1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Going	All	the	Way
Talks	given	from	1/11/80	to	30/11/80
Darshan	Diary
30	Chapters
Year	published:
Unpublished.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011015
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
IT	TAKES	A	PINCH	OF	POTTINESS
(Osho	is	addressing	Ma	Prem	Vanya;	first	he	explains	 the	origin	of	her	name.)
Vanya	is	the	Russian	form	of	John.	John	is	Hebrew.	Travelling,	passing	through
many	other	languages,	by	the	time	it	reached	Russia	it	became	Vanya,	and	really
it	has	become	far	more	beautiful	than	John.
John	was	the	most	beloved	disciple	of	Jesus,	hence	it	has	become	symbolic	of	a
beloved	disciple.	Your	full	name	means,	love	makes	one	a	beloved	disciple.
The	 relationship	 between	 the	 master	 and	 the	 disciple	 is	 not	 an	 ordinary
relationship.	 It	 is	 not	 mundane,	 it	 is	 not	 of	 the	 marketplace,	 it	 is	 not	 out	 of
calculation.	It	is	simply	falling	in	love.	It	is	a	little	bit	mad,	but	if	a	person	is	not
capable	of	going	a	little	bit	glad	he	is	not	alive.	Just	a	little	bit	of	madness	adds
much	spice	to	life.	Not	too	much	is	needed,	just	a	little	bit,	because	if	you	make
the	whole	of	the	food	of	spices	you	will	not	be	able	to	eat	it	--	just	a	little	bit,	just
like	salt.
The	so-called	sane	people	in	 the	world	have	not	even	a	 little	bit	of	madness	in
them	--	that's	why	their	lives	are	flat,	saltless,	tasteless,	boring.	Particularly	your
so-called	 saints	 are	 all	 boring.	 There	 seems	 to	 be	 no	 joy	 in	 their	 being	 no
explosion	 of	 delight,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 live	 in	 a	 very	 controlled
way;	 they	 are	 afraid	 of	 that	 little	 bit	 of	 madness.	 But	 that	 is	 an	 essential
ingredient	to	make	life	significant.
Poets	who	are	really	poets	have	that,	painters	who	are	really	painters	have	that.
Musicians,	 sculptors,	 scientists,	 people	who	 create	 something	 in	 this	world	 all
have	that	little	bit	of	madness.
To	be	a	disciple	means	 to	 fall	headlong	 in	 love.	And	 it	 is	 the	ultimate	 form	of
love	because	nothing	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
expected	out	of	 it;	 it	 is	 for	 its	own	sake.	But	 it	 transforms	your	being	because
when	love	is	for	its	own	sake	it	can	become	total.	There	is	no	division	between
the	means	and	the	end;	it	is	both	the	means	and	the	end.
And	 when	 it	 is	 both	 then	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 be	 involved	 in	 it	 without	 holding
anything	 back,	 going	 all	 the	 way,	 to	 the	 uttermost,	 to	 where	 the	 road	 ends,
risking	all	the	way,	to	where	nothing	is	loft	to	risk	--	only	then	the	revolution,	the
transformation....
The	 transformation	 does	 not	 happen	 to	 people	 who	 live	 a	 lukewarm	 life.	 It
happens	 only	 to	 people	who	 are	 like	 the	 fools	 of	 the	 proverb	which	 says	 that
fools	rush	in	where	angels	are	afraid	to	tread.	Disciplehood	is	only	for	those	who
can	risk	all	and	rush	in.
But	 the	moment	you	put	yourself	 totally	 into	 it	with	no	desire	 for	any	 reward,
something	immense,	something	beyond	the	mind,	starts	happening	--	something
which	 can	 only	 be	 described	 as	 a	 miracle.	 Only	 the	 disciple	 knows	 what	 a
miracle	 is,	 but	 to	 know	 it	 one	 has	 to	 be	 available	 to	 the	master	 in	 one's	 total
nakedness,	hiding	nothing,	exposing	oneself	entirely.
That	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 path	 for	my	 sannyasins:	 all	 of	my	 sannyasins	 have	 to
become	beloved	disciples.
Less	than	that	won't	do.	I	am	not	interested	in	students	who	have	come	to	learn
something.	I	am	only	interested	in	disciples	who	have	come	to	be	transformed,
who	are	ready	to	die	so	that	they	can	be	reborn.
That's	what	I	mean	when	I	say	going	all	the	way.
MEDITATION	IS	GIVING	IT	ALL	YOU'VE	GOT
('Totality'	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 Samagro,	 and	 is	 his	 approach	 in	 a	 nutshell,	Osho
tells	the	next	sannyasin.)	Be	total	in	everything	that	you	are	doing.	What	you	are
doing	is	 immaterial.	Cleaning	the	floor,	cooking	the	food,	 taking	a	shower	--	 it
doesn't	matter	what	you	are	doing.	My	emphasis	is	not	on	what	you	have	to	do,
my	 emphasis	 is	 on	 how	you	 do	 it.	 If	 you	 do	 it	 totally,	 it	 becomes	meditation.
Even	if	you	do	meditation	half-heartedly	it	is	not	meditation.
Chopping	wood	can	be	meditation	if	done	totally,	carrying	water	from	the	well
can	be	meditation	if	done	totally.	Otherwise	one	can	go	on	sitting	in	a	Buddha
posture	 for	 years	 --	 if	 it	 is	 not	 total	 it	 is	 useless;	 one	 is	 simply	wasting	 time.
Spring	will	come	but	the	grass	will	not	grow.	The	grass	does	not	grow	because
of	spring,	it	grows	because	of	your	totality.	What	can	the	poor	spring	do	to	it?
Sitting	silently	doing	nothing	spring	comes	and	the	grass	grows	by	itself.	Spring
simply	means	totality.
If	you	are	 sitting	 totally,	doing	nothing,	 just	 sitting	 totally,	 in	 that	very	 totality
spring	has	come.	And	then	everything	starts	growing	in	you.
Totality	 is	 the	 climate	 in	 which	 one	 reaches	 to	 one's	 optimum.	 And	 at	 the
optimum	is	the	experience	of	God.
TRUST	IS	A	MUST
(It's	 rare,	 and	 because	 it	 is,	 religion	 is	 on	 the	 way	 out.)	 People	 are	 taught	 to
doubt,	not	 to	 trust	and	 there	 is	a	 reason	why	 they	are	 taught	 to	doubt.	Science
depends	on	doubt,	its	whole	foundation	is	doubt	and	doubt	is	a	valid	method	for
scientific	enquiry;	trust	is	an	invalid	method	as	far	as	science	is	concerned.
That's	 why	 in	 the	 ancient	 days	 when	 religion	 prevailed	 science	 could	 not
develop.	 It	was	 impossible	for	science	 to	have	a	beginning.	 It	 is	only	now	that
science	has	found	the	right	ground,	the	right	climate.	But	the	cost	is	too	much,	it
has	 destroyed	 trust;	 and	 without	 trust	 the	 inner	 world	 becomes	 utterly
meaningless,	dark,	with	no	joy,	with	no	god	there.	The	shrine	becomes	empty.
Science	can	give	many	things	but	it	cannot	give	meaning	to	life.	It	can	give	you
a	better	standard	of	living	but	it	cannot	give	you	a	better	quality	of	living.	And
the	real	thing	is	not	quantity,	the	real	thing	is	quality.
I	am	not	against	 science	but	 it	has	 its	 limitations.	 It	 should	not	 interfere	 in	 the
world	of	religion.	Religion	is	a	totally	different	dimension,	in	fact	diametrically
opposite	to	science.	Science	needs	doubt	to	begin	with	and	religion	needs	trust	to
begin	with.
Trust	is	the	greatest	gift	god	can	give	to	anybody	--	and	it	is	given	to	all	but	we
never	nourish	it,	we	never	feed	it,	it	is	starving.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	opening	a	new	door	to	your	life	--	the	door	of
trust.	It	is	from	the	same	door	that	god	will	come	back	into	your	world.
So	my	suggestion	to	my	sannyasins	 is	when	you	are	working	scientifically	use
doubt.	It	is	just	as	when	you	are	listening	to	music	you	can	close	your	eyes,	there
is	no	need	to	open	your	eyes.	In	fact	it	will	be	better	if	you	close	your	eyes	and
just	become	your	ears	so	your	whole	consciousness	is	available	to	your	ears.	But
when	 you	 are	watching	 a	 sunset	 then	 closing	 your	 eyes	 is	 foolish.	Keep	 your
eyes	wide	open	because	ears	cannot	see,	just	as	eyes	cannot	hear.
Doubt	is	perfectly	right	in	the	objective	world	and	trust	is	perfectly	right	in	the
subjective	world.	For	 the	 outside	 journey	use	 the	 vehicle	 of	 doubt	 and	 for	 the
inner	 pilgrimage	 use	 trust.	 That's	 how	 I	 would	 like	 to	 bring	 a	 synthesis	 into
humanity:	one	should	be	capable	of	both.	But	if	it	is	impossible	to	be	capable	of
both	then	it	is	better	to	choose	trust.	If	there	is	a	question	of	choice	then	trust	has
to	be	chosen.	If	it	is	possible	to	synthesize	both	that	is	far	better.
ONE	IS	FUN
Ordinarily	we	exist	as	separate	entities.	That	very	separation	is	the	cause	of	our
misery.	We	have	to	dissolve	our	egos	into	the	whole.	Don't	exist	like	an	ice	cube.
Melt,	 become	 one	 with	 the	 river	 --	 that	 is	 my	 message	 --	 melting,	 merging,
becoming	 one	 with	 the	 whole.	 And	 then	 suddenly	 all	 silence	 is	 yours,	 all
blissfulness	 is	yours.	The	moment	you	dissolve	your	ego,	anxieties,	anguishes,
all	go.	The	same	energy	that	was	invested	in	tensions,	depressions,	anxieties,	is
released.	The	same	energy	becomes	your	dance,	your	celebration.
William	Blake	is	right	when	he	says	energy	is	delight.	When	you	have	too	much
energy	suddenly	your	whole	being	is	afire	with	the	joy	of	being.
I	 have	 chosen	 orange	 for	 my	 sannyasins	 as	 a	 symbol	 for	 becoming	 afire.	 It
represents	fire	in	two	ways.
First,	 it	has	 to	consume	your	ego	and	second,	 it	has	 to	give	you	the	eternity	of
light,	love,	laughter.
LOVE	--	NOT	JUST	INSPIRATION,	IT'S	INCINERATION
(That's	why	most	people	warm	 their	hands	by	 the	hearth	 rather	 than	 lose	 their
hearts.)	They	talk	about	it,	they	read	poetry	about	it,	they	go	and	see	a	film	about
it,	but	it	is	always	about	it;	they	keep	a	certain	distance,	they	don't	get	involved
in	it.	It	seems	risky	and	it	 is	certainly	risky	because	it	will	destroy	your	ego,	it
will	consume	your	ego.	It	is	fire	for	the	ego.
But	 blessed	 are	 those	who	 take	 the	 risk	 and	 jump	 into	 the	 fire	 of	 love,	 like	 a
moth	dancing	around	a	lit	candle,	dancing	madly	and	then	finally	jumping	into
the	flame.	Yes,	to	all	onlookers	the	moth	dies	but	those	who	know,	know	that	the
moth	is	reborn	too	--	because	each	death	is	a	rebirth.	Nothing	ever	comes	to	an
end.	Life	 is	eternal;	 it	only	changes	forms.	and	 the	best	way	 to	die	 is	 to	die	 in
love.	That	is	the	highest	way	to	die	because	if	you	die	in	love	you	will	be	born	in
love.	Your	new	life	will	begin	with	love	energy.
So	it	is	a	fire,	it	will	destroy	all	that	is	false	in	you	--	but	only	the	false.	The	real
cannot	be	destroyed,	hence	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid.	The	goldsmith	puts	the
gold	 into	 fire	 to	purify	 it.	That	which	 is	not	gold	burns	and	 that	which	 is	gold
remains.
And	 that's	 the	 function	 of	 a	master	 too:	 to	 put	 you	 into	 the	 fire	 of	 love.	 That
which	is	not	true	and	is	false	will	be	burned.	Your	make-up	will	be	burned	but
your	original	face	will	come	out	in	its	true	form.	And	that	is	the	beginning	of	a
divine	life.
IN	IS	FAR-OUT
(Osho	 talks	on	 the	difference	between	 the	 real	 and	natural	beauty.)	The	unreal
beauty	is	imposed	from	outside,	the	real	beauty	arises	from	inside.	The	name	of
real	beauty	is	grace.	When	one	is	silent	one	starts	radiating	bliss.	Silence,	bliss,
freedom,	 truth,	 awareness	 --	 all	 these	 are	 the	dimensions	of	 inner	 beauty.	And
when	 they	 all	 explode	 you	 are	 transported	 into	 another	world,	 into	 something
which	you	have	never	conceived	before,	 into	something	which	you	have	never
dreamt	of	before.
Because	we	dream	only	about	that	which	we	know,	we	cannot	dream	about	the
unknown.	In	fact	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
unknowable	is	impossible	to	imagine	and	the	inner	world	is	absolutely	unknown
to	us.	And	the	innermost	core	of	it	is	unknowable	too.
So	 start	 moving	 inwards.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 to	 Kaaba,	 no	 need	 to	 go	 to
Kailash,	 no	need	 to	visit	 Jerusalem;	 the	only	place	worth	visiting	 is	 your	won
inner	 centre	 because	 it	 is	 there	where	 god	 abides	 --	 and	 to	 know	god	 is	 to	 be
really	beautiful.
PRAYER	IS	YOUR	PASSPORT	TO	PARADISE
(But	firstly,	it's	gratitude	for	what	is	right	here	and	now.)	The	most	stupid	thing	a
person	can	do	is	to	take	life	for	granted.	And	that's	what	millions	of	people	are
doing,	they	take	it	as	if	it	is	their	right.	They	don't	feel	any	thankfulness,	in	fact
they	go	on	asking	for	more.
All	 their	 prayers	 are	 nothing	 but	 demands	 on	 god	 for	 money,	 for	 power,	 for
prestige,	 in	 this	world	or	 in	 the	other.	They	go	 to	 the	 temples,	 to	 the	churches,
only	to	beg,	they	never	go	to	give	thanks.	And	unless	you	thank	god	for	all	that
has	 been	 done	 for	 you,	 for	 all	 that	 has	 already	 been	 given	 to	 you.	 religion
remains	a	formality,	it	never	grows	roots	in	you
The	 beginning	 of	 sannyas	 is	 to	 be	 grateful	 to	 the	whole	 that	 it	 has	made	 life
possible,	 that	 it	 has	 chosen	you	 to	 be	 and	 that	 it	 has	 given	many	many	 things
with	life:	love,	awareness,	sensibility,	sensitiveness,	joy.
There	are	thousands	of	gifts.	It	is	almost	immeasurable,	what	has	been	given	to
us.	 If	we	 can	 feel	 the	 immense	 love	 of	 existence	 towards	 us	 that	 very	 feeling
triggers	a	new	process	in	our	being	--	that	process	is	prayer.	And	to	be	prayerful
is	all,	it	contains	the	whole	of	religion.	Then	nothing	else	is	needed,	then	all	else
starts	coming	on	its	own.
Jesus	 says	 seek	 ye	 first	 the	 kingdom	of	 god,	 then	 all	 else	 shall	 be	 added	 unto
you.	The	kingdom	of	god	opens	its	doors	when	you	are	prayerful;	that	is	the	way
to	 seek	 it.	And	once	you	have	 found	 it	 then	 everything	 else	 comes	of	 its	 own
accord.
CROSS-BREEDING	MAKES	A	HAPPIER	HUMANITY
(His	name,	Anekant,	means	multi-dimensionality,	Osho	says	to	a	new	sannyasin.
It	was	a	favourite	word	of	Mahavira.)
Life	should	not	be	lived	in	a	one-dimensional	way.	If	you	live	in	one	dimension
you	will	live	a	poor	life.
When	 so	 many	 dimensions	 are	 available,	 when	 they	 are	 your	 birthright,	 why
choose	one	of	it,	and	to	really	become	whole	you	have	to	live	all	those	aspects.
That's	 why	 I	 am	 not	 telling	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 renounce	 the	 world.	 If	 you
renounce	the	world	you	are	bound	to	become	one-dimensional.
A	monastery	will	give	you	only	a	one-dimensional	 life.	 It	 is	only	 in	 the	world
that	multi-dimensionality	is	possible.	You	can	be	a	poet	and	a	potter,	a	husband,
a	father,	a	son,	a	brother,	a	friend;	you	can	be	thousands	of	things.	And	the	more
you	relate	in	different	ways,	the	richer	you	are.
I	am	in	favour	of	richness.	There	is	a	certain	inner	world	of	aristocracy.	The	man
who	can	enjoy	music	and	can	also	enjoy	mathematics	will	have	something	more
than	 the	 mathematician	 and	 the	 musician.	 His	 mathematics	 will	 have	 some
flavour	of	music,	his	music	will	have	some	colour	of	mathematics.	In	fact	all	the
great	discoveries	in	the	world	have	been	made	by	people	who	Moved	from	one
branch	of	science	to	another,	because	they	brought	a	different	outlook.
For	 example,	 Albert	 Einstein	 was	 basically	 a	mathematician;	 when	 he	moved
into	physics	he	brought	a	revolution	to	physics	because	his	whole	approach	was
that	 of	 a	 mathematician.	 Mathematics	 meeting	 with	 physics	 becomes	 a	 cross
breeding,	a	very	delicate	phenomenon.	If	Einstein	had	also	been	a	poet	he	would
have	 given	 a	 totally	 different	 physics	 to	 the	world,	 and	 if	 he	 had	 also	 been	 a
mystic	--	which	he	was	a	little	bit	--	then	the	world	would	have	remembered	him
as	being	far	more	important	than	Jesus	and	Buddha	too...
because	they	were	in	a	way	one-dimensional	people.
My	sannyasins	have	to	learn	the	art	of	being	in	tune	with	many	things	and	then	a
subtle	cross-breeding	happens	inside	you.
Whenever	 two	systems	meet,	 two	outlooks	meet	a	new	outlook	 is	born.	 It	 is	a
well-known	fact	that	a	crossbreeding	brings	a	better	generation.	For	thousands	of
years	it	has	been	known,	that's	why	in	all	the	societies,	in	almost	all	the	societies,
marrying	your	own	daughter	or	marrying	your	own	sister	 is	prohibited,	 for	 the
simple	 reason	 that	 you	will	 be	 so	 alike	 that	 it	 won't	 give	 enough	 tension	 and
polarity.	But	they	never	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
went	 to	 the	whole	 logical	 end	of	 it;	 they	 still	 insisted	 that	 the	Catholic	 should
marry	 within	 the	 Catholics	 and	 the	 Hindus	 marry	 within	 the	 Hindus	 and	 the
Protestants	marry	within	the	Protestants.
I	 have	heard:	 a	 young	woman	 came	back	home	 after	many	years.	Her	mother
said	'I	was	very	much	worried	about	you	but	you	look	very	rich.'	She	had	come
in	a	brand	now	car	and	she	had	much	jewellery	on	her.	The	girl	said	 'I	have	to
tell	you	the	truth,	that	I	have	become	a	prostitute.'	The	mother	fainted.	When	she
came	back	she	said	'What	have	you	done?	How	could	you	do	it?'	The	girl	said	'I
never	 thought	 that	you	would	be	so	offended,	otherwise	 I	would	not	have	 told
you	 the	 truth,	 that	 I	 have	 become	 a	 prostitute.'	 The	mother	 said	 'Prostitute?	 I
thought	you	said	"Protestant"!'
It	 is	 far	more	 dangerous	 for	 a	CathoLic	mother	when	her	 daughter	 becomes	 a
Protestant	than	when	she	becomes	a	prostitute.	At	least	she	is	within	the	fold,	she
is	still	Catholic	--	there	is	hope!
I	believe	 that	 cross	breeding	has	 to	be	used	on	a	 far	wide	 scale.	White	people
should	 marry	 coloured	 people,	 the	 Indians	 should	 marry	 the	 Japanese,	 the
Japanese	 should	 marry	 the	 Americans,	 the	 Americans,	 the	 Germans,	 the
Germans,	 the	 English.	 The	whole	 world	 should	 be	 intertwined	 and	we	would
have	a	better	crop!	And	all	 the	creeps	would	disappear	 (laughter)	 ...	we	would
have	a	better	humanity.
(BUDS	WHEN	WE	COULD	BE	BUDDHAS)
The	old	light	has	failed	man.	There	is	no	need	to	cling	to	it	any	more.	The	old
light	means	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Mohammedanism;	and	all	the	scriptures	and
all	 the	 theologies	 and	 all	 the	 so-called	 saints.	 It	 has	 failed,	 it	 has	 not	worked.
Humanity	 is	enough	proof	 that	whatsoever	we	have	been	doing	 in	 the	past	has
not	succeeded.	Yes,	a	few	people	happened	--	a	Jesus,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a
Buddha	--	but	they	are	exceptions	and	the	exception	only	proves	the	rule.	In	fact
just	the	reverse	should	be	the	case:	we	should	all	be	like	Buddha	and	Jesus	and
Zarathustra;	only	once	in	a	while	somebody	may	not	be	able	to	rise	that	high.
It	 seems	 to	 be	 okay,	 if	 once	 in	 a	 while	 somebody	 fails.	 But	 a	 garden	 with
millions	of	trees	in	which	only	occasionally	a	tree	blooms,	is	not	worth	calling	a
garden.
Something	 is	 basically	 wrong.	 And	 what	 is	 basically	 wrong	 is,	 in	 short,	 that
religion	has	been	life-negative.	That's	how	everything	went	wrong.	Religion	has
to	be	life-affirmative.	That	is	the	new	light	--
life-affirmation,	 a	 tremendous	 love	 for	 life,	 so	much	 so	 that	 'life'	 replaces	 the
word	'God';	only	then	will	we	be	able	to	bring	spring	to	millions	of	people.
Everybody	is	born	with	the	potential	to	blossom,	to	bring	many	many	roses,	but
because	 the	 soil	 is	 not	 right,	 because	 the	 gardener	 is	 against	 the	 roses,	 the
gardener	hates	the	roses,	the	fertilizers	are	not	given,	the	water	is	not	supplied...
how	can	the	roses	bloom?	And	that's	what	our	so-called	priests	have	been	doing
--
destroying	our	very	roots.
Be	life-affirmative.	Rejoice	in	being	alive	and	help	others	to	rejoice.	That's	 the
true	work	of	God.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011025
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
GOALS	ARE	GAOLS
(Let	go	of	 the	ego	and	god	 takes	care,	Osho	 tells	Raimund.)	Man	exists	 as	 an
ego,	that's	why	he	feels	continuously	afraid,	unprotected,	insecure.	The	moment
you	drop	your	ego	the	whole	existence	becomes	your	protection,	your	security.
You	 cannot	 be	more	wise	 than	 the	whole.	 The	 part	 cannot	 be	 bigger	 than	 the
whole.	Whatsoever	we	can	do	think	is	bound	to	be	small,	tiny;	it	comes	out	of	a
tiny	mind.	Its	vision	is	small,	its	capacity	to	see	is	limited.	But	we	depend	on	this
small	capacity,	we	depend	on	our	blindness,	and	then	we	suffer.	The	mind	is	very
short-sighted.	 It	 is	because	of	 this	approach	that	people	 live	 in	misery,	anxiety,
anguish,	suffering;	they	create	their	own	hell.
Sannyas	means	a	radical	change,	dropping	the	ego	and	relaxing	with	the	whole	--
because	the	whole	is	wiser	than	the	part	--	trusting	the	whole.	The	whole	is	our
source,	we	have	come	from	it,	we	are	in	it	even	at	this	moment.	Just	as	the	fish	is
in	 the	ocean,	we	 are	 in	 gods	we	 are	 born	 in	 god,	we	 live	 in	God	 and	we	will
disappear	in	God;	hence	the	whole	effort	to	fight	with	the	universe	is	idiotic.
The	sannyasin	relaxes,	he	becomes	a	let-go.	He	allows	the	whole	to	possess	him,
to	 direct	 him,	 to	 guide	 him.	 He	 surrenders	 himself	 totally	 so	 the	 whole	 can
possess	 him	without	 any	hindrance	 from	his	 side,	without	 any	 resistance	 from
his	side	--	and	then	he	is	protected.
God	 is	 a	 wise	 protector.	 It	 is	 up	 to	 us	 to	 live	 in	 insecurity	 or	 to	 live	 in	 the
ultimate	security.	To	be	in	the	ego	is	to	live	in	insecurity;	to	be	egoless	is	to	live
in	ultimate	security.	Then	all	 is	good	because	you	don't	have	any	expectations,
you	don't	have	any	private	goal.	You	are	simply	one	with	the	whole	so	wherever
it	is	going	you	are	going;	you	need	not	worry.	Then	you	become	just	like	a	small
child	who	is	holding	the	hand	of	his	father
The	 father	may	be	worried,	 the	 father	may	have	got	 lost	 in	 the	 forest,	 but	 the
child	is	not	worried.	He	knows	his	father	is	with	him,	his	hand	is	in	his	father's
hand	 --	 that's	 enough.	 The	 child	 is	 enjoying	while	 the	 father	 is	 worrying;	 the
child	is	enjoying	the	butterflies	and	the	birds	and	the	flowers.	He	can	enjoy	them
because	of	his	trust.	He	has	no	worry,	no	anxiety.
To	relax	with	the	whole	is	the	beginning	of	a	joyous	life.	It	is	the	beginning	of	an
authentic	ceremony.
Then	 each	moment	 is	 so	 full	 of	 juice	 and	 ecstasy	 that	 one	 can	become	drunk.
And	the	person	who	relaxes	with	the	whole	becomes	drunk	with	the	divine.	His
joy	knows	no	limits,	his	bliss	is	infinite	EGO	IS	I-DIOTIC
(Buddha	calls	it	atta,	and	no-ego,	anatta.)
This	 is	 the	whole	problem,	how	 to	move	 from	 the	 ego	 to	 the	no-ego.	 It	 is	 not
impossible	but	 certainly	 it	 is	 difficult.	And	 the	difficulty	 arises	because	of	our
habits.	We	have	been	trained	to	be	egos	--	conditioned,	hypnotised.	It	has	gone
deep	into	our	blood,	our	bones,	into	our	marrow.	We	have	completely	forgotten
that	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 be	without	 the	 ego.	 It	 has	 become	our	 identity.	We	know
only	one	way,	we	are	only	acquainted	with	this	false	entity,	the	ego.
It	is	imposed	on	us,	it	is	not	real,	hence	it	can	be	disposed	of,	but	it	has	been	in
us	for	so	long,	hence	the	difficulty.	Otherwise	the	state	of	egolessness	is	our	very
nature;	 it	 should	 be	 very	 simple	 to	 be	 egoless.	 But	 for	 that	 one	 has	 to	 pass
through	 a	 deep	 unconditioning,	 a	 process	 of	 de-hypnosis	 --	 and	 that	 is	 how	 I
define	sannyas;	it	is	a	process	of	de-hypnosis.	What	society	has	done	to	you	has
to	be	undone.
The	ego	 is	absolutely	 false	 --	no	child	 is	born	with	 it	Now	even	psychologists
agree	 that	 the	 child	 first	 becomes	 aware	 of	 others	 then	 he	 becomes	 aware	 of
himself;	it	is	secondary.	First	he	comes	to	know	'thou'
and	 then	 he	 starts	 creating	 the	 idea	 of	 I.	He	 sees	 people	moving,	 coming	 and
going,	 and	 naturally	 he	 starts	 inferring	 that	 they	 are	 separate.	 Sometimes	 the
mother	is	there	and	sometimes	she	is	not	there,	sometimes	the	father	comes	and
then	disappears,	so	he	starts	learning	one	thing,	a	kind	of	vague	separation.	And
then	we	give	a	child	a	name.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
In	 the	 beginning	 every	 child	 uses	 his	 name	 in	 the	 third	 person.	 If	 his	 name	 is
Johnny,	he	says	'Johnny	is	hungry',	he	does	not	say	'I	am	hungry'.	The	I	has	not
yet	arisen.	Johnny	is	another	person,	as	the	others	are.
If	he	falls	and	is	hurt,	he	says	'Johnny	is	hurt'	he	has	not	yet	learned	the	idea	of	I.
But	 sooner	 or	 later	 he	 will	 have	 to	 learn	 it	 because	 the	 whole	 society	 --	 the
parents,	the	education	--	everybody	will	insist	that	you	replace	this	name	with	I.
The	name	 is	 for	others	 to	use,	you	 have	 to	use	 this	word	 'I'.	And	 then	 it	 starts
settling	in	our	unconscious.	Once	we	start	living	around	this	idea	our	whole	life
becomes	false	and	phony,	because	it	is	moving	around	a	false	centre
To	become	a	sannyasin	means	to	drop	all	that	is	false	and	to	discover	that	which
is	real	and	essential.
The	moment	it	is	discovered	you	enter	into	a	totally	different	kind	of	life.	Once
the	phoniness	disappears,	once	the	falsity	disappears,	each	moment	becomes	so
full	 of	 ecstasy	 that	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible	 to	 believe	 that	 so	 much	 ecstasy	 is
available.	But	the	ecstasy	is	available	only	to	the	real.	For	the	false	there	is	only
misery.
People	go	on	trying	to	drop	misery	and	to	become	blissful	--	that	is	not	possible.
The	real	change	has	to	happen	somewhere	deeper,	not	on	the	surface.	You	cannot
change	 suffering	 into	 blissfulness;	 you	 have	 to	 change	 the	 root	 cause	 of
suffering,	the	false	ego	has	to	be	dropped,	discarded,	thrown	into	the	rubbish	bin.
And	 then	 suddenly	 the	gestalt	 changes,	your	 energy	 starts	 flowing	 through	 the
real.	And	whenever	 you	 are	 in	 contact	with	 the	 real	 there	 is	 joy.	 Joy	 is	 a	 by-
product	of	being	real.
It	is	just	like	a	real	rose	and	a	plastic	rose,	the	plastic	rose	may	look	like	the	real
rose	but	 it	cannot	have	a	fragrance.	The	real	 rose	may	not	 look	so	beautiful	as
the	 plastic	 rose	 but	 it	 has	 a	 fragrance.	Man	 can	 be	 deceived,	 but	 you	 cannot
deceive	 the	bees.	Put	out	both	 flowers,	and	you	will	be	surprised:	no	one	ever
comes	to	the	plastic	rose	but	they	will	always	come	and	visit	the	real	rose.	God
visits	the	real	rose.	He	is	like	a	bees	you	cannot	deceive	him.
So	 this	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 work	 upon	 yourself:	 move	 from	 the	 ego	 to	 the
egolessness.	The	name,	Anatta,	will	remind	you	again	and	again	that	you	have	to
be	 nobody,	 a	 nothingness	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 greatest	 thing	 that	 can	 happen	 to
anybody.	It	is	nirvana.	The	disappearance	of	the	ego	becomes	the	appearance	of
god	in	you.
(LIFE	IS	A	XMAS	PUDDING:	THE	SIXPENCES	ARE	INSIDE.)
The	 only	 richness	 belongs	 to	 the	 inner	 world.	 The	wealth	 that	 we	 see	 on	 the
outside	is	nothing	but	delusion.	It	can	give	you	comfort	--	delusions	can	be	very
comfortable	 --	 it	 can	 make	 your	 life	 convenient,	 but	 it	 cannot	 give	 you
significance	or	meaning.	And	without	meaning	one	remains	poor.
Richness	can	have	only	one	meaning	and	that	is	to	feel	significance,	to	feel	that
you	are	not	accidental,	that	you	are	part	of	this	beautiful	existence,	that	without
you	the	existence	will	miss	something,	that	you	are	fulfilling	a	certain	purpose.
The	 moment	 one	 feels	 that	 I	 am	 fulfilling	 a	 certain	 purpose	 life	 becomes
illumined,	 then	 life	 is	more	 like	 a	dance.	 It	 is	 not	 emptiness,	 it	 is	 overflowing
with	joy.	The	greatest	joy	in	life	is	to	be	needed	by	god.
Man's	greatest	need	is	to	be	needed,	and	to	be	needed	by	god,	by	existence	itself
is	to	become	meaningful.	Then	you	are	not	just	dust.	Then	you	are	not	just	the
body,	 you	 are	 far	 more.	 And	 the	 feeling	 of	 that	 'far	 more'	 fulfills	 one,	 gives
tremendous	contentment,	makes	one	feel	at	home	with	existence.
HAVING	AN	ABSOLUTELY	DEVICEFUL	TIME
Alexander	the	Great	is	not	a	victorious	person,	Gautam	the	Buddha	is	--	although
on	the	surface	it	seems	just	the	opposite.	Alexander	conquered	the	whole	world
and	Buddha	renounced	even	his	kingdom.	But	Buddha	lived	in	ecstasy	and	died
in	ecstasy;	his	life	was	beautiful.	His	grace	was	the	ultimate	grace,	his	death	the
ultimate	grace.
Alexander	 lived	 an	 ugly	 life;	 he	was	 an	 alcoholic.	He	died	when	he	was	 only
thirty-three	 and	 he	 died	 because	 of	 too	much	 drinking;	 he	 became	 a	 drunkard
just	 to	 forget	 his	 misery	 and	 suffering.	 He	 was	 not	 happy	 with	 himself.	 The
happy	person	need	not	go	to	alcohol;	it	is	only	the	miserable	person	who	goes	to
alcohols	to	forget,	to	drown	his	miseries	and	sufferings.	Although	Alexander	was
the	 greatest	 conqueror	 the	 world	 has	 known,	 he	 died	 frustrated;	 he	 died	 as	 a
beggar.	And	he	died	knowing	that	he	had	missed	the	whole	point.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 real	 victory	 is	 inner,	 not	 outer.	 Unless	 you	 know	 yourself	 you	 cannot	 be
victorious.	And	if	you	know	yourself	you	need	not	be	victorious	is	anything	else.
In	knowing	oneself	one	becomes	the	greatest	conqueror.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 become	 not	 beggars	 but	 emperors.	 And	 it	 is	 easier	 to
conquer	yourself	 than	 to	 conquer	 the	whole	world.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 simple	process
and	 it	 is	not	a	 long	 journey	either,	 it	 is	 the	small	 trick	of	 turning	 in.	Once	you
have	known	how	to	turn	in	you	have	known	all	that	is	there	to	know	you	have	all
that	is	worth	having.
Being	 here	 with	 me,	 learn	 only	 the	 knack	 of	 turning	 in.	 All	 the	 devices	 are
available	here.	It	has	neVer	been	so.	Buddha	had	only	one	device.	Mahavira	had
another.	 In	 the	past	each	master	functioned	only	 through	one	device,	hence	his
device	 was	 useful	 only	 for	 a	 part	 of	 humanity,	 not	 for	 all	My	 commune	 is	 a
synthesis	of	all	the	paths,	hence	anybody	who	comes	to	my	door	is	welcome.	I
can	help	every	type	of	person.	All	the	past	devices	are	available	is	here,	all	that
have	been	discovered	recently,	the	present	ones,	and	all	that	may	be	discovered
tomorrow	What	is	going	to	happen	tomorrow	is	already	happening	here	today	--
so	don't	miss	the	opportunity!
NO	NEED	TO	CALL	GOD,	HE'LL	CALL	YOU
(Just	make	sure	you're	home	when	He	does.)
Man	cannot	go	 in	 search	of	God	because	we	don't	know	where	he	 is,	what	he
looks	 like.	Even	 if	 you	 somehow	happen	 to	meet	 him	you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to
recognize	him.	In	fact	you	may	have	met	him	many	times,	because	he	comes	in
all	 forms	 and	 all	 sizes	 and	 all	 shapes.	But	 how	 to	 recognize	him?	There	 is	 no
way	 to.	 You	 can	 recognize	 only	 that	 which	 you	 already	 know,	 and	 you	 don't
know	him.	Hence	my	approach	is	totally	different:	it	is	not	a	search	for	God,	it	is
only	an	invitation	to	God.	We	can	invite	him.
He	 can	 find	 us,	 we	 cannot	 find	 him	 -	 he	 knows	 us,	 we	 don't	 know	 him.	 He
exactly	knows	our	address,	our	location,	so	all	that	is	needed	on	our	part	is	to	be
ready:	if	he	comes	we	have	to	be	receptive	and	we	have	to	prepare	the	house	for
the	ultimate	guest.
The	whole	of	sannyas	is	a	preparation	-	not	a	search,	but	a	preparation.	You	have
to	cleanse	your	being;	you	have	 to	become	silent,	 spacious.	You	have	 to	make
your	being	a	small	shrine,	worthy	for	God	to	abide	in.
Sannyas	is	an	unaddressed	invitation,	to	whomsoever	it	may	concern.
My	observation	is	that	searchers	never	find	him;	only	the	people	who	invite	him
have	 found	him,	 because	 invitation	means	 a	 great	 task:	 you	have	 to	 transform
yourself	totally	to	be	worthy	to	receive.	You	have	to	be	loving,	you	have	to	be
alert,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 sensitive,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 creative.	You	 have	 to	 drop	 all
kinds	of	negativities	-	anger,	jealousy,	possessiveness;	you	have	to	burn	all	this
rubbish.	You	have	to	drop	all	your	knowledge	which	is	borrowed,	you	have	to	be
again	as	innocent	as	a	child.	And	then	he	comes,	then	he	surely	comes.
JUST	TAKE	A	CHAIR	AND	LEAN	BACK
(Take	it	easy	and	he'll	easily	take	you)
He	 comes	 to	 you	 only	 when	 you	 are	 absolutely	 restful,	 relaxed,	 calm,	 quiet,
when	there	is	no	desire,	no	thought,	when	you	are	not	asking	for	anything,	not
praying	for	anything.	When	you	are	simply	there,	in	that	simplicity	god	arrives.
Hence	my	whole	message	can	be	condensed	as	the	art	of	total	relaxation.
It	 is	 not	 through	 activity	 that	 you	 will	 find	 the	 truth;	 in	 fact	 it	 is	 continuous
activity	that	is	not	allowing	you	to	find	it.	You	need	some	gaps	of	interval,	some
moments	when	there	is	no	occupation.
So	that	is	going	to	be	your	work,	find	as	many	moments	as	possible	when	you
can	 just	 be.	Sit,	 stand,	 lie	 down	or	walk	or	 swim	but	 do	 it	 in	 such	 a	way	 that
there	 is	 no	doer,	 no	doing,	no	 strain.	And	you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 you	have
found	the	key	--	the	key	that	opens	all	the	doors	of	all	the	mysteries.
SUN-YES	RISE
(Dhyan	 means	 meditation,	 and	 Zohra	 has	 three	 meanings,	 Osho	 tells	 another
sannyasin)	Meditation	is	a	state	of	absolute	silence.	It	 is	not	prayer,	because	in
prayer	your	mind	functions,	you	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
saying	 something	 to	 god,	 praising	 the	 lord.	 But	 because	 you	 are	 saying
something	the	mind	is	there;	without	the	mind	nothing	can	be	said.	And	because
you	are	saying	something	you	are	not	silent	even	with	god.
Prayer	is	a	dialogue,	and	one	thing	has	to	be	very	deeply	understood	--	that	god
understands	no	language	except	the	language	of	silence.	He	neither	understands
Sanskrit	nor	Hebrew	nor	Arabic	nor	Latin	nor	Greek.
There	are	at	least	three	thousand	languages	on	the	earth	and	this	is	only	one	of
the	planets	which	is	populated.	Scientists	think	at	least	fifty	thousand	planets	are
populated	--	that	is	at	least,	more	are	possible.
This	is	a	very	conservative	estimate.	Three	thousand	languages	on	the	earth	with
at	 least	 thirty	 thousand	 dialects,	 and	 then	 there	 are	 fifty	 thousand	 planets	 ...	 if
god	is	to	understand	language,	he	will	go	crazy.
God	 understands	 only	 silence.	 Prayer	 is	 the	 last	 function	 of	 the	mind.	Where
prayer	ends	meditation	begins,	you	drop	saying	anything	 to	god.	What	can	we
say?	 What	 have	 we	 got	 to	 say?	 Prayer	 is	 saying	 something,	 meditation	 is
listening.	 Rather	 than	 saying	 something	 to	 god	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 silent	 and	 to
listen.
And	 in	 silence	 the	 message	 comes,	 in	 silence	 not	 only	 the	 message	 but	 god
himself	comes.
God	does	not	come	like	a	person.	He	does	not	come	shouting,	knocking	on	your
doors.	He	comes	very	silently,	like	a	fragrance,	making	no	noise.	no	fuss.	God	is
not	a	person	but	a	presence.
A	person	is	bound	to	be	limited.	A	person	can	be	photographed,	an	image	can	be
made	of	a	person.	No	image	can	be	made	of	god,	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	is
a	presence.	You	can	make	a	beautiful	painting	of	a	rose	flower	but	how	will	you
paint	the	fragrance	of	the	rose.	There	is	no	way	at	all.	So	god	is	not	a	person	but
only	a	presence,	a	feeling.	And	that	feeling	wells	up	from	your	 innermost	core
when	you	are	utterly	silent,	when	the	mind	has	gone	into	complete	cessation.
And	Zohra	 is	 a	 beautiful	word.	 It	 is	Arabic,	 It	 has	 three	meanings.	One	 is	 the
blossoming.	It	 is	only	in	deep	meditation	that	one	blossoms,	 that	one	comes	to
one's	total	unfoldment,	otherwise	one	remains	like	a	bud.	In	meditation	the	petals
open.	The	ultimate	opening	has	been	described	by	mystic,	as	a	lotus	opening.
And	to	make	it	clear	that	it	is	a	multi-dimensional	phenomenon	they	have	called
it	a	one-thousand	petalled	lotus.	But	 the	 lotus	opens	only	in	 the	morning	when
the	sun	rises.	The	lotus	opens	only	when	the	presence	of	god	is	felt,	the	presence
of	god	is	just	like	sunrise	for	the	soul,	hence	the	other	two	meanings...
Zohra	also	means	the	dawn,	 the	beginning	of	 the	day,	 the	end	of	 the	night;	 the
darkness	is	over,	one	has	entered	into	the	world	of	light.
And	 the	 second	meaning	 is	 one	whose	 birth	 is	 like	 sunrise.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 that
god's	presence	function,	like	sunrise	and	your	inner	being	opens	up,	it	is	also	a
birth	for	you.
I	have	chosen	this	orange	colour	for	my	sannyasins	specifically	to	represent	the
colour	of	the	sunrise,	when	the	East	becomes	orange,	awaiting	the	sunrise,	when
it	is	getting	ready	to	welcome	it.
The	moment	you	come	in	contact	with	 the	presence	of	god	 it	 is	a	birth,	a	new
birth.	 The	 first	 birth	 happened	 through	 the	 parent,	 the	 second	 birth	 happens
through	 meditation	 --	 and	 the	 first	 birth	 is	 only	 physical,	 the	 second	 birth	 is
spiritual
Sannyas	is	fulfilled	only	when	the	second	birth	is	achieved,	when	one	is	reborn.
Jesus	says	unless	you	are	born	again	you	shall	not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of	god.
MEDITATION:	TURNING	YOUR	SELF	ON
(The	light	is	inside,	we	just	can't	find	the	switch.)
We	 are	 acquainted	with	 the	 temporary	 light,	 from	 the	 light	 of	 a	 candle	 to	 the
light	of	the	stars.	A	candle	lasts	only	a	few	hours	and	the	stars	last	for	millions	or
years,	but	both	are	temporary.	The	difference	is	only	of	quantity,	not	of	quality.
The	 real	 light	 --	which	 is	qualitatively	different,	which	 is	non-temporal,	which
never	begins	and	never	ends,	which	is	always	there,	which	has	always	been	there
and	will	be	always	there	--
is	at	the	centre	of	our	being.
Meditation	is	an	enquiry	into	that	 inner	 light.	It	needs	no	fuel,	 that	 is	why	it	 is
eternal,	it	needs	no	cause,	that's	why	it	is	eternal.	We	are	born	with	it,	and	it	is
really	unfortunate	that	we	carry	inside	the	eternal	light	and	still	live	in	darkness.
The	foolishness	is	that	we	look	outside	and	the	light	is	inside.
The	whole	purpose	of	a	master	is	to	turn	you	inwards	so	that	you	can	see	your
own	light.	Once	seen	it	is	forever	yours	and	then	it	transforms	your	whole	life.
The	 transformation	 is	 so	 big	 that	 it	 is	 almost	 inconceivable	 unless	 you	 have
experienced	it.
It	 is	exactly	like	a	blind	man	suddenly	getting	eyes:	he	cannot	imagine	what	is
going	to	happen	when	he	gets	eyes,	there	is	no	way	for	him	to	imagine.	How	can
he	imagine	the	world	of	colours?	How	can	he	imagine	the	world	of	light,	of	sun,
moon,	stars?	How	can	he	imagine	the	world	of	faces,	beauty?	How	can	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
he	imagine	all	this	psychedelic	existence?	Impossible!	He	did	not	even	have	any
idea	of	darkness,	what	to	say	about	light?
The	blind	man	cannot	even	understand	what	darkness	is,	because	to	understand
darkness	 you	 need	 eyes,	 without	 eyes	 you	 cannot	 see	 even	 darkness,	 so	 the
question	of	visualising	light	does	not	arise	at	all.	And	the	same	is	the	situation	as
far	as	the	inner	growth	is	concerned:	we	are	are	blind.
The	master	cannot	describe	what	is	going	to	happen,	he	can	only	persuade	you	to
turn	 in.	 Hence	 there	 have	 been	 many	 enlightened	 people	 but	 very	 few
enlightened	people	ever	become	masters.	That	is	a	totally	different	art,	the	art	of
seducing	 people	 into	 something	 which	 they	 cannot	 even	 imagine.	 It	 is	 pure
salesmanship...	and	 it	 is	selling	 invisible	 things	-	 things	which	you	cannot	see!
And	the	price	is	much:	you	have	to	lose	yourself	totally	for	something	which	you
cannot	even	see.	It	needs	tremendous	trust,	it	needs	a	mad	love	on	the	part	of	the
disciple,	only	then	can	this	miracle	happen.	But	it	has	happened	many	times	so	it
can	happen	again	and	again.	Be	prepared	for	it!
You	have	fallen	into	the	hands	of	a	salesman!	And	it	 is	not	that	first	 the	goods
will	be	delivered	and	then	you	go	on	paying	in	instalments.	First	you	have	to	pay
the	whole	price	--	and	that	means	your	whole	being.
And	then	nobody	knows	whether	you	will	get	anything	out	of	it	or	not	--	that's
the	risk!	So	it	is	only	a	game	for	very	adventurous	people.	But	don't	be	worried	-
-	I	will	take	care!
SANNYAS:	A	SHOCKING	STATE	OF	AFFAIRS
(It's	only	for	lovers,	Osho	warns	Manglam.)
There	 are	many	 happy	moments	 in	 life,	 many	 joyous	 events,	 but	 they	 are	 all
dreamlike;	they	come	quickly	and	they	disappear.	When	they	are	there	you	feel
good,	but	when	they	are	gone	you	feel	far	worse	than	before	because	in	the	wake
you	fall	into	darkness,	into	a	depression.
So	each	joy	that	happens	in	life	brings,	almost	equal	to	it,	suffering	and	agony.	In
life,	 joys	 and	 sufferings	 are	 balanced.	There	 is	 no	way	 to	 change	 the	 balance.
That's	what	people	go	on	 trying:	 they	go	on	 trying	 to	do	 the	 impossible.	They
want	to	have	as	much	joy	as	possible	and	as	little	suffering	as	possible.
But	 that	 is	against	 the	arithmetic	of	existence;	 it	will	always	be	fifty-fifty.	You
cannot	have	ninety	per	cent	of	 joys	and	 ten	per	cent	of	 suffering.	As	you	start
having	more	joys,	you	will	have	more	sufferings	growing	together.	They	always
go	together,	they	are	like	two	sides	of	the	same	phenomenon.
But	there	is	one	ecstasy	which	is	without	its	opposite	-	that	is	called	manglam	,
the	ultimate	ecstasy.
Only	that	is	worth	achieving	because	there	is	no	opposite	to	it.	Once	it	is	yours	it
transforms	 your	whole	 being.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 a	moment	 that	 comes	 and	 goes,	 it
becomes	your	very	being.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	already	your	very	being	but	you	are	not
conscious	of	it.	It	is	as	if	an	emperor	has	fallen	into	sleep	and	is	dreaming	that	he
has	 become	 a	 beggar.	 All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 not	 to	 change	 the	 beggar	 into	 the
emperor;	all	that	is	needed	is	to	shake	him	so	he	wakes	up.	And	that's	my	work
here,	 to	shake	you	in	as	many	ways	possible.	And	the	more	you	allow	me,	 the
more	I	shake	you.
Slowly	slowly	shaking	turns	into	shocking.	But	I	go	very	slow,	I	give	you	only
that	much	which	you	can	digest	-	because	to	wake	up	a	person	who	has	remained
asleep	 for	 centuries,	 for	 many	 lives,	 is	 not	 easy	 work.	 He	 has	 become
accustomed	to	a	sleeping	consciousness,	he	knows	nothing	else,	so	to	bring	him
into	 the	 world	 of	 wakefulness	 needs	 a	 certain	 art	 -	 patience,	 love,	 a	 deep
compassion.
Buddha	used	to	say	to	his	disciples	that	before	you	become	enlightened	at	least
grow	as	much	compassion	as	you	can.	Again	and	again	he	was	asked,	"Why	do
you	emphasize	this?"
He	said,	"So	that	when	you	become	enlightened	you	have	enough	compassion	to
help	people."
Otherwise	many	become	enlightened	but	they	don't	have	any	compassion.	They
are	enlightened,	they	are	blissful,	they	have	reached	to	the	ultimate	good	-	who
bothers	 about	 others?	 They	 will	 take	 their	 own	 course.	 And	 why	 interfere	 in
anybody's	 life?	 But	 it	 is	 only	 through	 compassion	 that	 one	 takes	 the	 risk	 of
interfering.
And	it	is	risky	because	whenever	you	interfere	in	anybody's	sleep	he	is	going	to
become	angry	at	you	-
just	try	to	wake	up	somebody	early	in	the	morning	when	it	is	cold.	Even	though
he	has	 said	 to	you	 to	wake	him	early,	 he	has	 to	 catch	 a	 train;	 he	will	 become
angry,	he	will	go	through	a	tantrum,	he	will	think	you	are	an	enemy.	There	are
very	few	who	will	be	happy	about	it,	and	this	is	ordinary	sleep.	Humanity	can	be
divided	 into	 two	 types	 of	 people:	 one,	 who	 likes	 to	 wake	 up	 early	 in	 the
morning,	and	the	second	-	the	rest	of	us.
So	 the	work	of	 the	master	 is	 really	difficult	because	 'the	 rest	of	us'	 constitutes
ninety-nine	point	nine	per	cent	of	humanity.	They	would	like	to	pull	the	blanket
over	their	heads	and	turn	to	the	other	side	and	have	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
little	more	 beautiful	 dreaming.	But	 all	 these	 dreams,	 howsoever	 beautiful	 they
are,	are	just	dreams.	It	is	better	to	wake	up,	and	the	sooner	the	better,	so	that	we
can	have	something	which	is	eternal.
Only	the	eternal	can	become	the	base	of	real	growth.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
Two	and	a	half	weeks	.
Then	come	again...	because	it	will	be	difficult	to	pull	you	out	within	two	and	a
half	weeks!
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011035
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
THE	ONLY	VICTORY:	THE	INNER	INNINGS
The	victory	over	others	is	bound	to	be	ugly.
To	reduce	somebody	to	a	slave	cannot	be	beautiful,	to	possess	somebody	like	a
thing	 is	 the	 most	 inhuman	 act	 possible.	 But	 as	 far	 as	 the	 inner	 victory	 is
concerned	it	is	a	totally	different	matter.	Then	it	is	a	war	between	light	and	dark,
between	 the	 conscious	 and	 the	 unconscious,	 and	 one	 is	 trying	 to	 conquer	 the
darker	part	or	one's	being.	Nobody	is	reduced	to	a	slave,	in	fact	the	darker	part	is
released	from	imprisonment.
When	 one	 becomes	 absolutely	 conscious	 of	 oneself	 one	 has	 entered	 into	 the
most	beautiful	space.	There	is	no	slave	but	there	is	mastery,	nothing	is	possessed
but	 one	 is	 a	 conqueror.	 In	 fact	 even	one's	 own	 self	 disappears	 in	 that	 ultimate
victory.
To	say	it	exactly	will	look	like	a	paradox	but	this	is	the	only	way	to	say	it:	the
ultimate	victory	is	when	you	are	not,	when	the	ego	disappears,	only	then	has	one
arrived	home.
SLEEPY	I'S
Meditation	 is	 not	 concentration.	 That	 is	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 understand	 and	 the
misunderstanding	 is	 worldwide.	 There	 are	 thousands	 of	 books	 written	 about
meditation	which	say	that	it	means	concentration.
Meditation	is	just	the	opposite	of	concentration.
Concentration	 is	 a	 state	 when	 you	 are	 focussing	 your	 mind	 upon	 an	 object,
meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.	 Concentration	 includes	 only	 one	 object	 and
excludes	everything	else.	Meditation	is	just	silence	--
inclusive	 of	 all,	 excluding	 nothing.	 You	 are	 simply	 available	 to	 existence	 and
that	availability	creates	the	ultimate	peak	of	consciousness.	The	West	has	called
it	Christ	consciousness	and	the	East	has	called	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Buddha	consciousness.	Only	the	names	are	different;	it	is	the	same	phenomenon.
And	that	is	the	meaning	of	Christina:	Christ	consciousness.	You	must	have	been
told	that	 it	means	Christian	--	 it	doesn't.	Even	though	all	 the	dictionaries	say	it
does,	I	say	to	you	it	does	not	mean	Christian.	If	it	means	Christian	then	there	are
millions	of	Christians	in	the	world	and	nobody	seems	to	have	any	experience	of
Christ	consciousness.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	said	that	the	first	and	the	last	Christian	died	on	the	cross
twenty	centuries	ago	--
and	 he	 is	 right.	Christ	was	 the	 first	 and	 the	 last	Christian	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 he
attained	Christ	consciousness.
Others	have	been	just	imitators,	followers.
When	one	can	become	a	Christ	why	should	one	be	a	follower?	My	sannyasins
are	not	my	followers.
They	 are	 just	 friends,	 fellow	 travelers,	 lovers,	 but	 not	 followers.	 There	 is	 no
qualitative	difference	between	me	and	my	sannyasins.	The	only	difference	is	that
unfortunately	I	am	awake	and	they	are	fast	asleep.	But	that	is	my	problem,	not
theirs!
MEDITATION:	MENDING	THE	BUCKET	THEN	KICKING	IT
(Leonardo	 learns	 how	we	 dissipate	 energy	 and	 about	 a	 dying	 that	 can	 happen
before	the	death	of	the	body.)
Man	can	 live	 in	 two	ways	and	he	can	 live	both	ways	 simultaneously.	One	can
live	with	people	and	one	can	live	with	oneself	--	there	is	no	antagonism,	there	is
no	dichotomy.	The	door	from	which	you	come	out	is	the	same	door	from	which
you	enter.	It	is	the	same	door,	on	one	side	the	doors	says	entrance,	on	the	other
side	the	same	door	says	exit.	They	are	not	two	doors.	Man's	consciousness	has
these	two	powers:	to	relate	or	to	be	alone	--	and	both	are	good.
The	way	to	relate	is	love	and	the	way	to	be	alone	is	meditation.
Leonardo	 means	 strong	 as	 the	 lion.	 The	 lion	 metaphorically	 represent,	 a	 few
things:	 first,	 courage,	 second,	 fearlessness,	 and	 third,	 strength.	 And	 all	 these
three	are	needed	 for	 the	meditator.	One	has	 to	be	courageous	 to	be	alone.	The
most	courageous	act	in	life	is	to	experience	absolute	aloneness.	We	cling	to	each
other	just	in	order	to	avoid	our	aloneness.	But	one	cannot	succeed	because	it	is
our	intrinsic	nature	--
how	can	you	avoid	it?	how	can	you	escape	from	it?	Wherever	you	go	it	will	be
there	with	you;	even	in	the	crowd	you	are	alone.	It	is	your	very	nature;	hence	it
is	better	to	understand	it,	to	love	it,	to	live	it,	to	discover	its	treasures	rather	than
escaping	from	it.
All	our	occupations,	 all	 our	 so-called	 love	affairs,	 the	 family,	 the	children,	 the
business,	 the	 world	 of	 all	 desires	 and	 ambitions,	 are	 basically	 nothing	 but	 an
escape.	One	does	not	want	to	encounter	one's	aloneness.
It	 creates	 great	 fear.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 bottomless	 abyss	 --	 one	 wants	 to	 cling	 to
anything,	even	to	a	straw.
The	drowning	man	thinks	that	it	is	going	to	save	him.	When	he	is	in	his	senses
he	will	understand.	How	can	a	straw	help	him?	But	he	consoles	himself.	People
are	clinging	to	straws	and	life	is	slipping	out	of	their	hands,	they	are	drowning.
Every	moment	you	are	going	deeper	and	deeper	 into	 the	water	and	soon	death
will	take	over.	Before	death	takes	over,	the	most	important	thing	is	to	experience
your	aloneness,	because	the	person	who	knows	his	aloneness	becomes	immortal,
death	cannot	destroy	him.	Knowing	his	aloneness	he	has	already	lived	his	death	-
-	now	what	can	death	do	to	him?	He	has	experienced	it.
Meditation	is	the	experiences	the	conscious,	deliberate	experience	of	death.	And
the	person	who	can	experience	death	consciously	suddenly	becomes	aware	that
death	has	happened	but	his	consciousness	is	still	there;	he	is	absolutely	alone,	the
whole	world	has	disappeared,	but	he	is	still	there.
And	 when	 one	 knows	 this	 crystal	 clear	 consciousness	 there	 is	 a	 self-evident
certainty	that	even	death	will	not	be	able	to	touch	it.	The	body	will	be	taken,	the
mind	will	be	 taken,	 the	heart	will	be	 taken,	everything	will	disappear	but	your
innermost	core,	your	real	essence	will	survive	--	and	that's	what	you	are.
Hence	the	fear	of	death	disappears.	But	only	a	meditator	can	go	beyond	the	fear,
can	go	beyond	death.
So	 to	 experience	 meditation	 these	 three	 qualities	 are	 needed.	 One	 has	 to	 be
courageous	--	 it	 is	 facing	death.	Courage	can	be	defined	as	encountering	death
deliberately,	knowingly	risking.
Secondly,	 a	 certain	 fearlessness	 is	 needed.	 The	 fearful	 people	 always	 cling	 to
things,	to	money,	to	power,	to	people,	to	family,	tradition,	church	--	anything	will
do	but	they	cling.	And	they	go	on	inventing	new	ways	to	cling.	Sometimes	there
are	very	stupid	kinds	of	things	to	cling	to,	but	the	function	is	the	same.
Somebody	 goes	 on	 collecting	 postal	 stamps	 and	 he	 clings	 to	 them;	 that	 is	 his
treasure.	Now,	it	seems	to	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
so	foolish	but	it	keeps	his	mind	occupied.	As	if	life	is	not	enough,	people	invent
the	Rotary	Club,	 the	Lions	Club,	and	a	 thousand	and	one	clubs,	and	 they	 rush
from	one	club	to	another	club,	from	one	restaurant	to	another	restaurant	and	they
go	on	inventing	games,	playing	cards	and	chess.	If	you	ask	them	'What	are	you
doing?'	 they	 say	 'We	 are	 killing	 time.'	Now	 this	 is	 just	 absurd.	Time	 is	 killing
you!	Who	are	you	befooling	 that	you	are	killing	 time?	Who	has	ever	heard	of
anybody	being	able	to	kill	time?	Time	kills	everybody.
It	is	said	of	Diogenes	that	one	day	Alexander	came	to	see	him	and	he	was	very
much	puzzled.	Diogenes	was	sitting	there	in	a	cemetery.	He	had	a	pile	of	bones
and	he	was	searching	for	something.	Alexander	asked
'What	are	you	doing?'	He	said	'I	am	looking	for	the	royal	bones	of	your	ancestor'.
Alexander	said	'You	are	just	mad.	You	always	do	something	mad.	Now	bones	are
bones	--	you	cannot	make	any	distinction	between	the	bones	of	a	beggar	and	a
king.'
Diogenes	 said	 'Then	you	 are	not	 so	 stupid	 as	 I	 used	 to	 think.	 If	 bones	 are	not
different	 then	 nothing	 is	 different.	Then	why	do	you	go	 on	 befooling	 yourself
that	you	are	a	king?	Death	will	reduce	everything	to	equality;	nobody	will	be	a
king	 and	 nobody	 will	 be	 a	 beggar.	 Before	 that	 happens	 don't	 waste	 this
opportunity.	Look	in	and	find	something	that	goes	beyond	the	body,	that	which
goes	beyond	the	bone,	and	the	blood	and	the	marrow.'
Meditation	needs	courage,	it	needs	fearlessness	and	it	also	need	strength.	In	fact
everybody	 is	 born	with	 a	 great	 strength	 but	 our	 lives	 are	 such	 that	we	 have	 a
thousand	holes	and	the	strength	goes	on	leaking	out.
We	are	like	a	bucket	with	many	holes	and	you	put	the	bucket	in	the	well:	when	it
is	under	the	water	it	is	full	of	water	and	as	you	start	pulling	it	out	all	the	water
starts	flowing.	By	the	time	it	reaches	your	hands	it	is	empty.	The	meditator	has	to
close	 all	 these	 holes,	 he	 has	 to	 preserve	 energy,	 he	 has	 to	 live	 a	 life	 very
consciously	so	that	nothing	is	wasted.
And	if	you	watch	you	will	be	surprised;	almost	ninety	per	cent	of	your	work	is
sheer	wastage,	you	could	have	avoided	it.	And	if	you	can	drop	the	unnecessary
ninety	 per	 cent	 then	 the	 ten	 per	 cent	 which	 is	 necessary	 is	 not	 a	 wastage.	 It
nourishes	you,	 it	makes	you	stronger,	 it	gives	you	power,	some	integrity,	some
centering.
A	sannyasins	life	has	to	be	a	continuous	elimination	of	the	non-essential	so	only
the	essential	is	left,	then	meditation	is	very	simple.	It	is	as	simple	as	breathing,
but	one	has	to	fulfil	these	throe	conditions.
WAKING	BEAUTY
(It	takes	the	kiss	of	bliss.)
Any	other	kind	of	beauty	is	superficial,	it	has	no	depth.	It	is	just	a	facade.	One
can	 cover	up	one's	 ugliness	but	 the	 covered-up	ugliness	 is	 still	 there,	 not	 only
there	but	it	is	continuously	growing,	spreading	like	cancer.
The	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 search	 for	 the	 real	 source	 of	 beauty.	 The	 real	 source	 of
beauty	 is	 the	explosion	 that	happens	when	you	 reach	 the	centre	of	your	being.
The	moment	you	touch	that	centre,	suddenly	there	is	an	explosion	of	joy.	Every
cell	of	your	being	starts	dancing,	every	fibre	of	your	existence	starts	vibrating	in
an	unknown,	mysterious	melody.	And	then	there	is	beauty.
That	beauty	has	depth,	that	beauty	has	something	divine	in	it.	It	cannot	be	taken
away,	 it	 cannot	 be	 destroyed	 because	 it	 is	 not	 something	 painted	 on	 from	 the
outside,	it	has	grown	from	within.	Such	a	person	is	beautiful	even	in	his	death.
Even	in	his	death	there	is	a	smile,	even	in	his	death	you	can	see	that	though	the
soul	has	left	the	body	there	are	still	footprint,	of	something	immensely	beautiful.
When	P.D.	Ouspensky,	one	of	the	disciples	of	George	Gurdjieff,	was	dying	the
doctors	insisted	that	he	lie	down	and	rest	because	time	was	short,	he	would	not
survive	more	 than	 twelve	 hours.	 But	 he	would	 not	 rest	 --	 he	went	 for	 a	 long
walk.	 His	 disciples	 and	 friends	 followed	 him	 and	 they	 asked	 'What	 are	 you
doing?
He	said	'I	want	to	die	fully	conscious.'	And	then	for	the	whole	night	he	walked
up	and	down	the	corridor.
All	 his	 friends	 and	 disciples	 remained	 awake	 watching	 him	 and	 they	 were
surprised	 by	 one	 thing,	 that	 as	 death	 started	 coming	 closer	 he	 started	 looking
more	 and	more	 beautiful,	more	 and	more	 graceful.	When	 everybody	who	 had
loved	 him	 and	was	 present	 felt	 that	 it	 was	 a	 tremendously	 beautiful	moment.
They	had	never	known	Ouspensky	in	such	a	beautiful	space	ever.
The	 blissful	 person	 lives	 beautifully,	 dies	 beautifully.	 And	 if	 one	 can	manage
these	 two	 things,	 to	 live	 beautifully	 and	 to	 die	 beautifully,	 one	 has	 managed
everything.	Then	one	has	arrived	at	the	ultimate	destination.
In	the	East	we	have	given	god	three	names	satyam,	shivam,	sundaram.	Satyam
means	the	ultimate	truth,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
shivam	means	 the	ultimate	good	and	sundaram	means	 the	ultimate	beauty.	But
remember,	sundaram,	the	last	name,	is	the	highest.
LOVE'S	VIEW:	LOVE	OR	YOU
(Prem	 Juni	 means	 love,	 and,	 a	 small	 white	 flower,	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 Eastern
flower,	Osho	tells	a	sannyasin,	which	has	a	very	beautiful	fragrance.)
Love	also	is	a	flower,	a	small	flower.	Love	is	also	white,	white	in	the	sense	that	it
contains	all	 the	colours.	 If	you	mix	all	 the	colours	 the	ultimate	 result	 is	white.
White	is	not	a	colour,	it	is	the	synthesis	of	all	the	colours.	It	is	just	as	black	is	not
a	colour	either;	it	is	the	absence	of	all	colours.	And	white	is	the	presence	of	all
colours.	 They	 are	 two	 extremes,	 and	 between	 black	 and	 white	 are	 the	 seven
colours.	When	 all	 the	 colours	 are	 absent,	 it	 is	 black;	when	 all	 the	 colours	 are
present	 then	 it	 is	white.	Love	 is	 a	multi-dimensional	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	white.
And	 white	 also	 represents	 innocence,	 purity,	 cleanliness,	 an	 empty	 book	 in
which	nothing	is	written	yet.
Sufis	have	a	book,	 they	call	 it	THE	BOOK	OF	THE	BOOKS.	 It	 is	 absolutely
empty,	nothing	is	written	on	it.	It	has	existed	for	at	least	one	thousand	years	and
it	 is	given	by	the	master	 to	 the	disciple;	 it	has	been	delivered	hand	to	hand.	In
these	 last	 thousand	 years	 no	 book	 has	 been	 read	 so	meditatively	 as	 this,	 The
Book	of	the	Books.	People	read	it,	they	meditate	on	each	page.	And	the	miracle
is	that	as	you	go	on	reading	it,	more	and	more	meanings	are	revealed.
If	 you	 just	 look	 at	 a	 blank	 paper	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 that	 your	 mind	 starts
projecting	itself	onto	it.	You	start	reading	things	which	are	not	there,	your	mind
projects	 them.	 And	 the	 book	 is	 complete	 only,	 one	 has	 studied	 it	 completely
only,	when	one	 comes	 to	 the	 point	when	 there	 is	 no	 projection,	when	you	 are
there,	 fully	 conscious	 and	 the	 empty	 page	 is	 there	 and	 there	 is	 no	 projection.
That	 day	 the	 book	 can	 be	 closed;	 one	 has	 understood	 the	 message.	 One	 has
become	 utterly	 empty,	 white.	 Hence	 white	 is	 also	 the	 colour	 of	 absolute
emptiness.
And	love	needs	emptiness.	The	person	who	is	full	of	ego	cannot	love;	the	person
who	is	utterly	egoless	has	the	capacity	to	move	into	deep	love.
BELIEVE	YOU	DIE	AND	YOU	ACCEPT	A	LIE
(Amrit	Sadhana	means	the	search	for	the	deathless.)
One	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 and	 the	 profoundest	 prayers	 is	 found	 in	 the
Upanishads.	It	is	the	smallest	prayer	ever	uttered	yet	it	contains	all	the	scriptures.
The	prayer	is:	Asto	ma	sadgamay	--	lead	me,	lord,	from	the	world	of	untruth	to
the	world	of	 truth.	Tumso	ma	 jyotirgamay	 --	 lead	me,	 lord,	 from	 the	world	 of
darkness	to	the	world	of	light.	Mrityorma	amritamgamay	--	lead	me,	lord,	from
the	world	of	death	 to	 the	world	of	 the	deathless.	This	 is	 the	whole	prayer,	 just
three	sentences.	Translated	exactly	 it	simply	means	from	untruth	 to	 truth,	 from
darkness	to	light,	from	death	to	deathlessness	--	and	this	is	the	whole	enquiry	of
a	sannyasin.	It	is	a	three-dimensional	enquiry.
We	have	to	drop	all	that	is	untrue.	The	moment	we	drop	the	untrue	the	truth	is
revealed	of	its	own	accord.	You	need	not	go	anywhere	in	search	of	it,	it	is	found
within.	The	moment	we	become	aware	of	our	inner	darkness	that	very	awareness
creates	 light.	 Awareness	 is	 light	 and	 when	 the	 light	 is	 there	 darkness	 starts
disappearing.	 And	 the	 moment	 there	 is	 truth	 and	 there	 is	 light	 suddenly	 one
becomes	absolutely	certain	of	one's	immortality.	There	is	no	way	to	die.	Death	is
the	greatest	illusion.	Nobody	has	ever	died,	people	just	believe	that	they	die.	It	is
a	belief,	it	has	no	relationship	to	the	truth.
Those	who	know,	know	that	life	is	eternal,	always	ongoing;	there	is	no	end	to	it	-
-	no	beginning,	no	end.
It	has	always	been	here,	it	will	always	be	here.
One	of	 the	great	 sages	of	 India,	Maharishi	Ramana,	was	dying,	 and	a	disciple
asked	him,	 'Bhagwan,	after	your	death	where	will	you	go	 to?'	And	even	at	 the
moment	 of	 death	 --	 he	 was	 suffering	 very	much	 physically	 because	 he	 had	 a
cancer	 of	 the	 throat;	 even	 speaking	 was	 difficult,	 even	 drinking	 water	 was
impossible	--	he	burst	out	laughing.	The	doctors	could	not	believe	it,	because	to
laugh	 like	 this	 was	 almost	 impossible,	 his	 throat	 was	 completely	 choked,	 not
even	a	single	drop	of	water	was	entering.	But	he	laughed	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
and	it	was	a	belly	laughter	and	for	many	days	he	had	not	even	spoken.	But	at	the
last	moment	to	this	enquiry	he	said	'For	my	whole	life	I	have	been	teaching	you
but	you	don't	listen.	You	are	still	a	fool.	You	are	asking	me	where	I	am	going?	I
have	never	gone	anywhere,	I	have	always	been	here	and	I	will	always	be	here	--
because	there	is	only	one	time,	and	that	is	now,	here.	There	is	no	other	space	and
no	other	time.	Now	and	here	--	these	two	words	contain	the	whole	existence.'
Begin	by	dropping	all	that	is	untrue,	all	that	you	have	believed	but	you	have	not
known	--	that	is	untrue.
Drop	 it.	 And	 become	 aware	 of	 your	 inner	 unconsciousness	 so	 that	 awareness
starts	dispelling	the	darkness.
And	 then	 the	 third	 happens	 on	 its	 own:	 one	 suddenly	 enters	 into	 a	 new
dimension,	one	goes	beyond	time.
And	to	go	beyond	time	is	to	go	beyond	death.	To	know	that	life	is	eternal	is	the
beginning	of	rejoicing.
EMPTINESS	IS	AM-TINESS
(Bliss	is	never	partial,	Osho	begins	this	address.)
It	is	never	imperfect,	because	it	cannot	be	divided	into	parts.	Either	it	is	or	it	is
not	but	you	cannot	have	a	little	bit	of	it,	less	or	more	of	it.	The	word	'quantity'	is
irrelevant	 to	bliss	When	 it	 happens	 it	 is	 always	perfect,	 it	 is	 always	 total,	 it	 is
always	whole.
So	it	cannot	happen	gradually,	you	cannot	go	on	achieving	it	little	by	little,	step
by	step.	It	is	a	jump,	a	quantum	leap	from	misery	to	bliss,	from	darkness	to	light,
from	death	 to	 life	 --	 just	 a	 jump.	 It	 is	not	a	 journey,	 remember,	 it	 is	 a	 jump,	a
sudden	jump.	The	whole	preparation	is	for	 the	 jump.	The	whole	 journey	is	not
from	misery	 to	 bliss,	 the	whole	 journey	 is	 to	 prepare	yourself	 so	 that	 you	 can
take	the	jump,	but	the	jump	happens	suddenly	and	totally.	It	does	not	happen	in
time,	not	even	in	a	split	second,	it	is	non-temporal.
Hence	 the	 person	who	 is	meditating	 is	 waiting	 for	 the	 ultimate	 surprise.	 It	 is
unpredictable	--	when	it	is	going	to	happen	nobody	knows,	nobody	can	say.	One
thing	is	certain,	that	if	you	are	ready...	and	readiness	means	if	you	are	empty	--
no	thought,	no	desire,	no	imagination,	no	memory,	no	mind	as	such	--	when	you
have	put	the	whole	mind	aside.	It	is	going	to	happen	--	that	much	is	certain	--	but
when,	nobody	can	say.
Whenever	your	emptiness	is	total,	immediately	the	whole	sky	descends	in	you,
you	are	transformed.
One	becomes	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha	and	then	life	really	begins.	Before	that	we	are
in	 the	 womb.	 That	 is	 the	 moment	 when	 one	 really	 comes	 out	 of	 the
psychological	womb.	For	the	first	time	we	see	what	existence	really	is	--	and	that
experience	is	the	experience	of	god.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011045
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
EGO	OR	ZERO
(Osho	talks	on	discipleship.)
The	only	art	of	being	a	disciple	is	to	be	a	zero.	These	are	the	two	possibilities,
either	one	can	be	an	ego	or	one	can	be	a	zero.	The	egoist	cannot	be	a	disciple.	To
be	 a	 disciple	 means	 readiness	 to	 learn,	 openness	 to	 learn	 --	 and	 the	 egoist	 is
closed.	 In	 his	 ego	 ,	 cannot	 accept	 that	 he	 does	 not	 know	 --	 and	 that	 is	 most
fundamental	requirement	for	learning,	to	know	that	you	don't	know.	Only	from
that	 state	 of	 not-knowing	 does	 disciplehood	 begin;	 that	 is	 the	 very	 seed	 of
disciplehood	--	the	state	of	not-knowing.	And	the	ego	is	always	pretending	to	be
knowledgeable.	It	knows	nothing	but	believes	that	it	knows.
The	 other	 possibility	 is	 just	 to	 be	 a	 zero	 a	 nobody,	 utterly	 empty.	 In	 that
emptiness	 learning	 is	 possible,	 the	 contact	 with	 the	 master	 is	 possible,	 the
communion	is	possible,	the	transmission	of	the	truth	beyond	words	is	possible.
Initiation	into	sannyas	means	readiness	to	become	a	zero	and	then	disciplehood
comes	of	its	own	accord.
DISCIPLESHIP...	OR	SANNYAS	STREAM
(Some	more	pointers	about	being	a	sannyasin.)
Sannyas	 means	 not	 to	 cling	 to	 anything,	 not	 to	 be	 in	 any	 way	 attached	 to
anything,	always	flowing,	not	making	a	home,	moving	like	a	river.
Life	 is	 dynamic	 and	 the	moment	 you	 stop	 it	 it	 loses	 something	 tremendously
significant;	then	it	is	no	more	a	river,	it	becomes	a	lake.	The	lake	is	closed,	the
river	was	open;	the	lake	will	never	reach	to	the	ocean	the	river	would	certainly
have	reached.	The	river	was	growing;	the	lake	is	stagnant,	in	a	sense	dead.
The	sannyasin	has	to	be	riverlike,	always	moving	from	the	familiar	towards	the
unfamiliar.	 Enjoy	 wherever	 you	 are	 but	 always	 remember	 it	 is	 only	 a
caravanserai,	an	overnight	stay,	and	in	the	morning	we	go,	so	there	is	no	need	to
cling.	We	are	just	travellers.	Only	the	Way	belongs	to	us	and	nothing	else.
This	should	be	so	in	all	the	dimensions	of	life.	Then	it	becomes	your	very	style
of	 living	 --	 unclinging,	 unattached,	 flowing,	 dynamic,	moving,	 always	moving
from	 the	 known	 to	 the	 unknown	 and	 ultimate	 from	 the	 unknown	 to	 the
unknowable	--	then	one	has	learned	the	very	essence	of	sannyas.	It	is	perpetual
growth,	it	is	eternal	pilgrimage.
MIND	IS	AN	HEIR	CONDITIONING
(While	 meditation	 is	 dropping	 your	 head,	 Osho	 talks	 about	 the	 two	 ways	 in
which	consciousness	can	function.)
When	consciousness	functions	as	a	mind	it	functions	through	prejudices,	a	priori
ideas,	conditionings	--
Catholic,	Protestant,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Communist,	theist,	atheist.	There	are
layers	 and	 layers	 of	 conditionings	 and	 they	 are	 not	 even	 consistent	with	 each
other.
You	may	have	been	conditioned	by	many	people.	One	of	your	conditioners	may
have	been	a	Christian	and	another	may	have	been	a	Hindu;	you	may	have	been
reading	 the	Bhagavad	Gita,	 the	Koran,	 the	Bible,	 the	Dhammapada;	 you	may
have	 been	 brought	 up	 by	 Catholic	 parents	 but	 you	 may	 have	 studied	 in	 a
Protestant	school.	And	 then	 there	are	a	 thousand	and	one	 ideologies	 in	 the	air;
and	 the	 mind	 is	 very	 vulnerable,	 it	 goes	 on	 catching	 everything,	 it	 goes	 on
accumulating.	 Hence	 all	 those	 layers	 are	 not	 even	 consistent	 with	 each	 other;
they	are	contradictory.
Mind	is	a	chaos,	it	is	noisy.	And	every	part	of	it	is	trying	to	dominate.	There	is
continuous	war	--	who	is	going	to	win?	The	atheist	or	the	theist,	the	Catholic	or
the	Communist	 --	who	 is	 going	 to	win?	Nobody	 can	 ever	win,	 but	 this	whole
fight	in	yourself	destroys	your	energy.	It	depletes	you,	it	leaves	you	exhausted;	it
leaves	you	without	any	vigour,	without	any	freshness,	it	tires	you.	Life	becomes
a	 drag;	 somehow	 one	 goes	 on	 pulling	 oneself	 together.	 And	 that	 togetherness
also	cannot	be	taken	for	granted.
A	small	incident	may	prove	the	last	straw	on	the	camel	and	one	may	go	insane...
because	people	are	almost	boiling,	near	about	one-hundred	degrees.	Just	a	little
incident	--	your	lover	leaves	you,	your	bank	fails,	your	business	goes	bankrupt	--
anything	is	enough	to	bring	one	to	that	point	where	one	passes	over	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
boundary	of	sanity	into	insanity...	because	the	difference	is	only	of	degrees.	The
difference	is	not	qualitative,	it	is	only	quantitative.
To	live	through	the	mind	is	to	live	an	insane	life,	out	of	chaos,	with	no	meaning,
no	 significance.	 But	 there	 is	 also	 another	 way	 --	 that's	 what	 meditation	 is.
Meditation	 means	 living	 directly,	 immediately,	 putting	 the	 mind	 aside,
responding	 to	 reality	without	 any	 prejudices,	 seeing	 things	 as	 they	 are,	 not	 as
you	would	 like	 them	to	be,	not	according	 to	your	expectations	but	 just	as	 they
are.
The	 whole	 art	 of	 meditation	 is	 to	 see	 things	 just	 as	 they	 are,	 without	 any
interference,	without	 any	distortion	 --	 and	 then	 life	 becomes	 something	 totally
different.	It	moves	into	a	new	dimension.	You	are	full	of	energy	because	all	that
conflict	is	finished,	all	that	chaos	is	gone	--	you	have	bypassed	it	--	there	is	great
silence.	And	in	that	silence	there	is	joy,	in	that	silence	there	is	understanding,	in
that	silence	there	is	clarity.
You	 can	 see	 who	 you	 are,	 where	 you	 are,	 why	 you	 are.	 All	 these	 questions
simply	disappear.	Not	that	you	have	found	some	answers	in	the	scriptures	but	the
ultimate	answer,	which	dissolved	all	questions,	has	arisen	in	you.
And	Maila	means	fragrance.	To	 live	a	 life	of	meditativeness	 is	 to	 live	a	 life	of
fragrance.	The	mind	stinks,	it	is	a	rotten	gutter.	No-mind	is	the	opening	of	your
consciousness.	It	opens	like	a	flower:	there	is	a	great	release	of	fragrance.	Your
whole	life	becomes	fragrant	with	bliss,	with	truth,	with	love,	with	freedom,	with
all	that	is	worth	having,	with	all	that	is	timeless,	indestructible,	eternal.
GRACE	IS	OUR	ORIGINAL	FACE
(Again	 this	 evening	 Osho	 talks	 on	 the	 authentic	 beauty.)	 Beauty	 is	 physical,
grace	 is	 spiritual.	 It	 is	 beauty	 but	 on	 a	 totally	 different	 plane.	 Beauty	 is	 your
exterior	 expression,	 grace	 is	 your	 lnteriority.	 Beauty	 can	 be	 thought	 of	 as	 a
circumference,	grace	is	the	centre.	Hence	one	can	pretend	to	be	beautiful	but	one
cannot	pretend	to	be	graceful.	One	can	create	a	false	beauty,	pseudo.
It	is	just	an	appearance	and	it	can	deceive	others	but	it	cannot	deceive	you.	You
can	have	a	beautiful	mask	--
others	may	be	deceived,	but	you	will	know	all	 the	 time	that	you	are	wearing	a
mask,	it	is	not	your	original	face.
Grace	cannot	be	cultivated,	 it	cannot	be	 invented;	 it	has	 to	be	discovered.	 It	 is
divine.	It	is	already	there;	we	just	have	to	dig	deep	enough	into	our	own	being.	It
is	 exactly	 like	 the	 process	 of	 digging	 a	well	 in	 the	 earths	 the	water	 is	 already
there,	you	just	have	to	remove	a	few	layers	of	the	earth,	a	few	rocks,	stones,	and
suddenly	the	water	appears.	In	the	same	way	grace	is	already	a	gift	of	god;	it	is
there	--	we	have	to	discover	it.
Sannyas	is	the	discovery	of	grace.	And	once	you	have	found	your	centre	then	it
starts	 radiating,	 then	 it	 starts	 transforming	 your	 circumference	 too.	 Then	 you
need	not	pretend	 to	be	beautiful,	your	grace	 is	enough.	 It	 starts	changing	your
behaviour	 and	 your	 actions;	 even	 your	 physical	 body	 goes	 through	 a	 radical
change.	And	 the	beauty	 that	comes	out	of	grace	 is	 something	of	a	 tremendous
value	because	it	is	truly	sos	it	is	your	original	face,	your	real	nature.
Remember	 one	 fundamental	 laws	 the	 pseudo,	 the	 false,	 the	 unreal,	 the	 untrue,
always	 create,	 a	prison	 for	you,	 the	 real,	 the	 authentic,	 the	 true,	 always	brings
freedom.
Jesus	says	truth	liberates.	That	seems	to	be	one	of	the	most	important	sayings	out
of	all	his	sayings	 truth	 liberates.	And	 then	we	can	see	 that	untruth	must	create
bondage.
Drop	the	untrue	and	search	for,	seek,	the	true.
LAUGHTER	IS	HIS	LITURGY
(Osho	shares	his	vision	of	real	spirituality.)
My	religion	consists	of	blissfulness.	 It	has	nothing	 to	do	with	seriousness,	 it	 is
against	 seriousness.	To	me	 seriousness	 is	 a	 sin,	 and	blissfulness	 is	 the	greatest
virtue.	Hence	my	effort	is	to	create	saints	who	are	capable	of	laughing,	singing,
dancing.
In	the	past	the	saints	have	been	very	boring,	they	have	been	heavy,	dark,	dismal.
They	 have	 burdened	 humanity's	 heart;	 they	 have	 destroyed	 all	 cheerfulness,
playfulness,	 joyousness.	 They	 were	 all	 against	 laughter.	 To	 them	 laughter
seemed	to	be	something	irreligious.
To	me	laughter	is	a	form	of	prayer.	In	fact	I	know	only	very	few	things	which	the
quality	of	laughter.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	you	totally	laugh	the	ego	disappears.	In	that	moment	there	is	no	ego,	there
is	no	one	who	is	laughing,	there	is	only	laughter.	Yes,	when	you	try	to	laugh	that
is	another	matter;	then	you	are	there.	If	you	are	just	laughing	because	others	are
laughing	 then	you	are	 there.	 If	you	are	 just	 laughing	 to	be	polite,	 then	you	are
there.	But	if	the	laughter	is	happening	then	you	dissolve	in	it.
Any	action	that	helps	you	dissolve	the	ego	is	prayer.
I	am	not	 interested	in	 the	other	world,	my	interest	 is	here,	now	this	moment	 is
my	total	interest.	This	moment	has	to	be	lived	joyously	because	the	next	moment
will	be	born	out	of	it.	So	why	care	about	the	next?	If	this	moment	is	full	of	joy
and	dance	and	song,	the	next	will	be	more	so!
Don't	 destroy	 this	moment	 for	 the	 future.	 That	 is	 one	 of	 the	 ancient	 habits	 of
humanity	and	religions	have	been	 teaching	 this.	They	say	 this	 life	 is	mundane,
worldly,	materialist	and	to	be	interested	in	it	is	not	good;	sacrifice	this	life	for	the
life	beyond.	That's	how	they	have	made	the	whole	of	humanity	miserable.
I	say	sacrifice	all	beyonds	for	this	moment.	There	is	no	other	time	than	this,	no
other	place	than	this.
When	one	lives	with	such	totality,	 intensity,	passion,	one's	life	becomes	aflame
with	cheerfulness	and	joy.
And	when	the	next	life	comes	we	will	be	there	so	we	will	see	how	to	dance,	how
to	sing;	we	will	celebrate	that	too.	The	best	way	to	prepare	for	the	other	life	is	to
dance	and	sing	and	love	and	laugh	here,	otherwise	where	are	you	going	to	do	the
rehearsal?	Practise	here!
My	feeling	is	that	 if	your	so-called	saints	enter	heaven	they	will	not	be	able	to
laugh	even	there,	they	would	have	forgotten	how	to	laugh.	They	will	not	be	able
to	dance	or	sing.	They	will	have	completely	lost	track	of	those	dimensions.
So	this	is	going	to	be	your	religion.	So	the	more	blissful	you	are,	the	closer	you
are	to	me.	I	don't	teach	any	doctrine,	just	a	way	of	life,	a	way	of	love,	a	way	of
laughter.
PRAYER	IS	THE	OUTPOURING	OF	GLEE
(Not	a	petition	or	plea.	Osho	goes	on	to	talk	of	true	prayer	to	Swami	Vandano.)
The	prayer	that	is	prevalent	in	the	world,	in	the	churches,	in	the	temples,	in	the
mosques,	is	not	true	prayer	because	there	is	desire	in	it.	People	pray	to	god	only
to	get	something,	and	the	moment	you	pray	to	get	something	you	have	destroyed
your	prayer.	 It	 is	a	business	proposal.	 It	 is	buttressing	god	as	 if	god	 is	an	ego,
praising	 god	 in	 order	 to	 persuade	 him	 to	 do	 some	 favour	 for	 you.	 It	 is	 sheer
stupidity!
The	real	prayer	is	a	thankfulness,	not	a	desire	at	all.	When	you	start	feeling	how
much	 the	 universe	 has	 given	 to	 you	 already	 without	 your	 asking	 you	 feel
gratitude.	To	show	that	gratitude	is	real	prayer,	authentic	prayer;	even	words	are
not	needed,	but	just	the	feel	the	feel	of	gratitude.
Yes,	 sometimes	 it	 overwhelms	 one	 and	 one	 would	 like	 to	 dance	 and	 sing	 in
praise	of	god,	but	for	no	other	reason;	just	because	one	is	so	full	of	thankfulness
that	one	cannot	contain	it	and	it	starts	overflowing.
That	 is	 true	 prayer.	 Sometimes	 one	may	 simply	 bow	 down	 to	 the	 earth	 or	 lie
down	on	 the	earth	 like	a	small	child	 lying	on	 the	breast	of	 the	mother,	 resting,
feeling	a	deep	communion	with	the	earth	--	a	silent	thankfulness.	Nothing	is	said
but	all	is	heard.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Vandano.	Learn	true	prayer,	learn	thankfulness,	gratitude.
LOVE	A	WAY,	BECAUSE	LOVE	IS	THE	WAY
(The	way	to	god,	 to	 truth,	and	to	freedom,	Osho	tells	Prem	Marga.)	If	one	can
love	 unconditionally	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 of	 any	 Christianity,	 Hinduism	 or
Mohammedanism	 in	 the	 world.	 Because	man	 have	 forgotten	 how	 to	 love,	 all
these	religions	exist.
Love	 is	 spiritual	health.	And	when	you	are	not	healthy	of	course	 there	will	be
many	doctors	and	many	physicians	and	many	'pathies'	--	and	they	are	all	going
to	exploit	you.	In	the	name	of	helping	you	they	will	exploit	you,	when	the	simple
thing	is	to	learn	ways	of	loving.	Only	a	few	things	have	to	be	dropped	and	love
becomes	possible.
One	 has	 to	 drop	 any	motivation;	 one	 has	 to	 love	 for	 love's	 sake.	 If	 there	 is	 a
motive	 it	 is	 greed,	 it	 is	 not	 love.	 One	 has	 to	 drop	 possessiveness.	 If	 there	 is
possessiveness	 you	 don't	 love,	 because	 to	 possess	 somebody	means	 to	 reduce
him	to	a	thing,	and	no	lover	can	do	that	--	it	is	murder!
Drop	 jealousy	and	 love	wells	up.	 Jealousy	means	 that	 I	 am	 the	owner.	 It	 is	an
ego	trip,	and	wherever	there	is	ego	there	is	poison,	and	the	poison	kills	the	very
source	of	love.	One	has	to	become	aware	of	just	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
these	 few	 things	and	discard	 them	and	one's	 life	becomes	a	 lotus	of	 love.	And
then	there	is	no	need	to	go	in	any	search	of	god,	god	will	come	in	search	of	you.
This	 is	 my	 observation,	 that	 god	 always	 comes	 seeking	 the	 true	 seeker.
Whenever	the	disciple	is	ready	the	master	appears.
PURITY	IS	MENTAL	NUDITY
(It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	morality,	which	 is	 something	 calculated.)	There	 are
thousands	of	moralities	in	the	world.	The	Hindu	has	one	morality,	the	Christian
another,	the	Buddhist	still	another.
Purity	can	be	only	one.	The	blank	paper	can	be	only	one.	Yes,	writing	can	differ;
one	can	write	Arabic	or	Sanskrit	or	Greek	or	Latin,	one	can	quote	the	Bible	or
the	Vedas	or	the	Gita	or	the	Koran,	but	if	the	paper	is	blank	then	it	is	always	the
same:	two	blank	papers	have	no	difference.	To	me	purity	means	a	mind	which	is
like	a	blank	paper;	nothing	is	written	on	it.	Morality	is	a	writing,	immorality	is
also	a	writing.
And	one	thing	is	immoral	in	one	place,	the	same	thing	is	moral	in	another	place.
In	fact	 I	have	never	come	across	a	single	 thing	which	has	not	been	considered
moral	somewhere	at	some	period	of	history,	and	vice	versa;	neither	have	I	come
across	a	single	thing	which	has	not	been	considered	immoral	somewhere	in	some
time	of	history.	So	it	all	depends.	These	are	man's	ideas	about	what	is	right	and
what	is	wrong.
To	be	pure	means	to	be	empty	of	all	ideas.	It	is	going	beyond	the	moral	and	the
immoral,	it	is	simple	silence.	It	is	erasing	all	writing,	cleaning	your	slate.
In	 a	 small	 school	 the	 teacher	 told	 the	 small	 children	 to	write	 down	what	 they
would	do	if	they	were	a	very	rich	man,	a	millionaire.	The	children	started	writing
thousands	 of	 fantasies.	 Somebody	 thought	 to	 go	 around	 the	 world,	 somebody
thought	 to	go	 to	 the	moon,	somebody	thought	 to	purchase	an	aeroplane	or	 this
and	that.	Just	one	child	wag	sitting	doing	nothing.	The	teacher	said	'Why	are	you
not	writing?'	He	said	'This	is	what	I	would	do	if	I	were	a	millionaire	--	I	would
not	do	anything	at	all!	That	child	had	some	insight!
The	 real	 purity	 is	 a	 state	 of	 non-doing,	 a	 state	 of	 non-thinking,	 a	 state	 of	 just
awareness	 without	 any	 content,	 consciousness	 without	 any	 content.	 And	 to
achieve	 it	 is	 the	 ultimate	 achievement;	 there	 is	 nothing	 higher	 than	 that.	Once
you	have	known	it,	all	is	known	to	you.
MUD	CAN	MOTHER	MIRACLES
(Blossoms	and	Buddhas	are	born	of	 it.	Osho	 is	addressing	Ma	Kamalesh	 from
Japan.)	 The	 lotus	 is	 very	 symbolic.	 First,	 it	 grows	 out	 of	 dirty	 mud.	 It	 is	 a
miracle.	Looking	 at	 the	dirty	 and	nobody	could	 conceive	 that	 such	 a	beautiful
flower	 could	 come	 out	 of	 it.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 man:	 in	 his
unconsciousness	 he	 is	 nothing	 but	 dirty	 mud;	 when	 he	 becomes	 conscious,
awakened,	 a	 Buddha,	 he	 becomes	 a	 lotus.	 It	 is	 almost	 inconceivable	 that	 the
ordinary	unconscious	man	can	attain	to	such	heights	of	blissfulness.
Secondly,	the	lotus	grows	in	water,	floats	on	the	water,	but	is	so	velvety	that	the
water	doesn't	touch	it.
Even	in	the	morning	when	you	see	dewdrops	gathered	on	the	lotus	leaves	they
are	there	like	pearls,	separate;	they	don't	even	make	the	lotus	petal	wet.	That	is
the	second	meaning	of	the	lotus,	a	sannyasin	has	to	live	in	the	world	in	such	a
way	that	nothing	touches	him.	The	escapist	is	not	a	true	sannyasin,	he	who	runs
away	from	the	world	is	a	coward.
Live	 in	 the	 world,	 accept	 its	 challenge,	 but	 be	 a	 lotus.	 Remember	 these	 two
things	and	just	these	two	things	are	enough	to	transform	your	whole	life.
The	 first	will	 remind	you	of	 your	 ultimate	 potential	 and	 the	 second	will	 show
you	the	way	to	reach	it.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	don't	know.
--	 Then	 be	 here	 forever.	 I	 like	 people	 who	 don't	 know!	 This	 is	 the	 place	 for
people	who	 don't	 know	 anything	 at	 all.	 I	 am	 collecting	 all	 these	 not-knowing
people	around	me...	So	become	part	of	this	madhouse!
(laughter)	Good!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011055
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
PRAYER	SPOKEN.	COMMUNION	BROKEN
(Just	learn	to	listen.	Osho	talked	on	the	difference	between	meditation	and	prayer
on	 the	 second	of	 this	month;	 tonight	 he	 refers	 to	meditation	 as	 true	 prayer,	 as
opposed	to	the	prayer	that	can	be	said.)	The	moment	you	are	in	absolute	silence
all	that	you	ever	wanted	to	say	is	said	without	saying	it,	is	heard	without	saying
it.
There	 are	 things	 which	 cannot	 be	 said	 and	 those	 are	 the	 real	 things.	 Prayer
consists	only	of	 those	 things	which	cannot	be	said,	hence	a	spoken	prayer	 is	a
false	prayer.	The	moment	you	say	it	you	have	falsified	it,	 it	 is	no	more	true.	It
has	to	be	just	a	deep	profound	silence.	Rather	than	speaking	to	god	one	needs	to
learn	how	to	listen	to	him.	Prayer	is	not	speaking	but	listening.
What	 needs	 to	 be	 said?	 Words	 are	 very	 inadequate,	 and	 even	 if	 they	 were
adequate	then	too	they	would	be	irrelevant	because	god	knows	it	already.	Before
you	come	to	know	what	your	heart	wants	to	say	god	knows	it.	God	is	closer	to
your	 heart	 than	 you	 yourself	 are.	There	 are	many	deeper	 layers	 of	 your	 being
which	are	not	known	even	to	yourself	but	before	god	you	are	utterly	naked.
Prayer	 means	 to	 be	 silent	 in	 your	 utter	 nakedness	 totally	 exposed,	 available,
receptive.	And	that	is	the	moment	when	your	prayer	reaches	to	god.	That	is	the
moment	when	communion	starts	happening.
The	 communion	 from	 head	 to	 head	 is	 the	 most	 superficial,	 hence	 it	 has	 a
separate	name,	communication.
Communion	from	heart	to	heart	is	deeper,	but	still	there	is	a	communion	which
is	far	deeper	than	the	heart-to-heart	communion.	That	can	only	be	expressed	by
an	 orgasmic	 union,	 not	 communion	 but	 just	 union.	 Communication	 is	 most
superficial,	then	communion	is	a	little	deeper	and	then	there	is	union.
In	communication	you	use	words,	in	communion	you	use	feelings,	emotions,	and
in	union	nothing	is	used:	you	dissolve	yourself	in	the	whole.	That	is	the	ultimate
in	prayer.
BLISS	IS	IT
(Pleasure,	happiness	and	joy,	only	hint	at	it.)
Pleasure	is	very	limited,	in	fact	it	only	exists	for	a	split	moment.	There	are	only
two	basic	pleasures,	 food	and	sex.	When	you	are	enjoying	eating	 something	 it
exists	 only	 for	 a	moment	when	 it	 is	 on	 your	 tongue	 and	 you	 can	 taste	 it;	 the
moment	it	goes	below	the	throat	the	pleasure	is	gone,	it	is	finished.	It	is	only	a
question	of	a	few	little	buds	on	your	tongue.	Just	a	little	plastic	surgery	and	you
will	lose	all	pleasure	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
eating.
In	the	Second	World	War	it	happened	that	a	man	had	to	go	through	an	operation
in	which	his	 throat,	 the	connection	between	his	mouth	and	the	stomach,	had	to
be	removed.	But	a	device	was	found,	a	small	pipe	was	fitted	in	his	stomach.	He
could	pour	Coca	Cola	into	the	pipe,	but	there	was	no	joy,	no	pleasure!	The	man
was	 in	 very	 great	 trouble,	 the	 body	 was	 nourished.	 Everything	 was	 perfectly
okay,	 he	 was	 taking	 everything	 nourishing,	 but	 pleasure	 was	 missing.	 So	 he
found	a	ways	first	he	would	take	the	Coca	Cola	in	his	mouth,	rinse	it	around	his
mouth	and	then	pour	it	into	the	pipe	(much	laughter)...	because	the	taste	buds	are
in	the	tongue,	nowhere	else.	In	this	way	ho	managed	both.	It	looks	foolish,	but
that's	what	we	are	all	doing.	(laughter)	Whether	the	pipe	is	outside	or	inside	what
difference	does	it	make?
And	actually	the	case	is	the	same	with	sex	only	for	a	split	second	when	you	go
into	a	spasm...	It	is	going	a	little	bit	berserk,	it	is	a	kind	of	epileptic	fit,	but	it	is
relaxing!	 (much	 laughter)	All	 the	 tensions	disappear,	 one	 feels	 good.	One	was
carrying	so	many	tensions	and	anxieties,	and	it	is	like	a	shaking	up!	But	there	is
nothing	much	in	it.
Pleasure	is	very	momentary	and	very	childish.	Happiness	has	a	little	depth,	it	has
a	little	vastness,	but	for	that	you	have	to	grow	some	taste.	For	example,	you	will
have	to	learn	the	art	of	enjoying	classical	music.	It	is	not	given	by	biology;	you
have	 to	 grow	 a	 little	 beyond	 biology.	 Then	 you	 can	 enjoy	music,	 poetry,	 art,
literature	--	there	are	thousands	of	things.	Happiness	is	a	little	vaster,	higher.	Joy
is	even	a	 little	more	vast	and	more	subtle.	 Joy	means	being	 in	a	 state	of	well-
being,	just	feeling	good	with	no	ulterior	motive,	for	no	reason	at	all;	feeling	good
just	to	be	breathing,	sitting	silently,	relaxing,	swimming	or	looking	at	the	stars.
Joy	is	not	focussed	on	objects,	happiness	is;	joy	is	more	free	from	objects.	One
can	 be	 joyous	 without	 any	 objects,	 one	 can	 simply	 be	 with	 closed	 eyes	 and
joyous.	But	bliss	is	absolutely	unlimited.	Joy	comes	and	goes,	it	is	a	mood.	And
when	joy	goes,	in	the	wake	comes	sadness.
Bliss	comes	and	never	goes.	Once	 it	has	happened	 there	 is	no	way	 to	undo	 it;
once	it	has	happened	it	has	happened.	And	it	is	unlimited.	As	far	as	you	con	see
It	 is	 there.	 It	 is	an	ocean	without	any	source.	And	that	has	been	the	goal	of	all
true	seekers,	true	religious	people.
I	am	not	against	pleasure,	not	against	happiness,	not	against	joy.	I	would	like	you
to	use	them	as	stepping	stones	towards	blissfulness.
(Osho	 talks	 on	 similar	 lines	 to	 another	 sannyasin.	 Bliss	 transcends	 the	 whole
pleasure-happiness-joy	trinity,	he	says.)
It	is	something	combining	all	three	and	yet	something	more	than	the	total	sum	of
all	those	three.	And	that	something	more	is	its	reality.
It	is	easy	to	know	physical	pleasure	--	even	animals	know	it.	It	is	a	little	difficult
to	 know	 happiness	 but	 many	 human	 beings	 --	 the	 painters,	 the	 poets,	 the
musicians,	the	dancers	--	know	it.	It	is	a	little	more	difficult	to	know	joy	but	still
a	few	people	--	children,	lovers	--	know	about	it.	But	bliss	is	known	only	by	the
Buddhas,	by	those	who	have	awakened	totally.	And	that	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
Unless	that	is	achieved	one	remains	a	beggar.	Once	it	is	achieved	one	becomes
an	emperor.	And	the	conquest	is	such	that	it	cannot	be	taken	back,	that	it	is	yours
forever.
(Delving	into	a	dictionary	won't	give	you	a	clue	about	the	nature	of	bliss,	Osho
tells	Anand	Apurvo.)	 In	 the	 dictionary	 you	 can	 find	meanings	 of	 all	 kinds	 of
words	--	'love'	'god'	'truth'	--	but	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	what	love	is,	you
will	not	be	able	to	know	what	god	is,	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	what	bliss	is.
The	real	meaning	has	to	be	found	in	existence,	not	in	a	dictionary.	The	dictionary
is	befooling	many	people's	inner	world.	People	just	go	on	accumulating	words,
and	when	they	become	acquainted	with	words	they	think	they	know	what	it	is.
It	is	like	a	blind	man	who	is	acquainted	with	the	word	'light'	'rainbow'	and	all	its
colours,	but	what	does	he	know	about	the	colours,	what	does	he	know	about	the
rainbow,	what	can	he	know	about	the	light?	They	are	just	empty	words	with	no
content	in	them.
'Bliss'	is	one	of	those	words	which	is	not	known	by	us.	It	has	to	be	known,	it	has
to	be	discovered.	The	journey	to	bliss	is	the	journey	of	sannyas.
I	am	not	much	interested	in	god,	neither	am	I	much	interested	in	truth,	but	I	am
absolutely	 interested	 in	 blissfulness,	 because	 my	 own	 experience	 is	 that	 the
moment	you	become	blissful	god	comes	searching	for	you;	you	need	not	bother
about	him	at	all.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	you	are	blissful	truth	descends	in	you;	you	have	prepared	the	ground.	To
the	blissful	person	miracles	start	happening	because	he	is	in	the	right	key,	he	is
attuned;	 now	 everything	 is	 possible.	 The	 person	 who	 is	 blissful	 is	 entitled	 to
miracles.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 bother	 about	 all	 that	 --	 that	 happens	 on	 its	 own
accord	 --	 but	 bliss	 you	 have	 to	 seek	 and	 search	 for.	And	 one	 of	 the	 strangest
things	is	that	bliss	is	not	far	away	from	you,	it	is	not	somewhere	on	the	moon	or
on	Everest.
Standing	 on	Everest	Hillary	must	 have	 felt	 a	 little	 stupid.	What	was	 he	 doing
there?	(laughter)	Just	think
--	Hillary	 standing	 there.	There	was	nothing	 to	do!	The	moment	he	arrived	he
looked	all	around	and	started	descending	--	there	was	nothing	to	do.	There	was
not	even	enough	space	to	pitch	a	tent?	What	can	you	do	there?
Bliss	is	not	far	away,	it	is	within	you,	hence	the	journey	is	a	withinward	journey.
We	have	to	find	a	few	spaces,	a	few	intervals,	between	our	outer	activities	to	turn
in.	Whenever	there	is	an	opportunity,	whenever	you	have	nothing	to	do,	rejoice,
because	 now	 you	 can	 turn	 in.	 Rather	 than	 rushing	 into	 some	 other	 activity	 or
inventing	 some	 activity,	 or	 doing	 something	 just	 because	 one	 has	 to	 do
something...
You	can	watch	people	on	their	holidays:	they	go	on	doing	stupid	things.	For	the
whole	week	they	wait	for	the	holiday	hoping	that	they	will	relax,	and	when	the
holiday	is	there?	You	can	ask	any	wife	--	she	is	very	tired	on	the	holiday	because
the	husband	is	at	home,	the	children	are	at	home	and	they	are	all	doing	all	kinds
of	neurotic	things	And	the	most	problematic	is	the	husband:	the	clock	was	going
perfectly	well	 --	 he	will	 open	 it;	 the	 car	was	 going	 perfectly	well	 and	 he	will
open	it.	He	has	to	do	something!	He	cannot	sit	silently,	he	will	find	excuses	not
to.
Whenever	you	have	time,	any	moment,	relax	and	go	in.	Forget	the	whole	world
for	a	moment,	as	if	it	does	not	exist.	That	is	one	of	the	ancient	strategies	thinking
that	the	world	consists	only	of	illusions	--	it	is	not	that	it	is	illusory,	this	is	just	a
device	--	that	it	is	made	of	the	same	stuff	as	dreams	are	made	of.	Thinking	this	is
just	so	that	you	can	move	in;	there	is	no	need	to	bother	about	it.	Forgot	all	about
it,	lot	it	disappears	and	you	go	into	your	aloneness.	And	it	is	there	that	you	will
find	the	source	of	bliss.
Once	it	is	found	then	everything	else	will	start	happening	of	its	own	accord.
(And	it's	strange	but	true	that	it	takes	guts	not	to	be	blue	-	Osho	continues	with
the	theme	of	bliss.)	Misery	is	available	readymade	and	cheap!	In	fact	you	need
not	go	to	the	shops	to	purchase	it,	you	can	pick	it	up	anywhere	by	the	side	of	the
road.	 And	 people	 are	 very	 generous	 in	 giving	 misery	 to	 you.	 Even	 without
asking	they	will	give	misery	to	you.
It	 needs	 courage	 to	 reject	 misery,	 to	 resist	 the	 temptation	 to	 choose	 it	 when
everybody	 else	 is	 choosing	 it.	 It	 needs	 courage	 to	 search	 for	 bliss	 while	 the
whole	 world	 is	 living	 in	misery	 because	 these	miserable	 people	 will	 call	 you
selfish.	 They	 will	 say	 that	 the	 whole	 world	 is	 living	 in	 misery	 and	 you	 are
meditating?
Is	this	the	time	to	meditate?	If	they	are	right	then	there	is	never	going	to	be	time
to	meditate;	then	Buddha	was	selfish,	Krishna	was	selfish,	Lao	Tzu	was	selfish	-
-	because	the	world	has	always	been	in	misery.	And	if	one	waits	to	meditate	for
the	time	when	nobody	is	in	misery	that	time	is	never	going	to	come.
It	 needs	 courage	 to	 stand	 alone,	 because	 people	 will	 not	 like	 you	 if	 you	 are
blissful.	If	you	are	miserable	everybody	will	feel	sympathy	for	you	it	is	really	a
strange	world	--	and	if	you	are	blissful	everybody	will	feel	jealous	of	you.	If	you
are	really	blissful	they	will	destroy	you;	they	cannot	tolerate	you,	you	cannot	be
forgiven.	 They	 could	 not	 forgive	 Jesus,	 they	 could	 not	 forgive	 Socrates;	 they
have	 never	 been	 able	 to	 forgive	 blissful	 people	 --	 that's	why	 I	 say	 bliss	 needs
courage.
And	my	sannyasins	have	to	be	very	conscious	about	it,	that	they	are	taking	a	risk
by	being	blissful.	To	dance	in	a	world	of	cripples	is	risky.	They	will	break	your
legs!	To	talk	about	light	in	a	world	of	blind	people	is	dangerous.	But	the	risk	has
to	be	taken	because	living	in	misery	is	not	worth	living	at	all.
DISCIPLESHIP	IS	OWNING	YOUR	TRIP
Man	 ordinarily	 lives	 in	 darkness.	 It	 is	 his	 own	 creation,	 it	 is	 his	 own
responsibility;	 he	 has	 chosen	 it.	 But	 it	 is	 against	 his	 ego	 to	 accept	 the
responsibility	so	he	goes	on	throwing	the	responsibility	on	others'
shoulders.
And	unless	you	accept	the	responsibility,	there	is	no	possibility	of	any	revolution
in	your	life.	You	can	go	on	cursing	the	whole	world,	you	can	go	on	saying	it	is
fate,	it	is	karma,	it	is	the	economic	structure,	it	is	the	state,	it	is	the	church.	You
can	go	on	finding	some	causes	for	your	misery,	but	that	is	not	going	to	help,	that
is	not	going	to	change	you.	In	fact	it	is	a	way	of	consoling	yourself,	"What	can	I
do?	It	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
predetermined.	Nothing	is	in	my	hands	so	I	simply	have	to	accept	it	unwillingly,
in	despair.	But	I	have	to	tolerate	it,	I	have	to	live	with	it."	Then	life	becomes	a
misery.
The	first	action	of	a	sannyasin	is	to	take	the	whole	responsibility	on	oneself:	"I
am	responsible."	With	that	begins	a	new	dimension:	"If	I	am	responsible	then	I
can	 change.	 Then	 I	 need	 not	 choose	 darkness,	 I	 can	 choose	 light;	 I	 need	 not
remain	 unconscious,	 I	 can	make	 an	 effort	 to	 be	 conscious."	 And	 in	 that	 very
effort	is	the	dawn,	the	morning,	the	beginning	of	the	day.
As	your	consciousness	starts	rising	above	the	horizon,	life	starts	having	a	totally
different	flavor.	Then	it	is	a	dance,	a	celebration.
Remember,	whenever	you	are	miserable,	sad,	negative,	in	a	dark	hole,	remember
again	 and	 again:	 you	 are	 responsible.	 Howsoever	 it	 hurts,	 never	 shirk	 the
responsibility	of	 it	because	 that	 is	 the	 root	cause	of	misery	being	prolonged.	 It
can	be	prolonged	for	centuries,	for	lives	together.	It	can	be	cut	in	a	single	blow
of	a	sword.
The	 moment	 you	 say,	 "I	 am	 responsible,"	 you	 have	 taken	 the	 sword	 in	 your
hand.	 And	 if	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 accept	 that	 this	 is	 your	 responsibility,	 you	 are
already	getting	out	of	it,	because	who	wants	to	be	miserable?
If	you	are	responsible	and	you	are	creating	it,	you	start	withdrawing	your	energy.
You	 no	 longer	 feed	 it,	 you	 no	 longer	 nourish	 it.	 You	 start	 nourishing	 just	 the
opposite	-	and	that's	bliss.	That	is	what	a	spiritual	life	should	be	-	full	of	festivity.
It	is	the	same	earth	on	which	Buddha	has	lived,	Christ	has	lived,	and	on	which
all	kinds	of	miserable	people	are	 living.	 It	 is	 the	same	sky,	 the	same	stars,	but
people's	choices	are	different.
Man	creates	himself	by	his	own	choice.
TINKER,	TAILOR...	SOLDIER	OR	SANNYASIN
(It's	our	choice,	Osho	reminds	Anand	Ritama.)
Man	 can	 either	 exist	 in	 conflict	 with	 existence	 or	 in	 harmony	with	 existence,
either	as	an	enemy	or	as	a	friend.	Existence	is	the	same,	it	is	neither	inimical	to
you	 nor	 friendly;	 it	 is	 simply	 available	 --	 the	whole	 thing	 depends	 on	 you.	 It
simply	reflects	you,	echoes	you;	 it	 is	a	mirror.	 If	you	are	 inimical	you	will	see
your	own	 face	 in	nature	 and	nature	will	 look	 inimical.	 If	 you	are	 friendly	you
will	see	your	own	face	in	nature	and	the	whole	existence	will	look	friendly.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	choosing	to	be	a	friend	deliberately,	consciously.	And
once	you	start	looking	at	existence	in	love,	in	trust,	a	deep	harmony	starts	arising
with	the	trees,	with	the	clouds,	with	the	rain,	with	the	sun,	with	the	wind,	with
the	stars,	with	people,	with	animals.	Slowly	slowly	it	goes	on	and	on	spreading.
A	 moment	 comes	 when	 you	 are	 simply	 no	 more	 there;	 there	 is	 only	 pure
harmony.	Just	as	a	river	disappears	into	the	ocean	you	have	disappeared	into	the
whole.	That	is	the	moment	when	bliss	happens,	and	that	is	our	deepest	longing.
Everybody	is	searching	for	it.
The	secret	is	simples	being	in	harmony	with	nature.	A	sannyasin	is	not	a	warrior,
he	is	not	a	soldier;	he	is	a	lover.
GLAD	TO	MEET	YOU
(Until	you	know	yourself	you	are	going	to	be	in	anguish.)	And	out	of	this	basic
inner	darkness	a	thousand	and	one	other	anxieties	arise.	Anxieties	are	branches
of	anguish,	anguish	is	the	root,
Socrates	 is	 right	 when	 he	 says,	 'Know	 thyself'.	 He	 is	 giving	 you	 the	 key	 to
destroy	anguish	so	that	you	can	go	beyond	it.	And	once	anguish	is	destroyed	all
anxieties	disappear	because	 they	are	 just	branches,	 secondary.	They	don't	have
their	own	existence,	they	depend	on	anguish.
All	psychological	school,	try	to	help	you	not	to	be	anxious.	They	help	you	to	get
rid	of	anxieties.	They	are	trying	to	do	something	impossible.	They	may	be	able
to	patch	up	here	and	there	but	the	anxiety	will	assert	itself	from	somewhere	else
because	 the	anguish	 is	not	destroyed,	 the	anguish	 is	 there.	Psychology	has	not
been	able	 to	help	people	 to	know	 themselves	 --	 and	unless	you	know	yourself
you	cannot	be	yourself.
To	know	yourself	 is	 the	beginning	of	being	yourself.	 If	you	don't	know	and	 if
you	are	not	yourself	you	are	just	in	a	state	of	chaos.	a	mess.	That	is	anguish.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Psychology	is	not	the	way.	Except	for	meditation	there	has	never	been	any	way
and	there	will	never	be	any	way	out	of	it.
So	you	have	to	focus	your	whole	being,	your	whole	energy,	on	meditativeness.
Learn	how	to	be	silent	more	and	more,	deeper	and	deeper.	The	day	you	touch	the
point	where	 you	 are	 absolutely	 aware	 but	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	 aware	 of,	 the
miracle	has	happened.	You	have	reached	a	point	of	no	return;	then	the	process	is
irreversible.	 And	 in	 a	 single	 blow	 anguish	 is	 destroyed	 and	 all	 the	 anxieties
wither	away.
My	 work	 consists	 not	 in	 helping	 you	 out	 of	 your	 anxieties	 but	 in	 uprooting
anguish	itself.
KNOW	THAT	KNOWLEDGE	AIN'T	KNOWING
(The	knowing	that	Osho	referred	to	in	his	last	address	is	'truth'	in	this	one.)	All
knowledge	 is	 borrowed.	 Truth	 is	 never	 borrowed,	 truth	 cannot	 be	 borrowed.
Nobody	 can	 give	 it	 to	 you,	 nobody	 can	 take	 it	 away	 from	 you	 either.	 But
knowledge	can	be	given	and	taken.	The	universities	knowledge,	and	the	mystery
schools	deal	in	truth.	But	because	truth	cannot	be	given	the	whole	methodology
has	to	be	different:	it	has	to	be	discovered	within	you.	And	the	first	requirement
is	 to	put	aside	what	you	have	 taken	 from	others.	However	valuable	 it	 looks	 to
you	right	now	it	has	no	value	at	all.
Unless	it	is	yours	it	is	valueless	--	put	it	aside.	First	become	utterly	innocent	like
a	child,	knowing	nothing,	and	from	that	point	start	searching.	Then	the	search	is
very	simple.	But	if	you	carry	this	whole	load	of	knowledge	and	then	you	search,
it	is	very	difficult.	It	is	going	uphill	and	carrying	a	rock	on	your	head,	the	very
task	of	going	uphill	is	difficult	and	then	carrying	a	rock	makes	it	impossible	.	It
is	 swimming	 in	 the	 ocean	 and	 carrying	 a	 rock.	 Even	 without	 the	 rock	 it	 is
difficult	to	reach	to	the	other	shore	--	now	this	rock...
I	have	heard	that	a	beautiful	naked	woman	was	running	in	front	of	a	madhouse
and	two	people	were	chasing	her.	One	was	carrying	two	buckets	full	of	sand.	A
person	who	was	watching	was	puzzled;	he	asked
'What	is	the	matter?	If	you	want	to	catch	that	woman	--	I	know	that	she	is	mad	--
why	is	one	of	you	carrying	these	two	buckets	full	of	sand?'	And	the	person	who
was	 not	 carrying	 any	 sand	 said	 'Last	 time	 he	 caught	 her,	 this	 time,	 this	 is	 his
handicap.'
But	 this	 is	how	 I	 see	people,	 they	are	 carrying	 so	many	buckets	 all	 of	 sand	 --
they	will	never	reach	truth.
Drop	these	buckets!
Truth	is	not	as	difficult	as	it	appears.	For	the	innocent	it	is	very	simple,	for	the
knowledgeable	it	is	almost	impossible.
WHAT	RELIGION	SEES	AS	ONE,	SCIENCE	PUTS	ASUNDER
(Again	tonight	Osho	touches	on	the	difference	in	the	scientific	and	the	religious
approach.)	These	are	two	natures	in	man.	One	nature	is	studied	by	science	--	the
material	 part	 of	 man,	 the	 physiological,	 the	 biological,	 the	 chemical.	 That	 is
studied	by	science	and	science	thinks	that's	all,	there	is	nothing	more.	That's	why
science	 has	 humiliated	man	 very	much,	 insulted	 him	 very	much,	 it	 has	 taken
away	 all	 glory	 from	 man.	 You	 are	 nothing	 but	 chemicals,	 hormones,	 matter,
atoms,	electrons.
Science	speaks	in	the	language	of	nothing	but	and	that	is	a	wrong	approach.	Man
is	far	more.	But	I	can	understand	the	difficult	of	scientists:	 they	have	chosen	a
method	which	 gives	 a	 limitation	 to	 their	whole	 vision.	 They	want	 to	measure
everything	and	there	are	things	which	are	immeasurable.
It	is	as	if	a	deaf	person	tries	to	listen	to	music	with	his	eyes.	Certainly	he	will	say
there	 is	 no	music;	 he	will	 say	 'I	 can	 see	 that	 one	man	 is	 doing	 something	 but
there	is	no	music	at	all,	this	man	is	befooling	himself	and	others.'	He	can	see	the
sitar	 player	 but	 for	 him	 this	 man	 is	 only	 stretching	 strings	 and	 nothing	 is
happening.	If	he	is	absolutely	deaf	his	eyes	cannot	hear,	he	can	only	see	--	that	is
his	limitation.
Exactly	 what	 is	 happening	 in	 science	 is	 that	 the	method	 they	 have	 chosen	 of
dissecting,	analysing...
Analysis	is	their	method	and	you	can	analyse	only	matter.	If	you	try	to	analyse
that	which	is	not	matter	it	disappears.	If	you	kill	a	child	and	you	analyse	it	you
will	find	everything	--	bones	and	blood	and	fat	and	everything	--	but	you	will	not
find	the	child	at	all,	you	will	not	find	its	soul.	The	soul	exists	only	in	a	certain
state	of	harmony.	It	expresses	itself	only	when	the	child's	body	is	functioning	in
a	certain	attunement.	The	moment	that	attunement	is	destroyed	the	soul	departs.
Hence	we	have	 to	 learn	 to	go	beyond	 this	ordinary	nature	 that	 science	studies.
We	have	to	enter	another	nature,	the	higher	nature,	which	is	not	comprehensible
to	intellect,	to	analysis,	to	science.	Love	is	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
available	to	science,	beauty	is	not	available	to	it,	consciousness	is	not	available
to	it,	god	is	not	available	to	it.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 are	 entering	 into	 a	 totally	 different	 world	 to
science.	Science	has	to	be	put	aside.	The	method	of	science	is	analysis	and	the
method	of	religion	is	synthesis.
We	have	to	go	on	creating	bigger	and	bigger	synthesizes.	And	you	can	sees	the
whole	three	hundred	years	of	scientific	progress	has	led	to	one	thing	--	they	went
on	dissecting.	First	 they	 cut	matter	 into	molecules,	 then	molecules	 into	 atoms,
then	atoms	into	electrons,	neutrons	and	protons,	and	now	they	are	trying	to	cut
thorn	up.	They	will	go	on	cutting.
Religion	approaches	things	totally	differently	it	goes	on	adding	up.	Ultimately	it
says	the	whole	existence	is	one,	it	is	an	organic	unity.	Science	and	religion	move
in	opposite	directions.	And	sannyas	is	basically	the	search	for	the	ultimate	unity,
because	only	with	the	unity	can	we	be	blissful	and	be	eternal	and	be	deathless.
So	 go	 beyond	 the	 ordinary	 nature	 that	 is	 part	 of	 you	 and	 find	 within	 you
something	 which	 transcends	 ordinary	 nature,	 that	 is	 there.	 Just	 the	 right
approach,	the	right	method,	the	right	vision,	and	suddenly	it	is	yours.	And	that	is
your	true	reality,	that	is	your	very	being.
To	discover	it	is	the	whole	purpose	of	life.
LOVING	IS	GIVING	NOT	GRABBING
Love	 is	 the	path	and	 love	 is	also	 the	goal,	 the	beginning	and	 the	end,	 the	 first
step	 and	 the	 last	 step.	Love	 contains	 the	whole	 of	 religion,	 but	 love	has	 to	 be
understood:	it	is	not	lust.	It	is	not	a	desire	to	get	something	from	anybody,	on	the
contrary	it	is	an	overflowing	joy,	it	is	sharing.
Love	is	an	art.	It	is	the	ultimate	in	aesthetics,	it	is	creativity.	When	you	love	you
want	to	enrich	the	world	a	little	bit,	you	would	like	to	leave	it	a	little	better	than
you	found	it.	Only	lovers	can	be	creators.
Those	who	don't	know	how	to	love	are	bound	to	be	destructive	in	some	way	or
other.	It	is	the	same	energy	that	becomes	creation;	if	it	does	not	become	creative
it	becomes	poisonous,	turns	to	its	opposite,	becomes	destructive.
Adolf	Hitler	wanted	 first	 to	be	a	painter	 then	an	architect,	but	because	ho	was
refused	 permission,	 he	was	 not	 allowed	 in	 the	 art	 academy,	 his	whole	 energy
turned	into	destructiveness.	My	feeling	is	that	he	would	have	been	a	great	artists
he	had	the	energy	but	the	whole	energy	became	insane,	he	became	angry.
Love	means	that	you	are	grateful	to	existence	for	giving	birth	to	you	and	out	of
that	gratefulness	you	would	like	to	do	something	for	existence.	Love	is	prayer,	it
is	thankfulness.	And	slowly	slowly	as	you	start	moving	higher	into	the	world	of
love	new	dimensions	start	opening	up	in	you.	A	moment	comes	when	love	is	no
more	 a	 relationship,	 you	 are	 simply	 loving.	 And	 ultimately	 the	 final,	 the	 last
stage	is	when	you	are	not	even	loving,	you	are	simply	love.
That	is	the	state	of	Buddhahood	or	Christ	consciousness	--	and	that	is	where	I	am
trying	 to	 lead	 my	 people,	 slowly,	 slowly.	 Of	 course	 they	 have	 to	 begin	 their
journey	in	a	dark	valley,	but	if	you	can	keep	your	eyes	on	the	sunlit	peak	there	is
hope;	there	is	no	need	to	be	in	despair.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011065
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY06
Audio:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
THE	BEST	THINGS	IN	LIFE	ARE	FREE
A	person	who	 wastes	 his	 life	 in	 accumulating	 things	 that	 can	 be	 purchased	 is
simply	being	stupid,	because	those	are	not	the	things	which	can	give	meaning	to
your	life.	They	don't	have	any	real	value;	they	have	a	price	but	no	value.	So	this
is	 one	of	 the	most	 significant	 criterions	 to	 judge	what	 is	 essential	 and	what	 is
non-essential:	the	non-essential	can	be	purchased,	can	be	sold;	it	is	a	commodity.
The	essential	is	not	a	commodity.	It	can	neither	be	sold	nor	purchased;	it	has	to
be	grown	in	one's	being,	it	is	a	growth.
Now,	 a	 child	 cannot	 purchase	 youth	 he	 has	 to	 grow.	 The	 young	 man	 cannot
purchase	old	age,	he	has	to	grow.	The	old	man	cannot	purchase	wisdom.	We	may
have	lived	long	and	yet	he	may	not	have	grown	inwardly.	Growing	in	age	is	not
really	growing	up.
Sannyas	means	making	a	clear-cut	discrimination	between	the	non-essential	and
the	 essential	 and	 focussing	 your	 energy	 on	 the	 essential.	 The	 non-essential	 is
needed,	 it	 has	 a	 certain	 utility;	 you	 need	 food,	 you	 need	 clothes,	 you	 need	 a
shelter	 --	 make	 arrangements	 for	 them.	 But	 that's	 not	 all,	 that	 is	 only	 the
peripheral.
Don't	sacrifice	the	essential	for	the	non-essential.	The	non-essential	can	always
be	sacrificed	for	the	essential	and	then	one	is	not	going	to	be	a	loser.
Bliss	 is	one	of	 those	most	significant	 treasures	which	have	 to	be	grown	within
you.	And	the	most	strange	thing	is	that	all	that	is	needed	to	grow	into	a	blissful
state	is	available.	It	comes	with	you	with	birth.
All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 a	 turning	 in	 to	 look	 for	 it,	 to	 search	 for	 it,	 to	 give	 it	 an
opportunity.	 Attention	 is	 nourishment.	 When	 you	 pay	 attention	 to	 your	 inner
world	 it	 starts	growing,	 it	 is	nourished.	And	 that's	 the	whole	art	of	meditation,
the	art	of	turning	in.
COMBAT	OR	CONCERTO
(Whether	you	flow	or	fight	with	god	makes	no	difference	to	him	but	it	is	going
to	affect	you.)	Fighting	with	god	is	like	hitting	your	head	against	the	wall:	it	is
not	going	to	do	any	harm	to	the	wall,	only	your	head	will	be	destroyed.	You	will
lose	your	sanity.	To	be	in	tune	with	god	means	to	find	a	door.
You	can	go	through	it	and	then	there	is	no	need	to	fight	with	the	wall.	The	wall	is
not	your	enemy,	it	protects	you.	And	there	is	always	a	door.
It	is	childish	to	fight	with	existence	because	existence	is	vast	and	we	are	so	small
that	our	fight	is	doomed,	from	the	very	beginning	we	are	going	to	lose	it.	It	is	not
possible	 in	 the	nature	of	 thing,	 that	we	will	ever	win.	But	 there	 is	a	way	 to	be
victorious	too	and	that	is,	fighting	in	tune	with	god,	not	against	him	but	for	him.
And	when	 the	whole	 thing	 changes,	 the	whole	 gestalt	 changes,	when	 you	 are
fighting	 for	 god	 you	 start	 fighting	with	 your	 own	 unconsciousness,	with	 your
own	 anger,	 jealousy,	 possessiveness,	 greed;	 then	you	 are	 really	 entering	 into	 a
fight	with	all	that	is	not	needed	for	your	inner	growth	but	which	is	a	hindrance.
You	 are	 discarding	 all	 that	 is	 a	 hindrance	 and	 allowing	 the	whole	 to	 penetrate
you,	to	flood	you.
Consecrated	to	god	means	to	become	a	vehicle	for	god,	to	be	a	medium	of	god.
And	the	greatest	barrier	is	the	ego.	One	has	to	put	aside	the	ego,	and	then	there	is
no	 problem.	 The	 surrender	 comes	 very	 easily,	 the	 let-go	 happens	 just	 like
breathing,	there	is	no	effort	needed.	It	happens	like	falling	into	sleep	or	waking
up	in	the	morning	--	just	a	natural	phenomenon,	spontaneous.
And	when	one	is	in	a	deep	let-go	with	the	whole	the	consequence	is	bliss.	It	is	a
by-product,	it	is	a	reward,	but	an	inevitable	reward.	The	surrendered	person	has
tremendous	blissfulness	around	him,	within	and	without.	He	knows	nothing	else,
no	other	taste,	only	the	taste	of	blissfulness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sannyas	has	to	become	the	beginning	of	surrendering.	In	the	beginning	of	course
one	surrenders	only	hesitantly,	only	calculatively,	bit	by	bit.	One	watches	what
happens	--	 if	you	surrender	so	much,	what	happens?	But	as	you	surrender	you
start	opening	up	windows	towards	the	starry	sky,	then	sooner	or	later	you	will	be
able	 to	 surrender	 all.	 The	 moment	 all	 is	 surrendered,	 all	 is	 achieved.	 It	 is	 a
paradox;	the	moment	you	lose	everything	to	god,	you	gain	everything	that	you
always	wanted	 to	gain.	But	 it	does	hot	come	 through	 fight,	 this	victory	comes
through	love,	through	trust.
FROM	THE	SOIL	OF	SILENCE...
(...	 and	 the	air	of	awareness,	comes	 the	 fragrance	of	 the	eternal.	Osho	 initiates
Italian	sannyasin	Dhyan	Mariano.)
It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 comes	 and	 goes,	 it	 only	 comes	 and	 never	 goes.	 And
unless	one	has	known	 that	 fragrance	one	has	not	known	what	 life	 is	all	about.
One	only	lives	unconsciously,	not	knowing	why	one	is,	what	one	is,	from	where
one	has	come,	to	where	one	is	going.	One	goes	on	stumbling	in	a	deeply	drunken
state.	Then	life	is	accidental,	and	an	accidental	life	is	a	meaningless	life.
The	 moment	 you	 become	 silently	 aware	 a	 radical	 change	 happens,	 a	 change
from	your	vary	roots.	That	is	exactly	the	meaning	of	the	word	'radical'	--	it	is	not
just	the	pruning	of	the	branches	and	the	leaves	but	the	change	of	your	very	roots.
For	the	first	time	you	become	aware	that	you	are	not	the	body,	not	the	mind,	not
even	the	heart;	you	are	just	a	witness	to	all.	That	witnessing	begins	the	journey
in	god,	 that	witnessing	 changes	you.	The	world	 remains	 the	 same	but	because
you	are	no	more	the	same	it	also	changes	--	at	least	for	you.	It	suddenly	becomes
psychedelically	beautiful.	It	starts	having	a	new	intensity,	a	new	fervour,	a	new
dance.	 And	 to	 live	 that	 intensity,	 that	 dance,	 that	 passion,	 is	 to	 know	what	 it
means	to	be	alive.
Very	few	people	have	known	it,	although	it	is	everybody's	birthright.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
(His	reply	is	inaudible	save	to	Osho.)
Then	come	back	again	for	a	longer	period.	This	is	not	very	Italian.	Come	back
soon!
FREEDOM'S	JUST	ANOTHER	WORD	FOR	NO	MIND	LEFT	TO	LOSE
(Osho	is	talking	to	Amano	Francesco.)
Amano	 means	 no-mind.	 That's	 the	 most	 fundamental	 thing	 in	 sannyas,	 the
capacity	 to	 put	 the	 mind	 aside	 and	 to	 look	 directly	 into	 life	 with	 nothing
interfering	--	no	prejudice,	no	thought,	no	philosophy,	no	religion
--	 to	 look	 into	 life	 without	 any	 a	 priori	 conclusion,	 just	 like	 a	 mirror	 simply
reflecting	that	which	is.	That	is	the	state	of	Amano.	Zen	people	call	it	no-mind,
and	no-mind	is	the	door	to	the	divine.
It	is	the	same	door,	only	the	direction	changes.	If	you	go	outwards	it	is	mind,	if
you	go	inwards	it	 is	no-mind.	If	you	want	to	know	the	world	then	you	have	to
use	the	mind,	if	your	enquiry	is	scientific	or	philosophic,	then	the	mind	is	a	must.
But	if	your	enquiry	is	mystical,	spiritual,	religious,	if	you	want	to	know	yourself,
if	you	are	trying	to	explore	your	own	interiority,	then	no-mind	is	a	must.
And	Francesco	means	a	free	man.	The	man	who	is	clouded	by	 the	mind	 is	 the
unfree	man;	then	he	is	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	--	because	mind
means	either	you	belong	to	this	religion	or	to	that.
Then	 one	 is	 communist,	 fascist,	 socialist,	 then	 one	 can	 be	 theist,	 atheist,	 and
there	 are	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 ideologies	 --	 religious,	 philosophical,	 social,
economical	-and	all	these	are	chains,	very	subtle	chains.	You	will	find	everybody
a	prisoner	of	something	or	other.
Even	the	idea	of	nations	makes	people	prisoners.	The	Indian	is	imprisoned	in	his
past,	the	Italian	is	imprisoned	in	his	tradition,	the	Chinese	is	imprisoned	in	his	--
the	 whole	 five	 thousand	 years	 of	 thinking	 and	 philosophising.	 Nations	 are
prisons,	races	are	prisons,	the	idea	of	the	white	man	and	the	black	man	--	that	too
is	a	prison.	And	they	are	very	stupid	kinds	of	prisons,	because	between	the	white
man	 and	 the	black	man	 there	 is	 only	 a	 little	 difference	of	 colour	 pigment;	 not
more	than	four	annas	worth,	one-fourth	of	a	rupee	--
and	that	too	is	in	favour	of	the	black	man	because	he	has	more	pigment	than	the
white	man.	He	needs	a	certain	pigment	in	his	skin	to	protect	him	from	the	sun.
Just	four	annas	worth	of	pigment	is	creating	so	much	nonsense	in	the	world.
All	these	things	have	to	be	put	aside,	then	you	are	in	a	state	of	no-mind	and	then
you	are	also	free.	And	to	have	the	taste	of	freedom	is	the	most	beautiful	thing	in
life.	It	is	another	name	for	god.	In	fact,	one	of	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
greatest	 enlightened	masters	 of	 the	East,	Mahavira,	 never	used	 the	word	 'god'.
He	always	used	the	word
'freedom'	 for	 god.	 And	 I	 can	 understand	 why	 he	 insisted	 on	 using	 the	 word
'freedom',	 'moksha',	 because	 even	 the	 idea	 of	 god	 becomes	 an	 imprisonment,
because	it	divides	people	into	the	people	who	believe	in	god	and	the	people	who
don't	 believe	 in	 god.	 But	 you	 cannot	 find	 a	 person	 who	 does	 not	 long	 for
freedom.
Freedom	is	our	most	intrinsic	longing,	the	deepest	longing	of	the	heart.	It	can	be
achieved	only	by	the	process	of	no-mind.	You	can	call	it	meditation,	awareness,
silence	--	these	are	different	names	for	the	same	phenomenon.
LOVE	IS	EGOCIDE
(Osho	tells	Premdaya	that	a	sympathy	that	doesn't	stem	from	love	is	simply	ego-
fodder.)	 If	 you	 are	 in	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 suffering	 you	 will	 find	 many	 people
sympathizing	with	you	and	if	you	look	into	their	eyes	you	will	be	puzzled;	they
are	saying	one	thing	--	they	are	very	sympathetic	towards	you
--	but	their	eyes	are	showing	something	else;	they	are	enjoying	it.	And	there	is	a
subtle	mechanism	in	it.
When	 you	 sympathize	with	 somebody	 you	 are	 higher	 and	 the	 person	 you	 are
sympathizing	with	is	lower,	and	everybody	enjoys	feeling	higher	in	some	way.
For	example,	if	your	house	is	burned	down	the	whole	neighborhood	will	come	to
sympathize	with	you.
But	if	you	make	a	beautiful	house	nobody	will	come	to	appreciate	it;	 they	will
all	 feel	 jealous.	 Strange!	 If	 they	 really	 feel	 sympathy	 when	 your	 house	 gets
burned	down	they	should	feel	very	happy,	they	should	celebrate,	when	you	make
a	new	home.	But	they	don't	celebrate,	and	that	makes	things	clear;	they	are	not
really	happy	in	your	happiness,	they	are	happy	in	your	misery.
So	sympathy	to	me	is	ugly	if	it	is	not	rooted	in	love.	It	is	beautiful	if	it	is	rooted
in	love.	So	love	to	me	is	a	revolutionary	phenomenon;	it	changes	sympathy	into
something	totally	different	to	what	it	is.	Sympathy	should	not	be	because	people
are	in	sorrow,	sympathy	should	be	because	you	are	too	full	of	love	and	you	want
to	share	it.	Then	there	will	be	a	great	difference,	you	will	rejoice	when	they	are
happy	 and	 you	will	 feel	 sad	when	 they	 are	 unhappy.	You	will	 not	 feel	 happy
when	 they	 are	 sad	 and	 you	 will	 not	 feel	 jealous	 when	 they	 are	 happy;	 their
happiness	will	be	your	happiness	and	their	sadness	will	be	your	sadness.
Once	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 was	 asked,	 "What	 is	 more	 difficult?	 --	 to	 feel	 sad
when	somebody	is	sad	or	to	feel	happy	when	somebody	is	happy."	And	Buddha
said	the	second	thing	is	more	difficult;	the	first	thing	is	not	difficult.	One	can	feel
sad	when	others	are	sad	because	deep	down	one	can	enjoy	it,	but	when	others	are
happy,	to	celebrate,	to	really	celebrate,	is	very	difficult	--	it	goes	against	our	ego.
Hence	my	emphasis	is	on	love	because	love	basically	requires	that	you	drop	the
ego.	Love	kills	the	ego,	and	when	there	is	no	ego	then	love	can	blossom	in	many
flowers;	sympathy	is	one	of	those	flowers.	But	it	is	no	more	plastic	then,	it	has
its	source	in	love.
The	Christian	missionaries	going	around	the	world	and	serving	poor	people	are
all	 living	 out	 of	 sympathy;	 their	 service	 is	 not	 out	 of	 love,	 not	 at	 all.	 It	 is
cunning,	 it	 is	 very	 calculated.	 They	 are	 serving	 the	 poor	 people	 because	 they
want	 to	 enjoy	 the	pleasures	of	heaven.	They	are	not	 concerned	about	 the	poor
people,	their	whole	concern	is	to	use	them	as	a	ladder	to	reach	heaven.	And	not
only	that,	they	are	serving	the	poor	people	to	convert	them	into	their	religion.	It
is	a	political	game.
Even	a	woman	like	Mother	Teresa	of	Calcutta	who	has	been	serving	orphans	for
her	whole	life	and	helps	the	orphan	children	to	be	adopted	by	families...	but	the
subtle	 trick	 is	 that	 those	 children	 are	 given	 only	 to	 Catholic	 families,	 not	 to
anybody	else	--	not	even	to	a	Protestant	family,	although	they	are	also	Christians.
Just	a	few	days	ago	a	Protestant	couple	reached	Calcutta	and	because	they	don't
have	any	children,	they	wanted	to	adopt	a	child.	They	were	refused	because	they
were	not	Catholic.	So	 it	 is	 not	 a	question	of	 serving	 the	orphans,	 it	 is	 really	 a
strategy	to	exploit	poor	people,	their	children,	to	convert	them	into	Christianity.
It	is	buying	people,	purchasing	people,	it	is	using	people	as	commodities.
And	 these	 people	 who	 serve	 humanity	 are	 respected	 very	 much,	 all	 kinds	 of
honors	are	given	to	them.
Nobel	prizes	are	given	to	them,	and	all	the	countries	go	on	respecting	them	-	and
nobody	looks	at	the	subtle	strategy	that	is	behind	all	this	service.	It	is	cunning,	it
is	ugly,	it	is	nauseating.
I	don't	teach	my	sannyasins	to	be	servants	of	the	people.	Enough	of	that!	These
servants	of	people	have	been	the	most	mischievous	people	in	the	world.	Behind
a	beautiful	name	they	have	done	immense	harm.	No	more	of	this	any	longer.
I	 teach	simply	love.	Out	of	love	if	you	feel	to	help,	good,	but	that	help	will	be
out	of	your	love,	your	joy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	is	no	reward,	 there	is	no	question	of	attaining	some	pleasures	in	heaven,
there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 converting	 somebody	 into	 a	Hindu	 or	 a	Christian	 or	 a
Mohammedan.
Hindus	are	angry	at	me	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	wanted	me	to	convert	all
my	sannyasins	to	Hinduism.	Their	anger	is	understandable.	If	I	had	converted	all
my	sannyasins	 into	Hindus	 then	of	course	 they	would	have	respected	me,	 they
would	 have	 called	me	 the	 greatest	 saint	 that	 has	 ever	 been	 here	 on	 the	 earth.
Now	I	am	the	greatest	sinner	to	them.
Jainas	wanted	me	to	spread	Jainism	over	the	whole	world	and	they	were	ready	to
support	me	with	as	much	money	as	I	needed.	I	simply	rejected	the	idea;	I	said,
"This	 is	 sheer	 nonsense	 you	 are	 talking	 to	 me.	 I	 cannot	 spread	 anybody's
message.	 Why	 should	 I	 spread	 anybody's	 message?	 If	 your	 message	 has
something	in	it	people	will	come.	I	am	not	going	to	be	anybody's	missionary.	I
am	just	going	to	be	my	love	and	whosoever	wants	to	partake	of	it	is	welcome.	I
never	ask	whether	he	is	Christian	or	Hindu	or	Mohammedan.
That	is	not	the	question	at	all,	that	is	not	my	business	at	all."
One	should	 live	out	of	one's	 love	and	for	no	other	 reason,	 then	 life	becomes	a
beautiful	phenomenon,	music,	a	festivity.
LOVE:	 THE	 OVERFLOW	 FROM	 THE	 LAKE	 ALONENESS
ACCUMULATES
(A	balance	is	needed	between	being	with	others	and	loving,	and	being	alone	and
blissful,	Osho	 tells	us.)	Both	enhance	each	other,	both	enrich	each	other.	Your
love	makes	you	ready	to	go	into	aloneness,	because	one	can	be	with	people	only
for	 a	 certain	 time	 then	 the	 desire	 to	 be	 alone	 arises.	 It	 is	 a	 necessary
phenomenon,	a	natural	phenomenon.
And	when	one	is	alone	one	can	be	alone	only	for	a	certain	period	because	when
one	is	alone	one	accumulates	energy.	It	is	not	used,	one	becomes	a	reservoir	and
then	one	needs	people	 to	 share	 it.	That	 is	what	 love	 is	 sharing	 the	energy	 that
becomes	accumulated	in	your	aloneness.	But	when	you	share	your	energy,	when
you	live	with	people,	slowly	you	feel	exhausted,	tired,	depleted;	again	the	need
has	come	to	move	into	aloneness.
It	is	just	like	waking	in	the	day	and	going	to	sleep	in	the	night,	for	the	whole	day
you	 are	working,	 you	 feel	 tired	 and	 it	 is	 beautiful	 to	 feel	 tired.	 It	 has	 been	 a
beautiful	day	of	creativity;	you	worked	in	the	sun,	in	the	rain,	in	the	wind,	now
you	are	ready	to	fall	into	deep	sleep,	to	regain	energy,	to	become	ready	again	for
work	tomorrow.
So	bliss	is	like	sleep	and	love	is	like	creativity.	And	my	sannyasins	have	to	fulfil
both	 together;	 then	 the	 person	 is	 whole.	 A	 person	 who	 cannot	 sleep	 will	 go
insane,	and	the	person	who	cannot	wake	up	will	be	in	a	coma,	will	be	dead.
So	both	are	needed:	a	deep	capacity	to	go	into	sleep,	into	a	dreamless	sleep,	and
then	 immense	 energy	 to	 be	 creative.	 And	 they	 are	 not	 against	 each	 other,
remember,	they	are	complementary.
AN	ABSOLUTELY	DEVICEFUL	TIME
(Osho	speaks	on	Blissneyland.)
A	man	without	bliss	 is	homeless,	he	is	not	at	ease	with	existence,	he	is	always
tense,	never	relaxed.	He	is	always	full	of	anxiety	and	anguish.	He	does	not	know
how	to	be	in	a	let-go.	Existence	seems	to	be	inimical	to	him;	he	cannot	think	of	it
as	 his	 home,	 he	 feels	 as	 n	 outsider.	 It	 is	 hiS	 own	 creation,	 this	whole	 idea	 of
being	an	outsider.	Particularly	in	this	century	the	idea	that	man	is	an	outsider,	is	a
stranger,	that	he	does	not	belong	to	the	world,	that	man	is	alienated,	has	become
very	 dominant.	 All	 those	 ideas	 are	 simply	 wrong,	 but	 they	 look	 very	 solid,
convincing,	for	the	simple	reason	that	man	has	forgotten	how	to	be	blissful.
Once	you	feel	blissful	you	are	no	more	an	outsider,	you	are	an	insider.	You	are
no	more	 a	 stranger,	 you	belong	 to	 this	 existence	 and	 this	 existence	belongs	 to
you.	You	are	needed	by	existence	and	existence	is	needed	by	you.	It	is	a	mutual
need.
We	are	partners	 in	 the	same	organic	unity	and	everybody	is	essential;	 from	the
smallest	blade	of	grass	to	the	biggest	star,	everybody	is	needed,	equally	needed.
There	 is	 no	 hierarchy	 in	 existence.	 The	 grass	 blade	 and	 the	 star	 have	 no
inequality;	 they	 are	 equal.	 Existence	 supports	 them	 both	 in	 the	 same	 way,	 it
makes	 no	 discrimination.	To	 the	 sinners,	 to	 the	 saints,	 it	 is	 the	 same.	The	 sun
shines	for	all,	the	flowers	bloom	for	all,	the	birds	sing	for	all.	It	is	our	home!	But
without	a	taste	of	blissfulness	it	cannot	be	felt.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	 my	 whole	 approach	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 be	 cheerful,	 blissful,	 singing,
dancing,	creating	all	devices	so	that	you	can	relax,	come	out	of	your	conditioned
sadness,	seriousness,	so	that	you	can	be	children	again,	running	on	the	sea	beach
collecting	 seashells,	 coloured	 stones,	 running	 after	 butterflies,	 collecting	 wild
flowers	with	great	wonder	and	awe.
My	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 seriously	 religious	 people	 --	 sincerely	 religious	 but	 not
seriously	 religious.	 They	 are	 playful,	 and	 playfulness	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most
important	things	to	understand.	Life	should	be	taken	as	fun,	as	a	beautiful	joke.
The	movement	you	 are	 capable	of	 taking	 life	 as	 fun,	 as	 a	beautiful	 joke,	 your
vision	changes.	Suddenly	you	are	at	home,	suddenly	all	is	good,	suddenly	trees
start	 saying	 'hello'	 to	 you!	 Rocks	 start	 asking	 'How	 are	 you?'	 (laughter)	 The
whole	existence	becomes	alive	in	a	new	sense,	in	a	way	it	has	never	been	before.
Unless	 that	happens	a	man	 is	not	 enlightened,	 is	not	 awakened	 to	 the	ultimate
truth.	That	is	our	goal.
A	CLOUD'S	EYE	VIEW
(No	particular	place	to	go	and	no	special	way	to	be	--	that's	what	a	sannyasin	has
in	common	with	a	cloud.)
The	metaphor	 of	 the	 cloud	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	 It	will	 give	 you	 a	 few	 hints
about	blissfulness.	The	first	 thing	about	a	cloud	is	 that	 it	has	no	direction,	 it	 is
not	destined	towards	any	goal;	 it	 is	simply	floating.	It	 is	available	to	the	winds
wherever	they	take	it,	it	is	utterly	relaxed.	When	you	have	a	destination	you	are
tense,	you	are	worried	about	whether	you	are	going	to	make	it	or	not.	And	if	the
winds	 start	 blowing	 in	 the	opposite	direction	 then	 certainly	 there	will	 be	great
anxiety.	Rather	than	going	towards	the	goal	you	are	going	against	it.
The	 cloud	 has	 no	 goal	 so	 wherever	 the	 winds	 take	 it	 it	 is	 perfectly	 at	 ease.
Wherever	it	finds	itself	that	is	its	home.	The	same	is	true	about	bliss.	A	blissful
person	lives	now	and	here,	he	has	no	desire	to	be	somewhere	else.	Now	is	more
than	enough,	he	is	utterly	contented	with	it.
Secondly,	the	cloud	has	no	fixed	form.	It	is	constantly	changing.	One	moment	it
looks	like	an	elephant,	 the	next	moment	it	has	become	a	camel,	and	it	goes	on
changing.	The	same	is	true	about	bliss.	It	has	no	particular	form;	it	is	not	a	solid
thing,	it	is	flexible,	so	it	can	be	found	in	all	forms.
Yes,	the	man	of	understanding	can	find	it	in	the	body,	in	the	mind,	in	the	heart:	in
being.	He	can	find	it	in	himself,	he	can	find	it	in	others;	he	can	find	it	in	music,
in	poetry,	in	painting;	he	can	find	it	in	aloneness;	he	can	find	it	in	the	mountains,
he	can	find	it	in	the	marketplace.
It	is	not	a	fixed	thing;	rather	it	is	an	understanding,	a	sensibility,	a	sensitiveness,
so	 one	 can	 feel	 it	 wherever	 it	 is.	 And	 it	 is	 good	 that	 it	 is	 not	 a	 fixed	 thing
otherwise	we	would	have	become	bored	by	now.
Because	it	is	found	in	thousands	of	forms	and	thousands	of	ways,	it	is	always	an
adventure.	It	is	always	intriguing,	interesting,	it	is	always	inviting.
So	 remember	 those	 two	 things:	 live	 life	herenow	and	 search	 for	bliss	 in	every
possible	form	and	you	will	find	it	because	it	is	there.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011075
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
FREEDOM	--	THE	FLAVOUR	OF	GOD
(Osho's	 message	 to	 Swami	 Niren	 covers	 some	 of	 the	 points	 made	 in	 the	 last
address	on	the	sixth,	about	 the	nature	of	 the	cloud.	The	miracle	of	 the	cloud	is
that	while	it	continuously	changes,	essentially	it	remains	itself.)
A	sannyasin	has	to	becomes	outwardly	free,	unconfined	by	any	tradition,	nation,
caste,	 religion	 and	 inwardly	 capable	 of	 constant	 flow.	 The	 centre	 remains	 the
same	but	the	wheel	of	life	goes	on	changing.
I	 am	 not	 against	 change	 --	 change	 is	 life	 --	 but	 the	 person	 who	 knows	 only
change	 does	 not	 know	 life	 in	 its	 totality;	 he	 has	 come	 to	 know	 only	 the
circumference	of	 it.	The	wheel	 changes	but	 the	axel	 remains	unchanging.	And
they	both	are	together,	so	your	actions	will	change,	your	body	will	change,	your
mind	will	change,	your	feelings	will	change.	Amidst	all	this	change	you	have	to
be	a	witness.	That	witness	will	not	change,	that	will	remain	the	same.
This	brings	inward	freedom,	and	when	one	is	free	in	both	ways,	outwardly	and
inwardly,	one	has	tasted	of	god,	one	becomes	drunk	with	the	divine.
THE	CROWN	OF	CONSCIOUSNESS
Alok	Sara	means	light	and	god's	princess.
Man	is	unaware	of	his	own	kingdom.	The	kingdom	is	there	but	we	are	keeping
our	 back	 towards	 it.	We	 are	 looking	 everywhere,	 searching,	 desiring,	 begging;
and	 what	 we	 are	 begging	 for	 is	 already	 inside	 of	 everybody.	We	 are	 beggars
because	we	have	not	looked	in,	and	we	are	in	darkness	inside	because	wherever
consciousness	is	not,	there	is	darkness.	The	moment	we	turn	our	consciousness
inwards	it	becomes	light	--
consciousness	 is	 light.	 And	 to	 see	 what	 God	 has	 given	 to	 us	 is	 unbelievable.
When	it	happens	for	the	first	time	one	cannot	believe	one's	own	eyes.	One	looks
again	and	again	and	again.
In	 the	 Zen	 tradition	 it	 is	 said	 that	 before	 the	 final	 enlightenment	 at	 least	 one
thousand	small	enlightenments	happen;	those	small	enlightenments	are	because
you	look	again	and	you	cannot	believe,	you	look	again	and	you	cannot	believe.
Slowly	slowly	you	gather	courage	to	believe	that	you	have	seen	it,	that	you	are
not	a	beggar	but	an	emperor.
So	these	things	are	joined	together.	We	have	to	turn	our	light	in	and	discover	our
reality.	In	short	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.	It	is	not	a	religion	in	the	ordinary
sense	 because	 I	 don't	 teach	 any	 doctrine;	 it	 is	 an	 experience	 --	 existential,	 not
intellectual.	I	only	help	you	to	discover	that	which	you	have	already	got.
MAN	IS	A	MAYBE
(He	hovers	 between	 the	 finite	 and	 the	 infinite,	Osho	 tells	 Swami	Amiten.)	He
lives	 in	 a	 material	 body	 but	 he	 is	 absolutely	 non	 material.	 He	 is	 pure
consciousness.	 He	 lives	 in	 the	 mind	 but	 he	 is	 not	 the	 mind	 at	 all.	 So	 man
contains	two	worlds,	man	is	a	meeting	place	of	two	extremes.
Man	is	a	bridge	between	god	and	the	world,	between	the	finite	and	the	infinite,
between	time	and	eternity.
Unless	we	discover	 the	 infinite	 in	ourselves	our	 life	 remains	meaningless.	The
finite	cannot	give	us	meaning;	it	is	too	small,	too	momentary,	too	fleeting.	It	is
just	like	a	dream,	it	cannot	give	you	a	solid	foundation.	To	make	your	house	on
the	 shifting	 sands	 of	 the	momentary,	 of	 the	 temporary,	 is	 an	 exercise	 in	 sheer
futility.	The	very	recognition	of	 this	becomes	 the	beginning	of	a	search	for	 the
eternal.
Sannyas,	 initiation	 into	 sannyas,	 simply	means	 a	 turning	 point	 in	 your	 life,	 a
drastic	change,	shifting	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
your	consciousness	from	the	limited	to	the	unlimited.
It	is	as	if	a	man	is	walking,	looking	at	the	earth,	and	has	completely	forgotten	the
sky	and	all	its	stars.
And	then	you	help	him	to	look	upwards	and	he	is	mystified,	he	thinks	a	miracle
has	happened.	But	the	sky	was	always	there,	it	was	just	that	he	was	not	looking
at	 it;	he	had	become	too	concerned	with	 the	non-essential.	And	both	are	 in	us,
the	earth	part	and	the	sky	part.
Now	 it	 is	 our	 choice	 as	 to	where	 to	 look.	 So	 from	 this	moment	 start	 looking
more	 and	more	 for	 the	 unbounded	 and	 you	will	 be	 on	 the	 right	 track	 towards
god.	He	is	not	in	the	churches,	not	in	the	temples,	not	in	the	scriptures,	not	in	the
systems	of	 philosophy	 and	 theology.	They	 are	 all	 limited.	He	 is	 in	 a	 profound
silence,	 where	 you	 are	 not	 a	 body,	 not	 a	 mind,	 not	 even	 a	 heart,	 where	 you
simply	are.	In	that	simple	pure	existence,	truth	is	found,	god	is	found,	liberation
is	found.
(Osho	leads	up	to	the	same	truth	--	man's	immortality	--	from	a	different	vantage
point.)	 The	 past	 of	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 has	 been	 dominated	 by	 defeatist
attitudes.	All	the	religions	arose	out	of	despair.
My	vision	is	just	the	opposite	of	that.	My	sannyasins	are	not	sannyasins	out	of
any	 pessimism.	 They	 are	 not	 escapists,	 they	 are	 not	 defeatists,	 they	 are
adventurers,	 explorers.	 Initiation	 into	 sannyas	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 a	 journey,	 a
journey	 towards	 the	 ultimate.	 It	 is	 the	 only	 journey	 that	 can	make	 you	 really
victorious.
Money	cannot	do	it,	power	cannot	do	it,	prestige	cannot	do	it,	because	they	will
all	be	 taken	away	at	 the	 time	of	death.	So	you	never	 really	possess	 them;	you
lived	under	an	illusion	that	you	were	the	possessor.
The	 criterion	 to	 judge	 what	 you	 possess	 and	 what	 you	 don't,	 is	 simple:	 that
which	cannot	be	taken	away	by	death	is	your	possession,	that	which	is	going	to
be	 taken	 away	 is	 only	 an	 illusion.	 So	 whatsoever	 we	 can	 gain	 in	 the	 outside
world	 is	 not	 of	 any	 importance.	One	 has	 to	 become	 inwardly	 rich,	 one	 has	 to
conquer	oneself;	one	has	to	become	centred	at	the	very	core	of	one's	being.
Out	 of	 that	 groundedness,	 out	 of	 that	 rootedness,	 great	 tree	 grows,	 a	 tree	 that
brings	the	flowers	of	victory.
The	moment	you	know	something	in	you	which	is	eternal,	know	that	you	have
come	 home,	 that	 you	 have	 found	 that	 for	which	 you	 have	 been	 searching	 for
ages,	that	you	have	found	life	abundant.	God	is	only	another	name	for	it.
MEDITATION	IS	WHITE	MAGIC
Man	can	live	in	constant	conflict	or	in	constant	music.	It	is	the	game	energy	that
become	conflict	 or	 that	 becomes	music.	The	whole	 thing	 is	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of
creating	harmony	within	your	being	--	and	the	whole	conditioning	of	humanity	is
to	create	conflict.	They	tell	you	not	to	be	angry	but	they	never	tell	you	how.
They	insist	that	it	is	bad	to	be	angry	but	nobody	ever	tells	you	the	science	of	not
being	angry.	So	the	only	thing	left	for	you	is	to	repress	anger,	not	to	show	it.	It
will	be	there	and	it	goes	on	accumulating.
That's	how	one	creates	conflict,	one	becomes	double:	anger	 is	 there	and	one	is
smiling,	sex	is	there	and	one	is	taking	a	vow	of	celibacy,	desire	is	there	and	one
is	 renouncing	 the	 world,	 greed	 is	 there	 but	 one	 is	 pretending	 non-greediness,
violence	is	there	and	one	has	cultivated	a	mask	of	non-violence,	hate	is	there	and
one	 is	 trying	 to	project	 love.	So	 in	 a	 thousand	ways	one	becomes	divided	and
there	is	constant	conflict,	inner	war,	civil	war.	Everybody	is	sitting	on	a	volcano,
it	can	erupt	any	moment.	One	insane	any	time.
The	society	has	taken	every	care	to	drive	you	insane.	It	is	really	a	miracle	how
people	somehow	manage	to	keep	themselves	together.
Life	can	be	music	and	should	be	music	because	only	then	do	you	know	what	life
is.	But	then	repression	won't	help.	You	will	have	to	learn	something	of	the	inner
alchemy,	of	how	anger	is	transformed	into	compassion,	how	hate	is	transformed
into	love	with	no	residue	so	there	is	no	conflict	left,	how	violence	becomes	non-
violence	and	how	living	in	the	world	one	can	yet	be	not	of	it.
This	is	what	I	call	the	whole	science	of	sannyas,	the	whole	inner	alchemy,	It	is
the	greatest	science	in	the	world	because	it	transforms	man,	and	nothing	is	more
valuable	 than	 man.	 Even	 if	 we	 could	 transform	 iron	 into	 gold	 that	 would	 be
nothing;	if	we	can	transform	our	ugly	instincts	into	beautiful	flowers	that	is	real
magic.	And	it	is	not	difficult	either.	Just	a	simple	phenomenon	has	to	be	learned	-
-	I	call	it	meditation.
It	 has	 been	 called	 by	 different	 names.	Buddha	 used	 to	 call	 it	 sammasati,	 right
mindfulness.	 George	 Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 call	 it	 self-remembering,	 Krishnamurti
calls	it	awareness.	It	is	the	same.	The	whole	thing	is	how	to	become	a	witness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	you	are	angry	there	is	no	need	to	fight	with	it	--	it	is	a	great	opportunity	to
watch.	No	need	to	indulge	in	it	no	need	to	act	according	to	it,	no	need	to	follow
its	dictates,	and	no	need	either	 to	go	 to	 the	opposite	extreme	and	start	 fighting
with	 it.	Avoid	both.	 Just	 remain	 cool,	 detached,	 a	 simple	observer,	 as	 if	 it	 has
nothing	to	do	with	you.	Your	concern	should	be	scientific,	you	are	observing,	so
you	have	to	look	minutely	at	what	anger	is	in	all	its	details,	in	its	whole	mystery.
Your	interest	has	to	be	scientific;	'I	have	to	go	deeper	into	the	whole	method	of
it.	If	I	follow	it	I	will	not	be	able	to	go	into	it.	I	will	become	angry.'	In	that	hot
state	how	can	you	watch?	 'If	I	fight	with	it	again,	it	will	be	the	same:	I	will	be
running	 away,	 repressing,	 avoiding.'	 How	 can	 you	 watch	 something	 of	 which
you	are	afraid?
No	 need	 to	 be	 afraid,	 no	 need	 to	 follow	 --	 just	 sit	 silently	 and	 watch	 and	 a
miracle	starts	happening	slowly:	the	more	you	watch,	the	more	you	see	that	it	is
dispersing	on	 its	own.	Just	as	dewdrops	evaporate	 in	 the	morning	sun,	as	your
awareness	becomes	more	intense	it	starts	evaporating	faster.	And	the	same	is	the
process	 for	 sexuality,	 for	greed,	 for	 jealousy,	 for	 all	 the	problems	 --	 the	key	 is
one,	it	is	a	master	key.	Try	it	on	one	and	then	you	will	know	that	it	can	be	tried
on	everything.
A	day	arrives	when	you	have	understood	all	your	baser	instincts	and	in	that	very
understanding	 they	 are	 transformed,	 transmuted,	 and	 your	 life	 becomes	 a
melody.	 I	 call	 that	melody	 sannyas.	 That	musical	 phenomenon,	 that	 harmony,
that	beautiful	silence,	that	song	of	silence,	is	the	greatest	achievement	in	life.
PRAYER	IS	PARTICIPATION	IN	THE	CREATION
(Osho	returns	to	a	theme	he	has	been	touching	on	frequently	this	month	--	man's
relationship	to	existence.)
Existence	loves	us	all.	We	are	here,	that	is	enough	proof,	otherwise	we	would	not
have	 been	 here	 at	 all;	 we	 have	 been	 chosen	 to	 be	 by	 existence.	 It	 is	 not	 our
choice,	we	have	not	created	ourselves;	it	is	the	decision	on	the	part	of	the	whole.
And	existence	goes	on	nourishing	us	every	moment	on	all	the	planes	--
physical,	psychological,	 spiritual.	But	our	stupidity	 is	 such	 that	we	start	 taking
all	these	things	for	granted	as	if	we	have	earned	them,	as	if	we	deserve	them,	as
if	life	is	our	birthright.	We	forget	completely	that	it	is	a	gift	of	god.
A	sannyasin	has	to	remember	not	to	take	anything	for	granted.	That	is	one	of	the
most	 foolish	 things	 a	 person	 can	 do	 with	 existence,	 that	 is	 very	 ungrateful,
insensitive.	A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 continuously	 remember	 that	 existence	 goes	 on
pouring	 so	 many	 gifts	 and	 you	 have	 not	 even	 thanked	 it	 and	 you	 have	 not
contributed	anything	on	your	part.
The	only	way	to	show	our	gratitude	is	not	by	going	into	the	churches	and	falling
on	our	knees	and	reciting	some	parrotlike	prayers	or	by	going	into	a	temple	and
chanting	some	words	which	you	don't	understand.	You	don't	mean	anything,	just
a	formality	is	being	fulfilled.
The	real	gratitude	is	expressed	only	through	creativity.	When	you	start	creating
something	 to	 enhance,	 to	 enrich	 existence	 --	 it	may	 be	 just	 a	 small	 garden	 or
anything,	 a	 painting,	 a	 song,	 a	 dance...	when	 you	 start	 being	 creative	 you	 are
showing	gratitude.	In	your	own	small	way	you	are	participating	with	god.
The	only	thing	that	a	sannyasin	has	to	do	is	not	to	leave	the	world	in	the	same
ugly	shape	as	he	found	it
--	to	make	just	a	little	change.	One	cannot	hope	to	change	the	whole	world	--	it	is
too	big	and	our	hands	are	too	small	--	but	still	we	can	do	something.	There	can
be	a	few	more	flowers	in	the	world,	a	few	bigger	roses	in	the	world,	a	few	more
smiling	faces	in	the	world,	a	few	more	dancers,	a	few	more	singers,	a	few	more
paintings,	And	if	we	have	done	something	out	of	gratitude	t	brings	tremendous
joy.
Creativity	is	the	only	way	of	real	prayer.
IT'S	NIRVANA	OR	NEVER
Man	lives	like	a	robot,	almost	like	a	machine.	He	goes	through	so	many	actions
but	mechanically.	He	may	go	 for	 a	morning	walk	but	 he	will	 not	 listen	 to	 the
birds,	 he	will	 not	 see	 the	 trees,	 he	will	 not	 look	 at	 the	 sunrise,	 he	will	 not	 be
aware	of	the	beautiful	colours	that	are	changing	in	the	sky	--	and	still	he	has	been
for	 a	 morning	 walk.	 He	 will	 go	 and	 come	 home.	 In	 fact	 he	 went	 just	 like	 a
machine,	 a	 proxy,	 not	 himself.	He	may	 have	 been	 somewhere	 else,	 the	whole
time	he	was	on	his	morning	walk.	He	may	have	been	preparing	for	the	night,	for
the	dinner	 that	he	was	going	 to	attend,	 the	party	or	 the	movie	or	 the	girlfriend
that	he	was	going	to	see	--	all	kinds	of	fantasies	and	dreams	were	there.	He	was
not	there,	he	was	somewhere	else.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	 is	very	rare	 to	find	a	man	at	 the	exact	point	where	he	 is	physically;	you	can
find	him	somewhere	else	but	not	where	he	is.	There	is	such	a	disparity.	No	one	is
here,	no	one	is	now	--	and	here	and	now	is	the	only	life,	the	only	reality.
The	sannyasin	has	to	learn	the	knack	of	being	here,	and	now	because	nirvana	is
either	now	or	never.
Enlightenment	happens	now	or	never,	either	 it	happens	here	or	nowhere	else...
because	 existence	knows	nothing	 about	 the	 past	 or	 the	 future.	 Its	 only	way	of
being	is	the	present.	The	present	is	the	only	time,	now	is	the	only	time,	and	here
the	only	space.
So	we	have	to	bring	ourselves	now	and	here.	The	mind	will	go	on	clinging	to	its
old	 habits,	 it	 is	 very	 persistent,	 but	 you	 have	 to	 pull	 it	 back	 again	 and	 again.
Whenever	you	see	it	going	astray	you	have	to	bring	it	back	to	this	moment.
The	whole	 question	 is	 how	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 old	 habits.	 It	 takes	 perseverance,
effort	and	the	trust	that	if	it	has	happened	to	somebody	else	then	it	can	happen	to
me	too.
Everybody	 is	 potentially	 a	 Buddha.	 Bodhen	 is	 the	 process	 of	 becoming	 a
Buddha,	awakening	is	the	process	of	becoming	awakened.	The	seed	is	there,	but
we	have	 to	work	 to	bring	 it	 to	 a	point	where	 it	 can	blossom.	And	 it	 is	 always
spring,	so	the	opportunity	it	always	available.	Something	is	only	missing	on	our
part.
So	you	have	to	do	this:	learn...	There	are	hundreds	of	devices	available	here	to
become	 aware	 and	 alert,	 watchful.	 Learn	 all	 those	 devices	 and	 find	 the	 right
device	 that	 suddenly	 starts	 ringing	 bells	 in	 your	 heart.	 It	 always	 happens	 and
that's	the	only	way	to	choose.	It	 is	not	a	question	of	logic,	that	you	decide	that
this	device	will	fit	with	you.	When	you	come	across	the	right	device	your	heart
starts	pulsating	in	a	new	way,	it	dances.	Listen	to	the	heart	and	follow	the	heart.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011085
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
MIND	GONE,	CONSCIOUSNESS	BORN
(Meditation	is	a	second	birth,	the	birth	of	one's	spirit.	Osho	tells	Dhyano	Ursula.)
The	first	birth	is	only	physical.	It	is	ordinary;	it	happens	to	animals,	to	trees,	to
insects,	it	happens	to	everybody.	It	is	a	natural	phenomenon.
Meditation	 is	 a	 second	 birth.	 It	 happens	 only	 when	 you	 deliberately	 and
consciously	 take	part	 in	 it.	 In	 that	way	 it	 is	 not	 natural.	 it	 is	 transcendental	 to
nature.	And	it	is	only	meditation	that	makes	a	man	a	man.
otherwise	 he	 is	 just	 an	 animal.	 Without	 meditation	 there	 is	 no	 distinction
between	man	and	animal.	Maybe	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
there	are	some	differences	of	quantity	--	a	 little	more	intelligence,	a	little	more
cunning,	a	little	more	alertness	--	but	those	are	not	qualitative	differences,	only
quantitative.
Meditation	 gives	 you	 a	 qualitative	 distinction	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 meaning	 of
Ursula:	of	distinguished	quality.
Without	meditation	man	has	no	distinction.	With	meditation	his	whole	life	goes
through	a	radical	change;	from	horizontal	he	becomes	vertical,	from	moving	in
time	he	 starts	moving	 in	eternity.	Eternity	 is	vertical,	 time	 is	horizontal;	hence
time	can	be	divided	into	past,	present,	future.	It	is	a	line:	the	art	of	the	line	that
has	gone	is	the	past,	the	part	of	the	line	that	is	in	front	of	you	is	the	present,	and
the	part	of	the	line	that	is	going	to	be	in	front	of	you	is	the	future.	But	eternity	is
indivisible,	it	is	only	now.	There	is	no	past,	no	future;	it	is	only	present.
Hence	meditation	is	an	art	of	living	here	and	now,	of	getting	out	of	the	past	and
of	the	future.	Those	two	are	the	basic	pillars	of	the	mind.	Once	those	pillars	are
removed	 the	 mind	 collapses	 and	 in	 the	 death	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 your	 birth,	 the
second	birth.	And	once	you	know	your	eternity	there	is	great	joy,	there	is	great
understanding,	gratitude,	prayer.	All	that	is	valuable	starts	flowering	in	you.	Life
becomes	a	living	fragrance.
IN	THE	THICK	OF	THE	WORLD	AND_THE	THIN	OF	THE	IN
(One	has	to	learn	to	move	freely	between	the	two.)
Man	has	completely	forgotten	the	inner	dimension,	he	has	become	obsessed	with
the	 outer.	He	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 changing	 toys,	more	money,	more	 power,	more
prestige.	 These	 are	 all	 toys.	 You	 can	 play	 with	 them	 but	 meanwhile	 you	 are
wasting	precious	time.	They	can	keep	you	occupied	but	they	will	also	keep	you
in	 deep	 anguish,	 in	 tension,	 in	 anxiety,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	 world
outside	is	a	world	of	competition,	it	is	struggle.	You	are	not	alone	there;	millions
and	millions	of	people	are	searching	for	the	same	things.
All	are	after	money,	so	everybody	is	at	each	other's	throat.	It	is	a	violent	struggle,
a	 war	 --	 sometimes	 in	 the	 open,	 sometimes	 underground.	 Life	 on	 the	 outside
remains	feverish;	it	is	a	kind	of	delirium,	an	insanity.
There	is	no	rest,	no	peace,	no	bliss,	no	relaxation,	unless	one	enters	inside,	then
one	enters	a	totally	different	world.	There	you	are	alone.	There	is	no	question	of
conflict,	there	is	nobody	to	fight	anybody,	no	question	of	competition.	There	is
nothing	to	achieve,	nothing	to	 lose,	nothing	to	gain;	a	great	calmness	descends
upon	you.	That	is	the	meaning	of	Sauro;	Sauro	means	in	the	shade.
To	be	outside	yourself	is	to	be	under	the	hot	sun,	it	is	to	be	continuously	under
fire.	To	be	in	is	to	be	in	the	shade	--	cool,	calm,	collected.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	 learn	 the	whole	art	of	being	available	 to	both	worlds.	 I
am	not	against	the	outside	world,	I	am	only	against	its	insanity;	and	that	insanity
can	be	balanced	by	inner	sanity,	then	there	is	no	problem.	If	you	can	keep	cool
under	 the	hot	 sun	 there	 is	no	problem.	 If	you	can	keep	cool	 in	 the	 tumult	 and
noise	of	 life	 there	 is	no	problem.	If	you	can	remain	relaxed	in	 the	marketplace
there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	So	you	have	to	learn	the	art	of	moving	in	and
out	easily,	just	as	you	move	outside	and	inside	your	house	--	there	is	no	problem
in	it.
But	 for	 centuries	we	 have	 been	 told	 that	 you	 can	 either	 be	 an	 extrovert	 or	 an
introvert	--	and	not	only	the	old	traditions	say	so;	even	one	of	the	most	important
psychologists	of	 this	age,	Carl	Gustav	Jung	repeats	 the	same	 thing	--	either-or,
either	you	are	an	extrovert	or	you	are	an	introvert.	Nobody	has	recognized	even
the	possibility	of	being	flexible.	When	there	is	time	to	go	out,	go	out,	when	there
is	time	to	come	in,	come	in,	and	let	them	balance	each	other.	This	balancing	is
my	sannyas.
My	sannyas	cannot	be	categorized	by	Carl	Gustav	Jung,	my	sannyasin	will	defy
his	 categorization.	 Jung	 cannot	 call	 him	 introvert	 because	 he	 loves,	 relates,
creates	--	he	is	in	the	thick	of	the	world.	He	enjoys	both	worlds.	When	you	can
have	both	worlds	why	 choose	one?	That	 is	 foolish!	But	 for	 centuries	man	has
chosen	one.
There	 was	 a	 reason:	 to	 choose	 one	 is	 simple,	 you	 avoid	 complexity.	 But
complexity	has	its	own	beauty.
It	is	simple	to	grow	only	roses	in	your	garden,	you	will	become	a	great	expert	in
growing	 roses,	 but	 your	 garden	 will	 not	 look	 like	 a	 garden.	 It	 needs	 all	 the
colors,	 all	 the	 flowers,	 all	 the	 fragrances.	 Your	 roses	 cannot	 replace	 the
nightqueen	--	there	is	no	way,	no	rose	can	do	that.	Your	roses	cannot	become	the
sunflowers	--	they	cannot	move	with	the	sun,	they	are	not	sun-worshippers.	Your
roses	 are	 beautiful	 but	 they	 are	 beautiful	 only	 in	 the	 whole	 orchestra	 of	 the
garden,	otherwise	they	are	boring.	Even	the	most	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
beautiful	thing	can	become	boring,	and	it	is	simple;	you	simply	learn	one	art.	To
know	 all	 the	 flowers,	 their	 seasons,	 their	 seeds,	 the	manure	 they	 need	 creates
complexity.
Hence	 for	 centuries	man	 has	 chosen	 only	 one	world:	 either	 being	 an	 introvert
then	moving	into	a	monastery,	becoming	a	monk	or	a	nun	and	living	the	life	of	a
closed	existence	--	no	windows,	no	doors	to	the	outside	world...	Yes,	it	will	be	a
very	simple	existence	but	 there	will	be	no	song	in	it.	It	will	be	dull	and	flat.	It
will	be	like	a	person	continuously	playing	a	single	note	on	the	guitar.
I	 have	 heard:	Mulla	 Nasruddin	 was	 learning	 the	 guitar.	 He	 would	 just	 go	 on
playing	a	single	note	again	and	again,	day	in,	day	out.	He	was	driving	his	family
and	the	neighborhood	crazy.	Finally	they	all	decided	something	had	to	be	done.
They	all	approached	him	and	said,	"Mulla,	you	are	a	man	of	great	wisdom,	but
you	are	driving	us	crazy!	We	have	seen	many	players,	many	musicians,	but	this
is	strange	--	just	one	note?
You	never	change,	you	 simply	go	on	playing	 the	 same	again	and	again.	 It	has
become	so	much	that	even	when	you	stop	we	go	on	hearing	it!	So	please,"	they
requested	"learn	a	few	more	notes."
Mulla	Nasruddin	said	"That	is	not	possible.	The	others	play	other	notes	because
they	have	not	yet	found	their	note.	I	have	found	mine,	there	is	no	need	for	me	to
search,	I	have	already	arrived.	This	is	my	note,	this	 is	my	whole	life.	And	why
should	I	practise	unnecessary	things	which	are	not	mine...?	I	am	doing	my	thing
and	I	am	enjoying	it.	If	you	cannot	enjoy	it	that	is	your	problem."
It	is	easy	to	play	one	note,	very	easy	--	no	practise	is	needed,	any	fool	can	do	it.
And	that's	what	man	has	done	in	 the	past:	a	few	people	chose	 to	be	 introverts.
They	were	 silent	but	 they	were	without	 song	 --	 flat,	boring,	dull,	 almost	dead.
You	 have	 called	 them	 saints.	 And	 the	 others	 chose	 the	 outside	 world:	 very
excited,	always	on	the	go,	in	a	great	hurry,	not	knowing	where	they	were	going,
just	running	round	and	round	in	circles,	in	a	state	of	delirium,	shouting,	fighting.
There	was	great	hustle	and	bustle	but	no	silence.
Both	attitudes	are	wrong.
My	sannyasin	has	to	prove	a	new	man	in	the	world.	He	has	to	prove	that	there	is
no	 need	 to	 divide,	 that	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 either-or;	 I	 teach	 both	 and	 not
either-or.	And	the	moment	both	are	together	there	is	something	more	than	both,
because	the	meeting	of	two	polarities	is	not	just	the	sum	total;	the	total	is	more
than	the	sum	t1otal	of	the	parts.	That	is	beauty	and	that	is	ecstasy	and	that	is	god
--	a	phenomenon	which	is	more	than	the	sum	total	of	the	parts.
LOVE:	A	GIFT	BOX	THAT	HOLDS	A	PARADOX
(Osho	explains	the	nature	of	the	paradox.)
Love	is	a	paradox,	it	has	to	be	a	paradox	because	it	contains	the	whole	mystery
of	 existence.	From	one	 side,	 from	 the	 outside,	 it	 is	 just	 a	 dewdrop;	 but	 if	 you
look	from	within	it	is	the	whole	ocean.
This	 is	 something	very	essential	 to	be	understood:	all	 that	 is	great	will	 always
look	ordinary	from	the	outside	because	it	is	not	objective.	The	way	to	look	at	it
from	the	outside	is	to	make	it	an	object.
The	real	values	of	life	are	subjective.	The	right	way	to	look	at	them	is	from	the
inside.	Unless	you	are	getting	exactly	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	experience	you	will
not	be	 able	 to	know	what	 it	 is.	From	 the	 innermost	 core	 it	 becomes	 immense,
infinite,	from	the	outside	it	is	very	small.
It	is	just	like	man;	if	you	look	at	a	man	from	the	outside	then	what	is	he?	At	the
most	 he	will	 need	 a	 six-feet-long,	 two-feet-wide	 grave,	 and	 that	will	 be	more
than	enough.	But	if	you	look	from	the	inside	of	man,	he	contains	universes.
Those	who	have	looked	from	within	are	all	agreed	on	one	point,	that	the	inner	is
infinite,	unbounded.
Jesus	calls	 it	 the	kingdom	of	god,	Buddha	calls	 it	nirvana,	enlightenment;	 light
and	 light	 and	 light	 with	 no	 end	 --	 you	 cannot	 find	 the	 boundary.	 That	 is	 the
meaning	of	 enlightenment;	 you	 can	 go	 on	 searching	 for	 the	 boundary	 but	 you
will	never	find	it.	Mahavira	calls	it	freedom,	freedom	from	all	limits.	But	from
the	outside	man	 is	so	ordinary.	Just	a	small	dagger	can	kill	him,	a	small	bullet
can	kill	him.
Look	at	a	rose	flower	--	 it	 is	so	small	 that	you	can	crush	it	 in	your	fist,	but	 its
beauty	 is	 immense.	You	cannot	contain	 it	 in	anything.	 If	you	know	 the	beauty
then	you	know	that	the	flower	is	only	a	small	expression	of	it.	If	you	really	know
the	beauty	then	the	flower	is	part	of	the	beauty,	not	vice	versa.	If	you	know	only
the	flower	then	you	will	say	beauty	is	only	part	of	the	flower.	If	you	know	man
from	within,	you	will	not	say	that	 the	soul	 is	within	the	body,	you	will	say	the
body	 is	within	 the	 soul....	Because	 the	 soul	 is	 vast	 -	 how	 can	 it	 be	within	 the
body?	And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 love	 because	 love	 is	 the	 flowering	 of	 your
being.
If	you	look	from	the	outside	it	 looks	blind,	and	people	condemn	it.	They	think
you	are	just	being	foolish,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
illogical,	because	they	are	observing	in	a	scientific	way	and	there	 is	no	way	to
prove	it	in	a	test	tube.	You	cannot	go	into	a	scientific	lab	and	put	your	love	on
the	table	for	them	to	dissect	and	to	find	out	what	it	 is	all	about.	But	you	know
that	 it	 is	 far	more	valuable	 than	 life	 itself.	Lovers	have	sacrificed	 their	 life	 for
love.
One	can	sacrifice	everything	for	love	--	it	is	an	ultimate	value.
So	your	name	is	beautiful:	love	is	a	small	gift,	yet	it	contains	the	greatest	gift	in
it.	Go	 on	 loving,	 go	 on	 giving	 your	 love	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 giving,	with	 no
desire	for	any	return,	with	not	even	the	desire	that	somebody	says	a	thank-you.
Then	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 will	 get	 deeper	 into	 it,	 and	 one	 day	 that	 miraculous
moment	 arrives	when	 you	 are	 centered	 exactly	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 flower	 of
love.
And	then	you	know	love	is	not	less	than	god	--	love	is	god.
FROM	EGO	TO	ETERNITY
(Amrit	Shunyo	means	the	secret	of	immortality,	and	nothingness.)	The	secret	of
immortality	 is	 to	 die	 as	 an	 ego.	 Be	 just	 a	 zero	 and	 you	 have	 attained	 to	 the
eternal,	because	the	zero	cannot	be	killed	by	death.
The	ego	can	be	killed	by	death,	it	is	bound	to	be	because	it	is	our	invention,	it	is
man-made	--	and	whatsoever	is	man-made	cannot	last	forever.	Even	if	we	make
castles	of	rocks,	sooner	or	later	they	will	disappear,	they	will	become	sand.	It	is
only	a	question	of	time	but	nothing	which	is	made	by	man	can	remain.
Once	 I	was	 staying	 in	a	 small	village,	one	of	 the	 smallest	villages	 I	have	ever
visited.	Only	 ninety	 people	 lived	 there,	 but	 just	 seven	 hundred	 years	 before	 it
was	one	of	the	greatest	cities	of	this	country;	nine	hundred	thousand	people	lived
there.	The	whole	place	is	full	of	palaces	and	there	is	nobody	to	live	in	them;	all
are	falling	down,	all	are	ruins.
There	 is	 only	 one	 small	 hotel	 for	 the	 tourists,	 with	 only	 five	 rooms	 because
nobody	ever	comes.	I	was	staying	with	a	very	rich	man	and	he	was	planning	to
make	a	beautiful	house	in	his	own	city	and	he	was	continuously	talking	about	it.
I	listened	to	him;	again	and	again	he	was	obsessed	with	the	idea	of	how	to	make
that	house	the	most	beautiful	in	the	whole	of	the	city	--	and	he	lived	in	a	big	city,
he	lived	in	Calcutta.
To	make	a	house	in	Calcutta	which	surpasses	all	the	houses	is	not	easy;	it	is	one
of	the	most	populated	cities	of	the	world	and	has	beautiful	palaces.	But	he	had
money	and	he	could	manage	it,	so	he	was	asking	my	advice,	Rather	than	giving
him	advice	I	took	him	out	and	I	told	him	'Just	look	around	--	for	miles	there	are
ruins.'	I	said	'Think	how	much	these	people	must	have	planned.	For	hundred	of
years	this	city	was	being	built...	great	palaces.	There	are	mosques	where	ten	thou
and	people	can	pray	together.	There	are	caravanserais,	ruins,	where	ten	thousand
camels	can	stay	together.	It	was	one	of	the	greatest	cities,	but	now	there	are	only
ruins,	And	what	are	you	planning	for?	I	asked	him,	'Even	if	you	make	a	beautiful
house,	you	will	be	gone,	your	house	will	be	gone.	Nothing	man-made	is	going	to
stay	forever	--	why	waste	your	energy?	Rather	than	wasting	energy	in	something
man-made,	why	not	discover	that	which	god	has	made	within	you?'
It	was	very	 shocking	 to	him,	he	was	not	 expecting	 this.	But	 the	 shock	was	of
immense	 value	 --	 the	man	 changed.	 For	 the	 throe	 days	we	 stayed	 together	 he
never	 talked	about	 the	house.	Many	 times	 I	 asked	 'What	 about	 the	house?'	He
said	'Forget	all	about	it.	You	destroyed	it	before	I	made	it.'	And	he	never	made	it.
When	I	last	visited	him	he	was	just	on	his	deathbed	and	he	said,	'You	saved	my
energy,	 because	 once	 that	 idea	 was	 dropped	 I	 had	 all	 the	 energy	 to	 discover
myself.'
Amrit	Shunyo	means	become	a	zero,	drop	the	ego	and	all	the	projections	of	the
ego	so	 that	you	can	discover	 the	eternal	within	you.	We	belong	 to	eternity,	we
are	part	of	eternity.	We	should	not	waste	ourselves	in	small	creations	which	are
just	soap	bubbles,	nothing	much,	not	more	than	that.
These	are	the	only	two	possible	ways	for	a	person	to	live:	either	as	an	ego	or	as	a
zero.	A	sannyasin	lives	as	a	zero,	a	nobody,	a	nothingness.	And	immense	is	his
joy,	great	 is	his	bliss,	 infinite	 is	his	beauty,	because	god	starts	pouring	 through
him.	 Just	 because	 he	 is	 a	 zero	 he	 becomes	 a	 vehicle,	 a	 passage;	 there	 is	 no
obstruction	in	him.	The	ego	is	the	greatest	obstruction.	The	ego	means	your	flute
is	blocked,	stuffed,	no	song	can	flow	through	it.
To	be	a	zero	means	you	are	just	a	hollow	bamboo	and	god	can	make	a	flute	out
of	you.
ULTIMATE	COMMUNION:	TOTAL	DISSOLUTION
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Anand	Samvado	--	bliss-dialogue.)
One	can	be	in	an	argument	with	existence	or	one	can	be	in	a	dialogue.	When	you
are	in	argument	with	existence	you	are	fighting,	you	are	trying	to	prove	yourself
right	and	existence	wrong.	When	you	are	 in	a	dialogue	 there	 is	no	question	of
proving	yourself	right	or	existence	wrong.	There	is	no	a	priori	idea;	you	are	just
in	communion.	You	are	in	search	of	truth.
The	 argumentator	 already	 thinks	 he	 knows	 the	 truth.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 seeker.	 He
already	believes	in	the	truth,	he	is	not	an	explorer.	He	believes	that	he	has	found,
although	 that	 belief	 is	 absolutely	 unfounded,	 It	 is	 not	 true.	 He	 has	 just
accumulated	 ideas	which	 are	 floating	 in	 the	 air,	 from	 the	 scriptures,	 from	 the
traditions,	from	people	around,	and	he	is	 trying	to	convince	himself	and	others
that	 these	 ideas	 are	 his.	 In	 fact	 no	 thought	 is	 yours	 --	 they	 are	 all	 unoriginal.
Thought	as	such	is	never	original;	no-thought	is	original.
If	 you	 are	 in	 an	 argument	 with	 existence	 then	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 prove	 your
thought,	 right	 and	 existence	 is	 absolutely	 silent:	 you	 can	go	on	 imposing	your
ideas	--	existence	will	not	refute	them,	remember.	For	thousands	of	years	people
believed	that	the	earth	is	flat.	The	earth	never	denied	it	(laughter),	not	even	once.
People	believed	that	the	sun	goes	around	the	earth,	and	the	sun	never	denied	it	--
-who	bothers?
Do	 you	 bother	 what	 mosquitoes	 go	 on	 thinking	 about	 you?	 Nobody	 bothers
whether	 the	 mosquitoes	 think	 that	 Jesus	 is	 the	 messiah	 or	 not,	 whether
Mohammed	is	the	prophet	or	not,	whether	Buddha	is	really	enlightened	or	not.
In	the	same	way	existence	has	no	interest	in	what	man	thinks.
But	a	miracle	happens,	the	moment	you	are	silent,	the	moment	you	are	open,	not
trying	to	prove	something,	not	trying	to	say	something	to	existence	but	ready	to
listen,	available,	existence	immediately	becomes	immensely	interested	in	you.	It
opens	up	its	heart,	it	allows	you	to	enter	into	its	mysteries	--	that	is	Samvado.
The	 seeker	 has	 to	 be	 silent,	 then	 god	 speaks.	 If	 you	 speak	 then	 god	 remains
silent.	Only	one	can	speak.	If	you	want	to	listen	to	the	voice	of	existence	itself
then	learn	the	art	of	being	silent.	Then	disappear	completely.	Then	just	be	there,
available,	open,	receptive,	and	you	will	be	flooded	with	truth,	with	light	and	that
light,	 that	 truth,	will	 liberate	you,	will	make	you	what	you	are	supposed	 to	be,
what	 you	 intrinsically	 need	 to	 be.	Your	 real	 destiny	will	 be	 fulfilled.	You	will
feel	immense	gratefulness	and	tremendous	contentment.
But	 one	 has	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 being	 silent,	 then	 a	 dialogue	 with	 existence
happens.
Martin	Buber,	one	of	the	most	important	Jewish	thinkers	of	this	age,	has	written
a	famous	book,	I	AND
THOU,	 and	he	 propounded	 the	 idea	 that	 prayer	 is	 an	 I-Thou	dialogue.	But	 he
was	just	a	thinker	not	a	mystic
--	a	philosopher	but	not	a	Buddha.	He	came	very	close,	he	almost	stumbled	on
the	truth	--	but	stumbled.	He	guessed	approximately	but	missed	too.
As	 far	 as	 the	 word	 'dialogue'	 is	 concerned	 he	 is	 absolutely	 right,	 prayer	 is	 a
dialogue.	But	when	he	said	 it	 is	a	dialogue	between	 I	and	Thou	he	missed	 the
point.	It	is	not	a	dialogue	between	I	and	Thou,	because	if	I	and	Thou	are	there,
there	is	going	to	be	an	argument.	I	and	Thou	can	only	fight	and	argue;	a	dialogue
is	not	possible.	The	very	idea	of	I	is	argumentative.	The	I	says	'I	am	right;	how
can	you	be	right?'	So	the	word
'dialogue'	that	he	has	come	across	is	beautiful	but	it	is	only	guesswork,	so	he	can
be	forgiven.
When	real	dialogue	happens	 there	 is	only	Thou,	no	 I.	That	 is	 the	beginning	of
dialogues	the	I	disappears,	there	is	only	Thou.	And	then	the	end	of	the	dialogue
is	when	Thou	also	disappear,	there	is	complete	silence.
Jalaluddin	Rumi,	 one	 of	 the	most	 significant	Sufi	mystics,	 has	 reached	 a	 little
deeper	than	Martin	Buber.
In	his	famous	poem	a	lover	knocks	on	the	door	of	his	beloved,	and	the	beloved
asks	from	inside	'Who	are	you?'	He	says	'Cannot	you	guess	by	my	voice,	by	my
footsteps?'	And	 the	 beloved	 says	 'If	 you	 still	 are	 that	much	 then	 this	 house	 is
very	 small	 --	 it	 cannot	 contain	 two.	 When	 you	 have	 completely	 disappeared
come	back.'
And	the	 lover	goes	and	moves	 into	 the	forest.	Moons	come	and	go,	days	pass,
months	 pass,	 years	 pass,	 and	 one	 day	 he	 is	 no	more.	 So	Rumi	 says	 he	 comes
back	and	knocks	on	the	door.	There	is	the	same	question	again	'Who	are	you?	He
says	'I	am	no	more	--	only	you	are,	and	the	door	opens,	he	is	received.'
He	goes	a	little	deeper	than	Martin	Buber	but	as	far	as	I	am	concerned	it	too	is
only	the	beginning,	not	the	end.	If	I	am	to	write	the	poem	or	if	I	meet	Jalaludin
Rumi	then	I	will	insist	on	his	changing	it,	adding	something	more	to	it;	it	is	half.
He	must	have	written	it	in	his	early	days.	He	must	have	written	it	when	he	had
attained	only	 the	 experience	of	 satori,	 not	 of	 samadhi,	 because	 if	 the	man	had
really	dropped	his	ego	who	would	be	there	to	come	back	and	knock	on	the	door?
I	would	change	this	much,	the	last	part.
The	 first	 part	 is	 beautiful:	 years	 pass	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 he	 disappears.	 Then
there	is	nobody	to	come	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
back.	Now	the	beloved	comes	in	search	of	him	--	that	would	be	my	end	of	the
story.	She	comes	and	shakes	him	up	out	of	his	meditation	saying,	'What	are	you
doing?	I	have	been	waiting	and	waiting	and	waiting.'
And	 he	 asks	 'Who	 are	 you?'	 (much	 laughter)	 'Come	 only	 when	 the	 I	 has
disappeared.'	Then	the	story	will	be	complete,	then	the	dialogue	is	absolute	when
both	have	disappeared.	Then	 there	 is	 unity,	 then	 there	 is	 communion,	 union	 --
neither	 I	nor	 thou.	Martin	Buber	 says	prayer	 is	 an	 I-Thou	dialogue,	 Jalaluddin
Rumi	 says	 prayer	 is	 no	 I	 but	 only	 Thou;	 I	 say	 no	 I,	 no	 Thou,	 then	 there	 is
dialogue.	And	that	dialogue	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	all	religiousness.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	A	couple	of	months.
--	Good.	Next	time	come	for	a	longer	period.	If	you	are	still	there,	come	back!
(much	laughter)	Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011095
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
BLISSOLUTION
(Osho	 talks	 about	 the	 different	 reflections	 of	 bliss	 that	 we	 know	 as	 pleasure,
happiness	and	joy.)	It	is	just	as	you	see	your	face	in	the	mirror.	The	face	in	the
mirror	 is	 a	 reflection	 of	 your	 original	 face	 but	 it	 is	 not	 your	 face.	 Joy	 is	 the
reflection	of	bliss	 in	 the	mirror	of	 the	mind.	When	you	close	your	 eyes	 to	 the
mirror,	you	experience	your	original	 face.	And	 that's	 the	search	of	all	 religion,
the	search	for	the	original	face.
The	Zen	masters	 say	one	has	 to	 find	 the	 face	 that	belonged	 to	you	before	you
were	born	or	even	before	your	parents	were	born.	And	there	are	layers	and	layers
which	have	gathered	upon	the	original	face.
The	 most	 superficial	 layer	 is	 of	 pleasure.	 So	 whenever	 a	 society,	 a	 culture,
remains	 obsessed	 with	 pleasure	 it	 remains	 childish;	 it	 is	 playing	 with	 toys.	 It
cannot	have	anything	of	real	meaning.	Sooner	or	later	it	will	feel	the	emptiness,
the	 hollowness	 of	 it	 --	 because	 toys	 can	 keep	 you	 engaged	 for	 a	 time	 but	 not
forever.	And	 it	 is	 good	 that	 they	 cannot	 keep	 you	 occupied	 forever,	 otherwise
there	would	be	no	possibility	of	becoming	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha.
Toys	have	 to	 be	broken,	 have	 to	 be	 shattered.	One	has	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 them,	but
nobody	can	get	rid	of	toys	in	an	immature	way.	It	has	to	be	a	realisation	that	they
are	futile.
The	 people	 who	 have	 broken	 all	 the	 toys	 enter	 a	 deeper	 realm,	 the	 realm	 of
happiness.	 Then	 they	 start	 becoming	 aware	 of	 the	 beauty	 of	 existence	 --	 the
sunrise,	 the	 sunset,	 the	 stars	 and	 the	 immense	 harmony	 that	 exists	 in	 the
universe,	the	celestial	music...	what	Heraclitus	calls	the	hidden	harmony.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	feel	that	hidden	harmony	through	any	aspect	brings	happiness.	One	can	feel	it
through	painting,	one	can	 feel	 it	 through	music,	 poetry,	 sculpture.	But	modern
man	has	lost	that	dimension	almost	totally.	We	have	started	worshipping	ugliness
instead	 of	 beauty.	 It	 is	 a	 sad	 thing,	 unfortunate,	 but	 in	 a	 way	 indicative.	 It
indicates	a	failure	of	nerve.
The	 paintings	 of	 Picasso,	 and	 the	 paintings	 of	 the	 ancient	 masters,	 of
Michelangelo	and	Leonardo	Da	Vinci,	are	so	totally	different	that	they	seem	to
be	 unbridgeable.	 Leonardo	 or	 Michelangelo	 give	 you	 a	 sense	 of	 harmony,
accord.	Looking	at	their	sculpture	or	painting,	their	pieces	of	art,	you	will	feel	as
if	you	are	surrounded	by	something	which	can	only	be	called	the	song	of	silence.
A	grace	will	descend	on	you,	a	kind	of	meditativeness.	The	mind	will	stop	for	a
moment.
Looking	at	the	paintings	of	Picasso	or	Dali	one	feels	like	going	crazy,	one	would
like	 to	 commit	 murder	 or	 suicide.	 One	 cannot	 meditate	 on	 the	 paintings	 of
Picasso.	If	one	does	one	is	bound	to	become	sick,	sick	to	death.
The	paintings	of	Picasso	are	basically	not	works	of	art	but	works	of	pathology.
He	is	full	of	insanity	and	this	is	his	way	of	getting	rid	of	it,	by	painting	it	he	gets
rid	of	it.	It	is	good	for	him,	as	far	as	he	himself	is	concerned	it	is	cathartic.	It	is	a
kind	of	 throwing	up	or	 something	 that	 is	making	you	 feel	nauseous,	 once	you
have	thrown	it	out	you	feel	good,	there	is	a	certain	well-being.
If	Picasso	had	been	prevented	from	painting	he	would	have	committed	suicide	or
would	have	committed	murder	or	would	have	gone	mad	--	 these	were	the	only
three	alternatives	left	for	him.	Painting	was	good	for	him	as	a	psychoanalytical
method.
They	use	it	now	in	psychoanalysis:	mad	people	are	told	to	paint	--	and	it	helps.
Just	by	painting	they	can	throw	much	garbage	out	of	themselves.	They	are	told
to	write	and	 they	write	poetry	and	novels.	 Just	by	writing	 they	become	a	 little
saner	 because	 that	 which	 was	 torturing	 them	 inside	 is	 thrown	 out;	 they	 feel
unburdened.
This	is	a	pathological	state.
Happiness	 cannot	 arise	 out	 of	modern	 art.	 It	 has	 lost	 that	 quality,	 it	 has	 even
fallen	 from	 giving	 happiness	 to	 people.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 modern
poetry,	modern	music.	And	not	only	man	but	even	plants	give	their	judgement.
In	one	Canadian	university	they	were	experimenting	with	music.	To	a	few	plants
Ravi	 Shankar's	 sitar	was	 played,	 and	 to	 others	 of	 the	 same	 kind,	 of	 the	 same
height,	in	every	way	the	same,	jazz	music,	pop	music.	A	strange	thing	happened:
the	 plants	 that	 heard	Ravi	 Shankar's	 sitar	 --	 taped	music	 --	 all	 started	 leaning
towards	 the	 tape-recorder,	 like	 a	 person	 who	 is	 hard	 of	 hearing	 and	 wants	 to
listen	more	closely	and	puts	his	hand	to	his	ear	and	comes	closer.	And	the	other
plants	started	moving	away	from	the	jazz	music	and	the	pop	music...	to	avoid	it,
somehow	 to	 escape.	 They	 could	 not	 escape	 because	 they	 were	 rooted	 in	 the
ground,	imprisoned,	but	at	least	they	could	move	away	a	little.
And	the	plants	that	were	listening	to	Ravi	Shankar's	sitar	grew	faster.	In	the	same
time	they	became	double	 the	size	of	 the	other	plants	and	 they	produced	bigger
flowers	than	the	other	plants.
Happiness	 is	 the	experience	of	harmony	 in	existence,	but	 it	 is	passive,	you	are
just	receptive.	Joy	is	active,	not	passive.	Happiness	is	a	woman,	joy	is	a	man.	Joy
dances,	 sings,	 participates,	 creates;	 happiness	 only	 receives,	 welcomes.
Happiness	 is	 a	 host,	 but	 joy	 is	 the	 process	 of	 participation	 in	 the	 ultimate
harmony	of	things.	But	still	all	these	three	are	far	away	from	bliss.
Bliss	is	becoming	one	with	the	harmony,	not	even	participating.	It	is	neither	male
nor	 female.	 It	 is	 just	dissolving	 into	 the	whole	and	dissolving	 forever.	 It	 is	 the
point	of	no-return	--	and	that	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas.
ON	THE	WINGS	OF	WISDOM
(There	 is	 a	 difference	 between	 knowledge	 and	 wisdom;	 Osho	 elucidates.)
Knowledge	is	very	ordinary	--	you	can	gather	it	from	all	kinds	of	sources.	There
are	 libraries,	 there	 are	 museums,	 there	 are	 universities;	 they	 all	 deal	 in
knowledge,	their	whole	function	is	to	inform	people.	They	function	as	agents	of
the	past.	That's	why	the	teacher	has	been	respected	in	all	the	traditions	over	the
world	without	 any	 exception	 --	 he	helps	 the	new	generation	 to	 be	 conditioned
according	to	the	old.
He	may	not	even	be	aware	of	what	he	is	doing,	but	consciously	or	unconsciously
he	 is	part	of	 a	great	 conspiracy.	The	conspiracy	 starts	before	 the	children	 start
thinking	on	their	own	--	that	process	has	to	be	stopped.	They	have	to	be	stuffed
with	knowledge,	so	much	so	that	there	is	no	more	space	left	for	them	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
think.
Before	 they	 ask	 questions	 we	 have	 to	 give	 them	 answers.	 That	 is	 a	 way	 of
destroying	 the	 questions,	 it	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 abortion.	 And	 unless	 a	 person	 starts
questioning	authentically,	sincerely,	totally,	all	his	answers	are	borrowed.	In	fact
he	never	asked	them	so	they	have	been	painted	on,	just	like	labels	glued	onto	the
surface.	And	that	is	the	whole	work	that	the	so-called	system	of	education	goes
on	doing	in	the	world.
The	function	of	a	master	is	not	the	function	of	a	teacher,	it	is	just	the	opposite:
the	 teacher	 informs,	 the	master	 transforms.	The	 teacher	gives	you	 information,
knowledge;	he	functions	as	an	agent	of	the	past.	The	master	takes	away	all	your
knowledge,	 all	 your	 information.	He	 gives	 you	 nothing,	 he	 simply	 leaves	 you
absolutely	 as	 you	 are	 in	 your	 utter	 purity,	 in	 your	 innocence,	 in	 your
unconditioned	state	of	consciousness.
Socrates	is	right	when	he	says	that	the	master's	function	is	that	of	a	midwife:	he
helps	you	to	come	out	of	the	psychological	womb	that	the	teachers	have	created
around	you.	Once	you	are	out	of	the	psychological	womb	you	are	a	free	person,
then	you	can	explore,	then	you	can	enquire.	And	out	of	your	enquiry,	out	of	your
own	exploration,	whatsoever	knowing	happens	is	wisdom.
The	questions	are	yours,	the	answers	also	have	to	be	yours.	If	the	questions	are
yours	 and	 the	 answers	 are	 somebody	 else's,	 that	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help	 --	 those
answers	are	false.
So	remember	this:	here	you	are	to	be	unburdened	of	all	knowledge	so	that	your
own	wisdom,	your	own	insight,	can	start	welling	up.
That	is	the	true	meaning	of	the	word	 'education'.	It	 literally	means	to	bring	out
that	which	is	in.	It	is	like	drawing	water	from	a	well.	That	is	education,	drawing
out.	The	water	is	already	in,	you	drop	a	bucket	down	and	you	take	the	water	out.
But	 the	 education	 that	 exists	 in	 the	world	 is	 not	 education,	 it	 is	miseducation,
because	 you	 are	 not	 bringing	 out	 that	 which	 is	 in;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 you	 are
stuffing	in	that	which	is	out,	throwing	inside	the	person's	mind	and	body	and	just
somehow	making	him	swallow,	whatsoever	nonsense	others	have	decided	should
be	swallowed	by	every	child.
Others	are	the	deciders,	the	child	has	no	part	in	it.	He	is	helpless	and	he	does	not
know	what	 else	 to	 do;	 he	 cannot	 rebel,	 he	 cannot	 escape.	And	 because	 of	 his
helplessness	we	have	done	immense	harm.	Children	are	the	most	exploited	class,
far	 more	 exploited	 than	 the	 proletariat	 and	 women.	 And	 it	 seems	 almost
impossible	to	bring	them	out	of	this	deep	deep-rooted	exploitation	--	because	the
parents	are	powerful,	the	society	is	powerful,	the	church	is	powerful,	the	state	is
power,	d	the	child	has	no	power	at	all;	he	has	to	depend	on	them	for	his	survival.
To	survive	he	has	to	pay	this	cost:	he	has	to	sell	his	soul.
Sannyas	means	an	effort	to	reclaim	your	soul,	effort	to	destroy	all	that	has	been
forced	 on	 you	 when	 you	 were	 helpless.	 Now	 you	 are	 no	more	 helpless,	 now
there	 is	no	need	 to	carry	 it	even	for	a	single	moment.	 It	all	has	 to	be	dropped.
And	 the	moment	we	 drop	 all	 knowledge	 a	 great	 freedom,	 a	 great	 joy,	 a	 great
weightlessness,	happens.	Suddenly	you	start	growing	wings,	you	can	fly	 to	 the
very	end	of	the	sky	--
nothing	can	hold	you	back.
YOU	WON'T	FEEL	A	THING
(...	once	society	has	conditioned	you.	We	have	to	reclaim	the	sensitivity	we	had
as	children,	Osho	tells	us.)
The	 conditioning	 of	 all	 the	 cultures	 is	 to	 make	 everybody	 insensitive,	 dull,
numb,	 because	 sensitivity	 can	 be	 a	 trouble.	To	 allow	people	 to	 be	 sensitive	 is
dangerous.	If	they	are	sensitive	to	beauty	then	marriage	will	be	on	the	rocks.	If
marriage	 is	 to	 be	 saved	 then	 you	 have	 to	 destroy	 their	 sensitivity	 for	 beauty.
Because	 who	 knows?	 --	 tomorrow	 you	 may	 meet	 a	 woman	 who	 suddenly
catches	your	whole	being,	who	makes	you	afire.
Then	there	is	no	protection.
The	only	way	society	can	control	you	is	to	make	your	skin	as	thick	as	possible,
so	nothing	penetrates	you.	And	it	is	not	only	a	question	of	a	beautiful	woman	or
man,	 because	 beauty	 is	 the	 same.	 Whether	 you	 are	 experiencing	 a	 beautiful
sunset	or	a	beautiful	flower	or	a	beautiful	waterfall,	or	a	beautiful	cloud,	it	is	the
same	 beauty.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 crippled	 and	 paralysed	 so	 that	 you	 cannot
experience	beauty	--	then	marriage	is	safe.	And	marriage	is	the	foundation	of	our
so-called	groat	society.	Marriage	functions	as	the	basic	unit	and	it	is	the	ugliest
institution	man	has	invented	so	far.
They	 say	 love	 is	 blind.	 They	 also	 say	 marriage	 is	 an	 institution.	 Then	 I	 say
marriage	 is	 an	 institution	 for	 the	 blind.	 They	 make	 the	 institution,	 then	 they
make	 you	 blind	 because	 the	 institution	 needs	 people,	 otherwise	 all	 the
functionaries	of	the	institution	will	be	jobless;	they	need	some	work	to	do.	And
there	are	people	who	have	become	experts	in	blinding	you	--	they	need	jobs.	The
whole	society	is	functioning	in	such	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
a	way	that	it	is	basically	against	sensitivity.
A	sensitive	person	would	prefer	to	die	than	to	become	a	slave,	because	slavery	is
possible	only	if	you	are	so	dull	that	you	don't	feel	the	humiliation	at	all.	And	the
society	needs	slaves,	all	kinds	of	slaves;	from	the	peon	to	the	president,	all	kinds
of	slaves	are	needed.
The	only	guarantee	for	having	so	many	slaves	is	to	destroy	peoples'	capacity	to
feel,	to	be	aware,	to	see.
Their	whole	 clarity	 has	 to	 be	messed	 up	 so	 they	 cannot	 see,	 they	 cannot	 feel.
Then	naturally	they	go	on	accepting	any	kind	of	state,	just	to	survive	they	go	on
accepting	 all	 kinds	 of	 humiliations.	 They	 are	 ready	 to	 exist	 below	 the	 human
level.	Millions	of	people	are	existing	below	the	human	level,	 just	 like	dogs,	or
maybe	even	dogs	are	living	in	a	better	way.
The	 sensitive	 person	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 rebellious	 because	 wherever	 he	 sees
anything	unjust	he	will	revolt,	he	will	not	be	able	to	tolerate	it.	There	is	so	much
injustice	everywhere.	How	to	protect	this	injustice	and	the	structure	that	depends
on	it	and	all	the	investments.	Society	has	found	a	very	sure	and	certain	ways	--
that	is,	from	the	very	beginning	start	making	the	child	a	numskull.	It	is	a	kind	of
anaesthesia,	 psychological	 chloroform,	 so	 one	 only	 lives	 at	 the	minimum;	 and
only	 then	 can	 this	 whole	 exploitative	 establishment	 continue.	 The	 priest,	 the
politicians,	 the	 pedagogues	 --	 they	 can	 all	 go	 on	 exploiting	 people.	 And	 they
themselves	are	in	the	same	boat.
It	 is	 a	 very	 strange	 society.	We	 are	 standing	 in	 a	 circle:	 everybody's	 hand	 in
somebody's	 pocket;	 one	 person	 is	 searching	 in	 somebody	 else's	 pocket,
somebody	else	 is	 searching	 in	his	pocket...	 and	 so	on	and	 so	 forth.	We	are	 all
standing	 in	a	circle,	and	everybody	 is	happy	because	one	 is	not	aware	of	what
the	other	is	doing	to	him	and	the	other	is	completely	unaware	of	what	is	being
done	to	him!
This	whole	stupidity	has	 to	be	destroyed	--	 it	 is	 time.	 It	has	existed	beyond	 its
limit.	Now	 it	 is	 just	 a	mountainous	weight	on	 the	human	heart.	 It	 is	 crippling,
destroying;	it	is	like	a	cancer	that	goes	on	growing.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 be	 sensitive	 again	 like	 small	 children	 --
alert,	watchful,	available,	capable	of	feeling	wonder	and	awe.
I	am	not	much	interested	in	god,	because	if	you	are	sensitive	you	will	find	him.
So	that	is	not	the	problem	at	all,	the	problem	is:	are	you	sensitive	enough?	Are
you	sensitive	enough	to	find	love?	Are	you	sensitive	enough	to	be	a	rebel.	Are
you	 sensitive	 enough	 to	 go	 against	 the	mob	 psychology?	 If	 that	 is	 there	 then
there	is	no	question	of	bothering	about	God;	you	are	bound	to	find	him.	But	that
happens	 only	 when	 one's	 sensitivity	 rises	 to	 a	 peak	 and	 one	 functions	 at	 the
maximum.
God	is	the	experience	of	being	sensitive	at	the	optimum	point.
WITNESSING	IS	THE	WINDOW	TO	GOD
(Osho	explains	Haridarshan	means	god	realisation.)
God	is	within	us	as	a	seed	so	we	have	not	to	go	anywhere	else	to	find	him.	No
church,	no	temple,	no	mosque,	is	going	to	help,	no	scripture	is	going	to	become
a	guarantee.	The	whole	thing	is	so	simple	that	if	you	can	look	within	all	becomes
possible.	 So	 I	 don't	 teach	 many	 things	 here,	 just	 one	 single	 thing	 but	 it	 is	 a
master	key,	it	can	unlock	all	the	doors	within	you.	I	call	it	witnessing.
Learn	 to	 observe	 three	 things:	 First,	 your	 body	 and	 its	 actions....	 Walking,
remember	 that	 you	 are	walking;	 eating,	 remember	 that	 you	 are	 eating;	 falling
into	 sleep,	 remember	 for	 as	 long	 as	 you	 can,	 that	 you	 are	 falling	 asleep.
Secondly,	be	watchful	of	your	mind	and	its	mechanism.	Watch	the	thoughts,	the
memories,	the	desires,	without	any	evaluation,	as	if	they	don't	belong	to	you,	as
if	you	are	just	reading	a	novel	or	seeing	a	movie	--	unconcerned,	cool,	detached.
And	thirdly,	watch	your	feelings,	your	emotions,	your	moods,	knowing	perfectly
well	that	I	am	the	watcher	and	the	watcher	can	never	be	the	watched.	I	am	the
subject	and	they	are	the	object.	I	am	the	seer	and	they	are	the	seen.
You	 have	 to	 do	 these	 three	 things.	 In	 fact	 there	 is	 only	 one	 thing	 --	watching
witnessing,	but	it	has	to	be	practised	on	three	planes.	And	then	one	day	when	all
these	three	have	come	to	a	certain	ripeness	the	fourth,	witnessing,	happens	of	its
own	 accord.	Then	 the	witness	 becomes	 a	witness	 of	 itself,	 then	 consciousness
comes	 to	know	 itself.	That's	what	Socrates	means	when	he	 says	know	 thyself.
Knowing	oneself	means	witnessing	one's	ultimate	nature.	And	that	is	the	door	to
the	divine.	From	there	god	possesses	you.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Haridarshan:	the	vision	of	god,	the	experience
of	god,	the	realisation	of	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011105
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
LOVE'S	HUE
(It	colors	all	you	see	when	you	 take	a	heart's-eye-view	of	 life)	Man	can	 relate
with	existence	either	through	the	head	or	through	the	heart.	Relating	through	the
head	 is	 logical,	mathematical,	 scientific;	 relating	 through	 the	 heart	 is	 illogical,
poetic,	mystical.	But	when	you	relate	through	the	head	your	relationship	remains
only	superficial,	you	only	 touch	 the	periphery	of	 things,	never	 the	heart	of	 the
matter;	hence	science	will	always	remain	peripheral.	Logic	will	touch	things	but
only	the	outermost	part.
It	is	just	as	if	one	touches	the	waves	of	the	ocean	and	thinks	one	has	known	the
ocean.	To	know	the	ocean	one	has	to	dive	deep	into	it;	to	really	know	the	ocean
one	 has	 to	 become	 one	 with	 it.	 Only	 in	 that	 union	 or	 communion	 is	 truth
revealed.	 It	 is	 not	 possible	 through	 the	 head.	 The	 heart	 is	 the	 door	 for	 that
miracle.
Love	 represents	 the	 heart,	 and	 the	 moment	 you	 start	 relating	 with	 existence
through	the	heart	existence	starts	taking	on	a	totally	new	color.	It	starts	becoming
more	and	more	immaterial,	spiritual,	divine.
The	people	who	think	logically	have	always	come	to	the	conclusion	that	there	is
no	god.	Their	 logic	 is	not	 at	 fault,	 their	 choice	 is	 faulty:	 they	have	chosen	 the
wrong	method.	It	is	beyond	the	scope	of	their	method	to	comprehend	god.	God
is	known	only	by	the	illogical,	in	a	way,	the	mad	people	--	the	poets,	the	painters,
the	sculptors,	the	dancers.	And	ultimately,	god	in	its	totality	is	known	only	to	the
mystic	 --	 because	 the	 poet,	 the	 painter,	 the	 sculptor,	 they	 are	 somewhere	 in
between.	 They	 are	 not	 in	 the	 head	 --	 that	much	 is	 certain	 --	 but	 they	 are	 not
exactly	attuned	with	 the	heart	either.	In	 those	moments	poetry	arises,	but	 those
moments	come	and	go.	The	poet	only	has	glimpses	of	god,	the	mystic	abides	in
that	experience.	He	never	falls	from	it.	There	is	nowhere	to	fall;	wherever	he	is
there	is	god.
That	is	 the	meaning	of	your	name,	let	 it	also	become	the	meaning	of	your	life,
only	then	is	sannyas	realized.	This	is	the	beginning	of	a	tremendously	significant
pilgrimage,	but	only	the	beginning,	just	a	seed.
But	it	has	the	potential	of	ultimate	bliss,	of	ultimate	truth,	of	ultimate	freedom.
THE	GOLDEN	RULE:	SELF-RULE
One	can	rule	others	but	then	it	is	never	noble;	it	cannot	be,	by	its	very	nature.	At
the	most	 it	 can	 pretend	 to	 be	 noble	 but	 it	 cannot	 be.	 The	 very	 idea	 of	 ruling
another	person	is	ignoble,	it	is	ugly,	it	is	inhuman;	it	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
immoral	 because	 the	 other	 is	 not	 a	 means	 for	 you,	 the	 other	 is	 an	 end	 unto
himself.
To	 rule	 the	other	means	 to	 reduce	him	 to	a	commodity,	 to	a	 thing.	To	 rule	 the
other	means	to	use	the	other	as	a	means	for	your	purpose.
Emmanuel	 Kant,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 moral	 thinkers	 of	 the	West,	 has
come	very	close	to	defining	the	ultimate	criterion	of	morality.	He	says	to	use	the
other	 as	 a	means	 is	 the	 basic	 immoral	 act.	 Everything	 else	 that	 is	 immoral	 is
immoral	because	of	this,	so	this	should	be	the	criterion:	are	you	using	the	other
as	a	means?
Even	if	the	husband	uses	the	wife	as	a	means	to	fulfil	his	sexual	desire,	just	as	a
means,	 then	 it	 is	 immoral.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 difference	 between	 a	 wife	 and	 a
prostitute.	Maybe	the	wife	is	a	permanent	the	of	prostitute	--	you	have	a	longer
lease.	If	the	wife	is	using	the	husband	in	any	way	--	to	possess	money,	to	possess
power	--	then	again	she	is	reducing	the	man	to	a	servant.	And	to	reduce	the	other
in	any	way	from	his	uniqueness,	from	his	being	an	end	unto	himself	or	herself,
cannot	be	noble.	So	the	only	noble	rule	possible	is	the	rule	over	oneself.
Alexander	 the	 Great	 is	 not	 noble,	 only	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 is	 noble,	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	Buddha	has	no	rule	over	others	but	he	is	a	master	of	himself.
There	is	no	part	of	his	being	which	is	not	in	tune	with	him.	He	has	come	to	attain
absolute	harmony.	There	is	no	conflict	in	him,	there	is	a	reign	of	absolute	peace.
And	his	consciousness	is	supreme,	nothing	is	above	it	--	no	instinct,	no	intellect,
nothing	is	higher	than	his	consciousness.
Atmo	means	 that	 consciousness,	 the	 soul.	 And	when	 your	 soul	 is	 supreme	 in
your	existence	and	is	not	ruled	by	anything	--	by	your	sexuality,	by	your	greed,
by	your	anger,	by	your	violence,	by	all	kinds	of	unconscious	instincts	--	then	you
have	attained	real	mastery.	And	that	is	the	purpose	of	sannyas.
GOD	--	THE	LURE	IN	EACH	LONGING
We	love	many	things	but	essentially	in	all	our	love	we	are	searching	for	god.	Of
course	the	search	is	unconscious,	that's	why	you	cannot	give	any	explanation	if	it
is	asked	'Why	do	you	love	a	rose	flower?'	At	the	most	you	can	say	because	it	is
beautiful,	but	that	is	not	an	answer,	it	is	a	tautology.	Again	the	same	question	can
be	raised,	'Why	do	you	love	that	which	is	beautiful?',	and	you	will	be	at	a	loss	to
answer.
You	 love	a	beautiful	 sunset,	you	 love	a	beautiful	woman,	you	 love	a	beautiful
child,	you	love	a	beautiful	painting	--	you	love	thousands	of	things.	There	must
be	something	running	through	all	of	them	which	makes	you	love	them	all.	You
call	it	beauty	but	nobody	has	ever	been	able	to	define	what	beauty	is.
Three	 thousand	 years	 of	 philosophizing	 on	 the	 subject	 has	 not	 led	 to	 any
conclusion.	 The	 reason	 why	 we	 cannot	 define	 beauty	 is	 that	 beauty	 is	 really
nothing	but	the	reflection	of	god.	And	because	god	itself	is	indefinable,	likewise
its	reflection	is	indefinable.	If	you	cannot	define	the	moon,	how	can	you	define
the	moon	reflected	in	the	lake?
The	eastern	mystics	have	given	three	indications	of	god.	They	are	just	hints,	not
definitions:	satyam,	shivam,	sundaram.
Satyam	means	the	truth:	wherever	you	find	truth	it	is	a	reflection	of	god.	Shivam
means	the	good:	wherever	you	find	something	good	it	is	a	reflection	of	god.	And
sundaram	means	the	beautiful,	the	presence	of	beauty:	wherever	you	find	beauty
it	is	the	reflection	of	god.
This	 is	 the	 true	 trinity.	 And	 sundaram,	 the	 beautiful,	 is	 the	 highest	 peak.	 So
whatsoever	 you	 love	 --	 truth,	 good,	 beauty	 --	 it	 is	 all	 in	 fact	 an	 unconscious
search	 for	 god.	 Through	 sannyas	 the	 unconscious	 search	 has	 to	 be	 made	 a
deliberate,	conscious	effort.
The	moment	 your	 search	 becomes	 conscious	 it	 becomes	 very	 easy	 to	 find	 the
truth.	 In	 unconsciousness	 we	 go	 on	 in	 circles,	 in	 consciousness	 we	 can
immediately	see	the	centre	of	the	whole	thing	and	we	can	move	to	the	centre	like
an	arrow.
Meditation	helps	you	 to	become	aware	of	whatsoever	you	have	been	doing.	 It
takes	 you	 out	 of	 your	 vicious	 circle,	 it	 gives	 you	 a	 clear-cut	 insight	 into	 the
target.	And	once	you	know	exactly	what	your	deepest	longing	is	then	to	find	it	is
very	 easy.	 That's	 why	 Jesus	 says,	 'Seek	 and	 ye	 shall	 find,	 ask	 and	 it	 shall	 be
given	unto	you,	knock	and	the	door	shall	be	opened	unto	you.'	But	this	seeking,
this	searching,	this	knocking,	has	to	be	done	in	absolute	consciousness.
SIMPLY	BLISSING	DOWN
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(We	just	need	to	be	open	to	receive.)
Bliss	is	continuously	showering,	we	are	just	not	ready	to	receive	it.	Not	even	for
a	single	moment	does	it	stop	because	bliss	is	the	very	nature	of	existence.	But	to
receive	 it	 we	 have	 to	 be	 open,	 vulnerable,	 available,	 welcoming,	 and	 we	 are
taught	 to	remain	closed.	Our	windows	and	doors	are	all	closed;	we	don't	 leave
even	a	small	hole	for	the	sun	to	reach	us.	We	are	living	in	graves	and	we	have
lived	in	the	graves	for	so	long	that	now	we	are	afraid	to	come	out	into	the	light.
The	 light	 seems	 to	 be	 too	 dazzling,	 the	wind	 seems	 to	 be	 too	 rowdy,	 the	 rain
seems	to	be	dangerous,	risky.	We	have	become	accustomed	to	our	dark	cells	and
we	think	this	is	the	only	way	to	live.
In	fact	it	is	not	a	way	to	live	at	all,	it	is	only	a	way	to	commit	a	gradual	suicide.
The	 real	way	 to	 live	 is	 to	 live	with	 existence,	 in	openness.	There	 is	 a	 risk	but
risking	 is	 not	 bad.	 Risk	 is	 a	 thrill,	 it	 is	 adventure,	 it	 is	 challenge.	 It	 is	 only
through	 risking	 that	 one	 grows.	 The	 more	 adventurous	 one	 is,	 the	 more	 one
becomes	 integrated;	 the	more	 one	 goes	 into	 insecurity,	 the	more	 one	 becomes
solid,	centered,	grounded.	And	this	is	the	whole	process	of	spiritual	evolution.
By	your	becoming	a	sannyasin	all	that	is	expected	is	that	slowly	slowly	you	will
stop	 clinging	 to	 your	 dark	 cell	 and	 its	 conveniences,	 its	 comforts,	 its
consolations,	its	security,	its	insurance,	and	you	will	start	moving	a	little	beyond
the	boundary	of	the	familiar	into	the	unfamiliar,	from	the	known	to	the	unknown
and	ultimately	from	the	unknown	to	the	unknowable.
These	are	the	two	steps:	one,	from	the	known	to	the	unknown	--	and	that	is	half
of	 the	 journey	--	and	 the	second	step,	 from	the	unknown	 to	 the	unknowable	 --
and	 that	 is	 the	 second	 half	 of	 the	 journey.	 In	 two	 steps	 the	 whole	 journey	 is
complete.	And	the	moment	you	have	entered	into	the	unknowable,	for	 the	first
time	you	know	what	 life	 is	 all	 about	 --	 its	 very	 truth,	 its	 very	beauty,	 its	 very
splendor.
BELIGHTFUL
(We	are,	but	we've	forgotten	it.)
We	are	made	of	light,	we	come	from	light	and	we	go	to	light,	and	between	the
two	 we	 start	 dreaming	 of	 darkness.	 Although	 we	 dream	 of	 darkness	 we	 still
remain	 light	 because	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way	 to	 be.	 So	 it	 is	 just	 a	 question	 of
dropping	our	dreams	and	looking	at	our	reality.
Meditation	simply	means	putting	aside	your	dreams	for	a	few	moments,	telling
your	mind	 to	 shut	 off	 and	 for	 just	 a	 few	moments	 remaining	 in	 the	 gap	 --	 no
thought,	no	desire,	no	mind	--	and	you	will	be	immediately	aware	of	an	immense
upsurge	of	 light	within	you.	And	you	will	not	see	 it	as	separate	 from	yourself,
you	will	 see	 it	 as	your	very	essence,	you	will	 experience	 it	 as	yourself.	That's
why	the	ultimate	realisation	is	called	enlightenment:	you	become	the	light.
You	have	always	been	the	light,	it	is	just	that	you	have	forgotten	it.	It	has	to	be
remembered.
NOMADS	TO	NO-MINDS
(Osho	speaks	further	on	man's	nature.	It	is	not	part	of	time,	although	we	live	in
time.)	We	come	from	beyond	and	we	have	to	go	beyond	again.	Time	is	only	a
caravanserai,	an	overnight	stay.
Time	 exists	 only	 between	 birth	 and	 death,	 but	we	 existed	 before	 birth	 and	we
will	exist	after	death.	We	are	beginningless	and	endless.
The	Upanishads	say	"Amritasyaputrah"	--	we	are	the	sons	of	eternity.	This	has	to
be	realized,	not	believed.	Belief	 is	of	no	importance	at	all.	Not	only	is	 it	of	no
importance,	it	is	harmful,	because	it	prevents	your	exploration.
My	 people	 here	 are	 not	 to	 believe	 in	 anything;	 but	 to	 explore,	 to	 search,	 to
enquire,	to	realize.	If	it	is	the	truth	then	there	should	be	no	fear	in	enquiring;	if	it
is	not	the	truth	then	too	there	should	be	no	fear	in	enquiring.
The	 people	 who	 are	 afraid	 of	 enquiry	 are	 somehow	 doubtful	 what	 they	 are
believing	in,	hence	they	don't	want	to	explore.	Who	knows?	--	their	belief	may
not	 prove	 true	 and	 they	 have	 wasted	 so	 much	 in	 their	 belief	 that	 rather	 than
dropping	the	belief	they	are	ready	to	drop	the	truth.
Beliefs	are	man-made,	toys	to	play	with	--	good	for	small	children	but	not	good
for	grown-ups.	A	person	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	really	grown-up	when	he	can	get	rid	of	all	beliefs	--	that's	my	definition	of	a
grown-up	 person.	 If	 he	 is	 ready	 to	 drop	 all	 the	 beliefs	 and	 become	 utterly
innocent,	in	a	state	of	not-knowing,	from	there	enquiry	begins.
So	what	I	am	saying	is	truth	to	me	and	I	would	like	it	to	become	truth	to	you	too,
but	I	would	not	 like	you	to	start	believing	in	what	I	am	saying.	I	am	not	 to	be
believed.	 Use	me	 only	 as	 a	 triggering	 point	 for	 further	 enquiry,	 as	 a	 jumping
board,	and	take	the	jump	into	the	infinite,	into	the	eternal.
And	the	only	way	is	meditation	because	meditation	takes	you	beyond	mind.	And
the	moment	you	are	beyond	mind	you	are	beyond	time	too.	Time	and	mind	are
synonymous.	The	moment	time	stops,	mind	stops,	or	vice	versa	is	also	true:	the
moment	mind	stops,	time	stops.
And	 the	 easier	 way	 is	 to	 stop	 the	mind,	 it	 is	 very	 easy.	 Just	 watch	 it,	 and	 in
watching	you	will	 find	 that	 slowly	 a	 few	moments	 start	 coming	when	 there	 is
nothing	to	watch,	just	an	emptiness.	In	that	emptiness	you	will	become	aware	of
eternity.	First	it	will	come	like	glimpses	and	then	there	will	be	more	stability	and
then	ultimately	the	explosion	that	"I	am	that"	--	Aham	Brahmasmi,	I	am	god,	I
am	the	eternal,	I	am	the	truth	--
Ana'l	Haq.	When	this	happens	one	has	come	home.	Before	that	we	are	homeless
wanderers	in	a	desert.
HEART	FOR	HEART'S	SAKE
It	is	not	life-negative,	it	is	absolutely	life-affirmative.	I	don't	teach	renunciation,	I
am	against	 renunciation;	 I	 teach	 rejoicing.	 I	 am	not	 an	 escapist,	 hence	 I	 don1t
say	to	my	sannyasins	to	escape	from	the	world	and	to	go	to	the	mountains	or	to
the	monasteries.	I	say	to	 them	to	live	in	 the	world	and	yet	not	 to	be	of	 it.	And
that	is	something	worth	doing.
Escapism	is	cowardly	and	the	greatest	thing,	the	greatest	challenge	in	life	is	love:
love	and	yet	 remain	cool,	 love	and	yet	 remain	non-possessive,	 love	and	yet	do
not	demand	--	 love	 just	 for	 love's	sake!	And	you	will	be	 immensely	rewarded,
immeasurably	 enriched,	 because	 a	 person	 who	 is	 capable	 of	 loving	 without
asking	for	anything	in	return	becomes	worthy	of	receiving	god.
If	you	ask	for	something	you	will	get	it;	but	you	will	not	even	be	aware	of	what
you	have	missed.
I	have	heard	a	story:	a	very	rich	woman	was	operated	on	by	a	great	surgeon	and
the	surgeon	was	hoping	that	he	would	be	greatly	rewarded.	He	had	removed	her
appendix,	and	the	woman	was	very	happy	with	the	operation;	it	had	been	a	one-
hundred	 per	 cent	 success.	 But	 the	 doctor	 had	 not	 said	 anything	 about	 money
because	 he	 knew	 that	 she	 was	 so	 rich	 that	 there	 would	 be	 no	 problem;
whatsoever	would	be	asked	she	would	give.
And	 when	 she	 recovered	 she	 came	 with	 a	 very	 beautiful	 bag	 and	 she	 said,
'Doctor,	 I	 have	 come	with	 this	 small	 present	 for	 you.'	 The	 bag	was	 beautiful,
valuable,	 but	 it	 was	 not	 what	 the	 doctor	 was	 expecting.	 Just	 this	 bag	 as	 a
present?'	 He	 said	 'The	 bag	 is	 beautiful	 and	 I	 thank	 you	 for	 it,	 but	 this	 is	 not
enough	for	my	fee.	I	need	at	least	one	thousand	dollars.'
The	woman	 said	 'It	 is	 up	 to	 you.'	 She	 opened	 the	 bag,	 took	 out	 one	 thousand
dollars	and	gave	it	to	the	doctor.	The	doctor	looked	in	the	bag;	there	must	have
been	at	least	one	hundred	thousand	dollars;	she	closed	the	bag	and	took	it	away.
Now	you	can	think	what	happened	to	the	doctor	--	he	must	have	collapsed!
(laughter)
This	 is	 how	 life	 is:	 if	 you	 ask	 something	 it	 will	 be	 given	 to	 you,	 life	 is	 not
miserly	at	all,	but	the	doctor	at	least	was	fortunate	enough	to	have	a	look	in	the
bag	and	see	what	he	had	missed;	you	will	not	even	be	able	to	look	into	the	bag	to
see	what	you	have	missed.
Our	small	minds	can	only	ask	for	small	things.	When	even	god	is	available	we
go	on	asking	for	tiny	things.
My	 suggestion	 is	 to	 love	 and	 never	 to	 ask	 for	 anything	 --	 and	 you	 will	 be
surprised:	so	much	comes	that	it	is	impossible	to	believe,	because	it	comes	and
you	had	never	deserved	it,	you	were	not	worthy	of	it.
Once	 you	 have	 learned	 this	 secret	 of	 giving	 love	 for	 love's	 sake,	 you	 have
learned	the	arithmetic	of	god.
And	 then	 life	 is	 just	pure	ecstasy,	each	moment	 the	ecstasy	becomes	more	and
more	perfect.	It	is	not	that	it	is	perfect	in	the	sense	that	it	was	imperfect	before,	it
is	 not	 from	 imperfection	 to	 perfection	 but	 from	 perfection	 to	 perfection,	 from
one	peak	of	perfection	to	another	peak	of	perfection	which	is	higher.	And	it	goes
on	and	on	and	there	is	no	end	to	it.
But	one	simple	secret	has	to	be	learned.	The	name	of	the	secret	is	love!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011115
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
BELIEVING	VERSUS	RETRIEVING
(Osho	adds	 'Satyam'	 to	Michael's	 name	 so	his	 full	 name	means	 truth	 and	god.
The	order	is	significant.)	There	have	been	two	schools	of	mystics	in	the	world:
one,	 the	 first,	which	consists	of	 the	majority	of	 the	mystics,	puts	god	 first	 and
truth	second;	 the	second	category	of	mystics	which	 is	 in	 the	minority	 --	 it	 is	a
very	small	minority	but	it	consists	of	the	greatest	mystics	--	puts	truth	first	and
god	second.
Both	 attitudes	 are	 right,	 both	 can	 lead	 you	 to	 the	 ultimate	 goal,	 but	 my
preference	is	for	truth	to	be	the	first	thing	and	god	the	second.
Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	Mahavira,	 agree	with	me	 --	 and	 these	 are	 the	 three	greatest
mystics	 ever.	Mohammed,	 Jesus,	Krishna	 --	 they	belong	 to	 the	other	 tradition;
god	is	first,	truth	is	secondary.	Why	did	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu	and	Mahavira	insist	on
truth	being	the	suprememost	quality,	There	was	a	very	significant	reason	and	that
reason	has	become	even	more	 significant	 today.	After	 twenty-five	 centuries	of
experience	it	can	be	said	that	they	were	right,	their	insistence	was	right,	because
when	you	put	god	first,	god	becomes	a	belief.
Instead	of	creating	enquirers	you	create	believers.
If	you	put	truth	first	then	there	is	no	question	of	belief;	you	have	to	enquire,	you
have	 to	 explore.	 If	 god	 is	 first	 then	 the	 priest	 becomes	 very	 important	 --	 the
church,	the	temple,	the	doctrine,	the	scripture,	the	tradition.	If	truth	is	first	then
you	as	an	individual	are	the	most	important,	everything	else	becomes	secondary.
Belief	 can	 be	 given	 by	 others	 to	 you.	 Truth	 cannot	 be	 given,	 you	 have	 to
discover	it	yourself.	And	the	magic	of	discovery	is	so	great	that	it	should	not	be
missed.	Believing	 destroys	 all	 adventure.	 If	 somebody	 says	 the	Himalayas	 are
beautiful	and	you	believe	them	then	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	the	Himalayas.	Or
you	 can	 acquire	 an	 album	 of	 beautiful	 photographs	 of	 the	 Himalayas	 but	 an
album,	howsoever	beautiful,	is	not	the	reality	of	the	Himalayas.	You	will	not	feel
that	fragrance,	you	will	not	feel	that	coolness,	you	will	not	be	overwhelmed	by
that	mystery,	those	virgin	peaks	that	silence.	A	picture	cannot	give	you	all	that,	a
picture	is	very	flat.	It	can	only	give	you	some	idea.
It	is	just	like	rather	than	coming	to	India	you	look	at	the	map	of	India.	The	map
of	India	is	not	India,	although	it	is	useful.	But	it	is	useful	only	if	you	want	to	go,
otherwise	it	is	useless.	And	believers	stop	at	their	belief.	Christians	believe	in	a
god	of	their	own	concept,	Hindus	believe	in	a	god,	Mohammedans	believe	in	a
god	--	 the	whole	world	 is	 full	of	believers	yet	how	many	people	are	religious?
How	many	 people	 have	 that	 beauty,	 that	 grace,	 that	 is	 bound	 to	 happen	 to	 a
religious	person?	How	many	people	have	that	vibe?	It	is	missing.	And	the	reason
is	that	we	have	chosen	something	wrong,	we	have	put	god	first.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Truth	should	be	first.	Start	your	enquiry	for	what	truth	is	and	you	will	find	god	in
the	end,	because	god	is	the	truth	of	existence	so	you	cannot	miss	god.	But	when
you	 find	 on	 your	 own	 it	 will	 liberate	 you.	 That	 very	 experience	 is	 enough	 to
transport	you	to	a	totally	different	world,	from	time	to	eternity,	from	the	visible
to	the	invisible,	from	the	known	to	the	unknowable	.
So	remember	your	name:	Satyam	Michael	--	 truth	is	first,	 then	is	god.	Truth	is
the	journey,	god	is	the	realisation	of	it.
LOVING	THE	ULTI-MATE
(Osho	hands	Tantra	Mridani	her	sannyas	name	with	the	comments)	You	have	a
simply	far-out	name.	(laughter)	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Tantra	Mridani.	Mridani
means	 erotic	 partner	 of	 the	 cosmic	 lover	 (much	 laughter).	 Is	 it	 not	 nice?	 (His
grin	is	totally	disarming;	the	group	is	consumed	with	laughter.)
But	you	can	only	become	a	partner	of	the	cosmic	lover	through	tantra,	there	is	no
other	way.	Tantra	is	the	only	method.
Tantra	 means	 the	 science	 of	 falling	 in	 love	 with	 existence,	 not	 with	 any
individual	in	particular;	falling	in	love	without	any	address	of	any	lover,	falling
in	love	with	the	whole,	the	unaddressed	whole,	the	unnamable	whole.	It	contains
everything	from	the	rocks	to	the	stars.	And	certainly	one	can	have	a	communion
with	the	whole,	far	more	deeper	than	can	exist	between	two	individuals.
Two	 individuals	 can	 come	 to	 a	 union	 only	 for	 a	 moment	 --	 it	 is	 temporary,
fleeting	dreamlike.	For	one	moment	it	is	there	and	then	it	is	gone.	In	fact	before
you	 have	 recognised	 that	 it	 is	 there	 it	 is	 no	more	 there,	 Hence	 ordinary	 love
brings	 both	 --	 the	 ecstasy	which	 is	momentary,	 and	 after	 the	 ecstasy,	 the	 dark
night,	 the	 despair,	 the	 agony.	 Both	 these	 experiences	 are	 so	mixed,	 so	 deeply
mixed,	that	people	hare	chosen	either	one	or	the	other.	Those	who	have	chosen
the	 first,	 the	ecstasy	part,	 they	believe	 in	 love;	and	 those	who	have	chosen	 the
other	part,	 the	 agony	part,	 they	emphasise	 renunciation	of	 the	world.	But	both
have	 come	out	 of	 the	 experience	of	 love.	They	 are	 like	 two	 sides	of	 the	 same
coin.
You	can	 choose	one	 side,	 the	other	 side	will	 be	hidden	beneath	 it;	 you	 cannot
discard	 it.	 So	 those	 who	 live	 in	 the	 world	 are	 always	 attracted	 by	 the	monks
living	 in	 the	 monasteries,	 in	 the	 caves.	 Those	 who	 are	 worldly	 are	 always
respectful	 of	 the	 other	 --	 worldly.	 The	 worldly	 people	 in	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
ways	 are	 fascinated	 by	 the	 spiritual	 people.	 In	 fact	 only	 the	 worldly	 are
infatuated	 with	 the	 spiritual	 people,	 and	 this	 you	 can	 see	 everywhere	 --	 for
example,	in	India.	The	country	is	very	materialistic,	the	people	are	very	worldly,
clinging	to	small	things	but	their	respect	always	goes	to	the	saints,	to	those	who
have	renounced	everything.
It	 looks	a	contradiction	but	 it	 is	only	apparently	a	contradiction.	Deep	down	 it
has	significances	the	worldly	person	knows	the	momentary	joy	of	love	and	then
he	knows	the	long	despair	that	follows	so	he	understands	when	the	spiritual,	the
so-called	spiritual	condemns	love,	condemns	sex,	condemns	the	world.
He	understands	perfectly	well	that	he	is	right	--	it	is	his	own	experience	too.
For	 centuries	 all	 over	 the	 world	 people	 have	 been	 making	 love	 in	 the	 night
before	 they	go	 to	sleep,	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 to	avoid	 the	darker	part.	So	you
reach	sexual	orgasm,	you	enjoy	it	for	a	moment,	and	then	you	fall	asleep.	This	is
a	trick,	a	strategy,	to	avoid	the	other	side	of	the	coin.	because	it	hurts.	Reaching
to	such	a	peak	and	then	falling	to	such	a	depth.	reaching	to	a	sunlit	peak	and	then
falling	into	a	dark	valley	hurts	very	much.	It	is	better	to	fall	asleep.
For	millions	of	people	sex	is	nothing	but	a	kind	of	tranquilliser.	It	relaxes	them
into	a	good	sleep.	But	even	if	one	falls	into	sleep	one	cannot	absolutely	avoid	the
despair	 --	 it	 lingers,	 it	 is	 there.	And	you	cannot	 fall	 asleep	 immediately	either.
Even	 if	 you	 are	 awake	 for	 a	 few	minutes	 you	 know	 that	 you	 had	 come	 to	 a
height	 and	 now	 it	 is	 no	 more	 there;	 and	 again	 there	 is	 the	 longing	 for	 it	 It
becomes	a	vicious	circle;	again	and	again	you	reach	 the	peak,	again	and	again
you	fall	back.
So	when	 the	 spiritual,	 the	 so-called	 spiritual	 --	 the	 saints,	 the	 priests,	 the	 life-
condemners,	the	life-poisoners	--	condemn	your	life,	your	ways	of	life,	your	love
affairs,	 deep	down	you	 agree,	 you	know	 they	 are	 right.	And	on	 the	other	 side
they	--	the	saints,	the	monks,	the	nuns	--	also	feel	that	perhaps	they	are	missing,
perhaps	 the	 worldly	 people	 are	 enjoying	 themselves.	 Hence	 their	 attack	 on
world;	their	condemnation	becomes	more	sharpened.	That	is	a	revenge,	because
they	are	missing	even	those	moments.
By	 missing	 those	 moments	 of	 course	 you	 will	 not	 feel	 your	 agony	 so	 much
because	there	will	be	no	contrast,	but	the	agony	is	there.	Even	if	the	contrast	is
not	there,	how	can	you	feel	that	you	are	on	the	peak?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
--	you	are	in	the	dark	valley.	It	is	more	comfortable	in	a	way	because	you	move
on	 the	same	plane.	The	worldly	person	goes	up	and	down,	up	and	down	again
and	again;	his	life	is	a	little	chaotic.	The	monk's	life	in	the	monastery	moves	in	a
very	smooth	pattern	--	smooth,	certainly,	but	without	any	joy.	Even	those	small
moments	of	 ecstasy	are	missing.	So	he	 is	 angry	 --	 angry	with	all	 those	people
who	are	enjoying	themselves.
His	anger	comes	out	in	condemnation.
Tantra	is	the	only	science	ever	developed	which	can	give	you	an	ecstasy	which	is
not	temporal,	which	can	give	you	an	ecstasy,	an	orgasmic	joy,	which	remains	for
twenty-four	hours	a	day,	which	becomes	just	like	breathing	or	the	heartbeat:	it	is
simply	there.
If	people	can	live	for	twenty-four	hours	a	day	in	despair,	why	can't	they	live	for
twenty-four	hour,	a	day	in	ecstasy?	There	is	no	reason.	If	despair	is	possible	for
twenty-four	hours	a	day	then	ecstasy	too	is	possible.
But	then	one	has	to	learn	the	secrets	of	tantra.
The	 fundamental	 secret	 is:	 whenever	 you	 are	 making	 love	 to	 anybody,
remember,	the	person	is	only	a	window.	Don't	become	too	interested	in	the	frame
of	 the	 window;	 the	 person	 is	 only	 a	 window	 --	 you	 are	 making	 love	 to	 the
universe!
So	don't	 become	 attached	 to	 the	window.	There	 are	 others	windows,	 there	 are
other	doors,	and	if	one	is	courageous	enough	there	is	no	need	for	windows	and
door,	 one	 can	 come	 out	 in	 the	 open	 --	 -the	whole	 sky	 is	 available!	 (laughter)
That's	exactly	 the	meaning	of	your	name,	making	 love	 to	 the	stars	and	 the	sky
and	the	clouds.
It	will	be	a	little	crazy	but	it	will	bring	immense	bliss,	making	love	to	the	earth,
to	 the	grass,	 to	 the	 trees,	 just	being	 in	 love	with	everything	 that	exists.	That	 is
becoming	a	partner,	an	erotic	partner	of	the	cosmic	lover.
Slowly	slowly	one	dissolves	into	the	cosmos.	The	secret	should	be	remembered:
never	 become	 attached	 to	 individuals;	 they	 are	 only	 small	 windows	 into	 the
universal.	 Remember	 the	 universal.	 Thank	 the	 individual	 but	 remember	 the
universal.	Be	grateful	to	the	individual	but	don't	become	attached,	don't	become
possessive	and	don't	be	possessed.
If	one	can	avoid	being	possessed	and	being	possessive	then	doors	upon	doors	go
on	opening	and	one	day	all	the	walls	disappear.	You	are	suddenly	under	the	sky.
The	whole	existence	becomes	your	love	affair.
THE	KNOWER	OF	LOVE	IS	GOD'S	MESSENGER	BOY
(Osho	is	addressing	Anand	Gabrielle.)
The	miserable	person	is	a	closed	person.	Misery	makes	you	closed,	bliss	opens
you	 up.	 It	 works	 both	 ways:	 if	 you	 open	 up	 you	 become	 blissful,	 if	 you	 are
blissful	you	start	opening.	And	the	same	is	true	about	misery:	if	you	are	closed
you	are	miserable,	if	you	are	miserable	you	are	closed.	God	comes	to	both,	to	the
closed	and	to	the	open,	but	the	closed	cannot	feel	it,	the	open	feel	it.	God	knocks
on	the	doors	of	both	but	the	closed	cannot	hear;	he	is	too	engrossed	with	himself
he	is	too	self-centred.
The	open	can	hear	the	knock,	he	is	not	so	self-centred.	The	more	open	a	person,
the	less	self-centred	ho	is,	the	less	self-conscious	he	is.	He	is	conscious	but	not
self-conscious,	he	is	centred	but	not	self-centred.
And	 as	 one	 becomes	 aware	 of	 god's	 presence	 one	 becomes	 more	 and	 more
courageous	 in	 opening	 because	 so	 much	 is	 coming	 from	 the	 opening;	 now	 it
becomes	irresistible.	The	totally	open	person	starts	living	as	a	vehicle	of	god	--
god	 becomes	 his	 strength,	 his	 power.	 He	 is	 no	 more	 himself,	 he	 is	 simply	 a
messenger	of	god	--	that	is	another	meaning	of	Gabrielle.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	do	only	one	small	thing:	start	opening	up.	Open	to	the
flowers,	 open	 to	 people,	 open	 to	 the	 sunsets.	 Don't	 miss	 any	 excuse;	 any
opportunity	to	open	up	has	to	be	used.	Learn	the	art	of	removing	all	blocks	that
keep	one	closed.	To	be	closed	 is	unnecessarily	 remaining	 in	hell;	 it	 is	creating
your	own	anguish.
Once	 you	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 being	 open	 heaven	 is	 yours,	 and	 herenow	 --	 not
tomorrow,	 not	 after	 death.	 This	 very	moment	 is	 paradise	 for	 the	 open	 person,
because	god	starts	flowing	through	him.	He	becomes	his	breath,	he	becomes	his
very	being.	And	to	live	in	god	and	to	let	god	live	through	you	is	what	sannyas	is
all	about.
I	am	not	giving	you	any	religion	--	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Mohammedanism;	I
am	simply	giving	you	an	insight	into	the	art	of	opening	your	windows	and	doors.
God	is	neither	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan	nor	Christian.	When	god	comes	to	you
all	these	things	look	so	stupid,	all	these	churches	and	mosques	and	temple,	look
so	man-made,	man-manufactured.	They	have	nothing	to	do	with	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
THE	GIFT	OF	LOVE	HANDLE	WITH	CARE
Love	 is	 the	 most	 delicate	 experience	 in	 life	 and	 because	 it	 is	 delicate	 many
people	 decide	 not	 to	 have	 anything	 to	 do	with	 love.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 handled	very
carefully	and	people	are	not	so	careful;	they	are	rough.
They	are	good	at	playing	 rough	games,	ego	games.	Ego	 is	very	 rough,	 love	 is
very	 delicate.	 Ego	 is	 like	 a	 rock	 and	 love	 is	 like	 a	 rose	 flower.	 People	 are
accustomed	 to	 throwing	 rocks	 at	 each	 other;	 they	 cannot	 afford	 to	 love	 roses,
they	have	to	avoid	them.	But	 to	avoid	love	is	 to	avoid	life,	because	love	is	 the
very	essence	of	life,	the	very	soul	of	it.
So	one	has	to	take	the	risk.	To	be	in	love,	to	be	loving	and	ultimately	to	become
love	 is	 the	greatest	 risk	 in	 the	world	because	you	become	 so	delicate	 that	 any
small	thing	can	destroy	you.
This	 is	one	of	 the	 laws	of	 life	 that	 if	ever	 the	 lower	comes	in	conflict	with	 the
higher	 the	higher	will	be	destroyed,	not	 the	 lower,	because	 the	 lower	 is	 rough,
hard,	violent.
Those	who	are	interested	in	ambition	cannot	afford	love.	They	will	have	money,
power,	 prestige,	 they	 can	 become	 Alexander	 the	 Great,	 but	 they	 will	 live	 a
miserable	life.
Alexander	 lived	 a	 very	 small	 life,	 only	 thirty-three	 years,	 and	 even	 in	 those
thirty-three	 years	 he	 suffered	 much.	 He	 was	 continuously	 miserable;	 he	 was
never	 happy	 in	 those	 thirty-three	 years.	 He	 was	 so	 miserable	 that	 he	 started
drinking	 too	 much	 alcohol	 just	 to	 drown	 his	 misery.	 He	 died	 of	 alcoholism.
Otherwise	he	was	too	young	and	there	was	no	need,	no	hurry	to	die	so	quickly,
but	too	much	alcohol	killed	him.	It	is	strange	that	a	man	who	was	so	powerful,
the	first	world	conqueror...	why	was	he	miserable?	He	missed	love.
You	 can't	 have	 both	 ambition	 and	 love,	 ego	 and	 love,	 aggression	 and	 love,
violence	and	love.	If	you	choose	love	you	will	have	to	drop	all	these	things	--	the
ego,	aggressiveness,	violence,	 the	ambitiousness,	 the	desire	 to	be	powerful,	 the
desire	to	dominate,	the	desire	to	possess.	Love	is	so	precious	that	you	will	have
to	pay	for	it	with	all	these	things.	And	then	too	it	is	a	rose	flower	--	just	a	small
stone	can	be	thrown	and	it	can	be	destroyed	--	but	still	it	is	worth	it.
Even	if	you	can	know	it	for	a	single	moment	--	that	beauty,	that	grace	of	being	in
love	--	it	is	worth	it	It	is	better	to	be	a	Jesus	and	crucified,	better	to	be	a	Socrates
and	poisoned,	than	to	be	an	Alexander	or	a	Napoleon	or	a	Stalin.
Remember	 this:	choosing	love	means	choosing	 the	most	delicate	experience	of
life,	which	 is	always	 in	danger;	a	 small	 strong	wind	and	 the	petals	of	 the	 rose
will	wither	 away.	But	 so	what?	 Even	 if	 it	was	 there	 for	 a	moment	 in	 the	 sun
dancing	 in	 the	wind	 it	was	more	 than	 enough.	A	 single	moment	of	 love	 is	 far
bigger	than	the	whole	eternity	of	a	loveless	life.
SANNYAS:	THE	ART	OF	SAGING,	NOT	AGING
(Meditation	 is	 only	 a	 temporary	 measure,	 Osho	 reminds	 a	 new	 sannyasin.)
Meditation	is	only	a	method,	not	a	goal.	Its	work	is	negative.	It	is	like	digging	a
well.	 The	 water	 is	 already	 there	 underneath,	 the	 undercurrents	 are	 there;	 by
digging	you	remove	a	few	layers	of	earth,	few	rocks,	stones,	etcetera.	Once	they
are	removed	the	work	of	digging	is	finished,	the	water	is	available.	The	same	is
the	 case	 with	 meditation:	 meditation	 is	 a	 method	 of	 digging	 a	 well	 within
yourself	 to	 remove	 all	 that	 the	 society	 has	 imposed	 upon	 you.	 Once	 that	 is
removed	and	your	inner	life	starts	welling	up	the	method	is	finished.	One	need
not	 remain	 clinging	 to	 meditation	 for	 one's	 whole	 life,	 because	 it	 is	 only	 a
method;	a	method	has	to	be	used	and	then	thrown	away.
Buddha	used	to	say	it	is	like	a	boat:	you	cross	the	river	and	then	you	forget	all
about	the	boat.	You	don't	carry	it	on	your	head	for	your	whole	life	because	this	is
the	boat	which	took	you	from	the	other	shore	to	this	shore.
There	are	many	people	who	never	do	meditation	--	they	are	fools.	Then	there	are
many	other	people	who	do	meditation	but	then	they	become	obsessed	with	it	and
they	continue	doing	it;	even	when	the	work	is	over	it	becomes	a	dead	old	habit	--
they	are	also	fools	and	the	world	consists	of	these	fools.	It	is	very	rare	to	find	a
person	who	does	not	belong	to	these	two	categories	--	maybe	out	of	ten	thousand
people	there	is	one	person	who	uses	the	method	when	it	is	needed	and	drops	it
when	its	work	is	finished.
Right	now	put	your	 total	energy	 into	meditation	 till	you	feel	 that	 the	mind	has
become	 silent,	 that	 you	 have	 become	 capable	 of	 putting	 your	mind	 off	 or	 on
whenever	you	want.	The	moment	you	have	learned	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
art	of	putting	your	mind	on	and	off	you	have	found	the	ignition	key,	then	method
is	finished;	it	has	no	more	value,	you	can	forget	all	about	it.
First	 put	 your	 total	 energy	 into	 meditation	 but	 remember	 never	 to	 become	 a
clinger,	never	to	become	attached	to	any	method.	One	has	to	go	on	learning	and
unlearning	 so	 that	 one	 remains	 free	 to	 learn	more,	 then	 to	 unlearn	more.	 Life
should	 be	 an	 eternal	 pilgrimage	 of	 learning	 and	 unlearning.	 Whatsoever	 is
learned	 has	 to	 be	 unlearned	 so	 you	 are	 again	 clean,	 pure,	 again	 a	 child,	 again
innocent.
This	innocence	has	to	happen	each	moment	of	your	life	so	you	never	grow	old.
You	grow	up	but	you	never	grow	old.	You	remain	fresh,	as	fresh	as	dewdrops	in
the	morning	sun.	That	freshness	is	sannyas.
NOTHING	FAILS	LIKE	EXCESS.
(Osho	 talks	 about	 three	 aspects	 of	 god,	 and	 in	 particular,	 that	 of	 balancing.)
Brahma	 represents	 the	 creative	 force	 of	 god	 and	 Mahesh	 represents	 the
destructive	 force	 of	 god	 and	 Vishnu	 represents	 the	 balancing	 force	 between
creation	 and	 destruction.	 Of	 course	 the	 balancing	 force	 is	 of	 tremendous
importance.
Buddha	used	to	call	his	path	the	middle	way	--	being	neither	on	this	extreme	nor
on	 that	 extreme	but	being	exactly	 in	 the	middle.	That's	what	 is	 represented	by
Vishnu:	 just	being	 in	 the	middle,	 like	a	 tightrope	walker.	The	whole	art	of	 the
tightrope	walker	is	just	to	remain	in	the	middle,	balancing,	not	going	too	far	to
one	side,	otherwise	he	will	fall.
Sinners	fall,	saints	fall,	because	both	are	extremes.	My	sannyasins	have	to	learn
to	be	 tightrope	walkers	 exactly	 in	 the	middle,	neither	 a	 sinner	nor	a	 saint.	But
when	you	are	neither	a	sinner	nor	a	saint	you	will	have	to	be	both;	a	little	bit	of
each,	only	then	can	you	be	in	the	middle;	neither	and	both,	only	then	can	you	be
in	the	middle.
So	that	has	to	be	remembered:	avoid	extremes,	avoid	excess.	And	remain	aware,
alert,	 because	 the	mind	 tends	 to	 go	 to	 the	 extreme.	 It	 is	 a	 fundamental	 law	of
inner	growth	that	mind	tends	to	go	to	the	extreme.	If	you	remain	in	the	middle,
sooner	or	later	mind	dies,	because	in	the	middle	the	mind	cannot	exist.	To	exist	it
needs	the	extreme;	from	the	sinner	it	can	become	the	saint,	from	the	saint	it	can
become	the	sinner	but	it	cannot	remain	in	the	middle.
This	is	the	whole	art:	what	I	am	doing	here	is	to	teach	you	to	be	in	the	middle.
Once	you	have	learned	the	beauty,	the	joy,	of	being	balanced,	utterly	balanced	--
the	 music	 of	 it,	 the	 melody	 of	 it	 --	 your	 life	 is	 trans-formed,	 it	 becomes
luminous,	it	becomes	a	tremendous	relaxation	--	and	god	is	found	in	that	rest,	in
that	relaxation.
RAPPING	WITH	ROCKS
(Friendliness	is	something	quite	different	from	friendship.	Osho	talks	to	Maitreyi
about	the	meaning	of	her	name.)
Friendship	 is	a	 relationship.	You	can	be	 in	 that	 relationship	with	a	 few	people.
Friendliness	 is	 a	 quality	 not	 a	 relationship.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 anybody
else,	 it	 is	basically	your	 inner	quality.	You	can	be	 friendly	even	when	you	are
alone.	You	cannot	be	in	friendship	when	you	are	alone	--	the	other	is	needed	--
but	 friendliness	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 fragrance.	 A	 flower	 opens	 in	 the	 jungle;	 nobody
passes	 by	 --	 still	 it	 is	 fragrant.	 It	 does	 not	 matter	 whether	 anybody	 comes	 to
know	of	it	or	not,	it	is	its	quality.	Nobody	may	ever	come	to	know	about	it,	but
that	does	not	matter;	it	is	rejoicing.
Friendship	 can	 exist	 only	 between	 one	 man	 and	 another	 man	 or	 at	 the	 most
between	a	man	and	an	animal	--	a	horse,,a	dog.	But	friendliness	can	exist	even
with	 a	 rock,	with	 a	 river,	with	 a	mountain,	with	 a	 cloud,	with	 a	 far-away	 star.
Friendliness	 is	 unlimited	 because	 it	 is	 not	 dependent	 on	 the	 other;	 absolutely
your	own	flowering.
So	remember,	a	sannyasin	has	to	be	friendly,	just	friendly	to	all	that	exists.	And
in	that	friendliness	vou	will	find	all	the	that	is	worth	finding.	You	will	find	the
ultimate	friend	through	friendliness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011125
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
UNBEARABLE	BLISS
(Swami	 Anand	 Bernd's	 journey	 is	 from	 bear	 to	 bliss,	 Osho	 tells	 a	 German
sannyasin.)	 The	 religion	 of	 man	 has	 passed	 through	 many	 stages.	 The	 most
intense	 stage	was	when	man	was	worshipping	 animals.	 The	 second	 stage	was
when	man	 started	 worshipping	 images	 of	 god,	 statues.	 And	 the	 third	 and	 the
highest	 stage	 has	 been	 achieved	 only	 by	 a	 very	 few	 people	 --	 worshipping
consciousness.
To	worship	 an	 animal	 is	 to	worship	 life.	 Animal,	 the	 very	word,	 comes	 from
anima:	 anima	 means	 life.	 It	 is	 good	 to	 worship	 life	 but	 life	 is	 not	 enough,
something	more	is	needed.	The	animal	is	unconscious;	life	is	there	but	unaware
of	itself.
Then	man	 started	worshipping	 statues	of	Krishna,	Christ,	Buddha.	 It	 is	 a	 little
better	in	a	way	because	these	statues	represent	something	of	consciousness,	but
because	they	are	images	they	have	to	be	made	out	of	matter.
The	third	stage,	the	highest,	is	the	worship	of	pure	consciousness	--	no	image,	no
idol,	no	object	of	worship,	but	just	a	worshipfulness,	a	prayerfulness.	Unless	you
understand	this	you	will	not	be	able	to	understand	the	meaning	of	your	name.
Anand	 means	 bliss.	 That	 is	 the	 highest	 experience	 of	 consciousness,	 there	 is
nothing	higher	than	that.
When	consciousness	 comes	 to	 its	peak,	ultimate	peak,	bliss	 explodes.	So	bliss
represents	the	crescendo	of	consciousness.
Bernd	means	bear.	In	Germany	the	bear	was	worshipped	as	the	sacred	father,	just
as	in	India	people	worship	the	cow	as	the	sacred	mother.	Between	the	Germans
and	 the	 Indians	 good	 marriages	 can	 happen,	 they	 have	 the	 sacred	 father	 and
these	people	have	 the	sacred	mother.	And	 the	meeting	of	 the	sacred	father	and
the	 sacred	 mother	 can	 really...	 it	 can	 bring	 something	 new	 into	 existence!
(laughter)	With	all	the	stupidity	of	the	Indian	mind	and	with	all	the	efficiency	of
the	German	mind...	And	when	a	stupid	person	is	efficient	(peals	of	laughter)	it	is
better	if	he	remains	lousy	and	lazy.
So	your	name	represents	both:	 the	 first,	 the	beginning	of	 religion	 --	 the	sacred
father,	the	bear,	and	the	sacred	mother,	the	cow	--	and	the	last,	the	ultimate	too,
bliss.	When	consciousness	becomes	Christ	--
consciousness	 or	 Buddha-consciousness	 you	 have	 to	 leave	 those	 sacred	 cows
and	bears	back	far	behind.
One	has	to	move	from	life	to	conscious	life.
When	 life	 becomes	 consciousness	 it	 is	 a	 dance	 a	 celebration,	 a	 festival	 --	 and
that	is	the	goal	of	sannyas:	from	bear	to	bliss!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
MOLE	OR	MOTH
(Most	of	us	stumble	about	in	the	darkness	of	unconsciousness,	while	just	a	few
are	attracted	to	the	light	and	consumed	by	consciousness.)
Man	lives	in	darkness,	his	inner	sun	has	not	yet	risen.	The	dawn	has	not	come,	it
is	still	night.	Yes,	the	dawn	has	opened	to	a	few	people	but	to	so	few	people	that
it	almost	appears	as	 if	all	 those	people	are	 fictitious.	 In	millions	of	people	one
person	 becomes	 a	 Buddha.	 The	 phenomenon	 is	 so	 exceptional	 that	 it	 is
unbelievable.	That's	why	people	have	not	yet	really	been	able	to	trust	Buddhas,
Christs	and	Zarathustras.
They	 have	 paid	 them	 formal	 respect	 but	 deep	 down	 there	 is	 doubt.	 It	 is
impossible	 for	 them	 to	 believe	 a	man	 whose	 unconsciousness	 has	 completely
disappeared	because	it	is	not	their	own	experience.
They	are	not	at	fault,	they	cannot	be	condemned	for	this.	I	can	understand	their
problem.	 The	 problem	 is	 that	 a	 man	 can	 understand	 only	 that	 which	 has
happened	 to	him.	 If	 it	has	not	happened	 to	you	how	can	you	understand?	You
can	hear	the	word	but	the	word	will	remain	meaningless.
My	sannyasins	are	not	believers,	they	are	seekers,	inquirers,	explorers.	And	the
goal	of	the	search	is	light,	consciousness;	the	whole	unconscious	from	the	inside
has	to	be	dropped	--	and	it	is	possible.	And	when	your	inner	life	is	full	of	light	it
is	a	totally	different	life.	From	the	outside	everything	seems	to	be	the	same	but
from	the	inside	nothing	is	the	same	any	more.	It	is	a	new	birth.
CONSTANT	MOTION	OR	RELAX-OCEAN
(Take	it	e-sea	and	god	will	take	you	over.)
One	of	the	qualities	that	has	disappeared	from	the	modern	man	is	patience.	He	is
in	too	much	of	a	hurry,	so	much	so	that	he	cannot	enjoy	anything.	While	he	is
eating	he	is	thinking	of	something	else;	he	is	in	a	rush.	And	when	he	reaches	that
place	which	he	was	thinking	about	while	eating	he	will	be	thinking	of	something
else;	maybe	imagining	the	next	meal.	And	so	on	and	so	forth	it	goes	on	and	on.
One	is	never	where	one	is.	It	is	a	continuous	run.	Even	in	their	dreams	people	are
running,	chasing	something.
Two	 lazy	people	were	 lying	down	 in	 the	 sun	under	 a	 tree	 and	one	 said	 to	 the
other	'I	am	feeling	so	--
tired	today.'	The	other	said	'Tired?	But	why	should	you	be	tired?	--	you	have	not
done	anything.'	He	said
'Not	really,	but	in	my	dreams	a	tiger	was	chasing	me	and	I	was	running	so	fast
that	I	am	still	feeling	tired.'
Tn	fact	even	running	in	your	dream	will	make	you	feel	tired.	It	is	not	a	joke,	it	is
a	 truth.	 There	 are	method,	 in	 which	 you	 can	 do	 exercises	 just	 by	 visualising.
Close	 your	 eyes	 and	 go	 for	 a	 run	 on	 the	 beach:	 the	 sun	 is	 hot	 and	 you	 are
perspiring	and	the	air	is	salty.	The	whole	scene	has	to	be	visualised	as	concretely
as	possible.	You	are	huffing	and	puffing...	And	after	half	an	hour	open	your	eyes
and	you	will	see	perspiration	on	your	face	and	your	breathing	will	be	different	--
you	have	done	good	exercise.
In	fact	if	a	person	has	the	capacity	to	visualise	there	is	no	need	to	do	any	other
exercise;	just	visualising	will	help.	So	in	the	day	people	are	running,	in	the	night
people	are	running;	in	fact	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave	they	go	on	running.	And
one	wonders	where	they	are	running	to	--	to	the	grave!
The	moment	they	escape	from	the	cradle	they	rush	towards	the	grave!	It	seems
as	if	they	are	in	such	a	hurry	to	roach	the	place,	and	what	are	they	going	to	do	in
their	graves?	--	they	will	turn	and	toss	inside.
A	man	was	dying	and	his	wife	 told	him	 'Remember,	 be	 faithful	 to	me.	 I	 don't
know	about	the	other	life.
And	the	man	said	 'I	will	remain	faithful	but	you	also	promise	me	that	you	will
remain	faithful	--	because	I	know	about	this	life,	and	whenever	you	do	anything
unfaithful	to	me	I	will	turn	in	my	grave.'
After	many	years	the	woman	died.	The	moment	she	reached	the	door	of	heaven
she	asked	Saint	Peter
'Can	I	meet	my	husband	who	died	twenty	years	ago?	His	name	was	John.'	Saint
Peter	 said	 'But	 there	 are	 thousands	 of	 Johns	 here.	 Can	 you	 say	 something
specific	about	him?'	She	said	'Only	one	thing,	that	when	he	died	he	told	me	that
if	I	am	ever	unfaithful	to	him	he	will	toss	and	turn	in	his	grave.'
Peter	said	 'Then	don't	be	worried	--	he	is	a	well-known	figure.	People	call	him
Whirling	John.	He	is	continuously	whirling!'
Even	in	the	grave,	even	in	the	other	world...	But	old	habits	don't	die.	People	die,
habits	continue	--	they	have	their	own	life	and	their	own	momentum.
My	sannyasins	have	to	learn	to	be	relaxed,	restful,	not	to	be	in	a	hurry,	because
there	is	nowhere	to	go.
We	are	already	there,	so	what	is	the	hurry?	We	have	never	been	anywhere	else.
This	is	the	place	and	this	is	the	time.	There	is	no	other	place	and	no	other	time.
This	contains	my	whole	approach	towards	life:	being	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
herenow.	And	then	all	impatience	and	hurry	disappears,	and	with	them	disappear
the	 anxieties,	 the	 tensions,	 the	 nightmares,	 the	 worries.	 The	 whole	 world	 of
anguish	disappears,	and	in	that	space	of	calm	and	quiet,	rejoicing	in	the	moment,
what	happens	can	be	called	god	or	nirvana.
NURTURE	VIRTUE
Morality	is	not	virtue.	Morality	is	just	conformity	with	the	society	in	which	you
are	born.	Immorality	is	to	go	against	the	code	of	the	society,	morality	is	to	follow
it.	 Morality	 simply	 means	 obedience	 to	 the	 society	 and	 immorality	 means
disobedience.	In	that	sense	Jesus	is	immoral,	he	disobeyed	his	society.
Socrates	 is	 immoral,	 Buddha	 is	 immoral,	 Lao	 Tzu	 is	 immoral;	 in	 fact	 all	 the
great	 people	who	have	walked	on	 the	 earth	 are	 immoral	 in	 that	 sense	 because
they	 disobeyed,	 they	 were	 rebels.	 But	 they	 are	 virtuous.	 In	 fact	 they	 rebelled
against	the	morality	because	they	felt	it	was	not	virtuous.
Morality	comes	from	others	and	virtue	is	your	inner	understanding.	Virtue	comes
through	awareness.
When	you	start	seeing	clearly	 then	you	know	what	 is	right	and	what	 is	wrong.
Nobody	 else	 can	 decide	 it	 for	 you.	 In	 fact	 even	 you	 cannot	 decide	 it	 forever
because	what	 is	good	 this	moment	may	not	be	good	 the	next	moment,	what	 is
wrong	this	moment	may	be	right	the	next	moment.	So	the	virtuous	person	has	no
fixed	character.
Fixed	 characters	 are	 only	 for	 the	 dull	 and	 the	 dead.	 The	 virtuous	 person	 is
riverlike,	flowing,	moving,	dynamic.	He	is	flexible,	he	is	always	in	tune	with	the
situation.	 He	 has	 no	 prepared	 answers	 for	 the	 situation.	 He	 responds	 to	 the
situation	with	his	whole	heart.	His	response	is	spontaneous,	hence	according	to
me,	spontaneity	and	awareness	are	the	two	sides	of	real	virtue.
Be	aware	and	be	spontaneous,	and	then	beware	of	one	things	your	life	will	be	a
life	of	a	rebel.	But	the	rebel	comes	to	know	all	that	is	ecstatic.	Even	if	he	has	to
suffer	crucifixion,	his	life	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.
And	the	moral	person	may	be	crowned,	but	he	is	just	soulless,	empty,	hollow.
LIFE'S	NOT	A	SUM	BUT	A	SYMPHONY
My	approach	 towards	everything	 is	 that	of	poetry,	not	of	prose.	 It	 is	of	music,
not	of	mathematics.	 It	 is	of	 the	mystic,	not	of	 the	 scientist.	And	 these	are	 two
totally	different	approaches.	They	bring	two	totally	different	experiences.
The	person	who	thinks	in	prose	will	be	logical,	mathematical,	scientific,	but	he
will	miss	something.	He	will	be	very	efficient	 like	a	computer,	 like	a	beautiful
machine,	efficient,	reliable,	predictable,	but	he	will	not	have	life.	There	will	be
something	 dead	 inside	 him	 --	 because	 life	 can	 happen	 only	 when	 you	 reach
beyond	 the	world	 of	 logic	 and	 calculation,	when	 you	 allow	 the	mysterious	 to
enter	you.	That's	what	I	mean	by	poetry:	becoming	vulnerable	to	the	mysterious,
being	available	to	that	which	cannot	be	comprehended	by	intellect	alone.
Poetry	is	intuitive,	not	intellectual.	It	comes	from	deeper	sources	of	your	being
and	it	is	only	through	the	poetic	vision	that	one	can	feel	the	presence	of	god	--
within	and	without	--	both.	And	it	is	only	through	the	poetic	approach	that	one
can	have	some	sense	of	love,	beauty,	humour.	And	these	are	the	real	values.
Efficiency	 is	 not	 a	 value,	 calculativeness	 is	 not	 a	 value.	 It	 can	 make	 a	 good
businessman	but	it	will	not	make	you	a	real	man,	it	will	not	give	you	authenticity
--	and	you	will	miss	the	splendour	because	the	splendour	is	bigger	than	intellect.
It	needs	a	different	door.
The	man	of	logic	cannot	love	because	love	seems	illogical.	The	man	of	love	has
to	put	logic	aside,	he	has	to	go	into	love	in	spite	of	all	logic	and	its	objections.
A	beautiful	woman	wanted	 to	get	married	 to	Emmanuel	Kant,	one	of	 the	great
German	philosophers,	but	he	was	a	 total	 logician.	He	said	 'I	will	have	 to	 think
about	 it.'	 And	 whenever	 somebody	 says	 that	 about	 love,	 that	 he	 has	 to	 think
about	it,	it	is	already	over.
For	 three	 years	 he	 pondered	 over	 the	 matter,	 he	 looked	 into	 all	 the	 possible
books	 from	 where	 he	 can	 get	 information	 about	 whether	 to	 marry	 or	 not	 to
marry.	He	collected	all	the	information,	all	the	arguments	for	and	against.	Now,
this	 is	 not	 a	 way	 to	 move	 into	 love.	 And	 after	 three	 years	 he	 decided	 to	 get
married	because	there	was	one	argument	more	in	favour	than	against	--	and	that
argument	was	that	unless	you	experience	something	how	can	you	decide?	That's
certainly	a	significant	argument:	first	you	have	to	experience,	only	then	can	you
decide.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
He	knocked	on	the	door	of	the	woman,	her	father	opened	the	door,	and	he	asked
about	the	girl.	The	father	said	'You	are	a	little	bit	late:	she	is	already	married	and
is	a	mother	of	two	children.'	Emmanuel	Kant	remained	unmarried	for	the	whole
of	his	life.
Logic	is	not	possible	for	those	who	want	a	life	of	love.	Those	who	want	to	move
into	the	mysterious	existence	have	to	put	the	mind	aside.
Live	poetry.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about,	living	poetry,	not	just	composing	it
--	that	is	not	of	much	value	but	living	it,	breathing	it.
GOD	IS	NOT	A	PEEPING	TOM
(...	but	man	at	his	optimum)
One	of	 the	great	 Indian	mystics,	Chandidas	 has	 a	 very	 significant	 statement.	 I
consider	it	 to	be	one	of	the	most	significant	statements	ever	made	anywhere	in
the	whole	history	of	humanity.	His	statement	is	'	sabar	oopar	manus	satya,	tahar
oopar	nahin':	The	 truth	of	man	is	 the	highest	 truth	and	 there	 is	no	 truth	higher
than	that.
Chandidas	 was	 a	 lover	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha.	 In	 this	 small	 statement	 he	 has
condensed	 the	whole	philosophy	of	Buddha.	That's	what	Buddha	preached	his
whole	 life,	 that	 the	 truth	 of	 man	 is	 the	 highest	 truth.	 Don't	 look	 for	 any	 god
above	 the	clouds	--	 that	 is	childish.	Don't	 look	for	any	god	as	a	protector,	as	a
father	 figure,	 sitting	 somewhere	 on	 a	 golden	 throne	 in	 heaven	 watching
everybody,	 trying	 to	 detect	 something,	 spying	 on	 everybody.	 That	 is	 a	 very
stupid	idea.	God	is	not	a	person	somewhere	else,	it	is	the	ultimate	point	of	your
inner	growth.	God	is	a	discovery	within	man,	it	is	man's	truth.
So	we	have	to	search	for	god	within,	not	without.	And	the	only	method	to	search
for	him	is	meditation.
Meditation	 means	 going	 in,	 becoming	 a	 dropout	 for	 the	 time	 being	 from	 the
outside	world,	forgetting	it	all,	as	if	it	does	not	exist	any	more.
If	one	can	manage	even	a	few	small	gap,	of	inner	experience	the	whole	life	starts
having	a	different	colour	and	a	different	fragrance.	Then	even	when	you	are	in
the	outside	world	you	are	a	totally	different	person	because	your	consciousness
is	different.	Then	you	function	in	a	divine	way.
KILL	TO	CREATE
(Osho	talked	about	the	balancing	aspect	of	god	on	the	eleventh;	tonight	he	talks
about	Mahadeva	who	represents	the	destructive	element.)
Mahadeva	 is	 called	 the	 great	 god.	 It	 is	 strange,	 but	 significant,	 because	 every
creation	 is	 possible	 only	 through	 destruction.	 Destruction	 has	 to	 precede
creation.	Unless	you	demolish	the	old,	you	cannot	make	the	new.	And	it	 is	not
only	 a	 metaphor	 about	 the	 cosmos,	 it	 is	 a	 metaphor	 about	 each	 individual's
psychological	 growth	 too;	 first	 you	 have	 to	 destroy,	 you	 have	 to	 negate	many
things,	you	have	to	destroy	the	past-oriented	mind	and	clinging	with	memories.
All	that	is	nothing	but	dust	which	has	gathered	on	your	consciousness,	and	if	you
cling	to	it	you	lose	the	quality	of	mirroring	reality.	It	has	to	be	removed.
A	sannyasin	has	to	live	in	such	a	way	that	he	dies	to	the	past	every	moment,	so
no	 dust	 ever	 gathers	 and	 he	 is	 always	 fresh	 and	 in	 tune	 with	 reality,	 always
reflecting	that	which	is.
I	can	see	why	these	mystics	have	called	the	destructive	aspect	of	god	the	great
god.	Ordinary	logic	will	say	call	Brahma,	who	created	the	whole	world,	the	great
god,	or	call	Vishnu	who	maintains	 the	whole	world,	 the	great	god.	But	calling
Mahadeva,	who	one	day	simply	destroys	the	whole	world,	the	great	god,	looks
illogical,	but	it	only	looks	so;	it	has	a	psychological	truth	about	it.	He	cleanses
the	 whole	 world	 of	 all	 that	 is	 rotten,	 old,	 meaningless,	 junk;	 he	 cleanses	 the
world	of	it	all,	so	that	again	a	new	cosmos	begins.
And	this	is	to	be	understood	on	an	individual	plane	too;	my	sannyasins	have	to
be	 very	 destructive,	 destructive	 in	 order	 to	 create.	 They	 have	 to	 destroy
unconsciousness,	only	then	will	consciousness	be	created.	They	have	to	destroy
all	 their	 identities	 with	 the	 body,	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 heart,	 only	 then	 will	 they
come	to	know	their	eternity.
Destruction	is	a	way	to	discover	that	which	is	indestructible.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
SING	A	SONG	OF	SILENCE
(Osho	 spoke	 on	 the	 need	 to	 live	 a	 balanced	 life	 on	 the	 eleventh;	 tonight	 he
reiterates	that	in	reference	to	being	alone	and	in	love.	The	mind	moves	from	one
extreme	to	another,	just	like	the	pendulum	of	a	clock,	he	said.)
One	 thing	has	 to	be	understood,	when	 the	pendulum	 is	moving	 to	 the	 left	 it	 is
gathering	 momentum	 to	 go	 to	 the	 right,	 when	 it	 is	 going	 to	 the	 right	 it	 is
gathering	momentum	to	go	to	the	left.	That	momentum	is	not	visible	but	we	can
infer	it	easily.
The	farther	right	it	goes,	the	farther	left	it	will	go.	And	the	mind	is	continuously
doing	this.	One	will	cat	too	much,	then	one	will	diet	or	go	on	a	fast	or	one	may
become	a	fanatic	naturalist	and	may	start	believing	in	naturopathy.	First	one	eats
too	much,	then	fasts	and	then	soon	one	starts	eating	again.	And	this	is	the	story
of	all	the	people	who	go	on	dieting	they	will	lose	a	few	pounds	by	dieting	and
then	they	will	jump	to	the	other	extreme	one	day	and	will	start	eating	ice	cream
and	 everything.	And	 they	 have	missed	 it	 so	much	 that	 they	 jump	on	 it	with	 a
vengeance.
They	may	have	lost	only	a	few	pounds	in	few	weeks;	they	will	gain	more	than
that	within	days.	And	again,	the	misery,	and	again	the	desire	to	diet...	This	goes
on,	this	vacillation,	in	everything.
When	 you	 are	 with	 people	 you	 feel	 to	 be	 alone,	 to	 have	 your	 own	 space,
uninterfered	with	 --	 just	 like	 a	 bird	 on	 the	wing,	 the	whole	 sky	 is	 yours.	And
when	you	are	alone	you	are	simply	lonely,	not	alone.	There	is	no	sky,	no	bird	on
the	wing,	nothing	--	you	are	just	sitting,	looking	foolish	to	yourself.	And	there	is
the	 great	 desire	 to	 find	 somebody,	 to	 become	 engaged	 in	 something,	 to	 be
occupied.	The	mind	is	rushing:	what	to	do,	what	not	to	do,	where	to	go,	where
not	to	go?	Soon	you	will	be	somewhere	and	again	you	will	fall	in	love	and	you
will	think	of	the	beauty	of	aloneness;	you	will	be	alone	and	you	will	think	of	the
beauty	of	love.
The	sannyasin	has	to	avoid	these	extremes.
There	is	 the	same	extreme	between	bliss	and	silence.	If	you	are	silent	you	will
feel	that	something	is	missing.	Silence	is	there	but	there	is	no	joy	in	it.	There	is
no	disturbance,	but	it	is	like	the	peace	of	the	cemetery,	the	silence	of	a	grave,	--
no	song,	no	laughter,	no	dance.	And	the	desire	will	arise	to	rush	into	some	dance,
into	 some	 song,	 into	 some	 celebration.	Yes,	 there	 you	will	 fee	 cheerful	 --	 but
feverish,	tired,	exhausted,	and	suddenly	there	will	be	the	desire	for	silence,	to	be
left	alone,	to	be	with	yourself,	unoccupied.
One	has	 to	avoid	both,	 and	 the	best	way	 to	avoid	both	 is	 to	create	a	 synthesis
between	both.	Be	silent	and	blissful	 together,	be	blissful	and	peaceful	 together,
otherwise	you	cannot	avoid	that	vacillation,	because	they	are	essential	needs.	If
you	deny	one	 then	 sooner	or	 later	 it	will	 take	 its	 revenge.	There	 should	be	no
denial	of	anything.	My	sannyasins	are	not	to	deny	anything.	They	have	to	listen
to	 their	 needs	 and	 to	 find	 a	 balance,	 a	 synthesis.	And	 the	greatest	 synthesis	 is
between	silence	and	bliss.
So	 I	 teach	 both:	 I	 teach	 silence	 --	 sitting	 silently,	 doing	 nothing	 --	 and	 I	 also
teach	dance,	music,	singing,	celebration,	but	in	such	a	way	that	the	silence	still
goes	 on	 like	 an	 undercurrent	 in	 you.	You	 are	 dancing	 but	 the	 silence	 is	 there,
undisturbed,	unpolluted.	And	in	fact	that	silence	gives	a	depth	to	your	dance.	It
is	not	against	it,	it	gives	a	new	dimension	to	it.	And	if	you	can	dance	with	silence
undisturbed,	then	you	can	be	silent	and	there	will	be	a	subtle	dance	inside	like	an
undercurrent,	a	joy	running	like	a	small	stream.	You	can	feel	it,	nobody	will	be
able	to	see	it	but	you	can	hear	its	whisper.
When	this	happens	then	a	man	is	both.	I	call	that	man	Zorba	the	Buddha	--	and
that's	my	definition	of	a	sannyasin.
Buddha	is	silent,	the	Zorba	part	is	missing.	Zorba	is	cheerful,	blissful,	dancing,
rejoicing,	 but	 the	 silent	 part	 is	 missing.	 Now	 the	 world	 has	 come	 to	 a	 point
where	we	can	create	a	man	who	is	both,	Zorba	the	Buddha.	If	my	sannyasins	can
do	it	they	will	be	introducing	a	totally	new	age	in	human	consciousness,	a	new
beginning,	 a	 new	 history.	And	 it	 is	 immensely	 needed	 because	man	 is	 fed	 up
with	 the	old	pattern.	 It	has	done	 its	work,	 it	has	become	almost	 irrelevant;	we
have	gone	far	beyond	it.	Now	a	new	synthesis	is	the	demand	of	the	moment	--
and	I	don't	see	it	happening	anywhere	else,	I	don't	see	that	it	is	even	being	tried
anywhere.
What	 is	 happening	 is	 that	 the	 Zorbas	 are	 tired	 of	 being	 Zorbas	 and	 they	 are
trying	to	be	Buddhas,	and	the	Buddhas	are	tired	of	being	Buddhas	and	they	are
trying	 to	 be	Zorbas.	That	 is	 the	 same	game	 again	 --	 it	won't	 change	 anything.
The	West	is	turning	East	and	the	East	is	turning	West.	The	West,	particularly	the
most	intelligent,	the	most	young	and	alive	people	is	coming	to	the	East	and	the
East,	 the	 most	 alive	 and	 intelligent	 people,	 is	 rushing	 towards	 Oxford
Cambridge,	Harvard,	to	learn	more	technology	and	more	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
science.
Both	 look	 at	 each	 other	 in	 a	 very	 strange	way.	The	 intelligent	western	 person
coming	to	the	East	cannot	believe	that	the	eastern	intelligence	is	rushing	towards
the	West,	 and	 the	 eastern	 person	 cannot	 believe	why	 these	western	 people	 are
coming	to	the	East.	For	what?
Rudyard	Kipling	wrote	that	the	West	is	West	and	the	East	is	East	and	the	twain
shall	 never	 meet.	 And	 when	 he	 wrote	 it	 he	 was	 perfectly	 right.	 What	 is
happening	is	not	going	against	Kipling;	the	West	may	become	East,	the	East	may
become	West	 and	 again	 they	 shall	 never	meet	 again.	 It	may	 remain	 the	 same
thing;	the	labels	change	but	the	meeting	does	not	happen.
My	sannyasins	may	be	the	only	people	in	the	whole	world	where	the	meeting	is
happening,	at	least	the	basic	groundwork	is	being	done,	the	foundation	is	being
laid.	My	whole	effort	is	to	try	in	every	possible	way	to	prove	Rudyard	Kipling
wrong,	absolutely	wrong.	He	has	to	be	proved	wrong	--	and	that	is	possible	only
if	Zorba	 the	Buddha	 is	born.	And	I	am	very	hopeful	 that	he	will	be	born.	The
situation	is	ripe.	If	he	cannot	be	born	in	this	situation	then	he	will	never	be	born.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011135
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
SANNYAS:	PARADISE	REGAINED
(And	paradise	is	freedom	--	a	value	even	higher	than	god.)	The	most	divine	act
in	life	is	to	live	in	freedom.	We	are	born	free	but	we	are	not	left	free	by	society.
The	moment	we	 are	 born	 society	 starts	 creating	 bondages	 around	 us	 --	 gross,
subtle	and	very	subtle.	So	everybody	is	born	in	freedom	but	everybody	lives	as	a
prisoner	and	dies	as	a	prisoner.
Sannyas	 means	 regaining	 your	 freedom,	 destroying	 all	 the	 barriers	 that	 have
been	created	by	the	establishment,	the	state,	the	church.	They	have	their	vested
interests.	They	want	you	to	be	slaves;	they	don't	want	anybody	to	live	in	freedom
because	 a	 free	 person	 cannot	 be	manipulated,	 cannot	 be	 dominated,	 cannot	 be
possessed,	 cannot	 be	 reduced	 to	 a	 thing,	 to	 a	 commodity.	 And	 this	 society
believes	in	commodities;	it	believes	in	machines	not	in	man.	The	less	of	a	man
you	are,	the	better,	because	machines	cannot	revolt,	they	cannot	be	disobedient.
Man	can	 revolt,	he	can	go	against	 the	vested	 interests,	hence	up	 to	now	 it	has
been	always	that	each	child	is	chained	in	such	a	complex	way	that	only	very	few
people	have	been	able	to	live	a	life	of	freedom.
One	has	to	be	very	alert,	watchful,	adventurous,	courageous,	to	go	into	freedom.
Sannyas	 means	 all	 those	 things.	 It	 is	 a	 declaration	 of	 absolute	 freedom.	 Our
search	is	not	for	god,	our	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
search	is	for	freedom.	Of	course	when	you	are	totally	free	you	know	god	--	that's
a	by-product.
MEDITATION:	A	WHETSTONE	FOR	YOUR	WITS
A	man	without	meditation	is	bound	to	be	mediocre,	he	cannot	be	bright,	because
meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 sharpening	 your	 intelligence;	 without	 meditation
intelligence	gathers	rust.	Then	it	 is	 like	a	sword	which	has	not	been	used.	 It	 is
only	a	sword	in	name;	it	is	absolutely	useless.
The	same	is	true	about	intelligence,	it	has	to	be	continuously	sharpened;	and	the
only	way	 to	 sharpen	 it	 is	 to	 accept	 the	challenges	of	 life	meditatively.	And	by
meditation	I	mean	in	deep	silence,	in	calmness,	quietness.	Whenever	a	challenge
is	 accepted	 in	 a	 calm	 and	 quiet	 way	 it	 sharpens	 your	 intelligence.	 It	 is	 not	 a
disturbance,	it	is	not	a	curse,	it	is	a	blessing.
Meditation	only	teaches	you	the	simple	art	of	remaining	centred	in	the	turmoil	of
life.	It	teaches	you	to	be	a	centre,	always	a	centre	in	all	kinds	of	cyclones.	If	you
become	 disturbed	 you	 lose	 the	 opportunity,	 you	 become	 confused,	 unfamiliar,
clouded;	and	that's	how	dust	gathers.	If	you	remain	calm	and	quiet,	as	if	nothing
is	happening	to	you	--	you	are	only	watching	something	on	the	TV	screen	--	then
it	gives	sharpness,	brightness.	A	moment	comes	when	your	inner	brightness	is	so
much	 that	 it	 becomes	 almost	 an	 explosion	 of	 light.	 Hence	 the	 word
'enlightenment';	that	is	the	ultimate	peak	to	which	meditation	can	bring	you.
Meditation	is	climbing	the	mountain	towards	the	sunlit	peak.
JUST	GOOD	FRIENDS
The	man	of	meditation	inevitably	becomes	a	friend	to	existence,	a	friend	to	all.
He	loses	enmity	in	him,	so	much	so	that	even	where	there	is	a	need	he	can	at	the
most	pretend,	but	deep	inside	he	cannot	feel	enmity.	He	can	act	if	there	is	a	need
--	and	that's	my	understanding	about	many	things	which	Christians	are	incapable
of	explaining	about	Jesus.
He	 taught	 about	 love,	 he	 taught	 about	 compassion,	 still	 he	 threw	 the
moneychangers	out	of	the	temple	violently.	He	said	to	his	disciples	if	somebody
hits	 you	on	one	 of	 your	 cheeks	 give	 him	 the	 other	 too.	The	 same	man	 took	 a
whip	 in	 his	 hand	 and	became	 so	 enraged	with	 the	moneychangers	 that	 single-
handedly	he	threw	them	all	out	of	 the	temple,	 turned	their	boards	upside	down
and	 threw	 their	 money.	 He	 must	 have	 been	 really	 angry.	 Christians	 cannot
explain	how	such	a	man	like	Jesus	could	have	done	it.
My	own	experience	is	he	could	pretend,	he	was	pretending.	He	was	not	doing	it,
he	was	acting	it	--	it	was	needed.	But	he	was	not	an	enemy	to	anybody;	he	could
not	be.
One	of	the	famous	Sufi	mystics,	Rabiya	el	Adawiya,	changed	a	few	sentences	in
the	Koran;	wherever	it	said	hate	the	enemy,	the	devil,	Satan,	she	changed	it,	she
removed	it	Another	mystic,	Hasan,	was	looking	into	Rabiya's	copy	of	the	Koran
--	 he	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 eyes,	 because	 this	 was	 sacrilegious.	 You	 cannot
correct	the	Koran,	no	Mohammedan	can	think	of	it,	because	it	 is	god's	word	--
who	are	you	to	correct	it?
He	 asked	Rabiya	 'Who	 has	 destroyed	 your	 copy?	Do	 you	 ever	 look	 into	 your
copy	or	not?	In	many	places	I	see	a	few	words	have	been	cut	out.'
Rabiya	said	 'Nobody	else	has	done	it	but	myself.	I	had	to	do	it	because	since	I
have	known	silence,	since	I	have	known	god,	I	cannot	hate.	And	this	is	my	copy,
it	 is	 nobody	 else's	 business.	 I	 have	 to	 change	 it	 according	 to	 my	 deepening
consciousness.	 It	may	have	been	 right	when	 I	 knew	nothing	of	meditation	but
now	it	 is	no	more	right.	Even	if	 the	devil	appears	before	me	I	can	only	 love,	I
can	only	be	friendly.	I	would	welcome	him	the	same	way	I	have	welcomed	you,
Hasan,'	 she	 said.	 'I	would	ask	him	 to	 rest,	 to	 relax,	 I	would	ask	him	 to	be	my
honourable	guest;	I	would	serve	him.	I	cannot	hate.'
Meditation	 makes	 you	 a	 friend	 to	 the	 whole	 existence.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 most
beautiful	experience	--	when	there	is	no	hatred	left	in	you.	Thousands	of	flowers
bloom	in	your	being,	all	thorns	start	opening	lie	flowers.
This	is	the	transformation	that	sannyas	is	aiming	at,	this	is	the	goal.
LOONEY	AS	A	LOVER
(Sannyas	 is	marriage	 to	 the	unknown	and	 the	unknowable;	 it	 is	 falling	 in	 love
with	existence,	Osho	tells	Deva	Parinita.)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	not	a	logical	phenomenon,	but	a	love	affair	--	a	mad	mad	love	affair.
The	ultimate	secrets	are	open	only	to	lovers,	not	to	logicians.	And	if	one	wants
to	get	the	deepest	into	existence	then	a	certain	quality	of	madness	is	a	must.	In
fact	the	person	who	is	perfectly	sane	is	insane;	to	be	absolutely	sane	means	to	be
just	shallow,	empty,	meaningless,	because	the	perfectly	sane	person	will	not	have
any	 poetry	 in	 his	 life,	 will	 not	 have	 any	 love	 in	 his	 life,	 will	 not	 have	 any
celebration	in	his	life.	It	is	not	possible	for	him.	For	that	you	need	a	little	touch
of	madness.	Just	a	little	touch	of	madness	and	closed	doors	start	opening!
I	 teach	 the	madness	 called	 love,	 the	madness	 called	meditation.	 These	 are	 all
mad	things,	that's	why	only	a	very	few	chosen	people	have	ever	tried	them;	the
majority	never	bothers	about	these	things.	They	are	calculators,	business	people,
mathematicians.	 They	 cannot	 understand	 what	 you	 are	 doing.	 A	 businessman
looking	at	Buddha	meditating	under	his	 tree	with	closed	eyes	 sitting	 for	hours
will	think	he	is	a	fool.	In	fact	in	the	Hindi	language	the	word	'fool'	comes	from
'Buddha'.	 'Buddha'	 means	 the	 awakened	 one	 and	 from	 the	 same	 root	 comes
'buddhu'	--	Buddhu	means	the	fool.
There	were	two	types	of	people:	a	few	thought	Buddha	was	awakened	and	a	few
thought	he	was	just	a	fool,	hence	from	the	same	root	both	words	have	arisen.	But
the	majority	agreed	that	he	was	a	fool.	His	father	thought	he	was	a	fool,	his	wife
thought	he	was	a	fool.	In	fact	anybody	would	have	thought	him	a	fool
--	 escaping	 from	 a	 beautiful	wife,	 child,	 kingdom,	 palace,	 all	 the	 luxuries	 and
then	just	sitting	under	a	tree	like	a	beggar.	What	kind	of	sanity	was	that?
One	of	the	most	beautiful	women	India	has	given	birth	to	was	Meera.	She	was	a
queen	and	she	left	the	palace	and	danced	over	streets	and	villages	singing	songs
of	god.	She	sang	the	most	beautiful	songs	--	I	have	never	come	across	anything
more	poetic.	And	she	was	not	a	poet,	she	knew	nothing	of	language,	nothing	of
grammar	--	it	was	just	an	outpouring	of	her	madness.	But	she	was	so	madly	in
love	with	god	 that	 that	 very	 love	made	 the	great	 poetry,	 the	great	 singing,	 the
great	dancing.	Everybody	thought	that	she	had	gone	mad.	Even	her	family	tried
to	kill	her	because	she	was	becoming	notorious:	a	queen	dancing	on	the	streets,
mixing	with	beggars,	sleeping	in	caravanserais,	moving	with	ordinary	people.	It
was	unbearable	for	the	family	and	they	tried	to	kill	her.
And	the	story	is	that	they	sent	poison	with	a	message	that	just	for	their	sake	to
drink	it	and	be	finished.
Meera	sang	a	song	and	drank	the	poison.	And	the	story	is	that	the	poison	did	not
affect	her.	It	 is	possible,	 it	may	not	have	affected	her.	Mad	people	don't	follow
simple	 laws.	Her	 love	was	 so	great	 that	 the	poison	may	not	have	been	able	 to
destroy	it.	Her	love	was	so	great,	her	trust	was	so	total	that	even	poison	became
nectar.
That	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 your	 name:	 a	 little	 touch	 of	madness,	 a	 little	 touch	 of
love,	a	little	insanity	so	that	you	can	have	a	communion	with	the	whole.
My	sannyasins	have	to	learn	to	be	both	sane	as	far	as	the	world	is	concerned	and
insane	as	far	as	their	real	interiority	is	concerned;	logical	with	the	world	but	very
illogical	with	the	ultimate.
(Then	 Osho	 addresses	 Prem	 Satyo.	 His	 name	 means	 love	 is	 truth.)	 If	 one	 is
capable	of	love	one	is	capable	of	knowing	the	truth.	There	is	no	other	way,	there
is	no	other	approach.	Truth	comes	second,	love	comes	first.	Love	prepares	your
heart	to	receive	the	guest.	Love	makes	you	the	host.	And	the	moment	the	host	is
ready	the	guest	comes.	It	has	never	been	otherwise.
Buddha	used	to	say	'	ais	dhammo	sanantano'	--	this	is	the	law,	the	ultimate	law
of	life,	the	moment	the	guest	is	ready	the	guest	is	bound	to	come.	You	need	not
go	 anywhere;	 just	 be	 ready	 to	 receive.	 Love	 makes	 you	 receptive,	 open,
vulnerable,	trusting.
(Love	 is	 dangerous	 --	 love	 for	 the	 ultimate	 truth	 is	 the	 ultimate	 risk.)	 It	 is
dangerous	because	we	have	been	brought	up	with	so	many	prejudices,	a	priori
conclusions,	conditionings,	beliefs,	that	if	one	really	loves	truth	one	will	have	to
renounce	all	this.	One	will	have	to	renounce	one's	whole	past.	That	is	really	hard
work,	an	uphill	task,	because	we	have	become	so	identified	with	our	past.	Those
beliefs	are	no	more	separate	like	clothes	that	we	can	take	off	any	moment.	Those
beliefs	have	become	almost	like	our	skin,	and	to	peel	the	skin	off	hurts.
Bertrand	Russell,	one	of	 the	greatest	philosophers	of	 this	 age,	 says	he	 is	not	 a
Christian,	 he	 dropped	 all	 that	 nonsense	 long	 ago.	 But	 if	 somebody	 says
something	against	Christ,	still,	something	in	him	hurts.	He	himself	has	written	a
book	 'WHY	I	AM	NOT	A	CHRISTIAN'.	And	he	has	said	many	things	against
Christ	and	Christianity,	but	if	somebody	else	says	the	same	things	it	hurts.
Beliefs	slowly	sink	so	deep	in	you	that	even	if	you	consciously	drop	them	they
go	on	lingering	in	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
unconsciousness.	And	a	true	seeker,	a	true	lover	of	truth,	has	to	renounce	them
root	and	all.	One	has	to	be	completely	clean	of	all	beliefs	because	all	belief,	are
lies.	Truth	 is	never	a	belief,	 it	 is	an	experience,	and	before	 that	experience	can
happen	you	have	to	pay	this	price	of	dropping	all	beliefs.	That's	why	I	say	love
for	truth	is	the	most	adventurous	thing	in	life.	But	the	risk	is	worth	taking.
Lies	can	at	the	most	be	comfortable,	but	they	cannot	give	you	bliss,	they	cannot
give	 you	 freedom,	 they	 cannot	 give	 you	 god.	And	without	 these	 values	 life	 is
empty.	One	can	drag	but	one	cannot	dance,	and	unless	your	life	becomes	a	dance
you	have	missed	the	whole	opportunity.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	dancers,	celebrants.
THE	PRESENTS	OF	HIS	PRESENCE
(Anugraho	means	gratitude.	It's	 the	foundation	of	religion.	Osho	is	 talking	to	a
New	Zealand	sannyasin.)	Gratitude	is	the	most	essential	core	--	because	it	is	out
of	gratitude	that	prayer	arises.
People	are	very	ungrateful;	they	don't	feel	any	gratitude	for	existence	at	all.	The
whole	sky	is	full	of	stars	and	no	thankyou	arises	in	their	hearts.	It	 is	as	if	 their
hearts	are	non-functioning.	The	sun	rises	with	such	tremendous	beauty,	the	birds
sing,	the	flowers	open,	only	man	remains	closed,	without	any	song,	as	if	love	has
died	in	him.
And	these	same	people	who	cannot	see	the	beauty	of	a	sunrise	or	a	sunset,	who
cannot	feel	grateful	to	the	stars,	to	the	clouds,	to	the	trees,	to	people,	to	animals	-
-	these	same	people	go	to	the	churches	and	the	temples	and	the	mosques	to	pray.
How	can	 I	believe	 that	 their	prayer	 can	have	any	meaning?	 If	 sometimes	 they
have	not	felt	like	kneeling	down	on	the	earth,	if	sometimes	they	have	not	felt	like
dancing	with	joy	under	the	stars,	all	their	prayers	are	false,	formal.	They	are	just
being	hypocrites	and	nothing	else.
So	I	don't	teach	you	to	go	to	any	church	or	to	any	temple.	I	teach	you	gratitude.
And	then	there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	Just	sitting	here	silently,	the	sound	of
the	 silence	of	 the	night	 is	 enough,	more	 than	enough,	 in	 fact	uncontainable.	 If
one	has	a	heart	one	will	feel	the	presence	of	god	in	this	silence.	And	that	feeling
of	 the	 presence	 of	 god	 is	 what	 transforms	 a	 man	 --	 not	 a	 belief	 but	 the
experience.
So	let	 this	be	 the	keyword	for	you,	Anugraho	--	gratitude.	And	if	you	can	feel
gratitude	 then	many	 things	will	 come	 to	 you	 of	 their	 own	 accord.	They	 come
spontaneously,	without	any	search	on	your	part.
And	 when	 things	 happen	 of	 their	 own	 accord	 they	 have	 a	 totally	 different
fragrance	to	them.	They	are	gifts	from	the	beyond.
BLISS	BALM
One	cannot	achieve	bliss	on	one's	own.	We	can	achieve	misery	but	not	bliss.	We
can	do	something	to	ourselves	so	that	we	fall	sick.	But	healing	does	not	happen
through	us,	it	happens	through	the	whole,	it	comes	from	the	beyond.	Wounds	we
can	create	--	that	is	within	our	power	--	but	when	the	wound	heals	it	is	not	you
who	is	healing	it	It	heals	by	some	mysterious	energy.	That	mysterious	energy	is
called	god.	It	is	only	a	name	for	all	that	is	mysterious,	and	by	mysterious	I	mean
all	that	which	is	not	comprehensible	to	reason.
How	a	wound	heals	 is	 a	miracle,	 how	 the	 illness	disappears	 and	health	 comes
back	 is	 a	miracle.	 Even	medical	 science	 accepts	 the	 fact	 that	we	 can	 help	 the
healing	process	but	we	cannot	heal.	We	can	remove	the	barriers,	we	can	prepare
the	 ground	 for	 the	 healing	 energy	 to	 function,	 but	 the	 healing	 energy	 does
everything	on	its	own.
Bliss	is	the	ultimate	healing	when	all	your	bones	have	been	healed,	then	there	is
no	more	 any	wound,	when	 your	whole	 being	 is	 full	 of	well-being.	 It	 happens
through	god,	through	the	beyond.
The	 function	 for	 you	 is	 to	 remove	 all	 hindrances.	 That's	 the	 work	 of	 the
sannyasin	--	not	to	create	barriers	for	the	healing	energy.	For	example,	when	the
sun	rises	you	can	keep	your	eyes	closed;	you	will	remain	in	darkness,	although
the	 sun	 is	 there,	 available.	But	you	have	 to	open	your	 eyes,	 and	opening	your
eyes	is	just	removing	a	small	hindrance;	the	eyelid	is	just	a	small	hindrance.	You
can	keep	your	doors	closed	and	then	even	in	the	full	light	of	the	day	you	will	live
in	darkness.	But	you	can	open	the	door,	you	can	open	all	the	windows,	and	then
the	sun	and	the	wind	and	the	rain	come	in.
That's	what	we	can	do:	we	can	open	up	to	existence,	we	can	become	available	to
all	the	energies	that	are	showering	on	us,	and	then	healing	happens	on	its	own.	It
is	always	god	who	heals.	And	bliss	is	the	ultimate	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
experience	when	you	are	totally	healed,	when	nothing	is	missing,	when	one	has
come	home.
A	DARLING	OF	THE	COSMOS
(...	but	a	danger	to	the	crowd	--	that's	the	fate	of	the	blissful	man.)	Bliss	needs	a
very	strong	spirit.	Any	coward	can	afford	to	be	miserable.	It	needs	no	courage,
no	guts	to	be	miserable;	it	is	so	easy	and	so	cheap.	That's	why	millions	of	people
are	miserable	--	because	it	is	so	easily	available.	You	don't	have	to	do	anything	at
all;	you	don't	even	have	to	search	for	it,	it	searches	for	you.	You	just	have	to	be	a
coward	and	it	will	find	you.
But	 to	be	blissful	one	really	needs	a	 strong	spirit,	 for	 two	 reasons.	One	 is:	 the
whole	of	humanity	is	accustomed	to	living	in	misery	and	if	you	want	to	live	in
bliss	you	will	have	to	go	against	it;	in	many	ways	you	will	have	to	leave	the	fold,
the	crowd,	the	mob.
There	are	many	kinds	of	crowds:	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Communist,
Socialist,	Fascist	--	all	are	crowds.	The	miserable	person	cannot	be	alone;	he	is
so	cowardly	he	always	wants	to	belong	to	a	crowd.
The	 blissful	 person	 is	 like	 a	 lion.	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 has	 actually	 used	 the
words	'lion's	roar'	for	the	person	who	attains	to	bliss.	He	roars	like	a	lion,	he	is
no	more	a	sheep.	Sheep	are	always	afraid	of	being	alone;	they	move	in	a	crowd.
It	gives	them	a	feeling	that	they	are	not	in	danger,	it	is	a	kind	of	security	because
so	many	sheep	are	around	them,	they	are	not	alone.
The	first	thing	for	being	blissful	is	to	be	ready	to	go	on	a	lonely	path.	Sannyas	is
initiation	 into	being	an	 individual,	dropping	out	of	 the	mass	mind.	The	mob	 is
the	ugliest	phenomenon	in	the	world,	it	is	the	lowest	possibility	of	humanity,	but
whenever	you	want	to	be	alone	and	you	want	to	leave	the	mob,	the	mob	will	not
allow	it	easily.	Hence	the	second	problem:	the	mob	will	create	every	hindrance.
If	there	is	a	need,	the	mob	may	even	kill	you	--	it	has	killed	many	people	--	for
the	 simple	 reason	 that	 even	 if	 one	 person	 escapes	 from	 the	 fold	 and	 becomes
blissful	then	the	whole	foundation	of	the	crowd	is	shaken.	Then	others	may	start
thinking	of	the	same	too,	then	others	may	start	dreaming	about	being	individuals.
It	 is	because	of	 this	 that	Jesus	is	crucified,	 it	 is	because	of	 this	 that	Socrates	 is
killed,	 it	 is	 because	 of	 this	 that	 Al	 Hillaj	 Mansoor	 is	 murdered.	 Their	 very
presence	 is	dangerous	 to	 the	establishment;	 they	are	so	 blissful,	 naturally	 their
presence	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 spell.	 People	 can	 become	 hypnotised,	 people	 can	 start
moving	in	the	same	direction	in	which	they	have	moved,	and	the	crowd	becomes
afraid.	 Its	 fold	 is	 lo	 s	 ing	 its	 hold,	 and	 no	 crowd	 ever	 wants	 to	 lose	 its	 hold
because	in	the	crowd	there	are	politicians	who	are	politically	powerful	 leaders,
then	there	are	priests	who	are	religiously,	spiritually	powerful,	then	there	are	rich
people,	respectable	people,	saints	and	so	on	and	so	forth	--	and	they	all	depend
on	the	mob	psychology.
The	blissful	person	is	a	danger	to	all	of	them.
So	these	are	the	two	things	--	this	is	why	a	strong	spirit	is	needed	--	the	first,	to
go	 against	 the	 crowd,	 then	 the	 second,	 to	be	 ready	 to	 sacrifice	whatsoever	 the
crowd	demands.	One	 thing	 is	 certain,	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	more	valuable	 than
bliss,	so	everything	can	be	sacrificed	for	it,	even	life	itself.	It	is	far	better	to	be
crucified	 like	 Jesus	 than	crowned	 like	Alexander	 the	Great.	The	crucifixion	of
Jesus	is	far	more	beautiful	than	the	crowning	of	Alexander.	Alexander	is	still	a
beggar,	even	though	crowned;	Jesus	is	still	the	emperor,	though	crucified.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011145
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY14
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
HOME:	NOTHING-NEST
(Osho	is	talking	to	Shunyo	Anne.)
Shunyo	 means	 emptiness,	 nothingness,	 nobodyness,	 a	 state	 of	 utter	 silence
where	not	even	the	idea	of	I	exists;	one	is	but	with	no	idea	of	I.	It	is	the	state	of
egolessness,	a	perfect	zero.
That's	what	meditation	is:	creating	a	state	of	zero	inside	--	and	out	of	that	zero
miracles	happen.
Anne	 means	 three	 things:	 prayer,	 grace,	 mercy	 --	 and	 these	 are	 the	 most
important	miracles	that	can	happen	out	of	that	zero-ness.
The	 first	 will	 be	 prayer	 --	 not	 of	 words	 but	 a	 prayer	 of	 silent	 gratitude,	 a
gratitude	that	says	nothing.
Even	to	say	something	will	be	profane,	will	not	be	adequate	enough.	One	has	to
be	absolutely	silent,	but	there	is	gratefulness,	overflowing	gratefulness,	because
for	 the	 first	 time	one	 comes	 to	 experience	 the	 splendour	of	 life.	Thousands	of
flowers	bloom	within	you,	suddenly	the	spring	has	come.	The	zero	is	no	more	a
zero,	it	is	overflowing	with	fragrance.
The	moment	 you	 drop	 all	 the	 nonsense	 from	 yourself	 the	 zero	 is	 created,	 the
moment	 the	zero	 is	 created	 the	beyond	descends	 into	 it,	 because	nature	 abhor,
vacuum.	You	create	the	vacuum	and	immediately	the	beyond	fills	it.
The	 first	 flower	 will	 be	 prayer	 and	 the	 second	 flower	 will	 be	 grace,	 because
when	you	are	grateful,	prayerful,	thankful,	a	subtle	grace	surrounds	you.	It	is	just
the	 opposite	 of	 anger:	 when	 you	 are	 angry,	 enraged,	 violent,	 all	 your	 grace
disappears,	 all	 your	 beauty	 disappears.	 Even	 a	 beautiful	 person	 becomes	 ugly
while	 he	 is	 violent,	 when	 he	 is	 possessed	 by	 some	murderous	 instinct.	When
grace	descends	even	the	ugly	person	becomes	beautiful	because	grace	means	the
beyond	has	touched	you,	god	has	touched	you.	The	very	touch	is	transforming;
you	 are	 no	more	 ordinary.	 You	 become	 ordinary	 by	 dropping	 the	 ego,	 but	 in
dropping	 the	 ego	 one	 earns,	 deserves	 to	 become	 extraordinary	 --	 that's	 what
grace	is.
And	the	third	miracle	is	mercy,	compassion;	when	you	are	prayerful	that	is	your
inner	experience.
Nobody	 will	 know	 about	 it,	 but	 that	 prayerfulness	 starts	 radiating	 even	 from
your	body,	your	gestures,	 your	words,	 the	way	you	 sit,	 the	way	you	walk,	 the
way	you	talk,	the	way	you	relate	or	the	way	you	remain	silent.	In	every	possible
way	that	grace	will	radiate.	And	whatsoever	you	do	now,	all	your	actions	will	be
out	of	compassion.
Ordinarily	 all	 actions	 are	 out	 of	 passion,	 desire	 for	money,	 power,	 sex	 --	 and
there	are	millions	of	things.
Passion	 is	 unconscious;	 you	 are	 in	 the	 grip	 of	 biology.	 Compassion	 is
consciousness;	you	are	no	more	in	the	grip	of	the	instinctive	unconscious	you	are
freed	from	that	bondage.	You	still	act,	you	still	go	on	doing	things	but	the	cause
is	totally	different;	now	it	is	love.
You	 have	 to	 create	 the	 zero	 --	 that	 is	 your	 work	 --	 then	 these	 three	 are	 the
towards.	And	more	 one	 cannot	 ask	 for,	 because	 those	 three	 are	 enough,	more
than	enough	 --	uncontainable.	When	 there	 is	gratitude,	grace,	compassion,	one
has	 arrived.	 One	 can	 call	 it	 the	 state	 of	 Christ	 consciousness	 or	 Buddha
consciousness,	enlightenment,	nirvana,	but	they	all	mean	the	same	thing:	one	has
come	home.
A	JUMP,	NOT	A	JOURNEY
(Osho	speaks	on	the	nature	of	god,	of	existence,	of	us,	as	being	light.)	This	is	the
only	 point	 on	 which	 the	 physicists	 and	 the	 mystics	 agree.	 The	 physicists	 say
existence	 consists	 of	 electricity	 and	 the	 mystics	 say	 it	 consist	 of	 light.	 Their
language	may	be	different	but	they	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
indicating	the	same	thing:	the	whole	existence	is	made	of	the	stuff	called	light.
We	are	also	made	of	it	but	the	strangest	thing	is	that	we	live	in	darkness	because
we	 never	 look	 within,	 we	 never	 look	 at	 the	 source	 of	 our	 being.	 We	 go	 on
searching	everywhere	else	and	because	we	go	on	searching	everywhere3	else	we
never	find	the	source.	The	source	is	within	and	our	search	goes	on	somewhere
else.
The	 farther	 we	 go	 into	 the	 search,,	 the	 deeper	 in	 darkness	 we	 are.	 The
Upanishads	have	a	beautiful	saying;	they	say	the	ignorant	are	in	darkness	but	the
knowledgeable	are	in	deeper	darkness.	It	is	one	of	the	very	beautiful	statements.
The	ignorant	are	of	course	in	darkness	but	they	are	not	in	so	much	darkness	as
the	 knowledgeable	 person,	 because	 he	 has	 gone	 very	 far	 into	 the	 search,	 into
scriptures,	into	logic,	into	philosophy,	theology,	religion,	he	has	gone	far	away.
The	ignorant	person	at	 least	 is	very	close	by,	he	has	not	gone	anywhere.	If	 the
ignorant	person	turns	about,	immediately	he	will	become	enlightened.	It	is	just	a
one-hundred-and-eighty	degree	turn,	somebody	has	to	shout	to	him	'About-turn'
--	 and	 the	 thing	 will	 happen.	 And	 that's	 the	 function	 of	 the	 master,	 to	 go	 on
shouting	'About-turn',	a	one-hundred-and-eighty	degree	turn.	But	because	people
cannot	be	told	directly	to	about-turn,	the	master	first	has	to	say	'Right	turn,	left
turn,'	and	many	other	turns	and	by	and	by	persuades	you	to	about	turn.	Slowly
slowly	you	start	enjoying	 turning	 left,	 turning	 right	 --	 it	 is	good	exercise!	And
then	you	become	interested:	maybe	 there	 is	something	 in	about-turning	 too,	so
why	not	have	a	look	for	a	change.	Once	you	look	within	all	is	settled.	The	whole
journey	is	complete	in	a	single	quantum	leap.
(Devapriyo	--	beloved	of	god	--	was	one	of	the	names	of	Gautam	Buddha,	Osho
tells	the	new	swami	to	whom	he	has	given	the	name.)
A	 man	 becomes	 beloved	 of	 god	 only	 when	 he	 becomes	 a	 Buddha,	 when	 he
becomes	 awakened,	 conscious,	 alert,	 then	 he	 deserves	 all	 love	 from	 the
existence,	and	love	showers	in	torrents.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	about	a	Buddhist	disciple,	a	direct	disciple	of	Buddha,
Subhuti	who	was	the	first	disciple	of	his	to	become	enlightened.	He	was	sitting
under	 a	 tree	 doing	 nothing.	 Just	 sitting	 silently	 and	 suddenly	 flowers	 started
showering.	He	looked:	what	was	the	matter?	--	because	this	was	not	the	time,	the
tree	was	not	blooming.	From	where	were	the	flowers	coming?	Then	he	saw	the
gods	showering	flowers;	he	asked	'What	is	the	matter?	Why	are	you	showering
flowers	on	me?'	They	said	'Because	of	your	great	sermon	on	silence.'
Subhuti	 said	 'What	 are	 you	 talking	 about?	 I	 have	 not	 uttered	 a	 single	word	 --
what	sermon?	The	gods	laughed	and	they	said	'That's	what	we	call	the	sermon	of
silence:	you	have	not	uttered	a	word	and	we	have	not	heard	a	word;	this	is	what
is	called	the	great	sermon	of	silence.	You	have	not	spoken,	we	have	not	heard.
To	 honour	 this	 silent	moment	we	 are	 showering	 |	 these	 flowers.	This	moment
you	have	become	a	beloved	of	existence.	This	is	just	a	gesture	to	show	the	love
of	existence	towards	you.'
Remaining	 unconscious	 is	 remaining	 without	 the	 love	 of	 existence.	 Become
conscious,	alert,	aware,	and	you	will	be	surprised:	this	existence	has	so	much	to
give,	it	is	just	that	we	are	not	ready	to	receive	it	--	the	whole	fault	is	ours.
DATE	WITH	THE	ULTI-MATE
There	are	two	kinds	of	anxieties;	one	is	about	the	past,	which	is	no	more,	and	the
other	 is	 about	 the	 future,	 which	 is	 not	 yet.	 Between	 these	 two	 anxieties	 our
whole	 life	 is	wasted.	And	both	anxieties	are	exercises	 in	 sheer	 futility	because
nothing	can	be	done	about	the	past;	it	is	finished,	you	cannot	undo	it.
There	is	no	need	to	waste	a	single	moment	about	it.	I	even	say	there	is	no	need	to
repent	about	 it,	what	has	happened	has	happened	 --	 slip	out	of	 it,	 erase	 it,	 and
nothing	can	be	done	about	the	future	now.	When	it	comes	it	will	come	as	now.
Tomorrow	never	comes,	it	always	comes	as	today.	So	learn	to	act	in	the	now.
There	is	no	need	to	be	full	of	anxiety	about	the	future.
Once	 these	 two	 anxieties	 are	 removed	 life	 becomes	 a	 dance,	 a	 celebration.	So
much	 energy	 is	 released	 in	 you	 that	 you	 have	 to	 dance,	 you	 have	 to	 sing	 a
thousand	and	one	songs.	You	have	to	share	your	joy,	it	starts	overflowing.	It	 is
because	of	anxieties	that	we	are	living	a	very	low-energy	life.	Anxieties	are	like
parasites:	they	go	on	sucking	your	blood.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 all	 anxieties	 and	 just	 to	 be
herenow.	And	the	moment	you	are	herenow	god	is	--	suddenly,	the	experience	of
the	beyond,	suddenly	the	experience	of	the	ultimate.	Less	than	that	is	not	going
to	satisfy	and	one	should	not	settle	for	less	than	that	--	it	is	our	birthright.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
REVELATION,	NOT	INFORMATION
(Wisdom	isn't	 the	same	as	knowledge,	Osho	 tells	Vedama.)	Knowledge	can	be
taught,	wisdom	cannot	 be	 taught.	Wisdom	arises	within	 you,	 it	 is	 a	 growth;	 it
cannot	be	forced	from	the	outside.	And	the	only	way	to	help	it	grow	is	to	remove
all	the	knowledge	that	has	been	stuffed	into	you.
All	people	are	stuffed	with	such	unnecessary	things.
A	very	fat	woman	went	into	a	restaurant.	She	ordered	something	and	waited	and
waited	 and	 finally	 she	 became	very	 and	 she	 called	 the	waiter	 and	 said	 to	 him
'Have	you	forgotten	me?'	The	waiter	said	'No,	I	remember	--	you	are	the	stuffed
tomato!'	 (laughter)	 That's	 the	 way	 waiters	 know	 who	 is	 who.	 But	 that's	 how
people	are	really:	somebody	is	a	stuffed	tomato,	somebody	is	something	else,	but
all	are	stuffed.	And	my	work	is	to	somehow	bring	out	whatsoever	is	stuffed.	So
you	are	empty,	clean,	as	empty	as	the	moment	you	were	born,	as	clean	as	a	clean
slate	 on	which	 nothing	 is	 written.	 And	 then	 scriptures	 start	 appearing	 on	 that
clean	slate	of	their	own	accord.	That	is	wisdom.
When	 you	 are	 empty	 you	 give	 space	 for	 your	 inner	 being	 to	 grow	 --	 that	 is
wisdom.	And	only	wisdom	can	liberate.	Knowledge	creates	bondages.	And	the
knowledgeable	person	 is	a	 stupid	person	pretending	 that	he	 is	not	 stupid	but	a
scholar.	The	knowledgeable	person	is	a	mediocre	person	pretending	that	he	is	a
genius.
But	 how	 can	 you	 be	 a	 genius	 with	 borrowed	 knowledge?	 Genius	 is	 an	 inner
revelation,	it	is	authentically	your	uniqueness	that	makes	you	a	genius.	That's	the
meaning	of	Vedama,	and	that	has	to	become	your	experience	of	life	too.
So	just	try	to	empty	yourself	as	quickly,	as	fast	and	as	totally,	as	possible.	That	is
your	work.	Once	 you	have	 emptied	 yourself	 then	 the	 remaining	work	 is	 god's
work,	 it	 is	 nature's	work.	You	 throw	knowledge	 out	 and	 god	 helps	wisdom	 to
grow.	And	whatsoever	comes	from	god	has	beauty.
CHEERFULNESS	--	OUR	CHURCH
(Osho	 reiterates	 tonight	 that	 blissfulness	 is	 the	 only	 true	 worship.)	 No	 other
ritual	is	needed.	One	need	not	go	to	the	church	or	the	temple	or	to	the	mosque;
wherever	 you	 are	 be	 blissful	 and	 there	 is	 the	 temple.	 The	 temple	 is	 a	 subtle
creation	 of	 your	 own	 energy.	 If	 you	 are	 blissful	 you	 create	 the	 temple	 around
you,	a	certain	aura,	a	light,	a	fragrance.
In	the	temples	we	are	just	doing	pseudo	things.	In	the	temples	we	offer	flowers
which	are	not	ours;	we	borrow	them,	from	the	trees.	They	were	already	offered
to	god	on	the	trees	and	they	were	alive	on	the	trees;	you	have	killed	them,	you
have	murdered	 something	beautiful,	 and	now	you	 are	 offering	 those	murdered
flowers	to	god	and	not	even	feeling	ashamed.
I	have	watched:	particularly	in	India	people	don't	take	the	flowers	of	their	own
plants,	 they	 pick	 them	 from	 the	 neighbours,	 and	 nobody	 can	 prevent	 them
because	 this	 is	 a	 religious	 country	 and	 they	 are	 picking	 flowers	 for	 religious
purposes	--	you	cannot	say	no	to	them.	People	burns	lights	and	candles,	but	they
are	not	theirs;	people	burn	incense	and	create	fragrance	but	all	is	borrowed.
The	real	temple	is	created	by	blissfulness	and	all	these	things	start	happening	on
their	own.	If	you	are	blissful	you	will	 find	a	few	flowers	are	being	offered	but
those	 flowers	 are	of	your	 consciousness,	 there	 is	 light	but	 that	 light	 is	of	your
own	 inner	 flame;	 there	 is	 fragrance	 but	 that	 fragrance	 belongs	 to	 your	 very
being.	This	is	true	worship.
My	sannyasins	are	not	to	become	ritualistic.	The	whole	earth	is	our	temple	--	all
that	 is	 needed	 is	 a	 certain	 inner	 transformation	 in	 you.	And	nothing	 outer	 can
trigger	it;	only	you	can	do	it,	nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you.
So	being	here	with	me	learn	only	one	thing,	and	that	is	blissfulness	--	and	you
have	 learned	 all,	 you	 have	 learned	 the	 whole	 science	 of	 religion.	 In	 fact	 the
Indian	 temples	 were	 created	 in	 the	 same	 way;	 they	 represent	 a	 man	 sitting
cheerfully,	silently.	When	you	sit	in	a	lotus	posture	the	way	Indians	have	always
prayed	and	meditated,	that	is	 the	shape	of	a	temple	too:	exactly	the	same	base,
then	the	body,	then	the	head.
The	 temple	 simply	 represents	 a	 certain	 gesture	 within	 you,	 as	 far	 as	 art	 is
concerned	but	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	religion;	it	is	a	symbolic	piece	of	art.	But
one	should	not	be	deceived	by	symbols,	only	the	real	can	fulfil	you,	not	symbols.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
WITNESSING	BLISS-ENINg
(Osho	speaks	to	Prarthi	on	prayer.)
Prayer	is	not	something	that	you	can	do	once	or	twice	a	day,	not	something	for
which	you	can	have	a	special	 time.	Prayer	 is	a	quality	 that	has	 to	be	grown	so
that	it	remains	with	you	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	even	when	you	are	asleep.
The	 man	 of	 prayer	 remains	 prayerful	 the	 whole	 time.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
praying	at	some	certain	time.
That	means	if	you	pray	for	one	hour	every	day,	for	the	remaining	twenty-three
hour,	 you	 will	 be	 doing	 just	 the	 opposite.	 Then	 how	 is	 that	 one-hour	 prayer
going	to	win?	Out	of	twenty-three	hours	of	no	praying	and	one	hour	of	praying
which	is	going	to	win?
Unless	prayer	becomes	your	very	breathing	it	is	not	possible	for	it	to	happen	at
all.	And	only	one	thing	can	become	a	twenty-four	hour	phenomenon	and	that's
bliss.	One	can	remain	blissful.	A	simple	thing	has	to	be	understood,	and	that	is
witnessing:	whatsoever	happens	in	life	remain	a	witness	and	your	bliss	will	not
be	disturbed.
Success	comes,	don't	think	it	is	your	success,	and	failure	comes,	don't	think	it	is
your	failure.	All	are	accidental,	coincidences	--	success	and	failure	both,	richness
and	poverty	both,	fame	or	no	fame.
Whatsoever	 happens	 is	 accidental;	 only	 one	 thing	 is	 not	 accidental	 and	 that	 is
your	witness,	 the	one	who	goes	on	watching	 the	whole	 scene.	Sometimes	 it	 is
cloudy	 and	 sometimes	 it	 is	 sunny:	 watch	 both	 with	 equanimity,	 with	 an
equilibrium,	with	no	 choice,	with	no	preference.	And	you	will	 be	 surprised,	 if
you	 can	 do	 this	 witnessing	 you	 will	 find	 a	 strange	 thing	 happening,	 you	 are
constantly	blissful	for	no	reason	at	all.
Bliss	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 witnessing	 and	 once	 it	 has	 started	 happening	 then	 it
continues	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	Even	in	the	night	you	will	be	witnessing	your
dreams.	And	ultimately	you	will	be	able	 to	witness	dreamless	sleep	 too.	When
there	are	no	dreams	to	witness	you	will	witness	the	dreamless	sleep.	But	you	will
remain	 constantly	 a	 witness.	 And	 with	 that	 witness	 the	 fragrance	 of	 bliss
continuously	surrounds	you.	To	be	that	is	prayer:	a	twenty-four	a	day	offering	to
existence.
All	else	that	goes	on	in	the	name	of	prayer	is	pseudo.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011155
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
FLOWER	POWER
A	 sannyasin	 cannot	 be	 a	 rock;	 he	 has	 to	 be	 a	 flower.	 The	 rock	 represents
hardness,	the	flower	represents	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
softness.	The	rock	represents	destructiveness,	the	flower	is	creativity.
Every	rock	has	to	become	a	flower;	every	rock	has	the	seed	to	become	a	flower,
it	has	 the	potential.	But	one	has	 to	discover	 the	 flower,	one	has	 to	 remove	 the
rock	chunk	by	chunk	so	only	the	flower	is	left.	The	flower	is	the	very	centre	of
the	rock.	In	fact	the	rock	is	not	your	enemy,	it	protects	the	flower	until	the	time	is
ripe.
So	one	should	not	be	against	 the	 rock	but	one	should	not	cling	 to	 it	either.	Be
thankful	 to	 it	 but	 now	 the	 moment	 has	 come	 to	 discard	 it.	 Now	 let	 it	 be
something	that	is	past,	that	is	no	more	relevant,	that	will	not	have	any	meaning
in	 the	future.	Now	the	future	belongs	 to	 the	flower.	Think	of	yourself	as	being
more	like	a	flower	with	all	its	softness,	vulnerability,	delicateness,	feminineness,
receptivity.
The	flower	lives	very	momentarily,	it	is	not	stable.	The	rock	is	far	more	stable,	it
is	almost	permanent.
The	flower	is	born	in	the	morning	and	may	be	gone	by	the	evening	yet	for	those
few	moments	that	it	lived	it	really	lived.	It	danced	in	the	wind,	in	the	sun,	in	the
rain	--	it	rejoiced.
The	rock	may	be	almost	permanent	but	it	is	dead,	it	lives	not.	Durability	has	no
value.	Even	a	single	moment	of	total	aliveness	is	far	more	significant	than	being
dead	for	the	whole	of	eternity.
So	let	the	rock	be	the	past	and	the	flower	the	future.
PARIJAT	IS	THE	NAME	OF	AN	EASTERN	FLOWER
Parijat	is	the	name	of	an	Eastern	flower.
Flowers	 represent	many	 things.	The	one	 thing	 that	 is	 the	most	 important	of	all
those	is	the	phenomenon	of	flowering,	of	opening.
Man	 is	 also	 a	 flower,	 but	 closed	 like	 a	 bud.	And	unless	we	make	 a	 deliberate
effort,	unless	we	help,	it	won't	open	on	its	own.	Society	has	created	every	kind	of
hindrance	 for	 its	 opening.	 Society	 is	 against	 the	 ultimate	 flowering	 of	 man
because	 the	moment	 a	man	 flowers	 he	 becomes	 transcendental	 to	 all	 kinds	 of
social	 formalities,	 structures,	 religions,	 nations,	 ideologies	 --	 and	 everybody	 is
afraid	of	that	transcendence.
That	 means	 one	 has	 gone	 beyond	 all	 that	 you	 cherish	 and	 think	 of	 as	 very
valuable.
To	 the	 transcendental	 consciousness	 all	 social	 morality	 is	 childish,	 stupid.
Nations	 and	 politics	 are	 only	 for	 the	mediocre,	 for	 the	 unintelligent;	 they	 are
almost	for	the	insane.
It	has	happened	just	now	in	America:	the	whole	country	has	gone	from	choosing
a	 peanut	 as	 president	 to	 choosing	 a	 big	 nut!	 And	 this	 goes	 on	 happening
everywhere	 --	 small	 nuts	 are	 replaced	 by	 bigger	 nuts.	 Only	 bigger	 nuts	 can
replace	 them	because	only	 the	bigger	can	push	 them	out;	otherwise	 they	won't
budge	an	inch.
The	man	who	becomes	transcendental	is	no	longer	a	Hindu	nor	a	Christian	nor	a
Mohammedan,	is	neither	German	nor	French	nor	Indian;	he	transcends	all	these
limitations.	 That's	 why	 no	 society	 wants	 anybody	 to	 flower:	 people	 should
remain	 mediocre,	 ungrown-up,	 because	 those	 ungrown-up	 people	 are	 always
dependent	on	 leaders,	on	priests,	on	popes,	on	 imams	and	ayatollahs.	They	are
always	dependent	on	somebody.	They	have	to	be	--	they	need	a	father	figure.
The	 ungrown-up	 person's	mental	 age	 remains	 somewhere	 nearabout	 twelve	 or
fourteen;	 he	 never	 goes	 beyond	 that.	 Millions	 of	 people	 die	 at	 the	 age	 of
fourteen.	That	 is	 their	psychological	age	and	 that	 is	 the	age	of	 their	death	 too.
Then	 only	 the	 body	 goes	 on	 living	 but	 their	 soul	 remains	 absolutely	 dead,
repetitive.
Sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 remove	 the	 barriers.	And	 they	 can	 be	 easily
removed,	 the	 only	 thing	 is	 that	 you	 have	 to	 become	 conscious	 of	 what	 the
barriers	are.	They	can	easily	be	removed	because	you	can	just	throw	them	away,
nobody	 can	 prevent	 you.	 You	 can	 simply	 drop	 out	 of	 all	 "isms,"	 ideologies,
churches.
Who	can	prevent	you?	You	can	 simply	use	nations	 for	normal	purposes	 --	 the
passport,	 the	visa	 --	 otherwise	deep	down	you	 can	be	 free.	You	need	not	 be	 a
German	 or	 an	 Italian,	 just	 to	 be	 human	 is	 enough.	You	 need	 not	 be	 identified
with	any	race.
Once	 all	 these	 hindrances	 are	 removed,	meditation	 becomes	 very	 simple.	And
meditation	 is	 a	nourishment	 for	 the	 flower,	 it	 is	 like	 the	 sun	 rising:	 as	 the	 sun
rises	the	flower	starts	opening.
So	remove	the	barriers	and	start	meditating	and	becoming	silent	--	and	the	sun
will	rise	in	its	own	time	and	the	flower	will	open	up.
(Osho	 names	 another	 sannyasin,	 Harsinger;	 it's	 also	 the	 name	 of	 a	 flower.)
Flowers	 are	 songs	 of	 nature,	 existence	 rejoicing.	 The	 flower	 is	 really	 the
language	of	delight.	In	its	own	way	nature	is	saying	that	it	is	happy,	celebrating.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	flowers	on	a	higher	plane	so	that	god	can	feel	millions
of	people	around	the	earth	rejoicing.	Sannyas	is	also	only	a	language	of	delight.	I
don't	teach	you	anything	about	hell	and	heaven	and	life	after	death;	I	only	teach
you	life	herenow,	and	how	to	be	colourful,	fragrant,	how	to	dance	and	sing	and
how	to	show	your	gratitude	towards	existence.	That	is	enough	and	that	takes	care
of	everything	else.
No	other	 religion	 is	 needed;	 just	 be	 a	 flower,	 and	 in	 that	 very	being	you	have
prayed	--	you	have	surrendered,	you	have	expressed	your	gratitude.
(Madhukamini	is	the	name	of	a	flowers	and	one	that	is	among	his	favourites	--
Osho	tells	another	sannyasin.)
It	has	a	special	way:	when	the	Madhukamini	flowers	then	thousands	of	flowers
come	to	the	tree.	They	don't	come	in	small	numbers	they	explode;	the	whole	tree
becomes	just	flowers.
And	 another	 beautiful	 thing	 about	 the	 Madhukamini	 is	 that	 It	 blooms	 in	 the
night.	 Flowers	 ordinarily	 bloom	 in	 the	 day,	 they	 need	 the	 sun.	 Only	 very
courageous	 flowers	 bloom	 in	 the	 night.	 They	 don't	 bother	 about	 the	 sun	 and
darkness	does	not	disturb	them	at	all.	It	is	a	white	flowers	you	can	see	it	even	in
darkness.
And	the	third	thing	about	Madhukamini	is	that	with	just	a	small	breeze	its	petals
start	 falling	 down,	 showering	 like	 rain.	 In	 the	 morning	 yoU	will	 find	 a	 thick
layer	of	petals	all	around	the	tree,	and	it	is	so	fragrant	that	just	one	single	tree	is
enough	for	at	least	half	a	mile.
I	would	like	my	sannyasins	to	be	like	Madhukamini	because	the	night	is	really
dark.	Humanity	is	passing	through	a	very	dark	space;	unless	we	decide	to	flower
in	darkness	there	is	no	possibility	of	flowering.
Individual	flowers	have	happened	--	a	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Lao	Tzu
--	 but	 that	 is	 not	 going	 to	 change	 humanity.	 That	 is	 just	 like	 your	 pouring	 a
spoonful	of	sugar	into	the	ocean	and	hoping,	that	the	ocean	will	become	sweet.	It
is	hoping	against	hope.
We	need	an	explosion,	 thousands	of	Buddhas	are	needed	around	the	earth;	 less
than	that	won't	do.
Unless	millions	of	people	bloom	humanity	cannot	grow.	And	 it	has	 come	 to	a
point	where	either	it	has	to	grow	or	it	has	to	commit	suicide.	It	has	never	been	so
crucial	before.	Nature	has	brought	man	to	the	ultimate	point	where	a	decision	is
needed,	a	conscious	decision.	Nature	is	not	going	to	help	any	more,	nature	has
done	its	work.	As	far	as	nature	is	concerned	its	work	is	complete.	Now	man	has
to	 take	his	own	evolution	 in	his	own	hands	 --	 and	 that's	 the	whole	purpose	of
sannyas.
MISERY	MAKES	MONADS	OF	MEN
The	miserable	person	becomes	closed.	That	is	the	nature	of	misery,	the	intrinsic
nature	of	misery,	 that	 it	 closes	you;	 all	 the	windows,	 all	 the	doors,	 are	 closed.
You	are	afraid,	so	much	so	that	you	withdraw	within	yourself.	Misery	makes	one
introvert	and	introversion	is	a	kind	of	morbidity,	it	is	slow	suicide.
One	should	be	capable	of	going	in	but	one	should	also	be	capable	of	going	out.
One	should	remain	free;	one	should	not	become	obsessed	either	with	the	inner	or
with	 the	 outer,	 because	 both	 together	 make	 our	 lifes	 both	 together	 create	 the
harmony,	the	balance.
The	 categories	 into	 which	 Jung	 has	 divided	 humanity	 are	 true	 as	 far	 as	 the
humanity	 that	 exists	 today	 is	 concerned	 --	 but	 they	 should	 not	 be	 true	 for	 the
future.	 Jung	 divides	 humanity	 into	 the	 extrovert	 and	 the	 introvert	 but	 that
division	 has	 to	 be	 dissolved;	 one	 should	 become	 capable	 of	 both.	 And	 the
miracle	is	that	the	moment	you	are	capable	of	both	you	transcend	both.	Only	the
transcendental	can	be	capable	of	moving	 in	and	moving	out.	Something	 that	 is
neither	 in	nor	out	can	move	between	 the	 two.	The	 in	cannot	come	out,	 the	out
cannot	go	in;	a	third	element,	which	can	have	the	movement,	is	needed.
Misery	makes	people	introverts.	It	is	a	kind	of	psychological	grave.	Blissfulness
makes	 people	 more	 communicative,	 more	 available,	 more	 open,,more
vulnerable,	more	 healthy.	Extroverts	 are	 always	 healthier	 than	 introverts	 --	 for
the	simple	reason	that	they	relate	with	life,	and	life	is	god.	And	when	you	relate,
when	you	rejoice,	when	you	share	with	existence,	existence	also	responds.	It	is
not	indifferent	to	you,	it	is	a	very	loving	existence.	If	we	are	blissful	it	showers
its	love	on	us.
So	the	first	thing	is	to	become	blissful,	because	humanity	is	almost	crippled	and
paralysed	because	of	its	misery.
We	have	lived	the	misery	and	the	pattern	of	misery	for	so	long	that	it	has	almost
become	our	life	style.
In	 fact	people	 think	 the	more	miserable	 a	person	 is,	 the	holier	he	 is;	 the	more
sad,	the	more	serious,	the	longer	the	face	the	greater	saint	people	think	he	is.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Christians	 say	 Jesus	 never	 laughed,	 never	 in	 his	 whole	 life.	 It	 does	 not	 say
anything	about	Jesus,	it	simply	says	something	about	the	Christians:	that	is	their
idea	 of	 a	 perfect	 saint.	 How	 can	 a	 perfect	 saint	 like	 Christ	 laugh?	 --	 laughter
seems	to	be	so	human	and	he	is	the	son	of	god.
This	 is	a	very	ugly	approach	 towards	 life,	very	 ill,	 sick,	 sickening,	nauseating.
My	 approach	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 it.	 To	 me	 laughter	 is	 prayer,	 to	 me
blissfulness	is	virtue,	because	it's	only	through	laughter	and	blissfulness	that	you
will	become	a	beloved	of	god.
Yes,	one	should	also	be	capable	of	going	in,	because	there	too	god	exists.	He	is
within,	he	is	without,	and	he	should	be	tasted	in	every	possible	way.	He	should
be	 experienced	 from	 all	 possible	 aspects	 and	 dimensions	 --	 and	 these	 two	 are
very	fundamental	dimensions.	But	first	one	should	experience	god	through	bliss
by	communicating	with	stars	and	trees	and	rivers	and	mountains,	by	communing
with	 people,	 animals,	 birds.	 That	 is	 a	 natural	 phenomenon.	 When	 you	 have
experienced	god	without,	then	it	is	easy	to	move	in.
Now	you	know	that	if	god	exists	in	everything	he	must	exist	in	you	too.	It	can't
be	otherwise;	he	 is	 life	 and	you	are	 alive	 and	he	 is	 everywhere	 --	how	can	he
miss	you?	He	must	be	there	too.
The	experience	of	god	in	the	universe,	in	its	beauty,	in	its	splendour,	makes	one
trust	going	in	to	the	deepest	core,	to	dive	deep.	Then	the	interior	and	the	exterior
become	one,	then	it	is	one	spectrum	and	you	can	easily	move	from	one	polarity
to	 the	 other.	When	 a	 person	 is	 capable	 of	moving	between	 the	 both	with	 ease
then	he	is	a	sannyasin.
I	am	against	monks	and	nuns	and	the	people	who	have	renounced	the	world	--
they	are	all	morbid,	sick,	cowardly,	afraid.	It	is	out	of	fear	that	they	have	become
closed.
One	 should	 go	 inside	 to	 discover,	 not	 out	 of	 fear	 but	 on	 an	 exploration.	 The
inner-going	consciousness	should	be	an	adventure,	not	out	of	any	fear.	There	is
no	need	to	be	afraid,	there	is	nothing	to	be	afraid	of.	If	only	god	is	then	how	can
there	be	anything	to	be	afraid	of?
So	to	me	the	first	thing	is	to	be	blissful	--	that	will	help	you	to	experience	god	in
manifold	 forms	 around	 you	 --	 and	 then	 enquire	 within.	 And	 then	 remain
available	for	both,	never	cling	to	any	one	aspect.
The	truth	can	be	true	only	if	it	is	whole.	The	moment	you	divide	it	you	destroy
it.
GOD:	AS	CLOSE	AS	YOU	ARE	CONSCIOUS
Meditation	is	a	certain	kind	of	archery;	god	is	the	target	and	we	are	the	arrows.
And	once	we	are	clear	about	 the	goal	 then	 the	arrow	starts	moving	 in	a	direct
line,	it	does	not	go	zigzag.
Jesus	 says	 the	 path	 to	 god	 is	 narrow	 but	 straight.	 Both	 qualifications	 are
significant.	 It	 is	 narrow,	 narrow	 because	 only	 one	 person	 can	walk	 on	 it.	You
cannot	 take	 somebody	with	 you,	 you	 have	 to	 go	 alone,	 hence	 it	 is	 narrow,	 so
narrow	that	you	cannot	even	take	your	friend,	your	beloved,	with	you.	You	have
to	go	alone;	nobody	can	go	in	a	crowd.	And	it	is	straight;	nobody	can	go	zigzag,
one	can	only	go	like	an	arrow.
The	 whole	 thing	 is	 to	 be	 aware	 that	 god	 is	 our	 target.	 In	 everything	 we	 are
searching	for	god.	That's	why	there	is	so	much	frustration	in	life.
You	 love	 a	 person	 but	 it	 is	 not	 long	 before	misery	 starts	 settling	 in.	All	 those
fantasies	of	the	honeymoon	days	are	finished.	They	don't	last	long;	soon	there	is
despair,	a	kind	of	hopelessness.	Why?	The	analysis	that	people	make	is	wrong;
they	think	this	person	has	failed	them	and	the	same	is	the	attitude	of	the	other,	he
thinks	you	have	failed	him	or	her.	Nobody	has	failed	anybody,	in	fact	both	were
searching	for	god	and	god	has	not	been	found.	They	were	imagining	god	in	their
lovers	 and	 they	 have	 found	 only	 very	 limited	 human	 beings	with	 all	 kinds	 of
ugliness,	possessiveness,	jealousy.	Their	idea	was	of	something	divine	and	what
they	have	found	is	very	ordinary	--	that's	the	frustration.
When	 people	 fall	 in	 love,	 they	 always	 fall	 in	 love	with	 god.	 In	 the	 beginning
lovers	 always	 think	 of	 the	 other	 as	 divine.	 The	 man	 thinks	 he	 has	 found	 the
woman,	the	woman	he	has	been	searching	for	his	whole	life.	The	woman	may	be
absolutely	crazy.
Now,	Teertha	is	here	sitting	just	behind	you:	he	has	found	Krishna	--	one	of	the
craziest	women	in	the	whole	commune	--	and	he	thinks	this	is	the	woman	he	has
been	searching	for	his	whole	life!
But	how	long	can	you	think	that?	Within	two	or	three	days	Krishna	will	reveal
her	reality	and	then	Teertha	will	say,	"My	god!	--	is	this	the	woman	I	have	been
looking	for	my	whole	life?"	But	this	happens	to	every	lover.
And	 it	 is	 not	 only	 about	 love	 but	 about	 everything.	The	 person	who	has	 been
searching	for	money	thinks	that	once	he	has	got	enough	money,	so	many	million
dollars,	he	will	feel	at	ease	--	arrived	--	and	there	will	be	no	need	to	worry	and
no	need	to	be	miserable;	then	he	can	rest	and	enjoy	life.	By	the	time	he	reaches
the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
point	suddenly	he	realizes	that	the	money	is	there	but	there	is	no	relaxation,	no
rest,	no	joy.	He	is	as	miserable	as	before	or	even	more,	because	at	 least	before
there	was	a	certain	hope;	even	that	hope	has	left.
My	own	observation	 is	 that	people	are	searching	for	god	 in	 love,	 in	money,	 in
prestige,	and	they	are	going	to	fail	everywhere	because	god	cannot	be	found	this
way;	they	are	looking	in	the	wrong	direction.
They	are	not	conscious	of	their	search.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	absolutely	conscious	of	the	search,	conscious	that	we	are
looking	 for	 the	ultimate	 truth	 in	 everything.	Once	 this	 is	 clear	 then	everything
else	 becomes	 secondary	 and	god	 is	 the	 only	 quest,	 then	 life	 can	move	 like	 an
arrow,	directly.	And	the	miracle	can	happen	even	in	a	single	moment.	If	one	is
really	conscious	then	god	is	not	far	away.
The	distance	between	god	and	you	is	really	the	distance	of	consciousness;	if	you
are	unconscious	then	god	is	far	away.	The	more	unconscious	you	are	the	farther
away	 he	 is;	 the	 more	 conscious	 you	 are,	 the	 closer.	 If	 you	 are	 absolutely
conscious	then	this	very	moment	god	is	possible	--	because	god	surrounds	you.
He	is	your	breath,	he	is	your	very	heartbeat.
LOVE	--	THE	SOUL'S	SCENT
The	Sufis	have	one	hundred	names	for	god,	in	fact,	ninety-nine,	because	one	is
not	spoken	and	cannot	be	spoken	but	it	has	to	be	counted.	It	is	silent.	That	is	the
truest	name,	the	hundredth,	but	there	is	no	way	to	say	it.	Ninety-nine	names	are
ninety-nine	aspects.	Kamil	is	one	of	the	aspects	of	god:	perfection.	And	the	thing
that	man	can	bring	closest	 to	perfection	 is	 love.	 It	 is	because	of	 this	 that	Jesus
said	god	 is	 love,	because	 in	 the	human	experience	 the	most	perfect	experience
possible	is	that	of	love;	all	other	experiences	are	going	to	be	very	imperfect.
For	example,	one	can	have	great	physical	strength	but	it	cannot	be	perfect.	Even
the	greatest	wrestler	has	to	die;	in	fact	the	wrestlers	die	early	deaths	and	they	die
out	of	very	dangerous	diseases.	Gama	died	of	 tuberculosis.	 In	 those	days	 there
was	no	medicine	for	tuberculosis.	He	had	the	most	perfect	body	possible	but	he
died	very	early.	The	body	has	limitations,	the	mind	has	also	limitations;	even	the
most	perfect	mind	has	its	flaws.
Even	a	man	like	Albert	Einstein,	who	is	certainly	the	greatest	mathematician	in
the	whole	of	human	history,	used	to	commit	such	errors	in	his	calculations	that
even	 a	 school	 child	 would	 laugh.	 He	 himself	 was	 puzzled	 at	 how	 he	 could
manage	 to	 know	 about	 the	 infinite	 universe	 when	 he	 committed	 such	 small
errors.
Once	 it	 happened	 that	 he	 was	 travelling	 in	 a	 bus,	 he	 gave	 the	 fare	 to	 the
conductor	 and	 the	 conductor	 gave	 him	 back	 some	 change.	 Einstein	 counted	 it
and	 he	 said	 'This	 is	 not	 enough,	 give	 me	 more.'	 The	 conductor	 counted	 the
change	again	and	gave	it	back	to	him	and	said	'This	is	perfectly	okay.'	Einstein
counted	again	and	he	said	 'No,	this	is	not	right.'	And	the	man	said	 'That	means
you	don't	know	how	to	count
--	get	lost!'	He	was	not	aware	that	this	man	was	Albert	Einstein,	and	what	he	is
saying	 to	 him	 'You	 don't	 know	 how	 to	 count,	 you	 don't	 know	 even	 a	 little
arithmetic.	Don't	bother	me	and	don't	bite	my	head	off.'
Albert	 Einstein	 has	 recounted	 in	 his	 memoirs	 that	 it	 was	 a	 shock	 but	 the
conductor	 was	 right:	 when	 Einstein	 counted,	 the	 conductor	 was	 right	 and
Einstein	was	wrong.
Mind	 has	 its	 limitations	 because	 it	 is	 a	 machine.	 Only	 one	 thing	 has	 no
limitations,	 and	 that	 is	 love,	 because	 it	 is	 beyond	 body-mind;	 it	 is	 the	 only
spiritual	 quality.	 Love	 is	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the	 soul,	 hence	 it	 comes	 closest	 to
perfection.	 Living	 a	 life	 of	 love	 is	 living	 a	 life	 of	 prayer,	 religiousness,
spirituality.
My	whole	message	is	of	love.	Love	unconditionally,	love	for	no	other	reason	but
for	love's	sake	--	and	that	will	bring	you	closer	and	closer	to	god	every	moment
of	your	life.	And	in	fact	when	love	is	perfect	god	immediately	happens,	because
love's	perfection	and	god's	happening	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
THERE'LL	ALWAYS	BE	AN	INNER-LAND
(And	 unless	 we	 explore	 it	 we	 will	 remain	 outsiders	 to	 ourselves,	 Osho	 tells
Swami	 Svadesh.)	 Svadesh	 means	 one's	 true	 country,	 one's	 own	 country.	 To
translate	it	is	a	little	bit	difficult	because	'sva'
means	your	innermost	self	and	'desh'	means	the	land,	the	country	--	the	country
of	 your	 innermost	 self.	 It	 is	 unexplored,	 and	 man	 is	 so	 mad	 that	 he	 goes	 on
exploring	everything	else.
He	will	 go	 to	Everest,	 to	 the	North	Pole,	 to	 the	South	Pole,	 he	will	 go	 to	 the
moon.	Now	 he	 is	 trying	 to	 reach	 to	Mars	 and	 soon	 he	will	 be	 going	 to	 other
planets;	preparations	are	on	the	way,	projects	are	on	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
way.	And	nobody	exactly	bothers	about	why.
What	are	you	going	to	do	even	if	you	reach	the	moon?	You	will	be	the	same	fool
as	 you	 are	 here.	What	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 on	 the	moon?	You	will	 fight	 in	 the
same	 old	way.	Christians	will	 be	Christians,	Hindus	will	 be	Hindus,	 Russians
will	be	Russians,	Americans	will	be	Americans,	and	they	will	start	dividing	the
territories	and	they	will	start	putting	up	their	flags	and	fighting.	The	same	thing
will	 be	 repeated	 on	 the	moon,	 on	Mars,	 on	 every	 planet	 wherever	man	 goes,
because	unless	you	change	nothing	is	going	to	happen.
The	 whole	 misery	 is	 because	 one	 thing	 remains	 unexplored,	 and	 that	 is	 our
innermost	territory.	And	that	is	where	the	light	is,	that	is	where	the	potential	for
transformation	exists.
Sannyas	means	a	decision	to	explore	your	inner	world;	it	is	the	search	for	your
real	country.	Unless	you	have	found	it	wherever	you	are,	you	are	going	to	remain
a	foreigner.	Even	in	your	so-called	country	you	will	be	a	foreigner.	Only	the	man
who	has	discovered	himself	is	at	home.	Wherever	he	is	he	is	at	home	because	he
has	found	the	home.
WOMB	IN	THE	IN
Man	is	not	only	miserly	in	giving,	he	is	even	more	miserly	in	receiving,	because
in	fact	as	far	as	giving	is	concerned	it	 is	not	against	 the	ego;	the	ego	enjoys	it.
You	are	the	giver,	you	are	higher	than	the	person	to	whom	you	are	giving.	But
ego	feels	very	humiliated	in	receiving	because	ego	feels	you	are	 lower	and	the
person	 who	 is	 giving	 is	 higher.	 and	 all	 that	 is	 significant	 in	 life	 has	 to	 be
received,	it	cannot	be	achieved.
Love	cannot	be	 achieved,	 truth	 cannot	be	 achieved,	peace	cannot	be	 achieved,
god	cannot	be	achieved;	you	 just	have	 to	be	 receptive	 like	a	womb,	available.
You	have	to	become	a	host.	And	unless	you	trust	existence	you	cannot	be	a	host.
If	 you	 are	 too	 cautious	 then	you	 cannot	welcome	 everything	 and	 in	 your	 very
cautiousness	you	will	miss	the	real	guest.
God	 is	missed	 because	 people	 are	 not	 ready	 to	 receive,	 otherwise	 god	 comes
every	moment	and	knocks	on	your	door.	There	is	no	need	to	go	in	search	of	god,
god	in	continuously	searching	for	you,	but	you	are	not	ready	to	receive.	And	it	is
such	a	great	gift	 that	unless	you	put	your	whole	ego	aside	you	will	not	be	in	a
welcoming	mood.
To	welcome	existence	simply	means	to	surrender	the	ego.	In	the	very	surrender
of	the	ego	your	heart	opens	and	becomes	just	a	welcome	--	and	then	miracles	are
possible.	And	everybody	is	entitled	to	miracles.
If	they	are	not	happening	then	you	are	not	allowing	them	to	happen	--	remember
it!
INNO-SCENTS:	THE	FRAGRANCE	OF	SAGE
Pavitro	means	 pure,	 innocent	 --	 pure	 not	 in	 the	 sense	 of	morality,	 pure	 in	 the
sense	 of	 innocence.	 One	 has	 not	 to	 become	 a	 saint	 one	 has	 to	 become	 like	 a
child.	That	is	the	difference	between	the	saint	and	the	sage:	the	sage	is	childlike
and	the	saint	is	very	calculative,	each	of	his	moves	is	very	calculated.	He	is	like
a	 chess-players	 he	 contemplates	 at	 least	 three	 or	 four	 or	 five	moves	 ahead	 of
time:	 'If	 I	do	 this	what	will	happen?	If	 I	do	 this	am	I	going	 to	 fall	 into	hell	or
reach	heaven?	If	I	do	this	will	I	be	accumulating	virtue	or	not?	and	how	much?
The	saint	is	basically	a	Jew.	All	saints	are	Jews	and	all	Jews	are	saints!	(laughter)
The	whole	thing	is	businesslike.
The	 sage	 is	 innocent.	He	 lives	 like	 a	 child.	 That's	what	 Jesus	means	when	 he
says	 'Unless	you	are	like	small	children	you	will	not	enter	into	the	kingdom	of
god.'	Now,	he	couldn't	mean	saints	because	 they	are	never	 like	 small	 children.
He	must	have	meant	sages.
Christianity	has	avoided	even	the	word.	In	Christianity	sages	have	not	existed	at
all,	only	saints	--	and	Christians	have	a	very	ugly	meaning	of	the	word	'saint'.
In	Sanskrit	also	the	word	exists	as	'sant';	--	it	is	the	same	word	as	'saint'	--	but	in
Sanskrit	it	means	one	who	has	achieved	truth.	'Sat'	means	truth	and	'sant'	means
one	who	 has	 achieved	 it	 --	 but	 the	Christian	meaning	 of	 saint	 is	 very	 ugly.	 It
means	one	who	has	been	given	sanction	by	the	church,	that	yes,	he	is	a	saint.	He
is	sanctioned,	certified	--	-that	is	the	meaning	of	the	Christian	saint.
So	sometimes	it	happens	that	they	give	posthumous	sainthood.	The	person	may
have	died	three	hundred	years	ago.	In	fact	he	may	have	been	condemned	by	the
Christians	and	then	later	on	they	start	feeling	guilty;	they	find	out	that	that	was
not	the	right	step,	so	they	make	him	a	saint.
It	happens	 in	 the	 reverse	order	 too:	a	 saint	may	have	died	 three	hundred	years
ago	--	he	was	sanctioned	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
by	 the	 church,	 then	 later	 on	 they	 discover	 that	 he	 was	 not	 really	 a	 saint	 --
according	to	the	rules	(laughter),	so	they	take	the	certificate	back!
You	will	be	surprised	that	it	has	even	happened	--	this	is	unbelievable	--	that	one
saint	 who	 died	 three	 hundred	 years	 ago	 had	 his	 certificate	 taken	 away	 --	 and
when	you	 take	away	 the	certificate,	of	 course,	 something	has	 to	be	done.	And
what	can	you	do?	--	 the	man	has	been	dead	for	 three	hundred	years.	His	grave
was	 dug	 up	 and	 his	 bones	 were	 taken	 out	 and	 dragged	 along	 the	 road,	 and
insulted	 in	 every	 possible	 way...	 because	 what	 else	 can	 you	 do?	 For	 three
hundred	years	you	have	worshipped	the	wrong	person,	now	the	balance	has	to	be
put	right.
Just	now	this	Polack	pope	has	reopened	the	case	of	Galileo,	because	now	they
recognise	that	it	was	foolish	to	ask	him	to	change	his	idea,	his	hypothesis	that	the
earth	goes	around	the	sun.	They	had	called	old	Galileo	--	he	was	seventy-five	or
more	--	from	his	deathbed.	He	was	dragged	to	the	court	of	the	pope	and	he	was
forced	to	kneel	down	and	he	was	told	to	ask	forgiveness	for	the	sin	that	he	has
committed	against	the	Bible	--	because	the	Bible	says	the	sun	moves	around	the
earth	and	how	could	he	dare	to	go	against	the	sacred	scripture?
Galileo	must	have	been	a	very	sensible	man.	He	said	 'That's	perfectly	right	--	I
must	be	wrong.	How	can	I	be	right	against	the	scripture?	--	the	scripture	has	to
be	right.	So	forgive	me.'	And	when	he	was	getting	up	one	of	his	friends	said	'Are
you	really	changing	your	hypothesis?'	Galileo	said	 'What	 is	wrong	in	changing
the	hypothesis?	because	my	changing	of	the	hypothesis	is	not	going	to	make	any
difference	at	all;	the	truth	is	that	the	earth	goes	around	the	sun.	Even	if	I	change
it	the	earth	is	not	going	to	listen	to	me,	neither	is	the	sun	going	to	listen	to	me.
Why	should	I	get	into	unnecessary	trouble?'
The	 case	 was	 closed	 because	 he	 asked	 forgiveness,	 but	 now	 they	 are	 feeling
guilty	because	now	it	is	absolutely	a	fact....	It	looks	ugly	that	the	church	did	this
stupid	thing	with	Galileo,	so,	the	pope	has	ordered	the	case	to	be	opened	again,
and	for	things	to	be	put	right.
The	 Christian	 idea	 of	 a	 saint	 is	 just	 like	 a	 certificate	 of	 a	 university	 you	 are
certified,	you	have	followed	the	rules	and	regulations.	But	that	is	possible	only	if
the	man	has	been	very	calculative.	In	fact	I	don't	think,	if	Christians	were	asked
to	issue	a	certificate	for	Jesus,	 that	 they	would	be	willing	to.	I	don't	 think	they
would	because	he	never	followed	their	rules	and	regulations;	he	cannot	be	given
saint-hood.
Nobody	 has	 asked	 --	 nobody	 has	 raised	 the	 question,	 but	 I	 want	 to	 raise	 the
question	(laughter)...
whether	Jesus	is	a	saint	or	not.	What	kind	of	saint	is	he?	He	showed	nothing	of
the	 sainthoodness	 that	 is	 expected	 of	 Christians.	 He	 moved	 with	 prostitutes,
gamblers,	 drunkards,	 he	 enjoyed	 eating,	 drinking	 and	merrying.	He	must	 have
been	a	man	more	like	Zorba	than	like	a	saint.	If	he	were	a	saint	the	Jews	would
not	have	crucified	him.
He	was	 a	 sage,	 certainly,	 but	 not	 a	 saint.	 But	 that	word	 does	 not	 exist	 in	 the
Christian	vocabulary.	Sage	 is	a	Taoist	 terminology;	Lao	Tzu	 is	a	sage,	Chuang
Tzu	is	a	sage.	They	don't	talk	about	saints,	saints	are	just	very	ordinary	people.
Sinners	are	against	the	social	rules	and	saints	are	fulfilling	the	same	rules.	They
are	not	very	different;	as	far	as	their	quality	is	concerned	they	belong	to	the	same
category.	But	the	sage	transcends	them	both.	When	I	use	the	word	'pure'	I	mean
the	sage,	not	the	saint.
Be	like	small	children.	Rejoice,	wonder,	live	in	awe!	Each	moment	life	brings	so
many	surprises	that	it	is	strange	that	people	are	not	living	in	a	continuous	'Aha!'
'Aha!'	and...
(There	is	a	peal	of	laughter.	Osho	pauses	--	then	says:)	Say	it	loudly!	You	said	it
very...(more	 laughter)	 only	 in	 the	 heart;	 say	 it	 loudly	 --	 aha!	You	will	 have	 to
learn!
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Four	days.
--	Aha!	(gales	of	laughter)
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
16	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011165
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
PRAIRIE	OR	PARADISE
Man	is	born	with	a	great	potential	to	flower,	he	is	born	to	become	a	garden,	an
oasis.	 But	what	 really	 happens	 is	 very	 unfortunate:	 ninety-nine	 point	 nine	 per
cent	of	people	remain	just	deserts	And	the	simple	reason	is	that	we	never	think
of	life	as	an	opportunity	to	grow;	we	take	it	for	granted,	we	accept	it	as	if	 it	 is
already	 complete.	We	 think	of	 it	 as	 a	 thing	 --	 and	 it	 is	 a	 process	 --	 it	 is	 not	 a
thing.	 It	begins	 in	birth	but	 it	does	not	end	anywhere;	 it	goes	on	and	on,	even
beyond	death.
A	sannyasin	has	to	think	of	life	as	an	opportunity,	as	a	process,	as	a	potential,	as
a	challenge	for	growth.
And	then	bliss	is	yours.	Once	you	start	consciously	thinking	in	these	terms	you
enter	into	a	different	dimension;	the	desert	is	transformed	into	a	garden.	And	to
be	 a	 garden	 is	 to	 be	 in	 paradise.	 That	 is	 exactly	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 word
'paradise'.	It	comes	from	the	Persian,	'firdaus'	--	-firdaus	means	a	garden.
CELEBRATE	AND	YE	WILL	FIND
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	like	flowers.	Just	as	the	sword	represents	violence	and
war,	 the	 flower	 represents	 love	 and	 peace.	 My	 sannyasins	 are	 really	 flower
people!	We	are	not	fighting	with	anybody	we	are	not	 integrated	 in	any	fight	 --
we	 are	 not	 at	 all	 concerned	with	 any	 religious	 crusade.	We	 are	 not	 Jehovah's
witnesses,	we	are	not	Christians,	neither	Mohammedans	nor	Hindus	--	they	have
always	been	warring,	 fighting.	We	just	want	 to	be	 left	alone	so	 that	we	can	do
our	own	thing,	so	that	we	can	just	be	ourselves.
The	flower	simply	represents	love,	silence	--	peace,	joy,	festivity	--	colourfulness
--	and	that's	how	my	sannyasins	have	to	be.	They	have	to	be	a	totally	new	kind
of	religious	person,	not	like	those	old,	dull	saints
--	not	sober	and	very	serious	and	doing	something	holy.	My	sannyasins	have	to
live	 like	 nobodies	 --	 because	whenever	 you	 try	 to	 live	 like	 somebody	 there	 is
bound	to	be	fight	because	it	is	a	power	struggle,	it	is	an	ego	trip.	Love	the	world
in	 its	 absolute	ordinariness.	There	 is	no	need	 for	 another	world	 --	 this	 is	more
than	enough.	This	is	too	beautiful,	it	cannot	be	improved	upon	--	enjoy	it!	And	in
enjoying	it	you	will	find	god.
The	 old	 religions	 were	 telling	 people	 to	 renounce	 life.	 I	 say	 rejoice	 in	 life
because	god	is	life;	if	you	rejoice	only	then	will	you	find	him.
HAPPINESS	IS	AT	HOME-NESS
A	man	 without	 bliss	 is	 a	 man	 without	 a	 home.	 He	may	 have	 a	 house	 but	 he
cannot	have	a	home.	And	the	man	who	is	blissful	may	not	have	any	house	but	he
will	have	a	home	--	in	fact	wherever	he	is	he	will	be	at	home.
The	miserable	 person	 is	 always	 in	 a	 state	 of	 tension	 everywhere.	 He	 feels	 an
outsider,	 a	 stranger,	 he	 cannot	 relate	 with	 existence	 --	 he	 cannot	 relate	 with
himself.	He	cannot	see	any	meaning	in	life.	He	feels	like	driftwood	--	accidental,
and	 how	 can	 one	 really	 live	 if	 that	 feeling	 of	 being	 accidental	 persists?	 Then
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
one	can	only	somehow	vegetate	--	and	that	is	not	life;	just	somehow	carrying	on
is	not	being	alive.
Unless	there	is	dance	there	is	no	life,	unless	there	is	celebration	there	is	no	life.
My	religion	consists	of	blissfulness,	love,	poetry,	music,	dance,	celebration.	And
once	you	have	found	the	art	of	being	blissful	you	have	found	the	ultimate	home.
Then	you	are	no	more	accidental,,then	your	 life	becomes	part	of	 this	 immense
universe,	its	beauty,	its	glory,	its	splendour.	Then	the	flowers	are	yours	and	the
stars	too.
And	to	be	blissful	is	not	difficult;	we	just	have	to	be	consciously	at	work	for	it.	It
is	an	art	to	be	learned.
I	call	it	meditation	--	-that	is	just	a	name	for	the	whole	science	of	blissfulness.
SANNYAS:	EGO	ALTAR
(Osho	explains	the	meaning	of	Arpana	Donatella.)
Arpana	means	surrender,	offering	oneself	to	god.
Any	 offering	 is	 pointless	 unless	 you	 offer	 yourself.	One	 can	 offer	money,	 but
that	 is	 not	 a	 true	 offering,	 because	 everybody	 comes	 empty-handed	 so
whatsoever	you	possess	does	not	in	fact	belong	to	you.	You	came	empty-handed
and	you	will	go	empty-handed.	The	only	thing	that	can	be	given	to	god	is	your
own	being	--	that's	all	that	one	possesses.
And	Donatella	means	a	small	gift.	Of	course	one	is	a	small	gift	for	god,	but	a	gift
is	 a	 gift;	 no	 gift	 is	 small	 in	 that	 sense.	 Its	 being	 a	 gift	 is	 enough,	 it	 is	 always
infinite.
From	the	side	of	the	giver	it	may	be	a	small	gift	but	from	the	side	of	the	receiver
it	 is	 immense.	 So	we	 give	 small	 gifts	 to	 god	 but	 god	 receives	 an	 infinity.	We
don't	love	anything.	What	have	we	got?	--	just	a	little	love,	a	little	candlelight	--
but	in	offering	it,	it	becomes	big.
If	you	offer	yourself	 totally	a	new	experience	happens:	by	giving	yourself	you
become	 empty	 ,	 and	 in	 that	 emptiness	 god	 starts	 pouring	 his	 gifts.	 We	 give
nothing	but	we	get	everything.
And	sannyas	is	exactly	an	offering	of	your	being	to	god.	So	your	name	precisely
defines	sannyas.
STILL	THE	MIND:	BLISS,	THE	WINE
Meditation	is	a	process	of	stilling	the	mind,	of	settling	it.	Ordinarily	it	is	a	chaos.
Transforming	 the	 chaos	 into	 a	 cosmos,	 that's	 what	 meditation	 is	 all	 about.
Ordinarily	 it	 is	 just	 noise.	 Changing	 that	 noise	 into	 music,	 creating	 a	 hidden
harmony	 in	 it,	 that's	 what	 meditation	 is.	 When	 the	 mind	 is	 quiet,	 silent,
harmonious,	naturally	great	joy	comes.	That	is	the	meaning	of	Barbara:	coming
with	joy.
Only	the	meditator	knows	the	infinite	blissfulness	of	existence,	the	tremendous
benediction	of	it	all.	All	others	simply	go	on	missing	the	point.	So	by	becoming
a	sannyasin	meditation	becomes	your	very	target.
Everything	has	to	be	staked	for	it,	everything	has	to	be	risked	for	it.	Nothing	is
more	important	and	nothing	is	higher.	Meditation	becomes	your	central	theme	of
existence,	and	then	more	and	more	joy	starts	happening.	And	there	is	no	end	to
it,	it	is	an	infinite	process.	There	is	a	beginning	but	no	end.
(And	on	a	similar	theme	Osho	talks	to	Dhyano	Luis.)
It	 is	 only	 through	 meditation	 that	 one	 --	 aware	 of	 the	 glory	 of	 existence.
Meditation	is	a	bridge.	Without	meditation	you	are	disconnected	from	existence.
You	are	there,	the	existence	is	there,	but	there	is	no	bridge;	you	are	on	this	side
of	the	river	and	the	existence	is	on	that	side	of	it.	You	can	see	it	but	you	cannot
touch	it,	you	can	see	it	but	you	cannot	feel	it.	It	is	there,	just	like	a	dream,	but	--
not	a	reality.	It	becomes	a	reality	only	when	the	bridge	is	made.
When	you	become	capable	of	moving	between	these	two	shores	--	between	this
world	and	that	--
between	and	thou,	between	the	inner	and	the	outer,	between	the	visible	and	the
invisible,	 then	you	know	how	much	beauty	 is	 contained	 in	 every	moment	 and
how	 much	 bliss	 can	 be	 released.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 anybody	 to	 be	 poor.
Existence	has	so	much	to	give	that	everybody	can	be	an	emperor	--	there	is	no
need	even	for	competition.
EMPERORS	OF	ETCETERA
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	observation	is	that	the	miserable	person	becomes	mean,	cunning,	untrusting,
dishonest,	 insincere,	 inauthentic.	Simply	because	he	is	miserable	he	is	angry	at
existence,	he	wants	to	take	revenge.	We	cannot	have	a	noble	character,	he	cannot
have	nobleness	around	him.	Nobleness	 is	a	by-product	of	gratitude	and	he	has
nothing	 to	 be	 grateful	 for.	 He	 is	 just	 a	 complaint,	 a	 wound,	 and	 how	 can	 the
wound	give	fragrance?	--	it	can	only	stink.
Only	 the	blissful	 person	 is	 noble.	Nobility	has	nothing	 to	do	with	birth,	 it	 has
something	to	do	with	the	art	of	living.	Certainly	one	can	become	an	aristocrat	if
one	knows	how	to	live.	One	may	not	possess	anything	but	still	one	will	live	like
a	king	because	kingliness	has	nothing	to	do	with	possessions;	it	has	something	to
do	with	how	you	approach	life.	Is	it	with	complaint	or	with	gratitude?	And	one
can	be	grateful	only	 if	one	 is	blissful	because	 then	one	feels	 that	existence	has
given	one	so	much,	how	can	one	repay	it?
There	is	no	way	to	repay	it	--	hence	gratitude	arises.	If	there	were	a	way	to	repay
there	 would	 be	 no	 need	 to	 be	 grateful.	 But	 there	 are	 things	 which	 cannot	 be
repaid	 --	 then	 the	 only	 possible	 way	 is	 to	 feel	 thankful.	 In	 that	 thankfulness,
meanness,	 deceptiveness,	 cunningness,	 all	 disappear;	 one	 becomes	 simply
innocent,	trusting.
And	the	moment	you	trust	existence	you	start	feeling	the	presence	of	god.	God	is
not	a	belief.	It	is	trusting	existence	that	makes	you	feel	the	presence	of	god	--	it
is	an	experience.	But	everything	begins	in	blissfulness.
So	my	sannyasins	have	to	start	their	journey	with	laughter,	with	joy,	with	dance.
EGO:	I-LAND
Man	 can	 live	 either	 as	 an	 island,	 isolated	 from	 existence,	 thinking	 himself
separate,	as	an	ego,	but	 then	there	is	misery.	Then	misery	is	absolutely	certain,
because	we	are	going	against	existence.
You	 cannot	 be	 blissful	 if	 you	 are	 going	 against	 existence.	 You	 are	 fighting	 a
losing	battle.	It	is	like	trying	to	swim	upstream:	you	may	succeed	a	little	bit	but
sooner	or	 later	you	will	be	exhausted,	 tired	--	and	 then	 the	river	will	 take	you.
And	because	now	you	are	defeated	this	river	taking	you	away	will	look	like	an
enemy.	 It	 is	 just	your	 idea	 that	has	created	 the	bhole	problem.	The	river	 is	not
fighting	with	you,	it	has	not	defeated	you;	you	tried	to	fight	with	it	and	you	got
defeated.	 The	 river	 is	 not	 responsible	 at	 all.	 If	 you	 had	 taken	 a	 different
approach,	 if	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 you	 accepted	 going	with	 the	 river,	 there
would	have	been	no	defeat,	no	frustration.	You	would	not	have	felt	that	existence
has	 been	 against	 you;	 you	would	 have	 rejoiced.	Going	with	 the	 river,	 dancing
with	the	river,	you	would	have	felt	the	river	giving	you	strength.
That	is	the	way	of	the	religious	person.
The	first	--	the	way	of	the	ego	--	is	the	way	of	the	irreligious.	The	second	--	the
way	 of	 let-go	 --	merging	 and	melting	 into	 existence	 --	 that	 is	 the	 way	 of	 the
religious	 person.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 melt	 and	 merge	 with	 existence	 god
becomes	your	strength	and	there	is	great	rejoicing	in	the	heart.	Each	moment	is	a
moment	 of	 victory	 and	 without	 any	 fight,	 without	 any	 struggle.	 That's	 the
miracle	of	being	religious.
CHOOSE	AND	YOU	LOSE
(Indradhanu	means	rainbow.	Osho	tells	another	sannyasin	about	the	significance
of	her	new	name.)	The	 rainbow	is	symbolic	of	multi-dimensionality.	 It	has	 the
whole	 spectrum	 of	 colours.	 Religious	 people	 in	 the	 past	 have	 lived	 a	 one	 --
dimensional	 life	 --	 and	 when	 you	 choose	 to	 live	 one	 --	 dimensionally	 you
become	unnecessarily	poor,	you	cannot	be	rich.
Richness	means	multi-dimensionality.	Richness	means	ring	life	in	its	totality,	not
choosing	but	living	it	in	all	its	colours,	in	all	its	shades	--	in	all	its	possibilities.
The	 more	 windows	 you	 have	 to	 your	 house	 --	 the	 richer	 your	 house	 will	 be
because	one	window	will	open	 to	 the	East	 and	you	will	 see	 the	 sunrise	 --	 and
another	window	will	open	to	the	West	and	you	will	see	the	sunset.	,The	sunrise
has	 its	 beauty	 and	 the	 sunset	 has	 its	 own	 beauty,	 and	 they	 are	 incomparable.
There	is	no	question	of	choice	--	the	chooser	will	be	a	loser.
If	he	chooses	 the	 sunset	he	 loses	 the	beauty	of	 the	 sunrise,	or	vice	versa.	Life
should	be	lived	in	as	many	ways	as	possible.
One	should	 love	poetry,	music,	painting.	One	should	 try	 to	reach	beauty,	 truth,
goodness,	 from	 all	 directions.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 become	 a	 simple	 line,	 one
should	be	a	rainbow.
My	 first	 idea	 for	my	 sannyasins'	 robe	was	 the	 colour	 of	 the	 rainbow,	 but	 that
would	have	been	too	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
psychedelic.	And	I	am	already	so	notorious	that	thought	it	better	not,	it	would	be
too	much.	(laughter)	Otherwise	that	was	my	first	idea!
THE	REAL	SWINGER	IS	A	NON-CLINGER
(Samira	means	breeze,	and	it	represents	many	qualities	that	a	sannyasin	should
imbibe.)	One	 is	 --	 it	 comes	 like	a	whisper.	 It	does	not	make	noise,	 it	does	not
make	proclamations;	 it	comes	very	silently,	you	cannot	hear	it	--	suddenly	it	 is
there.	And	 that's	 how	god	 comes	 --	 truth	 comes	 --	 bliss	 comes,	 love	 comes	 --
they	 all	 come	 in	 a	 whisper-like	 manner,	 not	 with	 trumpets	 and	 drums.	 They
suddenly	come	without	even	making	any	appointment,	without	even	asking	you
'May	 I	 come	 in,	 sir?'	 --	 they	 just	 suddenly	 come.	 And	 that's	 how	 the	 breeze
comes:	one	moment	it	is	not	there,	another	moment	it	is	there.
And	the	second	thing:	just	as	it	comes,	it	goes;	you	cannot	hold	to	it,	you	cannot
cling	to	it.	There	is	no	possible	way.	Enjoy	it	while	it	is	there	and	when	it	goes,
let	 it	 go.	 Be	 thankful	 that	 it	 came.	 Don't	 feel	 any	 grudge,	 don't	 feel	 any
complaint.	When	it	goes	it	goes	--	nothing	can	be	done	about	it.	But	we	are	all
clingers.	When	love	comes	we	are	very	happy	but	when	it	goes	we	are	very	hurt.
That	is	being	very	unconscious	--	ungrateful	--	misunderstanding.
Remember,	it	comes	one	way,,now	it	is	going	the	same	way.	It	did	not	ask...	why
should	it	ask	now	if	it	can	go.	It	was	a	gift	from	the	beyond	--	mysterious,	and	it
has	to	go	in	the	same	mysterious	way.
If	 one	 takes	 life	 like	 a	 breeze	 then	 there	 is	 no	 clinging,	 no	 attachment	 --	 no
obsession	--	one	simply	remains	available	aud	whatsoever	happens	is	good.
For	example,	right	now	there	is	no	breeze	at	all.	It	has	its	own	beauty.	Not	even	a
leaf	is	moving,	the	trees	are	standing	like	Buddhas.	This	is	its	own	beauty	and	its
own	dimension,	 its	own	 richness.	Then	 the	breeze	will	 come	and	 the	Buddhas
will	become	dervishes	--	whirling	Sufis	--	and	the	trees	will	dance	and	sing.	And
when	the	breeze	has	gone	again	they	will	be	Buddhas.
This	is	how	one	should	be,	particularly	how	my	sannyasins	should	be	--	capable
of	 both.	Life	 brings	many	 things	 and	 one	 never	 knows	what	more	 is	 going	 to
come.	So	never	cling,	because	if	you	cling	your	hands	will	be	full	and	you	may
miss	the	next	gift.
Once	George	Bernard	Shaw	was	asked	--	What	do	you	say	about	making	love	in
the	morning?	--	He	said
--	 I	 am	against	 it...	 because	one	never	knows	who	one	 is	going	 to	meet	 in	 the
afternoon!	--	That's	right.
(much	laughter)...	one	never	knows!	It	is	better	to	wait!
Life	 goes	 on	 giving	 new	 things.	Never	 cling,,never	 remain	 obsessed	with	 any
experience.	Be	open,	certainly,	the	doors	should	not	be	kept	closed,	so	when	the
wind	 comes,	 good,	when	 the	 sun	 comes,	 good,	when	 the	moon	 comes,	 good,
when	 the	 rain	 comes,	good.	When	nothing	comes	 that	 too	 is	perfectly	good,	 a
peaceful	moment,	nothing	is	coming,	a	restful	moment	to	relax.
Rest	is	good,	dance	is	good.	One	just	needs	a	little	bit	of	understanding,	then	the
whole	of	life	is	good.
How	long	will	you	be	here?	--	That's	good!	(much	laughter)	Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011175
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
THAT	WHICH	BRINGS	US	TOGETHER	SETS	US	APART
(It	is	called	love	--	and	animals	can't	do	it.)
Aristotle	and	others	who	define	man	as	a	rational	animal	are	not	right	--	because
reason	is	not	his	distinction.	Other	animals	also	have	reason,	maybe	a	little	less	-
-	but	the	difference	is	only	of	degree;	there	is	no	qualitative	difference.	And	now
we	 know	 that	 even	 machines	 can	 have	 intelligence,	 computers	 can	 have
intelligence.
A	 computer	 is	 more	 rational	 than	 any	 man	 can	 ever	 be,	 more	 rational	 than
Aristotle	 himself.	Aristotle	was	not	 very	 rational.	He	had	 two	wives	 --	 now,	 a
rational	person	cannot	even	have	one	--	--	and	for	his	whole	life	he	was	tortured
by	two	women.	One	is	enough,	in	fact	more	than	enough;	to	be	pulled	by	two	is
not	 a	 very	 rational	 decision.	 And	 he	 writes	 in	 books	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
irrational	things.
One	of	 the	most	 irrational	 things	he	writes	 is	 that	women	have	 less	 teeth	 than
men.	 He	 had	 two	 wives,	 he	 could	 have	 asked	 them	 or	 counted	 their	 teeth;	 it
would	 have	 been	 so	 simple	 an	 experiment.	 No	 laboratory,	 no	 science	 was
needed,	just	simple	arithmetic,	but	he	never	bothered.	The	idea	was	prevalent	in
Greece	 that	women	have	 less	 teeth.	Obviously	 they	must	 have	 everything	 less
than	men.	That	is	the	male	chauvinist	idea:	everything	should	be	less.	How	can
they	have	an	equal	number	of	teeth?	That	is	irrational.
My	observation	 is	 that	 love	 is	 the	only	quality	 that	making	man	different	 from
everything	else	 in	 existence.	But	very	 few	men	are	 loving.	So	all	men	are	not
distinguished,	 they	 are	 ordinary.	Only	once	 in	 a	while	 a	Christ	 --	 a	Buddha,	 a
Lao	Tzu,	has	experienced	the	ultimate	peak	of	love	and	they	are	the	salt	of	the
earth.
My	sannyasins	have	to	move	deeper	into	the	phenomenon	of	love,	they	have	to
explore	it	in	every	possible	way	and	they	have	to	purify	it	of	all	lust.	They	have
to	make	it	more	and	more	close	to	prayer,	and	ultimately	it	becomes	just	prayer.
When	 love	 is	 just	 a	 prayerfulness	 one	 has	 attained	 true	 humanity,	 then	 one	 is
really	born_born	as	a	man.
Before	that	one	was	only	in	the	womb,	asleep.	To	attain	love	is	to	be	a	rake.
CREATOR	OR	HATER
Love	has	immense	power	but	a	very	different	kind	of	power.	We	are	acquainted
with	 the	power	of	violence	and	aggression,	we	are	acquainted	with	 the	animal
power	 --	 destructive	 power.	 That's	 why	 we	 go	 on	 writing	 history	 about
Alexander	 the	 Great	 and	 Genghis	 Khan	 and	 Tamerlane	 and	 Nadir	 Shah	 and
Adolf	 Hitler	 and	 Joseph	 Stalin	 and	 so	 on	 and	 so	 forth.	 These	 people	 have	 a
certain	power	but	that	power	is	of	violence,	aggression,	destruction.	It	is	against
god,	it	is	against	existence.	These	people	are	really	criminals.
History	needs	to	be	rewritten,	these	people	should	be	completely	dropped	out	of
history	 as	 if	 they	 never	 existed.	 Children	 should	 not	 be	 poisoned	 with	 their
names.
History	should	be	concerned	with	Gautam	the	Buddha,	Jesus	Christ,	Zarathustra,
Krishna,	 Kabir,	Meera,	 Rabiya	 --	 men	 and	women	 of	 love.	 They	 also	 have	 a
power	but	that	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	power,	it	creates.	To	destroy	is	very
easy.	Any	 child	 can	 do	 it,	 any	 fool	 can	 do	 it,	 it	 needs	 no	 intelligence.	 But	 to
create	 needs	 great	 intelligence.	 It	 can	 be	 done	 only	 by	 people	who	 experience
beauty,	truth,	love.
To	 be	 creative	 means	 to	 be	 part	 of	 god	 because	 god	 is	 the	 creator,	 to	 create
means	to	participate	in	his	creativity	--	and	that	--	q	the	power	of	love.	The	man
of	 love	 always	 creates.	 Poetry	 --	 music,	 painting,	 or	 whatsoever	 he	 does	 is
creative.	And	the	man	of	creativity	slowly	slowly	learns	about	love.
But	my	approach	is	to	start	from	love	because	that	is	the	centre,	and	creativity	is
the	 circumference.	 If	 the	 centre	 is	 there	 the	 circumference	 will	 happen
automatically,	 but	 to	 create	 first	 and	 then	 to	move	 towards	 love,	 is	 a	 far	 long
process.	 It	may	 take	 lives	 and	 even	 then	 there	 is	 no	 certainty	 --	 because	 each
time	you	die	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you	lose	whatsoever	you	have	attained	on	the	circumference	--	because	each	life
will	 give	 you	 a	 different	 circumference,,only	 the	 centre	 remains	 the	 same.	 So
whatsoever	 we	 attain	 at	 the	 centre	 of	 our	 being	 becomes	 ours	 forever,	 death
cannot	destroy	it	--	it	will	be	with	you	in	the	new	life.	It	goes	on	accumulating;
circumferences	go	on	changing	every	life.	So	many	times	people	create	much	on
the	circumference	but	they	lose	it	again	and	again.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	start	from	the	centre	itself,	only	then	are	you	on	the
right	 track.	Love	and	let	 love	become	creativity	 in	your	 life.	That	 is	my	whole
religion.	Love	plus	creativity	is	equal	to	religion.
TRUE	RELIGION:	AESTHETICISM,	NOT	ASCETICISM
Beauty	is	the	most	godly	experience.	One	should	not	think	about	god	in	terms	of
theology	--	that	is	the	wrong	route,	an	absolutely	wrong	route.	One	should	think
aesthetically	 about	 god,	 and	 to	 think	 aesthetically	 really	 means	 to	 feel.	 You
cannot	 think	 aesthetically,	 you	 can	 only	 feel.	 Beauty	 is	 felt,	 not	 thought.	 You
don't	think	that	the	sunset	is	beautiful,	you	know,	you	feel;	that's	why	you	cannot
prove	it	to	others.	If	somebody	denies	it	there	is	no	way	to	prove	that	it	really	is
beautiful.	 If	somebody	says	 the	rose	flower	 is	not	beautiful	what	can	be	done?
We	can	feel	sorry	for	him	but	we	cannot	help	him	to	experience	the	beauty	of	the
rose.
He	is	not	available	to	the	rose,	his	heart	is	not	open	to	the	rose.
There	are	millions	of	people	who	have	not	experienced	beauty	and	whatsoever
they	 think	 is	 beauty	 is	 nothing	 but	 biological	 lust.	 If	 a	man	 thinks	 that	 only	 a
woman	can	be	beautiful	and	never	bothers	about	the	sunrise	or	the	flowers	or	a
bird	on	 the	wing	or	 the	 clouds	or	 the	 stars,	 he	does	not	 know	anything	of	 the
woman	either.	 It	 is	only	 the	hormonal,	 the	 instinctive,	 the	unconscious	 in	him,
which	makes	him	clouded,	infatuated,	and	which	makes	him	think	the	woman	is
beautiful	--	that	is	not	the	experience	of	beauty.
The	 experience	 of	 beauty	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 biology,	 it	 has	 something
aesthetic.	And	when	you	know	the	aesthetics	of	beauty	then	certainly	a	woman,
a	man,	the	trees,	the	clouds,	the	mountains...	then	the	whole	universe	is	involved
in	 it.	And	to	experience	beauty	 in	all	 its	 forms	is	 to	feel	god.	That's	why	I	say
beauty	is	the	most	divine	experience.
Become	available	 to	beauty	 in	all	 its	 forms.	Open	up	open	as	many	doors	and
windows	as	possible.	The	more	you	know	of	beauty,	the	more	you	will	know	of
god.	And	the	beautiful	thing	about	this	experience	is	that	you	will	not	become	a
Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	because	you	are	not	going	via	theology;
you	are	approaching	god	directly,	not	via	 the	priests.	The	priest	poisons.	He	 is
the	greatest	poisoner,	the	greatest	curse	that	has	ever	happened	to	humanity.	The
priest	has	to	be	avoided	like	the	plague.
Humanity	 will	 be	 in	 a	 far	 more	 superior	 position	 when	 the	 priests	 become
something	of	the	past,	just	part	of	history.	You	can	save	a	few	for	the	museums
and	zoos,	etcetera	but	 they	should	not	be	part	of	humanity	any	more.	Pope	 the
Polack	will	look	very	beautiful	in	a	zoo	(laughter).	People	can	watch,	just	as	they
watch	 the	hippopotamus,	 and	 they	can	ask	what	kind	of	 animal	 this	 is?	 --	 and
that	 will	 be	 perfectly	 okay.	 But	 priests	 should	 not	 be	 allowed	 to	 dominate
humanity	any	more;	they	have	done	enough	harm.
The	best	way	to	destroy	the	whole	strategy,	the	whole	trade	secret	of	the	priest	is
to	 make	 man	 some	 direct	 route	 that	 he	 can	 follow	 towards	 god.	 And	 my
observation	 is	 that	 the	aesthetic	 experience	 is	 the	most	 immediate.	 It	 needs	no
via	media,	no	mediator	--	it	is	immediate,	it	overwhelms	one.
(And	bliss	 is	 about	as	aesthetic	as	you	can	be.	Osho	goes	on	 to	 talk	 to	Anand
Monika	about	the	two	ways	in	which	you	can	come	to	know	bliss.)
There	 are	 two	 kinds	 of	 blissful	 experiences:	 one	 is	 of	 love,	 the	 other	 is	 of
meditation.
Love	 needs	 at	 least	 two	 people,	 it	 is	 a	 dialogue	 between	 two	 energies.	 But
because	 the	 other	 is	 needed	 there	 is	 a	 limitation,	 it	 cannot	 be	 infinite.	 And
because	the	other	is	needed	there	is	a	certain	kind	of	dependence;	hence	lovers
love	each	other	but	deep	do,	they	cannot	forgive	each	other.	They	ca}mot	forgive
the	other	because	 they	have	become	dependent,	 hence	 the	 constant	quarrelling
between	 lovers.	 It	 is	very	 significant	 s	why	do	 lovers	go	on	quarrelling?	They
should	be	the	last	to	quarrel,	but	they	are	the	topmost	quarrellers.	Even	enemies
don't	quarrel	that	much,	in	fact	they	don't	meet!	And	lovers	are	together	twenty-
four	hours	a	day,	at	each	other's	neck,	fighting	tooth	and	nail.	Only	once	and	a
while	 are	 there	 love-breaks,	 otherwise	 they	 are	 wrestling;	 they	 are	 intimate
enemies.
The	 reason	 for	 their	 enmity	 is	 very	 subtle	 and	 unconscious	 --	 it	 is	 the
dependence.	Nobody	likes	to	be	dependent	on	anybody	else	because	freedom	is
the	highest	value	of	life.	But	if	you	want	the	joy	of	love	you	have	to	compromise
and	that	compromise	hurts.	The	other	starts	encroaching	on	your	space,	you	start
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
encroaching	on	the	other's	space.
Love	 is	 one	 kind	 of	 joy,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 very	 limited	 phenomenon.	Unless	 one	 has
known	 the	 other	 kind	 of	 bliss...	 and	 that	 rarely	 happens.	 That	 comes	 through
meditation.	Meditation	is	the	bliss	of	being	alone,	the	art	of	being	alone.	When
you	are	blissful	in	your	aloneness	there	is	no	limit,	nobody	to	interfere,	nobody
to	encroach.	You	have	the	whole	sky	to	yourself.
Once	 you	 have	 experienced	 this	 bliss	 which	 comes	 through	 being	 absolutely
alone,	then	you	can	enjoy	even	the	first	kind	of	bliss	which	comes	through	love,
because	 then	 two	lovers	can	be	 together	and	yet	not	 interfere	with	each	other's
aloneness.	That	is	true	love,	not	to	interfere	in	the	other's	aloneness,	to	give	him
total	freedom,,not	to	possess,	not	to	dominate,	not	to	reduce	the	other	to	a	thing
to	be	used	--	into	a	means	to	be	used.	But	that	is	possible	only	for	a	meditator.
When	two	meditators	love	then	love	and	meditation	are	no	more	different;	then
they	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	bliss.	But	this	has	not	happened	up	to	now.
Meditators	 have	 been	 afraid	 of	 love.	 They	 escape	 to	 monasteries	 in	 the
mountains.	 In	 fact	 they	 are	 escaping	 from	 the	 other,	 afraid	 that	 they	 may	 be
caught.	They	know	themselves,	they	have	experienced	something	of	love	--	and
they	 are	 afraid	 they	 may	 be	 trapped	 again	 in	 some	 relationship	 so	 they	 are
escaping	 to	 the	 deserts,	 to	 the	 mountains.	 There	 they	 may	 be	 able	 to	 have	 a
certain	peace	and	calmness	and	a	certain	joy	--	but	it	will	be	only	half,	it	will	not
give	them	the	wholeness.
And	 there	 are	 people	 in	 the	world	who	never	 bother	 about	meditation.	 In	 fact
they	 are	 afraid	 of	 meditation	 because	 they	 think	 meditators	 become	 life-
renouncers	 and	 they	 don't	 want	 to	 renounce	 their	 wife,	 their	 children,	 their
husbands	 their	 family.	 They	 don't	 want	 to	 renounce	 so	 they	 are	 afraid	 of
meditation.
I	have	come	across	both	kinds	of	people	but	both	are	half,	and	to	be	half	is	to	be
miserable,	to	be	whole	is	to	be	really	blissful.	To	be	whole	is	to	be	holy.	But	one
should	start	with	meditation.	One	should	first	be	able	to	be	happy	on	one's	own.
Then	there	is	no	dependence,	then	there	is	no	need	to	depend	on	anybody;	you
can	be	happy	on	your	own	--	but	still	you	would	like	to	share	your	joy.
I	 am	 doing	 many	 things	 here	 in	 my	 commune	 with	 my	 sannyasins,	 many
experiments.	One	of	the	experiments	is	to	make	them	all	meditators	and	lovers
so	that	they	can	start	a	new	kind	of	religiousness	in	the	world,	so	they	can	make
aloneness	and	love	go	together,	dancing	in	deep	harmony.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	go	back	tomorrow.
--	 Then	 come	 back	 again	 the	 day	 after	 tomorrow	 (laughter)	 or	 any	 day	 after
tomorrow,	but	come	back!
ECST-NEST-Y
(Bliss	 is	 our	 home,	 Osho	 is	 to	 make	 of	 Anand	 Horst's	 name.	 First,	 a	 brief
exchange.)
--	What	is	the	meaning	of	your	name?
--	I	don't	know	--	maybe	'nest'	in	German.
--	 Yes,	 that's	my	 feeling!	 I	 asked	Nandan	 (a	medium,	 she	 is	 sitting	 to	 Osho's
right)	--	she	is	a	German	--	and	she	said	it	means	a	small	forest.	In	fact	her	name
means	 a	 small	 forest;	 Nandan	means	 a	 small	 forest.	 I	 was	 suspicious...	 Horst
certainly	means	nest,	it	means	home.	That's	good!	(There	is	a	ripple	of	laughter
and	Nandan	grins	to	herself.	Osho	pops	the	mala	over	Horst's	head	and	touched
his	third	eye.)	Just	look	at	me.
(Then	Osho	shows	Horst	his	new	name.	He	talks	to	him	about	how	we	only	feel
at	home	when	we're	happy.)
Sannyas	 is	 a	 deliberate	 search	 for	 bliss,	 for	 the	 real	 home.	 And	 unless	 you
deliberately	seek	and	search	for	bliss	you	will	not	find	it.	You	may	come	across
it	many	times	but	you	will	not	be	able	to	recognise	it	unless	you	are	consciously
looking	for	it.
We	only	see	that	which	we	are	looking	for	--	remember	this.	Now	the	scientists
say	that	only	two	per	cent	of	information	goes	through	the	eyes;	ninety	--	eight
percent	is	debarred,	rejected,	censored.	for	the	simple	reason	that	your	eyes	don't
want	your	head	to	be	overloaded.	It	is	already	overloaded.	If	all	the	information
goes	in	within	twenty-four	hours	you	will	go	cuckoo.	It	has	to	be	prevented.	So
only	 that	 which	 you	 are	 seeking	 and	 searching	 for	 is	 allowed.	 It	 is	 an	 inbuilt
process.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
For	example,	many	people	pass	along	the	street,	the	same	street,	every	day,	but
they	all	look	at	different	things.	The	street	is	the	same	--	the	houses,	the	trees,	the
people,	everything	is	the	same,	but	they	all	see	different	things.	A	thief	passing
on	the	street	will	be	focussed	on	the	policeman,	he	will	not	look	at	anybody	else
but	 the	 policeman	 will	 immediately	 enter	 his	 mind,	 because	 he	 is	 afraid	 and
alert.	The	hungry	person	will	only	look	at	the	hotels	and	the	restaurants	--	but	the
person	who	 is	not	hungry	may	not	 look	at	 the	hotels	and	 the	restaurants	at	all.
The	person	who	has	lived	without	any	sexual	repression	may	not	look	at	women
or	men,	but	the	celibate,	the	monk,	the	nun	--	the	people	who	have	taken	the	vow
of	repressing	their	sexuality
--	will	look	only	at	women	and	men.	Their	whole	interest	will	be	there	--	nothing
else	will	enter	their	minds.
So	 remember	 it,	 we	 find	 only	 that	 for	 which	 we	 are	 looking.	 And	 bliss	 is
possible.	 It	 comes	 each	 moment	 but	 you	 never	 recognise	 it	 because	 you	 are
running	after	money,	power,	prestige	--	who	cares	about	bliss?	You	say	'We	will
see	about	bliss	when	we	retire,	 this	 is	not	 the	 time.'	But	by	 the	 time	you	retire
you	have	become	 so	 accustomed	 to	 running	 after	 power,	 prestige,	money,	 that
now	you	cannot	look	at	bliss;	it	has	become	a	life-long	habit	to	overlook	it,	not
to	recognise	it.	Habits	die	very	hard.
So	it	has	to	become	a	deliberate	search.	From	this	moment	look	for	bliss	in	every
possible	opportunity.
For	example,	 right	now	if	you	become	silent	 then	 the	sound	of	 the	 insects	and
the	silence	of	the	night...
and	suddenly	a	breeze	of	bliss,	suddenly	it	is	there.	You	start	falling	into	a	restful
moment.	Something	settles	--	a	pause,	an	interval	--	and	you	can	recognise	that
this	is	a	beautiful	moment.
Just	 go	 on	watching,	 go	 on	 deliberately	 looking	 for	 it.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 very	 far
away,	it	is	just	around	the	corner.
MIND	YOUR	BUSY-NESS
(Because	there	are	certain	things	you	can	only	know	when	you've	got	plenty	of
time.)	 For	 them	 there	 is	 no	 short-cut.	 And	 all	 that	 is	 great	 belongs	 to	 that
category.	Only	small	 things	can	be	attained	quickly.	Coffee	can	be	 instant	 --	 --
love	 cannot	 be.	 Instant	 love	 cannot	 be	 love.	 Instant	 simply	means	 you	 are	 not
even	ready	to	pay	the	little	patience	for	it.
One	 should	 learn	 to	 be	 patient	 --	 to	 be	 ready	 to	wait	with	 open	 doors,	with	 a
welcoming	heart,	but	not	in	a	hurry,	not	demanding,	not	forcing	things.	And	the
miracle,	 the	 paradox,	 is	 that	 the	 less	 you	 force	 things,	 the	more	 quickly	 they
happen.	The	more	you	force	them,	the	longer	it	takes.
Because	meditation	has	to	be	learned	--	and	meditation	only	means	stilling	of	the
mind,	the	silencing	of	the	mind	--	you	cannot	be	in	a	hurry.	If	you	are	in	a	hurry
your	mind	will	remain	in	a	turmoil.	You	will	be	jumping	ahead	of	yourself,	you
will	be	so	interested	in	the	result	that	you	will	not	be	able	to	give	total	attention
to	the	present	--	you	will	be	looking	at	the	future.	And	the	meditator	has	to	be	in
the	present;	he	has	to	forget	all	about	the	future,	all	about	ends	and	results.	He
has	to	be	so	attuned,	so	in	an	at	onement	with	existence	right	now	that	he	is	not
concerned	With	anything	else.	Of	course	this	is	possible	only	if	one	is	patient.
The	 word	 'patience'	 became	 associated	 with	 the	 ill	 people;	 we	 call	 them
'patients'.	 It	 became	 associated	with	 ill	 people,	 with	 sick	 people,	 for	 a	 certain
reasons	healing	cannot	be	forced,	you	have	to	wait	--	you	have	to	allow	nature	to
work.	All	that	medicine	does	is	to	help	you	to	wait,	it	gives	you	hope	to	wait.
They	say	that	the	common	cold	is	cured	within	seven	days	if	you	don't	take	any
medicine,	and	it	 is	cured	in	one	week	if	you	take	medicine.	Medicine	does	not
make	 much	 difference,	 the	 cold	 takes	 its	 own	 time,	 but	 if	 you	 don't	 take
medicine	then	those	seven	days	look	very	long.	Medicine	helps	you	to	hope	that
you	are	doing	whatsoever	needs	to	be	done.	And	the	more	famous	your	doctor
is...	The	more	you	have	to	pay	for	the	doctor	and	the	hospital,	the	better,	because
it	gives	you	more	hope	and	in	hope	you	can	wait,	you	can	be	patient.	That's	why
the	word	'patient'	became	synonymous	with	the	ill	person.	And	in	a	sense	we	are
all	 ill,	 ill	without	god,	 sick	without	god.	We	are	 carrying	wounds	 and	 they	 all
need	to	be	healed.
Religion	is	a	healing	process,	spiritual	healing.	One	has	to	be	patient,	so	much	so
that	one	need	not	bother	 about	 the	 result.	One	 should	be	 in	 the	present,	 in	 the
now,	 in	 the	here,	and	in	deep	trust	 that	whenever	 the	 time	is	ripe	 it	 is	going	to
happen,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	you.
One	of	the	greatest	statements	of	Krishna	in	Gita	is	s	Do	the	work	and	leave	the
result	to	god;	that	is	none	of	your	business.	Action	is	your	business	and	the	result
is	god's.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ESSENCE	D'ENLIGHTENMENT
Man	can	stink,	man	can	also	be	fragrant.	It	all	depends	on	how	you	live,	on	how
you	approach	 life.	 If	 one	never	 learns	 the	 art	 of	 living	 life	 stinks	 stinks	badly,
because	unless	you	 learn	 the	art	of	 living	you	can't	have	grace,	you	can't	have
beauty,	 you	 can't	 have	 bliss,	 you	 can't	 have	 truth,	 you	 can't	 have	 love,	 and
without	all	these	experience,	how	can	there	be	fragrance?
One	 comes	 with	 a	 great	 potential	 but	 very	 few	 people	 use	 that	 potential,	 it
remains	unused.	And	when	water	 is	dormant	 it	 starts	 stinking;	any	energy	 that
remains	dormant	goes	sour	--	it	needs	dynamic	flow.	One	should	be	more	like	a
river	than	like	a	pond.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 become	 dynamic,	 always	 moving,	 moving	 into	 the
unknown,	moving	 into	 the	 unfamiliar,	 always	 reaching	 for	 the	 stars.	And	 then
there	is	great	fragrance.	In	the	old	days	that	fragrance	was	called	god,	nirvana,
enlightenment.	It	is	nothing	but	life	blossoming.
YOU'RE	A	ONE-FF
Everyone	is	unique.	God	never	duplicates,	he	never	makes	two	people	alike;	he
respects	the	individual.
He	 is	 not	 like	 an	 assembly	 line	 is	 the	 factory	 of	 a	 car	manufacturer;	 he	 never
repeats.	There	has	never	been	a	person	like	you,	there	isn't	now	and	there	never
will	be	again.	This	is	god's	way	of	paying	respect	to	the	individual.
But	our	society	does	not	give	any	respect	to	the	individual;	it	teaches	you	not	to
be	 yourself	 but	 somebody	 else.	 It	 teaches	 you	 to	 be	 a	 Jesus	 or	 a	Buddha	or	 a
Krishna.	 That's	 why	 Christianity,	 Hinduism,	 Mohammedanism,	 exist.	 Society
teaches	 you	 to	 be	 imitators,	 and	 when	 people	 become	 imitators	 they	 become
ugly,	 pseudo,	 phony.	Then	 they	 have	 a	 double	 personality:	 on	 the	 surface	 one
thing,	in	the	depth	something	else,	just	the	opposite	of	it.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	simply	one.	You	are	not	to	be	an	imitation	of	anybody,
you	just	have	to	be	yourself.	To	accept	oneself	as	one	is	the	first	step	in	growing,
in	becoming	adult.	To	love	oneself	is	the	first	step	in	loving	god	--	because	this	is
the	way	he	has	made	you	--	To	love	his	creation	is	to	love	the	creator	--
and	we	are	his	creation.	It	is	against	god	to	be	somebody	else.	Just	be	yourself.
Love	 and	 respect	 yourself	 and	 never	 compromise	 for	 anything.	And	 then	 you
will	 be	 surprised	how	much	growth	 starts	 happening	of	 its	 own	 accord...	 as	 if
rocks	have	been	removed	and	the	river	has	started	flowing.
(You've	got	 to	be	one	and	 to	have	won	you	your	own	 truth.	Osho	 is	 talking	 to
another	sannyasin.)	Sannyas	is	courage,	the	courage	to	drop	out	of	all	traditions,
the	courage	to	discard	all	ideologies,	the	courage	to	renounce	the	whole	past,	the
courage	to	start	anew	from	ABC,	as	if	you	are	born	today.
Once	 these	 things	 are	 fulfilled	 you	 have	 started	moving	 towards	 god,	 towards
truth,	because	truth	is	not	a	tradition,	not	a	convention,	not	a	church,	not	a	race.
Truth	cannot	be	delivered	to	you	by	the	past.	Nobody	can	give	it	to	you,	it	has	to
be	discovered	by	you	and	only	by	you.	Unless	the	truth	is	yours	it	is	not	true.
Truth	certainly	liberates,	as	Jesus	says,	but	I	would	like	to	make	a	condition	to
that	statement;	truth	liberates	only	when	it	is	your	own.	If	it	is	somebody	else's	it
binds	you,	it	never	liberates.
EXISTENTIAL	EQUATION
Man	appears	very	small	from	the	outside,	but	if	you	look	at	yourself	from	your
own	centre,	from	inside,	you	are	as	infinite	as	the	sky	itself.	You	are	eternal	--	-
no	beginning,	no	end,	no	birth,	no	death.	But	a	very	funny	and	strange	thing	is
that	we	know	ourselves	only	through	a	mirror.	If	others	know	us	only	from	the
outside	that	is	understandable	because	they	cannot	enter	into	your	centre,	that	is
not	possible,	nobody	can	become	part	 )of	your	 interiority.	So	 they	 look	at	you
from	 the	 outside	 --	 that's	 perfectly	 right.	 They	 only	 know	 your	 boundary,	 and
that	boundary	is	not	really	yours	but	your	body's.	But	the	strange	thing	is	that	we
look	at	ourselves	through	a	mirror.
Looking	 through	 a	mirror	means	 looking	 at	 yourself	 from	 outside.	While	 you
can	stand	within	you	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
trying	 to	 look	 at	 yourself	 as	 others	 look	 at	 you.	That	 is	why	we	 create	 a	 very
wrong	notion	of	ourselves.
When	Socrates	and	people	like	him	say,	'Know	thyself'	they	are	saying	drop	the
mirror,	close	your	eyes,	go	within	and	see	from	there.	And	that's	what	mean	by
meditation:	go	within	and	see	from	there,	only	then	will	you	know	your	skylike
consciousness.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 tasted	 of	 it,	 that	 oceanic	 experience,	 all
misery	disappears,	all	darkness	disappears;	suddenly	you	are	part	of	god	himself.
One	 of	 the	 great	 disciples	 of	George	Gurdjieff,	 P.D.	Ouspensky,	 has	written	 a
very	beautiful	statement.
On	 the	 surface	 it	 is	 illogical.	 He	 says	 that	 the	 part	 can	 never	 be	 equal	 to	 the
whole.	 It	 is	obvious,	 simple	 arithmetic,	 that	 the	part	 can	never	be	 equal	 to	 the
whole.	How	can	my	finger	be	equal	to	the	whole	of	me?	--
the	part	is	bound	to	be	smaller	than	the	whole.	But	Ouspensky	says	there	is	an
inner	experience	where	the	part	is	equal	to	the	whole,	exactly	equal	to	the	whole.
Now	that	is	illogical,	beyond	mathematics,	but	certainly	true.
When	you	know	yourself	from	inside	suddenly	you	are	not	only	part	of	god,	you
are	god.	The	part	is	equal	to	the	whole.	hence	the	declaration	of	the	Upanishads
'Aham	Brahmasmi'	 --	 I	 am	 god.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 ego,	 it	 is	 a	 simple
statement	of	an	inner	reality.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011185
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
CONSCIOUSNESS	V.	CONDITIONING
(That's	 the	 struggle	 inherent	 in	 sannyas.	 It's	 because	 of	 society's	 diligence	 in
dampening	 all	 our	 attempts	 to	 be	 blissful	 that	 we	 have	 to	 work	 to	 actualise
something	which	is	actually	part	of	us.)	Society	creates	all	kinds	of	hindrances
for	us	to	reach	our	own	nature.	It	does	not	allow	us	to	be	ourselves.	The	whole
effort	 of	 culture,	 the	 religion,	 civilisation,	 education,	 is	 not	 to	 allow	you	 to	be
your	own	self,	to	be	your	own	natural	self,	not	to	allow	you	spontaneity,	for	the
simple	reason	that	the	spontaneous	person	cannot	be	manipulated.	If	people	are
to	be	manipulated	--	politically,	socially,	religiously	--	then	their	spontaneity	has
to	be	destroyed,	 they	have	 to	 be	made	pseudo,	 plastic,	 phony.	Only	phoniness
can	be	manipulated,	only	 the	mask	can	be	manipulated;	 the	personality	can	be
manipulated,	not	the	individuality.
They	do	all	kinds	of	tricks	and	have	subtle	strategies,	so	everybody	is	covered	by
social	conditioning	that	hinders	self-discovery;	hence	the	need	to	be	industrious.
It	is	really	unnecessary	but	we	are	brought	up	in	the	wrong	kind	of	society,	and
only	the	wrong	kind	of	society	has	existed	up	to	now.	We	have	not	yet	been	able
to	make	a	natural,	life-affirmative	culture.	That	has	not	happened	yet,	It	is	yet	to
happen.	But	we	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
cannot	wait.
So	 each	 sannyasin	 has	 to	make	 every	 effort	 at	 least	 for	 himself,	 so	 that	 it	 can
happen	within	him	and	that	will	also	trigger	the	process	of	happening	in	others.
But	the	first	concern	is	your	own	being,	and	everything	else	is	secondary.	Hence
I	am	very	clear	about	it:	my	sannyasins	have	to	be	selfish.	Their	first	concern	is
not	society,	not	the	church,	not	the	world,	not	humanity,	not	even	god;	their	first
responsibility	and	concern	is	their	own	innermost	core	--	it	has	to	be	discovered.
Once	it	is	discovered	everything	else	becomes	easy,	it	comes	of	its	own	accord.
Then	love	flows,	compassion	flows,	prayer	flows	--	they	are	by-products.
PAS-DE-BLISS
(Osho	talks	about	moving	the	energy	from	the	head	to	the	heart,	because	that	is
where	 joy	 starts.)	 Bliss	 is	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the	 youthful	 heart.	 One	 thing	 very
essential	to	be	remembered	is	that	the	head	is	always	old,	never	young.	Even	the
head	of	a	young	person	is	old,	even	the	head	of	a	one-day-old	person	is	old,	it	is
twenty-four	hours	old.	And	the	heart	is	always	young,	never	old;	even	the	heart
of	an	eighty-year-old	person	is	young.
The	reason	why	it	is	so	is	simple.	The	head	accumulates	thoughts,	experiences,
and	 whatsoever	 you	 have	 experienced	 is	 past.	 You	 have	 read	 something,	 you
have	 heard	 something,	 you	 have	 lived	 certain	 experiences	 --	 they	 are	 all	 past.
The	 head	 accumulates	memory.	 The	 head	 is	 really	 a	memory	 system	 --	 that's
why	 the	 work	 of	 the	 head	 can	 be	 done	 by	 a	 computer,	 because	 the	 head	 can
easily	memorize.
Memory	 is	 a	 mechanical	 phenomenon,	 but	 the	 computer	 can	 only	 repeat	 that
which	has	 already	been	 fed	 to	 it,	 it	 cannot	 give	 any	original	 idea.	One	 cannot
expect	any	original	idea	from	a	computer,	it	is	impossible
--	from	where	will	 it	get	 it?	It	can	make	new	combinations	out	of	old	thoughts
but	that	will	not	be	original.
Every	 part	 will	 be	 old,	 just	 the	 combination	 may	 appear	 new.	 It	 will	 be	 a
composition	 of	 old	 fragments	 but	 nothing	 original.	 Nothing	 original	 has	 ever
come	out	of	the	head.
That's	 why	 pundits	 are	 parrots,	 they	 are	 computers.	 They	 recite	 the	 scriptures
efficiently,	perfectly,	but	with	no	originality.	It	 is	never	young,	never	fresh	--	 it
cannot	be	--	because	mind	is	a	memory	system	and	how	can	a	memory	be	new?
That	is	impossible,	that	is	asking	something	absurd;	it	cannot	happen.
The	heart	 has	no	memory	 system,	 it	 lives	moment	 to	moment.	That's	why	 the
person	who	 is	 leaning	more	 towards	 the	 heart	 is	 unreliable,	 he	 is	moody.	You
cannot	 predict	 him;	 he	 may	 be	 one	 thing	 right	 now	 and	 another	 thing	 next
moment	because	he	is	not	repetitive,	only	his	future	is;	he	is	open-ended.
Bliss	 is	 possible	 only	 through	 the	 heart	 because	 the	 heart	 can	 dance	 in	 the
moment,	 in	 the	 present,	 now,	 here.	And	 bliss	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 experience	 of
now	and	here.	When	the	past	suddenly	disappears	and	there	is	no	future	and	only
this	moment	in	its	crystal	purity,	then	suddenly	there	is	a	dance.	It	is	a	feel,	not	a
thought.	It	is	more	like	music	than	like	mathematics.	It	is	pure,	not	prose	at	all.
And	if	one	lives	closer	to	the	heart	one	really	lives.
The	heady	person	only	pretends	to	live.	He	hopes	to	live,	he	thinks	he	lives,	but
everything	is	 just	 in	 the	head;	he	 is	never	 in	contact	with	 life,	with	reality.	His
thoughts	are	always	creating	a	barrier.	The	heart	has	no	thoughts,	hence	it	is	in
immediate	contact	with	reality.
God	has	been	known	through	the	heart,	truth	has	been	experienced	through	the
heart,	 love	has	been	lived	through	the	heart	--	all	 that	 is	great	happens	through
the	heart.	Sannyas	is	a	heart	phenomenon.
So	 remember	 it:	 move	 your	 energy	 more	 and	 more	 away	 from	 the	 head	 and
towards	the	heart.	The	day	the	whole	energy	is	centered	in	the	heart	and	the	head
is	left	far	behind	one	has	arrived	home.	Then	one	tastes	eternity,	eternal	beauty
and	 eternal	 youthfulness.	 And	 the	 freshness	 of	 it	 and	 the	 grace	 of	 it	 is
immeasurable.
(And	the	same	can	be	said	about	truth.	Osho	talks	to	Satyena.)	The	truth	is	not	in
the	 scriptures,	 it	 is	 not	 to	 be	 found	 in	 philosophies	 or	 ideologies.	 The	 truth	 is
existential,	not	intellectual.	It	is	now,	it	is	here.	It	is	within	you,	it	is	within	me,	it
is	both	within	and	without.
This	is	it!
One	 has	 to	 be	 utterly	 in	 the	 present	 to	 know	 it	 --	 and	 the	 knowing	 is	 not
knowledge,	 it's	 feeling,	 experiencing,	 because	 you	 are	 not	 separate	 from	 it	 so
you	cannot	know	it	like	other	things.	Hence	science	will	never	know	it	because
science	 always	 tries	 to	 reduce	 everything	 to	 an	 object.	 Its	 search	 is	 for	 the
objective,	it	has	to	be	there	in	front	of	us	--	and	truth	can	never	be	there	in	front
of	you.	It	is	your	very	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
consciousness;	you	cannot	make	an	object	out	of	it,	 it	 is	your	subjectivity.	It	 is
not	on	 the	 table	before	 the	 scientist,	 truth	 is	 the	 scientist's	 very	 consciousness.
All	those	objects	are	in	front	of	truth	but	truth	can	never	be	in	front	of	you.
That's	why,	except	for	meditation,	there	has	never	been	any	way	to	experience	it.
Meditation	 removes	 all	 objects,	 removes	 all	 content.	 It	 is	 simply	 a	 process	 of
eliminating	and	removing	everything.	It	empties	you	and	when	there	is	nothing
left,	only	you	are	there.	And	then	you	cannot	avoid	it,	 then	you	cannot	escape,
then	you	have	to	experience	it;	then	that	experience	is	inevitable.	I	call	it	simply
the	truth.
(Vidyarthi	has	his	first	lesson	in	learning.	)
Very	few	people	are	capable	of	learning	because	everybody	carries	the	idea	that
they	already	know.
To	 be	 available	 to	 learn	 means	 to	 function	 from	 a	 state	 of	 not-knowing.	 But
everybody	is	carrying	a	certain	quantity	of	knowledge	more	or	less,	everybody	is
knowledgeable.	 That	 kowledgeability	 is	 a	 hindrance	 in	 learning.	 And	 to	 be	 a
disciple	means	to	be	able	to	learn.	Hence	for	the	sannyasin	the	only	thing	to	be
renounced	 is	knowledge,	knowledgeability.	All	 that	 is	 borrowed	 should	be	put
aside.	Unless	you	know,	remember,	you	don't	know.	What	the	Bible	says	is	not
significant	 for	you,	what	 the	Gita	says	 is	not	of	any	help	 to	you.	 It	can	simply
decorate	your	ego	but	 it	won't	help	you	in	the	ultimate	sense	of	delivering	you
from	misery,	liberating	you	from	all	kinds	of	bondages.
Put	aside	all	knowledge	and	then	one	is	available,	open,	ready,	vulnerable.	That
is	the	state	of	a	learner,	and	one	should	remain	a	learner	for	the	whole	of	one's
life,	 just	 like	Socrates	who,	even	at	 the	moment	of	death,	was	 learning.	While
dying	he	was	learning.	He	told	his	disciples	not	to	cry	and	weep	and	not	to	make
a	scene.	He	told	them	'You	can	do	all	this	when	I	am	gone,	you	will	have	enough
time.	 Right	 now	 don't	 disturb	 me	 because	 something	 immensely	 beautiful	 is
happening	death	is	happening	--	and	I	don't	want	to	miss	this	opportunity	to	learn
about	 death	 because	 have	 waited	 my	 whole	 life	 for	 this	 moment.	 Life	 have
learned	about,	life	I	have	known;	now	death	is	there	confronting	me	and	I	want
to	experience	it.	So	keep	quiet	--	crying,	weeping	and	all	this	drama	you	can	do
later	on.'
He	watched	his	death	and	he	went	on	telling	his	disciples,	'My	body	has	become
numb	up	to	my	knees'
because	he	had	been	given	poison	and	the	poison	was	slowly	working.	And	he
said	'Remember	one	thing	I	am	dead	up	to	my	knees	but	my	feeling	of	myself	is
as	entire	as	ever,	it	is	not	less.'	Then,	 'up	to	my	waist	I	am	dead',	he	said	'I	can
feel	 only	 half	 of	my	 body	 --	 but	my	 consciousness	 is	 as	 entire	 as	 ever.	 So	 it
seems	that	the	death	of	the	body	cannot	be	the	death	of	consciousness.'	It	was	a
great	 deduction,	 a	 great	 conclusion,	 and	 not	 a	 philosophical	 conclusion	 but	 as
scientific	as	it	could	be.	And	he	went	on	saying	'Now	I	cannot	feel	my	hands.'
He	 told	 a	 disciple	 to	 pinch	 his	 hands	 and	 he	 said,	 'I	 cannot	 feel	 it,	 but	 my
consciousness	is	as	entire	as	ever.'	The	last	thing	he	uttered	was	'Now	my	tongue
is	getting	numb	--	I	may	not	be	able	to	say	any	more.
This	is	my	last	statement,	that	my	consciousness	is	absolutely	entire,	nothing	has
died	 in	 it.	The	body	 is	 almost	dead,	ninety	per	 cent	dead,	 soon	 it	will	be	one-
hundred	per	cent	dead,	but	it	seems	I	am	going	to	live	forever	--	life	is	eternal.'
This	is	the	way	of	a	true	disciple,	of	a	learner,	of	a	Vidyarthi.
WHEN	YOUR	LOVE-LIFE	FEELS	LIKE	DEATH
(Osho	 talks	 to	Christine	about	what	 it	 really	means	 to	be	a	Christian.)	To	be	a
Christian	 does	 not	mean	 to	 belong	 to	Christianity.	 The	 people	who	 think	 they
have	 become	 Christians	 because	 they	 belong	 to	 the	 Christian	 church	 are	 just
deceiving	 themselves.	 Unless	 you	 belong	 to	 the	 world	 of	 love	 you	 are	 not	 a
Christian.	And	the	world	of	love	is	not	a	church,	the	world	of	love	is	not	a	creed.
It	is	neither	Catholic	nor	Protestant	nor	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan.
The	word	'Christ'	is	very	beautiful;	it	simply	means	the	crowned	one.	It	is	very
strange	 in	 reference	 to	Christ	 because	 he	 is	 the	 crucified	 one.	But	 it	 has	 great
significance.	 Unless	 one	 crucifies	 one's	 ego	 one	 is	 not	 crowned	 --	 that's	 the
whole	 meaning	 of	 Jesus'	 crucifixion	 and	 resurrection.	 His	 resurrection	 is	 his
crowning.
He	dies	 as	 a	 son	of	man	and	 is	 reborn	 as	 a	 son	of	god.	That	 story	depicts	 the
whole	process	of	religious	transformation.
It	can	happen	only	through	love.	That	is	why	Jesus	says	god	is	love;	he	makes
them	synonymous.	Love,	and	love	without	any	conditions	--	-that's	the	only	way
to	 come	 closer	 to	 Christ-consciousness.	 In	 the	 East	 we	 call	 it	 Buddha-
consciousness	--	it	is	the	same	phenomenon.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Christine	does	not	mean	believing	in	a	certain	dogma;	it	means	living	love,	the
way	 Christ	 lived.	 He	 lived	 in	 love,	 he	 died	 in	 love.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 greatest
experience:	to	both	live	and	die	in	love.	His	last	words	were	a	prayer	to	god	to
forgive	 these	people,	 the	people	who	were	crucifying	him.	He	was	praying	 for
them	to	be	forgiven	because	they	did	not	know	what	they	were	doing.	That	was
his	last	utterance.	This	is	pure	love!
Unless	one	is	ready	to	sacrifice	oneself	in	love,	one	cannot	attain	the	ultimate	in
consciousness	--	and	that	i	s	the	goal	of	sannyas.
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 is	 really	 to	 be	 a	 Christian.	 But	 the	 same	 thing	 can	 be	 said
about	other	religions	too:	to	be	a	sannyasin	is	to	be	really	a	Mohammedan	or	to
be	really	 a	Buddhist	or	 to	be	really	 a	Hindu.	The	 important	 thing	 is	 that	word
'really'	--	that	has	to	be	underlined	with	red	ink.
JUST	BORN	TO	BE	A	BUDDHA
(Siddhartha	was	 the	name	of	Buddha	before	he	became	enlightened.	Osho	told
us	 a	 story	 about	 him.)	 The	 day	 Buddha	 was	 born	 a	 very	 old	 sage	 from	 the
Himalayas	rushed	towards	the	capital,	Kapilvastu	--
that	 was	 Buddha's	 father's	 capital.	 It	 was	 just	 in	 the	 valleys	 underneath	 the
Himalayas,	on	the	border	of	India	and	Nepal.	The	sage	was	immensely	respected
by	 the	 people	 but	 he	 had	not	 come	down	 to	 the	 plains;	 for	 at	 least	 fifty	 years
nobody	had	ever	seen	him.	Thousands	of	time	they	asked	him,	 'Come	down	to
the	plains	because	many	people	cannot	come	 to	 such	heights	 to	 see	you	 --	 the
climb	is	arduous,	difficult,	dangerous.'
But	he	never	agreed	to.
And	the	day	Buddha	was	born	the	sage	suddenly	rushed	from	his	cave	towards
the	plains.	His	disciples	followed,	they	asked	'What	has	happened?'	And	he	was
doing	two	very	strange	things...	because	nobody	had	ever	seen	him	doing	such
things	--	he	was	almost	one-hundredandfifty	years	old,	that	was	the	legend	about
him,	he	was	crying	and	laughing	together.
He	 travelled	 the	 distance	 in	 twenty-four	 hours.	Buddha's	 father	 fell	 at	 his	 feet
and	received	him	into	the	palace.	It	was	a	great	blessing	and	particularly	at	such
a	moment	when	a	child	was	born	to	the	king.	The	king	had	waited	his	whole	life
for	only	two	things:	a	visit	from	this	sage	--	that	has	been	a	deep	longing	in	him	-
-	and	the	other	was	the	birth	of	a	child,	because	he	had	no	son	and	he	was	getting
old	 and	 his	whole	 kingdom	would	 be	without	 an	 heir;	 So	 these	were	 his	 two
longing	and	they	were	both	filled	almost	simultaneously.	He	rejoiced!	He	said	'It
is	a	miracle.	The	child	 for	whom	I	have	been	waiting	and	waiting	 is	born	and
you	have	come	--	this	is	the	greatest	day	of	my	life.'
The	old	man	said,	'First	things	first:	I	would	like	to	see	the	child.'	The	child	was
brought	in	and	the	old	man	touched	the	feet	of	the	child.	That	was	strange!	And
again	he	 started	crying	and	weeping.	The	king	was	very	much	puzzled	and	he
asked	 'What	 is	 the	matter?	Why	 are	 you	 crying	 and	why	 are	 you	 laughing?	 It
looks	insane.'	The	old	man	said	'I	am	crying	because	I	will	not	be	able	to	see	this
child	becoming	a	Buddha
--	my	death	is	very	close.	And	I	am	rejoicing	and	laughing	because	this	child	has
already	done	everything	that	is	needed	to	be	a	Buddha,	born	perfect.'
The	king	asked	him	 'You	give	him	a	name,'	 and	Siddhartha	was	given	by	 that
ancient	old	sage.
Siddhartha	means	one	who	has	already	achieved	it.	Siddha	means	one	who	has
achieved,	 artha	 means	 the	 meaning,	 the	 purpose;	 one	 who	 has	 achieved	 the
meaning	 and	 purpose	 of	 life	 already.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 question	 of	 time	 for	 the
unfolding,	 for	 others	 to	 recognise	 it.	 The	 bud	 is	 there,	 when	 the	 right	 season
comes	it	will	become	a	flower.
The	old	sage	said,	'It	is	inevitable	that	this	child	is	going	to	become	a	Buddha.	I
am	crying	because	I	will	not	be	able	to	see	this	flowering,	I	will	not	be	here	any
more	--	my	work	is	finished.	And	I	am	rejoicing	at	the	same	time	because	it	is	a
rare	moment	 to	 see	a	man	who	 is	born	perfect.	Now	 it	 is	only	a	question	of	a
little	time	for	the	unfolding.'
In	 fact	 that	 is	 the	 story	 of	 every	man,	 every	man	 is	 a	 Siddhartha.	 It	 is	 only	 a
question	how	much	time	you	take	for	unfolding	--	one	life,	two	lives,	three	lives.
It	is	only	a	question	of	time,	otherwise	everybody	is	born	a	Siddhartha.	It	is	one
of	the	most	beautiful	names	ever	given	to	anybody.
And	 the	 old	 sage's	 prophecy	 was	 fulfilled:	 one	 day	 that	 child	 blossomed	 and
became	one	of	the	most	beautiful	flowers	ever.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I'm	always	here	but	tomorrow	I	may	die.
--	Good!	Then	die	tomorrow	but	don't	die	today.	Tomorrow	never	comes	--	don't
be	worried	about	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
LOVE	BORN	OF	JOY	IS	A	JOKE
(You	can	love	out	of	misery	or	blissery.	Osho	is	addressing	Anand	Lida.)	When
love	is	out	of	misery	it	is	never	noble,	it	cannot	be.
Love	born	out	of	misery	is	a	need.	You	are	not	rejoicing	in	your	being,	you	are
miserable;	you	need	the	other	to	make	you	happy.	You	will	be	dependent	on	the
other,	and	dependence	cannot	be	noble.	Only	 freedom	is	noble.	Dependence	 is
ugly,	it	is	a	slavery.	and	because	you	depend	for	your	happiness	on	the	other	you
will	not	be	able	even	to	forgive	the	other.	There	will	be	a	deep	deep	vengefulness
--	that's	why	lovers	go	on	quarrelling.	They	cannot	be	separate	and	they	cannot
be	together.	Separate,	they	are	miserable;	together,	they	become	slaves.
When	love	is	born	out	of	blissfulness	it	is	a	totally	different	story.	If	the	first	kind
of	 love	 is	 a	 tragedy	 then	 the	 second	 kind	 of	 love	 is	 a	 comedy	 (laughter),	 it	 is
laughter	all	the	way!	It	is	hilarious	(more	laughter)...	for	the	simple	reason	that
now	there	is	no	dependence	on	the	other.	You	are	not	using	the	other	as	a	means.
There	is	no	need	in	fact	for	the	other;	you	are	simply	sharing	your	joy	--	it	is	a
gift.	And	when	one	gives	there	is	nobility;	when	one	begs,	of	course	it	cannot	be
noble,	 a	 beggar	 cannot	 be	 noble.	When	 one	 gives	 out	 of	 abundance	 one	 is	 an
emperor	--	and	that	brings	nobility.
In	becoming	a	sannyasin	become	blissful.	That's	what	meditation	is	for,	to	make
you	 blissful	 in	 your	 aloneness.	 That	 is	 the	 first	 thing,	 love	 can	 only	 be	 the
second.	When	you	have	blissfulness	then	share	it,	because	by	sharing,	it	grows;
you	 don't	 lose	 anything	 by	 sharing	 it,	 you	 gain.	 It	 is	 a	 totally	 different
mathematics:	the	more	you	give,	the	more	you	have;	the	less	you	give,	the	less
you	have	.	If	you	stop	giving,	it	disappears	from	you;	if	you	want	to	have	infinite
love	and	joy	then	go	on	giving	infinitely,	unconditionally.
That	 ultimate	 experience,	 when	 one	 is	 ready	 to	 give	 infinitely,	 is	 called	 the
experience	of	god.	It	is	pouring	oneself	into	existence	with	joy.	It	is	just	like	the
river	pouring	itself	into	the	ocean:	it	loses	nothing,	it	becomes	the	ocean.
LIFE	IS	A	HAPPY-EN-ING
(It's	a	process	not	a	thing,	Osho	tells	Gatyo.)
It	 is	 a	 long	beginningless,	 endless	process	of	 events.	Unless	we	understand	 its
dynamism	we	are	going	to	miss	its	flavour,	its	joy,	its	fragrance.	And	if	we	don't
understand	 its	 riverlike	quality	we	may	 start	 creating	 little	ponds	because	 they
look	 safer,	 secure,	 comfortable.	 But	 a	 pond	 is	 a	 dead	 phenomenon;	 a	 river	 is
alive.
And	 the	 pond	 is	 not	 going	 anywhere,	 it	 is	 static,	 stagnant;	 the	 river	 is	 always
reaching	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 the	 ocean,	 it	 is	 always	 enquiring	 into	 some
unknown	source,	because	it	has	come	from	the	ocean	and	it	is	going	back	to	the
original	source.	By	merging	with	the	ocean	it	will	find	its	original	home.
So	only	a	dynamic	life	comes	to	know	god,	otherwise	people	are	just	static	and
stagnant.	They	cling,	they	cling	to	everything.	They	don't	want	to	grow;	they	are
afraid	 of	 growth,	 they	 are	 afraid	 of	 the	 unknown,	 they	 are	 afraid	 of	 any
adventure.	And	sannyas	is	the	greatest	adventure	there	is,	because	you	will	have
to	 learn	 to	 renounce	 the	 known	 for	 the	 unknown,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 risk	 the
familiar	for	the	unfamiliar.	But	the	moment	you	start	risking	and	gambling	you
gather	courage	and	you	take	the	jump.	For	the	first	time	you	experience	ecstasy	-
-	otherwise	it	is	only	a	word,	very	few	people	have	experienced	it.
One	experiences	ecstasy	only	in	that	interval	when	one	leaves	the	known	for	the
unknown.	That	pause,	that	interval,	is	the	moment	one	becomes	aware	of	life	at
its	peak,	the	Everest	of	consciousness,	That	is	ecstasy,	and	to	know	it	is	to	know
all,	to	miss	it	is	to	have	lived	in	vain.
Going	All	the	Way
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011195
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
GIVE	GRABLESSLY
Man's	misery	consists	in	his	incapacity	to	give	love.	He	asks	for	love	but	he	is
not	willing	to	give;	he	demands,	but	he	has	completely	forgotten	that	unless	you
give	you	cannot	get.	Giving	comes	first	and	then	getting	is	inevitable,	it	happens
of	 its	 own	 accord.	 And	 when	 love	 comes	 without	 your	 asking,	 it	 brings
happiness.	When	you	ask	in	the	first	place	it	cannot	come.	If	it	comes	it	will	be
false,	pseudo,	hence	it	will	not	bring	happiness.	The	flowers	will	not	be	real	and
they	will	not	have	any	fragrance.
This	is	something	very	fundamental	for	every	sannyasin	to	understand:	give	and
forget	about	getting	it	back.	It	comes	back,	it	comes	back	a	thousandfold,	it	starts
showering	on	you.	That's	the	very	nature	of	existence:	whatsoever	we	give	to	it
comes	back	to	us,	aud	nature	is	not	miserly.	But	if	you	have	any	conditions	then
you	create	the	barrier.	Any	demand	and	you	have	broken	the	bridge.	Love	has	to
be	given	without	any	desire	for	getting	and	then	bliss	is	yours.
ROOTIN'	FOR	YOURSELF
(Sannyas	 is	 a	 rebellion	 that	 turns	you	 totally	 inside	out.)	The	greatest	 spiritual
phenomenon	 is	 rebellion.	 Remember	 the	 distinction	 between	 revolution	 and
rebellion:	revolution	is	political,	social,	extrovert;	 rebellion	 is	 inner,	 individual,
spiritual.	 Revolution	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 superficial;	 it	 cannot	 go	 deep	 because	 its
whole	 concern	 is	 to	 change	 the	 structure.	 The	 structure	 consists	 of	 the
circumference	of	things,	it	is	not	the	centre,	it	is	not	the	root.	Revolution	is	like
pruning	the	branches	and	the	 leaves;	 the	 leaves	will	come	up	again,	 in	fact	 the
foliage	will	become	thicker	by	pruning.
That's	why	every	revolution	has	failed.
And	in	the	wake	of	every	revolution	something	absolutely	against	the	revolution
has	 settled.	 It	 happened	 in	 the	 French	 revolution,	 it	 happened	 in	 the	 Russian
revolution,	 it	happened	 in	 the	Chinese.	 It	has	been	man's	whole	history.	Every
revolution	becomes	anti-revolutionary	finally,	it	starts	destroying	itself	because	it
never	touches	the	roots.
Rebellion	 cuts	 the	 roots	 and	 then	 the	 leaves	wither	 away	of	 their	 own	 accord.
Not	the	structure	but	man's	consciousness	has	to	be	changed,	not	his	behaviour
but	his	being	has	to	be	changed.	That	is	rebellion.
Sannyas	is	pure	rebellion.
HAVE	A	GOOD	LOOK	--	AND	LOOK	GOOD
(Insight	and	beauty	are	by-products	of	meditation,	Osho	 tells	Dhyan	Michiko.)
Meditation	brings	both.	On	one	hand	it	brings	tremendous	beauty	to	your	being
because	it	brings	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
spring	to	your	soul.	Thousands	of	flowers	suddenly	burst	into	explosion.	And	on
the	other	hand	it	brings	a	great	insight	into	things	--	that	is	wisdom.	Wisdom	is
not	knowledge,	wisdom	is	clarity,	the	capacity	to	see	things	as	they	are.
Your	name	precisely	defines	the	whole	process	of	sannyas.	Begin	in	meditation,
and	 beauty	 and	 wisdom	 will	 be	 the	 outcome	 of	 it.	 In	 following	 the	 path	 of
meditation	 one	 becomes	 beautiful	 and	 wise.	 And	 to	 be	 beautiful	 and	 wise	 is
more	than	one	can	ask	for.
(The	ability	to	be	alone	and	love	it	is	part	of	the	bargain	too.)	Meditation	is	the
art	of	being	alone,	absolutely	alone,	forgetting	the	whole	world	and	its	concerns,
its	worries,	its	tensions	as	if	it	does	not	exist	any	more.	When	you	come	to	that
space	 inside	you	when	only	you	are	 and	nothing	else	 exists,	 that	 is	 aloneness.
But	remember,	it	is	not	loneliness.	You	are	not	lonely,	you	are	with	yourself.	It	is
not	negative,	you	are	not	missing	anything;	in	fact	for	the	first	time	you	are	with
yourself,	 for	 the	first	 time	you	are	not	 lonely.	Aloneness	 is	 just	 the	opposite	of
loneliness.
Ordinarily	people	are	lonely	even	when	they	are	in	a	crowd.	You	can	see	in	the
trains,	 in	 the	 clubs	 in	 the	 hotels,	 on	 the	 streets,	 thousands	 of	 people	 rushing
hither	and	thither	and	all	look	lonely.	You	can	see	in	their	eyes	that	they	are	all
searching	for	'something'	and	there	is	frustration,	they	are	not	finding	it.
Even	 while	 they	 are	 with	 friends	 they	 are	 lonely,	 somehow	 trying	 to	 befool
themselves	 that	 they	 are	 not	 lonely.	 But	 how	 long	 can	 you	 befool	 yourself?
Sooner	 or	 later	 you	have	 to	 recognise	 it,	 the	 truth	 cannot	 be	 ignored	 for	 long.
Even	lovers	are	lonely.	Maybe	in	the	days	when	you	begin	a	new	love	affair	you
can	befool	yourself	and	the	other,	you	can	both	conspire	in	befooling	each	other
--	 that	 is	 what	 is	 called	 the	 honeymoon.	 It	 is	 a	 conspiracy.	 Two	 person	 have
agreed	to	befool	each	other;	it	is	a	contract.	But	for	how	long?	--	one	week,	two
weeks,	three	weeks	at	the	most.	If	you	are	American	then	one	week,	if	you	are
British	 then	three	weeks!	(laughter)	If	you	are	an	Indian	then	it	can	remain	for
your	whole	life	because	in	fact	in	India	the	honeymoon	never	begins.	It	is	just	a
marriage,	 no	 honeymoon.	 Indians	 have	 been	 so	 afraid	 that	 sooner	 or	 later	 the
honeymoon	will	be	finished,	that	they	never	begin	it,	 it	 is	better	not	to	begin	it
They	never	go	on	a	honeymoon,	they	simply	start	it	businesslike,	because	that's
how	it	has	to	become	sooner	or	later.	It	is	better	from	the	very	beginning	to	know
that	 it	 is	 just	hell	and	nothing	else.	Those	 three	weeks	of	being	 in	heaven	will
make	 it	 look	 even	 worse	 than	 it	 is,	 because	 compared	 with	 those	 flights	 of
fantasy,	 coming	 back	 to	 the	 earth	 will	 look	 as	 if	 you	 have	 failed,	 you	 have
missed.
So	Indians	have	completely	eradicated	the	idea	of	a	honeymoon.	Marriage	starts
in	a	businesslike	way,	it	is	not	a	love	affair.	The	lovers	are	not	really	lovers	at	all;
the	parents	decide,	 the	astrologers	decide,	 the	society	decides.	They	begin	 in	a
business-like	 way,	 everything	 is	 considered	 except	 their	 hearts.	 Then	 it	 can
remain	for	your	whole	life,	but	it	is	ugly.
Whether	American	 style,	British	 or	 Indian,	 it	makes	 no	 difference;	 people	 are
lonely,	 very	 lonely.	 They	 are	 surrounded	 by	 the	 family	 and	 the	 children	 and
everything	but	still	something	deep	down	is	empty.
One	tries	to	forget	it	through	alcohol	and	through	many	other	things,	but	they	are
all	in	a	way	alcoholic.
Anything	 that	 can	 help	 you	 to	 forget	 yourself	 and	 your	 loneliness,	 sitting	 in	 a
movie,	looking	at	the	TV,	going	to	see	a	volleyball	match...	Somehow	trying	to
forget	it	all.	But	for	how	long	can	you	forget,	for	how	long	can	you	watch	TV?
Yes,	 people	 are	 watching	 TV	 for	 five	 or	 six	 hours,	 glued	 to	 their	 chairs.	 But
sooner	or	later	you	have	to	come	back	to	yourself	and	again	the	same	emptiness
welcomes	you,	the	same	loneliness.
People	are	lonely	in	crowds,	lonely	in	their	relationship.	But	meditation	makes	a
miracle	 happen:	 you	 are	 alone	 and	 not	 lonely.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 are	with
yourself	and	enjoying	it,	rejoicing	in	it.
The	moment	you	start	rejoicing	in	your	aloneness	it	becomes	wisdom.	Then	you
are	no	more	dependent	on	anybody;	you	have	 found	 the	source	of	bliss	within
yourself	 --	 that	 is	wisdom.	Now	you	have	 immense	 freedom,	now	you	 can	be
anywhere,	even	in	hell,	and	you	will	be	blissful.
It	has	been	said	that	the	blissful	people	go	to	heaven	--	that	is	absolutely	wrong.	I
say	to	you	wherever	blissful	people	go	there	is	heaven.	It	is	not	certain	that	they
go	to	heaven	but	wherever	they	go	it	is	heaven.
And	wherever	the	miserable	people	go	it	is	hell.	Looking	at	the	faces	of	your	so-
called	saints	I	can	predict	that	wherever	they	are	they	must	be	in	hell.	Their	faces
are	so	miserable,	so	Christian,	so	Hindu,	not	human	at	all,	inhuman.	They	cannot
enjoy	any	thing.
Just	 the	other	day	 I	 read	a	 statement	by	 the	Polack	pope	 that	 sex	 is	good...	 as
long	as	you	don't	enjoy	it(laughter).	This	is	beautiful!	(much	laughter)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
HIS	COMMANDMENT,	OUR	CRIME
(We	might	end	up	in	a	situation	like	that	of	Jesus,	Osho	warns	us	tonight.	Society
couldn't	forgive	Jesus	for	his	joy.)
Jesus	said	again	and	again	to	his	disciples	to	rejoice.	That	was	his	sin.	All	other
things	are	rationalisations	--	that	he	was	trying	to	prove	himself	the	messiah,	the
Christ	and	he	was	not.	These	are	just	rationalisations	trying	to	hide	the	real	fact.
The	 real	 fact	 was	 that	 he	 was	 a	 blissful	 person	 and	 he	 was	 making	 his	 bliss
infectious,	and	the	establishment	became	afraid,	scared.
So	 if	 one	 wants	 to	 be	 blissful...	 And	 by	 being	 my	 sannyasin	 you	 have	 to	 be
blissful,	that's	the	only	should.	There	is	only	one	commandment:	Be	blissful	and
forget	all	the	other	nine.	Even	if	you	have	to	break	the	other	nine	it	is	perfectly
okay	but	be	blissful.
And	 certainly	 a	 strong	 spirit	 is	 needed.	 So	 remember	 your	 name,	 Peter,	 be
rocklike.	You	will	have	to	fight	the	whole	miserable	lot	that	is	around	you.	But
one	 thing	 is	 good	 about	 bliss,	 that	 it	 is	 really	 powerful,	 if	 you	 decide	 to	 be
blissful	the	whole	world	of	misery	cannot	destroy	your	bliss.
It	can	kill	you	(much	laughter)...	but	it	cannot	destroy	your	bliss.
(Perhaps	the	expression	on	the	sannyasin's	face	is	somewhat	apprehensive.	Osho
chuckles	and	reassures	him.)
--	Don't	worry!
It	won't	kill	you	first,	 it	will	kill	me	first.	Your	number	will	come	much	much
later...	 maybe	 it	 will	 not	 come	 at	 all	 because	 I	 have	 two	 hundred	 thousand
sannyasins.	But	you	are	all	going	to	be	caught	--	that's	the	reason	for	the	orange.
Jesus'	 disciples	 escaped	 at	 the	 right	 moment;	 my	 disciples	 cannot	 escape	 --	 I
have	made	every	arrangement	so	that	you	will	be	caught!
ARRIVING	IS	WHEN	YOU'VE	STOPPED	WANTING	TO
The	first	great	meditator	in	the	world,	Patanjali,	defined	meditation	as	a	state	of
thoughtless	awareness.
But	it	can	exist	in	two	ways.	It	can	be	thoughtless	yet	there	may	be	hidden	seeds
out	of	which	new	thoughts	can	arise...	 it	can	be	seedless,	 then	there	will	be	no
question	 of	 thoughts	 ever	 arising.	 The	 first	 of	meditation	 Patanjali	 calls	 sabij,
with	seeds.	The	second	he	calls	nirbij	without	seeds.	It	 is	possible	to	get	rid	of
thoughts	very	easily,	but	to	get	rid	of	the	seeds	is	far	more	difficult	because	they
are	very	subtle,	they	are	yet	unmanifest.
But	 once	 you	 have	 got	 rid	 of	 thoughts	 you	 become	 capable	 of	 seeing	 in	 your
own	depth,	if	there	are	any	seeds,	any	eggs,	if	there	is	any	desire	left.
Even	the	desire	to	attain	to	god	is	a	seeds	even	the	desire	to	be	blissful	is	a	seeds
even	the	desire	for	truth	is	a	seed.
So	first	the	meditator	has	to	get	rid	of	the	whole	jumble	and	junk	of	thoughts	and
then	he	has	to	search	for	seeds,	possible	seeds,	and	then	he	has	to	uproot	those
seeds	too.
The	first	step	is	to	become	thoughtless,	the	second	step	is	to	become	desireless,
and	 in	 these	 two	 steps	 the	 whole	 journey	 is	 complete.	 When	 there	 are	 no
thoughts	and	no	desires	one	has	arrived,	one	has	found	the	home	--	and	we	are
all	searching	for	it.
MIND	V.	CONSCIOUSNESS:	IT	NEEDS	NOT	A	JUDGE	BUT	A	WITNESS
(Osho	 is	 addressing	 Swami	Nirvikalpo.	His	 name	means	 a	 state	 of	 choiceless
awareness	--	which	defines	exactly	what	meditation	is.)
Meditation	 is	 a	 simple	method.	Your	mind	 is	 like	 a	TV	 screen.	Memories	 are
passing,	 images	 are	 passing,	 thoughts,	 desires,	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	 are
passing;	it	is	always	rush	hour.	And	the	road	is	almost	like	an	Indian	road	--	no
traffic	rules,	everybody,	is	going	in	every	direction.	One	has	to	watch	it	without
any	 evaluation,	 without	 any	 judgement	 without	 any	 choice,	 simply	 watching
unconcerned	as	if	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	you,	you	are	just	a	witness.	That	is
choiceless	awareness.
If	 you	 choose,	 if	 you	 say	 'This	 thought	 is	 good	 --	 let	 me	 have	 it',	 or	 'It	 is	 a
beautiful	desire,	a	beautiful	dream,	I	should	enjoy	it	a	little	more,	I	can	go	into	it
a	little	deeper'...	if	you	choose	you	lose	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
witnessing.	If	you	say	'This	is	bad,	this	is	immoral,	this	is	a	sin,	I	should	throw	it
out,'	you	start	struggling,	again	you	lose	your	witnessing.
You	can	lose	your	witnessing	in	two	ways;	either	being	for	or	against.	And	the
whole	secret	of	meditation	is	to	be	neither	for	nor	to	be	against,	but	unconcerned,
cool,	 without	 any	 preference,	 likes,	 dislikes,	 without	 any	 choice.	 If	 you	 can
manage	even	a	few	moments	of	that	witnessing	one	will	be	surprised	how	much
bliss	happens,	how	ecstatic	one	becomes.
In	 the	 beginning	 there	 are	 only	 a	 few	moments,	 then	 those	moments	 become
bigger.	And	as	you	become	a	true	witness,	without	any	choice,	 in	that	moment
the	whole	 traffic	disappears.	Suddenly	 the	TV	screen	 just	a	white	screen,	 there
are	 no	 pictures	 at	 all.	 And	 to	 see	 your	 mind	 as	 utterly	 empty	 is	 the	 greatest
experience	in	life	because	it	turns	your	consciousness	inwards.	There	is	nothing
to	see	there,	so	the	consciousness	takes	a	turn,	a	one-hundred-and-eighty	degree
turn,	an	about-turn.	And	in	that	turning	you	encounter	yourself.
That	is	selfknowledge,	and	to	know	oneself	is	to	know	all.	You	have	found	the
door	to	the	divine.
MIND	IS	MOVEMENT
(Or	 immobilisation	 is	 god-realisation.	 Osho	 is	 talking	 to	 Swami	 Sambhava.)
Sambhava	means	looking	at	things	with	equanimity,	equilibrium,	remaining	in	a
total	balance.	Success	comes,	 failure	comes,	and	you	remain	equally	 the	same,
for	you	there	is	no	difference	--	that	is	Sambhava.
And	 things	 are	 happening	 every	moment,	 a	 child	 is	 born	 to	 you	 and	 a	 parent
dies,	one	day	you	are	rich,	another	day	you	are	poor,	one	day	you	are	famous,
another	 day	 you	 become	 just	 a	 nobody.	 To	 remain	 balanced	 in	 all	 possible
situations,	that	is	sambhava	and	that	is	the	secret	of	sannyas.
A	sannyasin	is	one	who	lives	in	equilibrium.	For	him	everything	is	the	same;	life
and	death	are	both	the	same,	youth	and	old	age	are	both	the	same,	day	and	night,
summer,	 winter	 --	 everything.	 He	 takes	 everything	 playfully,	 without	 any
seriousness.	Just	visualise	that	and	you	will	see	that	that	is	the	very	key.
Then	you	are	always	in	a	state	of	tremendous	silence.	Nothing	can	shake	you	up,
nothing	 can	 disturb	 you,	 nothing	 can	 distract	 you	 from	your	 centre	 --	 you	 are
centred,	grounded.	That	centering	is	sannyas.
So	that	has	to	be	your	work	upon	yourself.	Slowly	slowly	let	the	pendulum	not
move	far	away	between	extremes,	let	it	swing	less	and	less	and	less	and	less,	so	a
moment	comes	when	it	settles	exactly	in	the	middle.	The	moment	the	pendulum
settles	 in	 the	 middle	 the	 clock	 stops.	 The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 the	 mind:	 the
moment	you	settle	in	sambhava	the	mind	stops.	Mind	is	time,	mind	is	a	clock	--
it	 keeps	 you	 moving	 like	 a	 pendulum.	 Unless	 you	 move	 like	 a	 pendulum	 it
cannot	work.
So	from	this	very	moment	start	working.	Swing	less	and	less	so	that	one	day	that
great	 moment	 comes	 to	 your	 life	 when	 all	 movement	 disappears.	 You	 are
suddenly	there	and	nothing,	nothing	at	all,	can	shake	you	from	your	centre	--	that
day	is	the	day	of	enlightenment.
UPSTREAM	STRUGGLE	OR	DOWNSTREAM	DANCE
(Sannyas	is	opting	for	the	latter.)
The	ego	is	very	resistant,	it	is	always	in	a	search	to	fight	with	existence.	It	can
survive	 only	 through	 fighting.	 The	 moment	 you	 drop	 the	 fight	 the	 ego	 dies,
fighting	 is	 its	nourishment;	hence	 the	ego	 is	very	much	against	 surrender.	 It	 is
ready	to	go	to	any	length	to	fight,	to	suffer,	to	be	miserable,	but	it	is	not	ready	to
surrender.	And	by	 fighting	with	 existence	 you	 are	 not	 going	 to	 gain	 anything;
you	will	go	on	losing.	How	can	one	fight	with	existence?	--	we	are	part	of	it.	The
part	 cannot	 fight	with	 the	whole.	And	 if	 it	 fights	 it	 cannot	hope	 to	win	 --	 that
much	 is	 certain.	 There	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	winning,	 one	 is	 bound	 to	 lose,	 and
then	there	is	frustration	and	misery	and	constant	fear	because	it	is	a	losing	battle.
The	sannyasin	is	one	who	seeing	it	surrenders	the	ego.	He	says	to	existence	'I	am
no	more,	you	are.'	He	 stops	going	upstream,	he	 starts	 flowing	with	 the	 stream
wherever	 it	 is	going.	He	drops	all	his	 individual	goals,	he	simply	becomes	one
with	the	whole	and	starts	taking	the	destiny	of	the	whole	as	his	destiny	too.
Now	there	is	no	question	of	defeat,	now	all	the	way	there	is	victory.	And	when
there	 is	 victory	 every	 moment	 one	 is	 certainly	 in	 a	 state	 of	 ecstasy,	 constant
ecstasy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011205
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
BRIDGE	OR	BLOCKADE?
(Osho	talks	on	the	relationship	between	existence	and	the	person	of	ecstasy,	as
opposed	to	the	misery-maker.)
The	blissful	person	is	always	preferred	by	the	whole	existence.	The	miserable	at
the	most	is	tolerated	or	ignored.	The	miserable	cannot	really	be	part	of	existence;
he	himself	creates	barriers,	he	makes	walls	around	himself.	The	blissful	person
creates	bridges,	he	relates	with	life,	he	relates	because	he	rejoices	in	relating.
He	is	open,	available.	Out	of	his	bliss	comes	his	trust.	And	remember,	when	you
trust	existence,	existence	trusts	you.
Existence	always	pays	you	in	the	same	coin.	A	sannyasin	has	to	learn	the	art	of
being	 continuously	 blissful,	 irrespective	 of	 the	 situation.	 That's	 the	 difference
between	 happiness	 and	 bliss.	 Happiness	 depends	 on	 a	 certain	 situation.	 The
moment	the	situation	disappears,	happiness	disappears;	it	 is	situational.	Bliss	is
non-situational,	it	is	always	there.	Whatsoever	happens	on	the	outside	makes	no
difference.
One	 is	 blissful	 in	 life,	 one	 is	 blissful	 in	 death	 too,	 in	 success,	 in	 failure,	 in
richness,	 in	 poverty,	 in	 sickness,	 in	 health.	 The	 polarities	make	 no	 difference;
one	remains	balanced	exactly	in	the	middle.	To	remain	balanced	like	a	tightrope
walk	is	the	whole	meaning	of	sannyas.
TO	VERBALISE	IS	TO	FALSIFY
(Deva	 means	 god,	 or	 even	 better,	 godliness,	 Osho	 explains	 to	 Swami	 Deva
Tony.)	God	is	not	a	person	but	a	presence,	not	a	flower	but	a	fragrance;	hence	no
statue	can	do	justice	to	god.
He	has	no	boundary,	no	shape,	no	form.
The	word	 'god'	 can	mislead	 one,	 because	 it	 gives	 one	 the	 feeling	 that	 he	 is	 a
person;	then	he	must	be	somewhere,	then	he	must	be	someone.	The	whole	idea
of	god	the	father,	the	supreme	self,	the	creator	--	all	these	attributes	have	arisen
because	of	a	misinterpretation.	To	think	of	god	as	a	person	is	to	miss	the	point.
God	is	an	experience	like	love.	You	cannot	visualise	love,	you	cannot	visualise
god	either;	you	can	experience	both.
And	the	word	'Tony'	means	beyond	praise.	There	is	no	possibility	of	praising	god
because	what	can	we	say	about	the	ultimate?	Whatsoever	we	say	will	be	wrong.
Lao	Tzu	says	that	to	say	the	truth	is	to	falsify	it.
The	moment	you	utter	it,	it	is	no	longer	the	truth,	it	becomes	a	lie.	And	all	our
prayers	in	the	churches,	in	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
temples,	in	the	mosques,	are	nothing	but	praises	of	god:	'You	are	great,	you	are
compassionate,	 you	 are	 this,	 you	 are	 that...'	 and	 god	 is	 beyond	 praise.	All	 our
words	 fall	 short,	 they	 are	 bound	 to	 fall	 short.	 They	 are	 needed	 for	 a	 hum	 an
dialogue,	they	are	useful,	but	the	whole	language	is	man's	creation.
God	knows	no	language.	So	to	be	in	utter	silence	is	the	only	true	prayer.	To	say
anything	is	to	destroy	it.
And	silence	has	one	beautiful	thing	about	it:	it	is	neither	Christian	nor	Hindu	nor
Mohammedan.
Whatsoever	you	say	will	be	either	Christian	or	Hindu	or	Mohammedan,	because
words	have	associations;	words	come	from	the	past,	from	tradition.	The	Hindu
praises	 god	 in	 one	 way,	 the	 Mohammedan	 in	 another,	 the	 Christian	 in	 still
another.	But	silence	cannot	be	different	--	it	is	one.	Then	the	Mohammedan	and
the	Christian	and	the	Hindu	and	the	Jew	and	the	Jaina	and	the	Buddhist	are	all
silent;	 then	 all	 religions	 have	 disappeared.	 Religions	 belong	 to	 the	 world	 of
words,	now	what	 remains	 is	 religiousness.	God	has	disappeared,	what	 remains
now	is	godliness	--	the	fragrance,	the	presence.	It	is	felt	in	silence.
My	whole	effort	here	 is	 to	help	you	 to	be	blissfully	silent.	And	remember	 that
condition	--	blissfully,	because	one	can	be	silent	in	a	dead	way,	in	a	cold	way,	in
a	kind	of	indifference.	That	silence	is	not	prayer,	it	is	not	alive	at	all	--	how	can	it
be	prayer?	It	cannot	breathe,	it	has	no	heartbeat;	it	is	ice-cold.
The	silence	must	be	at	 the	same	 time	a	song,	 it	 should	have	 the	 flavour	of	 the
song.	It	will	not	have	words	but	it	will	have	a	tune.	It	will	be	pure	music,	it	will
be	 dance.	 Only	 then,	 when	 silence	 is	 blissful,	 does	 one	 come	 in	 contact	 with
godliness.
(Jutta	happens	to	follow	next.	Before	he	hands	her	the	name-sheet	Osho	pauses
and	grins.)	Now	your	name	creates	a	 trouble	 for	me.	Jutta	means	praise	of	 the
lord	--	but	I	have	my	own	ways!
This	will	be	your	full	name:	Ma	Shanti	Jutta.	Shanti	means	silent	--	silent	praise
of	 the	lord.	Jutta	 is	Hebrew	and	I	am	also	a	Jew	so	I	know	how	to	trick	them!
(laughter)	There	is	no	possibility	of	praising	god.	Whatsoever	we	say	will	come
out	of	our	minds	because	only	the	mind	speaks;	the	heart	is	always	silent.	And	it
is	the	heart	that	has	to	communicate	with	god,	not	the	head.
The	 head	 is	 needed	 for	 the	 world	 and	 the	 heart	 for	 the	 further	 shore,	 for	 the
beyond.	 The	 head	 has	 no	 possibility	 of	 even	 comprehending	 the	 beyond.	 It	 is
beyond	it,	 that's	why	it	 is	called	 the	beyond,	but	 it	 is	within	 the	heart.	What	 is
beyond	the	head	is	not	beyond	the	heart.	What	is	beyond	the	head	is	within	the
heart,	it	is	pulsating	there	already.
God	 is	 our	 very	 heartbeat,	 our	 life!	 To	 me	 life	 and	 god	 are	 absolutely
synonymous;	 they	don't	mean	two	different	 things	--	perhaps	 they	are	different
petals	of	the	same	lotus.
In	 the	East	we	have	 called	 the	 lotus	 one-thousand	petalled.	This	 one-thousand
petalled	 lotus	 does	 not	 exist	 anywhere	 on	 the	 outside,	 it	 is	 the	 lotus	 of
consciousness.	And	it	is	one-thousand	petalled	because	consciousness	has	multi-
dimensionality:	 love	 is	 one	 of	 the	 petals,	 freedom	 another,	 bliss	 still	 another,
truth...
and	 so	 on	 and	 so	 forth.	 All	 the	 great	 values	 for	 which	 we	 are	 searching	 and
longing	and	for	which	we	are	thirsty	and	hungry,	are	all	petals	of	the	same	lotus.
And	by	getting	hold	of	one	petal	you	will	be	able	to	reach	the	centre	of	the	lotus,
there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 through	 all	 the	 petals.	And	 once	 you	 have	 reached	 the
centre	you	will	know	that	all	the	petals	are	joined	at	the	centre.
The	 journey	 begins	 in	 the	 heart	 and	 also	 ends	 in	 the	 heart.	Words,	 thoughts,
ideologies,	 religions,	 dogmas,	 doctrines	 --	 they	 all	 belong	 to	 the	 head.	 The
rabbis,	 the	pundits,	 the	popes	 --	 they	 all	 belong	 to	 the	head.	The	 authentically
religious	person	 is	nothing	but	 a	pure	heart,	 an	 innocent	heart;	he	 is	 a	kind	of
heartfulness,	 an	 overflowing	 heartfulness.	 But	 that	 experience	 is	 utterly	 silent,
inexpressible,	wordless.
Because	 it	 is	 wordless,	 it	 is	 infinite,	 vast,	 immense.	 Falling	 into	 that	 silence
where	you	can	hear	your	own	heartbeat	is	the	praise	of	the	lord.
So	learn	to	be	silent,	bow	down	in	silence	to	the	earth,	to	the	trees,	to	the	moon,
to	the	sun.	It	does	not	matter	what	the	object	is,	what	matters	is	bowing	down	--
surrender,	 that	 feeling	of	gratitude.	Wherever	one	 is	 full	of	gratitude	 there	 is	a
temple.	 Wherever	 such	 a	 man	 sits,	 that	 place	 becomes	 sacred;	 wherever	 he
moves	he	transforms	the	energy	because	he	carries	his	own	Buddhafield	around
him.	His	silence,	his	joy,	his	love,	his	compassion	--	it	is	all	there,	but	absolutely
silent.
A	COP	OF	YOUR	OWN	CONSCIOUSNESS
(Meditation	 means	 watching	 the	 traffic	 of	 your	 thoughts,	 Osho	 explains	 to
another	sannyasin.)	That	watchfulness	 is	meditation.	 It	 is	not	 the	chanting	of	a
mantra.	That	is	sheer	stupidity.	You	can	call	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
it	transcendental	stupidity	(laughter)...	but	it	is	not	meditation.
Meditation	 is	 simply	watchfulness	 --	 doing	 nothing	 but	watching.	Watching	 is
not	something	to	be	done;	you	are	simply	there	and	the	mind	is	moving,	and	you
go	on	 looking	at	 it.	 In	 that	very	 looking	a	miracle	 starts	happening.	The	more
intense	your	look,	the	more	thoughts	disappear.	Moments	come	when	suddenly
your	awareness	is	at	a	peak,	at	the	optimum.	In	that	pause	the	mind	disappears
completely.	Then	one	comes	 to	know	the	arithmetic:	 if	 the	mind	is	ninety-nine
per	cent,	 then	awareness	 is	one	per	cent;	 if	 awareness	 is	 ten	per	cent,	 then	 the
mind	is	ninety	per	cent;	if	the	awareness	is	fifty	per	cent,	then	mind	is	fifty	per
cent;	 the	moment	 awareness	 is	 ninety-nine	 per	 cent	 the	mind	 is	 one	 per	 cent.
And	 when	 that	 fortunate	 moment	 comes	 when	 awareness	 is	 one	 hundred	 per
cent,	mind	is	nil.	That	is	the	moment	when	your	whole	energy	takes	a	quantum
leap,	when	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	become	aware	of	 the	meaning	of	 life	 and	 its
splendour.
Alfred	means	wise;	that	is	the	moment	when	one	becomes	wiser	when	wisdom
explodes	 because	 now	 you	 have	 the	 clarity,	 the	 perceptiveness,	 the	 silence,
awareness	--	all	that	is	needed	for	wisdom	to	arrive.
You	 have	 prepared	 the	 ground.	 Then	 not	 even	 a	 single	 moment	 is	 lost;
immediately,	one	becomes	a	Buddha,	a	Christ.	That's	what	wisdom	is:	to	become
a	Buddha,	a	Christ.	Then	one	simply	knows;	without	any	knowledge	one	simply
knows.	And	that	knowing	starts	guiding	you.	Now	you	have	an	inner	voice,	an
inner	light,	and	it	never	commits	any	mistake,	 it	never	takes	you	in	any	wrong
direction.	It	is	essentially	right;	it	is	impossible	for	it	to	be	wrong.
YOU	CHOOSE	THE	BLUES
(It's	up	to	us,	Osho	reminds	us	again	tonight.)
Misery	is	a	sin,	and	blissfulness	is	virtue,	although	for	centuries	just	the	opposite
has	been	taught.
People	have	been	told	that	if	you	sin	you	will	suffer,	and	If	you	are	virtuous	you
will	be	rewarded	by	bliss.
That	is	putting	the	whole	thing	upside-down.
I	 say	 if	 you	 are	 blissful	 virtue	 will	 follow	 you.	 Your	 life	 will	 have	 a	 certain
sacredness.	 Your	 actions	 will	 be	 inevitably	 beautiful,	 graceful,	 in	 tune	 with
existence,	never	against	the	law	of	the	universe,	always	in	accordance	with	it.
And	if	you	are	miserable,	whatsoever	you	do	you	will	do	wrong.	Out	of	misery
good	cannot	happen.
The	 miserable	 person	 sometimes	 intends	 to	 do	 good,	 his	 intentions	 are	 not
suspect,	but	the	ultimate	result	is	always	bad.
And	you	can	see	it	all	over	the	world.	All	the	parents	are	trying	to	do	good	for
their	 children,	 and	 they	are	 all	destroying	 them	 too.	Their	 intentions	are	good,
but	they	are	miserable	people;	they	are	blind.	They	have	not	lived	their	life	in	a
celebration.	Their	very	vibe	is	poisonous,	so	what	can	good	intentions	do?	That
poison	will	ride	upon	their	good	intentions.	Their	good	intentions	will	never	be
fulfilled;	 just	 the	opposite	will	be	 the	result.	The	politicians,	 the	priests,	are	all
full	of	good	intentions	but	the	outcome	is	this	chaos	in	the	whole	world.
My	insistence	is:	first,	drop	your	misery	--	and	it	can	be	dropped,	just	like	that.	It
is	only	a	question	of	not	choosing	it.	It	is	your	choice.	You	can	decide	not	to	be
miserable,	 and	 then	nothing	can	affect	you.	You	can	decide	 to	be	blissful.	Try
tomorrow	 (laughter).	 From	 the	 very	 morning	 decide	 to	 be	 blissful,	 and	 see
whether	what	I	am	saying	is	possible	or	not.
Sometimes	 the	old	habits	may	come	 in;	 then	 immediately	 remind	yourself	 that
today	you	have	decided	to	be	blissful.	Follow	the	decision.	And	if	you	can	do	it
for	one	day,	you	can	do	it	for	your	whole	life.
In	 fact,	 if	 a	 person	 can	 be	 blissful	 for	 a	 single	 moment,	 he	 knows	 the	 art.
Because	 you	 will	 not	 get	 two	 moments	 together;	 you	 will	 always	 get	 one
moment	at	one	time	--	and	that	much	of	the	secret	you	know!
Right	now	you	are	blissful	(laughter)...	this	is	the	secret	--	just	don't	forget	it!
CRIMINAL	OR	CHRIST
(Either	way,	you've	got	it	coming	to	you	because	you're	a	threat	to	society,	Osho
warns	Ma	Prem	Amrita.)
The	only	thing	in	existence	that	is	immortal,	that	defies	death,	is	love.	The	body
dies,	the	mind	dies	--
everything	that	begins	ends.	Only	love	never	dies,	because	it	is	our	very	nature.
It	 never	 begins,	 hence	 it	 cannot	 end.	 It	 has	 always	 been	with	 us;	 it's	 our	 very
being.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 strange	 thing	 is,	 the	 society	 is	 very	 much	 against	 love.	 It	 tries	 in	 every
possible	way	not	to	allow	your	loving	nature	to	surface;	it	represses	it.	And	then,
instead	of	a	humanity	we	have	only	a	crowd	of	subhuman	beings.	And	they	are
really	 in	 a	 mess...	 because	 they	 are	 no	 more	 animals.	 Animals	 are	 in	 a	 way
happy.	At	least	they	don't	have	the	popes	to	destroy	their	happiness,	to	give	them
commandments.	 to	 tell	 them	 what	 to	 do	 and	 what	 not	 to	 do.	 They	 live
spontaneously;	nobody	disturbs	their	spontaneity.
Man	 is	 no	more	 an	 animal	 and	he	 is	 not	 yet	 a	 human.	He	has	been	prevented
from	 being	 human	 by	 the	 vested	 interests.	 They	 don't	 want	 him	 to	 become
animal	again	so	in	every	way	they	punish	the	criminals	so	nobody	falls	from	this
subhuman	 state.	 And	 they	 punish	 Buddhas	 also.	 It	 is	 a	 strange	 world:	 they
punish	the	criminals	and	they	punish	the	saints,	the	sages.
The	 real	 saints	 are	 always	 punished.	 It	 is	 significant	 that	 when	 Jesus	 was
crucified	he	was	crucified	just	in	between	two	criminals.	On	that	day	there	were
three	crosses;	on	both	sides	of	him	there	was	a	thief	also	crucified	with	him.
Society	 crucifies	 the	 person	 who	 falls	 below	 humanity	 because	 he	 becomes
animal-like,	 and	 the	 society	 also	 crucifies	 the	 person	 who	 goes	 beyond
subhumanity	 because	 he	 becomes	 godlike.	 Society	 is	 afraid	 of	 both,	 society
wants	you	to	be	just	in	the	middle.	But	to	be	in	the	middle	is	a	very	tense	state.
One	is	neither	here	nor	there	--	in	a	limbo,	torn	apart,	one	cannot	be	at	ease,	one
cannot	be	at	home.
Society	is	afraid	of	the	criminal	because	he	will	create	chaos.	Society	is	afraid	of
the	Christs	 and	Buddhas	 also	 because	 they	will	 also	 create	 chaos.	 In	 different
ways	they	are	both	going	to	create	chaos.	The	animal	will	create	chaos	because
he	will	bring	violence,	aggression,	destruction;	and	the	Buddha	will	create	chaos
because	he	will	release	the	energies	of	love.
Of	 course,	 the	 chaos	 created	 by	 the	 Buddhas	 is	 beautiful	 because	 out	 of	 that
chaos	 all	 the	 stars	 are	 born,	 out	 of	 that	 chaos	 is	 creativity.	 But	 the	 society	 is
against	both.	Society	is	going	to	be	against	me,	too,	and	against	my	sannyasins
too.	So	anybody	who	dares	 to	be	with	me	has	 to	be	absolutely	ready:	 ready	 to
risk,	ready	to	gamble.	And	that	is	possible	only	if	the	relationship	with	me	is	of
love.
Two	types	of	people	come	to	me:	a	few	come	intellectually	convinced	that	what
I	am	saying	is	right	--
their	 relationship	with	me	 is	 very	 fragile;	 they	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 sacrifice	 or
risk.	Whenever	 things	 are	 going	 good	 they	will	 be	with	me,	 and	when	 things
start	going	bad	they	will	not	be	with	me.	Not	only	that;	they	can	even	be	against
me	just	to	protect	themselves.
But	 the	 real	 sannyasins	happens	not	 out	 of	 intellectual	 conviction	but	 out	 of	 a
heartfelt	 longing.	 With	 the	 real	 sannyasin	 it	 is	 a	 love	 affair.	 Then	 one	 can
sacrifice	everything,	even	life	itself,	because	love	is	far	higher	than	life.	Life	is
only	an	opportunity	 to	achieve	 love,	 life	 is	only	a	 ladder	 towards	 love.	Life	 is
mortal,	love	is	immortal,	the	mortal	can	be	sacrificed	for	the	immortal.
(Osho	 seems	 to	 pause	 for	 a	 split	 second,	 then	 adds	 something	 that	makes	 one
look	twice	new	sannyasin.)	Remember	it	--	you	will	need	it	in	your	life.
GIVE	YOUR	EGO	THE	BOOT
(...	and	become	god's	flute.	His	name,	Prabhupad,	means	at	the	feet	of	the	lord	--
surrendered,	dedicated,	Osho	tells	another	new	sannyasin.)
All	that	we	have	to	surrender	is	the	ego.	It	is	in	fact	rubbish,	but	we	don't	have
anything	else.	Everything	else	 is	god-given;	only	ego	 is	what	we	have	created.
That	which	is	already	god-given	cannot	be	surrendered,	only	that	which	we	have
created	can	be	surrendered.
Sannyas	 means	 surrendering	 the	 ego	 and	 relaxing,	 feeling	 at	 home	 with
existence,	 dropping	 all	 conflict	 and	 struggle,	 being	 in	 a	 let-go.	 And	 then
immense	 bliss	 follows,	 infinite	 benediction	 showers;	 flowers	 and	 flowers	 rain,
for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 you	 have	 removed	 the	 barrier.	 They	 were	 already
showering;	 it	 is	 just	 that	 your	 barrier	was	 not	 allowing	you	 to	 have	 a	 contact,
your	eyes	were	closed.	The	sun	rays	were	knocking	on	the	doors.
The	moment	you	drop	the	ego	you	open	your	eyes,	you	open	your	doors,	and	the
sun	 comes	 rushing	 in,	 and	 the	 wind	 and	 the	 rain,	 and	 the	 whole	 existence
suddenly	starts	flowing	through	you.	You	become	a	flute,	and	god	starts	singing
beautiful	songs	on	you.
That's	how	a	sannyasin	has	to	be	--	a	hollow	bamboo	flute.	That's	my	symbol	for
a	sannyasin,	the	hollow	bamboo	flute.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
GRATEFUL	OR	GRUMPY
(The	 first	 is	 the	 attitude	 of	 the	 really	 religious	 person.)	 One	 of	 the	 greatest
mistakes	in	life	is	to	take	life	for	granted.	It	is	a	gift	and	one	should	be	grateful
for	it;	one	should	not	take	it	for	granted.	We	don't	deserve	it,	we	have	not	earned
lt;	it	has	simply	been	given	to	Us.
We	are	not	even	worthy	of	 it.	And	not	only	has	life	been	given	to	us,	 love	has
been	 given	 to	 us,	 joy	 has	 been	 given	 to	 us,	 awareness	 has	 been	 given	 to	 us.
Thousands	of	gifts	are	contained	in	the	one	gift	of	life.
To	 feel	 grateful	 towards	 existence	 is	 to	 be	 religious.	 But	 instead	 of	 feeling
grateful	people	are	continuously	complaining.	That's	the	only	difference	between
the	 irreligious	 and	 the	 religious.	 The	 irreligious	 person	 is	 continually
complaining;	he	is	grumpy.	And	the	religious	person	is	contented.	He	is	always
thankful	because	he	feels	more	has	been	given	to	him	than	he	could	ever	ask	for.
And	that	is	the	way	of	the	sannyasin.
LOVERLESS	LOVE
(Love	 can	 exist	 in	 three	ways	Osho	begins	 in	 his	 address	 to	Ma	Premal.)	The
first	is	love	as	a	relationship.	One	is	loving	only	to	a	certain	person,	and	that	too
at	certain	moments.
When	 the	 person	 agrees	 with	 you,	 is	 according	 to	 you,	 is	 fulfilling	 your
expectations,	when	he	is	just	a	shadow	to	you	and	you	can	possess	him,	then	you
are	loving.
There	are	a	thousand	and	one	conditions	in	relationships.	The	moment	any	single
condition	 is	 not	 fulfilled	 love	 disappears.	 Love	 turns	 into	 hatred	 any	moment.
The	same	person	for	whom	you	would	have	died	--	you	can	kill	him.	So	that	is
the	lowest	kind	of	love,	love	as	relationship.
Your	name,	Premal,	means	the	second	kind	of	love.	It	is	not	a	relationship;	one	is
simply	 loving.	 It	 has	nothing	 to	do	with	 somebody	 in	particular,	 one	 is	 loving
whether	 one	 is	 alone	 or	with	 someone.	One	 is	 loving	with	 the	 trees,	with	 the
river,	with	the	mountains.	Sitting	alone	in	one's	room	one	is	loving.	Then	love	is
just	like	the	fragrance	of	a	flower	--	whether	somebody	is	present	or	not	does	not
matter.
This	 is	 transforming	 love	 from	 something	 very	 ordinary	 and	 animal	 into
something	 extraordinary	 and	 human.	Now	 love	 becomes	 a	 quality.	 That	 is	 the
meaning	of	Premal.
There	is	one	stage	more,	higher	than	that,	but	first	one	has	to	attain	this	second.
And	 the	second	 is	 the	most	 important,	even	more	 important	 than	 the	 third,	 the
highest,	because	once	the	second	is	there	the	third	is	bound	to	follow.	You	need
not	do	anything	about	it.
The	first	is	love	as	a	relationship,	the	second	is	lovingness	and	the	third	is	when
one	becomes	love	itself,	so	one	is	not	even	conscious	that	one	is	loving.	In	the
second	 there	 is	 consciousness	 a	 certain	 self-consciousness	 that	 one	 is	 loving.
That	is	the	only	flaw	left.	But	you	cannot	remove	it	yourself,	because	if	you	do
then	again	you	will	be	there.	Then	more	self-consciousness	will	arise:	'Look	how
great	I	am	--	I	have	removed	the	last	flaw!	Now	I	am	love,	pure	love.'	But	that	'I'
is	still	there.
You	cannot	do	anything;	once	you	have	attained	to	the	second,	you	have	to	wait
for	 the	 third	 --	 it	 comes	 as	 a	 gift	 from	 god.	 It	 always	 comes.	 You	 deserve	 it
because	 you	 have	 attained	 the	 second.	 Then	 one	 day	 suddenly	 the	 self-
consciousness	disappears	and	only	pure	love	is	left.	Everybody	will	feel	it;	only
you	 will	 not	 be	 conscious	 of	 it.	 And	 the	 more	 you	 are	 without	 self-
consciousness,	the	more	others	will	feel	it.
So	 attain	 the	 second,	 and	 leave	 the	 third	 for	 god.	 We	 always	 have	 to	 leave
something	 for	 him	 to	 do,	 otherwise	 he	 will	 be	 completely	 unemployed
(laughter).	And	 it	won't	 be	 a	 good	 scene:	 god	 standing	 before	 an	 employment
office	in	the	queue....	That	won't	be	a	good	sight.	We	have	to	leave	a	few	things
for	god!
THE	MELODY	OF	MINDLESSNESS
(That's	 the	meaning	 of	Omkar,	Osho	 tells	 the	 last	 sannyasin.)	 It	 is	 heard	 only
when	 all	 other	 noise	 has	 been	 dropped,	 when	 the	 mind	 is	 without	 thoughts,
without	desires;	the	heart	is	without	feelings,	without	emotions.	When	the	mind
and	heart	 are	both	 absolutely	 empty,	 then	 suddenly	you	hear	 something	which
was	always	there	but	which	you	had	never	heard;	you	were	so	preoccupied	with
other	things.
Suddenly	a	great	silent	music	is	heard,	a	soundless	sound,	just	a	pure	feeling	of
well-being,	as	if	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
whole	 body,	mind	 and	 soul	 are	 in	 a	 subtle	 dance,	 as	 if	 each	of	 your	 cells	 and
fibres	is	pulsating	and	humming.	That	humming	sound	is	called	omkar.	And	that
has	to	be	heard,	because	in	hearing	it	one	comes	to	know	the	beauty,	the	grace,
the	 benediction,	 the	 bliss	 of	 existence.	 In	 hearing	 it	 one	 has	 heard	 all	 the
scriptures.	In	hearing	it	one	has	heard	the	Buddhas,	the	Christs,	the	Lao	Tzus.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011215
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
BLISS	IS	A	SPENDTHRIFT
(It's	life	is	in	its	being	shared,	Osho	tells	Anand	Angelo.	To	begin	he	explains	the
first	meaning	of	Angelo:	a	bringer	of	truth.)
The	state	of	bliss	 is	a	passage	for	god	 to	enter	 into	 the	world.	Misery	 is	 like	a
cloud.	The	sun	cannot	penetrate	the	cloud	although	it	is	there,	but	when	the	sky
is	clouded	you	don't	get	the	light.
Truth	 is	 always	 there,	but	our	minds	are	 full	of	 clouds,	dark	clouds	of	misery,
sadness,	seriousness.	That	prevents	us,	that	becomes	a	barrier	between	us	and	the
truth.	Once	these	clouds	are	dispersed	the	sun	starts	shining	forth;	you	are	bathed
in	it.	And	it	is	not	only	that	you	are	transformed	through	it,	you	start	delivering
the	message	through	your	actions,	gestures,	words,	silence.
Hence	the	other	meaning	of	Angelo:	the	messenger	of	god.	The	blissful	person	is
a	messenger	of	god.
That	 is	 inevitable.	When	you	are	blissful	you	are	bound	 to	share	 it.	When	you
have	the	truth	you	cannot	be	miserly	about	it,	because	the	mathematics	of	truth	is
that	 the	more	you	give	it,	 the	more	you	have	it,	 the	less	you	give,	 the	less	you
have.	If	you	stop	sharing,	it	dies.	Sharing	is	its	very	breath,	its	very	heartbeat.
TRUTH	--	LESS	A	THEORY,	MORE	A	FLAVOUR
(Osho	is	talking	to	Satya	Antonella;	she	is	from	Italy.)	Satya	means	the	truth	--
not	a	 theory	about	 the	 truth	but	 truth	 itself,	 the	experience	of	 it,	 the	 immediate
communion	with	it,	not	going	round	and	round	in	thinking.	Thinking	is	always
about	and	about;	it	goes	on	in	circles.
Truth	never	comes	through	thinking	--	that	is	not	its	way.	When	thinking	stops,	it
is	there.	And	truth	is	not	an	experience	like	other	experiences,	either.	When	you
experience	something	it	remains	separate	from	you;	when	you	experience	truth
you	are	 it.	 The	 experiencer	 and	 the	 experienced	 are	 not	 two,	 the	 knower	 and
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	known	are	not	two.	The	seer	and	the	seen	become	one,	the	observed	and	the
observer	are	exactly	the	same.
And	 Antonella	 means	 priceless.	 This	 experience	 of	 truth	 cannot	 be	 given	 by
anybody	 to	 you,	 neither	 purchased	 or	 sold.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 commodity,	 it	 is	 not
available	in	the	market.	One	has	to	deserve	it,	one	has	to	be	worthy	of	it;	one	has
to	be	absolutely	receptive.
That's	 the	whole	 function	of	 sannyas	 --	 to	make	you	 ready,	worthy,	deserving,
receptive,	open,	so	when	the	truth	knocks	at	your	door	you	are	able	to	recognise
the	 guest.	 Sannyas	means	 preparing	 you	 as	 a	 host	 for	 the	 ultimate	 guest.	And
whenever	the	host	is	ready,	the	guest	immediately	appears,	as	if	he	were	always
waiting	just	for	your	readiness.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
(Her	reply	is	so	soft-spoken	as	to	render	it	almost	inaudible	but	her	body	slumps
to	one	side	as	she	waves	an	arm	about,	and	Osho	has	understood.)
Be	 here.	 That's	 the	 way	 Italians	 behave!	 Once	 they	 are	 here,	 they	 are	 here
forever.
NOTHING	TO	LOSE	BUT	LOVELESSNESS
Love	is	not	possible	if	one	is	arrogant,	egoistic.	Love	is	possible	only	if	one	puts
the	 ego	 aside	 --	 that's	 what	 makes	 one	 humble.	 Remember	 one	 thing:
humbleness	is	not	a	state	practised	by	the	ego.	The	ego	can	practise	humbleness,
but	then	that	humbleness	is	pseudo;	hidden	behind	the	facade	of	humbleness	is
ego.
One	can	even	become	proud	of	one's	humbleness;	then	one	has	missed	the	target.
It	 is	 impossible	 to	 be	 proud	 of	 one's	 humbleness	 --	 that	 is	 a	 contradiction	 in
terms.	Either	you	are	proud	or	you	are	humble,	you	can't	be	both	together.
So	humbleness	does	not	mean	less	ego,	it	means	simply	no	ego.	And	the	moment
ego	 is	 totally	 put	 aside,	 discarded,	 love	 starts	 blossoming	 as	 if	 the	 spring	 has
come	suddenly	to	you.	And	there	is	not	only	one	flower	but	thousands	of	flowers
in	your	being.	And	great	is	the	fragrance.
It	 is	 because	 of	 this	 experience	 of	 the	 spring	 and	 the	 flowers	 and	 the	 infinite
fragrance	that	Jesus	called	god	love.	He	came	closer	to	the	definition	of	god	than
anybody	else	before	him.	'God	is	love,	simply	means	god	is	only	for	those	who
are	ready	to	risk	their	ego	totally.	But	one	loses	nothing	in	losing	the	ego	except
one's	misery,	darkness,	one's	death.
All	that	is	wrong	with	us	is	with	us	only	because	of	the	ego.	The	ego	is	the	only
problem,	and	egolessness,	the	only	solution.
PRAYER:	NOT	SAID,	NOT	SAD
Prayer	is	not	serious	at	all.	If	it	is	serious	it	is	not	prayer;	it	is	something	pseudo
pretending	to	be	prayer.
Prayer	 is	 childlike	 innocence.	 Prayer	 is	 playfulness,	 cheerfulness	 joyousness.
And	when	 prayer	 is	 nothing	 but	 rejoicing,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 point	 in	 keeping	 a
separate	time	for	it	or	doing	it	in	the	church	every	Sunday	or	every	morning	and
evening	in	the	temple	or	five	times	a	day,	like	Mohammedans.	If	cheerfulness	is
prayer,	then	one	can	be	cheerful	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	And	one	should	be	in
communion	with	god	for	 twenty-four	hours	a	day;	 less	than	that	won't	do.	It	 is
not	 possible	 to	 be	 prayerful	 for	 one	 hour,	 and	 for	 twenty-three	 hours	 just	 the
opposite.	But	that's	what	the	whole	world	is	doing.
When	you	see	people	in	the	churches	they	are	totally	different	people.	When	you
meet	the	same	people	in	their	offices	and	in	their	shops	unbelievable	that	these
are	 the	 same	 people!	 How	 humble	 they	 were	 looking	 kneeling	 down	 in	 the
church	and	praying	to	god,	and	now	how	aggressive,	arrogant,	egoistic,	they	are!
And	what	they	are	for	twenty	--	three	hours	a	day	is	their	reality;	that	one	hour	is
bogus,	pretended.
But	 the	whole	of	humanity	 is	 somehow	 living	 in	deep	hypocrisy.	Not	only	are
people	deceiving	each	other,	 they	are	even	 trying	 to	deceive	god	by	creating	a
false	prayer.	What	is	one	doing?	-	one	is	trying	to	cheat	even	god.	And	that	is	the
ugliest	thing	even	to	imagine.
So	I	don't	teach	you	to	pray	at	a	certain	period	every	day	before	you	go	to	sleep.
It	 should	 not	 be	 a	 routine,	 it	 should	 be	 just	 your	 way	 of	 life.	 It	 should	 be
something	like	breathing	or	like	the	heartbeat.	It	is	not	only	that	you	breathe	for
one	hour	every	Sunday	in	church	and	then	drop	it.	Then	there	will	be	no	more
Sundays!	You	continue	to	breathe	even	your	sleep.
And	that's	how	prayer	should	be	--	just	a	blissfulness.	Then	it	is	neither	Christian
nor	Hindu	nor	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Mohammedan,	it	is	pure	prayer.
NOT	A	COP-OUT	BUT	A	DROP-OUT
(Sannyas	is	the	disinheritance	of	one's	past.)
Sannyas	has	to	be	a	new	birth,	only	then	can	it	have	any	significance.	Unless	you
discontinue	 with	 your	 past	 totally,	 irrevocably,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 really
become	 a	 sannyasin.	 The	 past	with	 all	 its	 rubbish	 and	 the	 garbage	 that	 others
have	loaded	upon	you,	has	simply	to	be	discarded	mercilessly.
The	beginning	of	the	inquiry	into	truth	is	possible	only	when	you	are	absolutely
free	from	all	knowledge	that	others	have	given	to	you	--	 that's	what	I	mean	by
discarding	 the	 past	 --	 so	 one	 starts	 from	ABC.	One	 starts	 growing	 one's	 own.
And	 the	 beauty	 of	 being	 one's	 own	 self	 is	 immense;	 it's	 inestimable,
immeasurable.	The	greatest	thing	that	can	happen	to	a	person	is	a	new	birth.
The	 first	 birth	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 ordinary	 because	 you	will	 be	 dependent	 on	 the
parents,	and	they	have	their	vested	interests.	You	will	have	to	go	to	the	college,
to	the	university,	and	they	have	their	vested	interests.
You	will	have	to	listen	to	the	priest	and	to	the	politician	and	all	kinds	of	advisors,
and	they	have	their	vested	interests.	It	is	a	vast	conspiracy	against	a	small	child,
a	helpless	child,	who	cannot	defend	himself,	who	cannot	even	argue,	who	does
not	even	know	what	 is	happening	and	why	it	 is	happening,	who	has	come	just
like	a	clean	slate.	And	people	are	writing	all	kinds	of	things	on	him.	What	they
are	writing	he	cannot	 read	and	 they	are	writing	without	asking	his	permission.
By	the	time	he	becomes	capable	of	understanding	what	has	been	written	on	him,
it	has	already	gone	too	deep	into	his	blood,	into	his	bones,	into	his	very	marrow.
So	the	first	birth	is	going	to	be	a	wastage.	And	I	don't	think	that	the	day	will	ever
come	when	we	will	 be	 able	 to	not	destroy	 the	 child.	 It	 seems	 impossible.	The
parents	 cannot	 lose	 their	 grip;	 the	 society	 cannot	 lose	 its	 grip.	 They	 have	 to
mould,	 shape,	 the	 child	 according	 to	 them,	 and	 of	 course	 they	 think	 they	 are
doing	it	for	the	child's	own	good.	And	they	sincerely	believe	it,	they	fanatically
believe	in	what	they	are	doing,	because	the	same	has	been	done	to	them	by	their
parents,	and	so	on	and	so	forth.
God	 himself	 did	 the	 same	with	Adam	 and	 Eve.	 He	 started	 giving	 them	 ideas
about	what	they	should	do	and	what	they	should	not	do.	The	first	father	--	and
already	 the	whole	 poisoning	 process	 has	 started.	You	 should	 not	 eat	 from	 this
tree.	He	would	not	allow	them	to	have	the	freedom	to	taste	all	kinds	of	fruits	and
decide	 what	 is	 worth	 eating	 and	 what	 is	 not	 worth	 eating.	 He	 started
manipulating,	and	since	then	every	father	has	been	doing	the	same.
So	 the	 only	 hope	 is	 the	 second	 birth;	 the	 first	 birth	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 hopeless.
Sannyas	is	a	second	birth.
Now	 you	 can	 consciously,	 deliberately	 become	 a	 dropout	 of	 the	 whole
established	 pattern.	 You	 can	 consciously	 withdraw	 yourself	 and	 you	 can	 start
afresh.
I	don't	give	you	any	shoulds	and	should-nots.	My	work	is	basically	negative.	It	is
just	 to	 remove	 the	 conditioning	 that	 has	 been	 forced	 upon	 you.	 Once	 the
conditioning	 is	 removed	 you	 are	 free	 to	 do	whatsoever	 you	want	 to	 do,	 to	 be
yourself,	 authentically	 yourself.	 And	 the	 moment	 one	 is	 oneself,	 one	 starts
growing,	blossoming,	flowering,	flowing.	Life	starts	taking	on	a	new	meaning,	a
splendour	of	its	own.
HAPPINESS	IS	KEEPING	PACE
(Lag	behind	 life's	dance	and	you	are	miserable,	Osho	says	 to	Vardana.)	Life	 is
not	 a	 thing	 but	 a	 process;	 it	 is	 continuously	 growing	 --	 but	 everybody	 stops
somewhere.	Life	goes	on	growing,	but	you	stop;	you	start	lagging	behind.	And
the	gap	between	you	and	life	is	your	misery.	And	the	gap	becomes	bigger	every
day	because	life	goes	on,	the	river	goes	on,	and	you	are	stuck	somewhere.
You	 have	 become	 obsessed	 with	 some	 place.	 You	 are	 no	 more	 part	 of	 the
flowing	river,	you	are	clinging	to	some	bank,	and	that	clinging	has	become	your
security,	your	safety.	You	are	now	afraid	to	move	with	life.
The	psychologists	 only	became	 aware	 in	 the	First	World	War	 that	 the	 average
psychological	age	of	human	beings	is	somewhere	between	twelve	and	fourteen.
The	 person	may	be	 eighty	 years	 old	 but	 his	 psychological	 age	 is	 only	 twelve.
What	 does	 it	 mean?	 It	 means	 that	 somewhere	 near	 about	 twelve	 he	 stopped
growing.	The	body	went	on	but	the	mind	stopped,	so	he	behaves	like	a	twelve-
year-old	 child;	 psychologically	 he	 is	 juvenile,	 not	 even	 adult.	 And	 you	 can
immediately	 see....	 Just	 create	 a	 situation:	 insult	 him	 and	 he	 will	 go	 into	 a
tantrum,	and	you	will	 immediately	see	 the	childishness	of	what	he	 is	doing,	of
what	 he	 is	 saying.	He	 himself	 repents	 later	 on;	 he	 himself	 feels	 very	 sad	 and
sorry	about	what	he	has	done,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
for	the	simple	reason	that	he	can	see	the	foolishness	of	it	and	he	sees	that	he	has
fallen	from	the	age	of	eighty	to	the	age	of	twelve.	He	tries	to	patch	things	up;	he
goes	and	asks	your	forgiveness	and	says	'I	did	it	in	spite	of	myself'	--	and	all	that
nonsense.	Now	he	is	trying	to	come	back	somehow	to	his	old	pretension,	to	his
old	mask.	But	that	mask	is	a	mask;	it	is	not	your	original	face.	The	original	face
is	hidden	behind	the	mask.
What	we	are	doing	here	is	to	help	you	see	where	you	have	stopped	growing	and
to	help	you	to	move	from	there	...	because	to	stop	is	to	die.	To	become	dormant
is	 to	become	dead.	To	become	stagnant	 simply	means	nothing	else	except	 that
your	 life	will	 stink	And	 the	whole	world	 is	 stinking	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that
people	 are	 pretending	 to	 be	 somebody	who	 they	 are	 not,	 and	whatsoever	 they
are,	they	are	repressing	it.
But	it	comes	up	again	and	again;	it	surfaces	again	and	again.
So	 there	are	 two	 things	 to	be	done	by	 the	sannyasin:	one:	he	should	 try	 to	see
where	he	has	stopped	growing	--	all	the	meditations	and	the	growth	groups	and
all	the	work	that	is	going	on	in	this	commune	is	to	make	you	aware	of	where	you
are	stuck	--	and	second,	he	should	drop	his	clinging	and	start	moving	with	 the
river.	The	moment	you	 start	 flowing,	great	 joy	 arises,	 the	heart	 starts	 dancing.
You	are	born	anew.	This	is	resurrection.
Life	knows	no	end.	Those	who	know	how	to	grow,	those	who	know	how	to	keep
in	tune	with	existence	and	not	lag	behind,	how	not	to	rush	ahead	but	just	to	be	in
tune,	in	step	with	life	--	they	go	on	growing	even	beyond	death,	because	death	is
not	the	end.	Life	is	an	eternal	procession	--	beginningless,	endless.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Vardana.	Let	it	become	your	experience	too.
NOT	ACCUMULATING	BUT	AWAKING
(Osho	 talks	 further	 on	 the	 difference	 between	 knowledge	 and	 knowing.)
Knowledge	 can	 be	 accumulated	without	 any	 awakening.	 It	 is	 a	 process	which
can	go	on	happening	even	while	you	are	asleep.	 It	needs	no	awareness;	 it	 is	 a
mechanical	phenomenon.	That's	why	now,	particularly	in	Soviet	Russia,	they	are
trying	to	create	methods	of	sleep-teaching.	Hypnosis,	sleep,	has	to	be	used	as	a
teaching	device,	so	the	child	is	not	to	be	left	alone	even	when	he	is	asleep.	He	is
not	to	be	allowed	to	dream	his	own	dreams.	Now	society	will	manipulate	even
dreams;	they	can	be	manipulated.	The	child	will	be	sleeping...	now	thousands	of
children	 in	 Russia	 are	 sleeping	 --	 it	 is	 still	 an	 experiment,	 but	 they	 are
succeeding	in	the	experiment,	and	soon	it	will	be	applicable	to	everybody	--	they
are	 sleeping	with	 earphones	 on,	 and	while	 they	 are	 asleep	 something	 goes	 on
being	repeated	in	their	ears,	whisper-like,	so	it	does	not	disturb	their	sleep,	and
soon	they	become	accustomed	to	it.	And	the	strange	thing	is,	their	minds	go	on
learning.	In	the	morning	you	can	ask	them	questions	and	they	will	answer	them,
and	 even	 they	 are	 surprised	 because	 they	 did	 not	 know	 those	 answers	 before.
Because	 they	were	 taught	while	 they	were	asleep,	 they	are	not	aware	 that	 they
know	 the	 answers.	But	 if	 you	 ask	 them	 the	 answer	 comes.	Even	 the	person	 is
surprised	as	to	where	the	answer	is	coming	from	...	because	mind	functions	like
a	machine,	like	a	computer.
So	 knowledge	 needs	 no	 awareness,	 but	 knowing	 is	 a	 totally	 different
phenomenon.	It	needs	awareness.
My	 concern	 is	 not	 knowledge	 but	 knowing.	 I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 imparting
information	 to	 you;	my	 interest	 is	 in	waking	 you	 up	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	with
your	own	eyes	what	the	case	is.	What	is	this	immense	universe?	And	what	is	this
consciousness	within	you?	The	moment	you	become	fully	acquainted	with	these
two	 things,	 the	within	and	 the	without	you	have	known	both	your	aspects,	 the
outer	and	the	inner.	And	that	knowing	liberates,	it	liberates	one	from	all	bondage
--	then	the	night	is	over	and	the	morning	has	come.
(In	 his	 address	 to	 Nagesh	 Osho	 expands	 more	 on	 the	 nature	 of	 knowing	 or
wisdom.	First	he	explains	the	meaning	of	Nagesh.)
Nagesh	 literally	 means	 the	 king	 of	 the	 serpents,	 but	 the	 serpent	 represents
wisdom.	 In	 all	 the	 cultures	 of	 the	 world	 the	 serpent	 has	 always	 represented
wisdom.	Even	Jesus	says:	"Be	ye	as	wise	as	serpents."
There	must	be	something	in	it,	that	the	serpent	has	appealed	to	all	the	cultures,
all	the	societies,	Eastern	and	Western,	and	has	given	them	some	idea	of	it	being
wise.	One	thing	is	very	special	about	the	serpent,	and	that	is,	it	has	no	ears	but	it
can	hear	music.	 It	can	even	dance	 to	 the	 tune	of	 the	music.	And	my	feeling	 is
that	that	phenomenon	has	triggered	the	idea	of	wisdom.
Only	now	have	scientists	been	able	 to	find	what	 the	reason	is...	because	it	was
strange:	snakes	don't	have	anything	comparable	 to	ears,	and	when	 there	are	no
ears	and	no	eardrums,	how	can	the	music	be	heard?	And	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
it	cannot	be	denied	that	it	is	heard.	You	can	even	see	the	snake	and	the	serpent
dancing,	moving.	The	 serpent-charmer	 simply	plays	on	his	 instrument	 and	 the
serpents	 start	 coming	 out	 of	 their	 hiding	 places,	 moving	 quickly	 towards	 the
person.	And	they	won't	attack	the	person;	they	will	surround	him	and	dance	with
the	tune.
Only	 recently	has	 science	been	 able	 to	discover	 that	 the	 serpent	 does	not	 hear
from	an	ear,	but	his	whole	body	is	sensitive.	There	is	no	particular	instrument	for
hearing,	but	his	whole	body	functions	as	an	ear.	It	is	so	sensitive,	so	receptive	--
it	 is	 as	 if	 each	 cell	 of	 its	 body	 hears;	 the	 very	 vibe	 of	 the	music	 pulsates	 his
whole	being.
And	that's	the	quality	of	the	wise	man,	that	his	whole	being	sees,	hears,	feels.	He
is	no	more	confined	to	his	senses,	his	seeing	is	not	only	of	the	eyes,	he	sees	from
his	whole	body.	The	moment	he	sees	a	sunset	his	whole	body	becomes	just	eyes.
He	feels	the	beauty	of	the	sunset	from	every	pore.	When	he	listens	to	music,	it	is
the	same	again:	his	whole	being	becomes	sensitive	--	turns	into	just	a	receptacle.
He	receives	the	music	from	each	cell	and	fibre	of	his	body,	mind	and	soul.	He	is
total	--	that	totality	indicates	wisdom.
So	 Nagesh	 metaphorically	 means	 total	 receptivity.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 are
totally	receptive	god	is	yours.	God	cannot	be	received	partially,	you	have	to	be
totally	 involved.	You	cannot	hold	yourself	back;	either	you	are	 in	 it	or	you	are
not	 in	 it.	 To	 be	 totally	 in	 the	 experience	 gives	 wisdom.	 Then	 whatsoever	 the
experience...	 if	you	are	in	 love,	be	total	 in	 love	and	don't	hold	back;	 if	you	are
dancing	then	dance	totally,	don't	hold	back;	if	you	are	singing	then	sing	totally,
don't	 hold	 back.	 Each	 act	 has	 to	 be	 total,	 and	 then	 from	 each	 act	 immense
wisdom	will	be	derived.	You	will	become	a	reservoir	of	wisdom.	When	one	 is
full	of	wisdom,	one	is	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ.	These	people	are	not	knowledgeable
people,	but	they	know,	they	understand.
BABY,	IT'S	DARK	INSIDE!
Man	ordinarily	lives	in	unconsciousness.	His	whole	inner	being	is	dark.	There	is
no	 light,	 not	 even	 a	 candle-light.	 That's	why	 people	 don't	want	 to	 go	 in,	 even
though	all	the	Buddhas	have	been	saying	to	go	in,	to	know	yourself,	to	discover
who	you	are,	to	ask	who	you	are.	People	listen,	but	they	don't	even	because	they
know	 that	whenever	 they	 look	 inside	 there	 is	 only	 darkness	 and	 nothing	 else.
Even	a	man	like	C.E.M.
Joad,	 a	 very	 famous	 Western	 philosopher,	 was	 intrigued	 again	 and	 again,
because	he	was	reading	Socrates,	Buddha,	Zarathustra	and	Jesus,	and	they	were
all	saying	one	thing	insistently:	Know	thyself,	look	within.
And	 then	 he	 read	 a	 book	 of	 George	 Gurdjieff	 in	 which	 he	 talks	 about	 self-
remembering:	Remember	 yourself.	 Fortunately,	 he	was	 ill	 and	 sick	 and	 taking
rest	 in	bed,	 and	 the	doctors	had	 said	 that	 for	at	 least	 two	months	he	could	not
leave	the	bed	--	total	rest.	So	with	nothing	to	do	he	thought,	'Why	not	try?	I	am
not	going	to	lose	anything,	I	am	not	doing	anything	else	anyway,	so	lying	down
on	the	bed	resting	I	can	try	to	go	within	and	see	who	I	am.'	He	tried	for	a	few
minutes	and	then	he	wrote	in	his	diary	that	it	was	useless,	because	there	was	only
darkness	and	nothing	else.	And	the	man	died,	although	he	came	very	close	to	the
key.	Those	 two	months	would	have	become	his	most	significant	experience	on
earth.	But	 he	missed,	 and	missed	while	 just	 around	 the	 corner	 the	door	would
have	opened.
He	 needed	 somebody	 to	 remind	 him	 that	 when	 you	 look	 within	 and	 you	 see
darkness,	one	 thing	 is	certain,	 that	you	are	not	darkness.	You	are	 the	seer,	and
you	 are	 seeing	 darkness.	 Certainly	 one	 thing	 is	 certain	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the
darkness,	otherwise,	how	can	you	see?	How	can	darkness	see	darkness?	--	it	 is
impossible.	 Just	 this	much	 had	 to	 be	 told	 to	 the	 poor	man	 and	 he	might	 have
tried	again.	But	because	he	was	just	working	on	his	own,	just	reading	from	the
book,	he	tried	it	for	a	few	minutes	then	dropped	the	idea	and	wrote	about	it	in	his
diary	--	and	that	was	his	last	thing.	Then	he	died	after	a	few	days.	The	diary	was
discovered	later	on.
It	is	this	moment	when	a	master	is	needed	who	can	tell	you	the	subtle	difference.
It	 was	 so	 simple;	 he	 would	 have	 immediately	 understood	 if	 somebody	 had
indicated	 it.	 He	 was	 not	 a	 stupid	 person	 but	 very	 intellectual,	 intelligent,	 He
would	have	followed	the	idea	that	 if	he	could	see	darkness...	not	darkness,	and
that	would	have	become	a	revelation.	Then	going	on	and	on,	deeper	and	deeper
into	 darkness...	 just	 as	 every	 night	 has	 an	 end	 and	 the	morning	 comes,	 every
enquiry	into	one's	darkness	brings	one	to	a	point	where	the	dawn....	That	dawn	is
symbolic	--	awakening,	enlightenment.
And	life	is	only	an	opportunity.	If	one	attains	sambodhi,	one	has	fulfilled	one's
life.	If	one	misses	it,	then	the	opportunity	is	lost,	a	great	opportunity	is	lost.	And
to	be	a	sannyasin	means	now	you	are	very	close.	The	key	is	just	right	in	front	of
you.	It	can	be	used.	It	can	unlock	the	doors	of	your	innermost	chamber,	and	there
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
god	 resides.	 At	 the	 innermost	 core	 of	 your	 being	 resides	 the	 most	 precious
experience	 of	 your	 life,	 one	which	 takes	 you	 beyond	 death,	 beyond	 time,	 into
eternity.
So	 I	 am	 giving	 you	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 names	 possible.	 Always
remember,	 it	 has	 to	 become	 an	 experience.	 And	 it	 can,	 it	 is	 everybody's
birthright.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011225
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
SERIOUSNESS	IS	SICKNESS
One	has	to	be	sincere	but	not	serious.	Ordinarily	people	think	of	them	together.
Seriousness	 is	 a	 disease,	 it	 is	 sickness;	 sincerity	 is	 health,	 sincerity	 has
cheerfulness	in	it.	The	sincere	person	need	not	be	serious	at	all.	He	has	nothing
to	hide,	he	need	not	wear	a	mask;	he	can	be	as	open	as	a	child.	And	of	course	the
child	is	bound	to	be	playful,	rejoicing.
In	 the	 past	 seriousness	 and	 sincerity	 became	 somehow	 associated	 and	 that
destroyed	the	whole	religious	growth	of	humanity.	My	effort	here	is	to	separate
them.	 Once	 they	 are	 separate	 it	 becomes	 a	 joy	 to	 be	 sincere.	 Then	 there	 is
nothing	like	the	idea	of	holier-than-thou	in	it.	One	does	not	become	special	and
saintly,	 on	 the	 contrary	 one	 becomes	 more	 simple,	 humble,	 ordinary.	 One
becomes	a	nobody	--	and	to	be	nobody	is	to	be	ready	to	receive	god.
NOT	PLANNING	BUT	UNDERSTANDING
Perfection	is	a	goal;	it	is	somewhere	there	far	away	in	the	future.	Totality	is	an
understanding;	one	can	be	total	right	now.	You	can	listen	to	my	words	in	totality,
not	 holding	 anything	back,	 as	 if	 the	whole	body	has	become	ears	 and	nothing
else,	as	if	you	are	not	listening	only	through	the	ears	but	through	every	pore	of
your	being.	Totality	is	not	goal-oriented,	it	is	immediate.	If	you	understand	it,	it
is	right	now.	If	you	don't	understand	it	then	the	idea	of	perfection	arises;	then	it
is	always	tomorrow,	next	life,	in	the	other	world,	in	heaven,	only	god	is	perfect.
To	understand	totality	 is	 to	be	herenow;	to	misunderstand	it	creates	 the	 idea	of
perfection.	 The	 idea	 of	 perfection	 is	 a	misunderstanding	 of	 totality,	 but	 it	 is	 a
very	basic	misunderstanding;	it	has	destroyed	the	very	roots	of	humanity.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	Helga	means	holy.
Only	the	total	person	is	holy,	the	whole	person	is	holy.	Holiness	is	not	an	ideal,	it
is	just	a	way	of	living.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	religion,	it	has	everything	to	do	with	your	whole	life	--
the	way	you	sleep,	the	way	you	walk,	the	way	you	listen,	the	way	you	talk,	the
way	you	eat,	 the	way	you	relate,,the	way	you	sit.	 It	permeates	 the	 twenty-four
hours	of	your	day.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	churches	and	the	temples	and	the
mosques	and	with	the	so-called	saints	and	mahatmas	and	the	holy	men	--	it	has
nothing	to	do	with	that.	They	are	all	pseudo;	that	kind	of	spirituality	is	plastic.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 spontaneous,	 total,	 in	whatsoever	 they	 are	 doing.	 It
does	not	matter	what	they	are	doing,	what	matters	is	whether	they	are	totally	in	it
or	not.	If	they	are	totally	in	it	that	action	is	holy,	if	they	are	only	half-heartedly	in
it	 that	action	 is	unholy.	And	 the	miracle	 is	 that	you	can	be	wholly,	 totally	 into
something	only	when	it	is	good.	If	it	is	not	good,	whatsoever	you	do	you	cannot
be	totally	in.	So	that	is	the	criterion	in	fact,	anything	in	which	you	cannot	be	total
is	sin,	anything	in	which	you	can	easily	be	total	is	virtue.	So	there	is	no	need	to
look	 in	 the	 scriptures	 for	 what	 is	 sin	 and	 what	 is	 virtue;	 you	 can	 just	 go	 on
experimenting	with	your	own	life.
You	cannot	be	totally	destructive,	that	is	impossible,	that	is	not	in	the	very	nature
of	 things;	 something	 in	 you	 will	 remain	 out	 of	 it.	 Destruction	 is	 unnatural,
criminal,	 ugly,	 destruction	 is	 going	 against	 the	 very	 fundamental	 law	 of	 life;
hence	one	cannot	be	 totally	 in	 it.	We	are	 life,	we	are	part	of	 the	eternal	 law	--
how	can	we	be	totally	in	destruction?	But	in	creation	one	can	be	total.
A	 painter	 painting	 can	 be	 totally	 in	 it,	 a	 dancer	 dancing	 can	 disappear	 in	 the
dance.	So	 I	 call	 the	 dancer	who	has	 disappeared	 into	 dance	 a	 holy	man,	 but	 I
cannot	call	Adolf	Hitler	or	Joseph	Stalin	or	Mao	Tse	Tung,	holy	men.	What	they
are	 doing	 is	 destructive,	 so	 whatsoever	 they	 do	 is	 going	 to	 remain	 only	 half-
hearted;	 somewhere	deep	down	 they	 themselves	will	 feel	 that	 it	 is	not	 right,	 it
should	not	be	done.	Their	very	own	centre	will	go	on	giving	them	signals,	will
go	on	whispering	to	them	'This	is	not	right.	There	is	still	time	--	stop	it.'
I	have	never	come	across	a	criminal	who	is	really	happy	with	what	he	is	going.
He	knows	it	is	wrong;	still,	he	is	weak	and	he	goes	on	doing	it	out	of	old	habit.
Maybe	 he	 has	 invested	 too	much	 in	 it	 and	 now	 to	withdraw	 is	 difficult.	 And
maybe	he	does	not	know	anything	else,	that's	the	only	thing	that	he	can	do.	That
is	his	skill,	his	efficiency,	his	expertise;	otherwise	he	is	not	happy.
Even	Alexander	the	Great	said	to	Diogenes	'If	I	am	born	again	I	will	ask	god	not
to	make	me	Alexander	again.	I	will	ask	him	to	make	me	a	Diogenes.'
That	 is	 significant:	 Alexander	 the	 Great	 saying	 that:	 'I	 would	 not	 ask	 to	 be
Alexander	 again.'	 Somewhere	 deep	 down	 he	 also	 feels	 he	 has	 missed,
whatsoever	he	has	done	was	wrong,	it	was	not	the	right	way	to	live.
So	 to	 me	 holiness	 means	 the	 right	 way	 to	 live,	 the	 creative	 way	 to	 live,	 the
loving	way	to	live	.
SOMNAMBULIST	OR	SANNYASIN
(Osho	is	talking	to	Anand	Cornelia.)
People	ordinarily	are	asleep,	fast	asleep.	If	you	listen	carefully	you	can	hear	their
souls	snoring	(laughter)	...	and	out	of	this	sleepiness	they	go	on	doing	all	kinds
of	 things.	 Those	 things	 cannot	 be	 right,	 they	 are	 done	 unconsciously.	 Out	 of
unconsciousness	 they	 create	 misery	 for	 others	 and	 for	 themselves,	 out	 of
unconsciousness	only	misery	can	result.
The	 moment	 one	 becomes	 aware	 one	 also	 becomes	 blissful.	 As	 awareness
grows,	 blissfulness	 grows;	 when	 one	 is	 absolutely	 aware	 one	 is	 absolutely
blissful.	 They	 are	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 coin;	 anand	 is	 bliss,	 cornelia	 is
awareness.	One	has	to	work	to	be	aware,	then	bliss	comes	as	a	consequence,	as	a
by-product.
That's	the	whole	meaning	of	sannyas:	the	effort	to	come	out	of	sleep,	the	effort
to	wake	up.
(Osho	expands	 further	on	 the	nature	of	 spiritual	 awakening.)	 Just	 as	 there	 is	 a
physical	 sleep	 and	 physical	 waking,	 parallel	 to	 it	 there	 is	 spiritual	 sleep	 and
spiritual	awakening.	Whatsoever	exists	on	the	physical	plane	also	exists	on	the
spiritual	plane.	 In	 the	day	you	are	 awake	only	physically	 and	 in	 the	night	you
have	to	go	to	sleep	--	that	too,	only	physically.	In	the	same	way	your	inner	being
also	needs	awakening.	It	is	fast	asleep	so	much	so	that	many	people	are	not	even
aware	of	it.	They	will	become	aware	of	it	only	when	it	wakes	up,	otherwise	they
think	 there	 is	no	 soul,	no	 self.	That's	what	 all	 the	atheists	down	 the	ages	have
believed;	from	Epicurus	to	Karl	Marx	they	have	all	believed	that	there	is	no	soul,
no	self,	that	man	is	only	the	body.	And	the	only	reason	for	their	belief	is	that	they
are	not	at	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
all	awake	spiritually.
Initiation	 into	sannyas	means	a	commitment,	a	decision	 to	wake	up	spiritually.
And	all	the	methods	are	available	here,	all	the	possible	methods	that	have	been
tried	in	the	past	and	many	new	ones	that	have	never	been	tried.	It	is	a	very	rare
opportunity.	 The	whole	 past	with	 all	 its	 experiments	 is	 available	 here	 and	 the
whole	 future	 with	 all	 the	 possible	 experiments.	 Not	 only	 are	 the	 yesterdays
available	here	but	the	tomorrows	too.	And	you	can	work	out	which	method	suits
you.	It	is	only	a	question	of	trying.	Nobody	can	predict	which	method	will	help
you	to	become	awakened,	nobody	can	predict	it.	But	one	has	to	work	it	out	just
by	the	simple	method	of	trial	and	error.
The	 commune	 of	 a	 master	 means	 that	 all	 doors	 are	 available	 --	 you	 have	 to
knock.	 Go	 on	 knocking,	 one	 door	 is	 certainly	 for	 you.	 And	 the	 moment	 you
knock,	it	will	open	for	you.	All	those	doors	lead	to	the	same	inner	shrine,	to	the
same	awakening.	The	difference	is	only	of	doors.
So	do	all	the	meditations,	do	all	kinds	of	groups,	in	search	of	the	right	door	for
you.	Once	you	have	 found	 the	 right	 door	 then	 all	 search	 is	 dropped,	 then	you
enter	the	journey.	And	always	remember:	unless	you	become	spiritually	aware	of
who	you	are	the	journey	is	not	complete.	When	you	can	experience	your	inner
being	 as	 full	 of	 light,	 exploding	 with	 light,	 overflowing	 with	 light,	 and	 all
darkness	has	disappeared,	then	the	night	is	over	and	the	dawn	has	come.
Only	on	that	day	is	sannyas	fulfilled.
MEDITATION-	CONSCIOUSNESS	CLEANSER.
(Osho	tells	Dhyan	Karen	that	the	three	meanings	of	her	name	actually	define	the
nature	of	meditation	exactly.)
One	has	to	be	clean.	We	are	so	much	full	of	dust,	we	go	on	gathering	dust	and
junk.	We	are	not	alert	about	what	we	are	doing,	but	to	gather	past	memories	is	to
gather	dust,	 is	 to	collect	corpses.	One	becomes	a	cemetery,	 just	 a	graveyard	 --
and	those	corpses	are	going	to	stink.
To	be	clear	means	to	go	on	removing	all	 the	dust	 that	naturally	gathers.	 If	you
have	 lived	 for	 twenty-four	 hours	 then	 twenty-four	 hours	 experiences	 gather	 as
dust	on	the	mirror	of	your	being	--	clean	them	away.	In	fact	there	is	no	need	to
wait	for	twenty-four	hours;	each	moment	go	on	cleaning	--	that	is	far	easier.	Just
a	little	bit	of	dust	and	it	can	be	cleaned.
In	short,	it	can	be	said	die	each	moment	to	the	past	so	that	you	can	be	born	anew
each	moment	in	the	present.	This	is	cleanliness,	freshness.	Out	of	this	cleanliness
comes	a	clarity	because	the	mirror	is	clean,	it	can	reflect,	it	can	reflect	things	as
they	are.	One	can	see	things	as	they	are;	now	the	eyes	are	no	more	covered	with
prejudices.	You	are	not	trying	to	see	things	in	a	particular	way;	you	are	simply
available	to	see	whatsoever	is	the	case.	That	is	clarity.
And	out	 of	 a	 clean	mirror	 and	 a	 clear	 vision	whatsoever	 you	 do	 is	 pure,	 your
action	becomes	pure.	It	has	a	fragrance,	it	has	something	of	the	divine	in	it,	it	has
something	of	the	beyond	in	it.	It	is	no	more	just	your	action	but	is	as	if	god	has
started	 functioning	 through	 you,	 you	 have	 become	 just	 a	 vehicle,	 a	 passage,	 a
medium.	And	that	 is	 the	most	beautiful	experience	in	 life,	 to	become	a	vehicle
for	the	whole,	to	be	in	the	service	of	god.
OF	SALESMEN	AND	SAILORS
Gautam	 the	Buddha	 has	 said	 that	 there	 are	 two	 kinds	 of	 people	 in	 the	world;
hence	when	 they	 become	 enlightened	 a	 little	 distinction	 also	 remains	 between
those	two	categories.	One	he	calls	the	bodhisattvas.
A	bodhisattva	is	one	who	has	attained	to	the	ultimate	truth	and	tries	 to	share	it
with	 others.	 He	 is	 compassionate.	 The	 way	 of	 the	 bodhisattva	 is	 called
mahayana;	literally	the	word	'mahayana'	means	the	great	boat...	because	he	is	not
willing	to	go	alone	to	the	other	shore.	His	boat	is	ready,	he	can	go	alone,	but	he
will	linger	on	this	shore	as	long	as	possible	to	persuade	people,	to	seduce	people,
to	tempt	people	to	the	other	shore.	He	will	collect	as	many	as	he	can	in	the	boat
and	 only	 then	will	 he	 leave.	He	will	 go	 to	 the	 other	 shore	 but	 he	will	 take	 a
community	with	him	to	the	other	shore,	he	will	not	go	alone.
The	other	category	of	humanity,	Buddha	says,	is	a	little	bit	different	--	and	that
difference	remains	even	when	the	ultimate	truth	is	achieved.	The	other	category
he	calls	the	arhatas.	Their	experience	is	the	same	as	that	of	the	bodhisattvas	but
the	arhatas	don't	wait	for	anybody;	when	their	boat	comes	they	simply	leave	this
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
shore,	 they	don't	 linger	on	 this	shore.	They	are	not	 interested	 in	sharing.	Their
understanding	 is	 that	 truth	 cannot	be	 shared	 so	why	bother?	Everybody	has	 to
attain	it	through	their	own	effort	and	it	is	pointless	to	tell	people	about	it.
The	path	of	the	arhatas	is	called	hinayana;	hinayana	means	the	small	boat.	It	is
enough	for	one	person;	it	is	not	a	ship,	it	is	just	a	small	boat.	It	cannot	take	even
two	to	the	other	shore,	only	one.
My	 boat	 is	 mahayana.	 My	 whole	 work	 here	 is	 to	 create	 a	 commune	 of
enlightened	people	 and	 spread	 them	all	 over	 the	world	 like	 sheets,	 so	 that	 not
only	do	they	become	ready	to	go	to	the	other	shore,,they	also	persuade	people	to
go.	And	the	other	shore	is	really	so	tempting	that	anybody	can	be	seduced.	One
just	has	to	learn	the	art	of	seduction	--	that	makes	a	master.
Arhatas	are	not	masters.	They	are	enlightened	people	but	 they	are	not	masters.
Only	 bodhisattvas	 are	 masters.	 They	 are	 not	 only	 masters,	 they	 are	 good
salesmen	too!
So	remember	that:	you	have	to	become	one	of	my	salesmen!
--	I	will!
--	Good!	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	As	long	as	you	want.
--	Good!
(Osho	 talks	 to	Mamta	 about	 the	 need	 to	 go	 beyond	 attachment	 to	 taste	 love.)
People	 go	 on	 thinking	 that	 attachment	 is	 love	 -	 it	 is	 not.	 It	 is	 a	 false	 coin.	 It
appears	 to	be	 love	but	 it	 is	 just	 the	opposite	of	 love.	 It	 is	 full	of	anger,	hatred,
jealousy,	possessiveness;	it	is	not	love.
And	 to	 live	 a	 life	 of	 attachment	 is	 very	 destructive	 because	whomsoever	 you
think	you	love	you	reduce	to	a	thing.	And	you	allow	yourself	also	to	be	reduced
to	a	thing.	It	is	good	to	be	a	man,	it	is	not	good	to	be	a	husband.	A	husband	is	a
thing	and	an	ugly	thing	at	that;	the	very	word	is	ugly.	It	is	good	to	be	a	woman
but	not	good	to	be	a	wife.	Being	a	wife	means	you	are	reduced	to	a	very	small
relationship.	 The	 woman	 was	 vast;	 the	 wife	 is	 tethered,	 chained,	 imprisoned.
And	that's	what	love	goes	on	doing.	People	do	it	to	their	children	--	they	possess
them.	Children	are	nobody's	possession;	they	come	through	the	parents	but	they
don't	belong	to	them.	But	people	behave	as	if	they	are	the	owners:	'my	child,	my
wife,	my	husband.'	The	very	idea	of	putting	your	ego	projection	on	the	other	is
destructive	 of	 love.	 The	word	 'mamta'	 literally	means	mine	 --	 literally.	 'Mam'
means	my,	mamta	means	mine.
The	moment	you	say	my,	mine,	you	have	projected	the	I,	the	ego	has	come	into
functioning	and	the	ego	is	the	enemy	of	love.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 the	ways	 of	 non-attachment,	 non-possessiveness,
only	 then	 does	 love	 blossom.	 And	 the	 blossoming	 of	 love	 is	 religion,	 true
religion.	When	your	heart	is	fragrant	with	love	you	know	what	god	is.
The	 taste	 of	 love	 gives	 you	 the	 proof	 that	 god	 exists,	 there	 is	 no	 other	 proof;
except	for	love	there	is	no	other	proof	for	god.	There	has	never	been	and	there
never	will	be;	love	is	the	only	proof,	 the	only	proof.	But	people	are	destroying
the	very	possibility	of	their	knowing	god	by	destroying	love.
RELIGION:	RECEIVING	NOT	BELIEVING
Christianity,	Hinduism,	Buddhism,	Jainism,	Mohammedanism	--	 these	are	only
ideologies,	dogmas,	creeds,	they	are	only	cults.	The	true	religion	has	no	name,	it
cannot	have	any	name.	Buddha	lived	it,	Jesus	lived	it,	but	remember,	Jesus	was
not	a	Christian	and	Buddha	was	not	a	Buddhist;	he	had	never	heard	of	the	word.
The	 truly	 religious	 people	 have	 been	 simply	 religious,	 they	 have	 not	 been
dogmatic.	And	all	the	people	you	see	around	the	world	--	there	are	three	hundred
religions	in	the	world...	This	is	such	an	absurdity:	if	truth	is	one,	how	can	there
be	 three	 hundred	 religions?	 There	 is	 only	 one	 science	 and	 three	 hundred
religions!
If	 the	science	 that	 is	concerned	with	 the	objective	 truth	 is	one,	 then	 religion	 is
also	one	because	it	 is	concerned	with	 the	subjective	 truth,	 the	other	side	of	 the
truth.	But	 that	 religion	cannot	have	any	religion,	any	name,	 it	cannot	have	any
ideology.	 I	 teach	 only	 that	 religion.	 Hence	 if	 somebody	 asks	 you	 what	 my
teaching	 is	 in	 short,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 say	 --	 because	 I	 don't	 teach
principles,	 ideologies,	 dogmas,	 doctrines.	 I	 teach	 you	 a	 religionless	 religion,	 I
teach	you	the	taste	of	it.	I	give	you	the	method	to	become	receptive	to	the	divine.
I	 don't	 say	 anything	 about	 the	divine,	 I	 simply	 tell	 you	 'This	 is	 the	window	 --
open	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
--	and	you	will	see	the	starry	night.'
Now,	that	starry	night	is	indefinable.	Once	you	see	it	through	the	open	window
you	will	know	it.	Seeing	is	knowing	and	seeing	should	be	being,	there	should	be
no	other	belief.
So	my	whole	effort	is	existential,	not	intellectual	at	all.	And	the	true	religion	is
existential.	 It	has	always	happened	to	only	a	few	people	and	then	it	disappears
from	 the	 earth	 because	 the	 intellectuals	 immediately	 grab	 it	 and	 they	 start
making	beautiful	ideologies	out	of	it	--	neat	and	clean,	logical.	And	in	that	very
effort	they	destroy	its	beauty.	They	create	philosophies	and	religion	disappears.
The	pundit,	the	scholar,	the	theologian,	is	the	enemy	of	religion.
So	here	 in	becoming	my	sannyasins,	 remember	 it:	you	are	not	getting	 initiated
into	a	certain	religion;	you	are	getting	initiated	into	just	a	religiousness.	It	is	vast,
immense,	unbounded	--	it	is	like	the	whole	sky.
Even	the	sky	is	not	the	limit.
So	open	your	wings	without	any	fear.	This	whole	existence	belongs	to	us,	this	is
our	 temple,	 this	 is	our	 scripture.	Less	 than	 that	 is	man-made,	manufactured	by
man;	where	it	is	manufactured	does	not	matter	much.
Beware	of	man-manufactured	religions	so	that	you	can	know	the	true,	which	is
not	man-made.	And	it	is	available	in	the	trees,	in	the	mountains,	in	the	rivers,	in
the	stars,	in	you,	in	people	that	surround	you	--	it	is	available	everywhere.	Once
you	get	rid	of	the	man-made	you	will	become	aware	of	the	god-made.
A	TALL	STOREY
(Osho	speaks	to	Avinasho	on	man's	immortality.)
Man	is	not	confined	between	birth	and	death.	Birth	and	death	are	both	episodes
in	your	eternal	life;	they	have	happened	many	times.	You	don't	begin	with	birth
and	you	don't	end	with	death.
The	search	for	 the	eternal	core	is	 the	search	of	sannyas.	The	Zen	people	call	 it
the	original	face;	they	say
'Try	to	find	your	original	face,	 the	face	that	you	have	before	even	your	parents
were	born,	or	the	face	that	you	will	still	have	even	when	your	children	are	dead.'
The	original	face	is	not	physical,	it	is	not	psychological,	it	is	spiritual.
Man	 is	 like	 a	 three-storied	 building,	 and	 we	 remain	 on	 the	 ground	 floor	 our
whole	life.	Only	very	few	people	in	rare	moments	have	a	few	glimpses	beyond
the	ground	floor,	otherwise	people	remain	concerned	with	the	physical.	Food	and
sex	are	their	lives;	these	two	are	enough.	And	they	go	on	round	and	round;	they
call	 it	merry-go-round,	 it	 is	 a	 very	 sorry-go-round.	 But	 knowing	 nothing	 they
just	go	on	chasing	 their	own	 tails	on	 the	ground	 floor.	And	of	course	 they	see
that	others	 also	are	doing	 the	 same	 so	 this	must	be	 the	way	 it	 has	 to	be	done.
Children	learn	from	their	parents	and	others,	and	everybody	is	chasing	his	own
tail	and	going	round	and	round...	just	crazy	dogs	--	all	nuts!	So	small	nuts	learn
from	big	nuts	 (laughter)	 ...	 and	 they	 start	doing	 the	 same.	And	 they	will	 teach
their	small	nuts	the	same	story.	And	it	goes	on	and	on.
Only	once	in	a	while	does	a	person	go	above	the	physiological	and	look	into	the
psychological.	That	world	is	totally	different.	It	consists	of	music,	poetry,	dance,
art,	creativity;	it	is	multi-dimensional.	Then	the	life	of	food	and	sex	seems	to	be
very	gross	compared	to	Beethoven	and	Leonardo.	Whatsoever	you	can	manage
on	 the	 physiological	 will	 remain	 gross,	 but	 even	 the	 psychological	 is	 not	 the
ultimate	height,	and	those	who	remain	on	the	psychological	are	still	missing	the
original	face.	There	is	one	higher	plane	where	only	a	Buddha,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Jesus
--	 a	 few	people	 --	have	entered,	 and	 that	 is	 the	world	of	 the	eternal,	 avinasho.
And	to	know	it	is	to	know	all.
Jesus	 calls	 it	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god,	 Buddha	 calls	 it	 nirvana;	 they	 are	 different
names	for	the	same	phenomenon.	Unless	the	third	is	known	remember,	you	are
falling	 short,	 something	will	 go	 on	 being	missed;	 you	will	 not	 feel	 contented.
And	 it	 is	 good	 that	 nobody	 can	 feel	 contented	 unless	 one	 knows	 the	 eternal
otherwise	we	will	 become	 satisfied	 on	 a	 very	 low	 plane.	 But	 something	 deep
inside	remains	restless,	it	goes	on	goading	you,	it	goes	on	telling	you	'This	is	not
it,	there	must	be	something	more	in	life	--	search,	seek.'
And	remember,	Jesus'	statement	is	true:	Seek	and	ye	shall	find;	ask	and	it	shall
be	given;	knock	and	the	doors	shall	be	opened	unto	you.
Blessed	is	the	seeker	of	truth	--	and	that's	what	you	are	becoming	today.	To	be	a
sannyasin	is	to	be	a	seeker	of	truth.	And	the	truth	is	eternal,	it	has	to	be	found.	It
is	the	very	task	of	life,	the	challenge	of	life.
Life	is	nothing	but	an	opportunity	to	find	it.	Don't	waste	it	in	small	trivia,	don't
waste	it	in	the	mundane.	Put	as	much	energy	as	possible	into	the	ultimate	search,
into	that	search;	do	it	intensely.	And	if	your	intention	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
there	and	you	are	 really,	 authentically	 interested	 in	 seeking,	 then	 the	doors	are
bound	to	open	for	you.	They	have	always	opened	for	the	real	seeker;	it	has	never
been	otherwise.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011235
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
MEDITATION:	REALLY	DIGGING	YOURSELF
We	are	alive	but	we	are	unaware	of	the	source	of	our	life,	from	where	it	comes.
And	unless	we	know	the	source	we	remain	unacquainted	with	ourselves.	Then
whatsoever	we	do	is	going	to	be	wrong,	inevitably	wrong,	because	it	comes	out
of	 self-ignorance.	 It	 is	 like	 a	blind	man	groping:	he	will	 stumble	here	 and	 fall
there.	 And	 ordinarily	 that	 is	 our	 whole	 life	 --	 stumbling,	 falling,	 getting	 up,
stumbling,	 falling	 again.	 It	 is	 a	 tragedy,	 and	 the	 reason	 is	 simple:	 we	 are	 not
aware	of	ourselves,	we	don't	know	who	we	are	--	and	it	can	be	known,	it	is	not
far	away.
The	source	is	within	us	and	the	method	to	know	the	source	is	meditation.	It	is	a
method	of	 digging	 a	well	within	your	being	 so	 that	 you	 can	 reach	 to	 the	very
centre	of	it,	to	where	life	juices	are	flowing.	And	once	you	are	acquainted	with
your	centre	you	are	simultaneously	acquainted	with	the	centre	of	the	whole	--
because	 it	 is	 the	 same;	 we	 are	 separate	 only	 on	 the	 circumference,	 not	 at	 the
centre.	At	the	centre	we	are	one,	at	 the	circumference	we	are	many.	To	live	on
the	circumference	is	to	be	worldly	and	to	live	through	the	centre,	at	the	centre,	is
to	be	a	sannyasin.
FOLLOWER	OR	FLOWER?
(Osho	has	talked	on	the	folly	of	imitating	anyone	and	on	the	real	Christian	being
a	lover.	But	he	puts	it	slightly	differently	this	time	round.)
The	only	way	to	really	be	a	Christian	 is	 to	know	the	art	of	 love.	One	does	not
become	a	Christian	by	becoming	a	follower	of	Christ,	because	the	follower	is	an
imitator;	he	remains	false.	You	can	only	be	yourself,	you	can	never	be	anybody
else.	 If	 you	 try	 to	 be	 your	 life	 will	 become	 schizophrenic.	 All	 followers	 are
schizophrenic	 because	 they	 are	 one	 thing	 and	 they	 are	 trying	 to	 be	 somebody
else.	And	existence	never	repeats	--	that's	one	of	the	fundamental	laws.	There	is
no	way	to	escape	from	that	ultimate	law.
A	man	like	Jesus	happens	only	once,	and	it	is	not	so	only	with	Jesus,	it	is	so	with
everybody	else;	there	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
has	been	no	person	like	you	before	and	there	will	never	be	another	person	like
you	again.	Hence	following	is	basically	wrong,	it	is	betraying	yourself.	And	how
can	you	be	healthy	and	whole	if	you	betray	yourself?
One	 does	 not	 become	 a	 Christian	 by	 becoming	 a	member	 of	 a	 church	 --	 one
becomes	a	Christian	only	by	 love.	 Jesus	defines	god	as	 love,	 so	all	 those	who
know	what	love	is	are	Christians,	but	they	are	not	followers	of	Christ.	Christ	was
never	a	follower	of	anybody	else;	if	he	had	been	a	follower	the	Jews	would	not
have	killed	him	--	he	was	authentically	himself.	Buddha	was	not	a	 follower	of
anybody;	he	was	authentically	himself.	Lao	Tzu	was	not	a	follower	of	anybody.
If	 one	 wants	 to	 be	 really	 whole,	 sane,	 blissful,	 then	 one	 has	 to	 continuously
remember	not	to	fall	into	the	trap	of	following.
My	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 my	 followers	 --	 just	 my	 lovers,	 my	 friends.	 They	 are
companions,	fellow	travellers,	but	not	followers.	You	are	not	to	imitate	me	--	that
will	make	you	pseudo.	You	are	just	to	learn	love.
Love	is	the	secret	of	all	the	religions.	It	not	only	makes	you	a	Christian,	it	also
makes	you	a	Mohammedan,	a	Hindu,	a	Buddhist,	 a	 Jaina,	 a	 Jew.	The	moment
you	 love,,you	 know	 that	 all	 these	 authentic	 people	 --	 Moses	 and	 Jesus	 and
Mohammed	and	Mahavira	and	Krishna	--	were	lovers,	great	lovers	of	existence,
unconditional	lovers.
Love	 is	 the	 essential	 core	 of	 religion.	 So	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 any	 dogma,	 any
doctrine;	 I	 simply	help	you	 to	discover	your	 loving	qualities.	They	are	already
there,	they	just	have	to	be	uncovered.	They	are	like	buds:	they	just	have	to	open
and	become	flowers.	And	then	there	is	great	fragrance	and	great	joy	and	for	the
first	time	life	becomes	a	dance,	a	celebration,	a	festivity.
HEART-MONIOUS
(Osho	is	talking	to	Cordelia.)
Cordelia	 is	 a	 beautiful	 name,	 one	 of	 the	most	 significant	 names	 that	 one	 can
have.	It	has	two	meanings;	in	Welsh	it	means	poetry,	in	Latin	it	means	warmth	of
the	heart.	Although	the	meanings	come	from	different	languages	somehow	they
are	related	to	each	other.
Poetry	is	nothing	but	warmth	of	the	heart.	The	cold	heart	cannot	be	poetic	--	it	is
dead!	And	people	are	dead	because	their	heart	is	cold;	their	head	is	hot	and	their
heart	is	ice	cold.	It	should	be	just	the	reverse	--
things	are	upside-down:	the	heart	should	be	warm	and	the	head	should	be	cool,
because	the	function	of	the	head	is	to	calculate.	and	cold	it	will	be	more	efficient
because	 it	 will	 be	 in	 a	 more	 mathematical	 space.	 And	 because	 the	 head	 is	 a
machine,	the	hotter	it	gets,	the	more	errors	it	commits.	It	is	a	machine,	it	should
remain	cool.
The	heart	is	not	a	machine	at	all;	the	heart	is	your	very	being,	it	is	your	love,	it	is
your	life.	It	has	to	be	in	a	state	of	dancing,	not	frozen.	When	the	heart	is	warm
there	is	poetry	in	life.	You	may	compose	poetry,	you	may	not	--	that	is	irrelevant
--	 but	when	 the	 heart	 is	warm,	 full	 of	 love,	 flowing,	 rejoicing,	 then	 there	 is	 a
poetic	sense,	a	poetic	touch.	Whatsoever	you	do,	whatsoever	you	are,	there	is	a
certain	 subtle	 aura	 around	 you	 --	 that	 of	 poetry,	 grace,	 beauty...	 an	 aesthetic
sense.
And	I	am	adding	Anand	to	your	name.	Anand	means	bliss.	Bliss	is	the	ultimate
experience	 of	 the	 dance	 that	 happens	 in	 the	 heart,	 of	 the	 poetry	 that	 happens
through	your	heart	when	it	is	fully	alive,	totally	alive.
And	 when	 your	 life	 is	 transformed	 into	 poetry	 you	 will	 know	 what	 bliss	 is,
because	 that	 is	 the	moment	when	 you	 start	 synchronising	with	 existence,	 you
start	having	a	deep	rapport	with	existence.	It	is	a	synchronicity;	you	start	melting
and	 merging	 with	 the	 flowers	 and	 the	 clouds	 and	 the	 stars.	 Boundaries	 start
disappearing;	they	become	irrelevant,	out	of	date.	They	wither	away	of	their	own
accord.	One	functions	as	part	of	the	whole	--	then	there	is	bliss.
Bliss	is	another	name	for	a	harmonious	existence,	but	it	is	possible	only	through
the	heart,	through	warmth,	through	love,	through	being	poetic.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	be	 lovers,	poets,	dancers,	musicians;	 they	have	 to	open
up	 all	 aesthetic	 possibilities.	 I	 teach	 a	 religion	 of	 aesthetic	 sensibility	 and
sensitivity.	 All	 the	 religions	 in	 the	 past	 have	 been	 anti-life,	 anti-love,	 anti-
warmth,	anti-poetry,	because	basically	they	taught	that	life	has	to	be	renounced,
that	there	is	something	wrong	in	it	--	it	is	sin	and	you	have	to	get	rid	of	it.
My	approach	is	just	the	opposite:	it	is	not	a	sin.	Life	is	a	gift,	a	great	gift	from
god	--	it	has	to	be	rejoiced	in.	Merge	and	melt	with	it.	The	more	you	disappear
and	 the	more	 you	 allow	 life	 to	 happen	 to	 you,	 the	 closer	 you	will	 be	 to	 god,
because	 life	 is	nothing	but	god	expressed,	manifest.	 In	other	words	god	 is	 life
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
unmanifest,,invisible	life;	and	life	is	visible	god.
RELIGION	IS	UNION	IS	YOU-AND-ME-ONE
(Osho	 speak,	 again	on	how	 the	 long	 for	 god	 is	 the	 impetus	 behind	 every	 love
affair.	He	is	addressing	Viyogini.)
Viyogini	 means	 one	 who	 is	 separated	 from	 the	 ultimate	 lover,	 one	 who	 is
separated	from	god.	God	is	the	ultimate	lover,	the	beloved.
In	all	our	love	affairs	we	are	seeking	and	searching	for	god	--	and	that's	why	all
our	love	affairs	fail,	they	fall	short.	They	cannot	fulfil	our	innermost	longing.	We
are	searching	for	god	--	less	than	that	cannot	give	us	contentment.
Viyogini	means	the	ultimate	separation.	We	are	all	separated,	alienated,	and	we
are	searching	again	in	every	possible	way	to	reach	to	that	union	where	we	will
not	be	 separate.	The	 search	 for	 the	union	with	 existence	 is	 religion.	That's	 the
meaning	of	the	word	'yoga';	yoga	means	union.	The	word	'viyogini'	also	comes
from	'yoga';	yoga	means	union,	viyoga	means	separation.	The	feminine	form	of
viyoga	is	viyogini.
So	these	are	the	only	two	states,	the	state	of	yoga,	yogini	--	one	who	is	one	with
the	beloved,	with	the	ultimate	truth,	with	existence	--	and	viyoga,	viyogini	--	one
who	 is	 separate.	 Only	 very	 few	 people	 have	 attained	 to	 yoga,	 to	 the	 ultimate
union,	but	it	is	everybody's	potential.	Everybody	has	the	birth-right	to	attain	to	it
but	nobody	tries.	Just	a	little	effort	and	the	miracle	can	happen.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 are	 taking	 a	 step	 towards	 that	 little	 effort.	 It	 is
really	a	little	effort,	not	much.	What	we	do	is	very	small	and	what	happens	out	of
it	is	immense.	It	is	just	as	if	a	particle	of	dust	has	fallen	into	your	eye	and	you
cannot	open	your	 eyes	 and	 the	Himalayas,	Everest,	 is	 just	 in	 front	of	you,	but
you	cannot	see	it	--	just	because	of	the	particle	of	dust.	A	small	particle	of	dust
has	 fallen	 in	 your	 eye,	 it	 is	 preventing	 your	 visions	 you	 cannot	 see	 the	 great
Himalayas,	 its	 beauty.	Remove	 the	particle	 and	 the	whole	of	 the	Himalayas	 is
available	to	you,	spreading	for	thousands	of	miles	--	those	virgin	peaks	and	the
sun	 shining	 on	 those	 snow	 covered	 mountains...	 and	 the	 beauty	 of	 it,
inexpressible	beauty	of	it.	And	just	a	particle	of	dust	was	creating	the	barrier.
The	situation	is	exactly	the	same	our	inner	vision	is	not	clear.	Just	a	few	particles
of	dust	have	gathered	there;	they	have	to	be	removed.	So	the	effort	is	very	little
but	the	gain	is	immense,	immeasurable,	incalculable.
THE	SAP	CALLED	HAPPINESS
(Your	juices	only	flow	when	you're	free.)
Life	is	a	discontentment	because	we	are	living	it	in	a	very	wrong	way.	We	have
been	 taught	 some	ugly	 things,	we	 have	 been	 taught	 those	 ugly	 things	 because
they	help	 the	 establishment,	 the	vested	 interests,	 the	people	who	are	 in	power.
Nobody	 cares	 about	 the	 individuals,	 nobody	 cares	 about	 the	greater	 humanity;
everybody	 is	concerned	with	his	own	power,	his	 investment	 --	 and	 they	go	on
poisoning	people.
For	 example,	 the	politicians	don't	want	 intelligence	 to	grow	 in	people	because
intelligence	 is	 always	 rebellious.	 But	 without	 intelligence	 life	 cannot	 find	 the
source	of	contentment.	A	mediocre	person	remains	superficial,	shallow,	but	the
politician	is	helped:	he	wants	everybody	to	be	mediocre.	He	can	only	remain	the
leader	if	people	are	mediocre,	unintelligent,	stupid	And	the	situation	is	the	same
with	 the	 priests.	 They	 have	 been	 in	 power	 for	 centuries	 and	 they	 know	 the
strategy	to	remain	in	power:	don't	allow	people	in	any	way	to	attain	insight	into
things,	 don't	 allow	 them	 to	 be	 wise,	 give	 them	 beliefs	 instead.	 Beliefs	 are
pseudo,	like	plastic	flowers,	lollipops.	So	people	can	go	on	sucking	on	lollipops,
playing	 with	 toys;	 they	 can	 go	 on	 playing	 with	 those	 toys	 so	 they	 don't	 turn
towards	the	real	thing.
And	 the	priests	and	 the	politicians	are	 in	deep	conspiracy.	They	have	made	an
unsigned	contract	 that	 the	politician	will	 rule	people	 in	worldly	affairs	and	 the
priest	will	rule	people	 in	other-worldly	affairs	and	they	will	support	each	other
because	both	have	to	depend	on	the	same	strategy:	force	people	to	remain	slaves,
believers,	not	seekers	--	not	intelligent,	not	rebellious.	Reduce	their	freedom,	cut
their	wings,	 paralyse	 them,	because	 then	 they	 can	be	manipulated	 and	used	 as
means.
My	work	here	is	to	undo	all	this	that	has	been	done	to	you,	to	everybody.	Only
when	your	intelligence	rises	to	the	optimum	is	there	contentment,	because	that's
when	you	start	flowering,	that's	when	spring	comes	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	your	life.
Your	love	has	to	be	allowed	absolute	freedom,	only	then	are	your	juices	flowing.
You	are	not	sad,	dry,	desert-like,	you	become	an	oasis.
My	sannyasins	have	to	become	gardens	with	birds	singing	and	flowers	spreading
their	 fragrance.	 That's	 exactly	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 word	 'paradise';	 paradise
literally	means	a	walled	garden.	It	comes	from	the	Persian,	'firdaus'.	I	would	like
each	of	my	sannyasins	to	be	a	paradise	unto	himself	or	herself.
SUNS	AND	LOVERS
(Osho	tells	us	about	the	origin	of	sun	worship.)
For	centuries	there	have	been	worshippers	of	the	sun.	They	have	been	very	much
misunderstood.	The	sun	was	only	a	symbol;	 they	were	really	 trying	to	find	the
ultimate	source	of	light	and	this	sun	was	only	representative	--	they	were	bowing
down	to	this	sun	symbolically	and	literally.	And	then	finally	they	found	that	this
sun	disappears	in	the	night,	so	if	you	want	to	worship	the	sun	in	the	night	it	will
be	 difficult,	 hence	 fire	 worship	 started.	 Zarathustra	 was	 the	 greatest	 fire
worshipper,	 and	 the	 followers	 of	 Zarathustra	 have	 carried	 on	 the	 fire	 that
Zarathustra	 started.	 A	 three-thousand-year-old	 fire,	 still	 continues	 in	 their
temples;	they	don't	allow	it	to	go	out,	they	go	on	giving	fuel	to	it.	That	too	is	a
misunderstanding.
People	always	become	addicted	to	symbols.	They	forget	that	a	symbol	is	only	a
symbol;	 they	 start	worshipping	 the	 symbol	 as	 if	 it	 is	 the	 real	 thing.	The	word
'god'	is	not	god,	the	word	'fire'	is	not	fire.	The	sun,	fire,	light	--	they	all	represent
a	 search	 for	 the	 ultimate	 source	 of	 light	 something	 that	 we	 are	 all	 missing
because	in	our	innermost	being	there	is	darkness.
The	Christian	mystics	like	Eckhart	have	called	it	the	dark	night	of	the	soul;	and
we	are	all	searching	for	the	dawn.	The	orange	colour	that	I	have	chosen	for	my
sannyasins	 symbolises	 the	 dawn;	 it	 is	 the	 colour	 of	 the	 eastern	 horizon	 just
before	sunrise.
The	 search	 is	 for	 the	 inner,	 but	 we	 know	 only	 the	 outer	 so	 the	 outer	 has	 to
become	a	symbol	for	the	inner.	The	search	is	for	the	inner	sun	but	the	outer	can
be	 used	 beautifully	 like	 a	 mirror;	 you	 can	 look	 in	 the	 mirror.	 The	 mirror	 is
outside	but	it	can	reflect	your	face,	it	can	show	you	your	form.	In	fact	there	is	no
other	way	to	see	your	own	face	except	through	a	mirror.	All	symbols	are	mirrors.
So	this	is	going	to	be	your	search:	the	inner	source	of	light	has	to	be	discovered.
But	 the	 outer	 symbols	 of	 light	 are	 all	 beautiful;	 they	 should	 be	 loved,
worshipped,	so	 that	 they	go	on	reminding	you	of	 the	 inner,	so	you	don't	 forget
about	the	inner	--	mind	tends	to	forget.
So	watch	the	early	morning	sun	rising.	Look	at	it,	absorb	it,	then	close	your	eyes
and	 try	 to	 search	within.	 Look	 at	 the	moon,	 watch,	 then	 close	 your	 eyes	 and
search	within.	Or	look	at	a	small	candle	in	the	night,	watch	it	for	a	few	moments,
then	 close	your	 eyes	 and	 search	within.	Let	 the	outer	 symbolise	 the	 inner,	 but
don't	 forget	 the	 inner.	 Until	 you	 have	 found	 the	 inner	 use	 the	 outer	 as	 an
indicator.	 The	 moment	 it	 is	 found	 the	 outer	 can	 be	 forgotten.	 It	 disappears
naturally,	one	forgets	all	about	it.	When	one	has	found	the	real,	who	cares	about
the	symbolic?
PILGRIM'S	PROGRESS
(Osho	 describes	 the	 three	 categories	 of	 the	 paths	 along	 which	 one	 can	 move
towards	god.)	There	are	many	ways	to	reach	god.	The	most	significant	are	threes
through	knowing,	 through	 loving	 and	 through	 action,	 service,	 compassion.	All
other	paths	belong	to	these	three	categories;	these	three	are	the	main	categories.
Remember:	 knowing	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 path.	 Knowing	 does	 not	 mean
knowledge,	it	means	understanding.	One	can	be	very	knowledgeable	yet	without
any	 understanding,	 and	 one	 can	 be	 tremendously	 wise	 and	 yet	 without	 any
knowledgeability.	So	they	are	not	synonymous,	knowing	and	knowledge.
Knowledge	 is	 a	 cheap	 commodity,	 available	 in	 the	 schools,	 colleges,,
universities,	 libraries;	 but	 knowing	 only	 comes	 through	 deep	 meditation.	 You
have	to	go	through	a	radical	change,	you	have	to	attain	a	different	kind	of	vision,
you	literally	have	to	open	a	third	eye	in	yourself.
So	the	path	of	knowing	means	the	path	of	meditation.	Put	your	total	energy	into
meditativeness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(His	path	is	love,	Premyogi	learns.)
Love	is	our	deepest	longing.	Just	as	the	body	needs	food	the	soul	needs	love	--	it
is	nourishment,	spiritual	nourishment.	Without	the	food,	air	and	water,	the	body
will	deteriorate;	without	love	the	soul	starts	shrinking.	And	everybody	is	living
with	a	very	small	soul	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	have	not	loved.
And	 why	 have	 they	 not	 loved?	 If	 you	 enquire	 into	 the	 question	 you	 will	 be
surprised,	because	for	the	whole	of	their	life	everybody	is	trying	to	get	love.	But
people	 are	 trying	 to	 get,	 not	 to	 give,	 and	 the	 law	 of	 love	 is	 that	 you	 get	 only
when	you	give.	Giving	comes	first,	getting	is	only	a	consequence.
And	 people	 are	 asking	 the	 impossible;	 they	 want	 first:	 "Give	 me	 love."
Everybody,	 in	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 ways,	 is	 saying	 "Give	 me	 love",	 but	 love
comes	 only	when	 you	 give;	 you	 cannot	 demand	 it.	Hence	 the	whole	world	 is
suffering;	everybody	is	full	of	love,	the	world	can	become	a	very	loving	place,
but	it	is	just	the	opposite	of	it	--	full	of	hatred,	anger,	rage,	violence,	destruction,
for	the	simple	reason	that	everybody	is	full	of	love	and	nobody	is	giving.	They
are	asking	and	demanding	and	trying	to	force	and	snatch	away.
Now,	 love	 is	 not	 a	 thing	 that	 you	 can	 force,	 love	 is	 not	 a	 thing	 that	 you	 can
possess,	love	is	not	a	thing	that	can	be	snatched	away	in	any	way.	It	is	beautiful
only,	 alive	 only,	 when	 it	 is	 given	 without	 any	 demand	 on	 your	 part,	 when	 it
comes	of	its	own	accord.	And	it	comes	on	its	own	accord	whenever	you	give;	in
fact	it	comes	a	thousandfold.
So	give	as	much	love	as	possible	and	you	will	get	so	much	in	return	that	you	will
not	be	able	 to	believe	 it	 in	 the	beginning.	 It	 is	absolutely	unbelievable	 that	 the
whole	existence	starts	pouring	love	towards	you.
You	 just	 show	 the	 gesture	 of	 giving,	 with	 no	 strings	 attached	 to	 it,	 with	 no
conditions,	no	expectations,	let	your	joy	be	in	the	giving	itself	--	love	for	love's
sake	--	and	you	will	be	in	for	a	great	surprise:	thousands	of	windows	suddenly
open	 and	 the	 sun	 and	 the	 wind	 and	 the	 rain	 and	 the	 whole	 existence	 starts
flowing	towards	you.	It	floods	you,	and	that	flooded	life	is	the	life	of	a	buddha,
that	life	is	the	goal	of	a	sannyasin.
(And	Wolfgang	receives	the	name	Karmayogi	to	remind	him	that	his	way	is	the
path	of	action.)	The	path	of	action	is	very	paradoxical.	The	paradox	is	that	you
have	 to	 act	 and	 yet	 deep	 down	 you	 have	 to	 remain	 absolutely	 inactive;	 at	 the
centre	absolute	stillness,	no	action,	not	even	a	wave,	not	even	a	 ripple,	and	on
the	circumference	much	action.
The	path	of	action	is	being	in	the	world	and	yet	not	being	of	it,	remaining	in	the
world	and	yet	surpassing	it,	transcending	it.	Krishna	has	called	it	action	without
action.	Zen	people	 in	 Japan	 call	 it	 effortless	 effort,	 actionless	 action.	Doing	 is
there	but	the	doer	is	not	there.	One	simply	becomes	the	centre	of	the	cyclone	but
the	cyclone	remains	only	one's	circumference.	One	becomes	more	like	an	actor;
action	becomes	more	like	acting.	It	 is	as	if	you	are	just	playing	a	role:	you	are
doing	it	as	perfectly	as	possible	but	 it	 is	still	a	role,	a	game;	you	are	not	really
involved	 in	 it.	 You	 are	 doing	 it	 perfectly	 well	 and	 yet	 you	 are	 not	 getting
involved	 in	 it,	 so	 whatsoever	 the	 result,	 it	 is	 none	 of	 your	 business	 --	 if	 you
succeed,	if	you	fail,	it	is	all	the	same.
It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 paths	 to	 follow.	 And	 my	 sannyasins	 have	 to
understand	it	very	deeply	because	I	am	not	telling	them	to	renounce	the	world,	to
escape	to	the	mountains,	to	the	deserts,	to	the	monasteries.	I	am	telling	them	to
remain	 in	 the	 world.	 I	 am	 not	 taking	 them	 out	 of	 the	 world,	 because	 that	 is
escapist	and	that	is	cowardly,	and	one	cannot	be	religious	through	cowardliness.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 accept	 all	 the	 challenges	 of	 life	 but	 with	 absolute
unconcern,	not	being	worried	at	 all	 about	 the	 result,	 about	 the	outcome,	 living
moment	 to	 moment	 totally,	 doing	 whatsoever	 life	 gives	 you	 to	 do,	 and	 then
moving	on,	not	even	looking	back,	not	even	through	the	rear-view	mirror.	There
is	no	point,	because	in	life	there	is	no	reverse	gear,	you	cannot	go	back.	God	has
completely	forgotten	about	the	reverse	gear.	He	has	been	just	like	Henry	Ford.
When	 he	made	 his	 first	 car	 there	was	 gear	 in	 it.	 Finding	 out	 that	 it	 is	 such	 a
difficult	 thing	 when	 you	 want	 to	 come	 back	 home	 he	 added	 it	 only	 later	 on
(laughter).	Otherwise	if	you	have	gone	a	few	feet	ahead	of	your	home	you	have
to	go	around	the	whole	city	just	to	come	back!
But	god	has	not	added	the	reverse	gear	yet	and	I	don't	think	he	is	ever	going	to
add	 the	 reverse	 gear	 (laughter)...	 because	 that	 will	 be	 travelling	 back	 in	 time.
That	is	impossible.	That	will	mean	that	the	old	man	can	become	a	young	man,
the	young	man	can	become	a	child	and	the	child	can	go	back	into	the	womb	--
and	 its	 mother	 may	 have	 died!	 (much	 laughter)	 It	 is	 impossible.	 Even	 if	 god
wants	to	do	it,	it	is	not	possible.
They	say	nothing	is	impossible	for	god	(laughter)	but	I	say	there	are	many	things
impossible.	This	is	one	of	the	things	he	cannot	do!
So	there	is	no	need	to	look	back,	need	to	think	about	the	past,	no	need	to	think
about	the	future.	Live	in	the	present	but	live	in	such	a	way	--	silently,	peacefully
--	that	nothing	disturbs	your	centre.	It	is	just	as	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
noise	of	this	train	passing	by	is	there	but	at	the	very	centre	of	your	being	there	is
no	 noise.	 In	 fact	 this	 noise	 of	 the	 train	 can	 enhance	 your	 inner	 silence,	 it	 can
become	a	background,	a	backdrop	for	it.
I	travelled	for	twenty	years	continuously	in	the	trains	all	over	India.	And	I	know
how	beautiful	it	is	and	how	silent	it	is.	So	whenever	I	was	not	travelling	I	used	to
miss	my	trains	--	all	the	noise	and	all	the	hustle	and	bustle	of	the	platforms...	But
if	you	know	how	to	remain	silent	inside	it	all	enhances,	it	becomes	a	contrast.
Life	should	be	taken	as	a	contrast	--	and	then	nothing	is	wrong.	A	sannyasin	has
to	 remember	 only	 one	 thing,	 not	 to	 get	 disturbed	 at	 the	 centre;	 whatsoever
happens	on	the	circumference	is	okay.	If	that	much	is	possible	then	you	are	free
from	all,	you	know	the	taste	of	freedom.	And	the	taste	of	freedom	is	the	taste	of
god	too.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
24	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011245
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
THE	PATH	IS	A	BATH
(Osho	 is	 talking	 to	 Renata,	 the	 elderly	 mother	 of	 an	 Italian	 sannyasin.)
Meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 absolute	 silence.	 It	 is	 not	 action,	 it	 is	 absolute	 rest.
Nothing	has	to	be	done	for	it,	all	doing	has	to	be	dropped;	so	one	can	do	it	in	any
state	of	the	body.	One	can	do	it	lying	on	the	bed	or	sitting	in	a	chair,	one	can	do
it	when	one	 is	 ill,	 sick,	because	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	activity.	 It	 is	 simply
gathering	 yourself	 inside,	withdrawing	 yourself	 from	 the	world,	 forgetting	 the
world.
When	you	collect	 the	whole	of	your	energy	at	 the	centre	of	your	being,	 that	 is
meditation.	And	to	be	in	that	state	is	to	be	reborn.	That's	the	meaning	of	Renata:
reborn,	born	anew.
Jesus	says	to	Nicodemus	'Unless	you	are	born	again	you	shall	not	enter	into	the
kingdom	of	god.'
Nicodemus	was	 a	 rabbi,	 a	 great	 scholar	 of	 those	 days.	He	was	 afraid	 to	meet
Jesus	openly	because	he	had	such	a	reputation	for	his	scholarship	that	going	to
an	illiterate	person,	the	son	of	a	carpenter,	and	asking	him	any	question	about	life
would	go	against	his	fame,	his	name,	against	his	reputation	and	respectability.	So
he	went	in	the	dark,	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	so	nobody	would	come	to	know
about	it.
When	Jesus	said	to	him	'Unless	you	are	born	again...'	being	a	scholar	he	heard	it
literally.	He	said	'How	is	that	possible?	How	can	one	be	reborn?	You	are	talking
nonsense.'
Jesus	was	 talking	 about	meditation,	 but	 a	man	who	 is	 hung	 up	 in	 the	mind	 is
bound	to	miss	the	point.
Meditation	is	nothing	of	the	mind.	It	is	slipping	out	of	the	mind	and	getting	into
your	very	life	source	--
because	only	from	that	 life	source	is	one	reborn.	That	 is	 true	baptism;	taking	a
bath	in	your	own	life	juices.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	 once	 you	 have	 tasted	 of	 it	 then	 there	 is	 no	 death,	 then	 you	 know	 life	 is
eternal.	And	to	know	it	is	to	know	all.
YOU	MIGHT	DIE	LAUGHING
Being	blissful	is	taking	a	risk	--	because	the	mob	lives	in	misery,	and	naturally	it
does	not	allow	anybody	to	be	blissful.	That	hurts	the	crowd,	it	wounds	the	mob;
they	start	thinking	"How	dare	you	be	blissful?"	They	are	very	at	ease	if	you	are
miserable;	they	are	sympathetic,	friendly,	because	you	are	just	like	them,	you	are
not	a	foreigner.	The	moment	you	become	blissful	you	are	a	foreigner,	you	are	an
outsider
--	and	people	have	always	been	afraid	of	outsiders.
They	 know	 the	 insiders,	 they	 are	 familiar	 with	 them,	 they	 can	 rely	 on	 them
because	they	are	predictable,	but	the	outsider	is	unpredictable.	And	the	blissful
person	is	the	farthest	away	from	the	crowd.	He	is	really	a	stranger;	he	belongs	to
another	 world,	 not	 only	 to	 another	 country.	 He	 speaks	 a	 totally	 different
language,	 he	 lives	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 life;	 hence	 people	 feel	 a	 certain
distance	from	such	a	person.	Either	they	will	condemn	him	as	mad...	that	is	their
first	reaction.	That's	what	they	are	doing	to	many	people	in	Soviet	Russia.	They
will	torture	them,	give	them	psychological	shocks,	electric	shocks.	They	cannot
accept	that	you	can	be	so	blissful.	It	is	not	possible	--	you	must	be	insane.
The	first	reaction	of	the	society	is	to	condemn	the	person	as	mad:	if	one	is	mad
one	can	be	ignored.	And	there	are	many	people	in	the	madhouses	of	 the	world
who	are	not	mad,	they	are	simply	different	and	people	cannot	tolerate	that.
If	 the	 person	 is	 very	 powerful,	 like	 Jesus,	 Buddha	 or	 Zarathustra,	 then	 you
cannot	just	call	him	mad.	He	will	persist,	he	will	try	to	prove	in	every	possible
way	that	you	are	wrong.	And	in	a	way	people	start	feeling	doubtful	about	their
own	ideas.	When	they	see	a	Buddha	so	silent,	so	blissful,	such	a	beautiful	space
surrounding	him,	they	become	suspicious	of	their	own	idea	that	he	is	mad	or	that
he	is	a	fool.	And	people	like	Buddha	are	very	persuasive,	almost	seductive.	Then
the	second	step	for	 the	society	 is	 to	condemn	that	man	as	anti-traditional,	anti-
religious,	anti-country,	and	finish	him	somehow.
They	killed	Socrates,	Mansoor,	and	many	others.	One	of	the	most	beautiful	men,
a	Sufi	mystic,	Sarmad,	was	killed	--	his	head	was	cut	off	--	for	the	simple	reason
that	he	was	so	blissful	 that	 the	priests	and	the	king	conspired	against	him.	Just
before	his	head	was	cut	off	he	said,	"You	can	cut	off	my	head,	but	you	cannot	cut
my	laughter.	Even	when	my	head	is	separate	from	me	you	will	hear	my	laughter
--	I	will	haunt	you!"
And	the	beautiful	story	goes	 that	when	his	head	was	cut	off	 it	 rolled	down	the
steps	of	the	mosque	where	he	was	murdered	--	laughing,	giggling!
Such	people	can	be	blissful	 in	 life	and	can	be	blissful	 in	death	 too.	That	 is	 the
meaning	of	the	story:	they	laugh	their	whole	way	to	God.	But	that	needs	courage
--	and	that	is	the	meaning	of	your	name:	blissful	courage.	It	needs	a	strong	spirit
because	it	will	be	going	against	the	current.
My	 sannyasins	 will	 have	 to	 face	 many	 antagonistic	 situations.	 They	 will	 be
thought	outrageous,	rebels,	dropouts;	all	kinds	of	condemnations	will	be	heaped
upon	them.	And	if	they	don't	listen	--	and	they	are	not	going	to	listen	--	then	they
will	even	be	killed,	condemned	to	death.	But	it	is	better	to	die	rejoicing	than	to
live	in	misery.	Just	a	single	moment	of	joy	is	far	more	valuable	than	an	eternity
of	misery.
I	teach	you	only	one	thing,	and	that	is,	be	blissful	--	whatsoever	the	cost.
LOVE:	PUT	WINGS	ON	YOUR	WORDS
(Osho	 speaks	 to	 Anna	 about	 the	 meanings	 of	 her	 name	 --	 prayer,	 grace	 and
mercy	--	in	relation	to	love.)	Without	love	there	is	no	prayer,	no	grace,	no	mercy.
On	the	tree	of	love	all	these	flowers	bloom.	People	can	pray	without	love	--	that's
what	 they	 are	 doing	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 in	 all	 the	 churches,	 temples	 and
synagogues:	 they	 don't	 know	what	 love	 is	 trying	 to	 pray.	That	 is	 very	 absurd,
their	 prayer	will	 be	parrotlike;	 they	will	 simply	 repeat	words,	 their	words	will
not	have	the	support	of	their	heart.	And	without	the	heart	beating	in	those	words
they	are	dead.	Only	the	heartbeat	can	make	them	alive,	can	give	them	wings,	can
make	them	reach	to	the	ultimate.
All	 these	prayers	 that	are	happening	 in	 the	world	are	not	heard.	Unless	 love	 is
there	at	the	source	prayer	is	a	hypocrisy.	It	is	a	very	dangerous	dishonesty	--	very
dangerous	 because	 you	 are	 not	 being	 honest	 even	 with	 god.	 Somebody	 is
repeating	 the	words	of	Jesus,	somebody	is	repeating	 the	words	of	Mohammed,
but	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
when	Jesus	prayed	it	was	out	of	love,	when	Mohammed	prayed	it	was	sheer	joy!
Those	words	don't	mean	much;	what	matters	is	the	inner	gesture	--	and	that	inner
gesture	is	missing	if	love	is	not	there.
And	if	love	is	there	you	need	not	learn	prayer	--	it	comes	of	its	own	accord.	All
these	 three	qualities	are	consequences,	by-products	of	 love.	Love	and	you	will
see	that	you	are	becoming	more	and	more	prayerful;	love	and	you	will	see	you
are	becoming	more	and	more	graceful;	love	and	you	are	in	for	a	great	surprise,
you	are	becoming	more	and	more	compassionate	and	merciful.	And	a	thousand
and	one	other	things	will	follow	too.	Love	opens	the	doors	of	the	divine.
So	 learn	 the	 simple	 art	 of	 love.	 Love	 for	 the	 sheer	 sake	 of	 love,	 for	 no	 other
reason,	and	don't	miss	a	single	opportunity	to	be	loving.	There	are	thousands	of
opportunities	every	day,	but	because	we	are	unloving	we	don't	even	see	them,	we
by	pass	them,	we	overlook	them,	we	ignore	them.	Because	we	are	unloving	we
immediately	jump	on	anything	that	is	going	to	support	our	unloving	mind;	we	go
on	 searching	 for	 negativities.	 We	 go	 on	 counting	 the	 thorns	 on	 a	 rosebush,
forgetting	all	about	the	roses.
So	love	means	to	become	attuned	to	the	roses.	Be	positive,	affirmative,	look	for
the	good	and	the	beautiful	and	the	true	--	and	they	abound!	And	when	you	start
looking	for	them	your	love	will	go	on	growing.	And	love	is	not	something	that
becomes	complete	one	day;	it	is	an	eternal	pilgrimage.	It	goes	on	becoming	more
and	more	complete	but	it	 is	never	finished.	No	point	comes	where	you	can	say
'Now	I	have	arrived.'
Love	is	not	a	goal	but	a	journey	--	and	that's	the	beauty	of	it	--	because	all	goals
are	dead	and	a	journey	is	alive.	Love	is	life,	love	is	god,	love	is	sannyas!
BLISS	AND	AWARENESS:	THEY	ENHANCE	THE	DANCE
(Anand	Prabodhi's	path	is	to	combine	the	two.)
Bliss	and	awareness	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin:	become	blissful	and	you	will
be	 aware,	 or	 become	 aware	 and	 you	 will	 be	 blissful.	 One	 can	 do	 both
simultaneously	 --	 and	 that's	 the	 best	 course	 because	 then	 things	 happen	 in	 a
faster	way.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 such	 a	 long	 and	 gradual	 process;	 both	 together	 can
make	an	opportunity	even	for	sudden	enlightenment.
So	 use	 them	 both	 together,	 be	 blissful	 and	 be	 aware.	 They	will	 enhance	 each
other,	 they	 will	 support	 each	 other.	 They	 are	 not	 things	 which	 have	 to	 be
developed	 separately,	 although	 that's	 what	 has	 been	 done	 in	 the	 past.	 A	 few
people	 have	 tried	 to	 be	 blissful	 --	 in	 the	 East	 they	 were	 known	 as	 bhaktas,
devotees;	and	a	few	people	have	tried	to	be	aware	--	they	were	called	gyanis,	the
knowers.
In	 India	 there	 have	 been	 two	basic	 trends;	 one	 is	 of	 blissfulness,	 prayer,	 love,
devotion,	 surrender,	 the	 other	 is	 of	 awareness,	 meditation,	 watchfulness',
witnessing.	Because	they	both	worked	separately	it	took	very	long.	In	fact	it	took
so	 long	 that	 India	had	 to	 think	 in	 terms	of	 there	being	many	 lives.	 India	 is	 the
only	country	which	has	thought	in	terms	of	there	being	many	lives.	Christianity,
Judaism,	Islam	--	they	think	of	only	one	life;	they	have	not	really	pondered	over
the	matter.	One	life	is	not	enough,	one	life	is	too	small	 to	grow	in.	There	are	s
thousand	and	one	things	to	be	done	and	the	mundane	takes	so	much	that	nothing
is	left	for	the	sacred.
The	 Indian	 seers	have	been	watching	 this,	 that	 this	 small	 life	 is	not	 enough	 to
know	god,	hence	slowly	slowly	they	started	exploring	'Is	there	any	possibility	of
there	being	more	lives?'	Then	they	found	that	there	is	a	possibility;	we	have	been
before,	we	will	 be	 afterwards	 --	 there	 are	many	 lives.	But	 the	 triggering	point
was	that	they	were	all	working	either	on	awareness	or	on	blissfulness	--	and	then
it	takes	very	long.	They	developed	the	whole	science	of	yoga	so	that	you	can	live
long	 even	 in	 this	 life	 because	 the	 work	 has	 to	 be	 completed.	 They	 started
thinking	of	how	 to	prolong	 life	 through	physical	 exercises,	 through	chemicals,
through	breathing	exercises,	they	have	tried	many	things	and	certainly	they	have
found	ways	to	prolong	life.
But	 the	whole	point	 is	 that	 if	 those	 two	 things	 can	be	put	 together	 there	 is	 no
need	to	go	into	the	tortures	called	yoga.	You	need	not	bother	about	the	length	of
life.
These	 two	 things	 together	 can	 become	 a	 sudden	 enlightenment	 because	 they
support	each	other,	enhance	each	other,	enrich	each	other.
So	remember	it:	on	one	hand	be	more	blissful,	cheerful,	 take	life	joyously,	and
on	 the	 other	 hand	 become	 more	 alert	 and	 watchful	 of	 everything	 --	 you	 are
doing,	 thinking,	 feeling.	 Be	 aware	 even	 of	 your	 cheerfulness	 and	 be	 cheerful
even	about	your	awareness.
(Osho	 continues	 on	 the	 theme	 of	 the	 synthesis	 of	 bliss	 and	 awareness	 in	 his
address	to	Sugito.)	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	 man	 without	 bliss	 is	 a	 man	 without	 song,	 without	 dance,	 without	 any
celebration.	He	 is	 dull,	 he	 is	 dead;	 he	 only	 vegetates.	 His	 life	 is	 a	 long	 drag.
Somehow	 he	 has	 to	 live	 because	 he	 has	 found	 himself	 alive	 on	 this	 strange
planet,	so	he	has	to	drag	his	way	towards	the	grave.	And	how	can	he	be	blissful?
--	because	he	knows	nothing	about	life,	he	knows	nothing	about	consciousness,
he	knows	nothing	about	birth,	death.
He	 knows	 nothing	 really.	Maybe	 he	 has	 accumulated	much	 information	 about
geography	and	history	and	philosophy	and	religion,	but	it	is	only	information;	he
himself	 knows	nothing.	And	without	 your	 own	knowing	your	 life	 cannot	 be	 a
song,	it	cannot	be	a	joy.
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	be	a	little	more	alert,	more	conscious,	so	that	you
can	experience	that	which	you	are.	And	the	very	experience	of	it	brings	bliss,	the
very	acquaintance	with	it	and	you	are	showered	with	bliss.	And	out	of	bliss	life
becomes	a	festival	--	a	festival	of	lights.	Suddenly	the	spring	comes	and	you	are
all	flowers,	and	then	each	action	is	a	song,	then	whatsoever	you	do	has	a	golden
touch	to	it.
I	 call	 this	 the	 greatest	 miracles	 transforming	 a	 dragging	 life	 into	 a	 dance,
changing	 the	 heavy,	 serious	 kind	 of	 life	 into	 a	 light-hearted	 laughter.	 It	 is
possible,	 it	 is	possible	 for	everyone.	Not	a	single	human	being	 is	born	without
the	possibility.	If	we	don't	realise	it	we	are	responsible	and	nobody	else.
Sannyas	 means	 taking	 the	 responsibility	 for	 whatsoever	 you	 are.	 With	 that
acceptance,	transformation	sets	in.	The	very	acceptance	that	you	are	responsible
for	your	 life,	makes	you	a	creator	of	your	 life.	You	start	changing;	you	cannot
wait,	because	all	waiting	is	waiting	for	Godot	--	who	never	comes.
Then	one	starts	changing	one's	life	right	now	because	there	is	no	tomorrow.	And
if	you	don't	do	anything,	nobody	is	going	to	do	it	for	you.	And	if	you	don't	do	it
now	then	you	will	never	be	able	to	do	it	--
now	or	never!
DEEP-ME	DIVING
To	 become	 one	with	 your	 interiority	 is	 the	whole	 process	 of	 sannyas.	We	 are
living	on	the	outside	absolutely	unaware	of	who	we	are,	because	our	being	is	on
the	 inside	and	our	wandering	 is	on	 the	outside,	 so	 the	meeting	never	happens.
basically	everybody	is	searching	for	themselves,	is	trying	to	find	out,	figure	out,
what	 this	 life	 is,	 what	 does	 this	 mean?	 but	 they	 are	 looking	 everywhere	 else
except	into	their	own	interiority	--	and	that	is	where	our	reality	is.
A	sannyasin	has	to	slowly	dive	deep	within	himself.	I	am	not	against	the	outside
world;	live	on	the	outside	but	find	moments	to	dive	within.	And	then	your	outer
life	 also	 will	 have	 more	 richness,	 more	 fragrance,	 it	 will	 have	 more	 dignity,
grace,	integrity.	You	will	be	able	to	live	even	on	the	outside	in	a	more	authentic
way,	you	will	not	be	a	hypocrite;	you	will	be	simple,	sincere,	ordinary,	honest.
You	will	not	be	a	saint	but	neither	saints	nor	sinners	are	needed;	they	both	exist
together	and	they	both	have	to	be	got	rid	of.
They	 are	 both	 ugly	 phenomena,	 both	 are	 extremes,	 and	 life	 is	 exactly	 in	 the
middle.	One	need	not	be	a	sinner,	one	need	not	be	a	saint;	one	has	just	to	be	an
ordinary	human	being.	Then	life	is	balanced,	and	a	balanced	life	has	harmony,	a
balanced	life	has	music,	poetry.
So	on	the	outside	also	if	you	become	acquainted	with	your	inner	being	you	will
be	a	totally	different	person.	You	will	have	a	certain	coolness	around	you;	even
in	the	hottest	moments	you	will	remain	cool	--
not	 cold,	 but	 cool,	 together.	 Even	 in	 the	 hardest	 moments	 you	 will	 not	 be
disturbed.	 Even	 in	 the	 greatest	 crises	 you	 will	 remain	 centred	 and	 grounded
because	you	know	that	whatsoever	 is	happening	on	 the	outside	 is	not	as	much
significant	as	your	inner	peace,	your	inner	silence.
Once	you	know	the	taste	of	your	inner	world	everything	on	the	outside	becomes
valueless.	Success	and	failure	are	almost	games.	Then	what	one	is	on	the	outside
--	a	president	or	a	peon	--	doesn't	matter,	 it	makes	no	difference.	One	can	be	a
beggar	or	one	can	be	an	emperor	--	it	is	all	the	same.	But	for	that	one	has	to	find
moments,	 intervals,	 gaps,	 to	 go	 in.	 And	 in	 those	 moments	 forget	 the	 whole
world,	as	if	it	doesn't	exist.	In	the	beginning	it	is	'as	if',	but	soon	you	will	realise
that	really	it	doesn't	matter,	it	is	not	a	question	of	'as	if'.
But	that	will	come	only	later	on;	we	have	to	begin	a	hypothetical	way.	My	effort
here	is	very	scientific:	we	have	to	begin	with	a	hypothesis,	as	if	the	outer	world
does	not	exist,	for	a	few	moments	every	day	at	least.	And	then	slowly	you	will
see	 that	 your	 'as	 if'	 was	 right,	 it	 coincided	with	 reality,	 it	was	 consistent	with
reality.	Your	hypothesis	was	not	 just	a	hypothesis,	 it	was	a	 truth.	You	were	not
aware	 then	but	 as	 you	 enter	 your	 own	being	you	will	 become	more	 and	more
aware,	 that	 the	 real	 is	 inner	 and	 the	 outer	 is	 only	 made	 of	 the	 same	 stuff	 as
dreams.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
25	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011255
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
SOUL	OR	SLAVE
(Osho	talks	on	the	rebellion	that	must	necessarily	ensue	if	one's	determined	to	be
an	individual	in	our	society.)
Society	kills	the	rebellious	spirit	in	every	child;	it	is	afraid	of	rebellion.	But	the
moment	the	rebellious	spirit	is	destroyed	simultaneously	intelligence,	brightness,
genius,	 are	 also	 destroyed.	 They	 are	 all	 together,	 they	 can	 exist	 only	 in	 a
togetherness.	 They	 form	 an	 organic	 unity.	You	 cannot	 destroy	 one	 part;	 either
you	destroy	the	whole	or	you	save	the	whole.
And	society	is	not	interested	in	the	individual;	 its	 interest	 is	in	the	structure,	 in
the	establishment,	in	the	state,	in	the	church	and	in	all	kinds	of	investments.	The
individual	is	not	even	counted.	The	individual	is	accepted	only	because	he	has	a
certain	 utility	 for	 the	 establishment,	 because	 the	 individual	 can	 be	 used	 as	 a
means	to	fulfil	certain	ends	which	are	not	his,	they	are	others	--	the	politicians,
the	priests	or	whosoever	they	may	be.
Every	child	is	born	a	genius	but	very	few	people	have	been	able	to	escape	from
the	slavery	that	society	imposes.	The	beginning	is	in	rebellion.	Rebel	against	the
tradition,	 rebel	 against	 the	 church,	 rebel	 against	 the	mob	 psychology.	And	 the
fundamental	law	is	to	insist	on	being	yourself	whatsoever	the	cost,	and	then	you
will	 have	 great	 intelligence	 flowering,	 brightness,	 and	 your	 life	 will	 become
alight	unto	itself.
That's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about	 the	 rebellion	 of	 the	 individual	 against	 the
collective,	 against	 the	 crowd,	 I	 believe	 in	 the	 individual	 because	 only	 the
individual	has	a	soul.	Society	is	only	a	name	without	a	soul,	and	the	individual
cannot	 be	 sacrificed	 for	 any	 end	 --	 nation,	 race,	 religion.	 Nothing	 is	 more
valuable	than	the	individual.	To	me	the	individual	is	the	ultimate	value,	Respect
yourself	and	in	that	very	respect	you	will	be	able	to	respect	others	too.
DIVINITY	IS	BEING	FREE
Any	experience	of	the	unlimited	is	the	experience	of	the	divine.	The	search	for
the	 divine	 is	 really	 the	 search	 for	 expansion,	 the	 search	 for	 a	 consciousness
which	is	absolutely	free,	a	consciousness	which	is	as	wide	as	the	sky	itself.
God	 is	 not	 a	 person	 somewhere;	 it	 is	 your	 own	 feeling	 of	 expanding
consciousness.	It	is	an	experience.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	it	is	not	difficult	to	know,	because	all	the	boundaries	are	arbitrary.	They	can
be	destroyed	because	we	have	made	them,	they	are	man-made;	they	don't	exist	in
existence	itself.	If	 they	existed	in	existence,	then	there	would	be	no	way	to	get
rid	of	 them.	 It	 is	good	 that	 they	are	 just	 in	our	minds.	For	example,	countries;
they	exist	only	on	maps	not	on	the	earth,	and	the	maps	can	be	burned	and	we	can
be	finished	with	it.	The	earth	remains	undivided	even	though	we	go	on	dividing
it	on	the	maps.
It	is	one	planet;	it	is	not	Asia,	and	Africa	and	Europe,	it	is	not	this	country	or	that
--	it	is	one	earth.	The	idea	of	belonging	to	a	nation	is	just	an	idea,	hence	it	can	be
dropped	 without	 any	 effort.	 The	 moment	 you	 see	 that	 it	 is	 only	 an	 idea	 --
arbitrary,	man-made,	invented	--	in	that	very	understanding	it	is	dropped.	And	so
are	 our	 other	 boundaries	 too;	 the	 boundary	 of	 being	 black	 and	 white,	 the
boundary	of	being	a	Catholic	or	a	Protestant,	the	boundary	of	being	a	Christian
or	a	Hindu	are	all	our	inventions.	The	child	comes	just	as	a	pure	human	being,
with	no	name,	with	no	adjective.
A	sannyasin	has	to	become	a	child	again,	with	no	name,	with	no	adjective.	Then
suddenly	 you	 start	 feeling	 that	 the	 boundaries	 have	 disappeared	 and	 your
consciousness	is	no	more	confined.
We	 carry	 the	 past	 and	 the	 past	 becomes	 a	 great	 burden.	 Then	 we	 invent	 the
future;	the	future	becomes	a	burden.	The	past	is	heavy	on	us,	but	it	is	only	in	our
memory,	it	is	nowhere	else;	and	the	future	is	only	in	our	desires,	nowhere	else.
We	can	erase	the	psychological	memories	and	the	psychological	desires.	It	 is	a
simple	phenomenon	like	cleaning	a	slate;	it	is	in	the	writing.
Once	a	man	has	done	that,	for	the	first	time	he	becomes	aware	of	how	wide,	how
vast,	life	is	and	how	beautiful.
Then	you	are	a	bird	on	the	wing	in	the	infinite	sky.
That	freedom	is	our	deepest	longing.
Sannyas	is	an	effort	towards	that	freedom.
CHRIST-INANITY
(The	formal	religion	that	grew	out	of	Christ's	teachings,	an	the	spirit	of	Christ's
life	seem	irreconcilable	to	the	point	of	being	ridiculous.)
One	of	the	most	important	teachings	of	Jesus	is	to	rejoice.	It	can	be	said	to	be	his
fundamental	 gift	 to	 humanity:	 Rejoice	 --	 he	 says	 again	 and	 again,	 rejoice...
although	 the	 so-called	 Christianity,	 the	 organised	 religion	 which	 exists	 in	 his
name	 has	 gone	 just	 the	 opposite	 to	 his	 teaching.	 If	 you	 look	 at	 the	 faces	 of
Christian	 saints	 you	 cannot	 believe	 that	 they	 are	 rejoicing.	 In	 fact	 Christians
have	also	painted	Jesus	as	being	very	sad,	serious,	sombre,	as	 if	he	carried	 the
cross	for	his	whole	life.
Just	the	opposite	is	the	case:	if	I	were	to	paint	Jesus	he	would	be	laughing	on	the
cross,	 he	 would	 be	 laughing	 at	 the	 whole	 stupidity	 of	 people,	 the	 whole
ridiculousness	 of	 it	 he	 had	 been	 trying	 to	 give	 you	 a	 new	 life	 and	 you	 are
rewarding	him	with	death?	Isn't	it	far	out?	(laughter)	He	must	have	enjoyed	the
scene:	this	was	something!	He	must	have	laughed	at	the	cosmic	joke.
Jesus	can	only	laugh	even	on	the	cross.	Yet	Christians	say	that	he	never	laughed
--	not	only	on	the	cross	but	never	laughed	at	all	in	his	whole	life.	That's	a	myth
invented	by	sad	people,	sadists,	masochists.	They	are	sad	and	they	are	projecting
their	sadness	on	Jesus.
So	the	Christianity	that	exists	is	just	the	opposite	of	Christ.	But	this	is	so	of	other
religions;	the	same	is	the	situation	with	the	Buddhists	and	with	the	Hindus.	Now,
Hindus	think	they	follow	Krishna	but	they	don't	at	all.	They	cannot	even	tolerate
my	 sannyasins	 holding	 hands	 or	 hugging	 and	 they	 think	 they	 are	 followers	 of
Krishna.	 It	 is	 strange	 that	 they	 can't	 see	 the	 absurdity:	 Krishna	 had	 sixteen
thousand	 girlfriends,	 and	 his	 whole	 life	 was	 of	 dance	 and	 song	 --	 and	 these
followers	 of	 Krishna,	 who	 are	 calling	 themselves	 Hindus,	 cannot	 accept	 my
sannyasins.	They	think	my	sannyasins	are	destroying	their	culture	because	they
don't	look	like	saints;	they	should	be	serious,	fasting,	torturing	themselves.	But
Krishna	 never	 tortured	 himself;	 he	 lived	 like	 a	 king,	 as	 everybody	 should.	He
loved	life,	as	everybody	should.
The	Hindus	are	as	against	Krishna	and	the	Buddhists	are	against	Buddha.	Now
continuously	observing	this	I	have	come	to	the	conclusion	that	every	organised
religion	is	against	the	original	founder	of	that	religion;	it	has	been	so	without	any
exception.	 There	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 certain	 law	 working	 in	 it.	 It	 seems	 that	 the
moment	 the	 original	 founder	 dies,	 the	 very	 people	 against	whom	 he	 has	 been
fighting	his	whole	life	start	capturing	whatsoever	movement	he	has	created	and
they	start	manipulating	his	philosophy	of	life	according	to	their	own	ideas.	That
is	their	revenge.	They	could	not	do	it	while	he	is	alive	but	now	that	he	has	gone
they	can.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	can	be	a	Christian	only	 if	you	are	not	 a	Catholic,	not	 a	Protestant,	 if	you
don't	belong	 to	any	Christian	organised	sect,	only	 then	can	you	be	a	Christian.
You	 can	 be	 a	 Christian	 if	 you	 rejoice.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 believing	 in
doctrines,	it	is	a	question	of	living	a	totally	different	kind	of	lifes	the	life	of	bliss.
So	rejoice	--	and	that	is	the	only	way	you	will	find	Christ-consciousness.
(Osho	speaks	further	on	Christ-consciousness	to	another	sannyas.)	Christ	is	not
the	name	of	any	person,	Jesus	has	no	monopoly	over	it	He	was	only	one	of	the
Christs;	 there	 have	 been	many	 before	 and	many	 afterwards	 and	 there	 will	 be
many	in	the	future.	He	is	part	of	a	long	chain	of	Christs.
To	me	Christ	only	represents	a	certain	state	of	consciousness,	the	ultimate	peak
of	consciousness.	In	the	East	we	call	it	Buddha-consciousness	--	it	is	the	same:
you	can	say	everybody	carries	a	Buddha	within	him.
But	 one	 can	 know	 the	 Christ	 or	 the	 Buddha	 within	 oneself	 only	 through
meditation.	It	is	not	a	question	of	believing,	you	have	to	discover	it.
Meditation	is	not	belief,	it	is	enquiry,	it	is	a	deep	search	within	your	being.	And
if	 one	 dive4	 deep	 within	 oneself	 one	 is	 bound	 to	 find,	 because	 it	 is	 one's
innermost	core.	Then	what	word	you	use	for	it	is	irrelevant
--	you	can	call	 it	 the	Christ	or	 the	Krishna	or	 the	Buddha	or	you	may	not	call
anything.	You	may	simply	call	it	the	ultimate	silence	or	the	ultimate	awareness,
the	ultimate	freedom.
But	the	only	way	to	find	is	meditation	and	meditation	means	turning	in.	We	are
extroverts,	moving	farther	and	farther	from	our	own	being.
Meditation	is	an	inner	 journey,	not	going	out	but	going	in.	There	is	no	need	to
create	a	conflict	between	the	two.	When	you	are	needed	on	the	outside	be	on	the
outside	and	when	you	have	time	then	there	is	no	need	to	be	on	the	outside	--	go
in.	Make	it	harmonious.
Just	as	in	the	day	you	are	awake	and	in	the	night	you	fall	asleep,	in	the	same	way
one	 should	 be	 able	 to	 go	 out	 and	 to	 go	 in.	 I	 don't	 want	my	 sannyasins	 to	 be
obsessed	by	anything;	 they	 should	be	 flexible,	not	 fixed,	not	 like	 things.	They
should	be	more	fluid	and	they	will	be	able	to	relate	with	others	and	they	should
be	capable	of	being	alone	too.
When	 both	 are	 possible	 the	 person	 who	 chooses	 one	 is	 foolish	 because	 he	 is
missing	half	of	his	life.
So	live	on	the	outside,	live	on	the	inside,	but	remember	that	only	on	the	inside
will	you	find	the	Christ.
On	the	outside	you	can	find	comforts	and	conveniences,	that's	all.	On	the	inside
you	 can	 find	 the	ultimate	bliss.	On	 the	 inside	you	 can	 find	 the	 truth,	 the	 truth
which	liberates,	which	liberates	one	from	all	misery.
CONTACT	HIGH
(Osho	explains	the	meaning	of	her	new	name	to	Premdip,	and	then	talks	about
the	magic	that	happens	in	the	meeting	of	a	master	and	a	disciple.)
Premdip	means	the	light	of	love,	a	small	lamp	of	love	--	but	that's	enough:	just	a
small	flame	of	love	in	your	heart	is	more	than	enough	because	it	transforms	your
whole	life.
Howsoever	 small	 it	 is,	 it	 is	 explosive,	 it	 makes	 you	 aflame.	 Soon	 it	 starts
spreading	 and	 not	 only	 are	 you	 totally	 consumed	 by	 it,	 it	 even	 starts	 kindling
other	people's	hearts.	That's	how	true	religion	spreads.	You	come	in	contact	with
a	master	and	suddenly	your	heart	 is	pulsating	with	a	new	beat.	Something	has
jumped	 from	 the	 master	 into	 your	 heart,	 something	 which	 is	 invisible,
mysterious,	something	which	is	not	possible	to	give	to	anybody	intentionally.	It
is	a	very	strange	phenomenon:	the	master	does	not	give	it,	the	disciple	does	not
ask	for	it	but	it	happens.
The	Zen	people	have	the	right	statement	about	it.	They	say	that	when	a	line	of
birds	flies	over	a	lake	the	lake	has	no	intention	of	reflecting	them,	they	have	no
intention	 of	 being	 reflected	 in	 the	 lake,	 but	 still	 the	 reflection	 happens.	 It	 is
unintended	from	both	sides.
The	case	is	similar	when	one	meets	a	master,	when	one	comes	across	a	Buddha.
The	Buddha	knows	he	cannot	give	 it	 --	 it	 is	not	a	 thing	 to	be	given	 --	and	 the
person	who	comes	in	contact	suddenly	becomes	aware	how	can	it	be	given.	How
can	 I	 ask	 for	 it?	 --	 it	 is	 not	 something	 to	 be	 asked	 for	 or	 desired.	 But	 in
encountering	a	Buddha,	in	the	very	meeting,	it	happens.
Love	is	an	inner	flame	in	the	heart.	All	 that	one	can	do	is	remove	the	barriers,
remove	all	that	is	unloving	in	you,	drop	all	that	is	unloving	in	you.	It	is	just	like
opening	your	doors	and	your	windows.	You	cannot	force	the	sun	to	come	in	but
you	can	open	the	window	and	the	sun	comes	of	its	own	accord	--	you	remove	the
barriers.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 whole	 process	 of	 mystical	 transformation	 is	 negative:	 you	 remove	 the
hindrances,	 the	 obstacles	 and	 the	 walls.	 And	 when	 there	 is	 no	 obstruction,
suddenly	it	is	there.	Out	of	nowhere,	from	the	beyond,	it	descends.
The	moment	your	heart	 starts	 feeling	 the	 light	 you	become	aware	of	who	you
are,	and	then	life	is	a	beautiful	experience	of	sharing	love;	you	can	go	on	sharing
it.	Then	it	is	not	a	question	of	with	whom	you	are,	you	simply	share	it.	You	share
it	 with	 rocks,	 you	 share	 it	 with	 people,	 you	 share	 it	 with	 the	mountains,	 you
share	 it	with	 the	 rivers,	 the	oceans.	You	 simply	 share	 it	 because	 the	more	you
share,	the	more	you	have	it.
(To	Melissa,	 a	middle-aged	American	woman,	 a	 psychologist,	 Osho	 gives	 the
name	Premgit,	and	continues	on	the	theme	of	love.)
Life	should	be	a	song	of	love	--	that's	the	only	true	religion.	All	else	is	rubbish,
rubbish	 created	 by	 the	 priests,	 the	 theologians.	 The	 truth	 is	 very	 simple,	 not
complicated,	but	 the	 theologian	complicates	 it;	his	business	 is	 to	complicate	 it.
He	spins	and	weaves	theories	and	people	can	be	lost	in	his	theories	as	if	they	are
lost	 in	 a	 jungle.	They	go	 in	 search	 for	 solutions	 and	 they	 find	more	 and	more
problems.	Each	solution	given	by	the	theologian	brings	ten	more	now	problems.
It	is	a	very	insane	effort	--	theology	is	insanity.
Religion	 is	 very	 simple.	 It	 can	 be	 reduced	 to	 one	word	 --	 love.	And	 if	 one	 is
capable	of	loving,	one	is	bound	to	find	god.	In	fact	one	need	not	go	in	search	of
god,	god	comes	in	search	of	the	person	who	loves.
He	earns	it,	he	deserves	it,	god	comes	as	a	reward.
So	let	your	life	be	a	song	of	love,	a	celebration	of	love,	and	then	one	day	you	are
in	for	a	great	surprise:	suddenly	god	knocks	on	your	door.	He	does	not	come	as	a
person;	he	is	not	a	person	but	a	presence.
Suddenly	 one	 day	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 a	 totally	 new	 kind	 of	 presence
surrounding	 you	 both	 within	 and	 without,	 a	 new	 light,	 a	 new	 energy,	 a	 new
delight	of	which	you	had	never	even	dreamt.
And	the	moment	you	come	in	contact	with	that	new	phenomenon	you	know	it	is
going	 to	 remain	 forever.	You	 simply	 know	 it,	 no	 proofs	 are	 needed;	 it	 is	 self-
evident.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Seven	months	this	time.
--	That's	good.	Next	time,	forever!	(laughter)	Good!	(She	has	risen	to	stand	and
her	back	is	towards	Osho	as	he	adds	enigmatically:)
I	 have	 recognised	 you!	 (She	 has	 turned	 to	 face	Osho.	As	 he	 concludes	with	 a
chuckle	she	looks	back	at	him,	a	question	mark	on	her	face,	and	grins	wryly	as
she	makes	her	exit.)	MORE	THAN	JUST	GOOD	FRIENDS
(Friendliness	 is	 an	 offspring	 of	 true	 religiousness,	Osho	 tells	Dharma	Mitro	 --
and	it's	an	even	higher	state	than	friendship.)
Friendship	exists	between	two	persons;	 it	 is	 relationship.	Friendliness	 is	only	a
quality;	it	need	not	depend	on	any	relationship.	It	is	just	the	way	you	live	your
lire	--	it	is	a	friendly	life.	You	are	friendly	to	everything,	to	the	whole	existence.
You	are	just	a	friend,	not	addressed	to	anybody	in	particular,	but	addressed	to	the
whole,	to	all.
In	friendship	you	make	an	exclusive	relationship	and	you	may	remain	inimical	to
many	people.	So	enmity	and	friendship	can	exist	together	--	in	fact	you	will	have
very	few	friends	and	many	more	enemies.
But	friendliness	cannot	have	any	enmity	in	it,	it	is	inclusive,	inclusive	of	all.	And
to	know	friendliness	 is	 to	know	the	real	 juice	of	 life.	Life	reveals	 its	mysteries
only	to	those	who	have	come	to	the	state	of	friendliness.
Religion,	 as	 it	 exists,	 creates	 enmity.	 The	 Christian	 is	 against	 the	 Hindu,	 the
Hindu	is	against	the	Buddhist,	the	Buddhist	is	against	the	Mohammedan	--	they
create	 enmity.	 These	 religions	 are	 just	 political	 ideologies	 masquerading	 as
religions,	politics	hiding	behind	 the	 facade	of	 religion.	This	 is	more	dangerous
than	ordinary	politics	because	at	least	the	ordinary	politics	is	honest,	it	does	not
hide	 itself,	 but	 these	 so-called	 religions	 are	 just	 politics	 pretending	 to	 be
religious.	These	are	more	dangerous;	this	is	more	cunning,	more	deceptive,	more
poisoning.
A	true	religious	person	cannot	have	any	enmity	in	him.	That	is	the	criterion	of	a
true	religious	person.
And	 it	 starts	 happening	 --	 the	more	 you	move	 into	meditation,	 the	more	 you
become	 silent,	 the	more	 you	 become	 aware,	 it	 starts	 happening	 naturally:	 the
friend	in	you	is	born.	And	the	day	the	friend	is	born	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	fulfilled	sannyas.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 birth	 process.	 Its	 culmination	 is	 in	 that	 ultimate	 peak	 called
friendliness.
(He'd	 like	 to	 replace	 the	 words	 god	 and	 prayer	 --	 and	 even	 love	 --	 with
friendliness,	Osho	declares	to	the	last	person	for	sannyas	tonight.)
Meditation	 needs	 not	 followers	 but	 friends.	The	 follower	 is	 stupid;	 he	 follows
out	of	his	stupidity:	because	he	cannot	depend	on	himself	he	starts	depending	on
somebody	 else,	 but	 he	 is	 a	 slave,	 a	 psychological	 slave,	 and	 psychological
slavery	is	a	deeper	slavery	than	all	other	slaveries.	It	is	very	subtle,	you	cannot
see	it,	but	you	can	feel	it.	The	people	who	call	god	the	father	are	just	looking	for
a	father	figure;	they	want	to	depend	on	a	father.	Or	there	are	religions	which	call
god	the	mother	--	it	is	the	same,	there	is	no	difference	at	all.
These	people	are	childish,	they	are	not	grown-ups.	They	may	be	old	is	age	but
psychologically	 they	 are	 retarded.	 All	 followers	 are	 retarded	 people.	 My
sannyasins	are	not	my	followers	but	my	friends.
Following	 comes	 through	 belief;	 friendship,	 friendliness	 is	 born	 out	 of
meditation.	So	I	don't	give	you	any	doctrine,	I	don't	give	you	any	philosophy.	To
me	 all	 those	 philosophical	 dogmas	 and	 great	 systems	 of	 thought	 are	 simply
bullshit.	But	people	are	so	interested	in	rotten	things	that	they	go	on	carrying	all
that	load	their	whole	life.	They	are	just	big	words,	jargon,	esoteric	jargon.
I	am	not	interested	at	all	in	any	kind	of	jargon.	You	have	to	be	very	simple	with
me	because	 it	 is	a	question	of	enquiry.	You	need	an	 innocent,	silent,	enquiring
mind,	not	full	of	belief,	not	full	of	philosophy,	just	clean.
Sannyasins	 are	 fellow	 travellers.	 We	 don't	 have	 a	 church,	 we	 don't	 have	 a
doctrine,	a	dogma,	we	don't	have	any	beliefs;	we	share	only	one	thing	with	each
other,	and	that	is	meditation.	All	those	who	have	gathered	close	to	me	are	here
just	 to	 learn	 meditation	 --	 and	 meditation	 means	 silence,	 not	 chanting,	 not
repeating	a	mantra.	That	is	not	meditation,	that	is	just	a	simple	process	of	auto-
hypnosis.
Meditation	means	becoming	 aware	 and	 silent,	watching	your	mind	with	 all	 its
game,	trips,	numbers.
And	the	miracle	is	that	if	you	can	watch	silently	all	those	trips	and	numbers	and
games	disappear.	Just	by	simple	watching	they	evaporate.	One	day	you	are	there
and	 the	mind	 is	no	more.	That	 sudden	 silence,	 that	profound	 silence	when	 the
mind	is	not	at	all....	You	look	for	it	because	you	have	become	habituated	with	it,
it	 is	 an	 old	 habit;	 you	 search	 for	 where	 it	 has	 gone	 and	 you	 cannot	 find	 it
anywhere	--	even	if	you	go	to	the	four	corners	of	the	world	you	will	not	find	it...
That	state	is	silence,	meditation,	samadhi.
And	out	of	that	state	is	a	new	upsurge	of	energy.	Call	it	love,	call	it	friendliness,
call	it	prayer	--	because	all	these	are	aspects	of	it.	But	to	call	it	friendliness	is	the
best,	because	if	you	call	it	prayer	it	stinks	of	old	religion;	if	you	call	it	god	many
people	withdraw,	 they	 become	 afraid	 --	 god	 has	 tortured	 them	 enough.	 In	 the
name	of	god	so	much	stupidity	has	happened	on	the	earth	that	it	is	time	to	quit.
But	 if	 you	 call	 it	 friendliness	 nobody	 is	 offended.	 It	 has	 never	 been	 called
friendliness,	 hence	 I	 call	 it	 friendliness.	The	word	 is	 fresh	 and	young,	without
any	old	associations.
My	sannyasins	are	friends	--	friends	to	me,	friends	to	each	other,	friends	to	the
whole	existence.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
26	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011265
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
SILENCE	IN	YOUR	SONG
(...	and	a	song	in	your	silence.	This	is	the	ultimate	harmony	Osho	says	to	Anand
Silvia.	First	he	explains	the	literal	meaning	of	her	name.)
Anand	means	bliss.	Silvia	 symbolises	 the	profound	 silence	 that	 prevails	 in	 the
woods.	It	comes	from	the	Latin	mythological	figure,	Sylvanus;	he	is	the	god	of
the	woods.
So	your	name	will	means	bliss	and	profound	silence.
A	man	is	whole	only	when	both	bliss	and	silence	are	present	together	in	such	a
deep	harmony	that	they	enhance	and	enrich	each	other.	It	is	easy	to	be	blissful	if
one	is	ready	to	forget	all	about	silence,	and	vice	versa	is	also	true;	it	is	easy	to	be
silent	if	one	drops	the	idea	of	being	blissful.	But	to	choose	one	is	to	remain	half,
and	one	cannot	 feel	 contented	with	half.	Less	 than	whole	 is	not	 enough,	more
than	whole	is	not	needed	and	is	not	possible	either.
A	 person	who	 is	 blissful	 without	 silence	 is	 shallow.	 The	 person	who	 is	 silent
without	bliss	is	serious,	sad,	cold	and	dead.	Both	become	significant	when	they
are	together.	The	blissful	silence	is	a	silence	with	songs;	the	silent	bliss	is	non-
feverish,	it	is	sane.	It	is	not	shallow,	it	has	depth.	Silence	gives	depth,	and	bliss
gives	 dance	 to	 that	 depth.	 And	 to	 be	 a	 sannyasin,	 particularly	my	 sannyasin,
means	that	you	should	be	trying	to	achieve	this	ultimate	harmony.
It	is	possible,	it	is	not	impossible	--	certainly	it	is	difficult	but	the	difficult	has	to
be	 accepted	 as	 a	 challenge.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 accept	 the	 difficult	 as	 a
challenge	it	is	no	more	difficult,	it	becomes	an	adventure.
MASTER	IS	A	MUST
(Andre	 means	 courageous,	 Osho	 tells	 another	 sannyasin.	 And	 it	 was	 also	 the
name	of	the	first	disciple	that	Jesus	called	to	join	him.)
It	 just	 have	been	 just	 a	 coincidence,	 but	 it	 becomes	 significant	 because	 a	man
like	Jesus	can	only	call	the	courageous	to	be	his	disciples.	It	needs	guts	to	be	a
disciple	of	a	master.
It	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 be	 a	 Christian,	 a	 Hindu,	 a	 Mohammedan,	 to	 belong	 to
something	 traditional,	 conventional,	 established,	 but	 to	 be	 with	 a	master	 is	 to
belong	to	a	rebellion.	To	be	with	a	master	is	to	belong	to	something	absolutely
new	 and	 fresh,	 to	 something	 which	 has	 no	 tradition	 behind	 it,	 no	 convention
supporting	it,	no	establishment	in	which	it	can	get	its	roots.	It	has	to	depend	only
on	the	love	of	those	few	courageous	ones	who	gather	around	a	master.
To	 belong	 to	 an	 old	 religion	 is	 to	 belong	 to	 the	 past,	 in	 a	 sense	 to	 something
dead.	It	was	tremendously	beautiful	to	be	with	Jesus	but	to	be	a	Christian	is	just
ugly.	To	walk	with	Buddha	is	a	rare	gift	--	only	the	fortunate	ones,	 the	blessed
ones,	can	walk	with	the	Buddha	--	but	to	be	a	Buddhist	is	very	simple	and	cheap.
Once	the	master	is	gone	then	belonging	to	the	ideology,	to	the	doctrine,	has	no
significant	at	all.
Religion	exists	between	 the	alive	master	and	 the	courageous	disciple	 --	 in	 that
communion.	 So	 religion	 exists	 only	 once	 in	 a	 while	 on	 the	 earth.	 It	 has	 no
continuum,	no	continuity.	It	existed	when	Jesus	was	here	but	it	existed	only	for
those	 few	 people	 who	 communed	 with	 him,	 then	 it	 disappeared.	 Then	 only
footprints	on	the	sands	of	time	are	left	and	people	go	on	worshipping	them.	But
to	worship	 the	 footprint	of	a	Buddha	or	a	 Jesus	 is	not	 to	be	 religious;	 to	walk
with	a	Buddha	or	a	Jesus	is	to	be	religious.	Hence	the	true	seeker	always	has	to
find	a	master;	there	is	no	other	way.	He	cannot	find	the	truth	in	the	scriptures,	he
cannot	 find	 it	 in	 any	 established	 church.	 It	 is	 possible	only	 in	 the	 company	of
someone	who	has	achieved	it,	who	has	realised	it,	who	has	become	it.	And	then
there	is	great	peace	and	a	bliss	that	you	have	not	even	dreamt	about.	All	that	you
can	think	about	bliss	is	only	a	negative	idea,	that	there	will	be	no	misery;	that's
all	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you	can	imagine.
If	 you	 talk	 about	 light	 to	 a	man	who	 lives	 in	 darkness	 he	will	 think	 only	 one
thing,	 that	 there	will	be	no	darkness.	But	 light	 is	far	more	than	just	absence	of
darkness.	But	 the	person	who	 lives	 in	darkness	 cannot	 imagine	anything	more
than	that,	The	absence	of	darkness	is	only	one	aspect	of	light.	But	the	presence
of	 colours	 and	 rainbows	 and	 clouds	 and	 people	 and	 faces	 and	 the	 beauty	 of	 a
sunset	 --	 these	 the	man	who	 lives	 in	 darkness	 cannot	 comprehend.	He	 cannot
even	dream	about	them	because	you	can	only	dream	about	that	which	you	have
experienced	in	some	way.	Your	dreams	are	not	original,	it	is	impossible	to	dream
an	original	dream.	It	is	all	rubbish	and	junk	and	old	and	gathered	from	here	and
there,	from	a	movie,	from	television,	from	a	story,	from	a	novel,	from	peoples'
lives,	 from	 your	 own	 experiences	 --	 just	 small	 pieces	 put	 together	 somehow
that's	why	it	is	so	crazy.
It	is	just	a	collage,	not	even	a	painting.	You	have	taken	one	leg	from	somebody,
one	eye	from	somebody	else	--	and	the	leg	may	belong	to	an	elephant,	 the	eye
may	belong	to	a	mosquito,	so	the	collage	is	going	to	be	very	insane.
It	 is	 said	 that	 Charles	 Darwin's	 disciples	 once	 tried	 to	 befool	 him.	 It	 was	 his
birthday	and	for	his	birthday	present	they	made	a	collage	of	an	insect:	 the	legs
were	 from	 one	 insect	 and	 the	 head	 was	 from	 another	 insect.	 They	 glued	 it
together	so	perfectly	that	it	really	looked	like	one	insect.
They	presented	 it	 to	Darwin	 and	 they	 asked	 'Sir,	 can	you	 tell	 us	what	 kind	of
insect	this	is,	to	what	category	it	belongs?'	--	because	that	was	his	whole	work.
He	was	working	on	all	kinds	of	species	--	animals,	insects	and	birds.	He	looked
at	 it,	 he	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 eyes.	 He	 had	 never	 even	 thought	 about	 such	 a
thing,	he	had	never	come	across	such	an	insect.
Then	 he	 asked	 'Does	 this	 insect	 hum?'	 They	 said	 'Yes.'	 Then	 he	 said	 'This	 is
humbug.'	But	that's	what	your	dreams	are	humbug!
You	cannot	even	think	of	what	bliss	is,	what	truth	is	--	and	it	is	better	not	to	think
about	it,	because	whatsoever	you	think	will	be	humbug.	It	is	better	to	keep	your
mind	 clean,	 it	 is	 better	 to	 know	 that	 you	 don't	 know.	 Only	 in	 a	 loving
relationship	with	someone	who	has	known	does	it	happen.	It	is	a	communion	not
between	two	heads	but	between	two	hearts.	Something	transpires,	something	like
a	flame	jumps	from	the	master	to	the	disciple	and	suddenly	his	unlit	candle	is	lit.
For	that	one	needs	courage,	the	courage	to	get	out	of	the	old	structures	--	because
they	are	convenient,	comfortable,	familiar	--	the	courage	to	go	from	the	familiar
into	the	unfamiliar.	Then	bliss	is	yours,	truth	is	yours,	freedom	is	yours.	All	these
significant	values	together	is	the	meaning	of	the	words	'god',	'freedom'
'bliss',	 'truth'	 'love'	 --	 altogether.	 God	 is	 not	 a	 person	 but	 all	 these	 qualities
together	like	many	fragrances	melting	and	merging	into	each	other	and	creating
a	totally	new	fragrance.
That	fragrance	is	god.
MEDITATION	MAKES	MEDIATORS	OF	MEN
It	 is	 impossible	 to	 know	 that	 you	 are	 appointed	 by	 the	 whole,	 that	 you	 are
created	for	a	special	purpose,	for	a	certain	destiny	to	be	fulfilled,	for	a	message
to	be	delivered.	It	is	impossible	without	meditation	to	conceive	that	your	life	is
significant	to	existence,	that	you	are	not	accidental,	that	you	are	not	here	just	by
chance,	that	there	is	a	hidden	hand	behind	you.
But	that	hand	is	revealed	only	in	deep	meditation.
Meditation	 means	 a	 thoughtless	 state	 of	 awareness.	 Mind	 consists	 only	 of
thoughts.	Behind	the	thought,	 there	 is	something	more	but	because	of	so	many
thoughts	we	have	become	completely	oblivious	of	 it,	 it	 is	 the	awareness	of	 the
thoughts.	Because	 you	 can	 be	 aware	 of	 thoughts,	 certainly	 you	 are	 behind	 the
thoughts
--	 farther,	 deeper.	You	can	 see	 the	 thoughts	moving	on	 the	 screen	of	 the	mind
like	a	film.	Certainly	you	are	not	a	thought,	you	are	totally	different.
A	 thought	cannot	watch	other	 thoughts	 --	 that's	 impossible.	A	computer	knows
nothing	about	its	thoughts;	it	is	just	a	machine,	there	is	no	awareness	behind	it.	It
is	meditation	which	reveals	to	you	that	you	are	not	only	a	machine,	that	are	not
only	a	mind	but	something	more,	something	far	superior.
Mind	is	constantly	changing	and	your	awareness	is	absolutely	still,	unchanging.
Mind	is	time	and	your	awareness	is	eternity.	When	mind	stops	it	becomes	easy
to	experience	your	awareness	because	all	the	turmoil	and	the	noise	is	gone.	Only
in	 that	 experience	 is	 there	 a	 possibility	 to	 feel	 that	 you	 are	 here	 for	 a	 certain
purpose.	The	purpose	--	that	you	are	appointed,	that	you	are	not	just	thrown	here,
that	you	are	needed	and	that	you	have	to	fulfil	a	certain	destiny	--	immediately
becomes	clear.	And	unless	that	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
fulfilled	 you	 will	 not	 feel	 at	 ease;	 you	 will	 remain	 tense,	 you	 will	 remain	 in
anguish.	The	moment	that	destiny	is	fulfilled	one	feels	immense	contentment,	as
if	one	has	come	home.	One	has	done	the	work.
It	is	just	as	if	you	are	painting	a	picture	and	when	it	is	complete	there	is	a	great
relaxation	and	the	joy	of	doing	something	perfectly	wells	now	you	can	rest,	you
can	relax.	Until	that	painting	was	finished	there	was	turmoil	and	anguish.	Every
creator	knows	that	anxiety:	something	wants	to	be	expressed,	 to	be	sung,	 to	be
put	to	music,	to	be	painted;	unless	you	fulfil	that	longing	it	will	go	on	haunting
you,	goading	you	to	do	it.
Exactly	 like	 that	 existence	has	 a	 certain	need	of	 you	otherwise	you	would	not
have	been	here.	Just	 the	fact	 that	one	 is,	 is	enough	proof	 that	one	 is	needed	 in
some	way.	Of	courage	we	don't	know	in	what	way;	we	don't	know	because	we
don't	know	our	own	source	of	consciousness.
The	 programme	 is	 there	 --	 meditation	 reveals	 the	 whole	 programme.	 You
become	 an	 open	book	 to	 yourself.	That's	 the	 beauty	 of	meditations	 it	 is	 a	 key
which	helps	you	to	read	your	own	destiny.
So	put	your	total	energy	into	meditation	while	you	are	here,	and	then	make	it	a
point	that	whenever	you	have	time,	rather	than	wasting	it,	rather	than	killing	it	--
use	 it	 for	meditation.	The	deeper	you	go	 into	meditation,	 the	better:	 the	closer
you	will	be	coming	to	god.
THE	WOMB	OF	AWARENESS
(Osho	 talks	 to	 Navajato	 about	 the	 second	 birth,	 that	 which	 happens	 through
sannyas.	Only	if	one	is	born	a	second	time	does	the	first	one	mean	anything.)
Socrates	is	right	when	he	says	that	a	master	is	only	a	midwife.	That	is	exactly	the
purpose	of	the	masters	to	help	you	to	be	born	anew,	to	help	you	to	be	born	as	a
soul.
People	are	well	aware	that	they	are	bodies;	they	think	in	terms	of	the	physical,	of
the	material.	And	science	stops	there	too,	because	science	is	created	by	ordinary
people.	The	day	Buddhas	create	science	will	be	the	greatest	blessing	to	humanity
because	they	will	create	a	totally	new	kind	of	science.	This	science	is	created	by
ordinary,	 unconscious	 humanity,	 howsoever	 intelligent	 they	 are.	 The	Darwins,
the	 Edisons,	 the	 Einsteins	 --	 howsoever	 intelligent	 they	 are,	 they	 are
unconscious.	They	don't	know	about	the	second	birth,	they	are	not	aware	of	their
own	 selves.	 They	 cannot	 lead	 humanity	 to	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 bliss,	 silence,
truth.
Yes,	 they	can	make	 life	 a	 little	bit	more	comfortable,	 a	 little	more	convenient,
but	on	the	other	hand	they	will	also	make	many	dangers	for	 life.	Because	they
are	unconscious	they	don't	know	what	they	are	doing.
So	 on	 one	 hand	 they	 go	 on	 creating	medicine	 to	 help	 humanity,	 to	 overcome
illness	and	disease	--	they	even	go	on	researching	into	how	to	help	humanity	not
to	get	old,	how	to	live	a	longer	life	in	a	perfectly	healthy	way	--	and	on	the	other
hand	 the	 same	 people	 go	 on	 creating	 atom	 bombs,	 the	 same	 people	 go	 on
creating	destructive	weapons.
You	can	 see	how	unconscious,	how	 insane,	must	be	our	 scientists.	This	 seems
very	illogical	if	you	are	trying	to	help	humanity	to	live	longer	then	please	stop
creating	 atom	 bombs	 and	 hydrogen	 bombs	 and	 death	 rays	 and	 all	 kinds	 of
destructive	things	--	because	what	is	the	point	of	helping	humanity	to	live	long
when	you	 are	 piling	 up	 atomic	weapons?	Sooner	 or	 later	 any	mad	person	 can
trigger	a	world	war.
And	where	can	you	find	more	mad	people	 than	 in	politics?	Politics	belongs	 to
the	nuts.	Now	 this	Reagan...	 he	has	 thrown	out	 the	peanut	 and	he	 is	 a	big	nut
himself.	Now	the	peanut	is	replaced	by	a	big	nut!
This	man	can	prove	dangerous.
Carter	 was	 just	 a	 peanut	 --	 not	 dangerous.	 You	 can	 make	 peanut	 butter	 or
something	(much	laughter)...
He	was	of	much	use	but	not	dangerous	either.	But	this	Reagan?	--	this	man	can
be	dangerous,	he	can	drag	the	whole	world	into	a	war	at	any	moment.
Just	one	mad	person	who	is	 in	power	is	enough.	And	people	are	mad.	Just	 the
other	day	I	read	a	news	item:	one	man	in	America,	 in	California...	of	course	 it
can	only	happen	in	California-land!	California	is	something	far-out!	It	does	not
belong	to	this	planet;	it	is	a	planet	unto	itself.	A	man	became	so	angry	with	the
cockroaches	 that	 he	 burned	 his	 house	 (laughter)	 and	 then	 seeing	what	 he	 had
done	he	killed	himself.
Cockroach	only	cause	of	the	whole	thing!
I	know	cockroaches	are	not	 that	beautiful...	but	 to	burn	 the	whole	house	 is	 too
much!	And	then	he	realised...	only	when	he	saw	the	house	going	up	in	smoke	did
he	realise	what	he	had	done,	then	he	killed	himself.
Now	you	see,	such	people	can	be	in	power,	they	are	in	power.	Science	is	created
by	people	who	don't	know	about	their	consciousness	at	all.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	 totally	 different	 science	 will	 be	 possible	 through	 meditation,	 through
awakened	people,	through	people	who	are	reborn.	Then	it	will	be	creative,	then
it	will	 think	more	of	ecology	and	nature.	 It	will	 think	 less	 in	 terms	of	nations,
religions,	boundaries;	it	will	think	more	of	humanity,	life,	birds,	trees.	It	will	be	a
totally	different	vision.
The	 second	birth	 is	 a	 very	 essential	 phenomenon,	moreso	now	 than	 ever.	And
that's	my	effort	here,	to	create	through	my	sannyasins	at	least	the	foundation	for
a	different	kind	of	humanity,	for	people	who	will	live	out	of	awareness,	who	will
be	alert	about	what	they	are	doing,	what	they	are	thinking,	who	will	be	guided
by	their	inner	light.
That's	 a	 new	 birth,	 that	 is	 the	 meaning	 name.	 And	 it	 has	 to	 be	 realised	 so	 it
becomes	a	reality	too,	not	only	a	name.
GOD	ADORES	A	VACUUM
(Vinito	means	absolutely	humble,	Osho	tells	another	swami.)	But	when	I	use	the
word	'humble'	I	don't	mean	something	against	the	ego,	I	mean	the	absence	of	the
ego.
If	something	is	against	the	ego	then	it	still	carries	some	relationship	to	the	ego.
Maybe	the	ego	is	standing	upside-down	so	it	looks	opposite,	but	the	ego	is	there.
Whenever	a	person	cultivates	humbleness	he	becomes	proud	of	his	humbleness	-
-	that	is	ego	coming	in	from	the	backdoor.	He	becomes	very	egoistic	in	a	subtle
way;	his	ego	is	not	gross,	 it	 is	very	saintly,	holy,	holier-than-thou,	but	 it	 is	still
ego.
When	I	use	the	word	'humble'	I	don't	mean	the	opposite	of	ego	but	the	absence
of	the	ego	--	and	there	is	a	tremendous	difference.	The	absence	of	the	ego	is	the
absence	of	all	kinds	of	ego.	The	holy	ego,	the	spiritual	ego,	are	all	rejected.	One
is	not	even	proud	of	one's	humbleness	...	because	that	is	a	contradiction	in	terms.
The	ego	is	so	absent	that	one	is	not	even	conscious	of	one's	humbleness.	One	is
simply	humble,	there	is	not	even	a	self	consciousness	about	it	Then	humbleness
is	true	and	that	humbleness	becomes	the	opening	to	god.
God	 can	 descend	 in	 you	 when	 you	 are	 not,	 when	 you	 are	 absolutely	 non-
existential.	When	god	is	absolutely	existential	in	you,	within	you,	in	each	cell	of
your	 being,	 in	 each	 fibre	 of	 your	 existence,	 then	 he	 pulsates,	 he	 beats,	 he
breathes;	you	are	simply	no	more.
Become	a	zero	and	you	become	the	abode	of	god.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	zeroes,	just	zeroes.
WAIT	WATCHER
(Sudhir	 means	 utterly	 patient,	 capable	 of	 waiting	 infinitely,	 Osho	 tells	 Ma
Sudhir.)	It	is	one	of	the	most	significant	qualities	for	a	seeker	of	truth,	to	be	able
to	wait.	It	cannot	be	done	in	a	hurried	way,	you	cannot	have	it	instantly;	it	is	not
like	instant	coffee.
Truth	cannot	be	achieved	through	the	American	way	of	life.	Maybe	it	is	because
of	 this	 that	 this	 country	 is	 so	 lazy	 and	 lousy	 but	 it	 has	 created	 the	 greatest
number	of	Buddhas	in	the	world.	That	laziness	and	lousiness	may	be	the	cause
of	it	all	(laughter)...	because	people	can	wait,	people	are	patient,	nobody	is	in	a
hurry.	If	somebody	says	'I	will	come	to	see	you	today,'	even	if	he	comes	within
the	week	he	is	perfectly	in	time!	(laughter)	Nobody	will	object	about	what	you
said	 and	 that	 now	 one	week	 has	 passed.	 That	 is	 not	 even	mentioned,	 nobody
takes	any	notice	of	it.
People	are	moving	with	a	very	slow	speed,	at	snail's	speed.	There	is	no	hurry	to
reach	anywhere.	When	you	are	in	a	hurry	you	cannot	enjoy	the	journey;	you	are
focussed	 on	 the	 goal.	 And	 when	 you	 are	 not	 in	 a	 hurry	 you	 can	 enjoy	 the
sideshows	and	 the	sight-seeings	and	sometimes	you	can	go	on	a	 side-path	and
enjoy	a	waterfall	or	a	river	and	have	a	swim	and	forget	all	about	the	goal.	You
can	go	astray,	it	is	allowed.	The	journey	in	itself	is	so	beautiful	that	who	bothers
about	 the	 goal?	And	what	 is	 the	 hurry?	 --	 life	 is	 eternal	 so	 some	 day	we	 are
bound	to	reach.	How	long	can	we	go	on	missing?
It	is	said	about	Diogenes,	a	Greek	mystic,	that	he	went	to	see	a	show	--	an	archer
was	 giving	 a	 show.	He	was	 so	 lousy	 that	 not	 even	 a	 single	 arrow	 reached	 the
target.	Diogenes	went	and	sat	by	the	side	of	the	target.
The	crowd	said	'What	are	you	doing?'	He	said	'This	is	the	safest	place!	This	man
can	shoot	anywhere,	but	this	is	the	safest	places	his	arrows	are	not	going	to	reach
here.'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Life	 should	 be	 taken	more	 joyously,	more	 cheerfully,	 less	 seriously.	 Certainly
truth	 has	 to	 be	 enquired	 into	 but	 not	 in	 a	 hurried	 way.	 And	 then	 a	 miracle
happens:	the	less	you	are	in	a	hurry,	the	quicker	it	happens.	If	you	are	ready	to
wait	for	infinity	it	can	happen	instantly,	because	the	very	capacity	to	wait	shows
your	 trust.	 The	 very	 capacity	 to	wait	 shows	 your	 surrender;	 it	 shows	 that	 you
know	it	 is	going	to	happen	sooner	or	 later	and	you	are	not	 trying	to	force	 it	 in
any	way	to	happen	right	now.
You	are	allowing	existence	to	take	its	own	time.	When	spring	comes	the	flowers
will	blossom.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Sudhirs	learn	to	wait	for	the	spring.	It	always	comes.	This
is	trust,	that	it	always	comes.	If	it	came	to	Buddha,	to	Jesus,	to	Zarathustra,	why
not	to	you?
Once	 this	 attitude	 settles	 you	 become	 relaxed,	 calm	 and	 quiet.	 And	 in	 that
calmness	and	quietness,	in	that	relaxed	state,	it	can	come.	It	can	come	right	now
(There	is	a	smile	in	Osho's	voice	as	he	asks)
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
(She	shrugs	her	shoulders,	the	very	picture	of	total	relaxation.	The	group	laughs
and	Osho	chuckles.)
--	That's	right.	Good,	Sudhir,	good!
BLISS	IS	IT
Pleasure	is	very	momentary,	it	exists	only	for	a	split	second.	Happiness	is	a	little
longer,	 joy	 even	 a	 little	 longer,	more	 suffused,	 but	 they	 are	 both	 part	 of	 time.
Pleasure,	happiness,	joy	--	they	are	all	part	of	time,	and	anything	that	is	part	of
time	is	bound	to	come	and	go,	it	cannot	be	forever.
Time	means	change,	time	means	flux,	movement.	Nothing	can	be	static	in	time,
nothing	can	be	at	a	standstill.	But	bliss	is	eternal,	hence	it	is	not	part	of	time,	it	is
beyond	time.	And	to	attain	to	bliss	one	has	to	go	beyond	time.
When	I	say	one	has	to	go	beyond	time	the	task	seems	to	be	impossible,	how	can
one	go	beyond	time?	--
because	as	far	as	physics	or	science	is	concerned	there	is	no	possibility	of	going
beyond	time	and	space	because	the	whole	existence	consists	only	of	time	and	is
only	 a	 fourth	 dimension	 of	 space,	 so	 you	 cannot	 go	 beyond	 it	 --	 according	 to
science.	But	according	to	the	awakened	ones	you	can	go	beyond	time	because	in
fact	 you	are	 beyond	 time;	 you	 just	 have	 to	 search	within	 yourself	 for	 a	 point
which	is	already	beyond	time.
Looked	 at	 in	 that	 light	 things	 have	 a	 different	 perspective:	 mind	 becomes
equivalent	to	time.	Mind	is	a	flux,	constantly	changing.	Just	behind	the	mind	is
your	awareness,	which	is	the	same,	always	the	same.
When	you	were	a	child	 it	was	 the	 same,	you	became	a	young	man,	 it	was	 the
same,	when	you	become	old	it	will	be	the	same.	When	you	were	in	the	womb	of
your	mother	it	was	the	same,	when	you	were	not	born	it	was	the	same,	when	you
are	dying	it	will	be	the	same,	when	you	are	dead	it	will	be	the	same.	There	will
be	no	difference	at	all,	it	is	always	the	same.	It	is	the	centre	of	the	cyclone.	The
mind	is	 like	 the	cyclone	and	awareness	 is	 the	centre,,it	 is	 in	 the	centre	and	yet
beyond,	it	is	within	and	yet	beyond.
This	 is	 the	 whole	 work	 of	 meditation,	 this	 is	 the	 commitment	 of	 sannyas	 to
search	for	that	which	is	already	beyond	time.	And	the	moment	you	know	it,	the
moment	you	taste	it,	you	know	that	life	is	immortal,	you	are	immortal.	There	has
never	been	any	birth	and	there	has	never	been	any	death,	all	that	has	happened
only	on	the	circumference.	At	the	centre	you	have	remained	untouched.
This	 experience	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 god	 or	 nirvana,	 enlightenment	 --	 or
whatsoever	one	wants	to	call	it.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
27	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011275
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
COAL	TO	KOHINOOR
(Osho	 opens	 the	 evening	 by	 talking	 to	 Dhyan	 Coleman	 about	 the	 difference
between	meditation	and	concentration.)
Meditation	is	misunderstood	all	over	the	world	because	for	centuries	the	idea	has
persisted	that	concentration	was	meditation;	and	concentration	is	not	meditation
at	--	it	is	just	the	opposite	of	meditation.
Concentration	 means	 narrowing	 the	 mind,	 focussing	 the	 mind	 on	 one	 point,
excluding	the	whole	existence,	just	including	that	one	point.	It	is	a	tunnel	vision;
it	 goes	 on	 narrowing	 and	 narrowing	 and	 then	 only	 one	 thing	 is	 left.	 And
meditation	is	just	the	opposite:	it	is	relaxation.	It	is	including	the	whole	existence
in	your	vision;	it	is	not	focussing,	it	is	not	narrowing,	it	is	widening,	expanding.
For	example,	you	can	listen	to	me	in	a	concentrated	way	or	in	a	meditative	way.
If	 you	 listen	 in	 s	 concentrated	 way	 then	 you	 have	 to	 exclude	 the	 train,	 the
aeroplane,	the	traffic	noise,	the	insects	and	their	beautiful	sounds	and	the	silence
of	the	night.	You	have	to	exclude	everything	from	your	vision;	you	have	just	to
concentrate	on	my	words.	But	those	words	will	become	very	poor,	they	will	lose
the	glory	of	inclusiveness.	They	will	become	poor	because	they	will	not	have	the
song	of	 the	 insects	 and	 the	 silence	 and	 the	noise	 and	 all	 that	 exists	 around,	 in
them.
But	 you	 can	 listen	 in	 a	meditative	way	 too.	Then	 you	 are	 simply	 available	 as
much	to	me	as	 to	 the	insects,	 to	 the	traffic	noise;	you	are	simply	open.	And	of
course,	concentration	is	bound	to	be	unnatural,	forced,	violent.	And	you	will	get
tired	 of	 it,	 exhausted.	Anything	 that	 goes	 against	 nature	 is	 tiring	 and	 anything
that	goes	with	nature	is	nourishing,	rejuvenating.	Meditation	is	very	nourishing.
Concentration	 is	 part	 of	 the	 mind,	 meditation	 is	 something	 beyond.	 In	 fact	 it
burns	 the	 mind	 completely,	 it	 consumes	 the	 mind	 totally.	 You	 are	 no	 more	 a
mind	in	meditation,	you	are	simply	a	state	of	profound	silence	with	no	thought,
with	 no	 desire,	 with	 no	 mind.	 And	 Coleman	 is	 a	 beautiful	 word;	 it	 has	 two
meanings.	The	first	meaning	comes	from	Latin.	In	Latin	it	means	dove;	the	dove
is	a	symbol	of	peace	and	of	the	renewal	of	life.
Meditation	gives	both.	It	makes	you	peaceful,	at	ease	with	yourself	and	with	the
whole	existence.	It	brings	harmony,	a	certain	quality	which	is	indescribable,	but
a	 few	 indications	 can	 be	 given	 about	 it.	 One	 is:	 there	 is	 no	 conflict	 in	 it,	 no
duality.	 You	 are	 not	 trying	 to	 achieve	 anything,	 because	 if	 you	 are	 trying	 to
achieve	anything	you	cannot	be	peaceful.	There	is	no	goal	in	it,	because	if	there
is	a	goal	you	will	be	ambitious,	and	ambition	cannot	be	peaceful.	In	fact	there	is
no	past	 in	 it	 and	no	 future	 in	 it,	because	 the	past	 is	 a	continuous	noise	and	an
unnecessary	noise.	It	has	no	significance,	it	cannot	come	back,	you	cannot	undo
it,	 you	 cannot	 disprove	 upon	 it.	 Nothing	 can	 be	 done	 about	 the	 past	 --	 it	 is
finished	--	but	it	is	hanging	around	you	like	smoke,	like	dust,	and	it	clouds	your
vision,	it	creates	a	disturbance.	Any	memory	can	disturb	you.	When	there	is	no
past,	only	then	When	there	is	no	future,	only	then	is	there	peace,	because	future
means	aspirations,	achievement,	goal,	ambition,	desire.	You	cannot	be	herenow,
you	 are	 always	 rushing	 for	 something,	 somewhere	 else,	 and	peace	 is	 now	and
here.	One	has	to	be	utterly	present	to	the	present,	then	there	is	peace.	And	out	of
that	is	renewal	of	life,	because	life	knows	only	one	time,	and	that	is	the	present.
The	past	is	death;	the	future	is	just	a	projection	of	the	dead	past.	What	can	you
think	about	the	future?	You	think	in	terms	of	the	past;	that's	what	you	know	and
you	project	it	--	of	course	in	a	better	way.	It	is	more	beautiful,	decorated;	all	the
pains	have	been	dropped	out	and	only	the	pleasures	have	been	chosen,	but	it	is
the	past.	It	is	modified,	improved,	a	better	edition,	but	it	is	the	past.	The	past	is
not,	 the	 future	 is	 not,	 only	 the	 present	 is.	 To	 be	 in	 the	 present	 is	 to	 be	 alive,
optimum	--	and	that	is	renewal.	A	new	life	begins	in	you	or,	life	begins	for	the
first	time.	Before	that	you	were	just	dreaming	about	life,	thinking	about	life	--	it
was	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
about	and	about.	Now	it	 is	 the	truth	of	it,	now	it	 is	existential.	And	the	second
meaning	which	comes	from	the	Teutonic	is	even	more	beautiful,	simply	far-out!
It	 means	 a	 coal	 burner	 (laughter).	 And	 in	 fact	 meditation	 is	 a	 coal	 burner.	 It
burns	 all	 that	 is	 coal	 in	 you,	 all	 that	 is	 dark	 and	 black	 and	 rotten	 --	 it	 burns
everything.	It	is	fire!	It	burns	the	ego.
And	one	significant	thing	to	be	remembered	is	that	the	chemical	composition	of
coal	and	a	diamond	is	the	same,	they	are	not	chemically	different.	The	diamond
was	once	a	piece	of	coal	and	the	piece	of	coal	can	become	a	diamond	through
pressure.	All	that	it	needs	is	the	pressure	of	thousands	of	years.
Now	 in	 the	market	 there	 are	 artificial	 diamonds;	 they	 are	 created	 by	 artificial
pressure.	The	chemistry	is	the	same,	there	is	no	difference	in	chemistry;	the	only
thing	 added	 is	 pressure.	 And	 sooner	 or	 later	 he	 will	 be	 able	 to	 create	 better
diamonds	 than	 the	natural	 ones,	 because	natural	 ones	 are	 bound	 to	 have	 some
flaws,	but	 the	artificial	ones	can	be	 looked	after	 from	the	very	beginning;	 they
will	not	have	any	flaw.
You	will	not	be	surprised	one	day	that	people	will	ask	for	a	diamond	which	has	a
flaw	because	only	that	will	prove	that	it	is	natural.	It	it	if	absolutely	flawless	it
will	prove	only	one	thing,	it	is	artificial.	It	will	shine	better,	it	will	have	all	the
qualities	 that	you	want	 it	 to	have,	 it	can	be	as	big	as	you	want.	Already	 in	 the
market	there	are	artificial	diamonds,	and	the	person	who	is	not	a	jeweller	cannot
make	the	distinction.	In	fact	the	artificial	will	look	better	than	the	natural.
Coal	and	diamonds	are	chemically	of	the	same	category.	When	the	coal	remains
bidden	 underneath	 the	 earth	 and	 goes	 on	 being	 pressed	 by	 the	 earth	 and	 its
weight	and	its	heat	...	because	as	you	go	deeper	into	the	earth,	it	becomes	hotter.
At	the	very	centre	of	the	earth	it	is	pure	fire;	everything	is	in	a	melted	state	--	it
is	 just	 like	 the	 sun.	So	 the	 farther	 in	you	go,	 the	more	heat	and	more	pressure
there	is.	And	both	together	transform	the	coal	into	a	diamond.	Ordinarily	a	man
is	 just	 coal,	 but	 meditation	 can	 transform	 the	 coal	 into	 a	 beautiful	 kohinoor.
Hence	 I	 say	 the	 second	 meaning	 is	 really	 far-out.	 The	 first	 is	 beautiful	 but
nothing	compared	to	the	second.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	don't	know,	I	really	don't	know.
--	Be	here	till	the	coal	is	burned!
MIND,	YOUR	MISERY
A	man	without	meditation	never	comes	to	know	the	blessedness	of	life.	He	can
only	feel	complaints	against	life.	Without	meditation	one's	approach	is	bound	to
be	negative;	one	only	picks	the	wrong	things.
One	picks	the	thorns	in	the	rosebush	and	forgets	about	the	flowers.	That's	why
you	see	the	whole	humanity	in	misery.	It	is	of	peoples'	own	choice,	they	ready	to
jump	 upon	 anything	 that	 is	 wrong.	 Once	 I	 used	 to	 work	 as	 an	 editor	 on	 a
newspaper,	 and	 there	 I	 discovered	 that	 a	 few	 people	 are	 born	 proofreaders.
Nobody	 can	 compete	 with	 them.	 Here	 is	 Vivek	 --	 she	 is	 a	 born	 proofreader.
(Vivek,	who	cares	for	Osho	around	the	clock,	is	sitting	on	his	left.	She	looks	at
him	now,	a	surprised	smile	on	her	face,	and	then	laughs.)	Just	show	her	anything
and	she	will	immediately	see	the	word	that	is	wrong.	The	whole	page	is	there	but
she	simply	lands	on	the	word	--	and	always	correctly!	(laughter)	Without	missing
the	target	she	will	immediately	go	to	the	word.	Just	as	there	are	born	poets	there
are	born	proofreaders!	 (laughter)	But	 life	 if	 you	 are	born	proofreader	you	will
have	many	troubles.	Meditation	changes	your	approach	from	the	negative	to	the
positive.	Of	course	meditation	cannot	make	a	person	a	good	proofreader.	He	will
go	on	missing	the	word	that	is	wrong!	(laughter)	Life	is	both	thorns	and	flowers.
It	is	better	to	choose	the	flowers.	But	this	should	not	be	done	artificially.	That	is
what	is	known	in	the	West	as	positive	thinking:	those	kind	of	people	teach
'Think	positively,	 affirmatively;	 go	on	denying	 the	 thorns	 and	go	on	 searching
for	 the	flowers.	 If	 they	are	not	 there,	 invent	 them.'	That	 is	going	 to	be	shallow
and	superficial,	because	your	mind	is	not	yet	meditative,	and	mind's	basic	quality
is	being	negative.	So	you	have	certain	cultivated	habits.	You	can	teach	the	dog	a
few	tricks,	but	the	dog	does	not	become	a	genius.	Even	if	he	knows	a	few	tricks
he	will	do	something	 foolish,	he	 is	bound	 to	do	 it.	A	few	people	were	playing
cards	and	a	man	was	standing	watching.	He	was	amazed	because	three	were	men
and	 the	fourth	partner	was	a	dog,	he	could	not	believe	his	eyes	 --	 the	dog	was
doing	perfectly	well.	So	he	asked	 'To	whom	does	 this	dog	belong?'	The	owner
was	 also	 playing,	 he	was	 one	 of	 the	 players;	 he	 said	 'He	 belongs	 to	me.'	 The
enquirer	said	'This	dog	is	really	a	genius.'	The	owner	said
'Nothing	 like	 that.	He	 is	 still	 a	 fool,	 because	whenever	 he	 gets	 good	 cards	 he
wags	his	tail	(much	laughter)	and	he	exposes	everything.'	That's	what	happens	to
positive	thinkers!
A	meditator	is	not	a	positive	thinker,	a	meditator	simply	drops	the	mind.	And	the
moment	the	mind	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
gone	there	is	positivity	without	any	effort	--	an	effortless	positivity,	a	effortless
affirmation	of	life.	Then	suddenly	it	is	all	spring,	then	suddenly	it	is	all	a	festival
of	 lights,	 and	 one	 for	 the	 first	 time	 experiences	 blissfulness,	 blessedness,
benediction;	and	out	of	that	arises	a	gratitude	towards	existence.
COMMITMENT	OR	LUBRICANT
(Osho	 speaks	 on	what	 religion	means	 to	 the	man	 in	 the	 street.)	Man	 has	 two
worlds	available	to	him,	the	outer	and	the	inner,	but	the	inner	is	so	obvious	that
one	tends	to	forget	all	about	it	The	obvious	is	almost	always	forgotten	because
we	 take	 it	 for	granted.	The	outer	 is	not	 so	obvious,	 it	 is	not	 so	easy,	hence	he
become	interested	in	the	outer.	We	are	always	interested	in	the	familiar,	and	the
outer	is	unfamiliar.	And	that's	the	first	wrong	step.	Once	you	become	interested
in	the	outer	there	is	no	end	to	it.
Man	has	 reached	Everest,	 the	South	Pole,	 the	North	Poles	 the	moon,	 and	now
they	are	striving	to	reach	Mars	and	nobody	is	bothered	about	the	purpose.	And
man	 has	 not	 even	 made	 an	 intensive	 effort	 to	 know	 himself.	We	 know	more
about	the	moon	than	we	know	about	our	own	being	--	this	is	sheer	stupidity.	I	am
not	against	knowing	about	the	world	but	the	first	and	the	foremost	thing	in	life	is
our	own	centre.
Self-knowledge	should	be	our	first	priority,	and	once	we	have	known	ourselves
then	we	 can	 enquire	 about	 the	whole	world.	Religion	 comes	 first,	 science	 can
only	 be	 secondary.	 But	 that	 is	 not	 the	 case:	 science	 has	 become	 the	 most
important	thing	and	religion	is	almost	ignored.	At	the	most	people	think	of	it	as	a
social,	 formal	 thing;	 nobody	 bothers	 much	 about	 it.	 Religion	 has	 become	 a
Sunday	affair.	Just	as	there	are	Rotary	clubs	and	Lion	clubs,	 there	are	Catholic
clubs	 and	 Protestant	 clubs	 and	 Hindu	 clubs	 and	 Mohammedan	 clubs	 called
churches,	 temples,	mosques,	 synagogues	 ...	 just	 clubs	where	you	 say	beautiful
things	to	each	other	knowing	perfectly	well	that	nobody	means	what	they	say	--
nice	nothings.
But	it	is	good	for	your	social	life;	it	gives	you	a	certain	social	status,	it	helps	you
to	 function	within	 the	pattern	of	society.	 It	 functions	 like	a	 lubricant,	 if	people
see	you	in	the	church	and	you	listen	to	the	sermon	and	you	pay	respects	to	Christ
and	to	Buddha	and	to	Krishna	you	are	thought	to	be	a	good	person	--
religious,	 respectable,	 and	 you	 can	 exploit	 that	 respectability	 in	 your	 business
life	and	in	other	ways.
Religion	 is	 just	a	 lubricant,	 it	makes	your	 life	smooth,	 that's	all,	but	nobody	 is
really	interested	in	it,	nobody	is	ready	to	risk	anything	for	it.
Religion	is	no	longer	important,	and	that	is	the	fall	of	humanity.	That's	why	there
is	so	much	darkness	and	gloom	and	misery	settling	in	people's	hearts.	They	are
accepting	life	as	a	tragedy	--	meaningless,	futile
--	 a	 tale	 told	 by	 an	 idiot,	with	 no	 significance;	 it	 is	 no	mere	 a	 song.	And	 the
reason	is	that	we	are	not	at	all	interested	in	the	inner.
Sannyas	means	initiation	into	your	own	interiority.	You	have	gone	too	far	away
from	yourself,	you	have	to	be	brought	back	home.	Sannyas	is	a	home-coming	--
and	the	method	is	meditation.
Just	as	mind	is	the	method	to	go	out,	meditation	is	the	method	to	come	in.	It	is
the	 same	 energy,	 the	 same	 door:	 on	 one	 side	 of	 the	 door	 you	 have	 the	 label
'entrance',	on	the	other	side	'exit'.	It	is	the	same	door;	when	it	opens	outwards	it
becomes	 mind,	 when	 it	 opens	 inwards	 it	 becomes	 meditation.	 It	 is	 the	 same
energy.	And	my	whole	work	here	is	to	help	your	energy	take	a	one-hundred-and-
eighty	degree	turn.
Once	you	can	see	just	a	glimpse	of	your	being	and	its	grandeur	and	its	splendour,
then	the	whole	outside	world	simply	becomes	insignificant,	it	loses	all	value	and
you	are	for	the	first	time	really	born.	The	journey	towards	home	has	started.	And
when	you	reach	the	centre	of	your	being	you	reach	god	because	god	is	nothing
but	your	innermost	centre.
On	the	circumference	we	are	different	people	but	at	the	centre	we	are	one,	at	the
centre	we	all	meet.	The	farther	away	we	go	from	the	centre,	the	farther	away	we
go	 from	 each	 other.	 The	 distance	 between	 persons	 becomes	 wider	 and	 wider
farther	 away	 from	 the	 centre;	 as	 you	 come	 closer,	 you	 start	 coming	 closer	 to
people	also.	Hence	 love	 is	a	natural	by-product	of	meditativeness	because	you
start	 feeling	 a	 new	kind	of	 closeness	with	 people,	with	 trees,	with	 rocks,	with
stars	 --	with	 everything	 that	 is.	And	when	 you	 are	 at	 the	 centre	 suddenly	 you
know	that	there	is	only	one	--	we	are	all	part	of	one	organic	unity	--	and	that's	the
meaning	of	god.
BLISS,	YOURS	FOR	THE	RECEIVING
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Her	 name,	 Anand	 Pratiksho,	 means	 bliss	 and	 awaiting,	 Osho	 tells	 another
sannyasin.)	 Pleasure	 can	 be	 achieved	 because	 it	 is	 physical.	 Even	 animals
achieve	 it	 so	 there	 is	 nothing	of	much	 importance	 in	 it.	And	pleasure	 consists
only	of	two	things,	food	and	sex	--	which	are	not	very	different.	In	fact	they	are
two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 coin:	 food	 keeps	 you	 surviving	 and	 sex	 keeps	 the	 race
surviving.	Sex	is	food	for	the	race	and	food	is	sex	for	the	individual	--	and	that's
why	 they	 are	 convertible.	People	who	become	very	 interested	 in	 sex	will	 start
becoming	more	proportionate	 in	 their	bodies;	people	who	are	not	 interested	 in
sex	will	start	gathering	fat,	they	will	start	eating	more.	This	is	like	a	pendulum.
Any	country	which	is	against	sex	will	become	too	interested	in	food.	And	all	the
religions	which	have	been	against	sex	have	helped	people	to	become	more	and
more	fat	and	ugly.	The	responsibility	goes	to	the	religious	organisations	who	are
against	 sex,	 because	 then	 where	 can	 the	 energy	 be	 put?	 Then	 if	 people	 start
stuffing	themselves	with	ice	cream	and	things	like	that	--	anything	will	do,	they
have	 to	 chew	 upon	 something...	 They	 cannot	 chew	 on	 people,	 so	 they	 start
chewing	things.	If	they	can	chew	on	people	then	they	don't	bother	about	things
too	much.	Then	chewing	gum	is	not	needed	--	 they	eat	each	other!	That's	why
the	 French	 expression	 for	 sex,	 'eating',	 is	 significant.	 It	 is	 really	 significant
because	it	shows	that	both	are	joined	together.	Looking	at	a	girl,	a	man	says	to
somebody,	 'I	 would	 like	 to	 eat	 this	 girl'	 --	 how	 does	 this	 eating	 come	 in?	He
wants	to	chew...	and	to	be	chewed	upon!	Lovers	are	chewing	gum	to	each	other!
(much	laughter)
In	 any	 country	 --	 for	 example,	 India,	 which	 has	 been	 against	 sex	 for	 many
centuries	you	will	find	people	eating	too	much	and	they	will	have	many	sweets
and	food.	I	don't	think	any	country	has	as	much	variety	as	India;	each	province
has	 its	 own	 varieties.	 India	 must	 be	 the	 most	 inventive	 as	 far	 as	 food	 is
concerned.
There	must	be	some	psychological	reason	behind	it.	Why	so	such	variety,	why
so	much	 concern.	 The	 concern	 is	 because	 sex	 has	 been	 denied	 now	 only	 one
pleasure	is	left,	so	the	whole	energy	becomes	focussed	on	it.
Americans,	 particularly	 Californians,	 are	 more	 physically	 proportionate;	 they
don't	gather	weight.	Even	when	 they	are	older	 they	 look	young,	 for	 the	simple
reason	that	sex	is	accepted	as	a	natural	phenomenon;	there	is	no	need	to	become
obsessed	with	food.	In	a	way	American	food	is	plain,	continental	food	in	Europe
is	 plain	 --	 except	 Italian	 food!	 (laughter)	 But	 Italians	 have	 suffered	 from	 the
Catholic	 church	 --	 that	 is	 the	 reason	why	 they	have	become	 so	 inventive	with
spaghetti	(laughter).
It	 is	easy	to	find	pleasure;	 it	 is	not	any	distinctive	quality	about	human	beings.
Happiness	 also	 is	 not	 very	 difficult	 to	 find,	 just	 a	 little	 more	 difficult	 than
pleasure.	Happiness	consists	of	aesthetic	sensibility:	Music,	art,	poetry,	painting,
sculpture	--	all	these	dimensions.	It	needs	training,	learning	and	discipline.
If	 one	 wants	 to	 understand	 classical	 music	 you	 have	 to	 go	 through	 a	 certain
training	of	the	ear,	otherwise	it	has	no	joy	for	you,	no	happiness	for	you.	But	still
it	is	within	human	limits,	within	human	capacity,	to	learn	about	music,	to	learn
about	poetry,	 to	be	able	 to	appreciate	philosophy,	 literature	and	great	works	of
art.
But	 bliss	 is	 beyond	 human	 capacity.	 Pleasure	 is	 animal,	 happiness	 is	 human,
bliss	is	divine;	it	is	a	gift	from	the	ultimate.	All	that	we	can	do	is	to	be	open	and
waiting.	 That's	 what	 a	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 learn,	 to	 be	 open,	 silent,	 vulnerable,
available.	But	other	than	that	nothing	can	be	done	about	bliss;	it	comes	when	it
comes.	Of	 course,	whenever	 you	 are	 ready	 it	 comes,	 but	 one	 has	 to	wait,	 one
cannot	demand,	one	cannot	say
'I	want	it	right	now.	One	has	to	be	infinitely	patient.	That	is	the	meaning	of	your
name:	awaiting	bliss.
Preparation	is	needed	but	it	is	only	a	preparation	to	receive	the	guest.	You	have
to	 become	 the	 host	 and	 the	 guest	 comes	whenever	 the	 host	 is	 ready,	 but	 you
cannot	 force	 the	 guest	 to	 come,	 there	 is	 no	way	 to	 force	 him.	Bliss	 cannot	 be
forced;	 it	descends	from	the	beyond.	And	because	it	comes	from	the	beyond	it
cannot	be	taken	away	from	you,	nobody	can	take	it	away.
Pleasure	can	be	taken	away	--	your	food	can	be	stolen,	your	man	can	be	stolen,
your	 woman	 can	 be	 stolen.	 That	 is	 not	 very	 difficult,	 it	 is	 very	 simple.	 Your
happiness	 can	 be	 destroyed	 very	 easily;	 in	 fact	 it	 is	 always	 in	 a	 process	 of
deterioration.	 You	 cannot	 enjoy	 the	 same	 music	 again	 and	 again,	 you	 cannot
enjoy	the	same	novel	of	Dostoevsky	again	and	again.	Maybe	once,	maybe	twice,
but	the	third	time	it	is	boring,	and	if	you	have	to	read	it	a	fourth	time	it	is	torture.
If	 you	 have	 to	 read	 it	 a	 fifth	 time	 you	 will	 have	 to	 be	 hospitalised!	 (much
laughter)	 So	 it	 goes	 down	 the	 drain	 automatically;	 then	 one	 has	 to	 go	 on
searching	for	new	sensations	and	novelties.	And	it	is	very	difficult	to	find	them
because	if	you	have	enjoyed	Dostoevsky	or	Tolstoy	or	Chekhov	then	it	 is	very
difficult	to	enjoy	anybody	who	is	secondary.
You	 will	 only	 be	 able	 to	 enjoy	 somebody	 who	 is	 at	 least	 on	 a	 par	 with
Dostoevsky,	in	fact	somebody	who	is	even	better	than	Dostoevsky	--	but	them?
Out	 of	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 only	 can	 be	 given	 which	 come	 close	 to
Dostoevsky,	as	far	as	novels	are	concerned.	Or	only	a	few	names	can	be	given	as
far	as	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
painting	is	concerned,	and	a	few	names	for	music.	Soon	happiness	is	exhausted.
But	bliss	 is	 inexhaustible.	You	cannot	achieve	it,	 it	cannot	be	taken	away	from
you.	Once	it	descends	it	 is	forever	yours.	And	the	miraculous	thing	about	bliss
is,	 it	 is	 never	 boring.	 It	 is	 always	 the	 same,	 not	 even	 a	 slight	 change	 ever
happens;	it	is	eternally	the	same.	But	it	is	strange	that	the	same	bliss	is	in	some
sense	new	every	moment	--	both	old	and	new.	It	somehow	knows	the	secret	of
renewing	itself	without	changing.	It	is	a	miraculous	quality.
Once	 a	 person	 is	 blissful	 he	 is	 blissful	 forever.	 But	 the	 quality	 that	 has	 to	 be
learned	is	of	awaiting,	of	patience,	of	trusting	that	whenever	the	time	is	ripe	it	is
bound	 to	 happen,	 it	 is	 inevitable.	 This	 is	 what	 I	 call	 trust	 --	 and	 trust	 is	 the
essential	core	of	sannyas.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Till	you	throw	me	out!
--	I	will	never	throw	you	out.	I	always	throw	people	in!	(laughter)	Good.
OBLITERATION	OR	TRANSFORMATION
(In	his	sannyasins	lies	hope	for	humanity,	Osho	is	to	say	in	his	address	to	Deva
Soundaryo.	First	he	explains	that	her	name	means	the	divine	is	beautiful,	or	vice
versa.)	There	are	no	other	proofs	for	god	than	the	beautiful	experiences	of	life.	A
sunset	 can	overwhelm	you	 so	much	 so	 that	 for	 that	moment	you	are	no	more,
only	 the	 sunset	 is.	 The	 observer	 is	 dissolved,	 there	 is	 only	 observation;	 the
duality	between	the	seer	and	the	seen	is	no	more	there,	there	is	only	one	bridged
experience.	The	observer	and	the	observed	are	both	bridged	together,	as	 if	you
and	the	sunset	are	two	poles	of	the	same	phenomenon.	Suddenly	your	heartbeat
starts	pulsating	with	the	beauty	that	is	the	sunset	...	or	there	is	a	bird	on	the	wing
and	suddenly	you	are	one	with	it.	It	is	not	the	bird	on	the	wing,	you	are	on	the
wing	and	the	whole	sky	is	yours.
It	can	happen	in	many	ways	--	either	in	nature	or	listening	to	music	or	reading
poetry	or	 just	 sitting	 silently	doing	nothing,	 just	 enjoying	your	own	breathing,
your	own	presence.	But	all	these	moments	are	of	beauty	and	these	are	the	only
proofs	of	god.	When	you	see	a	rose	flower	or	a	lotus	opening	in	a	lake	there	is
proof.	It	is	not	logical	proof	but	it	is	far	more	significant	than	logic	can	ever	be;
it	is	aesthetic	proof.
Suddenly	you	know	that	the	world	is	full	of	meaning	and	splendour,	that	it	is	not
accidentals	 that	 there	 is	 some	 underground	 meaning,	 some	 undercurrent	 of
meaning.	You	may	be	aware	of	it,	you	may	not	be	aware	of	it,	but	the	world	is
moving	towards	a	certain	destiny,	towards	a	certain	fulfilment.
The	 more	 you	 experience	 these	 beautiful	 moments,	 the	 more	 your	 life	 starts
becoming	beautiful.	 So	never	miss	 any	beautiful	moment.	Rejoice	 in	 it,	 dance
with	it,	sing	with	it,	be	silent	with	it.	In	some	way	or	other	become	one	with	it.
Let	 the	observer	be	 the	observed	 too.	Dissolve	yourself	 in	 it	and	you	will	 find
immense	nourishment.	You	will	become	aware	that	the	world	is	not	just	matter;
hidden	 behind	 matter	 is	 something	 far	 more	 significant	 --	 matter	 is	 only	 the
expression	 of	 something	 immaterial.	We	 can	 call	 it	 god,	 the	 truth,	 the	 soul	 of
existence,	the	very	heartbeat	of	the	universe.
And	the	sannyasin	has	to	find	that	heartbeat	--	not	only	to	find	it	but	to	create	a
certain	 synchronicity	 between	 his	 heartbeat	 and	 the	 heartbeat	 of	 the	 whole.
When	you	are	in	synchronicity,	in	accord	with	the	whole,	your	life	is	out	of	the
prison.	Then	the	imprisoned	splendour	is	released,	and	that	explosion	of	joy,	of
light,	of	love,	of	celebration,	is	enlightenment,	is	nirvana.
The	whole	work	that	is	going	on	here	is	to	bring	as	many	people	together	for	this
ultimate	explosion,	because	the	more	people	there	are	joined	together,	the	more
is	the	possibility	of	the	explosion.	It	own	happen	to	individuals	too,	but	then	it
does	not	affect	 the	consciousness	of	humanity	much.	 I	would	 like	 it	 to	happen
like	 a	 chain:	 thousands	 of	 people	 becoming	 enlightened	 all	 over	 the	 world
simultaneously,	 like	 lightning.	They	will	 transform	 the	whole	consciousness	of
humanity,	they	will	take	humanity	to	a	new	plane.	And	that	is	very	much	needed
today,	it	is	needed	today	more	than	ever,	because	either	humanity	has	to	come	to
a	 deep	 understanding	 about	 life	 or	 we	 are	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 going	 insane	 and
committing	global	suicide.
Something	tremendous	is	going	to	happen	by	the	end	of	this	century.	There	are
many	who	 are	 preparing	 for	 a	 global	 suicide	 and	 there	 are	 very	 few	who	 are
preparing	for	the	transformation	of	consciousness.	My	sannyasins	have	to	belong
to	those	few	because	with	those	few	is	the	whole	hope	for	humanity.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
28	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011285
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
HAPPINESS	IS	IN-STEPNESS
Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 slipping	 out	 of	 the	 mind.	 The	 child	 is	 born	 in	 a
meditative	state,	but	meditation	 is	of	no	use	 to	society;	society	needs	 the	mind
because	mind	can	be	used	in	every	possible	way.	The	mind	makes	the	person	a
commodity,	 a	means,	 and	 then	 the	 establishment	 can	 exploit	 him.	Without	 the
mind	a	person	cannot	be	exploited,	cannot	be	manipulated,	cannot	be	enslaved.
Mind	 is	 the	 subtle	 strategy	 of	 creating	 a	 spiritual	 enslavement.	 Society	makes
every	effort	to	create	the	mind	as	quickly	as	possible;	so	things	are	not	allowed
to	get	out	of	hand.	As	 the	child	 is	born,	 the	church,	 the	priest,	get	hold	of	 the
child	--	he	is	baptised	or	he	is	circumcised.	Hindus	have	done	the	most	in-depth
study	 of	 the	 whole	 phenomenon	 because	 Hinduism	 is	 the	 oldest	 religion	 on
earth.	 They	 don't	 even	 wait	 for	 nine	 months	 for	 the	 child	 to	 be	 born;	 their
religion	starts	with	the	impregnation	of	the	mother.	In	fact	the	oldest	method	--
which	looks	ugly	to	the	modern	mind	--	was	that	four	priests	would	stand	in	the
four	 corners	 of	 a	 room	chanting	mantras	while	 the	 couple	made	 love.	So	 they
could	 start	 even	 before	 the	 child	 was	 born,	 before	 the	 woman	 was	 even
impregnated;	 even	before	 that	 they	were	 creating	Hinduism	 --	 the	 atmosphere,
the	vibe.
They	get	hold	of	 the	person	even	before	birth	and	 they	continue	 the	hold	even
after	death,	particularly	in	Hinduism.	When	the	person	dies	the	last	rites	have	to
be	 performed	 by	 the	 priests,	 and	 even	 when	 he	 has	 been	 dead	 for	 years	 his
children	have	to	go	on	performing	certain	rites	each	year	for	the	welfare	of	the
soul	 that	has	departed.	This	 is	 the	complete	programme	of	 the	conditioning	of
man.	And	mind	is	nothing	but	the	conditioning	that	has	been	put	in	you	by	the
society.
So	there	are	Hindu	minds,	Mohammedan	minds,	Christian	minds,	Jewish	minds
--	all	kinds	of	minds	--
atheist,	theist,	communist,	capitalist,	socialist,	fascist.	There	are	political	parts	of
your	mind	and	religious	parts	of	your	mind,	and	man	is	completely	imprisoned
in	all	these	ideologies,	theologies	and	philosophies.
Meditation	 is	 a	 rebellion	 so	 that	 you	 can	 get	 out	 of	 the	 hold	 of	 the	 vested
interests	of	both	the	priest	and	the	politician	and	can	be	yourself	again.
And	Keith	is	a	beautiful	name.	It	has	two	meanings:	one	is	a	wood-dweller	and
the	second	is	wind.	On	the	surface	they	don't	seem	to	be	connected	at	all	but	they
are	connected,	particularly	in	Gaelic	mythology.
Wood	 represents	 paradise.	 The	 word	 "paradise"	 comes	 from	 the	 Persian
"firdaus";	firdaus	means	a	beautiful	walled-garden.
The	 wood	 represents	 paradise,	 the	 garden	 of	 Eden,	 and	 wind	 represents	 the
breath	of	 the	universe.	A	person	who	dwells	 in	the	wood,	means	a	person	who
dwells	in	paradise,	in	a	state	of	bliss,	in	silence,	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
profound	peace.	And	the	universal	breath	means	you	are	in	tune	with	the	whole,
you	 are	 not	 breathing	 separately;	 there	 is	 a	 synchronicity	 between	your	 breath
and	the	universal	breath.	The	moment	you	are	in	tune	with	the	universe	you	have
come	 home.	 To	 lag	 behind	 is	 to	 remain	miserable,	 not	 being	 in	 step	with	 the
universe	 is	what	misery	 is	all	about.	To	be	 in	harmony	with	 the	whole	 is	 to	be
blissful.
Meditation	opens	 the	doors;	 the	doors	 to	 silence,	 peace,	 paradise,	 the	doors	 to
falling	in	tune	with	the	whole.
YOU	JUST	CAN'T	BEAR	BUDDHA
(...	 at	 any	 rate,	 not	 until	 you're	 full	 of	 light.	 Osho	 explains	 the	 meaning	 of
Chaitanya	 Chris's	 name.)	 Chaitanya	 means	 consciousness,	 ultimate
consciousness,	where	all	darkness	has	disappeared.	The	whole	unconscious	has
been	transformed	into	consciousness;	there	is	no	part	in	your	being	which	is	any
longer	dark	or	unconscious	--	it	is	full	of	light.	Only	in	that	light	can	one	know
the	Christ	within.
Chris	means	one	who	bears	the	Christ	within	his	heart.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with
any	denomination	--
Catholic,	 Protestant,	 etcetera	 --	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 belonging	 to	 any
established	 church.	 It	 is	 a	 love	 affair;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 doctrine,	 dogma,
creed	or	cult.
Christ	is	not	a	person,	the	name	of	the	person	is	Jesus.	Jesus	is	not	synonymous
with	 Christ.	 There	 was	 a	moment	 when	 Jesus	 was	 not	 a	 Christ	 and	 then	 that
enlightening	 process	 came	 when	 his	 unconscious	 disappeared	 and	 he	 became
fully	conscious	and	aware.	At	that	moment	he	became	a	Christ	--	it	is	a	state	of
consciousness.
In	 the	East	we	call	 the	 same	state	 the	 state	of	Buddhahood.	 It	does	not	matter
what	word	 is	 used.	 Buddha	was	 not	 always	 a	 Buddha;	 his	 original	 name	was
Siddhartha,	then	one	day	he	became	awakened.	The	word
'buddha'	 means	 the	 awakened.	 Up	 to	 that	 moment	 he	 was	 as	 fast	 asleep	 as
everybody	 else	 is;	 he	 lived	 in	 a	 groping	way,	 in	 a	 blind	way.	The	moment	 he
attained	to	his	inner	vision	his	insight	opened	up	and	became	a	thousand-petalled
lotus;	 he	 could	 see	 things	 as	 they	were	 --	 he	 became	 a	 Buddha.	 The	 Buddha
means	the	awakened	and	the	Christ	means	the	crowned	one.
Certainly	that	ultimate	consciousness	makes	you	an	emperor;	before	that	you	are
just	a	beggar.	Christ	or	Buddha	are	just	names	of	that	ultimate	peak	which	is	the
deepest	longing	in	every	heart.
My	 work	 here	 consists	 of	 only	 one	 thing:	 to	 teach	 you	 the	 alchemy	 of
transforming	 unconsciousness	 into	 consciousness	 of	 giving	 you	 the	 knack	 to
create	 the	situation	 in	which	you	can	wake	up,	giving	you	devices	so	 that	you
can	wake	up	on	your	own...	because	if	somebody	else	wakes	you,	you	will	fall
asleep	again,	because	you	have	not	removed	the	root	causes	of	your	sleep.
Somebody	shakes	you,	wakes	you,	but	the	inner	causes	are	there	--	you	will	fall
asleep.	In	fact	you	will	feel	very	angry	with	the	person	who	wakes	you	up	while
you	 still	 needed	 sleep.	 So	 unless	 you	 remove	 the	 causes	 of	 sleep	 nobody	 can
wake	you	up.	All	the	efforts	made	by	others	to	wake	you	up	are	doomed.	After
each	effort	you	will	fall	into	deeper	sleep,	you	will	take	revenge.
The	function	of	the	master	is	not	to	force	you	to	wake	up,	but	to	persuade	you,	to
seduce	you,	to	learn	the	art	of	removing	the	inner	causes	which	are	creating	your
unconsciousness.	And	 they	 can	 be	 removed	 from	 the	 very	 roots,	 root	 and	 all.
Once	 you	 have	 removed	 them	 yourself	 only	 then	 does	 the	 real	 awakening
happen.	Even	in	physical	sleep	this	can	be	done.
For	example,	while	you	are	falling	asleep	at	night	there	comes	a	moment,	a	gap,
a	small	gap,	very	small	gap,	when	you	are	neither	awake	nor	asleep	or,	you	are
both	--	a	little	bit	awake,	a	little	bit	asleep.	We	pass	through	that	interval	every
night	but	it	is	such	a	small	interval	that	we	don't	take	any	notice	of	it.	If	you	take
notice	of	it,	it	is	or	great	significance.
It	 is	 like	 changing	 gears	 in	 a	 car.	When	 you	 change	 the	 gear	 the	 gear	moves
through	neutral,	it	has	to	go	through	neutral.	When	you	have	been	awake	in	the
day	 and	 are	 falling	 asleep,	 your	whole	 being	 is	 changing	 gears	 and	 there	 is	 a
moment	which	is	neutral	--	when	you	are	neither	awake	nor	asleep	--	and	that	is
the	most	significant	moment	because	 in	 that	moment	you	are	nowhere,	or	now
here.	 In	 that	moment	 there	 is	 no	 past,	 no	 future,	 because	 you	 are	 in	 a	 neutral
state.	You	are	just	in	the	present,	absolutely	in	the	present.	That	is	a	moment	of
meditation.	 And	 in	 the	 ancient	 traditions	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 in	 the	 mystery
schools	which	have	always	existed	around	the	world,	that	gap	has	been	used.
For	example	you	can	try	a	little	experiment:	just	go	on	watching	when	you	are
falling	asleep	and	soon,	within	a	week,	you	will	know	when	that	gap	begins	--
because	it	is	such	a	change.	If	you	are	alert,	just	a	little	alert,	through	watching
you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 know	 it.	 In	 that	 moment	 you	 can	 say	 to	 yourself	 'Chris,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
wake	me	up	at	five	o'clock,	at	exactly	five	o'clock	in	the	morning.'	Say	it	three
times	 --	 more	 than	 that	 you	 cannot	 say,	 the	 gap	 is	 too	 small.	 Repeat	 it	 three
times:	 'Chris,	wake	me	up	at	 five	o'clock	 in	 the	morning',	and	 then	 fall	asleep.
And	at	exactly	five	you	will	be	awake	--	not	a	minute	before,	not	a	minute	after.
This	is	a	small	experiment.	It	means	you	can	programme	your	waking,	you	can
even	programme	your	dreams.	You	can	say	'Tonight	I	don't	want	to	dream	at	all'
then	the	whole	night	will	be	without	dreams.	Or	if	you	enjoy	dreaming,	you	can
create	beautiful	dreams,	significant	dreams	--	more	poetic,	more	aesthetic.
You	 can	 give	 the	 whole	 script.	 Rather	 than	 dreaming	 something	 rubbishy,
haphazard,	neurotic,	 it	 is	better	 to	give	a	 script,	 it	 is	better	 to	dream	what	you
want	to.	At	least	you	are	the	master	of	it,	you	remain	the	director.
Slowly	slowly	you	can	programme	your	whole	sleep	and	once	you	have	learned
the	art	about	physical	sleep,	the	same	is	true	about	spiritual	sleep.	But	first	you
have	 to	 begin	 with	 the	 physical,	 then	 you	 can	 start	 using	 that	 gap	 for	 your
spiritual	awakening.	And	the	same	gap	happens	again	in	the	morning	when	you
are	waking	 up;	when	 sleep	 is	 no	more	 and	wakening	 is	 just	 going	 to	 happen,
again	the	same	gap	is	there.
These	two	moments	are	the	most	important	in	twenty-four	hours	time.
This	 has	 been	 the	 finding	 of	 thousands	 of	 years	 of	 meditators	 that	 these	 two
moments	are	the	most	significant.	If	a	person	can	use	these	two	moments	he	can
transform	his	whole	being,	he	can	become	enlightened.
Begin	with	 physical	 sleep	 so	 you	 learn	 the	 art	 then	 use	 the	 same	 strategy,	 the
same	device,	for	your	spiritual	awakening.	And	it	is	not	a	far	away	phenomenon,
it	is	very	close	by,	just	around	the	corner.
DEBATOR	AND	DANCER
(The	synthesis	of	the	two	makes	for	a	richer,	more	blissful,	you.)	Bliss	is	not	an
achievement	but	 a	discovery.	You	don't	have	 to	go	anywhere	 to	 find	 it,	on	 the
contrary	you	have	to	stop	going	and	remain	within	yourself	for	a	few	moments
...	just	being	there	inside,	doing	nothing,	just	being	alert	and	watchful	and	seeing
what	it	is,	your	consciousness.	And	as	your	insight	deepens	as	you	become	more
acquainted	with	your	 inner	world	with	your	 interiorities	with	your	subjectivity,
you	will	be	surprised	that	a	showering	of	bliss	happens	of	its	own	accord.
To	know	oneself	and	to	be	blissful	are	just	two	ways	of	saying	the	same	thing.
Socrates	says	'Know	thyself';	Krishna	says	'Be	blissful'.	On	the	surface	both	are
talking	about	different	things	--	it	is	so	obvious:	knowing	thyself	is	one	thing	and
being	blissful	is	another.	But	deep	down	they	are	exactly	two	sides	of	the	same
coin.	 One	 can	 start	 either	 the	 way	 Socrates	 says,	 by	 knowing	 oneself,	 or	 as
Krishna	says,	by	being	blissful.
My	 own	 approach	 is	 that	 it	 is	 better	 to	 use	 both	 things	 together	 because	 then
your	growth	is	speedier.
Following	Socrates	or	Krishna	separately	is	like	walking	on	one	leg:	it	will	not
be	much	 of	 a	walk,	 it	will	 be	 something	 like	 hopping.	You	will	 have	 to	 learn
many	tricks,	only	then	will	you	be	able	to	manage,	and	you	will	need	crutches
also.	In	a	way	you	will	be	crippled.	You	may	reach	the	goAl	but	it	is	unnecessary
trouble	when	you	can	use	both	your	legs.	Why	not	use	both?	And	by	using	both
the	 walk	 becomes	 a	 beautiful	 adventure.	 You	 are	 more	 independent,	 more
wholesome,	more	together,	and	your	being	is	more	rich.
Socrates	is	bound	to	remain	a	little	dry.	You	cannot	hope	that	he	can	play	on	a
flute,	he	can	only	argue.
He	is	the	greatest	arguer	the	world	has	known,	a	perfect	arguer,	but	just	arguing
is	desertlike,	it	is	negative.
It	follows	the	method	of	elimination:	this	is	not	it,	that	is	not	it,	neither	this	nor
that	--	go	on	denying.	It	is	via	negativa.	Then	when	you	have	denied	everything,
only	that	which	is	left	and	is	undeniable	is	the	truth.
Krishna	 is	 like	 a	 flowering	bush,	with	 a	 flute,	with	 song,	with	dance.	 It	 is	 via
affirmativa.	He	does	not	argue,	he	proves	by	his	very	being.	His	very	presence	is
proof	 enough	 that	 man	 is	 something	 more	 than	 we	 know	 about,	 that	 man	 is
something	far	bigger	than	the	mind.	But	I	would	like	you	to	be	Socrates	with	a
flute,	Socrates	in	a	dancing	gesture	and	Krishna	arguing,	together	--	then	life	is
richer.	 And	 I	 am	 always	 for	 richness.	 I	 hate	 poverty	 of	 all	 kinds.	 I	 have	 no
respect	for	poverty,	outer	or	inner.	Man	has	to	be	rich	on	both	the	sides.
SURRENDER:	SUBMITTING	THE	PSEUDO
(And	you're	bound	to	be	blissful	once	you	do	so.)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	 is	 inevitable.	We	are	 taught	 to	 fight,	we	have	been	 living	under	 a	very	dark
cloud	for	centuries,	and	that	dark	cloud	has	proved	to	be	the	greatest	calamity	to
human	beings.	The	dark	cloud	is	the	idea	that	man	has	to	continuously	fight	for
his	survival,	as	if	nature	and	man	are	enemies.	They	are	not	enemies.	Nature	is
our	home,	 the	universe	 is	not	antagonistic	 to	us,	otherwise	we	would	not	have
been	here	at	all	in	the	first	place.
Just	as	trees	grow...	if	the	universe	is	not	supporting	them,	how	can	they	grow?
In	the	same	way	the	universe	mans	the	earth,	 just	as	it	fills	 it	with	trees,	rivers
and	mountains.	We	are	part	of	this	tremendously	beautiful	existence;	we	are	not
foreigners,	outsiders.	But	the	idea	that	we	have	to	fight	creates	a	gap	between	us
and	 the	 whole	 --	 we	 become	 islands.	 Then	 there	 is	 fear,	 continuous	 fear,
insecurity	and	death.	And	man	lives	in	that	fear,	insecurity,	death	--	how	can	he
be	blissful?	From	where	can	he	get	any	nourishment?	He	becomes	alienated.	He
starts	 feeling	 futile	 and	 meaningless	 and	 the	 whole	 life	 seems	 to	 be	 just	 a
struggle.
And	it	is	to	no	purpose	because	in	the	end	is	the	grave.	For	the	whole	of	our	life
we	go	on	fighting	for	what?
To	reach	the	grave?	And	that's	the	ultimate	thing.
It	is	the	ultimate	thing	for	the	person	who	has	been	fighting	with	existence,	but
for	the	person	who	is	surrendered	to	existence,	is	in	tune	with	existence,	it	is	not
the	ultimate	thing.	For	him	there	is	no	death	at	all,	because	in	the	first	place	he
does	not	create	 the	ego.	It	 is	only	the	ego	that	dies,	because	it	 is	a	false	entity,
somehow	put	together;	it	is	artificial,	arbitrary.
Surrender	 means	 dropping	 all	 that	 is	 artificial	 and	 arbitrary,	 surrender	 means
becoming	egoless.
Surrender	means	feeling	the	universe	with	the	heart,	creating	bridges	instead	of
walls,	 rather	 than	 being	 an	 island,	 becoming	 part	 of	 the	 continent.	 And
immediately	 there	 is	 bliss	 and	 that	 bliss	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 increasing.	 It	 is	 an
unending	process;	it	begins	but	it	never	ends.
Buddha	 used	 to	 say	 misery	 has	 no	 beginning	 but	 an	 end,	 and	 bliss	 has	 a
beginning	but	no	end	--	and	he	is	perfectly	right.	The	name	I	am	giving	to	you	is
not	just	a	name	--	remember	it.	It	is	the	key	that	you	have	to	use	in	your	life.	You
have	to	know	the	beauty	of	surrender,	you	have	to	experience	it.	It	simply	means
saying	 yes	 to	 the	 whole,	 an	 absolute,	 unconditional,	 yes.	 And	 with	 that	 yes
comes	 the	 spring	 and	 thousands	 of	 flowers	 bloom	 in	 your	 consciousness.	 The
whole	of	your	life	becomes	fragrant.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
29	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011295
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY29
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
BLESSED	ARE	THE	MEDITATORS
(Osho	is	talking	to	Dhyana	Milly.)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	 is	 an	 exploration	 of	 your	 interiority,	 a	 search	 for	 your	 authentic
being,	a	quest	for	who	you	are.	The	moment	this	quest	is	fulfilled	an	explosion
happens;	just	like	atomic	explosion.	Many	new	qualities	which	had	never	existed
before	start	blossoming	in	you.	They	were	potentially	there	but	not	actual.
Meditation	 transforms	 the	potential	 into	 the	actual,	makes	 the	 invisible	visible,
makes	the	dream	a	reality.
And	Milly	 symbolises	 two	 very	 essential	 qualities	 that	 come	 out	 of	 that	 inner
explosion.	The	word
'milly'	can	be	derived	from	two	languages;	the	first	language	is	Teutonic	and	the
second	is	Latin.	From	the	Teutonic	root	milly	means	gentle	power.	That's	a	very
significant	point.
Ordinarily	power	 is	never	gentle,	power	 is	violent,	 aggressive,	destructive,	but
power	 becomes	 gentle	 by	 passing	 through	 meditation.	 This	 is	 the	 alchemical
change	that	comes	into	one's	being.	Even	the	destructive	forces	become	creative.
The	thorns	are	no	more	thorns,	they	become	flowers,	they	become	fragrant.
When	power	is	gentle	it	has	a	beauty;	then	it	is	nothing	but	the	power	of	love.	In
other	words	it	is	no	more	power,	it	is	simply	gentleness.	It	is	in	this	context	that
Jesus'	statement	can	be	rightly	understood:	Blessed	are	the	meek	for	theirs	is	the
kingdom	of	god.
On	one	hand	 they	are	meek,	gentle,	humble,	nobodies;	on	 the	other	hand	 they
become	 emperors,	 they	 have	 the	 infinite	 power	 of	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god.	 The
statement	is	paradoxical	but	very	representative	of	truth.
The	second	meaning	comes	 from	a	Latin	 root	and	 that	 is	 even	more	beautiful.
but	it	cannot	happen	before	the	first.	The	second	meaning	is	sweet	singer.	When
your	destructive	energies	are	transformed	into	creativity,	when	love	is	your	only
power,	when	gentleness	is	your	strength,	then	your	life	is	a	sweet	song,	then	your
life	is	a	dance,	a	celebration.	Then	each	of	your	gestures	and	acts	has	the	grace
of	the	beyond.
Then	 god	 starts	 filtering	 through	 you	 into	 the	world	 because	 now	 you	 are	 no
more,	 only	 god	 is.	 But	 this	 impossibility	 becomes	 possible	 through	 the	 art	 of
meditation.
One	has	 to	close	one's	eyes	 to	 the	outside	world	at	 least	 for	a	few	hours	every
day	 and	 focus	 within.	 In	 the	 beginning	 there	 is	 nothing	 but	 darkness.	 In	 the
beginning	you	meet	thoughts,	desires,	memories	and	dreams	--	nothing	else.	It	is
all	rubbish;	one	gets	fed	up	and	one	wants	to	go	out.	But	if	one	has	perseverance
and	patience,	then	one	day	just	through	going	on	and	on	looking	within	all	these
clouds	 disappear.	 Slowly	 slowly	 the	 night	 disappears	 into	 a	 dawn.	 And	 the
moment	the	darkness	is	no	more	and	light	has	arrived,	then	the	miracle,	then	the
transformation	of	power	into	gentleness	happens.	And	that	gentleness	becomes	a
sweet	song.
This	exactly	defines	sannyas	gentle	power	and	a	sweet	song.
(Continuing	on	the	theme	of	the	alchemical	action	of	meditation,	Osho	turns	to
Dhyano	Melville.)	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 has	 defined	 meditation	 as	 the	 miracle
that	transforms	all	your	passions	into	compassion,	that	brings	a	radical	change	in
your	 life	 energies.	 Hatred	 becomes	 love,	 greed	 becomes	 sharing,	 the	 effort	 to
dominate	others	becomes	service.
If	one	is	a	servant	without	meditation	then	that	state	is	not	good,	that	is	ugly;	that
simply	means	you	have	become	a	slave.	You	have	allowed	somebody	to	possess
you,	 you	 have	 allowed	 somebody	 to	 reduce	 you	 to	 a	 commodity.	 You	 have
allowed	 somebody	 to	 destroy	 you,	 to	 destroy	 your	 very	 being.	 It	 is	 like
committing	suicide.
But	 if	 it	 happens	 through	 meditation	 then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 becoming	 a
servant	to	somebody.	You	are	not	allowing	somebody	to	use	you	as	a	means	for
his	own	ends.	You	are	a	servant	not	because	you	are	forced	to	be	a	servant;	you
are	a	servant	because	of	your	love.	It's	orientation	is	within	you;	it	is	not	imposed
from	the	outside,	it	grows	in	you.	It	is	pure	service	with	no	greed,	with	no	fear,
with	no	 idea	of	 gaining	 anything	out	 of	 it	 It	 is	 simply	 sharing	your	 love.	 It	 is
sympathy	in	the	beginning	and	it	is	empathy	in	the	end.
It	 is	feeling	for	people's	misery	and	trying	to	do	something	for	 it.	But	 it	 is	 just
out	of	your	own	vision,	clarity,	love	and	compassion;	you	are	not	regimented	in
it.
So	 I	 don't	 think	 Christian	 missionaries	 are	 real	 servants;	 they	 are	 greedy.	 Of
course	their	greed	is	for	the	other	world,	but	greed	is	greed:	whether	you	desire
this	 world	 or	 the	 other	 makes	 no	 difference.	 They	 are	 longing	 for	 heavenly
pleasures	because	this	world,	pleasures	are	momentary	and	that	world's	pleasures
are	eternal.	So	 in	 fact	 they	are	more	greedy	 than	 the	worldly	people.	They	are
ready	 to	 sacrifice	 their	 life	 but	 it	 is	 not	 pure	 love,	 it	 is	 pure	 greed.	 It	 is	 not
sharing,	it	is	not	compassion	for	the	others;	it	is	just	an	other-worldly	selfishness.
And	the	reason	is	that	the	Christian	missionary	has	no	idea	of	meditation.	He	has
been	told	to	serve	people	because	through	service	he	will	attain	to	god,	through
service	 he	 will	 reach	 heaven,	 through	 service	 he	 will	 be	 able	 to	 avoid	 the
suffering	 of	 hell	 and	 he	 will	 gain	 all	 the	 pleasures	 that	 every	 Christian
missionary	is	entitled	to.	But	there	is	no	meditation	behind	it.
A	meditator	simply	serves	because	he	enjoys	serving.	There	is	no	future	in	it,	no
goal	and	no	end.	It	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
not	a	means	to	some	end,	either	this	worldly	or	other-worldly.	The	act	in	itself	is
so	joyous,	it	is	so	prayerful
--	who	bothers	about	heaven?
The	 story	 of	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 is	 that	 when	 after	 his	 death	 he	 reached	 the
doors	of	heaven,	 the	doors	were	opened	and	 the	angels	celebrated	his	coming,
but	he	didn't	enter.	He	stood	on	the	door,	his	back	towards	heaven,	and	looked
towards	the	world	which	he	had	left	far	behind.
The	angels	were	disturbed.	They	asked	 'What	is	the	matter?	For	whom	are	you
waiting?	Enter!	We	have	never	given	such	a	welcome	 to	anybody.'	And	 in	 the
story	Buddha	is	reported	to	have	said	'I	will	not	enter	unless	every	being,	every
suffering	being	 in	 the	world	has	entered.	 I	will	be	 the	 last	one.	So	please	keep
your	doors	closed;	 it	 is	not	 time	 for	me	 to	enter	yet.	 I	 am	going	 to	be	 the	 last
person.	 I	will	wait	 for	 everybody	 else	 to	 enter	 first,	 I	will	 help	 people,	 I	will
show	them	the	way,	because	I	love,	because	I	feel	immense	compassion.	Heaven
is	not	for	me	yet.	I	can	see	millions	of	souls	struggling	in	darkness,	in	suffering,
in	pain,	and	I	am	in	a	situation	to	help	them.	I	am	not	obliging	them,	it	is	just	my
joy.'	But	he	refused	to	enter	heaven.
This	 story	 shows	 the	 real	 attitude	 and	 the	 approach	 of	 a	 meditator.	 When
meditation	makes	you	a	servant	it	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon	--	and	that's
what	my	sannyasins	have	to	be.
The	 first	 and	 the	 foremost	 thing	 is	meditation,	 then	 service	 comes	 of	 its	 own
accord;	 you	 need	 not	 practise	 it.	A	 practised	 service	 is	 a	 false	 thing,	 it	 has	 to
come	 naturally.	 Just	 as	 flowers	 grow	 in	 the	 trees	 it	 has	 to	 grow	 out	 of	 your
meditativeness,	only	then	is	it	true,	authentic,	liberating.
LOVE:	THE	FLOWERS	ON	THE	TREE	OF	LIFE
(And	friendliness	is	the	fragrance	of	those	flowers.	Osho	tells	Anand	Damiet	that
her	name	comes	from	a	Greek	story	about	two	friend,	Damon	and	Pythias.)
Damon	offered	 his	 life	 for	 his	 friend	Pythias	 he	 died	 for	 his	 friend,	 hence	 his
name	has	become	a	symbol	for	friendship.
The	miserable	person	cannot	be	friendly,	it	is	impossible	for	him	because	he	has
nothing	to	share.
He	can	beg	but	he	cannot	give,	and	friendship	depends	on	giving.	But	you	can
give	only	that	which	you	already	have,	so	the	true	friend	has	to	be	blissful,	only
then	he	can	share.	Then	of	course	one	can	even	sacrifice	one's	life,	because	love
is	 a	 far	 higher	 value	 than	 life	 itself.	 Life	 is	 only	 an	 opportunity	 for	 love	 to
blossom.	 If	 love	 blossoms	 life	 is	 significant,	 if	 love	 does	 not	 blossom	 life	 has
been	a	sheer	wastage.
I	teach	blissfulness	because	out	of	blissfulness	many	things	happen;	friendship	is
one	of	the	qualities.
Friendship	 is	 only	 the	 beginning,	 remember.	 When	 friendship	 becomes	 more
purified	it	becomes	friendliness.	Friendship	is	a	relationship	between	two	people
or	a	few	people,	but	it	has	a	limitation.
Friendliness	 is	 simply	 your	 quality,	 your	 fragrance,	 the	 aura	 that	 surrounds	 a
blissful	person;	he	is	simply	friendly.	He	is	friendly	to	the	trees,	to	the	rocks,	to
people,	to	animals	--	he	is	simply	friendly.	He	is	friendly	towards	himself	too.	In
fact	all	enmity	in	him	disappears.	The	energy	that	is	enmity	and	hatred	has	been
transformed	into	love,	into	bliss.
And	 to	 be	 blissful	 is	 not	 as	 difficult	 as	 people	 think.	 It	 looks	 very	 difficult
because	the	whole	approach	is	wrong.	It	is	as	if	you	have	lost	something	in	the
house	and	you	are	searching	for	it	on	the	road,	you	will	not	find	it.	And	then	it
looks	difficult	or	almost	 impossible	 to	find	it,	and	it	 is	 impossible	because	you
have	not	lost	it	there;	you	have	to	look	where	you	have	lost	it.
People	are	looking	for	bliss	in	the	world	and	bliss	is	waiting	as	your	potential	at
the	 innermost	 core	of	your	being.	Go	 in,	 and	 the	moment	you	go	 in	you	have
found	it	out	and	the	farther	you	go,	the	farther	away	you	are	from	the	goal.
And	 to	 come	 to	one's	 self	 is	 a	 simple	process.	Nobody	 is	 competing	with	you
there	because	nobody	else	can	enter	you,	only	you	can	enter.	So	it	is	a	very	non-
competitive	thing.	If	you	want	to	be	a	president	or	a	prime	minister	then	millions
of	people	are	trying	to	be	the	same.	Of	course,	it	is	a	tough	struggle	and	only	one
is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 winner;	 the	 most	 cunning,	 the	 most	 destructive,	 the	 most
criminal,	 is	going	 to	win	 the	game.	The	cheat,	 the	deceptive,	 the	fraud	--	he	 is
going	to	win	the	game.
But	 as	 far	 as	 the	 inner	world	 is	 concerned	 there	 is	 no	 competition	 at	 all;	 that
makes	it	very	simple	and	very	easy.	And	because	you	are	not	trying	to	possess
something	which	belongs	 to	 somebody	else	you	are	not	 in	any	way	coming	 in
anybody's	way.	You	can	become	a	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Krishna,	and	you	will	not
have	taken	anything	from	anybody.	In	fact	whenever	a	person	becomes	a	Buddha
he	enhances	the	quality	of	the	whole	existence;	the	existence	gains	through	his
enlightenment.	So	the	process	is	simple;	we	just	have	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
learn	how	to	turn	in,	how	to	close	our	eyes	and	how	to	sit	silently	doing	nothing.
This	is	the	most	difficult	thing	for	people	because	they	have	been	told	again	and
again	 'Do	 something,	 don't	 just	 sit	 there!'	And	 I	 say	 to	my	 sannyasins	 'Just	 sit
there	--	don't	go	on	doing	something!'	Just	sitting	and	doing	nothing	is	the	whole
art	of	meditation.	And	out	of	that	centredness	and	groundedness	bliss	arises	and
goes	 on	 spreading.	 A	 single	 blissful	 person	makes	 the	whole	 universe	 radiate
with	high	bliss.
And	of	courage,	he	is	bound	to	be	friendly,	friendly	to	all	unconditionally.
TO	TELL	YOU	THE	TRUTH...
(You	have	to	know	your	own	truth	first,	then	you	comprehend	the	ultimate	truth.
Osho	first	explains	to	Satyam	Angelika	that	her	name	means	the	ultimate	truth,
and,	a	messenger	of	god.)	Everybody	is	a	messenger	of	god,	but	nobody	is	aware
of	it	because	nobody	is	even	aware	of	their	own	truth.
God	means	the	truth	of	the	whole	existence.	How	can	you	be	aware	of	god	if	you
are	not	even	aware	of	your	own	truth?	The	drop	is	not	aware	of	its	own	existence
and	 it	 is	 trying	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 the	 ocean	 --	 that	 is	 impossible.	 Vice	 versa	 is
possible:	if	the	drop	becomes	aware	of	its	own	truth	then	it	is	aware	of	the	truth
of	the	whole	ocean	too.	If	you	have	totally	understood	a	single	drop	of	water	that
means	you	have	understood	all	water,	not	only	on	this	earth	but	on	all	the	earths
and	all	the	planets,	in	the	whole	universe.	Wherever	water	exists	its	composition
is	going	to	be	the	same:	H2O;	water	cannot	exist	in	any	other	form.	And	a	single
drop	of	water	contains	the	whole	secret,	the	secret	of	the	oceans.
But	 people	 are	 so	 stupid	 that	 they	 try	 to	 believe	 in	 god.	 Rather	 than	 looking
within	their	own	selves	and	searching	for	the	truth,	they	start	their	journey	by	a
belief	in	the	cosmic,	in	the	universal.	That	is	sheer	tomfoolery,	it	is	idiocy;	these
peoples	are	Don	Quixotes.
My	approach	is	simple	and	scientific.	I	don't	teach	you	to	believe	in	god	because
I	know:	how	can	you	believe	in	god?	--	you	don't	even	know	who	you	are.	Who
is	the	believer?	That	is	the	first	thing	to	be	explored.	And	if	that	is	understood,
root	and	all,	you	will	understand	god	too.
So	 first	 try	 to	 discover	 your	 own	 ultimate	 truth	 and	 in	 that	 very	 discovery
suddenly	you	have	stumbled	upon	the	truth	of	the	whole	--	that's	what	god	is	all
about.	And	then	you	know	that	you	come	from	god,	that	everybody	comes	from
god,	 that	 all	 life	 originates	 in	 god.	 Hence	 everybody	 in	 his	 own	 way	 is	 a
messenger	of	god.
THE	TRIP	OF	THE	LIGHT	FANTASTIC
(Her	name,	Amitabha,	means	infinite	light,	Osho	tells	the	last	initiate.)	Amitabha
is	 one	 of	 the	 names	 of	Gautam	 the	Buddha;	 he	was	 given	 this	 name	when	he
became	enlightened.
Every	person	has	the	potential	to	be	enlightened;	just	a	little	work	is	needed,	just
a	little	awareness,	just	a	little	silence.	And	we	can	manage	it!	Nobody	need	miss.
If	we	miss	only	we	are	responsible.	Just	a	few	right	steps	--	according	to	me	just
two	steps	are	enough	--	and	the	journey	is	complete.
The	 first	 step	 is	 to	 become	 a	witness	 to	 your	mind	 processes,	 to	 the	 traffic	 of
thoughts,	 desires,	 memories,	 dreams	 and	 fantasies.	 And	 the	 second	 step	 is	 to
become	 aware	 of	 your	 own	 witnessing.	 And	 the	 journey	 is	 complete	 and	 the
darkness	is	over	and	the	night	is	finished	and	the	sun	has	risen.	That	moment	of
the	rising	sun	is	called	amitabha	--	the	infinite	light	has	exploded.
Going	All	the	Way
Chapter	#30
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
30	November	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8011305
ShortTitle:	ALLWAY30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
RELIGIOUSNESS	IS	WAKEFULNESS
(Osho	talks	about	his	vision	of	true	conversion	to	Swami	Parivarto.)	A	man	can
become	 a	 Christian	 from	 being	 a	 Hindu	 but	 that	 is	 not	 conversion.	 He	 only
changes	 his	 thoughts,	 he	 remains	 the	 same;	 there	 is	 no	 inner	 change	 in	 his
consciousness.
As	a	Hindu	he	was	worshipping	Krishna,	as	a	Christian	he	will	worship	Christ,
but	 the	 worshipper	 is	 the	 same;	 only	 the	 idols	 have	 been	 changed.	 From	 one
prison	he	has	moved	to	another	prison;	he	is	not	free	yet.
By	conversion	I	mean	a	transformation	of	consciousness	--	not	of	the	mind,	not
of	 thoughts,	 but	 of	 awareness.	When	 a	man	 becomes	 absolutely	 aware	within
himself	he	has	gone	through	a	radical	change.
That's	the	meaning	of	Parivarto	--	and	that's	the	definition	of	sannyas.
I	don't	give	you	a	new	ideology	I	don't	give	you	a	new	religion.	 I	simply	help
you	to	move	from	unconsciousness	towards	consciousness	from	a	state	of	sleep
towards	 a	 state	 of	 awakening.	 Except	 for	 the	 awakened	 person	 nobody	 is
religious.
(Osho	speaks	on	the	difference	between	knowledge	and	wisdom	to	Ma	Sanmati	-
-	her	name	means	right	knowing.	The	question	 is	not	of	knowing	more	or	 less
but	of	going	asleep	or	awake	Osho	reiterates.)	For	thousands	of	years	the	stupid
religious	people	have	been	arguing	about	whether	Buddha	knows	more	or	Jesus
whether	Krishna	knows	more	or	Buddha,	whether	Buddha	knows	more	or	Lao
Tzu.	 There	 are	 all	 fools,	 blind	 people	 arguing	 about	 light.	 They	 can	 go	 on
arguing	for	eternity	and	they	will	not	come	to	any	conclusion	because	light	has
to	 be	 seen,	 not	 argued	 about.	 There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 more	 or	 less;	 all	 the
awakened	people	are	 the	same.	They	have	come	 to	 the	same	silence,	 the	same
profound	peace.	It	is	not	a	question	of	quantity,	so	you	cannot	have	more	or	less.
It	 is	 not	 the	 dimension	 of	 quantity	 at	 all;	 it	 is	 a	 qualitative	 revolution.	One	 is
simply	 awakened,	 not	 more	 or	 less.	 That	 is	 Sanmati	 --	 true	 awakening,	 true
understanding,	 true	 knowing,	 true	wisdom,	 true	 awareness.	All	 these	meaning
are	 involved	 in	 that	 simple	 word,	 'sanmati'.	 It	 contains	 the	 whole	 of	 all	 the
religions,	the	secret.
Avoid	information	and	insist	on	transformation.
MENTAL-GO-ROUND
We	live	in	a	kind	of	restlessness.	Mind	consists	of	restlessness	and	nothing	else.
It	 knows	 no	 rest;	 day	 in,	 day	 out,	 it	 goes	 on	 spinning	 and	weaving	 thoughts,
dreams	and	fantasies.	From	the	cradle	to	the	grave	it	is	continuously	working;	it
cannot	exist	without	this	constant	occupation.	It	is	like	peddling	a	bicycle,	if	you
go	on	peddling	it,,it	keeps	moving;	the	moment	you	stop	peddling	it,	it	falls	over.
Its	whole	support	is	in	constant	movement.	And	that's	exactly	the	case	with	the
mind.
To	 be	 in	 absolute	 rest	 means	 to	 get	 out	 of	 this	 constant	 peddling.	 Stop	 co-
operating	with	the	mind	and	its	occupations,	because	it	is	your	energy	that	keeps
it	going	on.
Meditation	means	withdrawing	 your	 energy	 from	 the	mind.	The	moment	 your
energy	is	withdrawn	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
mind	 flops.	And	 the	collapse	of	 the	mind	 is	 the	beginning	of	a	new	 life.	Then
you	 live	 in	 a	 relaxed	way,	 then	 there	 is	 great	 silence	 in	 you.	And	 out	 of	 that
silence	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 is	 right,	 out	 of	 that	 rest	 your	 actions	 become
beautiful.	They	carry	something	of	your	inner	peace,	they	vibrate	with	your	inner
music.	 Your	 actions,	 your	 words,	 your	 gestures,	 even	 your	 silences	 are	 full,
overflowing	with	your	new	being.
Meditation	means	rest,	absolute	rest.	If	mind	is	occupation	meditation	is	rest.	If
mind	 is	 a	 constant	 chasing	 after	 goals	 then	meditation	 is	 dropping	 all	 chasing
and	all	goals.	In	that	stillness	you	become	capable	of	miracles	--	and	everyone	is
entitled	to	those	miracles.	But	mind	is	impotent.
Beware	 of	 the	mind	 and	 get	 out	 of	 it.	 Getting	 out	 of	 it	 is	 entering	 your	 own
innermost	core	--	and	that	is	the	only	temple	I	know	of	where	god	lives.
BE	A	SPIRITUAL	SWINGER
(...	be	a	non-clinger.	Osho	is	 talking	to	Ma	Viraga,	a	German	sannyasin.)	Love
can	have	two	kinds	of	expressions.	It	can	move	in	two	directions,	one	is	that	of
attachment,	 possessiveness,	 clinging,	 and	 the	 other	 is	 of	 non-attachment,	 non-
possessiveness,	non-clinging.
The	first	direction	destroys	love;	only	lust	is	left.	It	makes	love	something	closer
to	the	animal	instinct	--
mechanical,	unconscious	and	ugly	too,	because	the	moment	you	want	to	possess
somebody	you	start	destroying	 that	person.	 If	you	cling	 to	 the	person	he	starts
escaping	 from	 you	 because	 nobody	wants	 to	 be	 imprisoned.	 Freedom	 is	 a	 far
higher	goal	than	love;	love	can	be	sacrificed	for	freedom,	but	freedom	cannot	be
sacrificed	for	love.
So	if	love	wants	to	survive	--	and	it	is	a	beautiful	phenomenon	--	then	it	has	to
find	 a	way	 to	 be	 in	 tune	with	 freedom.	And	 that's	 what	 I	mean	 by	 this	 other
direction,	 when	 love	 is	 non-attached,	 non-clinging,	 non-possessive.	 Then	 love
rises	to	the	heights	of	prayer,	it	becomes	something	spiritual.	In	that	sense	Jesus
is	right	when	he	says	god	is	love.
Love	is	not	lust.	and	to	make	it	lust	is	to	miss	the	great	opportunity	of	rising	to
the	ultimate	peaks	of	freedom.	joy	and	bliss.	And	the	miracle	is	when	you	don't
cling	to	the	other	he	has	no	need	to	escape	from	you.	When	you	allow	freedom
he	allows	you	freedom;	when	you	allow	freedom	there	is	no	need,	not	at	all,	to
go	 somewhere	 else,	 because	 you	 are	 not	 only	 fulfilling	 his	 love	 need,	 you	 are
also	fulfilling	a	higher	need
--	the	need	for	freedom.
When	love	is	non-attached,	you	never	interfere	with	the	other's	space.	You	reject
his	 space,	his	 territory;	you	 respect	his	 aloneness.	 If	 he	wants	 to	be	 alone	you
don't	feel	offended;	it	is	his	birthright	to	be	alone.	In	fact	he	can	be	with	you	only
if	 he	 is	 allowed	 to	 be	 alone.	 If	 you	 force	 yourself	 on	 the	 other	 person,	 if	 you
don't	 allow	 him	 to	 be	 alone,	 if	 you	 trespass	 his	 territory,	 then	 he	 may	 be
physically	with	you	but	spiritually	you	are	far	apart,	thousands	of	miles	apart	--
and	 that	 creates	 a	 vicious	 circle.	 If	 you	 feel	 that	 the	 person	 you	 love	 is	 not
spiritually	 with	 you,	 you	 become	 more	 possessive;	 you	 start	 closing	 all	 the
possible	doors	from	where	he	can	escape.	And	the	more	you	create	this	state,	the
farther	away	he	is	from	you	--	you	are	murdering	your	love	yourself.
Love	cannot	exist	as	 lust.	As	 lust	 it	 is	only	a	corpse;	as	 freedom	it	has	eternal
life.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Two	weeks.
--	Then	come	back	 for	 a	 longer	period.	This	 is	not	being	 like	a	German.	 (The
group	is	laughing	but	the	joke	seems	to	be	lost	on	Viraga.	Gayan,	sitting	by	her
side	to	help	with	translation,	begins	to	explain.)	This	is	being	like	a	German:	a
joke	needs	to	be	told	twice,	and	then	too	he	smiles	just	to	be	polite!	(Presumably
Gayan	has	interpreted	the	joke	for	Viraga,	but	the	latter	remains	unsmiling.	Osho
chuckles.)	 Gayan,	 explain	 to	 her.	 (to	 a	 slightly	 perplexed	 Viraga)	 Come	 back
again!
TRUTH:	NOT	LOST,	JUST	MISLAID
(Osho	 is	addressing	Swami	Sumaran,	his	name	means	remembering.)	We	have
simply	 forgotten	 about	 it	 because	we	have	become	 too	 engaged	 in	 the	outside
world,	 too	occupied.	But	 the	 inner	has	been	 forgotten,	 there	 is	no	 space	 for	 it.
Our	consciousness	is	completely	covered	with	outside	information	and	we	go	on
collecting	 layer	 upon	 layers.	We	 become	 focussed	 on	 the	 outside	 so	 the	 inner
world	 is	 at	 our	 back;	 but	 not	 for	 a	 single	moment	 is	 it	 lost.	 Hence	 this	word
'sumaran'	is	one	of	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
most	important	words	in	the	whole	history	of	religion.
Gurdjieff	used	to	call	it	self-remembering	and	Buddha	used	to	call	it	sammasati,
right-remembering	 and	 Krishnamurti	 calls	 it	 awareness.	 These	 are	 different
names	but	the	basic	point	is	that	you	have	to	turn	in	and	to	see	what	is	there.	And
that's	 what	 meditation	 is	 all	 about:	 finding	 a	 few	 moments	 here	 and	 there,
whenever	possible,	so	that	you	can	turn	off	from	the	outside	world	and	turn	in.
Slowly	slowly	 it	becomes	easier,	 smooth,	 so	smooth	 that	any	moment	you	can
close	your	eyes	and	the	whole	world	with	all	its	worries,	problems,	tensions	and
anxieties,	 disappears	 and	 suddenly	 you	 are	 diving	 deep	 into	 a	 calm,	 peaceful,
cool	being.	And	slowly	slowly	one	becomes	capable	of	remaining	aware	of	both
the	outside	and	the	inner.
The	 first	 thing	 is	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 the	 inner,	 the	 second	 thing	 happens
automatically:	 you	 go	 on	 working	 outside	 but	 a	 subtle	 undercurrent	 of	 inner
awareness	persists;	even	in	deep	sleep	it	goes	on	persisting.	The	day	it	is	present
twenty-four	hours	a	day	one	becomes	a	Buddha,	one	becomes	a	Christ.
Sumaran	is	the	name	of	the	method.
SANNYAS	IS	OPENNESS
God	 is	not	 to	be	 searched	 for	anywhere;	one	 just	has	 to	become	 receptive	and
god	 comes.	 And	 by	 'god'	 I	 don't	 mean	 a	 person	 but	 an	 experience	 --	 the
experience	of	eternity,	the	experience	of	truth,	of	love,	of	freedom,	of	bliss,	the
experience	of	all	that	is	our	innermost	longing.	But	we	have	to	be	receptive.
People	 are	 living	 very	 closed	 lives,	 like	 monads.	 Leibnitzian	 monads	 --
windowless,	 doorless,	 completely	 closed.	 There	 is	 no	 way	 for	 them	 to	 reach
others	or	to	allow	others	to	reach	them.
One	has	to	become	very	vulnerable	and	open.	Yes,	there	is	a	risk	in	being	open
because	you	can	be	hurt	very	easily.	 If	you	are	open	anybody	can	hurt	you;	 if
you	 are	 vulnerable	 you	 can	 be	 exploited,	 deceived,	 cheated.	 If	 you	 keep	 your
doors	and	windows	open	things	can	be	stolen,	you	can	be	murdered.	That's	why
people	 are	 afraid	 of	 being	 open.	 They	 are	 even	 afraid	 of	 being	 open	 to	 their
lovers,	friends,	parents,	children
--	they	are	simply	afraid.	They	only	come	close	to	a	person	very	cautiously,	and
that	 too	 only	 to	 a	 certain	 extent,	 not	 wholly,	 always	 withholding	 so	 they	 can
withdraw	any	moment	if	the	thing	becomes	too	much,	or	the	danger	is	too	much;
or	if	the	insecurity	becomes	clear	they	can	immediately	withdraw.
People	live	like	turtles	carrying	their	shells.	Yes,	in	certain	moments	they	bring
their	necks	out	and	they	look	around.	Just	a	 little	danger	and	the	neck	goes	 in.
The	turtle	is	almost	dead,	unmoving	--	that's	how	people	are.	But	this	is	no	way
to	find	truth,	this	is	no	way	to	allow	god	to	enter	you.
One	has	to	drop	this	turtle-like	existence,	this	Leibnitzian	monad-like	life.	One
has	to	open	all	the	windows,	all	the	doors;	one	has	to	take	the	risk.	What	is	there
to	lose?
A	Zen	monk,	Lin	Chi,	was	lying	down	in	his	hut	looking	at	the	full	moon	from
the	window.	He	had	only	one	blanket	--	that	was	all	that	he	possessed	--	and	it
was	 a	 cold	winter	 night	 so	 he	was	 lying	 on	 his	 bed	 covered	with	 the	 blanket
enjoying	 the	 full	moon	 through	 the	window.	A	 thief	 entered.	Lin	Chi	 felt	very
embarrassed,	embarrassed,	because	the	thief	had	come	at	least	five	miles	--	the
town	was	that	far	away	--
and	he	would	not	be	able	to	find	anything,	the	hut	was	empty.	That	was	Lin	Chi's
embarrassment.
So	he	gave	the	blanket	to	the	thief	and	said	'Please	accept	this,	don't	say	no.	I	am
a	very	poor	man	but	you	are	the	first	man	who	has	made	a	bit,	a	little	bit	rich.	I
am	grateful	to	you!	Just	the	idea	that	a	thief	even	visits	me	is	so	gratifying	that
you	 need	 not	 feel	 obliged;	 I	 am	 not	 giving	 this	 blanket	 to	 you,	 but	 I	will	 not
accept	your	no.'
The	 thief	was	so	puzzled,	shocked,	afraid	 too	--	 'What	kind	of	man	is	 this?	To
where	have	I	come?	This	man	looks	mad!'	--	he	simply	escaped	with	the	blanket.
Lin	Chi	wrote	a	small	haiku.	Sitting	on	the	window	he	wept,	and	with	tears	in	his
eyes	 he	 wrote	 this	 small	 haiku	 which	 says	 'It	 would	 have	 been	 beautiful	 if	 I
could	have	given	this	moon	to	that	thief.	But	I	am	such	a	poor	man	--	I	have	only
an	old	blanket.	I	would	have	liked	to	give	this	full	moon	to	him.'
What	have	we	got	to	lose?	Seeing	this	one	becomes	open.	That's	the	way	of	the
sannyasin;	 one	 becomes	 open	 --	 open	 to	 love,	 open	 to	 friendship,	 open	 to	 all
kinds	 of	 sharing.	 One	 drops	 withdrawing,	 one	 indulges	 in	 every	 kind	 of
experience	 because	 one	 cannot	 predict	 from	 where,	 from	 what	 direction,	 god
will	 enter	 one's	 being.	 One	 simply	 lives	 totally,	 intensely,	 passionately,	 in	 a
welcoming	state;	one	is	simply	a	welcome.	And	then	it	is	not	far	away,	then	any
moment	god	is	possible.
Whenever	 you	 are	 totally	 open,	 with	 no	 strings	 attached,	 immediately	 god
becomes	possible.	And	unless	god	becomes	possible	life	is	a	sheer	wastage.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Osho	speaks	further	on	the	capacity	to	receive.)
The	cloud	of	bliss	is	always	available,	it	is	always	ready	to	shower,	to	bathe	us,
but	we	are	closed	or	upside-down	or	with	so	many	leakages.	These	three	things
have	 to	be	changed.	We	have	 to	be	right-side	up,	otherwise	 the	rain	can	go	on
and	on	 showering	but	 if	you	have	put	your	bucket	upside-down	 it	will	 remain
empty.
Secondly,	it	has	to	be	without	holes.	And	people	have	so	many	holes	 ...	 in	fact
they	are	just	holes	and	nothing	else!
I	have	heard	a	great	philosopher	was	watching	a	fisherman	making	a	net	and	he
was	watching	with	 such	wonder	 that	 the	 fisherman	also	became	curious	 about
why	he	was	standing	and	watching.	So	he	said	'You	look	so	interested	--	what	is
the	matter?'	The	philosopher	said	 'You	are	doing	miracles	--	putting	such	small
holes	together	--	such	neat,	clean	small	holes	together.	I	have	never	seen	such	a
thing!	Putting	holes	together	is	really	a	wonderful	job,	something	magical!'
That's	how	people	are,	just	holes	together.	So	even	if	they	are	right-side	up	the
water	comes	in	but	goes	out	again.
And	thirdly,	even	if	they	don't	have	holes	they	are	so	full	of	dirt	and	rubbish	that
the	moment	 the	water	 touches	 them	 it	becomes	dirty,	undrinkable,	polluted,	or
maybe	 they	 are	 so	 full	 that	 the	 water	 has	 no	 space	 there;	 again	 they	 remain
empty.
Remember,	god	is	always	ready.	The	guest	is	ready	to	come	in	but	the	host	is	fast
asleep.	The	guest	even	knock,	on	the	doors	but	the	host	goes	on	rationalising	that
it	 may	 be	 just	 wind	 or	maybe	 a	 passerby,	 he	 goes	 on	 rationalising	 and	 never
opens	the	door.	And	it	is	always	god	who	wants	to	be	your	guest.
My	sannyasins	have	to	learn	to	be	guests	in	god's	heart	and	hosts	for	god	to	enter
their	heart.	And	both	these	things	happen	together	if	you	allow	god	into	you,	you
are	allowed	into	god.	Then	the	host	and	the	guest	disappear	into	each	other	and
they	become	one	entity.	That	oneness,	 that	organic	unity	where	you	don't	have
any	definition,	where	you	don't	have	any	boundary	line	around	you,	where	you
are	dissolved	 into	 the	ocean	 like	a	 small	dewdrop,	 is	 the	goal	of	 sannyas.	You
don't	lose	anything,	you	become	the	ocean;	you	only	lose	the	small	boundary	of
the	drop	but	you	gain	infinity.
So	be	ready	to	lose	the	smallness,	the	pettiness,	so	that	you	can	become	the	vast,
the	infinite.	It	is	our	birthright,	it	has	to	be	claimed.
SONG	SONG	YOU
(...	everybody	has	one.)
One	of	the	great	poets,	Walt	Whitman,	has	written	a	song	of	the	self	in	which	he
say,	'I	sing	myself.'	He	is	one	of	the	most	important	poets	in	the	whole	history	of
humanity.	What	he	says	is	significant;	there	is	something	of	the	mystic	in	it.	Had
he	 been	 in	 the	 East	 he	 would	 have	 become	 a	 Buddha.	 Particularly	 these	 two
poets	 from	 the	West,	Whitman	 and	Blake	 ...	 if	 they	had	been	 in	 the	East	 they
would	 have	 become	Buddhas.	They	were	 already	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 it,	 but	 there
was	no	supporting	background	in	the	West.	They	remained	just	on	the	boundary
line	--	one	step	more	and	they	would	have	stepped	into	god	--	but	still	there	are
beautiful	fragments	in	their	poetry.
If	 you	 come	 across	 this	 song	 of	 the	 self	 meditate	 over	 it.	 This	 is	 my	 whole
teaching	here,	 that	 everybody	 is	born	with	a	 song	 inside	and	unless	 it	 is	 sung,
one	 remains	miserable.	 The	moment	 you	 have	 sung	 your	 song	 bliss	 happens,
explodes.	 You	 have	 arrived	 home	 because	 you	 have	 poured	 your	 heart	 into
existence.	 In	 that	 very	 creative	 pouring	 one	 becomes	 part	 of	 the	 whole;	 all
separation	 disappears,	 the	 ego	 is	 dissolved,	 and	with	 the	 ego,	 birth	 and	 death
disappear.	 Jesus	 calls	 it	 life	 abundant.	 But	 nobody	 can	 attain	 it	 without	 being
creative.
That	 is	one	of	my	basic	 insistences;	one	of	my	most	 important	emphases	 is	on
creativity.	 In	 the	past	 the	so-called	 religious	people	have	been	very	uncreative.
That	has	been	 the	cause	of	humanity	not	becoming	really	 religious,	of	 religion
becoming	only	an	hypocrisy.	Anything	 to	be	 true,	 authentically	 true,	has	 to	be
creative.
Sing	your	song,	dance	your	dance,	do	whatsoever	is	your	inner	feeling	to	do.	I
can	help	you	to	find	the	right	ear	which	can	hear	the	still	small	voice	within	--
then	follow	it!
The	function	of	the	master	is	to	throw	you	back	upon	yourself	totally	so	that	you
can	listen	to	your	heart	and	then	follow	it.	The	master	cannot	give	you	a	map	of
the	journey;	that	map	has	to	be	discovered	by	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	written	within	your	being	but	the	master	can	help	you	in	every	possible	way
to	 reach	 that	 inner-most	 core	 where	 you	 can	 read	 the	 writing	 that	 you	 have
carried	with	yourself	forever,	but	which	you	have	not	looked	at.
HIS	PRESENCE,	OUR	PATH
(This	is	 the	last	address	of	the	book.	It's	 to	Satmarga...	and	you.)	There	is	only
one	true	path	to	god	but	there	are	millions	of	paths	which	are	pseudo.	And	it	is
really	difficult	to	find	the	right	path.	But	if	one	is	a	sincere	seeker,	if	one	is	ready
to	risk	all,	sooner	or	later	one	finds	it	It	is	a	gamble,	and	before	you	can	knock
on	the	right	door	you	will	have	to	knock	on	many	doors	which	are	not	doors	at
all;	 they	 are	 only	 painted	 doors	 --	 they	 look	 doors	 from	 far	 away.	 But	 a	 few
indications	can	be	given	to	the	right	seeker.
One	is	that	the	true	path	never	exists	as	a	tradition.	The	true	path	exists	only	as	a
master.	While	Jesus	is	alive	it	exists,	while	Buddha	is	alive	it	exists.	The	moment
Buddha	stops	breathing	the	true	path	disappears.
Then	what	 is	 left	 is	 just	 words,	 dead,	meaningless,	 just	 scholarly	 jargon	 --	 in
other	words,	 in	 simple	words,	 just	 bullshit.	 (laughter)	Then	people	 carry	 it	 for
centuries	and	 they	go	on	analysing	 the	bullshit	and	searching,	 researching,	and
finding	great	things	in	it!	(laughter)	They	have	to	find	things	because	they	have
put	so	much	energy	into	it.	If	nothing	is	there	then	they	look	like	fools,	so	they
have	to	invent	something.
The	true	path	never	exists	as	a	tradition.	it	always	exists	as	a	living	master.	The
true	path	never	exists	in	the	scriptures,	it	only	exists	when	the	awakened	person
is	speaking	to	you,	because	only	then	are	those	words	alive.	Their	life	is	derived
from	 the	 awakened	 person's	 consciousness.	 No	 book	 can	 ever	 be	 alive.	 The
Bible,	 the	Gita,	 the	Koran	 --	 no	 book	 can	 ever	 be	 alive.	A	 book	 is	 just	 like	 a
picture	of	a	sunset:	it	is	not	the	sunset.	You	can	have	a	beautiful	picture	of	a	lamp
in	your	room	but	when	it	is	dark	that	picture	won't	help	(laughter).	Even	to	look
at	that	picture	you	will	need	light.
So	when	there	is	an	alive	master,	if	he	wants	to	reveal	the	secret	of	the	bible	and
the	 Koran	 and	 the	 Dhammapada,	 it	 is	 possible;	 without	 the	 master	 those
scripture,	are	just	pictures	--	beautiful	pictures	--	of	lamps	which	exist	no	more.
The	 true	 path	 is	 always	 original,	 never	 conventional,	 because	 truth	 always
happens	in	a	new	way	to	each	being;	it	is	never	repetitive.	The	way	it	happened
to	Buddha	 it	 has	not	happened	 to	me,	 the	way	 it	 has	happened	 to	me	 it	 is	not
going	to	happen	to	you.	Each	individual	is	so	unique,	that's	why	the	truth	and	its
happening	is	going	to	be	unique.
The	master	cannot	give	you	the	truth,	he	can	only	give	you	hint,	to	find	it.	It	has
to	 be	 found	 within	 you	 and	 nowhere	 else.	 Nobody	 can	 give	 it	 to	 you;	 it	 is
untransferrable.	So	whosoever	says	that	he	is	going	to	give	you	the	truth,	know
well	that	he	knows	nothing.	He	is	exploiting	you,	he	is	a	pseudo	person.	The	true
master	helps	you	to	find	the	truth	within	you	but	he	never	gives	it	to	you.
In	short,	the	true	path	is	a	love	affair	between	the	master	and	the	disciple.	It	is	a
meeting	of	two	hearts.	It	is	not	an	intellectual	question	at	all,	it	is	a	communion;
only	love	can	say	something	about	it.	It	is	trust,	hence	I	say	it	is	a	gamble.	You
are	 risking	 all	 that	 you	know	 for	 something	of	which	you	know	nothing.	And
you	are	going	with	a	man	who,	according	to	all	normal	considerations,	is	almost
mad	(laughter).	He	is	certainly	abnormal!
Jesus	is	abnormal,	Buddha	is	abnormal,	Zarathustra	 is	abnormal.	These	are	not
normal	 people,	 they	 are	 abnormal	 because	 they	 above	 the	 normal	 psychology
uses	 the	 word	 'abnormal'	 in	 a	 very	 wrong	 way.	 When	 you	 read	 the	 word
'abnormal'	 in	 a	 psychology	 book,	 read	 'subnormal'.	 That's	 what	 they	 mean.
Subnormal	means	below	the	normal,	abnormal	should	mean	above	the	normal.
But	don't	be	worried	(laughter)...	because	now	nothing	can	be	done	about	its	you
are	already	on	the	right	path	and	there	is	no	going	back,	no	turning	back.
Whosoever	comes	with	me,	whenever	he	wants	to	go	back,	there	is	no	way.	I	go
on	 destroying	 the	 bridge.	 The	 moment	 you	 cross	 the	 bridge,	 the	 bridge
disappears.	I	go	on	throwing	away	the	ladder,	so	you	can	only	go	forward.
My	sannyasins	don't	have	a	reverse	gear	at	all!
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
