
I	Am	the	Gate
Talks	given	from	01/4/71	to	30/06/71
English	Discourse	series
9	Chapters
Year	published:	1976
9	Discourses,	Interviews	by	Ma	Anand	Pratima
I	Am	the	Gate
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	I	am	consciousness,	I	am	freedom
14	April	1971	am	in	Bombay,	India
Archive
code:
7104140
ShortTitle:
GATE01
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	WISH	YOUR	FORGIVENESS	FOR	ASKING	YOU	VERY	PERSONAL
QUESTIONS.	I	AM	ONLY	ASKING	BECAUSE	I	FEEL	THESE	ARE	THE
QUESTIONS	 WHICH	 ARE	 BURNING	 IN	 THE	 HEARTS	 OF	 MANY
PEOPLE.
WHO	ARE	YOU?	WHY	HAVE	YOU	COME	INTO	THE	WORLD?	WHAT	IS
YOUR
WORK	HERE,	AND	HOW	WILL	YOUR	WORK	BE	ACCOMPLISHED?
It	makes	no	difference	whether	these	questions	are	personal	or	not	because	to	me
the	person	does	not	exist.	You	cannot	ask	any	personal	questions	because	there	is
no	one	to	be	related	to	as	a	person.	In	fact,	it	is	not	presumptuous	to	ask	personal
questions,	but	to	assume	that	a	person	is	is	certainly	presumptuous.	The	person	is
non-existent,	a	non-entity.	In	fact,	there	is	no	person,	or	there	is	only	one	person.
Only	God	can	be	said	to	have	a	personality,	because	only	God	can	have	a	center.
We	have	no	centers	at	all.
The	center	 is	non-existent,	but	we	assume	a	center.	The	center	 is	hypothetical,
illusory.
We	feel	that	without	a	center	life	is	not	possible.	This	assumed	center	is	the	ego.
You	can	 think	 that	 this	 question	 is	 personal.	As	 far	 as	 the	question	 is	 arrowed
toward	me,	it	is	arrowed	toward	a	non-entity.	As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	do	not
feel	at	all	to	be	a	person.	The	deeper	one	goes	the	lesser	one	is.	And	once	some
one	reaches	to	the	ultimate	core	of	himself,	there	is	no	self	at	all.
Secondly,	 you	 ask,	who	 am	 I?	 I	 say,	 "I	 am	 not."	 I	 always	 ask	 seekers	 to	 ask,
"Who	am	I?"
not	in	order	that	they	will	come	to	know	who	they	are,	but	only	in	order	that	a
moment	will	come	when	the	question	is	asked	so	intensely	that	the	questioner	is
not	 there;	 only	 the	 question	 remains.	 A	 moment	 is	 bound	 to	 come	 when	 the
question	 is	 absolutely	 intense,	 as	 deep	 as	 it	 can	 go;	 then	 the	 absurdity	 of	 it	 is
revealed.	You	come	to	know	that	 there	is	no	one	who	can	ask	"Who	am	I?"	or
who	can	be	asked	"Who	are	you?"	The	question	is	asked	not	to	get	any	answer,
but	to	transcend	the	question.
There	is	no	one	inside;	in	fact,	there	is	no	inside	at	all	and	the	moment	the	inside
falls,	there	is	also	no	outside.	The	moment	you	are	not,	inwardly,	then	there	is	no
outwardness.
Then	 the	 whole	 world	 becomes	 one	 whole.	 Then	 existence	 is	 one	 whole,	 not
divided	into	the	dichotomy	of	I	and	thou.
So	to	me,	the	question	"Who	are	you?"	makes	no	sense	at	all.	Rather,	"What	is?"
is	the	only	relevant	question	--	not	who?	but	what?	because	the	what	can	be	the
whole.	It	can	be	asked	about	the	totality,	about	all	that	exists.
The	question	"What	is?"	is	existential,	and	there	is	no	dichotomy	in	it;	it	does	not
divide.
But	 the	question	"Who?"	divides	from	the	very	start.	 It	accepts	 the	duality,	 the
multiplicity,	the	duality	of	beings.
There	is	only	being,	not	beings.
When	 I	 say	 there	 is	 only	 being	 it	means	 there	 is	 only	 beingness,	 because	 one
cannot	exist	apart	from	the	other.	If	there	is	no	other,	then	to	say	that	one	exists
is	meaningless.
So	there	is	not	really	being,	but	beingness.	I	always	say	that	there	is	no	God,	but
divineness,	because	the	very	word	'being'	carries	a	limitation	around	it.	The	very
word
'God'	 carries	 a	 finitude;	 it	 cannot	 be	 infinite.	 But	 beingness	 or	 divineness
becomes	 infinite;	 it	 comprehends	 all	 that	 is.	 It	 is	 all	 inclusive,	 nothing	 is
excluded.	So	when	you	ask,	 "Who	are	you?"	 the	question	 to	me	means	"What
is?"	To	me	it	cannot	mean	anything	else	except	that.
You	have	asked	through	me	a	very	fundamental	question.	What	is,	is	not	me	but
the	very	being,	the	very	existence.	If	one	goes	deep	into	a	single	drop,	one	will
find	the	ocean.
Only	on	the	surface	a	drop	is	just	a	drop.	Being	the	existence	itself,	the	ultimate
nature	of	the	single	drop	of	water	is	the	same	as	that	of	the	ocean.	It	is	oceanic.
So	only	in	ignorance	is	one	a	drop	of	water.	The	moment	one	knows,	there	is	an
ocean.
You	have	asked	me	a	question	about	 the	ocean.	So	when	I	answer	 it,	 I	am	not
answering	 about	 myself	 but	 about	 you	 also.	 When	 I	 am	 answering	 I	 am	 not
answering	about	me,	but	about	all	that	exists.
What	exists?	There	are	so	many	layers.	If	one	is	only	aware	of	the	surface,	then
matter	 exists.	Matter	 is	 the	 surface	of	 existence.	Science	has	been	only	on	 the
surface,	 in	 search;	 to	 science	 only	matter	 is	 real,	 and	 all	 else	 is	 not.	 But	 now
science	has	taken	a	step	further	and	says	matter	is	not,	but	energy	is.	Energy	is
the	second	layer;	it	is	deeper	than	matter.
If	one	goes	deep	in	matter,	then	there	is	no	matter	but	energy.	But	that	too	is	not
yet	enough,	because	beyond	energy	consciousness	exists.
So	when	you	ask,	"Who	are	you?"	I	say,	"I	am	consciousness."	And	this	answer
is	all	inclusive	--	everything	is	consciousness.	I	answer	only	as	a	representative
of	 all.	You	may	not	have	heard	 that	you	are	 consciousness,	you	may	not	have
known	 that	 you	 are	 consciousness,	 but	 I	 am	 answering	 even	 for	 you.
Consciousness	 exists,	 and	 when	 I	 say	 something	 exists,	 it	 carries	 for	 me	 a
particular,	definite	meaning.	When	I	say	something	exists,	it	means	it	will	never
be	in	nonexistence.	If	something	can	go	into	nonexistence,	it	would	mean	that	it
never	really	existed.	It	was	only	phenomenal,	it	just	appeared	to	exist.
So	all	that	changes	is	phenomenal;	it	is	not	really	existential.	All	that	changes	is
only	 the	 surface.	The	 innermost,	 the	 ultimate	 core,	 never	 changes.	 It	 is	 and	 is
always	 in	 the	present.	You	can	never	 say	 it	was,	you	can	never	 say	 it	will	 be.
Whenever	it	is,	it	is.	Only	the	present	is	applicable	to	it.
There	is	no	past	and	no	future,	because	the	past	and	future	become	relevant	only
when	something	changes.	When	something	 is,	 then	 there	 is	no	past	and	future,
but	only	 the	present.	Of	course,	 the	meaning	of	present	will	be	different,	quite
different.	For	us,	present	means	something	which	exists	between	the	past	and	the
future.	But	if	there	is	no	past	and	no	future,	then	the	present	will	be	something
very	different.	It	is	not	something	in	between	the	past	and	future.	The	present	is
just	a	moment	--	a	moment	between	two	nonexistentials:	the	past	that	has	gone
and	 is	 no	 more	 and	 the	 future	 that	 has	 not	 yet	 come.	 Between	 these	 two
nonexistentials,	one	present	moment	exists.	That	is	impossible.
Between	two	nonexistentials	there	can	be	no	existence.	It	only	appears	so.
When	I	say	consciousness	exists,	I	do	not	mean	something	of	the	past	and	future,
but	 something	 eternal	 --	 not	 everlasting,	 because	 the	word	 'everlasting'	 carries
the	 sense	 of	 time.	 When	 I	 say	 it	 always	 exists	 in	 the	 present,	 I	 mean	 it	 is
nontemporal;	 existence	 means	 it	 is	 nontemporal.	 It	 is	 beyond	 time	 and,
simultaneously,	 beyond	 space,	 because	 all	 that	 is	 in	 space	 will	 become
nonexistential.	Similarly,	all	that	is	in	time	will	become	nonexistential.	And	time
and	space	are	not	two	things.	That	is	why	I	relate	them.	They	are	one.	Time	is
only	a	dimension	of	space.	The	movement	in	space	is	time;	nonmoving	time	is
space.	Existence	is	nontemporal	and	nonspatial.
So	I	think	you	will	understand	when	I	say	I	am	someone	who	is	nontemporal	and
nonspatial.	 But	 my	 I	 is	 all-inclusive.	 You	 are	 included,	 the	 questioner	 is
included.
Nothing	 is	 excluded.	 Then	 it	 will	 be	 easier	 to	 answer	 your	 inquiry.	 All	 that
changes	is	purposive;	there	is	something	to	be	done,	it	exists	for	a	purpose.	The
moment	the	purpose	is	fulfilled,	it	goes	into	nonexistence.
But	 all	 that	 is	 really	 existential	 is	 nonpurposive,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 purpose
which	 can	 be	 fulfilled.	 And	 if	 there	 is	 any	 purpose	 and	 it	 is	 fulfilled,	 then
existence	 will	 become	 meaningless.	 So	 only	 temporal	 things	 have	 purposes.
They	 are	meant	 for	 something.	You	 can	 say	 it	 in	 this	way:	 they	 are	means	 to
some	end.	That	is	what	is	meant	by	purposive.
They	exist	for	something	to	be	fulfilled.	The	moment	it	is	fulfilled,	they	go.	But	I
will	 be	 needed	 always,	 and	 when	 I	 say	 "I,"	 that	 is	 all	 inclusive.	 There	 is	 no
purpose	in	it.
Existence	is	nonpurposive.	That	is	why	it	is	called	a	leela,	a	play.	The	existence
itself	has	no	purpose	to	fulfill.	It	is	not	going	somewhere.	There	is	no	end	to	it.
But	 still	 it	 is	 going,	 still	much	 is	 going.	 So	 it	must	 be	 a	 leela,	 a	 play	 --	 only
outflowing	energy.	This	can	be	related	to	me.	I	am	not	to	be	anything	at	all.	Even
then,	I	talk	of	doing	things.
Once	you	have	known	that	you	are	a	part	of	the	cosmic	consciousness,	you	will
realize	there	is	no	purpose.	You	just	exist	as	a	play;	of	course	the	play	becomes
cosmic,	multidimensional.	You	do	much,	and	still	there	is	no	doer	and	there	is	no
purpose;	those	things	are	not	there.	It	then	becomes	a	play.
And	 this	 must	 be	 noted:	 that	 a	 doer	 cannot	 exist	 without	 a	 purpose,	 and	 a
purpose	cannot	exist	without	a	doer.	They	are	two	polarities	of	one	ego,	and	ego
feels	 very	 uncomfortable	 if	 there	 is	 no	 purpose.	 Ego	 is	 fulfilled	 through
purposes.	 Something	 is	 to	 be	 done,	 one	 is	 to	 succeed	 in	 doing	 that,	 one	 is	 to
reach	somewhere,	one	is	to	make	something.	One	has	to	make	a	signature.	Thus
the	ego	is	purposive.	Existence,	on	the	other	hand,	is	not	purposive.	And	unless
you	know	that	which	is	beyond	the	ego,	you	have	not	known	at	all.
So	 to	me,	everything	 is	 just	a	play.	Neither	 I	am	nor	 is	 there	any	purpose.	Yet
things	 are	 going.	 So	 it	 can	 be	 asked,	 "Why	 are	 they	 going?"	 They	 are	 going
because	there	 is	no	purpose	 in	stopping,	and	there	 is	no	one	to	stop	them.	You
understand	me?	There	is	no	one	to	stop,	and	there	is	no	purpose	to	stop.	So	it	is
there	in	nature	to	go.	You	become	a	passage.	Actively	you	cannot	be	a	passage,
you	can	never	be	a	medium.	Only	passivity	makes	you	a	medium,	and	passivity
means	that	you	are	not.	Otherwise,	you	are	verbally	passive.	The	ego	is	always
active.	The	moment	you	are	passive,	the	ego	is	not.	Passivity	means	egolessness.
So	 I	 am	 totally	passive.	Whatever	happens,	happens.	 I	 never	question	 "Why?"
because	there	is	no	one	to	be	asked.	And	even	if	you	find	someone,	God	himself,
he	will	 just	 laugh.	Even	he	cannot	 answer	 it.	He	cannot	 answer	 it	 because	 the
concept	of	causality,	the	concept	of	why,	is	meaningful	only	in	a	divided	flux.	If
you	 take	 a	 beginning	 and	 an	 end,	 then	 causality	 becomes	 meaningful.	 If	 you
understand	the	whole	flux	as	endless,	beginningless,	then	all	things	go	into	other
things	and	all	things	come	from	other	things.
Just	like	waves	in	the	ocean,	every	wave	has	some	wave	behind	and	every	wave
has	 something	 in	 front,	 something	 ahead,	 another	wave.	And	 the	whole	 ocean
has	waves.	The	waves	are	eternal.
No	one	asks,	"Why?"	except	human	beings.	So	no	one	else	is	in	any	anxiety	at
all.
When	the	human	mind	becomes	anxious,	 it	creates	questions	and	then	supplies
the	answers.	The	questions	are	meaningless,	hence	the	answers	are	more	so.	But
because	we	fabricate	questions,	we	cannot	be	at	ease	unless	we	find	the	answers.
Therefore,	 we	 go	 on	 finding	 answers	 and	 creating	 questions.	 If	 you	 see	 this
whole	nonsense	of	asking	questions	and	answering	them,	you	may	find	that	you
are	 carrying	 on	 a	monologue	with	 yourself.	 Even	 if	 you	 are	 asking	 and	 I	 am
answering,	it	is	the	human	mind	asking	and	the	human	mind	answering.	It	is	just
a	hide-and-seek	of	the	same	mind.	It	makes	no	difference	who	is	asking	and	who
is	answering.
The	human	mind	questions,	and	the	human	mind	answers,	and	we	have	created
such	a	great	mess	of	answers	and	questions,	but	not	a	single	question	has	been
answered.	 The	 questions	 remain	 where	 they	 were	 always.	 If	 you	 can	 see	 this
whole	 procession	 of	 questions	 and	 answers,	 this	 meaningless,	 fruitless	 effort
leading	nowhere	--	if	you	become	aware	of	this	whole	nonsense	as	if	in	a	flash	of
lightning	 --	 then	 you	 can	 laugh	 at	 the	 absurdity	 of	 the	 human	mind.	 And	 the
moment	there	is	laughter,	you	transcend	the	human	mind	completely.	Then	there
is	no	question,	and	then	there	is	no	answer.	Then	you	love.	There	is	no	purpose,
and	there	is	no	cause.	Then	living	itself	is	enough.
You	ask	and	I	answer	you,	but	I	myself	cannot	ask	any	questions.	As	far	as	I	am
concerned	there	is	no	answer,	and	there	is	no	question.	I	go	on	living	just	like	the
waves	 in	 the	ocean	or	 just	 like	 leaves	of	 the	 tree	or	 just	 like	clouds	 in	 the	sky,
without	any	question	and	without	any	answer.	And	the	moment	I	became	aware
of	this	whole	absurdity	of	questions,	something	fell	down	completely,	totally.	It
was	a	resurrection.	I	was	reborn,	reborn	in	a	cosmic	dimension	--	not	as	an	I,	but
as	cosmic	consciousness	itself.
In	this	cosmic	dimension,	everything	is	a	play.	Once	you	understand	--	not	only
understand	but	realize	that	all	is	a	play	--	you	are	at	ease	completely,	absolutely.
Then	there	is	no	tension.	You	are	relaxed.	There	is	no	ego.
The	ego	cannot	relax.	It	lives	on	tensions,	it	feeds	on	tensions.	When	there	is	no
ego,	then	there	is	no	tension.	Then	there	you	are	--	all	inclusive.	Then	there	is	no
past,	and	then	there	is	no	future.	You	are	eternity.	Then	anything	that	happens	is
a	 happening,	 it	 is	 not	 that	 you	 are	 doing	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 something	 is	 to	 be
fulfilled	through	you.	These	are	all	illusory	notions.	And	even	a	religious	person
will	think	in	these	terms	--	of	doing	something.	Then	the	ego	has	become	settled,
pious,	and	more	dangerous.	If	the	ego	is	there,	then	both	the	doer	and	the	doings
are	there.	Only	the	objects	have	changed,	but	the	process	is	the	same.
To	me...	and	when	I	refer	to	"me,"	there	is	no	one	who	is	being	referred	to;	it	is
only	 a	 linguistic	 device	 in	 order	 that	 you	may	 understand	what	 I	 say.	 To	me,
there	is	no	one	who	can	be	referred	to	as	me	or	you.	But	then	language	will	be
impossible.	That	is	why	truth	cannot	be	expressed	in	language.	It	cannot	take	on
any	 linguistic	 form,	 because	 language	 is	 created	 by	 those	 who	 are	 not	 --	 by
untrue	ones,	nonexistential	ones.	The	mythical	ego	has	created	the	language.	It
comes	out	of	ego,	it	can	never	transcend	it.	So	even	if	you	know	that	there	is	no
one	who	can	be	referred	to	as	"me"	you	have	to	use	it	in	language.
And	I	remind	you	that	there	is	no	one.
As	far	as	this	"me"	is	concerned,	nothing	is	to	be	done	because	things	happen	by
themselves.	We	ourselves	happen.	We	are	happenings.	The	whole	existence	is	a
happening,	not	a	doing.	So	it	would	be	better	if	I	say	that	the	old	concept	of	God
as	creator	is	not	meaningful	to	me	--	I	will	not	say	"God	the	creator,"	because	the
expression	 reflects	 our	 egoistic	 conceptions	 of	 creation,	 of	 doing.	As	we	 "do"
something,	so	has	God
"made"	the	world.	We	have	projected	ourselves	onto	the	cosmic	plane,	so	there
is	creation	and	the	creator.	The	dichotomy	is	there.
To	me,	 God	 is	 that	 which	 happens	 --	 not	 the	 creator,	 but	 that	 which	 goes	 on
happening.
God	means	that	which	goes	on	eternally.	So	anything	that	happens	is	God.	You
and	everyone	are	happenings.	This	eternal	happening	is	God.	There	is	no	creator
and	 no	 creation.	 The	 very	 dichotomy	 is	 egoistic	 --	 our	 projections	 onto	 the
cosmic	plane.
Once	 you	 know	 that	 in	 yourself	 there	 is	 no	 dichotomy	 of	 doing	 and	 the	 doer,
then	you	know	that	there	is	no	doer	and	no	doing	--	only	happenings.	And	once
there	 is	 this	 revelation	 of	 eternal	 happening,	 there	 is	 no	 burden,	 there	 is	 no
tension.	Your	 birth	 is	 a	 happening,	 and	 your	 death	will	 be	 a	 happening.	Your
being	 here	 is	 a	 happening,	 your	 not	 being	 here	 will	 be	 a	 happening.	 You	 are
nowhere.
From	where	does	 this	ego	come	which	 thinks	"I	am"..."I	 am	doing"?	 It	 comes
through	memory.	 Your	memory	 goes	 on	 recording	 happenings.	 You	 are	 born,
you	 are	 a	 child,	 then	 youth	 comes,	 then	 you	 are	 old.	 Things	 happen	 --	 love
happens,	hatred	happens,	and	the	memory	goes	on	recording.	When	you	look	at
the	 past,	 the	 whole	 accumulated	 memory	 becomes	 "I".	 "I"	 loved	 someone.	 It
would	be	better	and	more	exact	to	say	that	somewhere	love	happened,	I	was	not
the	doer.	But	 the	memory	 that	 "I	 loved"	has	 happened	 just	 like	birth,	 just	 like
death.
If	 a	 person	 can	 remember	 this	 only	 for	 twenty-four	 hours,	 that	 things	 are
happening	 and	 there	 is	 no	 doer,	 he	will	 not	 be	 the	 same	 again.	 But	 it	 is	 very
arduous	to	remember	even	for	a	single	moment.
It	is	the	most	arduous	thing	to	remember	that	events	are	happening	and	you	are
not	the	doer.	For	example,	I	am	speaking.	If	I	say,	"I	am	speaking"	and	mean	that
"I"	 am	 speaking,	 then	 I	 have	 misinterpreted	 the	 phenomenon.	 I	 do	 not	 know
what	the	next	sentence	will	be.	When	it	comes	you	will	know	it	and	I	will	know
it.	 It	 is	 a	happening,	 so	 I	 cannot	 relate	myself	 to	 it.	Something	comes	 through
me.	I	am	not	at	all	a	doer.
Something	happens	in	me.
This	 is	what	 is	meant	when	we	say	 the	Vedas	are	 impersonal.	We	say	 they	are
not	 created	 by	 persons.	We	mean	 by	 this	 that	 those	 who	 compiled	 the	 Vedas
know	 this	 fact	 --	 the	 fact	 that	 something	 is	 a	 happening.	 They	 are	 not	 doers,
something	 is	 coming	 to	 them.	 They	 are	 only	 the	 passage,	 the	 medium,	 the
vehicle,	and	even	 this	being	a	vehicle	 is	a	happening.	 It	 is	not	 their	doing	 that
they	have	become	vehicles.	Otherwise,	the	same	fallacy	will	be	there	on	another
level.
So	go	deep	in	any	of	your	acts,	and	you	will	find	happenings	there.	There	will	be
no	 act,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 actor.	 So	 how	 can	 one	 ask	why?	Who	 can	 answer
this?	 The	 house	 is	 vacant,	 the	 owner	 is	 not.	 Let	 things	 go	 on	 happening.	 The
house	itself	without	the	owner	is	capable	of	happenings.
Try	to	understand	it	more	clearly.	Buddha	said	so	many	times,	"When	we	walk
there	is	no	walker,	only	the	walk."	How	can	this	be	understood?	If	I	am	not,	how
can	I	walk?
Walk,	 and	 find	 where	 you	 are	 --	 you	 will	 find	 only	 the	 walk.	 We	 cannot
understand	how	some	one	can	say	there	is	speaking	and	no	speaker.	But	as	you
go	deep	 in	 the	 act	 of	 speaking,	 you	will	 find	 no	 speaker	 but	 just	 speaking.	 In
fact,	 there	have	been	no	poets,	only	poetry	has	happened.	There	have	been	no
painters,	only	painting	has	been	happening,	but	the	vehicle	becomes	the	owner.
The	memory	creates	the	fallacy.	But	to	me	the	fallacy	is	not.	The	memory	cannot
trap	me,	it	has	lost	its	grip	on	me.	So	everything	happens,	but	there	is	no	doer.
And	all	that	will	happen,	will	happen.	I	will	not	be	the	primer;	I	will	not	be	the
master.
Once	you	know	that	you	are	not,	you	become	a	master	in	a	very	different	sense.
And	 if	 you	 are	 not,	 then	 you	 cannot	 be	 made	 a	 slave,	 negatively.	 Now	 your
freedom	is	total.
Now	no	one	can	make	you	a	slave.	Now	neither	can	there	be	any	slavery	nor	any
possibility	of	it.	Although	a	paradoxical	situation,	it	is	a	fact	--	one	who	tries	to
be	a	master	is	always	in	danger	of	becoming	a	slave.	One	who	loses	himself,	his
mastery,	his	efforts,	his	doer,	is	now	beyond	any	slavery.	He	is	free,	as	free	as	the
sky.	He	is	freedom	itself	--	not	even	free,	because	when	one	is	free	the	agent	is
there.	He	 is	 freedom.	So	 if	you	 like,	 I	will	 say,	 I	am	freedom.	And	 there	 is	no
reason,	because	if	there	is	any	reason	then	you	are	not	free.	You	are	bound	to	it,
tethered	 to	 the	 reason.	 If	 there	 is	 anything	which	 you	 are	 to	 do,	 then	 you	 are
tethered.	Then	you	are	not	free.
I	am	absolute	freedom	in	the	sense	that	nothing	is	to	be	done.	I	am	an	awaiting.
Things	will	happen,	and	 I	will	accept	 them.	And	 if	 they	do	not	happen,	 then	 I
will	accept	the	non-happening.	And	I	go	on	waiting.	This	waiting	makes	one	a
medium	for	the	divine	forces	of	existence.	Much	is	done	through	you	when	the
doer	is	not,	and	nothing	is	done	through	you	when	the	doer	is	 there.	When	the
doer	is	there,	you	are.	You	are	doing	something	which	is	impossible.	Because	the
doer	is	impossible,	the	doing	cannot	be	possible.
You	are	engaged	in	an	absurd	effort,	and	only	frustration	will	be	the	result.	When
you	 are	 not,	 you	 always	 succeed.	 There	 can	 be	 no	 failure,	 because	 you	 have
never	thought	of	being	anything;	and	even	if	failure	happens,	it	is	a	happening.	If
success	happens,	it	is	a	happening.	And	when	both	are	happening,	you	become
indifferent.	It	makes	no	difference;	either	one	will	do.
So	I	may	conclude	that	when	I	say	"I,"	everyone	is	included.	I	am	consciousness,
and	I	am	freedom.	I	use	two	words,	'consciousness'	and	'freedom',	only	to	make
the	 mystery	 more	 understandable	 for	 you.	 Otherwise	 both	 have	 the	 same
meaning.	 Consciousness	 is	 freedom,	 freedom	 is	 consciousness.	 The	 less	 the
freedom,	the	more	there	is	matter.	The	more	there	is	freedom,	the	more	there	is
consciousness.
When	we	say	this	table	is	"material,"	we	mean	to	say	that	it	is	not	free	to	move.
When	we	say	you	are	a	conscious	being,	you	are	free	to	some	extent.	But	if	you
become	consciousness	itself,	as	you	go	deep	and	know	the	source....
I	know	that	you	are	consciousness	itself,	not	the	conscious	being.	Consciousness
is	not	a	quality	attached	to	you,	you	are	consciousness.	You	are	totally	free.
So	proceed	from	anywhere.	Either	be	more	free	or	be	more	conscious,	and	 the
other	will	 result	 automatically.	Be	more	 free,	 and	you	will	be	more	conscious.
You	cannot	be	more	free	unless	you	are	more	conscious.	Be	more	conscious	and
you	will	be	more	free;	you	cannot	be	otherwise,	because	consciousness	creates
freedom.	And	when	you	are	absolutely	conscious,	you	are	absolutely	free.	Then
there	 is	 no	 cause	 and	 no	 purpose	 for	 you	 to	 exist.	 Then	 everything	 is	 a
happening,	and	a	happening	is	a	leela.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
ARE	YOU	SELF-REALIZED?	AND	HOW	DO	YOU	EXPLAIN	YOUR
RELATIONSHIPS	WITH	EXISTENCE	AND	WITH	PEOPLE?
The	word	you	say,	'self-realized',	is	not	right,	because	realization	always	means	a
transcendence	of	the	self.	The	word	'self-realization'	is	therefore	contradictory.	If
you	realize,	you	know	there	is	no	self.	If	you	do	not	realize,	then	there	is	the	self.
Whereas	selfhood	is	non-realization,	realization	is	non-selfhood.	So	I	cannot	say
I	am	self-realized.
I	can	only	say	there	is	no	self	now!
There	 was	 a	 self	 --	 that	 was	 only	 up	 to	 the	 door.	 The	moment	 you	 enter	 the
temple	of	realization,	you	find	it	no	more.	It	is	a	shadow	which	follows	you	up	to
the	door,	and	not	only	follows	you	but	clings	to	you	--	but	only	up	to	the	door,	it
cannot	enter	the	temple.	If	you	have	to	save	it	you	will	have	to	remain	outside.
The	 self	 is	 the	 last	 thing	 one	 has	 to	 throw.	One	 can	 throw	 everything,	 but	 to
throw	 the	 self	 is	 so	 impossible,	 because	 the	 effort	 for	 self-realization,	 the
endeavor	for	self-realization,	is	an	effort	of	the	self	for	the	self.	The	moment	you
realize,	you	will	not	be;	you	will	not	try.
So	all	the	great	teachers	have	used	words	which	are	fallacious,	'Self-realization'
is	a	fallacious	word.	But	you	do	not	understand	if	they	say	'no-self	realization'.	It
will	become	absurd.	But	that	is	the	real	thing	--	no-self	realization.	Only	Buddha
used	anatta,	no-self.
Only	Buddha	used	it.	That	is	why	Buddha	was	uprooted	from	India.	He	was	just
thrown	out,	and	Buddhism	could	not	get	roots	unless	Buddhism	began	to	use	the
word	'self-realization'.	In	China	and	Japan	Buddhism	again	came	back,	and	they
began	again	to	use
'self-realization'.	 Buddha	 used	 'no-self	 realization'.	 I	 am	 also	 using	 no-self
realization.
That	is	the	only	realization.
The	moment	 there	 is	 no	 self	 you	 have	 become	 cosmic.	 It	 is	 a	 great	 game!	To
know	the	self	 is	 the	only,	no	doubt	the	greatest,	 the	ultimate,	game.	The	self	 is
not	 something	which	 is	 to	 be	 protected;	 it	 is	 something	 to	 be	 destroyed.	 It	 is
something	 which	 is	 the	 barrier	 to	 your	 ultimate	 potentiality,	 to	 your	 ultimate
realization.
So	I	cannot	say	I	am	self-realized.	I	will	say,	I	am	no-self	realized,	and	that	is	the
only	realization	that	is	possible.	No	other	realization	exists.	The	emphasis	of	all
who	claim	self-realization	is	on	the	self	and	not	on	realization.	My	emphasis	is
on	realization.	That	is	why	I	emphatically	deny	the	self.
How	 am	 I	 related	 to	 the	 cosmos	 and	 to	 other	 people?	 Relationship	 exists
between	two	selves.	I	am	one	who	is	not	related,	one	who	is	not	in	relationship.
Relationship	 is	 always	 between	 two.	 This	may	 look	 paradoxical,	 but	 in	 every
relationship	you	remain	unrelated.
Howsoever	 you	 are	 related,	 you	 will	 remain	 unrelated,	 because	 relationship
exists	 between	 two.	The	 two	will	 be	 there.	So	 relationship	 is	 only	 a	 facade	 to
hide	the	duality.
For	moments	you	delude	yourself	 that	you	are	 related,	but	 again	you	are.	You
have	fallen	back	to	yourself,	and	there	is	no	relationship.
For	example,	when	we	are	in	so-called	love,	we	appear	to	be	related.	We	create
the	fallacy	of	relationship,	but	in	fact,	we	are	just	deceiving	ourselves.	The	two
will	remain	two.	However	near,	the	two	will	always	remain	two.	Even	in	a	sex
communion,	 they	will	 be	 two.	 The	 twoness	 only	 creates	 a	 fallacy	 of	 oneness.
Oneness	 can	 never	 exist	 between	 two	 selves.	Oneness	 can	 only	 exist	 between
two	non-selves.
So	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	am	not	related	to	the	cosmic	reality,	not	related	at
all.	And	by	that	I	do	not	mean	that	I	am	isolated.	By	that	I	mean	there	is	no	one
who	can	exist	in	relationship.	As	far	as	the	cosmic	reality	is	concerned,	I	am	one,
and	the	cosmic	reality	is	one	with	me.
From	my	side,	I	am	one,	but	as	far	as	others	are	concerned,	I	am	not	one	from
their	side.
They	are	related.	Someone	is	related	as	a	friend,	someone	is	related	as	an	enemy,
someone	is	related	as	a	brother,	and	someone	is	related	as	a	disciple.	They	may
be	related	to	me,	but	I	am	not	related	to	them.	And	the	whole	happening	in	me	is
to	make	them	unrelated.	But	there	cannot	be	any	effort	on	their	part,	That	only
can	be	a	realization	of	no-self.
If	they	know	that	there	is	no	one	who	can	be	a	disciple	and	no	one	who	can	be	a
guru,	if	they	know	that	there	is	no	one	who	can	be	related	to	anyone,	only	then
the	self	falls	and	your	emptiness	is	naked.	And	there	are	no	clothes	which	give
you	a	boundary,	a	self.	In	your	total	nakedness,	when	you	know	that	there	is	no
self,	you	are	but	a	space,	an	inner	sky,	emptiness	--	then	you	become	one.	Or	I
may	say	then	you	really	become	related.
When	oneness	happens,	then	one's	self	is	not.
You	have	asked	me	how	 I	 am	 related	 to	 the	cosmos	and	 to	 the	people.	To	me
they	are	not	two	things	--	the	cosmos	and	the	people.	The	cosmic	happens	in	so
many	ways,	and	one	of	the	ways	is	the	people.	The	cosmic	happens	in	so	many
ways	 --	 the	 sun,	 the	 stars,	 the	 earth,	 the	 trees,	 the	 animals,	 the	 people.	 Only
frequencies	differ,	the	divinity	is	the	same.
So	to	me,	the	cosmos	and	the	people	are	not	two	things.
Whatever	I	have	said	before	is	not	from	thinking.	It	is	a	fact.	But	if	I	think	--	and
I	 have	 to	 think	 if	 I	 am	 to	 understand	 your	 side	 --	 then	 you	 are	 related	 to	me
because	you	are	and	as	long	as	you	are,	you	will	be	related.	That	creates	a	very
difficult	situation.	Daily,	moment	to	moment,	it	creates	a	difficult	situation.
You	feel	yourself	related	to	me.	You	feel	that	you	belong	to	me.	Then	you	begin
to	expect	 that	 I	 should	belong	 to	you.	Because	you	feel	 that	you	are	 related	 to
me,	 you	 begin	 to	 expect	 that	 I	 should	 be	 related	 to	 you.	 Because	 of	 that
expectation,	I	know	that	you	are	bound	to	be	frustrated.	With	a	person	who	is	a
self,	 it	 is	bound	to	be	frustrating,	but	 it	may	take	a	 longer	 time.	But	 if	you	are
with	 a	 person	who	 is	 a	 no-self,	 it	 will	 not	 take	 even	 a	 short	 time	 gap.	 Every
moment	 will	 be	 frustrating	 because	 there	 will	 be	 no	 fulfillment	 of	 your
expectations.	There	is	no	one	to	fulfil	them.
So	 I	 am	 very	 irresponsible,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 one	 who	 can	 be	 responsible.
There	are	responses	but	no	one	who	is	responsible,	so	each	response,	therefore,
is	 atomic.	 It	 cannot	 be	 a	 sequence,	 so	 you	 cannot	 expect	 anything	 from	 the
moment	that	will	follow.	I	even	do	not	know.	The	response	is	going	to	be	atomic,
each	complete	in	itself,	not	in	any	way	related	with	the	past	or	with	the	future.
The	 ego	 is	 a	 series	of	 events,	 happenings,	 and	memories.	 It	 is	 so	because	you
exist	in	a	series	--	and	you	try	to	take	me	as	a	series,	but	that	becomes	difficult.
So	everyone	will	feel,	sometime	or	other,	angry	with	me,	because	my	response	is
atomic	 and	 not	 a	 serial	 one.	 The	 serial	 response	 becomes	 responsibility.	 Then
you	can	rely.
I	am	very	unreliable.	You	can	never	rely	on	me	--	I	myself	cannot	rely	on	me.	I
do	not	know	what	 is	 going	 to	happen.	 I	 am	completely	open	 and	 accepting	 to
anything	that	happens.	And	I	never	think	in	terms	of	relationship,	I	cannot	think;
rather,	I	live	in	terms	of	oneness.
Whenever	you	are	near	me,	it	does	not	mean	that	I	am	related	to	you.	It	is	that	I
become	one	with	you.	And	this	oneness	you	interpret	as	love.	But	this	oneness	is
neither	 love	nor	hate,	because	all	 that	 is	known	as	 love	can	change	 into	hatred
any	moment.	But	this	oneness	can	never	change	into	hate.	You	may	be	near,	you
may	be	far;	you	may	be	a	friend,	you	may	be	an	enemy;	it	makes	no	difference.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 you	may	 come	 to	me	 or	 go	 from	me,	 it	makes	 no
difference.
Relationship	 is	 conditional;	 oneness	 is	 non-conditional.	Relationship	 is	 always
with	 conditions.	Something	 changes	 in	 the	 condition,	 and	 the	 relationship	will
change.
Everything	 is	always	on	a	volcano.	Every	 relationship	 is	always	 in	a	wavering
state,	always	in	a	dying	process,	always	changing.	So	every	relationship	creates
fear,	because	always	there	is	the	danger	of	its	being	broken.	And	the	more	there
is	fear,	the	more	you	cling,	and	the	more	you	cling,	the	more	fear	you	create.
But	oneness	 is	quite	diametrically	opposite.	Oneness	 is	unconditional.	 It	 exists
because	no	condition,	no	expectation,	no	 fulfillment,	no	 future	 result,	 is	hoped
for.	 It	 is	 neither	 conditioned	 by	 the	 past	 nor	 oriented	 to	 the	 future.	 It	 is	 a
momentary,	atomic	existence,	unrelated	with	the	past,	unrelated	with	the	future.
So	 I	 feel	 oneness	 with	 the	 cosmos	 and	 with	 the	 people	 also,	 and	 from	 the
cosmos,	 the	 feeling	 is	 the	 same.	 As	 I	 feel	 one	 with	 it,	 from	 the	 cosmos	 the
feeling	is	of	the	oneness.
Once	I	was	not	feeling	this,	but	I	now	know	that	the	cosmos	has	always	been	in
the	same	feeling	towards	me.
Oneness	is	always	flowing,	it	has	always	been	flowing;	there	has	been	an	eternal
waiting	for	the	cosmos.	Now	I	feel	it	towards	the	cosmos;	I	feel	it	also	towards
the	people.	The	moment	some	one	feels	this	oneness	towards	me,	he	becomes	a
part	of	the	cosmic.	He	is	then	not	a	person,	he	becomes	cosmic.	And	once	you
feel	oneness,	even	with	one	person,	you	have	known	the	taste.	You	have	known
the	taste	of	ecstasy.	Then	you	can	jump	into	the	all.
So	 this	 is	 what	 is	 happening	 around	 me.	 I	 do	 not	 say	 I	 am	 doing	 --	 this	 is
happening	around	me.
I	will	call	you	near	just	to	give	you	a	taste	of	oneness,	and	if	you	can	realize	this
even	for	a	single	moment,	then	you	will	never	be	the	same	again.	This	is	a	very
patient	effort	--
very	 unknown,	 unpredictable.	 No	 one	 can	 say	 when	 the	 moment	 is	 near.
Sometimes	your	mind	 is	 so	 tuned	 that	you	can	feel	 the	oneness.	That	 is	why	I
insist	on	meditation,	because	it	is	nothing	but	tuning	the	mind	to	such	a	peak	that
you	can	jump	into	the	oneness.
Meditation	to	me	means	tuning	of	the	mind	toward	oneness,	opening	of	the	mind
toward	oneness.	This	can	only	happen	when	your	meditation	has	gone	beyond
you;	otherwise	it	can	never	happen.	If	it	is	below	you	--	you	are	doing	it,	you	are
the	 controller	 --	 then	 it	 cannot	 happen,	 because	 you	 are	 the	 disease.	 So	 I
persuade	you	toward	meditation	in	which,	beyond	certain	limits,	you	will	not	be.
Meditation	will	take	you	over.	By	and	by	you	will	be	pushed.	Of	course	you	will
begin	the	meditation,	because	there	can	be	no	other	way.	You	will	have	to	begin,
but	you	will	not	end	the	meditation.	You	will	begin,	but	you	will	not	end	it.	In
between,	somewhere	the	happening	will	happen.	The	meditation	will	catch	hold
of	you.	You	will	be	thrown,	and	meditation	will	come	in.	Then	you	will	be	tuned
to	the	cosmos.	Then	you	will	be	one.
Oneness	 is	 important,	 not	 relationship.	 Relationship	 is	 sansar,	 the	 world,	 and
because	 of	 relationship	 we	 have	 to	 be	 born	 again	 and	 again.	 Once	 you	 have
known	oneness,	 then	 there	 is	no	birth,	 then	 there	 is	no	death.	Then	 there	 is	no
one	except	you.	All	are	included.
You	have	become	the	cosmic.	The	individual	must	go	before	the	oneness	comes.
The	ego	must	go	before	the	divine	comes.
Ego	is	the	source	of	all	relationship.	The	world	is	the	relationship.	God	is	not	a
relationship,	 the	 divine	 is	 not	 a	 relationship.	 The	 divine	 is	 not	 selfness.	 This
means	you	cannot	become	one	with	it.	So	a	bhakta,	a	devotee,	can	never	reach
the	cosmic,	because	he	thinks	in	terms	of	relationship	--	God	the	father,	God	the
lover,	God	the	beloved.	He	thinks	in	terms	of	relationship.	He	goes	on	thinking
in	terms	of	self	and	the	other.	He	can	never	transcend	the	ego.	This	is	something
very	subtle,	because	the	devotee	is	always	struggling	to	surrender.	Devotion,	the
path	 of	 devotion,	 is	 the	 path	 of	 surrender.	 He	 is	 trying	 to	 surrender,	 but	 to
someone.
If	you	try	to	surrender	to	someone,	the	other	is	there.	And	the	other	cannot	exist
if	 you	 are	 not;	 so	 you	 will	 go	 on	 existing	 in	 the	 shadows.	 You	 will	 forget
yourself,	 but	 forgetting	 yourself	 is	 not	 surrender.	You	 remember	 the	 divine	 so
much	that	you	cannot	remember	yourself	now,	but	you	are	in	the	back,	you	exist
in	the	shadows.	Otherwise	God	cannot	exist	as	the	other.
So	the	path	of	devotion,	as	it	exists,	cannot	lead	you	to	the	transcendental,	to	the
cosmic,	to	the	one.	To	me,	it	is	not	a	question	of	surrendering	to	someone,	it	is
just	a	question	of	surrendering	the	self	--	not	at	someone's	feet,	just	surrendering
yourself.	If	there	is	no	self,	then	you	have	become	one.
The	self	can	go	on	creating	the	seeds,	it	can	go	on	creating	the	deception.	And
the	 greatest	 and	 most	 certain	 deception	 is	 that	 of	 the	 devotee	 and	 God	 --	 a
religious	deception.	Any	deception	which	becomes	religious	can	be	dangerous,
because	you	cannot	even	deny	it.	Even	to	deny	it	will	create	guilt.	You	will	feel
guilty	 to	 deny	 selfhood	 to	 the	 divine,	 but	 to	 the	 divine	 the	 selfhood	 is	 the
projection	of	your	self.	The	moment	you	are	not	a	self,	there	is	no	self	as	far	as
God	 is	 concerned.	 The	 whole	 existence	 has	 become	 selfless.	 And	 when	 the
whole	existence	has	become	selfless,	then	you	are	one	with	it.
Selflessness	is	the	path.
Selflessness	is	the	real	devotion.
Selflessness	is	the	authentic	surrender.
So	the	problem	is	always	of	the	self.	Even	if	we	think	of	liberation,	moksha,	we
think	of	 freedom	of	 the	self,	not	 freedom	from	the	self.	We	 think	 that	 then	we
will	be	free.	But	then	you	cannot	be	free	--	moksha	is	not	the	freedom	of	the	self,
it	is	freedom	from	the	self.	So	I	exist	in	a	selflessness,	in	a	flux,	in	a	process	of
selflessness.	Neither	am	I	a	self	nor	is	anyone	else	a	self.
For	 example,	 waves	 are	 in	 the	 ocean,	 but	 each	 wave	 misconceives	 itself	 as
separate	from	the	ocean.	 It	appears	 to	be	separate.	 It	can	deceive	 itself	 --	 there
are	so	many	waves	around,	and	each	wave	appears	different.	My	wave	is	higher
and	yours	will	be	lower,	or	my	wave	will	be	lower	and	yours	higher.	How	can	it
be	the	same?	And	waves	cannot	look	deep	down	in	the	sea.	Only	the	surface	is
known.	Your	wave	 is	dying,	and	my	wave	 is	young	and	rising.	Your	wave	has
reached	the	shore,	and	I	am	far	off.	How	can	I	think	that	we	are	both	the	same?
But	yet,	whether	we	think	so	or	not,	we	are	the	same.
So	the	wave	that	is	known	as	"me"	is	not	an	ego;	it	is	not	a	self.	This	wave	has
known	 that	 the	ocean	 is	 the	wave.	The	wave	 is	 just	 a	 surface	phenomenon.	A
surface	is	an	appearance,	a	surface	is	a	movement.	This	wave	that	I	call	"I"	has
not	known	that	wavelessness,	the	waveless	ocean,	is	the	real.	Even	your	wave	is
not	different.
I	have	known	that	which	joins	all.	You	may	call	 it	self-realization,	I	will	not.	I
will	call	it	no-self	realization,	because	this	is	the	essence	of	all	realizations.	This
is	no-selfness.	I	think	you	understand	what	I	mean.
Whatsoever	I	said	may	not	be	what	I	mean,	and	what	I	mean	may	not	be	what	I
said.	So	do	not	confuse	my	sayings	with	my	meanings,	but	always	look	into	the
deep.	 Always	 listen	 to	 that	 which	 has	 not	 been	 said,	 but	 indicated.	 There	 are
things	which	cannot	be	said,	but	shown,	indicated.	All	that	is	deep,	and	all	that	is
ultimate,	 can	 only	 be	 shown	 and	 never	 said.	 And	 I	 am	 saying	 things	 which
cannot	 be	 said.	 So	 do	 not	 think	 of	 my	 words.	 Always	 throw	 the	 words	 as
meaningless;	then	go	deep	down	to	the	wordless	meaning,	to	the	silent	meaning.
It	is	always	there	behind	the	word.
The	words	are	always	dead,	 the	meaning	 is	always	 living.	One	can	be	open	 to
the	words,	but	one	can	never	be	open	through	the	intellectual	understanding.	You
can	be	open	with	your	total	being,	not	with	only	your	intellect.	It	is	not	that	the
intellect	sometimes	misunderstands	--	 the	 intellect	always	misunderstands.	 It	 is
not	that	the	intellect	sometimes	errs	--	the	intellect	is	the	error.	It	always	errs.
So	whatsoever	is	being	said,	be	sympathetic	with	it.	Do	not	try	to	understand	it,
let	it	go	deep	in	you.	Be	vulnerable,	open	to	it.	Let	it	go	deep	into	the	heart.	Do
not	 create	 intellectual	barriers	 to	 it.	Then	with	your	 full	being	 in	participation,
you	will	know.	You	may	not	understand,	but	you	will	know.	And	understanding
is	not	enough,	knowing	is	needed.	Sometimes	you	understand	or	think	that	you
have	 understood,	 thus	 you	 create	 a	 barrier	 to	 the	 knowing.	 The	 intellect
understands;	the	being	knows.	The	intellect	is	just	a	part,	it	is	your	being	that	is
the	real.
When	you	know,	 you	know	with	 your	 blood,	 you	know	with	 your	 bones,	 you
know	with	your	heartbeats.	But	if	you	understand,	you	understand	only	with	the
mechanism	of	 the	mind,	which	 is	not	 so	deep.	 It	 is	only	a	device,	 a	utilitarian
device	 which	 is	 needed	 to	 survive,	 which	 is	 needed	 to	 be	 related,	 but	 which
becomes	a	barrier	toward	oneness	and	toward	spiritual	death	and	resurrection.	It
is	only	a	natural	device	to	survive.	It	is	not	meant	to	reveal	the	ultimate	truth.	It
is	not	meant	to	know	the	hidden	mysteries	--	and	the	mysteries	are	hidden.
So	whatsoever	I	am	saying,	do	not	think	about	it.	Go	home	and	sleep	over	it.	Just
let	 it	 go	 in,	 let	 it	 penetrate.	Do	 not	 guard	 yourself;	 be	 open.	Each	 guarding	 is
against	knowing.
And	only	when	it	has	reached	your	innermost	being	will	it	be	known	and	really
understood.	That	 is	what	 is	meant	 by	 shraddha,	 faith.	 It	 does	 not	mean	belief.
Belief	 is	 intellectual.	 One	 can	 believe	 intellectually,	 one	 can	 disbelieve
intellectually	--	both	are	intellectual.	Faith	is	not	intellectual	at	all.	It	is	the	total
mystic	participation.	It	is	being	one	with	the	hidden	mysteries.	It	is	a	jump.
So	whatsoever	 I	 am	 saying,	 I	 am	not	 interested	 in	 any	 theory	 at	 all,	 I	 am	not
interested	 in	 any	 philosophies	 at	 all.	 I	 am	 interested	 in	 the	 existential	 jump.
When	I	say	something,	it	is	only	to	lead	you	to	that	which	cannot	be	said.	And
when	 I	 use	words	 I	 use	 them	 only	 to	 lead	 you	 toward	 silence.	When	 I	 assert
something,	it	is	only	to	indicate	the	unassertable.
My	 expression	 is	 not	 really	 to	 express	 something,	 but	 to	 indicate	 the
inexpressible.
So	be	sympathetic,	because	only	sympathy	can	be	 the	opening.	Let	whatever	 I
said	drop	into	you;	 it	will	have	a	flowering.	If	 the	seed	goes	into	the	depths,	 it
will	have	its	flowering.	When	the	flower	comes,	you	will	know	that	which	has
been	said,	but	could	not	be	said.	You	will	know	that	which	has	been	said,	but	yet
remains	unsaid.
I	Am	the	Gate
Chapter	#2
Chapter	 title:	 Neo-sannyas:	 The	 answer	 to	 human	 crisis	 16	 April	 1971	 am	 in
Bombay,	India
Archive
code:
7104160
ShortTitle:
GATE02
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	DO	YOU	GIVE	SANNYAS	TO	ALMOST	ANYBODY	WHO	COMES
TO	SEE
YOU?
WHAT	IS	YOUR	CONCEPT	OF	SANNYAS?	WHAT	OBLIGATION	DOES	IT
INVOLVE?
To	me,	sannyas	is	not	something	very	serious.	Life	itself	is	not	very	serious,	and
one	who	is	serious	is	always	dead.
Life	is	just	an	overflowing	energy	without	any	purpose,	and	to	me	sannyas	is	to
lead	life	purposelessly.	Live	life	as	a	play	and	not	as	work.	The	so-called	serious
mind,	which	is	diseased,	will	in	fact	convert	play	into	work.	The	sannyasins	are
to	do	the	very	opposite	--
to	convert	work	into	play.	If	you	can	take	this	whole	life	just	as	a	dream,	a	dream
act,	 then	 you	 are	 a	 sannyasin.	 One	 who	 considers	 life	 as	 a	 dream,	 a	 dream-
drama,	has	renounced.
Renunciation	is	not	leaving	the	world,	but	changing	the	attitude.	An	attitude	of
changing	the	world	is	something	serious.	That	is	why	I	can	initiate	anyone	into
sannyas.	 To	me,	 initiation	 itself	 is	 a	 play.	 I	will	 not	 ask	 for	 any	 qualification,
whether	 you	 are	 qualified	 or	 not,	 because	 qualifications	 are	 asked	 where
something	serious	is	done.	So	everyone,	by	just	being	in	existence,	is	qualified
enough	 to	 be	 at	 play.	 He	 can	 play,	 and	 even	 if	 he	 is	 unqualified	 it	makes	 no
difference,	because	the	whole	thing	is	just	a	play.	That	is	why	I	will	not	ask	for
any	qualifications.
And	my	sannyas	does	not	involve	any	obligation	either	--	the	moment	you	are	a
sannyasin,	you	are	totally	at	freedom.	It	means	now	you	have	taken	a	decision,
and	 this	 is	 the	 last	decision.	Now	you	have	not	 to	 take	any	decision	anymore.
You	have	taken	the	last	decision	now	--	to	live	in	indecision,	to	live	in	freedom.
One	who	 lives	 decidedly	 can	 never	 be	 free.	 He	 is	 always	 bound	 by	 the	 past,
because	the	decision	was	taken	in	the	past.	You	can	never	take	any	decision	for
the	 future,	 because	 the	 future	 is	 unknown	 and	 whatever	 decision	 is	 taken	 is
bound	 up	 with	 the	 past.	 The	 moment	 you	 are	 initiated	 into	 sannyas,	 you	 are
initiated	 into	an	uncharted,	unplanned	 future.	Now	you	are	not	 tethered	by	 the
past.	You	will	 be	 free	 to	 live.	 That	means	 to	 act,	 to	 play,	 and	 to	 be	whatever
happens	to	you.	This	is	insecurity.
To	 renounce	a	name,	 to	 renounce	a	property,	 is	not	 really	 insecurity,	 it	 is	very
superficial	 insecurity.	 And	 the	 mind	 remains	 the	 same,	 the	 mind	 that	 was
thinking	about	the	property	as	security.	Even	property	is	no	security	at	all,	you
will	die	with	all	your	property.	Even	a	home	is	not	security	at	all,	you	will	die	in
it.	 So	 the	 false	 notion	 that	 property,	 home,	 friends	 and	 family	 are	 securities	 is
still	prevailing	in	the	mind	which	thinks,	"I	have	renounced;	now	I	am	insecure."
Only	that	mind,	only	that	person	lives	in	insecurity	who	lives	untethered	to	the
past.
Insecurity	means	untethered	 to	 the	past;	and	 it	has	so	many	meanings,	because
all	that	you	know	comes	from	the	past.	Even	your	mind	is	of	the	past.
So	one	who	renounces	knowledge	is	really	renouncing	something.	You	yourself
come	from	the	past,	you	are	nothing	but	accumulated	experiences.	So	one	who
renounces	himself	is	renouncing	something.	All	your	desires	and	all	your	hopes
and	 all	 your	 expectations	 --	 they	 all	 confirm	 the	 past.	One	who	 renounces	 his
past	renounces	his	desires,	his	hopes,	his	expectations.
Now	you	will	be	just	like	an	emptiness,	a	nothingness,	a	nobody.	Sannyas	means
throwing	 all	 claims	 of	 being	 somebody.	 Now	 you	 are	 going	 into	 no-identity,
nobodiness.
So	 this	 is	 the	 last	 decision	 of	 your	 mind,	 with	 which	 the	 past	 is	 closed.	 The
identity	is	broken,	the	continuity	is	not	there.	You	are	new;	you	are	reborn.
Everyone	who	 is	alive	 is	qualified	 to	 live	 in	 insecurity.	 If	one	 is	 really	 to	 live,
one	has	to	live	in	insecurity.	Every	arrangement	of	security	is	renounced	living.
The	more	you	 are	 secure,	 the	 less	 you	 are	 living.	The	more	you	 are	 dead,	 the
more	secure,	and	vice	versa	also.	For	example,	a	dead	man	cannot	die	again,	he
is	death-proof.	A	dead	man	cannot	be	ill,	so	he	is	disease-proof.	A	dead	man	is
so	 secure	 that	 those	who	go	on	 living	may	seem	foolish	 to	him	 --	 they	 live	 in
insecurity.
If	you	are	alive	at	all,	then	you	are	insecure.	The	more	insecure,	the	more	alive.
So	 a	 sannyasin	 to	 me	 is	 a	 person	 who	 decides	 to	 live	 to	 the	 utmost,	 to	 the
optimum,	to	the	maximum;	it	is	just	like	a	flame	burning	from	both	poles.
There	 is	 no	 obligation,	 there	 is	 no	 commitment.	 You	 are	 not	 bound	 to	 any
discipline	at	all.	If	you	want	to	call	insecurity	a	discipline,	that	is	another	matter.
Of	course,	it	is	an	inner	discipline.	You	are	not	going	to	be	anarchic,	no!	When
have	I	ever	said	 that	 the	person	will	be	anarchic?	Anarchy	is	always	bound	up
with	order,	with	a	system.	If	you	renounce	order,	you	can	never	be	disorderly.	It
is	not	denying	order,	 it	 is	 just	 renouncing,	and	renouncing	means	now	to	be	 in
order!	It	is	just	an	act,	a	play	for	others'	sake.	You	will	not	be	serious	about	it,	it
is	just	a	role	of	the	game.	You	walk	to	the	left	or	to	the	right	for	others'	sake,	for
traffic's	sake,	but	there	is	no	seriousness	about	it;	nothing	is	serious	in	it.
So	the	sannyasin	is	not	going	to	be	disorderly.	As	far	as	he	himself	is	concerned,
as	far	as	his	inner	consciousness	is	concerned,	now	there	will	be	no	order.	That
does	not	mean	there	will	be	disorder,	because	the	disorder	is	always	a	part	of	the
order.	When	 there	 is	order,	 there	 is	 a	possibility	of	disorder.	When	 there	 is	no
order,	then	there	is	no	disorder,	because	there	is	spontaneity.	Moment	to	moment
you	live,	moment	to	moment	you	act.
Each	 moment	 is	 complete	 in	 itself.	 You	 do	 not	 decide	 for	 it.	 You	 have	 no
decision	how	 to	act.	The	moment	comes	 to	you,	and	you	act.	There	 is	no	pre-
determination,	there	is	no	pre-plan.
The	moment	comes	to	you.	You	happen	to	the	moment,	and	whatever	comes	out,
let	 it	 come.	More	 and	more	 you	will	 feel	 a	 new	 discipline	 arising	 in	 you	 --	 a
moment-tomoment	discipline.	It	is	a	very	different	dimension,	so	it	will	be	better
to	understand	 it	clearly.	When	you	decide	beforehand	what	 to	do,	 it	 is	because
you	do	not	think	you	are	conscious	enough	to	act	in	the	moment,	spontaneously.
You	are	not	self-confident;	that	is	why	you	decide	beforehand.
And	still	you	are	deciding.	You	cannot	act	in	the	moment,	so	how	can	you	decide
beforehand?	Now	you	are	less	experienced.	You	will	be	more	experienced	when
the	 moment	 comes.	 If	 I	 cannot	 believe	 in	 the	 "me"	 of	 tomorrow,	 how	 can	 I
believe	in	the
"me"	of	today?	And	when	I	have	to	decide	it	beforehand,	it	carries	no	meaning.
It	will	only	be	destructive.
I	decide	today,	and	I	act	tomorrow.	All	has	changed.	Everything	is	new,	and	the
decision	is	old.	And	if	I	do	not	act	according	to	the	moment,	there	is	guilt.	So	all
those	who	teach	deciding	beforehand,	create	guilt.	I	do	not	act,	then	I	feel	guilty.
And	if	I	act,	then	I	cannot	act	adequately,	and	frustration	is	bound	to	follow.
So	I	say	you	have	not	to	commit	yourself	to	any	decision,	and	you	will	be	free.
Let	each	act,	each	moment,	come	to	you,	and	let	your	total	being	decide...	in	that
moment.	Let	the	decision	come	as	the	act	happens.	Never	let	it	precede	the	act,
then	the	act	can	never	be	total.
One	 should	 know	 that	 when	 you	 decide	 beforehand	 you	 decide	 intellectually.
Your	total	being	can	never	be	in	it,	because	the	moment	has	not	come.	If	I	love
someone,	and	I	decide	that	when	I	meet	him	or	her	I	will	act	this	way,	I	will	say
this	thing,	I	will	do	this	and	will	not	do	that,	this	can	only	be	intellectual,	mental.
This	can	never	be	total,	because	the	moment	has	not	arrived.	The	total	being	has
not	been	challenged,	so	how	can	the	total	being	act?
And	when	I	have	decided	beforehand	and	the	moment	comes,	the	total	being	will
not	 be	 able	 to	 act	 because	 the	 decision	 will	 be	 there.	 So	 I	 will	 only	 imitate,
follow,	copy,	the	preceding.	I	will	be	the	false	man.	I	will	not	be	real	because	I
will	not	be	total.	I	will	have	a	blueprint	to	act;	I	will	act	according	to	it.	Again
this	will	be	a	mental	act,	not	with	your	total	being.	So	either	you	succeed	or	you
fail,	yet	in	both	cases	you	have	failed	because	the	total	being	could	not	be	in	it.
You	will	not	feel	love.
So	let	the	moment	come,	let	the	moment	challenge	you,	and	let	your	total	being
act.	 Then	 the	 act	 is	 total.	 Then	 your	 total	 being	 comes	 to	 act.	 Then	 you	 are
totally	 in	 it!	 And	 the	 best	 that	 is	 possible	will	 come	 out	 of	 this	 totalness	 and
never	out	of	the	decisions.	So	sannyas	means	living	moment	to	moment	with	no
commitments	of	the	past.
If	I	give	you	a	mala	and	if	I	give	you	a	robe,	this	is	only	for	your	remembrance,
that	now	you	have	not	to	decide.	It	is	only	to	make	you	remember	that	you	are
not	 the	 old.	 When	 this	 awareness	 becomes	 so	 deep	 that	 you	 do	 not	 need	 to
remember	 it,	 then	 throw	 the	 robe,	 then	 throw	 the	mala.	 If	 it	 comes	 to	 you	 to
throw	 it,	 do	not	make	 it	 a	 decision,	 do	not	make	 it	 a	 commitment	 to	me.	 If	 it
comes	to	you,	then	throw	them,	but	not	unless	the	awareness	has	become	so	deep
that	even	in	sleep	you	know	that	you	are	a	sannyasin.
When	even	in	your	dream	this	ocher	robe	has	come,	then	throw	it.	When	even	in
your	dream	this	ocher	robe	is	there,	then	throw	it.	Then	it	is	meaningless.	If	even
unconsciously	 you	 remember,	 if	 you	 cannot	 forget	 even	 in	 any	 situation,	 then
there	is	no	need.	So	this	is	just	a	device	to	help	you	toward	total	being,	to	help
you	toward	total	action.
And	I	will	go	on	conferring	sannyas	on	each	and	everybody	who	happens	to	be
with	me	even	for	a	single	moment	because,	as	I	have	said,	I	do	not	know	about
tomorrow	at	all.
So	I	cannot	wait.	If	you	come	this	moment,	whatever	is	to	be	done	is	to	be	done.
This	moment	I	cannot	wait.	I	do	not	know	about	tomorrow,	about	what	is	going
to	happen,	and	I	cannot	plan.	So	the	moment	you	are	with	me,	whatever	is	being
done	is	to	be	done	this	very	moment.	It	cannot	be	postponed,	because	there	is	no
future	for	me.
And	this	sannyas	is	not	the	old	sannyas.	It	is	totally	a	new	concept,	or	totally	an
ancient	one	which	has	been	forgotten	completely	--	you	can	call	it	either.	It	is	the
newest	and	the	oldest,	simultaneously,	because	whenever	there	has	been	sannyas,
really,	 it	 has	 been	 such.	 But	 always	 there	 are	 imitators,	 and	 you	 cannot	 deny
them	--	they	are.	There	are	imitators,	and	there	will	always	be.	And	they	make
everything	a	discipline,	because	only	a	discipline	can	be	imitated.
Sannyas	is	something	that	cannot	be	imitated.	Freedom	cannot	be	imitated,	thus
sannyas	can	never	be	imitated.	But	 those	who	are	 imitators,	what	can	they	do?
They	will	make	a	system	out	of	this	--	imitators	always	create	systems.	Anything
other	 than	 sannyas	 they	 do	 not	 destroy	 so	much,	 because	 life	 as	 it	 is	 lived	 is
imitation.	 Imitation	 goes	 on,	 the	 whole	 world	 is	 imitating.	 Your	 whole
upbringing	is	through	imitation	--	in	language,	in	morality,	in	society,	in	culture,
everything	is	through	imitation.	Everything	is	imbibed	through	imitation.
So	imitations	are	successful	everywhere	except	 in	sannyas.	They	destroy	much
here.
They	 cannot	 destroy	 anywhere	 else	 because	 everywhere	 imitation	 is	 the	 rule.
You	cannot	be	free	with	language,	you	must	imitate	it.	You	cannot	be	free	with
social	 structure,	 you	 must	 imitate	 it.	 Imitators	 succeed	 everywhere.	 Only	 in
sannyas	the	dimension	of	total	freedom	is	something	with	which	imitators	grow
very	 destructive,	 because	 its	 very	 dimension	 is	 quite	 opposite.	 Imitation	 will
destroy	 it.	 So	 Jesus	 is	 imitated,	 you	 have	 the	 IMITATION	 OF	 CHRIST.
Whenever	sannyas	is	imitated	there	is	no	sannyas	left.	So	when	I	say	there	is	no
commitment,	I	mean	there	will	be	no	imitation.
You	are	totally	free,	I	will	throw	you	into	an	openness.	That	is	what	is	meant	by
initiation.	 It	 is	not	narrowing	you	down,	 it	 is	giving	you	an	open	sky.	 It	 is	 just
pushing	 you	 to	 fly	 in	 an	 open	 sky.	Of	 course	 there	 are	 no	 routes	 and	 no	 road
maps,	there	cannot	be.	And	there	cannot	be	any	road	in	the	sky.	So	you	have	to
fly	alone,	you	have	to	depend	on	yourself	alone.	Your	existence	will	be	the	sole
company	--	the	only	company.
Life	is	just	like	a	sky.	It	is	not	like	earth	roads,	you	cannot	follow;	following	is
impossible.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 alone.	 Initiation	 means	 that	 now	 I	 push	 you	 into
aloneness.	So	now	you	are	alone	totally,	not	depending	on	anyone,	not	even	me.
It	 requires	 courage.	 To	 imitate	 is	 easy,	 to	 follow	 is	 so	 easy,	 to	 depend	 on
someone	is	easy.	But	to	be	totally	alone	with	no	map,	with	no	discipline,	with	no
system,	is	the	greatest	courage.	And	a	sannyasin	means	one	who	is	courageous.
This	 courage	 is	 not	 something	 which	 can	 be	 imitated,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 developed
through	living.
You	will	err,	you	will	go	astray.	That	is	all	implied	in	it.	But	by	erring	you	will
learn,	and	by	going	astray	you	will	come	to	the	right.	And	there	is	no	other	way.
You	have	 to	pass	 through	arduousness.	This	walking	alone,	 this	 flying	alone...
one	has	to	pass	through	all	this	austerity.	And	this	sannyas	is	different	in	another
sense	also,	because	the	old	sannyas,	the	so-called	sannyas	which	is	prominent,	is
less	 a	 spiritual	 renunciation	 and	 more	 a	 social	 renunciation.	 Even	 the	 social
structure	of	it	is	more	physiological,	less	spiritual.
This	sannyas	is	basically	spiritual.	So	you	can	receive	it	anywhere,	wherever	you
are.	It	demands	involvement	--	inner,	deeper,	spiritual.	And	as	I	see	it,	the	more
you	 are	 involved	 physiologically,	 the	 less	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 to	 go	 deep,
because	once	 involved	with	 the	physiological	you	will	 never	be	out	of	 it.	You
will	never	be	out	of	 it	because	 there	are	 intrinsic	 impossibilities:	 if	someone	 is
trying	 to	 be	 above	desires	 he	 is	 struggling	 for	 something	which	 is	 impossible,
because	desires	are	natural.	Your	body	cannot	exist	without	them.	So	you	will	go
on	clinging	to	the	body,	and	still	desires	will	be	there	--
less,	 of	 course,	 but	 they	will	 be	 there.	 And	 the	weaker	 the	 body,	 the	 less	 the
desires	will	be	strongly	felt.	So	you	can	go	on	weakening,	but	unless	you	die	the
body	will	have	desires.
There	 are	 not	 only	 desires,	 there	 are	 needs.	Needs	 are	 to	 be	 fulfilled,	 and	 the
better	fulfilled,	the	less	they	trouble	you,	the	less	they	demand,	the	less	time	is
needed	for	them.
So	once	you	are	struggling	with	physiological	needs,	you	will	waste	your	whole
life.	 This	 whole	 process,	 this	 whole	 old	 sannyas,	 is	 negative,	 fighting	 against
something.	 Of	 course,	 it	 is	 ego-strengthening.	Whenever	 there	 is	 fight,	 ego	 is
strengthened.	If	you	can	kill	a	desire,	you	may	become	more	egoistic.	If	you	can
deny	 your	 body	 a	 particular	 need,	 you	 become	 more	 egoistic.	 Fight,	 in	 any
manner,	is	always	ego-satisfying	and	ego-fulfilling.
To	me,	sannyas	is	something	positive,	not	negative.	It	is	not	to	deny	your	bodily
needs.	It	 is	not	 to	deny	your	superficial	needs	 it	 is	 to	develop,	 to	grow	in	your
inwardness.	 It	 is	 not	 fighting	 against	 something,	 it	 is	 giving	 all	 your	 energies
toward	 growing	 something.	 Your	 being	 must	 grow	 and	 must	 become	mature.
The	more	your	being	grows,	the	less	you	will	be	your	ego.	And	once	your	being
has	grown,	you	know	what	is	need	and	what	is	desire.
Otherwise	you	can	never	know;	you	can	never	make	a	distinction	between	what
is	a	need	and	what	is	a	desire.
Desire	is	always	mad,	need	is	always	sensible.	If	you	deny	your	needs,	you	are
suicidal.
If	 you	 go	 on	 increasing	 your	 desires,	 again	 you	 are	 suicidal.	 If	 you	 go	 on
denying	your	needs,	you	are	 committing	 suicide.	 If	you	go	on	 increasing	your
desires,	then	again	you	are	committing	suicide,	in	a	different	way.
If	 desires	 become	 too	much,	 if	 desires	 are	 so	 overwhelmingly	 great,	 you	will
become	mad.	The	tension	will	be	unbearable.	If	you	deny	your	needs,	again	you
create	 tensions	 that	will	become	unbearable.	So	 there	are	 two	 types	of	suicidal
minds:	 one	 which	 goes	 on	 denying	 its	 needs,	 and	 one	 which	 goes	 on
transforming	 its	 needs	 into	 desires.	 And	 this	 distinction	 can	 never	 be	 made
outwardly.	No	 one	 else	 can	 decide	 for	 you	what	 is	 the	 desire	 and	what	 is	 the
need.	 Your	 own	 awareness	 will	 be	 the	 measure,	 because	 to	 one,	 something
maybe	a	need	and	to	another	it	may	be	a	desire.	So	no	ready-made	answer	can	be
given.
Only	this	much	can	be	said:	that	without	which	you	cannot	exist	is	the	minimum
definition	of	need.	But	one's	own	awareness	will	decide,	ultimately,	and	that	too
cannot	be	decided	forever	because	today	something	may	be	a	need,	tomorrow	it
may	be	a	desire.
This	moment	it	is	a	need,	and	that	moment	it	may	be	a	desire.	But	once	there	is
positive	 awareness	 in	 you,	 you	 are	 aware	 of	 your	 mind	 and	 its	 cunning	 and
shattering	ways;	once	you	are	aware	of	your	ego,	 its	methods	of	strengthening
itself,	its	methods	of	feeding	itself,	you	will	know	the	distinction.
So	I	am	not	negative.	Sannyas,	neo-sannyas,	is	absolutely	positive.	It	is	to	grow
something	in	you.	I	am	to	give	you	a	positive	attitude	toward	your	being,	not	a
negative	attitude.	You	are	not	to	deny	anything.	Of	course,	many	things	may	be
denied	--	not	by	you,	but	automatically.	As	you	go	more	inward,	you	will	shrink
outwardly.	The	less	one	is	a	being	inwardly,	the	more	he	has	to	substitute	himself
outwardly.	He	will	go	on	spreading.
But	 do	 not	 struggle	with	 your	 spreading,	 outward	 self.	 Struggle	with	 the	 seed
which	 is	you,	which	can	grow	 to	 such	heights	 that	 this	outward	nonsense	will
automatically	fall	down.	Once	you	know	the	inner	riches,	 then	there	is	nothing
which	 is	 comparable	 from	 the	 outside	world.	 Once	 you	 know	 the	 inner	 bliss,
then	enjoyment	is	foolish,	then	all	that	goes	on	in	the	name	of	entertainment	is
foolish,	stupid.	It	just	falls	down	once	you	know	the	inner	ecstasy.	Then	all	that
is	known	as	happiness,	joy,	is	nothing	but	deception.	But	not	before	--	unless	you
have	known	the	inner	happiness	you	cannot	say	that,	and	if	you	say	that	then	you
will	be	in	a	greater	deception.
So	 a	 positive	 attitude	 toward	 sannyas	means	 a	 dimension	 altogether	 different.
You	can	be	where	you	are,	you	can	go	on	doing	whatever	you	are	doing	--	no
outward	change	 is	 immediately	asked	for.	Of	course	 there	will	be	changes,	but
they	will	come.	When	they	come,	let	them	come,	but	do	not	try,	do	not	make	any
effort.	Do	not	force	them	to	come.
And	I	see	more	possibility	for	positive	sannyas,	for	positive	renunciation,	in	the
world	that	is	coming.
That	negative	concept	of	denying	oneself	was	possible	previously	 for	so	many
reasons.
One	 was	 the	 way	 society	 was	 structured.	 All	 the	 agricultural	 societies	 could
allow	some	persons	to	be	completely	without	work.	But	the	more	the	society	is
industrialized,	 the	 less	 will	 be	 the	 possibility	 of	 joint	 families.	 The	 more
individuality,	 the	 less	will	 be	 the	possibility	of	 joint	 families.	Loose	 economic
structure	could	allow	more	joint	families,	but	the	more	planned	the	economy,	the
less	will	be	the	possibility	of	joint	families.	Those	who	were	sadhus	and	monks
seem	to	be	exploiters.	Now	they	cannot	be	respected,	now	they	cannot	exist.	And
as	 I	 see	 it,	 everyone	must	 do	whatever	 he	 can	 do;	 one	must	 contribute	 to	 the
society	in	which	one	exists.	One	should	not	remain	an	exploiter.	One	should	not
be,	and	the	religious	person	cannot	be,	an	exploiter.	And	if	a	religious	person	can
exploit,	then	we	cannot	expect	others	not	to	exploit.
To	me,	a	sannyasin	will	not	be	an	exploiter.	He	will	earn	a	living.	He	will	be	a
producer,	 not	 only	 a	 consumer.	 So	 a	 productive	 concept	 also	 goes	 with	 the
positive.	The	old	concept	of	 the	non-productive	monks	was	well	adjusted	with
the	 negative	 attitude.	 The	 positive	 attitude	 will	 have	 more	 implications.	 For
example,	 the	old	concept	of	sannyas	denied	many	 things.	 It	denied	a	 family,	 it
denied	 sex,	 denied	 love.	 It	 denied	 everything	 that	 contributes	 to	 society's
happiness	 --	 that	 can	 contribute	 to	 your	 own	happiness.	 It	 denied	 --	 I	will	 not
deny.
That	 does	 not	mean	 that	 I	 allow.	When	 I	 say	 I	will	 not	 deny,	 it	 only	means	 a
moment	 can	 come	 when	 a	 person	 becomes	 absolutely	 transcendental	 --	 for
example,	 to	 sex.	 That	 is	 another	 thing,	 that	 is	 not	 a	 requirement	 but	 a
consequence.	It	is	not	needed	before	sannyas,	it	will	come	after	sannyas.	And	I
will	not	make	it	a	guilt	if	it	does	not	come.	The	old	concept	is	very	cruel,	it	was
sadistic	 and	 masochistic	 both.	 Sex	 was	 denied	 because	 sex	 seems	 to	 give	 a
glimpse	of	happiness.
So	 many	 religions	 allowed	 sex	 without	 happiness.	 You	 can	 just	 use	 it	 for
reproduction,	but	you	should	not	have	any	happiness	out	of	it.	Only	then	it	is	not
a	sin.	So	sex	is	not	really	a	sin.	"But	you	should	not	be	happy.	To	be	happy	is	a
sin."	To	me	everything	that	is	given	to	human	beings	is	not	to	be	denied;	it	is	not
to	be	suppressed.	Let	the	inner	flowering	come	first	--	then	you	will	see	that	so
many	 energy	 channels	 have	 changed	 their	 course.	 And	 the	 difference	 will	 be
great.
If	you	deny	sex,	 then	you	have	to	deny	love	also.	Those	sannyasins	who	deny,
will	become	loveless.	They	talk	about	love	but	they	become	loveless.	They	talk
about
"universal	 love."	 It	 is	 always	easier	 to	 talk	about	universal	 love	 than	 to	 love	a
single	individual	--	that	is	more	arduous,	to	love	the	whole	universe	is	so	easy;
nothing	is	involved.	And	one	who	thinks	in	terms	of	denial	will	talk	of	universal
love	and	will	go	on	denying	and	uprooting	individual	feelings.
Religion	that	denies	sex	will	have	to	deny	love,	because	with	love	there	is	every
possibility	 that	 sex	 may	 follow.	 But	 as	 I	 see	 it,	 if	 sex	 is	 not	 denied	 but
transformed	with	your	positive	growth,	then	there	is	no	need	to	deny	love.	You
can	be	loving.	And	unless	you	are	loving,	the	energy	that	may	come	to	you	that
is	not	going	through	the	sex	channel	cannot	be	used.	It	will	become	destructive.
So	to	me	a	growing	love	is	the	only	possibility	of	transcending	sex.
Love	must	grow.	It	must	go	up	to	the	universe,	but	it	must	not	begin	from	there,
it	is	never	from	the	far.	And	one	who	thinks	that	one	should	begin	from	the	far	is
deceiving	himself.	Every	journey	has	to	begin	from	the	near.	The	first	step	that	is
to	be	taken	cannot	be	taken	from	the	far.	One	should	be	a	loving	individual.	And
the	more	one's	 love	grows	deep,	 the	less	he	becomes	sexual	and	the	more	love
will	spread.
So	I	will	not	deny	anything,	because	ultimately	bliss	is	to	be	sought.	Everyone	is
seeking	bliss.	Happiness	 is	not	 to	be	denied,	but	when	there	 is	an	explosion	of
bliss	you	will	know	that	whatever	you	have	been	thinking	as	happiness	was	fake.
But	you	cannot	throw	it	at	this	moment.	Let	the	bliss	come	first.	That	is	what	is
meant	by	positive	growth.	Let	something	come	in	you,	something	greater,	only
then	 the	 lesser	 will	 be	 thrown.	 And	 your	 ego	 will	 not	 be	 strengthened	 by	 it
because	when	you	throw	it,	you	throw	something	useless,	worthless.
All	those	who	claim	renunciation	say	they	left	this	and	that.	They	show	by	this
that	nothing	great	has	been	achieved.	Whatever	they	have	renounced	yet	remains
meaningful.
It	is	there	in	their	memory,	it	is	still	a	part	of	the	mind,	they	are	still	the	owners.
Of	course	they	have	renounced,	but	how	can	one	renounce	something	which	one
does	not	own?	So	if	you	go	on	thinking	about	renunciation,	you	are	still	owning.
In	a	negative	way	you	are	the	owner.
But	once	you	know	a	greater	phenomenon	--	a	greater	bliss,	a	greater	happiness	-
-	 then	you	are	not	 renouncing	 things.	They	just	drop	away,	 just	 like	dry	 leaves
from	the	tree.	No	one	knows	and	no	one	hears,	the	dry	leaves	just	drop.	The	tree
remains	oblivious	to	it	and	there	is	no	wound	left	behind.	So,	to	me,	everything
has	a	moment	to	happen,	a	moment	of	ripeness	--	ripeness	is	all.	One	must	ripen;
otherwise	 one	 will	 be	 wandering	 unnecessarily	 and	 harassing	 himself
unnecessarily	and	destroying	himself	unnecessarily.
One	should	ripen,	then	the	opportunity	comes	by	itself.
So	renunciation	is	through	positive	growth.	That	is	what	I	mean	by	my	sannyas	-
-
renunciation	through	positive	growth.	There	is	no	negativity	at	all,	no	denial,	no
suppression.
I	accept	the	human	being	as	he	is.	Of	course,	now	much	is	potential,	but	as	he	is,
he	 is	not	 to	be	condemned.	There	 is	nothing	 to	be	condemned.	He	 is	 the	seed,
and	if	you	condemn	the	seed,	how	can	you	acclaim	the	tree?	I	accept	the	human
being	as	he	is	--	totally,	with	no	denial	at	all.	Only	I	do	not	say	that	this	is	all	he
can	be,	that	this	is	the	end.	I	only	say	that	this	is	the	beginning.	The	human	being
is	only	a	 seed	which	can	grow	 into	a	great	 tree,	which	can	grow	 into	divinity.
Each	human	being	can	be	a	god.	But	now,	as	he	is,	he	is	only	a	seed.	The	seed	is
to	 be	 protected,	 the	 seed	 is	 to	 be	 loved,	 and	 the	 seed	 is	 to	 be	 given	 every
opportunity	to	grow.
Sannyas	means	that	you	have	come	to	realize	that	you	are	a	seed,	a	potentiality.
This	is	not	the	end.	This	is	only	the	beginning,	and	now	you	must	decide	to	go
into	that	growth.
That	growth	comes	through	freedom,	that	growth	comes	through	insecurity.	You
see	 a	 seed	 --	 very	 secure.	 A	 tree	 is	 not	 so	 secure.	 The	 seed	 is	 closed,	 closed
completely.	 The	 moment	 the	 seed	 dies	 and	 the	 tree	 begins	 to	 grow,	 the
potentiality	begins	to	be	activated.
There	are	dangers	 --	 insecurity	will	be	 there,	 there	will	be	every	possibility	of
destruction,	a	very	delicate	 thing	 fighting	against	 the	whole	universe.	But	now
you	are	only	a	seed,	there	is	no	danger.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	now	you	take	the	decision	to	grow.	And	this	is	the	last
decision.
Now	 you	 will	 have	 to	 struggle,	 now	 you	 will	 have	 insecurity,	 you	 will	 have
dangers,	 and	 you	 will	 have	 to	 fight	 and	 face	 them	moment	 to	 moment.	 This
moment-to-moment	fight	and	struggle,	this	fighting	into	the	unknown,	this	fight
for	the	unknown,	this	living	in	the	unknown,	is	the	real	renunciation.
To	decide	to	grow	is	a	great	renunciation	--	a	renunciation	of	the	security	that	is
given	to	the	seed,	a	renunciation	of	the	wholeness	that	is	given	to	the	seed.	But
this	security	is	at	a	very	great	cost.	The	seed	is	dead,	it	is	only	potentially	living.
It	can	live,	or	it	can	remain	dead.	Unless	it	grows,	becomes	a	tree,	it	is	dead.	And
as	far	as	I	know,	human	beings,	unless	 they	decide	 to	grow,	unless	 they	 take	a
jump	into	the	unknown,	are	like	seeds	--
dead,	closed.
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 is	 to	 take	 a	 decision	 to	 grow,	 to	 take	 a	 decision	 to	 go	 into
dangers,	to	take	a	decision	to	live	in	indecision.	This	seems	paradoxical.	It	is	not.
One	 has	 to	 begin	 somewhere,	 and	 even	 to	 live	 indecisively	 one	 has	 to	 have	 a
decision	somewhere.	Even	to	go	into	insecurity	is	going	somewhere,	and	one	has
to	decide	it.	I	help	your	decision	and	create	a	situation	in	which	you	can	make	a
decision.	This	neo-sannyas	can	go	to	the	very	core	of	the	world.	It	can	reach	to
everyone	because	nothing	special	is	needed	--	only	understanding.
Another	 thing	 I	would	 like	 to	 explain	 is	 that	 this	 sannyas	 is	 not	 bound	 to	 any
religion.	 On	 this	 earth	 every	 type	 of	 sannyas	 has	 been	 part	 and	 parcel	 of	 a
particular	religion,	a	particular	sect.	That	 too	is	 is	a	part	of	a	security	measure.
You	renounce,	yet	you	belong.
You	say,	"I	have	left	the	society,"	yet	you	belong	to	the	sect.	You	go	on	being	a
Hindu,	a	Moslem	or	a	Sikh.	You	go	on	being	something.
Really,	sannyas	means	to	be	religious	and	not	to	be	bound	to	any	religion.	Again,
it	 is	 a	 great	 jump	 into	 the	 unknown.	 Religions	 are	 known,	 but	 religion	 is	 the
unknown.	 A	 sect	 has	 systems,	 religion	 has	 no	 system.	 A	 sect	 has	 scriptures;
religion	has	only	existence,	no	scriptures.	This	sannyas	 is	existential,	 religious,
nonsectarian.
That	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 this	 sannyas	 will	 deny	 a	 Mohammedan
Mohammedanism,	 that	 this	 sannyas	will	deny	a	Christian	Christianity	 --	no!	 It
means,	 really,	 quite	 the	 reverse.	 It	 means	 it	 will	 give	 the	 Christians	 the	 real
Christianity.	It	will	give	the	Hindu	the	real	Hinduism,	because	the	deeper	you	go
into	 the	 Hindu	 religion,	 ultimately	 the	 Hinduism	 will	 drop	 and	 you	 will	 find
religiousness	only.	The	deeper	 you	go	 into	Christianity,	 the	 less	 it	will	 be	 like
Christianity	and	 the	more	 like	religion.	At	once,	you	reach	 to	 the	center	of	 the
religion.
So	when	I	say	by	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	belong	to	no	religion	as	such,	I	do
not	mean	that	you	are	denying	Christianity	or	Hinduism	or	Jainism.	You	are	only
denying	 the	 dead	 part	 that	 has	 become	 burdensome	 in	 religion.	 You	 are	 only
denying	 the	 dead	 tradition,	 and	 you	 are	 uncovering	 and	 discovering	 again	 the
living	 current,	 the	 living	 current	 behind	 all	 the	 dead	 --	 dead	 traditions,	 dead
scriptures,	dead	gurudoms,	dead	churches.
You	are	again	finding	the	living	current.	It	is	always	there	but	it	is	always	to	be
rediscovered;	each	one	has	to	discover	it	again.	It	cannot	be	transferred,	it	cannot
be	transmitted.	No	one	can	give	it	to	you.	Whatever	has	been	given	will	be	dead.
You	will	have	to	dig	it	deep	within	yourself,	otherwise	you	never	find	it.	So	I	am
not	 giving	 you	 a	 religion,	 I	 am	 giving	 you	 only	 the	 push	 to	 find	 the	 living
current.	It	will	be	your	own	finding,	and	it	can	never	be	anyone	else's.	So	I	am
not	transmitting	anything	to	you.
There	is	a	parable....
Buddha	comes	one	day	with	a	flower	in	his	hand.	He	is	to	give	a	sermon,	but	he
remains	silent.	Those	who	have	come	to	listen	to	him	begin	to	wonder	what	he	is
doing.	Time	is	passing.	It	has	never	happened	like	this	--	what	is	he	doing?	They
wonder	whether	he	is	going	to	speak	or	not.	Then	someone	asks,	"What	are	you
doing?	Have	you	forgotten	that	we	have	come	to	listen	to	you?"
Buddha	 says,	 "I	 have	 communicated	 something.	 I	 have	 communicated
something	which	cannot	be	communicated	through	words.	Have	you	heard	it	or
not?"
No	one	has	heard	it.	But	one	disciple	--	a	very	unknown	disciple,	known	here	for
the	first	time,	a	bhikkhu	named	Mahakashyapa	--	laughs	heartily.	Buddha	says,
"Mahakashyapa,	come	 to	me.	 I	give	you	 this	 flower,	and	I	declare	 that	all	 that
could	 be	 given	 through	 words	 I	 have	 given	 to	 you	 all.	 That	 which	 is	 really
meaningful,	which	cannot	be	given	through	words,	I	give	to	Mahakashyapa."
So	Zen	tradition	has	been	asking	again	and	again,	"But	what	was	transmitted	to
Mahakashyap?"	--	a	transmission	without	words.	What	has	Buddha	said?	What
has	 Mahakashyapa	 heard?	 And	 whenever	 there	 is	 someone	 who	 knows,	 he
laughs	again,	and	 the	story	remains	a	mystery.	When	someone	understands,	he
laughs	again.	Wherever	there	are	persons	who	are	scholars,	who	know	much	and
who	know	nothing,	they	will	discuss	what	has	been	told,	they	will	decide	about
what	has	been	heard.	But	someone	who	knows	will	laugh.
Bankei,	 a	 great	Zen	 teacher,	 said,	 "Buddha	 said	 nothing.	Mahakashyapa	 heard
nothing."
So	someone	asks,	"Buddha	said	nothing?"
"Yes,"	Bankei	said.	"Yes,	nothing	was	said;	nothing	was	heard.	It	was	said,	and	it
was	heard.	I	am	a	witness."
So	someone	said,	"You	were	not	there."
So	Bankei	said,	"I	need	not	have	been	there.	When	nothing	was	communicated,
no	 one	 is	 needed	 to	 be	 a	 witness.	 I	 was	 not	 there,	 and	 yet	 I	 am	 a	 witness."
Someone	laughed,	and	Bankei	said,	"He	was	also	a	witness."
The	living	current	cannot	be	communicated.	It	is	always	there,	but	you	have	to
go	to	 it.	 It	 is	nearby,	 just	by	the	corner.	It	 is	 in	you,	you	are	 the	living	current.
But	you	have	never	been	in.	Your	attention	has	always	been	out,	you	have	been
out-oriented.	You	have	become	 fixed.	Your	 focus	has	become	deadly	 fixed,	 so
you	cannot	conceive	of	what	it	means	to	be	in.	Even	when	you	try	to	be	in,	you
just	close	your	eyes	and	go	on	being	out.
To	be	in	means	to	be	in	a	state	of	mind	where	there	is	no	out	and	where	there	is
no	in.	To	be	in	means	there	is	no	boundary	between	you	and	the	all.	When	there
is	nothing	out,	 only	 then	you	come	 to	 the	 inner	 current.	And	once	you	have	a
glimpse,	you	are	transformed.	You	know	something	which	is	incomprehensible,
you	know	something	which	 intellect	cannot	comprehend,	you	know	something
which	intellect	cannot	communicate.
But	 yet	 one	 has	 to	 communicate	 --	 even	with	 a	 flower,	 even	with	 a	 laugh.	 It
makes	no	difference,	they	are	gestures.	Does	it	make	any	difference	if	I	use	my
lips	or	if	I	use	my	hands	with	a	flower?	Just	the	gesture	is	new,	so	it	disturbs	you.
Otherwise,	 it	 is	 as	much	 a	 gesture	 as	 any	 lip	moving.	 I	make	 a	 sound,	 it	 is	 a
gesture.	I	remain	silent,	it	is	a	gesture.
But	 the	 gesture	 is	 new,	 unknown	 to	 you,	 so	 you	 think	 something	 is	 different.
Nothing	is	different.	The	 living	current	cannot	be	communicated,	yet	has	 to	be
communicated	--
somehow	has	to	be	indicated,	somehow	has	to	be	shown.
So	the	moment	someone	becomes	ready	to	take	sannyas,	it	is	a	decision	for	him
toward	a	great	search,	and	it	is	a	gesture	to	me	that	he	is	ready	to	take	a	jump.
And	when	someone	is	ready	to	change,	to	lose	an	old	identity,	to	be	reborn	into	a
new	 being...	 When	 someone	 is	 ready,	 he	 need	 not	 be	 qualified;	 it	 makes	 no
difference.	 This	 readiness	 is	 the	 qualification.	 When	 someone	 is	 ready,	 I	 am
ready	to	push.	It	is	not	necessary	that	he	should	reach,	but	is	it	not	a	wonder	that
he	should	begin?
That	is	not	the	point	--	that	he	should	reach	is	not	the	point	at	all.	But	one	begins.
This	beginning	is	something	which	is	great.	Reaching	is	not	so	great.	Beginning
is	 great	 because	 whenever	 someone	 reaches,	 he	 is	 capable.	 And	 whenever
someone	 begins,	 he	 is	 not	 capable.	 You	 understand	 me?	 Whenever	 someone
begins,	he	is	incapable.	So	the	beginning	is	the	miracle.
A	Buddha	is	not	a	miracle.	He	is	capable,	so	he	reaches.	It	 is	so	mathematical,
there	is	no	miracle.	But	when	someone	comes	to	me	with	all	his	desires,	with	all
his	 longings,	 with	 all	 his	 limitations	 and	 thinks	 to	 begin,	 it	 is	 a	miracle.	 And
when	 I	 have	 to	 choose	 between	 Buddha	 and	 him,	 I	 will	 choose	 him.	He	 is	 a
miracle,	so	incapable	and	so	courageous.
So	 I	am	not	concerned	at	all	with	what	end	you	achieve.	 I	am	only	concerned
with	the	beginning.	You	begin,	and	I	know	once	there	is	the	beginning,	the	end	is
half	in	hand.
The	beginning	is	the	thing.	Once	there	is	a	beginning,	you	will	go	on	growing.
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 a	 day	 or	 two	 days,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 time.	 It	may
happen	 at	 the	 next	moment,	 it	may	 not	 happen	 for	many	 births,	 but	 once	 you
have	begun	you	will	not	be	the	same	again.	This	very	decision	to	take	sannyas	is
such	a	miracle	of	 change.	For	births	continuing	you	may	not	 achieve,	but	you
will	not	be	the	same	again.	This	will	come	again	and	recur	again.
This	remembrance	of	taking	the	decision	of	freedom	will	be	there	always	amidst
all	your	slaveries,	amidst	all	your	bondages.	This	decision	to	be	free,	this	longing
to	be	free,	this	longing	to	transcend,	will	be	there	waiting	for	the	opportunity.	So
how	can	I	deny	anyone	a	beginning?	And	whom	do	I	have	to	ask	whether	he	is
qualified	or	not?	If	God	himself	allows	you	existence,	life,	and	never	asks	you,
"Are	you	qualified?"	who	am	I	to	ask?
I	am	not	giving	you	life,	I	am	not	giving	you	existence,	I	am	just	giving	you	a
conversion.
When	 God	 is	 ready	 to	 give	 you	 life,	 you	 must	 be	 qualified	 with	 all	 your
limitations	and	weaknesses.	He	allows	you	to	exist.	You	must	be	precious,	even
in	 the	 divine's	 eyes	 you	 must	 be	 precious.	 So	 who	 am	 I	 to	 deny	 you	 the
beginning?	 But	 gurus	 sometimes	 become	 even	 wiser	 than	 God	 himself.	 They
decide	who	 is	qualified	and	who	 is	not.	Even	God	comes	 to	 them	--	 then	 they
will	decide	who	is	qualified	and	who	is	not.	And	whenever	anyone	comes,	God
is	coming.	So	do	not	laugh:	whenever	anyone	comes,	God	is	coming,	because	no
one	else	can	come.
So	who	am	I	to	deny	someone	when	he	comes	to	me?	He	may	not	know	it,	he
may	not	be	aware	of	it,	but	I	am	aware	of	it	--	that	God	is	in	search	of	himself.
So	 I	 cannot	 deny	 him,	 I	 can	 just	 rejoice	 in	 his	 beginning.	 That	 is	 why	 no
distinction	 is	made,	no	qualification	 is	 required.	And	 this	 sannyas	 is	needed	at
the	 moment	 for	 the	 whole	 humanity.	 The	 whole	 humanity	 needs	 it.	We	 have
become	 so	 unaware	 of	 the	 living	 current,	we	 have	 become	 so	 unaware	 of	 the
divinity	within	and	without,	that	each	one	should	be	made	aware.
Otherwise,	 the	 situation	has	 fallen	 so	 low	 that	 it	may	not	 be	possible	 to	 come
back	for	a	century.	It	has	been	going	on	and	on.
Darwin	 thought	 that	 we	 were	 animals;	 now	 they	 think	 that	 we	 are	 automata.
Animals	have	souls	at	least!	They	had;	now	we	have	not.	And	soon	we	will	not
be	such	efficient	automata	either,	because	better	computers	will	be	there,	better
mechanisms	 will	 be	 there;	 not	 only	 will	 you	 be	 only	 a	 machine,	 but	 a	 very
ordinary	one.
This	 is	 the	 belief	 --	 this	 is	 not	 knowledge	 --	 this	 is	 the	 belief	which	 has	 been
forced	on	the	human	mind	for	three	centuries.	Now	it	has	become	prominent.	It
is	as	much	a	belief	as	any	belief.	It	makes	no	difference	that	science	is	in	support
of	it,	it	is	a	belief.	And	once	humanity	begins	to	believe	it,	it	will	be	difficult	to
revive	human	souls.
So	the	days	that	are	coming,	the	last	part	of	this	century,	will	be	very	definitive.
The	 last	part	of	 this	century	will	decide	 the	 fate	 for	centuries	 to	come.	This	 is
going	to	be	definitive	--	definitive	in	the	sense	that	the	belief	that	human	beings
are	 only	 machines,	 natural	 mechanical	 devices,	 will	 become	 prevalent.	When
this	belief	is	prevalent,	it	will	be	very	difficult	to	come	to	that	lost	hidden	current
again.	 It	 will	 go	 on	 becoming	 more	 difficult;	 even	 today	 it	 has	 become	 so
difficult.	 There	 are	 so	 few	 people	 in	 this	 world	 who	 really	 know	 the	 living
current	--	they	can	be	counted	on	the	fingers.
All	those	who	talk	are	only	talking.	Very	few	people	really	know,	and	each	day
the	number	is	falling	down.	Those	who	know	are	not	being	replaced	again.	Each
day	 there	are	 fewer	and	 fewer	people	who	know	 the	 living	current,	who	know
the	reality	behind,	who	know	consciousness,	who	know	the	divine.
This	century,	this	last	part	of	the	century,	will	be	decisive.	So	those	who	are	in
any	way	 ready	 to	 begin,	 I	will	 initiate	 them.	 If	 ten	 thousand	 are	 initiated	 and
even	one	reaches	the	goal,	the	trouble	is	worth	taking.	And	all	those	who	come
to	 know	 something	 of	 this	 inner	world,	 I	would	 ask	 them	 to	 go	 and	 knock	 at
every	 door,	 and	 tell	 them	 to	 stand	 on	 the	 roofs,	 and	 proclaim	 that	 something
blissful,	that	something	immortal,	that	something	divine,	is.
Be	 a	 witness,	 go	 and	 be	 a	 witness	 to	 it;	 otherwise	 the	mechanical	 belief	 will
become	prevalent.	 It	 is	 easier	 to	 check	 it	 now,	 it	will	 not	be	 easy	 to	 replace	 it
afterwards.	And	the	mind	is	 in	a	way	plastic,	more	plastic	 today	--	ready	to	be
molded	in	any	mold.	Because	all	the	old	beliefs	have	been	taken	away,	the	mind
is	 vacant	 and	 thirsty	 to	 belong	 anywhere	 --	 even	 to	 a	mechanical	 belief.	 Any
nonsense	 which	 can	 give	 you	 a	 feeling	 of	 belonging,	 which	 can	 give	 you	 a
feeling	of	knowing	that	you	know	what	reality	is,	will	be	caught.	And	the	human
mind	will	become	tethered	to	it.
So	not	a	single	moment	is	to	be	wasted.	Those	who	know	even	a	bit,	those	who
have	 even	 a	 glimpse,	 should	 talk	 about	 it	 to	 others.	 And	 this	 last	 part	 of	 this
century	is	not	so	small	as	it	seems.	It	is	a	big	one,	and	in	a	way,	bigger	even	than
centuries.	Because	the	speed	of	change	is	so	great,	these	thirty	years	are	just	like
thirty	centuries.	What	could	not	be	done	in	thirty	centuries	can	be	done	in	thirty
years,	in	three	decades.	The	rapidity	of	change	is	such	that	the	time	which	looks
small	is	not	small.
There	are	 three	beliefs	which	are	going	 to	kill,	which	are	going	 to	destroy	 the
last	bridge	between	humanity	and	the	divine	undercurrent.	One	is	the	belief	that
mind	 is	 just	 a	 machine.	 The	 second	 is	 communism	 --	 that	 man	 and	 man's
relationship	to	society	is	just	an	economic	phenomenon.	Then	there	is	no	heart,
then	man	 is	 not	 decisive	 --	 the	 economic	 is	 decisive.	 Then	man	 is	 just	 in	 the
hands	of	economic	forces,	blind	forces.
Then	 consciousness	 is	 not	 decisive,	 but	 social	 structure	 is	 decisive.	Marx	 says
that	 it	 is	 not	 consciousness	 which	 determines	 society,	 but	 society	 which
determines	consciousness.
Then	consciousness	is	nothing.	If	it	is	not	decisive,	it	is	not.
And	 thirdly,	 there	 is	 the	 concept	 of	 irrationality.	 The	 three	 are:	 the	Darwinian
concept	 which	 has	 turned	 into	 the	 belief	 of	 the	 human	 machine,	 the	 Marxist
concept	 which	 has	 turned	 consciousness	 into	 an	 epiphenomenon	 of	 economic
forces,	 and	 the	Freudian	 concept	of	 irrationality	 --	 that	man	 is	 in	 the	hands	of
natural	 forces,	 instinct.	 He	 has	 to	 do	 whatsoever	 he	 does,	 and	 there	 is	 no
consciousness	but	only	an	illusory	notion	that	we	are	conscious.
In	 these	 three	 concepts	 the	 religions	 are	 not	 prevalent.	 Neither	 is
Mohammedanism	 a	 prevalent	 religion,	 nor	 Christianity	 nor	 Hinduism	 nor
Buddhism.	Neither	is	Buddha	a	prophet	now,	nor	Mahavira	nor	Mohammed	nor
Christ.	Today's	prophets	are	Freud,	Darwin	and	Marx.	All	these	three	are	against
freedom,	and	all	these	three	are	against	immortality.
So	I	will	go	on	pushing	everyone	into	the	inner	world,	hoping	of	course,	hoping
against	 hope,	 that	 someone	may	 come	 to	 the	 living	 current,	 the	 satchitananda,
and	may	be	able	to	express	it	through	his	total	being	--	to	live	it.	If	even	a	few
people	can	be	found	to	live	it	now,	the	whole	course	of	the	humanity	that	is	to
come	 will	 be	 changed.	 But	 this	 can	 only	 happen	 not	 through	 teaching,	 but
through	living.	That	is	why	I	insist	on	sannyas,	it	is	a	beginning	to	living.
I	 insist	 on	 it	 also	 in	 another	 sense.	 You	 may	 say,	 "If	 no	 outward	 change	 is
needed,	 then	why	change	the	robe?	Why	change	the	name?"	I	want	sannyas	 to
become	infectious.	For	you,	it	helps	you	to	remember.	For	others,	it	begins	from
a	point	where	they	can	think	about	it.	They	can	be	for	or	against	it,	they	cannot
be	indifferent	to	it.	Your	colored	robe,	the	moment	someone	sees	it,	he	will	either
be	for	it	or	against	it;	no	one	can	be	indifferent.	He	will	think	about	it;	if	not,	he
will	 laugh	about	it.	He	will	either	 think	that	someone	has	renounced	or	he	will
think	someone	has	gone	mad,	but	he	will	begin	to	think.	And	if	these	robes	go	on
striking,	if	a	person	has	to	come	in	contact	with	these	robes	daily,	so	many	times,
they	are	going	 to	become	infectious.	He	cannot	continue	neglecting	 it.	He	will
have	to	decide	something	about	it.
I	want	religion	to	become	a	current	dialogue.	It	 is	not	a	current	dialogue	at	all.
No	one	talks	about	it.	Everyone	talks	about	politics;	no	one	talks	about	religion.
If	 someone	 talks	 about	 it,	 others	only	 tolerate	 it	 out	of	 etiquette.	They	preach,
hear	or	 listen	only	 as	 a	 social	 duty,	 as	 a	Sunday	 affair.	No	one	 takes	 any	 care
what	is	happening	to	his	innermost	soul.
So	 religion	 has	 to	 be	 made	 a	 current	 topic,	 a	 current	 dialogue.	 Every	 means
should	be	used,	and	it	should	be	a	living	symbol.
Wherever	you	go,	you	create	waves	of	thinking,	waves	of	emotion.	Even	by	your
passing,	just	your	passing,	you	create	a	wave,	an	atmosphere,	a	situation.	That	is
why	I	insist	on	change.	There	are	other	reasons	also.	The	ocher	color	helps	in	so
many	ways,	because	each	color	has	its	own	wavelength,	each	color	has	its	own
absorption	 capacity.	You	 cannot	 be	 the	 same	 in	 differently	 colored	 robes.	You
will	be	different.
When	 you	 are	 in	 a	white	 robe,	 you	 cannot	 be	 the	 same	 as	when	 you	 are	 in	 a
black	robe.
With	the	black	you	will	feel	sadness,	crippling	all	around	you,	in	you.	You	will
become	 sad	 unknowingly.	 In	 this	 world,	 in	 this	 existence,	 nothing	 is
meaningless,	 everything	 carries	 a	 meaning.	 Everything	 carries	 a	 particular
atmosphere	with	it.
The	ocher	color	is	chosen	for	so	many	reasons.	One	reason	is	that	it	makes	you
feel	 just	 like	 the	 sunrise	 in	 the	morning;	 it	 is	 the	 color	 of	 the	 sun	 rising.	 The
whole	atmosphere	becomes	alive,	worth	seeing.	Everything	becomes	alive.	The
rays	that	come	are	ocher	colored.	They	create	a	living	atmosphere	--	something
alive	and	vibrating.	So	this	color	was	chosen	in	order	that	you	might	vibrate	with
divinity.	You	must	be	alive	with	divinity.
No	sadness	shall	have	any	shelter	in	you,	no	sorrow	should	be	allowed	to	have
any	shelter.
You	must	be	in	a	dancing	mood	twenty-four	hours	--	it	is	the	dancing	color.	And
it	 conserves	 the	 same	 atmosphere	 around	 your	 body,	 just	 like	 in	 the	morning.
The	whole	day,	it	conserves.	If	you	can	feel	it,	cooperate	with	it,	you	will	know	a
great	difference.
And	when	 one	 is	 wearing	 ocher,	 it	 is	 one	 thing;	 when	 thousands	wear	 it,	 the
result	is	altogether	different.	The	quantity	changes	the	quality.
Buddha	 will	 come	 to	 a	 city	 with	 ten	 thousand	 ocher-colored	 bhikkhus.	 The
whole	city	is	surrounded	with	a	new	atmosphere,	it	is	a	great	attack!	The	whole
day	the	village	is	as	fresh	as	in	the	morning,	everywhere	is	the	ocher	color.	Each
moment,	everyone	is	remembering.	The	ocher	has	a	psychological	association.
You	know	that	the	policeman,	when	he	is	off	duty	and	not	wearing	his	uniform,
is	 an	 ordinary	 person.	 You	 will	 see	 the	 change	 even	 in	 his	 face	 --	 he	 is	 so
ordinary.	When	he	is	in	uniform,	he	is	someone	else	--	quite	a	different	person.
He	is	not	the	same	man,	his	whole	behavior	will	be	different.	He	will	stand	in	a
different	way,	he	will	walk	in	a	different	way.
The	ocher	color	has	become	associated	with	sannyas.	It	was	used	for	so	long,	for
thousands	and	 thousands	of	years.	 It	has	become	a	part	of	 the	collective	mind.
And	you	should	know	sannyas	is	originally	an	oriental	concept;	it	dawned	first
on	 the	 oriental	 mind.	 For	 at	 least	 ten	 thousand	 years	 the	 Orient	 has	 used	 the
ocher	color.	In	your	so	many	lives,	 the	ocher	color	has	been	worn	as	a	robe	of
the	sannyasin,	It	is	part	of	your	collective	mind,	of	your	collective	unconscious.
It	is	a	great	association.
So	once	you	use	it,	then	the	whole	ancient	collective	mind	is	revived	again.	Your
memories	come	up	again	and	surround	you.	They	change	your	personality,	they
change	you.	They	change	 the	 inner	structure	of	your	mind.	So	 it	 is	possible	 to
use	another	color,	but	 it	 is	difficult	 to	create	 the	 same	association	with	 it	now,
and	the	time	is	short	and	the	moment	is	crucial.
So	many	have	asked	me,	why	ocher?	Why	not	a	new	color?	A	new	color	can	be
used,	but	 it	will	not	be	useful.	 If	 I	had	 ten	 thousand	years	ahead	of	me,	 then	I
would	change	the	color,	but	the	time	is	short	and	decisive	and	crucial	and	a	great
crisis	is	to	be	faced.	So	I	will	use	your	many	births.
And	if	you	think	that	when	someone	comes	to	me	I	will	just	give	him	sannyas,	it
is	not	so.	I	may	say	that	I	gave	sannyas,	to	anyone	who	came	to	me,	but	it	is	not
just	so.	It	looks	so,	but	it	is	not	just	so.	The	moment	anyone	comes	to	me,	I	know
much	about	him	that	he	has	not	known	about	himself	even.
Yesterday,	someone	came	to	me	in	the	morning,	and	I	told	her	to	take	sannyas.
She	was	bewildered.	She	said	to	give	her	time	to	think	and	decide,	at	least	two
days.	I	said	to	her,
"Who	 knows	 about	 two	 days?	 So	 much	 you	 require...	 take	 it	 today,	 this
moment."	But	she	was	not	decisive,	so	I	gave	her	 two	days.	The	next	morning
she	came	and	took	it.	She	has	not	taken	two	days,	only	one	day.	I	ask	her,	"Why?
You	 have	 been	 given	 two	 days,	why	 have	 you	 come	 so	 soon?"	 She	 said,	 "At
three	o'	clock	at	night,	suddenly	I	was	awake,	and	something	went	deep	within
me	telling	me,	`Go	take	sannyas.'"
It	is	not	a	decision	that	she	has	made,	but	a	decision	that	has	been	made	by	her
very	 deep-rooted	mind.	 But	 the	moment	 she	 came	 in	 the	 room	 I	 knew	 her,	 I
knew	that	mind	which	she	came	to	know	twenty	hours	later.
So	when	 I	 say	 take	 sannyas,	 there	 are	 so	many	 reasons	 with	 every	 person	 to
whom	I	 tell	 it.	Either	he	has	been	a	sannyasin	in	 the	last	 life,	or	somewhere	in
the	long	journey	he	has	been	a	sannyasin.
I	had	given	her	another	name	yesterday,	but	 today	I	had	to	change	it	because	I
gave	her	that	name	in	her	indecision.	Now	I	am	giving	her	a	different	name	that
will	be	a	help	to	her.	When	she	came	this	morning,	she	herself	was	decided.	That
other	 name	 was	 not	 needed	 at	 all.	 And	 I	 have	 given	 her	 the	 name	Ma	 Yoga
Vivek,	because	now	the	decision	has	come	through	her	vivek	--	her	awareness,
her	consciousness.
Ma	Yoga	Tao	is	here,	for	example.	She	has	been	thrice	a	sannyasin.	I	have	given
her	the	name	Tao	because	in	a	past	life	she	was	Chinese	and	a	Taoist	monk.	She
might	not	know	it,	but	I	have	given	her	the	name	Tao.	Someday	she	remembers,
and	 then	 she	 will	 know	 why	 I	 have	 given	 her	 a	 Chinese	 name.	 Now	 it	 is
irrelevant,	but	the	moment	she	will	remember	that	she	had	been	a	Taoist	monk,
she	will	know	why	the	name	was	given	to	her.
Everything	is	meaningful.	It	may	not	be	so	obvious,	and	it	may	not	be	possible
to	explain	it	to	you.	So	many	things	will	remain	unexplained	for	a	much	longer
time,	but	the	more	you	become	receptive,	the	more	I	will	be	able	to	explain.	The
deeper	 your	 capacities	 to	 be	 sympathetic,	 the	 deeper	 the	 truth	 that	 can	 be
revealed.	The	more	rational	the	discussion,	the	less	the	truth	that	can	be	revealed,
because	only	less	significant	truths	can	be	given	any	proof	with	reason.	Deeper
truth	cannot	be	given	any	proof	with	reason.
So	unless	I	feel	that	you	are	so	sympathetic	that	reason	will	not	come	in.	I	cannot
tell	you.
I	 have	 to	 remain	 silent	 on	 so	 many	 points	 --	 not	 because	 I	 am	 withholding
anything	from	you,	but	because	it	will	not	be	helpful	to	you,	and	on	the	contrary
it	may	prove	harmful.
I	Am	the	Gate
Chapter	#3
Chapter	 title:	 Occult	 devices	 and	 the	 spiritual	 search	 18	 April	 1971	 am	 in
Bombay,	India
Archive
code:
7104180
ShortTitle:
GATE03
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 THE	 LAST	 SITTING	 YOU	 SPOKE	 ABOUT	 THE	 MALA,	 ABOUT
CHANGING
THE	COLOR	OF	THE	CLOTHING,	ABOUT	CHANGING	THE	NAME,	AND
THE
REASONS	 FOR	 THESE	 THINGS.	 WHY	 DO	 YOU	 WISH	 YOUR	 OWN
PICTURE	TO
BE	 WORN	 AROUND	 THE	 NECK,	 ESPECIALLY	 WHEN	 YOU	 DENY
BEING	A	GURU?
I	deny	being	a	guru,	but	I	do	not	deny	your	being	a	disciple.	One	should	never	be
a	 guru,	 but	 discipleship	 is	 something	 without	 which	 nothing	 is	 possible.	 And
when	there	is	no	guru,	then	discipleship	is	something	inner	--	an	inner	discipline.
Both	these	words	come	from	the	same	root.	'Discipleship'	means	a	mind	which	is
ready	to	seek,	search,	 learn	--	a	mind	which	 is	open	and	vulnerable.	So	I	deny
being	a	guru,	but	I	do	not	deny	your	being	a	disciple.
Another	point...	the	mala	with	a	picture	has	so	many	reasons	behind	it.	One,	the
picture	is	not	mine.	Had	it	been	mine,	I	would	have	hesitated	to	put	it	there.	No
one	would	be	courageous	enough	to	put	his	own	picture.	Everyone	would	think
of	 putting	 it	 there,	 but	 no	 one	would	 put	 it	 there.	The	 picture	 only	 appears	 as
mine,	 it	 is	 not.	 No	 picture	 of	 me	 is	 possible	 really.	 The	 moment	 one	 knows
himself,	 one	 knows	 he	 is	 something	 which	 cannot	 be	 depicted,	 described,
framed.	 I	 exist	 as	 an	 emptiness	 which	 cannot	 be	 pictured,	 which	 cannot	 be
photographed.	That	is	why	I	could	put	the	picture	there.
Two	or	three	things	more	are	to	be	understood.	The	more	you	know	that	picture,
the	more	you	concentrate	on	it,	the	more	you	come	in	tune	with	it,	then	the	more
you	will	feel	what	I	am	saying.	The	more	you	concentrate	on	it,	the	more	there
will	not	be	the	first	question	about	the	picture.	And	the	moment	you	remember
me,	even	unknowingly,	in	a	way	I	am	there.	But	this	you	will	come	to	experience
by	and	by.
So	many	more	 reasons	 are	 there,	 but	 I	will	 not	 talk	 about	 them.	This	much	 is
enough.
Other	reasons	will	be	revealed,	and	it	is	better	that	they	should	not	be	revealed
now.
There	 are	 things	 which	 should	 not	 be	 talked	 about,	 because	 even	 by	 talking
about	 them	 they	 become	 superficial.	 There	 are	 things	 which	 should	 remain
occult,	should	remain	secret,	because	they	work	in	secrecy,	otherwise	they	won't
work.	They	are	 just	 like	roots	of	a	 tree:	 the	roots	must	 remain	underground,	 in
the	dark,	unknown	to	the	tree.	Only	then	do	they	work.
So	 there	 are	 occult	 things	which	must	 remain	 unconscious,	 underground.	You
must	not	know	 them	 --	only	 then	do	 they	work,	otherwise	 they	will	not	work.
The	 roots	 must	 not	 be	 known.	 They	 must	 remain	 hidden.	 So	 there	 are	 many
things	you	ask	that	I	will	not	answer,	or	I	will	answer	only	up	to	that	limit	where
the	hiddenness	is	not	uncovered.	The	hidden	must	remain	hidden.	You	will	come
to	know,	but	only	by	experience.
After	three	months	you	will	not	be	able	to	remain	a	single	moment	without	the
mala.	You	will	feel	the	difference.	But	that	will	be	your	knowing.	It	is	so	great,	it
cannot	remain	unfelt.	And	by	and	by,	as	the	experience	grows	deeper	and	richer,
you	 will	 not	 feel	 the	 picture	 there.	 With	 your	 deepening	 consciousness,	 the
locket	will	become	empty.
Everyone	will	 see	 the	 picture,	 but	 not	 you.	When	 this	 happens,	 then	 you	 can
communicate	with	me	directly,	immediately,	without	any	medium.
I	 am	 trying	 in	 so	many	ways	 to	 convey	 things	without	 any	medium,	 because
there	are	things	which	cannot	be	conveyed	through	any	medium.	So	I	will	have
to	create	devices	--
this	sannyas	is	a	device,	this	initiation	is	a	device.	Those	who	are	initiated	will
soon	become	capable	of	knowing	things	which	cannot	be	told	to	others	--	of	so
many	 secrets,	 keys,	 which	 no	 one	 can	 ordinarily	 understand	 unless	 he	 has
seasoned,	ripened	through	occult	training.
This	 is	only	 the	beginning;	much	 is	 to	 follow.	 If	 I	 feel	you	are	 receptive,	 then
much	will	follow.	If	I	feel	you	are	not	receptive,	then	the	beginning	will	be	the
end.	You	will	gain	much	even	in	 the	beginning,	but	not	 the	whole	 thing.	So	in
many	ways	I	try	to	know	your	receptivity.
If	someone	comes,	I	give	him	the	mala	and	the	picture	with	it.	It	is	predictable
that	he	should	ask,	"Why	this	picture	of	yours?"	This	is	very	predictable.	But	if
he	does	not	ask	-
-	if	he	simply	takes	the	mala	and	asks	no	questions,	if	he	is	not	curious	--	he	has
given	a	deeper	hint	about	himself,	that	things	which	cannot	be	questioned	can	be
delivered	 to	 him.	 There	 are	 things	 which	 cannot	 be	 delivered	 if	 questioned,
because	 no	 proof	 can	 be	 given	 for	 them,	 no	 reasoning	 can	 be	 given	 for	 them.
There	 cannot	 be	 answers	 to	 some	 questions.	 They	 are	 bare	 statements	 of
knowing	--	with	no	proofs,	with	no	criteria.
So	if	I	see	someone	who	comes	to	me,	and	I	have	given	him	things	about	which
the	 ordinary	mind	 is	 prone	 to	 ask	questions	 and	he	does	 not	 ask	 them,	 he	 has
proven	capable	of	being	given	deeper	things	which	should	not	be	questioned.	In
so	 many	 ways,	 how	 tethered	 you	 are!	 How	 much	 you	 are	 tethered	 to	 the
reasoning	part	of	the	mind	must	be	known.	I	have	to	know	it	because	the	more
you	 are	 tethered	 to	 reason,	 the	 less	 you	 are	 capable	 of	 knowing	 the	 deeper
things...	 because	 reason	 is	 the	 most	 superficial	 part	 of	 your	 being,	 the	 most
superficial.
Although	it	claims	to	be	the	deepest	--	and	only	the	superficial	claims	to	be	the
deep	--
reason	is	 the	most	superficial	part	of	your	being.	It	has	something	to	do,	 it	has
some	 utility,	 but	 only	 utility.	 If	 you	 think	 of	 it	 as	 a	 vehicle	 to	 go	 into	 the
unknown,	 then	 you	 will	 never,	 never	 be	 able	 to	 know	 anything	 that	 is	 worth
knowing.
So	 I	 use	 so	many	 devices	 to	 know	you	 also.	And	 each	 and	 everything	 has	 so
many	reasons.	For	example,	the	case	of	a	person	who	resists:	someone	wrote	me
a	letter	fifteen	days	ago	saying,	"I	can	be	initiated	by	you.	I	want	to	be	initiated
by	you,	but	I	cannot	make	you	my	guru."
I	am	no	one's	guru,	I	myself	never	claim	to	be	a	guru	--	but	 to	 this	man	I	will
claim	to	be	a	guru.	To	this	man	I	cannot	say	"I	allow	you	not	to	think	of	me	as
your	guru."	He	has	shown	his	incapacity	so	clearly.	If	you	are	not	a	disciple,	then
I	will	have	to	be	a	guru.	If	you	are	a	disciple,	then	I	need	not	be	a	guru,	there	is
no	necessity.	But	if	you	insist	on	your	egoistic	non-surrender,	then	I	will	have	to
insist	on	so	many	things	to	destroy	your	ego.	I	will	have	to	use	so	many	devices
to	make	you	egoless.
If	you	are	egoless,	then	I	will	not	use	any	device.	So	the	problem	becomes	more
puzzling.
To	one	who	is	ready	to	be	a	disciple,	I	will	say,	"I	am	not	your	guru.	It	is	enough
that	you	are	a	disciple."	But	to	the	one	who	says,	"I	will	not	believe	you,	I	will
not	take	you	as	my	guru,"	I	will	insist.	Otherwise,	this	man	cannot	be	initiated.
He	is	coming	with	a	condition,	and	you	cannot	be	initiated	with	your	conditions.
Initiation	means	 that	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 surrender,	 ready	 to	 trust;	 otherwise	 you
need	not	go	through	the	initiation.	The	initiation	is	nothing,	this	mala	is	nothing,
this	robe	is	nothing.
This	 is	 only	 the	 entrance,	 now	 the	 ways	 will	 be	 darker.	 There	 will	 be	 things
which	you	have	not	imagined.	You	will	have	to	trust,	otherwise	you	cannot	take
a	 single	 step.	So	 it	 is	 better	 to	 know	at	 the	 entrance	 that	 you	 are	 incapable	 of
trust,	that	any	effort	to	lead	you	in	will	be	unnecessary	and	futile.
Religion	is	basically	neither	believing	nor	disbelieving.	Religion	is	trusting,	it	is
trust.
And	whenever	 there	 is	 an	 unknown	 to	 be	 jumped	 into,	 there	 is	 no	 other	way.
Unless	you	trust,	you	cannot	know	it.	And	you	do	not	know	it	now.	So	what	can
you	do?	You	can	only	trust	and	take	the	jump.	This	mala	will	also	help	you	to
create	this	trust.
When	I	say	that	if	you	meditate	on	the	picture	the	picture	will	be	absent,	do	not
take	 it	on	 trust.	Try	 it,	and	 it	will	happen.	When	I	say	 that	when	 the	picture	 is
absent	you	can	communicate	with	me,	do	not	 take	 it	 as	 a	 trust.	Try	 it.	Take	 it
hypothetically	and	experiment	with	it.	The	moment	the	picture	is	absent	and	you
can	communicate	with	me,	you	will	be	ready	for	the	things	which	will	need	your
trust.	Then	you	can	take	further	steps	with	a	trusting	mind.
The	more	civilization	has	progressed,	the	more	the	ego	has	become	crystallized.
The	 ego	 is	 the	 only	 barrier,	 and	 now	 it	 is	 the	 greatest	 barrier.	 It	 was	 not	 so
always.
Sariputta	came	to	Buddha.	He	was	one	of	the	most	learned	men	of	those	times.
He	 questioned	 many	 things,	 he	 asked	 many	 questions,	 he	 discussed	 so	 many
things,	 then	 he	 was	 initiated.	 From	 the	 moment	 he	 was	 initiated,	 then
continuously	for	thirty	years	he	was	with	Buddha.	But	then	he	would	never	ask
anything.
So	 someone	 asked,	 "Sariputta,	 you	were	 such	 a	 learned	man.	 People	 say	 you
know	 even	more	 than	 Buddha..."as	 far	 as	 information	 is	 concerned,	 he	was	 a
Mahapandit,	 a	 great	 scholar.	 "...	 When	 you	 came,	 you	 discussed	 such	 deep
things,	 you	 questioned	 many	 things.	 We	 were	 very	 happy	 that	 someone	 had
come	who	questions	Buddha,	so	that	we	could	come	to	know	many	things	which
might	have	 remained	unknown.	Through	your	questions	we	could	know	 them.
But	why	have	you	become	silent?"
Sariputta	 said,	 "The	 moment	 I	 was	 ready	 to	 be	 initiated,	 I	 had	 to	 stop	 my
questions,	because	to	question	anything	is	absurd.	I	questioned	everything	before
--	before	taking	the	trust.	Now	my	mind	is	settled."
Sometimes	 Buddha	 would	 say	 such	 absurd	 things,	 just	 to	 find	 out	 whether
Sariputta	would	ask	again.	He	said	such	absurd	things	that	anyone	would	begin
to	ask,	"What	are	you	saying?"	But	Sariputta	would	be	silent.
Buddha	said	 to	him,	"Wherever	you	are,	always	pay	respect	 to	 the	direction	 in
which	I	am	--	wherever	you	are."	Wherever	he	was	wandering,	he	would	always
pay	respect	in	the	direction	where	Buddha	was	dwelling.
Sariputta	 became	 an	 awakened	 one	 after	Buddha's	 death.	 Someone	 said,	 "You
have	become	awakened.	Now	you	need	not	pay	respect	to	anybody.	You	yourself
have	become	a	buddha."	Sariputta	said,	"I	could	not	pay	respect	before,	because
I	was	not	awakened	and	the	ego	was	there.	Now	I	cannot	pay	respect	because	I
have	become	awakened.	Then	when	will	I	pay	respect?	I	could	not	pay	respect
before,	 and	 even	 if	 I	 paid	 respect,	 it	 was	 with	 very	 great	 difficulty,	 and	 the
respect	paid	with	difficulty	is	no	respect.	Then	I	could	not	pay	respect	because	of
the	ego.	Now	you	say	I	should	not	pay	because	I	have	become	awakened.	Then
when	will	 I	pay	respect?"	Sariputta	said,	"Buddha	does	not	need	 it,	but	now	is
the	moment.	Before	it	was	impossible."
But	 these	 were	 times	 when	 trust	 was	 easy.	 Now	 trust	 has	 become	 quite
impossible;	that	is	why	religion	has	become	impossible.	Religion	is	bound	to	be
irrational	and	contradictory.
To	jump	into	existence	is	bound	to	be	irrational,	it	is	a	jump	from	the	rational	to
the	irrational.	So	by	and	by	I	will	have	to	make	you	ready	and	prepared.	Little	by
little	I	will	make	you	ready	to	go	into	the	irrational.	Even	if	I	answer	you	it	is	not
to	convince	your	reason,	but	just	to	shatter	it.	Even	if	I	sometimes	appear	to	be
rational,	it	is	only	as	a	beginning.	It	is	only	to	begin	with	your	mind.	If	you	feel
as	if	I	am	rational,	then	your	mind	is	attuned.
The	moment	I	see	you	are	attuned,	I	will	push	you	into	the	irrational.	There	is	no
way	except	that	one	is	pushed	into	the	irrational.	And	this	is	not	much.	The	more
you	are	ready,	the	more	I	will	put	things	on	you	which	will	look	insane	in	others'
eyes.	The	moment	I	see	that	you	are	ready	to	be	insane,	when	you	are	not	afraid
of	others'	eyes	and	others'	opinions,	even	of	your	own	reason	you	are	not	afraid,
only	then	can	the	deeper	keys	be	handed	over	to	you,	not	before.	Otherwise,	you
will	just	throw	the	keys	away,	you	will	not	be	able	to	appreciate	them.	You	will
not	be	able	even	to	understand	that	they	are	keys.
So	by	and	by	all	those	who	have	been	initiated	into	sannyas	will	have	to	be	ready
to	go	into	the	irrational.	Existence	is	such,	it	does	not	reply	to	questions.	Life	is
such,	it	gives	no	explanations.	It	is.	And	all	our	questions	and	all	our	answers	are
only	 deceptions.	 Even	 scientific	 answers	 are	 deceptions,	 because	 they	 never
really	answer	anything.	They	only	push	the	question	a	step	back	They	only	go	on
pushing	questions.	You	become	tired,	so	you	do	not	ask.
No	question	is	answerable	through	answers.	Through	the	existential	jump	every
question	 is	solved,	but	not	 through	 intellect.	 If	you	ask	a	scientist	why	oxygen
and	hydrogen	 combined	 create	water,	 he	will	 say	 that	 it	 just	 happens,	 it	 is	 so:
"We	can	say	only	this	--
that	it	just	happens."	But	why	does	it	happen?	No	one	will	go	to	ask	the	scientist
why	oxygen	and	hydrogen	can	create	water.	Why?	Why	not	helium	and	oxygen?
There	is	no	answer.
The	 scientist	 will	 say,	 "We	 can	 say	 only	 how	 it	 happens,	 not	 why."	 But	 with
religion	we	always	ask	why.	Even	science,	which	claims	 to	be	rational,	cannot
answer	why.	Religion,	which	never	claims	to	be	rational,	is	always	being	asked,
"Why?"
You	ask	me,	"Why	this	mala?	Why	this	picture?"	I	will	say,	"Use	it	in	this	way,
and	this	will	happen,"	and	my	answer	is	as	scientific	as	possible.	Religion	never
claims	to	be	rational,	the	only	claim	is	of	being	irrational.
Use	 the	mala	 in	 this	way:	meditate	on	 the	picture,	 then	 the	picture	will	not	be
there.	It	happens	so.	Then	the	absent	picture	becomes	a	door.	Through	that	door
communicate	with	me.	It	happens	so.	After	doing	meditation,	take	this	mala	off
and	feel,	and	then	put	this	mala	on	and	feel,	and	you	will	see	the	difference.
Without	this	mala	you	will	feel	totally	unprotected,	totally	in	the	reins	of	a	force
which	 can	 be	 harmful.	With	 this	mala	 on	 you	will	 feel	 protected,	 you	will	 be
more	confident,	settled.	Nothing	can	disturb	from	the	outside.	It	happens	so;	you
will	 do	 the	 experiment	 and	 know.	Why	 it	 happens	 cannot	 even	 be	 answered
scientifically.	 And	 religiously	 there	 is	 no	 question	 to	 answer.	 Religion	 never
claims,	that	is	why	so	many	rituals	of	religion	become	irrelevant.
As	 time	passes	by,	a	very	meaningful	 ritual	will	become	meaningless,	because
keys	are	 lost	and	no	one	can	say	why	 this	 ritual	exists.	Then	 it	becomes	 just	a
dead	ritual.	You	cannot	do	anything	with	 it.	You	can	perform	it,	but	 the	key	 is
lost.	For	example,	you	can	go	on	wearing	the	mala,	and	if	you	do	not	know	that
the	picture	 in	 it	 is	meant	 for	 some	 inner	 communication,	 then	 it	will	 be	 just	 a
dead	weight.	Then	the	key	is	lost.	The	mala	may	be	with	you,	but	the	key	is	lost.
Then	 one	 day	 or	 another	 you	will	 have	 to	 throw	 away	 the	mala	 because	 it	 is
useless.
The	mala	is	a	device	for	meditation.	It	is	a	key.	But	this	will	come	only	through
experience.	 I	can	only	help	you	 toward	 the	experience.	And	unless	 it	happens,
you	will	not	know.	But	it	can	happen,	it	is	so	easy,	it	is	not	difficult	at	all.	When	I
am	alive,	it	is	so	easy.	When	I	am	not	there,	it	will	be	very	difficult.
All	 these	statues	 that	have	existed	on	this	earth	were	used	as	such	devices,	but
now	they	are	meaningless.	Buddha	declared	that	his	statue	should	not	be	made.
But	 the	work	 that	was	done	by	statues	still	will	have	 to	be	done.	Although	the
statue	is	meaningless,	the	real	thing	is	the	work	that	can	be	done	through	it.
Those	who	follow	Mahavira	can	communicate	with	Mahavira	through	his	statue
even	today.	So	what	should	Buddha's	disciples	do?	That	 is	why	the	Bodhi	 tree
became	so	 important;	 it	was	used	 instead	of	Buddha's	 statue.	For	 five	hundred
years	after	Buddha	there	was	no	statue.	In	the	Buddhist	temples	only	a	picture	of
the	Bodhi	 tree	 and	 two	 symbolic	 footprints	were	 kept,	 but	 this	was	 sufficient.
That	 still	 continues.	The	 tree	 that	 exists	 in	Bodhgaya	 is	 in	 continuity	with	 the
original	 tree.	 So	 still	 today	 those	 who	 know	 the	 key	 can	 communicate	 with
Buddha	 through	 the	 Bodhi	 tree	 at	 Bodhgaya.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 meaningless	 that
monks	from	all	over	the	world	come	to	Bodhgaya.	But	they	must	know	the	key,
otherwise	they	will	just	go	and	the	whole	thing	will	be	just	a	ritual.
So	these	are	keys	--	particular	mantras	chanted	in	a	particular	way,	pronounced
in	 a	 particular	 way,	 emphasized	 in	 a	 particular	 way	 with	 such-and-such
frequencies.	A	wavelength	should	be	created,	the	waves	should	be	created.	Then
the	Bodhi	 tree	 is	 not	 just	 a	Bodhi	 tree;	 it	 becomes	 a	 passage,	 it	 opens	 a	 door.
Then	twenty-five	centuries	are	no	more,	the	time	gap	is	not	there.	You	come	face
to	face	with	Buddha.	But	keys	are	always	lost.	So	this	much	can	be	said:	use	the
locket,	and	you	will	know	much.	All	that	I	have	said	will	be	known,	and	more
that	I	have	not	said	will	be	known	also.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	DOES	IT	MEAN	TO	BE	A	SPIRITUAL	SEEKER?
It	means	 two	 things,	 primarily.	 One,	 that	 life	 as	 it	 is	 known	 outwardly	 is	 not
fulfilling,	 life	 as	 it	 is	 known	 outwardly	 is	 meaningless.	 The	 moment	 one
becomes	aware	of	this	fact,	that	this	whole	life	is	just	a	meaningless	thing,	then
the	 seeking	 begins.	 This	 is	 the	 negative	 part,	 but	 unless	 this	 negative	 part	 is
there,	 the	 positive	 cannot	 follow.	Spiritual	 seeking	means	 primarily	 a	 negative
feeling,	a	feeling	that	life	as	it	is,	is	meaningless,	this	whole	process	just	ends	in
death:	"Dust	unto	dust."	Nothing	remains	conclusively	in	one's	hands.	You	pass
through	 life	 with	 such	 agony,	 with	 such	 hell,	 and	 nothing	 is	 achieved
conclusively.
This	is	the	negative	part	of	spiritual	seeking,	and	the	whole	life	helps	you	toward
this.
This	part	--	this	negativity,	this	frustration,	this	anguish	--	is	the	part	the	world	is
to	do.
Once	you	become	 really	aware	of	 this	 fact	of	 the	meaninglessness	of	 life	as	 it
exists,	then	your	seeking	ordinarily	begins,	because	with	a	meaningless	life	you
cannot	be	at	ease.
With	a	meaningless	life	an	abyss	is	created	between	you	and	all	that	is	life.	An
unbridgeable	gap	grows,	becoming	wider	and	wider.	You	feel	unanchored.	Then
a	 search	 for	 something	which	 is	meaningful,	blissful,	 begins.	That	 is	 the	other
part,	the	positive	part.
Spiritual	seeking	means	to	come	to	terms	with	actual	reality,	not	with	the	dream
projection.	Our	whole	life	is	just	a	projection,	our	dream	projection.	It	is	not	to
know	what	is,	it	is	to	achieve	what	is	desired.	You	can	take	the	word	`desire'	as	a
symbol	of	our	so-called	life	--	it	is	a	desired	projection.	You	are	not	in	search	of
what	is,	you	are	in	search	of	what	is	desired.	So	you	go	on	desiring,	and	life	will
go	on	being	frustrating,	because	it	is	as	it	is.	It	cannot	be	as	you	like	it.	You	will
be	disillusioned.	It	is	not	that	reality	is	antagonistic	to	you,	but	that	you	are	not	in
tune	with	 reality,	 only	 in	 tune	with	 all	 your	 dreams.	Your	 dreams	will	 have	 a
shattering	disillusionment.	So	when	you	are	dreaming,	it	is	all	right.	When	any
dream	is	achieved,	everything	becomes	disillusioning.
Spiritual	 seeking	 means	 knowing	 this	 negative	 part:	 that	 desiring	 is	 the	 root
cause	of	frustration.	To	desire	is	to	create,	of	one's	own	accord,	a	shell.	Desiring
is	 the	world.	To	be	worldly	 is	 to	desire	and	 to	go	on	desiring,	never	becoming
aware	that	each	desire	comes	to	nothing	but	frustration.	Once	you	become	aware
of	this,	then	you	do	not	desire,	or	your	only	desire	is	to	know	what	is.
I	am	not	to	project	myself	but	to	know	what	is.	Not	that	I	should	be	this	way	or
the	 reality	 should	be	 that	way,	 but	 only	 this	 --	 that	whatever	 reality	may	be,	 I
want	to	know	it,	naked	as	it	is.	I	should	not	project.	I	should	not	come	in.	I	want
to	encounter	it	as	it	is.
Spiritual	 seeking	 positively	means	 encountering	 existence	 as	 it	 is	without	 any
desire.	 The	moment	 there	 is	 no	 desire,	 the	 projecting	mechanism	 is	 not	 there
working,	then	you	can	see	what	is.	This	"what	is"	--	that	which	is	--	once	known,
gives	you	all.
Desires	 always	promise	 and	never	give.	Desires	 always	promise	bliss,	 ecstasy,
but	the	end	never	comes,	and	each	desire	only	terminates	into	more	desire.	Each
desire	only	creates	in	its	place	more	desires	that	are	still	greater	and,	of	course,
in	the	end,	more	frustrating.
A	no-desiring	mind	 is	one	 that	 is	 in	spiritual	 seeking.	A	spiritual	seeker	 is	one
who	is	completely	aware	of	the	nonsense	of	desire	and	is	ready	to	know	what	is.
Once	one	 is	 ready	 to	know	what	 is,	 reality	 is	always	by	 the	corner,	 just	by	 the
corner.	But	you	are	never	 there,	 you	are	 in	 the	desire,	 in	 the	 future.	Reality	 is
always	in	the	present	--	here	and	now	--	and	you	are	never	in	the	present.	You	are
always	in	the	future,	 in	your	desires,	 in	your	dreams.	In	dreams,	 in	desires,	we
are	asleep.	And	the	reality	is	here	and	now.
Once	 this	 sleep	has	been	broken,	 the	dream	has	been	broken	 and	you	become
awakened	to	the	reality	that	is	here	and	now,	just	in	the	present.	You	are	reborn.
You	come	to	ecstasy,	to	fulfillment,	to	all	that	has	always	been	desired	but	never
achieved.	Spiritual	seeking	is	to	be	here	and	now,	and	you	can	only	be	here	and
now	when	 there	 is	 no	 desiring	 mind;	 otherwise	 the	 desiring	 mind	 will	 create
wavering.	Just	like	a	pendulum,	the	mind	goes	either	to	the	past,	in	the	memory,
or	 to	 the	 future,	 in	 desires,	 in	 dreams.	But	 it	 is	 never	 here	 and	now,	 it	 always
misses	the	point	of	here	and	now.	It	just	goes	to	the	one	extreme,	the	past,	or	to
the	other,	 the	 future.	We	miss	 the	 reality	between	 these	waverings	of	 past	 and
future.
Reality	 is	here	and	now.	 It	 is	never	past	and	never	 future;	 it	 is	always	present.
Now	is	the	only	moment.	Now	is	the	only	time.	It	never	passes.	Now	is	eternal.
It	 is	 always	here,	but	we	are	not	here.	So	 to	be	a	 spiritual	 seeker	means	 to	be
here.	You	may	call	 it	meditation,	you	may	call	 it	yoga,	you	may	call	 it	prayer.
Whatever	name	is	given	it	makes	no	difference,	the	mind	must	not	be.	And	the
mind	exists	only	when	there	is	past	or	future,	otherwise	there	is	no	mind.
I	was	talking	to	someone	yesterday.	You	cannot	think	in	the	present,	I	was	telling
him.
The	moment	you	think,	it	has	become	the	past.	So	the	mind	cannot	exist	in	the
present.	It	exists	only	in	the	memory	of	the	past,	or	it	projects	into	the	future.	It
never	comes	in	contact	with	the	present	--	it	cannot	come,	that	is	impossible.	So
if	 there	 is	no	 thought,	 there	 is	no	mind.	This	no-mindness	 is	meditation.	Then
you	are	here	and	now.	Then	you	explode	into	reality.	Then	the	reality	explodes
into	you.
Spiritual	seeking	is	not	for	moksha,	salvation	after	death.	Again,	that	is	a	desire,
even	more	greedy	 than	 the	desire	 for	wealth,	 the	desire	 for	prestige,	 the	desire
for	 power.	 The	 desire	 for	 moksha	 is	 even	more	 greedy,	 because	 it	 goes	 even
beyond	death.
Spiritual	 seeking	 is	 not	 to	 seek	 God,	 because	 again	 that	 is	 greed.	 If	 you	 are
seeking	 God,	 then	 again	 your	 mind	 is	 greedy.	 You	 must	 be	 seeking	 God	 for
something.	 However	 deep	 and	 unknown	 to	 you	 and	 unconscious	 to	 you,	 you
must	be	seeking	God	for	something.
But	I	do	not	mean	by	this	that	when	spiritual	seeking	comes	to	fulfillment,	there
is	no	God.	I	am	not	saying	that	when	you	have	come	to	meditation	and	the	mind
is	 not,	moksha	 is	 not.	Moksha	 is	 there.	You	 have	 liberation	 but	 it	 is	 not	 your
desire.	It	is	just	the	consequence	of	knowing	the	reality	as	it	is.
God	is	there,	but	it	is	not	because	of	your	desiring.	He	is	the	reality.	So	when	you
know	the	reality,	you	know	it	is	divine.	The	reality	is	divine.	But	seeking	is	not
for	God	or	moksha	or	bliss,	 because	whenever	 there	 is	desire	you	will	 project
again	into	the	future.
Spiritual	seeking	is	disillusionment	with	the	future	and	remaining	in	the	present,
being	 in	 the	present,	being	ready	to	face	whatsoever	comes	here	and	now.	The
divine	 explodes,	 the	 freedom	 comes,	 but	 these	 are	 not	 your	 objects.	 They	 are
consequences,	shadows	of	the	realization	of	the	real.
So	first	be	aware	of	the	whole	process	of	life	as	frustrating.	Not	a	single	illusion
should	be	there,	otherwise	you	will	be	tethered	to	it.	Go	deep	in	each	experience
of	 life.	 Do	 not	 escape	 from	 it.	 Know	 it	 so	 deeply	 that	 you	 know	 its
disillusionment.	Do	not	escape;	do	not	renounce.	Only	then	this	part	is	complete,
and	you	can	take	the	jump	into	the	here	and	now.
If	you	have	become	aware	 that	 the	 future	 is	 the	 root	cause	of	all	 the	nonsense
that	 the	 human	 mind	 creates,	 then	 you	 have	 taken	 the	 basic	 step;	 you	 have
traveled.	 Now	 you	 can	 be	 ready	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 what	 is.	 In	 the	 first	 part,	 the
negative	part,	life	helps	much.	So	go	to	every	experience,	to	every	desire;	know
it.	Never	renounce	prematurely.
This	happens:	you	are	not	really	frustrated	with	life,	but	have	become	greedy	for
religious	promises.	You	have	not	known	that	life	is	divine,	but	you	have	become
enchanted	with	religious	heavens.	Then	everything	will	be	difficult,	because	you
have	not	gone	through	the	first	part.	The	second	part	will	be	very	difficult.
So	 go	 through	 the	 first	 part	 and	 the	 second	 is	 very	 easy.	 The	 second	 is	 only
difficult	when	the	first	has	not	been	traveled	completely.	Then	you	ask,	"How	to
meditate?"	 Then	 you	 say,	 "The	 mind	 goes	 on	 working."	 Then	 you	 say,	 "The
thought	 process	 is	 continuing.	 It	 cannot	 be	 stopped.	How	 can	 it	 be	 stopped?"
Desire	is	there,	so	desire	will	go	on	creating	thoughts.	The	first	part	has	not	been
fulfilled.
A	 mature	 spiritual	 seeker	 is	 one	 who	 has	 gone	 without	 any	 fear	 in	 life,	 and
knows	 every	 nook	 and	 corner.	 He	 has	 known	 it	 so	 much	 that	 nothing	 has
remained	unknown.	Then	meditation	 is	 easy,	because	 there	 is	no	one	 to	 create
thoughts,	there	is	no	one	to	create	desires.	Just	by	shouting	Hoo!	you	are	in	the
present.	 Any	 simple	 device	 will	 make	 you	 stand	 still.	 The	 staff	 of	 the	 Zen
masters	is	raised	and	you	are	in	the	present.	Even	such	a	simple	device	can	help
if	the	first	part	is	fulfilled.
One	 day	 the	 Zen	 monk	 Rinzai	 is	 speaking	 in	 a	 temple.	 He	 has	 gone	 into	 a
sermon,	but	someone	is	disturbing	him	there.	So	Rinzai	stops	and	asks,	"What	is
the	matter?"	The	man	stands	up	and	says,	"What	is	soul?"	Rinzai	takes	his	staff
and	 asks	 the	 people	 to	 give	 him	 way.	 The	 man	 begins	 to	 tremble.	 He	 never
expected	that	such	will	be	the	answer.
Rinzai	comes	to	him,	takes	hold	of	his	neck	with	both	hands	and	presses	it.	The
man's	eyes	bulge	out.	He	goes	on	pressing	and	asks,	"Who	are	you?	Close	your
eyes!"	The	man	closes	his	eyes.	Rinzai	goes	on	asking,	"Who	are	you?"	The	man
opens	 his	 eyes	 and	 laughs	 and	 bows	 down.	He	 says,	 "I	 know	you	 have	 really
answered	what	is	soul."
Such	a	simple	device!	But	the	man	was	ready.	Someone	asks	Rinzai,	"Would	you
do	the	same	thing	when	anybody	asks?"	He	says,	"That	man	was	ready.	He	was
not	just	asking	for	the	question's	sake,	he	was	ready.	The	first	part	was	fulfilled;
he	was	really	asking.
This	was	 a	 life	 and	 death	 question	 to	 him:	 `What	 is	 soul?'	 The	 first	 part	 was
fulfilled	completely.	He	was	disillusioned	completely	of	life,	and	he	was	asking,
`What	is	soul?'
This	life	has	proved	just	a	death	to	him;	now	he	is	asking,	`What	is	life?'	So	no
answer	from	me	would	have	been	meaningful.	I	helped	him	to	just	stand	still	in
the	present."
Of	course,	when	someone	presses	your	neck	just	on	the	verge	of	killing	you,	you
cannot	be	in	the	future,	you	cannot	be	in	the	past.	You	will	be	here	and	now.	It	is
dangerous	 to	miss	 the	moment.	 If	 you	 just	 say	 to	 such	 a	man,	 "Go	 deep	 and
know	who	you	 are,"	 the	man	becomes	 transformed.	He	goes	 into	 samadhi;	 he
stands	still	in	the	moment.
If	you	are	in	the	present,	even	for	a	single	moment,	you	have	known,	you	have
encountered,	and	you	will	never	be	able	to	lose	the	track	again.
Spiritual	feeling	is	to	know	what	is	--	what	is	all	this.	Not	that,	this.	What	is	all
this	--	this	me	speaking,	this	you	hearing,	this	whole?	What	is	this?	Just	stand,	be
deep	 in	 this.	 Let	 it	 open	 to	 you,	 and	 let	 yourself	 open	 to	 it.	 Then	 there	 is	 a
meeting.	That	meeting	is	the	seeking.
That	 meeting	 is	 the	 whole	 search.	 That	 is	 why	we	 have	 called	 it	 yoga.	 Yoga
means	meeting.	The	very	word	yoga	means	meeting	--	joining	again,	becoming
one	once	more.
But	 so-called	 spiritual	 seekers	 are	 not	 seeking	 any	 spirituality.	 They	 are	 only
projecting	 their	desires	 in	a	new	dimension.	And	no	desire	can	be	projected	 in
this	 spiritual	dimension,	because	 this	 spiritual	dimension	 is	only	open	 to	 those
who	 are	 not	 desiring.	 So	 those	who	 desire	 go	 on	 creating	 new	 illusions,	 new
dreams.
First	know	that	desire	is	just	running	and	reaching	nowhere.	Then	stand	still,	and
know	what	is.	Everything	is	open.	Only	we	are	closed	in	our	desires.	The	whole
existence	is	open.	All	doors	are	open,	but	we	are	running	with	such	a	speed	that
we	 cannot	 see.	And	 the	more	we	become	 frustrated,	 the	more	we	 increase	 the
speed,	because	the	mind	says,
"You	are	not	running	fast	enough.	That	is	why	you	are	not	reaching."	The	mind
will	not	say,	"Because	you	are	running,	you	will	not	reach."	How	can	it	say	that?
It	is	illogical.
The	mind	says,	"Because	you	are	not	running	fast	enough,	 that	 is	why	you	are
not	 reaching.	 So	 run	 faster.	 Those	who	 are	 running	 faster,	 they	 are	 reaching."
And	ask	 those	who	are	 running	 faster.	Their	minds	 are	 saying	 the	 same	 thing:
"Run	faster	still.	Those	who	are	really	running,	they	are	reaching."
No	one	is	reaching,	but	always	someone	is	ahead	of	you	and	someone	is	behind.
You	 have	 gone	 ahead	 of	 someone,	 but	 wherever	 you	 are,	 someone	 is	 always
ahead.	Why?
Because	desire	 runs	 in	a	circle.	We	are	 running	 in	a	circle.	So	 if	you	 run	very
fast,	even	the	person	who	was	behind	may	come	to	be	ahead	of	you.	Because	we
are	running	in	a	circle,	someone	is	going	to	be	ahead	always,	and	the	feeling	will
be	there	that	you	are	not	running	fast	enough,	that	someone	else	is	reaching	and
you	are	losing.
We	in	this	land	knew	so	many	truths.	We	called	this	world	sansar.	Sansar	means
the	wheel	--	not	only	are	you	running,	but	the	wheel	itself	is	also	running.	It	is
not	a	steady	circle.	Even	if	you	stand,	the	wheel	will	go	on.	So	one	has	not	only
to	stop,	but	to	step	out	of	the	wheel.
This	 stepping	 out	 is	 sannyas.	 Stopping	 is	 not	 enough.	 You	 must	 step	 off	 the
wheel,	because	even	if	you	are	not	running,	the	wheel	will	go	on	rotating.	And	it
is	such	a	great	wheel,	with	such	a	 force,	 that	you	will	be	running	even	 though
you	 are	 standing	 in	 one	 place.	 To	 step	 off	means	 sannyas	 --	 not	 only	 to	 stop
running,	but	to	step	off.	Do	not	be	on	the	wheel.	Just	come	out	of	the	rut.	Be	a
witness	to	it.	Only	then	will	you	know	what	this	wheel	is	made	of	,	why	it	goes
on	running	even	when	you	are	not	running.
The	wheel	is	created	by	infinite	desires,	by	all	desires	that	have	ever	existed,	that
are	 in	 existence	 today	 --	 all	 the	 desires	 of	 all	 persons,	 of	 all	 beings	who	have
ever	existed.	You	will	die,	but	your	desires	have	created	waves	which	will	go	on.
You	will	not	be	here,	but	your	desires	have	created	ripples	in	the	noesphere.	You
will	not	be	here,	but	I	have	said	something;	these	words,	these	sounds,	will	go	on
vibrating	infinitely.
Whatever	you	have	desired	--	fulfilled,	unfulfilled,	it	makes	no	difference	--	the
moment	 the	desire	has	come	into	your	mind,	 into	your	heart,	you	have	created
ripples,	waves.
They	will	go	on.	This	wheel,	this	sansar,	is	constituted	of	all	the	desires	that	have
existed	and	all	the	desires	that	are	in	existence.	This	is	such	a	great	force,	of	all
the	dead	and	of	all	the	living,	that	you	cannot	stand	still.	They	will	push	you,	you
have	to	run.
It	 is	 just	 like	 in	 a	 crowd.	When	 the	whole	 crowd	 is	 running	 you	 cannot	 stand
still.	You	are	just	pushed	to	run.	You	are	safe	if	you	are	running;	if	you	are	not
running	you	will	be	killed.	It	is	not	that	your	energy	is	needed	to	run.	If	you	do
not	make	any	effort,	the	crowd	will	push	you.	This	is	the	wheel	--	the	wheel	of
desires.	You	must	 have	 seen	 the	Tibetan	picture	 of	 the	wheel.	 It	 is	 beautifully
depicted	--	the	whole	wheel	of	desires.
To	step	out	of	 the	wheel	 is	 sannyas.	You	 just	come	out	of	 the	crowd.	You	 just
step	down.
You	just	sit	by	the	side	of	the	road,	you	say	goodbye.	Only	then	do	you	know	the
phenomenon	of	what	is	the	wheel.	Only	then	do	you	know	that	some	persons	are
running	in	a	circle,	they	will	pass	you	so	many	times	--	then	you	know	that	this
is	a	wheel.
A	Buddha,	a	Mahavira,	could	call	this	world	sansar,	a	wheel,	because	they	knew
that	it	was	a	wheel	when	they	stepped	aside.	It	 is	not	that	you	are	running	in	a
line,	it	is	a	circle	-
-	 repeating	 the	 same	 desires,	 the	 same	 days,	 the	 same	 nights,	 the	 same
disillusionments,	 and	 going	 on	 in	 the	 whirlwind.	 Pushed	 from	 behind,	 pulled
from	the	front,	you	go	on.
Sannyas	means	 to	 step	 aside,	 to	 step	 out.	 This	 is	 the	 second	 part	 of	 sannyas.
Sannyas	 has	 two	 parts.	 The	 first	 part	 is	 knowing	 the	 frustration,	 knowing	 the
anguish.	This	is	the	miracle:	once	you	know	that	the	world	is	anguish,	the	world
is	 frustration,	 you	 are	 not	 frustrated	 at	 all.	 The	 frustration	 comes	 because	 you
think	 the	world	 is	 not	 frustrating.	 The	 anguish	 comes	 because	 you	 hope	 even
when	you	know	 it	 is	hopeless.	That	hoping	 is	nonsense.	When	you	know	 this,
then	you	do	not	feel	hopeless	at	all.	Then	there	is	no	need	to	feel	so.	Then	there
is	nothing	to	feel	hopeless	about	--	there	is	no	hope.
That	 is	why	Buddhism	could	not	be	understood.	The	Western	mind	could	only
interpret	 it	as	pessimism.	It	was	a	natural	 fallacy.	Buddhism	is	not	pessimistic.
But	to	the	Western	mind	it	appeared	pessimistic,	because	of	the	saying	that	the
world	is	frustrating,	the	world	is	dukkha	--	misery.	This	makes	you	pessimistic.
But	this	is	not	the	case.	The	earth	has	not	known	so	happy,	so	blissful	a	person	as
Buddha,	or,	it	has	known	very	few	such	people.	He	was	not	a	pessimist	at	all.	So
what	is	the	secret?	The	secret	is	this:	if	you	know	this	world	is	dukkha,	then	you
do	 not	 expect	 anything	 except	 dukkha.	 Expectation	 only	 creates	 pessimism.
When	there	is	no	expectation,	then	there	is	no	need	to	be	in	misery.	Once	life	is
known	as	miserable,	you	will	never	be	in	misery,	you	will	be	out	of	it.
So	a	sannyasin	is	not	one	who	is	frustrated.	A	sannyasin	is	one	who	has	known
the	world	as	frustrating.	He	is	not	frustrated,	he	is	most	at	ease.	There	is	nothing
to	frustrate	him.
Everything	that	happens,	he	knows	it	happens	so.	Even	death	is	not	an	anguish	to
him,	because	death	is	a	certainty.
Once	 you	 know	 the	 nature	 of	 this	whirling	wheel	 --	 of	 this	world,	 of	 this	 so-
called	life,	of	this	repetitive	vicious	circle	--	then	you	will	become	a	silent	and	a
blissful	person.	Now	you	do	not	hope,	so	there	is	no	feeling	of	hopelessness.	You
are	at	ease,	composed.	The	more	you	are	at	ease,	 the	more	you	are	composed.
The	more	you	are	in	the	moment,	the	more	you	are	non-wavering,	standing	still.
In	 this	 very	moment,	 here	 and	 now,	 is	 all	 that	 is	 to	 be	 known	 and	 realized	 --
moksha,	God,	the	reality	--	in	this	moment.	So	in	a	way,	spiritual	seeking	is	not
for	something.	It	is	not	for	some	object.	It	is	to	know	what	is,	and	the	knowing
comes	once	you	are	in	the	moment.
To	be	in	the	moment	is	the	secret	door,	or	you	may	say	the	open	secret.	To	be	in
the	moment	is	the	open	secret.
I	Am	the	Gate
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Love,	grace	and	divinity
20	April	1971	am	in	Bombay,	India
Archive
code:
7104200
ShortTitle:
GATE04
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Question	1
BELOVED	MASTER,
QUALITIES	OF	LOVE	AND	GRACE	HAVE	BEEN	ATTRIBUTED	TO	THE
DIVINE.
DO	THESE	QUALITIES	EXIST?	DOES	THE	DIVINE	EXIST?	CAN	THIS	BE
EXPLAINED?
To	say	 that	 the	divine	exists	will	not	be	 right,	because	all	 that	exists	 is	divine.
Each	and	everything	exists,	only	the	divine	cannot	be	said	to	exist.	The	divine	is
existence.	 To	 be	 divine	 and	 to	 exist	 is	 to	 say	 the	 same	 thing	 in	 two	 different
ways.	So	the	quality	of	existence	cannot	be	attributed	to	the	divine.
Everything	else	can	be	said	to	exist	because	it	can	go	into	non-existence.	I	can	be
said	 to	 exist	 because	 I	 will	 go	 into	 non-existence,	 you	 can	 be	 said	 to	 exist
because	there	were	times	when	you	were	not	in	existence.	But	the	divine	cannot
be	 said	 to	 exist	 because	 the	 divine	 is	 always	 there.	 Its	 non-existence	 is
inconceivable,	 so	 existence	 cannot	 be	 attributed	 to	 the	 divine.	 I	 will	 say
existence	is	divine,	or	divineness	means	existence.
Nothing	 exists	 which	 is	 not	 divine.	 You	 may	 know	 it	 or	 not,	 it	 makes	 no
difference	as	far	as	your	divinity	is	concerned.	If	you	know	it,	then	you	become
existence,	bliss.	If	you	do	not	know	it,	you	go	on	and	continue	in	agony,	but	you
are	divine.	When	asleep,	when	ignorant,	then	too	you	are	divine.	Even	a	stone	is
divine,	unknown	to	itself.	Existence	is	divine.
All	those	who	try	to	prove	that	God	exists	do	not	know.	This	is	sheer	nonsense	to
prove	that	God	exists.	Those	who	try	to	prove	that	God	does	not	exist	are	in	the
same	boat.	No	one	will	prove	that	existence	exists.	If	you	say	it	this	way,	if	you
ask	me	whether	existence	exists,	the	question	will	be	absurd.
To	 me,	 when	 someone	 says	 that	 God	 exists,	 it	 means	 the	 same	 thing,	 that
existence	exists.
God	and	existence	are	equivalent,	synonyms.	Once	you	have	become	aware	of
what	existence	is,	you	will	not	call	it	existence.	Then	you	will	call	it	God.	The
moment	one	becomes	aware	of	 the	 total	being	 that	 is,	 then	you	cannot	use	 the
existence.	 You	 become	 more	 intimate	 with	 it,	 so	 you	 have	 to	 use	 a	 personal
name.	You	call	it	God.	To	call	existence	God	only	means	this	and	nothing	else:
that	you	can	be	 in	an	 intimate	 relationship	with	 it,	 that	you	can	be	 in	personal
contact	with	it.
It	is	not	something	dead.	It	is	not	something	to	which	you	cannot	be	related.	It	is
not	 something	which	 is	 indifferent	 to	you.	When	we	 say	 existence	 is	God,	we
mean	to	say	existence	is	intimately	related	with	us.	We	are	related	with	it,	and	it
is	not	 indifferent	 to	us.	But	as	 far	as	 the	human	mind	 is	concerned,	we	do	not
know	a	more	accurate	word	to	use	than	God.
If	you	ask	some	orthodox	Jew,	he	will	not	use	the	full	word	God.	He	will	only
use	G-D
the	 O	 is	 dropped.	 If	 you	 ask	 them,	 "Why	 do	 you	 use	 G-D,	 why	 is	 the	 O
dropped?"	 they	 say,	 "Whatever	 we	 say	 is	 always	 less	 than	 what	 is.	 So	 O	 is
dropped	 just	 to	 symbolize	 that	we	 are	 using	 a	word	which	 cannot	 convey	 the
whole,	 which	 cannot	 be	 totally	 comprehensive."	 The	 O	 is	 symbolic	 of	 zero,
symbolic	of	perfection,	symbolic	of	totality,	the	whole.	So	the	O	is	dropped,	only
G-D	remains.
Whenever	 we	 use	 any	 word,	 it	 is	 never	 meaningful	 or	 comprehensive	 of	 the
whole.	 It	 just	 indicates	 not	 something	 about	 the	 divine,	 but	 about	 the	 human
mind.	 If	 you	 say	 xistence',	 then	you	use	 a	 term	which	 is	 neutral.	You	 can	be
indifferent	to	it,	and	existence	can	be	indifferent	to	you.	When	you	use	xistence'
there	cannot	be	a	dialogue	between	you	and	existence.	Then	there	is	no	bridge.
But	those	who	have	known	existence	know	there	is	a	dialogue	with	everything
that	 exists;	 you	 can	 be	 in	 an	 intimate	 relationship,	 in	 love.	 This	 possibility	 of
dialogue,	this	possibility	of	relationship,	this	possibility	of	being	in	love,	makes
the	term	`God'	more	meaningful	than	xistence',	but	they	mean	the	same.
So	 I	will	 not	 say	 that	 the	divine	exists,	 I	will	 say	 that	 all	 that	 exists	 is	divine.
Existence	 is	 divine.	 To	 exist	 is	 to	 be	 divine.	 Nothing	 is	 which	 is	 not	 divine.
Nothing	can	be	which	is	not	divine.	We	may	know	it,	we	may	not	know	it;	we
may	be	aware,	we	may	not	be	aware.	It	makes	no	difference.
Another	 thing	 you	 asked	 is	 whether	 the	 qualities	 of	 love	 and	 grace	 can	 be
attributed	to	God.	Again,	no	qualities	can	be	attributed	to	him,	because	qualities
can	be	attributed	only	if	 the	contrary	is	possible.	You	can	say,	"Someone	loves
me,"	because	someone	is	capable	of	not	loving.	If	he	is	incapable	of	not	loving,
you	will	never	say,	"He	loves	me."
Then	to	say	that	someone	loves	you	carries	no	meaning.	If	I	cannot	be	in	love,	I
can	only	be	in	hatred.	Then	I	can	say,	"I	love	you."	If	I	am	incapable	of	being	in
hatred,	 then	 the	quality	of	 love	 cannot	 be	 attributed	 to	me.	Love	 then	 is	 not	 a
quality,	but	nature.	And	what	is	the	difference	between	quality	and	nature?
A	quality	is	something	which	can	be	in	manifestation	and	which	can	be	in	non-
manifestation.	A	 quality	 is	 something	 of	which	 you	 can	 be	 deprived.	You	 can
exist	with	 the	quality,	you	can	exist	without	 the	quality.	 It	 is	not	your	 intrinsic
existence.	It	is	something	attributed	to	you,	it	is	something	added	to	you.	It	is	not
your	nature.
Nature	is	something	without	which	you	can	never	exist.	So	when	someone	says,
"God	is	loving,"	he	is	not	saying	exactly	the	right	thing.	Jesus	is	right	when	he
says,	"God	is	 love,"	not	 loving.	Then	love	becomes	his	nature,	not	a	quality.	It
cannot	 be	 replaced.	 God	 can	 be	 love,	 love	 can	 be	 God,	 because	 love	 is	 the
intrinsic	nature	of	the	divine.
Love	is	not	something	added,	it	cannot	be.	It	is	not	possible	to	conceive	of	God
without	love.	If	you	conceive	of	God	without	love,	you	are	conceiving	of	a	God
who	is	not	a	God.
To	 conceive	 of	 God	 without	 love	 is	 to	 conceive	 of	 a	 God	 without	 godliness,
because	the	moment	love	is	erased	there	is	no	godliness	left	behind.	So	again,	I
will	not	say	that	love	is	an	attribute.	Neither	will	I	say	that	grace	is	an	attribute;
they	are	nature.
Somewhere	Aesop	has	told	us	in	a	fable	that	by	a	riverside	a	scorpion	requested
of	a	 turtle,	 "Please	carry	me	 to	 the	other	 shore	on	your	back."	The	 turtle	 says,
"Don't	be	foolish.	Don't	think	me	stupid.	You	may	sting	me	in	the	middle	of	the
stream,	and	I	will	drown	and	die."	The	scorpion	said,	"I	am	not	foolish;	rather,
you	 are	 foolish,	 because	 you	 do	 not	 know	 simple	 logic.	 I	 belong	 to	 the
Aristotelian	school,	I	am	a	logician.	So	I	will	teach	you	a	simple	lesson	in	logic.
If	I	sting	you	and	if	you	are	drowned	and	dead,	I	will	also	die	with	you.	So	be
sensible,	be	logical.	I	will	not	sting	you.	I	cannot	sting	you."
The	turtle	thought	for	a	moment	and	then	said,	"Okay!	It	seems	sensible.	Hop	on
me,	and	off	we	go."	And	exactly	 in	midstream	the	sting	comes.	They	both	are
sinking	down.
Before	the	turtle	dies	it	asks,	"Where	has	your	logic	gone?	You	have	done	a	very
illogical	 thing,	 and	 you	 yourself	 said	 that	 this	 is	 simple	 logic,	 that	 you	would
never	do	it,	and	now	you	have	done	it.	Tell	me	before	I	die.	Let	me	learn	another
lesson	of	your	logic."
The	 scorpion	 says,	 "It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 logic	 at	 all,	 it	 is	 just	my	 nature.	 I
cannot	 be	 without	 it.	 I	 can	 talk	 about	 it,	 but	 I	 cannot	 be	 without	 it.	 I	 am
incapable,	really."
Something	which	you	are	incapable	of	doing	or	not	doing	indicates	your	nature.
We	cannot	conceive	of	the	divine	as	being	non-loving	or	without	grace.	The	love
is	always	there,	the	grace	is	always	there.	We	use	two	words	--	love	and	grace	--
because	of	our	linguistic	imitations.	Otherwise,	one	word	will	do.	Either	you	call
it	love	or	you	call	it	grace.
We	use	two	words	because	with	love	we	always	expect	something	in	return,	but
not	with	grace.	Whenever	we	love	someone,	something	in	return	is	expected.	It
is	always	a	bargain,	howsoever	subtle.	Told	or	not	told,	made	known	or	not	made
known,	it	 is	an	inner	bargain.	Something	is	expected	in	return.	That	is	why	we
use	two	words,	`love'	and
`grace',	because	with	grace	nothing	is	expected	in	return,	and	God	never	expects
anything	in	return	from	us.
But	as	far	as	divine	existence	is	concerned,	love	and	grace	are	both	one	and	the
same.	He	is	loving,	and	that	is	his	grace.	He	is	always	with	his	grace,	that	means
he	is	loving.	But	these	are	not	qualities	which	can	be	attributed	to	him.	This	is
his	nature,	he	cannot	be	otherwise.	But	we	make	distinctions	because	someone	is
known	to	have	received	grace,	someone	has	become	beloved	to	the	divine.	That
again	is	a	fallacious	statement.	God	is	always	grace	and	always	love.	But	we	are
not	always	in	the	receptive	mood.
Unless	we	become	receptive	we	cannot	receive	it.	So	when	you	are	not	receiving
divine	grace,	it	is	not	anything	lacking	on	the	part	of	the	divine,	but	something
like	a	barrier	you	are	carrying.	You	are	not	vulnerable	to	it.	God's	nature	is	to	be
graceful,	to	be	grace	itself.
But	as	far	as	we	are	concerned,	we	are	not	naturally	receptive,	we	are	naturally
aggressive.	And	these	are	two	different	things.
If	 the	 mind	 is	 aggressive,	 then	 it	 cannot	 be	 receptive.	 Only	 a	 non-aggressive
mind	 can	 be	 receptive.	 So	 all	 the	 qualities	 which	 carry	 any	 type	 of
aggressiveness	with	them	ought	to	be	dropped,	and	one	has	to	be	just	a	door	to
receive.	Just	like	a	womb,	one	has	to	be	in	total	receptivity.	Then	grace	is	always
flowing,	and	love	is	always	flowing.
From	 everywhere	 grace	 is	 flowing.	 Every	 moment,	 everywhere,	 grace	 is
flowing.	It	is	the	nature	of	existence.	But	we	are	not	receptive,	that	is	the	nature
of	mind.	Mind	is	aggressive.	That	is	why	I	always	insist	that	meditation	means
no-mind.	 Meditation	 means	 non-aggressive	 receptivity	 --	 openness.	 But	 logic
can	never	be	receptive,	 logic	 is	aggressive.	You	are	doing	something,	 then	you
cannot	be	receptive.	You	can	be	receptive	only	when	you	are	not	doing.
When	you	are	in	a	non-doing	state,	absolutely	non-doing,	simply	existing,	then
you	are	open	from,	all	sides,	and	from	everywhere	comes	the	flow	of	grace.	It	is
always	 coming,	 but	 our	 doors	 are	 closed.	We	 are	 always	 escaping	 the	 grace.
Even	if	it	knocks	on	our	doors,	we	escape.
There	is	a	reason	why	we	go	on	escaping:	the	moment	mind	is	born,	it	is	always
safeguarding	itself.	Our	whole	training,	our	whole	education,	the	whole	culture
of	 mankind	 is	 always	 so.	 Our	 whole	 mind,	 our	 whole	 culture,	 is	 based	 on
aggression,	competition,	conflict.	We	have	not	yet	become	so	matured	as	to	learn
the	 secret	 of	 cooperation	 --	 that	 the	 world	 exists	 in	 cooperativeness,	 not	 in
conflict;	 that	 the	other	one,	 the	neighboring	one,	 is	not	 just	a	competitor,	but	a
complementary	 existence	which	makes	me	 richer.	Without	 him	 I	will	 be	 less.
Even	if	a	single	individual	dies	in	the	world	I	am	a	bit	less.	The	richness	that	was
created	 by	 him,	 the	 richness	 carried	 into	 the	 atmosphere,	 is	 no	 more.
Somewhere,	something	has	become	vacant.	So	we	exist	in	a	coexistence,	not	in	a
conflict.
But	the	mind,	the	collective	unconscious,	is	always	thinking	in	terms	of	conflict.
Whenever	 someone	 is	 there,	 the	 enemy	 is	 there.	 The	 enemy	 is	 the	 basic
assumption.	You	 can	 develop	 your	 friendship,	 but	 that	will	 be	 developed.	The
basic	 assumption	 is	 the	 enemy.	Friendship	 can	be	 added	 to	 the	 enemy,	but	 the
base	in	inimical,	and	you	can	never	relax.
That	is	why	you	can	never	rely	on	your	friendships,	because	at	the	base	there	is
enemy.
You	 have	 only	made	 a	 fake	 friendship,	 you	 have	 added	 something	 artificially.
But	somewhere	at	the	base	you	know	always	that	there	is	the	enemy	--	the	other
is	the	enemy.
So	even	with	a	 friend	you	are	not	at	ease,	even	with	your	 lover	you	are	not	at
ease.
Whenever	there	is	someone,	you	are	tense	--	the	enemy	is	there.	Of	course,	the
tension	becomes	less	if	you	have	created	a	facade	of	friendship.	It	is	less,	but	it	is
there.
This	attitude	has	reasons	as	to	why	it	has	developed	so	--	evolutionary	reasons.
Man	has	come	out	of	the	jungle.	The	whole	evolution	has	seen	so	many	stages,
so	many	animal	stages.	Physiologically	also	the	body	knows,	because	the	body	is
not	 yours.	 When	 I	 say	 my	 body,	 I	 am	 claiming	 something	 which	 cannot	 be
claimed.	My	body	has	come	through	centuries	of	development.	The	basic	cell	is
inherited,	in	my	basic	cell	I	inherit	all	that	existed	behind	me.	All	the	animals,	all
the	trees,	all	that	has	existed	has	contributed	to	my	basic	cell.
In	my	basic	cell	there	is	accumulated	the	whole	experience	of	conflict,	struggle,
violence,	aggression.	Each	cell	carries	 the	whole	evolutionary	struggle	 that	has
preceded.
Physiologically	also,	mentally	also,	your	mind	has	not	evolved	just	in	this	life,	it
has	come	to	you	 in	a	 long	 journey.	 It	may	be	even	 longer	 than	 the	body	itself.
Because	 the	 body	 evolved	 on	 this	 earth,	 it	 cannot	 be	more	 than	 forty	million
years	old.	It	cannot	be	older	than	the	earth.
But	the	first	mind	came	from	another	planet,	mind	has	still	deeper	evolutionary
experiences.	And	 all	 those	 experiences	make	 you	 violent	 and	 aggressive.	One
has	 to	be	aware	of	 this	 total	phenomenon.	Unless	one	 is	aware,	one	cannot	be
free	from	his	own	past.	The	whole	problem	is	 that	one	has	 to	be	free	 from	his
own	past,	and	this	past	is	something	very	great	--	incomprehensibly	great.
All	that	has	lived	is	still	living	with	you.	All	that	has	been	is	still	in	you	in	seed,
in	potentiality.	You	come	from	the	past,	you	are	the	past.	This	past-oriented	mind
goes	on	creating	aggression,	goes	on	thinking	in	terms	of	aggression.
So	when	religion	says	be	receptive,	 the	advice	goes	unheard.	The	mind	cannot
think	of	how	it	can	be	receptive.	Mind	has	known	only	one	thing	in	which	it	has
been	 receptive,	 and	 that	 is	 death,	 in	 which	 the	mind	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 do
anything,	then	it	could	not	act.	The	only	thing	that	the	mind	has	known	in	which
it	 has	 to	 be	 receptive	 is	 death.	 So	 whenever	 someone	 says,	 "Be	 receptive,"
somewhere	in	the	shadows	you	feel	death.	If	I	say,	"Be	receptive,"	the	mind	will
then	say,	"Then	you	will	die.	Be	aggressive	if	you	want	to	exist	and	survive.	The
fittest	survives.	The	most	aggressive	one	survives.	If	you	are	just	receptive,	you
will	die."
That	 is	why	 receptivity	 is	 never	 understood	 --	 not	 heard,	 not	 understood.	This
receptivity	has	been	said	in	so	many	ways.	Someone	says,	"Surrender."	It	means
to	be	receptive.
Surrender	 means	 do	 not	 be	 aggressive.	When	 someone	 says,	 "Be	 faithful,"	 it
means	to	be	receptive.
Do	not	be	aggressive	through	your	logic.	Receive	existence	as	it	is.	Let	it	come
in.	The	mind	cannot	love,	because	love	means	to	be	receptive	to	someone.	Even
in	love	we	are	aggressive.	If	you	ask	a	friend,	he	will	say	love	is	nothing	but	a
sort	of	violence,	a	mutual	violence	in	which	two	partners	have	agreed	to	become
involved.	And	when	a	friend	says	this,	he	is	not	just	saying	nonsense.	He	means
it,	and	he	knows	something.
Whenever	you	are	in	a	sexual	act,	whenever	you	are	in	intimate	love,	the	actions
that	 follow	are	 just	 like	 fighting	 --	you	are	 fighting.	 If	you	go	deep	 in	any	act
which	we	know	as	love,	if	you	go	deep	in	it,	you	will	find	animal	roots.	Kissing
can	become	biting	anytime.	If	you	go	on	kissing,	if	it	goes	deep,	it	will	be	biting.
It	is	just	a	mind	form.
Sometimes	 lovers	 will	 say,	 "I	 want	 to	 eat	 you"	 --	 a	 very	 loving	 expression.
Really,	 they	 try.	Sometimes	 it	goes	deep,	becomes	 intensive,	 then	 sex	 is	 just	 a
fight.
So	 two	 partners,	 two	 sexual	 partners,	 will	 always	 alternate	 between	 love	 and
fighting.	 In	 the	 evening	 they	 are	 fighting,	 in	 the	 night	 they	 are	 loving;	 in	 the
morning	they	are	fighting,	 in	 the	evening	they	are	 loving;	 in	 the	night	 they	are
fighting...	This	 circle	will	 go	on	 --	 fighting	 and	 loving,	 fighting	 and	 loving.	 If
you	ask	D.H.	Lawrence,	he	will	 say,	 "If	you	cannot	 fight	with	your	 lover,	you
cannot	love."	The	fight	makes	it	intense.	It	is	just	creating	a	situation.
The	human	mind	as	it	 is,	as	it	has	come	out	of	the	past,	cannot	love	because	it
cannot	be	receptive.	It	can	only	be	aggressive.	So	it	is	not	that	you	are	loving	--
you	 always	 demand	 love.	 And	 even	 if	 you	 act	 loving,	 it	 is	 only	 to	 force	 the
demand.	There	is	a	cunning	logic.
It	is	always	demanding,	"Give	me	love."	And	if	I	give	you	love,	that	is	only	to
demand,	to	make	the	demand	more	forceful.	The	human	mind	cannot	love.
So	if	you	ask	those	who	have	really	known	love,	if	you	ask	Buddha,	he	will	say,
"Unless	 the	 mind	 dies,	 love	 cannot	 be	 born."	 And	 unless	 there	 is	 love,	 you
cannot	feel	grace,	because	only	in	love	do	you	become	open.
And	you	cannot	love	a	particular	individual	because	it	is	impossible	to	be	open
to	a	particular	 individual	 and	closed	 to	 all.	This	 is	one	of	 the	most	 impossible
things	to	do.
If	 I	 say,	 "I	 love	 you,"	 it	 is	 just	 like	 saying,	 "Whenever	 you	 are	 beside	 me	 I
breathe,	otherwise	I	do	not	breathe."	If	this	were	the	case,	then	another	time	you
will	 come	 to	me,	 and	 you	will	 find	me	 dead.	 But	 breathing	 is	 not	 something
which	 I	 can	 do	 and	 not	 do;	 love	 is	 not	 something	 like	 that.	 But	 whatever	 is
known	to	us	as	love	is	like	that.	That	is	why	sooner	or	later	a	lover	will	find	that
the	 other's	 love	 has	 gone	 dead,	 and	 both	will	 know	 this.	 Both	will	 know	 that
there	is	no	love	now.
The	 more	 lovers	 know	 each	 other,	 the	 more	 unfortunate	 is	 the	 situation.	 The
more	they	become	acquainted	with	each	other,	the	lesser	the	hope	and	the	more
the	disillusionment.
They	 know	 that	 the	 love	 has	 gone	 dead.	 You	 so	 narrowed	 it,	 demanded	 so
narrow	a	passage,	that	it	could	not	be	alive.
One	has	to	be	loving,	not	a	lover.	This	loving	must	come	as	an	intensive,	natural
manifestation,	not	as	something	added	as	an	attribute,	as	a	quality.	It	must	come
as	an	 inner	 flowering,	not	as	something	perfumed	from	without.	This	 love	can
happen.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 one's	 total	 past.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 have
transcended,	you	are	beyond	it,	because	that	which	is	aware	is	not	the	mind.
That	which	becomes	aware	of	 the	mind	is	consciousness	which	carries	no	past
with	it	--
which	 is	 eternal,	 which	 is	 always	 in	 the	 now,	 which	 is	 always	 new,	 which	 is
always	 here	 and	 now.	 That	 consciousness	 is	 known	 only	 when	 you	 become
aware	of	your	mind.	Then	you	are	not	identified	with	your	mind.	There	is	a	gap
between	you	and	your	mind.	You	know	this	 is	 the	mind	--	 this	aggressiveness,
this	hatred,	this	whole	hell,	is	the	mind.
And	this	mind	goes	on	continuing.	This	mind	will	go	on	continuing,	unless	you
become	 aware.	And	 this	 is	 a	miracle:	 that	 the	moment	 you	 become	 aware	 the
continuity	is	broken.
Now	you	will	be,	but	not	of	the	past.	Now	you	will	be	of	the	moment	--	fresh,
young,	new.	Now	each	moment	you	will	die,	and	you	will	be	reborn.
Somewhere,	 St.	 Augustine	 says,	 "I	 die	 every	moment."	One	who	 has	 become
aware	 of	 one's	 whole	 mind	 and	 its	 whole	 process,	 the	 continuity,	 the	 past
continuing	itself	and	carrying	on	and	forcing	itself	into	the	future	--	one	who	has
become	 aware	 of	 this	 will	 die	 each	 moment.	 Each	 moment	 the	 past	 will	 be
thrown	 out.	 One	 will	 be	 fresh,	 new	 and	 young,	 ready	 to	 jump	 into	 the	 new
moment	 that	 is	 coming	 on.	 Only	 this	 fresh	 consciousness,	 this	 young
consciousness	--	eternally	young	--	is	receptive,	is	open.	There	are	no	walls	to	it,
no	boundary	walls	to	it.	It	is	completely	open,	just	like	space.
The	Upanishads	call	 it	 the	 inner	 space	of	 the	heart.	There	 is	a	 space,	 simply	a
space.	 That	 is	 consciousness,	 sakshi	 --	 the	 expression	 of	 awareness.	 This
transcendence	of	the	mind,	of	the	past,	makes	you	open	and	vulnerable	from	all
sides,	 to	 all	 the	 dimensions.	 Then	 grace	 is	 falling	 on	 you	 from	 everywhere	 --
from	 the	 trees,	 from	 the	 sky,	 from	 human	 beings,	 from	 animals,	 from
everywhere.	Even	 a	 dead	 stone	 is	 graceful	 then.	You	 feel	 grace	 falling	 toward
you.
Then	you	cannot	say	 this	 is	simply	an	existence.	Then	you	say,	"This	 is	God."
This	metamorphosis,	this	transformation	of	your	own	mind,	this	transformation
of	 the	 dead	mind	 into	 an	 eternally	 living	 consciousness,	 from	 the	 junk	 of	 the
mind	 to	 the	 open	 sky	 of	 the	 consciousness...	 this	 transformation	 changes	 your
attitude	 toward	 existence.	 Then	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 just	 a	 flow	 of	 love	 --
friendly,	compassionate,	loving,	graceful.	Then	you	are	loved	through	thousands
of	hands.
So	Hindu	religion	has	created	deities	with	a	thousand	hands.	It	means	that	from
everywhere	is	the	hand;	nowhere	can	you	go	where	the	divine	hand	will	not	be
upon	you.
Everywhere	 is	 the	 embrace.	 You	 can	 go	 everywhere,	 now	 there	 is	 nowhere
where	the	divine	is	not.
Nanak	went	to	Kaaba.	He	was	tired	when	he	reached	the	mosque,	and	he	just	put
down	 his	 small	 bundle,	 whatever	 it	 was,	 and	 went	 to	 sleep.	 The	 priest	 was
furious	because	his	legs	were	toward	the	holy	stone.	So	he	dragged	him	out	and
said,	 "What	 foolishness	 are	 you	 doing	 here?	You	 do	 not	 even	 have	 this	much
respect	--	that	the	legs	should	not	be	toward	the	holy	stone.	Are	you	an	atheist?"
Nanak's	sleep	was	broken,	and	he	sat	up.	He	said,	"Put	my	legs	in	that	direction
where	God	is	not,	and	do	not	disturb	me."
There	 is	 no	 direction	where	God	 is	 not,	 because	 the	 direction	 itself	 is	 divine,
existence	is	divine,	but	you	must	be	open	to	it.
This	whole	tragedy,	this	dilemma	of	the	human	mind,	is	that	the	mind	is	closed.
The	mind	is	closed	and	it	goes	on	searching	for	that	which	will	be	freedom.	The
mind	is	an	imprisonment,	and	this	imprisonment	goes	on	seeking	freedom.	This
is	the	whole	tragedy	of	human	existence.
This	mind	is	a	prison.	It	cannot	find	any	freedom	anywhere.	It	must	die	before
freedom	comes	to	you.	But	we	have	taken	the	mind	as	us,	we	are	identified	with
it.	This	death	of	mind	never	happens	to	us,	it	never	occurs	to	us.
Mind	 is	 something	 other	 than	 "me."	 But	 we	 go	 on	 being	 identified	 with	 the
mind.	How	then	can	you	come	out	of	the	past	if	you	have	become	identified	with
the	past?	The	one	who	has	forgotten	that	he	is	a	prisoner	is	the	most	imprisoned,
because	there	is	no	possibility	of	his	freedom	then.	But	even	that	prisoner	may
become	aware.	An	even	greater	prisoner	is	the	one	who	has	become	one	with	the
imprisonment,	one	with	the	prison,	who	has	become	identified.	The	walls	of	the
prison	are	his	body.	The	whole	arrangement	of	the	imprisonment	is	his	mind.
Be	 aware,	 be	 conscious	 of	 your	 mind.	 And	 you	 can	 be,	 because	 you	 are
something	different.	The	dream	can	be	broken,	because	you	are	not	 the	dream.
The	dream	is	occurring	to	you,	but	you	are	not	the	dream.	You	can	shatter	this
imprisonment	and	come	out,	because	you	are	not	the	imprisonment.	But	there	is
such	a	long	association	with	the	body	and	the	mind.
And	 understand	 this	 well:	 that	 the	 body	 is	 new,	 each	 birth	 is	 new.	 Each
beginning	is	new,	but	the	mind	is	old.	It	is	continuing	from	your	past	births.	That
is	why	if	someone	says	your	body	is	ill,	you	are	never	angry,	you	feel	that	he	is
sympathetic	to	you.	But	if	someone	says	your	mind	is	mad,	your	mind	is	ill,	you
are	 mentally	 deranged,	 then	 you	 become	 angry.	 Then	 you	 do	 not	 feel	 he	 is
sympathetic	to	you.	He	does	not	seem	friendly.
With	 the	 body	 this	 is	 a	 new	 association,	 only	 of	 this	 birth.	Other	 bodies	 have
died	 with	 which	 you	 have	 been	 in	 association,	 but	 this	 body	 association	 is
broken	with	each	death.
It	has	been	broken	so	many	times	that	one	thinks	himself	a	body,	even	he	is	not
identified	with	his	body.	So	if	his	body	falls	ill,	something	else	has	fallen	ill.
I	was	reading	about	an	alcoholic's	 life.	He	was	sentenced	so	many	 times...	For
the	 tenth	 time	 the	 same	 judge	 is	 sending	 him	 to	 jail.	 So	 the	 judge	 says	 in	 his
judgment,	"It	is	only	the	alcohol,	the	alcohol,	the	alcohol,	which	is	the	root	cause
of	your	problems."	The	man	says,	"Thank	you,	sir.	You	are	the	only	person	who
has	not	made	me	responsible.
Everyone	 else	 says	 I	 am	 at	 fault.	You	 are	 the	 only	man	who	 understands	 that
alcohol	is	at	fault,	that	I	am	not	responsible	at	all."
With	the	body,	if	there	is	some	fault,	you	do	not	feel	you	are	responsible.	But	if
the	mind	feels	some	fault,	then	you	feel	that	you	are	responsible.	The	identity	is
keen	and	deeper.	It	has	to	be,	because	the	body	is	the	outer	layer	of	your	being.
The	mind	is	the	inner	layer.	It	is	the	inner	you,	you	can	be	more	identified	with
it.	It	has	been	with	you	for	so	many	lives.	The	mind	is	the	old,	always	the	old,
the	continuity.	But	you	are	not	the	mind.	And	this	can	be	known,	and	there	is	no
difficulty	in	knowing	about	it.
Just	be	a	witness.	Whenever	the	mind	is	working,	just	sit	aside	and	see	it	--	how
it	works.
Do	not	 interfere.	Do	not	come	in.	The	coming	in	will	again	create	 the	strength
which	makes	 the	 identity.	Do	 not	 come	 in.	Do	 not	 say	 anything.	Do	 not	 be	 a
judge.	Just	sit	aside	as	if	the	traffic	is	passing	on	the	road	and	you	are	sitting	by
the	 side,	 just	 looking.	 Do	 not	 make	 any	 judgement.	 And	 if	 even	 for	 a	 single
moment	you	can	sit	aside	and	 look	at	 the	mind's	 traffic,	 the	continuous	 traffic,
you	will	see	the	gap	--	the	gap	between	you	and	the	mind.	Then	this	gap	can	be
made	greater,	wider	unbridgeable.
When	 the	 gap	 is	 such,	when	 the	 interval	 is	 such,	 then	 there	 is	 no	bridge.	You
have	 seen	 from	 all	 possible	 points	 that	 the	 circle	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 somewhere
where	you	are	not.	You	are	always	inside	--	somewhere	else.	When	this	is	not	a
theory	 but	 a	 realized	 fact,	 then	 you	 are	 open.	 Then	 you	 have	 jumped	 into	 an
inner	 space,	 into	 the	 inner	 sky,	 into	 the	 inner	 space	 of	 the	 heart.	 You	 have
jumped	in.	Now	you	are	there,	and	you	are	open.
You	will	know	then	that	you	have	always	been	open.	You	have	been	sleeping	in
an	open	sky	but	dreaming	that	you	are	in	prison,	and	thoughts	are	not	any	other
substance	than	dreams	are	made	of.	They	are	of	the	same	stuff.	In	the	day	you
call	them	thoughts,	and	at	night	you	call	them	dreams.	But	because	the	thoughts
are	 transparent,	 identifying	becomes	 easier.	With	 anything	 transparent	 you	 can
forget	it	is	there.
If	there	is	a	totally	transparent	glass	between	you	and	me,	I	will	forget	the	glass.
I	 will	 think	 that	 I	 am	 seeing	 you	 directly.	 It	 means	 that	 I	 become	 so	 totally
identified	with	the	glass	that	it	is	not	there.	My	eyes	and	the	glass	have	become
one.
Thoughts	are	transparent,	more	transparent	than	any	glass	you	can	look	through.
They	are	not	at	all	a	hindrance	 then.	That	 is	why	 the	 identity	becomes	deeper.
The	 transparency	 of	 thoughts	 is	 so	 close	 to	 you,	 you	 forget	 totally	 that	 there
exists	a	mind	which	is	always	around	you,	always	between	you	and	the	world.
Always,	wherever	you	are	--	between	you	and	your	lover,	between	you	and	your
friend,	between	you	and	your	God	--	it	is	always	there.
Wherever	you	go,	your	mind	is	a	step	ahead	of	you.	It	is	not	only	that	it	follows
you	like	a	shadow,	it	is	always	one	step	ahead	of	you,	it	has	reached	before	you.
But	you	are	never	aware	of	it	because	it	is	so	transparent.
Whenever	you	are	entering	a	 temple,	your	mind	has	entered	before	you.	When
you	are	going	to	a	friend,	when	you	are	embracing	him,	your	mind	has	embraced
before.	And	 this	you	can	know,	your	mind	 is	always	 rehearsing.	That	stepping
ahead	is	always	rehearsing.
Before	 you	 speak,	 it	 is	 always	 rehearsing	what	 to	 speak.	Before	 you	 act,	 it	 is
always	rehearsing	what	to	act.	Before	you	do	anything	or	do	not	do	anything,	it
is	rehearsing.
The	rehearsal	means	that	the	mind	is	preparing	itself	before	you,	it	is	always	one
step	 ahead.	 And	 that	 is	 a	 constant,	 transparent	 barrier	 between	 you	 and
everything	else	that	you	will	come	across,	that	you	will	encounter.
Thus	an	encounter	can	never	be	real,	authentic,	because	something	else	is	always
in	 between.	 Neither	 can	 you	 love,	 nor	 can	 you	 pray.	 You	 cannot	 do	 anything
which	 requires	 the	 removal	 of	 this	 barrier.	 The	 grace	 is	 not	 felt	 because	 the
barrier	is	there,	always	surrounding	you	like	a	transparent	shell.	Grace	or	love	or
existence	are	not	open	to	them.
When	someone	is	open,	he	becomes	 the	receiver.	But	 then	 too	we	will	not	say
that	 he	 has	 become	 a	 receiver.	 The	 ego	 is	 competitive.	 We	 will	 say	 he	 has
received	grace.	We	are	denying	him	anything.	Now	we	 say,	 "God	has	become
graceful	to	him."
It	is	good	that	we	should	say	God	is	graceful	because	now	nothing	exists	except
God.
Once	the	barrier	is	not,	there	is	nothing	upon	which	to	stand	the	ego.	He	cannot
say	"I,"
so	he	cannot	say,	"I	have	become	capable	of	receiving	grace."	He	can	only	say
"I"	have	received	because	"I"	was	not	 there.	"I"	was	the	barrier.	So	once	"I"	 is
not,	he	can	always	say,	"It	is	due	to	God's	grace.	What	can	I	do?	I	is	no	more."
It	 is	 right	when	 he	 says	 so,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 right	when	we	 say	 so.	We	 are	 again
deceiving	ourselves.	We	are	deceiving	ourselves	because	we	are	not	recognizing
a	 great	 transformation.	The	 ego	will	 not	 let	 us	 recognize	 it.	 The	 ego	will	 say,
"God	is	graceful	 to	him	and	not	 to	me."	We	create	this	very	misguiding	notion
that	God	is	graceful	to	someone.	He	is	grace.
If	someone	is	ready	to	receive,	he	is	always	giving.	He	is	not	even	ready	to	give
--	he	is	giving.	When	you	are	not	receiving,	then	too	he	is	giving.	When	you	are
closed,	then	too	he	is	raining,	his	blessings	are	raining.	Be	open	and	know	it.	Be
conscious	and	be	open,	and	only	then	you	can	know	what	love	is,	what	grace	is,
what	compassion	is.	And	they	are	one	and	the	same	thing,	they	are	not	different
things.	Basically	they	are	one	and	the	same.
Only	then	can	you	know	what	prayer	is.	When	the	barrier	is	not,	then	prayer	is
not	to	ask	for	something,	it	is	not	begging.	Then	it	is	thanksgiving.	So	wherever
there	is	a	prayer	that	begs	for	something,	the	barrier	is	there.	The	begging	is	the
barrier,	the	mind	is	the	barrier.
Whenever	there	is	a	prayer	which	thanks	for	something,	not	even	for	something
but	 thanks	 for	 all	 that	 is...	Whenever	 grace	 is	 received,	 you	 feel	 gratitude.	On
God's	part	it	is	grace,	on	the	receiver's	end	it	is	gratitude.
We	have	not	known	gratitude	at	all.	We	cannot	know	unless	we	know	grace.	We
cannot	be	grateful	unless	we	know	grace.	And	this	can	be	known.
Do	not	 begin	 a	 search,	 do	 not	 begin	 an	 inquiry	 for	 the	 divine,	 because	 that	 is
metaphysical	 and	 useless.	 It	 has	 been	 going	 on	 for	 centuries	 that	 the
philosophers	have	been	thinking	about	what	are	 the	attributes	of	God.	So	there
have	been	metaphysicians	who	will	say,	"This	is	an	attribute	of	God	and	that	is
not."
Someone	 will	 say	 he	 is	 attributeless	 --	 nirguna.	 Someone	 will	 say	 he	 is	 with
attributes	--
saguna.	But	 how	can	we	know	what	we	have	not	 known	ourselves?	And	how
can	we	decide	whether	God	is	with	attributes	or	without	attributes,	whether	he	is
loving	or	not?
Just	by	thinking	we	are	going	to	decide	it?	This	is	not	possible.
So	metaphysics	will	 lead	us	 into	absurdity.	When	human	 imagination	becomes
logical,	then	we	think	that	we	have	achieved	something.	We	have	not	achieved
anything.
Imagination	is	ours,	and	logic	is	ours.	We	have	not	known	anything.
Always	begin	with	yourself	 if	you	are	to	escape	from	metaphysics.	And	if	you
cannot	 escape	 from	 metaphysics,	 you	 cannot	 be	 religious.	 Metaphysics	 and
religion	are	opposite	pillars.	Do	not	begin	with	God	at	 all.	Always	begin	with
your	mind	--	where	you	are.
Always	begin	from	there.	If	you	begin	from	your	mind,	then	something	can	be
done.
Then	you	can	know	something,	 then	 something	can	be	 transformed.	Then	 it	 is
within	your	capacity	to	do	something.	And	if	your	capacity	to	do	something	with
yourself	is	used	completely,	you	will	grow,	you	will	expand,	your	barrier	will	be
gone,	 your	 consciousness	 will	 be	 naked.	 Only	 then	 can	 you	 begin	 with	 the
divine.
When	you	have	begun,	when	you	are	in	contact	with	the	divine,	then	you	know
what	 grace	 is,	what	 gratitude	 is.	Grace	 is	 that	which	you	 feel	 showering	upon
you	from	everywhere,	and	gratitude	is	that	which	you	feel	within	your	heart,	at
the	 center	 of	 that	 space	 upon	 which	 the	 whole	 is	 showering	 his	 love,	 his
compassion,	 his	 grace.	 Only	 then	 is	 it	 meaningful	 to	 say,	 "Oh	 God"	 or	 Hare
Ram.	Otherwise	our	words	are	just	words	--
not	 known	 from	 existence,	 but	 only	 learned	 from	 language,	 learned	 from	 the
scriptures.
So	I	will	not	say	what	are	the	attributes	of	God.	As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	as	far
as	 I	know,	God	has	no	attributes.	But	 it	 does	not	mean	 that	when	we	come	 in
contact	with	 him	we	will	 not	 feel	 his	 love,	we	will	 not	 feel	 his	 grace.	 It	 only
means	 that	 these	 are	 not	 his	 attributes,	 these	 are	 his	 nature.	 This	 is	 how	 he
happens	 to	be,	 and	he	 cannot	be	otherwise.	When	you	 are	 close	 to	him,	when
you	are	just	giving	back	to	him,	then	too	he	is	the	same.
It	is	just	like	light	--	your	eyes	are	closed,	but	the	light	is	still	there.	It	will	not	go
into	nonexistence	just	because	your	eyes	are	closed.	Open	your	eyes!	The	light	is
there,	it	has	always	been	there.	Begin	with	your	eyes.
You	can	never	think	anything	about	light.	How	can	you	think?	And	any	thinking,
any	contemplating,	will	be	wrong;	from	the	very	beginning	it	will	be	wrong.	You
cannot	think,	you	have	not	known.
Thinking	about	that	which	is	known	will	go	on	in	circles.	It	can	never	touch	the
unknown,	 it	 can	 never	 conceive	 of	 the	 unknown.	 The	 unknown	 is	 not	 for
thinking.	That	is	why	thinkers	will	go	on	denying	God,	because	he	is	not	known
to	 them.	When	 someone	 says	God	 is	not,	 it	 is	not	 that	he	 is	 against	God,	 it	 is
only	 that	 he	 is	 a	 man	 who	 thinks;	 it	 is	 nothing	 else.	 He	 is	 not	 against	 God,
because	to	be	against	God	will	have	to	be	preceded	by	knowing	him.	He	is	not
against	God.	One	who	knows	cannot	be	against.	One	who	has	known	--	how	can
he	be	against?	It	only	shows	that	he	just	goes	on	thinking.	And	thinking	cannot
conceive	of	the	unknown,	so	he	denies	it.
Do	not	begin	with	God.	That	 is	a	false	beginning,	 it	always	 leads	 to	nonsense.
All	 metaphysics	 is	 nonsense.	 It	 goes	 on	 thinking	 about	 things	 about	 which
nothing	can	be	thought.	It	goes	on	giving	statements	about	the	existence,	about
which	no	statements	can	be	given.	Only	silence	can	be	a	statement	about	it.
But	if	you	begin	with	yourself,	then	much	that	is	solid	can	be	said.	If	you	begin
with	yourself,	then	you	begin	with	the	right	beginning.
Religion	 means	 to	 begin	 with	 oneself,	 and	 metaphysics	 means	 to	 begin	 with
God.	So	metaphysics	 is	madness	 --	of	course,	with	a	method.	All	madmen	are
metaphysicians	 without	 method,	 and	 all	 metaphysicians	 are	 mad	 but	 with
methodology.	Because	of	their	methodology,	they	seem	to	be	talking	sense,	and
they	go	on	talking	nonsense.
Begin	with	yourself.	Do	not	ask	whether	God	exists.	Ask	whether	 I	exists.	Do
not	 ask	 whether	 love	 is	 an	 attribute	 of	 the	 divine.	 Ask	 whether	 love	 is	 an
attribute	of	mine	--
whether	"I"	have	ever	 loved.	Do	not	ask	about	grace.	Ask	whether	I	have	ever
felt	gratitude,	because	that	is	the	pole	which	is	just	nearby,	which	is	just	a	step
from	us.	We	can	know	it.
Always	begin	from	the	beginning.	Never	begin	from	the	end,	because	then	it	is
no	beginning	at	all.	One	who	begins	from	the	beginning	always	reaches	the	end,
and	one	who	begins	from	the	end	does	not	even	reach	the	beginning,	because	to
begin	from	the	end	is	impossible.	You	can	just	go	on	and	on.
Make	God	not	a	metaphysical	notion	but	a	religious	experience.	Go	inward.	He
is	 there	 always	 waiting	 for	 you.	 But	 then	 you	 have	 to	 do	 something	 with
yourself.	 That	 doing	 is	 meditation;	 that	 doing	 is	 yoga.	 Do	 something	 with
yourself.	As	you	are,	you	are	closed.
As	you	are,	you	are	dead.	As	you	are,	you	are	not	in	any	dialogue	--	you	cannot
be	in	any	dialogue	--	with	the	divine,	with	the	existence.	So	transform	yourself.
Open	some	doors,	break	open	some	spaces,	make	some	windows,	jump	outside
of	your	mind,	your	past.
And	then	it	is	not	only	that	you	will	know,	but	you	will	live.	You	will	live	with
the	grace	of	the	divine;	you	live	with	the	love,	you	will	be	part	of	it,	just	a	ripple
of	it.	And	once	you	have	become	a	ripple	of	it,	a	wave	of	the	divine,	only	then	is
there	authentic	divineness.
So	 I	 am	 not	 a	 metaphysician	 at	 all.	 You	 can	 call	 me	 an	 anti-metaphysician.
Religion	is	existential.	Begin	from	yourself,	begin	transforming	your	aggressive
mind.	Let	it	be	just	receptive.
I	would	like	to	tell	you...	Buddha	tried	for	six	years	continuously	to	know	what
the	 divine	 is,	 and	 it	 cannot	 be	 said	 that	 he	 left	 anything	 undone.	 He	 did
everything	 that	 is	 humanly	 possible,	 even	 some	 things	 which	 seem	 humanly
impossible.	He	did	everything.
Whatever	was	known	up	to	his	day	he	practiced.	Whatever	methods	were	taught
to	him,	he	became	a	master	of	them.
He	went	to	all	the	gurus	that	existed	in	his	time,	to	everyone.	And	whatever	they
could	 teach,	he	 learned,	he	practiced.	And	then	he	said,	"Anything	more,	Sir?"
And	 the	guru	said,	 "Now	you	can	go,	because	all	 that	 I	could	give	you	 I	have
given,	and	I	cannot	say,	as	I	say	in	other	cases,	that	you	have	not	practiced.	You
have	practiced.	This	is	all	that	I	can	give."	Buddha	said,	"I	have	not	known	the
divine	yet."
With	each	guru	this	happened.	Then	he	left	all	 the	gurus.	Then	he	invented	his
own	methods.	Continuously,	for	six	years,	he	was	in	a	struggle	of	life	and	death.
He	did	everything	that	could	be	done.	Then,	at	last,	he	was	so	tired	of	doing,	so
deadly	tired,	that	one	day	when	he	was	taking	his	evening	bath	in	the	Niranjana
River	near	Bodhgaya,	he	felt	so	weak	and	so	tired	that	he	could	not	come	out	of
the	river.	He	just	clung	to	a	root	of	a	tree	and	a	thought	came	to	his	mind,	"I	have
become	 so	weak,	 I	 cannot	 even	 cross	 this	 small	 river.	How	will	 I	 be	 alive	 to
cross	 the	 whole	 ocean	 of	 the	 world?	 I	 have	 done	 everything,	 and	 I	 have	 not
found	the	divine.	I	have	only	tired	my	body."
He	felt	that	he	was	on	the	verge	of	death.	At	that	very	moment	he	felt	that	he	had
done	everything,	and	now	there	was	nothing	to	do.	He	relaxed,	and	new	energy
came	upon	him	because	of	his	relaxation.	All	that	was	suppressed	through	those
six	years	flowered.	He	came	out	of	 the	river,	he	felt	 just	 like	a	feather,	a	bird's
feather	--	weightless.	He	relaxed	under	a	Bodhi	tree.
It	 was	 a	 bright	 fullmoon	 night.	 Someone	 came	 --	 a	 girl,	 a	 shudra	 girl	 named
Sujata.	The	name	shows	that	 the	girl	must	have	been	a	shudra	because	to	have
the	 name	 Sujata	 means	 she	 has	 not	 come	 from	 a	 higher	 caste.	 Sujata	 means
wellborn.	She	had	promised	the	Bodhi	tree	to	pay	it	some	homage	daily,	so	she
has	come	with	some	sweets.
Buddha	 is	 there	 --	 tired,	pale,	bloodless,	 but	 relaxed,	 absolutely	unburdened	 --
and	it	is	a	fullmoon	night	with	nobody	around.	The	girl,	Sujata,	felt	that	the	deity
of	 the	 tree	had	come	 to	 receive	her	homage.	Had	 it	been	another	day,	Buddha
could	have	refused.	He	would	not	rest	 in	the	night,	he	would	not	eat	any	food.
But	today	he	was	totally	relaxed.
He	 took	 the	 food,	 and	he	 slept.	This	was	 the	 first	 night	 after	 six	years	 that	 he
really	slept.
He	 was	 relaxed	 with	 nothing	 to	 do.	 Then	 there	 was	 no	 worry.	 There	 was	 no
tomorrow	even,	because	tomorrow	exists	only	because	one	has	to	do	something.
If	one	has	not	 to	do	anything,	 then	 there	 is	no	 tomorrow.	Then	 the	moment	 is
enough.
Buddha	 slept,	 and	 in	 the	 morning,	 at	 five	 o'clock,	 when	 the	 last	 star	 was
withering	away,	he	was	out	of	the	sleep.	He	saw	the	last	star	disappearing,	with
no	mind,	because	when	you	have	nothing	 to	do	 there	 is	no	mind.	The	mind	 is
just	a	faculty	for	doing	something,	a	technical	faculty.	No	mind,	nothing	to	do,
no	effort	on	his	part,	indifferent	to	whether	he	was	alive	or	dead,	he	just	opened
his	eyes,	and	he	began	to	dance.	He	had	come	to	that	knowing	to	which	he	could
not	come	through	so	many	efforts.
Whenever	someone	would	ask	him	how	he	achieved,	he	would	say,	"The	more	I
tried	to	achieve,	the	more	I	was	at	a	loss.	I	could	not	achieve.	So	how	can	I	say	I
have	achieved?
The	more	I	 tried,	 the	more	I	was	 involved.	 I	could	not	achieve.	The	mind	was
trying	 to	 transcend	 itself,	 which	 was	 impossible.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 trying	 to	 be	 a
father	to	yourself,	just	trying	to	give	birth	to	yourself."
So	Buddha	would	say,	"I	cannot	say	I	achieved.	I	can	only	say	I	tried	so	much
that	 I	was	annihilated.	 I	 tried	 so	much	 that	any	effort	became	absurd.	And	 the
moment	came	when	I	was	not	 trying,	when	 the	mind	was	not,	when	I	was	not
thinking.	Then	there	was	no	future	because	there	was	no	past.	Both	were	always
together.	 Past	 is	 behind,	 future	 is	 in	 front;	 they	 are	 always	 conjoined.	 If	 one
drops,	 the	 other	 drops	 simultaneously.	 Then	 there	 was	 no	 future,	 no	 past,	 no
mind.	I	was	mindless,	I	was	I-less.	Then	something	happened,	and	I	cannot	say
that	this	something	happened	in	that	moment.	I	can	only	say	that	this	was	always
happening,	only	I	was	not	aware.	It	was	always	happening,	only	I	was	closed.
So	I	cannot	say	I	have	achieved	something."
Buddha	said,	"I	can	only	say	I	have	lost	something	--	the	ego,	the	mind	--	I	have
not	achieved	anything	at	all.	Now	I	know	that	all	that	I	have	was	always	there.	It
was	in	every	layer,	it	was	in	every	stone,	in	every	flower,	but	now	I	recognize	it
was	 always	 so.	 Only	 I	 was	 blind.	 So	 I	 have	 lost	 my	 blindness;	 I	 have	 not
achieved	anything,	I	have	lost	something."
If	 you	 begin	 with	 the	 divine,	 then	 you	 begin	 to	 achieve.	 If	 you	 begin	 with
yourself,	 then	you	begin	to	lose.	Things	will	begin	to	disappear,	and	ultimately
you	will	disappear.	And	when	you	are	not,	the	divine	is	--	with	all	its	grace,	with
all	its	love,	with	all	its	compassion,	but	only	when	you	are	not.
Your	nonexistence	is	the	categorical	condition.	For	no	one	can	it	be	relaxed.	It	is
categorical,	it	is	the	absolute.	You	are	the	barrier.	Fall	down,	and	then	you	know.
And	only	when	you	know,	you	know.	You	cannot	understand	it,	I	cannot	explain
it	 to	you.	 I	cannot	make	you	understand	 it.	So	whatever	 I	am	saying,	 I	am	not
saying	anything	metaphysical.	I	am	only	trying	to	show	you	that	you	must	begin
with	yourself.
If	 you	 begin	with	 yourself,	 you	will	 end	with	 the	 divine,	 because	 that	 is	 your
other	part,	the	other	pole.	But	begin	from	this	bank.	Do	not	begin	from	the	other,
where	you	are	not.
You	cannot	begin	from	there.	Begin	from	where	you	are,	and	the	more	you	will
go	deep,	the	less	you	will	be.
The	more	you	will	know	yourself,	the	less	a	self	you	will	be.	And	once	you	have
come	to	total	understanding	about	yourself,	you	will	be	annihilated,	you	will	go
into	nonexistence,	you	will	be	totally	negative	--	not.	And	in	that	not,	in	that	total
negation,	 you	 will	 know	 the	 grace	 which	 is	 always	 falling,	 which	 is	 always
raining	down	from	eternity.	You	will	know	the	love	which	is	always	around	you.
It	has	always	been,	but	you	have	not	paid	any	attention	to	it.	Be	annihilated,	and
you	will	be	aware	of	it.
I	Am	the	Gate
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Meditation	and	the	paths	to	inner	awakening	28	April	1971	pm	in
Bombay,	India
Archive
code:
7104285
ShortTitle:
GATE05
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Question	1
BELOVED	MASTER,
HOW	DOES	MEDITATION	REALLY	WORK?	HOW	CAN	ONE	ACHIEVE	A
CONSTANT	 MEDITATIVE	 STATE?	 AND	 IN	 WHAT	 WAY	 DOES
KUNDALINI	PRACTICE	RELATE	TO	MEDITATION?
Meditation	 is	 an	 adventure,	 an	 adventure	 into	 the	 unknown	 --	 the	 greatest
adventure	 that	 the	 human	 mind	 can	 take.	 And	 by	 adventure	 I	 mean	 that	 you
cannot	be	cultivated	in	it.
First,	 you	 cannot	 know	 anything	 beforehand.	Unless	 you	 know	 it,	 you	 cannot
know	it.
Everything	said	ultimately	means	nothing:	truth	remains	unsaid.	Much	has	been
said,	much	has	been	said	about	nothing;	however,	not	a	single	word	of	truth	has
been	uttered.
Unless	 you	 know	 it,	 you	 cannot	 know	 it.	 But	 something	 about	 it	 can	 be
indicated.	 It	will	never	be	 to	 the	point,	 it	 cannot	be.	The	nature	of	 the	 thing	 is
such	that	this	is	impossible.
You	cannot	say	that	this	is	meditation.	All	that	is	possible	is	to	say	that	this	is	not
meditation,	this	is	not	meditation,	that	is	not	meditation.	The	remaining	is.	And
the	remaining	is	left	unindicated.
Many	reasons	for	it	are	there.	Meditation	is	something	greater	than	the	mind.	It
is	not	something	which	happens	in	the	mind.	It	 is	something	which	happens	to
the	mind,	not	in	the	mind;	otherwise	the	mind	will	be	capable	of	defining	it,	the
mind	 will	 be	 capable	 of	 knowing	 it,	 understanding	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 something
happening	in	the	mind,	but	to	the	mind.
The	happening	is	just	like	death	happens	to	life.	Death	never	happens	in	life,	it
happens	to	life.
Meditation	 is	 just	 like	 death	 to	 the	mind,	 as	 death	 is	 to	 life.	We	 can	 say	 that
meditation	is	a	deeper	death	--	not	physical,	but	psychic.	The	deeper	the	death,
the	deeper	is	the	possibility	to	be	reborn.	When	there	is	physical	death,	you	will
be	reborn	physically.	As	far	as	you	are	concerned,	nothing	will	have	happened	at
all,	nothing.	You	will	remain	the	same	--	the	same	continuity,	the	same	old	one.
The	deeper	the	death,	the	deeper	is	the	resurrection.	If	you	die	psychologically,	if
the	 mind	 dies,	 then	 you	 are	 reborn.	 And	 this	 rebirth	 is	 not	 just	 like	 physical
rebirth,	because	then	the	body	is	replaced;	a	new	one	replaces	it.	But	when	there
is	 mental,	 psychic	 death,	 the	 mind	 is	 not	 replaced.	 Consciousness	 remains
without	the	mind.
So	meditation	 is	 consciousness	 without	 the	 mind	 --	 an	 open	 sky	 without	 any
walls	 around	 it.	 We	 can	 destroy	 the	 walls	 of	 this	 house,	 but	 not	 the	 room,
becausroom'	means	nothing	but	space.	So	now	the	room	will	be	the	roomness.
The	room	will	be	there	under	the	open	sky.	Of	course	you	will	no	longer	see	it	as
the	room,	because	now	you	cannot	define	it,	it	has	become	one	with	the	sky.	But
the	room	is	there	more	than	before,	only	the	walls	are	not.	So	if	you	define	the
room	as	the	roomness,	the	emptiness	between	the	walls,	then	without	the	walls
the	room	will	still	be	there.	It	will	have	become	greater,	infinite.
So	as	 the	mind	dies	 --	when	 I	 say	 the	mind	dies,	 I	only	mean	 the	walls	of	 the
mind	 --	 the	 emptiness	 within	 this	 space	 remains,	 becomes	 greater.	 That	 is
consciousness.	Make	 a	 distinction.	 I	 call	 the	 emptiness	within,	 consciousness,
and	the	walls	around	it	the	mind.
Or	you	can	say	it	like	this:	mind	with	a	small	`m'	dies,	mind	with	a	capital	`M'
goes	on	 living.	Then	 it	 is	not	your	mind,	 it	cannot	be	yours.	 If	 these	walls	are
removed,	this	room	will	not	be	mind.	The	room	will	be	there,	but	it	will	not	be
mind,	because	mind	can	only	be	the	walls,	mind	can	only	be	the	limitations.	This
pure	emptiness	cannot	be	mind.	So	then	the	mind	with	a	small	`m'	dies,	and	the
mind	with	a	capital	`M'	is	there;	you	are	not	there.	And	you	are	not	replaced	by
any	other	mind,	you	are	not	replaced	at	all.
So	meditation	is	a	subtle	death	--	a	deep	death	of	you,	your	mind,	your	ego,	of	all
that	 makes	 you	 defined.	 But	 that	 which	 is	 within	 is	 there.	 That	 is	 pure
consciousness.
So	firstly,	 the	walls	of	 the	mind,	 the	mental	processes,	are	not	meditation,	 they
are	 obstacles.	What	 are	 walls	 of	 the	mind?	How	 has	 the	mind	 defined	 itself?
How	has	it	become	a	limited	thing?	Where	are	the	boundaries,	the	walls,	due	to
which	the	mind	has	become	separated	from	the	Mind?
There	 are	 three	 things:	 the	 first	 is	 memory.	 The	 greater	 part	 of	 the	 mind	 is
memory.	And	this	memory	is	a	long	one,	it	goes	back	to	all	the	infinite	lives	that
you	have	lived.	The	mind	accumulates	everything,	not	only	that	which	you	have
collected	consciously.	When	you	are	asleep	the	mind	is	collecting.	When	you	are
even	in	a	coma,	completely	unconscious,	the	mind	is	collecting.	The	mind	goes
on	collecting.	Nothing	escapes	it.	The	unconscious	mind	is	a	great	Chinese	wall
of	memories	--	a	very	long	one.
This	memory	is	not	only	a	part	of	your	brain,	but	in	fact	a	part	of	each	and	every
cell	of	your	being,	of	each	and	every	cell	of	your	body.	That	is	why	twenty-four
cells	 from	the	male	and	 twenty-four	cells	 from	the	female	begin	 to	create	you.
They	have	a	built-in	program,	they	have	a	built-in	memory.	One	day	we	will	be
capable	of	knowing	what	type	of	a	nose	you	will	have	even	when	you	are	in	the
womb	the	first	day.	The	new	egg	will	indicate	what	type	of	eyes	you	will	have,
how	great	will	be	your	age,	how	much	intelligence,	how	much	ego.
That	so	simple	looking	cell	is	as	complex	as	you	are.	It	is	all	the	memories	of	the
whole	race.	It	carries	on	the	collective	mind.	And	then	your	soul,	your	ego,	your
mind,	penetrates	in	it.	So	the	body	has	its	own	memories,	and	your	mind	has	its
own.	You	are	a	crossroads	--	a	mind	with	so	many	memories,	and	a	body	with	so
many	memories	of	the	whole	collective	race,	the	whole	collective	mind.	Bodily
memories	 are	 stronger	 than	 the	 mind.	 So	 you	 always	 are	 a	 victim	 to	 them.
Howsoever	you	may	think	against	them,	when	the	moment	comes	the	body	wins.
Your	mind	 is	nothing	before	 it,	because	 it	 is	a	 racial	mind.	That	 is	why	all	 the
religions	fell	in	a	trap	when	they	began	to	fight	the	body.	You	cannot	fight	it.	If
you	begin	to	fight	it,	you	will	only	be	wasting	your	life.
You	cannot	fight	with	the	body	because,	in	fact,	it	is	the	race	--	not	only	the	race,
it	is	the	whole	history	of	the	being	itself.	Things	go	on	living	in	you.	Everything
that	 has	 existed	 goes	 on	 living	 in	 you	 body.	Your	 own	 self	 carries	 everything
within	it.	That	 is	why	a	child	in	 the	womb	has	to	pass	 through	all	 those	stages
through	which	the	human	being	passes	in	evolution.
Those	nine	months	in	the	womb	are	total	evolution	compressed.	One	begins	just
as	an	amoeba,	the	first	primitive	cell.	One	begins	just	in	the	same	situation	as	the
amoeba	 had	 to	 begin	 in	 sea	 water.	 The	 womb	 contains	 the	 same	 chemical
conditions	as	the	sea	water.
The	womb	water	 in	which	 the	cell	 swims	has	 the	same	components	as	 the	sea
water,	exactly	the	same.
In	the	womb	the	evolution	begins	again.	Of	course,	 it	 is	a	miniature	evolution.
But	the	whole	thing	has	to	begin	again,	because	the	cell	has	a	memory,	it	cannot
work	otherwise.
It	will	go	again	through	the	same	process.	The	time	will	be	short.	The	amoeba
had	to	pass	millions	of	years,	then	it	was	able	to	come	on	the	earth	from	the	sea.
This	cell,	 this	egg	cell	within	 the	womb,	will	pass	within	a	week.	But	 in	 those
seven	days	there	will	be	the	same	evolution,	compressed	from	millions	of	years,
and	the	same	stages.	These	nine	months	are	compressed	evolution,	and	the	cell
has	a	built-in	program.
So	in	a	way	your	body	is	the	whole	evolution.	In	a	very	compressed	atomic	state
the	body	has	a	memory	of	its	own.	One	who	desires	or	longs	to	be	in	meditation
will	 first	 have	 to	 understand	 his	 body	memory,	 the	 physiological	memory.	Do
not	fight	with	it.	If	you	begin	fighting	you	are	taking	the	wrong	step.	You	will	be
more	and	more	disturbed.	Be	cooperative,	there	is	no	other	way.	Let	the	body	be
completely	at	ease.	Do	not	create	any	 tension	between	you	and	the	body.	Your
real	fight	is	not	with	the	body,	not	with	the	body	memory	but	with	ego	memory	-
-	your	psyche,	your	mind.	And	that	is	another	thing,	completely	different.	So	do
not	fight	with	the	body.
When	we	fight	with	the	body,	we	never	have	time	to	fight	with	the	mind.	And	if
we	begin	to	fight	with	the	body,	it	will	go	on	and	on.	It	will	be	suicidal,	it	will	be
destructive,	it	will	just	sow	seeds	of	its	own	defeat.	One	is	bound	to	be	defeated	-
-	a	single	cell	fighting	the	whole	humanity,	fighting	the	whole	being	as	such;	that
is	impossible.
So	 do	 not	 take	 bodily	memories	 as	 your	memories.	 For	 example,	 hunger	 is	 a
body	 memory.	 You	 can	 fight	 with	 it,	 but	 to	 win	 will	 be	 very	 difficult,	 very
arduous,	 nearly	 impossible.	 If	 you	win,	 your	 victory	will	 be	 your	 total	 defeat,
because	if	you	can	win	over	your	hunger	you	have	taken	a	suicidal	step.	Within
ninety	days	you	will	be	dead.	Even	the	body	will	not	indicate	to	you	that	now	is
the	time	to	feed	it.	So	it	is	good	that	you	never	win	over	it,	otherwise	it	will	be
suicidal.	 Then	 between	 you	 and	 your	 body	memories	 there	will	 be	 no	 bridge.
That	is	the	only	way	to	win	--	but	you	are	not	winning	really,	you	are	going	to
murder	yourself.
So	 there	are	methods	which	can	break	 the	bridge	between	you	and	your	body.
There	are	methods,	so	many	hatha	yoga	methods	to	break	the	bridge.	The	body
goes	 on	 crying	 hunger,	 hunger,	 hunger...	 but	 you	 never	 know,	 the	 bridge	 is
broken.	The	body	goes	on,	but	you	never	know	about	it,	you	become	insensitive
to	 it.	 Never	 practice	 anything	 which	 makes	 your	 body	 or	 you	 insensitive,
because	meditation	is	total	sensitivity.
When	you	become	meditative,	your	body	will	become	so	sensitive	--	you	cannot
conceive	now	how	sensitive	the	body	organs	can	be.	We	never	hear	exactly,	we
never	see	exactly	-
-	 just	 so-so.	You	 pass	 through	 a	 garden,	 you	 seem	 to	 be	 looking	 but	 you	 just
look,	you	do	not	see.	The	eyes	have	become	insensitive,	you	have	been	fighting
with	 the	 eyes.	 The	 body	 has	 become	 insensitive,	 you	 have	 been	 fighting	 the
body.
The	whole	culture	is	against	the	body	--	this	whole	culture,	wherever	it	is,	East
or	West,	it	makes	no	difference.	The	culture	that	has	developed	on	this	planet	is,
in	a	way,	diseased.
It	is	against	the	body,	and	the	body	is	a	great	mystery.	If	you	go	against	the	body,
then	in	a	way	you	have	gone	against	the	universe;	it	is	a	miniature	universe.	Your
relationship	to	the	universe,	your	bridge	to	the	universe,	your	instruments	to	the
universe,	are	all	through	the	body.	Your	body	is	just	a	midway	station.
So	do	not	 fight	with	 the	body.	Always	make	 a	 clear	 distinction	of	what	 is	 the
body	memory	and	what	 is	 the	mind	memory.	Hunger	 is	 the	body	memory,	and
you	 can	 know	 it.	 But	 the	 mind	 has	 its	 own	 memories	 also.	 They	 are	 not
existential;	they	have	no	survival	value,	in	fact.	Body	memories	have	a	survival
value,	 and	 that	 is	 the	basic	distinction.	 If	you	deny	 the	body	memories,	 if	you
fight	 against	 them,	 you	will	 not	 survive.	But	 psychological	memories	 have	no
survival	value	really.	They	are	simply	waste	accumulation	--	something	which	is
to	be	thrown	if	you	have	accumulated	it,	something	which	needs	to	be	thrown.
You	have	only	burdened	yourself	with	it.	And	these	mind	memories	are	long.
Whenever	you	are	in	anger,	there	are	two	possibilities:	it	may	be	a	body	memory,
it	may	be	a	mind	memory.	A	certain	distinction	is	to	be	made	between	them.	If
your	anger	has	a	 survival	value,	 if	you	cannot	 survive	without	 it,	 then	 it	has	a
bodily	medium,	But	if	your	anger	has	no	survival	value,	then	it	is	just	a	habit	of
the	mind,	 just	 a	mechanical	 repetition	of	 the	mind.	Then	 it	 is	 a	mind	memory.
You	 have	 been	 angry	 so	many	 times,	 it	 has	 become	 a	 conditioning	with	 you.
Whenever	someone	just	pushes	you,	just	pushes	the	button,	you	are	angry	again.
So	be	aware.
One	who	 is	 never	mentally	 angry,	 not	 habitually	 angry...	 his	 bodily	 anger	will
have	 a	 beauty	 of	 its	 own.	 It	 will	 never	 be	 ugly.	 Then	 it	 will	 only	 mean	 that
someone	is	living,	not	dead.	But	the	more	you	are	habitually	angry,	the	less	will
be	your	capacity	to	be	bodily	angry,	and	your	anger	will	be	just	ugly.	It	will	not
add	anything	to	you,	it	will	just	be	disturbing	to	yourself	and	to	others.
We	 can	 understand	 it	 from	 another	 route	 also,	 for	 example,	 sex.	 It	 can	 be	 a
bodily	memory,	then	it	has	a	survival	value.	But	it	can	be	just	cerebral,	mental,
just	out	of	habit.
Then	it	has	no	survival	value.	And	one	who	has	become	trapped	in	the	habitual
pattern,	his	sex	will	become	an	ugly	thing.	Neither	will	it	have	any	love,	nor	will
it	have	any	beauty.	Neither	will	 it	have	any	music,	nor	will	 it	have	any	deeper
response.	The	more	cerebral	the	sex,	the	less	your	body	will	be	capable.	You	will
think	about	it	more,	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	what	it	is	exactly,	what	is
its	deepest	mystery.	The	mind	will	go	on	thinking	about	sex,	and	the	body	will
have	to	follow	the	mind.	And	whenever	the	body	follows	the	mind,	there	is	no
life	in	it;	it	is	just	dragged	along	as	a	dead	weight.
It	may	 be	 anything	 --	 sex	 or	 anger	 or	 greed.	Always	make	 a	 distinction	 as	 to
whether	it	has	a	survival	value,	then	you	do	not	have	to	fight	with	it.	If	it	is	just	a
mental	habit,	then	be	aware	of	it.	This	mental	memory	of	all	our	past	actions	has
become	 a	 conditioned	 thing.	 You	 go	 on	 repeating	 them,	 you	 act	 just	 like	 a
machine.	Be	conscious	of	this.	You	will	be	surprised	to	know,	if	there	is	no	mind
in	your	anger	and	if	it	is	just	a	total	response	to	a	situation	with	the	whole	body
in	it	and	no	mental	preconditioning,	then	there	will	be	no	repentance.	You	have
acted	 totally	 in	 the	 situation,	 as	 the	 situation	 required.	 Then	 there	 need	 be	 no
repentance	at	all.
Another	 thing:	 when	 there	 is	 no	 repentance,	 there	 will	 be	 no	 psychological
accumulation.
Nothing	will	be	a	habit	with	you.	You	need	not	accumulate	anything.	Why	does
the	mind	need	 to	accumulate	memories?	Because	 it	 is	not	confident	whether	 it
can	act	totally	in	a	situation.	It	prepares,	it	has	to	go	through	so	many	rehearsals.
If	there	is	such	and	such	a	situation,	it	is	not	confident	of	what	it	will	do.	It	must
know	all	 of	what	happened,	 it	must	 sort	 things	out,	 it	must	make	programs	of
what	 is	 to	be	done	 in	a	particular	 situation.	That	 is	why	 the	mind	accumulates
memories,	and	 the	more	 it	accumulates,	 the	 less	 is	your	capacity	 to	act	 totally.
And	the	less	your	capacity	to	act	totally,	the	more	the	mind	will	be	needed.
So	 act	 with	 the	 body,	 do	 not	 act	 with	 the	 mind.	 This	 will	 look	 strange,	 like
something	never	expected	from	a	religious	man	--	act	 from	the	body.	Then	 the
act	 is	 immeasurable,	 the	response	is	 total.	Do	not	 let	your	mind	come	in.	Then
there	will	be	no	memory,	there	will	be	no	mental	accumulation,	there	will	be	no
repentance.	The	act	 is	 just	over.	Things	were	such,	 the	situation	was	such,	you
acted	totally	with	no	part	remaining	behind.	So	no	one	can	repent.	You	were	total
to	it.	Otherwise,	the	part	that	is	withheld	repents	later	on.
The	body	can	act	totally;	the	mind	can	never	act	totally.	Mind	is	always	divided,
mind	works	 in	 dichotomies.	 So	 one	 part	 of	 the	mind	 is	 angry,	 another	 part	 is
simultaneously	 repenting	 or	 preparing	 to	 repent.	 This	 should	 also	 be	 noted	 --
whenever	there	is	a	part	constantly	against	another	part,	know	that	you	are	acting
through	the	mind	not	 through	the	body.	The	body	is	always	 total;	 it	cannot	act
dividedly.	The	body	is	just	a	flow,	there	are	no	divisions.	When	you	fall	in	love,
it	 is	 the	whole	body	which	has	fallen	in	love.	You	cannot	make	any	distinction
such	as	that	the	head	has	fallen	or	that	the	hands	begin	to	love.	The	whole	body
is	in	it,	but	the	mind	can	never	be	totally	in	anything.	A	part	of	it	will	always	be
criticizing,	judging,	commanding,	appreciating;	a	part	of	it	will	always	be	sitting
in	the	chair	to	judge,	to	condemn.	So	whenever	you	see	that	some	part	of	your
mind	 is	 working	 against	 the	 act,	 you	 know	 that	 you	 are	 doing	 it	 cerebrally,
mentally.
Begin	to	do	things	bodily.	When	you	are	eating,	eat	bodily.	The	body	knows	well
when	to	stop,	but	the	mind	never	knows.	One	part	will	go	on	eating	and	another
part	will	go	on	condemning.	One	part	will	go	on	saying	stop,	and	another	part
will	 go	 on	 eating.	 The	 body	 is	 total,	 so	 ask	 the	 body.	 Do	 not	 ask	 the	 mind
whether	 to	 eat	 or	 not	 to	 eat,	 to	 stop	 or	 not	 to	 stop.	Your	 body	 knows	what	 is
needed.	 It	 has	 accumulated	 the	 wisdom	 of	 centuries	 and	 centuries.	 It	 knows
when	to	stop.
Do	not	ask	the	mind,	ask	the	body.	Rely	on	the	body's	wisdom.	The	body	is	more
wise	 than	you.	That	 is	why	animals	 live	more	wisely	 than	us.	They	 live	more
wisely,	but,	of	course,	they	do	not	think.	The	moment	they	think	they	will	be	just
like	us:	This	is	a	miracle:	that	animals	can	live	more	wisely	than	human	beings.
It	 seems	 absurd.	 They	 know	 nothing,	 but	 they	 go	 on	 living	more	wisely.	 The
only	ability	in	which	the	human	being	has	become	efficient	 is	 to	interfere	with
everything.	You	go	on	interfering	with	you	body.	Do	not	interfere,	let	the	body
work.	Do	not	come	in	its	way,	and	then	you	will	have	a	clear	distinction	of	what
is	mental	memory	and	what	is	body	memory.
Memory	 in	 the	 body	 is	 a	 help	 to	 survive;	mental	memory	 is	 obstructive.	This
mental	memory	is	to	be	destroyed.	When	I	say	destroyed,	I	do	not	mean	that	you
will	not	remember	anything.	In	fact,	when	I	say	to	destroy	the	memory,	I	mean
that	you	should	not	be	identified	with	the	memory,	you	should	not	become	one
with	 it.	The	memory	must	not	be	an	autonomous	affair,	 it	must	not	perpetuate
itself.
It	 goes	 on	 perpetuating.	You	 are	 sitting,	 and	 the	memory	 is	working.	You	 are
sleeping,	 and	 the	 memory	 is	 working.	 You	 are	 working,	 and	 the	 memory	 is
working.	The	memory	goes	 on	 continuously	working.	What	 is	 it	 doing?	What
can	memory	do?	It	can	only	desire	the	same	for	the	future.	It	can	do	nothing	else.
It	can	perpetuate	and	project	itself	into	the	future:	"All	that	has	been	should	be
again,	or	something	that	has	been	should	not	be."
The	memory	 is	always	weaving	a	pattern	 for	 the	 future	around	you.	And	once
you	allow	it	to	weave	a	pattern	for	you,	you	will	never	be	free.	You	will	always
be	 in	 a	 pattern.	 That	 pattern	 constitutes	 the	 walls	 around	 the	 emptiness	 of
consciousness.	 Before	 you	 take	 one	 step	 into	 the	 future,	 memory	 has	 taken
many.	 The	 path	 is	 not	 an	 open	 path,	 it	 has	 become	 an	 imprisonment.	 The
memory	 is	 always	 narrowing	 it	 down.	 But	 we	 are	 deceived	 by	 it	 because	we
think	that	the	memory	is	helping	us	to	live	the	future	better.	It	is	not	helping.
It	is	just	helping	you	to	make	your	future	the	same	as	the	past.
The	memory	cannot	project	anything	which	it	has	not	known.	It	can	only	project
the	known:	it	will	project	it.	Do	not	fall	into	the	trap.	Do	not	allow	the	mind	to
project	 for	 the	 future	 even	 for	 a	 moment.	 Of	 course,	 it	 will	 take	 time	 to	 be
without	this	dead	habit.	To	begin	to	be	aware	of	it	is	meditation.	And	once	you
are	aware,	completely	aware,	intensely	aware,	alert,	the	memory	will	not	weave
the	future	for	you;	it	can	only	weave	when	you	are	dreaming.
To	 be	 dreaming	 is	 a	 basic	 condition	 for	 the	memory	 to	work.	That	 is	why,	 in
sleep,	it	creates	real	looking	dreams	--	more	real	looking	than	the	reality.	When
you	 are	 just	 sitting	 in	 your	 easy	 chair,	 then	 there	 are	 day	 dreams,	 there	 are
reveries.	 Just	 be	 a	 little	 sleepy,	 and	 the	 memory	 begins	 to	 weave,	 begins	 to
project.	 Be	 alert,	 conscious,	 and	 the	 memory	 stops	 working	 for	 the	 future.
Alertness,	more	alertness	within	and	without,	is	the	beginning	of	meditation.
This	alertness	can	be	created	in	so	many	ways.	By	telling	you	to	be	alert	I	know
that	you	are	not	going	 to	become	alert.	You	will	hear	 this	 in	a	dreaming	state,
and	the	memory	will	project:	"Yes,	I	will	be	alert	 tomorrow."	And	the	memory
will	work	upon	this	and	make	it	a	project.	If	you	hear	this,	"Be	alert,"	you	will
make	it	a	project.	You	will	say,
"Yes,	I	will	be	alert	sometime."	And	if	I	say	that	happiness	follows	alertness,	if	I
say	 that	 bliss	 is	 bound	 to	 come	 to	 you	 through	 alertness,	 you	 will	 be	 more
dreamy.	And	the	memory	will	project	events.
Only	telling	you	to	be	alert	will	not	make	you	meditative;	it	will	not	make	any
difference.
So	 I	 create	 devices,	 I	 create	 situations,	 in	which	 you	 cannot	 help	 but	 be	 alert,
situations	in	which	dreaminess	is	impossible.
I	will	tell	you	something....	Dreaminess	becomes	more	possible	if	there	is	more
carbon	dioxide	around	you;	you	will	be	more	dreamy.	That	is	why	in	the	day	you
cannot	be	so	dreamy	as	in	the	night.	The	chemical	components	change.	At	night
there	is	more	carbon	dioxide	in	the	air	and	the	oxygen	is	less.	So	if	the	reverse	is
possible,	 if	 the	 oxygen	 in	 you	 and	 around	 you	 is	more	 and	 carbon	 dioxide	 is
thrown	out,	you	cannot	be	dreamy.	That	is	why	I	insist	on	vigorous	breathing.	It
is	 nothing	 but	 a	 chemical	 device	 to	 change	 the	 chemical	 atmosphere	 in	 you.
Oxygen	must	be	 there	more	and	more.	The	more	 the	oxygen,	 the	 less	you	 fall
victim	 to	 the	 dream.	And	 your	memories	 cannot	work	without	 the	medium	of
dreaminess.
In	the	morning	we	feel	freshness.	What	happens	in	the	morning	with	the	rising
sun?	 The	 carbon	 dioxide	 decreases	 and	 the	 oxygen	 increases.	 So	 the	 same
chemical	change	is	needed	within	you.	The	technique	which	we	are	using	in	our
meditation	 camps	 nowadays	 is	 the	 most	 powerful	 method	 to	 create	 excess
oxygen	 in	 the	 body.	And	 after	 the	 first	 three	 stages,	 in	 the	 fourth,	 the	 student
becomes	charged	with	tremendous	life	energy	that	makes	him	very	alert.
Another	 device	 to	 make	 you	 alert	 is	 kundalini	 practice.	 It	 is	 a	 system	 to
transform	 sex	 energy	 for	 meditation	 and	 awareness.	 It	 is	 useful	 to	 a	 person
whose	sex	energy	can	be	easily	and	naturally	channeled	for	meditation	purposes.
In	 the	 days	 of	 the	 Vedas	 and	 Upanishads,	 in	 ancient	 India,	 the	 people	 were
simple	and	natural	and	they	could	easily	convert	their	sex	energy.	For	them	sex
was	not	a	mental	problem	at	all,	it	was	not	at	all	a	problem.	Once	it	is	a	problem,
it	becomes	mental.
Today,	 the	 modern	 world	 is	 so	 sexually	 perverse	 and	 sexually	 exploited	 that
kundalini	--
the	movement	of	psychic	energy	 in	a	particular	psychic	channel	--	has	become
difficult.
But	 through	 this	method,	 sometimes	 the	 kundalini	 is	 felt	 to	 be	 rising.	 That	 is
another	thing.	If	someone	feels	his	kundalini	rising,	then	I	begin	to	work	on	his
kundalini,	then	I	begin	to	give	him	techniques	for	working	on	it.	But	unless	there
is	a	spontaneous	feeling	of	kundalini,	I	will	not	even	touch	the	point.	I	will	not
talk	about	it.	You	can	by-pass	it,	and	this	age	is	such	that	you	will	have	to	by-
pass	it.	Only	with	natural,	physical	sex,	with	no	mind	in	it,	can	kundalini	work	--
with	innocent	minds	it	can	work.
Somewhere	on	 the	way,	when	you	have	gone	deeper	 in	meditation,	your	mind
loses	its	grip.	As	I	have	said	to	you,	when	you	go	deeper	in	meditation,	then	you
make	a	distinction	and	separation	of	these	two	memories,	then	you	become	less
and	 less	mental	 about	 the	 body	 and	 let	 the	 body	 function	 by	 itself	 through	 its
own	wisdom.
Then	sometimes	kundalini	will	become	active.	So	if	it	works	automatically,	then
it	is	good.	I	won't	allow	its	practice	directly.	Indirectly,	it	comes	to	work	itself.
And	it	comes	so	many	times.	At	least	thirty	to	forty	percent	of	people	working
on	this	method	feel	kundalini.	When	they	feel	it,	then	I	am	ready.	Then	they	can
proceed.	Then	through	this	method	they	proceed	through	the	door	of	kundalini.
But	this	method	is	only	indirectly	connected	to	kundalini,	not	directly.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned	there	is	no	future	for	direct	kundalini	methods,	unless
the	whole	world	takes	sex	as	a	natural	phenomenon.	And	there	are	no	kundalini
techniques	 that	 are	 used	 before	 sex	maturity.	Unless	 the	 track	 for	 kundalini	 is
created	within	you	before	sex	maturity,	there	is	every	possibility	--	even	if	sex	is
taken	naturally	--	that	you	may	not	turn	out	to	be	a	pervert,	but	you	will	turn	out
to	be	just	an	animal.
I	will	tell	you	a	story	from	the	Upanishads....
A	rishi	is	sitting	with	his	wife	and	son.	A	man	passes	by	there	and	he	falls	in	love
with	 the	wife.	He	 asks	her	 to	 accompany	him	 to	his	 residence.	The	wife	 goes
away	with	the	man.	There	is	no	criticism	or	objection	from	the	rishi,	but	the	son
becomes	angry	and	he	says	to	his	father,	"This	is	just	animalistic.	This	is	just	like
animals	do.	This	cannot	be	allowed.	When	I	will	make	a	moral	code,	I	will	not
allow	 this.	This	 is	 just	 like	animals	do."	The	 father	 says,	 "This	 is	not	 just	 like
animals	do.	But	on	the	contrary,	your	rage,	your	anger,	is	just	like	animals	do.	It
is	a	projection	of	moral	violence,	just	like	an	animal.
In	 fact	no	animal	will	 allow	what	 just	happened,	he	will	 fight.	No	animal	will
hold	on	to	a	possession	forever."
This	attitude,	the	father's	attitude,	is	really	a	higher	one.	It	cannot	be	understood.
He	says	your	attitude	is	just	like	an	animal's.	Animals	fight	for	their	mates.	They
have	a	territorial	possessive	sense.	And	if	you	trespass	it,	they	will	fight.	But	the
father	says,	"I	am	human.
If	 someone	 sees	your	mother	 and	 falls	 in	 love,	 no	one	 is	 at	 fault.	And	 if	 your
mother	is	ready,	who	am	I?	I	have	also	fallen	in	love	with	her	the	same	way.	It
makes	no	difference.	Just	like	this	I	have	fallen	in	love	with	her.	She	agreed	to	be
married,	 she	 agreed	 to	 be	my	wife,	 but	 not	my	 possession.	 Someone	 else	 has
fallen.	 I	 know	 human	 weakness	 because	 I	 know	 myself,	 I	 have	 also	 fallen
myself.	 So	 nothing	wrong	 is	 happening.	And	 I	 am	not	 an	 animal,	 so	 I	 cannot
fight	 for	 this.	 I	 know	 he	 is	 a	 human	 being	 just	 like	 me.	 And	 your	 mother	 is
beautiful.	I	have	also	fallen	in	love	with	her."
But	 this	 is	 a	 very	 high	 morality,	 and	 this	 can	 only	 be	 cultivated	 before	 sex
maturity,	if	you	have	trained	--	otherwise	not.	After	sex	maturity	you	will	not	be
able	to	channel	the	energy;	it	is	very	difficult.	But	if	channels	are	ready	before,
then	the	energy	just	flows	in	them	as	naturally	as	it	flows	in	sex.	And	this	man,
this	 father,	 this	 rishi,	must	 have	known	kundalini	 otherwise	he	 could	not	 have
been	as	he	was.	It	is	impossible.	This	rishi	had	kundalini	development	--	energy
going	upward	--	otherwise	this	attitude	would	never	come.
Downward	energy	is	always	toward	violence.	Upward	energy	is	always	toward
love,	understanding,	compassion.
So	this	method	is	an	indirect	method.	It	works	 through	so	many	doors.	If	your
kundalini	can	be	used,	the	method	will	use	it.	It	will	take	its	route,	it	is	flexible.
The	method	is	absolutely	flexible.	If	your	kundalini	is	ready	and	cannot	use	it,	if
it	is	dangerous,	it	will	not	use	it.	Then	there	are	other	channels,	other	routes.	It
can	use	other	routes.
Those	other	routes	are	not	named,	because	no	ancient	 teaching	used	 them.	But
there	 are	 other	 routes.	Mahavira	 never	 talked	 about	 kundalini,	 never.	 Buddha
never	 talked	about	kundalini,	never.	Christ	never	knew	about	 it,	Lao	Tse	never
heard	about	it.	They	had	been	through	other	routes.
The	 way	 Buddha	 went	 could	 not	 have	 been	 through	 kundalini.	 His	 sex	 had
become	absolutely	a	boredom	to	him,	he	was	not	 in	 the	 least	 interested	 in	sex.
And	 that	 was	 bound	 to	 happen,	 because	 his	 father	 arranged	 for	 him	 so	many
beautiful	girls	of	his	kingdom.	Every	girl	who	was	beautiful	was	in	his	palace.
He	 just	 became	 disgusted.	 It	 was	 bound	 to	 happen;	 everyone	 would	 become
disgusted	like	that.	He	became	so	disgusted	with	sex	that	he	could	not	conceive
that	the	same	energy	could	be	converted.
He	never	tried	for	it.	And	even	if	someone	had	said	to	him	that	sex	energy	can
become	divine	energy,	he	would	not	have	listened	to	him,	because	he	had	known
sex	 so	much,	 and	 there	was	nothing	divine	 about	 it	 to	 him.	 It	was	 just	 carnal.
Buddha	used	another	route.	He	did	not	talk	about	kundalini	at	all,	but	he	talked
about	centers,	chakras.	He	worked	for	chakras.
If	 you	 work	 for	 kundalini,	 then	 there	 is	 a	 gradual	 process.	 Kundalini	 is	 a
continuity,	 it	 has	 a	 continuity	 just	 like	 a	 thermometer.	 It	 rises	 just	 like	 a
thermometer,	 slowly,	 slowly.	 The	 passage	 is	 a	 continuous	 one.	 Buddha	 never
used	that	passage,	but	he	talked	about	chakras	working	in	sudden	jumps.	From
one	chakra	one	jumps	to	another.	There	is	no	continuity,	one	just	jumps.	Because
of	 this	 jumping	 process,	Buddha	 conceived	 of	 the	whole	world	 in	 a	 very	 new
way.	He	said	that	there	is	no	continuity	in	the	world,	only	jumps.
Nothing	is	continuous.	The	flower	is	not	continuous	with	the	bud;	the	flower	is	a
jump.
Youth	 is	 not	 a	 continuity	 of	 childhood;	 it	 is	 a	 jump.	 And	 so	 Buddhist
philosophers	 nowadays	 are	 very	 happy,	 because	 today	 science	 also	 says	 that
there	is	no	continuity.
Everything	 jumps,	 there	 is	 just	 a	 jump.	 We	 see	 continuity	 only	 because	 we
cannot	see	the	gaps	between.
You	see	this	light	continuously;	it	is	not	continuous.	Electrons	are	jumping,	but
the	gaps	are	so	small	that	your	eyes	cannot	know	them.	It	is	not	continuous;	it	is
jumping.	But	 the	 jumps	are	so	speedily	 taken	that	when	one	electric	particle	 is
dead	and	the	other	has	come,	the	gap	in	between	is	not	noticed.	There	is	just	a
sudden	jump.	You	light	the	flame	in	the	evening,	and	in	the	morning	when	you
put	it	out,	you	will	think	that	you	are	putting	out	the	same	flame.	The	flame	has
jumped	thousands	and	thousands	of	times.	It	has	gone,	evaporated,	and	the	new
one	has	come.	But	it	looks	so	continuous.
Heraclitus	said	that	you	can	never	step	twice	in	the	same	river.	Because	the	river
is	flowing,	you	can	never	step	in	it	twice.	Buddha	will	say	you	cannot	step	even
once	because	the	river	is	flowing.	As	soon	as	you	have	touched	the	surface,	it	is
gone.	Before	you	have	gone	deeper,	it	is	gone	again.	Even	one	step,	and	so	many
rivers	have	gone.
And	it	is	always	a	jumping	process.
This	 jumping	 concept	 came	 to	 Buddha	 because	 he	 never	 passed	 through
kundalini.	He	passed	 through	a	 jump,	one	chakra	 to	another.	So	he	 talks	about
seven	chakras,	that	also	is	possible.	I	can	come	to	your	house	jumping,	so	I	touch
only	some	points.	The	gaps	are	there,	there	is	no	continuity.
Mahavira	 never	 talks	 about	 chakras	 or	 jumps,	 he	 talks	 of	 explosions.	You	 are
this,	 and	 then	you	 are	 that.	There	 are	 not	 even	many	 stations	 to	 jump.	This	 is
another	route	--
explosion,	you	just	explode.	One	moment	before	you	are	this,	and	one	moment
after	you	are	that.	There	is	neither	a	continuity	nor	a	jump,	there	is	an	explosion.
There	is	no	midpoint	to	be	crossed.
In	Zen,	there	are	two	sects:	one	sect	is	known	as	the	sudden	school	of	Zen;	the
other	 is	 the	 gradual	 school	 of	 Zen.	 But	 even	 gradual	 Zen	 does	 not	 talk	 about
kundalini.	It	has	used	another	route.	So	there	is	no	talk	about	kundalini	in	Zen,
not	even	in	the	gradual	school;	another	route	was	used.
The	body	has	so	many	routes.	It	is	a	great	world	in	itself.	You	can	work	through
breathing,	and	through	breathing	you	can	take	the	jump.	You	can	work	through
sex,	and	through	sex	you	can	take	the	jump.	You	can	work	through	awareness	--
that	 is,	 directly	 through	 consciousness	 --	 and	 you	 can	 take	 the	 jump.	 This
working	directly	on	consciousness	has	been	one	of	the	deepest	routes,	but	even
one	 single	 route	 can	 be	 used	 in	 so	 many	 ways.	 You	 must	 understand	 the
complexity	of	this.
For	example,	one	road	can	be	used	in	so	many	ways.	One	can	use	it	with	a	car,
another	with	a	cart,	and	another	by	just	walking.	The	route	is	the	same,	but	the
method	is	absolutely	different.	What	is	common	between	walking	and	sitting	in	a
car?	Nothing	is	common.	In	the	car	you	are	just	sitting	and	not	doing	at	all.	You
are	not	doing	anything.
So	 someone	 can	 say,	 "I	 passed	 this	 route	 just	 sitting,"	 and	 he	 is	 not	 saying
anything	false.
But	one	who	has	only	walked	and	who	has	never	known	how	one	can	pass	the
route	only	sitting	will	deny	this	route.	He	too	is	right.
Even	 a	 single	 route	 can	 be	 used	 in	 different	 ways,	 for	 example,	 awareness.
Gurdjieff	 uses	 it,	 but	 he	will	 call	 it	 remembering,	 and	 the	method	 is	 different.
The	route	is	the	same.
Consciousness	is	to	be	used,	but	as	remembering,	not	as	awareness.	And	what	is
the	difference?	Remembering	means	you	are	on	 this	 street,	 just	 remember	you
are.	 Stand	 for	 a	 moment,	 remember	 you	 are.	 Look	 around	 completely
remembering	that	you	are.	Never	forget	for	a	single	moment	that	you	are.
But	we	forget,	we	never	remember.	If	I	see	you,	I	forget	myself	and	I	see	you.
The	awareness	becomes	one	arrowed,	the	other	arrow	is	not	there.	Gurdjieff	says
to	make	it	double	arrowed.	You	are	listening	to	a	discourse.	To	listen	to	what	the
speaker	says	is	the	first	arrow,	and	if	you	are	aware	of	yourself	--	of	the	listener	-
-	 then	 that	 is	 the	second	arrow.	Do	not	 forget	yourself	when	you	are	 listening,
remember	that	you	are	listening.
Someone	 is	 speaking,	 and	 you	 are	 listening;	 be	 beyond	 both	 and	 remember.
Make	 yourself	 double	 arrowed.	 The	 route	 is	 the	 same,	 but	 the	 method	 is
different.
Krishnamurti	will	say,	"Do	not	remember	this	way,	it	will	become	a	tense	effort.
Just	be	aware	of	the	totality.	Do	not	choose	that	you	are	here	and	he	is	there.	Do
not	 choose.	 Just	 let	 there	 be	 an	 all-inclusive	 awareness.	 Do	 not	 focus	 it	 --
unfocused	awareness."	I	am	speaking;	you	are	sitting;	the	horn	is	there;	the	car	is
passing...	 Things	 are	 --	 and	 awareness	 is	 unfocused.	Do	 not	make	 it	 arrowed,
make	it	unfocused.	The	route	is	the	same,	but	the	method	is	quite	different.
Tantra	 used	 the	 same	 method,	 the	 same	 route,	 in	 a	 different	 way.	 It	 was
unimaginable.
They	used	 intoxicants	 --	bhang,	charas,	ganja,	wine.	And	 the	method	was	 this:
take	 the	 intoxicant,	 and	 be	 aware.	 Do	 not	 lose	 awareness.	 Go	 on	 taking	 the
intoxicant,	and	be	aware	 that	you	are	aware.	Do	not	 lose	consciousness.	There
are	methods	 in	which	no	 intoxicant	will	be	of	any	effect,	 so	snake	poison	was
used.	The	snake	is	made	to	bite	on	the	tongue.	And	when	the	snake	bites	on	the
tongue	and	you	are	still	aware,	only	then	have	you	taken	the	jump	--	otherwise
not.	The	route	is	the	same,	but	the	method	is	quite	different.
In	 this	 Tantra	 practice,	 if	 no	 intoxicants	 work	 and	 you	 go	 on	 remaining
conscious,	you	behave	consciously,	then	something	has	crystallized	within	you.
Something	has	gone	beyond	body	chemistry.	Otherwise	the	chemistry	will	affect
you.	Now	you	 are	 beyond	 chemistry.	The	 chemistry	 is	 somewhere	working	 in
the	body,	but	you	are	aloof,	it	cannot	touch	you.
So	there	are	so	many	routes,	and	each	route	can	be	used	with	so	many	methods.
My	method	 is	 not	 directly	 concerned	 with	 any	 route.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 vehicle
which	 can	 fly,	 swim	 and	 go	 on	 the	 road.	 Whatever	 is	 the	 need	 of	 your
personality,	the	need	will	change	the	method,	the	route.	You	may	call	it	a	multi-
method.	It	is	indirect,	it	cannot	be	direct.	I	give	you	the	method;	your	body,	your
being,	will	give	the	route.	And	the	awakened	energy	can	use	any	route:	Tantric,
Buddhist,	Jain,	Gurdjieff's,	Sufi...	it	can	use	any	route.
And	when	I	say	this,	it	is	not	just	a	hypothesis.	When	I	say	this	I	have	worked
so.
People	have	come	to	me	who	have	worked	on	different	 routes.	When	 they	use
this	 method,	 it	 begins	 to	 help	 them	 in	 their	 route.	 If	 someone	 is	 working	 on
kundalini	 and	 comes	 to	me,	 then	works	with	 this	method,	 it	 helps	 him	 on	 his
own	route.	He	says,	"This	method	is	wonderful;	the	previous	kundalini	method
was	not	working	so	intensely	and	so	intently."	And	this	is	not	a	kundalini	method
at	all.	But	this	is	flexible.	The	method	will	find	out	the	route.	You	are	to	do	it,
and	all	else	will	be	done	by	the	method	itself.
And	 for	 the	 coming	 world,	 and	 also	 for	 today's	 world,	 only	 such	 flexible
methods	can	be	used	because	there	are	so	many	types	of	people	now.	In	the	old
world,	that	was	not	the	case.	In	a	particular	region,	a	particular	type	existed.	If
there	were	Hindus,	there	were	only	Hindus,	there	were	no	Moslems.	In	fact,	they
never	heard	about	one	another.	They	never	knew	about	each	other's	practices,	so
they	 were	 never	 confused.	 They	 were	 of	 a	 single	 type.	 If	 they	 were	 Tibetan
Buddhists,	 they	were	Tibetan	Buddhists;	 they	never	heard	about	anything	else.
Everyone's	 conditioning	 was	 the	 same,	 everyone	 was	 brought	 up	 in	 the	 same
milieu.	So	one	method	was	needed	that	worked.
Now	 that	 is	 all	 difficult.	Minds	 are	 confused;	 in	 fact,	 there	 is	 no	 single	 type.
Everyone	 is	 a	 multi-type.	 There	 are	 so	 many	 influences,	 contradictory
influences.	All	religions	say,	"Do	not	study	others.	Do	not	go	to	other	teachers."
That	is	not	simply	dogmatism.	It	looks	like	it	is	dogmatic,	it	was	basically	just	to
protect	 their	 type.	 This	 led	 to	 unnecessary	 confusion.	 Otherwise,	 no	 method
would	be	used	fully	--	neither	that	nor	this.	This	was	done	so	that	one	should	not
be	confused,	but	now	that	is	impossible.
But	now	everyone	is	confused,	and	there	is	no	help.	Now	there	can	be	no	single
type,	and	a	type	cannot	be	protected.	So	we	need	new	methods	which	belong	to
no	 type	 and	 can	 be	 used	 by	 every	 type.	 So	 this	 method	 is	 flexible.	 I	 am	 not
particularly	concerned	with	kundalini,	not	particularly	concerned	with	anything,
but	deeply	concerned	with	all.
You	use	this	method,	and	the	method	will	find	the	route	--	the	route	which	can	be
worked	out	in	you.	I	leave	this	to	the	method.	The	method	finds	it,	and	it	finds	it
more	exactly	 than	you	can	 find	 it.	But	 this	 finding	 is	unconscious.	 It	 just	puts
you	in	a	situation,	just	like	there	is	fire	in	the	house.	You	are	in	a	situation.	If	you
can	run,	run.	If	you	can	jump,	jump.	The	situation	is	there,	and	the	situation	will
push	you	toward	whatever	is	possible	for	you.
And	the	unconscious	mind	always	chooses	the	route	of	least	resistance.	That	is
necessarily	 the	 mathematics,	 the	 inner	 economy	 of	 mind.	 You	 never
unconsciously	choose	any	long	route,	you	always	choose	the	shortest.	Only	with
the	conscious	mind	do	you	begin	to	choose	routes	which	lead	nowhere	or	are	so
much	 longer	 that	 you	 are	 dead	 before	 you	 reach.	 But	 the	 unconscious	 always
chooses	 the	 shortest	 route.	 So	 this	 method	 will	 create	 the	 situation,	 and	 your
unconscious	will	take	the	route	which	is	potentially	its	type.
I	Am	the	Gate
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	The	secrets	of	spiritual	explosion
8	June	1971	pm	in	Bombay,	India
Archive
code:
7106085
ShortTitle:
GATE06
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Question	1
BELOVED	MASTER,
YOU	 HAVE	 SAID	 THAT	 WHENEVER	 THE	 ULTIMATE	 SPIRITUAL
EXPLOSION
HAPPENS	 TO	 A	 PERSON,	 THERE	 THEN	 STARTS	 AROUND	 HIM	 A
PROCESS	OF
SPIRITUAL	 EXPLOSION	 WHICH	 EFFECTS	 OTHER	 SEEKERS	 LIKE	 A
CHAIN
REACTION.	SO	PLEASE	TELL	US	WHETHER	A	CHAIN	REACTION	OF
SPIRITUAL	 EXPLOSION	 HAS	 STARTED	 AROUND	 YOU?	 ARE	 THERE
PERSONS
WHO	 HAVE	 UNDERGONE	 A	 HIGHER	 SPIRITUAL	 EXPLOSION?	 ARE
THERE
PERSONS	NEAR	YOU	PHYSICALLY	WHO	ARE	GOING	TO	EXPLODE	IN
THE
VERY	NEAR	FUTURE?
First,	one	has	 to	understand	what	 is	meant	by	spiritual	explosion.	Many	 things
are	implied.	One,	the	explosion	is	something	for	which	you	cannot	do	anything
directly.
Your	efforts	are	meaningless,	it	is	not	something	that	you	can	manage.	Explosion
happens	 to	 you.	 You	 cannot	 do	 anything	 positive	 to	 make	 explosion	 happen,
because	 if	 the	explosion	is	done	by	you,	 it	will	not	be	an	explosion	at	all.	You
will	remain,	and	you	will	continue.	Even	after	the	explosion	you	will	be	there.	If
you	have	attained	 it,	 then	you	will	not	 explode	 in	 it.	So	positively	no	effort	 is
possible	 toward	 explosion;	 this	 is	 the	 first	 thing,	 the	 first	 basic	 implication	 in
explosion.
Explosion	means	a	discontinuity	with	the	past.	The	old	has	gone	completely,	and
the	 new	 has	 come.	 There	 is	 no	 continuity	 between	 the	 two.	 This	 new	 is	 not
connected	with	the	old.	There	is	no	causal	link,	it	is	not	caused	by	the	old.	If	it	is
caused	by	 the	old,	 then	 there	 is	no	explosion.	Then	 there	 is	continuity,	 the	old
has	continued	 in	a	new	form.	Then	you	may	have	gained	something,	you	may
have	 added	 something	 to	 yourself.	 But	 you	 are	 the	 same,	 the	 central	 being
remains	 the	 same.	 Only	 on	 the	 periphery	 has	 something	 been	 added	 and
accumulated.	Your	 ego	 becomes	more	 strengthened,	 stronger	 than	 before;	 you
will	be	richer.	So	there	is	no	explosion	in	continuity.
Explosion	means	the	old	has	died	completely	and	the	new	has	come	into	being.
There	is	no	causal	link	between	the	two.	There	is	a	gap	--	an	unbridgeable	gap,
an	abyss.	Then	you	can	call	it	explosion.	This	is	very	difficult	to	understand.	In
our	 lives	 everything	 is	 easy	 to	 understand,	 everything	 is	 causal.	 Our	 whole
logical	 thinking	 is	 based	 on	 causality;	 everything	 is	 connected,	 everything	 is
related	and	is	in	continuity	with	something	else.
Nothing	 is	 new,	 everything	 is	 just	 a	 modification	 of	 the	 old	 --	 so	 it	 can	 be
understood.
This	is	because	the	mind	is	the	continuity.	The	mind	is	filled	with	accumulated
knowledge,	with	memory.	The	mind	can	always	understand	the	old,	but	the	new
is	 incomprehensible	 to	 it.	 The	 new	 cannot	 be	 understood	 by	 the	mind.	And	 if
your	mind	tries	to	understand	the	new,	it	will	transform	it	into	terms	of	the	past.
It	 will	 give	 shape	 to	 it,	 meaning	 to	 it,	 and	 will	 categorize	 it.	 If	 things	 are
connected	with	the	old,	then	the	mind	is	at	ease	because	it	can	understand.
Explosion	 is	 something	 which	 cannot	 be	 understood	 by	 the	 mind.	 Really,	 in
explosion,	the	mind	explodes	and	is	thrown	out	completely.	So	the	second	thing
to	be	understood	 is	 this:	you	will	not	be	able	 to	understand	explosion.	All	 that
you	understand	will	not	be	explosion.	You	will	change	something	into	something
old	which	is	known.	You	may	think	that	what	I	am	talking	about	is	like	any	other
explosion,	but	spiritual	explosion	is	not	similar	to	any	other	phenomenon.
If	a	bomb	explodes,	everything	is	destroyed.	The	old	order	is	gone,	and	there	is
chaos.
But	this	chaos	is	caused	by	the	old;	it	is	a	continuity.	Nothing	new	has	come	into
being.
This	whole	chaos,	this	whole	disorder,	is	just	a	continuity	with	the	old	order.	It	is
the	old	in	a	disordered	way.	No	material	explosion	can	even	be	symbolic	or	used
metaphorically	 for	 spiritual	 explosion.	 The	 word	 comes	 from	 a	 material
happening	and	has	a	connotation	which	is	quite	misleading.	Spiritual	explosion
does	 not	 mean	 that	 the	 old	 is	 disordered,	 that	 the	 old	 has	 become	 chaotic.
Spiritual	 explosion	means	 something	new	 is	 created,	 something	new	has	come
into	being.
Material	explosion	is	destructive.	Spiritual	explosion	is	creative.	But	if	we	try	to
understand	 it	by	analogy,	 then	we	will	not	be	able	 to	know	it.	Something	new,
something	quite	new,	comes	into	being.	You	cannot	give	it	meaning	because	you
are	the	old.	You	cannot	create	it.	You	have	just	to	be	vacant.	You	can	only	help	it
negatively	 by	 your	 absence,	 by	 your	 not	 being.	 If	 you	 are	 absent,	 then	 the
explosion	will	 take	 place.	Your	 cooperation	 is	 needed	 only	 in	 a	 negative	way.
But	 to	 do	 something	 positively	 is	 easy,	 to	 do	 something	 negatively	 is	 very
arduous.
To	cooperate	is	easy,	not	to	cooperate	is	easy;	but	to	cooperate	negatively	is	very
difficult.	To	cooperate	negatively	means	not	to	create	hindrances.	And	we	all	go
on	creating	hindrances	for	the	new	to	come	into	being.	We	always	emphasize	the
old,	we	always	stick	with	the	old,	are	identified	with	the	old.	The	old	is	really	the
"we",	the	"I".
When	I	say	the	"I",	it	is	the	total	past.	So	how	can	"I"	help	the	new?	How	can	"I"
help	the	future,	"I"	being	the	past?	Whenever	you	say	"I",	it	is	the	whole	past	in
a	single	word.	All	 that	 is	dead	now,	all	 that	must	be	buried	now,	stands	behind
this	 "I".	 So	 this	 "I"	 becomes	 the	 hindrance,	 the	 only	 obstacle,	 the	 only
obstruction,	for	the	new	to	come	in.
So	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	with	 the	 "I"	 positively,	 but	 negatively	 you	 can	 do
something.
Understand	 that	 you	 are	 the	 old,	 and	 let	 this	 understanding	go	 deep,	 penetrate
you	to	your	innermost	depth.	Become	completely	aware	that	you	cannot	help	the
new	to	come	into	being.	Unless	the	new	comes	in,	there	is	no	spirituality.	Unless
the	new	explodes,	you	will	not	be	reborn,	you	will	not	be	in	the	dimension	of	the
divine.
It	is	not	that	"I"	am	to	be	freed;	rather,	there	will	be	freedom	from	the	I,	freedom
from	myself.	It	is	not	that	I	am	to	do	something;	rather,	I	must	not	do	anything	so
that	 this	 phenomenon	 can	 happen.	But	we	 continue	 to	 do	 something	 or	 other.
This	comes	out	of
"me";	 it	prolongs,	 it	continues	"me."	It	projects	"me"	 into	 the	future,	and	 there
can	be	no	explosion.
The	dead	past,	which	accumulates	like	dust,	goes	on	accumulating	on	my	mirror-
like	consciousness,	and	the	mirror-like	consciousness	is	lost	and	only	the	dust	is
there.	We	 become	 identified	with	 the	 dust.	 Can	 you	 imagine	 yourself	without
your	past?	If	your	total	past	is	destroyed,	where	will	you	live?	What	will	you	do
then?	Who	will	you	be?	If	everything	from	the	past	is	taken	away,	by	and	by	you
will	feel	you	are	disintegrating	and	disappearing.
When	there	is	no	past,	who	are	you?	Where	are	you?	With	what	then	will	you	be
identified?	If	there	is	no	past,	still	you	exist,	but	not	the	same	way.	Really,	you
will	be	diametrically	opposite	to	that	which	you	were.	If	the	whole	past	is	taken
away,	you	will	be	just	a	consciousness.	Then	you	cannot	be	an	ego.
The	ego	is	 the	accumulated	events,	 the	past.	If	 it	 is	 taken	away	from	you,	 then
you	will	be	 just	 like	a	mirror,	mirroring	everything	with	a	new	identity.	 If	you
become	aware	that	you	are	the	hindrance,	then	you	do	not	have	to	do	anything.
This	very	awareness	will	destroy	 the	old	 identity.	And	when	the	old	 identity	 is
completely	 destroyed,	 when	 there	 is	 a	 gap	 between	 your	 real	 being	 and	 your
memories,	when	 there	 is	 a	 space	 between	 your	 ego	 and	 you,	 then	within	 that
space	the	explosion	comes	in.	Within	that	space	is	the	explosion.
This	 explosion	 cannot	 be	 comprehended	 intellectually	 in	 any	way	whatsoever.
The	more	you	will	try	to	understand	it,	the	less	you	will	understand	it.	So	do	not
be	tense	about	it,	just	be	relaxed.	And	do	not	try	to	understand	me,	but	rather	feel
inside	yourself	what	I	am	saying.	If	I	say	you	are	the	past,	then	do	not	just	hear
my	 words	 and	 think	 whether	 they	 are	 right	 or	 wrong.	 Just	 go	 in	 and	 feel
whatever	is	being	said.	Think	in	terms	of	fact.	They	are	facts.
Go	inside,	and	see	whether	you	are	the	past,	whether	what	I	am	saying	is	really	a
fact.
Have	 you	 anything	 more	 than	 the	 past?	 Are	 you	 the	 dead	 past	 or	 is	 there
something	living	in	you	which	is	not	part	and	parcel	of	the	past?	What	is	that?
You	cannot	confine	it	to	yourself,	because	the	"I"	is	the	confinement.	As	the	past
is	limited,	you	can	confine	it.
The	 past	 can	 be	 confined,	 it	 has	 happened,	 it	 is	 finite.	But	when	 you	 become
aware	of	something	in	you	which	is	not	of	the	past,	but	is	the	here	and	now,	then
even	if	the	whole	past	is	destroyed,	it	will	still	be.
If	there	is	something	in	you	which	will	not	be	destroyed	by	the	destruction	of	the
past,	 but	 will	 continue	 to	 be,	 it	 is	 just	 a	 mirror-like	 consciousness	 --	 pure
consciousness.	Then
"you"	are	not	in	it,	but	you	are	just	a	mirror	which	mirrors	everything.	Then	you
will	feel	the	gap	between	your	ego	and	you,	you	will	feel	the	space.	And	if	you
can	 remain	 in	 this	 understanding	 and	 in	 this	 awareness,	 then	 it	 becomes	 a
meditation.	 If	you	can	 just	 remain	 in	 this	understanding	and	awareness,	 in	 this
space	between	your	real	being	--	your	consciousness	--	and	your	past,	 then	the
accumulated	being,	the	ego,	becomes	just	an	outer	layer.
It	becomes	just	a	boundary	line,	and	in	the	center	is	pure	consciousness.	Remain
in	it.	It	will	be	very	uneasy;	it	will	be	very	inconvenient	and	arduous,	because	we
have	 never	 remained	 so.	We	 always	 run	 to	 the	 periphery,	 we	 always	 become
identified	with	 the	periphery.	We	live	on	 the	periphery	and	never	 in	 the	center.
The	 periphery	 is	 the	 ego,	 because	 all	 events	 happen	 on	 the	 periphery,	 on	 the
circumference.
The	circumference	is	the	point	from	which	you	are	in	touch	with	others.	If	I	love
you,	the	happening	of	love	is	on	the	periphery,	because	only	my	periphery	can	be
in	 touch	 with	 and	 in	 contact	 with	 your	 periphery.	 Everything	 in	 this	 world
happens	 on	 the	 periphery,	 on	 the	 boundary	 line.	 So	we	 always	 remain	 on	 the
boundary	line.	That	is	the	field	of	activity,	but	the	being	is	always	in	the	center.
So	if	you	can	remain	in	this	gap,	in	this	space,	and	if	you	can	be	yourself	--	not
on	the	periphery	but	in	the	center	--	if	you	can	become	aware	of	the	periphery	as
the	dead	past,	as	a	surface,	as	a	body,	 the	"you"	 is	 lost.	 I	am	not	 talking	about
this	physical	body.	Really,	the	ego	is	the	body.
So	 if	 there	 is	 this	 space,	 not	 intellectually	 comprehended,	 not	 logically
understood	but	existentially	felt,	 it	will	become	inconvenient.	You	will	become
uneasy,	as	if	you	are	dying,	because	you	have	always	remained	on	the	periphery;
that	has	been	your	life.	So	if	you	go	back	to	the	center,	it	will	be	just	like	dying,
because	at	present	the	periphery	has	become	the	life.	You	do	not	know	any	other
life.	You	will	feel	just	like	sinking,	dying,	as	if	suffocated,	and	the	mind	will	say,
"Go	back	to	the	periphery.	The	life	is	there."
But	 on	 the	 periphery	 there	 is	 no	 life	 --	 only	 action.	 There	 is	 only	 doing,	 not
being.	That	is	why	when	you	have	not	to	do	anything,	that	not	doing	becomes	so
difficult	 that	 you	 cannot	 remain	with	 it,	 you	 begin	 to	 do	 something.	You	may
read	a	newspaper,	you	may	put	on	the	radio,	you	may	do	anything.	Or	if	there	is
nothing	to	do,	then	you	may	go	to	sleep.	But	remaining	in	non-doing	is	the	most
arduous	thing.	Not	for	a	single	moment	are	you	in	non-doing.	And	the	being	is
only	 revealed	 to	 those	 who	 can	 remain	 in	 the	 non-doing,	 who	 remain	 in	 the
center.
That	is	what	is	meant	by	negative	cooperation	--	your	cooperation	is	needed	in	a
negative	way.	You	are	not	to	do	something;	you	are	to	remain	in	non-doing.	And
then	the	explosion	takes	place.
It	 just	 happens	 to	 you.	And	when	 it	 has	 happened,	 you	will	 always	 be	 in	 the
center.	 It	does	not	mean	 that	you	will	not	be	able	 to	do	anything.	You	will	be
able	 to	 do,	 but	 the	 quality	 of	 the	 action	 will	 be	 altogether	 different.	 Now	 a
different	kind	of	love	will	be	possible	from	the	center,	a	different	kind	of	activity
will	be	possible	from	the	center.	Now	love	will	not	be	an	act,	but	a	state	of	mind.
It	will	not	be	 that	sometimes	you	love	and	sometimes	you	do	not	 love.	Now	it
will	become	your	very	existence.	You	will	be	loving,	and	every	action	and	every
relationship	will	have	a	different	quality,	a	different	meaning,	a	different	depth.
Through	this	explosion	you	will	be	totally	unidentified	with	the	mind,	with	the
ego,	with	the	body,	with	the	periphery	--	totally	unidentified.
Destruction	 of	 the	 identification	 is	 the	 explosion.	 You	 will	 not	 be	 continuous
now,	 because	 any	 continuity	 is	 on	 the	 periphery.	 This	 is	 not	 something
continuous	 with	 the	 periphery,	 it	 is	 a	 jump.	 If	 you	 go	 on	 running	 on	 the
periphery,	then	it	is	a	continuity.	If	you	go	round	and	round	on	the	periphery	you
may	run	for	a	 lifetime,	but	each	step	is	bound	with	 the	previous	one,	and	each
step	leads	you	to	the	next.	It	is	a	linked	process.
But	jumping	from	the	periphery	to	the	center	is	not	continuous	with	the	old.	It	is
discontinuous	 --	 not	 a	 further	 step	 and	 not	 caused	 by	 your	 previous	 step.	 It	 is
completely	new	and	uncaused.
This	becomes	difficult	 to	understand,	because	 in	 this	world	of	happenings	 and
events	nothing	 is	uncaused.	But	modern	physics	has	come	nearer	 to	 this	point;
modern	physics	has	come	to	a	parallel	situation.	The	behavior	of	the	electron	is
discontinuous.	 So	 the	 whole	 physical	 science,	 because	 of	 this	 behavior	 of
electrons,	has	taken	a	new	dimension.
Before	 this	 century,	 physics	was	 the	 system	most	 based	 on	 scientific	method.
Everything	was	caused,	everything	was	a	continuity,	and	everything	was	certain,
because	 only	 with	 a	 causal	 link	 is	 there	 a	 certainty.	When	 things	 can	 happen
uncaused,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 certainty,	 then	 there	 are	 really	 no	 laws	 that	 can	 be
applied.
The	whole	science	is	wavering	today	because	they	cannot	decide	the	behavior	of
the	electron.	It	behaves	without	causes.	Sometimes	it	disappears	from	one	point
and	then	appears	on	another	without	any	continuity	 in	between.	From	point	A,
the	 electron	 disappears;	 on	 point	 B,	 it	 appears.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 continuity	 of
existence	between	A	and	B.	It	has	not	been	continuous,	it	has	not	traveled.	This
becomes	mysterious,	but	I	take	it	as	an	analogy.
There	 are	 two	 types	 of	 thinking:	 one	 is	 logical	 thinking	 and	 the	 other	 is
analogical	 thinking.	 Logical	 thinking	 proceeds	 in	 sequence:	 "This	 is	 so,
therefore,	that	will	happen."
The	 cause	 is	 determined,	 so	 the	 effect	 will	 follow.	 The	 logical	 process	 is	 a
definite,	certain	process.	Given	particular	premises,	particular	results	will	follow
automatically.
There	 is	 no	 freedom,	 in	 logical	 thinking,	 there	 is	 no	 freedom.	 Everything	 is
caused	by	the	past,	so	it	is	dominated	by	the	past.	If	I	will	give	you	a	particular
amount	of	poison,	you	will	die;	you	are	not	free.	A	particular	amount	of	poison
will	cause	death.	Death	must	follow;	it	is	a	certainty,	a	continuity,	a	causal	link.
Analogical	thinking	is	quite	different	--	altogether	different.	Analogical	thinking
is	in	a	way	poetic.	You	jump	from	one	thing	to	another	simply	through	analogy,
not	through	logical	sequences.	For	example,	I	may	love	someone	and	may	write
a	 poem	 in	 which	 I	 say,	 "My	 beloved	 is	 just	 like	 the	 moon."	 There	 is	 no
connection.	 There	 is	 no	 causal	 link	 between	 the	 face	 of	 my	 beloved	 and	 the
moon.	There	is	no	relationship	at	all,	only	analogy.	I	have	jumped	from	one	point
to	 another	 without	 traveling	 in	 between	 in	 any	 sequence.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 the
behavior	of	the	electron.
Poets	have	always	been	behaving	like	that,	they	jump	from	one	point	to	another
simply	 through	 analogy.	There	may	be	 no	 obvious	 resemblance	 even,	 but	 if	 it
appears	to	the	poet	that	it	somehow	resembles,	something	has	a	resonance,	that
is	enough.	Something	is	re-echoed.	Then	there	is	a	jump,	an	analogical	jump.
The	 whole	 literature	 of	 mysticism	 is	 analogical.	 Mystics	 can	 only	 give	 you
analogy,	that	is	why	there	are	so	many	parables.	They	were	all	analogical;	Jesus
was	 talking	 in	 analogy,	 Buddha	 also,	 and	 everyone.	 They	 are	 not	 giving	 any
logical	reasons	and	arguments.	Really,	Jesus	has	never	argued	any	point.	There	is
no	argument,	but	just	analogy.
If	you	are	sympathetic,	only	then	can	you	understand	analogical	thinking.	If	you
are	not	sympathetic,	 then	you	cannot	understand,	because	analogy	depends	not
on	reasoning	but	on	your	sympathetic	attitudes	and	on	whether	you	can	continue
the	same	process	inside	yourself.
So	for	analogy,	I	 take	the	behavior	of	 the	electron;	 just	 like	this	 is	 the	spiritual
explosion.
The	old	just	drops	on	the	periphery.	There	is	no	link	between	the	periphery	and
the	center,	there	is	no	travel.	You	do	not	travel	from	the	periphery	to	the	center.
If	 you	 travel,	 then	 there	 will	 be	 a	 link	 from	 the	 periphery,	 then	 the	 first	 step
toward	the	center	will	be	taken	on	the	periphery,	and	it	must	be	connected	with
the	previous	one.	Then	there	is	a	causal	link.
You	are	on	the	periphery,	and	suddenly	you	find	yourself	at	the	center.	There	is
no	 travel	 in	between.	That	 is	explosion.	We	will	 take	another	analogy,	because
physics	may	not	be	known	to	you.	For	example,	you	sleep	in	Bombay	and	dream
that	you	are	in	London.	In	the	morning	when	the	dream	is	over	and	the	sleep	is
over,	will	you	have	to	travel	back	from	London	to	Bombay?	Again,	you	dream
that	you	are	 in	London	while	sleeping	 in	Bombay.	Someone	comes	and	wakes
you	up,	 and	you	were	 in	London.	Will	you	awaken	 in	London	or	 in	Bombay?
You	will	awaken	in	Bombay.	But	how	did	you	come	back?
Did	you	travel	any	distance?	If	you	travel	the	distance,	then	you	will	not	wake
up,	 because	 the	 distance	 can	 only	 be	 traveled	 in	 dreams.	 If	 you	 travel	 the
distance,	 if	you	take	a	plane,	 then	the	plane	will	be	a	part	of	 the	dream.	If	you
simply	wake	up,	then	the	dream	will	be	discontinued	in	London;	you	will	wake
up	 in	 Bombay,	 and	 there	 will	 be	 no	 travel	 in	 between.	 So	 the	 waking	 is
something	new.	It	is	not	a	continuity	with	the	dream.
So	the	periphery	 is	 the	dream	--	 the	dream	of	 the	doing,	 the	dream	of	 the	ego.
That	is	why	in	India	mystics	have	said,	"This	is	illusion."	They	have	said,	"This
is	just	a	dream;	the	whole	world	is	just	a	dream."	And	when	Shankara	and	others
have	said	 that	 this	whole	world	 is	a	dream,	 this	 is	an	analogy	and	must	not	be
misunderstood.	 It	 has	 been	 misunderstood.	 You	 can	 point	 out	 what	 nonsense
they	are	telling.	Is	this	world	a	dream?
It	is	so	real!	The	Indian	mystic	philosopher	Shankara	also	knew	this.	Really,	this
is	real.
But	he	is	talking	in	analogy.
"The	world	is	a	dream."	When	it	is	said,	it	is	not	meant	that	the	world	is	actually
a	dream.
It	 only	 means	 that	 if	 you	 are	 awakened	 in	 it,	 the	 previous	 awareness	 will	 be
discontinued.
You	will	not	find	any	connection	between	dream	and	waking.	You	will	not	find
any	connection	whatsoever,	any	relation	whatsoever.	You	will	be	just	bewildered
how	you	were	in	London	and	how	you	came	back.
But	 no	 one	 is	 bewildered	 really.	When	 one	 is	 out	 of	 the	 dream,	 one	 is	 never
bewildered.
Are	you	ever	bewildered?	You	just	say,	"Oh!	It	was	a	dream,"	and	the	chapter	is
closed.
You	 never	 think	 about	 it.	 The	 same	 thing	 happens	 whenever	 the	 explosion	 is
there.	You	know,	"Oh!	The	dreaming	entity	has	dissolved.	It	was	a	dream,	and
now	I	am	in	the	center."	You	never	ask,	"How?	How	was	I	on	the	periphery,	and
how	did	I	come	back	to	the	center	again?	Hod	did	I	travel?"
People	would	ask	Buddha:	"How	did	you	become	enlightened?"	The	question	is
absurd.
It	is	just	like	asking	someone	how	he	came	out	of	a	dream.	What	is	the	method?
What	is	the	technique?	How	can	you	practice	coming	out	of	a	dream?	The	dream
is	 just	 broken,	 but	 the	 dream	has	 its	 own	ways	 of	 being	broken.	Sometimes	 a
dream	 becomes	 a	 nightmare,	 it	 becomes	 unbearable.	 Then	 the	 very
unbearableness	of	it,	the	anguish	of	it,	causes	it	to	be	broken.
So	 if	 life	 on	 the	 periphery	 has	 become	 a	 nightmare,	 if	 living	 as	 we	 live	 has
become	hellish,	then	all	of	this	will	put	you	out	of	the	dream.	But	when	you	are
out	of	it,	you	will	know	it	is	not	caused,	it	is	not	a	continuity.	That	is	why	we	call
it	an	explosion.
Something	new	happens	in	it	--	something	totally	new.	It	cannot	be	understood
in	terms	of	the	old.
So	what	can	you	do	even	negatively?	You	can	do	at	least	three	things	negatively.
One,	be	aware	--	even	if	you	can	be	aware	for	only	a	single	moment.	Be	aware
that	you	have	become	identified	with	a	past	which	is	not	your	being.	The	being
is	in	the	present,	here	and	now,	and	you	are	identified	with	something	which	is
not	here	and	now.	Be	aware	of	 this.	Let	 this	awareness	come	 to	you	suddenly,
anywhere.	You	are	walking	on	the	street	--
stop	 for	 a	moment,	 be	 suddenly	 aware.	Anywhere,	 in	 any	 situation,	 stop	 for	 a
moment	 and	 be	 suddenly	 aware	 where	 you	 are	 --	 on	 the	 periphery	 or	 in	 the
center?	Are	you	 identified	with	 the	memory	or	 are	you	not	 identified	with	 the
memory?	 In	 the	 beginning	 this	 can	 come	 only	 for	 a	 moment,	 or	 not	 even	 a
moment.	There	will	be	just	a	glimpse	for	part	of	a	moment.	You	will	feel	it,	and
it	will	be	gone.	But	that	glimpse	will	deepen,	and	there	will	be	a	new	movement
from	the	periphery	to	the	center	--	a	movement	just	like	the	electron	--	a	jump,	a
leap	from	one	point	to	another.	The	situation	will	deepen.
Remain	 aware	 as	 much	 as	 you	 can,	 and	 use	 any	 and	 every	 situation.	 For
example,	the	breath	has	gone	out,	and	the	breath	has	not	come	in.	There	is	a	gap
--	a	very	minute,	a	very	small	gap	between	the	two.	Neither	are	you	taking	the
breath	nor	is	the	breath	going	out.	Become	aware	of	that	gap.	Remain	in	it	for	a
single	 moment;	 you	 will	 feel	 the	 center,	 and	 you	 will	 be	 far	 away	 from	 the
periphery.	You	will	be	out	of	the	dream.
You	are	going	to	sleep,	be	aware	that	sleep	is	coming	in,	is	descending	on	you;
you	are	sinking	 in	 it.	Then	 there	 is	a	moment	when	you	are	neither	awake	nor
asleep.	The	mind	is	changing	its	dimension.	For	a	single	moment	there	is	neither
sleep	nor	are	you	awake.	Be	aware	of	it	and	remain	in	the	gap,	and	you	will	be
thrown	to	the	center.	You	will	be	off	the	periphery.
In	 the	morning	you	are	 returning	from	a	state	of	sleep.	Feel	 the	moment	when
you	have	not	yet	become	awake,	but	sleep	has	gone.	There	is	always	a	moment.
Whenever	 the	 mind	 changes	 from	 one	 state	 to	 another,	 there	 is	 a	 gap.
Everywhere	there	is	a	gap,	because	without	the	gap	change	is	impossible;	and	in
that	 gap	 you	 are	 never	 on	 the	 periphery.	 That	 gap	 is	 discontinuous	 with	 the
periphery.	 You	 must	 understand	 exactly	 what	 I	 am	 saying.	 No	 gap	 is	 on	 the
periphery;	every	gap	is	at	the	center.
The	only	 continuity	 is	 on	 the	periphery	 --	 one	 event	 happening,	 another	 event
happening.
And	 in	 between,	 in	 the	 gap,	 is	 always	 the	 center.	 You	 always	 go	 back	 to	 the
center,	and	for	another	moment	you	always	come	back	on	the	periphery.	But	this
happening	 is	 so	 rapid,	 it	 is	 so	 timeless	 in	 a	 way,	 that	 ordinarily	 you	 cannot
become	aware	of	 it.	But	 if	you	become	aware,	 attentive,	watchful	 and	careful,
then	by	and	by	you	will	have	glimpses.
You	love	someone,	and	the	love	has	gone	and	the	hatred	has	not	yet	set	in.	There
is	 a	 moment.	 The	 love	 happens	 on	 the	 periphery,	 the	 hatred	 happens	 on	 the
periphery,	but	 the	gap	 in	between	 them	always	happens	at	 the	center.	So	when
you	love,	you	are	on	the	periphery;	when	you	hate,	you	are	on	the	periphery.	But
when	you	change	from	love	to	hate	or	hate	to	love,	you	are	not	on	the	periphery.
The	gap	is	always	at	the	center.	You	are	thrown	back.	You	cannot	change	on	the
periphery	 because	 on	 the	 periphery	 you	 are	 only	 doing.	 The	 being	 is	 at	 the
center.	You	must	come	back	to	change,	but	this	coming	and	going	is	so	rapid,	is
so	timelessly	rapid,	that	ordinarily	you	cannot	become	alert	about	it.
Be	 alert	 in	 any	 change.	 You	 have	 been	 ill,	 now	 the	 illness	 has	 gone,	 and	 the
health	has	not	yet	come	in.	Be	aware	--	you	will	be	at	the	center.	No	change	is
possible	 on	 the	periphery	 itself.	That	 is	why	 everyone	needs	 sleep,	 because	 in
sleep	a	great	change	happens.	If	you	cannot	sleep	deeply	you	will	not	be	able	to
live,	 because	 life	 needs	 certain	 changes	 every	 day.	 Every	 day,	 much	 is	 to	 be
changed	in	the	body,	in	the	mind,	in	the	emotions.	There	is	much	change	every
day.	So	nature	has	a	way	of	making	you	unconscious,	because	consciously	you
will	not	remain	in	the	center	for	 long.	You	are	thrown	unconscious	so	that	you
are	not	on	 the	periphery,	you	are	not	 running	 to	 the	periphery.	You	are	asleep,
you	are	unconscious.	So	you	are	at	the	center,	and	you	have	settled	in	the	being.
But	even	when	you	are	awake	 there	are	changes.	As	an	analogy,	you	change	a
gear	 in	your	 car.	For	 a	very	 short	 time	you	put	 the	 car	 in	neutral.	 It	 is	 always
through	the	neutral	position	that	you	change	the	gear.	Neutral	means	no	gear.	If
you	shift	from	the	first	gear	to	the	second,	you	cannot	shift	it	directly.	It	must	be
put	in	neutral	first,	then	it	can	be	changed.	The	more	expert	you	become,	the	less
time	it	takes.	Really,	an	expert	driver	becomes	unaware	that	every	time	a	gear	is
changed	 it	passes	 through	neutral.	 It	 is	 changed	 so	 swiftly	 that	he	need	not	be
aware	of	it.	Only	one	who	is	learning	is	aware,	no	one	is	aware	otherwise.	And
neutral	 is	 always	 the	 difficulty	 in	 learning.	 Whenever	 you	 change	 from	 one
action	to	another,	you	come	back	to	the	neutral	state,	to	the	center.	So	be	aware.
Someone	has	 insulted	you,	now	you	will	change,	you	cannot	 remain	 the	same.
You	will	have	to	change	on	the	periphery.	The	same	face	has	become	irrelevant,
you	 will	 have	 to	 change	 the	 total	 face.	 Now	 be	 aware	 of	 what	 is	 happening
inside.	You	will	have	to	go	to	the	center,	again	come	back	to	the	periphery,	and
then	you	can	change	your	face.	So	when	someone	insults	you,	meditate	 inside.
Go	in.	He	has	given	a	point	of	change.
Tantra	 has	 used	 intoxicants	 to	make	 the	 seeker	 aware	 of	 the	 changing	 state	 of
consciousness.	They	will	go	on	giving	you	some	intoxicant,	and	the	teacher	will
say,	"Be	aware	of	the	gap."	Up	to	that	moment	you	were	aware,	and	now	you	are
losing	 awareness.	 So	 be	 aware	 of	 the	 moment	 when	 you	 change	 from
consciousness	to	unconsciousness.	One	is	always	changing,	and	if	one	becomes
aware	of	these	changing	moments,	one	becomes	aware	of	the	center.
A	Zen	master	will	throw	you	out	of	the	window	and	will	cry	from	behind,	"Be
aware!"
You	have	been	thrown,	you	are	in	between,	you	are	just	passing	the	window,	and
you	are	about	 to	hit	 the	ground.	He	cries,	 "Be	aware!"	You	have	 fallen	on	 the
ground,	your	 face	must	 change.	Now	 the	 situation	 is	quite	different.	You	have
come	to	ask	some	metaphysical	question,	and	he	has	done	something	completely
con-metaphysical.	 He	 has	 thrown	 you	 out	 of	 the	 window;	 you	 were	 asking
whether	God	is	or	not.
It	 is	 absolutely	 irrelevant	 to	 throw	 one	 through	 the	window.	But	 he	 says,	 "Be
aware!"	in	the	exact	moment	when	you	will	be	changing	faces,	changing	a	state.
When	you	are	just	passing	through	the	window,	it	is	not	only	your	body	that	is
passing	through	a	change,	your	state	of	consciousness	will	be	passing	through	a
change	also.	And	a	teacher	knows	exactly	when	it	changes.	That	exact	moment
he	will	cry,	"Be	aware!"	And	if	you	can	listen	to	him	for	that	moment,	you	will
be	at	the	center	--	thrown	out	of	the	periphery.
So	whenever	there	is	any	changing	situation,	be	careful	to	look	inside.	There	is
no	traveling.	There	is	only	a	jump	from	the	periphery	to	the	center	and	from	the
center	 to	 the	 periphery.	And	 the	 behavior	 is	 just	 like	 the	 electron,	 or	 just	 like
dreams.	 Deepen	 this	 awareness.	 This	 is	 all	 that	 you	 can	 do.	 This	 is	 negative
because	awareness	is	not	a	doing,	awareness	is	not	an	act.
Whenever	 you	 are	 in	 a	 changing	 state,	 be	 aware,	 and	 there	will	 be	 no	 action.
Action	will	 be	 withheld	whenever	 you	 are	 aware.	 If	 you	 become	 aware,	 then
there	will	 be	 no	 breath	 even.	 If	 I	 put	 a	 dagger	 at	 your	 throat,	 even	 the	 breath
stops.	You	become	so	aware	that	everything	stops.	You	are	thrown	to	the	center.
Awareness	is	not	action.	The	addiction	with	action	is	only	to	escape	awareness,
and	we	 all	 have	become	addicted	 --	 one	must	 do	 something.	This	 addiction	 is
helping	the	continuity.
Use	any	opportunity	to	be	alert	--	any	opportunity.	And	there	are	thousands	and
thousands	of	opportunities	every	day.	Be	alert,	and	you	will	feel	the	jump	from
the	periphery	 to	 the	 center.	This	being	 at	 the	 center	 can	become	easy	 for	you.
You	are	outside	the	house;	it	has	become	hot.	Just	come	in.	Whenever	you	feel
like	coming	in,	you	can	come	in.	Whenever	you	are	feeling	like	going	out,	you
can	go	out.	There	is	no	difficulty.
When	this	movement	from	the	periphery	to	the	center	has	become	just	like	this,
then	you	will	have	explosion.
I	use	the	word	`then';	I	use	the	word	`slowly';	I	say	`gradually';	I	say	`by	and	by';
these	words	are	all	 irrelevant.	But	because	I	cannot	do	anything	else,	I	have	to
use	these	words.
They	 are	 irrelevant	 as	 far	 as	 explosion	 is	 concerned.	 It	 is	 never	 gradual,	 it	 is
never	 slowly,	 it	 is	 never	 by	 and	 by.	 It	 is	 sudden.	 But	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to
understand	it.	So	for	your	understanding,	or	if	you	like,	your	misunderstanding,
these	words	are	used.
The	whole	pattern	of	 language	 is	made	 for	 the	periphery.	Nothing	 else	 can	be
done.
Language	 is	 created	 by	 those	minds	 that	 are	 on	 the	 periphery.	 It	 is	 needed	 by
those	minds	that	are	on	the	periphery.	It	is	a	necessity	of	the	periphery	and	not	of
the	 center.	The	 center	 is	 absolutely	 silent,	 no	 language	 is	 needed	 there.	So	we
have	to	interpret	the	center	in	the	language	of	the	periphery,	then	this	is	bound	to
happen.
So	do	not	misunderstand	me	when	I	say	gradually.	I	never	mean	gradually.	The
explosion	 will	 never	 come	 by	 and	 by.	 So	 these	 words	 are	 only	 for	 your
confidence,	so	that	you	may	hope,	so	that	it	may	become	conceivable	for	you,	so
that	something	on	the	periphery	may	be	understood.	It	is	just	like	talking	about
the	world	of	waking	consciousness	to	a	person	who	is	in	a	dream.
One	has	 to	use	dream	language	which	 is	absurd.	Any	 language	 is	absurd.	Any
expression	 is	 absurd	 in	 a	way,	 but	 nothing	 can	 be	 done.	One	 feels	 completely
helpless,	and	the	helplessness	is	so	great.
One	knows	something.	For	example,	I	know	what	is	meant	by	explosion,	I	know
what	is	meant	by	being	at	the	center.	But	I	cannot	tell	you.	You	ask	me;	I	tell	you
something,	and	I	know	all	 the	 time	 that	 I	cannot	 tell	you.	And	I	know	what	 is
meant	by	explosion,	what	is	meant	by	being	at	the	center.	The	moment	I	begin	to
speak,	 I	 begin	 to	 use	 the	 language	 of	 the	 periphery.	 The	 moment	 periphery
language	 is	 used,	 everything	 becomes	 distorted.	 So	 understand	 these
implications.
You	ask	 about	 chain	 explosions.	Whenever	 there	 is	 an	 explosion,	many	 things
begin	 to	happen.	Because	 the	phenomenon	 is	 so	great,	whenever	an	 individual
goes	through	it,	wherever	he	is,	he	cannot	help	but	become	infectious.	He	may
not	want	it,	but	this	begins	to	happen.	His	being	at	the	center	will	push	anyone
near	him	to	the	center	also.	And	because	of	this,	so	many	times	people	will	begin
to	feel	repulsed	by	him.
For	 example,	 Gurdjieff	 was	 felt	 to	 be	 repulsive	 by	 many	 people.	 They	 just
wanted	to	run	away	from	him	because	by	being	near	him	they	would	be	pushed
unknowingly.	Many	women	seekers	 ran	away	from	Gurdjieff	because	 they	 felt
as	 if	 they	were	hit	 in	 the	 sex	center,	 just	by	being	near	him.	They	 felt	 he	was
doing	 something.	 He	 was	 not	 doing	 anything,	 but	 because	 out	 only	 working
center	is	the	sex	center,	the	first	hit	is	always	felt	there.	If	male	seekers	will	come
to	Gurdjieff	they	will	not	feel	it	so	much.	But	women	seekers	will	feel	it.	This	is
because	the	physical	body	of	a	male	has	positive	bio-electricity,	and	the	physical
body	of	a	female	has	negative	bio-electricity,	so	the	opposite	sexes	attract	each
other.	 The	 enlightened	male	 radiates	 a	 tremendous	 energy	 for	 female	 seekers.
And	both	things	will	happen:	women	seekers	will	be	attracted	toward	a	person
like	Gurdjieff	and	at	the	same	time	be	repulsed	also.	The	inner	hit	will	be	felt	in
so	many	ways,	and	each	one	will	feel	it	in	his	own	way.
In	 the	 West,	 it	 was	 felt	 very	 deeply	 for	 so	 many	 reasons.	 One	 is	 that	 the
preliminaries	were	lacking.	In	India	the	seeker	must	touch	the	feet	of	the	guru.	It
seems	unnecessary,	it	looks	formal,	but	there	are	secrets.	If	you	just	bow	down	to
a	teacher,	you	just	touch	his	feet,	your	sex	center	will	not	be	hit	by	his	presence,
because	the	moment	you	surrender,	his	energy	will	be	felt	in	the	whole	body.	A
surrendered	 body	 becomes	 a	whole.	You	may	 not	 have	 felt	 it,	 but	when	 I	 tell
you,	now	you	will	feel	it	and	know	it.
So	the	Indian	way	of	touching	the	feet	is	lying	down	completely	on	the	earth.	All
the	parts	of	the	body	should	touch	the	earth.	We	call	it	sashtang.	It	means	all	the
parts	 of	 the	 body	 touch	 the	 earth	when	 you	 are	 just	 lying	 on	 the	 earth.	Many
scientific	 things	 begin	 to	 happen.	 Your	 body	 becomes	 one	 and	 the	 impact
vibrates	on	 the	whole	body	and	not	 just	on	one	center.	 It	does	not	penetrates	a
particular	 center,	 but	 the	whole	body.	You	 are	 horizontal,	 and	 the	 impact	 goes
through	 you	 from	 the	 head	 toward	 the	 legs.	 If	 you	 are	 vertical,	 standing,	 the
same	 impact	passes	 through	you,	but	 it	cannot	go	 through	your	whole	body;	 it
cannot	pass	through	your	legs.	The	only	sensitive	part	in	you	is	the	sex	center,	so
it	passes	through	the	sex	center.	If	you	are	standing	with	a	teacher	who	is	in	the
center,	his	impact,	his	vibrations,	will	pass	through	your	center.	It	may	become
repulsive	or	it	may	become	attractive.	In	either	case,	there	will	be	difficulties.	If
you	are	lying	down,	then	the	flow	passes	through	you,	touches	you,	flows	in	you
from	one	end	to	the	other	end.	And	it	has	a	soothing	effect.
In	 this	country,	where	they	developed	this	 inner	science,	 it	 took	centuries.	And
they	know	only	by	so	many	experiences,	because	man	cannot	be	experimented
upon	like	a	pig.	It	took	centuries	to	know	these	things	--	through	experiences	and
happenings	only.	They	made	it	a	basic	condition	that	one	should	begin	with	trust,
faith.	If	you	are	faithful	then	you	become	open.	If	you	are	doubting,	then	you	are
closed.	 If	 you	are	 closed,	 then	 the	 same	energy	which	would	have	helped	you
toward	your	explosion	will	go	round	and	round.	It	cannot	penetrate	you,	you	are
closed.	It	will	not	be	possible	to	help	you.	If	you	are	open	and	trusting,	 then	it
goes	deep	 inside.	Then	the	explosion	becomes	a	chain	explosion.	And	this	can
happen,	 this	 always	 happens.	 So	 a	 trusting	 attitude	 creates	 great	 chains	 of
explosion.
Sometimes	 the	 chain	 explosion	 goes	 on	 continuously,	 even	 when	 the	 original
teacher	has	died.	For	example,	in	the	tradition	of	the	Sikhs,	the	tenth	guru	is	the
last.	Up	to	the	tenth,	gurus	continued,	one	was	followed	by	another.	But	with	the
tenth,	 the	 tradition	 was	 stopped	 and	 broken.	 What	 is	 the	 reason?	 Why	 did
Govind	Singh	stop	the	chain?	It	was	continuous	from	Nanak	to	Govind	Singh.	It
was	 a	 living	 force,	 but	 with	 Govind	 Singh	 it	 was	 stopped.	 It	 could	 not	 be
delivered	and	transferred,	as	no	one	was	capable.	No	one	was	open	to	receive	it
completely,	totally,	and	it	cannot	be	given	partially.	Either	you	are	totally	open	or
not.
Partial	trust	is	no	trust.	It	is	just	deception.	It	is	not	that	you	believe	ninety-nine
percent,	 even	 ninety-nine	 point	 nine	 per	 cent	 will	 not	 do.	 And	 the	 one-tenth
percent	 doubt	 will	 be	 enough	 to	 kill	 the	 whole	 thing,	 because	 the	 one-tenth
percent	doubt	will	make	you	closed.
If	you	trust	openly,	then	there	is	a	chain	reaction;	then	you	come	completely	into
the	touch.	Then	the	touch	is	not	just	a	touch,	it	becomes	part	and	parcel	of	your
being.
If	you	are	open,	it	does	not	mean	that	you	are	taking	anything	from	me.	There	is
no	"me"
as	such.	It	is	not	that	you	are	taking	something	from	someone	else,	it	is	only	that
you	yourself	are	reflected	in	your	own	self.	We	just	look	separate	because	of	the
ego.	 If	 you	 are	 open,	 then	 the	 chain	 can	 continue	 for	 centuries.	 For	 example,
Buddha's	chain	still	continues.	Of	course,	it	is	not	so	broad	today;	it	has	become
a	very	narrow	stream,	but	it	continues.
When	Bodhidharma	went	to	China	from	India	it	was	not	to	teach	someone	or	to
give	the	message	of	Buddha	to	the	Chinese	and	to	others.	It	was	only	to	search
for	 a	 man	 who	 can	 be	 given	 the	 explosion,	 who	 is	 so	 open	 that	 before
Bodhidharma	died	he	could	 transfer	everything.	So	he	was	sitting	 in	China	for
nine	years,	continuously	facing	a	wall.	If	you	would	have	gone	to	him,	he	would
not	 even	 have	 looked	 at	 you.	 His	 back	 was	 toward	 all	 the	 visitors.	 So	 many
people	asked,	"What	is	this?	Why	are	you	sitting	like	this?"
Bodhidharma	would	say,	"I	have	been	facing	persons	for	many	years,	but	I	have
never	 found	 in	 their	 faces	 anything	 else	 than	 a	 wall.	 No	 one	 is	 receptive;
everyone	is	just	like	a	wall.	So	it	makes	no	difference	now.	When	you	come	to
me	not	as	a	wall,	then	I	will	face	you,	then	I	will	look	at	you."
For	nine	years	continuously	no	one	came	who	was	capable,	whom	Bodhidharma
could	face.	Then	come	Hui	Neng.	He	came,	stood	behind,	then	cut	off	his	hand
and	gave	it	to	Bodhidharma	and	said,	"Now	make	an	about	turn,	otherwise	I	will
cut	my	head."
Bodhidharma	just	faced	Hui	Neng	and	said,	"Now	the	man	has	come.	For	you	I
have	 traveled	 the	 whole	 of	 the	 Himalayas."	 And	 there	 was	 a	 transmission
without	scriptures.
There	 was	 no	 scripture	 with	 Bodhidharma,	 so	 they	 say	 the	 transmission	 was
given	without	scripture.	He	just	 looked	in	 the	eyes	of	Hui	Neng	and	there	was
transmission,	just	like	from	one	point	to	another	with	no	travel	in	between.
So	this	too	must	be	understood.	The	chain	of	explosion	is	again	a	jump.	When
something	from	my	consciousness	goes	to	your	consciousness,	it	is	a	leap.	It	was
here,	and	then	it	is	there,	and	it	was	never	in	between.	There	is	no	process.	If	you
are	 receptive,	 if	 you	 are	 open,	 the	 flame	 that	 is	 here	 will	 be	 found	 there
instantaneously.	There	will	be	no	time	gap.	The	chain	can	continue	forever,	but	it
never	does.	It	is	very	difficult	because	even	with	a	living	teacher	it	is	difficult	to
be	open.
The	mind	tries	 in	every	way	to	be	closed	because	 to	be	open	is	 to	die.	For	 the
mind	 it	 is	 death.	 So	 it	 will	 try.	 It	 will	 argue,	 it	 will	 find	many	 reasons	 to	 be
closed.	 It	will	 find	very	absurd	 things.	 In	other	moments,	 later	on,	you	cannot
conceive	 that	 these	 things	 could	 have	made	you	doubt,	 that	 these	meaningless
things	made	 you	 skeptical.	 These	 things	which	 have	 no	meaning	 at	 all	 create
barriers.	 And	 if	 you	 are	 not	 open,	 then	 the	 chain,	 the	 transmission,	 is	 not
possible.
All	 your	meditation,	 and	 all	 my	 stress	 and	 emphasis	 on	meditation,	 is	 just	 to
make	you	open.	Any	moment	you	will	be	open,	and	there	will	be	transmission.
Minor	 explosions	 happen	 daily.	 They	 are	 only	 the	 glimpses	 of	 the	 center.	But
that	glimpse	is	not	enough.	It	can	help,	but	do	not	be	satisfied	with	it.	Ordinarily
we	 become	 satisfied	with	 this.	 There	 is	 a	 glimpse,	 and	 one	 becomes	 satisfied.
One	makes	it	a	treasure,	then	one	goes	on	remembering	it.	When	the	glimpse	is
changed	from	the	center	to	the	periphery,	then	it	becomes	a	memory.	Then	you
nourish	 it,	 then	 you	 remember	 it,	 then	 you	 feel	 elated	 by	 it.	 Then	 you	 always
wonder	when	it	will	happen	again.	Then	it	has	become	a	part	of	the	periphery,	of
the	memory.	It	is	useless.
Minor	explosions	can	even	be	fatal	if	you	nourish	them	as	memory.	Throw	them,
forget	them.	Do	not	ask	for	their	repetition.	Only	then	the	major	will	be	possible.
Only	then	the	total	explosion	will	be	possible.
So	 there	are	minor	explosions,	but	 I	never	pay	any	attention	 to	 them.	And	you
should	 not	 pay	 any	 attention	 to	 them	 either,	 because	 then	 they	 only	 become	 a
part	of	the	memory.
They	cannot	destroy	 the	memory;	on	 the	contrary,	 they	can	strengthen	 it.	So	a
small	 experience,	 a	 petty	 experience,	 cannot	 do.	 Throw	 it.	 Unless	 the	 total	 is
achieved,	do	not	be	contented.
Before	 the	ultimate	explosion,	do	not	be	satisfied.	Remain	discontented.	Never
remember	 anything	 that	 has	 happened.	 No	 experience	 should	 be	 accumulated
and	nourished.	As	it	happens,	throw	it,	forget	it,	go	ahead.	Unless	there	is	a	total
explosion...	nothing	short	of	that	will	do,	so	do	not	pay	any	attention.
Things	 have	 happened,	 things	 are	 happening,	 but	 I	 never	 talk	 about	 minor
explosions.	If	someone	comes	to	me	and	says	that	there	is	this	minor	explosion,	I
will	 just	 try	 to	 throw	 it.	 It	 should	 not	 be	 remembered,	 it	 will	 be	 a	 barrier.
Continue	 to	 the	 center,	 until	 you	 reach	 to	 the	 point	 from	 where	 there	 is	 no
coming	 back.	 When	 that	 point	 comes	 it	 is	 never	 a	 part	 of	 memory.	 You
remember	 only	 the	 things	which	 are	 lost.	That	which	 is	 always	with	 you,	 you
need	not	remember.
Really,	you	become	aware	only	when	the	experience	is	lost.	If	you	say,	"I	love
you	very	much,"	be	aware	that	there	is	every	possibility	that	the	love	is	ending.	It
may	have	gone	already.	It	is	only	an	ego	of	the	past.	That	is	why	you	emphasize,
"I	love	you	very	much."
"Very	much"	is	an	effort	 to	fill	 the	gap,	and	there	 is	a	gap.	The	love	has	gone.
When	love	exists,	you	feel	it	and	live	it,	silence	is	enough.	When	it	is	gone,	you
chatter	about	it.	Now	silence	is	not	enough.	On	the	contrary,	in	silence	the	dead
love	will	be	exposed.	 In	silence,	you	cannot	hide	 it.	Now	you	begin	 to	chatter
about	 it.	Ordinarily,	we	are	not	speaking	to	 tell	 things.	On	the	contrary,	we	are
speaking	to	hide	things.	In	silence,	you	cannot	hide	it	with	words.
Whenever	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 any	 minor	 explosion,	 do	 not	 nourish	 the
memory,	and	do	not	long	for	its	repetition.	It	has	gone,	it	has	become	a	part	of
the	dead	past.	Throw	it.	Let	the	dead	be	buried,	and	go	ahead.	And	when	the	real
explosion,	 the	major	 explosion,	 the	 ultimate	 explosion,	 happens,	 you	 will	 not
remember	 it.	You	will	 not	 need	 to	 remember	 it,	 it	will	 be	with	you.	 It	will	 be
your	center.	It	will	be	your	being,	you	cannot	forget	it.
There	 is	 no	 meaning	 to	 remembering	 or	 forgetting.	 And	 unless	 the	 major
happens,	the	minor	has	no	meaning.
And	you	also	asked	whether	 the	people	who	are	around	me	are	going	 through
explosion.
Yes,	they	are	going	toward	it.	If	they	are	not	going	toward	it,	they	cannot	remain
with	me	 for	 long,	 they	 cannot	 continue.	 So	whenever	 incapable	 ones	 come	 to
me,	 either	 they	will	 go	by	 themselves	or	 I	will	 create	 situations	 in	which	 they
will	 go.	 With	 them	 nothing	 can	 be	 done.	 But	 those	 who	 remain	 with	 me,
continue	 with	 me.	 I	 allow	 them	 to	 do	 so	 only	 if	 they	 are	 going	 toward	 the
explosion,	 if	 their	understanding	 is	deepening,	 if	 they	are	becoming	more	alert
and	aware.	Of	course,	the	path	is	arduous	and	there	are	many	pitfalls.	One	goes
one	step	and	then	falls	two	steps	back;	it	happens	daily.	The	path	is	not	straight;
it	is	criss-cross.	And	it	is	not	on	a	plane;	it	is	just	like	on	a	hilly	track.	So	many
times	you	come	to	the	same	point,	only	on	a	slightly	higher	level.
I	 allow	 only	 those	 to	 be	 near	 me	 in	 whom	 I	 see	 possibilities,	 potentialities,
otherwise	I	create	situations	in	which	they	leave	by	themselves.	It	is	very	easy	to
create	a	situation	for	someone	to	leave.	It	is	very	difficult	to	create	a	situation	for
someone	to	stay.
Everyone	 is	 ready	 to	 leave,	 because	 to	 come	 to	 the	 center	 is	 really	 the	 only
arduous	 adventure.	And	with	me,	 they	will	 be	 always	 in	 a	 struggle.	With	me,
they	cannot	exist	on	the	periphery.	Their	minds	will	 try	every	method	to	be	on
the	periphery,	but	they	can	only	stay	with	me	if	they	are	proceeding	toward	the
center.
When	you	are	with	me,	you	continue	to	be	on	the	periphery,	and	I	continue	to	be
on	the	center.	The	whole	process	is	the	same	as	the	inner	struggle	in	each	one	of
you.	Your	being	 remains	at	 the	center,	and	your	ego	 remains	on	 the	periphery.
There	 is	 struggle	 and	 tension.	 And	 when	 you	 come	 to	 me,	 you	 become	 the
periphery,	I	become	the	center,	and	the	same	struggle	begins.	But	being	with	me
helps	in	many	ways.	If	you	can	continue	to	be	with	me	for	some	time,	you	will
be	 able	 to	 remain	 with	 your	 being,	 with	 your	 center,	 more	 easily.	 This
phenomenon	is	the	same	as	it	is	within	each	individual;	there	is	no	difference.
When	I	talk	to	you,	I	talk	to	you	as	your	center.	When	you	are	with	me	it	is	as	if
you	are	with	your	center.	And	when	one	day	you	will	explode	to	the	center,	then
you	will	know.
Before	that	you	cannot	know,	before	that	you	will	have	to	just	trust	me.
When	you	come	to	your	center,	then	you	will	know	that	you	have	not	lived	with
me	before,	you	have	only	lived	in	your	center's	reflection.	But	that	comes	only
later	on	when	you	pass	through	it.	But	this	will	happen.	Everyone	is	potentially
capable.	 If	 he	 hinders	 himself,	 that	 is	 another	 thing.	Otherwise,	 if	 you	 do	 not
hinder	yourself,	 if	you	are	not	an	enemy	to	yourself,	you	are	as	capable	as	any
buddha,	and	the	thing	will	happen.
I	Am	the	Gate
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	The	occult	mysteries	of	initiation
10	June	1971	pm	in	Bombay,	India
Archive
code:
7106105
ShortTitle:
GATE07
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Question	1
BELOVED	MASTER,
WHAT	DOES	 IT	MEAN	TO	BE	 INITIATED	 INTO	THE	SPIRITUAL	LIFE?
WHAT	IS
THE	DEEPER	OCCULT	AND	ESOTERIC	SIGNIFICANCE	OF	INITIATION?
WHAT
SORT	 OF	 INITIATION	 ARE	 YOU	 GIVING	 TO	 THE	 NON-SANNYASINS
AND	TO
THE	SANNYASINS?	PLEASE	TELL	US	ABOUT	THEM	IN	DETAIL.
Man	exists	as	if	in	sleep.	Man	is	asleep.	Whatsoever	is	known	as	waking	is	also
a	sleep.
Initiation	means	 to	be	 intimate	contact	with	one	who	 is	awakened.	Unless	you
are	in	intimate	contact	with	one	who	is	awakened,	it	is	impossible	to	come	out	of
your	sleep,	because	the	mind	is	capable	even	to	dream	that	it	is	out	of	sleep.	The
mind	can	dream	that	now	there	is	no	more	sleep,	and	in	any	dream	you	cannot
know	that	it	is	a	dream.	You	can	only	know	that	it	was	a	dream	when	you	are	out
of	it.
You	 can	 never	 know	 a	 dream	 in	 the	 present.	 You	 always	 become	 aware	 of	 it
when	it	has	gone,	when	it	has	passed.	No	one	can	ever	say,	"This	is	a	dream."	No
present	 tense	 can	be	used	 for	 a	 dream.	You	always	 say	 that	 this	was	 a	 dream,
because	 in	 a	 dream,	 the	 dream	 itself	 appears	 to	 be	 real.	 If	 a	 dream	 is	 not
appearing	as	real,	it	will	be	broken.	Only	if	there	is	an	appearance	of	reality	can
dream	be	created.
When	 I	 say	 man	 is	 asleep,	 this	 is	 to	 be	 understood.	 We	 are	 dreaming
continuously	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	In	the	night	we	are	closed	to	the	outward
world,	 dreaming	 inside.	 In	 the	 day	 our	 senses	 are	 opened	 toward	 the	 outside
world,	but	 the	dream	continues	 inside.	Close	your	eyes	for	a	moment,	and	you
can	be	again	in	a	dream.	It	 is	a	continuity	inside.	You	are	aware	of	 the	outside
world,	 but	 the	 awareness	 is	 not	 without	 the	 dreaming	 mind.	 It	 is	 over,	 and
imposed	on,	the	dreaming	mind,	but	inside	the	dream	continues.	That	is	why	we
are	not	seeing	what	is	real,	even	when	we	are	so-called	awake.
We	 impose	 our	 dreams	 on	 reality.	 We	 never	 see	 what	 is,	 we	 always	 see	 our
projections.
If	 I	 look	 at	 you	 and	 there	 is	 a	 dream	 in	 me,	 you	 will	 become	 an	 object	 of
projection.	I	will	project	my	dream	on	you,	and	whatsoever	I	understand	about
you	will	 be	mixed	with	my	dream,	with	my	projection.	When	 I	 love	you,	you
appear	 to	me	one	way.	When	 I	do	not	 love	you,	you	appear	 to	me	completely
different.	You	are	not	 the	same.	I	have	used	you	just	as	a	screen	and	projected
my	dreaming	mind	on	you.	When	I	love	you	then	the	dream	is	different,	so	you
appear	 different.	When	 I	 do	 not	 love	 you,	 you	 are	 the	 same,	 the	 screen	 is	 the
same,	but	the	projection	is	different.	Now	I	am	using	you	as	a	screen	for	another
dream	of	mine.	Again	the	dream	can	change.	Again	I	can	love	you,	then	you	will
again	appear	different	to	me.	We	are	never	seeing	what	is.	We	are	always	seeing
our	own	dream	projected	on	what	is.
So	the	dreaming	mind	creates	a	world	around	it	which	is	not	real.	That	is	what	is
meant	 by	maya,	 illusion.	By	 illusion	 it	 is	 not	meant	 that	 the	world	 is	 not,	 the
noise	outside	on	the	street	is	not.	It	is	but	as	it	is.	We	can	never	know	it	unless
the	dreaming	mind	stops	inside.
For	someone	the	noise	may	be	music,	for	someone	else	just	disturbance.	In	some
moment	you	may	not	be	aware	of	the	noise,	in	another	you	will	become	aware.
In	 some	 moments	 you	 will	 tolerate	 it,	 in	 some	 moments	 it	 will	 become
unbearable,	intolerable.	The	noise	is	the	same,	the	street	is	the	same,	the	traffic	is
the	same,	but	your	dreaming	mind	changes.
With	 your	 dreaming	 mind	 the	 whole	 thing	 around	 you	 takes	 on	 new	 colors.
When	we	say	the	world	is	illusion,	maya,	it	does	not	mean	that	the	world	is	not;
it	is.	But	as	we	see	it,	that	seeing	is	illusion.	It	is	nowhere	to	be	found.	So	when
someone	is	awakened	it	is	not	that	this	world	just	disappears,	but	the	world	that
was	known	by	him	before	his	awakening	disappears	completely.	An	altogether
new	world,	an	objective	world,	comes	in	its	place.	All	the	colors	that	were	given
by	you,	all	 the	shapes,	all	 the	meanings	and	 interpretations	 that	were	given	by
you	according	to	your	dreaming	mind,	are	no	more.
As	far	as	 this	world	of	maya,	 this	world	of	 illusion,	 this	world	of	projection	 is
concerned,	we	never	 live	 in	one	world.	Each	man	lives	 in	his	own	world.	And
there	are	as	many	worlds	as	 there	are	dreaming	persons.	 I	 am	not	 the	 same	 to
each	one	of	you.	Each	one	projects	onto	me	something.	I	am	one	as	far	as	I	am
concerned.	But	if	I	myself	am	dreaming,	then	even	for	me,	I	am	different	each
moment.	For	each	moment	my	interpretation	will	differ.	If	I	am	awakened	then	I
am	the	same.	Buddha	says	somewhere	that	the	test	of	the	enlightened	one	is	that
he	is	the	same	always,	just	like	the	sea	water.
Anywhere,	everywhere,	it	is	salty.
If	I	am	awakened,	then	for	me	I	am	the	same	--	not	only	in	this	life,	but	I	have
been	the	same	in	all	lives	that	have	gone.	I	have	been	the	same	for	eternity.	The
real	me	has	remained	the	same.	It	is	unchangeable,	only	the	projection	changes.
The	 screen	 remains	 the	 same,	 the	 film	 changes,	 the	 picture	 changes.	 But	 the
screen	 is	 never	 seen.	 You	 see	 the	 picture	 on	 it	 projected.	 When	 there	 is	 no
projection	then	you	see	the	screen,	otherwise	the	screen	is	never	seen.	And	the
screen	remains	the	same.	The	picture	changes,	and	you	see	a	change	in	me.	If	I
am	awakened,	 I	will	 be	 the	 same	 for	me,	 but	 you	will	 look	 at	me	 in	 so	many
ways,	because	you	will	come	to	me	with	your	dreaming	mind	which	will	project.
To	someone	I	may	look	like	a	friend	and	to	someone	I	may	look	like	an	enemy.
He	will	project	himself.	We	create	a	world	around	ourselves,	and	everyone	lives
in	his	own	world.	That	is	why	there	is	a	collision;	worlds	collide,	your	world	and
mine.	 So	 when	 two	 persons	 begin	 to	 live	 in	 one	 room,	 there	 are	 two	 worlds
living	there,	and	the	collision	is	inevitable.	There	are	not	only	two	persons	living
in	the	room,	the	room	has	enough	place	for	two	persons	--	but	the	room	has	not
enough	space	for	two	worlds.	Whenever	there	are	two	persons	in	a	room,	there
are	two	worlds.
The	whole	conflict	of	human	society,	of	human	relationship,	is	between	worlds,
not	 between	 persons.	 If,	 really,	 I	 am	 a	 person	without	 a	world	 created	 by	my
dreams	and	you	are	also	a	person	without	a	world	created	by	your	dreams,	we
can	live	in	a	room	for	eternity	without	any	collision,	because	this	room	is	enough
for	two	persons.	But	for	two	worlds	even	the	whole	planet	is	not	enough.	There
exist	 so	many	worlds,	 as	 every	 individual	 is	 a	world.	And	 he	 lives	 inside	 his
world	and	is	closed.	This	is	a	sleep.	You	have	around	yourself	a	filmy	enclosure
of	 projections,	 ideas,	 notions,	 conceptions,	 interpretations.	You	 are	 a	 projector
going	on	and	on	projecting	things	which	are	nowhere,	only	inside	you,	and	the
whole	world	becomes	a	screen.	You	can	never	be	aware	by	yourself	that	you	are
in	deep	sleep.
There	is	a	sufi	saint	Hijra...	an	angel	appears	in	his	dream.	He	says	to	him	that	he
should	save	as	much	water	as	possible	because	tomorrow	morning	all	the	water
of	this	world	is	going	to	be	poisoned	by	the	devil,	and	everyone	who	will	drink
this	water	will	become	mad.	So	the	fakir	saves	as	much	water,	the	whole	night,
as	 possible.	 And	 really	 the	 phenomenon	 happens.	 Everyone	 become	mad	 that
next	morning.	No	one	knows	the	whole	city	has	become	mad.	Only	the	fakir	is
not	mad,	but	 the	whole	city	 talks	as	 if	 the	 fakir	has	gone	mad.	He	knows	 it	 is
everyone	else	who	is	mad,	but	no	one	believes	him.
He	goes	on	drinking	his	water	and	remains	alone,	but	he	cannot	continue.	The
whole	city	is	living	in	an	altogether	different	world.	No	one	listens	to	him,	and
now	there	is	a	rumor	that	he	will	be	caught	and	sent	to	prison.
They	have	come	one	morning	to	get	hold	of	him.	Either	he	should	be	treated	as
ill	 or	 should	 go	 to	 prison.	 He	 cannot	 be	 allowed	 freedom.	 He	 has	 become
absolutely	mad.
Whatsoever	he	says	is	not	understandable,	he	talks	in	a	different	language.	The
fakir	is	at	a	loss	to	understand.	He	tries	to	help	them	to	remember	their	past,	but
they	have	forgotten	everything.	They	do	not	know	anything	of	the	past,	anything
about	 before	 that	 maddening	 morning.	 They	 cannot	 understand,	 the	 fakir	 has
become	incomprehensible.	They	are	around	his	house,	they	have	caught	hold	of
him.
And	the	fakir	says,	"Give	me	one	moment	more.	I	shall	treat	myself."	He	runs	to
the	common	well,	drinks	the	water,	and	he	becomes	all	right.	Now	the	whole	city
is	happy.
The	fakir	 is	okay	now.	Now	he	is	not	mad.	Really,	he	has	gone	mad	now!	But
now	he	is	part	and	parcel	of	the	common	world.	If	everyone	is	asleep,	you	will
never	be	aware	even	that	you	are	asleep.	If	everyone	is	mad,	and	you	are	mad,
you	will	never	be	aware	of	it.
By	initiation	is	meant	that	you	have	surrendered	to	someone	who	is	awakened.
You	say,
"I	do	not	understand	it.	I	cannot	understand,	and	I	am	part	of	the	world	which	is
mad	 and	 asleep.	 I	 am	 dreaming	 all	 the	 time.	My	 reasoning	 is	 phony,	 because
whenever	 I	 act,	 I	 act	 from	 the	 irrational	 part	 of	 my	 mind.	 I	 always	 act
unconsciously,	then	later	on	I	rationalize	it.	I	fall	in	love	with	someone,	and	then
I	 begin	 to	 rationalize	 why	 I	 love	 --	 where	 is	 the	 reason?	 The	 phenomenon
happens	this	way.	First	I	begin	to	like	something,	and	then	I	find	reasons	why	I
like	 it.	 The	 liking	 comes	 first,	 then	 follows	 rationalization.	 And	 the	 liking	 is
irrational."
This	 feeling	 can	 come	 even	 from	 a	 sleeping	 person,	 because	 a	 sleep	 is	 not
always	deep.	It	wavers,	becoming	very	deep,	then	coming	up	and	becoming	very
shallow.	 Sleep	 is	 never	 on	 one	 plane.	 There	 are	 fluctuations	 in	 sleep,	 even	 in
ordinary	sleep	there	are	fluctuations.	In	the	whole	night	you	are	not	on	the	same
plane.	Sometimes	you	go	very	deep,	so	deep	that	you	cannot	remember	anything
about	it	later	on.	If	you	have	slept	very	deeply,	then	in	the	morning	you	say,	"I
have	not	dreamed	anything."	You	have	dreamed,	but	the	sleep	was	so	deep	that
you	cannot	remember.	Now	there	are	implements	which	can	show	that	you	have
dreamed.	You	deny	because	no	memory	is	there.	You	were	so	deep,	the	distance
was	so	much	from	your	conscious	memory,	that	the	mind	could	not	get	anything
from	the	dream.	Sometimes	sleep	is	very	shallow,	just	on	the	border.	Then	you
can	 remember	 your	 dream.	 Ordinarily	 we	 always	 remember	 only	 morning
dreams,	 just	 before	we	 are	 coming	 out	 of	 the	 sleep,	 because	 the	 sleep	 is	 very
shallow	and	the	gap	is	very	little.
Ordinary	 sleep	 is	 a	 fluctuation	 between	 so	 many	 levels,	 so	 many	 planes.
Sometimes	 you	 are	 just	 wavering	 between	 waking	 and	 sleep.	 You	 can	 hear
something	 from	 the	outside	when	you	 are	wavering,	when	 the	 fluctuations	 are
just	 on	 the	 border.	 You	 have	 gone	 to	 sleep.	 You	 hear	 something,	 someone	 is
talking	 about	 something,	 something	 is	 understood,	 something	 is	 lost,	 and	 you
can	hear.	But	then	you	are	fast	asleep,	in	a	deep	sleep.	Then	someone	is	talking
and	you	cannot	hear.	There	is	no	question	of	interpretation,	there	is	no	question
of	meaning,	you	cannot	hear.
Just	like	in	this	ordinary	sleep,	the	same	happens	in	the	metaphysical	sleep	I	am
talking	 about.	 Sometimes	 you	 are	 just	 on	 the	 border	 line,	 very	 near	 to	 the
buddha.	 Then	 you	 can	 understand	 something	 of	 what	 the	 buddha	 is	 talking
about,	what	he	is	saying.	You	can	understand	something,	but,	of	course,	 it	will
never	 be	 exactly	 as	 it	 is	 said.	 But	 at	 least	 you	 have	 something,	 you	 have	 a
glimpse	of	the	truth.
So	a	person	who	is	on	his	border	of	metaphysical	sleep	will	like	to	be	initiated.
He	 can	 hear	 something,	 he	 can	 understand	 something,	 he	 sees	 something.
Everything	is	as	if	it	is	in	a	mist,	but	still	he	feels	something.	So	he	can	approach
a	person	who	is	awakened	and	surrender	himself.	This	much	can	be	done	by	a
sleepy	 person.	 This	 much	 can	 be	 done	 so	 that	 he	 can	 surrender.	 This
surrendering	means	he	understands	that	something	quite	different	from	his	sleep
is	happening.	Somewhere	he	feels	it.	He	cannot	know	it	correctly,	but	he	feels	it.
Whenever	 a	 buddha	passes,	 those	who	 are	 on	 the	 borderline	 of	 sleep	 feel	 that
something	 has	 happened	 to	 this	 man.	 He	 behaves	 differently,	 he	 speaks
differently,	he	lives	differently,	he	walks	differently.	Something	has	happened	to
this	man.	Those	who	are	on	the	borderline	can	feel	it,	but	they	are	asleep.	And
this	borderline	is	not	permanent.	Again	they	may	go	in	a	deep	sleep,	but	even	a
word	can	pull	 them	out.	So	before	 they	fall	down	into	deeper	unconsciousness
they	can	surrender	to	the	awakened	one.
This	 is	 initiation	 from	 the	 side	of	 the	 initiated.	He	says,	 "I	cannot	do	anything
myself.	 I	am	helpless.	And	I	know	that	 if	 I	do	not	surrender	 in	 this	moment,	 I
may	go	again	into	deep	sleep.	Then	it	will	be	impossible	to	surrender."	So	there
are	moments	which	cannot	be	lost.	And	one	who	loses	those	moments	may	not
be	able	 to	get	 them	again	 for	centuries,	 for	 lifetimes,	because	 it	 is	not	 in	one's
hands	to	come	to	the	borderline.
Sometimes	 it	 happens	 for	 so	 many	 reasons	 beyond	 your	 control.	 You	 cannot
control	 your	 sleep.	 Sometimes	 it	 happens	 that	 a	 buddha	 is	 passing.	 You	 can
surrender,	but	only	if	you	are	on	the	border.
There	is	a	very	meaningful	story	in	Buddha's	life....
When	he	himself	became	awakened,	for	seven	days	continuously	he	was	silent.
He	did	not	 feel	 like	 speaking.	This	 is	a	very	beautiful	 story.	The	gods	became
uneasy,	 because	 if	 Buddha	 remains	 silent	 what	 will	 become	 of	 those	 on	 the
borderline?	He	 cannot	 do	 anything	 for	 those	who	 are	 in	 a	 deep	 sleep,	 even	 a
Buddha	cannot	do	anything	for	them.
And	 he	 cannot	 do	 anything	 for	 those	who	 are	 already	 awakened,	 they	 do	 not
need	any	help	from	him.	But	there	are	a	few	who	are	just	on	the	edge,	and	just	a
small	 push	 will	 awaken	 them.	 His	 very	 presence	 may	 be	 enough	 to	 awaken
them.
So	 the	gods	came	 to	Buddha,	prayed	 to	him,	and	asked	him	 to	 speak.	Buddha
said	to	them	that	there	are	persons	who	cannot	be	helped.	They	are	so	asleep,	it
is	 useless	 to	 speak	 with	 them.	 Those	 who	 can	 listen	 to	 me,	 they	 are	 already
awake.	So	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 talk	with	 them	either.	So	why	do	you	ask	me	 to
talk?	 It	 is	meaningless.	Let	me	 remain	 silent.	And	 the	gods	 said,	 "But	 there	 is
still	a	category	that	is	left.	Those	who	are	not	so	awake	that	they	can	understand
that	they	are	just	on	the	border.	They	may	not	even	listen	to	all	you	say,	but	even
a	word	may	pull	them	out.	You	must	speak."
It	 is	 only	 after	 thousands	 and	 thousands	 of	 years	 that	 a	 person	 becomes	 a
buddha.	He	must	speak,	he	must	not	remain	silent.	The	opportunity	must	not	be
lost.	 Buddha	 became	 convinced.	 Yes,	 there	 is	 a	 third	 category.	 That	 third
category	is	the	category	of	the	initiates,	the	mid-category.
From	 the	 one	who	 is	 being	 initiated	 it	 is	 surrender,	 and	 nothing	 else	will	 do.
Initiation	means	to	be	surrendered.	The	Buddhist	term	for	initiation	and	the	one
who	is	being	initiated	is	shrotapann,	one	who	has	come	in	the	current.	Then	you
will	have	your	aims,	your	goal	to	reach	somewhere.
So	 there	 are	 persons	who	 come	 to	 the	 enlightened	 one,	 but	 they	will	 begin	 to
argue.	 They	 will	 want	 reasons,	 they	 will	 ask	 proof,	 they	 will	 like	 to	 be
convinced.	This	way	is	struggle
--	they	fight	with	the	enlightened	one.	This	does	not	harm	the	enlightened	one,
but	 this	 harms	 you	 because	 the	 moment	 is	 being	 lost.	 You	 were	 in	 the	 mid-
category,	that	is	why	you	have	come.	But	now	you	are	losing	the	moment;	it	may
be	that	you	will	go	again	in	deep	sleep.	Surrendering	means	one	who	begins	to
flow	with	the	stream,	who	gives	himself	to	the	stream.
Now	the	stream	flows;	he	follows	it.	He	is	just	in	a	let-go,	a	total	let-go.	So	for
the	initiated,	initiation	is	a	let-go,	a	complete	trust,	a	complete	surrender.	It	can
never	 be	 partial.	 If	 you	 surrender	 partially,	 you	 are	 not	 surrendering;	 you	 are
deceiving	yourself.
There	 can	 be	 no	 partial	 surrender,	 because	 in	 a	 partial	 surrender	 you	 are
withholding	 something.	 And	 that	 withholding	 may	 push	 you	 again	 into	 deep
sleep.	 That	 non-surrendering	 part	 will	 prove	 fatal;	 any	 moment	 you	 may	 be
again	in	deep	sleep.	Surrender	is	always	total.	That	is	why	faith	was	required	and
will	always	be	required	in	initiation.
Faith	is	required	as	a	total	condition,	as	a	total	requirement.	And	the	moment	you
surrender	 totally,	 things	 begin	 to	 change.	 Now	 you	 cannot	 go	 back	 to	 your
dreamland.
This	 surrendering	 shatters	 the	 whole	 projection.	 This	 surrender	 shatters	 the
whole	 projecting	 mind,	 because	 this	 projecting	 mind	 is	 tethered	 to	 an	 ego.	 It
cannot	live	without	the	ego.	The	ego	is	the	main	center	of	it.	I	call	someone	my
friend.	Why?	I	call	someone	my	enemy.	Why?	The	enemy	is	one	who	has	hurt
my	ego,	and	the	friend	is	one	who	has	fed	it,	who	has	nourished	it.	That	is	why
we	say,	"A	friend	in	need	is	a	friend	indeed."
Why	need?	What	is	the	need?	The	need	comes	when	your	ego	is	starving,	then
the	friend	is	known.	Our	whole	dreaming	world,	our	dreaming	mind,	is	based	on
the	pedestal	of	ego.	 If	you	surrender,	you	have	surrendered	 the	very	base.	You
have	 given	 up	 completely.	 Now	 you	 cannot	 continue	 wavering,	 because	 the
dream	is	given	up.
So	from	the	side	of	the	initiate,	it	is	a	total	surrender.	For	the	initiated	one	it	is
not	very	difficult	 to	understand	what	 initiation	 is.	 It	 is	very	 simple.	 It	 is	 just	 a
person	 who	 is	 asleep	 asking	 for	 help	 to	 be	 awakened,	 and	 he	 surrenders	 to
someone	who	is	awake.	This	is	very	simple.	The	thing	is	not	very	complex.
But	 for	 the	 one	 who	 initiates	 you,	 the	 thing	 is	 very	 complex,	 very	 difficult.
Ordinarily	 we	 think	 that	 surrendering	 is	 very	 difficult.	 You	 are	 helpless,	 you
cannot	do	anything.	You	may	not	surrender,	but	when	you	know	more	you	will
come	to	the	point	of	surrendering.
One	day	it	 is	bound	to	come	because	you	cannot	do	anything	else.	You	cannot
continue	 with	 a	 non-surrendering	 attitude,	 because	 this	 will	 create	 miseries,
agony	 and	 hell	 for	 you.	 You	 cannot	 continue.	 There	 is	 bound	 to	 come	 one
moment	 when	 out	 of	 your	 frustration,	 out	 of	 your	 own	 nightmare,	 you	 will
surrender.	 This	 is	 not	 the	 difficult	 part	 of	 the	 initiation.	 This	 is	 a	 very	 simple
thing.	But	 for	 the	 one	who	 initiates	 you,	 it	 is	 a	 very	 complex	 affair;	 there	 are
many	things	involved.	Many	things	are	ESOteric,	not	EXOteric.
It	is	good	that	we	should	understand	from	the	exoteric,	the	outer	things,	and	then
proceed	to	the	esoteric,	the	inner	things.
The	 first	 thing	 corresponding	 to	 surrender	 is	 responsibility.	 The	 one	 who	 is
asleep	surrenders,	the	one	who	is	awake	takes	the	responsibility.	When	you	go	to
a	Buddha,	 to	 a	 Jesus	or	 to	 a	Mohammed,	 and	 surrender	 yourself,	 he	 takes	 the
whole	responsibility.	What	you	are	surrendering	is	 that	which	is	with	you.	You
cannot	surrender	anything	more	--
you	are	nothing	more	than	sleep	and	dream.	You	surrender	this.	Your	sleep,	your
dreaming,	your	whole	nonsense	of	the	past...	you	surrender.
Surrendering	 is	 always	of	 the	past,	 responsibility	 is	 always	 for	 the	 future.	You
have	 no	 future,	 you	 are	 only	 a	 dreamy	 past.	 A	 long	 number	 of	 memories,	 of
dreams,	of	many	lives,	is	surrendered.	That	too	you	surrender	very	arduously.	It
is	so	difficult	to	surrender	even	this,	just	a	dusty	past.	Nothing	more	is	with	you.
You	have	been	asleep	and	dreamy.
You	 have	 a	 record	 of	 so	 many	 dreams	 --	 good	 or	 bad,	 beautiful	 or	 ugly,	 but
dreams	 all	 the	 same.	 You	 surrender	 before	 being	 lost:	 that	 too	 with	 great
hardship,	 that	 too	 is	 very	 difficult,	 a	 struggle;	 that	 too	 you	 try	 to	withhold,	 to
resist.	Something	must	be	saved.
What	have	you	got?	Nothing	but	a	long	series	of	dreams,	a	long	sleep.
So	from	the	initiated	it	is	a	surrendering	of	the	past.	From	the	one	who	initiates
you,	it	is	a	responsibility	for	the	future.	He	becomes	responsible,	and	only	he	can
be	responsible.
You	 can	 never	 be	 responsible.	 How	 can	 one	 who	 is	 asleep	 be	 responsible?
Responsibility	is	never	a	part	of	sleep.	If	you	commit	a	murder	in	your	sleep,	if
you	 are	 a	 somnambulist	 walking	 in	 your	 sleep	 and	 you	 commit	 a	murder,	 no
court	will	make	you	responsible,	because	there	is	no	responsibility.
A	person	who	is	in	deep	sleep,	how	is	he	responsible?	You	never	feel	responsible
for	your	dreams.	You	may	commit	anything	in	your	dreams,	but	you	never	feel
any	 responsibility.	 You	 may	 murder,	 but	 you	 say	 that	 it	 was	 just	 a	 dream.
Responsibility	comes	with	awakening.	This	 is	really	a	fundamental	 law	of	 life.
One	who	is	asleep	is	not	responsible	even	for	himself,	and	one	who	is	awakened
is	responsible	even	for	others.
A	person	who	is	enlightened,	who	is	awakened,	feels	he	is	even	responsible	for
the	whole	mess	 that	 you	 have	 created.	A	 buddha	 feels	 compassion.	A	 buddha
feels	guilty	for	your	crimes,	for	your	sins;	he	feels	involved,	he	feels	responsible.
He	knows	that	you	do	not	know;	he	is	fully	aware.	For	example,	the	third	world
war	 is	 going	 to	 come.	 The	 one	 who	 is	 awakened	 knows	 full	 well	 that	 it	 is
coming.	 It	 is	 coming	nearer	daily.	Soon	 it	will	be	over	us.	You	are	asleep	and
deep	in	it.	He	is	not	in	a	sleep,	he	is	not	in	a	dream.	He	is	fully	conscious	like
radar;	he	knows	the	future	that	is	coming.	He	feels	guilty,	he	must	do	something.
For	example,	you	are	in	a	plane,	flying	in	the	sky.	You	are	asleep,	dreamy,	but
the	pilot	is	aware.	If	anything	is	going	to	happen,	if	the	engine	begins	to	make	a
noise,	 a	 very	 slight	 noise;	 if	 no	 one	 knows	 about	 it	 but	 something	 has	 gone
wrong,	 only	 he	 will	 be	 responsible.	 No	 one	 else	 is	 responsible.	 He	 is	 fully
awake,	and	the	only	one.
A	buddha	will	 feel	 responsible	 for	all	our	crimes	and	sins.	The	whole	story	of
Jesus	 is	 based	 on	 this	 responsibility.	 The	 whole	 of	 Christianity,	 the	 whole
concept,	begins	from	this	responsibility.	Jesus	feels	responsible	for	all	the	sins	of
man	 from	 Adam	 to	 us.	 Jesus	 feels	 responsible,	 so	 he	 takes	 the	 cross	 on	 his
shoulders	 in	 order	 that	 our	 sins	 may	 be	 pardoned,	 forgiven.	 He	 is	 in	 no	 way
responsible.	If	Adam	has	done	something	and	the	whole	human	mind	has	done
something,	why	should	he	be	responsible?	Dogmatic	Christians	have	discussed
this	 for	 centuries.	 Jesus	 has	 not	 committed	 any	 sins;	 still,	 I	 say	 he	 feels
responsible	because	he	is	awakened.	By	the	very	phenomenon	of	awakening	he
has	 become	 responsible	 for	 all	 that	 the	 sleepy	 ones	 have	 done.	 His	 burden	 is
added,	his	cross	is	heavy.	His	crucifixion	is	symbolic;	it	is	for	us	that	he	dies	so
that	we	may	live.
That	is	why	the	crucifixion	of	Jesus	has	become	a	historic	event.
He	is	a	person	who	has	felt	responsible	for	the	whole	human	race,	and	dies	for	it
so	 that	 man	 may	 be	 transformed.	 But	 even	 with	 his	 death	 we	 are	 not
transformed.	His	message	was	heard	in	our	dream,	and	we	interpret	it	in	our	own
ways.	Then	his	life	becomes	a	part	of	our	dreaming	world.	We	create	churches
and	dogmas,	we	create	sects.	Then	there	are	Catholic	and	Protestant	sects	and	so
many	others.	The	whole	nonsense	returns	in	so	many	new	ways,	and	the	world
remains	the	same.
We	begin	to	worship	him.	That	is,	we	begin	to	dream	about	him,	that	he	is	 the
son	of	God.	We	are	not	initiated,	we	are	not	transformed.	Rather,	on	the	contrary,
we	transform	his	reality	into	our	dream.	We	create	a	church	for	him,	we	create	an
idol	of	him,	we	worship	him	--	and	continue	our	sleep.	Really,	we	use	him	as	a
tranquilizer.	It	becomes	a	Sunday	affair.	For	one	hour	in	the	week	we	go	to	him,
and	 then	 we	 continue	 on	 our	 own	 track.	 He	 helps	 us	 to	 sleep	 well;	 our
conscience	 becomes	 easy,	 we	 feel	 religious.	 We	 go	 to	 the	 church	 to	 pray,
worship,	and	are	back	home	the	same.	We	become	more	easy.	Now	there	is	no
burden	to	be	religious,	to	be	transformed.	We	are	religious	already,	because	we
have	 been	 to	 church	where	we	 have	worshipped	 and	 prayed.	We	 are	 religious
already,	and	the	whole	thing	goes	on	the	same	way.
Corresponding	to	surrender	is	responsibility.	Responsibility	means	answerability.
It	means	Jesus	feels	answerable	for	you.	He	feels	that	if	there	is	any	God,	he	will
be	responsible.	He	will	be	asked	and	he	will	have	to	answer	why	this	or	that	has
happened	 to	 humanity.	 Responsibility	 means	 this.	 He	 feels	 it	 as	 a	 natural
happening	 with	 him.	 And	 if	 you	 come	 to	 him	 and	 surrender	 to	 him,	 then	 he
becomes	particularly	responsible	for	you.
Krishna	could	say	 to	Arjuna,	"Leave	everything.	Come	to	me,	surrender	at	my
feet."
Jesus	could	say,	"I	am	the	truth.	I	am	the	door,	I	am	the	gate.	Come	to	me,	pass
through	me.	I	will	be	the	witness	on	the	last	day	of	your	judgment.	I	will	answer
for	 you."	 This	 is	 all	 analogical.	 Every	 day	 is	 the	 day	 of	 judgment,	 and	 every
moment	is	the	moment	of	judgment.	There	is	not	going	to	be	any	last	day.	This	is
just	what	could	be	understood	by	the	people	to	whom	Jesus	was	speaking.	"I	will
be	responsible	for	you,	and	I	will	answer	for	you	when	the	divine	asks,	and	I	will
be	there	as	a	witness.	You	surrender	to	me;	I	will	be	your	witness,"	Jesus	said.
This	is	a	great	responsibility.	No	one	who	is	asleep	can	take	it,	because	even	to
carry	 your	 own	 responsibility	 becomes	 difficult	 in	 sleep.	 You	 cannot	 carry
others'	responsibility.
You	 can	 carry	 others'	 responsibility	 only	when	your	 responsibility	 is	 no	more,
when	 you	 are	 unburdened	 completely	 --	 really,	 when	 you	 are	 no	 more!	 This
declaration	of	being	no	more	is	being	made	in	so	many	ways.
When	Jesus	said,	"I	am	the	son	of	the	father	who	is	in	heaven,"	what	he	meant
really	is	that	he	is	not	a	son	of	the	person	who	is	known	as	his	father,	he	is	not
the	 son	of	Mary	who	 is	known	as	his	mother.	Why?	Sometimes	 it	 seems	very
cruel.	 One	 day	 he	was	 standing	 in	 a	 crowd	 and	 someone	 said,	 "Your	mother,
Mary,	has	come.	She	is	calling	you	outside	this	crowd,	she	is	waiting	for	you."
And	Jesus	said,	"I	have	no	mother!	Who	is	my	mother?	Who	is	my	father?	No
one	is	my	mother,	no	one	is	my	father."	It	appears	cruel.	The	mother	is	standing
outside	the	crowd.	She	is	waiting,	and	Jesus	says	to	tell	her,
"No	one	is	my	mother,	no	one	is	my	father."	Why?	He	is	just	denying	the	pattern
of	your	dreaming.	"This	is	my	father,	mother,	wife,	brother..."	This	is	the	pattern
of	 the	dreaming	mind,	 the	dreaming	world,	 the	world	of	 projection.	 Jesus	 just
denies	 it.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 deny	 the	 mother,	 you	 have	 denied	 the	 whole
world,	 because	 with	 her	 everything	 begins	 --	 the	 whole	 world.	 That	 is	 the
beginning,	 the	 root	of	coming	 into	 this	dreamy	world,	 the	 root	of	 relationship,
the	root	of	sansara.
If	you	deny	your	mother,	you	have	denied	everything.	It	appears	cruel	to	those
who	are	fast	asleep,	but	it	is	just	a	fact.	The	emphasis	that	"I	am	the	son	of	the
one	who	is	in	heaven,"	is	just	to	say,	"I	am	not	an	individual.	I	am	not	Jesus,	the
son	of	Mary.	I	am	part	and	parcel	of	the	divine	force,	the	cosmic	force."
One	who	feels	like	that,	like	part	of	the	cosmic,	can	initiate	you.	Otherwise,	no
one	can	initiate	you.	No	particular	individual	can	initiate	anyone.	And	it	happens
so	many	times,	it	is	happening	every	day	--	those	who	are	themselves	asleep	will
initiate	those	who	are	also	asleep;	the	blind	leading	the	blind.	Both	fall	into	the
ditch.	No	one	who	 is	 asleep	can	 initiate	anyone.	But	 the	ego	wants	 to	 initiate;
this	egoistic	attitude	has	proved	very	dangerous.
The	whole	 initiation,	 the	whole	mystery	 of	 it,	 the	whole	 beauty	 of	 it,	 became
ugly	because	of	those	who	were	not	entitled	to	initiate.	Only	one	who	has	no	ego
inside,	 who	 has	 no	 sleep	 inside,	 who	 has	 no	 dream	 inside,	 can	 initiate.
Otherwise,	initiation	is	the	greatest	sin,	because	then	you	are	deceiving	not	only
others	but	yourself	also	--	because	initiation	is	a	great	responsibility,	the	ultimate
responsibility.	 Now	 you	 are	 becoming	 responsible	 for	 another.	 To	 become
responsible	for	someone	is	not	just	a	play,	this	is	 taking	the	impossible	in	your
hands.	You	are	becoming	responsible	for	someone	else	who	is	at	folly.
So	this	responsibility	can	be	taken	only	when	there	is	total	surrender;	otherwise
it	cannot	be	taken.	One	who	is	withholding	himself,	his	responsibility	cannot	be
taken,	 because	 he	 will	 continue	 himself;	 he	 will	 not	 listen	 to	 you.	 He	 will
interpret	you	in	his	own	ways.
There	is	a	Sufi	story....
A	rich	man	died.	He	was	not	only	 rich,	he	was	wise	also,	which	happens	very
rarely.	His	son	was	only	ten	or	twelve	years	of	age,	so	he	made	a	will	in	which
he	wrote	to	the	eldest	of	the	village,	the	panchayat.	He	proclaimed	in	that	will,
"From	my	property,	whatsoever	you	like	most,	you	take,	then	you	give	it	to	my
child."
The	will	was	as	clear	as	the	sunrise.	The	five	elders	divided	the	whole	property.
All	 that	 was	 of	 any	 worth,	 they	 divided	 among	 themselves.	 Nothing	 was	 left
except	a	bit	which	was	useless.	No	one	was	ready	to	take	that,	so	it	was	given	to
the	child.	But	the	old	dying	man	had	given	a	letter	to	the	boy	also,	which	he	was
to	open	when	he	came	of	 age.	So	when	he	was	of	 age	he	opened	 the	 letter	 in
which	his	 father	 had	written,	 "The	 elders,	may,	 of	 course,	 interpret	 the	will	 in
their	 own	 way.	 When	 you	 are	 of	 age,	 give	 it	 this	 interpretation.	 This	 is	 my
interpretation,	this	is	what	I	mean	to	say:	Take	all	that	you	like	most,	and	then,
all	that	you	like	most,	give	it	to	my	child.	"
The	son	produced	the	letter	before	the	elders.	They	never	conceived	of	any	such
meaning,	so	they	had	divided	everything	amongst	themselves.	They	returned	the
whole	 thing,	because	now	 the	meaning	was	clear,	and	 the	boy	was	 ready.	And
the	father	had	also	written:	"It	is	good	that	they	should	interpret	in	their	own	way
until	the	time	for	you	to	take	it	comes,	because	if	I	give	it	to	you	directly,	before
you	are	of	age,	it	will	be	destroyed	by	these	elders.	Let	them	protect	it	as	their
own	property	until	you	are	ready	to	take	it	over."	And	they	had	protected	it	as	if
it	were	their	own.
So	whenever	 there	 is	 a	 partial	 surrender,	 you	will	 interpret	 any	message,	 any
commandment,	any	order	to	you,	in	the	way	which	appeals	to	you	most.	In	your
sleep,	 you	 will	 make	 it	 meaningful	 through	 your	 sleepy	mind.	 So	 unless	 one
surrenders	totally,	 the	responsibility	cannot	be	taken.	And	when	one	surrenders
totally,	the	total	responsibility	comes	to	the	teacher,	to	the	awakened	one.	Then	it
is	total.
In	the	old	days,	initiation	was	not	easy;	it	was	the	most	difficult	thing.	The	very
phenomenon	was	such	that	it	had	to	be	difficult.	One	had	to	wait	for	years	to	be
initiated.
Even	for	a	whole	life	one	may	wait,	because	unless	one	is	ready	he	will	not	be
initiated.
This	waiting	stage	was	really	a	testing	ground.	Are	you	patient?	Can	you	wait?
Only	in	waiting	is	your	maturity	revealed.	A	child	cannot	wait	even	for	a	single
moment.	 If	 he	wants	 a	 toy,	he	wants	 it	 just	 now;	he	 cannot	wait.	So	 the	more
impatient	the	mind,	the	less	mature.	So	before	initiation	in	the	old	days,	one	had
to	wait	 for	so	many	years.	This	waiting	was	a	 testing	ground,	and	 this	waiting
was	also	a	discipline.
For	 example,	 Sufis	 will	 only	 initiate	 when	 you	 have	 waited	 for	 a	 particular
period.	 You	 wait	 without	 questioning	 just	 for	 the	 moment	 when	 the	 teacher
himself	will	answer.	One	had	to	do	many	things.	For	example,	a	Sufi	may	be	a
shoemaker.	 If	 you	 are	 to	 be	 initiated,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 help	 him	 for	 years	 in
shoemaking.	 And	 not	 even	 this	 can	 be	 questioned.	 What	 will	 happen	 by	 the
shoemaking?	How	are	you	going	to	be	a	self-realized	one?	How	are	you	going	to
be	the	divine?	This	shoemaking,	what	is	the	relevance?	Even	if	this	relevance	is
asked	about,	you	will	be	thrown	out,	because	that	is	not	your	business.
It	is	the	teacher's	business	to	know	what	is	relevant.	How	can	you	know?	You	do
not	 know	 the	 divine,	 so	 you	 cannot	 know	 how	 shoemaking	 is	 related	 to	 the
divine;	 you	 cannot	 know.	 For	 five	 years	 one	 is	 just	 waiting	 and	 helping	 the
teacher	in	shoemaking.
He	will	never	talk	of	prayer	or	meditation.	He	will	never	talk	of	anything	except
shoemaking.	You	 have	waited	 for	 five	 years,	 but	 this	 is	 a	meditation.	 It	 is	 no
ordinary	meditation,	you	will	be	cleansed	through	it.
This	simple,	unquestioned	waiting,	this	relying,	will	make	the	ground	ready	for
complete	surrender.	And	sometimes	it	looks	so	easy	from	the	outside.	It	is	not	so
easy,	it	is	very	difficult.	Your	mind	will	resist,	your	mind	will	ask	questions,	your
mind	will	raise	problems.	It	will	ask,	"What	am	I	doing?	Am	I	doing	something
rightly	or	am	I	just	wasting	my	time?	Is	this	man	really	worth	being	with,	with
this	shoemaking?	Is	it	in	any	way	related	to	the	search?"
The	mind	will	continue	to	ask.	Inside	you	will	be	bubbling,	and	yet	you	cannot
ask.	You	have	to	rely,	you	have	to	wait	for	the	moment.	If	you	can	wait	for	even
one	 year,	 the	mind	will	 become	 silent	 by	 itself.	 It	 cannot	 continue	 unless	 you
feed	it	daily,	unless	you	help	it	daily.	Unless	you	become	daily	disturbed	by	it,	it
cannot	 continue.	 You	 have	 been	 just	 waiting,	 and	 the	mind	 is	 just	 chattering,
raising	questions.
You	 have	 waited	 and	 waited	 and	 waited,	 then	 the	 question	 will	 become
meaningless.	The	mind	will	just	be	exhausted.	It	will	just	lose	interest,	it	will	just
go	 dead.	And	 though	 you	 are	waiting,	 a	moment	will	 come	when	 there	 is	 no
questioning.	When	there	is	no	questioning,	the	teacher	will	answer.
Exactly	the	moment	of	no	questioning	within	the	disciple	is	the	moment	for	the
teacher	to	answer,	because	now	you	can	hear.	Your	chattering	has	stopped;	now
you	are	silent,	now	you	have	become	a	passage.	But	ordinarily	we	feed	the	mind
daily.	We	are	disturbed.	We	will	not	even	wait	for	an	hour,	to	see	whether	it	can
continue	 for	 one	 hour.	You	will	 not	 even	wait	 and	 see	whether	 this	mind	 can
continue.	It	cannot	continue,	because	with	the	mind	nothing	is	permanent.	It	will
go	by	itself.
A	Tibetan	teacher,	Milarepa,	had	it	as	a	rule	that	if	some	question	came	to	him	he
would	answer	only	after	you	waited	for	seven	days.	This	is	the	price	one	has	to
pay	for	everything.	If	you	asked	this	moment,	he	would	throw	you	out:	"Wait	for
seven	days,	stay	with	the	question."	And,	really,	you	cannot	stay	with	it	for	seven
days.	Seven	days	are	too	long.
Sometimes	 someone	 comes	 to	me	 and	 asks	me	 a	 question,	 and	 if	 I	 can	dodge
him	and	talk	even	for	two	minutes	about	something	else,	he	forgets	the	question;
he	 never	 comes	 again	 for	 his	 question.	He	 can	 talk	 for	 one	 hour	 and	will	 not
raise	that	question	again.	It	was	just	a	whim,	just	a	wave.	It	means	nothing.	So	if
you	can	wait	for	five	years,	you	will	not	be	the	same.
Waiting	will	be	a	great	difficulty.	In	the	old	days	initiation	was	done	after	a	long
waiting.
Then	surrender	was	easy,	and	responsibility	too	could	be	taken.	Now	the	whole
thing	has	become	different,	no	one	 is	 ready	 to	wait.	The	most	acute	disease	of
the	modern	mind	 is	 hurry.	 The	 new	 phenomenon	 of	 the	modern	mind	 is	 time
consciousness,	the	basic	change	that	has	come	in	the	mind	is	time	consciousness.
We	have	become	so	time	conscious	that	not	for	a	single	moment	can	we	wait.	It
is	an	impossibility.
That	is	why	this	whole	age	has	become	childish.	There	is	no	maturity	anywhere,
because	maturity	is	always	a	by-product	of	waiting.	And	waiting	is	only	possible
with	timeless	consciousness,	not	with	time	consciousness.	Because	of	 this	 time
consciousness,	 initiation	 has	 become	 impossible.	You	 cannot	 be	 initiated.	You
run	past	Buddha	and	ask	him,	"Will	you	initiate	me?"	You	meet	Buddha	on	the
street	while	you	are	 running,	and	even	 this	utterance	of	 four	or	 five	words	has
not	been	from	a	standing	position.	You	have	been	running.
Maturity	 has	 become	 impossible.	 But	why	 this	 time	 consciousness	which	 is	 a
barrier	--
the	greatest	barrier?	Why	was	it	not	there	before?	Why	is	it	now	great?
Time	consciousness	deepens	only	when	you	become	fearful	of	death.	You	may
not	 be	 aware	 of	 it,	 but	 the	 more	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 death,	 the	 more	 you
become	 time	 conscious.	 Not	 a	 single	 moment	 should	 be	 lost!	 Death	 is	 there.
Every	moment	lost	 is	 lost	forever,	and	death	comes	near;	you	are	going	to	die.
So	use	every	moment!	You	cannot	wait,	because	waiting	only	means	waiting	for
death.	Death	is	coming.	No	one	can	wait,	no	one	knows	what	is	going	to	happen
tomorrow,	the	next	moment.	Death	may	come.
You	become	uneasy,	you	begin	trembling,	you	begin	to	run.	This	whole	running
of	the	modern	mind	is	because	of	the	fear	of	death.
For	the	first	time	man	is	so	fearful	of	death,	because	for	the	first	time	man	has
become	absolutely	unaware	of	 the	deathless.	 If	you	are	aware	of	 the	deathless,
then	 there	 is	 no	 hurry.	 You	 live	 in	 eternity,	 and	 there	 is	 always	 enough	 time,
more	than	enough.	Nothing	is	lost,	because	time	is	eternal.	So	if	a	moment	is	lost
does	not	mean	that	less	time	will	be	left.	The	time	remains	the	same	because	it	is
eternal.	From	a	treasury	which	is	immeasurable,	you	cannot	lose	anything.	You
may	go	on	losing,	it	makes	no	difference;	what	remains	is	the	same.	You	cannot
take	anything	out	of	it.	But	we	are	short	of	time.
Time	is	short,	and	death	is	there.
We	are	only	conscious	of	the	body	which	is	going	to	die.	We	are	not	conscious
of	the	inner	consciousness	which	is	deathless.	In	ancient	days	there	were	people
who	 were	 conscious	 of	 the	 deathless.	 Because	 of	 their	 consciousness,
deathlessness,	they	created	an	atmosphere,	a	new	sphere,	in	which	there	was	no
hurry.	Things	would	move	slowly	if	they	moved	at	all.	Then	initiation	was	easy,
then	waiting	was	easy,	then	surrender	was	easy,	then	responsibilities	were	easy.
They	all	have	become	difficult	now.	But	still,	there	is	no	alternative,	initiation	is
needed.	 The	 old	 initiation	 has	 become	 impossible,	 so	 a	 new	 initiation	 must
replace	it.	The	old	must	be	replaced	by	a	newer	one.	My	whole	effort	is	toward
that.
If	you	are	in	a	hurry,	 then	I	will	give	initiation	in	your	running	state	of	affairs,
because	otherwise	 there	will	be	no	 initiation.	So	 I	cannot	ask	you	 to	wait	 as	a
precondition.	I	must	initiate	you	first	and	then	prolong	your	waiting	in	so	many
ways.	 Through	 so	many	 devices	 I	will	 persuade	 you	 to	wait,	 because	without
waiting	there	is	no	maturity.	So	when	you	will	be	ready	there	will	be	a	second
initiation,	which	would	have	been	the	first	in	the	old	days.	It	cannot	now	be	the
first.
Sometimes	people	are	bewildered.	Sometimes	someone	comes	to	me;	he	has	not
even	heard	me,	he	has	not	even	known	me,	and	I	initiate	him	into	sannyas.	This
is	absurd,	not	understandable	at	all.	But	I	know.	And	whatsoever	I	am	doing,	I
am	doing	very	considerately.	This	 is	 just	 the	beginning,	 this	 initiation,	because
only	 through	 this	 initiation	 will	 I	 be	 able	 to	 create	 devices	 for	 his	 waiting;
otherwise	he	cannot	wait.	If	I	tell	him,	"Wait	five	years,	and	then	I	will	give	you
initiation,"	he	cannot	wait.	If	I	give	it	to	him	this	very	moment,	then	he	can	wait.
So	 let	 it	 be	 like	 this,	 it	 makes	 no	 difference.	 The	 same	 will	 be	 the	 process.
Because	you	cannot	wait,	I	change.	I	will	allow	you	to	wait	afterwards,	and	then
there	will	be	a	second	initiation.	This	is	the	formal	initiation,	the	second	one	will
be	informal.	The	second	one	will	be	like	a	happening.	You	will	not	ask	me,	I	will
not	give	you.	It	will	happen.	In	the	innermost	being	it	will	happen,	and	you	will
know	it	when	it	happens.
Now	there	is	no	other	way	possible	for	this	world,	for	this	moment.	For	this	time
conscious	mind,	there	is	no	other	way.	First	I	will	push	you,	then	I	will	have	to
work	on	you.	The	working	 is	also	going	 to	be	quite	different.	 It	 cannot	be	 the
same.	 For	 example,	 I	 will	 have	 to	work	much	with	 your	 intellect,	 which	was
never	before	needed.	 It	was	always	 thought	of	 as	 a	barrier.	 I	 also	know	 it	 is	 a
barrier,	I	also	am	aware	that	nothing	really	can	happen	with	the	intellect.	But	I
will	 have	 to	work	 and	 labor	with	your	 intellect,	 because	now	 if	 someone	 says
that	 your	 intellect	 is	 not	 needed,	 this	 statement	 will	 be	 interpreted	 by	 your
intellect.	You	will	be	just	disconnected	with	the	person,	there	will	be	no	further
intimacy.	This	will	be	a	closing	of	the	door.	Today	that	cannot	be	said.	Of	course,
it	is	a	basic	truth,	but	it	cannot	be	uttered.	It	could	be	uttered	in	the	old	days.
Now	I	will	have	to	do	much	with	your	intellect.	And	only	when	I	have	worked
with	your	intellect	so	much,	in	a	way	it	has	never	before	been	worked	with,	more
than	 your	 capacity,	 only	 then	will	 you	 be	 ready	 for	 the	 statement,	 "Throw	 the
intellect"	 --	 not	 before.	 If	 you	 become	 convinced	 --	 and	 intellect	 becomes
convinced	very	easily	because	 it	 is	a	very	superficial	part	 --	 that	whatsoever	 is
said	 is	 rational	 only,	 then	 I	 can	 begin	 with	 the	 irrational.	 There	 is	 the	 real
beginning.
But	 to	 come	 to	 your	 heart	 I	 will	 have	 to	 go	 round	 and	 round	 through	 your
intellectual	by-passes.	The	labyrinth	of	intellect	has	to	be	traveled	unnecessarily,
but	for	this	age	that	has	become	necessary.	Now,	even	the	irrational	will	have	to
be	found	by	a	rational	effort.
This	period	of	waiting	will	be	a	training	for	the	intellect	toward	the	beyond,	and
simultaneously	I	will	force	you	and	push	you	toward	meditation.	In	the	old	days
meditation	was	very	secret,	very	esoteric.	 It	would	be	given	 to	you	only	when
you	 were	 totally	 ready,	 because	 it	 is	 the	 most	 secret	 key	 of	 the	 most	 secret
treasure.	 It	 could	only	be	given	when	you	were	completely	 ready,	otherwise	 it
could	not	be	given.
But	if	I	wait	for	your	readiness,	it	is	not	going	to	be	given	to	you	at	all.	So	I	will
give	you	a	key	--	of	course,	a	false	one.	You	can	toy	with	it,	and	with	that	you
can	wait.	More	than	that	key,	the	waiting	will	help.	Even	with	a	false	key,	you
will	be	more	at	ease.	But	the	key	is	made	in	such	a	way	that	if	you	go	on	using	it,
it	will	become	an	authentic	one.	The	key	is	made	in	such	a	way	that	if	you	go	on
using	it....
It	 cannot	 unlock	 the	 door	 this	 very	moment.	 They	 key	 is	 false,	 it	 has	 corners
which	it	should	not	have.	But	if	you	go	on	trying	with	it,	those	corners	will	fall
down,	will	wither.
It	will	become	a	 real	key,	and	daily	 it	will	move	more.	 I	 think	you	understand
me.	 I	 am	not	going	 to	 replace	 it	with	 another	key.	The	 same	key	will	 become
authentic	by	much	using.	The	unnecessary	corners	of	it	will	have	withered.	But	I
cannot	wait	for	you	to	be	ready	to	be	given	a	ready	key	which	can	open	the	door
this	very	moment.	The	door	is	ready,	the	key	is	ready,	but	you	are	not	ready.
So	there	are	two	ways.	The	old	way	is	that	you	should	wait.	I	will	say,	"Wait	five
years.
This	is	the	key,	that	is	the	door,	but	wait	for	five	years.	Do	not	ask	again	where	is
the	key,	do	not	touch	the	door	even	in	curiosity,	do	not	go	near	the	lock.	Wait!
Even	if	I	see	that	you	are	looking	at	the	lock,	I	will	turn	you	out.	Just	wait.	Never
look	to	the	lock,	never	have	avarice.	This	is	the	key.	I	will	give	it	to	you	when
you	 are	 ready."	This	was	 the	old	way.	People	waited	 for	 years.	Even	 for	 lives
people	have	waited.
There	is	a	story....
One	disciple	waited	for	three	lives.	The	teacher	was	experimenting	with	him	to
see	how	much	he	could	wait.	He	said,	"I	am	going	to	know	how	much	you	can
wait."
The	disciple	said,	"Okay,	I	will	also	see	how	much	you	can	wait."	It	is	going	to
be	a	waiting	for	both;	never	think	that	it	is	going	to	be	a	waiting	for	you	alone.	If
you	 are	 waiting,	 I	 am	 also	 waiting.	 And	 I	 am	 in	 more	 of	 a	 hurry	 than	 you
because	 I	 may	 not	 be	 again."	 So	 the	 disciple	 said,	 "Let	 us	 see	 who	 can	 wait
more."
It	became	difficult	for	the	teacher.	He	had	to	come	for	three	lives	again,	and	the
disciple	waited.	Each	time	he	would	come	and	sit,	and	each	time	the	same	story
was	repeated.
In	the	end	the	teacher	lost	patience,	and	he	said,	"Take	this	key.	You	have	won;	I
am	defeated."
The	disciple	said,	"Why	are	you	in	such	a	hurry?	I	can	wait	still	more."
He	said,	 "You	can	wait,	but	 I	have	 to	come	 to	 this	earth	unnecessarily	 for	 this
waiting,	and	it	looks	as	if	you	can	continue	forever.	So	take	this	key."
But	 the	disciple	said,	"The	key	has	come	to	me	because	such	 long	waiting	has
itself	become	a	key.	I	do	not	need	it	now."
The	teacher	said,	"This	was	also	one	reason	why	I	was	in	such	a	hurry	--	because
if	you	wait	 still	more	 there	will	be	no	need	 for	 the	key	 to	be	given!	This	very
waiting	will	become	a	key."
This	was	 the	 old	way.	Wait	 first,	 then	 the	 key	will	 be	 given.	Now	 that	 is	 not
possible,	so	I	have	to	change	the	whole	thing.	I	give	you	the	key,	then	you	can
play	with	it.	You	cannot	wait	unoccupied,	but	you	can	wait	occupied.	Now	you
have	the	key,	you	have	the	lock,	 the	door,	you	have	rumors	about	 the	treasury;
you	have	everything.	I	go	on	rumoring	about	the	treasury.	You	have	the	key.	You
can	wait,	you	can	play	with	the	lock	and	key.
And	by	 this	 very	playing	 and	waiting	 the	 false	key	will	 turn	 into	 an	 authentic
one.
The	responsibility	of	the	teacher	corresponds	to	your	surrender.	There	are	many
other	 things	 the	 teacher	 does	 which	 are	 not	 in	 any	 correspondence	 with	 the
disciple.	Only	 in	 one	 thing	 is	 the	 teacher	 in	 correspondence	with	 the	 disciple,
that	is	the	bridge.	Surrender	from	the	disciple,	responsibility	from	the	teacher	--
that	is	the	bridge.	There	are	many	things	which	are	only	with	the	teacher.	Really,
the	disciple	has	not	 to	do	much.	The	teacher	has	 to	do	much.	And	that	 is	right
also,	that	is	how	it	should	be.	The	disciple	always	thinks	that	he	is	doing	much,
but	it	is	the	teacher	who	has	to	do	much.
So	 he	 can	 just	 indicate	 something.	 He	 has	 to	 work	 with	 you	 on	many	 layers
simultaneously.	He	has	 to	work	with	your	body,	which	you	cannot	understand,
because	you	are	 completely	unaware	of	your	body,	you	do	not	know	anything
about	your	body.
You	only	know	your	body	when	you	feel	hungry,	when	you	feel	pain,	disease;
that	is	all.
That	 is	 the	 only	 contact	 with	 your	 body.	 You	 do	 not	 know	 what	 a	 great
phenomenon	your	body	is.
The	 teacher	 has	 to	 do	 much	 with	 your	 body,	 because	 unless	 your	 body
transforms,	the	innermost	cannot	be	tackled.	And	he	has	to	do	it	in	such	a	way
that	you	should	not	become	aware	 that	he	 is	doing	something	with	your	body,
because	if	you	become	aware,	the	very	consciousness	will	create	disturbance	in
your	 body.	 And	 the	 teacher	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 do	 it,	 because	 this	 is	 a	 secret
phenomenon	 of	 the	 body;	 it	 works	 when	 you	 are	 not	 conscious	 of	 it.	 If	 you
become	conscious,	it	will	not	work.
You	can	make	an	experiment.	Tomorrow,	be	conscious	when	you	are	eating,	and
then	 be	 conscious	 that	 the	 stomach	 is	 working	 to	 change	 the	 food	 into	 living
nourishment.	 Be	 conscious	 for	 twenty-four	 hours	 and	 you	will	 feel	 sick,	 your
stomach	will	be	disturbed.
You	will	not	be	able	to	be	nourished	by	the	food,	it	will	become	poison.	You	will
have	 to	 throw	 it	 away	completely,	 the	whole	 system	will	 be	disturbed.	That	 is
why	 you	 need	 sleep.	 In	 sleep,	 the	 body	 can	 function	 better.	 You	 are	 not
conscious.
If	someone	is	ill,	the	doctor	will	see	first	whether	his	sleep	is	good.	Otherwise	no
medicine	will	do,	no	help	can	be	given.	He	cannot	be	helped,	because	his	body
cannot	work	--	he	is	too	conscious.	Unnecessarily,	we	continue	so	many	diseases
because	 of	 this	 consciousness.	 Once	 your	 stomach	 is	 disturbed,	 you	 become
conscious	 about	 it.	 Then	 the	 stomach	 is	 all	 right,	 but	 the	 consciousness
continues;	then	this	consciousness	will	disturb.
And	this	will	become	a	vicious	circle	--	your	consciousness	is	disturbed	by	your
stomach,	and	your	stomach	is	disturbed	by	your	consciousness.	Now	you	cannot
be	out	of	it.	You	will	go	on	in	it,	and	this	will	become	a	lifelong	thing.
One	day	your	sleep	is	disturbed.	Another	day	you	are	all	right,	but	now	you	have
become	conscious.	Now	you	are	thinking	it	may	be	that	today	also	sleep	is	not
going	to	come.
Today	you	have	become	conscious.	Sleep	will	not	come,	you	are	too	conscious.
Now	the	next	morning	you	will	be	even	more	conscious.
So	with	your	body	the	teacher	has	to	work	many	things	which	he	cannot	tell	you
about.
Even	a	touch	will	be	doing	something.	Even	a	hand	on	your	head	will	be	doing
something.	 In	 the	old	world,	with	ancient	people,	 it	was	very	easy.	They	were
not	 so	 body	 conscious.	 With	 time	 consciousness	 there	 is	 a	 corresponding
corollary	of	body	consciousness.	I	say	it	is	death	consciousness.	Really,	the	more
you	are	death	conscious,	the	more	you	will	be	body	conscious.
Today	 everyone	 has	 become	 so	 body	 conscious	 that	 you	 cannot	 touch	 him
without	 his	 becoming	 self-conscious.	 The	moment	 he	 becomes	 self-conscious,
the	touch,	the	inner	meaning	of	it,	the	inner	working	of	is,	has	stopped.	We	have
become	so	touchy,	everyone	is	constantly	aware	that	no	one	should	touch.	You
are	 standing	 in	 a	 crowd:	 everyone	 is	 touching,	 but	 somewhere	 inside	 you	 are
trying	all	the	time	not	to	be	touched.	Things	have	become	difficult	in	this	way,
unnecessarily	difficult.
In	so	many	ways,	I	have	to	create	devices	in	which	your	body	can	be	changed.	In
my	meditation	method,	I	have	added	a	cathartic	part	only	to	change	your	body
center.	No	old	meditation	has	this	part	added,	because	that	part	can	be	done	only
by	 the	 teacher.	His	 touching,	 just	 a	 single	 touch	 on	 any	 center,	 could	 have	 so
much	catharsis.	But	now	that	is	very	difficult.
For	example,	the	Zen	teacher	will	have	a	staff	in	his	hand.	He	will	beat	with	his
staff.	No	Westerner	could	understand	what	is	the	meaning	of	it	--	not	even	these
who	are	sympathetic.	And	then,	a	Zen	teacher	will	not	tell	what	is	meant	by	it.	It
is	not	just	a	beating,	it	is	hammering	on	a	particular	center.	It	is	not	a	beating	at
all.	But	it	has	to	be	hidden.	He	is	beating	on	your	backbone,	on	a	particular	part.
And	if	he	says	to	you,	"I	am	touching	on	this	center	to	help	your	body	to	work	in
a	particular	way,"	you	will	become	self-conscious.	He	will	not	say	that.	He	will
say,	"I	feel	that	you	are	sleepy,	so	I	beat	you."	Whenever	you	will	feel	sleepy,	he
will	 come	 and	 beat	 you,	 and	 this	 beating	 is	 a	 hidden	 trick	 to	 camouflage	 the
whole	affair.	You	will	think,	"He	is	beating	me."	You	will	not	become	aware	of
the	center	he	has	hammered.	Now	that	too	cannot	be	used.
Asanas	 are	 used	 to	 change	your	 inner	 current.	Mudras	were	 used,	 but	 they	 all
have	 to	 be	 practised	 a	 long	 time.	No	 one	 can	 practise	 so	 long	 now.	And	 they
have	 to	 be	 practised	 in	 a	 very	 isolated	 atmosphere,	 not	 in	 the	 marketplace,
because	when	you	practise	particular	asanas	and	mudras,	 the	particular	centers
become	so	sensitive	that	you	must	remain	isolated.	Otherwise	you	will	get	many
unnecessary	disturbing	influences	inside	--	because	your	centers	are	open.
So	the	teacher	has	much	to	do	with	your	body	in	so	many	methods.	It	is	always
up	to	him	to	devise	new	methods,	because	old	methods	become	useless.	This	is
because	 the	 more	 you	 know,	 the	 more	 you	 become	 self-conscious.	 So	 new
methods	are	to	be	used,	and	only	the	enlightened	ones	can	use	new	methods.	All
those	who	are	initiating	and	are	not	enlightened	themselves,	will	have	to	rely	on
old	methods,	because	they	cannot	devise	the	new.	they	do	not	even	know	what	is
meant	by	the	old.	They	know	only	the	outer	gestures.
So	 they	 will	 continue	 to	 use	 hatha	 yoga,	 pranayam;	 they	 will	 continue.	With
every	new	enlightened	person,	this	world	gets	new	devices.	Otherwise	it	cannot
get	 new	 devices,	 and	 each	 new	 age	 needs	 new	 devices	 because	 the	mind	 has
changed.
So	 the	 teacher	has	 to	do	much	with	your	body;	 that	 is	 the	beginning.	And	 the
difficult	part	of	it	is	that	you	must	no	be	aware	of	it.	That	is	why	it	is	meaningful
to	live	with	a	teacher,	to	live	in	an	ashram,	to	sleep	with	a	teacher	--	because	then
your	body	is	more	vulnerable	for	his	work,	without	your	knowing.	Teachers	have
even	 used	 intoxicants	 to	 make	 you	 unconscious,	 to	 work	 with	 your	 body.
Anesthetics	are	not	only	used	by	surgeons.
Teachers	 have	 also	 used	 them	 in	 their	 own	 way.	 When	 you	 are	 completely
unaware,	 then	 they	 can	work.	 And	 the	 work	which	 cannot	 be	 done	 in	 a	 year
ordinarily	can	be	done	in	a	moment,	because	then	the	exact	point	can	be	touched,
turned,	changed.	The	whole	current	can	be	made	different.
Then	 things	become	even	more	difficult,	because	 the	energy	 that	 is	 to	be	used
lies	 in	 the	 sex	center.	 It	becomes	even	more	difficult.	That	 too	 is	 a	part	of	 the
whole	complex.	I	am	talking	about	time	consciousness,	death	consciousness,	sex
consciousness,	 these	 are	 all	 parts.	 The	more	 you	 become	 death	 conscious,	 the
more	you	feel	sexual	--	because	sex	is	the	antidote.	Sex	is	the	beginning	of	life,
and	death	is	the	end.	If	you	are	more	conscious	of	death,	you	will	become	more
conscious	 of	 sex.	 Only	 a	 society	 which	 is	 not	 conscious	 of	 death	 will	 be
unconscious	 of	 sex.	 It	 does	 not	mean	 that	 it	will	 not	 be	 sexual,	 but	 it	will	 be
unconscious	of	it.	It	will	be	just	a	natural	thing.
You	can	go	to	a	primitive	society	and	touch	the	breast	of	a	woman	and	ask	her
what	it	is.
She	 will	 just	 reply	 in	 an	 automatic	 way;	 no	 reference	 to	 any	 morality,	 no
reference	to	any	body	consciousness,	no	reference	to	sex.	She	will	say	that	this	is
to	give	the	milk	to	the	child.
The	energy	lies	in	the	sex	center.	And	we	have	become	so	conscious	of	the	sex
center,	we	 guard	 it	 so	 continuously	 and	we	 have	 become	 so	 tense,	 it	 goes	 on
being	more	and	more	difficult	 to	help.	I	have	created	many	new	devices,	and	I
have	to	talk	about	very	different	things	from	so	many	dimensions.	For	example,	I
have	talked	so	much	about	moving	from	sex	to	superconsciousness	only	to	relax
you.	If	you	can	become	relaxed	at	your	sex	center,	if	there	is	no	tension,	then	the
energy	can	be	released	upwards.
The	first	thing	for	the	initiator	is	to	help	your	body	change.	It	has	to	be	changed,
because	 a	 new	 phenomenon	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 to	 your	 body.	 It	 has	 to	 be
prepared	 for	 the	 new	 explosion	 which	 is	 going	 to	 come,	 which	 is	 going	 to
descend,	for	the	new	energy	which	will	soon	be	your	guest.	So	you	have	to	be
made	a	host.	The	whole	arrangement	has	to	be	changed.
This	 arrangement,	 as	 we	 exist	 ordinarily,	 will	 not	 do.	 This	 is	 a	 biological
arrangement.
This	structure	of	the	body,	this	pattern	of	the	body,	is	biological.	It	is	used	only
as	 a	 sex	 vehicle.	 The	 whole	 process	 is	 just	 to	 continue	 it.	 Nothing	 more	 is
expected	from	your	body	as	far	as	nature	is	concerned,	so	it	is	arranged	in	that
way.	Now	you	want	not	only	to	continue	the	race,	you	want	to	change	the	whole
biological	 process	 and	 to	 create	 a	 new	 dimension	 that	 is	 absolutely	 non-
biological,	spiritual.	The	whole	structure	of	the	body	will	have	to	be	changed.
So	the	teacher	has	to	work	more	with	your	body,	then	much	with	your	emotions,
and	now	even	much	with	your	intellect.	This	is	the	conscious,	exoteric	part.	The
teacher	is	going	to	do	something	to	the	outer	parts	in	initiation.	But	there	is	the
inner	part,	the	esoteric.	That	is	being	worked	on	by	telepathic	messages,	through
your	dreams,	through	visions,	through	secret	communications.	Your	intellect	can
be	 pacified	 directly.	 It	 can	 be	 talked	 to	 and	 pacified	 directly,	 but	 not	 your
emotions,	 here	 one	 has	 to	 work	 indirectly.	 One	 has	 to	 create	 milieus	 through
which	your	emotions	are	changed,	transformed.
But	that	too	is	outer.	Your	emotions,	your	intellect,	your	body,	these	are	the	outer
self	of	your	body.	You	reside	within,	your	being	is	deeper	inside.	That	being	is
also	to	be	transformed.	That	is	being	done	through	telepathic,	 through	esoteric,
secret	paths.	Your	dreams	can	be	used,	they	are	used.	It	happens	ordinarily	that
you	 may	 not	 be	 aware	 of	 your	 dreams,	 but	 your	 teacher	 is.	 And	 he	 is	 more
interested	 in	 your	 dreams	 than	 your	 waking	 state.	 Your	 so-called	 waking
consciousness	 is	 false.	 It	 is	not	 real,	you	are	not	 expressed	 in	 it;	you	only	act.
Your	dreams	are	more	real.
Freud	just	used	analysis	of	dreams	because	of	some	alchemical	tradition	which
became	known	to	him.	Something	from	some	esoteric	circle	leaked.	He	used	it
and	created	a	whole	science.	Of	course,	he	could	not	know	your	dreams	directly;
he	had	to	make	you	confess,	show	your	dream,	remember	your	dream,	talk	about
your	dream.	Then	he	could	analyze	it.	But	 in	 initiation	the	teacher	knows	your
dreams.	He	can	go	into	your	dreams,	he	can	be	a	witness	to	your	dreams.	And
then	he	knows	more	secret	things	about	you	then	you	yourself	are	aware.
Edgar	 Cayce	 could	 go	 into	 an	 auto-hypnotic	 coma	 in	 which	 you	 tell	 him
something	about	your	dream.	There	are	your	missing	links.	He	could	go	into	the
dream	in	his	unconscious	state.	He	could	see	 the	whole	picture	of	your	dream.
Then	he	would	tell	you	that	these	are	the	missing	links,	this	is	your	full	dream.
And	you	will	be	surprised	that	no	one	remembers	his	full	dream	in	the	morning	-
-	it	is	impossible.
The	moment	the	conscious	mind	takes	charge	it	distorts	the	whole	thing,	because
the	message	 is	 from	 the	 unconscious.	 It	 is	 against	 the	 conscious,	 it	 distorts,	 it
interprets.	 It	 causes	 something	 to	 be	missing,	 something	 to	 be	 added,	 and	 the
whole	thing	becomes	just	nonsense.	You	say	this	is	just	a	dream	--	meaningless.
No	 dream	 is	 meaningless;	 dreams	 have	 a	 deeper	 meaning	 than	 your	 waking
moments.
So	 the	 teacher	has	 to	work	with	your	dreams.	And	unless	he	works	with	your
dreams,	he	cannot	work	for	your	awakening,	because	the	dream-creating	source
inside	you	is	the	whole	thing.	It	has	to	be	destroyed,	it	has	to	be	uprooted	from
your	 consciousness.	 The	 complete	 mechanism	 of	 dreaming	 has	 to	 be	 broken,
completely	uprooted.	When	it	is	uprooted	completely,	first	you	will	feel	that	you
have	lost	dreaming,	 then	you	will	feel	 that	you	have	lost	sleep.	You	will	sleep,
but	something	will	remain	aware.	The	body	will	be	refreshed	in	the	morning,	but
you	will	know	that	you	have	remained	conscious.	If	dreaming	is	lost,	sleep	will
be	lost.
You	may	be	surprised	that	the	dreaming	is	a	constant	help	to	sleep.	You	cannot
sleep	without	 dreaming.	Dreaming	 helps	 to	 continue	 your	 sleep.	 For	 example,
you	 are	 feeling	 hungry	 in	 sleep,	 then	 the	 sleep	will	 be	 broken.	 The	 body	will
break	 it,	 "Go	 and	 take	 something!"	You	 are	 feeling	 thirsty;	 the	 body	will	 say,
"Go	and	drink	something."	But	the	dream	structure	will	help	completely;	it	will
say,	"Okay."	The	dream	structure	will	create	a	dream.	You	are	drinking	water	in
the	dream,	then	there	is	no	need	to	break	the	sleep.
You	have	 taken	 something	which	was	 needed.	The	dream	has	 substituted,	 and
now	you	can	continue	sleeping.
Your	alarm	clock	 is	 ringing,	 it	 is	 five	o'clock	and	you	have	 to	 rise.	The	dream
structure	will	 create	 a	 dream.	You	 are	 in	 a	 temple,	 and	 a	 bell	 is	 ringing.	 The
alarm	ringing	outside	has	been	 transferred	and	made	a	part	of	 the	dream.	Now
the	bell	is	ringing	in	the	temple,	now	there	is	no	need	to	rise,	you	can	continue
sleeping.
The	dream	is	a	help	for	continuing	sleep;	otherwise	you	cannot	sleep.	The	sleep
will	be	broken	so	many	times,	because	there	are	so	many	happenings	outside	that
the	body	cannot	tolerate.	Even	a	single	mosquito	will	disturb	your	sleep,	but	the
dream	can	help	there	also.	It	may	create	a	dream,	and	the	music	of	the	mosquito
will	become	a	music	in	the	dream.	Then	you	continue	to	sleep	and	dream.
So	 the	whole	 structure	of	dreaming	consciousness	has	 to	be	uprooted,	 and	 the
teacher	 has	 to	 work	 for	 it.	 And	 when	 he	 destroys	 the	 whole	 mechanism	 of
dreaming,	then	only	the	inner	doors	are	open	and	he	can	communicate	directly.
Now	 there	 is	 no	 need	 of	 language,	 no	 need	 of	 words.	 He	 can	 communicate
directly.	And	when	there	is	direct	communication	without	words,	only	the	truth
can	 be	 revealed	 to	 you,	 otherwise	 not.	 So	 the	most	 esoteric	 part	 is	 with	 your
dreaming	consciousness	--	to	change	it.
Something	may	leak	out,	and	there	has	been	such	a	phenomenon	so	many	times.
There	are	even	sciences	based	on	a	single	leak,	a	single	point	that	has	come	from
the	esoteric	world.	You	can	create	a	science	on	it.	It	is	going	to	be	faulty,	always
imperfect.	Freud's	analysis	can	never	be	perfect	because	he	does	not	know	 the
whole	thing.	He	has	come	upon,	he	has	stumbled	somewhere,	on	a	single	point.
He	has	worked	it	out	completely,	but	the	point	itself	is	a	part.	The	whole	is	not
known.
When	 dreaming	 consciousness	 has	 been	 washed	 away,	 then	 the	 real	 esoteric
work	begins.
The	 teacher	 can	 take	 your	 hand	 in	 his	 hand	 and	 lead	 you	 anywhere	 --	 to	 any
reality,	to	any	depth	of	this	universe.	But	that	cannot	be	talked	about,	that	cannot
be	discussed.
Teachers	have	lead	their	pupils	to	heaven,	hell,	to	every	nook	and	corner	of	the
universe,	to	every	planet,	to	higher	realms.	But	that	can	only	happen	when	your
dreaming	 consciousness	 is	 gone	 completely.	You	 cannot	 project	 anything,	 you
have	just	to	become	a	screen.	Then	this	world	will	be	different	for	you	because
then	you	will	be	different.
This	world	will	remain	the	same,	but	you	will	not	be	projecting	anything.
And	there	still	are	many	things	for	which,	if	you	are	interested,	you	will	have	to
go	in.
You	cannot	be	informed	about	these	things.	They	can	be	made	known	to	you.	I
can	help	you,	I	can	work	with	you,	I	can	push	you	into	an	inner	dimension.	But	I
cannot	 inform	you.	Even	all	 I	am	informing	you	of	 is	more	 than	ever	allowed.
But	 I	 can	 inform	you	 about	many	 things	which	were	 never	 allowed	because	 I
always	drop	some	key	points.
You	cannot	work	them	up.
Something	is	always	missing	--	not	to	me,	but	to	you.	It	is	always	missing	unless
the	phenomenon	happens	 to	 you.	Then	 everything	will	 be	 complete,	 it	will	 be
linked.	So	I	talk	about	many	links.	There	are	always	some	missing	links	which
will	be	fulfilled	only	by	your	efforts.	I	talk	about	these	unlinked	links	so	that	you
may	 be	 persuaded	 to	 work	 hard.	 The	more	 you	work	 hard,	 the	more	missing
links	I	will	talk	about.	But	the	chief	link	will	never	be	talked	about.	It	can	only
be	experienced.	But	 I	am	ready	 to	help	you	 to	experience	 it,	 and	 the	nature	of
things	is	such	that	it	can	only	be	experienced.
Do	your	part,	and	remember	that	you	are	capable	of	doing	your	part.	Whenever
you	are	able	to	surrender,	the	teacher	will	come.	The	teacher	is	there.	Teachers
have	 always	 been	 in	 existence.	 The	 world	 has	 never	 lacked	 teachers,	 it	 has
always	 lacked	 disciples.	 But	 no	 teacher	 can	 begin	 anything	 unless	 someone
surrenders.	So	whenever	you	have	a	moment	to	surrender,	do	not	lose	it.	Even	if
you	do	not	find	anyone	 to	whom	to	surrender,	 then	 just	surrender	 to	existence.
But	whenever	 there	 is	a	moment	 to	surrender,	do	not	 lose	 it,	because	 then	you
are	on	the	borderline	where	you	are	in	between	sleep	and	waking.	Just	surrender!
If	you	can	find	someone,	that	is	good.	If	you	cannot	find	anyone,	just	surrender
to	the	universe.	And	the	teacher	will	appear,	he	will	come.	He	rushes	whenever
there	 is	 surrender.	 You	 become	 vacant,	 you	 become	 empty;	 spiritually,	 you
become	 empty.	 Then	 the	 spiritual	 force	 rushes	 toward	 you	 and	 fills	 you.	 So
always	 remember	 that	 whenever	 you	 feel	 like	 surrendering,	 do	 not	 lose	 the
moment.	 It	may	not	 come	again	or	 it	may	come	after	 centuries	and	 lives	have
been	unnecessarily	wasted.	Whenever	the	moment	comes,	just	surrender.
But	the	mind	has	a	trick.	If	you	are	angry,	you	will	be	angry	that	very	moment.
But	if	you	feel	like	surrendering.	you	will	think	about	it,	you	will	plan	about	it,
you	will	wait.	And	with	the	mind,	it	is	always	only	in	a	moment	when	it	is	on	the
boundary.	So	just	surrender	to	the	divine,	to	anything,	even	to	a	tree,	because	the
real	 thing	 is	 not	 to	 whom	 you	 surrender	 --	 the	 real	 thing	 is	 surrendering.
Surrender	to	a	tree,	and	the	tree	will	become	a	teacher	to	you.	Many	things	will
be	revealed	to	you	from	the	tree	which	no	scripture	can	reveal	to	you.
Surrender	to	a	stone,	and	the	stone	will	become	a	god.	And	the	stone	will	reveal
things	which	no	god	can	reveal	to	you.	The	real	thing	is	surrendering.	Whenever
there	is	surrendering,	one	always	appears	who	becomes	responsible	for	you.	This
is	what	is	meant	by	initiation.
I	Am	the	Gate
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	I	am	the	gate
14	June	1971	pm	in	Bombay,	India
Archive
code:
7106145
ShortTitle:
GATE08
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Question	1
BELOVED	MASTER,
THEOSOPHISTS	 HAVE	 TALKED	 ABOUT	 DIFFERENT	 GROUPS	 OF
MASTERS
EXISTING	PHYSICALLY	OR	EVEN	NON-PHYSICALLY.	HOW	MANY	OF
THESE
GROUPS	EXIST	TODAY?	WHAT	ARE	THESE	ESOTERIC	GROUPS,	AND
HOW
DO	 THEY	 INFLUENCE	 SEEKERS	 AND	 THE	 WORLD'S	 ACTIVITY?
PLEASE
TELL	 US	 ABOUT	 YOUR	 RELATIONSHIP	 WITH	 THESE	 ESOTERIC
GROUPS	OF
MASTERS.
Spiritual	knowledge	has	many	difficulties	in	order	to	exist.	The	first	difficulty	is
that	it	cannot	be	expressed	adequately.	So	even	when	someone	comes	to	know,
he	is	not	able	to	express	it	exactly.	What	has	been	known	cannot	be	transferred
easily.	Someone	knows	something,	there	are	seekers	who	want	to	know,	but	the
knowledge	cannot	be	communicated.	Just	because	you	want	to	know	it	and	just
because	someone	is	capable	of	telling	you	does	not	mean	that	communication	is
possible.	The	very	nature	of	spiritual	knowledge	is	such	that	the	moment	you	try
to	 express	 it,	 you	 feel	 that	 it	 cannot	 be	 expressed.	 So	 to	 express	 it	 and
communicate	it,	esoteric	groups	are	needed.
An	esoteric	group	is	a	group	specially	 trained	 to	receive	a	particular	system	of
knowledge.	We	may	take	an	analogy:	Einstein	made	reference	many	times	to	the
fact	that	there	existed	not	more	than	half	a	dozen	people	in	the	world	with	whom
he	 could	 communicate.	 He	 was	 talking	 about	 mathematical	 knowledge,	 not
about	spiritual	knowledge.	But	it	was	a	fact,	not	even	half	a	dozen	persons	really
existed	with	whom	Einstein	could	 talk	easily,	because	 in	mathematics	Einstein
reached	 such	 peaks	 that	 he	 could	 not	 communicate	 in	 ordinary	 mathematical
symbols.
Even	 if	 Einstein	 tries	 to	 convey	 his	 knowledge,	 you	 will	 hear	 it	 but	 not
understand	it,	because	 just	hearing	 is	not	understanding.	And	when	you	do	not
understand	it,	there	is	every	possibility	you	will	misunderstand	it,	because	from
understanding	 to	 non-understanding	 there	 is	 an	 in	 between	 phenomenon	 of
misunderstanding.	No	one	is	ready	to	accept	 that	he	has	not	understood.	When
there	 is	 no	 understanding,	 it	 does	 not	mean	 non-understanding.	 In	 ninety-nine
cases	out	of	a	hundred,	 it	means	misunderstanding,	because	no	one	 is	 ready	 to
say	that	he	has	not	understood.	Everyone	will	say	that	he	understands	it,	and	then
misunderstanding	follows.
Mathematics	 is	 not	 an	 esoteric	 knowledge	 and	 is	 not	 concerned	 with	 the
inexpressible.
Mathematics	 has	 existed	 continuously	 for	 five	 thousand	 years.	 Thousands	 and
thousands	 of	 minds	 are	 trained	 in	 mathematics.	 Every	 university	 all	 over	 the
world	 teaches	 it,	 every	 primary	 school	 teaches	 it.	 With	 so	 much	 training,	 so
much	 knowledge,	 so	 many	 departments	 in	 so	 many	 universities	 teaching	 it,
Einstein	still	 says,	"Only	six	persons	exist	 to	whom	I	can	communicate	what	 I
know."	 If	 you	 understand	 this,	 then	 you	 can	 understand	 the	 difficulty	 of
communicating	spiritual	experiences.
An	esoteric	group	also	means	a	group	which	is	specially	trained	for	a	particular
teacher.
Because	 the	 phenomenon	 is	 rare,	 a	 buddha	 happens	 only	 after	 thousands	 of
years.	 And	 if	 there	 is	 a	 happening	 like	 Buddha,	 how	 will	 he	 be	 able	 to
communicate?	 Buddha	 will	 be	 there,	 the	 world	 will	 be	 there,	 but	 with	 no
meaning.	Buddha	 cannot	 communicate	 directly,	 so	 an	 esoteric	 group,	 an	 inner
group,	 is	 trained.	 The	 training	 is	 completely	 so	 that	 this	 group	 can	 act	 as	 a
mediator	between	Buddha	and	the	world.	A	special	group	is	specially	trained	to
understand	Buddha	and	then	to	interpret	Buddha	to	the	world,	because	between	a
buddha	and	the	world	there	is	such	a	gap	that	a	buddha	will	not	be	understood	at
all.
It	will	be	meaningful	to	refer	here	to	Jesus.	Jesus	suffered	because	there	was	no
esoteric	group.	Buddha	did	not	suffer	because	here	was	an	esoteric	group.	Jesus
had	to	be	crucified	because	the	gap	was	such	that	the	common	people	could	not
understand	him.
They	 misunderstood	 him.	 It	 had	 to	 happen,	 because	 there	 was	 not	 a	 group
between	Jesus	and	the	common	masses.	There	was	no	mediator	between	the	two,
so	 Jesus	 suffered.	 In	 India,	neither	Buddha	 suffered	nor	Mahavira	 suffered;	no
one	was	crucified.	They	were	as	capable	as	Jesus,	but	Jesus	had	to	be	crucified
because	no	esoteric	group	existed.
Misunderstanding	 was	 inevitable.	 Whatsoever	 Jesus	 would	 say	 was
misunderstood.
Of	course,	Jesus	had	a	following,	but	a	following	of	the	common	people.	All	his
chief	 disciples	 came	 from	 the	 common	masses,	 without	 any	 esoteric	 training.
Luke	and	Thomas	were	peasants	from	the	common	and	uneducated	part	of	 the
society.	They	loved	Jesus,	they	felt	him,	but	they	also	could	not	understand	him,
so	there	were	so	many	instances	in	which	they	asked	very	childish	questions.	For
example,	 some	disciple	 asks	 Jesus,	 "In	 the	 kingdom	of	God,	what	will	 be	 our
position?	You	will	be	by	the	side	of	the	divine	soul.	Where	will	we	stand?	What
will	be	the	position?"	They	could	not	understand	what	he	meant	by	the	kingdom
of	God.	They	were	common	people.
This	esoteric	group	cannot	be	created	suddenly.	Buddha	happens	suddenly,	but
this	group	cannot	be	created	suddenly.	So	countries	which	have	been	spiritual	for
thousands	 of	 years	 have	 esoteric	 groups	 as	 a	 continuity,	 as	 a	 tradition.	 And
whenever	there	is	this	kind	of	happening,	the	group	begins	to	work.
Ashoka	 created	 a	 group	 which	 is	 still	 existing	 --	 a	 group	 of	 nine	 persons.
Whenever	 a	 person	 dies,	 another	 replaces	 him,	 so	 the	 group	 still	 continues.
Whenever	one	dies,	the	eight	remaining	ones	will	choose	one	to	replace	him.	He
will	be	 trained	by	 the	eight,	 so	 the	 training	continues.	Persons	change,	but	 the
group	 remains,	 and	 still	 today	 the	 group	 is	 there,	 because	 a	 reincarnation	 of
Buddha	 is	awaited.	He	can	come	at	any	 time.	And	when	Buddha	 is	 there,	you
cannot	suddenly	create	the	group,	because	this	group	of	esoteric	adepts	is	created
through	a	long	training	and	discipline.	This	is	not	a	sudden	happening.
So	 many	 times	 groups	 have	 been	 started.	 Sometimes	 they	 continue	 and	 then
wither	away.
Sometimes	 they	go	on	and	 then	are	no	more,	because	 so	many	difficulties	 are
there.
Many	 difficulties	 are	 there!	 This	 group	 of	 Ashoka's	 nine	 esoteric	 ones	 still
continues	 because	 there	 are	many	 conditions	which	 help	 it	 to.	One	 is	 it	 never
comes	 directly	 in	 contact	 with	 the	 masses	 itself.	 It	 has	 still	 other	 groups	 is
between.	 It	 always	 remains	 unknown,	 hidden.	 You	 can	 never	 know	 its
whereabouts.	And	any	person	who	is	initiated	in	the	group,	the	very	moment	he
is	 initiated	 he	 disappears	 from	your	world	 --	 completely	 disappears.	Then	you
can	never	know	anything	about	him,	the	group	can	continue	anonymously.
This	group	has	many	keys	and	many	methods.	Through	those	keys	and	methods,
it	 goes	 on	working	 in	many	ways.	 This	 is	 a	 group	whose	members	 are	 in	 the
physical	body,	they	are	as	alive	as	we	are.	Once	someone	has	become	a	member
of	the	group,	he	cannot	be	chosen	again	in	another	life.	Then	he	will	work	as	a
link	between	 the	group	 and	 the	masses.	This	 creates	 another	 circle	 around	 the
nine,	a	greater	circle,	because	so	many	persons	have	been	members	of	it.	They
know	 Buddha	 directly,	 they	 know	 the	 esoteric	 adepts	 directly.	 They	 are	 so
experienced	that	they	can	remain	in	the	masses	and	can	continue	the	work	with
the	group.	But	they	will	not	be	its	members.	When	someone	of	this	group	is	not
born	on	this	earth,	when	he	is	without	a	physical	body,	if	he	remains	in	a	non-
body	existence,	he	still	continues	to	work.
There	are	so	many	adepts	who	are	not	in	this	physical	body	who	go	on	working.
Theosophists	 call	 them	 masters	 --	 such	 as	 Master	 Koot	 Humi.	 These	 are
fictitious	names,	but	they	refer	to	a	particular	personality,	an	individuality.	They
are	 fictitious	 names,	 but	 they	 refer	 to	 a	 particular	 unembodied	 soul	 which	 is
helping.
This	Master	K.-H.,	 one	 of	 the	most	 ancient	 adepts	 of	Ashoka's	 circle	 of	 nine,
created	the	whole	movement	of	theosophy.	They	were	trying	to	create	a	situation
in	which	Buddha's	 coming	 incarnation	could	be	possible,	because	Buddha	had
said	that	after	twenty-five	centuries	he	would	again	be	born	and	his	name	would
be	 Maitreya.	 And	 an	 enlightened	 person	 like	 Gautam	 Buddha	 is	 capable	 of
knowing	 about	who	 is	 going	 to	 be	 enlightened	 twenty-five	 centuries	 later.	 So
Buddha	 predicted,	 and	 for	 this	 happening	 Ashoka's	 circle	 of	 nine	 has	 been
working	 for	 centuries.	Now	 the	 time	 is	 near,	 so	 the	 theosophy	movement	was
just	a	preparation.
It	failed,	the	experiment	failed.	They	experimented	with	three	or	four	people	to
be	made	vehicles	for	Maitreya	to	descend,	but	the	experiment	failed.	Something
or	other	missed.
Sometimes	the	thing	was	just	on	the	brim	of	success,	and	something	happened.
Krishnamurti	was	ready,	completely	ready,	to	be	made	a	vehicle.	Everything	was
ready.
He	 came	 on	 the	 pulpit	 to	 surrender	 himself	 and	 to	 become	 so	 empty	 that
Maitreya	 could	 come	 in.	 But	 at	 the	 last	moment	 he	 denied	 surrender.	No	 one
around	him	could	think	that	this	was	going	to	happen.	Not	even	a	hint	was	given
that	Krishnamurti,	 in	 the	 last	step,	would	fail	and	come	back.	And	that	 is	why,
after	that	phenomenon,	after	that	happening	of	coming	back,	for	his	whole	life,
continuously	 for	 forty	 years,	 he	 has	 been	 emphasizing	 individuality,	 "Be	 an
individual!"
This	 has	 a	 meaning.	 The	 whole	 preparation	 was	 to	 lose	 one's	 individuality,
otherwise	one	cannot	become	a	vehicle:	"Be	as	if	you	are	not!	Surrender	totally
to	forces	beyond	you."
He	 denied	 surrender	 just	 on	 the	 brink	 of	 jumping.	Everything	was	 ready.	One
step	and	Maitreya	would	have	been	in	the	world.
But	the	last	step	could	not	be	taken.	He	came	back.	He	said,	"I	am	myself."	That
is	why	his	whole	philosophy	became,	"Do	not	surrender,	do	not	follow,	do	not
believe,	 do	 not	 be	 a	 disciple."	 The	 whole	 thing	 is	 just	 an	 outcome;	 it	 is	 just
rationalization	and	consolation.
He	has	been	working	for	forty	years	continuously	out	of	that	step	that	could	not
be	taken.
Still	he	is	not	out	of	it.	The	repentance	is	there,	the	would	is	there.	He	could	not
surrender	at	the	last	moment.	So	theosophy	failed	with	Krishnamurti	and	became
a	dead	movement,	because	the	movement	existed	only	for	the	materialization	of
this	happening.	It	became	meaningless.	The	house	had	been	built,	but	the	master
never	 came	 to	 reside	 in	 it.	 So	 after	 Krishnamurti's	 denial	 to	 be	 a	 vehicle	 for
Maitreya,	theosophy	became	meaningless.	It	still	continues,	just	like	a	hangover,
but	nothing	substantial	exists	now.
This	whole	movement	was	created	by	the	nine	adepts	of	Ashoka.	They	are	still
working.
In	 so	many	ways,	 they	 go	 on	working.	And	 there	 is	 a	 history	 behind	 our	 so-
called	 history	 of	 which	 you	 will	 not	 even	 be	 able	 to	 conceive.	 History	 has	 a
deeper	 base.	 The	 periphery	 which	 we	 know	 as	 history	 is	 not	 of	 real	 events.
Behind	 out	 so-called	 history	 continues	 another,	 a	 deeper	 one,	 about	which	we
know	nothing.
For	example,	we	all	have	heard	about	Hitler,	his	fascism,	his	whole	movement,
his	desperate	efforts	to	do	something.	But	no	one	knows	that	there	is	something
behind	which	is	hidden.	Hitler	was	just	a	vehicle	for	other	forces.	Now	there	are
glimpses	that	he	was	not	the	real	actor	in	the	drama.	He	was	just	a	means,	he	was
used.	 Someone	 else	 was	 behind	 him,	 some	 other	 forces	 were	 working.	 For
example,	the	choice	of	the	swastika,	the	symbol	of	Adolf	Hitler's	party	--	this	is
the	oldest,	the	most	ancient	symbol	of	a	particular	school	of	adepts.
In	India,	one	of	the	most	ancient	groups	is	that	of	the	Jains.	The	swastika	is	their
symbol,	 but	 not	 exactly	 as	 it	 was	with	Hitler.	 Hitler's	 swastika	 design	was	 in
reverse.	 The	 Jain's	 swastika	 is	 clockwise;	 Hitler's	 is	 anticlockwise.	 This
anticlockwise	 swastika	 is	 a	 destructive	 symbol.	 They	 searched	 for	 three	 years
continuously	to	choose	a	symbol,	because	a	symbol	is	not	just	a	symbol.	If	you
can	take	a	symbol	from	a	deeper	tradition,	then	the	symbol	becomes	a	link.	So
persons	were	 sent	 to	Tibet	 to	discover	one	of	 the	most	 ancient	 symbols	of	 the
Aryan	race,	because	with	that	symbol	much	that	is	hidden	can	be	contacted.
The	swastika	was	chosen,	but	in	reverse.	And	the	person	who	found	the	symbol,
Hessenhoff,	convinced	Adolf	Hitler	that	the	symbol	should	be	in	reverse	order.
He	was	one	of	the	persons	who	was	in	contact	with	many	esoteric	groups,	but	he
was	confused.
He	was	searching	for	 two	things:	 firstly,	 for	a	symbol	which	was	very	ancient;
secondly,	 for	 a	 symbol	 which	 could	 also	 be	 made	 new.	 Because	 of	 this,	 the
swastika	was	chosen	and	was	made	in	reverse	order.	It	had	never	existed	in	this
way	before,	but	due	to	this,	events	took	altogether	a	new	shape.
And	with	this	reverse	symbol	it	was	known	all	over	the	world	to	those	who	were
in	contact	with	any	esoteric	knowledge	that	Hitler	was	going	to	destroy	himself.
He	was	going	to	become	mad;	he	would	be	in	contact	with	suicidal	forces.
The	 entire	 concept	 of	 Hitler's	 philosophy	was	 given	 by	 some	 hidden	 schools.
They	used	him	 just	 as	Krishnamurti	was	 going	 to	 be	 used	by	 the	 theosophists
and	the	hidden	groups.
Hitler	continued	winning	up	to	a	certain	extent,	up	to	a	certain	moment.	He	was
just	winning:	there	was	no	defeat.	The	thing	was	phenomenal,	he	could	just	win
anything,	 it	 looked	 as	 if	 he	 was	 undefeatable.	 But	 beyond	 a	 certain	 time,
everything	begins	to	go	in	reverse.	Why	did	this	happen?
Forces	 which	 were	 against	 Nazism	 defeated	 Hitler,	 but	 that	 is	 not	 the	 real
history.	That	was	 just	an	outward	phenomenon.	Hitler	was	used	by	an	esoteric
group.	This	was	one	of	 the	most	desperate	 efforts,	 because	 this	 esoteric	group
was	working	for	centuries	but	could	not	help	humanity	as	they	desired	to	help.
This	was	a	desperate	effort	to	help	humanity	before	humanity	destroys	itself	on
this	earth.	So	they	had	tried	through	saints,	through	persons	who	were	powerless,
who	were	poor	in	spirit.	They	tried	through	Adolf	Hitler	to	win	the	whole	world
before	it	is	destroyed	and	to	give	a	certain	teaching	to	humanity.
But	 just	 like	Krishnamurti	 became	 independent	 at	 the	 last	moment,	Hitler	 also
became	independent.	He	began	to	go	down.	This	is	the	miracle	of	war	history.	It
had	never	happened	before.	Hitler	would	not	take	the	advice	of	any	general.	He
would	move	or	attack,	but	no	advice	would	be	taken	from	any	general.	And	even
against	the	advice	of	all	his	trained	persons,	he	would	act	and	move	as	he	liked,
and	still	he	would	win.	There	were	absurd	moves,	nonsensical	moves.	No	one
who	knows	anything	about	war	would	have	taken	those	moves.	But	Hitler	would
take	them	and	he	won	for	three	years.
Everyone	who	was	around	him	knew	that	he	was	just	a	vehicle	of	some	greater
force.
This	was	not	explainable.	And	whenever	he	would	order,	he	would	not	be	in	his
conscious	mind.	This	is	a	new	fact	which	has	become	known	now.	Whenever	he
would	order,	he	would	just	be	ecstatic.	His	eyes	would	be	closed,	he	would	begin
to	 tremble,	 he	 would	 perspire,	 and	 then	 his	 voice	 would	 change	 completely.
Another	voice	would	order.
But	the	day	he	began	to	fall,	his	own	voice	began	to	order.	From	that	point,	from
that	moment,	 he	was	 never	 in	 ecstasy.	 Some	 contact	 which	was	working	was
lost.
Now	those	who	study	Adolf	Hitler	and	his	life	all	feel	that	the	phenomenon	was
not	merely	political.	The	person	himself	was	not	just	a	political	maniac,	not	just
a	mad	politician,	 because	whatsoever	he	did	was	 absolutely	nonpolitical	 --	 his
whole	approach.
And	those	who	had	remained	with	him	felt	that	he	was	a	split	personality.	In	his
ordinary	moments,	he	was	so	ordinary	that	you	could	not	conceive	of	it.	There
was	no	magic;	he	was	just	ordinary.	But	when	he	was	taken	over,	possessed,	he
was	quite	an	altogether	different	personality.
Who	was	 behind	 this?	 Some	 esoteric	 group	was	 behind	 this,	 and	 that	 esoteric
group	 was	 trying	 something.	When	 Hitler	 became	 independent,	 he	 lost	 every
power.	In	his	last	days,	he	was	just	ordinary.	After	this	particular	moment,	when
he	lost	contact,	whatsoever	he	did	went	against	him.	Before	this,	whatsoever	he
did	was	always	in	his	favor.
The	 same	 group	 I	 have	 been	 talking	 to	 you	 about,	 the	 nine	 of	 Ashoka,	 was
behind	it.
They	were	trying	to	capture	the	whole	world.	With	man,	it	is	always	a	possibility
that	 if	 you	 begin	 to	work	with	 some	 force	 from	 behind,	 you	 yourself	 are	 not
aware	 of	 it.	 If	 you	 succeed,	 then	 you	 are	 not	 aware	 that	 someone	 else	 is
succeeding.	 You	 succeeded,	 your	 ego	 is	 strengthened.	 And	 there	 comes	 a
moment	when	your	ego	is	so	strengthened	that	you	will	not	listen	to	any	force.
This	has	happened	so	many	times.
This	 esoteric	 group,	 as	 I	 said	 to	 you,	 functions	 primarily	 as	 a	 continuity
whenever	 there	 is	 any	 need.	 In	 many	 ways,	 they	 can	 help.	 It	 was	 not	 just	 a
coincidence	that	Japan	became	friendly	to	Germany.	It	was	because	of	this	group
of	nine	people.	This	is	the	hidden	fact.
The	esoteric	group	that	was	working	behind	Hitler	was	a	Buddhist	group,	so	a
Buddhist	country,	Japan,	could	be	influenced	to	side	with	Hitler.	And	the	whole
East	felt	exhilarated	when	Hitler	was	winning.	The	whole	East	was	with	Hitler
inwardly.	The	group	that	was	working	behind	him	was	an	Eastern	group.
Nothing	happens	accidentally,	everything	has	a	causal	link	behind	it.	Whenever	a
teacher	like	Buddha	happens,	the	primary	work	of	an	esoteric	group	is	to	help	by
becoming	a	mediator.	Another	work	of	 these	esoteric	groups	 is	 to	preserve	 the
knowledge	 once	 it	 is	 obtained.	Buddha	 obtained	 something	 supreme,	 but	who
will	preserve	it?	Preserving	in	books	is	no	preservation,	because	the	knowledge
is	so	living	and	books	are	so	dead.	Only	words	can	be	preserved,	not	knowledge.
Knowledge	 can	 be	 preserved	 only	 by	 living	 persons,	 not	 by	 books,	 because
books	will	have	to	be	interpreted	again,	and	who	will	interpret	them?	They	will
have	to	be	decoded	again,	and	who	will	decode	them?	And	if	someone	is	able	to
decode	them,	to	interpret	them	rightly,	then	that	person	can	give	you	the	message
without	the	books.	And	those	who	depend	on	books	will	not	be	able	to	interpret
it	rightly.
You	cannot	 read	any	book	which	you	have	not	known	 in	 some	way.	You	only
can	read
"yourself"	and	nothing	else.	So	if	you	are	reading	Buddha's	Dhammapada,	it	 is
not	Buddha's	Dhammapada	you	are	reading,	it	 is	your	Dhammapada.	Now	you
will	be	a	creator.	Now	your	depth	will	become	 the	depth	of	Buddha's	 sayings.
You	cannot	go	beyond	yourself;	you	cannot	have	any	glimpse	beyond	yourself.
So	whenever	knowledge	is	attained	--	subtle,	foundational,	ultimate	--	it	cannot
be	 preserved	 in	 books.	 Only	 ordinary	 knowledge	 can	 be	 preserved	 in	 books,
which	cannot	be	misinterpreted,	in	which	any	ordinary	school	training	can	train
you.	If	you	know	the	language,	you	can	know	it,	but	supreme	knowledge	cannot
be	 preserved	 in	 that	 way.	 It	 can	 be	 preserved	 only	 in	 living	 persons,	 hence,
esoteric	groups.	Then	 it	 is	being	 transferred	from	one	 living	person	 to	another.
And	 the	 transfer	 is	 not	 just	 like	 mechanical	 transfer.	 It	 is	 not	 mechanical,	 it
cannot	be.	It	is	just	like	an	art.
I	will	tell	you	a	story,...	a	very	esoteric	one....
There	is	a	Buddhist	story	of	a	master	 thief.	He	was	so	efficient,	such	a	master,
that	 he	 could	 not	 be	 caught.	 And	 whenever	 he	 broke	 into	 a	 house,	 he	 would
leave	behind	something	which	would	show	that	the	master	thief	had	entered.	His
art	became	so	famous	that	if	he	came	to	one	house,	then	others	would	be	jealous,
because	the	master	thief	only	goes	to	the	house	of	someone	who	is	worthy	of	his
skills.
Even	 the	 emperor	 of	 the	 country	 wanted	 to	 meet	 him.	 Everything	 would	 be
declared:	whenever	he	was	to	rob	someone,	there	would	be	a	rumor.	The	person
would	be	notified	somehow	that	the	master	thief	is	coming	soon:	"You	make	any
arrangements	 you	 would	 like	 to	 make,	 and	 then,	 on	 the	 particular	 day,	 the
particular	 moment,	 there	 will	 be	 a	 robbery"	 --	 and	 the	 thief	 would	 never	 be
caught.
Then	he	became	old	and	his	son	asked	his	father,	"Now	you	are	old,	and	I	do	not
know	even	the	ABC's	of	your	art.	So	let	me	be	trained."
The	father	said,	"It	is	very	difficult.	It	is	not	a	science,	it	is	not	a	technical	know-
how.	I	cannot	tell	you	unless	you	are	a	born	thief,	then	only	is	it	possible.	It	is	so
artistic,	it	is	a	creative	art.	I	have	lived	it.	This	has	not	been	an	evil	to	me,	but	my
spirit.	So	we	will	see."
One	night	he	asked	his	son	to	follow	him.	They	went	to	a	palace.	He	broke	the
wall.	His	 is	about	sixty-five	or	seventy,	but	 there	 is	no	 trembling	 in	his	hands.
And	the	son	is	young,	strong	but	he	perspires.	The	night	is	cold;	he	is	trembling.
His	father	said,	"Why	are	you	trembling?	Just	be	a	witness.	I	am	the	thief;	you	be
a	witness.	Why	are	you	trembling?"
But	 the	more	 he	 tries	 not	 to	 tremble,	 the	more	 he	 trembles.	And	 his	 father	 is
working	just	as	if	he	is	in	his	own	house.
Then	they	went	in.	He	opened	a	lock	and	asked	his	son	to	go	in.	He	went	in,	and
the	father	locked	the	door	behind	him.	The	father	then	made	such	noises	that	the
whole	house	was	awakened.	Then	he	ran	away,	and	the	son	was	locked	in.	The
whole	 house	 was	 searching	 for	 the	 thief.	 You	 can	 understand	 what	 was
happening	to	that	boy.
The	father	went	 to	his	house.	The	night	was	cold.	He	 just	went	 to	his	bed	and
relaxed.
After	two	hours,	the	son	came	running.	He	pulled	at	his	father's	blanket	and	said,
"You	nearly	killed	me.	Is	this	the	way	to	train	me?"
The	father	looked	at	him	and	said,	"Okay,	you	are	back.	Good!	Then	do	not	tell
me	 the	 story,	 it	 is	 irrelevant.	Do	 not	 go	 into	 the	 details.	You	 are	 back;	 that	 is
good.	 The	 art	 has	 been	 transferred.	 Do	 not	 tell	 me	 how	 you	 came	 here.	 It	 is
enough	that	you	are	back.	The	art	has	been	transferred."
The	son	is	uneasy	about	talking	but	says,	"Let	me	tell	you	first	that	you	nearly
killed	me.
How	cruel	you	are	to	your	only	son!"
The	father	said,	"Tell	me	what	happened,	not	what	you	did.	What	happened	after
I	locked	the	door?"
The	son	said,	"I	just	became	another	person.	Death	was	so	near!	I	never	before
felt	 such	 energy	 as	 that	which	 came	 to	me.	 Everything	was	 at	 stake	 --	 life	 or
death.	 I	 became	 so	 acutely	 aware.	 I	 was	 never	 so	 aware,	 I	 just	 became
awareness,	because	each	moment	was	precious.	This	way	or	that,	everything	was
to	 be	 finished.	Then	 some	maid	 passed	 through	my	door	with	 a	 candle	 in	 her
hand	--	and	you	asked	rightly,	`WHAT	happened?'
because	 I	 cannot	 say	 that	 I	did	 it.	Somehow	I	made	noises	as	 if	 some	cat	was
inside.	So	she	unlocked	and	opened	 the	door,	and	with	her	candle	 looked	 in.	 I
cannot	say	I	did	anything.	It	happened.
"I	just	blew	out	her	candle,	pushed	her	and	ran.	I	just	began	to	run	with	such	a
force	that	I	cannot	say	I	was	running.	The	running	happened	--	I	was	not.	I	was
completely	not.
There	was	just	a	force	moving.	They	followed	me,	and	I	passed	a	deep	well.	It
happened.
I	 cannot	 say	 that	 I	 did	 it,	 but	 I	 took	a	 stone	and	 threw	 it	 in	 the	well.	They	all
surrounded	the	well,	they	thought	that	the	thief	had	fallen	in.	So	I	am	here	now."
But	the	father	was	fast	asleep.	He	had	not	even	heard	the	story.	In	the	morning,
he	said,
"Details	 are	 irrelevant.	 Art	 cannot	 be	 told,	 only	 shown	 with	 living	 examples,
with	constant	communion."
The	supreme	knowledge	can	be	transferred	and	preserved.	And	sometimes	these
esoteric	groups	have	preserved	knowledge	 for	centuries	 for	a	particular	person
who	was	being	awaited,	so	that	this	knowledge	could	be	transferred	to	him.
For	example,	Mahavira	had	fifty	thousand	monks.	All	could	not	be	enlightened
in	his	time,	so	many	remained	somewhere	on	the	path.	Mahavira	was	not	to	be
again	in	this	world,	so	those	who	are	somewhere	on	this	path	must	be	supplied
further	knowledge.
Who	will	supply	it?	Mahavira	will	not	be	here.
Scriptures	 cannot	 be	 relied	 upon	 because	 they	 are	 absurd.	 Some	 persons	 will
have	to	interpret	them,	but	they	cannot	interpret	beyond	their	understanding,	so
this	 is	meaningless.	 There	must	 be	 a	 group	which	 preserves	 keys	 that	 can	 be
handed	 to	 persons	 in	 a	 particular	 state	 of	mind;	 otherwise	 they	will	 be	 lost	 or
they	 will	 have	 to	 struggle	 unnecessarily,	 meaninglessly,	 or	 they	 will	 have	 to
change	teachers.
Whenever	someone	changes	a	teacher,	he	has	to	begin	anew,	because	nothing	of
the	old	system	can	be	used	in	the	new.	Nothing	of	this	path	can	be	used	on	that
path	 --	 every	 path	 has	 its	 own	 organic	 unity.	 So	 that	 which	 is	 meaningful	 in
Mohammed's	 path	 is	 not	 meaningful	 in	 Mahavira's	 path,	 that	 which	 is
meaningful	 in	 Buddha's	 path	 is	 not	 meaningful	 in	 Jesus'	 path.	 So	 if	 someone
comes	from	the	Buddhist	path	to	Jesus'	path,	he	will	have	to	begin	anew.	All	the
efforts	to	past	lives	will	be	thrown.	That	is	not	good;	that	is	a	sheer	waste.
So	when	the	teacher	 is	not,	 these	esoteric	groups	preserve	knowledge,	and	that
knowledge	 begins	 to	 work	 as	 a	 teacher.	 But	 that	 knowledge	 can	 only	 be
preserved	by	living	persons.	Of	these	nine	persons	of	Ashoka's	circle,	each	one
is	adept	in	a	particular	key.	Individually,	they	do	not	have	all	the	keys.	Each	one
is	a	 specialist	 in	a	particular	key.	And	 the	group	was	 formerly	of	nine	persons
because	 Buddha	 had	 talked	 about	 nine	 doors,	 nine	 keys,	 nine	 kinds	 of
knowledge.
So	 each	 person	 is	 an	 adept	 only	 in	 one	 key.	 He	 knows	 only	 about	 one	 door.
Those	who	want	to	enter	from	that	door,	they	can	be	helped	by	him.	Buddha	can
know	about	nine.
But	these	nine	cannot	each	know	about	all	nine,	to	know	one	key	of	one	door	is
enough.
You	need	not	enter	from	nine	doors.	One	door	will	do;	you	will	be	in.
These	 nine	 adepts	 have	 one	 key	 each.	 Each	 one	 knows	 everything	 about	 one
door,	one	meditative	path.	And	whenever	a	meed	is	there,	that	one	will	help.	The
help	may	be	direct,	the	help	may	be	indirect,	but	he	will	help	you.	Whenever	a
new	 buddha	 is	 coming	 or	 a	 new	 enlightened	 one	 is	 coming,	 this	 group	 will
prepare	the	ground.	They	will	prepare	people	to	listen	to	him,	understand	him.	If
there	is	no	such	ground,	then	every	teacher	will	be	crucified	--	crucified	because
there	will	be	no	group	to	help	make	the	people	understand	him.
There	 are	 other	 works	 also	 with	 esoteric	 groups.	 Sometimes	 it	 happens	 that
humanity	forgets	that	which	it	had	previously	known.	Somewhere,	THE	BOOK
OF	 THE	 DEAD,	 the	 Egyptian	 book,	 says,	 "Ignorance	 is	 nothing	 but
forgetfulness."	Something	which	was	known	has	been	forgotten.	Nothing	is	new,
just	something	has	been	forgotten.	When	you	come	to	know	it	again,	it	appears
new.	Many	keys	are	lost,	many	times	--	sometimes	because	there	are	no	esoteric
groups	to	preserve	them.
Sometimes	 the	 group	 is	 there,	 but	 nobody	 is	 ready	 to	 be	 initiated	 in	 the
knowledge.	 Then	 the	 esoteric	 group	 cannot	 do	 anything	 other	 than	 preserve.
Sometimes	preservation	also	becomes	impossible,	because	this	is	not	so	easy.	If
one	person	dies	out	of	a	group	of	nine,	it	is	not	easy	to	replace	him,	because	the
replacement	 is	 not	 by	 any	 election.	 It	 is	 not	 democratic.	 Knowledge	 cannot
depend	on	democracy,	only	ignorance	can.
Knowledge	 is	 always	autocratic	 --	 always.	You	cannot	decide	by	election	who
will	be	the	head	of	the	atomic	commission.	And	when	you	decide	that	way,	then
you	decide	for	your	suicide.
Knowledge	is	always	autocratic.	It	is	never	from	below,	it	is	always	from	above.
See	this	distinction	clearly.	And	anything	that	comes	from	below	is	bound	to	be
ignorance.	So	politics	is	ignorance	par	excellence.	It	comes	from	below.	The	one
who	is	the	lowest	chooses	the	one	who	is	the	highest.	And	what	is	meant	by	the
highest?	The	 lowest	decides	 the	highest,	so	 the	highest	must	be	 lower	 than	 the
lowest.	So	in	a	democracy,	leaders	are	nothing	but	followers	of	their	followers,
and	knowledge	cannot	depend	on	this.	Knowledge	is	always	given	from	above
and	is,	therefore,	autocratic.
Esoteric	 groups	maintain	 keys,	 preserve	 knowledge.	But	 the	moment	 someone
becomes	capable	of	being	given	a	particular	system	of	knowledge,	a	particular
secret,	then	that	key	is	delivered.	Until	someone	is	ready,	the	group	has	to	wait;
it	 has	 to	wait	 for	 centuries	 even.	And	 it	 is	very	difficult	 to	 replace	one	person
from	them.	It	cannot	be	decided	by	the	others.	The	eight	have	to	find	a	person
who	is	capable,	and	even	a	capable	person	has	to	be	trained	before	he	enters	the
group.	 Sometimes	 the	 group	 works	 on	 a	 person	 for	 many	 lives,	 and	 then	 the
person	becomes	capable	of	replacing	a	member.	And	if	no	one	is	found,	that	key
is	lost,	and	that	key	cannot	be	found	again	by	this	esoteric	group.	It	can	be	found
again	 only	 when	 a	 person	 like	 Buddha	 happens.	 The	 esoteric	 group	 can	 only
preserve,	communicate.	It	cannot	discover,	discovery	is	not	within	their	capacity.
So	many	keys	are	lost.	Many	groups	have	worked,	and	many	are	still	working.
The	 Rosicrucians	 have	 been	 a	 parallel	 group	 in	 the	 West.	 It	 has	 worked	 for
centuries.	 Really,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 Christian	 group,	 it	 is	 more	 ancient	 than	 the
Christians.	Rosicrucians	are	of	the	esoteric	group	of	the	Rosy	Cross.	The	cross	is
not	just	the	Christian	symbol,	but	older	than	Christ.
Christ	 himself	 was	 initiated	 by	 an	 esoteric	 group	 known	 as	 Essenes.	 All	 the
Christians	 holy	 days	 --	 for	 example,	 Easter	 or	December	 25	 --	 are	 older	 than
Christ.	Christianity	only	absorbed	the	old	tradition.	Jesus	himself	belonged	to	an
esoteric	group	that	conveyed	to	him	many	things	which	he	tried	to	convey	to	the
masses.
For	Jesus	also	they	also	tried	to	prepare	a	ground,	but	it	could	not	be	made	ready.
It	 could	not	 function	well.	But	we	all	 know	 that	 John	 the	Baptist	 came	before
Jesus.	At	 the	River	 Jordan,	he	continued	 for	 thirty	 to	 forty	years	 just	with	one
teaching:	that	"I	am	the	forerunner.	The	real	one	is	still	to	come.	I	have	come	just
to	prepare	the	ground,	and	when	he	comes,	I	will	disappear."
He	baptized	people	 in	 the	Jordan	River,	 remaining	on	 the	bank	for	forty	years.
He	was	just	baptizing	everyone,	and	initiating	everyone	for	the	real	one	who	was
to	follow.
Everyone	 was	 asking,	 "Who	 is	 to	 come?"	 The	 whole	 country	 was	 provoked
about	 "the	 one	who	 is	 to	 come."	 The	 name	was	 not	 known	 even	 to	 John	 the
Baptist.	He	had	to	wait	also.	He	belonged	to	the	Essenes.	Christ	had	been	one	of
the	important	initiated	members	of	the	Essenes	group	in	his	past	life.	Then	Jesus
came	to	be	baptized	by	John	the	Baptist,	and	the	day	Jesus	was	baptized,	John
the	 Baptist	 disappeared	 forever.	 He	 baptized	 Jesus	 in	 the	 Jordan	 River	 and
shortly	after	was	never	seen	again.
This	happening	became	news	for	 the	country,	 that	 the	new	real	one	had	come,
because	for	forty	years	continuously	he	was	saying,	"When	the	real	one	comes	I
will	baptize	him	as	the	last	one,	and	then	I	will	just	disappear."	John	the	Baptist
disappeared.	 Baptism	 is	 pre-Christian.	 Before	 Christ	 baptism	 was	 there,	 then
Christianity	began.
John	 the	 Baptist	 belonged	 to	 one	 esoteric	 group	 --	 the	 Essenes.	 There	 are	 so
many	groups,	but	always	 the	difficulty	comes	 that	 someone	 is	no	 longer	 there,
and	no	one	can	replace	him.	Then	there	is	a	missing	link.	In	every	teaching	that
missing	link	appears,	and	when	a	missing	link	appears	you	cannot	be	helped	by
the	 group	 because	 those	 gaps	 cannot	 be	 filled.	 There	 are	 gaps	 in	 Christianity
now,	many	 gaps.	 There	 are	 gaps	 in	 every	 teaching.	 If	 one	 part	 is	 lost,	 then	 it
cannot	 be	 replaced	 unless	 a	 person	 like	 Jesus	 happens	 again.	 That	 is	 not
predictable,	 that	 cannot	 be	 arranged,	 that	 cannot	 be	 planned.	 But	 a	 group	 of
initiated	seekers	can	be	planned	and	created,	who	can	be	used	whenever	there	is
someone	who	is	capable	of	using	them.
These	 esoteric	 groups	 are	 not	 concerned	 with	 this	 earth	 alone.	 Now	 even
scientists	agree	that	at	least	fifty	thousand	planets	other	that	this	earth	must	have
life.	More	 is	possible,	but	 less	 is	not	possible.	 In	such	a	great	universe,	by	 the
ordinary	 laws	of	probability,	at	 least	 fifty	 thousand	planets	must	have	 life.	The
esoteric	group	has	another	task	to	do,	to	link	the	knowledge	of	one	planet	to	that
of	another.	That	is	a	little	more	difficult,	because	we	have	not	known	everything.
We	 may	 be	 missing	 something	 which	 was	 known.	 We	 may	 be	 knowing
something	 partially.	On	 another	 planet,	 there	may	 be	 a	 greater	 knowledge;	 on
another	planet,	there	may	now	be	another	Buddha.	The	esoteric	group	works	as
an	inner	link	between	different	systems	of	knowledge	that	exist	anywhere	in	the
universe.	 So	missing	 links	 can	 be	 supplied	 from	 other	 planets	 also.	 Really,	 it
always	happens	so.
Whenever	something	is	missing	and	we	cannot	call	upon	a	person	on	this	earth
to	 appear	 and	 discover	 it,	 then	 the	 knowledge	 can	 be	 supplied	 from	 another
planet,	 if	 it	 exists	 somewhere,	 and	 it	 always	 exists	 somewhere.	 The	 esoteric
group	can	be	in	contact	with	everything	that	exists	 in	 the	whole	universe.	This
work	 is	as	valuable	as	 someone	 from	a	university	going	 to	a	primitive	village.
The	primitive	village	does	not	know	anything,	 the	university	man	knows.	This
man	can	train	the	primitive	to	receive	the	knowledge.	Then	he	can	deliver	it,	and
he	 can	 always	 be	 in	 contact	 with	 his	 source	 of	 knowledge.	 This	 is	 just	 an
analogy.
Many	times	this	planet	has	been	visited	by	other	planetary	beings.	They	have	left
so	many	landmarks.	Sometimes	they	have	left	many	keys	of	knowledge	on	this
planet	with	 some	group.	Those	groups	have	been	at	work.	Esoteric	groups	are
interplanetary,	 but	 there	 is	 something	 missing,	 so	 it	 cannot	 be	 understood	 by
description.
Each	age	has	 to	devise	 its	own	methods,	no	old	method	can	be	helpful	 to	you.
You	have	changed,	your	mind	has	changed.	The	key	fit	the	old	lock	but	the	lock
has	changed.
Esoteric	groups	can	only	be	the	preservers	of	keys,	not	of	 locks,	because	locks
are	with	 you.	You	 understand	 it?	Locks	 are	with	 you	 --	 not	with	Buddha,	 not
with	Jesus.	They	have	keys.	They	devise	keys,	keys	that	open	many	locks.	These
keys	 can	 be	 preserved	 by	 esoteric	 groups,	 but	 in	 the	 meantime	 the	 locks	 are
changing.
You	are	not	the	same	lock	which	Buddha	opened.	The	same	key	exactly	as	it	is
will	not	do.	If	the	same	key	can	do	as	it	is,	then	any	ignorant	person	can	use	it.
Then	no	wisdom	is	needed,	anybody	can	use	it.	I	can	just	give	you	the	key,	and
you	go	and	open	the	lock;	you	need	no	wisdom.	This	much	is	enough:	that	this	is
the	key	and	that	 is	 the	 lock.	But	as	 the	 locks	are	changing	constantly,	 the	keys
must	be	given	to	a	group	who	is	wise	--	 to	devise	new	keys	 that	are	always	 in
tune	with	the	locks.
The	 locks	will	 go	 on	 changing.	They	will	 never	 be	 the	 same.	So	 not	 only	 are
dead	keys	to	be	preserved,	but	also	the	science	for	changing	these	keys	whenever
there	is	any	change	in	the	lock.	That	is	preserved	in	esoteric	groups.	You	cannot
preserve	 it	 in	 books	 because	 the	 locks	 are	 not	 known.	They	will	 change,	 they
will	 go	 on	 changing.	No	 book	 can	write	 about	 all	 these	 possibilities	 of	 locks,
about	 all	 the	 combinations	 of	 locks.	They	will	 go	 on	 changing.	The	 condition
changes,	 education	 changes,	 culture	 changes,	 everything	 changes,	 so	 the	 locks
become	different.	Howsoever	the	key	is	preserved,	it	will	always	be	faulty	in	a
way.	It	will	not	suit	the	lock.	So	the	key	must	be	handed	over	to	a	living	group	of
wise	ones	who	can	always	change	 the	key	also.	That	 is	 the	difference	between
esoteric	knowledge	and	exoteric	tradition.
Exoteric	 tradition	 always	 carried	 the	 key	without	 any	 reference	 to	 the	 lock.	 It
continues	to	talk	about	the	old	key;	it	never	notices	that	no	lock	is	being	opened
by	it.	But	the	exoteric	tradition	consists	of	ordinary	people	such	as	members	of
the	Christian	church.	The	church	carries	the	key.	They	know	that	this	is	the	key
which	opened	many	doors	in	Jesus'	time.
Their	 knowledge	 is	 right;	 their	 information	 is	 correct;	 of	 course	 this	 key	 has
opened	many	locks.	They	carry	the	key,	they	worship	the	key,	but	now	it	opens
no	lock.	They	cannot	devise	other	keys,	they	have	no	time	to	devise	keys;	they
have	only	one	key.	They	go	on	worshipping	it,	and	if	it	cannot	open	a	lock,	then
the	 lock	 is	 responsible.	Then	 the	 lock	must	be	faulty,	 then	something	 is	wrong
with	the	lock,	not	with	the	key.
The	exoteric	tradition	is	always	condemning	the	lock	and	worshipping	the	key.
The	 esoteric	 group	 never	 condemns	 the	 lock,	 it	 always	 changes	 the	 key.	 The
Vatican	carries	the	key.	They	have	the	key,	and	they	go	on	worshipping	it.	But
Christianity	also	has	 inner	esoteric	groups.	And	this	always	happens	--	 that	 the
esoteric	 group	 will	 be	 in	 conflict	 with	 the	 exoteric,	 because	 the	 exoteric	 will
insist	 that	 this	key	must	do.	This	key	 is	not	 for	you,	you	are	 for	 this	key.	You
must	behave	in	such	a	way	that	 this	key	can	open	the	lock.	The	key	cannot	be
changed;	you	must	change.	But	if	someone	says,	"We	can	change	the	key,"
he	becomes	an	infidel,	he	becomes	a	heretic.	Then	he	must	be	killed	because	of
the	nonsense	he	is	speaking:	"He	changed	the	key	--	the	key	that	Jesus	gave	us,
Buddha	gave	us,	Mahavira	gave	us.	This	key	cannot	be	changed!"
So	always,	whenever	 there	 is	a	 teacher,	a	 real	authentic	 teacher	who	discovers
something,	there	are	two	currents	from	him:	one	becomes	exoteric	--	the	visible
church	with	 the	pope,	 the	shankaracharya,	 the	orthodox.	They	always	 insist	on
the	same	key.	They	never	think	that	a	key	means	nothing	if	 it	cannot	open	any
lock.	But	then	it	is	not	a	key	at	all:	a	key	only	means	that	which	opens.
If	it	is	not	opening	any	lock,	then	it	is	just	fallacious	to	call	it	a	key.	It	is	just	a
linguistic	fallacy.	It	is	not	a	key	at	all,	it	only	becomes	a	key	when	a	lock	opens.
When	 you	 are	 putting	 something	 in	 your	 pocket,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 key,	 it	 is	 only	 a
possible	key.	When	 it	opens	 the	 lock,	 it	 becomes	 the	actual	key.	 If	 it	 does	not
open	any	lock	it	even	loses	the	possibility.
The	 visible	 churches	 are	 always	 obsessed	 with	 the	 key,	 because	 the	 key	 was
given	by	an	authentic	teacher.	But	every	authentic	teacher	also	creates	an	inner
circle.	That	 inner	circle	has	 the	key	and	 the	knowledge	of	how	 to	change	 it	 in
certain	circumstances.	This	inner	circle	will	always	be	in	conflict	with	the	outer,
because	 the	outer	will	 think	 that	you	are	 inferior	and	are	changing	 the	key	 the
master	gave	us:	"Who	are	you?	How	can	you	change	it?"	For	example,	in	Islam
some	 Sufis	 had	 esoteric	 knowledge,	 but	 the	 Mohammedans	 killed	 them.
Mansoor	was	killed	because	he	was	talking	about	many	changes	in	the	key.
The	esoteric	group	 is	 always	 interested	 in	 the	 lock,	not	obsessed	with	 the	key.
The	exoteric	group	is	obsessed	with	the	key,	but	not	interested	in	the	lock	at	all.
If	it	opens,	it	is	good;	if	it	does	not	open,	you	are	responsible.	The	key	is	never
responsible.
The	 Mohammedans	 have	 many	 Sufi	 orders,	 inner	 circles,	 inner	 groups.
Mohammedans	thought	that	they	had	worked	in	a	very	rebellious	way,	so	many
Sufis	were	killed.	Then,	ultimately,	they	had	to	disappear,	so	now	there	are	Sufis,
but	you	cannot	know	them.
Someone	may	be	just	a	sweeper;	you	will	never	even	be	able	to	detect	that	this
man	may	be	a	Sufi.	Unless	someone	introduces	you,	you	will	never	be	aware.	He
may	 be	 coming	 to	 your	 house	 daily,	 still	 you	will	 never	 be	 aware	 that	 this	 is
someone	who	has	some	key.
He	may	 just	 be	 a	 shoemaker.	 He	 will	 continue	 shoemaking,	 and	 you	may	 be
thinking	 that	 those	 who	 are	 sitting	 there	 are	 just	 being	 trained	 in	 the	 art	 of
shoemaking.	There	are	some	customers,	but,	in	fact,	there	may	be	some	disciples
among	 them	 who	 are	 not	 just	 being	 trained	 in	 shoemaking.	 This	 shoemaking
business	is	just	a	facade.	Inside,	something	else	is	going	on.
Sufis	had	to	disappear	completely	because	the	outer	tradition	would	not	tolerate
them.
They	would	just	be	killed,	"because	if	these	inner	ones	continue,	then	there	is	no
future	for	the	outward	tradition;	it	becomes	absolutely	meaningless."
Only	he	is	a	teacher	who	has	discovered	himself,	who	has	devised	a	key	himself,
who	 has	 known	 the	 source	 of	 knowledge	 himself,	 who	 has	 encountered	 the
reality	 himself.	 Then	 always	 there	 are	 two	 schools.	 Sometimes	 some	 teachers
never	 allowed	 any	 exoteric	 groups.	 In	 Buddha's	 time,	 there	 were	 seven	 other
teachers	of	the	same	rank	as	Buddha.
You	may	not	even	have	heard	their	names.	Only	one	name	is	known	--	Mahavira.
The	 other	 six	 are	 completely	 unknown.	 They	 also	 had	 keys	 --	 knowledge,	 as
much	as	Buddha	and	Mahavira	--	but	they	never	allowed	any	exoteric	group	to
be	formed	around	them.
Only	the	inner	circle	continued	in	some	way,	somewhere.
One	man	was	 Prabuddha	Katyayan,	 another	was	 Purna	Kashyap,	 another	Ajit
Keshkambal,	who	were	of	 the	same	 level,	of	 the	same	rank,	of	 the	same	 inner
realization	 as	 Buddha	 and	 Mahavira.	 Their	 names	 are	 known	 only	 because
Buddha	has	mentioned	them,	that	is	all.	No	scripture	is	found,	no	following,	no
temple,	no	church,	but	still	they	continue	in	a	very	hidden	and	subtle	way.	And
no	 one	 can	 say	 they	 have	 not	 helped	 many;	 they	 have	 helped.	 They	 are	 not
known	to	many,	but	they	have	helped	as	many	as	any	buddha.
Buddha's	name	is	known;	 the	whole	world	knows	about	him.	But	 the	more	we
know	 about	 him,	 the	 less	 we	 can	 use	 him.	He	 also	 has	 inner	 circles	 running.
Only	 these	 are	 meaningful.	 But	 they	 always	 came	 in	 conflict	 with	 the	 outer
religious	 order.	And	 the	 outer	 order	 is	 always	 a	 force,	 because	 the	masses	 are
with	it.	There	is	always	a	conflict.
Buddha	created	a	very	chosen	circle.	He	created	his	circle	with	a	person	by	the
name	 of	 Mahakashyapa.	 This	 name	 is	 only	 mentioned	 once.	 Sariputra	 and
Modgalayan	 were	 his	 chief	 disciples	 of	 the	 exoteric	 order;	 their	 names	 are
known	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 they	 have	 shrines.	 But	 the	 real	 authentic	 key	 was
given	to	Mahakashyapa	--	not	to	Sariputra,	not	to	Modgalayan.	But	his	name	is
mentioned	only	once,	only	once	in	the	whole	Buddhist	scripture.
I	will	narrate	the	incident....
Buddha	came	one	day	with	a	flower	in	his	hand.	He	was	going	to	give	a	sermon.
But	 no	 sermon	was	 given,	 he	 just	 sat	 silently	 looking	 at	 the	 flower.	Everyone
wondered	 what	 he	 was	 doing.	 It	 continued	 for	 ten	 minutes,	 twenty,	 thirty
minutes...	Then	everyone	became	uneasy.	No	one	was	able	to	say	what	he	was
doing.	They	all	had	gathered	--	at	least	ten	thousand	people	--	to	hear	him	speak.
And	he	was	just	sitting,	only	looking	at	the	flower.
Mahakashyapa	laughed.	Buddha	looked	and	said,	"Mahakashyapa,	come	to	me."
He	gave	the	flower	to	Mahakashyapa	and	said,	"All	that	could	be	said	I	have	said
to	all,	and	all	that	could	not	be	said	I	have	given	to	Mahakashyap."	Never	before
or	 after	 is	Mahakashyapa	mentioned	 --	 neither	who	 he	was	 nor	where	 he	was
born.
Why	is	the	whole	scripture	so	silent	about	him?	--	such	an	important	person	to
whom	 Buddha	 says,	 "I	 gave	 to	 Mahakashyapa	 all	 that	 cannot	 be	 said."	 Of
course,	 the	 essential	 this	 is	 "that	which	 cannot	be	 said."	Only	 the	nonessential
can	be	said,	only	the	superficial	can	be	said,	only	the	utilitarian	can	be	said.	The
most	 significant	 transfer	 of	 knowledge	 is	 possible	 in	 silence	 only.	 But	 never
again	is	his	name	mentioned,	and	then	for	centuries	no	one	knew	what	happened
to	 Mahakashyapa.	 But	 then	 after	 eleven	 hundred	 years,	 a	 person	 declared	 in
China,	"I	am	in	direct	contact,	in	the	direct	chain	of	Mahakashyapa."
After	 eleven	 hundred	 years,	 someone	 declared	 in	 China,	 "I	 belong	 to
Mahakashyapa.	 I	 am	 his	 disciple."	 He	was	 Bodhidharma.	No	 Indian	 scripture
mentions	Bodhidharma.	He	was	born	 in	 India,	 lived	 three	fourths	of	his	 life	 in
India.	No	one	knows	about	him	--
where	he	was	or	what	he	was	doing.	Suddenly,	he	appears	in	China	and	says,	"I
belong	to	Mahakashyap,	the	man	to	whom	Buddha	gave	the	flower.	And	I	have
the	flower	with	me,	still	fresh."
Of	course,	he	 is	 talking	about	 something	which	can	never	be	other	 than	 fresh.
Someone	 asks,	 "Where	 is	 that	 flower?"	 Bodhidharma	 says,	 "He	 is	 standing
before	you	--	I	am	that	flower.	This	flower	Buddha	transferred	to	Mahakashyapa,
and	I	have	come	to	seek	the	right	person,	because	now	I	am	going	to	die.	This	is
my	 last	 birth,	 so	 I	 have	 traveled	 from	 India	 to	China	with	 certain	 information
that	 someone	 is	 here	 to	 whom	 the	 flower	 can	 be	 delivered.	 So	 I	 have	 come
seeking	him.	But	 the	 same	source	of	 information	has	 informed	me	 that	 I	must
not	go	to	him,	he	must	come	to	me.	So	I	will	just	wait."
What	 does	 he	 mean	 by	 this	 "source	 of	 information"?	 Esoteric	 groups	 go	 on
informing	 the	 persons	 who	 need	 to	 be	 informed.	 Bodhidharma	 said,	 "But	 the
same	source	has	 informed	me	 that	 I	must	not	 seek	him,"	because	sometimes	a
direct	seeking	becomes	interference.
If	 I	 come	 to	 your	 house,	 it	will	 be	 one	 thing,	 if	 you	 come	 to	me,	 it	 is	 quite	 a
different	affair.	If	I	come	to	your	house,	you	will	be	closed	to	me;	if	you	come	to
me,	you	will	be	open.	You	have	come.
Bodhidharma	said,	"The	same	source	of	information	has	said	to	me	that	I	must
wait,	and	the	same	source	has	given	me	a	particular	indication	how	it	should	be
known	who	the	person	is	to	whom	the	flower	is	transferable."	So	he	sat	for	nine
years	without	facing	anyone,	 just	facing	the	wall.	Many	people	would	come	to
him.	Even	the	emperor	of	China,	Wu,	came	to	meet	him,	but	he	did	not	turn	his
face.	He	was	just	facing	the	wall.
Wu's	courtier	tried	to	persuade	him	that	the	emperor	was	coming	and	it	is	very
unworthy,	 very	 unmannerly,	 to	 sit	 before	 the	 emperor	 facing	 the	 wall.
Bodhidharma	said,	"I	am	not	going	to	the	emperor,	the	emperor	is	coming	to	me.
He	can	choose	to	come	to	the	unmannerly	Bodhidharma	or	not.	He	is	free.	I	am
not	coming	to	him."
The	 emperor	heard	 that	Bodhidharma	had	 said,	 "I	 am	not	going	 to	him.	He	 is
coming	to	me,	so	he	must	choose.	If	he	wants	to	come,	he	must	come	to	me	as	I
am."	Wu	came.	He	had	to	come;	it	became	obsessive.	He	could	not	check	if	the
man	was	worth	visiting;	he	came.	Bodhidharma	was	sitting	facing	the	wall.	Wu
asked	him,	"Why	are	you	facing	the	wall?	Why	do	you	not	look	at	me?	Why	do
you	not	look	at	others?"
Bodhidharma	 said,	 "For	my	whole	 life	 I	was	 facing	you	 and	 all	 others,	 but	 in
their	 eyes	 I	 never	 say	 anything	 other	 than	 a	 dead	wall,	 so	 I	 decided	 that	 it	 is
better	to	face	the	wall.
One	 is	 at	 ease,	 as	 one	 knows	 that	 there	 is	 a	 wall.	When	 facing	 someone	 and
feeling	the	wall	there,	it	becomes	more	difficult.	I	can	talk	with	you	more	easily
because	you	are	behind	and	I	am	not	looking	at	you."
For	 nine	 years	 continuously	 he	was	 facing	 the	wall	 just	 like	 this.	 The	 person
came	for	whom	he	had	certain	information.	The	person,	Hui	Neng,	came.	He	cut
off	 his	 hand,	 gave	 it	 to	Bodhidharma	 and	 said,	 "Make	 a	 complete	 about-turn;
otherwise	I	will	cut	my	head."
And	Bodhidharma	took	a	complete	turn,	faced	Hui	Neng	and	said,	"I	deliver	you
the	 flower.	 I	was	waiting.	A	certain	 source	of	knowledge	gave	me	 the	 signs	 --
`the	person	will	come,	will	cut	his	hand,	will	put	 it	 in	front	of	you,	and	 if	you
delay	a	second	he	will	cut	his	head.'	Do	not	be	in	a	hurry.	I	am	ready	to	give	you
the	things	for	which	I	have	traveled	from	India	to	China."
That	secret	cult	has	flowered	now	into	the	exoteric	cult	of	Zen.	Zen	Buddhism	is
just	 an	 exoteric	 cult	 around	 this	 esoteric	 Bodhidharma	 tradition.	 Now,
whatsoever	Suzuki	is	talking	or	others	are	talking	around	the	world,	is	from	the
exoteric	knowledge,	not	from	the	esoteric.	Now	that	has	become	hidden	again;	it
has	again	disappeared.	But	the	current	is	there,	it	continues	so	that	is	why	there
are	esoteric	circles;	they	exist	for	so	many	reasons.
You	 ask	 me	 how	 am	 I	 connected	 with	 any	 esoteric	 group.	 If	 you	 can	 be	 in
contact	with	one,	you	can	be	in	contact	with	all.	It	is	just	a	matter	of	tuning.	If
your	radio	can	work	with	one	station,	 there	 is	no	difficulty	 in	 its	working	with
another.	If	 the	mechanism	is	working	rightly,	you	can	catch	any	station	around
the	world.	If	you	can	be	in	contact	with	one	esoteric	group,	you	can	be	in	contact
with	all.	You	may	not	like	to	be	in	contact,	you	may	like	it,	but	once	you	know
the	 tuning	 you	 can	 be	 in	 contact.	 And	many	 times	 you	 come	 across	 a	 secret
school,	but	you	lose	the	opportunity,	you	lose	the	track.
Whatsoever	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 in	many	ways	 esoteric.	 That	 is	why	many	 times	 I
become	very	 confusing	 to	 you.	Any	 exoteric	 teaching	 is	 never	 confusing,	 it	 is
clearcut.	It	is	just	like	two	plus	two	equals	four,	it	is	always	a	simple	thing.	But
the	 esoteric,	 the	 inner,	 the	 secret,	 is	 difficult	 to	 understand,	 because	 your
understanding	 becomes	 disturbed	 with	 any	 new	 knowledge	 which	 has	 to	 be
absorbed.
Any	knowledge	 that	you	know,	you	can	absorb	easily.	 It	can	become	a	part	of
you;	 you	 can	 easily	digest	 it.	Anything	which	 is	 new	 to	you	 is	 hard	 to	digest.
And	no	esoteric	knowledge	can	be	delivered	in	mathematical	terms.	It	has	to	be
delivered	mystically,	it	has	to	be	delivered	poetically.	Then	it	becomes	living.	It
means	many	things	simultaneously.
I	have	been	in	contact	with	many	esoteric	groups.	I	have	known	many	persons
who	are	still	alive	who	belong	to	some	group.	I	have	known	many	keys	which
were	delivered	by	authentic	teachers.	But	no	key	of	the	old	tradition	is	enough,
so	I	am	devising	new	keys.
Because	I	am	devising	new	keys,	I	am	not	directly	concerned	with	any	esoteric
group,	as	each	esoteric	group	 is	 interested	 in	and	 is	entrusted	with	a	particular
key	 to	 preserve.	 I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 a	 particular	 key.	 I	 am	 interested	 in
devising	new	methods,	new	techniques,	new	keys,	because	all	the	old	keys	have
become	in	many	ways	irrelevant.
One	 thing	has	 to	be	understood,	 that	all	 these	keys	were	developed	 in	a	world
which	was	 local,	 always	 local.	 For	 the	 first	 time,	we	 are	 in	 a	world	which	 is
absolutely	 non-local,	 universal.	 Really,	 for	 the	 first	 time	 we	 are	 in	 a	 world.
Before,	we	were	always	confined	to	a	particular	part	of	the	world.	All	those	keys
were	 developed	 for	 particular	 local	 conditions	 and	 cultures.	Now,	 for	 the	 first
time,	the	world	is,	in	a	way,	a	mixed-up	mess.
There	is	no	particular	culture,	 there	is	no	particular	conditioning.	Everything	is
mixed	up.
And	soon	this	is	going	to	be	more	and	more	the	case.	Soon	there	will	be	a	world
citizen	with	no	local	background	at	all	--	with	a	universal	background.
Before	this	century	ends,	we	will	need	--	we	are	already	in	need	of	--	keys	which
are	universal.	For	example,	Jesus'	key	was	for	a	particular	Jewish	group.	This	is
really	an	irony	of	history,	that	Jesus	invented	a	key,	devised	a	key,	for	the	Jewish
mind,	and	now	Jews	are	against	him.	And	those	who	follow	him	are	against	the
Jews.	But	the	key	was	particularly	devised	for	a	Jewish-conditioned	mind.	As	far
as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 Christ	 can	 be	 used	 more	 easily	 with	 a	 Jew	 than	 with	 a
Christian,	because	the	Christian	is	just	a	later	outgrowth;	Jesus	never	knew	any
Christian.	He	himself	was	not	a	Christian,	he	was	a	Jew.	But	this	is	the	irony	of
our	history.
Buddha	 devised	 a	 key	 for	 a	 particular	 mind.	 Now	 only	 in	 India	 does	 that
particular	mind	exist,	but	his	key	is	nowhere	in	India.	It	exists	in	China,	Japan,
Ceylon,	Burma	and	Tibet,	but	not	in	India.	And	he	devised	a	key	for	a	particular
Hindu	mind.	He	was	Hindu	born	and	as	 a	Hindu	he	died.	He	never	knew	any
Buddhism.	So	 the	key	was	developed	 for	a	Hindu	mind.	And	 then,	around	 the
key,	there	develops	a	sect	which	goes	against	Hinduism.	Then	the	key	becomes
irrelevant.	 It	 is	not	of	 any	use	 for	 anyone,	 except	 for	 a	particular	Hindu	mind.
But	this	is	the	irony	of	history.	It	always	happens	so.
So	 I	 am	struggling	and	devising	keys	 that	 are,	 in	 a	way,	universal	 --	 not	 for	 a
particular	localized	culture,	but	for	the	human	mind	as	such.	And	soon	we	will
need	them,	these	local	keys	will	not	do.	Neither	will	any	amalgam	do,	nor	will
all	 these	 keys	 put	 together	 do.	 That	 makes	 even	 more	 nonsense.	 You	 are
unlocking	one	 lock	with	 so	many	keys:	 something	 from	 the	Koran,	 something
from	the	Bible,	something	from	Buddha,	something	from	Mahavira.	And	 there
are	many	people	with	very	good	wishes,	doing	much	wrong.	They	talk	about	the
unity	of	all	religions.	That	is	talking	about	the	unity	of	all	keys	for	opening	one
lock	--	the	unity	of	all	keys!	One	is	enough,	and	too	many	keys	will	not	enable
you	to	open	a	lock.	One	might	have	opened	it,	now	too	many	will	not.
These	are	all	local	keys	developed	in	a	world	which	was	divided.	There	was	no
universal	 mind.	 There	 never	 has	 been	 as	 far	 as	 our	 so-called	 knowledge	 of
history	is	concerned.
Sometimes	 this	 phenomenon	 of	 a	 universal	 mind	 has	 happened,	 but	 that	 is
beyond	 our	 civilization,	 that	 is	 beyond	 our	 memory.	 Sometimes	 this
phenomenon	of	a	universal	mind	has	happened	previously	also,	but	that	has	been
completely	forgotten.
For	example,	I	will	tell	you	one	or	two	things.	In	England,	they	change	the	date
at	midnight.	That	makes	no	sense,	really.	It	it	absurd,	no	one	will	awaken	out	of
his	sleep	just	 to	change	the	date.	It	 is	 illogical,	 impractical.	The	date	should	be
changed	 in	 the	 morning	 --	 that	 is	 common	 sense.	 You	 always	 change	 your
calendar	in	the	morning.	But	why	has	it	been	done	this	way?	There	is	a	secret.
In	India,	when	it	is	5:30	in	the	morning,	it	is	midnight	in	England.	There	was	a
time,	 before	 this	 civilization,	 when	 the	 Hindu	 concept	 ruled	 over	 the	 whole
world.	Just	like	when	the	British	Empire	was	all	over	the	world,	Greenwich	time
was	 the	 real	 time;	everyone	would	 refer	 to	 it.	Now,	with	 the	 fall	of	 the	British
Empire,	Greenwich	time	is	nearly	forgotten.	After	ten	or	fifteen	thousand	years
no	one	will	know	about	it.
There	was	 a	world	 before	Mahabharat	 --	 a	 prehistoric	 Indian	war	 --	when	 the
Hindu	mind	ruled	over	the	whole	world.	Whenever	it	was	morning	in	India,	that
was	 the	 time	 to	 change	 the	 date.	 It	 was	 midnight	 in	 England,	 so	 they	 also
changed	the	calendar	date	then.
That	continued.
You	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 in	England,	 the	parliament	made	a	 special	 act	 three
hundred	years	ago	to	begin	the	year	with	January	1.	Before	three	hundred	years
ago,	the	year	was	ending	with	March	25.	But	what	does	it	mean	to	end	the	year
with	March	25?	There	 is	 no	meaning	 in	 it.	But	 that	was	 the	day	 in	which	 the
Indian	year	ended.	On	March	25	the	Indian	year	ends,	and	that	was	so	all	over
the	world.	They	had	to	make	a	special	act	to	change	it.
The	word	 `December'	means	 the	 tenth	month,	 but	 it	 is	 the	 twelfth.	December
comes	 from	dush	 --	 ten	 in	Sanskrit.	But	why	 is	 it	 the	 twelfth	month?	 It	 is	 the
tenth	in	the	Indian	year.
The	old	tradition	had	continued;	their	calendar	was	derived	from	India.
The	last	week	of	December	is	known	all	over	 the	world	as	Xmas.	X	is	Roman
for	 ten,	 and	 mas	 in	 Sanskrit	 means	 month.	 Xmas	 means	 the	 tenth	 month,	 it
means	December.	But	why?	December	should	not	be	the	tenth	month.	But	it	has
been	 tenth	 in	 the	 Indian	 calendar,	 before	 Mahabharat	 happened,	 about	 five
thousand	years	ago.
In	Mahabharat,	 which	 also	 means	 a	 prehistorical	 Indian	 scripture,	 we	 have	 a
story	 that	 Arjuna	 was	 married	 to	 a	 Mexican	 girl.	 The	 Sanskrit	 word	 maxika
became	Mexico.	And	in	Mexico,	the	civilization	that	existed	has	so	many	Hindu
symbols	that	you	cannot	help	but	say	that	it	was	a	Hindu	civilization.	The	whole
of	the	Mexican	civilization	was	Hindu	--
Hindu	temples,	Hindu	gods.	Even	the	deity	Ganesh	was	found	there,	but	now	it
is	almost	as	if	it	never	was.
We	have	come	again	to	a	universal	world	in	which	Arjuna	can	marry	a	Mexican
girl.
Soon	 again	 there	will	 be	 no	 localized	 cultures.	 For	 this	 unfocused	 culture	we
have	to	devise	new,	more	liquid	keys	--	less	solid	and	more	liquid,	which	can	be
used	with	so	many	locks.
I	have	known	so	many	esoteric	groups	--	in	this	life	and	before.	I	have	been	in
contact	 with	many	 esoteric	 groups,	 but	 I	 cannot	 tell	 you	 their	 whereabouts.	 I
cannot	 tell	 you	 their	 names,	 because	 that	 is	 not	 permitted,	 and	 it	 is	 of	 no	 use
really.	But	I	can	tell	you	that	they	still	exist,	they	still	try	to	help.
Some	groups	are	still	very	alive	--	for	example,	Ashoka's	group.	If	Ashoka	has
done	 something	more	meaningful	 than	 any	 emperor	has	done	 anywhere	 in	 the
world,	it	was	creating	this	esoteric	group	of	nine.	Akbar	tried	to	imitate	Ashoka
in	many	ways.	He	made	a	group	of	nine,	but	it	was	meaningless.	They	were	just
courtiers	--	Nava	Ratna,	the	Nine	Jewels	of	Akbar.	But	they	were	just	imitation
jewels	--	exoteric.	Someone	was	a	poet,	someone	was	a	warrior,	and	that	makes
no	 sense.	 But	Akbar	 knew	 from	 somewhere	 that	Ashoka	 had	 a	 group	 of	 nine
wise	persons,	 so	he	made	a	group	of	nine	 jewels.	He	did	not	know	everything
about	Ashoka's	group.
The	Ashoka	group	has	persisted	for	two	thousand	years.	It	is	still	alive	with	the
key,	 still	 working.	 The	 whole	 theosophical	 movement	 was	 initiated	 by	 this
group.	That	is	why	in	theosophy	Buddha	became	the	suprememost	person.	And
the	whole	theosophy,	in	a	way,	was	Buddhist	or	Hindu.	That	is	why	in	Western
countries	it	was	thought	that	it	was	an	Eastern	effort	to	convert	the	West	--	that	it
was	just	Hinduism	working	in	a	new	garb.
This	is	true	in	a	sense,	because	the	initiator	group	was	a	Buddhist	group.
You	can	also	be	in	contact	with	some	esoteric	group.	There	are	techniques	and
methods.
But	 then	 you	will	 have	 to	 do	much	work	 upon	 yourself.	As	 you	 are,	 you	 can
never	be	in	contact.	You	will	just	pass	by	an	esoteric	circle,	but	you	will	not	even
be	able	to	detect	it.
You	will	 have	 to	 change	 yourself,	 tune	 yourself,	 for	 new	dimensions,	 for	 new
vibrations	to	be	felt;	you	will	have	to	be	sensitive.
Then	you	will	not	ask	me,	"Have	you	been	in	contact	with	an	esoteric	group?"
You	will	know	 just	by	sitting	near	me,	you	will	know	 just	by	 looking	 into	my
eyes.	You	will	 feel	 just	 by	 hearing	my	words,	 or	 even	 by	 hearing	my	 silence.
You	 will	 understand.	 But	 that	 will	 come	 only	 if	 you	 change	 yourself,	 attune
yourself,	for	the	new	reality	--	if	you	open	yourself	for	new	dimensions.
Esoteric	groups	are	and	always	have	been	there.	Only	you	are	closed	--	closed	in
thought,	closed	in	thinking,	closed	within	yourself	--	no	opening,	no	window,	no
door.	The	sky	is	 there	--	 just	open	the	window,	and	you	will	know	the	sky	and
the	stars.	Howsoever	far	off	they	may	be,	just	by	opening	your	window,	which	is
so	 near,	 you	 come	 in	 contact	 with	 far-off	 stars.	 In	 a	 way,	 it	 is	 illogical.	 By
opening	such	a	near	window,	how	can	you	come	in	contact	with	far-off	stars?	If	I
tell	you,	"Open	this	window	behind	you	and	then	you	will	come	in	contact	with
the	whole	 universe,"	 you	will	 say,	 "It	 is	 absurd.	 Just	 by	 opening	 this	window
which	is	so	near,	how	can	I	be	in	contact	with	what	is	so	far?"	But	it	is	so.
Open	 a	window	 in	 your	mind,	make	 a	meditative	window,	 and	you	will	 be	 in
contact	with	so	many	far-off	lights,	with	so	many	happenings	which	are	always
around.
Just	 around	 the	 corner,	 just	 around	 you,	 everything	 is	 happening.	But	 you	 are
blind	 or	 asleep	 or	 just	 unaware.	 I	 am	 here;	 you	 cannot	 conceive	 of	 what	 is
happening	here.	You	cannot	conceive	of	it!
I	 was	 a	 student	 in	 a	 university.	 The	 vice-chancellor	 spoke	 at	 some	 birthday
celebration.	 I	 was	 just	 a	 student	 in	 the	 first	 year.	 The	 vice-chancellor	 said,	 "I
wish	I	had	been	alive	in	the	days	of	Gautama	the	Buddha,	I	would	have	gone	to
his	feet."
I	 interfered	and	I	said,	"Please	reconsider	 this.	Please	 think	 it	over	once	again,
then	speak.
Really,	would	you	have	gone	to	Buddha's	feet?	Have	you	gone	in	this	life	to	any
beggar?
Buddha	was	a	beggar.	Have	you	gone	to	anyone	who	is	a	teacher	--	a	teacher	of
the	 invisible	world?	As	 far	 as	 I	 know,	 you	 have	 never	 gone	 to	 any,	 so	 please
reconsider	whether,	had	you	been	alive	in	Buddha's	day,	you	would	have	gone	to
his	feet,	whether	you	would	have	recognized	him.	Have	you	recognized	anyone
in	this	life?"
He	was	bewildered,	he	was	 taken	back,	he	became	 silent.	He	 said,	 "I	 take	my
words	back	because	 I	never	 thought	 it	over.	 I	 just	 said	 it.	Really,	 I	have	never
been	to	anyone,	so	it	seems	logical	that	I	would	not	have	gone	to	Buddha.	And
even	if	I	would	have	passed	by,	I	would	not	have	looked	at	him.	And	even	if	I
would	have	looked	at	him,	I	would	not	have	recognized	him,	because	it	is	not	so
that	whosoever	came	in	contact	with	Buddha	recognized	him.	It	is	not	so!"
Buddha	passes	from	a	village...	and	no	one	recognized	him.	His	own	father	does
not	recognize	him,	with	his	own	wife	even	there	is	no	recognition.
I	am	here;	you	cannot	recognize	what	is	inside.	Only	the	outside	is	known.	You
only	become	acquainted	with	the	outside.	That	is	how	it	should	be.	You	are	not
in	 contact	with	your	own	 innerness,	 so	how	can	you	be	 in	 contact	with	mine?
That	 is	 an	 impossibility.	 It	 becomes	 easy	 if	 you	 are	 in	 contact	with	 your	 own
innerness.	Then	you	can	be	in	contact	with	my	innerness,	or	innerness	as	such.
Otherwise,	 you	will	 just	 go	 on	 asking	me,	 and	 I	will	 continue	 answering	you.
Then	everything	just	misses	the	point.
But	I	answer	you	not	in	order	that	you	should	get	the	answer	from	my	answer.
No,	 I	never	hope	against	hope,	 I	never	hope	 that	my	answer	can	become	your
answer.	I	know	very	well	that	my	answer	is	of	no	use	to	you.	But	then	why	do	I
go	on	answering	your	questions?
I	 go	 on	 answering	 not	 in	 order	 that	my	 answer	will	 become	 your	 answer,	 but
because	 if	you	can	 listen	 to	me	silently,	 totally,	 in	 that	silent	 listening	you	will
come	 directly	 upon	 your	 own	 innerness.	 Suddenly	 it	 can	 explode	 to	 you,
suddenly	you	can	be	 in	another	world	 that	 is	 completely	different	 from	any	 in
which	you	have	been	living.	And	if	that	happens,	then	you	have	come	into	a	new
existence.
That	 new	 existence	 is	 your	 own.	 It	 is	 an	 esoteric,	 inner	 secret.	 That	 inner
existence	has	all	these	things.
I	Am	the	Gate
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	Even	In	a	Single	Moment
2	June	1971	in	Bombay,	India
Archive
code:
7104000
ShortTitle:
GATE09
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Question	1
PART	OF	A	DISCOURSE	GIVEN	BY	OSHO	ON	JUNE	2,	1971	IN	BOMBAY,
INDIA,	AND	BASED	ON	AN	INTERVIEW	BY	MA	ANANDA	PRATIMA.
Awakening	is	possible	even	in	a	single	moment.	In	that	single	moment,	one	can
explode	into	the	divine.	That	is	possible,	but	generally	it	never	happens.	One	has
to	 struggle	 for	 continuous	 lives,	 because	 the	 task	 is	 arduous	 and	 one	 cannot
awaken	himself.	It	is	very	much	like	this:	if	one	is	asleep	in	the	morning,	there	is
every	possibility	that	one	can	dream	he	is	awake,	though	he	will	not	be	awake.
A	 group	 of	 persons	 decide	 collectively	 to	 make	 some	 effort.	 Then	 it	 is	 more
possible	 that	sleep	can	be	broken.	So	awakening	 is	 really	a	group	work.	 It	can
happen	individually,	and	each	individual	is	capable	of	doing	it	alone,	but	it	never
happens	 so.	 The	 actual	 working	 is	 different,	 because	 we	 never	 work	 to	 our
utmost	capacity.	We	never	work	beyond	a	 ten	percent	part	of	 the	mind.	Ninety
percent	remains	just	potential;	it	is	never	used.
There	 is	 no	 difference	 in	 your	 dreaming	 whether	 you	 are	 asleep	 or	 awake,
dreaming	goes	on	inside.	This	awakening,	this	awareness	which	we	all	have,	is
only	superficial.	Deep	inside	there	is	a	dream,	and	that	continues.
So	one	can	have	two	things:	either	individual	work	is	possible	or	group	work	is
needed.
The	whole	 order	 of	 sannyas	was	 created	 as	 group	work.	 Awakening	 becomes
more	possible	if	there	are	ten	thousand	people	working	in	a	group,	so	even	if	one
is	awakened,	he	can	create	a	chain	of	awakenings.
Buddha	created	a	group	order,	Mahavira	created	a	group	order.	Their	orders	were
really	 an	 outward	 phenomenon;	 they	were	 sannyasins,	 an	 order	 of	 sannyasins.
Inwardly	they	were	doing	a	group	work,	and	that	group	work	continues	for	lives.
For	example,	 there	are	 still	persons	alive	of	 the	Buddhist	group	of	 sannyasins.
And	 they	 have	 an	 inner	 understanding	 and	 an	 inner	 oath	 --	 a	 promise	 to	 the
group	--	 that	whenever	someone	is	awakened,	he	will	do	his	utmost	 to	awaken
the	others,	particularly	those	belonging	to	the	group.	Why	those	belonging	to	the
group?	Because	every	school	has	a	particular	technique.
If	you	have	worked	with	a	particular	 technique	in	your	previous	lives,	you	can
work	easily	in	this	life.	So,	there	are	many	persons	who	belong	to	me	since	their
other	births,	their	other	lives.	And	that	group	of	persons	is	more	capable	in	many
ways.	It	has	worked	something,	it	has	done	something,	up	to	a	point;	it	is	not	just
a	beginning	for	them.
Otherwise,	 with	 every	 new	 person,	 you	 have	 to	 do	 more	 unnecessary	 and
unessential	work.
For	example,	intellectual	work	is	needed	for	beginners.	Those	who	have	worked
in	their	past	lives	with	a	particular	technique,	they	will	not	need	any	intellectual
work	now.	You	tell	them	the	technique,	and	they	will	begin	to	do	it.
There	will	be	no	intellectual	work,	they	will	not	ask	superficial	questions.	That
curiosity	will	not	be	there,	and	that	curiosity	takes	much	time	and	much	energy.
So	one	can	work	with	beginners	if	one	has	so	many	lives	ahead.	But	if	one	has
no	life	ahead,	he	cannot	work	on	beginners.	He	has	to	confine	his	work	to	the	old
ones	 who	 are	 somehow	 on	 the	 bank.	 They	 do	 not	 need	 any	 intellectual
philosophy;	they	have	no	superficial	inquiries.
They	will	just	go	deep,	directly.
The	old	requirement,	the	requirement	that	one	should	have	faith,	is	really	a	trick.
It	 is	 just	 to	 distinguish	between	 the	 old	 ones	 and	 the	 new	ones.	With	 the	 new
ones,	faith	is	impossible;	only	doubt	is	possible.	Only	with	the	old	ones	is	faith
possible,	and	doubt	is	impossible.
So	 faith	 is	 just	 a	 technique,	 a	 trick,	 to	 choose	 between	 them	 and	 to	 know	 on
whom	more	work	can	be	done	in	less	time.	It	is	not	that	those	who	can	have	faith
are	 in	any	way	different	 than	 those	who	have	doubts.	 It	 is	only	 that	 those	who
have	faith	have	worked	somewhere,	so	 intellectual	curiosity	 is	not	 there;	 it	has
been	fulfilled.	They	have	passed;	they	are	not	just	entering	the	school,	they	have
passed	the	entrance.
So	to	ask	for	faith	is	to	ask,	"Have	you	worked	in	your	past	lives?"	If	you	have
worked,	 only	 then	 can	 you	 have	 faith;	 otherwise	 you	 cannot.	 And	 in	 today's
world	 doubt	 seems	 much	 more	 prominent,	 easier.	 Faith	 is	 very	 difficult.	 The
reason	is	not	that	the	human	mind	has	been	changed,	the	reason	is	only	this:	that
the	old	traditions	are	running	narrow.
Really,	since	Nanak	there	have	been	no	new	traditions.	Now	all	the	religions	are
old.
They	have	been	going	on,	the	river	is	narrowing	every	day.	With	every	new	day,
the	tradition	has	fewer	persons	with	it.	Since	Buddha	there	are	now	twenty-five
centuries	--
the	tradition	is	so	old	that	almost	all	who	were	connected	with	the	living	master
are	liberated!	And	all	those	persons	who	have	remained	are	really	very	third	rate.
They	have	had	twenty-five	centuries	of	continuous	work.
All	the	traditions	and	their	continuity	are,	in	a	way,	so	old	now.	That	is	why	faith
is	less.
There	were	so	many	living	traditions	and	so	many	persons	who	have	worked	in
their	past	lives.	Faith	was	the	root	for	each	one,	doubt	was	very	difficult.
If	you	ask	me,	I	am	doing	many	things.	One	is	working	for	those	who	have	been
in	any	way	connected	with	me	--	and	there	are	many.	Another	is	to	create	a	new
continuity	which	we	will	be	living	in	the	coming	days,	because	no	old	thinking
is	of	use	now.
And	I	would	not	like	to	change	someone	from	his	own	continuity,	because	if	we
cannot	liberate	a	man	in	a	long	tradition	of	twenty-five	centuries,	it	is	useless	to
change	him	now.	It	is	better	to	let	him	go	deep	in	his	own	tradition.	It	is	better
not	to	change	him,	but	make	his	own	tradition	a	living	one.	He	can	go	deep	in	it.
He	will	be	another	continuity	with	the	old.
But	previously,	I	was	working	for	the	new	ones,	so	my	emphasis	was	on	doubt.	I
will	always	be	concerned	with	doubt,	because	only	through	doubt	can	you	attract
the	new	one,	never	through	faith.	Faith	attracts	the	old	one.	He	has	been	doing
something	 in	 his	 past	 lives.	 My	 emphasis	 has	 been	 on	 doubt	 only	 because	 I
should	work	for	a	new	tradition	which	will	be	living.
Now	my	emphasis	will	be	on	 faith,	 and	 there	 is	no	contradiction.	This	 is	only
changing	the	entrance	and	nothing	else.	When	I	was	emphasizing	doubt,	no	one
came.	Now	 I	will	 emphasize	 faith.	So	 I	will	work	 for	 those	with	whom	 I	was
connected	in	past	lives.
So	there	will	be	no	difficulty,	because	we	never	go	deep	in	anything.	We	cannot
go	deep.
There	are	levels.	When	I	say	doubt,	when	I	say	faith,	 this	is	 inconsistent.	Only
the	labeling	may	be	different,	only	different	words	will	come	now.	Whatsoever	I
was	doing	will	continue.	Now	my	emphasis	will	be	for	those	who	have	worked
for	something.	That	is	why	this	order	of	sannyas	--	because	with	doubt	it	cannot
be	created.
Whenever	there	is	doubt,	one	can	be	alone	and	can	never	work	in	a	group.	With
a	technique	of	doubt	you	can	never	work	in	a	group,	never.	Doubts	make	you	an
island.
But	when	you	become	a	continent,	then	you	are	joined	with	others.	Then	there	is
no	separation,	and	you	can	work	in	the	group.
As	 far	 as	 man	 is	 concerned	 he	 is	 so	 weak	 that	 we	 cannot	 rely	 upon	 him
individually.	He	cannot	do	anything,	he	can	only	deceive	himself.	So,	if	we	are
going	to	work	on	individuals	we	have	to	create	mechanical	helps.	For	example,
you	are	asleep,	and	no	one	is	there	to	awaken	you.	You	will	have	to	use	an	alarm
clock,	that	is	the	mechanical	device	to	help	you.	But	no	mechanical	device	will
be	very	helpful	for	long	because	you	will	become	used	to	it,	and	soon	you	will
not	be	disturbed	in	your	sleep	by	your	alarm	clock.
Rather,	sleep	can	be	even	more	sound	--	and	the	working	of	the	mind	is	such	that
you	will	change	the	alarm	into	a	symbol	in	a	dream,	and	it	will	be	interpreted	in
a	different	way.
Then	it	will	not	become	a	discontinuity	in	sleep.	You	will	create	a	dream	in	such
a	way	that	the	alarm	becomes	just	a	part	of	it,	so	that	it	is	not	against	your	sleep
but	a	part	of	your	dream.
I	 have	 tried	with	many	 persons	 individually.	 I	 have	 given	mechanical	 devices
also,	but	 they	have	become	accustomed	 to	 them	and	 then	a	new	fallacy	arises.
That	is	the	greatest	fallacy	in	spirituality:	one	can	dream	he	is	awake.	That	is	the
most	 fatal	disease,	 the	most	dangerous:	we	can	continue	our	 sleep	and	we	can
dream	we	 are	 awake.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 devices,	 and	 you	 are	 in	 your
dreams	alone.
So	 my	 emphasis	 from	 now	 on	 will	 be	 on	 group	 work.	 So	 even	 if	 one	 is
awakened	 just	 for	 a	 single	 moment,	 he	 can	 create	 shocks	 for	 others.	 He	 can
shake	you.	And	this	order	of	sannyas	will	be	just	a	group	with	inner	faith.
When	you	feel,	even	for	a	single	second,	awareness	coming	to	you,	help	others.
And	they	will	help	you	when	the	need	is	there.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	I	am	the	gate
