1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Talks	given	from	1/10/80	to	31/10/80
Darshan	Diary
31	Chapters
Year	published:
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010015
ShortTitle:	THUNK01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Prem	 Jan.	 Prem	 means	 love.	 Jan	 is	 a	 form	 of	 Hebrew,	 John.	 John	 the	 most
beloved	disciple	of	Jesus,	hence	his	name	has	become	a	symbol	of	disciplehood.
Love	 is	 the	 most	 essential	 quality,	 the	 fundamental	 quality,	 without	 which
nobody	can	be	a	disciple	It	 is	easy	 to	be	a	student	--	 it	needs	no	love,	 it	needs
only	logic	--	because	the	communication	between	the	teacher	and	the	student	is
from	head	to	head.	It	is	verbal,	intellectual,	logical.	The	teacher	simply	imparts
information	and	the	student	accumulates	it	in	his	memory.	There	is	no	question
of	 love.	 Love	 goes	 not	 arise	 between	 the	 teacher	 and	 the	 student,	 hence	 the
relationship	is	impersonal;	it	is	not	a	relationship	at	all.	It	is	very	formal.
But	 to	 be	 a	 disciple	 is	 totally	 different.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 formal.	 It	 is	 a
commitment,	it	is	involvement.
It	is	becoming	part	of	the	master.	It	needs	not	communication	from	head	to	head
but	a	communion	from	heart	to	heart.
The	verbal	part	is	not	that	important.	The	non-verbal	part	 is	far	more	essential,
because	 the	master	 is	 not	 a	 teacher,	 just	 as	 the	 disciple	 is	 not	 a	 student.	 The
master	has	no	information	to	impart	to	you,	he	has	something	far	more	valuable:
he	 wants	 to	 impart	 a	 transformation	 to	 your	 being.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
accumulating	something	 in	your	memory,	 it	 is	a	question	of	a	dying	and	being
reborn.
The	 disciple	 disappears	 into	 the	master,	 dies	 in	 a	way;	 leaves	 the	 old	 identity,
forgets	all	about	his	past	and	renews	himself	totally.	It	is	a	new	beginning,	a	new
birth.	And	without	love	it	is	not	possible.
Only	the	miracle	of	love	can	make	it	possible,	otherwise	it	is	impossible.	Being	a
disciple	 means	 falling	 in	 deep	 love	 without	 any	 motive,	 for	 no	 ulterior	 end
because	love	is	not	a	means	to	any	end;	it	is	an	end	unto	itself.
Once	love	has	started	flowing	then	the	master	can	trigger	a	process	in	you	which
can	bring	light,	which	.
can	 bring	 bliss,	which	 can	 bring	 truth,	which	 ultimately	 can	 bring	 god.	 It	 is	 a
tremendous	journey.
Prem	Vinamro.	Prem	means	love.	Vinamro	means	egolessness.
Love	 is	 possible	 only	 in	 the	 climate	 of	 egolessness.	With	 the	 ego	 love	 cannot
grow.	Ego	is	like	a	rock	and	love	is	like	a	rose	flower:	if	you	put	a	rock	on	the
rose	 bush	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 its	 growing,	 no	 possibility	 of	 roses	 ever
flowering.
The	ego	can	do	everything	else.	It	can	make	you	famous,	it	can	make	you	a	great
scholar,	 very	 knowledgeable,	 it	 can	 fulfil	 all	 kinds	 of	 ambition	 for	 power,
prestige,	money.	But	it	cannot	do	one	thing	which	is	the	most	significant	in	life:
it	 cannot	help	you	 to	grow	 in	 love.	And	without	 love	all	 else	 is	 futile	because
without	love	you	are	dead.	Love	is	life,	the	very	secret	of	life.
Without	love	one	starts	shrinking	and	dying.	Without	it	there	is	no	significance
at	all.	Without	love	why	should	one	live	at	all?	--	because	there	is	no	meaning.
One	 can	drag	but	 dragging	 is	 not	 living.	One	 can	vegetate	 but	 that	 is	 not	 life.
One	can	survive	but	one	cannot	reach	the	peaks	of	joy.
Love	opens	the	doors	to	the	divine,	but	one	condition	has	to	be	fulfilled	the	ego
has	to	be	dropped.	And	it	can	be	dropped	because	it	is	a	very	false	phenomenon,
it	is	our	invention.
We	 come	 without	 egos.	 Ego	 is	 not	 a	 natural	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	 produced	 by
society,	by	the	church,	by	the	educational	system.	It	is	a	pseudo	reality,	but	it	is
supported	from	every	direction.	The	parents	support	it,	everybody	supports	it,	so
naturally	 the	 child	 starts	 believing	 in	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 belief,	 it	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 auto-
hypnosis.
Otherwise	there	is	no	ego.
When	one	becomes	absolutely	 silent	 in	meditation	one	 finds	 that	 the	ego	does
not	exist	at	all	and	it	has	never	existed	from	the	very	beginning.	It	was	just	an
idea	implanted	in	you	by	society.
Society	needs	it	because	society	is	ambitious.	Without	an	ego	nobody	would	be
ambitious.	Then	where	would	politics	go?	Then	where	would	they	find	warriors
to	fight,	to	kill,	to	murder	And	to	be	murdered?
Where	 would	 they	 find	 foolish	 people	 waste	 their	 whole	 life	 accumulating
money.	Where	are	they	going	to	find	all	kinds	of	stupidities	without	the	ego?
This	whole	society,	this	establishment,	depends	on	the	ego.	And	my	work	here	is
to	help	you	see	that	ego	is	non-existential.	Don't	cling	to	it	and	don't	feed	it	any
more.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about,	stopping	feeding	the	ego.	And	then	it	dies
of	its	own	accord,	it	withers	away;	it	does	not	even	leave	a	trace	behind.
And	that	is	the	state	of	humbleness.
When	Jesus	says	blessed	are	the	meek	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god,	by	meek
he	means	the	egoless.
Not	 the	 so-called	 humble	 people,	 because	 the	 humble	 person	 still	 has	 an	 ego.
Now	it	is	upside-down	but	the	ego	is	there	standing	on	its	head,	doing	sirshasan
a	headstand.
The	humble	person	 is	not	egoless;	 the	ego	has	come	in	 from	the	backdoor.	He
threw	it	out	from	the	front	door	but	it	has	come	in	from	the	backdoor.	Now	he
brags	about	his	humanity,	his	humbleness	and	you	can	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
see	in	his	eyes,	on	his	nose,	that	the	ego	is	there.	Now	he	wants	to	be	the	most
humble	person	in	the	world,	the	greatest	humble	person	in	the	world	--	again	the
same	competition,	again	the	same	ambition.
By	 meek	 Jesus	 means	 the	 egoless,	 not	 the	 humble	 --	 because	 the	 egoless	 is
neither	an	egoist	nor	humble.
He	cannot	be	an	egoist	because	there	is	no	ego	and	he	cannot	be	humble	either,
because	without	ego	how	can	you	claim	humbleness?	He	simply	knows	that	ego
is	non-existential	and	there	the	chapter	is	closed.	It	does	not	create	a	new	kind	of
ego,	a	subtle	kind	of	ego.	And	that	is	the	meaning	of	your	name	egolessness.
If	one	can	do	this	simple	process	of	finding	that	there	is	no	ego	at	all,	then	love
bursts	 forth	as	 if	 suddenly	 spring	has	come	and	all	 the	 trees	are	blooming	and
birds	and	singing,	and	life	becomes	a	celebration.
Anand	Panthen:	a	traveller	of	bliss.
Sannyas	is	a	journey	from	misery	to	bliss.	We	are	living	in	misery.	Sometimes	it
is	 less,	 sometimes	 it	 is	more;	when	 it	 is	 less	you	don't	 feel	 it	 so	much	but	 the
difference	is	only	of	degree.	You	are	never	really	blissful	and	the	moments	that
you	 call	moments	 of	 happiness	 are	 only	 of	 less	misery,	 less	misery	 than	 your
usual	dose	--	diluted,	not	so	painful.	In	comparison	it	looks	like	happiness	but	it
is	only	less	misery.
Watch	and	you	will	find	what	I	am	saying	--	because	I	don't	believe	in	theories,	I
believe	 only	 in	 facts	 and	whatsoever	 I	 say	 is	 simply	 factual.	 Just	 watch	 your
moments	 of	 happiness	 and	 your	 moments	 of	 misery	 and	 see:	 is	 there	 any
qualitative	difference	between	 the	 two	or	only	a	difference	of	quantity?	 If	 it	 is
only	of	quantity	it	is	not	a	difference	that	makes	a	difference.
Only	 a	 qualitative	 difference	 is	 a	 difference	 that	 makes	 a	 difference,	 but	 that
qualitative	difference	is	possible	only	if	you	start	dismantling	the	roots	of	your
misery.
People	only	go	on	changing	symptoms.	You	are	miserable	with	one	woman	or
with	one	man;	you	change.	And	you	completely	forget	that	you	were	very	happy
with	this	woman.	You	have	completely	forgotten	the	honeymoon	days	and	again
you	 will	 do	 the	 same	 foolish	 thing	 with	 some	 other	 woman	 again	 the	 same
honeymoon	and	 the	same	excitement	and	again	 the	 same	depression,	 the	 same
boredom.
You	can	go	on	changing	the	woman	again	and	again	but	it	will	be	just	the	same
routine,	the	same	vicious	circle.
If	you	really	want	to	change	your	misery	you	have	to	go	to	the	root	cause.	The
root	cause	is	that	you	don't	know	what	love	is,	so	how	can	you	be	a	lover?	How
can	you	share	love	when	you	don't	know	what	it	is?	The	root	cause	is	that	you
are	not	blissful	so	when	you	relate	with	somebody,	in	the	beginning	you	manage
to	 act	 blissfully,	 but	 how	 long	 can	 you	 act?	As	 things	 settle	 you	 start	 coming
back	 to	 your	 normal	 self	 because	 one	 cannot	 live	 continuously	 acting.	 Those
honeymoon	days	when	you	are	smiling,	when	there	are	songs	on	your	lips,	are
just	days	of	acting	but	soon	they	disappear,	you	come	back	to	your	natural	and
normal	pace.	One	has	to,	otherwise	it	is	very	tiring;	one	cannot	go	on	putting	on
a	face	for	long.
And	the	same	is	true	about	the	woman	you	are	in	love	with,	she	also	settles.	And
then	both	are	miserable	persons;	then	the	reality	suddenly	is	there	and	has	to	be
encountered.	And	remember,	two	miserable	persons	together	do	not	only	double
the	misery,	they	multiply	it.	And	then	everybody	throws	the	responsibility	on	the
other	but	the	responsibility	is	basically	one's	self.
First	we	should	find	the	root	causes	of	our	misery	and	destroy	them,	burn	them.
Before	you	start	growing	roses	you	have	to	pull	out	all	 the	weeds,	you	have	to
prepare	the	ground,	remove	all	the	rocks.
One	should	go	deep	into	the	causes	of	misery	--	and	they	are	not	many.	Basically
the	main	root	is	ego	and	then	others	are	offshoots.	A	man	with	ego	is	bound	to
remain	miserable	because	ego	can	never	be	fulfilled,	 its	 thirst	 is	unquenchable.
And	 because	 it	 can	 never	 be	 fulfilled	 it	 always	 brings	 frustration.	 And	 that
frustration	 accumulates	 and	 becomes	 your	misery.	 It	 becomes	mountainous.	 It
destroys	all	joy,	all	love,	all	truth.	You	simply	become	a	black	hole.
As	I	see	people	they	are	black	holes	moving	around	in	the	world	searching	for
other	black	holes.	And	just	think	of	the	calamity	when	two	black	holes	meet	--
and	 they	call	 it	marriage,	 love.	There	are	simply	 two	black	holes	meeting,	and
there	is	nothing	else,	nothing	to	share,	nothing	to	give.	And	everybody	wants	to
suck	the	other,	to	get	as	much	as	possible.	Both	are	beggars.
First	 destroy	 the	 root	 of	 misery,	 the	 ego,	 and	 its	 offshoots	 --	 jealousy,
possessiveness,	the	desire	to	dominate	--	and	then	you	will	be	surprised	that	bliss
has	not	to	be	achieved;	it	is	your	intrinsic	nature.	Once	misery	is	removed	it	is	as
if	 clouds	have	disappeared	and	 the	 sun	starts	 shining	 forth.	And	when	you	are
blissful	your	life	is	a	pilgrimage.	It	is	no	ordinary	journey,	it	is	sacred.	Then	each
step	is	towards	god.
A	 blissful	 person	 cannot	 go	 anywhere	 else	 other	 than	 to	 god.	 He	 cannot	 go
astray,	it	is	impossible	to	go	astray.	If	he	has	fulfilled	one	thing,	if	he	has	allowed
his	blissful	nature	to	be	expressed,	then	there	is	no	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
problem.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	pilgrims	of	bliss:	dancing,	singing,	rejoicing.	And	then
god	is	not	far	away.
You	need	not	bother	about	god;	it	comes	in	its	own	course,	naturally.	You	need
not	even	Reek	and	search.
(Dhyanprem	 means	 meditation	 and	 love,	 and	 they	 are	 key	 words,	 worth
remembering,	Osho	 says.)	Meditation	means	 the	 art	 of	 being	 alone.	And	 love
means	 the	 art	 of	 being	 with	 people,	 the	 art	 of	 being	 together.	 But	 meditation
comes	first.
First	one	has	to	learn	to	be	blissfully	alone.	If	you	are	blissful	in	your	aloneness
you	can	be	blissful	in	togetherness.	If	you	are	not	blissful	with	yourself	how	can
you	be	blissful	with	anybody	else	in	the	world?	It	is	impossible,	it	is	against	the
law	of	life.	But	that's	what	millions	of	people	are	trying	to	do,	just	trying	to	do
the	impossible,	and	then	there	is	misery,	frustration,	failure,	despair,	anguish.
Start	with	meditation	and	then	move	into	love.	First	be	blissful	independently	of
others,	so	you	need	not	ask	that	they	should	make	you	blissful;	you	are	already
blissful.	And	once	you	are	not	dependent	on	others	you	are	never	possessive.	It
is	dependency	that	creates	possessiveness,	and	possessiveness	is	poison	to	love.
Only	 a	 non-possessive	 consciousness	 can	 be	 loving.	But	 to	 be	 non-possessive
you	have	to	fulfil	the	first	requirement	be	blissful	with	yourself,	at	ease,	at	home.
Then	if	somebody	is	there	and	you	happen	to	be	with	somebody	you	can	share
your	joy.	Then	it	is	a	sharing,	not	a	begging.	And	love	is	beautiful	when	it	is	a
sharing,	then	it	is	a	sheer	gift.	And	the	joy	of	giving	is	the	greatest	joy	in	life.	--
How	long	will	you	be	here?	(Haridas	translates)	--	She	doesn't	know.
-	 Be	 here	 as	 long	 as	 possible.	 Germans	 ordinarily	 don't	 leave	 the	 place!
(laughter)	Good!
Antar	Gyano.	Antar	means	inner.	Gyano	means	wisdom.
Knowledge	 comes	 from	 the	 outside,	 wisdom	 comes	 from	 within,	 hence
knowledge	is	of	no	use.	It	creates	bondage	for	you	because	it	is	borrowed.	And
truth	can	never	be	borrowed.	The	moment	you	borrow	a	truth	it	becomes	a	lie.
The	truth	to	remain	true	has	to	be	your	own	experience.
The	 Buddha	 has	 his	 truth,	 Jesus	 has	 his	 truth;	 Christians	 and	 Buddhists	 are
simply	 living	 with	 borrowed	 knowledge.	 Hence	 after	 two	 thousand	 years	 of
Christianity	not	a	single	Christ	has	come.	Two	thousand	years	of	 imitation	and
not	 a	 single	 Christ	 has	 been	 created.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 the	 other
religions:	 not	 a	 single	 Buddha	 has	 happened	 in	 twenty-five	 centuries,	 not	 a
single	Krishna	has	happened	 in	 five	 thousand	years.	And	 the	 reason	 is	 simple;
people	 are	 simply	 creating	 a	 bondage	 by	 accumulating	 knowledge	 from	 the
outside.
A	Christian,	a	Hindu,	a	Buddhist,	a	Mohammedan	--	these	are	all	slaves,	slaves
of	words,	knowing	nothing	of	truth.	Truth	is	hidden	inside	you,	it	is	the	kingdom
of	the	within,	and	you	have	to	go	in	to	look	for	it	--	not	in	the	Bible,	not	in	the
Koran,	not	in	the	Vedas,	but	within	you.	And	all	that	I	teach	is	a	simple	process
of	going	in.	It	is	so	simple	that	people	think	it	is	very	difficult.
The	obvious	always	seems	difficult.	It	is	just	a	question	of	closing	your	eyes	and
not	 doing	 anything;	 relaxing,	 resting.	 Yes,	 in	 the	 beginning	 the	 mind	 creates
havoc,	but	don't	pay	any	attention	to	it.	It	cannot	disturb	you.	Let	it	fool	around.
It	will	do	all	kinds	of	gymnastics	to	attract	attention.	Just	rest,	utterly	indifferent;
it	doesn't	matter.	You	can	 tell	 the	mind	"You	go	on	doing	your	 thing	and	I	am
going	 to	do	my	thing."	If	one	can	 just	go	on	remaining	 indifferent	 to	 the	mind
slowly	 slowly	 it	 becomes	 so	bored	with	 its	 own	work	 that	 it	 commits	 suicide.
When	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 pay	 it	 attention	 it	 dies	 of	 starvation.	 And	 one	 day
suddenly	you	find	that	the	buffoon	is	not	there!	You	look	all	around	and	it	is	all
silence.
In	 that	silence	wisdom	is	found,	 in	 that	silence	you	start	having	a	great	 insight
into	things.	And	then	whatsoever	you	do	is	right,	because	wisdom	liberates	and
makes	 you	 capable	 of	 seeing	what	 is	 right	 and	what	 is	wrong.	And	 once	 you
know	 on	 your	 own	 what	 is	 right	 you	 cannot	 go	 against	 it.	 Then	 an	 inner
discipline	arises.	And	that's	what	sannyas	is,	an	inner	discipline.
I	don't	give	you	any	discipline,	because	that	would	be	an	imposition.	I	certainly
help	 you	 to	 find	 your	 own	 wisdom	 and	 then	 you	 have	 to	 live	 in	 that	 light
accordingly.	I	am	not	here	to	make	you	a	slave.	My	whole	longing	is	to	help	as
many	people	as	possible	to	be	liberated	from	all	bondage.
(Veet	Udaseen	means	going	beyond	sadness.)
I	 can	 see	 a	 deep	 sadness	 in	 you	 and	 you	 have	 to	 come	 out	 of	 it,	 you	 have	 to
transcend	it.	In	fact	everybody	is	sad	but	people	go	on	pretending	that	they	are
not.	You	are	a	sincere	person,	you	cannot	pretend;	you	are	sad	and	it	is	written
all	over	your	face	(Udaseen	smiles).	It	is	good	that	one	does	not	wear	a	mask,	it
is	good	to	be	true,	sincere,	authentic,	because	only	through	sincerity	a	revolution
is	possible.	I	can	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
see	a	deep	sadness	has	settled	in	you.	There	may	have	been	reasons	for	it	but	it
can	be	transformed,	it	can	be	changed.
Religion	for	thousands	of	years	has	been	sad.	Except	for	the	Roman	gods	all	the
gods	of	the	world	have	been	sad.	And	Roman	gods	were	not	very	godly	--	they
were	 playboys!	 (Udaseen	 chuckles)	 The	 Roman	 name	 for	 god	 was	 Jove.	 In
English	we	still	say	"By	Jove",	and	from	Jove	comes	"jovial"	--	humorous.	Jove
is	a	 laughing	god,	but	otherwise	all	 the	gods	 in	 the	world	have	been	 sad.	And
even	 the	Roman	 joviality	has	been	destroyed	by	 the	Christians.	Rome	became
their	centre.	And	Christians	say	Jesus	never	laughed.
Certainly	 they	murdered	 Jove,	 they	 destroyed	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 laughing	 god.	 For
them	it	was	sacrilegious	to	think	of	god	as	laughing.
But	my	whole	effort	here	is	to	create	Joves,	laughing	gods.	My	sannyasins	have
not	to	be	sad;	they	are	not	Christian	monks	and	saints,	not	Hindu	nor	Jaina	nor
Buddhist.	 My	 sannyasins	 are	 of	 a	 totally	 new	 category,	 it	 has	 never	 existed
before.	Only	 once	 in	 a	while	 have	 a	 few	people	 been	 like	my	 sannyasins	 --	 a
Bodhidharma,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Chuang	Tzu	--	but	it	has	been	such	a	rare	thing	in	the
past.	I	would	like	it	to	become	the	very	quality	of	the	humanity	that	is	going	to
come,	 the	very	future	of	humanity.	Religion	should	 learn	 the	ways	of	 laughter,
religion	should	become	closer	to	singing	and	dancing	and	festivity.	I	don't	teach
fasting,	I	teach	feasting!
So	drop	your	sadness	--	enough	of	it,	there	is	no	need	to	carry	it.	And	if	you	are
sad	here	everybody	will	 think	 that	you	are	a	Christian	 saint	 --	 and	"saint"	 is	 a
dirty	word	around	here	 (Udaseen	 laughs)	Good.	So	start	 laughing,	enjoying.	 --
How	long	will	you	be	here?
Udaseen	extends	his	arms,	grinning	broadly,	in	an	extravagantly	relaxed	gesture,
and	shrugs	his	shoulders.	--	That's	good!	(more	laughter)	Be	here!
(Prem	Gathen,	means	a	beautiful	love	story.)
Shakespeare	says	'Life	is	a	tale	told	by	an	idiot,	full	of	sound	and	fury,	signifying
nothing.'	And	that	is	the	life	of	the	millions,	of	almost	ninety-nine	point	nine	per
cent	of	people.	 It	 is	 really	 ridiculous	 that	 people	 should	 live	 such	 a	 futile	 life,
such	a	tale	told	by	an	idiot.
People	can	live	joyously.	Their	life	can	have	significance,	meaning,	tremendous
meaning,	great	joy,	great	splendour.	Their	life	can	be	a	song,	a	beautiful	story	--
not	 told	 by	 an	 idiot	 but	 by	 a	 Buddha.	 But	 some	 basic	 change,	 some	 radical
change	is	needed.
People	 are	 living	 through	 the	 head,	 and	 the	 head	 is	 an	 idiot	 because	 it	 is	 a
mechanism.	People	should	live	through	the	heart	because	it	is	only	the	heart	that
feels.	The	head	does	not	feel.	It	is	really	thick,	it	has	no	feeling,	no	emotion,	no
sensitivity.	 People	 should	 live	 through	 the	 heart	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	meaning	 of
your	name.
Live	 through	 love,	 live	 as	 love	 and	 your	 life	will	 have	 a	 beauty,	 a	 blessing,	 a
fragrance	surrounding	it.
Drop	logic	and	revive	your	love.	Die	to	logic	and	be	born	as	love.	Of	course	to
be	in	love	in	this	insane	world	will	make	you	look	as	if	you	are	mad,	because	the
people	you	are	 surrounded	with	all	 live	 in	a	very	calculated	way;	 to	 them	you
will	look	mad.
But	those	who	understand	--	and	of	course	there	are	very	few	people	in	the	world
who	 understand	 --	 for	 them	 you	 will	 be	 a	 sane	 person,	 because	 for	 them	 the
whole	humanity	is	insane.
And	 the	criterion	 is:	 if	your	 life	 is	miserable,	 then	 it	 is	 insane.	 If	your	 life	 is	a
rejoicing,	then	it	is	sane,	than	it	is	wholesome,	then	it	is	healthy.	Then	you	have
found	something	in	which	you	can	rejoice.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	in	the	life	of	one	of	the	great	kings	of	India.	His	name
was	Akbar	 --	 a	 great	Moghul	 emperor	 --	 and	 he	 had	 collected	 in	 his	 court	 all
kinds	of	geniuses	the	greatest	painters,	poets,	sculptors,	musicians,	scholars.	He
had	the	topmost	musician	of	the	country,	Tansen,	in	his	court.	Tansen	is	the	most
important	name	in	Indian	music,	in	the	whole	history	of	India	--	and	India	has	a
glorious	history	of	music.
Tansen	was	Just	a	magician	as	far	as	music	is	concerned.	One	day	Akbar	asked
him,	'Last	night	when	you	departed	you	played	so	beautifully	on	your	Veena	and
your	song	was	so	haunting	that	I	could	not	sleep;	the	song	continued,	the	music
continued.	 You	 left	 but	 it	 was	 such	 a	 haunting	 experience.	 Then	 suddenly	 a
thought	 came	 to	me	 that	 if	 Tansen	 is	 so	 beautiful,	what	 about	 his	master?	He
must	 have	 learned	 from	 somewhere.	 Music	 is	 also	 learned	 in	 India	 through
masters	because	it	is	one	of	the	meditative	sciences.
What	about	his	master	if	his	disciple	is	so	great?
And	he	 told	Tansen	 'I	 could	 not	 imagine	 that	 something	 could	 be	 greater	 than
your	music	or	somebody	could	be	greater	than	you	are.	Is	your	master	alive?	If
he	is	alive	then	invite	him	to	the	court.'
Tansen	said	'He	is	alive	but	he	won't	come.	You	will	have	to	go	to	him.	He	is	a
beggar	and	he	does	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
care	 for	anything.	Even	 if	somehow	I	persuade	him	to	come	he	never	sings.	 If
somebody	asks	'He	never	plays	on	his	instruments,	he	plays	only	when	he	feels
to.	So	if	you	really	want	to	listen	you	will	have	to	follow	according	to	his	ways.
And	 he	 is	 an	 eccentric	 man;	 one	 never	 knows	 when	 he	 will	 play.	 But	 I	 will
enquire	and	I	will	make	arrangements.'
And	after	two	days	he	informed	the	king	'He	is	just	close	by	in	Agra	where	the
Taj	Mahal	is,	just	by	the	side	of	the	river;	he	lives	in	a	hut.	And	I	have	come	to
know	that	almost	every	morning,	early,	at	three	o'clock	in	the	morning,	he	plays
--	all	alone.	Nobody	hears	it	--	only	the	river	and	the	trees.	So	if	you	really	want
to	listen	we	will	have	to	go	and	hide	behind	his	hut	and	listen.'
Akbar	was	so	enchanted	 that	he	said,	 'Okay,	 I	will	come.'	They	went.	 It	was	a
cold	winter	night	and	Akbar	was	shivering	and	like	a	thief	he	was	hiding	behind
the	hut.	The	master	started	playing	at	three	o'clock.	Akbar	could	not	believe	it,	it
was	 so	 unearthly.	Many	 times	 he	 thought	 he	 was	 dreaming;	 and	 tears	 started
flowing	from	his	eyes	and	Tansen	was	watching	what	was	happening.	Akbar	did
not	utter	a	single	word,	he	was	in	such	awe.
When	they	were	returning	he	remained	silent	the	impact	of	the	music	was	such.
When	 he	 was	 entering	 his	 palace	 he	 said	 only	 one	 thing	 to	 Tansen,	 'It	 is
unbelievable.	 If	 you	 had	 told	me	 I	 would	 not	 have	 believed	 it.	 I	 thought	 that
there	was	nobody	who	can	surpass	you,	but	now,	what	I	have	heard	and	seen	is
so	superb	that	I	don't	thing	you	could	ever	reach	that	point.'
The	name	of	the	master	was	Haridas.	Akbar	said,	 'Haridas	is	simply	not	of	this
world,	 but	what	 is	 the	 secret?	Why	 there	 is	 such	 a	gap	between	you	 and	your
master?'	Tansen	said,	'There	is	no	secret	about	it,	it	is	an	open	secret:	I	sing	to	get
something	 --	 money,	 power,	 prestige.	 He	 sings	 not	 to	 get	 anything,	 he	 sings
because	he	has	already	got	something;	he	has	got	his	inner	silence.	Those	songs,
that	 music,	 is	 born	 out	 of	 an	 inner	 experience.	 It	 is	 a	 by-product,	 it	 is	 a
consequence,	 it	 is	 something	 that	 has	 happened	 within	 him	 and	 is	 flowing
outside	in	the	form	of	music.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned	I	am	a	technician;	I	know	how	to	play	but	nothing	has
happened	within	me.	 I	 am	 singing	 to	 get	 something,	 he	 sings	 because	 he	 has
already	got	something.'
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 live	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 way	 to	 the	 way	 ordinary
humanity	is	living.	They	have	to	live	love	--	that	is	the	inner	kingdom,	the	inner
richness.	Then	your	whole	life	will	be	full	of	songs,	music,	poetry,	joy,	dance.
The	world	will	call	you	mad,	but	who	cares	about	the	world?	You	will	know	that
if	 this	 is	madness	 then	madness	 is	 far	 better	 than	 the	 so-called	 sanity.	 --	How
long	will	you	be	here?	--	I	want	to	stay	forever.
--	Forever	is	the	best!	Good.
Your	name	is	beautiful:	Ma	Brigitte.	It	comes	from	the	same	root	from	which	the
word	'bridge'	comes.
Man	 is	 a	 bridge.	Man	 is	 not	 the	 goal	 but	 only	 a	 ladder,	 a	 passage,	 a	 bridge,
between	 the	 animal	 and	 the	 divine.	 One	 should	 not	 be	 satisfied	 by	 being	 just
human;	that	is	not	enough.	That	is	making	your	house	on	the	bridge.	It	is	not	safe
as	 the	bridge	 is	 not	meant	 for	 that	 purpose.	The	bridge	has	 to	be	 transcended,
passed	over.	Its	function	is	to	take	you	to	the	other	shore.
Man	is	not	a	being	but	a	bridge.	Animals	have	being	and	Buddhas	have	being,
but	man	is	only	a	bridge.
He	 has	 no	 being,	 he	 is	 a	 becoming.	He	 goes	 on	 becoming,	 changing,	moving
from	one	point	to	another.	He	is	a	journey,	a	pilgrimage.
This	has	 to	be	remembered:	unless	you	become	enlightened,	don't	be	satisfied.
Remain	 in	 divine	 discontent	 to	 the	 last	moment	when	 you	 explode	 into	 light,
when	you	become	light,	when	light	becomes	your	being.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8010025
ShortTitle:	THUNK02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Her	name	means	consecrated	to	god,	Osho	tells	a	social	worker	from	Italy.	And
he	adds	the	word
'anand'	--	which	means	bliss	--	to	it.)
One	can	live	one's	life	in	two	ways.	One	is	that	of	fighting	against	the	whole;	it
is	the	way	of	the	ego.
The	other	is	surrendering	to	the	whole;	that	is	the	way	of	love.	And	bliss	happens
only	on	the	second	path.
The	first	path	is	full	of	misery,	frustration,	failure.	It	 is	bound	to	be	so	because
the	part	cannot	win	against	the	whole.	It	is	utterly	stupid	for	a	wave	to	fight	the
ocean,	it	is	doomed	to	fail.	Maybe	for	a	few	moments	it	can	enjoy	the	idea	--	and
that's	what	happens	to	every	man:	we	waste	our	life	in	enjoying	the	idea	that	we
are	separate	from	existence.	Then	life	is	tragic.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	to	choose	the	other	way,	the	way	of	love,	surrender,	let-
go.	One	does	not	fight	the	river,	one	simply	goes	with	it;	one	becomes	more	and
more	natural.	And	when	there	is	no	fight	there	is	no	tension,	and	when	there	is
no	fight	there	is	no	question	of	failure.	One's	victory	is	absolutely	certain.
Without	fighting	a	battle	one	is	victorious	--	that	is	the	miracle	of	love.
Isabella	means	surrendered	to	god.	And	bliss	is	the	flowering	of	that	surrender.
(Goldie	means	golden	--	and	that's	just	what	love	is,	Osho	begins	in	his	address
to	 the	next	 for	 sannyas.)	Because	gold	 is	 the	most	precious	metal	 it	 represents
the	 most	 precious	 treasure	 in	 you.	 It	 is	 only	 through	 love	 that	 one's	 life	 is
transformed,	 transported	 from	 the	 dark	 valleys	 to	 the	 golden	 peaks,	 the	 sunlit
golden	peaks.
Without	love	a	man	lives	in	darkness,	without	love	a	man	really	does	not	live	but
only	dies	 slowly,	gradually.	 It	 is	only	 through	 love	 that	one	becomes	aware	of
what	 life	 is	all	about.	 It	 is	a	communion,	 it	 is	a	meeting	and	merging	with	 the
whole.	Love	gives	you	a	glimpse	of	the	merger.
And	 love	 has	 many	 planes	 --	 of	 course,	 the	 first	 is	 biological	 love,	 between
mother	 and	 child,	 lover	 and	 beloved,	 brother	 and	 sister.	 These	 are	 biological
aspects	of	love;	it	is	the	lowest	kind.	A	little	higher	is	the	love	between	friends.	It
is	higher	because	it	is	more	subtle;	it	has	no	biological	strings	attached	to	it.	And
there	is	some	consciousness,	some	awareness,	some	choice	in	it.
When	you	love	your	mother	there	is	no	question	of	choice.	You	happen	to	be	the
child	of	a	certain	woman.	If	 it	were	somebody	else	you	would	have	 loved	 that
person.	It	is	accidental	that	a	certain	woman	is	your	mother,	that	a	certain	man	is
your	 father,	 that	 a	 certain	person	 is	 your	brother	or	 sister.	 It	 is	 just	 accidental;
there	is	no	choice	in	it.
Even	when	a	lover	falls	in	love	with	a	woman,	of	course	it	appears	there	is	some
choice;	 then	 too	 there	 is	 no	 choice.	 It	 is	 instinctive.	You	 suddenly	 feel	 a	 deep
longing	for	a	certain	person	for	no	reason	at	all.	You	cannot	explain	why	it	is	so;
it	is	unconscious.	It	simply	happens.	You	can	only	shrug	your	shoulders	--	there
is	no	explanation.
If	 it	 is	 a	 conscious	choice	 then	 there	 is	 an	explanation,	 then	you	can	 say	why.
With	 friendship	a	 little	awareness,	consciousness,	and	choice	enters.	 It	 is	not	a
question	of	biology,	of	instinct,	at	all.
Friendship	is	more	explainable.	When	you	love	a	person	biologically	as	a	wife,
as	 a	husband,	 there	 is	possessiveness,	 jealousy,	domination.	You	would	 like	 to
possess	the	whole	person,	you	would	not	like	to	share	the	person	with	anybody;
you	 will	 be	 afraid.	 You	 can	 have	 many	 friends,	 but	 you	 cannot	 have	 many
women,	 you	 cannot	 have	 many	 men	 as	 lovers,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 in	 a
continuous	 misery,	 there	 will	 be	 constant	 turmoil	 and	 chaos	 because	 all	 their
egos	will	come	into	conflict.	But	you	can	have	many	friends.
That's	the	beauty	of	friendship	--	it	is	less	possessive,	it	is	less	egoistic.	You	don't
want	to	possess	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
person;	he	can	have	other	 friends.	 In	 fact	 if	he	has	many	 friends	you	will	 find
him	more	friendly	towards	you.	A	person	who	has	no	friend	other	than	you	will
not	be	very	friendly,	because	he	will	not	have	any	experience	of	friendship.
The	same	is	true	about	love	too:	in	a	better	world,	when	man	has	become	a	little
more	mature,	he	will	start	sharing	love	too,	just	like	friendship.	But	that	needs	a
more	mature	humanity.	A	woman	who	can	love	many	men	will	have	an	enriched
quality	 of	 love,	 and	 the	man	who	 can	 love	many	women,	 of	 course,	 he	 learns
from	each	love.	And	no	two	persons	are	alike.	Each	person	gives	a	new	aspect	of
love,	 a	 new	 vision,	 a	 totally	 new	 experience	 which	 cannot	 be	 possible	 with
anybody	else.
So	the	more	you	love,	the	more	dimensions	your	loving	quality	starts	having.	If
you	 love	 a	 poet	 certainly	 his	 love	 will	 be	 different	 than	 the	 love	 of	 a
mathematician.	If	you	love	a	musician	his	love	will	be	different	than	the	love	of
a	dancer.	If	you	love	a	painter	his	love	is	going	to	be	different	than	the	love	of	a
sculptor.
Their	attitudes,	 their	approaches,	are	different.	They	will	 love	you	for	different
reasons	--	and	naturally	when	a	person	loves	you	for	different	reasons	that	aspect
of	your	life	surfaces.
For	example,	a	sculptor	may	 love	you	because	of	 the	proportion	of	your	body.
The	painter	may	love	you	because	of	the	colour	of	your	face,	the	colour	of	your
hair,	the	colour	of	your	eyes,	becase	his	approach	towards	life	is	that	of	colour.	A
musician	 may	 love	 you	 because	 of	 your	 voice,	 your	 sound.	 That	 will	 not	 be
taken	into	account	by	the	painter	at	all,	but	to	the	musician,	to	his	attuned	ear,	the
most	 lovely	 thing	 is	 the	voice.	And	when	 a	 person	 loves	you	because	of	 your
voice,	your	voice	will	become	beautiful	because	his	attention	will	be	pouring	on
that	particular	aspect	of	your	life.
In	a	better	world	we	will	change	biology	 into	something	higher;	we	will	make
love	 affairs	 also	 affairs	 of	 friendship.	And	 that's	my	effort	 in	 this	 commune	 --
that	 love	 also	 should	 be	 raised	 a	 little	 higher.	 It	 should	 go	 a	 little	 beyond	 the
instinctive;	 it	 should	 start	 having	 some	 aesthetics	 about	 it.	 It	 should	 become
more	compassionate,	less	jealous.	It	should	allow	freedom.
A	 love	 that	 does	 not	 allow	 freedom	 is	 not	 much	 of	 a	 love.	 It	 is	 just	 an	 ego
number	 and	 sooner	 or	 later	 that	 ego	 is	 going	 to	 destroy	 the	whole	 thing.	 It	 is
poison,	pure	poison.	It	simply	kills,	it	is	never	creative.
Friendship	is	a	little	higher.	Prayer	is	even	higher,	because	in	prayer	the	other	is
no	more	thought	as	a	person	but	as	a	divine	manifestation.	He	is	no	more	thought
of	as	a	body	or	as	a	mind.	The	first	love,	the	biological,	thinks	of	the	other	as	a
body.	The	second	love,	friendship,	thinks	of	the	other	as	a	psychology	--
the	 other	 is	 a	mind.	 And	 the	 third	 love,	 prayer,	 thinks	 of	 the	 other	 as	 divine,
godliness.	 Now	 all	 limitations	 disappear,	 then	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 a	 divine
manifestation.	And	that	is	the	state	which	can	be	called	golden,	goldie.
(There	is	a	song	that	is	wordless,	tuneless	and	singerless.	Its	name	is	meditation,
Osho	 tells	Dhyangit.)	Meditation	means	 no-thought,	 no-mind,	 no	words.	They
have	all	been	left	behind;	one	has	come	to	an	immense,	infinite	silence.	But	that
silence	is	not	dead,	it	is	a	singing	silence.	It	is	throbbing,	pulsating	with	life.	It
has	a	dancing	quality	to	it.
You	cannot	see	the	dance,	you	can	only	feel	it.	You	cannot	hear	the	song	but	it
reverberates	in	your	whole	being.	Your	every	cell	becomes	bathed	in	it.
It	is	a	tremendous	experience	of	beauty,	of	bliss	--	but	it	is	inexpressible.	It	is	so
vast	that	no	word	can	contain	it.	The	thing	that	comes	closest	to	it	is	music,	but
that	 too	 just	 expresses	 it	 approximately,	 not	 exactly.	 Obviously	 music	 is	 also
sound	--	it	is	very	harmonious	sound,	but	the	sound	is	there.	In	meditation	there
is	no	sound,	it	is	soundlessness.	Everything	has	stopped,	no	movement,	one	has
come	to	a	complete	halt.	But	the	experience	can	only	be	described	as	a	song,	as	a
tremendous	harmony.	All	these	words	fall	short	but	these	are	the	only	words	that
give	little	bit	of	help.	They	are	only	fingers	pointing	to	the	moon.
They	are	not	the	moon	themselves,	just	fingers	pointing	to	the	moon.
But	 I	 emphasise	 its	 dancing	 quality	 for	 a	 certain	 reason	 --	 because	 many
meditators	have	become	dead;	 they	have	 tried	 to	 silence	 the	mind.	And	 if	you
persist	you	can	silence	 the	mind.	You	can	repress	 it	and	 there	will	be	a	certain
kind	 of	 silence,	 but	 that	 will	 be	 the	 silence	 of	 a	 cemetery:	 forced,	 violently
forced.
Something	has	been	crushed,	something	has	been	killed.	a	beautiful	experience.
That's	why	so	many	of	your	so-called	saints	look	so	sad,	so	serious.	They	have
lost	laughter,	they	have	lost	love,	they	have	lost	life.
They	 themselves	 have	 committed	 the	 crime,	 they	 themselves	 have	 committed
suicide.	 They	 are	 sincere	 people	 but	 a	 little	 bit	 foolish	 too.	 They	 missed	 the
point.
They	 followed	 it	 literally	 but	 they	 did	 not	 understand	 the	 symbolic	 message,
Meditation	 is	 silence,	 not	 an	 enforced	 silence	 but	 a	 silence	 that	 comes	 out	 of
deep	 understanding,	 not	 repression.	 And	 then	 the	 quality	 is	 totally	 different.
When	 silence	 comes	 out	 of	 understanding	 it	 is	 a	 singing	 silence,	 a	 dancing
silence,	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
your	life	immediately	bursts	into	creativity.
Everybody	is	carrying	a	song	in	their	hearts	which	has	to	be	sung,	whatsoever	it
is.	 One	 cannot	 know	 it	 beforehand,	 one	 knows	 it	 only	 when	 one	 goes
understandingly	 into	 meditation.	 With	 awareness,	 when	 one	 reaches	 to	 one's
core,	 one	 finds	 that	 there	 is	 something	 which	 has	 to	 be	 shared.	 It	 may	 be
painting,	it	may	be	dancing,	it	may	be	cooking	--	it	may	be	anything.	It	does	not
matter	what	it	is,	but	one	always	discovers	that	there	is	something	which	one	has
to	share.	One	has	to	create,	one	has	to	participate	in	existence	through	it.
To	 me	 that	 is	 true	 prayer.	 That	 is	 true	 worship	 --	 when	 you	 participate	 in
existence	 by	 creating	 something.	 God	 is	 the	 creator;	 then	 the	 only	 way	 to
commune	with	him	is	to	be	a	creator	in	your	own	way,	in	a	small	way	of	course.
But	you	have	to	do	something	creative.
And	this	creativity	should	not	be	thought	up	by	the	mind,	otherwise	it	won't	be
true	to	your	innermost	core.	It	has	to	be	discovered	in	meditation.	Everybody	has
to	 discover	 their	 song.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 have	 discovered	 it	 your	 life
becomes	a	blessing	--	not	only	to	you,	it	becomes	a	blessing	to	others	too.
And	 that's	 how	 a	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 live:	 in	 a	 dance,	 in	 a	 trance,	 sharing
whatsoever	 he	 has	 with	 no	 miserliness,	 with	 no	 possessiveness.	 Just	 pouring
oneself	whole-heartedly	into	existence.
And	that	is	 the	only	offering	that	is	accepted	by	god.	All	other	offerings	in	the
churches,	in	the	temples,	in	the	mosques	are	pseudo.
('God'	was	once	a	beautiful	word,	but	it	has	become	polluted	by	the	priests.	He
prefers	the	name	truth,	Osho	says	to	Satyash.	And	then	he	explains	why.)
'God'	has	taken	on	a	wrong	colour,	a	wrong	association.	It	reminds	you	of	rotten
religions,	 of	 superstitions,	 dogmatic	 creeds.	 It	 reminds	 you	 of	 the	whole	 ugly
history	of	religions,	of	massacre,	murder,	violence	against	each	other.	It	stinks	of
many	inhuman	things.
People	have	been	burned	alive	by	Christians,	by	Mohammedans,	by	Hindus.	The
religions	in	the	past	have	proved	not	a	blessing	but	a	curse.	Jesus	is	beautiful	but
Christianity	 is	 ugly;	 Krishna	 is	 beautiful	 but	 Hinduism	 is	 ugly;	 Buddha	 is
beautiful	but	Buddhists	are	 just	his	enemies	 --	 they	go	on	doing	 things	 that	he
was	against.
It	 is	 better	 to	 call	 god	 truth	because	 then	different	 ideas	 arise	 in	your	mind.	 It
does	 not	 remind	 you	 of	 religions	 and	 the	 chaos	 that	 they	 have	 created	 in	 the
world.	 It	 reminds	 you	 more	 of	 a	 scientific	 approach,	 it	 reminds	 you	 more	 of
enquiry	than	of	worship.	It	 reminds	you	more	of	going	into	a	deep	exploration
rather	than	following	a	certain	creed.
The	word	'truth'	is	very	inviting	for	those	who	have	courage	to	explore,	for	those
who	 are	 ready	 to	 go	 into	 the	 unknown	 and	 the	 unknowable.	 It	 is	 not	 for	 the
cowards,	it	is	only	for	the	courageous.	The	cowards	worship	and	the	courageous
enquire.	 The	 cowards	 believe,	 the	 courageous	 discover.	 The	 cowards	 cling	 to
others'	 ideas	 and	 the	 courageous	 insist,	 'Unless	 I	 know,	 all	 knowledge	 is
worthless.	Unless	I	know...
knowledge	is	just	a	cover-up	to	hide	one's	ignorance.
My	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 to	 be	 believers.	 They	 have	 to	 be	 explorers	 of	 the
unknown,	adventurers.
Whatsoever	 the	 risk,	 whatsoever	 the	 danger	 --	 it	 has	 to	 be	 accepted.	 The
challenge	 has	 to	 be	 accepted	 because	 it	 is	 only	 through	 challenge	 that	 one
matures,	 ripens.	 It	 is	only	 through	challenge	 that	a	certain	 integrity	happens	 to
you.	The	greater	the	challenge,	the	greater	the	soul,	the	greater	the	birth	of	a	new
being	in	you.
(We've	all	tasted	of	pleasure	and	of	happiness,	so	we	think	we	know	what	bliss
is.	But	it's	incomparable.
Osho	gives	Stefan	the	name	Anand	Apurvo	to	remind	him	of	the	unique	quality
of	bliss.)	All	that	we	know	about	pleasure	and	happiness	is	of	no	help	in	making
us	 understand	 what	 bliss	 is,	 because	 the	 difference	 between	 pleasure	 and
happiness	is	only	of	quantity	but	the	difference	between	pleasure,	happiness,	and
bliss	is	of	quality.	It	is	entering	into	a	totally	new	unknown	dimension.
So	when	we	talk	about	bliss	we	naturally	understand	it	in	terms	of	pleasure.	That
is	the	lowest	--
physiological,	biological.	Or	at	the	most	we	think	of	happiness	--	psychological.
But	neither	pleasure	nor	happiness	can	give	you	any	idea	of	bliss.
Once	a	blind	man	was	brought	to	Buddha	and	he	was	a	very	great	philosopher	of
immense	 logical	 acumen.	The	whole	of	 his	 village	had	become	exhausted	 and
tired	 because	 nobody	 could	 convince	 him	 that	 light	 exists;	 he	 would	 refute
everybody.	 And	 the	 problem	 for	 the	 villagers	 was	 that	 they	 know	 that	 light
existed	 but	 they	 were	 incapable	 of	 convincing	 the	 blind	 philosopher.	 On	 the
contrary	he	used	to	convince	them	that	light	does	not	exist	and	his	fundamental
argument	was.	'I	am	ready,	bring	the	light	to	me	so	I	can	touch	and	feel	it	just	the
way	I	feel	things.	Or	if	you	say	that	it	is	not	like	a	thing,	then	let	me	taste	it;	it
must	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	some	 taste.	 If	 it	has	no	 taste	 it	must	have	some	smell.	Even	 if	 that	 is	not
possible	then	you	can	do	something	so	that	some	sound	arises	out	of	it.	You	can
beat	it	like	a	drum	so	I	can	hear	it.
'These	are	the	four	possibilities:	touching,	tasting,	smelling,	hearing;	there	is	no
other!	And	I	am	ready	--
convince	me.'
Now,	you	cannot	touch	light,	you	cannot	taste	light,	you	cannot	smell	light,	you
cannot	hear	light.	So	when	they	heard	that	Buddha	was	coming	to	their	village
they	 were	 very	 happy.	 They	 brought	 the	 blind	 man	 to	 Buddha	 and	 they	 said
'Only	you	can	convince	this	fool.	We	are	tired	of	him.	He	convinces	us	that	there
is	no	light,	and	he	is	really	convincing.	We	are	absolutely	impotent,	incapable	of
convincing	him,	although	we	know	light	exists	and	he	does	not	know,	he	has	no
eyes.	But	how	to	convince	him?	He	says	on	the	contrary
"Just	 to	prove	me	blind	you	have	 invented	 this	 idea	of	 light	 --	and	you	are	all
blind!"'
Buddha	looked	at	the	blind	man,	he	heard	all	his	arguments	and	he	said	that	the
villagers	were	wrong:
'The	 blind	 man	 is	 right	 because	 in	 his	 blindness	 what	 else	 can	 he	 do?	 He	 is
absolutely	available	to	being	convinced	by	you	but	he	has	only	got	four	senses.
That	is	not	his	fault.	The	fault	is	yours.	The	very	idea	of	trying	to	convince	him
is	basically	wrong.	You	should	not	have	brought	him	to	me.	It	is	better	you	take
him	to	a	physician.'	And	Buddha	suggested	'Take	him	to	my	personal	physician;
he	is	the	best	in	the	country.'
Jivaka	 was	 the	 name	 of	 the	 physician.	 He	 was	 given	 to	 Buddha	 by	 a	 great
emperor	as	a	gift	and	 the	physician	used	 to	follow	Buddha	wherever	he	would
go.	So	he	said	'The	physician	is	here.	Take	him	to	the	physician	and	let	him	be
treated	--	it	is	not	a	question	of	arguing.'
The	blind	man	was	treated	and	within	six	months	he	started	seeing.	He	came	to
Buddha	with	tears	in	his	eyes,	fell	at	his	feet	and	said	'If	you	had	not	been	there	I
would	have	died	a	blind	man	with	 the	 idea	 that	 there	 is	no	 light,	 and	all	 these
people	of	my	village	are	just	fools:	 they	themselves	are	hypnotised	by	the	idea
and	they	are	trying	to	hypnotise	me.	I	thought	that	I	was	clever	but	I	was	a	fool.
And	it	 is	good	that	you	did	not	try	to	convince	me,	because	then	I	would	have
argued.	 And	 now	 I	 know	 that	 nobody	would	 have	 been	 able	 to	 persuade	me.
Now	I	know	that	I	cannot	convince	a	blind	man	because	it	 is	not	a	question	of
arguing,	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 seeing.	 It	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 sense	 which	 was
lacking	in	me.'
The	same	 is	 true	about	bliss:	 it	 is	not	pleasure,	 it	 is	not	happiness,	 it	 is	 totally
different.	 It	 is	 so	 unique	 that	 nothing	 in	 your	 experience	 can	 help	 you	 to
understand	it.
So	one	has	to	go	in	search	of	bliss	with	an	absolutely	empty	mind,	with	no	idea
of	what	it	is	exactly.	If	you	go	with	the	idea	of	pleasure	you	will	miss	the	point,
if	you	go	with	the	idea	of	happiness	you	will	miss	the	point.
And	that's	what	meditation	does:	it	makes	you	utterly	empty,	empty	of	all	your
experiences	and	ideas,	just	a	pure	nothingness.	And	only	in	that	nothingness	do
you	start	experiencing	for	the	first	time	something	new	of	which	you	would	not
even	have	dreamt.	It	is	so	unique,	it	is	so	incomparable.	No	other	experience	can
give	you	any	hint	of	it,	not	even	a	small	indication.	One	has	to	look	for	it	without
any	a	priori	idea,	without	any	prejudice,	without	any	conception.
And	 that's	my	whole	work	here:	 to	dismantle	all	your	 ideas,	 to	 remove	all	 the
junk	from	the	mind	so	you	become	absolutely	empty.	Emptiness	 is	so	pure,	so
innocent,	so	clear	and	 transparent,	 that	nothing	can	be	hidden	from	it.	 It	opens
your	inner	eye,	your	inner	vision.	It	gives	you	a	new	sensibility,	a	new	sense,	and
suddenly	a	new	world	opens	up.	 It	was	always	 there	but	you	were	closed	 to	 it
because	a	certain	sense	in	you	was	not	functioning.
Metaphorically	we	have	called	that	sense	the	third	eye.	It	is	a	metaphor.	It	is	not
that	there	is	a	third	eye,	actually,	literally,	but	a	new	kind	of	seeing,	a	new	kind
of	perceptibility	opens	up	and	then	the	world	is	just	pure	bliss.	It	is	ecstasy	and
nothing	else.
(He	calls	her	true	love	--	Lore	from	Germany.)
What	 is	 ordinarily	 known	 as	 love	 is	 always	 something	 other	 than	 love.	 It
masquerades	 as	 love,	 it	 pretends	 to	be	 love	but	 it	 is	 not	 so,	 because	 if	 it	were
love	 then	 the	 world	 would	 be	 full	 of	 love,	 because	 everybody	 is	 loving.	 The
mother,	 the	 father,	 the	 brother,	 the	 sister,	 the	 husband,	 the	 wife,	 everybody	 is
loving.	Each	person	is	being	loved	by	many	people.	Each	person	is	being	poured
on	with	 love	 from	many	 sides.	 Each	 person	would	 be	 a	 reservoir	 of	 love,	 so
much	love	is	given,	and	each	person	would	be	ecstatic.
But	 that	 is	not	 the	case.	Everybody	looks	so	miserable,	so	utterly	 in	gloom,	so
sad,	that	there	is	no	need	to	think	of	hell	somewhere	else;	it	seems	it	is	on	earth.
Why	are	people	living	in	such	hell?	If	there	is	so	much	love	this	place	should	be
a	paradise.	It	is	not	so.
The	world	 is	not	yet	a	paradise.	That's	why	we	have	been	inventing	a	paradise
somewhere	far	away:	it	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
simply	a	longing,	a	wishfulfilment.
All	 the	 cultures,	 all	 the	 societies	 of	 the	 world,	 think	 of	 heaven	 as	 being
somewhere	 above,	 far	 above,	 never	 here	 and	 now,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that
there	 is	nothing	here	and	now	 to	prove	 it	 so	we	have	 to	postpone	 it	until	after
death.	And	nobody	comes	back	from	the	dead	to	say	anything.	Once	a	person	is
dead	he	does	not	come	to	visit	us	and	tell	us	where	he	is,	so	it	is	easy	to	postpone
it	beyond	death,	above	the	clouds,	far	above	the	clouds.
It	is	just	a	trick,	a	strategy,	so	that	we	can	tolerate	our	hell	in	the	hope	that	it	will
end	soon,	it	is	not	going	to	last	forever	--	just	a	seventy	eighty-year	life;	nothing
to	be	worried	about.	In	the	eternal	existence	what	is	seventy	years,	eighty	years
or	even	a	hundred	years?	--	nothing.	Just	a	dewdrop	in	the	ocean	of	eternity.	So	it
is	 bound	 to	 pass,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	worried	 about	 it.	And	 sooner	 or	 later
paradise	will	open	up	with	all	its	joys	and	blessings,	with	the	celestial	music	and
angels	dancing	all	around	you.
These	 are	 just	 dreams;	 they	 are	 religious	dreams,	but	dreams	are	dreams.	And
dreams	prove	only	one	thing,	that	something	is	missing	in	our	life.	We	are	aware
that	something	is	missing	and	we	have	to	invent	some	idea	to	console	us.
Love	has	not	existed	on	the	earth.	Hatred	has	existed.	There	are	immense	proofs
of	 it.	 The	whole	 history	 is	 a	 proof	 of	 human	 insanity	 but	 it	 is	 not	 a	 proof	 of
human	love.	Love	exists	only	in	poetry	--	a	wishfulfilment.
My	effort	is	that	love	should	be	a	reality	in	your	life,	not	just	a	poem,	not	just	a
dream.	It	has	 to	be	actualised.	And	the	first	step	in	actualising	love	is	 to	know
that	whatsoever	we	have	thought	of	as	love	up	to	now	is	not	so;	this	is	the	first
step	 and	 of	 great	 importance.	 No	 other	 step	 is	 going	 to	 be	 of	 that	 much
importance.	The	first	step	is	always	the	most	important	step,	because	if	you	go
on	believing	that	this	is	love	then	there	is	no	way	to	find	true	love.	The	moment
you	 become	 aware	 that	 this	 is	 not	 true	 love	 because	 this	 is	 not	 giving	 us	 any
bliss...	Bliss	is	the	criterion	and	this	so-called	love	gives	you	only	jealousy,	gives
you	 all	 kinds	 of	 pains,	 agony,	 but	 no	 ecstasy.	 At	 the	most	 it	 is	 some	 type	 of
consolation	on	the	physical	plane	--
which	is	not	much,	it	is	very	momentary;	a	little	cosiness,	a	little	warmth	in	the
cold	world,	but	it	is	not	much.
Life	has	 to	 reach	something	higher,	has	 to	attain	 to	something	higher.	Life	has
the	potential	to	reach	to	the	peaks	and	we	are	crawling	in	the	valleys.	Yes,	once
in	a	while	a	ray	of	light	comes,	but	we	should	not	be	satisfied	with	it.
I	 call	 it	 divine	 discontentment.	We	 should	 not	 be	 satisfied	 with	 the	 so-called
ordinary	 life.	 We	 should	 become	 discontented	 with	 this,	 only	 then	 is	 there	 a
possibility	of	enquiring,	of	searching,	of	discovering	that	which	is	true.
Contentment	is	possible	but	the	beginning	has	to	be	discontentment.	One	should
not	remain	satisfied	with	the	so-called	world	that	has	been	given	to	us.	And	the
beginning	is	to	be	courageous	enough	to	see	things	as	they	are.
Our	love	is	not	true	love,	our	knowledge	is	not	true	knowledge,	our	personality
is	not	our	individuality.
It	is	not	authentic,	it	is	pseudo,	it	is	a	mask.	It	is	not	our	original	face.	And	we
have	to	withdraw	all	that	is	inauthentic.	We	have	to	destroy	all	that	is	false	and
pseudo	--	mercilessly,	only	then	will	we	be	able	to	discover	our	true	being.	And
with	that	discovery	many	things	are	automatically	discovered.	The	moment	you
discover	 your	 true	 being,	 your	 unique	 individuality,	 suddenly	 many	 things
become	available	to	you:	true	love,	true	knowing.	No	problem	arises.	Once	you
have	 discovered	 who	 you	 are,	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 has	 a	 truth	 about	 it,	 has	 a
sincerity	about	it,	has	some	authenticity	about	it.
Meditation	is	the	key	to	discover	your	true	being	and	through	it	to	discover	true
love,	true	wisdom,	the	true	god,	otherwise	people	are	worshipping	only	invented
gods.
All	 the	 idols	of	 the	gods	 in	 the	 temples	are	anthropocentric;	man	has	 invented
them	 according	 to	 himself.	 That's	why	 the	Chinese	 statue	 of	 god	 looks	 like	 a
Chinese	man	and	the	Indian	statue	of	god	looks	like	an	Indian	man:	these	are	just
projections.	And	all	our	theories	about	god	are	just	tricks	to	hide	our	ignorance.
My	sannyasins	have	to	uncover	their	ignorance.	It	hurts	but	that's	how	one	can
start	moving	 towards	 the	 healing	 of	 the	wound.	 If	 you	 keep	 it	 covered	 it	will
never	heal.	It	has	to	be	open	to	the	sun,	to	the	moon,	to	the	wind,	to	the	rain,	to
existence	as	such,	then	it	heals.
A	sannyasin	 is	one	who	has	attained	spiritual	health.	Then	his	 love	 is	 true,	his
seeing	 is	 true.	 Then	 whatsoever	 he	 does	 has	 a	 grace.	 And	 then	 he	 lives	 in
freedom,	 absolute	 freedom,	 because	 now	 he	 knows	 that	 even	 death	 cannot
destroy	him,	so	there	is	no	fear.	When	there	is	no	fear	then	there	is	freedom.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010045
ShortTitle:	THUNK04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(His	 new	 name	 contains	 the	meaning	 of	 sannyas	 --	 meditation	 and	 victorious
peace,	Osho	tells	Dhyan	Siggi.)
Sannyas	means	entering	into	the	inner	world	your	being	--	and	that	entry	brings
both	meditation	and	peace.	And	wherever	these	two	meet	there	is	victory.
Meditation	without	 peace	 is	 dead,	 forced,	 not	 really	meditation	but	 only	 some
kind	of	concentration.
And	 that	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 errors	 committed	 by	many	 people:	 they	 think
concentration	is	meditation.	It	is	not.	Meditation	is	just	the	opposite	of	it.
Concentration	is	a	tense	state	of	mind,	meditation	is	a	relaxed	state	of	mind.	And
the	miracle	 of	 relaxation	 is	 that	 when	 relaxation	 is	 total	 the	mind	 disappears.
Mind	 can	 only	 exist	 with	 tensions,	 anxieties	worries.	 It	 feeds	 on	 them;	 hence
concentration	 never	 leads	 you	 beyond	 the	mind.	 It	 can	manage	 to	 give	 you	 a
certain	strength	of	mind,	it	can	make	your	mind	function	more	efficiently,	more
powerfully,	because	you	will	be	less	distracted,	but	it	won't	help	you	to	attain	a
state	of	no-mind.
Meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.	 And	 only	 in	 meditation,	 in	 true	meditation,
does	peace	happen.	It	is	just	a	natural	fragrance	of	meditation.
One	 can	 also	 be	 peaceful	 without	 meditation	 --	 then	 again	 something	 goes
wrong.	That	peace	remains	only	on	the	surface	and	deep	inside	there	is	always
turmoil,	one	is	sitting	on	a	volcano	--	sitting	peace-fully,	but	the	volcano	is	there
and	it	can	erupt	any	moment.	Any	excuse	will	do.
Never	force	yourself	to	be	peaceful	and	never	force	the	mind	in	any	way,	on	any
subject,	in	any	direction.	Enter	relaxation,	total	relaxation,	doing	nothing	--	just
being	 --	 and	 in	 that	moment,	when	 you	 are	 a	 pure	 being,	 doing	 nothing	 --	 no
effort	to	be	peaceful,	no	effort	to	concentrate	--	when	there	is	no	effort	at	all	on
your	 part,	 in	 that	 effortless	 moment	 meditation	 and	 peace	 happen
simultaneously.	And	that	brings	victory,	inner	victory.	It	makes	you	the	master	of
your	own	soul,	of	your	own	destiny.
(Osho	 adds	Deva,	 to	 Lothar	 to	make	 his	 full	 name	mean	 divine	 vastness	 and
glory.	To	be	vast	is	glorious,	Osho	observes.)
To	 live	 within	 limitations	 is	 to	 live	 in	 gloom,	 in	 a	 state	 of	 indignity.	 It	 is	 a
humiliation	because	our	being	needs	the	whole	sky,	only	then	can	it	dance,	sing,
be.	Otherwise	everything	is	crippled,	paralysed;	there	is	no	space	to	fly,	no	space
to	move.	And	man	lives	in	limitations:	the	limitation	of	the	body,	the	limitation
of	the	mind,	the	limitations	of	emotions,	moods.	Those	are	all	 limitations	upon
limitations.	And	all	these	limitations	have	to	be	transcended.
That's	the	function	of	meditation,	to	help	you	to	go	beyond	all	boundaries.	It	is	a
voyage	into	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
unbounded.	Then	all	glory	is	yours;	then	life	is	a	benediction,	a	sheer	festivity,	a
pure	joy.	And	to	me	joy	is	the	only	thing	that	is	godly,	because	it	brings	all	other
godly	qualities	--	love,	truth,	consciousness,	silence.
It	 brings	 everything	 that	 is	 needed,	 that	 is	 a	 requirement	 for	 spiritual	 growth.
Without	joy	nobody	can	grow.
In	misery	one	shrinks,	in	joy	one	expands.
And	that	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Lothar:	expansiveness.	And	man	should
never	become	contented	with	any	boundary.	Whenever	you	come	to	a	boundary
try	 to	 go	 beyond	 it.	 When	 all	 boundaries	 are	 transcended,	 when	 you	 have
reached	infinity,	you	have	come	to	god,	you	have	come	home.
(The	new	 sannyasin's	 name	 is	Swami	Antar	Ueli.	Antar	 comes	 from	 the	 same
root	as	the	English	word
'inner'	Osho	tells	us.)
There	are	two	worlds.	One	is	on	the	outside,	the	other	is	on	the	inside.	They	are
two	only	for	the	ignorant,	they	are	two	only	because	you	have	not	yet	seen	the
unity,	because	the	ego	is	standing	between	the	two	like	a	dividing	line.	Once	the
ego	evaporates,	disappears,	there	is	only	one	world.	Then	it	is	neither	subjective
nor	objective,	neither	outer	nor	 inner,	 but	 to	begin	with	we	have	 to	 accept	 the
state	in	which	we	are;	hence	I	say	there	are	two	worlds.	I	mean	for	you	there	are
two	worlds	--	the	outside	world	and	the	inside	world.
To	enter	into	ultimate	truth	first	one	has	to	explore	the	inner.	And	we	all	explore
the	outer	--	we	begin	with	the	wrong	step.	Then	everything	else	goes	wrong.	If
the	first	step	is	wrong	then	everything	else	is	going	to	be	wrong.
First	one	has	to	explore	oneself:	'Who	am	I?'	Once	you	are	settled	with	that,	once
you	have	seen	your	reality	then	the	whole	world	can	be	explored,	but	then	you
will	be	standing	on	solid	ground.	Otherwise	the	stupidity	is	that	you	don't	know
who	you	are	and	you	go	on	knowing	everything	else.	Your	own	house	remains	in
darkness	 and	 you	 go	 on	 and	 on	 looking	 at	 all	 kinds	 of	 lights	 available	 on	 the
outside.	That	is	not	going	to	help.
No	outer	light	can	be	brought	in.	You	have	to	find	your	inner	source	of	light	first.
That's	 why	 Socrates	 says	 'Know	 thyself.'	 That	 is	 the	 very	 essence	 of	 all	 the
religions,	the	very	soul.	That's	what	I	mean	by	Antar:	your	interiority.	Explore	it
--	 and	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 ecstatic	 adventures.	 In	 fact,	 the	 greatest	 ecstatic
adventure.	No	other	adventure	can	be	compared	with	 it,	 everything	 falls	 short.
Even	 going	 to	 the	moon	 or	 to	Mars	 falls	 short.	 It	 is	 nothing	 compared	 to	 the
journey	that	Jesus	made	or	Buddha	made.	They	are	real	adventurers.
And	your	name,	Ueli,	means	a	noble	ruler.	If	you	rule	somebody	else	you	cannot
be	noble.	Take	it	as	a	categorical	 truth:	 if	you	rule	others	you	cannot	be	noble.
The	very	idea	of	ruling	others	is	ignoble,	it	is	ugly,	because	by	ruling	others	you
reduce	them	to	things.	A	slave	is	destroyed	completely	--	not	only	his	body,	not
only	his	mind,	but	his	soul	is	destroyed.	In	all	the	countries	slavery	has	existed	in
the	past	and	slaves	were	treated	like	things.	One	could	kill	one's	slave,	it	was	not
a	crime	--	because	if	you	dismantle	your	chair,	what	is	the	crime	in	it?	Nobody
can	take	you	to	court.	If	you	destroy	your	car	that's	up	to	you;	it	is	your	car.
The	 same	 was	 true	 about	 slaves:	 one	 could	 destroy	 them,	 one	 could	 murder
them.	There	was	no	appeal	for	them,	no	court,	no	justice	existed	for	them.	They
were	not	thought	to	be	human	beings.
The	 same	 has	 been	 true	 in	 the	 past	 about	 women:	 they	 were	 also	 treated	 as
slaves,	as	property.	In	China	it	was	not	a	crime	to	kill	your	wife.	You	could	sell
your	wife	in	the	marketplace,	there	was	no	problem	about	it	--	she	belonged	to
you.
Whenever	 one	 rules	 others	 one	 is	 being	 very	 immoral,	 very	 irreligious,	 one	 is
being	a	criminal,	a	sinner.
One	can	be	a	noble	ruler	only	in	the	inner	world.	That	means	you	rule	your	own
mind,	body,	soul,	you	have	mastery	of	all	 that	you	are,	you	are	not	a	victim	of
unconscious	instincts	any	more.	Hence	the	real	mastery	is	of	the	inner,	not	of	the
outer.
Alexander	 conquered	 the	 then-known	 world,	 but	 all	 his	 victory	 was	 simply
violence,	 murder,	 arson,	 destruction.	 He	 was	 a	 calamity	 to	 humanity.	 All	 the
great	conquerors,	the	so-called	great	conquerors	of	course,	have	been	calamities,
curses.	 But	 a	 Zarathustra,	 a	 Lao	 Tzu,	 a	 Krishna	 --	 they	 are	 pure	 blessings	 to
humanity.	But	their	rule	was	of	a	totally	different	world:	they	ruled	themselves.
They	were	in	absolute	inner	discipline.	There	was	no	conflict	within	them,	they
had	 come	 to	 understand	 their	whole	 conscious	 and	 unconscious,	 their	 totality.
And	in	that	very	knowing	one	becomes	a	master.
So	 be	 a	 noble	 ruler,	 but	 the	 only	way	 to	 be	 a	 noble	 ruler	 is	 to	 go	 in.	 Possess
yourself,	 be	 absolutely	 rooted,	 centred,	 integrated,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 move
according	 to	 your	 light,	 so	 no	 unconscious	 instinct	 forces	 you	 to	 move	 in	 a
certain	 direction,	 so	 you	 need	 not	 go	 into	 something	 into	 which	 you	 never
wanted	to	go.
But	 this	 is	 really	 the	 situation.	That's	why	 in	 all	 the	 languages	phrases	 like	 'in
spite	of	myself'	exist.	It	simply	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
means	you	are	not	the	master.	You	become	angry	and	then	later	on	you	apologize
and	you	say	'I	never	wanted	to	be,	but	I	became	angry	in	spite	of	myself.'	What
does	it	mean?	What	are	you	confessing?
You	are	confessing	 that	 there	are	 forces	 inside	you	over	which	you	don't	have
any	mastery.	They	can	do	things	which	you	don't	want	to	do.	But	what	kind	of	a
life	is	this,	where	you	don't	have	any	idea	of	your	own	forces.	Anger	can	come
and	one	can	commit	murder	in	an	enraged	state,	and	then	guilt	comes,	naturally,
because	 you	 have	 done	 something	 which	 you	 never	 wanted	 to	 do	 in	 the	 first
place.
Modern	psychology	has	come	to	a	decisive	conclusion	that	only	one	part	of	our
mind	is	conscious,	nine	parts	are	unconscious.	So	just	a	very	small	fragment,	just
a	very	small	part	of	your	being,	is	conscious,	but	the	major	part,	nine	out	of	ten
fragments	are	unconscious.	It	is	just	like	an	iceberg:	only	one-tenth	is	above	the
surface	of	the	ocean,	nine-tenths	is	below	the	surface.	How	can	one-tenth	decide
for	nine-tenths?	--
impossible.	But	meditation	helps	you	to	make	your	conscious	slowly	bigger	and
to	 slowly	 reduce	 the	 unconscious	 to	 a	 point	 where	 it	 totally	 disappears.	 Then
your	whole	being	becomes	conscious,	full	of	light.
That	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	'enlightenment':	when	nothing	is	dark	inside	of
you,	then	the	master	has	arisen	in	you.	You	are	no	more	a	victim	of	unconscious
forces,	 you	 are	 totally	 in	 control.	And	without	 any	 enforcement,	 just	 by	being
aware,	conscious,	has	this	mastery	happened.
This	mastery	has	a	beauty,	a	grace.	Of	course	such	a	man	will	help	many	people
to	 be	 masters	 of	 themselves.	 That's	 my	 purpose	 here.	 A	 sannyasin	 is	 not	 a
follower,	he	is	a	fellow	traveller.	A	sannyasin	is	not	to	imitate	me,	he	has	just	to
understand	me,	that's	all.	Nothing	else	is	expected.	In	that	very	understanding	he
will	 slowly	 come	 out	 of	 the	 darkness.	And	 as	 one	 comes	 out	 of	 darkness	 life
starts	having	a	meaning,	tremendous	meaning,	significance,	splendour.
(The	words	evolution	and	revolution	are	immensely	important,	Osho	tells	newly
named	Veet	Vikas	--
going	beyond	evolution.)
Evolution	 is	 an	 unconscious	 phenomenon.	 It	 is	 a	 natural	 phenomenon.	 The
scientists	say	man	was	born	as	a	fish	in	the	ocean.	Millions	of	years	have	passed
between	the	stage	of	the	fish	and	that	of	the	human	being.	It	took	really	long	to
get	to	the	stage	of	a	human	being.	Man	had	to	pass	through	almost	all	kinds	of
animal	 stages.	 The	 last	 stage	 before	 man	 was	 something	 like	 the	 ape,	 the
monkey.
All	 this	 has	 happened	 unconsciously;	 no	 deliberate	 effort	 has	 been	 there.	 But
since	 man	 became	 man	 that	 evolutionary	 process	 seems	 to	 have	 stopped.	 It
seems	it	has	come	to	its	culmination,	because	man	has	been	man	for	thousands
of	 years	 and	 nothing	 has	 happened,	 no	 further	 growth	 has	 happened.	 It
definitively	shows	one	thing:	that	nature	has	done	all	it	could	do;	now	we	have
to	take	the	whole	course	in	our	hands.
We	have	to	move	from	evolution	to	revolution.
Evolution	means	unconscious,	revolution	means	conscious.	Evolution	is	growth
but	because	it	is	unconscious	it	takes	millions	of	years.	Revolution	is	also	growth
but	because	it	is	conscious	it	is	like	a	quantum	leap,	like	a	jump.	It	is	not	gradual,
you	don't	go	slowly	step	by	step.	It	all	depends	on	you,	on	how	courageous	you
are.	 Even	 in	 a	 single	 step	 one	 can	 move	 from	 a	 human	 being	 to	 a	 god,	 to	 a
Buddha,	to	a	Christ,	 just	 in	a	single	leap.	It	all	depends	on	your	intensity,	your
commitment,	involvement,	your	totality.
Sannyas	is	significant	only	because	the	process	of	evolution	has	stopped,	it	has
come	 to	 a	 full	 stop.	 Now	 man	 will	 not	 be	 growing	 naturally.	 There	 is	 no
possibility	 of	man	 growing	 naturally	 any	more,	 he	will	 remain	man	 unless	 he
decides	to	grow	consciously,	deliberately,	purposively.	That's	what	sannyas	is,	a
conscious	decision	to	grow.	And	that	is	the	beginning	of	revolution.
Go	beyond	evolution	and	start	a	revolution	in	your	life.
(Hans,	a	woodcutter	from	Holland,	receives	the	name	Dhyan	Veetesh.	It	means,
meditation	is	transcendence	--	of	the	body,	of	the	mind	and	even	of	the	heart,	in
the	final	analysis.)	Think	of	man	as	consisting	of	four	things,	The	first	concentric
circle	is	of	the	body	--	that	is	the	outermost	part	of	man.	The	second	concentric
circle	within	the	first	is	of	mind.	The	third	is	of	the	heart	--
emotions,	feelings.	And	the	fourth	is	your	very	centre	--	that	is	your	being.
Millions	of	people	live	only	on	the	first	circle.	They	think	of	themselves	as	their
physiology,	so	eating,	drinking	and	being	merry	is	all	that	they	think	life	consists
of.	They	think	that	life	begins	with	birth	and	ends	with	death	and	there	is	nothing
more	to	it	--	the	materialist's	standpoint.
Nothing	 is	wrong	 in	eating,	drinking	and	merrying,	but	 to	 stop	 there	 is	 stupid.
There	is	much	more	to	life.	And	one	need	not	renounce	the	body;	one	has	to	use
the	body	as	a	stepping	stone	to	reach	higher	planes,	as	a	jumping	board	to	reach
depths.	The	body	is	beautiful,	I	am	not	against	the	body,	I	am	not	anti-body;	I	am
not	 anti-anything.	 I	 want	 everything	 to	 be	 used	 because	 whatsoever	 god	 has
given	to	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
has	a	purpose;	you	may	know	it.	you	may	not	know	it.	That's	why	I	don't	teach
any	renunciation.	But	man	has	to	know	that	he	has	to	go	farther	than	the	body,
otherwise	he	will	remain	unfulfilled.
He	has	been	given	a	palace	and	he	just	lives	in	the	porch.	The	porch	is	beautiful,
the	porch	is	needed,	the	porch	is	part	of	the	palace.	But	you	need	not	make	it	an
abode	when	 the	whole	palace	 is	yours.	This	 is	 sheer	 foolishness,	not	 to	 live	 in
the	palace	and	to	just	go	on	living	in	the	porch.
The	body	is	 just	 the	porch,	a	connection	between	you	and	the	world,	 that's	all,
but	 it	 is	not	your	 total	reality,	 just	 the	most	superficial	 layer.	Go	a	 little	deeper
and	there	is	mind.	And	the	joys	of	mind	are	higher	than	the	joys	of	the	body.	The
body	 needs	 only	 two	 joys:	 sex	 and	 food.	 That	 is	 the	 lowest	 kind	 of	 joy,	 the
animal	kind.
Mind	knows	better	joys	--	of	music,	of	painting	of	poetry,	of	literature.	Then	the
whole	world	expands.
Suddenly	you	 start	 enjoying	 the	 subtle	 things	 of	 life.	What	 can	 food	give	 you
compared	 to	 the	 great	music	 of	Mozart?	What	 can	 sex	 give	 you	 compared	 to
great	 literature,	 poetry,	 painting?	Once	you	have	 started	 enjoying	 the	world	of
the	mind,	 the	body	becomes	just	a	small	part	 in	 it.	You	can	still	enjoy	food,	 in
fact	you	will	enjoy	it	better	than	before	because	some	aesthetics	will	enter	your
eating.	You	can	still	enjoy	your	sex	but	now	your	sex	will	have	a	depth	which
was	missing	before.	Something	of	music	will	be	in	it,	something	of	poetry	will
be	in	it,	something	of	the	paintings	that	you	have	enjoyed	is	bound	to	be	there,
because	whatsoever	you	enjoy	enters	your	very	fibres,	your	very	cells.
A	man	who	 knows	 only	 sex	 and	 food	 knows	 nothing.	 His	 sex	 is	 very	 rough,
mundane;	it	has	no	sacred	dimension	to	it.	And	his	eating	is	animal.	He	cannot
enjoy	eating	with	others,	he	cannot	share.
Have	you	watched	animals?	--	when	animals	get	 food	 they	hide	 themselves	so
no	other	 animal	 can	partake	of	 their	 food.	And	 if	 there	 are	other	 animals	 they
keep	 them	 behind	 them	 and	 they	 somehow	 go	 on	 stuffing	 themselves	 fast,
because	 the	 fear	 is	 always	 there	 that	 some	other	 animal	may	attack	 them,	 it	 is
dangerous.
The	same	is	true	about	the	man	who	knows	nothing	higher	than	the	body.
Mind	gives	you	a	new	depth	but	mind	is	also	not	the	end;	there	is	a	still	higher
and	 a	 deeper	 phenomenon.	 And	 always	 remember:	 whatsoever	 is	 higher	 is
always	deeper	and	vice	versa;	whatsoever	 is	deeper	 is	always	higher.	Then	 the
world	 of	 the	 heart,	 of	 love,	 of	 emotions,	 sentiments,	 opens	 up.	 Now	 you	 are
reaching	the	subtlest	core.
A	man	who	has	not	known	what	love	is	has	missed	the	whole	point	of	life.	His
heart	has	remained	unopened.	And	when	the	heart	opens,	only	then	does	spring
come	to	you,	then	you	blossom.	But	even	the	heart	is	not	the	end.
Buddha	used	to	say	to	his	disciples	'Charaiveti,	charaiveti.'	Charaiveti	means	go
on,	go	on,	don't	 stop	anywhere.	Till	 you	come	 to	 the	very	end	where	 the	 road
ends	 and	where	 there	 is	 no	 further	 to	 go,	 go	 on,	 go	 on:	 charaiveti,	 charaiveti.
And	at	each	stop	you	will	feel	that	this	must	be	the	end.	What	more	can	there	be?
When	you	are	in	love,	when	love	is	flowering,	you	cannot	conceive	of	anything
greater.	But	there	is	something	still	greater	which	will	make	you	aware	of	your
centre	 and	 that	 is	meditation.	And	 at	 the	 centre	we	 are	 joined	 at	 the	 universe.
Your	centre	and	my	centre	are	not	separate,	your	centre	and	Christ's	centre	are
not	separate.	At	the	centre	we	all	meet;	we	are	different	only	on	the	periphery.
When	you	have	come	to	know	the	centre	you	have	come	to	know	god.	There	the
road	 ends.	 Beyond	 that	 there	 is	 nothing.	 But	 before	 that	 one	 has	 not	 to	 stop
anywhere.	That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name:	go	on,	go	on,	go	on	transcending.
While	 anything	 remains	 to	 transcend,	 go	 on.	When	 you	 come	 to	 the	 end	 and
there	is	nothing	left	to	transcend,	only	then	rest	at	peace.	That	is	paradise.
(He	 doesn't	 believe	 in	 believing,	 Osho	 tells	 Dhyan	 Darshana,	 he	 believes	 in
seeing.	He	pauses	till	the	laughter	subsides	and	then	resumes.)
Unless	 you	 see,	 never	 believe,	 because	 the	 danger	 is	 that	 one	 can	 believe	 in
something	very	easily	if	the	belief	is	comfortable,	consoling;	if	it	fulfils	a	certain
need	in	you,	you	can	believe.	But	belief	stops	enquiry.
The	moment	you	believe,	there	is	nothing	to	explore.
So	 don't	 believe	 in	 god	and	 don't	 believe	 that	 there	 is	 no	 god	 either;	 both	 are
beliefs.	One	is	positive,	one	is	negative,	but	both	are	beliefs.	Neither	be	religious
nor	be	irreligious,	neither	be	an	atheist	nor	a	theist.
Remain	open.	That's	what	I	mean	when	I	say	don't	believe:	remain	open.
Remain	 aware:	 that	 'I	 don't	 know.'	 It	 is	 difficult	 to	 remember	 'I	 don't	 know'
because	 it	hurts	 the	ego.	The	ego	wants	 to	claim	knowledge,	 the	ego	wants	 to
make	claims	about	everything.	That's	why	if	even	to	the	ugliest	person	you	say
'You	are	beautiful,'	he	will	believe	you;	even	the	ugliest	person	will	not	deny	it.
You	can	say	to	the	most	stupid	person,	'You	are	simply	a	great	Buddha,	a	great
wise	man,	and	he	will	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
not	deny	it.	He	will	smile	at	you	patronisingly.	In	fact	he	will	say	to	you	'You	are
the	 only	 intelligent	 person	 because	 you	 have	 recognised	 me.	 Fools	 don't
recognise	me.'	That's	why	it	is	easy	to	buttress	people	--
because	nobody	denies	anything.	The	ego	is	always	hankering	to	be	supported.
And	 knowledge	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 supports	 of	 the	 ego,	 so	 one	 goes	 on
believing	in	things	because	it	creates	knowledgeability.
There	 are	 Christians,	 Hindus	 and	 Mohammedans	 and	 Buddhists	 and	 almost
everybody	 belongs	 to	 some	 religion,	 to	 some	 political	 ideology	 --	 communist,
socialist,	fascist.	These	are	people	who	know	nothing,	but	they	believe	because
belief	gives	 them	 the	 idea	 that	 they	know	--	and	everybody	wants	 to	be	 in	 the
know.
Belief	is	the	cheapest	way,	at	no	cost.	And	the	person	who	believes	in	end...	look
at	 him	when	he	 comes	 across	 a	 person	who	does	 not	 believe	 in	 god,	 see	 how
superior	he	feels,	that	 'I	believe	in	god	and	you	don't	believe	in	god.'	He	really
feels	great	sympathy	for	you,	pity	for	you	that	you	will	fall	in	hell,	that	you	will
not	be	saved.	Deep	down	he	says	'poor	fellow.'	He	himself	is	in	the	same	state,
but	the	belief	hides	his	ignorance.	And	hiding	is	not	getting	rid	of;	it	is	in	a	way
really	protecting.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	open	--	no	belief,	no	belief	system,,neither	against	nor
for.	Religious,	political
--	all	kinds	of	ideologies	have	to	be	put	aside	so	that	you	can	move	with	a	clarity,
an	 innocence,	 a	 childlike	 innocence.	 And	 that	 is	 meditation:	 to	 remain	 open,
silent,	 aware,	watchful,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	whatsoever	 is	 the	 case.	You	 don't
project	anything	on	it.	Because	you	don't	have	any	belief	you	cannot	project,	you
can	see	that	which	is.	And	that	is	the	meaning	of	darshana.
In	 the	 East	 we	 don't	 have	 any	 word	 with	 exactly	 the	 same	 meaning	 as
philosophy.	 In	 the	 East	 philosophy	 is	 called	 darshana,	 but	 it	 has	 a	 totally
different	meaning.
Philosophy	means	thinking	about	truth	and	darshana	means	seeing	the	truth,	not
thinking.	What	 can	 you	 think	 about	 the	 truth?	What	 can	 the	 blind	man	 think
about	 light?	 What	 can	 the	 deaf	 think	 about	 music?	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	 thing
anything.	What	 is	needed	 is	not	 thinking	but	a	 restoration	of	your	eyes	so	 that
you	can	see,	an	opening	of	your	eyes	so	that	you	can	see.	Only	seeing	liberates.
And	 it	 is	 not	 so	 difficult	 as	 people	 think	 it	 is.	 It	 is	 not	 so	 difficult.	Once	 you
decide	that	you	will	not	believe	unless	you	know,	it	becomes	very	easy.	Once	all
the	rubbish,	the	rotten	accumulation	of	beliefs,	is	removed	you	have	a	clarity,	a
transparency,	and	you	start	seeing	things	as	they	are.	And	that's	what	god	is.
The	word	 'god'	 is	a	code	word;	 it	does	not	mean	anything	literally,	 it	 is	a	code
word.	G	stands	for	that,	O
stands	for	which,	and	D	stands	for	is	--	that	which	is.	That	is	the	meaning	of	the
word	'god'.	It	has	no	literal	meaning	at	all,	it	is	simply	a	code	word:	that	which
is.	And	the	only	way	to	know	it	is	to	have	clean	eyes.
Meditation	helps	you	 to	 remove	all	garbage	and	makes	you	capable	of	 seeing.
And	the	moment	you	see,	you	are	 liberated,	because	 the	moment	you	see,	 it	 is
your	 own	 truth,	 it	 is	 not	 borrowed,	 and	 only	 your	 own	 truth	 can	 become
liberation.	It	is	bliss	and	it	is	love	and	it	is	prayer,	because	when	one	is	free	there
is	bliss	and	when	there	is	bliss	one	wants	to	share	it.	It	is	a	natural	phenomenon,
to	share	it.	And	that's	what	love	is:	sharing	of	your	bliss.
Freedom	brings	bliss,	 bliss	brings	 love,	 then	 life	becomes	 a	 fulfilment,	 a	 deep
contentment.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010055
ShortTitle:	THUNK05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Love	 needs	 courage	 --	 that	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 his	 name,	 Prem	Andreas,	Osho
tells	the	first	sannyasin	tonight.)
Love	is	a	potential	in	man	but	not	an	actuality.	Everybody	is	born	with	the	seed
but	very	few	people	are	capable	of	 transforming	it	 into	reality.	That's	why	you
don't	 see	 so	 many	 joyful	 people	 in	 the	 world,	 blissful	 people	 in	 the	 world.
Everywhere	 there	 is	 great	misery,	 darkness.	 People	 are	 somehow	managing	 to
live	but	there	is	no	dance,	no	song,	no	music	in	their	lives.	They	are	living	life	as
a	 curse,	 not	 as	 a	 blessing,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 have	 taken	 it	 for
granted	that	love	is	a	reality.	It	is	not.	It	has	to	be	realised.
Of	course	the	potential	is	there,	the	possibility	is	there,	the	seed	is	there,	but	one
needs	courage	to	grow	it.	And	why	courage?	--	because	the	basic	requirement	for
love's	growth	is	dropping	the	idea	of	the	ego.
Both	cannot	be	together,	ego	and	love.	If	one	remains	enclosed	in	the	ego	love
remains	only	a	potential,	a	hope,	a	promise	which	is	never	going	to	be	fulfilled.
If	 one	 comes	 out	 of	 the	 imprisonment	 of	 the	 ego	 then	 suddenly	 there	 is	 great
rejoicing	in	your	being,	love	starts	growing.
To	be	in	a	growing	state	of	love	is	to	be	a	sannyasin.	To	realise	the	ultimate	in
love	is	to	be	awakened,	to	be	enlightened,	to	be	a	Christ	or	to	be	a	Buddha.
(Meditation	is	a	holiday	from	the	mind,	Osho	tells	Dhyan	Catherine.)	Otherwise
all	holidays	are	false	because	the	mind	goes	on	running.	In	fact	on	holidays	it	is
more	crazy	because	it	has	all	the	space,	all	the	time,	to	go	as	insane	as	possible.
On	holidays	more	people	go	insane,	more	people	commit	suicide,	more	people
murder.	There	are	more	accidents	on	holidays,	of	course,	because	everybody	has
space	and	time	and	somebody	is	bound	to	get	into	trouble.
It	 is	 good	 that	 people	 are	 continuously	 engaged	 in	 routine	work.	 The	 greatest
problem	that	the	future	humanity	is	going	to	face	is	when	machines	take	all	the
work	over	and	man	has	seven	days	holiday	per	week;	then	the	real	trouble	will
arise,	Then	you	will	see	everybody	going	berserk;	people	will	not	know	what	to
do.	And	they	will	do	all	kinds	of	things	because	the	mind	is	always	there	racing,
running,	becoming	more	and	more	speedy.
When	 this	whole	 functioning	 of	 the	mind	 ceases	 there	 is	 silence.	 And	 in	 that
silence	is	purity	--	that	is	the	meaning	of	Catherine.	Catherine	means	purity.	To
be	 without	 mind	 is	 to	 be	 pure.	 Mind	 is	 a	 pollution,	 a	 contamination,	 it	 is	 a
poisoning	process.
When	the	mind	is	put	aside	you	are	your	natural	self,	your	spontaneity	is	there.
You	have	clarity,	perspective,	vision.	And	out	of	 that	many	things	grow.	These
three	qualities	are	associated	with	the	name	Catherine:	beauty,	grace,	devotion.
Beauty	is	of	the	body,	grace	is	of	the	heart,	and	devotion	is	of	the	being.	And	the
only	disturbance	is	mind.	If	mind	is	silent	suddenly	your	body	attains	to	a	beauty
which	it	has	never	known	before.	And	your	heart	is	full	of	grace	and	your	being
is	full	of	devotion,	prayer.
These	 are	 all	 manifestations	 of	 beauty	 on	 different	 planes.	 And	 when	 all	 the
three	 are	 there	 --	 beauty	 on	 the	 physical	 plane,	 grace	 on	 the	 heart	 plane	 and
devotion	at	the	very	core	of	your	being	--	life	becomes	a	tremendous	ecstasy.	A
great	harmony	is	born	in	you,	and	that	harmony	is	our	search.	That	harmony	has
been	 called	 by	 different	 names:	 god,	 nirvana,	 enlightenment,	 tao,	 truth,	 but	 in
fact	what	man	is	constantly	searching	for	is	a	state	of	immense	harmony	with	no
discord,	 so	 all	 is	 functioning	 in	 deep	 attunement	 within	 one	 and	 also	 with
existence.	Then	you	are	no	more	separate.
First	 you	 become	 an	 organic	 unity	 within	 yourself,	 then	 the	 second	 thing
happens:	 you	 become	 a	 part	 of	 the	 whole.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 ultimate	 goal	 of
sannyas,	to	become	harmonious	within	and	without.
(Fight	against	 the	false	within	you	--	 this	 is	 the	message	to	Anatto	Gunar.)	We
are	not	one,	we	are	two	--	the	real	and	the	false.	The	false	has	to	be	defeated	so
we	can	become	one.
And	we	can	become	one	only	when	the	real	alone	is	left	within	and	the	false	has
been	completely	discarded.
But	the	society	teaches	us	hypocrisy.	It	goes	on	teaching	us	manners,	etiquette,
civilisation,	 culture;	 and	 all	 these	 things	have	 to	 be	 imposed	 from	 the	outside.
The	 ultimate	 result	 is	 that	 you	 become	 split.	 You	 want	 one	 thing	 but	 you	 do
something	else.	You	do	things	according	to	 the	expectations	of	others	but	your
longing	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
not	that.
For	example	you	may	not	feel	like	smiling,	you	may	be	full	of	tears,	but	if	some
guest	comes	you	have	to	welcome	him	with	a	smiling	face.	Your	smile	is	false,	it
is	a	Jimmy	Carter	smile	(laughter).	You	may	show	all	your	teeth	but	that	doesn't
make	it	 real	--	 just	an	exercise	of	 the	 lips.	There	is	no	heart	 in	 it,	 it	 is	painted:
you	are	full	of	tears	inside.	And	that's	how	we	are	living	in	every	dimension:	the
false	is	hiding	the	real.	And	the	false	seems	to	be	more	important	because	it	pays
and	the	real	is	ignored	because	it	creates	troubles.
If	you	assert	your	reality	you	will	be	in	trouble.	It	is	better	to	be	false	and	live	a
comfortable	 life,	 Of	 course	 it	 gives	 you	 many	 conveniences,	 but	 to	 live
conveniently,	comfortably,	does	not	mean	that	you	are	living	blissfully.	And	one
can	never	find	bliss	with	a	false	personality,	repressing	the	real	individuality.
A	sannyasin	has	to	come	out	of	the	false	--	this	is	the	real	battle	--	because	the
false	has	got	its	roots	deep	in	you.	It	has	become	almost	unconscious.	You	will
have	to	dig	very	deep	to	uproot	it.	And	that's	what	my	work	consists	of:	helping
you	 to	uproot	 the	 false,	because	a	man	can	 rejoice	only	when	he	 is	utterly	his
own	 self,	 authentically	 his	 own	 being.	 Otherwise	 life	 remains	 a	 misery	 --
convenient,	 comfortable,	 but	miserable,	 sad	 --	 sad	 because	 you	 have	 not	 been
able	to	sing	your	song,	sad	because	you	have	not	danced	your	dance.	You	have
been	dancing	to	other's	tunes;	they	whistle	and	you	dance.
The	 politicians,	 the	 priests,	 the	 pedagogues,	 the	 parents	 --	 the	 whole	 society
around	you	goes	on	pulling	your	strings:	dance	this	way.	Slowly	slowly	you	start
rejecting	yourself	and	accepting	what	others	expect	from	you.
A	sannyasin	has	 to	 live	according	 to	his	own	light,	whatsoever	 the	cost.	 In	 the
beginning	 it	 is	 really	a	 struggle,	but	once	you	are	passionately	 involved	 in	 the
battle	 you	 are	 going	 to	 win;	 the	 victory	 is	 absolutely	 certain.	 You	 should	 not
hesitate,	 because	 the	 false	 cannot	win;	 the	 false	 is	bound	 to	 collapse.	You	 just
have	to	be	persistently	alert,	aware,	not	to	support	it	any	more,	not	to	co-operate
with	it.
Humanity	up	to	now	has	lived	in	a	very	stupid	way.	And	that's	why	as	far	as	I	am
concerned	 I	 don't	 consider	 the	 past	 of	 humanity	 worth	 anything.	 Just	 a	 few
names	I	respect:	a	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Krishna	--	just	a
few	names,	 they	can	be	 counted	on	one's	 fingers.	And	 the	millions	have	 lived
only	 in	 a	 false	 way,	 pseudo.	 They	 have	 only	 been	 carbon	 copies	 of	 carbon
copies,	of	carbon	copies,	of	carbon	copies.	They	don't	know	where	the	original
is,	nobody	has	heard	about	 the	original.	They	 just	go	on	copying	some	carbon
copy.
You	imitate	your	parents,	your	parents	were	imitating	their	parents	and	so	on	and
so	 forth.	 Adam	 was	 following	 the	 dictates	 of	 Eve	 and	 since	 that	 time	 every
Adam	 is	 following	 Eve's	 dictates.	 The	 very	 beginning	 went	 wrong.	 And	 Eve
herself	was	not	living	originally;	she	had	been	seduced	by	the	serpent.	One	does
not	know	who	seduced	the	serpent	--	because	serpents	are	not	known	to	be	that
wise.	There	must	have	been	some	other	agency	behind	the	serpent.	So	on	and	on
it	goes.
A	sannyasin	has	to	live	an	original	life.	He	has	to	discover	his	original	face.	This
is	the	real	battle,	this	is	the	real	war.	It	has	to	be	won,	and	it	can	be	won.
(There's	a	wine	that	awakens	--	Osho	tells	Anand	Denise.)	Denise	is	a	beautiful
name.	 It	 comes	 from	Greek	mythology.	 In	Greek	mythology	Dionysius	 is	 the
god	 of	wine;	Denise	 comes	 from	Dionysius	 --	 so	 you	 have	 come	 to	 the	 right
person	(laughter).	I	am	a	drunkard	and	I	help	people	to	become	drunkards.
Dionysius	 has	 completely	 disappeared	 because	 of	 Christianity.	 Christianity
condemned	Dionysius	like	anything.	In	ancient	Greece	he	used	to	have	temples
of	his	own,	and	he	was	one	of	 the	most	beautiful	of	all	 the	gods.	What	can	be
more	 beautiful	 than	 the	 god	 of	wine?	 But	 Christians	 totally	missed	 the	 point.
They	 thought	 in	 a	 literal	way;	 they	 could	 not	 understand	 the	metaphor.	 It	 is	 a
metaphor	of	tremendous	import.
Sufis	 have	 also	 used	 it:	wine	 represents	 the	 ultimate	 bliss.	You	 become	drunk
and	at	the	same	time	you	are	fully	aware,	more	aware	than	you	have	ever	been
before.	 That's	 the	 miracle	 of	 meditation:	 it	 brings	 two	 polarities	 together
simultaneously.	Logically	 it	 looks	contradictory,	but	 existentially	 it	 is	not;	 it	 is
complementary.	Meditation	brings	both	into	such	a	heightened	synthesis	that	it	is
incomprehensible	to	the	mind.
The	mind	 can	 either	 conceive	 of	 somebody	 utterly	 drunk	 and	 unconscious	 or
somebody	 fully	 aware	 but	 not	 drunk.	Meditation	 is	 paradoxical:	 you	 are	 fully
drunk	and	fully	awake.	But	the	wine	does	not	consist	of	the	ordinary	wine	that
you	can	purchase.	It	is	not	a	commodity.	It	is	not	made	out	of	grapes,	it	comes
out	of	your	own	innermost	core,	it	flows	from	there.	It	is	already	there,	you	just
have	to	find	a	way	to	reach	there	and	you	will	be	drunk	and	awake	at	the	same
time	--	drunk	with	the	divine.	And	of	course	when	one	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
drunk	with	 the	 divine	 one	 reaches	 to	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 awareness.	 There	 is
bliss	 and	 there	 is	 silence	 both	 together.	 There	 is	 dance	 and	 yet	 everything	 is
centred.	The	circumference	dances	but	 the	centre	 is	absolutely	quiet	and	calm.
To	find	this	centre	of	the	cyclone	is	the	whole	process	of	sannyas.
(Osho	talks	to	Iris	about	the	difference	between	mentation	and	meditation.)	Mind
is	one	dimensional	and	meditation	makes	you	multi-dimensional.	Mind	can	only
move	in	a	linear	way,	on	a	single	track.	The	name	of	the	track	is	logic.	It	cannot
feel,	it	can	only	think.	It	cannot	experience,	it	can	only	think.	It	cannot	act,	it	can
only	think.	That's	why	thinkers	are	inactive	people.	That	has	been	a	calamity	in
the	 past	 because	 the	 great	 thinkers	 are	 inactive.	 They	 come	 to	 beautiful
conclusions	but	those	conclusions	are	impotent	because	they	never	act	on	them.
And	the	fools	are	very	active;	they	never	think.
So	Adolf	Hitlers	and	Joseph	Stalins	and	Lao	Tse	Tungs	--	these	are	very	active
people	and	these	are	the	fools.	So	it	has	been	a	strange	history.	The	people	who
think	and	come	to	beautiful	conclusions	go	on	thinking	they	never	act,	so	their
thinking	remains	futile,	a	sheer	exercise	 in	futility.	And	the	people	who	cannot
think	at	all,	who	have	no	capacity	to	think,	simply	go	on	acting.
In	fact	Adolf	Hitler	was	winning	in	the	beginning	of	the	Second	World	War	for
three	years	continuously	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 that	he	was	a	 fool,	an	 idiot.	All
the	generals	--	American,	British,	Russian	--	thought	logically,	wondering	what
to	 do	 with	 this	 man,	 because	 war	 is	 a	 science	 and	 they	 were	 moving
scientifically	 and	 that	 man	 was	 an	 absolute	 fool	 --	 he	 knew	 nothing	 about
military	 science.	His	 generals	 had	 no	 say,	 even	 they	were	 very	much	 puzzled
because	he	was	going	against	all	the	rules.
For	 example,	 the	 enemy	attacks	where	you	are	 the	weakest,	 the	weakest	 point
has	 to	 be	 attacked.	 That's	 simple	 logic,	 that	 if	 you	 are	 going	 to	 attack	 some
country	 you	 attack	 from	 the	 weakest	 point;	 there	 is	 more	 surety	 of	 winning.
Hitler	would	attack	the	strongest	point.	And	he	went	on	winning	for	three	years
for	the	simple	reason	that	the	others	thought	logically.	So	they	would	collect	all
their	forces	at	the	weakest	point	and	he	would	attack	at	the	strongest	where	their
military	was	absent.	But	after	three	years	of	continuously	fighting	with	this	fool
they	 became	 aware	 of	 his	method	or	 his	methodlessness	 and	 then	 they	 started
behaving	in	a	foolish	way	themselves,	then	they	started	winning.
Fools	 are	 very	 active	 people	 --	 they	 manage	 to	 do	 things;	 and	 thinkers	 are
impotent.
Meditation	is	going	beyond	both;	it	is	going	beyond	thinking,	it	is	going	beyond
stupidity.	 It	 is	moving	 into	a	 silent,	 relaxed	state.	 In	 that	 state	you	are	open	 to
everything	all	directions	become	available,	all	dimensions	are	yours;	you	are	not
linear.	You	are	simply	clear	so	wherever	you	look	you	have	clarity.	And	that's	the
meaning	of	being	a	rainbow	--	all	the	colours,	all	the	seven	colours.	That	means
all	possibilities	should	become	available.
A	meditator	is	not	a	thinker,	he	is	not	a	fool	either;	he	is	beyond	both.	He	acts	but
he	acts	out	of	his	multi-dimensionality	or	he	remains	inactive,	but	that	too	is	out
of	his	multi-dimensionality.	Sometimes	action	is	good	and	sometimes	inaction	is
good.	 Sometimes	 it	 is	 good	 to	 say	 something	 and	 sometimes	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be
silent.	 The	meditator	 simply	 allows	 his	 spontaneity	 to	 take	 over.	 He	 does	 not
force	himself	into	a	certain	pattern,	he	has	no	pattern,	he	lives	naturally.	If	action
is	needed	it	happens,	if	inaction	is	needed	it	happens.	And	whatsoever	happens
he	goes	totally	into	it.	If	he	is	doing	something	he	is	doing	it	totally;	if	he	is	not
doing	he	is	not	doing	totally;	but	he	is	never	half-half,	he	is	never	divided.	In	that
undividedness	 there	 is	 great	 beauty	 and	 great	 power,	 great	 insight	 and	 great
understanding.	 And	 out	 of	 that	 insight,	 understanding,	 power,	 clarity,	 life
becomes	a	piece	of	art.	Then	one	lives	with	sensitivity,	awareness.	And	the	man
who	 is	 sensitive	 and	aware	 in	 all	 the	dimensions	possible	 can	only	 experience
god,	because	god	simply	means	the	whole	existence.
And	you	cannot	 experience	god	by	being	one	 --	dimensional	because	god	 is	 a
totality	and	you	also	have	to	be	total	to	experience	totality.	You	also	have	to	be
whole	in	your	smaller	way,	on	a	small	scale	of	course,	to	know	the	whole.	Once
you	are	total	you	are	bridged	with	the	whole.
In	 ancient	 mythology	 the	 rainbow	 is	 a	 bridge	 between	 god	 and	 man.	 That	 is
significant.	Iris	is	the	name	of	the	god	of	the	rainbow.	Iris	is	the	messenger	from
god	 to	man	 and	 from	man	 to	 god,	 because	 the	 rainbow	 joins	 the	 sky	with	 the
earth.	It	is	a	bridge,	an	over-bridge.
That	mythological	idea	about	the	rainbow	is	beautiful.	To	me	it	means	that	to	be
multi-dimensional	is	the	only	way	to	be	bridged	with	god.	Then	this	very	earth	is
paradise,	then	to	live	herenow	is	to	live	in	heaven.
(Addressing	 a	 psychologist	 from	 Germany	 Osho	 points	 out	 that	 modern
psychology	hasn't	yet	figured	out	just	what	meditation	is.)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	means	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind,	 a	 state	 of	 no-thought,	 but	 not	 a	 state	 of
sleep.
Thoughts	 are	 not	 there	 but	 you	 are	 fully	 conscious	 and	 alert,	 you	 are	 just
awareness.	Of	 course	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	 aware	 of.	This	 is	 one	of	 the	most
significant	things	to	understand,	because	modern	psychology	has	a	notion	that	if
there	 is	 no	 content	 then	 you	 cannot	 be	 aware,	 you	 will	 fall	 asleep.	 That	 is
absolutely	wrong.
Modern	psychology	has	not	yet	been	able	to	understand	meditation.	That's	why
this	 wrong	 idea	 has	 persisted	 for	 fifty	 years	 continuously,	 for	 half	 a	 century.
Psychology	says	you	can	be	aware	only	if	there	are	thoughts;	if	there	is	nothing
to	 be	 aware	 of	 you	 cannot	 be	 aware.	 You	 cannot	 be	 simply	 aware,	 you	 need
something	to	be	aware	of.	But	they	can	be	logically	proved	wrong.	Existentially,
of	course,	they	are	wrong.
I	say	through	my	own	experience	that	 thoughts	disappear	and	I	am	still	aware.
But	 psychologists	 will	 not	 understand	 somebody's	 experience,	 they	 will
understand	only	logic.	And	logically	also	they	are	wrong	for	 the	simple	reason
that	 you	 can	 be	 asleep	 and	 thoughts	 are	 there,	 so	 thoughts	 are	 not	 necessarily
part	of	awareness.
You	fall	asleep,	you	become	unconscious,	but	thoughts	continue	as	dreams,	your
mind	 continues	 to	 be	 active.	 If	 the	 content	 can	 be	without	 consciousness	why
cannot	 consciousness	 be	 without	 content?	 It	 is	 a	 simple	 logic.	 They	 are	 not
inevitably	together.	In	sleep	consciousness	disappears	but	thoughts	continue;	in
meditation	 thoughts	 disappear,	 consciousness	 continues.	Meditation	 is	 just	 the
opposite	of	sleep.
And	Rainer	means	advice.	When	you	are	pure	awareness	then	you	need	not	ask
for	 any	 advice	 from	 anywhere;	 the	 advice	 comes	 from	 your	 very	 innermost
being.	You	find	your	inner	master.	And	the	outer	master	is	only	a	help	to	find	the
inner.	The	outer	master	has	not	 to	dictate	 any	discipline	 to	you;	he	has	 just	 to
give	 you	 a	 few	 hints	 so	 you	 can	 search	 for	 the	 inner	 master.	 Once	 you	 have
found	your	inner	source	of	knowing,	seeing,	then	there	is	no	need	for	any	advice
from	 the	 scriptures,	 from	 the	 masters	 --	 from	 any	 source.	 You	 start	 living
according	to	your	light.
The	real	advice	comes	only	from	your	own	being	but	for	that	your	mind	has	to
go	 into	complete	non-functioning,	otherwise	 it	 is	 so	noisy	 that	you	will	not	be
able	to	hear	the	very	still,	small	voice	within.	It	is	almost	a	whisper	and	mind	is	a
maniac,	an	Ayatollah	Khomaniac,	and	your	being	speaks	in	such	a	whisper	that
there	is	no	possibility	of	the	mind	over	hearing	it.
Mind	 is	 a	 disturbance.	 It	 distracts	 you	 from	your	 own	 source,	 from	your	 own
wisdom.	Meditation	 puts	 the	mind	 into	 silence	 and	 suddenly	 for	 the	 first	 time
you	start	hearing	inner	advice.	And	the	miracle	is,	it	is	always	right,	it	is	never
wrong.	 So	 you	 are	 never	 guilty	 and	 never	 feeling	 repentance.	And	when	 each
and	every	step	is	right	your	life	starts	settling	into	a	deep	accord.
(Celebration	--	that's	sannyas	in	a	nutshell.)
I	don't	 teach	you	any	philosophy,	 any	dogma,	 any	creed.	 I	 simply	 teach	you	a
blissful	way	of	living	moment	to	moment.	I	don't	ask	you	to	believe	in	god	or	in
anything	else	whatsoever.	There	is	no	need	for	any	belief.	All	that	is	needed	is	a
capacity	to	rejoice	--	and	it	is	there	in	everybody.
Life	 has	 it	 intrinsically,	 it	 is	 rot	 something	 added	 to	 you.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 only
discovered.	Every	child	is	joyous	and	for	the	child	life	is	festivity;	it	is	always	a
celebration.	And	 he	 celebrates	 small	 things.	 Collecting	 seashells	 on	 the	 beach
how	 cheerful	 the	 child	 is,	 as	 if	 he	 has	 found	 diamonds.	 He	 is	 just	 collecting
coloured	 stones	 or	 seashells	 or	 just	 making	 a	 castle	 of	 sand,	 and	 he	 is	 so
absorbed,	so	totally	in	it.
Every	child	brings	with	him	the	capacity	to	enjoy,	to	celebrate,	but	we	destroy	it;
we	 make	 him	 serious,	 we	 make	 him	 as	 serious	 as	 possible,	 as	 quickly	 as
possible.	 We	 are	 at	 ease	 only	 when	 he	 is	 serious,	 then	 we	 know	 we	 have
succeeded,	 then	 we	 know	 that	 now	 he	 is	 growing	 up.	 In	 fact	 we	 have	 killed
something	of	immense	beauty	but	now	we	are	happy	because	he	is	just	like	us	--
serious,	 sad,	moving	around	with	a	 long	 face	and	no	has	become	 interested	 in
our	stupidities:	ambitions,	desires,	money,	power,	prestige.	And	in	his	whole	life
now	ho	will	never	be	so	happy	as	he	was	before	he	was	destroyed	by	society.
My	 function	 is	 to	 help	 you	 regain	 that	 quality	 again.	 That's	 why	 Jesus	 says
'Unless	you	are	like	small	children	vou	shall	not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of	god'	-
-	and	he	is	right.	A	sannyasin	has	to	be	a	child	again.
Erase	all	that	society	has	done	to	you,	become	again	a	clean	slate	and	start	from
ABC	 anew.	 Let	 sannyas	 be	 a	 new	 birth,	 a	 new	 beginning,	 and	 you	 will	 be
surprised	 that	 suddenly	 a	 great	 rush	 of	 energy	 comes.	 And	 you	 will	 see	 my
sannyasins	 here	 dancing,	 rejoicing,	 singing.	 Listen!	 (Osho	 holds	 up	 his	 hands
and	pauses	in	his	talk	so	that	the	singing	from	the	music	group	in	Buddha	Hall	is
heard	more	clearly.	We	laugh,	and	then	he	resumes.)	They	have	become	children
again.
If	a	man	can	remain	a	child	to	the	very	end	of	his	life,	if	he	can	remain	a	child
when	he	is	dying	--	even	then	--	then	he	has	really	lived.	And	then	he	has	really
known	what	life	is	all	about,	its	wonder,	its	awe,	its	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
mystery.
(Love	and	nectar	 --	 that's	 the	meaning	of	Prem	Amritam,	Osho	 tells	a	German
woman.)	Amritam:	the	secret	that	can	make	man	immortal,	has	been	the	search
of	the	alchemists	of	all	the	ages.
In	fact	there	is	no	need	to	search,	it	is	already	there.	Love	is	the	secret	that	gives
you	the	first	glimpse	of	 immortality,	eternity,	 timelessness,	deathlessness.	Only
in	the	moments	of	love	does	one	become	aware	of	the	immensity	of	life,	aware
that	 it	 cannot	 be	 contained	 in	 the	 small	 span	 that	 is	 there	 between	 birth	 and
death.	It	is	so	vast	it	cannot	be	contained	in	this	small	life.	This	life	is	only	one
of	the	expressions.	We	have	been	before	and	we	will	be	after.	We	have	always
been	here	and	we	are	always	going	to	be	here.
Love	gives	you	 the	first	 inkling	and	 then	from	there	you	can	catch	hold	of	 the
thread	and	you	can	start	searching.	It	is	love	that	becomes	prayer,	it	is	love	that
becomes	meditation.	It	is	through	love	that	the	whole	religious	quest	has	arisen.
Without	 love	 there	would	 have	 been	 no	 religion	 at	 all	 and	 no	Buddha	 and	 no
Jesus	 and	 no	Mohammed.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 love	 that	 people	 became	 aware	 of
something	 transcendental	 in	 themselves	 --	 and	 then	 the	 search	 started.	 Love
triggered	a	process	in	man	to	search	beyond	the	mundane,	the	ordinary.
I	teach	love.	Love	for	love's	sake,	for	no	other	motive,	because	any	other	motive
destroys	 it.	Any	other	motive	and	 love	becomes	 lust.	Lust	means	 it	has	 lost	 its
eternity,	 it	has	come	 into	 the	very	muddy	world.	 It	 is	no	more	part	of	 the	vast
sky.
Love	 can	 either	 fall	 and	 become	 lust	 or	 can	 rise	 and	 become	 prayer.	 With
motives	 it	 falls,	with	expectations	 it	 falls.	With	no	motives,	no	expectations,	 it
starts	 rising.	 It	 becomes	more	 and	more	 refined;	 it	 comes	 closer	 and	 closer	 to
prayer	 and	 meditation.	 At	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 purity	 love	 is	 prayer,	 love	 is
meditation	--	 they	are	 two	sides	of	 the	same	coin.	And	that	 is	 the	moment	one
starts	feeling	the	presence	of	god.	That's	why	Jesus	says	god	is	love.
(Man	can	operate	from	his	headquarters	or	his	heartspace,	Osho	tells	us.)	Living
in	 the	 noisy	 mind	 man	 functions	 like	 an	 animal	 or	 even	 worse,	 like	 a	 crazy
animal.	 In	 the	 silence	of	 the	heart	man	 functions	 like	a	god	or	a	goddess.	The
whole	question	is	how	to	shift	your	energy	from	the	head	to	the	heart.	And	it	is
not	difficult.	It	needs	just	a	decisiveness	on	your	part,	because	it	is	your	energy	--
you	can	withdraw	it,	you	can	invest	it	in	a	different	lifestyle.
That's	what	 sannyas	 is,	 a	 different	 lifestyle.	 It	 is	 living	 life	 through	 the	 heart,
through	silence,	through	love,	through	bliss.	And	then	god	is	not	somewhere	in
heaven,	then	you	find	him	within	yourself	and	of	course,	within	everybody	else
too.	Then	even	in	the	rocks	he	is	present,	in	the	trees,	in	the	rivers,	mountains.
Then	the	whole	existence	is	transformed.	It	becomes	luminous	with	the	presence
of	god.
(And	more	about	head	and	heart	to	Veet	Vivad.)
Mind	lives	in	arguments;	it	 is	continuously	debating,	discussing,	doubting.	The
way	 to	 reach	 the	 heart	 is	 to	 drop	 argumentation,	 to	 forget	 all	 discussions	 and
debates,	only	then	do	you	start	living.	Otherwise	through	all	these	arguments	that
mind	becomes	involved	with	your	energy	goes	on	leaking	--	and	they	never	lead
you	anywhere.	The	whole	history	of	philosophy	is	proof,	absolute	proof,	and	it
should	be	a	 reminder	 to	every	person	 that	philosophy	has	not	 reached	a	 single
conclusion.	 Five	 thousand	 years	 of	 argumentation	 and	 no	 decision,	 no
conclusion,	has	been	achieved.	Even	after	fifty	thousand	years	there	will	be	no
conclusiveness.	It	is	not	in	the	nature	of	the	mind	to	come	to	a	conclusion,	it	is
against	mind's	nature.
As	 you	 come	 closer	 to	 a	 conclusion	 it	 immediately	 creates	 new	 doubts,	 new
questions,	and	again	you	are	in	the	same	trap.	Each	single	solution	brings	at	least
ten	more	problems	and	the	jungle	becomes	thicker	and	thicker.
The	philosopher	lives	not,	he	only	thinks,	The	mystic	lives	and	he	lives	because
he	has	understood	one	thing	--	 that	thinking	helps	not	--	so	he	disappears	from
the	head	and	he	merges	into	the	heart.	He	starts	functioning	from	the	heart.	The
heart	knows	love,	trust;	it	is	absolutely	unaware	of	doubts,	arguments.	There	are
no	problems	for	the	heart.	The	heart	knows	only	solutions	and	the	mind	knows
only	 problems.	 The	 mind	 knows	 only	 questions	 and	 the	 heart	 knows	 only
answers.	 For	 the	 mind	 everything	 is	 problematic,	 for	 the	 heart	 nothing	 is
problematic.	 Things	 are	mysterious,	 of	 course,	 but	 not	 problematic.	 The	 heart
enjoys	the	mysteries	of	life	--	and	life	is	full	of	mysteries.	It	all	depends	on	you:
if	you	make	problems	out	of	mysteries	you	will	waste	your	life.	If	you	listen	to
the	heart	and	you	approach	life	as	a	mystery,	not	as	a	problem,	then	you	can	live
beautifully,	 gracefully.	 And	 then	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 of	 knowing	 the	 truth,
because	the	truth	is	the	ultimate	mystery,	the	mystery	of	all	mysteries.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	remember	 this:	go	beyond	argumentation.	Slip	out	of	 the	mind	like	a	snake
slips	out	of	the	old	skin	and	immediately	you	will	have	a	renovation.	Your	whole
being	 will	 be	 resurrected.	 It	 will	 be	 a	 death,	 a	 death	 as	 far	 as	 the	 head	 is
concerned,	and	a	birth,	a	new	birth	as	far	as	the	heart	is	concerned.
Sannyas	is	both:	a	death	and	a	birth,	a	crucifixion	and	a	resurrection.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010065
ShortTitle:	THUNK06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(We	have	been	appointed	by	god,	but	it's	only	through	meditation	that	we	realise
that	--	this	is	the	meaning	of	Dhyan	Jockel,	Osho	tells	a	new	sannyasin.)
Man	without	meditation	has	 no	 idea	 from	where	 he	 comes,	why	he	 comes,	 or
what	 is	 the	purpose	of	his	being	here	at	all.	And	when	one	does	not	know	 the
purpose	of	it,	life	cannot	have	any	meaning;	then	life	remains	just	like	driftwood,
at	the	mercy	of	the	winds	and	the	waves.	Life	without	meditation	is	accidental;	it
has	no	sense	of	direction.	There	are	events	but	they	are	not	inter-connected.	Life
is	 just	 a	 pile	 of	 flowers	but	 it	 is	 not	 a	 garland.	There	 is	 no	 thread	of	meaning
running	 through	all	 the	 flowers	 to	make	 it	a	unity.	But	once	you	enter	 into	 the
world	 of	meditation,	 your	 vision,	 your	 perspective,	 immediately	 changes.	You
start	feeling	that	you	are	not	here	by	accident	--	that	you	are	fulfilling	a	certain
need	of	existence.	That's	the	meaning	of	Jockel:	appointed	by	God.
God	himself	is	behind	you,	but	this	can	be	discovered	only	in	deep	silence	when
your	 thoughts,	your	mind,	your	ego,	completely	cease.	 In	 that	clarity,	when	all
the	 clouds	 have	 disappeared,	 the	 sun	 shines	 forth	 and	 in	 that	 light	 life	 is
immediately	 transformed.	 It	 starts	 having	 meaning,	 significance,	 and	 with
meaning	and	significance	comes	joy,	bliss.
The	 greatest	 need	 of	man	 is	 to	 be	 needed	 and	 the	moment	 you	 feel	 existence
needs	 you,	 you	 start	 having	 roots,	 you	 start	 having	 a	 kind	 of	 centering;	 an
integrated	being	arises	out	of	it.	That's	the	whole	purpose	of	sannyas:	to	help	you
to	go	beyond	the	mind	and	enter	into	meditation.	Meditation	is	the	door	to	God,
mind	is	the	door	to	the	world.	If	you	want	to	explore	the	world	then	mind	is	the
right	 method.	 Hence	 science	 needs	 no	 meditation	 --	 it	 is	 exploration	 of	 the
world,	 of	 the	 objective	 world,	 of	 that	 which	 is	 outside	 you,	 the	 external.	 But
mind	is	absolutely	invalid	as	far	as	the	inner	journey	is	concerned.	For	the	inner
journey	meditation	 is	needed	 --	 a	 state	of	no-mind,	 a	 state	of	 absolute	 silence,
quietness,	 calmness,	 tranquillity.	 But	 it	 is	 not	 that	 you	 have	 fallen	 asleep;
awareness	is	there.	In	fact	you	are	more	aware	then	you	have	ever	been	because
the	whole	energy	 involved	 in	 the	processes	of	 the	mind	is	 released.	The	whole
energy	becomes	your	awareness.
Mind	 is	 a	 parasite,	 it	 goes	on	 sucking	your	 energy,	 it	 goes	on	destroying	your
awareness.	Once	you	start	having	 the	feel	of	silence	your	energy	 is	saved,	you
become	a	reservoir	of	energy.	And	that	energy	itself	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
delight.
William	Blake	has	said	many	beautiful	things:	one	of	those	beautiful	statements
is	that	energy	is	delight.
But	 the	mind	 leaves	no	energy	for	you.	 In	 thinking,	 in	memory,	 in	desiring,	 in
ambitions,	 in	 jealousies,	 it	 destroys	 all	 the	 energy.	 Everything	 leaks	 out;	 you
remain	empty.
Make	every	effort	to	get	out	of	the	mind	--	go	beyond	it.
(Amitgyan	means	infinite	knowing,	Osho	tells	an	Australian.	Then	he	indicates
the	difference	between	knowing	and	knowledge.)
Knowledge	 is	 always	 limited,	 always	 finite,	 always	 measurable.	 Knowing	 is
infinite,	unbounded,	immeasurable.	Knowledge	is	of	the	mind,	knowing	is	of	the
heart.	 Knowledge	 is	 logical,	 knowing	 is	 not	 logical	 at	 all;	 it	 is	 something
transcendental	to	logic.	It	is	closer	to	love	than	to	logic.
That's	the	meaning	of	wisdom;	wisdom	is	knowing.	But	knowledge	and	knowing
look	so	alike	that	many	people	are	misguided.	And	because	it	is	cheap	they	start
accumulating	 knowledge	 thinking	 that	 this	 is	 the	 way	 to	 become	 wise.
Knowledgeable	they	will	certainly	become,	but	not	wise.	Wisdom	has	nothing	to
do	with	knowledgeability.	 It	 is	not	 that	you	are	well-informed.	Wisdom	means
insight;	 not	 information	 but	 clarity,	 awareness,	 spontaneity,	 responsibility,	 the
capacity	 to	 respond	 immediately.	The	knowledgeable	person	always	 looks	 into
his	 accumulation	 before	 he	 acts.	 If	 some	 problem	 arises	 the	 knowledgeable
person	goes	 into	his	memory	 reservoir,	 he	 starts	 searching	 in	his	basement	 for
the	 answer	 --	 something	 ready-made	 that	 he	 has	 accumulated.	 And	 whenever
you	 respond	 to	 a	 real	 situation	 according	 to	 a	 ready-made	 answer	 it	 is	 not
response,	it	is	reaction.
And	 it	 is	 never	 adequate	 because	 life	 goes	 on	 changing	 every	 moment,	 it	 is
always	new	and	your	 ready-made	answer	 is	always	old,	always	out	of	date,	so
knowledge	 always	 falls	 short.	 Knowing	 does	 not	 go	 into	 memory,	 it	 simply
opens	its	awareness	towards	the	situation.	It	simply	allows	the	situation	to	enter,
and	out	of	consciousness,	not	out	of	memory,	arises	the	response.	You	act	here
and	now,	not	according	to	a	ready-made	answer.
Even	you	are	surprised	by	 it	because	you	don't	know	what	 is	going	 to	happen.
When	you	are	constantly	surprised	by	your	own	actions	then	it	is	knowing	and
then	 it	 has	 tremendous	 beauty	 and	 life	 remains	 an	 adventure.	 Ready-made
answers	 are	 always	 full	 of	 dust,	 ordinary,	 boring	 and	 always	 fall	 short	 of	 the
situation.
The	knowledgeable	person	is	very	stupid.	He	may	have	a	Ph.D.	or	a	D.Litt.,	but
no	Ph.D.,	no	D.Litt.	can	cover	up	your	stupidity.	And	whenever	a	new	situation
arises	you	can	immediately	find	the	fool	hidden	behind	all	the	certificates.
Yes,	he	 is	perfectly	able	 if	you	are	asking	 something	which	 is	not	 real;	 if	 it	 is
bookish	then	he	is	perfectly	able.	He	can	give	the	right	answer	to	every	question
which	is	not	real.	If	it	is	real	then	he	is	at	a	loss.
Meditation	 gives	 you	 knowing,	 not	 knowledge.	 It	 gives	 you	 the	 capacity	 to
respond	 spontaneously,	 immediately,	 herenow.	 And	 then	 your	 life	 is	 always
renewing	itself,	it	is	fresh,	like	dewdrops	in	the	early	morning.	It	is	young.	Even
at	 the	moment	 of	 death	 the	man	 of	 knowing	 remains	 young	 fresh.	He	 has	 the
same	 quality	 as	 the	 just	 arrived	 child,	 the	 same	 purity	 of	 the	 eyes,	 the	 same
innocence.	And	 that's	 the	definition	of	a	sage:	 if	one	becomes	again	a	child,	 if
one	is	born	again,	if	one	becomes	a	twice-born,	if	one	attains	a	second	childhood
in	this	life	then	he	is	a	sage.
Knowing	 is	 infinite,	 immeasurable.	 It	 knows	 no	 limits,	 no	 boundaries,	 and
because	 it	 has	 no	 limit,	 it	 makes	 you	 unlimited.	 And	 then	 life	 is	 a	 constant
wonder	to	live,	a	constant	awe,	a	continuum	of	discoveries.
You	are	always	at	the	point	of	shouting	'Eureka!'
(Osho	 talks	 more	 about	 wisdom	 to	 Valerie,	 who	 he	 renames	 Gyaneswari	 --
Goddess	of	wisdom.)	We	are	born	wise	and	then	we	deteriorate.	Every	child	is
born	a	Buddha	and	the	society,	the	whole	education	system,	civilisation,	culture,
destroy	his	 innocence.	They	throw	so	much	dust	 into	his	eyes	 that	he	becomes
almost	blind.	But	society	needs	blind	people,	the	politicians	need	blind	people	to
follow	them.
People	who	have	eyes	will	not	find	any	need	to	follow	anybody.
The	 priests	 need	 blind	 people,	 then	 they	 can	 be	 Christians,	 Hindus,
Mohammedans,	 otherwise	 who	 would	 bother	 about	 these	 stupid	 priests?	 The
leaders,	 the	 politicians,	 the	 priests,	 the	 pedagogues	 --	 they	 are	 all	 in	 need	 of
millions	 of	 blind	 people.	 So	 every	 child	 has	 to	 be	 forced	 to	 become	 blind
through	superstitions,	through	stupid	ideologies.	And	the	thing	is	done	at	such	an
early	stage,	when	the	child	is	so	delicate	that	he	can	be	moulded	in	any	way.	It	is
just	like	a	young	plant:	you	can	bend	it	in	any	possible	way	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
that	 you	 want.	 Once	 it	 becomes	 a	 big	 tree	 it	 will	 not	 be	 possible	 to	 bend	 it
according	to	you;	then	it	will	have	its	own	individuality.	So	if	the	gardener	wants
to	bend	a	tree	in	a	certain	way	he	has	to	do	it	as	quickly	as	possible.
In	Japan	there	are	trees,	three	hundred,	four	hundred	years	old	and	just	six	inches
high.	The	trees	belong	to	a	species	that	could	have	risen	one	hundred	feet,	two
hundred	feet	high	--	and	they	are	just	six	inches	high.	It	is	thought	to	be	an	art;
those	trees	are	thought	to	be	very	valuable.	The	trick	is	that	they	go	on	cutting
their	 roots.	 They	 are	 planted	 in	 pots	without	 bottoms	 so	whenever	 their	 roots
start	coming	out	of	the	bottom,	they	are	continuously	cut.	When	the	roots	cannot
grow,	 the	 tree	 cannot	 grow.	 The	 tree	 remains	 small,	 it	 becomes	 a	 pygmy,
retarded.	But	they	think	this	is	an	art.	And	that's	what	has	been	done	to	humanity.
Every	 human	 being	 is	 a	 retarded	 person.	His	 roots	 have	 been	 cut.	 But	 this	 is
called	 education.	 This	 is	 what	 is	 being	 done	 from	 the	 kindergarten	 to	 the
university:	 go	 on	 cutting	 the	 roots	 and	 bending	 the	 branches	 and	 pruning	 the
leaves;	 give	 it	 a	 shape.	 Of	 course	 the	 shape	 is	 given	 according	 to	 the
establishment,	not	according	to	the	child.	Nobody	bothers	about	what	the	child
would	like	to	be,	nobody	takes	any	not	of	the	child's	individuality.
Up	to	now	humanity	has	been	very	murderous.	It	is	strange,	very	strange,	that	a
few	people	somehow	escaped	--	a	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Lao	Tzu.	There	are	very
few	people,	 but	 it	 is	 almost	 a	miracle	 that	 they	 escaped	 and	 society	 could	 not
manage	to	cut	their	roots	and	they	grew	to	their	full	height.	But	they	are	proofs
enough	that	everybody	can	grow	to	the	same	height.
My	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 my	 followers;	 I	 am	 not	 a	 leader	 nor	 a	 priest	 --	 just	 a
friend.	And	because	I	know	how	one	can	get	rid	of	all	the	nonsense	that	has	been
imposed	 upon	 you,	 I	 simply	 share	 my	 understanding.	 It	 is	 not	 in	 any	 way	 a
conditioning,	 it	 is	 just	a	sharing.	And	then	it	 is	up	to	you	to	decide.	I	give	you
total	 freedom.	 I	don't	give	you	any	outer	discipline	 --	 that	you	have	 to	act	 this
way,	that	you	have	to	behave	this	way,	that	you	have	to	follow	a	certain	pattern,
a	 certain	 style.	 All	 that	 I	 give	 to	 you	 is	 meditation,	 and	 meditation	 means
becoming	aware	of	all	the	conditionings	that	have	been	given	by	society	to	you.
The	moment	 you	 are	 aware	you	 can	drop	 those	 conditionings.	Once	you	have
dropped	all	that	the	society	has	done	to	you,	once	you	undo	it,	you	are	again	as
pure	as	a	child,	as	 fragrant	as	a	child,	as	graceful	as	a	child.	And	 that	 releases
your	 intrinsic	 wisdom,	 that	 releases	 your	 imprisoned	 splendour.	 It	 makes	 you
wise.
And	 to	 live	 life	according	 to	your	wisdom	 is	 the	greatest	gift	of	god.	There	 is
nothing	higher	than	it.
(Gyan	Anatto)	Wisdom	 is	 only	 possible	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 the	 ego.	 Ego	 is	 the
hiding	place	of	all	kinds	of	 ignorance.	 It	 is	 a	 shelter	 for	 ignorance.	 It	prevents
you	 from	 bringing	 light	 into	 your	 being.	 It	 is	 afraid	 of	 the	 light	 because	 the
moment	light	comes	it	will	have	to	go,	it	will	have	to	leave.
A	 sannyasin	has	 to	be	very	 clear	 about	 it:	 either	 the	 ego	 can	 exist	 or	wisdom.
Ordinarily	we	all	choose	 the	ego	and	we	sacrifice	everything	 for	 the	ego.	And
the	ego	never	gives	you	anything.	It	promises	but	it	never	delivers	the	goods.	It
is	a	great	politician,	always	promising,	and	whatsoever	you	ask	 it	 immediately
promises	 that	 it	will	give	 it	 to	you.	 If	you	 look	back,	 it	has	never	 fulfilled	any
promise	--	it	cannot,	it	is	impotent.	But	it	is	a	braggart,	it	goes	on	bragging.	And
it	always	finds	excuses	for	why	you	failed	last	time;	this	time	you	are	not	going
to	fail,	just	take	a	few	more	precautions.	And	each	time	you	fail	it	will	find	some
rationalization,	 some	 excuse,	 and	 again	will	 convince	 you	 to	 go	 on	 along	 the
same	route.
People	 waste	 their	 whole	 life	 hoping	 against	 all	 hope	 that	 something	 will
materialize.	Nothing	ever	materializes	out	of	the	ego.	It	is	like	a	desert,	nothing
grows	in	it.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 decide	 to	 drop	 the	 ego	 with	 all	 its	 ambitions,	 dreams,
projections.	Once	you	drop	 the	ego	you	will	be	surprised,	amazed	at	what	was
being	 prevented	 by	 the	 ego:	 the	 whole	 kingdom	 of	 god.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 rock
preventing	 all	 the	 flow	 of	 your	 life	 energies.	 Once	 the	 rock	 is	 removed	 you
become	a	beautiful	stream	and	you	start	moving	towards	the	ocean.	And	then	the
meeting	with	the	ocean	is	not	far	away.	Once	the	movement	has	started	you	will
reach	the	ocean.	Every	small	stream	manages	to	reach	it.
This	is	what	is	happening	here.	All	these	sannyasins	are	small	streams;	now	they
are	becoming	a	big	river,	joining	together.	That's	why	communes	have	existed	--
for	the	simple	reason	that	a	single	individual	is	such	a	small	stream	that	he	may
be	lost	somewhere,	he	may	not	be	able	to	reach	the	ocean.	But	 if	even	a	small
dewdrop	becomes	part	of	 the	river	and	 then	 the	river	becomes	part	of	a	bigger
river,	then	there	is	no	fear:	it	is	absolutely	guaranteed	that	the	dewdrop	will	reach
the	ocean.
So	 small	 streams	 of	 sannyasins	 are	 gathering	 together	 --	 it	 is	 becoming	 a	 big,
wide	river.	And	then	god	is	not	far	away	and	everybody	is	going	to	find	him.	But
the	first	and	the	most	important	thing	is	to	drop	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ego.
Here,	be	as	egoless	as	possible.	Taste	egolessness	and	you	have	already	taken	the
greatest	 step	 towards	god	and	 towards	wisdom,	 realization,	nirvana,	 liberation.
These	are	all	different	names	for	the	same	reality,	the	same	truth.
(To	Marc,	 a	 craftsman	 from	Holland,	Osho	 gives	 the	 name	 Shivanand,	which
means	 god	 is	 bliss.)	God	 is	 not	 a	 person	 but	 an	 experience:	 the	 experience	 of
bliss,	of	joy,	of	benediction.	The	idea	of	god	as	a	person	has	been	a	calamity,	a
curse.	The	very	 idea	has	created	 the	 temples,	 the	mosques,	 the	churches	and	 it
has	led	man	astray	from	true	religion.
True	 religion	 can	 only	 be	 one	 --	 and	 there	 are	 three	 hundred	 religions	 on	 the
earth.	 True	 religion	 cannot	 have	 any	 adjective	 to	 it	 --	 Christian,	 Hindu,
Mohammedan.	Science	 is	 neither	Christian	nor	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan,	 how
can	 religion	 be	 Hindu,	 Christian,	 Mohammedan?	 Science	 investigates	 the
objective	 reality,	 religion	 investigates	 the	 subjective	 reality.	Both	are	 searching
for	the	real,	one	in	the	external	world,	the	other	in	the	internal.	If	science	cannot
be	Hindu	or	Mohammedan	or	Christian,	 then	how	can	 religion	be?	Religion	 is
nothing	but	a	quality	--	religiousness.
I	 teach	 a	 religionless	 religiousness.	 And	 the	 whole	 thing	 depends	 on	 your
dropping	the	idea	of	god	as	a	person.	Otherwise	if	god	is	a	person	then	you	start
worshipping,	praying;	then	you	start	persuading	him	to	do	some	favours	for	you
and	 you	 go	 in	 an	 absolutely	 wrong	 direction.	 No	 worship	 is	 meaningful,	 no
prayer	is	meaningful	because	there	is	nobody	as	a	person	to	answer	you.
God	is	an	inner	experience.	When	you	have	reached	your	innermost	core,	to	the
very	roots	of	your	being,	a	great	explosion	of	bliss	happens.	It	is	like	an	atomic
explosion.	 Your	 consciousness	 explodes	 and	 you	 are	 showered,	 bathed	 in	 a
totally	 new	 kind	 of	 splendour	 of	 which	 you	 have	 never	 dreamt	 before.	 That
experience	 is	 god.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 you	 encounter	 somebody	 who	 is	 a	 god,	 you
experience	something	inside	you	which	is	divine,	godly.
Remember	 this,	 then	 the	 whole	 approach	 changes.	 Then	 instead	 of	 worship,
prayer,	 meditation	 becomes	 important	 --	 because	 prayer	 means	 god	 is
somewhere	outside	you.	You	have	to	 talk	 to	him	and	of	course	you	have	to	be
very	nice,	otherwise	he	may	get	angry,	he	may	throw	you	into	hell;	you	can't	be
nasty	to	him.
You	 have	 to	 be	 nice	 and	 nagging	 --	 both	 things	 have	 to	 be	 done.	 That's	what
prayer	 is,	 nice	 and	nagging.	Be	 nice	 so	 he	 cannot	 punish	 you	 and	 continue	 to
nag:	'Do	this,	do	this,	do	this,'	so	he	gets	tired,	and	one	day	thinking	that	enough
is	enough,	he	says	'Let	me	do	it	and	be	finished	with	this	man.'
But	there	is	nobody	--	whether	you	are	nice	or	nasty	does	not	matter.	What	you
are	doing	is	a	monologue,	it	is	not	a	dialogue	because	there	is	nobody	at	all.	It	is
a	kind	of	insanity.
True	religion	begins	with	meditation,	not	with	prayer.	Of	course	it	ends	in	prayer
but	never	begins	 in	prayer.	And	when	it	ends	 in	prayer	 the	prayer	has	a	 totally
different	meaning.	When	the	light	has	exploded	in	you,	when	bliss	has	exploded
in	 you,	 when	 you	 have	 arrived	 home	 --	 then	 of	 course	 a	 deep	 gratitude	 to
existence	arises	in	you.	That	is	prayer:	just	gratitude.	Nothing	has	to	be	said,	you
just	 feel	 gratitude	 --	 that	 is	 prayer.	 You	 feel	 prayerful,	 you	 feel	 a	 kind	 of
tremendous	 thankfulness	 to	 the	whole	 universe	 for	 all	 that	 it	 has	 done	 to	 you
because	suddenly	you	can	see	that	what	has	happened	is	so	infinite,	so	profound,
that	you	don't	deserve	it	at	all.
Out	of	that	experience	that	you	don't	deserve	it,	you	have	not	earned	it	and	yet	it
has	happened;	what	 else	 can	you	do	other	 then	 feel	grateful?	That	gratitude	 is
prayer.	It	is	a	silent	bowing	down	to	existence.
(In	explaining	the	meaning	of	his	new	name	to	Dhyan	Veeten,	Osho	explores	a
theme	he	has	been	touching	on	several	times	this	week	--	the	different	layers	of
himself	with	which	man	can	identify	and	the	way	to	go	beyond	them.)
Man	can	 live	 as	 a	body,	 then	he	 lives	only	an	animal	 existence.	Then	 sex	and
food	are	his	only	interest.
And	ninety-nine	per	cent	of	people	live	that	way.	They	are	not	yet	human,	they
are	still	part	of	the	animal's	kingdom.	Of	course	they	have	the	shape	of	a	human
being	but	the	shape	does	not	matter	at	all.
The	second	style	of	 life	 is	 that	of	 living	 through	the	mind	or	as	 the	mind.	 It	 is
higher	 than	 the	 first,	 deeper	 than	 the	 first.	 It	makes	 you	 a	 human	being.	Then
your	interests	become	wider,	not	that	you	don't	enjoy	food,	not	that	you	become
anti-sex,	but	even	sex	starts	having	a	new	dimension	to	it;	it	becomes	more	and
more	gesture.
As	 far	 as	 the	 animal	 is	 concerned	 sex	 is	 but	 a	 process	of	 reproduction.	At	 the
most	 it	 releases	 certain	 physical	 tensions,	 it	 is	 a	 relief,	 because	 the	 body
accumulates	sexual	energy	and	you	don't	know	how	to	transform	it	so	you	have
to	throw	it	out,	otherwise	you	fool	burdened.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
With	 the	 second	 stage,	 the	 second	 plane,	 your	 sex	 starts	 becoming	 more	 and
more	 free	 from	 reproduction.	 It	 becomes	 a	 loving	 gesture.	 Sex	 becomes
secondary,	love	becomes	primary.	You	love	a	person	in	many	ways	--	sex	is	one
of	 those	 many	 ways.	 You	 still	 enjoy	 food	 but	 that	 too	 starts	 having	 new
dimensions.	You	enjoy	food	more	with	your	friends.	You	like	to	share,	to	invite
others.	 It	 starts	 becoming	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 experience.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 stuffing
yourself	with	food,	sharing	becomes	more	important.	That	too	is	part	of	love.
And	 new	 interests	 suddenly	 arise	 on	 the	 horizon.	 You	 become	 interested	 in
poetry,	in	music,	in	dance,	in	many	forms	of	aesthetics,	in	literature,	in	sculpture,
in	gardening.	You	have	now	a	bigger	world.	But	this	is	not	the	end.
Meditation	brings	to	you	a	third	plane	which	is	transcendental	to	both	body	and
mind.	It	makes	you	aware	of	god	or	better	to	say,	of	godliness.	It	is	the	deepest
penetration	into	reality.	You	suddenly	become	aware	of	the	centre	of	existence.
First	you	become	aware	of	the	centre	of	your	own	being	and	that	leads	you	to	the
awareness	of	the	centre	of	the	whole.	Now	you	can	see	that	body	and	mind	are
temporary	abodes	and	that	you	have	been	in	many	bodies	and	many	minds,	that
you	 don't	 begin	with	 birth	 and	 you	 don't	 end	with	 death,	 that	 you	 are	 eternal,
timeless,	deathless.	This	awareness	makes	you	free	from	all	fear,	all	tension,	all
misery,	all	anxiety,	all	anguish.
Suddenly	the	sun	has	risen	and	all	darkness	disappears	and	flowers	start	opening
up	and	birds	start	singing.	That's	the	meaning	of	transcendence.	And	meditation
is	nothing	but	a	process	of	transcendence.	It	simply	takes	you	to	a	higher	plane
than	the	mind.	And	that	is	the	highest	plane.
Man	is	a	three-storied	building;	ninety-nine	per	cent	of	people	live	only	on	the
ground	floor,	a	few	live	on	the	second,	the	higher	floor	than	the	first,	and	only
very	rarely	a	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Lin	Chi,	a	Bodhidharma,	reach	to	 the	highest,
the	third.	But	it	is	everybody's	birthright.
And	my	sannyasins	have	to	use	every	possible	way	to	reach	to	the	third.	And	I
am	making	all	kinds	of	 ladders	available	here.	These	are	all	 ladders.	And	I	am
not	much	worried	about	you	sticking	to	a	particular	ladder.	You	can	even	climb
up	 the	 waterpipes	 (laughter)...	 but	 enter	 the	 third!	 How	 you	 enter	 does	 not
matter.	If	you	have	to	bribe	the	guard,	bribe	him!	(laughter)	By	any	means	enter
the	third.	I	am	not	much	interested	or	obsessed	with	any	particular	method.
All	 the	 religions	 in	 the	 past	 have	 become	 obsessed	 with	 one	 method.	 So
whosoever	comes	 to	 this	commune	feels	a	 little	bewildered	because	people	are
doing	Vipassana	and	people	are	doing	Sufi	dancing	too	--	and	nobody	has	ever
conceived	that	there	could	be	any	meeting	between	Sufism	and	Buddhism.
People	 are	 using	 Yoga	 methods	 and	 Tantra	 methods	 --	 and	 they	 have	 been
enemies	for	centuries	--	because	my	emphasis	is	to	enter	the	third.	Use	a	ladder,
use	a	rope,	climb	up	on	somebody's	shoulders....	The	whole	point	is	to	reach	the
third	plane.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	that	if	right	means	don't	help	use	wrong	means	--	don't	be
worried.	He	emphatically	said,	and	I	completely	agree	with	him,	be	a	sly	man.
Even	if	you	have	to	be	a	thief	be	one,	because	sometimes	thieves	have	entered
the	third	floor	before	the	saints	because	they	know	how	to	climb	walls	and	how
to	enter	through	windows	and	how	to	break	down	walls	--	they	know	everything.
If	they	don't	have	the	right	key	they	don't	bother;	they	will	break	the	lock.
So	if	you	need	to	be,	be	a	master	thief	but	enter	the	third	floor.	Make	it	a	point
that	in	this	life	you	have	to	reach	the	third	floor.	once	this	commitment	is	there
and	one	remains	constantly	aware	of	it,	it	is	not	difficult.
And	my	experience	 is	 that	once	you	have	 reached	 the	 third	 then	all	 the	means
that	you	have	used	are	valid.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8010075
ShortTitle:	THUNK07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Dhyan	Andy	means	meditation	and	courage.)
Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 enjoying	 your	 aloneness,	 the	 art	 of	 transforming
loneliness	into	aloneness,	solitariness	into	solitude.
Ordinarily	you	are	not	alone,	you	are	lonely	and	of	course	loneliness	is	a	state	of
misery.	There	 is	a	constant	hankering	 to	be	with	 the	other,	 to	be	 together.	The
lonely	person	is	constantly	asking	for	love.
Asking	simply	means	that	he	is	not	at	ease	with	himself,	he	wants	somebody	else
to	be	occupied	with.	And	of	course	this	kind	of	love	is	not	true	love.
If	it	is	a	need	then	there	is	a	motive,	if	there	is	a	need	then	it	is	businesslike.	The
other	is	being	used	as	a	commodity	and	the	other	is	using	you	as	a	commodity;
hence	the	continuous	conflict	between	lovers.
Nobody	wants	 to	be	 reduced	 to	 a	 thing,	nobody	wants	 to	be	used	as	 a	moans.
That	is	a	humiliation,	it	is	a	great	insult,	it	is	disrespectful.	But	that's	what	lovers
are	doing,	hence	anger	arises.	They	are	constantly	at	each	other's	necks.	Excuses
may	be	different	but	 the	 fundamental	 thing	 is	 that	both	 are	 incapable	of	being
alone.	Out	of	that	incapability	they	are	trying	to	be	together.
But	if	you	cannot	enjoy	yourself	in	your	aloneness	you	cannot	enjoy	yourself	in
togetherness	either.
Hence	meditation	is	a	first	stop	towards	love.
Andy	means	 courageous,	 and	 great	 courage	 is	 needed	 to	 do	 this	miracle.	 It	 is
almost	 a	 miracle.	 It	 is	 the	 greatest	 change	 that	 can	 ever	 happen	 to	 a	 man:
transforming	 loneliness	 into	 aloneness,	 transforming	 the	 negative	 into	 the
positive,	 transforming	 darkness	 into	 light.	 But	 it	 is	 not	 impossible	 --	 difficult
certainly,	arduous	certainly,	an	uphill	task,	but	not	impossible.	All	that	is	needed
is	courage	to	risk,	to	go	into	it.
People	are	so	afraid	of	being	lonely	that	they	never	go	into	it,	they	never	allow	it
to	 happen	 in	 its	 totality	 and	 that's	why	 they	go	on	missing.	 If	 they	 allow	 it	 to
happen,	 if	 they	 penetrate	 into	 it,	 if	 they	make	 it	 an	 adventure,	 an	 exploration,
without	 any	 prejudgement	 about	what	 it	 is	 ...	 because	 how	 can	 you	make	 any
judgement	if	you	have	not	experienced	it?	So	going	with	no	notion,	with	no	idea
of	what	 it	 is,	but	 just	 entering	 into	 that	 space	of	aloneness,	 slowly	slowly,	one
starts	 enjoying	 the	 beauty	 of	 it,	 because	 it	 is	 the	 most	 beautiful	 thing	 in
existence.
But	we	are	constantly	 running	away	 from	 it	 in	every	possible	way	 --	 thinking,
desiring,	 imagining,	 going	 into	 the	 past,	 going	 into	 the	 future,	 visiting	 people,
going	 to	 the	clubs,	 to	 the	movies,	sitting	before	 that	 idiot	box	called	 television
for	 hours	 together,	 just	 somehow	not	 facing	 the	 reality	 of	 your	 aloneness.	But
one	cannot	avoid	it.	Death	will	bring	it	to	you	because	everything	will	be	taken
away.	And	if	you	have	not	learned	the	art	in	life	what	are	you	going	to	do	when
death	 takes	 the	 television,	 the	movie,	 clubs,	 lovers,	 everything	away	 from	you
and	 leaves	you	alone?	That's	why	people	die	 in	misery,	otherwise	death	 is	 the
ultimate	culmination	of	joy.
If	 you	 know	 how	 to	 enjoy	 your	 aloneness	 you	 have	 transformed	 death	 into
something	totally	different.
Then	death	will	not	come	as	a	calamity,	it	will	come	as	a	blessing.	The	meditator
dies	rejoicing.	There	is	dance	inside	his	being	because	he	already	knows	what	it
is	to	be	alone,	and	what	a	beauty	it	is	and	what	a	benediction	it	is.
Courage	 is	 a	 basic	 requirement	 to	 penetrate	 the	 innermost	 core	 of	 your
aloneness.	And	once	you	have	known	the	joy	of	being	alone	you	can	share	it	--
and	 that	 is	 love.	 Love	 is	 a	 fragrance	 of	 the	 flower	 of	 meditation.	 Without
meditation	is	just	an	empty	name,	an	empty	word;	it	has	no	meaning,	no	content.
It	 hides	 something	 else	 and	 not	 only	 something	 else	 but	 something	 totally
opposite	to	love:	it	hides	lust.
So	this	has	to	be	the	work	of	every	sannyasin,	this	is	the	work,	to	go	into	your
aloneness.	Find	moments	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
when	 you	 can	 be	 alone.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 escape	 to	 a	monastery	 or	 to	 the
mountains;	one	can	find	a	few	hours	every	day.	And	the	best	thing	is	to	find	it	in
the	world,	amongst	all	kinds	of	distractions,	because	then	nothing	can	destroy	it.
If	 you	 find	 it	 in	 the	 Himalayas	 when	 you	 come	 back	 to	 the	 world	 it	 will	 be
destroyed.	It	was	something	contributed	by	the	Himalayas,	it	was	not	something
that	 has	 grown	 in	 you.	 It	 was	 a	 gift	 of	 the	 Himalayan	 peace.	 It	 was	 just	 a
reflection	in	you,	it	was	not	really	yours	at	all.
So	my	insistence	 is	 that	my	sannyasins	have	 to	 live	 in	 the	world	and	yet	work
silently	to	create	the	space	within	themselves	where	the	whole	world	disappears,
where	 one	 becomes	 profoundly	 silent.	 Out	 of	 that	 arises	 love.	 And	 when
meditation	 and	 love	 are	 both	 there	 you	 have	 achieved	 your	 destiny,	 you	 have
fulfilled	 the	 task	 given	 to	 you	 by	 god.	 And	 then	 naturally	 there	 is	 great
contentment,	the	joy	that	comes	after	reaching	a	peak.
Now	you	can	rest,	now	you	are	at	home,	now	you	are	at	peace	with	existence.
Neither	 meditation	 alone	 is	 enough	 nor	 is	 love	 alone	 enough;	 both	 are	 two
aspects	of	 the	same	coin	and	for	both	courage	 is	needed,	but	 the	basic	 thing	 is
meditation.
Begin	 with	 meditation	 and	 end	 in	 love.	 That	 defines	 the	 whole	 journey	 of
sannyas.
(Dhyan	Angelika:	only	through	meditation	can	truth	be	unearthed.)	Truth	is	not	a
conclusion	 of	 logical	 thinking,	 it	 is	 a	 realisation	 of	 absolute	 silence.	 It	 is	 a
realisation,	 not	 a	 conclusion.	 Truth	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	 have	 to	 invent,
truth	is	something	that	is	already	in	your	being;	you	have	brought	it	with	you.
Everybody	 brings	 the	 truth	 hidden	 deep	 into	 one's	 being.	 It	 has	 not	 to	 be
invented,	it	has	only	to	be	discovered.	Whatsoever	is	invented	is	a	lie,	it	cannot
be	 true.	 Truth	 is	 already	 there,	 you	 just	 have	 to	 uncover	 it.	 And	 that's	 what
meditation	 is	 all	 about:	 uncovering	all	 layers.	Particularly	 there	 are	 three	 thick
layers	and	you	have	to	penetrate	those	layers.
The	 first	 is	 the	 identity	with	 the	 body	 --	we	 think	we	 are	 our	 bodies.	That's	 a
wrong	notion,	it	has	to	be	broken.	We	are	in	the	body	but	we	are	not	the	body.
The	body	 is	 a	beautiful	 temple,	but	 it	 is	 a	 temple	and	you	have	 lived	 in	many
temples	before.	This	is	not	the	first	time	that	you	are	in	a	body,	you	have	lived	in
thousands	of	bodies.	Bodies	change	but	the	traveller	remains	the	same.	You	are	a
guest,	the	body	is	a	host,	but	never	become	identified	with	the	host.
The	second	layer	is	identification	with	the	mind,	with	thinking.	People	think	we
are	our	minds	 --	 that's	why	people	become	 so	much	obsessed	with	 ideologies.
Somebody	 is	 a	 Christian	 and	 somebody	 is	 a	 Hindu	 and	 somebody	 is	 a
Mohammedan,	somebody	is	a	Communist	and	they	become	so	attached	to	these
ideas	 that	 they	 are	 ready	 to	 kill	 or	 be	 killed	 for	 them.	 And	 these	 are	 only
thoughts,	just	soap	bubbles	--	nothing	much	in	them.	You	are	not	your	mind,	but
people	become	very	much	identified	with	the	mind	--	and	more	so	than	with	the
body,	because	it	is	very	rare	that	you	have	a	really	beautiful	body.
So	people	are	very	rarely	at	ease	with	their	bodies,	but	 they	are	always	at	ease
with	their	minds,	for	the	simple	reason	that	mind	is	not	observed	by	others.	Even
if	it	carries	many	ugly	things	nobody	can	observe	it.	And	even	those	ugly	things
you	 can	 keep	 to	 the	 back;	 you	 need	 not	 observe	 them	 yourself.	 That's	 how
repression	 happens:	 people	 go	 on	 repressing	whatsoever	 is	 not	 of	 their	 liking,
they	 go	 on	 throwing	 it	 in	 the	 basement	 of	 their	 mind	 and	 the	 basement	 has
become	so	big,	 it	 is	ninety	per	cent	of	your	mind.	Only	 ten	per	cent	at	 the	 top
you	decorate	with	beautiful	ideas,	morality,	mannerism,	etiquette	--	nice	things.
It	is	a	decorative	piece	in	a	show	window	where	you	receive	guests	and	welcome
friends.	 But	 that	 is	 not	 your	 reality.	 That's	why	 psychologists	 have	 to	 go	 into
your	dreams	--	for	the	simple	reason	that	your	dreams	show	much	more	reality
about	you	than	your	conscious	mind.	The	conscious	mind	is	arbitrary,	artificial.
It	is	managed	for	the	simple	purpose	of	exhibiting.
It	is	just	as	you	make	a	beautiful	drawing	room	in	your	house	with	paintings	and
chandeliers.	 And	 you	 keep	 it	 clean	 and	 do	 everything	 because	 you	 will	 be
receiving	people	there.	The	rest	of	your	house	may	be	dirty	--	who	bothers	about
the	house?	--	but	that	shows	more	about	you.
With	the	body	very	few	people	are	at	case	because	it	 is	so	obviously	there	that
you	cannot	repress	it.
And	women	 are	more	 identified	with	 their	 bodies	 than	men	 because	 certainly
they	have	more	beautiful	bodies.	Men	are	not	so	much	identified	with	the	body,
they	are	more	identified	with	the	mind.	Women	are	not	much	interested	in	isms
and	ideologies;	they	think	these	are	just	foolish	things.
Men	 are	 very	 much	 interested	 in	 communism,	 in	 socialism,	 in	 fascism,	 in
religions,	 in	 philosophies.	 The	 woman	 is	 much	 more	 interested	 in	 the	 mirror
where	she	can	see	her	body.	And	of	course	she	takes	more	care	of	the	body.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	problem	 for	 a	woman	 sannyasin	 is	 how	 to	 get	 unidentified	with	 the	 body
and	the	problem	for	a	male	sannyasin	is	how	to	get	rid	of	the	identity	with	the
mind.	 But	 these	 are	 not	 absolute	 things.	 There	 are	 women	 who	 are	 more
identified	with	the	mind	--	they	must	be	ugly	women.	And	there	are	men	who	are
more	identified	with	the	body	--	they	must	be	stupid	men,	mediocre	minds.
So	this	is	just	a	general	observation;	I	am	not	making	a	definite	statement	about
it.	This	is	not	something	universal.	But	whether	you	are	identified	with	the	mind
or	with	the	body,	it	makes	no	difference:	identification	is	the	problem.
And	there	are	a	few	people	who	are	identified	neither	with	the	body	nor	with	the
mind	but	who	are	 identified	with	 their	 feelings	 --	 the	poets,	 the	musicians,	 the
painters,	the	artists.	They	are	more	identified	with	the	heart,	the	so-called	lovers	;
that	is	the	last	citadel	of	identification.
One	 has	 to	 get	 out	 of	 all	 these	 three	 and	 then	meditation	 happens.	When	 you
have	gone	beyond	the	three,	when	you	know	you	are	not	the	body,	not	the	mind,
not	 the	 heart,	 suddenly	 your	 being	 explodes.	 That	 is	 meditation:	 the	 whole
process	 of	 destroying	 identifications.	 The	 moment	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be
identified	 with,	 when	 your	 consciousness	 is	 just	 pure,	 unidentified,
unadulterated,	 you	 have	 achieved	 meditation	 and	 in	 that	 moment	 truth	 is
discovered.
Angelika	 also	 means	 a	 messenger	 of	 god.	 Only	 a	 meditator	 can	 become	 a
messenger	of	god	because	only	a	meditator	can	reveal	truth,	only	a	meditator	can
live	truth.	Only	a	meditator	can	radiate	truth,	nobody	else	--	not	the	philosophers,
not	the	theologians	but	the	mystic.	One	who	has	reached	to	the	innermost	core	of
his	being,	starts	living	his	truth.	And	that	truth	radiates,	it	starts	reaching	others,
it	 starts	 vibrating	 other	 peoples'	 beings.	 It	 creates	 a	 kind	 of	 synchronicity.	 If
whosoever	comes	close	to	the	person	who	has	attained	the	truth	is	open,	he	will
immediately	 feel	 a	 movement	 in	 the	 innermost	 soul.	 Something	 is	 triggered,
music	 is	 heard,	 a	 light	 has	 penetrated.	 There	 is	 a	 communion	 --	 and	 that
communion	is	the	whole	purpose	of	sannyas.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	simply	expose	yourself	 to	me.	You	withdraw	all
your	 resistance,	 you	withdraw	all	 your	 defences,	 you	become	 available	 to	me,
vulnerable.	And	then	something	invisible	starts	functioning.	Nobody	will	be	able
to	see	it.
There	 are	 many	 people,	 particularly	 journalists,	 who	 when	 they	 come	 to	 the
ashram	ask	sannyasins
'What	is	happening	to	you?'	because	they	can	see	something	is	happening.	And
sannyasins	 say	 it	 cannot	 be	 said,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 felt.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 here	 and
participate.	But	the	journalist	comes	here	to	be	an	observer	--
detached.	He	cannot	participate	because	he	 is	afraid	 that	 if	he	participates	 then
he	is	no	more	a	detached	observer.	So	he	has	to	be	just	a	detached	observer.	Then
there	is	trouble:	he	cannot	understand	what	is	happening.	Then	he	invents	things,
saying	that	may	be	it	 is	some	kind	of	mesmerism,	hypnotism,	witchcraft,	some
black	 magic.	 Then	 he	 goes	 on	 inventing	 things	 because	 he	 can	 see	 that
something	is	happening	but	he	cannot	analyse	it.	Rationally	he	cannot	find	what
it	 is	exactly.	Whomsoever	he	asks	invites	him	to	participate	and	that	he	cannot
do.
Everybody	 says	 to	 him,	 'Can't	 you	 feel	 the	 energy?	 Can't	 you	 feel	 the
Buddhafield?'	And	 he	 cannot	 feel	 it	 because	 he	 is	 closed.	Then	 he	 goes	 away
with	invented	stories	--	all	lies,	but	he	is	not	lying	intentionally.
He	may	not	like	to	do	any	harm	but	that's	what	he	really	does,	because	he	starts
saying	 things,	writing	articles,	books,	 spreading	 rumours	 that	he	was	 there	but
nothing	happened	to	him	so	how	can	he	believe	all	those	people?	And	he	is	right
in	a	way,	nothing	has	happened	to	him,	but	he	is	wrong	in	his	conclusion.
It	is	like	carrying	a	radio	with	you	without	putting	it	on.	You	can	go	on	carrying
it,	 it	 will	 not	 catch	 any	 station.	You	 have	 to	 put	 it	 on.	You	 have	 to	 bring	 the
needle	 to	 the	exact	position,	 to	 the	 right	position	where	 it	will	 start	 catching	a
certain	station.	That's	what	sannyas	is.	It	is	turning	yourself	on	and	then	trying	to
bring	your	needle	 into	a	deep	attunement	with	me.	Then	suddenly	the	message
starts	penetrating	you.
This	cannot	happen	to	detached	observers,	hence	journalists	are	always	going	to
be	reporting	something	wrong.	This	is	a	process	which	they	cannot	become	part
of	and	hence,	they	cannot	understand	it.	It	becomes	very	elusive	for	them.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	start	participating	in	my	being.	It	needs	a	certain
attunement,	a	certain	silence	on	your	part,	a	certain	opening	so	that	you	are	no
more	objecting,	resisting,	fighting,	defending.
That's	what	I	mean	when	I	use	the	word	 'surrender'.	It	 is	not	surrendering	your
being,	it	 is	surrendering	your	defences,	your	resistances,	it	 is	surrendering	your
negativity.	 It	 is	 opening	 your	 doors	 to	 the	 sun,	 to	 the	wind,	 to	 the	 rain.	 Then
miracles	are	possible,	and	everybody	is	entitled	to	miracles.
I	simply	feel	pity	for	those	people	who	come	here	as	observers.	It	is	good	to	be	a
detached	observer	if	you	go	to	a	scientific	lab,	but	this	is	not	a	scientific	lab;	it	is
a	subjective	phenomenon.	Here,	only	participants	will	know,	others	will	miss	the
whole	point.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Another	theme	Osho	has	been	emphasising	this	week	is	that	of	erasing	the	ego
so	one	is	a	zero.	Then	you	become	a	medium,	a	vehicle,	a	passage,	he	explains	to
Shunyo	Reinhold.)	You	are	no	more,	you	have	been	left	behind,	far	behind.	That
is	 the	meaning	of	becoming	a	nothing,	a	no-thing,	a	zero:	you	have	abandoned
your	 ego.	 And	 in	 that	 very	moment	 you	 are	 in	 for	 a	 great	 surprise:	 here	 you
abandon	your	ego	and	something	tremendously	powerful	starts	flowing	through
you	--	oceanic,	vast,	tremendous,	immeasurable.	It	gives	power	to	you	but	not	to
the	 ego.	 It	 gives	you	power	but	 it	 is	 no	more	yours;	 it	 is	 divine,	 it	 is	 god's.	 It
gives	 you	wisdom	but	 it	 does	 not	 come	 from	any	outer	 source	 --	 from	Christ,
from	Buddha,	 from	Krishna,	 from	the	Koran,	 from	the	Bible,	 from	the	Veda	--
no.	It	does	not	come	from	any	outer	source,	 it	comes	from	the	unknown	and	it
comes	through	you.	From	the	very	rock	bottom	of	your	being	it	comes.	It	is	like
a	fountain	that	suddenly	erupts.
It	 is	 both	 power	 and	wisdom.	Of	 course,	wisdom	has	 to	 be	 powerful,	 but	 this
power	is	not	the	ordinary	power	we	are	accustomed	to.	It	is	not	power	which	is
violent,	 it	 is	 power	 which	 is	 love,	 compassion.	 It	 is	 power	 which	 becomes
service.
It	is	not	the	power	of	Alexander,	it	 is	the	power	of	a	Buddha.	And	it	 is	not	the
wisdom	 of	 the	 professors	 and	 the	 priests,	 it	 is	 the	 wisdom	 of	 a	 Jesus,	 of	 a
Krishna	of	a	Mohammed.
Mohammed	was	absolutely	 illiterate,	he	could	not	even	 sign	his	name,	but	 the
Koran	 descended	 through	 him.	 The	 ways	 of	 god	 are	 very	 strange.	 He	 didn't
choose	 some	 scholar	 --	 and	 there	 were	 great	 scholars	 available,	 even	 in
Mohammed's	place	there	were	great	scholars,	imams.	But	he	chose	Mohammed
for	the	simple	reason	that	this	was	the	man	who	had	abandoned	his	ego.
In	Jesus'	time	there	were	great	rabbis,	very	scholarly,	great	historians	who	knew
all	the	scriptures,	who	could	quote	all	the	prophets	of	the	past	--	but	god	chose
the	son	of	a	carpenter.	He	also	was	illiterate,	uneducated,	from	a	small	village,
and	 the	 village	was	 very	 notorious;	 it	was	 known	 that	 nothing	 good	 had	 ever
happened.	But	god's	ways	are	mysterious.	He	chose	this	carpenter's	son	for	the
simple	reason	that	Jesus	was	capable	of	putting	his	ego	aside.
One	becomes	god's	chosen	person	if	one	can	fulfil	a	simple	requirement:	just	put
the	ego	aside.	Nothing	else	 is	needed.	Then	power	flows	through	you,	wisdom
flows	 through	 you,	 love	 flows	 through	 you.	You	yourself	 become	blissful	 and
you	become	a	blessing	to	the	whole	existence	too.
Yogen	 means	 the	 art	 of	 meeting	 and	 merging	 with	 god.	 Yoga	 simply	 means
meeting,	merging.
Ordinarily	we	are	separate	from	the	whole.	We	live	like	islands	--	and	that's	the
cause	of	our	whole	misery,	because	the	more	separate	from	existence	we	feel,	the
more	alienated	we	become.	And	 then	of	course	we	are	outsiders	and	 strangers
and	 we	 don't	 see	 any	 significance,	 any	 meaning	 in	 life.	 Then	 everything	 is
boring.
Soren	Kierkegaard,	the	founder	of	existentialism	in	the	West,	says	that	boredom
is	 the	most	 important	 problem.	But	 it	 is	 an	 important	 problem	only	 if	 you	 are
living	in	a	separate	world	of	your	own,	a	private	world,	alienated	from	existence,
inimical	to	existence.	Otherwise,	Buddha	says	there	is	no	question	of	boredom	--
there	is	bliss,	ecstasy.
Now	 to	 whom	 to	 listen?	 Is	 Kierkegaard	 right	 --	 that	 life	 is	 boredom?	 Or	 is
Buddha	 right	 --	 that	 life	 is	 infinite	 bliss?	 Both	 are	 telling	 their	 stories.
Kierkegaard	 lived	 like	 an	 island,	 He	 was	 in	 absolute	 isolation,	 he	 never	 met
people,	he	had	no	friends.	He	loved	a	woman	and	he	wanted	to	marry	her	but	at
the	 last	moment	he	escaped.	At	 the	 last	moment	he	rejected	her	 for	 the	simple
reason	that	he	was	always	afraid	to	be	so	close	to	somebody.
That	 closeness	was	 creating	 a	 trembling	 in	 him.	He	 never	wanted	 anybody	 to
look	into	his	private	world.
He	was	trying	to	hide	his	misery,	he	was	not	ready	to	share	or	expose	himself	to
anybody,	so	he	lived	imprisoned	in	his	own	world.	Naturally,	he	felt	 life	was	a
boredom.
And	Buddha	opened	himself	up	to	the	stars,	to	the	ocean,	to	the	sky,	to	the	trees,
to	 the	 birds,	 and	 he	 knew	 life	 as	 bliss.	 It	 all	 depends	 on	 how	 you	 relate	 to
existence.	Are	you	 trying	 to	be	an	egoist?	 --	 then	misery,	boredom,	anguish	 is
going	 to	 be	 your	 fate.	 If	 you	 meet	 and	 merge	 with	 existence,	 if	 you	 start
destroying	the	walls	and	creating	bridges...	because	the	same	bricks	can	be	used:
you	can	make	a	wall	or	you	can	make	a	bridge.	If	you	start	destroying	the	walls
and	making	 bridges,	 that	 is	 yoga.	 That	 is	 creating	 as	many	meeting	 points	 as
possible	--	a	multi-dimensional	unity	with	existence,	with	all	its	beauty,	with	all
its	celebration,	with	the	millions	of	forms	that	life	has	taken.
One	 should	 be	 able	 to	 relate	with	 trees,	with	 rocks,	with	 animals,	with	 rivers,
with	mountains.	One	 should	 be	 able	 to	 relate	with	 the	whole	 of	 life	 in	 all	 its
forms.	The	more	you	relate,	the	more	rich	you	are.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	when	your	relationship	becomes	so	deep	that	you	don't	feel	an	island,	you
become	part	of	the	vast	continent	that	god	is,	then	life	is	sheer	ecstasy.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name.	Bliss	comes	out	of	meeting,	merging	with	the
whole.
(Natural	 or	 spontaneous	 love,	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 her	 name,	Osho	 tells	 the	 last
person	for	sannyas.)	We	are	brought	up	in	such	a	way	that	we	even	forget	how	to
be	loving	naturally,	spontaneously.	Even	love	--	the	most	significant	value	in	life
--	becomes	something	artificial.	The	mother	says	to	the	child	'Love	me	because	I
am	your	mother.'	She	does	not	 allow	 the	 child	 to	grow	 towards	 a	 spontaneous
love.	She	enforces	on	the	child	the	idea	that	he	has	to	love,	he	must	love.	Now
this	is	sheer	stupidity.
Love	 cannot	 be	made	 a	 duty,	 and	 the	moment	 you	make	 it	 a	 duty	 it	 becomes
artificial,	 superficial.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 even	 skin	 deep.	 The	 father	 says	 'Love	me
because	 I	 am	 your	 father.'	 They	 are	 giving	 reasons	why	 the	 child	 should	 love
them,	as	if	love	needs	any	reasons.	They	are	not	creating	a	situation	around	the
child	 in	 which	 the	 child	 spontaneously	 flowers	 into	 a	 loving	 person;	 they	 are
enforcing	the	idea.
If	the	child	does	not	feel	love	naturally	he	feels	guilty	--	because	he	is	not	loving
the	mother;	 the	father,	and	this	 is	bad,	 this	 is	not	how	this	should	be.	He	starts
feeling	condemnation	for	himself.	And	if	he	tries	to	love	just	to	avoid	guilt	then
he	knows	that	it	 is	 just	hypocrisy,	but	he	has	to	learn	the	hypocrisy	because	he
has	to	survive.	It	is	a	question	of	life	and	death	for	him.	Then	he	has	to	love	the
brothers	 and	 the	 sisters	 and	 the	 uncles	 and	 the	 aunts.	 He	 has	 to	 love	 and	 he
completely	forgets	that	love	could	have	been	a	natural	growth.	Now	it	is	a	duty,	a
commandment	 to	 be	 fulfilled,	 so	 he	 goes	 on	 doing	 it.	 It	 becomes	 an	 empty
gesture.	And	this	becomes	his	pattern	for	the	whole	of	his	life.
In	fact,	the	first	seven	years	of	life	are	the	most	important	time.	If	the	person	is
going	to	live	seventy	years	then	those	first	seven	years	are	going	to	be	decisive
for	seventy	years	because	he	will	repeat	the	same	pattern	on	different	planes.	He
will	pretend	to	love	his	wife,	he	will	pretend	to	love	his	children,	he	will	pretend
to	love	the	friends.	And	the	pretension	will	go	so	deep	that	he	will	not	even	feel
that	this	is	a	pretension;	he	will	think	this	is	what	love	is	supposed	to	be.	This	is
love.	That's	why	everybody	in	the	whole	world	is	loving	and	the	world	is	turning
into	a	great	madhouse.	If	everybody	were	loving	the	world	would	be	a	paradise,
not	a	madhouse.	People	would	be	blissful	--	if	there	is	so	much	love	in	the	world
everybody	should	be	flowering.	Nobody	seems	to	be	flowering.	Something	very
basic	is	missing.
My	effort	here	 is	 to	help	you	become	aware	of	all	your	pretensions.	Once	you
are	 aware	 they	 can	be	dropped.	They	 can	be	dropped	very	 easily	 --	 the	whole
thing	is	to	become	aware	of	them,	They	have	gone	deep,	their	roots	have	reached
very	deep	into	your	bones,	 into	your	very	marrow.	So	one	has	to	be	very	alert,
very	aware,	to	find	all	the	roots.	Once	you	have	found	all	the	roots	of	your	false,
pseudo,	 love,	 you	 can	 uproot	 it.	 You	 can	 uproot	 all	 the	 weeds	 and	 you	 will
become	again	a	child	and	you	will	start	your	life	afresh	from	the	very	beginning
in	innocence,	and	then	there	will	be	spontaneity,	naturalness.
And	to	be	spontaneously	loving,	naturally	loving,	is	to	be	religious.	Religion	has
nothing	to	do	with	worshipping	Jesus	or	Buddha	or	Krishna.	It	has	nothing	to	do
with	chanting	mantras,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	all	kinds	of	rituals	being	done	in
the	churches	and	 the	 temples.	 It	has	nothing	 to	do	with	all	 this	nonsense.	True
religion	is	simply	spontaneous	love	--	and	the	whole	society	has	been	against	it.
Hence	 my	 sannyasins	 will	 be	 facing;	 many	 many	 challenges,	 but	 those
challenges	are	beautiful;	they	can	be	transformed	into	opportunities.
When	 you	 accept	 a	 challenge	 it	 gives	 you	 integrity,	 it	 gives	 you	 sharpness,	 it
gives	you	intelligence.	And	every	challenge	becomes	a	new	adventure.	We	have
to	use	all	challenges	as	stepping	stones.
But	remember	one	thing:	until	spontaneity	of	love	is	achieved	life	is	going	to	be
a	sheer	waste.	People	are	born	with	great	potential	and	they	die	like	beggars;	the
potential	remains	unfulfilled,	unrealised.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	die	as	 rich	emperors,	emperors	of	 the	 inner	world,	 that
Jesus	calls	the	kingdom	of	god.	Love	is	the	door	to	that	kingdom	of	god	--	but
spontaneous	love,	natural	love,	not	a	love	enforced	by	others	but	something	that
arises	within	you	for	no	reason	at	all.	Love	for	 love's	sake,	 then	 love	has	such
beauty,	 such	 grace,	 such	 incomprehensible	 depth	 and	 such	 heights	 that	 the
Himalayan	peaks	are	nothing	compared	to	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010085
ShortTitle:	THUNK08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Anand	Shari.	Anand	means	bliss	and	Shari	means	princess.)	Bliss	immediately
transforms	 beggars	 into	 emperors	 because	 bliss	 opens	 the	 doors	 of	 the	 inner
treasures,	the	doors	of	the	real	kingdom.
One	can	be	rich	on	the	outside	--	that	does	not	necessarily	mean	that	he	is	rich
inside.	 In	 fact	 the	 very	 effort	 to	 be	 rich	 on	 the	 outside	 simply	 shows	 an
inferiority	complex;	deep	down;	he	suffers	from	inner	poverty	and	is	somehow
trying	to	cover	it	up.	But	the	project	is	doomed;	nobody	has	ever	been	able	to	be
inwardly	rich	through	outward	richness.	Just	the	opposite	happens:	the	more	rich
you	become	on	the	outside,	the	more	you	become	aware	of	your	inner	poverty,
because	of	the	contrast.	The	outside	becomes	a	contrast	and	your	poverty	comes
to	your	vision	more	clearly,	more	loudly.
Hence	 the	 paradox:	 the	 richest	 person	 is	 the	 poorest	 in	 the	 world.	 Even	 poor
people	are	not	so	poor	because	they	don't	have	any	contrast	 to	compare.	That's
why	poor	people	will	look	a	little	more	contented.
They	have	nothing	 to	 be	 contented	 about	 but	 they	 appear	 to	 be	 contented;	 the
rich	 people	 seem	 to	 be	 very	 discontented	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 now	 they
know	 that	 the	 outward	 richness	 has	 taken	 up	 their	 whole	 life	 and	 the	 inner
poverty	has	not	even	been	touched	by	it;	their	life	has	been	a	wastage.	Hence	the
great	despair	that	grips	rich	societies,	that	is	gripping	the	whole	West	now.
Science	has	given	people	richness	--	technology,	industry,	thousands	of	gadgets	-
-	and	suddenly	it	has	made	them	aware	of	an	inner	emptiness,	meaninglessness.
But	taken	rightly	it	can	be	a	good	beginning.	It	can	be	a	blessing	in	the	form	of	a
curse	because	then	one	can	start	moving	inwards.
When	 the	outer	project	has	 completely	 failed,	 entirely	 failed,	when	all	hope	 is
shattered,	then	there	are	two	alternatives:	either	one	remains	in	despair,	becomes
suicidal,	 goes	mad	 or	 one	 turns	 in.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 sannyas,	 the
point	of	turning	in.
Shari	 is	 also	 a	 beautiful	 symbolic	 name.	 In	 the	 Song	 of	 Solomon	 the	 rose	 of
Sharon	appears	as	a	symbol	of	the	beloved.	And	the	song	of	Solomon	is	one	of
the	greatest	songs	that	has	ever	been	composed,	ever	been	uttered.	But	it	is	one
of	the	most	misunderstood	songs	too.	Christians	particularly	are	embarrassed	by
it.	 It	 is	part	of	 the	Old	Testament	and	 they	are	 incapable	of	comprehending	 its
meaning.	They	are	afraid,	very	much	afraid,	because	it	talks	about	beauty,	love,
joy,	and	their	idea	of	religion	is	that	of	sadness.	The	cross	seems	to	be	perfectly
fitting	to	them,	but	a	rose	of	Sharon,	a	beloved	and	a	song	of	love	seems	to	be
too	materialistic,	too	worldly.	So	no	Christian	commentary	exists	on	the	Song	of
Solomon.	 Jews	are	a	 little	more	earthly	people	but	even	 they	 feel	embarrassed
because	the	symbols	that	are	being	used	are	of	love.
My	own	experience	is	that	love	is	the	only	word	that	can	describe	something	of
the	 divine.	 The	 meeting	 of	 two	 lovers	 is	 the	 only	 experience	 that	 can	 say
something	about	the	indescribable,	of	the	indefinable,	that	can	at	least	indicate,
give	a	hint	of	 the	 tremendous	ecstasy	 that	happens	when	an	 individual	merges
with	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
whole.	It	is	like	two	lovers	merging	into	each	other,	it	is	a	deep	embrace	of	love.
Of	 course	 it	 is	 far	 greater,	 far	 more	 profound,	 qualitatively	 different,	 on	 a
different	plane	than	that	of	ordinary	lovers.	But	ordinary	lovers	come	closer	to	it
than	anything	else.	No	cross	can	come	close	to	it.
For	me	the	Song	of	Solomon	is	the	most	beautiful	part	of	the	Bible,	of	the	old
and	the	new	Testaments,	but	it	needs	a	totally	new	vision	to	explain	it.
My	sannyasins	can	 live	 the	Song	of	Solomon	and	 their	 life	will	become	a	 real
commentary.
Bliss,	industrious,	is	the	meaning	of	Anand	Jurgen.
It	is	not	something	to	be	added	to	us,	it	is	not	an	achievement.	We	have	brought
it	with	us	from	the	very	beginning	and	it	is	not	separable	from	us.	It	is	our	very
soul.
But	a	problem	has	arisen	for	the	whole	humanity	and	now	even	to	discover	our
innermost	 core,	 our	 very	 nature,	 industry	 is	 needed,	 great	 effort	 is	 needed,
because	 the	 society	 has	 created	 so	many	 barriers	 to	 reaching	 it.	 It	 has	 put	 so
many	rocks	in	the	way	and	the	source	is	completely	covered	with	rocks.	Those
rocks	have	to	be	removed.
Bliss	does	not	need	any	effort,	but	those	rocks	are	there	and	they	certainly	need
great	 effort,	 great	 industry,	 great	 perseverance,	 persistence.	 Once	 they	 are
removed	bliss	 is	 natural	 and	 spontaneous.	But	 the	 society	has	 done	 the	wrong
already	and	 it	has	been	doing	 it	 for	 so	 long	 that	we	have	completely	 forgotten
what	wrong	is	being	done	to	every	child.
His	 blissfulness	 is	 being	 methodically	 destroyed.	 The	 parents	 destroy	 it,	 the
priests	destroy	it	--
everybody	destroys	blissfulness	because	there	is	a	danger	in	it.	A	blissful	person
has	a	few	qualities	which	are	very	dangerous	to	the	establishment.
First,	 a	 blissful	 person	 becomes	 non-violent.	 You	 cannot	 force	 him	 to	 be	 a
soldier.	You	cannot	make	him	do	any	cruelty	to	anybody.	In	his	blissfulness	he
has	known	 that	all	 is	one.	 It	 is	not	a	belief,	 it	 is	his	experience	 that	 the	whole
existence	is	one.	He	becomes	non-destructive	--	and	society	is	violent,	politics	is
violent,	 nations	 are	 violent,	 the	 state	 is	 violent,	 the	 church	 is	 violent,	 because
they	are	all	political	games.
Politics	is	political	--	and	that	can	be	understood	--	but	even	religion	is	political.
Every	 religion	 is	 trying	 to	 defeat	 other	 religions.	 There	 is	 a	 constant	 struggle
going	on,	a	cold	war.	And	how	long	can	you	go	on	fighting	a	cold	war?	Sooner
or	later	it	becomes	heated	up,	then	a	hot	war	erupts.
The	 society	 needs	 soldiers,	 violent	 people,	 murderous	 people;	 and	 a	 blissful
person	 cannot	 be	 that.	 He	 would	 rather	 die	 himself	 than	 kill	 anybody.	 He
willingly	would	be	ready	to	die	because	he	has	tasted	something	of	immortality
so	he	does	not	care	about	death.	But	he	will	not	destroy	anything.
Even	plucking	a	flower	from	a	tree	would	be	difficult	for	a	blissful	person.	That
is	 destructiveness	 --	 you	 are	 killing	 the	 flower.	 A	 blissful	 person	 naturally
becomes	intelligent	because	when	you	become	natural	in	one	sense	you	become
natural	in	all	senses.	It	all	happens	simultaneously,	it	cannot	happen	in	parts,	in
installments.	It	is	not	possible	that	you	are	naturally	blissful	but	not	intelligent.
If	 you	 are	 naturally	 blissful	 you	will	 be	 naturally	 loving	 you	will	 be	 naturally
intelligent	 --	 and	 the	 society	does	not	want	 any	 intelligence	 in	 people	 because
intelligent	 people	 are	 not	 easily	 enslaved.	They	 create	 all	 kinds	 of	 resistances:
they	 will	 fight	 to	 the	 very	 end	 but	 they	 would	 not	 like	 to	 be	 enslaved	 by
anybody.	 And	 intelligent	 people	 cannot	 be	 Christians,	 Hindus	 and
Mohammedans.	They	 have	 enough	 intelligence	 and	 in	 that	 light	 they	will	 live
their	life	and	they	will	search	for	god.	They	will	not	look	up	to	the	stupid	priests
to	guide	them.	The	intelligent	people	will	not	follow	the	mediocre	politicians.
The	 politician	 cannot	 allow	 intelligence,	 the	 priest	 cannot	 allow	 intelligence.
Even	 parents	 don't	 like	 an	 intelligent	 child	 because	 he	 asks	 embarrassing
questions	 and	 he	 is	 not	 always	 reliable;	 sometimes	 he	 may	 say	 no.	 He	 will
follow	 his	 intelligence.	 You	 cannot	 reduce	 him	 to	 a	 yea-sayer.	 Yes,	 when	 his
intelligence	 feels	 it	 is	 right	he	will	 say	yes.	He	 is	not	 saying	yes	 to	you,	he	 is
saying	 yes	 to	 his	 intelligence.	 So	 whenever	 something	 does	 not	 fit	 with	 his
intelligence	he	will	say	no.	And	no	parents	want	disobedient	children.
These	 are	 the	 problems.	 That's	 why	 they	 have	 decided	 --	 unconsciously,	 of
course	--	 to	destroy	all	possibilities	of	 intelligence.	And	the	only	way	is	 to	put
many	 rocks	 around	 the	 source	 so	 it	 becomes	 covered;	 even	 your	 own	 eyes
cannot	 see	 it.	 And	 they	 teach	 you	 to	 look	 for	 it	 on	 the	 outside,	 to	 search	 in
money,	 in	 power,	 in	 prestige.	 And	 once	 you	 start	 searching	 for	 bliss	 in	 the
outside	world	you	are	finished.
Life	is	too	short	and	the	world	is	too	vast.	By	the	time	you	realize	that	you	are
doing	something	impossible	and	bliss	has	to	be	found	within,	life	has	gone	down
the	drain,	nothing	is	left.
Alexander	died	crying,	with	tears	in	his	eyes,	realizing	that	he	had	been	a	fool.	In
conquering	 the	 whole	 world	 he	 completely	 forgot	 that	 the	 real	 victory	 is	 to
conquer	oneself	--	but	then	it	was	too	late.
It	is	good	that	young	people	are	coming	to	me.	I	am	interested	in	young	people,
because	they	have	more	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
time,	something	can	be	done.	They	have	energy	and	they	are	ready	to	rebel	and
they	 are	 ready	 to	 throw	 away	 all	 the	 rocks.	 It	 only	 needs	 your	 readiness	 and
those	rocks	can	be	dislodged	from	their	places	--
because	they	are	not	natural	to	you,	they	are	just	unnatural.
Bliss	 is	 something	 spontaneous	but	 your	 spontaneity	 has	 been	 crippled.	 It	 is	 a
very	strange	society	 in	which	we	have	 lived	 for	centuries:	 first	 it	cripples	you,
then	it	gives	you	crutches.	and	then	it	sells	crutches	to	you:	go	to	the	church,	go
to	the	temple,	pray	to	god	and	read	the	Bible	or	the	Koran	or	the	Gita,	listen	to
the	priest.	First	it	cripples	you	and	then	it	starts	supplying	you	with	crutches.
My	effort	 is	 totally	different:	I	want	you	to	throw	away	all	crutches	and	regain
your	wholeness.	You	are	not	a	cripple.	It	is	only	a	belief	that	has	been	implanted
in	you,	 it	 is	 a	kind	of	hypnosis.	So	 I	 am	going	 to	be	opposed	by	 the	 religious
people,	by	the	politicians,	by	all	the	vested	interests.	And	it	is	understandable;	I
don't	feel	that	it	could	be	otherwise.	And	my	sannyasins	have	to	remember	that
they	are	moving	into	a	very	revolutionary	world	of	inner	search.
(Then	Osho	talks	of	prayer.)
There	are	two	kinds	of	prayer	in	the	world.	One,	which	needs	no	meditation	as	a
prerequisite,	 and	 the	 other	 which	 needs	 meditation	 as	 a	 preparation,	 as	 a
necessary	preparation	 for	 prayer.	Meditation	 is	 a	means	 and	prayer	 is	 the	 end.
Meditation	is	the	seed	and	prayer	is	the	flowering	of	it.	The	first	kind	of	prayer,
which	needs	no	meditation	as	a	prerequisite,	 is	false	because	it	will	be	without
any	grounding.	It	will	not	have	any	roots.
Christian	 prayer,	 Hindu	 prayer,	Mohammedan	 prayer	 --	 these	 are	 prayers	 that
you	can	 learn	 like	a	parrot.	You	can	 repeat	 them	and	you	can	go	on	 repeating
them	for	the	whole	of	your	life.	It	becomes	a	ritual.	If	you	don't	repeat	them	you
feel	a	 little	uneasy	because	it	has	become	a	habit;	 if	you	repeat	 them,	 that's	all
there	is	to	it;	nothing	happens	out	of	it.
It	is	just	like	smoking	a	cigarette,	one	can	make	it	a	habit;	before	a	person	goes
to	bed	he	smokes	a	cigarette.	If	he	does	not	smoke	he	cannot	go	to	sleep.	That
habit	haunts	him	and	forces	him	to	repeat	it	--
habits	are	repetitive.	And	somebody	says	a	little	prayer	before	he	goes	to	sleep.
If	 he	 does	 not	 do	 it	 then	 he	 cannot	 fall	 asleep.	 It	 is	 the	 same,	 there	 is	 no
difference;	psychologically	 there	 is	no	difference	 --	 for	both	 it	 is	a	mechanical
habit.
Smoking	 may	 be	 a	 little	 harmful	 physically	 and	 prayer	 may	 not	 be	 harmful
physically,	 but	 prayer	 can	be	more	harmful	 psychologically	 because	you	 think
you	 are	 being	 religiously	 just	 repeating	 a	 ritual.	 It	 is	 not	 so	 easy,	 it	 is	 not	 so
cheap.	And	what	are	you	doing?	--	 just	 repeating	a	 few	words	 to	somebody	 in
the	 sky.	You	don't	know	what	kind	of	man	 this	 is	 and	whether	he	understands
your	language	or	not	--	because	there	are	three	thousand	languages	on	the	earth
and	there	are	at	least	fifty	thousand	planets	populated	with	people.
Just	 think	of	all	 the	 languages.	 If	god	understands	all	 these	 languages	he	must
have	gone	mad	long	ago	--
you	need	not	worry,	forget	all	about	praying.	Either	he	must	have	gone	mad	or
he	must	have	become	deaf,	just	to	defend	himself.
It	is	a	monologue.	Your	god	is	only	a	projection.	You	believe	in	god	so	you	have
projected	a	god	somewhere	above,	in	the	sky,	and	you	are	praying	to	your	own
imagination.	 It	 is	 really	 stupid!	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 small	 child	 holding	 his	 teddy
bear...	without	his	teddy	bear	he	cannot	sleep,	he	goes	on	carrying	the	teddy	bear.
It	is	dirty	but	he	does	not	bother	about	that,	he	goes	on	carrying	it.	Without	the
teddy	bear	he	 feels	very	alone,	afraid.	With	 the	 teddy	bear	 things	are	okay,	he
feels	adjusted.
All	these	ideas	about	god	that	people	go	on	carrying	are	nothing	but	teddy	bears
a	little	refined.
To	me	prayer	needs	meditation	as	a	basic	requirement.	Meditation	means	the	art
of	becoming	silent,	 the	art	of	becoming	 thoughtless,	 the	art	of	becoming	a	no-
mind.	 When	 all	 thinking	 disappears,	 all	 words	 disappear	 and	 there	 is	 only
silence,	undisturbed	by	any	desire,	by	any	memory,	by	any	dream,	when	the	lake
of	your	consciousness	 is	completely	without	any	waves,	not	even	small	ripples
on	it	--	that	is	meditation.
Out	 of	 this	 meditation	 a	 great	 experience	 of	 joy	 arises	 in	 you	 because	 you
discover	your	authentic	reality,	your	original	face.
Out	 of	 this	 discovery	 of	 inner	 bliss,	 beauty,	 grace,	 immortality,	 eternity,
deathlessness,	 one	 feels	 thankful	 to	 existence,	 not	 to	 any	 person.	 One	 feels
grateful	 to	 the	whole	existence	because	 the	whole	existence	has	contributed	 in
making	you,	in	creating	you.	The	earth	has	given	something,	the	sky	has	given
something,	the	birds	have	given	something,	the	trees	have	given	something.	The
air,	the	sun,	the	moon,	the	stars	--	they	have	all	contributed.	Seeing	this,	knowing
this,	you	feel	grateful	and	a	deep	unspoken	thankyou	arises	in	you.	Remember	--
unspoken;	 you	 don't	 say	 it	 because	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 say	 it	 to.	 Just	 a
thankfulness	pervades	you,	permeates	you.	Your	whole	being	feels	a	tremendous
gratitude.	That	is	prayer,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
true	prayer.
(Due	to	a	technical	problem	the	next	sannyasin's	initiation	is	no	recorded.)	Prem
Nirmala:	love	purity.
The	 mind	 is	 very	 much	 polluted.	 Only	 the	 mind	 can	 be	 polluted	 through
education,	 conditioning,	 propaganda,	 but	 the	 heart	 fortunately	 remains	 beyond
the	 propagandists,	 the	 pedagogues,	 the	 priests,	 the	 politicians;	 they	 cannot
contaminate	 it,	 they	 cannot	 reach	 it.	 But	 they	 have	 played	 a	 trick,	 they	 have
made	 everybody	 ignore	 the	 heart.	 They	 are	 afraid	 that	 if	 you	 live	 through	 the
heart	 then	 you	will	 live	 an	 individual	 life,	 the	 life	 of	 freedom.	And	 the	 heart
cannot	be	conditioned,	they	can	condition	only	the	head,	so	they	have	played	a
trick	on	everybody:	 they	force	your	energy	 to	go	directly	 to	 the	head,	 ignoring
the	heart,	leaving	the	heart	aside.
And	my	effort	here	 is	 to	 rechannelise	your	energy:	 it	 should	move	 through	 the
heart,	then	it	can	go	to	the	head,	then	there	is	no	trouble.	Love	should	be	the	first
thing,	logic	should	be	secondary	to	it,	then	logic	cannot	harm.
But	 if	 logic	becomes	 the	 foremost,	 it	will	 destroy	you;	 it	will	 destroy	 all	 your
loving	qualities,	 because	 it	 is	 too	calculative	 to	be	 loving,	 it	 poisons.	And	 if	 a
man	 becomes	 incapable	 of	 love	 he	 becomes	 incapable	 of	 prayer,	 incapable	 of
meditation,	incapable	of	finding	himself	or	god.
So	the	first	thing	is,	the	first	step	is	to	revive	your	heart;	hence	my	emphasis	on
dancing,	singing	creativity,	painting.	So	something	that	needs	your	heart	and	put
the	mind	aside	as	much	as	possible.
To	 be	 here	with	me	 simply	means	 to	 commune	with	me	 through	 the	 heart.	 It
should	not	become	an	intellectual	relationship,	 it	should	be	a	 love	relationship.
The	relationship	between	the	master	and	the	disciple	cannot	be	intellectual.	First
it	has	to	be	a	loving	relationship,	heart	to	heart	--	and	then	finally	it	has	to	be	an
existential	relationship,	even	deeper	than	the	heart.	These	are	the	three	centres.
First,	 the	most	superficial,	 is	the	head;	the	second,	is	the	heart,	which	is	just	in
between	the	 three	centres;	and	 the	 third	 is	your	being.	A	sannyasin	has	 to	start
with	 the	 second	 and	 reach	 the	 third,	 Those	who	 remain	 in	 the	 first	 cannot	 be
disciples,	they	can	at	the	most	be	students.	But	I	am	not	interested	in	students	at
all	 because	 I	 am	 not	 here	 to	 impart	 knowledge	 to	 you,	 I	 am	 here	 to	 trigger	 a
process	of	inner	transformation	in	you.
(Osho	explains	 the	difference	between	knowledge	and	wisdom.)	Knowledge	 is
very	 ordinary,	 mundane.	 It	 is	 information	 about	 the	 outside	 world,	 about	 the
objective	world.	It	is	about	things.	Wisdom	is	the	experience	of	your	own	being.
It	is	self-knowledge,	and	for	it	to	happen	you	have	to	learn	a	certain	method	to
transcend	the	body	because	the	body	belongs	to	the	outside.
That's	why	it	depends	on	food,	water,	air.
Secondly,	you	have	to	transcend	the	mind	because	mind	is	also	an	agent	of	the
outside	 world.	 It	 accumulates	 information	 given	 by	 others.	 It	 is	 not	 at	 your
service,	it	is	serving	some	other	purpose	--	the	vested	interest,	the	establishment,
the	church,	the	state.	It	is	not	in	your	service.	It	is	a	very	illusory	thing.
People	think	the	mind	is	serving	them,	it	is	not	serving	you.	Its	whole	function	is
to	 serve	 the	 establishment	 in	 a	 very	 indirect	 way;	 hence	 every	 religion	 is
interested	in	bringing	new	children	into	the	fold	as	quickly	as	possible.	Baptise
them,	make	them	Christians,	Jews,	Hindus,	Mohammedans,	and	be	quick	so	that
the	 children	 are	 completely	unaware	of	what	 is	 happening	 to	 them.	And	 these
people	create	the	mind.
Of	course	in	Soviet	Russia	the	child	is	conditioned	as	a	communist,	as	an	atheist.
That's	what	he	thinks	he	is	and	for	the	whole	of	his	life	he	will	thing	that	he	is	an
atheist	--	he	is	not.	He	has	been	forced	by	the	state	to	be	an	atheist.	The	same	is
true	 about	 everybody	 else:	 somebody	 is	 forced	 by	 others	 to	 be	 a	 Catholic,
somebody	else	to	be	a	Protestant,	and	so	on	and	so	forth.	The	mind	is	not	yours	-
-	that	is	the	first	thing	to	understand	--	and	it	has	to	be	transcended.
When	the	body	and	mind	both	are	transcended,	when	you	know	that	the	body	is
not	you	and	 the	mind	 is	 also	not	you,	only	 then	 for	 the	 first	 time	do	you	 start
moving	 into	 the	 real	 world	 of	 your	 inner	 being,	 your	 subjectivity,	 your
interiority.	And	that's	what	Jesus	calls	the	kingdom	of	god.
It	is	so	full	of	light,	so	full	of	bliss	that	there	is	no	fear	possible,	no	anxiety,	no
worry,	no	anguish.	It	is	constant	ecstasy.	And	because	it	gives	you	a	glimpse	of
the	eternal	even	death	disappears.	Death	happens	only	to	the	bodymind	structure,
not	to	you.
Meditation	 is	 the	 method	 which	 helps	 transcendence	 and	 meditation	 simply
means	awareness.	Be	aware	of	the	body	and	you	will	see	that	you	are	not	it,	be
aware	of	the	mind	you	will	see	that	you	are	not	it	either.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	when	both	these	are	transcended,	suddenly	your	own	being	explodes.	Then
there	is	the	realisation	of	who	you	are.
(Bliss	and	freedom	happen	simultaneously;	attain	one	and	you	immediately	get
the	other	into	the	bargain,	Osho	tells	Anand	Vimukta.)
All	the	methods	that	have	been	used	down	the	ages	can	be	divided	into	two:	the
methods	that	search	for	bliss	and	the	methods	that	search	for	freedom.
For	example,	Socrates'	search	is	for	freedom,	Gautam	the	Buddha's	search	is	for
freedom,	 Mahavira's	 search	 is	 for	 freedom	 --	 to	 be	 free	 of	 everything	 so	 no
boundary	remains	around	you	and	you	become	unbounded,	so	that	you	can	have
the	whole	sky	to	yourself,	the	whole	space	to	yourself.	Or	Krishna,	Jesus,	Kabir,
Jalaluddin	--	 these	are	the	masters	who	are	in	search	of	bliss,	of	being	blissful,
utterly	blissful,	cheerful,	constantly	rejoicing.	Jesus	says	again	and	again	to	his
disciples	to	rejoice.
But	 one	 thing	 that	 is	 very	 significant	 is	 that	 both	 have	 to	 use	 meditation.
Whether	you	search	for	bliss	or	you	search	for	freedom	it	is	not	possible	without
meditation.	So	whatsoever	the	goal	 is	 it	 is	 just	an	excuse;	one	has	to	start	with
meditation.	 And	meditation	 is	 simply	 a	 state	 of	 awareness	where	 no	 thoughts
exist.	The	mirror	is	utterly	empty,	reflecting	nothing	because	nothing	is	passing
in	front	of	it.
When	 thoughts	 are	passing	 in	 front	of	your	consciousness,	your	consciousness
becomes	 overflooded	with	 thoughts	 and	 you	 forget	 the	mirror	 --	 because	 you
always	find	some	thoughts,	some	feelings,	some	mood,	some	emotion,	you	can
never	see	the	mirror	as	just	itself.	It	is	always	coloured	by	something	else.
Meditation	 simply	 means	 to	 stop	 this	 whole	 traffic	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	 your
mirrorlike	 consciousness	 in	 its	 purity.	 And	 then	 both	 things	 happen	 together.
Whatsoever	you	were	searching	for,	freedom	or	bliss,	they	both	come	together.
Both	are	flowers	of	the	same	bush.
I	teach	my	sannyasins	only	one	thing	--	I	don't	give	any	outer	discipline	but	only
an	inner	process	of	meditation.	So	while	you	are	here	put	your	energy	totally	into
meditation.	There	is	nothing	else	to	be	done.
Life	can	become	such	a	bliss	 and	 such	a	 freedom	 that	you	cannot	even	dream
about	it	right	now.	What	ecstasies	are	waiting	for	you,	you	cannot	imagine;	you
can	 only	 know	 them.	 Even	 those	 who	 know	 cannot	 describe	 them;	 they	 are
indescribable,	no	word	is	adequate	enough	to	say	anything	about	them.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010095
ShortTitle:	THUNK09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Thomas's	name	Osho	adds	bliss,	so	his	name	means	the	greatest	bliss	 is	 in
seeking	and	not	in	finding.)
The	finding	is	secondary,	the	seeking	is	primary;	hence	never	thing	of	the	goal
but	think	of	the	journey	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
--	 the	whole	 journey	has	 to	be	ecstatic.	And	the	goal	 is	not	something	static	at
the	very	end	of	the	journey,	it	is	spread	all	over	the	journey.	Each	step	is	a	goal
in	 a	 certain	 sense,	 because	 life	 is	 eternal	 so	 there	 cannot	be	 a	 fixed	goal	 to	 it.
Because	 life	 is	 eternal	 the	 pilgrimage	 is	 eternal.	And	 one	 has	 to	 learn	 to	 love
each	moment,	each	step,	each	phase	of	the	journey.
The	people	who	become	goal-oriented	become	oblivious	of	all	the	beauty	that	is
on	 the	 way.	 The	 goal-oriented	 person	 is	 future-oriented	 and	 he	 misses	 the
present.	And	the	present	is	the	only	reality	there	is.
He	loses	that	which	is	for	that	which	is	not.
A	sannyasin	is	not	to	be	goal-oriented,	he	is	not	to	be	ambitious.	He	has	to	drop
the	 achieving	 mind,	 root	 and	 all.	 Only	 a	 non-achieving	 mind	 is	 capable	 of
enjoying	each	moment	 to	 its	 fullest,	Then	 the	very	means	become	 the	end	and
there	is	no	division;	the	journey	becomes	the	goal	and	there	is	no	division.	And
when	 there	 is	 no	 division	 between	 the	means	 and	 the	 end	 there	 is	 no	 division
within	you;	you	become	for	the	first	time	united,	integrated,	one	organic	whole	--
and	that	has	tremendous	beauty.
To	be	one	organic	whole	is	to	know	what	truth	is.	Truth	is	not	somewhere	else,	it
is	within	you,	it	is	your	very	nature.
(Her	 name	means	 innocence	 --	 and	 that's	 just	what	meditation	 creates	 in	 you,
Osho	tells	Dhyan	Ines.)	Meditation	is	a	state	of	absolute	innocence	--	no	thought,
no	desire,	no	memory,	no	fantasy,	no	dreams.
When	all	 this	crowd	has	 left	you	and	you	are	utterly	alone,	spacious,	 infinitely
spacious,	that	is	the	moment	when	the	experience	of	innocence	happens	for	the
first	time.
Every	child	is	innocent	but	he	is	not	aware	of	it.	He	is	innocent	but	without	any
consciousness.	The	difference	between	a	child	and	a	Christ	is	only	of	one	thing...
Both	are	innocent,	as	far	as	innocence	goes	they	are	in	exactly	the	same	space	--
the	 difference	 is	 of	 consciousness.	 The	 child	 is	 unconscious	 and	 the	 Christ	 is
conscious.
If	innocence	is	unconscious	it	is	bound	to	be	lost.	You	cannot	have	it	for	long	in
the	cunning	world;	you	have	to	be	as	cunning	as	possible.	Where	everything	is
politics,	where	everything	is	conflict,	where	everything	has	to	be	snatched	away
before	somebody	else	snatches	things	from	you,	where	the	only	right	procedure
to	 defend	 yourself	 is	 to	 attack,	 you	 cannot	 remain	 innocent	 for	 long.	 In	 the
marketplace	one	has	to	learn	the	ways	of	cunningness	and	for	that	our	schools,
colleges,	universities	exist.	They	make	you	cunning.
Of	course	they	call	it	by	different	names,	beautiful	names.	They	say	that	they	are
making	you	clever,	not	cunning,	but	in	fact	what	they	do	is	to	make	you	cunning.
That's	what	is	called	cleverness	in	the	world.
They	 destroy	 your	 simplicity,	 they	 destroy	 your	 innocence.	 They	 destroy	 real
roses	in	you	and	they	go	on	handing	over	false,	plastic	things.
Real	education	has	yet	to	be	born,	it	has	not	happened	yet.	Real	education	will
make	you	consciously	innocent.	The	child	is	innocent	--	real	education	will	add
consciousness.	 Right	 now	 what	 it	 does	 is	 to	 destroy	 innocence.	 Rather	 than
helping	you	it	harms	you;	of	course	it	goes	on	saying	it	is	for	your	sake.	But	the
tree	has	to	be	judged	by	its	fruit.	The	whole	world	living	in	such	a	cunning	mess,
in	 such	 a	 chaos,	 is	 enough	 proof,	 because	 this	 is	 the	 by-product	 of	 all	 our
education,	civilisation,	culture.	This	is	enough	proof;	these	are	the	human	beings
we	have	created	--	and	they	are	all	in	anxiety,	despair,	anguish,	and	they	are	all
bored,	tired,	exhausted,	not	feeling	any	joy,	not	feeling	even	any	meaning	in	their
lives,	almost	always	on	the	verse	of	committing	suicide.	A	little	push	from	any
accidental	event	and	they	will	commit	suicide	or	they	will	go	mad.
This	is	what	we	have	made	of	human	beings:	we	have	pushed	them	into	such	a
place	from	where	either	they	have	to	go	on	living	a	stupid	life	utterly	devoid	of
meaning,	or	they	have	to	commit	suicide	or	go	mad.
Only	three	alternatives	are	left	for	them	and	none	of	them	is	of	any	worth.
My	work	 here	 consists	 in	 creating	 a	 real	 education.	And	 to	me	 real	 education
means	your	 innocence	has	 to	be	protected,	 respected,	honoured,	because	 it	 is	a
gift	 from	god.	 It	 is	 immensely	precious.	 In	 fact	 there	 is	nothing	more	precious
than	it.	Out	of	that	innocence	you	will	attain	to	love,	to	bliss,	to	godliness;	out	of
that	 innocence	 all	 great	 values	 are	 going	 to	 be	 born.	 Hence	 it	 should	 not	 be
destroyed,	 it	 should	 be	 protected,	 it	 should	 be	 helped	 and	 nourished.	And	 the
best	way	 to	 protect	 it	 is	 to	 give	 you	 some	 sort	 of	 awareness.	And	 that's	what
meditation	is	all	about:	creating	awareness	in	you	so	your	innocence	is	no	more
in	darkness	but	in	full	light.
You	 can	 lose	 your	 treasures	 if	 you	 are	 unaware	 of	 them,	 you	will	 be	 cheated.
Somebody	is	going	to	deceive	you.	But	when	you	know	your	treasures	and	the
immense	value	of	them	you	will	be	on	guard;	then	you	cannot	be	cheated.	You
will	 risk	 everything	 but	 you	 will	 protect	 your	 treasures.	 You	 will	 die	 if	 it	 is
needed	 but	 you	 will	 not	 allow	 anybody	 to	 destroy	 your	 innocence	 because	 it
means	all	that	is	significant.	It	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
means	love,	it	means	bliss,	it	means	a	life	of	celebration.
So	learn	awareness,	become	more	and	more	alert	about	everything	that	you	are
doing	and	about	everything	that	goes	on	in	your	mind	and	moves	in	your	heart.
Be	 aware	 of	 all	 these	 three	 layers:	 the	 body,	 the	 mind,	 the	 heart	 --	 actions,
thoughts,	 feelings.	 Be	 aware	 on	 all	 those	 planes	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 that
awareness	starts	settling	and	the	fourth	is	born	in	you.	When	the	fourth	is	born
god	has	penetrated	you.	The	fourth	 is	your	soul,	your	 innermost	core.	And	 the
revelation	of	it	reveals	to	you	that	you	are	unborn	and	that	you	are	not	going	to
die,	that	you	are	part	of	eternity.
And	the	very	feel	of	eternity	is	ecstatic.	Your	whole	perspective	changes.	It	is	the
same	world	but	it	is	no	more	the	same	because	you	are	no	more	the	same.	Jesus
says	again	and	again	'Unless	you	are	like	small	children	you	will	not	enter	into
my	kingdom	of	god.	But	that	does	not	mean	that	children	are	in	the	kingdom	of
god,	 otherwise	 they	 would	 not	 lose	 it.	 Who	 can	 lose	 the	 world	 of	 god,	 the
kingdom	of	god	for	mundane	things?	They	are	not	in	it,	they	are	unaware	of	it,
hence	the	emphasis:	those	who	are	like	small	children.
Remember	 the	word	 'like';	he	 is	not	saying	 those	who	are	small	children,	he	 is
saying	like	small	children.
One	thing	is	certain,	they	are	not	children,	they	are	like	small	children.
That's	the	definition	of	a	sage:	he	attains	to	a	second	childhood.	And	that's	what
sannyas	is	--	the	birth	of	a	second	childhood,	this	time	with	awareness.	The	first
time	it	was	without	awareness	and	you	lost	it	but	with	awareness	it	can't	be	lost.
Once	you	are	aware	it	is	yours	forever.
(There	is	a	second	Thomas	at	darshan.	Osho	adds	the	word	'atit'	to	his	names	and
then	explains	why.)	Thomas	has	 two	meanings.	One	is,	a	seeker	of	 truth	--	but
that	meaning	won't	apply	to	you	(laughter).
The	second	meaning	is	doubting	Thomas	(much	laughter).	I	have	been	watching
you...!	 But	 nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 doubt.	 Doubting	 Thomas	 became	 one	 of	 the
apostles	of	Jesus.
In	fact	in	a	way	it	is	related	to	the	first	morning.	A	seeker	of	truth	can	move	in
two	ways;	one	is	doubt,	another	is	trust.
If	one	moves	through	doubt	one	becomes	a	philosopher;	doubt	is	the	base	of	all
philosophy.	 If	 one	moves	 with	 trust	 one	 becomes	 a	 saint,	 a	 sage.	 Trust	 leads
towards	religion,	doubt	leads	towards	philosophy.
In	both	ways	one	is	seeking	truth	but	a	philosophical	search	can	at	the	most	give
you	a	few	ideas	about	truth.	And	remember	the	word	'about'.	It	is	never	the	truth
but	only	about	and	about;	and	the	word	'about'
means	around,	around	and	around.	You	go	in	circles,	never	reaching	the	centre.
So	philosophy	makes	much	 fuss,	 it	 is	 very	noisy,	 but	 nothing	 comes	out	of	 it.
You	go	on	digging,	you	dig	the	whole	mountain	and	not	even	a	rat	comes	out	of
it	(laughter).	You	are	as	empty	as	you	were	before,	in	fact	more	empty,	because
at	least	before	there	was	some	hope.	Now	even	that	is	gone.	Philosophy	leads	to
hopelessness.
Stop	your	toe	--	that	is	a	sign	of	doubt!
(Osho	has	glanced	at	Thomas'	feet,	and	now	looks	up	at	him,	grinning	broadly.)
You	were	just	moving	your	big	toe!	(Thomas	grins;	the	laughter	from	the	group
of	 sannyasins	 behind	 him	 is	 so	 deafening	 that	 Osho's	 next	 words	 are	 quite
drowned.)
Just	 look	at	my	feet.	You	can	go	on	watching	them	for	 the	whole	day	and	you
will	not	see	any	movement.	That's	what	trust	is!	(much	laughter)
Nothing	is	wrong	in	doubt.	If	you	want	to	become	a	philosopher	it	 is	perfectly
okay.	Because	you	cannot	move	your	head,	you	are	moving	your	toe	--	it	is	the
other	end.	But	I	am	watching	both	ends!	(much	laughter)
You	have	to	go	beyond	doubt	--	that	is	the	meaning	of	the	name	I	am	giving	you:
Atit	Thomas.	Atit	means	 go	beyond	 and	Thomas	means	 doubting	Thomas:	 go
beyond	doubt,	because	sannyas	is	not	a	philosophical	adventure,	it	is	a	religious
phenomenon.
Here	you	will	be	able	to	learn	only	if	you	love	and	trust.	It	is	a	love	relationship
with	me.	If	some	doubt	exists	between	me	and	you	that	doubt	will	function	as	a
wall.	And	I	am	not	at	a	loss	so	it	is	not	a	problem	for	me.	If	one	decides	to	doubt
one	can	go	on	doubting	--	I	am	not	losing	anything	through	it	--	but	one	will	be
missing	the	whole	point	of	being	here.
Doubt	creates	a	wall,	trust	creates	a	bridge.	And	the	same	bricks	have	to	be	used.
Out	of	the	same	bricks	you	can	make	a	wall	or	a	bridge	--	then	why	not	make	a
bridge?	when	you	make	a	wall	you	are	disconnecting	yourself	 from	existence,
and	of	course	you	will	feel	suffocated,	you	will	feel	imprisoned.
Create	bridges.	Trust	and	love	create	bridges,	and	the	more	bridges	you	create,
the	more	enriched	your	life	becomes,	because	existence	goes	on	pouring	its	joys
into	you	more	and	more.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Truth	can	be	 found	but	not	 through	doubting,	 truth	can	be	 found	only	 through
trust.	Then	 it	 is	not	about	 truth,	 it	 is	 truth	 itself.	 It	 is	 like	a	 taste.	You	can	 talk
about	light	to	a	blind	man	--	he	will	know	about	light	but	not	light	itself.	He	can
know	light	only	if	he	has	eyes.
My	function	here	is	not	that	of	a	philosopher	but	that	of	a	physical.	I	would	like
to	help	you	to	see,	to	cure	your	eyes,	to	help	you	open	your	eyes,	so	that	you	can
see	light.	It	is	needless	to	talk	about	light,	it	is	a	sheer	wastage	of	time.	One	can
make	a	blind	man	immensely	informed	about	light,	still	he	will	be	blind	and	he
will	be	unaware	about	the	experience	that	light	is	and	all	those	colours	that	light
reveals.
Scientists	have	come	to	the	conclusion	that	a	man	lives	eighty	per	cent	of	his	life
through	his	eyes.
That's	why	we	feel	so	much	compassion	for	a	blind	man.	You	don't	feel	so	much
compassion	 for	 a	 deaf	man;	 you	 don't	 feel	 so	much	 compassion	 for	 any	 other
kind	of	retarded	person	as	you	feel	for	a	blind	man.
One	person	may	be	dumb,	another	may	be	deaf,	someone	else	may	have	lost	any
sense	of	 smell	 --	 you	don't	 feel	 so	much	 compassion	 for	 these	people,	 but	 the
blind	person	gets	greatest	sympathy	from	every	nook	and	corner.
Once	a	blind	man	came	from	Kashmir	to	see	me	and	I	was	puzzled	about	how	he
had	travelled	alone	because	he	was	blind	and	Kashmir	away.	It	took	him	six	days
to	 reach	 me	 --	 travelling	 by	 train,	 changing	 train	 after	 train,	 because	 coming
from	Kashmir	one	has	to	change	trains	many	times.
I	asked	him	'How	did	you	manage	it	alone?	You	don't	have	anybody	with	you.'
He	said	 'Because	I	am	blind	everybody	takes	compassion	on	me,	so	everybody
helps	me.	In	fact	 if	 I	had	eyes	 it	would	have	been	far	more	difficult	 to	reach...
because	tickets	have	to	be	booked	four	weeks	or	six	weeks	ahead	and	then	too,
on	Indian	trains	you	cannot	rely	whether	you	will	get	a	seat	or	not.	But	because	I
am	a	blind	man	nobody	even	asked	me	whether	I	have	got	a	ticket	or	not.	Even
the	ticket	collector	helps	me	to	find	a	place	without	asking	for	the	ticket.'	And	he
told	me	'You	can	see	the	rickshaw-wallah	who	is	standing	outside;	he	has	refused
to	take	money	from	me,	he	has	taken	me	from	the	station	and	he	is	waiting	there
for	me	so	that	he	can	take	me	back	to	the	hotel,	to	some	hotel	where	I	can	stay.
And	he	has	refused	to	take	money.'
The	reason	is	 that	a	blind	person	suffers	the	most;	eighty	per	cent	of	his	life	is
closed.	He	lives	only	twenty	per	cent,	only	one-fifth	he	lives.	And	that	is	about
the	outer	eyes,	what	to	say	about	the	inner	eyes?
One	hundred	per	cent	is	missed.
Unless	your	inner	vision	opens	up	you	will	be	missing	the	real	life	because	you
will	be	missing	god,	you	will	be	missing	your	own	soul,	and	it	is	only	a	question
of	decisiveness,	 to	drop	doubting.	Just	 looks	back:	what	has	 it	given	you?	The
problem	 is	 that	 our	 whole	 education	 prepares	 us	 to	 doubt.	 It	 goes	 on
indoctrinating	 everybody	 in	 doubt	 because	 it	 is	 basically	 a	 scientific,
philosophical	approach,	and	both	philosophy	and	science	depend	on	doubt.	It	is
perfectly	 valid	 for	 scientific	 research,	 for	 philosophical	 enquiry,	 but	 it	 is
absolutely	 invalid	 for	 the	 inner	 journey.	 It	 is	 a	 hindrance,	 not	 a	 help.	 For	 the
inner	journey	you	need	a	totally	different	methodology,	and	that	is	trust.
So	while	 you	 are	 here	 learn	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 trust	 and	you	will	 be	 surprised	how
much	you	have	been	missing.	and	you	will	also	become	aware	how	much	more
is	possible	if	your	trust	goes	on	growing.
Sannyas	simply	means	approaching	life	with	trust,	love,	and	creating	bridges.	It
is	 possible.	 And	 I	 can	 say	 so	more	 emphatically	 because	 I	myself	 have	 lived
through	doubt.	I	began	my	enquiry	through	doubt	and	I	went	to	the	very	end	of
doubting	--	because	I	never	do	anything	half-heartedly;	when	I	do	something	I
do	it	madly.	Then	I	don't	listen	to	anything,	I	simply	go	on	and	on	until	I	come	to
the	very	end.
So	I	went	to	the	very	end	of	doubt	and	I	have	seen	that	the	road	suddenly	ends	in
nowhere.	It	leads	into	an	abyss	where	you	can	only	commit	suicide	or	go	insane.
So	I	know	the	whole	journey	of	doubt	and	its	futility.
When	Ramakrishna	says	this	he	has	no	experience	of	it;	he	never	doubted.	When
Ramana	says	it	he	has	no	experience	of	it;	he	simply	followed	the	path	of	trust
from	 the	 very	 beginning.	Hence	 I	 can	 be	more	 in	 tune	with	 the	modern	mind
than	anybody	else,	because	I	have	lived	through	doubt	and	I	abandoned	it.
Reaching	the	very	end	of	it	and	seeing	that	it	is	simply	nonsense	I	had	to	come
back.	The	whole	journey	had	to	be	gone	back	over	and	I	had	to	start	again	from
ABC.
So	my	sannyasins	need	not	go	on	the	journey	of	doubt,	I	have	done	that	journey
for	them.	They	can	start	through	trust,	through	love.
Premesh	means	god	of	love	--	and	in	fact	there	is	no	other	god.	Love	is	god.
Jesus	 says	 god	 is	 love	 --	 and	 that	 was	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 revolutionary
statements	made	by	him,	particularly	in	the	Jewish	context,	in	the	context	of	the
Old	 Testament...	 because	 the	 Old	 Testament	 god	 is	 not	 love	 at	 all.	 That	 god
himself	 declares	 in	 the	Old	Testament,	 'I	 am	 a	 very	 jealous	 god.	Worship	me.
And	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
those	who	are	not	with	me	are	against	me.'	This	is	the	way	Adolf	Hitler	speaks,
but	the	Jewish	god	spoke	the	same	way.
And	 in	 the	Talmud	 it	 says	 'God	 is	 not	 nice,	 god	 is	 not	 your	 uncle	 --	 beware!'
Particularly	 in	 the	 Jewish	 religion	 before	 Jesus	 time	 the	 old	 god	 was	 fear-
creating.	 That's	 why	 the	 word	 god-fearing	 exists	 for	 the	 religious	 person.	 In
almost	all	the	languages	of	the	world	there	is	something	like	this	god-fearing	for
the	religious	person.	It	is	ugly,	it	should	be	dropped.
Even	Christians	use	this	phrase	 'god-fearing',	not	remembering	at	all	 that	Jesus
says	god	is	love.	But	two	thousand	years	have	passed	since	Jesus	declared	god	is
love.	Now	something	even	more	 revolutionary	 is	needed,	 so	 I	 say	 love	 is	god.
From	the	outside	both	the	statements	may	look	alike	they	are	not	alike.
When	you	 say	god	 is	 love	 that	 simply	means	 love	 is	 an	 attribute	 of	 god.	God
may	have	many	more	things,	god	may	be	many	more	things.	Love	is	only	one
aspect	of	god.	When	I	say	 love	 is	god	I	make	 them	synonymous.	Then	 love	 is
not	only	an	aspect,	in	fact	god	himself	becomes	only	an	aspect	of	love.
The	statement	of	Jesus	makes	god	the	centre	and	love	only	an	aspect.	I	declare
love	 is	 the	 centre	 and	godliness	 only	 the	 fragrance	 of	 love,	 nothing	more.	My
whole	teaching	is	rooted	in	love.
A	religious	person	is	not	a	god-fearing	person	because	fear	and	love	cannot	exist
together;	 that	 is	psychologically	impossible.	If	you	are	afraid	of	somebody	you
cannot	love	him,	and	if	you	love	you	cannot	be	afraid.	If	you	love	how	can	you
be	 afraid.	 And	 if	 you	 are	 afraid	 naturally	 you	 will	 feel	 offended,	 insulted,
humiliated	and	deep	down	you	will	hate	the	person,	you	cannot	love	him.	And
that's	what	happened.
Nietzsche	declared	that	god	is	dead.	This	is	the	outcome	of	the	whole	religious
tradition	 of	 god-fearing	 people.	The	 complete	 statement	 of	Nietzsche	 is	worth
consideration.	 He	 says	 god	 is	 dead	 and	 now	man	 is	 free.	 That	 second	 part	 is
almost	never	quoted	and	the	second	part	is	very	important:	god	is	dead	and	now
man	is	free.	You	can	see	the	point,	that	if	god	is	there	you	have	to	be	afraid	and
if	there	is	fear,	how	can	you	be	free?	With	fear	there	is	no	freedom.	So	it	is	better
to	kill	god,	to	destroy	god,	so	at	least	man	retains,	attains,	reclaims	his	freedom.
It	 is	 out	 of	 sheer	 necessity.	 Friedrich	Nietzsche	 is	 simply	 a	 by-product	 of	 the
whole	tradition	of	those	people	who	have	created	fear	in	the	human	mind.	They
knew	how	to	dominate	the	human	mind;	through	fear	it	can	be	dominated.	It	is
politics,	it	is	not	religion.
And	a	god	declaring	'I	am	a	very	jealous	god,'	is	not	a	god	at	all.	Somebody	else
is	speaking	through	god.	The	priest	is	using	the	mask	of	god	to	dominate	people,
to	enslave	people,	to	oppress,	exploit	people.
My	 emphasis	 is	 absolutely,	 categorically	 on	 love.	 A	 god-loving	 person	 is
religious.	In	fact	we	can	drop	the	word	'god';	it	is	unnecessary.	A	loving	person	is
religious.	A	loving	person	naturally	comes	to	know	god
--	of	course,	never	as	a	person	but	only	as	an	experience,	a	presence.
Prem	Shunyo	means	love	and	absolute	nothingness.
Love	is	 the	fragrance	of	 the	 lotus	of	nothingness.	When	one	becomes	almost	a
nothing,	a	nobody,	no	ego,	then	love	arises.	Love	is	already	there,	we	just	have
to	 remove	 the	 hindrances.	 And	 the	 ego	 is	 the	 greatest	 hindrance,	 the	 greatest
rock	that	destroys	it.	The	seed	is	under	the	rock;	if	we	remove	the	rock;	then	the
seed	can	sprout	and	can	bring	great	flowers.
The	only	problem	is	 the	ego.	It	 is	 the	root	cause	of	all	other	problems.	But	we
are	taught	in	such	a	way,	conditioned	in	such	a	way,	that	we	become	egos.	We
are	told	to	be	ambitious,	we	are	told	to	be	successful	in	life,	we	are	told	how	to
be	great	achievers.	There	are	thousands	of	books	written	every	year	to	help	the
ego.
Dale	Carnegies	 and	Napoleon	Hills	 and	 so	many	 stupid	 people	 all	 around	 the
world	 go	 on	writing	 such	 books	 --	 and	 they	 sell!	 In	America	Dale	Carnegie's
books	 have	 sold	 next	 only	 to	 the	 Bible.	 And	what	 kind	 of	 childish	 things!	 --
HOW	TO	WIN	FRIENDS	AND	INFLUENCE	PEOPLE.	The	whole	project	 is
egoistic.
Napoleon	 Hill's	 books	 are	 there;	 one	 book	 is	 entitled	 THINK	 AND	 GROW
RICH,	 and	 there	 are	 positive	 thinkers	 who	 go	 on	 telling	 people	 that	 you	 can
achieve	 everything	 just	 by	 the	 magic	 of	 positive	 thinking	 by	 affirmative
thinking.	 You	 just	 have	 to	 project	 that	 you	 have	 become	 the	 President	 of
America.	Go	 on	 projecting	 it,	 go	 on	 thinking	 'I	have	 become	 the	 President	 of
America.'	And	if	you	absolutely	affirm	it,	it	will	happen,	because	this	will	create
a	certain	magic	around	you,	a	certain	vibration	around	you.	And	there	are	foolish
people	who	go	on	reading	 these	books	and	go	on	 trying	and	 they	never	ask	 'Is
Napoleon	Hill	rich?
How	many	friends	has	Dale	Carnegie	got?	He	has	not	even	been	able	to	win	me
and	influence	me...	But	they	go	on	spreading	these	things	and	the	whole	idea	is
that	everybody	has	to	be	a	great	achiever.	This	creates	ego.
My	approach	is	just	the	opposite:	the	ego	has	to	be	totally	dropped.	You	are	not
to	be	achievers.
Whatsoever	you	need	is	already	given,	it	is	already	the	case;	all	that	you	need	is
to	let	 it	grow.	Your	potential	 is	 there;	you	have	to	remove	hindrances.	You	can
call	my	thinking	negative	thinking,	against	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
positive	thinking.	The	positive	thinking	says	project	your	idea	of	who	you	want
to	be;	I	say	god	has	already	made	you	what	you	are,	only	negate	hindrances.
That	has	been	the	most	ancient	teaching	of	the	great	mystics,	of	all	the	Buddhas.
We	call	the	method	neti-neti.	Go	on	saying	'This	is	not	me,	this	is	not	me'	And
go	 on	 removing	 everything	 till	 nothing	 is	 left	 to	 be	 removed.	When	 absolute
nothingness	has	happened,	 in	 that	nothingness	 the	 lotus	opens	up.	For	 the	 first
time,	when	you	are	not,	you	are.	And	to	experience	this	paradox	is	the	greatest
experience	in	life.
Shakespeare	 says	 the	 question	 is	 to	 be	 or	 not	 to	 be	 and	 I	 say	 that	 is	 not	 the
question	at	all.	Not	to	be	is	the	way	to	be,	so	it	is	not	a	question	of	choosing.	If
you	 decide	 not	 to	 be,	 the	 outcome	 is	 going	 to	 be	 that	 when	 you	 disappear
something	far	more	beautiful,	far	more	significant,	meaningful,	descends	in	you.
When	you	 are	 an	 absolute	 nothingness	 you	 create	 the	 space	 in	which	god	 can
start	flowing.	It	is	a	deep	let-go.
(The	 name	Anand	Dhyano,	 represents	 the	 synthesis	 he	 is	 striving	 for	with	 his
sannyasins,	Osho	tells	the	next	for	sannyas.)
It	 is	 easy	 to	 be	 blissful	 without	 meditation;	 it	 is	 also	 easy	 to	 be	 meditative
without	bliss.	But	then	the	person	becomes	lopsided,	then	he	is	not	whole.	Then
he	has	chosen	only	one	pole	of	his	being	and	the	other	pole	will	be	missing.	And
without	the	polarity	life	loses	all	that	is	great.	Everything	becomes	flat.
Bliss	will	be	there	but	sooner	or	later	it	will	become	boring	tiring,	exhausting.	Or
meditation	 will	 be	 there	 but	 sooner	 or	 later	 you	 will	 start	 feeling	 a	 kind	 of
deadness,	a	coldness.	You	will	start	shrinking	there	will	be	a	kind	of	withdrawal,
you	will	 lose	 interest	 in	 life,	you	will	 lose	 interest	 in	people,	you	will	become
enclosed.	It	is	not	a	food	state;	but	this	has	been	done	in	the	past.	A	few	people
searched	 for	 bliss	 --	 they	 found	 it	 at	 the	 cost	 of	 meditation.	 A	 few	 people
searched	for	meditation	--	they	found	it	at	the	cost	of	bliss.
I	want	to	create	a	synthesis	in	my	sannyasins	because	my	observation	is	that	the
whole	man	has	not	yet	existed	on	the	earth	or	has	existed	only	very	rarely,	once
in	a	while	--	a	Buddha,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Jesus.	But	these	are	exceptional	people,	they
don't	 represent	 humility.	They	 are	 so	 exceptional	 that;	whether	 they	 existed	 or
not	makes	not	much	difference.	The	vast	humanity	has	 remained	 in	a	 lopsided
way.
It	is	just	like	walking	on	one	leg	or	a	bird	flying	with	one	wing:	it	can't	go	very
far.	 You	 can	 hop	 a	 few	 feet	 but	 you	 cannot	 go	 on	 a	 Himalayan	 journey,	 you
cannot	reach	Everest.	The	bird	can	take	a	little	jump	from	one	tree	to	the	other
but	he	cannot	reach	the	moon	or	the	stars.
One	 wing	 is	 silence,	 coolness,	 awareness,	 and	 the	 other	 wine	 is	 blissfulness,
dancing,	singing,	rejoicing.
And	you	need	both	wings	together.	When	both	are	together	a	beautiful	harmony
arises	 in	 you.	 When	 silence	 and	 song	 meet,	 when	 awareness	 and	 celebration
meet,	something	higher	 than	both	 is	born.	 It	 is	 like	cross-breeding:	 the	child	 is
greater	 than	 both	 parents.	 And	my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 prove	 this	 new	 arrival,
they	have	to	herald	the	new	arrival	of	the	whole	man	in	the	world.	He	is	neither
Christian	 nor	Hindu,	 neither	worldly	 nor	 other-worldly,	 neither	materialist	 nor
spiritualist,	but	both	and	more,	both	plus.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010105
ShortTitle:	THUNK10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Yoshiko	has	lots	of	different	meanings,	Osho	says.	They	are:	joy,	love,	clarity,
brightness,	goodness	and	fragrance	--	in	fact	almost	the	entire	gamut	of	qualities
that	 arise	 through	meditation.)	 The	moment	 one	 puts	 the	mind	 aside	 all	 these
things	start	happening	spontaneously.	It	 is	not	that	you	have	to	bring	them	into
existence,	they	come	of	their	own	accord.	And	that	is	the	most	significant	thing
to	be	remembered:	if	you	make	any	effort	to	be	loving	your	love	will	be	false	the
very	effort	will	make	it	false.
The	same	is	true	about	virtue,	about	joy	and	about	all	the	ultimate	values.	They
have	to	come	effortlessly,	only	then	are	they	true	and	authentic.
Meditation	does	not	bring	them	in,	it	only	prepares	you	to	receive	them.	It	only
opens	 the	doors	 so	 the	 sun	can	come	 in,	 the	moon	can	come	 ing	 the	 stars	 can
come	 in	 and	 the	 wind,	 the	 rain.	 It	 simply	 opens	 you	 up.	 It	 does	 not	 create
anything.	 It	 is	 basically	 negative,	 it	 removes	 the	 barriers.	 And	 these	 are	 the
barriers:	desires,	memories,	 thoughts,	fantasies,	dreams,	 the	whole	past	and	the
whole	future.
Once	 you	 drop	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future	 and	 you	 are	 just	 here	 and	 now,	 that	 is
meditation;	 to	 be	 in	 the	 present	 is	 to	 be	 meditative.	 And	 in	 that	 immediate
experience	of	 the	now,	of	 the	here,	one	opens	up	and	all	 these	qualities	simply
start	coming	on	their	own.	And	they	have	a	tremendous	beauty	when	they	come
of	their	own	accord.	You	cannot	feel	egoistic	about	them	because	you	have	not
manufactured	them;	they	are	gifts	from	god	or	gifts	from	the	whole,	hence	one
feels	tremendous	gratitude.	And	that	gratitude	is	religiousness,	the	very	essence
of	religiousness.
(Love-meditation	 is	 the	meaning	of	 the	name	of	 the	next	 Japanese	 sannyasin.)
Love	means	the	heart,	the	world	of	trust.	The	head	means	doubt;	it	is	the	world
of	logic.	And	these	are	the	two	things,	one	has	to	choose	between.	If	you	choose
the	head	you	have	chosen	the	outside	reality.
Then	you	can	have	many	achievements,	you	can	have	wealth,	power,	prestige,
respectability	and	all	 that,	but	deep	down	you	will	 remain	poor;	 internally	you
will	 remain	 empty.	Hence	 all	 those	 achievements	 are	 really	 in	vain,	 they	don't
fulfil	you.
If	you	choose	love,	if	you	choose	the	heart,	you	have	chosen	the	inward	journey.
Then	you	will	possess	immense	richness,	great	power.	But	it	will	not	be	of	this
world,	it	will	belong	to	a	totally	different	plane.
The	words	are	the	same	and	because	of	the	words	many	times	mystics	have	been
misunderstood.	 Jesus	 is	 a	 case	 of	 misunderstanding.	 He	 was	 talking	 of	 the
kingdom	of	god	and	the	woman	rulers	who	were	dominating	Jerusalem	in	those
days	became	afraid	of	him;	they	thought	he	was	a	political	revolutionary.	He	was
talking	about	the	inner	kingdom	but	they	thought	ho	was	just	trying,	to	hide	his
politics	behind	religious	words.	That's	why	they	conspired	with	the	Jewish	rabbis
to	kill	him.	And	Jesus	was	absolutely	innocent	as	far	as	politics	was	concerned;
he	was	not	interested	at	all	in	the	outer,	in	the	external	reality.	His	whole	concern
was	inner.	All	the	awakened	people	of	the	world	have	always	explored	the	inner,
but	 they	 have	 to	 use	 the	words,	 the	 same	words,	 that	 are	 used	 for	 the	 outside
reality:	richness,	power,	kingdom.
Love	 opens	 the	 door.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 very	 loving,	 only	 then	 can	 meditation
blossom.	With	doubts	one	cannot	meditate.	One	can	think	about	meditation	but
one	cannot	meditate.	With	doubts	how	can	you	drop	ideas?
Doubt	brings	more	and	more	ideas	in.	Doubt	functions	like	a	magnet:	it	attracts
thoughts	from	everywhere.	And	no	thought	is	impotent,	remember;	each	thought
is	very	reproductive.	Thoughts	are	almost	like	Indians,	they	don't	believe	in	birth
control.	Unless	you	have	at	least	one	or	two	dozen	children	you	have	not	proved
your	manhood.
Thoughts	 are	 continuously	 bringing	 in	more	 and	more	 children,	 so	 when	 you
allow	 one	 thought	 you	will	 find	 a	 queue,	 an	 almost	 endless	 queue.	 And	 each
thought	will	create	more	doubts	and	more	doubts	mean	more	thoughts.
Logic	can	ultimately	lead	only	to	insanity.	It	is	not	an	accidental	thing	that	in	the
past	many	philosophers	have	gone	mad.	It	is	a	natural	consequence.	Those	who
have	 not	 gone	 mad	 simply	 prove	 one	 thing,	 that	 they	 were	 not	 great
philosophers,	just	mediocre	people,	half-heartedly	trying	doubt.	To	me	Bertrand
Russell	 is	mediocre.	Friedrich	Nietzsche	 is	 a	great	philosopher;	he	goes	 to	 the
very	 end	 --	 and	 at	 the	 very	 end	 of	 logic	 there	 is	 insanity.	 Insanity	 is	 the	 only
proof	that	the	philosopher	has	been	truly	a	philosopher,	true	to	his	vocation.
Through	love	one	attains	to	sanity,	to	absolute	sanity,	because	when	all	thoughts
disappear	there	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
nothing	 that	 can	drive	you	mad.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	go	mad	when	 there	 are	no
thoughts;	nobody	has	ever	been	able	to	manage	it.	No	Buddha	can	go	mad,	it	is
simply	impossible.	Even	if	he	tries,	nothing	will	come	out	of	it	because	the	basic
roots	of	madness	are	destroyed.
Choose	trust,	love,	the	heart,	so	that	you	can	become	a	meditator.	And	once	you
are	a	meditator	nothing	is	missing;	then	everything	settles	in	a	deep	harmony,	in
an	infinite	accord.	Life	becomes	a	melody,	a	dance,	a	celebration.
Satya	 means	 the	 ultimate	 truth.	 Amritam	 means	 eternal,	 immortal,	 deathless,
timeless.
The	definition	of	truth	is	that	which	is	eternal.	That	which	is	not	eternal	is	only	a
fact,	 not	 a	 truth.	And	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 fact	 and	 a	 fiction	 is	 not	much.
That	 which	 is	 a	 fact	 may	 have	 been	 a	 fiction	 just	 a	 moment	 before	 and	 that
which	is	a	fiction	right	now	may	become	a	fact	in	the	next	moment.
When	you	 are	 dreaming	 about	 something	 it	 is	 fiction;	 but	 you	 can	materialize
your	dream,	 then	 it	 becomes	a	 fact.	The	difference	between	 fiction	and	 fact	 is
only	 of	 degree;	 hence	 all	 facts	 sooner	 or	 later	 disappear	 again	 and	 become
fictions.	They	can	be	real	only	for	the	time	being.	They	are	momentary,	just	like
soap	bubbles:	 they	are	factual	when	they	are	 there	but	 they	are	 there	 just	 for	a
moment	and	then	the	bubble	bursts	and	nothing	is	left	behind,	not	even	a	trace.
But	 it	was	 there	 just	a	moment	before	and	 it	was	beautiful.	And	 if	 the	sunrays
were	 penetrating	 it,	 it	 may	 have	 been	 tremendously	 colorful,	 psychedelically
colorful.	 A	 rainbow	 is	 a	 fact	 but	 it	 is	 very	 momentary,	 any	 moment	 it	 can
disappear.	 And	 in	 life	 we	 live	 like	 a	 pendulum	 moving	 between	 facts	 and
fictions,	continuously	moving	from	fact	to	fiction,	from	fiction	to	fact.
Neither	fiction	is	truth	nor	facts	are	truth.	That's	why	in	the	East	we	have	never
bothered	about	history	very	much	 --	because	history	consists	of	 facts.	Nobody
knows	exactly	when	Krishna	was	born	--	the	year,	the	time.	Nothing	historically
is	known	for	the	simple	reason	that	we	have	not	paid	any	attention	to	history.
The	West	is	very	fact-oriented.
The	East	has	paid	great	attention	to	the	inner	meaning	of	Krishna's	life,	we	have
penetrated	 the	 deepest	 into	 his	 very	 being,	 into	 his	 truth.	 But	 that	 truth	 is
timeless,	so	it	does	not	matter	when	he	was	born,	it	does	not	matter	whether	he
was	 born	 or	 not.	 What	 really	 matters	 is	 whether	 something	 like	 Krishna-
consciousness	is	possible	or	not	--	and	that's	a	tremendous	difference.	We	are	not
concerned	 about	 whether	 Christ	 was	 really	 a	 historical	 person.	 He	 may	 have
been,	he	may	not	have	been;	it	doesn't	matter.
What	matters	 is,	 is	Christ-consciousness	a	possibility?	Can	a	man	rise	 to	 those
heights	 of	 being	 a	Christ?	 If	 that	 is	 possible	 then	what	 does	 it	matter	whether
Jesus	became	a	Christ	or	not?	If	you	can	become	a	Christ,	then	Jesus	of	course
must	have	become	a	Christ	and	many	others	must	have	become	Christs	too.
The	Western	mind	lives	in	time-consciousness,	the	Eastern	approach	is	towards
timelessness;	 hence	 our	 definition	 of	 truth	 is	 that	 which	 is	 beyond	 time.	 So
unless	you	go	beyond	 time	you	know	nothing	of	 truth.	 In	 time	you	only	 see	a
film	on	 the	 screen	 --	 it	 can	be	beautiful	 and	 for	 the	moment	you	may	become
enchanted	with	 it,	 but	 deep	 down	 you	 know	 that	 it	 is	 just	 a	 fiction.	You	may
become	engrossed	in	 it,	you	may	completely	forget	 that	 it	 is	 just	a	fiction,	you
may	start	taking	it	for	real	--	and	if	it	is	a	three-dimensional	film	it	can	give	you
the	notion,	the	feeling,	that	it	is	real.	But	then	the	end	comes,	and	the	screen	is
left	behind	and	then	suddenly	there	is	the	realization	that	for	the	whole	time	only
the	screen	was	real	and	the	film	was	just	a	projection.
The	world	of	facts	is	only	a	projection,	the	screen	is	the	reality;	but	the	screen	is
hidden	 behind	 the	 projection.	 The	 screen	 is	 god	 and	 the	 world	 is	 just	 a	 film
moving	on	that	divine	screen.	How	to	penetrate	the	real	--	that	which	always	is
and	will	always	be	and	has	always	been?	The	method	that	we	have	discovered	in
the	East	is	meditation.	Meditation	simply	means	dropping	all	fictions	and	facts,
cleansing	 the	mind	of	 fictions	 and	 facts	 both,	 so	 that	 only	 the	 screen	 remains.
The	 screen	 of	 consciousness	 is	 pure	 and	 empty,	 clean	 and	white,	 and	 nothing
moves	on	it.	All	movement	has	disappeared	because	all	movement	is	in	time.
Time	 has	 stopped,	 the	 clock	 has	 stopped.	 Suddenly	 you	 are	 transported	 into
another	world,	the	transcendental	world.	And	that	is	the	world	of	truth.	To	know
it	 is	 to	 know	 all	 and	 to	 know	 it	 is	 to	 be	 it,	 because	 then	 the	 knower	 and	 the
known	are	no	more	separate;	then	the	knower	is	the	known,	the	seer	is	the	seen,
the	 observer	 is	 the	 observed.	 That	 is	 the	 ultimate	 experience	 which	 liberates,
which	liberates	you	from	all	the	fantasies	of	the	mind	and	from	all	the	mundane
facts	of	the	world.	You	still	live	in	the	world	but	now	you	know	that	it	is	a	game,
a	play:	play	as	beautifully	as	possible	but	don't	get	identified	with	it.	Remain	in
the	world	but	remain	absolutely	untouched,	unidentified.
That's	what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about:	 living	 in	 the	world	 and	 yet	 not	 being	 in	 the
world,	 living	 in	 the	 world	 but	 not	 allowing	 the	 world	 to	 live	 in	 you;	 passing
through	the	world	fully	aware	that	it	is	all	momentary,	so	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you	need	not	get	disturbed,	you	need	not	get	distracted.
Then	calamities	and	blessings,	failures	and	successes	are	all	the	same.	And	when
you	can	see	that	darkness	and	light,	life	and	death,	are	all	the	same,	a	tremendous
tranquillity,	an	equilibrium,	a	balance,	happens	to	you.	That	profound	silence	is
truth.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
Till	springtime.
That's	good.	Everybody	has	to	be	here	till	springtime!
(Osho	gives	the	name	Sat	Prabodhi,	and	talks	about	how	it's	possible	to	imagine
you've	become	enlightened	when	you	haven't	really.)
My	sannyasins	have	 to	be	aware	of	 it	because	I	am	continuously	 talking	about
enlightenment	and	trying	to	help	you	to	move	towards	it.	And	the	mind	can	play
tricks.	And	 it	has	happened	 to	many	sannyasins:	 they	start	believing	 they	have
become	 enlightened,	 they	 start	 a	 kind	 of	 dream	 and	 they	 believe	 in	 it.	 By
believing	in	it	they	are	trapped	by	the	mind	again.	Rather	than	getting	out	of	the
mind	they	have	got	even	more	deeply	entangled	with	it.
So	one	has	to	be	aware	not	to	allow	the	mind	to	play	this	last	trick.	This	is	the
last	trick	the	mind	can	play	upon	you.	It	call	deceive	you	that	there	is	no	need	for
anything,	no	need	to	meditate,	no	need	to	be	a	sannyasin	--	you	are	enlightened.
And	the	mind	can	always	rationalise.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 received	 a	 letter	 from	 a	 sannyasin	 --	 from	 California,	 of
course,	 such	 things	 happen	more	 in	 California;	 all	 the	 fools	 of	 the	 world	 are
gathered	there!	It	is	the	fools'	paradise.	She	has	written	to	me	'It	has	happened,
Osho.	What	you	nave	been	talking	about	and	you	have	been	telling	us	--	that	we
are	 already	 enlightened	 --	 has	 happened.	 So	 I	 dropped	 the	 mala,	 I	 dropped
sannyas,	because	you	have	said
"When	you	meet	me	on	the	way	kill	me!"'	But	then	after	a	few	hours	she	started
feeling	guilty,	afraid.	So	she	writes	 'Then	I	 took	 the	mala	back	and	 it	 felt	very
good	and	I	felt	relieved	and	great	gratitude	arose	in	me.'	But	she	still	thinks	that
she	is	enlightened.
Enlightenment	does	not	come	that	way.	When	it	comes	there	is	no	idea	that	it	has
come.	In	fact	the	master	has	to	tell	you	that	it	has	happened.	If	you	yourself	think
it	has	happened	then	thought	is	still	there.
One	 of	 Buddha's	 disciples,	 Manjusri,	 became	 enlightened;	 he	 was	 his	 first
disciple	 to	 become	 enlightened.	 For	 days	 Buddha	 waited	 for	 him	 to	 come
because	he	could	see	that	the	man	was	totally	transformed,	but	he	never	turned
up.	Buddha	would	 see	 him	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree	 listening	 to	 his	 discourses	 and
doing	all	 the	 routine	work.	We	watched	him	for	a	 few	weeks,	 then	he	went	 to
him	and	he	said	'Manjusri,	what	is	the	matter?	Why	don't	you	tell	me!'	He	said
'What?'	And	Buddha	said	'It	has	happened!'	Manjusri	said	'What	are	you	talking
about.	What	has	happened?	I	don't	know	anything.	All	that	I	can	say	is	that	I	am
feeling	tremendously	silent.	There	is	not	even	the	idea	that	this	is	it.	There	is	no
idea.	So	if	you	say	so	then	it	must	have	happened	--	it	is	up	to	you.	If	you	say	so
then	 it	 must	 have	 happened.	 If	 you	 say	 it	 has	 not	 happened	 it	 must	 not	 have
happened,	but	I	have	nothing	to	say	about	it.'
And	Buddha	related	the	whole	story	to	his	disciples,	saying	that	this	is	the	way	it
happens.	If	arises,	 the	ego	arises	 immediately;	 it	grabs	you.	It	says,	 'Look,	you
are	enlightened!'
True	 enlightenment	 is	 not	 a	 thought,	 it	 is	 an	 experience,	 a	 thoughtless
experience.	When	it	happens	one	becomes	absolutely	ordinary,	nothing	special.
One	does	not	start	having	that	haughty	attitude	of	holier-than-thou,	'I	have	got	it
and	you	don't	have	it	yet.'	It	does	not	give	you	any	nourishment	for	the	ego.	If	it
does	it	is	false.	Ir	the	idea	arises	in	you	that	you	have	become	enlightened,	then	it
is	false.	So	remember	it.
And	whenever	I	talk	to	anybody	I	am	talking	through	that	sannyasin	to	all	of	my
sannyasins.	 It	 is	 nothing	 personal	 when	 I	 talk	 to	 somebody,	 it	 is	 always
concerned	with	everybody.
(Bliss	is	beautiful	--	and	a	beautifier	 too,	Osho	tells	Anand	Rupama.)	Even	the
body	is	transformed	through	it,	because	the	bliss	starts	radiating.	It	gives	you	a
grace,	 both	 inner	 and	outer,	 because	whatsoever	 happens	 at	 the	 centre	 of	 your
being	starts	affecting	the	circumference.
If	 your	 house	 is	 dark,	 of	 course	 your	 windows	 and	 your	 doors	 will	 all	 show
darkness.	And	if	you	burn	a	candle	inside,	then	from	the	window,	from	the	door,
the	light	will	start	reaching	outside.
From	 far	 away	 a	 person	who	 is	 lost	 in	 the	 jungle	 ,	 in	 the	 darkness,	 will	 find
solace,	consolation,	a	direction,	because	your	house	is	lit	with	a	small	candle;	he
will	start	moving	towards	you.	But	if	the	house	is	dark	then	he	will	not	be	able	to
find	your	house.
Whenever	one	becomes	blissful	one	becomes	 full	of	 light.	Misery	 is	darkness,
bliss	 is	 light.	 And	 you	 can	 see	 the	 blissful	 person	 radiating;	 he	 is	 luminous.
Something	of	his	innermost	core	starts	filtering	out	of	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
body	too	--	and	that	gives	immense	beauty.
There	are	two	stories.	One	is	about	Moses.	A	king	was	very	much	interested	in
the	 teachings	of	Moses	and	he	wanted	one	of	Moses'	portraits	 to	be	put	 in	his
bedroom,	 so	 he	 sent	 a	 great	 painter	 to	 paint	 a	 portrait	 of	Moses.	 The	 painter
went,	and	he	took	months	and	then	he	came	back	with	 the	portrait.	Everything
was	beautiful	but	somehow	the	face	was	missing	something.	What	the	emperor
has	seen	was	not	there	something	else.
Moses	looked	as	if	he	were	a	criminal,	he	looked	as	if	he	were	a	murderer.	The
king	was	very	much	puzzled	because	the	painter	was	one	of	the	best	and	he	had
known	him	and	his	paintings.	He	said	 'What	 is	 the	matter?	Moses	 looks	 like	a
murderer!	How	have	you	painted	him	like	that?'	The	painter	said	'What	can	I	do?
Whatsoever	I	saw	I	have	painted.'
They	both	went	 to	 see	Moses	 and	 the	king	 said	 'I	 cannot	 understand	how	 this
great	 painter	 has	missed	 something	 in	 your	 face?'	Moses	 laughed	 and	he	 said,
'Your	 painter	 is	 right	 because	 he	 has	 a	 tremendous	 insight	 about	 even	 small
traces	of	the	past	on	the	face.	What	you	see	is	only	my	present.	Yes,	I	murdered	a
person	 once	 --	 unknowingly.	 I	 was	 not	 intentionally	 murdering	 him	 but	 it
happened.	I	hit	somebody	and	he	died,	and	something	of	it	has	remained	in	my
face.	I	can	see	when	I	look	in	the	mirror	that	my	skin	is	still	carrying	some	mark
of	 it	 You	 cannot	 see	 it	 but	 your	 painter	 is	 really	 great	 because	 this	 thing
happened	thirty	years	ago.	Nobody	has	ever	been	able	to	see	it	but	your	painter
has	discovered	it.
'And	I	was	afraid:	the	way	he	was	painting,	the	way	he	was	looking	and	trying	to
go	deeper	 into	my	past,	 I	was	afraid	he	would	discover	 this.	He	has	and	he	 is
right.	And	you	 are	 also	 right	 because	what	 you	 are	 seeing	 is	my	present	 face.
Now	my	light	 inside	 is	burning	and	I	am	luminous	with	 it.	He	has	painted	my
past,	you	are	seeing	my	present.'
The	same	is	true	about	Jesus.	There	are	two	kinds	of	stories	about	Jesus	--	one,
that	 he	was	 an	 ugly	man	 and	 the	 other	 that	 he	was	 one	 of	 the	most	 beautiful
people.	 There	 has	 been	 a	 quarrel	 going	 on	 for	 centuries	 Christians.	 The	 anti-
Christians	go	on	quoting	 some	old,	 ancient	documents	proving	 that	 he	was	 an
ugly	man	and	Christians	go	on	saying	 that	he	was	a	beautiful	man	 --	and	 they
have	not	come	to	any	conclusion.
My	own	understanding	is	that	both	are	right.	The	people	who	are	talking	about
those	 ancient	 documents...	 those	 documents	 exist,	 they	 are	 there,	 but	 they	 tell
about	Jesus	before	his	enlightenment.	And	what	Christians	are	talking	about	1s
after	his	enlightenment,	after	he	became	full	of	light,	full	of	joy.	Both	stories	are
true,	there	is	no	contradiction,	but	they	don't	belong	to	the	same	time.
The	first	story	belongs	to	the	factual	people,	 those	who	believe	in	history.	And
the	second	story	belongs	to	the	poets,	and	the	mystics	--	those	who	believe	in	the
truth,	in	the	inner	truth.
(Love	is	a	small	lamp	--	and	the	meaning	of	his	new	name,	Osho	explains	to	a
student	from	Germany.)	Love	is	a	small	lamp,	but	it	is	enough,	in	fact	more	than
enough.	You	don't	need	to	carry	a	sun	with	you;	just	a	small	lamp	is	enough	in
the	dark	night.	Of	course	it	sheds	light	only	a	few	feet	ahead	of	you	but	that's	all
that	is	needed:	you	walk	these	few	steps	then	the	light	goes	a	few	feet	ahead	and
it	 is	always	ahead	of	you.	One	can	cover	a	 long	 journey	of	 ten	 thousand	miles
with	a	small	lamp;	one	need	not	carry	the	whole	sun.	And	love	is	a	small	lamp	in
the	heart	but	 it	 is	enough;	nothing	more	 is	needed	 for	 life's	pilgrimage.	And	 it
goes	on	showing	you	the	right	path.	listening	to	one's	heart	then	there	is	no	need
to	 listen	 to	any	outer	commandment.	Then	god	goes	on	whispering	within	you
and	showing	you	 the	way.	Because	people	don't	 listen	 to	 their	own	heart,	 they
are	being	exploited	by	the	priests	and	the	politicians.	They	go	on	telling	people
what	to	do	and	what	not	 to	do,	and	of	course	they	think	of	 their	own	interests,
they	are	not	concerned	about	you.	What	they	say	you	should	do	is	for	their	own
vested	 interests.	Naturally	 --	why	 should	 they	be	worried	 about	 you.	They	 are
worried	 about	 their	 own	 vested	 interests.	 They	 enslave	 you	 through	 beautiful
words	--	morality,	religion,	spirituality	--	but	their	whole	desire	is	how	to	enslave
people,	how	to	imprison	people.
Freedom	comes	when	you	start	listening	to	your	own	heart.	And	my	work	here
consists	of	only	one	things	helping	you	to	find	your	own	voice,	your	own	still,
small	voice.	Once	you	have	found	it	the	function	of	the	outer	master	is	finished
because	you	have	found	your	inner	master.
And	the	real	master	is	always	working	so	that	you	can	find	your	own	source	of
light.	He	does	not	want	you	to	be	dependent	on	him	because	all	dependence	is
slavery.
(Osho	calls	 closer	 to	him	 the	 slim,	curly-haired	would-be	 sannyasin,	 last	 to	be
initiated.)	This	 is	your	name:	Ma	Gyangit.	 (He's	a	swami!	whispers	Mukta,	by
Osho's	side.)	A	swami?	That's	good!	(laughter)	Be	thankful	to	Mukta!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Osho	makes	the	correction	on	the	namesheet,	and	then	begins.)	Gyangit	means
a	song	of	wisdom.	Knowledge	is	never	a	song.	It	is	tedious,	boring,	it	is	heavy,	it
is	a	burden	and	the	burden	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger.	It	goes	on	piling
up	on	your	head	like	a	mountain.	People	are	crushed	underneath	the	burden,	the
weight	of	their	knowledge.	The	so-called	scholars	and	the	pundits	cannot	move
at	 all,	 they	 have	 to	 crawl.	 Their	 life	 becomes	 stagnant	 because	 movement
becomes	very	difficult.
It	is	like	swimming	in	the	ocean	with	rocks	hanging	around	your	neck,	they	are
bound	to	drown	you.
Knowledge	 is	 a	 weight	 and	 an	 ugly	 weight.	 Wisdom	 is	 a	 song,	 it	 is
weightlessness.	It	helps	you	to	grow	wings.	It	gives	you	the	whole	sky	and	the
freedom	 to	 move.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 knowledge	 and	 wisdom?
Knowledge	comes	from	others	and	wisdom	comes	from	your	innermost	core;	it
wells	up,	it	is	yours.	Knowledge	is	never	yours,	but	knowledge	is	cheap,	easily
available.	Wisdom	 is	 arduous.	You	have	 to	dig	deep	 into	your	being.	 It	 is	 like
digging	a	well	in	the	earth.	You	have	to	remove	many	many	layers	of	the	earth,
many	rocks	have	to	be	removed;	you	may	need	to	dynamite	them.	It	is	arduous,
but	 if	 you	 go	 on	 digging	 with	 great	 totality,	 intensity,	 perseverance,	 patience,
then	one	day	you	will	find	the	waters	rising	up.
Many	people	start	digging	but	very	few	people	are	patient	enough.
Jalaluddin	 Rumi,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 Sufi	 mystics	 who	 discovered	 the
method	 of	whirling	 dervishes,	 the	 Sufi	 dance,	 once	 took	 all	 his	 disciples	 to	 a
field.	 The	 disciples	 were	 a	 little	 bit	 puzzled:	 why	were	 they	 being	 taken	 to	 a
field?	For	what?	But	 the	master	 insisted,	so	they	went,	and	what	 they	saw	was
something	significant.	The	farmer	seemed	almost	insane	person	but	in	a	way	he
was	very	representative	of	humanity,	of	the	average	human	being.
He	was	 digging	 a	 hole	 in	 the	 earth	 and	 Jalaluddin	 said	 to	 his	 disciples	 to	 go
around	the	field	and	see.
They	counted;	he	had	dug	almost	a	dozen	holes	and	nowhere	had	the	water	come
up.	They	said	to	the	farmer	 'You	have	destroyed	the	whole	field.	And	what	are
you	doing?	--	are	you	still	digging	another	hole?'
He	 said	 'I	 have	been	digging	 to	 find	water	 but	when	 I	 don't	 find	water	 in	one
place	then	I	start	digging	in	another.'	And	Jalaluddin	said	to	his	disciples	'Look	at
this	man.	This	man	is	very	representative	of	humanity.
If	he	had	keep	digging	in	one	place	he	would	have	found	water	long	ago,	but	he
goes	on	changing	the	places.	His	patience	is	very	small,	his	perseverance	is	not
there	at	all,	so	he	has	destroyed	the	whole	field	and	he	will	still	change.	After	a
few	days	come	again	and	see	what	he	does.'	After	a	 few	days	 they	went	 there
and	he	was	digging	another	hole.
Many	 times	 people	 start	 to	meditate,	 to	 pray,	 to	 search	within,	 but	 they	want
everything	 so	quickly,	 like	 instant	 coffee	 --	 and	 it	 cannot	be	 instant	 coffee.	So
they	 drop	 the	 whole	 project	 and	 after	 a	 few	 days	 again	 they	 start	 digging
somewhere	else.	In	this	way	they	waste	energy,	they	destroy	many	many	places
in	their	being	and	after	each	failure	they	become	more	and	more	depressed	and
hopeless.
One	has	to	dig	in	one	place	with	total	effort,	with	absolute	commitment.	That's
what	 sannyas	 is.	 It	 is	 a	 commitment	 --	 categorical	 commitment,	 to	 find	 the
source	of	wisdom	in	you	whatsoever	the	cost	and	howsoever	long	it	 takes.	But
your	decision	 is	absolute	and	you	are	not	going	 to	 turn	back.	Then	 it	does	not
take	long.
The	paradox	 is	 that	 the	more	patient	you	are,	 the	quicker	 it	happens;	 the	more
impatient	 you	 are,	 the	 longer	 it	 takes.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 found	 your	 inner
being,	it	explodes	in	thousands	of	songs	--	songs	like	Solomon's	song,	songs	of
love	and	joy,	songs	of	beauty	and	benediction.
(Osho	 adds	 'Dhyan'	 to	 Hannelore	 and	 says	 that	 now	 her	 name	 is	 really
international.)	And	that's	what	my	sannyasins	are	supposed	to	be	--	not	bounded
by	any	nationality,	religion,	race,	color	or	creed.
'Dhyan'	 comes	 from	 Sanskrit,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 ancient	 languages.	 It	 means
meditativeness,	a	quality	of	profound	silence	where	mind	dissolves	 just	 like	an
iceberg	melting	into	the	ocean	and	becoming	one	with	it.
The	mind	is	just	like	an	iceberg:	it	can	melt	and	become	part	of	our	being.
'Hannelore'	 consists	 of	 two	 words	 from	 two	 languages.	 'Hanne'	 comes	 from
Anna;	Anna	 is	Hebrew	 --	 it	means	 prayer,	 grace,	mercy.	And	 the	 second	part,
'lore',	comes	from	Helen;	Helen	is	Greek	--	it	means	light.
So	now	you	 really	have	an	 international	name.	One	part	 comes	 from	Sanskrit,
the	 other	 from	 Hebrew	 and	 the	 third	 from	 Greek.	 The	 three	 most	 ancient
languages	of	the	world	and	the	most	cultured,	the	most	refined.
Meditation	brings	all	 these	qualities	naturally.	Prayer	 is	 an	attitude.	 It	means	a
loving	quality,	a	loving	relationship	with	existence.	To	be	in	love	with	existence
is	prayer	and	out	of	that	loving	relationship	with	existence	grace	arises.	A	man
who	 is	 prayerful	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 beautiful;	 and	 his	 beauty	 will	 not	 be	 of	 this
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
world,	 it	will	 belong	 to	 the	 beyond,	 it	will	 be	 grace.	And	when	 there	 is	 grace
there	is	compassion,	compassion	for	all	those	who	have	not	yet	arrived	--	that	is
mercy.
And	the	last	part	means	light.	When	one	is	absolutely	silent,	in	meditation,	when
the	mind	has	dissolved	like	an	iceberg	melting	and	becoming	one	with	the	ocean,
great	light	is	released;	one	becomes	just	light.
That	is	the	experience	of	ultimate	truth.	But	everything	depends	on	meditation.
Everything	depends	on	a	single	phenomenon:	how	to	be	absolutely	silent	so	that
the	mind	melts	and	one	becomes	a	flow	of	energy.
Mind	 is	 an	obstruction	 like	a	 rock.	Once	 it	melts	 there	 is	great	 joy,	 a	dance,	 a
new	kind	of	drunkenness:	one	is	utterly	drunk	with	joy	and	yet	absolutely	aware.
This	contains	the	whole	message	of	my	sannyas.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010115
ShortTitle:	THUNK11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Ingo	is	the	first	for	initiation	tonight.)
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Ingo.	Anand	means	bliss,	cheerfulness,	joy,	the
state	of	celebration.
Ingo	means	luminous.
Misery	creates	darkness.	Bliss	brings	 luminosity,	 light.	These	are	 simple	 facts.
We	may	not	know	about	bliss	but	we	certainly	know	about	misery;	everybody
has	known	misery	 in	 some	way	or	other.	The	moment	 there	 is	misery	you	are
surrounded	 by	 dark	 clouds;	 life	 loses	 all	 meaning,	 all	 significance.	 One	 feels
suicidal.	The	future	seems	absurd,	there	seems	to	be	no	reason	to	live	even	for	a
single	moment	any	more	and	once	becomes	closed,	one	starts	shrinking	inwards,
one	does	not	want	to	relate,	to	communicate.	One	wants	to	be	left	alone.
Exactly	the	opposite	is	the	case	with	bliss.	The	moment	bliss	arrives	life	begins
to	have	tremendous	meaning,	all	darkness	disappears.	The	dark	night	of	the	soul
is	over,	the	morning	has	arrived,	and	with	the	morning,	the	songs	of	the	birds	and
the	joy	of	the	flowers	and	the	colours	on	the	horizon.	Suddenly	one	would	like	to
live	for	eternity,	forever	and	forever.	But	people	are	not	aware	of	bliss.
Yes,	 they	 have	 known	 something	 of	 happiness.	Happiness	 is	 just	 a	 glimpse	 of
bliss,	a	faraway	glimpse,	a	reflection,	rot	the	reality.	It	is	as	if	you	are	seeing	the
moon	reflected	in	the	lake.	The	moon	in	the	lake	is	not	the	real	moon;	it	can	be
disturbed	 any	 moment.	 Just	 throw	 a	 small	 pebble	 into	 it	 and	 the	 reflection
disappears.
The	same	is	true	about	happiness;	just	a	small	accident	is	enough	to	destroy	it.	It
is	 reflection,	 it	 is	 not	 reality.	 Reality	 is	 indestructible;	 only	 illusions	 can	 be
destroyed.	But	when	you	have	seen	something	of	the	reflection	of	bliss	you	have
felt	a	little	light.	Even	in	the	reflection	the	moon	in	the	lake	is	full	of	light,	it	is
luminous.	The	candle	reflected	in	the	mirror	is	also	luminous.
We	know	something	of	happiness	but	those	small	glimpses	can	help	us	to	move
ahead,	to	seek	the	real.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	 it	 is	 not	 far	 away.	One	 of	 the	 strangest,	weirdest	 things	 about	 the	 human
mind	 is	 that	 bliss	 is	 inside	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 seeking	 it	 everywhere	 else	 except
inside.
Let	 sannyas	 be	 the	 point	 of	 a	 radical	 change,	 let	 it	 be	 a	 turning	 in.	 And
immediately	you	are	luminous.
And	the	moment	darkness	disappears,	death	disappears.	Then	life	is	eternal;	then
it	has	been	always	and	it	will	be	always.
To	know	it	is	to	be	free	from	fear.
(His	name:	Demian,	is	the	name	of	a	mythological	person,	a	man	who	gave	his
life	for	his	friend,	so	it	represents	friendship,	Osho	tells	the	new	swami.)
Love	can	lead	you	to	something	higher	 than	love.	Friendship	is	 that	something
higher.	Love	is	rooted	in	biology,	it	is	something	instinctive.	Falling	in	love	with
a	woman	or	a	man	is	nothing	extraordinary.	It	is	a	natural	fact.	I	am	not	against	it
but	there	are	still	higher	altitudes	of	love	free	from	biology.
The	 moment	 love	 is	 free	 from	 biology,	 from	 the	 instinctive,	 it	 becomes
friendship	--	and	it	is	a	rare	achievement.
People	 ordinarily	 think	 that	 they	 are	 friendly.	 But	 whenever	 there	 comes	 a
question	of	sacrifice	 they	withdraw;	 they	 immediately	find	a	 thousand	and	one
excuses	--	and	that	is	the	only	criterion.
Love	is	good	but	one	should	not	settle	at	that.	When	two	lovers	become	friends
they	have	really	loved	each	other.	And	it	is	very	rare	to	find	two	lovers	becoming
friends.	 They	 can	 become	 enemies	 very	 easily,	 in	 fact	 they	 are,	 they	 are
continuously	 at	 each	 other's	 throats	 jealous	 possessive,	 fighting,	 nagging,
suspicious.
This	is	not	friendship,	this	is	the	lowest	form	of	love,	it	is	lust.
Even	lust	is	not	bad.	It	is	raw	material	--	you	have	to	refine	it	I	don't	condemn	it.
The	people	who	have	condemned	it	have	not	helped	humanity.
Just	the	other	day	the	Polack	pope	made	the	statement	that	even	to	look	at	your
wife	with	lust	is	a	sin.
He	quotes	Jesus,	and	he	quotes	him	wrongly	--	because	Jesus	says	to	look	at	a
woman	with	lustful	eyes	or	even	to	think	in	lustful	ways	is	sin.	But	Jesus	says	it
about	a	woman,	not	about	your	wire	--	otherwise	why	should	one	get	married	in
the	first	place?	But	Polacks	are	Polacks!	Even	if	they	become	popes	they	cannot
change.
It	 is	 perfectly	 good	 between	 a	 husband	 and	 a	 wife	 because	 it	 is	 a	 biological
relationship.	It	is	instinctive.
But	one	should	not	settle	there.	One	should	rise,	one	should	use	it	as	a	stepping
stone.	 And	 unless	 your	 love	 becomes	 a	 friendship...	 And	 what	 are	 the
differences?
The	 first	 difference	 is	 that	 friends	 are	 not	 jealous.	 If	 your	 wife	 moves	 with
somebody,	 feels	happy	with	 somebody,	you	will	 feel	good	 if	 you	are	 a	 friend.
There	 is	nothing	wrong	 in	 it.	But	 if	you	are	a	husband	you	will	 feel	very	bad,
you	will	feel	hurt,	wounded.	Your	ego	suffers	as	if	you	are	being	rejected,	as	if
you	have	not	been	able	to	prove	your	manhood,	as	if	you	have	fallen	short,	your
wife	 enjoys	 other	 people's	 company	 more	 than	 your	 company.	 Comparison,
jealousy.	anger.	hatred	--	all	these	arise.	These	are	part	of	lust.
But	if	you	are	friendly	you	will	feel	happy	because	the	person	you	love	is	happy.
You	will	give	freedom	and	you	will	give	all	 the	help	 that	you	can	 to	make	 the
other	happy.	You	will	not	hinder	 them,	you	will	not	get	 in	 the	way.	Friendship
has	something	spiritual	about	 it.	Love	is	biological,	friendship	is	spiritual.	And
Unless	 love	 becomes	 something	 like	 friendship	 one	 suffers	 through	 it;	 rather
than	finding	bliss	one	finds	more	and	more	misery.	But	the	reason	is	not	in	the
energy	of	love.	The	reason	is	that	you	have	not	been	able	to	refine	it,	you	have
not	been	very	artful	about	it.	You	have	taken	it	for	granted,	as	if	this	is	the	end.
This	is	not	the	end.
Let	your	love	become	friendship,	let	your	love	become	prayer.	These	are	the	two
possibilities,	two	aspects.	If	you	become	friendly	with	the	person	you	love	then
you	 can	 love	many	 persons.	 Then	 your	 love	 spreads,	 then	 the	 circle	 becomes
bigger	 and	 bigger.	 This	 is	 one	 aspect.	 The	 other	 aspect	 is	 that	when	 you	 start
loving	many	 people	with	 no	 clinging	 and	 you	 also	 allow	 the	 others	 the	 same,
your	love	starts	growing	another	aspect	--	the	aspect	called	prayer.
Prayer	means	loving	the	whole,	the	whole	universe,	becoming	friendly	with	the
trees	 and	 the	 rocks	 and	 the	 rivers	 and	 the	 mountains	 and	 the	 stars.	 When
friendship	reaches	to	the	point	of	prayer	one	is	religious.
(Love,	and	the	new	dimensions	love	opens	up,	seems	to	be	a	theme	that	Osho	is
emphasising	this	month.
Love	is	a	great	trouble-maker,	Osho	begins	this	address,	and	that's	why	so	many
people	prefer	to	live	without	it.)
For	 centuries	 people	 have	 escaped	 from	 love	 to	 the	 monasteries,	 to	 the
mountains,	 to	 the	 deserts,	 just	 to	 avoid	 all	 opportunities	where	 love	 can	 grow.
They	have	lived	in	solitariness	in	the	caves,	afraid	of	love.	And	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
there	is	a	point	in	it:	love	creates	much	turmoil.	Life	without	love	has	a	certain
calmness	about	 it	but	 if	 that	calmness	 is	cold,	dead.	Yes,	 there	 is	a	 silence	but
that	silence	is	of	a	cemetery;	it	has	no	song	in	it,	it	is	not	worth	anything.
One	 has	 to	 transform	 love.	And	 this	 cannot	 be	 done	 by	 escaping.	One	 has	 to
enter	 into	 the	whole	 turmoil	of	 love	and	 still	 remain	alert,	watchful,	 aware,	 so
that	the	turmoil	remains	only	on	the	circumference	and	never	reaches	the	centre
and	the	centre	remains	still.
This	is	the	way	of	a	sannyasin:	love	has	to	be	accepted	and	yet	you	are	not	to	be
disturbed	 by	 it.	 It	 will	 bring	many	 problems	 and	 they	 are	 good	 because	 they
create	challenges	in	life.	And	when	you	respond	to	challenges	you	grow.
All	your	so-called	saints	who	escaped	to	the	deserts	became	retarded.	They	were
not	growing	 spiritually,	 they	were	 really	becoming	more	 and	more	 stupid.	But
we	have	worshipped	that	kind	of	stupidity	for	so	long	that	we	have	completely
forgotten	that	it	is	stupidity.
I	have	travelled	all	over	this	country.	This	country	has	more	saints	than	any	other
country	 --	 and	 they	 are	 all	 stupid,	 one	 hundred	 per	 cent	 stupid.	 I	 have	 never
come	across	a	saint	who	has	dwelled	in	the	mountains	for	long	who	has	not	lost
all	 intelligence.	 One	 is	 bound	 to	 lose	 intelligence	 because	 intelligence	 needs
constant	challenges,	only	then	does	it	remain	sharp.	It	is	like	a	sword:	if	you	put
a	sword	 in	a	mountain	cave	 it	will	gather	 rust;	 the	sword	will	become	useless.
And	the	same	happens	to	intelligence.	So	I	am	all	for	accepting	the	world	and	all
its	challenges	--	and	love	is	 the	greatest	challenge	because	its	requirements	are
so	many.
First	it	requires	you	to	drop	the	ego	and	there	the	struggle	begins:	the	ego	clings,
you	 cling	 to	 the	 ego,	 the	 ego	 wants	 to	 dominate	 the	 whole	 thing	 --	 and	 love
cannot	be	dominated.	If	you	cling	to	the	ego	love	disappears.	If	you	drop	the	ego
only	 then	can	 love	grow.	This	 is	 the	 first	 challenge	and	 then	one	after	 another
new	challenges	go	on	coming.
Love	means	that	you	have	to	learn	to	respect	 the	other	as	an	end	unto	himself,
the	other	is	not	a	means.
That	is	the	only	immoral	act	in	the	world.	In	fact	the	whole	of	immorality	can	be
defined	through	this	simple	things	if	you	are	using	the	other	as	a	means	you	are
immoral;	 if	you	are	full	of	respect	for	the	other	person	as	an	end,	then	you	are
moral.
And	sooner	or	later	the	other	person	wants	his	apace	and	fear	arises	in	you.	You
would	 like	 to	 make	 the	 other	 a	 prisoner	 --	 of	 course,	 with	 beautiful	 chains,
golden	 chains,	 studded	 with	 diamonds.	 But	 you	 would	 like	 the	 other	 to	 be
imprisoned	so	that	you	can	be	certain	of	the	tomorrow.	Otherwise	who	knows?	--
your	 lover	may	 leave	you.	One	never	knows	what	 is	going	 to	happen	 the	next
moment	so	one	wants	to	be	certain	about	the	next	moment,	one	wants	a	certain
guarantee	--	and	that	very	guarantee	kills	love.
Then	there	are	husbands	and	wives	--	these	are	the	people	who	have	butchered
love,	killed	it	completely.
Now	 marriage	 is	 certainly	 a	 far	 more	 permanent	 phenomenon,	 like	 a	 plastic
flower.	A	 real	 rose	 is	bound	 to	disappear,	 any	moment	 it	 can	disappear.	 Just	 a
strong	wind	comes	and	the	petals	wither	away.	One	has	to	accept	this,	that	life	is
a	constant	flux.
Love	 creates	 all	 these	 challenges,	 but	 if	 you	 remain	 centred,	 alert	 and	 aware,
then	these	challenges	are	immensely	helpful;	they	make	you	rich.
If	 you	 can	 be	 a	 centre	 to	 the	 cyclone	 that	 love	 creates	 then	 your	 life	 starts
growing.	 And	 as	 your	 centering	 becomes	 deeper	 with	 each	 challenge,	 as	 you
become	more	grounded,	more	rooted,	and	nothing	can	uproot	you	--	no	problem
can	shatter	you	and	you	remain	integrated	in	all	kinds	of	crises	--	you	will	feel
grateful	to	love,	because	it	is	only	through	all	those	problems	that	this	integration
has	happened.	And	then	one	starts	towering	higher	than	love	--	and	that	is	what
grace	means.	When	you	 love	and	yet	 love	cannot	 create	any	problem	 for	you,
then	there	is	grace,	then	there	is	immense	beauty	of	the	body,	of	the	mind,	of	the
soul.	And	they	are	all	 joined	together	 in	that	graceful	harmony.	But	there	is	no
way	if	you	avoid	love.
Never	 avoid	 love	 and	 its	 problems.	 Face	 them,	 accept	 the	 challenge	 and	 the
trouble,	but	at	the	same	time	remain	calm	and	quiet.
('Contentment	is	the	foundation	of	the	temple	of	bliss'	is	the	meaning	Osho	gives
to	Paritosh	Anand's	name.)
People	are	constantly	living	in	discontent	about	everything.	It	is	a	habit.	It	is	not
that	if	they	have	more	money	and	a	better	house	and	a	better	wife	or	a	better	son
or	a	better	job	they	will	be	contented	--	it	is	not	that.	Whatsoever	they	have	they
will	 remain	 discontented.	 Poor,	 they	 will	 be	 discontented;	 rich,	 they	 will	 be
discontented.
Discontent	 is	a	habit	of	 the	mind.	Mind	lives	through	it,	 it	 is	 intrinsic	 to	mind;
mind	can	never	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
contented.	Once	 you	 understand	 this	 a	miracle	 happens;	 then	 you	 can	 put	 the
mind	aside	because	it	is	never	going	to	give	you	contentment.	That	is	not	in	its
nature,	 so	 you	 are	 asking	 for	 the	 impossible.	And	what	 cannot	 happen	 cannot
happen,	 it	 is	 futile.	This	has	been	 the	experience	of	 the	whole	of	humanity	 for
centuries.	 Still	 everybody	 tries,	 hoping	 that	 he	 is	 an	 exception;	 nobody	 is	 an
exception.	And	discontentment	creates	misery.
If	you	understand	why	you	are	discontented,	if	you	don't	find	any	excuses	on	the
outside	and	you	see	 that	 it	 is	 the	functioning	of	 the	mind,	 then	 the	functioning
can	be	dropped.	It	is	very	easy.	The	question	is	to	see	it.	Don't	believe	it	because
I	say	it	is	so;	you	have	to	see	it.
Watch	your	mind.	Look	at	the	past.	Many	times	you	thought	if	you	could	get	a
certain	thing	you	would	be	happy,	and	you	got	it	and	you	were	not	happy.	And
you	have	not	even	 taken	note	of	 it.	This	has	happened	so	many	 times	but	you
don't	 learn	 the	 lesson,	 nobody	 learns	 the	 lesson.	 People	 go	 on	 landing	 in	 the
same	pitfalls	again	and	again.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 learn.	 That's	 precisely	 the	 meaning	 of	 disciplehood,	 the
capacity	 to	 learn.	Learn	 that	 your	mind	 is	 the	 cause	 of	 all	 discontentment	 and
then	there	is	misery	and	then	there	is	hell.	Drop	the	mind	and	with	it	all	misery
and	 all	 hell	 disappears	 and	 suddenly	 a	 revelation	 happens	 to	 you	 --	 your
innermost	core	is	full	of	bliss.	Just	the	layer	of	the	mind	has	to	be	removed	and
bliss	explodes.	And	bliss	and	contentment	happen	simultaneously.	But	first	you
will	feel	contentment	because	you	will	be	removing	discontentment.	So	the	first
experience	of	your	interiority	will	be	of	contentment	and	immediately	you	will
see	bliss	following	it.
So	watch	the	mind	and	all	its	tricks	that	it	goes	on	playing	upon	you.	To	have	a
transformation	nothing	else	is	required,	only	watchfulness	of	the	mechanism	of
mind.	 And	 through	 that	 understanding	 things	 start	 happening	 of	 their	 own
accord,	effortlessly,	quietly.
(Japanese	Satoru's	new	name,	Sagar	Deva,	is	to	remind	him	that	the	experience
of	god	is	one	of	vastness,	of	infinity,	Osho	says.)
There	are	neither	boundaries	in	space	nor	in	time.	There	is	no	beginning,	no	end.
And	to	experience	it	one	becomes	it,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	experience.
It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	 can	 know	 by	 standing	 outside.	 You	 cannot	 be	 a
spectator	to	it,	not	just	standing	by	the	roadside.	You	have	to	slip	into	existence
Just	 like	 a	 dewdrop	 slipping	 into	 the	 ocean.	 Of	 course	 the	 dewdrop	 loses
something	 --	 its	 identity	 --	 but	 it	 gains	 tremendously,	 it	 becomes	 the	 whole
ocean.
All	that	a	sannyasin	is	to	lose	is	the	ego.	And	once	there	is	egolessness	you	have
become	a	participant	with	the	whole.	You	are	no	more,	the	whole	is	--	and	that	is
the	ultimate	goal	of	all	religious	quest.
Meditation	is	just	a	method	of	encouraging	the	dewdrop	to	take	the	jump	into	the
ocean.	The	function	of	the	master	is	seductive:	he	simply	seduces	the	disciple	to
take	the	quantum	leap.	He	goes	on	encouraging	him.	Of	course	in	the	beginning
the	disciple	 tries	 in	every	way	 to	escape,	 to	avoid	 it,	 to	 find	excuses,	but	once
you	are	trapped	by	a	master	it	is	impossible.
And	you	are	trapped,	so	don't	waste	time	in	escaping	and	avoiding!	Rather	take
the	jump	as	quickly	as	possible.	And	I	know	Japanese	can	do	it	more	easily	than
anybody	else.	So	please,	do	it!
(Osho	speaks	about	another	aspect	of	contentment.)
Life	is	such	a	gift	that	if	we	see	how	much	has	been	given	to	us	we	will	be	just
grateful.	And	we	don't	deserve	it,	we	have	not	earned	it;	it	is	a	sheer	gift	from	the
whole.	We	are	not	worthy	of	it	but	we	have	taken	it	for	granted,	hence	we	go	on
asking	 for	more.	 So	 nothing	 ever	 gives	 us	 satisfaction,	 nothing	 ever	makes	 us
feel	gratitude.	The	mind	is	always	complaining,	 the	mind	goes	on	complaining
continuously.	 From	 the	 cradle	 to	 the	 grave	 the	 whole	 journey	 is	 full	 of
complaints.	This	is	how	we	miss	the	great	opportunity	of	growing,	of	loving,	of
being,	of	rejoicing.	And	there	is	so	much	to	dance,	so	much	to	sing,	so	much	to
love.
But	we	have	 to	change	 this	habit	of	complaining.	Instead	of	complaining	 learn
the	art	of	thankfulness.
That's	what	 sannyas	 is,	 the	 art	 of	 gratitude.	And	 it	 changes	 the	whole	 of	 your
life;	once	you	shift	from	complaint	to	gratitude,	from	discontent	to	contentment,
it	changes	your	whole	vision,	whole	perspective.
Suddenly	spring	bursts	forth	in	your	being,	thousands	of	flowers	bloom	in	your
consciousness	--	and	the	first	flower	is	that	of	love.
A	contented	person	is	nothing	but	love.	He	is	not	even	loving,	he	is	simply	love.
He	 loves	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 love	 because	 that	 is	 his	way	 of	 showing	 gratitude	 to
existence.	 That's	 his	 thankfulness,	 his	 prayer.	 So	 he	 goes	 on	 loving	 each	 and
everybody.	He	does	not	ask	for	anything	 in	 return;	he	simply	gives	because	so
much	has	been	given	by	god	that	we	should	share	it	a	little	bit.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	the	miracle	is	that	the	more	we	share,	the	more	goes	on	coming	to	us.	Once
you	have	learned	the	secret	and	the	arithmetic	of	sharing	you	cannot	be	miserly
about	 it;	you	will	simply	go	on	sharing	as	much	as	possible,	because	 the	more
you	share,	the	more	you	have.
Share	 your	 bliss,	 share	 your	 love,	 share	 your	 understanding,	 share	 everything
that	you	have	got	--	all	the	inner	riches.	That	sharing	is	essentially	what	I	mean
when	I	say	that	the	contented	man	becomes	love	itself.
So	change	your	mind	from	discontent	to	contentment	and	then	see	the	miracle	--
that	 love	 starts	 flowing	 through	 you	 in	 thousands	 of	 streams,	 in	 many
dimensions,	 in	 many	 ways.	 And	 life	 becomes	 such	 a	 splendour,
incomprehensible	 to	 the	 intellect,	 unfathomable	 for	 the	 mind,	 a	 tremendous
mystery	and	the	ultimate	ecstasy.	--	How	long	will	you	be	here?	--	I	don't	know.
Maybe	one	year,	two	years.	--
That's	good	--	be	here	forever.	I	can	say	it!
(Viola's	 new	 name	 is	Deva	Anuragini.	 It	means	 divine	 and	 full	 of	 love,	Osho
explains.	In	fact	to	be	full	of	love	is	to	be	divine,	he	says.)
One	need	not	go	to	the	church	or	the	temple	or	the	mosque,	one	need	not	be	a
Christian	or	 a	Hindu	or	 a	Mohammedan;	 to	 be	 religious	one	has	 simply	 to	 be
loving.	God	understands	only	one	language,	the	language	of	love.	If	you	love	his
existence	you	have	said	whatsoever	needs	to	be	said	to	him.
But	 people	 go	 on	 doing	 childish	 kinds	 of	 prayers.	 They	 are	 childish	 because
when	you	were	a	child	 they	were	 taught	 to	you.	Every	child	 is	 told	"Say	your
prayers	 before	 you	 go	 to	 sleep,"	 so	 every	 child	 mutters	 a	 prayer,	 finishes	 it
quickly,	pulls	up	the	blanket	and	forgets	all	about	it	once	it	 is	finished.	Then	it
becomes	a	habit	and	people	go	on	repeating	it	for	their	whole	life.	But	this	is	not
prayer,	 this	 is	 sheer	 stupidity.	Using	words	with	god	 is	being	 stupid.	The	only
language	he	understands	is	of	love,	of	silence.
So	love,	existence	and	your	prayer	will	go	on	reaching	him.	And	then	there	is	no
need	to	pray	at	a	particular	time,	with	a	particular	ritual.	Religion	is	not	a	ritual,
and	whenever	it	becomes	a	ritual,	it	is	dead.
Religion	 is	 love	alive,	 throbbing,	pulsating.	So	 love	his	existence,	 the	manifest
god,	 and	 the	 unmanifest	 will	 know	 about	 it,	 because	 the	 unmanifest	 is	 just
hidden	 behind	 the	 manifest.	 Whatsoever	 you	 do	 to	 the	 manifest	 reaches	 the
unmanifest.
See	what	so-called	religious	people	go	on	doing:	they	pray	to	god	yet	Christians
go	 on	 killing	 Mohammedans	 and	 Mohammedans	 go	 on	 killing	 Hindus	 and
Hindus	go	on	killing	Mohammedans.	They	go	on	praying	to	god,	all	of	them	--
and	 they	 go	 on	 killing	 live	 people.	 They	 go	 on	 destroying,	 killing,	 what	 god
creates	--	and	they	all	say	god	is	the	creator.	But	it	seems	they	are	just	repeating
words	without	knowing	any	of	the	meaning	of	those	words.	If	god	is	the	creator
then	to	destroy	is	to	be	against	god.	Then	the	only	way	to	participate	with	him	is
to	be	creative	--	and	that's	my	approach.
I	teach	my	sannyasins	to	be	creative.	In	your	own	small	way...	whatsoever	you
can	create,	be	creative.
Contribute	something	 to	existence	out	of	your	 love	 --	and	 that	 is	prayer.	Make
life	a	little	better	than	you	found	it.	When	you	leave	the	world,	leave	the	world	a
little	 bit	 better	 than	 you	 found	 it	 --	 and	 you	 have	 lived	 rightly.	 You	 will	 be
immensely	rewarded.
(Marion	becomes	Anand	Aruna.)
Aruna	means	the	early	morning	sun,	when	it	is	just	coming	above	the	horizon.
Literally	Aruna	means	red,	because	at	that	moment	the	sun	is	red	and	because	of
its	 redness	 the	 whole	 eastern	 horizon	 becomes	 red.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 colour	 of
sannyas.	It	is	the	beginning	of	the	day.	It	represents	the	end	of	the	night	and	the
beginning	of	 the	day,	 the	end	of	darkness	and	death	and	 the	beginning	of	 light
and	life.
Be	blissful,	only	then	can	the	sun	rise	within	you,	because	it	is	only	in	bliss	that
you	become	receptive,	open,	vulnerable,	because	in	bliss	all	fear	disappears	and
you	are	ready	to	receive	the	unknown	guest.	You	are	not	afraid	of	the	unknown.
And	 the	moment	you	are	not	afraid	of	 the	unknown	the	unknown	immediately
knocks	on	your	door.	 If	you	are	afraid	 then	 it	does	not	disturb	you.	God	never
interferes	in	anybody's	life	because	he	loves	his	creation.	So	he	leaves	everybody
total	 freedom,	 even	 to	go	against	him	 --	 that	 is	 part	 of	 freedom,	 even	 to	 close
their	doors	to	him	--	that	is	part	of	freedom,	even	to	deny	him	--	that	is	part	of
freedom.	But	it	is	foolish	to	use	freedom	in	that	negative	way.	Use	freedom	in	a
positive	way,	use	freedom	to	receive	the	unknown	guest,	use	freedom	to	create
trust	and	love	and	bliss	so	god	can	penetrate	you.
And	the	meeting	between	your	being	and	the	being	of	the	whole	is	the	beginning
of	light,	 the	beginning	of	eternal	life,	 the	beginning	of	immortality.	And	that	is
the	 search	 that	 everybody	 is	on,	knowingly,	unknowingly.	Everybody	wants	 to
know	something	which	is	indestructible,	which	cannot	be	taken	away.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Everybody	wants	to	come	into	the	light,	everybody	wants	to	have	eyes	to	see,	to
have	clarity	of	vision,	but	people	go	on	doing	things	which	really	prevent	their
vision,	hinder	their	insight,	cripple	their	being.	A	sannyasin	has	to	trust	existence
and	rejoice	in	the	small	things	of	life.
Life	 consists	 of	 small	 things,	 but	 if	 you	 rejoice	 you	 transform	 these	 ordinary
things	 into	 something	 extraordinary.	 Even	 if	 you	 rejoice	 eating	 your	 food	 it
becomes	 sacred.	 If	 you	 rejoice	 cleaning	 the	 floor	 it	 becomes	 prayer.	 If	 you
rejoice	cooking	food	for	your	friends,	for	your	lover,	for	your	children,	for	your
parents,	it	becomes	meditation.	The	secret	is	rejoicing.	Rejoice	in	everything	that
you	are	doing	and	then	it	is	done	for	god,	then	it	is	an	offering	to	god.
And	whenever	the	right	moment	has	arrived	and	you	are	ripe	and	ready	the	sun
rises	above	the	horizon	and	all	darkness	disappears.
(Dhyan	 Priya	 means	 when	 you	 are	 a	 meditator	 you	 become	 a	 beloved	 of
existence,	Osho	tells	the	former	Ruth.)
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Meditation	is	a	state	of	absolute	silence	when	there	is
no	mind	at	all	 to	disturb	you,	when	you	are	simply	alert,	aware	but	 there	is	no
thought,	 no	 desire,	 no	 memory,	 when	 there	 is	 no	 ripple	 in	 the	 lake	 of
consciousness,	when	 the	 lake	 of	 consciousness	 is	 so	 quiet	 and	 silent	 that	 it	 is
almost	like	a	mirror.	In	that	moment	the	whole	existence	is	reflected	in	you	as	it
is	in	its	reality	--	because	thoughts	distort,	desires	disfigure.	They	don't	allow	the
real	to	reach	you,	they	give	their	own	colour	to	reality.
Scientists	have	discovered	that	ninety-eight	per	cent	of	 information	is	not	even
allowed	 to	enter;	your	mind	prevents	 it.	The	 two	per	cent	 that	 is	allowed	 in	 is
very	much	 distorted.	 The	mind	 has	 made	 it	 according	 to	 itself,	 it	 is	 no	more
representative	 of	 It	 simply	 shows	 something	 about	 your	mind,	 it	 does	 not	 say
anything	 about	 reality.	 That's	 why	 come	 to	 see	 something	 they	will	 all	 report
about	different	ways.
You	 have	 heard	 the	 story	 about	 the	 five	 blind	men	who	 had	 come	 to	 see	 the
elephant.	 They	 were	 all	 great	 philosophers	 and	 they	 all	 reported	 differently.
Blind	 people	 are	 philosophers,	 philosophers	 are	 blind	 people.	 They	 started
arguing,	great	argument	ensued	because	they	were	all	perfectly	certain	that	what
they	 has	 seen	 was	 the	 real	 elephant.	 The	 person	 who	 touched	 the	 leg	 of	 the
elephant	said	that	it	was	like	a	pillar.
They	all	gave	different	descriptions,	 and	 they	were	all	 right	 in	a	way.	But	 that
part,	 that	 half	 truth	 is	 far	more	dangerous	 than	 a	whole	untruth	because	 it	 has
something	 of	 truth	 in	 it	 that	 gives	 it	 a	 certain	 validity,	 a	 certain	 quality	 to
convince	others.
Meditation	simply	helps	you	to	drop	all	ideas	so	that	you	become	totally	open	to
reality	 as	 it	 is,	 not	 according	 to	 you.	You	 don't	 have	 any	 prejudice,	 you	 don't
have	 any	 a	 priori	 conclusion.	You	 are	 simply	 available,	 open,	 and	whatsoever
comes	you	allow	in;	it	reaches	you	as	it	is.
And	Priya	means	a	beloved.	The	moment	one	becomes	a	meditator,	one	becomes
a	 beloved	 of	 the	whole	 existence.	The	whole	 existence	 becomes	 so	 loving,	 so
tender	 towards	 the	 meditator,	 that	 when	 it	 happens	 for	 the	 first	 time	 it	 is
amazing.	One	cannot	believe	 that	 trees	 are	 so	 loving,	 that	 rocks	are	 so	 loving,
people	are	so	loving.	The	whole	existence	starts	pouring	love	into	the	meditator.
It	is	said	--	and	It	is	a	metaphor	--	that	whenever	Buddha	passed	through	a	forest
trees	would	bloom	out	of	 season	 just	 to	 receive	Buddha!	Trees	would	become
alive	and	suddenly	great	foliage	would	start	growing,	just	to	receive	the	Buddha.
It	is	a	metaphor,	it	is	not	something	historical,	it	is	pure	poetry	but	it	is	indicative
of	 truth.	And	poetry	 is	 far	more	 indicative	of	 truth	 than	anything	else	 is.	Truth
cannot	be	described	in	a	scientific	way;	it	can	be	described	only	in	a	poetic	way
because	it	is	a	mystery.	But	those	symbolic,	metaphorical	stories	say	one	thing,
that	the	meditator	becomes	a	beloved	to	the	whole	existence.
About	Mohammed	it	is	said	--	because	he	lived	in	the	desert,	Arabian	desert,	and
of	course	 the	 sun	 is	very	hot	 in	 the	desert	 --	 that	 a	 cloud	would	always	go	on
moving	with	him	just	above	his	head	to	protect	him	from	the	heat	of	the	sun.	I
don't	think	clouds	will	do	that...	but	it	is	indicative,	indicative	of	something	far
deeper.	 Of	 course	 the	 whole	 existence	 protects	 such	 a	 person;	 he	 becomes	 a
beloved.
So	be	a	meditator	and	become	a	beloved	of	the	whole	existence.	Less	than	that	is
not	worthwhile,	less	than	that	is	not	going	to	satisfy	your	thirst.	It	cannot	quench
your	innermost	thirst.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010125
ShortTitle:	THUNK12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(A	 seeker	 of	 light	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 Douglas;	 Osho	 adds	 'anand'	 to	 it,	 then
addresses	the	first	new	sannyasin.)
Douglas	 also	 means	 a	 dweller	 in	 darkness,	 but	 both	 are	 aspects	 of	 one
phenomenon:	you	seek	light	because	you	dwell	in	darkness.
The	search	for	light	begins	with	the	experience	that	'I	am	in	darkness;'	that's	the
first	step.	To	know	that	one	is	ignorant	is	the	beginning	of	wisdom.
The	problem	with	millions	of	people	is	that	they	live	in	darkness	but	they	are	not
aware	of	it.	They	think	this	is	light.	They	live	in	ignorance	but	they	go	on	hiding
it	 in	 such	 ways	 that	 not	 only	 are	 others	 deceived,	 they	 themselves	 become
deceived.	They	don't	want	 to	 recognise	 that	 they	 are	 ignorant.	 It	 hurts,	 it	 goes
against	 the	 ego.	 And	 the	 first	 step	 for	 a	 sannyasin	 is	 to	 recognise	 the	 real
situation,	 to	 figure	 out	where	 one	 is,	what	 one	 is,	 to	 be	 very	 straight	 about	 it,
howsoever	 it	 hurts.	And	 it	 certainly	hurts	 because	 for	 the	whole	of	 our	 life	 or
perhaps	for	many	lives	we	have	believed	in	just	the	opposite.
The	person	who	is	suffering	from	an	inferiority	complex	starts	believing	in	some
kind	of	superiority.
Just	 to	 hide	 inferiority	we	 have	 to	 believe	 in	 the	 opposite.	 The	 person	who	 is
afraid	of	death	starts	believing	in	immortality,	just	to	somehow	cover	up	the	fear.
Our	 beliefs	 are	 indicators;	 they	 show	 what	 we	 are	 hiding,	 they	 are	 just	 the
opposite	of	what	we	are	hiding.	Somebody	believes	that	he	is	light,	love,	bliss...
if	these	are	his	beliefs	then	he	must	live	in	darkness,	in	hatred,	in	misery.
The	sannyasin	has	to	expose	himself,	he	has	to	stand	naked	in	the	sun,	because
the	 journey	 can	 only	 begin	 if	 we	 know	where	 we	 are	 --	 because	 the	 journey
begins	from	there.	You	cannot	begin	your	journey	from	somewhere	else	--	where
you	are	not.	Wherever	you	are,	even	if	you	are	in	hell,	 the	journey	has	to	start
there.	And	this	brings	great	authenticity	to	realise,	recognise,	whatsoever	we	are.
If	it	hurts	it	hurts;	it	is	natural;	it	has	to	be	accepted.	But	out	of	that	acceptance
begins	the	enquiry.
The	 two	different	paths:	 the	path	of	belief	and	 the	path	of	enquiry.	Belief	does
not	change	you;	it	simply	gives	you	a	false	idea	of	something	that	you	are	not,	of
somewhere	where	you	are	not.	It	is	a	false	phenomenon,	it	creates	hypocrisy.	It	is
good	to	recognise	that	you	don't	know;	at	least	it	is	authentic,	sincere.	And	then
don't	 start	 believing	 --	 that	 kills	 enquiry.	 Enquiry	 means	 going	 into	 existence
without	any	belief,	discarding	all	beliefs.	And	almost	half	the	work	is	done,	half
the	journey	is	complete	in	the	first	step.
And	there	are	only	two	steps,	not	more	than	that.
One	 step	 is	 to	 discard	 all	 beliefs	 because	 they	 are	 not	 your	 experiences;
howsoever	beautiful	they	are	they	have	to	be	discarded	for	the	simple	reason	that
they	 are	not	your	 experiences.	Once	you	have	discarded	all	 beliefs	 the	 second
step	 is	 just	 of	waiting,	 silently	waiting,	with	 the	 deep	 trust	 that	whenever	 the
right	time	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
comes	It	is	going	to	happen.
The	first	step	has	to	be	taken	by	you,	the	second	is	taken	by	existence	itself.	So
nothing	can	be	done	from	your	side,	you	can	only	wait	in	a	receptive	mood.	And
when	 your	 receptivity	 is	 total	 it	 happens.	 It	 always	 happens,	 it	 is	 never	 done.
And	then	life	becomes	full	of	light	and	full	of	bliss	and	full	of	godliness.
Then	all	those	beliefs	that	you	have	been	carrying	for	centuries	suddenly	become
realities,	but	now	they	are	not	beliefs	--	you	know.
Belief	is	irrelevant	in	any	case.	If	you	don't	know,	it	is	irrelevant;	if	you	know,	it
is	 not	 needed.	 If	 you	 know,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 believing	 and	 if	 you	 don't
know	what	 is	 the	point	 of	 believing?	 In	 any	 situation	belief	 as	 such	 is	wrong.
Enquiry	is	right.
A	 sannyasin	 is	 an	 explorer,	 an	 enquirer	 into	 the	 ultimate	 reality	 of	 one's	 own
being	and	the	being	of	the	whole.
(God	 is	 less	 a	 personality	 and	more	 a	 presence,	 a	 perfume,	Osho	 reminds	us.)
The	 flower	 has	 a	 form,	 a	 personality.	 The	 fragrance	 is	 formless,	 it	 has	 no
personality.	 It	 is	 there,	 it	 exists,	 but	 it	 exists	 not	 in	 a	 fixed	 form,	 it	 exists	 in	 a
formless	way.	And	 that's	what	 god	 is,	 a	 godliness.	And	 the	 experience	 of	 this
fragrance	 comes	 through	 meditation.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 way,	 there	 never	 has
been,	there	never	will	be.
The	 really	 religious	 person	 has	 only	 one	 thing	 to	 do,	 and	 that	 is	 to	 become
meditative.	 And	 by	 using	 the	 very	 word	 'meditation'	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 of
moving	in	a	wrong	direction	--	because	English	has	no	exact	word	for	'dhyana';
meditation	only	comes	close	to	it.
English	 has	 three	 words:	 concentration,	 contemplation,	 meditation.
Concentration	 is	of	 the	mind.	You	 focus	your	mind	on	a	particular	object,	you
exclude	everything	else,	you	just	go	on	narrowing	your	vision.
Hence	 in	 concentration	 everything	 can	 become	 a	 distraction.	 A	 dog	 starts
barking	and	you	will	be	distracted	because	you	were	excluding	everything	and
now	 the	 barking	 dog	 has	 come	 in.	 Hence	 the	 concentrator	 is	 always	 angry
because	small	things	--	a	mosquito	--	can	disturb	his	concentration.	Anything	is
capable	 of	 distracting	 you	 because	 you	 are	 doing	 something	 unnatural.
Concentration	 is	 unnatural.	 It	 is	 enforced,	 a	 regimentation.	 It	 is	 something
military-like;	violently	forcing	the	mind	to	remain	pinpointed	on	one	thing.
And	 the	nature	of	 the	mind	 is	constantly	 flowing,	moving.	 It	 is	natural	 for	 the
mind	to	move,	it	is	a	dynamic	process,	and	you	are	trying	to	make	this	dynamic
process	stagnant.
Because	it	 is	against	nature	any	excuse	and	the	mind	will	 immediately	jump	in
and	start	moving.	Even	if	you	force	the	mind	to	be	still	for	long	periods	you	will
be	sitting	on	a	volcano.	It	will	be	like	a	small	child:	you	can	force	the	child	by
saying,	'I	will	not	give	you	food	today.	Sit	in	the	corner	and	sit	silently.'	He	can
do	it.	You	can	tell	him	'Close	your	eyes,'	and	he	can.	But	just	see:	he	is	fidgeting,
he	is	screwing	up	his	eyes,	afraid	to	open	them	but	with	every	desire	to.	You	can
see	the	turmoil	that	is	inside,	but	he	is	somehow	holding	himself	back.	He	is	in
great	trouble.
That	is	the	situation,	when	one	is	in	the	process	of	concentration.
Meditation	 is	 not	 concentration;	 it	 is	 not	 contemplation	 either.	 Contemplation
means	you	are	a	little	more	fluid,	a	little	more	flowing,	but	you	have	to	remain
tethered	to	a	particular	subject.	In	concentration	you	have	to	remain	pinpointed;
in	contemplation	you	have	a	little	longer	rope.	You	can	roam	around	but	you	are
tethered.	For	example,	you	are	 thinking	about	 love.	Mm?	--	you	can	go	on	but
you	 are	 only	 allowed	 to	 think	 about	 love.	Certainly	 it	 has	more	 freedom	 than
concentration	but	still	 the	 freedom	is	 limited.	You	are	 in	a	bigger	prison,	 that's
all,	 but	 you	 are	 imprisoned.	 And	 still	 distractions	 will	 come	 --	 less	 than	 in
concentration	but	they	will	still	come.
In	English	even	'meditation'	gives	a	wrong	idea;	it	is	as	if	you	have	to	meditate
upon	something.	But
'dhyana',	 the	word	 in	Sanskrit	out	of	which	 the	 Japanese	word	 'zen'	has	come,
means	there	is	no	object,	no	subject,	no	concentration,	no	contemplation.	You	are
simply	 sitting	 silently,	 witnessing	 whatsoever	 is.	 A	 dog	 starts	 barking,	 you
witness	it	--	it	is	not	a	distraction.	Music	is	being	played,	you	listen	to	it	--	it	is
not	a	distraction	because	you	are	not	making	any	effort	to	concentrate.	You	are
all-inclusive,	nothing	is	excluded.
The	freedom	is	absolute.	The	only	thing	that	has	to	be	remembered	is	not	to	get
identified	with	anything.
Listen	to	the	music	but	don't	become	the	music,	remain	a	witness.
So	meditation	can	be	defined	as	witnessing,	not	getting	identified.	Now	this	is	a
totally	different	phenomenon;	there	is	no	question	of	concentration,	no	question
of	contemplation.	You	are	 just	sitting	by	 the	side	of	 the	road	and	watching	 the
traffic	 of	 the	 mind;	 allowing	 the	 mind	 whatsoever	 it	 wants	 to	 do	 fearlessly,
allowing	 It	 wherever	 it	 wants	 to	 go	 --	 to	 Timbuktu,	 to	 Toronto...	 wherever	 it
wants	 to	 go.	You	 just	 remain	 alert,	 aware,	watchful.	And	 then	 a	miracle	 starts
happening:	you	start	becoming	aware	of	godliness	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
everything.	 Even	 the	 barking	 of	 the	 dog	 starts	 having	 a	 divine	 quality	 to	 it.
maybe	the	dog	is	a	little	bit	upside-down,	but	still	the	dog	is	god	--	just	written
wrongly,	 that's	 all.	 You	 have	 to	 read	 it	 the	 other	 way,	 otherwise	 there	 is	 no
difference.	And	then	everything	starts	having	a	new	message,	a	new	feel,	a	new
splendour.	When	 the	whole	 is	 transformed	 through	your	witnessing	 it	becomes
fragrant.	There	 is	 no	 flower	but	 there	 is	 immense	 fragrance.	You	have	 entered
into	the	unmanifest.
This	is	the	way	of	entering	into	godliness.	And	once	you	have	tasted	of	godliness
you	are	an	emperor.
Then	the	whole	kingdom	of	god	is	yours.
(Her	name,	Carmen,	means	a	song	of	joy,	Osho	tells	the	next	sannyasin.	He	adds
'dhyan'	 to	 it	 to	 remind	 her	 that	meditation	 is	 the	 necessary	 preparation	 before
one's	 heart	 can	 explode	 in	 song	 of	 celebration.)	 Without	 meditation	 it	 is	 not
possible.	Without	meditation	one	is	bound	to	live	in	misery.	One	can	cover	it	up,
one	can	 find	a	 few	consolations,	one	has	 to	 find	 a	 few	consolations	otherwise
life	would	be	intolerable.	One	has	to	remain	occupied	so	that	one	does	not	feel
the	 inner	 emptiness.	 And	 people	 find	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 occupations	 just	 to
keep	themselves	engaged.	They	are	very	much	afraid	to	be	left	alone,	to	be	left
empty.
These	are	the	people	who	have	invented	the	proverb	that	an	empty	mind	is	the
devil's	workshop.	It	is	not	so.	The	empty	mind	is	the	only	door	to	god.	The	mind
which	is	continuously	occupied	with	thoughts	is	the	devil's	workshop.	Out	of	an
empty	mind	 no	 harm	 has	 ever	 happened.	 Adolf	 Hitler	 is	 not	 an	 empty	mind,
neither	is	Joseph	Stalin,	nor	is	Alexander	the	Great,	nor	Ivan	the	Terrible.	These
are	 people	 full	 of	 thoughts,	 great	 thoughts	 of	 changing	 the	 whole	 world,	 of
bringing	a	revolution.
Buddha	is	an	empty	mind,	Lao	Tzu	is	an	empty	mind.	And	out	of	these	empty
people	--	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	Basho	--	god	has	been	experienced.	They	have	been
able	to	sing	songs	of	joy.	Their	life	is	a	festival,	a	festival	of	lights;	their	life	is	a
continuum	of	celebration.
Meditation	means	making	the	mind	empty,	empty	of	all	thoughts,	discarding	all
thoughts,	remembering	that	'I	am	not	these	thoughts,'	that	'I	am	separate,'	that	'I
am	 just	 a	 watcher,	 a	 watcher	 on	 the	 hills,	 looking	 at	 the	 valley.'	 Creating	 a
distance	 between	 the	 thoughts	 and	 your	 awareness	 is	 the	 whole	 process	 of
meditation.
The	more	 distance	 there	 is,	 the	 better,	 because	when	 the	 distance	 is	 great	 you
cannot	feed	those	thoughts	and	they	start	dying	of	their	own	accord.	They	need
your	 co-operation,	 your	 continuous	 co-operation.	 And	 meditation	 means
withdrawing	your	co-operation,	you	are	not	fighting	with	the	thoughts,	you	are
allowing	them	to	move,	to	have	their	life,	but	you	are	no	more	co-operating,	no
more	nourishing	them,	no	more	getting	identified	with	them.	And	as	you	become
unidentified,	Just	a	watcher	on	the	hills,	they	start	dying.
They	are	no	longer	getting	any	feedback,	they	are	no	longer	invited	guests.	They
start	turning	away.
A	moment	comes	when	the	mind	is	utterly	empty	--	and	that	is	the	moment	when
the	heart	explodes	into	songs,	because	songs	need	space	and	the	mind	is	taking
up	 the	 whole	 space	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 junk	 and	 furniture,	 rotten	 furniture.	 But
people	 are	 such	 that	 they	 call	 rotten	 furniture	 antique.	 They	 go	 on	 collecting
antiques.	The	more	 rotten	 it	 is,	 the	more	old	 it	 is,	 the	more	valuable.	And	 the
mind	 is	 full	 of	 all	 kinds	 of	 nonsense	 --	 relevant,	 irrelevant,	 contradictory.
Nothing	has	to	be	chosen	out	of	the	mind,	all	has	to	be	categorically	rejected:	I
am	not	it.
In	the	East	we	have	defined	meditation	as	a	process	of	neti-neti.	The	word	'neti-
neti'	 means	 neither	 this	 nor	 that;	 'I	 am	 neither	 this	 nor	 that.'	 One	 goes	 on
denying:	"I	am	neither	this	nor	that,'	and	a	moment	comes	when	there	is	nothing
to	 be	 denied	 any	 more.	 A	 vast	 emptiness	 surrounds	 you,	 infinite	 emptiness
surrounds	you.	Only	that	much	emptiness,	that	much	space,	can	help	the	heart	to
open	up	for	the	first	time.	The	heart	needs	infinite	space,	it	needs	the	whole	Sky,
only	 then	 is	 there	 bliss	 and	 there	 is	 singing	 and	 there	 is	 dancing.	 And	 that
singing,	that	dancing,	that	blissful	state,	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas.
Your	name,	Carmen,	exactly	defines	sannyas:	a	song	of	joy.
(To	 Peggy	 Osho	 speaks	 of	 the	 differences	 between	 moonlight	 and	 sunlight.)
Sunlight	 is	masculine,	harsh,	 taut,	passionate,	aggressive,	violent.	Moonlight	 is
feminine,	soft,	tender,	receptive,	loving.	And	this	is	not	only	poetry,	even	science
has	become	aware	that	there	is	a	difference	between	moonlight	and	sunlight.
Mystics	have	been	aware	 for	 centuries:	more	people	have	become	enlightened
on	the	full-moon	night	 than	on	any	other	night.	I	have	never	heard	of	anybody
becoming	enlightened	in	the	day.	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Lao	Tzu	--	they	all	became
enlightened	in	the	night.	It	cannot	be	just	coincidence.
Night	 is	 feminine,	day	 is	masculine	and	enlightenment	happens	only	 in	a	very
receptive	mood,	 in	 a	 very	 feminine	mood.	Whether	 one	 is	 a	man	or	 a	woman
does	not	matter,	but	one	has	to	be	receptive.	You	cannot	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
conquer	god,	you	can	only	invite	and	wait.
And	 the	 feminine	 mind	 knows	 how	 to	 wait,	 how	 not	 to	 be	 aggressive;	 the
masculine	mind	is	aggressive,	in	a	hurry.	That's	the	difference	between	the	East
and	 the	West:	 the	West	 is	masculine,	 full	 of	 sun	 energy;	 the	East	 is	 feminine,
hence	 it	 looks	 slow,	 lazy.	 In	 the	East	 there	 is	 no	 desire	 for	 speed.	The	East	 is
ready	to	wait	for	eternity.	The	West	is	continuously	after	speed.	Nobody	bothers
about	 where	 you	 are	 going,	 everybody	 is	 thinking	 about	 how	 to	 reach	 there
quickly.	Nobody	is	interested	in	where,	for	what.	The	whole	interest	is	in	it	being
quick.
In	 the	 East	 we	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 quickness,	 in	 hurry,	 in	 speed,	 but	 we	 are
certainly	 interested	 in	where	we	are	going.	How	 long	 it	 takes	does	not	matter;
our	concern	is	'What	is	our	ultimate	goal	in	life?'	It	may	take	eternity	--	there	is
no	worry	about	that.
The	night	represents,	just	as	the	East	represents,	the	feminine.	And	the	full-moon
night	is	the	most	feminine	of	all	nights.	It	is	not	only	that	more	people	become
enlightened	on	 the	full-moon	night,	more	people	also	go	mad.	Hence	 the	word
'lunatic':	it	exists	in	all	languages.	It	comes	from	'lunar',	moon-struck.
It	is	not	only	the	ocean	that	is	affected	by	the	moon,	our	whole	being	is	affected.
And	in	fact	eighty	per	cent	of	our	body	is	ocean	water.	That	eighty	per	cent	 is
certainly	affected.
The	 moon	 is	 symbolically	 significant.	 It	 simply	 receives	 the	 sunrays	 and
transforms	them.	Through	the	moon	a	miracle	happens:	the	hot	energy	of	the	sun
becomes	 cool,	 the	 passionate	 sex-energy	 becomes	 compassionate	 is	 love.	 The
whole	process	of	the	moon	is	alchemical.
Your	name	has	two	parts;	one	is	love,	the	other	is	child	of	moonlight.	Love	is	a
child	of	moonlight.	Love	is	basically	feminine.
A	man	 has	 a	 need	 for	 love	 once	 in	 a	 while	 but	 the	 woman	 lives	 in	 love	 for
twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day.	 The	 man	 has	 many	 other	 interests	 also;	 one	 of	 his
interests	is	love.	But	the	woman	has	no	other	interest,	her	whole	interest	is	love.
And	out	of	that	love	other	interests	may	grow	but	they	are	part	of	love,	they	are
not	competitors	to	love.	Hence	a	man	can	always	sacrifice	love	for	his	art,	for	his
music,	for	his	meditation,	for	religion	--	he	can	easily	renounce	love.	It	 is	only
one	of	his	interests,	it	is	not	his	whole	being.	But	a	woman	cannot	do	that.
It	is	because	of	this	fact	that	you	don't	find	so	many	women	enlightened	because
nobody	 has	 worked	 out	 from	 the	 woman's	 side	 how	 to	 attain	 enlightenment.
Enlightenment	has	remained	basically	a	masculine	interest.	And	of	course	when
it	 is	 a	 masculine	 interest	 love	 has	 to	 be	 denied;	 love	 is	 an	 unnecessary
distraction.	So	all	the	religions	have	been	against	love.
My	effort	here	is	multi-dimensional.	I	am	trying	to	do	many	things	here.	Now	is
the	time	for	love	to	find	a	way	towards	enlightenment	so	that	women	can	also	be
Buddhas.	It	has	not	happened	in	the	past.
You	see	Jesus	and	Mohammed	and	Mahavira	and	Chuang	Tzu	and	Lieh	Tzu	and
Zarathustra,	but	they	are	all	men.	And	unless	women	start	becoming	enlightened
humanity	will	remain	lopsided,	the	balance	will	not	be	there.	And	unless	women
become	 enlightened	 they	 cannot	 be	 really	 free,	 because	 enlightenment	 is	 the
ultimate	 in	 freedom.	 The	 freedom	 of	 women	 cannot	 come	 through	 stupid
movements	like	Women's	Liberation.	It	can	only	come	through	a	totally	different
approach:	women	should	 learn	how	 to	become	enlightened.	 If	we	can	create	a
few	women	Buddhas	in	the	world	the	woman	will	be	freed	from	all	chains	an	d
fetters.
And	there	is	no	difficulty	at	all.	In	fact	nobody	has	bothered	about	it,	nobody	has
thought	about	it.
Woman	was	never	taken	into	consideration,	she	has	been	ignored.	She	has	never
been	given	 the	 same	 status	 as	man;	 she	was	 thought	 to	be	 just	 secondary.	But
because	of	this	the	whole	of	humanity	has	suffered.
Enlightenment	is	everybody's	birthright.
Man	can	easily	make	an	approach	through	meditation	but	the	woman	can	more
easily	make	an	approach	through	love.	Love	is	going	to	be	her	meditation.	To	be
loving,	 totally	 loving,	 unconditionally	 loving	 --	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be	 her	 path
towards	 light,	 towards	godliness.	And	out	of	 love	 the	woman	will	have	a	new
birth.
She	will	become	a	child	of	light,	a	child	of	moonlight.
Your	 name	 is	 significant.	 And	 you	 can	 see	 that	 thousands	 of	 women	 are
gathering	around	me.	It	has	never	happened	before.	It	has	always	been	a	male-
dominated	quest.	For	years	even	Buddha	denied	entry	to	women,	he	was	against
it.	He	was	 afraid,	 and	 I	 can	understand	his	 fear.	His	whole	method	was	male-
oriented,	 and	 he	 was	 afraid	 that	 if	 women	 were	 allowed	 to	 become	 initiates,
sannyasins,	 then	 the	males	would	 find	ways	 to	 be	distracted.	They	might	 start
falling	 in	 love	 and	 the	 whole	 method	 would	 be	 disturbed,	 the	 whole	 process
would	be	disturbed.
Mahavira,	 another	 enlightened	 man	 of	 the	 same	 category	 as	 Buddha,	 who
established	 Jainism,	 said	 that	 women	 can	 be	 enlightened	 only	 when	 they	 are
born	again	as	men.	In	this	life	when	they	are	women	all	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
they	can	do	is	to	work	to	be	born	as	men,	only	then	is	enlightenment	possible	--
not	 through	the	body	of	a	woman.	First	 they	have	to	attain	 the	body	of	a	man.
And	I	can	understand	what	he	means	by	 it	His	method	 is	such	 that	 there	 is	no
space,	no	place,	for	love	in	it.
Mary	Magdalene	loved	Jesus	more	than	any	of	his	disciples	did	but	she	was	not
accepted	as	an	apostle;	those	twelve	fools	became	apostles!	And	they	all	escaped
when	Jesus	was	crucified.	He	was	 taken	down	from	the	cross	by	 three	women
and	all	the	apostles	escaped.	But	still	those	three	women	are	not	respected.
Even	Jesus	did	not	show	any	respect	 to	women,	even	 to	his	mother	he	did	not
show	much	respect.
Once	his	mother	came	to	see	him	when	he	was	talking	to	a	crowd.	The	people
said	 'Your	mother	 is	waiting	outside	 to	see	you,'	and	he	said,	 'Tell	 that	woman
that	nobody	 is	my	father	and	nobody	 is	my	mother.'	Tell	 that	woman...	This	 is
ugly,	but	this	has	been	the	approach	of	all	the	male-oriented	methodologies.
My	 effort	 is	 to	 create	 a	 path	 for	 women	 also,	 because	 unless	 they	 are	 free
religiously	they	will	not	be	free	in	other	ways.	Religious	freedom	is	the	central
core	of	all	other	freedoms.	And	even	in	the	twentieth	century	there	are	religions
that	don't	allow	women	in	 their	 temples,	 they	don't	allow	women	to	be	priests;
no	woman	can	be	a	pope.
This	 is	 ugly,	 unnecessarily	 violent.	 It	 is	 something	 of	 the	 rotten	 past,	 still	 a
hangover	of	the	past.	It	has	to	be	completely	finished.
As	meditation	can	lead	to	enlightenment,	 love	can	lead	to	enlightenment.	They
are	different	paths	but	they	reach	the	same	peak.
(While	she	had	been	awaiting	her	sannyas,	Brigitta	was	sobbing,	so	much	so	that
Shiva,	Osho's	bodyguard,	saw	fit	to	move	over	to	her	and	soothe	her,	whereupon
her	 weeping	 slowly	 subsided.	 She	 is	 quiet	 now	 as	 Osho	 shows	 her	 her	 new
name:	Amrit	Sadhya.)	The	goal	of	sannyas	 is	 to	go	beyond	time	and	to	realise
the	 timeless,	 the	 unchanging,	 the	 eternal.	 Only	 the	 eternal	 can	 be	 true;	 the
momentary	is	only	a	reflection	of	the	truth,	it	is	not	truth	itself.	And	whatsoever
we	know	in	the	world	is	momentary.	Everything	begins	at	a	certain	point	in	time
and	then	ends	at	a	certain	point	in	time.
The	search	is	for	that	which	has	no	beginning	and	no	end.	Unless	one	has	found
that	one	cannot	be	contented,	one	cannot	feel	fulfilled.
So	remember,	that	has	to	be	found,	and	it	can	be	found	because	it	is	not	far	away,
it	is	within	you.
Because	we	go	on	looking	outside	we	go	on	missing.	We	have	to	look	in	and	all
that	we	have	been	missing	will	be	found.	The	whole	kingdom	of	god	is	within
you.
(She	closes	her	eyes	and	slowly	raises	her	arms	so	they	are	stretched	out,	one	on
either	side	of	her.)	Good,	Sadhya.	How	long	will	you	be	here?	(If	she	makes	a
reply	it	is	inaudible.)	Be	here	forever.	Good!
(Mind	is	a	moron:	it	is	always	demanding	more.	Give	it	more	and	it	asks	for	still
more,	Osho	explains	to	Anutosha.)
The	moment	you	go	beyond	the	mind	suddenly	there	is	contentment,	nothing	is
needed.	All	that	is	needed	is	already	given,	it	is	already	the	case.	We	have	been
provided	 with	 all	 that	 is	 needed;	 it	 is	 waiting	 inside.	 But	 the	 mind	 goes	 on
searching	outside.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	turn	so
that	we	 can	 look	within,	 and	 there	 is	 suddenly	 fulfilment.	 It	 is	 not	 gradual,	 it
happens	 in	 a	 single	 moment,	 not	 slowly.	 In	 a	 single	 blow	 all	 discontent
disappears	 and	 there	 is	 immense	peace.	There	 is	 no	question	of	wanting	more
because	one	cannot	imagine	there	can	be	more.	It	is	impossible	to	imagine	that
there	can	be	more.
The	whole	 thing	 is	 to	 shift	 the	 energy	 from	 the	mind	 to	 consciousness.	Mind
means	content,	it	is	not	consciousness.	And	consciousness	is	a	separate	entity,	it
is	not	content.	It	is	like	a	mirror,	reflecting	whatsoever	passes	in	front	of	it.	Many
things	pass,	they	are	contents	in	the	mirror;	the	them.	When	nothing	passes	the
mirror	 is	 empty.	 It	 has	 no	 content	 of	 its	 own,	 it	 is	 pure	 nothingness.	And	 that
nothingness	 is	 our	 reality.	 And	 not	 only	 is	 it	 our	 reality,	 it	 is	 the	 reality,	 the
unmanifest	reality	of	the	whole.
Once	you	have	entered	into	the	unmanifest	within	yourself	you	have	entered	into
the	world	of	god.	And	the	by-product	is	immense	contentment,	bliss,	fulfilment,
the	feeling	that	one	has	arrived	home.
(Dorothy,	 billed	 as	 an	 astrologer	 from	 the	 States,	 is	 a	 plump,	 warm-faced
woman,	 rather	 older	 than	 the	 majority	 of	 sannyas-takers.	 Osho	 gives	 her	 the
name	Anand	Nityama.)	Anand	means	bliss.	Nityama	means	eternal.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Happiness	is	momentary,	bliss	is	eternal;	hence	happiness	always	brings	misery.
Before	 happiness	 there	 is	 misery,	 after	 happiness	 there	 is	 misery,	 and	 when
happiness	 is	 there,	 deep	down	you	know	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 last,	 hence	 there	 is
misery.	Before	 there	 is	misery,	 after	 there	 is	misery	 and	 in	 the	middle	 too.	So
happiness	remains	just	a	very	thin	superficial	thing,	very	superficial;	deep	down
you	know	that	it	is	going,	it	is	going,	it	is	already	gone.	You	try	to	cling	to	it	but
it	is	impossible	to	keep	it;	it	has	to	go.
But	bliss	is	without	any	beginning	and	without	any	end,	and	unless	we	discover
bliss	our	whole	life	is	a	wastage;	chasing	after	happiness	is	an	exercise	in	sheer
futility.	 If	 the	 same	 energy	 is	 put	 in	 the	 search	 for	 bliss	 one	 can	 find	 it	 very
easily.	And	even	now	it	is	not	too	late,	because	it	is	not	a	question	of	time,	it	is	a
question	 of	 totality.	 It	 can	 be	 attained	 in	 a	 single	 moment.	 Sometimes	 it	 has
happened	 that	 a	 person	 has	 attained	 at	 the	 last	moment	 of	 his	 life.	 That's	my
observation	about	Jesus	himself,	that	he	attained	it	at	the	last	moment.
When	he	was	put	on	the	cross	he	was	not	yet	a	Christ,	he	had	not	yet	realised	it.
And	then	he	said	to	god
'Have	you	 forsaken	me?'	That	 shows	 there	must	 have	been	 some	desire,	 some
expectation;	he	must	have	been	waiting	for	god	to	do	some	miracle.	That	shows
mind,	 expectation,	 desire.	 And	 there	 is	 frustration	 when	 he	 shouts	 'Have	 you
forsaken	 me?'	 There	 is	 frus-tration,	 there	 is	 anger.	 He	 feels	 as	 if	 god	 has
forgotten	him,	completely	forgotten	him.	Is	 this	 the	moment	 to	forget	him?	He
has	sacrificed	his	whole	life	and	is	nothing	happening,	no	miracle?	No	hand	has
appeared	from	heaven	to	save	him,	to	show	the	world	that	he	is	the	son	of	god.
There	is	anger,	there	is	complaint,	but	immediately	he	understood.	He	was	a	man
of	 immense	 intelligence;	 he	 quickly	 understood,	 at	 the	 last	 moment	 he
understood	and	he	relaxed	and	he	asked	for	forgiveness	and	he	said	'Let	thy	will
be	done	--	not	mine	but	thine.	Let	thy	will	be	done,	let	thy	kingdom	come.'	The
complaint	 has	 disappeared;	 there	 is	 no	 anger,	 no	 frustration,	 no	 desire,	 no
expectation.	 He	 has	 surrendered	 totally.	 In	 that	 very	 moment	 when	 he
surrendered	his	mind	he	became	enlightened.	It	happened	in	a	single	moment.
That's	 why	 there	 are	 many	 statements	 of	 Jesus	 which	 are	 not	 those	 of	 an
enlightened	 man	 --	 because	 he	 had	 no	 time	 to	 make	 any	 statements	 after	 his
enlightenment.	 Buddha	 lived	 for	 forty	 years	 after	 his	 enlightenment;	 enough
time	to	say	the	unsayable.	What	Jesus	said	and	what	is	recorded	in	the	Bible	is
not	exactly	the	truth	because	he	himself	had	not	known	it.	He	was	coming	closer,
but	even	if	you	are	close	to	truth	it	is	not	truth.	There	is	nothing	like	approximate
truth.	Even	the	approximate	is	a	lie.
So	there	are	many	things	about	Jesus	which	cannot	be	explained	as	being	of	an
awakened	 man.	 He	 behaved	 many	 times	 like	 an	 unawakened	 person	 and	 the
reason	is	that	he	became	enlightened	at	the	very	last	moment.
I	am	saying	this	to	you	because	now	you	are	old	and	you	will	be	getting	older,	so
don't	get	depressed,	don't	feel	hopeless.	Even	at	the	last	moment	it	can	happen.
In	India	we	have	a	proverb:	If	a	person	gets	lost	in	the	morning	and	can	manage
to	reach	home	even	by	the	evening	when	the	sun	is	setting,	it	is	not	too	late;	he
has	not	to	be	thought	of	as	lost.
There	 is	enough	 time,	 there	 is	always	enough	 time,	but	 intensity	 is	needed.	So
now	withdraw	your	 energy	 from	all	 non-essential	 things	 and	 put	 the	whole	 of
that	energy	into	becoming	silent,	loving.
Remember	 these	 two	 words,	 silence	 and	 love.	 Be	 silent	 as	 far	 as	 you	 are
concerned	 and	become	 loving	 as	 far	 as	 the	world	 is	 concerned.	Let	 there	be	 a
synthesis	of	silence	and	love.	And	I	feel	you	will	be	able	to	manage	it.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010135
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ShortTitle:	THUNK13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(There	are	certain	experiences	in	which	one	comes	closest	to	knowing	godliness;
they	are	like	four	pillars	of	a	temple,	Osho	tells	Anand	Michiel.)
Without	these	four	the	temple	cannot	exist.	And	they	are	all	interrelated;	if	you
create	one	the	other	three	follow	of	their	own	accord.	One	need	not	think	about
all	four,	just	choose	one.
And	for	you	bliss	is	going	to	be	the	choice.	Become	more	and	more	cheerful	--
don't	miss	any	opportunity.	People	are	very	stupid,	they	never	opportunity	to	be
miserable.	Even	if	there	opportunity	they	create	it.	If	they	cannot	find	one	they
invent	one,	 they	 fantasise.	 If	 it	 is	not	 in	 the	present	 they	 start	 searching	 in	 the
past;	if	it	is	not	in	the	past	they	will	think	of	the	future,	but	somehow	they	have
to	find	something	to	worry	about,	to	be	miserable	about.	Then	there	is	no	wonder
that	the	world	is	full	of	misery.
The	same	should	be	done	about	bliss:	never	miss	an	opportunity	--	and	there	are
a	 thousand	 and	 one	 opportunities	 every	 day.	 Once	 you	 are	 alert	 you	 will	 be
surprised	 how	many	 opportunities	 you	 have	 been	missing	 up	 to	 now.	At	 each
step	 there	 are	 opportunities.	One	 need	 not	 invent	 them,	 one	 need	 not	 imagine
them,	they	are	always	coming	--	god	goes	on	showering.	But	we	are	accustomed
to	 a	 wrong	 attitude,	 a	 wrong	 approach,	 a	 negative	 approach	 towards	 life.	We
choose	the	thorns	and	we	ignore	the	flowers.
The	sannyasin	changes	the	whole	gestalt;	he	chooses	the	flowers,	he	ignores	the
thorns.	If	you	choose	the	thorns	and	ignore	the	flowers,	sooner	or	later	there	will
be	 no	 flowers	 for	 you,	 only	 thorns.	 Even	 flowers	will	 become	 thorns	 because
your	whole	 approach	will	 be	 such	 that	 even	 a	 flower	will	 only	 remind	you	of
some	 thorns.	And	 the	opposite	happens:	 if	you	choose	 the	 flowers	even	 thorns
remind	you	of	beautiful	flowers.	By	and	by	thorns	disappears	the	whole	of	life
becomes	full	of	flowers;	it	becomes	a	springtime.
And	then	god	is	not	far	away,	he	is	very	close.	Once	bliss	starts	happening	you
can	feel	him	closer	o	than	the	heart,	closer	than	your	own	heartbeat.
(Osho	adds	'dhyan'	to	Peter's	name.)
People	without	meditation	are	making	their	houses	on	the	shifting	sands	of	time.
Those	houses	are	bound	to	collapse	and	then	there	is	misery,	frustration,	failure,
darkness,	gloom.	And	if	all	the	houses	that	you	create	go	on	collapsing,	naturally
you	feel	depressed.	Then	 life	 is	no	more	a	celebration,	 it	 is	no	more	a	song	of
joy.	It	is	just	a	scream	of	deep	pain.
But	 the	house	of	 life	can	be	built	on	a	 rock,	 the	 rock	of	eternity	 --	 that's	what
meditation	makes	available	to	you.
Meditation	is	the	jump	from	time	to	no-time,	from	the	momentary	to	the	eternal.
It	 is	 the	 greatest	 revolution	 possible	 and	 it	 can	 happen	 just	 by	 changing	 your
focus.	It	is	not	an	impossible	task;	all	that	is	needed	is	a	little	understanding.
You	may	be	standing	before	a	wall	and	of	course	you	cannot	 see	 the	beautiful
sunset	outside.	You	have	to	understand	that	you	cannot	see	through	the	wall	so
move	to	a	window.	And	don't	stand	before	a	window	if	it	is	closed,	open	it!	Or
move	 to	 the	 door	 and	 open	 it!	Or	 go	 outside	 the	 door.	 Standing	 before	 a	wall
don't	 expect	 to	 see	 stars,	 the	 moon,	 flowers,	 birds,	 people.	 You	 cannot	 see
anything.	Standing	before	a	wall	you	will	simply	become	bored,	and	boredom	is
one	of	the	greatest	problems	every	human	being	faces.	But	it	is	just	because	you
go	 on	 standing	 in	 the	 same	 place.	You	 don't	 learn	 to	 shift	 your	 focus,	 change
your	place.
The	mind	is	like	a	wall.	Meditation	is	an	open	window,	a	door.	Mind	is	the	thick
wall;	 there	 are	 thousands	 of	 thoughts,	 layer	 upon	 layer.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to
penetrate	that	wall.	It	is	thicker	than	any	wall	can	be.
Just	move	from	mind	to	no-mind.	And	the	strategy	of	movement	is	simple,	very
simple:	just	watch	your	thoughts	moving.	Don't	make	any	judgement	about	those
thoughts,	don't	call	them	good	or	bad,	don't	make	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
any	 evaluation.	Remain	 indifferent,	 as	 if	 it	 is	 none	 of	 your	 concern.	 Let	 them
pass;	good	and	bad,	alike,	relevant,	irrelevant,	all	alike.
If	you	can	remain	in	this	indifferent	state	you	are	in	for	a	great	surprise:	as	your
indifference	 towards	 the	 mind	 grows	 deeper,	 becomes	 rooted,	 the	 mind	 starts
disappearing,	 the	 wall	 starts	 disappearing;	 a	 window	 opens,	 a	 door	 opens.
Suddenly	you	can	see	the	splendour	of	life	and	the	eternity	of	life.	Time	has	been
transcended.	And	 just	 a	 single	 glimpse	 is	 enough.	 Then	 you	 know	 the	 secret,
then	the	key	is	in	your	hands.
Then	you	can	go	on	moving	deeper	and	deeper	into	that	experience.
Meditation	is	the	beginning,	samadhi	is	the	end.	Sannyas	begins	with	meditation
and	ends	in	absolute	ecstasy.
(To	Michael	 from	America	 --	billed	as	a	Kung	Fu	 teacher	and	a	 rabbi	 --	Osho
talks	of	love	and	of	god.
There	is	no	proof	for	god	logically,	intellectually.	Intellectually	the	atheist	is	in	a
far	better	position;	 the	theist	 is	bound	to	get	defeated	because	the	theist	has	no
proofs	for	god.	The	atheist	can	disprove	all	the	proofs	that	the	theist	supplies,	but
the	 theist	 is	 right	 and	 the	 atheist	 is	 not	 right	 because	 god	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
intellectual	argumentation,	it	is	an	existential	experience	--	just	like	love.
You	cannot	prove	that	 it	 is.	If	somebody	insists,	 it	will	be	impossible	to	prove.
You	fall	in	love	with	a	woman	and	she	insists	if	she	is	logical	--	which	is	rare	and
that	is	good...	If	she	is	philosophical	she	can	create	trouble	for	you.	She	can	ask
for	the	proof:	'What	proof	have	you	got	that	you	are	really	in	love?	And	what	is
love	in	the	first	place?'	Intellectually	you	cannot	convince	her.	You	will	be	at	a
loss,	you	will	not	be	able	to	answer.	Whatsoever	you	say	will	look	absurd.
One	of	the	great	Christian	mystics,	Tertullian,	is	right	when	he	says	'I	believe	in
god	because	he	cannot	be	proved.	I	believe	in	god	because	god	is	absurd:	credo
qua	absurdum.'	It	is	one	of	the	greatest	statements	ever	made,	and	only	a	mystic
can	make	such	a	daring	statement	I	believe	in	god	because	he	cannot	be	proved.
Life	 needs	 a	 few	 things	 which	 cannot	 be	 proved.	 Only	 because	 of	 those	 few
things	does	 life	become	meaningful.	Things	 that	can	be	proved	never	give	 life
meaning.	 Science	 cannot	 impart	 meaning	 to	 life;	 it	 proves	 everything.	 No
scientific	 statement	 is	 unproved.	 It	 is	 proved	 logically,	 intellectually,
experimentally.
You	can	experiment	in	thousands	of	ways	and	the	result	will	be	the	same	again
and	again	without	any	exception.	But	science	does	not	make	life	meaningful.	It
makes	 it	 comfortable,	 it	makes	 life	 convenient,	 cosy,	 it	 gives	 you	 all	 kinds	 of
gadgets.	But	they	are	all	on	the	outside;	deep	inside	you	don't	have	any	meaning.
Meaning	 needs	 something	more	 than	 proof,	 something	more	 than	 experiment.
Meaning	needs	experience,	not	experiment.
God	 and	 love	 are	 on	 exactly	 the	 same	 plane.	 Begin	with	 love	 because	 that	 is
more	natural.	And	if	one	can	love	that	means	one	is	ready	to	go	into	the	illogical,
one	is	courageous	enough	to	put	logic	aside.	Then	in	the	next	step	one	can	move
towards	god,	one	can	agree	with	Tertullian.
Love	will	give	you	the	first	experience	of	something	that	transcends	intellect.	So
the	 real	mystics	don't	give	any	proofs	 for	god;	 the	people	who	give	proofs	 for
god	 are	 theologians,	 not	 mystics,	 thinkers	 but	 not	 mystics;	 they	 have	 not
experienced.	 And	 those	 theologians	 have	 created	 great	 trouble,	 unnecessary
trouble.
In	fact	it	 is	because	of	them	and	their	stupidity	that	the	atheist	has	always	won
the	case.	They	provide	things	which	he	can	disprove	and	easily	disprove.	I	have
never	come	across	a	single	proof	 for	god	 that	cannot	be	disproved	very	easily,
even	by	 a	 child.	 Just	 a	 little	 intelligence	 is	 needed.	The	 theologian	has	 played
into	the	hands	of	the	atheist;	he	has	not	served	god,	he	has	not	served	religion.	In
fact	he	has	done	a	great	dis-service.
The	mystic	is	in	a	far	better	situation.	He	will	laugh	at	all	the	arguments	both	for
and	 against.	 His	 existence	 is	 the	 only	 proof,	 his	 love	 is	 the	 only	 proof,	 his
blissfulness	 is	 the	 only	 proof,	 his	 silence	 is	 the	 only	 proof.	 He	 can	 invite	 the
atheist	and	he	can	tell	the	atheist	to	be	with	him:	maybe	at	some	moment	you	are
open	and	something	from	me	can	enter	you	and	trigger	a	process.	But	more	than
that	is	not	possible.
If	theologians	stop	proving	god,	atheists	will	disappear	from	the	world	because
they	will	not	have	anything	to	disprove.	They	cannot	disprove	the	mystic	--	that
is	 impossible	 --	 because	 he	 never	 gives	 any	 argument.	To	disprove	 the	mystic
they	will	have	to	meditate.	And	once	a	person	meditates,	he	himself	will	become
a	mystic.
My	whole	effort	here	is	against	theology.	I	am	all	for	love	and	absolutely	against
logic.
(Compassion	 is	 the	only	criterion	 to	 judge	whether	one	 is	a	meditator,	Buddha
said.	 It	 is	 so,	 affirms	 Osho,	 because	 meditation	 happens	 in	 the	 most	 private
recesses	of	your	being.)	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	 is	 so	 absolutely	 private	 that	 you	 cannot	 invite	 anybody	 into	 your	 world	 of
meditation.	It	is	not	possible	at	all.
Meditation	 means	 your	 absolute	 aloneness,	 where	 only	 your	 consciousness
exists,	and	 there	 is	no	other	 so	you	cannot	 take	anybody	 there.	But	meditation
starts	affecting	your	behaviour,	it	starts	affecting	your	actions,	your	relationships,
it	 affects	 everything.	And	 slowly	 slowly	whatsoever	 you	 do	 has	 something	 of
your	meditation	 in	 it	 --	 and	 that	 is	 compassion.	You	 start	 doing	 things	 out	 of
great	love,	love	for	the	whole	existence.
So	meditation	is	the	inner	phenomenon	and	compassion	is	the	outer	expression
of	 it.	 Because	 of	 this	 a	 great	 calamity	 has	 also	 happened:	 knowing	 that
compassion	 is	 inevitably	 there	when	meditation	 happens,	 people	 have	 tried	 to
cultivate	 compassion.	And	 that	 can	 be	 done,	 but	 it	 does	 not	 bring	meditation.
That	cultivated	compassion	remains	superficial,	not	even	skin-deep.	And	that	is
what	has	happened	to	Christian	missionaries	for	these	past	twenty	centuries;	they
have	 been	 trying	 to	 do	 service	 and	 to	 love	 and	 to	 help	 humanity,	 to	 be
compassionate,	 but	 they	 don't	 know	 anything	 of	 meditation;	 hence	 their
compassion	 is	 plastic,	 synthetic,	 it	 has	 no	 roots.	 Just	 scratch	 any	missionary	 a
little	bit	and	you	will	find	an	ordinary	human	being	or	even	worse.
You	can	paint	the	circumference	but	that	does	not	change	the	centre.	But	if	the
centre	changes	--	and	the	centre	cannot	be	painted...	The	surface	can	be	painted
but	 the	 centre	 is	 not	 available;	 you	 cannot	 paint	 it.	 It	 is	 so	 deep	 inside	 that
nothing	can	be	done	to	falsify	it.	It	always	remains	in	its	truth.
Once	 you	 have	 experienced	 your	 centre	 in	 silence,	 once	 you	 have	 realised
yourself,	the	circumference	is	bound	to	change,	you	need	not	change	it.	Hence	I
am	against	creating	any	kind	of	character.	Cultivating	a	character	is	superficial.
It	 deceives	 others,	 It	 deceives	 you	 --	 and	 life	 is	 too	 precious	 to	waste	 in	 such
stupid	 things	as	deceiving	others	and	deceiving	yourself.	Death	will	 come	and
destroy	 all	 your	 hypocrisy	 and	 you	 will	 be	 left	 alone	 and	 then	 except	 for
meditation	nothing	can	be	of	help.	Only	meditation	can	allow	you	to	enjoy	your
aloneness.	 The	meditator	 dies	 blissfully	 because	 he	 has	 really	 died	 before	 the
ordinary	death	ever	happens.
The	moment	he	knows	his	centre	he	knows	that	he	is	not	the	body,	not	the	mind
either.	That	day	 the	real	death	happens	and	he	knows	 that	by	 leaving	 the	body
nothing	 dies.	He	will	 be	moving	 into	 a	 vaster	 space,	 he	will	 be	 becoming	 far
richer	 than	he	has	ever	been.	He	will	be	 really	 freed	from	a	prison.	And	when
you	feel	this	eternity,	this	joy	of	being	part	of	eternity	and	the	whole,	naturally
your	life	starts	showing	compassion	for	all	 those	who	are	still	struggling	in	the
darkness,	groping	in	darkness	and	who	cannot	find	their	way.	But	this	is	nothing
cultivated,	 it	 happens	 naturally.	 When	 character	 comes	 naturally	 it	 has	 a
tremendous	beauty.
My	sannyasins	has	 to	begin	with	 the	centre	and	 leave	 the	circumference;	don't
touch	it.	Once	you	have	known	your	being	you	will	see	the	miracle	happening	of
its	own	accord:	your	life	will	become	compassion.
Instead	of	passion	it	will	be	transformed	into	compassion.
(To	Majsan	from	Sweden,	Osho	gives	the	name	Prem	Suvasa,	which	means	love
and	perfume	or	fragrance.)
Love	 is	 a	 flowering,	 the	 flowering	 of	 your	 consciousness.	 The	 moment	 your
consciousness	 opens	 its	 petals	 great	 fragrance	 is	 released.	 And	 once	 that
fragrance	 is	 released	 one	 feels	 tremendously	 contented,	 fulfilled,	 because	 one
has	 come	 to	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 flowering.	To	 remain	 a	 seed	 is	 to	 remain	 in
misery;	 to	become	a	flower	 is	 to	become	blissful.	Then	one	has	attained;	one's
potential	is	transformed	into	a	reality.
That's	the	meaning	of	realisation:	that	which	was	only	a	possibility	has	become
actual,	a	reality.	Life	has	not	been	in	vain,	you	have	not	missed	the	opportunity.
One	 feels	 one	 has	 come	 home,	 and	 that	 very	 feeling	 gives	 a	 fragrance	 to	 the
person.	 And	 those	 who	 are	 sensitive	 will	 feel	 it,	 those	 who	 are	 open	 will
immediately	recognise	it.	In	fact	whenever	somebody's	inner	lotus	opens	people
start	 coming	 from	 faraway	 places.	 In	 some	 mysterious	 way	 the	 vibe	 starts
reaching	the	farthest	corners	of	the	earth.	It	has	always	been	so.
That	 is	 the	 significance	of	 the	 story	 in	 Jesus'	 life	 that	when	he	was	born	 three
wise	men	from	the	East	went	in	search	of	the	child.	They	were	guided	by	a	star
in	the	sky.	Now,	this	 is	a	parable.	Stars	cannot	guide	anybody.	They	have	their
own	 orbit;	 they	 cannot	 leave	 their	 orbit	 and	 start	 guiding	 somebody.	 But	 the
meaning	 is	great.	The	meaning	 is	 that	some	unknown	force	was	guiding	 them,
some	miraculous	magnetism	was	pulling	them.	It	was	as	if	a	light	was	guiding,	a
star	was	guiding	them.	They	felt	that	somebody	for	whom	they	has	been	waiting
had	 been	 born.	 From	 different	 parts	 of	 the	 East	 those	 three	 wise	 men	 started
moving	towards	the	place	where	this	miracle	had	happened.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	same	1s	 the	story	about	Buddha.	When	he	was	born	a	very	great	old	sage
came	 down	 from	 the	 Himalayas.	 He	 must	 have	 been	 more	 than	 one	 hundred
years	old.	He	was	well-known	all	over	the	country,	and	for	seventy	years	he	had
not	 left	 his	 cave	 in	 the	Himalayas.	And	 suddenly	he	 came	down.	Buddha	was
born	just	on	the	border	of	Nepal	and	India,	just	below	the	Himalayas.	The	sage
came	running.
The	father	of	Buddha	fell	at	his	 feet	because	he	was	such	a	great,	well-known
saint	and	he	said	 'This	is	a	great	blessing.	Why	have	you	come?'	The	sage	said
'Where	is	the	child?	I	have	come	to	see	him	because	when	he	becomes	a	Buddha
I	will	not	be	here.'
And	the	child	was	brought,	just	a	one-day-old	child.	The	sage	touched	the	feet	of
the	child	and	wept.
The	king	was	very	much	puzzled	and	worried	too	--	why	was	he	weeping?	He
asked	'What	is	the	significance	of	your	weeping?'	The	sage	said	'Don't	worry	--	I
am	weeping	 out	 of	 joy	 and	 out	 of	 sadness	 too:	 joy	 for	 the	 child	 that	 a	 great
Buddha	is	born	and	sad	for	myself	because	when	he	is	really	an	opened	lotus...
Right	now	he	is	just	a	bud.	Only	people	like	me	can	recognise	him,'	the	old	man
said,	'but	when	he	is	recognised	by	thousands	of	people	I	will	not	be	here	--	I	am
crying	for	that.	I	am	happy	that	he	is	born	and	I	am	unhappy	because	I	am	going
to	die;	this	is	my	last	year	on	earth.	That's	why	I	rushed	quickly:	I	may	fall	ill,	I
may	 not	 even	 be	 able	 to	 see	 the	 child,	 but	 I	 am	 happy	 that	 I	 have	 seen	 him.
Although	he	is	still	a	bud	and	it	will	take	time,	it	is	absolutely	certain	that	he	will
become	one	of	the	greatest	lotuses	ever.	His	perfume	will	pervade	humanity	for
centuries.'
My	sannyasins	have	to	learn	the	art	of	opening	their	consciousness.	And	one	of
the	keys	is	love.	To	you	I	give	the	key	of	love.	Be	loving	and	that	will	help	your
opening.	And	everybody	is	carrying	the	perfume,	it	just	needs	the	right	effort	to
be	 released.	 Once	 it	 is	 released	 there	 is	 great	 joy	 not	 only	 in	 you,	 the	 whole
existence	rejoices	in	it.
(Prem	Sagari	 is	Lena's	new	name.	Be	miserly	 in	 love	 and	you'll	 be	miserable,
Osho	 begins.)	 Love	 brings	 bliss	 if	 it	 is	 vast.	 If	 love	 is	 one-dimensional	 it
becomes	 a	 bondage;	 if	 it	 is	 multi-dimensional	 it	 becomes	 a	 freedom.	 Almost
everybody	 loves	 in	 his	 own	 way	 but	 it	 more	 or	 less	 creates	 hell.	 Nothing	 is
wrong	with	the	energy	called	love;	what	is	wrong	is	that	we	are	trying	to	focus
our	 love	 in	 a	 certain	 direction,	 pin-pointing	 it	 --	 which	 is	 unnatural.	 Then	 it
creates	 jealousy,	 possessiveness,	 conflict,	 struggle,	 because	 the	 other	 is	 also
doing	 the	 same	 and	 both	 are	 trying	 to	 do	 something	 unnatural.	 Humanity	 has
lived	under	this	shadow	for	centuries	so	it	has	become	our	second	nature.
Love	that	can	create	great	bliss	is	only	creating	hell.	And	many	people	are	fed	up
with	it	and	it	has	not	been	so	just	now;	for	centuries	many	people	have	felt	the
misery	and	they	have	renounced	the	world,	but	that	is	not	the	solution.
The	solution	is	in	a	different	directions	love	should	not	be	confined	and	should
not	be	conditional.	It	should	be	like	the	fragrance	of	a	flower	which	spreads	in
all	directions.	It	has	no	address;	it	is	not	that	it	has	to	reach	a	particular	person;	it
is	unaddressed.	And	when	your	 love	 is	also	 like	an	unaddressed	 fragrance	you
will	be	surprised:	it	only	brings	bliss	it	creates	paradise	around	you.
My	effort	here	 is	 to	help	your	 love	become	greater.	All	 the	 so-called	 religions
have	been	trying	just	the	opposite.	Seeing	that	love	creates	misery	they	teach	the
renouncing	of	love.	I	also	see	that	love	creates	misery	but	seeing	that	I	teach	the
renouncing	of	limitations.	Let	your	love	become	unlimited.
The	 so-called	 religious	 traditions	 and	my	 approach	begin	 from	 the	 same	point
but	 we	move	 in	 different	 directions.	 They	 think	 it	 is	 love	 that	 is	 creating	 the
trouble;	I	don't	see	that	it	is	love	that	is	creating	the	trouble.	It	is	the	limitation
that	you	impose	upon	love	--	that	is	creating	trouble.	Renouncing	love	is	not	the
solution.	 Renounce	 the	 limitation.	 Just	 be	 loving.	 Let	 love	 be	 a	 spontaneous,
natural	 phenomenon.	 Don't	 make	 it	 a	 relationship;	 relate	 but	 don't	 become
confined	to	relationship.
The	moment	you	free	your	love	from	limitations	you	are	free.	The	moment	your
love	is	free	your	very	being	is	free	because	your	being	consists	of	love,	your	soul
consists	of	love.
(To	a	middle-aged	woman,	a	child	psychologist,	Osho	gives	the	name	Chaitanyo
--	pure	consciousness.)	Consciousness	is	impure	if	it	is	full	of	thoughts,	desires,
memories,	 fantasies,	 dreams.	 When	 all	 these	 contents	 are	 dropped,	 when
consciousness	 is	 just	 empty	of	everything,	 it	 is	pure.	And	 in	 that	purity	god	 is
experienced.	 That	 purity	 is	 the	 basic	 qualification	 for	 experiencing	 truth,	 god,
liberation.	The	function	of	meditation	is	 to	destroy	the	content,	 to	help	you	get
rid	of	all	the	contents.
For	example,	if	you	watch	your	mind	you	will	be	able	to	see	very	easily	that	it	is
pointless	 to	go	on	carrying	 the	past;	 it	 is	no	more.	 It	 is	non-existential,	 it	 is	an
unnecessary	burden,	useless	luggage.	And	it	goes	on	becoming	bigger	every	day
because	the	past	goes	on	becoming	bigger.	As	you	live	more	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
experiences,	more	memories	 accumulate,	 and	 it	 becomes	 a	mountain	 --	 really
heavy.	People	are	crushed	under	it.
The	moment	you	see	that	it	is	useless	you	can	drop	it.	It	is	not	clinging	to	you,
you	are	clinging	to	it,	so	you	simply	take	your	hands	away.	Then	the	next	thing
that	comes	through	watchfulness	is	that	you	become	aware	that	the	future	is	not
yet	so	why	be	bothered	about	it?	When	it	comes	we	will	see,	we	will	respond.
There	is	no	need	to	be	worried	about	it	--	it	may	never	come	or	it	may	come	in
such	a	way	that	you	cannot	imagine	it	right	now.	It	is	unpredictable.	Whatsoever
you	 think	 about	 it,	 ninety-nine	 per	 cent	 of	 it	 is	 never	 going	 to	 happen.	 And
wasting	your	energy	for	that	one	per	cent	is	sheer	foolishness.
Once	you	see	it	you	withdraw	from	the	future	--	and	the	past	and	the	future	are
one	hundred	per	cent	of	your	mind,	the	whole	content.	Fifty	per	cent	belongs	to
the	past,	fifty	per	cent	to	the	future.	In	the	present	there	is	no	content.	If	one	is
just	herenow	then	consciousness	is	empty.
You	can	see,	whenever	you	look	in	your	mind	either	something	from	the	past	is
moving	or	something	from	the	future.	As	far	as	this	very	moment	is	concerned
consciousness	is	pure.	And	the	meditator	by	slowly	slowly	dropping	the	past	and
the	future	starts	settling	in	the	present.
To	live	herenow	is	to	live	a	religious	life.	That	is	pure	consciousness	and	out	of
pure	 consciousness	whatsoever	 happens	 is	 virtue.	Whatsoever	 you	 do	 is	 right.
Whatsoever	your	response	you	will	never	repent	for	it,	you	will	never	feel	guilty
for	it.
(Full	 of	 light	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 Gudrun's	 new	 name	 --	 Jyotirmaya,)	 Man
ordinarily	lives	in	darkness.	We	are	born	in	darkness.	In	fact	darkness	is	a	basic
need	 in	 the	 beginning.	 There	 is	 darkness	 in	 the	 mother's	 womb.	 It	 is	 needed
because	light	will	be	a	disturbance	for	the	growing	child.	The	child	is	so	soft,	so
tender;	it	needs	velvety	darkness	to	surround	it.	And	the	child	sleeps	for	twenty-
four	hours	a	day	in	the	mother's	womb:	light	will	disturb	his	sleep,	and	sleep	is	a
must.	In	those	nine	months	the	child	is	growing	so	much	that	there	needs	to	be
no	disturbance,	otherwise	energy	will	be	diverted.	So	darkness	helps	the	child	to
remain	relaxed.
Everything	in	the	beginning	grows	in	darkness.	You	put	the	seed	in	the	ground
you	dig	a	little	bit,	 then	you	put	the	seed	in.	If	you	just	 throw	it	on	the	ground
then	it	may	not	grow	because	there	is	too	much	light	there.	It	needs	the	womb,
the	womb	of	the	earth	to	grow	in	--	there	it	is	dark.	Once	the	seed	starts	growing
it	starts	rising	above	the	earth.	Then	it	starts	reaching	towards	the	sun,	towards
the	moon,	towards	the	stars.
The	child	is	born	physically	he	comes	into	light	but	spiritually	he	still	remains	in
darkness.	 And	 that	 darkness	 can	 be	 dispelled	 only	 through	 meditation;	 hence
meditation	 gives	 you	 a	 second	 birth.	 The	 first	 birth	 is	 physical,	 the	 second	 is
spiritual.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 whole	 meaning	 of	 initiation	 into	 sannyas:	 it	 has	 to
become	a	second	birth.	Physically	you	are	in	light,	now	you	need	another	birth
too	--	so	that	psychologically,	spiritually	also,	you	are	in	full	light.	And	there	is
no	difficulty	in	it,	it	is	just	that	people	are	not	aware	of	it.	They	never	think	about
it,	they	have	never	bothered	about	it,	so	they	remain	only	physical	beings.	They
never	grow	spiritually.
While	you	are	here	concentrate	your	whole	energy	on	meditation	so	that	you	can
learn	the	secret.	It	is	a	knack.	Just	by	doing	all	the	meditations	here,	one	day	you
will	 find	 which	 meditation	 fits	 with	 you.	 And	 the	 moment	 it	 fits	 something
clicks.	Suddenly	you	know	'This	is	 the	method	for	me.'	And	the	knowing	is	so
absolute	 and	 categorical	 that	 no	 doubt	 ever	 arises.	 Then	 move	 with	 that
meditation,	 then	 let	 that	meditation	become	 the	central-most	 thing	 in	your	 life,
because	you	will	be	born	into	light	through	it.
Light	 is	 another	 name	 for	 god.	 And	 to	 be	 born	 into	 that	 light	 is	 the	 whole
purpose	 of	 sannyas.	 One	 moment	 you	 are	 born	 into	 that	 light	 you	 are
enlightened.	That	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	'enlightened'	--
because	to	be	in	that	light	means	to	become	that	light.	One	melts	and	merges	and
becomes	one	with	it.	You	are	not	two;	you	are	not	the	seer	and	the	light	is	not	the
seen.	You	become	one,	you	are	the	light.
The	last	words	of	Buddha	on	the	earth	were	'Be	a	light	unto	yourself.'
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#14
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
14	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010145
ShortTitle:	THUNK14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	 explains	 the	 significance	 of	 the	 name,	 Swami	Dhyan	Kurt.)	One	 of	 the
greatest	 problems	 that	 humanity	 always	 has	 to	 face	 is	 the	 distinction	 between
knowledge	 and	wisdom.	Knowledge	 pretends	 to	 be	wisdom	 --	 it	 is	 not.	But	 it
pretends	 in	a	very	cunning	and	clever	way.	 It	has	deceived	millions	of	people.
And	 once	 a	 person	 becomes	 deceived	 by	 his	 knowledge	 he	 loses	 all	 track	 of
wisdom,	because	they	are	polar	opposites.
The	 direction	 of	 knowledge	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 the	 direction	 of	 wisdom.
Knowledge	is	external	and	wisdom	is	internal.	To	seek	knowledge	one	has	to	go
outside	oneself	and	to	seek	wisdom	one	has	to	go	in.
Knowledge	is	information,	wisdom	is	transformation.	Wisdom	does	not	happen
through	collecting	information;	it	happens	through	getting	rid	of	the	mind	itself.
Mind	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 accumulation	 of	 knowledge,	 borrowed	 knowledge.	 It
comes	 from	 books,	 from	 schools,	 colleges,	 universities,	 from	 parents,	 from
society,	 from	 tradition,	 church,	 priests	 --	 from	 everywhere	 except	 from	 your
inner	source.
The	more	you	become	burdened	with	knowledge	the	farther	away	is	your	inner
source	 of	wisdom.	My	work	here	 consists	 in	 helping	you	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 all	 this
burden,	to	remove	all	these	rocks	of	knowledge	so	that	the	springs	of	your	own
wisdom	can	start	flowing.	And	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about.	Getting	rid	of
the	mind	is	meditation,	and	the	moment	you	are	free	of	mind	wisdom	explodes.
Wisdom	 is	 light,	 wisdom	 is	 silence,	 wisdom	 is	 divine,	 wisdom	 is	 bliss	 and
wisdom	is	all	that	one's	heart	longs	for.	It	fulfils	you	totally.
(Love	 is	 wisdom	 --	 that	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 Premgyan,	 Osho	 tells	 the	 former
Patricia.)	 The	 sannyasins	 has	 to	 shift	 his	 whole	 energy	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the
heart.	 It	 is	 not	 as	 difficult	 as	 it	 seems	 in	 the	 beginning	 because	 the	 heart	 is	 a
natural	 phenomenon	 and	 head	 is	 a	 social	 institution.	 To	 go	 back	 to	 nature	 is
never	 difficult	 because	 it	 is	 natural.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 more	 difficult	 to	 go	 to	 the
unnatural.	 That's	 why	 the	 society	 needs	 every	 child	 to	 go	 through	 school,
college,	 university	 --	 almost	 one-third	 of	 life	 is	 wasted	 --	 to	 force	 the	 energy
towards	an	unnatural	centre,	 the	head,	and	 to	create	barriers	so	 that	 the	energy
does	not	go	through	the	heart.
The	natural	process	is	that	the	energy	comes	from	the	being	to	the	heart	and	from
the	heart	to	the	head.
This	 is	 the	natural	process,	and	 if	 the	energy	comes	 through	 the	heart	 then	 the
heart	remains	the	master	and	the	head	becomes	the	servant.	The	whole	trick	of
so-called	education	is	to	avoid	the	heart	completely	and	to	create	a	direct	track
between	the	being	and	the	head	and	to	ignore	the	heart.
It	has	been	done;	the	heart	is	left	by	the	side	and	the	energy	starts	moving	from
the	being	to	the	head.
Then	the	head	becomes	the	master.	And	the	head	as	a	servant	is	a	beautiful	serv
an	t	but	as	a	master	it	is	very	ugly.
My	effort	here	is	to	undo	what	society	has	done	to	you.	But	it	is	not	as	difficult
as	society's	work	is;	it	does	not	take	twenty-five	years.	It	can	happen	even	in	a
single	moment.	It	only	needs	a	clear-cut	understanding.
Just	 the	 moment	 you	 understand	 what	 the	 society	 has	 done	 to	 you,	 you	 can
immediately	open	your	heart	 and	 the	 energy	 starts	 flowing	 through	 it,	 because
that	is	the	natural	way,	it	is	how	it	should	be.	If	the	society	had	not	interfered	it
would	have	been	that	way.	But	the	society	does	not	leave	anybody	uninterfered
with.
The	society	is	very	much	afraid	of	love,	very	much	afraid	of	the	heart,	because	if
a	person	lives	in	the	head	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
he	is	efficient,	a	good	servant,	obedient,	a	slave	--	and	that's	what	society	needs:
slaves,	efficient	workers,	good	servants.	The	society	does	not	need	masters.
One	 of	 the	 great	mystics	 of	 the	West	was	Dionysius.	He	 has	 been	 very	much
misunderstood	in	the	West.
If	he	had	been	 is	 the	East	he	would	have	been	one	of	 the	Buddhas.	We	would
have	respected	him	as	much	as	we	have	respected	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Lao	Tzu,
not	a	bit	less.	But	in	the	West	he	was	laughed	at	for	the	simple	reason	that	there
was	no	context	in	which	to	understand	him.	He	was	a	very	rare	exception;	he	had
no	relevance	 to	 the	society	 in	which	he	was	 living.	He	was	a	contemporary	of
Alexander	the	Great.
He	 lived	 naked,	 and	 once	 he	 was	 caught	 by	 a	 few	 robbers.	 Looking	 at	 his
beautiful	 body,	 they	 thought	 that	 it	 would	 be	 good	 to	 sell	 him	 as	 a	 slave,	 he
would	fetch	good	money.	In	those	days	all	over	the	world	men	and	women	were
sold	 in	 the	 marketplace	 like	 cattle;	 they	 were	 auctioned.	 Those	 robbers	 were
talking	 together.	Dionysius	was	 lying	by	 the	 side	of	 the	 river	enjoying	 the	 sun
and	he	asked	'What	are	you	whispering?	What	is	the	matter?	What	do	you	want?
My	 feeling	 is	 that	you	are	 interested	 in	me,'	 he	 said	 to	 them.	They	 felt	 a	 little
embarrassed	and	they	confessed,	'Yes,	that	is	true.	We	are	thinking	to	catch	you
but	we	are	afraid:	although	there	are	eight	of	us	and	only	one	of	you,	you	are	so
strong	that	we	are	afraid	that	we	may	not	be	able	to.'	He	laughed,	he	said	'Don't
be	worried.	What	do	you	want	to	catch	me	for?'	They	said
'We	want	to	sell	you	in	the	slave	market.'	He	said	'I	am	coming	with	you.	There
is	no	need	to	catch	me.	I	am	a	free	man,	I	am	coming	out	of	my	own	will.'
They	had	never	seen	such	a	man!	He	walked	with	them	like	an	emperor	and	they
looked	like	servants!
And	he	was	ordering	 them	 'Do	 this	 and	do	 that.'	He	was	 a	 natural	master	 and
they	were	following	his	orders
--	what	 else	 could	 you	 do?	He	was	 so	 strange	 a	man	 --	 they	 had	 never	 come
across	 such	 a	 man.	 They	 were	 a	 little	 bit	 puzzled.	 When	 they	 reached	 the
marketplace	he	stood	in	the	middle	of	the	market	and	shouted	loudly,	'A	master
has	come	to	be	sold	--	is	any	slave	ready	to	purchase	me?'	That's	exactly	what	he
said:	 'For	 the	 first	 time	 a	master	 has	 come	 to	 be	 sold	 --	 is	 any	 slave	 ready	 to
accept	me?'
Once	your	heart	is	opened	even	if	you	are	imprisoned	you	remain	a	master,	even
if	you	are	enslaved	you	remain	a	master.	Your	mastery	 is	 so	deep	 that	nothing
can	take	it	away	from	you.	But	if	the	heart	is	not	functioning	you	may	be	very
rich,	you	may	even	be	the	emperor	of	a	big	country,	but	you	are	a	slave.
So	you	have	to	do	this	miracle:	shift	your	energy	from	the	head	to	the	heart.
Anand	means	bliss.	Laura	means	victory;	it	also	means	immortality.
Victory	and	immortality	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	The	moment	you	know
your	 immortality	you	 are	victorious,	 never	 before	 it.	To	 think	 that	 you	 are	 the
body	 is	 to	 remain	 in	defeat.	To	 think	 that	you	are	 the	mind	 is	 to	 remain	 in	 the
dark	night	of	the	soul.	And	to	believe	that	you	are	the	body	and	the	mind	is	the
root	cause	of	all	misery.	The	moment	you	become	aware	that	you	are	something
transcendental	 to	 body-mind,	 something	 more,	 something	 plus,	 immediately
great	bliss	descends	on	you.	The	bliss	is	the	beginning	of	your	victory.
As	you	go	deeper	into	this	transcendental	consciousness,	the	more	you	become
aware	of	your	eternity,	your	 timelessness.	You	were	here	before	birth,	you	will
be	here	after	death;	death	happens	only	to	the	body-mind	structure,	not	to	you.	It
is	impossible	to	die.
Consciousness	is	immortal.	And	unless	one	knows	it	how	can	one	live	joyously?
When	 death	 is	 the	 end	 of	 everything,	 everything	 becomes	 pointless.	 All	 your
creativity	 is	 pointless	 if	 death	 is	 the	 end	 of	 it	 all,	 all	 your	 love	 is	 pointless	 if
death	is	the	end	of	it	all.	All	your	joys	are	nothing	but	occupations	to	somehow
keep	yourself	occupied	so	that	you	can	avoid	the	constant	knock	of	death	on	the
door.	But	for	how	long	can	one	avoid?	Whether	you	 listen	 to	 the	knock	or	not
one	day	death	opens	the	door	and	walks	in.	It	does	not	even	ask	'May	I	come	in,
sir?'	It	simply	comes	in.
And	it	does	not	give	you	a	single	moment	to	prepare.	You	cannot	take	anything
of	whatsoever	you	have	accumulated	and	for	which	you	wasted	your	whole	life.
Death	simply	dismantles	your	whole	life's	effort.
With	death	one	cannot	feel	meaning	in	life.	If	everything	ends	in	the	grave,	what
does	it	matter	whether	you	were	a	saint	or	a	sinner,	whether	you	were	world	--
famous	 or	 just	 a	 nobody,	whether	 you	were	 a	 president	 of	 a	 country	 or	 just	 a
peon	 in	 an	 office	 --	 it	 does	 not	 matter,	 it	 is	 all	 the	 same.	 Death	 equalises
everybody.	It	comes	like	a	bulldozer	and	goes	on	equalising,	making	everybody
flat	on	the	ground.
But	if	there	is	something	more	than	that	in	you	which	defies	death	then	life	has
meaning.	 Then	 what	 you	 are	 doing	 is	 significant.	 Then	 each	 act	 has	 value
because	 each	 act	 is	 coming	 out	 of	 the	 immortal	 source,	 out	 of	 your	 being.	 It
represents	you.	And	 it	 not	only	 represents	you,	 it	 also	 reveals	you	 --	 to	others
and	to	yourself.	It	is	a	manifestation	of	your	being.	Then	your	creativity	is	your
manifestation.	Then	whatsoever	you	are	doing	has	significance	in	the	context	of
eternity.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Then	to	be	a	sinner	or	to	be	a	saint	makes	a	difference,	then	to	be	a	creator	or	a
destroyer	makes	 a	 difference.	 Then	 the	 grave	 is	 not	 the	 end	 and	 death	 is	 just
superficial.	In	the	depths	you	are	deathless,	timeless.
Victory	is	possible	only	if	you	come	to	know	the	deathless	in	you	--	and	it	can	be
known.	 That's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 for.	 The	 whole	 search,	 the	 enquiry	 is	 for	 that
which	abides	forever.	Only	a	sannyasin	can	be	victorious.
(He	 adds	 'Sambuddha'	 to	 Flor's	 name	 so	 altogether	 his	 sannyas	 name	 means
enlightenment	is	man's	flowering.)
Man	is	a	flower	and	unless	he	opens	up	he	remains	unaware	of	his	own	beauty,
of	 the	 great	 gift	 that	 god	 has	 given	 to	 him.	He	 remains	 unaware	 of	 the	 inner
treasures	 which	 he	 has	 been	 carrying	 all	 along.	 He	 remains	 unaware	 of	 the
kingdom	 of	 god	 within.	 The	moment	 the	 blossoming	 happens	 and	 the	 flower
opens	up,	you	are	transported	into	another	world.	Your	life	becomes	full	of	light,
joy,	beauty.
Flor	also	means	a	flower	of	beauty.	Not	 just	a	beautiful	 flower	but	a	flower	of
beauty	 itself.	And	only	a	Buddha,	one	who	has	come	to	 the	 total	 realisation	of
his	being,	can	say	'I	have	blossomed,	flowering	has	happened	to	me.	I	have	come
to	the	peak,	my	potential	 is	actual.	Now	nothing	is	 left.	I	have	lived	my	life	to
the	 utmost.'	 And	 only	 when	 you	 have	 lived	 your	 life	 to	 the	 utmost	 and	 your
whole	potential	is	transformed	into	a	reality	are	you	worthy	of	god,	never	before
it.
So	many	people	seek	and	search	for	god	without	ever	bothering	about	whether
they	 are	 ready	 to	meet	 him,	whether	 they	 are	 ready	 so	 that	 he	would	want	 to
meet	 them.	They	never	 think	about	 that.	My	emphasis	 is:	 forget	all	about	god,
just	prepare	yourself.	Whenever	the	time	is	ripe	and	you	are	ready	god	is	going
to	happen	to	you.	You	need	not	bother,	you	need	not	even	think	about	god;	your
thinking	is	not	going	to	help.
Prepare,	and	to	prepare	means	to	rejoice,	to	blossom,	to	dance,	to	sing,	to	love,
to	meditate,	so	all	the	dimensions,	all	the	petals	of	your	being,	start	opening.
The	eastern	symbol	of	ultimate	flowering	is	a	one	thousand	petalled	lotus.	The
one	thousand	simply	represents	it	s	multi-dimensionality	and	the	fact	that	those
dimensions	cannot	be	counted.	They	are	infinite.
Once	you	 start	 opening	 the	opening	goes	on	and	on;	you	go	on	opening	more
and	more.	And	a	moment	comes	when	you	are	 just	pure	fragrance.	The	flower
disappears,	only	fragrance	remains.	That	 is	 the	flower	of	beauty.	The	flower	 is
no	more	there	but	only	an	experience,	just	like	a	fragrance	--	formless.
It	has	happened	only	to	very	few	people	in	the	world	--	unfortunately,	because	it
could	have	happened	to	everybody,	whosoever	has	ever	lived.	It	is	everybody	is
right	but	very	few	people	ever	try	to	make	it	a	reality.
This	initiation	into	sannyas	should	become	a	new	beginning	in	your	life	so	that
you	can	gather	all	your	energies	and	pour	your	whole	being	into	flowering.
(His	name,	Dan,	is	from	the	name	Daniel	--	the	Old	Testament	prophet	who	was
thrown	into	a	den	of	lions	--	Osho	tells	the	next	for	sannyas.)
The	story	is	that	he	emerged	unharmed.	To	me	it	cannot	be	a	historical	fact	but	it
is	far	more	important	than	any	historical	fact	can	ever	be.	It	is	a	parable.
Lions	 are	 not	 so	 understanding.	 If	man	 is	 not	 then	what	 can	 you	 expect	 from
lions?	Because	he	was	thrown	in	by	men...	And	he	emerged	unharmed.	It	is	not
historically	possible,	unless	the	lions	were	not	hungry	at	all,	because	lions	don't
kill	they	are	not	hungry;	it	is	only	man	who	kills	without	being	hungry.
I	have	heard:	once	a	missionary	was	caught	by	cannibals	 in	an	African	 jungle.
They	all	are	gathered	together	around	him	--	the	second	world	war	was	going	on
--	and	they	said	'We	are	puzzled	--	you	are	killing	so	many	people,	how	do	you
manage	to	eat	so	many	people?'	He	said	'What?	Do	you	think	we	are	cannibals?'
They	said	'Then	it	becomes	even	more	puzzling.	If	you	are	not	eating	them,	why
are	you	killing	them	unnecessarily?	We	are	far	better:	we	kill	only	when	we	are
hungry.	 For	 example,	 today,	 we	 have	 not	 killed	 you,	 we	 are	 preserving	 you
because	 our	 feast	 day	 is	 to	 come.	 We	 are	 far	 more	 sane;	 you	 go	 on	 killing
millions	of	people	for	no	reason	at	all	--	and	you	condemn	us	poor	cannibals.	We
kill	only	when	we	are	hungry	but	you	kill	without	any	reason,	as	if	killing	itself
is	an	end?'
A	cannibal	cannot	understand	our	wars.
Unless	the	lion	was	absolutely	fed	up	with	food	and	he	was	not	interested	at	all
this	 could	 not	 have	 happened.	 And	 I	 don't	 think	 that	 the	 people	 who	 threw
Daniel	into	the	den	would	have	thrown	him	to	lions	who	were	fully	fed;	he	must
have	been	thrown	to	hungry	lions.
It	is	a	parable.	His	body	may	have	been	destroyed	but	he	remained	untouched	by
it.	He	emerged	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
unharmed	 --	 that	 simply	means	 he	 remained	 undisturbed.	His	 silence	was	 not
disturbed,	 his	 bliss	 was	 not	 disturbed.	 He	 remained	 centred	 and	 grounded,
unshaken,	unafraid.	That's	 the	 true	meaning	of	emerging	unharmed.	He	proved
that	he	knows	the	truth	so	he	is	not	worried	about	the	body	or	the	mind,	about
life.	 He	 is	 not	 at	 all	 worried	 because	 he	 knows	 some	 higher	 life.	 He	 has
experienced	something	higher,	that's	why	he	is	ready	to	sacrifice	his	life.
You	 can	 sacrifice	 your	 life	 only	 when	 you	 know	 something	 higher	 than	 life,
otherwise	 you	 cannot	 sacrifice	 it	 And	 then	 it	 is	 worth	 sacrificing,	 rather	 than
sacrificing	your	truth.	Nobody	can	sacrifice	truth	if	one	knows	it.	One	will	easily
let	go	of	life	because	any	way	life	is	going	to	end.	Where	it	ends,	in	your	bed	or
in	a	den	of	lions,	does	not	matter;	in	fact	a	den	of	lions	is	a	far	better	place	than
just	dying	in	your	bed.	At	least	the	hungry	lions	will	enjoy	it	And	Daniel	must
have	enjoyed.
If	 I	were	 to	write	 the	 story	 I	would	write	 it	 in	 a	 different	way.	He	must	 have
enjoyed	the	fact	that	at	least	his	body	was	being	used	and	the	poor	lions	were	are
enjoying	it.	He	must	have	participated	in	their	joy,	he	must	have	celebrated	with
them.	And	he	would	have	remained	unconcerned,	his	coolness	unaffected.
But	 that	 is	 not	 the	 interpretation	 that	 Jews	 and	 Christians	 go	 on	 putting	 on
Daniel.	They	think	he	did	a	miracle.
The	Bible	has	fallen	into	wrong	hands;	it	needs	mystics	to	interpret	it.	It	is	being
interpreted	by	stupid	theologians	who	cannot	understand	the	deeper	meaning	of
things,	 for	whom	 everything,	 if	 it	 is	 true,	 has	 to	 be	 historical.	 In	 fact	 just	 the
reverse	 is	 the	cases	whatsoever	 is	historical	 is	 just	 factual;	 it	has	nothing	 to	do
with	 truth.	 Truth	 is	 something	 higher	 than	 history	 because	 truth	 is	 something
higher	 than	 time.	History	 is	 time	 and	 truth	 is	 not	 temporal;	 it	 is	 timeless,	 it	 is
eternal.
But	it	is	a	beautiful	name.	Remember	that	the	truth	has	to	be	found	so	that	even
life	becomes	 insignificant	compared	 to	 truth.	 --	How	long	will	you	be	here?	 --
Four	months.	--	That's	very	good.
This	 is	 the	den	of	 lions	 (laughter)...	 and	you	will	 not	 emerge	unharmed!	 (Dan
throws	back	his	head	and	laughs	boisterously.)
Good,	Daniel.	Good
(Anand	Pratito	means	the	experience	of	bliss,	Osho	tells	Maria	from	Belgium.)
Bliss	is	not	a	concept,	an	idea.	It	is	an	experience,	something	existential,	not	just
intellectual.
We	have	become	so	accustomed	to	thinking	of	everything	in	terms	of	the	mind
that	we	go	on	missing	the	higher	realities.	Bliss,	love,	beauty,	truth,	god	--	these
are	the	higher	realities,	higher	than	the	intellect.
The	intellect	cannot	grasp	them.	If	you	want	to	grasp	them	you	have	to	go	higher
than	intellect.
Nobody	 can	 understand	 love	 without	 being	 in	 love.	 Yes,	 about	 love	 you	 can
collect	many	many	things	but	about	love	is	about	love;	it	is	not	love	itself.	About
god	much	information	is	available,	but	 to	know	about	god	is	not	 to	know	god.
Remember	that	distinction.
Many	are	 living	 in	deception.	They	collect	 information	about	bliss,	 about	god,
about	 truth,	 about	 meditation	 and	 they	 become	 so	 hypnotised	 by	 their
information	that	they	forget	that	those	things	have	to	be	experienced.	Unless	you
experience	you	have	not	known.
My	 approach	 here	 is	 totally	 existential.	 Intellect	 is	 being	 used	 as	 a	 stepping
stone,	as	a	ladder,	to	help	you	to	go	beyond	it,	but	it	is	not	the	end,	only	a	means.
This	 has	 to	 be	 constantly	 remembered,	 otherwise	 my	 words	 can	 become
dangerous	to	you.	If	you	cling	to	those	words,	if	you	start	collecting	those	words,
you	will	 forget	 the	real	purpose	of	being	here.	The	purpose	of	being	here	 is	 to
experience.
Avoid	 the	 old	 habit	 of	 getting	 addicted	 to	words	 and	 always	 go	 on	 reminding
yourself	that	the	purpose	of	being	here	is	to	experience.	And	then	it	is	possible;	it
is	not	as	arduous	as	people	think.
All	great	realities	can	be	experienced.	Everybody	has	the	potential,	the	capacity,
the	opportunity,	but	if	you	become	addicted	to	words	you	lose	everything.
(Truth	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 absolute	 silence	 --	 that's	 the	 meaning	 of	 Satyam
Mauna's	name.)	All	that	a	sannyasin	has	to	learn	is	the	art	of	being	silent,	calm
and	quiet.	And	the	secret	is	to	be	watchful	of	your	mind.
Nothing	 has	 to	 be	 done	 with	 the	 mind	 --	 no	 fight,	 no	 struggle,	 no	 effort	 to
change,	 just	 watch	 it	 without	 any	 prejudice.	 And	 just	 by	 watching,	 the	 mind
starts	 disappearing,	 evaporating.	watching	 creates	 enough	heat	 for	 the	mind	 to
evaporate.
In	the	East	we	have	actually	called	it	'tapa';	tapa	means	heat.	If	you	witness	your
mind,	 great	 heat,	 great	 energy,	 is	 created.	 If	 you	 don't	 watch	 your	 mind	 the
energy	moves	into	the	mind	and	becomes	thoughts,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
desires,	 memories,	 ambitions.	 The	 same	 energy	 comes	 as	 anger,	 violence,
destruction.	When	you	watch,	 the	co-operation	 is	broken,	 the	bridge	 is	broken.
Your	energy	remains	with	you,	it	does	not	move	into	the	mind	and	you	become	a
reservoir	of	energy.	Great	heat	is	created	by	it	and	the	mind	simply	evaporates.
The	 moment	 there	 is	 no	 mind	 there	 is	 silence,	 and	 in	 that	 silence	 truth	 is
experienced.	 And	 truth	 liberates;	 liberates	 you	 from	 all	 fear,	 from	 all	 misery,
liberates	you	from	all	boundaries,	limitations,	and	gives	you	the	freedom	of	the
whole	sky.	You	suddenly	become	a	bird	on	the	wing.
Love	and	gratitude	--	that	is	the	meaning	of	Prem	Anugraha	and	the	two	things
that	a	sannyasin	needs.
Have	 love	for	 the	whole	existence	and	deep	gratitude	for	all	 that	existence	has
done	for	you.
Ordinarily	 we	 take	 everything	 for	 granted,	 as	 if	 we	 have	 earned	 it,	 as	 if	 we
deserve	 it.	 Not	 only	 that,	 we	 are	 continuously	 complaining	 because	 we	 want
more	and	the	universe	is	not	giving	us	enough.
People	are	continuously	grumbling,	they	are	grumpy.	Their	whole	life	is	full	of
ungratefulness,	 they	don't	have	any	experience	of	gratitude.	And	without	 these
two	things	--	love	and	gratitude	--	there	is	no	religion	at	all.
Love	 has	 to	 be	 the	 foundation	 and	 gratitude	 is	 the	 temple.	 Once	 love	 and
gratitude	are	there	the	temple	is	ready	for	God	to	enter.	One	need	not	search	for
God	at	all,	one	should	only	prepare	one's	being.	Love	removes	all	that	is	wrong,
all	that	is	negative,	and	gratitude	brings	all	that	is	right,	all	that	is	positive.
Love	functions	as	a	gardener	preparing	the	ground,	removing	the	rocks	and	the
weeds,	 and	 gratitude	 functions	 as	 the	 gardener	 sowing	 the	 seeds.	 These	 two
things	 are	 enough.	 Then	 when	 the	 right	 climate	 and	 the	 right	 season	 comes,
those	seeds	start	sprouting.	And	once	a	seed	has	sprouted	the	flowering	is	not	far
away,	it	is	very	close.	The	real	problem	is	the	beginning	of	the	sprout	--	the	death
of	the	seed	into	the	soil.
Once	the	seed	has	died	it	means	the	ego	has	died.
The	 seed	 is	 covered	with	 a	 hard	 shell	 and	 that	 is	 our	 ego.	Once	 the	 ego	 is	 no
more	there	our	intrinsic	qualities	start	growing.
So	you	have	to	do	these	two	things:	be	loving	and	be	grateful.	And	then	nature
takes	 care	 of	 everything	 else	 of	 its	 own	 accord.	You	 need	 not	worry,	 you	 can
trust	the	whole.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010155
ShortTitle:	THUNK15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(A	musician	from	Denmark,	Martin	becomes	a	divine	warrior.)	The	sannyasin	is
a	 divine	warrior.	He	 does	 not	 fight	 for	 anything	worldly,	 his	 fight	 is	with	 his
inner	 darkness.	 He	 fights	 for	 light,	 for	 consciousness,	 for	 enlightenment	 --
neither	 for	 power	 nor	 prestige	 nor	 money.	 He	 fights	 to	 realise	 his	 potential
because	that	is	the	only	way	to	know	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	moment	you	have	 realised	your	potential	god	 is	 revealed.	And	unless	you
know	god	 --	 and	 by	 'god'	 I	mean	 the	whole,	 the	 essential	 core	 of	 existence	 --
unless	 we	 know	 it	 our	 life	 remains	 a	 hell.	 Knowing	 it	 transforms	 hell	 into
heaven.	 Everything	 remains	 the	 same	 but	 we	 are	 transformed,	 our	 vision	 is
transformed.
(John	is	a	freelance	writer	and	an	opera	singer.	Osho	reminds	him,	in	explaining
the	meaning	of	Dhyan	John,	that	meditation	is	the	most	valuable	of	all	the	gifts
God	 bestows	 on	 us.)	 Even	 life	 is	 not	more	 valuable	 than	meditation.	 Love	 is
there,	bliss	 is	 there,	beauty	 is	 there,	but	meditation	 is	 the	highest	gift.	 It	 is	 the
greatest	 gift	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 if	 meditation	 happens	 then	 all	 else
happens	 of	 its	 own	 accord.	With	meditation	 you	 become	 really	 alive,	 you	 are
born	 anew.	You	 become	 flooded	with	 bliss,	 you	 become	 simply	 loving	 for	 no
motive.	Your	 life	 becomes	 radiant,	 it	 starts	 having	 the	 quality	 of	 godliness.	 It
blooms;	 the	 flower	 of	 your	 being	 opens	 and	 the	 fragrance,	 the	 imprisoned
splendor,	 is	 released.	But	 it	all	happens	 through	meditation.	So	 there	are	many
gifts	but	nothing	compared	to	the	gift	of	meditation.
It	is	a	gift,	remember;	it	is	not	an	achievement.	But	also	remember	that	one	has
to	prepare	oneself	 to	 receive	 the	gift.	That	 is	 your	 achievement	 --	 preparation.
Without	the	preparation	the	gift	will	not	reach	you.
Even	if	it	comes	you	will	not	be	able	to	recognize	it.	It	may	have	already	come
but	you	will	have	ignored	it.
Unless	you	are	ready	to	receive	it	--	alert,	aware,	watching,	waiting	prayerfully	--
you	will	go	on	missing	it.	So	there	are	two	parts	in	meditation.	The	first	part	is
your	 achievement.	 That	 means	 creating	 a	 quiet,	 silent	 mind,	 creating	 a	 space
within	 you	 --	 it	 is	 too	 full	 of	 junk	 --	 throwing	 all	 the	 junk	 outside,	 making
yourself	 spacious	 inside.	 That	 is	 your	 achievement.	 And	 whenever	 you	 have
done	it	the	gift	comes.	That	is	the	second	part	of	meditation.
The	 first	part	 is	man's	 achievement,	 the	 second	part	 is	 a	gift	 from	God.	Those
who	have	done	the	first	part	become	ready	to	receive	the	second	part.	That's	why
it	is	said	that	meditation	is	an	effortless	effort.
When	 one	 hears	 it	 for	 the	 first	 time	 it	 looks	 like	 an	 absolute	 contradiction:
"effortless	effort?"	 It	 is	effort	and	yet	effortless.	The	 first	part	 is	effort	and	 the
second	part	is	effortless.
So	one	has	to	do	much,	remembering	always	that	all	this	doing	is	only	preparing
the	ground,	and	then	when	the	ground	is	ready	one	has	to	wait.	Wait	for	the	right
moment,	 because	 there	 is	 never	 any	 injustice	 in	 existence.	 Whenever	 your
readiness	has	come	 to	 the	 right	point,	 to	 the	 right	degree,	 immediately	 the	gift
arrives;	instantaneously	it	arrives.
(Ib	is	the	father	of	Danish	sannyasin,	Lena.	Osho	explains	the	origin	of	his	name
as	derived	from	two	sources.	In	Welsh	it	comes	from	Ivor,	which	means	god	or
lord,	and	 in	Hebrew	 it	 comes	 from	Abraham.)	The	Hebrew	Abraham	becomes
Ibrahim	in	Arabic	and	Ib	is	the	first	part	of	Ibrahim.	Ibrahim	is	the	ancientmost
religious	person	in	the	Judaic	tradition,	hence	he	is	called	the	father.	He	founded
the	first	mystery	school,	the	first	religious	tradition	in	the	West.
Both	meanings	are	beautiful.	Ibrahim	is	the	first	prophet	of	god,	and	one	can	be
a	prophet	of	god	only	if	one	has	realised	god.	Unless	one	becomes	god	himself
one	 cannot	 be	 a	 prophet.	Unless	 one	 becomes	 one	with	 the	 divine	 one	 cannot
deliver	 the	message	of	 the	divine.	Only	 in	 that	oneness	does	 the	message	 start
flowing.
Your	name	will	mean	bliss	 is	god,	or	godliness	 to	be	more	precise,	 to	be	more
exact.	The	quality	that	comes	closest	to	god	is	bliss.	Love	also	comes	very	close
because	of	bliss	--	because	love	creates	bliss.
Meditation	also	comes	very	close	but	because	of	bliss.	Beauty	also	comes	very
close	but	because	of	bliss.	If	we	look	at	all	the	doors	of	the	temple	of	god	they
are	 very	 different	 --	 the	 door	 called	 love,	 the	 door	 called	meditation,	 the	 door
called	beauty.	The	poet	 enters	 from	 the	door	of	beauty.	Any	creater	 --	 painter,
musician,	sculptor	--	enters	from	the	door	of	creativity.
But	one	thing	is	common	and	that	is	bliss.	Whether	you	are	a	painter	or	a	poet	or
a	 dancer	 or	 a	musician,	 whether	 you	 are	 a	meditator	 or	 a	 lover,	 whether	 you
practise	yoga	or	zen,	 it	does	not	matter,	one	 thing	 is	essential:	whatsoever	you
are	doing,	its	centre,	the	axle,	always	remains	bliss.	The	wheel	may	be	different
but	 the	wheel	 is	 not	 significant.	The	unchanging	axle	 is	 significant	 and	 that	 is
always	bliss.
The	poet	finds	 it	 in	poetry,	 the	painter	 in	painting,	 the	meditator	 in	meditation,
the	lover	in	love,	but	it	is	always	bliss.	Hence	bliss	is	syonymous	with	godliness.
To	become	absolutely	blissful	is	to	become	divine.
Hence	 I	 don't	 teach	 renunciation;	 I	 teach	 rejoicing.	 Rejoice	 more	 and	 more
because	only	when	you	are	throbbing	with	joy	do	you	ride	on	that	wave	of	bliss
and	start	coming	closer	to	god.	When	the	wave	of	bliss	is	a	tidal	wave	it	can	land
you	on	the	farther	shore,	the	ultimate	truth,	god,	nirvana	or	whatsoever	one	may
choose	 to	 call	 it.	But	 it	 is	 always	 the	 tidal	wave	of	 bliss	 that	 takes	 you	 to	 the
farther	shore.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Osho	has	fun	with	Diotama's	name.	He	even	mentions	it	again	in	discourse	the
following	morning!)	Dhyano	means	meditation.	Diotama	has	two	meanings.	The
first	 is	very	beautiful.	It	means	priestess	of	 love,	but	 the	second	is	 just	far	out!
(laughter)	The	second	means	a	 jar	with	a	neck	and	 two	handles.	That's	what	a
woman	 really	 is!	 (much	 laughter)	 That	 is	 the	 actual	 meaning,	 but	 through
meditation	the	second	meaning	is	possible:	the	jar	with	a	neck	and	two	handles
can	become	a	priestess	of	love,	because	meditation	is	an	alchemical	process.	It
transforms	the	lowest	into	the	highest.
But	 ninety-nine	 point	 nine	 per	 cent	 of	 women	 remain	with	 the	 first	meaning;
they	 never	 reach	 the	 second.	 Becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 means	 now	 the	 second
meaning	has	to	be	enquired	into,	realised.	It	is	potentially	there.	And	whenever	a
woman	becomes	self-realised	her	realisation	is	more	full	of	love	than	any	man's
can	ever	be.
Whenever	a	man	achieves	the	ultimate	he	calls	it	truth.	Whenever	a	woman	has
achieved	 the	 ultimate	 it	 has	 always	 been	 known	 as	 love;	 that	 is	 the	 woman's
approach.	But	 it	 is	 the	 same	experience.	Truth	 seems	 to	be	 a	 little	 dry,	 desert-
like;	love	is	an	oasis.	Love	is	full	of	song,	joy,	dance	and	celebration.
Millions	 of	 woman	 have	 missed	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 have	 been
following	Jesus,	Buddha,	Zarathustra,	Lao	Tzu	--	and	 they	all	 talk	about	 truth,
obviously.	Their	very	language	is	male-oriented,	and	to	a	woman	the	very	word
'truth'	falls	flat;	it	has	no	meaning.	Just	utter	the	word	'love'	and	suddenly	a	bell
starts	 ringing	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 a	 woman.	 Because	 all	 the	 founders	 of	 the	 great
religions	were	men,	women	have	missed.
My	effort	here	is	to	put	the	balance	right.	I	would	like	many	woman	sannyasins
to	become	enlightened
--	 this	 will	 be	 happening	 for	 the	 first	 time	 --	 so	 that	 the	 other	 approach	 also
becomes	very	clear.	Women	need	not	go	on	following	something	which	does	not
fit	with	their	deepest	longing,	which	remains	a	little	distant.
I	don't	feel	truth	can	ever	be	very	close	to	a	woman;	some	distance	will	remain.
She	can	try	to	reach	it	--
and	many	women	have	tried	and	a	few	of	them	have	even	reached	to	the	ultimate
peak.	But	they	remain	secondary,	they	are	bound	to.	They	cannot	compete	with	a
Buddha.	Even	 if	 they	 realise	 truth,	even	after	 their	 realisation,	 their	expression
will	remain	very	ordinary	compared	to	Buddha,	because	what	he	has	found	fits
with	his	whole	being.	And	for	a	woman	truth	remains	a	little	bit	alien,	strange.
Only	love	can	release	the	woman	and	her	energies.
So	here	I	am	trying	to	give	men	their	methods	and	to	woman,	a	totally	different
approach.	Yes,	 there	are	a	 few	men	who	would	 like	 to	move	 through	 love	and
there	 are	 a	 few	 women	 who	 would	 like	 to	 move	 through	 truth.	 Those	 are
exceptions,	they	need	not	be	counted;	they	only	prove	the	rule.
So	 whenever	 a	 man	 becomes	 realised	 he	 becomes	 s	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 he
becomes	 a	 prophet	 of	 truth,	 but	whenever	 a	woman	 achieves	 she	 is	 bound	 to
become	a	priestess	of	love.
Diotama	is	a	beautiful	name,	but	remember	both	meanings!	The	first	has	 to	be
changed	and	the	second	has	to	be	achieved.
(Ingrid	becomes	Prem	Sugandho	--	love	fragrance.)
Love	is	more	like	fragrance	than	like	a	flower.	A	flower	has	a	form	--	but	every
form	gives	a	limitation	and	love	is	unlimited,	hence	it	can't	have	any	form.
The	flower	has	colour,	the	fragrance	is	colourless.	Every	colour	makes	you	one-
dimensional,	but	colourlessness	makes	you	multi-dimensional.	And	 love,	 to	be
truly	 love,	 has	 to	 be	 formless,	 unlimited,	 multi-dimensional.	 If	 it	 is	 linear	 it
becomes	lust;	if	it	is	multi-dimensional,	it	becomes	prayer.	It	is	the	same	energy
--	love.	The	lowest	it	can	fall	is	lust	and	the	highest	it	can	rise	is	prayer.
The	 energy	 is	 not	 different,	 it	 is	 the	 same	 ladder.	 Lust	 is	 the	 lowest	 rung	 and
prayer	is	the	highest	rung.
The	name	of	the	ladder	is	love;	it	is	all	the	rungs	from	the	lowest	to	the	highest.
That's	what	I	mean	when	I	say	it	is	multi-dimensional,	formless.
But	 because	of	 our	 unawareness	we	 try	 to	 give	 it	 a	 form,	 a	 colour,	 a	 shape,	 a
limit.	We	 try	 to	create	a	boundary,	and	 the	more	we	succeed	 in	doing	 this,	 the
more	love	is	going	to	disappear,	it	will	die.	It	has	to	be	a	bird	on	the	wing,	in	the
sky	 --	you	cannot	encage	 it.	Even	 if	you	make	a	golden	cage	you	will	kill	 the
bird.
The	bird	in	the	cage	and	the	bird	in	the	open	sky	are	not	the	same;	they	are	two
different	phenomena.
They	 look	 alike	 but	 the	 bird	 on	 the	 wing,	 in	 the	 winds,	 in	 the	 clouds,	 has
freedom,	 and	because	of	 freedom	 it	 has	bliss.	The	bird	 in	 the	 cage	only	 looks
formally	the	same	but	it	has	no	sky,	no	freedom,	no	bliss.	And	birds	don't	bother
much	about	whether	the	cage	is	made	of	gold	or	iron,	whether	it	is	studded	with
diamonds	or	 just	a	poor	thing	--	 it	does	not	matter.	These	foolish	things	matter
only	to	man.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Words	like	 'diamond'	and	'gold'	are	human	inventions;	to	birds	they	don't	mean
anything.	What	matters	 is	 freedom,	and	 that	 is	destroyed.	Love	 is	a	bird	and	 it
loves	to	be	free.	It	needs	the	whole	sky	to	grow.
So	remember	never	to	encage	it,	never	to	imprison	it,	never	to	give	it	a	limit	and
a	 form,	 a	 shape,	 a	 name,	 an	 address,	 a	 label	 --	 never.	 Just	 let	 it	 remain	 a
fragrance,	invisible,	and	then	it	can	take	you	on	its	wings	to	the	ultimate.
(An	indicator	as	to	his	path	is	Ed's	new	name,	Sagarprem.	It	means	love	for	the
oceanic,	for	the	unbounded.)
Anything	 that	 has	 a	 boundary	 will	 imprison	 you.	 All	 boundaries	 have	 to	 be
transcended,	surpassed.
When	you	have	come	to	a	point	where	no	boundary	to	your	being	exists,	when
you	 simply	 are	 without	 any	 definition	 --	 neither	 Hindu	 nor	 Christian	 nor
Mohammedan,	 neither	German	 nor	American	 nor	Canadian,	 neither	 black	 nor
white,	neither	man	nor	woman,	neither	communist	nor	fascists...	when	you	have
transcended	all	these	boundaries	of	the	body	and	the	mind	you	enter	an	oceanic
world.	And	that's	the	search	of	sannyas:	to	go	on	surpassing	till	nothing	is	left	to
surpass,	only	then	know	that	you	have	come	home.
Before	 that	everything	is	a	caravanserai.	You	can	stay	to	rest	but	don't	cling	to
anything,	 nothing	 is	 your	 home,	 just	 an	 overnight	 stay	 and	 remember	 in	 the
morning	you	have	to	go.
So,	 there	 is	no	need	 to	cling,	no	need	 to	become	attached	 to	anything.	Remain
unattached	 so	 that	 your	 flow	 is	 not	 hindered.	 Remain	 like	 a	 river.	 It	 passes
through	many	many	 territories.	 In	 the	mountains	 it	comes	 from	the	Himalayan
peaks,	it	passes	virgin	snow.	If	it	clings	it	will	remain	there.	And	it	is	beautiful	--
those	virgin	peaks,	that	virgin	snow	has	a	purity,	an	innocence,	a	beauty.	But	the
river	moves.	It	passes	through	many	beautiful	valleys,	mountains,	forests	but	it
goes	on	moving.	It	passes	through	many	beautiful	scenes	but	without	clinging;	it
goes	on	and	on	till	it	reaches	the	ocean.
Be	like	a	river	--	flowing,	never	getting	attached,	otherwise	you	will	become	a
pond.	And	a	pond	can	never	reach	the	ocean,	only	a	river	can.	So	remain	open-
ended	 and	go	on	 flowing.	 If	 one	 can	 continue	 to	 flow	one	has	 understood	 the
meaning	of	 sannyas.	 If	 one	 can	 remain	 a	 river	 in	 life	 one	has	 experienced	 the
innermost	core	of	sannyas.	Then	the	ocean	is	not	far	away.	Howsoever	far	away
it	is,	it	is	not	far	away.
(To	a	psychology	teacher	Osho	gives	the	name	Prem	Sugatha.)	Prem	means	love.
Sugatha	 means	 a	 beautiful	 story.	 Life	 can	 either	 be	 a	 tragi	 dy	 or	 it	 can	 be	 a
beautiful	love	story.	Either	it	can	be	just	a	series	of	miseries,	nightmares	or	it	can
be	just	a	continuum	of	celebration.
It	all	depends	on	us	,	what	we	make	out	of	it.	It	is	an	empty	canvas.	We	have	to
paint	it.	We	can	make	a	monster	on	the	canvas	and	can	become	frightened	by	it
or	we	can	create	a	beautiful	sunset	or	flowers	and	we	can	be	enchanted	by	it.
Remember:	man	comes	 into	 the	world	as	an	empty	canvas.	God	does	not	give
any	programme	to	you,	you	are	not	programmed.	There	is	nothing	like	fate;	it	is
the	 invention	 of	 the	 cowards,	 it	 is	 the	 invention	 of	 people	 who	 don't	 want	 to
make	anything	out	of	 their	 life	--	who	are	so	 lazy,	so	cowardly,	 that	 they	don't
want	to	take	any	risk.	They	throw	the	whole	responsibility	on	god.	They	call	it
fate,	kismet,	karma	and	thousands	of	names,	but	all	are	basically	tricks	to	avoid
the	responsibility	that	'My	life	is	my	responsibility.
Whatsoever	 I	 am	 I	 have	 made	 it	 that	 way	 and	 whatsoever	 I	 am	 going	 to	 be
tomorrow	I	am	creating	today.
Nothing	can	be	done	about	yesterday;	 there	 is	no	need	 to	bother	about	 it,	 it	 is
finished.	But	today	is	still	available	and	out	of	 today	all	 the	tomorrows	will	be
coming.	And	if	one	is	alert	just	a	small	touch	can	change	the	whole	story.
Two	 small	 boys	were	 talking;	one	boy	was	 the	 son	of	 a	great	painter.	He	 said
'My	father	is	such	a	great	artist.	Just	the	other	day	I	was	watching	him	painting.
He	painted	 a	picture	 and	 the	man	was	 looking	 so	miserable	 that	 I	 said	 to	him
"Father,	why	are	you	making	him	so	miserable?"	He	said	"Okay,	I	will	change
it."	And	with	just	one	stroke	of	his	brush	the	man	started	smiling!'	And	the	other
boy	 said	 'That's	 nothing,	my	mother	 does	 it	 every	 day:	without	 even	 having	 a
paintbrush,	 just	 one	 stroke	 and	 she	 can	make	me	 cry	 or	weep.	 That's	 nothing
much.	Not	even	a	stroke,	just	the	way	she	looks	is	enough.'
We	are	absolutely	responsible	for	whatsoever	we	are.	By	becoming	a	sannyasin
this	is	the	first	thing	to	accept,	that	'Whatsoever	I	am	is	my	responsibility.'	But	in
it	 there	 is	 freedom.	 In	 the	 beginning	 it	 hurts	 because	 the	 ego	 feels	 badly
shattered:	 'Is	 it	my	 own	 responsibility?	 So	 I	 have	made	 this	whole	mess,	 this
whole	 chaos	 that	 I	 am?'	 It	 hurts	 the	 ego,	 but	 if	 we	 understand	 it	 then	 it	 can
become	the	beginning	of	a	new	life.	And	just	a	few	strokes	and	the	sad	face	can
become	 a	 smiling	 face.	 Just	 a	 few	 strokes,	 just	 little	 bits	 of	 changes	 here	 and
there	and	the	ugly	painting	can	become	a	beautiful	painting.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 art	 of	 painting	 rightly,	 meditatively,	 so	 that	 life	 can	 be	 a
continuously	growing	love,	bliss,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
dance.	Unless	 it	 becomes	 the	very	crescendo	of	 joy,	one	has	 failed.	But	 it	 can
become	so	because	death	is	not	 the	end	of	 life	but	 the	highest	peak	of	 life,	 the
very	 summum	bonum	of	 life.	 In	 a	 single	moment	of	death	 the	person	 tells	his
whole	story,	whether	he	has	lived	authentically	or	inauthentically,	whether	he	has
lived	lovingly	or	violently,	whether	he	has	lived	out	of	silence	or	has	been	just
insane.	The	moment	of	death	expresses	his	whole	life	condensed.	And	we	have
to	prepare	for	that	moment.
But	whatsoever	we	 have	 to	 do	 has	 to	 be	 done	 today,	 because	 yesterday	 is	 no
more	and	tomorrow	has	not	come	yet.
All	that	is	available	to	us	is	today,	but	today	is	enough.
(Change	 your	 orientation	 from	 accumulation	 to	 transformation,	 Osho	 tells
Anandgyan.)	Change	only	one	thing,	change	from	misery	to	bliss.	from	sadness
to	 celebration.	And	 it	 can	 be	 done	 very	 easily	 because	misery	 is	 an	 unnatural
thing.
We	are	making	such	a	hard	effort	to	remain	miserable.	People	don't	see	it.	When
they	do	they	will	laugh	at	the	whole	ridiculousness	of	what	they	have	been	doing
to	 themselves.	 They	 are	 really	 doing	 great	 work	 to	 create	 misery	 in	 every
possible	way.	 They	 don't	miss	 a	 single	 opportunity;	 they	 jump	 upon	 anything
that	can	make	thorn	miserable.
This	 approach	 has	 to	 be	 changed.	And	 life	 gives	 both	 opportunities	 to	 you.	 It
gives	you	the	day,	it	gives	you	the	night,	it	gives	you	the	thorns	and	the	roses,	it
gives	you	both	opportunities.	And	it	is	always	balanced,	it	is	always	fifty-fifty;	it
depends	 on	 you	 what	 you	 choose.	 And	 the	 miracle	 is	 that	 if	 you	 choose	 the
thorns	sooner	or	later	you	will	find	there	are	no	flowers	because	your	mind	will
become	accustomed	only	to	thorns.	You	will	only	be	able	to	see	thorns,	you	will
miss	the	flowers;	you	will	simply	not	take	any	note	of	them.	And	the	person	who
chooses	flowers,	the	same	happens	to	him:	he	starts	forgetting	about	thorns,	he
takes	no	note	of	them.	His	approach	becomes	so	positive	and	so	affirmative	that
his	whole	arithmetic	is	different.
There	are	people	who	have	invented	the	saying	that	every	dark	cloud	has	a	silver
lining,	and	there	are	people	who	say	that	every	silver	lining	has	a	dark	cloud	to
it.	Both	are	 right.	 I	am	not	saying	 that	any	one	person	 is	 right	and	 the	other	 is
wrong;	both	are	right.	But	the	problem	arises	of	what	it	is	going	to	give	to	you.
There	are	people	who	think	there	is	only	one	day	between	two	nights	and	there
are	people	who	think	there	is	only	one	night	between	two	days.	Both	are	right;	so
far	as	being	right	is	concerned	there	is	no	problem,	but	what	is	it	going	to	do	to
you?	If	you	think	in	a	negative	way	then	your	life	will	be	a	misery	and	how	can	a
miserable	 person	 be	 religious?	What	 has	 he	 to	 thank	 god	 for?	Only	 a	 blissful
person	 can	 be	 religious	 because	 he	 has	 so	much	 to	 thank	 god	 for.	 Every	 day
flowers	go	on	showering	on	him.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 very	 beautiful	 rabbi	who	 fell	 from	 a	 one-hundred-storey
building.	The	rabbi	was	well-known;	all	over	the	building	everybody	knew	him.
And	people	 looked	 from	 their	windows	 and	 they	 asked	 'How	are	you'	And	he
said	'So	far,	so	good!'	He	went	on	falling,	saying	'So	far,	so	good!'
That	is	 the	right	thing	so	far,	so	good.	And	who	cares	what	is	going	to	happen
next?	--	if	it	is	going	to	happen	it	is	going	to	happen.	But	the	man	who	can	say
'So	far,	so	good,'	till	the	very	end,	his	end	will	also	be	totally	different	because	it
will	be	the	accumulation	of	his	whole	approach.	It	cannot	come	from	nowhere,	it
comes	from	his	being:	his	death	will	also	be	beautiful.
(Osho	names	Erik,	Swami	Raidas	after	an	Indian	mystic.	Although	he	was	of	the
same	 calibre	 as	 Buddha,	 Nanak	 and	 Kabir,	 he	 is	 not	 so	 well	 known,	 Osho
explains,	because	he	was	poor;	in	fact	he	was	an	illiterate	cobbler.)
In	India	to	be	a	cobbler	means	to	be	an	untouchable.
That	 is	one	of	 the	greatest	misfortunes	 that	has	happened	to	India;	almost	one-
third	 of	 the	 population	 is	 rejected,	 as	 if	 they	 are	 not	 human	 beings.	 They	 are
living	not	as	part	of	society	but	as	outsiders,	on	the	fringes.	They	are	not	even
allowed	to	live	in	the	villages;	they	have	to	live	outside	the	villages.
For	centuries	these	poor	untouchables	were	not	allowed	to	drink	from	the	same
well	as	the	whole	village	drank	from.	They	were	not	allowed	to	move	on	certain
streets,	they	were	not	allowed	to	come	into	the	villages	in	the	daylight,	or	if	they
had	to	they	had	to	declare	that	they	were	coming	--	'Please	move	yourself	away'	-
-	because	even	their	shadow	was	thought	to	be	evil.	If	their	shadow	fell	on	you
you	had	to	take	a	bath	to	purify	yourself.	This	is	the	ugliest	thing	that	India	has
done.
Raidas	belonged	 to	 those	poor	people,	hence	he	never	became	famous	 --	 there
was	no	possibility.	But	he	was	of	the	same	status	as	Buddha,	Krishna,	Mahavira.
His	statements	are	very	simple,	that	of	an	illiterate	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
person,	 but	 very	 straightforward	 too,	 very	 clear-cut	 --	 no	 philosophising,	 no
going	round	and	round	in	circles.
His	 statements	 are	 few	 but	 they	 go	 direct,	 like	 an	 arrow,	 and	 simply	 hit	 your
heart.	He	used	to	sing	and	dance	his	songs.	Whosoever	was	courageous	enough
to	come	to	him	would	come.
This	man,	Raidas,	had	only	one	message	and	that	was:	if	you	can	dance	and	sing
totally,	forgetting	yourself,	lost	in	the	dance	and	the	song,	you	have	entered	into
god.	And	 that's	my	message	 too.	Dropping	 the	 ego	by	any	 strategy	 is	 enough.
The	moment	you	drop	 the	ego,	 the	moment	you	forget	yourself...	Not	 that	you
become	unconscious	or	you	fall	into	a	coma,	it	is	simply	that	self-consciousness
is	no	more	there.
Consciousness	is	there	more	than	ever	but	there	is	no	self,	no	ego.	In	that	very
moment	the	meeting	with	god	happens.
So	 his	whole	message	was	 to	 dance	 so	 totally,	 to	 sing	 so	 totally,	 that	 the	 ego
could	be	forgotten	and	you	would	enter	into	god.	There	is	no	need	to	go	to	the
temple,	he	said,	there	is	no	need	to	worship	any	idol,	there	is	no	need	to	perform
any	ritual;	do	only	one	thing:	whatsoever	you	are	doing	do	it	so	totally	that	you
are	 immersed	 in	 it.	 And	 that	 very	 action	 becomes	 prayer,	 that	 very	 activity
becomes	meditation.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010165
ShortTitle:	THUNK16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	explains	to	an	Indian	woman	--	a	lawyer	working	in	Nairobi	--	his	concept
of	sannyas	as	opposed	to	the	old	idea.)
The	 old	 idea	 is	 basically	 life-negative.	 My	 approach	 is	 absolutely	 life-
affirmative.	 To	 me	 life	 is	 god,	 hence	 life	 has	 not	 to	 be	 renounced	 but	 lived
intensely,	passionately,	 totally.	 It	 is	only	by	going	deeper	 into	 life	 that	one	can
come	to	god	--	there	is	no	other	way.
The	old	 idea	was	cowardly,	 it	was	rooted	in	fear.	 It	was	escapist,	and	escaping
from	the	challenging	world	is	missing	the	whole	opportunity	of	being	born	into
it.	God	gives	the	whole	opportunity	of	life	in	existence	and	we	renounce	it.	We
are	 trying	 to	prove	 that	god	 is	wrong.	The	opportunity	has	 to	be	used	because
only	by	using	 it	will	we	become	enriched.	Our	 intelligence	will	 be	 sharpened,
our	being	will	be	integrated.	The	more	one	passes	through	the	storms	of	life,	the
more	one	becomes	centred.	The	only	way	to	go	beyond	life	is	to	go	through	it.
Secondly,	 the	 old	 idea	 of	 sannyas	was	 to	 impose	 certain	 rules	 and	 regulations
upon	yourself,	to	try	to	cultivate	a	character.	I	am	against	cultivating	a	character.
Character	should	come	spontaneously.	A	cultivated	character	is	a	pseudo	thing	--
it	has	to	be	avoided.	It	is	false;	it	may	look	like	the	real	coin	but	it	is	not	the	real
coin,	 it	 may	 even	 look	 golden	 but	 it	 is	 not	 gold.	 And	 never	 forget	 the	 old
proverb:	All	that	glitters	is	not	gold.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	you	cultivate	a	character	of	course	you	will	be	respectable,	but	respectability
nourishes	 the	 ego	 and	 nothing	 else	 --	 and	 ego	 is	 the	 problem.	 You	 will	 be
honoured	by	people,	you	will	be	thought	of	as	a	sage	or	a	saint,	a	holy	man	or
woman.	But	deceiving	others	is	not	going	to	help	ultimately.	Before	god	you	will
be	standing	naked,	naked	of	all	cultivated	character.	You	will	have	to	show	your
true	 colours.	 So	 it	 is	 better	 not	 to	 miss	 the	 precious	 time,	 not	 to	 waste	 the
precious	time	in	false	coins.	When	the	real	can	be	found	why	settle	for	the	false?
And	thirdly,	because	my	sannyas	is	not	escapist	and	because	it	does	not	approve
of	any	cultivated	character,	any	morality,	it	has	to	depend	on	only	one	thing,	and
that	is	meditation.	So	my	whole	idea	of	sannyas	is	synonymous	with	meditation.
The	whole	energy	has	to	be	put	into	only	one	thing:	how	to	be	silent,	and	silent
in	the	noisy	world,	how	to	be	without	mind	in	the	thick,	crowded	marketplace.
It	is	easy	to	be	silent	in	the	Himalayas;	the	Himalayas	give	you	the	false	idea	that
the	 silence	 is	 yours;	 it	 is	 simply	 part	 of	 the	 Himalayas.	 You	 can	 live	 in	 the
borrowed	glory,	but	when	you	come	back	down	to	the	world	it	will	all	be	gone,	it
will	be	shattered.
So	 I	 am	not	 in	 favour	 of	moving	 into	 certain	 situations	whore	 silence	 is	 easy.
Rather,	 live	 in	 all	 the	 situations	 where	 silence	 is	 really	 difficult.	 Take	 the
difficulty	 as	 a	 challenge.	And	 it	 is	 not	 destructive	 to	 silence.	Once	 you	 know
how	to	create	meditativeness,	how	to	create	awareness,	once	you	know	how	to
watch	your	mind	 in	 a	 cool	 dispassionate	way,	 then	nothing	distracts	 you.	And
when	nothing	distracts	only	then	is	something	real	there.
If	 these	 three	 things	 are	 remembered	 then	 nothing	 else	 is	 needed.	One	 comes
slowly,	gradually,	 to	 the	ultimate	 resting	place,	 to	 the	 full-stop	of	 all	birth	and
death.	One	becomes	part	of	the	whole	and	the	eternal
--	and	that	is	the	goal.
(Osho	says	about	purity	what	he	had	said	earlier	this	month	about	compassion	--
that	 it	can	be	cultivated	as	part	of	one's	character	or	be	 the	natural	outcome	of
meditation.	 He	 addresses	 Dhyan	 Kathryn.)	 Morality	 cannot	 transform	 your
being.	It	is	just	a	kind	of	painted	face,	it	is	a	beautiful	mask.	The	problem	is	that
one	can	be	deceived	by	it.	Others	will	be	deceived	--	that's	simple	because	they
will	see	your	mask	as	your	face	--	but	if	you	live	with	the	mask	long	enough	and
you	never	 know	your	 original	 face	without	 the	mask,	 then	 there	 is	 the	 danger
that	 you	may	 get	 deceived	 by	 it	 yourself;	 you	may	 start	 thinking	 that	 you	 are
it.And	that's	a	great	tragedy	because	you	are	not	it.	It	 is	not	your	original	face,
you	have	simply	made	it.
The	 second	 and	 the	 right	 approach	 is	 not	 through	 morality	 but	 through
meditation.	 Meditation	 means	 discovering	 your	 original	 face	 first.	 The	 most
fundamental	 thing	 for	 a	 sannyasin	 is	 to	 discover	 his	 original	 face.	 The	 Zen
people	say	discover	the	face	that	you	had	before	your	parents	were	born	--	not
just	before	you	were	born	but	before	your	parents	were	born	--	or	discover	the
face	you	will	have	when	you	die	and	your	body	 is	burned	and	nothing	 is	 loft.
Discover	what	face	you	will	have	then.	And	that	is	your	face	own	now.
That	which	was	with	you	before	birth	and	that	which	will	be	after	death	is	there
like	an	undercurrent	and	that	is	your	true	reality.	And	it	can	be	discovered.
It	is	just	like	water	underneath	the	earth:	you	can	make	a	well,	you	can	dig	a	well
and	you	can	find	the	undercurrent	of	water.Just	a	few	layers	of	the	earth	have	to
be	removed.
The	process	of	morality	and	meditation	are	opposite,	diametrically	opposite.	In
morality	 you	go	on	putting	more	 layers	 upon	yourself,	 in	meditation	you	 start
discarding	 layers.	 In	 meditation	 you	 discard,	 in	 morality	 you	 accumulate.	 In
meditation	you	are	just	doing	the	same	thing	as	when	you	peel	an	onion	--	it	is	a
peeling.	Layer	by	layer	you	go	on	throwing	away	until	nothing	is	left.
Buddha	 is	 reported	 to	have	 said	 that	your	hands	are	 full	 only	when	nothing	 is
left.	And	he	is	right.	When	the	onion	has	been	peeled	totally	and	all	 the	layers
have	been	thrown	away	then	what	is	left?	But	that	nothing	is	your	original	face
and	 that	 nothing	 is	 absolute	 purity.	 Not	 a	 cultivated	 purity	 but	 a	 spontaneous
purity	welling	up	from	your	deepest	core.
At	 the	 deepest	 core	we	 are	 just	 absolute	 so	 pure	 --	 pure	 space.	And	once	 that
pure	 space	 is	 discovered	 your	 whole	 life	 is	 transformed.	 Then	 whatsoever	 is
right	 is	 done	 spontaneously	 and	 whatsoever	 is	 not	 right	 i8	 not	 done
spontaneously.	There	are	no	commandments	guiding	you.	You	have	clear	vision,
you	have	your	own	perspective;	you	go	accordingly.
A	truly	religious	person	is	absolutely	free	from	all	outer	commandments,	who	is
moral	but	in	a	totally	different	sense	from	the	so-called	moralists.	His	morality	is
not	 imposed,	 it	 is	 spontaneous.	And	whenever	something	 is	 spontaneous	 it	has
tremendous	beauty.
These	 three	 qualities	 are	 associated	with	 the	 name	 of	Kathryn:	 first	 is	 beauty,
second	is	grace,	third	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
devotion.	If	one	discovers	one's	original	face	for	the	first	time	one	knows	one's
beauty	 and	 the	 tremendous	 gift	 of	 god	 and	 one	 feels	 the	 grace	 --	 because	we
don't	deserve	it	and	god	goes	on	showering	more	and	more	gifts.
When	you	are	absolutely	empty	then	gifts	go	on	arriving	every	moment	from	all
directions	and	dimensions.	One	cannot	be	thankful	enough;	the	grace	is	infinite.
And	 out	 of	 this	 beauty	 and	 the	 experience	 of	 grace,	 devotion	 arises.	 That
devotion	is	neither	Christian	nor	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan,	it	has	nothing	to	do
with	any	creed,	any	dogma,	any	priesthood.	One	simply	feels	like	bowing	down
to	 existence	 --	 to	 the	 trees,	 to	 the	 stars,	 to	 the	moon,	 to	 the	 sun.	One	 feels	 so
grateful	that	there	is	nothing	to	say;	all	words	fall	short.	One	cannot	even	utter	a
prayer.	One	is	prayerful	but	one	cannot	say	a	prayer;	saying	anything	seems	to
be	so	futile,	so	inadequate.	That	is	devotion.
Devotion	 is	 prayerfulness,	 so	 deep	 and	 so	 profound,	 so	 overflowing,	 that
language,	mind,	 thoughts,	 are	 left	 far	 behind.	 It	 is	 such	 a	 flood	 of	 love	 that	 it
takes	away	everything.	One	is	washed	totally	clean.	This	is	the	new	birth	Jesus
calls	the	second	childhood.
Jesus	says	unless	you	are	born	again	you	shall	not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of	god.
This	is	the	birth	he	is	talking	about.	Sannyas	has	to	be	just	the	beginning	of	this
birth	process.
(Prem	 Gabriele	 means	 love	 is	 the	 messenger	 of	 god,	 Osho	 likens	 love	 to	 a
rainbow	because	it	is	a	bridge	between	the	earth	and	the	heavens.)
It	is	only	through	love	that	one	can	understand	what	god	is.	And	when	one's	love
is	perfect	then	one	becomes	a	vehicle	for	god	in	the	world.	Then	whatsoever	one
says	is	divine,	whatsoever	one	does	is	divine,	then	whatsoever	one	is,	is	divine.
To	be	a	messenger	of	god	simply	means	to	be	full	of	love.	It	is	so	simple	and	so
natural	 to	 be	 full	 of	 love	 but	 we	 go	 on	 missing	 because	 we	 put	 so	 many
conditions	on	love.	And	love	can	exist	only	unconditionally.
The	moment	you	put	a	condition	on	it	you	have	already	poisoned	it.	The	moment
you	demand	something	out	of	love	you	are	butchering	it,	killing	it.
Everybody	wants	to	love	and	everybody	wants	to	be	loved	but	very	rarely	have
people	experienced	 the	 joy	of	 love,	 the	music	of	 love,	 the	godliness	of	 love	 --
very	 rarely,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 everybody	 learns	 love	 from	 the	parents.
They	 don't	 know	what	 love	 is	 and	 they	 go	 on	 putting	 conditions	 on	 the	 small
child.
The	mother	says	 'If	you	do	this	only	then	will	I	know	that	you	love	me.	If	you
don't	 do	 this	 then	 it	 is	 certain	 that	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 love	 for	me.	 Love	me
because	 I	 am	your	mother.'	There	 is	 a	 because;	 they	go	on	giving	motives	 for
love.	And	the	child	is	not	left	to	himself	so	that	he	can	love	when	he	feels	like
loving;	ho	has	to	pretend.	When	he	does	not	feel	 like	loving	he	has	to	create	a
facade	because	the	mother	is	powerful	and	the	father	is	powerful	and	he	has	to
show	his	love.	So	rather	than	being	loving	he	becomes	a	showman,	he	becomes	a
diplomat,	 a	politician.	Each	child	 is	destroyed	by	 the	parents,	 converted	 into	a
politician.	He	starts	learning	the	tricks	of	how	to	pretend,	how	to	smile.
When	the	child	smiles	at	the	mother	she	good,	and	the	child	starts	knowing	that
if	 he	 wants	 to	 do	 business	 with	 his	 mother	 he	 has	 to	 smile.	 The	 truth	 is
something	else.	Why	the	child	smiles	for	the	first	time	has	been	a	long-debated
question.	My	own	understanding	is	that	the	moment	his	eyes	become	fixed	and
for	the	first	time	he	sees	his	mother	and	his	father,	they	look	so	ridiculous	that	he
starts	laughing.	It	is	nothing	else.
But	the	mother	feels	great	and	the	father	feels	great:	look	--	their	child	is	smiling
at	 them.	They	don't	know	the	 real	 thing,	otherwise	 they	would	 feel	very	angry
about	why	the	child	is	smiling.	But	by	and	by	the	child	learns	that	a	smile	is	like
a	 bribe.	 He	 is	 helpless	 and	 his	 parents	 exploit	 his	 helplessness.	 They	 go	 on
putting	 their	 numbers	 on	 the	 child.	By	 the	 time	 he	 becomes	 strong	 enough	 to
stand	on	his	own	legs	he	has	already	been	corrupted.
Now	 for	 the	whole	 of	 his	 life	 he	will	 go	 on	 playing	 games	 and	 he	will	 never
know	authentic	 love.	Of	course	he	will	be	miserable	because	without	 love	you
cannot	be	blissful.	Of	course	he	will	not	have	any	sense	of	god.	He	may	believe
in	god	and	he	may	go	 to	 the	church	and	 to	 the	 temple	--	because	 that	has	also
been	 imposed	 on	 him,	 that	 he	 is	 a	 Christian	 or	 a	Hindu,	 that	 he	 has	 to	 go	 to
church;	he	will	say	his	prayers.
It	will	all	become	routine	and	ritual	and	he	will	perform	it.	It	gives	him	a	good
feeling	that	he	is	doing	everything	that	is	expected	of	him.	But	it	is	not	related	to
his	being;	hence	his	life	becomes	a	hypocrisy.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 unlearn	 all	 these	 tricks	 that	 they	 had	 to	 learn	 in	 their
childhood.	All	that	childhood	have	to	be	erased	totally,	cancelled,	so	that	one	can
become	innocent	again	and	one	can	start	from	ABC.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	even	once	if	a	 little	bit	of	real	 love	happens	 to	you,	you	will	be	surprised
how	much	joy	it	brings	and	how	much	awareness	and	how	much	meaning	and
significance	--	and	one	has	moved	towards	god.	God	is	the	ultimate	meaning.
Love	is	the	beginning	of	the	journey	and	god	is	the	end	of	the	journey.
(Osho	gives	 the	college	professor	 from	America	 the	name	Ma	Anand	Pritama,
and	 explains	 its	 meaning,	 that	 in	 being	 blissful	 one	 becomes	 a	 beloved	 of
existence.)	 The	 miserable	 person	 has	 to	 live	 a	 lonely	 life.	 Existence	 cannot
commune	with	the	miserable	person,	the	trees	cannot	say	hello	to	him,	the	stars
cannot	whisper	to	him,	the	winds	cannot	dance	around	him.	He	is	so	miserable
that	the	whole	existence	is	bound	to	ignore	him.
Misery	is	bound	to	be	ignored,	at	the	most	tolerated,	because	the	whole	existence
is	 full	 of	 bliss	 and	 to	 be	 miserable	 is	 to	 be	 out	 of	 step.	Where	 everybody	 is
dancing	and	singing	and	you	are	just	sitting	like	a	Christian	saint	or	a	Hindu	holy
man,	you	are	out	of	step.	These	dancers	and	singers	can	at	the	most	tolerate	you.
They	 will	 have	 to	 ignore	 you	 because	 even	 your	 presence	 is	 annoying,	 it	 is
irritating.
Just	 think	 of	 a	 Christian	 saint	 sitting	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 my	 sannyasins.	 My
sannyasins	can	at	the	most	do	one	thing	--	forget	all	about	him,	because	his	very
presence	will	be	an	irritant.	He	will	be	sitting	there,	holier-than-thou,	egoistic,	a
deep	 condemnation	 in	 his	 eyes.	 The	 miserable	 person	 is	 always	 in	 deep
condemnation.	He	cannot	be	grateful,	he	cannot	be	respectful,	he	cannot	accept
the	 other	 person's	 individuality;	 he	 wants	 to	 impose	 himself	 on	 them.	 He	 is
miserable	and	he	wants	everybody	else	to	be	miserable	too,	only	then	can	he	be
happy.
The	moment	 you	 are	 blissful	 the	whole	 existence	 starts	 coming	 closer	 to	 you.
You	are	becoming	part	of	the	dance,	you	are	joining	the	dance.	Hence	my	whole
effort	here	 is	 to	help	you	 to	be	blissful,	 to	help	you	 to	 laugh	with	existence	 --
with	 no	 desire	 to	 impose	 yourself	 upon	 anybody.	 Living	 moment	 to	 moment
rejoicing	 in	 small	 things	 is	what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about.	And	 then	miracles	 start
happening.	The	whole	existence	starts	pouring	its	 love	on	you.	One	becomes	a
beloved	only	by	being	blissful.
(Nirmal	Premo	--	innocent	love.)
Love	 cannot	 be	 calculating.	 If	 it	 is	 it	 is	 not	 love.	 It	 can	 only	 be	 innocent,
uncalculating,	 illogical.	 Love	 cannot	 be	 cunning	 and	 clever;	 it	 is	 really	 a	mad
affair.	 But	 blessed	 are	 those	 who	 are	 capable	 of	 being	 madly	 in	 love	 with
existence	 because	 those	 are	 the	 few	 chosen	 people	 who	 come	 to	 know	 the
ultimate	 truth.	 Truth	 is	 not	 known	 through	 logic,	 it	 is	 not	 known	 by	 the
philosophers;	it	is	known	only	by	the	lovers.
But	love	has	to	be	innocent.	Love	has	to	be	just	an	opening	of	the	heart	in	trust,
risking	 --	 because	 there	 is	 a	 danger	 that	 you	 may	 be	 exploited.	 But	 my
observation	 is	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 exploited	 than	 to	 be	 cunning,	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be
betrayed	 than	 to	 be	 cunning.	 One	 loses	 nothing	 by	 being	 exploited	 or	 being
betrayed;	one	loses	certainly	something	by	being	cunning.
What	 can	 people	 exploit?	Maybe	 they	 can	 take	 your	 money,	 maybe	 they	 can
steal	your	clothes,	maybe	you	will	not	have	so	many	gadgets,	you	may	not	have
a	big	house	to	live	in	--	but	these	are	non-essential	things.	But	you	will	have	a
bigger	soul	if	not	a	bigger	house,	you	will	have	a	richer	soul	if	not	a	richer	bank
balance.	And	that	is	of	real	value.
So	 I	 suggest	 to	my	 sannyasins:	 be	 innocent.	Even	 if	 you	 are	 destroyed	by	 the
cunning	world	 that	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	worried	 about,	 because	 by	 being	 innocent
you	will	find	the	indestructible	in	you,	you	will	find	god.	And	it	is	worth	risking
everything	for	that.
Sannyas	is	an	adventure	in	love,	in	trust,	in	surrender.	It	is	not	for	the	cowards;	it
is	only	for	the	courageous	few.
Be	courageous	and	you	will	be	rewarded	infinitely,	but	those	rewards	will	be	of
the	inner	kingdom.
(A	 man	 without	 meditation	 is	 like	 a	 house	 without	 a	 light,	 Osho	 tells	 Jyoti
Dhyan.)	With	meditation	your	 inner	 light	starts	burning,	your	being	becomes	a
flame,	exactly,	literally	a	flame	--
and	it	is	no	ordinary	flame	either.	It	has	a	few	extraordinary	things	about	it.	One
is	that	it	burns	but	it	has	no	fuel,	hence	it	cannot	be	extinguished.	Once	it	is	there
it	is	forever.
Secondly,	it	is	smokeless,	it	does	not	create	any	smoke.	Smoke	is	created	only	by
the	 fuel.	The	more	 refined	 the	 fuel	 is	 the	 less	 smoke	 is	created;	 the	cruder	 the
fuel,	the	more	smoke.	But	if	there	is	no	fuel	at	all	there	is	no	smoke.	Meditation
is	a	flame	without	smoke,	hence	it	gives	you	an	absolute	clarity.
Once	the	light	is	there	inside	you	your	whole	world	becomes	luminous.	Nothing
changes	on	the	outside,	everything	remains	the	same,	yet	it	is	no	more	the	same
because	now	you	can	see	in	a	totally	different	light	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
which	you	had	never	 seen	 in	 before,	They	 are	 the	 same	 flowers	 but	 now	 they
have	a	beauty,	something	psychedelic;	 they	are	 the	same	stars,	 the	same	rocks,
the	same	rivers,	but	because	you	have	a	new	vision,	a	freshness,	an	aliveness,	the
whole	existence	comes	alive.
This	coming	alive	of	existence	 is	what	 is	meant	by	 the	word	 'god'.	God	means
the	coming	alive	of	the	whole	of	existence.	But	if	you	are	dead,	if	 the	flame	is
not	 there	and	you	are	 just	 like	a	dark	hole,	 then	how	can	you	experience	god?
God	is	light,	you	have	to	be	light	in	your	own	small	way.	God	is	love,	you	have
to	be	love	in	your	own	small	way.	God	is	life,	you	have	to	be	alive	in	your	own
small	way	--	only	then	can	life	commune	with	life,	can	love	commune	with	love,
can	light	commune	with	light.
(Osho	 talks	 again	 of	 the	 difference	 between	 knowledge	 and	 wisdom,	 but	 this
time	from	a	slightly	different	angle.)
Love	cleanses	you	of	all	rubbish	--	and	there	is	much	rubbish	inside.	Everybody
is	almost	a	British	Museum;	all	kinds	of	rubbish	is	collected	there.	They	say	that
the	British	Museum	has	so	many	books	that	if	you	go	on	putting	one	book	next
to	the	other	they	will	go	around	the	earth	three	times.	But	that	is	nothing	because
when	 I	 see	 people...	 if	 you	 put	 their	 rubbish	 together	 it	will	 go	 three	 hundred
times	around	the	earth.
It	is	almost	infinite.
There	 are	 only	 two	 things	 that	 are	 infinite:	 the	 wisdom	 of	 a	 Buddha	 and	 the
ignorance	of	a	fool.	These	two	things	are	infinite,	there	is	no	beginning,	no	end
to	them.	But	this	whole	nonsense	can	be	thrown	out.
All	that	is	needed	is	a	new	functioning	within	you.	Right	now	only	the	head	is
functioning,	the	heart	is	in	a	state	of	non-functioning.	It	has	to	be	changed.	The-
heart	 has	 to	 become	 functioning	 and	 the	 head	 has	 to	 become	non-functioning,
then	 you	 are	 immediately	 transported	 into	 another	 world	 and	 wisdom	 arises.
When	there	is	wisdom	you	can	start	using	the	mind	again,	but	now	the	mind	will
be	a	servant,	not	a	master,	because	the	master	will	have	come	in.	Now	you	will
be	able	to	use	the	servant	and	now	the	mind	can	be	of	immense	value,	of	great
utility,	but	it	will	be	a	beautiful	servant,	a	mechanism,	nothing	more	than	that.
Right	now	the	mechanism	has	become	the	master.	The	servant	 is	pretending	to
be	 the	master	 and	 the	master	 is	 fast	 asleep	 in	 the	 heart.	 The	master	 has	 to	 be
awakened,	and	love	is	just	the	awakening	of	the	heart,	the	awakening	of	trust.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 change	of	 the	gestalt;	 the	 energy	has	 to	move	 from	 the	heart	 not
from	the	head.	It	comes	from	your	being,	it	should	go	through	the	heart.	First	it
should	be	refined	by	your	love,	it	should	be	made	fragrant	by	your	love,	and	then
it	can	reach	the	head.	Then	it	will	have	enough	understanding	and	wisdom	to	use
the	head.
But	 society	 has	 been	 trying	 to	make	 a	 special	 arrangement	 in	 every	 person:	 it
avoids	the	heart,	it	tries	to	join	the	being	and	its	energy	directly	to	the	head,	then
the	head	becomes	the	master.	And	nobody	leaves	their	mastery	easily,	hence	the
meditator	has	 to	 struggle,	 to	 fight,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 fight	 for	 freedom,	 it	 is	 a	 fight	 to
come	out	of	a	prison.
Sannyas	means	that	now	you	will	dedicate	your	life,	your	energy,	to	this	struggle
for	ultimate	freedom.
Logic	has	to	be	dropped	and	love	has	to	be	revived.	The	revival	of	love	becomes
a	resurrection.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010175
ShortTitle:	THUNK17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Barbara	means	a	stranger,	and,	coming	with	joy.	Osho	relates	both	meaning	to
meditation.	 )	 Man	 can	 live	 either	 through	 thoughts	 or	 directly,	 without	 the
mediation	of	 thoughts	 .	To	 live	 through	 thoughts	 is	 to	 live	very	half-heartedly,
because	then	the	contact	with	life	is	only	partial.	Thoughts	function	as	barriers	,
they	don't	allow	much	of	reality	to	enter	you,	and	even	if	they	do	allow	it	they
distort	 it.	 They	 are	 constantly	 making	 commentary	 on	 it	 ,	 they	 are	 giving	 it
colour	 and	meaning	 of	 their	 own.	 They	 don't	 allow	 it	 in	 its	 authenticity;	 they
falsify.
To	 live	without	 the	mediation	 of	 thought	 is	meditation	 --	 to	 live	 immediately,
directly,	putting	the	mind	aside.	When	Jesus	says	to	the	devil	 'Leave	me	alone,
go	behind	me,'	 in	 a	metaphorical	way	he	 is	 talking	 about	 the	mind:	Leave	me
alone,	go	behind	me,	don't	come	in	front	of	me.	There	is	no	other	devil	except
the	mind.	That	is	an	ancient	way	of	saying	it.	He	is	saying	'Let	me	live	directly.	I
don't	need	your	interpretation.
I	want	to	see	reality	as	it	is,	utterly	naked'	--	and	to	experience	reality	in	its	total
nakedness	is	to	know	god.
Barbara	 is	 a	Greek	 name.	 It	 has	 two	meanings;	 both	 are	 significant.	One	 is	 a
stranger.	 The	 man	 of	 meditation	 becomes	 a	 stranger	 in	 the	 world	 because
everybody	 is	 living	 through	 the	mind	and	he	 is	 living	without	 the	mind.	He	 is
moving	with	people	who	will	not	be	able	to	understand	his	language.	He	will	be
able	 to	 understand	 their	 language	 because	 he	 has	 lived	 their	 way	 too.	 He	 has
known	both	lives,	life	with	the	mind	and	life	without	the	mind,	hence	he	will	be
able	 to	understand	 them	but	 they	will	not	be	able	 to	understand	him,	They	are
bound	 to	 crucify	 such	 a	 man,	 they	 will	 be	 afraid	 because	 he	 is	 an	 absolute
stranger.
If	you	know	only	Chinese	and	you	come	to	India	where	nobody	knows	Chinese,
you	are	not	such	a	stranger;	at	least	you	can	manage	through	gestures.	The	basic
gestures	 are	 the	 same.	 If	 you	 are	 thirsty	 you	 can	 make	 a	 gesture,	 if	 you	 are
hungry	you	can	make	a	gesture,	if	you	want	to	sleep	you	Can	make	a	gesture.
Slowly	 slowly	 you	 can	 get	 people	 to	 understand	 you	 and	 you	 can	 understand
them.	A	bridge	is	possible.
Even	if	some	day	man	reaches	a	planet	where	he	finds	a	totally	different	kind	of
people,	there	will	still	be	a	possibility	to	Communicate.	But	when	a	Buddha	or	a
Jesus	or	a	Zarathustra	walks	on	earth	he	is	really	an	outsider.	He	Cannot	make
any	gestures	because	the	thing	that	he	has	come	to	know	is	inexpressible	in	any
way,	by	any	means,	hence	he	looks	very	dangerous,	so	different	--	qualitatively
different.
But	 these	outsiders	 are	 the	 salt	of	 the	earth.	There	 is	 some	 joy	on	earth,	 some
song,	 some	 splendour	 because	 of	 these	 few	 outsiders.	 They	 have	 brought
something	of	god	into	the	world,	something	of	the	beyond	to	the	earth.	Of	course
they	 have	 suffered	much;	 still	 they	 have	 given	 to	 the	world	 that	which	 is	 the
greatest	treasure.
And	hence	the	second	meaning;	the	second	meaning	is	coming	with	joy.	Only	a
man	 of	 meditation	 can	 become	 a	 vehicle	 for	 joy,	 for	 bliss,	 for	 celebration.
Meditation	 makes	 him	 a	 stranger	 in	 the	 world	 but	 at	 the	 same	 time,
simultaneously	makes	him	immensely	blissful.	Even	if	you	take	his	life	he	loses
nothing	because	he	has	attained	to	something	which	is	far	more	than	life	itself;
he	has	found	eternal	life.
(The	Dutch	name,	Joop,	comes	from	Joseph;	and	Osho	sees	significance	in	the
fact	that	Jesus	was	born	of	Joseph	--	a	name	which	means	faithfulness	and	trust.)
I	 don't	 believe	 in	 all	 that	 nonsense	 about	 Jesus	 being	 born	 through	 the	 holy
ghost,	 that	 he	 was	 born	 out	 of	 a	 virgin	 mother.	 He	 was	 the	 son	 of	 the	 poor
carpenter	Joseph.	It	takes	on	a	significant	meaning:	a	man	like	Jesus	can	be	born
only	out	of	trust,	out	of	faithfulness.
Whenever	a	person	attains	to	Christ-consciousness	he	attains	it	through	trust	and
faith.	But	remember	trust	and	faith	are	not	at	all	concerned	with	belief.
Belief	is	of	the	head	and	trust	--	or	faith	--	is	of	the	heart.	Belief	is	an	idea,	faith
is	an	emotion.	The	very	word	 'emotion'	 is	 significant;	 it	means	 that	which	can
move	 you,	 e-motion.	 Belief	 cannot	move	 you,	 you	 remain	 the	 same.	You	 can
believe	in	the	Bible	or	in	the	Koran	or	in	the	Gita	--	you	remain	the	same.	Your
belief	never	changes	anything	in	you;	in	fact	belief	is	a	way	of	avoiding	change.
It	is	the	way	of	the	coward	and	the	cunning.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Only	trust,	faith,	can	transform	you	because	it	starts	moving	in	your	heart.	Your
heart	 starts	 beating	with	 a	 new	 rhythm.	 A	 new	 source	 of	 joy,	 of	 knowing,	 of
being,	opens	up	with	the	faith.	Belief	is	repression	of	doubt	and	faith	is	knowing
of	 the	 truth.	Belief	 remains	 ignorant,	 truth	 is	 full	 of	 light,	 the	 light	 that	 comes
through	knowing.
Know	the	truth	and	you	will	find	great	trust	--	or	allow	trust	to	happen	and	you
will	find	truth.	It	works	both	ways,	one	can	begin	from	either	end.
(Osho	 mentions	 the	 concept	 of	 Gurdjieff's	 work	 in	 his	 next	 address.	 First	 he
begins	by	talking	about	meditation.)
Meditation	 is	 a	 battle	 against	 darkness.	 It	 is	 an	 inner	 battle.	You	have	 to	 fight
against	all	that	is	dark	in	you.	You	have	to	dispel	all	darkness,	you	have	to	create
more	 and	 more	 light,	 awareness,	 alertness,	 attentiveness,	 so	 that	 night
disappears.	This	darkness	that	exists	in	everybody	is	really	ancient,	very	ancient,
it	may	be	thousands	of	lives	old.	But	one	thing	is	good,	that	howsoever	old	the
darkness	is,	even	a	small	candle	can	dispel	it.
Meditation	 is	 only	 a	 small	 candle	 in	 the	 beginning	 but	 it	 ends	 finally	 as
thousands	of	suns	rising	within	you.	Just	a	small	fire	is	enough	to	put	the	whole
forest	alight,	but	it	 is	a	battle	because	you	have	to	fight	to	reclaim	the	territory
that	has	become	darkness.
Man	 is	 just	 like	an	 iceberg,	only	one-tenth	 is	 above	 the	 level	of	 the	water	and
nine-tenths	is	below.
One-tenth	 of	 our	 being	 is	 conscious,	 nine-tenths	 is	 unconscious,	 and	 the	 one-
tenth	 has	 to	 fight	 against	 the	 nine-tenths.	 It	 is	 a	 great	 battle	 but	 light	 has	 the
quality	 intrinsic	 to	 winning.	 Light	 is	 always	 fighting	 a	 winning	 battle	 and
darkness	 is	 always	 fighting	 a	 losing	 battle.	 Darkness	 cannot	 win	 by	 its	 very
nature.	That's	the	only	hope	--	but	it	is	a	great	hope.
Begin	 the	 journey	 into	 sannyas	 with	 this	 hope,	 with	 tremendous	 joy.	 A	 great
future	is	possible,	a	transformed	life,	a	luminous	life,	but	work	is	needed.	In	the
East	we	have	one	word,	'sadhana'.	It	is	untranslatable	into	English,	but	Gurdjieff
has	coined	a	word	which	comes	very	close	to	it.	He	used	to	call	it
'the	work',	the	work	of	inner	transformation.
In	the	Gurdjieffian	circles	what	is	called	the	work	is	exactly	what	we	have	called
sadhana	in	the	East,	the	fight	to	move	beyond	darkness	into	the	realms	of	light,
the	fight	to	move	beyond	death	into	the	world	of	immortality,	the	fight	to	move
beyond	 untruth	 into	 the	 world	 of	 ultimate	 truth	 --	 because	 except	 for	 truth
nothing	liberates.
(The	 art	 of	 loving	 is	 not	 so	much	 a	 question	 of	 accumulating	 anything	 but	 of
discarding	many	things,	Osho	tells	Prem	Suviro.)
The	greatest	courage	in	life	is	to	drop	the	ego,	and	the	moment	one	drops	the	ego
love	arises.	One	cannot	practise	love,	a	practised	love	is	bound	to	be	false.	One
cannot	do	anything	positively	for	love	because	love	is	bigger	than	us.	What	can
we	do?	Love	has	to	do	something	for	us,	we	cannot	do	anything	for	love.	We	are
just	small	waves	in	the	ocean	of	love.	What	can	the	wave	do?	It	can	dance	with
joy	 in	 the	sun,	 in	 the	wind,	 in	 the	 rain;	while	 it	 is	 there	 it	can	dance,	 it	comes
dancing,	it	goes	dancing.	All	that	the	wave	can	do	is	celebrate	the	moment,	but
the	ocean	can	do	much	for	the	wave	because	the	ocean	is	the	source.
Love	is	synonymous	with	god.	Love	is	as	vast	as	god	so	we	cannot	do	anything
positively.	Anything	done	by	us	will	be	smaller	than	us.	So	the	only	course	left	is
to	remove	the	barriers;	hence	the	whole	work	of	moving	into	the	world	of	love	is
negative.	 Drop	 the	 ego	 --	 that	 is	 negative.	 Drop	 possessiveness	 --	 that	 is
negative.	Drop	jealousy	--	that	is	negative.	Drop	hatred	--	that	is	negative.	Drop
anger	--	that	is	negative.	All	these	are	negatives,	but	if	we	can	manage	to	do	all
these	 negatives	 the	 ultimate	 positive	 arises	 of	 its	 own	 accord.	And	when	 love
comes	 of	 its	 own	 accord	 it	 is	 infinite.	 And	 only	 the	 infinite	 can	 make	 one
fulfilled,	 less	 than	 that	 won't	 do.	 We	 are	 not	 made	 for	 that.	 Our	 innermost
longing	is	for	the	infinite,	the	unbounded,	the	eternal.
Courage	 is	 needed	 to	 destroy	 the	 barriers.	We	 cling	 to	 the	 barriers.	Man	 is	 so
stupid	he	clings	to	the	ego	and	loses	the	tremendous	ecstasy	of	love.	He	clings	to
small	 jealousies	 --	 absolutely	absurd.	 In	your	 saner	moments	you	even	see	 the
absurdity	of	them,	but	when	those	insane	moments	take	grip	of	you,	you	forget
all	your	understanding.
What	are	we	trying	to	possess?	In	this	world	we	come	empty	handed	and	we	go
empty	handed	so	what	is	the	point	of	being	possessive?	Just	because	one	has	mot
a	person	on	the	way,	just	because	for	two	hours	you	have	been	walking	together
on	the	same	road,	in	the	same	direction,	is	it	right	to	start	claiming	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
possession?
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 all	 our	 relationships.	 A	 son	 is	 born	 --	 it	 is	 just	 being
together	on	the	road	of	infinity.	There	is	no	need	to	possess	him.	Rejoice	in	being
together,	share	your	joy,	but	don't	possess	him.
The	moment	the	child	is	possessed,	the	child	is	paralysed,	crippled.	You	meet	a
person	 and	 you	 feel	 great	 love	 and	 immediately	 possessiveness	 comes	 in.
Remember,	 just	 a	moment	 before	 you	were	 not	 even	 acquainted	 and	 still	 you
were	there	and	the	other	person	was	there.	Nobody	is	indispensable	for	anybody.
You	have	existed	up	to	now	and	the	other	has	existed.	Just	as	a	moment	before
you	were	not	 together,	 there	 is	every	possibility	after	a	 few	moments	you	may
not	be	 together	again.	So	why	insist	 that	now	you	always	have	 to	be	 together?
That	will	destroy	things,	that	will	make	slaves	out	of	you	--	and	nobody	likes	a
slave.
Everybody	hates	both	slavery	and	the	person	who	is	creating	the	slave.	One	may
say	 so;	 one	may	 not	 say,	 but	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 erupt	 in	many	ways:	 in	 anger,	 in
hatred,	in	conflict.
If	you	see	people	who	are	in	love	you	will	be	surprised	--	 they	fight	over	such
stupid	 things	 that	 one	 cannot	 believe	 that	 these	 people	 are	 sane,	 and	 still	 they
believe	that	they	are	in	love.
Love	 exists	 but	 between	 love	 and	 the	 world	 there	 are	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
barriers.	And	by	the	time	love	reaches	the	other	it	is	no	more	love,	it	has	become
something	else.
Remove	the	barriers	--	that	is	why	courage	is	needed.	And	remember	that	we	are
basically	alone.	So	it	is	good	to	enjoy	when	we	are	together	--	with	the	son,	with
the	 friend,	with	 the	husband,	with	 the	wife,	with	 the	 father,	with	 the	mother	 --
enjoy	and	 feel	grateful,	obliged,	 that	 somebody	walked	by	your	 side	 for	a	 few
hours,	a	few	days,	a	few	months.	But	there	is	no	need	to	demand	anything,	there
is	no	point	in	demanding.
We	have	no	right	 to	demand.	When	love	 is	undemanding	 it	 is	 love.	When	it	 is
just	given	with	no	idea	of	any	return	it	becomes	divine.
That's	the	way	of	the	truly	religious	person.	That's	the	way	of	my	sannyasin.
(Her	new	name	,	Anand	Pathika,	is	to	remind	the	Turkish	sannyasin	that	she	is
now	on	the	path	of	bliss.)	Bliss	 is	 the	keyword	to	be	remembered.	Whatsoever
you	do,	do	it	blissfully.	Since	you	are	doing	it,	why	not	do	it	blissfully?	Either	do
it	or	don't	do	it.	If	you	have	decided	to	do	it	then	do	it	blissfully.	And	by	doing
anything	blissfully	small	things	become	tremendously	beautiful.
It	is	not	a	question	of	what	you	are	doing,	the	real	question	is	how	you	are	doing
it.	 Prayer	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 going	 to	 church	 or	 the	 temple.	You	 can	 just
wash	the	floor	and	it	can	be	prayer	if	it	is	done	blissfully,	joyously.	You	can	cook
--	 a	 friend	 is	 coming,	 a	 guest	 is	 coming,	 then	 a	 very	 ordinary	 thing,	 cooking
something	for	the	guest,	for	the	friend,	starts	having	a	spiritual	dimension.
Spirituality	is	not	other-worldliness.	Spirituality	is	a	way	of	living	in	this	world
meditatively,	totally,	blissfully.	It	is	not	against	this	world;	in	fact	it	enhances	this
world,	enriches	this	world,	it	makes	this	world	more	beautiful,	more	blissful.	But
religions	 up	 to	 now	have	 done	 just	 the	 opposite.	They	 have	made	 this	 earth	 a
hell.	 I	 hold	 the	 so-called	 religions	 absolutely,	 categorically	 responsible	 for	 the
misery	that	exists	in	the	world.
If	they	had	really	worked	in	the	right	direction	they	would	have	transformed	the
whole	world	into	paradise.	But	 they	thought	paradise	was	somewhere	above	in
the	sky	so	they	were	in	a	hurry	to	reach	there	before	others...	and	they	have	to
stand	 in	 the	queue.	Everybody	was	 in	a	hurry	 to	reach	 there	and	nobody	cared
about	this	world.	And	this	is	the	world	which	can	be	transformed	either	into	hell
or	heaven;	it	all	depends	on	how	people	live.
My	sannyasins	have	to	give	a	new	perspective	to	humanity,	a	new	spirituality,	a
new	meaning,	to	the	very	world	of	spirituality,	a	new	insight	as	to	what	it	means
to	be	religious.	It	simply	means	to	be	blissful	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	of	course
one	cannot	be	in	a	church	twenty-four	hours	a	day	so	life	has	to	be	transformed.
Religion	 cannot	 be	 a	 separate	 thing	 from	 life,	 it	 has	 to	 spread	 all	 over	 life.
Sitting,	 walking,	 sleeping,	 eating,	 swimming	 --	 each	 small	 act	 has	 to	 be
transformed	into	something	sacred.	That's	what	I	call	the	path	of	bliss.
(Osho	warns	Gyan	Atita	about	the	danger	of	mistaking	knowledge	for	knowing.)
The	 first	 step	 of	 sannyas	 is	 to	 go	 beyond	 knowledge.	Knowledgeability	 is	 the
greatest	sin.	It	hinders	one's	growth	more	than	anything	else	because	it	gives	you
a	false	notion	that	you	know	--	and	you	know	not.
It	 is	 like	 a	 person	 suffering	 from	 cancer	 but	who	 believes	 that	 he	 is	 perfectly
healthy:	just	by	his	belief	the	cancer	is	not	going	to	change.	His	belief	is	going	to
do	 only	 one	 thing;	 he	 will	 not	 go	 to	 any	 physician,	 he	 will	 not	 take	 any
treatment;	he	will	miss	that	moment	when	it	is	curable	and	the	cancer	will	go	on
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
growing.	It	does	not	bother	about	your	belief.
Knowledge	hides	your	 ignorance.	And	the	 thicker	 the	knowledge	becomes,	 the
more	 you	 are	 oblivious	 of	 your	 real	 state.	 Hence	 I	 say	 the	 first	 step	 of	 a
sannyasin	is	to	throw	off	this	whole	blanket	of	knowledge.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 cover	 yourself;	 it	 is	 better	 to	 know	 that	 you	 are	 ignorant,
because	 from	 that	 knowing	 the	 journey	 begins.	 One	 cannot	 remain	 with
ignorance.	 If	one	knows	one	 is	 ignorant,	one	starts	searching	for	ways,	means,
devices,	to	get	rid	of	ignorance.
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 hiding	 it,	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 destroying	 it.	 Meditation
destroys	 ignorance	 and	 knowledge	 covers	 it.	Knowledge	 is	 deceptive.	 It	 gives
you	an	illusion	of	something	that	you	are	not,	of	somewhere	you	are	not	and	it
keeps	you	unaware	of	the	place	where	you	are.	Meditation	simply	reveals	to	you
where	you	are,	what	you	are,	and	out	of	that	insight	the	journey	begins.	You	start
moving	more	and	more	deeply	into	meditation,	more	and	more	into	silence.	And
a	 moment	 comes	 when	 the	 silence	 is	 profound;	 it	 becomes	 a	 flame	 and	 all
ignorance	is	burned,	is	dispersed.
Transcend	knowledge	if	you	want	to	be	wise.	If	you	want	to	remain	a	fool	then
go	 on	 collecting	 knowledge.	 Fools	 are	 great	 scholars,	 fools	 are	 great	 pundits.
They	are	great	fool-osophers.	Avoid	fool-osophy,	be	innocent	like	a	child.
(Nigel,	a	social	psychologist	from	England.	is	given	the	name	Anand	Bhajan	--	a
sacred	 song	 of	 bliss.)	 There	 is	 a	 difference	 between	 an	 ordinary	 song	 and	 a
sacred	song.	The	difference	is	not	of	words,	the	difference	is	not	of	composition;
the	difference	 is	 somewhere	within	you,	not	 in	 the	 song	 itself.	One	can	 sing	a
film	 song	 in	 a	 sacred	way,	 then	 it	 becomes	 a	 bhajan.	And	 one	 can	 sing	 a	 so-
called	sacred	song	in	such	a	stupid	way	that	it	becomes	very	mundane.
My	emphasis	 is	 always	on	you,	 not	what	 you	do	but	what	 you	 are,	From	you
comes	the	quality.	You	are	the	source,	the	song	becomes	what	you	are.
I	 see	 these	Hare	Krishna	people,	 they	 think	 they	are	 singing	devotional	 songs,
sacred	 songs.	 I	 have	 seen	many	 kinds	 of	 fools	 in	 the	world	 but	Hare	Krishna
people	are	at	the	top,	nobody	can	defeat	them,	they	are	so	stupid.	I	always	feel
that	this	man,	Prabhupad,	must	have	had	in	him	a	magnetic	energy	that	attracted
fools,	because	I	have	never	come	across	a	single	Hare	Krishna	person	who	has
any	intelligence.	It	seems	his	appeal	was	only	for	the	unintelligent.	They	go	on
singing	sacred	songs	but	their	singing	is	just	like	parrots.
You	can	teach	parrots	anything.
A	 mother	 found	 out	 that	 her	 small	 child	 was	 teaching	 their	 parrot	 four-letter
words.	She	was	of	course	very	angry	and	she	said	'What	are	you	doing?	teaching
four-letter	words	 to	 the	 parrot?'	 He	 said	 'No,	Mummy,	 I'm	 simply	 telling	 him
"These	are	the	words	you	are	not	to	use!"	Just	the	way	you	tell	me	these	words
are	not	to	be	used,	I'm	telling	the	parrot!'
The	mother	has	 taught	 the	child,	now	 the	child	 is	 teaching	 the	parrot.	And	 the
parrot	will	 learn.	This	 is	how	mischief	goes	on	passing	from	one	generation	to
another	generation.
For	a	song	to	be	sacred	two	things	are	needed.	One	is	silence	in	your	heart.	That
is	not	possible	without	meditation.	And	the	second	is	blissfulness.	Silence	alone
won't	do.	 It	may	be	 there	but	 it	will	not	explode	 into	songs.	When	silence	and
bliss	meet	then	there	is	bhajan,	the	sacred	song.	The	meeting	point	of	silence	and
bliss	creates	a	miracle;	your	song	has	something	of	your	silence	and	something
of	your	bliss	together.
Then	whatsoever	you	sing...	you	may	simply	utter	nonsense	words	but	they	will
have	sacred	quality.
A	Christian	 sect	 uses	 a	 certain	 beautiful	method	 --	 I	 like	 it.	 It	 is	 one	 --	 of	 the
secrets	 that	 has	 been	 followed	 by	 many	 mystics	 down	 the	 ages.	 It	 is	 called
glossolalia.	One	simply	relaxes,	becomes	silent,	and	then	whatsoever	comes	one
allows	it	--	gibberish,	nonsense	words,	sounds.	One	has	not	to	prevent	anything.
one	has	to	enjoy	whatsoever	is	coming.	The	word	'gibberish'	comes	from	a	great
mystic's	name;	his	name	was	Jabar,	a	Sufi	mystic.
You	 ask	 him	 a	 very	 rational	 question	 and	 he	will	 utter	 some	 absurd	words	 or
meaningless	 sounds,	 you	 cannot	 figure	 out	what	 he	 is	 saying,	what	 he	means.
But	you	can	see	his	joy	and	you	can	see	his	silence.
That	is	his	message,	whatsoever	the	question,	that	is	his	answer.	It	is	from	Jabar
that	the	English	word
'gibberish"	has	arisen.	Gibberish	is	called	glossolalia,	a	divine	language,	by	this
certain	sect	of	Christians.
You	are	not	speaking,	something	is	speaking	through	you.	You	are	simply	silent,
then	an	urge	arises	in	you	to	shout	--	you	shout.	An	urge	arises	in	you	to	jump
and	you	jump,	and	you	jog	and	you	dance.	You	simply	follow	the	inner	feel,	and
then	it	is	bhajan,	then	it	is	sacred.
And	that	has	to	be	the	method	for	you.	I	have	been	watching	you	--	it	is	possible
for	you,	you	can	become	a	Jabar.	Try	it!	--	How	long	will	you	be	here?	--	About
six	months.	--	Do	some	gibberish.
(The	group	laughs.	From	Bhajan	there	is	a	pause	of	disbelief.)	--	What	now?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Osho	chuckles.)
Right	 now!	 (With	 scarcely	 a	moment's	 hesitation,	 Bhajan	 closes	 his	 eyes	 and
babbles	incoherently	for	a	few	seconds,	then	breaks	off	suddenly	in	laughter.)	--
Good.	You	will	be	able	to	do	it.	Good!
(Dhyan	Deva.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Deva	means	god.)
The	way	to	god	is	meditation.	Meditation	means	a	state	of	no-mind.	Mind	is	the
way	to	the	outside	world	and	no-mind	is	the	way	to	the	inside	world.	If	you	want
to	approach	the	world	you	have	to	become	more	and	more	of	a	mind.	That's	what
a	 scientist	 becomes:	more	 and	more	 a	mind,	To	 reach	 farther	 into	 the	 exterior
reality,	that	is	the	only	way.	For	science	it	is	the	only	valid	method.
But	 if	 you	 want	 to	 go	 inwards	 you	 have	 to	 retrace	 your	 steps,	 you	 have	 to
become	less	and	less	of	a	mind.	Then	the	ultimate	change,	you	start	becoming	a
no-mind.	 When	 you	 have	 come	 to	 the	 full	 point	 of	 being	 a	 no-mind,	 when
nothing	is	left	of	the	mind,	all	the	mind	is	gone,	you	simply	are,	just	being.	The
throbbing	of	the	heart	is	heard,	even	the	pulsation	of	the	blood	is	felt.	but	there
are	no	thoughts,	no	feelings.
no	moods	--	all	is	quiet	and	calm.	You	are	just	sitting	or	just	standing.
A	Zen	master	was	standing	on	a	hilltop.	Three	people	had	come	for	a	morning
walk	 and	 they	 started	 arguing	 about	what	 he	was	doing.	One	 said	 'As	 far	 as	 I
know	his	cow	sometimes	gets	lost	so	he	goes	to	the	top	of	the	hill	and	from	there
he	looks	around	for	where	the	cow	is	--	it	is	easier	from	there	to	see	all	around.
So	he	must	be	looking	for	the	cow.'
The	second	man	said	'I	don't	think	it	is	so	because	I	don't	see	him	moving	at	all.
If	he	were	looking	for	the	cow	at	least	his	head	would	be	moving,	searching	all
around.	 But	 he	 is	 standing	 just	 like	 a	 statue,	 he	 cannot	 be	 looking	 for	 his
cow.'My	feeling	is,'	said	the	second	man,	'that	he	is	waiting	for	some	friend	who
came	with	him	but	has	been	left	behind.'
The	 third	 said,	 'I	 cannot	 agree	 because	 if	 he	were	waiting	 for	 somebody	 then
once	in	a	while	he	would	look	back,	wondering	why	he	has	not	come	yet,	where
he	has	gone,	how	long	he	is	going	to	take	--	but	he	never	looks	back.	This	is	not
the	way	of	a	man	who	is	waiting	for	somebody.'
They	could	not	 agree	 so	 they	all	 travelled	 to	 the	peak,	 reached	 the	master	 and
asked	him...	the	first	man	asked	'Are	you	looking	for	your	cow?'	And	the	master
said	'	My	cow?	I	have	come	into	the	world	without	anything	and	I	will	go	from
the	world	without	 anything.	Nothing	 is	mine.	 Even	my	 body	 is	 not	mine,	my
mind	 is	 not	mine.	 I	 don't	 exist	 at	 all	 --	 what	 nonsense	 you	 are	 talking.	What
cow?'
The	second	man	said	 'Then	I	must	be	right,	you	must	be	waiting	for	the	friend
who	 came	with	 you	 for	 a	morning	walk,	who	 is	 left	 behind.'	 The	master	 said
'Friend?	But	 I	don't	have	any	enemy	 in	 the	world	so	how	can	 I	have	a	 friend?
You	can	have	friends	only	if	you	have	enemies.	The	more	friends	you	have,	the
more	 enemies	 you	 have.'	 And	 the	 master	 said	 'I	 am	 not	 interested	 either	 in
friends	or	in	enemies.	I	have	come	alone	and	I	will	go	alone.	Between	these	two
alonenesses	why	get	into	trouble	unnecessarily?	I	am	alone.'
The	third	man	jumped	up.	He	said	'Then	I	must	be	right.	I	told	these	people	that
he	 is	not	 looking	 for	his	cow,	not	 looking	 for	his	 friend,	he	 is	meditating.	The
way	he	is	standing,	utterly	still,	he	must	be	meditating.'
And	 the	master	 said	 'Meditating?	Do	you	 think	meditation	 is	 an	act?	 I	 am	not
meditating,	I	am	not	doing	anything;	I	am	simply	standing.'
But	 that's	exactly	what	meditation	 is:	simply	standing	or	simply	sitting,	simply
being.	The	moment	you	are	 in	 that	space	you	know	what	god	is.	And	to	know
god	 is	 to	know	all,	 to	know	god	 is	 to	be	a	god.	And	 that	 is	 the	unfoldment	of
your	 being,	 the	 ultimate	 flowering	 of	 the	 one-thousand-petalled	 lotus	 of	 your
consciousness.	That	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8010185
ShortTitle:	THUNK18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(A	man	to	be	really	worthy	of	the	name	man	has	to	go	through	not	one	but	two
births,	Osho	says	to	Rita	from	Switzerland.	Then	he	explains	why.)
One	is	the	physical	birth,	the	other	is	the	spiritual	birth.	The	physical	happens	to
everybody	but	for	the	spiritual	one	has	to	work,	one	has	to	deserve	it.	The	first	is
ordinary,	 it	 only	 gives	 you	 the	 material	 dimension,	 and	 because	 there	 is	 no
spiritual	 dimension	 in	 it,	 it	 is	 utterly	 dark.	 Matter	 is	 darkness,	 spirit	 is	 light.
Unless	one	is	born	again	one	remains	in	a	dark	night.	The	initiation	into	sannyas
means	the	preparation	for	the	second	birth.
Socrates	says	the	master	functions	as	a	midwife,	and	he	is	absolutely	right.	The
function	of	 the	master	 is	 to	bring	your	potential	 into	 the	actual,	 to	help	you	 to
come	out	of	darkness	into	the	light.	And	the	moment	you	are	born	into	light	bliss
also	starts	happening	of	its	own	accord.
Misery	belongs	to	the	first	birth	and	bliss	belongs	to	the	second.	So	those	who
have	not	attained	the	second	birth	can	hope	for	bliss	but	they	will	never	attain	it.
Remember,	 by	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 are	 entering	 into	 great	 work	 upon
yourself.	 But	 miracles	 are	 possible	 if	 we	 work	 and	 everybody	 is	 entitled	 to
miracles.
Jesus	has	not	got	more	potential	than	you	have	got,	neither	has	Buddha	nor	Lao
Tzu.	As	far	as	spiritual	possibility	is	concerned	everybody	is	absolutely	alike,	we
just	 have	 to	 prepare	 the	 ground,	 uproot	 the	 weeds,	 remove	 the	 rocks,	 so	 that
roses	can	grow	in	it.
(Osho	makes	of	Amrit	Gerhard	 the	meaning;	 the	 search	 for	 immortality	needs
great	 effort.)	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 good	 that	 it	 is	 a	 great	 struggle	 because	 in	 that	 very
challenge	 one	 grows.	 If	 it	were	 easily	 available	 like	 any	other	 commodity	 life
would	lose	all	depth,	all	height,	life	would	become	a	mundane	phenomenon.	The
things	of	the	world	are	available	easily	but	higher	values	have	to	be	attained	after
an	arduous	climbing	 towards	 the	heights.	One	needs	 to	be	a	great	warrior.	But
the	 fight	 is	 not	with	 anybody	 else,	 the	 fight	 is	 inner,	 it	 is	with	 the	 hindrances
within	yourself,	with	the	rocks	that	are	preventing	your	flow	of	energy,	with	the
blocks.	They	don't	allow	you	to	function	in	a	total,	wholistic	way.
Accept	the	challenge.	At	the	innermost	core	of	every	human	being	there	is	a	ray
of	light	which	immediately	joins	you	together	with	the	immortal	world,	with	the
eternal,	which	 takes	you	beyond	 time	and	beyond	death.	But	we	have	 to	go	 in
search	of	it	and	there	are	many	hazards,	hindrances,	many	possibilities	of	going
astray.	 like	a	jigsaw	puzzle,	One	has	to	be	very	intelligent,	alert,	aware	at	each
point	because	the	possibilities	of	going	wrong	are	many,	and	the	possibility	to	be
right	is	only	one	amongst	the	many.
But	if	one	is	alert	and	watchful	and	one	is	learning	even	from	mistakes	then	the
task,	howsoever	difficult	it	is,	is	not	impossible.	And	the	joy	of	reaching	to	that
ultimate	peak	is	infinite.	Compared	to	that	joy	all	that	we	do	for	it	is	nothing.
(His	 understanding	 of	 the	 real	meaning	 of	 a	Christian	 is	 one	who	 is	 a	Christ,
Osho	tells	Dhyan	Tina.)	Friedrich	Nietzsche	is	right	when	he	says	that	the	first
and	 the	 last	Christian	died	on	 the	cross	 twenty	centuries	 ago.	His	 insistence	 is
worth	 meditating	 on:	 the	 first	 and	 last	 Christian.	 So	 the	 whole	 world	 of	 the
Christians	is	just	pseudo,	it	is	hypocrisy	more	or	less.	It	is	the	same	with	Hindus
and	the	same	with	the	Buddhists	and	the	same	with	the	Mohammedans,	there	are
three	hundred	religions	on	the	earth	and	it	is	true	about	all	those	three	hundred
religions.
To	be	a	Christ	only	one	quality	is	needed	and	that	is	meditation.	To	be	a	Christ
means	to	be	so	silent	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	whole	turmoil	of	the	mind	disappears	and	the	silence	is	so	profound	that	one
can	hear	the	still,	small	voice	of	god	within	one's	own	being.	It	arises	from	your
very	depths.	You	are	just	a	listener,	you	are	just	on	the	receiving	end.
That's	 how	 all	 the	 great	 scriptures	 are	 born.	 The	Upanishadas,	 the	Koran,	 the
beatitudes	 of	 Jesus,	 the	 Sermon	 on	 the	 Mount,	 the	 Bhagavad	 Gita,	 the
Dhammapada,	Lao	Tzu's	Tao	Te	Ching	--	these	great	documents	are	not	written
by	 somebody,	 they	 have	 been	 heard.	 The	 people	 who	 were	 writing	 were	 not
writing	on	their	own,	they	were	just	vehicles,	they	were	writing	on	behalf	of	god.
But	that	is	possible	only	when	your	mind	has	completely	gone,	otherwise	it	will
interfere.	 So	 the	 whole	 art	 of	 being	 a	 Christ	 or	 a	 Buddha	 is	 to	 be	 absolutely
silent.
So	learn	to	be	silent,	enjoy	silence	and	whenever	you	have	an	opportunity	to	be
silent	just	fall	into	it.
Make	it	a	point	that	the	most	important	thing	in	life	is	silence.	Everything	else	is
secondary.	So	everything	can	be	sacrificed	for	 it	but	 it	cannot	be	sacrificed	for
anything.
This	 is	 the	 foundational	 commitment	 of	 sannyas,	 that	 from	 now	 onwards
meditation	 will	 be	 your	 religion	 --	 and	 meditation	 is	 the	 essential	 core	 of	 all
religions.
(Joost	 becomes	 Prem	 Satyo	 --	 which	 Osho	 explains	 as	 meaning	 love	 is	 the
beginning	of	the	experience	of	truth.)
To	love	is	to	open	a	window	unto	the	vast	sky	of	truth.	And	remember	that	the
frame	of	the	window	is	not	the	sky	and	the	frame	of	the	window	is	not	the	frame
of	the	sky	either,	the	sky	is	far	bigger.	The	frame	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	sky.
Love	is	only	a	frame.	It	belongs	to	your	heart	just	as	the	window	belongs	to	your
house.	 But	 when	 you	 open	 the	 window	 you	 can	 see	 the	 stars,	 faraway	 stars,
millions	of	light	years	away.	You	can	see	the	clouds,	you	can	see	the	moon,	the
sun.	 Suddenly	 a	 great	 perspective	 becomes	 available	 to	 you.	 But	 one	 has	 to
remember	constantly	that	this	is	only	a	beginning.	Love	is	the	beginning,	not	the
end.
Once	you	have	felt	the	sky	through	the	window	then	you	have	to	go	beyond	even
the	window.	And	these	are	the	three	centres	of	man.	The	first	is	the	head.	Head
means	a	house	with	all	the	windows	and	doors	closed.	The	second	centre	is	the
heart	 --	 the	 same	 house	 but	 the	 windows	 and	 the	 doors	 are	 open.	 You	 can
experience	something	of	the	beyond.	Although	you	are	still	in	the	same	house	it
is	no	longer	a	prison,	there	are	openings.	If	you	decide	to	go	out	you	can.	And
there	is	great	pull	from	the	outside	world	because	now	the	wind,	the	rain	and	the
sun	reach	you,	and	they	are	all	indications	of	the	beyond	--	the	birds	sing	and	the
flowers	open	and	their	fragrance	flows	to	you.	Everything	is	calling	you	out	of
your	small	cage.
The	house	is	our	body.	The	head	belongs	to	that	same	body	but	it	is	closed.	The
heart	also	belongs	to	that	body	but	it	has	openings,	hence	it	is	far	better	to	live
through	the	heart	than	through	the	head.	Both	belong	to	the	body,	but	from	the
head	 there	 is	 no	 going	 beyond	 because	 there	 is	 no	 opening.	You	 are	 not	 even
aware	 there	 is	something	beyond.	With	 the	heart	 the	beyond	starts	communing
with	you.
And	then	comes	the	third	centre,	your	being.	That	means	you	have	hoard	the	call
of	 the	 beyond	 and	 you	 have	 gone	 out	 of	 the	 house,	 you	 have	 surpassed	 the
house.	You	are	no	more	inside	the	house,	you	are	under	the	sky,	under	the	stars.
But	to	reach	the	third	the	second	is	a	most	essential	preparation.
So	love	is	the	beginning;	love	means	the	heart.	Logic	is	not	the	beginning;	logic
means	 the	 head.	 Logic	 is	 invulnerable.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 Leibnitzian	 monad	 --
windowless,	completely	enclosed.	The	heart	is	vulnerable,	it	allows	the	beyond
to	 come	 to	 you.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 beginning.	 Something	 starts	 stirring	 in	 you,
something	of	the	beyond	starts	ringing	bells	in	you.	A	challenge	has	come.	It	is
irresistible,	you	have	to	go.
And	 the	moment	you	 leave	 the	house,	you	surpass	 the	house	--	 that	means	 the
moment	 you	 start	 forgetting	 the	 body-mind	 structure	 and	 look	 beyond	 --	 you
have	 entered	 into	 the	 world	 of	 truth,	 the	 ultimate	 truth.	 And	 it	 is	 truth	 that
liberates,	it	is	truth	that	brings	bliss,	it	is	truth	that	brings	freedom.	And	these	are
our	deepest	longings,	only	truth	can	fulfil	them.	Without	the	experience	of	truth
man	remains	unfulfilled,	a	tree	without	flowers,	a	barren	tree.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 become	 full	 of	 flowers	 and	 fruits.	 The	 very	 flavour	 of	 a
sannyasin	has	to	be	that	of	tremendous	contentment,	fulfilment.
(Anand	 Shivam	 means	 bliss	 is	 virtue,	 Osho	 tells	 the	 former	 Michael	 from
Trinidad.)	Misery	is	sin,	misery	is	immoral,	misery	is	vice	because	the	miserable
person	goes	on	knowingly	or	unknowingly	creating	misery	for	others.	He	cannot
help	it;	he	can	give	only	that	which	he	has	got.	Even	if	he	does	not	want	it	he	is	a
victim	of	his	own	misery.	Even	if	he	wants	to	do	some	good	the	ultimate	result	is
going	to	be	bad.	In	spite	of	all	his	good	intention,	his	actions	will	bring	misery	to
people	because	nothing	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
can	arise	out	of	a	miserable	person	that	can	bring	bliss	to	people.	That's	the	very
definition	of	good,	virtue:	helping	people	 to	be	blissful.	But	you	can	give	only
that	which	you	have	got,	hence	to	me	bliss	is	virtue,	the	only	virtue.
Be	blissful	--	that's	what	I	teach.	I	don't	teach	you	to	be	virtuous	because	that	is
secondary,	that	is	a	by-product.	I	teach	the	real	transformation	within	you.	Move
from	 misery	 to	 bliss	 and	 then	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 will	 be	 good;	 it	 cannot	 be
anything	else	than	good.
So	I	don't	teach	any	service	to	the	public.	People	think	my	sannyasins	are	selfish
--	 they	 are	 not.	 But	 my	 understanding	 is	 that	 unless	 a	 person	 transforms	 his
energy	from	misery	to	bliss...	and	that	is	an	inner	work,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with
the	public	or	with	serving	the	people,	the	poor,	the	ill.	You	have	to	go	through	a
transformation	within	yourself	and	then,	once	the	transformation	has	happened,
it	is	inevitable	that	you	will	do	something	which	will	beautify	the	world,	which
will	make	the	world	a	little	better,	which	will	help	mankind	to	rise	a	little	higher.
I	am	not	concerned	about	 that	because	 it	 is	 inevitable,	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 talk
about	it.	That's	why	I	never	talk	about	altruism.	What	is	the	need?	If	you	grow
roses	 fragrance	 is	bound	 to	come.	 I	 teach	only	how	 to	grow	roses.	Why	waste
time	with	the	fragrance?	And	if	people	become	too	interested	in	fragrance	they
will	forget	about	growing	roses.	That's	what	has	happened..
People	like	Mother	Theresa	of	Calcutta	or	Vinoba	Bhave	--	and	there	are	many
around	the	world	like	these	people	who	have	wasted	their	whole	life	in	serving
others...	But	 if	you	 look	at	 them	you	can	sees	what	service	can	 they	do?	They
don't	seem	to	be	in	a	state	of	celebration.	Mother	Theresa	is	as	dry	and	dead	as
Morarji	Desai.	Sometimes	I	wonder	why	they	don't	get	married!	(much	laughter)
They	would	make	the	most	absurd	couple	in	the	world	--	they	look	so	alike!	The
world	has	missed	a	great	opportunity.
Altruism	comes	on	its	own,	and	I	certainly	teach	you	to	be	selfish,	selfish	in	the
true	sense	of	the	word.
Know	thyself	--	that	is	selfishness;	be	thyself	--	that	is	selfishness;	and	then	act
out	 of	 it	 --	 that	 too	 is	 selfishness.	But	 if	 one	 has	 fulfilled	 these	 conditions,	 of
being	oneself,	of	knowing	oneself,	of	acting	according	to	one's	own	light,	 then
life	becomes	a	great	sharing,	a	great	rejoicing.	And	one	does	not	become	egoistic
about	 doing	 something	 good	 to	 people,	 one	 simply	 enjoys	 sharing	 one's	 own
light.	It	is	out	of	sheer	joy,	for	joy's	sake.	One	is	not	obliging	anybody.
That	is	Shivam;	it	is	a	by-product	of	bliss.
(The	Greek	mystic,	Heraclitus,	says	you	can't	step	in	the	same	river	twice.	Osho
goes	 one	 further.)	 I	would	 like	 to	 say	 you	 cannot	 step	 in	 the	 same	 river	 even
once,	because	the	river	is	moving	so	fast.
Life	 is	 a	 river,	 a	 constant	 movement.	 In	 this	 moving	 wheel	 one	 cannot	 find
anything	 except	 love	 which	 can	 give	 a	 glimpse	 of	 the	 eternal,	 of	 the	 non-
changing,	of	the	immutable.	Love	seems	to	be	the	only	rainbow	bridge	between
time	and	eternity.	There	has	to	be	some	bridge	because	life	in	all	its	dimensions
is	an	organic	unity.	Nothing	is	separate,	nothing	can	be	separate;	it	is	all	oneness.
So	there	is	bound	to	be	some	subtle	link	between	time	and	eternity.
And	my	experience	is	that	the	rainbow	bridge	is	love.	I	call	it	a	rainbow	bridge
for	 three	reasons.	One:	 it	 is	very	fragile,	very	delicate?	you	can	destroy	it	very
easily.	Secondly	I	call	it	a	rainbow	bridge	because	it	has	all	the	colours,	all	the
dimensions,	of	both	worlds,	of	this	and	that,	of	this	shore	and	the	further	shore.
Because	it	joins	both	it	has	all	the	colours	of	both;	it	is	multi-coloured	and	multi-
dimensional.	It	is	very	rich.
Thirdly,	 I	 call	 it	 a	 rainbow	bridge	because	you	cannot	possess	 it.	 If	you	 try	 to
possess	a	rainbow	you	will	not	find	anything,	your	hands	will	be	empty	--	maybe
a	little	bit	wet,	 that's	all.	It	 is	there	in	all	 its	 tremendous	beauty	but	don't	 try	to
possess	it.	Enjoy	it,	dance	it,	sing	it	but	don't	try	to	possess	it.
And	 these	 three	 things	 have	 to	 be	 remembered	 about	 love	 too.	 Don't	 try	 to
possess	 it	otherwise	 it	will	disappear.	People	destroy	 their	 love	 in	 the	effort	 to
possess	it.	The	paradox	of	love	is,	if	you	want	to	possess	it	you	will	destroy	it,
you	will	miss	 it;	 if	you	don't	want	 to	and	always	yours.	 It	belongs	 to	 the	non-
possessive	person.
Love	has	all	dimensions	but	I	want	to	make	it	one-dimensional	because	we	are
afraid	of	multi-dimensionality.	That	too	is	a	way	of	destroying	it.	You	want	the
rainbow	to	be	only	of	one	colour	--	it	is	not	possible.	You	may	have	chosen	the
most	beautiful	colour	but	you	cannot	paint	a	rainbow	just	green	or	just	red	or	just
yellow.	You	cannot	paint	it,	it	has	to	be	multi-dimensional.	We	kill	love	in	trying
to	colour	it.
For	example,	a	man	can	love	a	woman	for	one	reason	and	he	can	love	another
woman	for	another	reason	and	still	another	for	another	reason.	But	lovers	don't
accept	 that.	A	woman	 can	 love	 one	man	 for	 his	 intelligence	 and	 she	 can	 love
another	man	 for	 his	 physical	 beauty	 --	 because	 the	 intelligent	 person	may	 not
always	 be	 beautiful.	 A	 few	 very	 ugly	 people	 have	 been	 known	 to	 be	 very
intelligent.	Socrates	is	one	of	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
examples;	he	was	one	of	the	ugliest	men...	disgusting!	(much	laughter)...	but	one
of	the	most	intelligent	who	has	ever	walked	on	earth.	One	would	love	him	for	his
intelligence,	 but	 for	 his	 body...	 one	 would	 have	 to	 keep	 one's	 eyes	 closed!
(laughter)
And	women	know	the	secret:	whenever	they	make	love	to	a	man	they	keep	their
eyes	closed.	Because	many	men	are	like	Socrates,	it	is	better	not	to	see	what	they
are	doing!	(laughter)	It	is	better	not	to	see	their	faces	because	they	may	be	going
through	 contortions	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 things!	 If	 you	 see	 it	 you	may	 freak	 out!
That's	why	women	make	love	in	darkness.	It	is	always	good:	under	the	blanket
(in	the	deluge	of	laughter	one	can	lip-read	where	Osho's	words	are	drowned,	'in
the	darkness,	with	closed	eyes...').
So	let	this	Socrates	do	whatsoever	he	wants	to	and	meanwhile	you	can	think	of
some	beautiful	person.
In	a	bed	you	will	always	find	at	least	four	persons:	the	two	real	ones	and	the	two
that	both	lovers	are	fantasising	about.
One	can	love	one	person	for	one	reason,	another	person	for	another	reason,	but
up	to	now	we	have	not	accepted	it,	and	that	has	been	one	of	the	greatest	causes
of	love	not	being	able	to	transform	the	earth,	of	love	dying	so	quickly.
We	kill	it.	Our	demands	are	so	much.	We	cannot	accept	the	simple	phenomenon
that	 the	 woman	 may	 love	 a	 man	 for	 his	 music	 or	 for	 his	 poetry	 or	 for	 his
painting,	 for	 his	 body,	 for	 his	 intelligence,	 for	 his	 silence,	 for	 his	 coolness	 --
there	are	 thousands	of	qualities,	nobody	can	claim	all	of	 them.	No	woman	can
claim	 all	 the	 qualities	 either.	 It	 is	 very	 rare	 to	 find	 an	 intellectual	 woman	 --
intelligent,	but	not	intellectual.
At	least	I	have	not	found	one	yet	and	I	must	have	known	more	women	than	any
man	in	the	world!	(laughter)	And	I	trust	thorn	only	because	they	don't	have	much
intellectuality.	They	function	intuitively,	that	is	the	feminine	form	of	intelligence.
I	have	handed	over	the	whole	commune	to	women	because	one	thing	is	certain,
they	cannot	be	cunning,	they	cannot	be	deceptive,	they	cannot	betray	me	--	it	is
impossible.
Whatsoever	they	do	they	will	do	out	of	love.	But	the	clever	can	become	cunning
at	 any	moment.	And	 sometimes	you	may	 find	a	woman	who	 is	 an	 intellectual
and	you	may	love	her	for	that.	She	shows	one	aspect	of	beauty.
Another	 woman	 may	 be	 physically	 beautiful	 and	 psychologically	 very	 nasty.
That	 is	 almost	 always	 the	 case.	People	 fall	 in	 love	with	 the	physical	 and	once
they	 are	 trapped	 then	 slowly	 they	 come	 to	 know	 about	 the	 psychology	 of	 the
woman	--	and	she	is	just	crazy,	but	now	it	is	too	late.
If	we	 understand	 love	 as	 a	 rainbow	 of	 all	 the	 colours,	 then	 a	 totally	 different
quality	can	exist	on	earth.
Then	one	can	love	many	people,	it	becomes	friendship.	And	one	can	love	people
for	different	reasons.
There	is	no	reason	to	be	possessive.
And	 thirdly,	 I	 call	 it	 a	 rainbow	 bridge	 because	 the	 rainbow	 is	 the	 only
phenomenon	in	nature	which	joins	the	earth	with	the	sky.	It	is	an	are	joining	the
physical	with	the	metaphysical,	joining	the	material	with	the	spiritual.	Love	joins
two	 extremes	 which	 almost	 seem	 to	 be	 unjoinable,	 which	 cannot	 have	 any
meeting	ground	--	but	love	makes	that	impossible	possible.
So	 go	 deeply	 into	 love,	 non-possessively.	Don't	 try	 to	 hold	 on	 to	 it,	 allow	 its
multi-dimensionality.
Transform	 it	more	 and	more	 into	 a	 friendship	 so	 that	 no	 jealousy	 exists.	And
remember,	 it	 is	 fragile.	 It	 can	 be	 destroyed	 very	 easily.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to
create	it	and	it	is	very	easy	to	destroy	it.
It	is	like	a	rose	flower.	This	fundamental	law	of	nature	has	never	to	be	forgotten,
that	whenever	the	higher	is	in	conflict	with	the	lower,	the	lower	will	win.	If	you
clash	a	rock	with	a	rose	flower	you	cannot	hope	for	the	rose	flower	to	destroy	the
rock;	the	rock	will	destroy	the	rose	flower.	The	higher	is	vulnerable,	very	fragile.
Handle	 it	 with	 care.	 The	 lower	 in	 a	 brutal	 way,	 an	 animal	 way,	 is	 always
stronger.	And	 love	 is	 crushed	 by	 the	 lower	 realities	 --	 anger,	 hatred,	 jealousy.
They	are	like	rocks	and	love	is	like	a	rose	flower.
Or	it	would	be	even	more	true	to	say	that	love	is	like	the	fragrance	that	arises	out
of	 the	 rose	 flower.	 But	 it	 can	 lead	 you	 to	 immortality,	 to	 the	 world	 beyond
change,	beyond	death.
(Simon,	the	son	of	elderly	ashramite,	Paritosh,	after	several	visits	to	the	ashram
over	a	period	of	two	or	three	years,	takes	sannyas	tonight..Osho	names	him	Prem
Dinesh.)	A	life	without	love	is	a	life	of	darkness	--	and	of	unending	darkness	--
no	dawn	ever	comes,	no	sun	ever	rises.	Millions	of	people	live	in	this	dark	night
of	the	soul	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave.	In	fact	they	have	remained	unborn.	They
were	in	darkness	in	the	womb	of	the	mother;	even	out	of	the	womb	they	are	not
in	the	light	Physically	of	course	they	are	in	the	light	but	spiritually	they	are	still
unborn.	The	miracle	of	the	day	has	not	happened	yet,	the	sun	has	not	risen,	the
eastern	horizon	has	not	yet	become	red.	It	can	become	red	only	when	you	start
throbbing	with	love,	when	you	start	pulsating	with	love.
Love	means	a	heart-to-heart	contact	with	existence.	It	may	be	person-to-person,
it	may	be	from	a	person	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
towards	nature,	it	may	be	between	a	person	and	music,	poetry,	painting.	It	can	be
personal,	 it	 can	 be	 impersonal,	 it	 can	 be	 universal.	 One	 can	 love	 the	 whole
existence	in	its	totality,	as	it	is,	with	all	the	stars.
The	greater	your	love	is,	the	greater	you	become.	The	smaller	your	love	is,	the
smaller	 you	 remain.	 Your	 love	 is	 the	 criterion	 of	 how	 big	 you	 are.	 So	 love
without	 any	 other	 consideration	 because	 love	 means	 growth.	 Love	 more	 and
more	people	--	birds,	animals,	trees,	rocks	--	include	as	much	as	you	can	in	your
love.	One	 day	 it	 has	 to	 become	 all-inclusive	 so	 that	 nothing	 is	 left	 outside	 it,
everything	has	fallen	in	and	has	become	a	part	of	it.
When	love	encompasses	all	it	becomes	divine,	it	becomes	the	experience	of	god.
And	that's	what	I	mean	by	the	beginning	of	the	day:	suddenly	the	sun	has	risen
and	 that	 rising	sun	 takes	you	 into	 realms	undreamt	of.	Otherwise	man	remains
crawling	on	the	earth	just	like	a	snake;	he	knows	nothing	of	anything	other	than
the	dust	in	which	he	crawls.	He	is	not	aware	of	the	stars,	not	aware	of	the	vast
beyond,	not	aware	of	the	infinity	that	surrounds	him,	not	aware	of	the	eternity	of
which	he	is	a	part,	an	essential	part.
We	are	not	 islands;	we	 are	part	 of	 an	 infinite	 existence.	We	have	 always	been
here	and	we	will	always	be	here.	We	have	been	 in	different	 forms,	 in	different
forms	we	will	be.	Birth	and	death	are	episodes	in	an	eternity	of	life.	Only	when
this	is	experienced	is	darkness	dispelled	an	d	the	day	has	arrived.
It	is	because	of	this	that	for	my	sannyas	I	have	chosen	the	colour	of	the	eastern
horizon	 in	 the	early	morning	 just	before	 the	sun	rises.	This	 is	 the	colour	 --	 the
orange	 of	 the	 eastern	 horizon	 at	 that	 tremendously	 significant	 moment	 when
night	changes	into	day,	when	death	changes	into	abundant	life.	It	is	the	colour	of
that	transition,	that	transmutation,	that	radical	change,	that	revolution.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010195
ShortTitle:	THUNK19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(God	can	only	hear	that	which	isn't	uttered,	Osho	tells	Mouno	David.)
...	hence	anything	said	in	any	language	other	than	silence	never	reaches	god.	All
prayers	fall	down	--
they	 are	 futile.	But	 in	 silence	 the	miracle	 happens:	 you	have	 not	 said	 a	 single
word,	god	has	not	heard	a	single	word	but	 the	message	 is	conveyed;	you	have
poured	your	heart,	you	have	offered	your	being.	That	offering	is	true	prayer.
Learn	silence	because	 that	 is	 the	ultimate	 language.	And	only	 those	who	know
how	to	be	silent	become	beloveds	of	god.
(Osho	adds	'Santosh'	to	'Toby'	and	then	links	the	two	parts	of	the	name	together
in	his	address	to	the	actor	from	America.)
Many	 people	 cultivate	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 satisfaction,	 but	 just	 below	 it	 there	 is
turmoil,	just	below	it	there	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	 discontent.	 It	 is	 a	 facade.	 They	 are	 simply	 consoling	 themselves,	 they	 are
repeating	Aesop's	fable	of	the	sour	grapes.	Because	they	cannot	reach	anything
more	than	what	they	have	they	start	saying	'It	is	not	worth	reaching	for.	We	are
perfectly	contented.	We	don't	want	money,	we	don't	want	power,	we	don't	want
prestige.'	Not	that	they	don't	want	those	things	--	they	do	--	but	they	know	that
they	are	not	strong	enough	to	fight	for	them	all.
Just	to	hide	their	cowardliness,	their	weakness,	they	pretend,	but	that	pretension
is	not	real	contentment.
A	real	contentment	arises	out	of	gratitude.	God	has	given	you	life	and	you	have
not	thanked	him	for	it.
He	has	given	you	the	capacity	to	love	and	you	have	not	thanked	him	for	that.	He
has	given	you	intelligence	to	know	and	you	have	not	thanked	him	for	it.	He	has
given	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	 which	we	 go	 on	 accepting	 as	 if	 we	 deserve
them,	as	if	we	have	a	right	to	have	them.	We	don't	have	any	right.	All	is	a	gift.
To	 know	 that	 brings	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 satisfaction.	 It	 comes	 out	 of
gratitude.	You	feel	grateful	for	so	much	that	has	already	been	done	--	you	cannot
ask	for	more.	Even	that	which	is	given	to	you	is	more	than	you	are	worthy	of.
And	 Toby	 means	 god	 is	 good.	 When	 you	 start	 feeling	 this	 contentment	 a
tremendous	experience	happens	--	that	life	is	good,	that	everything	is	good.
God	 simply	means	 the	whole.	And	 to	 feel	 that	 god	 is	 good	 is	 to	 be	 religious.
Now	there	is	no	complaint,	no	desire.	One	is	utterly	attuned	with	whatsoever	is.
Contentment	arises	out	of	gratitude,	and	out	of	contentment	arises	the	experience
of	god's	goodness,	his	unconditional	goodness.	He	gives	 to	us	and	he	asks	 for
nothing	in	return.
This	is	the	way	of	the	sannyasin.
(To	Beryl	Osho	adds	Dhyan.)
Meditation	is	a	state	of	 thoughtless	awareness:	one	is	fully	aware	but	 the	mind
has	ceased	to	function.
Ordinarily	two	things	are	known	to	us.	One	is	when	the	mind	is	functioning	but
you	are	not	aware.	It	goes	on	functioning,	 thoughts	go	on	moving,	but	you	are
not	 aware	 of	 what	 is	 happening	 inside	 you.	 You	 never	 witness	 it,	 you	 never
watch,	you	never	observe.	That's	how	we	all	function.	This	is	a	state	of	sleep.
And	 the	 second	 thing	 is	 when	 the	mind	 stops	 functioning.	 In	 deep	 dreamless
sleep	the	mind	stops	functioning.	It	happens	almost	every	night	at	least	for	two
hours	 --	 in	small	gaps	but	 the	whole	 time	 is	near	about	 two	hours	every	night,
sometimes	ten-minute	fifteen-minute	intervals	when	you	dive	deep	into	sleep.
Even	dreaming	stops;	dreaming	is	also	a	functioning	of	 the	mind.	But	then	too
you	are	asleep.	When	the	mind	functions	you	are	asleep,	that	is	one	state.	When
the	mind	does	not	 function	you	are	still	asleep,	 that	 is	another	state.	These	are
our	ordinary	experiences	of	the	so-called	waking	state	and	sleep.
Meditation	 brings	 a	 third	 state:	mind	 is	 non-	 functioning,	 just	 as	 it	 is	 in	 deep
dreamless	 sleep	 --	 that	 is	 one	 part	 of	 meditation,	 the	 circumference	 of
meditation.	And	the	second	part	is	when	you	are	not	asleep,	you	are	fully	awake,
alert,	a	 flame	of	witnessing	 --	 that	 is	 the	centre	of	meditation.	Whenever	 these
two	things	happen	--	you	are	aware	and	there	is	no	mind,	no	thought,	no	desire,
no	dream	passing	 through	the	screen	of	consciousness	--	you	attain	 to	ultimate
clarity.	That	is	the	meaning	of	Beryl:	crystal	clear.
In	that	crystal	clarity	one	knows	what	truth	is,	what	bliss	is,	what	beauty	is.	And
to	know	it	is	to	have	attained	the	ultimate	flowering,	to	know	it	is	to	have	come
to	the	highest	peak.	Then	one	feels	at	home,	at	rest.	Now	finally	there	is	nowhere
to	go,	nothing	to	attain.	One	has	arrived.
We	in	the	East	call	it	samadhi.	Samadhi	means	a	state	of	ultimate	realisation,	of
truth,	beauty,	bliss,	consciousness,	freedom	--	of	all	the	higher	values.
(Annamaria	from	Italy	is	next.)
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Sujato.	Prem	means	love.	Sujato	means	well-born.
The	 first	 birth	 is	 very	 ordinary,	 it	 is	 animal.	 It	 is	 nothing	 peculiar	 to	 human
beings.	Donkeys	are	born	the	same	way	(laughter)	monkeys	too.	Only	the	second
birth	makes	man	special,	and	the	second	birth	happens	through	love.
In	the	first	birth	you	come	out	of	the	womb	of	your	mother.	It	was	a	shelter	for
nine	months,	it	protected	you,	but	beyond	nine	months	it	is	dangerous.	If	a	child
insists	on	remaining	in	that	protected,	secure	space	for	longer	than	nine	months
he	will	 be	 dead.	 For	 nine	months	 it	 is	 perfectly	 beautiful,	 but	 then	 one	 has	 to
come	into	the	world.
In	 the	 same	way	 the	 ego	 is	 also	 a	 shelter,	 a	 protection.	 In	 the	 beginning	 it	 is
good,	but	 there	 is	 a	moment	when	one	has	 to	come	out	of	 the	egg	of	 the	ego.
That's	what	love	is:	dropping	the	ego.
Once	you	drop	the	ego	and	love	starts	flowing	you	are	twice	born.	And	then	you
really	become	a	human	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
being.
(And	more	about	love	to	Prem	Michael.)
There	are	a	 few	 things	 in	 life	which	can	be	called	godly.	Love	 is	one	of	 those
very	rare	experiences.
Silence	is	one	of	those	experiences;	awareness,	bliss	--	these	are	the	windows	of
our	 house.	 We	 can	 keep	 them	 closed	 and	 remain	 unaware	 of	 the	 beautiful
existence	beyond,	or	we	can	open	them.
The	 easiest	 to	 open	 is	 love.	All	 other	windows	 are	 far	more	 difficult	 to	 open,
hence	my	suggestion	is	to	try	to	open	the	window	which	is	the	easiest	because	it
is	very	natural.
The	 desire	 for	 awareness	 is	 not	 so	 natural.	 It	 comes	 only	 later	 on	 at	 a	 certain
stage	of	evolution.	The	desire	for	freedom	is	also	not	immediately	available.	But
love	and	 the	desire	 for	 love	 is	born	with	you;	hence	 love	can	become	 the	key.
And	 once	 you	 know	 how	 to	 open	 one	 window	 you	 know	 how	 to	 open	 other
windows	 too,	 then	 it	 becomes	 easy.	 The	 art	 is	 the	 same;	 the	 method,	 the
technique,	is	not	different.
Start	being	more	loving.	Make	it	a	decision	not	to	miss	any	opportunity	to	love.
And	don't	ask	others	to	love	you	--	that	is	where	people	go	wrong.	Love.	If	love
is	 returned,	 good;	 if	 it	 is	 not	 returned,	 then	 too	 it	 is	 good,	 because	 to	 love	 is
good,	 to	 love	 in	 itself	 has	 an	 intrinsic	 beauty.	 It	 need	not	 be	 rewarded.	 If	 it	 is
rewarded	that	is	something	extra.
And	the	miracle	is	that	if	you	don't	demand,	it	is	rewarded	more	and	more.	If	you
completely	forget	any	demands	it	is	always	rewarded.
Everybody	wants	love.	But	people	go	wrong:	from	the	very	beginning	they	start
asking	 for	 love	 rather	 than	 giving	 it.	 And	 the	 way	 to	 get	 is	 to	 give.	 So	 give
whole-heartedly	and	don't	be	a	miser,	because	 it	 is	not	 something	quantitative,
that	by	giving	you	will	have	less.	It	belongs	to	the	higher	realm	where	the	more
you	give,	the	more	you	have.	It	is	a	totally	different	economics.
(But	bliss	is	Anand	Dwariko's	way.)
Bliss	is	the	door	to	god,	so	in	becoming	a	sannyasin	rejoice,	be	of	great	cheer,	let
the	 heart	 dance	 and	 sing	 --	 in	 short,	 go	 cuckoo!	 (laughter)	 And	 Italians	 go
cuckoo	very	easily!	I	have	many	Italian	cuckoos	here	(laughter).
My	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 to	 be	 sad	 people.	 Enough	 of	 sadness!	 Throughout	 the
whole	 past	 of	 humanity	 we	 have	 created	 sad	 saints	 and	 sages.	 It	 has	 been	 a
nightmare.	 Now	 we	 need	 cheerful	 sages,	 saints	 who	 are	 capable	 of	 love	 and
laughter.	God	 is	 fed	up	with	your	old	 saints.	He	 is	continuously	 informing	me
not	to	send	any	more	of	the	old	type	of	saints.	He	needs	a	few	dancers	in	heaven,
the	 singers,	 lovers	 --	 the	 old	 saints	 have	made	 heaven	 look	 like	 hell.	 So	 I	 am
preparing	my	people.
Once	my	orange	people	enter	heaven	they	are	going	to	make	even	the	old	saints
turn	on!	(laughter)	Either	those	old	fools	will	have	to	leave	or	they	will	have	to
be	ready	to	be	turned	on.	I	am	trying	to	smuggle	psychedelic	people	into	heaven!
(much	laughter)	Anand	Nandan	means	a	garden	of	bliss.
Man	can	either	be	a	desert	or	he	can	be	a	garden	--	both	are	the	possibilities.	But
millions	 have	 chosen	 to	 be	 desertlike.	 They	 all	 wanted	 to	 be	 gardens	 but
something	went	wrong	and	instead	of	becoming	gardens	they	have	just	become
deserts.	Unless	that	basic	wrong	is	put	right	one	can	never	become	a	garden.	And
without	becoming	a	garden	--	full	of	trees,	flowers,	birds	--	life	cannot	have	any
meaning,	it	cannot	have	any	poetry,	any	music.
The	most	 fundamental	 thing	 to	 transform	 life	 into	 a	 garden	 is	meditation,	 and
meditation	is	not	part	of	our	education	at	all.	Neither	the	parents	nor	the	schools,
colleges	or	universities	teach	it,	not	even	the	churches,	the	temples,	the	mosques
--	 nobody	 teaches	 meditation.	 And	 it	 is	 only	 through	 meditation	 that	 the
transformation	happens.
If	you	live	your	life	through	the	mind	you	will	live	in	a	desert,	in	a	meaningless
desert.	 You	 will	 feel	 bored,	 tired,	 exhausted,	 almost	 always	 on	 the	 verge	 of
committing	suicide	or	going	mad.
So	my	emphasis	is	on	meditation	and	on	nothing	else.	Learn	how	to	live	directly,
immediately,	 not	 through	 the	 mind.	 Mind	 can	 be	 used	 as	 a	 biocomputer	 for
certain	 things:	 for	 factual	 memories,	 for	 mathematics,	 geography,	 history,
science.	It	 is	a	perfectly	beautiful	computer	but	you	need	not	 live	through	it,	 it
has	 to	be	put	 aside.	When	needed	you	can	 ask	 for	 information	but	 it	 does	not
have	to	be	always	there.
When	 you	 are	meeting	 your	 girlfriend	 the	 computer	 is	 there,	 and	 there	 is	 not
only	one	--	there	are	two	computers	between	you	and	your	girlfriend.	In	fact	you
are	hiding	behind	your	computer,	she	is	hiding	behind	her	computer,	and	those
two	computers	are	talking	to	each	other.	Now	what	can	happen	out	of	this?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	have	heard	about	a	psychoanalyst	who	was	a	very	busy	man,	so	busy	that	one
day	he	told	one	of	his	clients,	"Today	I	am	so	busy	I	have	left	my	tape-recorder
here	 --	 just	 talk	 to	 the	 tape-recorder.	Later	on	at	night	when	 I	have	 time	 I	will
listen."	The	client	said,	"Okay."
When	the	client	was	leaving	he	came	to	the	office	to	say	goodbye.	He	came	so
quickly	 --	 just	 within	 a	 few	 minutes	 --	 and	 it	 should	 have	 been	 a	 one-hour
session.	The	psychoanalyst	said,	"Where	are	you	going?"
The	 client	 said,	 "I	 have	 left	 my	 tape-recorder.	 In	 fact	 I	 was	 planning	 it	 so	 I
brought	 it.	 Whatsoever	 I	 was	 going	 to	 say	 to	 you	 I	 have	 put	 onto	 my	 tape-
recorder.	 Now	 my	 tape-recorder	 is	 talking	 to	 your	 tape-recorder.	 Why	 waste
time?	I	am	also	a	busy	man	and	you	are	busy	so	this	is	a	beautiful	method.
Whenever	 I	 have	 time	 I	will	 talk	 to	my	 tape-recorder	 and	whenever	you	 have
time	you	can	listen	to	your	tape-recorder.	We	need	not	meet	again."
But	 this	 is	what	 is	 happening,	 actually	 happening.	This	 is	 not	 a	 joke,	 this	 is	 a
reality!
Meditation	 simply	means	 coming	 in	 direct	 contact	with	 reality,	 face	 to	 face	 --
and	that	immediately	transforms	the	desert	into	a	garden.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
At	least	three	weeks	but	I'll	be	back.
Come	back.	And	next	time	don't	bring	your	tape-recorder!
(Tonight	Osho	has	talked	at	 length	of	love	and	of	bliss.	Now	to	a	student	from
Germany	he	talks	of	the	two	together	as	being	her	path.)
For	 yourself	 be	 blissful,	 for	 others	 be	 loving.	 Bliss	 will	 take	 care	 of	 your
subjectivity,	 interiority,	and	love	will	 take	care	of	your	external	 life.	And	when
both	are	 there	simultaneously	 they	balance	each	other,	otherwise	man	becomes
lopsided.	One	has	 to	 be	 constantly	 balancing	 between	 love	 and	bliss.	More	 of
love	and	you	become	an	extrovert,	more	of	bliss	and	you	become	an	 introvert.
But	 when	 both	 are	 balanced,	 in	 that	 balance	 transcendence	 happens;	 you	 go
beyond,	beyond	the	inner	and	the	outer,	beyond	all	dualities.
And	that	is	the	target	for	a	sannyasin:	to	go	beyond	all	dualities	--	darkness-light,
life-death,	matter-mind,	this	world	and	that	world.	One	has	to	go	on	transcending
all	dualities.
When	 all	 dualities	 are	 forgotten,	 left	 far	 behind,	 then	 you	 have	 come	 to	 your
ultimate	essence.	To	experience	it	is	to	know	the	truth,	and	truth	liberates.
(Trish	becomes	Gyan	Arpan	--	wisdom,	offering.)
Wisdom	 happens	 only	 when	 you	 have	 offered	 yourself	 totally,	 when	 you	 are
surrendered	to	the	whole,	when	you	relax	and	drop	all	your	defences,	when	you
withdraw	 all	 your	 boundaries,	 when	 you	 start	 meeting	 and	 merging	 with	 the
whole	like	ice	melting	into	the	ocean.
Ordinarily	we	exist	in	the	ocean	like	icebergs.	We	are	made	of	water	but	we	exist
like	icebergs	--	cold,	hard	--	and	we	cling	to	our	identities.
Sannyas	 has	 only	 one	meaning:	 the	 dropping	 of	 your	 ego	 and	 its	 identity,	 the
forgetting	 of	 the	 self	 so	 that	 you	 can	 experience	 the	 whole.	 And	 that	 very
experience	brings	ecstasy,	an	ecstasy	which	is	eternal.	It	comes	but	it	never	goes.
Once	it	is	there	it	is	forever.
(In	 his	 address	 to	 the	 last	 sannyasin	 whom	 he	 names	 Veet	 Asmito,	 Osho
reiterates	the	need	to	drop	the	ego.)
Ego	 can	 exist	 in	 three	ways.	 The	 grossest	 exists	 on	 the	 physical	 plane,	 like	 a
Mohammed	Ali	claiming	to	be	the	greatest.	It	is	a	very	gross	ego	but	in	a	way	it
is	easier	to	get	rid	of	the	gross	ego	because	it	is	so	apparent.	It	is	impossible	not
to	 see	 it,	 it	 is	 just	 on	 the	 surface.	 The	 second	 ego	 is	 a	 little	 deeper,	 it	 is
psychological.	A	painter,	a	musician,	a	poet	--	these	people	have	a	psychological
ego.	It	is	far	more	subtle	and	also	far	more	difficult	to	see.	From	the	outside	the
person	may	not	look	egoistic	at	all,	he	may	seem	a	very	beautiful	person,	but	if
you	just	scratch	him	a	little	bit	you	will	find	ego	exploding.
And	the	third	is	the	subtlest:	the	spiritual	ego	that	exists	in	the	so-called	saints,
mahatmas,	 yogis,	 siddhas.	 The	 third	 is	 so	 subtle	 that	 it	 wears	 the	 garb	 of
humbleness,	hence	it	is	very	difficult	to	find.
Thousands	of	people	have	lived	with	it	absolutely	unaware	of	its	existence	and
others	have	worshipped	them	as	humble	people,	as	simple	people,	as	divine,	as
godly.	But	if	you	watch	accurately	you	will	see:	behind	the	humbleness	there	is	a
desire	 to	 claim	 'I	 am	 the	 most	 humble	 person	 in	 the	 world.	 Nobody	 is	 more
humble	than	me.'	 It	 is	 the	ego,	 the	same	ego.	It	has	come	again	but	now	it	has
come	in	such	a	way	that	one	needs	tremendous	intelligence	to	find	it.
Asmito	means	the	third,	the	subtlest	ego.	And	the	sannyasin	has	to	go	beyond	it.
Certainly	he	has	to	go	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
beyond	the	physical	and	the	psychological,	but	I	want	you	to	be	more	aware	of
the	subtlest	because	that	is	where	all	the	old	traditional	religious	people	got	lost.
It	wears	the	mask	of	humbleness,	simplicity,	poverty,	meekness.
The	 really	 egoless	 person	 has	 no	 humbleness	 in	 him,	 he	 cannot	 have.	 He	 is
neither	 egoistic	 nor	 humble,	 he	 is	 neither	 proud	 of	 anything	 nor	 its	 opposite.
Humbleness	is	nothing	but	ego	standing	on	its	head	--	but	it	is	still	ego.	Whether
it	is	standing	on	its	head	or	on	its	feet,	it	makes	no	difference.	The	really	egoless
person	is	not	egoistic	and	is	not	humble	either,	he	is	simply	whatsoever	he	is.	He
claims	nothing,	not	even	humbleness.
Jesus	 says	 blessed	 are	 the	meek	 for	 theirs	 is	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god.	Because	 of
such	statements	Christian	saints	went	wrong.	They	started	cultivating	meekness
to	attain	 the	kingdom	of	god.	Now	what	kind	of	meekness	 is	 this?	 It	 is	greed,
pure	greed,	it	is	an	ego-longing	to	enter	the	kingdom	of	god.
Jesus'	purpose	was	totally	different.	When	he	said	blessed	are	the	meek	for	theirs
is	 the	kingdom	of	god,	he	was	not	talking	in	terms	of	cause	and	effect,	he	was
not	saying	be	meek	so	that	you	can	attain	to	the	kingdom	of	god.	He	was	saying
that	the	kingdom	of	god	happens	naturally	to	those	who	have	lost	their	ego.
But	he	used	the	wrong	word,	'meek'.	His	meaning	is	clear	but	only	for	those	who
understand.	He	simply	wants	to	say	'egoless';	but	'meek'	gives	a	different	sense,
it	becomes	humbleness.	But	humbleness	isn't	egolessness,	it	is	ego	pretending	to
be	humble.
Egolessness	knows	nothing	of	humbleness.	For	example,	I	am	not	a	humble	man
at	all.	I	cannot	be	humble,	there	is	no	way	for	me	to	be	humble.	I	am	simply	the
way	I	am.
If	one	is	simply	the	way	one	is,	if	one	simply	relaxes	into	one's	nature,	into	one's
spontaneity,	then	that	is	the	kingdom	of	god.	It	is	not	a	reward,	it	is	not	that	you
attain	 it	 because	 of	 your	 egolessness.	To	be	 egoless	 is	 it.	 It	 is	 the	kingdom	of
god.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010205
ShortTitle:	THUNK20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Anand	Angelika.
God	has	a	message	to	convey	to	us,	but	we're	never	home....
The	message	comes	but	we	are	not	 receptive.	 It	does	not	 reach	our	heart.	The
head	does	not	allow	it	to	enter,	the	head	keeps	it	outside.
The	 head	 allows	 only	 the	mundane;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 vehicle	 for	 the	 sacred.	 For	 the
sacred	one	has	to	open	another	door,	another	center	has	to	start	functioning.	And
bliss	 is	 the	 key	 to	 start	 that	 other	 center	 functioning.	 In	moments	 of	 bliss	 the
mind	disappears,	there	is	only	a	heart	full	of	dance,	song,	celebration.
And	the	message	is	immediately	understood.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	sannyasins	have	to	learn	how	to	be	blissful	in	spite	of	all	that	is	disturbing.
Remember	 that:	 in	 spite	 of	 all.	 There	 are	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	 which
distract,	 disturb,	 annoy,	 irritate.	 This	 is	 the	 whole	 challenge	 of	 life,	 not	 to	 be
disturbed	by	it.	One	has	to	become	the	center	of	the	cyclone,	then	the	night	may
be	dark	but	deep	in	your	heart	a	small	candle	goes	on	burning;	and	that's	enough
--	enough	for	you	to	stay	full	of	light.
Sannyas	simply	means	a	cheerful	way	of	living	--	then	everything	else	comes	on
its	own.
(Osho	adds	 'Dhyan''	 to	Daniel's	name,	and	talks	of	meditation	in	relation	to	the
meaning	of	Daniel	--	god	is	my	judge.)
Dhyan	means	an	absolute	state	of	silence	where	no	thought	moves	inside	you;	all
the	 waves	 of	 the	 mind	 are	 gone,	 the	 consciousness	 has	 become	 a	 silent,
undisturbed	 lake.	 In	 that	very	moment	one	becomes	unafraid	of	 the	society,	of
the	 state,	 of	 the	 church,	 of	 all	 so-called	 outer	 authorities	 which	 are	 reducing
every	 human	 being	 to	 a	 slave.	 In	 those	moments	 of	 silence	 one	 stands	 naked
before	god.	One	knows	that:	except	for	god	nobody	is	my	judge.
Daniel	means	god	is	my	judge.
The	moment	you	experience	that	only	god	is	your	judge	you	become	fearless	of
all	other	judges,	of	the	opinions	of	others.	The	greatest	fear	in	the	world	is	of	the
opinions	of	others.	And	 the	moment	you	are	unafraid	of	 the	crowd	you	are	no
longer	a	sheep,	you	become	a	lion.	A	great	roar	arises	in	your	heart,	the	roar	of
freedom.
Buddha	has	actually	called	it	the	lion's	roar.	When	a	man	reaches	an	absolutely
silent	 state	 he	 roars	 like	 a	 lion.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 he	 knows	 what	 freedom	 is
because	 now	 there	 is	 no	 fear	 of	 anybody's	 opinion.	What	 people	 say	 does	 not
matter.	Whether	they	call	you	a	saint	or	a	sinner	is	immaterial;	your	whole	and
sole	judge	is	god.	And	by	 'god'	a	person	is	not	meant	at	all,	god	simply	means
the	whole	universe.
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	of	 having	 to	 face	 a	 person,	 you	have	 to	 face	 the	 trees,	 the
rivers,	 the	mountains,	 the	stars	--	 the	whole	universe.	And	this	 is	our	universe,
we	 are	 part	 of	 it,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 afraid	 of	 it,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 hide
anything	 from	 it.	 In	 fact	 even	 if	you	 try	you	cannot	hide.	The	whole	knows	 it
already,	 the	 whole	 knows	 more	 about	 you	 than	 you	 know;	 hence	 the	 other
meaning	of	Daniel.
One	meaning	 is	 god	 is	my	 judge	 and	 the	 second	 is	 even	more	 significant;	 the
second	is,	god	has	already	judged.	It	is	not	something	that	is	going	to	happen	in
the	 future,	 it	 has	 already	 happened,	 he	 has	 judged.	 So	 even	 the	 fear	 of	 that
judgement	withers	away.	It	is	not	a	question	of	some	judgement	day	at	the	end.
You	need	not	tremble.	The	judgement	day	happened	on	the	first	day;	the	moment
he	 created	you	he	 already	 judged	you.	He	knows	you,	 you	 are	 his	 creation.	 If
something	goes	wrong	with	you	he	is	responsible,	not	you.	If	you	go	astray	he	is
responsible,	 not	 you.	 How	 can	 you	 be	 responsible?	 --	 you	 are	 not	 your	 own
creation.	If	you	paint	and	something	goes	wrong	you	cannot	say	that	the	painting
is	the	cause	of	it	--	the	painter	is	the	cause.
So	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid	of	the	crowd	or	of	some	imaginary	god	at	the	end
of	 the	world	asking	you	what	you	have	done	and	what	you	have	not	done.	He
has	already	judged	--	that	is	really	significant	--	it	has	already	happened	so	you
are	free.	And	 the	moment	one	knows	 that	one	 is	 totally	 free	 to	be	oneself,	 life
starts	having	a	dynamic	quality	to	it.
Fear	creates	fetters,	freedom	gives	you	wings.
(Bob	 is	 a	 college	 professor	 --	 and	 becomes	 not	 Swami	 but	Ma	Anand	 Bob...
because	Bob's	not	a	man	but	a	lady!)
Bob	has	two	meanings;	one	is	brightness	and	the	other	is	fame.	Bliss	brings	both.
As	far	as	you	are	concerned	it	gives	a	tremendous	upsurge	to	your	intelligence,	it
removes	all	the	hindrances,	it	sharpens	your	genius.
Everybody	is	a	genius.	Society	makes	people	mediocre,	stupid,	because	society
needs	 the	mediocres	and	 the	stupids.	The	mediocres	become	the	heads	and	 the
stupids	become	the	hands.	But	society	is	very	much	afraid	of	a	real	genius	--	of	a
Buddha,	of	a	Lao	Tzu,	of	a	Jesus.	It	is	very	much	afraid.	A	genius	seems	to	be	a
danger	 to	 all	 vested	 interests	 --	 and	 in	 fact	 he	 is.	 The	 fear	 is	 not	 wrongly-
founded,	the	is	right,	because	society	is	dominated	by	ugly	interests,	and	the	man
of	 genius	 can	 see	 so	 clearly	 the	whole	 nonsense	 that	 has	 been	perpetuated	 for
centuries	that	he	immediately	rebels.	It	is	not	a	question	of	decision	on	his	part,
rebellion	 comes	 to	 him	 naturally,	 spontaneously.	 He	 cannot	 be	 reduced	 to	 a
slave,	to	a	commodity.
Society	 wants	 everybody	 to	 remain	 miserable.	 Miserable	 people	 are	 good,
obedient.	Miserable	people	are	good	because	misery	destroys	their	intelligence.
Miserable	people	are	good	because	they	are	always	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
more	like	machines	than	like	human	beings,	more	efficient.	And	that's	what	the
society	 needs,	machines,	 not	men.	But	 the	 people	 have	 to	 suffer	 hell	 for	 their
whole	life.
Bliss	opens	the	doors	of	paradise.	And	paradise	is	not	somewhere	above	in	the
clouds,	it	is	within	you.
The	moment	you	start	feeling	blissful	the	doors	of	paradise	open.	In	fact	they	are
always	 open,	 there	 is	 not	 even	 a	 Saint	 Peter	 on	 guard	 --	 you	 just	 have	 to	 be
blissful	to	enter.
And	 of	 course	 the	 second	 meaning	 is	 also	 significant:	 whenever	 a	 person
becomes	 blissful,	 without	 any	 effort	 he	 starts	 affecting	 other	 people's	 lives	 in
some	mysterious	way.	It	is	just	like	when	a	flower	opens.
Somehow	the	bees	come	to	know	that	the	flower	has	opened	and	from	miles	they
start	moving	towards	it.	It	has	been	recorded	that	from	at	least	four	miles	away
bees	can	feel	the	fragrance	and	immediately	they	start	moving	in	the	direction	of
the	fragrance,	towards	the	source	of	it.
So	whenever	a	person	becomes	blissful	it	means	a	flower	of	consciousness	has
opened,	and	those	who	you	are	thirsty	--	and	who	is	not	thirsty?	--	those	who	are
starved	--	and	who	is	not	starved?	--	 they	all	start	moving	as	if	some	magnetic
force	is	pulling	them.
Bliss	 inside	creates	 intelligence	and	outside	creates	a	 tremendous	attraction	for
all	those	who	are	seeking	and	searching.
(You've	 got	 to	 drop	 knowledge	 to	 allow	 wisdom	 to	 surface,	 Osho	 reiterates
tonight.)	 One	 has	 to	 be	 just	 like	 a	 child.	 It	 is	 a	 second	 childhood.	 Jesus	 says
again	 and	 again	 'Unless	 you	 are	 like	 small	 children	 you	 will	 not	 enter	 my
kingdom	of	god.'
The	rabbis,	the	pundits,	the	imams,	the	ayatollahs,	the	bishops,	the	popes	--	they
cannot	 enter	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god.	 Those	 are	 the	 people	 for	 whom	 a	 special
arrangement	 has	 been	made:	 hell.	 It	 is	 for	V.I.P.'s,	 it	 is	 a	V.I.P.	 treatment	 --	 or
V.V.I.P.	Hell	is	not	for	poor	sinners	--	who	cares	about	poor	sinners?	It	is	a	five-
star	place.	Avoid	it!
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 renounce	 knowledge	 so	 that	 they	 can
become	like	small	children	again.
(A	star	of	love,	Osho	names	the	former	Genevieve.)
Love	is	the	only	star	in	the	dark	night	of	the	soul.	But	that	one	star	is	enough	to
transform	everything;	it	can	bring	the	day,	the	dawn.
One	has	to	be	totally	loving,	and	the	love	has	not	to	be	something	addressed.	It
has	to	be	unaddressed	like	the	fragrance	of	a	flower.	It	is	not	a	question	of	giving
love	to	this	person	or	that,	it	is	a	question	of	just	being	loving,	and	ultimately,	of
being	just	love.
These	are	the	three	stages:	love	as	a	relationship	is	the	lowest,	loving	as	a	quality
is	 higher	 than	 the	 first,	 and	 becoming	 just	 love	 --	 not	 even	 a	 quality	 but	 love
itself	--	that	is	the	highest.	It	is	because	of	this	that	Jesus	says	god	is	love.	It	is
the	highest	phenomenon,	the	ultimate	transformation	of	your	energy.
(Osho	speaks	of	god.)
God	is	not	an	object;	it	is	not	something	separate	from	you;	it	is	not	something
that	one	day	can	become	known.
Science	 divides	 reality	 into	 only	 two	 categories,	 the	 known	 and	 the	 unknown.
But	 there	 is	 no	 qualitative	 difference	 between	 the	 two.	 That	 which	 is	 known
today	was	 unknown	 yesterday	 and	 that	which	 is	 unknown	 today	may	 become
known	tomorrow,	it	is	bound	to	become	known	sooner	or	later.
God	 is	 neither	 the	 known	 nor	 the	 unknown.	 Then	 what	 is	 god?	 God	 is	 the
knower,	hence	it	will	always	remain	beyond	science.	It	is	really	so	stupid	that	we
only	think	of	the	object	and	never	think	of	the	subject.
Science	 seems	 to	 be	 very	 illogical	 about	 that	 one	 thing.	The	 scientist	 is	 really
very	logical	about	objects	but	very	illogical	about	himself.	He	goes	on	denying
himself.	He	tries	to	know	everything	except	the	scientist	himself.	He	never	asks
the	 question,	 'Who	 am	 I?'	 He	 asks	 all	 other	 questions	 but	 the	most	 important
question	 is	 never	 raised	 by	 him.	 In	 fact	 he	 is	 afraid	 to	 raise	 it	 because	 no
scientific	method	can	be	of	any	help	in	answering	it.	He	will	have	to	move	in	a
totally	different	world,	the	world	of	mysticism.
God	never	happens	as	an	object;	it	is	your	very	subjectivity.	The	very	energy	that
knows,	is	god.	Hence	the	only	way	to	know	the	knower	is	to	discard	all	objects.
That's	what	meditation	is	all	about,	putting	all	the	objects	aside.	If	the	objects	are
there	your	knowing	is	focussed	on	them;	if	there	is	no	object	your	knowing	has
to	come	back	to	yourself.	There	is	no	hindrance.	A	circle	is	created;	it	goes	away
from	 you	 but	 finding	 no	 object	 ultimately	 comes	 back	 to	 you.	 In	 that	 coming
back	you	experience	god.	It	is	energy	coming	back	to	its	own	source.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	knowing	is	the	only	knowing	worth	calling	knowing;	all	else	is	superficial.
To	know	it	is	to	know	all,	not	to	know	it	is	to	know	nothing.
(Hariprem	is	one	of	the	thousand	names	that	Hindus	have	found	for	god,	Osho
tells	 Hariprem.)	 A	 whole	 scripture	 is	 devoted	 only	 to	 names.	 In	 that	 great
scripture,	 VISHNUSAHASTRANATH,	 The	 One	 Thousand	 Names	 of	 God,
nothing	else	is	mentioned;	throughout	the	whole	scripture	only	names	are	given
but	each	name	signifies	some	aspect	of	god.
The	most	 loved	by	me	 is	Hari.	 In	no	other	 language	of	 the	world,	 in	no	other
tradition	or	 religion	does	such	a	name	exist.	 It	 is	 really	extraordinary,	of	 some
tremendous	intuition.	Hari	means	a	thief.	Now	to	call	god	a	thief	needs	courage.
Only	somebody	who	knows	can	do	that.	And	certainly,	god	is	a	thief	because	he
steals	your	heart.
And	 the	 surgery	 is	 done	 so	 silently	 that	 you	never	 become	 aware	 of	what	 has
happened.	Suddenly	one	day	you	find	your	heart	is	missing	--	that's	the	work	of
Hari,	the	god!	Suddenly	one	day	your	own	heart	is	no	more	your	own,	it	is	god's;
he	has	stolen	it,	he	has	succeeded!
Love	that	thief,	invite	that	thief,	pray	to	that	thief,	saying	'I	am	ready,'	and	leave
your	door	open.	Don't	create	any	obstructions,	help	him	in	every	possible	way	so
that	 he	 can	 steal	 your	 heart,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 greatest	 experience	 that	 can
happen	to	somebody.
Life	becomes	meaningful	only	when	god	enters	 it,	before	 that	 it	 is	 just	a	drag.
The	moment	god	enters	you	it	is	a	dance.
(To	Cathy	from	France,	Osho	gives	the	name	Haridasi.)
Hari	 is	 one	 of	 the	 names	 of	 god,	 it	means	 the	 great	 thief.	And	he	 has	 already
stolen	your	heart!	(much	laughter)	It	is	already	missing!	Later	on	you	can	search
for	it	but	you	will	not	find	it.	It	happened	quickly.
And	 dasi	means	 one	who	 is	 surrendered:	 surrendered	 to	 the	 ultimate	 thief.	 So
now	 you	 are	 no	 more	 your	 own	 master,	 from	 this	 very	 moment	 become
discontinuous	with	your	past,	it	is	no	more	relevant,	it	is	a	new	birth.	And	now
live	in	a	surrendered	way.
Surrender	 means	 the	 way	 of	 love.	 And	 the	 miracle	 of	 love	 is	 that	 through
surrender	it	becomes	victorious.	And	only	love	becomes	victorious,	nothing	else
ever	becomes	victorious.	With	god	neither	money	can	succeed,	nor	intellect,	nor
physical	power	 --	only	 love,	because	 love	 is	not	 a	 fight,	 it	 is	 a	 surrender.	One
simply	relaxes,	one	simply	lets	go	of	one's	ego	and	one	says	to	god	'I	am	yours,
sincerely	yours!'
And	 the	 moment	 you	 have	 said	 that	 totally	 --	 that	 'I	 am	 yours',	 --	 a
transformation	happens	instantly.	It	is	not	a	gradual	process,	not	that	one	changes
slowly	slowly.	People	change	slowly	because	they	are	cowards.
They	 change	 slowly	 because	 they	 give	 up	 very	 reluctantly,	 chunk	 by	 chunk.
They	are	very	miserly,	they	go	on	holding	back.	If	one	is	ready	to	give	up	then
immediately,	in	a	single	moment,	the	miracle	happens.
There	is	no	need	to	be	miserly	because	our	life	is	god's,	it	is	his	gift.	We	are	not
giving	 anything	 to	 him,	 just	 offering	what	 he	 has	 given	 to	 us.	But	 people	 are
strange;	 they	 cling	 to	 something	 that	 is	 not	 theirs.	 In	 that	 clinging	 they	 create
misery.	 Once	 you	 accept	 that	 your	 life	 is	 not	 your	 own,	 it	 is	 god's,	 and	 you
surrender	 it	 unto	 his	 feet,	 all	 burden	 disappears,	 all	 tension	 disappears,	 all
anxiety,	all	anguish.	Then	life	is	a	sheer	joy,	a	beautiful	song,	a	constant	festivity,
a	 celebration.	 --	 How	 long	will	 you	 be	 here?	 --	 Five	months.	 --	 Five	months
won't	do.	Forever	--	and	a	little	bit	more!	Good,	Haridasi.
(To	Judith,	the	name	Premdasi	--	devoted	to	love.)
The	 quality	 that	 can	make	 you	 transported	 from	 the	mundane	 to	 the	 sacred	 is
love.	 It	 is	 the	 bridge	 between	 the	 ordinary	 and	 the	 extraordinary,	 between	 the
manifest	and	the	unmanifest,	between	the	circumference	and	the	centre.	One	has
to	learn	only	one	thing,	the	art	of	love.
It	is	certain	an	art.	Everybody	wants	to	love	and	wants	to	be	loved,	but	nobody
learns	 the	 art.	 A	 great	 misunderstanding	 prevails	 that	 just	 by	 being	 born	 you
know	what	love	is,	so	there	is	no	need	to	learn	it.
Certainly	 the	potential	 is	 there,	but	even	 the	painter	with	 the	greatest	potential
has	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	painting	even	 the	greatest	dancer	has	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of
dancing.	The	potential	 is	 there	but	 the	 art	 is	needed	 to	bring	 the	potential	 into
actuality,	to	transform	it	from	the	seed	into	a	flower.
Sannyas	means	 the	 art	 of	 love.	 Love	 in	 a	multi-dimensional	way	 because	 this
whole	existence	is	divine.
So	 don't	 make	 choices,	 love	 choicelessly.	 Love	 for	 love's	 sake	 --	 that	 is	 the
meaning	of	your	name	--	and	then	you	need	not	search	for	god.	God	will	try	to
find	you	--	it	is	up	to	him.	And	only	he	can	find	you,	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
cannot	find	him.	Where	will	you	try	to	find	him?	He	has	no	postal	address,	no
telephone	 number.	 In	 what	 direction	 is	 one	 going	 to	 search	 for	 him?	 --	 so
searching	is	futile.
Just	 prepare	 yourself,	 just	 be	 ready	 to	 be	 the	 host.	 That's	 what	 love	 does,	 it
creates	 the	 host.	 And	 the	 moment	 the	 host	 is	 ready	 the	 guest	 immediately
appears.	 It	 has	 never	 been	 otherwise.	One	 can	 rest	 assured:	whenever	 you	 are
ready	god	appears,	instantly,	immediately.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010215
ShortTitle:	THUNK21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	 ingeniously	makes	of	Satyam	Donna	 the	meaning;	 truth	 can	 enter	 one's
being	only	if	one	has	the	quality	of	feminine	receptivity.)
Receptivity	 is	 always	 feminine.	 The	 male	 quality	 is	 aggressive,	 the	 feminine
quality	is	receptive.	It	is	not	only	physically	that	a	woman	has	a	womb,	it	is	also
spiritually	true.	When	when	a	man	attains	to	the	truth	he	has	to	learn	the	art	of
being	feminine.	Hence	you	will	see	in	the	statues	of	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Krishna,
Christ,	 a	 certain	 quality	 of	 femininity,	 a	 grace,	 a	 sensitivity,	 an	 availability,	 a
vulnerability,	because	 truth	has	 to	be	 received,	welcomed.	You	cannot	conquer
truth,	you	have	to	allow	the	truth	to	conquer	you.
There	 is	 no	 way	 to	 be	 aggressive	 as	 far	 as	 truth	 is	 concerned.	 Aggression	 is
violence	 and	 the	 violent	 person	 becomes	 incapable	 of	 knowing	 the	 truth.	One
has	to	be	utterly	loving.
The	 feminine	 quality	 makes	 you	 a	 host	 and	 then	 the	 guest	 can	 come	 at	 any
moment.	Whenever	your	receptivity	is	ripe	the	guest	inevitably	arrives.	Not	even
a	single	moment	is	lost.
(Shirley	 means	 a	 restful	 spirit.	 Osho	 adds	 'Anand'	 to	 it,	 and	 explains	 to	 an
American	groupleader	that	if	we	could	only	calm	down	a	bit	we'd	find	bliss	was
already	ours.)	We	have	completely	forgotten	about	it,	it	has	become	a	forgotten
language,	but	it	is	still	there.
It	is	like	when	you	see	a	person	and	you	remember	his	face,	you	even	remember
that	you	remember	him,	you	remember	that	you	remember	his	name	--	you	say
'It	is	just	on	the	tip	of	my	tongue	but	it	is	still	not	coming.'	And	the	more	you	try,
the	 less	 is	 the	 possibility	 of	 it	 coming	 because	 your	 very	 effort	 creates
restlessness,	your	very	effort	makes	you	tense,	your	very	effort	creates	a	turmoil
and	 it	 becomes	more	 and	more	difficult	 to	 search	 in	 that	 turmoil.	And	 finally,
you	 decide	 not	 to	 bother	 about	 it	 you	 become	 engaged	 in	 something	 else	 --
maybe	 listening	 to	 music	 or	 cooking	 food	 or	 working	 in	 the	 garden	 or	 just
cleaning	the	floor	or	taking	a	shower	--	and	suddenly	it	pops	up.	You	were	not
looking	for	it,	you	had	completely	forgotten	about	it	You	dropped	the	very	idea
and	 suddenly	 it	 is	 there.	What	 happened?	 The	moment	 you	 dropped	 the	 idea
your	rest	was	restored;	you	became	calm	and	quiet,	you	became	effortless,	you
became	relaxed.	And	that's	what	is	needed.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sannyas	means	living	life	in	a	relaxed	way,	with	no	hurry,	with	no	worry,	as	if
nothing	 is	serious,	 living	 life	 joyously,	playfully,	 from	moment	 to	moment,	not
bothering	about	 the	past,	not	bothering	about	 the	future	either,	not	bothering	at
all;	whatsoever	happens	is	good	and	whatsoever	does	not	happen	is	also	good.
Taking	things	with	such	calmness	and	equanimity	brings	a	restful	spirit.	Slowly
slowly	 the	whole	 turmoil	 settles	 and	 suddenly	 there	 is	bliss,	 out	of	nowhere	 it
starts	welling	up.	You	become	flooded	with	light,	with	life,	with	love.	Those	are
the	three	dimensions	of	bliss.	It	makes	you	more	light-full,	makes	you	more	life-
full,	 makes	 you	more	 love-full.	 And	when	 all	 these	 three	 L's	 --	 these	 are	 the
learned,	 one	 has	 arrived	 home.	 In	 the	 universities,	 colleges	 and	 schools	 they
teach	you	three	R's;	and	their	three	R's	are	worthless,	mundane.
I	 teach	 three	 L's.	 The	 whole	 phenomenon	 happens	 only	 when	 you	 are	 restful
spirits,	at	home,	at	ease.
(Richard	becomes	Swami	Prem	Svargo.)
Prem	means	love.	Svargo	means	heaven,	paradise.
Heaven	 is	 not	 something	 geographical,	 it	 is	 not	 something	 outside	 you,
somewhere	above	the	clouds;	it	is	within	you.	The	whole	idea	of	a	geographical
heaven	 somewhere	 out	 there	 has	 led	 millions	 of	 people	 into	 all	 kinds	 of
stupidities.
Heaven	is	a	state	of	being,	it	is	a	state	of	love.	When	you	are	full	of	hate	you	are
in	 hell,	 when	 you	 are	 overflowing	 with	 love	 you	 are	 in	 heaven.	 The	 English
word	'paradise'	comes	from	a	Persian	word	'firdaus'.
Firdaus	means	a	walled	garden	with	many	flowers,	streams,	birds.	That	garden	is
your	potential.	Seeds	are	there,	everything	is	there	as	a	potential	but	you	have	to
actualise	it.	God	only	provides	seeds	and	the	challenge	of	life	to	sow	those	seeds,
to	grow,	to	protect,	to	water,	to	nourish,	to	wait.	And	then	spring	comes	and	one
day	the	mysterious	has	happened.
The	 seed	 has	 never	 given	 any	 clue	 as	 to	 what	 it	 contained;	 when	 suddenly
lotuses	bloom	you	cannot	believe	that	 they	were	hiding	in	such	small	seeds,	 in
ugly	seeds	--	closed,	windowless.	They	almost	look	like	small	stones,	pebbles	--
and	 such	beautiful	 roses	were	hiding	 there.	 if	 you	had	 cut	 open	 the	 seeds	you
would	not	have	found	anything.
That's	where	science	is	missing:	it	goes	on	dissecting,	cutting	seeds	and	trying	to
find	 roses,	 lotuses,	 marigolds.	 It	 finds	 nothing,	 not	 even	 a	 hint,	 because	 the
potential	is	invisible.	It	needs	many	things,	only	then	can	it	become	visible
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	one	is	taking	a	step	towards	the	actualisation	of	all	the
potential	that	has	come	with	you	from	the	very	beginning.	The	potential	should
not	 die	 as	 a	 potential.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 sin,	 to	 have	 been	 living	 with	 such	 an
opportunity	 and	not	 to	have	used	 it.	That's	 the	only	 sin.	To	have	used	 it	 to	 its
maximum,	its	optimum	capacity,	is	virtue.
(That	we're	alive	proves	we	are	loved,	Osho	tells	Haripriya.)	We	are	here	--	that
is	more	 than	 enough	 proof	 that	 existence	 needs	 us.	We	 are	 fulfilling	 a	 certain
need;	we	are	not	useless,	we	are	not	accidental	as	science	goes	on	telling	people.
In	 these	 three	 hundred	 years	 science	 has	 created	 one	 great	 problem	 for	 every
human	being;	the	problem	is	that	science	has	destroyed	the	possibility	of	feeling
respect	for	oneself.	And	the	moment	a	person	loses	respect	for	himself	he	loses
all	the	joy	of	life,	he	loses	his	soul,	he	becomes	soulless.	And	science	has	been
telling	 and	 teaching	 everybody	 that	 man	 is	 just	 an	 accident,	 that	 the	 whole
existence	is	accidental.
The	 very	 idea	 that	 we	 are	 accidental	 takes	 all	 sense	 out	 of	 life;	 all	 meaning
disappears.	Whether	we	are	or	not	does	not	matter	--	then	why	bother	to	go	on
living?	For	what?
The	 greatest	 need	 of	man	 is	 to	 be	 needed.	 The	moment	 one	 feels	 needed	 life
starts	having	ecstasy.	Even	if	a	single	person	needs	you	it	gives	you	significance.
A	child	needs	you	as	a	mother	--	that's	enough	to	live	for.	A	man	needs	you	as	a
wife	 and	 that's	 enough	 to	 live	 for.	 A	 friend	 needs	 you...	 without	 you	 there
somebody	will	miss	you,	somebody	will	 feel	 lonely	--	 that's	enough	for	you	to
feel	 meaningful.	 And	 the	 religious	 person	 is	 one	 who	 feels	 that	 the	 whole
existence	needs	him,	hence	his	joy	is	infinite.
If	even	one	person	can	give	you	meaning	by	needing	you,	by	desiring	you,	then
you	 can	 imagine	 how	much	 bliss	 can	 happen	when	 you	 come	 to	 feel	 that	 the
whole	 infinite	 universe	 needs	 you,	 that	 you	 are	 fulfilling	 some	 purpose.
Suddenly	 life	 becomes	 poetry,	 a	 song.	A	 dance	 arises	 in	 you,	 a	 celebration,	 a
thankfulness.	 That	 thankfulness	 is	 prayer.	 That	 gratitude	 is	 the	 greatest
experience.	 My	 whole	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 feel	 the
significance	of	life.
And	existence	makes	no	conditions	on	you.	It	is	not	that	if	you	do	certain	things
only	then	will	the	love	from	the	whole	flow	towards	you.	It	is	unconditional.	It
comes	to	the	saint,	it	comes	to	the	sinner;	it	makes	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
no	distinctions.
When	 a	 raincloud	 comes	 and	 showers	 it	 does	 not	 shower	more	 on	 the	 saint's
garden	and	less	on	the	sinner's	garden;	it	makes	no	distinctions.	So	there	are	no
conditions	 from	 existence	 that	 you	 should	 fulfil	 this,	 that	 you	 should	 do	 that.
Human	beings	make	conditions	and	destroy	the	beauty	of	love.
Existence	gives	you	love	without	any	conditions.	Whatsoever	you	want,	you	do	-
-	that's	your	freedom.
God	loves	you	as	you	are.	But	we	have	destroyed	even	the	idea	of	god.	The	Old
Testament	god	says	 'I	am	a	very	 jealous	god.	 If	you	worship	some	other	god	I
will	take	revenge.'	Now	this	is	not	god's	voice.	This	is	so	ugly,	the	very	idea	that
some	 jealous	man	 is	 speaking	 in	 the	 name	 of	 god,	 that	 some	 jealous	 priest	 is
wearing	the	mask	of	god,	is	so	stupid.	It	is	not	god's	face,	not	god's	voice;	god's
love	is	unconditional.	And	god	is	not	a	person,	hence	he	cannot	be	jealous.
Jesus	is	far	more	right	when	he	says	god	is	love.	But	Christians	misunderstood
even	 that.	They	 thought	 love	was	one	of	 the	qualities	 of	 god	 --	 that	 is	 not	 so.
Jesus	is	saying	that	god	is	love,	not	that	god	is	a	quality	or	that	love	is	a	quality;
he	is	simply	making	both	words	synonymous.	Saying	that	god	is	love	means	god
equals	love.	It	is	the	same	energy	called	by	a	different	name.
Existence	is	love	--	and	to	feel	it	is	to	be	transformed.
Anand	Sagar.
Bliss	is	an	unboundedness,	just	like	an	ocean.	It	is	so	vast	that	one	is	completely
in	it.	Just	as	a	dewdrop	slips	from	a	lotus	leaf	into	the	lake	and	becomes	one	with
the	lake,	 in	 the	same	way	man	has	to	slip	out	of	 the	ego	and	become	one	with
existence,	only	then	is	there	bliss.
Ego	is	misery,	the	source	of	misery,	the	only	cause	of	misery;	and	egolessness	is
the	source	of	bliss.	Ego	gives	you	boundaries,	identities,	it	makes	you	a	certain
person.
The	 word	 'person'	 is	 significant.	 It	 comes	 from	 the	 Greek	 'persona';	 persona
means	 a	mask.	 In	Greek	 theater	 actors	used	 to	wear	masks.	The	word	 'person'
and	the	word	'personality'	both	come	from	persona.
The	ego	is	a	persona;	it	is	a	mask,	it	is	not	your	reality.	It	has	to	be	dropped,	only
then	 do	 you	 know	what	 is	 real.	And	 the	 real	 is	 always	 blissful.	 The	 unreal	 is
against	your	nature,	hence	it	creates	misery.	Unreal	means	unnatural,	real	means
natural.	And	your	nature	is	infinitely	blissful,	it	is	a	constant	celebration.	Except
for	man	 you	will	 not	 find	 any	 animal,	 tree,	 star,	 rock	miserable,	 because	 only
man	creates	the	idea	of	the	ego.
Only	man	can	create	the	idea	of	the	ego,	he	is	the	most	highly	evolved	form	of
life.	But	as	you	grow	higher	the	risk	of	falling	becomes	bigger.	Animals	cannot
fall	and	become	an	Adolf	Hitler	or	a	Genghis	Khan	or	a	Tamerlaine	or	a	Nadir
Shah	--	no	animal	can	do	that.	A	cat	 is	a	cat,	a	dog	is	a	dog,	a	 lion	is	a	lion,	a
serpent	 is	 a	 serpent.	 They	 are	 simple	 people;	 whatsoever	 they	 are	 they	 are,
neither	more	nor	less.
But	man	moves	on	high	peaks	and	hence	the	danger	--	he	can	fall.	If	he	falls	he
can	 fall	 below	 the	 animals,	 if	 he	 rises	 he	 can	 rise	 above	 the	 gods.	With	 that
possibility	 of	 rising	 above	 the	 gods	 also	 comes	 the	 risk	 of	 falling	 below	 the
animals.	The	whole	thing	depends	on	this	simple	word	'ego'.	If	ego	becomes	too
much	you	 start	 falling,	 the	weight	of	 the	ego	 starts	pulling	you	downwards.	 If
you	become	egoless	you	become	weightless,	and	with	that	very	weightlessness
you	start	moving	upwards.
Science	knows	only	one	law,	the	law	of	gravitation.	But	the	mystics	have	known
another	law,	the	law	of	levitation.	Just	as	things	fall	downwards	things	also	rise
upwards	 --	 but	 for	 that	 one	 has	 to	 become	 absolutely	 weightless,	 one	 has	 to
remove	the	rock	of	the	ego.	And	that's	the	whole	work	of	sannyas:	removing	the
rock	of	the	ego.	Then	you	have	wings	and	you	can	have	what	Plotinus	calls	the
flight	of	the	alone	to	the	alone,	the	ultimate	flight,	the	flight	of	man	to	god,	the
flight	from	the	finite	to	the	infinite.
(Love	is	a	bridge,	Osho	had	said	some	nights	ago.	And	so	is	meditation,	he	tells
Dhyan	Divyam.)	Meditation	means	becoming	absolutely	silent,	still,	serene,	as	if
nothing	moves	inside,	everything	stops
--	 the	mind,	 time.	 There	 comes	 a	 full	 stop	 to	 all	movement.	 In	 that	 full	 stop,
when	 the	 ordinary	movement	 of	 the	mind	 stops,	 you	 start	moving	 into	 a	 now
dimension.	The	ordinary	movement	of	the	mind	is	horizontal.
When	it	stops,	the	energy	cannot	stop.	Energy	is	basically	dynamic,	so	when	the
horizontal	movement	stops,	energy	changes	its	movement	to	a	new	dimension;	it
becomes	vertical.
Once	 the	 energy	 becomes	 vertical	 you	 are	 joined	 to	 god.	 That	 change	 from
horizontal	 to	 vertical	 is	 meditation.	 You	 just	 have	 to	 drop	 all	 the	 old	 known
movements	of	the	mind	so	the	energy	accumulates	and	has	to	find	a	new	path.	It
cannot	remain	static,	remember.	This	is	the	whole	strategy	of	meditation.
Because	energy	cannot	remain	static	there	is	hope.	If	you	stop	the	energy	moving
as	it	has	always	done,	in	thoughts,	desires,	memories,	imagination,	dreams,	when
you	cut	out	all	 these,	when	you	put	a	full	stop	there	as	if	 the	road	had	ended...
Energy	cannot	remain	static,	it	is	essentially	dynamic.	So	when	the	old	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
movement	completely	 stops	 it	 takes	a	new	 turn,	 absolutely	new	 --	you	are	not
even	 aware	 that	 such	 a	 possibility	 ever	 existed.	 From	 being	 horizontal	 it
becomes	vertical.
That	 is	 the	 symbol	of	 the	Christian	 cross.	Christians	have	missed	 its	meaning,
they	think	it	is	just	a	cross.	But	it	is	part	of	the	old	eastern	symbol,	the	swastika;
it	 is	just	a	part	of	the	swastika.	The	swastika	is	a	cross	with	a	few	more	things
added	 to	 it;	 but	 the	 cross	 is	 the	 middle	 section	 of	 the	 swastika.	 The	 cross
symbolises	these	two	possibilities.	One	is	horizontal	--	Jesus'	hands	are	crucified
on	 the	 horizontal	 and	 the	 whole	 of	 his	 body	 is	 on	 the	 vertical.	 His	 hands
represent	 work,	 action,	 and	 his	 whole	 body	 represents	 rest,	 relaxation.	 The
vertical	means	relaxation	and	rest.
So	once	your	energy	stops	moving	 in	 the	old	structure	and	pattern	a	new	door
opens	for	you.	You	cannot	open	it	because	you	don't	know	where	it	is.	All	that
you	can	do	is	stop	the	old	flow	and	let	it	find	the	new	route.	Because	energy	can
move	only	in	two	ways	there	is	no	problem;	if	the	horizontal	is	blocked	it	has	to
move	vertically;	it	will	find	its	own	way.
That's	why	I	say	meditation	is	the	bridge	between	man	and	god	--	it	is	divine.
Amrita	Pritam.
Amrita	means	the	immortal,	the	timeless,	the	deathless.	It	represents	god	because
god	is	immortal,	timeless,	eternal,	deathless.	It	represents	the	real.
The	unreal	 is	momentary,	 it	 s	 changing	continuously.	 It	 is	 like	a	dream	world,
everything	goes	on	changing.
You	see	a	movie	--	scenes	go	on	changing,	but	something	behind	the	scenes,	the
white	screen,	remains	the	same;	it	is	hidden	behind	the	changing	scenes.	When
these	 scenes	 stop,	when	 the	 projector	 stops,	 you	 suddenly	 become	 aware	 of	 a
new	thing	which	was	always	there	when	you	were	looking	at	the	picture	but	you
were	not	aware	of	it.
God	 is	 just	 like	 the	 screen	 of	 the	whole	 changing	world.	The	whole	 changing
world	is	but	a	projection.
Hidden	behind	it	is	the	immortal,	the	eternal.
So	Amrita	is	another	name	for	god.	And	Pritam	means	beloved:	beloved	of	god,
beloved	of	the	eternal,	the	immortal.
This	is	the	most	significant	thing	that	I	want	to	insist	on	again	and	again	for	my
sannyasins	to	remember,	because	the	mind	tends	to	forget	it.	In	fact	the	mind	has
great	 investment	 in	 forgetting	 it,	 because	 if	 you	 remember	 it	 then	 the	 mind
becomes	 useless.	 If	 you	 remember	 the	 eternal,	 if	 you	 remember	 the	 ultimate,
then	the	mind	becomes	very	insignificant,	because	the	mind	is	just	a	momentary
phenomenon.	If	you	watch	a	thought	it	arises	one	moment,	the	next	moment	it	is
gone.	If	you	watch	any	mood,	it	comes,	it	is	there	for	a	little	while	and	then	it	is
gone.
If	you	are	aware	of	the	eternal,	attuned	to	the	eternal,	you	won't	care	much	about
all	these	passing	phases.	And	we	become	so	much	disturbed.	A	little	bit	of	anger
arises	and	we	are	completely	clouded	by	it,	we	forget	everything	--	 it	becomes
the	 most	 important	 thing	 --	 and	 we	 know	 that	 tomorrow	 we	 will	 not	 even
remember	it.	After	few	days	it	will	look	so	insignificant.
There	is	a	great	Sufi	story.	A	king	asked	a	Sufi	mystic,	'Can	you	give	me	some
advice	 which	 will	 be	 helpful	 to	 me	 in	 the	 critical	 moments	 of	 life,	 in	 the
dangerous	moments	of	 life?'	The	Sufi	was	wearing	a	 ring	he	 took	off	 the	 ring
and	gave	 it	 to	 the	king	 and	he	 said	 'Under	 this	 diamond	 there	 is	 a	message,	 a
small	note,	but	don't	remove	the	diamond	unless	a	real	need	arises.	Unless	you
feel	 that	you	have	come	to	the	moment	where	nothing	else	can	help,	only	then
remove	the	diamond	and	you	will	find	the	message.'
The	 king	was	 tempted	many	 times	 but	 he	 kept	 control.	And	 then	 the	moment
came.	His	country	was	invaded,	he	was	defeated,	he	lost	all	that	he	had.	He	was
being	 chased	 by	 the	 enemy	 and	 he	 ran	 away	 on	 his	 horse.	 The	 enemy	 was
coming	closer	and	closer	--	he	could	hear	the	noise,	the	sound	of	the	horses.	He
knew	that	within	a	few	minutes	they	would	reach	-him.	And	then	he	came	to	a
cul-de-sac,	the	road	ended.	It	was	a	mountainous	region	and	suddenly	there	was
a	 great	 abyss	 and	 there	was	 no	way	 to	 go	 further.	 He	 could	 not	 go	 back,	 the
enemy	was	 there,	 just	 on	 his	 heels,	 and	 their	 sound	was	 becoming	 louder	 and
louder	and	louder.	Suddenly	he	remembered	the	message.
He	opened	the	ring	and	removed	the	stone.	There	was	a	small	note;	it	said	'This
too	 will	 pass.'	 A	 great	 silence	 descended	 on	 him.	 'This	 too	 will	 pass.'	 And	 it
actually	happened	that	slowly	slowly	the	sound	of	the	coming	enemy	receded	--
they	had	taken	a	wrong	turning,	they	had	moved	in	another	direction.
Finally	 he	 collected	 his	 army	 again,	 conquered	 the	 enemy,	 came	 back	 to	 his
capital	 and	was	 received	 greatly	 by	 the	 people.	 They	were	 shouting	with	 joy,
dancing,	 celebrating,	 the	 whole	 capital	 was	 decorated,	 the	 roads	 were	 full	 of
flowers	and	he	 felt	very	great,	 as	 if	he	had	 suddenly	become	young	again.	He
was	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
riding	on	that	wave	of	victory	with	great	pride	and	suddenly	he	remembered	the
message	--	'This	too	will	pass'.	A	great	calm	descended	on	him	again.	And	he	felt
it	is	all	the	same	--	defeat,	victory,	nothing	remains.
The	 people	 were	 puzzled	 --	 after	 that	 day	 their	 king	 had	 changed,	 he	 was	 a
totally	now	man.	They	asked	him	again	and	again	 'What	has	happened	to	you?
You	don't	look	disturbed	at	all,	you	don't	look	rootless	at	all.
The	old	worrying,	the	old	anxieties,	have	all	disappeared.	You	look	so	calm	and
quiet	and	collected	--	what	is	the	secret	of	it?'
Finally	he	called	his	court	and	he	showed	them	the	ring.	He	said,	 'There	is	not
much	secret	in	it.	This	ring	is	the	secret,	 this	is	my	only	scripture.	Now	I	don't
need	 any	 other	 scripture.	 This	 simple	message,	 one	 single	 sentence,	 "This	 too
will	pass",	is	enough.	Whenever	something	comes	to	my	mind	--	anger,	jealousy,
hatred,	greed	--	I	simply	remind	myself	that	this	too	will	pass,	and	suddenly	it	is
no	 longer	 there.	 It	 suddenly	passes	because	 it	 is	bound	 to	pass;	 and	 then	 I	 am
again	settled	in	my	eternity,	I	am	again	rooted	in	the	ultimate,	in	my	very	nature.'
To	remember	that	we	belong	to	the	eternal,	to	remember	that	existence	loves	us,
that	we	are	beloveds	of	existence,	is	enough	to	get	rid	of	all	anxieties,	anguishes,
tensions,	worries.	Then	life	and	death	are	 the	same,	success	and	failure	are	 the
same.	 Then	 what	 happens	 does	 not	 matter.	 What	 matters	 now	 is	 of	 a	 totally
different	 dimension:	 the	 beginningless,	 the	 endless,	 the	 immortal.	 To
continuously	remember	this	is	the	whole	secret	of	sannyas.
The	orange	will	 remind	you	--	 this	 is	 just	 like	 the	ring	--	 the	mala	will	 remind
you,	 my	 picture	 will	 remind	 you.	 These	 are	 just	 devices	 to	 keep	 you
continuously	aware	 that	whatsoever	happens	on	 the	outside	 is	 irrelevant.	Let	 it
pass	and	remain	rooted,	grounded	in	your	own	centre.
To	 be	 centred	 is	 to	 know	 what	 god	 is,	 to	 be	 grounded	 in	 one's	 nature	 is	 to
become	enlightened,	is	to	become	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha.
(Osho	interpreted	Dhyan	as	meaning	silence	this	time,	in	talking	to	Dhyanprem
about	his	new	name.)	There	have	been	people	in	the	past	who	lived	in	silence	but
they	 sacrificed	 love	 for	 it.	There	 have	 also	 been	people	who	 lived	 in	 love	 but
they	sacrificed	silence	for	it.	And	to	me,	both	missed	the	wholeness	of	life.
The	wholeness	of	 life	 is	possible	only	when	 love	and	 silence	go	hand	 in	hand
together	in	deep	harmony.
Silence	is	subjective,	it	is	something	that	happens	within	you,	it	belongs	to	your
interiority.	And	love	is	relating	with	others.	Love	is	moving	into	the	world,	love
is	other-oriented.
A	person	who	simply	becomes	an	introvert	becomes	closed	to	the	world,	and	to
be	closed	to	the	world	means	to	be	closed	to	the	sun,	to	the	moon,	to	the	flowers,
to	this	tremendously	beautiful	existence.	It	is	moving	alive	into	a	kind	of	grave.
That's	what	your	so-called	monasteries	were	supposed	to	be:	graves	for	people
who	were	not	dead	yet.	Monasteries	gave	them	an	opportunity	to	live	a	dead	life.
They	escaped	from	the	world,	they	were	afraid	of	love,	very	much	afraid	of	love.
There	are	Christian	monasteries	where	no	woman	has	ever	entered	and	Christian
nunneries	where	no	man	has	ever	entered.	For	one	thousand	years	no	woman	has
entered	the	monastery	at	Athos	and	once	you	become	a	monk	in	that	monastery
you	cannot	got	out.	You	enter	 forever.	There	 is	an	entrance	but	no	exit.	 It	 is	a
grave;	a	communal	grave	you	can	call	it	--	many	people	living	in	one	grave.
This	is	not	wholeness,	not	health.	And	these	people	are	bound	to	become	stupid,
imbeciles,	 idiots,	 because	 to	 remain	 intelligent	 you	 need	 all	 the	 challenges	 of
life,	 all	 the	 problems	 of	 life.	 The	 challenges	 and	 problems	 go	 on	 giving
opportunities	for	your	intelligence	to	grow.	They	sharpen	your	sword,	they	don't
allow	any	rust	to	gather	upon	you.	And	there	have	been	people	who	have	lived	in
the	world,	 in	 the	world	of	 love,	 in	 relationships	of	all	kinds,	but	 they	 lived	an
insane	life	because	there	was	no	silence	in	them.
Up	to	now	this	has	been	the	way	for	ninety-nine	point	nine	per	cent	of	humanity.
We	 have	 existed	 in	 a	 lopsided	 way.	 My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 bring	 a	 new
synthesis;	they	have	to	live	in	silence	and	love	together.
It	 should	 be	 easy:	 when	 you	 are	 alone	 be	 silent,	 be	 meditative,	 move	 to	 the
innermost	core	of	your	being;	and	when	you	are	with	somebody,	share	your	joy
and	 love	 --	 relate,	 sing,	dance,	 love,	 laugh.	They	are	not	against	each	other.	 In
fact	just	the	opposite	is	the	case:	love	will	help	you	to	attain	deeper	silence,	and
silence	will	help	you	to	attain	deeper	love.	They	support	each	other,	They	are	not
antagonists,	but	complementaries.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010225
ShortTitle:	THUNK22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	adds	Deva	to	Ananda's	name	and	explains	that	bliss	is	one	of	those	things
which	is	of	the	beyond.)
Love,	 awareness	 --	 these	 are	 also	 of	 the	 same	 category.	 All	 these	 values	 can
become	doors	to	god	because	if	you	can	catch	hold	of	one	ray	of	light	you	can
reach	 the	very	 source	of	 it,	you	can	use	 it	 as	a	bridge.	And	bliss	 is	one	of	 the
easiest.	Love	 is	 the	most	difficult	because	 it	 requires	 the	other.	Things	become
complicated.	Bliss	 is	 absolutely	your	own.	You	are	not	 dependent	 on	 anybody
else,	you	just	have	to	choose	to	be	blissful.	It	is	basically	your	choice.	They	are
not	caused	by	anything	outside	you	--	neither	bliss	nor	misery.	It	is	your	choice.
There	 are	 people	 who	 are	 always	 choosing	 misery,	 and	 in	 the	 same	 situation
there	are	people	who	will	choose	the	bliss	part.	It	is	the	same	world	in	which	you
and	I	live.	It	is	the	same	world	in	which	Judas	lived	and	Jesus	lived,	but	from	the
same	world	they	chose	very	different	lives.
Jesus	 chose	 a	 life	 of	 bliss.	 Even	 in	 his	 crucifixion	 there	 was	 immense
blissfulness.	Judas	chose	the	life	of	misery;	even	being	with	a	Jesus	he	remained
miserable.	And	he	 committed	 suicide	 the	day	 after	 the	 crucifixion.	That	 is	 the
ultimate	result	of	choosing	misery;	suicide	is	its	logical	end.	And	the	logical	end
of	bliss	is	resurrection.	On	the	path	of	bliss	even	death	becomes	the	beginning	of
a	new	life,	of	the	eternal	life.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	be	choosers	of	bliss.	 In	spite	of	all	 try	 to	 find	 in	every
situation	what	is	blissful.
And	there	is	not	a	single	situation	in	which	you	cannot	find	bliss.
(Osho	reveals	just	why	man	prefers	to	live	in	lies	and	can't	tolerate	truth.	)	False
things	 are	 always	 cheap.	 You	 can	 always	 purchase	 a	 mask	 for	 your	 face,	 a
beautiful	 mask.	 To	 transform	 your	 face	 into	 a	 beautiful	 face	 is	 an	 arduous
journey.	It	needs	great	transformation	in	your	being	because	your	eyes	will	show
that	which	is	within	you,	your	face	will	radiate	your	inner	reality.
Unless	your	whole	being	is	transformed	you	cannot	have	real	beauty.	Authentic
grace	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 your	 innermost	 core	 becomes	 illumined,	 when	 it
becomes	a	light	unto	itself.	Then	certainly	from	your	eyes,	from	your	face,	from
your	hands,	from	all	your	actions	and	gestures,	your	inner	reality	is	conveyed.
But	that	needs	great	work.
To	purchase	a	false	mask	is	very	simple.	You	can	purchase	a	mask	and	look	like
Buddha	or	Jesus	or	Krishna.	And	you	can	learn	how	to	act	like	somebody	else.
Acting	is	not	a	difficult	thing.	To	be	a	real	Christ	is	one	thing,	to	act	as	Christ	is
another.	Millions	 of	 Christians	 are	 doing	 that	 act	 --	 particularly	 the	 pope,	 the
bishops,	the	priests.	In	their	own	way	they	are	just	acting.
Just	a	few	months	ago,	 the	pope	enacted	 the	whole	scene	of	Jesus'	crucifixion.
He	carried	a	small	golden	cross	on	his	shoulders	--	a	golden	cross!	Thousands	of
people	followed	him	to	a	small	hillock	by	the	side	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	Vatican,	and	there	he	washed	the	feet	of	a	poor	man	who	had	already	been
cleaned	and	bathed	and	prepared	for	 the	whole	scene.	And	the	pope	kissed	his
feet.	This	 is	all	an	act.	And	then	he	came	back	--	no	crucifixion!	(laughter)	At
least	they	should	have	crucified	him	--	then	the	whole	act	would	have	been	done.
The	real	thing	was	left	out.	They	should	have	crucified	him	and	then	waited	for
three	days	to	see	whether	he	resurrected	or	not.
Acting	is	so	cheap,	that's	why	millions	of	people	have	chosen	the	easier	course,
the	short-cut.	But	once	you	choose	a	lie	you	will	have	to	choose	a	thousand	other
lies	to	support	it,	and	you	will	become	afraid	of	truth	because	a	single	truth	will
destroy	the	whole	edifice	of	your	falsity,	of	your	pseudo-ness.
It	is	because	of	this	that	the	Jews	had	to	crucify	Jesus.	He	was	destroying	their
traditional	 lies.	 Socrates	 was	 poisoned	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 he	 started
talking	about	the	truth,	he	started	seducing	people	into	enquiring	what	the	truth
is	and	not	being	blind	followers,	not	being	believers	but	enquirers.	And	that	was
a	danger	to	the	whole	establishment.	The	establishment	immediately	took	action.
This	man	had	to	be	stopped.
If	he	did	not	listen	then	he	would	have	to	be	killed.
Why	have	people	been	so	much	against	truth?	Because	of	their	investment	in	the
lies.	 But	 the	 trouble	 with	 lies	 is	 that	 although	 they	 are	 cheap,	 simple,	 easily
available...	You	can	find	all	kinds	of	lies	in	the	churches,	in	the	mosques	,	in	the
temples,	 in	 the	 gurudwaras,	 everywhere.	 You	 can	 choose.	 They	 come	 in	 all
shapes	 and	 sizes;	whatsoever	 fits	 you,	 you	 can	 choose	 that	 kind	of	 belief.	But
you	will	remain	miserable.
That	 is	 the	 real	 price	 you	 are	 paying.	 On	 the	 surface	 they	 look	 cheap	 but
ultimately	you	will	come	to	realise	one	day	that	your	whole	life	has	been	wasted,
your	whole	soul	has	been	destroyed	--	and	you	have	done	it.	It	is	a	suicidal	act,
and	your	whole	life	will	be	nothing	but	a	long	tragedy,	a	sequence	of	miseries,
from	one	misery	to	another.	Of	course	one	will	be	always	hoping	that	something
good	is	going	to	happen	but	it	never	happens.	Lies	can	never	deliver	the	goods;
only	 truth	 can	bring	bliss	 to	you,	only	 truth	 can	bring	celebration	 to	your	 life,
only	truth	can	bring	spring.
I	have	chosen	for	my	sannyasins	 the	orange	colour.	 In	 India	 it	 is	 the	colour	of
spring	 --	when	 all	 the	 trees	 burst	 forth	 in	 red	 colours.	 They	 dance,	 they	 sing,
suddenly	their	whole	being	is	rejoicing.	A	tree	flowers	only	out	of	overflowing
energy.	It	is	so	overflooded	with	joy	it	has	to	share	it	with	the	existence.	Flowers
represent	bliss,	celebration,	spring,	youth,	resurrection.
Remember,	 to	be	 initiated	 into	sannyas	means	 to	be	 initiated	 into	 truth.	 I	don't
ask	my	sannyasins	to	renounce	the	world;	I	certainly	ask	you	to	renounce	all	lies,
falsehoods,	hypocrisies	--	that's	enough.	If	you	renounce	all	lies	your	whole	past
is	renounced.	You	will	be	reborn;	in	that	renunciation	is	a	rebirth.	And	when	life
is	 fresh	 and	 clean	 of	 all	 the	 junk	 of	 the	 past	 you	 can	 again	 have	 the	 same
wondering	eyes	of	a	child,	the	same	innocence.	And	it	is	innocence	that	can	have
a	communion	with	the	ultimate	--	not	knowledge	but	innocence.
(Rumi	is	the	name	of	a	Sufi	mystic,	Osho	tells	the	third	initiate.)	Rumi	does	not
mean	anything,	it	is	a	name	of	a	place;	because	he	came	from	Rum	he	was	called
Rumi.
His	message	is	love,	and	he	belongs	to	the	highest	categories	of	the	Buddhas.	He
was	the	man	who	inverted	a	new	method	of	meditation,	whirling.
There	 have	 been	 hundreds	 of	 devices;	 Rumi	 has	 also	 contributed	 one	 special
device.	He	became	enlightened	not	by	sitting	silently	like	a	Buddha,	he	became
enlightened	by	dancing.	And	his	dance	is	a	special	and	of	dance.	You	turn	round
and	round,	as	if	you	are	just	a	wheel	moving	faster	and	faster;	you	are	both	the
axle	and	the	wheel.	Small	children	enjoy	it	very	much.	Almost	all	over	the	world
parents	have	to	stop	their	children	from	doing	it	because	they	are	afraid	they	may
get	 dizzy,	 but	 they	 don't	 know	 that	 the	 children	 are	 enjoying	 something	 very
special.
When	a	small	child	goes	on	whirling	he	loses	the	sense	of	being	a	body,	he	starts
hovering	 above	 his	 body,	 he	 can	 see	 his	 own	 body	 turning	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the
miracle	of	the	method.	But	we	are	stopped	by	our	parents	very	early.
Jalaluddin	introduced	that	method.	He	himself	became	enlightened	by	thirty-six
hours	of	continuous	whirling;	day	in,	day	out	he	went	on	and	on.	He	was	riding
on	a	cloud,	he	could	not	stop	till	he	fell	down.
But	when	he	opened	his	eyes	and	got	up	he	was	a	totally	new	man,	the	old	was
gone.	People	had	gathered	to	watch	him,	thousands	of	people	--	he	was	a	well-
known	mystic.	What	 had	 happened	 to	 him?	 dad	 he	 gone	 crazy	 or	 something.
And	he	had	told	his	disciples	that	he	should	not	be	disturbed.
For	thirty-six	hours	he	danced	and	danced.	The	dancer	disappeared	in	the	dance,
there	was	only	dance	and	no	dancer	--	the	ego	died.	And	he	could	see	his	own
body	 from	 the	 higher	 plane	 dancing	 somewhere	 on	 the	 earth.	 He	 became	 a
watcher	 on	 the	 hill,	 the	 body	was	 in	 the	 deep	 dark	 valley.	And	 that's	 how	 he
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
introduced	the	method	to	his	disciples.
His	message	was	 love	and	dance.	Love	 the	whole	existence	so	you	can	dance,
and	dance	to	abandon	so	that	you	can	love.
(And	then	there	was	more	about	love-dance	one	can	have	with	life.)	People	are
fighting	with	existence,	that's	why	they	create	misery.	Dance	with	it,	sway	with
the	wind,	dance	with	the	trees,	whisper	with	the	clouds,	sing	songs	to	the	stars.
Create	a	friendship.	It	is	our	existence.
Don't	 remain	 alienated,	 don't	 remain	 a	 foreigner,	 don't	 remain	 an	 outsider;
become	 part,	 part	 of	 this	 great	 dance	 that	 existence	 is.	 Create	 a	 harmonious
relationship	with	everything	that	surrounds	you.	Say	hello	even	to	the	rocks.	And
don't	think	that	people	will	think	you	are	crazy.	If	they	do,	let	them	think	you	are
crazy.
They	 don't	 know	 that	 if	 one	 really	 lovingly	 says	 hello	 to	 a	 rock,	 the	 rock
responds.
If	you	hug	a	tree	lovingly	the	hug	is	returned.	The	moment	you	start	creating	a
friendship	with	 existence	 you	 become	 a	 real	 sannyasin.	 To	 be	 at	 home	 in	 the
world,	to	be	rejoicingly	part	of	this	tremendous	drama	is	to	be	a	sannyasin.	It	is
not	renunciation	of	life,	it	is	rejoicing	in	life,	with	life.	It	is	a	deep	deep	let-go,	it
is	saying	yes	to	all	that	is.
(Osho	talked	of	the	difference	between	faith	and	belief	on	the	seventeenth	of	the
month.	Tonight	he	expanded	on	the	subject.)
Faith	 is	 not	 belief.	Many	 people	misinterpret	 faith	 as	 belief.	 Religious	 people
misinterpret	it,	anti-religious	people	misinterpret	it;	both	are	agreed	on	one	thing,
that	faith	means	belief.	Faith	does	not	mean	belief	at	all.	Belief	is	of	the	head	and
faith	 is	 of	 the	 heart	 --	 they	 belong	 to	 two	 different	 centres,	 they	 are	 really
diametrically	opposite.
Belief	is	a	repression	of	doubt	and	faith	is	an	expression	of	trust.	They	are	as	far
from	each	other	as	 two	 things	can	be.	But	priests	played	a	 trick.	Because	faith
has	been	praised,	and	faith	is	worth	praising,	they	played	a	trick	upon	the	word;
they	made	 it	 mean	 belief	 and	 they	 go	 on	 telling	 people	 'Believe,	 because	 the
scriptures	say	 if	you	don't	believe	you	will	never	attain	 to	god.'	The	scriptures
certainly	say	if	you	don't	have	faith	you	will	never	attain	to	god,	you	will	never
know	what	bliss	is,	what	truth	is,	what	love	is.	But	faith	is	not	belief.
Belief	means	falsifying.	There	is	doubt	in	you	and	you	cover	it	up	with	a	belief.
It	 is	as	 if	you	have	a	wound	and	you	put	a	rose	flower	on	it:	 it	 is	not	going	to
heal	it	but	you	can	deceive	others,	they	will	not	be	able	to	see	the	wound.	And
the	most	dangerous	thing	is	that	you	may	be	deceived	by	your	flower	yourself,
you	may	 forget	 about	 the	wound	 and	 you	will	 start	 believing	 that	 there	 is	 no
wound	at	all	 --	 look,	 the	beautiful	 flower	 is	 there.	Forgetting	 the	wound	 is	not
going	 to	heal	 it.	And	covering	 it	 is	dangerous	because	 it	will	go	on	 increasing
underneath	the	flower;	it	can	become	a	canceric	growth	inside	you.
That's	what	has	happened	to	humanity:	for	thousands	of	years	people	have	lived
with	 doubt	 repressed	 by	 belief	 and	 now	 the	 doubt	 has	 grown	 so	 big	 that	 it	 is
throwing	all	belief	away,	it	is	erupting	everywhere.	Now	the	whole	humanity	is
in	a	 state	of	doubt.	Even	 those	who	pretend	 to	believe	know	 that	 that	belief	 is
only	formal.	It	may	be	utilitarian,	pragmatic,	it	is	good	for	other	reasons,	not	for
religious	reasons	to	go	to	church	every	sunday.	It	is	a	social	affair,	it	gives	you	a
good	social	status.	People	think	you	are	religious,	virtuous.
People	 give	 you	 respect	 and	 your	 ego	 feels	 good	 with	 the	 respectability	 that
comes	 through	 it.	 But	 now	 almost	 half	 the	 humanity	 has	 gone	 communist,
atheistic,	and	the	other	half	 is	only	formally	religious,	 there	is	no	true	religion.
And	 the	 people	who	 are	 responsible	 for	 this	whole	 nonsense	 are	 the	 priests	 --
they	deceived	humanity.
I	 am	 against	 belief	 because	 belief	 is	 a	 repression	 of	 doubt.	 I	 am	 all	 for	 faith
because	 faith	 is	an	enquiry,	 it	 is	not	belief.	 It	 is	 trust	 in	existence,	 it	 is	 trust	 in
oneself,	it	is	trust	in	one's	consciousness,	it	is	trust	in	one's	intelligence.	If	I	am
intelligent	 it	 is	 a	 simple	 conclusion	 that	 'How	can	 I	be	 intelligent	 if	 the	whole
universe	 is	 unintelligent?	 I	 come	 from	 the	 universe,	 I	 am	 part	 of	 it;	 if	 I	 am
intelligent	that	simply	shows	that	the	universe	is	intelligent.'	It	is	not	a	question
of	belief,	it	is	a	simple	enquiry,	it	is	a	simple	logical	process.
There	is	no	need	to	repress	doubt.
Trusting	one's	 intelligence,	 trusting	one's	enquiry,	 trusting	even	one's	doubts	 --
that	 is	 faith.	 Because	 doubts	 are	 not	 bad.	 They	 are	 only	 question	 marks,	 and
every	question	mark	can	lead	you	into	enquiry,	and	every	enquiry	is	good.	If	the
enquiry	proves	that	god	is,	it	is	good;	if	it	proves	that	god	is	not,	that	too	is	good.
Either	way	we	will	be	discovering	 the	 truth.	Whether	god	 is	or	 is	not	does	not
matter;	whatsoever	is	the	case	has	to	be	known.
Truth	does	not	mean	that	god	has	to	be.	Truth	simply	means	whatsoever	is	has	to
be	discovered.	In	fact	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
according	to	me,	whatsoever	is,	is	god.	Even	if	there	is	no	god	then	that	universe
without	god	is	the	truth.
Faith	 is	 enquiry	 into	 truth,	 and	 faith	 is	 courageous	 enough	 to	 go	 into	 every
question	 without	 shrinking.	 It	 is	 not	 cowardly,	 beliefs	 are	 cowardly.	 With	 is
courage.	Only	the	courageous	can	go	into	the	unknown,	only	the	courageous	can
ask	 dangerous	 questions,	 only	 the	 courageous	 can	 dare	 the	 journey	 into	 the
uncharted.
Faith	 is	 beautiful.	And	 remember,	 the	meaning	 of	 Joseph	 is	 faith.	There	 is	 no
such	thing	as	increasing	belief.	Belief	is	a	dead	thing,	it	does	not	increase.	It	is	a
plastic	thing,	you	impose	things	on	it.	It	neither	decreases	nor	increases;	it	is	like
a	plastic	flower.
But	faith	increases	and	goes	on	increasing.	There	is	no	end	to	it,	it	is	an	eternal
pilgrimage.	The	more	you	go	into	it,	 the	more	it	 increases.	It	 is	a	movement,	a
process.	It	is	not	a	thing	dead	and	complete,	it	is	riverlike.	It	is	not	like	a	pond
closed	from	everywhere,	it	is	moving	towards	the	ocean.
And	to	me	it	is	significant	that	Joseph	was	the	name	of	Jesus'	father.	A	man	like
Jesus	can	be	born	only	to	a	man	like	Joseph.	I	don't	believe	in	the	theory	of	his
virgin	mother.	That	is	sheer	nonsense.	Joseph	symbolises	faith,	simplicity,	trust.
A	son	like	Jesus	is	possible	only	through	such	a	man.
But	 somehow	 Christianity	 has	 been	 very	 unjust	 to	 Joseph.	 He	 has	 been
completely	ignored,	not	only	ignored	but	insulted.	The	first	insult	is	that	they	say
that	Jesus	was	born	 to	a	virgin	mother.	 In	fact	 it	 is	an	 insult	 to	Joseph,	 it	 is	an
insult	 to	Mary,	 it	 is	an	 insult	 to	Jesus:	he	becomes	a	bastard.	Who	is	 this	Holy
Ghost?	And	if	these	ghosts	go	on	playing	tricks	like	this,	can	you	call	them	holy?
Then	what	 is	 unholy?	This	Holy	Ghost	made	 poor	Mary	 pregnant...	 and	 he	 is
still	part	of	the	trinity.	He	should	have	been	expelled	--	he	committed	a	crime!
But	Joseph	is	 the	most	 ignored.	Mary	at	 least	slowly	slowly	has	been	accepted
but	not	much.	Many	times	there	have	been	efforts	to	make	her	part	of	the	holy
family;	from	three	the	family	should	consist	of	four.	But	Christian	priests	have
not	accepted	that;	a	woman	cannot	be	accepted	in	the	holy	trinity.	They	are	all
male,	 all	 three.	 It	 is	 the	male	 chauvinistic	 attitude.	But	 at	 least	Mary	has	been
worshipped	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	could	not	deny	that	Jesus	came	out	of
her	womb.
At	 that	 time	 test-tube	 babies	 were	 not	 available,	 otherwise	 I	 am	 certain
Christians	 would	 have	 dropped	 Mary	 also;	 just	 as	 they	 dropped	 Joseph	 they
would	have	dropped	Mary.	They	would	have	tried	saying	that	Jesus	was	a	test-
tube	baby.
The	whole	idea	is	rooted	in	antagonism	towards	sex.	Sex	is	unholy	--	how	can
they	 accept	 a	 Joseph?	 But	 I	 accept	 Joseph	 absolutely.	 In	 fact	 without	 Joseph
there	would	be	no	Jesus.	We	owe	that	much	to	Joseph.
And	his	name	is	so	symbolically	meaningful	that	it	is	also	a	metaphor:	a	son	like
Jesus	can	only	come	out	of	a	father	like	Joseph	--	out	of	increasing	faith	not	out
of	belief.
I	teach	faith	because	faith	to	me	is	another	name	of	love.	Belief	is	ugly,	heady;
faith	is	beautiful,	of	the	heart.	And	the	whole	energy	of	a	sannyasin	has	to	shift
from	the	head	towards	the	heart.	If	we	can	bring	the	energy	from	the	head	to	the
heart	 the	miracle	 has	 happened.	 From	 there	 a	 totally	 new	 life	 starts,	 a	 life	 of
bliss,	a	life	of	dance	and	song	and	celebration.
(Doubts	 are	 not	 bad,	Osho	 told	 the	 last	 sannyasin,	 but	we	 have	 to	 go	 beyond
them,	he	tells	the	next	person.)
But	repressing	is	not	a	way	of	surpassing.	We	have	to	pass	through	those	doubts,
we	have	to	use	those	doubts	as	stepping	stones.
The	ordinary	religions	teach	you	to	believe.	Belief	means	the	repression	of	your
doubts.	But	 repressed	doubts	will	 remain	 there,	 they	will	 accumulate,	 and	one
day	they	will	erupt	like	a	volcano.
My	approach	is	totally	different.	Don't	repress	doubts.	Use	them	as	enquiries,	as
triggering	points,	so	that	you	can	use	them	as	stepping	stones.
Truth	 is,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	worried;	 doubts	 can	 be	 used	 beautifully	 to
reach	truth.	In	fact	that's	why	nature	gives	you	doubts,	so	that	you	can	enquire.
Only	an	idiot	has	no	doubts;	 the	more	intelligent	you	are,	 the	more	doubts	you
have.	But	to	live	in	doubts	is	to	waste	your	life.
Use	 them	 creatively,	 go	 beyond	 them	 and	 only	 then	 can	 you	 feel	 fulfilment.
When	 doubts	 disappear	 because	 truth	 has	 arrived	 it	 is	 not	 repression,	 it	 is
freedom	from	doubt.
That's	the	meaning	of	your	name	--	let	it	become	a	meaning	of	your	life	too.
(To	Atit	Gyano	Osho	 talks	 of	 the	 difference	 between	wisdom	and	 knowledge.
The	first	part	of	the	address	is	similar	to	what	he	has	said	earlier	in	the	month;
but	then	he	adds:)	Knowledge	demystifies	existence	because	it	gives	you	a	false
notion	that	you	know	everything	--	and	man	knows	nothing.	Even	our	so-called
great	scientists	know	nothing.	Whatsoever	they	know	is	very	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
superficial.	If	you	dig	a	little	deeper	you	will	find	great	ignorance.	Nobody	has
yet	seen	the	electrons,	neutrons,	positrons;	nobody	exactly	knows	what	they	are,
nobody	 knows	 how	 they	 function,	 how	 they	 move.	 But	 the	 whole	 edifice	 of
modern	physics	stands	on	this	ignorance.
A	sannyasin	has	to	completely	cut	out	all	this	rotten	garbage	and	become	clean,	a
clean	slate,	so	that	your	innermost	being	can	start	giving	you	messages.
Living	in	the	intellect	is	living	in	knowledge.	The	moment	knowledge	is	dropped
intuition	flowers	--
and	that	is	the	real	revolution.
(Love	 gives	 you	 a	 little	 look	 at	 the	 timeless,	 the	 deathless	 Osho	 tells	 Prem
Sanatano.)	That's	why	when	people	are	in	love	they	are	absolutely	fearless,	as	if
death	 disappears,	 it	 becomes	 irrelevant.	 But	 our	 love	 is	 a	 very	 wavering
phenomenon:	 one	moment	 it	 is	 there,	 another	moment	 it	 is	 gone,	 again	 death
enters.	Many	times	we	have	a	glimpse	but	it	remains	a	glimpse.
As	a	sannyasin	you	have	to	work	hard	to	make	that	glimpse	a	reality	to	yourself,
always	available.	And	it	is	possible	because	love	is	our	intrinsic	nature.	It	is	not
something	 accidental,	 it	 is	 our	 very	 source.	 So	 if	 we	 work	 a	 little,	 if	 we	 dig
inside	our	being	we	will	find	the	eternal	source.	And	once	love	is	flowing	in	you
for	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	irrespective	of	situations,	circumstances,	you	live	in
the	world	but	you	are	no	more	part	of	it;	you	have	become	part	of	god,	you	have
become	part	of	eternity.	All	fear	disappears.	Then	you	know	that	birth	and	death
don't	make	any	difference.	Only	the	body	is	born	and	the	body	dies,	not	you;	you
are	never	born	and	you	never	die.
The	moment	it	becomes	your	realisation	you	are	released	from	all	bondage,	from
all	misery,	from	all	limitation,	from	all	prisons.	Suddenly	you	become	as	vast	as
the	whole	 universe,	 you	 become	oceanic.	 Just	 a	 dewdrop	of	 love	 can	 increase
and	become	a	great	ocean.	But	one	has	to	work	deliberately,	consciously.
Our	ordinary	love	is	an	instinctive	phenomenon,	unconscious;	it	has	to	be	made
a	conscious	process.
And	that	is	the	whole	work,	the	whole	alchemy,	of	sannyas.
(Amrit	Dhyana's	special	sadhana	is	to	work	on	deathlessness.)	The	body	is	going
to	die,	 the	mind	 is	going	 to	die,	 the	heart	 is	going	 to	stop,	so	don't	waste	your
time	 in	 remaining	 identified	 with	 the	 body,	 the	 mind,	 the	 heart,	 with	 action,
thought	 and	 feeling.	 Beyond	 these	 three	 there	 is	 something	 in	 you	 which	 is
immortal	--	that	is	consciousness,	awareness.	Meditate	on	that.
In	 the	 East	 we	 call	 the	 process	 neti-neti,	 neither	 this	 nor	 that,	 eliminating;
eliminating	all	that	is	not	eternal	so	that	only	that	which	is	eternal	remains.	And
then,	 remain	absorbed	 in	 it	 for	as	 long	as	possible,	 as	many	 times	as	possible.
Whenever	you	have	time	just	remember	'I	am	not	the	body,	not	the	mind,	not	the
heart'	and	go	on	entering	deeper,	rejecting	everything	outer.
These	are	the	three	circles:	the	body	--	the	outermost	--	then	the	mind,	then	the
heart.	And	within	these	three	concentric	circles	is	the	centre	of	your	witnessing,
your	consciousness.	Just	remain	relaxed	in	that	centre	--	that's	what	meditation	is
all	about.	And	once	you	start	entering	that	centre	you	have	come	home.
Then	life	is	a	tremendous	contentment.	It	is	pure	ecstasy,	it	is	all	light.
Prem	Kundan
It	is	by	passing	through	the	fire	of	love	that	one	becomes	one's	real	self.	Cowards
are	afraid	of	love	as	much	as	they	are	of	death.	It	needs	courage	to	go	into	love
because	 it	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 death,	 in	 fact	 a	 deeper	 death	 than	 the	 ordinary	 death.
Ordinary	death	only	changes	your	body,	your	form,	but	not	your	substance.
Ordinary	 death	 only	 changes	 your	 shadow,	 your	 personality,	 but	 not	 your
essence.
Love	changes	your	very	being,	 it	gives	you	a	new	birth.	Hence	the	fear;	hence
many	 decide	 not	move	 into	 love.	 They	 can	 find	many	 excuses.	 They	 can	 say
"Love	 is	 blind;"	 that	 is	 a	 rationalization	 of	 the	 cowardly	mind.	 They	 can	 say
"Love	is	animal;"	that	is	again	a	rationalization	of	the	so-called	religious	mind.
They	can	even	deny	the	reality	of	love;	they	can	they	it	is	all	poetry,	just	a	fiction
created	by	some	imaginative	people.
Either	 the	 coward	 finds	 some	 rationalization,	 some	 excuse,	 or	 he	 finds	 some
substitute.	For	example,	sex	can	become	a	substitute	for	love,	and	by	just	going
into	sex	one	can	think,	"I	am	a	great	lover."	Or	people	can	find	even	more	subtle
substitutes.	For	example,	somebody	is	greedy	for	money	--	money	has	become
his	 love	object.	And	he	 is	not	aware	 that	he	has	 fallen	 in	 love	with	 something
absolutely	false.	Or	power	can	become	his	love	affair.	But	these	are	strategies	of
the	mind	to	avoid.
Beware	of	all	 these	strategies	and	 take	a	 jump	 into	 love.	 It	 is	 fire.	 It	will	burn
you,	it	will	destroy	you.
But	it	will	also	give	you	a	new	birth,	a	resurrection.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010235
ShortTitle:	THUNK23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Muriel	Osho	talks	of	the	three	dimensions	of	joy	--	pleasure,	happiness	and
bliss.)	One	can	have	pleasures	without	meditation	because	pleasures	are	of	 the
body,	 but	 one	 cannot	 have	 joy	 without	 meditation.	 Joy	 belongs	 to	 the	 spirit.
Pleasures	belong	to	the	body,	happiness	to	the	mind	and	joy	to	the	soul.
For	pleasures	everybody	is	equipped	by	nature,	because	it	is	our	animal	heritage,
it	 is	our	past,	 it	 is	 instinct	 --	 it	 is	already	 there,	 fully	developed.	For	happiness
you	 have	 to	 do	 something.	 Happiness	 is	 human,	 a	 little	 bit	 above	 the	 anima.
Pleasure	con-sists	of	only	two	things,	food	and	see	--	those	are	the	two	polarities
of	 pleasure.	 Happiness	 consists	 of	 many	 things,	 but	 for	 happiness	 one	 has	 to
grow	sensitivity	and	creativity.
To	be	happy	is	an	art.
One	has	to	learn	music,	then	one	can	be	happy	with	it.	One	can	learn	painting,
poetry,	 sculpture,	 gardening	 .	 there	 are	 thousands	 of	 possibilities.	 As	 you	 rise
above	 the	 mind	 and	 you	 start	 becoming	 a	 little	 artful	 and	 alert	 about	 the
dimensions	 available	 and	 you	 start	 using	 all	 those	 doors,	 you	 learn	 something
more	than	any	animal	can	ever	do.	No	animal	can	enjoy	painting,	no	animal	can
enjoy	poetry;	it	is	not	possible.
And	no	animal	can	be	condemned	for	that.	If	it	is	not	possible	what	can	animals
do?	But	 if	man	is	not	able	 to	enjoy	music	 then	he	should	be	condemned;	he	 is
living	lower	than	he	is	capable	of.
Joy	comes	at	the	ultimate	peak.	It	belongs	to	the	soul.	For	that	you	have	to	learn
to	be	meditative.
Pleasure	 is	 dual;	 sex	 and	 food	 are	 the	 two	 polarities.	 Happiness	 is	 multi-
dimensional.	Joy	is	one;	it	is	neither	two	nor	many.	Joy	has	simply	one	taste	--
the	taste	of	silence,	the	taste	of	no-mind.
If	one	wants	to	be	full	of	joy	one	has	to	nut	both	body	and	mind	behind	one,	one
has	to	transcend	both.
Meditation	 is	 the	 transcendence	 of	 the	 body-mind	 structure,	 it	 is	 to	 become
aware	 of	 both	 body	 and	 mind.	 The	 moment	 you	 are	 aware	 of	 both	 you	 are
separate;	the	moment	you	are	aware	of	both	you	are	above	both.	That	quality	of
beyondness	is	joy.	--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
(Her	reply	is	inaudible,	save	to	Osho.)
Then	 come	 back	 again...	 the	 day	 after	 tomorrow!	 (much	 laughter)	Or	 any	 day
after	tomorrow!	Okay?
(She	nods	laughingly	as	she	rises	to	leave.)
(Osho	explains	the	connection	between	Krista's	name	and	the	words	'Christ'	and
'Krishna'.)	The	very	word	'Christ'	comes	from	the	Sanskrit	work	'Krishna'.	From
Krishna	it	has	moved	into	many	languages	and	ultimately	it	has	become	Christ.
In	 its	 long	 journey	 from	 Krishna	 to	 Christ,	 Krista	 has	 been	 one	 of	 the	 very
significant	milestones.	Krista	is	exactly	halfway	in	the	journey	from	Krishna	to
Christ.	In	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
fact	 in	Bengali,	one	of	 the	Indian	languages,	Krishna	is	called	Krista,	he	is	not
called	Krishna.
Christ	is	not	a	personal	name	of	Jesus.	His	name	is	Jesus.	The	moment	he	attains
to	the	ultimate	he	is	called	Christ.	In	the	East	we	have	called	that	state	Krishna;
it	is	the	same	word	and	the	same	state	too.
Your	name	will	mean	Christ-consciousness.	And	that	 is	 the	goal	of	sannyas,	 to
become	crowned	wit	consciousness.
Man	lives	in	unconsciousness.	He	lives	like	a	robot.	The	major	part	of	his	being
is	 in	darkness;	 just	 a	 little	bit	has	come	out	of	 the	darkness,	 just	 the	 tip	of	 the
iceberg	 --	 and	 that	 too	 is	 very	 fragile.	At	 any	moment	 it	 goes	 back	 again	 into
darkness.	 Somebody	 insults	 you	 and	 you	 lose	 your	 consciousness.	 It	 is	 very
fragile.	You	become	unconscious,	you	start	behaving	in	an	unconscious	way,	and
later	on	you	yourself	recognise	it.	You	wonder	'How	did	I	do	all	this?'	You	start
saying	'It	happened	in	spite	of	me.	I	never	wanted	to	do	it.'
People	have	done	 things	 in	anger	which	only	 insane	people	can	do	--	and	 they
were	 not	 insane,	 they	 were	 as	 sane	 as	 anybody	 else,	 but	 in	 anger	 they	 lose
consciousness,	in	passion	they	lose	consciousness.
There	are	a	thousand	and	one	situations	every	day	when	we	lose	consciousness,
so	that	small	portion	of	consciousness	is	not	very	effective	either.	If	one	is	alert
about	 using	 it	 rightly	 the	 only	 purpose	 is	 to	meditate	with	 that	 small	 piece	 of
consciousness	that	you	have	not,	because	through	meditation	more	and	more	of
the	 unconscious	 starts	 becoming	 conscious,	 more	 and	 more	 of	 your	 hidden
darkness	starts	disappearing.
Right	 now	 ninety	 per	 cent	 is	 unconscious,	 ten	 per	 cent	 is	 conscious.	 As	 you
meditate,	slowly,	 fifteen	per	cont	becomes	conscious,	 twenty	per	cent	becomes
conscious.	The	moment	there	is	at	least	fifty	per	cent	of	consciousness	and	fifty
per	cent	of	unconsciousness,	then	you	can	rely	upon	your	consciousness	because
now	there	is	a	balance;	the	unconscious	cannot	easily	take	over.
When	 there	 is	 sixty	 per	 cent	 of	 consciousness	 and	 only	 forty	 per	 cent	 of
unconsciousness,	you	can	move	with	certainty	in	life.	Somebody	can	insult	you
and	you	will	 remain	unaffected.	When	ninety	per	 cent	becomes	conscious	 and
only	ten	per	cent	is	left	unconscious	the	first	satori	happens,	the	first	glimpse	of
reality.	And	 in	 that	 ten	per	 cent	many	 satoris	happen;	 thousands	of	 satoris	 can
happen,	but	at	least	three	are	absolutely	necessary.
As	that	ten	per	cent	is	transformed	into	consciousness	it	is	transformed	in	three
parts.	The	first	part	gives	you	the	first	satori,	the	second	part	the	second	satori,
and	the	third	part	gives	you	samadhi.	When	one	hundred	per	cent	of	your	being
is	 conscious	we	 call	 it	 samadhi.	 The	 very	word	 'samadhi'	means	 that	 one	 has
arrived	at	absolute	equanimity,	at	absolute	equilibrium.	Now	nothing	can	disturb
you,	even	death	cannot	disturb	you.
That	is	the	goal	of	sannyas,	to	arrive	at	one	hundred	per	cent	consciousness.	At
that	 moment	 one	 is	 a	 Christ,	 a	 Krishna,	 a	 Buddha,	 or	 whatsoever	 name	 one
wants	 to	use.	These	 are	 just	 names,	 but	 the	 real	 thing	 is	 one	hundred	per	 cent
consciousness.	And	it	 is	possible;	everybody	is	born	with	the	potential,	we	just
have	to	work	upon	it	to	change	it.	And	that	small	piece	of	consciousness	can	be
used	to	transform	the	whole	being	into	consciousness.	It	can	become	a	triggering
point.
It	 is	a	small	 light	but	we	can	create	more	and	more	light	 through	it.	It	 is	 just	a
small	 candle	 but	more	 candles	 can	 be	 lit	 by	 it.	 A	 chain	 of	 candles	 can	 be	 lit
through	it	and	your	whole	life	becomes	a	festival	of	light.
In	 India	 every	 year	we	 celebrate	 one	 night,	 the	 festival	 of	 lights.	 People	 burn
thousands	of	candles	and	small	lamps.	The	whole	country	celebrates	the	festival
of	lights.	That	night	is	the	night	when	Mahavira,	one	of	the	greatest	mystics	ever,
became	enlightened.	And	it	is	a	very	special	night	in	that	way	because	Mahavira
is	the	only	person	who	became	enlightened	on	the	darkest	night.
Buddha	 became	 enlightened	 on	 the	 full-moon	 night	 and	 Mahavira	 became
enlightened	 on	 the	 no-moon	 night.	 That	 is	 very	 significant,	 it	 is	 a	 very	 rare
phenomenon.	Almost	all	enlightened	people	have	become	enlightened	either	on
a	 full-moon	 night	 or	 very	 close	 to	 it.	 Except	 for	Mahavira	 I	 have	 never	 come
across	another	person	who	has	become	enlightened	on	the	darkest	night.	Hence
we	celebrate	that	night,	the	darkest	night,	as	the	festival	of	lights.
But	people	have	completely	forgotten	the	significance;	they	go	on	observing	the
festival	as	a	ritual.
There	are	thousands	who	don't	even	connect	it	with	Mahavir.	There	are	millions
who	don't	even	know	 the	name	of	Mahavir	or	know	 that	 it	has	anything	 to	do
with	Mahavir..
But	it	shows	one	thing,	that	even	if	you	are	living	in	the	darkest	night,	there	is	a
possibility	that	it	can	be	transformed	into	a	festival	of	light.	So	there	is	no	need
to	feel	hopeless	--	even	the	darkest	night	has	a	dawn	to	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Sergio	 means	 to	 serve.	 Prem	means	 love	 --	 and	 the	 only	 real	 service	 is	 that
which	arises	out	of	love.)	One	can	serve	without	love,	but	then	that	service	has
no	 spiritual	 dimension	 to	 it.	 It	 may	 be	 rooted	 either	 in	 fear	 or	 in	 greed.	 For
example,	Christian	missionaries	go	on	serving	humanity.	It	is	not	out	of	love	but
out	of	the	fear	of	hell	and	the	greed	for	heaven.	They	don't	know	what	love	is;
their	whole	effort	is	to	attain	to	heavenly	pleasures.	It	is	sheer	greed	and	lust	and
they	are	also	afraid	of	the	pains	and	the	agonies	and	the	sufferings	of	hell.	They
are	using	poor	people,	exploiting	them	for	some	gain	in	the	other	world.	But	this
is	not	true	service.	There	are	motives	behind	it.
The	 service	 is	 true	 only	 when	 it	 is	 unmotivated,	 and	 there	 is	 only	 one	 thing
which	is	unmotivated	--	that	is	love.	So	unless	service	is	rooted	in	love	it	is	false.
I	teach	love	because	I	know	if	love	arises	in	you,	service	will	come	as	a	shadow
of	it.	And	then	you	will	not	serve	for	some	reward,	you	will	serve	because	you
enjoy	it.	Then	there	will	be	no	end	to	your	service,	then	your	service	will	be	an
end	unto	itself.
And	the	greatest	bliss	is	when	your	means	and	your	ends	are	one,	when	they	are
not	separated	in	time.
When	whatsoever	you	are	doing	is	an	end	unto	itself,	then	there	is	bliss.
Anand	 Vinito.	 A	 miserable	 person	 is	 never	 humble.	 He	 cannot	 afford	 to	 be
humble.	 He	 is	 so	 miserable	 that	 he	 has	 to	 hide	 it	 by	 projecting	 his	 ego.	 He
magnifies	his	ego	to	hide	his	misery,	his	poverty,	his	inner	emptiness.	He	goes	on
making	 the	 balloon	 of	 the	 ego	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 so	 it	 hides	 everything.	 The
miserable	person	cannot	be	humble	--	even	if	he	tries	to	show	humbleness,	that
will	be	just	another	way	of	proving	his	superiority.	That	will	be	just	another	trip
of	the	ego,	another	number	--	nothing	else.
But	 the	 blissful	 person	 is	 naturally	 humble.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 the	 ego.	We
need	the	ego	to	hide	our	emptiness.	The	blissful	person	is	so	full	that	there	is	no
question	of	hiding	anything;	he	can	stand	naked	in	the	sun.	The	blissful	person
has	so	much	bliss	in	his	being	that	ego	cannot	have	any	appeal	for	him.	What	is
there	 for	 the	ego	 to	give	 to	 the	blissful	person?	He	has	got	everything	 --	more
than	he	needs.
There	is	a	Sufi	story....
A	king	had	gone	to	hunt	but	he	and	his	party	got	lost	in	the	jungle.	They	were	all
searching	for	the	way	back	to	the	capital.
A	blind	mystic	used	to	live	in	the	jungle	with	one	of	his	followers.	One	man	of
the	king's	party	came	and	said,	"Hey,	blind	man,	do	you	know	which	is	the	way
to	the	capital?"	The	mystic	laughed	and	he	said,	"Yes.
You	are	a	soldier	of	the	king,	you	must	have	come	with	his	party.	Go	this	way
and	after	one	mile	you	will	find	the	road	to	the	capital."
The	follower	was	very	much	mystified	because	he	knew	his	master	was	blind	--
how	did	he	come	to	know	that	this	man	was	a	soldier?
And	then	another	man	came.	He	said	 to	 the	blind	man,	"Sir,	can	you	show	me
the	way?	I	have	got	lost	in	this	jungle."	And	the	blind	man	said,	"Yes.	You	must
be	the	prime	minister.	This	is	the	way	--	after	one	mile	you	will	find	the	road	to
the	capital."
The	follower	was	even	more	mystified,	but	he	kept	silent	and	he	waited.	In	the
night,	when	they	went	to	rest,	he	would	ask	the	master	how	he	knew	--	because
certainly	this	man	looked	like	he	was	the	prime	minister.
And	then	the	king	himself	came	and	he	touched	the	feet	of	the	mystic	and	said,
"Please	show	me	the	way."	And	he	said,	"Yes,	I	know	--	you	are	the	king	of	this
country.	This	is	the	way."
In	the	night,	the	follower	asked	the	master,	"This	is	the	first	time	that	you	have
behaved	strangely,	not	like	a	blind	man.	And	every	time	you	were	right	--	how
did	you	manage	it?"
The	mystic	said,	"There	was	nothing	to	manage.	The	soldier	behaved	arrogantly
--	that	simply	shows	he	is	a	miserable	person,	he	must	be	of	the	lowest	rank.	The
prime	minister	addressed	me	as	"Sir".	That	simply	shows	he	belongs	to	a	higher
rank;	he	 is	a	man	of	culture,	education	--	polished,	 rich.	And	 the	king	 touched
my	 feet	 because	 he	 has	 nothing	 to	 lose	 and	 he	 has	 no	 need	 to	 show	 his
arrogance,	his	ego.	 It	was	a	simple	 inference,	you	need	not	be	mystified,"	said
the	old	man.	"I	cannot	see-you	know	that	perfectly	well	--	but	I	just	inferred	that
the	man	who	touches	my	feet	and	asks	so	politely	must	be	the	king.	It	was	just	a
coincidence	that	my	inferences	fitted	well;	I	cannot	see	who	is	who,	but	the	way
they	were	behaving	showed	something."
This	story	is	beautiful:	the	most	blissful	person,	the	person	who	is	a	king	of	the
inner	 world,	 will	 be	 absolutely	 egoless.	 He	 will	 be	 humble.	 Those	 who	 are
beggars	in	their	spiritual	world	are	very	egoistic,	they	cannot	be	humble.
So	 remember,	 your	 name	 means	 bliss,	 humbleness.	 Bliss	 has	 to	 be	 the
foundation	of	all	humbleness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Become	blissful	and	you	will	find	humbleness;	there	is	no	need	to	cultivate	it.	A
cultivated	 humbleness	 is	 false.	 It	 is	 not	 humbleness	 --	 it	 is	 all	 humbug!	 An
uncultivated	humbleness	which	comes	as	a	fragrance	of	bliss	is	beautiful,	is	real,
is	 true.	And	only	 that	which	 is	 true	 is	worth	achieving.	The	 false	simply	 takes
your	time,	your	energy,	and	gives	you	nothing	--	it	is	a	sheer	wastage.
(The	 last	 sannyasin,	 a	 Japanese	woman	 --	 a	 doll-maker	 --	 had	wept	 as	 she	 sat
with	 the	 others	 awaiting	 her	 turn.	Osho	 tells	 her	 that	 the	meaning	 of	 her	 new
name	and	the	direction	of	her	new	life	is	the	path	of	devotion.)
You	don't	need	anything	else!
There	 are	 three	 paths.	 One	 is	 of	 meditation,	 of	 awareness.	 The	 second	 is	 of
action,	of	serving	god.	And	the	third	is	of	devotion,	of	just	loving	god.	The	third
is	your	path.	Just	totally	love	existence	because	it	is	visible	god.	Love	the	whole
creation	because	everywhere	is	the	signature	of	god.	On	the	trees,	on	the	birds,
on	the	animals,	on	people	--	everywhere	you	will	find	signatures	of	god.
One	need	not	 go	 to	 the	 temples	 and	 the	 churches	 to	worship;	 god	 is	 available
everywhere.	It	is	not	a	question	of	finding	an	object	to	worship,	the	real	thing	is
to	 find	 a	 heart	which	 can	worship.	And	you	 already	have	 the	 heart.	Wherever
you	bow	down,	that	becomes	the	temple.
(Her	head	is	bent	down	so	that	it	touches	the	namesheet	she	holds	in	her	hands.
When	she	lifts	her	head	her	face	is	tear-stained.)	--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
(the	 translator)	 She	 wants	 to	 be	 forever	 here	 but	 she	 can	 only	 stay	 for	 three
months.
Good	--	that	will	do.	Good!
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
24	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010245
ShortTitle:	THUNK24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Emanuela	means	 god	 is	 with	 us.	 If	 you	 truly	 feel	 this,	 then	 you	 know	 bliss,
Osho	 tells	 us.)	 The	 ordinary	 person	 remains	 in	 conflict	 with	 existence.	 That's
what	makes	him	ordinary.	He	is	not	in	a	state	of	attunement,	he	remains	separate,
surrounded	by	his	own	definition	of	his	being.	He	remains	enclosed,	not	open,
not	available.	He	is	like	a	small	island,	and	hence	there	is	fear	--	the	ocean	is	vast
and	the	danger	is	always	there	that	the	island	may	disappear	any	moment.
The	initiation	into	sannyas	means	initiation	into	the	wholeness	of	existence.	It	is
the	dropping	of	the	ego	and	feeling	one	with	the	whole...	because	that's	the	truth:
we	 are	 not	 separate.	 Even	 if	 we	 want	 to	 be,	 we	 cannot	 be	 separate,	 we	 are
intrinsically	part	of	this	organic	unity	of	existence.	We	are	not	outsiders;	this	is
our	home.
The	moment	this	feeling	arises,	one	knows	god	is	with	us.	Then	all	conflict	and
struggle	disappears;	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
deep	 relaxation,	 a	 tremendous	 rest	 comes.	 That's	 the	 moment	 when	 bliss
explodes.
(But	we	live	in	a	world	which	has	come	to	such	a	sorry	state	of	affairs	that	the
blissful	 people	 are	 banished,	 Osho	 points	 out	 in	 his	 next	 address	 to	 Ireneo.)
Society	is	capable	of	coping	with	mad	people,	with	criminals,	even	with	people
like	Adolf	Hitler	and	Genghis	Khan	and	Nadir	Shah	and	Joseph	Stalin	and	Mao
Tse	Tung.	It	is	capable	of	coping	with	these	people	but	it	has	not	yet	risen	to	the
level	where	 it	can	cope	with	a	Jesus,	a	Socrates,	a	Mansoor.	The	gap	 is	so	big
that	 the	 society	 feels	 threatened.	 The	 very	 existence	 of	 a	 blissful	 person
humiliates	millions	of	people,	they	feel	insulted.	His	presence	makes	them	aware
of	their	stupidity,	hence	they	cannot	forgive	him.
It	is	very	difficult,	it	has	never	been	possible	up	to	now	to	forgive	an	enlightened
person,	to	forgive	a	Buddha.	Society	takes	as	much	revenge	as	possible,	for	the
simple	 reason	 that	 he	 has	 gone	 astray.	 Society	 is	 living	 in	misery	 and	 he	 has
become	 blissful;	 society	 is	 living	 in	 darkness	 and	 he	 has	 become	 a	 light	 unto
himself.	He	has	gone	astray,	he	has	left	the	collective	crowd,	he	has	moved	on	a
path	of	his	own;	he	is	no	more	part	of	the	mob.	The	mob	has	been	creating	every
possibility	 for	 him	 to	 be	 miserable	 and	 somehow	 he	 escaped,	 somehow	 he
managed	to	get	out	of	the	prison.
Because	of	this	one	has	to	fight	for	bliss,	otherwise	bliss	is	very	natural.	Misery
is	unnatural,	bliss	is	natural...	just	as	flowers	are	natural.	If	a	tree	does	not	bloom
that	means	something	has	gone	wrong	--	either	the	soil	is	not	right	or	the	climate,
or	 the	water	 is	 not	 enough	 or	 there	 is	 not	 enough	 sun	 --	 something	 has	 gone
wrong.	If	nothing	has	gone	wrong	then	the	tree	is	bound	to	blossom.	Flowers	are
natural,	bliss	is	a	flowering.	If	nothing	goes	wrong	every	person	will	be	blissful,
but	the	society	up	to	now	has	been	against	bliss.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	taking	a	risk,	you	are	going	astray	in	the	eyes
of	 the	 crowd.	 From	 now	 onwards	 the	 only	work	 that	 you	 have	 to	 do	 is	 to	 be
blissful,	in	spite	of	all	the	obstacles	that	society	will	create.	And	to	be	blissful	is
to	be	religious,	 to	be	blissful	 is	 to	be	able	to	know	god	because	god	is	nothing
but	the	ultimate	peak	of	bliss.
(On	the	eighteenth	of	the	month	he'd	talked	of	the	two	births	man	needs	to	pass
through.	Tonight	Osho	talks	about	them	in	greater	depth.)
The	first	birth	 is	 the	coming	out	of	 the	mother's	womb,	 the	second	birth	 is	 the
coming	 out	 of	 the	 mind's	 womb,	 coming	 out	 of	 the	 psychological	 structure,
pattern,	gestalt.
The	child	first	lives	as	part	of	his	mother's	body,	not	separate	at	all.	His	mother's
breath	 is	 his	 breath,	 his	 mother's	 nourishment	 is	 his	 nourishment,	 even	 his
mother's	mood	affects	him:	if	she	is	happy	he	is	happy,	if	she	is	miserable	he	is
miserable.	He	is	just	a	part	of	the	body	of	the	mother,	they	are	joined,	linked.
The	 second	 birth	 happens	 when	 you	 become	 unlinked	 with	 your	 mind.
Otherwise	people	 live	 in	 the	mind,	 identified	with	 the	mind,	 thinking	 that	 they
are	nothing	but	the	mind.	Getting	out	of	the	mind,	watching	the	mind,	seeing	it
as	 separate,	 becoming	more	 and	more	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the	mind,	 is	 the
process	of	meditation.
The	moment	 this	becomes	your	absolute	 realization	 --	not	 just	 a	 thought	but	a
realization,	your	experience	--	the	second	birth	has	happened.	Then	one	is	well-
born,	 only	 then	 is	 one	 noble.	 That	 is	 another	 meaning	 of	 Jena	 --	 noble,
aristocratic.	Only	then	is	one	part	of	a	totally	different	world.
To	me,	only	Buddhas	are	real	aristocrats,	the	awakened	people	of	the	earth;	they
are	the	salt.	Because	of	them	life	is	meaningful,	significant.	It	has	some	poetry
and	some	dance	in	it.
(Osho	 indicates	 that	 the	 seemingly	 contradictory	 meanings	 of	 the	 next
sannyasin's	name	are	actually	intrinsically	related,	for	victory	comes	not	through
fighting	 but	 through	 letting	 go.)	 One	 cannot	 be	 ambitious	 for	 victory.	 The
ambitious	 person	 will	 live	 in	 misery	 and	 will	 die	 in	 misery.	 He	 may	 achieve
many	things	but	 those	things	--	money,	power,	prestige	--	will	be	of	 the	world,
and	 they	 don't	 fulfil	 you,	 they	 don't	 give	 contentment,	 they	 don't	 make	 you
peaceful	or	blissful.	Even	Alexander	the	Great	dies	a	beggar.	He	realised	it	but
only	at	the	very	last	moment.
He	was	told	by	Dionysius	that	he	was	wasting	his	life	by	conquering	the	world,
he	would	die	a	beggar.
In	 India	he	visited	many	mystics	and	everywhere	he	was	 told	not	 to	waste	his
life	in	conquering	the	world	because	death	would	come	and	everything	would	be
taken	away,	so	it	is	just	making	a	house	of	playing	cards,	a	little	breeze	and	the
whole	 house	 collapses.	He	 heard	 and	 yet	 he	 did	 not	 hear.	At	 the	 last	moment
there	was	great	pain	in	his	heart	because	it	was	not	that	he	was	not	warned	--	he
was	warned	many	times	--
but	his	ego	wouldn't	allow	him	to	understand.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sannyas	means	putting	your	 ego	 aside	 so	you	can	understand.	And	 sannyas	 is
basically	surrender,	surrender	to	the	whole.
The	master	 is	 just	 an	excuse..You	 surrender	 to	 the	master	because	you	are	not
capable	 of	 communicating	 directly	with	 such	 a	 vast	 universe.	You	 need	 some
small	window	 through	which	 to	 look	 at	 the	 sky.	 The	 open	 sky	 is	 frightening,
scary,	but	once	you	have	looked	through	the	window,	the	indication	of	the	stars
will	take	you	into	an	eternal	journey.
The	master	is	only	a	window,	a	window	to	god.	That's	why	in	the	East	we	have
worshipped	the	master	as	a	god,	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	opens	a	small	door
through	which	you	can	enter	into	the	whole.	You	learn	the	art	of	surrendering	in
the	company	of	the	master	then	finally	you	have	to	do	it	with	the	whole.
It	 is	 just	 like	when	 you	 go	 to	 learn	 swimmings	 you	 first	 learn	 in	 the	 shallow
water,	very	close	 to	 the	bank.	You	cannot	go	 into	 the	deep	water	directly.	But
once	you	have	learned	swimming	then	you	start	adventuring	towards	the	depths
more	 and	more.	And	 then	 one	 day	 one	 knows	 how	 to	 swim;	 then	 it	 does	 not
matter	whether	the	water	is	one	mile	deep	or	five	miles	deep.	It	doesn't	matter,	it
is	the	same	for	the	swimmer,	it	makes	no	difference	at	all.
The	master	is	just	the	bank,	the	shore	where	without	any	fear	you	can	learn	the
basic	art	of	surrender	--
and	 then	 the	 journey	begins.	The	master	 is	only	 the	 first	 step	 in	 the	 journey,	a
triggering	 point.	 But	 once	 one	 knows	 how	 to	 surrender	 one	 starts	 becoming
victorious	because	by	surrendering	you	become	one	with	god
--	and	that's	victory.	Then	there	is	no	defeat	possible.	How	can	one	be	defeated	if
one	has	felt	oneness	with	the	whole?
(Another	paradox	seems	to	lie	in	the	name	Osho	makes	for	the	next	sannyasin	--
Shunyo	 Lothar.)	 The	 flower	 of	 consciousness	 opens	 up	 only	 when	 all	 the
garbage	 that	 one	 has	 accumulated	 over	 many	 many	 lives	 is	 thrown	 out,
otherwise	there	is	no	space	for	the	one-thousand	petalled	lotus	to	open.	It	needs	a
space	and	we	are	so	full	of	junk,	useless	junk,	full	of	memories	which	are	of	no
use	any	more.	We	go	on	piling	up	files	and	files	of	memories,	not	only	of	 this
life,	 of	 many	 many	 lives.	 They	 are	 all	 there,	 now	 absolutely	 useless,	 but	 the
functioning	of	our	mind	is	like	the	functioning	of	any	bureaucracy.
I	have	heard	that	in	the	White	House	the	president	was	very	worried	because	so
many	files	had	accumulated.	He	told	his	secretary	to	destroy	all	those	files	which
were	 useless	 and	 to	 only	 keep	 those	 which	 had	 any	 use.	 The	 secretary
immediately	started	working.	He	ordered	many	many	people	to	first	make	copies
of	 the	 files	 in	 case	 something	 was	 needed	 sometime,	 and	 then	 to	 destroy	 the
files.	This	 is	 how	bureaucracy	works.	Now,	 this	 is	 unnecessary	work:	 you	 are
destroying	 the	 file	but	keeping	a	 copy	 --	 then	what	 is	wrong	with	keeping	 the
file?
We	 go	 on	 accumulating	 useless,	 irrelevant	 memories,	 imagination,	 desires	 --
desires	 that	 we	 know	 are	 unfulfilable,	 still	 we	 carry	 on,	 still	 we	 again	 start
fantasising.	 We	 have	 fantasised	 many	 times	 and	 we	 know	 it	 is	 pointless.
Sometimes	even	in	the	middle	of	the	fantasy	you	realise	what	you	are	doing.
Taking	your	bath	you	start	 thinking	 that	you	have	become	 the	president	of	 the
country	and	that	if	you	become	the	president	you	are	going	to	do	this	and	that....
And	then	suddenly	the	cold	water	reminds	you	what	you	are	doing	--	you	are	not
the	president	of	the	country	and	you	are	unnecessarily	getting	worried.
But	it	will	come	again.
There	are	so	many	desires	and	so	many	thoughts	and	there	is	no	space	left;	hence
in	 the	 East	 our	 emphasis	 has	 been	 on	 how	 to	 empty	 the	 whole	 inside	 of	 our
being.	And	 there	 is	no	need	 to	keep	any	copies	because	 the	more	spacious	we
are,	the	more	conscious	we	become,	and	that	consciousness	is	enough	to	respond
to	any	situation.	You	need	not	have	notes,	that	consciousness	is	enough	to	tackle
any	challenge.
What	is	the	point	of	carrying	an	unnecessary	load?
As	one	empties	oneself	one	becomes	aware	of	 two	 things:	 the	 less	 the	burden,
the	more	 efficient	 one	 is;	 the	 less	 the	 burden,	 the	more	 responsible,	 the	more
capable	 of	 response,	 one	 is.	Now	one	 is	 not	 carrying	 readymade	 answers,	 and
because	one	 is	 not	 carrying	 readymade	 answers	 one	 can	be	more	 in	 tune	with
reality,	 one	 can	 see	 reality	 as	 it	 is	 and	can	 respond	accordingly.	Otherwise	 the
mind	always	reacts,	it	never	responds.	It	uses	the	old	readymade	answer,	it	may
not	fit	at	all;	and	then	you	fail,	then	you	fall	short.
A	man	of	absolute	emptiness	always	has	 the	 right	 response.	He	never	 fails,	he
never	repents,	he	never	feels	guilty,	he	never	looks	back.	Each	act	is	finished	so
totally	that	there	is	no	question	of	thinking	about	it	again	and	again.	He	simply
moves	ahead,	unburdened	of	the	past.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Shunyo	emptying	oneself	totally.	And	then	glory,	ultimate
glory,	is	yours.	In	that	emptiness	you	have	enough	space	for	your	consciousness
to	 unfold.	 Symbolically	 we	 have	 called	 it	 a	 one-thousand	 petalled	 lotus.	 It	 is
such	 a	 huge	 phenomenon	 that	 it	 needs	 the	 whole	 sky.	 Our	 inner	 being	 is	 as
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
vast	as	the	sky	if	we	just	get	rid	of	the	junk.
So	I	don't	want	my	sannyasins	to	renounce	anything	except	the	junk,	except	the
rubbish,	the	dust	that	one	gathers	on	the	way.
(Osho's	 vision	 is	 of	 love	 as	 being	 less	 a	 revolution	 and	 more	 a	 process	 of
evolution.	He	explains	why.)	Revolution	 is	drastic,	 sudden,	 like	an	earthquake.
Love	is	evolution,	very	silent	 like	a	whisper.	It	works	slowly,	 it	works	silently,
but	it	transforms	you	totally;	in	fact	because	it	is	very	silent	it	goes	very	deep.
An	earthquake	is	more	destructive	than	creative,	hence	the	so-called	revolutions
have	 destroyed	 much;	 they	 have	 not	 been	 really	 creative.	 Love	 is	 far	 more
creative.	In	revolution	destruction	becomes	the	goal,	in	love	creation	is	the	goal.
If	 something	 needs	 to	 be	 destroyed	 it	 is	 destroyed	 only	 in	 order	 to	 create.	 In
revolution	 destruction	 becomes	 the	 goal	 and	 if	 something	 is	 needed	 for
destruction	 then	 it	 is	 created,	 otherwise	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 creating.	 A
revolution	is	a	little	bit	upside-down,	evolution	is	a	natural	course.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 change	 very	 silently	 without	 making	 any	 noise,	 without
making	any	fuss	--	and	that	happens	through	love.	The	very	soul	of	sannyas	is
love.
Love	 as	 deeply	 as	 possible,	 let	 your	 love	 be	 as	multi-dimensional	 as	 possible.
Love	 as	many	 things	 as	 you	 can;	 love	music,	 love	 poetry,	 love	 dancing,	 love
people,	trees,	birds.	Don't	make	any	limitation	to	your	love.
The	more	you	 love,	 the	 richer	you	are;	and	 if	you	 love	 in	a	multi-dimensional
way	then	from	each	dimension	something	new	comes	to	your	being.	Poetry	will
give	 something	 to	 you	 which	 dancing	 cannot	 give	 and	 dancing	 will	 give
something	 to	you	which	poetry	cannot	give.	Music	will	give	something	 totally
different	 and	 sculpture	 something	 still	 different.	When	 all	 these	 gifts	 come	 to
your	being	they	become	one.
Then	 whatsoever	 is	 given	 by	 dance	 and	 poetry	 and	 painting	 and	 people	 and
animals	 and	 trees	 and	 clouds,	 all	 comes	 to	 you	 and	 becomes	 a	 tremendous
orchestra.	Your	life	becomes	a	sheer	joy,	a	phenomenon	of	beauty.
That	 orchestra	 has	 been	 called	 god.	 That	 ultimate	 music,	 that	 multi-faceted
richness	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
(There	is	a	way	to	judge	whether	what	you	are	doing	is	truly	meditation	or	not.	If
it	remains	confined	to	the	mind	it's	not	the	real	thing,	Osho	says.)
There	are	many	false	meditations	prevalent	in	the	world	because	they	are	cheap,
easy,	and	they	fit	with	your	mind;	on	your	part	they	don't	require	any	effort	to	go
beyond.
Real	 meditation	 is	 an	 uphill	 task;	 you	 are	 climbing	 a	 mountain.	 The	 untrue
meditation	 is	 like	 rolling	down	from	a	peak.	 It	 is	easy,	gravitation	does	all	 the
work,	you	don't	do	anything.	When	your	car	is	coming	down	you	can	turn	off	the
ignition;	 no	 gas	 is	 needed,	 the	 car	will	 continue	 going	 downwards	 just	 by	 the
pull	of	gravitation.
What	 Maharishi	 Mahesh	 Yogi	 teaches	 is	 only	 such	 a	 meditation,	 a	 false
meditation.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 repetition	 of	 a	 mantra	 --	 and	 when	 anything	 is	 being
repeated	it	simply	means	that	the	mind	is	being	used.	And	by	using	the	mind	you
cannot	go	beyond	the	mind,	by	using	the	mind	the	mind	becomes	strengthened.
In	fact	 the	word	 'mind'	and	mantra	come	from	the	same	Sanskrit	root;	 they	are
not	two	separate	words.	From	mantra	comes	the	Sanskrit	word	for	mind,	 'man',
and	from	'man',	--	from	'man'	comes	the	English	word	mind
--	from	the	same	root.	It	means	thinking.
You	can	repeat	a	certain	mantra	continuously	--	it	will	hypnotise	you,	it	is	auto-
hypnosis.	You	will	fall	into	a	peaceful	sleep,	that's	true,	and	if	you	are	searching
fora	peaceful	sleep	a	mantra	can	be	used.	I	am	not	against	 it.	It	 is	a	good	non-
medicinal	 tranquilliser	 but	 it	 is	 not	 meditation	 and	 not	 at	 all	 transcendental
meditation,	because	transcendence	simply	means	transcending	the	mind,	and	that
can	 be	 done	 only	 by	 one	 thing	 and	 that	 is	witnessing	 the	mind;	 not	 by	 doing
anything,	 not	 by	 repeating	 a	mantra,	 chanting	 or	 anything.	Any	 doing	will	 be
part	of	the	mind.
There	 is	only	one	 secret	which	 is	not	part	of	 the	mind,	 and	 that	 is	witnessing,
watching.	Thoughts	are	passing,	desires	are	moving,	memories	are	coming	and
going	 like	 clouds	 in	 the	 sky	 and	 you	 are	 sitting	 silently	 simply	watching,	 not
doing	anything.	If	you	do	anything	immediately	the	mind	starts	functioning.
What	you	do	does	not	matter	--	doing	is	part	of	mind.	A	non-doing	witnessing,
just	witnessing,	as	if	a	mirror	goes	on	witnessing	whatsoever	passes	by	--	that	is
awareness.	And	that	awareness	takes	you	beyond	the	mind.	It	is	true	meditation.
(Know	truth	and	you	know	you	are	immortal,	Osho	promises	Sambodhi	Amrita.)
Only	the	untruth	dies.	The	untruth	has	to	die,	it	is	bound	to	be	momentary.	It	is
born,	for	a	moment	it	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
there	and	then	it	is	gone	--	it	is	a	soap	bubble.	But	truth	is	eternal.	To	know	it	is
to	know	that	we	have	been	here	eternally	and	we	are	going	to	be	here	eternally.
The	moment	this	realisation	settles	in	one,	all	fears	disappear	--	because	all	fears
are	rooted	in	the	fear	of	death.
The	moment	one	realises	this	there	is	no	anxiety,	no	anguish	left	and	the	whole
energy	 that	 was	 involved	 in	 anxiety,	 fear,	 anguish,	 agony,	misery,	 is	 released.
And	that	released	energy	becomes	a	rejoicing,	it	becomes	a	dance	in	your	being.
Without	any	deliberation	on	your	part	you	start	a	new	kind	of	life,	a	life	which
can	only	be	described	as	celebration.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
25	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010255
ShortTitle:	THUNK25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	talks	of	true	nobility	to	Anand	Heidi.)
Misery	brings	a	callous	quality,	 it	brings	cunningness.	The	miserable	person	 is
bound	to	be	ignoble.	He	cannot	afford	to	be	noble;	he	has	nothing	to	share,	he	is
a	beggar.
We	can	give	only	that	which	we	have	got.	If	we	are	miserable	we	are	bound	to
give	 misery	 to	 others,	 whether	 we	 intend	 to	 or	 not	 is	 immaterial.	 Only	 the
blissful	 person	 can	 be	 noble	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 he	 cannot	 harm,	 it	 is
impossible	for	him	to	harm.	And	he	has	so	much	joy	that	he	is	bound	to	share	it	-
-	what	else	can	he	do	with	it?	Just	as	the	sun	has	to	radiate	its	light	the	blissful
person	has	to	radiate	his	blissfulness;	it	is	a	natural,	spontaneous	phenomenon.
So	to	me	nobility	cannot	be	cultivated.	A	cultivated	nobility	will	be	superficial,
pseudo,	a	mask,	and	behind	it	will	be	hiding	an	ugly	face;	hence	my	insistence	is
on	bliss.	If	you	are	blissful	nobility	will	come	as	a	shadow	of	it,	as	a	by-product.
When	a	flower	opens	there	 is	fragrance	and	when	bliss	opens	there	 is	nobility;
we	 need	 not	 bother	 about	 nobility.	 The	 whole	 concern	 of	 sannyas	 is	 how	 to
create	bliss,	then	everything	comes	of	its	own	accord.
So	to	me	to	be	blissful	is	the	only	morality	in	the	world,	the	only	religion.
(Osho	 adds	 'Dhyan'	 to	 Hannelore	 and	 says	 that	 now	 her	 name	 is	 really
international.)	And	that's	what	my	sannyasins	are	supposed	to	be	--	not	bounded
by	any	nationality,	religion,	race,	color	or	creed.
'Dhyan'	 comes	 from	 Sanskrit,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 ancient	 languages.	 It	 means
meditativeness,	a	quality	of	profound	silence	where	mind	dissolves	just	 like	an
iceberg	melting	into	the	ocean	and	becoming	one	with	it.
The	mind	is	just	like	an	iceberg:	it	can	melt	and	become	part	of	our	being.
'Hannelore'	 consists	 of	 two	 words	 from	 two	 languages.	 'Hanne'	 comes	 from
Anna;	Anna	 is	Hebrew	 --	 it	means	 prayer,	 grace,	mercy.	And	 the	 second	part,
'lore',	comes	from	Helen;	Helen	is	Greek	--	it	means	light.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	now	you	 really	have	an	 international	name.	One	part	 comes	 from	Sanskrit,
the	 other	 from	 Hebrew	 and	 the	 third	 from	 Greek.	 The	 three	 most	 ancient
languages	of	the	world	and	the	most	cultured,	the	most	refined.
Meditation	brings	all	 these	qualities	naturally.	Prayer	 is	 an	attitude.	 It	means	a
loving	quality,	a	loving	relationship	with	existence.	To	be	in	love	with	existence
is	prayer	and	out	of	that	loving	relationship	with	existence	grace	arises.	A	man
who	 is	 prayerful	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 beautiful;	 and	 his	 beauty	 will	 not	 be	 of	 this
world,	 it	will	 belong	 to	 the	 beyond,	 it	will	 be	 grace.	And	when	 there	 is	 grace
there	is	compassion,	compassion	for	all	those	who	have	not	yet	arrived	--	that	is
mercy.
And	the	last	part	means	light.	When	one	is	absolutely	silent,	in	meditation,	when
the	mind	has	dissolved	like	an	iceberg	melting	and	becoming	one	with	the	ocean,
great	light	is	released;	one	becomes	just	light.
That	is	the	experience	of	ultimate	truth.	But	everything	depends	on	meditation.
Everything	depends	on	a	single	phenomenon:	how	to	be	absolutely	silent	so	that
the	mind	melts	and	one	becomes	a	flow	of	energy.
Mind	 is	 an	obstruction	 like	a	 rock.	Once	 it	melts	 there	 is	great	 joy,	 a	dance,	 a
new	kind	of	drunkenness:	one	is	utterly	drunk	with	joy	and	yet	absolutely	aware.
This	contains	the	whole	message	of	my	sannyas.
(Love	 is	 the	 foundation	 that	makes	 for	 real	 beauty,	Osho	 tells	 Prem	Annette.)
Without	love	one	can	be	beautiful	but	there	will	be	no	grace	in	it.	Something	will
be	missing,	something	very	essential	will	be	missing.	You	can	see	that:	you	can
find	 a	 beautiful	 prostitute	 --	 physically	 she	 is	 beautiful	 but	 something	 is	 ugly,
something	is	fundamentally	wrong.	You	can	see	it	in	her	eyes,	her	face,	her	body.
She	is	beautiful	but	her	beauty	seems	to	be	dead,	 it	 is	not	alive.	It	seems	to	be
like	a	plastic	flower	with	no	fragrance.	It	looks	like	a	flower	but,	it	is	not	really	a
flower.	Grace	comes	only	with	love,	and	because	the	prostitute	has	no	love	she
cannot	 be	 blissful.	 Even	 though	 she	 is	 beautiful	 there	 is	 something
fundamentally	ugly,	so	the	beauty	will	be	only	skin-deep	and	behind	it	there	will
be	just	ugliness.
Just	 the	opposite	 also	happens:	 even	an	ugly	person	can	have	grace.	And	 then
you	will	be	surprised	that	his	ugliness	is	not	taken	note	of;	he	becomes	beautiful
in	 a	 subtle	way,	 beautiful	 in	 a	 very	 profound	way	 because	 he	 has	 grace.	 That
happened	with	Jesus	Christ.
There	are	 two	traditions	about	Jesus.	One	tradition	says	 that	he	was	one	of	 the
ugliest	men	who	has	ever	walked	on	earth,	and	Christians	say	he	was	one	of	the
most	beautiful	men.	There	has	been	a	constant	quarrel	for	the	two	thousand	years
about	what	 the	truth	really	is.	Both	the	parties	have	their	own	reasons	for	 their
argument.
Those	who	were	 against	 Jesus	 saw	 only	 his	 physical	 part	 --	 and	 I	 agree	with
them	that	he	was	not	a	beautiful	man.	His	height	was	only	four	feet,	five	inches,
and	to	add	insult	to	injury	he	was	a	hunchback.	He	was	certainly	ugly	as	far	as
the	physical	form	is	concerned,	but	none	of	his	disciples	describe	him	as	ugly;
they	describe	him	as	one	of	the	most	beautiful	men	--	and	I	agree	with	them	too.
Because	they	were	disciples	--	available,	open	--	they	could	see	deeper	than	the
skin.	They	could	see	this	man's	profound	beauty,	they	could	see	his	grace.
So	 I	don't	 see	 that	 there	 is	 any	conflict	between	 these	 two	 ideas.	 I	may	be	 the
first	person	who	says	that	both	traditions	are	right.	Those	who	thing	he	was	ugly
are	right	because	they	saw	the	outermost	part	and	those	who	say	that	he	was	one
of	the	most	beautiful	men	who	ever	walked	on	earth,	they	are	also	right	because
they	saw	his	depths,	his	heights	--	and	they	were	really	of	immense	dimensions,
in	fact,	immeasurable.
It	is	only	through	love	that	one	becomes	graceful.	I	teach	very	few	things	to	my
sannyasins;	love	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental	qualities.	If	you	are	full	of	love
then	grace	comes	of	its	own	accord	and	following	grace	comes	god.
God	is	not	a	person	but	the	ultimate	in	gracefulness,	the	ultimate	in	beauty.
(And	 love	 is	 not	 a	 theory	 but	 an	 experience,	Osho	 goes	 on	 to	 say	 to	 the	 next
sannyasin.)	And	so	is	truth	and	so	is	god	and	so	is	bliss	and	that	is	valuable.
Beware	of	 theorising,	philosophising	--	 that	 is	 the	only	way	to	go	astray.	Insist
on	experiencing.	Always	remember	that	the	only	way	to	understand	anything	is
to	experience	it.	There	has	never	been	another	way,	there	is	none	and	there	will
never	be	--	just	experience.
Just	 as	 in	 science	 experiment	 is	 the	 way,	 in	 religion	 experience	 is	 the	 way.
Experimenting	is	extrovert	and	experiencing	is	introvert.	Experimenting	is	done
by	 the	head	and	experiencing	 is	done	by	 the	heart.	And	 truth,	 love,	bliss	 --	all
that	is	really	valuable	--	happens	in	the	heart,	not	in	the	head.
If	one	thing	is	always	remembered	--	that	we	are	not	to	waste	our	life	in	theories,
in	words	and	our	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
whole	 emphasis	 has	 to	 be	 on	 experience	 --	 then	 one	 cannot	 miss	 this	 great
opportunity	life	has	given	to	us.
Then	 miracles	 become	 possible,	 and	 everybody	 is	 entitled	 to	 miracles.	 If	 we
miss,	 we	 miss	 because	 of	 ourselves.	 God	 has	 given	 us	 every	 opportunity	 to
blossom,	to	flower,	to	become	fruitful,	but	all	that	happens	through	experience.
There	 are	 foolish	 people	who	go	on	 thinking	 about	 love.	Love	 --	 -never	 think
about	 it.	Thinking	 is	a	 sheer	wastage	of	 time	and	a	wastage	of	energy.	Put	 the
same	energy	 into	 love	and	 then	you	will	be	gaining	something,	some	 treasures
will	 become	 yours.	 Don't	 think	 about	meditation.	 There	 are	many	who	 go	 on
thinking	about	meditation	--	meditate.	There	is	no	need	to	think	about	dance	--
dance,	be	realistic	and	then	the	impossible	becomes	possible.
(The	 teacher	 from	 America	 who	 is	 next	 becomes	Ma	 Satyam	 Celia.)	 Satyam
means	the	ultimate	truth	--	not	the	truth	of	the	philosophers	but	the	truth	of	the
mystics,	not	the	truth	of	Aristotle,	Plato,	Kant,	Hegel,	Bradley,	Russell,	but	 the
truth	of	Socrates,	Pythagoras,	Heraclitus,	Jesus,	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	Nanak,	Kabir.
These	are	two	different	approaches.
Philosophy	 thinks	 about	 truth,	 but	what	 can	you	 think	 about	 truth?	Either	 you
know	it	or	you	don't	know	it.	Thinking	about	truth	is	like	a	blind	man	thinking
about	 light.	What	 can	 he	 think	 about	 light?	He	 does	 not	 even	 know	 anything
about	darkness,	what	to	say	about	light?
Ordinarily	 people	 think	 that	 blind	 people	 live	 in	 darkness	 --	 they	 are	 wrong,
because	 to	see	darkness	you	need	eyes.	Without	eyes	you	cannot	see	darkness.
And	 the	 blind	man	 has	 no	 eyes	 so	 he	 cannot	 see	 even	 darkness.	 This	 fallacy
persists	all	over	the	world	that	the	blind	man	lives	in	darkness	--	because	when
we	 close	 our	 eyes	 we	 see	 darkness;	 but	 to	 see	 that	 darkness	 the	 eyes	 are
absolutely	needed.	Even	when	your	eyes	are	closed,	 they	are	 there	 so	you	can
see	 darkness.	 But	 the	 blind	 man	 cannot	 see	 darkness,	 he	 cannot	 see	 light,
because	he	simply	cannot	see;	the	seeing	faculty	is	missing.	What	can	he	think
about	 light?	There	 is	 no	possibility	 of	 thinking	 anything.	And	whatsoever	 you
say	to	him	will	remain	only	in	his	head,	it	can	never	become	his	experience.
Philosophers	are	like	blind	people.
In	 the	 East	we	 have	 the	 famous	 story	 of	 five	 blind	men	who	went	 to	 see	 the
elephant	and	of	course	they	touched	the	elephant	in	different	places.	Somebody
touched	his	leg	and	they	said	'My	god,	this	animal	is	like	a	pillar,'	and	somebody
else	 touched	 the	 ear	 of	 the	 elephant	 and	 said	 'What	 nonsense	 are	 you	 talking
about?	This	animal	is	 like	a	fan'...	and	so	on	and	so	forth.	They	quarrelled	and
they	 argued	 and	 they	 started	wrestling	with	 each	 other	 and	 a	 crowd	 gathered.
The	crowd	somehow	managed	 to	pacify	 them	and	 told	 them,	 'Whatsoever	you
are	saying	is	only	partially	true.	None	of	you	has	seen	the	elephant,	you	just	have
touched	a	few	parts	--	those	too	you	have	not	seen	yet	and	you	are	trying	to	give
a	picture	of	the	whole	animal.'
In	 the	East	we	say	 those	 five	blind	people	were	 five	philosophers.	That's	what
philosophers	have	been	doing	down	the	ages	from	Aristotle	to	Wittgenstein,	for
two	thousand	years	 in	 the	West	and	for	at	 least	 ten	 thousand	years	 in	 the	East.
They	 are	 suffering	 from	 the	 same	 disease.	 The	 disease	 is	 that	 they	 don't
recognise	that	they	are	blind.
The	 mystics'	 approach	 is	 totally	 different.	 'Socrates,	 Plotinus,	 Heraclitus,
Pythagoras	or	Lao	Tzu,	Zarathustra,	Jesus	--	their	approach	is	totally	different.	It
is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 thinking	 about	 truth	 --	 because	 thinking	 can	 lead	 you
nowhere,	it	goes	round	and	round	in	circles.	Their	approach	is	to	see	truth.	The
question	 is	 how	 to	 have	 eyes,	 not	 what	 to	 think	 about	 truth.	 The	 most
fundamental	thing	is	how	to	create	eyes.
So	when	I	talk	about	truth	I	mean	the	truth	of	the	Buddhas,	of	the	Christs,	not	the
truth	of	the	philosophers.
And	Celia	means	from	the	sky.	Truth	always	descends	from	tHe	beyond;	it	is	not
an	achievement.	You	can	see	light	but	light	is	not	your	achievement.	It	is	there
coming	from	the	sun	or	from	the	stars	or	from	the	moon;	it	is	coming	from	the
sky,	from	the	beyond.	In	the	same	way	truth	comes.	All	that	you	need	is	eyes	and
then	 truth	descends.	The	 light	 falls	on	 the	blind	person	 too,	 it	 falls	on	his	eyes
too,	but	they	are	blind,	non-receptive,	unwelcoming.
I	only	 teach	 the	 simple	art	of	how	 to	 see.	 In	 the	East	we	don't	have	any	word
exactly	parallel	to
'philosophy'.	 The	 word	 that	 we	 have	 is	 'darshan',	 which	 is	 a	 totally	 different
word.
Philosophy	means	thinking	about	truth	and	darshan	means	seeing	the	truth.	So	I
never	translate	darshan	as	philosophy	but	as	philosia.	 'Sia'	means	to	see,	 'philo'
means	love	--	love	of	seeing;	not	love	of	thinking	but	seeing.	The	truth	is	always
there,	 coming	 continuously,	 knocking	 on	 your	 doors	 --	 but	 your	 doors	 are
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
closed.
Sannyas	 means	 the	 art	 of	 opening	 your	 doors,	 the	 art	 of	 opening	 your	 eyes,
becoming	receptive,	available.	All	that	is	needed	on	the	part	of	a	sannyasin	is	to
be	 available	 to	 the	 beyond,	 to	 be	 in	 a	 yes	mood	with	 the	 beyond	 --	 and	 truth
comes,	it	inevitably	comes	and	liberates.
(And	the	seeker	of	 truth	needs	no	knowledge	but	 innocence,	Osho	tells	Nirmal
Satyarthi.)	One	needs	an	absolute	empty	mind	 to	know	truth	 --	not	a	scholarly
mind,	not	a	bookish	mind,	not	a	mind	full	of	scriptures,	 theories,	philosophies,
ideologies.	The	people	who	are	too	full	of	such	junk	and	rubbish	can	never	find
truth	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 that	 they	already	believe	 they	know;and	 they	know
nothing,	all	their	knowledge	is	borrowed.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 a	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 do	 is	 renounce	 knowledge,	 to	 just	 clean
oneself	completely	of	all	rubbish	--	and	by	rubbish	I	mean	all	that	is	borrowed.	If
it	 is	 your	 own	 experience,	 good;	 if	 it	 is	 not	 your	 own	 experience	 then	 simply
throw	it	out	--	it	is	unnecessarily	occupying	your	inner	space.
And	 when	 you	 are	 absolutely	 innocent,	 all	 scriptures	 burned,	 all	 theories
dissolved,	when	you	suddenly	realise	that	you	know	nothing,	a	miracle	happens:
in	that	state	of	not-knowing,	truth	descends	in	you.
That's	what	Socrates	says:	I	know	only	one	thing:	 that	I	know	nothing.	That	 is
the	beginning	of	the	true	search,	that	is	sannyas.
(Osho	compares	the	state	of	meditation	to	an	absolutely	calm	lake	in	which	the
sky	above	is	reflected	undistorted.)
The	whole	reality	penetrates	you.
It	 is	 the	 mind	 that	 does	 not	 allow	 that.	Mind	 means	 the	 lake	 is	 disturbed	 by
waves	 and	 winds.	 The	 moon	 may	 be	 there,	 the	 full-moon,	 but	 still	 the	 lake
cannot	reflect	it.	By	the	time	the	rays	of	the	moon	reach	the	lake	the	waves	have
distorted	 them.	On	 the	 lake	 they	spread	 like	silver	but	no	moon	 is	 reflected.	 If
the	 lake	 were	 conscious	 it	 would	 not	 have	 any	 idea	 of	 how	 the	 moon	 looks
unless	it	came	to	a	silent	state.
Dhyano	means	 an	 absolute	 silent	 state	 of	 consciousness.	 And	 Lucretia	 means
light.	The	moment	you	are	silent	suddenly	the	light	from	the	beyond	penetrates
you.	It	is	not	just	an	experience	of	light;	it	also	transforms	you,	so	much	so	that
by	knowing	 light	one	becomes	 light.	 It	 is	 an	alchemical	 change.	One	becomes
part	of	the	infinite	light.	Then	there	is	no	death,	no	anxiety,	no	fear,	no	darkness.
Then	life	has	no	beginning	and	no	end.	In	fact	that	beginningless,	endless	life	is
called	god.
God	 is	 only	 a	 word	 denoting	 a	 certain	 experience,	 not	 indicating	 a	 certain
person.	There	is	no	such	person	as	god	anywhere.	It	is	the	ultimate	experience	of
light,	of	life	of	its	eternity,	of	its	deathlessness,	of	its	immortality.
All	that	is	needed	on	our	part	is:to	be	utterly	silent	so	that	knowing	and	seeing
become	possible.
(His	 name,	 Antun,	 has	 three	 meanings,	 Osho	 tells	 the	 psychiatrist	 from
Yugoslavia,	and	they	are	:	inestimable,	immeasurable)
Of	course	 their	ways	are	very	unconscious,	hence	 the	possibility	 that	 they	will
find	it	is	very	rare.	But	in	that	very	effort	they	start	moving	upwards	on	higher
planes.	That's	how	man	has	happened.
Man	has	passed	through	all	these	stages.	Charles	Darwin	was	the	first	man	in	the
West	 to	 introduce	 the	 idea	 of	 evolution	 but	 in	 the	 East	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 very
ancient	ideas.	In	the	East	it	has	existed	for	at	 least	 ten	thousand-years,	but	in	a
very	metaphorical	way,	in	a	poetic	form.	It	was	bound	to	be	so	because	it	could
not	be	scientific	in	those	days.
In	the	East	the	idea	has	existed	in	the	form	of	the	incarnations	of	god.	The	first
incarnation	is	that	of	a	fish	--	and	that's	what	Charles	Darwin	came	to	realise	and
later	 on	 what	 science	 started	 discovering	 and	 found	 out	 that	 life	 must	 have
started	in	the	ocean.	The	beginning	of	life	must	have	been	in	the	ocean;	and	that
idea,	 that	 the	 first	 incarnation	of	god	was	of	 a	 fish,	 has	 existed	 in	 India	 for	 at
least	ten	thousand	years.
And	then	there	were	higher	forms	of	 life.	A	moment	came	in	 the	 long	story	of
incarnations	--	there	are	twenty-four	reincarnations	of	god...	In	the	middle	of	the
whole	story	one	reincarnation	is	called	'nari'	--	half	man,	half	lion.	That	seems	to
be	the	point	where	man	was	divided	off	from	the	animals.
It	 is	 far	 more	 true	 than	 the	 idea	 that	 man	 has	 come	 from	 the	 monkey.	 Even
todays'	 scientists	 are	 working	 to	 find	 the	 link	 between	 the	 monkey	 and	 man
because	there	must	be	a	link,	a	stage	which	is	in	between	both.
So	far	it	has	not	yet	been	discovered.	Many	efforts	have	been	made	but	all	have
failed.	But	in	the	East	the	idea	has	existed	that	there	was	a	point	where	man	was
only	half	man	and	half	 animal.	Maybe	as	 far	 as	 the	major	part	of	humanity	 is
concerned	people	are	still	at	that	stage	--	half	man,	half	animal.	And	the	ultimate
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
transformation	is	not	only	the	creation	of	man	but	the	surpassing	of	man.
The	moment	a	man	surpasses	humanity	he	becomes	pure	consciousness.	In	 the
East	we	have	called	it	satchidananda.	Three	words:	'sat'	means	truth,	'chid'	means
consciousness	 and	 'anand'	means	 bliss.	 That	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 far	more	 beautiful
idea	of	the	trinity.	Before	it,	the	Christian	idea	of	god	the	father	and	the	son	and
the	holy	ghost	just	looks	stupid,	childish,	good	for	the	kindergarten	to	explain	to
small	children,	but	satchidananda	--	truth,	consciousness,	bliss...	this	seems	to	be
the	ultimate	triangle.	And	bliss	is	the	highest,	bliss	is	the	search.
Animals	are	searching	unconsciously,	and	unfortunately	ninety-nine	per	cent	of
human	beings	 are	 also	 searching	unconsciously.	Sannyas	means	 the	 search	 for
bliss	in	a	conscious	way,	deliberate,	making	it	a	target,	making	it	your	only	target
in	 life.	And	once	bliss	becomes	your	only	conscious	 target	 it	 is	not	difficult	 to
attain.	 Man	 remains	 unfinished	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 he	 never	 takes
anything	as	a	deliberate	aim;	he	remains	a	victim	of	winds,	accidental.
And	the	moment	you	start	experiencing	bliss	it	is	inestimable;	there	is	no	way	to
measure	it	--	it	is	oceanic.	It	is	priceless.	You	cannot	purchase	it,	you	cannot	sell
it.
The	third	meaning	of	Antun	is	beyond	praise.	No	words	can	do	any	justice	to	it,
no	 poetry	 can	 express	 it,	 no	 song	 can	 sing	 it.	 Even	 the	 highest	 music	 --
Beethoven,	Mozart,	Bach,	even	they	are	far	away	from	it,	are	far	away	echoes.
Even	they	fall	short.	But	 they	come	closest.	My	own	observation	 is	 that	music
comes	closest	to	expressing	bliss	but	even	that	is	miles	away.	Language	is	very
inadequate.
One	great	Zen	master,	Rinzai,	was	sitting	on	the	bank	of	a	river.	A	seeker	came
and	he	asked	'Master,	can	you	tell	me	very	precisely	what	exactly	one	has	to	do
to	attain	 self-realisation?'	Rinzai	 remained	as	 if	he	has	not	heard,	 as	 if	nobody
had	come,	as	if	he	were	still	alone.
The	 man	 was	 very	 much	 puzzled.	 He	 said	 'Are	 you	 deaf	 or	 something?'	 He
almost	shouted	and	Rinzai	said	'There	is	no	need	to	shout,	I	have	heard	you.	That
was	my	answer	--	 remaining	silent.	 I	was	 telling	you	 that's	 the	shortest	way	 to
attain,	and	to	express	the	ultimate	only	silence	can	do	justice.'
The	man	said	'That	is	too	mystical	for	me.	Make	it	a	little	more	clear.'	So	Rinzai
wrote	on	the	sand	with	his	finger	 'Dhyan	--	meditation.'	He	said	 'If	you	cannot
understand	silence	try	to	meditate,	then	one	day	you	may	be	able	to	understand
silence.'	But	the	man	said	'Even	that	is	not	comprehensible	to	me	--	just	a	single
word,	 "meditation"?'	 So	 Rinzai	 wrote	 'meditation'	 twice	 but	 the	man	was	 still
insistent	so	Rinzai	wrote
'meditation'	 thrice.	 And	 the	 man	 said	 'You	 must	 be	 mad	 because	 you	 go	 on
writing	the	same	word	again	and	again.'
Rinzai	said	,'I	know	that	it	will	look	mad	to	you	but	what	can	I	do?	Lower	than
that	I	cannot	fall.	The	first	answer,	to	be	absolutely	silent,	was	the	truest	because
it	is	beyond	words.	But	if	you	insist	then	at	the	most	I	can	compromise	by	saying
'meditation'.	Lower	than	that	I	cannot	fall,	it	is	impossible.	I	cannot	be	so	unjust
to	truth	just	because	of	your	insistence.	Rather	than	pulling	me	down	to	you,	you
start	rising	towards	me.'
Move	from	meditation	 to	silence	and	 then	bliss	becomes	possible.	And	bliss	 is
the	real	god,	the	real	truth,	the	real	search.
(Osho	puts	across	 the	 same	point	 in	 terms	of	victory	over	 the	 inner	kingdom.)
The	real	victory	is	of	the	inner	kingdom.	The	outer	victory	is	absolutely	useless.
Even	if	you	become	Alexander	the	Great,	if	you	conquer	the	whole	world,	still,
it	is	pointless.
Alexander	the	Great	died	when	he	was	thirty-three,	and	he	died	because	of	too
much	 drink.	He	was	 an	 alcoholic.	Why	was	 he	 drinking	 too	much?	He	was	 a
successful	man,	the	most	successful	man	the	world	has	ever	known,	the	greatest
conqueror	 --	 why	 did	 he	 drink	 too	 much?	 He	 was	 feeling	 more	 and	 more
miserable,	more	 and	more	 defeated,	 deep	 inside	 he	 felt	 like	 a	 beggar.	 All	 his
victory	was	 proving	 only	 one	 thing,	 that	 it	 was	 all	 in	 vain.	 And	 the	more	 he
realised	the	stupidity	of	his	life	and	the	wastage,	the	more	he	started	drinking;	he
died	 of	 too	 much	 drink.	 He	 was	 young	 and	 healthy	 but	 he	 committed	 many
crimes	because	of	his	drunkenness.
Many	cities	he	simply	burned	down	because	he	was	too	drunk;	he	just	ordered
them	to	be	burned.	He	killed	one	of	his	greatest	friends,	murdered	him,	because
he	was	drunk.	Later	on	he	felt	very	guilty	but	the	man	was	gone.	And	the	more
victorious	he	became,	the	more	he	became	addicted	to	alcohol.'
It	is	very	significant.	It	shows	the	futility	of	outer	success,	the	utter	futility	and
the	stupidity.	But	this	is	not	told	to	the	students	in	the	colleges	and	the	schools	--
that	he	died	as	an	alcoholic.	Every	effort	has	been	made	not	to	say	it,	because	in
the	schools	and	colleges	we	are	teaching	nothing	but	ambition	--	and	Alexander's
life	proves	the	failure	of	ambition.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	sannyasins	have	to	become	victorious	over	the	inner	world.	That	is	the	only
true	victory.	All	else	is	just	a	game,	and	a	very	dangerous	game	because	you	are
wasting	 precious	 time	 and	 you	 will	 not	 gain	 anything	 out	 of	 it.	 Tomorrow	 is
uncertain	 --	who	knows	whether	 tomorrow	will	come	or	not?	 --	so	don't	waste
time.	 Put	 your	 total	 energy	 into	 the	 inner	 conquest.	 That's	what	 sannyas	 is	 all
about,	a	decision	to	make	the	inner	conquest.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
26	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010265
ShortTitle:	THUNK26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Dhyan,	meditation,	is	the	art	of	centring,	Osho	tells	the	first	sannyasin;	and	the
second	 part	 of	 her	 name,	 Christine,	means	 a	 follower	 of	 Christ,	 or,	 in	 Osho's
terminology,	 one	who	has	 found	his	 centre.)	Ordinarily	we	 are	 circling	 on	 the
periphery	 of	 our	 being	 and	 we	 go	 on	 in	 circles;	 hence	 life	 remains	 a	 deep
frustration.	We	 cannot	 find	 any	 anchor,	we	 cannot	 find	 any	 home.	 Everything
remains	a	flux,	and	we	cannot	rest	in	this	flux.
There	is	a	point	within	our	being	which	can	give	us	eternal	shelter,	but	it	is	not
on	the	periphery,	it	is	exactly	in	the	middle	of	our	life.	So	we	have	to	search	for
that	centre	--	that	search	is	meditation.
And	Christine	means	a	follower	of	Christ,	but	the	only	way	to	be	a	follower	of
Christ	 is	 to	 find	 your	 centre,	 there	 is	 no	 other	way.	By	 reading	 the	Bible	 one
cannot	be	a	Christian.	One	can	pretend,	millions	are	pretending.	By	reading	the
Bhagavad	Gita	others	are	pretending	to	be	Hindus,	by	readirg	the	Koran	others
are	pretending	to	be	Mohammedans.	But	unless	you	find	your	centre	you	cannot
be	a	Christian,	a	Hindu	or	Mohammedan;	and	 the	moment	you	 find	 the	centre
suddenly	you	realise	the	unity	of	all	religions.	Then	being	a	follower	of	Christ	or
of	Buddha	or	 of	Mahavira	makes	 no	difference	 at	 all;	 it	 is	 the	 same	 taste,	 the
same	flavour,	the	same	fragrance.
One	who	has	found	his	centre	becomes	simply	religious.	His	religiousness	is	no
more	confined	 to	any	 religion;	he	becomes	 religionlessly	 religious.	That's	why
my	 effort	 is	 for	my	 sannyasins	 to	 be	 religionlessly	 religious,	 neither	Christian
nor	Mohammedans	nor	Hindus	--	simply	religious.
And	 of	 course	when	 you	 are	 in	 a	 state	 of	 silence	 you	 know	Christ	 from	your
innermost	core	and	Buddha	from	your	very	being;	Krishna	starts	playing	on	his
flute.	 But	 it	 is	 no	 more	 something	 outside	 of	 you,	 it	 is	 happenirlg	 at	 the
innermost	shrine	of	your	own	existence.	Then	life	is	splendour,	an	ecstasy.
(As	Angelica	 listens	 to	 the	meaning	of	her	name	her	hands	 instinctively	move
together	into	the	classical	prayer	position,	and	remain	there,	quite	still.)
Man	can	exist	in	two	ways,	either	through	logic	or	through	love.	Logic	functions
in	the	head	and	love	functions	in	the	heart.	Logic	can	only	give	you	hypotheses,
never	any	conclusion;	it	remains	inconclusive.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
At	 the	most	 it	 can	 give	 you	 some	 ideas	 aBOUT	 truth	 but	 not	 truth	 itself;	 and
ideas	about	truth	are	not	truth.
Even	 the	 blind	 man	 can	 have	 ideas	 about	 light	 --	 there	 is	 no	 problem	 about
having	ideas	--	but	the	blind	man	knows	nothing	of	light.	And	logic	is	blind.
The	irony	is	that	the	head	calls	love	blind.	In	fact	the	head	is	blind,	not	the	heart,
because	the	head	is	completely	closed;	not	only	metaphorically	but	literally	too.
It	is	closed	within	a	skull,	completely	closed.
Yes,	 there	are	a	few	openings	--	ears	and	eyes	and	nose	--	 to	connect	you	with
existence,	otherwise	it	is	completely	closed.
The	heart	means	an	opening,	a	vulnerability,	an	availability.	All	that	is	beautiful
happens	through	the	heart.
Science	happens	through	the	head,	 technology	happens	through	the	head	--	but
not	poetry,	not	music,	not	dance.	And	truth	is	closer	to	music,	to	poetry,	to	dance,
than	to	technology.
Live	through	the	heart.	It	is	only	through	the	heart	that	one	comes	to	know	the
truth.	And	when	you	know,	you	can	 share	 it,	 you	can	 become	a	messenger	 of
god;	everybody	has	the	potential	to	become	a	bringer	of	truth.	And	unless	that	is
fulfilled	one	remains	in	despair	because	one	has	missed	one's	vocation.
The	 head	 can	 give	 you	 occupation,	 business,	 but	 not	 vocation,	 not	 something
that	can	make	your	life	meaningful.	It	can	give	you	comforts,	conveniences,	but
still	you	will	remain	empty,	empty	of	all	meaning,	shallow.
Love	 gives	 life.	 It	 starts	 movingyouinto	 the	 world	 of	 the	 unknown	 and	 the
mysterious.	Love	is	true	magic,	white	magic.
(To	want	bliss	is	to	miss	bliss,	Osho	tells	us.)
That's	why	all	the	awakened	people	have	been	teaching	desirelessness,	because
if	 bliss	 is	 not	 an	 achievement	 you	 cannot	make	 an	 ambition	 of	 it,	 you	 cannot
desire	it;	your	desire	will	become	a	hindrance.
Your	very	effort	to	achieve	it	will	cause	delay.	The	way	to	find	it	is	to	be	totally
desireless,	 utterly	 silent,	 not	 hankering	 for	 it,	 and	 in	 that	 very	 moment	 the
miracle	happens,	when	you	are	not	desiring	it,	it	starts	showering	on	you.	It	is	a
gift,	 it	 is	 a	gift	 of	god.	 It	 is	within	god's	pwer	 to	give	or	not	 to	give;	 it	 is	 not
within	man's	power	to	get	it	or	not	to	get	it.
Yes,	a	certain	groundwork	is	needed	from	man's	side	to	prepare	you	to	receive	it.
You	cannot	be	aggressive	about	it.	Hence	the	whole	of	religion	as	such	depends
on	receptivity,	sensitivity.	You	have	to	be	open	to	receive	the	guest,	you	have	to
become	the	host.	One	thing	is	certain,	 the	guest	comes;	 if	 the	host	 is	ready	the
guest	immediately	comes.
An	 ancient	 Egyptian	 proverb	 says	 that	 when	 the	 disciple	 is	 ready	 the	 master
appears.	 The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 god	 too	 because	 god	 is	 the	 ultimate	 master.
When	the	disciple	is	ready	the	ultimate	master	too	appears.
And	John	also	has	a	metaphorical	meaning.	He	was	one	of	Jesus'	most	intimate
disciples,	so	intimate	that	his	name	has	become	a	symbol,	a	symbol	of	a	beloved
disciple.	 His	 surrender	 was	 total.	 He	 was	 not	 holding	 anything	 back,	 he	 was
totally	available	to	Jesus.	That's	what	disciplehood	is.
Sannyas	is	initiation	into	disciplehood.	Today	you	are	really	becoming	a	John,	a
beloved	 disciple.	 Don't	 hold	 yourself	 back	 --	 because	 one	 cannot	 be	 a	 part
disciple	or	a	part-time	disciple;	either	one	is	totally	a	disciple	or	one	is	not	at	all.
It	is	indivisible.	Disciplehood	is	not	possible	in	fragments,	in	instalments.	Either
you	are	a	disciple	totally	or	you	are	not.	One	cannot	be	calculative	about	it,	one
cannot	be	cunning	about	it.
So	 be	 utterly	 innocent,	 receptive,	 available.	 And	 the	 guest	 will	 find	 you,	 you
need	not	go	anywhere.
(Deva	Connie	means	 divine	 vigilance	 --	 and	 that's	 just	what	 sannyas	 is,	Osho
points	out.)	It	is	the	key	to	the	door	of	the	divine.	It	is	a	master	key.	It	unlocks	all
the	mysteries.
So	 go	 on	 remembering	 again	 and	 again	 that	 your	 name	 has	 to	 become	 your
discipline.	Be	watchful	of	three	things:	the	body	--	that	means	your	actions;	the
mind	--	 that	means	your	 thoughts;	and	 the	heart	 --	 that	means	your	feelings.	 If
you	are	aware	of	 these	 three	you	will	become	aware	of	 the	 fourth	without	any
effort	on	your	own.	For	these	three	you	have	to	make	an	effort,	but	the	fourth	is	a
gift.	Gne	who	has	become	aware	of	these	three,	of	body,	mind,	heart,	of	action,
thought,	 feeling,	 earns	 the	 fourth	 awareness;	 he	 becomes	 aware	 of	 his	 being.
And	that	is	the	ultimate	in	joy.	One	has	arrived	home,	one	has	found	god,	truth,
nirvana.
(Antje	becomes	Amrit	Sagaro.)
Man	is	a	potential	ocean	of	nectar,	but	he	lives	like	a	dewdrop	and	a	dewdrop	not
of	nectar	but	of	poison.	This	is	unfortunate	but	it	happens	to	almost	everybody
for	the	simple	reason	that	we	are	brought	up	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
as	egos.	The	ego	is	a	dewdrop	of	poison,	and	when	we	become	identified	with
the	ego	we	tend	to	forget	our	oceanic	being.	Then	we	totally	forget	that	we	are
immortals,	that	we	were	before	birth	and	we	will	be	after	death.
The	ego	gives	us	a	very	wrong	impression	of	life.	It	makes	us	limited	within	life,
between	birth	and	death,	and	because	of	this	a	thousand	and	one	problems	arise.
It	is	because	of	the	ego	that	man	becomes	afraid	of	death.	All	fears	are	rooted	in
that	basic	fear,	the	fear	of	death.
It	 is	because	of	ego	 that	man	becomes	 incapable	of	 love,	because	for	 love	you
need	 to	drop	 the	 ego,	 and	 that	 looks	 like	 suicide.	 It	 is	 because	of	 the	 ego	 that
man	becomes	like	a	rock	--	hard,	violent,	aggressive,	murderous.	The	ego	is	very
competitive,	 jealous,	 possessive,	 dominating.	 And	 the	 ego	 is	 constantly	 in	 a
hurry	because	death	is	coming	close	and	nothing	is	finished	yet.	And	wherever
there	 is	 hurry	 there	 is	 worrry,	 tension,	 anxiety.	 The	 ego	 is	 the	 whole	 of	 our
misery,	our	very	hell.
When	one	becomes	a	sannyasin	one	has	to	learn	the	language	of	immortality,	of
one's	 oceanicness,	 of	 one's	 eternity.	And	 it	 is	 just	 there;	 you	have	 to	 learn	 the
simple	art	of	slipping	out	of	the	ego.	It	is	just	like	a	snake	slipping	out	of	the	old
skin:	once	you	know	it	you	start	laughing	about	why	it	took	you	so	long.
When	 Bodhidharma	 --	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 enlightened	 persons	 who	 has	 ever
walked	on	the	earth	--
became	enlightened,	he	laughed	for	seven	days	continuously.	He	could	not	even
sleep!	 His	 friends	 became	 very	 much	 alerted:	 had	 he	 gone	 crazy?	 He	 was
looking	tremendously	beautiful,	blissful,	but	why	was	he	laughing?	They	would
ask	 him	 and	 he	 would	 laugh	 more.	 It	 was	 uncontainable.	 Finally	 when	 he
became	a	little	cooled	down,	came	back	to	his	senses	--	he	had	gone	beyond	his
senses	--	he	explained	to	his	friends,	'I	started	laughing	because	for	thousands	of
lives	 I	 have	 been	 searching	 for	 this	 experience	 and	 it	 was	 just	 within	 me!	 I
looked	 in	every	nook	and	corner	of	 the	world,	 I	did	everything	possible	and	 it
needed	nothing	to	be	done;	I	just	had	to	slip	within	myself.'
All	the	people	who	have	become	enlightened	have	felt	the	problem:	'Why	do	we
go	on	missing?'	It	is	so	close	by,	it	is	just	around	the	corner,	it	is	always	within
reach.	No	special	effort	is	needed.
So	here	 I	 don't	 teach	great	 ascetism,	 standing	on	your	 head,	 doing	 all	 sorts	 of
contortions	of	the	body.	I	simply	teach	one	thing:	relax,	relax	into	yourself.	And
just	by	relaxing	one	day	it	happens.	Suddenly	one	day	you	find	you	are	out	of	it.
And	then	a	 totally	different	dimension	opens	up.	That	dimension	can	be	called
god	 or	 truth	 or	 freedom.	 These	 are	 different	 names	 for	 the	 same	 unnameable
experience.
(Then	Osho	speaks	further	on	the	nature	of	the	ego.)
Man	 lives	 in	 ego	 consciousness	 --	 that	 is	 his	 misery.	 He	 can	 live	 in	 god
consciousness	and	 immediately	 the	doors	of	heaven	open.	Hell	and	heaven	are
not	geographical,	 they	are	not	outside	you;	 they	are	 just	ways	of	 living.	 If	you
live	as	an	ego,	 thinking	of	yourself	as	separate	 from	existence	you	will	 live	 in
misery.	 If	 you	 live	with	 existence	 in	 deep	 unity,	 in	 oneness,	 in	 an	 inseparable
love	affair,	in	an	organic	unity,	then	you	live	in	god-consciousness	--	and	that's
what	heaven	is	all	about.	It	is	very	childish	of	religious	people	to	look	for	heaven
in	the	sky.
All	 the	 old	 scriptures	 are	 full	 of	 such	 nonsense.	Hell	 is	 somewhere	 below	 the
earth.	In	fact,	in	Indian	scriptures	hell	is	exactly	below	you;	if	you	go	on	digging
you	will	reach	hell,	in	fact	you	will	reach	America
--	in	a	way	they	are	right!	But	what	about	Americans?	If	they	go	on	digging	they
will	reach	India.	They	are	also	right!	And	whenever	people	think	of	heaven	they
think	of	something	beyond	the	clouds.	It	is	all	nonsense,	these	ideas	are	childish.
I	have	heard	that	when	the	first	Russian	came	back	from	a	journey	to	the	moon
Breshnev	called	him	 in	private	and	asked	him	 'Did	you	see	god	 there?'	 Just	 to
have	fun	the	astronaut	said	yes.	And	Breshnev	said	'I	always	knew	that	he	must
be	there,	but	now	promise	me	not	to	say	it	to	anybody,	keep	quiet	about	it;	it	is
against	our	official	philosophy.	We	have	to	go	on	denying	it.'
And	then	the	astronaut	went	around	the	world,	he	had	many	invitations	to	many
receptions	and	had	many	prizes	to	receive.	And	of	course	he	was	received	by	the
Polack	 pope	 in	 the	Vatican	 also.	The	 pope	 also	 took	 him	 into	 a	 private	 room,
closed	 the	 door,	 locked	 it,	 and	 then	 asked	 'Tell	me	 one	 thing,	 please:	 did	 you
meet	god	there?'	And	again	just	to	joke	the	astronaut	said	'No,	there	is	no	god.'
And	the	pope	said	'I	always	knew	it...	but	please,	don't	say	it	to	anybody.	This	is
against	our	official	philosophy.	Keep	quiet.
Whatsoever	you	have	seen	keep	quiet	about	it,	never	talk	about	it	to	anybody.'
Communist	 or	 Catholic,	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan,	 they	 all	 think	 god	 is	 there
somewhere	--	and	they	will	all	be	disappointed,	very	much	disappointed.
God	 is	 within	 you,	 it	 is	 a	 state	 of	 consciousness,	 the	 ultimate	 state	 of
consciousness.	 When	 nothing	 is	 unconscious	 in	 you,	 when	 all	 darkness	 has
disappeared,	when	your	whole	being	is	full	of	light,	that	state	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
god.	It	is	a	state,	remember,	an	experience,	remember.	It	is	not	an	object	outside
you,	it	is	your	subjective	feeling.	It	is	more	like	love.
(You	can't	 have	bliss	 in	 instalments;	Akhilananda	means	 total	bliss,	Osho	 tells
the	next	initiate.)	You	cannot	reach	bliss	by	climbing	a	ladder	step	by	step;	it	is	a
jump.	You	can	only	have	it	whole.
That's	why	very	few	people	ever	try	for	it	--	because	our	minds	are	trained	in	a
mathematical	way.	We	would	first	like	samples.
This	is	a	very	business-like	world.	People	want	even	samples	of	god,	truth,	bliss,
only	 then	will	 they	decide	whether	 it	 is	worthwhile	or	not.	And	 in	a	way	 they
seem	to	be	logical,	but	no	samples	are	possible.
You	can	have	god	but	samples	are	not	possible.	You	have	to	risk,	you	have	to	go
into	 the	 unknown.	And	 it	 is	 a	 jump.	 Even	 if	 you	want	 to	 turn	 back	 from	 the
middle	you	cannot.	It	is	a	jump	--	you	have	to	go	the	whole	way.	Once	you	have
jumped,	 it	 is	 finished:	 you	 have	 to	 go	 the	whole	way.	You	 cannot	 stop	 in	 the
middle,	you	cannot	turn	back	either.	That's	why	very	very	few	people	ever	try	it.
People	go	on	 talking	about	god,	praying	 to	god,	going	 to	 churches,	 temples	 --
that	is	done,	it	is	formal.
Only	very	few,	courageous	people	have	ever	tried	to	take	the	risk.	It	really	needs
guts.
And	 this	 is	very	 fundamental	 for	my	sannyasins	 to	understand,	 that	 courage	 is
the	 greatest	 religious	 quality.	Your	 so-called	 religions	 are	 based	 in	 fear,	 not	 in
courage,	 in	 cowardice	 not	 in	 courage.	 Hence	 we	 have	 expressions	 like	 god-
fearing.	 We	 call	 religious	 people	 god-fearing.	 That	 is	 sheer	 nonsense.	 God-
loving	maybe,	 but,	 not	 god-fearing.	And	 in	 all	 the	 languages	 of	 the	world	we
have	such	expressions.
They	show	one	thing,	that	all	the	religions	that	exist	on	the	earth,	particularly	the
organised	 religions,	 exploit	 fear,	 they	make	you	 afraid.	And	 in	 fact	 fear	 is	 the
most	anti-religious	value.
The	 afraid	 person	 can	 pray,	 will	 be	 a	 victim	 to	 the	 priest,	 available	 to	 their
exploitation	but	he	can	never	know	god,	bliss,	truth.	That	journey	is	not	for	him,
that	pilgrimage	 is	not	 for	him	 --	 it	 is	 only	 for	 the	 courageous.	 It	 is	 a	quantum
leap.	 It	 is	 jumping	 from	 the	 ego	 into	 nothingness.	 But	 the	moment	 you	 reach
nothingness	 the	nothingness	 turns	 into	bliss.	 It	 looks	 like	nothingness	 from	the
standpoint	of	the	ego	but	when	you	really	reach	it,	it	is	pure	bliss,	it	is	total	bliss.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Akhilananda:	total	bliss,	absolute	bliss.
(And	bliss	is	actually	another	word	for	god,	Osho	tells	the	next	sannyasin.)	And
it	is	more	relevant	than	'god'	because	the	word	'god'	falls	flat,	it	does	not	ring	any
bells	 in	 the	 heart	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 it	 has	 become	 associated	with	 the
wrong	 people	 --	 with	 the	 popes,	 with	 the	 imams,	 with	 the	 shankaracharyas,
Ayatollah	Khomaniacs.	All	kinds	of	mad	people,	all	kinds	of	stupid	people,	have
destroyed	the	beauty	of	the	word	'god'.
Moreover	 'god'	 has	 no	 connection	 with	 ordinary	 humanity.	 It	 has	 a	 meaning
when	 one	 becomes	 a	 Buddha,	 otherwise	 it	 is	 meaningless.	 But	 bliss	 is	 not
meaningless.	 Wherever	 you	 are,	 bliss	 has	 significance	 because	 everybody	 is
searching	 for	 bliss;	 even	 the	 atheist	 who	 denies	 god	 is	 searching	 for	 bliss.
Sometimes	atheists	come	to	me	and	they	want	to	be	sannyasins	and	they	ask	me
'Can	we	be	sannyasins	--	because	we	don't	believe	in	god?'	I	say	that	is	not	the
point	at	all,	god	or	no	god.	If	you	are	a	seeker	for	bliss	that's	enough.	And	I	have
never	come	across	a	 single	 individual	wno	 is	not	 searching	 for	bliss.	That	 is	a
natural,	instinctive	longing.
When	 you	 have	 found	 bliss	 you	 suddenly	 realise	 that	 this	 is	 what	 god	 is	 all
about.	But	that	is	at	the	very	end	of	the	journey;	in	the	beginning	it	is	better	to
start	 with	 bliss,	 it	 is	 natural,	 simple,	 meaningful.	 And	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 the
climax,	then	you	will	know	it	is	god	and	nothing	else.	You	were	searching	god	in
the	name	of	bliss	but	that	is	only	a	latter	recollection.
So	 begin	with	 bliss	 and	 end	with	 god	 --	 this	 is	 the	whole	 journey	 of	 sannyas.
And	this	is	your	name,	Anand	Bhagwat.	Begin	with	Anand	--	bliss,	and	end	with
god	--	Bhagwat.
(The	music	 of	 silence	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 Sangit	 Shunyam.)	 Ordinarily	 we	 are
acquainted	with	the	music	of	sound,	but	there	is	also	a	music	which	is	soundless.
There	is	music	but	there	is	no	sound.	That's	the	ultimate	music.
The	 Taoists	 in	 China	 for	 centuries	 have	 emphasized	 the	 fact	 that	 when	 the
musician	 is	 perfect	 he	 throws	 away	 his	 instruments.	 Why?	 --	 because	 those
instruments	were	creating	only	sound,	and	when	the	musician	is	perfect	he	starts
experiencing	 the	music	 of	 soundlessness.	Why	 should	 he	 carry	 his	 guitar,	 his
sitar,	his	veena,	his	flute?	He	can	be	freed	from	all	instruments,	he	can	just	live
in	the	purity	of	silence,	he	can	enjoy	the	soundless	sound.	Or	they	say	that	when
the	archer	is	perfect	he	breaks	his	bow;	there	is	no	need	to	keep	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
it.
These	 are	 very	 strange	 statements,	 but	 mystics	 are	 known	 to	 make	 strange
statements.	Only	they	can	make	them,	only	they	have	the	guts	to	make	strange
statements,	but	in	a	subtle	way	they	are	telling	the	truth.
Truth	can	be	told	only	in	a	paradoxical	way;	you	cannot	make	it	logical.	It	has	to
be	 illogical	 because	 it	 is	 far	 bigger	 than	 logic,	 far	 more	 comprehensive	 than
logic,	far	wider	than	logic.	Logic	is	a	very	small	phenomenon,	tunnel-like,	linear,
one-dimensional.	Truth	is	multi-dimensional.
And	this	is	the	experience	of	deep	meditation:	when	all	sound	stops,	when	only
your	 being	 is	 there,	 pulsating	 without	 any	 sound	 --	 even	 the	 heartbeat	 is
soundless	--	only	then	are	you	totally	in	tune	with	existence.	That	is	attunement
or	 at-onement.	 Suddenly	 you	 are	 bridged,	 bridged	 with	 reality.	 All	 separation
disappears,	 evaporates.	You	 are	 part	 of	 this	 beautiful	 existence.	 Then	 you	 can
dance	 with	 the	 trees,	 with	 the	 wind,	 with	 the	 rain,	 with	 the	 sun.	 You	 have
become	a	member	of	the	universe.
Ordinarily	people	are	living	as	outsiders,	not	as	members	of	the	universe.	Unless
the	ego	disappears	some	noise	will	continue.	Ego	makes	much	noise,	 it	 is	very
noisy,	and	that	noise	disturbs	your	inner	music,	your	inner	dance.
Your	name	is	the	very	essence	of	meditation:	the	music	of	silence.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
27	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010275
ShortTitle:	THUNK27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Whether	man	lives	in	the	dark	or	enlightenment	is	his	choice,	Osho	says	first	off
tonight.)	 If	 people	 are	miserable	 that	 is	 their	 choice	 and	 responsibility.	 If	 they
really	want	to	change	they	can	change	it	instantly.	They	go	on	saying	that	they
want	to	change	but	they	still	cling	to	misery,	hence	their	talk	remains	impotent.
They	are	simply	deceiving	themselves	by	their	own	words.
This	is	the	first	thing	a	sannyasin	has	to	understand,	that	we	are	born	in	freedom
and	we	create	ourselves	by	our	acts	and	choices.	There	 is	no	fate;	we	make	 it.
Hence	except	for	ourselves	nobody	is	responsible.
Once	it	is	understood	things	become	very	easy.	Then	it	is	up	to	you;	nobody	can
prevent	you	from	being	blissful.
Darkness	 represents	 unconsciousness,	 light	 represents	 consciousness.	 In
darkness	 there	 is	misery;	 in	 light	 there	 is	 bliss	 --	 and	meditation	 is	 the	 key	 to
change	darkness	into	light.
(And	wisdom	is	the	experiencing	of	that	light.)
Wisdom	 is	 not	 the	 accumulation	 of	 facts,	 figures,	 information	 --	 it	 is	 a
transformation.
We	are	living	outside	ourselves,	hence	our	inner	world	remains	dark.	If	we	turn
in,	 if	 our	 attention	 starts	 focussing	 inside,	 then	 light	 is	 created.	 We	 have
everything	that	is	needed	to	create	light,	just	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
rearrangement	is	needed.
It	is	as	if	your	room	is	messed	up	by	somebody	--	the	furniture	is	upside-down,
the	chandelier	is	on	the	floor.	Everything	is	there	but	not	in	its	place.	It	will	be
difficult	to	live	in	such	a	room.	You	will	have	to	put	things	back	exactly	where
they	belong.
This	 is	 how	 man	 is:	 he	 has	 everything	 that	 is	 needed,	 god	 has	 provided
everything.	We	come	absolutely	ready	to	live	our	lives	to	the	optimum,	but	we
live	 at	 the	 minimum	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 we	 never	 arrange	 things.	 For
example,	 our	 attention	 is	 extrovert,	 hence	 we	 can	 see	 everybody	 except
ourselves	--	and	that	is	the	most	important	thing	to	see.	It	is	perfectly	good	to	see
others	but	first	you	have	to	see	yourself,	first	you	have	to	be	yourself.	From	that
vantage	point,	from	that	centred	state,	you	can	look	at	others	and	that	will	give
you	a	totally	different	quality.
So	 the	 attention	 has	 to	 be	 turned	 inwards.	 That's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about	 a
hundred-and-eighty-degree	 turn	 of	 our	 attentiveness,	 of	 our	 awareness.	 And
wherever	we	focus	our	awareness	that	space	becomes	lit	up.	I	am	not	against	the
outside	world	but	the	inside	world	is	the	first	to	be	taken	care	of,	then	the	outside
world	 has	 a	 secondary	 place.	 And	 the	 person	 who	 can	 take	 care	 of	 his	 inner
world	 is	 easily	 capable	 of	 taking	 care	 of	 the	 outside	 world.	 Wisdom	 means
knowing	 oneself,	 and	 to	 know	 oneself	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 all	 other	 knowing.
Then	the	circle	of	your	light	can	go	on	spreading;	it	can	become	more	and	more
comprehensive.	A	moment	comes	when	your	wisdom	comprehends	everything,
it	becomes	all-inclusive.	That	is	the	moment	of	enlightenment	--	when	one	feels
nothing	 is	 missing,	 nothing	 is	 lacking.	 One	 has	 come	 home,	 there	 is	 great
relaxation,	rest,	fulfilment,	deep	contentment;	 there	is	a	silence,	yet	 it	 is	full	of
songs.
(Wisdom	is	knowing	yourself,	Osho	reiterates	to	Satyam	Gyanam,	and	reminds
him	that	that	knowing	doesn't	happen	through	books.)
Books	contain	every	kind	of	information.	The	Bible,	the	Koran,	the	Gita	--	they
have	beautiful	statements.	Those	statements	are	made	by	people	who	know	the
truth.	But	the	problem	with	truth	is	that	the	moment	you	say	it	it	becomes	untrue.
It	remains	truth	only	when	it	is	unexpressed;	express	it	and	you	have	falsified	it.
But	 there	 is	 no	other	way	 to	 convey	 it.	Hence	 all	 the	 enlightened	people	have
passed	through	a	very	strange	experience:	they	cannot	remain	silent	because	now
they	know	something	which	they	would	like	to	share,	but	when	they	try	to	share
they	find	that	it	is	not	the	same	when	you	say	it;	it	is	something	else.
The	real	thing	is	left	behind,	only	the	word	reaches	the	other	person.
So	 there	 have	 been	 three	 kinds	 of	 enlightened	 people	 in	 the	world.	 One	 kind
decided	 to	 remain	silent,	 so	 the	world	knows	nothing	about	 them	because	 they
never	spoke.	The	second	kind	decided	to	convey	it,	knowing	perfectly	well	that
whatsoever	 you	 say	 misses	 the	 point.	 But	 they	 thought	 something	 was	 better
than	nothing	--	even	if	it	only	triggers	a	process	of	enquiry	in	the	listeners	that's
more	than	one	can	hope	for.
But	 they	 have	 not	mentioned	 that	 truth	 is	 inexpressible,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason
that	 if	 they	 say	 it	 is	 inexpressible	 then	 immediately	 the	question	will	be	asked
'Then	what	are	you	saying?	Then	what	are	you	expressing?	If	it	is	not	true	then
why	do	you	go	on	saying	it?	Either	it	is	true	or	it	is	not	true.	If	it	is	not	true	don't
say	it;	if	it	is	true	only	then	is	it	worth	saying.'	So	they	have	not	mentioned	that
they	are	doing	something	which	is	not	possible.	That	 is	 the	second	category	of
enlightened	people.
And	the	third	category	is	 the	most	paradoxical	--	 it	consists	of	people	like	Lao
Tzu,	Buddha.	They	speak	and	simultaneously	they	also	say	that	it	is	not	sayable.
Hence	Lao	Tzu	has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 find	many	 followers,	 because	 he	 looks	 a
little	crazy:	he	goes	on	saying	things	and	at	the	same	time	he	goes	on	saying	that
nothing	can	be	said.	He	defines	truth	and	says	it	is	indefinable.	He	starts	his	Tao
Te	Ching...	that	is	the	Bible	of	the	Taoists.	The	first	sentence	is	'To	say	the	truth
is	to	falsify	it,	the	truth	cannot	be	said.'	This	is	the	beginning	of	the	book.	And
then	he	 goes	 on	 saying	 everything	 about	 truth.	Now	who	will	 listen	 to	 such	 a
crazy	man?
Mohammed	 does	 not	mention	 that	 truth	 is	 inexpressible	 at	 all,	 Jesus	 does	 not
mention	 it	 at	 all.	 they	 belong	 to	 the	 second	 category.	 But	 because	 they	 don't
mention	 that	 truth	cannot	be	said	 their	 ideas	have	been	reduced	 to	dogma,	and
doctrines	and	churches.
Lao	Tzu's	ideas	cannot	be	made	into	a	dogma,	his	philosophy	cannot	be	reduced
to	 a	 creed.	 He	 has	 put	 enough	 dynamite	 in	 it;	 that	 dynamite	 will	 destroy	 all
structures	that	are	created	around	it.	It	is	self-sabotage;	he	has	made	every	effort
to	sabotage	himself.	But	the	third	category	of	the	enlightened	people	is	the	most
honest	 and	 sincere.	 Of	 course	 they	 have	 to	 be	 very	 paradoxical	 and
contradictory,	almost	illogical	and	crazy.
Lao	Tzu	has	been	thought	to	be	a	madman.
His	disciple	Chuang	Tzu	went	even	further.	Nobody	has	surpassed	Chuang	Tzu
in	craziness;	he	is	the	craziest	Buddha	that	has	ever	walked	on	the	earth.	That's
why	I	call	this	place	(Osho	indicates	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
auditorium	 with	 a	 circular	 movement	 of	 his	 fore	 finger)	 Chuang	 Tzu
Auditorium,	I	love	this	man!
My	own	approach	is	the	same:	every	day	I	go	on	saying	what	truth	is,	and	every
day	I	have	to	deny	whatsoever	I	have	said.	So	those	who	are	going	to	be	with	me
have	to	become	accustomed	to	my	self-contradictions,	my	paradoxicalness,	my
craziness.
To	be	my	sannyasin	means	to	be	in	the	hands	of	a	crazy	man.	But	what	can	I	do
if	you	choose	this	way?
--	it	is	your	freedom!
It's	 not	 so	 important	 whether	 one	 is	 just	 a	 rather	 ordinary	 sort	 of	 flower	 or
something	 more	 exotic,	 the	 essential	 thing	 is	 that	 one	 has	 blossomed,	 Osho
points	out	to	Anand	Nurit.
Hence	the	most	ordinary	grass	flower	enjoys	 the	same	sun,	 the	same	wind,	 the
same	 rain,	 the	 same	 stars	 as	 the	 most	 loved	 flower,	 the	 lotus.	 There	 is	 no
difference	in	nature.	So	there	is	no	question	of	being	small	or	big,	rich	or	poor,
educated	 or	 uneducated,	 black	 or	 white,	 beautiful	 or	 not	 beautiful,	 man	 or
woman	--
nothing	matters.	All	 that	matters	 is	 flowering.	The	moment	 a	 flower	 opens	 its
petals	it	enjoys	the	same	bliss	as	the	most	beautiful	lotus	or	the	rose.
Gautam	Buddha	may	be	the	son	of	a	great	king	and	you	may	be	very	poor,	but	it
makes	no	difference.
He	may	have	 lived	 in	great	palaces,	you	may	be	 living	 in	a	hut	 --	 it	makes	no
difference.	As	 far	 as	 inner	 growth	 is	 concerned	 god	 is	 available	 to	 everybody
equally;	god	is	a	communist.	And	in	fact	only	people	who	know	god	can	be	true
communists,	 because	 they	 understand	 the	 essential	 equality;	 then	 even	 the
smallest	is	equal	to	the	biggest.
One	 of	 the	 most	 precious	 sayings	 of	 Gurdjieff	 is	 that	 there	 is	 an	 experience
where	 the	 part	 is	 equal	 to	 the	whole.	Logically	 it	 is	 absurd;	 as	 far	 as	 logic	 or
arithmetic	is	concerned	the	part	cannot	be	equal	to	the	whole.
How	 can	 the	 part	 be	 equal	 to	 the	whole?	 The	 part	 is	 small,	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 be
small,	it	cannot	be	equal	to	the	whole.	The	whole	consists	of	many	parts	and	this
is	only	one	part.	But	Gurdjieff	is	right:	there	is	an	experience	of	absolute	silence,
of	tremendous	understanding,	of	awareness,	where	the	part	is	equal	to	the	whole;
there	is	no	difference	at	all.
Remember	it:	nobody	is	born	privileged,	everybody	is	born	equal.	And	as	far	as
ultimate	 truth	 and	 the	 ecstasy	 that	 follows	 its	 realization	 is	 concerned,	 all	 are
equal.	In	talents	people	are	different.	Somebody	is	a	poet,	somebody	is	a	painter,
somebody	 is	 a	 mathematician,	 somebody	 is	 a	 scientist.	 The	 mathematician
cannot	be	a	poet,	the	poet	cannot	be	a	scientist,	the	scientist	cannot	be	a	painter;
they	have	different	talents.
In	talents	people	are	different,	there	is	variety,	but	as	far	as	their	innermost	being
is	concerned	there	is	no	difference	at	all.	All	are	equal,	with	the	same	possibility,
the	same	potential	for	opening	up.
So	even	a	small	grass	flower	has	the	same	value	as	the	greatest	lotus.	Remember
it:	the	universe	is	absolutely	impartial.	It	does	not	give	more	to	some	and	less	to
some;	 it	 showers	 on	 all	 equally.	 Then	 it	 is	 up	 to	 you	whether	 you	 allow	 it	 to
penetrate	your	being	or	not.
(The	meaning	of	Prem	Denis's	name,	love	and	god	of	wine,	just	about	sums	up
sannyas,	Osho	tells	the	newest	addition	to	the	party.)
In	Greek	mythology	 there	 is	 a	 god,	Dionysius,	 the	 god	 of	wine.	 In	 that	 sense
Greek	mythology	is	the	only	mythology	which	has	a	special	god	for	wine.
Christianity	 destroyed	 that	 whole	 idea.	 There	 were	 temples	 of	 Dionysius	 and
there	were	festivals,	particularly	 in	Springtime	when	flowers	bloom	and	nature
suddenly	becomes	joyous,	and	bursts	forth	into	celebration	where	Dionysius	was
worshipped.	And	his	worship	consisted	of	only	two	things,	singing	and	dancing.
People	gathered,	they	danced,	they	sang.	They	abandoned	their	egos	completely,
they	got	utterly	lost	in	their	singing	and	dancing.	In	fact	it	had	nothing	to	do	with
the	outer	wine,	it	was	essentially	to	create	an	inner	drunkenness.
If	 you	 dance	 totally,	 forgetting	 yourself,	 dropping	 your	 self-consciousness,	 a
certain	subtle	drunkenness	arises	in	you.	And	it	is	very	paradoxical:	on	the	one
hand	you	are	drunk,	on	the	other	hand	you	are	fully	aware.
My	effort	here	is	to	revive	Dionysius,	so	my	whole	method	consists	of	singing,
dancing,	 rejoicing.	My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 rejoicers	 and	 love	 has	 to	 be	 the
wine,	because	if	you	love	you	can	dance,	if	you	love	you	can	Ying,	if	you	love
you	can	create.	Love	releases	all	kinds	of	creativities	in	you.	Love	helps	you	to
grow	grapes	in	your	inner	world.
So	you	have	come	to	the	right	place,	Denis!
(As	Susana	sits	 in	 front	of	Osho	 listening	 to	 the	explanation	of	her	new	name,
Anand	Archano,	her	eyes	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
close	and	her	head	slowly	falls	back.	Moments	 later	a	 tear	plops	off	her	cheek
onto	her	lap.)	I	know	only	one	prayer	and	that	is	being	blissful.	Nothing	has	to
be	said	to	god,	one	has	simply	to	be	blissful	and	all	is	said	through	one's	bliss.
People	can	pray	but	if	they	are	sad,	miserable,	their	prayer	is	only	words,	empty
words	with	no	content.	If	one	is	blissful	then	words	are	not	needed	at	all;	one	can
simply	 dance	 and	 sing	 or	 just	 sit	 silently,	 joyously	 --	 and	 that's	 enough.	 That
gratitude	reaches	to	the	ultimate	source	of	light.
So	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 prayers	 no	words	 but	 a	 silent	 joy	 pervading	 your
whole	being.	 --	How	 long	will	you	be	here?	 --	Forever.	 --	That's	 right	 --	 that's
what	I	was	afraid	of!	(laughter)	Good!
(Real	 knowing,	 or	 truth,	 is	 beyond	 all	 books	 --	 even	 Bibles,	 Osho	 repeats.)
Hence	the	seeker	of	truth	has	to	leave	behind	all	that	he	knows,	all	knowledge	as
such,	 because	 it	 consists	 only	 of	 theories,	 assumptions,	 beliefs,	 inferences,
hypotheses,	philosophies.	It	consists	of	all	that	is	borrowed	from	others,	and	you
cannot	know	truth	unless	you	are	totally	free	from	all	that	has	been	taken	from
others.	That	 is	a	hindrance.	 It	does	not	allow	you	 innocence,	 it	does	not	allow
you	clarity,	perceptiveness,	transparency.
So	 put	 aside	 all	 that	 is	 borrowed,	 be	 utterly	 nude,	 naked	 like	 a	 small	 child,
knowing	 nothing.	 From	 that	 point	 the	 real	 journey	 begins.	Wisdom	 is	 not	 far
away	from	a	state	of	not-knowing;	in	fact	half	the	journey	is	already	complete.
The	negative	part	you	have	already	done,	you	have	removed	all	the	rocks.	Now
you	 can	wait,	 and	 spring	will	 start	 flowing.	 It	 was	 hindered,	 now	 there	 is	 no
hindrance	it	will	start	flowing.
Man	can	do	only	the	negative	part,	the	positive	happens	of	its	own	accord.	You
put	aside	knowledge	and	wisdom	wells	up.
(In	 his	 address	 to	 Zeno,	 Osho	 puts	 right	 a	 popular	 misconception	 about	 the
nature	of	meditation.)	Ordinarily	whenever	people	think	of	meditation	they	think
of	making	a	great	effort,	they	think	it	is	arduous,	they	think	it	is	an	uphill	task.
Real	meditation	is	just	the	opposite	of	that.	It	is	a	let-go;	it	is	not	an	uphill	task,	it
is	a	total	let-go.	It	is	surrender,	not	fight;	it	is	not	effort	but	effortlessness.
Real	meditation	means	 learning	 to	 sit	 silently	doing	nothing,	 relaxing	 in	doing
nothing,	 resting	 in	 one's	 own	being	 doing	 nothing	 --	 because	 doing	means	we
have	moved	from	the	centre,	doing	means	mind	has	come	in,	body	has	come	in.
Either	you	have	started	thinking	and	desiring	or	you	have	started	acting.
These	are	the	three	concentric	circles	around	our	being.	The	first	circle	closest	to
our	 being	 is	 that	 of	 feeling.	 Even	 when	 you	 feel	 something	 you	 have	moved
away	from	being.	The	second,	which	is	even	farther	from	being,	is	of	thinking;
when	you	think,	you	have	moved	even	farther,	farther	than	feeling.	And	the	third
circle	 is	 of	 activities;	when	you	 start	 doing	 something	you	have	gone	very	 far
away,	the	farthest	possible.
The	 meditator	 slowly	 moves	 inwards.	 First	 he	 leaves	 activities.	 That's	 why
sitting	 silently	 in	 a	 certain	 restful	 posture	 became	 important.	 The	 statues	 of
Buddha	depict	him	sitting	in	a	certain	posture	--	that	posture	is	called	the	lotus
posture.	It	is	the	most	restful	position	for	the	body,	scientifically	too.	When	the
spine	is	exactly	erect,	making	a	ninety-degree	angle	with	the	earth,	the	body	is	in
the	most	relaxed	position	because	gravitation	affects	your	body	the	least	in	that
posture.	If	you	are	leaning	forwards,	backwards	or	sideways,	then	more	of	your
body	 is	 pulled	 by	 gravitation.	 When	 you	 are	 just	 erect	 the	 least	 effect	 of
gravitation	is	on	the	body,	hence	it	is	the	least	tiring.
In	 walking	 you	 get	 tired	 because	 you	 are	 going	 against	 gravitation,	 you	 are
fighting;	when	you	are	walking	you	are	fighting	against	gravitation.	It	is	a	fight.
The	 earth	 is	 pulling	 you	 downwards	 and	 you	 are	 raising	 your	 legs	 up	 --	 that
means	you	are	fighting.	In	running	you	get	even	more	tired	and	more	quickly	for
the	simple	reason	that	running	is	a	greater	fight.	Sitting	became	the	posture	Or
meditators,	particularly	the	lotus	posture	when	the	spine	is	absolutely	erect	and.
the	 legs	are	 crossed.	For	Westerners	 it	 is	 a	 little	difficult	because	 for	 centuries
they	have	never	used	the	lotus	posture;	they	have	completely	forgotten	it.	In	the
East	it	is	a	very	common	phenomenon:	people	sit	on	the	earth	without	knowing
they	are	sitting	in	a	lotus	posture	--	or	something	very	close	to	it.
When	 your	 legs	 are	 crossed	 and	 your	 hands	 are	 also	 resting	 on	 your	 legs	 and
touching	 each	 other,	 it	 is	 now	 a	 well-known	 scientific	 fact	 that	 your	 body
electricity	 starts	 moving	 in	 a	 circle.	 In	 this	 posture	 the	 circle	 is	 not	 broken
anywhere.	 The	 electricity	 is	 released	 from	 your	 fingertips	 or	 from	 your	 toes.
When	 both	 legs	 are	 resting	 on	 each	 other	 and	 both	 hands	 are	 resting	 on	 each
other	the	electricity	starts	moving	in	a	circle.	It	is	not	released	from	the	body,	it
becomes	an	inner	circuit,	hence	it	preserves	energy.	And	as	your	electricity	starts
moving	in	a	circle	you	become	the	centre	of	the	circle.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Your	consciousness	simply	rests	in	the	middle	of	it.
So	the	body	has	to	be	in	a	non-active	posture,	then	it	is	easy	to	stop	the	thought
process.	And	 the	way	 is	 just	 to	watch	 the	 thoughts	without	 any	 evaluation	 or
judgement.	That's	the	whole	strategy	of	getting	out	of	thoughts:	don't	condemn,
don't	judge,	just	remain	an	indifferent	watcher.
The	word	Buddha	uses	for	it	is	 'upeksha':	absolute	indifference,	unconcern.	Let
the	thoughts	pass,	they	have	nothing	to	do	with	you	and	remain	unaffected.	The
more	unaffected	you	are,	the	less	they	will	come.
When	 your	 unaffectedness	 is	 absolute	 the	 mind	 disappears.	 And	 with	 the
disappearance	of	the	mind	now	there	is	only	one	more	circle	left,	that	of	feeling.
Feelings	are	more	 subtle,	hence	 they	can	be	only	 tackled	 last.	The	body	 is	 the
most	gross;	the	mind	is	just	between	feeling	and	body	--	a	little	subtle	but	a	little
gross	also.	Feelings	are	the	most	subtle..	They	come	like	a	whisper,	like	a	little
breeze:	if	you	are	not	very	alert	you	will	not	be	able	to	feel	them.	There	are	just
subtle	changes	of	mood.	You	were	feeling	very	good	and	a	slight	change	and	you
are	not	feeling	so	good;	a	little	anger	has	arisen	or	a	little	sadness	has	come	in.
And	they	are	continuously	changing.
After	watching	 your	mind	 you	 become	 capable	 of	watching	 those	 very	 subtle
nuances	of	feeling.	The	strategy	remains	the	same,	the	method	is	the	same,	it	just
becomes	 a	 little	 more	 subtle.	 Just	 go	 on	 watching,	 unaffected,	 and	 one	 day
feelings	also	disappear.	The	body	 is	 sitting	 there	 like	a	Buddha	statue	and	you
are	just	resting	in	your	being.
This	state	is	Zeno,	meditation.	And	to	be	in	it	is	the	greatest	experience	of	life.
Once	 you	 have	 known	 it	 you	 can	 again	 start	moving	 into	 the	world	 using	 the
body,	 the	mind,	 the	feelings,	but	now	you	are	 the	master.	Now	you	can	use	all
those	three	circles	very	easily	but	you	are	not	identified	with	them.
So	 this	 process	 is	 only	 till	 one	 has	 experienced	 absolute	 silence,	 cent	 ring,
grounding.	Once	it	has	been	experienced	then	there	is	no	need	to	have	a	separate
time	 for	 meditation;	 then	 whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing	 is	 meditation.	 Then	 for
twenty-four	hours	a	day	there	is	a	kind	of	meditativeness,	because	one	remains
centred	and	yet	one	goes	on	doing	all	kinds	of	things.
Thoughts	 come	 and	 the	 watchfulness	 is	 there,	 the	 body	 functions	 and	 the
watchfulness	is	there,	and	any	moment	you	can	go	in,	any	moment	you	can	slip
out.	 This	 is	mastery.	And	 a	man	who	 is	 capable	 of	 it	 is	 the	 real	 conqueror	 --
others	are	just	slaves.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
28	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010285
ShortTitle:	THUNK28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Prem	Claus	means	love	and	a	victorious	heart.	Osho	describes	what	he	refers	to
as	the	map	of	sannyas
--	the	journey	from	sex	to	prayer.
Man	has	many	centers	in	his	being.	The	most	important	centers	are	seven.	The
lowest	is	the	sex	center	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
and	the	highest	is	called	sahasrar,	 the	one-thousand-petalled	lotus.	Between	the
two,	exactly	 in	 the	middle,	 is	 the	heart.	So	these	 three	out	of	 the	seven	are	 the
most	significant.	The	energy	has	to	move	from	the	sex	center	towards	the	heart
center.	Unless	it	happens	one	remains	a	slave	to	one's	instincts.
Sexuality	is	the	greatest	slavery	because	it	dominates	you	through	biology.	You
are	 not	 the	master	 of	 it;	 you	 are	 under	 the	deep	 slavery	of	 chemistry,	 biology,
nature.	 The	 energy	 has	 to	 move	 from	 the	 sex	 center	 towards	 the	 heart.	 The
moment	it	becomes	love	the	heart	opens.	That	is	the	first	victory,	the	beginning
of	a	victorious	life.
To	live	confined	to	 the	world	of	sex	is	 to	 live	an	animal	existence,	 it	 is	 to	 live
just	as	physiology,	nothing	more.	To	live	through	the	heart	is	to	live	like	man,	a
human	 being,	 transcending	 animal,	 transcending	 the	 lower,	 transcending	 that
which	binds	you,	keeps	you	imprisoned.	And	once	the	energy	has	moved	to	the
heart	 then	 the	 remaining	half	 journey	 is	not	difficult.	The	 first	part	 is	 the	most
difficult	part	because	you	have	to	do	the	first	part	--	the	second	part	is	done	by
God's	grace.
One	becomes	 entitled	 to	 the	 second	part	 if	 one	has	 fulfilled	 the	 first	 part.	The
moment	your	energy	reaches	to	the	heart	center	then	nothing	is	needed	on	your
part.	 Then	miracles	 start	 happening	 and	 the	 energy	 goes	 on	 rising	 higher	 and
higher	 and	 one	 day	 it	 touches	 the	 ultimate	 center,	 the	 seventh,	 where	 prayer
happens.	 Sex	 is	 the	 lowest,	 prayer	 is	 the	 highest;	 exactly	 in	 the	middle	 is	 the
center	of	love.
This	is	the	whole	map	for	a	sannyasin:	from	sex	to	love,	from	love	to	prayer	--
and	the	pilgrimage	is	complete,	one	has	arrived	home.
(To	Dick	Osho	speaks	of	the	difference	between	the	soldier	and	the	sannyasin.)
For	 the	 whole	 past	 of	 humanity	 we	 have	 praised	 the	 quality	 of	 being	 hard
because	the	soldier,	the	warrior,	has	dominated	the	scene.	War	has	been	going	on
continuously:	 in	 three	 thousand	 years	 we	 have	 fought	 five	 thousand	 wars.
Naturally,	 the	 soldier	was	 the	most	 important	 person.	 The	 past	 belongs	 to	 the
soldier,	but	the	future	does	not	belong	to	the	soldier	at	all.	The	soldier	is	finished,
he	is	already	living	a	post-mortem	existence	because	science	has	developed	the
technology	of	destruction	to	its	ultimate:	within	ten	minutes	the	whole	earth	can
be	 destroyed.	 And	 we	 have	 piled	 up	 atomic	 weapons	 so	 much	 that	 we	 can
destroy	seven	hundred	planets	like	this	earth	or	--	to	put	it	another	way	--	we	can
kill	every	person	seven	hundred	times.
Now	war	is	impossible.	Small	battles	can	go	on	--	like	Iraq	fighting	Iran...	very
small	 battles	 --	 just	 because	 of	 old	 habit,	 just	 because	 it	 is	 an	 old	 routine,
otherwise	war	is	no	more	possible.	The	third	world	war	is	not	going	to	happen
unless	man	decides	to	commit	suicide,	a	global	suicide.	The	soldier	is	finished.
He	will	linger	on	the	scene	a	little	while,	creating	small	wars	here	and	there	just
to	keep	himself	engaged...
and	 the	 stupid	generals	with	all	 their	gold	medals	 to	brag	about.	But	 it	has	all
become	stupid,	it	is	utterly	stupid.	In	fact	the	generals	with	all	those	gold	medals
look	 foolish	 --	 clowns.	 They	 should	 be	 preserved	 in	museums	 or	 presented	 in
circuses,	otherwise	there	is	no	use	for	them.
The	 future	 belongs	 to	 the	 sannyasin,	 but	 the	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 live	 a	 totally
different	life	from	the	soldier.
The	most	important	quality	in	the	soldier	was	hardness,	and	the	most	important
quality	 in	a	sannyasin	is	 tenderness.	The	soldier	was	destructive,	 the	sannyasin
has	 to	 be	 creative.	 The	 soldier	 hankered	 for	 war,	 the	 sannyasin	 has	 only	 one
longing:	to	fill	the	whole	earth	with	the	perfume	of	love.
(A	challenge	lies	within	the	taking	of	sannyas.	Osho	tells	Anand	Bernd	what	it
is.)	Bliss	is	the	beginning	of	a	new	life.	Ordinarily	man	lives	in	misery	--	that	is
an	old	gestalt,	an	old	pattern.	Your	parents	lived	in	misery,	and	their	parents	and
their	parents'	parents	too;	you	can	go	back	to	the	very	beginning,	to	Adam	and
Eve.	They	also	must	have	lived	in	misery.	If	they	were	really	living	in	bliss	the
serpent	 would	 not	 have	 been	 able	 to	 seduce	 them.	 A	 blissful	 person	 is
untemptable.	What	can	you	offer	to	tempt	him?	--	he	has	got	it	already.
Then	of	course	the	problem	arises,	a	theological	problem:	why	did	Adam	believe
that	he	lived	in	paradise	if	he	was	miserable?	The	only	reason	that	I	can	find	is
that	 he	 had	 no	mother-in-law.	 (laughter)	That	may	 be	 the	 only	 reason	why	 he
believed	 that	 he	 lived	 in	 paradise,	 otherwise	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 no	 reason.	He
lived	 naked	 and	 only	 one	woman	was	 there.	What	 kind	 of	 paradise	was	 that?
And	even	that	woman....	every	night	when	he	came	back	home	and	fell	asleep,
she	would	count	his	ribs!	(laughter)	She	was	created	out	of	a	rib	--	if	another	rib
were	missing	that	meant	some	other	was	around	somewhere!	(much	laughter)	It
was	not	much	of	a	paradise.
He	must	have	been	miserable,	utterly	miserable,	hence	 the	serpent	was	able	 to
tempt	 him	 with	 something	 better.	 The	 salesman	 can	 only	 tempt	 you	 with
something	better	if	you	are	fed	up	with	your	car	or	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
with	your	house...	otherwise	nobody	can	tempt	you.
So	 from	Adam	 and	Eve	 downwards	 every	 generation	 has	 lived	 in	misery	 and
every	generation	has	given	its	misery	to	the	new	generation.	That	is	our	way	of
life	on	earth	 --	at	 least	up	 to	now	 that	has	been	our	way	of	 life.	 It	 is	 time	 that
some	new	gestalt	should	emerge,	some	new	way	of	life.
To	me	 the	 sannyasin	has	 to	prove	 that	 there	 is	 a	possibility	of	 living	 in	a	new
way	--	blissfully,	musically,	 lovingly,	in	a	sheer	dance.	That	is	the	challenge	of
sannyas.
(And	living	life	in	a	new	way	is	knowing	its	intrinsic	sacredness,	Osho	goes	on
to	say.)	Life	in	all	its	multi-dimensionality,	in	all	its	totality,	is	sacred.	And	there
is	nothing	else	other	than	life,	no	god	separate	from	life.	The	very	idea	of	god	as
separate	 from	 life	 has	 created	 trouble	 because	 then	 god	 is	 sacred	 and	 life
becomes	 unsacred.	 Then	 to	 choose	 life	means	 to	 deny	 god.	Or	 to	 choose	 god
means	to	go	against	life.
I	 want	 to	 destroy	 that	 separation	 between	 god	 and	 life.	 I	 want	 to	 declare	 to
everybody	that	life	is	god,	there	is	no	other	god,	only	then	can	we	create	a	new
man	who	will	not	be	schizophrenic.
The	 old	 man	 was	 schizophrenic,	 because	 naturally	 he	 wanted	 to	 live	 life
joyously	but	there	was	guilt,	in	every	joy	there	was	guilt	All	joys	were	poisoned
by	the	priests	because	they	were	continuously	saying,
'Remember,	god	has	to	be	found	and	you	have	to	sacrifice	this	life	totally,	only
then	can	you	find	god.'	To	rejoice	in	life	was	a	sin;	it	was	to	be	materialist,	to	be
worldly.	In	every	possible	way	the	so-called	saints	have	been	condemning	life.
Naturally,	if	you	lived	life	you	felt	a	deep	guilt;	if	you	followed	the	saints	it	was
unnatural	and	artificial	so	you	became	sad.	Either	way	you	were	a	loser.	This	is
creating	 a	 split	 in	man,	 this	 is	 the	 root	 cause	of	 all	 schizophrenia.	And	 to	me,
schizophrenia	is	not	a	disease	that	happens	to	only	a	few	people.	Who	whole	of
humility	is	more	or	less	schizophrenic.
It	cannot	be	one	because	it	has	two	goals	and	both	are	attractive.
You	must	have	heard	the	famous	ancient	fable,	a	donkey	died	because	he	starved
himself.	 It	was	not	 that	 food	was	not	available.	There	were	 two	piles	of	green
grass	by	his	side	at	the	same	distance	from	him	--	one	was	on	the	left,	one	was
on	the	right.	He	died	because	he	could	not	choose.	When	he	wanted	to	go	to	the
left	he	felt	the	right	side	to	be	greener.	That's	how	it	always	is:	the	grass	is	green
on	your	neighbour's	 lawn,	not	on	your	own	 lawn	--	and	your	neighbour	 thinks
the	same.
When	 the	 donkey	moved	 towards	 the	 left	 the	 right	was	 very	 attractive,	 so	 he
would	start	moving	towards	the	right,	and	then	suddenly	he	would	see	that	 the
left	grass	was	greener.	And	the	poor	donkey	simply	died.
He	 could	 not	 decide	 --	 he	 must	 have	 been	 a	 philosopher!	 He	 died	 out	 of
indecision.	And	that's	how	humanity	has	been	behaving.
If	you	become	religious	life	seems	to	be	very	attractive,	more	attractive	to	you
than	to	the	people	who	are	living	it.	The	farther	you	go	away,	the	more	attractive
it	becomes.	 If	you	 live	 life	 then	 the	 saints	 look	very	attractive	 --	 their	 silence,
their	purity,	their	holiness.	And	ultimately	they	are	going	to	enjoy	the	heavenly
pleasures	and	you	will	be	down	in	hell	burning	and	burning	forever,	for	eternity,
so	naturally	it	feels	attractive.	But	if	you	become	a	saint	then	suddenly	there	is
all	 sadness,	 all	 juice	 disappears,	 you	 become	 just	 a	 desert	 and	 everybody	 else
seems	to	be	enjoying	life.
This	has	been	the	problem	up	to	now.	I	want	 to	destroy	it	 from	the	very	roots.
My	sannyasins	have	to	know	one	basic	truth,	that	life	is	god.	I	worship	life!	So
there	is	no	question	of	choice.	One	can	enjoy	life	with	total	abandon	because	that
is	how	one	is	going	to	find	god.
The	only	way	to	find	god	is	through	life.	God	is	the	innermost	core	of	life.	Life
is	the	outside	of	god	and	god	is	the	inside	of	life.
(We're	all	messengers	of	truth	dispatched	to	earth	by	god	--	but	we	get	distracted,
Osho	tells	Satyo	Angelika.)
We	forget	from	where	we	are	coming,	why	we	are	here	and	where	we	are	going.
We	forget	everything!
This	 is	 in	 a	 way	 natural,	 because	 our	 coming	 down	 from	 the	 beyond	 is	 like
somebody	descending	from	the	sunlit	peaks	of	Everest	into	a	dark,	dark	valley.
The	journey	is	long	and	as	he	comes	down	lower	he	starts	becoming	accustomed
to	the	darkness.	He	has	to	become	accustomed	to	it	because	he	has	to	live	with	it.
By	the	time	he	reaches	the	valley	he	has	forgotten	all	about	the	sunlit	peaks;	or
maybe	 if	 he	 remembers	 them	 then	 they	 look	 like	 dreams,	 not	 like	 realities	 --
fantasies.	It	is	as	if	one	has	heard	about	them	or	dreamt	about	them	or	read	about
them	in	a	novel	or	seen	them	in	a	movie.	But	the	journey	is	long,	and	it	is	very
natural	to	forget.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Coming	from	the	ultimate	source	of	light	is	really	an	arduous	journey.	Entering
into	the	womb	of	the	mother	is	the	greatest	fall.	One	cannot	go	below	that;	it	is
the	darkest	place	possible.	And	then	in	living	nine	months	in	that	darkness	one
forgets	all	about	light;	and	then	one	is	born.
In	the	East	we	have	a	legend	that	even	after	birth	the	child	remembers	something
of	god	till	he	starts	speaking.	By	the	time	he	becomes	capable	of	speaking	he	has
forgotten	 everything.	 He	 has	 started	 learning	 the	 ways	 of	 the	 world	 --	 the
language	 of	 the	 world,	 the	 behavior.	 And	 we	 condition	 the	 child	 in	 every
possible	 way.	 Slowly	 slowly	 he	 forgets	 everything;	 he	 becomes	 unaware	 of
himself.	And	 that's	 how	millions	 of	 people	 live	 and	 die.	 Their	whole	 life	 is	 a
sheer	exercise	in	futility.	They	gain	nothing,	they	discover	nothing,	they	rejoice
in	nothing,	 they	don't	come	to	feel	any	truth.	And	if	you	cannot	feel	your	own
truth	 how	 can	 you	 share	 it	 with	 others?	 And	 that	 is	 the	 basic	 purpose	 of	 our
coming	into	the	world	--	to	bring	something	of	god	from	the	beyond	and	share	it.
It	 has	 to	 be	 rediscovered.	We	have	 to	 destroy	 all	 the	 barriers	 that	 have	 grown
around	it.	And	that's	the	whole	process	of	sannyas:	sannyas	means	a	total	process
of	deconditioning.	Whosoever	someone	is	--
Christian,	 Hindu,	 Mohammedan,	 German,	 Japanese	 --	 it	 does	 not	 matter;	 we
have	to	decondition	him.	The	Christian	will	have	to	be	deconditioned	as	well	as
the	Hindu,	 as	well	 as	 the	Mohammedan.	We	will	 have	 to	 destroy	 all	 that	 has
grown	around	your	natural	self.	And	once	all	the	barriers	are	removed	a	great	joy
arises.
Suddenly	one	recollects	who	one	is	and	what	one's	purpose	is	here.
In	 that	 very	moment	 life	 becomes	 significant	 because	 you	 have	 come	 to	 your
own	truth	--	and	that	 is	god's	message.	Then	you	can	share	it	with	others,	 then
you	can	also	help	others.
My	effort	here	is	to	create	as	many	sannyasins	as	possible	so	they	can	be	spread
all	 over	 the	 world	 and	 they	 can	 start	 triggering	 many	 many	 people	 into	 self-
discovery.	 I	 am	 not	 creating	 a	 church	 or	 a	 creed,	 I	 am	 simply	 emphasizing	 a
process.	 If	one	passes	 through	that	process	one	will	come	to	one's	own	natural
self.
That	 is	our	 truth,	and	 that's	also	god's	 truth,	because	 truths	cannot	be	separate;
our	truth	and	god's	truth	are	the	same.
Truth	is	one,	but	first	it	has	to	be	discovered	within	oneself,	only	then	can	we	see
it	 in	others	 too.	And	if	you	can	discover	 it	within	yourself	you	can	help	others
because	the	process	is	the	same.
(Meditation	 is	 pure	mirroring,	 Osho	 tells	 Dhyan	 Lole.	 And	 Lole	 is	 a	 form	 of
Violet.)	The	colour	violet	symbolically	represents	two	things:	one	is	humbleness
and	second	is	love	for	truth.
Both	these	things	become	possible	in	meditation	and	only	in	meditation,	there	is
no	other	way.
The	moment	 there	are	no	 thoughts	 the	ego	disappears	 --	because	ego	 is	only	a
thought.	 And	 then	 there	 is	 humbleness.	 When	 the	 mind	 is	 not	 there	 truth	 is
revealed,	 because	 mind	 is	 the	 only	 barrier.	 When	 thinking	 disappears	 truth
arrives.
(Prem	Prakash	means	love	for	light.)
Light	represents	consciousness,	and	we	are	living	in	a	state	of	unconsciousness.
We	 are	 really	 sleep	walkers	 full	 of	 dreams.	And	 if	 you	 listen	 quietly,	 you	 can
hear	people	snoring	even	when	they	are	walking.
They	 look	awake,	but	 they	are	not.	Certainly	 their	 souls	 are	 snoring;	 the	body
goes	on	doing	its	work	mechanically.
Love	 for	 light	 means	 love	 for	 consciousness.	 And	 that's	 the	 goal	 of	 sannyas:
transforming	 darkness	 into	 light,	 transforming	 unconsciousness	 into
consciousness.	 The	 moment	 your	 whole	 unconscious	 continent,	 the	 dark
continent	 inside	 you,	 the	Africa	within,	 becomes	 full	 of	 light	 --	when	 the	 sun
rises	inside	--	life	takes	on	a	totally	new	meaning,	a	new	joy,	a	new	fragrance.	It
is	a	rebirth.	And	it	is	possible	because	the	person	who	can	be	unconscious	can	be
conscious	too.
Only	the	dead	person	cannot	be	conscious,	because	he	is	dead.	And	he	cannot	be
unconscious	either.
The	 possibilities	 of	 unconsciousness	 and	 consciousness	 exist	 together;	 hence
there	 is	 great	 hope.	 Because	 we	 are	 unconscious,	 the	 hope	 is	 that	 we	 can	 be
conscious.	And	the	whole	religious	effort	depends	on	this	hope.	Up	to	now	only
very	few	people	have	been	able	to	transform	their	darkness	into	light.	But	those
few	people	are	enough	proof	that	every	man	has	the	same	potential.	Just	a	little
work	upon	oneself	is	needed,	just	a	little	respect	for	oneself.
Give	 the	world	 twenty-three	 hours	 of	 your	 day,	 and	 give	 to	 yourself	 only	 one
hour	 of	 your	 day,	 and	 that	 will	 do.	 Finally,	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 that	 those
twenty-three	hours	have	gone	 in	vain	 and	only	 that	 one	hour	 that	 you	gave	 to
yourself	for	the	work	upon	yourself	has	been	saved.
(Dhyan	Navya.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Navya	means	new.)	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	 is	an	end	and	a	beginning	--	 the	end	of	 the	old	and	 the	birth	of	 the
new.	You	 cannot	 even	 comprehend	 it	 because	 the	 old	 cannot	 comprehend	 the
new,	the	old	can	only	comprehend	something	which	is	old.	It	has	limitations,	it
can	move	only	within	the	boundary	of	the	known,	and	the	new	is	not	within	its
boundary,	the	new	is	unknown.	Hence	only	very	courageous	people	can	take	the
jump.
Courage	 is	 needed	because	you	have	 to	die	 to	 the	old,	 and	 the	old	 is	 familiar.
You	 are	 dropping	 that	 which	 is	 familiar	 for	 something	 which	 is	 absolutely
unfamiliar.	This	is	what	courage	is:	dropping	the	known	for	the	unknown.
There	are	two	steps	to	courage:	the	first	is	dropping	the	known	for	the	unknown,
and	the	second	is	dropping	 the	knowable	for	 the	unknowable.	By	dropping	 the
known	for	the	unknown,	meditation	happens.
And	by	dropping	the	knowable	for	the	unknowable	--	samadhi,	the	ultimate	form
of	meditation,	beyond	which	nothing	exists.
Meditation	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 samadhi.	 There	 is	 no	 word	 in	 English	 for
samadhi.	Samadhi	means	all	problems	have	disappeared,	all	thoughts	have	died,
the	ego	is	no	longer	there.	One	has	become	immersed	with	the	whole,	just	like	a
dewdrop	 slipping	 from	 a	 lotus	 leaf	 into	 the	 lake.	 In	 a	 way	 it	 disappears;	 in
another	way	it	becomes	the	very	lake.
(Love	is	prayer	--	that	is	the	meaning	of	her	new	name,	Osho	tells	the	American
counsellor.)	 Love	 is	 prayer,	 hence	 no	 temple	 is	 needed,	 no	 church	 is	 needed.
Wherever,	on	whomsoever,	you	shower	your	love	it	is	prayer.	You	can	give	the
prayer	to	the	tree,	to	people,	to	the	river,	to	the	rock,	to	the	sun,	to	the	moon	--
the	 whole	 universe	 becomes	 your	 temple.	 And	 wherever	 you	 sit	 prayerfully,
lovingly,	feelingly,	sensitively,	it	is	prayer.
Prayer	has	nothing	 to	do	with	words;	 it	 is	 a	 silent	gratitude	 towards	existence,
utterly	 silent.	 To	 say	 something	 will	 be	 a	 disturbance	 in	 prayer.	 Not	 to	 say
anything	is	far	better,	because	words	are	very	inadequate	and	all	lovers	know	it.
When	 you	 say	 to	 somebody	 'I	 love	 you'	 immediately	 you	 recognise	 that	what
you	wanted	to	say	has	not	been	said.	'I	love	you'	does	not	contain	that	which	you
wanted	to	convey.	It	becomes	very	ordinary	--
expressed,	 everything	 becomes	 very	 ordinary.	Hence	 lovers	 really	 don't	 say	 to
each	other,	'I	love	you.'
My	own	observation	is	that	when	love	dies	then	they	start	saying	to	each	other	'I
love	you,'	because	now	the	real	thing	has	evaporated.	Somehow	they	can	go	on
making	 the	 old	 lies	 with	 which	 they	 have	 become	 accustomed	 to	 live	 --	 the
security,	 the	 safety,	 the	 convenience	 of	 it	 and	 all	 the	 promises	 that	 they	 have
given	to	each	other.	My	feeling	is	that	only	husbands	and	wives	say	to	each	other
'I	love	you.'	And	whenever	anybody	says	'I	love	you,'	that	means	it	is	the	end,	so
it	is	better	to	say	goodbye	rather	than	to	go	on	unnecessarily	torturing	each	other.
That	is	a	kind	of	nagging	--	'I	love	you.'
When	there	is	really	love	there	is	silence.	When	two	lovers	sit	together	there	is
silence	--	it	is	enough.
There	is	communion,	heart-to-heart,	the	mind	does	not	interfere	at	all.	The	mind
means	words,	language,	expression;	the	heart	simply	means	a	silent	feel.
And	it	is	true	even	on	a	wider	scale,	true	as	far	as	prayer	is	concerned,	because
you	 are	 starting	 a	 dialogue	 with	 the	 beyond.	 Now	 words	 are	 absolutely
meaningless.	The	beyond	can	understand	only	the	language	of	silence.
So	be	 love-full,	 overflowing,	 but	 remain	 silent.	Let	 the	 heart	 say	 it	 in	 its	 own
way.	There	is	no	need	for	the	head	to	come	in.	And	only	then	does	prayer	reach
the	very	core	of	existence.	Silence	is	the	bridge.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
29	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010295
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ShortTitle:	THUNK29
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Mechthild's	 way,	 and	 that	 of	 all	 his	 sannyasins,	 lies	 beyond	 battle,	 beyond
conflict,	 Osho	 begins.)	 Life	 is	 not	 a	 battle	 although	 we	 have	 been	 told	 for
centuries	 that	 it	 is.	Not	only	have	 religious	people	been	poisoning	us	but	even
the	scientists	have	co-operated.	Religious	people	have	always	been	saying	 that
life	is	a	struggle,	a	battle,	a	constant	fight	And	then	Charles	Darwin	started	the
idea	of	the	survival	of	the	fittest	only	those	who	are	capable	of	fighting	are	going
to	survive	and	the	fittest	 --	and	by	fittest	he	means	 the	most	cunning,	 the	most
clever,	the	most	deceptive.
But	the	truth	is	that	life	is	not	a	battle	at	all.	To	take	it	as	a	battle	is	to	miss	it	The
true	religion	will	say	life	is	a	love	affair.	And	only	when	we	take	life	as	a	love
affair	is	there	a	possibility	of	knowing	its	mysteries.	We	have	not	to	conquer	it,
we	are	part	of	it	--	how	can	the	part	conquer	the	whole?	There	is	no	need	at	all,
the	whole	idea	is	stupid.	We	have	to	enjoy	it,	we	have	to	dance	with	it,	sing	with
it.
Hence	my	whole	philosophy	of	sannyas	can	be	put	in	two	simple	words,	'let-go'.
And	that	is	the	meaning	of	your	name:	go	beyond	the	idea	of	fighting,	learn	to
love	 and	 relax	 and	 surrender	 and	 trust	 and	 you	will	 come	 to	 know	 all	 that	 is
worth	knowing,	all	that	makes	life	a	tremendously	beautiful	phenomenon.
(Bliss	isn't	a	pot	of	gold	at	the	end	of	the	road,	it's	the	flowers	alone	the	wayside,
Osho	 reminds	 us.)	 Truth	 is	 not	 a	 goal	 but	 a	 pilgrimage	 from	 nowhere	 to
nowhere.	It	 is	an	eternal	enquiry	because	the	mysteries	are	infinite;	you	cannot
come	to	an	end.	In	existence	there	is	no	full	stop.	Existence	is	not	like	a	movie
film	 which	 begins	 at	 a	 point	 and	 then	 'The	 End'	 comes.	 It	 is	 an	 ongoing
celebration,	it	has	been	going	on	since	eternity	and	it	is	going	to	continue.	There
is	no	beginning	and	no	end.
So	the	real	seeker	of	truth	enjoys	every	moment	of	the	journey.	He	is	not	goal-
oriented.	 The	 goal-oriented	 person	 is	 always	miserable	 because	 his	 joy	 is	 not
here	but	there	at	the	end	of	the	journey,	and	the	journey	is	such	that	it	never	ends,
so	he	 is	always	miserable.	Wherever	he	 is,	he	 is	miserable	because	his	 joy,	his
bliss,	is	somewhere	there	on	the	horizon	where	the	earth	meets	the	sky.	But	they
only	appear	to	meet,	they	never	meet	anywhere.	You	can	go	round	and	round	the
earth	and	the	horizon,	where	the	earth	meets	the	sky,	is	always	ahead	of	you.	But
it	is	an	illusion;	they	are	not	meeting	anywhere.
Truth	is	never	achieved;	you	cannot	possess	it,	it	is	not	a	thing	to	possess.	Truth
is	the	realisation	that	each	moment	belongs	to	it,	that	wherever	you	are	you	are
in	it	or	to	be	more	precise,	you	are	it.	The	seeker	and	the	sought	are	not	two,	the
journey	and	the	goal	are	not	two,	the	first	step	is	also	the	last	step.
The	moment	one	drops	all	goals	life	becomes	a	sheer	ecstasy.	Then	there	is	no
need	 to	 be	 anxious,	 worried,	 about	 whether	 you	 are	 going	 to	 make	 it	 or	 not.
There	is	no	tension	because	there	is	no	future.	The	present	is	enough	unto	itself.
Jesus	says	to	his	disciples	'Look	at	the	lilies	in	the	field.	And	the	poor	lilies,'	he
says	 'are	far	more	beautiful	than	even	the	great	emperor	Solomon	attired	in	his
precious	garments.'
Why	 are	 they	 more	 beautiful	 than	 the	 emperor	 Solomon?	 Jesus	 answer	 is
tremendously	beautiful.	He	himself	has	raised	the	question	and	answered	it.
He	says	'Because	they	think	not	of	the	morrow.'	They	are	not	worried	about	the
future	--	that	is	their	beauty.	They	are	just	herenow.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	just	like	lilies	in	the	field.
(The	sought	is	hidden	in	the	seeker,	Osho	says	again,	this	time	to	Sateesha.)	We
are	already	gods	but	unaware	of	it,	because	we	have	never	searched	for	our	own
being.	If	we	could	find	ourselves	we	would	find	god	too.	But	there	are	thousands
of	fools	who	are	searching	for	god	and	they	don't	know	at	all	who	they	are.	Now,
searching	for	god	not	knowing	who	the	searcher	is,	is	absolutely	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
stupid.	First	we	have	to	know	the	seeker,	the	searcher.	And	the	miracle	is	that	the
moment	you	have	found	the	seeker,	you	have	also	found	the	sought.	Then	there
is	no	need	to	seek	god,	because	he	resides	in	the	innermost	core	of	your	being.
He	is	your	very	being,	he	is	your	very	consciousness.
So	 I	 don't	 teach	 worship,	 I	 only	 teach	 meditation	 because	 meditation	 is	 the
technique	to	discover	your	being.	In	discovering	it,	all	is	discovered;	in	knowing
it,	all	is	known.
(Bliss	is	the	flowers	along	the	very	spring	itself,	Osho	says	to	Anand	Vasanto.)
The	moment	 spring	 comes	 all	 the	 trees	 rejoice,	 they	welcome	 the	 spring	with
their	flowers,	with	their	perfume.	In	the	East	orange	is	the	colour	of	spring.	Its
Hindi	name	is	Vasanti;	it	is	from	Vasant	--	spring.	It	is	the	colour	of	the	flowers.
There	 are	 wild	 flowers	 which	 explode	 in	 the	 springtime	 and	 the	whole	 forest
seems	to	be	afire.	It	suddenly	becomes	covered	with	roses	and	roses;	you	cannot
even	see	the	leaves.
Bliss	also	functions	in	the	same	way	for	your	inner	flowering,	for	the	flowers	of
your	 consciousness.	 So	my	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 to	 be	 serious.	 Seriousness	 is	 a
disease	 which	 has	 to	 be	 avoided.	 They	 are	 not	 to	 be	 sad;	 they	 have	 to	 be
cheerful,	enjoying	small	things	of	life,	not	bothering	about	whether	these	things
are	worth	enjoying	or	not.	The	real	 thing	 is	 to	enjoy;	what	you	are	enjoying	 is
immaterial.
If	you	can	enjoy	even	ordinary	things	of	life,	of	course	you	will	become	capable
of	 enjoying	 the	 extraordinary.	 And	 the	 person	 who	 cannot	 enjoy	 the	 ordinary
loves	the	capacity	to	enjoy	anything.
Omar	 Khayyam	 was	 a	 Sufi	 master	 who	 has	 been	 very	 much	 misunderstood
because	Fitzgerald,	who	translated	him	for	the	first	time	into	English,	could	not
understand	the	Sufi	message.	His	translation	is	the	best	possible	and	as	a	poet	he
has	done	something	superb	--	many	translations	have	been	done	of	the	Rubaiyat
of	Omar	Khayyam	but	nothing	has	gone	beyond	the	translation	of	Fitzgerald	--
but	he	was	not	a	mystic,	just	a	poet.	So	he	understood	the	language,	the	beauty
of	 the	 language,	 he	 translated	 it	 very	 sincerely,	 but	 still	 he	 missed	 the	 point
created	a	misunderstanding	around	the	world	about	Omar	Khayyam.
People	started	thinking	that	Omar	Khayyam	was	just	a	drunkard	--	talking	about
wine,	song	and	dance	--
that	 he	was	 just	 a	materialist,	 that	 'Eat,	 drink	 and	 be	merry'	was	 his	message.
This	is	a	great	misunderstanding	and	very	unjust	to	Omar	Khayyam.
Wine,	 song	and	dance	 are	 symbols.	What	he	means	by	using	 them	 is	 that	 one
should	enjoy	even	small	things	--	eating,	drinking	--	just	the	small	things	of	life,
things	 of	 no	 spiritual	 quality.	 But	 the	 spiritual	 quality	 comes	 from	 your
enjoyment,	 not	 from	 the	 things.	One	 can	 eat	 just	 ordinary	 food	with	 such	 joy,
with	 such	 gratitude,	 with	 such	 prayer,	 that	 it	 becomes	 a	 meditation.	 It	 starts
having	the	quality	of	the	sacred.
In	one	of	his	poems	Omar	Khayyam	says,	 'I	want	 to	warn	 the	 so-called	 saints
that	if	they	don't	enjoy	this	life	they	will	become	incapable	of	enjoying	the	other.'
And	he	is	perfectly	right,	because	enjoying	something	is	an	art	and	this	life	is	an
opportunity	to	learn	the	art.
If	 you	 cannot	 enjoy	 flowers	 here	 how	 will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 enjoy	 flowers	 in
paradise?	Those	flowers	may	be	of	gold,	studded	with	diamonds	--	everlasting,
eternal	--	but	if	you	cannot	enjoy	the	momentary,	not	even	the	momentary,	how
will	you	enjoy	the	eternal?	The	momentary	gives	you	an	opportunity	to	learn	the
art	--
that's	the	whole	function	of	life.
So	my	sannyasins	have	to	enjoy	everything	possible.	Go	on	finding	way	to	enjoy
even	things	which	seem	on	the	surface	unenjoyable.	If	you	search	you	will	find
some	way	to	enjoy	even	the	unenjoyable	things.	And	that's	the	whole	process	of
inner	transformation.	A	moment	comes	when	you	c	an	enjoy	everything.	That	is
the	moment	when	light	descends,	when	god	penetrates	you	--	you	are	ready,	your
heart	is	ready.
Unless	that	happens	god	never	enters.	The	host	is	not	ready	--	how	can	the	guest
come?
(Love	is	the	first	rung	of	the	ladder	to	god.)
Love	is	the	seed	of	prayer.	The	problem	is	that	everybody	in	this	world	wants	to
be	loved	but	is	not	ready	to	love,	is	greedy	for	love	but	not	ready	to	share;	hence
everybody	wants	love	and	nobody	gets	it.
How	can	you	get	it?	--	because	nobody	is	willing	to	give	it.
Love	has	 to	be	given,	only	 then	do	your	 inner	sources	start	 flowing.	The	more
you	give,	the	more	you	will	be	surprised	that	you	are	getting	energy	from	some
unknown	sources	and	you	are	more	full	than	ever.
Once	this	secret	is	known	then	all	miserliness	disappears;	then	one	simply	gives
for	the	joy	of	giving.	And	the	moment	you	can	give	love	without	any	desire	for
any	return	it	becomes	prayer.	And	that	is	its	blessedness,	that's	the	moment	when
a	person	 turns	 towards	 the	sacred.	The	vast	dimension,	 the	 infinite	door	of	 the
eternal,	opens	up.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	 that	has	a	desire	 to	get	 something	 in	 return	 remains	human	but	 love	 that
has	no	motive	becomes	divine.	Ordinarily	people	are	not	even	human	as	far	as
love	 is	 concerned;	 they	are	very	animal.	And	by	animal	 I	mean	 they	want	but
they	don't	want	to	give.
One	 has	 to	 move	 from	 the	 animal	 to	 the	 human	 and	 from	 the	 human	 to	 the
divine.	This	is	the	whole	process	of	sannyas,	the	alchemy	of	transformation.
(Osho	 gives	 Uta	 the	 beautiful	 name	 Prem	 Purva	 --	 love	 for	 the	 East.)	 Prem
Purva.
The	 East	 represents	 the	 spiritual	 search,	 just	 as	 the	West	 represents	 objective
enquiry.	The	West	represents	science	and	the	East	represents	religion.
Love	for	the	East	is	only	a	metaphor;	it	is	love	for	the	inner	search,	for	trying	to
know	 what	 the	 ground	 of	 your	 being	 is,	 who	 in	 fact	 we	 are,	 what	 this
consciousness	in	us	is.
As	you	start	moving	inwards	a	few	identities	are	broken.	The	first	identity	that	is
broken	is	with	the	body.	You	suddenly	see	that	you	are	not	the	body;	you	are	in
the	body	but	not	the	body.	Then	the	second	identity	is	broken;	you	come	to	know
you	are	not	the	mind;	you	are	in	the	mind	but	not	the	mind.	And	the	final	and	the
last	identity	is	broken	when	you	come	to	know:	you	are	in	the	heart	but	not	the
heart,	in	the	feelings	but	not	the	feelings.
These	 three	 barriers	 crossed,	 suddenly	 you	 have	 entered	 the	 ultimate	 truth	 of
your	being.	It	is	pure	consciousness,	it	is	just	witnessing,	seeing,	knowing.
I	am	not	against	the	body	--	I	am	not	against	anything.	The	body	is	beautiful,	a
beautiful	 temple	 to	be	 looked	after,	but	one	should	not	get	 identified.	 I	am	not
against	 the	mind	either,	 it	 is	one	of	 the	most	beautiful	mechanisms	 to	be	used,
but	one	should	not	become	one	with	it.	And	I	am	certainly	not	against	the	heart,
not	 against	 feelings.	 Enjoy	 them,	 use	 them,	 dance	 with	 them,	 sing	 them,	 but
remember	that	you	are	a	witness,	that	you	are	beyond	all	this.	You	are	a	watcher
on	the	hills	and	everything	else	is	in	the	valley.	The	deepest	in	the	valley	is	the
body,	 then	 the	mind,	 then	 the	heart.	The	heart	comes	closest	 to	your	being	but
still	 it	 is	not	exactly	your	being.	This	 is	 the	discovery	 that	has	 to	be	made	and
this	is	really	the	whole	meaning	of	life.
The	 people	 who	 have	 not	 discovered	 their	 consciousness	 in	 its	 purity	 have
missed	an	opportunity:	They	were	given	a	great	chance,	a	great	challenge,	and
they	wasted	it.	This	is	the	only	sin	as	far	as	I	know.
Forgetting	yourself	is	the	only	sin,	remembering	yourself	is	the	only	virtue.
(Osho	points	out	the	futility	of	fretting.)
Man	is	always	in	anxiety	--	sometimes	more,	sometimes	less	but	the	anxiety	is
always	there.	Either	it	is	concerning	the	past	which	is	no	more,	hence	it	is	futile.
Nothing	 can	 be	 done	 about	 it,	 but	 people	 go	 on	 brooding,	 thinking	 that	 they
should	 have	 done	 this,	 they	 should	 not	 have	 done	 that.	 And	 it	 is	 so	 absurd
because	now	nothing	 is	possible,	 the	past	 is	no	more	 there,	 it	 is	 finished.	And
thinking	about	it,	becoming	concerned	about	it,	is	waiting	the	present	--	which	is
and	can	still	be	used	--	too.	Or	people	are	anxious	about	the	future,	about	what
they	are	going	to	do	tomorrow,	how	they	are	going	to	manage	and	how	they	are
going	 to	make	 their	 future	 beautiful,	 rich,	 successful	 --	 and	 the	 future	 has	 not
come	yet.
And	 ninety-nine	 per	 cent	 of	 what	 you	 are	 thinking	 about	 it	 is	 never	 going	 to
happen,	so	that	ninety-nine	per	cent	of	your	thinking	is	absolutely	futile.	And	the
one	per	cent	that	is	going	to	happen...	because	your	energy	is	wasted	in	thinking
about	the	past	and	the	future	you	will	not	be	able	to	respond	to	that	one	per	cent.
When	the	right	time	comes	you	will	suddenly	find	you	don't	have	enough	energy
to	cope	with	it.
One	should	become	aware	that	the	past	is	no	more	and	the	future	not	yet;	both
are	non-existential.	And	anxiety	 is	concern.	 for	 the	non-existential.	 In	 fact	you
cannot	be	anxious	about	the	present	moment	even	if	you	try.	What	is	there	to	be
anxious	 about	 in	 the	 present	 moment?	 If	 you	 sit	 silently	 and	 try	 to	 be	 very
anxious	about	the	present	you	will	not	be	able	to.	Nobody	has	ever	been	able	to,
it	is	not	in	the	nature	of	things,	it	is	impossible.	Yes,	you	can	be	anxious	about
something	which	 is	past	or	something	which	 is	 in	 the	future,	but	not	about	 the
present.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 live	 in	 the	 prevent.	And	 life	 always	 comes	 as	 now,	 as	 the
present,	so	one	who	lives	in	the	present	without	any	anxiety	has	enough	energy,
in	fact	more	than	is	needed,	to	accept	the	challenge	that	life	gives.	And	then	it	is
a	 joy,	 the	 challenge	 is	 a	 joy	 because	 it	 sharpens	 your	 intelligence,	 gives	 you
integrity	and	gives	you	a	chance	to	adventure	into	the	unknown.
Go	beyond	the	past	and	the	future	and	you	will	go	beyond	anxiety.	And	to	live
without	anxiety	is	the	only	way	to	live.	The	people	who	are	living	full	of	anxiety
are	simply	dying,	not	living.	They	are	on	their	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
deathbed	already;	missing	that	which	is	and	wasting	time	on	that	which	is	not.
There	cannot	be	anything	more	foolish	than	this.
I	call	that	man	intelligent	who	can	see	this	and	can	drop	the	past	an	d	the	future.
My	definition	of	intelligence	is	the	understanding	to	drop	that	which	is	not	and
to	live	in	that	which	is.	And	immediately	life	becomes	a	light,	a	festivity,	a	great
joy.
(Man	unconscious	lives	like	a	mole	--	moving	through	a	dark	night	of	the	soul,
Osho	 calls	 it.)	He	 cannot	 answer	 as	 to	why	 he	 is	 doing	 something.	 In	 fact	 he
himself	feels	puzzled	as	to	why	he	is	doing	it.	Sometimes	in	spite	of	himself	he
goes	 on	 doing	 things	 he	 does	 not	 want	 to	 do.	Who	wants	 to	 be	 angry?	Who
wants	 to	 be	 jealous?	 Everybody	 knows	 that	 being	 angry,	 being	 jealous,	 being
possessive,	 is	 destroying	your	whole	 life.	 It	 is	 not	 some	mystery	 --	 everybody
understands	it,	everybody	has	experienced	it
--	 but	 still	 one	 goes	 on	 in	 the	 same	 rut,	 going	 on	moving	 in	 the	 same	 circles,
mechanically.	One	decides	many	times	that	now	it	is	enough,	one	is	not	going	to
do	it	any	more.	But	again	just	after	a	few	hours	you	will	see	the	person	behaving
in	 the	 same	way.	This	 is	what	 I	 call	 unconsciousness,	 this	mechanical	 life.	To
me,	this	is	the	night.
Without	the	dawn,	without	the	daybreak,	one	will	never	know	what	truth	is,	one
will	never	know	what	bliss	is,	one	will	never	know	what	god	is.	Then	life	is	just
a	dragging	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave	--	a	long,	long	unnecessary	journey.	But
there	is	a	possibility	of	going	beyond	it.	That	possibility	exists	in	everybody.
Just	a	little	effort	is	needed	to	bring	those	seeds	to	sprout.	That's	what	meditation
is	 all	 about:	 helping	 your	 consciousness	 become	 clearer,	 dispelling	 your
unconsciousness,	claiming	your	being	from	unconsciousness.
Slowly	 slowly,	 as	 land	 can	 be	 reclaimed	 from	 the	 ocean,	man	 can	 reclaim	his
being	from	the	darkness.
But	it	can	be	done	only	very	slowly;	it	cannot	be	done	in	a	hurried	way,	it	cannot
be	done	in	a	hasty	way.
One	has	to	be	very	patient	and	trusting	that	it	takes	time.	It	is	not	like	seasonal
flowers	which	are	there	within	weeks;	but	within	weeks	they	are	gone	too.	This
consciousness	 is	 not	 seasonal,	 it	 is	 eternal.	 It	 is	 like	 the	 cedars	 of	Lebanon,	 it
grows	slowly.	But	once	it	has	started	growing	you	are	constantly	moving	higher
and	 higher	 into	 joy,	 higher	 and	 higher	 into	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 vision,	 clarity,
perceptiveness.
Everything	remains	the	same	and	yet	nothing	is	the	same	any	more	because	you
are	changing	and	you	have	started	moving	upwards.	You	have	a	bigger	vision,	a
bird's	eye	view;	you	can	see	more	than	you	have	over	seen.	The	higher	you	go,
the	more	you	can	see.	And	small	things	start	disappearing	from	your	life.
When	the	first	man	walked	on	the	moon	looked	towards	the	earth	he	didn't	say
my	America	 --	 there	was	no	America	 left	 --	he	said	 'MY	EARTH.'	He	himself
was	surprised	that	he	said	earth;	he	had	never	said	 it	before.	When	you	are	on
the	earth	you	are	an	Indian,	an	American,	an	Italian	--	this	and	that	--	a	Hindu,	a
Mohammedan,	 a	 Christian,	 but	 looking	 from	 that	 height	 all	 boundaries
disappear.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 he	 could	 feel	 that	 the	whole	 earth	was	 his.	 Now
there	was	no	question	of	excluding	even	Russia.	He	didn't	say	'Earth
--	excluding	Russia.'	It	was	simply	'my	Earth.'	And	for	that	moment	he	could	see
the	point,	 that	as	you	go	higher	small	 things	are	 left	behind.	Standing	 there	on
the	moon	 he	 was	 not	 a	 Christian	 or	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a	Mohammedan,	 Catholic	 or
Protestant~	belonging	to	this	church	or	that.	He	had	no	nationality,,	no	religion,
no	ideology.
The	 height	 did	 it,	 ordinary	 physical	 height,	 BO	 what	 to	 say	 about	 when	 one
grows	 spiritually	 and	 reaches	 to	 spiritual	moons?	From	 there	one	 can	 laugh	at
small	problems	that	one	was	so	much	concerned	about	and	one	can	feel	pity	and
laughter	 simultaneously	 for	 people	 who	 are	 unnecessarily	 still	 dragging
themselves	along	with	thousands	of	small	problems.	They	all	become	irrelevant.
I	 don't	 help	 you	 to	 solve	 your	 problems	 --	 that	 is	 not	 my	 work.	 That	 is	 the
difference	 between	 psychoanalysis	 and	 all	 its	 branches	 and	 religion:
psychoanalysis	 tries	 to	 solve	 your	 problems,	 religion	 tries	 to	 give	 you	 a	 new
height;	from	that	height	these	problems	become	irrelevant.	That's	the	difference
between	Freud	and	Buddha.	Freud	is	trying	to	solve	small	problems	--	and	you
cannot	 solve	 them.	You	 solve	 one	 problem,	 another	 arises	 because	 the	 person
remains	on	the	same	plane;	he	will	create	another	problem.	So	psychoanalysis	is
never	 complete.	 There	 is	 not	 a	 single	 person	 in	 the	 whole	 world	 whose
psychoanalysis	is	absolutely	complete,	who	is	completely	psychoanalysed.
Even	 psychoanalysts	who	 have	 undergone	 the	 process	 for	 ten	 years	 or	 twelve
years	are	still	living	with	the	same	problems,	To	others	they	may	be	of	some	help
but	for	themselves,	you	will	be	surprised:	they	are	the	same	type	of	people.	To
others	they	are	very	wise,	they	will	suggest	to	you	not	to	be	possessive....
Wilhelm	 Reich,	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 psychoanalysts,	 for	 his	 whole	 life	 taught
'Never	 be	 jealous.'	 And	 he	 was	 so	 jealous.	 His	 wife,	 who	 has	 written	 her
memoirs,	wrote	 that	she	had	never	come	across	such	a	 jealous	person.	He	was
fooling	around	with	so	many	women,	but	with	his	wife	he	was	very	possessive.
He	was	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
working	like	a	detective,	continuously	watching,	searching,	looking	for	clues	--
and	of	course	he	knew	many	ways	to	look	for	clues	because	his	whole	work	was
that,	making	people	free	of	possessiveness.
So	he	had	 two	 faces	one	 face,	his	public	 face,	when	he	was	helping	people	 to
become	non-possessive,	 free,	and	 the	other	 face,	his	 reality,	when	he	was	very
possessive,	so	possessive	 that	 the	wife	got	fed	up	with	him	and	had	 to	divorce
him.	She	was	also	a	psychoanalyst	and	she	was	helping	others,	but	they	did	not
manage	to	help	with	each	other's	problem	at	all.
Basically	the	problem	is	not	that	you	have	small	problems;	they	are	bound	to	be
there.	The	real	problem	is	that	your	height	has	to	be	changed.	You	have	to	come
to	 a	 higher	 vision	 and	 from	 that	 point	 you	 have	 to	 look;	 all	 those	 problems
simply	lose	meaning.
So	psychoanalysis	cannot	help,	ultimately	only	religion	can	help.	Psychoanalysis
is	 a	 patchwork:	 one	 hole	 appears	 and	 psychoanalysis	 covers	 it,	 another	 hole
appears	And	again	it	patches	it	up;	then	a	third	hole	appears.	Those	holes	go	on
appearing	because	the	real	cause	is	never	changed.
My	function	here	is	to	help	you	to	see	that	unless	you	change	your	altitude	the
problems	will	remain.
Once	 you	 go	 higher	 in	 your	 consciousness	 the	 problems	 that	 belong	 to	 a
particular	 altitude	 become	 irrelevant.	 You	 will	 face	 new	 problems,	 higher
problems,	 better	 problems.	 And	 it	 is	 good	 to	 face	 higher	 problems.	 At	 the
ultimate	height	there	are	no	problems.	One	simply	faces	one	problem:	what	to	do
now?
(laughter)
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	None
30	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010305
ShortTitle:	THUNK30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
('Adrian'	means	creative	heart	--	and	Dhyan,	meditation,	brings	that	out	in	you,
Osho	tells	us	to	begin	this	evening.)
We	are	born	with	great	potential	but	we	are	not	born	aware	of	it.	The	treasure	is
there	but	hidden	in	our	being	and	unless	we	become	aware	of	it,	it	is	almost	as	if
it	 does	 not	 exist.	We	 can	 be	 emperors	 but	 we	 remain	 beggars	 for	 the	 simple
reason	that	we	don't	know	what	seeds	we	have	brought	from	the	beyond.
Meditation	is	just	a	method	of	discovering	one's	potential.	Once	it	is	known	you
cannot	remain	indifferent	to	it;	the	whole	world	pales	down	compared	to	it.	Then
all	the	flowers	of	the	outside	are	nothing	and	all	the	beauty	and	all	the	sunrises
and	sunsets	are	nothing.	The	inner	beauty	is	immeasurable,	because	what	we	see
outside	 is	 only	 the	 painting	 and	 inside	 what	 we	 see	 is	 the	 painter	 himself.
Outside	we	see	the	dance,	inside	we	see	the	dancer	himself.	Outside	is	the	world,
inside	is	god	himself.
(You	can	only	worship	god	when	you've	experienced	something	that	makes	you
grateful	to	god,	Osho	points	out.)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	there	is	no	bliss	in	your	being	your	whole	life	will	be	a	complaint;	you	will	be
really	 irritated	 and	 annoyed.	You	will	 be	 asking	 again	 and	 again	 'Why	 have	 I
been	created?	Why	was	I	not	asked	before	I	was	created?'
One	 of	 the	 characters	 of	 Dostoevsky's	 very	 famous	 novel,	 THE	 BROTHERS
KARAMAZOV,	says	'If	I	ever	meet	god	I	will	be	unable	to	contain	my	anger.	I
could	even	kill	him!	Why	did	he	create	me?	And	without	asking	me,	what	right
has	he	got?'	And	one	cannot	say	that	what	this	character	is	saying	is	absolutely
wrong.
Ordinary	life	is	such	a	tragedy	that	it	is	very	natural	to	feel	enraged.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	written	a	small	parable.	A	madman	comes	to	the	city	and
declares	'God	is	dead
--	 have	 you	 heard	 it	 or	 not?'	 The	 crowd	 starts	 laughing	 and	 they	 start	 asking
stupid	 questions.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 certain	 to	 them	 that	 the	 m	 an	 is	 mad.	What
nonsense	is	he	talking	about?
They	 have	 heard	 of	 two	 types	 of	 people,	 one	 who	 believes	 in	 god,	 one	 who
doesn't.	This	fool	seems	to	be	a	new	type;	he	says	god	is	dead.	Before	Friedrich
Nietzsche's	madman,	nobody	had	said	that	god	is	dead.
They	are	giggling	and	laughing	and	making	fun	and	finally	he	says	'I	think	you
have	not	 yet	 heard	 the	news,	 I	 have	 come	ahead	of	my	 time.	And	moreover	 I
have	to	say	to	you	that	he	did	not	die	naturally,	it	is	you	who	have	killed	him.'
Now	it	is	absolutely	certain	that	he	has	gone	completely	crazy....
But	 he	 is	 right:	 man	 has	 killed	 god,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 his	 life	 is	 so
joyless	 --	 how	 can	 he	 tolerate	 somebody	who	 gave	 him	 this	 life?	You	 cannot
forgive	god;	worshipping	is	far	away,	even	forgiving	is	not	possible.
Hence	 my	 whole	 approach	 is	 not	 that	 of	 teaching	 you	 a	 certain	 belief	 but
creating	a	right	climate	inside	you.	Bliss	is	the	right	climate.
Love,	sing,	dance,	enjoy	as	much	as	you	can,	everything	that	is	possible	to	enjoy
has	to	be	enjoyed,	and	only	then	when	you	are	rising	higher	and	higher	in	your
cheerfulness	does	a	sense	of	gratitude	arise.	At	a	certain	point	you	start	feeling
the	grace	of	god,	 the	blessing	of	being	here.	Then	there	is	gratitude	--	and	that
gratitude	becomes	worship.
It	may	not	become	a	ritualistic	worship	 like	 the	Hindus	and	 the	Christians	and
the	Mohammedans	have
--	there	is	no	need	for	it	 to	become	a	ritual.	The	real	worshipper	is	in	a	certain
state	of	gratitude	towards	the	whole	because	it	has	given	you	so	much	and	you
don't	deserve	it	at	all	and	there	 is	no	way	to	repay	it.	So	all	 that	we	c	an	do	is
bow	down	to	existence.	That	is	worship.
(Henry	is	given	one	of	the	Indian	names	for	god	--	Narayana.)	In	India	we	have
one	thousand	names	for	god,	for	the	simple	reason	that	god	is	multi-dimensional
and	that	multi-dimensionality	cannot	be	expressed	through	one	name;	the	name
will	not	cover	his	wholeness.
Even	one	thousand	names	are	not	enough	to	cover	all	his	aspects	but	they	cover
a	few	important	aspects.
Narayana	 is	 a	very	beautiful	name.	 'Nar'	means	man	and	Narayana	means	one
who	lives	in	man,	one	who	has	made	man	his	abode.	It	is	one	of	the	aspects	of
god,	 that	 he	 is	 the	 interiormost	 core	 of	 everything	 that	 exists;	 he	 abides	 in
everything.	At	the	very	centre	of	the	rose	flower	you	will	find	him,	he	is	there	at
the	very	centre	of	a	rock.	He	is	the	centre	of	everything	--	that	is	the	meaning	of
Narayana.	 And	 particularly	 in	 reference	 to	 man	 it	 means	 that	 there	 is	 no
qualitative	 difference	 between	 man	 and	 god.	 That	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest
contributions	of	eastern	mystics	to	the	world.
All	 the	 religions	 that	 evolved	 outside	 India	 missed	 this	 dimension.	 Judaism,
Christianity,	Islam	--	these	are	the	three	religions	born	outside	of	India.	All	these
throe	 religions	 make	 a	 qualitative	 difference	 between	 man	 and	 god.	 They	 all
insist	that	man	cannot	be	god;	god	is	god	and	man	is	man.	At	the	most	man	can
be	religious,	holy,	but	never	god.
There	 are	 also	 three	 religions	 that	 were	 born	 in	 India	 --	 Hinduism,	 Jainism,
Buddhism.	These	are	the	six	great	religions	of	the	world.	All	three	religions	that
have	 come	 out	 of	 the	 Indian	mystic	 experience	 are	 agreed	 on	 one	 point:	 that
there	is	no	qualitative	difference	between	man	and	god;	man	is	only	god	asleep
and	god	is	only	man	awake.	That's	the	only	difference.	So	if	one	becomes	awake
one	is	god.
And	my	effort	here	is	just	that:	to	help	you	to	be	awake,	to	be	aware,	to	dispel
the	darkness	and	to	bring	light	into	you.	And	suddenly,	the	truth,	that	'I	am	that	--
Aham	 Brahasmi	 --	 I	 am	 god'	 is	 revealed.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 ego	 assertion,	 it	 is	 the
realisation	of	the	ultimate	truth.
(Mahesh,	Norbert's	new	name,	is	also	a	name	of	god.)
Just	as	there	is	the	idea	of	the	Christian	trinity	--	god	the	father,	god	the	son	and
god	the	holy	ghost	--	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
India	we	also	have	the	idea	of	a	trinity.	We	call	it	the	trimurti,	the	three	faces	of
god	--	and	they	are	far	more	significant	than	the	Christian	idea.
Compared	 to	 the	eastern	 idea	 the	Christian	 idea	 looks	very	childish,	 immature.
These	 are	 the	 three	 faces	 of	 god	 --	 not	 three	 people,	 remember.	The	Christian
idea	is	of	three	people.	The	eastern	idea	is	only	of	three	faces;	the	person	is	one
but	he	has	three	faces,	three	basic	aspects.
These	 are	 the	 three	 names	 of	 the	 eastern	 trinity.	 The	 first	 is	 Brahma;	Brahma
means	the	creative	force,	god's	creativity.	The	second	is	Vishnu;	Vishnu	means
god's	power	to	maintain	existence.	Brahma	creates;	Vishnu	maintains,	keeps	it	in
tune,	keeps	it	in	harmony,	in	accord,	And	the	third	is	Mahesh;	Mahesh	means	the
destructive	power	of	god...	because	everything	that	is	born	has	to	die,	everything
that	begins	has	to	end.
No	other	religion	has	that	idea;	they	are	afraid	of	accepting	that	god	can	destroy.
But	you	cannot	create	if	you	cannot	destroy.	Creativity	and	destruction	are	two
aspects	of	the	same	coin.	In	fact	whenever	you	create	you	are	already	destroying
something,	and	when	you	are	destroying	you	are	creating	something.
For	example,	when	a	painter	paints	on	 the	canvas	he	 is	creating	a	painting	but
destroying	the	canvas.
When	 the	 physician	 operates	 on	 you	 he	 is	 destroying	 the	 disease	 and	 creating
health.	Destruction	and	creation	go	hand	in	hand,	they	are	two	wings.
Mahesh	means	 the	 destructive	 part	 of	 god.	Brahma	 begins,	Mahesh	 ends,	 and
between	the	two	Vishnu	maintains.	Each	existence	begins	with	Brahma	and	ends
with	Mahesh.	And	 to	me	destruction	 is	a	prerequisite	 for	creation.	 If	you	don't
abolish	the	old	you	will	not	be	able	to	create	the	new.	So	it	is	a	circle;	you	cannot
really	say	who	comes	first.	You	cannot	say	Brahma	comes	first,	because	before
Brahma	Mahesh	has	to	destroy,	and	before	Mahesh	Vishnu	has	to	maintain	and
before	Vishnu	Brahma	has	to	create	and	before	Brahma	Mahesh	has	to	destroy	--
it	 is	 a	 circle.	 And	 it	 is	 tremendously	 significant	 to	 understand	 that	 life	 is	 a
circular	process.
Everything	in	existence	moves	in	circles:	the	earth,	the	sun,	the	stars,	all	move	in
circles.	You	cannot	pinpoint	where	it	begins	and	where	it	ends;	all	is	one	process.
That's	why	 they	 say	 there	 is	one	god	with	 three	 faces.	You	can	 look	 from	one
side	and	you	can	see	one	face	but	the	other	two	faces	are	still	there,	whether	you
look	at	them	or	not.
And	 my	 work	 begins	 with	 destruction.	 Every	 creation	 has	 to	 begin	 with
destruction.	I	have	to	destroy	all	the	conventions	in	your	mind,	all	the	traditions
in	 your	 mind,	 all	 the	 ideas	 in	 your	 mind;	 I	 have	 to	 destroy	 all	 that	 has	 been
imposed	upon	you.	Only	through	that	destruction	will	you	be	created,	will	you
come	out	in	your	reality,	 in	your	purity.	That	will	be	the	beginning.	But	before
the	beginning	there	is	a	death.	Every	birth	has	to	be	preceded	by	death.
The	word	'mahesh'	itself	means	the	great	god.	Brahma	does	not	mean	the	great
god,	he	is	only	one	of	the	gods;	Vishnu	is	another.	But	Mahesh	means	the	great
god	 because	 destruction	 is	 the	 greatest	 work;	 without	 it	 nothing	 is	 possible.
Destruction	means	revolution.	And	each	moment	we	have	to	die	to	the	past.	we
have	to	destroy	the	past,	we	have	to	get	rid	of	it	so	each	moment	becomes	a	new
moment,	a	fresh	beginning.
Hence	 it	 is	 significant	 that	 the	 god	 of	 destruction,	 not	 the	 god	 of	 creation,	 is
called	the	great	god.
Ordinarily	one	would	think,	logically	one	would	think	that	the	god	who	creates
would	be	called	the	great	god	but	he	is	not	called	the	great	god.	And	you	will	be
surprised	that	in	the	whole	of	India	only	one	temple	exists	for	Brahma,	only	one
--	and	 there	are	millions	of	 temples	 in	 India,	 in	 fact	each	city	has	hundreds	of
temples.	Even	a	small	village	has	at	least	half	a	dozen	temples.	People	may	not
have	places	to	live	in	but	there	are	temples.
Brahma	has	only	one	temple	devoted	to	him,	Vishnu	has	many	temples	devoted
to	 him	 but	 Mahesh	 has	millions	 of	 temples	 devoted	 to	 him.	 In	 fact	 so	 many
temples	 were	 devoted	 to	Mahesh	 that	 they	 had	 to	 drop	 the	 idea	 of	 making	 a
temple.	So	any	place	where	you	put	a	shivalinga...	the	shivalinga	is	the	symbol
of	Mahesh.	Find	just	any	round	stone	you	can	and	put	it	under	a	tree.	You	can
just	 sit	 by	 the	 side	 and	within	 a	 few	minutes	 you	will	 see	 that	 somebody	 has
brought	flowers	and	somebody	has	started	chanting	mantras	--
and	the	temple	has	started!
In	 fact	 when	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the	 Britishers	 made	 roads	 and	 they	 made
milestones	 they	were	 in	 trouble	because	wherever	 they	put	 a	milestone	people
would	start	worshipping	 it!	 It	made	great	 trouble	prevent	 them	doing	 it,	 telling
them	that	this	was	just	a	milestone.	It	took	years	to	prevent	them.	The	police	had
to	 see	 that	 nobody	 worshipped	 the	 milestone...	 because	 it	 becomes	 a	 temple
immediately.	You	put	 the	stone	 there...	And	 the	milestones	were	painted	 red	 --
that	made	them	even	more	important.	They	were	the	colour	of	sannyas,	so	they
must	be	devoted	to	some	god.	And	India	has	the	idea	that	all	included	there	are
three	hundred	and	thirty	million	gods,	so	who	knows	which	god	he	is?	--	but	at
least,	whosoever	 he	 is,	 it	 is	 better	 not	 to	 annoy	 him:	 put	 a	 few	 flowers	 there,
chant	a	few	son's	and	worship	him.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Mahesh	 has	 the	 greatest	 number	 of	 temples.	 It	 shows	 one	 thing,	 that	 the	 East
understood	 very	 correctly	 the	 beauty	 of	 destruction.	 To	 worship	 the	 god	 of
destruction	is	to	accept	the	fundamental	of	revolution	.
(The	 light	 your	 eyes	 perceive	 is	 not	 real	 illumination,	 Osho	 tells	 us.)	 It	 only
reveals	objects.	 It	only	 reveals	 the	 superficial,	 it	does	not	 reveal	 the	 innermost
core	of	 things;	 the	subjectivity	remains	unrevealed	by	 it.	The	definition	of	 true
light	 is	 that	 which	 reveals	 your	 interiority	 --	 and	 it	 is	 possible	 only	 through
meditation.	There	is	no	other	way	to	reveal	your	inner	world,	to	make	it	full	of
light,	to	see	what	it	is.	And	once	you	have	seen	your	inner	world	you	have	seen
everybody	else's	inner	world	too,	because	it	is	the	same	reality.
If	 you	 have	 seen	 one	 rose	 flower	 you	 have	 seen	 all	 rose	 flowers.	 Then	 the
difference	will	be	only	of	detail.	Some	flower's	be	a	little	smaller,	and	some	will
be	a	little	bigger,	some	will	be	yellow	and	some	will	be	red,	but	the	flowering	is
the	same.	And	to	understand	one	flower	is	enough;	to	understand	all	flowering.
So	the	person	who	knows	himself	knows	everything	and	the	person	who	goes	on
accumulating	 knowledge	 about	 everything	 without	 bothering	 about	 himself
becomes	 loaded	 with	 knowledge	 and	 remains	 just	 a	 donkey	 loaded	 with
scriptures.	He	knows	nothing,	he	has	not	yet	found	the	true	light.
So	here	you	have	to	work	deeply	on	meditative	techniques.	My	whole	emphasis
is	on	meditation.	It	is	the	key,	it	opens	the	door	to	the	divine.
(Nirav	means	silence.)
Become	as	silent	as	possible,	drop	all	noise	of	the	mind.
Mind	is	very	noisy,	it	is	a	marketplace,	so	withdraw	from	it.	Take	shelter	in	your
heart.	And	when	you	take	shelter	in	the	heart	and	the	mind	is	left	far	away	you
will	start	feeling	silence	descending	on	you.	This	is	half	the	journey,	from	mind
to	the	heart	--	 the	first	stoppage	in	the	journey.	When	this	 is	complete	and	you
can	 see	 the	 mind	 moving	 farther	 and	 farther	 away	 and	 can	 see	 the	 silence
descending	upon	you,	then	take	shelter	in	being.	It	is	even	deeper	than	the	heart.
The	 heart	 is	 very	 silent	 compared	 to	 the	 mind	 but	 it	 has	 its	 own	 very	 subtle
noise.	It	is	beautiful,	like	bees	humming,	it	is	very	musical.	So	when	you	come
from	the	mind	to	the	heart	you	feel	great	silence,	comparatively	--	because	it	is	a
relative	experience.
But	when	you	move	 from	 the	heart	 to	 the	being	 then	you	 realise	 that	even	 the
heart	had	its	own	noise.
Taking	shelter	in	the	heart	you	feel	silence	descending,	but	taking	shelter	in	the
being	the	whole	experience	changes.	Suddenly	you	see	you	are	silence,	not	that
silence	is	descending,	it	is	no	more	a	separate	thing.
And	that	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	silence.
The	head	is	absolutely	noisy,	the	heart	is	very	musical	--	the	noise	has	a	certain
melody	about	it	and	it	is	very	subtle	--	and	the	being	is	just	silence.	And	in	these
two	steps	the	journey	is	complete.
The	whole	journey	from	man	to	god	consists	only	of	two	steps.	The	first	is	from
the	head	to	the	heart	and	the	second	is	from	the	heart	to	the	being.
(A	basic	 ingredient	 for	growth	 --	and	a	 rare	one	 these	days	 --	 is	 the	quality	of
patience,	Osho	says.)	The	world	has	become	too	time-conscious.	Everybody	is	in
a	hurry,	nobody	can	rest,	nobody	can	sit	silently.	Everybody	is	fidgeting,	they	are
restless,	hankering	to	do	something,	because	we	have	been	brought	up	with	the
idea	that	time	is	money,	don't	waste	it	--	do	something!	But	sannyas	is	initiation
into	non-doing.
Find	 as	 much	 time	 as	 you	 can	 for	 non-doing,	 for	 just	 sitting,	 just	 relaxing,
resting,	waiting,	not	exactly	knowing	for	what	 --	because	whatsoever	 the	mind
can	expect	will	not	be	god,	will	not	be	truth,	will	not	be	enlightenment;	it	will	be
just	a	thought.	And	the	mind	knows	nothing	about	these	transcendental	things.
So	one	has	to	learn	a	deep	waiting	without	any	expectation	about	what	is	going
to	happen.	Just	waiting	in	silence,	in	stillness,	miracles	start	happening.	One	has
just	 to	 be	 patient	 with	 god	 and	 he	 comes,	 he	 surely	 comes.	 You	 need	 not	 go
anywhere	to	find	him;	he	comes	looking	for	you,	searching	for	you.
So	this	is	going	to	be	your	work:	be	patient,	awaiting,	and	find	as	much	time	as
possible	when	 you	 can	 drop	 the	 hurry	 and	 the	worry	 and	 time-consciousness.
Doing	nothing	 is	 always	 far	 better	 than	doing	 something	because	 the	 essential
will	 be	 found	 by	 non-doing.	 By	 doing	 you	 will	 find	 money,	 power,	 prestige
which	 are	 non-essentials.	 By	 doing	 you	will	 find	 the	world,	 you	will	 become
worldly-rich;	 by	 non-doing	 you	 will	 find	 the	 eternal,	 the	 infinite.	 You	 will
become	 rich	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 sense.	 It	 is	 a	 richness	 which	 cannot	 be
destroyed,	a	richness	which	even	death	cannot	take	away	--	and	that	is	the	only
true	richness.
(Marco's	 new	 name,	 Abhinavo,	 is	 to	 remind	 him	 that	 sannyas	 is	 the	 art	 of
renewing	oneself	every	moment.	It	is	a	constant	rebirthing.)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Die	each	moment	to	the	past,	don't	let	it	hang	around	you,	so	each	moment	you
are	fresh	and	young.
The	 past	 clings	 like	 dust	 and	 the	 past	 goes	 on	 growing	 bigger	 every	 day,	 so
layers	and	layers	of	dust	accumulate	on	the	mirror	of	consciousness	--	and	that's
the	 only	 problem.	 Because	 the	 mirror	 becomes	 so	 covered	 it	 cannot	 reflect
anything.	It	loses	its	mirrorlike	quality	totally,	it	becomes	blind.
One	has	to	go	on	removing	the	dust.	When	the	mirror	is	absolutely	fresh	every
moment	you	are	continuously	in	contact	with	god.	God	simply	means	that	which
is,	so	if	you	are	capable	of	reflecting	that	which	is	you	are	living	in	god.
(Niraj	means	a	cloud,	and	the	cloud	is	representative	of	freedom,	Osho	explains.)
It	is	untethered	to	anything,	the	whole	sky	is	available	to	it,	it	can	move	in	any
direction.	 It	 is	 so	 free	 that	 in	 fact	 it	 has	 no	 destination	 at	 all,	 it	 is	 not	 going
towards	some	address;	it	is	simply	enjoying	floating	in	the	sun,	on	the	winds.	It
is	so	totally	free	that	it	is	always	ready	to	go	with	the	wind	wherever	it	is	going.
Out	of	that	freedom	comes	a	second	quality	--	that	of	let-go.	So	it	is	always	in	a
state	of	let-go.	The	wind	goes	to	the	south,	it	goes	to	the	south.	If	the	wind	starts
moving	towards	the	north	it	does	not	say	'What	is	the	matter?	--	we	were	going
to	 the	 south.	 How	 can	 you	 change	 just	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 journey?'	 No,	 it
simply	starts	moving	towards	the	north.	There	is	no	problem,	no	resistance.
Freedom	brings	let-go,	and	because	there	is	absolute	let-go	there	is	no	possibility
of	the	ego.	Ego	needs	resistance,	fight,	struggle,	the	ego	wants	things	according
to	 its	 conditions.	 The	 cloud	 has	 no	 conditions,	 it	 is	 unconditionally	 one	 with
existence.
And	that's	what	a	sannyasin	has	to	be	--	a	cloud,	living	in	deep	let-go,	freedom,
egolessness,	living	in	such	immense	trust	with	existence	that	everything	is	good.
Life	is	good	and	death	too.
When	 both	 are	 equally	 good	 one	 has	 come	 home.	 When	 there	 is	 nothing	 to
choose	all	anxiety	disappears.	When	there	is	nothing	to	choose	there	is	nothing
to	lose	either;	whatsoever	happens	now	is	totally	accepted	as	a	gift.	And	the	gifts
are	always	coming	to	the	person	who	is	ready	to	receive.	To	live	like	a	cloud	is
the	true	way	of	living.
Anand	Samadhan.
It	is	not	the	solution	to	any	particular	problem,	it	is	a	solution	for	all	problems.
Those	who	try	to	solve	single	problems	are	never	going	to	succeed	because	there
are	millions	of	problems.	You	can	go	on	solving;	there	will	be	no	end	to	it.	New
problems	are	arising	every	day:	you	can	solve	a	few	but	meanwhile	many	more
will	have	arisen.
One	can	go	crazy	in	trying	to	solve	problems	individually.	It	 is	 like	cutting	the
leaves	of	a	tree.	The	tree	is	huge	and	you	go	on	cutting	the	leaves	and	new	leaves
go	on	coming	up.	Instead	of	one,	three	leaves	will	pop	up;	you	cut	one	and	the
tree	will	 respond	with	 three	 leaves.	 It	will	 become	 thicker,	 the	 foliage	will	 be
thicker	because	 the	 tree	 takes	on	 the	 challenge;	 you	 cannot	 defeat	 it	 so	 easily.
But	cut	the	roots	and	the	whole	tree	is	gone,	all	the	leaves	will	fall	on	their	own.
But	roots	are	invisible	and	leaves	are	visible;	hence	many	people	go	on	pruning
the	leaves	for	the	whole	of	their	life.
The	case	is	exactly	the	same	with	man:	the	root	of	all	problems	is	the	mind,	but
the	mind	is	invisible.
The	body	is	visible	so	people	go	on	doing	things	with	the	body.	They	will	stand
on	their	heads	and	they	will	think	they	are	doing	something	--	yoga	--	that	they
are	 becoming	 spiritual	 by	 standing	 on	 their	 head.	 They	 are	 only	 looking	 silly,
that's	 all.	You	 can	 go	 on	 distorting	 your	 body	 this	way	 and	 that	 --	 that	 is	 not
going	to	help.
A	young	man	came	to	a	Zen	master.	The	Zen	master	asked,	"Have	you	ever	been
to	another	master	before?"	and	the	young	man	said,	"Yes,	I	have	been	to	a	certain
master."
The	Zen	master	asked,	"What	have	you	learned	there?"
The	young	man	said,	"I	will	show	you."	He	sat	in	the	Buddha	posture	and	closed
his	eyes.	The	master	hit	him	hard	on	the	head	with	his	staff	and	said,	"You	fool!
Get	lost!	Get	out	of	here!	We	already	have	so	many	stone	buddhas	in	our	temple
--	what	are	we	going	to	do	with	you?"
Just	sitting	like	a	buddha	is	not	going	to	help.	It	is	easy	to	learn	because	the	body
is	visible	but	inside	the	mind	is	going	crazy	--	and	you	are	sitting	like	a	buddha.
You	 can	 fast,	 you	 can	 learn	 exercises,	 you	 can	 chant	 mantras,	 because	 these
things	are	visible	--	but	the	real	thing	is	to	become	a	witness	of	your	mind.
Mind	 is	 not	 visible;	 it	 has	 no	 weight.	 Thoughts	 are	 not	 things;	 they	 are
weightless.	That's	why	you	can	contain	millions	of	thoughts.	If	they	had	weight
it	would	be	impossible	to	contain	so	many	thoughts	in	the	head;	the	head	is	so
small.
As	many	weightless	thoughts	as	you	like	can	be	contained.	In	fact	they	say	that	a
single	man's	mind	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
capable	of	containing	all	the	libraries	of	the	world.	Thoughts	are	weightless,	they
don't	occupy	space;	hence	it	is	great	work	to	be	alert	about	and	watchful	of	these
invisible	things	that	surround	you;	but	that	is	the	way	to	cut	the	root.	And	once
you	have	seen	the	mind	in	all	its	functionings,	in	all	its	craziness,	and	you	have
become	 detached,	 aloof,	 you	 have	 seen	 that	 "I	 am	 not	 it,"	 immediately	 bliss
descends,	showers	on	you.	In	that	showering	all	problems	disappear.
Become	a	witness	and	you	will	attain	to	bliss	--	and	bliss	becomes	the	solution,
the	ultimate	solution.
I	Am	Not	As	Thunk	As	You	Drink	I	Am
Chapter	#31
Chapter	title:	None
31	October	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8010315
ShortTitle:	THUNK31
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(All	the	new	sannyasins	tonight	are	German	--	save	for	Eva,	she's	from	Sweden.
Osho	adds	'Anand'	to	Eva	and	talks	to	her	about	why	life	hasn't	been	blissful	up
to	 date.)	 For	 centuries	man	 has	 lived	 at	 the	minimum	of	 his	 potential	 --	 that's
why	 there	 is	 no	 bliss	 anywhere.	 Life	 has	 been	 conditioned	 by	 the	 priests,	 the
politicians,	 the	demagogues,	 in	such	a	way	that	everybody	remains	at	 the	most
lukewarm.	But	 one	 cannot	 evaporate	 unless	 one	 starts	 reaching	 the	maximum,
the	one-hundred-degree	point.
These	 people	 who	 have	 dominated	 the	 scene	 up	 to	 now	 have	 great	 vested
interests	 in	keeping	man	at	 the	minimum.	To	keep	man	at	 the	minimum	serves
two	purposes.	One	is	that	man	remains	obedient	to	the	establishment.	He	hasn't
got	enough	energy	to	fight,	to	rebel,	to	go	against	the	mob	psychology.	He	is	so
tired,	so	bored,	that	at	the	most	he	can	somehow	only	manage	to	live.	He	cannot
have	a	dance	in	his	life,	he	can	only	drag.
Secondly,	 to	keep	man	at	 the	minimum	means	 to	keep	man	a	machine.	At	 the
minimum	m	an	is	a	machine,	at	the	maximum	man	becomes	divine.
To	control	people	who	know	something	of	god	is	impossible,	to	reduce	them	to
slaves	 is	 not	 possible	 at	 all.	 They	 would	 rather	 decide	 to	 die	 than	 become
enslaved.	 So	 all	 the	 vested	 interests	 have	 been	 in	 deep	 conspiracy	 against
humanity	as	such.	People	are	not	living	their	life	at	the	optimum,	and	only	at	the
optimum	is	there	joy,	overflowing	joy.	Life	becomes	so	flooded	with	light,	love
and	blissfulness.	But	 then	 there	 is	 danger	 for	 the	 establishment,	 because	 those
people	will	become	so	intelligent,	so	sharp,	 that	 these	mediocre	politicians	and
stupid	priests	will	not	be	able	to	dominate	the	scene	at	all.
My	sannyasins	have	to	live	life	totally,	fully,	to	the	maximum,	to	the	uttermost,
because	only	at	that	point	does	the	transformation	happen,	never	before	it.	And	if
a	few	people	on	the	earth	decide	to	risk	everything	to	live	totally	we	can	bring	a
new	 humanity	 into	 existence.	 A	 new	 man	 is	 possible,	 in	 fact	 is	 absolutely
needed.	It	is	time	that	the	old	man	is	buried	and	burned	and	the	new	man	arrives
on	the	scene	--
with	freedom,	with	love,	with	joy,	with	a	song	in	the	heart,	with	celebration.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	sannyasins	have	to	prepare	the	ground	for	the	new	man.
(Only	the	toughies	--	the	tough	of	heart,	that	is,	the	courageous	--	can	find	truth,
Osho	 reminds	 Ulf.)	 One	 of	 the	 most	 important	 qualities,	 the	 most	 basic	 and
fundamental	quality,	for	the	seeker	is	courage:	courage	to	drop	beliefs,	courage
to	 come	 out	 of	 all	 conditionings,	 courage	 to	 be	 innocent	 again,	 courage	 to
function	from	a	state	of	not-knowing,	courage	to	live	moment	to	moment,	being
dominated	by	neither	the	past	nor	the	future,	courage	to	be	oneself	--	and	that's
exactly	what	sannyas	is	all	about.	And	then	truth	comes	of	its	own	accord,	to	the
courageous	heart	truth	happens.
Cowards	 only	 believe.	 Cowards	 become	 Christians,	 Hindus,	 Mohammedans;
courageous	people	are	seekers,	 they	don't	belong	 to	any	dogma	or	creed.	They
enquire,	they	are	inspirited	by	all	the	awakened	ones
--	Jesus,	Buddha,	Zarathustra,	Lao	Tzu	--	but	they	don't	belong	to	any	church	as
such.	And	because	 they	don't	belong	 they	can	get	 inspiration	 from	all	 sources;
there	is	no	problem	for	them.
The	Christian	 feels	 afraid	 to	 be	 influenced	 by	 Buddha	 and	 the	 Buddhist	 feels
afraid	 of	 Jesus;	 they	 are	 all	 living	 in	 fear	 because	 they	 are	 clinging.	 Their
clinging	 gives	 them	 fear:	who	 knows?	 --	 something	may	 appeal	 to	 you	more,
then	 your	 old	 clinging	will	 have	 to	 be	 dropped.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 keep	 your	 eyes
closed	 so	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 choice.	 You	 can	 remain	 clinging	 to	 your
tradition,	 to	your	 religion,	 to	your	country,	 to	your	 race	 --	and	all	 that	 is	 sheer
nonsense	because	all	that	means	the	past.
A	seeker	has	to	learn	the	way	of	unclinging.	He	is	not	a	clinger,	he	does	not	take
shelter	in	any	tradition.
Those	traditions	are	comfortable,	convenient,	very	consoling.	Their	beliefs	help
people	because	those	beliefs	give	them	an	idea	as	if	they	have	come	to	know	the
truth.	But	that	'as	if'	is	very	great	and	one	tends	to	forget	that	it	is	only	'as	if'.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	remind	you	that	whatsoever	you	have	believed	up	to
now	is	only	'as	if'.	It	is	as	if	you	know	--	and	you	know	not.	It	is	better	to	know
that	'I	don't	know,'	because	from	that	point	a	real	enquiry	can	start.
The	sincere	person	cannot	be	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan.	He	can
only	be	a	seeker	of	truth.	For	that,	courage	is	very	essential.
(Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	mirrorlike	 stillness,	Osho	 tells	Dhyan	Mike.	And	 it's
through	experiencing	that	state	that	one	comes	to	know	one's	godliness	--	which
is	what	Mike	means.)	In	that	moment	of	awareness	and	silence	the	whole	world
becomes	overflooded	with	a	new	fragrance	that	has	always	been	there	but	which
we	were	not	able	to	feel	because	we	were	in	such	a	turmoil,	we	were	insensitive.
Otherwise	 it	 was	 always	 there.	 The	 moment	 we	 are	 sensitive,	 receptive,
available,	it	reveals	itself	to	us.	Then	there	is	only	god	and	nothing	else.
And	to	know	this	is	the	ultimate	in	knowing	and	being.	There	is	nothing	beyond
it.	To	know	it	means	to	come	to	the	ultimate	rest.	Then	all	desires	disappear.	One
feels	utterly	fulfilled,	contented.	Then	one	comes	to	know	this	is	the	most	perfect
existence	that	can	ever	be.	And	then	certainly	one	feels	grateful,	grateful	 to	all
that	is.	That	gratefulness	is	religiousness,	the	essential	core	of	religiousness.
(Gabriele	means	god	 is	my	strength	 --	 and	you	can	only	experience	 that	when
your	ego	has	evaporated	in	love.)
Love	is	a	poison	to	the	ego	and	nectar	to	the	soul.	The	ego	is	the	false	centre	in
us	and	the	soul	is	the	real	centre	in	us,	because	we	don't	know	the	real	we	have
to	invent	the	false.	It	is	impossible	to	function	without	a	centre,	so	something	is
better	than	nothing;	even	though	the	centre	is	false	it	is	workable,	it	has	a	certain
utility.
To	discover	 the	real	centre	 is	a	 long,	arduous	enquiry,	but	 to	create	 the	false	 is
simple,	cheap,	easy;	hence	society	has	decided	to	choose	the	easier.	Our	whole
education	 is	managed	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 from	 the	 first	moment	 of	 the	 child's
birth	up	to	the	time	he	returns	from	university,	he	is	 taught	only	one	thing,	 the
false	 ego.	 He	 is	 taught	 ambitiousness,	 he	 is	 taught	 greed,	 he	 is	 taught
cunningness,	 he	 is	 taught	 competitiveness.	 He	 is	 told	 you	 have	 to	 become
famous,	you	have	to	become	this	and	that,	you	have	to	defeat	others.	He	is	told
continuously	 that	 life	 is	a	 struggle	and	 if	you	don't	 fight	you	will	be	nowhere,
nobody.
The	 parents	 tell	 him	 to	 become	 respectable,	 become	 honourable.	 The	 teachers
tell	him	to	be	the	first	in	the	class,	in	the	school,	in	the	university,	to	win	the	gold
medal,	to	top	the	list;	and	in	subtle	ways	they	are	creating	a	false	centre.	Twenty-
five	 years	 --	 almost	 one-third	 of	 life	 and	 the	 most	 important	 one-third	 --	 are
wasted	 in	 creating	 it.	 Never	 again	 will	 the	 person	 be	 so	 alive,	 so	 full	 of
intelligence,	so	adventurous,	so	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ready	 to	 risk	 --	 never	 again.	 As	 time	 passes	 he	 will	 become	 more	 and	 more
conventional,	 he	 will	 become	more	 and	more	 of	 a	 coward,	 he	 will	 start	 only
doing	things	that	society	expects.
The	most	important	period	of	our	life	is	wasted	in	creating	a	false	centre	--	and	it
is	because	of	 the	ego	that	 the	world	 lacks	 love.	Love	is	a	natural	need,	but	 the
egoist	cannot	love	because	for	love	the	basic	requirement	is	to	put	the	ego	aside
and	you	don't	know	how	to	put	the	ego	aside;	in	fact	you	have	become	identified
with	the	ego.	And	ego	will	bring	only	frustration	because	all	those	ambitions	are
not	going	 to	be	 fulfilled.	Even	 if	 they	are	 fulfilled	 they	will	not	bring	you	any
contentment.	Fulfilled	or	not	fulfilled,	frustration	is	certain.
The	ego	will	never	allow	you	to	love,	 to	rejoice,	 to	relax,	 to	play.	It	will	make
you	always	look	serious,	holier-than-thou,	it	will	keep	you	uptight,	tense	--	and
that	is	the	greatest	calamity	that	can	happen	to	anybody.
Once	you	know	how	to	drop	the	identity	with	the	ego	love	explodes	and	in	that
explosion	of	love	one	comes	to	know	'I	am	not,	god	is.'I	am	only	a	small	wave	in
the	ocean	of	god	so	god	is	my	strength.	I	need	not	worry,	I	need	not	be	uptight,	I
need	not	hanker	for	certain	goals	because	I	am	not	separate	from	the	whole	so
there	is	no	need	to	have	separate	goals.'	Then	one	is	in	tune	with	the	whole.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Gabriele:	god	is	my	strength.	God	is	your	strength	only
when	 the	 ego	 has	 been	 dropped.	 Then	 the	 block	 is	 removed,	 then	 the	 energy
from	 the	 beyond	 starts	 descending	 in	 you	 like	 a	 waterfall.	 It	 cleanses	 you,
purifies	 you.	 It	makes	you	 innocent	 again	 and	 it	 gives	you	 for	 the	 first	 time	 a
glimpse	of	real	life.
(Then,	using	Deva	Roswitha's	name	as	an	excuse,	Osho	talks	on	another	aspect
of	divine	power.)	All	 power	 comes	 from	 the	divine	but	we	can	deceive	others
and	 ourselves	 that	 it	 is	 coming	 from	 us.	 That	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 canceric
phenomena	happening	to	everybody.	That	gives	you	a	false	beginning,	and	once
the	first	step	goos	wrong	everything	else	goes	wrong.
Our	life	is	not	ours,	it	is	a	gift.	You	have	not	created	yourself.	Even	to	breathe	is
not	within	our	capacity.
We	 go	 on	 saying...	 we	 have	 expressions	 in	 every	 language	 like	 this:	 'I	 am
breathing.'	That	 is	 sheer	 nonsense,	 you	 are	 not	 breathing.	 If	 you	 are	 breathing
then	death	cannot	come	to	you.	Death	may	come	and	you	will	go	on	breathing.
What	can	death	do	if	one	continues	to	breathe,	if	one	insists	on	breathing?	But
we	know	that	when	death	comes	suddenly	 the	breath	disappears;	you	were	not
breathing	in	the	first	place.
In	fact	if	you	are	breathing	then	in	the	night	when	you	are	fast	asleep	you	may
forget	to	breathe	and	in	the	morning	people	will	discover	that	you	are	gone.	How
can	you	continue	breathing	in	sleep?	Even	if	a	person	is	in	deep	unconsciousness
he	goes	on	breathing.	Your	conscious	effort	is	not	needed	at	all;	even	our	breath
is	not	our	own.
You	eat	food	but	you	don't	digest	it	The	hunger	is	not	yours,	the	desire	to	eat	is
not	 yours,	 the	 power	 to	 digest	 is	 not	 yours;	 it	 is	 a	miracle	 how	 the	 bread	 and
butter	becomes	blood	and	bones.	Science	has	yet	to	discover	how	it	happens.	It
is	 the	 greatest	 miracle	 that	 is	 happening	 in	 everybody's	 belly	 every	 day,	 but
nobody	takes	any	notice	of	it,	of	how	bread	becomes	your	blood.	Even	spaghetti
becomes	your	blood	 --	 that	 is	 the	greatest	miracle!	 (laughter)	Not	only	does	 it
become	 your	 blood,	 it	 becomes	 your	 brain!	 I	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 look	 into
Italians	minds	--	they	are	full	of	spaghetti,	their	minds	really	look	like	spaghetti.
The	inside	of	the	brain	looks	like	spaghetti.
Nothing	is	ours.	To	know	it	becomes	a	great	relief.	Then	all	is	god's,	so	who	are
we	to	worry	about	it?
Success	is	his,	failure	is	his.	Life	is	his,	death	is	his.	To	be	in	the	body	or	not	to
be	in	the	body,	it	is	his	business.	That's	how	a	sannyasin	looks	at	existence,	with
a	deep	surrender	to	the	whole.	Then	all	power	is	divine.	In	fact	we	don't	exist	at
all;	we	are	just	small	manifestations	of	that	power.
The	 moment	 it	 is	 experienced,	 understood	 --	 not	 only	 intellectually	 but
existentially	 --	 your	 life	 goes	 through	 a	 transformation:	 a	 great	 tranquillity,	 a
great	 equilibrium,	 starts	 happening.	Then	 all	 is	 good,	 then	 you	don't	 have	 any
complaint	because	in	the	first	place	you	were	not	expecting	anything	to	happen.
Then	whatsoever	happens	is	good.	It	is	happening	through	the	will	of	the	whole	-
-	it	can't	be	wrong.
To	live	with	this	attitude	is	to	live	a	religious	life.
(Not	many	people	really	want	to	know	truth	even	though	they	profess	to,	Osho
declares.)
...	 because	 if	 they	 really	 loved	 truth	 they	would	 not	 believe.	A	 believer	 is	 not
searching	 for	 truth,	 he	 is	 looking	 for	 some	 consolation.	 He	 wants	 to	 believe
because	he	is	afraid.
For	 example,	 in	 India	 people	 believe	 in	 the	 immortality	 of	 the	 soul	 and	 for
twenty-two	 centuries	 they	 have	 been	 slaves.	 Now	 this	 is	 unexplainable:	 a
country	that	believes	that	the	soul	is	immortal	should	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
absolutely	 fearless,	 nobody	 can	 enslave	 it,	 because	what	 can	you	do?	 --	 at	 the
most	you	can	kill	the	body	but	the	soul	is	immortal.
But	India	has	behaved	just	the	contrary	to	its	belief	--	very	cowardly,	clinging	to
life,	afraid	of	death.
But	I	can	see	a	deep	logic	in	it.	It	is	not	apparent,	it	is	hidden,	but	if	you	just	dig
a	 little	 bit	 you	 can	 discover	 it.	 People	 believe	 in	 the	 immortality	 of	 the	 soul
because	they	are	afraid	of	death.	It	is	not	their	experience,	it	is	their	consolation.
They	are	basically	cowards.
Poor	people	have	always	believed	in	heaven	for	the	simple	reason	that	here	they
are	suffering	so	much	--
they	need	some	consolation	somewhere	after	life,	a	divine	carrot	hanging	there
beyond	 the	 clouds.	 It	 keeps	 them	 running	 after	 it,	 it	 helps	 them	 to	 comfort
themselves.	It	helps	them	to	overlook	the	misery	because	they	can	always	say	it
is	momentary	--	just	a	few	days	more	and	then	there	is	eternal	joy	in	heaven.	It	is
worth	suffering!
We	could	have	made	the	earth	a	paradise	but	 that	golden	carrot	hanging	above
the	clouds	has	been	one	of	the	greatest	hindrances	in	transforming	the	earth.
People	go	on	believing	in	things	because	they	don't	want	to	search	for	the	truth.
Not	only	do	they	not	love	truth,	they	are	afraid	of	truth,	because	who	knows?	--
truth	may	be	consolatory	or	may	not	be	consolatory.	Truth	has	no	obligation	to
be	according	to	our	expectations.	It	may	be	totally	different	 than	how	we	were
expecting	it	to	be.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	said	it	is	better	not	to	tell	people	the	truth	because	they
will	be	very	much	disturbed;	let	them	believe.	Their	beliefs	keep	them	happy.	It
does	not	matter	whether	 their	beliefs	are	only	 illusory;	at	 least	 for	 the	moment
they	are	enjoying	the	dream	--	why	disturb	them?
He	has	a	point	there.	Millions	of	people	don't	want	the	truth	and	whenever	there
has	 been	 somebody	 like	 Socrates	 who	 insisted	 on	 telling	 them	 the	 truth	 they
have	killed	such	a	man	--	they	could	not	tolerate	him.
But	my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 seek	 the-truth	 whatsoever	 the	 cost.	 It	 may	 not	 be
according	to	your	expectations	but	there	is	no	need	to	have	any	expectations	in
the	 first	 place.	 Truth	 has	 to	 be	 known	 because	 only	 through	 truth	 does	 one
become	free,	one	attains	freedom.
Jesus	says	truth	liberates	--	and	he	is	absolutely	right.	Belief	creates	a	bondage,
truth	liberates.	And	the	greatest	thing	that	the	heart	of	man	longs	for	is	freedom,
freedom	from	all	limitations	--	and	that	is	possible	only	through	truth.
So	I	don't	 teach	any	beliefs	here.	I	simply	take	away	all	your	beliefs	and	leave
you	utterly	empty	so	that	you	can	start	your	journey	afresh.	If	one	is	ready	to	be
empty	half	the	journey	is	already	complete.	And	the	magic	of	the	journey	is	that
the	other	half	is	done	by	truth	itself.	You	remain	empty	and	waiting,	just	with	a
welcoming	 heart,	 and	 truth	 comes.	And	 the	moment	 truth	 becomes	 a	 guest	 in
your	house	your	life	becomes	luminous,	meaningful,	significant.
(A	loveless	life	is	no	life	at	all,	Osho	tells	Prem	Shivani.)	The	moment	you	enter
into	the	dimension	of	love	life	becomes	divine,	then	one	is	a	god	or	a	goddess.
The	first	 taste	of	 the	divine	happens	 through	love,	and	 the	first	 taste	 is	enough
because	 then	 everything	 else	 becomes	 irrelevant.	 Then	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 has
any	significance	and	meaning	is	love.	Then	you	go	on	doing	a	thousand	and	one
things	but	now	there	is	no	other	motive	except	love.
You	do	something	because	you	love.	You	take	care	of	your	children	because	you
love	them	--	for	no	other	motive,	not	even	because	they	are	your	children.	You
take	care	of	your	husband	or	 lover	because	you	 love	him	with	no	expectation,
with	no	demand,	with	no	possessiveness,	because	now	love	in	itself	is	the	end.
To	love	is	so	joyful	--	who	bothers	whether	it	is	returned	or	not?	If	it	is	returned,
good;	if	it	is	not	returned	that	too	is	perfectly	good.	The	reward	is	not	outside	the
act	of	love,	the	reward	is	intrinsic	to	it.
Love	is	not	a	means	to	something	else,	it	is	an	end	unto	itself.
As	your	understanding	of	love	deepens,	your	feeling	of	yourself	as	being	part	of
god	and	of	others	also	being	part	of	god,	becomes	more	and	more	clear.	Then	the
whole	mist	disappears	from	your	eyes,	then	life	becomes	synonymous	with	god.
The	moment	life	is	synonymous	with	god,	one	is	enlightened,	one	has	become	a
Buddha,	a	Christ.
I	don't	want	you	to	become	Christian	but	I	would	certainly	like	you	to	become	a
Christ.	 I	 don't	want	you	 to	become	Buddhist	but	 I	would	certainly	 like	you	 to
become	a	Buddha.
In	 the	West	 'Christ'	 represents	 the	 same	 ultimate	 state	 of	 consciousness	 as	 the
word	'Buddha'	represents	in	the	East;	Buddha	means	the	awakened	one,	one	who
has	 come	 out	 of	 his	 sleep	 and	 can	 see	 clearly,	 absolutely	 clearly;	 and	 Christ
means	the	crowned	one.	Awakening,	total	awakening,	is	the	crowning	ceremony,
one	becomes	an	emperor.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Learn	the	art	of	love	and	follow	the	way	of	love	and	you	will	be	moving	towards
god.
(Richman,	poorman,	beggarman	or	Buddha	--	it's	our	choice	what	we	become.)
God	creates	everybody	absolutely	free.	He	neither	makes	you	an	emperor	nor	a
beggar,	he	simply	gives	you	a	clean	slate.	You	have	to	write	your	fate	on	it.
If	you	start	living	a	life	of	desires	you	will	be	a	beggar.	Even	if	you	accumulate
the	whole	wealth	of	the	earth	you	will	still	be	a	beggar	--	a	rich	beggar	but	still	a
beggar,	because	those	desires	go	on	and	on.	One	desire	leads	to	another;	it	 is	a
chain	phenomenon,	it	is	a	vicious	circle,	unending.
If	 you	 start	 living	 a	 life	 of	 awareness,	meditativeness,	 desirelessness,	 you	 are
immediately	an	emperor.
Then	each	moment	is	golden	because	you	don't	sacrifice	it	for	any	future	goal,
you	 live	 it	 totally	 here	 and	 now.	And	 that	 very	 living	 releases	 the	 imprisoned
splendour	in	you.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	be	emperors	 --	whether	you	possess	anything	or	not	 is
irrelevant.	 I	 am	not	 against	 possessions,	 I	 am	not	 against	 physical	 comforts	 --
they	are	perfectly	good	as	far	as	they	go,	but	they	don't	go	far	enough.
Wherever	you	are,	in	whatsoever	situation,	live	a	life	without	any	future	--	that
means	without	any	desire,	because	desires	need	a	future.	To	live	in	the	present	is
to	 live	 a	 desireless	 life	 because	 in	 the	 present	 there	 is	 not	 enough	 space	 for
desires	to	arise.	The	moment	is	so	small	that	it	cannot	contain	desires,	you	can
only	live	it.	 If	you	are	dancing	you	can	only	dance,	 if	you	are	singing	you	can
only	sing,	if	you	are	eating	you	can	only	eat,	if	you	morning	walk	you	can	only
walk.	There	is	not	enough	space	in	the	present	moment	for	many	many	desires,
not	even	for	a	single	desire.
To	be	in	the	present	is	to	be	desireless	and	that's	the	way	to	be	an	emperor.	And
only	emperors	know	god	--	beggars	miss	everything.
(A	dancer	--	Natraj.)
Natraj	 is	one	of	 the	most	beautiful	names	given	 to	god	ever	 in	any	country,	 in
any	language	at	any	time	in	history.	Natraj	means	the	dance,	the	ultimate	dancer,
the	king	of	the	dancers.
Christians	could	not	think	of	such	a	name	for	god.	It	would	look	too	worldly,	too
mundane.	 Jews	 could	 not	 think	 of	 such	 a	 name	 for	 god.	 Their	 god	 is	 very
jealous,	a	very	angry	god.	He	looks	more	like	Adolf	Hitler,	Benito	Mussolini	or
Ayatollah	Khomaniac	--	someone	like	that.	He	could	not	be	a	dancer.	You	cannot
think	of	Ayatollah	Khomeini	dancing.	But	 in	 the	East,	of	 the	many	names	 that
we	have	given	to	god	this	seems	to	be	the	most	significant	--	Natraj.
Why	have	we	 called	 god	 a	 dancer?	 --	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 dance	 comes
closest	to	the	divine	experience.	You	cannot	divide	the	dancer	and	the	dance,	it	is
indivisible.	 In	 the	 same	 way	 existence	 and	 god	 are	 indivisible.	 God	 is	 not
separate;	 he	 is	 not	 a	 creator	 above	 and	beyond	 the	 creation.	That's	 the	 idea	of
Christians,	Mohammedans	and	other	religions:	god	is	separate	from	creation.	In
six	days	he	created	the	world	and	on	the	seventh	day	he	rested	and	one	has	never
heard	what	he	has	been	doing	since	then!
(laughter)	If	he	is	still	sleeping	it	seems	a	long	sleep...	or	maybe	he	had	a	heart
failure	while	he	was	asleep	or...	what	happened?	Because	Monday	has	to	come
after	Sunday	 --	what	happened?	With	Sunday	everything	ended...	he	went	 to	a
picnic	and	never	returned	or	had	a	car	accident?	--	something!
The	whole	idea	is	stupid:	he	finished	the	whole	creation	in	six	days	and	then	gets
so	tired	that	on	the	seventh	day	he	has	to	have	a	holiday.
No,	in	the	East	we	think	of	god	not	as	a	creator	separate	from	creation,	not	like	a
painter	who	paints	and	then	the	painting	and	the	painter	are	different,	but	like	a
dancer.	The	dance	and	the	dancer	are	one.	You	cannot	have	only	the	dance	and
you	 cannot	 have	 only	 the	 dancer	 because	when	 he	 is	 not	 dancing	 he	 is	 not	 a
dancer	 either;	 he	 is	 a	 dancer	 only	when	 he	 is	 not	 dancing	 he	 is	 not	 a	 dancer
either;	he	is	a	dancer	only	when	he	is	dancing.
So	 god	 is	 creativity,	 not	 a	 creator.	 He	 is	 still	 creating,	 he	 is	 still	 painting	 --
painting	the	clouds	orange	early	in	the	morning.	He	is	still	working,	painting	the
butterflies	 new	 colours,	 still	 trying	 to	 help	 the	 trees	 to	 be	more	 beautiful,	 still
bringing	 new	 children	 to	 the	 world	 --	 still	 hoping.	 He	 is	 not	 fed	 up	 with	 the
world	and	he	will	never	be	fed	up	with	the	world;	he	is	enjoying	it.	And	he	never
goes	for	a	single	holiday	because	if	he	goes	on	a	holiday	the	whole	world	will
flop.	When	he	comes	back	after	twenty-four	hours	he	will	find	that	everybody	is
finished	because	who	will	breathe?
It	 is	 not	 that	 he	 breathed	 only	 in	 the	 beginning	 and	 since	 then	 everybody	 is
breathing	on	his	own.	He	is	still	our	breath,	our	very	breath,	he	is	still	our	heart,
our	 very	 heartbeat.	 God	 and	 existence	 are	 not	 two;	 god	 is	 the	 very	 soul	 of
existence	--	and	existence	is	a	dance,	it	is	celebration,	it	is	festivity.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	 that's	 what	my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn:	 to	 know	 life	 as	 a	 festival,	 as	 a
carnival	 --	 rejoicing,	dancing,	singing.	The	more	deeply	you	rejoice,	 the	closer
you	are	 to	god.	When	you	disappear	 in	your	 rejoicing	you	melt	 into	god.	And
that	is	the	moment	of	experiencing	realisation,	attainment.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
