
I	Celebrate	Myself:	God	Is	No	Where,	Life	Is	Now	Here
Talks	on	Zen
Talks	given	from	13/02/89	pm	to	19/02/89	pm
English	Discourse	series
7	Chapters
Year	published:	1989
I	Celebrate	Myself:	God	Is	No	Where,	Life	Is	Now	Here
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	The	grand	rebellion
13	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902135
ShortTitle:
CELEBR01
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
206
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
SEKITO	SAID:
"MY	 TEACHING,	 WHICH	 HAS	 COME	 DOWN	 FROM	 THE	 ANCIENT
BUDDHAS,	 IS	 NOT	 DEPENDENT	 ON	MEDITATION	 OR	 ON	 DILIGENT
APPLICATION	OF
ANY	KIND.
"WHEN	YOU	ATTAIN	THE	 INSIGHT	AS	ATTAINED	BY	THE	BUDDHA,
YOU
REALIZE	 THAT	 NO-MIND	 IS	 BUDDHA,	 AND	 BUDDHA	 IS	 NO-MIND;
THAT	 NO-MIND,	 BUDDHA,	 SENTIENT	 BEINGS,	 BODHI,	 AND	 KLESA,
ARE	OF	ONE	AND
THE	SAME	SUBSTANCE	WHILE	THEY	VARY	IN	NAMES.
"YOU	 SHOULD	 KNOW	 THAT	 YOUR	 OWN	 NO-MIND	 ESSENCE	 IS
NEITHER
SUBJECT	 TO	 ANNIHILATION	 NOR	 ETERNALLY	 SUBSISTING,	 IS
NEITHER
PURE	 NOR	 DEFILED.	 IT	 REMAINS	 PERFECTLY	 UNDISTURBED	 AND
SELF-SUFFICIENT.	 THE	 SAME	 IS	 SO	 WITH	 THE	 WISE	 AND	 THE
IGNORANT.	YOUR
NO-MIND	ESSENCE	IS	NOT	LIMITED	IN	ITS	WORKING,	AND	IS	NOT
INCLUDED	 IN	 THE	 CATEGORY	 OF	 MIND,	 CONSCIOUSNESS,	 OR
THOUGHT.
"THE	THREE	WORLDS	OF	DESIRE,	 FORM,	AND	NO-FORM,	AND	THE
SIX
PATHS	 OF	 EXISTENCE	 ARE	 NO	 MORE	 THAN	 MANIFESTATIONS	 OF
YOUR
MIND	 ITSELF.	 THEY	 ARE	 ALL	 LIKE	 THE	 MOON	 REFLECTED	 IN
WATER,	OR
IMAGES	IN	THE	MIRROR.	HOW	CAN	WE	SPEAK	OF	THEM	AS	BEING
BORN
OR	AS	PASSING	AWAY?
"WHEN	 YOU	 COME	 TO	 THIS	 UNDERSTANDING,	 YOU	 WILL	 BE
FURNISHED
WITH	ALL	THE	THINGS	YOU	ARE	IN	NEED	OF."
Friends,
Good	evening.	And	good	news	...!
This	 evening	we	 are	 starting	 a	 new	 series	 of	 talks:	 I	CELEBRATE	MYSELF.
GOD	IS
NO	WHERE:	LIFE	IS	NOW	HERE.
The	statement	of	Friedrich	Nietzsche	that	God	is	dead,	is	only	symbolic	because
God	has	never	been	in	the	first	place	--	not	even	born.	How	can	he	be	dead?	But
it	was	a	tremendously	powerful	symbol	to	declare	that	God	is	dead.
It	was	a	 recognition	 that	we	have	been	worshipping	a	 lie.	And	 it	was	not	only
worshipping,	we	were	being	destroyed	by	a	 lie.	We	had	been	exploited	by	 the
priesthood	 of	 all	 the	 organized	 religions.	 Our	 dignity	 has	 been	 destroyed.	We
have	been	turned	into	puppets	in	the	hands	of	a	fiction.
His	declaration	that	God	is	dead	simply	means	that	Man	is	born.	That	is	the	other
side	of	 the	 coin.	And	because	man	 is	born,	he	brings	 freedom	 to	 the	earth,	he
brings	 joy	 to	 the	earth,	he	brings	dignity	 to	 the	earth.	And	he	destroys	all	 that
was	clinging	to	the	ultimate	lie,	God	--	all	the	superstitions,	heaven	and	hell,	all
theologies,	all	religions	...	all	kinds	of	false	programming	of	man's	being.	They
have	also	died	with	God.
Hence,	I	celebrate	myself	and	I	celebrate	you.
Friedrich	 Nietzsche's	 statement	 also	 includes	 another	 part:	 "God	 is	 dead,
therefore	man	is	free."	God	was	the	slavery	of	man,	he	was	the	bondage.	He	was
the	 prison	 that	 did	 not	 allow	 humanity	 to	 rise	 to	 its	 ultimate	 heights.	 He	was
keeping	the	whole	of	humanity	reduced	to	subhuman	beings,	sinners.	His	death
is	a	great	moment	to	celebrate.
His	death	means	man	has	come	of	age.	He	is	no	longer	a	child	and	he	does	not
need	a	father	figure.	He	can	stand	on	his	own	feet.	He	is	not	a	sheep,	as	all	the
religions	 have	 been	 telling	 him,	 and	 he	 does	 not	 need	 any	 shepherds.	 Jesus,
Krishna,	Mahavira,	Mohammed,	Moses	...	no	prophets	are	needed,	no	saviors	are
needed,	no	messengers	of	God	are	needed.	They	were	all	megalomaniacs,	and	in
the	 name	 of	 God	 they	 have	 been	 pushing	 human	 consciousness	 to	 the	 lowest
levels	of	existence.
The	death	of	God	cleans	the	whole	sky	outside	and	cleans	the	inner	world	also,
completely	--	cleans	you	of	all	 the	belief	systems,	cleans	you	of	all	prejudices,
cleans	you	of	all	guilt.	That	 is	what	he	meant	by	freedom.	Freedom	from	guilt
was	possible	only	if	God	was	dead.	And	once	you	are	free	from	God	you	have
the	whole	sky	 to	yourself,	 inner	and	outer	both	 --	you	can	open	your	wings	 in
utter	freedom.	Without	any	inhibition,	and	without	any	suppression,	you	can	live
your	life	with	joy,	with	song,	with	dance.
God	not	being	there	is	a	great	event,	the	greatest	event	that	has	happened	in	the
whole	 history	 of	 mankind.	 The	 absence	 of	 God	 gives	 you	 a	 certain	 solid
presence.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 are	 individuals,	 independent	 souls	 --	 not
creatures	 who	 have	 been	 created,	 but	 individual	 consciousnesses	 which	 have
been	in	existence	from	eternity	to	eternity.
This	is	a	glorious	moment	for	those	who	can	understand	all	the	implications	of
God's	 death.	 They	 will	 immediately	 celebrate	 it,	 because	 it	 gives	 you	 a	 new
sense	of	direction,	 a	new	uniqueness,	 a	new	destiny.	 It	makes	you	a	master	of
your	own	destiny.	Nobody	is	there	to	guide	you,	and	nobody	is	there	to	dominate
you,	and	nobody	is	there	to	give	commandments	to	you.
For	 the	 first	 time,	 in	 Nietzsche's	 statement,	 man	 comes	 of	 age.	 But	 very	 few
people	have	heard	that	God	is	dead	and	they	are	still	worshipping	him.	They	are
still	 praying	 in	 the	 churches,	 in	 the	 temples,	 in	 the	 mosques.	 They	 are	 still
holding	the	lie	as	if	it	is	the	truth.
And	because	of	that	lie	their	whole	life	becomes	phony.	They	cannot	laugh,	they
cannot	 enjoy.	 Their	 only	 duty,	 propounded	 by	 all	 the	 religions,	 is	 to	 be
masochists	 --	 torture	 yourself	 as	 much	 as	 you	 can.	 The	 more	 you	 torture
yourself,	the	greater	saint	you	are.
All	 the	religions	have	been	preaching	nothing	but	masochism.	That	gives	me	a
deep	insight	into	God.
Mankind	 has	 to	 be	 masochist,	 guilty	 --	 torturing	 himself,	 torturing	 and
destroying	his	own	roots	in	nature,	going	against	nature	...	suffering	all	kinds	of
stupidities	 because	 God	 was	 a	 sadist.	 All	 the	 religions,	 unknowingly,	 are
propounding	a	God	that	is	a	sadist.	He	loves	humanity	to	suffer.	He	loves	people
to	torture	themselves.	He	does	not	like	your	laughter,	he	does	not	like	your	joy.
He	does	not	like	your	pleasure,	your	blissfulness,	your	cheerfulness.	He	does	not
like	your	songs,	and	he	does	not	like	your	dances	and	your	celebrations.	He	has
taken	away	all	that	was	beautiful	on	this	earth.	He	hates	the	earth!
He	is	against	the	earth.	He	is	against	life	itself.
So	what,	in	the	name	of	God,	your	saints	have	been	doing	all	these	thousands	of
years	 is	nothing	but	committing	a	gradual	suicide.	The	more	dead	you	are,	 the
more	you	will	find	followers.	The	more	alive	you	are,	the	religions	will	condemn
you,	the	masses	will	condemn	you,	all	the	idiots	of	the	world	will	be	together	to
destroy	you.
Joy	is	not	acceptable.	Laughter	is	not	acceptable.	A	sense	of	humor	is	not	part	of
any	religion.	Life	has	become	sad,	misery,	anguish,	anxiety.	Who	is	responsible
for	all	this?
The	first	responsibility	is	a	fictitious	God	who	is	represented	by	the	priesthood
around	the	world.	Millions	of	people	in	this	priesthood	are	living	on	your	blood.
They	are	parasites	not	priests.	And	their	whole	function	is	to	keep	you	miserable,
because	 only	 a	miserable	 person	 can	 bow	down	 to	 a	 fictitious	God.	And	 they
have	 been	 respecting	 those	 --	 giving	 them	 prestige	 and	 honor	 --	 who	 were
nothing	but	insane	people.
Anybody	who	goes	against	life	is	insane.
Life	is	all	that	we	have.
If	you	go	against	it,	you	are	committing	suicide.	Maybe	it	is	very	slow	suicide	--
it	may	take	a	few	years	for	you	to	die.	One	religion,	Jainism	--	unfortunately	I
have	 been	 born	 into	 that	 religion	 --	 even	 supports	 the	 idea	 of	 suicide.	 Other
religions	unconsciously	support	it,	but	Jainism	is	clear	about	it.
It	preaches	that	if	you	want	to	commit	suicide,	commit	it	because	this	life	is	not
worth	living.	This	earth	is	not	your	home,	your	home	is	beyond	the	clouds.	They
call	 it	 santhara,	 but	 it	 actually	means	 slow	 suicide.	Whenever	 a	man	 goes	 on
santhara,	he	becomes	immediately	a	great	saint.	Santhara	is	a	fast	unto	death	--
no	food,	and	in	the	end	no	water.	For	a	healthy	man	to	die	it	takes	almost	ninety
days,	 and	 those	 ninety	 days	 are	 of	 immense	 self-torture.	 Jainism	 is	 simply
making	conscious	that	which	every	religion	has	as	an	implication.
What	have	all	 the	saints	of	 the	world	been	doing?	And	what	 is	 saintly	 in	 their
actions,	in	their	behavior,	in	their	style	of	life?
A	man	who	was	worshipped	 very	much	 by	 the	Christians	 in	 Egypt,	 remained
sitting	on	a	high	pole	for	twelve	years!	It	was	a	ruin	of	an	old	palace,	and	only
one	pillar	was	standing	high.	It	was	very	difficult;	it	was	a	small	place	to	remain
on	for	twelve	years.	He	could	not	sleep	--	he	had	to	tie	himself	to	the	pillar.	He
could	 not	 come	 down	 even	 to	 go	 to	 the	 toilet,	 so	 he	was	 defecating	 from	 the
pillar,	pissing	from	the	pillar	...	and	people	were	worshipping	him	...!
He	must	have	suffered	immensely	just	to	get	this	honor,	honor	from	the	ignorant
masses.
Just	 to	 get	 this	 prestige	of	 being	 a	great	 saint,	 he	was	 living	 in	utter	 dirtiness,
ugliness.
And	he	dropped	from	the	pillar	only	when	he	died.	A	great	memorial	exists	 in
his	 name	 because	 he	 has	 done	 the	 greatest	 penance	 against	 the	 original	 sin	 of
Adam	and	Eve.
Strange	ways	have	been	found	how	to	take	your	pride.	Now	Adam	and	Eve	have
committed	a	sin?	I	don't	 think	they	have	committed	any	sin.	They	were	simply
provoked	 by	 God	 to	 eat	 from	 the	 Tree	 of	 Knowledge	 and	 from	 the	 Tree	 of
Eternal	Life.	To	prohibit	anything	is	to	provoke	--	it	is	a	simple	psychology.	God
could	have	learned	much	from	Sigmund	Freud.
In	the	Garden	of	Eden	where	God	lived,	there	were	millions	of	trees.	If	he	had
not	 prohibited	 those	 two	 trees,	 I	 don't	 think	 that	 even	 by	 now	we	would	 have
found	them	...
millions	of	trees	with	beautiful	fruits.	We	would	have	still	been	chewing	grass	in
the	Garden	of	Eden	just	like	the	buffaloes.	If	anybody	committed	the	sin	it	was
God	himself.
And	 why	 did	 he	 prohibit	 his	 own	 children	 from	 eating	 from	 the	 Tree	 of
Knowledge?	No	father	would	do	it.	Every	father	wants	his	children	to	be	as	wise
as	possible.	And	why	should	a	father	prevent	his	own	children	from	eating	the
fruit	which	will	make	 them	eternal,	 immortal.	Every	father	would	 love	--	even
ordinary	fathers	on	the	earth	would	love	their	children	to	be	immortals.
What	kind	of	God	was	this?	And	if	this	is	God	--	who	prevents	his	children	from
becoming	 wise,	 from	 becoming	 Socrates,	 and	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 and	 Lao	 Tzu,
this	is	not	a	god	worth	having.	If	he	has	not	died	by	himself,	then	somebody	has
to	murder	him.	He	has	tortured	humanity	enough.
And	strange	is	the	fact	that	it	was	the	Devil	who	persuaded	Eve	to	eat	from	the
Tree	of	Knowledge.	He	showed	her	why	God	was	preventing	them.	He	does	not
want	anybody	to	be	equal	to	him	--	and	you	call	this	God	compassionate?	And
you	call	this	God	love?	The	Devil	was	far	more	loving,	far	more	compassionate!
In	fact,	he	showed	man	the	way	of	wisdom,	the	way	of	immortality.
God	is	preventing	his	own	children	because	he	does	not	want	them	to	be	wise,	he
does	not	want	them	to	be	immortal.	If	they	are	immortal	and	wise	then	they	will
be	equal	to	God,	and	he	is	afraid	of	their	equality	--	a	very	jealous	God.	In	fact,
the	 Old	 Testament	 declares	 it	 through	 God	 himself.	 God	 says,	 "I	 am	 a	 very
jealous	God."	He	certainly	is.	He	was	jealous	of	his	own	children.	He	is	not	even
worthy	to	be	called	a	father.	If	the	Devil	had	not	told	Eve,	"You	have	to	eat	these
fruits,	only	 then	will	you	know	in	your	 innermost	being	that	you	are	also	gods
..."
As	 the	 story	 is,	 it	 makes	 it	 clear	 that	 the	 Devil	 was	more	 in	 favor	 of	 human
individuality,	 respect,	 dignity.	 God	was	 against	man	 from	 the	 very	 beginning.
The	whole	evolution	that	has	happened	in	science	 ...	 `Science'	 in	 its	very	roots
means	knowledge.	Anything	that	has	evolved	in	the	inner	consciousness	of	man
--	the	awakened	ones,	the	enlightened	ones	who	have	come	to	know	that	life	is
eternal,	 it	 is	 a	 festival,	 beginningless,	 endless	 --	would	not	have	been	possible
without	the	Devil.	The	Devil	was	the	first	rebellion	against	a	dictatorial	God.
And	I	have	 to	 tell	you	 that	 the	word	`devil'	 is	much	more	meaningful	 than	 the
word
`God'.	`God'	simply	means	nothing,	but	`devil'	comes	from	the	Sanskrit	root	div.
From	 div	 are	 derived	 `devil'	 and	 `day'	 in	 English;	 in	 Hindustani	 from	 dev,
devata,	 which	 means	 divine;	 from	 div,	 divas,	 which	 mean	 daybreak,	 the
beginning	of	 the	day,	 the	end	of	 the	night.	The	Devil	 seems	 to	be	more	divine
than	God.	God	seems	to	be	really	a	very	mean	fellow,	and	it	 is	good	that	he	is
dead	otherwise	somebody	would	have	 to	shoot	him.	 It	 is	good	 that	he	died	by
himself,	and	we	had	not	to	have	his	blood	on	our	hands.
But	 once	 God	 is	 no	 longer	 there,	 your	 freedom	 becomes	 a	 tremendous
responsibility.	 It	 should	 not	 fall	 down	 into	 licentiousness,	 it	 should	 rise	 into
enlightenment.	Freedom	brings	responsibility.	And	I	want	you	to	understand	that
responsibility	does	not	mean	duty,	it	means	only	the	ability	to	respond.	Ability	to
respond	to	what?	To	every	situation,	moment	to	moment	you	should	be	so	aware
that	 you	 can	 find	 original	 responses	 to	 every	 original	 situation.	 Nothing	 in
existence	ever	repeats.
They	 say	 history	 repeats	 itself,	 because	 man	 is	 an	 idiot.	 But	 existence	 never
repeats	 itself,	 because	 existence	 is	 intelligence,	 wisdom,	 eternity.	 History	 will
also	stop	repeating	once	there	are	millions	of	buddhas	around	the	world,	millions
of	people	who	have	the	sense	of	being	alert,	aware,	conscious,	and	who	feel	that
they	 have	 a	 great	 responsibility	 moment	 to	 moment	 --	 not	 according	 to	 any
scripture	but	according	to	everyone's	consciousness.
Freedom	brings	many	fruits,	and	many	flowers,	and	many	gifts	to	you.	The	death
of	 God	 is	 not	 something	 to	 be	 sorry	 and	 sad	 for.	 It	 is	 something	 to	 rejoice,
something	to	dance,	something	to	celebrate.	At	last	man	is	free	from	guilt,	man
is	free	from	a	constant	judgmental	eye	from	the	sky.
It	 is	 strange	 that	The	Holy	Bible	 says,	 "Judge	ye	not,"	but	God	does	only	one
thing,	judge.	And	they	have	also	determined	a	day	called	The	Judgment	Day.	To
man	it	is	said,
"Judge	ye	not"	--	and	God	is	continuously	judging,	and	is	going	to	judge	finally
at	The	Judgement	Day.	What	kind	of	contradiction	...?
Just	 today	 I	have	 received	a	 letter	 from	a	 few	Christians	 saying	 that	 the	Bible
says,
"Judge	 ye	 not."	 But	 I	 am	 not	 a	 Christian,	 and	 I	 don't	 have	 any	 obligation	 to
follow	 the	Bible.	 I	 am	 not	 a	Hindu	 ...	 I	 am	 not	 a	 person	who	 belongs	 to	 any
religion,	so	I	don't	have	any	obligation	to	follow	The	Holy	Bible	or	holy	Koran,
or	 holy	 Bhagavadgita.	 All	 holy	 scriptures	 as	 I	 have	 looked	 into	 them,	 are
absolutely	unholy.
These	 four	 or	 five	Christians	who	 have	written	 a	 letter	 to	me	want	me	 not	 to
judge	Christians	or	Catholics,	because	the	Bible	says,	"Judge	ye	not"	--	and	they
are	judging	me!	And	their	Bible	says,	"Judge	ye	not."	I	am	not	a	Christian	so	I
have	 no	 obligation	 to	 follow	 the	 Bible.	 They	 are	 Christians,	 they	 should	 not
judge	me.	I	am	free	to	judge,	and	I	am	free	to	judge	everybody	because	I	don't
have	any	prejudice	against	anybody.	 I	don't	belong	 to	any	organization,	 to	any
system	of	beliefs.	A	God	who	 teaches	people,	"Judge	ye	not,"	himself	goes	on
judging	--	and	you	don't	see	the	contradiction?
Jesus	says,	"God	is	love,"	but	there	seems	to	be	no	love	flowing	from	the	skies	to
humanity.	In	three	thousand	years	we	have	fought	five	thousand	wars.	What	kind
of	God	 is	 there	who	 allows	Genghis	Khan	 to	 be	born?	Tamerlane	 to	 be	born?
Nadirshah	to	be	born?	These	three	generations	of	one	family	killed	one	hundred
million	people,	and	they	were	never	defeated.
What	kind	of	God	allows	President	Truman	to	drop	atom	bombs	on	Hiroshima
and	Nagasaki?	What	 kind	 of	 God	 is	 allowing	 all	 the	 stupid	 politicians	 of	 the
world	to	pile	up	nuclear	weapons	which	will	only	prove	to	be	a	global	death?
But	as	I	told	you,	God	is	a	sadist.	He	enjoys	when	you	are	suffering.	He	enjoys
when	you	are	 in	pain.	He	enjoys	when	you	are	poor.	He	enjoys	when	you	are
starving	to	death.	His	enjoyment	is	simply	sick!
The	 word	 `sadism'	 comes	 from	 a	 French	 count,	 de	 Sade;	 he	 used	 to	 torture
women.	He	was	 a	 super-rich	man,	 a	 count,	 and	 had	 a	 vast	 territory	 under	 his
control.	So	any	beautiful	woman	would	be	dragged	to	his	torture	chamber.	You
all	have	love	chambers;	he	had	a	torture	chamber	--	that	was	his	love	chamber.
And	 as	 the	 woman	 entered	 she	 could	 not	 believe	 what	 was	 going	 to	 happen
because	all	over	the	walls	were	hanging	different	kinds	of	instruments	of	torture.
He	also	used	to	carry	a	box,	a	portable	torture	chamber	--
because	who	knows?	He	may	find	a	woman	in	a	hotel	room	and	he	may	not	have
his	instruments.
All	those	instruments	...	First	he	would	force	the	woman	to	be	naked	--	not	in	a
loving	way	--	he	would	tear	off	her	clothes,	he	would	scratch	her	body,	he	would
start	 beating	her	 ...	 and	he	had	 all	 those	 instruments.	You	have	heard	only	 the
word	 `screwing'	 --	 he	 really	used	 to	use	 screws	 to	make	holes	 in	 the	woman's
body.	Unless	there	was	blood	he	did	not	get	excited.	When	he	saw	the	woman	in
utter	torture,	then	he	was	in	great	sexual	excitement,	then	he	would	make	love.
And	perhaps	something	of	de	Sade	exists	in	every	masochist	man.	Unless	there
is	a	pillow	fight,	unless	there	is	some	conflict	before	going	to	bed,	a	man	seems
not	 to	 be	 excited.	 A	 woman	 who	 beats	 him,	 hits	 him,	 throws	 things	 at	 him,
excites	him.
The	 only	 perfect	 couple	 possible	 in	 the	 world	 would	 be	 if	 one	 partner	 was	 a
sadist,	 and	 the	 other	 partner	 was	 a	 masochist.	 `Masochist'	 also	 comes	 from
another	count	who	enjoyed	torturing	himself.	His	name	was	Masoch;	hence	the
word	 `masochist'.	 Both	 were	 imprisoned	 for	 insanity,	 both	 were	 found	 guilty;
one	of	torturing	others,	and	one	of	torturing	himself.
God	 must	 be	 a	 sadist	 on	 a	 far	 bigger	 scale	 than	 de	 Sade.	 He	 is	 omnipotent,
omnipowerful,	omnipresent	 --	everywhere.	You	cannot	escape	him;	his	eyes	of
judgment	are	following	you	day	and	night,	twenty-four	hours,	wherever	you	are.
He	is	threatening	you	that	you	will	fall	into	hellfire	for	eternity.
Even	a	man	like	Bertrand	Russell	refused	to	be	a	Christian	for	the	simple	reason
--	he	has	given	many	other	reasons,	but	 the	first	reason	was	"I	cannot	accept	a
God	who	is	so	unjust"	--	that	in	Christianity	there	is	only	one	life.
Even	if	you	live	a	life	of	one	hundred	years,	as	Bertrand	Russell	almost	managed
to	live,	one	century	...	He	counted	very	honestly	the	sins	that	Christians	call	sins
--	they	are	not	sins,	they	are	just	natural	experiences.	They	have	been	converted
into	sins	to	torture	you.
Making	 love	 to	 a	woman	 is	 not	 sin,	 but	 it	 has	 become	 a	 sin.	Both	 are	 feeling
immensely	guilty	that	they	are	doing	something	against	God.
So	 he	 counted	 all	 those	 so-called	 sins	 which	 are	 not	 sins,	 but	 just	 for	 the
argument's	 sake	 he	 counted	 all	 the	 sins	 that	 he	 had	 committed.	 And	 he	 also
counted	all	the	sins	that	he	had	dreamed	about	but	he	had	not	committed.	Still	he
said,	"The	most	strict	judge	cannot	put	me	in	jail	for	more	than	four	and	a	half
years,	and	God	is	going	to	throw	me	into	hellfires	for	eternity!	There	seems	to	be
no	proportion."
If	you	go	on	committing	sin	and	don't	do	anything	else,	just	sin	and	sin	and	sin
from	the	moment	you	are	born	till	the	moment	you	are	in	your	grave,	then	too,
an	eternity	of	hellfire	is	not	just,	it	is	not	justice.
God	seems	to	enjoy	hellfire.	God	seems	to	enjoy	poisoning	all	your	pleasures	--
you	 should	 not	 enjoy	 any	 of	 your	 senses.	 Different	 religions	 have	 different
emphases,	but	the	point	is	the	same.	Mohammedans	are	not	allowed	to	listen	to
music.	Strange?	It	is	sin	because	you	are	enjoying	a	sense,	your	hearing.	You	are
giving	pleasure	to	your	ears,	so	you	are	not	to	be	allowed	to	listen	to	great	music.
I	cannot	conceive	in	what	way	music	can	be	a	sin.	But	the	idea	is	that	enjoyment
is	sin,	so	whatever	you	can	enjoy	has	to	be	condemned.
Jainism	says	you	should	not	enjoy	taste,	you	should	eat	without	any	taste.	You
are	putting	man	into	such	a	guilt.	How	can	he	avoid	tasting?	When	it	is	sweet,	it
is	 sweet!	When	 it	 is	 bitter,	 it	 is	 bitter!	On	 his	 tongue	 there	 are	 sensitive	 buds
which	decide	the	taste.	Unless	you	have	plastic	surgery	and	remove	all	the	buds
from	your	tongue,	you	cannot	manage	not	to	taste	the	food.
But	 they	 have	 poisoned	 your	 enjoyment.	 Just	 small	 enjoyments	 --	 eating	 your
food	with	love	and	joy	with	friends	is	condemned.	And	it	is	not	only	one	sense,
but	all	five	senses.
Gautam	 Buddha	 is	 against	 touching	 a	 woman.	 Even	 touch	 is	 a	 sin,	 because
touching	a	woman	is	a	joy.	She	is	warmer	than	you,	she	is	more	fragile	than	you,
she	 is	more	beautiful	 than	you.	And	what	 is	wrong	 if	 touching	a	woman	gives
you	joy?	Joy	cannot	be	wrong.	And	you	are	not	harming	anybody,	you	are	not
interfering	by	 touching	 the	woman	against	her	will.	She	enjoys	being	 touched;
you	enjoy	being	the	toucher.	Why	should	God	come	in	between?
But	 he	 is	 there	 always,	 following	 you	 as	 a	 judge.	 He	 has	 become	 your	 inner
conscience.
Your	 inner	 conscience	 is	 false!	 It	 is	 created	by	 the	 religions.	So	God	does	not
depend	only	on	himself,	he	depends	on	the	priests	to	create	a	conscience	in	you.
It	is	not	consciousness,	it	is	conscience	--	a	false	entity	which	continuously	goes
on	saying	to	you,
"This	is	not	right.	The	scriptures	are	against	...	God	is	against	....	Don't	do	this!"
And	your	whole	nature	wants	to	do	it.
Jaina	monks	are	not	allowed	even	to	have	a	bath	or	a	shower,	every	day,	because
that	is	enjoying	the	coolness	of	water,	enjoying	your	body's	freshness.	You	can
see	these	people	are	criminals.	The	Jaina	monk	is	not	allowed	even	to	make	his
teeth	clean.	He	cannot	use	any	toothbrush,	or	any	toothpaste,	or	any	mouthwash.
It	is	so	difficult	to	talk	to	a	Jaina	monk	--	his	breath	is	so	disgusting,	his	whole
body	is	disgusting.
In	 a	 hot	 country	 like	 India	 you	 perspire	 ...	 and	 Jaina	monks	 have	 to	 travel	 on
dirty,	dusty	paths.	They	cannot	ride	in	any	vehicle	because	that	is	pleasure;	they
have	 to	 walk.	 So	 they	 are	 walking	 on	 dusty	 roads	 in	 villages,	 and	 their
perspiration	under	the	hot	sun,	blazing	hot,	showering	fire	on	the	earth	...	They
become	ugly,	they	become	really	tanned.
Their	bodies,	their	skin	shrinks.	And	dust	upon	dust,	layer	upon	layer	...
All	 the	 religions	have	shared	 in	some	way	or	other	 the	desire	 that	man's	every
pleasure	 should	 be	 poisoned.	Only	 then	will	 he	 turn	 towards	 the	 priest	 to	 get
some	 advice,	 because	 he	 is	miserable.	Make	 him	miserable,	 take	 away	 all	 the
possibilities	of	pleasure.
I	have	not	come	across	any	Indian	woman	who	knows	what	orgasm	is.	In	fact,	in
the	Hindi	 language	 there	 is	 no	word	 equal	 to	 òrgasm'.	The	 Indian	woman	has
never	 known	 orgasm.	 Even	 the	 Western	 woman	 has	 started	 to	 know	 about
orgasm	just	thirty	years	ago.
It	 was	 due	 to	 the	 research	 of	 psychologists,	 psychoanalysts	 and	 psychiatrists.
Sigmund	Freud,	Havelock	Ellis,	Masters	and	Johnson	--	they	opened	a	new	door
to	women's	pleasure.
For	 centuries	 they	 did	 not	 know	 what	 orgasm	 was,	 so	 naturally,	 they	 were
disgusted	with	sex.	They	thought	that	the	man	was	simply	using	them,	because
they	were	not	getting	any	enjoyment	out	of	it.	But	the	reason	was	that	the	man
has	not	been	allowing	them	to	have	an	orgasm.
In	the	very	primitive	days	he	must	have	become	aware	that	a	woman	can	have
multiple	 orgasms,	 and	 a	 man	 can	 have	 only	 one	 orgasm.	 So	 a	 man	 is	 not
competent	to	fulfill	a	woman.	Either	he	has	to	call	his	friends,	or	he	has	to	get
some	hormonal	injections,	because	a	woman	ordinarily	is	capable	of	having	six
orgasms	one	after	the	other.
It	 is	 better	 not	 to	 let	 her	 know	 that	 she	 is	 capable	 of	 any	 orgasm.	 It	 can	 be
avoided,	 because	 the	 woman's	 vagina	 is	 insensitive.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 insensitive
because	it	will	be	giving	birth	to	a	child.	If	it	was	sensitive,	the	birth	of	a	child
would	have	immensely	increased	pain;	it	is	insensitive	and	still	there	is	pain.
So	 the	 woman's	 orgasm	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 vagina,	 it	 is	 just	 a
reproductive	mechanism.	Her	 orgasm	 is	 not	 dependent	 on	 a	man	making	 love
through	the	vagina	--
that	is	good	for	reproduction.	She	has	a	separate	part,	just	a	very	small	part	--	the
clitoris	-
-	 which	 is	 not	 in	 the	 way	 of	 man's	 making	 love	 to	 her.	 Unless	 the	 man
understands	the	physiology	of	the	woman,	which	ordinarily	no	man	understands
...
Man	is	the	only	inexperienced	lover	in	the	world,	because	neither	does	he	have
any	experience	before	your	marriage,	nor	does	the	woman	have	any	experience
before	the	marriage.	This	is	a	very	strange	world.	When	two	people	are	going	to
live	 together	 for	 their	 whole	 lives	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 experience,	 they	 don't
know	what	to	do.
The	woman's	clitoris	is	the	organ	which	gives	her	pleasure,	and	it	is	not	part	of
her	vagina.	Man's	ejaculation	 is	 just	 two	minutes	or	 three	minutes	at	 the	most.
And	he	has	 to	be	quick,	because	 if	you	are	committing	sin,	commit	 it	quickly.
Don't	do	it	too	long,	otherwise,	remember	hellfire.
Unless	 a	 man	 understands	 the	 physiology	 of	 a	 woman,	 which	 he	 has	 never
bothered	...
her	whole	body	is	sexually	sensitive.	Man's	whole	body	is	not	sexually	sensitive.
The	man's	sexuality	is	very	local;	it	is	just	in	his	sexual	machinery.	The	woman's
whole	body	is	sexual,	and	unless	the	man	plays	with	her	whole	body	and	arouses
her	body	 --	 that	 is	 foreplay	 ...	No	man	wants	 to	do	 it,	 because	 it	will	 take	 too
long,	and	one	has	to	be	quick	before	God	comes	in.	So	no	more	foreplay!
Christians	particularly,	introduced	the	missionary	position,	in	which	the	beauty	is
under,	and	the	beast	is	on	top.	The	poor	woman	has	to	lie	down	almost	dead,	and
only	 then	 is	 she	considered	 to	be	a	 lady.	Only	prostitutes	enjoy.	No	woman	of
honor	will	groan	or	moan,	or	start	gibberish	or	screaming	out	of	joy.	So	she	has
been	 told	 to	be	completely	dead	while	 the	man	 is	making	 love.	 It	 is	one-sided
love.	The	other	side	is	completely	dead;	the	other	side	has	not	been	aroused.
The	people	who	understand	 sexology	 say	 the	woman	should	be	on	 top	 so	 that
she	has	more	possibility	of	movement,	and	the	man	should	be	underneath	her	so
he	can	remain	silent,	because	his	ejaculation	happens	in	just	two	minutes!	If	he
remains	silent	he	can	manage	twenty	minutes	or	thirty	minutes.	A	woman	needs
at	 least	 ten	minutes	 to	 become	 aroused.	 This	 disparity	 is	 there,	 and	 it	 can	 be
fulfilled	only	if	the	man	understands	that	the	woman	is	not	just	a	mechanism	to
be	used.	She	is	also	a	soul,	equally	alive,	and	has	all	rights	to	pleasure	just	as	you
have.
So	foreplay	is	needed,	and	the	man	should	be	underneath	and	the	woman	should
be	on	top.	The	man	should	lie	down	like	a	lady,	and	the	woman	should	be	a	real
rascal!	 Then	 only	 is	 there	 a	 possibility	 that	 they	 come	 to	 orgasm	 at	 the	 same
time.	 When	 they	 both	 start	 throbbing	 and	 getting	 out	 of	 control,	 that	 is	 the
moment	when	they	know	what	sex	contains.	It	is	not	only	a	reproductive	organ,
it	 is	 also	 an	 organ	 of	 immense	 pleasure.	 And	 that	 pleasure,	 according	 to	 me,
gives	you	the	first	glimpse	of	meditation,	because	the	mind	stops,	time	stops.	For
those	 few	moments	 there	 is	no	 time,	and	 there	 is	no	mind,	you	are	 just	utterly
silent	and	blissful.
I	say	it	--	it	is	my	scientific	approach	to	the	subject	--	because	there	was	no	other
way	 for	man	 to	 find	out	 that	 if	 there	 is	no	mind	and	no	 time,	you	enter	 into	a
blissful	 state.	 Except	 for	 sex	 there	 was	 no	 other	 possibility	 for	 the	 mind	 to
understand	that	there	was	some	way	of	going	beyond	mind,	beyond	time.	It	was
certainly	 sex	which	 gave	 the	 first	 glimpse	 of	meditativeness.	And	 I	 am	 being
condemned	all	over	the	world	because	I	am	telling	people	the	truth.
Nobody	 has	 come	 up	 with	 any	 other	 idea	 to	 explain	 how	 you	 have	 found
meditation.	You	cannot	find	it	by	just	walking	on	the	side	of	the	road	--	it	is	lying
there	 and	 you	 go	 over	 and	 pick	 up	 meditation.	 Where	 have	 you	 found
meditation?	Not	a	single	person	in	the	whole	world	...	and	I	have	been	discussed
around	the	world,	condemned,	just	because	I	am	talking	about	going	from	sex	to
superconsciousness.	 But	 nobody	 has	 given	 any	 explanation	 why	 they	 are
condemning	me	because	of	my	book	--	which	has	been	translated	into	thirty-four
languages,	 has	 gone	 into	 dozens	 of	 editions,	 and	 is	 read	 by	 all	 the	 monks
whether	 they	 are	 Hindu,	 Jaina,	 Christian,	 Buddhist.	 Monks	 are	 the	 best
customers	for	that	book.
Here	 there	 was	 a	 Jaina	 conference	 just	 a	 few	 months	 ago,	 and	 my	 secretary,
Neelam,	 informed	me,	 "It	 is	 strange.	 Jaina	monks	 come	 and	 they	 ask	 for	 one
book	only,	FROM
SEX	TO	SUPERCONSCIOUSNESS.	Then	they	hide	it	in	their	clothes	and	just
get	out	of	the	door	silently	so	nobody	finds	them	out."
The	 book,	 FROM	SEX	TO	SUPERCONSCIOUSNESS,	 is	 not	 about	 sex,	 it	 is
about	superconsciousness.	But	the	only	possible	way	for	man	to	find	that	there	is
some	 door,	 some	way	 to	 go	 beyond	 his	 thoughts	 into	 eternal	 silence	 ...	 Even
though	it	lasts	only	one	moment,	that	moment	is	eternity	--	everything	stops.	You
forget	all	the	worries,	all	the	tensions.
Have	 you	 ever	 heard	 of	 any	man	 getting	 a	 heart	 attack	while	 he	was	making
love?	It	should	have	happened	more	often	if	the	religions	were	true.	God	would
be	so	angry,	that	at	least	he	could	give	a	heart	attack.	Hellfire	will	be	after	death;
right	now	...
But	no	man	has	died	while	making	love,	because	making	love	takes	away	your
stress.	It	is	stress	that	can	give	you	a	heart	attack.	It	is	stress	that	can	drive	you
mad	 and	 insane.	 It	 is	 sex	 that	 keeps	 you	 sane,	 keeps	 you	 normal,	 keeps	 you
within	the	boundaries	of	sanity.
Otherwise	you	are	going	 to	be	a	pervert,	and	perversion	does	not	give	you	 the
same	key	of	superconsciousness.
Homosexuals	cannot	have	the	same	experience	that	is	possible	in	a	heterosexual
relationship.	 Nor	 can	 lesbians	 have	 the	 same	 orgasmic	 experience.	 But	 ten
percent	of	American	men	have	accepted	that	they	have	homosexual	tendencies,
and	thousands	of	women	have	married	women	--	lesbian	couples.	And	this	year
it	 is	 expected	 that	 forty	 thousand	 babies	 will	 be	 born	 out	 of	 lesbian	 couples.
From	 where	 are	 these	 babies	 coming?	 From	 artificial	 insemination.	 Now
hospitals	 are	 not	 only	 carrying	 a	 blood	 bank,	 but	 a	 semen	 bank.	 So	 when	 a
lesbian	couple	wants	a	baby,	 the	one	who	 is	 ready	 to	 take	 the	 trouble	 for	nine
months,	gets	an	injection	of	somebody	anonymous.	An	injection	is	not	a	joy.	An
injection	cannot	give	you	any	orgasm.	Although	doctors	call	it	"the	prick,"
it	is	not	the	prick.
When	my	personal	physician,	Amrito,	 came	 for	 the	 first	 time	 from	England	 --
and	he	 is	 a	member	of	 the	Royal	College	of	Physicians,	highly	educated	 --	he
would	say	to	me,
"Now	 comes	 the	 prick!"	Then	 I	would	 start	 laughing,	 "Amrito,	 this	 is	 not	 the
prick.	You	have	been	misguided."	Now	he	silently	gives	me	the	injection	without
saying	anything.
These	 forty	 thousand	 babies	 will	 be	 born	 this	 year	 in	 America	 through	 an
injection.	Now	those	women	are	completely	out	of	 the	possibility	of	having	an
orgasm.	And	 there	are	homosexuals	all	around	 the	world,	even	very	 intelligent
people.
I	 have	 chosen	 this	 title,	 I	 CELEBRATE	 MYSELF	 from	 one	 of	 the	 most
important	poets	of	America,	Walt	Whitman.	But	he	was	a	homosexual	--	 that's
where	 he	 goes	 wrong.	 All	 his	 poetry	 becomes	 superficial;	 he	 knows	 nothing
about	 orgasmic	 joy.	 But	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 even	 a	 man	 like
Socrates	 was	 a	 homosexual;	 hence	 he	 could	 not	 become	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha.
Howsoever	intelligent,	and	howsoever	great	a	logician	he	was,	his	dialogues	are
great	but	something	is	missing.	He	is	not	a	man	of	great	consciousness.	He	has
become	unnatural,	he	has	gone	against	nature.
But	religions	are	forcing	people	to	go	against	nature.	The	third	man	in	England's
hierarchy	of	the	church	...	the	archbishop	in	England's	church	is	equivalent	to	the
Polack	pope.	This	man	has	only	one	man	between	him	and	the	archbishop,	and
there	is	every	possibility	that	 this	bishop	will	some	time	become	archbishop	of
England.	He	has	come	with	the	idea	that	celibacy	simply	means	no	heterosexual
relationship,	 but	 it	 does	 not	 include	 homosexuality,	 it	 does	 not	 include
masturbation,	it	does	not	include	making	love	to	an	animal	--	sodomy,	bestiality.
It	 does	 not	 include	 anything.	 Celibacy	 simply	 prevents	 you	 from	 being
heterosexual.	Great	religious	leaders	...!
Fifty	 percent	 of	 monks	 in	 monasteries	 are	 homosexuals.	 And	 there	 are
possibilities	like	the	monastery	of	Mount	Athos	where	thousands	of	monks	live
...	They	have	not	seen	any	woman	since	 they	have	become	monks,	because	no
woman	 is	allowed	 to	enter	 --	not	even	a	six-month-old	girl	 is	allowed	 into	 the
monastery.	 When	 I	 heard	 this,	 I	 thought,	 "Are	 those	 monks,	 monks	 or
monsters?"	And	they	have	their	own	church-state,	so	they	have	their	own	guards
and	police.
For	 one	 thousand	 years	 no	 woman	 has	 ever	 entered	 into	 the	 monastery.	 And
anybody	who	 becomes	 a	monk	 in	 the	Mount	Athos	monastery	 cannot	 get	 out
alive	 again.	Only	when	he	 is	 dead,	will	 his	 body	be	 taken	out;	 it	 is	 a	 lifelong
commitment.	No	 intelligent	man	can	commit	himself	even	 for	 tomorrow.	Who
knows	what	will	happen	tomorrow?
That's	 what	 I	 call	 responsibility.	 A	 man	 who	 is	 responsible	 will	 not	 commit
himself	 to	 anything,	 will	 not	 promise	 anything,	 because	 who	 knows	 about
tomorrow?	Let	tomorrow	come	and	we	will	see.	I	will	respond	with	my	totality
whatever	 the	 situation,	 but	 I	 cannot	 commit	 myself.	 I	 have	 never	 promised
anybody	anything.	I	have	never	committed	myself	to	anything	in	my	whole	life.
Let	 the	tomorrow	come.	One	never	knows,	 this	may	be	my	last	day	and	I	may
not	be	there	tomorrow	to	fulfill	my	promise.
Time	goes	on	changing	--	I	may	not	be	the	same	tomorrow,	you	may	not	be	the
same	tomorrow.	Today	there	is	great	love	between	me	and	you.	Tomorrow,	who
knows?	Love	disappears,	not	only	disappears,	but	sometimes	turns	into	hate.
A	 man	 of	 awareness	 lives	 moment	 to	 moment	 --	 that	 is	 his	 celebration.	 He
enjoys	everything	of	the	world	without	any	inhibition.	Because	God	is	dead	he
need	not	be	worried.	And	with	God,	hell	is	dead,	hellfire	has	been	put	off.	With
him,	heaven	is	also	dead.	So	don't	be	greedy	for	heaven,	and	don't	be	afraid	of
hell.	 Just	 live	moment	 to	moment	with	 a	 dance,	with	 a	 joy,	with	 cheerfulness,
with	courage.
Encounter	 every	 situation	 with	 your	 total	 consciousness,	 without	 any	 guilt.
Enjoy	music,	enjoy	food,	enjoy	love	--	enjoy	everything	that	is	natural.
God	has	been	against	nature,	God	has	been	against	enlightenment,	and	God	has
been	against	your	experience	of	eternity.
God	was	your	enemy.
It	is	good	that	he	is	dead.
This	is	the	good	news	for	this	evening.
Now	your	questions.
Question	1
The	first	question:
I	HAVE	BEEN	SURROUNDED	SINCE	MY	CHILDHOOD	BY	PEOPLE	WHO
WANTED	 ME	 TO	 BELIEVE	 IN	 GOD	 AND	 TO	 FOLLOW	 HIS
COMMANDMENTS.
WHY	 ARE	 THE	 GOD	 BELIEVERS	 ALWAYS	 TRYING	 TO	 CONVERT
OTHERS?
This	is	a	very	delicate	question.
You	may	not	immediately	grasp	why	God	believers	are	always	trying	to	convert
others.
The	reason	is	they	have	their	own	doubts,	and	by	converting	others	they	are	able
to	repress	their	doubts.	If	they	can	convert	many	people	...	by	converting	others
they	 are	 also	 converting	 themselves.	When	 they	 see	 that	 one	 thousand	 people
have	started	believing	in	God	--	"Perhaps	God	is.	My	doubt	was	useless."	When
they	 see	 that	 the	 whole	 world	 believes	 in	 God	 --	 the	 whole	 world	 cannot	 be
wrong.	That	 is	 the	argument,	very	ancient,	as	ancient	as	man:	 the	whole	world
cannot	be	wrong.	And	 I	 say	unto	you,	only	single	 individuals,	 rare	 individuals
have	been	right.	When	something	is	believed	by	the	whole	world,	remember,	it	is
certainly	 going	 to	 be	 wrong!	 The	 masses	 are	 living	 like	 somnambulists,
sleepwalkers,	in	utter	unconsciousness.	Their	belief	systems	cannot	be	right.
I	have	told	you	a	small	story	....
One	journalist	died,	and	as	journalists	are	pushy	people	he	knocked	immediately
on	the	Pearly	Gates.	He	took	it	for	granted	that	he	was	going	to	Heaven	and	that
he	was	going	to	have	an	interview	with	God.	This	would	be	the	first	 interview
ever.
Saint	Peter	opened	the	doors.	He	asked,	"What	do	you	want?"
He	said,	"An	interview	with	God,	and	this	is	my	card."
But	Saint	 Peter	 said,	 "You	 cannot	 enter	Heaven.	Your	 name	 is	 not	 on	 the	 list.
And	 anyway	 we	 don't	 need	 any	 journalists.	 We	 have	 a	 quota:	 one	 dozen
journalists,	and	they	are	already	in."
And	they	are	useless	in	Heaven	because	nothing	happens,	no	sensation.	All	the
saints	 are	 almost	 dead	 --	 sitting	 on	 their	 white	 clouds,	 playing	 their	 harp,
"Alleluia!	Alleluia!"	Now	this	is	going	to	be	forever,	so	what	news	...?
George	Bernard	Shaw	exactly	defined	what	news	is:	When	a	dog	bites	a	man,	it
is	not	news;	when	a	man	bites	a	dog,	it	is	news.
But	in	Heaven,	there	are	no	dogs,	only	dead-as-dodo	saints.
"So	 the	 newspaper	 started,"	Saint	Peter	 told	 him,	 "but	 only	 the	 first	 issue	was
published.
There	was	no	news	for	the	second	issue.	So	even	those	twelve	journalists	are	just
waiting	for	nothing.
"It	 is	good	you	knock	on	the	other	door;	 that	 is	Hell,	and	there	is	always	great
news	there.
Everything	that	you	may	not	have	even	imagined	is	happening,	because	all	 the
great	 intellectuals	 are	 there,	 all	 the	 great	 politicians	 are	 there,	 all	 the	 great
criminals	are	there	...
everybody	of	any	importance	is	there!	So	you	go	there."
He	said,	"But	being	a	journalist,	I	cannot	go	so	easily.	You	will	have	to	give	me
at	least	twenty-four	hours	to	have	a	look	around	Heaven.	If	I	can	persuade	some
journalist	from	your	quota	to	go	to	Hell,	are	you	ready	to	accept	me?"
Saint	Peter	said,	"It	doesn't	matter.	 If	somebody	is	ready	to	go	to	Hell	you	can
take	his	place.	This	is	good.	For	twenty-four	hours	you	can	have	a	walk	around."
The	moment	he	entered	Heaven	he	started	spreading	a	lie	that	there	was	going	to
be	 a	 very	 great	 newspaper	 starting	 soon	 in	 Hell,	 and	 a	 chief	 editor,	 and	 an
associate	chief	editor,	assistant	editors,	and	all	kinds	of	journalists	were	needed.
He	went	on	spreading	the	news	so	it	reached	to	all	the	twelve	journalists.
After	twenty-four	hours	he	went	to	see	Saint	Peter,	to	inquire	whether	anybody
had	gone	out.	Saint	Peter	immediately	closed	the	door	and	told	him,	"You	remain
in.	All	the	twelve	have	gone	out."
He	said,	"My	God!	All	have	gone	out?	Then	I	don't	want	to	be	here.	Something
must	be	right,	otherwise	I	could	not	have	convinced	twelve	people."
Saint	Peter	said,	"Are	you	sane	or	insane?	You	created	the	lie."
He	 said,	 "I	know	 I	 created	 the	 lie,	but	 there	must	be	 something	corresponding
actually	happening.	I	cannot	remain	here,	just	open	the	doors!"
That	is	the	reason	why	every	religion	is	interested	in	converting	people,	because
every	religion,	every	priest,	every	pope,	every	saint,	every	Ayatollah	Khomeini,
every	 shankaracharya,	 are	 all	 deep	 down	 full	 of	 doubt	 because	 belief	 cannot
destroy	doubt.
Belief	can	only	repress	doubt.	A	blind	man	can	believe	in	light,	but	that	does	not
mean	 he	 knows	 light.	 All	 your	 believers	 are	 blind	 people	 who	 don't	 know
anything	about	the	truth.
Hence	the	doubt	is	just	repressed	underneath	the	belief.
To	 keep	 one's	 belief	 strong	 enough,	 one	 needs	 to	 propagate	 it	 continuously.
That's	 why	 all	 the	 religious	 propagandists	 you	 see	 are	 very	 fundamentalist,
almost	fanatics,	fascists.
Have	 you	 seen	 the	 Jehovah	 Witnesses?	 They	 go	 on	 shouting,	 beating	 their
drums,	shouting	whether	you	listen	or	not.	They	don't	look	at	your	eyes,	they	just
look	 at	 the	 ground	 and	 they	 go	 on	 shouting,	 and	 they	 go	 on	 reading	 passages
from	the	Bible.	Just	to	get	rid	of	them	people	purchase	their	Bibles.
Why	 are	 these	 people	 so	 much	 interested	 in	 converting	 people?	 The
psychological	 reason	 is	 they	 are	 afraid.	Their	 own	belief	 is	 very	 thin;	 anytime
doubt	may	arise.	Doubt	is	very	existential.	Belief	is	only	a	program	that	has	been
given	by	your	parents,	 and	by	your	priests,	 and	by	your	 teachers,	 and	by	your
society.	But	it	is	only	a	program.
In	the	Soviet	Union	they	are	giving	a	different	program:	there	is	no	God.	Every
child	believes	that	there	is	no	God.	All	communists	believe	there	is	no	God.
Half	 of	 the	 world	 is	 communist	 now,	 so	 half	 of	 the	 world	 for	 the	 first	 time
believes	there	is	no	God.	It	is	not	that	they	know,	it	is	not	that	they	have	explored
the	outer	sky,	or	they	have	explored	the	inner	consciousness	and	have	found	that
there	is	no	God.	They	just	have	been	told,	just	as	you	have	been	told	that	there	is
God.
Every	religion	tries	to	convert	people,	because	those	who	are	inside	the	fold	are
full	of	doubt.	When	the	fold	starts	growing,	their	doubts	are	settled,	their	belief
becomes	thicker,	weightier	--	"So	many	people	cannot	be	wrong."
And	 have	 you	 watched	 this?	Whenever	 a	 person	 moves	 from	 one	 religion	 to
another	religion,	the	new	religion	that	he	has	entered	gives	him	great	respect	and
honor.	 The	 older	 religion	 condemns	 him,	 that	 he	 has	 betrayed,	 but	 the	 new
religion	 gives	 him	great	 honor	 because	 he	 has	 confirmed	 their	 belief	 --	 "Even
people	belonging	to	other	religions	are	coming	into	our	fold.	Our	fold	must	have
the	truth,	otherwise	why	are	people	coming?"
All	 these	missionaries	all	 around	 the	world	bringing	people	 to	Catholicism	are
just	making	the	Catholics	inside	the	fold	believe,	"You	are	the	real	religion,	and
other	religions	are	just	so-so."
A	man	of	truth	never	tries	to	convert	you.
A	man	 of	 truth	 conveys	 his	 experience	 to	 you.	He	 shares	 his	 experience	with
you,	but	that	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	agree	with	him.	It	does	not	mean
either	 that	 you	 have	 to	 disagree	 with	 him.	 It	 was	 his	 joy	 to	 share,	 and	 that's
where	he	is	finished.
No	 man	 of	 truth	 has	 been	 ever	 a	 missionary.	 All	 missionaries	 are	 trying	 to
convince	 the	 insiders	 that	 they	 are	 right	 because	 outsiders	 are	 coming	 in.	 All
missionaries	are	trying	to	convince	themselves	also,	that	their	belief	system	must
have	some	truth	in	it;	otherwise	why	do	people	get	converted?
So	 that	 is	 the	 reason	God	believers	 are	 always	 trying	 to	 convert	 other	 people.
Otherwise,	 conversion	 is	 an	 interference	 into	 other	 people's	 freedom.	You	 can
enjoy	 sharing	 with	 your	 friends,	 with	 their	 consent,	 whatever	 you	 have
experienced	 --	 not	 your	 beliefs	 but	 your	 experience.	 And	 if	 you	 have	 no
experience,	be	honest,	be	truthful.	Say,	"I	don't	have	any	experience.	I	have	only
a	 bunch	 of	 beliefs	 others	 have	 given	me,	 which	 are	 not	my	 experience.	 I	 am
carrying	borrowed	knowledge,	I	don't	know	anything	on	my	own,	hence	I	cannot
recommend	anything	to	you."
What	am	I	doing	here?	I	am	not	trying	to	convert	you	to	any	religion,	or	to	any
cult,	or	to	any	creed.	I	don't	have	any	belief	system,	I	don't	have	any	theology,	I
don't	have	any	philosophy,	I	don't	have	any	religion.	What	I	am	trying	to	convey
is	my	experience	of	truth.	If	it	can	be	of	any	use	to	you,	you	can	use	it.	If	you	see
it	is	not	of	any	use	to	you,	that's	perfectly	all	right.	It	is	your	freedom,	I	will	not
interfere	in	your	freedom.	I	will	not	trespass	your	individuality.	I	respect	you,	I
love	you.	How	can	I	convert	you?
So	no	man	of	 truth,	no	man	of	compassion,	no	man	of	authentic	experience	 is
ever	a	converter.	It	is	all	those	believers,	who	are	afraid	of	their	own	doubt,	who
want	 to	 keep	 the	 insiders	 in,	 and	 go	 on	 bringing	 new	 people	 from	 outside.	 It
helps	 the	 believers	 to	 have	 thicker	 beliefs,	 and	 thicker	 beliefs	 make	 your
intelligence	 also	 retarded.	 The	 thicker	 the	 belief,	 the	 more	 retarded	 the
intelligence.	 No	 belief	 helps	 your	 intelligence	 to	 grow,	 even	 though	 there	 is
space	enough	to	grow.	When	you	go	on	pushing	beliefs	and	hiding	your	doubt	in
your	 unconscious	 corners	 of	 darkness,	 you	 are	 crippling	 yourself.	 You	 are
destroying	your	own	buddhahood,	you	are	destroying	your	own	potential.
You	 could	 have	 been	 one	 of	 the	 enlightened	 ones,	 but	 you	will	 remain	 just	 a
Catholic,	 or	 a	Hindu,	 or	 a	Mohammedan.	And	 these	 are	 all	 fictions,	 beautiful
fictions.	 You	 can	 enjoy	 them	 as	 stories,	 as	 novels,	 but	 don't	 call	 them	 "holy"
scriptures.
Four	hundred	and	eighty-eight	pages	in	the	Holy	Bible	are	pure	pornography.	I
sometimes	wonder	why	 people	 go	 on	missing	 those	 four	 hundred	 and	 eighty-
eight	pages	-
-	not	one	page,	or	two	pages.	I	told	one	of	my	friends	to	pick	out	all	those	pages,
and	he	has	published	a	book	of	four	hundred	and	eighty-eight	pages	taken	out	of
the	Old	Testament.	Every	passage	is	so	obscene,	so	ugly,	and	you	go	on	calling	it
the	Holy	Bible.
Even	 playboys	 and	 their	 magazine	 PLAYBOY,	 and	 the	 playgirls	 and	 their
magazine	 PLAYGIRL,	 and	 PENTHOUSE	 are	 nothing	 compared	 to	 the	 Holy
Bible.
They	are	nothing	compared	to	the	temples	of	Khajuraho	in	India.	Even	Mahatma
Gandhi	was	so	ashamed	that	he	wanted	thirty	temples	of	Khajuraho	...	which	are
great	sculpture.
Nowhere	have	have	men	and	women	been	sculpted	so	beautifully	--	but	they	are
making	 love,	 they	 are	 utterly	 naked,	 and	 millions	 of	 statues	 in	 those	 thirty
temples	...
There	 used	 to	 be	 one	 hundred	 temples;	 seventy	 have	 been	 destroyed	 by	 the
Mohammedans.	Thirty	were	saved	because	they	were	hidden	behind	thick	forest.
Mahatma	 Gandhi	 wanted	 them	 to	 be	 covered	 with	 mud	 so	 nobody	 could	 see
them.
You	must	have	heard	about	the	three	famous	monkeys	of	Mahatma	Gandhi	--	he
used	to	keep	them	on	his	table.	Even	though	he	is	dead,	they	are	still	sitting	on
his	 table.	 Those	 three	monkeys	were	 sent	 from	 Japan	 by	 a	 friend.	 They	 are	 a
beautiful	piece	of	sculpture,	but	they	are	not	complete.	They	came	from	China	to
Japan,	and	the	original	set	used	to	be	of	four	monkeys,	not	three.
The	 fourth	monkey	 seems	 to	 have	 been	 taken	 by	 the	 friend	 out	 of	 the	 set,	 or
perhaps	...	I	suspect	Mahatma	Gandhi	himself	cut	the	fourth	monkey	out	of	the
set.	I	have	to	describe	the	monkeys	so	you	can	understand	why	he	should	have
cut	...	because	three	is	not	the	original	set.
The	 first	 monkey	 is	 keeping	 his	 hands	 on	 his	 ears.	 The	 second	 monkey	 is
keeping	 his	 hands	 on	 his	 eyes.	 The	 third	monkey	 is	 keeping	 his	 hands	 on	 his
mouth.	And	the	fourth	monkey	is	missing.
The	 fourth	monkey	 --	 I	know	 the	 fourth	monkey.	 In	 the	original	 set	 the	 fourth
monkey	was	holding	his	hands	on	his	genitals.
Mahatma	Gandhi	 interpreted	 them	 --	 I	 don't	 agree	 with	 his	 interpretation.	 He
interpreted	 that	 the	monkey	who	 is	 holding	his	 hands	on	 the	 ears	 says,	 "Don't
listen	to	anything	evil."
And	the	monkey	who	is	holding	his	hands	on	the	eyes	says,	"Don't	see	anything
evil."
And	the	third	monkey	who	has	his	hands	on	the	mouth	is	indicating,	"Don't	say
anything	 evil."	 Now,	 you	 can	 understand	 why	 the	 fourth	 monkey	 has	 been
dropped	--	in	fact	he	should	not	have	been	dropped	if	Gandhi	had	really	been	a
man	of	truth.	The	fourth	monkey	is	the	logical	conclusion:	"Hide	the	origin	of	all
evil."
But	this	is	not	my	interpretation.	Knowing	the	people,	and	knowing	that	Charles
Darwin	has	this	great	idea	that	man	has	come	from	monkeys	--	and	there	is	every
possibility,	because	your	mind	still	 functions	 like	a	monkey.	My	interpretation,
when	 I	 went	 to	 see	 Mahatma	 Gandhi's	 ashram	 ...	 He	 was	 dead,	 but	 his	 son
Ramdas	was	my	friend,	so	he	invited	me	and	he	showed	me	around.	It	is	an	ugly
place	--	Mahatma	Gandhi	was	a	great	self-torturer	and	he	forced	torture	on	other
people.
I	said,	"These	three	monkeys	...	where	is	the	fourth?	--	because	I	know	the	whole
set."
He	 said,	 "I	 have	 never	 heard	 about	 the	 fourth."	 And	 he	 told	 me	 Mahatma
Gandhi's	interpretation.
I	 said,	 "That	 is	 not	 right.	 Looking	 at	 humanity,	 looking	 into	 humanity's
psychology	...
The	first	monkey	says,	`Don't	 listen	to	the	truth	because	it	will	disturb	all	your
consoling	lies.'
"The	second	monkey	says,	`Don't	look	at	the	truth;	otherwise	your	God	will	be
dead	and	your	heaven	and	hell	will	disappear.'
"The	 third	 monkey	 says,	 `Don't	 speak	 the	 truth,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be
condemned,	crucified,	poisoned,	 tortured	by	 the	whole	crowd,	 the	unconscious
people.	You	will	be	condemned	--	don't	speak	the	truth!'
"And	 the	 missing	 fourth	 monkey	 says,	 `Hide	 your	 pleasures.	 Hide	 your
enjoyment,	don't	show	it	to	anybody.'"
People	can	respect	you	if	you	are	miserable,	but	if	you	are	happy	everybody	is
jealous	of	you.
People	 have	 been	 asking	 me	 why	 my	 commune	 failed	 in	 America.	 It	 never
failed.	The	reason	it	was	destroyed	by	the	violence	of	the	American	government
was	that	it	was	such	a	successful	experiment.	Never	has	there	been	a	commune
in	the	whole	history	of	man	so	successful.
That	was	 the	 trouble.	 If	we	had	 failed,	nobody	would	have	bothered	about	us,
but	 we	 succeeded.	 In	 five	 years	 we	 fought	 against	 the	 greatest	 power	 in	 the
world	--	and	we	had	no	power.	We	were	not	a	nation,	we	had	no	army	...	but	we
had	truth	on	our	side.
The	commune	was	destroyed	because	it	was	successful.
The	fourth	monkey	is	saying,	"Keep	your	pleasures,	your	joys,	hidden.	Don't	let
anybody	 know	 that	 you	 are	 a	 cheerful	 man,	 a	 blissful	 man,	 an	 ecstatic	 man,
because	that	will	destroy	your	very	life.	It	is	dangerous."
And	looking	at	humanity	I	can	say	without	any	doubt	 that	my	 interpretation	 is
far	 better	 than	Mahatma	Gandhi's.	He	 himself	 for	 his	whole	 life	was	 teaching
celibacy.	But	he	was	an	honest	man,	about	that	I	have	no	doubt.	His	honesty	is
clear.	Even	at	the	age	of	seventy	he	was	having	nightmares	about	sex,	and	in	his
dreams	 he	 was	 ejaculating	 --	 at	 the	 age	 of	 seventy!	 This	 is	 a	 whole	 life	 of
suppression.	Otherwise	by	 the	 time	a	man	 is	 forty-two,	 if	 he	has	 lived	his	 life
joyfully,	 without	 guilt,	 without	 any	 God,	 without	 any	 religion,	 just	 naturally,
flowing	with	nature	with	a	deep	relaxation,	in	a	let-go	...	by	the	time	he	is	forty-
two	he	will	become	aware	that	these	pleasures	were	very	momentary.
And	now	death	is	approaching,	he	has	to	find	something	more	eternal.
These	pleasures	will	have	indicated	the	way	to	him,	that	 if	 in	a	sexual	orgasm,
time	and	mind	stop	and	you	feel	as	if	you	are	part	of	eternity	...	you	disappear	as
an	 ego	 and	 you	 become	 simply	 one	 with	 the	 whole.	 It	 happens	 only	 for	 a
moment,	but	it	can	happen	...	on	your	own	if	you	can	manage	to	go	beyond	the
mind	and	beyond	time	--	no	need	for	a	woman,	no	need	for	a	man.	Every	man,
every	woman	is	capable	of	going	beyond.	Once	you	know	it	is	possible,	then	you
can	manage	it.
That's	what	meditation	is	--	just	getting	beyond	the	mind	and	beyond	time,	and
you	have	entered	into	eternal	silence,	into	eternal	life.	And	once	you	have	tasted
that	life	your	whole	existence	becomes	a	celebration.
Question	2
The	second	question:
WOULD	YOU	AGREE	WITH	STENDHAL	WHEN	HE	SAYS,	"GOD'S	ONLY
EXCUSE	IS	THAT	HE	DOES	NOT	EXIST"?
Absolutely!
If	 God	 existed,	 he	would	 have	 been	murdered	 long	 ago.	Man	 could	 not	 have
tolerated	him;	he	was	an	enemy.	It	is	good	that	he	does	not	exist,	so	you	can	go
on	praying	...	Just	think	....
There	is	a	story,	a	very	ancient	story	....
Once	God	used	 to	 live	 just	 in	 the	marketplace,	but	 the	whole	day,	 even	 in	 the
night	 people	 were	 knocking	 on	 the	 doors	 and	 complaining	 about	 everything:
"This	 is	 not	 the	 right	 kind	 of	world	 you	 have	 created.	Why	 is	 there	 so	much
sickness?	If	you	are	the	creator,	then	why	do	you	create	bodies	which	are	sick?
Why	is	there	old	age,	and	why	is	there	death?"
So	people	tortured	him	so	much,	the	old	story	says,	that	he	called	a	council	of	his
angels	 and	 asked	 them,	 "I	will	 either	 die	 out	 of	 this	 constant	 torture,	 or	 I	will
have	to	commit	suicide!	Can	you	tell	me	what	I	should	do?	These	people	don't
leave	me	 for	 a	 single	moment	 and	 their	 demands	 are	 such	 that	 I	 cannot	 fulfill
them.	One	woman	comes	and	she	says,	`Tomorrow,	remember,	no	rain	because	I
am	trying	to	dry	my	wheat.'	And	another	man	says,	`Tomorrow	I	absolutely	need
rain	because	I	am	sowing	my	seeds.'	Now	what	am	I	to	do?
"And	 there	 are	millions	of	 people	 shouting	 and	 angry	because	 their	 desire	 has
not	been	fulfilled,	their	prayer	has	not	been	heard."
So	 the	angels	 thought.	One	angel	 said,	 "It	 is	good	 if	you	move	 to	Everest,	 the
highest	peak	of	the	Himalayas."
God	 said,	 "You	don't	 know	 it	 but	 I	 am	omniscient,	 I	 know	everything	 --	 past,
present,	future.	Soon	there	will	be	a	man	who	will	reach	to	the	highest	peak	of
the	Himalayas.
And	once	one	man	has	found	me,	there	will	be	buses	and	airplanes,	and	all	kinds
of	 vehicles.	And	 they	will	make	 roads	 and	 hotels,	 and	 again	 there	will	 be	 the
marketplace.
You	 don't	 understand:	 it	will	 only	 be	 just	 a	 little	 peace	 for	 a	 short	 time.	 That
won't	do.	I	will	have	to	change	my	place	again."
So	somebody	suggested,	"Why	don't	you	move	to	the	moon?"
He	said,	 "You	don't	understand	because	you	don't	know	 the	 future	 --	 just	 after
Everest	they	are	going	to	go	to	the	moon.	So	I	will	have	to	change	again.	Show
me	something	from	where	I	have	not	to	change!"
Then	an	old	angel	came	close	to	him	and	whispered	in	his	ear,	"The	only	place
man	may	never	think	of	is	within	his	own	heart.	You	just	sit	there	..."
He	has	disappeared	from	everywhere.	Perhaps	you	can	encounter	something	of
divineness	in	your	own	being.	In	your	own	life	you	may	find	something	which	is
godly.
You	 will	 not	 find	 God	 as	 a	 person,	 you	 will	 find	 a	 quality,	 a	 fragrance,	 a
presence;	a	certain	air,	a	certain	energy	which	is	not	yours,	which	belongs	to	the
cosmos.
Stendhal	is	perfectly	right:	"God's	only	excuse	is	that	he	does	not	exist."	That	is
saving	him;	otherwise	there	was	no	safety,	no	security.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	 in	his,	THUS	SPAKE	ZARATHUSTRA,	comes	 to	 a	point
where	Zarathustra	 is	coming	down	from	his	mountain	cave	where	he	has	 lived
many,	many	years.	And	he	finds	on	the	way	an	old	hermit's	hut,	and	the	hermit	is
praying	to	God.
Early	in	the	morning,	as	the	sun	is	rising,	the	hermit	is	praying.
And	Zarathustra	murmurs	to	himself,	"Is	it	possible	that	this	old	hermit	has	not
heard	that	God	is	dead?"
When	Zarathustra	goes	down	he	tells	the	crowd,	"Have	you	heard	the	news	that
God	is	dead?"	They	all	start	laughing.
They	say,	"You	must	be	insane.	Living	in	a	cave	for	many,	many	years	alone,	has
made	you	a	crackpot."
Nietzsche	himself	became	mad	in	the	last	phase	of	his	life,	because	he	declared
really	good	news	but	he	could	not	manage	to	find	something	to	replace	God.	He
could	 not	 find	 the	 celebration	 of	 life,	 he	 could	 not	 find	 the	 experience	 of	 the
living	stream	within	you.
He	remained	in	a	vacuum	--	in	a	vacuum	you	are	going	to	be	mad.
More	people	go	mad	in	the	West	than	in	the	East.	More	people	commit	suicide	in
the	West	 than	 in	 the	East.	More	people	murder	 in	 the	West	 than	 in	 the	East.	 It
should	 be	 otherwise	 --	 the	East	 is	 so	 poor	 that	 people	 should	 commit	 suicide,
should	go	mad	...	but	they	don't.	What	is	happening?
The	Western	mind	has	come	to	know	God	is	not	 there	--	an	immense	vacuum.
And	man	 cannot	 live	 without	meaning,	man	 cannot	 live	 without	 significance,
man	cannot	live	without	joy.	If	God	is	dead,	man	has	become	absolutely	empty,
and	man	cannot	live	in	emptiness.
He	needs	juices	of	life	flowing	through	him.	He	needs	to	blossom	into	beautiful
lotuses.
He	needs	to	sing	songs,	he	needs	to	play	music.	He	needs	all	the	blessings	that
existence	makes	available	to	you.
The	Western	man	 is	more	 educated,	 is	 more	 rich,	 hence	 his	 bodily	 needs	 are
almost	 fulfilled.	He	 looks	 at	 the	 sky	 and	 finds	 the	 sky	 is	 empty	 --	 there	 is	 no
God.	This	understanding	that	there	is	no	God,	rather	than	becoming	good	news
to	 the	Western	man	has	become	bad	news.	He	 feels	 accidental,	 unnecessary	 --
there	is	no	reason	why	he	should	be	here.
The	East	knows	three	religions	which	don't	have	any	God	--	Jainism,	Buddhism,
Taoism
--	three	religions	which	are	not	centered	on	God.	And	these	three	religions	seem
to	 be	 saner	 than	 the	 religions	 which	 have	 come	 out	 of	 Judaism	 --	 Judaism,
Christianity,	Mohammedanism.	These	 three	Eastern	 religions	 seem	 to	 be	more
sane,	 because	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 there	 is	 no	God.	So	 they	don't	 have	 to
look	upward	in	the	sky,	they	have	to	look	inward.	That	is	the	only	place	where
they	have	to	explore	for	truth.
Prayer	is	not	the	way;	meditation	is	the	way.
And	those	who	have	come	to	the	ultimate	experience	of	meditation	--	a	Gautam
Buddha,	 a	 Bodhidharma,	 a	Mahakashyapa,	 a	Mahavira,	 a	 Lao	 Tzu,	 a	 Chuang
Tzu,	a	Ma	Tzu,	a	Sekito	...	they	all	don't	even	talk	about	God.	That	which	does
not	exist	--	what	is	the	point	even	to	say	that	he	does	not	exist?	It	is	simply	out	of
the	question	to	discuss	God,	to	discuss	heaven	and	hell.
Hence	 I	want	 you	 to	 understand	 that	 Zen	 has	 come	 as	 a	 flowering	 out	 of	 the
meeting	of	Gautam	Buddha	and	Lao	Tzu.	It	is	the	meeting	of	Dhamma	and	Tao.
It	 is	 a	 crossbreed	 of	Bodhidharma	 and	Chuang	Tzu.	These	 two	 religions	 have
reached	to	the	highest	peak,	and	they	are	unorganized	religions.	Where	they	have
become	organized	 they	are	dead.	For	example,	 in	Tibet	 it	became	organized,	 it
became	dead.	In	Sri	Lanka	it	became	organized,	it	became	dead.
Wherever	religion	becomes	organized	it	becomes	dead	because	it	is	immediately
a	desire	for	power,	a	desire	to	dominate.	It	becomes	politics	instead	of	religion.
Organization	destroys	the	individual,	sacrifices	the	individual,	and	the	individual
is	the	only	one	who	can	know	the	highest	peaks	of	consciousness	and	the	depths
of	consciousness.
Out	of	the	meeting	of	Gautam	Buddha	and	Lao	Tzu,	Zen	is	born.	Zen	is	neither
Buddhism,	nor	 is	 it	Tao;	 it	 is	both,	 just	 as	you	are	both	your	mother	 and	your
father.	You	are	neither	--	something	of	your	father,	something	of	your	mother	is
flowing	in	you.
Zen	 has	 come	 to	 the	 highest	 point	 of	 expression.	 It	 has	 become	 almost
synonymous	with	eternal	life.	Adam	and	Eve	could	not	eat	the	fruit	of	the	eternal
life,	they	were	expelled	from	the	Garden	of	Eden.	They	had	only	eaten	the	fruit
of	knowledge.	But	Zen	gives	you	the	other	tree,	the	tree	of	eternal	life.
So	in	this	series	we	will	be	discussing	Zen,	as	equivalent	to	eternal	life.
God	is	no	where.
Life	is	now	here.
And	Zen	is	the	master	key	to	open	the	doors	of	the	mystery	of	life.
The	sutra:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
SEKITO	SAID:
MY	 TEACHING,	 WHICH	 HAS	 COME	 DOWN	 FROM	 THE	 ANCIENT
BUDDHAS,	IS
NOT	 DEPENDENT	 ON	MEDITATION	 OR	 ON	 DILIGENT	 APPLICATION
OF	ANY
KIND.
The	 word	 `meditation'	 here	 may	 give	 you	 a	 feeling	 of	 misunderstanding,	 of
confusion,	 because	 in	 English	 there	 are	 three	 words:	 concentration,
contemplation,	meditation.	None	of	 these	 three	words	 is	 capable	of	 translating
the	Sanskrit	word	dhyana,	which	became	in	Buddha's	language	--	he	used	Pali,	a
different	 language	 from	 Sanskrit	 --	 zhana.	 And	 when	 Bodhidharma	 took	 the
message	 to	 China,	 from	 zhana	 it	 became	 ch'ana.	 And	 when	 Rinzai	 took	 the
message	from	China	to	Japan,	from	ch'an	or	ch'ana,	it	became	zen.	It	came	closer
to	Buddha's	zhan	or	zhana.
But	there	is	no	equivalent	word	in	English,	because	even	the	word	`meditation'
gives	 the	 idea	 that	 you	 are	 meditating	 upon	 something.	 Concentrating	 upon
something,	 contemplating	 about	 something,	 meditating	 upon	 something	 --	 but
dhyan,	or	zen,	are	without	any	object.
Zen	means	neither	are	you	contemplating	nor	are	you	concentrating,	nor	are	you
meditating,	because	 there	 is	no	object.	You	simply	are	--	silent,	no	 thought,	no
mind.
It	 is	 because	 of	 this,	 Sekito	 includes	 meditation	 also:	 "One	 does	 not	 need
meditation	or	a	diligent	application	of	any	kind	to	become	the	enlightened	one."
But	for	your	understanding	and	clarity,	when	I	use	the	word	`meditation'	--	it	is	a
poor	 word,	 it	 does	 not	 have	 the	 same	 quality	 as	 `dhyan'	 or	 `zen'	 --	 I	 use	 it
because	there	is	no	other	word	in	the	English	language.
And	there	is	a	reason	why	there	is	no	other	word	--	the	West	never	came	to	the
point	of	dhyana.	It	never	came	to	the	point	where	one	simply	is	--	neither	doing
anything	outwardly	nor	doing	anything	inwardly.	One	simply	is	--	a	pure	isness,
an	utter	silence.
That	brings	you	to	your	very	center,	and	the	moment	you	are	at	the	very	center
you	start	growing	into	a	buddha,	into	an	enlightened	one.	Your	awareness	for	the
first	 time	opens	 its	 petals	 the	way	a	 lotus	opens	 its	 petals	when	 it	 is	 daybreak
when	the	sun	starts	rising,	when	the	night	is	over.
Sekito	 is	 right:	 no	 special	 discipline	 is	 needed.	 No	 special	 application	 of	 any
kind	is	needed.	No	mind	effort	is	needed	--	that's	what	he	means	by	meditation.
What	you	need	is	just	to	leave	everything	aside.	Transcend	the	body,	the	mind,
the	heart.	Just	go	on	transcending	till	you	come	to	a	point	which	is	the	end	of	the
road.	There	--	you	simply	are.
Basho	says:
SITTING	SILENTLY
DOING	NOTHING,
SPRING	COMES	--
AND	THE	GRASS	GROWS	BY	ITSELF.
You	 don't	 have	 to	 do	 anything,	 you	 have	 just	 to	 sit	 silently	 doing	 nothing,
because	any	kind	of	doing	is	going	to	take	you	away	from	yourself.	When	you
are	 not	 doing	 anything,	 the	 whole	 energy	 gathers	 inside;	 it	 is	 not	 invested
anywhere.	The	moment	you	pass	your	mind,	all	the	energy	that	was	invested	in
thoughts	is	released.	When	you	pass	your	heart,	all	the	energy	that	was	invested
in	your	emotions,	feelings,	sentiments,	is	released.
Now	you	are	becoming	too	full	of	energy.	This	abundance	of	energy	gives	you
the	 first	 taste	 of	 existence,	 and	 as	 this	 energy	 becomes	 a	 pillar	 of	 tremendous
height	and	depth,	you	have	 found	 the	connection	with	 the	cosmos.	You	are	no
longer	alone.	In	fact,	you	are	no	more,	only	existence	is.	Then	the	existence,	the
cosmos,	the	life,	is	a	sheer	dance.
I	teach	you	to	be	dancers.
I	teach	you	to	be	lovers.
I	am	absolutely	life	affirmative,	and	your	all	religions	are	life	negative.
I	 am	utterly	devoted	 to	 the	present	moment.	Don't	move	 into	 the	past	 because
that	 is	memory;	 there	 is	no	 relevant	existence	 to	your	memory	anymore.	Don't
move	into	the	future	because	that	is	only	imagination.
Just	remain	here,	and	you	will	be	surprised.	If	you	are	just	now	here,	all	thoughts
disappear,	because	all	thoughts	are	either	of	the	past	or	of	the	future.	No	thought
is	of	the	present.
The	present	is	so	pure,	so	clean,	so	clear,	just	an	opening	into	the	cosmos.	This	is
Zen,	 and	 this	 is	 the	 key	 to	 enter	 into	 life	 eternal.	The	 very	 feel	 of	 life	 eternal
takes	all	tensions,	anxieties	of	old	age,	of	sickness,	of	death,	and	birth	away	from
you.
You	have	never	been	born	and	you	will	never	die.
It	is	the	body	that	has	been	changing.
You	have	been	changing	houses.
But	you	are	the	reality,	the	truth.
The	truth	is	not	outside	you,	it	is	at	the	innermost	hidden	center.
So	 Zen	 simply	 means	 doing	 nothing,	 just	 being.	 And	 in	 that	 utter	 silence	 of
being,	 you	 slowly	 slowly	 relax,	 and	 the	 spring	 comes	 and	 the	 grass	 grows	 by
itself.	You	suddenly	start	blossoming	--	your	eyes	start	having	a	new	depth.	Your
gestures	start	having	a	new	grace	--	your	every	act	becomes	sheer	joy.	It	may	be
just	 chopping	wood,	 it	 may	 be	 just	 carrying	water	 from	 the	 well	 --	 it	 doesn't
matter.
Once	 you	 know	 you	 are	 not	 accidental	 to	 existence,	 once	 you	 know	 you	 are
existence	 itself,	 life	 takes	 a	 tremendous	 quantum	 leap.	 You	 are	 no	 longer
confined	to	the	body,	you	are	no	longer	confined	to	the	small	mind.	You	become
vast	and	infinite,	and	only	in	this	vastness	and	infinity	can	you	rejoice,	can	you
be	blissful.
And	this	vastness	has	become	available	to	you	because	God	is	dead;	otherwise
he	was	occupying	 every	place,	 he	was	watching	you	 from	every	 side.	He	was
judging	you	continuously,	poking	his	nose	into	your	affairs,	condemning	you	--
"This	is	wrong,	don't	do	it."	And	all	his	commandments	were	against	life.
I	have	heard	an	old	story	....
When	God	made	the	world	he	went	with	his	commandments	to	the	Babylonians
first,	and	asked	them,	"Would	you	like	to	have	a	commandment?"
They	said,	"First,	we	would	like	to	know	what	the	commandment	is."
And	he	said,	"Thou	should	not	commit	adultery."
They	said,	"Forget	all	about	it.	Without	adultery	there	is	no	joy	in	life.	Just	take
your	commandments."
God	was	very	much	disappointed,	"What	kind	of	people	are	these?"
He	went	to	the	Egyptians	...	the	same	question.
"What	are	the	commandments?	First	we	have	to	know	it	before	we	take	one"	--
and	nobody	was	ready	to	take	it.
And	then	he	found	Moses	who	asked	a	wrong	question.	When	God	said,	"Would
you	like	to	have	a	commandment?"	Moses	said,	"How	much?	How	much	does	it
cost?"
God	said,	"It	is	free."
Moses	said,	"Then	why	one?	I	will	have	ten."
But	when	God	 is	no	 longer	 there,	 all	his	 commandments	disappear	 and	all	his
holy	 scriptures	 disappear,	 and	 the	 world	 becomes	 one	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 No
religions,	no	religious	boundaries,	no	discrimination	--	without	God,	humanity	is
one.
Zen	teaches	you	not	only	to	be	one	with	humanity,	but	to	be	one	with	the	trees
and	the	rivers,	and	the	mountains	and	the	sky	and	the	stars.	This	whole	universe
is	our	being.	We	are	just	flowers	of	different	colors	giving	a	beautiful	variety	to
existence.	We	are	expressions	of	existence,	unique	expressions.	That	gives	you
pride,	 that	 gives	 you	 dignity.	 That	 gives	 you	 an	 intrinsic	 honor,	 a	 self-respect
which	you	were	not	able	to	have	if	God	was	alive.
But	 the	whole	of	humanity	has	not	heard	even	yet.	They	are	 still	 praying	 to	 a
fiction,	 and	 that	 fiction	 is	making	 the	whole	humanity	 schizophrenic,	neurotic,
obscene,	ugly.
Three	rabbis	were	sitting	on	a	park	bench	one	evening	....
They	used	 to	come	 to	 that	park	every	evening	 --	old	 rabbis.	One	was	seventy-
five,	one	was	eighty-five,	one	was	ninety-five	--	all	retired.
The	 youngest	 rabbi	 who	 was	 seventy-five	 looked	 very	 sad.	 The	 second	 rabbi
who	was	eighty-five	asked	him,	"What	 is	 the	matter?	Why	are	you	so	sad	 this
evening?"
He	said,	"What	to	do?	I	have	to	tell	you	so	that	I	can	be	unburdened.	It	happened
that	a	beautiful	lady	was	a	guest	in	my	house,	and	when	she	was	taking	a	bath	I
looked	through	the	keyhole	at	her	beautiful	proportionate	body."
Both	the	rabbis	started	laughing.
The	second	rabbi	said,	"You	idiot.	Everybody	does	that	in	their	childhood."
But	the	youngest	rabbi	said,	"You	have	not	heard	the	whole	story	and	you	have
interfered.	I	was	caught	red-handed	by	my	mother."
Those	two	rabbis	said,	"We	know.	Everybody	gets	caught.	This	is	nothing	to	be
sad	about."
But	the	man	said,	"You	don't	understand	at	all.	This	happened	today!	It	is	not	a
question	of	childhood."
They	said,	"Then	it	is	a	serious	matter."
"But	it	is	nothing,"	the	second	rabbi	said.	"What	is	happening	to	me,	you	don't
know	..."
His	problem	was	that	he	had	not	made	love	to	his	wife	for	three	days.	And	both
the	rabbis	started	laughing,	because	they	both	knew	what	his	"love"	was.	At	the
age	of	eighty-five,	one	leg	in	the	grave,	one	leg	out	--	what	was	his	love?	They
already	knew	it,	so	they	both	laughed.
He	said,	"Why	are	you	laughing?"
They	said,	"We	are	laughing	at	your	love.	Don't	be	worried	about	it."
His	love	was,	he	would	take	the	hand	of	the	wife	before	going	to	sleep,	squeeze
it	three	times,	and	say	goodnight.	That	was	his	love.
But	wives	are	wives,	and	even	this	much	love	the	wife	was	not	allowing	him	for
three	days.	She	would	turn	and	say,	"I	have	a	headache;	you	just	go	to	sleep."
So	he	said,	"For	three	days	she	has	had	a	headache.	At	exactly	the	moment	I	try
to	make	love	to	her,	she	says,	Ì	have	a	headache;	you	just	go	to	sleep.'"
The	 third,	 the	 oldest	 rabbi	 said,	 "You	 are	 all	 idiots.	You	 don't	 understand	 real
problems.
The	 real	 problem	 is	 happening	 to	me.	 Just	 this	morning	when	 I	was	 going	 to
make	love	to	my	wife	she	started	screaming,	Àre	you	a	sex	maniac?	The	whole
night	you	have	been	making	love	again	and	again	and	again.'"
So	he	said	to	his	friends,	"It	seems	I	am	losing	my	memory.	I	thought	it	was	the
first	time."
A	repressed	humanity	is	going	to	have	all	these	problems.	But	who	has	created
all	 these	 problems?	Your	God,	 your	 priests	 ...	 they	 are	 the	 greatest	 criminals,
because	 very	 piously	 they	 appear	 to	 be	 your	 well-wishers,	 but	 they	 have
destroyed	everything	in	you.
Zen	wants	you	to	resurrect,	to	take	hold	of	your	life	again,	which	you	have	given
to	somebody	else	to	be	taken	care	of.	Be	a	master,	and	you	will	start	blossoming
flowers	of	beauty	and	blissfulness	and	ecstasy,	and	a	divine	drunkenness.
Sekito	says,	"WHEN	YOU	ATTAIN	THE	INSIGHT	AS	ATTAINED	BY	THE
BUDDHA,	 YOU	 REALIZE	 THAT	 NO-MIND	 is	 BUDDHA	 ..."	 Just	 going
beyond	the	mind,	and	you	have	become	a	buddha.	It	is	such	a	small	passage,	so
small	a	journey	--
perhaps	a	single	step.	But	because	you	are	not	total,	I	tell	you	about	three	steps.	I
divide	one	step	into	three	steps,	because	you	are	hesitant	to	take	such	a	jump	--
one	step.
Otherwise	 there	 is	 only	 one	 step:	 from	 mind	 to	 no-mind.	 But	 because	 you
hesitate	to	go	beyond	the	mind,	you	are	afraid	you	may	go	insane.	That	is	true.	If
you	go	beyond	the	mind	from	the	wrong	door,	you	will	be	insane.
There	are	two	doors	to	go	beyond	the	mind:	one	goes	below	the	mind,	one	goes
beyond	the	mind.	Both	are	outside	 the	mind.	If	you	enter	from	the	lower	door,
you	will	be	insane,	and	you	will	be	lying	on	a	psychiatrist's	couch.	If	you	enter
the	 no-mind	 from	 the	 above	 door,	 you	will	 be	 a	 buddha.	No	 buddha	 has	 ever
suffered	from	any	madness,	any	neurosis,	any	psychosis	--	nothing.
"WHEN	YOU	ATTAIN	THE	 INSIGHT	AS	ATTAINED	BY	THE	BUDDHA,
YOU
REALIZE	 THAT	 NO-MIND	 is	 BUDDHA	 AND	 BUDDHA	 is	 NO-MIND"	 --
they	 are	 synonymous	 --	 THAT	 NO-MIND,	 BUDDHA,	 SENTIENT	 BEINGS,
bodhi,	 AND	 klesa,	 ARE	 OF	 ONE	 AND	 THE	 SAME	 SUBSTANCE	WHILE
THEY	VARY	IN	NAMES.
Everything	 is	 made	 of	 the	 same	 stuff,	 the	 same	 existence,	 the	 same
consciousness	of	no-mind;	only	names	differ.	You	can	call	it	anything	--	nirvana;
you	can	call	it	salvation;	you	can	call	it	liberation.	But	these	are	different	names
of	 the	 same	 space	 which	 accurately	 described	 is	 just	 no-mind,	 or	 beyond	 the
mind.	You	appear	 in	a	space	which	has	no	limits,	no	boundaries,	and	suddenly
you	become	aware	that	your	being	has	been	here	since	eternity,	and	it	is	going	to
be	here	forever.
This	very	no-mind	is	the	buddha,	and	this	very	moment	is	the	lotus	paradise.	You
don't	have	to	go	anywhere.	You	have	to	just	sink	inwards	to	find	the	bottom	of
your	being.
"YOU	 SHOULD	 KNOW	 THAT	 YOUR	 OWN	 NO-MIND	 ESSENCE	 IS
NEITHER
SUBJECT	 TO	 ANNIHILATION	 NOR	 ETERNALLY	 SUBSISTING,	 IS
NEITHER
PURE	NOR	DEFILED."
It	 is	 so	 pure	 that	 you	 cannot	 even	 call	 it	 pure,	 because	 it	 is	 never	 defiled.
Anything	pure	can	be	defiled,	but	 it	 is	 so	pure	you	cannot	even	call	 it	pure.	 It
cannot	be	defiled,	 its	purity	 is	 absolute.	No	dust	 ever	gathers	on	 the	mirror	of
your	consciousness.
This	makes	a	tremendous	point.	The	sinner	and	the	saint	are	both	capable	to	go
into	 no-mind,	 because	 the	 sinner	 cannot	 defile	 his	 no-mind,	 the	 saint	 cannot
purify	it.	It	is	always	beyond	duality.
It	is	so	pure	and	so	innocent	--	available	to	the	sinner,	available	to	the	saint.	Both
have	to	go	beyond	their	mind.	The	sinner	has	to	go	beyond	the	sinning	mind,	and
the	 saint	 has	 to	 go	 beyond	 the	 saintly	mind.	 But	 both	 have	 to	 go	 beyond	 the
mind,	and	they	reach	to	the	same	space	of	absolute	purity.	It	is	transcendental	to
all	 dualities;	 it	 simply	 is.	You	 cannot	 name	 it,	 you	 cannot	 utter	 a	 single	word
about	it.
One	 of	 the	 most	 important	 logicians	 of	 the	 West,	 Ludwig	 Wittgenstein,	 has
written	 in	 his	 great	 work,	 TRACTATUS	 LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS...	 he
wrote	in	a	very	strange	and	special	style,	the	style	that	has	been	used	in	the	Zen
people's	 sutras.	He	would	 only	write	 in	 small	 stanzas	 and	put	 numbers.	Every
stanza,	 every	 line	 was	 complete	 in	 itself,	 made	 a	 complete	 statement.	 So	 he
would	number	--	not	the	pages,	but	he	would	number	the	first	sutra,	the	second
sutra,	the	third	sutra,	the	fourth	sutra	...
One	of	the	maxims	--	sutra	means	maxim,	the	smallest	condensed	statement	--	I
came	across	when	I	was	a	student	says:	That	which	cannot	be	said	should	not	be
said.	A	 complete	 statement	 --	 if	 you	 cannot	 say	 anything	 about	 no-mind,	 then
please	don't	 say	 anything,	 because	whatever	you	 say	will	 be	wrong.	Whatever
you	say	will	not	be	exactly	what	you	wanted	to	say.	So	please	don't	say	anything
about	that	which	is	inexpressible.
I	wrote	a	letter	to	him,	but	he	had	died.	His	friend	sent	me	the	reply:	"If	he	was
alive	 he	would	 have	 accepted	 your	 amendment.	He	was	 a	man	 of	 tremendous
honesty	and	he	would	not	have	thought	that	you	were	criticizing	him."
I	was	not	criticizing.	I	was	simply	saying	to	him,	"You	are	saying,	`That	which
cannot	be	said	should	not	be	said,'	but	you	have	said	something	about	it.	Remove
this	maxim.	Even	 to	say	 this	much	 is	 saying	something.	That	which	cannot	be
said	should	not	be	said	--	you	have	said	something	about	it."	Nothing	can	be	said
about	the	no-mind,	including	this	sentence:	Nothing	can	be	said	about	no-mind.
It	 is	 a	 pure	 experience	 --	 you	 can	 experience	 it.	You	 can	 have	 it,	 you	 already
have	it.	You	can	dance	with	ecstasy	when	you	come	to	recognize	that	it	has	been
always	 there,	 you	 just	 never	 looked	 at	 it.	 You	 were	 so	 occupied	 outside,	 so
involved	in	trivia	that	the	essential	got	lost.	But	it	is	there	waiting.
"IT	REMAINS	PERFECTLY	UNDISTURBED	AND	SELF-SUFFICIENT.	THE
SAME
IS	SO	WITH	THE	WISE	AND	THE	IGNORANT."
They	 are	 made	 of	 the	 same	 stuff:	 no-mind	 --	 the	 wise	 and	 the	 ignorant.	 The
ignorant	have	not	to	become	wise	before	they	enter	into	no-mind.	They	can	enter
into	no-mind	from	every	place	they	are	--	the	sinner,	the	ignorant,	the	wise,	the
knowledgeable.	Wherever	you	are,	your	distance	from	no-mind	is	the	same.
This	is	a	grand	rebellion	against	all	religions.	It	does	not	say	the	sinner	has	first
to	become	a	 saint,	 the	 immoral	 has	 first	 to	become	a	moral	 person.	Zen	gives
you	a	tremendous	insight	that	wherever	you	are,	whoever	you	are,	whatever	your
actions,	nothing	can	defile,	nothing	can	make	it	disturbed.	From	your	very	space
you	move	directly	 into	 no-mind.	From	different	 spaces	 you	move	 to	 the	 same
center,	and	you	will	find	your	being	absolutely	clean,	utterly	clean.	It	has	never
been	otherwise.
"YOUR	NO-MIND	ESSENCE	IS	NOT	LIMITED	IN	ITS	WORKING,	AND	IS
NOT
INCLUDED	 IN	 THE	 CATEGORY	 OF	 MIND,	 CONSCIOUSNESS,	 OR
THOUGHT.
"THE	THREE	WORLDS	OF	DESIRE,	 FORM,	AND	NO-FORM,	AND	THE
SIX
PATHS	 OF	 EXISTENCE	 ARE	 NO	 MORE	 THAN	 MANIFESTATIONS	 OF
YOUR
MIND	ITSELF."
All	 your	 so-called	 disciplines,	 methods,	 yoga	 ...	 all	 your	 prayers,	 are	 just
gimmicks,	projections	of	your	own	mind.	Drop	everything!
I	am	reminded	of	a	great	Catholic	bishop	....
He	had	a	beautiful	parrot	who	used	 to	 recite	 the	Catholic	prayer	completely.	 It
was	 a	 precious	 parrot.	 The	 parrot	 was	 shown	 to	 all	 the	 guests,	 and	 he	would
recite	the	whole	Catholic	prayer.	And	he	was	such	a	pious,	saintly	parrot.	He	was
trained	 --	 he	 used	 to	 have	 a	 rosary	 in	 one	 hand,	 and	 he	would	 go	 on	 saying,
"Alleluia,	Alleluia!"	And	everybody	was	surprised	that	such	a	pious	parrot	...
But	he	looked	very	sad,	as	every	saint	always	looks	--	you	cannot	become	pious
without	becoming	sad.	Because	he	was	 looking	so	sad,	 the	bishop	was	always
worried	what	to	do	about	it,	because	otherwise	he	was	absolutely	normal.
One	day	he	went	to	see	one	of	the	members	of	his	congregation,	a	woman,	who
had	got	a	parrot	just	that	day.	And	the	parrot	owner	had	told	her,	"I	don't	want	to
sell	this	parrot	to	you.	You	can	take	any	other	parrot.	We	have	got	many	in	our
shop."	 But	 she	 became	 so	 interested	 in	 the	 parrot	 --	 it	 was	 a	 very	 beautiful
specimen.
She	said,	"I	will	pay	anything,	but	only	for	this	parrot."
The	man	said,	"I	have	to	tell	you	that	this	parrot	comes	from	a	very	ugly	place.
He	used	 to	be	 in	a	whorehouse	so	he	uses	 four-letter	words.	That	 is	why	I	am
trying	to	prevent	you	from	taking	it."
But	 the	 lady	 said,	 "I	 will	 teach	 him,	 but	 I	 will	 take	 it."	 He	 was	 so	 beautiful
looking	that	she	thought,	"If	he	can	speak	four-letter	words,	what	is	the	problem?
Just	a	little	training	will	be	needed."	But	it	was	simply	impossible.	He	would	say
anything	 in	 front	 of	 the	 guests,	 in	 front	 of	 the	 neighbors.	 He	 would	 shout
anything	--	all	kinds	of	obscene	words.
So	when	the	bishop	came	for	his	weekly	visit,	she	told	him	her	misery,	"What	to
do?	I	have	purchased	this	parrot	...	so	beautiful."
The	 bishop	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 worried.	 I	 have	 a	 very	 pious,	 saintly	 parrot,	 who
continuously	goes	on	moving	his	beads	on	 the	 rosary,	has	 the	complete	prayer
and	recites	 it	 so	perfectly.	 I	will	 take	your	parrot	and	keep	 this	parrot	with	my
parrot	in	the	same	cage.
And	he	is	such	a	saintly	person	he	will	teach	this	parrot."	So	he	took	the	parrot.
He	put	the	parrot	in	the	same	cage,	and	he	went	in.	As	he	came	out,	he	could	not
believe	his	eyes.	The	saintly	parrot	had	dropped	his	rosary	and	was	sitting	very
close	to	the	other	parrot.	And	the	bishop	said,	"What	happened?	Why	have	you
dropped	your	rosary?	And	why	are	you	not	reciting	Ave	Maria	or	Alleluia?"
The	parrot	said,	"I	was	praying	for	a	woman,	and	I	have	got	it.	No	more	rosary,
no	more	prayer.	I	have	got	such	a	beautiful	girlfriend.	You	get	lost!"
Your	 so-called	 saints	and	your	 so-called	 sinners	are	not	much	different	 --	only
their	 masks	 are	 different.	 And	 my	 experience	 is	 that	 your	 sinners	 are	 more
innocent	than	your	saints.	I	have	seen	criminals,	I	have	seen	murderers.	I	used	to
visit	 the	 jails,	and	 then	I	was	 finally	 jailed	 in	America.	 I	 lived	as	an	 insider	 in
five	jails,	and	I	found	such	beautiful	human	beings,	far	more	beautiful	than	the
politicians,	than	the	priests	--	utterly	innocent	people.
Zen	gives	 equal	 opportunity	 to	 sinners	 and	 saints,	 to	 the	good	 and	 to	 the	bad,
because	 its	 understanding	 is	 very	 clear.	 Its	 insight	 is	 so	 deep	 that	 the	 distance
from	no-mind	is	equal.
So	 it	does	not	matter	what	kind	of	 things	you	have	been	 involved	 in.	Whether
you	were	doing	things	which	people	think	are	wrong,	or	whether	you	were	doing
things	which	 people	 think	 are	 right	 --	 it	 does	 not	matter!	Those	were	 all	 your
mind	phenomena.	Just	go	beyond	the	mind.	When	the	saint	drops	his	mind,	and
the	 sinner	 drops	 his	 mind,	 they	 both	 enter	 into	 the	 same	 space,	 the	 same
buddhahood.
This	is	the	great	rebellion	of	Zen.	And	this	gives	you	a	totally	different	kind	of
religiousness.	This	makes	you	dance,	 live	with	 totality	with	no	 inhibition,	with
no	 guilt,	 because	 wherever	 you	 are,	 the	 moment	 you	 want	 to	 enter	 into	 your
eternal	life,	you	can	take	a	jump.	From	any	point	in	existence,	from	any	kind	of
personality,	you	can	drop	that	personality	and	move	into	utter	silence.
No	religion	has	 that	amount	of	guts;	no	 religion	has	 that	amount	of	courage	 --
Zen	is	really	daring!	It	belongs	only	to	the	lions,	not	to	the	sheep	of	Jesus	Christ.
"THEY	ARE	ALL	LIKE	THE	MOON	REFLECTED	IN	WATER	OR	IMAGES
IN	THE
MIRROR."
If	a	saint	comes	in	front	of	a	mirror,	the	mirror	does	not	bother	"that	you	are	a
saint."	A	sinner	comes	--	the	mirror	makes	no	discrimination.	The	sinner	is	equal
to	the	saint,	to	the	idiot,	to	the	so-called	great	scholar.
The	mirror	mirrors	equally.
The	no-mind	is	your	mirror.
In	front	of	the	mirror	everyone	is	equal.
Zen	gives	you	a	 totally	new	concept	of	spiritual	communism.	All	 religions	are
against	communism,	only	Zen	has	the	capacity	to	absorb	communism.
You	may	be	an	atheist,	it	does	not	matter.
You	may	be	a	theist,	it	does	not	matter.
The	distance	from	no-mind	is	equal.
So	I	never	ask	you	who	you	are.	Whether	you	are	an	atheist,	whether	you	are	a
theist	--	it	is	your	business.	Whether	you	are	a	communist	or	an	anarchist	--	it	is
your	business.
Whether	you	are	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan,	it	does	not	matter.
What	matters	 to	me	 is	 whatever	 kind	 of	mind	 you	 have	make	 it	 the	 jumping
board	 and	 jump	 into	 the	 no-mind.	 No-mind	 knows	 no	 differences,	 it	 is	 one
cosmic	whole.	And	to	me,	the	man	of	no-mind	is	the	only	religious	man.	All	else
is	just	pseudo.
He	is	saying,	"THEY	ARE	ALL	LIKE	THE	MOON	REFLECTED	IN	WATER
OR
IMAGES	IN	THE	MIRROR.	HOW	CAN	WE	SPEAK	OF	THEM	AS	BEING
BORN
OR	AS	PASSING	AWAY?"
You	are	never	born,	you	have	always	been	here.	You	have	always	been	 in	 the
space,	 in	the	time,	here	and	now;	you	will	never	die.	Death	and	birth,	are	both
superficial	episodes	in	a	long	eternal	life	--	small	things;	they	don't	matter.
"WHEN	 YOU	 COME	 TO	 THIS	 UNDERSTANDING	 YOU	 WILL	 BE
FURNISHED
WITH	ALL	THE	THINGS	YOU	ARE	IN	NEED	OF."
I	have	been	 telling	you	 again	 and	 again	 that	 you	don't	 need	 any	morality,	 you
don't	 need	 any	 discipline.	 But	 if	 you	 come	 to	 the	 no-mind,	 all	 that	 you	 ever
needed	will	be	furnished.	You	will	become	immensely	compassionate.	You	will
have	the	grace	which	is	almost	not	of	this	world.	You	will	have	love	without	any
conditions.	You	will	share	your	joy,	your	blessings,	to	all	and	sundry	--	not	only
to	 friends,	 but	 also	 to	 strangers.	You	will	 become	 just	 like	 a	 rain	 cloud	which
goes	 on	 showering	without	 bothering	whether	 it	 falls	 on	 the	 stones,	 or	 on	 the
road,	or	on	the	roof,	or	in	the	field,	or	in	the	garden.	When	you	have	abundance,
who	 cares?	You	 simply	go	on	 sharing.	Anybody	who	 is	 receptive	will	 take	 it,
who	is	not	receptive	will	not	take	it.	But	that	is	not	your	problem.
A	buddha	is	choicelessly	good.	It	is	not	that	he	is	practicing	a	certain	morality,
following	certain	commandments.	It	is	simply	that	he	cannot	do	anything	wrong.
His	consciousness,	his	light	is	so	clear	that	he	can	see	exactly	what	is	good.	He
knows	the	good	is	a	reward	in	itself,	not	that	you	will	have	a	reward	in	heaven.
And	 the	 bad	 is	 a	 punishment	 in	 itself,	 not	 that	 you	will	 have	 a	 punishment	 in
hell.	So	there	is	no	heaven,	no	hell.
Every	action	brings	its	 joy	or	its	misery.	A	man	with	clear	eyes	can	see.	And	I
don't	think	anybody	is	going	to	choose	misery,	is	going	to	choose	pathology,	is
going	to	choose	something	ugly	and	obscene.	If	you	have	eyes,	you	will	choose	-
-	 the	 most	 beautiful,	 the	 most	 glorious,	 the	 most	 majestic.	 It	 will	 come
spontaneously.
Gyodai	wrote	a	haiku:
FOR	MY	SAKE,
DO	NOT	LIGHT	THE	LAMP	YET,
THIS	EVENING	OF	SPRING.
These	small	haikus	are	as	beautiful	as	small	dewdrops	on	the	lotus	leaves	in	the
early	morning	sun.	They	shine	more	than	diamonds,	more	than	pearls.
"For	my	sake	..."	It	is	a	beautiful	evening	of	spring.	Slowly,	slowly	the	darkness
is	coming.	The	sun	is	setting,	the	birds	are	returning	to	their	trees.	The	fragrance
of	the	flowers	is	all	around.	The	flowers	of	the	night	are	opening	their	petals.
Darkness	 has	 its	 own	 beauty;	 it	 is	 very	 clean,	 and	 it	 makes	 every	 separation
disappear.
Everything	becomes	one.	Darkness	has	a	depth	which	light	misses.	Darkness	has
a	silence	which	light	does	not	have.
So	when	the	darkness	is	descending,	and	he	can	smell	the	night	flowers	opening,
and	 the	birds	coming	back	 to	 the	 trees	making	beautiful	 sounds,	he	 says,	 "For
my	sake,	do	not	light	the	lamp	yet"	--	don't	disturb	this	beautiful	spring	evening	-
-	 "this	 evening	 of	 spring."	Let	me	 rest,	 let	me	watch	 this	 transformation	 from
light	into	darkness.
Light	 is	 very	 superficial,	 darkness	 has	 depth.	 Light	 comes	 and	 goes,	 darkness
remains.
You	don't	have	to	bring	it	in;	you	can't	push	it	out.	You	cannot	do	anything	with
darkness	directly,	you	can	do	only	something	with	the	light.	You	bring	the	light
in	--	darkness	disappears.	You	take	the	light	out	--	darkness	comes	in.	In	fact	it
never	went	 anywhere;	 it	was	 there,	 the	 light	 just	 covered	 it.	When	 the	 light	 is
gone,	darkness	is	left.
Light	is	momentary	because	it	depends	on	fuel.	And	fuel	--	even	the	fuel	of	the
sun	one	day	is	going	to	be	finished,	because	it	is	giving	so	much	light,	radiating
every	moment.	It	is	becoming	poorer	every	moment.	Scientists	think	that	it	will
take	at	least	four	million	years	for	the	sun	to	die.	But	in	the	eternity	of	existence,
four	million	years	don't	matter.
Every	day	some	suns	are	exhausted,	become	old,	dead,	finished.	The	physicists
say	they	enter	into	black	holes,	they	disappear.	And	every	moment,	as	suns	are
disappearing,	 new	 suns	 are	 being	 born.	 Science	 has	 not	 yet	 discovered	 white
holes.	 I	 think	 if	 there	are	black	holes	 there	must	be	white	holes.	 If	black	holes
pull	stars	and	planets	and	they	disappear,	they	die,	then	perhaps	on	the	other	side
is	a	white	hole	from	which	after	some	time	of	rest
--	maybe	nine	months	in	the	womb	--	they	come	out,	again	born.
But	 nothing	 in	 existence	 dies.	 Everything	 goes	 on,	 and	 everything	 gets	 tired.
There	is	a	moment	to	live	and	there	is	a	moment	to	die.	But	your	essential	being
simply	goes	from	action	to	no-action.	And	again	when	it	has	gathered	energy,	it
is	rejuvenated,	it	becomes	fresh;	it	comes	back	again	from	a	new	womb.
Only	 a	 buddha	never	 comes	 back.	His	 death	 is	 final	 because	 he	 has	 no	 desire
left.	 It	 is	 the	desiring	mind	 that	 takes	 you	 into	 another	womb.	Buddha,	 a	man
who	has	 realized	his	no-mind,	 is	completely	empty	of	desires,	ambitions.	Now
there	is	no	need	for	him	to	enter	into	another	womb	and	suffer	nine	months	in	a
prison.	Then	getting	out	of	the	prison	is	not	a	pleasure	either.	And	the	whole	life
again	 starts,	 the	 whole	 round.	 The	 same	 journey,	 the	 same	 youth,	 the	 same
romances,	the	same	failures,	the	same	frustrations	...	and	the	old	age,	and	the	fear
of	death.
The	interest	of	Zen	is	how	to	help	you	to	get	rid	of	this	circle	of	birth	and	death.
The	 only	way	 is	 going	 beyond	 the	mind.	 It	 is	 the	mind	 that	 contains	 all	 your
ambitions,	desires,	tensions,	anguishes,	anxieties,	angst.	If	you	get	out	of	it,	you
are	 the	awakened	one.	You	have	come	 to	 the	point	 from	where	you	can	move
into	the	cosmos	directly.	You	become	part	of	the	whole,	or	more	accurately,	you
become	the	whole.
Question	3
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
IN	HIS	POEM,	"SONG	OF	MYSELF,"	WALT	WHITMAN	WRITES:
"YOU	SHALL	POSSESS	THE	GOOD	OF	THE	EARTH	AND	SUN	 ...	YOU
SHALL
NO	LONGER	TAKE	THINGS	AT	SECOND	OR	THIRD	HAND,	NOR	LOOK
THROUGH	THE	EYES	OF	THE	DEAD,	NOR	FEED	ON	THE	SPECTERS	IN
BOOKS
....
"THERE	WAS	NEVER	ANY	MORE	 INCEPTION	 THAN	THERE	 IS	NOW,
NOR
ANY	MORE	YOUTH	OR	AGE	THAN	THERE	IS	NOW,	AND	THERE	WILL
NEVER
BE	ANY	MORE	PERFECTION	THAN	THERE	IS	NOW,	NOR	ANY	MORE
HEAVEN
OR	HELL	THAN	THERE	IS	NOW."
BELOVED	MASTER,	FROM	THE	DEIFICATION	OF	A	FICTION	TO	THE
CELEBRATION	 OF	 ONE'S	 SELF	 --	 IS	 THIS	 NOT	 THE	 ESSENTIAL
DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN	THE	OLD	AND	THE	NEW	MAN?
Maneesha,	 it	 is	 exactly	 the	difference	between	 the	old	man	who	 lived	under	 a
slavery,	and	 the	new	man	who	would	have	come	out	of	 the	slavery	of	God,	of
churches,	of	religions.
The	 old	 man	 never	 really	 lived,	 he	 followed	 borrowed	 knowledge.	 He	 was
always	dictated	to,	dragged	from	this	point	to	that	point.	The	new	man	will	live
out	of	freedom,	spontaneity,	awareness.	He	will	not	have	any	scriptures,	he	will
not	have	any	dictators,	he	will	not	have	any	gods.	He	will	be	himself	the	ultimate
consciousness.	This	is	real	growth.
And	it	is	time,	the	right	time!	We	have	lived	in	slavery	enough.	Now	drop	it	...in
toto!
Move	into	an	open	sky.	Open	your	wings,	the	whole	existence	belongs	to	you.
The	new	man	is	going	to	be	an	emperor,	in	the	sense	that	he	will	be	the	master
himself.
He	will	not	allow	any	other	master.	He	will	not	allow	any	other	slavery.	He	will
not	allow	nations,	he	will	not	allow	races,	he	will	not	allow	caste	systems.	He
will	not	allow	all	kinds	of	religions	and	their	superstitions.	The	new	man	will	be
absolutely	clean	and	fresh	and	innocent	like	a	child.	And	out	of	that	innocence
arises	a	divine	being,	the	buddha.
The	buddha	is	the	new	man.
It	is	time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh.
Put	the	light	on!
Jerry	 and	 Judy	 Jam	 are	 sitting	 at	 breakfast	 one	morning	when	 Judy	 sighs	 and
puts	down	her	toast.
"Darling,"	 she	 says,	 "I	 have	 been	 thinking	 about	 that	 time	 when	 you	 were
shipwrecked.
All	the	newspapers	called	you	a	hero	because	you	survived	alone	in	the	Indian
Ocean	for	three	months	on	a	life	raft.
"And	yet	I	feel,	darling,"	continues	Judy,	"that	you	have	been	hiding	something
from	me	ever	since.	What	happened?"
"Well,	 dear,"	 replies	 Jerry,	 trying	 not	 to	 look	 like	Mickey	Mouse,	 "since	 you
have	been	so	wonderful	to	me,	I	must	confess	I	am	hiding	something	from	you!
There	was	a	lovely	girl	on	that	raft	with	me.	We	were	on	that	ship	together	when
it	sank.	We	were	the	only	ones	that	survived."
"A-ha!"	cries	Judy.
"It	was	not	like	that,	dear,"	explains	Jerry.	"It	is	true,	she	was	a	prostitute,	but	she
saved	my	life!	We	had	no	food,	no	water	--	all	we	had	was	ourselves	and	our	will
to	survive."
"I	see,"	snaps	Judy.	"So	what	did	you	do?"
Jerry	 takes	 a	 long	 drink	 from	 his	 coffee	 cup	 and	 continues.	 "You	 have	 to
understand	the	conditions	out	there,	dear.	We	had	no	food,	no	water.	All	we	had
was	our	own	naked	bodies."
"You	have	already	told	me	that!"	interrupts	Judy,	sharply.
"We	held	each	other	tight,"	continues	Jerry.	"All	we	had	was	our	bodies	--	naked
under	the	burning	sun."
Judy	does	not	say	a	word.	She	just	stares	at	him	as	though	he	is	a	snake.
"All	 right!	All	 right!"	 cries	 Jerry,	 as	 he	 cracks	 under	 the	 strain.	 "You	want	 to
know	the	truth?	We	fucked!	Yes!	We	screwed	all	the	time!	If	it	had	not	been	for
that	wonderful	 girl	 I	would	 never	 have	 survived!	Believe	me	 --	 she	 saved	my
life!"
Slowly,	Judy	pours	herself	another	cup	of	coffee.	"I	don't	like	it,"	she	says.	"But	I
suppose	I	will	have	 to	 live	with	 it.	But	 just	one	 thing.	Have	you	ever	seen	her
again?"
"Just	once,	dear,"	replies	Jerry.	"I	met	her	in	Las	Vegas	last	summer	at	our	sales
convention."
"And	what	was	she	doing?"	snaps	Judy,	suspiciously.
"The	same	thing,	dear,"	replies	Jerry.	"Still	saving	lives!"
On	the	Buckingham	Palace	lawn	one	afternoon,	Prince	Edward	--	the	rather	dim
son	of	Queen	Elizabeth	--	is	sitting	reading	PLAYBOY	magazine.	He	looks	up	at
his	brother,	Prince	Andrew,	and	asks,	"Hey,	Andy,	you've	got	brains:	 tell	me	--
what	is	a	fox	pass?"
Andrew	thinks	for	a	moment,	and	then	says,	"Oh,	you	mean,	faux	pas!	That's	a
French	expression	which	means	a	social	blunder."
Edward	looks	at	Andrew	blankly.	"What	do	you	mean,	à	social	blunder'?"	asks
the	dim	prince.	"Give	me	an	example."
"Well,"	explains	Prince	Andrew,	"remember	last	Sunday	when	the	Archbishop	of
Canterbury	came	to	lunch,	and	mother	took	him	for	a	walk	in	the	rose	garden?"
"Yes,	I	remember,"	says	Edward.	"What	about	it?"
"Just	 listen,"	 continues	Andrew.	 "Remember	 the	 archbishop	pricked	his	 thumb
on	a	thorn?	It	was	bleeding	a	lot,	so	mother	brought	him	into	the	palace.	They
went	 into	 the	 bathroom	 together,	 and	 stayed	 there	 for	 a	 long	 time.	And	when
they	came	out,	we	all	went	for	lunch.	Do	you	remember	all	that,	Edward?"
"Sure,	I	remember,"	replies	Edward.
"Now,"	continues	Andrew,	"do	you	remember,	as	I	was	just	passing	the	pudding
to	 you,	 mother	 said,	 Àrchbishop,	 is	 your	 prick	 still	 throbbing?'	 And	 then	 the
archbishop	replied,
`No,	Your	Majesty,	 the	 swelling	 has	 gone	 down	 since	 you	massaged	 it	 in	 the
bathroom.'
"And	then	the	pudding	flew	out	of	my	hands	and	spattered	all	over	everybody,
and	you	shouted	out,	`Shit!'	Do	you	remember	all	that?"
"Yes,	I	remember!"	cries	Edward,	excitedly.
"Well,"	says	Prince	Andrew,	"when	you	shouted	`shit'	--	that	was	a	faux	pas!"
One	 afternoon	on	 the	 little	Greek	 island	 of	Crete,	 the	 local	 theatrical	 group	 is
performing	the	famous	Greek	drama,	"Eat-a-Puss	Rex."	Young	Spiro	Sphincter,
an	amateur	Greek	actor,	gets	a	small	part	in	the	play.	He	only	has	to	come	onto
the	stage,	approach	a	beautiful	girl	lying	on	a	bed,	and	say	the	words:	"I	would
love	to	kiss	your	lips	and	steal	away!"
But	on	the	opening	night	Sphincter	is	really	nervous.	He	comes	onto	the	stage,
his	knees	shaking,	he	stumbles	over	to	the	girl	in	the	bed,	and	stutters,	"I	would
love	to	kiss	your	...
I	would	love	to	kiss	your	..."	but	his	mind	goes	blank.
He	tries	again.
"I	would	love	to	kiss	your	..."
Suddenly,	someone	in	the	back	jumps	up	and	shouts	out,	"Pussy!"
Instantly,	Old	Mrs.	Acreepolis,	 sitting	 in	 the	audience,	has	a	 severe	 stroke	and
falls	over	dead.
The	 next	 day	 at	 her	 funeral,	 in	 The	 Holy	 Orthodox	 Church	 of	 the	 Blessed
Bleeding	Virgin,	Bishop	Cretin,	who	has	now	got	only	three	old	ladies	left	in	his
flock,	swears	revenge!
"We	have	got	to	stamp	out	this	kind	of	filth!"	cries	Cretin.	"I	am	going	to	put	a
stop	to	this	moral	decay!"
So	 that	 evening	 at	 the	 theater,	 Cretin	 is	 sitting	 at	 the	 side	 of	 the	 stage	with	 a
loaded	shotgun	on	his	knee	and	a	stick	of	dynamite	in	his	pocket,	looking	mean
and	menacing.
Sure	 enough,	 in	 the	 second	 act	 of	 the	 play,	 the	 young	 actor	 Sphincter	 comes
bounding	onto	the	stage,	stumbles	over	to	the	girl	in	the	bed,	and	announces,	"I
am	going	 to	kiss	your	 ...	 I	 am	going	 to	kiss	your	 ..."	But	 again	his	mind	goes
blank.
There	 is	 a	 ripple	 of	 light	 laughter	 from	 the	 audience,	 and	 immediately	Bishop
Cretin	jumps	to	his	feet	and	cocks	his	gun.
"All	right,	everybody,"	screams	Cretin,	"I	will	blow	the	head	off	the	first	son-of-
a-bitch	who	says	`pussy'!"
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
(Gibberish)
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Be	silent,	and	close	your	eyes.	Feel	your	bodies	completely	frozen.	This	 is	 the
right	moment	for	turning	inwards.
Gather	all	your	energy,	your	total	consciousness,	and	rush	towards	the	center	of
your	being	which	is	just	below	the	navel,	inside.	Two	inches	below	the	navel	....
Rush	inside	with	an	urgency	as	if	this	is	the	last	moment	of	your	life.	Unless	you
have	that	urgency	and	intensity,	you	can	never	reach	to	the	center.
It	 is	not	far	away,	it	 is	very	close;	 it	only	needs	intensity	and	a	deep	feeling	of
urgency.
Faster	and	faster	...
Deeper	and	deeper	...
As	you	are	coming	closer	to	your	center,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you	like
soft	rain.
You	can	feel	the	coolness	of	it.
A	little	more	....
And	 suddenly	 you	 find	 immense	 peace	 arising	 from	 the	 very	 center	 of	 your
being,	surrounding	you	like	incense.
Just	a	little	more	...
And	you	will	start	feeling	immensely	calm,	quiet,	tranquil,	blissful.	Just	one	step
and	you	are	at	 the	center.	The	moment	you	 reach	 to	 the	center	you	are	almost
drunk	by	the	divine.
You	disappear.
In	place	of	you,	there	is	sitting	the	image,	the	symbol	of	the	Eastern	awareness,
enlightenment,	Gautam	the	Buddha.
It	is	your	very	nature.
Everybody	is	by	his	very	birth	a	Gautam	Buddha.
Very	few	people	go	deep	enough	to	recognize	it;	they	remain	outside	their	whole
life.
You	are	the	most	fortunate	people	on	the	earth,	who	are	trying	to	reach	to	your
innermost	nature.
Being	the	buddha	simply	means	being	alert,	aware,	conscious.	It	means	you	have
become	only	a	witness.
This	word	`witness'	has	to	be	remembered,	because	this	is	the	only	quality	that
buddha	is	made	of.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body;	witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind	--	this	is	the
way	to	transcend	body	and	mind.
Witness,	finally,	that	you	are	only	a	witness.
This	is	how	one	becomes	a	Gautam	Buddha,	the	highest	peak	of	consciousness
ever	achieved.
A	great	ecstasy	arises	in	you	--	you	have	never	known	it	before.	You	are	feeling
in	 tune	 with	 the	 universe;	 your	 heartbeat	 has	 become	 harmonious	 with	 the
heartbeat	of	existence.
To	make	this	witness	deeper	and	more	clear	...
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Relax	...	but	go	on	remembering	only	one	thing	--	that	you	are	a	witness,	nothing
else.
This	is	your	transcendence.
And	as	your	witnessing	deepens,	you	start	melting	into	the	universe	as	ice	melts
into	the	ocean.
Gautama	the	Buddha	Auditorium	is	turning	into	an	ocean	of	consciousness	--	ten
thousand	buddhas	have	become	one	oceanic	consciousness.	We	are	separate	on
the	periphery,	but	we	are	one	at	the	center.	The	center	is	the	center	of	everyone.
At	 this	moment,	 rejoice	 ...	and	gather	all	 those	 fragrances	 that	are	surrounding
you	 --	 the	 blissfulness,	 the	 ecstasy.	 Drink	 more	 and	 more	 from	 this	 eternal
current	 of	 your	 life.	And	persuade	 the	 buddha	 to	 come	with	 you	 --	 he	 is	 your
nature,	he	has	to	come	with	you.	He	has	to	become	your	very	day-to-day	life;	he
has	 to	express	his	grace	 in	your	actions,	 in	your	words,	 in	your	silences	of	 the
heart.
That	day,	you	will	feel	the	most	blessed	person	in	existence	when	you	disappear
and	only	buddha	remains.
These	I	have	called	the	three	steps	of	enlightenment:
The	 first	 step,	 the	 buddha	 comes	 behind	 you	 as	 a	 presence	 --	 very	 solid,	 very
tangible,	you	can	feel	it.	You	can	feel	its	fragrance,	you	can	feel	its	power;	it	fills
you	with	great	cheerfulness.
The	 second	 step,	 the	 buddha	 comes	 in	 front	 of	 you;	 you	 become	 the	 shadow.
And	slowly,	slowly	the	shadow	starts	disappearing.
The	third	step,	you	are	no	more.	Not	even	a	shadow	is	left,	only	buddha	remains
--	 a	 transparent	 consciousness,	 an	 eternal	 life.	 Those	 who	 come	 to	 this
experience	are	the	real	people	who	can	celebrate	life.
I	celebrate	myself.
And	I	want	you	all	to	celebrate	yourself.
Become	a	dance,	become	a	song.
Become	a	lotus,	become	a	spring.
There	is	no	religion	and	there	is	no	God	to	prohibit	you	--	you	are	free	from	all
superstitions,	you	are	free	from	all	God-oriented	theologies,	you	are	free	from	all
rubbish	that	everybody	in	the	world	is	carrying	within	himself.	Throw	it	out	so
that	your	inner	world	is	completely	clean	and	ready	to	welcome	the	buddha.
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Now	 come	 back.	But	 come	 back	 as	 a	 buddha,	with	 the	 same	 grace,	 the	 same
silence,	the	same	peace,	the	same	blissfulness.	Sit	down	for	a	few	moments	just
to	 recollect	 the	 golden	 path	 that	 you	 moved	 on,	 the	 immense	 opening	 that
happened	at	your	very	center.
You	found	yourself	so	close	to	existence	that	it	started	flowing	in	you.	Its	dance
became	your	dance;	 its	 celebration	became	your	 celebration.	 Its	 immensity,	 its
grandeur,	its	splendor,	became	your	splendor.
And	see,	just	behind	you	is	the	buddha,	with	all	its	transparency	...	utter	silence
....
This	is	the	first	step.
Soon	you	will	be	able	to	take	the	second	step.	You	will	become	the	shadow,	and
buddha	will	become	almost	your	very	heart,	your	very	heartbeat.
At	the	third	and	final	step	you	will	not	be	any	more.	You	will	be	absent,	and	life
will	be	present.
Then	begins	the	celebration.
Unless	 life	 is	 a	 celebration	 you	 have	 lived	 in	 vain.	 Unless	 life	 turns	 into	 a
Gautam	Buddha	you	have	been	wasting	a	tremendous	opportunity	given	to	you
by	existence.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
I	Celebrate	Myself:	God	Is	No	Where,	Life	Is	Now	Here
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Ringing	bells	in	your	heart
14	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902145
ShortTitle:
CELEBR02
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
174
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
WHEN	DAITEN	FIRST	CAME	TO	SEKITO,	 THE	MASTER	ASKED	HIM,
"WHAT
IS	YOUR	NO-MIND?"
DAITEN	REPLIED,	"THE	ONE	WHO	SPEAKS	IS	IT."
AT	THIS,	SEKITO	SHOUTED,	"KWATZ!"	--	AND	LEFT.
TEN	 DAYS	 LATER,	 DAITEN	 AGAIN	 CAME	 TO	 SEKITO	 AND	 ASKED,
"THE
LAST	 ANSWER	 I	 SAID	 TO	 YOU	 WAS	 NOT	 NO-MIND.	 WHAT	 IS	 NO-
MIND?"
SEKITO	 SAID,	 "WITHOUT	 RAISING	 EYEBROWS	 OR	 MOVING
EYEBALLS,	BRING	YOUR	NO-MIND	HERE."
DAITEN	SAID,	"THERE	IS	NO	NO-MIND	TO	BE	BROUGHT."
SEKITO	SAID,	"BASICALLY,	NO-MIND	IS.	WHY	DO	YOU	SAY	NO-MIND
IS
NOT?	THAT	IS	THE	WRONG	STATEMENT."
AT	THIS,	DAITEN	WAS	GREATLY	ENLIGHTENED.
Friends,	first,	a	few	questions.
Question	1
The	first	question:
TO	US,	ARE	THE	WORDS	`GOD'	AND	`NO-MIND'	SYNONYMOUS?
No,	not	at	all.	God	can	never	be	synonymous	with	no-mind.	God	is	always	there,
far	away.	God	has	been	always	referred	to	by	the	word	`that'	--	invisible,	just	a
fiction.	No-mind	has	been	always	referred	to	as	this.
No-mind	is	your	reality,	your	ultimate	nature;	God	was	a	mind-created	lie.	No-
mind	 is	 your	 truth,	 your	 splendor,	 your	 very	 universe.	 They	 cannot	 be
synonymous.
God	does	not	exist;	no-mind	exists.
God	is	only	a	belief;	no-mind	is	an	experience.
God	has	been	the	cause	of	all	your	mental
sickness.
No-mind	is	pure	health,	wholeness.
The	moment	you	utter	the	word	`God'	you	immediately	start	thinking	of	him	as	a
person,	 as	 a	 creator.	 No-mind	 is	 not	 a	 person;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 your	 very
personality	disappears,	only	then	does	no-mind	start	blossoming.	No-mind	is	not
a	creator.	It	has	always	been	here,	and	will	remain	always	here;	it	is	always	now.
No-mind	is	your	eternity,	your	very	source	of	life.
God	 was	 just	 an	 excuse	 to	 exploit	 humanity	 and	 to	 keep	 humanity	 in	 a	 very
subtle	 and	 invisible	 bondage.	 God	 has	 been	 your	 prison;	 no-mind	 is	 your
freedom.	God	has	been	in	the	hands	of	the	priests,	and	the	priests	are	doing	the
ugliest	job	in	the	world,	because	their	whole	business	depends	on	a	lie.
No-mind	has	no	priests,	it	is	simply	there	inside	you.	And	once	you	experience
it,	suddenly	you	become	aware	that	no-mind	is	not	your	property,	it	is	not	your
monopoly.
The	first	experience	appears	to	be	that	it	is	your	no-mind,	but	soon	you	become
aware	 that	 the	 no-mind	 contains	 the	 whole	 universe,	 it	 contains	 the	 whole
existence.
God	has	always	been	an	outsider.	You	cannot	create	anything	if	you	are	not	an
outsider.
The	Hindus	refer	to	God	as	a	potter,	but	the	potter	has	to	be	outside	the	pot,	only
then	can	he	create	it.	If	he	is	inside	the	pot,	the	pot	is	already	created.	What	is	he
doing	 inside	 the	pot?	The	potter	has	 to	be	outside,	only	 then	can	he	create	 the
pot.	 All	 religions	 have	 the	 same	 idea	 in	 different	 symbols	 --	 but	 God	 is	 an
outsider.
If	 there	 is	 a	God	you	are	only	creatures,	 created	people.	Without	God	you	are
buddhas,	 uncreated	 people.	 God	 is	 the	 heaviest	 burden	 that	 man	 has	 been
carrying,	 and	 because	 of	 that	 there	 is	 no	 progress,	 there	 is	 no	 evolution.	 The
heavy	burden,	the	chains,	go	on	pulling	you	backwards.	They	don't	allow	you	to
move	faster	to	the	higher	peaks	of	evolution.
God	 has	 to	 be	 completely	 demolished	 from	 your	 minds.	 It	 is	 an	 absolute
necessity	 and	 urgency.	 Once	 you	 drop	 God	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 how	 many
other	 lies	have	simply	disappeared.	He	is	 the	source,	 the	foundation	of	all	 lies.
Just	watch	God	disappearing	and	you	will	see	heaven	has	disappeared,	hell	has
disappeared,	 fear	 has	 disappeared,	 dread,	 greed	 ...	 they	 are	 simply	 gone.	 God
was	the	source.	For	the	first	time	you	can	breathe	at	ease.
God	 was	 judgmental;	 no-mind	 has	 no	 judgment.	 God	 was	 continuously
condemning	you;	no-mind	 is	 a	blissful,	 ecstatic	 state.	God	 is	 just	programmed
into	your	mind.
In	 the	Soviet	Union	 they	program	differently.	They	program	no-God,	 but	 both
are	programs.	The	atheist	does	not	know	that	there	is	no	God,	nor	does	the	theist
know	that	there	is	a	God.	Both	are	belief	systems	contrary	to	each	other.	But	that
does	not	mean	that	one	is	right	and	the	other	is	wrong.	Both	cannot	be	right,	but
both	can	be	wrong	--	and	both	are	wrong.
An	authentic	man	will	not	accept	any	belief	system	either	of	atheist	or	of	theist.
He	 will	 explore	 on	 his	 own	 what	 the	 truth	 is;	 he	 will	 not	 like	 secondhand
knowledge.	You	never	think	about	it,	but	you	would	not	like	to	wear	somebody
else's	 shoes.	You	would	 not	 like	 to	wear	 somebody	 else's	 secondhand	 clothes.
But	 your	 whole	 mind	 is	 secondhand,	 and	 not	 only	 secondhand,	 in	 fact,	 your
mind	has	 been	going	 from	hand	 to	 hand	 to	 hand	 for	millions	 of	 years.	Living
with	this	mind	is	not	living	at	all.
Your	mind	is	borrowed	--	your	life	cannot	be	sincere	and	honest.	Your	mind	is
borrowed
--	your	morality	cannot	be	truthful,	it	will	only	be	hypocrisy.	Out	of	a	borrowed
mind,	how	can	you	manage	any	truthfulness,	any	sincerity,	any	authenticity,	any
originality?
God	is	the	oldest	lie,	and	no-mind	is	a	fresh	original	experience.
God	is	no	where;	no-mind	is	now	here.
No-mind	is	equivalent	to	life,	is	equivalent	to	existence.	God	is	against	life,	God
is	against	existence.
Can't	 you	 see	 all	 the	 religions	 are	 against	 life?	 They	 don't	 want	 you	 to	 live.
Anything	 that	makes	 you	 joyous,	 anything	 that	makes	 you	 really	 alive	 --	 they
start	crushing	it,	condemning	it	as	a	sin.
No-mind	 simply	 allows	 you	 to	 be	 natural.	 It	 gives	 you	 an	 opportunity	 to	 be
natural,	 to	 be	 relaxed,	 to	 be	 at	 ease	 --	 no	 guilt,	 no	 inhibition,	 no	 suppression.
Nature	is	accepted	in	its	totality,	it	becomes	your	very	heart,	your	very	being.
There	is	no	morality	from	outside.	That	outside	God	was	creating	all	things	from
outside,	 imposing	 on	 you.	 And	 everybody	 around	 the	 world	 is	 carrying
mountains	 of	 loads	 of	 beliefs,	 moralities,	 commandments.	 They	 are	 all
inventions	of	the	mind.
No-mind	 is	 not	 an	 invention	 of	 the	mind,	 it	 is	 a	 discovery.	You	 don't	 have	 to
invent	it,	it	is	already	here.	You	just	have	to	be	here	also	--	and	the	meeting,	and
the	transformation.
And	out	of	that	meeting	and	transformation	arises	a	totally	new	kind	of	morality,
a	new	kind	of	spontaneity,	a	new	kind	of	natural	grace,	a	new	love	for	existence,
a	new	reverence	for	all	that	is	here,	for	all	that	surrounds	you.
But	everything	that	comes	from	your	very	innermost	being	is	being	prevented	by
your	God,	by	your	priests,	by	your	scriptures.	They	are	your	enemies.	You	have
to	 take	 it	 very	 clearly.	Unless	 you	 understand	who	 are	 the	 obstacles,	 you	will
never	reach	to	no-mind.
God	is	the	biggest	obstacle	to	no-mind.
Because	 of	 God,	 the	 God-oriented	 religions	 could	 not	 manage	 any	 kind	 of
meditation,	because	meditation	goes	inwards,	and	God	is	outside.	And	because
God	is	outside,	all	the	God-oriented	religions	have	invented	prayers.
Prayers	 are	 for	 the	outside	God,	 and	nobody	has	 seen	 that	God.	A	 few	people
have	pretended	--	either	they	were	lying	or	they	were	hallucinating,	but	nobody
has	seen	God.
It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 unproved	 hypotheses.	 Don't	 carry	 with	 you	 unproved
hypotheses;	they	become	very	burdensome.	As	time	passes	they	go	on	gathering
more	weight.	The	weight	becomes	so	heavy	that	you	stop	growing.	There	is	no
space	left	for	you	to	grow.
All	kinds	of	rubbish,	furniture,	rotten	...	surrounds	you.	You	don't	have	any	space
to	move.
If	God	is	there	you	don't	have	any	empty	space,	you	don't	have	any	empty	sky.
You	 don't	 have	 any	 possibility	 to	 evolve	 --	 there	 is	 no	 space.	Where	 are	 you
going	to	evolve?	God	is	filling	every	place.	That's	why	religions	insist	that	he	is
omnipresent.	If	he	is	omnipresent,	then	there	is	no	space	left	for	you.	If	he	is	all
over,	then	wherever	you	go	you	will	be	struggling	against	God.
No-mind	 is	 a	 pure	 space.	 It	 simply	 gives	 you	 an	 opening	 which	 goes	 on
widening	as	your	experience	becomes	ripe.	Finally,	you	find	there	 is	only	pure
space	all	around	you,	infinite	and	eternal	--	and	you	can	open	your	wings.	It	 is
your	home	--	you	can	fly	as	high	as	you	want.	There	is	no	weight	dragging	you
downwards,	 dragging	 you	 backwards.	 The	 experience	 of	 weightlessness	 is
synonymous	with	no-mind.
A	strange	Sufi	story	is	....
A	Sufi	mystic	was	staying	in	a	disciple's	home.	But	he	used	to	pray	to	God	so
loudly	 that	 the	 neighbors	 started	 complaining.	 In	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 he
would	start	shouting	so	loudly	--	you	have	to	shout	loudly	if	you	want	to	reach	to
an	 invisible	 God.	 You	 don't	 know	 where	 he	 is.	 Nobody	 knows	 his	 telephone
number,	nobody	knows	his	address.
Blindly,	you	are	 just	 raising	your	hands	 towards	 the	 sky,	which	never	 answers
because	there	is	nobody	to	answer.
Looked	at	 scientifically,	people	who	are	praying	 to	God	are	 absolutely	 insane,
neurotics,	because	they	are	praying	to	somebody	who	is	not	there,	and	they	are
talking	to	somebody	who	has	never	been	there.	No	answer	ever	comes.
That	Sufi	used	to	shout	loudly.	Finally,	the	disciple	decided	that	it	was	better	to
keep	him	in	the	basement	at	night.	So	they	arranged	a	bed	in	the	basement	of	the
house,	so	he	could	pray	as	loudly	as	he	desired	and	nobody	would	be	disturbed.
But	in	the	middle	of	the	night	the	whole	neighborhood	gathered,	and	they	said,
"Why	have	you	put	him	on	the	roof	of	your	house?"
He	said,	"Roof?	We	have	put	him	in	the	basement."
But	 they	went	up	 to	 the	 roof	 and	he	was	 there	praying	 to	God	 so	 loudly.	And
when	you	are	praying	from	the	roof,	naturally	your	sound	goes	on	waking	all	the
neighbors.
The	disciple	asked,	"How	did	you	manage	to	go	to	the	roof?"
The	mystic	said,	"I	had	to,	because	from	the	basement	God	will	not	hear	me."
Mohammedans	 have	 great	 pillars	 around	 their	 mosque,	 high	 pillars	 they	 call
minarets.
And	the	priest	goes	to	the	high	pillars,	because	if	you	pray	from	the	high	pillars
there	is	a	possibility	God	may	hear	you.
Hindus	 have	 in	 their	 temples	 --	 Tibetans	 also	 have	 them	 in	 their	 temples	 --
different	 kinds	 of	 bells,	 gongs.	 Did	 you	 know	 their	 purpose	 is	 to	 attract	 the
attention	of	God?	So	you	give	a	good	beat	on	 the	gong	and	God	will	 listen	 to
you.	Then	after	giving	the	beat	on	the	gong,	or	the	drums,	or	the	bells,	you	can
pray.
In	the	Hindu	temple	the	bell	is	where	you	enter.	And	the	bigger	the	temple,	the
bigger	 the	 bell.	 The	 richer	 the	 temples,	 the	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 the	 bells	 ...
deafening	sound.	First	you	have	to	ring	the	bell	to	wake	up	God	for	him	to	listen
to	 you.	 But	 you	 don't	 know	 where	 he	 is.	 Your	 gong,	 your	 bells	 are	 just
resounding	in	the	empty	sky.	There	is	nobody	to	be	wakened.
No-mind	 is	a	 reality	 that	you	can	experience,	but	 for	 that	no	prayer	 is	needed.
You	 don't	 have	 to	 look	 outside	 of	 you.	You	 have	 to	 close	 your	 eyes,	 and	 you
have	to	look	inwards	without	any	idea	of	what	you	are	going	to	find.	If	you	have
any	 idea	 that	 this	 is	what	 you	 are	 going	 to	 find,	 then	most	 probably	 you	will
imagine,	and	you	will	think	you	have	found	it.
Go	 inwards	without	any	prejudice,	because	all	prejudices	are	part	of	 the	mind.
Your	Jesus,	your	Krishna,	your	Rama	--	all	are	part	of	your	mind.	If	you	carry
any	 prejudice	 with	 you,	 you	 remain	 confined	 to	 the	 mind.	 If	 you	 want	 to
transcend	 the	 mind	 and	 reach	 to	 the	 no-mind,	 which	 is	 the	 ultimate
consciousness,	pure	consciousness,	the	very	essence	of	existence	...	But	for	that,
prayer	is	not	of	help,	nor	are	temples	of	any	help,	nor	are	scriptures	of	any	help.
No	philosophy	is	needed,	no	system	of	beliefs	is	needed,	no	theology	is	needed.
All	that	you	need	is	to	unload	yourself	of	everything	that	has	been	forced	upon
you.
Unload	yourself.
Unburden	yourself.
Drop	everything	that	has	been	given	to	you	by	your	parents,	by	your	teachers,	by
your	priests,	by	your	leaders.
Drop	everything	that	has	come	from	outside.
Throw	it	out!
And	 suddenly	 you	will	 find	 your	mind	 is	 giving	way	 into	 no-mind.	You	 have
only	to	drop	the	rubbish	--	and	God	is	part	of	the	rubbish,	the	heaviest	part.
So	there	is	no	possibility	of	God	and	no-mind	being	synonymous.
Here,	 we	 are	 searching	 without	 any	 belief,	 without	 any	 hypothesis.	 We	 are
simply	going	into	our	subjectivity,	into	our	interiority.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 this	 is	 the	 only	 temple:	 your	 body.	As	 far	 as	 I	 am
concerned,	your	subjectivity	--	silent,	peaceful,	just	an	empty	space	--	is	the	very
source	you	have	come	from,	and	is	the	very	goal	you	are	going	towards.
When	the	source	and	the	goal	meet,	you	are	enlightened	--	the	whole	circle,	the
whole	 pilgrimage	 is	 complete.	You	 have	 left	 the	 source	 as	 ignorant,	 you	 have
come	back	to	the	source	again	as	innocent.	You	have	again	become	a	child.
One	 birth	 is	 given	 by	 your	 parents,	 another	 birth	 you	 have	 to	 manage	 by
yourself.	The	second	birth	is	the	birth	which	matters.	The	first	birth	is	going	to
end	up	in	death.	The	second	birth	is	the	beginning	of	eternity:	no	death,	no	end,
no	beginning.
No-mind	 is	 the	whole	 universe,	 and	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 find	 this	 no-mind	 by
worshipping,	 by	 prayer,	 by	 believing.	 This	 mind	 needs	 you	 to	 be	 completely
cured	 from	 all	 past-oriented	 ideologies,	 from	 all	 organized	 religions,	 from	 all
scriptures,	from	all	that	has	been	forced	upon	you.	It	is	phony,	it	is	plastic.
Real	roses	come	on	the	bush	from	its	interiority.	You	can	hang	plastic	roses	on
the	bush,	but	they	will	not	be	fragrant,	and	they	will	not	be	alive.	And	because
they	are	not	alive	they	are	not	going	to	die.	They	will	just	hang	there.	They	are
already	dead;	they	are	man-manufactured	flowers.
God	is	a	man-manufactured	idea.
No-mind	is	not	your	 idea.	No-mind	is	not	manufactured	by	man.	No-mind	is	a
gift	 of	 existence.	You	 can	 only	 be	 grateful,	 you	 can	 only	 be	 in	 deep	 gratitude
when	you	find	no-mind.	You	will	not	find	even	a	single	word	to	say	to	existence.
Even	saying	"thank	you"
will	look	very	superficial.
In	 the	West	 it	 is	 very	 formal,	 you	 even	 say	 "thank	 you"	 to	 your	mother,	 you
thank	your	father	--	not	that	you	really	mean	it,	it	is	just	part	of	formality.
In	 the	East	 it	 is	 totally	different.	 I	have	never	 thanked	my	 father,	 I	have	never
thanked	my	mother.	It	is	so	superficial,	it	is	so	formal.	When	you	love	someone
you	cannot	utter	 the	words	`thank	you'.	 It	will	destroy	 the	whole	beauty	of	 the
experience.
So	when	you	come	to	no-mind,	you	are	utterly	dumb.
Kabir	 has	made	 a	 statement.	He	 says	 the	 experience	of	 no-mind	 is	 gunge	keri
sarkara	--
as	if	the	dumb	man	has	tasted	the	sugar.	He	cannot	speak.	He	knows	taste,	but	he
is	dumb;	he	cannot	speak.
The	experience	of	no-mind	is	 inexpressible.	You	can	have	 it,	you	can	dance	 in
celebration	but	you	cannot	say	anything	about	it.	Your	dance	certainly	will	shine
with	 a	new	 joy,	with	 a	new	ecstasy,	with	 a	new	drunkenness.	Your	dance	will
show	a	new	radiation,	a	new	aura	around	you.	Your	eyes	will	be	shining.	For	the
first	 time	 they	 have	 seen	 something	 worth	 seeing.	 Your	 whole	 being	 will	 be
throbbing	with	joy,	because	you	have	come	back	to	the	original	source.
Let	 gods	 die.	 Don't	 carry	 on	 them.	 People	 are	 carrying	 dead	 gods,	 and	 when
somebody	is	dead	and	you	go	on	carrying	him,	you	start	stinking.	All	religious
people	stink	because	they	are	carrying	a	dead	body.
There	is	a	beautiful	Hindu	mythology	....
Shiva,	 one	 of	 the	 gods	 of	 the	 Hindus,	 one	 of	 the	 three	 gods,	 the	 trinity	 of
Hinduism	...
Shiva's	 wife	 dies,	 but	 he	 won't	 accept	 the	 death	 of	 his	 wife.	 His	 mind	 was
constantly	 telling	 him,	 "If	 you	 go	 around	 the	 country	 there	may	 be	 somebody
who	can	resurrect	her."
He	 used	 to	 live	 in	 the	 Himalayas,	 so	 he	 came	 down	 with	 the	 dead	 body	 of
Parvati,	his	wife.	The	very	word	parvati	means	daughter	of	 the	mountains	 ...	a
beautiful	 woman,	 but	 dead.	 He	 carried	 the	 corpse	 around	 the	 country,	 asking
everybody,	"Is	there	any	physician,	any	man	of	miracles?"
The	 body	 was	 deteriorating,	 and	 soon	 it	 started	 falling	 into	 pieces.	 The	 legs
dropped	 in	 one	 place,	 the	 hands	 dropped	 into	 another	 place	 ...	 Hindus	 have
twelve	holy	places.	Those	twelve	holy	places	in	the	country	are	the	twelve	places
where	 Parvati's	 parts	 dropped.	 But	 even	 though	 parts	 were	 dropping,	 Shiva
continued	 around	 the	 country	 until	 he	 found	 that	 the	 last	 part	 had	 dropped.	 It
must	have	taken	him	years.
But	your	carrying	a	dead	God	 is	a	 longer	pilgrimage	--	millions	of	years.	And
you	go	on	believing	that	someday,	somewhere,	God	will	materialize.	Meanwhile
you	go	on	carrying	the	corpse.	The	corpse	is	destroying	you	also,	because	it	 is
rotten,	and	it	is	making	a	rotten	humanity.
God	is	a	sickness;	you	have	simply	to	drop	it.	But	the	only	good	thing	is	that	you
are	carrying	the	sickness,	so	you	can	drop	it.	It	is	your	belief,	so	you	can	throw	it
out!	It	is	not	something	that	is	a	part	of	you,	it	is	something	that	you	are	holding
unnecessarily.	 It	 is	not	holding	you!	This	 is	 the	only	beautiful	 thing	about	 it	 --
that	you	can	drop	God.
One	day	I	dropped	God,	and	since	 then	I	have	felt	so	weightless,	so	blissful.	 I
used	to	carry	the	dead	body	myself,	but	I	realized	that	the	body	was	dead	--	no
breathing,	no	heartbeat	--	it	was	up	to	me	whether	to	carry	it	or	drop	it.	And	as	I
dropped	it,	 for	 the	first	 time	I	felt	myself	as	an	 individual.	The	dead	body	was
overwhelming	 me,	 it	 was	 covering	 me	 from	 all	 the	 sides.	 It	 had	 become	 my
personality.
For	a	moment	I	felt	naked,	because	the	personality	had	dropped,	the	masks	had
dropped.
But	soon	I	knew	that	this	nudity,	this	nakedness	was	natural.	Everybody	is	nude
behind	the	clothes.	The	moment	you	drop	your	clothes	 ...	Have	you	ever	felt	a
certain	 freedom	 just	 on	 the	 seabeach	 as	 you	 drop	 your	 clothes?	You	 suddenly
feel	the	sun	with	your	body,	the	wind	blowing	on	your	body,	and	a	tremendous
sense	of	freedom	--	just	by	dropping	clothes,	which	are	not	of	much	weight.
God	 is	very	heavy.	 It	goes	on	becoming	heavier	and	heavier	as	 time	passes.	A
moment	 comes	 when	 it	 is	 heavier	 than	 you	 --	 you	 are	 crushed	 under	 the
mountainous	load.	Unless	one	is	free	from	God,	one	knows	not	what	freedom	is.
So	God	cannot	be	synonymous	with	no-mind.
No-mind	is	really	the	antidote	to	the	disease	called	God.
No-mind	is	your	freedom.
All	chains	dropped,	all	 thoughts	dropped,	all	 feelings	dropped	 ...	 suddenly	you
find	only	the	purest	essence	has	remained.	All	 that	was	covering	it,	 layer	upon
layer,	has	been	dropped.	This	dropping	I	call	meditation.
Finally	 only	 a	 witness,	 a	 sakshi,	 remains	 --	 just	 a	 pure	 awareness.	 This	 is
ultimate	freedom,	and	the	authentic	religion	is	for	ultimate	freedom	and	ultimate
liberation.
God-oriented	religions	cannot	even	give	you	a	sense	of	freedom,	or	a	direction
for	 freedom.	Their	whole	 effort	 is	 to	 direct	 your	mind	 towards	God.	Fill	 your
mind	with	God,	repeat	his	name	again	and	again	so	it	becomes	ingrained	in	your
mind.	The	more	 ingrained	 it	 becomes,	 the	more	difficult	 it	will	 be	 to	 leave	 it.
The	 sooner	you	 leave	God,	 the	better.	And	you	will	have	 to	 leave	one	day,	 so
why	not	now!	One	cannot	live	a	lie	forever.	Only	truth	can	be	lived	forever.
You	have	to	believe	only	in	lies,	you	don't	have	to	believe	in	the	truth.	Truth	has
to	be	discovered.	I	teach	you	purely	the	attitude	of	an	agnostic	--	one	who	does
not	believe,	who	does	not	disbelieve,	but	who	is	a	seeker,	a	searcher,	an	explorer.
Certainly	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 be	 explored	 is	 your	 own	 inner	 being.	 That	 is	 the
closest	life	throbbing,	everything	else	is	a	little	far	away.	The	man	of	intelligence
first	will	look	inside	his	own	house	before	he	goes	searching	on	the	moon	and	on
Mars.	First	he	will	 look	 inside	 to	 see	what	 is	 there.	And	 those	who	have	gone
inside	have	never	come	empty	handed.	They	have	come	with	so	much	bliss,	so
much	 ecstasy,	with	 such	 an	 abundance	 that	 they	 start	 sharing,	 because	 as	 they
share	they	come	to	understand	the	inner	economics.
The	more	you	share	the	more	you	have.	If	you	don't	share,	you	won't	have	even
that	which	you	had.	Jesus	says,	"Those	who	have	shall	be	given	more,	and	those
who	have	not,	 even	whatsoever	 they	have	will	be	 taken	away."	 I	 cannot	 agree
with	him.	I	say	unto	you,	the	more	you	give,	the	more	you	will	have;	the	less	you
give,	the	less	you	will	have.
If	you	don't	give	at	all,	you	won't	have	anything	left.
Sharing	is	the	only	compassion.
Sharing	is	the	only	service.
Sharing	 is	 the	only	way	 the	awakened	one	 lives.	That	 is	 real	character.	That	 is
authentic	morality.	That	is	true	religiousness.
You	don't	have	a	God,	but	you	become	godly.	Hence	I	say,	the	moment	you	drop
God	you	are	moving	in	the	right	direction	of	becoming	godly.	You	will	be	divine
in	your	ecstasies,	in	your	silent	spaces	of	the	being.	You	will	be	divine.	But	you
will	 be	 divine	 because	 you	 will	 be	 participating	 in	 the	 divine	 existence.
Everything	 is	 sacred	 to	 the	 man	 who	 has	 come	 to	 know	 himself,	 who	 has
discovered	his	hidden	secret	of	life.	Everything	becomes	sacred.
A	story	is	told	about	the	mystic	Nanak	....
He	went	to	Kaaba,	the	holy	place	of	the	Mohammedans.	It	is	a	beautiful	story.
He	reached	Kaaba	by	the	evening,	but	his	fame	had	already	reached,	so	people
were	waiting	for	him.	They	received	him,	welcomed	him,	but	he	was	very	tired.
So	he	said,	"I	would	like	to	go	to	sleep,	I	have	been	walking	miles	and	miles."
So	they	prepared	a	bed	under	a	tree,	but	he	turned	the	bed.	Mohammedans	don't
sleep	with	their	legs	towards	Kaaba,	but	he	turned	the	bed	so	that	his	legs	were
towards	Kaaba,	and	his	head	was	on	the	opposite	side.
When	 the	head	priest	of	Kaaba	heard	about	 it,	he	came	running.	He	said,	"We
thought	you	were	a	great	mystic,	but	you	don't	even	seem	to	be	religious.	You
don't	 understand	 that	 you	 are	 hurting	 our	 feelings.	 You	 are	 keeping	 your	 feet
towards	the	most	divine	and	the	most	holy	land!	You	should	turn	your	feet."
Nanak	 laughed.	He	said,	"As	far	as	 I	am	concerned,	wherever	 I	 turn	my	feet	 I
find	they	are	towards	the	holy	land,	because	to	me	the	whole	existence	is	holy.
Now	if	you	think	there	is	some	place	which	is	unholy,	please	turn	my	legs.	I	am
willing!"
There	was	a	silence.	The	priest	could	not	say	that	there	was	some	place	that	was
unholy.
But	 this	 could	not	 be	 tolerated	 either,	 that	 this	man	 continued	 to	 keep	his	 feet
towards	Kaaba.
I	think	up	to	this	point	it	is	factual.	Beyond	this	point	it	becomes	more	and	more
symbolic.	But	even	that	is	significant	....
Finally,	the	priest	decided	to	turn	his	legs	and	turn	his	head	towards	Kaaba.	But
they	 were	 utterly	 disappointed,	 surprised.	 They	 could	 not	 believe	 their	 eyes.
Wherever	they	moved	Nanak's	legs,	Kaaba	moved.
This	 must	 be	 symbolic,	 but	 it	 is	 significant.	 It	 is	 poetry,	 but	 it	 gives	 you	 the
feeling	 that	 if	everything	 is	holy	and	sacred	 it	does	not	matter	where	you	keep
your	 legs	 it	 will	 always	 be	 towards	 the	 sacred	 land.	 The	 whole	 existence	 is
sacred	for	a	mystic.	Nanak	showed	his	understanding	very	clearly.	Only	a	man	of
no-mind	can	do	that.
A	man	of	no-mind	knows	that	everywhere	life	is	throbbing	--	in	the	trees,	in	the
rivers,	 in	 the	 mountains	 ...	 Even	 the	 Himalayas	 are	 still	 growing.	 It	 is	 the
youngest	mountain	in	the	whole	world,	but	really	powerful	because	it	has	got	the
highest	peaks	 in	 the	world	and	 they	are	 still	growing	 --	one	 foot	per	year.	But
that	means	it	is	alive,	it	is	not	a	dead	mountain.	It	is	reaching	towards	the	stars,
perhaps	very	slowly	because	it	is	not	a	small	mountain.	And	for	mountains,	even
to	rise	one	foot	in	one	year	is	quite	fast.	Looking	at	eternity,	if	the	Himalayas	go
on	growing	in	this	way,	soon	they	will	be	touching	stars;	it	won't	be	long.
When	you	see	 life	everywhere,	 in	 the	stones	 --	perhaps	 fast	asleep	so	 that	you
cannot	 feel	 it,	perhaps	a	different	dimension	 --	 in	 the	 trees,	 so	 that	you	cannot
understand	it	...	But	everything	is	so	abundantly	alive,	all	that	you	need	is	space
and	perceptivity	of	no-mind.
God	is	your	blindness.	No-mind	is	going	to	give	you	fresh	eyes	to	look	again	at
the	universe.
Question	2
The	second	question:
NIETZSCHE	 MADE	 THE	 OBSERVATION	 THAT	 WHEN	 "ORDINARY
PEOPLE"
ARE	IN	AN	UNPLEASANT	SITUATION,	"THEY	ALWAYS	SEEK	TO	GET
OUT	OF
IT	WITH	THE	SMALLEST	EXPENDITURE	OF	INTELLIGENCE."
IS	 GOD	 SIMPLY	 THE	 FIRST	 AND	 LAST	 RESORT	 OF	 A	 RETARDED
HUMANITY?
Yes,	 absolutely	 yes.	God	 is	 the	 invention	 of	 the	 retarded,	 of	 the	 idiots,	 of	 the
imbeciles,	 of	 the	 people	who	want	 a	 shortcut	 so	 they	 don't	 have	 to	 exert	 any
intelligence.	 God	 is	 the	 belief	 of	 the	 unintelligent.	 God	 is	 the	 belief	 of	 the
unconscious.	God	is	 the	belief	of	 those	who	are	still	asleep	and	dreaming.	The
moment	you	wake	up,	all	dreams	disappear,	and	with	the	dreams	your	God	will
also	disappear.
No-mind	is	waking	up	from	the	sleep	of	the	mind.
No-mind	is	a	sunrise.
Mind	has	been	a	 long	 long	dark	night,	and	no-mind	blossoms	 into	 tremendous
intelligence,	not	intellect.	Intellect	is	part	of	the	mind,	intelligence	is	part	of	no-
mind.	 It	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon.	And	when	 that	 fire	 of	 intelligence
rises	in	you	in	great	flames,	you	don't	find	any	God	anywhere,	but	you	certainly
find	everything	is	sacred	because	everything	is	alive.
So	a	great	 reverence	 for	 life	 --	 that's	what	 I	 teach	you.	But	you	will	know	 life
only	when	you	have	touched	your	own	life.	Then	you	will	know	the	criterion	for
what	is	alive.	Right	now	you	don't	know	the	criterion	for	what	is	alive.
Question	3
The	third	question:
THROUGH	 MY	 OWN	 RECENT	 ENCOUNTER	 WITH	 DEATH,	 I	 CAME
ACROSS
MANY	 STORIES	 OF	 PEOPLE	 FROM	 DIVERSE	 CULTURES	 AND	 OF
DIFFERENT
RELIGIOUS	 BACKGROUNDS,	 WHO	 TEMPORARILY	 LEFT	 THEIR
BODIES	AND
APPEARED	TO	OBSERVERS	TO	BE	DEAD.	THEY	REPORTED	SEEING	A
"BEING
OF	LIGHT,"	WHICH	WAS	TOTALLY	LOVING	AND	COMPASSIONATE.
COULD	 THIS	 "BEING	 OF	 LIGHT"	 BE	 THE	 BASIS	 ON	 WHICH	 THE
CONCEPT	OF
GOD	HAS	BEEN	CREATED?
No,	not	at	all.	This	experience	is	authentic.	It	happens	sometimes	to	people	who
have	almost	died	--	not	completely,	but	almost.	They	see	a	luminous	being.	It	is
their	 own	 being,	 it	 is	 not	 God.	 In	 meditation	 you	 will	 encounter	 the	 same
luminous	being	without	dying.
Meditation	is	a	kind	of	death.	You	are	separated	from	the	body,	you	are	separated
from	the	mind	--	 that's	what	death	does.	You	are	separated	from	the	body,	you
are	separated	from	the	mind.	Suddenly	you	become	aware	of	a	luminous	being,
which	 you	 think	 is	 separate	 from	 you	 because	 you	 have	 never	 seen	 such	 an
experience	before.	If	you	have	been	a	meditator,	you	would	have	recognized	--
"This	is	me."
You	are	a	 light,	 luminous	body	inside	 this	body	--	a	flame,	an	eternal	flame	of
light.	But	those	who	have	almost	died	and	come	back	to	life,	because	they	don't
have	 any	 experience	 of	 meditation,	 they	 think	 they	 have	 seen	 something,	 a
luminous	 being.	 They	 remember	 it	 vaguely,	 faintly,	 a	 faraway	 echo,	 but	 they
remember	 it.	 They	 have	 seen	 something	 luminous.	 Naturally	 they	 cannot
conceive	that	they	have	seen	themselves.
God	 is	not	based	on	 the	experience	of	people	who	were	almost	dead	and	have
come	back	again	to	life.	But	meditation	knows	exactly	what	has	been	happening
to	these	people	--
they	have	encountered	 themselves.	But	because	 the	encounter	was	 for	 the	 first
time,	and	so	quick	...	just	like	a	flash	it	came	and	went	away,	and	they	were	back
to	 life.	Naturally	 they	 think	 they	have	seen	some	object,	 some	person	standing
there	with	 a	 radiant,	 luminous	body,	because	 they	have	known	only	objects	 in
their	lives.	They	have	never	known	the	subject.
A	 meditator	 will	 not	 commit	 such	 a	 mistake.	 A	 meditator	 will	 recognize
immediately	--
whether	alive	or	dead	--	that	he	is	the	luminous	eternal	light.
The	sutra:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
WHEN	DAITEN	FIRST	CAME	TO	SEKITO,	 THE	MASTER	ASKED	HIM,
"WHAT
IS	YOUR	NO-MIND?"
DAITEN	REPLIED,	"THE	ONE	WHO	SPEAKS	IS	IT."
AT	THIS,	SEKITO	SHOUTED	"KWATZ!"	--	AND	LEFT.
Daiten	is	not	yet	enlightened,	but	he	must	have	been	a	great	scholar.	He	has	read
in	the	scriptures	that	the	no-mind	is	the	one	from	where	all	that	is	original	comes
out.	When	a	buddha	speaks,	he	is	not	speaking	borrowed	words.	His	speaking	is
coming	from	no-mind.	No-mind	is	flowing	in	his	words,	hence	the	beauty.
The	 same	 ordinary	 words	 on	 the	 lips	 of	 a	 buddha	 certainly	 become	 magical,
alive.	 Very	 ordinary	 words	 suddenly	 take	 a	 totally	 different	 flavor,	 a	 new
fragrance.	They	start	being	poetic.	They	have	around	them	a	certain	aura.	That's
why	the	words	of	a	buddha	start	ringing	bells	in	your	heart.
He	is	not	speaking	strange	words.	You	know	those	words,	you	use	those	words.
But	when	a	buddha	speaks	those	same	words,	because	they	are	coming	from	no-
mind,	they	carry	some	space	around	them	that	makes	the	awakened	one's	words
so	authoritative.	The	awakened	one	 is	not	authoritative.	He	does	not	command
you,	he	does	not	give	quotations	from	the	scriptures	to	support	as	an	evidence.
He	is	his	own	authority.
I	have	been	telling	stories,	and	people	who	don't	understand	me	have	sometimes
written,
"Your	 stories	 go	 on	 changing.	 Sometimes	 you	 say	 something,	 sometimes	 your
story	completely	changes	 ..."	They	are	only	listening	to	the	mere	words,	not	 to
me.	They	 are	 blind	 people,	 they	 cannot	 see	 that	my	 story	 is	 a	 response	 to	 the
people	to	whom	I	am	talking.	In	the	present	moment	it	takes	a	new	shape,	a	new
meaning,	a	new	dimension.
My	stories	go	on	changing	because	life	goes	on	changing.	What	can	I	do	about
it?
Sometimes	 it	 is	 spring	 and	 there	 are	 flowers	 all	 over,	 and	 sometimes	 it	 is	 not
spring	and	the	trees	are	standing	naked	without	any	leaves.	What	can	I	do?	Life
goes	on	changing.
My	stories	are	not	dead,	they	are	as	alive	as	I	am	alive.	They	are	coming	from	a
living	source.
And	 they	 have	 told	 me	 --	 great	 scholars	 and	 professors,	 linguists,	 those
belonging	to	different	religions	--	"I	like	your	story	but	it	is	not	in	the	scriptures
at	 all."	 I	 said,	 "Then	 you	 should	 put	 it	 in.	Your	 scripture	 is	 not	 growing,	 it	 is
dead.	If	you	like	the	story,	if	you	felt	there	was	some	meaning,	then	put	it	in	your
scripture."
Buddha	is	not	the	end	of	the	world.	There	are	going	to	be	buddhas	after	Gautam
Buddha.
There	 will	 be	 buddhas	 after	 me,	 after	 you,	 and	 certainly	 they	 are	 going	 to
continuously	improve.	It	is	not	an	effort,	it	is	a	spontaneous	phenomenon.
When	I	start	the	story	I	don't	know	what	shape	it	is	going	to	take.	I	am	as	much
surprised	as	you	are	--	"My	God!	This	story	is	not	the	story	I	have	heard	before."
But	what	can	I	do?	It	is	not	my	mind.	Mind	has	a	memory	system,	so	it	goes	on
repeating	 the	 same	 gramophone	 record,	 and	 gets	 stuck	 at	 the	 same	 point	 each
time.	 If	 it	 is	an	ancient	gramophone	record,	 the	needle	goes	on	stopping	at	 the
same	place.	You	start	again;	again	it	will	stop	at	the	same	place.
Once	 I	 was	 participating	 as	 a	 student	 in	 an	 inter-university	 competition	 for
eloquence.	 I	was	 the	 first	 one	 to	 speak,	 and	 the	 second	 person	 came	 from	 the
Sanskrit	University	of	Varanasi.	 It	 is	devoted	completely	 to	Sanskrit	 scriptures
and	language.	But	the	student	must	have	been	feeling	a	little	inferior	to	the	other
students	who	came	from	different	universities,	because	in	the	Sanskrit	University
they	don't	teach	English.	So	he	must	have	crammed	one	statement	in	English	of
Bertrand	Russell,	just	to	make	an	impression.
But	he	was	nervous.	As	he	started,	after	 three	or	 four	 lines,	he	said,	 "Bertrand
Russell	has	said	..."	--	in	English	--	and	then	he	stopped.	His	mind	went	blank.	I
was	 just	 sitting	 by	 his	 side	 because	 he	 was	 the	 second	 person	 to	 speak.	 The
whole	 auditorium	 was	 full	 of	 students	 and	 professors,	 and	 there	 was	 a	 great
silence	when	 he	 stopped.	 I	 thought	 I	 should	 help	 him,	 so	 I	 told	 him,	 "Repeat
again."
And	when	you	have	crammed	something,	you	can	repeat	 it	only	from	the	very
beginning.
So	he	said,	"Sisters	and	brothers	..."	So	the	whole	audience	started	laughing.	He
again	 repeated	 those	 three	 or	 four	 sentences	 and	 came	 to	 the	 point,	 "Bertrand
Russell	has	said
..."	--	and	a	fullpoint.
I	said,	"Repeat!"	Finding	no	way	out,	he	again	started,	"Brothers	and	sisters	..."
And	it	was	such	a	joy	--	for	ten	minutes	it	continued.	I	would	say,	"Repeat,"	and
finding	no	way	out	...	and	I	was	the	only	help.	Everybody	was	laughing.	And	he
would	say,
"Sisters	and	brothers	..."	--	and	finished!	Everybody	was	waiting	for	these	three
sentences,	"Bertrand	Russell	has	said	..."	--	fullpoint.
After	 ten	minutes,	 the	 chairman,	 the	 vice-chancellor	 of	 the	 university,	 himself
was	laughing,	and	he	told	the	boy,	"Just	sit	down.	Don't	be	worried,	everything	is
okay.	Just	sit	down"	--	he	was	perspiring.	And	the	chancellor	said	to	me,	"You
should	not	have	done	this."
I	 said,	 "I	was	 simply	 helping	 him.	 I	 never	 thought	 that	 he	was	 a	 gramophone
record.	I	thought	some	time	he	may	slip	ahead	--	`Bertrand	Russell	has	said	...'
But	 he	 proved	 to	 be	 a	 gramophone	 record,	 broken.	 It	 was	 not	 my	 fault.	 And
anyway,	he	gave	such	a	 joyous	evening.	Even	if	you	give	him	the	first	prize,	I
am	ready,	because	he	has	given	so	much	joy,	nobody	can	give."
Now	scientists	have	 found	 that	your	memory	system	functions	exactly	 like	 the
gramophone	record.	They	have	opened	the	brain	for	other	reasons,	but	somehow
they	found	that	if	they	put	an	electrode	on	the	memory	point	in	your	brain,	you
start	saying	something.	And	if	 they	take	the	electrode	away,	you	stop	and	your
brain	automatically	reverses.	Again	when	they	put	the	electrode	back,	you	start
from	"Brothers	and	sisters"	--
again	the	same.	Take	the	electrode	off,	and	you	stop.
They	have	discovered	that	the	mind	has	an	automatic	reverse	system	--	once	you
have	stopped,	it	goes	back	to	its	original	place.	You	touch	that	spot	again	and	the
person	 starts	 saying	 the	 same	 thing.	There	 is	 no	 reason	why	 he	 is	 speaking	 --
nobody	has	asked	anything.	But	he	is	helpless	--	the	memory	starts	repeating	like
a	record.
Daiten	must	have	been	a	scholar.	He	has	quoted	this	sentence,	not	from	his	own
experience	but	from	scriptures.
What	is	he	saying?	When	Sekito	asked	him,	"WHAT	IS	YOUR	NO-MIND?"
DAITEN	 REPLIED,	 "THE	 ONE	 WHO	 SPEAKS	 IS	 IT."	 One	 who	 speaks
originally.	If	one	speaks	only	that	which	is	borrowed,	it	is	from	the	mind.	But	if
one	speaks	originally,	spontaneously,	then	it	is	coming	from	the	space	called	no-
mind.	 But	 he	 forgot	 the	 word	 òriginally'.	 That	 happens	 to	 scholars;	 it	 cannot
happen	to	a	buddha.	Whatever	 is	coming,	 is	coming	from	the	very	source.	But
when	you	are	repeating	a	scripture	which	is	not	your	experience,	there	is	going
to	be	some	difficulty.
If	 he	 had	 said,	 "The	 one	who	 speaks	 spontaneously	 --	 that	 is	 the	 place	 of	 no-
mind	..."	He	has	forgotten	that	one	word	òriginal',	and	perhaps	it	was	not	written
in	 the	 scripture	 itself,	 because	 no	 buddha	 has	 written	 a	 single	 word.	 All
scriptures	 have	 been	 compiled	 by	 their	 disciples,	 sometimes	 after	 the	 death.
Sometimes	 hundreds	 of	 years	 have	 passed	 and	 then	 disciples	 of	 disciples	 ...
generations	have	passed.
The	four	gospels	of	Jesus	are	recorded	after	his	death,	and	not	immediately,	three
hundred	 years	 afterwards.	Now	 nobody	was	 a	witness;	 all	 the	witnesses	were
dead.	And	these	gospels	were	recorded	by	people	who	had	not	seen	Jesus.	They
had	 not	 even	 seen	 Jerusalem.	 Now	 biblical	 research	 scholars	 have	 found	 that
even	the	geography	that	they	have	mentioned	in	the	four	gospels	is	wrong.	These
people	have	never	been	to	Israel.
They	have	heard	from	others,	who	have	heard	from	others,	who	have	heard	from
others.
That's	why	 I	 have	 spoken	on	Thomas's	 gospel	which	was	written	 in	 India.	He
was	a	direct	disciple	of	Jesus,	but	his	gospel	is	not	included	in	the	Holy	Bible.	It
was	discovered	just	thirty	years	ago,	but	it	is	the	most	beautiful	because	at	least
Thomas	was	a	witness.	And	it	has	tremendous	beauty	because	it	is	not	only	that
he	was	a	witness	to	Jesus,	here	in	India	he	went	through	a	transformation.
He	 meditated,	 he	 practiced	 yoga,	 he	 lived	 like	 a	 sannyasin	 and	 moved	 from
monastery	 to	 monastery.	 Buddha's	 air	 was	 still	 there.	 Buddha	 was	 gone	 five
hundred	years	before	that,	but	his	fragrance	was	still	alive.	So	in	his	gospel	there
is	a	certain	authority	which	is	 lacking	in	the	four	gospels	of	 the	Bible.	First	he
was	a	witness,	he	had	heard	Jesus,	and	secondly	he	himself	had	experienced	the
truth.	The	 combination	of	 both,	 gives	 a	greater	 authority	 to	 the	 fifth	gospel	 of
Thomas	than	The	Holy	Bible.
Thomas	is	the	only	man	in	the	whole	world	whose	body	has	not	deteriorated.	His
body	 is	 still	 in	 a	 church	 in	 Goa.	 Every	 year	 at	 Christmas	 time,	 his	 body	 is
brought	 out	 of	 the	 church	 and	 his	 coffin	 is	 opened	 for	 any	 observer,	 for	 any
scientist,	for	any	researcher.
Nobody	has	been	able	to	figure	out	why	it	looks	so	fresh,	as	if	he	had	died	just
now.
There	 seems	 to	 have	 been	 no	 device	 used.	 It	 is	 not	 kept	 in	 a	 freezing
temperature,	it	is	in	a	hot	country,	but	even	the	skin	does	not	look	as	if	it	is	dead.
He	looks	so	fresh.	I	have	been	to	see	the	body.
Jesus'	miracles	may	have	been	a	myth,	but	 this	man	really	managed	a	miracle.
After	 two	 thousand	 years	 he	 is	 the	 only	 person	 around	 the	world	whose	 body
looks	as	if	it	has	died	just	now	--	or	perhaps	he	is	fast	asleep.	No	smell,	and	if	it
can	remain	for	two	thousand	years;	there	is	no	problem	for	it	to	remain	forever.
Care	has	to	be	taken	that	nobody	disturbs	it.
There	have	been	 efforts	 to	disturb	 it	 by	Hindus,	 by	Mohammedans,	 by	people
who	are	not	Christians,	because	 it	 is	 a	great	 argument	 in	 favor	of	Christianity.
But	the	man	Thomas	was	not	a	Christian,	he	never	knew	about	Christianity.	He
came	just	after	Jesus	was	crucified.	He	left	Jerusalem	for	the	simple	reason	that
Jesus	must	have	told	his	close	friends	--	and	Thomas	was	one	of	those	who	was
very	 close	 to	 him	 --	 about	 India,	 and	 about	 the	 universities	 of	 Nalanda	 and
Takshashila,	and	about	meditation.
So	now	that	Jesus	was	crucified,	he	saw	there	was	no	point	in	being	there,	and	he
left.	He	came	by	ship,	so	he	landed	in	South	India.	But	he	traveled	all	over	India,
and	met	all	kinds	of	mystics	who	were	deeply	rooted	in	meditation.	His	body	is	a
proof	 that	 he	 must	 have	 followed	 a	 certain	 method	 which	 was	 known	 to	 the
Tibetan	lamas,	to	the	Ladakh	people.
They	used	to	use	a	certain	method	of	meditation	when	the	meditator	was	dying
...	at	the	last	moment,	a	certain	process	called	Bardo.	It	was	nothing	but	a	post-
hypnotic	suggestion.	When	a	man	is	dying,	he	is	in	a	very	vulnerable	state.	And
if	he	has	been	a	meditator,	then	he	is	perfectly	awake.	Death	is	coming,	but	he	is
perfectly	awake.	He	can	be	hypnotized	and	told,	"When	you	leave	your	body,	the
body	will	remain	intact	as	it	is
..."	You	have	 to	 continue	 repeating	 so	 that	 it	 enters,	 not	 only	 into	 his	mind,	 it
enters	even	into	his	bones,	into	his	marrow,	into	his	blood.
Bardo	is	a	very	intensive	hypnosis,	and	it	is	also	possible	to	give	directions	for
the	future	to	the	soul	that	is	leaving	the	body.	Both	can	be	done.	The	body	can	be
preserved	by	post-hypnotic	suggestion.	But	you	cannot	do	it	if	the	man	has	died.
Then	there	is	nobody	to	listen	to	the	post-hypnotic	suggestion.	The	man	has	to
be	alive,	just	on	the	verge	of	death.
You	give	him	the	post-hypnotic	suggestion:	"Your	body	will	remain	intact,	will
remain	intact	...	you	go	on."	And	if	he	is	a	meditator,	even	the	bones,	the	blood,
the	body	starts	listening.	The	soul	will	leave	but	the	body	will	remain	completely
as	the	soul	has	left	it.
This	was	one	way	that	Bardo	was	used	for	the	body.
And	there	was	a	second	way.	You	can	give	suggestions	to	the	leaving	soul	as	to
what	 kind	 of	 womb	 will	 be	 good	 --	 "Choose	 rightly.	 Don't	 be	 accidental."
Millions	of	people	are	making	love,	and	millions	of	people	are	dying.	So	those
souls	 are	 roaming	 around,	 finding	 a	 couple	 who	 is	 making	 love.	 This	 is
accidental.	 Because	 they	 die	 unconsciously,	 they	 unconsciously	 grope	 in	 the
darkness,	and	whoever	comes	close	by,	just	by	chance	they	enter	into	that	womb.
Bardo	 prevents	 the	 accidental.	 It	 gives	 the	 soul	 a	 right	 direction:	 "You	 need	 a
certain	kind	of	womb,	so	don't	be	in	a	hurry.	You	have	been	a	meditator,	and	you
have	to	find	a	mother,	a	father,	who	will	allow	you	to	meditate	--	not	only	allow
you	 to	 meditate	 but	 who	 will	 help	 you	 to	 meditate,	 who	 are	 themselves
meditators.	So	don't	be	in	a	hurry!
Choose	a	couple."
Sometimes	 the	man	of	meditation	 takes	 time	 to	 find	 the	 right	womb;	ordinary
persons	immediately	enter	into	the	womb.	Bardo	gives	two	kinds	of	possibilities:
the	body	can	be	kept,	and	the	soul	can	be	given	a	sense	of	direction	where	to	go.
But	 this	 is	possible	only	 if	 the	man	has	been	deeply	 into	meditation,	has	been
practicing	meditation	 for	a	 long	 time,	and	was	capable	of	 remaining	conscious
when	death	comes,	because	death	is	the	greatest	operation.
Nature	has	managed	it	so	that	nobody	should	die	consciously,	just	as	a	surgeon
will	not	be	ready	to	operate	on	you	if	you	are	conscious.	First	he	will	give	you
chloroform	or	something	 that	makes	you	unconscious.	Then	he	can	operate	on
you	because	you	don't	know	what	 is	happening.	You	are	 so	deeply	asleep	 that
things	can	be	removed	from	your	body,	bones	can	be	cut,	replaced,	anything	can
be	done.
Death	is	 the	greatest	operation,	because	the	whole	seventy	years'	attachment	 to
the	body	has	to	be	broken.	Nature	has	managed	--	this	is	the	wisdom	of	nature,
the	intelligence	of	nature	--	that	a	person	who	is	not	capable	of	detachment	with
the	 body,	 who	 does	 not	 know	 that	 "I	 am	 not	 the	 body,"	 should	 be	 made
unconscious.	 Otherwise	 he	 will	 be	 passing	 through	 tremendous	 anguish	 and
anxiety.
So	it	 is	natural	wisdom,	but	it	 is	not	applicable	to	the	meditator.	The	meditator
can	afford	to	die	consciously	without	any	pain,	without	any	anguish,	without	any
anxiety.
DAITEN	REPLIED,	"THE	ONE	WHO	SPEAKS	IS	IT."
AT	THIS,	SEKITO	SHOUTED,	"KWATZ!"	--	AND	LEFT.
This	shout	says	to	Daiten,	"Shut	up!	It	 is	not	you,	it	 is	borrowed.	I	can	see	the
deadness	of	your	statement."	Shouting	"Kwatz!"	is	saying	"Shut	up!"	And	then
he	left	 immediately,	because	there	was	no	point	 in	wasting	time	with	this	man,
he	was	just	a	dead	scholar.
TEN	 DAYS	 LATER,	 DAITEN	 AGAIN	 CAME	 TO	 SEKITO	 AND	 ASKED,
"THE
LAST	ANSWER	I	SAID	TO	YOU	WAS	NOT	NO-MIND."
He	realized.	He	was	sincere,	at	least,	honest.
First	 he	 had	 tried	 to	 deceive	 Sekito	 --	 you	 cannot	 deceive	 a	 master,	 that	 is
impossible.	 He	 looks	 through	 and	 through	 you.	 He	 knows	 from	 where	 the
answer	is	coming:	from	the	mind	or	from	the	no-mind.	It	is	so	clear	to	a	master
from	where	the	answer	is	coming.
Any	answer	from	the	mind	--	"Kwatz!	Shut	up!"
He	must	have	thought	about	it:	"Why	did	the	master	behave	in	such	a	hard	way?
And	I	was	a	stranger,	a	new	person.	Certainly	there	must	be	some	reason	why	he
behaved	 without	 any	 compassion.	 I	 must	 be	 wrong."	 And	 then	 in	 ten	 days'
meditation	he	understood,	"What	I	said	was	only	a	repetition	of	scriptures."	So
he	came	back.
TEN	 DAYS	 LATER,	 DAITEN	 AGAIN	 CAME	 TO	 SEKITO	 AND	 ASKED,
"THE
LAST	 ANSWER	 I	 SAID	 TO	 YOU	 WAS	 NOT	 NO-MIND.	 WHAT	 IS	 NO-
MIND?
Please	tell	me.	I	don't	know."
An	 authentic	 seeker	 begins	with	 "I	 don't	 know,	 because	 all	 that	 I	 know	 is	 not
mine.	It	does	matter.	I	may	have	much	knowledge,	but	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,
I	don't	know."
This	acceptance	is	the	beginning	of	the	search.	If	you	know	already,	there	is	no
need	to	search,	there	is	no	need	to	seek.
SEKITO	 SAID,	 "WITHOUT	 RAISING	 EYEBROWS	 OR	 MOVING
EYEBALLS,	BRING	YOUR	NO-MIND	HERE."
Strange,	but	masters	are	strange	people.	They	have	 their	own	ways	of	pushing
you	into	the	unknown	territory	of	your	own	being.
SEKITO	 SAID,	 "WITHOUT	 RAISING	 EYEBROWS	 OR	 MOVING
EYEBALLS,	BRING	YOUR	NO-MIND	HERE."
DAITEN	 SAID,	 "THERE	 IS	NO	NO-MIND	TO	BE	BROUGHT.	 In	 the	 first
place,	 I	don't	know	what	no-mind	 is.	 In	 the	second	place,	 if	 it	 is	no-mind	how
can	you	bring	it?	It	is	not	a	thing.	It	is	not	even	a	thought,	it	is	pure	awareness.	It
cannot	be	brought	here	as	an	object	for	your	observation."
SEKITO	 SAID,	 "BASICALLY,	 NO-MIND	 IS."	 You	 cannot	 bring	 it	 --	 I	 can
understand.
It	is	not	a	thing,	it	is	not	a	thought,	it	is	only	pure	isness,	thisness,	suchness.
"BASICALLY,	NO-MIND	IS.	WHY	DO	YOU	SAY	NO-MIND	IS	NOT?"	It	is
the	only	 isness	 in	existence.	Because	you	cannot	bring	 it,	you	 think,	"It	 is	not.
That's	why	I	cannot	bring	it."	You	cannot	bring	it	because	no-mind	is	the	whole
universe.	How	can	you	bring	it?	It	is	already	here.
This	very	moment	it	is	here,	as	it	was	in	front	of	Sekito.
"WHY	 DO	 YOU	 SAY	 NO-MIND	 IS	 NOT?	 THAT	 IS	 THE	 WRONG
STATEMENT."
Just	say	I	don't	know.	Say	no-mind	is	not	a	thing,	not	a	thought,	hence	it	cannot
be	brought.	But	don't	say	no-mind	is	not.	No-mind	only	is	--	pure	is.
AT	THIS,	DAITEN	WAS	GREATLY	ENLIGHTENED	--	hearing	this	statement,
that	all	that	is,	is	no-mind.	Isness	and	no-mind	are	two	names	of	the	same	thing.
This	presence	of	 life	 in	 the	 trees,	 in	 the	 stones,	 in	people,	 in	birds	 ...	 this	vast
isness,	 this	 presence	 is	 no-mind.	You	 don't	 have	 to	 bring	 it	 here,	 it	 is	 already
here.	You	cannot	take	it	anywhere	else.
As	far	as	time	is	concerned,	it	is	now.
As	far	as	space	is	concerned,	it	is	here.
If	you	are	silent,	you	will	immediately	become	aware	of	it.
This	 statement	 made	 such	 a	 deep	 penetration	 into	 Daiten,	 he	 was	 greatly
enlightened.
An	 authentic	 seeker,	 sincere	 seeker,	 who	 does	 not	 hide	 himself	 behind	 false
knowledge,	borrowed	knowledge,	who	does	not	pretend	that	he	knows	without
knowing,	if	he	accepts
"I	 don't	 know"	 --	 he	 is	 already	 very	 close	 to	 the	 truth.	 He	 has	 accepted	 his
innocence	now	there	is	no	barrier.	No	God,	no	scripture,	no	knowledge	--	he	is
just	 as	 close	 as	 one	 can	 be	 to	 no-mind.	 A	 little	 push	 by	 the	 master,	 a	 little
statement,	and	he	will	be	drowned	into	existence.	That	drowning	into	existence
is	enlightenment.	Disappearing	into	existence	is	enlightenment.
I	have	always	loved	one	story	from	China	....
The	emperor	of	China	was	a	great	painter.	At	his	seventy-fifth	birthday,	he	was
feeling	old,	and	perhaps	the	day	was	not	far	away	when	he	would	have	to	leave
the	body.	So	he	arranged	a	great	competition	before	he	would	leave	the	body:	a
competition	for	painting	throughout	China.
First,	 in	 every	 state	 there	would	 be	 a	 competition,	 and	 one	 painting	would	 be
chosen.
Then	the	final	would	be	in	the	capital,	and	the	emperor	would	choose	which	was
the	greatest	painting.	He	himself	was	a	 competitor.	He	had	painted	a	beautiful
painting.
All	the	painters	came	from	all	over	China.	They	all	brought	their	great	canvases
that	 they	had	done.	Only	one	man	came	without	any	painting,	 just	paint	and	a
brush	--	strange	fellow!
The	emperor	asked,	"Where	is	the	painting?"
He	said,	"I	don't	like	old	things.	I	will	paint	freshly	here	and	now.	You	have	to
give	me	a	room,	because	I	don't	paint	on	canvas,	I	paint	on	the	walls.	Give	me
the	biggest	room	in	your	palace	and	don't	disturb	me.	And	keep	a	guard	so	that
nobody	disturbs	me.	I	don't	know	how	long	it	will	take,	because	it	is	going	to	be
a	spontaneous	thing.	I	don't	know	what	I	am	going	to	paint.	I	am	just	going	to
paint	out	of	spontaneity,	whatever	happens,	however	long	it	takes."
The	 king	 said,	 "I	 am	 getting	 old,	 that's	why	 I	 have	 arranged	 this	 competition.
You	have	to	be	quick	and	fast."
He	said,	"No.	I	don't	know.	It	may	be	quick.	Tomorrow	morning	I	may	inform
you	that	the	painting	is	complete,	or	it	may	take	longer.	I	cannot	promise."
No	man	of	understanding	can	ever	promise	anybody,	because	who	knows	about
the	next	moment?	All	promising	is	in	ignorance.
The	king	said,	"You	are	a	difficult	person,	but	I	can	see	in	your	eyes,	and	I	can
see	in	your	face	--	perhaps	you	will	be	the	greatest	painter."	So	he	gave	him	the
biggest	room	in	the	palace	--	and	there	were	many	big	rooms	--	with	a	plain	wall
so	he	could	paint,	and	he	closed	the	doors.
The	 painter	 said,	 "Nobody	 should	 enter,	 not	 even	 you,	 until	 the	 painting	 is
complete.	 I	will	 come	out	 for	 food	or	anything	 I	need."	And	he	kept	a	curtain
also	so	that	even	the	guards	could	not	have	a	look	inside	at	what	was	happening
behind	the	curtain.
It	took	three	years	for	him,	and	the	king	was	saying,	"What	are	you	doing?	I	may
never	be	able	to	see	your	painting,	I	may	die!"
The	painter	said,	"It	does	not	matter.	If	you	die	you	die.	If	you	are	alive	you	will
be	able	to	see	it.	But	I	cannot	do	anything	in	a	hurry."
The	emperor	had	to	wait.
Four	years	passed	and	the	painter	came	out	one	morning	and	said	to	the	emperor,
"The	painting	is	complete.	You	are	welcome."
Such	curiosity	had	arisen	in	the	emperor's	mind.	For	four	years,	he	was	thinking,
"What	is	that	guy	painting?"	He	himself	was	a	painter.	It	did	not	take	four	years
for	one	painting.
And	when	he	came	 the	emperor	 immediately	 followed	him.	They	went	behind
the	curtain.
The	 painting	 was	 just	 unbelievable;	 it	 looked	 so	 real.	 He	 had	 painted	 a	 huge
forest,	 so	 green,	 lush	 green,	 almost	 three-dimensional.	 And	 a	 small	 path	 was
going	--	you	could	see	the	path	was	going	and	going	...	and	then	it	disappeared
into	the	thickness	of	the	jungle.
And	the	emperor	said,	"Where	does	this	path	go?"
The	painter	said,	"Let	us	...	Come	with	me.	We	can	walk	and	see	where	the	path
goes,	because	without	experience	you	will	not	know	where	it	goes."
The	story	is,	both	went	 into	the	path	--	 the	guards	were	watching	--	and	as	 the
path	 turned	 around,	 they	 both	 turned	 around	 and	 since	 then	 nothing	 has	 been
heard.
This	story	--	in	a	painting	you	cannot	enter	--	is	a	symbolic	story.	It	says	you	can
enter	 in	 the	 isness	 of	 things.	 The	 painter	 has	 made	 the	 painting	 so	 alive	 that
branches	 were	 moving	 in	 the	 wind.	 The	 path	 was	 no	 ordinary	 path,	 and	 the
symbolic	 meaning	 is:	 if	 you	 cannot	 enter	 into	 a	 painting,	 the	 painting	 is	 not
worth	 calling	 a	 painting.	 But	 entering	 does	 not	mean	 physical	 entry.	 Entering
means	you	get	lost	completely:	you	are	no	more,	only	the	painting	is.
That's	 how	 you	 enter	 into	meditation	 --	 you	 are	 no	more.	You	 come	 across	 a
tremendous	isness;	everything	disappears,	you	disappear,	yet	that	isness	remains.
That	experience	of	 isness	 is	enlightenment.	This	story	simply	gives	a	symbolic
representation	of	enlightenment.
A	 painter	 is	 not	 worth	 the	 salt	 if	 he	 himself	 cannot	 disappear	 into	 his	 own
painting.
Picasso	 is	 reported	 to	have	said,	"When	I	am	painting,	 I	am	no	more,	only	 the
painting	is."
Nijinsky	has	said	many	times	in	his	life	--	because	he	was	asked	again	and	again
--
"When	 I	 am	dancing	 I	 am	no	more.	As	 long	as	 I	 am,	 the	dance	 is	 superficial.
When	only	dancing	remains	and	I	am	no	more,	then	it	has	a	tremendous	quality."
It	 was	 observed	 by	 scientists,	 and	 they	 could	 see	 the	 tremendous	 quality.
Whenever	he	forgot	himself	completely	in	dancing	he	used	to	jump	higher	than
gravitation	allows.	Scientists	were	simply	at	a	loss	how	to	figure	it	out,	because
that	much	of	a	jump	was	not	possible.
And	even	more	miraculous	was	his	coming	back	....	Gravitation	pulls	everything
so	fast.
You	 see	 every	 night	 --	 you	 think	 stars	 are	 falling.	 All	 around	 the	 earth	 six
thousand	stars	fall	every	day	on	the	earth.	They	are	not	stars,	stars	are	very	big,	a
thousand	 times,	 a	million	 times	 bigger	 than	 the	 earth.	 If	 one	 star	 falls,	we	 are
finished.	 Those	 are	 not	 stars,	 those	 are	 small	 stones	 which	 have	 been	 left
hanging	in	space.
When	the	moon	separated	from	the	earth	--	once	it	was	part	of	the	earth	...	You
have	 all	 these	 great	 oceans,	 the	 great	 Indian	 Ocean,	 and	 the	 Pacific,	 and	 the
Atlantic.	 All	 these	 oceans	 are	 created	 because	 the	 mud	 and	 the	 stones	 and
everything	 from	 these	 places	 fell	 out,	 because	 the	 earth	 was	 liquid	 --	 in	 the
beginning	it	was	liquid.	The	moon	is	just	the	combination	of	that	whole	lot	that
has	fallen	out	of	the	earth.	But	it	created	great	oceans	-
-	the	Pacific	is	five	miles	deep.
But	when	such	great	lumps	fell	out,	many	small	pieces	also	fell	out.	Those	small
pieces	 are	 just	 floating	 in	 space,	millions	 of	 pieces	 of	 stone	 of	 different	 sizes.
The	earth's	gravitation	pulls	these	stones	downwards,	and	at	the	point	where	the
atmosphere	 begins,	 it	 is	 two	 hundred	miles	 deep.	 Around	 the	 earth	 there	 is	 a
thickness	of	two	hundred	miles	of	atmosphere,	because	up	to	that	point	there	is
air.	 Beyond	 that	 there	 is	 no	 air;	 it	 is	 pure	 space,	 even	 air	 is	 not	 existent.
Sometimes	those	small	stones	--	and	there	are	a	few	big	stones	also	...
The	stone	in	the	Mohammedans'	holy	place	that	they	worship,	Kaaba,	is	also	one
of	the	stones	that	has	fallen	from	outer	space,	but	it	is	a	very	huge	stone.	In	every
museum	you	can	find	stones	which	have	reached	to	the	earth.
But	what	happens	when	they	enter	the	earth's	atmosphere	by	chance?	Gravitation
pulls	them	so	fast	that	the	friction	with	the	air	makes	them	turn	into	a	fiery	stone,
a	 fire.	 That	 is	 why	 you	 can	 see	 them	 up	 to	 a	 point,	 and	 then	 suddenly	 they
disappear.	 If	 the	 stone	was	 small,	 then	 it	would	 come	 to	 a	 certain	point	 and	 it
would	be	burned	out.	The	force	of	gravitation	is	such	that	only	very	big	stones
can	come	up	to	the	earth,	otherwise	they	disappear	in	the	air	somewhere.
Nijinsky's	 coming	 back	was	 absolutely	 against	 gravitation.	 He	 came	 just	 as	 a
feather	comes	slowly	--	so	slow	was	his	movement	coming	back.	Both	the	things
were	against	gravitation:	first	his	jump,	and	then	his	coming	like	a	feather	as	if
he	had	no	weight;	gravitation	cannot	work	on	it.
And	he	was	asked	about	it	again	and	again.	He	said,	"I	have	tried,	but	whenever
I	try,	it	does	not	happen	so	I	cannot	say	anything	about	it.	When	I	am	not,	when	I
get	 completely	 disappointed	 and	 forget	 all	 about	 it,	 that	 one	 day	 suddenly	 it
happens.	When	I	am	not	trying	to	do	it,	it	happens.	I	am	not,	only	the	dance	is.
When	I	am	not,	only	the	dance	is."
Nijinsky	perhaps	was	the	greatest	dancer	in	the	world.
But	this	is	the	misfortune	--	that	these	people	were	born	in	the	West.	They	had	no
idea	that	they	were	so	close	to	no-mind.	They	needed	a	master	just	to	give	them
a	little	push.
Nijinsky	would	 have	 been	 a	Gautam	Buddha,	 and	 Picasso	would	 have	 been	 a
Gautam	Buddha.	They	have	come	so	close.	But	the	West	has	no	idea	how	to	go
ahead,	how	to	go	into	the	painting.
Just	move	on	on	the	road	and	get	lost.	That	will	be	your	great	experience	--	when
you	are	lost.	When	you	are	no	more,	only	existence	is.
And	this	existence	gives	you	such	bliss,	such	ecstasy,	such	eternity,	that	you	are
bound	 to	 feel	 a	 tremendous	 sacredness,	 a	great	 reverence	 for	 life	 and	 this	vast
universe	which	has	given	birth	to	you.
One	day	it	will	allow	you	to	disappear	again	into	the	oceanic	consciousness.	This
entering	into	the	oceanic	consciousness	is	enlightenment.
Shiki	wrote:
THE	MOON	RISES	--
LEAF	UPON	LEAF	UPON	LEAF
FLUTTERS	DOWN.
He	must	be	sitting	under	a	tree,	and	it	must	be	the	time	for	fall.
"The	moon	rises	..."	--	he	is	watching	the	moon	rising.
Zen	has	many	ways	of	meditation	--	watch	the	moon	rising.	The	emphasis	is	on
watching,	not	on	the	moon.	Watch	the	sun	rising.	The	emphasis	is	on	watching,
what	I	am	calling	witnessing	to	make	it	more	clear	--	witness	the	sun	is	rising.
And	 witness	 "leaf	 upon	 leaf	 upon	 leaf	 flutters	 down"	 --	 and	 you	 are	 just	 a
witness.
On	one	side	the	sun	is	rising,	on	the	other	side,	"leaf	upon	leaf	upon	leaf	flutters
down."
And	between	these	two	you	are	just	a	mirror,	no	judgment.
He	 is	not	saying	 that	 the	sunrise	 is	beautiful,	and	he	 is	not	saying	 that	 the	 leaf
upon	leaf	upon	leaf	are	creating	beautiful	music	in	the	air.	No,	he	is	not	making
any	judgment.	He	is	simply	describing	what	he	has	been	witnessing,	just	like	a
mirror,	showing	you	the	sun	is	rising,	and	leaf	upon	leaf	upon	leaf	is	fluttering
down.	He	is	just	a	watcher.
This	is	the	whole	secret	of	Zen.
Question	4
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ST.	BERNARD	WROTE:	 "WHO	 IS	GOD?	 I	CAN	THINK	OF	NO	BETTER
ANSWER
THAN:	HE	WHO	IS."
ECKHART	 STATED:	 "THOU	 MUST	 LOVE	 GOD	 AS	 NOT-GOD,	 NOT-
SPIRIT,	NOT-PERSON,	NOT-IMAGE,	BUT	AS	HE	 IS	 --	A	 SHEER,	 PURE,
ABSOLUTE	 ONE,	 SUNDERED	 FROM	 ALL	 TWONESS	 AND	 IN	 WHOM
WE	MUST	ETERNALLY
SINK	FROM	NOTHINGNESS	TO	NOTHINGNESS."
IF	 ONE	 SUBSTITUTED	 THE	 PRONOUN	 `HE'	 WITH	 ÌT',	 WOULD	 NOT
THESE
TWO	CHRISTIAN	MYSTICS	BE	SPEAKING	THE	LANGUAGE	OF	ZEN?
Maneesha,	you	can	change	thèhe'	into	ìt',	and	certainly	they	will	be	speaking	the
language	of	Zen,	but	you	cannot	do	that.	It	is	their	statement,	not	yours.	They	are
still	saying	`he'.	They	are	not	even	saying	`she';	 ìt'	 is	far	away	--	although	they
have	 come	very	 close	 to	 the	 point.	That's	why	 both	 the	 saints	were	 in	 trouble
with	 the	 orthodox	 church,	 particularly	 Eckhart	 who	 was	 tortured,	 harassed,
threatened	 to	be	expelled	 if	he	published	his	books.	His	books	were	published
after	his	death	because	of	these	statements.
The	statement	is	tremendously	good,	but	still,	somehow	the	faint	image	of	God
is	present.
"Who	is	God?	I	can	think	of	no	better	answer	than:	He	who	is."	Using	the	word
`he'	and	saying	"who	is,"	is	very	close;	only	thèhe'	is	standing	in	between.
That's	 what	 I	 have	 been	 telling	 you	 --	 even	 a	 very	 thin	 concept	 of	 God	 as	 a
person	is	going	to	create	enough	of	a	barrier	for	you.
St.	 Bernard	 has	 come	 very	 close,	 but	 to	 be	 close	 is	 still	 to	 be	 at	 a	 distance.
Closeness	is	a	kind	of	distance.	What	does	it	mean?	You	may	be	one	inch	away,
or	one	mile	away,	or	one	thousand	miles	away	--	you	are	away.	Even	one	inch
away	--	you	are	away.	That	one	inch	is	as	thick	as	the	China	Wall,	solid	rock.
When	 St.	 Bernard	 says,	 "He	 who	 is,"	 using	 the	 word	 `he',	 he	 accepts	 a
personality,	and	not	only	a	personality	but	a	male	personality.	Both	are	wrong.
Existence	 is	 neither	male	 nor	 female.	 It	 expresses	 in	 the	 both	 --	 as	 female,	 as
male,	but	 it	 itself	 is	simply	pure	 isness.	Its	expression	will	be	manifold,	but	 its
essence	is	the	same.	A	woman	in	her	interiority	is	as	pure	a	consciousness	as	a
man	in	his	interiority.
If	St.	Bernard	had	 really	experienced	 isness,	he	would	not	have	used	 the	word
`God'	or
`he'.	He	seems	he	must	have	been	a	great	giant,	but	only	intellectual.	Many	times
philosophers	have	come	very	close,	but	 then	 they	go	on	 in	a	 round	and	go	 far
away.	 Just	 coming	 close	 is	 not	 enough,	 but	 even	 this	 was	 condemned	 by	 the
church,	by	the	pope.
Certainly	 St.	 Bernard	 has	 some	 conception	 of	 a	 male	 God,	 and	 you	 cannot
change	his	statement.	If	you	change	his	statement,	then	it	comes	exactly	to	what
Zen	 is.	 But	 then	 it	 will	 not	 be	 the	 statement	 of	 St.	 Bernard,	 it	 will	 be	 your
statement.
So	I	would	say	that	he	came	very	close,	but	because	of	thèGod',	and	because	the
programming	in	his	mind	of	the	Christian	God	was	still	there,	that	prevented	him
from	the	quantum	leap	from	mind	to	no-mind.	His	idea	is	still	within	the	mind.
He	has	 logically	and	 rationally	worked	out	 that	 if	God	 is	 there	he	can	only	be
described	as	"He	who	is."	But	this	is	not	the	exact	experience.
The	exact	experience	will	not	use	the	word	`God',	will	not	use	the	word	`he'.	It	is
male-chauvinistic,	and	 it	gives	a	personality	 to	existence	which	 it	has	not.	 It	 is
infinite,	so	it	cannot	have	a	personality.	It	cannot	be	called	who,	and	it	cannot	be
called	he.
So	St.	Bernard	is	still	not	enlightened	--	intellectually	great,	logically	great,	but
existentially	still	a	little	far	away	from	the	truth.
Eckhart	comes	even	more	close,	maybe	just	a	fragment	of	an	inch	away,	when	he
says,
"Thou	must	love	God	as	not-God,	not-spirit,	not-person,	not-image,	but	as	he	is	-
-	a	sheer,	pure,	absolute	One,	sundered	from	all	twoness	and	in	whom	we	must
eternally	sink	from	nothingness	to	nothingness."	He	has	come	very	much	closer
than	St.	Bernard,	and	hence	he	was	more	condemned	than	St.	Bernard,	because
he	was	destroying	the	whole	Christian	theology.
But	 still	 I	 say	 he	 is	 within	 the	 framework	 of	 the	 Christian	 God,	 although	 he
seems	to	be	a	far	more	refined	intellect	than	St.	Bernard	--	a	very	thin	barrier,	a
Japanese	rice-paper	barrier.	But	that	is	enough	to	keep	your	eyes	closed.
His	statement	is	beautiful:	"Thou	must	love	God	as	not-God."	But	why	use	the
word
`God'	at	all	if	it	is	to	be	loved	as	not-God?	Why	not	say,	"Thou	must	love	not-
God,	 not-Spirit,	 not-person,	 not-image,	 but	 just	 the	 sheer	 existence,	 pure,
absolute	One,	sundered	from	all	twoness,	and	in	it	we	must	eternally	sink	from
nothingness	 to	 nothingness"?	 But	 his	 beginning,	 "Thou	 must	 love	 God,"	 is	 a
Christian	programming.
Zen	has	dropped	all	programming.	It	has	dared	as	much	as	human	consciousness
is	 capable	 of.	 Now	making	 this	 statement	 has	 a	 certain	 compromise	 with	 the
church.	"Thou	must	 love	God"	--	 so	 the	Christian	church	 is	 satisfied	 that	he	 is
still	 talking	about	God,	although	a	 little	crazy,	because	he	says,	you	must	 love
God	as	not-God.	Then	who	is	he?
a	woman?	a	man?	a	tree?	the	ocean	...?	What	do	you	mean	by	"not-God"?
So	Christianity	 condemned	 him,	 but	 because	 he	was	 saying,	 "Thou	must	 love
God,"	 they	 told	 him	 not	 to	 publish	 such	writings	while	 he	was	 alive,	 because
they	would	create	doubt	in	people's	minds.	And	they	have	been	doing	that	even
today.
They	prevented	one	great	French	scientist,	Chardin,	from	publishing	his	papers
about	the	Peking	man	--	he	discovered	the	Peking	man	--	"because	your	papers
will	go	against	Christianity."	And	because	he	was	an	ordained	priest,	he	had	to
follow	the	orders	from	the	Vatican.	They	destroyed	a	great	man.	He	could	have
contributed	much.	But	 if	 you	don't	 have	 any	 feedback,	 if	 other	 scientists	 don't
know	what	you	are	writing,	what	you	are	discovering,	and	you	don't	know	their
opinions	...	It	needs	constant	feedback.
Science	grows,	not	by	one	scientist,	it	grows	amongst	all	the	scientists.	There	is
a	 constant	 dialogue	 going	 on	 through	 papers,	 through	 conferences,	 through
books,	 through	 periodicals	 ...	 a	 constant	 dialogue	 is	 happening	 all	 around	 the
world.	That's	how	science	tries	to	figure	out	the	best	hypothesis	about	anything.
Now	 preventing	 Chardin	 from	 publishing	 any	 paper,	 from	 attending	 any
conference,	from	writing	any	book	while	he	was	alive	--	and	of	course	when	you
are	dead	 somebody	 else	will	write	 it,	 you	will	 not	 ...	 Somebody	 else	 does	not
have	 the	 same	 scientific	 background,	 nor	 the	 same	 discovery.	 And	 after	 your
death	what	happens	to	your	ideas	will	not	be	a	feedback;	you	will	not	be	able	to
improve	upon	it.	They	destroyed	a	great	scientist	of	 the	same	caliber	as	Albert
Einstein.
But	I	am	also	angry	at	Chardin.	Rather	than	stopping	his	writings	and	researches,
why	did	he	not	resign	from	being	a	Christian	priest?	He	resigned	from	science	in
favor	 of	Christian	 superstition.	Nobody	 has	 raised	 the	 question	 that	 he	 is	 also
part	of	the	whole	slavery	game;	everybody	has	condemned	the	Vatican.
I	 condemn	 the	Vatican,	 but	 I	 also	 condemn	Chardin	 --	Chardin	more	 than	 the
Vatican.
The	Vatican	has	been	doing	 that	 for	 centuries	 --	 that	 is	not	new.	But	why	was
Chardin	 such	 a	 sheep?	Why	 could	 he	 not	 gather	 the	 courage?	A	man	 of	 such
tremendous	 intelligence	 should	 have	 left	 the	 priesthood.	 What	 was	 in	 it?	 A
religion	that	prevents	you	from	declaring	truth	is	not	worth	being	part	of.
But	he	proved	a	coward	--	he	stopped	writing.	And	now	a	Chardin	society	exists
in	France	which	publishes	his	works	and	papers	and	his	researches	--	but	it	is	too
late.	If	somebody	raises	a	question,	Chardin	is	not	 there	to	answer.	And	by	the
time	Chardin	died,	other	scientists	had	come	to	better	hypotheses.	If	he	had	been
allowed,	 or	 if	 he	 had	 had	 the	 guts	 to	 come	 out	 of	 the	 church,	 he	would	 have
managed	 to	 refine.	 It	 is	 a	 continuous	 growth	 and	 evolution.	 Science	 is	 not
something	static.
When	 Albert	 Einstein	 was	 asked,	 "If	 you	 had	 not	 discovered	 the	 theory	 of
relativity,	 do	 you	 think	 it	 would	 ever	 have	 been	 discovered?"	 Albert	 Einstein
said,	"It	would	not	have	taken	more	than	three	weeks."	And	finally	it	was	found
that	somebody	in	Germany	had	already	discovered	it	before	Albert	Einstein,	but
he	was	a	 lazy	guy	and	did	not	publish	 the	paper.	So	not	after	 three	weeks,	but
three	weeks	before,	it	had	been	found.
Einstein	was	 right	 --	 that	when	something	 is	 there,	 sooner	or	 later	 it	has	 to	be
discovered.
You	cannot	go	on	missing	it	if	there	is	a	truth	in	it.
Eckhart	 also	 proved	 to	 be	 a	 little	 cowardly,	 just	 like	 Chardin.	 He	 came	 very
close,	but	he	continuously	maintained	that	he	loved	God.	Of	course	he	has	those
conditions	"as	not-God	..."	Then	as	what?	And	if	you	are	loving	only	the	isness
of	existence,	then	why	go	on	calling	it	God?	Why	continue	that	old	superstition,
that	old	lie?	Just	a	compromise	with	the	Vatican,	just	a	fear	that	if	you	don't	do
that	much	you	are	taking	a	risk	with	your	life.
I	was	born	into	Jainism,	and	when	I	started	speaking	against	their	ideologies	--
and	 when	 I	 say	 anything	 I	 say	 it	 with	my	 total	 being	 --	 they	 were	 unable	 to
answer	me.	 Their	 highest	 command	 decided	 to	 expel	me	 from	 Jainism.	 But	 I
wrote	 to	 them:	 "You	need	not	 expel	me,	 I	 expel	 your	whole	 Jainism	and	your
whole	 Jaina	 society.	You	need	not	 expel	me,	 I	 have	 already	expelled	you."	So
they	were	shocked,	they	could	not	figure	out	what	to	do.	They	could	not	expel
me,	I	was	already	outside	--	what	does	it	matter?	And	I	don't	 think	it	has	done
any	harm	to	me.
Compromise	is	always	cowardly.
Truth	never	compromises.
Maneesha,	 both	 these	 people	were	 very	 close	 to	 Zen,	 but	 both	were	 cowards.
God	makes	 people	 cowards.	Religion	makes	 people	 cowards.	Otherwise,	what
was	the	risk?	Eckhart	should	have	left	Christianity,	St.	Bernard	should	have	left
Christianity,	 and	 then	 they	would	 have	 been	 the	 very	 first	 Zen	masters	 in	 the
West.	But	they	missed	that	great	opportunity,	 that	great	dignity.	They	remained
slaves	of	the	Christian	church.
I	want	 you	 to	 be	 lions	 and	 not	 like	 sheep	 as	 Jesus	wanted	 you	 to	 be.	He	 has
insulted	humanity	very	badly.
It	 is	 time	 for	 Sardar	Gurudayal	 Singh	 --	 a	 really	 great	 time.	 Put	 on	 the	 light,
because	I	want	to	see	the	faces	of	my	people	laughing!
Three	women	--	Betty	Boobs,	Lucy	Legs,	and	Nellie	Knickers	--	meet	at	an	old
high-school	reunion.	They	soon	start	gossiping	about	the	men	they	have	married,
and	what	they	are	like	in	bed.
"My	 husband,	 Bob,"	 says	 Betty	 Boobs,	 "is	 like	 a	 1989	 Rolls	 Royce	 --
comfortable,	sizeable,	powerful,	and	very	satisfying!"
"My	 husband,	 Larry,"	 says	 Lucy	 Legs,	 "is	 like	 a	 1970	 Cadillac	 --	 still	 fairly
comfortable	and	satisfying,	but	lacks	performance	sometimes.	Generally,	quite	a
good	ride."
"Hmm,	my	husband,	Norbert,"	says	Nellie	Knickers,	"is	like	a	vintage	Model-T
Ford.
"Really?"	say	 the	other	 two,	staring	at	Nellie	 in	amazement.	"Why	do	you	say
that?"
"Well,"	continues	Nellie,	"what	I	mean	is	--	he	manages	to	rally	twice	a	year,	but
he	has	to	be	started	by	hand!"
On	 the	 forty-second	 floor	 of	 the	 Fast	 Buck	 Brokers	 building,	 executive	 vice-
president,	Bilbo	Ballbag,	is	interviewing	girls	for	a	secretarial	job.
After	 examining	 many	 talented	 and	 capable	 applicants,	 Bilbo	 finally	 hires
Gorgeous	Gloria	for	the	job.
After	 two	 days,	 Gloria	 is	 bending	 down	 to	 get	 something	 from	 the	 bottom
drawer	of	 the	filing	cabinet,	and	Bilbo	Ballbag	gets	an	eyeful.	He	immediately
calls	her	into	his	office.
"Look,	Gloria,"	he	says,	his	eyes	playing	with	her	 tits,	"I	wonder	if	you	would
mind	working	with	me	over	the	weekend?"
"Sure,"	says	Gloria,	giving	Bilbo	a	wink,	"that	would	be	great."
"Good,"	 replies	Bilbo,	 "we	can	get	 all	 this	 extra	work	done	aboard	my	 luxury
sailboat!"
"Ah,	dear,"	says	Gloria,	"but	I	get	terribly	seasick."
"Don't	worry!"	says	Bilbo,	perspiring	as	he	 loosens	his	 tie.	"I	will	 take	care	of
everything."
That	evening,	on	his	way	home	from	work,	Bilbo	stops	in	at	 the	drugstore.	He
goes	up	to	the	counter	and	approaches	Victor	Vaseline,	the	clerk.
"Give	me	a	pack	of	Trojan	condoms,"	 says	Bilbo,	 "and	a	bottle	of	 seasickness
pills."
"Yes,	 sir,"	 says	 Victor,	 fumbling	 around	 under	 the	 counter,	 and	 discreetly
handing	Bilbo	the	two	items.	"It	 is	none	of	my	business,	sir,"	continues	Victor,
"but	if	it	affects	you	like	that,	why	do	you	bother?"
Amongst	 the	 early	Christians,	 it	was	 rumored	 that	 the	 Lord	 and	 Savior,	 Jesus
Christ,	was	blessed	with	enormous	sexual	machinery,	which	used	to	terrorize	all
his	followers,	men	and	women	alike.
As	the	story	goes:	On	that	fateful	day	on	Calvary	Hill,	Jesus	had	been	hanging
on	his	cross	for	a	couple	of	hours,	staring	up	at	the	sky,	waiting	for	Godot.
He	 looks	 down	 and	 sees	 his	 favorite	 girl,	 Mary	 Magdalena,	 weeping	 in	 the
crowd,	and	feels	a	stirring	of	the	spirit	in	his	loincloth.
"Mary!	Mary!"	Jesus	calls	out.	"Come	closer!"
Hesitantly,	Mary	walks	out	of	the	crowd	towards	the	cross.	She	comes	closer,	but
stops	in	her	tracks	when	she	sees	the	huge	growing	lump	in	Christ's	knickers.
"Mary!	Mary!"	moans	Jesus.	"Closer,	come	closer!"
Mary	 shuffles	 forward	 nervously	 eyeing	 the	 ever-growing	 mountain	 in	 his
underpants	--
then	she	stops,	again.
"Mary!	Mary!"	gasps	Jesus.	"I	have	something	from	the	Holy	Ghost	to	impart	to
you	--
come	closer!"
"Ah!	Christ,	No!"	cries	Mary,	her	eyes	popping	out.	"Don't	give	me	anymore	of
that	Holy	Ghost	shit!	I	can	see	your	resurrection	from	here!"
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
(Gibberish)
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Be	silent	...
Close	your	eyes,	and	feel	your	body	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	 is	 the	 right	 moment	 to	 enter	 inwards.	 Gather	 all	 your	 energy,	 your	 total
consciousness,	 and	 rush	 towards	 the	 center	of	your	being,	which	 is	 just	 below
your	navel,	inside	--	two	inches	below,	exactly	--	with	an	urgency,	as	if	this	is	the
last	moment	 of	 your	 life.	Only	 those	 people	 have	 ever	 reached	 to	 their	 center
who	had	this	urgency,	this	intensity.
Faster	and	faster	...
Deeper	and	deeper	...
As	you	come	closer	to	your	inner	center,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you	just
like	soft	rain	with	all	its	coolness.	And	inside	you,	a	great	peace	arises,	a	peace
that	passeth	understanding.
A	little	more	close	--	and	you	feel	so	blessed.
A	little	more	close,	and	you	are	getting	drunk	with	the	divine.	Just	one	step	and
you	are	at	the	center	of	your	being,	utterly	ecstatic.
As	you	get	 centered,	you	are	no	more,	 just	 a	pure	 isness.	This	 isness	we	have
called	symbolically,	the	buddha.	This	is	your	original	being.
Centered,	silent,	no	more	your	old	being	--	utterly	naked,	just	a	pillar	of	light	...
you	are	the	buddha.
Everybody	is	born	with	a	hidden	buddha	in	him.
The	word	buddha	means	the	awakened	one.
It	is	everybody's	eternal	birthright.
The	buddha	has	only	one	quality:	watching,	witnessing.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind.
And	 finally,	 witness	 that	 you	 are	 only	 a	 witness	 --	 just	 a	 mirror	 reflecting
everything.
At	 this	moment	 you	 are	 the	most	 fortunate	 people	 on	 the	 earth.	 Everybody	 is
concerned	with	trivia;	you	are	entering	into	the	essential	and	the	eternal.
You	can	feel	a	tremendous	reverence	for	existence,	a	great	joy	in	the	sacredness
of	everything.	The	whole	universe	becomes	your	home;	you	are	not	an	outsider.
To	make	your	witnessing	deeper,
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Relax	...	but	go	on	remembering	that	you	are	only	a	witness.
As	your	witnessing	deepens,	you	start	melting	 into	an	ocean	of	consciousness.
Ten	 thousand	 buddhas	 disappear	 into	 one	 consciousness,	 into	 one	 ocean	 of
consciousness.
Gautama	 the	 Buddha	 Auditorium	 has	 turned	 into	 an	 ocean	 of	 consciousness
without	any	waves	and	without	any	ripples	--	utterly	silent	and	quiet.
This	is	your	real	space,	 this	 is	your	no-mind.	From	this	no-mind	you	can	enter
into	the	cosmos.	This	is	the	door,	the	opening.
Collect	 the	 peace,	 the	 silence,	 the	 blissfulness,	 the	 ecstasy,	 the	 divine
drunkenness,	before	Nivedano	calls	you	back.
And	also	persuade	the	buddha	to	come	behind	you	--	he	is	your	dhamma.	He	is
your	nature;	 you	have	 just	 never	 requested	him.	And	he	has	been	waiting	 and
waiting,	hidden	deep	inside	you.	A	sincere	request,	a	welcoming	heart,	and	he	is
bound	to	come	behind	you.
This	is	the	first	step	of	enlightenment:	Gautam	Buddha	behind	you	as	a	shadow.
But	the	shadow	is	miraculous,	the	shadow	is	not	dark;	the	shadow	is	pure	light,
pure	presence.
You	can	feel	the	warmth	of	it,	you	can	almost	feel	the	touch	of	it.	It	surrounds
you	with	a	new	fragrance,	and	it	gives	you	a	totally	new	dimension	to	live.
Your	 everyday	 acts	 start	 changing	 their	 color,	 their	 approach.	 Your	 very	 life
becomes	meditative.
At	 the	 second	 stage,	 the	 buddha	 comes	 in	 front	 of	 you,	 and	 you	 become	 the
shadow.	 To	 be	 a	 shadow	 of	 the	 buddha	 is	 a	 beautiful	 experience.	 And	 the
experience	goes	on	becoming	deeper	and	deeper	as	the	shadow	disappears.
At	the	third	and	final	stage,	there	is	no	more	of	you	--	not	even	a	shadow,	only
the	buddha	is.
This	 isness	 is	 the	master	key	 to	open	all	 the	doors	of	 the	mysterious	existence
that	 surrounds	 you.	 Once	 you	 have	 the	 key,	 you	 are	 the	 master	 of	 your	 own
being.	There	is	nobody	above	you,	there	is	nobody	below	you.	For	the	first	time
you	experience	a	tremendous	communion	with	the	whole	existence.
I	call	this	the	only	authentic	spirituality,	the	only	authentic	religiousness.
Now	don't	forget	to	request	the	buddha	to	come	behind	you	...
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Come	back	...	but	come	as	a	buddha,	with	great	grace,	peace,	silence.
Sit	 down	 for	 a	 few	moments	 just	 to	 remember	 the	 golden	 path	 that	 you	 have
traveled,	the	center	that	you	have	found	within	you,	the	opening	into	the	cosmos,
and	all	those	fragrances	from	the	beyond;	the	silence	showering	on	you,	and	the
warmth	of	the	buddha	who	has	come	behind	you.
You	can	feel	him.	It	 is	your	very	nature.	 It	 is	you	 in	your	 truthfulness,	 in	your
existential	experience.
If	 the	 first	 step	 is	 complete,	 the	 second	 will	 follow	 automatically.	 When	 the
second	is	complete,	the	third	will	follow	automatically.
The	day	you	will	complete	the	third	step	will	be	the	most	fortunate	day	in	your
life.	That	day	you	will	be	awakened	 from	a	 long,	 long	 sleep,	 a	 spiritual	 sleep.
That	day	you	will	become	enlightened.
Then	 there	 is	 no	 more	 birth,	 no	 more	 death.	 You	 have	 become	 one	 with	 the
whole.
This	is	the	only	holiness	I	know	of.	There	is	no	other.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
I	Celebrate	Myself:	God	Is	No	Where,	Life	Is	Now	Here
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	The	paradise	of	yourself
15	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902155
ShortTitle:
CELEBR03
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
170
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ONE	 TIME,	WHEN	DAITEN	CAME	TO	 SEKITO,	 THE	MASTER	ASKED
HIM,
"ARE	YOU	A	ZEN	MONK	OR	AN	ORDINARY	MONK?"
DAITEN	REPLIED,	"I'M	A	ZEN	MONK."
SEKITO	ASKED,	"WHAT	is	ZEN?"
DAITEN	 REPLIED,	 "IT	 IS	 RAISING	 EYEBROWS	 AND	 MOVING
EYEBALLS."
SEKITO	 SAID,	 "EXCLUDING	 RAISING	 EYEBROWS	 AND	 MOVING
EYEBALLS,	BRING	YOUR	ORIGINAL	FACE	AND	SHOW	IT	TO	ME."
DAITEN	SAID,	 "PLEASE	OSHO,	EXCLUDE	RAISING	EYEBROWS	AND
MOVING
EYEBALLS,	AND	LOOK	AT	ME."
SEKITO	SAID,	"I	HAVE	EXCLUDED	THEM."
DAITEN	SAID,	"I	HAVE	GIVEN	IT	TO	YOU."
SEKITO	SAID,	"WHAT	IS	THE	NO-MIND	YOU	HAVE	GIVEN	TO	ME?"
DAITEN	SAID,	"NOT	DIFFERENT	FROM	YOU,	OSHO."
SEKITO	SAID,	"NO	CONCERN	ABOUT	YOU."
DAITEN	SAID,	"REALLY,	THERE	IS	NOT	A	NO-MIND	NATURE."
SEKITO	SAID,	"IS	THERE	NOT	A	THING	WITH	YOU	ALSO?"
DAITEN	SAID,	 "IF	THERE	 IS	NOT	A	THING	ANYMORE,	THAT	 IS	THE
REAL
THING."
SEKITO	SAID,	"THE	REAL	THING	CANNOT	BE	OBTAINED.	SO,	THAT	IS
WHAT
YOU	UNDERSTAND.	RETAIN	IT	FIRMLY	AND	KEEP	IT."
DAITEN	 THEN	 LEFT	 SEKITO	 AND	 RETIRED	 TO	 MOUNT	 REIAN	 IN
SOUTHERN
CHINA,	WHERE	MANY	DISCIPLES	WOULD	LATER	GATHER	AROUND
HIM.
Friends,
I	have	been	saying	for	years	that	it	is	time	that	the	politicians	should	be	watched,
and	they	should	be	looked	after	by	psychiatrists,	psychoanalysts.
Since	 nuclear	weapons	 have	 come	 into	 existence,	 the	 politicians	 have	 become
immensely	 powerful.	 Power	 certainly	 corrupts,	 and	 absolute	 power	 corrupts
absolutely.	It	not	only	corrupts,	it	gives	you	a	megalomania.	And	every	politician
is	a	split	personality;	he	has	to	be.	He	says	one	thing,	he	does	another.	He	always
has	a	mask	to	show	to	the	people,	and	his	real	face	is	always	hidden.	The	longer
he	remains	in	power,	the	more	possibility	of	his	going	neurotic,	schizophrenic.
It	was	okay	in	the	past,	because	all	these	politicians	could	not	do	much	harm,	but
today	 it	 is	 absolutely	 different.	 A	 single	 politician	 who	 is	 mentally,
psychologically	sick,	can	destroy	the	whole	beautiful	planet.
I	have	been	waiting	 for	psychoanalysts	and	psychiatrists	 themselves	 to	declare
this	situation,	and	the	declaration	has	come	today.
Two	 psychiatrists,	 very	 famous,	 known	worldwide,	Dr.	 Jablow	Hershman	 and
Dr.	Julian	Lieb,	wrote	in	the	WASHINGTON	POST	recently	that	there	should	be
a	 shrink	 in	 the	White	 House.	 At	 present	 there	 is	 an	 official	 physician	 for	 the
president,	but	no	psychiatrist.	They	said,	"In	this	nuclear	age,	when	the	president
of	 the	U.S.	 can	 start	 a	 nuclear	war,	 one	 has	 to	make	 sure	 that	 he	 is	mentally
stable,	and	not	subject	to	euphoria,	manic	depression,	or	suicidal	tendencies."
They	 cited	 several	 examples.	 "President	 Nixon,	 before	 he	 resigned,	 had	 been
miserable	for	months	--	avoiding	people,	taking	long	walks	alone.	He	refused	to
talk	about	how	he	felt,	and	had	drawn	away	from	his	family.	He	was	not	sleeping
enough,	and	once	could	not	sleep	for	four	nights	in	a	row.	He	was	drinking	too
much,	sometimes	before	lunch.	He	had	become	unpredictable:	one	minute	close
to	tears,	the	next	furious	over	some	bit	of	nonsense,	and	an	hour	later	on	top	of
the	world.	Sometimes	he	seemed	out	of	 focus.	He	rambled	or	gave	orders	 that
were	ridiculous.	One	night	he	walked	the	halls	of	the	White	House	talking	to	the
portraits	on	the	walls.	He	hinted	of	suicide.
"Such	episodes,"	say	Hershman	and	Lieb,	"are	usually	kept	under	wraps,	but	we
have	begun	 to	 realize	how	widespread	 the	phenomenon	 is	 --	 from	the	periodic
inertia	of	Ronald	Reagan,	to	the	latest	revelations	about	Lyndon	Johnson,	to	the
details	 of	 incapacitating	 conditions	 suffered	by	Woodrow	Wilson	 and	Franklin
Roosevelt."
It	would	be	a	good	sign	if	every	president,	not	only	the	American	president,	but
every	 prime	minister	 --	whoever	 has	 the	 power	 to	 destroy	 this	world	 --	 had	 a
personal	psychiatrist	 looking	after	him.	But	 that	 is	not	enough.	Man	 is	body	--
the	personal	physician	can	look	after	it.	Man	is	mind	--	the	psychiatrist	can	look
after	 it.	 But	 man	 is	 something	 more	 too.	 So	 what	 these	 two	 psychiatrists,
Hershman	and	Lieb,	are	suggesting	is	an	incomplete	cure.
Every	president,	every	prime	minister,	every	king	around	the	world,	should	also
have	a	master	of	meditation.	Only	 then	we	can	be	 safe,	and	 this	planet	can	be
safe.
Psychiatry	can	only	help	to	keep	the	mind	normal,	at	the	most,	but	its	limit	is	the
mind.
But	man's	existence	is	far	bigger,	it	is	beyond	the	mind.	That	beyond	has	to	be
understood	also,	and	that	beyond	only	can	create	right	sanity.	That	beyond	can
make	you	peaceful	and	silent,	creative,	celebrating.	Once	you	know	something
of	the	beyond,	you	are	no	more	suicidal,	and	you	are	no	more	murderous.
Nuclear	weapons	will	disappear	 from	the	world	 if	we	can	make	 the	politicians
understand	 the	 absolute	 necessity.	 Just	 as	 they	 are	 not	 feeling	 embarrassed	 by
having	 a	 personal	 physician,	 they	 should	 not	 be	 embarrassed	 by	 having	 a
personal	psychiatrist,	and	they	should	not	be	embarrassed	by	having	a	personal
master	of	meditation.	These	have	become	absolute	necessities.
If	we	want	the	world	to	survive,	the	politicians	have	to	be	kept	under	control	by
intelligent	people,	 by	people	who	know	 the	 secrets	of	 life,	 of	 eternity,	 and	 the
people	who	 can	 impart	 that	 energy,	 that	 understanding,	 that	 experience	 of	 the
innermost	 being.	 This	 is	 the	 only	 possibility,	 otherwise	 there	 is	 no	 hope	 for
humanity,	and	no	hope	for	life	--	no	hope	for	Gautam	Buddhas,	people	rising	to
the	highest	peak	of	consciousness,	to	the	deepest	depth	of	consciousness.
And	 this	planet	 is	 special.	 It	 is	 a	very	 small	planet,	but	 it	 is	 absolutely	unique
because	it	has	life,	consciousness,	and	the	opportunity	for	evolving	into	Gautam
Buddhas.	It	should	be	saved	at	any	cost.	We	cannot	afford	a	global	suicide.
I	thank	Dr.	Hershman	and	Dr.	Lieb	for	their	suggestions,	but	I	would	like	them	to
know	that	 their	suggestions	are	incomplete,	because	more	psychiatrists	go	mad
than	any	other	profession	--	four	times	more.	More	psychiatrists	commit	suicide
than	any	other	profession.	More	psychiatrists	are	vulnerable	to	all	kinds	of	mind
sicknesses,	because	 the	psychiatrist	 is	not	 a	meditator.	This	 is	our	whole	 inner
poverty.
The	 psychiatrist	 knows	 about	 the	 mind,	 but	 mind	 is	 not	 in	 itself	 the	 eternal
source	of	life.
It	 can	 slip	 at	 any	 moment	 into	 neurosis.	 At	 any	 moment	 it	 can	 become
megalomaniac.	A	little	power	...
I	am	also	worried	about	the	psychiatrists	who	will	be	looking	after	the	presidents
and	 the	 prime	ministers.	 They	 themselves	may	 turn	 out	 to	 be	megalomaniacs
because	they	now	have	great	power!
So	their	suggestion	is	good,	but	it	has	to	be	supported	by	a	master	of	meditation
who	can	 look	after	 the	president	or	prime	minister,	and	also	can	 look	after	 the
psychiatrist.	Do	you	understand	what	I	mean?
It	is	absolutely	urgent	because	we	don't	have	much	time	before	somebody	goes
crazy.
Any	moment	the	destruction	of	the	earth	is	imminent.
The	questions	from	sannyasins.
Question	1
The	first	question:
I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 EXISTENCE	 IS	 NON-JUDGMENTAL,	 BUT	 OUR
MINDS	ARE
FULL	OF	JUDGMENTS.
WHERE	DO	THEY	COME	FROM?	ARE	THEY	ALSO	RELATED	TO	THE
IDEA	OF
GOD?
Existence	is	non-judgmental.
That	is	one	of	the	greatest	contributions	of	Zen	to	humanity:	that	you	need	not	be
a	 saint	 to	 be	 awakened.	 You	 can	 be	 awakened	 from	 any	 angle,	 from	 any
dimension	of	life.
It	 is	 almost	 like	 somebody	 is	 dreaming	 that	 he	 is	 murdering	 someone,	 and
somebody	 else	 is	 dreaming	 a	 very	 sweet	 dream	 that	 he	 is	 serving	 the	 poor
people.	Somebody	is	dreaming	that	he	is	very	virtuous,	a	saint,	and	somebody	is
dreaming	that	he	is	a	murderer,	the	worst	kind	of	criminal.
Do	you	 think	 the	 saintly	 dreamer	will	wake	up	 sooner,	 and	 the	 sinner	 and	 the
criminal	 will	 take	 a	 little	 longer	 time	 to	 wake	 up?	 They	 will	 both	 wake	 up
exactly	at	the	same	time,	by	the	same	method.	Just	throw	one	bucket	full	of	ice-
cold	 water	 on	 both	 and	 they	 will	 jump	 out	 of	 their	 beds.	 It	 does	 not	 matter
whether	they	were	dreaming	of	sin	or	they	were	dreaming	of	virtue.
Zen's	understanding	is	--	and	I	absolutely	support	it,	it	is	my	own	experience	--
that	you	can	wake	up	wherever	you	are,	whatever	you	are	doing;	your	actions,
your	 personality,	 your	 character,	 don't	 count	 at	 all.	 This	 is	 a	 tremendous
declaration	 because	 all	 religions	 have	 been	 telling	 you,	 "First	 you	 have	 to
become	a	saint,	then	only	can	you	enter	into	the	paradise	of	God."
Zen	gives	you	a	 tremendous	equality.	It	does	not	matter	what	you	are	doing,	 it
does	 not	 matter	 how	 you	 are	 behaving,	 it	 does	 not	 matter	 what	 is	 your
personality	 --	 polished,	 crude,	 uncultured	 ...	 You	 can	 wake	 up	 by	 the	 same
method,	 meditation,	 directly,	 without	 changing	 anything	 in	 your	 character,	 in
your	actions.
And	existence	in	this	way	is	non-judgmental.	It	gives	life	to	the	sinner,	it	gives
life	to	the	saint,	without	any	discrimination.	It	gives	love,	showers	silence	over
all,	without	any	discrimination.
Your	 question	 is,	 where	 do	 these	 judgments	 come	 from?	 Fundamentally,
originally,	they	come	from	the	fiction	of	God.	But	a	fiction	cannot	do	anything,
the	fiction	has	to	hire	living	people.	They	come	from	your	priesthood,	from	your
popes,	your	shankaracharyas,	your	imams,	your	Ayatolla	Khomeniacs.
Just	 now,	 one	Mohammedan	 has	written	 a	 book	 about	 the	 holy	Koran.	 It	 has
been	 banned	 by	 Rajiv	 Gandhi	 --	 and	 he	 has	 not	 read	 it	 --	 because	 the
Mohammedan	pressure	in	India	is	of	immense	importance.	They	vote	in	a	solid
block	and	they	are	second	to	Hindus	--	they	create	fear.	They	asked	that	the	book
should	be	banned.	It	is	being	banned	in	many	countries	which	are	Mohammedan.
Ayatolla	Khomeini	 came	 on	 the	 radio	 in	 Iran	 and	 declared	 that	 wherever	 this
man	is,	he	has	to	be	immediately	killed,	murdered	--	not	only	the	person	who	has
written	 the	book,	but	 the	person	who	has	published	 it,	and	 the	person	who	has
printed	it,	and	the	person	who	has	the	sole	agency	to	sell	it.	All	four	have	to	be
butchered	wherever	they	are.	And	it	is	the	duty	of	every	Mohammedan	to	finish
them	off	as	quickly	as	possible	and	burn	all	the	copies	of	the	book.	Not	a	single
copy	should	remain	anywhere	in	existence.	And	that	man	has	done	an	immense
job	of	analysis.
This	you	call	a	world	which	is	democratic?
This	you	call	a	world	where	there	is	freedom	of	speech?
These	priests	are	the	source,	the	immediate	source.	In	the	name	of	God	they	have
made	your	minds	judgmental.	Without	understanding	anything,	you	are	carrying
judgments	in	your	mind.
The	moment	you	see	something,	immediately	a	judgment	arises.	You	don't	have
to	 make	 the	 judgment	 it	 has	 become	 almost	 automatic.	 You	 see	 a	 rose	 and
suddenly	you	watch	a	judgment	arising:	"This	is	beautiful."	But	the	moment	you
say,	"This	is	beautiful,"	the	judgment	is	hiding	the	rose.	The	judgment	is	coming
from	 past	 experiences	 of	 roses.	But	 this	 is	 a	 new	 rose,	 you	 have	 never	met	 it
before,	 it	 has	never	before	been	on	 the	 earth.	For	 the	 first	 and	 last	 time	 it	 has
come	into	expression.	You	may	have	seen	roses,	but	this	one	is	not	the	same.	All
your	judgments	about	other	roses	are	figments	of	your	memory.
The	robotlike	arises	in	you:	"This	is	beautiful"	--	not	 that	you	have	understood
its	beauty,	not	that	you	are	existentially	in	direct	contact	with	its	beauty,	not	that
your	eyes	are	absolutely	pure	and	rejoicing	the	beauty	of	the	rose.
The	judgment	comes	and	you	destroy	the	rose.
The	 judgment	 stands	 between	 you	 and	 the	 rose,	 and	 you	 are	 lost	 into	 past
memories	of	roses	that	you	have	seen	before.	But	this	is	not	one	that	you	have
ever	come	across.
Any	judgment	 is	past	oriented,	and	existence	 is	always	herenow,	 life	 is	always
herenow.
All	 judgments	 are	 coming	 from	 your	 past	 experiences,	 your	 education,	 your
religion,	 your	 parents	 --	 which	 may	 be	 dead,	 but	 their	 judgments	 are	 being
carried	 by	 your	 mind	 and	 they	 will	 be	 given	 as	 a	 heritage	 to	 your	 children.
Generation	after	generation,	every	disease	is	being	transferred	as	a	heritage.
Only	 a	 non-judgmental	 mind	 has	 intelligence,	 because	 it	 is	 spontaneously
responding	to	reality.
I	want	you	to	drop	God.
I	want	you	to	drop	your	scriptures.
I	want	you	to	drop	your	parents.
I	want	you	to	drop	everything	that	has	been	given	to	you	with	all	good	intentions
--	 that	 does	 not	matter.	 Those	 good	 intentions	 don't	 have	 any	weight	 but	 they
have	made	you	judgmental.
So	immediately,	without	knowing,	without	understanding,	without	experiencing,
you	 come	 to	 a	 judgment.	The	 judgment	 comes	 immediately,	 so	quickly	 that	 if
you	are	not	alert	enough	you	are	not	going	to	be	able	to	get	rid	of	them.	They	are
just	waiting	there	in	your	mind,	in	your	storage	of	the	memory.	The	moment	you
see	 something,	 the	 moment	 you	 hear	 something,	 immediately	 comes	 the
judgment:	"It	is	right,	it	is	wrong.	It	is	according	to	my	mind,	hence	I	agree	with
it."
But	 if	 you	 are	 agreeing	 according	 to	 your	mind	you	 are	 not	 agreeing,	 you	 are
simply	getting	your	mind	to	become	stronger.
The	function	of	the	master	is	a	very	delicate	one.	He	has	to	take	away	all	your
mind,	slowly	slowly,	so	that	a	certain	pure	space	exists	in	your	mind.	Then	only
have	 you	 the	 eyes	 to	 see,	 and	 the	 ears	 to	 hear.	 Then	 everything	 goes	 deep,
without	any	obstacles,	to	your	very	center	of	being.
Everything	in	existence	is	nourishing.
Everything	 in	 existence	 has	 its	 own	 purpose,	 it	 is	 fulfilling	 its	 own	 job.	 That
which	you	deny	according	to	your	borrowed	knowledge	is	needed	by	existence,
otherwise	 it	would	 not	 have	 been	 there.	Anything	 that	 is	 happening	 anywhere
must	have	some	support	from	existence,	otherwise	it	will	simply	drop	dead.
Life	needs	variety.	Just	think	of	a	world	where	everybody	is	a	saint	--	it	will	be
the	worst	world,	the	most	boring.	And	the	boredom	will	become	so	heavy	that	it
will	create	only	one	desire:	how	to	finish	yourself,	because	you	cannot	finish	all
the	 saints.	Only	you	 can	 commit	 suicide	 to	 get	 out	 of	 that	 boredom.	 If	 all	 the
people	were	of	the	same	size	and	had	the	same	faces	...	howsoever	beautiful	the
faces,	 howsoever	 beautiful	 the	 personalities,	 if	 they	were	 all	 the	 same,	 carbon
copies	of	carbon	copies,	you	would	be	utterly	bored.
Knowing	 one	 woman	 you	 would	 know	 all	 women,	 finished	 --	 there	 is	 no
opportunity	 to	 have	 another	 experience.	 Knowing	 one	 man	 you	 would	 have
known	all	men.
And	 that	 is	 not	 right	 because	 every	 man	 is	 different	 and	 every	 woman	 is
different.	Every	rose	is	different	from	other	roses,	every	flower	is	different	from
other	flowers.
Just	now,	as	I	was	getting	ready	to	come	here,	taking	my	bath,	the	cuckoos	in	my
garden	were	really	going	cuckoo!	But	I	wondered	that	every	cuckoo	has	its	own
song	to	sing.	I	could	make	out	clearly	how	many	cuckoos	there	were.	Their	song
was	different,	their	sound	was	different.
Existence	takes	care	of	variety.
Sinners	are	also	needed	in	this	world	--	they	make	life	more	cheerful.	Saints	are
also	needed	as	an	example	that	you	should	not	follow	them.	They	are	as	dead	as
dodos.	They	are	good	examples	to	avoid.	Sinners	are	nice	people.	I	have	never
seen	a	sinner	sad	and	I	have	never	seen	a	saint	joyful.	It	is	strange,	it	should	have
been	otherwise	if	religions	were	true.	But	religions	are	not	true.
Sinners	 have	 a	 quality	 of	 innocence	 which	 saints	 don't	 have.	 They	 are	 very
calculating,	 very	 cunning.	 What	 they	 are	 doing	 in	 their	 saintliness	 is	 just
purchasing	some	good	land,	some	good	house,	some	bank	account	 in	 the	other
world.	They	are	 so	greedy	 that	 they	are	not	 satisfied	with	 this	beautiful	planet
and	 this	beautiful	dance	of	 life.	Sinners	 are	non-greedy	people,	 they	 rejoice	 in
small	things	--	a	beautiful	woman,	delicious	food,	just	a	little	drink;	and	they	are
so	happy	 to	dance	 and	 sing	 and	 celebrate.	These	 are	 the	 real	 salt	 of	 the	 earth.
They	are	needed.	And	saints	are	needed	so	that	you	can	avoid	them.
But	 remember,	 everything	 in	 this	 world	 has	 its	 own	 place	 and	 has	 its	 own
dignity,	and	by	your	 judgment	you	are	destroying	 the	dignity	of	 someone,	you
are	interfering	into	somebody's	territory.
A	 man	 who	 is	 full	 of	 judgment	 becomes	 ugly,	 become	 unbearable.	 A	 man
without	 judgment	 is	 always	 welcomed	 by	 everyone	 because	 he	 will	 never
interfere	 into	 your	 territory,	 he	 will	 never	 trespass	 your	 spirituality	 and	 your
dignity.
All	 your	 judgments	 are	 coming	 from	 the	 priesthood	 in	 the	 name	of	God.	God
cannot	 do	 it	 by	 himself	 because	 he	 is	 a	 lie;	 he	 does	 not	 exist,	 he	 has	 never
existed.	But	priests	go	on	supporting	the	lie,	it	is	their	very	profession.	If	God	is
exposed	completely	then	the	priests	have	no	way	to	continue	their	exploitation	of
humanity.	They	are	selling	God	to	almost	the	whole	of	humanity	--	a	God	which
does	not	exist.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 shop	 in	 New	 York	 which	 was	 advertising:	 "We	 have
manufactured	invisible	hairpins."
Certainly	there	were	queues	of	women.	Invisible	hairpins?	No	woman	can	resist
the	temptation.
One	woman	looked	into	the	box	when	she	got	 it	--	of	course	the	invisible	pins
you	cannot	see	--	seeing	the	box	empty,	she	asked	the	salesman,	"Are	you	sure
that	there	are	invisible	hairpins	inside?"
He	said,	"To	be	frank	with	you,	we	have	run	out	of	invisible	hairpins	for	almost
two	 weeks,	 but	 the	 empty	 boxes	 are	 selling.	 But	 the	 truth	 is,	 there	 are	 no
invisible	pins,	and	only	empty	boxes	were	selling	from	the	very	beginning."
You	can	sell	invisible	pins	to	people	...	and	God	is	the	most	invisible	thing	in	the
world.
Perhaps	 some	 day	 we	 may	 invent	 invisible	 pins,	 but	 God	 cannot	 be
manufactured.	And	a	God	manufactured	by	us	will	not	be	much	of	a	God.	We
would	like	to	change	the	model	every	year,	and	those	who	are	super-rich	would
like	to	change	every	six	months.
But	because	God	is	nowhere	 to	be	found,	 the	priests	can	go	on	thriving	on	the
business.
They	know	perfectly	well	--	they	are	the	only	people	who	know	--	that	God	does
not	 exist.	 But	 they	 cannot	 say	 it	 because	 what	 will	 happen	 to	 their	 whole
profession?	 A	 millions-of-years-old	 profession,	 supporting	 millions	 of	 priests
around	the	world	--	and	they	are	the	highest	people	everywhere.	They	don't	want
to	lose	it,	they	don't	want	to	miss	their	whole	business.
So	 they	 go	 on	 creating	 more	 commandments,	 more	 judgments,	 they	 go	 on
creating	 more	 theological	 fictions	 and	 they	 go	 on	 feeding	 your	 mind.	 Their
whole	purpose	is	your	mind	should	be	full	of	all	kinds	of	rubbish	so	you	cannot
have	any	space	to	be	intelligent.
Because	if	you	can	have	an	empty	mind	the	no-mind	is	not	far	away.	The	empty
mind	becomes	the	door	to	no-mind.	When	the	empty	mind	becomes	a	stepping-
stone	to	no-mind,	it	creates	no	problems,	no	obstacles.
So	your	mind	has	to	be	filled	with	the	holy	Koran,	with	The	Holy	Bible,	with	the
holy	Gita,	and	there	are	thousands	of	scriptures.	You	can	choose	whatever	kind
of	 rubbish	 you	want	 --	 it	 comes	 in	 all	 sizes	 and	 all	 shapes.	There	 is	 immense
choice.	There	are	three	hundred	religions	on	the	earth.	You	can't	imagine	a	new
religion,	they	have	exhausted	all	possibilities.	Three	hundred	religions	about	one
God	--	you	can	choose.	You	are	free	to	choose	but	you	are	not	free	not	to	choose.
And	that's	what	I	am	teaching	you:	don't	choose.
Explore,	 discover,	 don't	 decide	 before	 you	 have	 realized.	 And	 realization,
liberation,	 freedom,	 will	 give	 you	 an	 insight	 into	 everything.	 You	 will	 feel
compassionate	and	loving	to	the	whole	life	that	surrounds	you,	non-judgmental.
I	have	told	you	the	story	of	a	Zen	master	....
A	thief	entered	his	house	without	knowing	that	it	was	a	Zen	master's	house	--	it
contained	 nothing.	The	Zen	master	 felt	 very	 embarrassed.	The	 night	was	 cold
and	he	had	only	one	blanket	that	he	used	in	the	day	to	cover	his	body,	and	in	the
night	 to	 cover	 his	 body	 to	 go	 asleep.	That	was	 all	 that	 he	 had,	 and	 the	whole
house	was	empty.
He	felt	so	compassionate	towards	the	thief	that	when	the	thief	was	going	out	he
threw	 the	 blanket	 on	 his	 shoulders	 and	 told	 him:	 "Please	 accept	 it.	You	 came
without	informing	me.
If	 you	had	 just	 informed	me	at	 least	 three	days	before,	 I	would	have	gathered
something	 for	 you.	 I	 feel	 for	 the	 first	 time	 really	 poor.	 I	 cannot	 give	 you
anything;	this	house	is	empty."
And	the	thief	was	very	much	afraid	of	 this	man.	He	was	standing	naked	in	the
cold	winter	night	and	he	had	given	his	only	possession,	the	blanket.	But	the	man
was	strange,	he	was	saying	to	him,	"You	should	first	inform	me	and	then	you	can
come.	But	give	me	a	little	time	so	I	can	beg	from	people	and	keep	something	for
you.	This	is	not	right	for	you	to	come	so	suddenly	without	any	information."
The	man	certainly	was	strange.	The	thief	had	come	across	hundreds	of	people	--
everybody	was	 angry,	 everybody	was	 handing	 him	over	 to	 the	 police.	He	 had
suffered	 in	 jails	 so	 many	 times.	 Everybody	 was	 abusive,	 everybody	 was
insulting.	Out	of	jail,	life	was	difficult.	Nobody	was	ready	to	give	him	a	job,	so
finally,	 he	 had	 to	 commit	 another	 crime	 just	 to	 enter	 into	 jail	 because	 that
became	his	home.	At	least	he	had	food,	shelter,	clothes.
This	man	was	strange.	He	became	afraid	of	this	man	--	he	rushed	out	of	the	door.
And	 the	Zen	monk	 shouted,	 "Stop!	That's	 not	 right,	 come	back.	First	 give	me
àthank	you'	so	that	you	don't	feel	guilty	that	you	have	stolen	anything	--	I	have
given	it	to	you.
"And	 then	 close	 the	 doors.	 You	 have	 opened	 the	 doors,	 at	 least	 this	 is	 your
responsibility	to	close	the	doors.	I	am	naked,	the	door	is	open,	and	the	cold	wind
is	blowing	...	and	you	don't	have	any	compassion."
So	he	gave	him	a	"thank	you,"	and	while	he	was	leaving	and	closing	the	door,
the	saint	said,	"Perhaps	some	day	this	`thank	you'	will	save	you,	this	closing	the
door	will	be	of	much	help	to	you."
He	could	not	understand	what	help	 it	could	be	 ....	But	 that	night,	 looking	from
the	 window	 to	 the	 full	 moon	 in	 the	 sky,	 the	 Zen	master	 wrote	 a	 small	 haiku
which	said:	I	AM	SO	POOR.
I	WOULD	HAVE	LOVED
TO	GIVE	THIS	MOON	TO	THAT	THIEF,
BUT	I	DON'T	POSSESS	IT.
Two	 years	 afterwards	 the	 thief	 was	 caught	 again	 in	 a	 very	 dangerous	 case	 --
perhaps	he	would	get	a	life-long	imprisonment.
The	 judge	asked	him,	"Can	you	bring	anybody	as	a	witness	 that	you	are	not	a
criminal?
We	 don't	 have	 any	 evidence,	 only	 circumstantial	 evidence,	 that	 you	 have
committed	a	crime.	If	you	can	produce	a	man	of	dignity	to	support	you	in	that
you	are	a	man	who	is	not	capable	of	doing	such	a	crime	..."
He	 remembered	 the	 Zen	master	 because	 that	 was	 the	 only	 person	 who	 could
support	him.
He	told	the	judge	the	name	of	the	Zen	master.
The	judge	said,	"You	are	referring	to	a	Zen	master	--	I	know	him.	If	he	says	you
are	not	a	criminal	the	case	is	finished."
And	the	Zen	master	came	and	he	said,	"This	man	you	are	saying	is	a	criminal	--
this	man	is	so	nice.	When	I	gave	him	a	blanket	he	thanked	me,	and	when	I	told
him	to	close	the	door,	he	closed	the	door.	He	is	so	obedient,	such	a	nice	person.
The	blanket	was	not	much,	it	had	holes,	it	was	old,	but	he	received	it	as	if	I	was
giving	him	an	empire.	He	was	so	grateful	--	just	leave	him."
The	case	was	dropped	...	the	Zen	master	was	well	known,	even	to	the	emperor.
The	thief	followed	the	Zen	monk,	and	the	Zen	monk	asked	him,	"Where	are	you
going?"
The	thief	said,	"I	am	not	going	anywhere,	I	am	coming	with	you.	I	have	found	a
man	who	has	no	judgments	and	who	has	returned	my	dignity	to	me.	For	the	first
time	 I	 feel	 I	 am	 a	 human	 being	 and	 there	 is	 someone	who	 loves	me,	 there	 is
someone	who	feels	for	me,	and	there	is	someone	who	has	compassion	even	for	a
man	who	has	never	done	anything	good."
The	Zen	master	said,	"Don't	judge	yourself."
This	 is	 the	 trouble.	 People	 judge	 others	 and	 they	 judge	 themselves	 too.	When
they	judge	themselves	they	feel	guilty;	when	they	judge	others	they	take	people's
dignity	and	honor.
This	 judgmental	mind	 is	 a	 double-edged	 sword,	 it	 cuts	 both	 the	ways.	 It	 cuts
you,	it	cuts	others.	It	has	destroyed	the	whole	humanity.
Drop	this	judgmental	mind,	and	with	this	judgmental	mind	you	will	drop	all	your
religions,	 all	 your	moralities.	You	will	 become	 an	 innocent	 child,	 rejoicing	 in
everybody	and	his	uniqueness.
Question
The	second	question:
IT	 SEEMS	 THAT	 MANY	 OF	 US	 ARE	 STILL	 PLAGUED	 WITH	 GUILT,
EVEN
THOUGH	 WE	 HAVE	 BEEN	 IN	 YOUR	 SURGERY	 A	 LONG	 TIME.	 NO
MATTER
WHAT	IT	IS,	WE	FEEL	GUILTY	IF	WE	DO,	GUILTY	IF	WE	DON'T	--	A	NO-
WIN
SITUATION.	 AND	 THE	 DEEPER	 IT	 IS,	 THE	 MORE	 SUBTLE	 AND
ELUSIVE	IT
SEEMS	TO	BE.
WILL	 WE	 EVER	 BE	 FREED	 FROM	 THIS	 INSIDIOUS	 EMOTIONAL
BLACKMAIL?
IS	 THIS	 THE	 SURGERY	 YOU	 HAVE	 BEEN	 DOING	 IN	 THESE
DISCOURSES	ON
GOD?
What	do	you	think?
By	killing	God	I	am	killing	your	guilt.
I	 have	 no	 concern	with	God	because	 he	 does	 not	 exist.	But	 I	 have	 to	 be	 very
discreet	not	to	kill	your	guilt	directly,	because	you	will	stand	in	defense.	So	I	kill
the	gods	--	that	is	my	indirect	way	to	kill	your	guilt.	Otherwise	I	have	no	concern
with	God.	Without	God	you	cannot	be	guilty,	and	that	is	certainly	my	concern.
I	am	operating	on	God	--	that	is	an	indirect	way	of	operating	on	you.	It	is	a	very
strange	 kind	 of	 surgery	 in	 which	 God	 is	 to	 be	 cut	 into	 pieces	 so	 that	 your
clinging	 to	 God	 disappears	 and	 your	 clinging	 to	 God's	 commandments
disappears.	When	there	 is	no	God,	suddenly	you	will	drop	all	morality,	and	all
so-called	duties,	virtues.	Suddenly	you	will	become	a	pagan.
I	love	the	pagan.
I	want	the	world	back	in	the	hands	of	the	pagans.
All	 the	 religions	 have	 destroyed	 the	 pagans	 because	 they	 were	 the	 people
without	 any	 judgment,	 without	 any	 God,	 without	 any	morality	 --	 just	 simple,
innocent,	 flowing	with	 nature,	 in	 a	 deep	 let-go.	 So	whatever	was	 spontaneous
they	were	doing,	whatever	was	coming	 from	 their	nature	 they	were	 following.
There	was	no	question	of	guilt,	there	was	no	situation	like	a	no-win	situation.
The	pagan	was	always	victorious.	Whatever	he	was	doing	or	not	doing,	he	had
his	dignity,	his	honor.	 I	want	you	 to	be	pagans,	 that	 is	 the	 first	 step	 to	being	a
buddha.	 I	 have	 chosen	 Zorba	 as	 an	 example	 of	 a	 pagan,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 very
foundation.	 On	 that	 foundation	 you	 can	 make	 a	 shrine	 for	 the	 buddha.	 But
without	the	foundation,	the	buddha	is	hanging	in	the	air	like	a	balloon.	You	can
worship	it,	but	you	cannot	be	nourished	by	it	unless	your	roots	are	deep	into	the
earth.	 Your	 branches	 cannot	 grow	 into	 the	 sky,	 you	 cannot	 touch	 the	 stars
without	 deep	 roots	 in	 the	 earth.	First	 you	have	 to	be	very	 earthly,	 earthbound,
then	only	will	you	start	growing	towards	the	stars.
Without	 roots	 in	 the	 earth	 you	 become	 simply	 a	 star	 gazer,	 you	 don't	 grow
towards	stars.
You	simply	 look	at	 the	buddha,	you	worship,	you	pray.	But	neither	 is	worship
going	 to	 help	 nor	 is	 prayer	 going	 to	 help.	 What	 is	 going	 to	 help	 is	 a	 real
foundation,	 and	 that	 real	 foundation	 is	 to	 be	 without	 God,	 to	 be	 without
scriptures,	to	be	without	discipline,	to	be	without	any	commandments.	Be	a	free
man,	don't	be	a	spiritually	enslaved	person.
Once	you	have	attained	 freedom	from	all	 these	 fictions,	mythologies,	you	will
feel	so	great,	so	fresh,	so	young,	and	so	alive,	that	the	dance	will	come	by	itself.
So	abundantly	rich	in	your	innermost	being	...	because	your	innermost	being	is
the	place	from	where	you	are	joined	with	the	cosmos.	Your	roots	in	the	cosmos
grow	from	your	innermost	center.
Once	you	have	 accepted	 existence	 as	 it	 is,	 you	have	 accepted	yourself	 also	 as
you	are.
If	you	want	to	improve	on	existence,	on	other	people,	you	cannot	be	at	ease	with
yourself.	Your	own	judgments	will	kill	you.	You	have	never	thought	about	it	...
whenever	 you	 are	 judging	 somebody,	 you	 are	 judging	 yourself	 also;	 if	 you
condemn	somebody	as	a	thief,	you	are	condemning	yourself	also.	You	may	have
have	done	many	kinds	of	stealing
--	 you	 may	 have	 stolen	 thoughts	 from	 other	 people,	 you	 may	 have	 stolen
hypotheses	from	other	people.
It	is	not	only	money,	anything	that	you	take	from	others	without	being	grateful	to
the	person,	without	his	knowledge,	is	stealing.	Money	is	the	most	ordinary	thing
in	the	world,	 there	are	far	higher	values.	When	you	imitate	you	are	stealing.	If
you	imitate	Jesus,	if	you	imitate	Buddha,	what	are	you	doing?	--	you	are	stealing
their	personality.	You	are	a	thief	of	the	worst	kind	and	you	cannot	feel	at	ease.
People	cannot	accept	themselves	because	they	cannot	accept	others	as	they	are.	I
have	 never	 judged	 in	 my	 life.	 I	 have	 loved	 all	 kinds	 of	 people;	 just	 their
uniqueness	makes	 them	more	 loveable.	And	because	 I	 have	 loved	all	 kinds	of
people	without	discrimination,	I	have	no	way	of	feeling	guilt,	I	have	no	way	of
rejecting	myself.	I	have	loved	myself	immensely.
These	both	go	together:	if	you	judge	others	you	will	feel	guilty,	and	you	will	be
judging	yourself	also	continuously	--	whether	it	is	right	or	wrong.	Both	have	to
be	dropped	together	because	they	are	two	sides	of	the	same	phenomenon.	And	it
is	 so	 easy.	 Don't	 ask	 me	 how	 long	 it	 will	 take	 --	 that	 is	 a	 cunning	 way	 of
postponing.	It	does	not	take	time,	it	needs	understanding.	And	that	understanding
is	possible	now,	this	very	moment.	You	drop	all	your	judgments	--	you	drop	all
your	guilt.	They	go	together	down	the	drain.
Then	you	will	live	like	a	healthy	animal,	and	out	of	your	health	and	out	of	your
healthy	 animal	 will	 arise	 the	 greatest	 experience	 possible.	 As	 you	 become
natural	you	are	coming	closer	to	the	experience	of	the	buddha.
Only	Zorbas	can	be	buddhas.
Gautam	Buddha	himself	was	a	Zorba.	Buddhists	don't	understand	it.	For	twenty-
nine	 years	 of	 his	 life	 --	 the	 first	 part	 of	 his	 life	 --	 he	 had	 as	 many	 beautiful
women	 as	 any	man	 in	 the	whole	 of	 history.	He	 had	 all	 kinds	 of	 comforts	 and
luxuries	that	were	available	in	those	days.	He	lived	in	so	much	luxury,	so	much
drinking,	dancing,	singing	--	that	was	his	whole	life	for	twenty-nine	years.	What
does	 not	 normally	 happen	 to	 you	 even	 by	 the	 time	 you	 are	 eighty	 years,
happened	to	him	by	the	age	of	twenty-nine.
He	became	fed	up	--	everything	was	repetition.	Because	he	was	surrounded	with
so	 many	 women	 he	 became	 fed	 up	 with	 women.	 You	 don't	 become	 fed	 up
because	of	your	wife.
Your	wife	is	a	protection,	she	does	not	allow	you	to	look	this	way	or	that	way,
she	 keeps	 you	 looking	 straight	 forward,	 looking	 ahead	 --	 four	 feet	 ahead,	 not
above!	And	 you	 don't	want	 to	 create	 unnecessary	 trouble	 for	 yourself,	 so	 you
have	to	follow.	And	because	she	is	imposing	certain	moralities	on	you	she	has	to
follow	those	moralities	herself;	otherwise	she	will	not	be	able	to	impose	them.
It	 is	 a	very	complex	 system.	The	husband	becomes	 the	prison	 to	 the	wife,	 the
wife	becomes	 the	prison	 to	 the	husband.	Both	are	slaves	and	both	are	masters;
both	are	prisoners	and	both	are	jailers	--	and	both	want	to	get	rid!	But	both	have
values	--	that	marriages	are	made	in	Heaven,	and	what	God	has	put	together	you
should	not	put	asunder.
Now,	no	marriage	I	have	seen	happens	in	Heaven.	God	himself	does	not	have	a
wife	and	he	has	escaped	from	women	as	far	away	--	perhaps	millions	of	 light-
years	away	...	no	possibility	of	finding	any	woman.	But	the	desire	is	there	so	he
comes	once	 in	 a	while	 to	 create	 a	 Jesus	Christ.	Once	 in	 a	while,	 he	 has	 to	 be
forgiven	 ...	poor	 fellow	is	 living	with	a	Holy	Ghost.	 I	have	been	 trying	 to	 find
whether	 this	 Holy	 Ghost	 is	 a	 man	 or	 a	 woman;	 perhaps	 he	 is	 capable	 of
functioning	in	both	the	ways!
I	have	heard	a	story	....
When	Henry	Ford	died	...	and	he	was	a	perfectionist	and	a	great	man,	one	of	the
greatest,	richest	people.	He	came	from	a	poor	family	and	all	that	he	created	was
by	his	own	effort	with	his	own	intelligence.
So	when	he	met	God	in	Heaven,	God	asked	Henry	Ford	--	because	he	was	the
right	 person	 to	 ask	 --	 "What	 do	 you	 think	 of	 my	 creation?	 You	 are	 a
perfectionist,	I	know.	You	have	created	the	best	cars	and	you	went	on	improving
and	improving	and	improving.
What	do	you	think	about	my	creation?"
He	said,	"Your	creation	needs	tremendous	improvement."
God	said,	"For	example?"
He	said,	"For	example	you	have	put	the	pleasure	center	of	men	and	women	at	the
wrong	places.	The	woman's	pleasure	center	is	between	two	exhaust	pipes!"
He	was	a	manufacturer	of	cars,	and	he	seems	to	have	been	right:	"What	kind	of
dirty	fellow	are	you?	The	pleasure	center	is	at	the	dirtiest	place.	Could	you	not
put	it	somewhere	else?	--	in	the	hands	...?"
And	I	think	his	criticism	is	right.
God	was	just	shocked	--	he	used	to	think	that	Henry	Ford	was	a	Christian!
But	 when	 you	 force	 judgment	 on	 people,	 these	 people	 are	 going	 to	 force
judgment	on	God	if	by	chance	they	meet	him.
The	judgmental	mind	is	going	to	judge	everybody,	it	is	going	to	judge	the	person
himself.
Everything	becomes	miserable,	everything	seems	to	be	wrong,	everything	seems
to	be	negative.	He	always	goes	on	counting	the	thorns	in	a	rosebush	and	never
looks	at	 the	flower.	There	 is	no	 time	 to	 look	at	 the	flower,	counting	 the	 thorns
takes	his	whole	life.	He	always	looks	at	the	dark	side	of	things.	If	you	ask	him,
he	will	say,	"It	is	a	miserable	world.	Between	two	nights	there	is	only	one	day!"
His	whole	perception	 is	 to	condemn	and	he	 feels	good	 in	condemning.	But	he
does	 not	 know	 that	 when	 he	 is	 condemning	 others	 he	 is	 also	 condemning
himself.	Deep	down	he	will	feel	guilty.
Don't	postpone.	Don't	ask	me	how	long	it	is	going	to	take	--	it	depends	on	you.	If
you	are	miserable	and	feeling	caught	in	a	no-win	situation,	then	why	carry	it?	If	I
could	drop	 it,	why	 can	you	not	 drop?	 I	 am	not	 a	messiah,	 or	 a	 prophet,	 or	 an
incarnation	of	God.	I	don't	have	any	miracle	powers	with	me,	I	am	just	as	human
as	you	are.	If	I	could	do	it,	who	is	preventing	you?
Perhaps	 you	 have	 started	 enjoying	 your	 misery.	 Perhaps	 you	 have	 become
habituated	and	it	seems	that	if	you	drop	your	misery	you	will	be	empty.	Yes,	you
will	be	empty,	but	just	in	the	interim	period	which	is	very	small.	For	a	moment
you	will	 feel	 all	 is	 lost,	 but	 soon	you	will	 see	your	 emptiness	 starts	 becoming
filled	 with	 a	 totally	 new	 energy	 that	 you	 have	 been	 repressing	 by	 your
judgments,	and	guilt,	and	morality,	and	religion,	and	God.
Suddenly	you	will	feel	from	your	own	very	sources	new,	fresh	waters	of	life	are
rising	 like	 fountains.	 Soon	 you	 will	 find	 yourself	 filled	 with	 tremendous
contentment,	filled	with	light,	joy,	blissfulness	--	not	only	filled	but	overflowing.
Such	an	abundance	is	possible,	but	you	have	to	take	the	risk	to	be	empty.	And	it
is	not	much	because	what	you	are	losing	is	only	misery,	guilt,	sadness,	suffering,
hellfire;	what	you	are	dropping	out	is	not	worth	keeping	in.
And	once	you	are	clean,	you	are	ready	for	existence	 to	assert	 itself	with	all	 its
grace	and	beauty,	with	all	its	wisdom	and	enlightenment.	But	for	a	moment	you
will	have	to	be	empty.
Before	the	new	enters,	the	old	has	to	go.
Before	the	truth	enters,	the	false	has	to	fall	out.
And	 you	 have	 certainly	 been	 blackmailed.	 The	 whole	 of	 humanity	 has	 been
blackmailed,	and	 the	blackmailing	continues.	From	the	very	childhood	 it	 starts
and	it	goes	on	even	when	you	are	going	into	your	grave	and	the	priest	is	giving	a
sermon.	From	birth	to	death	the	priest	is	blackmailing	you	in	the	name	of	God,
in	 the	name	of	great	 things.	The	politician	 is	blackmailing	you	 in	 the	name	of
nationalism,	patriotism.	Your	own	parents	are	blackmailing	you	in	 the	name	of
obedience	and	respect	for	the	elders.
Once	I	participated	in	an	all-India	seminar	of	professors	arranged	by	the	federal
government	under	the	auspices	of	the	education	ministry.	All	the	professors	were
discussing	only	one	thing	--	after	one	professor,	another,	another,	another	--	that
the	problem	was	that	students	don't	have	any	respect,	and	something	had	to	be
done	about	it.
It	seemed	everybody	was	in	absolute	agreement.
When	it	came	for	me	to	speak,	I	said,	"All	these	people	are	talking	nonsense."
The	 education	 minister	 was	 shocked,	 and	 all	 the	 professors	 who	 had	 fallen
asleep	woke	up.	I	said,	"It	is	not	that	students	are	not	respectable,	the	problem	is
that	the	professors	are	not	worthy	of	respect.	You	are	taking	the	whole	problem
from	the	wrong	side;	that's	why	you	cannot	solve	it.
"And	I	am	saying	it	from	my	own	experience.	I	have	been	a	professor	for	nine
years	and	nobody	has	been	disrespectful	 to	me.	Because	I	respect	my	students,
how	can	they	disrespect	me?	I	respect	them,	I	love	them,	I	give	them	freedom.	I
tell	them:	If	you	want	to	leave	the	class	you	can	leave	silently	without	disturbing
anybody.	Don't	ask	me;	you	don't	need	to.	Whenever	you	want	to	come	into	the
class	 you	 can	 come.	 Don't	 ask	 me	 because	 your	 asking	 me	 disturbs	 me	 and
disturbs	the	class."
When	 I	 first	entered	 the	university	 I	could	not	believe	my	eyes:	 the	girls	were
sitting	on	one	side,	the	boys	were	sitting	on	the	other	side,	and	in	between	there
was	a	big	gap.	I	said,	"What	is	the	matter?	To	whom	am	I	going	to	talk?	To	this
gap?	And	I	don't	have	the	kind	of	eyes	that	go	this	way	..."
"So	if	you	want	me	to	teach,	you	have	all	to	bring	your	desks	into	the	middle	and
be	together,	because	I	hate	to	see	you	throwing	letters	--	it	is	ugly.	Why	not	sit
beside	the	girl	and	enjoy	the	warmth	and	share	your	love?	You	are	old	enough	--
you	don't	need	any	control.	I	don't	think	you	are	cannibals	and	that	you	will	eat
the	girl	or	do	something	...	so	get	mixed	up	immediately!"
They	 looked	 at	 each	 other	 thinking,	 "This	 is	 a	 very	 strange	 situation.	 Every
professor	functions	like	a	constable,	keeps	us	apart,	and	this	fellow	seems	to	be
strange	..."
I	said,	"Be	quick,	otherwise	I	will	leave	the	class	and	I	will	never	come	again!"
Unwillingly	they	had	to	pull	their	desks	together.	With	great	embarrassment	they
went	to	the	girls	who	they	had	been	throwing	stones	at,	whose	bicycles	they	had
been	puncturing.
The	girls	were	very	much	 ...	 and	 I	 said,	 "Be	close	 to	each	other.	Why	are	you
shrinking	to	this	side	and	the	girl	is	shrinking	to	that	side?	That	gap	between	you
has	to	be	filled.	Be	together!"
They	 reported	 to	 the	 vice-chancellor:	 "What	 are	 we	 supposed	 to	 do?	Another
professor	comes	and	he	says	`What	is	happening?	Put	your	desks	separate!	Who
has	done	this?'
And	we	are	continually	carrying	the	desks	from	side	to	side."
So	the	vice-chancellor	called	me	and	he	said,	"This	is	not	right	on	your	part."
I	said,	"Have	you	ever	been	young?"
He	said,	"Yes."
I	said,	"Then	be	frank.	Have	you	ever	loved	a	girl	when	you	were	a	student?"
He	looked	all	around	to	see	that	nobody	was	listening	...	I	said,	"There	is	nobody.
Only	I	am	here,	and	you	can	be	truthful."
He	said,	"Yes."
I	asked	him,	"Have	you	ever	punctured	their	bicycles,	thrown	stones?"
He	said,	"Yes."
I	said,	"Then	you	understand	everything.	You	are	creating	an	unnatural	situation.
Now	my	students	will	not	puncture	anybody's	cycle,	they	will	not	throw	stones	--
they	don't	 have	 to.	And	 this	 is	 absolutely	natural.	They	 are	 sexually	mature	 --
they	became	mature	 long	ago	when	they	were	fourteen	and	thirteen.	Now	they
are	twenty-two,	 twenty-four,	 twenty-five.	You	have	been	torturing	them	for	 ten
years	continuously,	blackmailing	them	against	biology,	against	existence,	against
nature.	This	is	the	time	they	should	have	as	many	experiences	as	possible	before
they	choose	a	woman	or	a	husband."
You	go	 shopping	 ...	 even	 for	 small	 things	 you	go	 to	many	 shops	 to	 check	 the
price,	 to	 see	 the	 product.	You	 are	 going	 to	 live	with	 a	woman	 or	 a	man	 your
whole	 life	 and	you	have	 not	 been	 shopping	 ...?	 First	 do	 the	 shopping.	 Just	 go
around	and	have	as	many	experiences	as	possible.	If	you	are	intelligent,	all	these
experiences	will	make	you	richer.
Then	you	will	be	capable	of	finding	a	woman	or	a	man	with	whom	you	can	be	in
deep	love	and	friendship.
There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 divorces.	 Divorces	will	 be	 very	 few	 if	 we	 give	 children
enough	 experience.	 Then	 they	 will	 know	 that	 there	 are	 slight	 differences
between	man	and	man,	woman	and	woman.	And	 they	will	also	come	 to	know
with	what	kind	of	woman,	with	what	kind	of	man	they	feel	the	most	at	ease,	at
home.	You	don't	give	any	opportunity.
This	is	sheer	blackmail.
Your	 parents	 are	 responsible,	 your	 God	 is	 responsible,	 your	 priests	 are
responsible,	your	 teachers	are	 responsible	 --	your	whole	society	 is	 responsible.
But	ultimately	you	are	responsible.	Why	are	you	living	in	this	prison	when	the
doors	are	open?	Get	out!	And	don't	ask	me	how	long	it	will	take.	It	depends	on
you	whether	you	run	out	of	 the	prison,	or	walk	 in	such	a	way	that	you	will	be
caught	again	and	put	back	into	your	cell.
A	 small	 child	 was	 late	 to	 school	 one	 rainy	 day,	 and	 his	 teacher	 asked	 him,
"Johnny,	you	are	always	late.	Again	you	are	late?"
He	said,	"What	can	I	do?	It	was	so	slippery	that	I	would	put	one	foot	ahead	and	I
would	slip	two	steps	backwards."
The	teacher	said,	"If	you	are	right,	then	how	did	you	manage	to	come	here?	One
step	ahead	two	steps	backwards	...	you	could	never	have	come	here."
He	 said,	 "You	 don't	 understand.	 Then	 I	 started	 walking	 towards	 my	 house!
Finally,	I	got	to	school."
So	 it	 all	 depends	 on	 you	 --	 it	 is	 a	 very	 slippery	way.	 If	 you	 really	want,	 this
moment	it	can	happen.	But	if	you	postpone,	then	perhaps	never.	Now	or	never.
The	sutra:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ONE	 TIME,	WHEN	DAITEN	CAME	TO	 SEKITO,	 THE	MASTER	ASKED
HIM,
"ARE	YOU	A	ZEN	MONK	OR	AN	ORDINARY	MONK?"
DAITEN	REPLIED,	"I	AM	A	ZEN	MONK."
SEKITO	ASKED,	"WHAT	IS	ZEN?"
DAITEN	 REPLIED,	 "IT	 IS	 RAISING	 EYEBROWS	 AND	 MOVING
EYEBALLS."
There	is	a	certain	ancient	method	coming	from	Taoism	to	Zen	--	it	can	give	you
a	very	empty	mind.	If	you	just	close	your	eyes	and	move	your	eyeballs,	soon	you
will	see	you	are	getting	dizzy	just	as	the	whirling	Dervishes	in	Sufism	get	dizzy,
just	 by	 whirling.	 But	 when	 the	 Sufi	 Dervish	 gets	 dizzy	 he	 starts	 feeling	 the
center	of	 the	cyclone.	His	whole	body	is	moving,	but	 there	is	something	at	 the
very	center	which	is	unmoving	--	that	is	his	very	being.
For	Mevlana	Jalaluddin	Rumi	it	took	thirty-six	hours	of	continuous	whirling.	He
went	on	and	went	on	and	went	on.	And	that	is	the	whole	secret	of	it	--	that	you
should	not	stop	because	you	are	feeling	tired,	you	should	go	on	and	on	till	you
fall.	Not	 that	you	have	to	manage	to	fall,	you	just	go	on	doing	the	whirling.	A
time	is	bound	to	come	when	you	cannot	manage	not	falling.	You	will	fall	down
almost	dead.	I	say	almost	--	the	whole	body	is	utterly	tired.	But	there	you	can	see
the	difference,	 because	 the	whole	body	 is	 so	 tired	 and	 so	dead,	 it	wants	 to	go
back	to	the	earth	just	to	rest.	You	will	see	inside	you	there	is	still	a	center	full	of
light,	full	of	energy,	not	tired	at	all.	Contrast	is	needed	to	see	that	center.
Zen	has	a	far	more	simple	method.	There	is	no	need	to	stand	and	whirl.	You	just
sit	down	and	roll	your	eyes,	your	eyeballs,	 faster	and	faster,	and	soon	you	will
see	your	whole	head	 is	whirling.	A	moment	comes	when	 this	very	whirling	of
the	 head	 inside	 gives	 you	 the	 passage	which	 leads	 to	 your	 very	 center	 below
your	navel.
In	Zen	they	call	it	hara	--	it	is	your	very	life	source.	You	must	have	heard	that	in
Japan,	 suicide	 is	 called	hara-kiri.	 If	you	push	a	knife	 in	 just	 two	 inches	below
your	 navel,	 it	 will	 hit	 the	 hara	 center	which	 is	 your	 life	 source.	 So	without	 a
single	 drop	 of	 blood,	 the	 person	 dies	 because	 he	 has	 hit	 the	 life	 center	 and
opened	 the	 door	 for	 life	 to	 fly	 out	 into	 existence.	 They	 have	 found	 the	 best
method	to	commit	suicide.	But	how	did	they	find	it?
They	found	it	 through	meditation.	The	same	center	 is	your	birth,	and	 the	same
center	is	your	death.
So	 when	 you	 are	 whirling	 your	 head,	 you	 will	 find	 a	 passage	 which	 is	 not
touched	at	all	by	your	whirling	--	either	by	whirling	the	body,	or	just	by	moving
your	eyeballs.	Both	do	the	same	function	--	you	reach	to	your	life	center.
Perhaps	 this	Zen	monk	had	been	using	 that	method	for	meditation.	So	he	said,
"IT	IS
RAISING	EYEBROWS	AND	MOVING	EYEBALLS."
SEKITO	 SAID,	 "EXCLUDING	 RAISING	 EYEBROWS	 AND	 MOVING
EYEBALLS,	 BRING	 YOUR	 ORIGINAL	 FACE	 AND	 SHOW	 IT	 TO	 ME.
Neither	 eyebrows	 nor	 eyeballs	 contain	 your	 original	 face,	 the	 buddha,	 the
awakened	one.	So	leave	them	aside,	these	are	unnecessary	things,	non-essential.
BRING	YOUR	ORIGINAL	FACE	TO	ME.
DAITEN	SAID,	 "PLEASE	OSHO,	EXCLUDE	RAISING	EYEBROWS	AND
MOVING
EYEBALLS	AND	LOOK	AT	ME."
Daiten	 was	 certainly	 very	 close	 to	 enlightenment.	 He	 is	 saying	 to	 Sekito,
"PLEASE
OSHO	 --	 Oh,	 great	 master	 --	 EXCLUDE	 RAISING	 EYEBROWS	 AND
MOVING
EYEBALLS	AND	LOOK	AT	ME.	This	is	my	original	face."
SEKITO	SAID,	"I	HAVE	EXCLUDED	THEM."
DAITEN	 SAID,	 "I	 HAVE	 GIVEN	 IT	 TO	 YOU.	 If	 you	 have	 excluded	 the
eyebrows	and	the	eyeballs	I	have	given	my	original	face	to	you."
These	dialogues	are	so	valuable,	so	mysterious.	But	once	you	have	got	the	knack
to	understand	them	they	give	you	such	tremendous	keys	to	open	the	mysteries	of
life.
DAITEN	SAID,	"I	HAVE	GIVEN	IT	TO	YOU."
SEKITO	SAID,	"WHAT	IS	THE	NO-MIND	YOU	HAVE	GIVEN	TO	ME?"
DAITEN	SAID,	"NOT	DIFFERENT	FROM	YOU,	OSHO.	It	 is	 the	same:	you
have	it;	I	have	also	got	it.	There	is	no	need	for	any	explanation,	there	is	no	need
for	 any	 answer	 from	 you.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 --	 NOT	DIFFERENT	 FROM	YOU,
OSHO."
SEKITO	SAID,	"NO	CONCERN	ABOUT	YOU."
DAITEN	SAID,	"REALLY,	THERE	IS	NOT	A	NO-MIND	NATURE."
He	is	saying,	"Once	I	have	found	my	original	face,	I	am	no	more.	And	when	I
am	 no	more,	my	mind	 is	 no	more,	my	 no-mind	 is	 also	 no	more.	 In	 fact,	 my
individuality	has	melted	into	the	cosmic	whole.	Don't	ask	me	personal	questions,
I	am	no	more	a	person,	only	a	presence."
SEKITO	SAID,	"IS	THERE	NOT	A	THING	WITH	YOU	ALSO?	Are	you	sure
that	you	don't	have	anything	left	that	needs	to	be	dissolved?"
DAITEN	SAID,	 "IF	THERE	 IS	NOT	A	THING	ANYMORE,	THAT	 IS	THE
real	THING."
When	 you	 don't	 have	 anything	 you	 have	 the	 real	 thing,	 the	 very	 essence	 of
existence,	the	very	essence	of	life.	When	you	lose	yourself	you	have	found	really
yourself	for	the	first	time.	This	is	the	mystery	of	existence.
By	losing	you	find.
By	dissolving	you	arise.
By	disappearing	you	find	yourself	becoming	 the	whole	 --	not	disappearing	but
expanding	to	infinity.
A	 great	 statement	 from	Daiten:	 "IF	 THERE	 IS	 NOT	A	 THING	ANYMORE,
THAT	IS
THE	real	THING."
SEKITO	SAID,	"THE	REAL	THING	CANNOT	BE	OBTAINED."
"The	real	thing	cannot	be	obtained"	means	that	the	real	thing	is	always	there.	So
there	is	no	question	of	achieving	it,	obtaining	it,	finding	it,	reaching	it,	realizing
it.	All	these	words	are	meaningless.	It	is	already	there;	you	have	never	lost	it.
"THE	REAL	THING	CANNOT	BE	OBTAINED.	SO	THAT	IS	WHAT	YOU
UNDERSTAND.	RETAIN	IT	FIRMLY	AND	KEEP	IT."
DAITEN	 THEN	 LEFT	 SEKITO	 AND	 RETIRED	 TO	 MOUNT	 REIAN	 IN
SOUTHERN
CHINA,	WHERE	MANY	DISCIPLES	WOULD	LATER	GATHER	AROUND
HIM.
He	became	a	master	in	his	own	right,	not	saying	a	single	word	when	Sekito	said,
"If	 you	 understand	 this,	 then	 RETAIN	 IT	 FIRMLY	 AND	 KEEP	 IT."	 He	 has
given	 him	 the	 seal	 of	 enlightenment:	 "You	 understand	 it,	 you	 are	 very	 clear
about	it.	I	have	tried	to	trap	you	into	some	question,	but	you	always	managed	to
get	out	of	it.	So	now	that	you	have	got	it,	retain	it,	keep	it."
Daiten	did	not	say	a	single	word.	In	deep	silence,	 in	deep	gratitude	--	which	is
beyond	 words	 --	 he	 simply	 left	 and	 moved	 to	 a	 mountain	 in	 southern	 China
WHERE	MANY
DISCIPLES	WOULD	LATER	GATHER	AROUND	HIM.
You	are	life,	eternal	life.
You	are	existence,	infinite	existence.
You	are	pure	no-mind.
Just	misguided,	misdirected,	you	have	forgotten	yourself.	All	that	is	needed	is,	in
the	words	of	Gautam	Buddha,	"Sammasati	--	just	remember	your	self."	You	don't
have	 to	 go	 anywhere,	 just	 a	 remembering	 of	 a	 forgotten	 language,	 a
remembering	what	you	already	are.	It	is	not	a	realization	because	you	have	never
been	otherwise.
You	don't	have	to	go	to	any	Kaaba	or	to	any	Jerusalem	or	to	any	Kashi,	you	have
just	 to	 remember,	 in	a	silent	state,	your	authentic	being.	And	suddenly,	all	 that
you	 thought	 was	 important	 becomes	 false.	 All	 that	 you	 thought	 --	 power,
prestige,	money,	respectability	...
just	 disappear	 like	dreams	of	 no	meaning	 at	 all.	Suddenly,	with	 an	 easy	heart,
you	 start	 living	 life	 in	 a	 totally	 new	way	 out	 of	 your	 spontaneity,	 out	 of	 your
simplicity,	out	of	your	innocence.
Then	whatever	you	do	is	good;	then	whatever	you	do	is	beautiful.	Then	whatever
you	 do	 is	 coming	 out	 of	 your	 ultimate	 purity	 which	 has	 never	 been
contaminated.	Then	your	grace	is	the	same	as	that	of	Buddha,	and	your	clarity	is
the	same	as	all	 the	buddhas.	You	are	fully	awake,	the	night	is	over,	the	dreams
are	finished,	the	sun	is	rising.	And	the	inner	sun	only	starts	rising,	it	never	sets
again.
Buson	wrote:
A	FLASH	OF	LIGHTNING!
THE	SOUND	OF	THE	DEW
DRIPPING	DOWN	THE	BAMBOOS.
These	small	pieces	of	a	meditative	mind	--	"A	flash	of	lightning!"	Visualize,	you
can	 see	 it	 --	 "A	 flash	 of	 lightning!	 The	 sound	 of	 the	 dew	 dripping	 down	 the
bamboos."	Listen	quietly	and	you	will	hear	the	sound	of	the	dew	dripping	from
the	bamboos.
A	 man	 of	 utter	 silence	 comes	 to	 know	 so	 many	 things	 which	 are	 happening
around	you,	but	you	are	so	much	occupied.	Have	you	ever	heard	 the	sound	of
dripping	dew	from	the	bamboos?	You	are	so	much	occupied,	you	are	so	full	of
thoughts	 that	 these	 subtle	 experiences	 around	 you	 which	 have	 tremendous
beauty,	just	escape	you,	just	pass	by	your	side.	But	you	are	occupied,	you	don't
look	at	them.	Your	ears,	your	eyes,	your	mind
--	everything	is	full.	There	is	no	space	for	any	new	experience	to	enter	in	you.
Meditation	 makes	 you	 spacious,	 it	 cleanses	 all	 your	 senses.	 It	 makes	 your
sensitivity	so	sharp	that	the	smallest	fragrance	passing	by	your	side,	and	you	will
immediately	get	it.
Just	 a	 small	 sound,	 even	 the	 sound	 of	 silence,	will	 be	 heard	 so	 loudly	 and	 so
clear.
We	are	living	in	trivia,	and	all	that	is	great	in	existence	we	are	missing.	Only	a
man	 of	 no-mind,	 a	man	 of	 enlightenment,	 knows	what	 beauty	 is,	what	 joy	 is,
what	ecstasy	is.
And	the	moment	you	know	what	ecstasy	is,	you	know	you	don't	need	any	God,
you	 don't	 need	 any	 commandment,	 you	 don't	 need	 any	 discipline.	 Everything
comes	out	of	your	no-mind,	fresh.	You	live	for	the	first	time	in	freedom	without
bondage.
I	define	sannyas	as	 living	 in	freedom	without	bondage,	 living	 in	freedom	from
every	 commandment,	 from	 every	 discipline,	 from	 every	 morality,	 from	 every
religion.
This	 life	 in	freedom	is	 the	only	authentic	 life	 there	is.	And	this	 is	eternal	--	no
beginning	no	end.
Question	4
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER
IN	HIS	BOOK,	PERENNIAL	PHILOSOPHY,	ALDOUS	HUXLEY	WRITES:
"RELIGIONS	THAT	MAKE	NO	APPEAL	TO	EMOTIONS	HAVE	VERY	FEW
ADHERENTS."
LOOKING	AT	HOW	MANY	CHRISTIANS	THERE	ARE	 IN	THE	WORLD
AS
COMPARED	WITH	THOSE	DRAWN	TO	ZEN,	IT	WOULD	SEEM	TRUE.
ARE	 PEOPLE	 ATTACHED	 TO	 THE	 IDEA	 OF	 A	 GOD	 BECAUSE	 IT
EXCITES	THE
EMOTIONS?	THAT	MAY	 INCLUDE	FEAR	AS	WELL	AS	LOVE,	BUT	AT
LEAST
ONE	FEELS	SOMETHING,	AND	IS	FOR	THE	TIME	BEING	TAKEN	OUT
OF
ONESELF.
No.	Maneesha,	 Aldous	 Huxley	 is	 a	 great	 thinker,	 but	 he	 is	 not	 an	 awakened
buddha.
What	he	is	saying	is	logically	true,	but	not	existentially	true.
Religions	 that	make	no	appeal	 to	emotions	have	very	 few	adherents,	but	 those
are	 the	only	 religions	 there	are.	The	 religions	 that	 attract	people	and	appeal	 to
their	emotions	are	not	religions	but	mock	religions,	pseudo-religions,	fake.
Authentic	religion	goes	beyond	emotions,	feelings,	sentiments,	thoughts	--	that	is
your	 whole	 mind.	 But	 inauthentic	 religions	 which	 are	 more	 interested	 in
exploiting	people	than	freeing	them,	making	them	slaves	rather	than	awakened,
are	 bound	 to	 appeal	 to	 your	 emotions.	 Obviously,	 these	 religions	 have	 many
more	 followers	 than	 Zen.	 But	 these	 religions	 are	 not	 religions,	 that's	 why	 so
many	people	are	attracted	towards	them.
When	 the	 masses	 are	 attracted	 to	 anything	 you	 can	 be	 certain	 something	 is
wrong,	because	the	masses	consist	of	the	retarded	people;	their	mental	age	is	not
more	than	ten.
So	 there	 are	 traps	 for	 them.	 There	 are	 religions	 which	 conceive	 of	 God	 as	 a
female,	a	beautiful	woman.	Suddenly	you	start	feeling	emotions	arising	--	God
must	 be	 the	 most	 beautiful	 woman	 in	 the	 whole	 existence;	 you	 become
possessed	with	romance.
That's	where	Sufis	get	stuck	--	they	conceive	of	God	as	a	beautiful	woman.	They
are	the	lovers,	and	God	is	the	beloved;	they	are	male,	and	God	is	female.	Now,
they	 are	 simply	 transferring	 all	 their	 biology,	moving	 it	 from	ordinary	women
made	of	bones	 and	 flesh	and	blood	and	mucus	 ...	 and	perhaps	 false	 teeth,	 and
false	hair,	and	rubber	breasts	...!
The	 scriptures	don't	 talk	about	 rubber	breasts,	 false	 teeth,	plastic	 surgery,	 false
hair,	 but	when	 the	 scriptures	were	written	 these	 things	were	 not	 available.	 So
they	 have	 talked	 only	 about	 the	 bones,	 and	 the	 flesh,	 and	 the	 blood,	 and	 the
mucus.	God	must	be	a	golden	woman	--	no	perspiration,	no	need	for	deodorants.
God	must	be	eternally	young.
This	is	transferring	your	biology	to	a	fake	idea,	a	fiction.	But	this	is	not	religion.
This	is	driving	you	mad,	because	if	you	want	to	love	you	have	to	understand	that
the	real	women	exist	here,	not	in	heaven.	And	what	is	the	problem?
I	have	always	wondered	...	The	people	who	have	written	scriptures	--	and	I	have
listened	to	great	saints	in	this	country	--	continuously	talk	about	women	as	flesh,
and	bones,	and	blood,	and	nothing	else.	And	I	always	wondered	what	they	think
about	their	own	bodies?
Are	they	made	of	gold?	Or	platinum?	Not	a	single	scripture	talks	about	a	man's
body,	only	a	woman's	body.
My	understanding	is	that	these	people	are	still	deep	down	hankering	for	women.
To	 repress	 that	 hankering	 they	 go	 on	 condemning	 the	 woman.	 They	 are	 not
condemning	 for	 you,	 they	 are	 condemning	 for	 themselves	 so	 that	 they	 can
repress	the	desire	for	a	woman.
Now	this	is	a	transfer	--	that	God	becomes	a	woman.	I	will	give	you	another	case
which	will	be	more	simple	....
Meera,	one	of	the	most	famous	Indian	women	saints,	thinks	of	God	as	a	man,	a
young	man,	Krishna.	She	 is	 the	beloved	and	he	 is	 the	 lover.	She	sleeps	with	a
statue	of	Krishna	in	her	bed.
She	 got	 married	 --	 she	 belonged	 to	 a	 royal	 family	 so	 she	 got	 married	 to	 the
prince	of	another	royal	family	of	Rajasthan.	But	the	prince	was	utterly	disgusted
because	she	told	him	on	the	first	night,	"My	husband	is	Krishna.	Don't	touch	my
body,	it	will	be	sacrilegious.	Only	Krishna	can	make	love	to	me,	not	you."
Certainly	 the	prince	was	absolutely	angry,	and	never	went	again	 into	 the	 room
where	Meera	used	to	live,	sing	songs	and	dance	in	front	of	Krishna.	Her	whole
idea	 about	Krishna	was	 that	 he	was	 a	 real	man	 in	 the	 sky,	 and	 it	 was	 only	 a
question	of	a	few	years	before	she	would	meet	him.	But	preparation	was	needed
--	she	had	to	make	a	heart-to-heart	contact.
It	is	all	repressed	sexuality	....
The	 more	 she	 avoided	 a	 man,	 the	 more	 her	 love	 for	 Krishna	 grew,	 because
sexual	energy	needs	some	expression	in	some	way.
She	left	 the	palace,	started	dancing	in	the	streets	and	singing	songs	of	Krishna.
You	 have	 to	 just	 look	 into	 the	 songs	 and	 you	 will	 see	 how	 sex	 is	 dominant,
predominant:	"When	you	come	I	will	be	waiting	for	you	 in	my	bed.	When	are
you	coming?	The	night	is	beautiful,	the	night	flowers	have	blossomed,	all	lovers
have	reached	to	their	beloveds,	and	I	am	waiting	alone	--	when	are	you	coming?"
These	are	subtle	expressions	of	sexuality,	sensuality.	Her	songs	are	very	sensual.
She	 had	 poured	 all	 her	 sensuality	 and	 all	 her	 sexuality	 into	 her	 songs,	 and
Krishna	became	her	hallucination.	She	dreamt	of	Krishna,	she	sang	of	Krishna,
she	danced	with	Krishna	--
she	kept	Krishna	close	to	her	heart.
She	was	worshipped	by	people	as	a	great	saint,	but	those	who	understand	a	little
bit	of	psychology	would	have	suggested,	"You	need	psychiatric	 treatment,	you
are	simply	sick."
These	 people	 have	 attracted	 many	 people,	 obviously.	 You	 already	 have	 your
sexuality	...
just	a	 little	 turn	 ....	You	already	have	your	emotions	and	feelings	 ...	 just	a	 little
turn	....	It	is	all	a	mind	game.
So	 Catholics	 can	 number	 six	 hundred	million	 people,	 but	 Zen	 is	 only	 for	 the
chosen	few,	the	very	elite.	Its	appeal	is	not	for	the	masses;	its	appeal	is	only	for
the	very	intelligent	who	can	look	beyond	the	mind	where	there	is	no	feeling,	no
thought,	 no	 sentiment.	 You	 have	 simply	 gone	 beyond	 your	 body	 chemistry,
biology,	physiology.	You	have	entered	into	a	space	which	can	only	be	called	no-
mind.
So,	Maneesha,	it	 is	true	that	the	religions	that	make	no	appeal	to	the	emotions,
have	very	few	adherents,	but	they	are	the	only	religions	worth	calling	religions.
And	the	religions	which	attract	millions	of	people	...	you	can	see	it	--	the	lower
and	more	pseudo	the	religion,	the	more	people	will	be	attracted	to	it.	Now,	what
has	 the	Catholic	 religion	 in	 it	 except	 fictions?	 Just	 take	 out	 those	 fictions	 and
nothing	remains.	There	is	nothing	essential.
Biblical	scholars	are	continuously	pointing	out	that	the	miracles	told	about	Jesus
are	not	true.	They	never	happened	because	no	contemporary	source	even	reports
them.	And	the	miracles	were	such	that	they	could	not	have	gone	unreported.	It	is
a	very	simple	thing.	A	man	just	puts	his	hands	on	a	blind	man's	eyes	and	he	starts
seeing;	a	man	turns	water	into	wine;	a	man	makes	dead	people	come	back	to	life
again	 ...	 do	 you	 think	 such	 a	 man	 will	 go	 unreported?	 And	 he	 was	 not	 a
Christian,	 so	 you	 cannot	 say	 that	 because	 he	 was	 Christian,	 Jews	 have	 not
reported	him.	He	was	born	a	Jew,	he	lived	a	Jew,	he	died	a	Jew.
Jesus	never	knew	that	he	was	a	Christian.
Christianity	was	born	three	hundred	years	after	Jesus'	death.	He	never	knew	that
people	 would	 know	 him	 as	 Christ.	 Christ	 is	 the	 Greek	 word	 for	 messiah;
Messiah	is	the	Hebrew	word.
Christianity	seems	to	be	the	lowest	religion,	hence	it	attracts	the	greatest	mass.
As	religions	go	higher,	 less	and	 less	people	are	attracted,	because	 less	and	 less
people	can	understand	it.
Intelligence	 is	not	widespread.	How	many	people	can	understand	the	 theory	of
relativity	by	Albert	Einstein?	When	he	was	alive	it	was	a	well-known	fact	 that
there	were	only	twelve	people	around	the	world	who	could	understand	what	he
meant	by	relativity.
Bertrand	Russell,	one	of	the	greatest	philosophers	of	this	century,	wrote	a	book
on	Albert	Einstein.	He	called	it	THE	ABC	OF	RELATIVITY.	And	when	he	met
Albert	Einstein,	Einstein	asked,	 "Why	have	you	written	 the	ABC,	why	not	 the
whole	thing?"
Russell	 said,	 "I	 only	 understand	 the	 very	 beginning.	 I	 can't	 claim	 that	 I
understand	 the	 whole	 implications	 of	 your	 theory.	 I	 have	 written	 the	 ABC
because	 that's	 what	 I	 understand.	 Some	 day	 somebody	will	 write	 the	XYZ	 ...
perhaps	you	can	write	it."
Twelve	persons	only	around	the	world	--	does	that	make	the	theory	of	relativity
wrong?
And	six	hundred	million	Catholics	"know"	that	Jesus	is	born	of	a	virgin	woman	-
-	only	stupid	people	can	believe	 that.	That	Jesus	walks	on	water	 --	only	stupid
people	 can	 believe	 that.	 All	 these	 fictions	 have	 been	 created	 to	 attract	 the
masses.
I	have	heard	about	one	archbishop	of	England	who	was	visiting	Jerusalem.	And
he	had	two	old	friends,	both	of	whom	were	very	learned	rabbis.	So	he	informed
them,	"I	am	coming	and	I	want	to	see	every	place	where	Jesus	has	been."
Obviously	he	was	interested	to	see	the	sea	of	Galilee	where	Jesus	used	to	walk
on	water.
The	 two	 rabbis	 took	 him	 in	 a	 boat	 to	 the	 place	 where	 he	 used	 to	 walk.	 The
archbishop	asked,	"Can	you	also	walk	...	because	you	are	great	rabbis?"
They	said,	"Of	course."
He	could	not	believe	it.	He	said,	"Then	just	give	me	a	little	example,	just	a	few
steps."
So	 one	 rabbi	 got	 down	 from	 the	 right	 side	 and	went	walking	 on	water	 --	 the
archbishop	could	not	believe	it	--	and	he	came	back.
Those	 two	old	 rabbis	 said	 to	him,	 "Can	you	do	 it?	We	don't	believe	 in	Christ;
you	believe	in	Christ.	If	your	faith	is	enough	you	can	walk."
Now	it	was	a	question	of	faith.	Faith	was	at	stake.	The	archbishop	was	hesitating
and	trembling	inside.	But	in	front	of	these	two	rabbis,	to	be	defeated	would	not
be	right.	So	he	said,	"Okay,	I	can.	I	have	faith.	If	you	people	who	don't	believe	in
Jesus	Christ	can	walk,	why	cannot	I?"
And	he	went	from	the	left	side	of	the	boat	and	immediately	started	drowning	and
shouting,	"Save	me!	Help!"
So	the	two	rabbis	pulled	him	back.	They	said,	"What	happened?"
He	said,	"I	don't	know,	but	I	have	faith."
"Your	faith	does	not	seem	to	be	worth	much,"	those	two	rabbis	said.
Finally,	the	rabbi	who	had	gone	out	said	to	the	other	rabbi,	"Should	we	tell	the
boy	the	right	thing?"
The	archbishop	heard	their	whispering.	He	said,	"What	are	you	whispering?"
They	said,	"The	truth	is,	you	got	out	from	the	wrong	side.	On	this	side,	the	right
side,	 there	are	stones	 just	below	 the	water.	The	water	 is	 just	covering	 them	by
one	inch,	not	more	than	that.	Jesus	used	to	walk	here,	and	every	Jew	can	walk
who	knows	these	rocks.
It	is	not	faith,	it	is	rocks!"
Just	 take	 away	 all	 the	miracles	 --	 and	what	 remains	 of	 Jesus?	 Take	 away	 the
virgin	birth	-
-	what	remains	of	Jesus?	Take	away	his	claim	which	is	absolutely	pathological:
"I	am	the	only	begotten	son	of	God"	--	what	remains	of	Jesus?	Just	an	ordinary
carpenter's	son	riding	on	a	donkey	--	a	laughingstock!
So	the	Vatican	has	just	now	informed	all	the	churches	not	to	pay	any	attention	to
biblical	 scholars.	 Because	 if	 you	 pay	 attention	 to	 them	 they	will	 destroy	 your
whole	religion.	This	is	their	whole	religion.
But	Gautam	Buddha	has	not	done	any	miracles,	so	you	cannot	destroy	Gautam
Buddha	so	easily.	He	is	not	born	out	of	a	virgin,	and	he	is	not	the	only	begotten
son	of	God.	Any	non-essential	 is	not	 there	 so	you	cannot	 take	away	anything.
But	certainly	he	becomes	more	difficult	for	the	masses	to	understand.
His	approach	can	be	understood	by	the	very	intelligent	people.	So	even	in	India
...	he	was	born	in	India,	but	his	religion	disappeared	from	India.	These	masses	of
India	 could	 not	 follow	 him.	 He	 did	 not	 give	 them	 what	 Maneesha	 calls
"something."	He	gave	them	nothing,	because	nothing	is	the	pure	space.
Something	is	bound	to	be	something	in	the	mind.
Nothing	is	the	beyond-mind.
Gautam	Buddha	disappeared	after	his	death	very	quickly.	For	two	thousand	five
hundred	years	there	has	not	been	a	single	Buddhist	in	India.	Even	in	the	temple
which	 the	king	Ashoka	built	as	a	memorial	at	 the	side	of	 the	bodhi	 tree	where
Gautam	 Buddha	 became	 enlightened,	 the	 priest	 is	 a	 brahmin.	 There	 was	 no
Buddhist	even	to	be	at	the	memorial	to	take	care	of	the	temple.
That	brahmin	does	not	believe	in	Buddha.	He	was	paid	and	he	is	still	being	paid
by	Buddhists	 from	outside	 India.	He	does	not	believe	 in	Buddha,	but	he	 takes
care.	 His	 family	 has	 been	 taking	 care	 of	 the	 temple	 for	 hundreds	 of	 years,
generation	after	generation	--	just	a	caretaker.	He	does	not	believe	in	Buddha,	he
does	not	think	that	he	is	the	right	person	to	belong	to.
But	Buddhism	 spread	 in	China	 and	 Japan,	 in	 Tibet	 and	Ceylon,	 in	Korea	 and
Taiwan	--	it	reached	faraway	places.	In	Mongolia,	in	Afghanistan,	in	a	few	states
which	now	belong	to	the	Soviet	Union,	Buddhist	statues	and	temples	have	been
discovered.
Its	spread	is	wide,	but	the	reason	for	its	spread	is	that	the	Buddhists	who	went	to
these	places	 started	 compromising.	Buddha	was	 a	non-compromising	man.	No
man	of	truth	can	be	compromising	--	it	does	not	matter.	What	matters	is	truth	in
its	 purity.	 But	 how	 many	 people	 are	 able	 to	 rise	 to	 that	 height,	 to	 that
consciousness,	to	understand?	Surely	very	few	people.
So	all	the	Buddhists	around	the	whole	continent	of	Asia	are	not	true	Buddhists,
they	 have	 compromised	 with	 their	 local	 religion,	 they	 are	 mixed.	 If	 Buddha
comes	 back	 he	 will	 simply	 deny	 all	 these	 Buddhists	 because	 they	 are	 doing
something	which	he	was	against,	absolutely	against.	And	they	are	all	doing	all
those	things	just	as	a	compromise.
Only	Zen	has	not	compromised	--	that's	why	my	respect	for	Zen.	It	has	remained
a	very	small	thin	stream	of	masters.	It	never	became	a	mass	religion	--	it	cannot.
The	day	it	becomes	a	mass	religion	it	will	not	be	a	religion	anymore.	My	love
for	 it,	my	 respect	 for	 it	 is	because	 it	 is	 absolutely	non-compromising,	 it	 is	not
interested	in	gathering	crowds.	It	is	interested	only	in	the	highest	evolved	human
beings.	That	 is	my	 interest	 also.	That's	why	you	 cannot	 see	masses	 coming	 to
me.
The	 day	 masses	 start	 coming	 to	 me	 I	 will	 not	 come.	 I	 hate	 the	 unconscious
masses.	They	have	been	the	cause	of	killing	people	like	Socrates,	killing	people
like	al-Hillaj	Mansoor,	killing	people	 like	Jesus.	There	 is	every	possibility	 that
Gautam	Buddha	also	was	killed	by	being	given	poison.	They	have	 tried	 to	kill
Mahavira	--	many	attempts.
The	masses	are	against	 the	 truth	because	 truth	 is	going	 to	 shatter	all	 their	 lies.
What	Maneesha	is	calling	"something"	--	that	something	is	a	lie,	a	consolation.
No	man	who	loves	the	truth	is	going	to	console	you.
He	 is	going	 to	destroy	all	your	consolations.	He	 is	 there	 to	 take	away	all	your
lies	so	you	can	rise	to	the	ultimate	peak	of	consciousness.	But	that	peak	comes	to
you	when	you	are	no	more.
When	 there	 is	 nothing	 inside	 you,	 then	 the	 whole	 existence	 simply	 starts
showering	on	you	flowers	of	peace,	love,	silence,	ecstasy,	a	divine	drunkenness.
Aldous	 Huxley	 is	 not	 right	 because	 he	 does	 not	 understand	 the	 difference
between	an	authentic	 religion	and	a	 fake	 religion.	He	 is	 a	man	of	 rational	 and
logical	understanding,	but	not	a	man	who	can	be	called	meditative.	It	is	because
of	this	he	started	taking	LSD.
He	wrote	a	book	called	HEAVEN	AND	HELL	in	which	he	preaches	 that	LSD
gives	you	real	samadhi,	real	enlightenment.
A	 chemical	 can	 give	 you	 enlightenment	 ...?	 And	 after	 six	 hours,	 eight	 hours,
twenty-four	hours,	enlightenment	disappears	and	you	are	again	your	old	fucking
self!
This	is	the	right	time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh.	Put	on	the	lights!
One	night,	the	German	Zen	master,	Stonehead	Niskriya,	decides	that	he	wants	to
get	a	date	....
It	is	very	difficult	for	Zen	masters	to	get	a	date.	He	used	to	have	a	girlfriend	...
When	I	was	telling	you	that	I	cannot	see	this	way	...
(WITH	 CROSSED	ARMS	 RAISED	HIGH,	 THE	MASTER	 INDICATES	 TO
BOTH
SIDES	OF	THE	AUDITORIUM,	SIMULTANEOUSLY.)	...	 that	girlfriend	used
to	see	this	way!	She	always	missed	the	Zen	master	Niskriya,	so	she	never	knew
who	he	is.
But	even	she	escaped.	So	he	went	to	Germany	--	you	can	see,	here	he	could	not
find	a	single	girl	...!	So	he	went	to	Germany	and	picked	up	a	punk	girl.	Even	that
punk	girl	has	escaped!	That's	why	Niskriya	is	missing	from	his	place.	He	has	a
fever!
Somebody	has	to	have	some	compassion	on	him.	He	was	thinking	to	go	to	Goa	-
-	not	for	Goa,	but	just	to	find	another	punk.	So	this	story	comes	right	on	time	....
One	night,	the	German	Zen	master,	Stonehead	Niskriya,	decides	that	he	wants	to
get	 a	date.	But	 recently,	he	has	had	 trouble	getting	any	women	 to	go	out	with
him	because	they	are	afraid	of	his	fierce	appearance	and	his	Zen	stick.
So	Stonehead	has	an	idea.	He	disguises	himself	in	a	big	overcoat,	a	black	hat	and
sunglasses.
Then	 he	 goes	 into	 Zorba's	 and	 sits	 down	 next	 to	Ma	 Papaya	 Pineapple.	 They
begin	 to	 talk.	 Stonehead	 buys	 her	 a	 piece	 of	 piesta,	 and	 one	 thing	 leads	 to
another,	and	finally	Stonehead	invites	Papaya	back	to	his	room.
Papaya	thinks	this	guy	looks	a	bit	weird	wearing	sunglasses	at	night,	but	thinks
to	herself,
"Ah!	What	the	hell!	My	chakras	are	open	this	week!"	And	they	go	off	together.
When	they	get	to	his	room,	Stonehead	turns	off	all	the	lights.	"Well,	Papaya,"	he
says,	"I	only	like	to	do	it	in	the	dark.	Is	that	okay	with	you?"
"Sure,"	says	Papaya,	and	they	begin	to	get	undressed.
Papaya	 is	 sitting	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 bed	 in	 total	 darkness,	 and	 Stonehead	 is
standing	next	to	her.	When	he	bends	over	to	take	off	his	socks,	Papaya	reaches
out	in	the	dark	and	touches	Stonehead's	shiny,	bald	head,	hovering	near	her	face.
"Wow!"	exclaims	Papaya	in	shock.	"You	had	better	be	careful	with	that	thing!"
An	international	team	of	eminent	zoologists	gathers	in	Africa	to	do	research	on
the	life	cycle	of	the	elephant	in	the	wild.	When	one	year	is	over,	all	the	scientists
publish	their	reports.
The	Englishman's	report	is	titled:	"The	African	Elephant	at	Tea	Time."
The	 American's	 report	 is	 titled:	 "Fast-food	 Cheeseburgers	 and	 the	 Modern
African	Elephant."
The	Italian	report	is	titled:	"Fitting	an	Elephant	into	a	Ferrari."
The	 French	 report	 is	 titled:	 "The	 Seventy-two	 Love	 Positions	 of	 the	 African
Elephant."
The	Russian	report	is	titled:	"How	to	Hide	Your	Elephant	from	the	KGB."
The	German	report	is	published	in	five	volumes	entitled:	"An	Introduction	to	the
African	Elephant's	Left	Testicle."
And,	finally,	the	Polish	report	is	titled:	"Elephants?	What	Elephants?"
Young	 Father	 Fever	 is	 having	 problems	 again.	 So	 he	 goes	 for	 some	 fatherly
advice	from	his	superior,	Father	Fornicate.
"Tell	me,	my	son,"	says	Father	Fornicate,	"are	you	still	having	trouble	with	those
nasty	fantasies?	You	know,	things	like	crotchless	panties,	French	ticklers	and	hot
buttered	nuns?"
"No,	 no!"	 cries	 young	 Fever,	 "this	 time	 it	 is	 the	 big	 `M'	 --	 you	 know,
masturbation!"
"Ah!	Masturbation!"	 replies	Father	Fornicate,	crossing	his	 legs	and	gritting	his
teeth.
"Yes!	One	of	my	favorite	subjects!	What	do	you	want	to	know	about	it?"
"Well,"	replies	Fever,	perspiring,	"is	it	as	bad	as	they	say?"
"My	boy,"	intones	Fornicate,	uncrossing	his	legs	and	adjusting	his	robe,	"it	used
to	 be	 believed	 that	 masturbation	 led	 to	 insanity	 and	 blindness.	 But	 that	 is	 no
longer	thought	to	be	true."
"I	 am	 not	 worried	 about	 THAT,"	 says	 Father	 Fever,	 trembling.	 "I	 read	 in	 the
latest	Vatican	report	that	masturbation	can	be	the	cause	of	a	serious	reduction	in
hearing	--	even	deafness!"
Father	Fornicate	leans	forward	and	says,	"WHAT?"
Nivedano	...
(drumbeat)
(gibberish)
Nivedano	...
(drumbeat)
Be	silent	...
Close	 your	 eyes	 and	 feel	 your	 body	 to	 be	 completely	 frozen.	This	 is	 the	 right
moment	to	turn	inwards.
Gather	all	your	energy,	your	total	consciousness,	and	rush	towards	your	center	of
being	--
it	is	just	below	your	navel,	two	inches	below	exactly,	inside	--	with	an	urgency	as
if	it	is	your	last	moment	of	life.	Without	such	urgency	and	intensity,	nobody	has
ever	reached	the	center	of	his	being.
Faster	and	faster	...
Deeper	and	deeper.
As	you	are	coming	closer	to	your	center,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you	just
like	soft	rain.	You	can	feel	the	coolness	of	it.
A	little	more	close	and	you	find	a	great	peace	arising	from	your	own	life	sources,
and	surrounding	you	like	fragrance.
Even	the	night	is	helping	you.
The	whole	existence	is	helping	you.
Not	only	are	you	meditating,	the	whole	existence	is	meditating	with	you.
Just	one	step	more	and	you	are	at	the	center	of	your	being,	utterly	drunk	with	the
divine,	an	authentic	ecstasy	which	is	not	produced	by	any	drug	like	LSD,	but	is
part	of	your	opening	of	the	inner	lotus.
Once	 it	 is	 with	 you,	 it	 is	 forever	 and	 it	 transforms	 your	 whole	 life,	 your
activities,	your	responses.
At	the	center,	with	this	ecstasy	you	are	no	more,	only	a	pure	space.
This	pure	space	we	have	personified	as	Gautam	the	Buddha.	It	simply	means	the
awakened	consciousness.	The	face	of	the	buddha	is	everybody's	original	face.	In
this	space	suddenly	you	find	you	are	no	more	but	buddha	is	your	original	face.
You	are	no	more	but	life	is,	eternal	life	--	without	beginning,	without	end.	You
are	no	more,	but	existence	is.
And	 this	 isness	 brings	 you	 tremendous	 liberation.	 This	 isness	 is	 the	 only
salvation.
Nobody	 else	 can	 give	 it	 to	 you,	 you	 already	 have	 it.	 All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 a
remembrance,	it	is	a	forgotten	language.	You	got	too	much	occupied	with	trivia
and	forgot	the	essential.
At	 this	moment	you	are	 the	most	blessed	people	on	 the	earth	 just	because	you
are	traveling	inwards,	whereas	everybody	is	going	outwards.
One	 thing	 to	 remember:	 buddha	 consists	 of	 only	 one	 quality	 --	 awareness,
watchfulness,	remembrance,	witnessing.	You	can	call	it	anything,	but	I	prefer	the
word	`witnessing',	to	make	it	clear	to	you	what	it	means.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind.
Witness	that	you	are	only	a	witness,	just	a	pure	mirror	reflecting,	responding	to
every	situation.
To	make	this	witnessing	deeper	and	clearer,
Nivedano	...
(drumbeat)
Relax,	 but	 go	 on	 remembering	 only	 one	 thing:	 witnessing.	 Witnessing	 is	 the
whole	secret	of	meditation,	the	master	key	to	all	the	mysteries	of	existence	and
life.
As	your	witnessing	deepens	you	start	melting.
Your	 separation	 disappears,	 all	 boundaries	 are	 dissolved,	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha
Auditorium	 becomes	 an	 ocean	 of	 consciousness.	 Ten	 thousand	 buddhas	 have
become	one	solid	consciousness,	one	oceanic	consciousness.
Collect	all	the	experiences	that	are	happening	within	you,	the	silence,	the	peace,
the	bliss,	the	ecstasy,	the	divine	drunkenness,	and	persuade	your	buddha	to	come
with	you,	to	follow	you.
These	 are	 the	 three	 steps	 of	 enlightenment:	 the	 first	 step,	 buddha	 comes
following	you	like	a	shadow	--	it	is	your	nature,	your	eternal	nature.
The	second	step,	buddha	comes	ahead	of	you;	you	become	the	shadow.
And	the	third	step,	you	disappear	into	the	buddha.	Not	even	a	shadow	is	left	of
you.	Only	buddha	is,	only	life	is,	only	existence	is.
This	brings	you	immortality,	eternity.	It	makes	you	whole	with	the	cosmos,	one
with	the	whole.	It	is	the	ultimate	sanity	and	the	ultimate	health	and	the	ultimate
holiness.	This	is	Zen.
Nivedano	...
(drumbeat)
Come	back,	but	come	back	as	buddhas	--	very	silent,	very	peaceful,	with	a	great
grace.
Sit	 down	 for	 a	 few	moments	 just	 to	 remember	 the	 golden	 path	 that	 you	 have
traveled,	 and	all	 the	 flowers	 that	have	 showered	on	you	of	 silence,	peace,	 joy,
ecstasy,	 and	 the	 opening	 into	 the	 eternal,	 into	 the	 ultimate,	 into	 the	 absolute
cosmos.
Take	care	of	the	buddha	who	is	just	behind	you	as	a	silent	presence.	But	you	can
touch	it.
It	 is	 tangible,	you	can	feel	its	warmth.	It	will	 transform	your	ordinary	acts	into
extraordinary	responses.
It	will	bring	to	you	a	choiceless	awareness	where	you	simply	do	spontaneously
what	 is	 good	 ...	 a	 totally	 new	 kind	 of	 morality	 that	 springs	 out	 of	 your
spontaneity,	 a	 totally	 new	 kind	 of	 life	 that	 is	 lived	 moment	 to	 moment	 with
absolute	dedication	to	existence.
A	new	freedom,	a	new	sky	 to	open	your	wings,	and	a	new	celebration	without
any	 reason,	without	 any	 cause.	 Just	 overflowing	 energy,	 overflowing	 juices	 of
life,	overflowing	ecstasies,	overflowing	songs	and	dances.
To	transform	life	into	a	celebration	is	the	only	authentic	science	of	religion.
I	celebrate	myself	and	I	want	you	to	learn	the	art	of	celebrating	yourself	--	for	no
reason,	for	no	cause.	Just	to	be	is	enough,	more	than	enough.	To	be	part	of	the
whole	is	such	a	great	metamorphosis	that	you	cannot	resist	--	you	have	to	dance,
you	have	 to	sing,	you	have	 to	express	your	 joy,	your	blissfulness.	You	have	 to
share	it.
Sharing	your	blissfulness	is	the	only	charity.
Sharing	your	joy	is	the	only	gratitude.
Existence	has	given	you	too	much,	share	it.
The	more	you	share	the	more	you	will	have	it
The	less	you	share	the	less	you	will	have	it.
If	you	don't	share	it	you	won't	have	it	at	all.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
I	Celebrate	Myself:	God	Is	No	Where,	Life	Is	Now	Here
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Showering	invisible	flowers
16	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902165
ShortTitle:
CELEBR04
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
121
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
SEKITO'S	"SONG	OF	THE	GRASS	HUT."
I	 MAKE	 A	 GRASS	 HUT	 IN	 WHICH	 INSIDE	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 WORLDLY
TREASURE.
I	EAT	AND	SLEEP	NATURALLY	AND	EASILY.	WHEN	I	MADE	THE	HUT,
THE
REEDS	WERE	NEW.	WHEN	THE	HUT	GETS	TORN,	 I	 COVER	 IT	WITH
REEDS
AGAIN.	 THE	 PERSON	 LIVING	 IN	 THE	 HUT	 IS	 ALWAYS	 THERE.	 HE
DOES	NOT
BELONG	TO	INSIDE	OR	OUTSIDE.	I	DO	NOT	LIVE	WHERE	ORDINARY
PEOPLE
LIVE;	I	DO	NOT	LOVE	WHAT	ORDINARY	PEOPLE	LOVE.
ALTHOUGH	THE	HUT	IS	SMALL,	IT	CONTAINS	THE	DHARMA	WORLD.
A	 MAN	 OF	 ZEN	 UNDERSTANDS	 IT	 WELL.	 BODHISATTVAS	 OF	 THE
SUPREME
VEHICLE	 HAVE	 NO	 DOUBT	 ABOUT	 IT,	 BUT	 THE	 MEDIOCRE	 ARE
BOUND	TO
BE	DUBIOUS.
IF	 I	 WERE	 ASKED	WHETHER	 THIS	 HUT	 BREAKS	 DOWN	 OR	 NOT,	 I
WOULD
SAY	THAT	THE	SUBJECT	 IS	ORIGINALLY	BOTH	IN	THE	BREAKABLE
AND
UNBREAKABLE.	 I	 DON'T	 LIVE	 IN	 THE	 NORTH	 OR	 SOUTH	 OR	 THE
WEST	OR
EAST.
THE	 FOUNDATION	 OF	 THE	 HUT	 IS	 THE	 MOST	 SOLID.	 UNDER	 THE
GREEN
PINE	 TREE,	 IN	 THE	 HUT'S	 BRIGHT	 WINDOW	 --	 EVEN	 A	 GOLDEN
PALACE
CAN'T	 COMPARE.	 IF	 I	 COVER	 MYSELF	 WITH	 THE	 OLD	 QUILT,
EVERYTHING
SETTLES.	THEN	I	DON'T	UNDERSTAND	ANYTHING.
LIVING	 IN	THIS	HUT,	 I	 STOP	LOOKING	FOR	ANY	SOLUTIONS.	WHO
WOULD
PUT	THEM	PROUDLY	 IN	 THE	 SHOW	WINDOW	FOR	THE	 PEOPLE	TO
BUY?
WHEN	EVENING	COMES	AND	THE	SUN	IS	SETTING,	I	COME	BACK	TO
THE
HUT.	 MY	 BEING	 IS	 SO	 VAST	 THAT	 THERE	 ARE	 NO	 DIVISIONS.
MEETING
WITH	 THE	 INTIMATE	 TEACHINGS	 OF	 THE	 ANCESTRAL	 MASTER,	 I
MADE	A	HUT	WITH	GRASSES	AND	DON'T	THINK	OF	LEAVING.	I	JUST
LET	THE
HUNDRED	YEARS	GO	AS	THEY	PASS	BY.
IF	 I	 MOVE	 WITH	 MY	 HANDS	 OPEN,	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 PROBLEM.	 A
THOUSAND
WORDS,	 TEN	 THOUSAND	 SOLUTIONS,	 ONLY	 KEEP	 YOU	 IN
IGNORANCE.	IF
YOU	WANT	TO	KNOW	THE	IMMORTAL	PERSON	IN	THE	HUT,	WHY	DO
YOU
GO	AWAY	FROM	THIS	SKIN	BAG?
Friends,
I	 hope	 that	 the	 Prime	Minister	 of	 India,	Rajiv	Gandhi,	will	 cancel	 the	 ban	 on
Salman	Rushdie's	book	THE	SATANIC	VERSES.	It	is	absolutely	innocent.	The
fanatic	 Mohammedans	 who	 are	 trying	 to	 destroy	 the	 book,	 to	 ban	 the	 book,
perhaps	have	not	read	it.
Rudolph	Salman	Rushdie	was	born	in	India	as	a	Mohammedan,	then	he	moved
to	England,	and	has	become	a	worldwide	literary	figure.	Being	born	in	India,	he
has	every	 right	of	an	 Indian	citizen	 too.	The	 Indian	constitution	gives	 to	every
individual	 freedom	 of	 speech	 and	 freedom	 of	 expression	 as	 a	 fundamental
human	right.
Salman	Rushdie's	book	has	only	one	mention	of	Mohammed	which	is	not	at	all
condemnatory.	 It	 is	 a	 factual	 thing	 that	 he	 describes,	 and	 it	 has	 already	 been
accepted	by	the	Mohammedan	theologians	for	centuries.
The	incident	is	concerning	the	earlier	version	of	the	Koran,	in	which	Mohammed
accepted	three	female	deities.	Later	on	he	cancelled	those	verses	concerning	the
female	deities,	and	declared	that	those	verses	were	inspired	by	the	devil.	Now	it
is	a	well-known	fact	that	Mohammed	changed	those	verses.	If	Salmon	Rushdie
writes	about	it,	it	is	not	condemnatory,	he	is	simply	stating	a	fact	which	has	been
accepted.
But	the	anger	is	coming	because	the	world	will	know	that	even	Mohammed	was
capable	of	being	deceived	by	the	devil.	What	about	the	other	verses?	If	he	had
not	said	it,	those	verses	would	have	remained	in	the	Koran.
But	Salman	Rushdie	is	not	responsible	for	it.	Mohammed	himself	has	to	take	the
responsibility,	and	Mohammedans	have	to	accept	the	fact	that	he	was	capable	of
being	deceived.	Now	this	is	hurting	them.	But	Salman	Rushdie	is	not	responsible
for	 it.	He	has	 simply	picked	up	 theological	 information	 and	written	 it	 into	 his
book	THE	SATANIC
VERSES.
In	Pakistan	already	five	people	have	been	killed	because	they	were	surrounding
the	American	Embassy.	The	book	has	been	published	in	England	and	now	it	 is
going	to	be	published	in	America.	And	they	were	demanding	from	the	American
Embassy	that	it	should	not	be	published	in	America,	"otherwise	we	will	destroy
you."	 Just	 to	 protect	 them	 from	 these	 fanatical	 Mohammedans,	 who	 know
nothing	about	 the	book	but	have	 just	heard	 the	 rumor,	 the	police	had	 to	 fire	at
and	kill	five	Mohammedans,	and	it	is	a	Mohammedan	state.
India	 is	a	democratic	 secular	country.	Rajiv	Gandhi's	banning	 the	book	simply
shows	fear.	And	the	fear	of	Rajiv	Gandhi	should	not	be	against	the	constitution
of	 India,	 against	 the	 laws	 of	 India.	 The	 ban	 should	 be	 immediately	 removed.
That's	why	I	said	perhaps	he	has	not	read	the	book	himself,	otherwise	he	would
see	that	it	is	a	beautiful	fiction.
And	 now	 even	 Mohammedan	 scholars	 are	 coming	 out	 in	 favor	 of	 Salman
Rushdie.	Of	course,	they	are	all	outside	Iran.	The	so-called	religious	leaders	are
the	worst	 kind	of	 butchers.	They	would	have	killed	 anybody	who	would	have
raised	the	question.	And	I	doubt	whether	they	have	read	the	books	that	they	are
condemning	or	not.	I	suspect	that	the	book	contains	nothing,	nothing	that	should
cause	four	persons	to	be	murdered	as	a	punishment.	It	is	against	Islamic	law	and
it	is	against	Iran's	constitution.	But	in	Iran,	Ayatollah	Khomeini	is	the	law,	is	the
constitution.
He	 should	 be	 condemned	 from	 all	 corners	 of	 the	 world,	 whether	 one	 is	 a
Mohammedan	 or	 not.	 He	 is	 taking	 away	 a	 human	 right,	 and	 that	 too,
unnecessarily,	 because	 Salman	Rushdie's	 book	 contains	 nothing	 condemnatory
about	 Mohammed.	 Just	 stating	 a	 historical	 fact	 which	 has	 been	 accepted	 for
fourteen	 hundred	 years	 by	 Mohammedan	 scholars	 is	 not	 a	 crime.	 And	 his
coming	to	the	radio	and	declaring:	"It	is	the	duty	of	every	Mohammedan	around
the	world	to	kill	these	four	persons	--	Salman	Rushdie,	the	writer,	the	publisher
of	the	book,	the	printer	of	the	book,	and	the	sole	agent	of	the	book.	These	four
persons	have	to	be	killed	without	any	mercy	..."
Salman	Rushdie	 is	hiding	 in	England,	and	has	canceled	his	 tour	of	America	 to
promote	the	book	and	its	publication	there.
I	was	waiting	 to	 tell	Rajiv	Gandhi,	waiting	 until	 some	Mohammedan	 scholars
would	raise	their	voices.	And	all	around	the	world	voices	are	being	raised.
I	have	received	this	news	report:
EMINENT	 MUSLIMS,	 INCLUDING	 THE	 FORMER	 CHIEF	 JUSTICE	 OF
MADRAS
HIGH	 COURT,	 JUSTICE	 ISMAIL,	 HAVE	 UNEQUIVOCALLY
CONDEMNED
AYATOLLAH	KHOMEINI'S	"DEATH	SENTENCE"	ON	AUTHOR	SALMAN
RUSHDIE	AND	ALL	THOSE	ASSOCIATED	WITH	THE	PUBLICATION	OF
HIS
BOOK	THE	SATANIC	VERSES,	DESCRIBING	IT	AS	AGAINST	ALL	LAW
INCLUDING	ISLAMIC	LAW.
ISLAMIC	 SCHOLARS	 STATED	 THAT	 "THE	 SENTENCE	WAS	DUBIOUS
ON
THEOLOGICAL,	NOT	TO	MENTION	LEGAL	GROUNDS."
HESHAM	EL-ESSAWY,	SPOKESMAN	FOR	BRITAIN'S	ESTIMATED	ONE
MILLION	 MUSLIMS,	 SAID,	 "ANYONE	 CARRYING	 OUT	 KHOMEINI'S
ORDER
WOULD	 BE	 GUILTY	 OF	 MURDER.	 WE	 VERY	 MUCH	 REGRET	 AND
DENOUNCE
KHOMEINI'S	STATEMENT.	THREATS	LIKE	THIS,	OR	ANY	VIOLENT
RESPONSE,	 IS	 NOT	 THE	 CORRECT	 RELIGIOUS	 RESPONSE.	 IT	 IS	 A
VERY
DANGEROUS	DEVELOPMENT	AND	WILL	GIVE	RUSHDIE	SYMPATHY
WHERE
IT	IS	NOT	DESERVED."
BRITISH	MP'S	HAVE	ALSO	CALLED	FOR	THE	BRITISH	GOVERNMENT
TO
FORMALLY	PROTEST	TO	IRAN.
One	 has	 to	 be	 very	 aware	 about	 the	 fanatic	 and	 fascist	 attitudes	 of	 religious
leaders.	A	great	consciousness	is	needed,	particularly	for	those	who	are	in	power,
that	they	don't	misuse	it.	Banning	Salman	Rushdie's	book	is	a	misuse	of	power,
and	I	condemn	it	with	my	whole	heart.
I	have	nothing	to	do	with	the	book,	or	with	Islam,	or	with	the	writer.	My	concern
is	 that	 these	 things	 become	 precedents	 for	 destroying	 freedom	 of	 speech,
freedom	of	expression,	which	are	necessary	 foundations	 for	a	cultured	society,
for	a	humane	society.
I	hope	that	Rajiv	Gandhi	comes	to	his	senses	and	takes	the	ban	away.
And	 the	 same	 should	 be	 done	 around	 the	 world	 by	 all	 the	 political	 leaders,
otherwise	all	creativeness	 in	poets,	 in	novelists,	 is	bound	 to	be	destroyed.	And
they	 are	 the	 very	 salt	 of	 the	 earth,	 they	 are	 the	 only	 people	who	 are	 creating
something.	 Religious	 leaders	 like	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 have	 not	 contributed
anything	to	the	world,	to	its	beauty,	to	its	truth,	to	its	culture,	to	its	civilization.
They	have	only	destroyed.	But	 they	destroy	 in	 the	name	of	God,	and	 the	poor
God	cannot	even	say	anything	because	he	does	not	exist.
The	second	thing	I	was	going	to	say	to	you	before	I	take	the	questions	from	the
sannyasins	is	that	I	came	to	know	this	day	that	Chinese	sannyasins	are	a	little	bit
upset	because	I	may	have	told	you	that	a	few	of	 the	Zen	masters	are	Japanese,
and	their	disturbance	is	that	they	are	Chinese.
I	am	not	a	very	informed	person.	I	don't	speak	out	of	information,	I	speak	out	of
my	transformation.	I	know	that	Zen	belongs	to	no	country,	so	to	me	it	does	not
matter	whether	they	were	Chinese,	or	Japanese,	or	Indians.	At	least	Zen	should
not	be	confined	 to	any	country,	 to	any	 race,	 to	any	 language.	 It	belongs	 to	 the
whole	universe.	So	what	is	the	fuss	all	about?
I	 have	 never	 read	 the	 sutras.	 Maneesha	 finds	 the	 sutras;	 I	 simply	 speak
spontaneously.
My	concern	is	Zen,	not	China	or	Japan.	And	you	will	see	Sekito	himself	says,	"I
don't	belong	to	the	east,	I	don't	belong	to	the	west,	I	don't	belong	to	the	south,	I
don't	belong	to	the	north."	If	Zen	is	also	to	be	confined	to	a	race,	to	a	language,
to	a	certain	part	of	the	earth,	then	it	is	not	Zen.
So	you	have	to	be	very	clear.	Neither	am	I	a	scholar,	nor	am	I	knowledgeable,
informative.	 What	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 my	 moment-to-moment	 response.	 And	 my
consideration	for	Zen	is	that	it	belongs	to	the	whole	universe.
So	don't	be	bothered.	It	is	good	that	you	got	upset.	I	love	upsetting	people.	And
do	you	see	the	trivia	you	get	upset	about?	What	does	it	matter	where	Sekito	was
born	--	China	or	Japan?
I	 don't	 belong	 to	 India,	 I	 belong	 to	 this	 vast	 universe,	 and	 I	want	 you	 also	 to
belong	 to	 this	 vastness.	 Why	 be	 confined	 into	 small	 prisons	 created	 by
politicians	and	priests?
The	 whole	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 bring	 you	 back	 to	 the	 vastness	 and	 infinity	 and
eternity	of	 the	universe.	And	still	you	 think	about	China	and	Japan	and	 India?
Then	in	China	there	are	many	states,	and	in	every	state	there	are	many	districts,
and	in	many	districts	there	are	even	smaller	units	...
A	Zen	master	 is	 simply	a	Zen	master.	He	belongs	 to	Zen,	not	 to	China,	not	 to
Japan,	not	to	India.	I	would	like	you	also	to	be	clear	about	it.	These	boundaries
have	to	be	dropped.
Why	 cling	 to	 such	 small	 meaningless,	 mediocre	 things?	 Why	 not	 open	 up
yourself	 to	 the	whole	 universe,	 this	 vast	 sky,	 the	 beyond?	 Zen	 belongs	 to	 the
beyond.
Don't	 be	 mediocre.	 I	 don't	 want	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 be	 mediocres.	 I	 want	 my
sannyasins	to	be	universal	citizens.
Question	1
The	first	question:
NOW	 BEING	 FREE	 FROM	 THE	 CONCEPT	 OF	 GOD,	 IS	 OUR	 NEWLY
FOUND
DIGNITY	 THAT	 YOU	 SPOKE	 OF	 THE	 OTHER	 DAY,	 NOT	 PRONE	 TO
BECOME
ENTANGLED	IN	THE	EGO?
You	will	not	be	entangled	in	the	ego,	because	the	ego	is	part	of	your	mind,	just
as	 God	 is	 part	 of	 your	 mind.	 Both	 are	 fictions;	 they	 both	 are	 relatives.	 The
moment	you	drop	God	...
If	you	have	guts	to	drop	God,	you	certainly	will	have	guts	to	drop	the	ego	--	that
is	 a	 smaller	 God	 within	 you.	 And	 once	 the	 bigger	 brother	 is	 dead,	 the	 little
cousin-brother	will	die.	First	you	have	to	kill	the	big	brother;	it	is	his	reflection
in	you.	Your	God	is	an	egoist,	an	arch-egoist,	and	he	gives	you	the	idea	of	 the
ego.
Don't	 get	 confused	 between	 dignity	 and	 ego.	 Dignity	 is	 very	 humble,	 very
simple,	very	innocent;	it	belongs	to	the	trees.	When	they	blossom	in	spring,	you
just	 look	 and	 watch	 their	 pride,	 their	 dignity.	 Just	 watch	 when	 a	 peacock	 is
dancing.	Those	psychedelic	colors,	and	the	beautiful	dance	...	do	you	think	there
is	any	ego?	But	there	is	certainly	dignity.
Dignity	 is	 a	 totally	different	phenomenon,	 it	 is	 self-respect.	Ego	 is	domination
over	others.	Dignity	is	just	standing	on	your	own	feet,	independence,	freedom;	it
is	not	domination	over	others.	The	moment	you	start	thinking	of	dominating,	you
are	 falling	 into	 the	 trap	 of	 the	 ego.	 And	 God	 is	 the	 greatest	 ego	 because	 he
created	everything,	he	dominates	everything.	He	is	present	everywhere,	he	is	all-
powerful.	 And	 his	 reflection	 in	 the	 priests	 ...	 The	 pope	 claims	 that	 he	 is
infallible.	Now	this	is	ego.
A	man	of	dignity,	a	man	of	self-respect	will	not	say	such	things.	Certainly	he	will
walk	 straight	 with	 his	 head	 raised	 in	 dignity.	 He	 will	 not	 walk	 like	 a	 slave,
surrendered,	 subdued.	He	will	walk	 like	a	 lion	and	 roar	 like	a	 lion.	But	 that	 is
your	intrinsic	energy,	your	intrinsic	power.
The	power	that	depends	on	others	creates	 the	ego.	The	power	that	comes	from
within	 your	 own	 sources	 of	 life	 creates	 dignity.	Meditation	 brings	 tremendous
dignity,	a	great	grace,	but	not	even	a	shadow	of	ego	is	found	in	it.
If	you	are	capable	of	murdering	God,	you	will	certainly	be	capable	of	murdering
his	image	in	you.	In	fact,	the	moment	God	is	no	longer	there,	you	will	suddenly
be	surprised.
Where	has	the	ego	gone?	If	the	moon	is	not	there,	the	reflection	in	the	lake	of	the
moon	will	disappear.
To	me,	egos	are	reflections	of	one	moon	in	different	ponds,	in	different	lakes,	in
different	oceans,	in	different	rivers	--	millions	of	reflections.	But	just	remove	the
moon	 and	 all	 the	 reflections	 are	 removed.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 remove	 every
reflection.	 It	will	 take	millennia	 to	 remove	all	 those	 reflections.	And	 in	 fact,	 if
the	moon	remains,	you	cannot	remove	the	reflections.
So	I	am	hitting	directly	on	God's	head.	Zen	masters	have	been	hitting	on	poor
disciples'
heads.	 I	 am	 hitting	 to	 the	 very	 source	 from	 where	 your	 ego	 is	 arising.	 God
removed,	you	will	not	find	the	ego	at	all,	it	is	a	reflection.
The	Bible	says,	God	created	man	in	his	own	image.	This	causes	ego.	You	are	the
highest	creature	in	existence	because	God	created	you	in	his	own	image,	and	he
created	all	the	animals	for	you	to	eat.	These	are	your	religions,	scriptures	which
are	 telling	 you	 to	 destroy	 the	 ecology	 of	 existence,	 which	 are	 telling	 you	 to
destroy	 beautiful	 animals	which	 bring	 grace	 and	 joy	 all	 around	 you.	But	God
himself	says	in	your	holy	scriptures,	"I	have	created	everything	for	your	use."	He
is	giving	you	the	first	incentive	for	the	ego.
Once	God	is	removed,	you	will	simply	find	your	ego	is	gone.	It	was	the	shadow,
the	 reflection	 of	 God.	 And	 then	 you	 will	 find	 a	 totally	 new	 phenomenon,	 a
dignity	 which	 is	 not	 a	 domination	 over	 others,	 which	 is	 not	 superiority	 over
others.	It	 is	simply	the	joy	that	existence	loves	you,	 that	existence	creates	you,
that	existence	needs	you,	that	you	are	not	accidental.	This	gives	you	dignity,	this
gives	you	honor,	and	it	is	not	dependent	on	others.
It	comes	from	your	own	innermost	experience	of	your	being.
The	moment	you	find	yourself	existential,	that	you	belong	to	the	whole	cosmos,
and	the	whole	cosmos	belongs	to	you,	there	arises	a	tremendous	splendor	in	your
being	--
Himalayan	peaks	of	consciousness,	Pacific	depths	of	consciousness.	That	brings
you	the	lion's	roar.
You	realize	for	the	first	time	you	are	not	a	slave.
You	realize	for	the	first	time	you	are	not	a	created	creature.
You	realize	for	the	first	time	that	existence	is	your	home,	you	are	not	an	outsider,
and	existence	is	nourishing	you	every	moment.
There	 must	 be	 a	 certain	 purpose,	 a	 certain	 destiny	 that	 existence	 is	 seeking
through	you	to	reach,	a	certain	height	of	consciousness,	a	certain	height	of	love,
a	 certain	 height	 of	 compassion,	 understanding,	 wisdom,	 enlightenment.
Existence	 is	 trying	 in	 every	 possible	 way	 to	 create	 a	 buddha	 in	 your	 very
innermost	 being.	 The	moment	 you	 are	 a	 buddha,	 there	 is	 dignity	without	 any
superiority.
There	is	dignity	in	a	roseflower.	Do	you	think	it	has	any	power	over	anybody?	It
is	so	delicate,	so	vulnerable,	but	it	has	tremendous	dignity.	When	it	is	dancing	in
the	sun,	in	the	rain,	in	the	wind,	it	knows	existence	has	created	in	him	one	of	the
most	beautiful	things.
Dignity	arises	out	of	meditation.
Ego	arises	out	of	mind.
So	don't	be	worried	about	it.
Meditation	will	take	care.
You	will	not	become	egoist,	that's	an	impossibility.
Question	2
The	second	question:
IN	THE	FIRST	LECTURE	OF	THE	SERIES,	GOD	IS	DEAD,	NOW	ZEN	IS
THE
ONLY	LIVING	TRUTH,	YOU	SAID:	"EXISTENCE	NEEDS	YOU."	FOR	ME
THIS	IS
LIKE	A	NEW	BELIEF	BECAUSE	I	DON'T	KNOW	THIS.
I	 have	not	 told	you	 to	believe	 it;	 I	 have	not	 told	you	 to	disbelieve	 it.	 It	 is	my
experience,	I	am	sharing	it	with	you.	You	don't	have	to	believe	it,	you	don't	have
to	disbelieve	it.	You	have	to	inquire	into	it.	You	have	to	go	to	the	same	depths,	to
the	same	heights	 from	where	 I	am	speaking,	 to	 the	same	center	of	your	being.
Then	you	will	 understand	 it,	 not	 believe	 it.	You	will	 know	 it.	Existence	needs
you,	otherwise	you	wouldn't	be	here.
Why	 should	 you	 be	 here?	 Why	 should	 existence	 bother	 to	 keep	 you	 alive
eternally?
But	if	you	start	believing	in	my	statements,	you	are	misunderstanding	me.	I	am
not	here	to	create	any	belief	system	in	you.	Whatever	I	say	is	not	to	be	believed
or	disbelieved.	 It	has	 to	be	 simply	understood	and	 inquired	 into.	Search	 inside
yourself	for	what	I	am	saying	to	see	whether	it	is	true	or	not.	Put	it	to	the	test.	I
know	that	when	you	put	it	to	the	test,	you	will	come	to	experience	it.
I	am	not	converting	you	towards	any	theology,	belief,	any	philosophy.	I	don't	do
that	kind	of	dirty	work.	There	are	enough	missionaries	around	the	world	doing
that.	I	destroy	your	beliefs,	and	you	start	believing	in	me?
Please,	don't	believe	in	me!	Belief	in	anyone	is	ignorance	--	I	am	included	in	it.
Just	 listen	to	me,	and	then	put	whatever	you	hear	and	understand	to	a	fire	 test.
Go	into	the	exploration.	I	don't	want	you	to	believe,	because	I	know	what	I	am
saying	is	truth.	You	don't	have	to	believe	it,	you	have	just	to	inquire	and	you	will
find	it.
The	people	who	tell	you	to	believe	--	for	example	Jesus,	who	goes	on	saying	to
people,
"Believe	in	me,"	is	not	certain	about	his	truth.	If	he	was	certain	about	his	truth,
he	would	never	have	insisted	on	belief.	He	would	have	said,	"Explore.	Inquire.
Search."	I	am	simply	giving	you	an	incentive,	a	sense	of	direction	where	to	go.
Then	find	yourself.
Because	it	is	truth	you	have	to	find	it,	and	you	will	find	it.	Only	lies	have	to	be
believed.
So	all	those	messiahs	and	prophets	and	incarnations	of	God	who	have	talked	you
into	 beliefs,	 are	 destroying	 your	 truth.	 They	 are	 taking	 you	 away	 from	 your
innermost	 realization.	 They	 are	 taking	 you	 away	 from	 your	 own	 buddhahood,
from	your	own	nature,	from	your	own	truth.
My	 effort	 is	 totally	 against	 all	 the	 messiahs,	 and	 all	 the	 avataras,	 all	 the
tirthankaras,	all	the	prophets,	and	all	the	messengers.	My	work	is	not	only	totally
different,	 but	 absolutely	 against	 them.	 They	 were	 creating	 beliefs.	 I	 am
destroying	beliefs,	because	I	know	the	truth.	And	I	know	that	if	you	inquire	--	I
am	absolutely	certain	--	you	will	find	it.
So	why	 should	 I	 insist	 on	belief?	Only	people	who	are	not	 certain	 about	 their
own	 experience,	who	 are	 concerned	 that	 if	 you	 go	 deeper	 inside	 you	may	not
find	what	they	are	saying,	insist	on	believing.
So	you	never	go.	Once	you	believe	in	a	thing,	all	search	stops.	That's	why	I	want
you	to	be	open,	no	belief	system.	Just	inquire	into	your	own	consciousness,	and
all	that	is	truthful,	all	that	is	beautiful,	you	are	going	to	find	it.	You	will	realize,
when	you	are	centered	in	your	being,	that	existence	needs	you,	because	you	are
nothing	but	projections	of	existence,	hands	of	existence	reaching	for	the	stars.
Evolution	of	consciousness	is	just	the	greatest	ambition	of	existence,	and	it	has
trusted	you	a	tremendous	responsibility.
Rise	above	the	mind	which	is	a	social	product.	Rise	above	everything	that	others
have	forced	upon	you,	and	be	authentically	yourself.	Try	to	find	what	 it	 is	 that
you	 are	 in	 your	 innermost	 being	 which	 never	 changes.	 The	 body	 goes	 on
changing	from	childhood	to	youth,	from	youth	to	middle	age,	from	middle	age	to
old	age,	from	old	age	to	death.
The	mind	moves	even	faster.	Every	moment	it	is	changing.	In	the	morning	it	is
one	thing,	in	the	evening	it	is	something	else.	But	behind	mind	and	body	there	is
some	space	which	is	absolutely	eternal	and	remains	the	same	whether	your	body
is	 that	of	 a	 child	or	of	 an	old	man,	whether	you	are	 alive	or	dead.	 It	 does	not
matter	 to	your	 innermost	consciousness.	That	 is	 the	only	 truth,	and	 realizing	 it
you	will	see	how	much	existence	needs	you.
You	are	its	greatest	potentials	on	the	way	to	become	Gautam	Buddhas.
Now	the	sutras:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
SEKITO'S	"SONG	OF	THE	GRASS	HUT."
I	 MAKE	 A	 GRASS	 HUT	 IN	 WHICH	 INSIDE	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 WORLDLY
TREASURE.
I	EAT	AND	SLEEP	NATURALLY	AND	EASILY.	WHEN	I	MADE	THE	HUT,
THE
REEDS	WERE	NEW.	WHEN	THE	HUT	GETS	TORN,	 I	 COVER	 IT	WITH
REEDS
AGAIN.	THE	PERSON	LIVING	IN	THE	HUT	IS	ALWAYS	THERE.
He	is	talking	about	the	body;	the	hut	is	only	a	symbol.	The	person	living	in	there
is	 always	 there.	 That	 will	 give	 you	 the	 clue	 that	 the	 hut	 is	 just	 a	 symbol,
otherwise	sometimes	the	person	will	have	to	go	out	to	find	food,	to	find	water.
But	the	person	remains	there	always.
"HE	DOES	NOT	BELONG	TO	INSIDE	OR	OUTSIDE"	--	how	can	he	belong
to	China	or	Japan?
"I	DO	NOT	LIVE	WHERE	ORDINARY	PEOPLE	LIVE	..."	Where	do	ordinary
people	 live?	 --	 in	 the	 body,	 in	 the	mind.	 Sekito	 is	 saying,	 "I	 DO	NOT	 LIVE
WHERE
ORDINARY	PEOPLE	LIVE;	I	DO	NOT	LOVE	WHAT	ORDINARY	PEOPLE
LOVE."
What	is	the	love	of	ordinary	people?	--	money,	power,	prestige.
Sekito	is	saying,	"I	also	love,	but	not	the	way	the	ordinary	people	love,	and	not
the	 objects	 that	 ordinary	 people	 love.	 I	 love	 their	 subjectivity.	 I	 love	 their
subjectivity	because	I	know	my	own	subjectivity.	Just	as	I	am	there	always,	they
are	also	always	there.	They	may	know	it,	they	may	not	know	it.	I	don't	love	their
bodies.	I	don't	love	their	minds,	but	I	love	that	which	is	behind	and	beyond	their
bodies	and	their	minds.
"I	don't	love	the	way	they	love.	They	always	love	with	conditions	and	conditions
and	conditions.	They	destroy	their	love	because	of	so	many	conditions	attached
to	it.	I	simply	love	because	it	is	my	nature	to	love.	I	have	come	to	the	point	from
where	love	is	overflowing.	There	is	no	condition	attached	to	it."
If	you	 receive	Sekito's	 love,	or	my	 love,	you	are	obliging	me	and	Sekito.	You
could	have	refused.	It	was	within	your	power,	but	you	received	it	with	joy.	You
are	not	to	be	grateful	to	me	or	to	Sekito.	I	have	to	be	grateful	to	you.	I	was	too
full	of	love,	and	you	came	on	the	way	and	unburdened	me.	I	have	to	be	obliged
to	you,	and	I	have	a	deep	gratitude	towards	you.
ALTHOUGH	THE	HUT	IS	SMALL,	IT	CONTAINS	THE	DHARMA	WORLD.
The	hut	is	small	in	the	sense	that	it	is	within	you,	but	the	moment	you	realize	--
not	as	a	concept	in	the	mind,	but	as	an	actual	experience	beyond	the	mind	--	you
suddenly	see	 that	 the	smallest	center	of	your	being	contains	 the	whole	dharma
world,	the	whole	world	of	nature,	the	whole	existence.	A	small	seed	contains	so
much,	it	can	make	the	whole	earth	green.	Your	smallest	center	contains	so	much
that	the	whole	universe	can	be	filled	by	it.
Once	you	know	it,	you	know	it;	it	is	without	limits	and	without	boundaries.
A	MAN	OF	ZEN	UNDERSTANDS	IT	WELL	--	that	although	the	hut	is	small,	it
contains	the	whole	existence.	BODHISATTVAS	OF	THE	SUPREME	VEHICLE
HAVE
NO	 DOUBT	 ABOUT	 IT,	 BUT	 THE	 MEDIOCRE	 ARE	 BOUND	 TO	 BE
DUBIOUS.
And	the	world	is	full	of	mediocre	people.
Just	 today	 somebody	 has	 written	 an	 article	 against	 me	 --	 as	 an	 example	 of	 a
mediocre	mind	--	because	I	sent	the	telegram	to	Rajiv	Gandhi.	It	said	if	you	are
honest	and	truthful,	then	throw	away	all	your	weapons,	arms,	into	the	ocean,	and
let	your	armies	be	dissolved.
Put	all	those	people	into	the	fields,	into	the	orchards,	into	farms,	into	gardens,	to
create	and	to	work.
The	 telegram	 was	 in	 response	 to	 his	 address	 of	 an	 international	 gathering	 of
scientists,	and	he	was	telling	them	that	there	was	no	need	for	nations,	there	was
no	need	for	boundaries,	there	was	no	need	for	arms,	there	was	no	need	for	wars.
My	telegram	was	simply	to	provoke	him	and	focus	his	mind	--	"Can	you	do	it?
And	if	you	cannot	do	it,	you	don't	have	the	right	to	tell	others	to	do	it."
I	was	simply	making	it	clear	 to	him	that	he	is	not	capable	of	doing	it.	Nobody
else	is	capable	of	doing	it	for	the	simple	reason	of	the	fear	of	being	invaded.	But
if	you	are	not	capable	of	doing	it,	you	should	understand	nobody	is	capable	of
doing	it.	Then	don't	talk	nonsense.
My	 telegram	was	not	an	appeal	 to	him	 to	 throw	away	 the	arms	 into	 the	ocean
and	dissolve	the	armies.	I	was	trying	to	check	upon	his	intelligence.	He	has	not
answered,	because	he	knows	perfectly	well	this	cannot	be	done.
He	was	simply	imitating	Mahatma	Gandhi.	Mahatma	Gandhi	had	said	it	to	Louis
Fischer	 an	American	writer	who	was	 living	with	Gandhi	 and	working	out	 and
preparing	 a	 biography	 of	 Mahatma	 Gandhi.	 Louis	 Fischer	 asked	 Mahatma
Gandhi,	 "When	 India	 becomes	 independent"	 --	 it	 was	 before	 independence	 --
"what	are	you	going	to	do	with	 the	arms,	because	you	are	nonviolent,	and	you
preach	 nonviolence?	What	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do	 with	 your	 armies?	What	 will
happen	to	your	factories	which	produce	a	tremendous	amount	of	arms?"
And	without	any	hesitation	Mahatma	Gandhi	said,	"I	will	 throw	all	 these	arms
into	 the	ocean,	 and	 I	will	make	all	 the	 armies	 retire	 and	go	back	 to	work.	We
don't	 need	 armies,	 we	 need	 more	 people,	 strong	 people	 to	 create	 more	 food,
more	clothes."
The	 obvious	 question	 was,	 and	 Louis	 Fischer	 asked	 it,	 "What	 will	 happen	 if
some	foreign	country	invades	you?"
And	Mahatma	Gandhi,	without	any	hesitation,	again	said,	"We	will	receive	them
as	our	guests,	and	we	will	tell	them,	Ìf	you	want	to	live	in	this	country,	you	are
welcome.'"
Rajiv	 Gandhi	 was	 simply	 imitating	 Mahatma	 Gandhi.	 It	 is	 very	 good	 to	 use
sweet	words,	but	the	point	is	that	even	Mahatma	Gandhi	did	not	prove	true	to	his
own	promises.	He	was	the	first	man	to	bless	three	airplanes	full	of	bombs	who
were	going	to	attack	Pakistan.	They	came	over	the	house	where	he	was	staying
in	New	Delhi,	Birla	House,	with	one	of	the	most	super-rich	families	in	India.	He
talked	about	poverty,	and	he	lived	in	Birla	House	which	is	a	palace	....
And	the	three	airplanes,	before	going	to	Pakistan,	came	as	close	to	the	house	as
possible	 to	 receive	 the	blessings	of	Mahatma	Gandhi.	And	he	came	out	of	 the
house	and	he	blessed	--	"Go	away	and	be	victorious."	Seeing	his	hand	raised	as
he	was	standing	in	the	garden	of	Birla	House,	those	three	airplanes	were	the	first
to	attack	Pakistan.	And	this	was	the	man	who	just	a	few	years	back	was	talking
about	throwing	arms	into	the	sea	and	receiving	invaders	as	guests.
So	 I	 was	 simply	 provoking	 Rajiv	 Gandhi	 to	 come	 to	 his	 senses:	 "Don't	 talk
nonsense."	 I	have	every	 right	as	a	citizen	of	 this	country	 to	ask	 that	 the	prime
minister	of	this	country	does	not	talk	nonsense.	If	he	is	honest,	he	should	answer
me	 and	 ask	 for	 an	 apology	 for	 those	 things	 he	 said	 to	 the	 international
conference	of	the	scientists	--	or	he	should	do	what	he	has	said!
Now	this	man	has	written	a	whole	article	against	me	saying	that	I	am	suggesting
to	Rajiv	Gandhi	to	throw	away	all	the	arms	and	dissolve	the	armies.	"Then	what
will	happen	if	somebody	attacks?"	--	this	man	asks	me	--	"Have	you	gone	mad?"
I	have	returned	him	the	answer	that	first	think	about	Gandhi.	Was	he	mad?	And
you	are	a	dim-witted	fellow	that	you	could	not	understand	the	telegram.	You	are
a	mediocre.	You	 don't	 have	 even	 the	 capacity	 to	 understand	 that	 the	 telegram
was	 not	 an	 appeal,	 it	 was	 a	 response	 to	 his	 absolutely	 nonsense	words	 to	 the
international	conference.
And	he	contradicted	himself	just	after	four	days.	Then	he	was	addressing	Hindu
chauvinists.	Then	he	said,	"We	should	save	our	national	heritage."	And	just	four
days	 before	 that	 he	 was	 saying,	 "All	 boundaries	 of	 nations	 should	 dissolve."
From	where	has	the	national	heritage	come	now?	And	if	you	are	going	to	save
your	national	heritage,	why	should	others	dissolve	their	national	heritage?	--	"We
should	be	patriotic!"
Politicians	have	so	many	masks.	 I	was	 just	 trying	 to	pull	his	mask	and	 let	him
see	his	original	face.	But	this	idiot	who	has	written	the	article	did	not	understand
the	 meaning	 of	 the	 telegram.	 It	 was	 against	Mahatma	 Gandhi,	 it	 was	 against
Rajiv	Gandhi.	It	was	against	all	the	politicians	who	say	one	thing	and	always	do
just	the	opposite.
But	 this	 is	 how	 it	 has	 been	 since	 man	 started	 growing	 on	 this	 planet.	 The
mediocre	are	bound	 to	be	dubious,	 they	cannot	understand.	Only	bodhisattvas,
the	potential	buddhas	...
that	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	bodhisattvas.	You	are	all	bodhisattvas,	potential
buddhas	in	the	seed,	in	the	essence.
So	when	you	go	to	your	very	center	in	meditation,	I	start	calling	you	buddhas.
Particularly,	at	that	moment	you	are	a	buddha.	You	will	again	fall	and	become	a
bodhisattva,	 but	 slowly	 slowly,	 you	will	 start	 feeling	 the	 difference	 between	 a
bodhisattva	 and	 a	 buddha.	 I	 want	 this	 distance	 to	 disappear.	 The	 bodhisattva
turns	into	a	buddha,	dissolves	into	the	buddha.	Only	buddhas	know	exactly	what
is	the	truth.	And	only	they	are	capable	of	not	misunderstanding.
"IF	I	WERE	ASKED,"	says	Sekito,	"WHETHER	THIS	HUT	BREAKS	DOWN
OR
NOT,	I	WOULD	SAY	THAT	THE	SUBJECT	IS	ORIGINALLY	BOTH	IN	THE
BREAKABLE	AND	UNBREAKABLE."
Now	 you	 can	 understand	 clearly,	 he	 is	 not	 referring	 to	 any	 hut.	He	 is	 saying,
"Whether	this	hut	breaks	down	or	not,	does	not	matter."	One	who	is	living	in	it,
the	subject,	your	 interiormost	consciousness	which	 is	 living	 in	 the	body,	 is	not
affected	whether	the	hut	is	breakable	or	unbreakable.
Even	in	your	death	you	never	die.
Even	in	your	birth	you	are	never	born.
You	 have	 always	 been	 here.	 Birth	 and	 death	 have	 happened	many	 times,	 just
small	episodes	in	an	eternity-to-eternity	long	life.
I	DON'T	LIVE	IN	THE	NORTH	OR	SOUTH	OR	THE	WEST	OR	EAST.
Where	is	China?	Now	where	should	I	put	this	fellow	Sekito?	When	I	don't	find
any	place,	I	put	people	in	Japan,	because	that	is	 the	most	crowded	place	in	the
world	--	no	land!	So	I	go	on	increasing	the	crowd	there.
So	don't	be	worried.	Japan	has	to	be	worried,	why	should	you	be	worried?	I	hope
sooner	or	later,	the	emperor	of	Japan	is	going	to	object	saying,	"You	are	sending
too	many	people	to	Japan,	and	we	are	already	so	crowded."
Tokyo	 is	 the	most	 crowded	 city	 in	 the	world.	Now	 they	 are	 creating	 artificial
islands	because	there	is	nowhere	to	go.	It	is	a	small	country,	and	had	an	immense
increase	 of	 population	 after	 the	 second	world	 war.	 That	 always	 happens	 after
war,	because	nature	immediately	replaces.	Seeing	Hiroshima	and	Nagasaki	and
that	 so	many	 people	 have	 died,	 nature	 immediately	 rushes	 and	 starts	 bringing
more	and	more	children.	 It	 is	a	well-known	fact	 that	after	every	war	 there	 is	a
boom	of	children.	They	suddenly	go	on	and	on.
It	is	very	difficult	to	stop	them.
So	 Japan	 had	 a	 great	 boom	 of	 children.	 And	 Japanese	 children	 are	 really
beautiful.	What	happens	to	them	afterwards	is	a	tragedy.	The	Japanese	children
are	so	beautiful.	I	don't	 think	anywhere	else	such	beautiful	children	are	born	--
just	like	Japanese	dolls.	But	something	goes	wrong.	When	they	grow	up,	then	all
that	beauty	simply	disappears.	Then	they	look	like	rats,	but	very	dangerous	rats.
I	 have	 always	 wondered	 what	 happens	 --	 such	 beautiful	 children	 suddenly
disappear.
I	love	Japan	because	of	those	children.	And	I	love	Japan	because	of	the	second
birth,	when	a	man	again	becomes	a	child	--	those	are	the	Zen	masters.
So	forgive	me	please.
A	man	of	Zen	belongs	to	the	universe,	not	to	the	south	or	the	west	or	the	east	or
to	the	north.
THE	 FOUNDATION	 OF	 THE	 HUT	 IS	 THE	 MOST	 SOLID.	 UNDER	 THE
GREEN
PINE	 TREE,	 IN	 THE	 HUT'S	 BRIGHT	 WINDOW	 --	 EVEN	 A	 GOLDEN
PALACE
CAN'T	COMPARE.
I	am	reminded	of	an	ancient	parable	....
A	poor	man	in	his	hut	...	it	is	the	middle	of	the	night,	and	the	hut	is	so	small	that
only	the	husband	and	wife	can	sleep	in	it.	That's	enough	space,	that	is	all.
And	somebody	knocks	on	the	door	....
It	is	raining	so	much,	and	the	dark	night	--	perhaps	somebody	has	forgotten	the
way.
Deep	in	the	forest	they	lived.
So	the	husband	told	the	wife,	who	was	near	the	door,	"Open	the	door."
The	wife	said,	"But	there	is	no	space."
The	husband	said,	"It	is	not	a	palace,	it	is	a	poor	man's	hut;	there	is	always	space.
Only	in	palaces	is	it	very	difficult	to	find	space."
The	wife	 said,	 "You	always	 say	 strange	 things.	 In	 the	middle	of	 the	night	 that
fellow	must	be	drenched	with	water.	 It	 is	pouring,	 and	you	want	him	 to	 come
in?"
He	said,	"Yes,	you	just	open	the	door.	Nobody	should	go	away	from	my	door!"
So	the	woman	reluctantly	opens	the	door,	and	then	asks,	"What	should	we	do?"
He	said,	"There	is	no	problem.	We	were	lying	down,	now	we	will	sit.	For	three
persons	 it	 is	 enough	space	 to	 sit,	 and	we	will	 talk.	We	have	not	 seen	anybody
coming	 from	 the	 city	 for	many	days,	 so	he	may	have	 some	news,	 and	he	will
gossip.	And	the	night	is	not	long	-
-	half	is	already	gone,	half	will	also	go."
So	 the	man	comes	 in	and	 they	sit.	The	man	 looks	around	and	sees	 that	he	has
intruded	upon	their	privacy	--	there	is	no	space.	But	there	is	no	way	of	going	out,
there	is	too	much	rain	and	it	is	too	dark,	and	he	has	forgotten	the	way.	So	he	said,
"Forgive	me."
They	said,	"There	is	no	problem.	It	is	not	a	palace,	it	is	a	poor	man's	hut.	There
is	always	enough	space."
So	they	started	talking,	and	suddenly	another	man	knocked	on	the	door.	And	this
stranger	inside	was	sitting	close	to	the	door,	so	the	man,	the	owner	said,	"Open
the	door."
The	stranger	said,	"What?	There	is	no	space!"
The	man	said,	"If	I	had	listened	to	my	wife,	who	was	saying	there	is	no	space,
you	would	not	have	been	in.	Just	open	the	door.	There	is	enough	space,	we	just
have	 to	 sit	 a	 little	 closer.	 And	 you,	 who	 have	 been	 given	 space,	 should	 not
object."
Reluctantly	 that	man	opened	 the	 door	 and	 another	man	 came	 in.	And	he	 said,
"Forgive	me,	but	 there	 is	nowhere	 to	go.	The	light	from	your	hut	has	been	my
only	safety.	I	have	been	walking	all	the	way	just	looking	at	your	hut	--	a	small
light	from	the	window.	So	forgive	me	for	intruding."
The	man	said,	"You	are	not	intruding.	We	can	sit	closely	and	it	will	be	warmer
also.	You	are	drenched	and	you	must	be	feeling	cold.	So	the	more	people	who
are	inside,	the	warmer	it	will	become.	Sit	down	and	be	close."
Now	 this	 new	 stranger	 is	 sitting	 closest	 to	 the	 door,	 and	 a	 donkey	 comes	 and
knocks	on	the	door	by	his	head.
The	man	said,	"Please	open	the	door,	because	I	know	that	donkey	loves	me.	He
always	 comes.	And	when	 there	 is	 trouble,	 the	poor	 fellow	has	nowhere	 to	go.
Just	open	the	door."
The	second	stranger	who	was	sitting	by	the	side	of	the	door	said,	"What?	For	a
donkey
...?	Where	is	the	space?"
The	man	said,	"This	has	been	the	problem,	and	I	have	been	creating	space.	We
will	create	space,	don't	be	worried.	We	are	sitting,	we	will	stand,	and	the	donkey
can	be	just	at	the	center	--	and	he	is	such	a	lovely	philosophical-minded	fellow.
We	will	all	enjoy	him."
Those	strangers	said,	"You	are	a	very	strange	fellow."
He	said,	 "I	 am.	Otherwise	you	would	not	have	been	 in.	My	wife	 is	 absolutely
rational,	she	would	not	have	allowed	anybody.	So	please	open	the	door.	It	is	my
hut	and	you	should	not	forget	you	are	only	a	guest.	Another	guest	has	come.	Just
open	the	door."
So	he	has	to	open	it,	but	very	reluctantly,	angry	that	a	donkey	was	being	brought
in.	And	the	donkey	entered	and	stood	in	between,	and	all	those	people	stood	up.
"Now,"	the	man	asked,	"do	you	see	how	a	poor	man's	hut	is	so	spacious?
"It	is	not	a	question	of	the	hut,	it	is	a	question	of	the	heart.	If	you	have	space	in
the	heart,	you	have	space	in	the	hut.	In	the	palaces	there	is	no	space	in	the	heart,
that's	why	 there	 are	 empty	 palaces,	 but	 no	 space.	Doors	would	 not	 have	 been
opened	for	you.
"This	poor	donkey	has	no	chance	of	entering	into	a	palace,	but	a	poor	man's	hut
respects	everybody."
So	 he	 says,	 "THE	 FOUNDATION	 OF	 THE	 HUT	 IS	 THE	 MOST	 SOLID.
UNDER	THE
GREEN	 PINE	 TREE,	 IN	 THE	 HUT'S	 BRIGHT	 WINDOW	 --	 EVEN	 A
GOLDEN
PALACE	CAN'T	COMPARE."
The	foundation	 is	on	a	 rock.	You	know	Sekito	 --	he	used	 to	 remain	on	a	 rock,
that's	 why	 he	 became	 famous	 as	 Stonehead.	 A	 completely	 shaven	 head	 that
looked	like	a	stone,	and	he	was	always	sitting	on	a	stone.	And	it	was	the	master
Nangaku	who	ordered	his	people	to	make	a	hut	for	him	--	around	him,	because
he	was	a	strange	fellow,	he	would	not	even	move.
So	the	foundation	was	really	strong.	It	was	a	flat	rock,	and	he	remained	sitting
while	 Nangaku's	 people	 were	 making	 the	 hut	 around	 him.	 He	 did	 not	 say
anything	--	whether	to	make	it	or	not	to	make	it,	he	did	not	take	any	note.
A	man	reported	to	Nangaku:	"That	fellow	is	very	strange.	We	are	making	a	hut
around	him,	and	he	does	not	even	inquire	what	we	are	doing."
Nangaku	 said,	 "I	 know	 him.	 Even	when	 he	was	 not	 enlightened	 he	was	 very
strange.	And	now	that	he	is	enlightened,	he	is	the	strangest	man.	But	you	finish
the	job;	don't	be	bothered	by	him,	and	don't	be	afraid	of	him.	He	is	a	very	soft-
hearted	man,	just	his	head	is	like	a	stone,	hard."
He	is	right.	If	you	are	really	alive,	then	even	a	small	hut	with	a	window	goes	on
giving	 you	 a	 sunset,	 a	 sunrise,	 the	 moon	 and	 the	 whole	 sky	 full	 of	 stars,	 a
beautiful	pine	tree	and	the	fragrance	of	 the	pine	filling	into	the	hut.	Who	cares
about	palaces?
He	is	saying	that	a	man	of	consciousness	is	in	a	palace	everywhere.	His	palace	is
this	whole	sky.	His	foundation	is	absolutely	solid,	his	center	is	absolutely	solid.
Now	it	doesn't	matter	where	he	is.	Wherever	he	is,	he	is	the	emperor.	Wherever
he	is,	he	is	in	the	palace.
"IF	I	COVER	MYSELF	WITH	THE	OLD	QUILT,	EVERYTHING	SETTLES.
There	is	no	sun,	there	is	no	moon,	there	is	no	sky,	there	are	no	stars	--	everything
simply	disappears,	 there	 is	no	world.	The	moment	 I	cover	myself	with	 the	old
quilt,	 EVERYTHING	 SETTLES.	 THEN	 I	 DON'T	 UNDERSTAND
ANYTHING."
This	is	the	beauty	of	a	Zen	master.	He	can	accept	his	ignorance.	He	can	accept
that	"I	don't	know	anything."
Out	of	this	not-knowing	arises	tremendous	wisdom.
Out	of	this	ignorance	arises	innocence.
Out	of	 this	 not-knowing,	 this	 darkness	 of	 not-knowing,	 comes	 a	 fresh	 sunrise.
This	not-knowing	 is	not	 the	mediocre	man's	not-knowing.	This	not-knowing	 is
beyond	the	mind.
Mind	can	be	a	knower,	 it	 can	be	a	non-knower	 --	 those	are	possibilities	of	 the
mind.	But	beyond	the	mind	you	can	only	say,	"I	am."	Or	perhaps	even	"I"	is	not
needed,	perhaps
"am"	is	also	not	needed,	only	existence	is.
It	 is	 a	 tautology	 to	 say	 "existence	 is,"	 because	 isness	 is	 what	 is	 meant	 by
existence.	 So	 just	 isness,	 a	 pure	 isness	without	 any	 disturbance	 of	 knowledge,
information	 ....	 But	 the	 purity	 of	 it	 and	 the	 beauty	 of	 it	 is	 beyond	 limits.	 Its
abundant	blossoming	of	all	the	qualities	that	man	has	always	cherished,	hoped,
dreamed,	 have	 become	 realities.	 But	 they	 are	 coming	 from	 an	 innocence.	 All
those	flowers,	all	those	lotuses	are	blossoming	out	of	not-knowing.
A	mirror	does	not	know	anything,	but	when	you	come	in	front	of	 the	mirror	 it
immediately	responds,	reflects.	A	Zen	master	functions	in	the	same	way.	You	put
a	question	to	him	...	he	is	not	filled	with	knowledge	or	readymade	answers.	You
put	 a	 question	 to	 him,	 and	 just	 like	 a	 mirror	 he	 reflects	 your	 question.	 The
answer	 is	 coming	 out	 of	 not-knowing.	 It	 is	 not	 from	 scriptures,	 it	 is	 from
absolute	awareness	and	spontaneity.
LIVING	IN	THIS	HUT,	I	STOP	LOOKING	FOR	ANY	SOLUTIONS.
The	man	who	has	gone	beyond	has	no	doubts,	has	no	beliefs,	has	no	questions,
has	no	answers.	He	simply	is,	and	this	isness	is	the	ultimate	blossoming	of	your
potentialities.
WHO	WOULD	PUT	THEM	PROUDLY	IN	THE	SHOW	WINDOW	FOR	THE
PEOPLE	TO	BUY?	A	man	who	has	become	a	buddha,	a	man	who	is	enlightened
can	share	with	you	all	that	he	has,	but	he	has	nothing	to	sell.
All	 the	 religions	 are	 selling.	 They	 are	 selling	 God,	 they	 are	 selling	 beautiful
places	 in	paradise,	 they	are	 selling	bank	accounts	 in	paradise.	They	are	 selling
everything	 and	 pocketing	 the	 money	 from	 you.	 And	 you	 are	 not	 getting
anything,	 and	 you	 don't	 know	 anything	 about	 what	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 after
death.	You	don't	have	even	a	receipt	to	show	to	God:	"I	have	deposited	so	much
money	with	the	priest.	Where	is	my	bank	account?	He	has	not	given	me	even	the
number	of	the	bank	account."	And	one	never	knows.
One	thing	is	certain	that	everything	you	give	to	the	priest	goes	into	his	pocket.	It
never	reaches	beyond	that.	And	how	can	the	priest	manage?	He	himself	does	not
know	the	address	of	God.	Where	has	he	to	send	it?
He	is	simply	selling	things	which	don't	exist.	But	because	he	is	giving	you	hope
and	consolation	for	after	death,	you	feel	it	is	good	to	purchase	something	for	the
long	journey	after	death.	One	never	knows,	he	may	be	right.	At	least	it	is	a	great
consolation	that	you	are	prepared.	You	have	done	the	homework,	and	you	can	go
into	the	darkness	of	death.	It	is	a	tunnel,	whether	it	will	end	anywhere	or	not	you
have	no	 idea.	But	at	 least	while	you	were	alive	you	dropped	 the	fear	of	death.
The	priest	was	giving	you	the	consolation,	you	were	giving	your	money.
God	 is	 for	 sale.	All	 churches,	 all	 denominations,	 all	 religions	 are	 selling	God.
They	are	the	most	dangerous	people	in	the	sense	that	they	are	giving	you	hopes
which	will	never	be	fulfilled,	and	they	are	giving	you	consolations	you	will	be
utterly	disappointed	in.
Hence,	 I	 don't	want	 to	give	you	 any	hope,	 any	promise.	 I	 simply	want	 you	 to
explore	 on	 your	 own.	 If	 you	 can	 find	 something,	 good.	 If	 you	 can't	 find
something,	I	am	helpless.
But	I	know	if	you	search	deeply	enough	you	are	bound	to	find.	If	I	have	found	it,
if	Sekito	has	found	it,	then	there	is	no	problem	for	anybody.	Every	human	being
is	born	as	a	bodhisattva.	It	is	only	a	question	of	turning	the	seed	into	a	plant,	and
then	the	roses	will	come	on	their	own.
WHEN	EVENING	COMES	AND	THE	SUN	IS	SETTING,	I	COME	BACK	TO
THE
HUT.	 MY	 BEING	 IS	 SO	 VAST	 THAT	 THERE	 ARE	 NO	 DIVISIONS.
MEETING
WITH	 THE	 INTIMATE	 TEACHINGS	 OF	 THE	 ANCESTRAL	 MASTER,	 I
MADE	A	HUT	WITH	GRASSES	AND	DON'T	THINK	OF	LEAVING.	I	JUST
LET	THE
HUNDRED	YEARS	GO	AS	THEY	PASS	BY.	He	lived	one	hundred	years	--	the
whole	century.
But	he	is	saying,	"I	don't	go	anywhere	or	leave	the	hut.	I	am	utterly	contented.
There	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere	in	search.	I	have	found	it;	it	is	within	me."	So	a
hundred	years	have	passed	by	the	side,	but	Sekito	remains	almost	a	child.	Those
years	 have	 not	 been	 a	 corruptive	 influence	 on	 him.	He	 has	 remained	 a	 tabula
rasa,	nothing	is	written	on	his	slate.	Utterly	empty,	nobody	special,	but	hundreds
of	people	managed	to	reach,	finding	his	slippery	path.
A	 certain	magnetism	 arises	 with	 enlightenment,	 and	 those	 who	 are	 searching,
knowingly	or	unknowingly,	are	pulled,	sometimes	in	spite	of	 themselves.	They
don't	want,	 but	 something	 is	more	 forceful	 than	 their	wanting	 or	 not	wanting.
Some	challenge	is	coming	from	some	direction,	and	they	start	moving.
You	can	see	people	here	from	all	over	the	earth,	from	every	nook	and	corner,	and
I	am	the	most	condemned	man,	the	most	notorious	man	around	the	world.	Why
should	 you	 be	 here?	All	 the	 governments	 are	 against	me,	 all	 the	 religions	 are
against	me,	all	the	nations	are	against	me,	but	it	does	not	prevent	you.	Something
far	more	powerful	is	pulling	you.
You	had	to	come;	it	was	impossible	to	resist.	And	once	you	have	come,	it	is	very
difficult	to	go	away.
Even	if	you	go	away,	you	will	be	carrying	me	with	you	--	not	in	the	luggage	but
in	your	heart,	because	luggage	gets	lost	many	times.	Don't	trust	luggage.	And	I
don't	like	to	be	in	a	suitcase.	I	don't	have	any!
Avirbhava	 has	 all	 the	 suitcases.	 She	 carries	 things	 for	 me	 in	 her	 suitcases	 --
eighteen	in	total.	I	wonder	where	she	lives	in	the	room	when	there	are	eighteen
suitcases.	Perhaps	keeping	her	 feet	 in	one	suitcase	and	her	head	 in	another	 ...?
Yes?
(THE	 MASTER	 TURNS	 TOWARDS	 AVIRBHAVA	 WHO	 SHRIEKS	 IN
SURPRISE
AND	SQUIRMS	IN	HER	SEAT.	EYEBROWS	RAISED	AND	CHUCKLING,
HE
ENJOYS	THE	SITUATION	FOR	SOME	SECONDS.)
IF	 I	 MOVE	 WITH	 MY	 HANDS	 OPEN,	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 PROBLEM.	 A
THOUSAND
WORDS,	 TEN	 THOUSAND	 SOLUTIONS,	 ONLY	 KEEP	 YOU	 IN
IGNORANCE.	IF
YOU	WANT	TO	KNOW	THE	IMMORTAL	PERSON	IN	THE	HUT,	WHY	DO
YOU
GO	AWAY	FROM	THIS	SKIN	BAG?
Your	skin	bag,	your	body,	your	hut,	contains	 the	buddha.	 If	you	really	want	 to
live	without	any	problems	and	without	any	solutions,	without	any	questions	and
without	any	answers	--	just	a	pure	innocent	life,	undisturbed	by	anything	--	then
don't	go	anywhere	else.	In	this	very	bag	of	skin,	in	this	very	body	is	the	buddha,
and	in	this	very	place	is	the	lotus	paradise.
Sekito's	statements	are	tremendously	beautiful.	It	is	absolutely	right	to	call	them
Sekito's
`Song	of	the	Grass	Hut.'	It	is	a	song,	and	sung	with	great	dignity	and	with	great
joy.
Issa	wrote:
I	HAVE	NOTHING	AT	ALL	--
BUT	THIS	TRANQUILITY!
THIS	COOLNESS!
Perhaps	he	was	writing	for	you.	Just	watch	this	tranquility,	this	coolness	--	I	have
nothing	 at	 all.	But	 to	 have	 such	 tranquility	 and	 such	 coolness,	 you	 don't	 need
anything.	 You	 have	 all!	 You	 have	 the	 whole	 universe	 within	 you	 --	 in	 the
dewdrop	the	whole	ocean,	in	the	seed	the	whole	greenery	of	the	earth.
"I	have	nothing	at	all"	--	Issa	is	right.	He	does	not	possess	anything,	but	a	great
tranquility	 surrounds	 him,	 and	 this	 coolness	 that	 penetrates	 deep	 into	 the	 very
center	 of	 your	 being.	 That	 tranquility	 is	 present	 here,	 and	 that	 coolness	 is
possible	to	be	felt	by	you.
Issa	has	put	the	whole	of	Zen	into	a	small	haiku.
I	HAVE	NOTHING	AT	ALL	--
BUT	THIS	TRANQUILITY!
THIS	COOLNESS!
Question	3
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ALAN	WATTS	 HAD	 A	 NOVEL	 IDEA	 FOR	 HOW	 EASTER	 SHOULD	 BE
SPENT.
"EVERY	 EASTER	 SUNDAY	 SHOULD	 BE	 CELEBRATED	 WITH	 A
SOLEMN	AND
REVERENT	BURNING	OF	 THE	HOLY	 SCRIPTURES,"	HE	 SUGGESTED,
"FOR
THE	WHOLE	MEANING	OF	THE	RESURRECTION	AND	ASCENSION	OF
CHRIST
INTO	HEAVEN	 (WHICH	 IS	WITHIN	YOU)	 IS	THAT	GOD-MANHOOD	IS
TO	BE
DISCOVERED	HERE	AND	NOW,	 INWARDLY,	NOT	 IN	THE	LETTER	OF
THE
BIBLE."
WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK	OF	HIS	IDEA?
Just	great!
Maneesha,	it	is	time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh.	Put	on	the	lights!	I	want	to	see
my	people	laughing,	celebrating.
In	Leningrad,	 in	 Soviet	Russia,	 the	 Jehovah's	Witnesses	 have	 been	 allowed	 to
build	 their	 own	 special	 church	 called	 The	Kingdom	Hall.	 At	 the	 first	 service,
there	is	a	lot	of	hooting,	shouting,	fainting,	preaching	and	sermonizing	before	the
service	finally	comes	to	an	end.
Perspiring,	 old	 Grandma	 Botovitch,	 shuffles	 up	 to	 the	 front	 of	 The	 Kingdom
Hall.	She	prostrates	herself	under	a	huge	statue	of	Jesus	nailed	to	the	cross,	and
then	lifts	her	head	and	plants	a	big	wet	kiss	on	Christ's	feet.
Officer	Molotov,	 of	 the	 KGB,	 has	 been	 watching	 Grandma	 Botovitch	 closely
from	behind	a	curtain.	He	marches	over	to	the	old	woman	and	says,	"Would	you
kiss	the	feet	of	our	great	leader,	Mikhail	Gorbachev,	like	that?"
"Sure,"	replies	Grandma.	"If	you	nailed	him	up	like	this!"
The	pub	door	swings	open	and	Chicken	Chopper	walks	in	with	an	unlit	cigarette
hanging	from	his	mouth.	He	goes	over	to	the	bar	where	Dick	Puller	is	smoking	a
cigar	and	drinking	a	beer.
"Have	you	got	a	light?"	asks	Chicken.
"Fuck	off!"	says	Dick	Puller.
"Hey!"	says	Chicken.	"I	only	asked	for	a	light!"
"I	heard	you,"	snaps	Dick.	"Fuck	off!"
"Hey!"	cries	Chicken.	"Why	won't	you	give	me	a	light	then?"
"Because	 if	 I	do,"	 replies	Dick,	"you	will	buy	me	a	drink.	Then	 I	will	have	 to
buy	 you	 a	 drink.	 And	 then	 we	 will	 both	 get	 drunk.	 And	 then	 we	 will	 both
become	friends.	And	then	I	will	invite	you	over	to	my	house.	And	then	it	will	be
too	late	for	you	to	go	home,	won't	it?"
"Gee!	I	guess	so,"	replies	Chicken.
"Yes!	That's	right,"	snaps	Dick	Puller.	"And	then	you	will	want	me	to	give	you	a
bed	at	my	house	--	won't	you?"
"Well,	yes,"	replies	Chicken.	"Maybe."
"And	my	daughter	is	a	real	beauty,"	continues	Dick,	"so	you	will	want	to	sleep
with	her	--
won't	you?"
"Yes,	sure!"	exclaims	Chicken.
"And	then,"	continues	Dick,	"you	will	make	her	pregnant,	won't	you?"
"Yes!"	cries	Chicken.
"But	you	won't	marry	her,	will	you?"	asks	Dick.
"Ah	yes	I	will!"	cries	Chicken	Chopper.	"I	will	marry	her!"
"Ah	no	you	won't,"	says	Dick,	"because	I	am	not	giving	you	a	light!"
Two	Englishmen,	Charles	 and	Henry,	 are	getting	drunk	at	 their	 local	pub,	The
Duke	 and	 Tart,	 in	 London	 one	 evening.	 They	 see	 Paddy	 and	 Sean,	 the	 two
Irishmen,	at	the	other	end	of	the	bar,	and	decide	to	pick	a	fight	with	them.
"Just	watch	this,	Charles,"	says	Henry.	"I	will	make	that	Irish	idiot	so	pissed	off
that	he	will	have	to	hit	me,	and	start	a	fight."
So	Henry	wanders	over	 to	Paddy	and	says	in	a	superior	 tone,	"Listen	here,	my
good	man,	do	you	know	Saint	Patrick?"
"Yes	 sir,	 certainly,"	 says	 Paddy,	 putting	 down	 his	 beer	 glass.	 "Well,	 I	 don't
actually	know	him	personally,	but	I	do	know	of	him,	certainly	sir!"
"Well,	then,"	continues	the	Englishman,	"you	must	know	that	he	was	a	pooftah	--
or	to	put	it	more	bluntly,	a	bloody	homosexual!"
"Ah!	 No,	 sir,"	 replies	 Paddy,	 politely,	 "I	 did	 not	 know	 that.	 That's	 certainly
interesting	though	--	a	pooftah,	you	say?"
"And	 not	 only	 that,"	 continues	 Henry,	 still	 trying	 to	 provoke	 him,	 "but	 Saint
Patrick	was	a	shithead,	as	well!"
"Really?"	replies	Paddy.	"That	 is	amazing.	Well,	you	 live	and	 learn,	don't	you,
sir?"
Henry	gives	up	and	goes	back	 to	 the	other	end	of	 the	bar.	But	Charles,	 seeing
Henry's	 failure,	 jumps	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 says,	 "Leave	 it	 to	 me!	 I	 will	 get	 him
going!"
So	 Charles	 staggers	 over	 to	 Paddy	 and	 says,	 "Listen	 here,	 you	 idiot,	 do	 you
know	that	Saint	Patrick	was	an	Englishman?"
"Yes,	sir,	I	do,"	replies	Paddy,	"your	friend	just	told	me!"
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
(Gibberish)
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Be	silent	...	close	your	eyes,	and	feel	your	body	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	is	the	right	moment.	Everything	is	tranquil,	a	great	coolness	surrounds	you.
You	can	move	inwards	very	easily.
Gather	all	your	energies,	your	total	consciousness,	and	with	an	urgency	as	if	this
is	going	to	be	your	last	moment	of	life,	rush	towards	your	center	of	being.	It	is
just	exactly	two	inches	below	the	navel	inside	you.
Faster	and	faster	...
Deeper	and	deeper	...
As	you	start	coming	close	to	the	center	of	your	being,	a	great	silence	descends
over	you	like	soft	rain.
A	little	closer,	and	peace	starts	growing	in	you	--	very	luminous.	This	peace	has
been	called	by	the	mystics,	"the	peace	that	passeth	understanding,"	because	it	is
beyond	mind.
A	little	closer,	and	you	start	becoming	drunk	with	the	divine.
The	final	step	into	the	very	center	--	and	you	are	pure	ecstasy,	a	dance	without
movement,	a	song	without	words,	a	music	without	sounds.
This	is	your	original	being.
Zen	calls	it	the	original	face	which	you	have	been	carrying	eternally	with	you.	It
resembles	symbolically	the	face	of	Gautam	the	Buddha.
Not	knowing	it,	you	are	only	a	bodhisattva.
Knowing	it,	you	are	a	buddha.
At	this	moment	you	are	a	buddha.
Buddha	has	only	one	quality	--	that	of	witnessing.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind.
And	finally,	witness	that	you	are	only	a	witness.
This	is	the	whole	secret	of	meditation,	the	master	key	of	Zen,	which	can	open	all
the	mysteries	of	existence,	all	 the	doors	upon	doors,	skies	upon	skies.	There	 is
no	end	to	it,	only	a	beginning.
Gautam	Buddha	 is	 reported	 to	 have	 said,	 "Ignorance	 has	 no	 beginning	 but	 an
end.
Enlightenment	has	a	beginning	but	no	end"	--	a	very	significant	statement.	Let	it
sink	deep	in	you.	This	moment	you	are	so	vulnerable	you	can	allow	it	to	sink	in
you.	It	will	blossom	into	tremendous	experiences.
I	 repeat	 it:	 Ignorance	 has	 no	 beginning	 but	 an	 end.	 Enlightenment	 has	 a
beginning	but	no	end.
You	are	at	 the	beginning	point.	From	now	on	starts	a	 journey	 into	 the	 infinite,
into	the	eternal,	into	the	ultimate,	into	the	absolute.
To	make	the	witnessing	more	clear,
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Relax	...	but	go	on	remembering	that	you	are	not	the	body,	you	are	not	the	mind,
you	 are	 only	 a	witness.	And	 as	 the	witnessing	will	 start	 becoming	deeper	 and
deeper,	you	will	suddenly	feel	a	great	melting	of	consciousness,	all	boundaries
disappearing.
Gautama	 the	 Buddha	 Auditorium	 becomes	 an	 ocean	 of	 consciousness.	 Ten
thousand	 buddhas	 dissolve	 into	 one	 consciousness,	 an	 oceanic	 consciousness
without	any	ripples	or	waves.
The	 whole	 existence	 starts	 rejoicing	 with	 you.	 It	 starts	 showering	 invisible
flowers	over	you.
At	 this	moment	 you	 are	 the	most	 blessed	 people	 on	 the	 earth,	 because	 all	 the
others	are	concerned	only	with	the	trivia.	You	are	working	and	searching	for	the
essential,	for	the	eternal.
All	 are	 concerned	with	 lies	 and	 consolations	 about	God.	You	are	working	 and
trying	with	intensity	to	find	the	truth.
The	 truth	 is	 that	 existence	 is	 enough	 unto	 itself,	 it	 needs	 no	God.	 It	 certainly
needs	every	living	being	to	rise	to	such	heights	as	Gautam	Buddha.
Collect	all	 these	 flowers,	 these	 fragrances	 from	 the	beyond.	You	have	 to	bring
them	with	you.
And	persuade	Gautam	Buddha	--	it	is	your	birthright,	it	is	your	nature	--	to	come
behind	you.
He	will	come	first	as	a	shadow,	but	the	shadow	will	be	very	solid,	a	foundation
for	 enlightenment.	 It	 will	 have	 immense	 warmth	 surrounding	 you,	 it	 will	 be
almost	tangible.
On	the	second	step,	the	buddha	comes	in	front	of	you	--	you	become	the	shadow.
Your	shadow	is	just	a	shadow,	it	starts	disappearing	in	the	light	and	radiance	of
the	buddha.
At	the	third	stage,	the	final	stage	where	you	become	enlightened,	you	disappear.
You	 have	 been	 just	 a	 shadow,	 a	 fake	 personality,	 a	 mask.	 You	 disappear
completely,	only	the	buddha	remains.
This	remaining	consciousness	is	your	essential	being.	It	is	your	existential	truth,
it	is	your	life.	To	know	this,	every	moment	becomes	a	celebration.
I	 celebrate	myself,	 and	 I	hope	 soon	 the	day	will	 come	you	will	 be	 celebrating
yourself.
And	when	thousands	and	thousands	of	people	around	the	earth	are	celebrating,
singing,	dancing,	 ecstatic,	 drunk	with	 the	divine,	 there	 is	 no	possibility	of	 any
global	suicide.	With	such	festivity	and	with	such	laughter,	with	such	sanity	and
health,	with	such	naturalness	and	spontaneity,	how	can	there	be	a	war?
The	third	world	war	is	not	going	to	happen!	I	predict	it!	It	is	not	going	to	happen,
because	of	you,	because	of	my	people	around	the	earth!	They	are	the	only	hope.
Only	millions	of	buddhas	are	capable	of	creating	the	atmosphere	for	peace,	for
love,	for	compassion,	for	celebration.
Life	 is	 not	 given	 to	 you	 to	murder,	 to	 destroy.	 Life	 has	 been	 given	 to	 you	 to
create,	and	to	rejoice,	and	to	celebrate.
When	 you	 cry	 and	 weep,	 when	 you	 are	 miserable,	 you	 are	 alone.	When	 you
celebrate,	 the	whole	existence	participates	with	you.	Only	in	celebration	do	we
meet	the	ultimate,	the	eternal.	Only	in	celebration	do	we	go	beyond	the	circle	of
birth	and	death.
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Come	 back	 ...	 but	 come	 back	 as	 buddhas,	 carrying	with	 you	 all	 the	 peace	 the
silence,	the	grace.
And	sit	down	just	for	a	few	seconds	to	remember	the	golden	path	that	you	have
followed,	all	the	experiences	that	you	have	encountered,	and	the	buddha	that	has
come	with	you.
Feel	the	warmth,	the	radiance,	the	light,	just	behind	you.
The	day	will	come	soon	--	soon	the	spring	will	be	here	--	and	buddha	will	not	be
a	 shadow	 to	 you,	 you	will	 become	 a	 shadow	 to	 buddha.	And	 once	 you	 are	 a
shadow	then	the	final	step	is	very	easy.	The	shadow	disappears	in	the	light,	in	the
luminosity	of	the	buddha,	the	awakened	one.
The	third	step	happens	so	spontaneously.	You	are	no	more,	only	existence	is.
This	brings	you	to	the	celebration	I	have	been	talking	about.	Unless	you	are	full
of	 songs,	 full	 of	 dances,	 overflowing	 life,	 abundance	 of	 love	 and	 compassion,
you	have	not	lived	at	all.	You	were	simply	slowly	dying,	dying,	dying.
I	want	you	 to	 live	 intensely,	 totally,	because	only	 those	who	 live	 intensely	and
totally	are	transformed.	Only	they	know	what	is	the	ultimate	secret	of	life.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
I	Celebrate	Myself:	God	Is	No	Where,	Life	Is	Now	Here
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Don't	knock,	wait!
17	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902175
ShortTitle:
CELEBR05
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
204
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
GOSETSU	 AFTER	 BECOMING	 A	 MONK	 UNDER	 MA	 TZU,	 CAME	 TO
SEKITO
AND	 SAID,	 "IF	 YOU	 SETTLE	 THIS	 WITH	 ONE	 WORD,	 I	 WILL	 STAY
HERE.	IF
NOT,	I	WILL	LEAVE."
SEKITO,	 KNOWING	 THAT	 THIS	 MAN	 HAD	 PROMISE,	 MADE	 A
GESTURE,	BUT
GOSETSU	DID	NOT	GET	IT.	SO	GOSETSU	TOOK	HIS	LEAVE	AND	MADE
FOR
THE	GATE,	WHEN	SEKITO	CALLED	TO	HIM	"TEACHER!"
GOSETSU	 TURNED	 AROUND,	 AND	 SEKITO	 SAID,	 "FROM	 BIRTH	 TO
OLD	AGE,	 IT	 IS	 ONLY	 THE	 FELLOW	 THERE	 AND	NOTHING	 ELSE	 --
DON'T	LOOK
ANYWHERE	FURTHER."
AT	 THIS,	 GOSETSU	WAS	 GREATLY	 ENLIGHTENED.	 HE	 STEPPED	 ON
HIS
STICK	TO	BREAK	IT	AND	STAYED	THERE.
ONCE,	 SEKITO	 SAID	 TO	 HIS	 ASSEMBLED	 MONKS,	 "EVEN	 IF
LANGUAGE	IS
USED,	IT	IS	IRRELEVANT."
HEARING	THIS,	YAKUSAN	SAID,	"EVEN	IF	LANGUAGE	IS	NOT	USED,
IT	IS
IRRELEVANT."
SEKITO	SAID,	"HERE,	EVEN	A	NEEDLE	CANNOT	GET	THROUGH."
YAKUSAN	 SAID,	 "HERE,	 IT	 IS	 LIKE	 PLANTING	 A	 FLOWER	 ON	 A
ROCK."
SEKITO	INDICATED	HIS	APPROVAL	OF	WHAT	YAKUSAN	SAID.
Friends,
I	have	been	telling	you	that	God	has	been	the	greatest	poison	to	humanity	and	its
evolution	 towards	 ultimate	 peaks	 of	 consciousness.	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 has
supported	 what	 I	 have	 been	 telling	 to	 you,	 by	 declaring	 a	 death	 sentence	 on
Salman	Rushdie	and	three	others	for	simply	publishing	a	factual	statement.	No
law	of	any	country	supports	it.
No	 constitution	 in	 the	world	 supports	 it.	 But	 this	 has	 been	 the	 attitude	 of	 the
priests	all	down	history.
A	second	ayatollah	--	Ayatollah	simply	means	a	religious	leader	--	not	Khomeini,
but	another	ayatollah,	and	there	are	two	thousand	ayatollahs	in	Iran,	has	come	up
with	 a	 better	 support	 to	 my	 argument.	 Now	 he	 has	 declared	 that	 if	 Salman
Rushdie's	 head	 is	 presented	 to	 him,	 he	 is	 going	 to	 give	 two	 point	 six	million
dollars	 if	 the	 person	who	 presents	 it	 happens	 to	 be	 an	 Iranian.	 If	 it	 is	 a	 non-
Iranian,	then	one	million	dollars.
From	 every	 Mohammedan	 country,	 including	 Pakistan,	 death	 squads	 have
moved	into	England	to	kill	those	four	people	--	and	if	not	four,	at	least	Salman
Rushdie	for	writing	the	novel	--	and	to	bring	his	head	to	Iran.
Now	this	will	show	you	why	I	have	been	condemning	all	God-oriented	religions,
because	finally	the	God-oriented	religion	is	in	the	hands	of	the	priests.	God	does
not	 exist,	 the	 priest	 exists.	And	 the	 priest	 does	 not	 know	 any	 civilization,	 any
culture.	Murdering	 a	 man	 is	 not	 an	 argument,	 it	 is	 really	 accepting	 defeat.	 A
cultured	 society	 needs	 dialogue.	 If	 you	 have	 something	 against	 Rushdie,	 you
have	 every	 right	 to	 say	 it	 and	 criticize	 him	 --	 that	 is	 human.	 If	 you	 feel	 he	 is
wrong,	you	have	all	the	freedom	to	criticize	him.
But	religions	don't	believe	in	dialogues,	they	believe	in	murder,	in	the	sword	--
that	is	their	argument.	To	me,	it	is	their	defeat.
These	people	have	been	keeping	 the	world	 retarded.	A	 few	people	 from	India,
and	 from	 other	 countries	 who	 have	 condemned	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 and	 the
other	 ayatollah,	 have	been	 receiving	 anonymous	phone	 calls,	 that	 they	will	 be
killed	also.
Here	in	India,	one	of	my	friends,	Madhu	Mehta,	made	a	statement	condemning
Ayatollah	Khomeini.	He	 is	 a	man	 of	 immense	 intelligence,	 culture,	 education.
He	leads	a	certain	movement	called	the	Hindustani	Andolan,	the	movement	for	a
new	language	which	will	not	be	Hindi,	 the	 language	of	 the	Hindus,	and	which
will	not	be	Urdu,	the	language	of	the	Mohammedans,	but	a	combination	of	both,
Hindustani.	Of	course,	he	has	no	support.
Neither	 are	 Mohammedans	 ready	 to	 support	 him,	 nor	 are	 Hindus	 ready	 to
support	him,	but	he	goes	on.	For	years	he	has	been	working	on	it.
That	seems	to	be	the	simplest	solution	--	for	India	to	have	a	national	language,
otherwise	this	country	is	not	going	to	have	a	national	 language,	ever.	For	forty
years	--	more	than	forty	years	--	the	constitution	has	declared	Hindi	the	national
language.	 But	 the	 government	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 implement	 it	 because	 the
Mohammedans	are	against	it	and	think	Urdu	should	be	the	language.	And	there
are	thirty-two	languages	accepted	by	the	constitution	as	state	languages.	They	all
are	 claiming	 that	 they	 should	 have	 the	 right	 to	 be	 the	 national	 language.	Now
thirty-two	languages	fighting	amongst	each	other	...
there	seems	to	be	no	way.
Madhu	Mehta	has	received	an	anonymous	phone	call	that	he	also	will	be	killed
and	 that	 anybody	 who	 says	 anything	 against	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 will	 be
murdered.	Are	we	living	in	the	twentieth	century,	or	some	thousand	years	back
where	 only	 killing	 and	 murder	 was	 the	 argument?	 --	 whoever	 kills,	 whoever
wins	in	killing	is	the	right	person.
It	is	very	easy	to	kill	a	Gautam	Buddha.	Any	idiot	can	do	it,	in	fact,	only	an	idiot
can	do	it.	But	that	does	not	prove	that	the	idiot's	idea	of	religiousness	is	correct,
nor	does	the	death	of	a	Gautam	Buddha	prove	that	his	philosophy	is	wrong.	In
fact,	 it	 just	 does	 the	 opposite.	 It	 proves	 that	 the	 unconscious	 and	 retarded
humanity,	for	which	all	the	religions	are	responsible,	have	a	tremendous	poverty
of	 philosophy,	 of	 argument,	 of	 a	 cultural	 and	 civilized	 dialogue.	 And	 it	 goes
back,	as	far	back	you	can	see.
Socrates	 is	 poisoned	 --	 that	 was	 not	 an	 argument	 against	 his	 philosophy	 --
poisoned	 by	 the	 masses.	 The	 reason?	 The	 reason	 was:	 "He	 is	 destroying	 our
religion	 and	 our	morality,	 and	 corrupting	 the	 youth."	 Socrates	was	 one	 of	 the
most	 intelligent	persons	who	has	ever	walked	on	 this	earth.	And	anybody	who
has	 intelligence	 is	 not	 going	 to	 support	 a	 God-oriented	 religion,	 or	 a	 God-
dictated	morality,	because	it	 is	coming	from	the	priests,	not	from	the	God.	The
priest	 is	 interested	 in	 keeping	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 as	 retarded	 as	 possible.
That's	what	makes	him	powerful,	holier,	higher	and	more	superior.
There	are	two	ways	to	become	superior:	one	is	to	evolve	your	consciousness	and
become	 a	 buddha;	 another	 is	 to	 keep	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 retarded	 so	 you
appear	higher	to	them.
I	am	reminded	of	a	small	anecdote	about	one	of	the	most	significant	emperors	of
India,	Akbar.	He	was	a	Mohammedan	but	not	a	fanatic,	and	he	gathered	into	his
court	all	kinds	of	religious	people,	from	different	religious	sources.	He	had	in	his
court	 all	 the	 intelligent	 people	 of	 the	 country	 without	 any	 discrimination	 of
religion	or	caste.
One	day	he	came	to	the	court	and	asked	all	his	wise	people	of	the	court,	"I	am
trying	to	solve	a	problem	and	I	need	your	help."	And	then	he	drew	a	line	on	the
wall	and	asked	those	people,	"Can	you	make	it	smaller	without	touching	it?"
Obviously,	you	cannot	make	a	line	smaller	without	touching	it,	so	they	were	all
at	a	loss.
But	every	court	in	the	past	used	to	have	a	man	of	immense	sense	of	humor,	so
that	the	court	keeps	balanced,	it	does	not	become	serious,	tense,	stressed.
Birbal	was	Akbar's	man	of	a	sense	of	humor.	He	stood	up	finally,	and	he	went	to
the	wall	and	drew	a	bigger	 line	underneath	the	 line	 that	Akbar	had	drawn,	and
made	it	small	without	touching	it.
The	 priests	 have	 been	 trying	 in	 every	 way	 to	 keep	 humanity	 at	 the	 lowest
intelligence.
This	is	their	way	of	keeping	themselves	holier	and	higher.
If	 everybody	 starts	 growing	 in	 consciousness,	 intelligence,	 awareness,	 that	 is
going	 to	 destroy	 all	 fictions	 about	God,	 heaven	 and	 hell,	 and	 that	 is	 going	 to
destroy	all	the	business	that	the	priests	are	doing	all	around	the	world.	Millions
and	millions	of	priests	 are	 just	 parasites.	Unless	we	get	 rid	of	 the	priests,	 it	 is
very	difficult	to	get	rid	of	God	--
they	are	both	very	deeply	connected.	 It	 is	easy	 to	get	 rid	of	God	 if	 there	 is	no
priest,	because	God	does	not	exist,	and	the	priest	exists.
It	 is	 the	priests	who	have	programmed	your	minds	as	Christians,	as	Hindus,	as
Mohammedans,	in	the	name	of	God.	And	it	has	been	going	on	for	centuries.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	don't	think	humanity	has	a	mental	age	of	more	than
seven	years.
In	America,	where	our	commune	was	destroyed	by	the	fundamentalist	Christians
--
Ronald	 Reagan	 himself	 is	 a	 fundamentalist	 Christian,	 a	 fanatic.	 And	 the	 only
reason	 to	 destroy	 the	 commune	 was	 that	 they	 could	 not	 tolerate	 a	 Godless
commune	 living	 so	 happily,	 so	 joyously,	 singing	 songs	 and	 dancing	 and
celebrating	without	any	fear,	without	any	inhibition,	without	any	guilt.
The	Attorney	General,	Ed	Meese,	admitted	 it	before	a	press	conference.	When
they	had	already	deported	me,	he	accepted	that	I	had	not	committed	any	crime,
but	I	had	to	be	deported.	He	said,	"Our	priority	was	to	destroy	the	commune,	but
without	 deporting	 Rajneesh	 we	 would	 not	 have	 been	 able	 to	 destroy	 the
commune."
Why	was	 it	 a	priority	 for	 them	 to	destroy	 the	commune	and	 to	propose	 thirty-
four	absolutely	imaginary	crimes	against	me?
In	 fact,	 they	were	committing	 the	crime	against	 five	 thousand	people	who	had
simply	 escaped	 from	 centuries-old	 slavery	 and	 declared	 their	 dignity	 and
freedom.	 This	 was	 intolerable.	 People	 declaring	 their	 independence	 and
freedom?	Their	 dignity	 and	 their	 prestige	 and	 their	 pride.	 Their	 individuality?
This	could	not	be	tolerated	by	any	fanatical	so-called	religious	person.
I	 had	 said	 at	 a	 press	 conference	 that	 in	 Oregon,	 where	 the	 commune	 was
situated,	people	are	retarded.	All	the	politicians	were	angry;	the	whole	of	Oregon
was	 angry.	 And	 finally,	 the	 University	 of	 Oregon	 decided	 to	 take	 a	 survey	 --
because	 that	 is	 the	only	 civilized	way	 to	 prove	me	 either	 right	 or	wrong.	And
their	conclusions	are	immensely	valuable.
They	 surveyed	 cross	 sections	 of	 society	 in	 Oregon,	 and	 they	 surveyed	 the
commune.
They	were	puzzled.	They	found	that	the	average	mental	age	of	Oregonians	was
seven	years,	and	the	average	mental	age	of	the	sannyasins	was	fourteen	years	--
double	that	of	any	Oregonian.	And	I	don't	think	that	if	we	take	into	account	the
whole	of	humanity,	the	mental	age	will	be	more	than	seven.	It	will	be	less	than
seven	 years,	 because	 millions	 of	 people	 are	 far	 more	 retarded	 than	 the
Oregonians.	When	the	average	 is	 taken,	 it	may	come	to	 three	and	a	half	at	 the
most.
People	 have	 been	 kept	 in	 this	 slavery	 just	 for	 a	 few	 people	 to	 enjoy	 the
superiority.
Obviously	 these	 people	 who	 have	 enjoyed	 superiority	 --	 the	 brahmins,	 the
priests,	 the	ayatollahs,	 the	 imams,	 the	rabbis,	 the	popes	--	will	not	easily	allow
human	beings	to	declare	their	independence.
You	 have	 to	 understand	 deeply.	My	whole	 work	 here	 is	 to	make	 you	 declare
freedom	 and	 total	 independence	 from	 all	 prisons	 --	 religious,	 national,	 racial.
Only	that	is	going	to	give	you	a	life	of	celebration.	Your	freedom	will	give	you
the	 space	 to	 dance,	 to	 sing,	 to	 celebrate.	My	 vision	 of	 religiousness	 is	 that	 of
sheer	celebration,	 a	 tremendous	 joy	 in	 life,	 in	 love,	 in	creative	actions.	This	 is
my	manifesto,	the	Manifesto	of	Zen.
Unless	 humanity	 is	 taken	 out	 of	 their	 prison	 cells	 --	we	 are	 living	 in	 the	 dark
ages	--	every	vested	interest	is	going	to	be	against	me,	it	is	going	to	be	against
you.	Every	manifesto	of	freedom	will	be	crushed.
It	is	not	accidental	that	Socrates	is	poisoned,	that	al-Hillaj	Mansoor	is	murdered,
that	Jesus	 is	crucified,	 that	Sarmad	is	killed,	 that	many	attempts	were	made	on
the	 life	 of	 Mahavira,	 that	 many	 attempts	 were	 made	 on	 the	 life	 of	 Gautam
Buddha,	and	finally,	he	died	from	food	poisoning.	There	is	every	suspicion	that
it	was	deliberate	poisoning.
Gautam	 Buddha	 was	 certainly	 a	 religious	 man.	 As	 he	 was	 dying	 he	 told	 his
disciples,	in	particular	Ananda	--	he	called	him	close	and	whispered	to	him,	"It
does	not	matter	 that	I	am	dying.	I	am	concerned	about	 the	man	who	has	given
me	the	food	that	has	poisoned	me.	You	have	to	protect	him,	otherwise	the	people
who	love	me	will	kill	him.
"So	spread	the	idea	around	my	disciples,	and	my	lovers,	and	my	sympathizers,
that	 two	 persons	 are	 the	 most	 blessed:	 the	 one	 who	 for	 the	 first	 time	 gives
nourishment	 to	 the	 enlightened	 one	 --	 of	 course,	 that	 is	 the	mother	 --	 and	 the
second	is	 the	one	who	gives	him	his	 last	 food.	These	 two	persons	are	 the	very
blessed	ones.	Create	this	rumor,	so	that	the	person	who	has	poisoned	me	should
not	suffer	unnecessarily."
This	 is	 the	 way	 of	 a	 religious	man	 --	 a	 great	 concern	 even	 for	 the	 murderer.
Unless	we	fill	this	earth	with	such	people,	humanity	is	not	going	to	have	all	the
great	experiences	which	every	human	being	has	the	birthright	to	attain.
Everybody	 is	 prohibited	 from	 making	 this	 earth	 a	 lotus	 paradise,	 and	 from
experiencing	in	his	own	body,	the	very	consciousness	of	a	Gautam	Buddha.	All
religions	are	against	you	because	they	are	against	freedom,	and	they	are	against
human	culture,	civilization.
They	are	against	any	kind	of	dialogue.	Murder	is	their	argument.
This	simply	shows	the	poverty	of	all	religions,	and	this	also	shows	that	humanity
has	 to	 revolt	 against	 these	 religions,	 these	 churches,	 these	 temples,	 these
mosques.	A	great	revolt,	a	rebellion	can	only	give	you	the	opportunity	to	grow,
otherwise	you	simply	grow	old,	you	don't	grow	up.	And	remember	the	difference
between	the	two.
Growing	old	is	not	of	any	worth,	every	animal	does	it,	it	needs	no	intelligence.
Growing	up	is	a	totally	different	experience.	Growing	old	is	horizontal;	growing
up	is	vertical,	it	leads	you	to	heights,	it	leads	you	to	depths.
And	strangely	enough,	you	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	time	is	horizontal.	One
moment	passes,	another	moment	comes,	another	moment,	another	moment	...	in
a	 line,	 a	 horizontal	 line.	 Time	 is	 horizontal,	 and	mind	 is	 also	 horizontal.	 One
thought	is	followed	by	another	thought,	and	by	another	thought,	and	by	another
thought,	but	 in	a	 line,	 in	a	 row,	a	procession,	or	 just	a	 traffic	 --	but	 it	 is	going
horizontal.
Meditation	 is	vertical,	 it	 is	going	beyond	mind	and	beyond	 time.	And	perhaps,
ultimately	 you	will	 find	 that	 time	 and	mind	 are	 equivalent,	 two	 names	 of	 the
same	phenomenon	--
the	 horizontal	 procession	 of	 thoughts,	 of	moments.	Meditation	 is	 to	 stop	 time
and	mind	both,	and	suddenly	you	start	rising	up	in	eternity.	Eternity	is	not	part	of
time,	and	eternity	is	not	a	thought;	it	is	an	experience.
It	is	a	difficult	task	to	get	rid	of	God	and	God-oriented	religions,	and	the	priests
who	are	supporting	this	lie	by	threatening	people	with	murder.	These	murderers
should	 be	 exposed,	 and	 they	 should	 be	 dethroned.	 The	 basic	 need	 is	 a	 deep
understanding	of	your	own	divinity.	Then	there	is	no	need	for	an	external	God,
and	then	there	is	no	need	for	any	mediators	between	you	and	God.
Meditation	 is	 a	 rebellion,	 perhaps	 the	 most	 fundamental	 rebellion	 against	 all
fictions,	against	all	lies,	and	against	all	those	who	are	living	on	those	fictions	and
lies.
I	teach	you	rebellion,	I	teach	you	revolt.
I	teach	you	freedom	of	your	individuality.	Destroy	all	kinds	of	prisons,	destroy
all	kinds	of	 lies	 --	 and	you	can	destroy	 them	only	by	meditation.	Rise	beyond
time	 and	mind,	 and	 you	will	 find	 not	 only	 that	 you	 are	 divine,	 but	 the	whole
existence	is	divine,	life	is	divine.
And	you	enter	into	a	totally	new	dimension	that	has	been	completely	blocked	by
scriptures,	 by	 priests,	 by	God,	 by	 heaven	 and	 hell,	 by	 all	 kinds	 of	 fear,	 by	 all
kinds	of	greed.
It	is	a	very	unnatural	phenomenon	that	a	person	goes	on	growing	physically	but
his	mind	is	stuck	somewhere	below	seven	years.	It	cannot	be	natural!	The	mind
is	kept	retarded,	otherwise	just	as	your	body	grows,	your	physiology	grows,	your
mental	 age	will	 follow	 simultaneously.	When	 you	 are	 seventy	 years	 old,	 your
mental	age	must	be	seventy	years	old.	But	it	is	seven	years	old	....
According	to	me,	if	this	is	possible	then	the	opposite	is	also	possible.	If	a	man	of
seventy	years'	age	of	the	body	has	only	the	mental	age	of	a	seven-year-old	child,
then	the	reverse	is	also	possible.	A	man	of	seventy	may	have	the	mental	age	of
seven	hundred	years.
Once	Emerson	was	asked,	"What	is	your	age?"
And	he	said,	"Three	hundred	and	sixty	years."
The	man	who	had	asked	could	not	believe	it.	Three	hundred	and	sixty	years	...?
He	said,
"I	did	not	hear,	please	repeat	what	you	have	said."
Emerson	said,	"You	have	heard	it:	three	hundred	and	sixty	years."
The	man	said,	"I	cannot	believe	it.	You	must	be	 joking	 ...	you	don't	 look	more
than	sixty	years."
Emerson	said,	"Yes,	my	body	is	only	sixty	years	old,	but	my	consciousness	is	six
times	 more	 than	 sixty.	 I	 count	 my	 age	 according	 to	 my	 intelligence,	 not
according	to	my	body,	because	I	am	not	the	body,	I	am	my	intelligence."
Religions	have	kept	you	chained,	because	a	man	of	intelligence	is	not	going	to
believe	in	any	lies.	So	intelligence	has	to	be	crippled,	and	all	the	religions	have
been	involved	in	this	crippling	process.
In	Japan,	there	is	a	certain	method,	which	is	ugly	to	me,	but	which	is	very	much
appreciated	by	the	Japanese	people.	There	are	four-hundred-year-old	trees	which
are	 only	 six	 inches	 high.	 They	 look	 very	 ancient,	 but	 their	 height	 is	 only	 six
inches.	And	 the	 strategy	 that	 has	 been	 used	 is	 the	 strategy	 that	 has	 been	 used
against	 every	 human	 being	 by	 your	 religions,	 by	 your	 God	 and	 God-oriented
theologies.
The	 trick	 is	 very	 simple.	 For	 four	 hundred	 years	 a	 family,	 generation	 after
generation,	keeps	a	tree.	It	is	kept	in	a	pot	which	has	no	bottom,	so	they	can	go
on	cutting	 the	 roots	 from	 the	bottom.	 If	you	don't	 allow	 the	 roots	 to	grow,	 the
tree	cannot	go	high.	They	don't	touch	the	rest	of	the	tree;	it	simply	becomes	older
and	 older	 and	 older.	 But	 the	 tree	 does	 not	 reach	 to	 the	 height	 which	 was	 its
potential,	because	the	roots	are	being	continuously	cut.
Intelligence	is	your	root.
They	show	those	trees	as	if	it	is	an	art.
To	me,	it	is	against	nature,	against	those	poor	trees.	You	have	not	allowed	them
to	grow.
And	 perhaps	 if	 those	 trees	 have	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 mind,	 a	 certain	 kind	 of
intelligence,	they	will	think,	"This	is	how	we	are:	six	inches	high."	They	will	not
be	able	 to	discover	 at	 all	 that	 they	have	been	kept	 imprisoned	by	cutting	 their
roots	--	because	they	don't	see	the	roots.
You	don't	see	your	roots	in	existence.
Only	a	meditator	comes	to	see	his	roots	in	existence.	Those	roots	have	been	cut
completely,	 continuously,	 century	 after	 century,	generation	after	generation,	by
the	priest.
You	have	been	kept	retarded	in	intelligence.
People	ask	me	why	the	masses	don't	come	to	me.	They	cannot	understand	me.
Only	very	intelligent	people	who	have	a	certain	individuality	and	a	certain	sense
of	 freedom,	 can	 understand	 me.	 The	 masses	 can	 only	 murder	 me.	 Only	 the
intelligent,	the	elite	...
To	understand	me	you	will	have	to	go	through	a	transformation,	you	will	have	to
look	into	your	roots:	Who	has	been	cutting	those	roots?	Who	are	these	rats	who
have	 been	 cutting	 your	 roots?	 All	 your	 rabbis,	 all	 your	 bishops,	 all	 your
ayatollahs,	 all	 your	 shankaracharyas	 ...	 they	 are	 the	 rats	 who	 are	 cutting	 your
roots.	And	 they	don't	 give	you	a	 chance	 to	have	 a	 fuller	 life.	Otherwise	 every
person	will	have	a	tremendous	life	of	such	great	fulfillment	that	who	cares	about
what	 happens	 after	 death?	One	 has	 lived	 so	 totally,	 loved	 so	 totally	 that	 who
cares	about	what	happens	after	death?
There	are	only	two	possibilities:	either	you	die,	then	there	is	no	problem,	or	you
continue	to	live.	And	you	know	how	to	live,	you	know	how	to	be	total,	so	you
will	live	more	totally	without	the	body.	You	will	have	the	whole	sky	available	to
you.	So	whether	you	are	atheist	or	theist	does	not	matter.	What	matters	is	to	live
life	 so	 totally	 that	 death	 becomes	 absolutely	 unimportant,	 because	 only	 two
alternatives	are	left:	either	you	will	die	...	so	what	is	the	problem?
Do	you	think	you	had	any	problem	before	you	were	born?	Just	think	of	that.	You
had	no	problem,	you	were	not	there.	So	how	can	the	problem	exist	without	you?
Do	you	remember	any	problem	before	you	were	born?
I	say	to	you,	that	is	one	side;	the	other	side	is	death.	You	won't	have	any	problem
if	you	really	die.	If	you	don't	die,	you	will	have	all	the	opportunities,	more	than
you	have	now.
But	you	have	to	discipline	yourself	for	living	so	abundantly	that	if	you	survive
death,	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 live	 more	 abundantly	 because	 you	 will	 have	 more
space	to	dance,	more	space	to	celebrate.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	 know	 there	 is	 no	 death.	 But	 I	 don't	 want	 you	 to
believe	it,	I	want	you	to	experience	it.
The	 religions	have	been	creating	all	kinds	of	devices	 to	keep	you	blind	and	 in
darkness.
An	ancient	saying	describing	a	philosopher	says:	A	philosopher	is	a	man	who	is
blind,	in	a	dark	house	where	there	is	no	light,	and	he	is	searching	for	a	black	cat
which	is	not	there.
This	is	not	the	description	or	the	definition	only	of	a	philosopher.	This	is	exactly
the	description	and	definition	of	all	human	beings.	Religion	has	kept	them	blind,
in	utter	darkness,	telling	them	lies,	and	telling	them	to	find	it:	a	black	cat	that	is
not	there!	All	religions	are	telling	you	to	find	God,	and	you	don't	have	eyes,	and
you	don't	have	any	light,	and	God	does	not	exist.	God	is	the	cat!
And	 you	 go	 on	 groping	 and	 stumbling.	 The	 more	 you	 grope,	 the	 more	 you
stumble;	 the	more	fractured	you	are,	 the	more	despair	and	anxiety	and	anguish
that	perhaps	others	have	caught	 the	cat	and	you	have	not	fulfilled	the	promise.
Your	 hands	 are	 empty	 and	 death	 is	 coming	 every	 moment	 closer	 and	 closer.
Naturally	the	whole	of	humanity	has	lost	the	sense	of	humor.	People	smile	only	a
lipstick	smile.	It	does	not	go	beyond	the	lipstick.	And	lipstick	makes	women	so
ugly	--	anything	fake	makes	people	ugly.
Even	my	 sannyasins,	when	 they	 go	 back	 to	 the	west,	 start	 painting	 their	 lips.
When	they	come	back,	it	takes	a	few	days	to	clean	that	dirt	that	they	have	been
putting	on	 their	 lips.	 I	can't	conceive	 that	any	man	of	 intelligence	could	kiss	a
woman	who	has	lipstick!	That	lipstick	is	almost	a	China	Wall	--	you	don't	reach
the	woman	at	all.	At	 least	 I	am	certain	about	me.	The	moment	 I	see	 lipstick,	 I
know	that	this	woman	is	phony.	Avoid	it;	it	has	no	soul,	it	is	just	a	mask.
Just	a	few	days	ago,	a	very	rich	young	Indian	woman	--	because	Indian	women
don't	use	lipstick	unless	they	are	very	rich	and	convent	educated	--	came	because
she	 is	 the	 owner	 of	 a	magazine	 and	 a	 newspaper.	 She	wanted	 to	write	 a	 story
about	me,	and	she	wanted	a	photograph	with	me.
And	Anando	was	 telling	me	--	Anando	is	my	legal	secretary	--	she	was	 telling
me	 that	 she	 is	 a	 very	 beautiful	 woman.	When	 I	 saw	 her,	 I	 saw	 only	 the	 red
lipstick	and	nothing	else.	I	tried	to	avoid	her	face,	and	I	told	Anando,	"You	were
telling	me	this	woman	is	beautiful?
Have	you	not	seen	her	lipstick?"
No	falsity	can	be	beautiful,	only	authenticity,	sincerity.	As	you	are,	in	your	utter
nudity,	you	have	a	beauty,	you	have	an	individuality.
But	all	the	religions	are	creating	hypocrites.	Not	only	is	their	God	a	lie,	but	they
have	 caused	 the	whole	of	 humanity	 to	be	 in	deep	hypocrisy.	Pretend	 --	 that	 is
their	preaching.
Exhibit	that	you	are	a	moralist,	that	you	are	a	puritan,	that	you	are	a	saint.	They
have	 not	 allowed	 you	 any	 transformation.	 They	 have	 only	 given	 you	 masks,
personalities,	 and	 they	 have	 deprived	 you	 of	 the	 individuality	 which	 is	 your
eternal	right.
Declare	your	eternal	 right,	 and	 that	 right	will	destroy	 the	gods	and	 the	priests,
because	they	are	conspiring	together	against	whole	of	humanity.
Your	God	is	not	a	creator	of	life,	he	is	the	enemy	of	life,	because	life	is	truth	and
God	is	a	lie!	But	he	continues	to	live	because	of	the	priesthood.	That's	why	the
priesthood	has	no	evidence,	no	argument	for	God,	only	murder!
Now	this	nonsense	that	a	man	who	has	not	done	any	harm	to	anybody,	but	has
simply	 stated	 a	 fact	 that	 Mohammed	 himself	 had	 accepted	 ...	 that	 the	 devil
inspired	him	to	write	a	few	verses	describing	three	female	deities.	If	the	prophets
of	God	cannot	even	understand	who	is	inspiring	them	--	whether	it	is	God	or	the
devil	 --	 then	 they	 are	 not	 worth	 calling	 prophets	 of	 God.	 And	 what	 is	 the
certainty	about	these	prophets'	others	statements?	Perhaps	they	are	also	dictated
by	the	devil!
And	 it	 is	 a	 strategy,	 the	 same	 as	 I	 told	 you	 about	 this	American	TV	 preacher
Bakker,	who	has	been	one	of	the	most	famous	TV	preachers.	This	is	a	new	kind
of	priesthood	arising	in	America.	Millions	of	people	used	to	listen	to	him	every
Sunday.	He	was	talking	about	celibacy,	and	he	was	found	red-handed	in	a	sexual
relationship	with	a	woman.	And	then	it	was	discovered	that	he	was	also	having
homosexual	relations	with	his	assistant.	And	because	he	was	caught	red-handed	-
-	it	is	very	easy	to	throw	the	blame	on	the	devil	--	he	immediately	said,	"I	was
forced	by	the	devil!"
It	is	strange.	He	had	been	having	these	love	affairs	his	whole	life,	and	he	did	not
tell	anybody	in	all	these	sermons	--	every	Sunday	for	years	--	"I	am	being	forced
by	the	devil
..."	Suddenly	now	that	he	is	caught	...	if	he	had	not	been	caught,	he	would	have
remained	the	representative	of	God.
But	strange,	when	I	saw	this,	that	the	man	was	now	blaming	the	devil	 ...!	That
the	 devil	 was	 forcing	 him	 to	make	 love	 to	 his	 secretary,	 to	 make	 love	 to	 his
assistant	who	was	a	male,	 to	make	 love	 to	other	women	who	were	part	of	his
congregation	...	it	was	the	devil!
But	how	do	you	know	it	was	the	devil	and	not	God?	If	you	were	not	caught	--
and	it	is	such	an	easy	device	...
Then	all	the	criminals	can	say	in	the	court,	"I	was	inspired	by	the	devil.	I	have
not	murdered,	it	was	the	devil	who	was	forcing	me	to	murder.	I	have	not	raped,	it
was	 the	 devil!"	 Then	 no	 criminal	 can	 be	 punished	 --	 "If	 you	want	 to	 punish,
punish	the	devil."
And	that	Bakker,	after	one	year's	penance,	is	back	on	the	TV	--	again	as	God's
representative!
Watching	his	whole	strategy,	I	was	reminded	of	a	woman	who	was	confessing	to
a	Catholic	priest	....
She	said,	"I	have	been	raped."
The	priest	said,	"You	have	been	raped	continuously	for	six	weeks.	Every	Sunday
you	come	...	how	do	you	manage	it?"
She	said,	"It	is	the	same	person.	And	it	is	not	once	in	a	night,	sometimes	twice
he	rapes	me."
The	priest	said,	"Do	you	understand	the	meaning	of	raping?"
She	said,	"I	understand."
"The	same	person	goes	on	 raping	you	 for	 six	weeks?	Sometimes	even	 twice	a
night	...
and	you	just	confess?	And	again	the	raping	continues.	Why	do	you	confess?"
She	said,	"I	enjoy	confessing.	It	gives	me	such	joy,	almost	exactly	the	same	as
when	I	am	raped.	Just	the	whole	scene	..."
And	she	used	to	describe	it	in	absolute	detail,	minute	detail.
Now	can	you	conceive	people's	blindness?	Bakker	is	back	....
Mohammed,	in	the	last	part	of	his	life	changed	those	verses,	and	the	reason	was
not	the	devil.	The	reason	was	a	male	chauvinistic	idea.	Then	why	had	he	written
those	three	verses?	The	reason	was	his	wife.
He	married	a	very	rich	widow	who	was	forty	years	old	and	he	was	only	twenty-
six.	 The	 reason	 to	marry	 that	woman	was	 simply	 her	 riches,	 her	 prestige,	 her
power.	She	was	a	powerful	woman,	Khadija.	She	was	the	first	Mohammedan.
Mohammed	himself	was	 epileptic.	He	used	 to	have	 fits,	 and	one	day	he	 came
home	 trembling	 and	 feverish.	 Khadija	 asked,	 "What	 happened?"	 He	 was	 a
shepherd.	 He	 used	 to	 take	 the	 goats	 and	 sheep	 to	 the	 mountains,	 and	 on	 the
mountain	it	happened.	Most	probably	it	was	again	an	epileptic	fit,	because	there
is	no	God	to	say	anything	to	anybody.
He	 said,	 "I	 became	 almost	 unconscious.	 I	 was	 foaming	 --	 when	 I	 became
conscious	I	saw	the	foam	on	my	mouth,	and	God	spoke	 to	me.	And	since	 that
moment	I	have	been	trembling	and	feeling	deep	fever."
So	Khadija	put	as	many	blankets	as	possible	on	him,	but	he	was	still	trembling.
And	 she	 convinced	 him,	 "It	was	God!	Don't	 be	worried!	And	 I	 am	 your	 first
disciple."
Because	 of	 this	 woman,	 and	 because	 of	 her	 riches,	 Mohammed	 was	 able	 to
spread	Mohammedanism	around	Saudi	Arabia.	My	understanding	is	because	of
this	 woman	 he	 included	 those	 three	 verses	 saying	 that	 there	 are	 three	 female
deities.	Once	Khadija	was	dead,	there	was	no	reason	to	keep	those	verses	in	the
Koran.	Now	his	male	chauvinist	mind	--	which	has	been	there	all	over	the	world
in	every	founder	of	every	religion	...
Jainism,	which	is	one	of	the	most	refined	religions	in	the	world,	declares	that	no
woman	 can	 become	 enlightened.	 But	 one	 woman	 managed	 to	 become
enlightened.	And	the	whole	reason	that	a	woman	cannot	be	celibate	was	because
of	her	menstrual	period.	A	man	can	pretend	to	be	celibate,	can	manage,	but	how
can	 a	 woman	 pretend	 that	 she	 is	 not	 having	 the	 menstrual	 period?	 And
particularly	in	the	religion	of	the	Jainas,	because	you	cannot	become	enlightened
unless	you	become	nude.
So	 there	 are	 five	 stages	 ...	 slowly,	 slowly	 you	 drop	 your	 possessions,	 and	 the
final	 stage	 is	of	 the	muni	 --	 the	muni	becomes	naked.	Now	a	naked	woman	--
how	 is	 she	 going	 to	 deceive	 people	 when	 her	 period	 comes?	 This	 was	 the
trouble.
People	condemn	me	that	I	am	concerned	about	trivia,	and	Mahavira	and	twenty-
four	 tirthankaras	of	 the	 Jainas	were	concerned	about	 the	woman's	period!	And
because	of	 the	period	--	because	you	cannot	hide	it,	and	particularly	when	you
are	nude	--	the	woman	cannot	become	enlightened,	she	cannot	be	celibate.	She
cannot	 change	 her	 biology,	 nor	 does	 any	 man	 ever	 change	 his	 biology.	 It	 is
beyond	the	mind's	control.	No	man	has	ever	been	celibate	 ...	all	pretenders,	all
hypocrites.
But	 one	 woman	 was	 very	 courageous,	 Mallibai	 --	 because	 women	 are
courageous,	 particularly	 in	 a	 society	 like	 India	 where	 the	 woman	 has	 to	 hide
herself	 in	 a	 sari	 ...	 The	 sari	 is	 very	 beautiful	 in	 hiding	 the	 woman,	 her
proportions,	her	curves	of	the	body.	The	sari	is	a	beautiful	device.	You	only	see
the	woman's	face,	you	don't	see	anything	else.
And	in	such	a	country,	in	such	a	culture,	the	woman	will	be	shy	to	be	nude.
But	Mallibai	must	 have	 been	 a	 tremendously	 daring	woman.	 I	 have	 immense
respect	for	that	woman	who	stood	nude.	And	unwillingly	they	had	to	accept	that
she	was	enlightened.	You	cannot	deny	enlightenment,	but	they	managed	to	once
she	was	dead.
They	changed	her	name	from	Mallibai	 to	Mallinath.	Now	Mallinath	 is	a	man's
name.
Nath	changes	everything.	Bai	means	a	woman,	and	mallibai	 they	changed	 into
mallinath.
And	not	 only	 that	 ...	 In	 Jaina	 temples	 you	will	 find	 twenty-four	 statues	 of	 the
tirthankaras,	but	you	will	not	find	any	statue	of	a	woman	--	they	are	all	naked,	so
you	can	find	out.
I	used	to	harass	my	father	every	time	I	went	with	him	to	the	temple,	"Where	is
Mallibai	in	these	twenty-four	statues?"
And	he	used	to	say,	"I	don't	know	at	all,	and	you	continue	to	ask	again	and	again.
Whenever	you	come	with	me,	the	first	thing	you	ask	is	about	Mallibai.	And	how
am	I	supposed	to	know?	These	twenty-four	all	are	male,	nobody	is	a	female."
I	said,	"What	happened	 to	Mallibai?"	They	have	changed	even	 the	statue.	 It	 is
not	of	a	woman,	the	statue	is	of	a	man.	The	name	changed,	the	statue	changed	--
because	 they	 have	 to	 save	 this	 male	 chauvinistic	 idea	 that	 only	 a	 man	 can
become	enlightened.
All	 the	 religions	 in	 some	 way	 or	 other,	 have	 condemned	 the	 woman.	 So
Mohammed	must	have	 felt	 that	when	Khadija	died,	 that	 it	was	 time	 to	change
those	three	verses.	Now,	the	blame	goes	to	the	devil.
The	Koran	is	one	of	the	most	strange	books,	because	it	has	not	been	written	in	a
continuity	 --	 one	 verse	 today,	 one	 verse	 ten	 days	 after	 ...	 because	Mohammed
was	 uneducated.	 He	 did	 not	write	 it	 himself.	 He	 used	 to	 dictate	whenever	 he
found	 something	worth	dictating.	So-called	holy	 scriptures	are	written	by	 self-
styled	prophets	and	messiahs
--	and	they	are	called	"holy"!	I	don't	see	anything	holy	in	them.
So	 many	 Mohammedan	 friends	 have	 asked	 me,	 "You	 have	 spoken	 on	 many
religions,	why	don't	you	speak	on	the	Koran?"
I	 said,	 "Do	 you	 want	 me	 to	 be	 murdered?"	 I	 have	 something	 else	 to	 do
meanwhile.
Finally,	when	I	think	that	it	is	time	for	me	to	leave	the	body,	I	will	speak	on	the
Koran.
And	 I	will	manage	 to	 have	 one	 of	my	 sannyasins	 kill	me	 and	 get	 2.6	million
dollars	for	my	work!	While	my	work	is	incomplete,	I	am	not	going	to	speak	on
holy	scriptures,	because	they	are	the	most	primitive	kind	of	literature.
These	so-called	prophets	are	suffering	from	all	kinds	of	mental	sicknesses;	they
are	 epileptic,	 neurotic,	 psychotic	 and	 schizophrenic.	 They	 are	 not	 worth
discussing	at	all.
These	 priests	 all	 around	 the	world	 are	 holding	 the	whole	 of	 humanity	 in	 their
clutches.
They	are	vultures,	not	human	beings.
This	 is	 your	 work:	 to	 spread	 the	 message	 of	 freedom,	 of	 individuality	 of	 a
religiousness	 which	 is	 a	 quality,	 and	 not	 to	 be	 a	 member	 of	 any	 organized
religion.	 It	 is	 purely	 an	 individual	 affair,	 just	 as	 love	 is.	 It	 is	 the	 greatest	 and
highest	and	the	purest	love	with	existence.
You	have	fallen	in	love	with	a	woman,	this	is	a	small	matter.	You	have	fallen	in
love	with	 a	man,	 this	 is	 a	 small	matter.	 Once	 you	 fall	 in	 love	with	 existence
itself,	with	 life	 itself,	 then	 it	 is	 the	great	matter.	Zen	masters	 call	 it	The	Great
Matter.
But	it	is	individual,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	institution.	In	institutions,	only
mad	 people	 live.	 When	 people	 call	 marriage	 an	 institution,	 I	 agree.	 It	 is	 an
institution,	because	in	institutions	only	mad	people	live.
Religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	organization.
The	moment	you	organize	truth	you	kill	it.
A	bird	on	the	wing	is	one	thing.	You	can	catch	hold	of	the	same	bird	and	put	it	in
a	golden	cage.	Outwardly	it	is	the	same	bird,	but	inwardly	it	has	lost	its	freedom.
It	has	lost	its	joy	in	the	sun,	in	the	rain,	going	beyond	the	clouds.	It	has	lost	its
sky,	 its	 space;	 it	 is	not	 the	 same	bird.	 Just	 in	 appearance	 it	 is	 the	 same,	but	 in
truth	it	is	a	slave.
The	bird	on	the	wing	was	in	total	freedom,	dancing	over	the	clouds,	going	across
the	sun	towards	the	unknown	without	any	fear.	But	now,	there	is	nowhere	to	go	-
-	although	the	cage	is	golden.	All	responsibility	is	taken	by	the	owner.	The	bird
will	 have	 his	 food,	 nourishment	 ...	 everything,	 but	 it	 is	 selling	 your	 soul	 too
cheaply.
Don't	be	encaged	in	any	religion.
Be	religious.
Create	 the	vastness	of	 sky	which	 is	 already	 there.	You	 just	have	 to	discover	 it
within	you.
And	you	will	be	free	of	all	prisons,	of	all	religions,	and	of	all	 the	Holy	Bibles,
the	holy	Koran,	 the	holy	Gita	 ...	 none	of	 them	 is	 holy.	The	only	holy	place	 is
within	 you.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 known	 it,	 then	 you	 know	 that	 it	 is	 within
everybody.	Wherever	there	is	life,	all	over	there	is	sacredness,	holiness.
You	are	not	only	being	prevented	from	growing	into	your	 intelligence,	you	are
being	 prevented	 from	 knowing	 the	 authentic	 divineness	 of	 existence,	 the
authentic	sacredness	of	life.
These	priests	are	murderers	--	not	literally	--	actually.	They	have	murdered	more
people	 than	 the	 politicians.	 And	 they	 are	 still	 there;	 they	 are	 still	 openly
declaring	 and	 supporting	murder.	And	 anybody	who	 opposes	 it	 has	 also	 to	 be
murdered.	 They	 know	 only	 one	 language	 --	 that	 of	 murder.	 They	 have	 not
learned	anything	that	can	be	called	human;	 they	are	animals.	But	even	animals
are	more	cultured.
Question	1
The	first	question:
GOD	IS	A	FICTION	OF	THE	MIND,	AN	INVENTION	OF	RELIGIOUS
POLITICIANS.	BUT	MY	MIND	WANTS	 FICTIONS,	HOPES,	 FUTURE.	 IS
THIS
NATURAL?
No,	not	at	all.	You	have	been	programmed,	you	don't	know	what	nature	is.	All
these	hopes	that	you	think	your	mind	needs,	are	created.
The	old	 economists	 used	 to	 say	 that	wherever	 there	 is	 a	demand	 there	will	 be
supply.
Now	things	have	completely	changed.	Manufacturers	of	all	kinds	of	goods	first
start	 advertising,	 they	 have	 not	 yet	 manufactured	 the	 thing.	 They	 put	 more
money	 into	advertising	 than	 in	producing	 the	product,	because	 that	advertising
creates	a	false	need	in	people's	minds	that	they	need	it.	Once	the	need	is	there	...
It	is	false	need,	because	they	have	never	needed	it.
Just	this	advertisement	consistently,	constantly,	hammering	on	their	heads	from
every	 television	 set,	 from	 every	 radio,	 from	 every	 corner	 of	 the	 street,	 from
every	 magazine,	 from	 every	 newspaper	 --	 how	 long	 can	 you	 avoid?	 You	 are
surrounded	continuously	by	the	same	advertisement,	and	soon	you	start	feeling
that	you	need	 it,	you	cannot	 live	without	 it.	 It	 is	not	even	produced.	When	 the
manufacturer	 finds	 that	 people	 have	 started	 feeling	 the	 need,	 then	 he
manufactures	it.	So	now	it	is	a	created	need	which	you	take	for	granted	as	if	it
has	been	your	natural	need.
These	priests,	religious	politicians,	have	been	doing	the	same	kind	of	advertising
for	 thousands	 of	 years.	They	give	 you	 the	 idea,	 and	 they	 preach	 continuously.
Their	 scriptures	 are	 continuously	 preaching	 all	 the	 old	methods.	And	 they	 are
now	using	the	new	media	also:	television,	radio,	satellites	...	to	propagate	lies.
You	think	you	need	--	your	mind	wants	fictions.	No,	these	fictions	are	created.
Just	don't	tell	a	child	there	is	a	God,	and	he	will	never	feel	the	desire	to	find	God.
It	 is	 so	 easy	 to	 understand.	 In	 the	 Soviet	Union	 nobody	 is	 searching	 for	God,
because	they	have	a	totally	different	programming,	the	communist	programming,
atheist	programming.	From	very	childhood	the	child	is	told	there	is	no	God.	But
in	the	past,	people	were	so	stupid	they	used	to	worship	a	lie,	a	fiction.
One	of	my	friends,	Rahul	Sanskritayana,	a	scholar	of	Sanskrit,	Pali	and	Prakrit,
was	a	Buddhist	monk.	But	he	also	became	interested	in	communism	because	of
the	simple	similarity	that	Buddha	has	no	God	and	Marx	also	has	no	God.	So	he
started	 becoming	 interested	 in	Marxism,	 and	 finally	 he	 became	 a	 communist.
And	the	Soviet	Union	asked	him	to	go	to	Moscow	University	to	teach	Sanskrit
there.	So	he	went	to	Moscow.
Out	 of	 India,	 in	 Moscow,	 things	 were	 different.	 Here	 it	 would	 have	 been
impossible	for	him	to	remain	a	Buddhist	monk	and	yet	fall	in	love.	In	the	Soviet
Union	there	was	no	difficulty.	He	fell	in	love	with	a	beautiful	woman,	Lola	--	she
was	also	a	professor	in	the	same	university,	and	she	had	two	children.
But	the	Soviet	government	did	not	allow	him	to	take	the	wife	or	children	out	of
the	Soviet	Union.	He	could	 live	 there,	but	he	wanted	 to	come	back	 to	his	own
country.	 And	 he	 was	 also	 afraid.	 In	 a	 way	 the	 government	 was	 fulfilling	 his
innermost	desire	--	how	could	he	go	to	India	with	a	wife	and	two	children?	He
would	 be	 condemned	 by	 everybody,	 particularly	 the	 Buddhists:	 "You	 are	 a
monk!"	So	he	was	happy	in	a	way,	that	the	government	itself	did	not	allow	it,	so
there	was	no	question.
He	came	back.	He	 told	me,	 "When	 I	 first	went	 to	 the	Soviet	Union,	 I	 asked	a
small	boy,
`Do	you	believe	 in	God?'	He	said,	 `God?	People	used	 to	believe	 in	 that	 in	 the
dark	ages.
If	you	want	to	see	the	statue	of	God,	you	can	go	into	the	museum.'"
But	 this	 is	 also	programming.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 these	 small	 boys	know	 there	 is	 no
God,	or	that	even	Karl	Marx	knew	there	was	no	God.	Only	a	man	of	immense
meditation	can	know	whether	God	is	or	is	not.
So	you	are	programmed,	and	so	deeply	ingrained	is	the	program	that	you	think	it
is	your	nature.	Your	fictions,	your	hopes,	your	future	...	nothing	is	natural.
Nature	knows	nothing	except	 this	moment.	Nature	knows	nothing	about	hopes
and	desires	and	wants.	Nature	simply	enjoys	whatever	is	available	this	moment,
now	and	here.
You	are	asking:
OR	IS	IT	A	DISTORTION,	A	REFLECTION	OF	A	SICK	CULTURE?
Yes,	 absolutely	 and	 categorically,	 yes.	 It	 is	 a	 distortion,	 a	 reflection	 of	 a	 sick
culture.
And	you	are	asking:
IS	THE	STATE	OF	GRACE	THAT	I	SEEK	HIDDEN	FROM	ME	BY	NATURE
FOR
SOME	PURPOSE?
There	 is	 no	 purpose.	 Purpose	 again	 brings	 the	 whole	 lot	 of	 lies	 in.	 Existence
simply	is.
Just	look	at	it	from	this	angle.	When	you	are	sick	you	go	to	the	doctor	and	you
ask,
"What	is	the	cause	of	my	sickness?"	You	ask	for	the	diagnosis.	But	when	you	are
feeling	healthy,	do	you	go	to	the	doctor	and	ask,	"Diagnose!	What	is	the	cause	of
my	health?
Why	am	I	feeling	so	happy?"	You	don't	go	to	the	doctor,	or	to	the	psychiatrist,	or
to	the	psychoanalyst.	And	if	you	go,	that	means	you	are	mad.	If	you	ask,	"Why
am	I	feeling	so	happy	...?"
No,	 happiness	 needs	 no	 cause.	 It	 is	 your	 simple	 nature,	 you	 are	 intrinsically
happy.	No	cause,	no	purpose,	no	goal	is	needed.	Life	is	in	itself	enough.	It	needs
nothing	else	to	complete	it.	It	is	complete!	It	is	entire!	It	is	already	what	it	has	to
be.	So	there	is	no	purpose	in	existence	and	no	goal	in	existence.
Existence	is	a	sheer	dance.
Picasso	was	constantly	bothered	by	people	because	his	paintings	seemed	 to	be
purposeless,	 meaningless.	 Once	 a	 critic	 was	 staying	 with	 him	 and	 he	 was
painting.	 He	 watched	 and	 watched,	 and	 he	 said	 to	 Picasso,	 "Why	 are	 you
wasting	your	time?	This	is	nothing.	There	is	no	purpose	in	your	painting."
He	said,	"This	is	strange.	I	am	at	least	painting.	And	why	are	you	sitting	behind
me.	For	three	hours	you	have	been	wasting	your	time	and	you	are	telling	me	that
I	 am	 wasting	 my	 time.	 I	 am	 enjoying	 immensely.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any
purpose.	Just	painting,	just	playing	with	these	colors	is	so	great.	Who	cares	about
the	purpose	and	the	meaning	and	the	goal?
"Why	don't	you	go	 into	 the	garden	and	ask	 the	 roses,	 `What	 is	 the	purpose	of
your	being?
Why	 are	 you	 dancing	 without	 purpose?	 Why	 are	 you	 looking	 so	 happy	 and
smiling?	Shut	up!	You	don't	have	any	purpose,	and	you	are	dancing	in	the	wind
and	under	the	sun.
What	is	the	great	idea?	Why	are	you	spreading	your	fragrance?
"Why	don't	you	go	into	the	garden?	And	if	a	rose	need	not	have	a	purpose,	why
should	my	 paintings	 have	 a	 purpose?	They	 are	 existential."	And	 the	man	was
perfectly	right,	just	in	a	wrong	place.
These	people	like	Picasso	needed	the	environment	of	Zen,	but	they	were	living
in	 the	West	where	everything	has	 to	have	a	purpose,	otherwise	you	are	 insane.
Why	 are	 you	 doing	 it?	 They	 can't	 understand	 that	 just	 doing	 it	 can	 be	 out	 of
sheer	joy.	Playing	with	colors	is	a	sheer	joy	in	itself.	Trying	to	find	meaning	in	it
is	just	your	programming:	everything	has	to	be	meaningful.
I	 was	 a	 student	 in	 the	 university,	 and	 I	 was	 winning	 all	 kinds	 of	 debates,
eloquence	 competitions,	 all	 over	 the	 country.	 I	 had	 filled	 my	 head	 of	 the
department's	office	with	all	kinds	of	trophies	and	cups	--	gold	and	silver.	And	he
started	telling	me,	"If	you	go	on	winning	in	this	way,	I	think	I	will	have	to	move
out	of	my	office.	There	is	no	space	left."
I	 said,	 "You	 don't	 have	 to	move	 out,	 I	 will	 move	 all	 the	 trophies	 and	 all	 the
cups."
He	said,	"No,	that	is	credit	to	the	department."
I	said,	"Then	you	have	 to	decide	whether	you	want	 to	be	 in	 the	office	or	not."
And	finally	he	had	to	move	out	of	the	office.	He	created	another	small	office	on
the	verandah	where	he	used	to	sit,	because	his	whole	office	became	a	showplace
for	any	guest.
One	day	he	asked	me	--	because	in	my	own	university	there	was	going	to	be	a
national	 university	 competition	 --	 "Why	 do	 you	 go	 on	 unnecessarily	 traveling
long	distances?
What	is	your	purpose?"
I	said,	"I	don't	have	any	purpose.	I	love	it	--	that's	my	way	of	playing.	That's	my
way	 of	 telling	 stories	 which	 have	 no	 purpose	 at	 all.	 Just	 the	 sheer	 joy,
overflowing	life.	I	am	not	old	enough	to	think	about	purposes."
He	said,	"What?"
I	said,	"Yes,	I	am	not	old	enough,	and	I	will	never	be	old	enough	to	think	about
purpose	and	meaning.	I	rejoice	in	whatever	I	am	doing.	There	is	no	purpose."
Do	 you	 think	 talking	 to	 you	 there	 is	 any	 purpose?	 I	 just	 enjoy	 it.	 You	 enjoy
listening,	I	enjoy	talking,	it	is	complete.	There	is	no	need	beyond	it.	If	something
happens	within	it,	that	is	not	my	responsibility.
If	you	become	enlightened,	it	is	your	problem.
So	be	careful!
I	 am	 just	 enjoying	 talking,	 you	 are	 enjoying	 listening.	 In	 between	 these	 two
things	anything	is	possible.	You	may	become	enlightened,	but	remember,	never
condemn	me	 for	your	enlightenment.	 It	 is	 just	your	problem,	not	mine.	 I	have
my	problem	--	you	don't	worry	about	it.
So	I	told	my	head	of	the	department,	"There	is	no	purpose.	I	enjoy	talking.	I	love
a	heart-to-heart	talk."
And	 that	 day	 the	 competition	 was	 going	 to	 be	 held	 ...	 There	 used	 to	 be	 two
persons	from	each	university	--	one	opposing	the	subject	and	one	supporting	the
subject.	I	was	opposing	the	subject,	but	my	partner	became	so	nervous	...	it	was
his	first	time	to	come	to	the	stage.
The	 student	 who	 used	 to	 come	 with	 me	 around	 the	 country	 had	 died	 in	 an
accident,	so	I	had	to	find	a	new	partner,	and	that	was	his	first	time.	I	tried	hard	to
prepare	him	...	to	repeat	his	speech	many	times,	but	finally	when	the	time	came
he	disappeared.
So	the	vice-chancellor	asked	me	what	to	do?	I	said,	"I	can	manage.	First	I	will
speak	in	support	--	because	my	partner	is	missing,	and	I	don't	want	to	lose	that
prize	--	and	then	I	will	oppose."
He	said,	"My	God!	You	will	do	both	the	things?"
I	said,	"Just	try.	It	will	be	a	great	enjoyment."
So	 I	 spoke	 for	 it,	 and	 I	 spoke	 against	 it,	 and	 I	 had	 both	 the	 prizes,	 first	 and
second.
And	as	I	was	going	out,	the	vice-chancellor	took	me	into	a	corner	and	said,	"It
was	a	miracle.	When	you	were	speaking	in	favor	of	it,	I	was	thinking	what	will
you	do?	You	are	giving	such	a	great	argument	in	favor,	I	don't	think	you	will	be
able	 to	oppose	 it.	But	when	you	 started	opposing,	 I	 thought,	My	God!	 --	your
arguments	are	so	clear.	What	happened	to	the	other	arguments	...?"
He	said,	"But	I	want	to	ask	you	one	thing,	that's	why	I	have	pulled	you	out	of	the
crowd.
Do	you	have	any	convictions	of	your	own?"
I	said,	"I	just	love	talking.	You	have	heard	only	two	sides	--	there	are	many	sides.
And	if	you	want	some	day	I	can	speak	from	many	points	of	view.	These	are	only
two	polar	opposites,	but	 there	are	middle	positions	and	 there	are	at	 least	seven
positions	on	each	subject."
He	said	"That	would	drive	me	mad.	Just	these	two	positions	drive	me	completely
out	of	my	mind.	I	don't	think	I	am	going	to	sleep,	because	I	am	wondering	what
is	right."
I	said,	"That	is	your	problem.	I	enjoyed	the	whole	game,	and	I	have	got	both	the
prizes.
And	 this	 is	 far	better.	 If	you	can	convince	other	vice-chancellors	 that	only	one
person	is	coming	and	he	will	represent	both	the	sides,	it	will	be	far	easier	for	me
because	I	won't	have	to	prepare	 the	other	person.	It	 is	better	and	easier.	 I	don't
have	 any	 belief,	 I	 don't	 have	 any	 prejudice.	 I	 am	 utterly	 open.	And	 because	 I
love,	it	is	a	game."
Your	life	should	be	a	playfulness,	not	a	purpose.
Your	life	should	be	a	fun,	not	goal	oriented.
It	should	not	be	business,	it	should	be	pure	love.	What	is	the	purpose	of	love?	If
there	 is	 no	 purpose	 in	 love,	why	 should	 there	 be	 purpose	 in	meditation?	Why
should	there	be	any	purpose	in	nature	and	existence?
Purpose	is	always	an	end	somewhere	far	away	that	you	have	to	achieve.	Purpose
is	an	achievement	of	a	distant	goal,	it	is	never	herenow,	and	life	is	herenow.	It	is
not	going	anywhere,	it	has	no	purpose.
And	you	don't	understand	the	implication	of	the	word	`purpose'.	If	once	purpose
is	 fulfilled,	 life	 will	 be	 dead.	 Then	 there	 will	 be	 no	 need	 for	 existence	 --	 the
purpose	is	fulfilled,	the	game	is	finished.	Because	it	is	an	ongoing	game,	eternity
to	eternity,	 it	can't	afford	to	have	a	goal,	 it	can't	afford	to	have	a	death,	 it	can't
afford	to	have	a	purpose.
Unless	you	understand	how	to	 live	purposelessly,	you	have	not	understood	 the
meaning,	the	significance	of	life.
Life	 has	 everything	 that	 it	 needs	 in	 itself;	 it	 is	 intrinsic,	 not	 outside.	 It	 is	 an
unfoldment	of	more	and	more	joy,	of	more	and	more	blissfulness,	of	more	and
more	ecstasy.	But	the	unfoldment	is	in	the	present.	As	you	go	deeper	and	deeper,
and	higher	 and	higher,	you	become	more	and	more	playful.	And	 to	be	playful
takes	all	seriousness	away.
Purpose	makes	people	serious,	and	I	consider	seriousness	 to	be	sickness	of	 the
soul.
Laughter	is	health,	but	laughter	has	no	purpose.	It	is	so	beautiful	in	itself,	it	need
not	 have	 a	 purpose.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 means	 to	 any	 end.	 It	 is	 means	 and	 end	 both
together.
And	finally,	you	are	asking:
IS	MY	 IDENTIFICATION	WITH	 THE	 EGO	A	NECESSARY	 STAGE	 IN	 A
NATURAL	PROCESS?
No,	it	is	again	a	created	phenomenon	by	the	priests,	by	the	politicians,	by	your
parents.
The	 child	 is	 born	without	 any	 ego.	Have	you	 ever	watched	 a	 small	 child	who
says	--	if	his	name	is	Johnny	--	"Johnny	is	feeling	thirsty"?	He	never	says,	"I	am
feeling	 thirsty,"	 I	will	 come	 later	 on	when	 programming	 has	 happened.	 In	 the
beginning	the	child	says,	"Johnny	is	feeling	sleepy."
One	 of	 the	 Hindu	 mystics,	 Ramateertha,	 never	 said	 "I"	 in	 his	 whole	 life.	 He
would	always	say,	"Rama	is	tired.	Rama	is	hungry	..."
He	went	to	America.	Here,	the	people	who	surrounded	him,	understood	him,	but
in	America	 it	 seemed	 a	 very	 strange	 type	 of	 language	 that	 he	 used.	 "Rama	 is
feeling	thirsty"
--	and	people	would	 look	around	wondering,	"Who	is	Rama?"	And	 they	asked
him,	"Why	don't	you	simply	say	Ì	am	feeling	thirsty'?"
He	said,	"That	I	cannot	say,	because	there	is	no	Ì'.	So	I	just	use	the	name,	which
is	a	false	 thing,	apparently	false,	because	it	has	been	given.	It	 is	a	 label	put	on
me,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 Ì'	 in	 me.	 And	 my	 innermost	 space	 is	 neither	 thirsty	 nor
hungry.	 It	 is	 the	 body,	 and	 the	 label	 of	 the	 body	 is	Ramateertha.	 It	 is	 not	my
name.	 I	 am	 nameless	 and	 formless;	 name	 and	 form	 belong	 to	 the	 body.	 So	 I
cannot	use	the	word	Ì',	because	there	is	no	corresponding	reality	to	it	inside	me."
And	he	was	absolutely	right.
The	ego	 is	created	by	ambition,	by	desire,	by	greed.	Everybody	 is	 telling	you:
"Become	somebody	special.	Have	power,	prestige,	respectability,	money,	things
that	matter	in	the	world."	All	these	create	slowly,	slowly	the	idea	of	the	ego,	of
superiority,	 of	 holier-than-thou,	 higher-than-thou.	This	 ego	 creates	 your	 saints,
this	 ego	 creates	 your	 so-called	 priests,	 your	 politicians,	 your	 presidents,	 prime
ministers.	This	is	all	the	projection	of	the	ego.
But	 ego	 has	 no	 natural	 existence.	 It	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 a	 certain	 programming
that	society	manages	to	befool	you	with.
Once	you	see	that	the	ego	is	false,	handed	over	to	you	by	others,	the	whole	house
of	falsity	simply	disappears,	like	darkness	when	you	bring	light	in.
Meditation	will	bring	the	light	from	your	very	center,	a	cool	fire.	And	when	your
interior	 becomes	 luminous,	 you	will	 not	 find	 any	 ego,	 any	 I.	You	will	 simply
find	the	whole	existence	pouring	into	you.
The	ego	is	also	an	imprisonment.
Being	egoless	you	are	again	out	of	the	golden	cage.
My	parents	used	to	say	to	me,	"The	way	you	are	going,	you	will	end	up	being
nobody."
And	somebody	else	would	say,	"You	will	end	up	 in	being	good	for	nothing."	I
have	ended	up	being	nobody,	good	for	nothing.	But	I	am	enjoying	this	good-for-
nothingness,	this	nobodiness	so	much	that	each	moment	has	become	a	splendor,
a	magic,	a	miracle.
Out	 of	 this	 nothingness	 arises	 my	 freedom,	 my	 wholeness.	 Out	 of	 this
nothingness	I	meet	with	existence	with	an	easy	heart,	relaxed,	in	a	deep	let-go.
There	 is	 no	 ego,	 no	 somebody	 to	 prevent	 me.	 I	 don't	 have	 any	 borders,	 any
limits.	In	this	nothingness	I	have	arrived	at	the	very	source	of	existence.
I	would	love	you	also	to	be	good	for	nothing,	a	nobody.	And	then	you	will	find	a
tremendous	 dignity	 --	 for	 no	 reason,	 but	 just	 because	 the	 whole	 existence	 is
overflowing,	and	all	around	you	flowers	are	blossoming,	stars	are	dancing.	For
the	 first	 time	when	you	are	nobody,	you	 feel	your	heartbeat	and	 the	universe's
heartbeat	 are	 in	 deep	 synchronicity.	 That	 feeling	 is	 the	 greatest	 experience	 in
existence,	the	most	divine,	the	most	godly.
Now	the	sutras:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
GOSETSU,	 AFTER	 BECOMING	 A	 MONK	 UNDER	 MA	 TZU,	 CAME	 TO
SEKITO
AND	 SAID,	 "IF	 YOU	 SETTLE	 THIS	 WITH	 ONE	 WORD,	 I	 WILL	 STAY
HERE.	IF
NOT,	I	WILL	LEAVE."
His	question	certainly	shows	he	is	coming	from	Ma	Tzu.
Ma	Tzu	is	the	most	strange	master	that	ever	happened.	He	must	have	heard	this
statement	from	Ma	Tzu,	or	in	the	air	of	Ma	Tzu	where	there	were	many	people
just	becoming	afire,	coming	to	their	real	home.
He	is	asking	Sekito,	"IF	YOU	SETTLE	THIS"	--	remember	the	word	"this."	The
whole	emphasis	is	on	"this"	--	"IF	YOU	SETTLE	THIS	WITH	ONE	WORD	..."
He	is	saying,
"By	 a	 single	 word	 if	 you	 can	 say	what	 this	 is,	 I	 will	 stay	 here.	 If	 not,	 I	 will
leave."
SEKITO,	KNOWING	THAT	THIS	MAN	HAD	PROMISE	--	his	very	question
showed	an	 intense	 longing	 to	understand	 this.	But	he	does	not	want	 to	go	 into
details,	he	does	not	want	any	unnecessary	commentary.	He	wants	simply	a	single
word:	"Settle	it	and	I	will	stay	here;	otherwise	I	leave."
A	man	fiery	enough,	bold	enough,	daring	enough,	challenging	a	man	like	Sekito.
SEKITO,	KNOWING	THAT	THIS	MAN	HAD	PROMISE	--	he	could	see	 the
promise	in	his	eyes,	in	his	very	air,	in	his	very	approach	--	MADE	A	GESTURE,
a	silent	gesture.
Even	a	single	word	is	too	much.	That	was	the	emphasis	of	Sekito,	"Why	are	you
asking	for	even	one	word?	One	word	leads	to	another	and	to	another,	and	then
the	whole	 theology	 and	 the	whole	 philosophy,	 and	 the	whole	 religion	 goes	 on
growing.	Words	and	words	...	and	you	forget	all	about	this.
"So	I	won't	use	even	a	single	word	--	that	is	too	much.	You	have	already	gone,
you	 have	 already	 passed	 this.	 You	 have	moved	 into	 language	 from	 existence.
And	that	is	the	greatest	distance	in	the	world:	the	experience	of	this,	and	making
a	statement	about	it.
That	is	the	greatest	distance	possible.	Even	stars	are	not	that	far	away.	They	may
be	millions	of	light-years	away	--	that	does	not	matter.	The	distance	between	this
and	the	statement	about	this	is	the	greatest	distance	between	two	points."
Sekito	avoided	even	a	single	word.
Always	remember,	one	thing	leads	to	another	and	to	another,	and	then	there	is	no
end.
You	are	 lost	 in	a	 jungle	of	words.	So	he	would	not	say	even	a	single	word,	he
simply	made	 a	 gesture.	 And	 his	 gesture	 was	 immensely	 profound,	 but	 it	 was
utterly	silent.
Gosetsu	did	not	get	 it.	He	wanted	a	word.	He	was	 looking	 for	 the	word,	 that's
why	he	missed	 the	gesture.	Whenever	you	are	 looking	for	something,	you	will
miss	the	truth.
Don't	look	for	something!	Just	go	emptyhanded,	without	any	projection,	without
any	prejudice,	without	any	belief.	Perhaps	he	had	come	from	Ma	Tzu	hearing	his
words,	 and	 he	 wanted	 Sekito	 to	 say	 something	 greater,	 in	 a	 single	 word,
condensed.	But	one	word	or	one	thousand	words	...	it	makes	no	difference.
Sekito	is	utterly	truthful,	absolutely	honest.	Not	uttering	a	single	word,	he	simply
made	 a	 gesture.	 And	 in	 his	 gesture	 there	 was	 thisness.	 In	 his	 gesture	 was
suchness.	In	his	gesture	was	the	whole	existence.	In	his	presence	and	the	gesture,
everything	was	contained;	nothing	was	left	out.	Nothing	was	said,	but	everything
was	indicated	--	a	hint,	a	naked	truth	without	clothes.
All	words	are	clothes.	The	more	words,	the	more	clothes.	Finally,	you	have	layer
upon	layer	of	language,	and	the	truth	is	lost	in	the	jungle.
But	Gosetsu	missed	 it	because	he	was	waiting	for	a	word.	His	focus	was	for	a
word,	otherwise	he	would	not	have	missed	it.	He	was	alert	and	waiting	for	 the
word,	and	the	word	did	not	come.	Because	of	his	narrowing	mind	upon	a	word,
he	missed	the	vastness	of	this	that	Sekito	was	indicating	by	a	gesture.
Never	look	for	anything.	That	which	is,	will	declare	itself	to	you,	you	simply	be
silent	and	wait.	Yes,	waiting	is	the	right	approach	to	truth.
Wait,	be	a	witness,	be	patient.
Keep	your	doors	open	 for	 the	guest,	because	one	never	knows	when	 the	guest
comes	and	knocks	on	your	doors.
Do	 you	 remember	 a	 small	 poem	 by	 Rabindranath	 Tagore,	 "The	 King	 of	 the
Night"?
There	used	 to	be	 an	ancient	 temple,	very	ancient.	The	 temple	was	vast.	 It	 had
thousands	of	statues	and	one	thousand	priests.	The	high	priest	one	night	dreamed
that	 God	 was	 saying	 to	 him,	 "Tomorrow	 sometime	 I	 am	 coming	 to	 visit	 the
temple.	Clean	it,	prepare	it.
I	 am	coming	 for	 the	 first	 time	 to	your	 temple.	You	have	waited	 long,	now	 the
time	has	come."
He	 woke	 up	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night.	 He	 called	 all	 the	 priests	 from	 their
bedrooms.
They	were	 surprised:	 "What	 is	 the	matter?"	 --	 because	 it	 had	 never	 happened
before.
The	 arch-priest	 said	 to	 them,	 "I	 had	 a	 dream.	 Although	 it	 is	 a	 dream,	 who
knows?	It	may	be	true,	it	may	be	just	an	indication	that	he	is	coming."
They	 laughed,	 they	 giggled.	 They	 said,	 "You	 are	 getting	 old,	 you	 are	 getting
senile.	A	dream	is	a	dream,	and	you	disturbed	our	sleep."
The	arch-priest	said,	"I	am	sorry,	but	 I	have	 to	say	 to	you	not	 to	 take	chances.
There	is	nothing	wrong	in	cleaning	the	temple	and	preparing	the	richest	food,	the
best	room	for	him	to	rest.	Anyway	this	is	going	to	give	the	temple	a	good	spring-
cleaning.	It	has	not	been	cleaned	for	hundreds	of	years,	so	this	is	good	chance.	If
he	comes,	good;	if	he	does	not	come,	there	is	no	harm."
They	could	see	the	argument.
And	he	said,	 "If	we	don't	do	anything	and	he	 turns	up,	 then	don't	blame	me.	 I
will	not	be	responsible.	I	have	told	you."
They	all	felt	that	there	was	some	grain	of	truth,	an	argument,	very	convincing	in
it.	So	they	cleaned	the	whole	temple	the	next	day.	It	was	a	vast	temple.	To	clean
it	--	and	it	had	not	been	cleaned	for	hundreds	of	years	--	was	a	tremendous	job.
They	 called	many	 other	 people	 --	 one	 thousand	 priests	 and	 hundreds	 of	 other
people	from	the	nearby	villages	who	used	to	worship.	So	they	came,	and	all	the
statues	were	cleaned	--	 fragrance,	flowers,	garlands,	great	sweets	and	delicious
food	was	prepared.	For	the	first	time	God	was	coming.	But	they	all	knew	deep
down,	"It	is	just	a	dream,	and	we	are	unnecessarily	being	harassed,	but	what	to
do?"
And	they	waited	and	they	waited	and	they	waited.	It	was	sunset	and	he	had	not
turned	up.
And	they	were	becoming	angry	because	the	priests	could	not	eat	unless	God	has
taken	 the	 food.	 Every	 day	 they	 were	 offering	 food	 to	 the	 statues,	 and	 statues
don't	 eat	 --	 that	 is	 the	 only	 good	 thing	 about	 statues.	 So	 they	would	 offer	 the
food,	and	 they	would	 take	 the	food	back.	Now	it	had	become	sacred,	God	had
given	it	as	a	gift.	It	became	prasad,	it	became	holy,	sacred.	Then	they	would	eat
it.
But	today	was	different.	God	himself	was	coming,	and	if	he	found	them	eating
before	 he	 had	 come,	 there	 was	 going	 to	 be	 trouble.	 But	 by	 the	 evening	 they
became	very	angry	with	 the	arch-priest.	They	 said,	 "Your	dream	has	disturbed
our	night,	has	disturbed	our	day.
We	have	been	laboring	the	whole	day	and	we	are	hungry,	and	we	cannot	eat,	we
cannot	drink.	And	now	it	is	sunset,	the	day	is	finished.	So	it	is	better	that	we	now
offer	our	food	to	our	statues,	take	it	back,	eat	it	and	go	to	sleep."
The	arch-priest	could	not	say	anything	more.	He	also	felt,	"They	are	right."	But
deep	down	his	dream	was	so	vivid	and	so	colorful	that	only	with	reluctance	did
he	allow	them.
But	 he	 could	 see	 their	 argument:	 "How	 long	 do	we	 have	 to	wait?	 The	 day	 is
over,	we	have	waited	enough."
So	they	ate.	They	were	tired,	so	they	went	to	sleep	early	....
And	in	the	middle	of	 the	night	 the	chariot	of	God	came,	making	great	noise	 ...
the	chariot's	wheels	on	a	dusty	road.	Somebody	heard	the	noise	and	half-asleep
and	half-awake	he	said,	"Look!	It	seems	he	has	come.	I	have	heard	the	noise	of	a
chariot's	wheels."
Somebody	 shouted,	 "Shut	 up!	Now	 don't	 bring	 that	 subject	 up	 again.	Do	 you
want	to	disturb	our	sleep	again?	It	is	not	a	chariot!	It	is	just	clouds	thundering	in
the	sky!	Go	to	sleep!"
And	 then	 the	 chariot	 stopped	 in	 front	 of	 the	 temple,	 but	 the	 door	was	 closed.
Still,	he	went	up	the	steps	--	there	were	many	steps	to	the	temple.
There	 are	 temples	 in	 India	 with	 one	 hundred	 steps,	 two	 hundred	 steps,	 three
hundred	steps	...	then	you	find	the	main	door.
The	Kind	of	the	Night	knocked	on	the	door.	And	again,	another	priest	heard	the
knock.
He	said,	"Listen,	somebody	is	knocking	on	the	door.	Perhaps	he	has	come."
Again	somebody	shouted,	"Will	you	not	stop?	Can't	you	allow	us	to	rest?	There
is	nobody	knocking	on	the	door!	It	is	just	the	wind!"	So	they	again	went	to	sleep.
The	King	of	the	Night	waited	at	the	door.	There	was	no	sign	of	anybody	coming
to	open	the	door,	so	he	returned	to	his	chariot.
In	 the	morning,	 they	 saw	 that	 a	 chariot	 had	 come	up	 to	 the	door	on	 the	dusty
road.	They	could	see	the	marks	of	the	wheels	of	the	chariot,	and	they	could	see
on	the	dust	that	had	gathered	on	the	steps,	that	somebody	had	walked	up	to	the
door.	But	now	it	was	too	late	-
-	nothing	could	be	done.	They	missed	it.
This	is	a	small	poem	by	Rabindranath	Tagore,	emphasizing	one	point:	waiting.	It
is	never	enough.	Waiting	consciously,	alert,	witnessing	whatsoever	is	happening
but	 not	 asking	 a	 certain	 hypothesis	 to	 be	 fulfilled,	 because	 the	 mind	 has	 the
capacity	 to	 create	 any	 hallucination	 you	 ask.	You	 can	 see	Christ,	 you	 can	 see
Krishna,	you	can	see	anybody	you	want.
Mind	has	the	capacity	to	dream,	and	it	has	the	capacity	to	dream	with	open	eyes
--	that	is	called	hallucination.	If	you	go	on	asking	for	something,	it	will	appear	as
if	it	is	real.	Mind	can	give	reality	to	all	kinds	of	lies.
So	 you	 have	 to	 put	 aside	 all	 your	 prejudices,	 all	 your	 conceptions,	 all	 your
projections	...
all	 your	 gods	 aside.	 You	 have	 to	 enter	 into	 your	 own	 being	 just	 watching,
waiting,	 trusting	existence	that	whenever	a	time	is	ripe	and	your	spring	comes,
the	grass	will	grow	by	itself.
Every	 tree	 trusts	 existence	 --	 the	 spring	comes,	 the	 flowers	blossom,	 the	 fruits
arrive.
Why	 can't	 you	 wait	 for	 the	 right	 time?	 Why	 should	 you	 make	 demands	 on
nature?	A	demanding	mind	 is	not	 the	mind	of	 a	 seeker.	A	seeker	 simply	waits
and	 allows	 existence	 its	 own	 time,	 its	 own	 wisdom.	Whenever	 you	 are	 ripe,
whenever	you	are	really	ready,	the	doors	will	be	opened	for	you.	You	don't	have
to	knock.
Jesus	says	to	you,	"Knock	and	the	door	shall	be	opened."	I	say	unto	you,	"Don't
knock,	wait!	When	the	time	is	ripe,	doors	shall	be	opened	unto	you."	Knocking
is	demanding,	knocking	is	interfering.	Knocking	is	not	trust.	Knocking	is	forcing
existence	to	appear	in	a	certain	way	according	to	your	hypothesis,	according	to
your	belief	system.	No,	no	knocking!	Just	wait	and	watch.
Jesus	 says,	 "Ask,	 and	 it	 shall	 be	 answered."	No,	 never	 ask,	 otherwise	 it	 shall
never	be	answered.	Just	wait.	In	the	right	moment	you	will	find	the	answer.
Jesus	says,	 "Seek,	and	ye	shall	 find	 it."	 I	 say	unto	you,	"Don't	 seek,	otherwise
you	will	never	find	it,"	because	seeking	means	you	already	know	what	you	are
seeking.	 Seeking	 means	 you	 already	 believe	 in	 a	 certain	 hypothesis.	 Seeking
means	you	have	already	an	idea	about	truth.	This	is	dangerous.	No	seeking,	just
waiting	...	in	utter	silence,	in	tremendous	trust.	And	as	your	silence	deepens,	you
will	see	things	are	happening	on	their	own	accord.	And	as	things	start	happening
on	their	own	accord,	your	trust	deepens.	This	is	almost	spontaneous.
Just	waiting,	and	Gosetsu	would	have	understood	the	gesture	of	Sekito.	But	he
was	 asking,	 demanding.	 Just	 look	 at	 his	 question:	 "IF	 YOU	 SETTLE	 THIS
WITH	ONE
WORD,	 I	 WILL	 STAY	 HERE."	 As	 if	 Sekito	 needs	 his	 staying	 there.	 He	 is
making	a	bargain:	"I	will	stay	here	if	you	explain	this	in	one	word"	--	now	this	is
a	demanding	mind.	"If	not,	I	will	leave."	Whom	is	he	threatening?	But	because
of	this	he	was	full	of	bullshit	and	missed.
But	 even	 though	 he	 missed,	 Sekito	 knew	 that	 beyond	 this	 bullshit	 there	 was
someone	 very	 promising,	 a	 bodhisattva.	 Once	 this	 nonsense	 is	 dropped,	 that
bodhisattva	will	surface	as	a	buddha,	as	an	awakened	soul.
SEKITO,	 KNOWING	 THAT	 THIS	 MAN	 HAD	 PROMISE,	 MADE	 A
GESTURE,	BUT
GOSETSU	DID	NOT	GET	IT.	SO	GOSETSU	TOOK	HIS	LEAVE	AND	MADE
FOR
THE	GATE,	WHEN	SEKITO	CALLED	TO	HIM,	"TEACHER!"
You	have	to	understand	the	difference	between	master	and	teacher.	The	master	is
one	who	knows,	the	teacher	is	one	who	knows	not	but	is	knowledgeable.	He	has
collected	much	information,	but	he	has	not	gone	through	the	transformation.	So
when	Sekito	called	to	him,	he	used	the	word	`teacher',	not	`master'.
He	was	full	of	knowledge;	his	question	shows	it.	He	has	heard	much,	read	much.
He	is	a	scholar,	a	knowledgeable	person,	learned;	hence	he	called	him	teacher.
GOSETSU	 TURNED	 AROUND,	 AND	 SEKITO	 SAID,	 "FROM	 BIRTH	 TO
OLD	AGE,	 IT	 IS	 ONLY	 THE	 FELLOW	 THERE	 AND	NOTHING	 ELSE	 --
DON'T	LOOK
ANYWHERE	FURTHER."
What	 is	 he	 saying?	He	 is	 saying,	 "What	 are	you	 asking	 for?	 It	 has	been	 there
within	 you	 from	 birth	 to	 death,	 from	 eternity	 to	 eternity.	 And	 just	 by	 turning
back,	 you	 have	 yourself	 given	 the	 answer.	 Just	 look	 there,	 don't	 go	 anywhere
else,	 turn	back.	Turn	 inwards	 --	 that	 is	a	complete	 turn	back.	Don't	go	 further,
just	turn	in,	turn	back,	and	you	will	find	this	--
the	suchness	of	existence,	the	tathata.	It	has	been	there	always.
This	 turning	 around	 ...	 "FROM	 BIRTH	 TO	 OLD	 AGE,	 IT	 IS	 ONLY	 THE
FELLOW
THERE	..."	Who	has	 turned?	Who	has	heard	the	word	`teacher'?	And	who	has
followed	 the	word	 and	 turned	 around?	This	 is	 it!	 The	 fellow	 there	 inside	 you
..."THE	FELLOW
THERE	AND	NOTHING	ELSE	--	DON'T	LOOK	ANYWHERE	FURTHER."
AT	 THIS,	 GOSETSU	WAS	 GREATLY	 ENLIGHTENED.	 HE	 STEPPED	 ON
HIS
STICK	TO	BREAK	IT	AND	STAYED	THERE.
People	who	go	on	the	mountains	take	a	stick	as	a	support	...	steep	mountains.	So
he	has	come	with	a	stick	to	the	mountain	where	Sekito	Stonehead	was	sitting	on
a	rock.
You	know	that	Ma	Tzu	said	to	another	person	who	was	going	to	Sekito,	"You	are
going.
That's	perfectly	good,	but	do	you	remember	Sekito's	path	is	very	slippery?"	He
was	sitting	on	a	rock	and	the	path	was	very	slippery,	so	anybody	who	had	to	go
there	had	to	bring	a	stick	with	him.
This	action	of	Gosetsu,	of	breaking	the	stick,	shows	that	now	he	had	found	his
master	and	there	was	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	He	was	not	going	down	that	steep
hill	again.	Finished!
He	had	heard	it,	he	had	found	it.	This	gesture	on	his	part	shows	that	now	he	is
going	to	stay	forever.	All	bridges	were	broken.	With	that	stick	breaking,	all	the
bridges	that	lead	backwards	to	the	past	were	finished.	He	had	found	the	man,	he
had	fallen	in	love.	He	knew:	"You	are	the	master."
He	 became	 greatly	 enlightened	 by	 this	 simple	 act	 of	 Sekito	 calling	 him	 --
"Teacher!"	--
and	 his	 turning	 around	 and	 Sekito	 saying	 to	 him:	 "This	 fellow	 has	 been	 there
always	and	always.	Don't	go	further."
A	very	immense	statement,	but	it	needs	a	very	alert	mind.	First,	he	had	asked	the
question,	he	was	full	of	his	question	and	wanted	one	word.	There	was	wanting,
desiring,	and	all	kinds	of	things.	Now,	just	as	he	was	going	out	of	the	hut	--	he
had	 dropped	 the	 idea	 of	 finding	 anything	 from	 Sekito	 --	 suddenly	 he	 heard,
"Teacher!"	And	he	turned.	He	must	have	been	utterly	empty	because	there	was
no	question.	He	had	not	asked	anything.
In	 that	 silence	 he	 heard	 that	 impeccable,	 that	 profound	 sentence:	 "This	 fellow
who	has	turned	around	has	been	there	always	and	always."
A	single	statement	from	a	master	sometimes	triggers	a	chain	reaction	and	leads	a
silent	being	into	enlightenment.	This	is	one	of	the	most	important	gifts	from	Zen
to	humanity.
ONCE,	 SEKITO	 SAID	 TO	 HIS	 ASSEMBLED	 MONKS,	 "EVEN	 IF
LANGUAGE	IS
USED,	IT	IS	IRRELEVANT."
All	language	is	irrelevant	as	far	as	truth	is	concerned.
Hearing	 this,	 another	master,	Yakusan,	 said,	 "EVEN	 IF	LANGUAGE	 IS	NOT
USED,	IT
IS	IRRELEVANT."
Language	certainly	 is	 irrelevant.	You	may	not	use	 the	 language,	you	may	keep
your	mouth	shut,	but	the	language	is	going	round	and	round	in	your	head.	So	just
not	 using	 language	 is	 not	 enough	 --	 that	 too,	 is	 irrelevant.	 Language	 or	 no
language,	both	are	irrelevant.
SEKITO	SAID,	"HERE,	EVEN	A	NEEDLE	CANNOT	GET	THROUGH."	He
is	saying,
"HERE,	 EVEN	A	NEEDLE	 CANNOT	GET	 THROUGH	 --	 as	 far	 as	 truth	 is
concerned,	 the	path	 is	 so	narrow,	only	a	witnessing,	 silent	witnessing	can	pass
through.	It	is	far	more	subtle	than	even	a	needle.	Even	a	needle	is	too	solid,	too
tangible,	too	material,	it	cannot	enter	into	the	immaterial	space	of	your	being."
YAKUSAN	 SAID,	 "HERE,	 IT	 IS	 LIKE	 PLANTING	 A	 FLOWER	 ON	 A
ROCK."
Both	masters	are	enjoying	pulling	each	other's	leg.	That	can	happen	only	in	the
world	 of	 Zen;	 otherwise,	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 ...!	 These	 kinds	 of	 playful
dialogues	between	masters	are	of	immense	beauty.
What	Sekito	said	was	absolutely	right,	and	what	Yakusan	said	is	also	absolutely
right	--
different	expressions.
"HERE	IT	IS	LIKE	PLANTING	A	FLOWER	ON	A	ROCK."
You	can't	plant	a	flower	on	a	rock.	Putting	language	in	the	service	of	truth	is	just
like	planting	 a	 flower	on	 a	 rock	where	 it	 cannot	 grow.	 It	will	 simply	die.	The
moment	you	bring	truth	to	language,	it	dies	on	the	way.
But	just	not	using	the	language	is	not	enough	either.	You	have	to	use	silence.	Not
using	the	language	is	negative;	using	the	language	is	the	positive	side	--	but	both
belong	 to	 language.	 Saying	 is	 positive;	 not	 saying	 is	 negative	 --	 but	 both	 are
irrelevant.	 You	 have	 to	 indicate	 without	 using	 language,	 or	 without	 not	 using
language.	You	have	 to	 create	 a	device,	 a	gesture	 --	maybe	 just	 a	 look	 into	 the
eyes	 of	 the	 disciple,	 or	 just	 as	 Sekito	 called	 him,	 "Teacher!"	 and	 he	 turned
around	utterly	empty.	He	caught	him	in	the	right	moment.
When	he	first	came	he	was	too	full	of	knowledge.	Now	he	has	dropped	the	idea
of	being	with	Sekito,	so	he	was	caught	suddenly.	And	whenever	you	are	caught
suddenly,	your	mind	cannot	function.	The	mind	needs	time	before	it	can	figure
out	what	is	the	matter.
Just	a	 small	 space	of	no-mind	and	no-time,	and	suddenly	he	 realized	Sekito	 is
saying,
"This	fellow	who	has	turned	around,	this	fellow	is	the	answer.	And	this	turning
around	is	enough.	Don't	go	further!"
SEKITO	INDICATED	HIS	APPROVAL	OF	WHAT	YAKUSAN	SAID.
He	did	not	say	anything,	but	just	indicated	his	approval.	We	don't	know	how	he
indicated.	Maybe	he	just	took	Yakusan's	hand	in	his	hand	and	pressed	it,	or	just
looked	into	his	eyes	and	showered	his	love,	or	just	remained	silent	and	closed	his
eyes,	radiating	the	vibe	of	the	man	who	knows	his	nothingness.
It	 is	 not	 said	 how	he	 indicated,	 but	 there	 are	millions	 of	ways	 --	 according	 to
each,	a	master	uses	a	certain	way	to	indicate.	But	he	approved	what	Yakusan	was
saying.	Both	were	saying	very	significant	statements.
Zen	 is	 not	 argumentative,	 it	 is	 what	 Martin	 Buber	 would	 have	 loved,	 it	 is	 a
dialogue,	 a	 dialogue	 in	 which	 two	 persons	 are	 not	 forcing	 their	 ideas	 on	 the
other,	where	 two	persons	 together	are	 trying	 to	find	something	existential.	 It	 is
not	a	question	of	defeating	the	other	or	being	victorious.	A	real	dialogue	is	when
two	persons	are	discussing	just	to	find	the	truth.	And	truth	is	nobody's	monopoly
--	 nobody	 is	 a	 winner,	 nobody	 is	 defeated.	 Truth	 is	 victorious,	 and	 both	 are
surrendered	 to	 the	 truth.	 You	 have	 to	 remember	 in	 all	 these	 dialogues	 this
different	quality.
Socratic	 dialogues	 are	 argumentative,	 they	 are	 logical.	 Zen	 dialogues	 are
absolutely	beyond	logic,	beyond	mind.	They	are	very	mysterious,	but	far	more
profound	 than	 any	 Socratic	 dialogue.	 Even	 Martin	 Buber's	 understanding	 of
dialogue	 is	 not	 the	 ultimate	 understanding,	 because	 he	 continues	 the	 dialogue
with	these	two	words:	I	and	thou.	But	in	the	Zen	dialogue	there	is	no	I,	no	Thou.
Two	Zen	masters,	both	are	empty,	and	playing	just	like	children	playing	on	the
seabeach
--	running	around,	finding	colored	stones	and	seashells	....	Two	Zen	masters	are
just	like	children	--	shouting,	shrieking,	screaming,	for	no	reason	at	all.
You	know	Avirbhava's	shrieking	....	That	is	Zen	shrieking	--	for	no	reason	at	all.
Because	I	don't	do	anything	to	her	...!	But	I	miss	her	when	she	is	not	there	at	the
door.	She	is	almost	like	a	gong	declaring:	"The	Master	has	come!"	When	she	is
not	there,	I	miss	her.
Her	screaming	is	 just	 like	a	small	child,	so	 innocent,	without	any	purpose.	But
she	is	total	when	she	screams,	it	is	not	from	her	mind,	it	is	coming	from	deeper
spaces.	So	even	sometimes	when	I	have	entered	the	hall,	she	goes	on	screaming.
My	car	goes	away	and	then	she	drops	on	the	ground	with	immense	joy.
The	dialogue	of	Zen	has	a	difference	to	Socratic	dialogue,	or	to	Martin	Buber's
idea	of	dialogue.
Martin	Buber	could	not	drop	 the	 idea	of	 I	 and	 thou;	hence	he	 remained	 in	 the
mind,	could	not	enter	into	the	beyond.	And	the	Zen	sky	is	of	the	beyond.
Boncho	wrote:
THE	NIGHTINGALE	SINGING.
THIN	SNOWFLAKES.
Do	you	see	any	connection?	Do	you	see	any	logic?
"The	nightingale	singing"	--	that's	one	thing.
"Thin	snowflakes"	--	that	is	completely	another.
But	in	a	meditative	mind	nothing	is	separate.	All	things	are	joined	together.	The
nightingale	 singing	 and	 the	 thin	 snowflakes	 --	 both	 are	 part	 of	 one	 existence,
they	 cannot	 be	 separated.	Only	mind	 separates	 them:	 this	 is	 one	 thing;	 that	 is
another.	And	how	are	you	putting	them	together?	But	they	are	together,	and	not
only	these	two.	Then	the	bamboos	cracking,	and	the	wind	blowing	through	the
pine	trees,	and	the	clouds	coming	with	great	lightning	--	everything	is	connected.
In	 these	 two	 small	 sentences	 he	 has	 said	 that	 everything	 is	 so	 connected	with
each	other	that	you	cannot	create	separations.
THE	NIGHTINGALE	SINGING
THIN	SNOWFLAKES.
I	have	heard	that	scientists	say	that	if	--	and	someday	it	is	going	to	happen	--	the
sun	loses	all	its	energy	...	It	is	losing	every	moment;	it	is	burning	out.	One	day	it
will	 be	 simply	 a	 black	 hole,	 no	 light	will	 be	 coming	 to	 the	 earth.	 It	 takes	 ten
minutes	 for	 the	 light	 to	 come	 to	 you,	 so	 if	 sun	 dies	 ...	 and	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 die.
Everything	 that	 is	 born	 needs	 one	 day	 to	 rest.	 Everything	 gets	 tired,	 everyone
gets	tired.	Even	suns	are	going	to	die,	and	new	suns	are	being	born.
It	will	 take	 four	 billion	 years,	 they	 say,	 to	 die.	But	 in	 an	 eternity,	 four	 billion
years	are	just	like	four	seconds,	or	maybe	not	even	that	much.	But	they	say	if	the
sun	 dies,	 then	 for	 only	 ten	 minutes	 will	 you	 still	 be	 getting	 light.	 So	 for	 ten
minutes	 only,	 life	will	 exist	 after	 the	 sun	 dies.	And	 then	 there	will	 be	 no	 life
without	the	sun,	no	warmth,	no	life.
But	they	have	not	looked	at	it	from	the	other	side,	because	they	don't	know	that
there	is	another	side	also.	It	is	true	that	the	sun	gives	us	life,	but	it	is	one-sided.	If
on	 the	 earth	 life	 disappears,	 I	 say	 unto	 you	 the	 sun	will	 die	 immediately.	Not
even	ten	minutes	will	be	taken,	because	life	is	a	continuous	communication,	it	is
a	dialogue.
If	we	need	the	sun,	the	sun	needs	us!	Without	us	do	you	think	the	sun	will	have	a
sunrise?
I	am	absolutely	certain	that	without	life	on	the	earth,	the	sun	will	not	rise	again.
For	whom?	For	what?	No	 flowers,	 no	 nightingales,	 no	 people,	 no	 birds.	On	 a
dead	earth	even	the	sun	will	be	ashamed	to	arise	because	everything	is	so	deeply
connected	--	from	the	smallest	grass	blade	to	the	greatest	sun	in	the	sky.
Our	sun	is	a	very	mediocre	one,	it	is	middle	class.	There	are	suns	far	bigger	than
it,	but	even	the	smallest	grass	blade	on	the	earth	is	connected	to	the	farthest	star.
They	are	all	cousins,	parts	of	the	same	existence.
But	Martin	Buber	could	not	understand	that	between	I	and	Thou	there	can	be	a
discussion	but	not	a	dialogue.	A	dialogue	needs	no	I,	no	Thou.
When	I	read	his	book,	I	AND	THOU,	I	immediately	wrote	a	letter	to	him	--	he
was	alive
--	asking	him	to	please	try	to	understand,	"No	I,	no	Thou."	And	I	said,	"That	is
an	absolute	necessity	for	a	dialogue.	What	you	are	talking	about	is	not	dialogue,
it	is	only	discussion."
I	 received	 a	 small	 note	 from	 him	 saying,	 "I	 will	 think	 it	 over."	 I	 replied
immediately,
"Thinking	 is	not	going	 to	solve	 it.	Thinking	 is	 the	barrier.	 It	 is	 thinking	 that	 is
making	you	propose	 that	 there	 is	dialogue	between	 I	and	Thou.	 I	am	speaking
from	a	 state	 of	 no-thinking.	No	 I,	 no	Thou,	 then	 there	 is	 a	 dialogue,	 and	very
playful	dialogue."
He	did	not	answer	again,	seeing	the	situation	that	whatever	he	would	say	would
be	 part	 of	 thinking.	 He	 was	 a	 great	 thinker,	 no	 doubt,	 but	 even	 the	 greatest
thinker	 has	 nothing	 to	 say	 about	 the	 truth.	 Only	 the	 space	 which	 is	 beyond
thought	brings	you	closer	to	life	and	existence.	And	when	two	persons	are	settled
and	at	ease	with	existence,	there	is	no	I,	no	Thou,	just	a	play.	That	play	can	be
called	dialogue.	Only	Zen	masters	know	what	dialogue	is.
Question	3
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
HUBERT	BENOIT	SUGGESTS	THAT	EVEN	THOSE	PEOPLE	WHO	ARE
SUFFICIENTLY	 INTELLECTUALLY	 EVOLVED	 NOT	 TO	 BELIEVE	 IN	 A
PERSONAL	 GOD,	 STILL	 RETAIN	 THE	 CONCEPT,	 ALTHOUGH	 IN
DIFFERENT
TERMS.
HE	SAYS,	 "THEY	IMAGINE	THEIR	SATORI	AND	THEMSELVES	AFTER
THEIR
SATORI,	AND	THAT	 IS	THEIR	PERSONAL	GOD	 --	A	COERCIVE	 IDOL,
DISQUIETENING,	IMPLACABLE.	THEY	MUST	REALIZE	THEMSELVES,
THEY
MUST	 LIBERATE	 THEMSELVES.	 THEY	 ARE	 TERRIFIED	 AT	 THE
THOUGHT	OF
NOT	BEING	ABLE	TO	GET	THERE,	AND	THEY	ARE	ELATED	BY	ANY
INNER
PHENOMENON	WHICH	GIVES	THEM	HOPE."
BELOVED	MASTER,	WOULD	YOU	AGREE	THAT	THERE	IS	A
DANGER	OF	THIS	HAPPENING	TO	MEDITATORS?
Maneesha,	 Hubert	 Benoit	 has	 written	 a	 very	 scholarly	 book	 on	 Zen,	 THE
SUPREME
DOCTRINE,	but	 it	 is	only	an	 intellectual	understanding	 .	Although	he	went	 to
Japan,	 and	 he	 lived	 in	 Zen	 monasteries	 and	 watched	 the	 meditators,	 and	 he
thinks	that	he	has	known	the	inner	story	--	that	is	wrong.
Just	being	in	a	Zen	monastery	does	not	mean	you	have	become	an	insider.	You
are	 still	 a	 spectator	 --	 you	 are	 watching	 others	 meditating.	 You	 are	 not
meditating,	and	unless	you	meditate	there	are	bound	to	be	such	questions	arising
in	you.
So	 Hubert	 Benoit	 has	 written	 a	 very	 beautiful	 book	 for	 intellectuals.	 He	 is	 a
giant,	and	I	don't	think	there	is	any	other	book	from	any	Western	philosopher	or
thinker,	 which	 conveys	 something	 about	 Zen	 in	 a	 better	 way	 than	 Hubert
Benoit's	THE	SUPREME
DOCTRINE.
But	still	 it	 is	 intellectual,	highly	polished,	refined.	His	arguments	are	beautiful,
but	not	based	in	experience;	they	are	not	existential.	That's	why	he	could	say	that
even	people	in	their	satori	think	they	are.	But	if	they	think	they	are,	then	that	is
their	personal	God	--
again	it	asserts.	They	denied	the	God,	but	now	they	themselves	become	the	God.
But	this	is	an	outsider's	viewpoint.	He	does	not	know	what	satori	is.
In	satori,	or	in	samadhi	--	satori	is	the	Japanese	word	for	samadhi	--	one	is	not.
So	who	 is	 there	 to	 think	 of	 himself	 that	 he	 is	God?	Gautam	Buddha	 uses	 the
word	 anatta.	 In	 the	 Pali	 language,	 which	was	 the	 language	 Buddha	 used,	 atta
means	self,	and	anatta	means	no-self.	In	samadhi,	in	satori,	you	come	to	a	point
when	you	suddenly	remember	you	are	not
--	just	a	pure	space,	throbbing	with	life,	dancing	with	joy,	but	you	are	no	more.
You	are	dissolved	just	like	ice	melting	and	becoming	the	ocean.
He	is	concerned	because	he	does	not	know	the	real	experience	of	satori.	He	says,
"They	must	 realize	 ..."	There	 is	no	question	of	 realization.	There	 is	nobody	 to
realize,	 and	 there	 is	no	question	of	must.	 In	 the	vocabulary	of	Zen	 there	 is	no
must.
I	have	read	a	book	written	by	a	famous	American	author,	Napoleon	Hill,	YOU
MUST
RELAX.	Now	if	there	is	must,	how	can	you	relax?
Now	Hubert	Benoit	says,	"They	must	realize."	There	is	no	one	to	realize.	Whom
is	 he	 talking	 about?	 "They	 must	 realize	 themselves,	 they	 must	 liberate
themselves."	From	whom?	There	is	nobody.	This	is	liberation:	when	you	are	not.
It	 is	not	a	question	of	 liberating	yourself,	because	 if	you	 liberate	yourself,	you
will	be	there.
But	 it	 is	 the	 problem	 of	 all	 intellectuals.	 They	 can't	 look	 beyond	 the	 words,
beyond	logic	and	language.	"You	must	realize,"	and	"They	must	liberate"	--	but
liberate?	Neither	is	there	one	who	is	unliberated,	nor	is	there	one	who	is	forcing
them	to	remain	unliberated.
There	is	only	liberation!
The	meditator	comes	to	see	 that	he	 is	 liberated	from	himself.	He	is	no	more	--
that	is	his	liberation.	But	looking	from	the	outside,	even	a	man	of	such	a	refined
and	cultured	mind,	Hubert	Benoit,	misses	the	point	completely.
Once	you	are	in	deep	meditation,	you	are	not	--	this	is	liberation,	and	there	is	no
other	liberation.
It	has	been	long	enough	to	be	serious.	It	is	time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh.	Put
on	 the	 lights!	 It	 is	 good	 you	 can	 be	 serious	when	 it	 dark,	 but	 when	 the	 light
comes,	laughter	follows.
One	afternoon	in	Doctor	Feelgood's	office,	Buster	Chubbs	comes	staggering	in.
He	is	the	most	haggard-looking	patient	Doctor	Feelgood	has	seen	in	a	long	time.
"I	 cannot	 sleep,	Doc,"	moans	Buster,	 pulling	 on	 his	 thinning	 hair.	 "I	 have	 got
dogs	to	the	left	of	me,	dogs	to	the	right	of	me,	and	dogs	running	all	around	me!
They	bark	all	night	--
and	I	am	telling	you,	they	are	driving	me	crackers!"
"Don't	worry,"	says	Feelgood,	sympathetically.	"There	is	a	new	sleeping	pill	on
the	market	called	Knock	Out.	I	have	been	having	a	lot	of	success	with	it.	Try	it!"
Buster	Chubbs	calls	in	at	the	drugstore,	buys	a	box	of	pills,	and	staggers	home.
One	 week	 later,	 he	 is	 back	 in	 Feelgood's	 office.	 He	 looks	 even	 worse	 than
before.
"It	is	no	good,	Doc,"	groans	Buster.	"I	have	not	slept	all	week.	I	am	up	all	night
chasing	 those	 goddam	 dogs.	 And	 even	 when	 I	 catch	 them,	 they	 refuse	 to
swallow	the	pills!"
Young	Duncan	MacPherson	 tiptoes	 into	 the	 room	where	Hamish	MacTavish	 is
sitting	by	the	fire,	reading	his	newspaper.
"Mister	MacTavish,"	 says	 young	 Duncan,	 nervously.	 "I	 have	 come	 to	 ask	 for
your	 kind	 permission.	 I	 would	 like	 to	 ask	 you	 if	 I	 can	 marry	 your	 daughter,
Tillie."
"Well,	 well,	 lad!"	 says	 Hamish,	 looking	 up.	 "Before	 I	 say	 a	 word	 about	 the
matter,	my	boy,	have	you	seen	my	wife,	Mrs.	MacTavish?"
"Yes,	sir,"	replies	Duncan.	"But	I	still	prefer	your	daughter!"
The	 scene	 is	 outside	Moscow	 in	 the	 heavy	 snows	 of	 midwinter.	 Colossus	 G.
Magnus,	the	greatest	Hollywood	movie	director	of	all	time	--	known	as	"Big	G."
Magnus	 --	 is	 ready	 to	 complete	 his	 most	 daring	 epic,	 the	 multi-billion	 dollar
movie:	"Napoleon	Eats	Russia!"
Across	the	vast	snowy	plain,	"Big	G."	Magnus	has	constructed	four	huge	towers,
each	complete	with	camera,	lighting	and	sound	crews.
Gigantic	 snow	machines	 are	 standing	 ready	 to	whip	 up	 an	 instant	 blizzard	 of
snow.	The	crews	are	ready,	and	 the	cast	of	five	 thousand	soldiers,	with	horses,
cannons,	swords,	and	everything,	are	poised	and	ready	to	go.
The	big	snow	fans	slowly	start	to	blow,	and	suddenly,	director	Magnus,	sitting	in
tower	number	four,	shouts	out,	"Action!"
An	 incredible	 flurry	 of	 battle	 follows	 with	 fury	 and	 authenticity.	 For	 forty
minutes	 the	 Russian	 and	 French	 armies	 clash,	 recreating	 history	 amongst
booming	cannons,	and	screaming	men	and	horses.
Finally,	"Big	G."	Magnus	shouts	out	through	his	microphone,	"Cut!"
Immediately,	 all	 the	 actors,	 technicians,	 and	 crews	 burst	 into	 loud	 cheers	 and
applause.
"Big	G."	smiles	 to	himself	with	satisfaction,	and	 reaches	 for	his	 telephone.	He
dials	up	film	tower	number	one.
"You	got	everything,	Paddy?"	asks	the	director.
"Mister	Magnus,"	hiccups	Paddy,	"it	is	Thursday	--	the	power	failed!	We	did	not
get	a	single	shot!"
It	seems	Poona	also	belongs	to	Russia	--	every	Thursday	the	power	fails!
"What?"	screams	Magnus,	slamming	down	the	phone	and	dialing	tower	number
two.
"Seamus,"	shouts	the	director,	"how	was	it?"
"Mister	 Magnus,"	 replies	 Seamus,	 "please	 don't	 get	 mad,	 but	 my	 cameraman
forgot	to	put	film	in	the	camera."
"Idiots!	Turkeys!"	shouts	"Big	G."	"You	are	all	fired!"
Frantically,	Magnus	dials	up	tower	number	three.
"What	about	you,	Sean?"	he	cries,	perspiring.	"How	did	it	go?"
"Ah!	Mister	Magnus,"	replies	Sean.	"Never	was	there	such	a	scene!	It	will	make
film	history!	You	are	a	genius	...!"
"Cut	the	bullshit,	Sean!"	shouts	"Big	G."	"Did	you	get	it	all	on	film?"
"On	 film?"	 asks	 Sean.	 "You	 wanted	 me	 to	 photograph	 it?	 I	 thought	 it	 was	 a
rehearsal!"
"You	moron!"	roars	Magnus.	"You	imbecile!	You	will	never	work	for	me	again!"
And	he	slams	down	the	phone.
"Big	G."	Magnus	mops	his	 forehead	with	a	handkerchief	and	 then	 turns	 to	his
own	cameraman,	Stonehead	Niskriya.
"Jesus	Christ!"	shouts	Magnus.	"Thank	God	you	are	here,	Stonehead!	I	am	sure
everything	here	is	okay!"
"Absolutely!"	confirms	Stonehead	Niskriya.	"First	class	--	number	one!"
"Enough	film	in	the	camera?"	asks	"Big	G."
"Plenty,	Mister	Magnus,"	replies	Stonehead.
"Sound	okay?"	asks	Magnus.
"You	bet!"	replies	Stonehead.	"Perfect	sound."
"Those	new	lights	from	Berlin	working	okay?"	asks	Magnus.
"Just	great!"	enthuses	Niskriya.
"Thank	God!"	shouts	Magnus.
"Ja!"	says	Niskriya.	"I	am	ready	to	start	when	you	are!"
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
(Gibberish)
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Stop.	Close	your	eyes	...
Be	silent	...	and	feel	your	body	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	is	the	right	moment	to	look	inwards.
Gather	 your	 energy,	 your	 total	 consciousness,	 and	 rush	 towards	 the	 center	 of
your	being.
It	is	just	below	the	navel	--	two	inches	below	the	navel,	inside.	The	Japanese	call
it	the	hara.	It	is	the	center	of	life.	You	have	to	move	faster,	with	an	urgency	as	if
this	is	the	last	moment	of	your	life.	Now	or	never.
Faster	and	faster	...
Deeper	and	deeper	...
As	you	are	coming	closer	 to	 the	center,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you,	 just
like	falling	rain,	very	soft	rain.	You	can	feel	the	coolness	of	it.
A	little	closer	to	the	center,	and	a	great	peace	surrounds	you.	Your	whole	inner
being	 becomes	 full	 of	 light,	 a	 luminosity	 you	 have	 never	 known	 before,	 a
blissful	moment,	utterly	ecstatic.
It	is	the	right	time	to	step	into	the	very	source	of	your	life.	You	will	feel	drunk
with	the	divine.	You	will	find	the	original	face.	Symbolically	Gautam	Buddha's
face	has	been	accepted	in	the	East	as	everybody's	original	face.
Just	remember	one	thing:	the	buddha	has	only	one	quality,	that	of	a	witness.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body	...
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind	...
Witness	that	you	are	only	a	witness	and	nothing	else.	This	will	take	you	deeper
and	deeper	into	the	source	of	your	being.	It	will	open	doors	into	eternity.
To	make	this	witnessing	more	and	more	deep,
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Relax	 ...	 but	 remember	 you	 are	 only	 a	witness.	You	 are	 not	 the	 body,	 not	 the
mind,	 just	 a	 pure	witness.	And	 immediately,	Gautama	 the	Buddha	Auditorium
starts	becoming	an	ocean	of	consciousness.	Ten	thousand	buddhas	disappear	as
separate	beings	into	one	oceanic	consciousness.
This	moment	you	are	the	most	blessed	people	on	the	earth.
Everybody	is	concerned	with	trivia,	nobody	cares	to	look	inwards.	Everybody's
eyes	are	focused	on	objects	which	are	not	going	to	help	you,	which	are	not	going
to	be	with	you.
Death	will	take	everything	away	from	you	--	money,	power,	prestige.	Death	will
leave	only	one	thing:	that	is	witnessing.	If	you	have	it,	there	is	no	death.	If	you
don't	have	it,	there	is	only	death	and	nothing	else.
There	are	three	steps	which	can	be	remembered	at	this	silent	moment.	The	first,
the	 buddha	 follows	 you	 behind	 like	 a	 shadow.	The	 second,	 instead	 of	 buddha
being	 your	 shadow,	 you	 become	 the	 shadow	 of	 buddha.	 And	 the	 third,	 you
disappear	even	as	a	shadow,	only	the	buddha	remains.
Only	 the	witnessing	 pure	 consciousness	 remains	 --	 no	 I	 no	 Thou,	 no	God	 no
soul,	just	a	vast	nothingness.	An	immense	universe	opens	all	its	doors	to	you,	it
pours	 into	 you	 abundantly,	 splendors,	 miracles.	 Your	 life	 starts	 becoming	 a
magic,	a	grace,	a	beauty,	a	truth.
Gather	all	these	experiences	you	are	having	now.	You	have	to	bring	them	from
the	center	to	the	surface,	to	your	ordinary	day-to-day	life.
And	persuade	 the	buddha	 to	 come	along	with	you.	He	 is	your	Dhamma,	he	 is
your	 nature,	 he	 is	 your	 Tao.	 He	 is	 bound	 to	 come.	 He	 has	 been	 waiting	 and
waiting,	but	you	never	invited	him.	You	never	even	bothered	about	him.
It	has	been	long,	a	millennia	he	has	been	sitting	there	just	like	a	seed.	Allow	him
space.
Invite	 him	 so	 he	 can	 surface	 just	 like	 a	 lotus	 coming	 from	 the	 dirty	mud	 and
passing	beyond	the	waters	and	opening	its	petals	to	the	sun	and	to	the	moon	and
to	the	stars.
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Come	 back	 ...	 but	 come	 as	 a	 buddha.	 Come	with	 grace,	 silence,	 peace.	 Settle
down	 just	 for	 a	 few	moments	 to	 remind	yourself	 of	 the	golden	path	you	have
traveled,	and	the	great	silence,	peace,	ecstasy	that	you	have	experienced.	You	are
still	drunk	with	the	divine.
You	can	feel	the	buddha	just	behind	you,	his	warmth,	his	love,	his	presence.	He
is	only	a	presence,	he	is	not	a	person.
I	hope	the	first	step	will	be	followed	by	the	second,	the	second	will	be	followed
by	 the	 third,	 and	 it	will	 not	 be	 long	 before	 one	 day	 you	will	 find	 yourself	 no
more	and	only	existence	is.	That	will	be	the	most	glorious	day	of	your	life.	Not
only	will	you	celebrate,	the	whole	existence	will	celebrate	with	you.
Celebration	is	my	manifesto.
Let	it	be	your	manifesto	too.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
I	Celebrate	Myself:	God	Is	No	Where,	Life	Is	Now	Here
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Come	to	your	own	festival
18	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902185
ShortTitle:
CELEBR06
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
212
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
SHODAI,	WHO	WAS	BORN	IN	738	IN	CHINA	AND	DIED	IN	820,	WAS	A
DISCIPLE	OF	SEKITO.
SHODAI	STAYED	AT	MOUNT	NANGAKU	UNDER	SEKITO	FOR	THREE
YEARS,	THEN	WENT	TO	MOUNT	SHUKO	WHERE	HE	SAW	MA	TZU.
MA	TZU	ASKED,	"WHAT	DID	YOU	COME	HERE	FOR?"
SHODAI	SAID,	"I	CAME	HERE	FOR	BUDDHA'S	JAMUNA	DARSHAN."
MA	 TZU	 SAID,	 "BUDDHA	 HAS	 NO	 JAMUNA	 DARSHAN.	 JAMUNA
DARSHAN	IS
THE	WORLD	OF	DELUSION.	YOU	ARE	FROM	MOUNT	NANGAKU,	BUT
IT
SEEMS	THAT	YOU	HAVE	NOT	YET	KNOWN	THAT	YOU	NEED	SEKITO.
SO
YOU	SHOULD	GO	BACK."
HEARING	 THAT,	 SHODAI	 WENT	 TO	 SEKITO.	 ON	 MEETING	 THE
MASTER,	SHODAI	ASKED	SEKITO,	"WHAT	IS	BUDDHA?"
SEKITO	REPLIED,	"THERE	IS	NO	BUDDHA	NATURE	IN	YOU."
SHODAI	ASKED,	"WHAT	ABOUT	ALL	LIVING	BEINGS?"
SEKITO	REPLIED,	"THEY	HAVE	BUDDHA	NATURE."
SHODAI	ASKED,	"WHY	DON'T	I	HAVE	IT?"
SEKITO	SAID,	"BECAUSE	YOU	DON'T	ACCEPT	IT."
AT	THIS,	SHODAI	DECIDED	TO	STAY	THERE.
LATER,	 HE	 LIVED	 IN	 THE	 SHODAI-JI	 TEMPLE	 AND	 DID	 NOT	 GO
OUTDOORS
FOR	 THIRTY	 YEARS.	 WHENEVER	 A	 SEEKER	 CAME	 TO	 HIM,	 HE
WOULD	SAY,
"GO	AWAY	--	YOU	DON'T	HAVE	BUDDHA	NATURE."
Friends,
A	 famous	 psychoanalyst,	 Franz	 Strunz	 from	Munich,	 has	 been	 studying	 child
behavior	in	dreams,	and	he	has	found	that	Sigmund	Freud's	original	idea	was	not
right.
Sigmund	Freud's	original	 idea	was	 that	 the	child	 --	 every	child,	particularly	 in
the	 civilized	 and	 cultured	 world	 --	 lives	 under	 repressive	 morality,	 repressive
priesthood,	repressive	parents,	and	he	cannot	understand	exactly	why	his	natural
and	spontaneous	behavior	is	unacceptable.	He	is	not	yet	grown	up	in	the	mind	--
the	mind	will	come	slowly	--	but	he	has	been	born	as	a	natural	being.	So	he	finds
it	absolutely	difficult	to	understand	why	his	natural	behavior	is	condemned.
But	because	he	has	to	be	dependent	on	the	parents	--	and	he	is	utterly	helpless	--
he	has	to	accept	the	God	that	the	parents	believe	in,	and	he	has	to	accept	all	the
commandments	 in	 which	 the	 parents	 believe.	 And	 they	 drive	 the	 child	 to	 the
church,	or	to	whatever	religious	organization	they	belong.	This	is	the	beginning
of	programming	the	child.
Sigmund	 Freud's	 original	 thesis	 was	 that	 under	 these	 circumstances	 the	 child
finds	only	freedom	in	his	dreams.	The	parents	are	no	longer	there,	 the	priest	 is
no	 longer	 there,	 God	 is	 no	 longer	 there	 ...	 no	 morality,	 no	 condemnation,	 no
repression,	no	inhibition.	In	his	dreams	he	lives	a	very	natural	and	very	pleasant
life.	That	becomes	a	substitute	for	him.
And	I	am	absolutely	in	agreement	with	Sigmund	Freud.
The	child	does	not	know	yet	what	is	dream	and	what	is	real,	it	takes	a	little	time.
That	 is	why	you	cannot	 remember	 if	you	go	backwards.	Up	 to	 the	age	of	 four
you	may	be	able	to	remember	a	few	things;	beyond	that	is	a	complete	blank,	but
things	were	happening.
From	your	birth,	up	to	the	age	of	four,	things	were	happening	but	you	don't	have
any	memory	of	them	because	you	did	not	have	yet	a	mind.
The	mind	is	a	social	product.	It	takes	at	least	four	years	to	program	the	child	to
be	ready	to	accept	anything	that	is	told	to	him,	because	he	knows	if	he	denies	it,
he	will	suffer	punishment	--	not	only	here	but	in	hellfire.
But	 in	 his	 dreams,	 up	 to	 the	 age	 of	 four,	 he	 enjoys	 absolute	 freedom.	 Hence
Sigmund	Freud	said	that	children's	dreams	are	very	pleasant,	very	beautiful.	In
fact,	the	child	can	cope	with	reality	only	because	of	his	dreams.	The	dreams	are
compensatory.
This	 man,	 Franz	 Strunz,	 has	 been	 surveying	 hundreds	 of	 children	 and	 their
dreams,	and	his	conclusion	is	that	Sigmund	Freud	was	wrong.	So	first	I	have	to
give	you	his	statement.
SIGMUND	 FREUD'S	 VIEWS	 ON	 CHILD	 DREAMS	 HAVE	 BEEN
CHALLENGED
BY	MUNICH	PSYCHOLOGIST,	FRANZ	STRUNZ.
SIGMUND	FREUD	CLAIMED	THAT	CHILDREN'S	DREAMS	REVEALED
THE
PLEASURE-ORIENTED	NATURE	OF	NOCTURNAL	FIGMENTS	OF	AN
IMAGINATION,	WHICH	WAS	NOT	HAMPERED	BY	THE	SUPPRESSION
AND
REPRESSION	 OF	 THE	 adult	 EMOTIONAL	 MAKE-UP,	 AND	 WHICH
AIMED	AT
MAKING	SECRET	WISHES	COME	TRUE.
Obviously,	dreams	are	very	private.	Nobody	can	enter	your	dreams,	and	nobody
can	know	what	you	are	dreaming.	The	child	has	absolute	freedom,	but	he	is	not
free	when	he	is	awake	--	naturally	he	compensates.	Whatever	has	been	denied	in
his	waking	 life,	 he	 fulfills	 those	wishes	 in	 his	 dream.	And	 because	 he	 cannot
make	 the	 distinction	 that	 the	 dream	 is	 just	 a	 dream	 and	 the	 reality	 is	 a	 totally
different	matter,	he	is	completely	happy.
He	 can	 tolerate	 this	 society	 and	 this	 repressive	 culture,	 and	 these	 unnatural
demands	 made	 by	 religions,	 their	 God,	 their	 priests,	 just	 because	 he	 has	 a
freedom	at	least	when	he	is	asleep.
This	has	been	challenged	by	this	Munich	psychologist:
STRUNZ'S	 RESEARCH	 SHOWED	 THAT	 CHILDREN'S	 NOCTURNAL
FANTASIES
ARE	 MAINLY	 ACCOMPANIED	 BY	 STIFLING	 FEELINGS	 OF
UNEASINESS	AND
UPSET,	 AND	 THAT	 ALL	 KINDS	 OF	 THREAT	 ANIMALS,	 THIEVES,
ROBBERS,	 MURDERERS,	 CATASTROPHIES,	 DEATH	 AND
FRIGHTENING	STRANGERS
GREATLY	DISTURB	SLEEPING	CHILDREN.
MOST	 CHILDREN,	 HE	 SAID,	 ARE	 PARALYZED	 WITH	 FEAR	 BY	 THE
DANGERS
THEY	DREAM	ABOUT.
I	 absolutely	 disagree	 with	 this	 Munich	 psychologist.	 In	 a	 hurry	 to	 criticize
Sigmund	Freud,	he	has	forgotten	that	Sigmund	Freud	was	surveying	the	dreams
of	totally	different	children.	A	great	 thing	has	happened	in	between	that	he	has
not	taken	note	of:	that	is	television.
It	 is	 television	 that	 has	 changed	 children's	 dreams	 --	 what	 God	 could	 not	 do,
what	 the	 priest	 could	 not	 do,	 what	 the	 parents	 could	 not	 do.	 They	 used
alphabetical	 language,	 logic,	 which	 the	 child	 was	 not	 yet	 capable	 of
understanding.	The	child	lives	in	a	primitive	way.	Pictures	he	can	understand;	his
language	is	pictorial.	His	dreams	are	very	vivid,	very	colorful	and	very	alive.
Television	 has	 created	 a	 great	 impact	 on	 children,	 on	 their	 behavior,	 on	 their
dreams,	because	dreams	and	television	look	alike.	Now	the	child	cannot	tell	the
difference	between	television	and	dreams.	And	on	the	television	he	sees	all	these
things	 that	 this	Munich	psychologist	 is	 trying	 to	use	as	a	criticism	of	Sigmund
Freud's	fundamental	hypothesis:	"	...	STIFLING	FEELINGS	OF	UNEASINESS
AND	UPSET,	AND	ALL
KINDS	OF	THREAT	ANIMALS,	THIEVES,	ROBBERS,	MURDERERS,
CATASTROPHIES,	DEATH	AND	FRIGHTENING	STRANGERS	GREATLY
DISTURB	SLEEPING	CHILDREN."
All	 this	 is	 the	 gift	 of	 television.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Sigmund	 Freud's
fundamental	hypothesis;	it	is	still	right.
But	 this	 is	 how	 even	 your	 psychologists,	 world-famous	 people,	 behave
unconsciously.	 He	 has	 completely	 forgotten	 that	 a	 new	 thing	 has	 happened
between	him	and	Sigmund	Freud
--	and	that	is	television.	And	it	has	changed	not	only	the	child's	dreams,	but	his
behavior	too.
He	sees	all	kinds	of	robberies,	rapes,	murders,	thieves	...	all	kinds	of	dangerous
people	on	the	television.	Those	are	pictorial.	The	sermons	of	the	priest	were	not
pictorial,	they	were	linguistic.	His	parents'	teachings	were	linguistic,	and	he	was
not	yet	able	 to	understand	 language	and	 logic.	But	pictures	he	understands.	So
television	 has	 given	 all	 kinds	 of	 threatening,	 sensational,	 dangerous	 ideas	 to
children's	minds.
It	is	television	that	should	have	been	noted	by	the	psychologist.	But	rather	than
focusing	on	television,	he	has	immediately	gone	to	criticize	Sigmund	Freud.
I	am	taking	it	as	an	example	to	give	you	a	sense	that	even	your	psychoanalysts,
psychiatrists,	 psychologists,	 are	 as	 unconscious	 as	 anybody	 else.	 There	 is	 no
difference.
Not	only	have	the	dreams	changed,	but	even	the	behavior	of	children.
In	America,	just	a	few	days	ago	one	child	went	into	school	with	his	father's	gun
and	 killed	 four	 children	 at	 random.	And	 it	was	 not	 that	 they	were	 enemies	 or
anything	 --	 just	 random.	He	fired	 just	because	he	had	been	watching	continual
killing,	 murder	 on	 the	 television	 ...	 a	 great	 excitement.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 an
exceptional	case.
Young	boys	have	been	found	trying	to	rape	small	girls.	The	idea	is	being	given
by	the	television.	Children	of	the	age	of	seven	and	eight	are	taking	drugs.	They
have	 left	 hippies	 far	 behind.	 At	 least	 to	 be	 a	 hippie	 you	 used	 to	 be	 eighteen,
nineteen,	twenty	...
Hippiedom	exists	only	from	twenty	to	thirty.	After	thirty	the	hippie	disappears	--
in	his	place	comes	 the	yuppie.	By	the	 time	he	 is	 thirty,	he	starts	understanding
that	 this	way	of	 life	 is	 not	 going	 to	 last	 long.	Now	his	 parents	 are	 refusing	 to
support	him,	and	the	hippie	has	to	change	into	a	square	world.	He	has	to	go	back
to	 the	 same	 society,	 clean	 shaved,	well	 dressed,	 looking	very	 professional	 and
efficient.	And	yuppies	have	proved	 that	 they	are	capable	of	doing	 things.	Now
they	 have	 their	 homes,	 their	 cars,	 their	wives,	 their	 children.	And	 nobody	 can
imagine	that	these	people	used	to	walk	around	the	streets	dirty,	unclean.
Uncleanliness	 had	 become	 their	 philosophy.	 It	 was	 a	 reaction,	 because	 their
parents	were	telling	them,	"Cleanliness	is	just	next	to	God."	And	they	have	heard
the	news	that	God	is	dead.	Now	who	is	next	to	God?	Cleanliness?	The	reaction
was	 against	 the	 parents	 and	 their	 constant	 effort	 to	 repress	 their	 nature.	 They
started	moving	 to	 the	 one	 extreme,	 the	 other	 extreme.	 They	 started	 to	 have	 a
philosophy	 of	 uncleanliness,	 dirtiness.	 But	 then	 they	 became	 dropouts,	 and
society	would	not	accept	them;	they	became	unfit.
But	they	could	manage	only	up	to	the	age	of	thirty.	By	that	time	their	parents	are
fed	up	--
they	 have	 been	 trying	 hard,	 but	 they	were	 not	 listening	 at	 all.	 They	were	 not
going	 to	 the	 church,	 they	 were	 moving	 towards	 Kabul,	 Kulu	 Manali,
Kathmandu,	Goa	 ...	 and	 ending	 up	 in	 Poona!	This	was	 their	 route.	You	 know
what	route	has	brought	you	here	--	Poona	was	the	dead	end!
But	 the	 new	 children	 are	 taking	 drugs	 because	 they	 are	watching	 all	 kinds	 of
drug	 stories	 on	 television,	 and	 certainly	 they	 become	 interested.	 Children	 are
very	 curious	 to	 explore	 anything	 that	 they	 see	 on	 television.	 Seven-year-old
children	are	taking	drugs,	hard	drugs,	and	it	is	becoming	a	widespread	danger	in
America.
Their	 dreams	 are	 full	 of	 dangers,	 murders,	 suicide	 --	 that's	 what	 they	 are
watching	for	almost	seven-and-half	hours	on	average	per	day!	You	cannot	expect
...	If	you	are	wasting	one	third	of	your	life	on	television,	then	it	is	going	to	have
a	 deep	 impact.	 Children	 understand	 the	 language	 of	 pictures,	 and	 television
brings	all	these	colorful	sensational	stories.
Their	dreams	have	changed,	their	behavior	has	changed.
I	would	like	this	Munich	psychologist	to	survey	a	place	where	television	has	not
entered,	 and	 I	 am	 absolutely	 certain	 he	will	 have	 to	 support	 Sigmund	 Freud's
hypothesis.	And	if	he	really	wants	to	go	deeper	into	his	search,	he	should	go	to
the	 aboriginals,	where	not	 even	 television	has	 entered.	Even	 the	priest	 has	not
reached,	even	God	is	unheard	of.
People	are	living	naturally:	no	repressive,	no	inhibiting	morality.	If	Franz	Strunz
goes	to	those	places	he	will	be	surprised.
First,	 he	 should	 explore	 countries	where	 television	 has	 not	 yet	 come,	 because
these	will	be	the	children	whom	Sigmund	Freud	has	studied.
I	 know	 children	 in	 India	 ...	 almost	 ninety	 percent,	 or	 even	 more	 than	 ninety
percent	 of	 India	 has	 no	 idea	 of	 television	 or	movies.	 Small	 villages	 ...	 there	 I
have	come	across	people	who	have	not	even	seen	a	railway	train.	Electricity	has
not	reached	to	many	places,	so	there	is	no	question.	And	television	has	just	been
introduced	to	India,	so	only	big	cities	--	like	Bombay,	New	Delhi,	Calcutta	and
Madras	may	have	television,	but	not	the	major	part	of	the	country.	He	can	study
the	children	there.
I	have	studied	children	for	my	own	purposes,	and	I	can	give	a	guarantee	that	if
television	 and	 movies	 have	 not	 reached,	 you	 will	 find	 Sigmund	 Freud's
hypothesis	absolutely	correct.	And	if	you	go	to	the	aboriginals	...
Particularly	 one	 tribe	 of	 the	 aboriginals	 in	 Burma	 has	 been	 studied	 by
psychologists	and	they	could	not	believe	it:	that	tribe	had	never	been	in	any	war.
They	don't	fight	with	each	other	--	not	even	in	their	dreams.	They	don't	have	so
many	dreams	as	you	have.	There	are	hundreds	of	people	in	that	tribe	who	have
never	dreamed.	When	you	talk	about	dreams,	they	just	look	at	you	--	"What	are
you	talking	about?	When	we	are	asleep	we	are	asleep.
What	do	you	mean	by	dream?"	In	their	language	there	is	no	word	for	dream.
And	if	once	in	a	while	a	child	dreams,	or	a	man	dreams	anything	--	for	example,
having	a	fight	with	some	neighbor,	or	having	a	love	affair	with	some	woman	--
first	thing,	in	the	early	morning,	he	has	to	confess	the	dream	to	his	parents.	And
then	all	the	elders	of	the	village	gather	together	to	figure	out	who	the	person	is
that	he	has	murdered	in	his	dream,	or	was	fighting	with	him	in	his	dream,	or	who
the	woman	is	that	he	has	fallen	in	love	with	in	his	dream.	They	figure	it	out.	He
gives	 the	 complete	 detailed	 description,	 very	 vivid	 and	 very	 real.	 So	 they	 can
figure	out	who	the	person	is	--	it	is	a	small	tribe.
Then	the	elders	tell	the	person	who	has	been	dreaming,	"You	should	take	sweets
and	 flowers	 and	 gifts	 to	 that	woman,	 let	 her	 know	 that	 you	 have	misbehaved
with	her	in	the	dream,	and	you	have	come	to	be	forgiven.	Go	with	an	apology	to
the	woman	or	 to	 the	man	with	whom	you	have	been	violent.	And	unless	 they
forgive	you,	don't	return,	sit	there."	And	obviously,	the	person	had	nothing	to	do
with	 it	 --	you	have	not	murdered	him,	you	 just	dreamed	 --	 so	obviously,	he	 is
willing	to	forgive	you.
This	has	been	their	culture	for	thousands	of	years	--	that	even	the	dream	has	to
be	taken	into	account.	And	the	ultimate	result	is	that	the	people	ordinarily	don't
dream.	Only	once	in	a	while	does	somebody	dream,	and	that	happens	only	when
he	 has	 repressed	 something	 natural.	 For	 example,	 he	 has	 been	 looking	 at	 a
woman	with	lust,	but	could	not	express	it	in	reality;	hence	the	dream	comes	as	a
substitute	for	wish	fulfillment.
That	 society	 knows	 a	 far	 better	 psychoanalysis	 than	 our	 so-called	 civilized
world.	 They	 have	 been	 psychoanalyzing	 for	 thousands	 of	 years,	 and	 their
method	is	far	more	effective.
They	have	 relieved	people's	 sleep	completely	of	dreams.	They	know	authentic
sleep,	what	Patanjali	calls	dreamless	sleep.
He	divides	your	states	of	mind	into	four:	 the	so-called	waking	state,	 the	dream
state,	 deeper	 then	 is	 dreamless	 sleep,	 and	 deeper	 than	 that	 is	 samadhi,	 a	 real
awakening.	The	first	is	called	so-called	waking;	the	last	is	called	real	awakening,
which	makes	you	a	buddha.
But	 these	 aboriginal	 tribes	 don't	 have	 the	 dream	 state	 at	 all.	 From	 the	waking
state	 they	 simply	 move	 into	 dreamless	 sleep.	 And	 they	 are	 innocent,	 utterly
graceful.	Not	 a	 single	war	 in	 their	whole	 history,	 not	 a	 single	murder	 in	 their
whole	 history,	 not	 a	 single	 suicide	 in	 their	 whole	 history!	 They	 are	 just	 like
flowers	--	innocent,	natural.
And	 you	 call	 yourself	 civilized,	 and	 you	 call	 them	 uncivilized	 ...	 primitive	 ...
pagans	...?
So	if	this	psychologist	is	really	interested,	first	he	should	study	people	who	don't
know	 television,	 who	 don't	 know	 movies,	 and	 he	 will	 find	 the	 hypothesis	 of
Sigmund	Freud	absolutely	correct.
Then	he	should	study	those	aboriginals	who	have	lived	so	naturally,	without	any
repressive	church,	without	any	Christianity,	without	any	God,	without	any	priest.
Just	 like	animals,	 just	 like	birds,	 just	 like	trees,	part	of	 this	 immense	existence,
naturally	flowing,	they	don't	have	dreams	at	all.	Once	in	a	while	somebody	may
have	a	dream,	but	only	once	in	a	while.	And	then	the	elders	of	the	society	gather
together	to	decide	what	has	to	be	done.
First,	 one	 has	 to	 figure	 out	 who	 really	 was	 the	 person	 he	 dreamed	 about.	 He
gives	 the	whole	details,	 and	 then	goes	with	 an	apology	and	with	 some	gifts	 --
sweets,	fruits,	flowers;	they	are	poor	people.	He	just	offers	these	gifts	and	asks
for	 their	 forgiveness.	 In	 his	 dream	 he	 has	 been	 nasty	 to	 them,	 angry	 to	 them,
violent	 to	 them,	 lustful	 to	 them.	Now	it	 is	absolutely	obligatory	 that	he	should
ask	for	their	forgiveness:	"Unless	they	forgive	you,	just	sit	down	in	front	of	their
houses	..."
This	 is	 a	 more	 authentic	 psychoanalysis	 --	 not	 lying	 on	 the	 couch	 of	 a
psychiatrist	or	psychoanalyst	and	just	talking	about	your	dreams.	It	goes	on	and
on,	 because	 every	 day	 you	 are	 repressing	 so	 much	 that	 it	 bubbles	 up	 in	 the
dreams.	No	psychoanalysis	has	ever	been	complete.	There	is	not	a	single	man	in
the	whole	world	whose	psychoanalysis	is	complete.
It	cannot	be	complete,	because	every	day	you	are	creating	fresh	material	for	new
dreams.
You	go	on	getting	analyzed,	and	you	go	on	getting	repressed	by	the	priest	in	the
name	of	God.
God	 and	 the	 priest	 together	 have	 conspired	 against	 human	 consciousness	 so
deeply	 and	 so	 violently	 that	 they	 have	 disturbed	 your	waking	 state,	 they	 have
disturbed	 your	 dream	 state.	 And	 because	 these	 states	 are	 so	 disturbed,	 you
cannot	go	beyond.	This	disturbance	keeps	you	engaged	and	occupied.
People	who	are	moving	directly	from	the	waking	state	to	the	dreamless	sleep,	are
very	easily	capable	of	slipping	down	to	the	fourth	state.	That's	why	the	ancient
Zen	 masters	 continuously	 say	 you	 have	 just	 to	 relax,	 you	 don't	 have	 to	 do
anything.
It	is	not	a	question	of	doing,	it	is	a	question	of	non-doing.	Just	relax	and	rest,	so
that	you	can	reach	to	the	fourth	stage	where	you	are	suddenly	awake	for	the	first
time.	Then	you	know	that	your	so-called	wakefulness	was	not	authentic,	it	was	a
very	small,	thin	layer,	very	fragmentary,	not	of	much	use.
You	will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 in	 these	 aboriginal	 societies,	 there	 are	 no
buddhas.
There	 is	 no	 need.	 Those	 people	 are	 naturally	 entering	 finally	 into	 the	 fourth
stage.	As	they	become	more	and	more	experienced,	and	become	more	and	more
peaceful,	 centered,	 they	 start	 moving	 into	 the	 fourth	 state	 without	 any	 effort,
without	any	teaching,	without	any	scripture.
If	 you	understand	me,	 a	 natural	 life	will	 end	up	 in	 enlightenment	without	 any
effort.	You	will	suddenly	find	you	are	enlightened.	That's	why	no	recognition	is
given	 to	 the	 enlightened	 person.	 That	 is	 a	 natural	 phenomenon,	 just	 as	 every
rosebush	 if	watered	well,	 if	allowed	 to	have	some	sunlight,	 if	given	good	soil,
will	come	to	flowering.	That	is	not	a	miracle.
Every	 man	 comes	 to	 flowering,	 he	 becomes	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha	 without	 any
effort.	 And	 because	 every	 natural	 human	 being	 is	 bound	 to	 become	 an
enlightened	 person,	 no	 recognition	 is	 taken	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 just	 as	 childhood	 is
followed	by	youth,	youth	is	followed	by	middle	age,	middle	age	is	followed	by
old	 age	 and	 you	 know	 that	 old	 age	 is	 followed	 by	 death.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 natural
sequence.
Buddhahood	 should	be	 a	natural	 sequence.	 It	 is	 not,	 because	of	your	God	and
your	priest	and	your	scriptures;	they	are	preventing	you.	Freedom	from	all	these
is	absolutely	necessary.
And	 strangely	 enough,	 every	 government	 knows	 that	 television	 is	 harming
people	immensely,	ruining	their	physical	health,	ruining	their	mental	sanity.	Still,
because	 all	 the	 great	 corporations	 which	 support	 the	 politicians	 for	 their
elections	own	these	televisions
...	 The	 churches	 have	 their	 own	 television	 stations,	 radio	 stations,	 magazines,
newspapers
--	in	different	names	so	you	will	not	know	it.
One	of	the	British	publishers,	Sheldon,	has	published	nine	of	my	books.	I	had	no
idea	 that	 it	 was	 just	 a	 front,	 and	 behind	 it	 was	 the	 church.	 As	 the	 church
authorities	became	aware	 that	my	books	were	being	published,	 then	 I	 came	 to
know.	 The	 man	 who	 was	 the	 manager	 of	 Sheldon	 Press	 must	 have	 been
sympathetic	 to	 my	 thoughts,	 my	 approach	 to	 things.	 So	 without	 asking	 the
church,	he	continued	publishing.	Nine	books	he	published.
And	 then	he	 informed	me,	 "The	church	has	 found	 that	 I	 have	been	publishing
your	books,	so	they	have	put	an	absolute	ban	on	it.	So	please	forgive	me,	I	will
not	be	able	to	publish	any	more.	And	they	have	ordered	that	these	books	should
be	given	for	recycling	--
whatever	has	been	published	--	so	they	can	be	destroyed."
But	the	man	must	have	been	in	great	love	with	me.	He	did	not	give	them	to	the
recycling	factory.	He	sold	them	to	a	secondhand	bookstore,	and	he	informed	one
of	my	sannyasins,
"You	can	get	them	from	the	secondhand	bookstore."	So	we	got	all	the	books	at	a
throwaway	price,	but	 it	was	 the	Sheldon	Press	manager	who	managed	it.	Then
we	became	aware	that	Sheldon	was	a	fake	name.	You	would	not	think	that	it	had
anything	to	do	with	the	church.
I	have	been	informed	from	Germany	that	all	the	great	newspapers	are	owned	by
the	 church,	 but	 you	 would	 not	 know.	 Television	 stations	 are	 owned	 by	 the
church,	 radio	 stations	 are	 owned	 by	 the	 church.	 Satellites	 are	 owned	 by	 the
church	...	and	big	corporations.
People	 have	 not	 looked	 into	 the	 big	 corporations.	 They	 are	 international	 like
Coca-Cola.
Only	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 was	 not	 aware	 of	 Coca-Cola,	 but	 now	 Comrade
Gorbachev	 has	 brought	 Coca-Cola	 into	 the	 Soviet	 Union.	 Now	 the	 only
international	thing	is	Coca-Cola.
Wherever	 you	 go	 you	 find	 billboards	 declaring,	 "Things	 go	 better	with	Coca-
Cola."
There	 are	 ten	 rising	 corporations	 and	 one	 survey	 says	 that	 in	 the	 coming	 ten
years,	there	will	only	be	these	ten	corporations	in	the	whole	world,	because	they
are	 purchasing	 all	 the	 small	 corporations.	 The	 small	 corporations	 cannot
compete.	These	ten	corporations	will	have	all	the	wealth	of	the	world	in	different
names	so	you	will	not	even	suspect	a	new	kind	of	imperialism,	and	a	very	subtle
kind	that	you	will	not	be	able	to	figure	out	who	is	behind	it.
These	corporations	own	almost	all	the	television	stations,	and	their	interest	is	not
in	 people's	 psychology	 or	 their	 disturbance.	 Their	 whole	 interest	 is	 that	 fifty
percent	 of	 television	 time	 is	 devoted	 to	 advertisements	 --	 that	 is	 their	 income.
But	 that	 income	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 millions	 of	 people	 are	 watching	 their
programs,	otherwise	nobody	is	going	to	advertise.
To	attract	millions	of	people	to	the	programs	they	have	to	make	it	as	sensational
as	possible.	It	has	to	be	a	triangle	story:	two	women	and	one	man,	or	two	men
and	one	woman.	And	then	murder,	and	suicide,	and	mental	sickness,	and	insanity
and	all	kinds	of	sensations	have	to	be	brought	every	day.	It	is	the	same	story	that
goes	on	and	on.
And	they	don't	allow	you	to	see	the	whole	story.	They	give	you	a	fragment,	and
then	comes	the	advertisement.	When	you	are	getting	hot,	excited,	then	suddenly
comes	the	advertisement.	In	that	hot	state,	vulnerable,	you	immediately	swallow
the	advertisement.
You	 don't	 care	 whether	 it	 is	 healthy	 or	 whether	 you	 need	 it	 or	 not,	 it	 simply
makes	an	imprint	on	your	mind.
And	again	the	story	comes,	so	you	don't	even	have	time	to	think	over	what	has
got	 into	 your	 mind;	 they	 don't	 give	 you	 the	 chance	 to	 think.	 Again	 the	 story
starts,	and	you	forget	all	about	 the	advertisement.	A	fragment	again,	and	again
the	same	advertisement	 is	 repeated.	 It	goes	on	from	six	o'clock	 in	 the	morning
till	twelve	o'clock	in	the	night.	And	people	are	just	being	imprinted	by	all	kinds
of	nonsense	and	stupidity.
Television	has	become	one	of	the	great	dangers	to	humanity.	It	could	have	been	a
great	 bliss,	 a	 great	 blessing.	 It	 could	 have	 been	 tremendously	 useful	 as
education.
According	to	me,	all	television	stations	should	belong	to	the	universities,	to	the
colleges,	to	the	schools.	And	they	should	have	programs	which	educate	people.
No	advertisements
--	 that	 is	not	education,	 that	 is	mis-education,	 that	 is	exploitation.	They	should
teach	 people	 history,	 geography	 ...	 Small	 children	 who	 cannot	 get	 it	 through
language,	will	be	easily	interested	in	learning	history,	in	learning	geography,	in
learning	other	kinds	of	subjects.	Sciences,	 literature,	 fiction,	poetry,	painting	 ...
all	kinds	of	arts	can	be	brought	to	children	of	all	grades.
So	there	must	be	television	stations	for	small	children,	and	then	there	should	be
some	 for	 the	 college	 graduates.	 And	 there	 should	 be	 television	 to	 the	 highest
grade,	 postgraduate	 and	 research	 people.	 Professors	 have	 to	 be	 continuously
made	aware	of	all	new	kinds	of	discoveries,	otherwise	they	are	lagging	behind,
almost	 twenty	years	behind.	They	studied	 twenty	years	ago	when	 they	were	 in
their	postgraduate	classes,	but	that	knowledge	has	become	out	of	date.
To	 update	 professors	 will	 be	 very	 easy	 with	 television.	 To	 bring	 students
tremendous	interest	in	all	kinds	of	subjects,	in	whatever	they	are	interested	...	If
they	are	 interested	 in	music,	 they	can	be	 taught	music,	musical	 instruments.	 If
they	are	interested	in	painting,	they	can	be	taught	painting,	sculpture.	They	can
be	taught	meditation.	All	kinds	of	possibilities	are	there,	once	television	is	taken
out	of	the	hands	of	the	exploiters,	and	out	of	the	hands	of	the	religious	preachers.
And	then	these	children	will	prove	Sigmund	Freud's	hypothesis	absolutely.
This	man	has	taken	a	revengeful	attitude.	It	always	happens.	Because	Sigmund
Freud	is	the	founder	of	psychology,	every	psychologist	feels	to	take	revenge,	just
as	every	child	feels	to	take	revenge	with	the	parents.
This	research	simply	shows	a	very	deep	hidden	secret	of	this	psychologist	--	that
he	wants	to	take	revenge	with	the	father	figure,	Sigmund	Freud.	Otherwise,	this
was	so	simple	to	understand	that	technology	has	brought	so	many	things	to	the
children	which	were	not	 available	 in	Sigmund	Freud's	 time.	The	new	children
were	not	available	for	him	to	study,	nor	was	he	aware	of	the	aboriginal	children.
He	was	aware	only	of	Christian	and	Jewish	children	--	both	repressive	religions.
Christianity	 is	 a	 child	 of	 Judaism.	 So	 is	Mohammedanism.	All	 three	 religions
born	 outside	 India	 are	 branches	 of	 Judaism,	 repressive.	 The	God	 is	 angry,	 the
God	 is	 jealous,	 the	God	 is	going	 to	punish	you	with	eternal	hellfire.	But	 these
words	do	not	get	 into	 the	minds	of	 the	 children.	They	 start	 after	 four	years	of
age,	but	television	can	be	watched	before	four	years	of	age.
Small	 children	 are	 watching	 television	 because	 they	 know	 the	 language	 of
pictures	 and	 color.	 Their	 world	 consists	 of	 pictures.	 That	 is	 why	 in	 children's
books	 first	 you	 have	 to	 print	 a	 big	 picture.	 If	 you	want	 to	 teach	 them	what	 a
mango	 is	 you	 have	 to	 put	 a	 big	 picture	 of	 a	 mango.	 Saliva	 comes	 first;	 then
comes	the	word	`mango'.	Looking	at	the	picture,	the	child	starts	feeling	to	eat	it,
and	 the	 picture	 becomes	 associated	 by	 and	 by	with	 the	word	 `mango'.	As	 the
child	grows,	the	mango	picture	becomes	smaller	and	smaller	and	smaller.	In	the
university,	 pictures	 completely	 disappear	 from	 the	 books;	 words	 become	 very
small,	 longer,	 complicated,	and	sentences	become	complex.	Now	 the	child	has
moved	 from	 pictorial	 language	 to	 an	 alphabetical	 language	 --	 to	 words	 from
pictures.
Now	words	don't	have	color,	and	words	don't	have	that	kind	of	impact	which	a
child	can	understand.
So	what	this	psychologist	has	to	understand	--	I	am	going	to	send	him	the	whole
discourse	--	is	that	his	hypothesis	is	absolutely	wrong	and	biased,	and	it	is	just	a
revenge	against	Sigmund	Freud.	Otherwise,	a	conscious	researcher	would	have
looked	at	what	changes	have	happened	between	the	time	of	Sigmund	Freud	and
our	time.
Are	 the	 children	 the	 same	 that	 you	 are	 surveying?	 They	 are	 not	 the	 same
children.	Then	you	cannot	condemn	Sigmund	Freud's	hypothesis	because	he	was
studying	a	different	kind	of	children.	Those	children	are	disappearing	from	the
West	completely,	so	this	hypothesis	will	be	accepted.	That's	why	I	have	taken	it
for	your	consideration	that	this	hypothesis	is	wrong.	This	hypothesis	is	bound	to
be	accepted,	because	you	can	study	 the	children	and	 that	 study	will	 support	 it.
But	the	reason	is	television,	not	the	children!
Remove	 the	 television	 and	 you	 will	 find	 children	 exactly	 as	 Sigmund	 Freud
found	them.
But	he	also	missed	the	aboriginal	children	who	don't	have	any	dreams	at	all.
He	could	not	have	conceived	that	there	are	people	who	don't	have	any	dreams,
because	 the	 Christian-Judaic	 religion	 is	 so	 repressive.	 People	 who	 have	 been
brought	up	 in	 that	culture	cannot	conceive	 that	 there	are	still	aboriginal	people
around	 the	 world,	 hidden	 in	 deep	 forests,	 who	 are	 absolutely	 natural	 beings.
Those	people	have	never	heard	that	there	is	anything	to	be	repressed.
Just	in	the	middle	of	India	there	is	a	state,	Bastar.	It	used	to	be	an	independent
state	under	British	rule,	and	 the	king	of	Bastar	was	my	friend.	And	he	became
my	friend	by	a	strange	coincidence	....
We	 both	 were	 traveling	 in	 the	 same	 train	 compartment,	 and	 we	 both	 looked
alike.	He	had	a	beard	exactly	the	same	size	as	I	had	at	that	time,	and	he	used	to
wear	 the	 same	 kind	 of	 long	 robe	with	 a	 lunghi	 wrapped	 around.	 So	we	were
sitting	 in	 the	 same	 compartment	 looking	 at	 each	 other,	 thinking,	 "This	 is
strange."	And	he	was	also	 looking	at	me	and	watching,	 thinking,	 "What	 is	 the
matter?"
Finally,	he	said	to	me,	"We	both	look	so	alike.	From	where	are	you	coming?"	I
told	him.
He	said,	"Strange	...	and	where	are	you	going?"
So	we	were	 going	 to	 the	 same	 place,	 Gwalior.	 And	we	were	 going	 to	 be	 the
guests	 at	 the	 same	palace	 of	 the	Gwalior	maharani,	 the	 queen	of	Gwalior.	We
were	both	going	to	participate	in	an	annual	conference	she	used	to	call	a	World
Conference	of	All	Religions.
He	was	going	to	represent	the	aboriginal	idea.	They	are	pagans,	they	don't	have
any	organized	religion	or	dogma;	they	don't	have	any	holy	scripture,	they	don't
have	 any	 priest.	 And	 because	 he	 was	 an	 educated	 person,	 he	 was	 going	 to
represent	pagans.
I	was	invited	by	some	misunderstanding.	The	maharani	must	have	read	some	of
my	 books	 and	 thought	 that	 I	 was	 a	 religious	 person.	 On	 the	 first	 day	 of	 the
meeting,	 she	 became	 so	 worried,	 because	 at	 least	 fifty	 thousand	 people	 were
there	in	the	palace	grounds.
Gwalior's	palace	is	a	very	big	palace,	and	has	acres	and	acres	of	greenery	around
it,	and	small	bungalows,	and	it	is	all	in	a	walled	garden.	Almost	half	of	the	city
belongs	to	the	palace.	And	just	behind	the	palace	is	a	huge	mountain	where	they
run	a	school	for	all	the	princes	of	the	country	and	even	outside	the	country.	That
school	belongs	to	the	palace.	It	was	created	just	for	Gwalior's	sons	and	daughters
in	the	beginning.	Then	it	became	a	royal	school	for	all	the	royal	states	of	India.
It	is	a	beautiful	palace,	and	it	has	a	huge	ground	where	fifty	thousand	people	can
sit	 every	year.	But	when	 I	 spoke,	 she	was	completely	 shattered.	She	could	not
sleep.	At	twelve	o'clock	in	the	night	she	knocked	on	my	door.	I	had	left	her	at	ten
o'clock	after	the	meeting.	I	could	not	think	who	would	be	knocking	on	my	door,
so	I	opened	the	door,	and	it	was	the	queen	herself.
She	said,	"I	cannot	sleep.	You	have	shattered	my	whole	mind.	And	now	I	cannot
allow	you	to	speak	tomorrow."	The	conference	was	going	to	continue	for	seven
days,	I	spoke	only	one	time.	And	she	said,	"My	son	wants	to	see	you,	but	I	have
prohibited	him."	She	said,	"Whatever	you	said	feels	to	be	true,	but	it	goes	against
all	our	beliefs,	all	our	religious	feelings."
I	said,	"Do	you	think	about	truth,	or	do	you	think	about	lies	and	consolations?"
She	said,	"I	can	understand,	but	my	young	son	who	is	going	to	be	the	head	of	the
state	is	too	young,	and	he	will	be	impressed	by	you	immediately."	She	requested
me,	"Just	for	my	sake	--	even	if	he	comes,	don't	allow	him	in."
So	I	said,	"If	I	am	not	going	to	speak,	then	I	don't	have	to	stay	here.	You	have
asked	me	for	seven	lectures,	and	just	one	lecture	and	you	are	finished.	Let	me	do
my	job.	Those	fifty	thousand	people	will	ask	for	me."
She	said,	"I	know	it,	because	you	were	the	only	one	they	seemed	to	be	interested
in,	and	there	was	absolute	silence.	I	have	never	seen	such	silence	in	the	crowd.
The	priests	go	on	speaking,	who	cares?	They	are	telling	the	same	thing	again	and
again,	year	after	year,	the	same	dogmas.	For	the	first	time,"	the	queen	said	to	me,
"I	understood	what	it	means	to	have	pindrop	silence.	So	they	will	be	asking,	but
it	is	difficult,	because	all	the	other	participants	are	absolutely	against	you."
Hindus	 and	 Mohammedans	 and	 Christians	 --	 they	 were	 all	 there,	 so	 they
approached	 the	maharani	after	 the	 lecture,	 "If	 this	man	 remains	here	 for	 seven
days,	then	we	are	leaving.
We	 cannot	 sit	 on	 the	 same	 stage	 together,	 because	 he	 is	 destroying	 every
religion."
I	 said,	 "They	 are	 so	many,	 they	 can	 defend.	 I	 am	 alone"	 --	 there	were	 almost
twelve	 people	 on	 the	 stage	 with	 me	 --	 "They	 have	 enough	 time	 ...	 there	 are
twelve,	they	can	defend."
The	maharani	 said,	 "I	 know	 they	 cannot.	 They	 don't	 have	 the	 guts,	 they	 don't
have	 the	 argument,	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 idea	 how	 to	 defend.	 And	 you	 have
destroyed	 their	 smallest	 things,	 which	 I	 could	 not	 have	 conceived	 can	 be
destroyed!"
Just	 before	me,	 one	of	 the	 shankaracharyas	was	 speaking,	 and	he	 told	 a	 small
story	which	I	love	to	tell	myself,	but	when	anybody	else	tells	it,	that	is	a	different
matter.
It	is	an	ancient	story	he	was	telling:
The	story	is	that	ten	blind	men	were	crossing	a	flooded	stream.	Being	frightened,
they	were	holding	each	other's	hands,	 and	 somehow	 they	managed.	 It	was	not
deep,	but	the	current	was	forceful.	They	reached	to	the	other	side,	and	somebody
amongst	them	said,
"We	should	count,	because	we	don't	know	if	the	river	has	taken	somebody	away,
or	we	are	all	together	still."
So	 they	 started	 counting.	 Everybody	 counted,	 and	 it	 was	 always	 ending	 with
nine	because	he	was	leaving	himself	out.	He	would	count	the	others:	one,	two,
three,	four,	five,	six,	seven,	eight,	nine	--	one	man	was	missing!	They	all	tried,
but	it	always	stopped	on	the	ninth!
One	man,	sitting	by	the	side	of	the	road,	working	in	his	field,	was	watching	all
this	nonsense	that	was	going	on.	And	all	the	ten	blind	men	had	started	crying	and
weeping,	 because	 one	 of	 them,	 one	 friend	 of	 theirs	 had	 been	 taken	 by	 the
current.
So	finally,	the	man	came	up	and	he	said,	"What	is	the	matter?"
They	said,	"We	were	 ten,	and	one	person	has	gone	with	 the	river.	Now	we	are
only	nine."
The	 man	 immediately	 looked	 --	 they	 were	 ten.	 So	 he	 said,	 "I	 have	 been
watching.	Now	I	will	count.	Stand	up!	I	will	go	on	slapping.	First	I	will	slap	the
first	 person	 one	 slap,	 and	 I	 will	 say	 one!	 Then	 I	 will	 slap	 the	 second	 person
twice,	and	I	will	say	two,	and	the	third	person	three	times,	and	I	will	say	three	...
and	this	way	I	will	count."
They	said,	"Any	way	...	just	bring	our	tenth	man."
So	he	counted	--	and	they	were	ten.	And	they	were	rejoicing,	although	they	had
been	beaten	well.
It	is	an	ancient	story.	And	the	shankaracharya	was	telling	it	to	show	that	this	is
the	way	we	are:	forgetting	ourselves	and	looking	around	the	whole	world;	trying
to	find	peace,	 trying	to	find	bliss,	 trying	to	find	God,	and	not	 looking	inwards,
not	counting	ourselves.
After	him	I	was	to	speak,	and	for	the	first	time	I	had	to	criticize	this	story,	which
I	have	told	you.	But	my	context	was	totally	different!
So	 I	 said	 to	 the	 shankaracharya,	 "Your	 story	 is	 absolutely	 stupid,	 because	you
have	first	to	explain	how	they	came	to	know	they	were	ten.	Before	they	started
moving	into	the	river,	how	did	they	manage	to	count?	And	if	they	knew	how	to
count,	how	did	they	forget	it	just	by	crossing	the	river?"
Now	he	was	at	a	loss.
I	said,	"There	are	only	two	possibilities:	one	is	that	somebody	else	has	counted
them	just	as	somebody	else	counted	them	afterwards."
He	said,	"Perhaps."
I	said,	"That's	the	trouble	with	borrowed	knowledge.	Because	somebody	else	has
counted	 them,	 that	created	 the	 trouble.	 It	was	not	 their	own	understanding	 that
they	were	ten.	It	was	somebody	else's	understanding	that	they	were	ten,	and	they
were	 carrying	borrowed	knowledge.	That	borrowed	knowledge	 is	not	going	 to
help.	When	 they	 themselves	 counted,	 the	borrowed	knowledge	did	not	 help	 at
all.	 Again	 they	 needed	 somebody	 else	 to	 count	 them,	 again	 the	 borrowed
knowledge.
"I	 am	 against	 borrowed	 knowledge	 because	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help	 you.	 It	 is
going	 to	 create	 more	 misery,	 more	 anguish,	 more	 anxiety.	What	 happened	 to
those	blind	people?"
And	I	asked	the	shankaracharya,	"Whatever	you	know,	is	it	your	knowledge	or
just	borrowed?	And	be	honest,	because	 I	have	ways	 to	check	out	whether	 it	 is
your	knowledge	or	borrowed."
He	 said,	 "I	 don't	 know	myself;	 I	 am	 a	 scholar.	 I	 know	 the	Vedas,	 I	 know	 the
Upanishads,	but	I	don't	know	myself."
I	said,	"Then	you	are	a	blind	man.	Sooner	or	later,	passing	any	current	you	will
be	in	difficulty.	You	will	always	remain	dependent	on	others,	you	will	never	be
free.	And	without	freedom	there	is	no	spirituality."
For	the	first	time	I	suddenly	found	the	criticism,	I	had	never	thought	about	it.
But	the	queen	said	to	me,	"This	is	dangerous.	You	finished	that	shankaracharya,
and	 everybody	 was	 laughing	 and	 enjoying.	 Now	 that	 shankaracharya	 is	 very
angry.	He	is	sitting	in	my	palace."
I	was	staying	in	the	guest	house.	Everybody	had	a	guest	house.	They	had	at	least
twenty	 guest	 houses	 in	 the	 thick	 garden	 ...	 huge	 and	 ancient	 trees.	 The
shankaracharya	 was	 sitting	 in	 the	 main	 palace	 where	 the	 queen	 and	 the	 king
lived.	And	he	said,	"I	am	not	going	to	leave	unless	you	make	the	arrangement.
Either	we	all	will	leave	--	twelve	persons	..."
I	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	I	will	speak	for	three	hours	continuously.	Those	twelve
persons	 are	 not	 needed.	 I	 will	 manage	 the	 fifty	 thousand	 people.	 In	 fact,
tomorrow	you	will	have	difficulty	because	more	people	will	be	coming.	These
fifty	thousand	people	are	going	to	tell	at	least	one	hundred	thousand	people.	So
don't	 be	 worried,	 there	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a	 double	 gathering.	 You	 have	 to	 make
arrangements.	Let	these	twelve	people	go,	I	will	manage	the	seven	days."
She	said,	"But	I	cannot	do	that.	I	am	an	orthodox	Hindu."
I	said,	"That	does	not	matter.	I	will	finish	all	orthodoxy	in	seven	days."
She	 said	 "That	 I	 can	 understand.	 You	 will	 finish,	 but	 I	 cannot	 tell	 all	 those
religious	leaders	to	go	away.	And	they	are	twelve,	and	you	are	alone."
I	said,	"That	does	not	matter.	I	am	enough	for	those	twelve.	If	they	don't	want	to
sit	on	the	same	stage,	make	another	stage	for	 them,	and	I	will	 just	sit	alone	on
my	stage.	I	will	take	care	of	each	of	the	twelve."
She	said,	"You	are	going	to	create	trouble,	and	I	want	no	trouble."
I	said,	"Then	if	you	want	to	keep	those	people,	you	don't	understand.	You	will	be
in	trouble."
At	that	moment	the	Bastar	maharajah	also	came	in.	He	was	staying	in	the	next
room	in	the	guest	house	with	me.	And	he	said	to	me,	"You	have	done	a	great	job,
and	if	you	have	to	leave,	I	am	coming	with	you."
That's	how	we	became	friends.	And	he	invited	me	to	his	state.	So	from	Gwalior	I
went	directly	to	Bastar.	It	is	far	away	from	Gwalior.	And	he	introduced	me	to	the
people	 of	 Bastar.	 They	 are	 aboriginals,	 and	 they	 live	 almost	 naked.	 They	 put
only	 a	 small	 piece	 of	 cloth	 around	 them	when	 they	 come	 to	 the	main	 capital,
Jagdalpur	--	otherwise,	in	the	forest,	in	the	mountains	they	live	naked.
You	can	ask	a	woman,	even	by	 touching	her	breast,	"What	 is	 this?"	--	and	she
will	not	feel	embarrassed,	she	will	not	feel	offended.	She	will	say,	"This	is	just	to
give	 milk	 to	 my	 child,"	 with	 no	 idea	 that	 "you	 are	 being	 offensive,	 you	 are
touching	my	 breast."	 She	 is	 not	 going	 to	 scream,	 and	 she	 is	 not	 going	 to	 any
police	station;	in	fact,	there	is	no	police	station	there.
The	 people	 are	 so	 innocent,	 that	 rarely	 does	 it	 happen	 that	 somebody	 kills
someone.	 It	 has	happened	perhaps	 twice	 in	 this	maharajah's	 lifetime.	Then	 the
person	who	has	killed	comes	to	the	capital	himself,	because	only	the	capital	has
the	police	station	and	the	court.
He	goes	to	the	police	station	and	informs	them:	"I	have	killed	a	man	and	I	need
to	 be	 punished."	Otherwise	 no	 one	would	 ever	 have	 known	 that	 he	 had	 killed
anybody.	Nobody	goes	into	those	deep	forests.	They	live	in	caves;	nobody	goes
there.	And	they	have	such	beautiful	caves.
And	they	are	such	beautiful	people.	You	will	not	find	anybody	fat,	you	will	not
find	 anybody	 thin	 --	 they	 all	 look	 alike.	 They	 live	 long,	 and	 they	 live	 very
naturally.	Even	about	sex	they	are	very	natural,	perhaps	the	only	natural	people
left	in	India.
And	exactly	what	they	do,	has	to	be	done	all	over	the	world	if	you	want	people
not	to	be	perverted.	Behind	all	kinds	of	mental	sicknesses	is	sexual	perversion.
In	Bastar	I	found	for	the	first	time,	people	totally	natural.
After	a	girl	and	a	boy	come	of	age	--	that	is	thirteen	and	fourteen	...	They	have	in
their	villages,	in	the	middle	of	the	village,	a	small	hall	just	made	of	bamboos,	as
their	huts	are	made.	The	moment	a	girl	starts	having	periods,	she	has	to	stay	in
the	central	hall.	By	the	time	a	boy	is	fourteen,	sexually	potent,	he	has	to	live	...
All	 the	girls	 and	 the	boys	who	have	become	 sexually	mature,	 they	 start	 living
together,	sleeping	together,	with	one	condition	--	and	that	is	a	beautiful	condition
--	that	no	boy	should	sleep	with	a	girl	for	more	than	three	days.	So	you	have	to
become	acquainted	with	every	girl	of	the	village,	and	every	girl	has	to	become
acquainted	with	every	boy	of	the	village.
Before	 you	 decide	 to	 marry	 someone,	 you	 must	 know	 every	 woman	 of	 the
village,	so	there	is	no	question	arising	afterwards	that	you	start	feeling	lustful	for
some	woman.	You	 have	 lived	with	 all	 the	women	 of	 your	 age,	 and	 it	 is	 your
choice	after	the	experiment	with	all	the	woman.
And	 there	 is	no	 jealousy	at	 all,	 because	 from	 the	very	beginning	everybody	 is
living	with	every	girl.	Every	boy	has	the	chance	to	be	acquainted	with	every	girl
of	the	village,	and	every	girl	has	the	chance	to	be	acquainted	with	every	boy	of
the	village.
So	there	is	no	question	of	any	jealousy,	there	is	no	competitive	spirit	at	all.	It	is
just	 an	 experiment,	 an	 opportunity	 for	 every	 child	 to	 know	 sex	with	 different
people,	 and	 then	 find	 out	 who	 suits	 you,	 and	 with	 whom	 you	 were	 the	 most
happy,	 with	 whom	 you	 settle	 harmoniously,	 with	 whom	 you	 felt	 your	 heart.
Perhaps	this	is	the	only	scientific	way	to	find	a	soul	mate.
But	these	people	are	called	uncivilized,	and	missionaries	are	doing	a	great	job	of
civilizing	them:	opening	schools,	hospitals.	They	don't	need	hospitals.	They	are
such	healthy	people,	and	these	missionaries	bring	all	kinds	of	diseases	to	them.
They	have	never	heard	about	gonorrhea,	they	have	never	heard	about	all	kinds	of
perverted	diseases.
The	missionaries	bring	the	diseases,	and	then	the	hospital.
The	 missionaries	 bring	 the	 idea	 to	 them	 that	 you	 are	 poor.	 They	 have	 never
thought	 about	 it	 --	 they	 are	 all	 equal,	 equally	 poor.	 There	 is	 no	 question	 of
comparison,	and	they	are	living	perfectly	well,	and	healthy,	on	one	meal	a	day.
They	are	more	healthy	than	anybody	else	in	the	world.
Just	recently	scientists	have	been	experimenting	on	rats,	and	they	were	puzzled.
They	 kept	 two	 categories	 of	 rats,	 the	 same	 kind.	 To	 one	 category	 they	 were
giving	as	much	food	as	they	wanted	--	American	rats.	And	to	the	other	category,
the	Bastar	rats,	 they	were	giving	food	only	one	time.	And	they	were	surprised.
The	rats	who	were	given	whatever	they	wanted,	lived	to	be	only	half	of	the	age
of	the	rats	who	were	fed	only	one	time.	They	were	double	the	age	--	 twice	the
American	fellows!
So	 Bastar	 people	 live	 longer,	 although	 they	 don't	 know	 how	 long	 they	 have
lived,	because	they	cannot	count.	They	live	up	to	one	hundred	years	very	easily,
one	hundred	and	twenty	very	easily.	If	you	search	deeper	in	the	forests,	perhaps
you	 can	 find	 a	 person	who	 has	 lived	 one	 hundred	 and	 fifty	 years.	 They	 don't
know	it	--	you	have	to	figure	it	out.
And	they	don't	look	that	old	either.
Even	the	oldest	person	goes	on	working.	Life	is	hard,	but	it	 is	beautiful.	Every
night	--
particularly	when	it	is	fullmoon	nights	--	they	dance	to	abandon.	The	whole	day
they	have	been	working	hard,	and	in	the	night	they	dance.	All	the	women,	all	the
men	together
...	 no	 question	 that	 you	have	 to	 dance	with	 your	wife.	 People	 go	 on	 changing
partners.	 It	 is	 a	 social	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 possessiveness	 that
you	 should	 dance	with	 your	 own	wife.	 And	 if	 she	 is	 dancing	with	 somebody
else,	then	you	are	looking	jealous,	you	are	looking	murderous.
I	have	watched	their	dances.	They	look	so	beautiful.	There	is	no	question	of	any
lust,	because	they	are	fulfilled,	sexually	fulfilled,	physically	fulfilled.
They	 don't	 have	 dreams.	 I	 have	 asked	many.	 I	 have	 asked	 the	maharajah.	 He
said,	"They	don't	have	dreams,	but	I	have	because	I	am	an	educated	person.	They
destroyed	me.	I	was	born	in	these	hills,	and	I	would	have	loved	to	remain	just	as
uneducated,	as	uncultured	as	these	people.	Their	joy	is	infectious,	their	laughter
is	infectious.	But	they	don't	have	any	dreams."
There	is	no	need	for	dreams.	A	dream	is	a	need	created	by	a	repressive	morality,
by	a	repressive	God,	by	a	repressive	priesthood.	These	are	the	people	who	have
created	 dreams.	 And	 then	 another	 priesthood	 has	 come	 into	 being,	 the
psychoanalyst.	 They	 exploit	 your	 dreaming.	 One	 priesthood	 has	 created	 the
dreams,	another	priesthood	...	and	both	were	Jews.
Jesus	 was	 a	 Jew,	 and	 Sigmund	 Freud	 was	 a	 Jew.	 One	 Jew	 has	 created
Christianity	 --	 the	most	 repressive	 religion	 in	 the	world,	and	 the	other	Jew	has
created	psychoanalysis	to	analyze	your	dreams.	And	both	are	having	great	fun.
Both	are	the	most	highly	paid	people	...	psychoanalysts	and	the	missionaries,	and
the	priests	and	the	bishops,	and	the	cardinals	and	the	pope	....
Psychoanalysis	will	remain	incomplete	unless	it	comes	to	understand	the	people
who	don't	have	dreams.	Then	you	will	have	to	change	the	whole	idea.	It	 is	not
that	by	analyzing	people's	dreams	you	are	going	to	give	them	mental	health.	The
question	is	how	to	help	them	move	from	dreamless	sleep	to	relax	into	the	fourth
stage	 called	 turiya,	 samadhi,	 satori,	where	 one	 becomes	 utterly	 awakened,	 the
state	of	a	Gautam	Buddha.
And	a	good	news	before	I	take	the	sutras.
A	famous	New	York	sculptress,	Martine	Vaugel	has	just	now	taken	sannyas	from
the	 New	 York	 Center	 of	 Neo-Sannyas	 International.	 She	 is	 a	 world-famous
sculptress.	 She	 must	 have	 been	 listening	 to	 my	 tapes,	 and	 must	 have	 been
hearing	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh's	name	every	day.	So,	without	seeing	him	--	she
has	not	yet	come	to	Poona,	and	she	has	not	seen	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh	...	but
this	 is	 the	 sensitivity	of	an	artist,	 a	creativity.	She	has	made	a	 statue	of	Sardar
Gurudayal	Singh,	and	she	has	sent	me	a	picture	of	the	statue	to	see	whether	she
is	right?	And	I	was	amazed.	She	is	absolutely	right.	The	picture	looks	almost	like
Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh.
(THE	 MASTER	 HOLDS	 UP	 THE	 PHOTOGRAPH	 OF	 SARDAR
GURUDAYAL
SINGH	 FOR	 ALL	 TO	 SEE.	 IN	 RESPONSE,	 EVERYONE	 CHEERS	 AND
CLAPS.)	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh	...	take	your	picture!
(THE	MASTER,	ENJOYING	THE	SITUATION	IMMENSELY,	HOLDS	OUT
THE
PHOTOGRAPH	FOR	SARDAR	TO	TAKE.)
Question	1
The	first	question:
SO-CALLED	"MODERN	CHRISTIANS"	PARTICULARLY	YOUNG
PROTESTANTS,	TALK	ABOUT	GOD	AS	IF	HE	IS	NOT	A	PERSON	--	LIKE
"GOD
IS	EVERYWHERE,	 IN	EVERY	BEING,	 IN	EVERY	TREE,	 IN	NATURE"	 --
NOT	A	PERSON	HIDDEN	IN	THE	CLOUDS.
DO	 THEY	 GET	 THE	 POINT	 OR	 IS	 IT	 JUST	 OUT	 OF	 CUNNINGNESS,
BECAUSE
THEY	SEE	THAT	THE	OLD-MAN	GOD	HAS	NO	GROUNDS	AT	ALL	AND
NO
FUTURE?
It	 is	out	of	 absolute	cunningness,	because	 they	go	on	 saying	 that	God	 is	not	 a
person.
Then	why	do	they	go	to	the	church?	Then	why	do	they	continue	to	pray	to	God
as	 a	 person?	 If	 God	 is	 not	 a	 person,	 prayer	 should	 be	 stopped,	 going	 to	 the
church	 should	 be	 stopped.	 If	 God	 is	 not	 a	 person,	 then	 Jesus	 cannot	 be	 his
begotten	 son.	 Then	 you	 have	 to	 drop	 the	 idea	 that	 Jesus	 is	 related	 to	 God
especially.
If	God	is	really	everywhere,	then	he	is	no	more	in	Jesus	Christ	than	in	you.	Then
why	should	you	worship?	Then	what	 is	 the	function	of	 the	priest	 if	 there	 is	no
God	as	a	person?	The	priest	has	to	disappear.
That's	why	I	say	these	people	are	simply	repeating	the	approach	of	Zen	--	which
has	become	known	to	the	West	now	--	that	there	is	no	God.	But	they	cannot	say
it	exactly,
"There	 is	 no	 God"	 --	 it	 hurts	 their	 programmed	 minds.	 So	 they	 are	 finding
excuses	in	such	a	way	that	it	appears	God	is,	but	it	is	not	a	person.
But	 they	 don't	 understand	 the	 implications.	They	 say,	 "God	 is	 everywhere."	 If
God	is	everywhere,	then	no	place	can	be	called	sacred.	If	God	is	everywhere,	in
every	being,	then	you	cannot	be	violent	to	the	animals,	you	cannot	hunt	animals,
you	cannot	kill	animals	 for	your	 food.	You	are	killing	God.	 If	God	 is	 in	every
being,	 then	 everybody	 has	 to	 be	 vegetarian.	 Nobody	 can	 be	 non-vegetarian;
otherwise	you	are	killing	God	and	eating	God.
In	 every	 tree	 in	 nature	 ...	 and	 you	 are	 cutting	 trees,	 you	 are	 destroying	 the
ecology	of	nature.
Just	when	India	became	independent,	forty	years	ago,	there	were	nearabout	one
hundred	 and	 fifty	million	 hectares	 of	 trees	 in	 the	 country.	Now	 there	 are	 only
sixty	million	 hectares.	Over	 half	 of	 the	 trees	 in	 India	 have	 been	 cut.	And	 the
Christians	are	saying	now	that	God	is	everywhere,	even	in	trees	...?	Hindus	have
been	 saying	 it	 for	 centuries	 that	 God	 is	 everywhere.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of
òmnipresent'.	And	if	God	is	everywhere,	then	why	do	you	go	to	the	church,	why
do	you	go	to	the	temple,	why	do	you	go	to	the	mosque?	And	why	do	you	listen
to	the	sermons?	Why	do	you	carry	a	Holy	Bible	or	a	holy	Koran?
I	 don't	 think	 a	 non-personal	 God	 can	 write	 the	 Vedas	 and	 the	 Bible	 and	 the
Koran	--	or	a	non-personal	God	can	send	messengers	and	prophets	and	messiahs.
Then	if	you	are	honest	all	your	holy	scriptures	have	to	be	burned.	And	all	your
churches	have	to	be	demolished,	if	you	are	honest.	And	all	your	priesthood	has
to	be	told:	"You	have	exploited	enough;	now	start	working.	Unless	you	work	you
will	not	have	anything	to	eat."
If	you	don't	do	 that	 then	 it	 is	mere	cunningness,	because	you	cannot	prove	 the
personal	God	 anymore.	You	 are	 trying	 to	 create	 an	 impersonal	God,	 but	 your
whole	religion	continues	to	be	the	same.	It	does	not	change.
It	 is	 such	a	great	change	 from	a	personal	God	 to	an	 impersonal	God	 that	your
whole	 religion	 will	 go	 through	 a	 revolution	 --	 no	 church,	 no	 priest,	 no	 holy
scripture.	Then	the	whole	existence	becomes	the	holy	scripture.
And	 if	 God	 is	 everywhere	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 pray.	 The	 closest	 is	 your	 own
being,	so	first	find	God	in	your	own	being.
But	 still	 these	Christians	 are	not	 interested	 in	meditation.	These	Christians	 are
still	praying,	to	an	impersonal	God.
Prayer	 is	 absolutely	 absurd.	 And	 if	 these	 Christians	 do	 understand	 the
implications,	then	Christianity	disappears	and	the	pagan	appears	again.	That	was
the	only	problem.
Christianity	killed	millions	of	pagans	who	believed	in	the	whole	of	nature,	in	the
whole	of	existence	as	divine;	who	worshipped	trees,	who	worshipped	the	moon,
who	worshipped	the	sun,	who	worshipped	rivers,	mountains,	anything	--	because
everything	was	sacred.	Christianity	destroyed	them,	and	converted	those	pagans
into	Christians	--
from	an	impersonal	God	to	a	personal	God,	from	natural	people	into	repressive
maniacs!
And	now	if	you	again	disperse	the	personal	God	into	the	whole	of	existence,	you
will	have	to	disperse	the	whole	of	Christianity.	You	will	have	to	disperse	all	the
religions,	and	the	whole	earth	will	be	full	of	pagans,	Zorbas.
That	is	my	effort	--	to	create	the	Zorba	as	a	solid	foundation	for	a	buddha.
Zorba	is	the	earth.
Buddha	is	the	sky.
And	when	 these	 two	meet	 there	 is	communion.	When	 these	 two	meet,	 there	 is
synchronicity.	When	 these	 two	meet	 there	 is	 revolution.	You	are	no	 longer	 the
same,	nor	 is	 the	world	anymore	 the	same.	Everything	changes	 in	a	 totally	new
perspective.	 New	 doors	 open	 --	 and	 a	 new	 human	 being,	 and	 a	 new,	 fresh
existence	without	any	priests	to	poison	your	nature.
No,	 these	 people,	 the	 so-called	 new	 Christian	 theologians	 are	 just	 deceiving
themselves	and	other	Christians,	because	their	whole	structure	remains	the	same.
Just	God	...	because	they	cannot	support	by	logic	or	evidence,	and	they	can	see
the	point	of	Zen,	at	least	intellectually.	Not	to	feel	inferior,	they	are	talking	about
the	impersonal	God.
That's	what	Eckhart	was	doing,	that	was	what	Saint	Bernard	was	doing	--	trying
to	 make	 God	 impersonal.	 But	 they	 don't	 understand	 that	 it	 means	 destroying
your	whole	structure	of	religion.	If	 they	truly	understand	the	phenomenon	they
will	destroy	all	Bibles,	all	churches,	popes,	the	Vatican	...	all	should	be	finished,
there	 is	no	need.	God	 is	everywhere	 --	 there	 is	no	need	 for	any	priest	 to	stand
between	you	and	God.	He	is	surrounding	you,	he	is	in	the	air,	and	he	is	in	your
blood	and	in	your	bones.	He	is	in	your	very	marrow	and	he	is	in	your	inner	space
--	as	he	is	everywhere.
But	 to	 know	 that	 he	 is	 everywhere	 is	 not	 a	 logical	 conclusion.	To	 know	he	 is
everywhere	 has	 to	 be	 an	 existential	 experience.	 First	 you	 have	 to	 go	 into
yourself.	Unless	you	know	it	in	yourself,	you	cannot	say	it	is	in	the	trees	and	it	is
in	 every	 animal	 and	 it	 is	 in	 every	 living	 being.	You	 are	 a	 living	 being	 --	 first
enter	into	yourself.
These	Christians	are	not	talking	about	meditation	at	all.	So	all	the	talk	is	simply
to	deceive	themselves	and	others,	as	if	they	have	risen	to	the	same	height	of	Zen.
Just	by	 talking	you	cannot	do	 that.	You	have	 to	give	evidence,	proof,	by	your
every	gesture,	by	your	every	action,	by	your	every	word.
But	 I	watch,	 I	 have	 been	 aware	 of	 these	 new	Christian	 theologians,	 and	 their
behavior	 is	 the	 same	 as	 any	 Christian.	 That	 behavior	 proves	 that	 their
understanding	 is	 just	 to	 camouflage	 people's	minds,	 to	 create	 confusion.	 They
are	protecting	the	old	God	with	a	new	name	--	"impersonal	God"	--	because	their
whole	religion	remains	the	same.
How	can	it	remain	the	same	if	God	is	impersonal?	That	is	the	equivalent	to	there
being	no	God	only	godliness,	a	quality	pervading	the	whole	cosmos.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	....
al-Hillaj	Mansoor,	who	became	finally	a	great	enlightened	being,	was	murdered
by	 the	 Mohammedans.	 He	 was	 a	 poor	 man	 and	 he	 wanted	 to	 go	 to	 Kaaba
because	it	is	the	duty	of	every	Mohammedan,	at	least	one	time	in	your	life,	that
you	should	go	for	haj,	for	a	holy	pilgrimage	to	Kaaba.	If	you	don't	go	at	least	one
time	you	are	not	a	Mohammedan.
So	even	the	poorest	Mohammedans	sell	their	houses,	their	land,	and	go	at	least
one	time	to	Kaaba.
Mansoor	was	very	poor.	His	father	and	mother	died	when	he	was	very	young,	so
he	was	almost	an	orphan,	a	beggar.	The	neighbors	helped	him	up	 to	his	youth
and	then	he	started
--	 because	 there	was	 no	 education	 for	 him	 ....	 People	were	 going	 ...	 there	 is	 a
special	month	 every	 year	when	Mohammedans	 from	 all	 over	 the	world	 go	 to
Kaaba.	Many	people	from	the	village	were	going,	and	he	started	telling	them,	"I
would	like	to	come."
But	they	said,	"You	don't	have	any	money."	So	he	collected	money	from	every
house.
But	by	the	time	he	had	collected	money,	the	other	pilgrims	had	already	left.
So	alone,	he	started	his	 journey.	Just	outside	the	village,	underneath	a	tree	was
sitting	a	man	who	was	going	to	become	his	master	--	Junnaid.	And	he	said	to	the
young	man,
"Where	are	you	going?"
al-Hillaj	 said,	 "I	 am	 going	 to	 Kaaba.	 All	 the	 pilgrims	 from	 my	 village	 have
already	left."
Junnaid	said,	"Come	here!"	The	voice	of	Junnaid	was	such	...	his	eyes	were	such
that	al-Hillaj	could	not	say	no.	He	said,	"Give	me	the	money!	There	is	no	need	to
go	anywhere.	I	am	the	Kaaba	and	I	have	come	to	your	village	just	for	you.	You
can	make	seven	rounds	of	me,	 just	as	 the	other	pilgrims	will	be	making	seven
rounds	of	Kaaba.	That	is	a	stone	--
I	am	a	living	human	being."
al-Hillaj	was	 so	magnetically	 drawn	 to	 the	man	 that	 he	 gave	 all	 his	money	 to
him,	and	made	seven	rounds.
And	 Junnaid	 said,	 "Now	 you	 can	 go	 to	 your	 village.	 And	 I	 will	 be	 leaving
tomorrow	morning,	so	if	you	want	to	come	with	me,	you	can	come."
He	went	to	the	village.	The	villagers	asked,	"What	happened?	You	had	gone	to
Kaaba"	--
it	used	to	take	three	months	walking	to	Kaaba,	and	three	months	to	come	back	--
"and	you	are	back	just	within	half	an	hour!	Where	is	the	money?"
al-Hillaj	said,	"What	to	do?	I	met	Kaaba	just	outside	the	village.	He	was	sitting
under	a	tree."
They	said,	"You	idiot!	You	have	given	the	money	to	THAT	Kaaba?"
He	said,	"He	asked,	and	he	told	me	to	make	seven	rounds	around	him.	So	I	made
seven	rounds	and	I	am	feeling	so	fulfilled,	and	so	dignified	that	Kaaba	himself
has	come."
They	said,	"You	come	with	us.	We	want	to	see	who	this	man	is	who	has	cheated
you.
You	are	a	simpleton!	How	can	Kaaba	come	here,	and	for	you?"
He	said,	"You	can	come.	Tomorrow	morning	I	am	leaving	with	Kaaba."
He	said,	"You	come	with	us.	First	let	us	see	who	this	fellow	is	--	he	is	a	man?"
al-Hillaj	 said,	 "Of	 course.	 And	 a	 very	 magical	 man.	 I	 think	 it	 is	 Kaaba
personified."
They	said,	"You	keep	quiet,	you	just	follow	us."	The	whole	village	gathered,	and
they	could	see.	The	man	had	a	tremendous	light	around	him	--	it	was	night	now	-
-	and	they	could	feel	as	they	started	coming	closer	to	him,	that	he	was	in	deep
silence	with	closed	eyes.	The	 light	was	radiating,	and	al-Hillaj	was	not	wrong,
there	was	an	immense	attraction,	the	man	had	charisma.
They	all	went	around	him	and	Junnaid	opened	his	eyes	and	said,	"First	put	the
money!	 I	 have	 traveled	 to	 your	 village	 and	 you	 are	 doing	 your	 haj	 without
paying	the	money.	Bring	the	money	first!"
al-Hillaj	said,	"Now	you	know	that	he	is	not	an	ordinary	Kaaba,	he	speaks	too!"
And	the	whole	village,	whatsoever	they	could	bring,	brought	and	gave	to	him.
Junnaid	allowed	them	to	make	a	round,	and	the	day	after,	he	left	with	al-Hillaj.
The	 whole	 village	 had	 come	 to	 send	 them	 off.	 They	 thought,	 "This	 al-Hillaj,
although	he	was	an	orphan,	proved	to	be	more	blessed	than	we	are.	He	has	found
a	master."
Only	the	enlightened	man	can	say	such	a	thing,	that	there	is	no	God,	because	he
knows	God	is	a	quality,	it	is	the	fragrance;	you	cannot	catch	hold	of	it,	but	it	is
everywhere.
Wherever	 life	 is,	wherever	 laughter	 is,	wherever	 love	 is,	 that	quality	pervades,
penetrates	your	heart.	And	in	meditation	it	goes	to	the	deepest	part	of	your	being.
Only	then	can	you	say	there	is	no	God.	That	does	not	mean	you	are	atheist,	that
simply	 means	 you	 are	 denying	 a	 personal	 God,	 a	 creator	 God,	 and	 you	 are
accepting	existence	itself	as	divine.
But	then	there	is	no	church	and	then	there	is	no	priest,	and	then	there	is	no	holy
scripture.
If	 these	 neo-theologians	 are	 really	 sincere,	 honest	 human	 beings,	 they	 should
start	destroying	the	holy	scriptures	--	at	 least	 the	Christian	ones,	since	they	are
Christians.	 And	 they	 should	 start	 demolishing	 the	 Vatican,	 taking	 away	 the
power	from	the	priests,	and	abolishing	the	monasteries.
But	they	are	not	doing	anything	of	the	kind,	so	it	is	all	bullshit	--	just	bullshit	and
nothing	else.
The	sutra:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
SHODAI,	WHO	WAS	BORN	IN	738	IN	CHINA	AND	DIED	IN	820,	WAS	A
DISCIPLE	OF	SEKITO.
SHODAI	STAYED	AT	MOUNT	NANGAKU	UNDER	SEKITO	FOR	THREE
YEARS,	THEN	WENT	TO	MOUNT	SHUKO	WHERE	HE	SAW	MA	TZU.
MA	TZU	ASKED,	"WHAT	DID	YOU	COME	HERE	FOR?"
You	 can	 see	 the	 difference	 between	 so-called	 religious	 people	 and	 the	 Zen
masters.	 Ma	 Tzu	 knew	 that	 he	 was	 coming	 from	 Sekito.	 Rather	 than	 feeling
happy	that	he	had	got	a	disciple	from	Sekito	and	his	number	of	disciples	had	at
least	increased	by	one,	Ma	Tzu	said,	"What	did	you	come	here	for?	Sekito	was
enough	for	you."
This	 is	 the	 beauty	 of	 Zen	 --	 an	 immense	 reverence	 for	 everyone	 who	 is
enlightened.
There	is	no	competition	at	all.	Never	heard	of	in	the	world	of	Zen	is	the	word
`competition'	...	no	effort	to	convert	anybody.	Ma	Tzu	simply	asked	him,	"Why
have	you	come	here?	For	what?	Everything	was	available	where	you	are	coming
from."
SHODAI	SAID,	"I	CAME	HERE	FOR	BUDDHA'S	BIRTH	CELEBRATIONS,
JAMUNA	DARSHAN."
Buddha's	 birthday	 was	 coming.	 And	 Buddha's	 birthday	 has	 a	 very	 special
coincidence.
He	was	born	on	the	same	fullmoon	night	as	he	became	enlightened,	in	the	same
month,	on	the	same	fullmoon	night,	as	he	died	eighty-two	years	afterwards	--	the
same	month,	 the	 same	 fullmoon	 night.	A	 strange	man	 --	 birth,	 enlightenment,
death,	all	happened	on	the	same	fullmoon	night,	in	the	same	month	of	the	year.
So	his	birthday	is	also	his	enlightenment	day.	It	is	also	his	death	celebration.	So
in	a	single	day	all	three	experiences	happened.	That's	why	for	Zen	the	full	moon
has	become	 something	 special	 --	 because	 everything	 that	 happened	 to	Buddha
happened	on	the	fullmoon	night.
So	in	every	Zen	monastery	on	the	fullmoon	night	people	just	sit	under	their	trees
and	 watch	 the	 full	 moon.	 The	 full	 moon	 has	 become	 symbolically	 connected
with	 Gautam	 Buddha.	 And	 just	 watching	 and	 witnessing	 the	 full	 moon,	 they
enter	into	deep	meditation.
The	 fullmoon	night	 has	 a	 specialness	 that	 is	 now	being	 recognized	by	 science
itself.	They	have	to	approach	it	from	the	wrong	side,	because	scientists	are	living
on	 the	 wrong	 side	 of	 the	 earth,	 in	 the	 West.	 They	 became	 aware	 that	 more
murders	happen	on	 the	 fullmoon	night,	more	 suicides	happen	on	 the	 fullmoon
night,	more	 people	 go	 insane	 on	 the	 fullmoon	 night	 ...	 strange.	 This	 fullmoon
night	certainly	affects	people	and	their	psychology.	It	affects	the	ocean	--	that	is
a	known	fact.	On	the	fullmoon	night	waves	become	very	tidal	--	as	if	the	ocean
is	trying	to	reach	to	the	moon.	Man	consists	of	eighty	percent	of	ocean	water,	so
something	in	him	also	starts	feeling	a	subtle	vibration.
Scientists	 say	 that	 the	 first	 living	 being	was	 the	 fish.	Man	 is	 the	 other	 end	 of
progress	 --	 in	 the	beginning	was	 the	 fish.	So	we	have	a	very	deep	connection.
Our	real	forefathers	lived	in	the	ocean	--	they	were	fish.
So	don't	eat	fish!	You	are	eating	your	own	forefathers,	and	that	is	nasty!	And	I
see	people	carrying	tinned	fish	--	forefathers	tinned!	And	people	love	eating	fish
....
If	life	was	born	in	the	ocean	then	life	is	bound	to	be	affected	when	the	ocean	is
affected.
There	 is	 a	 deep	 connection,	 underlying	 currents.	 But	 Western	 psychologists
became	aware	from	the	wrong	side:	suicide,	murder,	madness.	The	East	became
aware	 that	more	people	have	become	enlightened	on	a	 fullmoon	night;	 in	 fact,
almost	all	except	one,	Mahavira.
He	became	enlightened	on	 the	no-moon	night,	 amawas.	The	 fullmoon	night	 is
called	purnima	--	the	moon	has	become	perfect,	purna.	And	the	no-moon	night	is
when	there	 is	no	moon	at	all,	absolute	darkness.	Except	Mahavira,	nobody	has
become	 enlightened	 on	 amawas,	 no-moon	 night.	 Mahavira's	 name	 was	 not
Mahavira	 --	Mahavira	 means	 a	 great	 warrior.	 His	 name	 was	 Vardhaman.	 But
because	he	became	enlightened	on	 amawas,	 no-moon	night,	 he	proved	 that	 he
could	go	against	the	current.	It	was	natural	for	everybody	to	become	enlightened
on	 the	 fullmoon	night,	but	 this	 fellow	Mahavira	 tried	 to	go	against	 the	normal
order	of	things,	and	still	managed	to	become	enlightened.
In	 India,	 people	 have	 completely	 forgotten	 why	 every	 year	 on	 a	 particular
amawas,	 no-moon	 night,	 they	 celebrate	 Diwali,	 a	 festival	 of	 lights.	 You	must
have	seen	people	putting	all	kinds	of	candles,	lamps,	lights	in	their	houses.	This
is	 the	 night	 when	 Mahavira	 became	 enlightened.	 And	 this	 festival	 is	 in
remembrance	of	Mahavira	but	nobody	even	thinks	of	Mahavira.
Those	 firecrackers	 are	 in	 celebration	 of	Mahavira.	He	 certainly	 did	 something
unique	which	 never	 happened	 before	 and	 never	 happened	 afterwards.	 So	 it	 is
perfectly	 right	 to	 call	 him	 Mahavira,	 a	 great	 warrior.	 A	 very	 strong	 man	 ...
otherwise	 it	 is	almost	 impossible	 for	anyone	 to	become	enlightened	on	 the	no-
moon	night.
In	Zen,	on	the	fullmoon	night	of	every	month,	 they	watch	the	moon	the	whole
night.	And	 as	 they	 go	 on	witnessing	 the	moon,	 a	 deep	 tranquility	 and	 silence
descends	over	 them,	particularly	on	 the	night	when	Gautam	Buddha	was	born,
became	enlightened,	and	died.
So	 this	 is	 a	 special,	 very	 special	 night	 for	 the	 people	 belonging	 to	 the	 small
stream	of	Zen.
Shodai	said,	"I	have	come	here	for	Buddha's	birthdate	celebrations."	Ma	Tzu	was
a	 very	 famous	master;	 Sekito	was	 not	 that	 famous.	 Slowly,	 slowly	 he	 became
famous	 after	 his	 death,	 but	 Ma	 Tzu	 was	 famous	 while	 he	 was	 alive	 --	 very
famous,	because	of	his	strange	behavior.	Shodai	must	have	 thought	 that	on	 the
celebrations	of	this	moon,	it	would	be	good	to	go	to	Ma	Tzu	--	something	might
transpire.	 So	 he	 said,	 "I	 have	 come	 here	 to	 celebrate	 the	 birth	 of	Gautam	 the
Buddha."
Ma	Tzu	said,	"Buddha	has	no	birth,	no	death	--	Buddha	is	eternal.	Life	has	no
beginning,	 no	 end,	 it	 is	 eternal.	The	 very	word	 `birth'	 belongs	 to	 the	world	 of
delusion,	 because	 that	 which	 is	 authentic	 in	 you	 is	 never	 born.	 It	 has	 been
coming	from	one	house	to	another	house,	from	one	body	to	another	body,	but	it
is	 eternal	 in	 itself.	 So	 no	 birth,	 no	 death	 happens	 to	 it.	 It	 happens	 only	 to	 the
outside	of	the	house,	which	becomes	tattered	so	it	has	to	be	renewed,	or	else	you
have	to	move	into	a	new	house."
Ma	Tzu	said,	"Buddha	has	no	birth,	no	death.	The	very	idea	of	birth	and	death	is
delusion.	 YOU	 ARE	 FROM	 MOUNT	 NANGAKU,	 BUT	 IT	 SEEMS	 THAT
YOU
HAVE	NOT	YET	KNOWN	THAT	YOU	NEED	SEKITO.	He	is	your	master.	I
don't	think	it	 is	the	right	time	for	you,	or	that	there	is	any	need	to	change	your
master.	 You	 have	 not	 allowed	 your	 master	 to	 transform	 you	 yet.	 SO	 YOU
SHOULD	GO	BACK.	You	cannot	stay	here."
HEARING	 THAT,	 SHODAI	 WENT	 TO	 SEKITO.	 ON	 MEETING	 THE
MASTER,	SHODAI	ASKED	SEKITO,	"WHAT	IS	BUDDHA?"
All	the	way	coming	back	he	must	have	been	thinking,	"Ma	Tzu	said	there	is	no
birth	of	the	buddha	and	no	death	of	the	buddha.	Then	what	is	the	buddha?"
The	buddha	is	equivalent	to	awakened	life.
SEKITO	REPLIED,	"THERE	IS	NO	BUDDHA	NATURE	IN	YOU."
SHODAI	ASKED,	"WHAT	ABOUT	ALL	LIVING	BEINGS?"
SEKITO	REPLIED,	"THEY	HAVE	BUDDHA	NATURE."
Sekito	was	strange	in	his	own	way.	Ma	Tzu	had	very	strange	behavior;	he	went
to	 the	extreme.	But	Sekito	was	not	 just	a	normal	enlightened	master	either;	he
had	 his	 own	 uniqueness.	 He	 said,	 "All	 living	 beings	 have	 buddha	 nature,	 but
Shodai,	you	don't	have	it!"	This	is	a	very	strange	statement.	Why	does	this	poor
Shodai	not	have	the	buddha	nature?	When	all	living	beings,	even	animals,	even
trees	have	buddha	nature	--	only	Shodai	has	not!
SHODAI	ASKED,	"WHY	DON'T	I	HAVE	IT?"
SEKITO	SAID,	"BECAUSE	YOU	DON'T	ACCEPT	IT."
The	only	question	is	of	recognition,	of	accepting,	of	remembering.	Even	if	you
have	immense	treasures	but	you	are	unaware	of	them,	what	is	the	point	whether
you	have	them	or	not?
An	 ancient	 story	 says	 that	 one	master	 and	 his	 disciple	were	moving	 from	one
village	 to	 another	 village.	 But	 they	 started	 late	 because	 people	were	 trying	 to
persuade	them	to	stay	a	little	longer	in	their	village.	Starting	late,	the	master	was
continuously	 looking	 into	 his	 bag.	 That	 he	 had	 never	 done	 before.	 And	 the
disciple	was	behind	--	he	was	also	thinking,
"What	is	the	matter?	Why	does	he	go	on	looking	into	the	bag,	and	then	close	it?"
And	again	and	again	he	said,	"We	should	go	faster,	we	have	to	reach	the	other
village	before	sunset."
The	 disciple	 simply	 could	 not	 believe	 it,	 because	 there	 had	 been	many	 nights
when	they	stayed	in	the	wildest	parts	of	the	forest	where	there	were	all	kinds	of
dangers	...	and	the	master	had	never	bothered.	They	had	slept	soundly	under	the
trees,	 knowing	 perfectly	 well	 there	 was	 danger	 all	 around.	 But	 what	 had
happened	 today?	He	wanted	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 other	 village	 before	 sunset.	 There
was	danger	--	what	kind	of	danger?
Then	 they	 stopped	 at	 a	well,	 and	 the	master	 had	 to	wash	 his	 face	 and	 do	 his
evening	prayer	before	the	sun	set,	so	he	was	in	a	hurry.	He	gave	the	bag	to	the
disciple	and	told	him,	"Keep	it	carefully."	That	too	was	strange.	He	had	given	the
bag	to	him	many	times,	but	he	had	never	said,	"Keep	it	carefully."	Of	course	he
had	always	kept	it	carefully.
So	when	the	master	started	drawing	the	water	from	the	well,	the	disciple	looked
in	the	bag.	And	then	he	knew	what	the	problem	was:	he	was	carrying	a	golden
brick,	 a	 complete	 brick	 of	 pure	 gold.	He	 knew	 now	what	 the	 danger	was.	 So
while	the	master	was	praying
--	and	he	was	praying	quickly,	and	fast	--	the	disciple	threw	that	golden	brick	at
the	side	of	the	well	into	the	forest	and	took	a	stone	of	the	same	weight	and	put	it
in	the	bag.
The	master	quickly	finished	his	prayer	and	immediately	took	the	bag	...	felt	the
weight.
The	sun	was	setting	and	it	was	getting	dark.	Feeling	the	weight,	and	touching	the
bag,	he	was	perfectly	 satisfied.	They	 started	moving	 and	 the	master	 said,	 "We
have	to	run.	We	have	to	reach	the	village	anyway,	we	cannot	stay	in	the	forest	in
the	night.	It	is	dangerous."
After	 two	 miles	 of	 running,	 both	 were	 tired,	 huffing,	 puffing	 ....	 Finally,	 the
master	said,
"It	seems	we	are	on	the	wrong	track	because	there	seems	to	be	no	village	ahead.
Far	away	we	can	see	--	not	even	a	single	light.	And	the	danger	is	there	..."
The	disciple	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	I	have	thrown	the	danger	near	that	well."
He	said,	"What!!"	He	looked,	he	took	out	the	stone,	and	he	said,	"You	threw	that
brick	gold	of?	I	told	you	to	keep	it	carefully!"
And	the	disciple	said,	"I	have	kept	it	carefully!	For	two	miles	you	have	also	been
keeping	the	stone	carefully.	Not	knowing	that	it	was	a	stone,	you	were	worried.
Now	can	we	stay	overnight?"
He	said,	"Now	there	is	no	problem!	You	really	threw	away	the	whole	danger."
They	slept	very	well	in	the	night	....
If	you	don't	know,	you	can	carry	a	stone	as	if	it	is	gold.	And	you	can	carry	gold
as	if	it	is	nothing	if	you	don't	know.
You	 are	 carrying	 a	 tremendous	 treasure	 within	 you	 --	 the	 buddhahood,	 the
enlightenment.
But	unless	you	realize	it,	whether	it	is	there	or	not	does	not	matter.	It	is	the	same.
That's	why	Sekito	said,	"You	don't	have	it.	All	other	living	beings	may	have	it,
but	you	don't	have	it.	That	much	is	certain.	All	 living	beings	are	not	here,	so	I
don't	know,	but	about	you	I	know	--	you	don't	have	it."
He	said,	"But	why?	Why	make	me	an	exception	then?	Every	living	being	has	it
...!"
He	said,	"BECAUSE	YOU	DON'T	ACCEPT	IT.	You	don't	explore	it,	you	don't
recognize	it.	You	don't	remember	a	forgotten	language."
AT	THIS,	SHODAI	DECIDED	TO	STAY	with	Sekito.
Ma	Tzu	was	right.	This	was	the	right	man	for	him.
First	he	must	have	felt	a	little	disappointed	in	Ma	Tzu,	a	little	humiliated	that	he
had	been	sent	back.	But	now	he	recognized:	"Ma	Tzu	was	right.	Sekito	has	the
secret	in	his	hands,	and	he	is	my	master.	Ma	Tzu	has	a	different	discipline	and	he
will	have	to	begin	from	ABC,	and	Sekito	has	been	working	for	years	over	me."
So	now	everything	was	clear	why	he	had	been	sent	back.	"Go	to	the	same	master
who	has	been	working	on	you,	and	he	has	been	working	perfectly	 rightly.	His
method	is	his;	my	method	is	different."
But	methods	don't	matter,	they	are	pure	devices	to	bring	you	a	certain	awareness,
a	certain	realization,	a	certain	deepening	of	your	consciousness.	This	statement:
"Because	you	don't	accept	it,	you	don't	have	it.	Just	realize	it	and	you	have	it	--
you	have	already	had	it	for	centuries,	but	you	have	never	looked	at	it."	At	this,
there	must	have	been	a	lightning	flash	in	Shodai's	mind,	in	his	consciousness.	He
decided	to	stay	with	Sekito.
LATER,	HE	LIVED	IN	THE	SHODAI-JI	TEMPLE	--	he	created	a	temple,	and
he	 lived	 in	 the	 temple,	which	used	 to	be	 called	Shodai-ji	 temple	 --	AND	DID
NOT	GO
OUTDOORS	FOR	THIRTY	YEARS.
This	is	simply	symbolic	and	factual,	both.	He	did	not	go	outside	the	temple	for
thirty	years.	After	this	statement	of	Sekito	--	"You	have	it,	but	because	you	don't
accept	it	you	don't	have	it"	--	for	thirty	years	he	did	not	go	outside	the	temple.
Nor	did	he	go	out	of	himself	for	thirty	years,	he	went	on	in	and	in	and	in.	Those
thirty	years	he	was	not	even	counting.	The	only	thing	that	mattered	was	that	he
had	 to	 remember	 the	hidden	secret	of	buddhahood.	He	had	 to	give	birth	 to	his
own	 buddhahood	 --	 and	 he	 had	 gone	 to	 Ma	 Tzu	 for	 the	 birth	 of	 Buddha's
celebration.
How	can	you	 celebrate	Gautam	Buddha's	 birth	 if	 your	 buddha	 is	 still	 unborn?
You	 can't	 understand	 what	 Buddha	 means,	 you	 can't	 understand	 what	 this
festival	is	for,	because	you	have	not	come	to	your	own	festival.
First	you	have	to	celebrate	yourself.
Only	 then	 can	 you	 celebrate	 all	 the	 buddhas,	 awakened	 or	 asleep,	 can	 you
celebrate	 the	 whole	 existence.	 ...	 AND	 DID	 NOT	 GO	 OUTDOORS	 FOR
THIRTY	YEARS	--
neither	 out	 of	 the	 hut	 nor	 out	 of	 himself.	 He	 went	 on	 in	 and	 in	 --	 went	 on
digging.
WHENEVER	A	SEEKER	CAME	TO	HIM,	seeing	the	temple,	and	knowing	that
Shodai	was	inside	meditating	for	thirty	years	...	People	used	to	bring	some	rice,
some	food,	some	water,	 inside	the	temple.	But	he	never	asked	anybody	and	he
never	went	out.
In	the	East	that	has	been	a	very	virtuous	act	if	somebody	is	meditating	so	deeply
that	he	has	no	 time	for	 food,	no	 time	 to	beg,	no	 time	 to	go	out.	People	have	a
tremendous	 reverence	 for	meditators.	They	may	have	been	poor	and	 they	may
have	cut	 their	own	food	 into	 two	pieces	 --	one	 they	would	eat,	 the	other	piece
they	would	go	and	offer	to	Shodai.
In	the	East,	meditation	has	not	been	thought	of	as	a	personal	matter.	It	is	not	that
you	are	doing	something	selfish	for	your	own	self;	it	 is	something	that	you	are
doing	for	the	whole	existence.	If	you	become	blossomed,	you	will	be	a	proof	to
everybody	 that	 they	 can	 also	 blossom.	 You	 will	 become	 an	 argument	 for	 the
inner	 world.	 You	 will	 become	 an	 incentive	 for	 others	 also	 to	 explore	 --	 it	 is
possible;	 it	 is	 not	 impossible.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 that	 Gautam	Buddha	 can	 become
enlightened,	Shodai	also	can.	He	has	been	refused	by	Sekito
--	"You	don't	have	it!"	This	hit	him	hard.
But	 this	was	 the	device	of	Sekito.	He	needed	 that	much	of	a	hit.	So	he	 retired
into	 a	 temple,	 meditated	 for	 thirty	 years,	 became	 enlightened.	 But	 whenever
anybody	 would	 come	 to	 him,	 he	 would	 say,	 "Go	 away	 --	 you	 don't	 have	 a
buddha	nature."
The	same	device	that	had	been	used	on	him	by	his	master,	he	went	on	using	his
whole	life.	And	he	helped	many	people,	because	the	moment	he	would	say,	"You
don't	 have	 buddha	 nature,"	 immediately	 they	 would	 ask,	 "What	 about	 other
living	beings?"	And	he	would	say,	"Of	course,	they	have	it."
Naturally,	 the	 same	dialogue	happened	 again	 and	 again,	 and	 the	person	would
say,	"You	are	being	absurd.	If	everybody	has	it,	why	have	I	not?"	And	he	would
say,	"Because	you	don't	accept."	Just	remember	--	it	is	a	forgotten	nature.	Just	go
in.
Shodai	was	not	 very	 inventive	 --	 that's	what	 I	 call	 a	 "normal"	Zen	master.	He
simply	 had	 one	 small	 statement.	 Even	 that	 small	 statement	 helped	 many,	 but
could	not	help	a	really	great	number	of	people,	because	those	people	who	were
coming	to	him	were	not	in	the	same	state	in	which	he	was	when	he	asked	Sekito.
He	had	been	meditating	with	Sekito	 for	years.	He	was	 just	on	 the	verge	 ...	 the
last	hit	....
But	 the	 people	 who	 were	 coming	 were	 absolutely	 beginners,	 so	 with	 many
nothing	transpired.	Once	in	a	while,	if	a	man	had	come	from	some	other	master
...	perhaps	the	master	was	dead,	or	perhaps	he	had	become	tired	--	how	long	had
he	to	wait?	And	he	became	anxious:	"My	master	is	becoming	old	and	I	am	not
yet	enlightened	..."	People	like	these	who	had	been	meditating	and	were	just	on
the	verge	--	this	man	Shodai	succeeded	by	hitting	them.	He	knew	only	one	hit	--
a	poor	Zen	master.
There	 are	 poor	Zen	masters	 and	 rich	Zen	masters	 and	 super-rich	Zen	masters.
You	are	caught	up	with	a	super	Zen	master!	I	hit	you	without	hitting	you.	I	hit
you	 in	so	many	ways,	 from	every	direction	possible,	and	my	hits	are	not	cruel
and	 primitive.	 They	 are	 very	 contemporary	 --	 in	 fact	 very	 few	 contemporary
people	are	going	to	understand	me.
Perhaps	 a	 century	 or	 two	 centuries	 afterwards,	my	 hits	will	 shake	 people	 into
awakening.
But	right	now	you	are	caught	up,	and	you	cannot	go	anywhere	because	you	will
not	find	me	anywhere	around	the	world.	You	will	find	just	poor	masters.	Those
super-rich	masters	have	disappeared	from	the	world.
We	are	living	in	a	poorer	world	spiritually	than	before.	Materially	we	are	living
in	a	richer	world,	but	spiritually	it	is	a	very	poor	world.	When	Ma	Tzu	was	there
and	Sekito	was	there	and	Rinzai	was	there	and	Nangaku	was	there,	Yakusan	was
there	 ...	 there	 were	 so	 many	 masters	 just	 in	 Japan	 --	 or	 in	 China	 ...!	 When
Gautam	 Buddha	 was	 here	 in	 India	 there	 were	 eight	 masters	 just	 in	 the	 small
province	of	Bihar,	and	they	transpired	hundreds	of	people	into	enlightenment.
But	 you	 are	 blessed.	You	have	 found	 a	 super-rich	Zen	master.	Don't	miss	 this
opportunity,	because	the	world	has	been	becoming	thinner	and	thinner	as	far	as
spirituality	is	concerned.
You	have	to	create	a	great	rebellion	around	the	earth.
You	have	to	upset	all	the	organized	religions.
Only	 then	will	 people	 be	 liberated	 from	 their	mind	 programs.	And	 to	 liberate
anybody	 from	 his	 mental	 programming,	 conditioning,	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest
virtues.	You	are	helping	that	man	towards	freedom.	But	you	can	help	only	if	you
are	free.	If	you	are	not	free,	there	is	no	possibility	to	help.	A	blind	man	cannot
help	 another	 blind	man.	 First	 you	 have	 to	 open	 your	 eyes	 and	 recognize	 your
buddhahood,	and	then	it	is	very	easy	to	trigger	the	same	experience	in	others.
There	are	many	who	are	ready,	on	the	verge,	but	there	is	nobody	to	push	them.
Everybody	needs	a	push,	and	everybody	needs	a	certain	proof	that	buddhahood
is	a	reality.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	when	the	Christian	missionaries	first	came	to
India	--
and	 they	were	 the	 first	 to	 translate	 the	Buddhist	 scriptures	 into	English	 --	 they
did	 not	 think	 that	 a	man	 like	Buddha	 had	 ever	 been	 there.	 It	 seemed	 to	 them
almost	 an	 impossibility;	 they	 had	 never	 heard	 about	 enlightenment.	 They	 had
heard	 about	 prophets	 coming	 from	 God,	 they	 had	 heard	 about	 messiahs,
messengers,	they	had	heard	about	the	only	begotten	son	Jesus.	They	believed	in
them,	but	they	had	never	heard	about	enlightenment.
Was	Moses	enlightened?	Was	Jesus	enlightened?	They	had	no	answer.	They	had
never	heard	about	the	phenomenon	at	all.	So	Buddha	was	a	strange	phenomenon.
The	early	missionaries	simply	canceled	the	idea	that	he	was	a	historical	person.
It	took	almost	one	hundred	years	of	research	for	Christian	missionaries	to	accept
that	Buddha	was	a	real	human	being,	not	a	fiction.	This	shows	that	they	had	been
believing	in	fictions!
So	 they	 thought,	 deep	 down	 ...	 nobody	 can	 believe	 in	 Jesus	 and	 his	miracles.
Howsoever	 great	 an	 effort	 you	 make	 to	 believe,	 the	 doubt	 will	 remain
underneath	and	will	surface	whenever	your	belief	will	be	shaken	by	something	--
and	it	will	be	shaken	by	anything,	because	a	belief	has	no	evidence,	no	proof.
Every	Christian,	 every	 Jew,	 every	Mohammedan,	 every	Hindu,	 is	 living	under
such	beliefs	which	they	themselves	know	cannot	be	true.	But	out	of	fear	they	are
accepting	it.
But	fear	cannot	transform	you.	There	is	only	one	way	to	be	transformed,	and	that
is	to	find	your	buddhahood.	That	will	give	you	the	proof	that	other	buddhas	have
actually	happened.
If	 you	 can	 become	 a	 buddha,	 you	 are	 the	 argument,	 you	 are	 the	 proof.	 And
unless	you	know	buddhahood	you	cannot	come	to	a	trust	that	such	a	miracle	is
possible.	And	it	is	the	greatest	miracle.	Walking	on	water	is	just	stupid;	it	is	not	a
miracle.
It	happened	once	....
A	 man	 came	 to	 Ramakrishna	 and	 he	 had	 trained	 himself	 in	 a	 certain	 yoga
method.	There	are	yoga	methods	by	which	you	can	throw	all	 the	air	out	of	 the
body	 so	 you	 become	 a	 vacuum	 inside.	You	 cannot	 remain	 in	 that	 vacuum	 for
more	than	ten	minutes,	but	ten	minutes	is	enough	to	show	that	you	can	walk	on
water.	If	you	are	a	vacuum	you	can	walk	on	the	water.
But	it	takes	almost	eighteen	to	twenty	years	to	learn	that	method	of	creating	the
vacuum.
Once	 you	 have	 created	 the	 vacuum	 ...	 I	 have	 seen	 one	 man	 only.	 If	 you	 can
create	 a	 vacuum	 you	 can	 do	 strange	 things.	 I	 have	 seen	 this	 man	 in	 my
childhood,	 and	my	memory	 is	 absolutely	 clean	 about	 that	man.	 I	 can	 see	 him
still,	because	he	was	doing	such	a	strange	thing.	From	his	prick	he	would	drink
water!	And	 that	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 can	 create	 a	 vacuum	 inside.	 Then	 the
vacuum	pulls	 the	water,	pumps	 the	water	 in.	But	 I	have	come	across	only	one
man.	I	have	tried	hard	again	to	find	somebody	...
I	asked	him,	"How	long	did	it	take	for	you?"
He	said,	"It	is	a	very	difficult	job.	It	took	at	least	twenty	years	for	me	to	create
the	vacuum.	And	only	for	ten	minutes	...!"
A	man	came	to	Ramakrishna	and	he	said,	"I	have	heard	much	about	you,	but	can
you	walk	on	water?"
Ramakrishna	said,	"That's	nothing.	You	can?"
He	said,	"Of	course."
Ramakrishna	said,	"I	prefer	riding	on	a	cloud.	Do	you	know	the	art?"
He	said,	"No,	I	have	never	heard."
Ramakrishna	said,	"How	long	did	it	take	for	you	to	learn	the	knack?"
The	man	said,	"Eighteen	years	continuously	I	have	been	..."
Ramakrishna	said,	"You	are	an	idiot.	Because	when	I	want	to	go	on	the	Ganges"
--	 and	 they	 both	were	 sitting	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	Ganges	 under	 a	 beautiful	 tree
where	 Ramakrishna	 used	 to	 sit	 and	 just	 watch	 the	 Ganges	 flowing.	 It	 is	 a
beautiful	 place	 where	 Ramakrishna	 lived	 --	 outside	 Calcutta,	 a	 very	 silent,
peaceful	place.	Just	one	temple	existed	at	that	time	in	which	he	lived,	just	on	the
bank	of	Ganges.
So	Ramakrishna	said,	"Whenever	I	want	to	go	there,	you	see	that	ferryboat?	--	it
takes	only	two	paisa.	And	that	too,	that	boatman	does	not	take	from	me.	He	says,
`Not	from	you	...	I	earn	enough,	I	can	take	you	without	it.'	So	when	I	can	go	to
the	other	side	without	even	giving	two	paisa,	why	should	I	waste	eighteen	years
of	my	life	in	learning	to	walk	on	the	water?	And	do	you	think	it	is	something	of
spirituality?	All	the	fishes	are	doing	that,	and	there	are	so	many	water	animals	...
so	 what	 is	 the	 point?	 How	 do	 you	 think	 it	 is	 connected	 with	 your	 spiritual
growth?	You	wasted	your	eighteen	years	in	sheer	stupidity.	And	I	don't	ride	on
the	clouds	either.	 I	was	 just	 trying	 to	 show	you	 that	 even	 riding	on	 the	clouds
will	not	be	of	any	value."
The	real	value	is:	are	you	acquainted	with	your	buddha?
It	is	the	only	thing	that	matters.
When	 Christians,	 the	 missionaries,	 came	 to	 know	 about	 Buddha	 and	 his
scriptures	 they	were	 very	much	 amazed,	 because	 these	 sutras	 of	Buddha	 have
such	beauty	that	the	Bible	simply	fades	away,	looks	very	childish.
One	great	missionary	in	Japan	had	gone	to	see	a	Zen	master,	and	he	believed	he
could	 convert	 him.	 His	 idea	 was	 that	 if	 he	 could	 convert	 this	 Zen	 master,	 to
whom	 even	 the	 emperor	 of	 Japan	 comes	 --	 and	 he	 had	 large	 following	 --	 just
converting	 this	 one	 man,	 he	 could	 convert	 the	 whole	 of	 Japan.	 The	 emperor
would	 be	 converted,	 thousands	 of	 his	 disciples	would	 be	 converted.	 So	 rather
than	 working	 on	 ordinary	 people,	 it	 was	 better	 to	 work	 on	 this	 man.	 And
certainly	there	are	beautiful	statements	in	the	Bible,	particularly	the	Sermon	on
the	Mount,	so	he	took	the	Bible.
He	was	greeted	by	 the	Zen	master,	 and	he	 said,	 "I	 have	brought	 you	my	holy
scripture.	I	would	like	to	read	it	to	you	and	I	would	like	to	know	your	opinion."
So	he	started	reading	the	Sermon	on	the	Mount.	He	had	gone	two	or	three	lines
when	 the	 Zen	 master	 said,	 "Stop.	Whoever	 wrote	 it,	 in	 his	 next	 life	 he	 may
become	enlightened."
He	did	not	even	listen	to	the	whole	sermon.	He	said,	"Just	stop.	Whoever	wrote
it,	 in	 his	 next	 life	 will	 become	 enlightened.	 But	 right	 now	 these	 sutras	 are
coming	from	an	unenlightened	person."
Shocked,	the	missionary	could	not	understand	--	"Jesus	Christ	is	unenlightened?"
But	the	idea	of	enlightenment	has	never	happened	in	the	West.	The	very	idea	is
missing.
So	 it	 was	 very	 difficult	 for	 them	 to	 understand	 that	 there	 have	 been	 a	 totally
different	kind	of	people.	They	have	always	believed	in	God,	his	son,	which	is	not
possible	without	God.
His	 prophets	which	 come	 from	 the	God,	 his	messengers,	 they	 come	 from	 the
God	--
everything	comes	from	God.	That	hypothesis	 is	 fundamental.	 If	you	deny	 that,
then	 the	 whole	 of	 Judaism,	 Christianity,	 Mohammedanism,	 all	 three	 religions
flop	 down.	 They	 simply	 disappear	 with	 one	 hypothesis	 which	 is	 absolutely
unproved.
Here	 they	 came	 to	 understand	 a	 totally	 different	 process.	 A	 buddha	 does	 not
come	 from	 above,	 he	 comes	 from	 below	 and	 he	 rises	 upwards.	 You	 see	 the
difference:	he	becomes	godly	as	he	goes	on	upwards.	And	all	 the	Christian	or
Jewish	or	Mohammedan	prophets	and	messiahs	come	from	up	to	down.
Buddha	 is	 an	evolution.	 It	 is	 an	 intrinsic	potentiality	 that	 starts	going	upwards
like	a	tree,	and	when	the	spring	comes	it	blossoms.	They	have	never	thought	that
man	 becomes	 godly;	 they	 have	 always	 thought	 only	 God	 can	 come	 down.
Hindus	believe	in	incarnation
--	God	comes	as	Krishna,	God	comes	as	Rama	...
And	 it	 is	 absolutely	clear	 that	God	has	been	coming	so	many	 times	 --	 and	 the
world	is	such	a	mess!	What	has	God	done	to	the	world?	God	comes	in	Krishna
as	a	perfect	 incarnation	--	and	what	has	 that	perfect	 incarnation	done?	Nobody
asks	the	question:	Why	has	he	come	in	the	first	place?	And	if	he	has	come	then
what	has	he	done?
Krishna	has	promised,	and	Hindus	are	still	believing	that	he	will	be	coming.	His
promise	 is:	 "When	 there	 will	 be	 danger,	 when	 humanity	 will	 be	 in	 pain	 and
anguish	and	anxiety,	when	 there	will	 be	atheism	spreading	 in	 the	world,	when
saints	will	be	tortured	...
whenever	 there	will	be	such	a	crisis	 in	 religion,	 I	will	come."	But	 I	have	been
asking	so-called	Hindu	saints,	"The	last	time	he	came,	what	did	he	do?	And	why
are	you	waiting	for	him?	The	last	time	he	proved	nothing.	Even	if	he	comes	he	is
not	going	to	do	anything.	And	how	many	times	has	he	come?"
Hindus	believe	 that	he	has	already	come	 twenty-three	 times;	 the	 twenty-fourth
time	 he	 has	 to	 come.	 But	 twenty-three	 times	 he	 has	 been	 a	 failure.	 That	 is
enough	proof:	the	twenty-fourth	time	he	is	not	going	to	be	a	success.
And	what	have	the	prophets	of	the	Jews	done?	And	what	have	the	prophets	like
Jesus	 or	Mohammed	 done	 to	 Christianity	 or	 to	Mohammedanism?	 They	 have
created	 an	 ugly	 human	 psychology,	 neurotic.	 They	 have	 not	 been	 helping	 the
evolution	of	consciousness.
So	 Buddha	 is	 completely	 a	 different	 category.	 He	 is	 not	 coming	 from	 any
hypothesis	 downwards.	He	 is	 not	 special.	He	 is	 just	 an	 ordinary	 human	 being
like	you	and	me,	but	he	starts	growing	his	potentiality	upwards.	He	touches	the
very	 stars,	 he	 grows	 roots	 into	 the	 earth,	 goes	 to	 the	 deepest	 possibility.	 He
stands	vertical,	leaves	the	horizontal	plane	of	consciousness	which	belongs	to	the
animals.	He	is	really	a	rebel,	an	authentic	rebel.
Naturally,	every	word	that	has	come	from	him	has	tremendous	meaning,	because
he	 is	not	accepting	any	 lies,	any	consolations.	And	he	 is	not	giving	any	 lies	 to
people	or	any	consolations.	He	is	simply	saying	what	his	experience	is,	and	that
it	can	be	your	experience	also.
Buddha	 created	 a	 totally	 different	 world,	 and	 following	 him,	 masters	 upon
masters	 ...	but	certainly	 they	remain	a	very	 thin	stream.	Buddha	belongs	 to	 the
very	intelligent	people.	It	is	not	for	the	mediocre,	it	is	not	for	the	retarded,	it	is
not	for	the	masses.
But	if	the	intelligent	people	of	the	world	rise	into	buddhahood,	they	will	help	the
whole	of	humanity	at	 least	 to	 see	what	 is	possible	 for	 a	human	being,	what	 is
hidden	in	us.	And	if	thousands	of	people	can	bring	it	to	blossoming,	why	cannot
we?
Every	buddha	becomes	a	proof,	an	argument	to	the	whole	of	humanity.	He	raises
the	 level	of	 existence	 spiritually,	 and	each	buddha	goes	on	 raising	 the	 level	of
humanity	 without	 your	 knowing.	 You	 are	 more	 close	 now	 after	 twenty-five
centuries	than	you	were	when	Buddha	was	alive.
Most	of	you	must	have	been	around	him.	Most	of	you	must	have	been	around
other	 buddhas,	 because	 you	 are	 not	 new	 to	 the	 world.	 You	 have	 been	 here
always,	but	you	never	managed	up	to	now	to	go	as	intensely	as	possible.	Hence
my	insistence:	Don't	miss	this	opportunity.
You	have	to	decide	--	you	have	to	be	very	decisive:	"I	have	to	bring	my	potential
to	 its	 ultimate	 flowering.	 I	 have	 to	 become	 a	 celebration,	 a	 festival.	 I	 have	 to
contribute	to	the	beauty	and	truth	and	the	divineness	of	existence."
Basho	wrote:
EARLY	SPRING
A	NAMELESS	HILL	KNEE	DEEP
IN	THE	GAUZE	OF	MORNING	STILLNESS.
These	 are	 all	 statements	 of	 meditators,	 and	 Basho	 is	 a	 great	 master	 and
simultaneously	one	of	the	greatest	haiku	poets.
"Early	spring"	--	just	visualize.	"Early	spring"	--	it	has	just	come	fresh.	The	trees
have	been	waiting	for	it,	the	earth	has	been	waiting	for	it.	Those	who	have	some
aesthetic	sense	--	the	painters,	the	poets,	the	musicians,	the	dancers,	the	sculptors
--	 they	have	been	waiting	for	 it.	 It	has	come.	Early	spring	--	such	a	 joy	comes
following	with	it,	such	freshness	all	around.	Such	fragrance	of	flowers.
"A	nameless	hill	knee	deep	 in	 the	gauze	of	morning	stillness."	Even	 the	hill	 is
feeling	the	spring	breeze,	"knee	deep	in	the	gauze	of	morning	stillness."	Not	only
am	I	kneeling	down	in	my	gratitude	for	existence,	for	this	fresh	spring,	but	once
more,	the	mountain	is	also	knee	deep	--	is	as	grateful	as	I	am.
EARLY	SPRING
A	NAMELESS	HILL	KNEE	DEEP
IN	THE	GAUZE	OF	MORNING	STILLNESS.
Those	small	hours	before	 the	sunrise,	when	 the	night	 is	 just	going	and	 the	sun
has	not	arrived	on	the	horizon,	are	the	most	peaceful.	And	meditators	have	found
that	 that	 is	 the	 best	 time	 to	 meditate	 --	 particularly	 in	 the	 East,	 when	 those
moments	are	the	coolest	in	the	day.
Perhaps	 it	may	not	be	 true	about	 the	West;	 it	may	be	 too	cold.	Perhaps	for	 the
West	 the	best	 time	will	be	midnight.	 It	 is	good	 for	 the	East	 also,	but	 the	early
morning	when	just	the	flowers	are	opening	to	welcome	the	sun,	and	the	birds	are
fluttering	their	wings	getting	ready	to	sing	their	songs	and	dance	into	the	air	...
And	that	stillness	...	Night	is	gone,	almost	gone,	and	the	morning	is	not	born	yet.
That	 in-between	moment	 has	 been	 given	 a	 special	 name	 in	 the	East,	 sandhya.
Sandhya	means	the	interval	between	day	and	night.	So	it	comes	two	times	--	in
the	morning	and	in	the	evening,	when	the	sun	has	set	and	the	night	has	not	come.
So	these	two	times	are	called	sandhya,	intervals.
In	these	intervals	you	can	meditate	more	deeply	than	at	any	other	time.	It	is	just
an	existential	experience	of	thousands	of	meditators.
Basho	is	expressing	his	own	experience	in	this	haiku.
Question	2
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
PAUL	 TILLICH,	 THE	 PROTESTANT	 THEOLOGIAN,	 ASSERTED	 THAT
"GOD
WILL	REMAIN	SOMEHOW	REMOTE	AND	ÒUT	THERE,'	UNLESS	THERE
IS	A	COMPLETE	TURNABOUT	 IN	WHICH	ALL	REFERENCES	 TO	THE
HIGH	AND
THE	 BEYOND	 ARE	 TRANSLATED	 INTO	 TERMS	 OF	 DEPTH.	 THIS
INFINITE
AND	INEXHAUSTIBLE	DEPTH	AND	GROUND	OF	ALL	BEINGS	IS	GOD.
THAT
DEPTH	IS	WHAT	THE	WORD	`GOD'	MEANS.	HE	WHO	KNOWS	ABOUT
DEPTH
KNOWS	ABOUT	GOD."
WOULD	YOU	LIKE	TO	COMMENT?
Maneesha,	Paul	Tillich	and	all	neo-theologians	are	trying	their	hardest	somehow
to	save	God,	and	there	is	no	way	to	save	him,	he	is	already	dead!
Now	he	is	giving	another	idea:	take	God	from	there	beyond	the	clouds	and	put
him	deep	down.	But	what	is	the	difference?	Deep	down	where?	--	in	America?
Because	from	this	place,	if	you	go	on	digging	you	will	suddenly	see,	My	God!
all	Americans	are	walking	upside	down.	Are	they	doing	shirshasan,	headstand?
Because	 from	 here	 you	 will	 reach	 exactly	 into	 America	 --	 the	 shortest	 way.
People	are	unnecessarily	flying	...	just	dig	a	hole!	And	from	both	the	sides	it	can
be	started	--	from	America	towards	India,	and	from	India	towards	America.	And
the	meeting	will	happen	just	in	between.
But	as	 far	as	America	 is	concerned,	 India	will	be	 the	depth.	As	 far	as	 India	 is
concerned,	America	will	be	the	depth.	Where	are	you	going	to	put	God?	In	the
depth?	They	are	just	trying	absurdities	to	save	the	name	God,	because	the	danger
is	that	God	is	becoming	more	and	more	an	impossible	hypothesis	to	prove.
So	change	his	place.	Take	him	out	from	the	clouds,	 take	him	from	there	in	the
beyond,	and	put	him	there	in	the	depth.
But	you	cannot	save	him.	He	is	dead	there	in	the	beyond,	and	he	will	be	dead	in
his	 grave	 in	 the	 depth.	 You	 are	 only	 digging	 a	 grave.	 Paul	 Tillich	 is	 just	 a
gravedigger	and	nothing	else.
And	you	can	see	clearly	what	he	is	saying,	"God	will	remain	somehow	remote
and	òut	there,'	unless	there	is	a	complete	turnabout	..."	But	still	the	distance	will
be	the	same.
First	he	was	beyond	in	the	clouds;	now	he	will	be	deep	inside	the	earth.	In	fact,	it
was	easy	to	go	to	the	clouds,	going	inside	the	earth	will	be	more	difficult.	And
you	don't	know	what	is	inside	the	earth,	volcanoes	...	It	is	all	hot	and	melted.	The
deeper	you	go,	you	will	 come	 to	 a	point	when	everything	 is	melted.	Fire,	 still
alive,	 that	 comes	 through	 the	 volcanoes.	You	 can	 see	 it.	You	 are	 putting	God
there?	I	like	the	place.	That	will	be	his	funeral	pyre.
"This	infinite	and	inexhaustible	depth	and	ground	of	all	beings	IS	God."	But	he
will	cling	to	the	word	`God'.	There	is	no	change,	just	the	place	has	been	changed.
God	is	the	same	-
-	he	has	moved	the	house.	"That	depth	is	what	the	word	`God'	means."	First	he
was	the	height,	now	he	is	the	depth,	but	he	is.
"He	who	knows	about	depth	knows	about	God"	--	great!
Those	who	have	known	the	depth	or	the	height	are	the	people	who	have	declared
there	 is	 no	God.	 There	 is	 only	 a	 quality,	 a	 fragrance,	which	 you	 cannot	 catch
hold	 of,	 but	 you	 can	 feel	 overwhelmed	 by	 it.	But	 it	 is	 not	God,	 it	 is	 the	 very
flavor	of	existence	itself.	It	is	the	very	life.
Why	create	an	unnecessary	hypothesis?	Be	a	little	scientific.	In	science	it	 is	an
accepted	fact	that	no	unnecessary	hypothesis	should	be	accepted.	Do	with	as	few
hypotheses	 as	 possible,	 because	 every	 hypothesis	 creates	 new	 problems	 and
solves	nothing	--	and	particularly	unproved	hypotheses	which	for	centuries	man
has	 been	 trying	 to	 prove	 and	 has	 failed.	 All	 theologians	 have	 failed!	 No
theologian	has	been	able	to	give	any	proof	for	God.
They	are	 trying	 to	do,	Maneesha,	something	 impossible.	God	 is	dead,	and	 it	 is
good	and	great	that	God	is	dead,	because	it	brings	freedom	and	dignity	to	life,	to
existence.	 It	destroys	our	spiritual	slavery,	 it	gives	us	a	great	pride	 that	we	are
existence	and	nobody	is	above	us.
One	of	the	Baul	mystics,	Chandidas,	has	made	a	beautiful	statement:	Sabar	upar
manus	satya,	tahar	upar	nahi.	He	is	a	Bengali	mystic;	the	statement	is	in	Bengali.
Sabar	upar	manus	satya	--	above	all	is	the	truth	of	man.	Tahar	upar	nahi	--	and
beyond	that	there	is	nothing.
This	 is	what	I	call	 the	dignity	of	man,	of	 life,	of	existence.	Why	unnecessarily
drag	 humanity	 into	 slavery?	Paul	Tillich,	 and	 all	 those	who	 are	 trying	 to	 save
God,	the	neo-theologians	of	Christianity,	are	going	to	fail,	because	all	that	they
can	do	 is	give	new	words,	new	meanings,	new	 references,	new	addresses.	But
when	you	reach,	you	will	find	nothing.	Neither	is	he	beyond	there,	nor	is	he	in
the	depth	somewhere	hiding.
God	does	not	exist	and	has	never	been	in	existence.
Life	exists.
Celebrate	life.
Rejoice	life.
Let	life	be	your	freedom,	your	pride,	your	dance,	your	celebration.
This	is	the	right	time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh.	Put	on	the	light!
Old	Miss	Crumbum,	 the	 Jehovah's	Witness,	 is	 going	 round	 from	door	 to	 door
collecting	 money	 to	 send	 missionaries	 abroad.	 She	 knocks	 on	 the	 door	 of
Hamish	MacTavish,	 the	Scotsman,	and	when	Hamish	opens	 the	door	she	starts
her	speech.
"Praise	 the	Lord,	good	sir!"	 intones	Miss	Crumbum.	"We	are	planning	 to	 send
twenty	Witnesses	of	Jehovah	to	the	African	countries.	Please	give	generously	for
our	missionary	service	overseas!"
"Absolutely	 not!"	 replies	 Hamish.	 "I	 totally	 disapprove	 of	 those	 foreign
missions."
"But,	good	sir!"	cries	Miss	Crumbum.	"The	scriptures	command	us	 to	feed	the
hungry!"
"Well,	 that's	 fine,"	 says	 Hamish,	 "but	 surely	 we	 can	 feed	 them	 on	 something
cheaper	than	missionaries?"
The	 new	 priest	 in	 the	 village,	 young	 Father	 Fever,	 is	 coming	 to	 visit	 the
Sidebottom	 household.	 So	 little	 Sally's	 mother	 gives	 her	 daughter	 some
instructions.
"If	the	new	priest	asks	you	your	name,"	says	Mrs.	Sidebottom,	"say	Sally-Jane.
And	if	he	asks	you	how	old	you	are,	say	you	are	seven	years	old.	And	if	he	asks
who	made	you,	say,	`God	made	me!'	Can	you	remember	all	that?"
"I	think	so,"	says	Sally.
A	few	minutes	later,	young	Father	Fever	arrives,	puts	down	his	hat	and	his	Bible,
and	walks	up	to	little	Sally.	He	pats	her	on	the	head	and	says,	"I	am	Father	Fever,
your	new	priest.	And	what	is	your	name,	little	girl?"
"Sally-Jane,"	replies	Sally.
"And	how	old	are	you,	Sally-Jane?"	asks	the	priest.
"Seven	years	old,"	replies	Sally.
"Well,	that	is	nice,"	says	Fever.	"And	do	you	know	who	made	you,	Sally-Jane?"
Little	Sally	hesitates	for	a	moment,	and	then	says,	"Shit!	Mom	did	tell	me,	but	I
have	forgotten	the	guy's	name!"
Late	 one	 evening	 on	 the	 little	 Greek	 island	 of	 Crete,	 old	Mrs.	 Lilypopolis	 is
weeping	into	her	black	handkerchief,	mourning	the	recent	death	of	her	old	friend
Mrs.	Acreepolis.
"Ohhh!"	wails	old	Mrs.	Lilypopolis	 to	Bishop	Kretin	who	is	holding	her	hand,
"God	 is	 so	 unjust!	 He	 is	 knocking	 off	 us	 old	 ladies	 one	 by	 one.	 I	 must	 say,
Bishop	 Kretin,	 that	 my	 faith	 in	 the	 Blessed	 Bleeding	 Virgin	 is	 beginning	 to
wobble."
"Don't	 worry	 my	 child,"	 comforts	 Bishop	 Kretin,	 impatiently.	 "You	 are	 only
ninety-seven	 years	 old,	 you	 have	 lots	 of	 life	 in	 you	 still.	 Just	 pray	 to	 God
Almighty	and	everything	will	be	fine."
But	 over	 the	 next	 few	 days,	 old	Mrs.	 Lilypopolis	 gets	 freaked	 out.	 She	 starts
looking	 around	 for	 something	 else	 to	 strengthen	 her	 faith.	 One	 night	 she	 is
wandering	around	the	streets	of	the	village	and	finds	herself	in	Madam	Goggle's
fortune	telling	parlor.
"I	 have	 been	 a	 Blessed	 Bleeding	 Virgin	 Christian	 all	 my	 life,"	 says	 old	Mrs.
Lilypopolis,
"and	you	are	a	spiritualist	and	a	pagan	--	but	I	have	come	to	you	because	I	have
lost	faith	in	Bishop	Kretin.	I	come	to	you	in	the	hope	of	receiving	the	answer	to
one	question."
Madam	Goggle	nods	her	head	and	closes	her	eyes,	lapsing	into	a	deep	trance.
"Go	ahead,"	she	says	in	a	spiritual	voice,	"tell	me	your	question."
"I	want	to	know,"	says	old	lady	Lilypopolis,	"when	I	die,	will	I	go	to	heaven	--	I
mean	my	Christian	heaven	--	to	be	reunited	with	my	friends,	Mrs.	Souvlaki,	Mrs.
Theocrapolis	and	Mrs.	Acreepolis,	in	the	glory	of	eternal	paradise?"
After	some	time	in	a	deep	trance,	Madam	Goggle	opens	her	eyes	and	speaks,	"I
have	 asked	 the	 sacred	ones	 if	 you	will	 go	 to	 heaven,"	moans	Madam	Goggle.
"And	their	answer	is	...	their	answer	is	..."
And	the	old	fortune	teller	rubs	her	thumb	and	forefinger	together	under	the	old
Greek	woman's	nose.
"Oh,	yes!"	cries	old	Mrs.	Lilypopolis,	fumbling	in	her	purse	and	bringing	out	a
handful	of	money.	She	puts	it	on	the	table	and	then	Madam	Goggle	continues.
"Well,	there	is	some	good	news	and	some	bad	news.	First	the	good	news	....	Yes,
Mrs.
Lilypopolis,	because	you	have	been	such	a	good	person	you	will	be	transported
by	 the	 heavenly	 angels	 to	 paradise	 --	 to	 the	Golden	Throne	 in	 the	 skies.	And
there	 you	 will	 remain	 throughout	 eternity	 with	 all	 the	 other	 blessed	 virgins,
sitting	on	God's	knee."
"Oh!"	cries	old	Mrs.	Lilypopolis,	"Oh,	I	am	completely	overwhelmed!"
"Wait!"	continues	Madam	Goggle.	"And	the	bad	news	is	..."
"But,	 Madam	 Goggle!"	 interrupts	 the	 old	 lady.	 "After	 such	 wonderful	 good
news,	what	news	could	possibly	be	bad?"
"Well,"	says	Madam	Goggle,	"you	will	be	going	there	tonight!"
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Be	silent	...
Close	your	eyes	...	and	feel	your	body	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	 is	 the	 right	moment	 to	 enter	 in	 your	 inner	world.	You	 have	 to	 reach	 just
below	your	navel,	two	inches	exactly	below,	inside.
Gather	your	energy	and	total	consciousness,	and	rush	with	a	deep	urgency	as	if
this	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 last	moment	 on	 the	 earth.	Only	 those	who	 have	 such
urgency	and	intensity	ever	reach	to	their	center	of	life.
Faster	and	faster	...
Deeper	and	deeper	...
As	you	are	coming	closer	to	your	center,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you	just
like	soft	rain	falling.	You	can	feel	the	coolness.
A	 little	 closer,	 and	 you	 find	 an	 explosion	 of	 light.	 Your	 inner	world	 becomes
luminous.
A	 little	 deeper,	 and	 flowers	 of	 blissfulness,	 flowers	 of	 ecstasy	 suddenly	 start
showering	on	you.	Existence	is	rejoicing	in	your	inner	journey.	This	is	the	only
spiritual	pilgrimage.
Just	one	step	more	and	you	are	standing	at	the	very	center	of	your	being.
This	 is	 the	 state	 of	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 the	 space	 of	 all	 the	 buddhas.	 At	 this
moment	 you	 are	 no	 more,	 only	 the	 buddha	 is.	 And	 the	 buddha	 has	 only	 one
quality:	witnessing.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind.
And	witness	that	you	are	only	the	witness.
This	pure	witnessing	opens	all	the	closed	doors	of	existence	and	life,	of	song	and
dance,	of	the	ultimate	celebration	of	becoming	one	with	the	cosmos.
To	make	this	witnessing	deeper,
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Relax	...	but	continue	to	witness.
That	 is	 your	 very	 eternity	 --	 no	 beginning,	 no	 end	 ...	 infinite,	 inexhaustible,
sacred.
This	 is	 your	 original	 face.	We	 in	 the	 East	 have	 symbolized	Gautam	Buddha's
face	as	everybody's	original	face	--	that	is	only	a	symbol.
Recognize	it!
And	rejoice	in	its	recognition.
At	 this	 moment	 you	 are	 the	 most	 blessed	 people	 on	 the	 earth.	 Everybody	 is
concerned	with	 the	 trivia,	you	are	 trying	 to	explore	 the	very	center	of	 life	 and
existence.
Other	than	this,	there	is	no	religiousness.
Other	than	this,	there	is	no	spirituality.
And	 this	 experience	 is	 absolutely	 individual,	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the
collective,	with	the	society,	with	an	organized	religion.
And	 from	 this	 opening,	 you	 can	 see	 there	 is	 no	 God,	 there	 is	 only	 godliness
surrounding	you	--	all	around	limitless.
The	height	is	infinite.
The	depth	is	infinite,	but	you	don't	find	any	God	anywhere.	On	the	contrary,	you
start	melting	and	disappearing.
Gautama	 the	Buddha	Auditorium	 has	 become	 an	 ocean	 of	 consciousness.	 Ten
thousand	buddhas	have	joined	together	into	one	consciousness.
This	is	your	truth,	and	this	is	the	beauty	of	the	truth,	and	this	is	the	divineness	of
the	truth.
One	who	knows	this	center	and	this	opening	into	existence,	knows	all.
Collect	 as	 many	 flowers	 as	 you	 can	 of	 serenity,	 of	 tranquility,	 of	 silence,	 of
peace,	of	ecstasy,	of	a	divine	drunkenness.	You	have	to	bring	all	these	juices	of
life	from	the	center	to	the	surface	of	your	day-to-day	life.	You	have	to	start	living
like	a	buddha,	with	 the	same	grace,	with	 the	same	beauty,	with	 the	same	truth,
with	the	same	authenticity,	with	the	same	originality.
This	opening	and	the	experience	of	it	will	bring	you	a	dignity	which	is	not	ego,	a
pride	which	 is	 not	 ego,	 but	 simply	 a	 joy,	 simply	 a	 remembrance	 that	 you	 are
existential,	not	accidental.	Hence,	the	possibility	of	celebration.
The	accidental	person	lives	in	anguish,	in	anxiety,	in	angst.
The	existential	person	lives	in	celebration,	in	love,	in	grace,	in	gratitude.
Do	not	forget	to	persuade	the	buddha	to	come	with	you.
These	are	the	three	steps	of	enlightenment.
The	 first	 step,	 buddha	 comes	 behind	 you	 as	 a	 shadow.	 But	 the	 shadow	 is
luminous,	it	has	tremendous	warmth,	and	it	surrounds	you	with	a	new	fragrance,
fragrance	of	the	beyond.
The	next	step,	the	second	step,	you	become	the	shadow,	buddha	comes	in	front
of	you.
Your	 shadow	goes	 on	 becoming	 thinner	 and	 thinner	 as	 buddha	 becomes	more
and	more	solid	and	existential.
A	moment	comes	and	the	third	step	happens	on	its	own	accord:	your	shadow	has
disappeared,	you	are	no	more;	only	the	buddha	is,	only	life	is,	only	the	existence
is.
Hence	the	celebration.
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Come	back	...	but	come	with	all	the	glory	and	the	splendor	of	a	buddha,	with	all
the	grace	and	silence	and	peace.
Sit	down	just	for	a	few	seconds	to	remind	yourself	of	the	golden	path	that	you
have	 followed,	 and	 the	 depth	 you	 have	 reached	 within	 yourself,	 and	 all	 the
experiences.	And	feel	the	presence	of	buddha	behind	you.
The	day	is	not	far	away	when	the	first	step	will	turn	into	the	second	step,	and	the
second	step	will	turn	into	the	third	step.	You	will	be	no	more.	And	when	you	are
no	more	there	is	dance,	there	is	song,	there	is	joy,	there	celebration	of	life.
I	celebrate	myself,	and	I	teach	you	nothing	else	but	celebration.
Religiousness	has	fallen	into	wrong	hands,	and	they	have	made	the	whole	world
sad	 and	miserable.	 I	 want	 the	world	 to	 be	 filled	with	 laughter,	 with	 joy,	 with
festivity.
The	whole	life,	moment	to	moment	has	to	be	lived	as	a	celebration.	That	is	the
only	religious	life.	You	have	every	potential	and	every	opportunity.
Just	a	little	relaxed	effortless	melting	into	the	ocean	that	surrounds	you	--	and	the
dance	begins.	And	the	dance	never	ends.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
I	Celebrate	Myself:	God	Is	No	Where,	Life	Is	Now	Here
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Existence	is	celebration
19	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902195
ShortTitle:
CELEBR07
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
186
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ONE	 DAY,	 SEKITO	 ANNOUNCED	 TO	 EVERYBODY	 THAT	 THE	 NEXT
DAY
THEY	WOULD	WEED	THE	GRASS	IN	FRONT	OF	THE	BUDDHA	HALL.
THE
FOLLOWING	 DAY,	 ALL	 THE	 MONKS	 GATHERED	 WITH	 SICKLES	 IN
THEIR
HANDS,	 BUT	 ONLY	 TANKA	 CAME	 WITH	 A	 TRAY	 FILLED	 WITH
WATER.
BEFORE	 COMING	 THERE	 HE	 HAD	WASHED	 HIS	 HAIR,	 BUT	 IT	WAS
NOT	YET
SHAVEN.	 NOW	 HE	 KNEELED	 DOWN	 IN	 FRONT	 OF	 SEKITO,	 AND
SEEING	 HIM,	 SEKITO	 LAUGHED,	 AND	 SHAVED	 TANKA'S	 HEAD.	 AS
THE	MASTER
USUALLY	 DID,	 SEKITO	 GAVE	 TANKA	 SOME	 SPECIFIC
COMMANDMENTS,	 BUT	 AS	 HE	 DID	 SO,	 TANKA	 WALKED	 AWAY
COVERING	HIS	EARS	WITH	HIS
HANDS.
TANKA	THEN	LEFT	FOR	KOSEI	TO	SEE	MA	TZU.	ARRIVING	AT	THE
MONASTERY,	 HE	 WENT	 INTO	 THE	 HALL	 AND,	 CLIMBING	 ON	 THE
STATUE
OF	MANJUSHRI,	SAT	THERE.	THE	OTHER	MONKS	WERE	ASTONISHED
AND
TOLD	MA	TZU,	WHO	CAME	IN,	LOOKED	AT	HIM	AND	SAID,	"MY	SON
IS
TENNEN."
TANKA	CAME	DOWN,	MADE	A	 BOW	AND	 SAID,	 "THANK	YOU	 FOR
GIVING
ME	A	DHARMA	NAME."
MA	TZU	THEN	ASKED,	"WHERE	DO	YOU	COME	FROM?"
TANKA	SAID,	"I	COME	FROM	SEKITO."
MA	TZU	SAID,	"THE	PATH	ON	THE	STONEHEAD	IS	SLIPPERY.	DID	YOU
FALL
OVER?"
TANKA	REPLIED,	"IF	I	HAD	FALLEN	OVER,	I	WOULDN'T	HAVE	COME
HERE."
Friends,
First	the	questions	....
Question	1
The	first	question:
IT	 SEEMS	 THAT	 NEVER	 HAS	 ANY	 GOD-ORIENTED	 RELIGION	 BEEN
MORE
ANACHRONISTIC	 THAN	 IT	 IS	 TODAY;	 YET	 CURIOUSLY,
CHRISTIANITY	AT
LEAST	SEEMS	TO	BE	BLOOMING.	BORN-AGAIN	CHRISTIANS,	 JESUS
FREAKS,	AND	FUNDAMENTALIST	CHRISTIANS	ARE	RIFE.
ARE	WE	SEEING	THE	PHENOMENON	YOU	HAVE	DESCRIBED	WHEN
SOMETHING	 IS	 ABOUT	 TO	 DIE?	 YOU	 HAVE	 COMPARED	 IT	 TO	 A
CANDLE
GOING	OUT,	HAVING	A	LAST,	FINAL	SPURT	OF	ENERGY	BEFORE	IT
SPLUTTERS	INTO	EXTINCTION.
It	is	exactly	what	has	happened.	Not	only	is	Christianity	going	out	of	existence,
all	religions	as	such	are	already	out	of	date.	They	are	living	a	posthumous	life.
Whatever	 they	have	been	 teaching	 to	humanity	has	been	found	criminal.	Their
God	is	a	fiction,	a	lie.	They	all	have	been	telling	people	to	be	truthful,	and	they
are	teaching	lies	about	heaven	and	hell	and	God.	They	have	made	the	whole	of
humanity	hypocrite.
The	misery	that	you	see	all	over	the	earth	is	created	by	your	religions.	Once	you
make	a	man	feel	guilty	he	cannot	enjoy	life,	he	cannot	rejoice	in	existence.	You
have	cut	his	roots,	the	very	roots	that	nourish	your	joy,	your	blissfulness.
All	 the	 religions	 have	 been	 against	 humanity.	 They	 are	 bound	 to	 go	 into
extinction.	 The	 sooner	 they	 disappear	 from	 the	 earth	 the	 better.	Man	 needs	 to
sing	with	the	birds,	to	dance	with	the	trees.	Man	needs	to	rise	to	the	heights	of	a
Gautam	Buddha.
The	 religions	 have	 not	 been	 helping	 any	 evolution	 of	 consciousness;	 on	 the
contrary	 they	are	 the	greatest	obstacles.	Religion	has	become	a	business	 in	 the
hands	of	the	priests.	And	certainly	an	authentic	religiousness	has	nothing	to	do
with	business.	It	has	something	to	do	with	your	blossoming,	it	has	something	to
do	with	your	initiation	into	eternity,	into	truth,	into	beauty,	into	good.
Religiousness	has	no	way	to	make	humanity	spiritually	slave	--	but	 that's	what
religions	 have	 done.	 Everybody	 is	 enslaved,	 oppressed,	 exploited,	 and
everybody	 is	 being	 poisoned	by	 the	 religions,	 forced	 to	 be	 unnatural.	And	 the
moment	 you	 force	 somebody	 to	 be	 unnatural	 you	 are	 committing	 the	 greatest
crime	against	existence.
All	the	religions,	God-oriented	or	not	God-oriented,	have	been	teaching	man	to
renounce	life.	They	are	anti-life,	they	are	against	everything	that	can	make	you	a
whole	person.	Not	only	physically,	not	only	psychologically,	but	spiritually	too.
They	have	been	cutting	you	into	pieces,	and	they	have	been	trying	for	centuries,
insistently,	to	enforce	the	idea	of	renouncement.	This	is	not	a	right	approach	to
existence.
The	 moment	 you	 start	 renouncing,	 you	 start	 shrinking.	 Rather	 than	 growing,
rather	 than	becoming	vaster	and	infinite,	you	start	shrinking	into	yourself.	You
lose	 all	 interest	 in	 existence,	 in	 love,	 because	 you	 are	 told	 to	 torture	 yourself.
Renunciation	from	the	world	is	another	name	for	self-torture.	And	a	man	who	is
torturing	himself	--	how	can	you	expect	him	to	dance?	How	can	you	expect	him
to	be	ecstatic?	He	is	committing	a	slow	suicide.
God-oriented	 religions,	 and	 not	 God-oriented	 religions	 --	 both	 are	 going	 to
disappear.
Religion	is	an	individual	matter;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	collectivity.	It	is	not	a
social	phenomenon,	 it	 is	very	private,	absolutely	private,	your	innermost	affair.
Even	love	is	not	that	much	private,	because	at	least	two	persons	are	involved	in
it.	 In	 meditation,	 nobody	 is	 involved	 --	 only	 you	 are.	 It	 is	 absolutely
individualistic.
I	teach	you	to	be	individuals.
Never	belong	to	any	organization,	never	belong	to	any	holy	scriptures,	churches,
temples.
Never	 belong	 to	 any	 monastery.	 This	 whole	 existence	 is	 available	 for	 you	 --
rejoice	in	it,	celebrate	in	it.
No	 religion	 teaches	 celebration;	 they	 teach	 celibacy!	 I	 am	 absolutely	 against
celibacy	 and	 all	 for	 celebration.	 I	 am	 making	 every	 effort	 to	 bring	 a	 new
approach	towards	life	which	the	past	humanity	has	missed	--	a	new	freedom,	a
new	sky	to	open	your	wings.	All	religions	have	been	cutting	your	wings,	putting
you	 into	cages	and	making	you	believe	 that	 this	 is	all	 that	 life	 is.	There	was	a
reason	 for	 them	 to	 do	 this.	 Unless	 you	 take	 away	 people's	 individuality	 and
destroy	 their	wings	 and	 their	 freedom	 and	 cut	 their	 roots	 of	 nourishment,	 you
cannot	enslave	them.	It	is	impossible	to	create	armies	and	wars;	it	is	impossible
to	make	millions	of	people	 suffer	 in	poverty	 --	 they	would	have	 revolted	 long
ago.	But	religions	are	keeping	them	subdued	by	the	fear	of	God,	by	the	fear	of
punishment	in	hell,	and	by	the	greed	that	if	you	follow	their	commandments	you
will	be	rewarded	immensely.
I	have	 told	you	about	 this	man	Salman	Rushdie.	The	way	Ayatollah	Khomeini
and	 the	other	 religious	 leaders	of	 Iran	have	behaved	 ...	ordinarily	people	 think
that	this	is	very	strange	from	a	religious	man.	I	want	to	tell	you	this	is	not	--	this
is	what	religions	have	been	doing	for	centuries.
Mohammed	himself	 carried	 a	 sword	 his	whole	 life,	 killing	 people,	 and	 he	 has
given	the	name	Islam,	to	his	religion,	which	means	peace!	And	on	his	sword	was
written	in	letters	of	gold,	"Peace	is	my	message"	--	on	the	sword!
Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 is	 exactly	 behaving	 like	 all	 the	 religious	 leaders.	 It	 is
absolutely	 irreligious	 behavior	 but	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 is	 not	 the	 only	 one
responsible	 for	 it,	 he	 is	 simply	 a	 representative	 of	 the	 whole	 past	 history	 of
religions:	killing,	murder,	crusades	...
fights	over	strange	things.
Christians,	Mohammedans	and	Jews,	all	three	religions	have	been	fighting	over
a	strange	idea	which	can	be	shared	very	easily,	that	Jerusalem	is	the	holy	city.	So
what	is	wrong?
All	 three	 religions	 can	 enjoy	going	 to	 Jerusalem.	But	 they	have	been	 fighting.
Jews	 have	 been	 claiming,	 "It	 is	 our	 holy	 city."	And	Christians	 of	 course	were
saying,	 "It	 is	 our	 holy	 city	 because	 Jesus	 was	 crucified	 here."	 And	 Jews	 are
saying	 it	 is	 their	 holy	 city	 because	 the	 ancient	 Jewish	 temple	 used	 to	 exist	 in
Jerusalem	and	 there	 is	still	 the	great	wall	where	Jews	weep,	cry	--	 that	 is	 their
prayer,	 in	 front	 of	 an	 ancient	wall.	You	will	 find	 hundreds	 of	 Jews	 every	 day
standing	in	front	of	the	wall	or	kneeling	down	in	front	of	the	wall.	It	is	their	holy
city.
And	then	came	the	Mohammedans	and	with	a	strange	fiction	they	have	made	it
their	 holy	 city.	 The	 fiction	 is	 that	 Mohammed	 went	 to	 heaven	 sitting	 on	 his
horse,	 and	 just	 on	 way	 to	 heaven	 he	 stopped	 for	 a	 rest	 in	 Jerusalem.	 Now,	 I
cannot	conceive	how	Jerusalem	comes	on	 the	way	 to	heaven.	 It	does	not	exist
somewhere	in	the	clouds	....
So	the	rock	on	which	he	had	rested	for	a	few	minutes	before	ascending	to	heaven
is	the	holy	rock,	and	because	the	holy	rock	is	in	Jerusalem,	Mohammedans	have
been	claiming,
"It	 is	 our	holy	 city."	And	all	 three	 religions	have	been	 fighting	 and	killing	 for
hundreds	and	thousands	of	years.	I	cannot	understand	why	they	all	cannot	share
the	holy	city	--
they	all	 can	go	and	worship.	But	 the	very	claim	 that	 it	 is	 "ours,"	 is	 absolutely
non-religious.
A	 religious	person	has	no	possessiveness.	These	 are	not	 religious	people,	 they
belong	 only	 to	 pseudo-religious	 organizations.	 And	 they	 are	 doing	 everything
wrong	in	the	name	of	God.	That	gives	a	sanctity	to	their	immoral	acts.
Ayatollah	Khomein'si	 death	 sentence	 on	 four	 persons	was	 absolutely	 immoral,
absolutely	 unspiritual.	 And	 then	 another	 ayatollah	 came	 and	 declared	 that	 he
would	 give	 2.6	 million	 dollars	 to	 the	 person	 who	 brings	 the	 head	 of	 Salman
Rushdie	to	Iran.
I	was	hoping	Salman	Rushdie	would	prove	to	be	a	man	of	integrity	--	he	did	not.
He	has	started	falling	from	integrity,	from	individuality.	Today	he	has	requested
Ayatollah	Khomeini	 --	 "I	 can	 feel	 that	 I	 have	 hurt	 so	many	 people's	 religious
feelings	 ..."	 Yesterday,	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 said	 that	 if	 Rushdie	 asks	 for
forgiveness	 and	 is	 ready	 to	 receive	 a	 penance,	 then	 he	 can	 save	 his	 life.
Otherwise	there	is	no	way.
This	statement	is	not	accurately	speaking	an	apology,	but	just	a	recognition	that
he	had	unconsciously	hurt	the	feelings	of	thousands	of	Mohammedans,	and	that
he	would	 be	more	 careful	 in	 the	 future.	 But	 he	was	 not	 aware	 that	 Ayatollah
Khomeini	 is	 not	 a	 sane	man.	He	 rejected	 the	 statement,	 and	 said	 again	on	 the
radio,	"Rushdie	has	not	apologized	and	whatever	he	has	said,	we	reject	it."
Now	Salman	Rushdie	 has	 started	 falling.	 Soon	 he	will	 have	 to	 apologize,	 and
after	 apologizing,	 Ayatollah	Khomeini	 will	 ask	 him	 to	 do	 penance.	 "Come	 to
Kaaba	and	fast	for	one	month	..."	Salman	Rushdie	has	taken	a	wrong	move.	This
is	how	people	out	of	fear	have	been	kept	imprisoned.
I	 was	 hoping	 that	 a	 man	 of	 the	 intelligence	 of	 Salman	 Rushdie	 would	 prefer
death	 to	 apologizing.	 He	 has	 not	 committed	 any	 sin,	 and	 he	 has	 not	 done
anything	wrong.	I	was	hoping	that	he	would	put	Ayatollah	Khomeini	in	a	corner.
He	 should	 ask	 him,	 "On	what	 grounds	 are	 you	 saying	 that	 I	 have	 committed
anything	against	 Islam?	Tell	me	exactly	what	 is	 the	reason	 that	you	are	asking
for	an	apology	or	giving	me	a	sentence	to	death."
And	 that	 would	 have	 exposed	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 because	 none	 of	 these
ayatollahs	have	given	a	reason.
Rushdie	 simply	 stated	 a	 historical	 fact,	 that	 a	 few	 of	 the	 verses	 which
Mohammed	wrote	in	an	earlier	version	of	the	Koran	he	dropped	later	on	saying
that	 he	 had	 been	 inspired	 by	 the	 devil	 to	 write	 these	 verses.	 Now,	 this	 is	 a
historical	 fact,	 it	 is	 not	 Salman	 Rushdie's	 imagination.	 Why	 should	 he	 ask
forgiveness?
He	 should	 have	 said,	 "Give	 me	 the	 reasons,"	 and	 he	 would	 have	 put	 these
fanatics	into	a	corner,	because	they	cannot	say	what	really	is	the	problem.	I	want
you	 to	 understand	 it	 because	 that	will	 give	 you	 an	 insight	 into	 the	murderous
instinct	of	all	 the	religions.	This	does	not	make	any	sense	because	 it	 is	a	well-
established	 fact,	 accepted	 by	Mohammedan	 scholars	 for	 centuries,	 that	 a	 few
verses	have	been	dropped.	And	 the	 statement	of	Mohammed	 is	well	known	 to
those	who	have	ever	studied	the	Koran	and	the	history	of	Islam.	If	anybody	is	at
fault	it	is	Mohammed,	not	Rushdie.
So	they	cannot	really	say	these	are	the	verses	that	are	creating	trouble,	because
then	immediately	the	question	arises	that	they	are	historical	facts.	So	nobody	has
said	what	the	problem	is.	The	problem	is	 that	 if	Mohammed	can	be	influenced
by	 the	devil,	and	he	withdraws	a	 few	verses	as	 the	devil's	 inspired	verses,	 that
makes	 a	 crack	 in	 the	 whole	 fanatic	 idea	 that	 the	 Koran	 is	 infallible,	 that
Mohammed	 is	 God's	 only	 paigambar,	 only	 authentic	 prophet.	 "One	 God,	 one
prophet	Mohammed,	and	one	holy	book	the	Koran"	--
these	are	the	three	basic	principles	of	Mohammedanism.	Accepting	the	fact	that
Mohammed	could	be	influenced	by	the	devil	and	could	not	recognize	it	for	many
years	makes	 the	whole	Koran	dubious,	makes	 the	prophet	Mohammed	fallible.
These	are	the	reasons	hidden	behind,	implied,	and	they	cannot	say	why	they	are
so	angry.
They	 are	 angry	 because	 if	 the	 whole	 world	 knows	 that	Mohammed	 could	 be
deceived	by	the	devil,	then	he	is	not	a	perfect	prophet	of	God	--	what	about	the
other	verses	 in	 the	Koran?	Who	knows	which	verses	are	 inspired	by	 the	devil,
which	verses	are	inspired	by	God?	Just	to	avoid	this	implication	becoming	clear
to	everybody,	these	people	are	getting	mad.
For	the	same	reason,	Galileo	was	called	by	the	pope	because	he	had	written	that
it	 is	not	 the	 sun	 that	goes	around	 the	earth;	on	 the	contrary,	 it	 is	 the	earth	 that
goes	around	the	sun.
But	the	Bible	states	the	commonsense	view.	Just	as	we	see	the	sun	rising	in	the
morning	and	going	around	from	the	east	 to	 the	west,	 setting,	so	 it	appears	 that
the	sun	is	going	around	the	earth.	This	is	a	commonsense	view,	but	the	question
that	Galileo	had	asked	the	pope	was,	"Why	are	you	are	so	much	afraid	of	a	truth?
I	have	been	experimenting;	this	is	my	whole	life's	work.	And	even	if	I	withdraw
the	sentence	that	you	are	wanting	me	to	withdraw,	neither	is	the	earth	going	to
change	its	course	nor	the	sun,	because	they	don't	read	my	books.	The	earth	will
go	on	circling	the	sun.	But	why	are	you	afraid?"	Galileo	had	asked,	and	he	had
cornered	 the	pope:	 "You	either	prove	 that	 I	 am	wrong	on	scientific	grounds	 ...
because	it	is	not	a	religious	matter	at	all.	What	has	religion	to	do	with	whether
the	sun	goes	around	the	earth	or	the	earth	goes	around	the	sun?	It	has	nothing	to
do	with	 any	 spirituality,	 it	 is	 a	 scientific	 area.	 If	 anybody	 can	 prove	 anything
scientifically	 against	 me,	 then	 of	 course	 I	 will	 withdraw.	 But	 why	 are	 you
afraid?"
Cornered	in	this	way,	the	pope	had	to	accept	that	the	real	problem	was:	"We	are
not	 concerned	whether	 the	 earth	 goes	 around,	 or	 the	 sun.	Our	 concern	 is	 that
even	if	one	sentence	in	the	Bible	is	found	to	be	wrong,	the	whole	credibility	of
the	 Bible	 goes.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 work	 of	 God.	 God	 is	 infallible,	 God	 cannot
commit	 such	a	mistake.	He	made	 the	earth,	he	made	 the	 sun,	 and	he	does	not
know	who	goes	around.
"The	point	is	that	one	sentence	proved	wrong	will	create	doubt	about	the	whole
authenticity	of	the	Bible,	so	we	cannot	allow	you	to	create	this	doubt	in	people's
minds."
Galileo	was	 very	 old,	 almost	 on	 his	 deathbed.	He	 had	 been	 dragged	 from	 his
deathbed	 to	 the	 court	 of	 the	 pope.	 He	 said,	 "I	 don't	 want	 to	 get	 into	 any
unnecessary	trouble.	I	am	already	dying.	So	I	will	cancel	the	sentence."	And	he
must	have	been	a	man	of	a	great	sense	of	humor.	He	canceled	the	sentence.	But
in	a	footnote	he	wrote,	"Although	I	am	canceling	 this	sentence,	 the	fact	 is	 that
the	earth	goes	around	the	sun.	They	are	not	going	to	listen	to	me,	and	they	don't
follow	any	religion	and	they	are	not	Christians."
Certainly	 the	 earth	 is	 not	Christian,	 neither	 is	 the	 sun	Christian.	And	 certainly
whoever	wrote	the	Bible	is	not	omniscient,	is	not	infallible.
Hundreds	 of	 facts	 have	 been	 found	 in	 these	 three	 hundred	 years	 after	Galileo
which	go	 against	 the	Bible,	which	go	 against	 the	Koran,	which	go	 against	 the
Vedas	...	which	go	against	every	religious	scripture	in	the	world.	And	that	proves
that	these	books	have	not	been	written	by	God,	or	written	by	the	only	begotten
son	 of	 God,	 Jesus	 Christ,	 or	 by	 prophets	 like	 Mohammed	 or	 Moses	 who
represent	God.	And	they	are	the	messengers	....
Certainly	these	messages	are	their	imagination.
All	these	holy	scriptures	are	full	of	common	sense,	not	of	any	scientific	inquiry,
nor	of	any	spiritual	inquiry.
It	 is	 so	 strange	 to	 read	 the	 holy	 scriptures.	 They	 look	 such	 rubbish	 that	 even
newspapers	 seem	 to	 be	more	 important.	And	 if	God	 is	writing,	 or	 his	 special
messengers	are	writing	these	scriptures,	they	cannot	be	counted	sane.
My	whole	understanding	is	that	all	these	prophets	and	messiahs	and	avataras	and
tirthankaras	 --	 the	 founders	of	all	 the	 religions	 --	are	basically	megalomaniacs,
great	egoists.	This	is	the	greatest	ego	in	the	world,	that	you	are	related	with	God
in	a	manner	nobody	else	is	related.
That's	why	Jesus	excludes	the	idea	that	 there	is	another	son,	another	brother	to
him,	or	another	 sister.	God	has	only	one	begotten	son	and	 that	 is	 Jesus	Christ.
Why	 does	Mohammed	 close	 the	 doors	 --	 "I	 am	 the	 last	 prophet	 of	God;	 now
there	will	be	no	more	prophets	coming.	So	the	holy	Koran	is	the	final	message
from	God;	no	correction	can	be	made	in	it."	But	he	himself	corrected	it,	and	he
himself	accepted	that	he	was	inspired	by	the	devil.
Religions	have	been	repressing	truths,	and	now	it	is	time	that	the	truth	should	be
declared,	freedom	should	be	declared,	individuality	should	be	declared.	Man	has
lived	under	 slavery	 long	 enough.	The	night	 has	 been	 too	 long;	 a	 new	dawn	 is
needed.	A	 new	man	 is	 needed,	 a	 new	 humanity	 is	 needed,	 and	 that	 humanity
necessarily	needs	all	these	so-called	religions	to	disappear	from	the	earth.
They	are	having	their	last	breaths,	so	your	question	is	exactly	right.	The	same	is
the	case	with	a	candle	going	out	--	having	a	 last	final	spurt	of	energy	before	it
splutters	into	extinction.
This	happens	 to	man	also.	Physicians	have	been	observing	 it	 for	centuries	 that
before	 death	 the	 person	 becomes	 perfectly	 healthy;	 all	 his	 diseases	 disappear.
And	 they	could	not	understand	 --	 "What	 is	happening?	He	 is	going	 to	die,	 the
logical	 thing	would	 be	 that	 his	 diseases	 become	more	 dangerous	 because	 they
are	going	to	kill	him.	But	at	the	last	moment	all	diseases	disappear."
It	 is	 the	 last	 spurt	 of	 energy.	Before	going	 into	darkness,	 the	 candle	 flares	 up.
And	many	 times,	 physicians	 have	 been	 deceived	 by	 this	 flaring	 up	 of	 energy;
they	think	they	have	cured	the	person.	And	by	the	time	they	have	reached	home,
the	phone	 rings	 to	 say	 that	 the	man	 is	dead.	And	 they	were	 thinking	 they	had
cured	him,	because	everything	becomes	normal	before	death.	The	man	is	making
his	 last	 effort	 --	 of	 course	 unconsciously	 --	 to	 remain	 alive.	He	 is	 for	 the	 first
time	being	 total,	so	 the	whole	energy	 is	gathered.	That	gathering	of	 the	energy
gives	a	false	appearance	of	health	as	if	he	is	cured.
All	 these	 religions	 are	 gathering	 their	whole	 energy	 --	 the	 last	 flare-up	 of	 life
before	 they	 disappear	 forever	 with	 their	 God,	 with	 their	 priests,	 with	 their
monks,	 with	 their	 churches,	 with	 their	 holy	 scriptures.	 That	 day	 will	 be	 the
greatest	day	in	the	history	of	man.	Man	will	become	free.
Hence	I	say	that	the	days	for	celebration	are	coming	closer.	Get	ready!
Celibacy	 is	 no	 longer	 scientific;	 we	 have	 to	 fill	 up	 the	 gap	 with	 celebration.
Renunciation	is	no	longer	logical,	rational;	we	have	to	fill	the	gap	with	rejoicing.
That	is	the	reason	so-called	religious	people	are	against	me,	because	they	can	see
what	I	am	saying	destroys	their	lies	and	their	fictions	and	their	consolations.	This
destruction	they	call	"having	their	religious	feelings	hurt."
Just	today	one	man	has	asked	the	government	of	India,	"Just	as	you	have	banned
Salman	Rushdie's	book,	why	don't	you	ban	Rajneesh's	books	which	are	far	more
dangerous?"	 It	 is	 true,	 they	 are	 far	 more	 dangerous.	 Rushdie	 has	 not	 done
anything,	 and	 is	 unnecessarily	 being	 harassed.	 If	 you	 harass	 me	 that	 will	 be
absolutely	right,	because	I	am	stating	things	against	every	religion.
But	to	ask	the	government	to	ban	my	books	is	to	accept	defeat.	Why	can't	you
argue	with	me?	Why	can't	you	bring	a	dialogue	into	existence?	If	you	think	your
religious	 ideology	is	 right,	 I	am	ready	for	any	challenge	 to	discuss	 it.	Why	are
you	 afraid?	 In	 a	 cultured	 society,	 in	 a	 democratic	 nation	 it	 is	 against	 the
constitution	to	 take	away	anybody's	freedom	of	speech.	I	am	ready	to	confront
anybody	--	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Christian,	Jaina,	Buddhist.	Whoever	they	are,
I	am	ready	to	confront	them,	but	because	they	don't	have	any	way	to	answer	my
questions	they	immediately	take	the	course	of	asking	the	government.
The	 Indian	 government	 is	 secular,	 it	 has	 no	 way	 to	 defend	 any	 religion	 or
anybody's	 religious	 feelings.	 And	 it	 is	 barbarious	 to	 ask	 the	 government;	 it
simply	shows	you	are	primitive	and	you	don't	know	how	to	behave	in	a	civilized
way.
If	Ayatollah	Khomeini	was	a	civilized,	sane	man,	he	would	have	asked	Rushdie,
"Are	 you	 ready	 for	 an	 argument?"	 To	 declare	 a	 death	 sentence	 ...	 and
Mohammedan	 criminals,	 professional	 murderers	 have	 already	 entered	 Britain
from	 different	Mohammedan	 countries.	 Even	 Pakistan	 has	 sent	 people.	 I	 was
shocked	 because	 the	woman	who	 is	 now	 the	 president	 of	 Pakistan,	 her	 father,
Bhutto,	was	sentenced	to	death	for	no	reason	at	all.
He	was	the	most	prominent	person	in	Pakistan,	the	most	influential	person.	And
because	of	him,	the	man	who	was	in	power	--	he	was	a	military	general,	it	was	a
military	 dictatorship	 --	 was	 afraid	 to	 call	 elections,	 so	 he	 was	 tolerating	 and
making	excuses	and	postponing.	But	how	long	can	you	postpone?	People	were
asking	again	and	again,	"Why	are	elections	not	happening?"	And	the	reason	was
that	Bhutto	was	alive.	He	used	to	be	the	president	of	the	country,	and	this	was	a
takeover	by	the	army,	by	force.	Bhutto	had	to	be	killed	before	the	elections.
So	 they	 brought	 all	 kinds	 of	 imaginary	 crimes	 that	 he	 had	 not	 committed.	He
was	a	well	educated	man,	and	he	was	not	a	fanatic.	They	killed	him.	No	appeal
was	granted	to	him;	he	could	not	appeal	to	the	president	for	mercy.	It	was	against
Pakistan's	 constitution,	 against	 Pakistan's	 law,	 but	 General	 Zia,	 who	 was	 in
power,	was	not	a	man	of	any	influence	in	the	public.	He	had	come	into	power	by
force	and	violence	because	he	was	 the	commander-in-chief	of	 all	 the	 forces	 --
the	navy,	the	air	force,	and	the	army.
It	was	 just	 luck	 that	 a	 few	 days	 ago,	General	 Zia,	with	 his	 seventy-four	most
intimate	people	from	all	the	armies,	had	an	accident,	an	airplane	accident,	and	all
seventy-five	people	died.
This	woman	is	General	Zia's	enemy	and	has	been	fighting	from	Britain,	trying	to
get	into	Pakistan.	And	General	Zia	was	not	allowing	her,	because	people	would
have	 sympathy	 for	 her	 because	 her	 father	 had	 been	 killed	 illegally,
unconstitutionally.	But	when	Zia	was	dead	she	 immediately	 rushed	 to	Pakistan
and	 she	 has	 been	 elected.	 Now	 she	 is	 the	 president	 --	 a	 young	 woman,	 well
educated,	 but	 she	 is	 doing	 the	 same	 stupidity	 as	Zia	 did.	 Zia	 killed	 her	 father
without	any	reason	or	rhyme,	simply	because	he	was	the	most	impressive	person
in	 the	country	and	Zia	could	not	stand	against	him	and	win	 the	elections.	That
was	the	reason.
Now,	I	was	thinking	that	this	woman	would	behave	--	and	she	has	been	educated
in	Britain,	just	as	her	father	was	educated	in	Britain	--	in	a	different	way.	First,
she	is	a	woman,	and	has	more	heart	than	any	man.	Secondly,	her	father	has	been
killed.	She	should	reconsider	the	very	desire	for	killing	people.	And	now	she	has
sent	 a	 death	 squad	 to	 Britain,	 professional	murderers,	 to	 kill	 Rushdie	 and	 the
other	three	persons	who	are	involved	in	the	publication	of	the	book.
It	 seems	 people	 don't	 learn	 at	 all.	 That's	 why	 history	 goes	 on	 repeating.	 The
repetition	of	history	simply	shows	that	people	don't	learn	at	all.	Otherwise,	there
is	no	reason	for	history	to	repeat	--	if	you	learn,	you	only	commit	a	mistake	once,
not	 twice.	That's	what	 learning	means:	commit	as	many	mistakes	as	you	want,
but	only	commit	one	mistake	once.	Committing	mistakes	is	not	bad	--	that	is	the
only	 way	 of	 learning;	 you	 have	 to	 commit	 mistakes.	 If	 you	 don't	 commit
mistakes	you	 cannot	 find	 the	way	 from	 this	 darkness	 that	 surrounds	 the	 earth.
But	don't	commit	the	same	mistake,	otherwise	you	will	be	in	a	vicious	circle.
Committing	the	same	mistake	again	simply	shows	you	are	unconscious,	you	are
not	 behaving	 consciously.	 Now,	 this	 woman,	 Bhutto's	 daughter,	 is	 doing	 the
same	as	Zia	was	doing.	And	the	man,	Rushdie,	has	not	done	anything	wrong.
But	he	seems	to	be	a	coward.	And	because	of	these	cowards	these	insane	people
have	been	in	power.
I	am	ready	for	any	argument	with	anybody,	because	I	know	their	whole	religious
belief	 is	 absolutely	 unfounded.	 They	 cannot	 prove	 God,	 they	 cannot	 prove
heaven,	 they	cannot	prove	hell.	They	cannot	prove	that	God	created	the	world,
because	there	is	no	witness.
How	have	you	found	it?	Who	told	you?	Obviously	there	cannot	have	been	any
witness	 when	 God	 created	 the	 world.	 If	 there	 was	 a	 witness,	 the	 world	 was
already	there.	It	is	intrinsically	rational	to	accept	that	there	cannot	be	any	witness
--	 because	 there	 was	 no	 world.	 From	 where	 will	 the	 witness	 come?	 So	 God
cannot	have	a	witness;	then	how	have	these	people	come	to	know?	From	whom?
Their	whole	 idea	 is	 based	 on	 the	 lie	 of	God.	And	 I	 always	 strike	 at	 the	 very
foundation,	I	don't	bother	about	the	branches	and	the	leaves.	I	cut	the	very	roots.
And	they	cannot	defend,	because	they	don't	have	any	foundation	to	their	temple.
I	once	went	to	see	a	temple	which	is	a	very	rare	temple,	near	Indore.	There	is	a
very	 small	 village	 where	 the	 temple	 is;	 it	 is	 a	 Jaina	 temple.	 Jainas	 have	 the
mythology	 that	 the	 temple	 has	 fallen	 from	 heaven.	 It	 does	 not	 look	 very
heavenly	....
And	 it	 fell	 because	 the	gods	 --	 Jainism	does	not	believe	 in	God,	 it	 believes	 in
gods	--	and	the	devils	were	fighting	about	who	should	own	the	temple,	and	the
fight	was	going	on	just	above	the	clouds.	So	they	became	so	much	engaged	in
fighting	that	they	lost	control	of	the	temple	and	the	temple	fell	near	the	village.
And	the	only	reason	they	could	manage	this	mythology	was	that	the	temple	has
no	 foundation.	You	can	put	a	 thin	wire	underneath	and	you	can	go	around	 the
whole	 temple.	The	wire	 goes	 through	 to	 the	 other	 side.	Then	 two	persons	 can
take	the	wire	and	go	around	the	whole	temple	--	it	 is	a	round	temple,	it	has	no
foundation	at	all.
So	this	has	given	the	idea	that	it	must	have	fallen,	because	how	can	you	make	a
temple	without	a	foundation?
It	 can	be	made,	 there	 is	 not	much	problem	 in	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 small	 temple,	 and	 just
some	architect's	imagination	to	make	something	absolutely	new	...	he	had	raised
this	temple	without	any	foundation.
But	when	 I	went	 to	see	 the	 temple	 --	a	 few	friends	had	accompanied	me	 from
Indore,	and	they	were	all	amazed.	They	said,	"Perhaps	the	mythology	is	true."
I	 said,	 "You	 are	 idiots!	 No	 temple	 has	 any	 foundation.	 No	 church	 has	 any
foundation.	No	belief	system	has	any	foundation.	This	temple	is	a	proof!"
Humanity	requires	a	totally	different	approach.	We	should	discuss.	Why	is	there
so	much	fear	about	discussing?	The	fear	is	valid	--	they	know	they	cannot	win.
All	 their	 religions	 are	 slipping	 out	 of	 their	 hands;	 they	 cannot	 win,	 they	 are
fighting	a	losing	battle.	If	they	are	men	of	intelligence	it	is	better	that	they	come
out	 of	 the	 temples	 and	 the	 churches	 and	 the	 monasteries	 and	 declare	 their
independence.
My	whole	effort	is	to	give	you	freedom	from	all	chains,	from	all	prisons,	so	that
you	can	celebrate	life.
Friedrich	Nietzsche's	statement,	"God	is	dead;	hence	man	is	free"	...	but	free	for
what?
That	he	has	no	 idea.	That's	why	he	went	 insane.	God	was	dead	--	 that	was	 the
consolation.	Now	the	consolation	is	gone	and	there	is	a	vacuum.	If	you	leave	the
vacuum,	the	whole	of	humanity	is	going	to	be	mad.
Great	intellectuals	in	the	West	have	committed	suicide	or	gone	mad.	In	fact	it	has
become	almost	a	criterion:	if	you	don't	go	mad	or	you	don't	commit	suicide	you
are	not	much	of	an	intellectual!	The	greatest	 intellectuals	have	gone	mad,	have
suffered	suicide,	because	they	could	not	find	how	to	live	without	God.	Without
heaven	 and	 hell,	 how	 to	 live?	 They	 suddenly	 saw	 their	 future	 was	 complete
darkness,	death.	To	live	for	death	...?	Without	God	they	lost	all	reason	for	living.
And	my	whole	effort	is	that	before	your	God	is	taken	away	--	and	it	is	going	to
be	taken	away,	because	it	has	no	foundation	in	truth	--	you	should	learn	the	art	of
living.	You	 should	 learn	 the	art	of	 celebration	 so	you	never	 suffer	 the	vacuum
which	creates	insanity	and	all	kinds	of	neurosis,	psychosis.
Even	the	founder	of	psychoanalysis,	Sigmund	Freud,	because	he	did	not	believe
in	God
...	He	 said	God	 is	 a	 father	 fixation	 --	 and	his	 analysis	 is	 correct,	 intellectually
correct.
That's	why	you	call	God	"the	Father"	and	that's	why	you	call	even	the	Catholic
priest
"father"	--	who	has	no	wife,	no	children!	What	kind	of	father	 ...?	At	least	God
has	only	one	begotten	son,	something	to	brag	about.	But	these	Catholic	priests	--
unless	 they	have	 illegitimate	children	 --	cannot	claim	 to	be	called	 fathers.	 It	 is
very	strange	--	what	kind	of	father	...?
Sigmund	Freud	is	right	that	the	child	grows	up	with	the	idea	that	the	father	is	his
security.
He	 is	 so	 powerful	 to	 the	 small	 child,	 seems	 to	 be	 all-powerful,	 he	 can	 do
anything.	 But	 as	 he	 grows	 he	 finds	 that	 the	 father	 is	 not	 all-powerful.	 His
security	starts	disappearing,	he	starts	feeling	insecure,	unsafe.
Sigmund	 Freud's	 analysis	 was	 that	 this	 fear	 of	 losing	 security	 and	 safety	 has
been	the	cause	of	creating	a	Father	God	far	away	in	the	sky,	who	never	dies,	who
is	always	there	to	protect	you;	he	is	compassionate	...	Jesus	says,	"God	is	love."
He	 will	 be	 very	 loving	 and	 very	 compassionate,	 so	 you	 need	 not	 be	 worried
about	anything.	All	that	you	have	to	do	is	to	believe	in	God.
But	once	this	God	is	found	to	be	dead,	as	Nietzsche	found	--	that	we	are	carrying
a	corpse,	God	is	dead	...	He	was	not	aware	that	he	himself	was	going	to	get	into
trouble,	because	his	own	make-up	was	of	a	father-fixation	psychology.	Now	he
found	the	father	--
even	 the	 ultimate	 father	 --	 is	 dead.	These	 temporary	 fathers	 go	 on	 dying,	 it	 is
okay.
"Daddy"	has	been	always	dead,	nothing	much	in	it.	But	the	eternal	God	...	to	find
him	dead	is	such	a	shock	that	although	Friedrich	Nietzsche	wrote	it,	after	writing
it	immediately	he	went	mad.
The	 moment	 he	 concluded	 THUS	 SPAKE	 ZARATHUSTRA,	 where	 he	 states
this	sentence	that	"God	is	dead	and	man	is	free,"	he	started	behaving	strangely.
And	finally,	his	friends,	and	particularly	his	sister	who	was	taking	care	of	him,
had	to	put	him	into	a	madhouse.
He	could	not	find	the	alternative.	"God	is	dead	and	man	is	free"	--	but	free	for
what?	That	he	does	not	say	at	all	 in	the	whole	book.	And	just	 to	be	free	is	not
enough.	Free	from	something	is	not	enough,	you	have	to	be	free	for	something.
So	there	are	two	sides	of	freedom	--	from	and	for.	You	can	be	free	from	God,	but
if	you	don't	have	any	freedom	for	you	will	go	mad.	That	consolation	has	been
very	ancient	and	very	deep	rooted;	it	will	kill	you.	You	cannot	live	in	insecurity,
you	need	an	immediate	alternative	--	freedom	for.
Freedom	for	celebration,	freedom	for	meditation,	freedom	for	rejoicing,	freedom
for	dancing	--	because	God	is	dead.	Now	there	is	nobody	above	you	and	you	are
ultimately	free	from	any	spiritual	slavery.	Now	you	can	dance	without	any	guilt.
You	can	love	without	any	guilt.	You	can	live	as	abundantly	as	possible.	There	is
nobody	 to	 dominate	 you,	 and	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 send	 commandments	 to	 you,
and	there	is	nobody	to	frighten	you	with	hellfire,	and	there	is	nobody	to	provoke
your	greed	for	heavenly	pleasures.
Sigmund	Freud	 analyzed	 from	a	different	 angle,	 psychoanalysis.	But	 he	 found
himself	 in	 the	 same	 trouble	 as	 Nietzsche.	 He	 never	 went	 mad,	 but	 almost
touched	the	boundaries.
Because	 God	 was	 no	 longer	 there,	 death	 became	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 you	 are
moving	towards.	He	became	so	much	afraid	of	death	--	God	was	a	security,	he
would	be	there	to	welcome	you	after	death.	Now	there	is	no	one,	now	once	you
enter	 this	 tunnel	of	death	 there	 is	no	way	out.	He	became	 so	much	afraid	 that
even	the	word	`death'	was	prohibited.
He	had	hundreds	of	disciples,	he	created	the	whole	movement	of	psychoanalysis.
It	was	prohibited	in	his	presence	ever	to	mention	the	word	`death',	because	it	was
so	frightening	that	the	moment	somebody	mentioned	death	he	would	fall	into	a
fit	and	start	foaming	from	the	mouth.
And	 this	 is	 your	 great	 psychoanalyst.	 But	 he	 was	 suffering	 from	 the	 same
problem.	God	was	the	security.	He	psychoanalyzed	people	and	found	that	there
is	no	God,	it	is	just	an	invention	of	a	sick	mind.	Logically	right	...	but	what	about
himself?
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	Sigmund	Freud	founded	psychoanalysis	but
he	himself	was	never	psychoanalyzed,	because	he	refused.	He	was	asked	again
and	again	by	his	disciples,	who	had	become	well-known	psychoanalysts.	They
said,	"It	will	be	good	if	you	yourself	get	psychoanalyzed.	Now	we	are	ready,	you
have	prepared	us	so	we	know	the	whole	technique.	And	we	would	like	to	look
into	your	dreams.	 It	will	be	an	 immense	 treasure	 to	 find	out	 the	dreams	of	 the
man	who	found	dream	analysis."
He	refused.	And	the	reason	he	refused	was	he	was	afraid	because	he	was	boiling
with	the	same	repressed	desires	as	you	are	boiling.	It	would	be	a	great	threat	to
his	 whole	 movement	 if	 people	 came	 to	 know	 his	 dreams.	 They	 would	 be	 as
sexual,	as	criminal,	as	anybody's	--	maybe	more.	Why	was	he	afraid?	He	knew
his	dreams.
And	that	shows	that	the	man	was	not	well	psychologically,	although	he	was	the
founder	of	psychoanalysis.
And	 this	 goes	 on	 and	 on.	 Psychoanalysts	 themselves	 are	 the	 most	 highly
vulnerable	group	of	people	to	become	insane.	And	they	go	on	psychoanalyzing
each	other.	But	that	does	not	bring	sanity,	that	brings	only	normal	insanity.
The	whole	of	humanity	is	normally	 insane	--	a	few	people	become	abnormally
insane;	they	go	beyond	the	border	of	common	sense.	But	the	difference	between
your	 insane	and	 the	 so-called	 sane	 is	only	of	degrees.	Perhaps	you	are	ninety-
nine	degrees	and	the	other	person	has	gone	to	one	hundred	and	one	--	past	that
line.	And	all	that	psychoanalysis	is	to	bring	him	back	to	the	ninety-nine	degree
insanity.	One	hundred	and	one	degrees	is	dangerous.
The	whole	of	psychoanalysis	and	all	kinds	of	other	schools	that	have	developed	-
-
analytical	 psychology,	 or	 psychosynthesis,	Assagioli,	Carl	Gustav	 Jung,	Adler,
and	then	there	is	a	long	line	of	people	who	are	inventing	their	own	therapies	--
they	are	as	sick	people	as	anybody.	Your	priests	are	as	ignorant	as	anybody,	your
psychoanalysts	are	more	in	danger	than	you	are	--	because	they	know	there	is	no
God.	 Your	 philosophers,	 your	 giants	 of	 intellect	 are	 in	 more	 danger	 than	 the
retarded	people.	The	retarded	people	don't	worry	at	all;	they	don't	know	that	God
is	dead.	They	have	not	heard	it	yet.
But	sooner	or	 later	 they	are	going	 to	hear	 it.	How	long	can	 it	 remain	a	secret?
The	priests	have	been	keeping	it	a	secret	too	long,	and	now	they	are	themselves
becoming	 aware	 that	 there	 is	 no	 God	 as	 they	 used	 to	 believe.	 So	 they	 are
inventing	new	gods	--	a	last	flare-up	of	energy	before	the	candle	goes	out	and	it
becomes	dark.
My	 effort	 is	 not	 an	 ordinary	 religious	 sermonizing.	 My	 effort	 is,	 before	 this
candle	 goes	 out	 you	 should	 have	 your	 inner	 light	 ready,	 so	 you	 don't	 fall	 into
darkness,	 that	 you	 don't	 go	 mad.	 I	 want	 you	 consciously	 to	 drop	 God,
consciously	 to	 drop	 all	 lies	 and	 fictions	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religion,	 and	 start	 the
other	side.	First,	freedom	from,	and	then	the	other	side,	freedom	for	--	freedom
for	celebration,	freedom	for	rejoicing.
Now	there	is	no	longer	any	point	in	renouncing.	Nobody	is	going	to	reward	you;
don't	unnecessarily	torture	yourself.	The	whole	sky	is	open	for	the	first	time;	just
open	your	wings	and	enjoy	this	freedom.
Very	few	people	are	capable	of	enjoying	this	freedom,	because	they	don't	know
how	to	dance.	They	have	become	crippled.	They	don't	know	how	to	sing,	 they
don't	know	how	 to	 love.	People	 say	 to	each	other,	 "I	 love	you"	 --	but	 just	 ask
them,	"What	do	you	mean?"
They	will	shrug	 their	shoulders	and	 they	will	say,	"I	don't	know	...	but	what	 is
love?"
Their	love	is	just	a	fiction.
You	cannot	love	anybody	unless	you	know	yourself.	You	are	not	there	--	who	is
going	to	love?	You	cannot	love	anybody	unless	love	starts	like	a	flood	and	starts
overflowing	you.
First	you	must	have	love,	then	you	can	share	it.
But	do	you	have	love?	It	 is	a	by-product	of	meditation.	Only	people	who	have
meditated	deeply	know	what	love	is,	and	then	there	is	no	question	of	"falling"	in
love.	 Then	 comes	 the	 rising	 in	 love,	 you	 go	 higher	 and	 higher;	 your	 love
becomes	your	religion,	your	love	becomes	your	very	existence.
I	teach	you	love,	not	renunciation.
I	teach	you	celebration,	not	celibacy.
I	teach	you	to	be	natural,	to	be	existential.
Then	you	will	find	yourself	being	very	creative	in	some	dimension	or	other,	and
you	will	not	be	suffering	from	a	vacuum.
Celebration	 has	 to	 fill	 up	 your	 vacuum,	 otherwise,	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 is
going	 to	 suffer	 badly.	 These	 religions	 are	 dead.	 Sooner	 or	 later	 everybody	 is
going	 to	 recognize	 the	 fact	 and	 then	 there	will	 be	 an	 immense	 vacuum	which
God	 used	 to	 fill.	 It	 was	 a	 lie,	 but	 it	 was	 a	 great	 consolation	 that	 there	 was
somebody	who	was	caring	 for	you,	who	was	your	 security.	Even	 in	death	you
need	not	be	worried	--	beyond	death	is	paradise.
But	now	there	is	no	paradise,	no	God.	Nobody	is	waiting	for	you	beyond	death.
You	will	be	going	alone.
You	have	to	learn	how	to	be	alone.
You	have	to	learn	how	to	rejoice	to	be	alone.	You	have	to	learn	how	to	dance	--
alone;	 there	 is	 no	need	 for	 spectators.	And	 there	 is	 no	need	 even	 for	 partners.
You	can	dance	alone	the	way	a	rose	dances	in	the	wind,	in	the	air,	in	the	sun,	in
the	rain.	Do	you	think	the	rose	is	waiting	for	spectators	or	for	partners?
Meditation	gives	 you	 the	 deep	 insight	 into	 your	 aloneness.	And	 remember	 the
difference:	aloneness	is	not	loneliness.	If	you	don't	learn	aloneness,	you	will	feel
yourself	very	lonely.	God	no	more,	all	consolation	gone,	no	paradise	after	death
...	 suddenly	 you	 feel	 accidental,	 not	 wanted	 by	 existence,	 not	 needed	 by	 any
God.	You	don't	have	any	purpose,	you	don't	have	any	meaning.	Suddenly	your
whole	personality	which	was	supported	by	lies,	falls	down.
This	is	what	brings	neurosis,	breakdown.
Unless	 you	 learn	 meditation	 you	 cannot	 change	 your	 breakdown	 into	 a
breakthrough.	 The	 whole	 alchemy	 of	 meditation	 is	 to	 change	 breakdown	 into
breakthrough,	to	teach	you	freedom	for.
Freedom	from	is	simply	clearing	the	ground,	creating	a	dancing	hall,	removing
all	gods	and	temples	who	are	cluttering	the	whole	space.
You	 cannot	 dance	 in	 a	 church,	 where	 everywhere	 you	 see	 all	 around	 Jesus
crucified	with	a	long	face	--	and	you	can	celebrate	this	situation?
A	 small	 boy	 was	 for	 the	 first	 time	 found	 doing	 homework.	 His	 parents	 were
surprised,	because	he	never	did	it.
They	asked,	"What	is	the	matter?	We	have	been	telling	you	to	do	homework	and
you	never	listen	--	what	happened?"
He	said,	"The	new	school	..."
They	 had	 changed	 him	 from	 the	 old	 school	 because	 they	 had	 changed	 their
neighborhood,	so	he	had	to	go	into	a	new	school.	The	new	school	was	a	convent
school,	and	the	little	boy	said	to	his	parents,	"In	this	school	they	have	one	Jew
named	Jesus,	crucified	everywhere	--	and	I	am	the	only	other	Jew	in	the	whole
school!	So	I	have	to	do	homework	and	everything	they	say.	Immediately	I	do	it,
because	I	don't	want	to	be	crucified!"
He	 is	 being	very	 sensible	 and	very	 rational.	He	 is	 only	 the	 second	 Jew	 ...	His
number	is	just	number	two	--	one	has	been	already	crucified.	Maybe	he	was	not
doing	his	homework	or	something	....
You	cannot	dance	when	Jesus	is	crucified.	When	all	your	gods	are	watching	you,
you	cannot	 love.	It	 is	 loving	in	a	crowd	of	gods,	who	will	be	all	pointing	their
Saint	Finger	towards	you:	"You	are	committing	a	crime!"
You	have	 to	 throw	away	all	 these	gods.	They	are	all	man	made,	so	 there	 is	no
need	 to	 be	 worried;	 they	 are	 our	 creation.	We	 have	 invented	 beautiful	 lies	 to
console	ourselves,	so	we	are	absolutely	capable	of	throwing	them	away;	nobody
can	prevent	you.
But	you	have	to	learn,	side	by	side.	As	you	are	clearing	the	ground,	start	singing
a	tune.
Start	moving	your	 legs;	 get	 out	 of	 the	 crippledness	 of	 centuries.	 It	 is	 not	 only
Jesus	who	is	crucified	--	all	those	who	believe	in	Jesus	are	living	a	crucified	life,
crippled.	Of	course	Jesus	cannot	dance!
That	would	have	been	a	real	miracle,	if	he	had	danced	on	the	cross.	He	could	not
even	laugh	--	that	would	have	been	a	real	miracle.	But	he	is	so	sad	that	perhaps
he	is	having	second	thoughts	...
And	he	shouted	at	God,	with	anger,	"Have	you	forsaken	me?"	Because	he	was
waiting	for	six	hours,	and	not	a	single	white	cloud.	The	whole	sky	was	blue,	as
far	he	could	see.
There	was	no	sign	of	God	coming.
At	 least	 he	 could	have	 sent	 some	 saints	 --	 if	 he	was	not	 coming	 then	 servants
would	do.
But	 somebody	 should	 have	 been	 there!	 Six	 hours	 he	 has	 been	 on	 the	 cross,
waiting	and	waiting,	and	looking	all	around,	and	finally	finding,	"It	seems	that	I
have	lived	in	a	false	consolation."	He	died	in	sadness.
That	sadness	pervades	every	church.	And	that	sadness	has	become	ingrained	all
over	 the	world.	Not	 only	 amongst	 the	Christians	 --	 because	Christianity	 is	 the
biggest	religion	in	the	world;	half	of	the	earth	is	Christian	--	other	religions	have
been	immensely	influenced,	without	their	knowing,	by	Christianity.
For	 example	 a	man	 like	Mahatma	Gandhi.	 I	 have	 looked	 very	 carefully	 and	 I
have	found	that	ninety	percent	he	was	a	Christian,	nine	percent	he	was	a	Jaina,
one	percent	he	was	a	Hindu	--	and	he	was	born	a	Hindu.	What	happened?	In	his
life,	three	times	he	was	just	on	the	verge	of	being	converted	into	Christianity.	His
wife	just	made	such	a	fuss	that	he	stopped.	He	said,	"Okay,	wait	 ..."	It	was	the
wife	who	prevented	him	from	becoming	Christian.	Many	wives	are	doing	great
jobs!	She	would	start	beating	her	chest	and	crying,
"We	are	Hindu,	and	what	are	you	doing?"	And	she	would	make	such	a	scene	that
neighbors	would	gather	 and	 they	would	 say,	 "This	 is	 not	 good.	She	 is	 right	 --
why	are	you	becoming	a	Christian?"
But	he	was	influenced,	and	it	is	happening	all	over.	You	can	see	how	Christianity
is	 influencing	 --	 because	 they	 serve	 the	 poor,	 every	 religion	 starts	 serving	 the
poor.
Otherwise	 they	will	 not	 look	 so	 religious	 as	 the	Christians.	The	Christians	 are
taking	care	of	the	orphans,	so	Hindus	have	to	open	orphanages,	otherwise	their
religion	 will	 look	 a	 little	 unconcerned	 about	 suffering	 people.	 So	 they	 open
hospitals,	which	they	have	never	done	in	the	past.	They	have	been	in	existence
thousands	of	years	before	Christ	and	they	have	never	made	hospitals,	they	have
never	served	the	poor.	They	have	told	the	poor,
"You	are	suffering	from	your	evil	acts	of	the	past	life,	so	there	is	nothing	to	be
done.	You	just	finish	it!	Get	cleared	out."
But	 Christianity	 has	 been	 a	 tremendous	 influence.	 It	 has	 poisoned	 almost	 the
whole	of	humanity,	made	them	sad	and	miserable.
So	once	you	 start	 feeling	 a	vacuum,	your	 sanity	 is	 at	 risk.	Before	 the	vacuum
comes,	 I	want	you	 to	 learn	how	 to	 fill	 it	with	beautiful	 songs	and	 flowers	and
ecstasy,	and	a	divine	drunkenness	and	a	festivity.
The	only	art	of	life	is	to	transform	it	into	a	celebration.
Question	2
The	second	question	I	have	already	answered.	It	is:
IS	IT	BECAUSE	OF	GOD	THAT	SOCIETY	CREATED	MADHOUSES?
Of	course!	Without	God	there	is	no	need	for	madhouses.	The	pagans	who	don't
have	 any	 God	 never	 go	 mad.	 Animals	 never	 go	 mad	 --	 I	 mean	 animals	 in
wildlife.	Animals	 in	 a	 zoo	of	 course	go	mad,	 because	 they	 are	 living	 amongst
insane	human	beings.	In	a	zoo	they	start	being	influenced	by	human	beings;	only
in	a	zoo	do	they	start	behaving	unnaturally.
Only	in	a	zoo	has	it	been	found	that	animals	turn	into	homosexuals	because	they
can't	find	a	female	animal.
A	zoo	has	 to	be	studied	very	carefully	--	your	monasteries	are	zoos	where	you
cannot	 find	 a	woman;	 your	 nunneries	 are	 zoos	where	 you	 cannot	 find	 a	man.
Then	women	turn	into	lesbians,	and	men	turn	into	homosexuals.
All	perversions	you	can	see	in	a	zoo.	In	a	zoo,	animals	go	mad	--	but	only	in	a
zoo.	It	seems	that	human	insanity	is	infectious.	But	in	wildlife,	in	the	forest,	no
animal	has	been	ever	 found	 insane	 --	utterly	 intelligent,	utterly	 sensitive,	alert,
completely	 alert.	 Because	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 god,	 they	 don't	 need	 any
madhouses.
God	creates	guilt.	Guilt	creates	unnatural	behavior.	Unnatural	behavior	leads	you
into	madhouses.	It	is	a	very	cunning	device.	Priests	and	psychoanalysts	are	in	a
deep	conspiracy	without	perhaps	knowing	it.	The	priest	creates	the	mad,	and	the
psychoanalysts	try	to	cure	them.	And	back	they	go	to	the	church!
People	are	moving	between	the	church	and	the	couch	of	the	psychoanalyst,	and
they	don't	understand	the	secret	conspiracy.
Question	3
The	third	question:
COULD	 IT	 BE	 THAT	 THE	WORD	 `GOD'	 IN	ANCIENT	 TIMES,	 BEFORE
THE
PRIESTS,	WAS	USED	BY	PEOPLE	TO	EXPLAIN	THE	UNEXPLAINABLE,
THE
DIVINE	EXISTENCE,	THE	NATURE	OF	BEING,	THE	BUDDHA?
Before	the	priest	there	was	no	God	--	not	even	the	word.	God	and	priests	come
simultaneously.	In	fact	the	priest	will	be	needed	to	come	in	first;	then	he	brings
God	in.
God	cannot	exist	without	priests.
There	was	no	God	before	 the	priests.	People	were	 just	pagans;	 they	 loved	 life,
they	rejoiced	in	life.	They	had	no	idea	of	heaven	or	hell.	This	earth	was	enough,
this	life	was	too	much;	they	lived	moment	to	moment.	In	fact	they	had	no	idea	of
calendar	and	time,	because	they	had	no	watches	and	no	calendars.	They	had	no
idea	when	the	year	ends	and	when	the	year	begins.	They	had	no	idea	how	many
days	are	in	a	week,	how	many	days	are	in	a	month,	how	many	months	there	are
in	a	year.	All	these	things	came	very	late.
If	 you	 had	 gone	 to	 the	 real,	 the	 original	 people	 on	 the	 earth	 they	 were	 the
happiest	 people	 ever.	 They	 simply	 lived	 --	 without	 fear,	 without	 greed.	 They
loved	nature.	Everything	was	mysterious,	miraculous.	A	sunrise	again,	and	they
danced;	a	 full	moon	again,	and	 the	whole	night	 they	danced	 to	abandon.	They
had	 no	 God	 and	 they	 had	 no	 madhouses;	 they	 had	 no	 priests	 and	 no
psychoanalysts.	They	had	not	heard	about	the	buddha,	yet	they	were	all	buddhas.
But	very	natural	buddhas,	not	philosophizing	about	it,	so	they	never	used	words
like	"inexpressible,	unexplainable,	the	divine	existence,	the	nature	of	being,	the
buddha	..."	All	this	nonsense	comes	afterwards!
When	 the	 priests	 came	 they	 took	 power	 in	 their	 hands	 and	 declared,	 "We
represent	God
..."	 It	 took	a	 little	 longer	 time	 for	 the	priests	 to	 invent	God	and	 slowly	 slowly
refine	it.
And	they	are	still	refining	and	trying	to	deceive	humanity	even	into	the	future.
That	was	what	Paul	Tillich	was	doing	--	trying	to	improve	the	image	of	God.	If
God	has	 failed	as	 someone	 far	away	 there,	beyond,	perhaps	we	should	change
his	place.
That	shows	that	it	is	our	idea	that	he	is	there:	"We	should	change	our	idea.	That
idea	 has	 failed;	 it	 worked	 long	 enough.	 Now	 put	 God	 into	 the	 depths.	 Not
faraway	 there,	 but	 faraway	 THERE."	 But	 it	 is	 far	 away	 always,	 because	 they
cannot	put	it	close	by.	Close	by	you	will	see	this	is	not	God.	So	it	has	to	be	far
away	--	either	way,	this	side	or	that	side.
But	far	away	has	to	be	there	between	you	and	him,	an	unbridgeable	distance	so
you	never	can	come	to	see	him	and	take	a	close-up	photograph.
No	 photograph	 exists	 because	 nobody	 has	 ever	 been	 close	 to	 God	 to	 take	 a
photograph.
Priests	have	been	 trying	 to	 improve	 the	 image	so	 it	appeals	again	 to	 the	newer
generations,	but	now	they	cannot	manage	it.	Once	it	is	declared	God	is	dead,	you
may	 go	 on	 giving	 him	 artificial	 breathing,	 but	 everybody	 knows	 he	 is	 on
artificial	breathing.	Just	switch	off	and	the	fellow	is	gone.
A	little	biographical	note	before	the	sutras	...
AS	A	YOUNG	MAN,	TANKA	TENNEN	FIRST	STUDIED	CONFUCIANISM.
Confucius	seems	to	be	a	giant	in	creating	confusion!	He	has	confused	the	whole
of	China	for	centuries.
He	has	no	God,	but	he	substitutes	God	with	morality,	and	he	makes	so	much	of
moral	 preachings	 that	 people	 have	 to	 live	 in	 a	 tight	 space,	 almost	 imprisoned.
And	he	became	a	great	influence	over	China.
He	was	a	great	 intellectual,	no	doubt,	but	he	never	 looked	beyond	intellect.	So
whatever	 he	 says	 is	 just	 rationalization,	 creating	 more	 convenient	 societies.
Etiquette,	 morality,	 behavior,	 all	 are	 based	 on	 creating	 a	 better	 society.	 It	 is
because	of	Confucius	that	China	easily	became	communist,	although	Confucius
lived	twenty-five	centuries	ago,	a	contemporary	of	Gautam	Buddha	and	Lao	Tzu
and	Socrates.
China's	conversion	 to	communism	is	strange,	because	 it	was	a	poor	country,	 it
did	not	have	a	capitalist	class	to	exploit.	It	was	still	feudal	with	landlords;	it	was
an	agricultural	society.	It	has	not	come	to	technology	yet.
Marx	failed	in	all	his	prophecies.	He	is	the	greatest	failure	as	a	prophet.	He	never
said	that	Russia	would	become	communist,	or	China	would	become	communist,
no.	 He	 could	 not	 conceive,	 because	 these	 countries	 were	 not	 even	 capitalist;
communism	can	only	come,	according	to	him,	after	capitalism	has	developed	to
its	 climax	 and	 society	 is	 completely	divided	between	 the	proletariat,	 the	have-
nots,	and	the	bourgeois,	the	haves	--
a	clear-cut	distinction.	Naturally	the	haves	will	be	in	the	minority	and	the	have-
nots	will	have	a	tremendous	majority.
In	 his	 Communist	 Manifesto	 the	 last	 line	 is:	 "Proletariat	 of	 the	 whole	 world
unite.	You	have	nothing	to	lose	except	your	chains."	When	you	have	nothing	to
lose,	 revolution	 is	 possible.	 But	 if	 you	 have	 something	 to	 lose	 you	 cannot
become	 part	 of	 a	 revolution;	 there	 is	 danger,	 you	may	 not	 get	 anything.	 And
what	you	have	got	may	get	lost	--	that	may	also	be	taken	away.
China	and	Russia	both	were	never	conceived.	Not	even	for	a	single	moment	did
it	come	to	Karl	Marx's	mind	that	they	would	become	the	first	communists	--	vast
countries,	both	together	almost	half	of	the	world.
China	 became	 communist	 because	 of	 Confucius,	 because	 Confucius	 was
absolutely	materialist.	No	God,	no	heaven,	no	hell;	you	come	from	nothingness
and	you	go	to	nothingness.	There	is	no	life	before	birth,	and	there	is	no	life	after
death.	 So	 all	 that	 you	 have	 got	 are	 these	 seventy,	 eighty,	 ninety,	 perhaps	 one
hundred	 years.	 Make	 the	 most	 of	 it.	 So	 his	 whole	 teaching	 is	 a	 materialist
morality.	Because	you	are	not	alone,	you	are	living	in	a	society,	you	have	to	take
care	that	you	don't	trespass	other	people.
His	whole	idea	is	ethical,	not	religious.	He	managed	to	lay	the	foundation	of	the
Chinese	 mind,	 and	 Karl	 Marx	 immediately	 got	 a	 completely	 ready-made
foundation:	materialist,	 atheist,	 believing	only	 in	 this	 life,	 no	eternal	being,	no
eternal	life.	That	was	the	reason	China	easily	became	communist.	Confucius	had
done	almost	half	the	work.
But	 he	was	 a	 well-known	 teacher,	 so	 people	 used	 to	 go	 to	 that	 great	 scholar.
Even	the	emperors	used	to	send	their	sons	to	learn	how	to	be	utterly	moral.	That
would	give	you	the	ego	--	he	created	ego.	He	believed	in	strengthening	your	ego,
polishing	your	ego;	giving	 it	 a	prestige,	an	 image	 that	would	be	 respectable	 in
society.	But	he	had	nothing	of	religiousness	in	him.
So	when	 this	 young	man,	Tanka	Tennen,	 first	 studied	Confucianism	 ...	 he	 had
gone	 there	 in	search	of	something	essential,	not	outward	behavior.	One	day	he
was	on	his	way	 to	 the	city	 --	 frustrated	with	Confucius;	all	 that	he	was	saying
was	about	social	behavior.	He	was	the	first	behavioral	psychologist.
ONE	 DAY	 HE	 WAS	 ON	 HIS	 WAY	 TO	 THE	 CITY	 WHEN	 HE	 CAME
ACROSS	A	MAN	OF	ZEN,	WHO	ASKED	WHERE	HE	WAS	GOING.
TANKA	REPLIED,	"I	AM	GOING	FOR	THE	GOVERNMENT	SERVICE
EXAMINATION."
That	 was	 the	 most	 respected,	 prestigious	 profession,	 and	 being	 a	 student	 of
Confucius	he	would	be	accepted	 for	any	high	post.	The	very	 recommendation,
that	he	had	been	with	Confucius,	was	grounds	enough	that	he	was	the	right	man.
THE	 ZEN	 MAN	 SAID,	 "MASTER	 MA	 TZU	 IS	 WORKING	 IN	 KOSEI
COUNTY.
THAT	 IS	 THE	 PLACE	 FOR	 CHOOSING	 BUDDHAS	 --	 YOU	 MUST	 GO
THERE.
Rather	than	going	into	government	service,	at	least	give	it	a	try.	Ma	Tzu	is	very
close	by,	where	buddhas	are	blossoming.	You	can	go	to	the	government	service
any	time	--	but	Ma	Tzu	may	not	be	available.	Such	a	great	master	is	so	close	by,
just	working	in	Kosei	county.	You	must	go	there."
Suddenly,	the	hidden	desire	that	had	led	him	to	Confucius	--	and	Confucius	had
completely	changed	his	search	for	truth.	He	used	to	say,	"There	is	only	behavior
--	good	behavior,	bad	behavior	--	there	is	no	truth	to	be	found.	Don't	waste	your
time."	So	he	overpowered	the	young	man,	convinced	him	that	the	best	thing	is,
"You	 are	 intelligent,	 you	 go	 into	 government	 service.	 And	 with	 my
recommendation	you	will	be	immediately	accepted."
Suddenly	a	hidden	seed	surfaced.	Because	of	this	man	of	Zen	...	A	man	of	Zen
simply	means	 a	man	who	 has	 become	 a	 buddha	 but	who	 is	 not	 a	master.	 He
knows	 the	 truth	but	he	has	no	way	of	conveying	 it.	He	 is	a	mystic	 in	his	own
right	 but	 he	 is	 not	 a	 master;	 he	 is	 not	 articulate	 enough	 to	 manage	 the
inexpressible	in	some	device	to	be	conveyed	to	you.
He	 does	 not	 know	 how	 to	 transmit	 the	 lamp.	 So	 he	 ...	 that	 type	 of	mystic	 is
simply	called,	in	Zen,	"a	man	of	Zen."	He	is	as	experienced	as	any	buddha,	but
because	he	 is	 not	 a	master,	 he	knows	 the	 truth	but	he	has	not	 the	way	 to	 lead
others	to	it.	But	his	personality	will	be	luminous,	his	eyes	will	have	a	different
quality,	his	gestures	will	have	a	different	grace.
So	when	this	man	of	Zen	met	the	young	man	and	told	Tanka,	"Master	Ma	Tzu	is
working	in	Kosei	county;	that	is	the	place	for	choosing	buddhas	--	you	must	go
there,"	 without	 any	 hesitation,	 without	 thinking	 again	 that	 he	 was	 going	 to
become	 a	 government	 officer	 and	 suddenly	 he	 has	moved	 on	 a	 different	 path
altogether,	Tanka	went	to	Kosei.	He	did	not	even	answer	the	man,	"I	am	going."
Such	 a	 deep	 search	 must	 have	 been	 hidden,	 and	 forced	 deeply	 into	 the
unconscious	by	Confucius.	 It	 suddenly	 surfaced.	Seeing	 this	man	was	 enough,
that	the	path	is	towards	Ma	Tzu.	If	this	man,	who	is	not	a	master,	has	an	aura	of
mystery	around	him,	an	energy,	a	charisma,	 then	what	about	Ma	Tzu?	Without
saying	anything	to	him,	TANKA	WENT	TO	KOSEI	RIGHT	AWAY.	WHEN	HE
SAW	MA	TZU,	THE
MASTER	 PULLED	 TANKA'S	 HEAD	 TOWARDS	 HIM	AND	 LOOKED	AT
HIM	--
into	his	eyes	--	FACE	TO	FACE,	FOR	A	LONG	TIME.	THEN	MA	TZU	SAID,
"SEKITO	OF	MOUNT	NANGAKU	WILL	BE	YOUR	MASTER."
He	was	looking	into	this	young	man's	eyes	--	what	kind	of	potential?	Who	will
be	the	right	master	for	him?	Should	I	accept	him?	Will	it	be	quicker	with	me	or
with	Sekito?
And	you	can	see	the	non-competitive	world	of	Zen.	He	saw	in	the	young	man's
eyes	that	Sekito	would	be	a	far	more	suitable	master	for	him	than	he	would.	So
he	told	him,
"Sekito	of	Mount	Nangaku	will	be	your	master."
Seeing	Ma	Tzu,	he	could	see	the	difference	between	a	man	of	Zen	and	a	master
of	Zen.	A	man	of	Zen	is	a	small	flame;	a	master	of	Zen	is	the	whole	forest	afire.
And	when	Ma	Tzu	looked	into	his	eyes,	he	was	also	looking	into	the	eyes	of	Ma
Tzu.	He	could	 see	 the	compassion,	 the	great	 love.	 It	 is	out	of	 compassion	and
love	that	he	tells	him,	"Go	to	Sekito.	That	will	be	quicker;	here	it	will	take	a	little
longer	time.	Why	waste	time?"	And	he	was	so	much	impressed	by	Ma	Tzu	that
he	immediately	followed	his	advice.
SO	 TANKA	 WENT	 TO	 MOUNT	 NANGAKU.	 WHEN	 HE	 SAW	 SEKITO,
SEKITO
SAID	TO	TANKA,	"GO	AND	WORK	IN	THE	RICE-POLISHING	ROOM."
It	almost	always	happens	in	Zen	monasteries	when	a	new	initiate	comes	in,	the
master,	even	when	he	enters	the	room	--	the	way	he	walks,	the	way	he	sits	--	the
master	 is	witnessing	what	will	be	 right	 for	him	 in	 the	beginning.	He	has	 to	be
trained	 according	 to	 his	 potential.	 No	 Zen	 master	 ever	 imposes	 himself	 on
anybody.	So	Sekito	said	 to	him,	 looking	at	him,	he	felt	 that	he	needed	to	 learn
first,	waiting.	He	said,	"Go	and	work	in	the	rice-polishing	room."
TANKA	MADE	A	BOW	AND	LEFT	FOR	THE	DORMITORY.	HE	WORKED
IN	THE
KITCHEN	FOR	THREE	YEARS.
He	never	went	again	to	ask	Sekito,	"How	long	do	I	have	to	polish	rice?"
A	Zen	master	creates	such	a	tremendous	trust.
It	is	not	belief	--	belief	is	in	theories,	theologies.
Trust	 is	 a	 personal	 intimacy,	 a	 feeling	 that	 "he	 understands	me;	 that's	 enough.
Now	whenever	the	time	is	ripe	he	will	call	me."
People	have	waited	not	only	three	years	but	thirty	years,	polishing	rice.
Once	it	happened	...
The	man	was	polishing	rice	for	thirty	years,	and	the	master	had	told	him,	"Unless
I	 call	 you,	 you	 should	 not	 come.	 And	 you	 are	 not	 to	 attend	 the	 scholarly
discussions	 in	 the	 monastery,	 you	 are	 not	 to	 read	 the	 scriptures.	 You	 simply
polish	rice	from	the	morning	till	late	in	the	night.	There	are	ten	thousand	monks,
and	you	have	to	take	care	of	the	rice."
So	 for	 thirty	 years	 the	man	 completely	 forgot	 thinking	 --	 because	what	 is	 the
need	 of	 thinking	when	 you	 are	 just	 polishing	 rice	 every	 day	 for	 thirty	 years?
Almost	 half	 of	 his	 life	 had	 gone	 into	 polishing	 rice.	 And	 it	 is	 such	 a	 simple
process	you	don't	need	any	mind,	you	don't	need	any	thinking.	And	he	had	been
prohibited	 from	 going	 to	 the	 discourses,	 going	 to	 the	 sermons,	 going	 to	 the
discussions	of	the	monks,	told	not	to	read	scriptures.
He	had	been	prevented	completely	from	anything	 that	could	create	a	mind.	He
had	 been	 given	 a	 simple	 task	 that	 was	 going	 to	 uncreate	 the	mind.	Whatever
mind	he	had	got	would	be	uncreated.
And	these	people	were	of	great	strength,	 integrity.	Just	 to	wait	 for	 thirty	years,
without	any	complaint,	without	even	seeing	the	master	again	...	and	because	the
master	had	said,
"This	 is	 the	only	 thing	you	have	 to	do."	He	was	not	even	 talking	 to	any	other
monk.
People	had	completely	forgotten	about	him.
He	lived	in	a	small	hut	by	the	side	of	the	kitchen.	In	the	morning	he	would	enter
the	kitchen;	 late	 in	 the	night	he	would	 fall	back	 into	 the	hut,	go	 to	sleep.	This
was	a	simple	process.	In	thirty	years'	time	there	was	no	mind.
And	an	incident	happened.	The	master	was	getting	old,	and	seeing	that	his	death
was	coming	close,	he	informed	the	ten	thousand	monks	--	excluding	the	one	who
was	 just	polishing	 the	 rice	 --	 "If	 anybody	wants	 to	be	my	successor	he	 should
come	 in	 the	 night	 and	write	 on	my	 door	 just	 the	 essence,	 the	 very	 essence	 of
Zen."
There	were	 great	 scholars,	 and	 the	whole	monastery	 knew	who	was	 the	most
scholarly	person;	perhaps	he	would	be	chosen.	That	scholarly	person,	when	the
master	had	gone	to	sleep,	stole	very	silently	so	that	nobody	would	find	who	had
written	it.	He	was	even	afraid;	he	knew	the	master.	You	could	not	deceive	him,
that	was	 certain.	And	 he	 himself	 knew	 that	 he	 knew	nothing	 of	Zen	 as	 far	 as
experience	was	 concerned,	 although	he	 could	make	 a	 scholarly	 statement.	But
that	old	fellow	was	not	going	to	be	deceived	by	scholarship.
And	he	made	a	beautiful	statement;	he	wrote	it	on	the	door,	very	silently	so	that
the	master	did	not	wake	up:	"Zen	is	nothing	but	getting	out	of	the	mind,	and	the
beyond	opens	its	doors."	But	he	did	not	sign	it,	afraid,	and	very	cautious	--	"If	he
finds	it	right,	I	will	stand	up	and	say	I	have	written	it.	If	he	finds	it	wrong,	I	will
simply	sit	silently."
That	old	fellow	used	to	beat	the	disciples.
In	the	morning,	when	the	master	opened	the	door	and	saw	the	sentence,	he	said,
"Who	is	the	idiot	who	has	written	this?"	And	there	was	no	answer	from	the	ten
thousand	monks.
So	he	washed	it	off,	and	said,	"Don't	destroy	my	door!	Unless	you	know	...	I	can
die	without	a	successor,	but	I	will	not	have	any	scholar	to	be	my	successor."
Of	course	the	statement	was	perfectly	good,	you	could	not	improve	on	it:	"Zen	is
going	beyond	the	mind."	It	could	not	be	condensed	more	clearly	and	accurately.
But	masters	have	their	own	ways	of	finding	....
Two	monks	 simply	 passed	 by	 the	 rice	 polisher.	 People	 did	 not	 even	 know	his
name,	they	simply	called	him	the	rice	polisher.	They	did	not	consider	him	even	a
monk;	he	had	never	 told	 anybody	 that	 he	had	been	 initiated,	 and	nobody	 ever
bothered	 about	 him,	what	 his	 name	was.	He	 never	 came	 to	 the	 discourses,	 he
never	 came	 to	 meditations,	 he	 never	 came	 to	 scholarly	 discussions.	 And	 the
whole	 campus	 was	 agog	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 philosophical	 discussions;	 when
scriptures	are	read,	sutras	from	Gautam	Buddha	were	read,	he	never	came.	What
kind	 of	man	 ...?	 Just	 doing	 one	 thing	 ...	 people	 had	 completely	 forgotten	 how
many	years	he	had	been	doing	it.
Two	men	was	just	passing	by,	discussing,	"The	sentence	was	perfectly	right,	but
this	old	fellow	is	very	strange	...	How	did	he	manage	to	find	that	it	is	a	scholarly
statement	but	not	existential,	not	experiential?"
For	the	first	time	the	rice-polisher	monk	laughed.	In	thirty	years	that	was	the	first
expression.	 Those	 two	 monks	 looked	 at	 him,	 and	 they	 said,	 "Why	 have	 you
laughed?	And	we	have	never	seen	you	laughing	..."
He	said,	"I	laughed	because	whoever	wrote	that	must	be	an	idiot!"
They	 said,	 "Exactly	 --	 these	 were	 the	 words	 of	 the	 master!	 Can	 you	 write
something	better?"
He	said,	"I	don't	know	how	to	write.	I	have	forgotten.	In	thirty	years	the	little	bit
I	 knew	 how	 to	 write,	 I	 have	 forgotten.	 And	 anyway	 who	 wants	 to	 be	 the
successor?"
They	were	 shocked,	 "This	man	 is	 strange.	 Thirty	 years	 completely	 silent,	 and
suddenly	exploding	..."
In	the	middle	of	the	night	the	master	came	to	the	rice-polisher	and	he	said,	"Can
you	improve	upon	it?"	The	rice-polisher	monk	said,	"There	is	no	mind;	how	are
you	going	to	go	beyond	it?	And	there	is	no	beyond	--	all	is	here	and	now.	One
has	to	go	nowhere,	not	even	beyond	mind.	Mind	is	a	fiction,	and	the	people	have
created	another	fiction	of	going	beyond	the	mind.	But	forgive	me.	I	don't	want	to
be	your	successor.	I	am	so	happy.	You	are	such	a	great	man,	you	gave	me	such	a
meditative	job	..."
The	master	 said,	 "You	 will	 have	 to	 accept	 my	 successorship	 because	 there	 is
nobody	 else	whom	 I	 can	 trust.	 They	 are	 all	 filled	 up	with	 scholarship	 and	 all
kinds	of	knowledge.	You	are	the	right	person,	and	I	have	been	waiting	for	these
thirty	 years:	 perhaps	 you	 will	 be	 the	 successor.	 This	 waiting	 proved	 to	 me
absolutely	 that	 you	 must	 have	 experienced	 something	 that	 is	 keeping	 you
centered,	without	any	worry,	no	tension.	You	have	not	even	uttered	a	single	word
to	anybody;	you	just	do	your	job	and	go	to	sleep.	But	one	thing:	these	scholars
and	 these	 ambitious	 people	will	 create	 trouble	 for	 you.	 So	 I	 have	 brought	my
robe	and	my	staff	and	my	cap"	--	these	are	the	things	that	the	successor	gets	from
the	master.	 "So	 take	 this	 robe,	 this	 staff,	 and	 this	 cap."	He	 put	 it	 on	 the	 rice-
polisher	monk's	head,	and	told	him	to	escape	from	the	monastery	as	quickly	as
possible.
"Just	go	deeper	into	the	mountains.	Those	who	need	will	reach	you.	But	beware!
If	anybody	finds	it	out	from	this	monastery	they	are	going	to	kill	you.	They	will
not	accept	a	rice-polisher	monk	as	their	master."
So	 the	 poor	 fellow	 took	 the	 robe,	 the	 staff,	 and	 escaped.	 But	 while	 he	 was
escaping	from	the	gate,	 the	gatekeeper	saw	him	with	 the	robe	and	with	 the	hat
and	the	staff	of	the	master.	So	he	immediately	informed	all	the	ambitious	monks
who	were	 trying,	working	out	how	 to	 improve,	 "Now	stop!	The	man	has	been
chosen."
They	said,	"Who	is	the	man?"
They	said,	"Do	you	remember	a	man	who	came	thirty	years	ago	and	never	spoke
for	thirty	years?	The	rice-polisher!	I	saw	him	just	going	out	of	the	gate	with	the
master's	staff	and	cap	on	his	head,	and	the	robe	he	was	carrying	in	his	hand	and
running!"
So,	many	 ambitious	people	 took	 their	 swords	 and	 rushed	 towards	 the	way	 the
guard	 had	 told	 them.	And	 they	 soon	 found	 that	 poor	 rice	 polisher,	 surrounded
him	with	 their	 swords,	 and	 told	him,	 "Give	 the	 robe.	You	don't	 know	a	 single
word	about	Zen."
The	poor	man	laughed.	He	said,	"Do	you	think	 there	 is	a	word	 that	one	has	 to
know	before	he	knows	Zen?"
They	were	 shocked.	 It	was	 true,	 but	 still	 their	 ambition	 ...	 and	 they	 could	 not
accept	him.
But	he	said,	"There	is	no	problem.	Keep	your	swords	in	their	sheath,	there	is	no
need	to	be	worried.	This	is	the	cap"	--	he	threw	the	cap	on	the	ground.	"And	this
is	the	robe,	and	this	is	the	staff.	If	you	can	take	it,	take	it."
But	although	they	were	ambitious,	they	had	a	certain	sensibility,	living	with	the
master	so	long.	How	could	they	take	it?	If	the	master	had	given	it	to	him,	then	it
would	be	absolutely	wrong.	And	they	knew	that	they	knew	not,	and	this	fellow
seemed	to	know.	It	did	not	matter	that	he	was	a	rice-polisher.
So	they	touched	his	feet	and	said,	"We	were	wrong.	We	were	just	ambitious.	You
please	come	back."
He	said,	"But	I	don't	want	to	be	the	successor.	I	had	refused,	but	the	old	man	was
so	insistent.	You	please	take	all	these	things.	Whoever	wants	to	be	the	successor,
he	can.	I	am	going	to	the	mountains."
They	said,	"No,	you	have	to	come	back."
He	became	the	successor.
Zen	is	a	very	strange	path.	No	scholarship	 is	needed,	no	knowledge	 is	needed.
What	 is	needed	 is	 an	 immense	 silence,	 and	waiting,	watching	 ...	whenever	 the
time	is	ripe,	existence	pours	all	its	mysteries	into	you.
So	for	thirty	years	he	worked	in	the	kitchen.
Now	the	sutra:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ONE	 DAY,	 SEKITO	 ANNOUNCED	 TO	 EVERYBODY	 THAT	 THE	 NEXT
DAY
THEY	WOULD	WEED	THE	GRASS	IN	FRONT	OF	THE	BUDDHA	HALL.
THE
FOLLOWING	 DAY,	 ALL	 THE	 MONKS	 GATHERED	 WITH	 SICKLES	 IN
THEIR
HANDS,	 BUT	 ONLY	 TANKA	 CAME	 WITH	 A	 TRAY	 FILLED	 WITH
WATER.
BEFORE	 COMING	 THERE	 HE	 HAD	WASHED	 HIS	 HAIR,	 BUT	 IT	WAS
NOT	YET
SHAVEN.	 NOW	 HE	 KNEELED	 DOWN	 IN	 FRONT	 OF	 SEKITO,	 AND
SEEING	 HIM,	 SEKITO	 LAUGHED,	 AND	 SHAVED	 TANKA'S	 HEAD.	 AS
THE	MASTER
USUALLY	 DID,	 SEKITO	 GAVE	 TANKA	 SOME	 SPECIFIC
COMMANDMENTS,	 BUT	 AS	 HE	 DID	 SO,	 TANKA	 WALKED	 AWAY
COVERING	HIS	EARS	WITH	HIS
HANDS
--	giving	the	gesture	that	"I	don't	need	any	knowledge,	I	know	it.	Don't	fill	my
ears	with	nonsense.	Don't	fill	my	ears	with	words.	I	have	come	to	experience	the
wordless."	That	gesture	shows	that	Tanka	had	arrived.
TANKA	THEN	LEFT	FOR	KOSEI	TO	SEE	MA	TZU.	ARRIVING	AT	THE
MONASTERY	--	because	 it	was	Ma	Tzu	who	had	sent	him	to	Sekito;	now	he
had	completed	the	job.	He	got	his	head	shaved	after	he	had	completed	the	job.
Ordinarily,	when	one	becomes	a	monk	his	head	is	shaved.	But	because	he	was
told	immediately	to	go	to	the	kitchen	and	work	there	...	In	those	three	years	just
waiting	 and	watching	 and	 being	 aware,	 he	 realized	 his	 very	 nature.	 That	 very
nature	is	the	buddha,	so	now	was	the	right	time	to	be	initiated.	Before	it,	it	would
have	been	a	formal	 initiation.	Now	it	was	going	to	be	authentic	 initiation.	And
that's	why,	when	he	bowed	down	in	front	of	the	master,	Sekito	laughed	--	"This
fellow	is	really	clever!	He	has	not	even	shaved	his	head	for	these	three	years.	He
was	waiting	for	the	moment	when	he	would	be	really	worthy	of	initiation."
He	shaved	his	head,	and	as	every	master	does	after	shaving	the	head	--	that	is	the
initiation	process	--	he	gave	him	a	few	commandments.	But	as	he	did	so	--	gave
the	 commandments	 --	 TANKA	 WALKED	 AWAY,	 COVERING	 HIS	 EARS
WITH	HIS
HANDS,	 showing	 absolutely	 to	 Sekito	 that	 "You	 don't	 have	 to	 teach	 me
anything.	You	have	put	me	in	the	device	and	I	have	come	to	the	space	where	no
teaching	is	needed."
TANKA	THEN	LEFT	KOSEI	TO	SEE	MA	TZU,	because	he	was	his	original
master	who	had	looked	into	his	eyes,	and	directed	him	to	the	right	place	where
he	could	become	quickly	 a	buddha.	He	needed	 to	 show	his	gratitude,	 to	 show
what	he	had	attained	and	get	his	recognition.
ARRIVING	 AT	 THE	 MONASTERY	 HE	 WENT	 INTO	 THE	 HALL	 AND,
CLIMBING
ON	THE	STATUE	OF	MANJUSHRI,	SAT	THERE.
Manjushri	is	one	of	Gautam	Buddha's	very	important	enlightened	disciples.	He
chose	the	statue	of	Manjushri	--	there	must	have	been	other	statues,	of	Sariputra,
of	Mahakashyapa,	of	Maudgalyan,	other	disciples	who	had	become	enlightened
when	Gautam	Buddha	was	alive.	So	 they	are	 the	original	 forces.	Manjushri	he
had	chosen	for	a	particular	reason,	because	...	I	have	to	tell	you	a	little	bit	about
Manjushri.
Manjushri	 was	 always	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree,	 the	 same	 tree.	 He	 never	 asked	 a
question	 to	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 never	 read	 any	 scriptures.	 Every	 day	 he	 would
come	whenever	Gautam	Buddha	was	talking,	in	the	morning,	in	the	evening.	He
would	 sit	 under	 the	 tree	with	 his	 eyes	 closed.	And	 everybody	was	wondering
why	he	did	not	ask	anything.
One	 day,	 suddenly	 in	 the	 morning	 as	 Buddha	 came	 ...	 Manjushri	 was	 sitting
under	 his	 tree.	 Suddenly,	 flowers	 from	 the	 tree	 started	 falling	 over	Manjushri.
The	 tree	must	have	been	blossoming	with	hundreds	of	 flowers,	 and	 they	were
showering	like	rain.	And	Buddha	told	the	whole	ten	thousand	disciples	to	look	at
what	was	happening.	All	looked	-
-	they	could	not	believe	their	eyes.	Why	were	all	the	flowers	suddenly	falling	on
Manjushri's	head,	his	body,	his	lap?	He	was	almost	covered	with	flowers.
Gautam	Buddha	declared:	"Manjushri	has	become	enlightened.	Even	the	tree	is
giving	him	recognition.	Existence	is	celebrating."
And	Manjushri	had	arrived	without	asking	a	question,	without	getting	an	answer
--	 just	waiting	 silently.	Nature	was	 celebrating.	One	 of	 nature's	 ambitions	was
fulfilled:	 one	 man	 again	 had	 become	 a	 buddha,	 had	 reached	 to	 the	 ultimate
consciousness.
Tanka	 certainly	 chose	 the	 statue	 of	Manjushri	 and	 sat	 upon	 it:	 THE	 OTHER
MONKS	 WERE	 ASTONISHED	 AND	 TOLD	 MA	 TZU,	 WHO	 CAME	 IN,
LOOKED	AT	HIM	AND	SAID,	"MY	SON	IS	TENNEN."
In	Chinese,	 tennen	means	natural.	That	was	 the	very	quality	of	Manjushri.	He
had	 become	 attuned	 with	 nature.	 Just	 sitting	 with	 that	 tree,	 he	 had	 become
almost	one	with	it.
So	 when	 he	 became	 enlightened	 the	 tree	 could	 not	 resist	 the	 temptation	 to
shower	all	the	flowers	--	not	a	single	flower	was	left	on	the	tree.	All	the	flowers
had	showered.
So	Manjushri's	enlightenment	is	called	natural,	spontaneous	enlightenment,	with
no	method,	with	no	device.	Tennen	means	natural,	and	when	Ma	Tzu	saw	him
sitting	on	the	statue	of	Manjushri	...	and	every	disciple	of	Ma	Tzu	was	stunned,
they	could	not	believe	how	this	man	was	behaving.	But	Ma	Tzu	could	see:	the
man	had	changed.	It	was	no	longer	the	same	man	whose	eyes	he	had	looked	into.
He	simply	said,	"My	son	is	Tennen."	My	son	is	just	natural,	a	natural	buddha.
TANKA	CAME	DOWN,	MADE	A	 BOW	AND	 SAID,	 "THANK	YOU	 FOR
GIVING
ME	A	DHARMA	NAME."
He	 accepted	 that	word	 `tennen'	 as	 his	 dharma	 name,	 his	 sannyas	 name.	 Since
that	time	he	started	calling	himself	Tanka	Tennen.	Tanka,	the	natural	one.
MA	TZU	THEN	ASKED,	"WHERE	DO	YOU	COME	FROM?"
TANKA	SAID,	"I	COME	FROM	SEKITO."
MA	TZU	SAID,	"THE	PATH	ON	THE	STONEHEAD	IS	SLIPPERY.	DID	YOU
FALL
OVER?"
TANKA	 REPLIED,	 "IF	 I	 HAD	 FALLEN	 OVER,	 I	 WOULD	 NOT	 HAVE
COME
HERE."	I	would	have	waited.	I	have	not	fallen	over,	I	have	risen	above.
That's	why	he	was	sitting	on	the	head	of	Manjushri	--	declaring,	"I	am	another
Manjushri	and	I	have	not	fallen	over;	otherwise	I	would	not	be	here.	I	would	not
have	come	to	show	my	face	to	you	again	without	becoming	a	buddha."
This	 man,	 Tanka	 Tennen,	 became	 a	 master	 in	 his	 own	 right.	 But	 his	 whole
teaching	was	just	to	be	natural.
That's	my	whole	 teaching:	 just	 to	be	natural.	Nature	 is	dhamma,	nature	 is	Tao,
nature	 is	Zen.	And	 the	moment	you	are	natural,	 flowers	will	 shower	over	you.
The	 moment	 you	 will	 be	 natural,	 not	 only	 will	 you	 celebrate	 and	 dance,	 the
whole	existence	around	you	will	dance	and	celebrate.
Hakuin	wrote:
YOUR	SINGING-AND-DANCING
IS	NONE	OTHER	THAN	THE	VOICE	OF	DHARMA.
Your	celebration,	your	singing-and-dancing,	is	none	other	than	your	very	nature.
And	this	nature	has	been	crippled	by	your	so-called	religions	--	your	God,	your
priests,	your	theologians.
Zen	 is	 a	 rebellion	 against	 all	 religion.	 It	 is	 all	 for	 religiousness	 but	 not	 for
religion.
Religiousness	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon	 than	 religion.	 Religion	 is	 a
doctrine,	a	creed,	a	cult,	an	organization.	Religiousness	is	simply	a	quality	that
naturally	blossoms	in	you.	You	have	just	to	go	deep	down	into	yourself	to	find
the	seed	of	the	buddha	that	exists	at	the	very	center	of	your	being.
All	our	meditations	are	concerned	only	with	one	 thing:	how	to	 take	you	 to	 the
seed	where	the	buddha	is	hidden,	just	as	flowers	are	hidden	in	a	seed.	And	once
you	have	reached	to	the	center,	the	seed	starts	growing.
Then,	 becoming	 a	 buddha	 is	 not	 a	 faraway	 phenomenon.	 You	 have	 started
becoming	 a	 buddha,	 you	 have	 started	 on	 the	 path	 which	 brings	 the
transformation.	Right	now	you	are	all	bodhisattvas,	buddhas	in	essence,	in	seed.
If	you	can	find	out	 the	center	of	your	being	you	have	found	the	very	center	of
existence.
Just	 finding	 it,	 and	 immediately	 something	 starts	 growing	 in	 you	 --	 a	 huge
buddha	 suddenly	 surfaces.	 You	 disappear.	 You	 are	 completely	 gone	 into	 the
ocean,	just	like	a	dewdrop.	You	are	no	more,	only	life	is	--	dancing,	celebrating.
Question	4
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
NIETZSCHE	 SUGGESTS	 THAT	 MAN	 ONLY	 SEARCHES	 FOR	 TRUTH
BECAUSE
HE	PRESUPPOSES	THAT	TRUTH	IS	A	CONSOLATION,	A	CURE.	BUT,	HE
SAYS,	 PERHAPS	 TRUTH	 "EXISTS	 ONLY	 FOR	 SOULS	WHICH	 ARE	 AT
ONCE
POWERFUL	AND	HARMLESS,	AND	FULL	OF	JOY	AND	PEACE	...	JUST
AS	IT
WILL	 NO	 DOUBT	 BE	 ONLY	 SUCH	 SOULS	 AS	 THESE	 THAT	WILL	 BE
CAPABLE
OF	SEEKING	TRUTH."
DO	YOU	AGREE	WITH	HIM?
Maneesha,	I	absolutely	agree,	because	what	he	is	saying	is	absolutely	true.	But	it
does	 not	 suit	 the	 lips	 of	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche.	 It	 would	 be	 perfectly	 right	 if	 a
Gautam	Buddha	said	it.
You	 have	 to	 understand	 the	 difference.	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 is	 only	 an
intellectual;	he	came	to	this	conclusion	as	a	logical	conclusion.	He	has	stumbled
almost	 on	 the	 right	 thing,	 but	 it	 is	 stumbling	 in	 the	 dark.	 A	 buddha	 does	 not
stumble	in	the	dark,	he	is	living	in	an	immense	luminosity.
So	what	he	is	saying	is	right,	but	 the	man	who	is	saying	it	 is	not	right.	I	agree
with	the	statement,	I	don't	agree	with	Friedrich	Nietzsche.
It	will	be	a	little	difficult	for	you:	the	distinction	is	very	delicate.	His	statement	is
correct,	but	it	is	not	his	experience.	He	himself	was	not	a	man	of	joy	--	very	sad.
He	was	not	a	man	who	could	dance	or	sing;	that	was	far	below	him.	He	was	a
serious	philosopher.
Philosophers	don't	dance.	They	 look	at	 the	dancers	as	 stupid	 --	 "What	are	you
doing?"
But	 even	 without	 a	 clear-cut	 experience,	 Nietzsche	 is	 a	 rare	 phenomenon.
Buddhas	 have	 always	 been	 saying	 that,	 but	 a	man	who	 is	 not	 enlightened	 has
stumbled	unconsciously	on	a	 truth	 that	 is	not	his	experience	but	only	a	 logical
conclusion.
It	 is	 perfectly	 right	 that	 people	who	 search	 for	 truth,	 the	majority	 of	 them	 are
searching	 for	 truth	 because	 they	 presuppose	 that	 truth	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a
consolation,	a	cure.	They	are	sick	people.	Their	old	consolation	has	gone	away:
God	 is	 dead.	Now	 they	 are	 seeking	 for	 truth	 in	 place	 of	God,	 so	 they	 can	 be
again	consoled.
Prayer	is	dead,	so	they	are	searching	for	meditation.	Perhaps	meditation	can	be
the	substitute.	But	these	are	the	people	who	will	not	find	it.
He	 says	 truth	 "exists	 only	 for	 souls	which	 are	 at	 once	 powerful	 and	harmless,
and	full	of	joy	and	peace."	He	was	not	full	of	joy	or	full	of	peace;	he	was	one	of
the	most	tense	persons	who	has	ever	walked	on	the	earth.	And	finally	he	had	to
be	admitted	into	a	madhouse.	His	anxiety	became	so	serious	that	to	keep	him	in
the	house	was	dangerous;	he	had	to	be	handed	over	into	a	mad	asylum.
But	what	he	was	saying	is	perfectly	right.	Only	a	man	of	peace,	silence,	 joy,	a
man	who	is	capable	of	singing	and	dancing,	a	man	who	is	capable	of	celebrating,
is	the	man	who	is	capable	of	seeking	and	finding	the	truth.
I	 am	 trying	 in	 every	 possible	way	 to	make	 you	 nonserious,	 non-tense.	 Laugh,
dance,	 sing,	 celebrate,	 because	 these	 are	 the	 people	 who	 will	 find	 immense
power	 arising	 in	 themselves	which	 is	 dormant.	These	 are	 the	 people	who	will
have	power	but	will	not	harm	anybody	with	their	power.	Their	power	will	be	a
blessing	to	the	world.	It	will	not	be	the	power	that	destroys,	it	will	be	the	power
that	creates.	These	will	be	the	creators.
And	 these	 will	 be	 the	 people	 who	 know.	 These	 will	 be	 the	 people	 who	 have
disappeared	 in	 joy,	 in	 dance,	 and	 are	 no	 more.	 Only	 a	 consciousness,	 a	 pure
consciousness	remains.
That	 pure	 consciousness	 we	 have	 called	 the	 awakened	 consciousness,	 the
enlightened	 consciousness;	 we	 have	 called	 it	 samadhi	 or	 satori	 ...	 Gautam
Buddha	is	just	a	name,	representative	of	this	ultimate	blossoming.
It	is	time	to	be	nonserious!
Time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh	....
Martha	Grumble	 and	Mildred	Mousebreath,	 two	middle-aged	 housewives,	 are
sharing	confidences	over	a	cup	of	coffee.
"I	don't	know	what	to	do	about	my	husband	anymore,"	sniffs	Martha.	"He	never
comes	home	until	three	in	the	morning."
"Oh	dear!"	sighs	Mildred.	"My	husband	used	to	be	like	that	--	but	not	anymore!"
"Really?"	asks	Martha.	"What	made	him	change?"
"What	made	him	change,	my	dear,"	says	Mildred,	smiling,	"is	that	every	time	he
crept	through	the	door	at	three	o'clock	in	the	morning,	I	would	sweetly	call	out,
Ìs	that	you,	Raymond?'"
"Is	that	all	there	is	to	it?"	asks	Martha.
"That's	right!"	explains	Mildred.
"But	I	don't	understand,"	says	Martha.	"Why	would	that	stop	him?"
"Simple,"	explains	Mildred.	"Because	his	name	is	Sidney."
Jack	 Jerk	 stays	 out	 late	 one	 night	 and	 comes	 home	 at	 three	 o'clock	 in	 the
morning.	He	walks	 into	 the	 bedroom	and	 finds	 his	wife	 Jill	 Jerk	 lying	 awake,
naked,	in	the	bed.
"Where	 the	 hell	 have	 you	 been	 until	 three	 in	 the	 morning?"	 screams	 Jill,
furiously.
Ignoring	 her,	 Jack	 takes	 off	 his	 coat	 and	 opens	 the	 bedroom	 closet.	 To	 his
amazement,	he	finds	a	naked	man	crouching	on	the	floor.
"Who	the	hell	is	this	guy?"	shouts	Jack.
Jill	sits	up	in	bed	and	cries,	"Don't	change	the	subject!"
It	is	a	sunny	morning	on	Cape	Catastrophe	beach,	and	Prunella	Polygon,	a	very
homely-looking	 girl,	 is	 rambling	 along	 daydreaming.	 She	 stumbles	 and	 trips
over	a	bottle	lying	in	the	sand,	and	nearly	faints	when	the	top	of	the	bottle	flies
off	and,	"Poof!"	--	a	genie	pops	out.
The	genie	stretches	and	yawns	and	then	looks	at	Prunella	and	announces,	"Ah!	I
am	 forever	 in	 your	 debt,	 young	 lady.	 You	 have	 freed	 me	 from	 a	 prison	 of	 a
thousand	years.
Ask	anything,	and	I	will	fulfill	your	desire."
Prunella	Polygon	cannot	believe	her	good	luck	and	does	not	hesitate.
"I	want	a	figure	like	Sophia	Loren,"	she	says,	"and	a	smile	like	Raquel	Welch,
and	 hair	 like	 Bridgette	 Bardot	 and	 tits	 like	 Samantha	 Fox.	 And	 eyes	 like
Elizabeth	Taylor	and	an	ass	like	Marilyn	Monroe."
The	genie	takes	a	long	look	at	Prunella	and	says,	"Honey,	please	put	me	back	in
the	bottle."
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
(Gibberish)
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Be	silent	...
Close	your	eyes	...	and	feel	your	body	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	is	the	right	moment	to	turn	in.
Gather	 all	 your	 energy	 ...	 and	 with	 a	 total	 consciousness,	 rush	 towards	 your
center	 of	 being.	 The	 center	 of	 your	 being	 is	 just	 two	 inches	 below	 the	 navel,
inside	your	body.
All	 that	you	need	is	an	urgency,	as	if	 it	 is	going	to	be	the	last	moment	of	your
life.	With	great	urgency	and	intensity,	rush	towards	the	center.
Faster	and	faster	...
Deeper	and	deeper	...
As	you	are	coming	close	 to	your	center,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you	just
like	soft	rain.
You	can	feel	it.
You	can	feel	the	coolness	of	it.
A	 little	more	deep,	a	 little	more	close	 to	 the	center	 ...	 and	a	 tremendous	peace
arises	in	you,	overwhelming	you.
As	you	are	coming	closer,	suddenly	there	arises	a	luminosity:	your	whole	being
becomes	light.
Now	step	into	the	very	center.
And	you	start	feeling	drunk	with	the	divine.
This	is	what	is	called	ecstasy.
Out	of	this	ecstasy	is	all	celebration.
Centered	in	your	very	being,	you	are	no	more.	You	have	come	to	the	seed	--	the
bodhisattva	has	dissolved	into	the	buddha.
The	face	of	Gautam	Buddha	is	the	original	face	of	every	human	being.	The	only
quality	Gautam	Buddha	has	is	witnessing.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind.
And	finally,	witness	that	you	are	only	a	witness.	This	pure	witness	--	sakshin	--
is	your	ultimate	freedom.	It	is	your	enlightenment,	it	is	your	liberation.
It	is	entering	into	the	eternal	dance	of	life.
It	is	because	of	this	I	say	again	and	again,	I	celebrate.	To	me,	life	is	celebration.
Existence	is	celebration.
Witness	the	eternal	dance	that	is	happening	inside	you.	This	dance	has	to	become
your	very	flavor,	your	very	fragrance.	And	invisible	flowers	are	showering	over
you.
You	 cannot	 celebrate	 alone,	 existence	 participates	 from	all	 dimensions.	Nature
rejoices	when	 anyone	 comes	 to	 the	 very	 center	 of	 being.	A	part	 of	 nature	 has
become	awakened.
To	make	this	witnessing	deeper,
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Relax	...
Be	in	a	let-go.
This	is	the	peace,	the	joy,	the	silence,	the	power	that	is	harmless,	that	is	creative.
This	is	what	Nietzsche	has	stumbled	on	in	his	darkness	and	blindness.	But	you
are	going	with	open	eyes	to	the	very	heartbeat	of	the	universe.
The	 whole	 universe	 except	 the	 so-called	 religions	 is	 in	 immense	 celebration
every	moment	 --	 in	 the	 birds,	 in	 the	 trees,	 in	 the	 rivers;	 in	 the	 oceans,	 in	 the
mountains,	in	the	stars.	All	around	you	there	is	nothing	but	celebration.
You	have	to	participate	in	it.
Throw	out	all	the	barriers.
They	are	only	fictitious,	and	reality	has	immense	power.
Witnessing	will	do	the	job.	Witnessing	is	another	name	for	meditation.
At	 this	 moment,	 Gautama	 the	 Buddha	 Auditorium	 is	 becoming	 an	 ocean	 of
consciousness.	 Ten	 thousand	 buddhas	 are	 melting	 like	 ice	 in	 the	 ocean	 --	 no
waves,	no	ripples,	absolute	silence.
Remember,	enlightenment	has	three	steps.
The	first	is	that	the	buddha	you	are	experiencing	within	you	follows	behind	you
like	a	shadow.	It	is	your	very	nature,	your	dhamma.	It	is	your	tennen.
The	second	step,	after	experiencing	the	buddha	behind	you,	his	warmth,	his	love,
his	 truth,	 his	 compassion,	 his	 divine	 drunkenness	 ...	 you	 slowly	 become	 his
shadow.	He	comes	in	front	of	you	--	that	is	the	second	step.
And	 your	 shadow	 starts	 disappearing,	 slowly	 slowly.	 As	 you	 melt	 into	 the
buddha	--	that	is	the	third	and	final	step	--	you	are	no	more.
Only	the	buddha	is	--	you	are	no	more.
Only	an	enlightened	awareness	is	--	you	are	no	more.
Only	life	is	celebrating.
A	sheer	dance	of	joy	...
A	song	that	has	no	words	in	it,	a	music	without	any	sound.
Eternity	in	your	hands.
You	become	one	with	the	cosmic	whole.
I	 celebrate	myself.	 I	 hope	 soon	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 say	 the	 same:	 "I	 celebrate
myself."
Before	Nivedano	calls	you,	collect	all	these	experiences.	You	have	to	bring	them
to	your	day-to-day	life.	The	grace,	the	beauty,	the	truth,	the	honesty,	the	intensity
of	living	--	and	the	witnessing	has	to	be	your	very	breath,	your	heartbeat.
And	persuade	the	buddha	--	he	is	your	nature;	you	have	never	requested	it,	you
have	never	welcomed	it.	That's	why	it	has	been	there	hiding	in	the	very	center	of
your	being.
Help	it	to	come	along	with	you.
It	is	bound	to	come.	It	has	come	thousands	of	times,	to	thousands	of	buddhas.	It
is	every	living	being's	birthright.
Just	ask	him	to	come	along	with	you	and	he	will	transform	your	whole	life	--	in
every	 gesture,	 in	 every	word,	 in	 every	 silence	 you	will	 find	 his	 presence,	 his
light.
Nivedano	...
(Drumbeat)
Come	back	...	but	come	as	a	buddha,	full	of	joy.	A	great	serenity,	a	pure	silence
...	 and	 sit	 down	 for	 a	 few	moments	 just	 to	 recollect,	 to	 remind	yourself	of	 the
golden	path	that	you	have	followed	inwards,	and	the	silent,	peaceful	space	that
you	have	encountered.
You	have	seen	your	original	face,	the	face	of	the	buddha.
Feel	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 buddha	 behind	 you	 --	 the	 warmth,	 the	 coolness,
together;	 the	 power	 and	 humbleness	 together.	 The	 silence	 --	 utter	 egolessness
and	yet	a	tremendous	dignity.
This	is	what	makes	one	celebrate	life.
There	cannot	be	anything	more	than	existence	is	already.
Just	participate	in	the	dance.
Celebrate	to	your	abandon,	and	all	the	mysteries	and	all	the	secrets	of	existence
and	life	will	be	opened	unto	you.
It	is	my	promise.
It	is	the	promise	of	all	the	buddhas,	past,	present,	future.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	The	grand	rebellion
Chapter	title:	The	paradise	of	yourself
Chapter	title:	Showering	invisible	flowers
Chapter	title:	Existence	is	celebration
