1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Talks	given	from	1/12/80	to	31/12/80
Darshan	Diary
31	Chapters
Year	published:
Unpublished
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012015
ShortTitle:	GREENR01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dhyan	Manuela.	Dhyan	means	meditation.
Meditation	is	just	the	opposite	pole	of	mind.	Mind	means	conflict,	struggle,	ego,
competition.	 Mind	 is	 always	 planning	 to	 reach	 somewhere.	 It	 never	 reaches
anywhere	because	the	only	place	that	one	has	to	reach	is	within	oneself	and	the
effort	of	the	mind	is	to	reach	somewhere	else	--	to	the	moon,	to	Mars,	to	become
the	president,	 the	prime	minister,	 to	have	 this,	 to	have	 that.	The	mind	goes	on
thinking	 in	 terms	 of	 the	 outside	 world.	 The	 mind	 is	 extrovert.	 Its	 whole
philosophy	is:	the	grass	is	greener	on	the	other	side	of	the	fence.
Meditation	is	just	the	reversal	of	this	whole	approach.	Meditation	means	asking
the	question	'Is	the	grass	really	greener	on	the	other	side	of	the	fence?'	With	that
question	 a	 radical	 change	 starts	 happening.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 reaching
somewhere,	the	question	is	of	being	yourself.	Only	that	can	bring	contentment;
and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
contentment	opens	you	towards	god	--	that's	the	meaning	of	Manuela.
Manuela	means	 god	 is	with	 us.	The	mind	 cannot	 know	 that	 because	 the	mind
keeps	its	back	towards	god.	God	resides	within	you.	Unless	you	are	absolutely
non-competitive,	non-ambitious,	you	cannot	turn	in.
The	competition	is	on	the	outside;	in	the	inner	world	you	are	alone	--	with	whom
to	compete,	whom	to	defeat,	whom	to	conquer?
In	 that	 aloneness,	 in	 that	 silence,	 in	 that	 noiseless	 harmony,	 one	 discovers	 the
temple	of	god.	Everybody	carries	the	temple	within.
And	the	name	Manuela	is	also	significant	because	originally	this	name	was	used
only	for	Christ	himself,	because	he	had	discovered	god	within	himself.	That's	the
meaning	of	Christ.
Jesus	becomes	a	Christ	by	discovering	god	within	himself.	You	also	can	become
a	Christ	by	discovering	 the	god	within	you.	To	discover	oneself	 is	 to	discover
god	--	and	unless	 that	happens	 there	 is	no	possibility	of	bliss,	no	possibility	of
rejoicing,	no	possibility	of	ecstasy.
Meditation	is	the	way	to	ecstasy,	to	god,	to	the	ultimate	peak	of	consciousness.
Sahajo	is	the	name	of	one	of	the	most	important	woman	mystics	of	India.	There
have	been	very	few	women	mystics	in	the	whole	history	of	man	for	the	simple
reason	that	man	never	allowed	them	to	discover	themselves.
Humanity	 up	 to	 now	 has	 lived	 in	 a	 very	 ugly	 way.	 Half	 of	 humanity,	 the
feminine	 half,	 has	 been	 reduced	 to	 a	 thing.	Women	 have	 not	 been	 allowed	 to
discover	their	being;	in	fact,	many	cultures	have	believed	that	the	woman	has	got
no	soul	to	discover.	What	is	there	to	discover?	--	she	is	just	a	body	to	be	used	by
man.
And	that	is	the	ugly	part	of	the	biblical	story	--	that	God	made	woman	for	man's
use	because	he	was	alone,	 feeling	 lonely.	The	story	 is	anti-feminine,	 it	 is	male
chauvinistic.
God	makes	Adam	for	his	own	self,	but	because	Adam	feels	lonely,	God	makes	a
woman	 --	 but	 in	 a	 different	way.	He	 just	 takes	 a	 rib	 out	 of	Adam's	 body	 and
creates	a	woman.	So	the	woman	is	just	to	be	a	part	of	man's	life.	She	cannot	be
herself;	she	is	only	a	rib,	a	bone,	to	be	used	as	a	means.
All	the	religions	have	supported	this	ugly	nonsense,	this	idiotic	idea.	That's	why
I	say	the	real	religion,	a	religion	which	makes	everybody	capable	of	discovering
God,	has	yet	to	be	born.	Hence,	only	a	few	women
--	 their	names	can	be	counted	on	one's	 fingers	 --	have	attained	 to	 the	ultimate
peak.	Sahajo	is	one	of	them.
In	 India	 we	 have	 known	 only	 five	 women	who	 can	 be	 compared	 to	 Buddha,
Christ,	 Zarathustra,	 Lao	 Tzu	 and	 Nanak.	 One	 is	 Meera,	 whose	 name	 is	 well
known	all	over	the	world.	The	second	is	Lalla	--	she	was	born	in	Kashmir,	and
Kashmir	 has	 tremendous	 respect	 for	 the	woman.	 In	Kashmir	 there	 is	 a	 saying
that	 they	know	only	 two	names:	Allah	and	Lalla.	Allah	means	God,	and	Lalla
means	 the	woman	Lalla.	The	 third	name	 is	Sahajo;	 the	fourth	name	 is	Daya	--
another	 contemporary	of	Sahajo	 and	a	 friend	of	Sahajo.	And	 the	 fifth	name	 is
Mallibai,	one	of	the	tirthankaras	of	the	Jainas,	one	of	the	most	important	masters.
Literally,	 the	 meaning	 of	 Sahajo	 is	 spontaneity	 --	 and	 that	 was	 her	 teaching;
hence	the	name	was	given	to	her	by	her	master.
Live	spontaneously,	moment	to	moment.	This	moment	is	all.	The	past	has	to	be
dropped,	forgotten,	because	 it	 is	no	more,	and	 the	future	has	not	 to	be	worried
about	because	it	is	not	yet.	Then	all	that	is	left	is	this	beautiful	moment.	Rejoice
in	this	moment,	live	in	this	moment	totally	and	this	moment	becomes	the	door	to
God.
Jesus	 says	 to	his	 disciples,	 "Look	at	 the	 lilies	 in	 the	 field	 --	 they	 are	 far	more
beautiful	than	even	the	emperor	Solomon	attired	in	all	his	precious	clothes	and
ornaments,	in	all	his	grandeur.	These	poor	flowers,	lilies,	are	far	more	beautiful
than	Solomon,	 for	 the	simple	reason	 that	 they	don't	 think	of	 the	morrow.	They
live	in	the	moment,	herenow.	That	is	their	beauty."
And	 my	 own	 observation	 of	 the	 female	 is	 that	 she	 is	 less	 worried	 about	 the
future	than	man	and	less	burdened	with	the	past	than	man.	She	is	more	realistic,
pragmatic,	more	rooted	and	grounded	in	the	earth;	hence	it	is	easier	for	her	to	be
spontaneous.	And	 spontaneity	 and	 a	 life	 of	 spontaneity	 can	become	 the	whole
path.
God	knows	only	one	time	and	that	is	now,	and	only	one	space	and	that	is	here.
God	is	always	now-here.
So	once	you	withdraw	yourself	 from	 the	past	 and	 the	 future,	only	God	 is	 left.
There	is	no	need	to	pray,	there	is	no	need	to	go	into	scriptures,	there	is	no	need	to
dig	into	all	kinds	of	stupid	esoteric	 teachings.	One	can	be	very	simple	and	one
can	 find	 the	 truth	without	 any	 fuss.	 The	whole	 of	 theology	 is	 an	 unnecessary
fuss,	much	ado	about	nothing.
And	 this	 is	 my	 approach	 too	 --	 to	 live	 totally	 in	 the	 present.	 Nothing	 else	 is
needed.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Supriti	means	love.
Love	can	exist	 in	 three	possible	ways.	The	lowest	 is	 lust,	 the	highest	 is	prayer,
and	exactly	between	the	two	is	love.
Lust	means	the	instinctive,	the	biological,	of	the	body	It	can	reproduce	children,
it	helps	the	race	to	survive;	it	is	reproductive	but	it	is	not	creative.	Higher	than
lust	 is	 love.	Love	 is	 creative;	 it	 creates	music,	 painting	 and	poetry.	When	you
love	a	person	you	create	the	person.	The	moment	somebody	loves	you,	the	very
love	changes	you	immediately.	The	loved	person	is	no	more	the	same	person,	the
lover	is	no	more	the	same	person	either.	Love	is	so	magical	that	it	transforms,	it
makes	people	beautiful,	graceful.	Wherever	love	lands	it	creates	something	new.
Love	 is	 of	 the	mind.	 It	 is	 higher	 than	 the	 body	 but	 lower	 than	 the	 spirit.	 The
highest	 form	 is	 prayer.	 The	 first	 is	 reproductive	 --	 it	 only	 goes	 on	 creating
replicas.	Your	children	will	 just	be	replicas	of	your	 repetitions	--	and	 they	will
produce	and	their	children	will	produce	and	so	on,	so	forth.	It	is	a	chain.	Love	is
creative.	 Creativity	 is	 something	 greater	 than	 reproductivity.	 There	 have	 been
only	very	few	creators	in	the	world,	very	few	lovers.
Prayer	 is	 neither	 reproductive	 nor	 creative;	 prayer	 is	 higher	 than	 both.	 It	 is
discovery:	discovering	the	truth,	the	ultimate	reality:	god.	Lust	is	on	the	surface,
Love	 is	 going	 slowly	 deeper;	 it	 is	 in	 the	 middle,	 between	 the	 centre	 and	 the
circumference.	Prayer	is	at	the	very	centre	of	your	being.
My	concern	is	with	the	highest	form	of	love.	To	help	you	move	from	the	lowest	I
use	the	second	form	of	love	also,	the	creative	part.	But	that	is	only	a	milestone
on	the	way;	the	goal	is	prayer.
Truth	cannot	be	created.	Reproduction	is	biological	and	natural,	and	creativity	is
imagination.
Discovering	 is	 simply	 uncovering	 that	 which	 is	 already	 there,	 that	 which	 is
already	 the	 case.	And	 to	know	 the	 truth	 is	 to	 know	all	 that	 is	worth	knowing.
Truth	liberates	it	liberates	one	from	darkness,	from	misery,	from	hell,	and	opens
the	doors	of	paradise.
Anadi	means	beginningless.
Life	is	eternal;	there	is	no	beginning,	no	end.	We	begin	at	the	time	of	birth	and
we	end	at	the	time	of	death.	That	means	we	have	not	yet	known	our	real	life.	We
have	known	only	the	container,	not	the	content.
The	container	changes;	it	becomes	old	and	it	needs	a	change.	The	body	is	only	a
container,	so	you	can	use	it	for	seventy,	eighty,	ninety	or	one	hundred	years,	then
you	 have	 to	 change	 the	 house.	 It	 become	 so	 dilapidated,	 it	 becomes	 so
impossible	to	renovate	that	it	is	better	to	move	into	a	new	house	than	to	renovate
the	old.	It	is	less	costly.
So	life	goes	on	changing	from	one	house	to	another	house,	unless	you	discover
it.	The	moment	you	discover	it	there	is	no	need	to	change	houses;	then	life	can
become	 part	 of	 the	 universal	 life.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 confined	 to	 a	 small
body.	That's	what	is	meant	by	the	word	'god';	god	means	the	life	of	the	cosmos.
And	man	can	feel	blissful	only	when	his	small	river	disappears	into	the	ocean	of
god.
I	don't	teach	any	philosophy	here.	I	only	give	you	small	strategies	to	discover	the
ocean,	small	devices	to	reach	the	ocean.	It	is	not	very	far,	we	just	need	to	know
the	right	method,	the	right	technique.
Mohani	means	the	beautiful,	the	graceful.
Truth	 has	many	 aspects	 to	 it	 and	 one	 of	 the	most	 important	 aspects	 is	 beauty.
There	are	three	types	of	people	in	the	world	and	there	are	three	main	aspects	of
truth.	Satyam	is	one	aspect;	satyam	means	truth.
Shivam	 is	 another	 aspect;	 shivam	means	 the	good.	And	Sundaram	 is	 the	 third
aspect;	sundaram	means	the	beautiful.	And	these	are	also	the	three	categories	of
people.	 A	 few	 people	 seek	 the	 truth,	 a	 few	 people	 seek	 the	 good	 and	 a	 few
people	seek	the	beautiful.
The	people	who	seek	 the	beautiful	become	painters,	poets,	musicians,	dancers.
That	 is	 the	 most	 lovely	 path	 to	 follow,	 and	 the	 easiest	 and	 the	 smoothest	 --
particularly	 for	 a	 female	 seeker.	 It	 is	 very	 close	 to	 her	 heart.	 The	woman	 has
more	of	an	aesthetic	sense	than	man.	She	is	not	much	concerned	about	truth,	that
seems	to	be	a	far-away	thing.	I	have	never	come	across	a	woman	who	is	really
philosophical.	Even	if	she	has	studied	philosophy	it	remains	superficial,	because
the	ultimate	is	not	the	feminine	concern	but	the	immediate.
Rather	than	studying	Plato	and	Aristotle	and	Kant	and	Hegel,	she	likes	to	stand
before	 a	 mirror...	 for	 hours!	 That	 can	 be	 transformed	 into	 a	 meditation!	 But
because	nobody	has	bothered	about	woman,	so	nobody	has	taken	note	that	this	is
such	a	meditative	process.
I	have	made	a	certain	meditation	out	of	 it,	 just	 look	at	your	eyes	 in	 the	mirror
and	enjoy	 it!	Look	at	your	 face,	at	your	eyes,	and	enjoy	 it.	 Just	 looking	at	 the
mirror,	doing	nothing,	spring	comes	and	the	grass	grows	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
by	itself!
Move	through	the	door	of	beauty.	And	there	is	so	much	beauty	all	around	--	it	is
very	immediate.	Truth	may	be	somewhere	above	the	clouds,	but	the	clouds	are
so	beautiful,	why	bother	about	something	that	is	above	them?	And	the	stars	are
so	beautiful	and	the	people	and	the	trees	and	rocks.	To	reach	god	through	beauty
is	the	simplest	method;	it	is	very	easy	because	it	is	so	close.
Mohani...	is	also	the	name	of	the	great	Indian	mystic,	Krishna;	one	of	his	names
is	Mohan.	Mohan	means	 the	beautiful	 --	and	he	was	really	a	beautiful	man.	 In
fact	if	you	look	at	pictures	of	him...	he	can	defeat	any	woman.	He	has	long	hair
and	a	beautiful	 crown	of	peacock	 feathers	 and	he	uses	all	kinds	of	ornaments.
And	the	way	he	stands	in	a	dancing	pose	with	a	flute...	a	perfect	hippie!	Nobody
has	 seen	 him	naked,	 otherwise	 you	would	 find	 him	 tattooed!	That's	 the	 secret
thing	I	am	telling	you	--	don't	tell	anybody	because	Hindus	will	be	very	angry!
Akhil	means	the	total.
My	approach	towards	life	is	that	of	totality;	whatsoever	you	do,	don't	do	it	half-
heartedly.	Either	do	 it	or	don't	do	 it,	but	never	be	 in	anything	 in	a	half-hearted
way.	Never	be	partial,	fragmentary,	because	unless	you	are	total	in	your	acts	you
will	never	have	any	taste	of	god.	And	the	moment	you	have	learned	the	knack	of
being	 total	 in	 things	 then	 every	 action	 becomes	 prayer,	 then	 every	 gesture
becomes	meditation.	Then	if	you	are	cleaning	the	floor	with	your	total	heart	in	it,
not	 withholding	 anything,	 it	 is	 no	 more	 ordinary;	 you	 have	 brought	 some
extraordinary	 quality	 into	 it.	 You	 have	 changed	 something	 mundane	 into	 the
sacred.	That's	 the	whole	secret	of	sannyas:	change	every	mundane	activity	 into
the	sacred	--	and	the	way	is	to	be	total.
While	eating	simply	eat,	while	sleeping	simply	sleep,	while	walking	 just	walk.
And	slowly	slowly	your	whole	life	goes	through	a	rebirthing	process.	A	moment
comes	in	life	when	each	and	every	thing	has	your	whole	heart	in	it.	That	is	the
greatest	moment.	In	that	moment	of	total	absorption	one	becomes	enlightened.
What	one	was	doing	does	not	matter	--	how	one	was	doing	it	matters.
Astiko	is	ordinarily	translated	into	English	as	the	theist.	But	that	is	not	its	deeper
meaning,	 it	 is	 its	superficial	meaning	--	one	who	believes	in	god.	And	it	 is	not
only	superficial	but	in	a	way	inadequate	too.
My	 definition	 of	 a	man	 of	 god	 is	 one	who	 knows,	 not	 one	who	 believes.	The
believer	 is	 ignorant.	He	 believes	 because	 he	 is	 not	 capable	 of	 doubting,	 he	 is
afraid	of	doubt.	Through	his	belief	he	represses	his	doubt,	but	the	doubt	is	there;
and	 the	more	you	 repress	 it,	 the	 deeper	 it	 goes	 into	you.	You	may	 completely
forget	about	 it	but	 it	will	remain	part	of	your	unconscious.	And	any	moment	it
can	again	surface,	any	situation	can	bring	it	up.
To	me,	knowing,	not	believing,	is	the	only	way	to	be	religious.	In	the	past	it	has
been	said	that	believing	is	knowing;	I	say	to	you	knowing	is	believing.	Without
knowing	there	is	no	point	in	believing.
So	Astiko	means	one	who	knows	god.	And	in	fact	we	all	know,	it	is	just	that	we
have	 forgotten	 that	 we	 know	 it.	 We	 are	 born	 knowing;	 each	 child	 is	 born
knowing	but	he	is	not	aware	that	he	knows.	So	we	have	not	to	know	god	really,
just	we	have	to	become	aware	of	our	knowing.	But	we	are	so	occupied	with	the
outside	world	that	the	whole	energy	is	spent	in	the	non-essential	and	nothing	is
left	for	the	essential.
The	religious	person	is	one	who	starts	discriminating	between	the	essential	and
the	 non-essential	 and	 goes	 on	 dropping	 the	 non-essential	 so	 more	 and	 more
energy	is	available	for	the	essential.	The	moment	enough	energy	is	available	for
the	 essential	 you	 suddenly	 go	 through	 an	 explosion	 and	 that	 explosion	makes
you	aware	of	who	you	are.	Suddenly	it	is	there,	the	experience	that	we	are	part	of
god.	And	also	in	that	moment	one	knows	that	we	always	know	it	in	a	very	subtle
way,	in	an	underground	way	--	something	like	an	undercurrent	--	but	we	were	so
occupied,	preoccupied	with	other	things	that	it	receded.	We	had	been	ignoring	it,
that's	all.
The	English	word	 'ignorance'	 is	beautiful.	 It	means	 ignoring;	 it	 does	not	mean
not-knowing.	We	 have	 been	 ignoring	 god,	 that's	 all;	 our	 ignorance	 consists	 of
ignoring.	If	we	drop	ignoring,	if	we	pay	attention,	if	we	just	become	a	little	bit
concerned	about	our	own	being,	immediately	the	discovery....
Neti-neti.	They	contain	the	whole	of	religion	--	those	two	words,	neti-neti.	They
mean	neither	this	nor	that.
This	is	a	method	of	inner	discovery.	One	has	to	become	aware	that	one	is	not	the
body	--	that	is	the	first	neti	--	and	then	one	has	to	become	aware	that	one	is	not
the	mind	--	that	is	the	second	neti.	Neither	this	nor	that	...	and	then	suddenly	only
that	which	you	are	is	left	behind.
One	is	neither	the	body	nor	the	mind.	With	these	two	discarded	what	is	left?	--	a
pure	consciousness,	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
deep	awareness.	That	awareness	is	our	very	being,	that's	what	we	are	and	that's
what	 god	 is.	We	 are	 little	 bits	 of	 awareness,	 just	 dewdrops	 of	 awareness.	God
may	be	the	ocean,	a	vast	ocean,	but	our	innermost	nature	is	the	same.
But	 you	 have	 to	 go	 beyond	 two	 things,	 the	 body	 and	 the	 mind;	 hence	 the
repetition:	neti-neti.	One	won't	do!	 If	you	can	 fulfil	 these	 two	 simple	words	 --
and	 I	 think	 you	 can	 do	 it....	 (Osho	 is	 grinning	 broadly.	He	 holds	 her	 gaze	 for
what	seems	like	some	minutes.	And	the	longer	he	does,	the	louder	becomes	the
laughter	of	the	group	watching.)	I	know	you	can	do	it	(more	laughter)	It	is	a	very
simple	thing.	I	have	done	it	and	I	found	it	easy!
Now	 start	 meditating!	 That's	 all	 you	 need,	 at	 least	 one	 hour	 every	 day.	 Use
twenty-three	hours	for	the	world	and	one	hour	for	yourself.	And	ultimately	you
will	 find	 that	 those	 twenty-three	 hours	 are	 wasted;	 only	 one	 hour,	 the	 one	 in
which	you	were	meditating,	is	saved.
Time	 becomes	 precious	while	 you	 are	meditating.	 Time	 is	 a	wastage	 in	 every
other	way;	without	meditation	 time	has	no	significance	at	all.	Then	people	are
right	when	they	say	that	they	are	killing	time	--
they	are:	playing	cards	and	looking	at	a	TV	or	going	to	a	movie	and	becoming	a
member	of	a	Rotary	club.
And	there	are	few	fools	who	even	become	members	of	a	Lions'	club!	(laughter)
As	 if	 to	 be	 just	 a	 man	 is	 not	 enough	 for	 them	 --	 they	 have	 to	 become	 some
animal!	But	these	people	think	they	are	killing	time	and	time	goes	on	laughing
because	time	knows	it	is	killing	all	these	people.
So	don't	kill	time	and	time	will	not	be	able	to	kill	you.	The	only	way	to	escape
from	 time	 is	meditation	because	 in	meditation	you	move	beyond	 time.	Slowly
slowly	you	start	transcending	time	--	and	that	is	our	reality,	that's	our	truth:	the
transcendental.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012025
ShortTitle:	GREENR02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Veet	Adam:	Veet	means	 transcending,	 surpassing,	 going	beyond.	Adam	means
earth	 because	 in	 the	 biblical	 story	 the	 first	man	was	made	 of	 earth.	 It	 exactly
means	red	earth	because	according	to	the	story	the	earth	of	Israel	out	of	which
the	 first	man	was	made,	was	 red.	Symbolically	 it	 represents	 the	human	being;
man,	a	mortal,	mortality.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	a	beautiful	 statement;	 in	defining	man	he	says	 'Man	 is
the	only	animal	that	tries	to	surpass	himself.'	That's	the	most	beautiful	definition
about	man	that	has	ever	been	uttered	by	anybody.
The	dog	is	born	a	dog	and	remains	a	dog,	the	rose	is	born	a	rose	and	remains	a
rose.	Except	for	man	the	whole	existence	is	settled	wherever	it	is,	whatsoever	it
is.	Only	man	is	in	a	chaos,	but	that	chaos	is	beautiful,:out	of	that	chaos	stars	are
born.	It	 is	only	man	who	gives	birth	to	a	Christ,	 to	a	Buddha,	 to	a	Moses,	 to	a
Mohammed,	to	a	Lao	Tzu.	It	is	out	of	this	chaos	that	man	tries	to	rise	above,	to
go	beyond.
Man	is	not	only	the	earth,	he	is	far	more,	but	ordinarily	he	is	born	as	part	of	the
earth	although	he	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
contains	 the	whole	 sky	within	 him.	 But	 that	 sky	 has	 to	 be	 found,	 discovered.
And	the	only	way	to	discover	it	is	to	go	beyond	the	physical,	the	psychological	--
because	 mind	 and	 body	 are	 not	 two	 separate	 things.	We	 should	 not	 use	 'and'
between	the	two;	we	should	not	say	'mind	and	body';	instead	'mindbody'	would
be	closer	to	the	truth.	The	body	is	the	outside	of	the	mind,	the	mind	is	the	inside
of	the	body,	but	man	is	beyond	both:	man	is	consciousness.
So	 Adam	 only	 defines	 the	 actuality,	 but	 it	 does	 not	 define	 the	 potential,	 the
possible	 --	 and	man	 contains	 infinities	 in	 himself.	 He	 can	 go	 on	 transcending
himself;	there	is	no	limit	to	it.	That's	the	whole	dignity	of	man,	the	glory	of	man.
That	 is	 his	 distinguishing	mark:	 he	 is	 part	 of	 the	 earth	 but	 not	 just	 that;	 he	 is
something	plus.	And	that	plus	is	his	real	reality,	his	authentic	reality.
So	your	name	means	go	beyond	 the	mortal,	 the	physical,	 the	mental,	 seek	and
search	 for	 that	 which	 is	 beyond	 all	 this,	 that	 is	 eternal,	 immortal.	 The	 whole
religious	 search	 is	 concerned	with	 the	 eternal,	 the	 timeless,	 the	deathless.	And
that's	what	 initiation	 into	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about:	 looking	beyond	your	 actual.	To
remain	confined	to	the	actual	is	to	remain	a	prisoner.
Unless	one	reaches	the	ultimate	peak	of	one's	potential	there	is	no	contentment,
no	bliss,	no	god,	no	truth.
Dhyan	Inge.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Meditation	is	a	method	of	slipping	out	of
the	mind	in	the	same	way	as	the	snake	slips	out	of	its	own	skin.
The	mind	 is	 nothing	 but	 old	 skin.	The	mind	 is	 always	 dead;	 it	 consists	 of	 the
past,	which	 is	 no	more,	The	mind	 is	 a	 kind	of	 cemetery	 --	 graves	 and	graves.
And	you	can	see	 rows	of	crosses	on	 the	graves;	howsoever	whitewashed,	 they
only	contain	dead	bodies,	rotten	bodies.	Mind	is	a	graveyard.
And	it	 is	not	coincidental	 that	churches	have	graveyards	behind	them:	they	are
part	of	the	same	game.
The	 churches	 are	 as	 dead	 as	 the	 graves,	 or	maybe	more.	 They	 don't	 represent
life.
Mind	 is	 always	 against	 life.	 It	 prevents	 you	 from	 living,	 it	 holds	 you	 back,	 it
insists	 on	 the	 known,	 on	 the	 familiar.	 It	 always	 creates	 fear	 in	 you	 about	 the
unknown,	 and	 the	 unknown	 is	 what	 life	 is;	 not	 only	 the	 unknown	 but	 the
unknowable.	And	mind	is	a	coward	--	it	clings	to	all	that	is	known,	well-known.
That	is	why	people	are	Christians	and	Hindus	and	Mohammedans	and	Jesus.
Jesus	was	not	a	Jew.	Of	course	his	mind	must	have	been	Jewish.	He	was	not	a
(Christian	either,	he	had	not	even	heard	about	the	word	'Christian'.	He	was	not	a
Jew,	he	was	not	a	Christian	--	then	who	was	he?
That	state	is	meditation.
Buddha	 was	 not	 a	 Hindu	 although	 his	 mind	 was	 Hindu.	 And	 he	 was	 not	 a
Buddhist	 either.	 Hinduism	 was	 of	 the	 past,	 Buddhism	 was	 of	 the	 future,	 and
Buddha	lived	in	the	present.
To	 live	 in	 the	present,	 to	be	 in	 the	present,	 always	 alive,	 searching,	 enquiring,
exploring,	accepting	the	challenges	of	the	unknown,	is	the	whole	of	meditation.
And	Inge	comes	from	Norse	mythology.	In	Norse	mythology	Inge	was	the	god
of	creativity,	peace	and	prosperity.	And	all	 those	 things	are	 just	by-products	of
meditation.
An	authentic	meditator	is	bound	to	be	creative	because	he	will	be	constantly	in
touch	with	 life.	 That	 touch	with	 life	 gives	 him	 energy	 to	 create,	 a	 passion	 to
create,	 because	 life	 is	 nothing	 but	 creativity.	 The	 alive	 person	 overflows	with
creativity.
All	the	so-called	religious	people	are	uncreative,	for	the	simple	reason	that	they
don't	live	in	the	present,	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	are	afraid	of	being	alive
and	they	are	trying	in	every	possible	way	to	avoid	life,	to	by-pass	it.	It	seems	to
be	too	risky	to	be	alive;	to	be	dead	is	very	secure.
Creativity	needs	a	kind	of	gambler's	mind,	otherwise	one	goes	on	repeating	the
same	pattern	because	one	 is	more	 efficient	 in	 it.	To	be	 creative	means	 to	 give
birth	 to	 the	new;	of	 course	one	 is	 not	 efficient	with	 the	new.	How	can	one	be
efficient	with	the	new?	Only	with	the	old	can	one	be	efficient.	With	the	new	you
are	 always	 experimenting,	 exploring;	 one	 never	 knows	what	 is	 going	 to	 come
out	of	it.	The	new	is	unpredictable;	there	is	no	guarantee	that	you	will	succeed	in
creating	something.
Meditation	 releases	 all	 your	 energies	 of	 creativeness.	 Whatsoever	 one's
dimension	of	work	is,	meditation	brings	great	energy	to	it.	It	comes	like	a	flood.
It	 brings	 a	 kind	 of	madness,	 a	madness	which	 is	 far	 superior	 to	 the	 so-called
average	 sanity.	All	 the	 great	 creators	 have	 been	mad	people	 --	 poets,	 painters,
sculptors,	musicians,	 dancers	 --	 they	 cannot	 be	 called	 average	 sane,	 otherwise
they	would	 be	 businessmen,	 they	would	 be	 politicians,	 they	would	 be	 priests.
These	things	are	secure,	insured;	there	is	no	risk	in	them.
The	sane	person	behaves	in	a	businesslike	way,	calculatedly.
When	I	say	creators	are	mad	I	mean	they	behave	like	gamblers,	like	drunkards	--
they	can	risk	all	for	something	which	is	not	guaranteed.	But	they	are	the	salt	of
the	earth,	these	people;	these	few	people	are	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
whole	 joy	of	 the	earth.	They	bring	prosperity	 in	every	possible	way,	 they	raise
the	consciousness	of	humanity.
The	 whole	 evolution	 of	 man	 has	 depended	 on	 very	 few	 people;	 they	 can	 be
counted	on	ones	fingers.	The	masses	have	not	contributed	anything	at	all;	 they
have	been	like	a	dead	weight,	they	have	hindered	but	they	have	not	helped.	The
crowd	mind	is	always	against	 the	new.	They	crucified	Jesus	simply	because	he
was	 so	new.	The	way	he	was	 talking	nobody	had	 ever	 talked,	 the	war	he	was
behaving	nobody	had	ever	behaved.
The	mob	could	not	tolerate	the	man	--	such	a	beautiful	man,	such	a	lovely	person
--	and	the	masses	decided	to	crucify	him.	But	that	has	always	been	the	case,	they
did	the	same	with	Socrates,	with	Mansoor.
Whenever	 there	 is	 a	man	who	 brings	 the	 new	 into	 existence,	 who	 becomes	 a
vehicle	 of	 the	 beyond,	 his	 life	 is	 in	 danger	 because	 the	masses	 cannot	 forgive
him.	He	is	soaring	so	high	that	the	masses	feel	offended,	insulted;	their	egos	are
hurt.	But	 the	 strange	 thing	 is	 that	 these	 few	 people	who	 have	 been	 killed	 and
murdered	 and	 tortured	 by	 the	 people	 are	 the	 cause	 of	 the	whole	 prosperity	 of
humanity;	 they	are	 the	foundation	stones	of	 this	 temple	that	 is	still	 incomplete.
Many	more	sacrifices	are	needed,	many	more	Jesus	have	to	be	crucified,	many
more	Socrates	have	to	be	poisoned	and	killed.
Meditation	 brings	 creativity	 and	 through	 creativity	 there	 is	 prosperity	 --	 both
material	 and	 spiritual.	 And	 a	 man	 who	 is	 creative	 becomes	 very	 peaceful,
because	he	starts	feeling	that	he	is	doing	the	work	he	is	born	for.	He	is	fulfilling
his	 nature,	 his	 longing,	 his	 hidden	 potential	 is	 becoming	 more	 and	 more
manifest,	 actualised.	 When	 the	 whole	 potential	 is	 actualised	 a	 man	 is
enlightened.
That	 is	 the	 goal	 of	 sannyas:	 to	 be	 creative,	 to	 be	 peaceful	 and	 to	 help	 the
unwilling	humanity	to	be	prosperous	in	all	possible	ways,	in	all	dimensions.
Anand	August:	Anand	means	bliss.
Bliss	 is	 not	 pleasure;	 pleasure	 is	 physical,	 momentary.	 Bliss	 is	 not	 happiness
either;	happiness	 is	psychological	 --	a	 little	bit	deeper	 than	pleasure	but	only	a
little	 bit.	 Pleasure	 is	 just	 on	 the	 surface	 and	 happiness	 is	 skin	 deep,	 but	 just
scratch	the	skin	and	it	disappears.	It	has	no	real	roots,	it	is	just	in	the	mind.
Bliss	is	neither	of	the	body	nor	of	the	mind;	hence	it	has	infinite	depth.	It	is	your
very	 soul,	 your	 self-nature,	 your	 being.	 Pleasure	 comes	 and	 goes,	 happiness
happens	and	disappears.	Bliss	is	forever!	Even	when	we	are	not	aware	of	it,	it	is
there,	present	is	an	undercurrent;	one	just	has	to	dig.
And	that's	my	whole	work	here,	to	help	to	dig	a	well	within	your	being	so	that
you	can	find	the	undercurrent	of	blissfulness.
August	means	 sacred,	 sublime,	 exalted.	 Bliss	 is	 sacred,	 sublime,	 exalted.	 It	 is
divine,	it	is	godly.	To	know	bliss	is	to	know	god;	in	fact	god	is	only	a	name	for
bliss.
In	India	we	have	defined	god	as	satchidananda.	Satchidananda	consists	of	three
basic	words.	'Sat'	--	sat	means	the	truth;	'chid'	--	chid	means	consciousness;	and
'anand'	 --	anand	means	bliss.	When	you	dig	deep	within	yourself	 first	you	will
find	truth,	then	you	will	find	consciousness	and	then	you	will	find	bliss.	Bliss	is
the	deepest	--	and	the	deepest	is	also	the	highest.
God	 is	 only	 a	 name	 for	 bliss,	 god	 is	 not	 a	 person.	 The	 very	 idea	 of	 god	 as	 a
person	has	misled	humanity.
It	is	an	experience,	the	experience	which	is	beyond	bodymind,	the	experience	of
that	 which	 is	 hidden	 in	 you	 and	 which	 has	 always	 been	 there.	 You	 need	 not
create	 it;	you	need	not	 search	 for	 it	 anywhere	else,	you	 just	have	 to	dive	deep
within	yourself.
Sannyas	means	a	turning	in,	it	means	exploring	your	interiority.	I	am	not	against
the	exterior	--	the	exterior	is	beautiful	--	but	if	you	don't	know	your	interiority,	if
you	don't	know	your	inner	world,	your	exterior	cannot	be	very	beautiful.	It	can
have	depth,	beauty,	joy,	only	if	you	are	rooted	within	your	of	sources.
If	a	 tree	wants	 to	reach	high	into	 the	sky,	wants	 to	 touch	the	stars	and	whisper
with	the	clouds,	then	the	first	thing	it	has	to	do	is	to	reach	as	deep	into	the	earth
with	its	roots,	as	deep	as	possible.
The	deeper	the	roots,	the	higher	the	tree	can	rise.	And	the	same	is	true	about	the
internal	and	the	external:	the	deeper	the	roots	into	the	internal,	the	greater	will	be
your	approach	into	the	external.
If	your	roots	are	really	touching	your	source	of	bliss	 then	your	branches	in	the
outside	will	have	a	flowering.	In	the	past	the	religions	have	tried	to	create	a	split
between	 the	 outside	 and	 the	 inside	 --	 that	was	 a	 reactionary	 attitude.	 Because
they	 saw	 the	 people,	 the	worldly	 people,	 too	 concerned	with	 the	 outside,	 they
turned	to	the	opposite	pole;	they	became	too	concerned,	overly	concerned,	with
the	 inner.	 But	 they	 created	 a	 split	 and	 that	 split	 has	 been	 one	 of	 the	 greatest
calamities	humanity	has	suffered	so	far,	because	that	has	created	a	schizophrenic
humanity.
The	outside	and	the	inside	look	like	enemies,	the	worldly	person	and	the	other-
worldly	person	look	like	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
enemies.	The	worldly	is	the	sinner	and	the	other	--	worldly	is	the	saint.
My	sannyasin	has	to	be	both	together:	in	the	world	and	yet	not	of	it,	with	roots	in
the	inner	and	flowers	in	 the	outer.	He	hasn't	 to	escape	to	the	Himalayas,	 to	the
monasteries;	he	has	 to	 live	 in	 the	marketplace	and	yet	 live	 silently,	peacefully,
lovingly,	meditatively.	That	is	the	only	way	that	we	can	create	a	whole	man.
And	to	me	to	be	whole	is	to	be	holy.	That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name:	August:
to	be	sacred.
The	inner	is	not	the	only	dimension	of	sacredness;	the	outer	is	also	the	same.	But
first	 certainly	 the	 roots	have	 to	grow,	 then	 the	branches	 can	 follow.	 If	 the	 tree
grows	first	it	will	fall	down,	it	cannot	stand.
So	the	sannyasin	first	has	to	become	more	and	more	meditative,	more	and	more
blissful,	then	naturally	he	starts	growing	new	foliage	on	the	outside,	he	becomes
greener,	 he	 rises	higher.	And	when	 the	 roots	 are	nourished	by	 the	bliss	 inside,
sooner	or	 later	 the	branches	are	bound	 t	be	burdened	with	 flowers.	That	 is	 the
moment	a	person	becomes	a	Buddha,	a	Christ,	a	Zarathustra.
Vimal	means	innocent,	pure,	literally	without	any	dirt.
The	only	dirt	that	we	are	full	of	is	thoughts.	Our	consciousness	is	like	a	mirror;
thoughts	are	like	just	collecting	on	the	mirror.	And	the	work	of	a	sannyasin	is	to
continuously	clean	the	mirror,	because	if	tile	mirror	is	clean	it	can	reflect	reality,
if	the	mirror	is	clean	it	can	show	you	the	way.	You	need	not	depend	on	anybody
else;	you	have	your	own	inner	vision,	perspective,	clarity.
Once	we	know	the	art	of	cleaning	the	mirror	every	moment,	life	becomes	such	a
joy,	such	a	benediction	because	 then	whatsoever	you	do	 then	 is	beautiful,	 then
whatsoever	you	touch	becomes	gold.	One	becomes	a	magician.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	magicians.	And	the	greatest	magic	in	life	is	to	live	in
this	world	which	is	so	full	of	misery,	stupidity,	mediocrity,	in	an	intelligent	way,
blissfully,	rejoicingly.	The	world	may	be	living	in	hell	but	the	intelligent	person
lives	here,	in	paradise.
The	people	who	 invented	a	paradise	somewhere	above,	 in	heaven,	were	stupid
people.	They	were	simply	saying	that	it	 is	impossible	to	live	here	 in	heaven	so
they	projected	 a	heaven	 somewhere	beyond	 the	 clouds;	 it	 is	 just	 a	 consolation
and	nothing	else.
My	sannyasins	have	to	live	now	and	here	in	paradise.	If	others	are	living	in	hell,
that	is	their	decision,	that	is	their	responsibility.	One	cannot	be	forced	to	live	in
heaven,,one	has	to	choose.	And	if	people	are	choosing	to	live	in	hell,	of	course
they	are	free	to	choose	it,	but	my	sannyasin	have	to	live	in	heaven	here	and	now,
in	this	very	world.
Unless	 you	 can	 live	 here	 blissfully	 you	 cannot	 live	 anywhere	 else	 blissfully...
because	you	will	be	the	same	person.	Even	if	you	are	transported	to	heaven	in	a
spaceship,	what	will	you	do	there.	You	will	do	the	same	stupid	things	that	you
were	doing	here,	maybe	on	a	bigger	scale.	You	will	get	into	the	same	ego	trips,
into	the	same	miseries,	you	will	fall	into	the	same	kinds	of	love	affairs	and	you
will	suffer	in	the	same	way.
My	effort	is	to	create	a	sannyasin	who	can	live	even	in	hell	beautifully.	The	old
definition	 was	 that	 when	 a	 saint	 dies	 he	 goes	 to	 heaven.	 My	 definition	 is:	 a
person	 is	 a	 saint	 who	 lives	 in	 heaven	 whether	 dead	 or	 alive	 and	 even	 if	 you
throw	him	into	hell	he	will	change	the	whole	quality	of	hell.
If	 I	have	 the	choice	 then	 I	will	go	 to	hell	with	all	my	sannyasins	 (laughter).	 It
will	be	such	a	beautiful	trip...	and	initiating	all	the	devil,	into	sannyas	and	giving
them	beautiful	names...!
Apantho	means	no	path.
There	is	no	path	to	truth	because	truth	is	not	on	the	outside.	Truth	is	within	and
no	path	 is	needed	because	you	are	 already	 there;	 it	 is	 just	 that	your	 eyes	have
wandered	far	away,	that's	all.
It	is	exactly	like	a	dream.	You	are	sleeping	in	your	room	but	in	your	dream	you
are	travelling	to	far-away	planets.	In	the	morning	when	you	wake	up	you	will	not
find	yourself	on	the	planet	you	have	been	dreaming	about;	you	will	find	yourself
in	your	bed,	in	your	own	room.
When	 one	 becomes	 awakened	 to	 one's	 reality	 one	 finds	 that	 one	 was
unnecessarily	 travelling,	 there	was	no	need	 to	go	anywhere;	and	all	 those	 trips
were	mind	trips,	made	of	the	same	stuff	dreams	are	made	of.
One	has	never	left	one's	home,	one	cannot	leave	in	the	very	nature	of	things.	So
all	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 an	 awakening	 from	 your	 dreaming	 state	 --	 and	 that's	my
purpose	here:	to	give	you	shocks,	to	shake	you,	to	fix	many	alarms	around	you.
All	 these	 meditation	 techniques	 and	 therapy	 groups	 are	 nothing	 but	 alarm
methods	 to	make	 so	much	 trouble	 that	 you	have	 to	wake	up	 and	 see	what	 the
matter	 is,	what	 is	going	on.	And	once	you	wake	up,	 the	work	 is	 finished;	 then
you	cannot	fall	asleep	and	resume	your	old	dreaming.
There	 is	 no	 path	 to	 truth	 because	we	 are	 already	 there.	We	 have	 not	 to	 reach
there;	we	have	just	to	wake	up	and	see.	Because	it	is	so,	it	is	simple,	very	simple.
The	moment	you	decide	whole-heartedly	to	wake	up,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
nobody	can	prevent	you.	It	can	happen	right	now!
Navyo	means	the	eternally	new.
Existence	is	eternally	new,	it	never	gets	old,	but	our	minds	get	old.	And	because
we	 go	 on	 clinging	 to	 our	minds	we	 lose	 contact	with	 reality,	we	 start	 lagging
behind.
When	a	child	is	born	he	is	in	tune	with	reality;	he	is	not	lagging	behind,	he	is	in
the	moment,	herenow.
But	we	start	teaching	him	and	he	has	to	learn	whatsoever	we	teach	because	he	is
so	helpless.	He	has	to	bargain	with	us,	he	has	to	sell	his	self	for	survival.
Now	psychologists	have	discovered	 that	even	a	six-week-old	baby	starts	being
diplomatic.	 He	 smiles	 when	 he	 sees	 the	 mother	 coming.	 He	 knows	 that	 this
woman	is	dangerous	--	it	is	better	to	smile!	This	is	a	diplomatic	smile;	he	does
not	mean	it,	he	has	nothing	to	smile	for.	But	he	knows	that	it	pays	to	smile	and	it
costs	nothing,	so	he	simply	opens	his	mouth,	Carter-style.	It	is	just	an	exercise	of
the	lips;	there	is	no	heart	in	it.	He	does	not	want	to	smile,	there	is	no	reason	for
it,	but	the	mother	feels	good,	and	to	make	this	woman	feel	good	is	safer.
Now,	he	has	 started	getting	 into	 the	mind.	Slowly	 slowly	he	will	 start	 lagging
behind	reality.	By	the	time	he	is	four,	if	he	is	a	boy,	or	three	if	the	child	is	a	girl...
Girls	are	more	pragmatic	and	realistic,	hence	they	got	into	the	mind	earlier,	one
year	earlier	than	boys.	Boys	are	a	little	reluctant,	resistant;	they	try	hard	to	give	a
fight,	to	somehow	escape.	Girls,	seeing	the	situation,	settle	quicker:	'It	is	better,
no	 need	 to	 fight,	 it	 is	 unnecessary;	 sooner	 or	 later	 one	 has	 to	 settle,	 so	 why
bother	to	postpone?'
It	 is	 because	 of	 this	 fact	 that	 when	 you	 try	 to	 remember	 your	 past	 you	 can
remember	only	up	to	a	certain	age	--	for	example,	three	or	four.	Beyond	that	is
blank	because	mind	 is	perfectly	 settled	at	 that	 time.	From	 that	 time	mind	 took
over;	 it	 started	 managing	 you,	 it	 became	 the	 manager.	 Hence	 it	 has	 perfect
records,	 files,	 everything,	 of	 after	 that	 time,	 so	 people	 can	 easily	 remember
backwards	to	the	age	four	or	three.	Then	there	is	a	blank	because	there	is	nothing
to	remember.	They	were	in	tune	with	reality,	they	were	enjoying	themselves,	but
there	is	nothing	to	remember.
After	one	gets	 into	 the	mind	everything	has	 to	be	 remembered.	Mind	 is	 just	 a
biocomputer,	a	memory	system.	It	goes	on	collecting	information,	and	the	more
it	 collects,	 the	 older	 it	 is,	 and	 the	 older	 it	 is,	 the	 farther	 away	 you	 are	 from
reality;	hence	the	child	is	the	closest	and	the	old	man	is	the	farthest.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 remaining	 a	 child	 for	 his	 whole	 life;	 not
childish	but	 childlike.	 Jesus	 says:	Unless	you	are	 like	 small	 children	you	 shall
not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of	god.	And	I	agree	with	him	absolutely	because	the
kingdom	 of	 god	 means	 the	 harmony	 with	 the	 universe	 --	 and	 the	 universe	 is
always	new,	and	the	mind	is	always	old.
Get	out	of	the	mind	and	be	in	tune	with	reality.	Be	more	spontaneous,	be	more
alive	 to	 the	moment;	 live	moment	 to	moment.	Go	on	dying	 to	 the	past,	 go	on
getting	rid	of	the	past,	so	that	you	are	always	fresh	--	as	fresh	as	the	dewdrops	in
the	early	morning	sun,	as	fresh	as	the	flowers	just	opening	in	the	early	morning
sun.
That's	the	way	of	a	sannyasin:	to	be	always	new,	young.	The	body	will	get	old	--
that	is	not	a	problem	at	all	--	but	you	should	not	get	old.	Even	at	the	moment	of
death	a	sannyasin	is	a	child,	full	of	wonder	and	awe.
That	quality	of	wonder	and	awe	is	the	greatest	religious	quality	in	the	world;	it	is
through	that	that	one	comes	to	know	what	god	is.
Nilamber	means	the	blue	sky.
The	sky	only	looks	blue,	it	has	no	colour.	It	looks	blue	because	of	its	infinity;	its
infinite	 depth	 gives	 it	 an	 appearance	 of	 blueness.	Hence	 blue	 has	 become	 the
symbol	of	depth,	of	infinity,	of	eternity,	of	vastness.
You	can	see	 it	happening	 in	water	 too:	 if	 the	 river	 is	shallow	then	 the	water	 is
white,	 if	 the	 river	 is	 deep	 the	 same	 water	 becomes	 bluish;	 depth	 gives	 it	 the
colour	of	blueness.	So	blue	represents	depth.
And	just	as	there	is	a	sky	outside	you	spreading	to	infinity	there	is	also	an	inner
sky.	We	are	standing	exactly	in	the	middle	of	two	skies,	two	infinities.	And	the
inner	is	of	course	Is	more	beautiful	because	the	inner	is	yours	and	the	outer	is	not
yours.	 Even	 if	 you	 try	 to	 have	 it,	 it	 cannot	 be	 yours.	 Alexander	 tried,	 all	 the
conqueror	tried,	and	they	all	failed.
In	 the	 outside	 you	 can	 only	 have	 a	 very	 temporary	 illusion	 that	 you	 are
possessing	it,	but	sooner	or	later	death	comes	and	takes	all	your	possessions.	But
the	inner	cannot	be	stolen,	the	inner	cannot	be	burned	cannot	be	destroyed.	Even
death	is	impotent	as	far	as	the	inner	is	concerned.	The	person	who	has	conquered
his	inner	sky	dies	as	conqueror.
Alexander	 the	 Great	 dies	 like	 a	 beggar;	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 dies	 like	 a
conqueror,	he	is	the	real	emperor.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Although	 on	 the	 outside	 Buddha	 was	 like	 a	 beggar	 with	 a	 begging	 bowl	 and
Alexander	the	Great	was	the	great	conqueror	of	the	then	known	world,	those	are
appearances.
Don't	 be	 deceived	 by	 appearances.	 Remember,	 the	 real	 victory	 is	 inner.	 And
don't	waste	your	time	and	energy	in	the	non-essential.	Put	your	energy	as	much
as	possible	 into	 the	essential,	and	 the	essential	means	only	one	 thing,	 it	means
the	inner.
Sannyas	means	the	beginning	of	an	exploration	of	the	inner	sky.
Nilam	means	sapphire,	a	blue	diamond.
It	represents	the	third	eye.	Two	eyes	are	needed	to	look	at	the	outside	world,	two,
because	 the	 outside	 world	 consists	 of	 duality.	 It	 is	 always	 divided	 into	 two
polarities	 --	 day	 and	 night,	 hot	 and	 cold,	 summer	 and	winter,	 birth	 and	 death.
Everything	is	divided	in	two.
The	 outer	 world	 consists	 of	 two-ness.	 Everything	 is	 opposed	 by	 its	 polarity,
hence	 there	 is	 constant	 conflict.	And	 day	 is	 followed	by	 night	 and	 pleasure	 is
followed	by	pain	and	success	is	followed	by	failure	and	so	on	and	so	forth.	One
goes	on	moving	in	a	wheel	and	nothing	is	stable.
The	 inner	world	 needs	 only	 one	 eye	 --	 that	 is	 called	 the	 third	 eye.	 It	 is	 not	 a
physiological	phenomenon,	 it	 is	only	symbolic.	And	when	you	experience	 that
inner	vision	for	the	first	time	it	is	just	like	a	sapphire,	a	blue	diamond	radiating
its	blueness,	like	a	blue	flame.	In	a	literal	sense	too	the	first	inner	experience	is
of	a	blue	flame.	It	gives	light	but	light	is	so	vast,	so	infinite	that	it	appears	blue.
Jesus	has	said	when	the	two	eyes	become	one	then	you	have	arrived	home.	The
moment	you	 turn	 in	 these	 two	eyes	become	one,	because	 the	 inner	needs	only
one	vision;	just	one	eye	is	enough	because	there	is	no	duality	inside.	In	the	inner
world	light	and	darkness	are	one,	death	and	life	are	one.	And	because	there	is	no
duality	 there	 is	 no	 conflict;	 there	 is	 tremendous	 peace,	 silence,	 stillness,	 so
profound	that	we	cannot	even	imagine	it	from	the	outside.
That	 profound	 silence	 make	 you	 aware	 of	 the	 beauties,	 of	 the	 blessings,	 that
existence	has	been	showering	on	you	but	which	you	had	not	even	seen	before.
These	 flowers	 were	 always	 falling	 like	 rain	 on	 you	 but	 you	 were	 engaged	 in
other	 things.	 You	 were	 so	 full	 of	 other	 things	 you	 could	 not	 pay	 attention	 to
them.
When	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you	 are	 able	 to	 see	 the	 miracle	 of	 existence,	 great
gratitude	arises.	That	gratitude	is	prayer.
Meditation	makes	 you	 capable	 of	 seeing	 the	 grace	 of	 existence,	 the	 gifts,	 the
infinite	 gifts,	 and	 that	 vision	 leads	 you	 towards	 prayer.	 Meditation	 is	 the
beginning,	prayer	is	the	end.	Meditation	is	the	flower	and	prayer	is	the	fragrance.
Nobody	can	begin	with	prayer;	you	have	to	begin	with	meditation.	Prayer	comes
of	its	own	accord.
Sow	 the	 seeds,	 grow	 the	 flowers	 and	 one	 day	 spring	 comes	 and	 the	 flowers
blossom	and	the	whole	sky	is	full	of	fragrance.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012035
ShortTitle:	GREENR03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Satyam	literally	means	the	truth,	but	 the	approach	of	the	western	mind	and	the
eastern	 is	 so	 different,	 so	 diametrically	 opposite,	 that	 sometimes	 literal
translations	of	words	are	not	adequate	at	all.
In	the	West	truth	is	a	philosophical	quest;	in	the	East	it	is	a	mystical	enquiry	--
and	there	is	tremendous	difference.	Philosophy	means	something	of	the	head	and
mysticism	 is	 something	of	 the	heart.	Philosophy	 is	based	on	 logical	 reasoning,
and	mysticism	is	rooted	in	something	that	transcends	all	logic,	it	is	supralogic.
And	when	 I	 use	 the	word	 'truth'	 I	 use	 it	with	 the	 eastern	 emphasis	 --	 and	 that
makes	a	lot	of	difference.
In	 the	 East	 we	 have	 thought	 about	 truth	 as	 an	 experience,	 not	 as	 a	 logical
conclusion;	more	like	love	and	less	like	logic,	more	in	the	mode	of	feeling	than
in	 the	mode	of	 thinking.	 In	fact	 in	 the	West	 if	you	are	an	enquirer,	a	seeker	of
truth,	 you	 have	 to	 sharpen	 your	 reasoning	 you	 have	 to	 become	very	 skilful	 in
thinking.
That's	what	the	whole	western	philosophy	is,	the	art	of	thinking.
In	the	East	just	the	opposite	has	to	be	done:	logic,	reasoning,	mind	itself	has	to
be	put	aside;	you	have	 to	come	 into	direct	contact	with	 reality,	 into	 immediate
contact	with	reality.
The	mind	 is	 an	 interference	 because	 it	 interprets	 reality,	 and	 the	moment	 you
interpret,	it	is	something	else,	it	is	no	more	the	something.
The	mind	 cannot	 experience,	 only	 the	 heart	 can	 experience,	 but	 the	mind	 can
interpret,	the	heart	cannot	interpret.	The	mind	interprets	without	experiencing.	It
is	like	a	blind	man	talking	about	light	to	a	dumb	man	who	cannot	talk	but	who
knows	what	light	is.
The	heart	is	dumb,	silent;	it	cannot	express	itself,	there	is	no	way	for	it	to	express
itself,	but	it	can	feel.
Tile	 mind	 is	 very	 talkative	 --	 it	 can	 interpret,	 comment,	 argue,	 philosophise,
prove,	 disprove,	 but	 it	 cannot	 experience.	 And	 the	 real	 thing	 is	 experience	 --
whether	you	can	talk	about	it	or	not	is	immaterial.
Hence	all	the	great	eastern	mystics	have	said	nothing	can	be	said	about	truth.	All
that	we	say	is	how	to	reach	it	but	nothing	can	be	said	about	the	experience	itself;
one	has	to	experience	it	 to	know	it	The	Buddhas	only	show	the	way,	they	give
you	some	hints	about	how	to	reach	to	the	ultimate	peak	of	experience,	but	that's
all;	you	will	know	only	when	you	have	reached.	The	truth	has	to	be	an	individual
experience.	 It	 cannot	 be	 borrowed,	 it	 cannot	 be	 transferred;	 it	 cannot	 even	 be
expressed.	And	that	 is	 its	beauty;	 its	profoundness	 is	such	that	no	word	can	be
comprehensive	enough,	no	language	is	so	unlimited	that	it	can	contain	it.
So	remember,	when	I	say	the	truth,	I	mean	the	truth	of	the	mystics,	not	the	truth
of	the	philosophers.
Even	in	the	West	there	have	been	mystics	but	they	are	not	the	main	current	of	the
western	mind.	 Jesus	 is	 a	mystic,	 not	 a	 philosopher;	Eckhart	 is	 a	mystic,	 not	 a
philosopher;	 Heraclitus,	 Pythagoras,	 Plotinus	 --	 these	 are	 mystics,	 not
philosophers.	But	 they	are	 far	and	 few	 in	between,	very	 rare.	And	because	 the
western	philosophy	knows	no	place	to	put	them,	to	what	category	they	belong,
they	are	ordinarily	but	 into	 the	 same	category	as	Plato,	Aristotle,	Kant,	Hegel,
Bradley,	Russell,	Wittgenstein,	Sartre.	They	are	put	in	the	same	category	because
that	is	the	only	category	known	in	the	West.
In	 the	East	we	 have	 an	 absolute	 distinction.	The	 philosophers	 are	 not	 counted
with	 the	Buddhas;	 they	 are	 only	 thinkers,	mere	 thinkers.	The	Buddhas	 are	 the
knowers.	 And	 my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 make	 a	 journey	 of	 knowing,	 not	 of
thinking.
Anubodh	means	awareness	--	and	that	is	the	secret	key,	the	most	essential	part	of
religious	experiment,	of	religious	investigation,	enquiry,	exploration.
One	has	to	become	more	aware	than	one	ordinarily	is.	The	ordinary	life	does	not
need	more	awareness	than	you	have;	just	a	superficial	awareness	is	enough	to	go
to	the	office,	to	do	the	routine	work,	to	come	home,	to	reproduce	children,	to	get
things	 done.	And	 once	 you	 have	 learned	 them,	 you	 go	 on	 repeating	 the	 same
pattern	every	day	--	 it	 is	a	mechanical	phenomenon.	The	mechanical	 life	is	 the
mundane	life.
To	be	a	 sannyasin	means	 to	enter	 into	 the	phenomenon	of	 the	 sacred.	For	 that
more	awareness	is	needed,	much	more,	because	it	is	not	something	mechanical,
something	routine.	It	is	now	every	day.	It	is	moving;	from	the	unknown	towards
the	 unknowable;	 it	 is	 dropping	 the	 known	 every	 day,	 dying	 to	 the	 known	 and
entering	into	the	unknown.	It	is	an	eternal	pilgrimage,	because	every	moment	is
so	full	of	mystery	that	one	has	to	be	very	alert,	otherwise	one	will	miss.	One	has
to	be	constantly	watchful.
Very	few	people	know	the	beauty	of	the	stars.	Even	if	they	do,	they	have	read	it
in	a	poem;	it	 is	not	 their	own	experience.	Very	few	people	know	the	beauty	of
the	 mountains.	 Even	 if	 they	 do	 it	 is	 because	 they	 have	 looked	 at	 albums,
pictures,	films.	Even	if	they	go	to	the	Himalayas,	they	are	much	more	concerned
with	taking	photographs	rather	than	looking	at	the	reality.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 tourist	 is	 a	 very	 strange	personality:	 carrying	 the	 camera	 everywhere.	His
idea	 is	 that	 back	home,	 sitting	before	 the	 fireplace	 at	 ease,	 he	will	 look	 at	 the
pictures,	 at	 how	 beautiful	 the	 Himalayas	 were;	 and	 when	 he	 was	 in	 the
Himalayas	he	was	concerned	with	the	camera	--	loading,	unloading	and	clicking.
The	camera	was	not	working	(laughter)...	and	something	got	stuck	and....	Who
bothers	about	the	Himalayas!
That	 is	 later	 on	 when	 the	 album	 is	 ready	 and	 one	 sits	 in	 the	 easy	 chair	 and
relaxes,	with	 the	coffee	pot	by	 the	 (much	 laughter)	 side	and...	 (The	 rest	of	 the
sentence	is	drowned	in	a	deluge	of	laughter.)	That's	how	people	are.
This	is	not	the	way	to	experience	reality	--	it	is	a	way	to	avoid	it.	Your	pictures
cannot	contain	the	beauty...	or	maybe	only	a	very	far	far-away	echo.	They	cannot
contain	the	coolness	of	the	breeze,	the	warmth	of	the	sun.	They	are	bound	to	be
one-dimensional,	flat.
Once	a	 friend	 said	 to	Picasso	 'I	don't	 like	your	paintings.	They	don't	 represent
reality,	 they	 are	 not	 realistic.'	He	 said	 'Rather,	 I	 like	 photographs	 --	which	 are
realistic,	representative.	For	an	example,	he	took	out	of	his	pocket,	a	photograph
of	his	would-be	wife	and	he	 showed	 it	 to	Picasso	 saying	 'Look	at	 this	picture,
this	is	my	would-be	wife:	see	how	beautiful	she	is	and	how	clear	the	photograph
is.	This	is	a	realistic	thing.'	Picasso	touched	the	photograph,	felt	it	and	said	'But
your	would-be	wife	 looks	very	 flat	 --	no	curves,	 absolutely	 flat.	What	are	you
going	to	do	with	this	woman?'
Of	 course	 a	 picture	 is	 a	 flat	 thing,	 it	 cannot	 represent	 the	 multi-dimensional
reality.	It	is	only	a	reflection	in	the	mirror	and	that	too	is	dead	--	because	if	you
are	 in	 the	Himalayas	 it	 is	 changing	 every	moment.	The	 clouds	 are	 dispersing,
moving;	sometimes	 the	sun	 is	 there	and	 the	peaks	with	 the	virgin	snow	are	all
golden;	 and	 sometimes	 it	 is	 clouded	and	all	 that	gold	 suddenly	disappears	 and
the	 shade	 and	 the	 shadows	 of	 the	 clouds	 move	 on	 the	 snow.	 You	 can	 see	 it
reflected	 in	 the	 snow,	 the	 peaks	 functioning	 like	 mirrors.	 Your	 pictures,
howsoever	beautiful	they	are,	cannot	contain	its	reality.
You	have	to	be	more	in	contact	with	that	which	surrounds	you;	for	that	only	one
thing	is	needed,	and	that	is	more	alertness.	Very	few	people	are	alert.	They	go	on
like	 sleepwalkers,	 somnambulists.	 Somehow	 they	 manage,	 but	 for	 that
management	 just	 a	 small	 bit	 of	 consciousness	needed,	 a	 very	peripheral	 thing.
And	awareness,	Anubodh,	means	a	central	awareness,	not	peripheral.	Your	very
centre	 is	 full	 of	 consciousness,	 you	 are	 all	 consciousness.	Only	 then	 does	 one
become	aware	of	the	presence	of	the	sacred,	of	the	divine.
Then	this	very	earth	is	paradise.
Getting	 initiation	 into	 sannyas	 really	 means	 getting	 initiation	 into	 awareness.
That's	the	whole	work	a	sannyasin	has	to	do.	All	the	methods	of	meditation	are
nothing	but	devices	to	help	you	to	become	more	aware.
Naresha	means	an	empress,	a	queen.
Man	 is	 not	 born	 as	 a	 beggar	 but	 ho	 lives	 like	 a	 beggar	 --	 and	 the	 whole
responsibility	is	his,	he	chooses	to	live	like	a	beggar.	Life	gives	so	much	but	he
is	not	ready	to	receive	it,	he	is	very	reluctant;	he	is	closed.
When	love	knocks	on	his	door	he	shrinks,	withdraws;	he	is	even	afraid	of	love.
He	is	afraid	of	truth;	he	feels	more	comfortable	with	conventional	beliefs,	which
are	nothing	but	 beautiful	 lies,	 comfortable	 lies.	At	 the	most	 they	 can	give	one
consolation.
Truth	 needs	 enquiry,	 it	 needs	 work.	 A	 belief	 needs	 nothing;	 you	 can	 simply
believe.	Just	by	being	born	accidentally	into	a	Christian	home	or	a	Hindu	home
or	a	Mohammedan	home,	one	gets	beliefs.	People	start	conditioning	you	--	 the
parents,	the	teachers,	the	priests.	They	are	all	ready	to	jump	upon	every	child	and
they	start	giving	him	a	 shape	and	a	 form.	They	call	 it	 education,	culturisation,
civilisation.	And	 all	 they	do	 is	 to	give	 the	 child	 cheap	beliefs,	 plastic	 flowers,
which	are	of	no	help.	 In	fact	 they	are	harmful,	because	 then	a	person	becomes
afraid	of	truth;	he	has	invested	so	much	in	beliefs	that	he	is	not	ready	to	look	at
the	 truth;	 he	 avoids	 it.	 To	 look	 at	 the	 truth	 will	 mean	 all	 his	 beliefs	 will	 be
shattered	 and	 with	 those	 beliefs	 all	 his	 dreams	 will	 be	 shattered	 and	 all	 his
investment	will	be	gone	down	the	drain.	So	he	shuts	himself	off.
People	are	taught	in	such	a	way	that	they	become	incapable	of	love,	incapable	of
truth,	 incapable	 of	 authenticity	 and	 sincerity.	 And	 the	 strange	 thing	 is	 that
everybody's	 taught	 to	 find	 god	 but	 all	 the	 qualities	 that	 help	 to	 find	 god	 are
destroyed,	systematically	destroyed.
That's	why	 there	 are	 so	many	churches	 and	 so	many	 temples,	 synagogues	 and
mosques	 and	 all	 people	 belong	 to	 some	 religion	 or	 other	 --	 still,	 the	world	 is
absolutely	irreligious.	God	is	only	a	formality.
People	don't	bother	really	about	god	or	anything	significant.	In	fact	it	is	impolite
to	talk	about	such	things;	people	don't	want	to	get	involved	in	such	things	--	it	is
better	to	talk	about	the	weather.
English	people	are	very	much	interested	in	the	weather.	And	it	is	a	very	strange
thing	because	what	is	there	to	talk	about?	And	both	know	what	the	weather	is.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Osho's	thumb	arches	back	over	itself	to	indicate	Vivek	sitting	by	his	side.)	Yes,
she	is	also	English!
(laughter)	When	you	meet	her	you	can	talk	about	the	weather.	(There	is	a	roar	of
laughter.)	Yes,	she	is...
There	are	many	English	people	hiding	here!
It	 is	 good	 manners	 to	 talk	 about	 the	 weather	 because	 you	 don't	 get	 into	 any
controversial	thing:	that	it	is	very	cloudy	--	of	course	you	can...(He	doesn't	even
bother	to	finish	the	sentence	this	time.	Naresha	smiles;	and	the	group	behind	her
doubles	up.)	But	to	talk	about	god	or	to	talk	about	truth	or	to	talk	about	anything
really	 significant	 is	 dangerous;	 the	 other	 person	may	not	 agree.	There	may	be
argument,	there	may	be	a	conflict;	there	is	every	possibility	that	that	may	create
a	 disagreement	 --	 and	 it	 is	 not	 good.	When	people	meet	 they	have	 to	 create	 a
certain	kind	of	lubricant	between	themselves	so	things	go	smoothly.
Man	is	born	with	infinite	potential.	He	can	be	as	great	as	a	Buddha,	as	a	Jesus,	as
a	Zarathustra;	but	he	lives	at	the	minimum,	he	never	reaches	the	maximum.	And
the	only	reason	is	that	he	remains	confined	to	his	conditionings	given	by	others.
My	sannyasins	have	to	drop	those	conditionings.	They	have	to	come	out	of	the
cave	that	others	have	created	for	them	to	live	in.	It	is	a	dark	cave,	very	small,	but
cosy	and	comfortable.	They	have	to	come	out	into	the	open,	under	the	sky,	under
the	 stars,	 and	 they	 have	 to	 be	 adventurers,	 adventurers	 about	 life,	 about
consciousness,	 about	 love,	 about	 truth.	 Nothing	 has	 to	 be	 accepted	 as	 belief,
everything	has	to	be	explored.
Unless	you	experience	it	as	true	there	is	no	need	to	believe	in	anything.
I	 don't	 give	 any	 belief,	 any	 dogma,	 any	 creed.	 I	 only	 provide	 you	methods	 to
enquire	 with.	 And	 once	 a	 person	 becomes	 an	 explorer	 he	 is	 on	 the	 way	 to
becoming	 an	 emperor.	 He	may	 not	 possess	 anything	 of	 the	world	 but	 he	will
possess	his	 inner	being	--	and	 that	 is	 the	most	precious	 thing.	Jesus	calls	 it	 the
kingdom	of	god.	It	certainly	is!
Parishuddha	means	perfectly	pure.
Thoughts,	 desires,	 memories	 --	 these	 are	 the	 impurities	 of	 consciousness.
Consciousness	is	pure	when	there	are	no	thoughts,	no	desires,	no	memories.	It	is
just	 as	when	 there	 are	no	clouds	 the	 sky	 is	pure.	Purity	means	 to	be	 just	your
essential	consciousness	with	no	content,	no	clouds,	just	and	openness,	a	vastness
--
unhindered,	unbounded.	And	that's	the	whole	purpose	of	meditation,	to	give	you
a	perfect	purity,	a	clarity,	an	open	sky.
So	all	that	a	sannyasin	has	to	do	is	to	get	out	of	the	rut	of	thoughts.	It	is	not	as
difficult	as	it	appears	in	the	beginning.	One	only	has	to	learn	to	be	a	witness.	Just
watch	your	thoughts	whenever	you	have	time.
Relax	and	watch	--	don't	do	anything.	There	is	no	need	to	fight	with	them,	there
is	 no	need	 to	 throw	 them	out,	 because	 if	 you	 fight	with	 them	 they	will	 defeat
you.	 They	 will	 defeat	 you	 because	 you	 will	 be	 unnecessarily	 fighting	 with
yourself.
Thoughts	 are	 non-existential,	 like	 darkness:	 you	 cannot	 fight	 with	 darkness
because	it	does	not	exist	at	all.	If	you	start	wrestling	with	darkness	you	will	be
defeated	 --	 not	 because	 darkness	 is	 powerful	 but	 because	 you	will	 simply	 get
tired	and	exhausted.	There	is	nothing	to	fight	--	darkness	does	not	exist	at	all.	All
that	is	needed	is	to	bring	light	in	and	there	is	no	darkness.	That	light	comes	in	by
witnessing,	not	by	fighting.
Just	watch,	go	on	looking,	unattached,	unconcerned,	without	any	judgement	that
this	 thought	 is	 good	or	 this	 thought	 is	 bad.	Don't	 bring	your	moral	 notions	 in.
Otherwise	you	will	get	involved	in	thinking,	because	you	will	cling	to	the	good
and	you	will	want	to	throw	out	the	bad	--	and	they	are	inseparable.	They	have	a
certain	intrinsic	unity,	a	certain	organic	unity.	If	you	throw	out	the	bad	you	will
have	to	throw	out	the	good	too.	If	you	want	to	keep	the	good	you	will	have	to
keep	the	bad	too.	They	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
That's	why	every	saint	is	unconsciously	a	sinner:	That	is	the	other	side.	He	is	just
a	repressed	sinner.
And	every	sinner	is	a	repressed	saint.	So	there	is	not	much	difference.	The	only
difference	is	that	one	is	standing	on	his	feet	and	the	other	is	standing	on	his	head,
upside-down,	 that's	 all.	 The	 saint	 is	 doing	 a	 headstand.	 Saints,	 particularly	 in
India,	love	to	stand	on	their	heads	very	much.	But	that's	what	they	are	actually
doing	for	their	whole	life;	that	headstand,	the	sirshasana,	represents	their	whole
life.	But	even	if	you	are	standing	on	your	head	you	are	the	same	person,	nothing
has	changed;	it	is	just	that	your	legs	are	up	and	your	head	is	down.	Just	a	little
digging	in	the	saint	and	you	will	find	the	sinner.	So	every	saint	is	a	sinner	in	his
dreams	and	every	sinner	is	a	saint	in	his	dreams.	That's	why	the	psychoanalysis
pays	 so	 much	 attention	 to	 dreams	 --	 because	 they	 show	 what	 part	 you	 have
repressed	 and	 the	 repressed	 part	 is	 very	 significant	 because	 it	 goes	 into	 your
unconscious;	and	the	unconscious	is	bigger.	The	conscious	is	only	one-tenth	and
the	unconscious	is	nine	times	bigger	than	the	conscious.	So	the	saint	is	only	one-
tenth	 and	 nine	 times	 more	 he	 is	 a	 sinner.	 In	 fact	 the	 sinner	 is	 in	 a	 far	 better
situation	psychologically:	he	is	only	one-tenth	a	sinner	and	nine	times	a	saint.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	have	more	love	for	the	sinner	than	for	the	saints.	For	the	saints	I	have	only	pity,
I	feel	sorry	for	them.
Remember	 that	 to	fight	with	anything	 is	going	 to	create	a	dichotomy	in	you,	a
division,	 a	 split	 personality.	 So	 don't	 choose,	 don't	 fight,	 don't	 judge.	 Remain
choicelessly	 aware	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 will	 find	 those	 clouds	 are
disappearing.	 And	 the	 moment	 the	 sky	 is	 completely	 without	 clouds	 there	 is
purity.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	morality	--	it	is	innocence.
Your	 vision	will	 be	 clear,	 unhindered.	You	 can	 see,	 you	 can	 hear	 for	 the	 first
time;	you	can	feel,	you	can	touch,	you	can	smell	for	the	first	time;	you	can	taste
for	the	first	time.	Then	all	your	senses	are	doors	to	the	divine.	Then	each	sense
brings	a	new	feel	of	the	divine.	Then	you	are	surrounded	by	the	divine	--	you	see
the	divine,	you	hear	 the	divine,	you	taste	 the	divine,	you	touch	the	divine,	you
smell	 the	divine.	All	your	 five	 senses	are	continuously	pouring	 the	divine	 into
you.
It	was	happening	before	also	but	you	were	not	able	to	see	it.	There	were	so	many
thoughts,	 desires,	 memories,	 imagination,	 dreams,	 fantasies,	 between	 you	 and
the	reality	--	a	thick	China	wall.	But	it	disappears	very	easily,	one	just	has	to	be	a
witness.	Witnessing	is	the	whole	art	of	meditation.
Gyanesha	 means	 goddess	 of	 wisdom;	 remember,	 not	 of	 knowledge	 but	 of
wisdom.	And	the	difference	 is	as	much	as	 it	can	be.	They	are	unbridgeable,	 in
fact	they	are	opposites,	enemies.
The	 knowledgeable	 person	 cannot	 become	 wise.	 It	 is	 impossible,	 absolutely
impossible	for	him	to	become	wise,	because	his	knowledgeability	does	not	allow
him	 innocence,	 does	 not	 allow	 him	 wonder.	 He	 cannot	 feel	 any	 surprise,	 he
cannot	taste	anything	mysterious,	magical.	His	life	is	flat.	And	the	reason	is	that
he	 thinks	 he	 already	 knows,	 he	 has	 answers,	 ready-made	 answers	 for	 every
question.	He	has	never	really	asked	the	question,	he	has	only	learned	the	answer.
And	how	can	you	learn	an	answer?
First	 he	 learns	 the	 answer	 and	 then	he	manages	 the	 question,	 but	 the	 question
comes	later	on,	it	is	not	his	own.	The	answer	is	somebody	else's	and	just	to	make
the	answer	fit	with	him	he	creates	a	question.	The	question	is	not	part	of	his	own
growth.	So	he	knows	 the	question	and	he	knows	 the	 answer,	but	he	has	never
been	 in	any	quest,	he	has	never	 risked	anything	 for	 the	question,	he	has	never
gone	 into	 it	 the	 whole	 way,	 he	 has	 never	 gambled.	 He	 has	 only	 learned	 the
answer	 from	 the	 scriptures,	 from	 the	 scholars,	 from	 the	 philosophers.	 And	 so
many	 answers	 are	 available.	 For	 each	 question	 thousands	 of	 answers	 are
available	--
you	can	have	your	choice.
A	knowledgeable	person	is	a	stupid	person,	very	stupid,	unintelligent.	He	may	be
intellectual	but	he	is	not	intelligent	at	all.
Wisdom	is	intelligence	and	the	first	act	required	for	wisdom	to	happen	is	one	has
to	discard	all	knowledge	in	toto;	one	has	to	become	a	child	again	--	innocent,	full
of	wonder,	awe.	Everything	seems	to	be	mysterious	because	there	is	no	answer.
Gertrude	Stein	on	her	deathbed	suddenly	opened	her	eyes	and	said	"What	is	the
answer?"	The	 friends	who	had	gathered	were	a	 little	bit	puzzled;	 "What	 is	 the
answer?"	What	kind	of	a	question	is	this?	--	because	the	question	had	not	been
asked.
One	person	gathered	courage	and	said	"But	we	don't	know	the	question,	so	first
tell	us	about	the	question,	only	then	can	something	be	done	about	the	answer."
She	laughed	and	said	"Okay.	Then	what	is	the	question?"...	and	she	died!	Neither
the	 question	 is	 known	 nor	 the	 answer	 is	 known	 --	 and	 this	 was	 at	 her	 last
moment.	But	this	is	the	tragedy	of	humanity.	At	least	at	the	last	moment	she	had
the	 guts	 to	 ask	 "What	 is	 the	 answer?"	Of	 course	 there	was	 no	 time	 left,	 that's
why	she	was	saying	"What	is	the	answer?	Don't	waste	time	with	the	question	--
just	give	me	the	answer."	And	because	they	insisted,	she	said	"Okay,	then	what	is
the	question?"
This	 is	 really	 the	 situation:	 we	 don't	 know	 the	 question,	 we	 don't	 know	 the
answer,	 but	 we	 are	 full	 of	 knowledge.	 The	 wise	 man	 is	 not	 at	 all	 full	 of
knowledge.	He	knows	the	question	and	he	knows	the	answer;	and	there	is	only
one	question	and	there	is	only	one	answer.	The	question	is	"Who	am	I?"	and	the
answer	cannot	be	given,	one	has	to	find	it.	If	it	is	given,	it	becomes	knowledge;
if	you	find	it,	it	becomes	wisdom.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012045
ShortTitle:	GREENR04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dhyan	Helen:	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Helen	means	light.
Man	without	meditation	is	without	light.	He	is	just	darkness.	If	one	looks	within
without	knowing	the	art	of	meditation	one	will	find	only	darkness	and	darkness
and	 nothing	 else.	 That's	 why	 nobody	 wants	 to	 look	 within.	 The	 Christs,	 the
Buddhas,	the	Zarathustras,	have	been	telling	people	to	look	within;	Jesus	goes	on
insisting	that	the	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you	and	Socrates	says	know	thyself.
People	 listen	 but	 nobody	 tries	 it	 because	 when	 they	 try	 the	 experience	 is	 not
ecstatic,	 it	 is	 just	 terrible!	 (laughter)	There	 is	 nothing	but	 emptiness,	 darkness.
One	 meets	 nobody	 --	 no	 god,	 no	 kingdom	 of	 god.	 One	 goes	 with	 great
expectations	and	just	the	opposite	is	the	case.
So	one	pays	polite,	 formal	 respect	 to	 these	great	 teachers	and	goes	on	 looking
outside;	the	real	world	is	there.	But	the	reason	why	we	miss	is	that	to	look	inside
one	needs	a	certain	discipline.	 It	 is	 like	 listening;	 to	classical	music:	 it	needs	a
certain	discipline,	you	need	certain	ears	to	listen	to	it,	to	understand	it,	to	feel	it,
to	see	the	beauty	of	it.
Meditation	 is	 a	 whole	 art;	 it	 is	 the	 art	 of	 focussing	 inwards,	 it	 is	 the	 art	 of
dropping	the	outside	completely	as	if	it	has	disappeared	for	the	moment	at	least,
it	is	illusory.	When	your	total	energy	starts	moving	inside	--	remember	the	word
'total'	--	only	then	will	you	find	light.	And	once	you	have	found	light	within	you
have	found	god	and	the	kingdom	of	god.	That	light	transforms	your	whole	life.	It
gives	a	new	dance,	a	new	song,	to	your	being.
Dhyan	Paul.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Paul	means	rest.	Meditation	is	a	way	of
resting	within	yourself.
Mind	 is	 restlessness.	 Unless	 you	 go	 beyond	 the	 mind	 you	 cannot	 rest,	 hence
meditation	means	transcending	mind,	transcending	restlessness,	being	at	ease,	at
home,	utterly	restful,	as	if	there	is	nothing	to	do,	nowhere	to	go,	so	blissfully	in
the	moment	--	that	is	with	no	past,	no	future,	no	thought,	no	memory,	no	desire,
with	not	even	a	small	ripple	in	your	consciousness	to	go	somewhere	else.
The	 mind	 is	 always	 running,	 chasing	 shadows,	 mirages,	 far-away	 goals.	 It	 is
ambitious,	 it	 is	 political;	 mind	 is	 a	 politician.	 To	 be	 in	 the	 mind	 is	 to	 be	 in
continuous	struggle,	competition	 --	how	can	you	 rest?	You	can	 rest	only	when
you	understand	 the	 futility	of	 ambition,	 the	 futility	of	desire,	 the	 futility	of	all
goals,	 then	 suddenly	 your	 energy	 settles	 and	 rests	 at	 the	 very	 centre	 of	 your
being.	The	circumference	starts	shrinking	and	becomes	equal	to	the	centre;	there
is	no	circumference,	only	the	centre.
When	you	are	 in	 the	mind	 there	 is	 no	 control	 only	 the	 circumference,	 and	 the
circumference	 goes	 on	 expanding.	 In	 meditation	 there	 is	 only	 the	 centre,	 no
circumference	--	and	that	is	the	moment	of	rest.	And	to	know	it	is	to	know	all,
because	by	knowing	it	 the	door	of	the	divine	opens.	It	 is	a	beautiful	name	--	 it
carries	the	whole	secret	of	meditation.
Anandi	means	blissful,	cheerful,	with	laughter	in	the	heart.
The	 religious	 people	 are	 ordinarily	 serious	 people.	 They	 have	 long	 faces,	 sad,
sombre,	 because	 they	 are	 engaged	 in	 something	 very	 great,	 something	 divine,
very	superior	to	all	the	other	activities	people	are	involved	in.	The	whole	world
is	mundane	and	they	are	holy	--	how	can	a	holy	person	laugh?	Impossible.
Laughter	seems	to	be	the	very	essence	of	unholiness.
Christians	 say,	 Jesus	 never	 laughed.	Now	 there	 cannot	 be	 anything	more	 false
than	that.	If	one	asks	me	I	will	say	he	never	stopped	laughing,	even	on	the	cross
he	laughed.	The	last	thing	that	he	did	was	to	laugh,	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	 a	 good	 laugh	 at	 the	 cosmic	 joke!	 God	 has	 ditched	 him	 beautifully!
Thousands	of	people	were	waiting	 for	 the	miracle	 and	nothing	happened!	Can
you	 find	 a	 better	 joke?	 Even	 he	 himself	 was	 waiting	 and	 looking	 again	 and
again...	and	nothing	happened!
If	something	had	happened	the	whole	point	would	have	been	lost,	the	punch	line
would	have	been	missed!	It	was	really	beautiful	of	god	not	to	interfere.	For	the
whole	of	his	life	Jesus	was	doing	miracles	--
raising	the	dead,	giving	eyes	to	the	blind	--	and	at	the	last	moment	he	could	not
manage	 anything!	 He	 must	 have	 laughed!	 And	 when	 they	 all	 met	 afterwards
Jesus	must	have	said,	"You	did	it!"
I	 can't	 see	why	 he	 should	 not	 laugh	 at	 the	 last	moment.	But	Christians	 go	 on
saying	he	never	laughed.
The	 statues	 they	 have	 made,	 the	 pictures,	 the	 paintings,	 are	 always	 serious.
Those	are	not	representative,	they	are	false,	they	are	inventions.
To	me	cheerfulness	is	the	essence	of	religiousness.	To	take	life	as	fun,	to	enjoy
it,	 to	 love	 it	 and	 to	 accept	 it	 with	 all	 its	 thorns	 and	 flowers,	 with	 all	 its	 dark
nights	and	beautiful	days,	to	accept	it	in	its	totality	is	sannyas.
Yes,	 there	is	agony;	 it	needs	to	be	there,	 it	balances	ecstasy.	Ecstasy	alone	will
lose	its	taste.	If	one	is	ecstatic	and	never	comes	to	know	what	agony	is,	one	will
start	 forgetting	 what	 ecstasy	 is.	 The	 ecstasy	 can	 be	 felt	 only	 when	 there	 is	 a
background	 of	 agony.	 You	 can	 see	 the	 stars	 in	 the	 night	 only	 when	 there	 is
darkness	 as	 a	 backdrop.	 In	 the	 day	 also	 they	 are	 there	 but	 the	 background	 is
missing.	It	is	so	full	of	light	that	they	disappear.
Once	you	understand	life	with	its	duality	then	even	in	pain,	even	in	anguish,	one
has	a	cheerful	heart	because	one	understands;	one	understands	the	essentiality	of
the	 polar	 opposite.	 Then	 in	 success	 or	 failure	 one	 remains	 balanced,	 one's
cheerfulness	is	not	disturbed	by	anything.
When	Alexander	came	to	India	he	wanted	one	sannyasin	 to	go	with	him	--	his
name	was	Dandamis	--
but	 the	 sannyasin	 refused.	 He	 said	 'Nobody	 can	 force	me'...	 because	 the	 way
Alexander	asked	him	to	go	was	aggressive.	He	said	'either	you	come	with	me	or
I	will	kill	you!'	Dandamis	said	'It	is	better	you	kill	me,	be	finished	with	it	--	I	am
not	coming.	Nobody	can	force	me	to	do	anything	and	death	has	no	point	as	far	as
I	am	concerned;	I	died	long	ago.'	And	then	he	said	 'Why	are	you	waiting?	Pull
out	your	sword	and	cut	off	my	head.	You	will	see	it	falling	on	the	ground	and	I
will	also	see	it.	And	you	will	hear	my	laughter.	After	my	head	has	fallen	you	will
hear	my	laughter!'
Alexander	could	not	kill	him.	For	the	first	time	he	had	come	across	a	man	who
was	simply	amazing,	what	he	was	saying.	And	he	said	'I	am	sorry.	I	should	not
have	 said	 it	 to	 you	 in	 such	 an	 aggressive	 way,	 this	 is	 just	 my	 habit	 because
everybody	 has	 always	 followed	 my	 orders.	 But	 now	 I	 understand,	 there	 are
people	who	cannot	be	 forced.	But	 can	you	please	 send	 some	of	your	disciples
with	me?'
Dandamis	 said	 'That's	 alright.'	 He	 called	 a	 disciple,	 his	 name	 was	 Kalyan,
Kalyan	Swami	was	his	name.
He	 said	 'Kalyan,	 you	 go	with	 this	 fool.'	Kalyan	 said	 'Okay,	master.	Anyway	 I
have	 to	 go.'	 Alexander	 could	 not	 understand	 what	 this	 talk	 was	 all	 about	 --
Kalyan	had	said	'Anyway	I	have	to	go.'	Only	later	on	did	he	understand,	because
on	the	way	Kalyan	Swami	died.	When	he	died	he	said	'Now	do	you	understand?
Do	you	understand	or	not?	I	told	my	master	"Anyway	I	have	to	go,	so	it	doesn't
matter.'	He	has	sent	a	dead	man	with	you!	(laughter)	He	befooled	you!'
Alexander	 said	 'But	you	Hindus	believe	 in	 the	 immortality	of	 the	 soul	 --	don't
you	 think	you	will	 not	 die?'	He	 said	 'No,	 I	will	 not	 die,	 and	 I	will	 see	 you	 in
Babylon	 and	 he	 died	without	 explaining	what	 he	meant	 by	 'I	 will	 see	 you	 in
Babylon.'	Alexander	 understood	 it	 only	 because	 he	 died	 in	Babylon;	when	 he
was	 moving	 back	 to	 his	 home,	 on	 the	 way,	 in	 Babylon,	 he	 died.	 One	 of	 his
advisers	 reminded	 him:	 'That	 man	 was	 right!	 He	 said	 "I	 will	 see	 you	 in
Babylon."'
These	people	are	cheerful	people.	Now	Dandamis	played	a	trick	on	Alexander	--
sending	a	disciple	who	was	already	going	to	die	within	a	few	months.	Then	the
disciple	played	a	trick	on	him;	he	said	 'I	will	see	you	in	Babylon.'	He	was	just
laughing	about	death	--	it	is	nothing	much	to	be	serious	about.	Even	death	is	not
worth	 being	 serious	 about.	 But	 there	 are	 fools	 who	 think	 that	 even	 life	 is	 a
serious	affair;	nothing	is	a	serious	affair.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 to	 be	 cheerful	 in	 every	 situation	 --	 good	 or	 bad.
Even	if	you	are	 thrown	into	hell,	go	laughing	and	your	 laughter	will	 transform
hell.	This	is	my	fundamental	message:	I	want	a	religiousness	in	the	world	which
knows	how	to	laugh,	how	to	be	blissful,	how	to	dance,	how	to	celebrate.
Gandharvo	 means	 divine	 musician.	 In	 Indian	 mythology	 gandharvas	 are	 the
musicians	of	god,	they	are	heavenly	musicians.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Music	 is	 divine.	 It	 is	 something	 that	 comes	 very	 close	 to	meditation.	 Just	 one
step	more	and	you	are	in	the	world	of	meditation.	Music	is	almost	the	boundary
line	between	mind	and	meditation.	Nothing	comes	closer	because	music	is	pure
joy,	it	is	festivity.	Also	it	has	no	words.	Words	are	limited,	sounds	have	unlimited
significance.
And	the	beauty	of	music	is	that	although	it	is	sound	it	creates	silence.	That	is	the
criterion	to	judge	whether	Music	is	real	music	or	just	pseudo.	The	pseudo	means
it	is	noisy;	it	simply	disturbs	you.	Maybe	the	disturbance	looks	like	excitement,
but	 it	 is	 not	 of	 any	 great	 value.	 That's	 what	 the	 so-called	 pop	music	 does:	 it
touches	 only	 the	 superficial	 in	 you,	 the	 biological,	 the	 sexual;	 it	 does	 not	 go
deep.	 The	 higher	 the	 music	 is,	 the	 more	 the	 sound	 starts	 doing	 a	 miracle:	 it
creates	 silence.	When	 the	music	 creates	 silence	 in	 you,	 when	 listening	 to	 the
sound	 silence	 is	 created,	 then	 one	 is	 truly	 a	musician,	 then	 has	 heard	 the	 real
music.
Meditation	 can	 be	 expressed	 only	 through	 music.	 So	 learn	 the	 beauty	 of	 the
sound,	so	that	you	can	learn	the	beauty	of	silence.	From	sound	to	silence	--	that
is	the	way	of	the	meditator.	Just	listen	to	this	silence	of	the	night.	It	is	also	sound,
the	insects	are	creating	a	certain	king	of	music	but	their	sound	does	not	disturb
the	silence;	on	the	contrary,	it	enhances	it,	it	enriches	it.	And	life	should	be	such
that	the	paradoxical,	the	contradictory,	becomes	complimentary.	Then	your	very
life	has	a	music,	a	harmony,	and	only	in	that	harmony	does	one	come	to	know
the	truth.
Shantiprem.	 Shanti	 means	 silence,	 prem	means	 love.	 The	 moment	 these	 both
happen	together	you	have	entered	the	world	of	miracles.
Love	is	excitement,	it	is	feverish	--	that's	why	it	is	called	passion.	It	is	a	little	bit
crazy,	 it	 drives	 you	 nuts!	 (laughter)	 Love	 alone	 is	 not	 enough.	 Silence	 is	 also
needed	to	balance	it,	to	give	it	some	sanity,	to	make	it	less	of	a	fever	and	more	of
a	healthy	phenomenon.
Silence	alone	 is	dead.	 It	 is	of	a	graveyard,	 it	 is	not	alive.	Love	 is	needed,	 then
even	on	the	grave	roses	start	blooming.	Love	and	silence	together	make	a	life	a
really	rich	life.
And	that's	the	work	my	sannyasins	have	to	do,	to	create	a	rich	life.	I	am	against
poverty	 --	 and	 the	 greatest	 poverty	 is	 of	 the	 inner,	 the	 outer	 poverty	 will	 be
removed	sooner	or	later.	Either	science	will	remove	it	or	nature	will	remove	it,
but	 it	 is	going	to	be	removed,	 it	cannot	remain	for	 long.	But	 the	inner	poverty,
neither	science	can	remove	nor	nature	can	remove.	It	has	to	be	removed	by	the
individual.	Hence	I	have	chosen	the	inner	world	and	the	work	that	is	concerned
with	that.
The	 outer	 world	 is	 the	 concern	 of	 the	 politicians,	 the	 social	 workers,	 the	 so-
called	revolutionaries,	scientists,	technicians	--	that	is	their	work.	My	work	is	to
change	 the	 inner	world	and	 to	make	 it	 rich	 --	and	 richness	happens	only	when
love	and	silence	meet.	When	love	and	silence	are	really	merged	into	one	organic
unity	you	have	come	to	know	the	greatest	joy	of	life.
Vishram	means	relaxation.
Life	 should	be	 lived	 in	 a	very	 relaxed	way.	There	 is	no	need	 to	be	 in	 a	hurry,
there	is	no	need	to	be	always	rushing.	It	is	to	no	purpose	at	all,	nothing	is	served
by	 it.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 a	 way	 of	 destroying	 your	 life,	 because	 once	 this	 rushing
becomes	 your	 habit	 you	 are	 never	where	 you	 are,	 you	 are	 always	 somewhere
else,	 so	your	body	 is	 in	one	place,	your	mind	 is	 in	some	other	place.	And	 this
distance	between	your	body	and	mind	creates	anxiety,	anguish,	and	never	allows
you	joy.	Joy	means	to	be	here	and	now,	so	totally	that	there	is	no	idea	at	all	of
being	anywhere	else	or	of	being	somebody	else.
To	 feel	 relaxation	 is	 to	 feel	 the	mystery	 of	 your	 being,	 because	 then	 you	 are
available,	unoccupied,	utterly	open	and	vulnerable.	 In	a	relaxed	state	you	open
up	like	a	lotus	flower	--	to	the	sun,	to	the	rain,	to	the	wind,	to	all	that	is.	And	this
whole	is	divine.	God	is	not	a	person	but	only	the	totality	of	existence,	the	organic
unity	of	all	that	is.	But	you	can	know	it	only	when	you	are	not	in	a	rush,	not	in	a
hurry.
Sannyasins	have	to	learn	to	relax,	to	drop	this	speedy	neurosis.	It	is	neurosis,	it	is
driving	 people	 almost	 insane.	Now	 psychologists	 say	 that	 out	 of	 four	 persons
three	are	almost	insane.	And	when	out	of	four,	three	are	insane,	how	long	can	the
fourth	 remain	 sane?	 --	 because	 he	 will	 have	 to	 live	 with	 the	 three!	 And	 the
greatest	 insanity	 comes	 to	 people	 who	 have	 to	 live	 with	 insane	 people.	 The
fourth	 cannot	 remain	 sane	 for	 long;	 he	 has	 to	 become	 part	 of	 the	 insanity,
otherwise	he	cannot	survive.
I	 teach	my	 sannyasins	 to	be	 relaxed,	because	 through	 relaxation	 sanity	 comes,
awareness	 comes,	 peace	 comes,	 bliss	 comes,	 love	 comes	 and	 ultimately,	 the
ultimate	guest	too:	God	comes!
Kavya	means	poetry.
My	 approach	 towards	 life	 is	 not	 that	 of	 a	 philosopher	 but	 that	 of	 a	 poet.
Philosophy	is	something	of	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
mind	 --	 rational,	 logical,	 but	 superficial.	 Poetry	 is	 of	 the	 heart	 --	 it	 is	 not
thinking,	 it	 is	 feelings	 it	 is	not	 logic,	 it	 is	 love.	And	when	you	 love	 life,	when
you	feel	life	without	the	interference	of	the	mind,	you	are	in	immediate	contact
with	god.
The	first	step	 is	 to	change	your	gears	 from	the	head	 to	 the	heart,	 from	being	a
philosopher...	 And	 everybody	 is	 a	 philosopher;	 a	 few	 people	 are	 &cod
philosophers	and	a	few	people	are	bad	philosophers	--
that	doesn't	matter.	A	few	people	are	very	systematic	philosophers	and	others	are
lousy,	 but	all	 are	 philosophers,	more	 or	 less,	 in	 some	way	or	 other;	 hence	 the
first	shift	has	to	be	from	the	head	to	the	heart.
The	poet	stands	between	the	philosopher	and	the	mystic,	the	heart	is	exactly	in
between	the	head	and	the	being	so	the	heart	is	a	necessary	station,	anyone	who	is
going	on	the	journey	of	being	--	and	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about	--	first	has	to
stop	at	the	heart.
Once	you	have	settled	at	the	heart	and	mind	is	no	more	a	disturbance,	the	second
step	is	not	difficult,	very	easy;	then	one	starts	moving	from	feeling	to	being.	And
once	you	have	reached	being	sannyas	is	fulfilled.
The	philosopher	is	the	farthest	from	the	truth;	the	poet	is	very	close,	the	mystic
has	arrived	--	he	has	found	his	home.	But	nobody	can	go	bypassing	the	heart.
So	 start	 feeling	 more,	 thinking	 less,	 start	 loving	 more,	 dropping	 logic,
calculation,	 arithmetic.	 This	 is	 half	 of	 the	 work,	 and	 the	 most	 hard	 part;	 the
second	part	is	very	easy.	If	one	has	done	the	first	part,	the	second	happens	very
easily,	very	spontaneously.	In	fact	nothing	is	needed	to	be	done	for	the	second;
once	you	have	started	feeling	you	are	bound	to	go	through	a	new	transformation.
The	 feeling	 slowly	 slowly	disappears	of	 its	own	accord	and	only	being	 is	 left.
When	 only	 you	 are,	 simply	 you	 are	 --	 no	 thought,	 no	 feeling,	 just	 a	 pure
existence	--	then	you	are	a	mirror,	and	in	that	mirror	reality	is	reflected	as	it	is.
Vinamro	means	humble,	 simple,	with	no	desire	 to	be	somebody,	utterly	at	 rest
with	being	nobody.
A	sannyasin	is	a	nobody.	The	only	thing	that	he	has	to	drop	is	the	ego,	because
ego	 is	 the	 only	 barrier	 between	 you	 and	 existence,	 between	 you	 and	 bliss,
between	 you	 and	 love,	 between	 you	 and	 god.	 Except	 for	 ego	 nothing	 is
preventing	you	 from	 living	your	 life	 at	 the	peak,	 at	 the	optimum.	Ego	 is	 your
enemy,	the	only	enemy;	hence	sannyas	means	surrender	of	the	ego.
And	it	 is	only	a	question	of	a	 little	understanding	that	 the	ego	never	gives	you
anything	 except	 misery,	 except	 wounds,	 so	 why	 carry	 it?	 It	 has	 never	 given
anybody	 anything.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 cancer	 of	 the	 soul.	 And	 remember,	 it	 is	 an
incurable	as	the	cancer	of	the	body.	Sooner	or	later	they	will	find	some	cure	for
the	bodily	cancer	but	for	ten	thousand	years	mystics	have	tried	to	find	a	cure,	but
there	is	no	cure,	for	ego;	every	cure	becomes	a	nourishment	for	it.
Hence	the	decision	of	all	the	awakened	ones	is:	why	bother	curing	it?	--	drop	it,
it	can	be	dropped.	That	is	a	surgical	method.	There	is	no	need	for	any	medicine,
simply	 drop	 it	 You	 cannot	 so	 simply	 drop	 the	 physical	 cancer,	 for	 the	 simple
reason	that	it	becomes	part	of	your	body.	But	the	ego	is	never	part	of	your	soul;
it	only	pretends	to	be.	It	never	becomes	the	part,	it	always	remains	separate.
The	moment	you	decide	 to	drop	 it	 you	can	drop	 it	 immediately;	you	need	not
even	wait	for	a	single	second.	Hence	many	people	have	attained	enlightenment
instantly.
A	king	came	to	see	Buddha.	He	was	bringing	the	greatest	diamond	that	existed
in	those	days	to	present	to	him.	One	should	not	go	to	a	Buddha	empty-handed,
something	has	to	be	presented	--	that	was	his	idea.
But	his	queen	said	'I	know	the	Buddha,	I	have	been	to	see	him	--	this	diamond	is
nothing	but	a	stone	as	far	as	he	is	concerned.	Rather,	take	something	better.'	She
said	 'A	lotus	has	blossomed	in	our	pond,	and	it	 is	unseasonal,	rare,	so	take	this
lotus.'
The	king;	decided	to	take	both.	He	thought	'First	I	will	present	the	diamond	--	if
he	accepts	it,	good;	if	he	does	not	accept	it,	I	will	present	the	lotus.'
He	 presented	 the	 diamond	 and	 Buddha	 simply	 laughed	 and	 he	 said	 'Drop	 it!'
When	Buddha	said	'Drop	it,'	he	had	to	drop	it!	He	dropped	it	reluctantly	because
it	was	such	a	precious	thing,	but	what	can	you	do	when	ten	thousand	sannyasins
are	sitting	there	and	in	front	of	them	Buddha	says	'Drop	it.'	And	when	you	have
come	to	present	it...	So	it	was	okay;	he	felt	very	sad	but	he	dropped	it.
Then	 he	 presented	 the	 lotus	 flower	 and	 Buddha	 said	 'Drop	 it.'	 Now	 he	 was
feeling	a	little	bit	awkward.
He	 dropped	 that	 too	 and	 then	 he	 stood	 there	 with	 empty	 hands,	 a	 little	 bit
embarrassed;	'Now	what	to	do?
How	 to	 start	 a	 conversation	with	 this	man?	And	Buddha	 again	 said	 'Drop	 it!'
Then	 the	 king	 said	 'Either	 you	 are	 crazy	 or	 I	 am	 crazy	 --	 now	my	 hands	 are
empty.'
And	Mahakashyapa,	one	of	Buddha's	first	disciples	to	become	enlightened,	said
'Drop	it;	drop	it,	don't	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
hesitate!'	The	king	 turned	 to	Mahakashyapa	and	said	 'But	what	 should	 I	drop?
My	hands	 are	 empty.'	And	Mahakashyapa	 said	 'Now	 is	 the	 point	 of	 dropping.
Buddha	never	meant	that	you	should	drop	the	diamond,	he	never	meant	that	you
should	drop	the	flower.	He	means	drop	the	ego,	drop	yourself.	If	you	have	come
here	then	the	only	way	to	be	in	communion	with	Buddha	is	to	drop	the	ego.'
And	 the	 story	 is	 that	 the	 man	 fell	 at	 Buddha's	 feet	 and	 immediately	 became
enlightened.	It	was	a	sudden	enlightenment,	just	a	simple	understanding,	and	he
dropped	the	ego.	It	can	be	dropped	just	like	that.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	let	it	become	the	meaning	of	your	life	too.
Premdo	means	the	loving	one.
There	are	a	 few	words	which	 I	emphasize	continuously	 --	 love	 is	one	of	 those
words.	It	contains	a	whole	philosophy	of	life.	If	you	become	loving	nothing	else
is	needed,	because	love	goes	on	changing	you.	The	deeper	you	love,	the	deeper
you	understand	yourself.	When	you	love	totally	you	understand	yourself	totally.
Love	becomes	a	mirror	in	which	you	can	see	your	original	face.
So	don't	miss	a	single	opportunity	to	love:	love	people,	love	animals,	love	trees,
rocks,	rivers,	stars.
Don't	miss	 a	 single	 opportunity,	 and	whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing	 do	 it	 lovingly.
And	start	the	journey	from	yourself:	the	first	love	is	to	love	oneself.
For	centuries	we	have	been	told	the	opposite;	it	has	been	engrained	in	us	that	it	is
bad	to	love	oneself	--
love	others,	of	course,	but	don't	 love	yourself.	Now	that	 is	sheer	stupidity.	 If	a
person	is	incapable	of	loving	himself	he	cannot	love	anybody	else	in	the	world.
Love	begins	at	home,	just	as	everything	else	begins	at	home.
Love	yourself,	 then	go	on	radiating	love.	Radiate	it	 to	the	whole	universe.	The
farther	the	reach	of	your	love,	the	bigger	your	consciousness.	Love	functions	like
wings	and	you	start	soaring	higher	and	higher.
Love	can	take	you	to	the	ultimate	abode	of	god.
It	is	because	of	this	that	Jesus	has	made	them	synonymous:	he	says	god	is	love.
Devika	means	the	divine.
All	is	divine,	because	except	for	god	nothing	else	exists.	Existence	means	god.
When	we	say	god	is,	we	are	unnecessarily	repeating	the	same	word	because	god
means	 'is',	 'isness'.	When	 we	 say	 god	 is	 existence	 we	 are	 repeating	 the	 same
thing	twice	because	god	is	 'isness',	obviously	god	is	existence,	so	everything	is
divine.
The	 earth	 is	 divine,	 the	 trees	 are	 divine,	 the	 stars	 are	 divine,	 the	 people	 are
divine,	even	 the	devil	 is	divine.	The	word	 'devil'	 comes	 from	 the	same	root	as
divine.	 Devika	 also	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 Sanskrit	 root.	 Maybe	 the	 devil	 is
divine	but	he	is	standing	on	his	head	--	that	may	be	the	only	difference.	He	has
just	gone	a	 little	bit	crazy,	cuckoo,	but	even	if	he	is	a	cuckoo	god	he	is	a	god!
(laughter)	Nothing	else	exists,	so	the	whole	existence	becomes	a	temple,	and	the
whole	world	becomes	a	play	 to	pray	 in,	 to	worship	 in.	Then	wherever	you	are
walking	you	are	walking	on	holy	'round'	whatsoever	you	are	doing	is	sacred.
But	the	religions	have	created	a	division.	They	say	when	you	go	to	the	church	it
is	 religious	 and	 when	 you	 go	 to	 the	 shop	 or	 the	 office	 or	 the	 factory,	 that	 is
worldly.	When	you	are	praying	it	is	holy	and	when	you	are	taking	a	shower	it	is
nothing	 holy.	 I	 don't	 believe	 in	 this	 division.	 This	 division	 creates	 a	 split
humanity,	it	is	the	root	cause	of	schizophrenia.
One	 can	 take	 a	 shower	 as	 prayerfully	 as	 one	 can	 pray;	 one	 just	 has	 to	 be
understanding.	The	water	is	divine,	the	shower	is	divine,	the	coolness	is	divine,
you	are	divine.	The	divine	is	showering	on	the	divine	--
it	 is	multiplied!	 It	 is	 just	 a	 question	 of	 seeing,	 understanding;	 and	only	 then	 a
person	 is	 religious	 --	 when	 all	 his	 acts,	 gestures,	 movements	 become	 divine.
Then	the	twenty-four	hours	of	your	day	are	prayerful.
That's	 the	meaning	 of	 sannyas,	 to	 transform	 your	whole	 life	 into	 a	 prayer,	 an
unending	prayer.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#5
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
5	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012055
ShortTitle:	GREENR05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Anand	means	bliss.	Trinda	means	pure,	clean,	clear.
These	are	the	basic	qualities	of	a	blissful	person.	He	is	pure	but	not	in	the	moral
sense,	he	is	pure	in	a	scientific	sense,	because	there	is	no	misery	in	him.	Misery
pollutes	 the	 being,	 it	 covers	 your	 being	 like	 clouds.	 The	 pure	 person	 is	 one
whose	being	is	a	sky	without	clouds.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	morality.	Morality	itself	is	a	cloud	--	maybe	a	beautiful
cloud	--	and	immorality	is	an	ugly	cloud.	But	a	cloud	is	a	cloud.	Beautiful	or	not,
it	hinders	the	vision,	the	light.	The	sun	cannot	reach	you,	the	moon	cannot	reach
you.	It	comes	like	a	wall	between	you	and	the	stars.
Clean	has	a	second	quality.	Bliss	has	the	fragrance	of	the	just-opening	flower	or
the	just-born	baby;	it	is	the	same	feeling	as	when	you	come	out	of	a	shower.	That
cleanliness	continuously	remains	with	the	blissful	person.
The	miserable	 person	 is	 dirty,	 he	 feels	 the	 dirt	 clinging	 to	 him.	He	 has	 never
known	that	the	beyond	showers	continuously.	He	has	never	been	bathed	with	the
beyond,	he	has	never	taken	a	shower	in	God;	hence	he	is	unclean.
And	clear,	 the	third	quality.	The	blissful	person	can	see	things	as	they	are.	The
miserable	person	always	projects	his	desires.	He	is	so	full	of	desires,	so	full	of
frustrations,	 so	 full	 of	 failures,	 that	 his	 whole	 life	 is	 nothing	 but	 wanting,
wanting,	wanting.	He	cannot	see	things	as	they	are,	his	wants	are	too	many.
The	blissful	person	is	at	ease	with	himself.	He	is	in	a	state	of	non-wanting,	he	is
satisfied.	 He	 has	 got	 that	 after	 which	 everybody	 is	 running	 and	 rushing.	 His
perception	has	no	projections	in	it.	And	to	see	things	as	they	are	is	to	see	God.
The	word	'God'	is	simply	a	code	word.	In	mystery	schools	G	stands	for	that,	O
stands	for	which,	and	D
stands	for	is.	That	which	is	--	that's	exactly	the	meaning	of	the	word	'God'.	God
is	not	a	word;	it	is	a	code	word.	It	has	to	be	decoded,	and	only	a	blissful	person
is	capable	of	decoding	it.
So	 my	 message	 basically	 is	 simple:	 be	 blissful,	 be	 cheerful.	 And	 if	 you	 are
blissful	you	are	religious.
Anand	means	bliss.	Alexis	means	a	helper	of	mankind.
The	blissful	person	is	inevitably	a	helper	of	mankind.	And	not	only	of	mankind,
he	 is	simply	a	helper	of	existence	 itself.	And	I	say	 it	 is	 inevitable	--	 it	 is	not	a
question	of	doing	 something,	 it	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 blissfulness.	 It	 comes	of	 its
own	accord	because	there	is	a	fundamental	law	of	bliss	that	you	have	to	share	it.
You	 cannot	 escape	 sharing	 it.	 That	 is	 intrinsic	 to	 bliss,	 its	 organic	 quality	 --
inalienable,	inseparable.
Just	as	when	light	comes	darkness	cannot	exist,	when	bliss	happens	you	cannot
cause	misery	to	anybody,	not	even	in	your	dreams.	That	simply	disappears.	And
when	you	cannot	cause	misery	you	are	so	full	of	bliss	--	it	is	overflowing.	You
have	to	share	it,	otherwise	it	becomes	a	burden.	There	is	a	pain	if	you	don't	share
bliss,	the	same	pain	as	the	cloud	feels	when	it	is	full	of	rain	and	cannot	shower.	It
has	to	shower	to	unburden.	It	is	the	same	pain	as	a	woman	feels	when	the	child	is
ready	in	her	womb.	Nine	months	are	over	and	the	child	has	to	be	given	birth	to.
Now	it	is	becoming	heavier,	it	is	impossible	to	contain	the	child	anymore.
Giving	birth	 to	a	child	simply	means	sharing	the	child	with	 the	world,	sending
him	into	the	world.	The	same	is	true	about	bliss:	when	you	have	it,	it	comes	in
such	abundance,	floodlike,	that	it	starts	overglowing	you.	And	the	beauty	is	the
more	you	share	it,	the	more	you	have	it.
Once	 you	 have	 learned	 this	 strange	 law	 that	 sharing	makes	 it	 deeper,	 greater,
then	it	is	simple	logic	to	go	on	giving	it	for	no	other	reason	but	just	for	the	sake
of	giving.	And	you	don't	feel	that	others	have	to	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
obliged	to	you.	In	fact,	the	blissful	person	is	obliged	to	those	who	allow	him	to
shower	his	bliss	upon	them.
That's	 the	whole	philosophy	of	sannyas:	be	blissful	and	let	 it	 flow	from	you	in
every	direction.	Never	bother	about	who	deserves	it	and	who	does	not;	you	are
not	the	judge.	And	there	is	no	need	to	judge,	your	joy	should	be	in	sharing.
So	give	without	any	conditions.	Just	give,	not	as	a	duty	but	as	love.	You	are	not
doing	 anything	 to	 anybody,	 you	 are	 not	 doing	 anything	 special.	You	 are	 not	 a
public	servant,	a	social	reformer	and	all	that	nonsense,	you	are	not	a	missionary.
To	be	a	missionary	 is	 to	be	ugly,	because	 the	whole	 idea	 is	 that	you	are	doing
something	great,	something	holy.
My	sannyasins	are	not	holy	people	in	that	sense.	My	sannyasins	have	to	be	very
ordinary,	 because,	 this	 is	 my	 observation,	 to	 be	 just	 ordinary	 is	 the	 most
extraordinary	 phenomenon	 in	 existence	 because	 everybody	 wants	 to	 be
extraordinary.	 Hence	 the	 desire	 for	 extraordinariness	 is	 very	 ordinary.	 Who
wants	to	be	ordinary?	--	only	a	very	extraordinary	person.
Anand	means	bliss.	Harry	means	home.
Life	in	every	form	is	searching	for	a	home,	it	is	searching	for	its	source.	That's
why	 animals,	 birds,	 trees,	man	 --	 all	 kinds	 of	 life	 forms	 are	 one	 as	 far	 as	 the
longing	for	bliss	is	concerned,	because	bliss	is	the	home.
There	are	many	houses,	but	a	house	is	not	equivalent	to	a	home.	A	house	is	just
an	overnightls	stay;	tho	home	is	eternal.	Once	you	have	arrived,	there	is	no	need
to	 go	 anywhere,	 all	 is	 fulfilled,	 the	 journey	 is	 completed.	 And	 the	 joy	 of
completing	 a	 great	 job,	 of	 finishing	 something	 that	 has	 been	 incomplete	 for
thousands	of	lives!
Bliss	is	the	only	real	longing	of	man.	So	I	don't	insist	on	your	believing	in	god
because	 that	will	be	a	belief,	and	all	beliefs	are	plastic,	artificial,	arbitrary;	my
insistence	 is	 on	 the	 natural.	 So	whether	 one	 is	 an	 atheist	 or	 a	 theist,	 it	 doesn't
matters	bliss	is	the	longing	of	allO	Hence	I	call	bliss	the	home.	It	is	the	source
and	it	is	the	end,	the	beginning	and	the	end,	the	alpha	and	the	omega.
We	have	come	from	some	unknown	source	and	we	are	searching	for	a	way	back
to	 it.	The	circle	will	be	complete	when	we	have	found	it.	And	the	moment	we
find	it	--	immediately	the	recognition	that	this	is	the	origin	and	this	is	the	goal,
and	they	are	not	separate.
Veet	Seraida.
Seraida	 is	 a	 dangerous	 name,	 hence	 I	 have	 to	 put	 a	 condition	 before	 it;	 Veet
means	go	beyond	--	go	beyond	Seraida.	Seraida	means	one	who	is	burning	with
a	religious	desire,	one	who	is	ardently	religious.
That	is	a	very	dangerous	thing,	that	creates	fanaticism.	Ardently	religious	people
have	been	a	calamity	in	the	world.
I	 want	 you	 to	 be	 simply	 religious;	 not	 ardently,	 not	 seriously,	 not	 fanatically.
There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 burning	 with	 religiousness.	 Flower	 --	 that's	 right.
Rejoice,	dance,	sing,	but	don't	burn!	Because	when	a	person	starts	burning	with
religiousness	 then	 he	 wants	 everybody	 to	 burn	 with	 the	 same	 religiousness.
That's	 how	 Christianity,	 Mohammedanism,	 Hinduism,	 Judaism,	 has	 been
functioning	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 The	 earth	 has	 been	 dominated	 by	 the
fanatics,	and	religion	is	not	fanaticism.
One	should	be	very	light-hearted,	don't	take	religion	seriously.	Take	it	as	fun	--	it
is	the	ultimate	fun,	but	fun	all	the	same.
The	eastern	mystics	have	called	the	world	god's	'leela',	his	play	--	that	is	far	more
beautiful.	 That	 idea	 is	 missing	 in	 all	 the	 Judaic	 religions.	 Christianity,
Mohammedanism	--	these	are	Judaic	religions,	by-products	of	Judaism.	They	are
completely	missing	the	whole	dimension	of	festivity	and	light-heartedness;	they
have	been	too	serious,	deadly	serious.	That's	the	meaning	of	ardently	religious.
Of	course	 in	 the	past	 it	has	been	 thought	 to	be	a	great	quality,	hence	 the	name
Seraida	became	very	significant.	But	with	me	you	will	have	to	unlearn	it.	To	me
existence	is	a	cosmic	joke.	God	is	playing	hide	and	seek.	We	know	where	he	is
hiding,	he	knows	that	we	know	but	just	to	continue	the	game....
I	can	show	you	where	he	is	hiding	but	then	the	whole	game	is	finished.	If	you
read	the	punchline	of	a	joke	first	then	what	is	the	point	of	reading	the	joke?	--	all
is	finished.	So	the	punchline	remains	hanging	like	a	carrot	ahead	of	you;	you	go
on	moving	and	the	carrot	goes	on	moving;	it	is	always	there	on	the	horizon.	It	is
very	close,	it	is	not	very	far	away,	but	you	never	reach	it.
That's	the	whole	joy	of	life!	That's	the	beauty	of	life,	that	it	remains	a	mystery.
And	it	is	not	that	we	cannot	dissect	it,	it	can	be	dissected	but	only	a	fool	will	do
that	and	a	fool	cannot	do	that.	A	wise	man	can	do	it	but	a	wise	man	will	not	do
it.	Do	you	get	it?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Thomas	means	a	seeker	of	truth.
There	are	two	ways	to	seek	the	truth:	one	is	mind,	the	other	is	meditation.	If	you
choose	the	mind	you	land	in	the	world	of	philosophy.	Then	there	are	thousands
of	questions	but	no	answers.	Many	times	you	will	feel	you	are	coming	closer	to
an	answer,	but	when	you	arrive	you	will	find	ten	more	questions	hiding	behind
it.
In	philosophy	answers	are	only	hiding	places	for	many	more	questions.	So	each
answer	creates	ten	questions.	And	as	philosophy	has	grown	bigger	and	bigger...
now	it	is	nothing	but	questions	and	questions	and	no	answer	at	all.	It	can	drive	a
man	crazy	--	in	fact	it	does.	It	is	very	difficult	to	find	a	philosopher	who	is	not
crazy.	If	he	is	not	crazy	he	is	not	much	of	a	philosopher,	he	is	wasting	his	time	--
that	 is	 not	 his	 business.	A	 philosopher	 has	 to	 be	 crazy;	 otherwise,	who	wants
questions	 and	 questions?	 And	 to	 be	 surrounded	 by	 all	 kinds	 of	 questions...
finally	one	gets	lost	in	the	jungle	of	philosophy.
If	you	go	 through	meditation,	which	 is	 just	 the	opposite	of	mind	 --	meditation
means	no-mind	 --	 then	you	enter	 the	world	of	 religion.	 Just	as	 in	 the	world	of
mind	there	are	only	questions,	in	the	world	of	meditation	there	are	only	answers,
no	questions.	Hence	a	person	moving	 into	meditation	becomes	more	and	more
silent,	more	and	more	sane.	The	name	of	ultimate	sanity	is	buddhahood	--	that's
what	we	call	wisdom.
Then	there	are	no	questions	left	anymore.
And	because	there	are	no	questions	anymore,	you	cannot	say	you	have	got	 the
answers	 either	 --	 because	 they	 are	 relevant	 only	 with	 the	 questions.	 One	 is
simply	silent.
The	philosopher	is	in	a	turmoil,	the	mystic	is	absolutely	silent.	The	philosopher
tries	hard	but	finds	nothing,	the	mystic	does	not	try	at	all	and	finds	everything.
The	 mystic	 says:	 sitting	 silently,	 doing	 nothing,	 spring	 comes	 and	 the	 grass
grows	by	itself.
The	West	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 understand	 the	mystic;	 the	mystic	 seems	 to	 be
very	 alien	 to	 the	Western	 mind.	 Just	 sitting	 silently,	 doing	 nothing,	 not	 even
thinking?	Then	why	are	you	sitting?	For	what?
The	 Western	 approach	 is	 a	 mind	 approach.	 It	 is	 dominated	 by	 philosophy.
Because	of	that	domination	it	cannot	think	that	there	is	a	possibility	of	just	being
and	doing	nothing	--	no	questions,	no	problems,	no	thoughts;	relaxing	in	oneself,
resting	 in	 oneself.	 And	 in	 that	 rest	 one	 arrives,	 one	 arrives	 at	 one's	 own
innermost	core.	And	that	is	where	one	finds	the	truth.	There	is	nowhere	else	one
can	find	the	truth.
The	philosopher	goes	everywhere,	the	mystic	simply	sits	in	his	own	home.	Lao
Tzu	says	that	you	need	not	even	go	out	of	the	room;	all	that	you	want	you	can
find	inside.	And	he	is	right!
Being	initiated	into	sannyas	means	being	initiated	into	meditation.	So	now	learn
to	 drop	 the	 mind.	 Pull	 the	 energy	 out	 from	 the	 mind	 and	 put	 it	 into
meditativeness,	into	silence.
I	don't	give	any	answers,	I	only	destroy	your	questions.	I	call	that	answering	--
destroying	your	questions.	When	all	your	questions	are	destroyed,	nothing	is	left
in	you,	all	is	found.
In	nothing	all	is	found.
Anand	means	bliss.	Marlies	consists	of	two	words;	the	first	part	means	rebellion
and	the	second	part	means	victory.
Bliss	is	a	rebellion	and	also	a	victory.	It	is	a	rebellion	against	the	stupid	society
in	which	we	 are	 brought	 up,	 against	 the	 dull	 and	 dead	 tradition	 that	 has	 been
imposed	 upon	 us.	All	 kinds	 of	 ideologies,	 philosophies,	 theologies,	 have	 been
forced	on	every	person.	One	has	 to	 rebel	against	all	 that	because	 those	are	 the
things	which	are	keeping	you	tethered	to	your	misery.	Unless	you	uproot	all	that
has	been	imposed	on	you	by	others,	you	will	never	be	blissful.
The	 society	 lives	 in	misery	 and	 this	 society	 goes	 on	 conditioning	 every	 child.
The	 parents	 are	 miserable,	 the	 teachers	 are	 miserable,	 the	 neighbours	 are
miserable,	the	priests	are	miserable;	the	politicians	are	miserable	--	and	they	are
all	 together,	 imposing	what	 is	 right,	what	 is	wrong,	what	 you	 have	 to	 do	 and
what	you	haven't	 to	do.	And	of	 course	 they	create	 just	 replicas	of	 themselves.
They	create	every	child	in	their	own	image	--	and	they	are	miserable	people.	So
many	miserable	people	working	hard	on	a	small	child	are	bound	 to	destroy	all
his	intrinsic	blissfulness.	Bliss	is	intrinsic	and	natural	but	it	can	be	destroyed,	at
least	it	can	be	covered	with	rubbish;	you	can	be	made	to	forget	all	about	it.	And
that's	what	they	have	done.
A	 rebellion	 is	 needed.	 And	 unless	 one	 is	 ready	 to	 rebel,	 one	 cannot	 be	 a
sannyasin.	Rebel	against	all	that	creates	misery	in	you	and	you	will	be	surprised
to	know	that	you	will	have	to	rebel	agalnst	the	whole	mind	that	up	to	now	you
thought	was	yours;	it	is	your	enemy,	not	your	friend.
And	if	one	is	ready	to	rebel	against	the	mind,	bliss	explodes	and	brings	victory.
The	 only	 victory	 which	 can	 be	 really	 called	 victory	 is	 not	 the	 victory	 over
somebody	else	but	the	victory	over	your	own	innermost	self,	the	victory	which
makes	you	capable	of	entering	into	the	kingdom	of	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	most	 important	 thing	 in	 life	 is	 to	discover	your	 truth.	Certainly	 it	 is	 there
becauso	we	are	alive,	we	are	conscious.	We	have	to	dig	into	our	consciousness,
we	have	 to	go	 to	 the	very	source	of	 it,	 to	 the	very	rock-bottom.	And	once	you
have	found	it,	you	have	found	your	truth.	Once	you	know	who	you	are	--	that's
what	I	mean	by	your	truth'	--	you	are	liberated.	You	will	 live	in	the	same	way,
nothing	on	the	outside	will	change,	but	still	you	will	be	a	totally	different	person.
In	one	sense	everything	will	be	 the	same,	 in	another	 sense	nothing	will	be	 the
same	 any	 more,	 because	 now	 you	 will	 have	 a	 perspective	 which	 is	 timeless,
deathless.	Now	you	know	that	you	were	before	birth	and	you	will	be	after	death.
Now	that	you	have	seen	your	original	faco	you	are	freed	from	all	small	things	--
life's	 failures	 and	 successes,	 richness	 and	 poverty,	 small	 pains	 and	 pleasures.
They	all	look	so	small,	so	insignificant,	that	one	can	remain	absolutely	centred	in
every	 kind	 of	 situation.	 Nothing	 makes	 you	 waver,	 your	 groundedness	 is	 so
solid,	your	centredness	is	so	absolute.
This	 centredness	 is	 the	 goal	 of	 sannyas.	This	 groundedness,	 this	 integrity,	 this
unwavering	state	of	consciousness	which	remains	untouched	by	everything,	this
is	 the	 goal	 of	 sannyas.	 And	 once	 this	 is	 discovered	 there	 is	 nothing	 more	 to
discover.	Then	one	can	livo	the	ordinary	life	with	an	extraordinary	beauty,	with
an	extraordinary	bliss,	with	grace,	with	god	within	one's	heart.
Toshi	means	absolutely	contented.
Mind	 is	 discontentment,	 it	 is	 never	 contented.	 It	 goes	 on	 saying	 'Get	 this,	 get
that,	 and	 I	will	be	contented,'	 but	by	 the	 time	you	get	 it,	 it	 is	 again	asking	 for
something	 else.	 And	 the	 game	 continues	 for	 the	 whole	 of	 one's	 life	 from	 the
cradle	to	the	grave.	It	goes	on	asking	for	more.
It	 is	 said	 that	 when	 Alexander	 the	 Great	 saw	 Diogenes,	 a	 Greek	 mystic,
Diogenes	 said	 to	 him	 'I	 have	 heard	 that	 you	 are	 going	 to	 conquer	 the	 whole
world,	 but	 have	 you	 pondered	 over	 one	 question?'	 Alexander	 said	 'What
question?'	Diogenes	said	'A	simple	question,	that	you	must	consider	before	you
enter	on	this	enterprlses	remember	there	is	only	one	world	and	if	you	conquer	it
then	what	will	you	do	afterwards?'
The	 story	 is	 that	 just	 the	 idea	 made	 Alexander	 sad;	 just	 the	 idea	 that	 if	 he
conquered	 the	whole	world	 of	 course	 the	 problem	would	 arise	 of,	 now	what?
With	just	the	idea	--	he	had	not	yet	conquered	the	world	--	his	mind	immediately
became	discontented	and	asked	for	another	world,	another	toy.	That's	the	way	of
the	mind;	it	goes	from	one	discontentment	to	another.
But	there	is	something	more	than	mind	in	you;	and	that	is	the	only	hope.	There	is
something	 deeper	 than	 the	mind	 in	 you:	 your	 consciousness.	Consciousness	 is
not	part	of	the	mind,	because	you	can	even	watch	your	mind,	so	the	watcher	is
separate	from	the	mind,	different	from	the	mind.	And	this	watcher	has	a	totally
different	 quality,	 just	 the	 opposite	 to	 the	 mind	 --	 the	 quality	 of	 contentment,
absolute	contentment.
Each	moment	 is	 so	 full	 of	 joy,	 so	 exquisitely	 joyful,	 that	 even	 if	 death	 comes
right	 now	 you	 will	 not	 ask	 for	 another	 moment	 because	 this	 moment	 was
enough.	 There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 asking	 for	 another	 world;	 even	 for	 another
moment	you	will	not	say	 to	death	 'Wait,	because	I	have	 to	 finish	a	 few	things,
because	there	are	a	few	things	which	I	was	doing	and	they	are	incomplete.	You
will	say	I'	am	ready.'
Contentment	means	 'This	moment	is	enough.	Right	now	all	 that	I	need	is	here;
all	that	I	have	ever	needed	and	will	ever	need	is	here.'	And	to	be	in	such	a	state	is
to	know	god,	is	to	be	god.	Then	each	moment	is	a	dance	and	a	celebration.	Then
each	 moment	 has	 such	 infinite	 depth	 and	 so	 much	 treasure,	 that	 who	 cares
whether	tomorrow	comes	or	not?	Who	bothers?
In	his	prayer	at	night	before	he	went	to	bed,	one	Sufi	mystic,	Farid,	used	to	say
'Thank	you,	god.'	And	in	the	morning	again	when	he	opened	his	eyes,	the	same
prayers	'Thank	you,	god.'	His	disciples	were	a	little	puzzled	because	this	was	not
the	Mohammedan	way.	They	have	 specific	prayers;	 a	Mohammedan	has	 to	do
five	kinds	of	prayer	 five	 times	a	day.	What	kind	of	prayer	was	 this?	He	did	 it
only	twice!	and	'Thank	you,	god...'?
They	 said	 to	 him	 'Please,	 don't	 be	 offended	 --	 we	 are	 your	 disciples	 and	 we
should	not	ask	any	questions	like	this,	this	is	your	personal	matter	--	but	we	have
become	very	 curious:	why	 do	 you	 say	 "thank	 you"	when	 you	 go	 to	 sleep	 and
again	in	the	morning?'	He	said	'I	say	thank	you	because	who	knows?	--	this	may
be	my	last	moment	and	in	the	morning	I	may	not	wake	up,	so	at	 least	before	I
leave	the	world	--	he	has	given	so	much	to	me	--	I	should	say	thank	you.	In	the
morning	when	I	wake	up	I	am	so	full	of	wonder,	I	cannot	believe	my	own	eyes
that	I	am	here	again	and	the	day	is	here	--	so	it	seems	I	have	one	day	more!	So
much	 is	 available	 --	 the	 sun	 and	 the	 birds	 singing	 and	 the	 flowers	 and	 the
fragrance	 --	 so	 I	 say	 thank	 you.	 I	 had	 never	 asked,	 I	 never	 thought	 that	 there
would	be	another	day	but	thore	is.	It	is	just	a	gift	from	god,	so	I	say	thank	you.
More	than	that	I	don't	know,'	he	said,	'More	prayer	is	not	needed.'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Prayer	 is	 a	 thankfulness;	 in	 fact	 a	 contented	 being	 is	 continuously	 prayerful.
Whether	 he	 says	 anything	 or	 not	 there	 is	 always	 a	 deep	 undercurrent	 of
thankfulness.	That	has	to	become	your	life.
I	 am	 giving	 you	 a	 very	 small	 name	 --	 Toshi	 --	 but	 it	 contains	 the	 whole	 of
religions.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	(Her	reply	is	very	softly	spoken.)
--	Be	here	as	long	as	possible	--	and	as	long	as	god	allows!
Anudeva	means	divine,	godly.
We	are	gods.	If	we	know	that,	we	live	an	ecstatic	life;	if	we	don't	know,	we	live
in	 agony.	The	only	difference	 is	 of	 knowing;	 there	 is	 no	qualitative	difference
between	you	and	Christ,	except	just	a	very	simple	difference	that	he	knows	who
he	is	and	you	are	unaware	of	the	fact.	He	has	the	treasure,	you	have	the	treasure;
it	is	the	same	treasure,	but	you	are	unconscious	of	it	and	he	is	conscious	of	it.	So
all	that	is	needed	is	a	little	bit	of	awareness,	just	a	little	candle	of	awareness	and
the	miracle	happens.
Meditation	 is	 that	 little	 bit	 of	 awareness.	 It	 is	 only	 a	 seed	 but	 the	 seed	 soon
becomes	a	big	tree	with	great	foliage	and	flowers	and	fruits.
Now,	 let	 meditation	 become	 the	 very	 focus	 of	 your	 life,	 the	 very	 centre.
Everything	else	should	be	secondary	and	everything	else	should	be	arranged	in
such	a	way	 that	 it	helps	your	meditation	and	does	not	hinder	 it.	Anything	 that
hinders	your	meditation	has	 to	be	dropped	and	anything	 that	helps	 it	has	 to	be
practised.	Meditation	has	to	be	the	criterion.	And	it	is	such	a	great	criterion	that
you	can	easily	dissect	the	non-essential	from	thc	essential;	the	essential	is	always
nourishing	to	meditation	and	the	non-essential	is	always	poisoning.
The	 sannyasin	 lives	 the	 essential	 life,	 and	 the	 non-essential	 slowly	 slowly
disappears,	evaporates.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012065
ShortTitle:	GREENR06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Veet	Dirk.	Dirk	is	a	dangerous	name.	It	means	the	ruler	of	the	people.	The	very
idea	of	ruling	others	is	ugly;	it	is	political,	it	is	inhuman.	Hence	I	am	giving	you
the	name	Veet	Dirk:	Veet	means	go	beyond	Dirk,	go	beyond	the	idea,	the	desire
of	domination,	of	ruling	others.	Veet	means	transcending.	It	is	an	ordinary	desire
in	everybody,	to	somehow	prove	superior	to	others.
The	really	superior	man	has	no	desire	to	prove	that	he	is	superior	--	he	simply	is!
He	never	becomes	a	politician,	 there	is	no	need.	The	politician	suffers	from	an
inferiority	complex,	hence	to	compensate	he	projects	just	the	opposite	of	it	into
the	world;	he	tries	to	prove	that	he	is	great,	that	Alexander	the	Great,	but	inside
he	knows	his	emptiness.
Sannyas	means	dropping	the	desire	to	rule	others	and	putting	your	whole	energy
into	conquering	yourself,	 into	becoming	a	matter	of	one's	own	being.	And	one
cannot	manage	both	together.	To	rule	others	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
one	has	to	go	outside,	one	has	to	be	violent,	competitive,	destructive.	To	become
a	 master	 of	 oneself	 one	 has	 to	 go	 in,	 one	 has	 to	 become	 more	 loving,	 more
peaceful,	 more	 silent,	 more	 non-competitive,	 more	 non-ambitious,	 more	 and
more	diving	into	one's	being.	A	moment	comes	when	you	reach	the	very	centre.
That	 moment	 is	 the	 moment	 of	 real	 victory.	 That	 is	 the	 moment	 when	 one
becomes	a	master.
And	that	is	worth	achieving;	all	else	is	just	stupid.
Prem	means	love.	Gabriele	means	God	is	my	strength.
Man	 can	 live	 either	 as	 love	 or	 as	 an	 ego.	 These	 are	 the	 two,	 the	 only	 two
alternatives	available,	the	two	alternative	lifestyles.
The	ego	is	very	attractive	because	it	promises	great	 things,	although	it	delivers
nothing;	those	goods	are	never	delivered.	But	it	is	very	persuasive,	seductive.	It
goes	on	promising,	it	goes	on	alluring,	it	goes	on	telling	you	that	just	a	few	steps
more	 and	 you	 will	 achieve	 the	 goal	 --	 although	 the	 goal	 is	 never	 achieved
because	 the	 goal	 is	 like	 the	 horizon.	 You	 can	 go	 on	 and	 on	 but	 the	 distance
between	you	and	 the	horizon	remains	 the	same,	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 that	 that
horizon	is	illusory.	It	exists	not,	it	only	appears	to;	it	has	no	reality.
The	ego	creates	dreams	and	fantasies	of	achieving	this,	of	being	this,	of	getting
that,	of	reaching	there.
And	 through	 all	 these	 fantasies	 it	 takes	 you	 farther	 and	 farther	 away	 from
yourself.	And	to	be	away	from	one's	own	self	is	to	be	away	from	god.
Love	is	not	at	all	persuasive.	You	have	to	choose	it,	it	does	not	propagate	itself.
It	will	not	prove	itself.
So	 when	 the	 ego	 style	 fails	 --	 and	 it	 fails	 only	 for	 the	 intelligent	 people,
remember;	 for	 the	 stupid	 it	 never	 fails.	 It	 fails	 again	 and	 again,	 but	 again	 and
again	they	are	in	the	same	trap;	they	can	be	befooled	for	their	whole	life.	But	the
intelligent	person	sooner	or	later	--	and	it	is	sooner	rather	than	later	--	recognizes
that	the	ego	is	just	a	deceptive	phenomenon,	a	mirage.
In	that	failure	of	the	ego	lifestyle	one	moves	to	egolessness.	And	that's	what	love
is:	love	is	egolessness.
Now	 there	 is	 nowhere	 to	 go,	 nothing	 to	 achieve;	 your	 whole	 energy	 starts
settling,	resting	within	yourself.
And	when	it	rests	at	the	center	one	comes	to	know	that	one	is	not,	only	God	is.
"That's	the	meaning	of	Gabriele:	'God	is	my	strength,	God	is	my	existence,	God
is	my	very	being.	I	am	just	a	small	manifestation	of	divine	energy.'"
To	know	it	brings	great	rejoicing.	All	worries	disappear,	all	anxieties	disappear;
now	you	know	that	there	is	somebody	far	bigger	than	you	who	takes	care,	who	is
concerned.	You	are	his	project	so	it	is	his	business	to	fulfill	it,	to	help	you	to	be
blissful.	 And	 he	 is	 constantly	 trying	 to	 reach	 you	 to	 be	 blissful.	 And	 he	 is
constantly	 trying	 to	 reach	 you	 but	 you	 are	 always	 running,	 chasing	 after
shadows,	hence	he	cannot	reach	you.	When	you	are	inside	yourself,	immediately
you	hear	the	still,	small	voice	within	you	--	and	that	becomes	the	guiding	star.
Then	 you	 don't	 need	 any	 scriptures,	 any	morality,	 any	 codes	 of	 behavior;	 you
have	your	own	insight	--
now	you	can	know	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong,	on	your	own.	And	that	has
tremendous	beauty:	to	live	according	to	one's	own	being	is	to	live	authentically.
That's	the	way	a	sannyasin	should	live.
Dhyan	Susanne.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Susanne	means	full	of	grace.
Everybody	 is	 born	 with	 great	 grace,	 beauty	 and	 intelligence,	 but	 it	 has	 to	 be
discovered.	 It	 is	only	a	potential;	 it	has	 to	be	actualised.	 It	 is	only	a	seed;	you
have	to	sow	it,	only	then	will	it	burst	forth	into	flowers	one	day.
Ordinarily	it	is	invisible.	You	cannot	see	the	flowers	in	the	seed.	Even	if	you	cut
the	seed	you	will	not	find	any	colour,	any	fragrance,	nothing,	no	foliage,	and	you
know	this	seed	has	all	that.	Millions	of	flowers	are	possible	through	it,	for	years
and	 years	 millions	 of	 leaves,	 greenery,	 will	 come	 out	 of	 it;	 it	 has	 infinite
potential,	but	that	potential	has	to	become	a	tree,	a	reality.
Man	is	a	seed	full	of	grace,	full	of	beauty,	full	of	wisdom,	full	of	god	--	but	he	is
only	 a	 seed.	 Meditation	 is	 the	 way	 to	 make	 that	 seed	 sprout.	 Meditation	 is
nothing	but	preparing	 the	ground,	withdrawing	all	 the	 stones,	weeds,	 roots,	 all
that	is	non-essential,	so	that	the	essential	can	have	space	enough	to	grow.
Meditation	only	creates	space	within	you	by	taking	out	all	the	weeds.
Thoughts	are	weeds,	desires	are	weeds,	memories	are	weeds	--	and	they	all	have
to	 be	 taken	 out,	 root	 and	 all.	 Once	 the	 space	 is	 there	 you	 will	 be	 surprised:
suddenly	roses	start	growing	within	you.
Govindo	is	a	name	of	god.	One	may	know	it	one	may	not	know,	but	one	is	a	god.
The	function	of	 the	master	 is	 to	remind	you,	 to	create	a	situation	in	which	you
can	remember,	to	create	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
devices	which	can	function	as	mirrors	in	which	you	can	see	your	original	face.
But	 one	 is	 not	 less	 than	 god;	 less	 than	 that	 is	 all	 false.	 Less	 than	 that	 is	 our
invention,	more	 than	 that	 is	 not	 possible.	So	don't	 settle	 for	 less.	Discover	 the
reality	of	your	being.	And	it	is	not	very	far	away	either.
Just	a	little	bit	of	shaking,	jumping,	jogging,	and	you	will	wake	up.	That's	what
we	are	doing	here,	One	never	knows	through	what	situation	one	is	going	to	wake
up.	Buddha	 became	 awakened	while	 he	was	 just	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree,	 like	 any
lazy	man	--	just	sitting,	doing	nothing.	And	we	Indians	are	really	efficient	at	it!
(laughter)	Perhaps	that's	why	so	many	people	became	Buddhas	in	India:	laziness
may	be	the	real	cause	of	it.
We	know	how	not	to	do	things.	We	are	really	efficient.	So	he	was	just	sitting	like
any	other	Indian	under	a	tree	and	he	became	awakened.
If	you	sit	 too	 long	under	a	 tree	sooner	or	 later	you	will	wake	up.	You	will	get
tired	of	sitting	and	you	will	think	'What	am	I	doing?'	You	will	have	to	get	it.	For
how	long	can	one	sit?
Somebody	can	become	enlightened	while	he	is	dancing.	One	never	knows.	So	in
my	commune	all	kinds	of	devices	are	Made	available.	Try	every	possible	door.
One	 thing	 is	 certain,	 that	 there	 is	 one	 door	 for	 you	 too,	 but	 you	will	 have	 to
knock	on	many	doors	before	you	come	to	the	real	door	that	will	be	yours.
It	 is	 a	 trial-and-error	 method.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 possibility.	 So	 do	 all	 that	 is
happening	here,	participate	in	everything.	Don't	be	choosey,	because	whatsoever
you	choose	you	will	choose	from	the	mind	--	and	 the	mind	 is	very	cunning:	 it
will	avoid	the	door	that	is	really	going	to	be	your	door.
My	 own	 observation	 is	 that	 whatsoever	 the	 mind	 chooses	 is	 almost	 always
wrong.	So	the	best	way	is:	whatsoever	is	available,	try;	try	everything	--	all	the
meditations,	all	the	groups.	One	never	knows	in	what	situation	the	lightning	will
happen.	But	it	happens	--	that	much	is	certain.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	One	month.
--	That	is	not	like	a	Japanese!	(Osho	shakes	his	head	slowly,	looking	smilingly	at
Govindo,	and	does	it	for	so	long	that	everyone	begins	to	laugh.)
Next	time	come	for	a	longer	period!	Good.
Anurage	means	pure	love.
Love	can	be	impure,	then	it	creates	bondage.	When	it	is	pure	it	brings	freedom.
The	whole	process	of	sannyas	is	of	purifying	your	love-energy.	It	is	mixed	with
many	things,	because	our	society	makes	every	child	a	mess.	There	is	lust,	which
is	not	love	but	millions	of	people	think	that	is	love;	it	is	just	a	biological	instinct.
It	 is	 just	nature	 trying	 to	continue	 the	race.	 It	has	nothing	 to	do	with	you;	 it	 is
almost	impersonal.
Love	is	not	possessiveness;	many	people	 think	 that's	what	 love	 is:	you	possess
somebody	 totally.	 To	 possess	 somebody	 is	 to	 destroy	 all	 possibility	 of	 love.
Possessiveness	 can	 be	 hate	 but	 cannot	 be	 love,	 it	 can	 be	 fear	 but	 it	 cannot	 be
love.
One	has	to	drop	possessiveness,	one	has	to	drop	the	very	idea	of	dominating,	one
has	 to	 give	 freedom	 if	 one	wants	 freedom.	Whatsoever	 you	want	 for	 yourself
give	to	others.	And	if	you	cannot	give	even	to	those	you	love,	to	whom	else	can
you	give	it?	And	the	only	gift	worth	giving	is	freedom.	And	the	miracle	is	that
the	moment	 love	 gives	 freedom	 it	 becomes	 pure,	 absolutely	 pure.	And	 in	 that
purity	it	rises	to	its	ultimate	height.	That	height	is	prayer.	At	that	height	you	start
meeting,	merging	with	the	eternal,	with	the	infinite.
Nothing	else	is	needed	if	one	can	go	on	watching	all	those	elements	which	made
one's	love	impure	and	drop	them	so	ultimately	only	love	is	left.	Then	love	is	just
fragrance	--	so	sweet	and	of	such	grandeur	that	one	cannot	imagine	it,	there	is	no
way	to	imagine	it,	one	can	only	experience	it.	It	is	of	the	beyond,	penetrating	the
thick	 layers	of	 the	 earthen	 existence.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 ray	 coming	 from	 the	ultimate
source.	Jesus	says	god	is	love	--	and	he	is	right.
Gopalo	is	a	name	of	god.
Every	man	should	be	reminded	again	and	again	that	he	is	a	god.	In	fact	we	do
just	the	opposite:	we	remind	every	man	that	he	is	nothing	but	an	animal.	This	has
been	particularly	so	since	Charles	Darwin.	That	man	is	nothing	but	an	evolution
of	a	certain	animal	species	has	become	a	popular	myth,	although	it	is	absolutely
ungrounded	 and	 no	 proof	 exists	 for	 it.	 The	Darwinians	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to
provide	a	single	proof	that	monkeys	have	become	men.	If	 it	were	true	then	we
would	see	at	least	a	few	monkeys	becoming	men	today	also.	There	is	no	record
of	that.	At	least	ten	thousand-year-old	scriptures	exist:	not	at	a	single	point	has
anybody	seen	a	monkey	becoming	a	man	(laughter).	Sometimes	it	happens	that	a
man	becomes	a	monkey	(laughter)	and	goes	crazy,	nuts,	but	vice	versa	has	never
happened.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	Darwinians	go	on	believing	it	and	they	have	polluted	the	whole	mind	of	man
for	all	these	years	and	now	everybody	has	accepted	the	idea.	That	idea	has	been
one	of	the	greatest	hindrances	in	human	evolution.
The	old	idea,	that	man	comes	from	god,	was	far	more	significant	because	it	gives
you	an	impetus,	a	challenge.	If	you	come	from	god	than	you	are	god;	then	there
is	a	possibility	for	you	to	regain,	 to	reclaim,	your	inheritance.	But	if	you	come
from	monkeys,	what	challenge	is	there?	One	just	feels	a	little	awkward,	that's	all;
one	wants	to	hide	somewhere.	And	one	feels	as	if	one	has	come	to	the	ultimate
peak	of	evolution
--	what	more	can	you	do?
Monkeys	have	done	great	work.	Buddha	 is	 a	monkey,	 Jesus	 is	 a	monkey,	Lao
Tzu	 is	a	monkey	--	what	else	can	you	 think	of?	Monkeys	have	done	miracles!
But	this	is	just	an	absurd	idea,	utterly	unscientific.
Science	 is	burdened	with	many	superstitions;	 this	 is	one	of	 the	superstitions	of
science.
I	insist	that	man	comes	from	god.	In	fact	I	insist	that	even	monkeys	come	from
god;	all	that	exists	comes	from	god.	God	is	our	only	source,	and	unless	we	again
reach	that	source	we	will	remain	discontented.
Sannyas	is	a	deliberate	effort	to	regain	our	real	source,	to	again	become	part	of
the	reality	from	which	we	have	become	uprooted.
Rishiraj.	Rishi	is	a	very	specific	word.	There	is	no	equivalent	in	English	for	it,	in
fact	in	no	other	language	is	there	an	equivalent	for	it.	All	the	languages	have	just
one	word	for	the	poet;	only	Sanskrit	has	two	words	for	the	poet.	One	is	"kavi"
which	is	exactly	synonymous	with	poetry;	the	other	is	"rishi"	which	is	something
plus	--	but	that	plus	is	mysterious,	very	mysterious.
The	 rishi	 is	 a	 poet	 but	 in	 a	 very	 special	 sense.	 The	 poet	 composes	 poetry	 but
there	are	only	a	 few	moments	when	he	 functions	as	a	poet,	otherwise	he	 is	an
ordinary	 man.	 No	 poet	 is	 a	 poet	 for	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day.	 Yes,	 there	 are
moments	when	windows	open	and	he	can	see	into	the	beyond	and	he	can	bring
great	treasures	from	that	experience.	But	those	windows	open	and	close,	and	he
is	not	the	master	of	those	windows;	whenever	they	open	they	open....
Coleridge,	a	great	English	poet,	died	with	 thousands	of	 incomplete	poems.	His
friends	 insisted	 again	 and	 again	 "Why	 don't	 you	 complete	 these	 poems?"
Sometimes	only	a	 single	 line	was	needed	and	 the	poem	would	be	complete.	 It
would	 be	 such	 a	 beautiful	 poem	 that	 it	 would	 be	 unfortunate	 if	 it	 remained
incomplete.	 But	 Coleridge	 was	 insistent,	 he	 said,	 "No,	 I	 cannot	 complete	 it
because	I	have	not	composed	it.
Only	once	in	a	while	am	I	a	poet	and	at	 that	moment	something	starts	flowing
through	me.	 I	 cannot	 claim	 that	 I	 am	 the	 author	 of	 it	 but	 just	 the	 vehicle,	 so
whatsoever	 comes,	 comes.	 If	 the	 process,	 if	 the	 energy,	 stops	 in	 the	middle,	 I
stop,	I	have	to	stop.	I	have	tried	many	times	to	complete	it	but	my	line	seems	to
be	very	far	away	from	the	other	lines	that	have	come	on	their	own.	It	does	not	fit
--	there	is	a	qualitative	difference."	And	he	was	right.
A	 rishi	 is	 a	poet	who	 is	 a	poet	 twenty-four	hours	a	day,	who	knows	 the	art	of
opening	 the	 window	 whenever	 he	 wants	 to	 open	 it.	 The	 poet	 is	 in	 a	 way
unconscious.	 The	 rishi	 is	 a	 conscious	 poet;	 he	 is	 an	 awakened	 poet,	 an
enlightened	poet.
It	is	not	a	question	of	him	feeling	poetry	flowing	through	him	once	in	a	while;	it
is	flowing	all	the	time,	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	That's	the	meaning	of	rishi.
And	Raj	means	a	king.	A	poet	who	is	a	poet	twenty-four	hours	a	day	is	certainly
a	king;	he	has	found	the	real	kingdom	--	the	kingdom	of	god.
Narayani.	Narayani	is	a	very	significant	name.	 'Nar'	means	man,	and	Narayana
means	god	in	man.
Narayani	is	the	feminine	form	of	Narayana.
Man	 is	 not	 only	man.	 From	 the	 outside	 he	 is	man,	 from	 the	 inside	 he	 is	 god.
Jesus	says	many	times	 'I	am	the	son	of	man,'	and	many	times	 'I	am	the	son	of
god.'	 For	 two	 thousand	 years	 Christian	 theologists	 have	 been	 pondering,
discussing,	analysing,	arguing	about	why	he	uses	these	two	expressions.	Either
he	is	a	son	of	man	or	he	is	a	son	of	god.	How	can	he	be	both?	But	everybody	is
both,	it	is	not	only	Jesus.	Jesus	is	simply	representing	a	truth	about	everybody:
from	the	outside	we	are	sons	of	man,	 from	the	 inside	we	are	sons	of	god.	Our
body	comes	from	our	parents	and	our	consciousness	comes	from	god	himself.	So
we	are	the	meeting	place	of	these	two,	the	physical	and	the	supraphysical.
Narayani	means	 the	meeting	of	 the	physical	and	 the	non-physical.	Unfortunate
are	those	people	who	think	themselves	only	physical.	Those	people	are	in	a	far
better	way,	far	more	fortunate	are	those	who	think	themselves	spiritual.	But	the
ultimate	 joy	and	 the	blessing	and	 the	benediction	belongs	 to	 the	 third	category
that	knows	that	we	are	both.
And	that's	exactly	my	approach,	that	man	should	live	both	sides,	the	exterior	and
the	interior,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
simultaneously,	in	deep	harmony.	There	is	no	need	to	drop	life	and	escape	to	a
monastery,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 become	 just	 a	 worldly	 man,	 a	 Rotarian,
etcetera.	You	have	to	be	both	because	only	when	you	are	both	does	a	synthesis
happen	in	you,	a	synthesis	which	takes	you	beyond	both,	which	leads	you	to	the
transcendental.
So	my	sannyasins	have	to	live	in	the	world	without	being	part	of	the	world.	They
have	 to	 be	 in	 the	 cyclone,	 but	 still	 rooted	 in	 their	 centres.	 Let	 the	 cyclone
surround	you	--	it	has	its	own	beauty	--	but	you	remain	unaffected,	calm	and	cool
and	centred,	and	then	the	beauty	is	a	thousand	times	more.
Anuradha	is	the	name	of	Krishna's	beloved.	The	name	is	Anuradha	but	in	love	it
can	 be	 pronounced	 Anuradhe.	 It	 becomes	 more	 beautiful,	 more	 rounded.
Anuradha	looks	square,	Anuradhe	becomes	circular.
Words	 also	 have	 shapes.	 Just	 a	 little	 change	 and	 a	 word	 becomes	 a	 totally
different	thing	--	if	its	shape	changes.
The	 woman,	 Anuradha,	 is	 very	 mysterious	 in	 a	 way,	 because	 no	 scripture
mentions	her.	Because	of	that	many	historians	think	that	it	is	a	latter	addition	--
that's	 not	 true.	 In	 the	 ancient	 scriptures	Anuradha	 is	mentioned	but	 not	 by	her
name,	for	the	simple	reason	that	she	effaced	herself	totally.	And	that's	what	love
can	do:	 it	can	efface	you	totally,	 it	can	help	you	to	become	absolutely	egoless.
That's	what	happened	to	Anuradha.
The	ancient	scriptures	only	say	that	there	was	one	woman	who	followed	Krishna
just	like	a	shadow	--
that's	 the	 only	mention.	No	 name	 is	mentioned,	 nothing	 else	 is	 said	 about	 the
woman	except	that	she	was	just	like	a	shadow.	Love	can	do	that	miracle.
In	love	one	becomes	so	one	with	the	beloved	that	there	is	no	need	for	a	separate
name.	 And	 'just	 like	 a	 shadow'	 is	 also	 very	 significant.	 Lovers	 quarrelling,
fighting,	nagging	each	other,	arguing,	is	something	which	is	not	love-like	at	all.
But	that's	what	the	contemporary	idea	has	become:	lovers	encountering.
Most	 of	 the	 time	 they	 encounter	 each	 other.	 Love	 is	 only	 just	 a	 break,	 a	 love
break,	and	again	the	encounter	starts.	And	here	I	have	many	sannyasins	who	are
great	encounter-addicts!	(laughter)	When	they	become	tired	of	encountering	then
there	 is	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 love.	 That	 is	 just	 to	 keep	 things	 going	 on	 so	 that	 they
remain	 glued	 together.	 Love	 is	 just	 like	 a	 glue.	 But	 the	 whole	 purpose	 is
encounter!
That	 was	 not	 the	 ancient	 ideal	 of	 love;	 it	 was	 totally	 different,	 a	 completely
different	perspective.	Lovers	have	 to	be	so	deeply	 in	 tune	with	each	other	 that
they	lose	all	separate	identity,	they	become	shadows	to	each	other.	That's	what	I
love	in	Anuradha	--	that	she	is	only	mentioned	as	a	shadow.	Nobody	knew	who
she	 was,	 what	 her	 name	 was,	 but	 she	 always	 followed	 Krishna	 wherever	 he
went,	just	like	a	shadow	serving	him,	loving	him,	showering	him	with	her	love,
asking	 nothing	 in	 return.	 And	 she	 must	 have	 been	 absolutely	 non-possessive
because	Krishna	had	many	women	who	loved	him.	There	is	not	a	single	mention
of	any	argument	between	Anuradha	and	Krishna,	no	encounter...
It	will	look	unbelievable	to	modern	psychologists	who	think	lovers	are	nothing
but	intimate	enemies.
And	 they	 are	 right	 as	 far	 as	 modern	 lovers	 are	 con-cerned:	 they	 are	 intimate
enemies.	In	fact,	 they	are	only	enemies;	 just	 to	be	polite	we	call	 them	intimate
enemies.	The	'intimate'	has	to	be	put	in	brackets.	It	happens	only	once	in	a	while,
that	 intimacy.	 But	 the	 ancient	 ideal	 of	 love	 was	 certainly	 just	 intimacy,	 pure
intimacy,	a	surrender.	That	is	the	message	of	your	name,
To	be	with	a	master	is	an	intimate	love	affair.	It	is	not	a	logical	relationship,	not	a
rational	 phenomenon;	 it	 is	 utter	 irrational,	 absurd.	 You	 cannot	 prove	 it,	 you
cannot	convince	anybody.	You	can	simply	say	something	has	happened	which	is
incomprehensible	to	others.
Just	today	I	was	reading	about	two	young	women,	two	twin	sisters	in	England,
who	 have	 become	 a	 problem	 to	 the	 psychologists.	 Never	 such	 a	 case	 has
happened	before.	 It	 is	 really	something	very	unique:	 they	have	 two	bodies	and
one	mind.	Twins	are	alike	physically,	but	these	twins	are	psychologically	alike.
If	one	gets	angry	the	other	gets	angry,	immediately,	for	no	reason	at	all.	Not	only
that,	 their	facial	expression	in	anger	is	 the	same.	Not	only	that,	 if	 they	become
angry	 --	 that	means	 if	 one	 becomes	 angry	 and	 starts	 saying	 something	 --	 they
start	shouting	both	together	and	the	same	words	come	from	both,	as	if	one	mind
is	functioning	in	two	bodies.	They	are	the	same	words,	exactly	same	words.	In
any	mood	--	in	love,	in	anger,	whenever	they	are	just	warmed	up	--	they	say	the
same	words,	they	make	the	same	gestures;	even	if	they	are	in	two	separate	rooms
it	happens	the	same	way.	If	one	falls	ill,	the	other	falls	ill	--	it	is	the	same	illness.
They	may	be	far	away,	there	is	no	question	of	infection,	but	they	fall	ill	and	they
get	healthy	at	the	same	time.
They	both	fell	in	love	with	one	person.	The	man	of	course	escaped,	because	he
would	 have	 gone	 crazy	with	 these	 two	women!	 (laughter)	 Just	 one	 is	 enough,
and	two	exactly	alike...	He	escaped,	he	got	married	as	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
quickly	 as	 possible,	 because	 when	 you	 hare	 a	 woman	 you	 are	 protected,
otherwise	 those	 two	 were	 chasing	 him.	 But	 he	 was	 a	 cabdriver,	 so	 whenever
these	 two	women	found	him	driving	 the	cab	anywhere	 they	would	both	 fall	 in
front	of	the	cab	and	would	start	saying	the	same	things.	A	crowd	would	gather,
and	it	was	a	scene	to	watch:	exactly	the	same	words	glowing!
Now	psychologists	are	studying...	They	can	only	think	that	it	 is	something	like
telepathy	perhaps;	they	can	find	nothing	else.	But	this	has	happened	many	times
between	a	master	and	disciple.	This	has	happened	many	 times	between	 lovers.
With	Anuradha	it	must	have	happened.
And	 when	 it	 happens	 between	 a	 master	 and	 disciple	 then	 one	 consciousness
starts	 functioning	between	 two	bodies.	That	 is	 communion,	 that	 is	Satsanga	 --
and	that's	the	whole	purpose	of	this	commune	of	sannyasins.
So	be	ready	for	some	crazy	things	to	happen!	Right?	Good!
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012075
ShortTitle:	GREENR07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Prem	Sabine.	Prem	means	love.
Love	 is	 the	 only	 quality	 that	man	 goes	 on	 losing.	 As	 civilisation	 grows,	 love
evaporates.	The	 basic	 structure	 of	 the	 civilisation	 that	we	 have	 chosen	 is	 anti-
love,	because	it	is	head-oriented.	It	avoids	the	heart,	it	ignores	the	heart,	it	tries
to	bypass	it.
The	head	of	course	is	very	efficient,	 it	 is	needed,	but	it	 is	a	mechanism.	And	a
man	 who	 lives	 only	 in	 the	 head	 becomes	 a	 robot.	 He	 is	 useful	 for	 the
establishment	but	to	himself	he	has	almost	committed	suicide.
Only	the	man	of	love	lives	and	lives	in	abundance.	A	man	of	love	is	always	in
spring,	flowers	and	flowers	bloom	within	his	being.	There	is	dance	in	his	step,
there	is	song	even	in	his	silence.
My	whole	teaching	is	based	on	love.
Sabine	is	a	tribal	name	indicating	a	woman	from	the	ancient	Italian	tribe	of	the
Sabines.	It	signifies	a	state	of	society	when	civilisation	had	not	yet	entered,	when
people	were	still	living	natural	lives,	when	they	were	more	close	to	the	earth,	to
the	 rocks,	 to	 the	 rivers,	 when	 they	 were	 almost	 part	 of	 the	 ecology.	 They
belonged	to	the	trees	and	to	the	stars.	The	home	was	not	yet	 lost;	 they	were	at
home	in	the	universe.
Love	can	do	that	miracle	again.
Man	has	to	become	capable	of	living	naturally,	lovingly,	and	yet	able	to	use	his
mind	 when	 needed.	 But	 he	 should	 not	 become	 obsessed	 with	 the	 mind.	 He
should	live	in	the	heart,	and	mind	should	be	used	only	as	a	mechanism,	just	as
you	 use	 your	 car	 or	 your	 radio	 or	 your	 television.	 One	 should	 not	 become
addicted	to	the	head.
A	totally	new	kind	of	civilisation	is	needed:	a	heart-oriented	civilisation.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 that	 new	 kind	 of	 civilisation.	 By	 becoming	 a
sannyasin	you	are	becoming	part	of	the	future,	of	that	which	is	going	to	happen
of	that	which	has	to	happen	if	man	is	to	survive,	if	life	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	exist	on	earth.	The	old	has	failed,	utterly	failed;	the	new	is	absolutely	needed
and	as	quickly	as	possible,	because	man	is	dying,	his	heart	is	missing	beats.	Man
is	in	a	state	of	heart	failure	--	only	a	great	dose	of	love,	an	allopathic	dose,	can
save	him,	otherwise	there	is	no	hope.
Anand	David.	Anand	means	bliss.	David	means	a	friend.
Love	is	a	flower,	friendliness	is	like	fragrance.	Love	has	some	biological	roots,	it
has	something	physiological	 in	 it,	 it	has	a	chemistry	but	 friendliness	 is	a	sheer
miracle.	 There	 is	 no	 reason	 for	 it	 to	 exist	 at	 all,	 that's	why	 I	 say	 it	 is	 a	 sheer
miracle.	If	it	did	not	exist	nobody	would	ever	be	able	to	imagine	that	something
was	missing.
Nature	does	not	need	 it.	 It	 helps	 in	no	way	as	 far	 as	nature	 is	 concerned;	 it	 is
non-essential.
Love	is	rooted	in	the	earth;	friendship	is	an	opening	towards	the	sky	--	that	is	a
totally	 different	 dimension.	 Hence	 it	 is	 certainly	 far	 more	 superior	 to	 love	 or
maybe	it	is	the	essential	of	love.	When	you	have	purified	love	of	all	biology	then
only	friendliness	remains.
And	David	also	means	a	beloved	of	god.
Naturally	when	your	love	is	so	pure	that	it	reaches	the	optimum	you	become	a
beloved	 of	 existence.	 And	 only	 a	 blissful	 person	 can	 attain	 to	 this	 state.	 The
miserable	person	may	create	a	certain	kind	of	 love	 relationship	because	 that	 is
his	need	--	if	it	is	not	there	he	feels	empty,	lonely.	But	friendliness	is	not	a	need;
it	is	an	overflowing	joy,	it	is	a	sharing.
Love	is	a	kind	of	begging,	that's	why	lovers	are	always	quarrelling,	because	both
are	 beggars	 and	 both	 are	 trying	 to	 get	 as	 much	 as	 they	 can.	 It	 is	 a	 constant
struggle,	a	 fight.	Friendliness	 is	not	a	need	at	all,	 it	 is	a	 luxury.	Only	very	few
blissful	people	have	been	able	to	afford	it.	It	is	the	most	luxurious	phenomenon.
So	bliss	has	to	be	the	base	of	sannyas	and	friendliness	will	be	the	outcome	of	it.
And	the	experience	of	god	will	be	the	ultimate	grace	of	existence.	One	begins	in
blissfulness	and	reaches	god;	exactly	in	the	middle	is	friendliness	--	 it	 is	 like	a
bridge.
And	I	am	using	the	word	'friendliness'	more	than	friendship	because	friendship	is
a	very	 low	kind	of	friendliness.	 It	 is	 limited,	 it	 is	closer	 to	 love	very	close	--	a
little	bit	higher,	but	very	close.	Friendliness	is	very	far	away.	Friendliness	is	not
limited,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 relationship	 at	 all;	 it	 is	 just	 your	 quality.	 You	 are	 simply
friendly	to	all	that	is	--	and	to	me	that	defines	sannyas,	that	defines	religion.
Dhyan	Regenbogen.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Regenbogen	means	a	rainbow.
The	 rainbow	symbolises	 the	meeting	of	 the	earth	and	 the	 sky.	And	 that's	what
meditation	 is:	 a	 rainbow,	 a	meeting	 of	 the	 earth	 and	 the	 sky,	 a	meeting	 of	 the
material	and	the	spiritual,	a	meeting	of	the	visible	and	the	invisible.
The	 old	 idea	 of	 religion	 was	 only	 of	 spirituality.	 It	 had	 no	 concern	 with	 the
material	 part	 of	 existence.	 It	was	 suppressive	 of	 the	material,	 condemning	 the
material,	 rejecting,	 renouncing	 the	 material.	 It	 created	 a	 very	 ugly	 situation
because	 the	 material	 is	 there,	 it	 is	 fifty	 per	 cent,	 and	 it	 is	 essential	 for	 the
spiritual;	without	it	the	spiritual	cannot	exist	at	all.	The	spiritual	is	rooted	in	the
material.
Because	 the	 material	 was	 denied	 the	 old	 religious	 person	 was	 just	 airy-fairy,
without	roots,	just	hot	air,	an	abstraction,	but	nothing	concrete.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 create	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 religiousness	 which	 is	 capable	 of
absorbing	 the	 earth	 in	 it,	 which	 is	 vast	 enough	 to	 have	 both	 worlds	 together.
Then	it	will	have	a	richer	quality.	The	old	saints	were	poor	people.
And	when	Jesus	says	'Blessed	are	the	poor	in	spirit	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of
god'.	 I	 don't	 agree	with	him	at	 all.	 I	would	 like	 to	 say	 'Blessed	 are	 the	 rich	 in
spirit	 for	 theirs	 is	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god.'	 But	 to	 be	 rich	 in	 spirit	 needs	 multi-
dimensionality.	And	 these	 are	 two	very	basic	dimensions:	 the	material	 and	 the
spiritual,	the	outer	and	the	inner.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 create	 a	 split;	 we	 should	 try	 to	 bridge.	We	 should	 create
bridges,	not	walls.	We	should	make	man	more	an	d	more	vast,	including	as	much
as	possible.	And	as	I	see	man	can	include	all,	he	can	become	almost	universal.
He	can	have	trees	and	rivers	and	mountains	and	stars	within	his	being;	he	can	be
as	vast	as	the	sky.
But	the	old	saint	was	certainly	poor.	He	was	linear,	one-dimensional,	flat.
Just	 today	 I	was	 reading	 a	 joke:	A	 Japanese	 soldier	went	 to	America	 after	 the
Second	World	War	and	 for	 the	 first	 time	saw	 the	Californian	beauties.	He	was
very	much	 amazed.	He	 said	 to	 his	 host	with	whom	he	was	 staying	 'American
women	are	very	beautiful,	particularly	 the	Californian	ones.'	His	host	said	 'But
Japanese	women	are	also	beautiful.'	And	the	Japanese	said	'Yes,	that	is	true,	but
American	women	have	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
dimensions.	The	Japanese	women	are	a	little	flat!'	(laughter)	They	are	like	saints,
the	 old	 kind	 of	 saints.	 They	 are	 not	 my	 sannyasins.	 When	 they	 become	 my
sannyasins	they	also	start	growing	dimensions!	(much	laughter)	Nobody	can	be
my	sannyasin	without	growing	dimensions!	(still	more	laughter)
And	 the	most	 significant	 dimension	 is	 to	 have	 as	much	 of	 the	 earthly	 and	 as
much	of	the	unearthly	together.	My	sannyasin	has	to	become	Zorba	the	Buddha.
It	has	never	happened	before.	Buddha	 is	poor	and	Zorba	 is	also	poor.	Zorba	 is
poor	because	he	knows	only	one	dimension	--	the	physical	--	and	Buddha	is	poor
because	he	knows	only	one	dimension	--	the	spiritual.
I	 am	 trying	 to	 introduce	 my	 people	 to	 a	 totally	 new	 world,	 a	 totally	 new
perspective,	where	Zorba	and	Buddha	can	have	a	meeting	--	where	not	only	can
they	meet	but	they	can	merge	and	become	one	with	each	other.
That's	 the	meaning	of	 the	 rainbow	--	and	meditation	can	become	 that	 rainbow,
that	bridge.
Amido	is	one	of	the	names	of	Gautam	the	Buddha.
We	have	given	him	many	names	--	we	loved	him	so	much.	And	he	had	so	many
qualities;	 to	 represent	 each	 quality	 we	 have	 given	 him	 one	 name.	 One	 of	 his
names	is	Amitabh.	Amitabh	means	infinite	light.
'Amitabh'	travelled	from	India	to	China	and	from	China	to	Japan	and	by	the	time
it	reached	Japan	it	became
'Amido';	and	certainly	it	became	far	more	beautiful,	more	musical.
'Amitabh'	 is	 a	 Sanskrit	 word;	 it	 has	 certain	 corners	 to	 it.	When	 a	 stone	 starts
rolling	from	the	source	of	the	Ganges	--	Gangotri	--	it	may	have	corners	but	by
the	 time	 it	 reaches	 Gangasagar,	 the	 end,	 where	 Ganges	 meets	 the	 ocean,	 it
becomes	round.	That's	how	Shivalingas	happened	--	all	these	statues	of	Shiva's,
so	 beautifully	 rounded.	 They	 are	 not	 made;	 it	 simply	 happens	 that	 a	 stone
travelling	from	the	Himalayas	goes	on	becoming	rounder	and	rounder	and	loses
corners.	That	happens	in	language	also.
Amitabh	has	a	few	corners,	it	is	not	so	melodious;	Amido	has	more	melody,	but
its	meaning	 also	 is	 infinite	 light.	 That	 is	 our	 innermost	 experience:	when	 you
reach	your	centre	you	experience	infinite	light	and	eternal	light.
We	are	made	of	 light.	This	 is	 the	only	point	where	 science	and	 religion	are	 in
agreement.	 Science	 says	matter	 is	 made	 of	 light	 --	 electricity,	 in	 their	 jargon.
And	religion	says	everything	is	made	of	light.
The	 English	 word	 'divine'	 comes	 from	 a	 Sanskrit	 root	 'div'.	 Div	 means	 light;
from	div	also	comes	the	English	word	'day'	and	'divine'.	They	all	originate	in	the
root	which	means	light.
The	 work	 of	 a	 sannyasin	 is	 to	 penetrate	 to	 his	 innermost	 core	 where	 light
explodes.	On	the	circumference	there	is	darkness,	at	the	centre	there	is	light,	but
that	 light	 is	 like	 a	 seed.	 If	 you	 reach	 there	 it	 explodes;	 it	 is	 like	 an	 atomic
explosion.	That	experience	is	called	enlightenment,	because	light	explodes.
And	once	you	have	known	that	light	you	have	known	all	 in	that	 light.	Nothing
remains	 hidden	 for	 you	 all	mysteries	 are	 revealed.	One's	 journey	 is	 complete,
one	has	arrived	home.
Turio.	 One	 of	 the	 greatest	 enlightened	 masters	 of	 the	 whole	 of	 history	 was
Patanjali,	who	found	the	school	of	yoga.	He	divides	man's	consciousness	in	four
stages.
The	first	 is	 the	ordinary	waking	state;	 it	 is	only	so-called	waking,	 it	 is	not	 real
awakening	because	only	a	superficial	part,	just	the	tip	of	the	iceberg,	has	a	little
consciousness,	but	nine	times	bigger	than	this	is	the	unconscious	underneath	it.	It
is	a	superficial	consciousness,	hence	it	is	called	so-called	waking	state.
The	 second	 state	 he	 calls	 dreaming.	 It	 is	 a	 strange	 phenomenon	 that	 we	 are
closer	 to	 our	 reality	 in	 dreaming	 than	 we	 are	 in	 the	 so-called	 waking	 state,
because	when	we	are	awake	we	are	hypocrites.	We	not	only	deceive	others,	we
deceive	ourselves	too;	we	pretend	to	be	somebody	who	we	are	not;	we	say	one
thing,	 we	 do	 another.	 We	 have	 many	 masks.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 find	 the
original	face	of	a	person	--	he	himself	has	forgotten	what	his	original	face	is.	But
in	dreaming	we	a	little	closer	to	our	real	self.
Sigmund	 Freud,	 Carl	 Gustav	 Jung	 or	 Alfred	 Adler	 are	 not	 the	 first	 people	 to
discover	that	the	analysis	of	his	dreams	can	give	us	many	clues	about	the	reality
of	a	person;	Patanjali	was	the	first	man.	He	existed	exactly	three	thousand	years
before	Sigmund	Freud;	he	should	be	called	the	father	of	all	psychology.	He	went
farther	and	deeper	than	Sigmund	Freud;	he	went	the	whole	way,	he	has	not	left	a
single	stone	unturned.
Dreaming	 is	 the	 second	 stage,	 in	 which	we	 are	 truer.	 If	 our	 dreams	 could	 be
understood	we	would	 see	 our	 authenticity,	 because	 then	we	 are	 not	Christians
nor	 Hindus	 nor	 Mohammedans,	 neither	 moral	 nor	 immoral,	 we	 are	 simply
whatsoever	we	are.	All	masks	disappear.
But	Sigmund	Freud	and	the	Freudian	school	that	grew	out	of	his	insight	depends
on	a	psychoanalyst.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Now,	he	himself	has	a	mind	and	when	he	starts	analysing	your	dreams,	of	course
his	 interpretation	 is	 his	 interpretation.	 That's	 why	 the	 same	 dream	 will	 be
analysed	in	a	different	way	by	different	psychoanalysts.
You	can	go	to	the	Freudian	and	he	will	find	nothing	but	sexuality	in	it.	What	you
dream,	that	does	not	matter;	he	will	manipulate	it	in	such	a	way	that	it	becomes
sexual.	If	you	dream	of	trees	they	are	nothing	but	phallic	symbols,	if	you	dream
of	mountains	they	are	nothing	but	phallic	symbols,	if	you	dream	of	rockets	they
are	phallic	symbols.	Whatsoever	you	dream...	you	cannot	find	a	dream	which	a
Freudian	will	not	be	able	to	interpret	as	having	a	sexual	colour.	It	is	his	idea	and
he	is	going	to	impose	that	idea	upon	it.	Take	the	same	dream	to	the	Adlerian	and
he	will	 interpret	 it	 as	 a	 will	 to	 power.	 The	 same	 rocket	 now	 becomes	will	 to
powers	you	want	 to	rise	higher	and	higher.	The	same	tree	 is	no	more	a	phallic
symbol;	it	simply	means	you	desire	to	become	bigger	and	bigger	and	grow	like	a
tree	 touching	 the	 stars,	 the	 far-away	 stars.	 That	 is	 your	 destination,	 the	 power
trip.	 Take	 the	 same	 dream	 to	 the	 Jungian	 and	 he	 will	 find	 something	 else,
something	very	esoteric.	And	now	there	are	many	more	schools	available....
Patanjali	 is	 not	 in	 favour	 of	 the	 analysis	 of	 dreams.	He	 says	meditate	 on	your
dreams.	 Except	 for	 you	 nobody	 can	 know	 the	 exact	 meaning.	 Either	 go	 to	 a
Buddha	 who	 has	 no	 mind	 of	 his	 own,	 who	 has	 no	 ideology,	 no	 dogma,	 to
interpret	it,	 to	give	it	a	certain	colour,	 to	emphasise	a	certain	concept,	a	certain
prejudice,	that	he	is	already	carrying.	Either	go	to	a	Buddha	or	the	best	way	is	to
meditate	over	it,	silently	watch	it,	and	in	that	watchfulness	you	will	come	across
the	 third	 layer.	 Just	 hidden	 underneath	 the	 dreams	 is	 a	 third	 state	 of
consciousness:	dreamless	sleep.
It	happens	every	night.	When	you	are	not	dreaming	but	 simply	 sleeping,	 there
are	 almost	 eight	 cycles	 every	 night.	You	will	 dream	 for	 a	 time	 then	 there	 is	 a
dreamless	 pause,	 a	 rest,	 because	 dreaming	 is	 a	 very	 tiring	 process,	 very
exhausting.	So	you	take	a	little	rest,	and	when	you	are	rested	you	start	dreaming
again.
If	you	meditate	you	will	find	those	small	intervals.	That	will	give	you	the	insight
into	the	third	state	--
dreamless	 sleep	 --	 which	 is	 even	 closer	 to	 reality	 than	 dreams.	 Modern
psychology	has	yet	to	discover	it.
And	then	Patanjali	says	now	the	most	difficult	task	for	the	seeker	is	to	meditate
on	dreamless	 sleep.	 If	 one	meditates	 and	watches	 one's	 dreamless	 sleep,	 those
pauses,	then	one	becomes	aware	of	the	fourth.	Turio	simply	means	the	fourth	--
no	name	is	given	to	it.	And	no	name	is	given	to	it	for	a	significant	reason,	it	is
simply	called	the	fourth;	so	that	you	don't	start	interpreting	it	a	number	is	given
rather	than	a	name.
This	 is	 the	 real	 awakening,	 this	 is	 the	 state	 of	 Buddhahood,	 of	 Christ-
consciousness.
Only	when	you	are	 in	 the	fourth	state	will	you	know	your	original	face.	In	 the
first	 you	 are	 the	 farthest	 away	 from	 your	 original	 face,	 in	 the	 second	 a	 little
closer,	in	the	third	a	little	closer;	in	the	fourth	you	are	centred	at	the	very	core	of
your	being.	And	that	centring	is	the	only	revelation	of	truth,	of	freedom,	of	love,
of	 bliss,	 of	 all	 that	 is	 worthwhile,	 of	 all	 that	 is	 significant.	 One	 enters	 into	 a
world	of	eternal	celebration;	then	there	is	no	fall	from	it,	then	there	is	no	going
back.	That	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas.
Nirguno	literally	means	attributeless,	without	any	qualities.	That	is	the	definition
of	God:	he	has	no	qualities	because	every	quality	would	be	a	limitation.
If	you	call	him	white	he	cannot	be	black	--	that	becomes	a	limitation.	If	you	call
him	any	thing	then	you	immediately	enforce	a	limitation	--	and	God	is	infinite.
He	has	all	 the	qualities	and	yet	he	is	quality-less;	he	has	all	 the	aspects	and	all
possibilities	but	no	aspect	can	define	him.	And	all	that	has	been	tried	up	to	now
as	 far	 as	 a	 definition	 of	 god	 is	 concerned	 has	 created	more	 trouble,	 it	 has	 not
solved	anything.
For	example,	Christians	call	him	the	father.	Now	the	problem	arises:	who	is	the
mother?	And	from	where	does	 this	only	begotten	son,	 Jesus	Christ	come?	Has
the	father	himself	given	birth?	Or	is	 there	some	illegal	connection	between	the
father	 and	 the	Holy	Ghost?	And	who	 is	 this	Holy	Ghost	 anyway	 --	 a	man	 or
woman?	Now	thousands	of	questions	will	arise	--	and	all	that	was	done	was	just
giving	him	a	quality	of	fatherliness,	not	exactly	calling	him	father	but	giving	him
a	quality	of	fatherliness.	But	once	you	give	him	the	quality	you	create	problems.
Call	him	anything	and	you	are	immediately	in	trouble.
The	mystics	of	the	East	have	called	him	attributeless,	and	that	seems	to	be	a	far
wiser	step.He	has	no	qualities,	he	is	indefinable,	and	you	can	know	him	not	by
any	 definitions	 but	 only	 by	 becoming	 utterly	 silent;	 because	 if	 a	 definition	 is
given	 the	mind	 immediately	 starts	 working.	 If	 no	 definition	 is	 given	 then	 the
mind	 has	 nothing	 to	 chew	 upon,	 then	 the	 mind	 becomes	 silent.	 And	 in	 that
silence	one	comes	to	encounter	the	ultimate	reality.
The	message	is:	be	silent.	Don't	try	to	think	about	God,	rather	drop	thinking	so
that	 you	 can	 feel,	 then	 drop	 feeling	 too	 so	 that	 you	 can	be.	And	 these	 are	 the
three	layers:	thinking,	feeling,	being.
Thinking	creates	a	philosopher,	feeling	creates	a	poet,	being	creates	a	mystic	--
and	being	is	the	dimension	of	the	sannyasin.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Prabuddho	means	the	awakened	one.
We	 are	 all	 born	 with	 the	 capacity	 to	 be	 awakened,	 in	 a	 sense	 we	 are	 all
awakened,	 but	we	 are	 not	 aware	 of	 this.	A	 thin	 layer,	 just	 like	 a	 thin	 curtain,
hides	us	from	our	own	reality,	but	the	curtain	can	be	removed.
And	it	is	a	very	thin	curtain,	almost	transparent.	The	curtain	consists	of	thoughts,
desires,	 memories,	 fantasies,	 dreams,	 etcetera.	 These	 are	 all	 non-substantial
things,	 so	 the	 curtain	 is	made	 of	 non-substantial	 things.	 It	 is	 transparent,	 very
thin,	 and	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 remove	 it.	 One	 just	 has	 to	 know	 the	 knack	 of
removing	it	--	and	that	knack	is	meditation.
It	cannot	be	called	a	science,	it	cannot	be	called	an	art;	the	best	thing	to	call	it	is
a	knack.	Hence	a	close	relationship	with	the	master,	an	intimate	relationship	with
the	master,	exactly	a	love	affair	is	needed	to	learn	the	knack.	If	it	were	a	science
we	could	teach	it	in	the	schools,	colleges,	universities;	if	it	were	an	art	it	would
not	 be	much	of	 a	 problem.	But	 because	 it	 is	 a	 knack	only	hints	 can	be	given,
only	fingers	pointing	to	the	moon.	The	problem	is	one	may	become	too	attached
to	the	fingers	and	forget	all	about	the	moon.
That's	 what	 has	 happened	 thousands	 of	 times.	 Christians	 have	 become	 too
obsessed	with	Christ	 --	 that	 is	getting	 fixated	on	 the	 fingers	 and	 forgetting	 the
moon.	 And	 the	 Buddhists	 are	 fixated	 on	 the	 figure	 of	 Buddha,	 his	 statue.
Worshipping	 the	 statue	 means	 worshipping	 the	 fingers,	 and	 they	 have	 all
forgotten	the	moon	completely.
That	is	the	problem	with	a	knack,	that	only	subtle	hints	can	be	given.	Buddhas
can	only	show	you	the	way	and	that	too,	very	indirectly.	No	clear-cut	programme
can	be	given,	no	definite	map	can	be	handed	over	to	you	and	you	told	'This	is	the
map,	this	is	the	route'	--	you	simply	can	follow	the	map	and	the	route	and	reach
the	destination.	That	is	not	possible.
One	has	to	be	with	the	master	in	a	kind	of	communion	so	that	slowly	slowly,	not
only	are	the	words	understood	but	the	gestures	too,	and	not	only	the	gestures,	not
only	the	words,	but	even	the	silences;	so	that	one	can	learn	the	language	of	the
master's	eyes,	his	hands,	the	way	he	sits,	the	way	he	talks,	the	way	he	laughs,	the
way	he	eats,	 the	way	he	 sleeps.	You	never	know	from	where	you	may	get	 the
right	hint	and	your	journey	start.
Once	 you	 have	 learned	 the	 knack,	 the	 curtain	 can	 be	 very	 easily	 removed.
Initiation	 simply	means	 initiation	 into	 a	 very	mysterious	 relationship	 --	 not	 of
this	world	and	not	very	tangible.	You	cannot	explain	it	to	others.	If	questions	are
raised	 you	will	 simply	 feel	 dumb.	You	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 say	why	 you	 have
become	a	sannyasin,	what	got	into	your	head,	why	you	have	gone	crazy.
It	is	a	crazy	phenomenon	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	explain	it,	you	will	not	be
able	to	convince	anybody	--	nobody	has	ever	been	able	to.	The	first	disciples	of
Jesus	 were	 not	 able	 to	 say	 anything	 about	 why	 they	 were	 moving	 with	 this
dangerous	fellow.	The	first	disciples	of	Buddha	were	not	able	 to.	They	used	to
come	to	Buddha	--	 there	are	references	--	 to	ask	 'What	should	we	say,	because
people	ask	why?
What	got	 into	your	head?	Why	have	you	dropped	your	old	way	of	 life?	It	was
comfortable,	convenient,	you	were	succeeding	in	the	world	and	everything	was
going	well	--	what	wont	wrong?	Why	are	you	following	this	man?'
And	Buddha	would	say	'It	is	impossible	to	explain	to	them.	The	only	thing	you
can	 do	 is	 to	 bring	 them	 here.	 If	 in	 being	with	me	 something	 happens	 in	 their
hearts	only	that	will	be	a	proof;	if	nothing	happens,	nothing	can	be	done.	Then
forget	all	about	them.	In	this	life	it	is	not	going	to	be	their	cup	of	tea.	Maybe	in
some	other	life,	with	some	other	Buddha,	with	some	other	master,	it	may	click.'
Yes,	it	is	a	click.
So	 be	 here,	 open,	 available,	 vulnerable	 --	 it	 may	 click!	 Don't	 stand	 aloof,
detached	--	then	it	cannot	click.
Don't	 be	 an	 observer,	 be	 a	 participant.	 And	 dive	 headlong	 because	 one	 has
nothing	to	lose	and	everything	to	gain.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#8
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
8	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012085
ShortTitle:	GREENR08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Veet	Leo.	Veet	means	going	beyond,	surpassing,	transcending.	Leo	means	lion.
In	 India	 we	 have	 a	 beautiful	 story,	 a	 parable,	 that	 god	 has	 taken	 many
incarnations	 and	 all	 those	 incarnations	 represent	 particular	 phases	 of	 human
evolution.	The	idea	of	evolution	is	very	ancient	in	the	East,	it	is	only	in	the	West
that	the	idea	seems	to	be	original	--	just	three	hundred	years	old.	But	in	the	East
we	have	a	tradition	of	the	idea	which	is	at	least	ten	thousand	years	old.
The	 Indian	mythology	 of	 the	 incarnations	 of	 god	 is	 very	 significant.	 The	 first
incarnation	of	god	is	a	fish
--	and	that's	exactly	what	science	says	about	how	life	started,	as	a	fish.	And	then
slowly	 other	 animals	 come	 in	 exactly	 in	 the	middle	 Indian	mythology	 has	 the
incarnation	of	god	called	Narsima:	half	man,	half	lion.
That	seems	to	be	the	exact	middle	point	where	man	started	separating	from	the
animals.	The	lion	slowly	disappeared	and	man	came	into	his	own.
The	 lion	 is	 respected	 in	 all	 cultures,	 in	 all'	 societies,	 because	we	 have	 always
worshipped	 violence,	 destruction,	 cruelty.	 Of	 course	 we	 cover	 it	 up	 behind	 a
beautiful	veil	of	courage,	but	the	real	courage	is	creative,	not	destructive,	and	the
real	courage	is	non-violent,	not	violent.	The	real	courage	is	to	transcend	all	that
is	 animal	 in	 oneself,	 the	 real	 courage	 is	 to	 become	 a	 Buddha,	 just	 pure
humanness.	But	the	past	is	dominated	by	the	soldiers,	the	generals.	Alexander	to
Great,	Tamerlane,	Nadir	Shah.	Genghis	Khan.	Our	whole	history	is	ugly.
Even	 if	 we	 mention	 Christ	 and	 Buddha	 and	 Zarathustra	 and	 Lao	 Tzu,	 we
mention	them	in	the	footnotes	they	don't	make	our	main	current	of	history.	They
are	just	a	few	astray	people,	exceptions;	they	need	not	be	counted.
In	fact	 the	whole	of	history	should	be	rewritten.	Alexander	has	not	contributed
anything	to	the	worlds	he	was	a	disaster,	just	as	Adolf	Hitler	was,	Mussolini	was,
Stalin	was.	These	people	should	be	erased	from	history,	their	memory	should	not
be	 continued.	History	 should	 be	written	with	 a	 view	 to	 giving	 the	 idea	 of	 the
evolution	of	consciousness.	It	should	consist	of	Lao	Tzu,	Chuang	Tzu,	Lieh	Tzu.
Confucius,	 Ma	 Tzu,	 Buddha,	 Mahavir.	 Patanjali,	 Nagarjuna,	 Nanak,	 Kabir,
Jesus.	 Plotinus,	 Heraclitus,	 Pythagoras	 --	 people	 who	 have	 really	 contributed,
who	are	 the	very	salt	of	 the	earth.	And	 that's	what	 I	mean	by	 transcending	 the
lion	 in	you.	 It	 is	 in	everybody.	because	we	are	carrying	 the	whole	animal	past
with	us	--	it	is	in	our	unconscious.
The	 whole	 purpose	 of	 sannyas	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 go	 beyond	 it,	 so	 the	 past	 is
dropped	and	you	are	reborn,	born	anew,	only	then	can	you	have	a	vision	of	god,
only	then	will	you	be	sensitive	enough	to	feel	the	presence	of	the	divine.	It	is	not
a	question	of	argumentation,	it	is	a	question	of	sensitivity.
Antar	Kim.	Antar	means	inner,	originating	from	the	very	source	of	your	being,
coming	 out	 of	 the	 centre	 and	 spreading	 towards	 the	 circumference.	 And	Kim
means	dignity	of	character.
Character	has	beauty	when	it	originates	in	your	own	being,	when	it	 is	imposed
by	others	on	you	it	is	ugly.	A	character	imposed	by	others	serves	others,	it	does
not	serve	you.	 It	 serves	 the	established	society,	 it	 serves	 the	vested	 interests,	 it
serves	the	church,	the	state,	the	people	who	are	in	power	politically,	religiously,
in	every	possible	way.	They	try	 to	give	a	certain	structure	and	pattern	 to	every
person	so	that	he	becomes	servile,	a	servant.	Of	course	they	give	beautiful	labels
to	this	servitude.	They	create	conscience	in	you,	they	tell	you	what	is	right	and
what	is	wrong.	And	in	fact	nobody	has	the	right	to	say	to	anybody	what	is	right
and	what	is	wrong,	for	the	simple	reason	that	right	and	wrong	are	not	qualities	of
certain	acts.
One	thing	can	be	right	in	one	situation	and	can	be	wrong	in	another	situation	--
the	 same	 thing.	 If	 by	 a	 small	 lie	 you	 can	 save	 a	man's	 life	 then	how	will	 you
decide	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong?	You	can	tell	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
just	a	small	 lie,	 that	 'I	was	not	there,	I	and	you	were	there,'	but	that	can	save	a
human	 life	which	may	have	 infinite	potential,	 infinite	possibilities,	which	may
blossom.	The	man	may	become	a	Buddha	--	who	knows?
Tomorrow	is	unpredictable,	so	is	it	right	to	say	a	lie	or	wrong?	In	this	situation	it
is	perfectly	right	to	tell	a	lie,	in	other	situations	it	would	not	be	right	to	tell	lies.
Who	 is	 going	 to	 decide?	 --	 because	 ultimately.	 You	 have	 to	 encounter	 the
situations.	You	cannot	go	on	carrying	the	Bible	and	the	Koran	and	the	Vedas	and
consulting	them.	And	how	can	they	help	you?
Mohammed	may	never	have	passed	through	such	a	situation,	Buddha	may	never
have	 come	 across	 such	 a	 situation	 --	 how	 can	 they	 help	 you?	 Life	 goes	 on
changing	every	moment.	So	the	only	determining	factor	can	be	inner,	 it	cannot
be	outer.
Hence	 character	 can	 be	 of	 two	 types:	 one,	 which	 is	 just	 a	 fixed,	 ready-made
thing	 given	 to	 you	 --	 that	 is	 ugly,	 it	 can't	 have	 any	 dignity	 --	 and	 a	 totally
different	 kind	 of	 character	which	 you	 have	 to	 create	moment	 to	moment,	 you
cannot	carry	it	with	you	ready-made.	You	have	to	be	alert,	watchful,	responsible;
you	have	to	be	alive	to	the	situation.	And	you	are	not	to	bother	what	others	have
said	 to	you;	you	have	 to	 look	 into	 the	situation	as	one	 looks	 into	a	mirror	and
then	let	the	moment	decide.	Of	course,	be	totally	present	to	the	situation	and	out
of	 that	 presence	 a	 character	 arises.	That	 has	 dignity.	 certainly	 it	 has	 dignity,	 a
tremendous	 beauty	 of	 its	 own,	 but	 it	 will	 not	 be	 a	 fixed	 entity,	 it	 will	 be	 a
process,	 it	 will	 be	 a	 growth,	 a	 continuous	 movement.	 And	 you	 will	 have	 to
contradict	yourself	many	times,	because	life	goes	on	changing.
A	really	alive	person	cannot	be	consistent,	only	a	dead	person	can	be	consistent
because	 the	 dead	 person	 has	 a	 certain	 routine	 that	 he	 follows.	 He	 runs	 like	 a
railway	train,	the	rails	are	fixed,	the	train	cannot	go	into	the	jungle	and	have	its
own	choice	as	to	where	to	go	and	where	not	to	go,	it	runs	on	the	fixed	rails.
A	 character	 like	 that	 is	mechanical	 and	 no	machine	 can	 have	 dignity.	Dignity
belongs	to	a	soul.
A	character	has	 to	be	 like	a	river,	not	 running	on	fixed	routines.	Each	moment
has	to	be	decisive,	each	turn	has	to	be	taken	according	to	the	situation.	The	past
cannot	determine	it,	the	future	cannot	decide	it,	only	the	present	is	to	be	decisive.
The	real	man	of	character	lives	in	the	present.	If	he	has	to	go	against	his	whole
past	he	will,	but	he	will	not	go	against	the	present	just	to	be	consistent	with	the
past.	The	past	is	dead;	to	be	consistent	with	the	past	is	simply	stupid.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 a	 totally	 new	 kind	 of	 character.	 It	will	 look	 like
characterlessness	 to	others	because	 it	will	not	be	a	 fixed	 thing,	 it	will	be	 fluid,
liquid.	And	the	people	who	think	of	character	as	a	certain	entity,	fixed	forever...
Moses	gave	the	Ten	Commandments,	now	you	have	simply	to	follow	them.
A	real	character	cannot	have	 that	kind	of	quality.	One	has	 to	 follow	one's	own
consciousness.	 It	 is	 risky,	 it	 is	 dangerous,	 because	 you	 cannot	 throw	 the
responsibility	 on	 anybody	 else's	 shoulders;	 you	 are	 totally	 responsible	 for	 it.
Each	act	 is	your	act	 --	not	Moses',	not	Jesus'.	not	Buddha's.	To	be	a	sannyasin
means	to	accept	the	total	responsibility	of	your	whole	life,	of	each	of	your	acts
and	gestures.	But	that	is	the	dignity	of	man,	the	dignity	of	being	a	human	being.
It	is	a	priority.
Animals	 have	 fixed	 characters.	 You	 cannot	 find	 anything	 unexpected	 about
animals.	Everything	is	fixed,	they	are	predictable.	Man	is	unpredictable	--	that	is
his	beauty	because	that	is	his	freedom.	He	creates	himself	by	choosing	what	to
be,	 how	 to	be,	what	not	 to	be,	 how	not	 to	be,	 each	moment.It	 is	 a	 continuous
creativity.
To	be	a	sannyasin	simply	means	to	take	this	courageous	leap	in	your	life.	Move
from	conscience	to	consciousness,	move	from	the	outer	to	the	inner.
Veet	 Torben.	 Veet	 means	 go	 beyond,	 transcend.	 Torben	 comes	 from
Scandinavian	 mythology;	 it	 means	 Thor's	 bear.	 Thor	 is	 a	 Scandinavian
mythological	 god,	 the	god	of	 thunder,	 rain	 and	 farming.	His	 symbol	 is	 a	 bear,
and	Torben	means	Thor's	bear!	No	ordinary	bear,	of	course,	but	a	bear	after	all	is
a	bear!	 (laughter)	You	have	 to	go	beyond	 it!	 (more	 laughter)	And	 this	Thor	 is
also	not	a	very	beautiful	god	--	the	god	of	thunder	and	rain	and	farming.	He	is
very	 old	 fashioned.	 too	 childish	 and	 primitive!	And	 in	 fact	we	 don't	 need	 any
more	 thunder;	 peace	 is	 needed.	 But	 in	 the	 ancient	 days	 every	 country	 was
dominated	by	such	gods.
They	were	just	projections,	they	don't	exist,	they	have	never	existed.	But	people
always	 thought	 in	 terms	of	gods,	 if	 it	was	 raining	 it	meant	 somebody	must	be
behind	it.
In	India	we	have	a	god,	Indra	--	that	is	Thor,	the	god	of	rains	and	thunder.	And
when	 it	 is	 lightning,	 that	 means	 Indra	 is	 very	 angry,	 he	 wants	 to	 punish.	 So
priests	 used	 to	 worship,	 pray,	 make	 great	 yagnas,	 fire-worship	 --	 wasting
millions	of	rupees	to	pacify	the	god	of	lightning	because	he	was	very	angry	and
he	 would	 not	 be	 pacified	 unless	 you	 made	 many	 sacrifices.	 Animals	 were
sacrificed,	even	man	was	sacrificed...
just	to	pacify	a	foolish	god.	He	exists	nowhere,	he	has	never	existed.
For	 example,	 I	 am	 calling	 him	 foolish;	 if	 he	 existed	 he	 would	 do	 something
immediately	(much	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
laughter)...	 and	 nothing	 happens.	 I	 have	 tried	 many	 times	 --	 no	 lightning,	 no
thunder	 --	 nothing!	 But	 the	 old	 mind	 of	 man	 was	 to	 create	 many	 gods	 for
everything,	everything	had	to	be	dominated	by	a	god.	Without	a	god	how	could
it	happen?
My	sannyasins	have	to	go	beyond	all	these	mythologies.	They	are	still	lingering
in	our	unconscious;	we	have	to	get	rid	of	them,	we	have	to	throw	them	out	--	it	is
all	junk.	And	unless	you	throw	all	this	old	furniture	out	one	thing	is	certain	you
yourself	cannot	enter,	there	is	no	space.
So	 slowly	 go	 on	 pulling	 out	whatsoever	 you	 can	 and	 throw	 it	 out,	 just	 create
spaciousness.	 That's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 creating	 inner	 space,	 absolute	 space.	 In
absolute	 spaciousness	 you	 will	 start	 feeling	 something	 mysterious	 which
surrounds	 you,	 which	 is	 everywhere	 --	 inside,	 outside,	 within,	 without.	 That
mysterious	presence	is	god.	God	is	not	a	person	but	just	a	feeling	of	something
mysterious,	something	incomprehensible	to	the	mind.
Now	 thunder	 and	 rain	 and	 farming	 --	 these	 things	 can	 be	 taken	 care	 of	 by
science.	There	is	no	need	for	Thor;	he	can	be	freed.	And	the	poor	bear	also	has
been	with	 him	 for	 too	 long;he	 can	 also	 be	 freed	 from	 the	 god.	 They	must	 be
getting	tired	of	each	other,	that's	why	I	say	go	beyond	them.
One	has	 to	go	beyond	 the	whole	past.	The	whole	past	 of	humanity,	 of	 the	 so-
called	religions,	is	in	many	ways	superstitious,	stupid.	It	was	okay	in	those	old
days	 because	 the	 human	 mind	 was	 so	 primitive	 that	 it	 could	 not	 understand
better	 than	 that.	But	now	man	has	come	of	age,	we	are	now	no	more	childish.
Religion	 is	 lagging	behind,	 far	 behind;	 science	 is	 in	 the	 twentieth	 century	 and
religion	 is	 still	 pre-historical,	 near	 about	 three	 thousand	years	old.	This	gap	of
three	 thousand	 years	 between	 science	 and	 religion	 has	 to	 be	 bridged.	 If	 we
cannot	 bridge	 it	man	will	 remain	 schizophrenic,	 divided.	His	 religion	will	 say
one	thing,	his	science	will	say	another	thing,	and	there	will	be	no	meeting	point,
no	synthesis.
My	whole	approach	 is	 that	of	 synthesis.	Science	and	 religion	have	 to	come	so
close	 that	 they	 can	 become	 almost	 one,	 two	 aspects	 of	 one	 truth	 science,	 the
outer	aspect,	religion,	the	inner.
Pritamo.	Pritamo	means	the	beloved.
God	should	not	be	thought	of	as	truth	because	the	very	word	'truth'	is	a	little	dry,
juiceless,	desert-like.
God	should	be	thought	of	as	the	beloved.
Truth	 has	 a	 deep	 background	 of	 logic.	 The	word	 'beloved'	 changes	 the	whole
thing	from	logic	to	love.
And	 love,	 not	 logic,	 is	 the	 door	 to	 the	 divine.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 start
searching	 for	 the	 beloved,	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 find	 him,	 because	 love	 is	 a	 natural
phenomenon.
The	search	for	truth	is	arbitrary,	in	fact	I	have	never	come	across	a	single	person
who	 is	 really	 interested	 in	 truth,	 who	 could	 sacrifice	 his	 life	 for	 truth.	 It	 is
perfectly	 good	 to	 sit	 in	 your	 easy	 chair	 and	 think	 about	 truth	 and	 great
philosophical	things,	but	I	don't	see	that	that	is	really	a	longing.	Maybe	in	very
few	 exceptions,	 in	 people	 like	 Socrates,	 it	 is	 a	 longing,	 but	 they	 are	 so
exceptional	that	they	only	prove	the	rule.
Love	 is	 a	 universal	 longing,	 everybody's	 heart	 is	 thirsty	 for	 love.	 So	 my
emphasis	is	on	love	unless	I	find	a	man	who	is	really	interested	in	truth,	because
to	seek	god	as	truth	one	will	have	to	take	a	totally	different	route.	To	seek	god	as
the	beloved	you	will	pass	through	absolutely	different	routes,	methods,	devices,
so	to	be	clear	is	very	decisive.
If	you	think	of	the	ultimate	as	beloved	your	heart	starts	responding	immediately.
Suddenly	a	note	is	struck,	suddenly	a	bell	starts	ringing	in	the	heart	--	and	that	is
the	beginning	of	prayer.
Kalyani	 means	 one	 who	 always	 thinks	 of	 the	 well-being	 of	 others.	 But	 it	 is
possible	only	 if	you	are	blissful.	A	miserable	person	cannot	 really	 think	of	 the
well-being	of	others;	it	is	intrinsically	impossible.
He	 can	 force	 himself	 to	 serve	 others	 but	 that	 service	will	 only	 be	 a	means	 to
some	other	end	--	to	reach	heaven.	to	achieve	heavenly	pleasures;	there	must	be
some	hidden	 goal.	The	miserable	 person	 is	 bound	 to	 have	 a	 secret	 goal.	Even
when	he	is	serving	others,	is	being	compassionate,	it	 is	calculated,	businesslike
there	is	a	certain	arithmetic	behind	it.	But	the	blissful	person	is	simply	a	blessing
to	others	--	that	is	exactly	the	meaning	of	Kalyani:	to	be	a	blessing.
But	how	can	you	be	a	blessing	if	you	are	not	blissful	yourself?	You	can	give	only
that	which	you	have	already	got.	It	is	a	sharing.	The	miserable	person	can	only
give	his	misery,	the	blissful	person	can	only	give	his	blissfulness.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	celebrants,	always	in	 the	mood	of	festivity.	dancing,
singing,	 rejoicing.	Out	 of	 this	 rejoicing	 arises	 compassion	 and	 love	 for	 others.
And	when	you	are	overflowing	with	joy	what	can	you	do	except	share	it?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Karuno	means	compassionate	one.
Gautam	the	Buddha	gave	one	criterion	to	judge	whether	you	have	succeeded	in
your	 meditation	 or	 not,	 and	 the	 criterion	 is	 compassion.	 If	 you	 have	 really
realised	yourself,	if	you	have	found	the	source	of	your	life,	if	you	have	become
centred,	silent,	blissful,	then	one	thing	is	inevitable,	all	these	things	will	happen
inside	you	so	only	you	will	know	or	your	master	will	know	or	the	people	who
are	your	fellow	travellers,	who	are	reaching	the	same	state	of	consciousness,	will
know,	but	 the	world	at	 large	cannot	know	anything	about	 it.	 It	will	know	only
your	compassion,	your	love.
Your	unconditional	love,	non-possessive	love,	love	for	love's	sake	--	that's	what
compassion	is	all	about.
One	simply	goes	on	showering	love,	giving	to	everybody	--	to	the	worthy,	to	the
unworthy,	to	the	needful,	to	the	not-so-needful.	It	is	as	when	a	flower	opens,	it
releases	 fragrance	 to	 the	 winds	 --	 unaddressed,	 or	 to	 whomsoever	 it	 may
concern.	If	somebody	happens	to	pass	by	he	will	rejoice	in	it;	if	nobody	passes
by	it	is	none	of	the	business	of	the	flower.	It	is	happy,	it	is	dancing	in	the	wind;	it
has	done	its	work.
Be	blissful,	 so	blissful	 that	your	bliss	 starts	overflowing	and	becomes	 love	 for
the	 whole	 existence.	 Less	 than	 that	 cannot	 fulfil	 one,	 less	 than	 that	 and	 the
journey	is	not	yet	complete.
Bhadren	means	graceful.
Grace	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 meditation,	 the	 shadow	 of	 meditation.	 It	 follows
meditation	--	there	is	no	need	to	cultivate	it.	Just	become	silent,	peaceful,	calm
and	collected,	cool,	relaxed,	and	you	will	suddenly	be	surprised	that	a	shadow	is
following	you.	That	shadow	is	grace	--	it	is	a	gift	from	God.	It	is	given	only	to
those	who	 have	 achieved	meditation.	 It	 is	 a	 certificate,	 it	 is	 a	 sanction.	 That's
exactly	the	meaning	of	the	English	word	'saint',	but	Christians	have	used	it	in	a
very	wrong	way.	They	think	a	person	is	a	saint	if	he	is	sanctioned,	certified	by
the	church,	the	pope,	the	Vatican.	That	is	a	strange	idea.
A	Saint	is	sanctioned	by	God,	not	by	any	pope,	not	by	any	church	or	a	council	of
bishops.	They	themselves	are	not	saints,	what	can	they	know	about	saints?	And
it	has	happened	many	times	in	the	history	of	the	church	that	they	changed	their
decision.	 They	made	 somebody	 a	 saint	 and	 then	 afterwards,	 even	 after	 a	 few
centuries,	they	re-opened	the	case,	found	some	faults	and	the	man	was	no	longer
a	saint!	Not	only	that,	they	have	been	so	stupid	that	now	the	man	has	been	dead
for	two	hundred	or	three	hundred	years	and	nothing	can	be	done	--	he	lived	as	a
saint	and	for	three	hundred	years	he	was	worshipped	as	a	saint	and	he	has	to	be
punished.	So	to	insult	him	his	bones	are	dragged	out	of	the	grave	to	be	spat	upon
and	to	be	dragged	into	the	marketplace	so	everybody	can	insult	him	--	because
revenge	has	to	be	taken.	Sanction	has	been	taken	back,	he	is	no	longer	a	saint.
And	 this	Vatican	has	been	so	 foolish	 that	 sometimes	 it	has	happened	 that	 they
made	the	man	a	saint	again!	Some	other	pope	re-opened	the	case,	found	out	that
those	flaws	were	not	right,	that	somebody	was	playing	a	trick	and	that	somebody
was	 against	 the	man,	 and	 the	man	 was	 sanctioned	 again,	 and	 his	 bones	 were
brought	 back	 again	 in	 a	 ceremonial	 procession	 because	 he	 really	was	 a	 saint;
again	his	bones	were	worshipped	and	put	into	the	grave.
The	church	has	no	idea	of	what	a	saint	is.	Only	the	whole	can	sanctify,	but	that
sanction	does	not	come	as	a	written	certificate,	that	"As	far	as	I	know	this	man	is
a	saint,"	or	"Hereby	it	is	certified...".	It	comes	as	a	grace.	When	you	are	settled
and	silent	you	are	surrounded	by	grace.	Anybody	who	has	eyes	can	see	 it	 and
anybody	who	has	ears	can	hear	the	music	of	it.
And	it	is	possible	for	you.	In	fact	I	was	going	to	give	you	the	name	of	a	Ma;	it	is
Mukta	who	has	saved	you,	otherwise	I	was	going	to	change	your	sex!
And	 once	 I	 have	 done	 it	 I	 never	 undo	 it!	 I	 never	 change	my	 decisions	 --	 she
prevented	me	 just	 in	 time	saying	"Wait,	 let	him	meditate	a	 little...	 then	he	will
automatically	become	feminine	--	don't	be	worried.	It	is	too	early!"
Grace	will	 come...	 and	grace	 is	 a	 feminine	quality.	Nietzsche	 is	 right	when	he
says	that	Buddha	and	Christ	are	feminine.	Of	course	he	is	condemning	them,	but
I	take	it	not	as	condemnation	but	as	the	greatest	compliments	paid	to	Buddha	and
Christ.	And	any	compliment	from	a	man	like	Friedrich	Nietzsche	is	of	immense
importance.
Sangati	means	communion.
Communication	 can	 happen	 anywhere	 because	 it	 is	 head-to-head.	 Something
closer	to	communion,	not	exactly	communion,	happens	between	lovers	because
it	 is	 not	 head-to-head	 but	 heart-to-heart.	 But	 that	 too	 is	 only	 closer	 to
communion.	It	is	not	exactly	communion,	just	approximately.	Real	communion
happens	only	between	a	master	 and	a	disciple,	 from	being-to-being.	These	 are
the	three	possibilities:	first,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
head-to-head;	second,	heart-to-heart;	third,	being-to-being.
The	head-to-head	communication	is	argumentative,	it	is	quarrelsome.	The	heart-
to-heart	 communion	 is	 sympathetic,	 loving,	 but	 it	 is	 only	 approximately	 a
communion.	The	real	communion,	being-to-being,	is	just	a	sharing	of	the	energy,
a	pure	sharing,	with	no	words.	It	is	silent.	Two	beings	just	merge	into	each	other.
And	 when	 the	 master's	 being	 and	 the	 disciple's	 being	 are	 bridged,	 a	 miracle
happens.	That	miracle	is	called	the	transmission	of	truth	beyond	the	scriptures.
I	am	giving	you	one	of	the	most	significant	names,	Sangati.	It	carries	the	whole
secret	of	sannyas.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012095
ShortTitle:	GREENR09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dhyan	Shemesh.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Shemesh	means	the	center	of	being.
It	means	the	sun	and	also	illumination,	enlightenment.	It	 is	a	beautiful	word;	 it
carries	the	whole	dimension	of	meditation,	all	its	aspects.
Meditation	means	reaching	the	center	of	your	being.	It	is	a	journey	inwards.	The
farther	away	you	are	from	your	center,	 the	darker	your	life	is;	 it	 is	 in	the	same
proportion.	The	closer	you	are	 to	 the	center,	 the	 less	dark	 it	gets,	 less	and	 less
dark.	Then	a	moment	comes	when	you	are	just	in	between	darkness	and	light
--	twilight.	In	Zen	they	call	it	satori	--	when	the	darkness	is	no	more	and	the	light
is	yet	to	be,	just	dawn,	the	boundary	line	between	the	night	and	the	day.
One	can	fall	from	satori,	one	can	be	pulled	back	again	by	the	darkness.	Its	forces
are	great	because	it	is	your	whole	past	of	thousands	of	lives.	Its	weight	is	great,
mountainous.	 Hence	 one	 can	 fall	 from	 satori,	 one	 can	 turn	 back,	 one	 can	 get
afraid.
Too	much	light	ahead	can	create	fear.
That	is	the	moment	when	the	master	is	needed.
There	 are	 only	 two	moments	 when	 the	master	 is	 absolutely	 needed.	 The	 first
moment	is	when	you	start	the	journey,	but	even	more	important	than	that	is	the
second	moment	when	you	reach	 the	 twilight	zone.	That	 is	 the	most	significant
moment	 in	 the	 relationship	 of	 the	 master	 and	 the	 disciple	 because	 only	 the
master	can	push	you	into	the	unknown	world	of	light.
Once	you	have	entered	it	you	are	pulled	by	the	center	as	if	through	gravitation;	it
has	its	own	magnetism.	Once	you	are	in	the	field	of	it	you	are	pulled;	then	you
cannot	 turn	back,	 then	 there	 is	no	way	 to	go	back.	Once	you	have	reached	 the
center...	in	India	we	have	called	it	samadhi.
One	 cannot	 fall	 from	 samadhi.	 That	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 samadhi	 and
satori.	One	can	have	one	hundred	satoris,	but	one	can	have	only	one	 samadhi.
That	is	the	moment	when	illumination	happens.	For	the	first	time	you	are	fully
aware	of	who	you	are	and	what	this	life	is	all	about.	One	can	call	it	the	state	of
Christ-consciousness	 or	 Buddhahood.	 It	 is	 literally	 enlightenment	 --	 you	 have
become	the	light.	That's	the	goal	of	sannyas.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dhyan	 Dominique.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation.	 Dominique	 means	 belonging	 to
god,	a	child	of	god.
It	is	only	through	meditation	that	one	comes	to	realise	that	one	belongs	to	god,
that	 one	 is	 not	 without	 roots	 in	 existence.	 that	 one	 is	 not	 an	 orphan.	Without
meditation	one	remains	an	orphan.	That	is	the	misery	of	the	man	who	has	never
known	the	taste	of	meditation.	He	feels	afraid;	he	is	continuously	surrounded	by
all	kinds	of	anxieties	and	fears.	Anguish	is	there	because	he	cannot	see	anybody
protecting	him,	there	is	no	security,	nobody	to	look	after	him.	And	one	seems	so
small	 compared	 to	 the	universe.	The	universe	 is	 so	vast,	 almost	 like	an	ocean,
and	one	is	just	a	dewdrop.
The	moment	you	understand	 that	 the	ocean	 is	not	your	enemy	but	your	home,
that	you	belong	to	it,	that	you	are	inseparably	one	with	it,	great	rejoicing	arises,
you	 feel	 blessed.	One	 is	bathed	 in	 a	new	kind	of	 light	which	goes	on	pouring
from	the	beyond.
Meditation	is	nothing	but	the	art	of	opening	up	to	the	beyond,	of	coming	to	terms
with	existence,	of	feeling	at	home,	at	rest.	Then	one	lives	blissfully,	then	life	has
the	flavour	of	a	continuous,	unending	celebration.
God	 cannot	 be	 believed	 in	 and	 should	 not	 be	 believed	 in;	 god	 has	 to	 be
discovered,	 realised	 --	 and	 that	 realisation	 happens	 only	 by	 becoming	 silent.
Silence	is	meditation.
Anand	 Gerard.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Gerard	 has	 two	 meanings.	 One	 is
courageous,	 the	other	 is	a	 loyal	heart.	Both	are	 significant	as	 far	as	 sannyas	 is
concerned.
And	 bliss	 happens	 only	 to	 a	 courageous	 person	who	 has	 deep	 trust	 in	 life,	 in
existence.	 who	 has	 a	 loyal	 heart.	 In	 fact	 that's	 why	 courage	 is	 needed.	 Any
coward	can	doubt	--	that	needs	no	guts	In	fact	cowards	continuously	doubt;	they
live	in	doubts,	they	are	surrounded	by	doubts.	They	doubt	everything,	they	doubt
themselves.	There	are	doubts	and	doubts,	 it	 is	 an	almost	 infinite	 regress.	They
even	 doubt	 their	 doubts!	 They	 cannot	 find	 any	 place	where	 they	 can	 stand	 in
deep	 trust	 and	 loyalty.	And	 how	 can	 such	 a	 person	 be	 blissful?	Doubts	 create
misery.
Trust	 creates	 bliss.	 It	 is	 only	 in	 trust	 that	 life	 blossoms,	 that	 life	 becomes	 a
prayer.	And	for	trust	courage	is	needed,	because	to	trust	means	to	be	capable	of
opening	up	to	danger,	of	leaving	your	doors	open	for	the	sun,	for	the	rain,	for	the
wind.	But	thieves	can	also	enter	from	the	same	doors.	To	close	the	door	because
of	the	thief	is	to	close	the	door	to	the	sun	and	to	the	rain	and	to	the	wind.	Your
doubt,	your	fear,	will	create	a	grave	around	you;	you	will	 live	a	dead	life.	You
will	not	be	able	to	love,	because	who	knows?	--	the	woman	may	deceive	you.	In
the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 she	 may	 cut	 your	 throat	 --	 women	 are	 dangerous
(laughter).
Who	knows	what	she	is	going	to	do	--	crazy	people!	To	live	with	a	woman	in	the
same	room	and	be	fast	asleep	and	snoring	(laughter)...	anything	is	possible!
Adolf	 Hitler	 never	 got	 married	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 he	 was	 very	 much
afraid	of	getting	too	involved	with	anybody.	He	had	many	love	affairs	but	he	was
very	 suspicious.	He	 got	married	 only	 at	 the	 last	moment,	when	 he	 decided	 to
commit	 suicide	 --	 just	 before	 that.	 Now	 there	 was	 no	 fear	 --	 what	 could	 this
woman	do?	He	got	married	in	the	middle	of	the	night	and	the	next	thing	that	they
did	was	to	commit	suicide.
The	person	who	has	doubts	cannot	 love,	 the	person	who	has	doubts	cannot	be
friendly,	 the	 person	who	has	 doubts	 cannot	 enjoy	 life.	He	 is	 always	on	guard,
watching,	 'Who	 is	 going	 to	 deceive	me?'	 Everybody	 looks	 like	 an	 enemy.	He
lives	in	paranoia.
Sannyas	means	to	live	fearlessly,	open,	available,	vulnerable,	to	existence.
And	then	bliss	is	a	natural	consequence.	You	need	not	seek	bliss,	it	comes	of	its
own	 accord.	 And	 when	 it	 comes	 of	 its	 own	 accord	 it	 never	 goes;	 then	 it	 is
eternal,	yours	forever.
Prem	Michael.	Prem	means	love.	Michael	means	godly.
Logic	is	the	farthest	from	god	and	love	the	closest.	Those	who	live	in	logic	live
without	 god;	 they	 cannot	 afford	 god.	 They	 can	 go	 on	 playing	 with	 words,
theories,	philosophies,	ideologies,	but	their	life	will	not	have	the	fragrance	of	a
divine	 experience.	They	will	 never	 know	what	Buddha	 tasted,	 they	will	 never
know	what	Lao	Tzu	became	drunk	with.	They	are	 the	most	unfortunate	people
on	earth.
One	 has	 to	 shift	 one's	 energies	 from	 logic	 to	 love.	 They	 are	 polar	 opposites.
Logic	is	reason,	love	is	absolutely	irrational.	Logic	is	of	the	head	and	love	of	the
heart;	 logic	 is	 thinking	and	 love	 is	 feeling.	And	nobody,	anywhere,	 is	 teaching
you	the	art	of	feeling.	From	the	kindergarten	to	the	university	you	are	taught	how
to	 think;	 you	 are	 trained,	 disciplined,	 to	 argue,	 to	 think,	 to	 philosophize.	 The
whole	discipline	is	of	logic,	and	one	gets	so	involved	in	it	that	one	tends	to	forget
one's	heart.	And	that	is	the	only	door	to	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	open	that	door	--	and	it	opens	only	in	one	way,
there	 is	 no	 other	way:	when	 all	 your	 energy	 is	 pulled	 out	 of	 its	 investment	 in
logic	it	is	a	tremendous	force.	It	rushes	against	the	doors	of	the	heart	like	a	flood
and	the	doors	open.	Suddenly	you	are	face-to-face	with	god	and	for	the	first	time
you	know	what	it	means	to	realize	god,	what	it	means	to	feel	god.	It	transforms
you	 totally.	 Time	 disappears,	 mind	 disappears,	 death	 disappears.	 You	 are
suddenly	 taken	 into	 a	 totally	 different	 dimension	 of	 timelessness	 and
deathlessness;	you	become	part	of	eternity.
Only	then	is	there	bliss,	only	then	is	one	for	the	first	time	at	rest.	The	journey	is
complete	--	one	has	arrived.
Anandesh	means	god	is	bliss.
In	 the	 East	 the	mystics	 have	 defined	 god	 as	 satchidanand.	 It	 consists	 of	 three
words,	'sat',	'chid',	'anand'.
'Sat'	means	 truth,	 that	which	is	 forever;	 'chid'	means	consciousness,	awareness,
Buddhahood;	and	'anand'
means	bliss.	Anand	is	the	ultimate	peak.	When	you	enter	into	the	dimension	of
the	divine,	first	you	encounter	truth,	then	you	encounter	awareness	and	then	you
encounter	bliss.	This	is	 the	eastern	trinity.	It	 is	certainly	far	more	superior	than
the	Christian	idea	of	god	and	the	holy	ghost	and	the	son	--	that	is	very	childish,
juvenile.	But	these	three	qualities	are	really	fundamental	qualities	and	the	most
important	is	bliss.
My	 emphasis	 is	 that	 if	 one	 can	 choose	 to	 be	 blissful...	And	 remember,	 it	 is	 a
question	of	choice.	Each	moment	presents	you	both	alternatives,	to	be	miserable
or	to	be	blissful.	It	is	up	to	you.
A	Hassid	master	was	dying	and	his	disciples	asked	 'Now	tell	us	 the	secret.	We
have	watched	you	for	almost	fifty	years	and	we	have	never	found	you	sad,	not
even	for	a	single	moment.	And	we	have	heard	from	our	fathers	and	forefathers
that	 in	 your	 youth	 you	 were	 a	 very	 sad	 and	 serious	 person	 --	 then	 what
happened?	How	did	you	become	so	cheerful?'
He	said	'They	are	right,	up	to	my	thirtieth	year	I	was	a	very	sad	and	very	serious
person.	Then	one	morning	 I	 thought	"What	am	I	doing?	Why	am	I	so	sad	and
serious?	Why	should	I	waste	my	energies?	Let	me	try	today,	just	for	a	change,	to
be	cheerful."	I	tried	and	it	worked!	Since	then	every	morning	when	I	wake	up	I
ask	myself,	"Zusya"	--	Zusya	was	his	name	--	"What	do	you	want	today?	Do	you
want	to	be	sad,	serious	and	sad,	miserable,	or	blissful?"	And	I	always	choose	to
be	blissful.	Since	then	I	have	been	blissful.'
And	I	totally	agree	with	this	man	Zusya,	he	is	certainly	right,	it	is	only	a	question
of	choice.
So	 from	 tomorrow	morning	 try	 it.	You	have	been	 serious	 enough.	Or	you	 can
start	 even	 now.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 wait	 even	 for	 tomorrow,	 because	 who
knows?	--	 tomorrow	may	come,	may	not	come.	Give	 it	a	 try.	And	believe	me,
you	will	like	it!	(much	laughter)
(Osho	slips	a	mala	over	 the	head	of	 the	next	 initiate	and	 touches	his	 third	eye.
Just	before	handing	him	the	names	sheet,	Osho	comments:	Another	serious	guy!
Where	Anandesh	did	look	like	a	'serious	guy',	this	new	sannyasin	dissolves	into
laughter	along	with	the	group.)
Dhyanesh	 means	 god	 of	 meditation.	 I	 am	 giving	 you	 a	 very	 serious	 name!
(laughter)	 But	 whenever	 I	 am	 serious	 I	 am	 joking	 (much	 laughter)...	 and
whenever	 I	 am	 joking	 I	 am	 serious	 (Osho	 chuckles).	 This	 you	 have	 to	 be
absolutely	aware	of	from	the	very	beginning.
Meditation	 is	 a	 simple	art,	 very	 simple.	 It	 need	not	be	 taken	 seriously.	 It	 is	 so
simple	that	even	a	child	can	learn	it,	in	fact	a	child	can	learn	it	more	easily.	The
older	one	becomes,	the	more	serious	one	becomes.
In	 fact	 it	 is	 thought	 that	 if	you	are	mature	you	have	 to	be	serious.	Seriousness
and	maturity	somehow	have	been	associated	--	it	is	a	wrong	association.
A	really	mature	person	cannot	be	serious,	 there	 is	nothing	 to	be	serious	about.
The	whole	of	 life	 is	 fun,	 it	 is	 a	play,	 a	play	of	 consciousness.	And	 that's	what
meditation	reveals	to	you	--	that	the	whole	of	life	is	a	beautiful	play	of	energy.
The	same	energy	 is	 in	 the	 trees,	 in	 the	stars,	 in	 the	rivers,	 in	 the	mountains,	 in
you,	in	animals.	It	is	the	same	energy	dancing	in	different	forms.	We	in	the	East
have	 called	 it	 'leela';	 leela	 means	 god's	 play.	 But	 the	 Judaic	 attitude	 which	 is
carried	by	Christianity	and	Islam	is	very	serious.
The	 Talmud	 says	 god	 is	 not	 your	 uncle,	 and	 I	 say	 to	 you	 he	 is	 your	 uncle!
(laughter)	Forget	all	about	him	being	your	father	--	that	is	a	serious	thing.	He	is
your	uncle	and	he	is	a	very	nice	fellow!	The	Talmud	insists	that	he	is	not	nice,	he
is	not	your	uncle,	be	afraid	of	him.	And	I	say	to	you,	don't	be	afraid	of	him,	don't
be	 afraid	 of	 existence.	 It	 is	 beautiful,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 afraid.	 It	 is	 not
antagonistic	to	you,	it	is	nourishing	to	you.
Meditation	 reveals	 many	 things	 but	 the	 first	 revelation	 is	 the	 playfulness	 of
existence	--	and	then	one	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
becomes	like	a	child.
Jesus	says	'Unless	you	are	like	small	children	you	will	not	enter	my	kingdom	of
god.'	He	is	right;	you	have	to	be	like	small	children,	so	small	that	you	don't	have
any	weight	of	experience.	Experience	makes	people	serious	and	a	meditator	has
tn	 drop	 all	 experience,	 the	whole	 past.	He	 has	 to	 bury	 his	 past,	 he	 has	 to	 die
every	moment	 to	 the	 past	 so	 that	 every	moment	 he	 is	 renewed,	 so	 that	 every
moment	he	is	a	new	person.
And	 then	 miracles	 become	 possible.	 If	 you	 are	 cheerful	 the	 whole	 existence
starts	laughing	with	you!
The	old	proverb	is	right.	Laugh	and	the	whole	world	laughs	with	you,	weep	and
you	weep	alone.
Gyanda	means	wisdom.
The	most	essential	thing	to	remember	about	wisdom	is	that	it	is	not	knowledge.
Knowledge	 is	 ignorance	 covered	 with	 information,	 a	 wound	 covered	 with
flowers;	but	the	wound	goes	on	growing	inside	and	the	pus	goes	on	gathering.	It
is	not	advisable	to	hide	a	wound;	it	is	better	to	leave	it	open	because	if	it	is	open
then	the	wind	and	the	sun	and	existence,	can	heal	it.	But	people	are	very	much
afraid	 to	 show	 their	 ignorance,	 and	 the	 only	 way	 to	 hide	 it	 is	 to	 collect
information.	That's	what	knowledge	is.	Information	is	utterly	useless	because	it
is	borrowed.
Wisdom	is	that	which	arises	in	you.	It	is	a	growth,	not	an	accumulation;	it	does
not	 come	 from	 the	 outside.	 The	 first	 step	 towards	 wisdom	 is	 to	 accept	 one's
ignorance	without	any	guilt,	without	any	humiliation.	It	is	so,	such	is	the	nature
of	things	--	we	are	born	ignorant.
And	 once	 you	 accept	 it	without	 any	 judgement,	 like	 Socrates	 did...	He	 said	 'I
know	only	one	thing,	that	I	know	nothing.'	That	was	the	moment	that	the	Oracle
of	the	temple	of	Delphi	declared	him	to	be	the	wisest	man	in	the	whole	world,
because	he	had	taken	the	first	step.	And	the	first	step	is	the	last	step	too,	because
it	 is	a	quantum	leap.	Once	you	accept	your	 ignorance	you	become	simple,	you
are	 no	 more	 a	 pretender,	 you	 are	 no	 more	 a	 hypocrite,	 you	 are	 not	 trying	 to
deceive	 anybody.	 You	 have	 accepted	 the	 truth	 as	 you	 are	 and	 in	 that	 very
acceptance	 something	 explodes	 within	 you.	 In	 that	 very	 acceptance	 wisdom
starts	arising.
And	wisdom	never	becomes	knowledge;	 it	always	remains	insight,	clarity.	You
are	able	to	see	things	clearly	and	to	find	your	way	out	of	the	jungle	of	life.	It	is
always	 just	 unclouded	 consciousness,	 nothing	 else.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 by	 becoming
wise	you	will	be	able	to	know	all	the	secrets	of	life	and	you	will	be	able	to	know
everything	that	is	there	to	know	--	that	is	not	so.
A	wise	person	 is	one	who	has	a	clear	 insight,	so	whatsoever	comes	 in	his	 life,
whatsoever	challenge,	whatsoever	situation	arises,	he	is	capable	of	dealing	with
it	 with	 full	 awareness,	 with	 totality.	 He	 never	 feels	 repentant,	 because	 he	 did
whatsoever	 he	 could.	He	 never	 holds	 back,	 he	 is	 always	 total,	 his	 response	 is
total.
And	whenever	one	is	total	in	one's	acts	life	has	a	grace,	a	beauty	of	its	own.
I	call	that	grace	sannyas,	that	beauty	sannyas.
Rupda	means	the	beautiful.
God	can	be	approached	in	many	ways;	one	of	the	doors	is	the	door	of	beauty.	It
is	from	the	door	of	beauty	that	the	poets	and	the	painters	and	the	dancers	and	the
musicians	 --	 the	 people	 of	 sensitivity,	 the	 people	 of	 aesthetic	 consciousness	 --
enter.	 And	 to	 me	 that	 is	 the	 most	 beautiful	 door.	 On	 that	 path	 you	 will	 find
beautiful	flowers	and	birds	singing	and	waterFalls	and	rivers	and	mountains.
There	 are	 other	 doors	 and	 other	 paths	 too,	 but	 no	 path	 is	 so	 enchanting,	 so
magical.	So	unless	I	find	that	somebody	is	absolutely	 incapable	of	sensitivity	I
never	 suggest	 any	 other	 path.	 I	 suggest	 creativity,	 sensitivity,	 love,	 feeling,
poetry,	music,	dance,	sculpture	--	all	the	possibilities	of	experiencing	beauty	and
creating	 beauty.	 That	 is	 the	 most	 significant	 religiousness,	 the	 religion	 of	 the
creator.	And	my	sannyasins	have	to	follow	that	path.
Yes,	there	will	be	a	few	people	who	will	have	to	follow	the	door	of	truth,	which
is	a	desert	path,	but	for	a	few	people	the	desert	 is	beautiful;	 it	also	has	its	own
beauty.	It	depends	on	the	person	and	his	inner	structure.	Bet	out	of	one	hundred
sannyasins	ninety	will	find	the	door	of	beauty	the	closest	to	their	heart.
Satsang	 is	 a	 very	 specific	word.	 It	 is	 almost	 impossible	 to	 translate	 it,	 but	 the
flavour	can	be	transmitted.
Satsang	means	 the	miracle	 that	 transpires	between	 the	disciple	 and	 the	master.
Something	does	 transpire;	what	 it	 is	exactly	 is	 indefinable.	The	disciple	 sits	 in
silence	with	the	master	and	the	master	is	already	absolutely	silent;	the	master	has
nothing	to	say	because	the	truth	cannot	be	uttered,	and	the	disciple	has	nothing
to	 ask	 because	 whatsoever	 can	 be	 asked	 cannot	 be	 significant.	 The	 really
significant	question	remains	unasked.	So	the	disciple	sits	in	silence,	waiting	for
the	 answer	 for	which	 he	 has	 not	 asked	 the	 question	 and	 the	master	 is	 already
silent.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Slowly	 slowly	 these	 two	 silences	 start	 meeting	 and	 merging	 into	 each	 other,
because	two	silences	cannot	be	two	for	long.	It	is	like	two	zeroes:	if	they	come
closer	 and	 closer,	 they	become	one	 zero.	 It	 is	 just	 the	 reverse	process	of	what
happens	 in	 the	 life	 of	 amoebas.	 The	 amoeba	 becomes	 fatter	 and	 fatter	 --	 like
Vidya!
(Vidya,	 one	 of	 the	 office	 administrators,	 is	 sitting	 in	 the	 front	 row.	 Osho
indicates	her	with	a	gesture	of	his	left	hand,	not	even	glancing	in	her	direction...
which	makes	even	more	intimate	the	reference	to	her.	There	is	much	laughter.)
Any	day	that	miracle	can	happen	here:	Vidya	can	split	in	two	and	we	will	not	be
at	a	loss
--	we	will	have	two	Vidyas!	(much	laughter)
The	amoeba	goes	on	becoming	fatter	and	fatter	and	then	a	point	comes	where	it
cannot	hold	 itself	 together,	 it	 splits	 in	 two.	So	 the	amoeba	never	dies.	And	 the
amoeba	is	the	only	celibate	animal	in	the	world;	there	is	no	sexuality	involved	at
all,	it	goes	on	giving	birth	without	any	sex.	Then	two	amoebas	start	getting	fatter
and	they	split	and	they	become	four	and	this	goes	on	and	on,	for	eternity.
Just	 the	opposite	 happens	with	 the	master;	 two	 zeroes	 start	 coming	 closer	 and
closer	and	suddenly	there	is	only	one	zero.	That	is	the	moment	of	satsang,	when
the	master	is	not	there	and	the	disciple	is	not	there	but	only	a	pervading	silence,
so	vast	that	it	comprehends	both	in	oneness.
Nothing	 is	 said,	 nothing	 is	 heard,	 all	 is	 said,	 all	 is	 heard.	 Hence	 I	 call	 what
transpires	between	the	master	and	the	disciple,	a	miracle.
Sannyas	is	only	a	preparation	for	satsang.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Six	months.
--	Then	it	is	possible.	Good!
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012105
ShortTitle:	GREENR10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Surajprakash	Bharti.
Only	 one	 thing	 to	 be	 remembered,	my	 sannyas	 has	 two	 aspects	 to	 it	 --	 one	 is
non-renunciation	of	 life,	 because	 life	 is	god.	To	 renounce	 it	 is	 irreligious,	 it	 is
against	existence.
One	 has	 to	 worship	 life,	 to	 live	 it	 totally,	 prayerfully	 of	 course,	 because	 it	 is
divine.	Hence	there	is	no	need	to	escape	anywhere;	and	the	escapist	is	not	going
to	find	god.	He	has	been	the	cause	of	the	whole	misery	of	humanity.	escapism	is
cowardliness	but	we	have	worshipped	escapism	for	thousands	of	years.
That	has	taken	away	the	most	beautiful	people	from	the	A	world,	the	people	who
would	 have	 benefitted,	 the	 people	 who	 would	 have	 made	 it	 a	 paradise.	 I	 am
totally	against	that.	My	sannyasins	have	to	love	life,	to	live	life,	to	rejoice	in	it.
And	 the	 second	 aspect	 of	my	 sannyas	 is	 to	 be	meditative.	Be	 in	 life	 but	 very
quiet,	calm,	silent.	Life	becomes	the	circumference	and	meditation	becomes	the
centre.	A	sannyasin	has	 to	be	a	centre	of	 the	cyclone.	Without	 the	cyclone	 the
centre	is	dead,	without	the	centre	the	cyclone	is	mad.	And	the	meeting	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
both	 is	 what	 yoga	 really	 is;	 the	 meeting	 of	 the	 turmoil	 with	 the	 silent
consciousness.	At	that	meeting	point	god	happens.
Dhyan	Dante.	Dante	is	really	a	significant	name;	it	means	the	feminine.	And	all
that	is	beautiful	is	feminine,	all	that	is	significant	is	feminine.	It	is	the	male	mind
that	has	destroyed	the	beauty	of	life.	The	male	mind	is	aggressive,	it	is	violent,	it
is	 destructive.	Creativity	 belongs	 to	 the	 feminine	mind,	 hence	 I	 appreciate	 the
feminine.	I	would	like	the	world	to	be	more	feminine	than	it	has	ever	been.
In	three	thousand	years	five	thousand	wars	have	been	fought	--	this	is	what	the
male	mind	has	done.	 I	am	in	support	of	a	matriarchal	system.	I	would	 like	 the
power	 to	 go	 to	women	 because	 basically	 they	 are	 non	 --	 aggressive;	 they	 are
loving,	 they	 are	 compassionate.	 But	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 biology	 really;
even	 the	 male	 mind	 can	 become	 feminine.	 And	 the	 whole	 process	 of
transforming	the	male	mind	is	the	art	of	meditation.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Dhyan.
So	your	full	name	means	the	creation	of	the	feminine	quality	through	meditation.
Respect	the	feminine
--	it	 is	higher,	certainly	higher,	than	the	male	qualities.	But	the	male	chauvinist
mind	is	 incapable	of	accepting	it.	Out	of	an	inferiority	complex	the	male	mind
has	 tried	 to	 repress	 the	 feminine	and	of	course	because	 the	male	 is	aggressive,
violent,	destructive,	he	can	repress	it.	The	feminine	is	receptive,	surrendering;	it
knows	how	to	let	go,	it	knows	how	to	adjust,	so	it	has	become	adjusted	even	to
the	male	chauvinist	attitude.
The	whole	past	of	humanity	is	ugly	and	the	reason	is	that	we	have	not	allowed
the	feminine	qualities	to	blossom.
So	become	more	and	more	receptive,	sensitive,	creative,	loving,	dancing,	singing
--	and	that's	how	you	will	go	on	becoming	more	and	more	meditative.	And	the
more	meditative	you	are,	 the	more	you	will	find	feminine	qualities	blossoming
in	 you.	 The	moment	 the	 male	 energy	 becomes	 feminine	 a	 Buddha	 is	 born,	 a
Christ	is	born.
Shanti	Ann.	Shanti	means	silence.	Ann	means	prayer.
The	 ordinary	 idea	 of	 prayer	 is	 to	 say	 something	 to	 god	 --	which	 is	 absolutely
foolish.	 There	 is	 nothing	 to	 say;	 one	 can	 only	 be	 silent	 before	 god.	 To	 say
anything	is	to	create	a	disturbance,	to	say	anything	is	to	bring	your	head	in.	And
prayer	is	a	heart-to-heart	communion,	it	is	not	a	communication.
So	 all	 the	 prayers	 which	 exist	 on	 the	 earth	 are	 pseudo	 --	 Christian,	 Hindu,
Mohammedan,	 whatsoever	 they	 are,	 wherever	 they	 are.	 The	 temples,	 the
mosques,	the	synagogues,	the	churches	--	they	are	all	involved	in	a	pseudo	kind
of	religion,	because	they	all	teach	prayer	as	a	dialogue.
I	teach	prayer	as	silence,	not	as	dialogue.	It	is	not	a	dialogue.	We	have	nothing	to
say,	 rather,	on	 the	contrary,	we	have	 to	 listen.	Listening	 to	existence	 is	prayer,
and	listening	can	happen	only	in	deep	silence.
And	 the	 beauty	 of	 silence	 is	 that	 it	 is	 neither	 Hindu	 nor	 Mohammedan	 nor
Christian	nor	 Jewish,	 it	 is	 simply	silence.	So	 the	silent	person	goes	beyond	ail
sects,	 cults	 and	 ideologies.	 And	 only	 the	 silent	 person	 is	 capable	 of	 knowing
something	of	god.
Dhyan	Itzik.	Dhyan	means	meditation.
Meditation	is	a	state	of	absolute	silence	where	mind	stops	functioning.	When	the
mind	 is	 no	 more	 present	 your	 mirror	 of	 consciousness	 is	 utterly	 empty	 --	 no
thoughts,	 no	 desires,	 no	 memories.	 The	 lake	 of	 consciousness	 is	 absolutely
without	waves,	even	without	ripples.
And	Itzik	is	tremendously	significant;	it	means	laughter.
The	idea	has	gone	very	deep	in	the	human	mind	that	religious	people	have	to	be
serious	and	sad,	with	long	faces.	Laughter	seems	to	be	too	mundane.	It	is	not	so.
Laughter	is	one	of	the	most	sacred	phenomenon	on	the	earth.	In	fact	in	profound
laughter	 mind	 disappears	 exactly	 like	 it	 disappears	 in	 meditation.	 That's	 why
laughter	is	so	relaxing,	so	rejuvenating.	A	good	laugh	is	a	tonic,	it	is	very	vital
for	one's	well-being.
The	man	who	cannot	laugh	is	ill,	sick.	A	heartfelt	laughter	releases	your	hidden
sources	of	energy.	One	thing	is	certain,	when	you	are	in	real	laughter,	when	it	is
not	just	polite,	when	it	is	not	just	polite,	when	it	is	not	just	to	say	that	yes,	you
understand	 the	 humour	 of	 the	 situation	 or	 the	meaning	 of	 the	 joke,	when	 it	 is
really	arising	out	of	your	heart,	when	it	is	total,	whole,	when	your	whole	being	is
throbbing	with	it,	then	it	gives	you	a	taste	of	meditation.
Mind	disappears;	it	cannot	exist	in	laughter.	It	melts,	it	evaporates,	for	a	moment
there	is	no	mind,	there	is	only	laughter.	There	is	no	one	who	is	laughing,	there	is
pure	laughter.	And	that's	exactly	what	meditation	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is.	When	the	dancer	disappears	and	there	is	only	dance	it	is	meditation,	when	the
singer	 disappears	 and	 there	 is	 only	 singing	 it	 is	 meditation,	 when	 the	 lover
disappears	and	there	is	only	loving	it	is	meditation,	when	the	walker	disappears
and	 is	 only	 walking	 it	 is	 meditation.	 And	 laughter	 gives	 you	 the	 taste	 of
meditation	more	easily	than	anything	else.
So	I	teach	a	new	kind	of	sannyas.	It	is	non-serious	--	sincere	but	not	serious.	It
knows	how	 to	 laugh	and	enjoy,	 it	 takes	 life	as	 fun.	 It	does	not	 think	of	 life	as
mundane,	hence	it	has	no	egoistic	idea	of	holier-than-thou.
I	 teach	a	dancing,	 singing,	 laughing,	 loving	sannyas.	 It	 is	urgently	needed.	We
are	tired	of	the	sad	saints
--	enough	of	all	that	junk!	We	should	get	rid	of	all	those	long	faces.	The	temples
will	 become	 alive	 again	when	 people	 start	 dancing,	 singing,	 laughing,	 loving.
When	all	 these	ordinary	 life	 activities	 start	 having	 this	 sacred	dimension,	 only
then	can	the	earth	be	transformed	into	heaven,	not	before	it.
And	this	earth	is	so	beautiful	--	it	can	become	a	paradise.	All	that	is	needed	is	a
new	kind	 of	man.	That's	what	my	 sannyas	 is:	 the	 beginning	 of	 a	 new	kind	 of
man.
Jayesh	means	the	victorious.
There	is	only	one	victory,	that	is	victory	over	oneself.	The	people	who	are	trying
to	be	victorious	over	others	are	simply	deceiving	themselves;	sooner	or	later	they
will	find	they	have	wasted	their	life	in	something	utterly	futile.	Death	will	come
--	 it	 is	 coming,	 every	moment	 it	 is	 coming	 closer	 --	 and	 it	 will	 take	 all	 your
trophies	and	medals	and	degrees	and	honours	and	prizes.	All	your	victories	will
be	gone	with	it	and	you	will	be	left	alone,	utterly	defeated,	empty.
Before	it	happens	it	is	better	to	reconsider	your	life.	The	initiation	into	sannyas
means	 a	 reconsideration	 of	 your	 lifestyle.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 very	 clear	 what	 is
essential	and	what	is	non-essential.
The	outside	activities	are	non-essential;	yes,	they	have	to	be	done	so	they	should
be	done,	but	one	should	not	stake	one's	whole	life	on	them	--	on	money,	power,
prestige.	One	should	 think	more	of	 the	 inner	dimension	 --	 the	 real	kingdom	of
god	is	there	and	we	have	to	conquer	it.	And	it	can	be	easily	conquered	because	it
is	already	inside	us;	we	just	have	to	discover	it.	The	very	discovery	becomes	the
victory.
Sujato	means	well-born.
The	 first	birth	 is	only	physical;	 it	 can	only	be	called	a	 so-called	birth.	 It	gives
you	the	opportunity	for	a	second	birth,	it	is	meaningful	only	in	reference	to	the
second	birth.	The	second	birth	happens	 through	meditation.	When	you	become
aware	 of	 yourself,	 when	 you	 become	 immensely	 contented	 with	 your
consciousness,	when	you	suddenly	explore	the	eternity	of	your	being,	then	you
become	really	well-born.
The	first	birth	will	end	with	the	death;	the	second	birth	will	not	end	with	death.
The	second	birth	will	make	you	part	of	the	eternal	process	of	life.	Then	there	is
no	beginning	and	no	end,	then	it	is	a	continuity.
And	when	one	is	completely	beyond	death	all	fears	disappear	--	life	becomes	a
blessing,	a	benediction.
Navino	means	the	new.
We	are	conditioned	by	the	old,	to	live	according	to	the	old,	to	live	for	the	old,	to
sacrifice	ourselves	for	the	old.	That	means	we	are	dominated	by	the	grave-yard.
That	our	whole	life	is	continuously	pulled	backwards.	This	is	not	the	true	way	to
live;	it	may	be	a	good	way	to	commit	slow	suicide	but	it	is	not	a	way	to	live.
To	live	authentically	one	has	to	go	on	dying	to	the	past	every	moment,	so	every
moment	one	is	new	and	fresh,	as	fresh	as	the	dewdrops	in	the	early	morning	sun,
as	fresh	as	a	lotus	just	opening	in	the	lake.	Each	moment	should	be	fresh,	young,
alive,	 innocent,	unburdened	by	the	past.	Then	life	brings	so	many	surprises,	so
many	wonders,	 so	many	 gifts,	 that	 there	 is	 no	way	 to	 repay	 it.	 Only	 tears	 of
gratitude,	only	a	heart	throbbing	with	thankfulness	--	that's	all	we	can	give...	and
that's	what	prayer	 is.	Only	 the	person	who	 is	not	burdened	by	 the	past	 can	be
prayerful.
Prayer	means	a	deep	gratitude	towards	existence,	but	you	can	feel	the	gratitude
only	 when	 you	 have	 enjoyed	 existence.	 People	 are	 dragging,	 they	 are	 not
dancing,	and	they	are	carrying	a	mountainous	burden,	the	Himalayas.	And	they
cling	 to	 their	burden;	 they	are	dying	under	 the	burden	but	 they	 think	 it	 is	very
precious.	They	think	all	that	is	old	is	gold.	That	is	sheer	nonsense.	Only	the	new
is	divine.
And	 each	 moment	 one	 has	 to	 discover	 it.	 One	 should	 not	 lag	 behind,	 there
should	not	be	a	gap	between	oneself	and	 the	moment.	The	bigger	 the	gap,	 the
bigger	the	misery,	the	lesser	the	gap,	the	lesser	the	misery.
If	there	is	no	gap	then	there	is	no	misery,	no	suffering;	then	the	whole	of	life	is
nothing	but	a	sheer	joy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Pradipo	means	a	lamp,	a	light.
We	in	India	make	small	earthen	lamps.	Those	earthen	lamps	are	called	'pradip'.
A	pradip	is	just	a	small	bowl	made	of	earth;	it	represents	the	human	being.
Our	body	is	made	of	earth,	that's	why	man	is	called	Adam;	Adam	means	earth.
The	body	is	made	of	earth	but	inside	the	body	there	is	a	flame	which	is	not	part
of	the	earth,	which	belongs	to	god,	to	the	beyond.
So	looking	at	an	earthen	 lamp	you	have	 the	whole	representation	of	humanity:
the	earth	is	represented	and	the	flame	represents	consciousness.
The	 flame	 is	 continuously	 going	 upwards.	 To	 go	 upwards	 is	 natural	 for	 the
flame,	for	the	flame	gravitation	does	not	exist.	It	follows	another	law.	In	the	East
we	have	called	it	the	law	of	levitation;	science	has	yet	to	discover	it.	They	have
found	 gravitation	 and	 they	 know	 that	 each	 law	 has	 to	 be	 counterbalanced	 by
another	law	on	the	opposite	pole.	If	there	is	a	law	which	pulls	things	downwards
there	must	be	a	law	that	pulls	things	upwards,	only	then	can	there	be	a	balance.
So	 the	 body	 is	 pulled	 downwards	 and	 your	 consciousness	 is	 pulled	 upwards.
Take	care	of	 the	body	but	don't	 forget	 the	 flame	 --	 that's	 all	 I	 expect	 from	my
sannyasins.
The	body	is	a	beautiful	place	because	it	is	enshrining	in	itself	the	beyond	--	but
remember	 the	beyond	because	 in	fact	 that	 flame	is	our	real	being.	The	body	is
only	a	host,	remember	the	guest!	It	has	been	staying	in	many	bodies	in	the	past;
this	 is	only	one	of	 the	caravanserais.	And	when	you	stay	in	a	caravanserai	you
know	that	in	the	morning	you	have	to	go.
So	don't	forget	the	journey,	the	ultimate	journey.	Remembering	it	transforms	the
quality	of	your	whole	life.	And	meditation	helps	you	to	discover	the	flame.
It	 is	 unfortunate	 that	millions	 of	 people	 live	 only	 as	 the	 earth	 and	 they	 never
come	to	know	their	inner	heaven.	My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	discover	it.	It
is	already	the	case,	nothing	has	to	be	done	--	just	a	little	digging	is	needed.	And
it	is	a	simple	process,	just	like	digging	a	well	in	the	earth;	and	soon	you	will	find
the	water.	Maybe	a	few	rocks	have	to	be	removed	or	sometimes	maybe	dynamite
has	to	be	used	(laughter).	For	that	I	have	found	the	dynamic	meditation	--	that	is
the	dynamite!
Navajata	means	newly	born.
Sannyas	is	a	birth.
Socrates	says	that	the	master	is	a	midwife	--	and	he	is	right.	The	master	simply
helps	you	to	come	out	of	a	certain	womb.
The	first	birth	is	the	coming	out	of	the	womb	of	the	mother.	The	mother's	womb
is	 a	 physiological	 thing,	 but	 then	 one	 lives	 in	 a	 psychological	 womb	 and	 the
master	can	bring	you	out	of	your	psychological	womb.
The	moment	 you	 are	 out	 of	 your	 psychological	 womb,	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you
know	that	you	are	not	the	mind,	you	are	something	transcendental	to	both	body
and	mind.	 And	 to	 know	 it	 is	 to	 know	 all.	 Knowing	 it	 makes	 one	 feel	 utterly
contented,	absolutely	contented.	One	has	come	home,	one	has	found	the	goal;	all
desires	 are	 fulfilled,	 the	 deepest	 longing	 of	 the	 heart	 is	 satisfied.	 And	 the
moment	there	is	no	desire,	no	longing,	that	is	the	moment	when	bliss	happens,	or
one	can	say	nirvana	happens	or	god	happens.	These	are	different	words	 to	say
the	same	thing.
Unless	one	comes	out	of	the	mind	one	remains	in	a	cocoon	--	closed	to	the	wind,
to	the	rain,	to	the	sun,	to	the	stars,	to	the	infinity	of	existence	and	to	all	its	joys
and	all	its	gifts;	and	they	are	immense,	incalculable.
To	remain	confined	to	one's	own	mind	is	to	live	in	a	grave.	To	come	out	of	it	is
to	 allow	 the	 hidden	 splendour	 to	 be	 released.	And	with	 it	 comes	 thousands	 of
flowers	--	love,	freedom,	light,	silence.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Till	the	baby	is	born.
(One's	 eyes	 instinctively	 fall	 on	 Navajata's	 body.	 Perhaps	 she	 is	 physically
pregnant	too;	whatever	the	case,	Osho	chuckles	in	response.)
--	That's	good.	I	am	your	midwife!	(laughter)
Mandir	means	a	temple.
Man	 is	 a	 temple	 but	 from	 the	 outside	 you	 can	 only	 see	 the	 walls.	 It	 is	 very
strange	that	not	only	do	people	see	you	from	the	outside,	you	also	see	yourself
from	the	outside.	You	look	in	the	mirror	to	find	your	face,	you	look	into	people's
eyes	to	find	your	image,	you	listen	to	people's	opinions	to	know	who	you	are	--
good,	bad,	moral,	immoral,	saint,	sinner.	This	is	really	strange,	because	we	can
know	ourselves	from	within;	there	is	no	need	for	any	mirror,	there	is	no	need	to
depend	on	other's	opinions,	because	their	opinions	will	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
only	tell	us	about	the	walls,	the	outer	walls	of	our	temples.	They	cannot	tell	us
anything	about	the	deity	within.
And	sannyas	is	nothing	but	the	change,	the	shift,	the	radical	shift,	from	looking
at	oneself	from	outside	to	looking	at	oneself	from	inside.	It	is	sitting	inside	and
looking,	not	depending	on	other's	opinions,	scriptures,	etcetera,	but	just	watching
yourself	 from	your	 innermost	 core	 and	 asking	 'Who	 am	 I?',	 not	 depending	 on
anybody	 else's	 answer.	 One	 has	 to	 find	 one's	 own	 answer,	 only	 that	 can	 be
fulfilling.	And	 the	moment	you	 sit	 at	 the	 centre	of	your	being	and	you	watch,
you	are	amazed	your	body	is	only	a	temple,	god	is	inside	you.	And	there	is	no
way	to	find	it	from	outside,	there	is	no	need	to	find	it	from	the	outside.
Once	you	have	discovered	your	god	within	yourself	then	you	will	be	able	to	see
it	 in	other	people	also,	 the	same;	you	will	know	they	are	also	 temples	and	that
god	is	bound	to	be	there	because	they	are	alive	and	life	is	god.
To	me	 life	 and	god	are	 synonymous,	 interchangeable.	And	 if	 I	have	 to	choose
between	 the	 two	words	 I	would	 like	 to	 choose	 the	word	 'life'	 instead	 of	 'god',
because	'god'	has	been	exploited	by	the	priests	for	so	long	that	they	have	made
the	word	almost	dirty,	obscene.	It	is	better	to	use	the	word	'life'	and	not	even	with
a	 capital	 'L',	 but	with	 a	 lower	 case	 'l'.	 Just	 the	 simple	 life,	 the	ordinary	 life,	 is
divine.
The	moment	you	 can	 see	your	god	within,	 your	 life	within,	 your	 truth	within,
you	will	find	it	everywhere	too.	Then	you	will	see	it	in	the	trees,	in	the	people,	in
the	animals,	everywhere	you	will	see	it.
Wherever	life	is,	god	is.	Then	the	whole	existence	becomes	his	temple	and	then
there	is	no	need	to	go	to	the	Hindu	temple	or	the	Christian	temple	or	the	Jewish
temple	--	that	looks	childish.
Dhyan	Madira.
I	 am	 giving	 you	 a	 very	 paradoxical	 name	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 life	 is
paradoxical,	 existence	 is	 a	 paradox,	 hence	 it	 cannot	 be	 understood	 by	 logic,
because	a	paradox	is	beyond	logic.	To	logic	it	looks	absurd.	It	can	be	understood
only	by	a	very	loving	heart,	not	by	a	logical	mind.	One	has	to	change	the	gestalt
from	logic	to	love.
Your	 name	 means	 meditative	 drunkenness.	 Meditation	 means	 awareness;	 and
this	 is	my	observation,	 that	 as	you	become	more	meditative,	 both	 things	grow
together	in	you.	It	is	illogical,	but	what	can	I	do?	--
that's	how	it	is.	On	one	hand	you	become	more	alert,	more	aware;	on	the	other
hand	you	become	more	drunk;	 and	 they	go	on	growing	 simultaneously.	That's
the	beauty	of	it,	because	if	one	is	simply	aware	then	it	will	be	dry,	without	any
juice.	It	will	be	arithmetical	but	there	will	be	no	poetry	in	it;	it	will	be	scientific
but	something	will	be	missing	in	it.	It	will	be	objective	but	it	will	not	have	the
inner	 dimension	 of	 subjectivity,	 of	 interiority.	 It	 will	 be	 measurable	 but	 that
means	it	will	be	limited.	It	will	not	have	the	quality	of	indefinability.	It	will	not
have	any	music;	it	will	have	mathematics	but	no	music.
Drunkenness	means	poetry,	music,	dance.	And	if	there	is	only	drunkenness	and
no	awareness	then	too	something	is	missing;	then	you	become	unconscious,	you
go	into	a	coma.	They	balance	each	other,	they	both	nourish	each	other;	they	are
opposite	only	for	those	who	have	not	experienced	the	state.	For	those	who	have
experienced	 it,	 they	 are	 complementary,	 not	 opposite.	 The	 drunkenness	makes
awareness	 green,	 alive,	 flowering,	 and	 awareness	 makes	 the	 drunkenness	 not
dark,	 not	 unconscious,	 not	 falling	 into	 a	 coma;	 it	 keeps	 it	 above
unconsciousness.
So	there	is	a	kind	of	dance	in	it,	but	that	dance	remains	fully	alert,	conscious	at
the	 centre.	 And	 only	 when	 these	 two	 things	 happen	 together	 is	 one	 able	 to
understand	 life	 in	 its	 totality;	 otherwise	 the	 approach	 is	 partial,	 and	 a	 partial
approach	is	not	going	to	give	you	fulfilment.	Only	the	whole	can	fulfil	you.
For	me	to	be	whole	is	to	be	holy.	And	this	is	the	most	beautiful	whole!
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8012115
ShortTitle:	GREENR12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dhyan	Alberto.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Alberto	means	noble,	brilliant.
Meditation	brings	both	a	kind	of	nobility	and	a	grace,	a	beauty.	It	has	a	certain
aristocracy	of	the	inner.
It	does	not	depend	on	birth	nor	on	money	nor	on	power	nor	on	respectability;	it
depends	on	your	inner	unfolding.	When	what	is	potential	starts	becoming	actual
you	 are	 no	more	 the	 same.	On	 the	 surface	 you	 are	 the	 same,	 but	 because	 the
inner	 centre	 starts	 becoming	 aflame	 it	 is	 radiated	 by	 your	 surface	 too;	 one
becomes	 luminous.	And	 everything	 is	 sharpened:	 your	 intelligence,	 your	 love,
your	creativity,	sensitivity,	compassion.	Everything	suddenly	flares	up,	becomes
aflame.
That's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about:	 creating	 the	 aristocracy	 of	 the	 inner,	 of	 the
spiritual.
Dhyan	Francesco.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Francesco	means	freedom.
There	are	many	kinds	of	freedom	--	the	social,	the	political,	the	economic	--	but
they	are	only	superficial.	The	true	freedom	has	a	totally	different	dimension	to	it.
It	is	not	concerned	with	the	outside	world	at	all;	it	arises	in	your	interiority.	It	is
freedom	from	conditioning,	from	all	kinds	of	conditioning,	religious	ideologies,
political	philosophies.	All	 that	has	been	 imposed	by	others	on	you	 fetters	you,
chains	you,	imprisons	you,	makes	you	spiritually	a	slave.
Meditation	 is	 nothing	but	 the	destroying	of	 all	 these	 fetters,	 conditionings,	 the
destroying	of	the	whole	prison	so	that	you	can	again	be	under	the	sky,	under	the
stars,	in	the	open,	available	to	existence.
The	moment	you	are	available	 to	existence,	 existence	 is	 available	 to	you.	And
the	meeting	of	 those	 two	availabilities	 is	 the	ultimate	peak	of	bliss.	But	 it	 can
happen	only	 in	 freedom.	Freedom	 is	 the	highest	value;	 there	 is	nothing	higher
than	that.
Veet	Neal.	Veet	means	go	beyond,	transcend.	Neal	means	father,	daddy,	etcetera.
The	idea	of	the	father	is	arbitrary,	artificial.	The	mother	is	natural	but	the	father
is	a	social	invention;	it	is	an	institution.	One	has	to	go	beyond	all	institutions	and
this	is	the	root	of	all	other	institutions.	It	is	not	accidental	that	god	is	called	the
father	and	the	pope	is	called	the	father;	the	word	'pope'	also	means	Neal	--
'po-pa'	 or	 'papa'.	 Translated	 exactly	 into	 contemporary	 language	 it	 will	 be
'daddy'.
Why	is	man	seeking	a	father-figure?	Why	does	he	need	to	depend	on	the	priest,
on	the	pope,	on	god	the	father?	--	because	we	make	every	child	psychologically
retarded.	 We	 don't	 allow	 him	 to	 grow,	 we	 don't	 allow	 him	 to	 become
independent,	so	for	 the	whole	of	his	 life	he	 is	searching	for	a	father-figure.	He
always	wants	somebody	authoritative	to	dominate	him,	to	dictate	to	him,	to	show
him	the	way,	to	tell	him	what	to	do	and	what	not	to	do	and	at	the	same	time	he
resists	it.	That	creates	a	dichotomy.	He	does	not	want	to	be	dependent,	he	wants
to	be	independent,	but	his	growth	has	been	retarded,	prevented,	and	he	does	not
know	how	 to	get	 rid	of	 that	 retardation,	 so	he	has	 to	be	dependent.	So	on	one
hand	he	seeks	some	dependence	and	on	the	other	he	fights.
Either	he	worships	god	or	he	tries	 to	kill	god,	but	 in	both	ways	he	is	behaving
childishly.	The	atheist	and	the	theist	are	not	very	different;	both	are	in	some	way
concerned	with	the	father-figure,	the	ultimate	father-figure.
Just	 be	 a	 human	 being;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 a	 father,	 because	 you	 can	 be	 a
father	only	if	you	retard	the	growth	of	your	child.
You	can	enjoy	that,	people	are	enjoying	that	ego	trip	--	crippling	and	paralysing
children	and	enjoying	their	children	being	dependent	on	them.	This	is	ugly,	this
is	 sickening.	 The	 children	 should	 be	 helped	 to	 be	 independent	 as	 quickly	 as
possible.	But	the	father	is	an	institution	and	all	institutions	are	prisons.
An	 institution	 means	 something	 that	 is	 not	 natural,	 something	 that	 has	 been
invented	 by	 man.	 So	 I	 take	 the	 word	 'father'	 as	 symbolic	 of	 all	 invented
institutions.	And	there	is	no	other	kind.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
One	has	to	go	beyond	being	a	husband,	being	a	father,	being	a	wife,	one	has	to
go	beyond	all	these	stupid	ideas.	One	has	just	to	be	human,	loving	--	and	then	a
miracle	 happens	 in	 life	 then	 you	 can	 love	 somebody	 else's	 child	 as	 deeply	 as
your	own.	Once	the	idea	of	father	is	dropped	your	love	is	free,	then	there	is	no
limitation	to	it.	And	we	will	need	a	totally	different	kind	of	humanity.
All	people	should	not	be	fathers,	should	not	be	mothers;	only	very	few	people
should	be	allowed	to	reproduce,	only	very	few	women	should	be	allowed	to	be
pregnant	--	and	it	is	not	necessary	that	they	be	pregnant	by	their	own	husbands	--
only	then	will	we	be	able	to	improve	the	human	race.
We	have	done	 it	 as	 far	 as	 the	 animal	 species	 are	 concerned	but	we	 are	 not	 so
scientific	with	man;	with	man	we	 remain	 superstitious.	That's	why	 there	 is	 so
much	 misery,	 so	 much	 psychological	 mediocrity,	 so	 much	 illness.	 All	 these
things	can	disappear	from	the	earth	but	then	we	have	to	choose	who	is	going	to
be	 the	 parent.	And	 the	 father	 of	 your	 child	 need	 not	 be	 the	 same	 person	with
whom	you	are	 in	 love.	But	 for	 that	we	will	need	a	 far	bigger	consciousness,	a
very	non-possessive	consciousness.
The	family	as	it	has	existed	up	to	now	has	to	disappear.	Just	a	few	days	ago	the
Pope	 has	 said	 that	 'we	 are	 against	 birth	 control,	 against	 abortion,	 against
interfering	in	human	life,	because	if	these	things	are	allowed	then	the	family	will
be	destroyed,	and	the	church	depends	on	the	family'	--	his	own	words.	And	what
he	is	saying	is	right;	the	church	depends	on	the	family.	All	religions	depend	on
the	 family,	 all	 nations	 depend	 on	 the	 family,	 hence	 I	 am	 basically	 against	 the
family	 because	 unless	 the	 family	 is	 uprooted	 all	 these	 foolishnesses	 will
continue.	The	nation,	 the	race,	 the	church,	 the	state	 --	 they	will	continue	 if	 the
family	remains.	The	family	is	the	basic	unit.	And	I	am	hammering	on	the	basic
unit	because	unless	you	cut	the	roots	you	cannot	change	the	tree;	it	will	remain.
You	can	go	on	pruning	the	leaves,	it	won't	help;	it	will	simply	make	the	foliage
thicker.
Up	to	now	no	revolution	has	succeeded	for	the	simple	reason	that	no	revolution
has	happened	to	the	basic	foundation	of	the	society	and	that	is	the	family.	Even
in	communist	Russia,	in	the	beginning	they	tried,	just	for	five	years,	to	disperse
the	 family,	 but	 soon	 they	 recognised	 that	 if	 the	 family	was	 destroyed	 then	 the
state	 would	 not	 exist.	 Immediately	 they	 stopped	 that	 whole	 programme,	 they
dropped	the	very	idea,	and	now	in	Soviet	Russia	the	family	is	more	strict	than	it
is	anywhere	else	in	the	West,	it	is	very	orthodox,	because	they	immediately	saw
the	relationship	between	the	state	and	the	family:	if	you	destroy	the	family	you
are	cutting	your	own	roots.
So	 go	 beyond	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 family,	 of	 the	 father,	 of	 the	 husband,	 of	 all
institutionalised	ideas,	and	only	then	can	you	understand	my	message.
Dhyan	 Babbo.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation	 and	 Babbo	 creates	 again	 the	 same
trouble,	it	means	the	father,	the	daddy.	So	many	daddies	today!	(laughter)
So	 you	 have	 to	meditate	 over	 it	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	way	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 it.
Meditation	is	a	miracle.	If	you	want	to	get	rid	of	anything	simply	meditate	over
it	and	you	will	get	rid	of	it.	If	you	cannot	get	rid	of	it	by	meditation	that	simply
means	 it	 is	 natural	 and	 there	 is	 no	need	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 it.	 So	meditation	 is	 very
decisive;	it	decides	what	is	nature	and	what	is	not	nature,	what	is	nurture.	Once
you	 start	meditating	on	 anything...	For	 example,	 if	 you	meditate	on	 love,	 love
starts	growing,	it	starts	spreading,	it	starts	having	wings.	You	cannot	destroy	love
by	meditation;	it	deepens,	it	becomes	vaster.	But	possessiveness	will	disappear,
jealousy	will	disappear,	anger	will	disappear,	hatred	will	disappear.
So	when	something	disappears	by	meditation	that	simply	means	that	it	was	just
human,	 an	 arbitrary	 arrangement.	 When	 something	 deepens,	 becomes	 bigger,
that	means	it	is	a	gift	of	god.	And	except	for	meditation	there	is	no	criterion	for
knowing	what	is	nurture	and	what	is	nature;	they	have	both	got	so	mixed	up.	But
meditation	simply	gives	you	absolute	discrimination,	it	cuts	the	essential	and	the
non-essential	apart.
And	 I	 call	 it	 a	miracle	because	 the	non-essential	 simply	 starts	 evaporating	and
the	energy	that	was	involved	in	the	non-essential	starts	getting	into	the	roots	of
the	essential	so	the	essential	starts	becoming	bigger	and	stronger.
So	 this	 is	 your	 meditations	 start	 meditating	 on	 your	 fatherhood.	 And	 once	 it
disappears	 you	 will	 be	 a	 totally	 new	 man	 because	 your	 whole	 vision	 and
perspective	will	be	new.
And	it	is	only	a	question	of	succeeding	in	one	thing	through	meditation,	then	you
know	 the	key,	 then	you	can	go	on	opening	all	 the	 locks	because	 it	 is	a	master
key.
Kalyana	means	welfare	of	the	others.
The	 moment	 one	 becomes	 blissful	 he	 becomes	 a	 blessing	 to	 others.	 That	 is
Kalyana.	It	is	not	a	question	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	serving	others.	You	cannot	serve	unless	you	have	something	to	share.	If	you
are	miserable	and	you	start	serving	others	you	will	simply	complicate	their	lives
because	your	misery	will	infect	them.
That's	 why	 all	 the	 so-called	 public	 servants	 have	 proved	 very	 dangerous	 to
human	society.	The	missionaries,	the	public	servants,	the	social	reformers,	they
are	 all	mischievous	 people.	 If	 they	 all	 disappear	 the	world	will	 be	 in	 a	 better
shape.	And	 the	 reason	why	 they	go	on	 creating	 trouble	 is	 that	 they	 are	 full	 of
trouble	themselves.	Their	service	to	humanity	is	only	an	escape	from	their	own
personal	problems.
My	approach	 is	 totally	different.	 It	 is	 individualistic.	First	you	have	 to	become
blissful.	Once	you	are	blissful	then	the	bliss	starts	flowing	over	you	--	and	that
overflowing	 bliss	 is	 the	 only	 true	 service.	 But	 then	 it	 is	 absolutely
unselfconscious;	you	go	on	doing	things	because	you	love	to	do	them.	There	is
no	 motivation	 in	 it,	 no	 desire	 to	 attain	 to	 some	 pleasures	 in	 heaven,	 some
rewards	from	god.	There	is	no	end	in	your	service,	it	is	sheer	joy;	it	is	not	future-
oriented	at	all	--	and	then	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.
Sandhano	means	enquiry.
The	truth	has	not	to	be	believed,	it	has	to	be	enquired	into.
My	sannyas	does	not	begin	in	belief,	it	begins	in	enquiry.	For	thousands	of	years
humanity	has	been	told	that	believing	is	seeing;	I	say	to	you	seeing	is	believing.
So	the	question	is	not	of	believing,	the	question	is	of	seeing.	Even	a	blind	man
can	believe	in	light,	in	fact	only	a	blind	man	believes	in	light;	the	man	who	has
eyes	need	not	believe	at	all	--	he	knows	Belief	is	a	poor	substitute	for	knowing
and	knowing	never	happens	through	belief.	The	very	first	step	has	gone	wrong.
So	start	within	any	belief	or	disbelief	 --	because	disbelief	 is	 to	believe	upside-
down.	Start	with	an	open	mind,	with	no	a	priori	conclusion.	Start	from	a	state	of
not-knowing	and	then	you	are	on	the	right	track.
Then	truth	is	not	very	far	away,	it	is	just	around	the	corner.	For	the	enquirer	it	is
just	around	the	corner,	for	the	believer	it	doesn't	exist	at	all.
Nandita	means	the	blissful	one.
My	effort	here	is	not	religious	in	the	ordinary	sense.	I	don't	 teach	a	doctrine,	a
dogma,	a	creed.	This	is	not	a	cult	because	I	don't	have	any	ideology.	I	only	teach
blissfulness,	how	to	enjoy	the	small	things	of	life,	because	my	experience	is	that
if	you	start	enjoying	the	small	things	of	life	you	start	feeling	the	extraordinary	in
the	ordinary.	Then	even	drinking	a	cup	of	tea	becomes	a	meditation,	or	taking	a
shower	becomes	a	prayer.	Wherever	bliss	is	there	is	meditation,	there	is	prayer.
One	has	to	change	one's	whole	lifestyle.	We	have	been	brought	up	in	such	a	way
that	misery	has	become	our	life-style.	We	become	happy	once	in	a	while,	when
there	 is	 really	 something	 to	 be	 happy	 about,	 but	 that	 too	 remains	 only	 for	 a
moment.
You	 have	 won	 the	 lottery	 and	 for	 a	 moment	 you	 are	 happy,	 and	 then	 the
happiness	disappears	because	it	goes	against	your	habit.	So	the	lottery	breaks	the
ice	but	only	 for	 a	moment;	 again	 the	old	habit	 suffocates	your	happiness.	You
start	worrying	about	what	to	do	with	this	money,	what	not	to	do,	and	a	thousand
and	 one	 things	 start	 happening.	 Now	 you	 cannot	 sleep	 in	 the	 night	 because
fantasies	go	on	and	on,	and	the	next	morning	you	are	more	tired	than	ever.
Just	the	opposite	should	be	the	case:	one	should	be	naturally	happy	unless	there
is	 really	 some	 cause	 to	 be	 unhappy.	 That	 would	 be	 a	 normal,	 natural
phenomenon.	Happiness	should	be	like	breathing:	unless	something	goes	wrong
so	 that	 your	 breathing	 is	 disturbed	 it	 should	 continue	 smoothly.	And	 if	 one	 is
happy	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	then	even	when	there	is	a	cause	to	be	miserable	it
will	not	go	very	deep.	It	will	remain	superficial	because	it	will	be	going	against
your	nature	--	just	as	right	now	even	when	there	is	a	cause	to	be	happy	you	can
be	only	for	a	moment	or	for	a	time	being,	because	it	goes	against	your	habit.	And
remember,	a	habit	is	not	so	deep	as	nature.
Once	you	are	naturally	blissful	 then	even	when	 there	 is	a	cause	 to	be	unhappy
you	will	not	feel	unhappy;	you	will	be	able	to	pass	through	it,	calm	and	cool	and
quiet.	That's	what	sannyas	is	a	transformation	of	your	total	life-style	from	misery
to	bliss.
And	that's	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Nandita.
From	 this	 very	moment	 start	 feeling	 happy	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all.	 Feel	 unhappy
only	when	there	is	really	some	reason	to	be.	And	you	will	be	surprised:	it	is	very
difficult	to	find	a	reason	to	be	unhappy.	For	twenty-five	years	I	have	been	trying
and	I	have	not	found	one!	(laughter)	So	I	don't	think	you	will	be	able	to	find	it.
Whenever	 you	 feel	 something	 entering	 your	 being	 creating	 unhappiness,
immediately	try	to	find	out	what	there	is	to	be	miserable	about.	Go	deep	into	it
and	you	will	not	find	anything.	And	whenever	there	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
bliss	 no	 need	 to	 bother	 about	why	 it	 is	 there,	 just	 enjoy	 it.	 People	 do	 just	 the
opposite.
A	psychiatrist	sent	one	of	his	patients	to	the	mountains	for	a	holiday	and	the	next
day	he	received	a	telegram.	The	patient	wrote:	'I	am	feeling	very	happy	--	why?'
People	ask	why	they	are	happy.	Every	day	I	receive	questions	saying	'Osho,	I	am
feeling	very	happy	--
why?	There	seems	to	be	no	reason.'
There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any	 reason;	 happiness	 is	 our	 nature.	 Nobody	 asks	 'I	 am
breathing	--	why?	I	am	alive
--	why?'	In	the	same	way	one	is	blissful;	there	is	no	need	to	be	searching	for	a
cause.	But	certainly	when	you	are	not	feeling	good	find	out	the	cause.	And	the
deeper	 you	 go	 into	 it,	 the	 more	 you	 will	 find	 it	 doesn't	 exist	 at	 all,	 it	 was
imagination.	You	had	imagined	it	in	the	first	place,	so	it	evaporates.
Anubhavo	means	experience.
Truth	 is	 not	 a	 concept,	 it	 is	 an	 experience.	 God	 is	 not	 a	 person,	 it	 is	 an
experience.	Love	is	not	an	idea,	it	is	an	experience.	All	that	is	really	significant
is	experience.	And	people	go	on	living	in	ideas.	Love	is	just	an	idea,	a	beautiful
idea.	God	 is	 just	 a	 name,	 an	 abstraction.	Beauty,	 freedom,	 truth	 --	 all	 are	 just
words,	and	if	these	words	are	repeated	again	and	again,	one	becomes	hypnotised
by	 them.	 One	 starts	 believing	 in	 these	 words	 and	 forgets	 that	 these	 are	 mere
words,	they	are	not	the	reality.
The	 word	 'god'	 is	 not	 god,	 the	 word	 'love'	 is	 not	 love.	 Insist	 on	 experience
because	 only	 experience	 liberates	 and	 only	 experience	 makes	 your	 potential
actual.	It	is	only	through	experiencing	the	multi-dimensional	life	that	one	grows,
that	 one	 comes	 one	 day	 to	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 where	 one	 becomes	 crowned	 a
Christ,	where	one	is	awakened	from	all	unconsciousness	and	becomes	a	Buddha.
So	remember:	don't	get	lost	in	the	jungle	of	words;	it	is	easy	to	get	lost	in	words.
Always	insist	on	experience,	because	except	for	experience	all	is	just	dreamstuff,
a	sheer	wastage	of	life,	time	and	energy.
Being	here	with	me	means	getting	ready	to	experience	things,	risking	everything
for	experience.
Nityama	means	the	eternal.
We	are	not	confined	between	birth	and	death,	we	have	been	before	birth	and	we
will	be	after	death.
Birth	and	death	are	simply	episodes	in	the	eternal	stream	of	life,	but	you	are	not
to	 believe	 in	 what	 I	 am	 saying;	What	 I	 am	 saying	 has	 only	 to	 be	 taken	 as	 a
hypothesis,	 so	 that	you	can	enquire	whether	 it	 is	 right	or	wrong.	 I	 am	 the	 last
person	to	ask	anybody	to	believe	in	me,	because	what	I	am	saying	is	so	true	that
just	a	little	effort	on	your	part	and	it	can	become	your	experience,	and	when	it	is
your	experience,	only	then	has	it	any	value.
You	can	love	me	--	that	love	will	help	you	to	go	into	the	enquiry	--	but	you	need
not	believe	in	my	words	--	that	will	hinder	you.	So	there	is	a	great	distinction	to
be	always	remembered:	love	me	but	don't	believe	in	the	words,	Mm?	words	are
words,	whether	 they	are	mine	or	Jesus,	or	Buddha's	makes	no	difference.	Your
love	for	me	should	not	become	your	love	for	my	words;	your	love	for	me	should
only	be	a	nourishment,	an	encouragement,	to	go	into	the	enquiry.
Trusting	me	does	not	mean	that	whatsoever	I	say	you	have	to	believe	in;	trusting
me	only	means	that	you	are	ready	to	enquiry.	Trust	is	needed	to	enquire,	not	to
believe,	because	enquiry	means	going	into	the	unknown.	Unless	you	trust	me	it
will	be	impossible	for	you	to	risk	the	known	for	the	unknown.	But	you	need	not
believe	in	the	other	shore	unless	you	have	found	it.	And	I	know	that	because	it	is
there,	it	can	be	found.
If	I	can	find	it,	you	can	find	 it.	We	are	all	born	equal,	with	 the	same	potential,
with	the	same	possibilities.
Vedanto	means	going	beyond	words,	scriptures,	philosophies.
Truth	is	beyond	words,	inexpressible;	there	is	no	way	to	say	it.	The	master	only
shows	it,	he	does	not	say	it.	The	master	is	a	finger	pointing	towards	the	moon,	he
shows	it.	But	the	world	is	so	full	of	fools	that	they	start	worshipping	the	finger,
they	don't	look	at	the	moon	at	all;	hence	there	are	Christians....	Christians	means
the	people	who	are	worshipping	the	finger	of	Christ	and	the	Buddhists	mean	the
people	who	 are	worshipping	 the	 finger	 of	Buddha.	And	 the	 irony	 is	 that	 both
fingers	were	pointing	to	the	same	moon	and	now	these	fools	are	quarrelling	for
centuries,	arguing	that	I'am	right.	'Your	finger	is	small	and	my	finger	is	big,	and
look	 how	 beautiful	 my	 finger	 is	 and	 your	 finger	 is	 not	 so	 beautiful,	 and	 my
finger	is	white	and	yours	is	black.'	Thousands	of	books	have	been	written	about
these	 fingers,	 possible	 and	 impossible	 things	have	been	 said	 about	 the	 fingers,
and	the	argument	has	become	so	vast	that	nobody	bothers	about	the	moon
--	nobody	has	time!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
First	 one	 has	 to	 decide	 which	 one	 is	 the	 real	 finger,	 which	 one	 is	 the	 finger
authorised	by	god.	And	that	is	not	possible	to	decide	at	all,	there	is	no	criterion
to	 decide	 it	 --	 the	 argument	 will	 continue,	 theologians	 will	 go	 on	 writing
treatises.	 And	 the	 miracle	 is	 that	 nobody	 reads	 those	 treatises,	 only	 other
theologians	read	them	and	they	refute	them.
For	 five	 thousand	years	 the	 followers	of	Krishna,	Patanjali,	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,
Jesus,	Mohammed,	Nanak,	Kabir,	 they	 have	 all	 been	 arguing	 --	 I	 have	 looked
into	 their	argument:	all	 their	arguments	are	about	 the	finger.	Nobody	is	 talking
about	the	moon.
My	function	here	is	to	help	you	to	see	the	moon.	So	don't	get	concerned	with	the
finger.	All	 scriptures	 are	 fingers,	 all	words	are	 fingers,	 all	 theories	 are	 fingers.
Use	 them	but	don't	get	obsessed	by	 them,	use	 them	and	 forget	all	 about	 them.
When	you	have	found	the	moon	then	you	have	to	look	at	the	moon;	then	don't	let
the	finger	come	in	between	you	and	the	moon.
That's	the	meaning	of	your	name.	Let	it	also	become	the	meaning	of	your	life.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	think	always...	no	end	to	it.
--	That's	good!	See	you	on	the	moon!	(much	laughter)
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012125
ShortTitle:	GREENR13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dhyan	Gail.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Gail	means	source	of	joy.
Pleasure	 is	possible	without	meditation,	but	 it	 is	 soon	bound	 to	be	momentary
and	 physical.	 The	 physical	 part	 of	 ourself	 is	 the	 most	 superficial;	 without
meditation	 at	 the	most	 one	 can	 have	 certain	 glimpses	 of	 happiness	 which	 are
deeper	than	pleasure.
Happiness	 is	 psychological	 but	 that	 too	will	 remain	momentary.	 It	will	 have	 a
little	more	depth	than	the	pleasure	derived	from	food	and	sex,	it	will	have	more
aesthetic	sensitivity	to	it,	but	that	too	will	pass	away	and	will	leave	you	in	deeper
despair	 than	 before.	 Each	 time	 you	 experience	 happiness	 it	 is	 followed	 by
despair.	One	falls	from	the	peak	into	the	valley	--	it	hurts.
Joy	 is	 possible	 only	 through	meditation.	Meditation	 is	 a	method	 to	 go	beyond
body	and	mind,	 it	 is	 to	enter	 into	 the	deepest	core	of	your	being.	The	moment
you	transcend	body	and	mind,	you	also	transcend	time;	hence	joy	is	eternal,	it	is
forever.	That	is	the	only	thing	worth	achieving	in	life,	everything	else	is	only	a
toy	to	play	with.
I	 am	not	against	pleasure,	not	against	happiness,	but	one	 should	not	 think	 that
that	is	all	there	is	to	life;	there	is	far	more.
The	word	'gail'	is	very	beautiful;	it	comes	from	two	words.	One	is	'abi'	abi	means
the	source;	and	'gil'
means	to	dance.
The	moment	you	are	so	joyful	that	your	whole	energy	starts	a	dance	of	its	own
accord,	when	you	cannot	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
contain	it,	when	it	starts	overflowing	you	like	the	perfume	of	a	flower,	not	only
do	you	become	blissful,	the	whole	existence	feels	blessed	by	your	bliss.
Anand	Manuel.	Anand	means	bliss	Manuel	means	god	is	with	us.
Originally	the	name	was	reserved	only	for	Christ,	because	he	declared	'I	and	my
father	are	one.'
The	 moment	 you	 know	 that	 you	 and	 existence	 are	 not	 separate	 --	 that's	 the
ultimate	 peak	 of	 understanding,	 of	 being,	 there	 is	 nothing	 higher	 than	 that	 --
that's	the	moment	when	one	becomes	a	Christ.
Christ	simply	means	the	crowned	one;	one	is	crowned	by	glory,	crowned	by	the
meeting	and	merger	with	the	divine.
It	is	possible	only	for	a	very	blissful	person.
The	people	who	go	to	the	churches	and	the	synagogues	and	the	temples	and	the
mosques	are	almost	always	a	miserable	 lot.	They	go	 there	not	 to	celebrate	 life
but	 to	 ask	 something	 from	 god.	 They	 go	 there	 as	 beggars;	 and	 god	 is	 not	 for
beggars,	god	does	not	exist	for	beggars.	The	beggar	is	full	of	desires	and	desires
are	the	hindrances.	God	exists	only	for	the	emperors,	and	by	'emperor'	I	mean	a
person	who	has	seen	the	futility	of	all	desiring.
When	 you	 see	 that	 desiring	 is	 futile	 bliss	 explodes.	 It	 is	 desire	 that	 creates
misery.	 If	 it	 is	not	 fulfilled	you	are	miserable,	 if	 it	 is	 fulfilled	 then	 too	you	are
miserable,	because	when	it	 is	fulfilled	you	see	that	nothing	is	fulfilled,	you	are
the	same	person.	You	wanted	a	big	house	and	now	it	is	yours.	You	wasted	years
and	years	for	it	and	dreamt	about	it	and	spent	so	much	energy;	now	the	house	is
yours	but	you	don't	see	the	bliss	that	you	were	dreaming,	fantasising,	about.
Nothing	fails	like	success,	so	if	a	desire	is	fulfilled	you	are	miserable,	if	it	is	not
fulfilled,	you	are	miserable.	Either	way	it	brings	misery.	Seeing	this	the	man	of
understanding	drops	desiring	and	in	that	very	dropping	is	the	explosion	of	bliss.
And	when	you	are	dancing	and	 rejoicing	 in	each	moment	of	 life	you	will	 find
god	is	with	you,	within	you,	god	is	you.
That's	the	goal	of	sannyas,	to	experience	oneself	as	divine.	Nothing	less	is	going
to	fulfil,	nothing	less	is	going	to	help.	And	it	is	not	a	far-away	goal;	it	is	within
everybody's	reach,	we	just	have	not	tried	in	the	right	direction.
Blissfulness	is	the	right	direction,	the	way	that	leads	to	god.	Misery	is	the	way
that	leads	you	farther	and	farther	away.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Nadia	means	hope.
The	only	hope	is	meditation.	And	remember,	I	say	the	only	hope	--	all	else	is	just
hopeless.	 One	 can	 have	 money,	 power,	 prestige,	 but	 ultimately	 one	 finds
everything	has	betrayed	one.	Even	a	man	like	Alexander	the	Great	dies	in	deep
frustration	and	hopelessness.	But	 the	man	of	meditation	 lives	with	 tremendous
ecstasy	and	dies	too	with	the	same	ecstasy,	with	the	same	dance.
Just	before	Buddha	died	his	disciples	naturally	started	crying	and	weeping;	they
could	not	contain	their	tears.	He	said,	"Stop!	You	should	rejoice	because	I	have
fulfilled	my	mission	 in	 life.	 There	 is	 nothing	more	 for	me	 to	 do	 here.	 I	 have
known	 whatsoever	 was	 worth	 knowing,	 I	 have	 realized	 whatsoever	 was	 my
potential.	My	death	is	not	the	end	of	life	but	the	ultimate	crescendo,	the	climax.
Weeping	 and	 crying	 you	 can	 do	 later	 on;	 right	 now	 while	 I	 am	 still	 here,
rejoice!"
Meditation	is	the	only	hope.	One	should	put	one's	whole	energy	into	meditation.
It	 means	 the	 exploration	 of	 your	 own	 interiority.	 It	 is	 a	 journey	 from	 the
circumference	 to	 the	 center.	The	moment	you	 reach	 the	center	you	have	come
home.	Then	suddenly	spring	is	there	and	the	birds	start	singing	and	the	flowers
suddenly	appear	from	nowhere	and	the	whole	of	life	is	fragrant.
It	is	better	to	move	into	meditation	as	quickly	as	possible.	Every	moment	that	is
not	meditative	is	lost.
We	save	only	 that	 time	which	goes	 into	meditation	 --	 that	 is	 the	only	 real	 life.
And	once	you	know	how	to	live	at	your	center	you	need	not	renounce	life;	you
live	in	life,	amidst	life,	but	still	you	are	centered,	rooted	in	your	self.
The	meditative	person	is	not	an	escapist;	he	is	creative.	That	 is	 the	criterion	of
real	 meditation:	 if	 it	 helps	 you	 to	 be	 creative	 only	 then	 is	 it	 true	 meditation;
otherwise	 you	 are	 carrying	 something	 pseudo	 in	 the	 name	 of	meditation.	 If	 it
creates	 the	 longing	 to	 escape	 from	 life	 --	 to	 the	monastery,	 to	 the	caves	 to	 the
mountains
--	that	is	not	true	meditation.
One	has	to	be	blissful	wherever	one	is.
Prem	Michael.	Prem	means	love.	Michael	means	godly.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	 are	 a	 few	experiences	which	can	only	be	 called	godly,	 there	 is	no	other
way	to	define	them.	Love	is	one	of	those	few	rare	experiences.	Meditation,	bliss,
love	--	these	can	be	only	indicated	by	the	word
'godly',	because	whenever	you	are	in	love	or	in	bliss	or	 in	meditation	suddenly
you	become	aware	of	a	 translucent	presence,	 surrounding	 the	whole	existence.
You	see	it	within,	you	see	it	without.	It	has	always	been	there,	it	is	just	that	you
were	blind.	You	are	breathing	it	every	moment,	you	are	living	in	it.	Just	lives	in
the	ocean	we	are	 living	 in	god.	All	 that	 is	needed	 is	a	certain	clarity,	a	certain
ability	to	see.
And	love	helps	immensely	to	cleanse	your	eyes,	because	fundamentally	love	is
the	dropping	of	 the	ego,	and	 the	moment	ego	 is	dropped	a	curtain	 that	was	on
your	eyes	disappears.	The	clouds	that	were	surrounding	you	are	no	more	there,
the	sky	is	clear	and	you	can	see	the	farthest	stars.
God	 is	not	a	person	but	a	presence,	hence	you	will	not	meet	a	person	 the	way
Christians	have	been	talking	about	god,	the	father	--	a	very	ancient,	old	man.	His
beard	must	have	reached	the	floor	by	now,	it	just	be	sweeping	the	floor,	because
I	have	never	heard	 that	 there	are	barbers	 in	paradise;	nobody	has	ever	 thought
about	barbers	and	hair-cutting	salons.	He	must	be	completely	covered	with	hair!
There	 are	 all	 kinds	 of	 gods	 invented	 by	 religious	 people,	 but	 they	 are	 all
inventions,	 imagination,	 fiction	 --	 you	 can	 call	 them	 spiritual	 fiction.	 Just	 as
there	is	science	fiction,	so	there	is	spiritual	fiction.	But	the	truth	is	that	god	is	not
a	person	at	all,	you	cannot	make	any	image.
God	is	beauty,	not	beautiful.	God	is	love,	not	loving.	God	is	bliss,	not	somebody
who	is	blissful.
And	when	you	start	seeing	god	as	beauty,	as	truth,	as	love,	as	bliss,	as	ecstasy,
your	whole	vision	goes	through	a	radical	change.	And	love	can	become	one	of
the	most	significant	steps.	One	can	enter	god	through	love	very	easily.
Use	it	as	a	device,	as	a	bridge.
Dhyan	Beate.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Beate	means	the	blessed.
We	 don't	 know	 how	 blessed	 we	 are	 because	 we	 are	 not	 aware	 of	 our	 own
inexhaustible	treasures.	We	are	not	even	thinking	about	the	inner	--	experiencing
is	 a	 far-away	 thing.	We	are	 continuously	 thinking	about	 everything	except	our
own	being.
Sannyas	means	the	change	of	the	whole	gestalt.	It	means	turning	in,	looking	at
one's	 own	 self,	 because	 unless	 one	 knows	who	 one	 is,	 all	 other	 knowledge	 is
futile.
Albert	Einstein	 is	one	of	 the	most	 intelligent	persons	who	has	ever	walked	on
earth	but	he	died	in	deep	misery.	Just	two	days	before	his	death	he	said	'If	I	am
born	again,	I	would	not	like	to	be	a	scientist.'	Now	a	man	of	the	calibre	of	Albert
Einstein	saying	that	means	much.	What	is	the	point	of	knowing	about	stars	and
electrons	 and	 neutrons	 and	 protons	 when	 you	 don't	 know	 anything	 about
yourself?	And	whatsoever	you	do	without	knowing	about	yourself	is	going	to	be
wrong.
The	most	important	thing	in	life	is	to	become	acquainted	with	oneself.	And	the
moment	you	have	a	little	acquaintance	you	suddenly	see	your	blessedness.
Beate	is	a	beautiful	name.	It	exactly	means	bhagwan.	The	word	 'bhagwan'	also
means	the	blessed	one.
Beate	may	have	certain	far-away	connections	with	the	root	of	bhagwan.	It	may
have	come	from	the	same	Sanskrit	root.	In	Sanskrit	bhagwan	does	not	mean	god
--	 that	 is	 a	 secondary	meaning;	 it	 simply	means	 the	blessed	one,	 one	who	has
known	his	blessedness.
Buddha	never	believed	in	any	god,	still	we	called	him	bhagwan	because	he	was
one	 of	 the	 most	 blessed	 people	 who	 has	 ever	 walked	 on	 the	 earth.	Mahavira
never	believed	in	any	god,	still	we	call	him	bhagwan,	for	the	simple	reason	that
we	have	never	seen	any	person	as	blessed	as	him.
Beate	 is	 significant,	 but	 the	 discovery	 has	 to	 be	made.	 It	 is	 there,	 somewhere
within	 you,	 you	 just	 have	 to	 dig	 within	 so	 many	 layers	 of	 thoughts,	 desires,
conditionings.	Just	a	little	bit	of	searching	inside	and	you	will	see,	because	it	is
just	 like	 a	 Kohinoor:	 it	 is	 so	 brilliant,	 your	 innermost	 self,	 so	 luminous,	 that
nothing	can	hide	it.	Just	a	little	search	and	the	miracle	happens.
Nadma	means	the	ultimate	sound	which	is	heard	when	all	other	noise	in	the	head
stops.
It	is	always	there	but	the	head	is	so	full	of	noise	you	cannot	hear	it.	It	is	a	very
subtle	sound,	so	subtle	that	the	mystics	have	called	it	a	soundless	sound.	It	is	not
like	somebody	hammering	on	your	door,	it	is	not	even	a	whisper;	it	is	just	like	a
breeze	passing	through	the	trees.	Unless	you	are	very	alert,	silent,	you	hear	it.
Once	you	have	heard	it	then	you	will	be	able	to	hear	it	even	in	the	marketplace;
then	no	noise	can	distract	you	from	it	because	it	has	such	a	magnetic	beauty,	it	is
so	alluring,	it	is	so	hypnotising.	Once	it	is	found	it	is	never	lost.
So	all	that	we	have	to	do	is	to	put	the	mind	in	a	calmer	and	quieter	space.	And	it
happens	easily	if	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
watch;	 if	 you	 watch	 the	 mind	 processes	 they	 start	 withering	 away.	 One	 day
suddenly	you	are	left	alone,	just	a	watchfulness	with	nothing	to	watch.
In	 that	 pregnant	moment	 the	 soundless	 sound	 is	 heard,	 the	 sound	of	 one	hand
clapping	--	and	your	life	is	transported	into	a	totally	different	existence.	You	are
no	more	part	of	earth,	you	become	part	of	the	sky,	of	the	beyond.
Anahata	is	one	of	the	most	significant	words.	Literally	it	simply	means	unstruck
sound.
The	mystics	have	found	--	and	it	 is	one	of	the	ancientmost	discoveries,	at	 least
ten	thousand	years	old	--
that	 life,	 that	 the	whole	of	 existence,	 is	made	of	 sound,	of	 subtle	vibrations	of
sound.
Modern	physics	discovered	 it	 too	 from	a	very	different	 route;	because	of	 their
different	 routes	 their	definitions	are	a	 little	bit	different.	But	anybody	who	has
some	perception,	who	can	think	in	both	ways	--
scientifically	 and	mystically	 --	 can	 see	 the	 unity,	 can	 see	 that	 they	 are	 talking
about	the	same	thing	in	different	languages,	different	jargon.
Modern	physics	says	that	the	world,	existence,	consists	of	electricity.	The	whole
existence	is	nothing	but	electrical	vibration.	And	if	you	ask	them	what	sound	is,
they	will	say	it	is	nothing	but	a	certain	kind	of	vibration	in	the	electric	energy.	If
you	 ask	 the	mystics	what	 electricity	 is,	 they	 say	 it	 is	 a	 certain	 form	 of	 sound
vibrations	--	and	then	things	become	very	clear.
The	mystics	discovered	sound	first,	hence	they	define	electricity	by	sound.	In	the
East	there	has	been	a	certain	melody	called	'deepak	rag'	light	melody.	It	is	said
that	 there	have	been	singers...	And	it	seems	to	be	almost	an	historical	 fact,	not
just	 a	mythology,	 because	 there	 are	 so	many	 records	 about	 it	 and	 very	 recent
records	--	five	hundred	years	old.
In	the	great	emperor	Akbar's	court	there	was	a	musician,	Tansen,	who	was	expert
in	 that	melody.	It	 is	a	certain	music	can	help	 the	unlit	 lamp	to	become	lit.	The
musician	simply	plays	on	his	sitar,	surrounded	by	unlit	lamps	and	by	and	by	they
start	becoming	suddenly	aflame.	It	is	possible	because	a	sound	can	hit	the	air	in	a
certain	 way	 that	 it	 can	 create	 heat	 --	 that's	 a	 known	 phenomenon.	 Sound	 can
create	heat.	If	it	can	create	heat	it	can	create	fire;	if	it	can	create	fire	it	can	create
electricity	and	vice	versa	is	also	true.
The	mystics	and	the	physicists	have	travelled	towards	the	same	destination	from
different	angles.
Anahata	means	 the	 sound	of	which	we	are	made,	 so	 it	 is	 unstruck.	When	you
play	on	a	guitar	or	then	it	is	a	struck	sound;	but	there	is	a	melody	inside	which	is
continuously	there.	In	fact	the	mystics	say	that	when	that	melody	disappears	we
die,	when	 that	melody	 becomes	 disturbed	we	 become	 ill.	When	we	 feel	well-
being	 it	 is	 really	 because	 of	 that	melody;	 it	 is	 going	 as	 it	 should,	 there	 is	 no
hindrance	in	it.
The	 mystics	 have	 also	 experienced	 --	 and	 I	 can	 vouch	 for	 them,	 I	 can	 be	 a
witness	for	them	that	they	are	saying	something	really	significant	--	that	there	is
a	 way	 in	 which	 you	 can	 resonate	 with	 the	 whole	 existence	 in	 the	 same	 tune.
That's	meditation:	 resonating	with	 the	whole	universe	without	any	disturbance,
falling	in	step	with	the	melody	of	the	whole.	Then	your	ego	disappears,	then	you
are	 no	 more	 there.	 Then	 there	 is	 only	 music	 --	 that	 music	 is	 Anahat,	 and	 to
experience	it	is	to	know	what	bliss	is.
Ageya	means	the	unknowable.
These	 three	words	 have	 to	 be	 remembered:	 the	 known,	 the	 knowable	 and	 the
unknowable.
The	 known	 was	 unknown	 yesterday.	 The	 knowable	 is	 unknown	 today	 but
tomorrow	 it	 may	 become	 knowable,	 known.	 Science	 believes	 in	 only	 two
categories,	the	known	and	the	unknown.	But	the	unknown	means	the	knowable;
up	to	now	we	have	not	been	able	to	know	it	but	sooner	or	later	we	will	know	it.
Hence	science	believes	a	moment	will	come	in	history,	some	time	in	the	future,
where	 there	will	 be	 nothing	 left	 to	 know,	when	 the	whole	 unknown	will	 have
become	known.	But	 religion	has	 a	 third	 category	 also,	 the	unknowable,	which
always	 remains	 unknowable.	 It	 was	 unknowable	 yesterday,	 it	 is	 unknowable
today,	it	will	remain	unknowable	tomorrow.
Science	 thinks	 that	 existence	 can	 be	 demystified,	 religion	 knows	 it	 cannot	 be
demystified	 because	 that	 unknowable	will	 always	 remain	 a	mystery.	 And	 that
unknowable	is	called	god,	truth,	nirvana	--	so	many	names	have	been	given	to	it
--	tao,	dhamma,	logos,	but	one	quality	is	definitely	there	in	all	these	words:	it	is
unknowable,	it	is	an	absolute	mystery.	You	can	enter	into	it,	you	can	become	part
of	it	but	you	cannot	know	it.
You	 can	 live	 it	 but	 you	 cannot	 know	 it,	 you	 can	 taste	 it	 but	 you	 cannot	 say
anything	about	it,	You	can	feel	it	in	your	belly	but	you	will	be	absolutely	dumb.
And	 that	 is	 the	 most	 precious	 experience.	 It	 is	 experienceable	 but	 not
expressible.	That's	why	it	cannot	become	part	of	the	known.
Many	people	have	experienced	it	--	Buddha	experienced	it,	Lao	Tzu	experienced
it,	Patanjali	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
experienced	 it,	 Kabir	 experienced	 it,	 but	 nobody	 has	 ever	 been	 able	 to	 say
anything	about	it.	All	that	they	say	is	how	to	find	it,	but	they	never	say	anything
about	that	which	you	are	going	to	find.
Lao	 Tzu	 begins	 his	 book,	 TAO	 TE	 CHING:	 'Truth	 is	 that	 which	 cannot	 be
expressed.	Remember	this,'
he	says	'and	then	you	can	read	my	book.	Don't	forget	it	--	because	truth	you	will
not	find	in	the	words.
Perhaps	one	can	find	it	in	the	gaps	between	the	words	or	between	the	lines	but
not	in	the	words,	not	in	the	lines	themselves.'
That	is	our	search	--	the	unknowable.	And	the	only	way	to	seek	it	is	to	dissolve
into	the	whole	just	like	a	dewdrop	dissolves	into	the	ocean	and	becomes	it.
Videha	means	the	bodyless.
We	are	 in	 the	 body	but	we	 are	 not	 the	 body;	 the	 body	 is	 the	 host,	we	 are	 the
guest.	So	be	thankful	to	the	body,	but	don't	get	identified	with	it.	Take	care	of	the
body	 --	 it	 is	 a	 temple	 --	 love	 it,	 respect	 it,	 but	 don't	 become	 addicted	with	 it,
obsessed	with	it,	because	it	is	only	an	overnight's	stay;	in	the	morning	we	have	to
go.
We	have	been	in	many	bodies	and	we	will	be	in	many	bodies,	we	have	changed
forms	 many	 times.	 One	 has	 to	 go	 on	 changing	 forms	 unless	 one	 comes	 to
experience	 the	 formless.	 That's	 why	 buddhas	 are	 never	 born	 again.	 Once	 you
have	experienced	the	formless	you	have	gone	beyond	birth	and	death,	then	there
is	no	need	to	come	back.
As	 a	 first	 step	 start	 creating	 a	 little	 distance	between	you	and	your	body.	And
that	 same	 distance	will	 automatically	 happen	with	 the	mind	 because	 the	mind
and	body	are	not	two,	but	two	aspects	of	one	reality.
The	body	is	the	outer	part	of	the	mind,	the	mind	is	the	inner	part	of	the	body,	so
if	you	create	distance	from	the	body,	the	same	distance	is	created	with	the	mind
too.	A	little	distance	is	needed,	and	the	simplest	way	to	create	the	distance	is	to
watch	 your	 body	 in	 it's	 acts	 and	 your	 mind	 in	 it's	 functionings.	 The	 watcher
slowly	slowly	becomes	separate;	attains	a	coolness,	remains	undisturbed.	Events
happen	 in	 the	 body-mind;	 to	 the	 observer,	 to	 the	 consciousness,	 nothing	 ever
happens	--	it	is	always	the	same,	unchangingly	the	same.
There	 is	 no	past	 for	 it,	 no	 future	 for	 it.	There	 is	 only	 the	present.	 It	 is	 always
now,	here.
So	this	is	going	to	be	your	work	upon	yourself:	disidentification	with	the	body-
mind	structure.	Once	that	is	done,	everything	else	becomes	very	easy.	You	have
taken	the	most	significant	step	towards	self-realization.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012135
ShortTitle:	GREENR14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Veet	Madison.	Veet	means	go	beyond.	Madison	means	might	in	battle.
Man	 needs	 now	 peace,	 not	 war.	Man	 needs	 love,	 no	 violence.	We	 have	 been
tortured	 enough	 by	 the	 idea	 of	 becoming	 heroes	 in	 war,	 of	 destruction,	 of
violence.	It	is	time	that	it	be	completely,	totally	stopped.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
In	the	past	it	was	possible	to	afford	it	but	now	it	is	impossible,	because	science
has	given	us	so	much	destructive	power	that	if	we	go	on	living	according	to	the
old	values	and	ideals	then	humanity	is	finished.
The	warrior,	the	soldier,	the	general,	should	become	criminals	in	the	future.	The
future	 belongs	 to	 the	 sannyasins,	 not	 to	 the	 soldiers,	 it	 belongs	 to	 the	 lovers.
Only	love	can	give	us	the	balance.
But	humanity	has	lived	against	love	up	to	now	and	that's	why	there	is	so	much
misery;	it	is	bound	to	be	so:	we	have	lived	destructively,	in	an	insane	way.
Now	there	are	only	 two	alternatives:	either	we	have	 to	change	 totally	from	the
very	roots,	root	and	all,	or	we	have	to	be	ready	for	a	global	suicide.
So	go	beyond	the	idea	of	being	a	mighty	warrior	--	enough	of	it.	It	is	a	mad	idea.
So	Madison	will	remind	you	that	it	is	a	mad	idea!
Love	insanity,	war	is	madness.	And	when	we	can	live	according	to	a	now	vision
of	life	there	is	no	need	to	go	on	carrying	the	old	values	just	because	they	are	old.
Their	time	is	over,	they	are	outdated.	We	have	to	put	a	full	stop	to	the	past,	we
have	to	break	the	continuity	with	the	past	--	and	my	whole	work	consists	of	that,
to	make	humanity	discontinuous	with	its	own	past	so	we	can	start	afresh.
So	my	 people	 are	 really	Adams	 and	Eves	 and	we	 have	 to	 start	 from	 the	 very
beginning.	It	is	a	tremendous	challenge,	it	is	worth	accepting	it.	It	is	the	greatest
adventure,	and	it	is	possible	now.	It	was	not	possible	before.
Man	can	live	in	ecstasy	on	the	earth,	there	is	no	need	for	a	paradise	after	death.	It
can	be	before	death	too.
Veet	Holm.	Veet	means	to	go	beyond.	Holm	means	an	island.
Man	is	not	an	island	but	we	live	with	the	false	notion	of	being	an	island.	We	are
part	of	the	whole,	we	are	not	apart.	We	belong	to	the	continent,	and	the	continent
is	infinite,	there	is	no	demarcation	line.
The	ego	is	an	island	but	your	being	is	not	an	island.	To	follow	the	dictates	of	the
ego	is	to	make	a	mess	of	your	life,	because	it	is	basically	taking	you	away	from
the	 organic	 unity	 of	 existence.	 It	 is	 trying	 to	 create	 a	 separate	 entity,	which	 is
impossible.	 The	 whole	 project	 is	 doomed	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 it	 cannot
happen	because	it	is	not	according	to	the	law	of	existence.	How	can	the	tree	be
separate	from	the	earth?	It	is	impossible.	How	can	the	leaf	be	separate	from	the
tree?	The	moment	it	is	separate	it	is	dead.	Life	is	being	with	the	tree,	being	part
of	it.
Ego	is	a	dead	thing,	a	dead	weight.	The	bigger	the	ego,	the	more	dead	is	the	man
because	it	suffocates	his	being.	The	moment	you	drop	the	ego	you	are	free	again,
free	 from	 all	 imprisonment,	 free	 from	 all	 chains.	 Then	 this	 whole	 universe
belongs	 to	you.	Then	all	 the	stars	and	 the	mountains	and	 the	 rivers	are	part	of
you,	just	as	you	are	part	of	them.
To	feel	that	unity,	that	synchronicity,	that	affinity,	is	sannyas.	To	feel	that	music,
that	resonance,	is	sannyas.
Vidyasagar	 Bharti.	 Vidyasagar	 is	 a	 beautiful	 name.	 It	 has	 tremendous
significance.
The	Upanishads	define	science	as	'avidya',	ignorance,	and	the	science	of	the	self
as	'vidya',	as	wisdom.
The	 objective	 science	 is	 defined	 as	 ignorance	 and	 the	 subjective	 science	 is
defined	as	knowing,	wisdom.	 It	 is	 a	very	 strange	definition.	Nowhere	else	has
science	 been	 defined	 as	 avidya,	 ignorance,	 but	 the	 Upanishads	 are	 right.	 The
word	 'ignorance'	 simply	 means	 that	 you	 have	 been	 ignoring	 the	 essential;	 it
comes	from	ignoring.	The	person	who	is	too	much	concerned	with	the	objective
world	is	ignoring	himself.	So	it	is	perfectly	right	to	define	science	as	ignorance:
it	 is	becoming	concerned	with	the	non-essential.	While	 life	was	an	opportunity
to	discover	the	essential	we	wasted	it	in	the	non-essential.	While	we	could	have
found	 the	 immeasurable	 treasure	 of	 our	 being	 we	 wasted	 our	 time	 collecting
seashells	and	coloured	stones	on	the	sea	beach.	We	rushed	hither	and	thither	and
there	was	so	much	hurry	and	so	much	worry	to	no	purpose	at	all;	 it	was	much
ado	about	nothing.
It	is	right,	perfectly	right,	that	the	Upanishads	call	it	ignorance.
The	true	knowledge	can	only	be	of	your	consciousness.	That	is	the	morning	of
Vidya.
And	Sagar	means	ocean.	The	moment	you	know	yourself	you	become	oceanic.
Then	all	boundaries	disappear;	you	lose	all	limitations	of	body,	of	mind,	of	caste,
creed,	 cult,	 nation.	 All	 boundaries	 simply	 disappear	 because	 consciousness	 is
neither	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan	nor	Christian,	neither	 Indian	nor	German	nor
English,	 neither	 black	 nor	 white;	 consciousness	 is	 just	 consciousness	 with	 no
adjective	attached	to	it.	Because	it	has	no	adjective	it	has	immense	freedom,	it	is
not	tethered	to	anything.
The	 moment	 one	 enters	 into	 oneself	 one	 is	 entering	 into	 infinity.	 To	 know
oneself	is	to	know	that	one	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
vast,	 as	 vast	 as	 the	 universe	 itself.	 And	 there	 cannot	 be	 two	 vastnesses,
remember.	If	there	are	two	vastnesses	they	cannot	be	vast;	they	will	define	each
other,	there	will	be	a	demarcation,	a	boundary	line.
There	can	be	only	one	vastness,	only	one	infinity.	So	the	moment	you	know	that
you	are	infinite,	you	also	know	that	you	are	not,	only	the	whole	is.
So	self-knowing	is	a	very	paradoxical	phenomenon:	first	you	become	very	much
intrigued	 by	 the	 existence	 of	 the	 self,	 but	 as	 you	 go	 deeper	 the	 self	 starts
evaporating.	 Ultimately	 what	 is	 found	 is	 pure	 consciousness	 --	 no	 self	 at	 all.
That's	why	Buddha	 called	 it	 anatta,	 no-self,	 just	 to	 give	 you	 the	 feel	 that	 you
have	become	the	whole.
The	 word	 'vidyasagar'	 contains	 both	 the	 definition	 of	 knowing	 and	 the
experience	 of	 knowing.	 And	 it	 all	 happens	 through	 a	 very	 simple	 process	 of
meditation.	 One	 just	 has	 to	 learn	 to	 be	 silent,	 related,	 calm	 and	 quiet,	 so	 all
turmoil	 settles.	 Slowly	 slowly	 a	 moment	 comes	 when	 there	 is	 no	 movement
within	you,	all	movement	has	disappeared.	 In	 that	very	moment	 the	miracle	of
knowing	 happens	 and	 one	 is	 transformed,	 one	 is	 born	 anew.	 That	 is	 the
beginning	of	a	divine	existence.
Dhyan	 Wolf.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation.	 Meditation	 means	 awareness,
watchfulness,	a	silent	witnessing	of	all	the	processes	of	the	mind.	And	the	magic
of	watching	 is	 that	 as	 your	watchfulness	deepens,	 the	mind	 starts	 evaporating.
When	 the	 watchfulness	 is	 absolute	 mind	 becomes	 nil,	 a	 zero.	 And	 the
disappearance	of	 the	mind	gives	you	clarity,	absolute	clarity,	 transparency;	you
can	see	through	and	through,	you	become	a	mirror.	And	then	life	is	reflected	as	it
is	--	not	according	to	any	doctrine,	not	according	to	the	Bible	or	the	Koran	or	the
Gita	but	as	it	is.	And	to	know	life	as	it	is,	is	to	know	god.
In	 Germany	 mythology	 wolf	 is	 a	 symbol	 for	 two	 things:	 cunningness	 and
courage.	Meditation	will	help	you	to	get	rid	of	cunningness	and	it	will	nourish
your	courage.	The	cunning	part	cannot	survive	meditation.
Meditation	is	like	fire.	When	you	put	gold	into	fire	all	that	is	not	gold	is	burned
and	 then	 gold	 comes	 out	 of	 it	 absolutely	 purified.	 The	 same	 happens	 through
meditation:	put	anything	into	it	and	that	which	is	wrong	will	be	burned	and	that
which	is	right	will	come	up	in	its	total	fragrance.
Courage	 is	 an	 essential	 quality,	 cunningness	 is	 a	 learned	 trick.	Cunningness	 is
not	 inborn.	 One	 learns	 it	 from	 society	 because	 one	 has	 to	 live	 with	 cunning
people	 --	 just	 to	 survive	 you	 have	 to	 be	 cunning.	 But	 courage	 is	 an	 inborn
quality,	 intrinsic.	Every	child	 is	courageous.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 the	parents	who	make
him	a	coward.	They	talk	about	ghosts,	they	talk	about	thieves	and	murderers	and
they	make	him	afraid	of	darkness.	They	go	on	making	him	afraid	of	a	thousand
and	one	things.	Slowly	slowly	he	loses	heart,	he	becomes	nervous.	If	there	are	so
many	fears	surrounding	one,	one	has	to	be	very	cunning	just	to	survive.
And	by	and	by	he	finds	that	the	parents	are	right	because	society	consists	of	all
kinds	of	deceptive	people.
So	 his	 courage	 by	 and	 by	 becomes	 covered	 with	 layers	 of	 cunningness.	 And
cunningness	cannot	give	you	anything	because	it	is	something	imposed	from	the
outside.	It	has	to	be	burned,	removed,	then	courage	bursts	forth!
My	 definition	 of	 right	 and	 wrong,	 of	 good	 and	 bad,	 of	 essential	 and	 non-
essential,	 is	 always	 derived	 from	 meditation.	 When	 you	 go	 through
meditativeness	 whatsoever	 survives	 is	 right,	 is	 good,	 is	 moral,	 is	 beautiful,	 is
natural,	is	divine.	Whatsoever	is	burned	through	meditation	was	wrong,	was	not
natural.
So	in	a	way	the	word	'wolf'	is	good;	is	symbolizes	two	things:	the	essential	part
of	you,	courage,	and	the	non-essential	part,	cunningness.
Sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 courageous	 but	 not	 cunning.	 In	 fact	 to	 be	 cunning	 is
cowardly,	it	is	not	really	courageous;	cunningness	goes	against	courage.
For	 example	 the	 really	 courageous	 animals	 are	 not	 cunning;	 the	 lion	 is	 not
cunning,	 the	 elephant	 is	 not	 cunning.	 The	 wolf	 is	 cunning,	 the	 fox	 is	 very
cunning,	 but	 they	 are	 not	 very	 courageous	 people.	 They	 are	 cunning	 just	 to
supplement	 what	 they	 are	 lacking:	 they	 are	 lacking	 courage.	 They	 need
something	else	 to	be	added	 to	 them	--	 that	 is	cunningness.	But	 the	 tiger	or	 the
lion	 or	 the	 elephant	 need	 not	 have	 any	 cunningness;	 the	 elephant	 is	 the	most
simple	 and	 the	most	 courageous	 animal	 --	 very	 simple	 and	very	 innocent,	 just
childlike.
Go	 through	meditation	and	you	will	 see	 that	much	 is	 just	weeds	within	you	 --
those	weeds	will	be	burned	and	only	roses	will	be	saved.	And	when	one's	life	is
full	of	roses	one	has	arrived,	one	has	found	the	source	of	joy.
Dhyan	Hendrik.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Hendrik	means	home.
A	man	without	meditation	 is	 a	man	without	 a	 home,	 he	 is	 homeless.	He	 lives
accidentally;	he	has	nothing	running	through	his	life	as	a	connecting	link.	He	has
no	idea	of	what	he	is	doing,	or	why	he	is	doing	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
it.	He	has	no	vision	of	who	he	 is	or	why	he	 is.	He	has	not	even	thought	about
from	where	 he	 comes,	 to	where	 he	 is	 bound.	He	 is	 just	 like	 driftwood,	 at	 the
mercy	of	the	wind	and	the	waves	--	wherever	the	winds	are	going	or	the	waves
are	going.	He	lives	in	this	way	but	this	kind	of	life	cannot	have	any	significance,
it	 cannot	 have	 meaning	 and	 poetry.	 It	 will	 be	 like	 a	 monkey	 sitting	 on	 a
typewriter,	 knowing	 nothing	 about	 the	 typewriter,	 but	 he	 has	 watched	 people
typing	so	he	can	imitate	them.	But	do	you	think	that	some	poetry	will	come	out
of	it?
There	are	scientists	who	say	that	in	infinite	time	there	is	a	possibility	that	if	the
monkey	goes	on	typing	and	typing	for	millions	and	trillions	of	years,	maybe	one
day	 he	 will	 turn	 out	 a	 beautiful	 poem.	 But	 that	 is	 a	 very	 far,	 far-away,	 very
remote	possibility	 --	 so	 remote	 that	 one	 can	 take	 it	 for	 granted	 that	 it	will	 not
happen,	 it	cannot	happen.	But	 that's	how	people	are	 living:	monkeys	sitting	on
typewriters,	 just	 sitting	 here	 and	 there	 and	 hoping	 that	 they	 will	 become
Shakespeares	and	Miltons	and	Shelleys	and	Byrons	--	and	what	comes	out	is	just
rubbish.
That's	 how	 people's	 lives	 are	 --	monkeyish,	 imitative.	 They	 do	 hard	work	 but
because	 there	 is	no	clear-cut	perception,	nothing	ever	comes	out	of	 it,	 all	 their
efforts	are	wasted.
Meditation	gives	you	a	home,	it	gives	you	a	shelter.	It	gives	you	a	certain	inner
security,	a	balance,	an	understanding,	a	vision	to	live	by	and	to	live	for,	or	if	the
need	arises,	even	to	die	for.	Then	not	only	does	life	become	significant	but	even
death	becomes	significant.
And	 the	man	who	 can	 transform	 his	 life	 and	 death	 into	 significant	 poetry	 has
succeeded,	has	not	been	a	failure.	Very	few	people	have	succeeded	in	the	past.
The	irony	is	that	everybody	has	the	potential	to	succeed	but	we	never	look	at	our
own	potential.
Meditation	 is	 nothing	 but	 looking	 at	 your	 own	 potential,	 searching	 for	 it;
exploring	your	inner	territory	to	find	out	what	you	have	brought	into	the	world,
what	seeds	are	 there,	what	kind	of	soil	you	need,	what	kind	of	climate	will	be
helpful	for	your	inner	growth.
I	don't	give	you	any	idea	about	what	you	have	to	become;	I	only	give	you	a	key
so	you	can	explore	within	yourself	what	script	you	have	brought	with	you,	what
seeds	you	already	have	within	you.	Somebody	will	become	a	rose	and	somebody
may	become	a	lotus,	so	no	idea	has	to	be	imposed	from	the	outside.
I	don't	give	you	any	discipline	but	I	certainly	give	you	a	key	which	can	help	you
to	unlock	the	doors	of	your	own	home,	of	your	own	being.	And	that's	the	most
precious	 thing	 that	 can	 happen	 to	 a	man;	 there	 is	 nothing	more	 precious	 than
finding	the	key.
Meditation	is	the	key.
Agneya	means	aflame,	afire.
We	are	carrying	fire	within	our	souls.	Of	course	it	is	covered	with	much	dust,	so
much	 so	 that	we	 have	 completely	 forgotten	 about	 it.	 But	 that	 fire	 is	 our	 very
source	of	life;	even	though	it	is	covered,	it	is	through	it	that	we	are	alive.
The	moment	it	is	really	gone	we	are	dead.	That's	why	warmth	is	symbolic	of	life
and	coldness	 symbolic	of	death.	But	people	 live	only	at	 the	minimum	because
their	fire	is	covered,	so	only	a	little	bit	of	it	reaches	them,	a	very	small	fragment.
Scientists	have	discovered	that	people	use	only	five	per	cent	of	their	potential	in
their	whole	life,	ninety-five	per	cent	of	their	potential	remains	unused.	Even	the
greatest	geniuses	like	Albert	Einstein	don't	use	more	than	fifteen	per	cent.	Only
Buddhas	have	used	one	hundred	per	cent	of	their	potential	--	and	then	of	course,
their	 life	has	a	dance	 incomparable,	a	 joy	overflowing,	 inexhaustible.	They	are
not	only	blissful,	they	are	a	blessing	to	others.
This	fire	has	to	be	discovered.
I	have	chosen	orange	as	the	colour	for	my	sannyasins	to	remind	them	of	fire.	So
all	shades	of	red...
because	fire	has	all	the	shades	of	red.
There	is	the	religion	of	Zarathustra.	He	was	very	much	in	love	with	fire.	But	his
followers	have	misunderstood	him	as	everybody's	followers	have	always	done	--
that	 is	 the	 routine	way.	Zarathustra's	 followers	 started	worshipping	 fire;	 rather
than	finding	the	fire	within	they	started	making	temples	of	fire.
Now	those	followers	exist	only	in	India.	Zarathustra	was	born	in	Iran;	the	whole
of	Iran	once	was	under	his	 impact	but	Mohammedans	forcibly	converted	those
simple	 people	 to	 Islam.	Only	 a	 few	 could	 escape,	 only	 a	 few	 thousand	 could
escape	 from	 Iran.	 They	 landed	 in	Bombay,	 so	 now	Bombay	 is	 the	 only	 place
where	 the	followers	of	Zarathustra	are	 living	--	 just	one	hundred	 thousand,	not
more	than	that.
But	what	they	are	doing	is	strange:	they	have	carried	the	original	fire	from	Iran
and	 they	 are	 still	 maintaining	 it	 --	 that	 fire	 has	 remained	 continuous.	 Their
temples	are	called	'agyaris',	fire	temples,	and	their	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
whole	effort	is	that	the	old	ancient	fire	should	not	be	in	any	way	lost	--	it	is	their
god.
So	for	twenty-four	hours	a	day	for	three	thousand	years	--	because	Zarathustra's
religion	is	three	thousand	years	old	--	they	have	gone	on	adding	fuel.	For	three
thousand	years	they	have	carried	the	fire	on	and	they	have	kept	it	burning.	The
whole	thing	is	useless.
The	real	thing	is	to	discover	the	fire	within.	And	it	has	been	there	from	eternity,
so	why	bother	 about	 the	 fire	 outside?	But	 that's	 always	 happening:	 the	master
talks	 about	 the	 inner	 and	 the	 followers	 translate	 it	 into	 the	 outer.	 In	 that
translation	everything	gets	lost.
My	 work	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 discover	 your	 inner	 temple	 of	 fire.	 I	 love
Zarathustra,	 he	 has	 given	 a	 very	 significant	 message,	 and	 his	 followers	 have
been	really	simple,	 innocent	people,	very	straight,	not	cunning	at	all,	very	life-
affirmative,	very	loving,	intelligent,	but	even	then	they	have	missed	the	point.
So	remember	it:	the	temple	is	not	on	the	outside,	you	are	the	temple	and	your	life
source	is	your	fire.
And	once	you	have	found	it	you	have	found	eternity.	Then	there	is	no	misery,	no
darkness,	no	death.
Svarupanand	means	bliss	is	your	self-nature.
It	is	not	something	that	happens	to	you;	it	is	already	the	case.	It	is	that	you	are
not	there,	present,	you	are	somewhere	else,	dreaming	of	other	places,	dreaming
of	the	future,	dreaming	of	the	past	and	never	in	the	present,	never	herenow.
Withdraw	yourself	from	the	past	and	the	future,	withdraw	all	your	energies	from
everywhere	and	let	them	rest	herenow,	in	this	moment,	within	yourself,	just	like
a	 child	 in	 the	 womb	 of	 the	 mother.	 So	 become	 a	 mother	 and	 let	 your	 whole
energy	rest	in	your	womb	and	you	will	be	surprised;	for	the	first	time	you	will
understand	the	meaning	of	what	Jesus	says,	'The	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you.'
There	is	so	much	bliss	that	one	cannot	believe	it.	For	the	first	time	one	misses	a
few	heartbeats	--	 it	 is	such	a	shock	that	 it	has	always	been	within	you	and	you
have	 always	 been	 running	 somewhere	 else	 to	 find	 it.	 And	 the	 whole
ridiculousness	of	it:	how	can	you	find	it	anywhere	else	if	it	is	within	you.	There
is	no	way	to	find	it	anywhere	else.
So	first	 there	 is	a	shock,	one	is	stunned,	one	misses	a	few	heartbeats,	 then	one
sees	the	ridiculousness	of	one's	life,	effort,	investment	and	then	laughter	arises;
one	 laughs	 at	 oneself.	 That	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 Buddhahood,	 when	 one	 starts
laughing	at	oneself.
It	 is	easy	to	laugh	at	others,	 the	ego	enjoys	it,	but	laughing	at	oneself	becomes
the	death	of	the	ego.
It	 is	 said	 that	 after	 his	 enlightenment	 Bodhidharma	 laughed	 for	 seven	 days
continuously;	he	could	not	even	sleep.	His	disciples	and	friends	would	put	him
to	 bed	 and	 he	 would	 pop	 up	 again	 (laughter)...	 and	 start	 laughing.	 They	 said
'Have	you	gone	mad	or	what	is	the	matter	with	you?'	And	he	said	 'For	the	first
time	I	have	gone	sane	--	up	to	now	I	have	been	mad	--	that's	why	I	am	laughing.
I	cannot	believe	how	it	was	possible	to	miss	for	so	long	something	that	was	so
close	by!'
Just	a	little	understanding	--	it	is	not	a	question	of	much	effort	but	only	of	a	little
understanding,	 a	 little	 alertness,	 watchfulness,	 turning	 in	 and	 seeing	 --	 and	 a
totally	new	dimension	opens	its	doors.
Videhanand	means	the	experience	that	you	are	not	the	body,	is	the	experience	of
bliss.	The	 identity	with	 the	 body,	 that	 'I	 am	 the	 body'	 is	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 our
misery.	So	 it	 is	very	simple	arithmetic:	 if	one	 thinks	oneself	 the	body	one	will
live	in	hell;	 if	one	becomes	aware	of	the	fact	that	 'How	can	I	be	the	body?	--	I
can	watch	my	 body,	 I	 can	watch	my	mind.	Certainly	 I	 am	 separate	 from	 that
which	I	can	watch....'
The	 observer	 is	 certainly	 different	 from	 the	 observed.	 The	 body	 is	 there,	 the
mind	is	there	and	you	can	see	both,	their	functionings,	their	activities.	The	body
is	ill	but	you	are	not	ill.	You	can	see	that	the	body	is	ill	--	there	is	a	headache	--
you	can	watch	it,	you	can	see	it	is	there,	and	when	it	goes	away	you	know	it	has
gone;	you	are	not	it.	You	are	separate	from	all	that	happens	in	the	body	and	the
mind.
This	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 bliss.	 The	 moment	 you	 are	 totally	 aware	 of	 your
separation	 from	 the	 body-mind	 complex	 your	 life	 is	 rooted	 in	 deep	 bliss.	 It
becomes	 so	 blissful,	 every	 moment	 is	 so	 infinitely	 sweet,	 fragrant,	 that	 one
cannot	resist	the	idea	of	prayer;	one	has	to	thank	existence.	It	is	impossible	not	to
thank	it,	one	has	to	feel	gratitude,	because	we	have	not	earned	it	--	it	is	a	gift.	We
don't	deserve	it;	it	has	simply	been	given	to	us	for	no	reason	at	all.	As	far	as	we
are	 concerned	 we	 are	 not	 even	 worthy	 of	 it;	 hence	 the	 gratitude,	 hence	 the
prayer.
There	is	no	god	as	a	person	to	listen	to	your	prayers.	Prayers	do	not	say	anything
about	the	existence	of	god;	prayers	only	say	something	about	the	gratitude	of	the
man	 who	 has	 come	 to	 know	 bliss.	 It	 has	 some	 reference	 to	 you	 and	 to	 your
experience	but	it	has	no	reference	to	god	at	all;	god	does	not	come	into	it.
This	is	a	simple	process	of	non-identification.	So	from	this	moment	watch:	'I	am
not	the	body;	I	am	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	mind;	I	am	just	the	awareness,	the	pure	mirror,	that	reflects	all.	And	slowly
slowly	it	becomes	so	deep	--
rooted	 that	 it	 remains	with	you	 twenty-four	hours	 a	day.	Even	 in	deep	 sleep	 a
certain	awareness	remains	like	a	flame	burning	in	you,	fully	alert,	that	the	body
is	asleep,	you	are	just	the	watcher.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012145
ShortTitle:	GREENR15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dhyan	Joy.	Dhyan	means	meditation.
Meditation	is	a	way	of	silencing	your	being.	Ordinarily	it	is	in	a	turmoil,	but	it
has	 the	capacity	 to	become	silent.	 In	fact	unless	 there	 is	a	capacity	 to	be	silent
there	 cannot	 be	 turmoil.	 The	 opposites	 always	 go	 together.	 If	 there	 is	 one
polarity	one	can	assume	without	any	doubt	that	the	opposite	polarity	must	be	in
existence,	we	have	only	to	discover	it.	Just	as	electricity	cannot	exist	without	the
negative	and	the	positive,	everything	in	life	is	balanced	by	its	opposite.	But	we
can	focus	our	mind	on	one	pole	and	we	can	completely	forget	the	other	--	that's
what	 the	 situation	 is	 ordinarily.	And	 to	 live	 in	 turmoil	 is	 to	 live	 in	misery.	To
move	towards	silence	is	to	enter	into	the	world	of	joy,	bliss,	ecstasy.
Meditation	 is	 the	 path	 from	misery	 to	 ecstasy.	 Initiation	 into	 sannyas	 is	 really
initiation	into	meditation.
The	sannyasin's	whole	life	work	is	to	create	as	much	silence	as	possible	because
when	one	is	absolutely	silent	one	comes	into	contact	with	god;	not	as	a	person,
of	course,	but	only	as	a	presence,	overflooding	the	whole	existence.
Anand	Arabella.	Anand	means	bliss,	Arabella	means	yielding	to	prayer.
It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 strange	 phenomenon	 that	 miserable	 people	 pray	 --	 and	 it	 is
impossible	for	the	miserable	person	to	pray;	out	of	misery	prayer	cannot	arise.
Misery	is	like	a	desert,	nothing	grows	in	it;	certainly	prayer	is	impossible.	Prayer
is	the	most	beautiful	flowering	in	existence,	there	is	nothing	comparable	to	it.	It
can	happen	only	when	one	is	blissful;	bliss	becomes	the	foundation.	When	one	is
blissful	prayer	 is	natural:	one	has	 to	 thank	existence.	The	miserable	person	has
nothing	to	be	thankful	for;	he	has	a	thousand	and	one	things	to	complain	about,
but	he	has	nothing	to	be	thankful	for.
One	 of	 the	 characters	 in	 Dostoevsky's	 greatest	 novel	 BROTHERS
KARAMAZOV	says	'If	I	meet	god	the	only	thing	that	I	want	to	ask	is	"Why	did
you	create	me?	--	and	without	my	permission.	This	is	unjust,	unfair;	at	least	you
could	have	asked	me!"	And	 the	next	 thing,'	 he	 says	 'I	will	do,	 I	will	give	him
back	the	ticket	and	tell	him	that	I	don't	want	to	exist	any	more.'
The	existentialist	philosopher,	Marcel,	says	the	only	real	philosophical	problem
is	whether	to	commit	suicide	or	not	--	and	he	is	right	in	a	sense.	If	you	have	not
tasted	bliss	 then	of	 course	 there	 is	 only	one	question	which	 is	 bound	 to	 assert
itself	 again	 and	 again:	 why	 go	 on	 living,	 for	 what?	 Then	 the	 whole	 of	 life
becomes	 just	 a	 waiting	 for	 God,	 who	 never	 comes,	 nothing	 ever	 happens.	 It
seems	such	a	futile	exercise,	so	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
much	ado	about	nothing	--	how	can	one	yield	to	prayer?	There	is	no	point.	And
if	one	does	pray	then	that	prayer	will	be	pseudo,	phony,	false.
The	temples,	the	mosques,	the	synagogues,	the	churches,	the	gurudwaras,	are	all
full	of	pseudo	and	phony	people,	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	have	gone	there
to	complain,	not	to	pray;	they	have	gone	there	to	ask	for	something	not	to	thank.
And	 prayer	 essentially	 is	 not	 a	 desire,	 you	 cannot	 ask	 for	 anything,	 but	 that's
what	 it	 has	 become.	 To	 pray	 means	 to	 pray	 for	 something.	 It	 has	 become
synonymous	 with	 desiring	 while	 it	 is	 exactly	 the	 opposite	 of	 desiring;	 it	 is
gratitude.	 One	 feels	 tremendously	 overwhelmed	 by	 what	 existence	 has	 done.
One	 also	 feels	 one's	 unworthiness	 and	 yet	 existence	 goes	 on	 showering	 a
thousand	and	one	blessings.
Feeling	 that,	 one	 bows	 down,	 not	 to	 a	 particular	 god	 --	 Christian,	 Hindu,
Mohammedan	--	but	 to	 the	whole:	 to	 the	stars,	 to	 the	sky,	 to	 the	mountains,	 to
the	oceans,	to	the	trees,	to	all	that	is.	One	simply	bows	down,	feeling	immensely
grateful.	That	is	yielding	to	prayer.
So	I	don't	teach	prayer,	I	teach	bliss,	because	prayer	is	a	natural	consequence	of
blissfulness.	I	say	to	my	sannyasins	be	blissful	and	prayer	will	come	of	its	own
accord.	And	when	it	comes	of	its	own	accord,	it	 is	neither	Christian	nor	Hindu
nor	Mohammedan;	it	is	simply	prayer.	Then	it	does	not	divide	you,	then	it	unites
you,	not	only	with	humanity	but	with	animals,	with	trees,	with	rocks.	It	simply
unites	you	with	existence,	it	becomes	a	bridge.
Ordinarily	 we	 are	 living	 surrounded	 by	 walls,	 All	 those	 walls	 disappear	 and
suddenly	the	same	bricks	that	were	creating	those	walls	start	making	a	new	form,
a	 new	gestalt,	 a	 bridge,	which	 spreads	 from	your	 heart	 to	 the	 heartbeat	 of	 the
universe.	Then	the	whole	of	life	becomes	prayer,	then	to	breathe	is	prayer,	then
to	be	is	prayer.	And	only	when	everything	is	prayer	has	one	come	to	know	the
mystery	which	is	there	at	the	very	centre	of	prayer.
Prayer	is	a	lotus	that	opens	only	when	the	sun	of	bliss	is	shining.
Vinamro	Maximilian,	 Vinamro	means	 egoless.	Maximilian	means	 the	 greatest
(laughter).
Jesus	says	blessed	are	the	meek,	blessed	are	the	humble,	the	egoless,	for	theirs	is
the	kingdom	of	god.
Religion	is	a	paradox:	you	have	to	become	nothing	to	become	all,	you	have	to
become	nobody	to	become	a	god,	you	have	to	prepare	for	nothingness	and	then
the	wholeness	descends	in	you.	They	are	two	sides	of	the	same	phenomenon.
So	the	person	who	is	not,	is	the	greatest;	the	person	who	thinks	he	is	the	greatest,
he	is	 just	an	idiot	and	a	very	ordinary	idiot	at	 that	--	not	even	an	extraordinary
idiot!	For	 example,	Mohammed	Ali,	 the	Greatest	Alexander	 the	Great	 --	 these
people	are	basically	stupid.	Their	whole	desire	is	a	kind	of	megalomania.	And	of
course	 they	 suffer	 much.	 They	 themselves	 are	 responsible	 for	 their	 suffering:
they	go	on	puffing	up	the	balloon	of	their	ego,	then	one	day	it	bursts.
It	 need	not	be	burst	by	 somebody	else.	Although	 just	 a	pinprick	will	 do,	 even
that	 is	not	needed.	 If	you	go	on	making	 the	balloon	bigger	 and	bigger	 a	point
comes	when	it	bursts	automatically.	It	becomes	so	thin	and	the	pressure	of	the	air
inside	is	so	much	that	it	bursts	of	its	own	accord.	Every	ego	goes	on	becoming
bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger	and	a	moment	comes	when	the	puncture	happens,
when	 everything	goes	 flat	 (laughter)...	 just	 like	 a	 flat	 tire	 and	 a	 flat	 tire	 on	 an
Indian	road!	That's	what	they	call	hell!	(laughter)	Ego	is	the	root	cause	of	it,	it	is
bound	to	create	hell.
Egolessness	is	paradise,	that's	why	Jesus'	statement	is	significant.	He	has	many
beatitudes	 like	 this	 but	 this	 one	 has	 one	 special	 quality	 about	 it:	 in	 other
beatitudes	 he	 says...	 For	 example,	 those	 who	 are	 last	 shall	 be	 the	 first	 in	 the
kingdom	of	god	--	note	the	difference:	he	is	using	the	future	tense,	'They	shall	be
the	first',	but	when	he	says	blessed	are	the	meek	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god,
he	is	not	using	the	future	tense,	he	is	using	the	present	tense.
The	moment	you	are	meek,	humble,	egoless,	then	it	is	not	a	question	of	waiting
for	some	future,	that	one	day	you	will	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	god;	it	is	already
the	 kingdom	 of	 god,	 to	 be	 egoless	 is	 to	 be	 in	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god.	 They	 are
synonymous	so	there	is	no	gap,	no	time	gap	between	the	two.
So	 become	 more	 and	 more	 Vinamro	 and	 less	 and	 less	 Maximilian.	 The	 day
Maximilian	disappears	completely	and	only	Vinamro	remains	you	have	arrived!
These	 two	 words	 will	 be	 very	 decisive	 now.	 Pull	 your	 energy	 out	 from
Maximilian,	go	on	withdrawing	from	the	idea	of	the	greatest.	Everybody	has	it	--
it	is	just	that	you	are	honest,	your	parents	were	honest,	they	gave	you	the	name.
But	everybody	has	the	idea,	everybody	is	basically	trying	to	be	the	greatest.	And
the	 whole	 project	 is	 doomed,	 it	 cannot	 succeed;	 it	 has	 never	 succeeded.	 It	 is
against	existence.
Ego	means	you	are	trying	to	win	against	the	whole.	That's	not	possible.	No-ego
means	you	dissolve	with	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	whole,	you	are	in	a	state	of	let-go.	You	say	'Thy	kingdom	come,	thy	will	be
done'	 --	 and	 suddenly	 life	 is	 a	 totally	 new	 phenomenon,	 it	 has	 tremendous
beauty,	bliss,	benediction.
Sahajanando	means	spontaneous	bliss.
That	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 things	 to	 understand	 about	 bliss:	 it	 is
spontaneous,	 you	 cannot	 cultivate	 it,	 you	 cannot	 practise	 it.	 A	 practised
blissfulness	 is	bound	 to	be	phony.	You	will	be	smiling	but	 that	smile	will	be	a
Jimmy	Carter	smile.	You	may	show	all	your	teeth	but	it	will	be	just	an	exercise
of	the	lips	--	maybe	good	for	the	lips	and	for	the	teeth,	a	little	bit	of	open	air	and
(laughter)	not	joy,	it	is	not	heartfelt,	it	is	not	coming	from	your	being.	It	is	just
painted,	it	is	a	mask,	not	a	reality,	Bliss,	to	be	true,	has	to	be	spontaneous.	Then
the	problem	arises,	what	does	one	have	 to	do	 for	 it?	 If	 it	cannot	be	cultivated,
cannot	be	practised,	and	it	is	not	there,	then	what	is	one	supposed	to	do	about	it?
One	can	only	remove	 the	barriers.	There	are	barriers.	For	example,	 the	 light	 is
there	but	you	are	 sitting	with	closed	eyes:	 just	open	your	eyes.	You	are	not	 to
create	the	light,	it	is	already	there,	but	if	you	keep	your	eyes	closed	you	remain
unavailable.	Open	your	eyes,	remove	the	barrier	and	suddenly	it	is	light.
If	you	are	 sitting	 in	 the	 room	with	closed	doors	and	you	are	 feeling	 the	 stuffy
atmosphere,	only	you	are	responsible.	Open	the	doors	and	the	windows	and	the
wind	is	ready	to	come	in	and	the	sun	is	ready	to	come	in	and	the	fragrance	of	the
flowers	is	ready	to	flow	in.
We	 only	 have	 to	 remove	 barriers.	 Once	 the	 barriers	 are	 removed	 bliss	 starts
flowing	naturally,	 spontaneously.	 It	 is	 like	 removing	 rocks	 and	 then	 the	 spring
starts	flowing.	And	the	rocks	are	very	subtle	so	we	don't	think	of	them	as	rocks.
Thoughts,	 desires,	 memories,	 dreams,	 expectations	 --	 these	 are	 the	 rocks	 and
they	are	hindering	your	self-nature	in	asserting	itself.	Remove	them.
Removing	 them	 is	 the	whole	 art	 of	 sannyas.	And	 they	can	be	 easily	 removed;
once	you	know	these	are	the	causes	of	your	misery,	they	can	be	removed.	In	fact
just	 to	understand	 that	 they	are	 the	causes	of	your	misery	 is	enough;	one	need
not	even	remove	them,	they	simply	disappear.	You	were	supporting	them	up	to
now	 thinking	 they	 were	 very	 essential	 for	 your	 joy,	 for	 your	 life,	 for	 your
success,	 this	 and	 that.	You	were	 supporting	 them,	 you	were	 clinging	 to	 them;
once	you	open	your	hands	they	start	disappearing	on	their	own.
They	are	not	clinging	to	you.
But	bliss	is	spontaneous.	That's	the	beauty	of	it:	 it	 is	a	natural	fragrance	of	our
being.	So	we	have	not	to	find	it	somewhere	else,	we	are	not	to	go	anywhere	else
to	 find	 it,	we	 are	 not	 supposed	 to	 do	 anything	positively;	 only	 a	 few	negative
things	 have	 to	 be	 dono:	 opening	 the	 doors,	 and	 the	 windows	 and	 the	 eyes,
removing	a	few	thoughts,	desires,	creating	a	few	gaps	so	that	in	those	gaps	you
become	 connected	 with	 existence.	 And	 that	 connection	 immediately	 starts	 a
dance	in	you.
When	the	trees	dance	something	dances	in	you	--	if	you	are	connected;	when	the
flowers	open	something	opens	in	you	--	if	you	are	connected;	when	the	sun	rises
something	 rises	 in	 you	 --	 if	 you	 are	 connected.	 And	 the	whole	 existence	 is	 a
celebration.	 When	 you	 are	 connected	 with	 existence	 each	 moment	 a	 new
experience,	a	new	ecstasy,	is	waiting	for	you,	is	ready	to	welcome	you.
Veet	Nito.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Nito	means	morality.
There	 is	a	morality	which	 is	beyond	all	moralities,	 there	 is	a	 religion	which	 is
beyond	all	religions	--	and	that	is	the	true	morality	and	the	true	religion.
Our	so-called	moralities	are	just	utilitarian.	For	thousands	of	years	we	have	been
programmed	for	them,	so	we	go	on	following	them,	but	we	don't	have	any	clear-
cut	perception	of	our	own	whether	what	we	are	doing	is	right	or	wrong.
Moses	has	said	that	something	is	right	and	something	else	is	wrong	and	so	has
Manu	and	so	has	Mohammed,	but	it	is	not	your	heart.	And	the	ultimate	decision
has	 to	 be	 yours.	 How	 can	 Manu,	 Moses	 or	 Mohammed	 decide	 for	 you?	 --
everything	has	changed.	So	much	water	has	gone	down	the	Ganges	since	Manu.
Manu	existed	five	thousand	years	ago	and	Hindus	are	still	following	his	dictates;
he	has	decided	what	is	moral	and	what	is	immoral.	No,	this	is	sheer	nonsense.
Life	 has	 completely	 changed.	 If	 Manu	 comes	 back	 he	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to
recognise	 anything	 he	 will	 be	 simply	 bewildered.	 He	 will	 only	 be	 able	 to
understand	his	own	book,	MANUSMRATI,	the	book	that	he	wrote	five	thousand
years	 ago;	 everything	 else	 has	 changed.	 But	 he	 will	 certainly	 laugh	 at	 the
foolishness	of	the	Hindus	--	that	they	are	still	following	him.
In	a	totally	different	world,	in	a	totally	different	situation,	a	different	response	is
needed.
So	I	don't	give	any	morality	to	you,	I	don't	give	any	discipline	to	you.	That	has
been	done	again	and	again	and	it	has	always	failed,	it	has	not	helped	humanity.	I
believe	in	the	individual	and	my	effort	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
basically	different	from	all	the	efforts	that	have	preceded	me.	They	all	depended
upon	giving	you	certain	instructions,	detailed	instructions.
In	 Buddhist	 scriptures	 there	 are	 thirty-three	 thousand	 rules	 of	 morality.	 Now
even	to	remember	them	is	impossible	--	thirty-three	thousand	moral	rules,	such	a
detailed	description	on	how	to	sit,	how	to	walk,	how	far	to	look	ahead	when	you
are	walking	--	only	four	feet	ahead,	not	even	four	feet,	six	 inches.	You	are	not
supposed	to	look	sideways	because	some	women	may	be	passing.	Just	four	feet,
that	is	the	minimum	that	one	needs	for	walking,	otherwise	one	will	stumble	into
a	woman	and	everything	will	be	lost!	(laughter)	Just	four	feet	so	one	can	see	the
feet,	 nothing	 else:	 if	 a	 woman	 is	 coming,	 only	 her	 feet.	 And	 you	 can	 escape
immediately;	seeing	by	her	feet	that	a	woman	is	coming,	the	monk	escapes.
Such	a	fear,	such	a	fear-oriented	morality...
Don't	 talk	 to	 a	woman	because	 they	 are	 very	 seductive;	 don't	 touch	 a	woman.
Even	this	is	a	rule	for	the	Buddhist	monks,	that	if	a	woman	has	been	sitting...	for
example,	that	place	that	you	have	been	sitting	in	(Osho	nods	towards	her	former
place	 in	 the	 line	 of	waiting	would-be	 sannyasins	 )	 for	 nine	minutes	 no	monk
should	 sit	 there	 --	 this	 is	 just	 absurd	 --	 because	 it	 is	 vibrating	 with	 feminine
energy!	You	may	destroy	the	monk's	life.
Now	Vishwasa	is	just	sitting	behind	you	--	he	may	already	be	in	hell!	(Vishwasa,
the	 resident	 artist,	 looks	 up	 from	his	 drawing	 to	 laugh.)	But	 he	 is	 not	 looking
anywhere,	he	is	just	doing	his	painting.	Afraid	--
so	many	women...
(Osho's	words	are	lost	in	laughter;	Vishwasa	has	retreated	into	his	work.)
...	 not	 even	 four	 feet,	 just	 down	 on	 his	 page!	 This	 is	 how	 a	 Buddhist	 should
behave!	(much	laughter)	This	 type	of	nonsense	has	been	thought	of	as	a	moral
discipline.
I	teach	you	consciousness,	not	conscience:	just	be	alert,	watchful,	aware,	and	let
your	acts	come	out	of	your	watchfulness,	your	awareness.	So	whatsoever	comes
out	of	awareness	is	moral	--	that	is	my	only	definition	--	and	whatsoever	comes
out	of	unawareness	is	immoral.	So	no	need	for	thirty-three	thousand	rules,	only
two	 rules,	 only	 two	 commandments,	 not	 even	 ten	 commandments;	 and	 in	 fact
not	two,	it	is	really	one	commandment.	The	other	is	just	its	negative	part.	Act	in
awareness,	 that's	all,	and	whatsoever	you	do	 is	good	because	out	of	awareness
nothing	wrong	can	ever	happen.	And	 it's	other	 side	 is:	out	of	unconsciousness
nothing	right	can	ever	happen.
So	go	beyond	the	so-called	taught	moralities	of	all	the	religions	and	puritans	and
the	so-called	great	thinkers.	Get	rid	of	them.	Live	your	life	as	authentically	and
fully,	with	as	much	awareness,	as	possible.
A	life	lived	totally	in	awareness	is	a	divine	life.
Veet	Parigraha.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Parigraha	means	possessiveness.
The	old	religions	have	taught	people	to	go	beyond	possessions;	I	teach	you	to	go
beyond	possessiveness
--	and	there	is	a	vast	difference	between	the	two.
Going	 beyond	 possessions	 is	 a	masochistic	 thing.	 Then	 you	 are	 unnecessarily
torturing	yourself.
Mahavira	 lived	 naked,	 he	 carried	 the	 idea	 of	 non-possessions	 to	 the	 ultimate
extreme,	 so	 he	 did	 not	 even	 have	 clothes.	 He	 had	 to	 live	 naked	 --	 that	 is	 the
logical	consequence	of	the	idea	of	not	possessing	anything,	not	even	the	begging
bowl	which	was	 allowed	 in	 India	 for	 the	monks,	 for	 all	 kinds	of	mystics.	But
Mahavira	would	not	have	anything	to	do	even	with	a	begging	bowl.	He	would
eat	with	his	hands,	he	would	beg	with	his	hands.
But	this	is	in	a	way	masochistic.	When	it	was	cold	he	must	have	been	shivering
and	when	it	was	hot	and	when	it	was	raining....	Seasons	change	and	this	is	going
to	be	unnecessarily	hard	on	your	body,	which	is	a	gift	from	god.	You	need	not
torture	it.	This	is	committing	a	slow	suicide.
Buddha	does	not	go	 to	 that	extreme.	That's	why	the	followers	of	Mahavira	are
angry	 at	 him,	 they	 don't	 accept	 him	 as	 the	 ultimate	 embodiment	 of
enlightenment.	He	 is	 thought	a	 little	 lower	 than	Mahavira,	because	he	allowed
three	 changes	 of	 clothes	 and	 a	 begging	 bowl	 for	 his	 monks	 and	 for	 himself.
Three	 changes	 of	 clothes	 --	 two	 to	 wear	 and	 one	 could	 be	 washed	 --	 and	 a
begging	 bowl	 so	 you	 could	 carry	 your	 food.	 It	 is	 not	much,	 but	 according	 to
Mahavira's	 concept	 it	 is	 too	 much!	 It	 is	 luxury!	 And	 of	 course,	 if	 you	 saw
Mahavira	 shivering	 in	 winter	 and	 Buddha	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree,	 wearing	 two
garments	 and	 having	 a	 third	 spare	 one,	 it	 was	 luxury!	 And	 when	 you	 saw
Mahavira	 taking	his	 food	 in	his	hands	and	Buddha	having	a	beautiful	begging
bowl,	 on	 which	 some	 disciple	 had	 carried	 drawings,	 then	 of	 course	 it	 looked
luxurious.
Luxury	always	means	comparison.
I	don't	 teach	against	possessions,	because	 I	am	not	against	 the	body	or	against
comforts	 or	 against	 luxury,	 but	 I	 teach	 non-possessiveness.	 That	 is	 a	 totally
different	phenomenon,	possessing	and	yet	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
possessing,	having	and	yet	not	having.
Use	everything	that	is	available.	If	a	palace	is	available	why	live	in	a	hut?	--	live
in	the	palace.	If	a	hut	is	available	why	live	under	a	tree?	--	live	in	the	hut.	If	the
tree	 is	 available	why	 live	 under	 the	 sky?	 --	 live	 under	 the	 tree.	Whatsoever	 is
available	make	 the	best	out	of	 it,	but	don't	be	possessive,	don't	 claim	 that	 it	 is
yours.	That	idea	has	to	be	dropped.	We	come	empty-handed	into	the	world	and
we	go	empty-handed	from	the	world,	so	there	is	no	need	to	be	possessive.
My	feeling	is	that	the	people	who	taught	against	having	possessions	were	afraid
of	being	possessive.	If	you	are	afraid	of	even	having	a	begging	bowl,	that	simply
means	if	the	begging	bowl	is	there	then	you	will	become	possessive	--	that	fear
is	there,	so	better	not	to	have	the	bowl.	You	have	destroyed	the	thing	and	you	can
live	 with	 the	 idea	 that	 you	 have	 destroyed	 your	 possessiveness.	 That	 is	 not
necessarily	true.
You	may	live	in	a	hut	and	you	may	desire	a	palace.	You	may	have	renounced	the
palace,	you	may	have	escaped	from	the	palace,	but	the	very	escape	shows	your
fear.	And	a	man	full	of	fear	cannot	be	full	of	joy.
You	cannot	afford	both	together.
So	 I	 am	 bringing	 a	 totally	 new	 concept	 of	 sannyas.	 Sannyas	 means	 non-
possessiveness.	There	is	no	need	to	leave	your	wife,	your	children,	your	parents;
there	 is	no	need	 to	 leave	anybody.	Be	 in	 the	world	but	 remember	 that	nothing
belongs	 to	 you,	 that	 sooner	 or	 later	 you	will	 have	 to	 go,	 so	 don't	 cling.	Non-
clinging	is	what	I	teach.	Use	everything	possible,	but	don't	cling.	In	short,	be	in
the	world	but	don't	let	the	world	be	in	you.
Veet	Samayo.	Veet	means	go	beyond.	Samayo	means	time.
Meditation	is	going	beyond	time.	Time	is	mind.	Mind	consists	of	past	and	future;
mind	has	no	experience	of	 the	present.	 It	 is	 thought	 that	 time	has	 three	 tenses:
past,	 present	 and	 future.	 I	 don't	 agree,	my	 own	 experience	 is	 totally	 different;
time	consists	only	of	two	tenses,	past	and	future.	The	present	is	not	part	of	time,
the	present	 is	part	of	eternity.	 It	 is	a	 totally	different	 thing.	Past	and	 future	are
horizontal	and	present	is	vertical.
Mind	 lives	 horizontally,	meditation	 is	 a	 vertical	 phenomenon.	When	 you	 drop
out	of	 the	past	 and	 the	 future,	 suddenly	you	 enter	 into	 the	present,	 and	 that	 is
beyond	 time.	And	 that	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 god,	 of	 truth,	 the	 beginning	 of	 that
which	is.
The	whole	science	of	meditation	is	to	help	you	to	get	rid	of	past	and	future;	and
in	fact	it	is	not	much	of	a	work,	because	the	past	is	no	more	and	the	future	is	not
yet,	so	you	are	simply	getting	rid	of	something	which	is	not	yet,	it	is	not	much	of
a	work.	And	you	are	getting	rid	of	something	which	is	no	more	--	that	too	is	not
much	 of	 a	 work.	 You	 are	 entering	 into	 which	 is	 and	which	 always	 is.	 Hence
meditation	is	simple,	just	a	right	understanding	is	needed.
But	in	the	name	of	meditation	so	many	stupidities	go	on	in	the	world	that	people
have	 become	 very	 much	 confused;	 what	 is	 meditation?	 People	 are	 changing
mantras,	doing	certain	rituals,	worshipping,	bowing	down	to	statues.	All	kinds	of
things	are	being	done.	The	Tibetan	Buddhists	go	on	doing	things	the	whole	day:
lying	 down	 on	 the	 ground	 and	 touching	 the	 ground	 with	 their	 head.	 And	 the
more	you	do,	the	more	meditative	you	become.	There	are	people	who	do	it	one
thousand	times	a	day,	two	thousand	times	a	day,	three	thousand	times	a	day	--	the
bigger	 the	 number,	 the	 greater	 you	 are.	 And	 just	 think,	 a	 person	 doing	 this
nonsense	of	lying	down	on	the	earth	and	touching	the	earth	with	his	head	for	the
whole	day	--	of	course	he	will	become	mindless...	but	that	is	not	meditation.	That
is	falling	below	mind,	not	going	above	mind.	He	will	become	idiotic	but	he	will
not	 become	 a	 buddha.	 He	 may	 become	 very	 robust	 because	 this	 is	 a	 good
exercise,	continuously	doing	it	for	the	whole	day.	He	may	enjoy	good	health	but
he	will	be	utterly	in	an	illusion	if	he	thinks,	that	he	knows	what	meditation	is.
Then	people	are	chanting	mantras	continuously	--	they	become	mechanical,	they
go	 on	 chanting	 and	 they	 go	 on	 thinking	 also.	Mind	 is	 capable	 of	 doing	many
things,	you	just	have	to	 learn	 the	 trick.	You	can	try	 it	 --	you	can	chant	"Rama,
Rama,	Rama,	Rama..."	and	after	a	few	days	you	start	counting,	"One,	two,	three,
four,	one,	two,	three,	four,	Rama,	Rama,	one,	two,	three,	four,	Rama...",	and	both
will	 start	 happening	 together.	 You	will	 have	 both	 together.	 "Rama,	 Rama	 and
one,	two,	three,	four,"	then	a	woman	passes	by	and	you	look	and	you	miss	and
that	too	enters	in	the	head	and	you	start	fighting,	feeling	this	is	not	good.
The	mind	 is	 capable	of	many	processes	 together,	 so	 just	 by	chanting	a	mantra
you	cannot	get	rid	of	it.
All	that	is	needed	is	a	great	understanding,	awareness,	alertness,	not	to	get	into
past	memories	and	not	to	get	into	trips	about	the	future.
Slowly	slowly	one	settles	in	the	present.
The	moment	you	are	here-now	you	have	found	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012155
ShortTitle:	GREENR16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Deva	Heribert.	Deva	means	divine.	Heribert	means	glorious.
Man	is	unaware	of	his	glory,	of	his	splendor.	He	lives	in	absolute	ignorance	of
himself;	 that's	 why	 there	 is	 so	 much	 misery,	 anxiety,	 anguish.	 Not	 knowing
oneself	means	whatsoever	you	do	will	be	amiss.	You	may	be	doing	something
good,	at	least	your	intention	may	be	good,	but	the	result	will	not	be	good.	Out	of
an	 unconscious	 being,	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 any	 good	 arising,	 no	 virtue	 is
possible,	no	flowering	is	possible.
The	first	and	the	most	important	thing	in	life	is	to	become	aware	of	one's	being.
The	moment	 you	 turn	 in	 you	 become	 aware	 --	 it	 is	 a	 simple	 as	 that.	We	 are
focussed	on	the	outside;	we	have	to	relax	our	focussing	on	the	outside,	we	have
to	make	our	muscles	a	little	flexible	so	we	can	look	in.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all
about:	a	turning	in.
And	once	you	have	seen	your	own	inner	world	you	have	seen	all	 that	 is	worth
seeing,	 the	most	 glorious,	 splendrous	 phenomenon.	 And	 after	 that	 whatsoever
you	do	is	right.	Each	act	becomes	virtuous	and	each	act	has	a	beauty,	sensitivity,
grace.	Then	life	is	a	dance,	a	celebration.
Anand	Edgar.	Anand	means	bliss.	Edgar	means	rich.
A	man	can	possess	the	whole	world	and	yet	can	remain	poor,	a	beggar.	And	vice
versa	is	also	trues	a	man	may	not	possess	anything	and	yet	be	immensely	rich.
Richness	has	something	to	do	with	inner	exploration;	it	is	not	an	achievement	in
the	outside	world.	It	is	neither	money	nor	power	nor	prestige	nor	respectability;
it	is	bliss,	and	bliss	rises	out	of	your	own	being.	There	is	no	other	way	to	find	it,
no	other	place	to	find	it.
One	has	to	learn	to	dive	within	one's	own	depths.	It	is	there	where	the	source	of
bliss	is	and	all	that	is	needed	is	a	courageous	heart	--	that	is	the	other	meaning	of
Edgar,	a	courageous	heart.
The	 mind	 is	 a	 coward	 because	 it	 is	 always	 calculating,	 The	 mind	 is	 always
thinking	in	terms	of	getting	more,	risking	less,	of	putting	in	less	and	taking	out
more.	It	is	always	bargaining,	it	is	businesslike.	The	heart	is	a	gambler	--	and	the
inner	world	opens	only	to	the	gamblers.
One	has	to	be	courageous	enough	to	risk	all	for	it.	If	you	cannot	risk,	you	cannot
take	the	jump	into	the	unknown,	you	will	remain	tethered	to	the	known,	you	will
go	on	clinging	to	the	known.	Although	you	know	it	is	misery	and	nothing	else,	at
least	there	is	one	consolation,	that	you	are	familiar	with	it.
Courage	 means	 dropping	 the	 familiar,	 if	 it	 is	 giving	 your	 misery,	 for	 the
unknown.	 Of	 course	 you	 cannot	 decide	 what	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 through	 the
unknown;	that's	the	risk.	You	may	fall	into	greater	misery	or	you	may	achieve	to
bliss	--	it	is	unpredictable,	that's	why	I	say	it	is	only	for	the	gambler.
Sannyas	is	a	gamble,	meditation	is	a	gamble;	religion	is	nothing	but	gambling.
And	all	the	religions	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
against	gambling	for	the	simple	reason	that	religion	itself	is	the	ultimate	gamble.
Don't	waste	your	gambling	energy	anywhere	else	--	that's	why	they	are	against	it,
so	that	you	can	gather	your	courage	into	one	pool.
And	you	will	need	it	for	the	jump	is	big	It	is	not	only	a	jump	with	a	calculated
step;	you	are	 jumping	 into	an	abyss.	But	 those	who	have	 jumped	have	always
found	bliss,	without	any	exception.
That's	 the	 purpose	 of	 the	 master:	 to	 encourage	 you,	 to	 seduce	 you	 into	 the
unknown.	The	master	is	a	salesman	for	the	unknown.
So	get	ready	for	the	jump.
Sannyas	 is	only	a	gesture	from	your	side	 that	you	are	willing	--	and	if	you	are
willing,	I	am	willing	too!
Dhyan	Michael.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Michael	means	godly.
The	only	thing	that	can	become	a	proof	for	god	is	meditation.	No	other	argument
can	help,	no	other	proof	is	possible.
Philosophers	have	been	giving	many	proofs,	but	all	those	proofs	are	just	stupid.
If	you	look	a	little	bit	deeply	into	them	you	will	find	that	their	basic	assumption
is	 ungrounded.	 They	 themselves	 need	 proof,	 they	 are	 not	 self-evident.	 For
example,	 the	greatest	proof	 that	 the	philosophers	have	been	giving	all	over	 the
world	is	that	everything	needs	a	creator	and	if	this	immense	universe	exists	then
it	must	have	a	creator.	 It	 looks	 logical	but	only	on	 the	surface;	 just	scratch	 the
surface	and	a	new	problem	will	arises	who	created	the	creator?
If	 everything	 needs	 a	 creator	 then	 according	 to	 the	 same	 law	 the	 creator	 will
have	 to	 be	 created	 by	 somebody.	 And	 the	 argument	 seems	 stupid,	 idiotic,
because	if	this	god	needs	another	god,	then	this	other	god	will	need	still	another
god;	 and	 you	will	 fall	 into	 an	 infinite	 regress.	 Ultimately	 you	will	 come	 to	 a
point	where	you	will	have	to	say	that	this	is	not	created	by	anybody.	But	then	the
whole	argument	is	lost.	That	was	the	very	first	assumption,	that	everything	needs
a	creator.
There	is	no	self-evident	proof	for	god,	not	through	logic	--	but	yes	there	is	a	way
to	experience.	 It	 is	not	 intellectual,	 it	 is	existential.	Meditation	 is	an	existential
way	to	experience	god	and	all	that	is	godly.	And	meditation	is	a	simple	process
of	becoming	 silent,	utterly	 silent.	When	 the	mind	has	 lost	 all	 its	nonsense	and
noise,	when	the	mind	traffic	 is	nil,	when	the	mind	has	stopped	completely,	has
come	to	a	standstill,	suddenly	in	that	silence	you	experience	a	presence	that	has
always	been	there	within	and	without,	but	of	which	you	were	not	aware	because
the	mind	was	too	noisy;	it	was	impossible	to	hear	the	still,	small	voice.
And	once	you	have	heard	it	your	life	is	transformed.	Then	for	the	first	time	you
know	the	taste	of	religion.
And	the	taste	of	religion	is	the	taste	of	neither	Christianity	nor	Hinduism	nor	of
Judaism	 nor	 of	 Mohammedanism;	 the	 taste	 of	 religion	 is	 simply	 the	 taste	 of
religiousness.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	all	those	cults	and	sects	and	dogmas	and
churches,	synagogues,	temples,	mosques	--	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	these.
This	is	sheer	politics	played	in	the	name	of	religion.
When	you	have	experienced	just	a	dewdrop	of	true	religiousness	through	silence,
you	don't	belong	to	any	religion,	although	for	the	first	time	you	are	religious.
I	teach	a	religionless	religiousness	--	and	that	is	the	need	of	today	and	of	all	the
tomorrows	that	are	going	to	follow.	The	old	kind	of	religion	is	outdated;	its	time
is	 finished,	 in	 fact	 it	 has	 been	 living	 a	 posthumous	 kind	 of	 existence	 for
centuries.	It	is	dead	already,	we	are	only	carrying	a	corpse	and	it	is	stinking.
Meditation	is	the	only	way	to	experience	god,	to	experience	religion.	You	cannot
get	 it	 from	 the	 Bible,	 from	 the	 Gita,	 from	 the	 Koran,	 from	 the	 Talmud	 --	 no
words,	no	 scriptures	 can	give	 it	 to	you.	Only	 silence	 is	 able	 to	 receive	god,	 is
able	to	become	pregnant	with	god.	And	that	is	the	greatest	ecstasy	in	life	--	to	be
pregnant	with	 god,	 to	 carry	 god	 in	 your	 very	 belly,	 in	 your	 very	 heartbeat,	 in
your	breathing,	to	feel	him	everywhere,	in	everybody!
Dhyan	Ferdinand.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Ferdinand	means	adventure.
There	are	adventures	and	adventures	but	no	adventure	can	be	compared	with	the
adventure	of	meditation.	It	is	the	ultimate	adventure,	because	you	are	not	going
to	Everest	or	to	the	moon	or	to	Mars,	you	are	going	to	your	innermost	bring.
It	is	easy	to	go	to	Everest;	it	is	not	very	difficult	to	go	to	the	moon	now	--	soon
man	will	be	able	to	reach	other	stars.	The	most	arduous	journey	is	to	reach	your
own	 centre,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 you	 have	 to	 go	 through	 a	 great
transformation	 before	 you	 can	 reach	 the	 centre.	 Going	 to	 the	moon	 you	 don't
need	any	transformation,	you	remain	the	same	person.	The	people	who	went	to
the	moon	 remained	 the	 same	 people,	 no	 transformation.	 Yes,	 they	 collected	 a
few	stones	and	rocks	and	came	back.	They	were	just	the	same,	no	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
change	 happened	 in	 them.	 It	 cannot	 happen	 that	 way.	 It	 was	 a	 technical
phenomenon,	 something	 on	 the	 outside.	 But	 going	 in	 is	 a	 non-technical
phenomenon.	No	scientific	device	can	help	you.	You	have	to	learn	a	new	style	of
life.
Mind	knows	how	to	think;	you	will	have	to	know	how	not	to	think.	Mind	knows
how	to	go	on	creating,	manufacturing	more	and	more	noise,	words	upon	words,
theories,	philosophies,	ideologies	--	it	is	very	skilful	in	that.	It	is	a	factory	which
goes	on	creating	abstractions.	You	will	have	 to	 learn	how	to	stop	 this	constant
flow	 of	 words,	 thoughts,	 concepts,	 dreams,	 desires.	 Mind	 knows	 how	 to	 be
ambitious;	you	will	have	 to	 learn	how	not	 to	be	ambitious.	Mind	 is	always	on
some	ego	trip;	you	will	have	to	learn	how	not	to	be	on	an	ego	trip.
This	 is	a	great	 transformation.	So	much	 is	 involved	 in	 it	 that	you	will	be	born
anew,	you	will	have	a	new	life	 if	you	go	 through	all	 this	 transformation;	 that's
the	 ultimate	 adventure.	 Getting	 out	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 the	 only	 challenge	 worth
accepting.	 Getting	 beyond	 mind	 is	 the	 most	 arduous	 but	 the	 most	 beautiful
journey	too,	because	it	is	through	this	journey	that	you	come	back	home.
Every	other	journey	takes	you	away	from	yourself,	farther	and	farther	away,	this
is	the	only	journey	that	brings	you	home.	And	what	we	are	really	searching	for	is
the	 home,	 the	 source	 --	 because	 the	 source	 is	 also	 the	 goal	 and	 it	 is	 only	 in
finding	the	home	that	one	can	relax	and	be	at	ease	and	enjoy	and	dance	and	sing
and	create.
Your	name	also	means	journey,	venture,	adventurous	life.	It	is	a	beautiful	name	-
-	it	exactly	defines	meditation.
Saroja	means	a	lotus	flower.
The	 lotus	 does	 two	 things:	 one,	 it	 arises	 out	 of	mud,	 and	 two,	 it	 floats	 on	 the
water	 but	 remains	 untouched	 by	 the	 water.	 And	 both	 these	 things	 are	 very
significant	for	a	sannyasin.
Unless	we	know	our	consciousness	we	are	nothing	but	mud.	That	is	the	meaning
of	the	word	 'adam';	adam	means	mud,	earth	--	because	the	first	man	was	made
by	god,	just	as	a	potter	makes	a	pot,	out	of	mud.
Unless	 we	 know	 our	 consciousness	 we	 are	 just	 mud.	 Once	 you	 know	 your
consciousness	the	mud	is	transformed	into	a	lotus,	a	miracle	happens.	One	could
never	have	thought	that	this	dirty	mud	would	create	such	a	beautiful	flower.	The
lotus	is	the	king	of	all	the	flowers,	incomparable,	unique.	And	the	second	thing
is	that	it	remains	in	the	water	but	is	untouched	by	it.
That's	the	quality	of	a	sannyasin,	first	he	has	to	go	beyond	the	body	of	mud	and
become	 a	 lotus	 of	 consciousness;	 second	 he	 has	 to	 live	 in	 the	 world	 but	 be
untouched	by	it.	He	is	not	to	escape	from	the	world.
I	am	against	the	escapist	attitude,	I	am	all	for	the	world	--	it	is	a	beautiful	world.
And	 the	 people	 who	 have	 been	 teaching	 to	 escape	 are	 cowards.	 They	 have
destroyed	much,	they	have	destroyed	the	whole	possibility	of	humanity	turning
religious,	because	 they	created	 this	 idea	 that	unless	you	go	 into	 the	mountains,
into	 the	 desert	 and	 you	 escape	 from	 all	 responsibilities	 --	 your	 wife,	 your
husband,	your	children	--	you	cannot	be	religious.	So	people	thought,	'This	is	not
for	us,	at	least	not	now.	Right	now	we	have	to	be	in	the	world	and	we	have	to	be
worldly.	God	willing,	 some	day,	 in	 this	 life	or	 in	 some	other	 life,	we	will	 also
have	 the	 possibility	 of	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin,	 of	 going	 to	 the	 desert	 or	 to	 the
mountains	or	moving	into	a	monastery,	turning	our	backs	towards	the	world...'	It
is	 because	 of	 this	 ideology	 of	 escapist	 that	 millions	 of	 people	 have	 been
prevented	from	being	religious.
I	am	giving	sannyas	a	totally	new	meaning,	the	real	meaning	that	it	should	have.
There	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	Live	here	and	now,	live	wherever	you	are,	but
live	silently,	peacefully,	centred,	grounded,	alert,	aware.	Live	like	a	lotus	flower
and	 your	 life	 will	 have	 all	 the	 blessings	 possible	 and	 all	 the	 benedictions
possible.
Sucheta	means	awareness,	alertness,	watchfulness.
People	 live	 robot-like,	 they	 live	 mechanically.	 They	 live	 like	 sleepwalkers,
somnambulists;	they	are	not	aware	of	what	they	are	doing,	what	they	are	saying,
what	they	are	being.	A	sannyasin	has	to	learn	the	art	of	awareness	--	that	is	the
most	precious	treasure,	the	treasure	of	all	treasures.
So	 three	dimensions	of	awareness	have	 to	be	 learned.	First:	watch	your	bodily
activities.	In	walking,	be	alert	about	your	walking.	In	talking,	be	alert	about	your
talking.	In	listening,	be	alert	about	your	listening.
Bring	your	awareness	again	and	again	 to	your	bodily	acts,	whatsoever	you	are
doing	--	cleaning	the	floor	or	cooking	the	food	or	taking	a	shower.	Just	watch,	as
if	you	are	separate;	in	fact	you	are	separate.	In	the	beginning	it	is	'as	if',	soon	you
will	realize	it	 is	not	 'as	 if'	 --	 it	 is	 the	truth:	you	can	watch,	you	can	watch	as	if
you	are	watching	somebody	else.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Once	this	watchfulness	has	settled,	then	enter	into	the	second	dimension:	watch
your	thoughts	--	this	dimension	is	more	subtle	--	your	desires,	your	dreams,	and
you	will	be	able	too	because	you	are	separate.
The	dreams	are	just	passing	in	front	of	you	the	way	you	watch	pictures	moving
on	the	TV	screen.	Mind	is	just	a	TV	screen,	and	a	very	crazy	TV	screen	at	that.
Many	 channels	 are	 working	 simultaneously	 --	 many	 stories	 going
simultaneously	in	all	directions.	To	watch	it	is	the	second	step.	As	you	become
skilful	 in	watching	 it	 then	 try	 the	 third	dimension,	 the	most	subtle:	watch	your
emotions,	your	moods.	That	is	the	subtlest.
First	 is	 the	 body,	 second	 the	 mind,	 third	 is	 the	 heart	 --	 and	 when	 you	 have
become	aware	of	all	these	three	the	fourth	--	turiya,	the	fourth	--	happens	of	its
own	accord.	Suddenly,	one	day,	you	become	aware	of	awareness	itself.	And	that
is	the	moment	when	one	experiences	truth,	bliss,	peace,	god,	nirvana	--	these	are
all	names	for	the	same	experience.
Sangit	means	music.
Man	can	live	either	in	mathematics	or	in	music.	Mathematics	is	mind,	music	is
being.	 Your	 being	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 tremendous	 harmony.	 It	 is	 a	 multi-
dimensional	 harmony:	 it	 is	 harmonious	within	 itself,	 it	 is	 harmonious	with	 the
universe;	 and	 the	 universe	means	many	 dimensions.	 It	 is	 harmonious	with	 the
sun,	with	the	moon,	with	the	stars,	with	the	trees,	with	the	wind,	with	the	rain	--
with	all	that	is.	There	is	a	bridge	of	rhythm,	but	we	are	too	hung	up	in	the	head,
in	the	world	of	mathematics.	We	are	continuously	calculating,	counting,	trying	to
possess	more	and	more.
The	mind	 is	never	satisfied,	 it	goes	on	asking	 for	more;	and	 it	always	 remains
empty.	Whatsoever	you	give	to	it	simply	disappears	and	is	again	there	asking	for
more.	It	is	a	beggar.	It	makes	a	beggar	of	you	because	in	keeping	company	with
a	beggar	you	become	a	beggar.
The	moment	you	start	moving	from	mathematics	to	music,	from	prose	to	poetry,
from	mind	 to	 being,	 you	 start	 becoming	 an	 emperor.	Without	 any	 empire	 you
start	becoming	an	emperor,	because	 the	 richness	of	 the	 inner	harmony	 is	 such,
the	light	of	the	inner	being	is	such,	the	beauty,	the	sweetness...	it	is	nectar.	That's
what	alchemists	have	been	searching	and	searching	for,	for	centuries.
They	were	not	really	searching	for	what	it	says	they	were	in	the	books.	That	was
a	 facade,	 a	 trick,	 because	 Christianity	 was	 so	 repressive	 that	 it	 did	 not	 allow
anybody	 to	 function	 outside	 the	 church.	 The	 church	 tried	 to	 monopolise
everything,	no	individual	search	was	allowed.	And	in	fact	a	search	can	only	be
individual,	 it	cannot	be	organised.	An	organised	religion	is	no	more	religion,	 it
becomes	politics.	And	it	 is	not	strange	that	 the	pope	became	both	the	religious
head	and	the	temporal	head.	Still...	of	course,	his	empire	is	not	very	big	--	just	a
small	 place,	 the	Vatican,	 only	 a	 few	 square	miles	 --	 but	 he	 is	 also	 a	 political
head.
The	empire	has	shrunken	very	much	but	still,	it	is	just	the	tail-end.	The	elephant
is	gone	but	the	Polack	pope	is	hanging	onto	the	tail.	Only	the	tail	is	left,	there	is
nothing	much	of	the	elephant	anywhere;	but	still	he	is	a	temporal	head,	he	is	the
head	of	the	state,	the	state	of	the	Vatican,	and	he	is	the	head	of	the	church.
Christianity	tried	to	monopolise	everything	so	deeply	that	the	individual	seekers
had	to	hide	and	work	in	such	a	way	that	nobody	came	to	know	what	they	were
doing,	 so	 they	 created	 this	 facade	 of	 alchemy.	 It	 was	 just	 a	 strategy	 to	 hide
behind.	It	was	just	for	the	masses,	to	show	them	that	they	were	doing	something
with	 chemicals,	 that	 they	were	 trying	 to	 transform	baser	metals	 into	gold.	But
behind	this	whole	trick	they	were	really	searching	for	the	innermost	harmony,	for
the	soul.	That's	what	they	used	to	call	gold.
The	ordinary	man	is	a	baser	metal,	when	he	becomes	a	Buddha	or	a	Jesus	or	a
Moses	or	a	Mohammed,	then	he	becomes	gold.	These	were	just	symbols,	code
words.	But	 this	 is	 the	real	search,	 the	search	for	 the	 inner	nectar,	because	once
you	have	drunk	out	of	 it	you	become	an	 immortal.	Then	 there	 is	no	death;	 the
body	dies	but	not	you.	And	then	there	is	no	birth,	because	once	you	have	known
your	timelessness,	your	eternity,	you	have	learned	the	lesson.	There	is	no	need	to
come	 back	 to	 the	 school	 of	 life	 again.	 Then	 you	 disappear	 into	 the	 universal
bliss.
That's	 what	 god	 is	 all	 about:	 the	 universal	 bliss,	 the	 universal	 harmony,	 the
celestial	music.
(The	 last	 for	 sannyas	 is	 Feroze,	 a	 Pakistani,	 to	 whom	 Osho	 gives	 the	 name
Anand	 Bodhisattva.)	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Bodhisattva	 means	 a	 Buddha	 in	 the
seed.
Everybody	is	a	Buddha	in	the	seed.	The	only	difference	between	the	Buddha	and
the	one	who	is	not	a	Buddha	is	that	of	manifestation.
Ordinary	 human	 beings	 are	 just	 closed	 flowers,	 buds	 or	 seeds.	 They	 have	 the
potential,	the	same	potential,	but	they	have	not	tried	to	make	it	actual.	Once	it	is
actualised	your	life	is	bliss.	If	it	is	not	actualized	you	are	a	prison.	A	seed	means
thousands	of	flowers	are	imprisoned.	They	want	to	get	out	of	it,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
they	want	to	sway	in	the	wind,	they	want	to	release	their	fragrance,	they	want	to
whisper	with	the	clouds,	they	want	to	have	a	communion	with	the	stars	and	the
sun	--	and	they	are	imprisoned	in	the	seed.	Hence	a	seed	means	misery.
When	the	seed	becomes	a	tree	there	is	joy	and	when	the	tree	comes	to	flowering
and	fulfilment	the	tree	becomes	a	Buddha	--	that	is	the	meaning	of	the	Buddha.
Buddha	is	not	the	name	of	any	person;	it	is	a	state.
Mohammed	is	a	Buddha	and	Jesus	is	a	Buddha	and	Jalaluddin	is	a	Buddha,	and
Krishna	is	a	Buddha.
Anybody	who	has	realised	his	potential,	one	who	has	manifested	his	total	being,
whose	lotus	has	opened	up,	is	a	Buddha.	And	the	difference	between	us	and	the
Buddhas	is	not	of	any	quality;	essentially	we	are	the	same,	it	is	just	that	we	Are
asleep.	But	 the	person	who	 is	asleep	can	be	awakened;	 in	 fact	only	 the	person
who	 can	 be	 awakened	 can	 be	 asleep.	 They	 are	 two	 poles	 of	 the	 same
phenomenon.
So	one	should	rejoice	that	one	has	the	potential	to	become	the	ultimate	peak	of
consciousness,	of	bliss	and	of	truth	--	and	then	one	should	start	working	for	 it.
And	the	work	consists	of	a	simple	process	of	meditation,	of	becoming	silent,	of
resting	 in	 one's	 own	 being,	 of	 withdrawing	 from	 unnecessary	 turmoil,	 of
dropping	out	of	all	that	is	non-essential.
If	one	can	discriminate	between	the	non-essential	and	the	essential,	then	it	is	not
very	far	away	that	the	lotus,	the	one-thousand	petalled	lotus,	will	open	up.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	will	be	here	for	about	a	week.
--	Good.	Much	has	to	be	done	there	in	your	country	--	continue.
--	Yes.	There	are	very	few	people	there.	(Presumably	Bodhisattva	is	referring	to
sannyasins.)
--	But	still	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	Just	a	few	seeds	and	the	whole	country
can	become	a	garden.	Just	go	on	working.	Good!
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012165
ShortTitle:	GREENR17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Anando	Joachim.	Anando	means	rejoice.	Joachim	means	appointed	by	god.
Man	 is	 not	 an	 accident.	 But	 that's	 what	 science	 still	 believes,	 that	 man	 is	 an
accident.	According	to	science	everything	 is	accidental;	 the	world	 itself	has	no
meaning,	it	has	no	inner	unity,	it	is	not	an	organic	whole.	It	is	just	a	chaos,	and	in
the	chaos	things	are	happening	but	they	are	accidental,	not	intentional.	That's	the
basic	difference	between	 the	 religious	attitude	and	 the	 scientific.	Religion	says
the	world	is	a	cosmos,	not	a	chaos,	and	whatsoever	is	happening	is	not	accidental
but	intentional,	that	there	is	a	purpose	behind	it,	that	there	is	an	undercurrent	of
meaning	 holding	 everything	 together	 and	 that	 man	 is	 the	 most	 significant
phenomenon.
Hence	 to	 say	 that	man	 is	 accidental	 is	 to	 destroy	 all	 his	 joy.	One	 cannot	 feel
joyous	 if	 one	 is	 a	 mere	 accident.	 One	 will	 start	 feeling	 empty,	 rejected,	 not
wanted,	not	needed.	That's	what	is	happening	all	around	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	world	 because	 of	 science:	 the	modern	man	 is	 feeling	 very	miserable,	 sad,
meaningless,	 and	 then	 once	 life	 starts	 losing	meaning,	 sooner	 or	 later	 suicide
remains	the	only	way	to	get	out	of	it.
Man	 is	 coming,	 individually,	 socially,	 universally,	 closer	 and	closer	 to	 suicide,
Except	 through	 religion	man	 cannot	 be	 saved.	Man	 needs	 to	 feel	meaningful;
and	it	is	not	a	question	of	inventing	meaning,	meaning	is	already	there	--	it	has	to
be	 discovered.	 Once	 you	 discover	 some	 meaning	 in	 your	 life	 there	 is	 great
rejoicing.	You	are	needed	by	existence,	you	are	not	superfluous,	you	cannot	be
discarded	 like	 rubbish.	 You	will	 be	missed	 if	 you	 are	 not	 there,	 without	 you,
something	will	be	lacking.
That's	 the	 meaning	 of	 Joachim	 --	 your	 being	 appointed	 by	 god	 means	 the
universe	 intentionally	wants	 you,	 the	whole	 universe	wants	 you.	And	 it	 is	 not
only	the	question	of	you;	even	a	small	blade	of	grass	is	as	much	needed	as	the
greatest	star.	The	very	ordinary	person	is	as	much	needed	as	any	Albert	Einstein.
There	 is	 no	 hierarchy	 in	 existence.	 Existence	 is	 absolutely	 just,	 it	 treats
everybody	equally.	Animals,	birds,	trees,	planets,	man	--	all	are	joined	together
for	a	certain	ultimate	destiny.
The	conscious	search	for	that	destiny	is	sannyas,	the	deliberate	effort	to	discover
the	meaning	of	 life	 is	sannyas.	Sannyas	 is	 the	science	of	discovering	meaning,
significance.
Anand	Bela.	Anand	means	bliss.	Bela	means	beautiful.
The	 only	 thing	 really	 beautiful	 is	 blissfulness.	 And	 the	 only	 thing	 ugly	 is
sadness,	misery.	But	because	the	majority	of	human	beings	live	in	misery,	they
worship	misery.	They	are	afraid	of	bliss,	they	are	afraid	of	blissful	people.	They
cannot	believe	that	somebody	is	really	blissful,	hence	they	deny	the	Buddhas,	the
Christs.	The	whole	effort	of	the	mob	psychology	is	to	say	that	such	persons	have
never	existed	and	if	they	exist	it	is	better,	immediately,	to	destroy	them,	because
they	 create	 a	 disturbance	 in	 their	 minds.	 The	 disturbance	 is,	 "If	 somebody	 is
blissful	 that	means	 that	 is	my	possibility	 too,	and	 I	am	miserable,	 so	 I	have	 to
change	myself,	I	have	to	go	through	a	transformation,	and	that	seems	to	be	very
arduous,	an	uphill	task."
It	 is	 not	 coincidental	 that	 the	 awakened,	 the	 enlightened,	 the	 really	 beautiful
people,	have	always	been	mistreated	by	the	mob.	For	the	simple	reason	that	they
have	become	accustomed	to	their	misery,	to	their	ugliness	and	they	don't	want	to
encounter	any	mirror,	they	don't	want	to	see	their	own	faces.	Rather	than	seeing
their	faces	and	seeing	the	ugliness,	they	would	rather	like	to	destroy	the	mirror.
They	will	say,	"It	is	because	of	the	mirror	that	we	are	looking	ugly;	the	mirror	is
responsible.	Destroy	 the	mirror	 and	we	 are	 perfectly	 okay	 as	we	 have	 always
been."
Beautiful	people	have	existed	very	rarely.	To	be	beautiful	is	risky,	dangerous,	but
the	risk	has	to	be	taken,	otherwise	one	misses	the	whole	of	life.	It	is	better	to	live
for	a	single	moment	in	total	bliss	than	to	live	a	long	life	of	misery.	It	is	better	to
live	in	bliss	and	be	crucified	than	to	live	in	misery,	carrying	your	own	cross	for
the	whole	of	your	life;	then	life	is	pointless.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 accept	 the	 challenge,	 they	 have	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 be
blissful.	That's	my	only	work	here,	to	help	you	to	be	blissful,	to	be	beautiful,	to
attain	to	an	inner	harmony	and	grace;	then	whatsoever	the	cost,	one	has	to	pay	it.
How	long	will	you	be	here?	How	long	will	you	be	staying?
I	don't	know.
Be	here.	You	seem	to	belong	here!	Good.
Anand	Hannes.	Anand	means	bliss.	Hannes	means	god's	gracious	gift.
Misery	is	man's	invention,	bliss	is	a	gift	from	the	beyond,	so	if	one	stops	creating
misery	one	becomes	blissful:	the	gift	is	always	there.	But	we	go	on	ignoring	it.
We	are	too	occupied	in	creating	our	misery.
Continuously,	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day,	 people	 are	working	 hard,	 overtime,	 to
create	 misery.	 They	 are	 doing	 great	 work.	 If	 you	 watch	 yourself	 you	 will
understand	what	 I	mean	 (laughter).	Nobody	misses	 a	 single	 opportunity	 to	 be
miserable	And	one	cannot	be	both	miserable	and	blissful	together.	If	you	are	so
full	of	misery	and	continuously	creating	it	there	is	no	space	for	bliss	to	enter	you.
It	remains	standing	at	the	door.
Unless	you	empty	yourself	of	all	misery	it	cannot	enter.
Meditation	means	emptying	yourself	of	the	misery	that	you	have	created	in	the
past	and	not	creating	the	same	misery	again.
Just	today	I	was	reading	the	definition	of	a	bachelors	A	bachelor	is	a	person	who
has	not	committed	the	same	mistake	even	once!	(laughter)
But	if	you	cannot	be	a	bachelor,	at	least	don't	get	married	again,	don't	commit	it
twice.	And	 there	 are	people	who	are	 committing	 the	 same	mistake	millions	of
times.	If	a	man	is	alert	he	can	see	all	around	what	people	are	doing	and	that	will
be	 enough...	 but	 that	 much	 understanding	 is	 rare.	 But	 one	 can	 learn	 at	 least
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
from	one's	own	experience.	Reconsider	what	you	have	done	 to	yourself	 in	 the
past	 and	you	will	 see	 you	have	been	wounding	yourself.	And	you	don't	 allow
your	 wounds	 to	 heal;	 you	 go	 on	 opening	 them	 again	 and	 again,	 you	 go	 on
scratching	 them	 again	 and	 again.	 Then	 slowly	 slowly	 it	 becomes	 just	 a
mechanical	habit,	 then	one	goes	around	 in	a	vicious	circle	 from	one	misery	 to
another,	and	one	becomes	of	course,	more	and	more	skilful.	Whatsoever	you	do
remember,	 you	will	 become	 efficient	 in	 it,	 you	will	 become	 an	 expert.	 And	 I
have	come	across	so	many	experts	 in	creating	misery	that	I	sometimes	wonder
what	 people	 are	 doing	 with	 their	 lives.	With	 the	 same	 energy,	 with	 the	 same
effort,	with	 the	same	commitment,	 they	would	have	achieved	 the	greatest	bliss
possible.
And	people	are	doing	 the	work	of	creating	misery	so	religiously,	so	devotedly,
that	if	you	want	to	stop	them	they	won't	listen	to	you.
To	become	a	sannyasin	means	you	have	to	stop	your	old	patterns	and	you	have
to	 learn	a	new	style	of	 life.	Start,	even	 though	you	have	 to	start	 from	the	very
beginning;	 learn	 the	ABC	of	 cheerfulness,	 blissfulness	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 you
will	become	an	expert	in	that	too.
And	 the	 whole	 expertise	 in	 bliss	 is	 simple;	 the	 expertise	 in	 misery	 is	 very
complex,	 it	 needs	many	people,	 it	 needs	many	 things.	 It	 needs	money,	 power,
prestige,	family,	wife,	husband,	children	--	thousands	of	things.	It	needs	politics
and	the	church,	and	political	ideology	and	what	not.	One	has	to	arrange	a	whole
junkyard	around	oneself,	then	finally	one	succeeds	in	being	miserable.
Being	 blissful	 needs	 nothing.	 You	 have	 just	 to	 be	 spacious,	 empty,	 and	 bliss
starts	 pouring...	 yes,	 dogs	 and	 cats!	 It	 is	 not	 just	 a	 shower,	 it	 really	 pours!
(laughter)	Deva	Prita.	Deva	means	divine.	Prita	means	love.
Love	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 divine	 qualities.	 One	 can	 enter	 into	God	 from	many
doors.	Love	is	one	of	the	doors	and	one	of	the	most	beautiful	doors	to	enter	into
God	because	it	is	more	aesthetic,	more	musical,	more	poetic.
Truth	is	also	a	door	but	it	is	dry,	desertlike,	logical.	There	are	people	who	may
like	to	enter	from	the	desert	route	--	that	is	their	choice	--	but	when	one	can	go
through	 the	 garden	 path,	 with	 birds	 singing	 and	 flowers	 and	 fragrances,	 why
unnecessarily	go	through	a	desert?	If	one	is	a	masochist,	if	one	enjoys	torturing
oneself,	then	it	is	another	matter.	But	rarely	are	there	people	who	would	like	to
torture	themselves.	Even	if	they	continue	torturing	themselves	because	they	have
been	taught	to,	deep	down	they	don't	want	it.
Everybody	would	like	to	live	a	life	in	a	beautiful	way,	in	a	sensitive	way.
Love	is	the	most	beautiful	path	towards	God,	but	one	has	to	go	on	purifying	it.
The	 ordinary	 love	 is	 too	 full	 of	 jealousy,	 possessiveness,	 anger,	 hatred,
domination,	 ego	 --	 these	 are	 all	 enemies	 of	 love,	 these	 are	 parasites.	As	 these
parasites	 are	 removed,	 love	 starts	 becoming	 purer,	 more	 alive,	 more	 intense,
total.
First,	love	is	a	relationship,	and	then	love	is	only	a	friendship.	Then	love	is	only
a	loving	quality,	and	ultimately	one	becomes	love	itself.	That	is	the	meaning	of
your	name:	the	ultimate	love,	the	divine	love.
Then	one	is	simply	love,	not	even	loving.
When	 one's	 whole	 energy	 is	 transformed	 into	 love,	 then	 the	 lotus	 of	 one's
consciousness	opens	up.	That	is	the	highest	peak,	and	our	hearts	are	longing	for
it.	 And	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 fulfill	 it,	 one	 just	 needs	 a	 little	 intelligence	 and
watchfulness	so	that	one	can	discriminate	between	what	is	love	and	what	is	not
love.,	 When	 you	 see	 what	 is	 not	 love	 --	 and	 it	 is	 not	 difficult...	 Even	 the
possessive	 person	 can	 see	 that	 possessiveness	 is	 not	 love,	 that	 jealousy	 is	 not
love,	 that	 domination	 is	 not	 love.	And	when	 you	 see	 it,	 then	 don't	 just	 go	 on
seeing	it,	do	something,	move	towards	the	opposite	pole.
If	possessiveness	is	there	then	become	non-possessive.	If	 jealousy	is	there	then
become	 more	 and	 more	 non-jealous,	 allow	 space	 and	 freedom.	 If	 you	 see
domination	 is	 there	 then	drop	 the	ego.	The	other	has	 to	be	respected,	 the	other
has	not	to	be	reduced	to	a	commodity.	Nobody	is	a	means	for	you,	everybody	is
an	end	unto	himself	or	herself.
This	respect	for	the	other	is	a	basic	requirement	if	one	wants	to	move	on	the	path
which	leads	ultimately	to	God.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
I	don't	know.
Be	here	forever!	Good.
Sanjayo	means	the	victorious.
There	 are	 two	 kinds	 of	 victories.	 One,	 which	 is	 a	 pseudo	 victory,	 a	 fool's
paradise,	is	over	others.	It	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
soon	shattered.	Death	comes	and	shatters	all	your	victories	over	others.	Suddenly
you	 are	 standing	 naked	 without	 anything	 and	 the	 realisation	 that	 you	 have
wasted	your	life.	But	now	it	is	too	late:	death	does	not	wait,	it	does	not	give	time,
it	does	not	give	you	a	few	more	opportunities.
The	 other	 victory,	 the	 true	 victory,	 is	 victory	 over	 oneself,	 when	 you	 become
conscious	and	start	changing	all	that	is	unconscious	in	yourself,	you	have	started
fighting	with	your	darkness.	And	one's	darkness	consists	of	ego,	violence,	anger,
greed,	lust	--	all	that	is	ugly	and	monstrous.	All	these	monsters	go	on	hiding	in
the	darkness.
There	is	no	need	to	fight	with	each	monster	separately	because	that	would	be	a
long,	 long	 process;	 one	 life	would	 not	 be	 enough.	 That's	why	Hindus	 have	 to
think	of	many	lives,	because	 if	you	have	 to	fight	with	each	monster	separately
then	it	would	take	thousands	of	lives	to	be	finished	with	all.
There	is	no	need	to	fight	with	each	wrong	separately.	There	is	a	simple	process
of	 increasing	 your	 consciousness,	 of	 making	 yourself	 more	 alert	 and	 more
aware.	As	consciousness	spreads	and	the	unconscious	starts	dispersing,	with	the
unconscious	all	 the	monsters	disappear	of	 their	own	accord.	They	cannot	exist
without	 darkness,	 they	 are	 inseparable	 from	 darkness.	 So	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
fight	with	 anger	 and	 lust	 and	 greed	 separately.	That	 is	 absolutely	 foolish.	The
whole	effort	should	be	focussed	on	awareness
--	that	is	the	key.
A	sannyasin	has	to	become	as	much	aware	as	possible,	and	the	more	aware	you
become,	the	more	you	are	aware	that	there	is	still	 territory	within	you	which	is
dark.	But	one	day	the	point	comes	when	there	is	nothing	which	is	dark	in	you.
That	 is	 the	 point	 when	 one	 is	 awakened,	 enlightened,	 when	 one	 becomes	 a
Buddha.	That	is	true	victory.
Veet	Puratan.	Veet	means	surpassing,	transcending.	Puratan	means	the	old.
The	old	is	very	heavy	on	us.	It	is	a	mountainous	load	that	everybody	is	carrying
and	 is	 being	 crushed	 under.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	 move,	 the	 load	 is	 so	 much.
Centuries	and	centuries	have	gone	before	you	and	it	has	all	become	accumulated
and	you	are	carrying	that	load.	We	have	become	beasts	of	burden.	We	are	dying
under	 the	weight,	but	we	cling	to	the	weight,	we	think	it	 is	very	precious.	It	 is
not	precious	at	all.	It	is	death,	it	is	not	life.	One	has	to	get	rid	of	it.
And	it	is	not	that	the	load	is	clinging	to	you,	it	is	you	who	is	clinging	to	it.	If	the
load	were	clinging	to	you	then	it	would	be	impossible	to	get	rid	of	it,	but	there	is
great	hope	because	it	is	up	to	you	to	cling	to	it	or	not	to	cling	to	it.
One	has	to	live	each	moment	anew,	fresh,	young.	One	has	to	be	so	young	each
moment	as	 if	one	 is	born	again	and	again.	 In	other	words,	one	has	 to	die	each
moment	to	all	that	is	old	and	one	has	to	be	born	again	to	the	new,	only	then	does
one	come	to	know	what	this	existence	is.	Then	it	is	tremendously	ecstatic,	it	 is
just	pure	bliss	and	nothing	else.	But	our	eyes	are	so	covered	with	the	dust	of	the
old,	and	we	think	that	the	old	is	gold.	It	is	just	rubbish,	rotten!	But	thinking	it	is
gold	we	go	on	carrying	it.
Sannyas	means	a	new	life,	so	new	that	 it	 is	always	a	surprise,	so	new	that	you
live	in	awe	and	wonder,	so	new	that	it	is	unpredictable.	Then	every	small	thing
becomes	so	extraordinary,	so	exquisite,	so	beautiful,	that	it	is	unbelievable.
So	 just	do	one	 thing	and	do	 it	 in	a	single	blows	don't	go	on	doing	 it	chunk	by
chunk	because	it	is	a	very	big	load;	if	you	try	to	do	it	chunk	by	chunk	your	life
will	be	wasted.	Do	it	in	a	single	blow	and	never	look	back	and	never	repent	for
it,	and	never	feel	guilty	about	it.
The	moment	you	are	free	of	the	old	you	will	 taste	freedom	for	the	first	 time	--
and	freedom	is	another	name	of	god.
Satyo	Pratita.	Satyo	means	truth.	Pratita	means	experiencing.
Truth	can	only	be	experienced,	it	cannot	be	expressed.	One	can	know	it,	but	one
cannot	say	it.	It	is	like	a	taste;	you	cannot	communicate	it	to	somebody	who	has
not	tasted	it.	And	those	who	have	tasted	it	need	not	be	told	about	it;	they	know
themselves.	So	all	the	theories	about	truth	are	false.	They	are	about	truth,	that's
why	 they	are	 false.	The	word	 'about'	means	around.	About	 and	about	 they	go,
around	and	around	 they	go,	but	 they	never	 touch	 the	center,	 they	move	on	 the
circumference.
Philosophy	is	the	circumference	and	religion	is	the	center.	The	basic	difference	is
that	philosophy	thinks,	religion	experiences.
Now,	 a	 blind	man	 can	 become	 a	 philosopher	 about	 light.	 He	 can	 think	much
about	light.	He	can	go	on	making	great	systems	of	thought	about	light.	He	can
imagine,	 and	 he	 has	much	more	 freedom	 to	 imagine	 than	 the	 person	who	 has
eyes,	because	the	person	who	has	eyes	knows	what	 light	 is;	he	cannot	imagine
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
something	contrary	to	reality.	The	blind	man	can	imagine	in	every	direction,	in
every	possible	way.	He	can	be	very	imaginative	and	he	can	be	very	logical;	he
can	make	a	systematic,	logical	philosophy	about	light	out	of	his	blindness,	but	it
will	be	about	light.	And	beware	of	the	word	'about'.	Unless	somebody	sees	light,
all	that	he	is	saying	is	nonsense.
The	mystics	have	always	said	that	philosophy	is	nonsense	because	it	is	thinking.
It	 is	 like	 a	 thirsty	man	 thinking	 about	water.	Even	 if	 he	discovers	 the	 formula
H2O	it	is	not	going	to	help	him;	he	is	thirsty,	he	needs	water,	not	H2O.	And	we
need	 truth,	 not	 theories	 about	 truth.	 We	 need	 experience,	 not	 Christianity,
Hinduism,	 Mohammedanism	 --	 these	 are	 all	 ideologies	 about	 truth.	 And
experience	only	comes	through	meditation,	there	is	no	other	way.
Mind	gives	you	thinking,	meditation	gives	you	experiencing.	So	the	shift	has	to
happen	from	mind	to	no-mind.	Meditation	is	a	state	of	no-mind.
Veet	Atita.	Veet	means	transcending.	Atita	means	the	past.
Life	 is	 always	 now	 and	 here,	 and	mind	 is	 never	 now	 and	 here	 --	 it	 is	 always
somewhere	 else,	 it	 is	 always	 then	 and	 there.	 It	 is	 either	 in	 the	 past	 or	 in	 the
future;	but	the	future	is	not	different	from	the	past,	it	is	a	projection	of	the	past.
In	 the	 past	 you	 have	 experienced	many	 things	 --	 good	 and	 bad,	 beautiful	 and
ugly,	pleasant	and	painful.	Out	of	all	 that	experience	you	project	a	 future.	 It	 is
chosen	out	of	 the	past.	 It	 is	a	collage:	all	 that	 is	pleasant	you	have	chosen	and
you	have	dropped	all	that	is	painful.	All	that	was	sad	you	have	put	aside	and	all
that	you	think	was	nice	you	have	chosen	and	projected,	you	have	magnified.	So
future	is	not	really	separate	from	the	past;	it	is	a	selected	past	but	it	is	the	past	all
the	same.
Life	is	in	the	present	and	mind	is	in	the	past.	Mind	means	the	past,	mind	means
the	memory,	the	memory	system.	It	is	a	computer:	it	collects	all	information,	it
goes	on	collecting	all	that	is	happening.	It	is	good	to	use	it	for	ordinary	purposes:
to	 remember	 a	 phone	 number,	 somebody's	 name,	 somebody's	 face.	 Of	 course
one	has	to	remember	that	this	man	is	your	boyfriend!	If	you	transcend	the	past
completely	and	you	go	back	home	and	you	ask	your	boyfriend,	 "Who	are	you
and	what	are	you	doing	here?"	(much	laughter)	For	ordinary	purposes	it	is	okay
but	for	deeper	purposes	it	is	dangerous.	It	is	good	to	remember	the	boyfriend	but
it	 is	 bad	 to	 remember	 what	 he	 has	 done	 in	 the	 past.	 That	 is	 psychological
memory	--	one	has	 to	forget	all	about	 it	so	 that	each	day	the	boyfriend	is	new.
People	need	new	boyfriends	because	they	cannot	make	the	old	one	new.	The	old
one	 goes	 on	 becoming	 older	 and	 older	 and	 older	 (laughter)	 and	 then	 so	much
dust	 is	 dumped	 on	 him.	 Then	 one	 gets	 completely	 lost	 --	 where	 has	 the	 old
boyfriend	gone?	It	is	just	dust	piled	up!	So	one	starts	looking	for	somebody	new.
If	one	can	drop	the	past	from	the	mind	--	I	mean	the	psychological	past,	not	the
factual	past	 --	 then	each	moment	 is	new,	 then	each	experience	 is	new	because
you	are	not	interpreting	it	according	to	the	past;	you	are	simply	seeing	it	as	it	is.
And	then	life	becomes	really	vast,	 infinite,	and	then	it	has	all	 the	splendor	one
can	 imagine	 and	dream	about.	 It	 is	 really	 far	more	beautiful	 than	 the	 sweetest
dream,	far	more	beautiful	than	the	greatest	poetry	and	far	more	penetrating	than
the	highest	music.	But	one	has	 to	 learn	one	 thing,	very	 fundamental:	 to	go	on
dropping	the	past.
Never	project	 the	 future,	 because	whatsoever	you	project	 about	 the	 future	will
give	you	misery.	 If	 it	 is	 fulfilled	 it	will	be	nothing	but	a	 repetition	of	 the	past.
And	no	 repetition	 can	 ever	 be	 fulfilling;	 it	 is	 always	boring,	 tiring.	 If	 it	 is	 not
fulfilled	then	you	will	be	disappointed;	you	had	hoped	so	much.	If	you	project
the	future,	either	way	you	are	disappointed:	if	it	is	fulfilled	you	are	miserable,	if
it	is	not	fulfilled	you	are	miserable.	So	the	best	way	is	not	to	project	it.	But	if	the
past	is	carried	along	then	you	will	be	projecting	it,	you	are	bound	to	project	it.
It	is	intrinsic	in	carrying	the	past	to	project	the	future.	Dropping	the	past	means
you	 have	 destroyed	 the	 project	 itself,	 now	 nothing	 can	 be	 projected.	 The	 past
becomes	psychologically	clean	and	 the	 future	 remains	open.	 In	an	open	 future
whatsoever	happens	is	blissful.	One	feels	immensely	blessed.
The	only	 true	way	 to	 live	one's	 life	 is	 to	 live	 in	 the	present.	To	be	herenow	 is
what	I	mean	by	sannyas.
(Osho	pauses	and	grins	before	he	asks:)
How	long	are	you	going	to	be	here?	(much	laughter)
-A	few	more	weeks.
That's	not	right!	--	come	back	again.	Good!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012175
ShortTitle:	GREENR18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	a	 twelve-year-old	 Indian	child:)	Puneet	 is	a	beautiful	name;	 it	means	pure,
clean,	clear,	innocent.
That's	how	every	child	is	born,	but	sooner	or	later	the	society	disturbs	all	purity,
all	cleanliness,	all	innocence;	it	corrupts	everybody.
The	only	significant	thing	is	not	to	be	corrupted,	not	to	allow	anybody	to	corrupt
you.	 It	 is	a	difficult	 task,	but	not	 impossible.	And	 if	one	 is	alert	 from	the	very
beginning	one	can	save	oneself	from	all	that	is	imposed	by	others.
One	should	be	courageous	enough	to	live	as	individually	as	possible.	It	is	better
to	 commit	 mistakes	 rather	 than	 follow.	 somebody	 and	 not	 commit	 mistakes,
because	one	learns	through	mistakes;	one	never	learns	by	imitating	anybody.
Never	be	an	 imitator	because	 imitators	 finally	prove	only	 to	be	carbon	copies,
and	all	carbon	copies	are	dead	and	ugly.	One	has	to	be	one's	original	self.
Becoming	a	sannyasi	at	this	age	is	significant.	If	you	can	protect	yourself,	if	you
can	 remain	 a	 little	 alert,	 courageous,	 then	 nobody	 can	 disfigure	 your	 original
face.	 And	 that's	 the	 whole	 meaning	 of	 sannyas.	 The	 individual	 is	 the	 most
precious	 phenomenon,	 the	 individual	 cannot	 be	 sacrificed	 for	 the	 society,	 the
individual	is	the	goal,	not	the	society.
Deva	Josef.	Deva	means	divine.	Josef	means	increasing	faithfulness.
There	are	very	few	things	which	can	be	called	divine;	trust	is	one	of	them.	Love,
bliss,	 awareness,	 freedom,	 trust	 --	 only	 these	 few	 things	 can	 be	 called	 divine.
And	trust	is	certainly	the	most	fundamental	of	all,	because	it	is	needed	in	love,	it
is	 needed	 in	 awareness,	 it	 is	 needed	 in	 freedom,	 it	 is	 needed	 in	 bliss	 It	 is	 an
essential	ingredient	of	all	that	is	divine.
But	one	thing	has	to	be	remembered:	faithfulness	does	not	mean	belief,	it	means
trust	--	and	these	are	totally	different	things.	What	the	dictionaries	say	is	wrong.
The	 existential	 experience	 is	 the	 only	 decisive	 factor.	 Belief	 is	 of	 the	 head,
borrowed;	faith	is	of	the	heart,	your	own.
Through	 belief	 one	 becomes	 a	 Christian,	 a	 Hindu,	 a	 Mohammedan,	 a	 Jew;
through	faith	one	becomes	simply	religious.	And	to	be	religious	is	divine.	To	be
Christian	 is	worthless,	 to	 be	Hindu	 is	meaningless,	 to	 be	Mohammed	 an	 is	 to
degrade	yourself,	because	all	 these	are	cults	 imposed	by	others	on	you.	Maybe
those	 others	 are	 your	 parents,	 your	 well-wishers	 --	 that	 does	 not	 make	 any
difference.	 Whenever	 you	 allow	 others	 to	 impose	 anything	 upon	 you	 they
destroy	you,	even	though	their	 intentions	are	good.	The	results	prove	that	even
good	intentions	do	not	necessarily	bring	good	results.	And	the	ultimate	criterion
is	the	result,	not	the	intention.
Faith	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	It	is	trust,	trust	in	existence,	not	in	god.
Belief	 is	 in	god	 --	 then	 there	 are	many	gods,	 each	 religion	has	 its	own	 image.
Trust	 is	 in	 existence	 because	 we	 are	 born	 out	 of	 existence,	 we	 are	 part	 of	 it.
Every	moment	we	 are	 breathing	 it	 in	 and	 out.	We	 are	 not	 separate	 even	 for	 a
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
single	second.	Trusting	this	universe	out	of	which	we	have	arisen	and	into	which
one	day	we	will	disappear	again	 is	 really	 trusting	yourself,	because	you	are	an
intrinsic	 part	 of	 existence;	 existence	 is	 your	 innermost	 core,	 your	 very	 being.
Trusting	in	existence	is	trusting	in	yourself.	And	the	person	who	trusts	in	himself
and	in	existence	starts	growing,	but	his	growth	is	individual.	It	is	not	according
to	others,	not	according	to	their	expectations.	He	may	frustrate	others,	in	fact	it	is
almost	inevitable	that	he	will.
Gautam	the	Buddha	frustrated	the	Hindus;	he	was	born	a	Hindu	but	he	rejected
the	imposed	religion.	He	started	growing	individually,	he	became	a	dropout	from
the	society.
Jesus	was	born	a	Jew	but	he	started	having	his	own	lifestyle.	That's	what	angered
people,	 annoyed	 them:	 they	were	 not	 only	 frustrated,	 they	were	 annoyed.	The
individual	always	irritates	the	crowd.	The	mind	of	the	crowd	says	'How	can	you
dare	 to	be	an	 individual	when	we	are	not?	When	we	are	all	 just	behaving	 like
sheep,	how	can	you	behave	like	a	lion.	And	of	course,	they	are	the	majority,	they
have	great	numbers	with	 them	--	 the	 tradition,	 the	state,	 the	church	--	 they	can
destroy	the	individual.	But	it	is	better	to	die	as	an	individual	rather	than	to	live	as
a	non-entity,	rather	than	to	live	as	a	cog	in	the	wheel	--	that	is	not	to	live	at	all.
So	 trust	 yourself,	 trust	 totally	 and	 risk	 everything	 for	 it.	 This	 is	 what	 I	 call
sannyas.	 It	 is	 not	 trusting	 in	 god,	 in	 the	Bible,	 in	 the	Koran,	 in	 the	Gita,	 it	 is
trusting	 in	your	own	existence.	And	out	of	 that	 grows	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful	 and
graceful.	Life	becomes	fragrant,	it	becomes	a	constant	revolution.	One	goos	on
moving	 from	 one	 peak	 to	 another,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 end	 to	 this	 growth	 --	 it	 is
infinite!
Prem	 Elisabeth.	 Prem	 means	 love.	 Elisabeth	 means	 consecrated	 to	 god,
surrendered	to	god.
God	 is	 a	 code	word.	 It	 does	 not	mean	 anything	 because	 it	 is	 not	 an	 ordinary
word,	it	is	just	a	code	word.
He	 should	 not	write	 simply	 god,	we	 should	write	 g-o-d,	 then	 it	 will	 be	 right,
because	 it	 consists	of	 three	 symbols.	 It	 is	 an	ancient	 symbol	 from	 the	mystery
schools.
There	 is	 a	 possibility	 that	 it	 came	 from	 a	 civilisation	 which	 has	 completely
disappeared	 from	 the	 earth,	 the	 civilisation	 of	 Atlantis.	 The	 whole	 continent
disappeared	 into	 the	ocean;	 the	Atlantic	ocean	 is	still	hiding	a	whole	continent
within	it	It	was	one	of	the	greatest	catastrophes.	Perhaps	all	the	stories	in	all	the
religions	about	 the	great	 flood	have	something	 to	do	with	 that	catastrophe	 that
happened	to	Atlantis:	the	whole	continent	simply	went	into	the	sea.
But	a	few	things	were	saved.	They	were	kept	in	one	of	the	greatest	libraries	of
the	world	 in	Alexandria,	 but	Mohammedans	 destroyed	 it.	 Calipha	Omar,	who
burned	the	library	went	with	a	torch	in	one	hand	and	the	Koran	in	the	other,	and
he	said	to	the	librarian	'I	have	two	questions	to	ask	to	you.	The	first	is:	You	have
millions	of	books	in	this	library,	very	ancient	books	--	do	they	contain	only	that
which	is	contained	in	the	Koran?'
And	before	the	librarian	could	answer	he	himself	said	'If	they	contain	the	same
as	 the	Koran	 then	 they	 are	 not	 needed.	The	 second	 question:	Do	 they	 contain
something	which	is	not	contained	in	the	Koran?'
Again	he	didn't	wait	for	the	answer	but	answered	his	question	himself,	saying	'If
they	contain	something	else	than	the	Koran	then	they	cannot	be	allowed	to	exist,
because	all	that	is	true	is	in	the	Koran,	neither	less	nor	more	--	Koran	is	all.'
And	he	put	the	torch	to	the	library,	he	started	the	fire.	The	library	was	so	big,	it	is
said	in	the	records	that	it	took	six	months	for	the	fire	to	destroy	the	whole	library.
That	 library	 contained	many	 scriptures	 from	Atlantis;	 a	 few	 pieces	may	 have
even	been	taken	away	while	the	library	was	being	burned.	'God'	seems	to	be	one
of	the	code	words	that	has	travelled	from	Atlantis	to	us.
G	means	that,	o	means	which,	d	means	is:	--	that	which	is.	That's	the	meaning	of
god.	It	does	not	mean	an	old	man	who	created	the	world.	Nobody	ever	created
the	world;	 the	world	has	 always	been	here.	The	universe	 is	 eternal,	 it	 is	 not	 a
creation	and	god	is	not	a	creator.	God	simply	means	existence	--	that	which	is
--	and	to	be	surrendered	to	existence	is	the	ultimate	peak	of	love.
When	the	whole	existence	becomes	your	beloved	--	the	stars	and	the	Milky	Way
and	the	sun	and	the	moon	and	the	clouds	and	the	mountains,	rivers,	this	whole,
vast,	multi-dimensional	existence	--	when	you	shower	it	with	your	love	you	start
becoming	bigger	and	bigger	with	it.
Remember,	the	secret	of	expansion	is	to	love	something	bigger	than	you.	If	you
love	something	smaller	than	you,	you	will	have	to	shrink;	if	you	love	something
bigger	 than	 you,	 you	 expand.	 And	 when	 you	 love	 the	 whole	 universe	 you
become	unlimited,	you	become	as	vast	as	the	universe	itself.	And	that's	what	a
religious	 person	 should	 be:	 vast,	 containing	 all,	 excluding	 nothing,	 including
everything	that	is.
Veet	Thomas.	Veet	means	transcending,	Thomas	means	a	seeker	of	truth.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 very	 idea	 of	 seeking	 the	 truth	 has	 to	 be	 transcended;	 the	 very	 idea	 is
basically	wrong.
Lao	Tzu	says	if	you	seek	the	truth	you	will	not	find	it	because	truth	is	already	in
you.	 It	 has	 not	 to	 be	 sought;	 it	 is	 in	 the	 seeker	 himself.	 The	 idea	 of	 seeking
means	 it	 is	 somewhere	 else:	 you	 are	 the	 seeker	 and	 the	 truth	 is	 out	 there,
somewhere.	And	truth	is	really	the	very	existence	of	the	seeker	himself.	So	when
all	seeking	disappears	and	one	simply	sits,	doing	nothing,	searching	for	nothing;
when	one	simply	relaxes	into	oneself,	one	simply	rests	into	oneself,	one	finds	it.
Seek	and	you	are	sure	to	miss,	don't	seek	and	you	are	sure	to	find	it.	It	is	a	very
paradoxical	 law,	but	unless	one	understands	 it,	one	cannot	be	a	meditator.	The
seekers	of	 truth	become	philosophers	and	 the	people	who	drop	all	seeking	and
searching	become	mystics	 --	 and	only	 they	are	 the	people	who	come	 to	know,
only	they	are	the	people	who	experience.
Science	is	a	search,	religion	is	not.
Anand	Nancy.	Anand	means	bliss,	Nancy	means	prayer.
The	only	 true	prayer	 --	 and	 I	 emphasise	 the	only	 true	prayer	 --	 is	 blissfulness.
Nothing	 has	 to	 be	 said,	 no	 words	 are	 needed.	 The	 ready-made	 prayers	 of
Christians	and	Hindus	and	Mohammedans	are	just	rubbish,	but	one	can	become
addicted	 to	words,	 to	 just	 repeating	 again	 and	 again	 the	 same	words,	morning
and	 evening.	 If	 you	 don't	 repeat	 them	 you	 miss	 them,	 you	 feel	 something	 is
wrong	because	the	mind	has	become	programmed.	And	if	you	repeat	them	you
don't	gain	anything;	there	is	no	ecstasy	in	it.	How	can	the	same	words	repeated
again	and	again	--	your	own	words	--	give	you	ecstasy?	They	can	only	give	you
boredom.
The	so-called	religious	people	are	very	boring	people.	The	churches	are	full	of
the	vibe	of	boredom,	because	so	many	bored	people	gathered	together...
In	a	church	the	priest	announced	after	the	sermon,	 'After	fifteen	minutes'	break
there	will	be	a	meeting	of	the	board.'	He	was	very	much	surprised	because	one
man,	a	 stranger,	was	 there	 in	 the	meeting,	 just	 sitting	by	his	 side.	He	 told	him
'This	is	a	meeting	of	the	board...'	The	man	said	'That	I	know	--	I	have	never	been
so	bored	in	my	whole	life!	That's	why	I	am	here.	I	heard	your	announcement,	so
I	thought	that	if	I	have	suffered	so	much,	let	me	suffer	a	little	more.'
Religious	people	are	boring	because	they	themselves	are	bored.	What	 they	call
prayer	 is	 not	 prayer,	 it	 is	 a	 monologue,	 they	 are	 talking	 to	 themselves.	 It	 is
meaningless.	It	is	not	a	dialogue,	because	there	is	no	god	as	a	person	with	whom
you	can	have	a	dialogue.	God	is	an	experience,	not	a	person.
So	 blissfulness	 has	 to	 be	 the	 only	 prayer.	 Be	 blissful,	 cheerful,	 dancing,
celebrating.	 Life	 is	 such	 a	 great	 opportunity,	 we	 should	 not	 miss	 a	 single
moment.	And	then	you	will	by	and	by	become	aware,	through	your	blissfulness,
of	 a	 totally	new	presence	 that	 surrounds	 the	whole	 existence.	That	presence	 is
the	ultimate	bliss.	And	you	can	become	aware	of	 it	only	when	you	are	blissful
because	only	the	same	can	know	the	same.	When	you	start	vibrating	in	the	same
rhythm	you	become	aware	of	the	ultimate	bliss	You	can	call	it	god	but	it	is	better
to	call	it	the	ultimate	bliss.
In	your	own	small	way	be	blissful	so	that	you	can	resonate	in	the	same	beat	as
the	whole	universe	is	already	resonating.	The	universe	is	a	dance	and	we	have	to
fall	in	step	with	it	--	that's	what	prayer	is.
Dhyan	Barry.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Barry	is	a	Celtic	mythological	symbol.
Literally	it	means	a	spear,	but	in	Celtic	mythology	the	spear	represents	the	life-
giving	force.	So	your	name	will	means	meditation,	the	life-giving	force.
We	are	alive	but	we	don't	know	from	where	our	life	springs.	We	are	breathing,
we	 are	 conscious,	 we	 are	 living,	 but	 we	 are	 unaware	 of	 our	 own	 roots.
Meditation	 is	 a	 search	 for	 the	 roots,	 for	 the	 very	 source	 of	 our	 being	 and
existence.
Unless	we	know	that	source	we	cannot	know	the	goal,	because	the	source	is	the
goal	 too.	We	have	to	go	back	to	where	we	started	the	journey,	 then	only	is	 the
circle	 complete	 --	 and	 the	 completion	 of	 the	 circle	 is	 the	 fulfillment	 of	 life.
Hence	the	source	has	to	be	searched	for.	Without	knowing	the	source	nobody	can
know	about	the	goal.	Whatsoever	goals	we	project	without	knowing	the	source
are	 going	 to	 be	 only	 temporary.	By	 the	 time	you	 reach	 them	you	will	 have	 to
invent	new	goals	again.
Unless	you	know	the	source	you	cannot	know	the	ultimate	goal.	And	the	whole
energy	 that	 we	 put	 into	 temporary	 goals	 is	 a	 sheer	 wastage.	 That's	 why	 life
remains	 a	misery,	 a	 hell;	 in	 knowing	 the	 source	 life	 becomes	 clear.	 Then	 you
know	where	you	have	to	go,	then	you	know	what	has	to	be	done,	what	path	has
to	 be	 taken,	 then	 you	 know	what	 has	 to	 be	 avoided.	 Then	 you	 have	 a	 certain
criterion	 to	 discriminate	 between	 the	 essential	 and	 the	 non-essential;	 then	 you
don't	get	lost	in	the	non-essential	and	you	can	go	on	following	the	essential.	It	is
just	a	ray	of	light,	but	it	is	enough.	In	following	it	one	comes	back	home.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	moment	you	enter	your	source	again	you	have	come	home.	And	the	feeling
of	coming	home	can	only	be	described	as	rejoicing.	That's	why	the	people	like
Zarathustra,	Buddha,	Krishna,	are	so	full	of	joys	they	have	arrived,	now	there	is
nowhere	 to	 go.	 The	 journey	 is	 complete,	 the	 pilgrimage	 fulfilled.	 They	 have
blossomed!
Meditation	 is	 the	only	way	 to	 find	 the	 source	because	meditation	 is	an	 inward
Journey;	it	is	digging	for	your	own	roots.
By	becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 one	 is	 only	 expected	 to	 learn	 a	 simple	 discipline	 of
meditativeness.	 So	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 many	 commandments	 but	 a	 single
commandment;	 I	call	 it	 the	eleventh	commandment!	But	 that	 single	one	 fulfils
all	ten	--	the	eleventh	existed	before	all	ten!
Premsindhu	means	ocean	of	love.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 not	 to	 put	 any	 limit	 to	 his	 love.	To	 limit	 love	 is	 to	 kill	 it,	 to
destroy	 it.	 Love	 can	 exist	 only	 in	 its	 unlimitedness.	 The	moment	 you	 draw	 a
boundary	you	have	already	started	poisoning	it.	It	may	look	like	love	but	it	will
only	be	a	corpse;	it	will	not	be	alive	any	more.
It	is	like	you	see	a	bird	on	the	wing,	it	is	so	beautiful	in	the	clouds,	or	singing	in
the	trees,	so	colourful,	so	musical,	and	then	you	catch	hold	of	the	bird	and	you
put	 it	 in	a	golden	cage.	The	cage	is	very	precious	and	the	bird	looks	the	same,
but	it	is	not	the	same	bird.	The	bird	on	the	wing,	in	the	clouds,	had	freedom;	this
bird	is	a	prisoner.	It	is	qualitatively	different.	Out	of	old	habit	it	may	still	sing	but
its	heart	won't	be	in	the	song.	It	will	be	mechanical,	like	a	gramophone	record.	It
looks	like	the	same	bird	but	it	only	looks	it	--
and	don't	be	deceived	by	the	appearance.
This	 is	 what	 we	 are	 continuously	 doing	 with	 loves	 we	 always	 make	 it	 a
possessiveness,	a	jealousy,	an	ego	trip,	and	immediately	the	freedom	is	lost,	the
song	is	lost,	the	heartbeat	disappears.	We	can	go	on	carrying	the	corpse	but	then
it	does	not	fulfil	anything.
Love	can	give	you	all	 that	 is	needed	 to	become	absolutely	contented,	but	 then
one	has	 to	be	alert	not	 to	destroy	 it,	not	 to	 limit	 it.	That's	 the	meaning	of	your
name;	 let	 it	 become	 the	 meaning	 of	 your	 life	 too.	 Let	 your	 love	 be	 oceanic,
unbounded,	and	you	will	find	god	through	it.
Premmadhu	means	love	is	as	sweet	as	honey.	But	very	few	people	ever	come	to
know	its	sweetness;	the	majority	comes	to	know	only	its	bitterness.
Yes,	in	poetry	it	is	always	sweet,	but	in	actual	experience	it	is	very	bitter.	And	it
is	not	only	now	that	it	is	so,	it	has	always	been	so.	Thousands	of	monks	and	nuns
have	 escaped	 from	 the	world.	 They	 are	 not	 really	 escaping	 from	 the	world	 --
'world'	 is	 a	 very	 deceptive	word	 --	 they	 are	 escaping	 from	 love.	They	 use	 the
word	 'world'	 to	 hide	 something	 else.	 They	 are	 escaping	 from	 love	 because	 all
their	love	relationships	have	proven	frustrating,	failures;	they	have	all	turned	into
nightmares.	Again	and	again	they	have	experienced	agony,
They	 expected	 ecstasy	 but	 sooner	 or	 later	 they	 become	 aware	 that	 they	 are
expecting	 something	 which	 is	 not	 possible;	 then	 they	 escape	 from	 the	 world.
They	are	 really	escaping	from	all	 the	situations	where	 love	can	arise;	and	 they
can	be	caught	again,	because	 in	 their	dreams	 they	still	dream	of	 its	 sweetness.
But	my	observation	 is	 that	 they	are	wrong.	Rather	 than	changing	 their	 idea	of
love,	they	escape	from	the	opportunity	of	love.
One	has	to	change	the	idea	of	love,	then	it	is	really	sweet,	it	is	pure	nectar.	If	it	is
not	then	something	is	wrong	with	us,	not	with	love.	But	this	is	one	of	the	tricks
of	the	ego,	that	it	never	wants	to	accept	any	responsibility;	it	always	throws	the
responsibility	 on	 others,	 it	 always	 finds	 excuses	 and	 shrinks	 from	 taking
responsibility.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 to	 accept	 the	 responsibility.	 If	 love	 is	 bitter	 that
means	we	have	 not	 learned	 the	 art	 of	 love.	 If	 I	 give	 you	 a	 sitar	 and	 you	only
make	noise	out	of	it	that	does	not	mean	that	the	sitar	is	noisy;	it	only	means	you
don't	know	how	to	play	it.	You	have	to	learn.
Humanity	 lives	 under	 a	 very	 strange	 illusion	 that	 everybody	 knows	 love.
Nobody	really	knows	love	unless	you	learn.	It	is	one	of	the	greatest	arts.	Playing
the	sitar	is	nothing	compared	to	playing	on	the	mystery	of	love.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	 learn	what	 love	 is	and	what	 love	 is	not.	And	 then	 they
have	to	drop	all	that	is	not	love,	and	this	can	be	done	only	through	medita-tion.
Meditation	 can	make	 you	 aware,	 can	make	 you	 capable	 of	 discriminating,	 of
dividing	that	which	is	valuable	from	all	 that	 is	not	valuable.	Meditation	can	be
said	to	be	the	science	of	purifying	love.	And	by	the	time	you	have	come	to	the
purity	of	love	it	is	just	fragrance	--
fragrance	of	the	beyond	--	and	it	gives	you	a	taste	of	eternity,	of	god,	of	truth,	of
life	in	its	immense	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
splendour.
Premvan	means	the	jungle	of	love.
Love	 is	 not	 a	 garden.	A	garden	 is	man-made;	 it	 is	 artificial,	 arbitrary.	Love	 is
wild.	It	is	because	of	so	much	civilisation	that	we	have	lost	the	knack	of	love;	we
have	 become	 too	 civilised,	 too	 cultured,	 too	 cultivated,	 so	 our	 life	 is	 like	 an
English	 garden,	 Victorian	 style	 (laughter).	 Everything	 is	 symmetrical	 and
everything	is	pruned,	cut,	given	shape	and	form.	But	the	more	you	give	it	shape
and	form,	the	more	you	are	destroying	the	reality.
In	Japan	they	have	the	art	of	bonzai.	It	is	not	an	art,	it	is	pure	murder.	They	have
four-hundred	--	year	old	trees	just	six	inches	tall.	They	think	it	is	an	art.	They	go
on	cutting	the	roots.	They	place	the	tree	into	a	pot	with	no	bottom	and	they	go	on
pruning	the	roots.	Because	the	roots	cannot	grow	the	tree	goes	on	becoming	old
but	 it	 cannot	 grow;	 it	 ages	 but	 it	 cannot	 become	big.	 So	 you	 can	 see	 from	 its
texture	 that	 it	 is	 an	 ancient	 tree	 but	 a	 pygmy	 tree.	 It	 may	 have	 risen	 to	 one
hundred	feet,	it	is	only	six	inches	high	--	and	they	call	it	an	art!	It	is	like	cutting	a
child	 so	 he	 becomes	 old	 but	 is	 only	 six	 inches	 tall	 (laughter)	 ...	 with	 a	white
beard	(more	laughter)...	And	you	call	it	art	--	it	is	pure	murder!
But	bonzai	is	being	practised	on	every	child.	All	over	the	world,	all	the	cultures
have	been	doing	something	 like	bonzai.	That's	why	 love	has	disappeared,	 love
can	exist	only	in	its	wild	state.
My	sannyasins	have	to	remain	at	least	ninety-nine	per	cent	wild.	One	per	cent	is
enough	for	day-to-day	work,	your	offices	in	the	market	(laughter).	By	the	time
you	come	home	you	should	again	become	wild,	a	 jungle,	no	more	a	garden	 --
certain	not	an	English	garden.	If	you	want	to	become	a	garden	then	look	around
my	garden,	be	something	like	my	garden	--	it	is	a	jungle!
Man	has	to	learn	something	so	that	he	can	become	a	little	uncivilised.	It	is	good
when	you	are	in	a	Rotary	club	to	be	civilised	--	I	am	not	against	it.	In	a	Rotary
club	 it	 is	perfectly	good	 to	be	false,	pseudo,	phony,	otherwise	you	cannot	be	a
member	of	the	Rotary	club.	But	by	the	time	you	are	out	of	these	clubs	and	the
offices	and	the	factories,	be	wild!	Be	a	child	again.	Be	a	primitive	again	and	you
will	 be	 surprised	 how	many	wonders	 are	 there	 repressed	within	 you	 and	 how
many	mysteries	start	opening	up.
My	whole	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 give	 you	 roots,	 to	 stop	 this	whole	 art	 of	 practising
bonzai	 on	 you.	 And	 everybody	 has	 practised	 on	 you,	 they	 have	 all	 cut	 you.
Whenever	 I	 see	 a	 person	 I	 see	 he	 has	 been	 cut	 and	 pruned	 from	 everywhere;
nothing	of	the	real	is	left.	Somehow	he	goes	on	living	but	his	life	is	no	more	a
joy,	it	cannot	be.	To	be	a	joy	it	needs	to	be	natural,	spontaneous.	And	then	you
will	see	love	growing	in	you	to	such	dimensions	that	it	is	unbelievable.	And	the
ultimate	peak	of	love	is	the	realisation	of	god.
God	and	love	are	synonymous	to	me.
Premshanti	means	love	and	peace.
It	is	very	difficult!	It	is	like	putting	a	cat	and	a	dog	in	a	room	(laughter)...	but	I
enjoy	it!	(much	laughter)	I	create	as	many	difficulties	as	possible	because	only
through	difficulties	does	one	grow.	So	 if	 the	dog	and	 the	cat	are	 in	a	room	the
encounter	 is	 going	 to	 happen,	 primal	 therapy	 is	 going	 to	 happen;	 all	 kinds	 of
bizarre	things	are	going	to	happen.	But	there	is	a	possibility	that	they	may	fall	in
love,	they	may	become	friendly,	they	may	start	enjoying	and	sharing,	they	may
start	having	a	communion.	And	if	it	happens	then	something	really	beautiful	has
started.
Love	is	easy	if	you	don't	ask	for	peace,	because	love	is	a	kind	of	war	--	the	so-
called	 love,	 I	mean.	The	 real	 love	 is	 certainly	peaceful.	But	 if	 peace	 suddenly
comes,	 these	who	 have	 not	 known	 real	 love	will	 think	 love	 has	 died,	 because
then	the	peace	will	look	very	cold	to	them;	they	have	become	accustomed	to	the
heat	 of	 fighting,	 nagging,	 continuously	 quarrelling.	 That	 gives	 excitement,	 it
feels	as	if	one	is	alive.	But	without	peace	love	is	feverish,	 it	 is	sick;	and	peace
without	love	is	also	easy	but	then	it	is	dead,	it	has	no	ecstasy	in	it.	It	is	the	peace
of	 the	 cemetery,	 the	 grave	 --	 white-washed.	 You	 can	 even	 plant	 roses	 on	 the
grave,	but	a	grave	is	a	grave.
Peace	 alone	 is	 a	 grave,	 love	 alone	 is	 insanity;	 both	 together	 and	 a	 magic
happens:	the	grave	becomes	alive	and	the	insanity	disappears	and	the	energy	that
was	involved	in	being	insane	starts	becoming	ecstasy.
It	starts	having	a	new	flavour,	a	new	meaning,	a	new	significance,	a	new	dance,
a	new	song.
This	 is	 my	 understanding,	 that	 both	 together	 make	 a	 man	 go	 to	 the	 ultimate
heights.	They	are	like	two	wings,	with	one	wing	you	cannot	go	to	the	ultimate
heights;	you	need	both	wing,	functioning.	When	both	wings	are	functioning	you
can	reach	the	stars.	But	both	wings	are	in	a	way	opposite	to	each	other.	One	goes
towards	 the	 left,	 the	other	goes	 towards	 the	 right	 --	 they	are	contradictory	 in	a
way	but	complementary	too.
Peace	and	love	are	contradictory	and	complementary.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	 one	 has	 to	 keep	 a	 balance	 between	 the	 two,	 otherwise	 things	 become
lopsided.	And	 to	be	 lopsided	 is	 to	be	crazy;	 to	be	balanced	 is	 to	be	whole	and
healthy.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012185
ShortTitle:	GREENR19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Anand	Renate.	Anand	means	bliss.	Renate	means	reborn,	born	anew.
Man	brings	 tremendous	bliss	with	himself	but	only	as	a	potential,	as	a	seed;	 it
needs	the	right	atmosphere,	the	climate,	the	soil,	to	grow.	And	society	does	not
allow	it	to	grow,	it	wants	miserable	people.
There	 is	 some	 reason	why	all	 societies	all	over	 the	world	 in	 the	whole	past	of
humanity	have	wanted	miserable	people.
First,	the	miserable	person	is	always	dependent;	he	is	dependent	on	the	parents,
he	 is	 dependent	 on	 the	 priest,	 he	 is	 dependent	 on	 the	 state,	 dependent	 on	 the
politician.	He	basically	hankers	 for	 dependence;	 he	 is	 not	 able	 to	 stand	on	his
own.	He	cannot	trust	himself.	He	is	in	such	a	misery	--	how	can	he	trust	himself,
his	intelligence?	He	lives	in	distrust	of	himself;	he	knows	that	I'am	unworthy,	I
have	failed,	whatsoever	I	do	goes	wrong,	everything	turns	sour,	so	it	is	better	to
listen	to	those	who	are	in	power.'
It	is	one	of	the	basic	needs	of	the	establishment	to	keep	people	miserable,	only
then	will	they	be	dependent.	And	when	they	are	dependent	they	are	obedient	too;
they	cannot	risk	disobedience,	they	cannot	revolt.	They	are	trembling	inside	with
fear;	their	guts	are	destroyed,	their	courage	is	crippled.	And	whenever	there	has
been	a	blissful	person	he	has	been	a	danger	to	the	establishment.	The	society	has
learned	that.
Jesus	was	a	danger,	Buddha	was	a	danger,	Lao	Tzu	was	a	danger.	So	it	is	better
to	cut	from	the	very	roots	all	possibilities	of	somebody	ever	becoming	a	rebel.
And	 the	best	way	 that	 they	have	 found	 is	 to	 keep	people	 in	misery.	 In	misery
they	cannot	bring	their	potential	to	actuality.	And	unless	one	becomes	actual,	a
flowering,	one	is	missing	the	whole	opportunity	of	life.	One	is	not	really	born;
only	physically	is	one	born,	but	spiritually	one	is	still	in	the	womb.
Sannyas	means	a	spiritual	birth.	And	the	beginning	of	that	birth	is	to	learn	the	art
of	being	blissful	Rejoice	 --	 there	 is	much	 to	 rejoice	 in.	We	 just	have	 to	decide
that	we	will	start	 looking	for	all	 that	helps	blissfulness.	It	 is	only	a	question	of
choosing.	 There	 are	 thorns,	 there	 are	 roses;	 the	 miserable	 person	 chooses	 the
thorns,	 the	 person	 who	 decides	 to	 be	 blissful	 chooses	 the	 roses.	 And	 then	 a
miracle	starts	happening:	the	more	full	of	roses	you	are,	the	less	thorns	there	are.
When	the	whole	being	is	full	of	roses	 thorns	simply	disappear,	 they	don't	exist
any	more	for	you.	For	 the	blissful	person	 there	 is	no	misery	anywhere;	 for	 the
enlightened	person	there	is	no	darkness	anywhere,	for	the	really	alive	there	is	no
death.
Amano	Robert.	Amano	means	no-mind.	Robert	means	bright,	intelligent.
Mind	 is	 intellect,	not	 intelligence.	 Intellect	 is	a	poor	substitute	 for	 intelligence;
and	 they	 are	 diametrically	 opposite.	 Intellect	 is	 brought	 in	 from	 the	 outside.
That's	what	we	go	on	doing	in	the	schools,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
colleges,	 universities,	 we	 create	 intellect.	 And	 as	 a	 person	 becomes	 more
intellectual	 his	 own	 intelligence	 remains	 in	 a	 latent	 form.	So	much	 intellect	 is
piled	upon	the	intelligence	that	one	tends	to	forget	all	about	it.
Intellectual	people	are	basically	unintelligent	people.
It	 is	 very	 rare	 to	 find	 a	 scholar,	 a	 professor,	 who	 is	 intelligent.	 I	 never	 came
across	one;	as	a	student	I	never	came	across	a	single	professor	who	was	really
intelligent.	Then	I	became	a	professor	in	a	university;	for	nine	years	I	searched
and	searched	but	I	could	not	find	a	single	professor	who	was	really	intelligent	--
they	were	intellectual.
If	 you	 are	 intellectual	 it	 means,	 you	 are	 full	 of	 readymade	 answers,	 so	 if	 the
situation	is	old,	which	it	never	is,	then	you	have	the	answer,	but	if	the	situation	is
new,	 you	 are	 at	 a	 loss.	 Intelligence	 means	 spontaneous	 responsibility,	 the
capacity	to	respond	to	the	new.	Intellect	means	carrying	readymade	answers	like
a	computer.
A	computer	 can	never	be	 intelligent.	 It	 can	have	 immense	 intellect,	more	 than
any	man	 can	 ever	 have.	A	 computer	 can	 be	 fed	 all	 kinds	 of	 information	 --	 its
memory	 is	 infinite	 --	 it	 can	 store	 everything	 that	 you	 go	 on	 feeding	 it	 and
whenever	you	need	 it,	 just	 the	push	of	a	button	and	 the	answer	 is	 there.	But	a
computer	can	never	be	intelligent.	Any	new	situation	for	which	the	answer	has
not	already	been	put	into	the	computer	and	the	computer	will	be	at	a	loss.	It	may
be	a	small	 thing,	a	very	small	 thing,	but	 the	computer	will	not	be	able	 to	cope
with	 it.	And	 that's	what	our	 scholars,	 professors,	 pundits,	 priests,	 the	 so-called
learned	people	are:	computers.
They	have	no	spontaneity;	parrotlike	they	go	on	repeating	answers	that	they	have
collected	from	the	scriptures,	from	every	possible	source.
Intelligence	is	a	totally	different	thing.	You	have	to	put	intellect	aside	so	that	you
can	be	alert,	aware,	of	the	situation;	and	the	answer	has	to	come	from	your	being
not	from	your	memory,	then	the	answer	is	immediate	and	it	is	always	right.	You
respond	with	your	total	heart,	with	your	wholeness,	and	then	there	is	never	any
repentance.	Whether	you	succeed	or	fail,	that	is	irrelevant,	but	intelligence	never
repents	because	whatsoever	was	possible	you	did	totally,	there	was	nothing	more
for	you	to	do.	You	were	not	holding	anything	back,	you	went	into	it	totally.
Amano,	 no-mind,	 helps	 you	 to	 bring	 your	 intelligence	 to	 the	 surface.	 Mind
represses	your	intelligence.
We	have	yet	 to	discover	 the	right	method	of	education	 in	which	 intelligence	 is
more	 significant	 than	 intellect.	 Right	 now	 things	 are	 upside-down;	 nobody
bothers	about	intelligence;	the	whole	system	is	to	cultivate	intellect.	That	is	not
the	meaning	of	the	word	'education';	it	is	not	education,	it	is	MISeducation.
Education	 means	 to	 draw	 out.	 Certainly	 this	 is	 not	 what	 is	 happening	 in	 the
universities	and	 the	colleges	and	 the	schools.	We	are	not	drawing	out	anything
from	 the	 person;	 we	 are	 stuffing	 him	 from	 the	 outside.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 we	 go	 on
throwing	rocks	into	a	well;	sooner	or	later	the	well	will	be	covered	with	rocks,
there	will	be	no	water	available.	That's	what	has	happened	to	man;	in	the	name
of	education	we	have	been	putting	rocks	upon	rocks	into	him	and	behind	those
rocks	his	intelligence	is	almost	lost.
The	 function	of	meditation	 is	 to	withdraw	all	 those	 rocks,	 to	 take	you	 to	your
original	source,	to	the	very	springs	of	your	life	--	and	then	a	person	is	intelligent.
Every	person	can	be	utterly	intelligent,	one	just	has	to	be	ready	to	put	the	mind
aside.	And	that's	my	whole	work	here,	to	help	you	to	put	the	mind	aside,	to	shift
your	energy	from	the	head	to	the	heart,	from	mind	to	no-mind.
Once	 the	 energy	 starts	 functioning	 without	 the	mind,	 your	 whole	 life	 has	 the
flavor	of	intelligence,	awareness,	brightness.	You	are	fully	alive	to	the	moment	--
and	that	brings	bliss,	that	brings	thousands	of	blessings.
Dhyan	Toni.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Toni	means	inestimable.
Mind	 is	 limited;	 it	 can	 be	 estimated,	 it	 can	 be	 measured.	 Meditation	 is
immeasurable,	inestimable.
Meditation	is	when	the	mind	stops	functioning,	when	all	 the	noise	of	 the	mind
and	the	traffic	of	the	mind	disappears,	when	there	is	pure	silence	and	you	are	just
a	witness,	not	thinking,	not	feeling,	but	just	being.
That	 silence	 and	 that	 being	 is	 meditation.	 That	 state	 opens	 the	 doors	 of	 the
divine.	Suddenly	you	are	open	to	the	infinity,	to	the	eternal,	to	all	that	is.
Toni	 also	 has	 a	 few	 other	 meanings	 --	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 word.	 It	 also	 means
priceless.	 Meditation	 cannot	 be	 purchased;	 you	 have	 to	 earn	 it,	 you	 have	 to
deserve	 it.	 Money	 cannot	 purchase	 it,	 power	 cannot	 snatch	 it,	 otherwise	 the
Alexanders	would	have	been	the	greatest	meditators	and	the	Rockefellers	would
have	purchased	all	the	meditation	available	in	the	world.	But	there	is	no	way	to
purchase	 it,	no	ways	 to	catch	hold	of	 it.	You	have	to	become	worthy	of	 it.	For
that	a	certain	inner	transformation	is	needed;	nothing	else	can	be	of	any	help.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	Toni	also	means	beyond	praise.
Whatsoever	 we	 say	 about	 meditation	 falls	 short.	 All	 words	 prove	 to	 be
inadequate.	It	remains	indefinable,	 it	 remains	beyond	praise,	 it	 remains	beyond
all	expression.
One	Zen	master	was	asked	by	a	learned	scholar	'What	is	meditation?'	The	master
was	 sitting	on	 the	 sand	by	 the	bank	of	 a	 river.	He	 remained	 as	 if	 nothing	had
been	asked,	as	if	nobody	had	come.	He	didn't	 take	any	notice	of	the	scholar	or
his	question.	The	scholar	said	'What	is	the	matter?	Are	you	dead	or	something?'
The	 master	 said	 'I	 have	 answered	 your	 question;	 you	 asked	 me	 "What	 is
meditation?"	and	I	showed	you:	it	is	silence.	If	I	say	something	it	will	be	untrue.
The	moment	you	say	something	about	meditation	it	becomes	untrue,	that's	why	I
remained	silent.	I	showed	you,	I	was	meditation,	but	you	massed	the	point.	You
were	 waiting	 for	 some	 words,	 and	 meditation	 is	 not	 anything	 which	 can	 be
caught	in	the	net	of	words.
So	we	cannot	praise	it,	we	cannot	purchase	it,	we	cannot	measure	it.	Because	we
cannot	purchase	it	and	cannot	praise	it	and	cannot	measure	it,	it	is	the	only	thing
worth	 having,	 it	 is	 the	 only	 treasure	worth	 possessing.	 It	 is	what	 Jesus	means
when	he	says	the	kingdom	of	god.
Premda	means	one	who	is	capable	of	giving	love.
The	 world	 can	 be	 full	 of	 love	 but	 it	 is	 absolutely	 loveless;	 it	 is	 full	 of	 hate
instead,	 and	 for	 the	very	 simple	 reason	 that	 everybody	wants	 love	but	nobody
gives	it.	If	everybody	wants	it	and	nobody	gives	it,	then	how	can	love	happen?	--
it	is	impossible.	We	have	to	change	the	whole	arithmetics	everybody	should	give
and	nobody	should	want.
If	it	comes	without	desiring,	be	thankful;	if	it	does	not	come,	accept	that	it	is	not
coming,	that	'Perhaps	this	is	not	the	right	time,	perhaps	I	don't	deserve	it,	perhaps
I	have	to	wait	a	little	more,'	but	don't	desire.
Even	when	 love	 is	 not	 coming,	 go	on	giving.	And	 it	 is	 absolutely	 certain	 that
when	you	give,	you	get	and	you	get	a	thousandfold,	not	less	than	that.
The	whole	of	existence	loves	the	lover.	The	lover	is	the	most	precious	being	in
existence,	so	the	whole	of	existence	showers	love	on	him,	it	rejoices	with	him.	If
you	go	on	giving	love	to	people,	even	to	strangers,	to	animals,	to	birds,	to	trees,
to	 rocks,	 they	will	all	 respond	and	 from	 thousands	of	directions	 love	will	 start
coming	towards	you	--	it	will	bounce	back!	And	then	you	will	be	so	full	of	love
that	you	would	like	to	give	because	now	you	know	the	more	you	give,	the	more
you	have.
Up	 to	now	humanity	has	 lived	 a	very	 loveless	 existence	 for	 the	 simple	 reason
that	everybody	wants,	tries	to	snatch,	to	steal	and	in	every	possible	way	to	force
the	other	to	give	to	them.	Everybody	wants;	and	not	only	helpless	people,	even
powerful	people	are	asking	for	love.	If	it	were	a	small	child	asking	love	from	his
parents,	one	could	understand	 it;	but	even	parents	are	asking	for	 love	from	the
small	child.
The	mother	comes	and	wants	 the	small	child	 to	smile	and	 to	welcome	her	and
the	poor	child	may	not	be	in	a	state	to	smile	at	all,	but	he	has	to	smile.	He	starts
learning	diplomacy;	he	smiles,	he	simply	stretches	his	lips.	He	may	be	ready	to
cry,	he	may	be	hungry,	but	he	smiles	because	he	knows	that	a	smile	works.	If	the
mother	 is	 happy	 then	 he	may	 get	 some	 love,	 some	 food,	 otherwise	 he	will	 be
ignored.	And	the	mother	also	goes	on	doing	that,	bribing	the	child:	whenever	he
is	 showing	 love	 she	 will	 feed	 him,	 hug	 him,	 and	 whenever	 the	 child	 is	 not
showing	love	she	will	punish	him,	 in	a	 thousand	and	one	ways	she	will	 ignore
him,	neglect	him.
So	 from	 his	 very	 childhood	 the	 child	 is	 surrounded	 by	 beggars.	 They	 are	 all
asking	 'Give	us	 love!	I	am	your	--	daddy,	 I	am	your	mummy	--	give	me	love!'
The	 poor	 child	 has	 no	 idea	what	 is	 happening,	 but	 he	 has	 to	 pretend	 at	 least.
From	that	moment	he	pretends	for	his	whole	 life,	he	will	be	a	hypocrite.	Then
one	day	he	will	show	love	to	his	wife	without	feeling	any	love,	because	if	you
don't	show	love	 to	your	wife	she	will	create	 trouble.	She	may	put	more	salt	 in
your	vegetables	(laughter),	she	may	give	you	tea	without	sugar;	she	will	devise
all	kinds	of	strategies.	She	will	throw	things	and	she	will	break	pots	and	she	will
create	chaos.
So	it	is	better,	just	to	keep	things	silent	(The	crash	from	the	region	of	Vrindavan
canteen	 --	 which	 runs	 under	 the	 hand	 and	 heart	 of	 Italian	 Deeksha	 --	 could
hardly	be	better	timed.	The	group	in	front	of	Osho	bursts	into	laughter,	and	Osho
grins.)...	This	is	mother	Deeksha!	(much	laughter)	She	immediately	did	some...
(Osho's	 sentence	peters	off	as	more	 laughter	breaks	out.)	And	 this	goes	on	 for
the	 whole	 of	 one's	 life.	 When	 you	 are	 old	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 get	 love	 and
pretending	 that	you	 love,	and	others	are	also	pretending	 that	 they	 love	you,	 so
the	whole	of	life	becomes	pretentious,	phony.
And	to	live	a	phony	life	is	not	to	live	at	all.	It	is	better	to	commit	suicide	than	to
live	a	phony	life,	because	at	least	suicide	will	be	authentic,	not	phony.	Nobody
can	commit	a	phony	suicide.	People	try	that	too,	particularly	women.	They	will
take	sleeping	pills	but	always	such	a	quantity	that	they	don't	die!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(laughter)	That	is	phony	suicide,	a	phony	attempted	suicide,	we	should	call	it.
Give	 love	and	don't	ask.	Give	authentically	 --	 that's	 the	way	of	 sannyas	 --	and
you	will	be	rewarded.
That	 is	 without	 any	 question,	 that	 is	 inevitable.	 But	 one	 has	 to	 know	 it	 by
experience	whether	what	I	am	saying	works	or	not.
Here	you	can	see	so	much	love,	so	much	over-flowing	love,	because	everybody
is	giving	 it	and	nobody	 is	 trying	 to	snatch.	Those	who	are	 trying	 to	snatch	are
miserable	even	here,	in	this	place	where	love	is	the	only	rule,	the	only	discipline.
Here	also	are	a	few	people	who	are	sitting	thirsty	on	the	bank	of	the	river,	crying
and	weeping.	But	sooner	or	later	they	learn	that	this	is	stupid:	when	everybody	is
jumping	 in	 the	 river,	why	waste	 time?	 It	 is	 hesitantly,	 but	 one	 day	 they	 jump.
Once	 they	 have	 jumped	 suddenly	 they	 become	 aware	 that	 they	 have	 been
unnecessarily	sitting	and	waiting	for	somebody	to	come	and	give	love	to	them.
There	 is	 nobody	 to	 come	 and	 give	 love	 to	 you,	 unless	 you	 go	 and	 give	 it	 to
others.	Then	they	will	respond.	Whatsoever	you	give	comes	back	to	you,	and	a
thousandfold.
Veet	Manu.	Veet	means	transcending.	Manu	means	mind.
Sannyas	can	be	defined	as	a	transcendence	of	the	mind.	Mind	is	the	root	cause	of
all	our	misery.	Mind	means	 the	past,	 the	 future,	memories	and	desires.	All	our
thoughts	are	either	memories	or	desires,	and	existence	is	now;	it	is	neither	past
nor	 future.	 It	 is	never	past,	never	 future;	 it	 is	always	present,	 it	 is	always	now,
and	the	mind	does	not	know	how	to	be	herenow.	And	it	cannot	be	taught	to	be
here	and	now.	Its	very	construction	is	such	that	it	can	exist	only	in	the	past	or	in
the	future.
In	the	present	what	exists	is	a	state	of	no-mind.	You	can	try	it	any	moment,	just
be	silent,	utterly	herenow,	and	you	will	be	surprised:	there	is	no	mind.	Memories
have	 been	 put	 aside,	 desires	 have	 been	 put	 aside	 and	 in	 the	 gap	 between	 the
memory	and	the	desire	the	whole	existence	opens	up.	But	it	is	not	mind,	it	is	not
thought,	it	is	reality	itself.
The	experience	of	this	reality	is	meditation.	The	moment	you	have	experienced
it	you	know	that	reality	and	god	are	synonymous.	You	can	call	it	god	if	you	like,
you	can	call	it	truth	if	you	like,	you	can	call	it	liberation,	freedom,	but	all	these
words	simply	indicate	one	thing:	the	real.
Mind	is	the	unreal,	the	world	of	the	unreal,	as	we	have	to	come	out	of	the	unreal
to	meet,	to	merge,	to	melt	into	the	real.
Pankaj	 means	 a	 lotus,	 but	 the	 English	 word	 'lotus	 does	 not	 have	 that	 quality
which	the	Sanskrit	word
'pankaj'	has.	'Pank'	means	the	mud	and	'pankaj'	means	born	out	of	the	mud.
The	lotus	arises	out	of	mud;	hence	it	contains	a	significant	message:	we	are	mud
but	we	can	be	lotuses	also.	That	potential	is	there.
The	Hebrew	word	 'Adam'	means	mud,	 in	 fact,	 red	mud,	 because	 the	 earth	 in
Israel	 is	 red.	And	 god	 of	 course	 created	 the	 first	man	 in	 Israel	 and	 out	 of	 red
mud.	God	must	have	loved	red	as	I	love	it!	(laughter)	Otherwise	why	bother	to
go	to	Israel?	He	could	have	found	mud	anywhere,	but	if	you	are	looking	for	red
mud	you	have	to	go	to	Israel.
Man	is	nothing	but	mud;	the	lotus	is	only	a	potentiality.	It	is	possible	if	we	work
for	it,	but	if	we	don't	work	for	it	we	will	remain	mud	and	we	will	be	lost	in	mud.
Sannyas	means	making	a	deliberate	effort	to	transform	the	mud	into	a	lotus.	And
the	lotus	is	the	greatest	flower,	it	is	incomparable.	No	other	flower	is	so	big,	no
other	flower	is	so	fragrant.	It	is	the	emperor	of	all	flowers;	hence	it	has	become
symbolic	of	Buddhahood,	because	when	consciousness	unfolds	in	the	mud	of	the
ordinary	humanity	it	is	a	one-thousand	petalled	lotus.	It	is	such	a	revolution	from
the	mud	 to	 the	 lotus;	 it	 is	 unbelievable	 that	 out	 of	 dirty	 mud	 such	 a	 delicate
flower	can	arise.
That's	why	Buddhas	have	always	been	suspected,	people	can't	believe	it,	because
they	are	aware	of	 their	muddiness	but	 they	have	no	 idea	of	 their	 lotusness.	So
when	 somebody's	 lotus	 opens	 up	 they	 cannot	 believe	 it,	 they	 think	 it	 is	 just
illusion:	either	 the	person	 is	deluding	himself	or	he	 is	 trying	 to	deceive	others.
People	could	not	believe	in	Jesus,	people	could	not	believe	in	Socrates,	people
could	not	believe	in	Pythagoras	--
people	 have	 never	 believed	 in	 any	 Buddha	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 --	 and	 it	 is
understandable	 too	 --	 that	 they	are	 just	mud.	How	can	 they	believe	 that	out	of
such	mud	--	lust,	greed,	anger,	hate	--	such	compassion,	such	love,	such	prayer
can	arise?	Impossible!	It	seems	illogical.	But	if	one	accepts	the	possibility	even
hypothetically	then	a	search	begins.
So	I	don't	say	believe	in	the	existence	of	the	Buddhas;	I	say	only	hypothetically
assume	that	perhaps	that	is	a	possibility.	That	'perhaps'	will	open	a	door	in	you.
You	will	be	able	to	know	only	when	the	lotus	has	opened	in	you.	Unless	one	is	a
Buddha	 oneself	 one	 cannot	 understand	 any	 other	 Buddha.	 There	 is	 no	 other
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
way.
So	my	effort	here	 is	not	 to	make	you	Christians	but	Christs,	not	Buddhists	but
Buddhas,	 because	 unless	 you	 have	 experienced	 it	 within	 your	 being	 all	 the
stories	of	those	great,	fragrant	people	will	remain	only	stories.	They	are	beautiful
stories,	but	not	factual,	not	real	--	 fables.	And	I	say	to	you	they	are	not	fables,
they	 are	 realities.	 But	 I	 don't	 want	 you	 to	 believe	 in	 them	 --	 I	 want	 you	 to
experience	those	realities.
Nilima	literally	means	blueness,	but	symbolically	it	is	of	immense	significance.
It	symbolises	two	things;	one	is	depth.
Whenever	water	 is	 deep	 it	 starts	 looking	 blue.	When	 it	 is	 shallow	 it	 does	 not
have	the	colour	blue	but	depth	gives	it	the	colour	blue.	Scientists	say	the	sky	is
not	blue,	it	has	no	colour	but	it	looks	blue	because	it	is	so	infinite;	such	depth,
such	 infinity,	 gives	 it	 the	 colour	 of	 blue.	 Blueness	 represents	 depth,	 infinite
depth.
And	we	are	as	infinite	as	the	sky!	Even	the	sky	is	not	the	limit.	We	are	as	deep	as
the	Pacific,	perhaps	 the	Pacific	 is	not	as	deep	as	we	are	--	 it	 is	only	five	miles
deep.	That	is	not	much	of	a	depth.	But	our	consciousness	has	no	bottom	to	it,	it
is	abysmal.	Hence	when	one	enters	into	one's	inner	space	one	feels	tremendous
blueness.	 It	 is	 an	 existential	 experience.	 When	 one	 turns	 in	 one	 finds	 such
blueness	as	one	has	never	seen	before:	 the	blueness	of	 the	sky	fades	away,	 the
blueness	of	deep,	dark	waters	is	nothing	compared	to	the	inner	blueness.
Secondly,	man	has	a	few	centres	from	where	energy	functions.	There	are	many
centres	 but	 the	 main	 centres	 are	 seven.	 The	 lowest	 is	 the	 sex	 centre,	 where
almost	everybody	 is	hung	up	because	we	are	born	out	of	 sexuality.	So	 the	 sex
centre	 is	 our	 inheritance.	 Only	 that	 centre	 is	 functioning.	 Unless	 we	 start
working	on	our	energy	other	centres	remain	dormant.	If	one	goes	on	living	at	the
sex	centre	one	 lives	at	 the	 lowest	point	of	 the	 ladder.	The	highest	centre	 is	 the
seventh	which	in	the	East	is	called	'sahasrar',	because	it	is	at	the	seventh	that	the
one-thousand	petalled	lotus	opens.
The	name	'sahasrar'	means	one-thousand	petalled.	It	remains	closed	if	the	energy
is	somewhere	lower.
Three	centres	are	the	lower	centres,	three	centres	are	the	higher	centres,	and	one
is	exactly	in	the	middle.
The	middle	centre	is	the	heart,	the	centre	of	love.
When	sex	starts	becoming	love,	 then	your	heart	opens	up.	That's	a	great	 jump;
that	is	moving	from	sex	to	love.	It	is	really	a	great	achievement.	To	move	from
the	centre	of	love	to	the	seventh	centre	one	has	to	pass	one	more	very	significant
centre	--	that	is	the	sixth.	That	is	called	the	third	eye	centre;	it	is	exactly	between
the	 two	eyes.	And	when	your	energy	reaches	 the	 third	eye	centre	 it	becomes	a
blue	 flame,	 it	 actually	 becomes	 a	 blue	 flame.	 It	 is	 very	 cool	 although	 it	 is	 a
flame;	 it	 is	 fire	 but	 cool	 fire.	 That	 is	 the	 last	 that	man	 can	 achieve,	 the	 sixth
centre,	and	the	seventh	happens	on	its	own.	When	the	whole	energy	has	moved
to	the	sixth	and	has	become	a	blue	flame	--	and	a	flame	naturally	rises	upwards
on	its	own	it	moves	upwards	--	that	flame	moving	upwards	at	a	certain	point,	at	a
certain	 intensity	opens	 the	 seventh	 centre	 and	one	 is	 freed	 from	all	misery,	 all
limitation,	all	bondage.
So	Nilima,	blueness,	has	 these	 two	meanings.	First,	 infinite	depth;	 second,	 the
blue	light	that	is	the	ultimate	achievement	of	one's	efforts	in	meditation.	It	is	at
the	sixth	centre	that	your	energy	becomes	prayer.
And	 once	 your	 energy	 has	moved	 from	 sex	 to	 love,	 from	 love	 to	 prayer,	 you
have	done	whatsoever	you	could	do.	Now	everything	 is	going	 to	happen	of	 its
own	 accord.	 You	 have	 come	 to	 the	 end	 of	 your	 effort;	 now	 something	 will
happen	as	the	grace	of	the	beyond.	The	flame	will	hit	the	closed	bud	of	the	lotus
and	open	it	up.
And	 the	 fragrance	 released	 is	 the	ultimate	goal	of	 life.	There	 is	nothing	higher
than	that.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8012195
ShortTitle:	GREENR20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Anand	Fiore.	Anand	means	bliss.	Fiore	means	a	flower.
The	nature	of	misery	is	to	make	you	closed	--	closed	to	existence,	to	people,	to
all	 that	 is.	 It	 is	 intrinsic	 to	misery	 that	 it	makes	 you	 shrink	 inside	 yourself;	 it
makes	you	hide,	it	disconnects	you.
The	nature	of	bliss	 is	 just	 the	opposite:	 it	opens	you	up	like	a	flower.	It	makes
you	available	to	existence
--	to	the	sun,	to	the	wind,	to	the	rain	--	and	when	you	are	available	to	existence,
existence	 is	 available	 to	 you.	Whatsoever	 you	do	 to	 existence	 always	 bounces
back	upon	you.	If	you	are	closed,	existence	is	closed;	if	you	are	open	existence	is
open.	Existence	simply	reflects	you.	And	when	you	are	closed	and	existence	is
closed	life	becomes	hell.
One	 of	 the	 famous	 plays	 of	 Jean	Paul	 Sartre	 is	NO	EXIT.	Three	 persons	 find
themselves	 in	 a	 room	which	 has	 no	 exit.	 Everything	 is	 available,	 whatsoever
they	need	is	there,	but	they	cannot	get	out.	Naturally	they	become	bored,	bored
with	each	other,	bored	to	death,	but	there	is	no	way	out;	they	have	to	be	there.
And	one	can	conceive	how	torturous	it	could	become.	That's	Sartre's	idea	of	hell.
No	need	to	throw	people	into	a	fire	--	that	is	a	very	primitive	idea,	just	put	them
in	a	place	from	where	they	cannot	escape.	And	there	is	no	need	to	torture	them,
give	 them	 all	 the	 luxury	 and	 comfort	 and	 convenience,	 but	 just	 destroy	 their
freedom	 --	 that's	 enough.	 It	 is	more	 than	 throwing	 them	 into	 hellfire.	At	 least
there	 would	 be	 some	 excitement	 in	 hell-fire,	 but	 in	 a	 closed	 room,	 with	 no
opening,	nowhere	to	go...
This	is	the	situation	of	every	miserable	persons	no	exit	--	no	windows,	no	doors.
Windowless,	he	is	living	in	a	cocoon.
Meditation	opens	windows.	Windows	are	there,	it	is	just	that	you	have	forgotten
about	them.	Even	if	they	are	locked	there	are	keys	which	can	open	them.	And	it
is	up	to	you	to	open	them	or	not	to	open	them	--
it	is	your	freedom,	it	is	your	choice.
The	moment	 you	 start	 opening	 up...	 That's	what	 I	 call	meditation,	 opening	 up
like	a	flower.	And	then	suddenly	life	is	paradise;	instantly,	immediately,	you	are
transported	into	an	other	dimension.
The	whole	art	of	bliss	is	the	art	of	opening	your	petals.	Take	the	risk	--	of	course
there	is	a	risk	in	opening	up,	there	is	danger,	but	the	only	way	to	live	is	to	live
dangerously,	there	is	no	other	way.	Nothing	can	be	done	about	it.
If	one	does	not	want	 to	 live	 then	there	 is	no	danger.	Then	the	best	place	 is	 the
grave,	one	simply	goes	inside	the	grave,	all	is	closed,	a	beautiful	marble	stone	is
put	over	you	and	then	rest	forever	in	peace.
Nothing	will	ever	happen,	no	accident,	no	 trouble,	no	anxiety,	no	problem,	but
then	you	are	dead.
Life	 means	 challenges,	 problems.	 One	 has	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 enjoy	 those
challenges,	how	to	ride	over	those	challenges	how	to	conquer	all	the	dangers	that
life	gives	 to	you.	It	 is	a	gift.	And	as	you	start	 learning	the	ways	of	conquering
more	 and	 more	 you	 become	 more	 and	 more	 blissful	 and	 ecstatic.	 Then	 each
moment	is	a	joy.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Peter.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Peter	means	a
rock.
Mind	is	like	shifting	sands.	Mind	is	always	in	a	flux,	changing.	Not	even	for	two
consecutive	moments	is	it	the	same,	so	you	cannot	make	your	house	there.	And
everybody	is	trying	to	do	that.
To	make	your	house	in	the	mind	is	 to	make	your	house	on	shifting	sands.	It	 is
like	 writing	 on	 water:	 you	 have	 not	 even	 written	 and	 it	 is	 gone.	 Or	 it	 is	 like
making	a	house	of	playing	cards:	a	little	breeze,	maybe	just	your	own	breath,	and
the	house	collapses.	One	card	slips	and	the	whole	house	is	gone.
Meditation	is	just	the	opposite	of	mind.	It	is	rocklike.	Mind	is	time,	meditation	is
eternity	--	that	is	what	is	represented	by	the	rock.	The	rock	is	a	symbol,	a	symbol
of	eternity.	One	has	to	get	out	of	the	mind	and	enter	into	a	state	of	no-mind,	no-
thought,	no-desire,	no-memory;	 just	pure	silence,	pure	being.	Then	whatsoever
you	make	remains,	then	whatsoever	you	create	is	forever.
It	is	only	there	that	one	can	find	shelter,	that	one	can	find	a	home.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	moment	Gautam	the	Buddha	became	enlightened	the	first	thing	that	he	said
was,	 "I	 have	 found	my	 home.	 This	 is	 the	 place	 I	 have	 been	 searching	 for	 for
thousands	of	lives."	And	he	said	to	his	own	mind,
"Now	you	will	 not	be	needed	anymore.	You	have	been	doing	great	work,	you
have	been	taking	all	kinds	of	troubles	for	me	--	thank	you	for	all	that	--	but	now
you	will	 not	 be	 needed	 because	 I	 have	 found	 the	 real	 home,	 so	 your	work	 is
finished.	Goodbye!"
Svaraj	means	the	kingdom	of	the	self.
We	are	all	beggars	because	we	have	chosen	to	look	outside	our	own	self	and	we
are	 searching	 there	 for	 the	 kingdom	 that	 somehow	 we	 remember.	We	 have	 a
vague	 remembrance	 that	 it	was	once	ours,	but	we	cannot	 figure	out	whether	 it
was	a	dream	or	a	reality.	But	each	child	in	his	mother's	womb	has	experienced
the	inner	kingdom;	hence	that	nostalgia	persists.	Out	of	that	nostalgia	is	born	the
whole	art	of	meditation.
Without	that	nostalgia	there	would	have	been	no	meditation	at	all.
We	have	tasted	something	but	a	gap	has	arisen;	we	have	forgotten	the	way	to	it
and	we	 are	 searching	 for	 it	 again	 and	 again,	 in	 every	 direction.	 The	more	we
search,	the	more	frustrated	we	become,	because	it	is	not	found	anywhere	outside;
it	can	be	found	only	within	yourself.
Meditation	again	creates	the	same	space	as	was	in	the	womb	of	the	mother.
Sigmund	 Freud	 had	 many	 beautiful	 insights.	 One	 of	 his	 insight,	 was	 that	 the
search	for	god	is	the	search	for	the	womb.	Of	course	he	was	using	his	insight	as
a	condemnation	of	religion,	but	his	insight	was	right	--
his	 condemnation	 was	 wrong.	 There	 is	 nothing	 wrong	 in	 searching	 for	 the
womb.	If	it	was	beautiful	--	and	it	was	beautiful;	if	it	was	peaceful	--	and	It	was
peaceful	if	it	was	blissful	--	and	it	was	blissful,	then	what	is	wrong	in	searching
for	it	again?
Of	 course	 now	 one	 cannot	 enter	 into	 the	 womb.	 Perhaps	 lovers	 are	 trying	 to
enter	deeply	 into	each	other	for	 the	same	reason,	but	 that	 too	is	futile,	 it	 is	not
possible	in	the	nature	of	things.	The	only	way	one	can	again	create	the	space	is
to	 enter	 into	oneself;	one	has	 to	 enter	 into	one's	own	womb	 --	 and	 that's	what
meditation	 is.	 And	 suddenly	 you	 know	 that	 the	 kingdom	was	 always	 waiting
there	for	you.	The	goal	is	not	outside,	it	is	within;	god	is	not	outside,	it	is	within.
Veet	Paribasha.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Paribasha	means	definition.
Truth	cannot	be	defined,	love	cannot	be	defined,	bliss	cannot	be	defined.	All	that
is	 significant,	 all	 that	 is	 meaningful,	 is	 intrinsically	 indefinable.	 It	 can	 be
experienced	but	it	cannot	be	expressed.	It	is	ineffable,	it	is	a	mystery;	you	cannot
solve	 it.	 You	 can	 dissolve	 into	 it,	 you	 can	 become	 it,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to
demystify	it	--	and	that's	what	a	definition	does,	it	demystifies	something.
Science	 lives	 in	 definitions.	 Everything	 is	 defined,	 everything	 is	 clear-cut,
everything	 is	 arithmetically	 put,	 calculated,	 experimented	with	 a	 thousand	 and
one	times	so	no	mistake	can	happen.	Science	is	a	way	of	defining	things.	If	you
ask	the	scientist	'What	is	water?',	he	has	the	definition,	H2o,	and	in	a	telegraphic
way	his	definition	contains	the	whole	secret	of	water	--	according	to	science.	But
this	is	not	the	way	of	religion.
In	religion	just	the	opposite	process	happens:	all	that	is	defined	starts	becoming
indefinable.	Even	things	that	you	used	to	think	you	know	you	start	feeling	you
don't	know;	your	knowledge	starts	becoming	more	and	more	vague,	less	and	less
clear-cut.	Mathematics	becomes	more	like	music,	logic	becomes	more	like	love,
prose	starts	turning	into	poetry.	And	when	you	enter	this	mysterious	world	you
are	for	the	first	time	moving	on	sacred	ground.	This	is	the	true	pilgrimage.
Science	is	superficial,	just	on	the	circumference;	it	is	about	and	about.	Religion
is	not	about	and	about,	it	is	the	very	experience	of	the	centre.	But	the	experience
is	so	vast	that	there	is	no	way	to	calculate,	no	way	to	measure,	no	way	to	weigh,
no	way	to	indicate	it.
So	 those	who	 have	 known	 have	 also	 known	 that	 it	 is	 something	 unknowable;
they	 have	 stumbled	 upon	 something	 unknowable	 --	 not	 only	 unknown	 but
unknowable...	 because	 the	 unknown	 will	 become	 known	 some	 day,	 but	 the
unknowable	will	remain	unknowable	forever.	But	that's	the	beauty,	that	it	cannot
be	 demystified.	When	 the	whole	 existence	 becomes	mysterious	 again	 you	 are
again	a	child.
The	child	looks	at	the	world	with	wonder	and	awe;	meditation	makes	you	a	child
again,	again	there	is	an	explosion	of	wonder	and	awe.	Then	your	heart	is	beating
in	a	new	rhythm,	then	your	eyes	see	in	a	new	way,	your	ears	hear	in	a	new	way.
Everything	is	new	and	every	moment	there	is	a	surprise	waiting	for	you.
To	live	in	this	wonder	and	awe	is	to	live	in	god.
Premraj	means	kingdom	of	love.
There	are	two	types	of	conquerors	in	the	world	and	one	has	to	choose	to	be	one
or	the	other,	one	cannot	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
remain	without	 choosing.	One	 kind	 of	 conqueror	 is	 represented	 by	Alexander,
Napoleon,	Nadir	Shah,	Adolf	Hitler,	Joseph	Stalin.	The	other	kind	of	conqueror
is	represented	by	Gautam	Buddha,	Jesus	Christ,	Lao	Tzu,	Zarathustra,	Krishna.
These	are	two	diametrically	opposite	dimensions.
The	first	category	tries	to	conquer	others,	and	to	conquer	others	is	to	be	violent,
is	to	be	aggressive,	is	to	be	destructive.	So	all	these	so-called	conquerors	of	the
first	 category	 which	 the	 whole	 of	 history	 is	 full	 of,	 have	 been	 the	 most
destructive	people	on	the	earth.	They	have	not	only	destroyed	people,	they	have
destroyed	 the	 very	 possibility	 of	 love,	 bliss,	 silence,	 peace,	 god.	 They	 are	 the
murderers	of	god.
One	has	 to	 learn	another	kind	of	conquest	 and	 that	has	nothing	 to	do	with	 the
other;	it	is	an	inner	journey.	If	the	other	is	conquering	through	violence,	then	one
conquers	oneself	through	love.	And	the	most	strange	thing	is	that	when	you	are
trying	to	conquer	the	other	you	have	to	destroy	the	other,	but	the	destroyer	is	also
destroyed	in	that	destruction.	He	tries	to	conquer	the	other	--	that	never	happens,
and	meanwhile	he	is	losing	the	time	and	energy	with	which	to	conquer	himself.
So	he	tries	to	make	others	slaves	but	he	himself	becomes	a	slave	to	others.	And
just	the	opposite	happens	with	the	inner	journey:	one	conquers	oneself,	becomes
full	of	love,	creative,	poetic,	and	that	gives	one	immense	power,	but	that	power
is	 not	 of	 destruction,	 it	 is	 of	 creation.	 And	 because	 of	 that	 power	 he	 is	 also
capable	of	conquering	others	without	conquering	them.
People	 have	 loved	 Jesus,	 Buddha,	 Zarathustra,	 they	 have	 totally	 surrendered
themselves	to	them,	and	that	surrender	is	basically	different	from	the	surrender
when	 you	 are	 forced	 to	 do	 it	 by	 a	 sword.	 It	 is	 unwilling.	Deep	 down	you	 are
against	it,	it	can	never	be	total.	It	is	not	surrender	done	by	you,	it	is	forced,	and
sooner	or	later	you	will	take	revenge	with	a	vengeance.	That	always	happens.
Joseph	 Stalin	 was	 condemned	 once	 he	 was	 not	 in	 power.	 Even	 his	 body	was
removed	 --	 because	 his	 body	was	 lying	 by	 the	 side	 of	Lenin	 and	 it	 had	 to	 be
removed	 to	 a	 remote	 place	where	 nobody	would	 ever	 come	 to	 visit.	Now	 the
same	is	happening	to	Tao	Tse	Tung	in	China,	every	day	his	posters,	his	pictures,
his	 statues	 are	 being	 removed.	 This	 always	 happens.	 The	 people	 who	 try	 to
conquer	others	simply	waste	their	life.
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 means	 to	 become	 concerned	 with	 the	 inner	 conquest.	 It
releases	 infinite	energy	of	 love.	You	are	a	master	of	yourself	and	you	can	help
many	others	to	become	masters	of	themselves.
Whosoever	falls	in	love	with	a	master	will	become	a	master	sooner	or	later.
The	kingdom	of	love	is	the	only	goal	worth	achieving.	And	then	you	can	share	it
with	millions	of	people,	and	the	beauty	is	that	the	more	you	give,	the	more	you
have.
Veetena	means	transcendence.
One	has	to	transcend	three	things	to	find	oneself	or	to	find	god.	The	first	is	the
body.	We	are	in	the	body	but	we	are	not	the	body,	so	one	has	to	watch	and	slowly
slowly	become	aware	that	the	body	is	just	a	house
--	a	beautiful	house	and	we	have	to	love	it	and	keep	it	fit	and	keep	it	beautiful	--
but	we	are	not	it.	We	are	in	it	but	not	it.
And	the	key	is	to	watch	your	acts.	Walking,	eating,	talking,	listening	--	just	go	on
watching	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 the	 watcher	 becomes	 separate	 from	 the	 watched.
Then	the	second	step	is	to	become	a	watcher	of	your	mind	--	that	is	the	second
thing	to	be	transcended.	Watch	the	thoughts,	memories,	fantasies,	and	the	same
happens	 again	 you	 become	 disidentified	 with	 the	 mind.	 Then	 the	 third
transcendence	is	of	feeling,	emotions,	moods.
The	 physical	 is	 gross,	 the	mind	 is	 a	 little	 subtle,	 but	 feeling,	 the	 heart,	 is	 the
subtlest.	 And	 the	 day	 you	 have	 transcended	 the	 heart	 also	 you	 enter	 into	 the
fourth,	 turiya.	 And	 that	 entry	 brings	 you	 to	 the	 ultimate	 goal.	 Then	 there	 is
nowhere	to	got	you	have	found	your	truth,	which	is	also	the	truth	of	the	whole
existence.
And	truth	liberates	--	 liberates	you	from	all	misery,	from	all	darkness,	from	all
death.	It	gives	you	the	whole	kingdom	of	eternity,	the	kingdom	of	god.
Deva	Vigyan.	Deva	means	divine.	Vigyan	means	science.
Meditation	 is	 a	 divine	 science.	 Just	 as	 mathematics	 is	 a	 mundane	 science,
meditation	is	a	sacred	science.
Mathematics	is	concerned	with	the	measurable	and	meditation	is	concerned	with
the	immeasurable.
Ordinary	science	is	objective,	it	is	about	things,	and	the	divine	science	is	about
you,	 about	 your	 very	 consciousness,	 your	 being.	 Initiation	 into	 sannyas	means
initiation	into	the	divine	science,	so	the	whole	energy	has	to	be	put	into	growing
meditativeness.
And	my	 approach	 to	meditation	 is	 such	 that	 it	 does	 not	 divert	 you	 from	 your
ordinary	 life,	 it	 is	not	 escapist.	You	can	go	on	meditating	 in	all	your	activities
walking	you	can	meditate,	driving	you	can	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
meditate,	 working	 you	 can	meditate,	 because	 to	me	meditation	 simply	means
awareness.
If	you	start	chanting	a	mantra	while	driving	there	is	danger.	If	you	start	changing
a	mantra	while	working	in	the	office	you	will	not	be	able	to	do	your	work.	But
just	being	aware	is	not	a	diversion,	not	a	distraction.	On	the	contrary	it	helps	you
to	do	your	work	more	efficiently,	more	skilfully;	and	if	you	are	more	alert	and
aware	naturally,	your	work	will	have	some	quality	which	it	can	only	have	if	the
person	doing	it	is	doing	it	consciously,	not	mechanically.
So	 meditation	 is	 synonymous	 with	 awareness,	 and	 meditation	 is	 the	 whole
science	of	entering	into	god.
And	god	is	not	somewhere	else,	it	is	your	awareness	itself.	So	one	need	not	pray
to	some	god	there	above,	in	the	clouds.	One	has	just	to	become	aware	and	one
finds	god	at	the	very	core	of	one's	being.	And	to	have	found	it	is	to	have	found
all	that	is	worth	finding.
(To	a	middle-aged	woman:)
Anand	Rajyo.	Anand	means	bliss.	Rajyo	means	kingdom	--	kingdom	of	bliss.
Man	is	born	to	be	a	king.	That	is	our	very	destiny,	but	very	few	people	ever	try
to	fulfil	it.	They	take	life	for	granted,	they	don't	take	it	as	an	opportunity.	They
think	that	just	to	be	born	is	enough,	that	just	to	be	born	is	to	be	alive.
It	is	not	so.	Birth	is	only	a	beginning,	the	beginning	of	an	opportunity.	You	can
use	the	opportunity,	you	may	not	use	the	opportunity.	And	many	people	live	in
vain;	 they	 live	 superficially,	without	 ever	knowing	who	 they	 are,	without	 ever
understanding	 the	meaning	of	 life,	without	 ever	 even	 thinking	 about	why	 they
are	here,	from	where	they	come,	to	where	they	are	going.
I	have	heard	about	a	man	who	became	retired	at	the	age	of	sixty.	On	the	first	day
of	his	retirement	his	wife	said	 'Should	I	prepare	your	breakfast?	--	boiled	eggs,
etcetera?'	He	said	 'I	hate	boiled	eggs!'	But	his	wife	said	 'What	are	you	saying?
For	forty	years	continuously	you	have	been	eating	boiled	eggs	for	your	breakfast
and	suddenly	you	hate	them?'	And	the	man	said	'I	have	always	hated	them!'	The
wife	 said	 'Well,	why	 didn't	 you	 say	 so	 before?'	He	 said	 'I	 had	 no	 time!	 I	was
always	in	such	a	rush.	I	had	to	catch	the	train	and	go	to	the	office.	There	was	no
time.	Now	I	have	time.'
After	forty	years...	But	I	think	even	that	is	too	early.	As	far	as	people's	lives	are
concerned,	 even	 by	 the	 time	 they	 are	 dying	 they	 have	 not	 asked	 the	 only
significant	questions	of	'Why	was	I	here?	Who	am	I?	And	what	was	the	purpose
of	it	all?'	A	person	has	lived	his	life	--	seventy,	eighty,	ninety	years	--	and	he	is
dying,	he	is	like	a	letter	which	has	remained	unopened.	Nobody	has	read	it,	not
even	 he	 himself	 has	 read	 it.	 Even	 the	 envelope	 has	 not	 been	 opened.	Nobody
knows	what	the	message	was,	why	god	created	the	person.
Everybody	is	living	a	life	without	any	consciousness,	that's	why	although	we	are
destined	 to	be	kings	we	remain	beggars.	Our	whole	 life	 is	 just	a	begging	bowl
we	 are	 continuously	 asking	 for	more	 and	more,	 and	 nothing	 ever	 satisfies	 us,
nothing	ever	fills	the	bowl.	The	bowl	remains	empty.
And	we	are	not	meant	to	be	beggars...
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	become	kings	and	queens.	My	sannyasins
are	not	beggars.	They	have	to	be	emperors;	less	than	that	won't	do.	But	to	be	an
emperor	 an	 empire	 is	 not	 needed	 at	 all.	 All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 an	 inner
understanding,	 an	 inner	 awareness.	 Just	 a	 small	 candle	 of	 awareness	 burning
inside	is	enough	and	all	darkness	disappears.
And	the	moment	you	know	yourself	life	becomes	a	bliss,	a	benediction,	a	gift	of
god,	and	one	feels	immensely	thankful.	Such	gratitude	arises	towards	existence
that	 one	 cannot	 express	 it.	 One	 can	 only	 bow	 down	 to	 existence;	 not	 to	 a
particular	god	--	Christian,	Hindu	or	Mohammedan	--	but	to	existence	as	such,	to
the	 trees,	 to	 the	mountain,	 to	 the	 stars.	We	are	part	 of	 an	 immensely	beautiful
universe,	but	if	we	don't	know	ourselves,	how	can	we	know	the	whole?	At	least
we	should	become	acquainted	with	who	we	are.
And	 the	miracle	 of	miracles	 is	 that	 even	 a	 small	 dewdrop	 contains	 the	whole
secret	 of	 all	 the	 oceans.	 So	 if	 we	 can	 know	 our	 own	 small	 dewdrop	 of
consciousness	we	have	opened	the	whole	secret	of	existence.
Old	 age	 has	 a	 beauty	 of	 its	 own.	 Children	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 ignorant.	 Their
innocence	 is	 nothing	 but	 ignorance.	 Young	 people	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 foolish
because	they	have	to	learn	and	the	only	way	to	learn	is	 through	trial	and	error,
they	have	to	fool	around	--	that's	the	only	way	to	become	ripe	and	mature.
By	the	time	one	starts	getting	old	one	is	neither	ignorant	nor	inexperienced;	one
has	a	certain	maturity,	a	certain	ripeness	--	and	that	is	the	right	moment	to	enter
the	inner.	The	outer	one	has	experienced	and	known	and	seen	whatsoever	it	 is.
Now	there	is	no	more	excitement;	that	game	is	finished.	Now	the	whole	energy
can	 turn	 in	 --	 and	 that's	my	work	here,	 to	 turn	you	 in.	Once	you	 start	moving
inwards	 then	 everything	 else	 follows	 of	 its	 own	 accord,	 then	 the	 kingdom	 of
bliss	is	not	far	away.
The	 first	 step	 is	 the	most	difficult	 step	and	sannyas	can	help	you	 in	 taking	 the
first	step.	Then	the	second	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
follows	 easily.	 And	 the	 whole	 journey	 is	 completed	 in	 two	 steps	 the	 first	 is
turning	in	and	the	second	is	to	settle	in,	 to	sit	 in.	That's	why	in	Japan	they	call
meditation	zazen;	zazen	means	just	sitting,	doing	nothing.
Sitting	 within	 oneself,	 resting	 within	 oneself,	 and	 that's	 enough!	 It	 opens	 the
door	of	all	the	mysteries.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012205
ShortTitle:	GREENR21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dhyan	Rod.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Rod	means	the	esteemed	one.
Society	 gives	 the	 feeling	 to	 every	 person	 that	 he	 is	worthless.	 It	 is	 a	 political
strategy.	Once	a	person	gets	the	idea	that	he	is	worthless,	he	cannot	be	rebellious,
he	 cannot	 be	 independent,	 he	 cannot	 go	 outside	 the	 fold.	He	 cannot	 choose	 a
path	of	his	own,	he	will	follow	the	crowd.
Once	 the	 idea	 sinks	 deep	 into	 your	 unconscious	 that	 you	 are	 worthless	 you
cannot	trust	yourself;	you	will	have	to	trust	the	priest,	the	politician,	the	teacher,
the	parents	--	all	kinds	of	authorities.	And	you	will	seek	them,	you	will	cling	to
them	 because	 the	 ground	 underneath	 your	 feet	 has	 been	 taken	 away.	 You	 are
afraid	to	be	left	alone	on	your	own	because	then	you	know	you	cannot	decide,	all
that	you	decide	is	wrong;	you	cannot	act,	whatsoever	you	do	is	wrong.	Then	it	is
better	to	follow	the	mob;	let	them	decide,	you	just	be	an	imitator.
To	create	imitators	and	slaves	each	child's	trust	in	himself	is	being	destroyed	all
over	the	world,	in	all	kinds	of	societies	and	cultures,	in	all	countries.
My	effort	here	is	to	give	you	again	the	feeling	of	worth,	a	self-trust	--	and	that	is
possible	only	through	meditation,	because	meditation	can	help	you	get	rid	of	all
conditionings.	 And	 it	 is	 only	 a	 matter	 of	 conditioning.	 Others	 have	 told	 you
things	 again	 and	 again,	 they	 have	 hypnotised	 you.	 That	 hypnosis	 has	 to	 be
destroyed,	you	have	to	be	dehypnotised.	That's	what	meditation	is:	a	process	of
dehypnotisation.	Once	you	are	dehypnotised	you	wake	up	for	the	first	time,	then
suddenly	you	know	that	you	are	immensely	valuable,	as	everybody	else	is.	Then
one	feels	tremendous	respect	for	oneself	also.	And	it	is	not	ego,	because	you	feel
the	same	respect	 for	others.	You	are	not	higher,	you	are	not	holier	 than	others;
suddenly	 you	 have	 known	 that	 everyone	 is	 esteemed	 by	 nature	 itself,	 by	 the
universe	itself.
Prem	Martina.	Prem	means	love.	Martina	means	a	loyal	heart,	a	loyal	spirit,	one
who	is	capable	of	trust.
Love	can	arise	only	in	the	climate	of	trust.	When	you	are	full	of	doubts	love	is
impossible.	Doubt	belongs	to	the	mind	and	trust	belongs	to	the	heart.	Being	full
of	 doubts	mean	 s	 you	 are	 full	 of	mind,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 space	 for	 the	 heart	 to
grow.	 Being	 full	 of	 trust	 means	 you	 have	 emptied	 yourself	 of	 the	 mind,	 its
doubts,	and	questions;	then	there	is	enough	space	for	the	heart	to	grow.
And	 remember	one	 fundamental	 law	of	 life,	 that	 the	gross	 is	 stronger	 than	 the
subtle,	 that	 the	 lower	 is	stronger	 than	 the	higher	 --	stronger	 in	 the	sense	 that	 it
has	more	destructive	power.	The	higher	is	stronger	in	a	totally	different	sense;	it
has	more	creative	force	but	it	is	not	destructive.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Mind	 is	 a	gross	phenomenon.	Heart	 is	 subtle,	delicate,	 soft,	 feminine.	Mind	 is
male,	aggressive,	ambitious,	destructive;	mind	has	not	created	anything.
All	 that	 has	 been	 created	 --	 great	 poetry,	 great	 music,	 great	 paintings	 --	 all
belongs	 to	 the	heart.	And	 love	 is	 the	highest	 creation	of	 the	heart,	but	 for	 that
rose	to	grow	you	have	to	pull	out	all	the	weeds.	Weeds	are	very	strong	people.
They	grow	on	their	own	--	that	is	the	first	thing	--	you	need	not	sow	Roses	don't
grow	on	their	own;	you	have	to	plant	them	and	protect	them	--	they	are	delicate
people.	And	if	you	leave	it	 to	nature	 then	the	roses	will	be	crushed,	destroyed.
and	the	weeds	will	overpower	everything.
The	same	is	true	about	the	inner	world.
A	 priest	 was	 passing	 by	 and	 he	 saw	 a	 gardener	 working	 in	 his	 garden.	 Such
beautiful	roses	had	blossomed	that	the	priest	stopped	to	have	a	look	and	talk	to
the	gardener.	He	said	'God	and	man	together	can	create	so	much.'	The	gardener
laughed	and	 said	 'You	 should	have	 come	before	when	god	alone	was	growing
this	 garden	 --	 then	 there	 was	 not	 a	 single	 rose,	 there	 were	 all	 weeds.'	 The
gardener	said	'It	is	not	co-operation	with	god;	in	fact	I	have	been	fighting	against
god!	 He	 was	 growing	 weeds	 and	 I	 am	 growing	 roses,	 and	 he	 still	 insists	 on
growing	weeds.	It	is	a	continuous	struggle.'	And	he	was	right!
The	higher	has	to	fight	against	the	lower,	but	the	fight	has	to	be	very	intelligent
otherwise	the	lower	will	crush	it.
Love	has	 to	be	not	 only	 love	but	meditative	 love;	 then	 love	has	 a	 tremendous
intelligence,	 then	 it	 is	 not	 insane,	 it	 is	 the	 highest	 form	 of	 sanity.	And	 then	 it
knows	how	 to	protect	 itself,	how	 to	prevent	doubts	growing	around	 it,	 how	 to
prevent	the	mind	from	encroaching	on	the	territory	of	the	inner	being.
It	is	only	through	meditation	that	love	becomes	capable	of	winning	the	battle	--
between	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 heart,	 between	 doubt	 and	 trust,	 between	 logic	 and
love.	But	if	one	is	courageous	enough	one	can	drop	the	doubts.	One	can	uproot
all	 the	weeds.	 That's	 the	work	 a	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 do:	 uprooting	 the	weeds	 of
doubt	and	merging	and	molting	into	trust,	surrender,	into	a	deep	and	total	yes.	In
that	climate	love	blossoms.
That	 climate	 functions	 like	 the	 spring	 and	 suddenly	 one's	whole	 life	 is	 full	 of
roses.
Bodhi	Herma.	Bodhi	means	intelligence.	Herma	means	diligence.
Intelligence	alone	is	impotent;	it	can	think	but	it	cannot	act.	Diligence	alone	can
act	but	it	is	blind,	hence	whatsoever	it	does	will	create	more	trouble	and	chaos.
And	 this	 is	 one	of	 the	 calamities	 in	 the	world,	 that	 the	diligent	 people	 are	not
intelligent	and	the	intelligent	people	are	not	diligent.	For	example,	Adolf	Hitler,
Napoleon,	 Alexander,	 are	 very	 diligent	 but	 not	 intelligent.	 Buddha,	 Lao	 Tzu,
Kabir,	are	very	intelligent	but	not	diligent.
My	sannyasin	has	to	create	a	synthesis.	It	 is	beautiful	that	a	few	Buddhas	have
happened	in	 the	world,	but	 if	 they	had	been	creative	also,	 if	 they	had	not	been
just	silent,	just	blissful,	but	also	active	in	the	world,	they	would	have	immensely
benefitted	humanity.	And	these	diligent	people,	they	are	really	great	workers;	for
their	whole	life	they	go	on	doing	things.	Whore	even	angels	are	afraid	to	tread,
the	 fools	 rush	 in.	 They	 are	 very	 intelligent	 people,	 fools	 are	 very	 intelligent
people.	They	are	active,	very	active.	Their	activity	is	the	danger,	their	diligence
is	the	danger.	If	the	fools	are	less	diligent	and	the	wise	are	more	diligent	it	would
be	good.	If	the	wise	are	a	little	less	intelligent	it	will	do	but	the	fools	should	be	a
little	more	intelligent	--	it	will	bring	balance	into	the	world.
That's	why	I	am	not	telling	my	sannyasins	to	renounce	the	world	and	to	escape
to	the	monasteries.	That	would	be	easier:	you	can	be	silent,	you	can	be	blissful,
you	c	an	 forget	all	about	 the	world	 --	but	 it	 is	not	good	 to	 forget	all	about	 the
world.	It	is	our	world;	we	have	to	make	it	beautiful,	we	have	to	make	a	paradise
out	of	it.
So	I	am	telling	my	sannyasins	to	remain	in	the	marketplace	yet	to	be	there	very
intelligently	 so	 you	 are	 not	 contaminated	 by	 the	marketplace;	 on	 the	 contrary,
you	transform	the	marketplace	itself.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I'd	like	to	stay	for	good,	Osho.
--	That's	good.	Be	here	forever!
Paribodh	means	transcendental	intelligence.
The	intellect	is	part	of	the	ordinary	mind.	It	is	needed	in	the	world,	it	is	really	a
biocomputer.	 It	 collects	 information,	memory,	 and	keeps	 all	 the	 records	which
you	may	need	any	time,	but	it	is	not	intelligence;	it	is	only	intellect.	Intelligence
is	something	transcendental,	beyond	the	intellect.
You	have	 to	go	 through	 the	bridge	of	meditation,	only	 then	will	you	 reach	 the
other	shore.	This	shore	is	intellect,	the	other	shore	is	intelLigence.	And	these	two
shores	have	to	be	bridged.	I	am	not	against	intellect,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
but	to	remain	confined	to	intellect	is	to	remain	confined	to	the	outside	world.	To
be	 just	 intellectual	means	 to	be	a	materialist,	because	 intellect	cannot	give	you
any	 idea	 about	 that	 which	 is	 beyond	 it.	 It	 has	 a	 limitation;	 it	 can	 see	 matter
because	 matter	 is	 measurable,	 weighable;	 it	 can	 be	 comprehended	 by	 the
intellect.	 But	 it	 cannot	 give	 you	 any	 idea	 of	 consciousness.	 Consciousness	 is
something	beyond	--	the	other	shore,	the	further	shore.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Paribodh:	the	other	shore,	the	further	shore,	the	shore	of
intelligence.	It	can	be	bridged	--	meditation	is	the	bridge.
Once	you	have	bridged	it,	once	you	have	known	how	to	be	silent,	utterly	silent,
how	to	put	your	intellect,	your	mind,	to	rest,	to	bring	it	to	a	full	stop,	how	to	put
it	 off,	 once	you	have	 learned	 the	knack	of	 it,	 suddenly	your	 intelligence	 starts
functioning	and	for	the	first	time	you	become	aware	of	the	mysteries	of	life
--	of	consciousness,	of	love,	of	truth,	of	god.	And	than	you	can	use	the	intellect
whenever	it	is	needed.
When	you	want	to	remember	somebody's	phone	number	you	can	put	 it	on,	but
when	you	don't	want	the	phone	number	there	is	no	need	for	the	intellect	to	go	on
reminding	you	about	phone	numbers.	And	it	goes	on	reminding	you.	Even	if	you
go	on	shouting	at	it	 'Shut	up!',	that	does	not	matter,	it	laughs	at	you,	it	goes	on
saying	 the	same	phone	number	again	and	again.	 If	you	 try	 to	shut	 it	up	 it	will
become	very	very	aggressive.	You	can	try	it....
I	give	you	the	phone	number	--	22333	--	and	try	to	put	it	off...	22333..,	(laughter)
And	the	more	you	try...	 tonight	 try	it!	(more	laughter)	For	the	whole	night	you
will	 have	 to	 remain	 awake,	 you	 cannot	 turn	 it	 off.	 Those	 figures	will	 become
bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger	and	they	will	cover	your	whole	being	and	they	will
enter	 from	this	side	and	 that	side.	You	can	go	on	shouting	 'Shut	up!',	and	 they
won't	listen	at	all.
It	is	not	a	question	of	shouting	at	the	mind;	one	needs	a	subtle	technique	to	put	it
off.	That	technique	is	meditation.	Reduced	to	its	most	essential	core	meditation
means	 watching.	 When	 the	 mind	 says	 22333,	 you	 simply	 watch,	 don't	 say
anything;	 just	 look	 directly,	 go	 on	 looking.	And	you	will	 be	 surprised:	 as	 you
look	those	figures	start	evaporating,	they	recede.	You	go	on	looking	without	any
fight,	without	shouting,	without	getting	angry	and	they	disappear.
This	is	how	the	whole	mind	is	slowly	slowly	overcome.	And	one	day	when	you
have	been	able	to	put	the	mind	to	rest...	It	is	good	for	the	mind	too	to	have	a	little
rest;	 it	 starts	working	 at	 the	 cradle	 and	 goes	 on	working	 up	 to	 the	 grave,	 and
maybe	 --	 who	 knows?	 --	 maybe	 even	 after	 you	 are	 in	 the	 grave	 it	 may	 be
continuously	working.
It	 is	good	 that	Hindus	burn	 the	bodies.	One	 thing	 is	certain,	 that	 it	 is	 finished,
they	 have	 burned	 the	 computer.	 But	 inside	 the	 grave	 a	 Christian	 or	 a
Mohammedan	may	be	still	doing	things	22333	(laughter).
And	 then	 you	 cannot	 stop	 it	 at	 all;	 you	 cannot	 even	 get	 up.	 You	 cannot	 start
reading	 the	newspaper	or	 turn	 the	 radio	on!	You	cannot	 argue	with	your	wife.
There	is	nowhere	to	go;	they	don't	even	allow	tossing	and	turning	in	the	grave...
just	 lying	 down	 and	 the	 same	mind	 goes	 on	 playing	 the	 same	 games!	Certain
processes	continue	in	the	grave:	hair	goes	on	growing,	nails	go	on	growing	--	so
who	knows?	--	the	mind	may	go	on	functioning	just	out	of	old	habit.
But	one	thing	is	certain,	that	if	mind	continues	to	work	you	will	never	be	able	to
know	 your	 innermost	 core	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 liberating	 experience,	 the	 most
ecstatic	experience.	Once	you	have	 tasted	of	 it	you	are	 freed	 from	all	kinds	of
nonsense.	You	are	freed	from	politics,	you	are	freed	from	the	so-called	religions,
you	 are	 freed	 from	 all	 kinds	 of	 ideologies.	 You	 start	 living	 in	 the	 moment,
immediately	 related	 with	 reality,	 in	 tune,	 a	 dance	 arises	 in	 you	 --	 a	 dance	 of
spontaneity.
Of	course,	whenever	you	need	the	mind	you	can	put	it	on	and	put	it	off.
Sambodh	means	right	intelligence.
Intellect	is	the	wrong	intelligence.	It	pretends	to	be	intelligence	--	it	is	not.	But
we	have	accepted	its	pretension,	so	from	the	school	to	the	university	all	that	we
do	is	to	cultivate	intellect.	We	think	we	are	helping	intelligence	to	grow;	in	fact
we	are	hindering	intelligence,	we	are	putting	more	and	more	rocks	on	top	of	it.
Hence	it	is	not	coincidental	that	the	scholars	and	the	professors	and	the	so-called
learned	people	are	very	efficient	as	far	as	their	own	field	of	work	is	concerned.
Outside	 of	 their	 own	 field	 of	work,	 outside	 of	 their	 own	 expertise,	 they	prove
utter	 fools,	 far	more	 stupid	 than	 the	 ordinary	 human	 being.	 Even	 farmers	 and
gardeners	and	labourers	seem	to	be	more	intelligent.
Just	take	the	scholar	out	of	his	field...	In	his	field	he	is	perfectly	at	ease	because
he	 is	carrying	a	big	 load	of	 information,	all	kinds	of	ready-made	answers.	Pull
him	out	of	his	field,	just	as	a	simple	question	and	he	will	be	at	a	loss;	if	it	does
not	concern	his	specialisation,	he	will	be	simply	at	a	loss	as	to	what	to	do	with	it.
By	asking	him	a	question	any	child	can	get	him	into	trouble.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	is	bound	to	happen	because	intellect	is	not	intelligence.	And	because	of	this
continuous	 cultivation	 of	 intellect	 in	 the	 educational	 world	 we	 have	 deprived
humanity	 of	 intelligence.	 Humanity	 needs	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 education.	 This
education	I	call	miseducation.	Humanity	needs	a	totally	different	perspective	so
that	 intelligence	 can	 grow.	 Of	 course	 intellect	 is	 needed,	 but	 they	 should	 be
balanced.
But	 intellect	 should	not	become	 the	boss,	 it	 should	only	be	 the	 servant.	When
intellect	is	the	servant	of	intelligence	then	you	are	in	the	right	situation;	when	the
intellect	 is	 the	master	 then	intelligence	disappears;	 then	you	are	hung	up	in	the
head.	Then	you	know	much	and	still	you	are	as	ignorant	as	any	ignorant	person
is.	Your	knowing	does	not	 transform	your	 being.	 It	 does	 not	 give	you	bliss,	 it
does	not	give	you	a	better	life.
It	may	give	you	a	better	standard	of	living	--	intellect	can	do	that,	it	has	done	it.
It	 can	 give	 you	 a	 more	 comfortable	 life,	 a	 better	 standard	 of	 living,	 better
devices,	gadgets,	more	technology,	but	it	cannot	give	you	a	better	quality	of	life;
it	can	only	increase	the	quantity.	The	quality	comes	from	intelligence.
The	Buddha	or	Lao	Tzu	or	 Jesus	are	not	very	 intellectual	people,	but	 they	are
utterly	 intelligent.	And	 their	 very	 life	 shows	 it,	 their	 spontaneity,	 their	 totality,
their	joy.	Their	life	is	a	festival	of	lights.
And	that's	how	it	should	be	for	every	sannyasin.	Life	has	 to	be	changed	into	a
celebration.	That	can	happen	only	through	intelligence.
Intellect	is	the	cultivation	of	the	mind,	intelligence	is	the	discovery	of	meditation
--	 and	meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.	 So	 one	 has	 to	 shift	 from	mind	 to	 no-
mind.	 And	 one	 has	 to	 be	 flexible	 so	 that	 one	 can	 come	 back	 to	 the	 mind
whenever	needed	and	can	go	back	to	no-mind	whenever	mind	is	not	needed,	but
one's	home	should	be	no-mind	and	mind	should	be	only	the	porch,	not	more	than
that.	Once	in	a	while	you	have	to	pass	the	porch	so	you	use	it,	but	you	don't	live
there.	 And	 ordinarily	 people	 are	 living	 in	 their	 porches	 and	 have	 completely
forgotten	about	the	palaces	that	are	within	themselves.
My	function	here	is	to	remind	you	of	your	palace,	of	your	kingdom.
Samvado	means	communion.
These	 two	 words:	 communication	 and	 communion,	 have	 to	 be	 understood.
Communication	is	from	head-to-head,	communion	is	from	heart-to-heart.
The	relationship	between	the	master	and	the	disciple	is	of	communion,	it	is	not
of	 communication.	 The	 relationship	 between	 a	 student	 and	 a	 teacher	 is	 of
communication.
Becoming	a	sannyasin	means	now	you	will	be	listening	more	and	more	with	the
heart	 and	 less	and	 less	with	 the	head.	And	 listening	 from	 the	heart	 is	 a	 totally
different	 experience.	 There	 is	 no	 argument,	 there	 is	 no	 judgement;	 one	 listens
just	 as	 one	 listens	 to	 the	 song	of	 the	 birds	 or	 to	music	 or	 to	 the	wind	 passing
through	the	pine	trees.	One	is	not	questioning	it,	there	is	no	why;	one	is	simply
enjoying	it	The	master	has	to	be	enjoyed!
Remember	it:	the	master	has	to	be,	in	Jesus'	words,	eaten.	The	disciple	has	to	be
a	cannibal.	Don't	be	worried	(laughter)	to	be	a	cannibal	is	perfect	with	me!	To	be
with	 a	master	 simply	means	 to	 digest	 his	 being	 to	 let	 him	 come	 into	 you,	 to
allow	him	to	the	innermost	shrine	of	your	being	where	you	have	never	allowed
anybody,	 where	 you	 yourself	 have	 never	 entered,	 to	 open	 all	 your	 doors	 and
windows.	That	 is	 Samvado	 that	 is	 communion.	And	 then	 one	 understands	 not
only	the	words,	one	starts	understanding	the	silences	too.
And	when	the	disciple	can	understand	the	silence	of	the	master	then	something
miraculous	 transpires;	 then	 something	 from	 the	 master	 simply	 enters	 into	 the
being	 of	 the	 disciple	 and	 the	 unlit	 candle	 of	 the	 disciple	 is	 suddenly	 lit	 and
becomes	aflame.	Where	there	was	darkness	now	there	is	only	light	and	nothing
else.
This	 is	 a	 commune.	 Becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 means	 becoming	 part	 of	 this
commune.	And	commune	means	a	space	where	people	are	living	in	communion,
where	people	are	no	more	interested	in	theories	and	words	and	reasons	and	logic
and	 arguments;	 where	 people	 are	 only	 interested	 in	 living	 totally,	 in	 loving
totally,	in	being	totally.
Anurodh	means	invitation.
Truth	has	to	be	invited.	One	cannot	conquer	it,	one	cannot	be	aggressive	about	it
If	one	is	aggressive	one	will	never	get	to	know	truth.	In	that	very	aggressiveness
one	becomes	farther	away	from	truth	than	ever.
Truth	 is	 a	 love	 affair;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 fight,	 not	 a	 struggle.	One	 has	 to	 persuade	 it.
Anurodh	also	means	persuasion.
One	has	to	slowly	bring	the	truth	into	one's	being.
So	 two	 things	 are	 needed:	 a	 deep	 receptivity,	 a	 welcoming	 and	 spaciousness
within.	And	when	you	invite	a	guest	you	have	to	prepare	your	house,	you	have
to	make	it	ready.	Truth	is	the	ultimate	guest,	and	when	you	are	inviting	truth	you
are	becoming	the	ultimate	host.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	becoming	the	ultimate	host,	learning	the	art	of
being	a	host,	so	that	truth	can	come,	and	not	only	come	but	can	be	persuaded	to
abide	in	you.	It	can	be	persuaded,	that's	the	only	way	it	has	ever	happened.
Open	up	to	truth	like	a	lotus	opens	to	the	sun.
The	sun	is	showering	but	if	the	lotus	is	closed	then	the	rays	don't	reach	its	inner
core.	If	the	lotus	is	open	then	the	sun	starts	dancing	on	the	petals	and	the	lotus
becomes	 really	 alive	 when	 the	 sun	 starts	 showering.	 In	 that	 very	 shower	 its
fragrance	is	released.
Asking	 truth	 to	 enter	 you,	 inviting	 truth	 to	 be	 a	 guest	 in	 your	 heart,	 is	 asking
light	to	penetrate	you	--	and	without	your	becoming	afraid,	allowing	it	to	reach
the	 very	 core,	 the	 very	 centre.	 It	 goes	 like	 an	 arrow	 and	 penetrates	 your	 very
being.	The	moment	the	arrow	of	truth	penetrates	your	being	two	things	happen:
death	and	resurrection.	You	die	as	you	have	always	been	before	and	something
new	 is	born,	 something	 totally	new,	which	has	never	been	 there	before.	 It	 is	 a
rebirth,	a	resurrection.
Sannyas	is	only	the	beginning	of	learning	the	art;	it	is	just	ABC.	But	if	you	can
take	the	first	step	then	other	steps	are	bound	to	follow.
So	 become	 an	 invitation	 to	 god,	 to	 truth,	 to	 love,	 to	 bliss,	 to	 all	 that	 is,	 and
thousands	of	gifts	are	ready	to	shower	on	you.	But	we	are	closed	--	we	have	to
be	open,	vulnerable.
Risk	everything	and	be	open.	It	is	better	to	die	as	a	flower	than	to	live	as	a	seed.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012215
ShortTitle:	GREENR22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Anand	 Gerard.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Gerard	 means	 courageous,	 brave;	 it	 also
means	symbolically,	loyal	heart.
The	phenomenon	of	bliss	has	a	few	basic	requirements,	and	these	two	are	very
important:	courage	and	loyalty.	And	both	belong	to	the	heart.	The	mind	is	always
a	coward	and	the	mind	is	always	full	of	doubts.
Cowardliness	and	doubting	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin,	and	in	the	same	way
courage	and	trust	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
Sannyas	means	changing	the	gestalt,	the	pattern	of	your	energy,	shifting	yourself
from	the	head	to	the	heart.	The	moment	you	start	living	through	the	heart,	life	is
blissful	--	that	is	a	by-product.	If	you	live	through	the	head	life	is	a	misery	--	that
too	is	a	by-product.	The	head	is	impotent	in	creating	bliss	--	and	we	are	all	trying
to	do	that,	hence	the	tremendous	failure	of	humanity.
It	is	not	only	a	question	of	a	few	individuals;	the	whole	of	humanity	is	at	a	loss
now.	We	have	 tried	for	centuries	 to	 live	 through	 the	head	and	we	have	created
deeper	and	deeper	misery.	We	have	made	the	earth	a	hell,	now	it	is	the	time	that,
rather	 than	going	on	 the	same	 track,	 in	 the	same	vicious	circle,	we	change	 the
whole	energy	pattern.	Man	needs	a	rebirth,	a	radical	change.	The	future	belongs
to	the	heart;	and	my	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	bring	your	energy	from	the	head
to	the	heart.	Once	it	is	there,	life	is	a	song,	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
celebration.
Dhyan	Vivien.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Vivien	means	lively,	alive,	full	of	life.
People	are	alive	only	at	the	minimum.	The	difference	between	death	and	life	is
not	much.	People	are	existing	only	on	the	boundary	line	--	just	a	little	accident
and	they	are	no	more.	Why	people	have	decided	to	live	at	the	minimum	is	one	of
the	most	significant	questions	worth	pondering	over.
There	 is	 a	Sufi	 story:	 a	king	made	a	palace	only	with	one	door,	 there	was	not
even	a	window,	so	that	he	could	be	absolutely	safe.	That	one	door	was	guarded
by	a	big	military	 force	 and	over	 that	military	 force	 there	was	 another	 force	 to
supervise,	and	then	another	force	to	supervise	them;	so	three	circles	of	military
forces	were	guarding	only	one	door.
One	of	 the	king's	 friends	 --	who	was	 also	 a	king	 --	visited	him.	He	had	heard
much	about	this	palace	and	when	he	saw	it	he	said	'It	is	really	safe.	There	is	no
possibility	of	any	danger.'
When	he	was	departing	the	owner	of	the	palace	came	out	to	give	him	a	send-off
and	again	the	guest	praised	the	palace	and	he	said	'I	will	also	make	a	palace	like
this.'	A	beggar	sitting	on	the	street	started	laughing.	They	both	asked	him	'Why
are	you	laughing?'	The	king	who	owned	the	palace	said	'What	is	so	funny	about
his	praising	my	palace?'	The	man	said	'I	am	laughing	because	there	is	only	one
loophole	 --	 that	 one	 door.	 If	 you	 really	want	 to	 be	 safe	 you	 be	 inside	 and	 let
people	make	a	wall	instead	of	a	door	--	then	you	will	be	absolutely	safe.	Right
now	you	are	only	ninety	--	nine	point	nine	per	cent	safe	and	that	point	one	per
cent	of	danger	is	enough	to	kill	a	person.	That's	why	I	am	laughing.'
The	story	is	significant;	it	says	people	have	started	living	at	the	minimum	to	be
safe,	to	be	secure.	To	live	fully	means	to	live	dangerously,	to	live	fully	means	to
live	 in	 insecurity,	 to	 live	 fully	means	 to	 live	 at	 the	maximum.	Then	 life	 is	 an
adventure,	 then	 one	 never	 knows	 what	 is	 going	 to	 happen;	 one	 cannot	 be
predictable.	But	 life	 is	 life	only	when	you	 live	at	 the	maximum,	at	 the	highest
peak.	Of	course	the	danger	is	 there	that	 if	you	fall	from	the	peak	you	are	gone
forever,	but	that	danger	is	worthwhile,	that	risk	is	worthwhile.	If	one	chooses	not
to	take	that	risk	then	one	lives	in	vain;	one	only	vegetates	and	calls	it	life.
Meditation	is	nothing	but	the	process	of	helping	you	to	go	to	the	ultimate	peak	of
your	energy,	 to	 transfer	your	energy	from	the	minimum	to	the	maximum,	from
the	valley	to	the	peak.	Hence	meditation	teaches	you	to	live	dangerously,	to	live
adventurously,	to	live	like	a	gambler,	not	like	a	businessman.
Sannyas	is	a	gamble.	It	is	risky,	it	is	going	into	the	unknown,	into	the	uncharted	-
-	but	that's	its	beauty	too.	The	very	danger	brings	life.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	reading	that	a	man,	a	very	great	criminal	in	America,	has
died.	His	whole	expertise	was	robbing	banks;	for	his	whole	life	he	was	robbing
banks.	For	almost	 forty	years	of	 the	sixty-five	years	of	his	 life	he	was	 in	goal,
but	he	robbed	all	the	big	banks,	he	was	the	most	famous	robber.
He	has	written	a	small	autobiography	and	he	says	 'The	most	alive	moments	 in
my	life	were	when	I	was	robbing	a	bank.	I	lived	for	those	few	moments;	all	else
was	just	a	preparation	to	live.	Those	few	moments	when	I	was	robbing	a	bank,
actually	robbing	--	the	risk,	the	danger,	the	wondering	what	was	going	to	happen,
whether	I	was	going	to	succeed	or	was	going	to	be	caught	or	killed...	Those	were
the	few	moments	I	lived!'
Now	if	 this	man	had	met	me,	then	I	would	have	told	him	to	rob	god.	Why	are
you	just	robbing	the	bank	of	America?	The	real	risk	is	robbing	god,	his	kingdom
--	 and	 that's	 the	whole	 art	 of	meditation.	 It	makes	 you	 a	master	 thief.	 So	 get
ready!
Prem	Oscar.	Prem	moans	love.	Oscar	means	god's	spear.	Love	is	certainly	god's
spear:	it	kills	you	--	but	it	resurrects	you	also.	It	goes	directly	to	the	heart.
All	that	is	needed	is	to	be	available	to	god,	and	by	saying	that	I	simply	mean	to
be	available	to	existence
--	to	me	god	and	existence	are	synonymous	--	to	be	available	to	the	sun,	to	the
wind,	to	the	rain,	to	be	available	to	all	that	is,	to	be	open	and	vulnerable.	Then
one	day	 the	 spear	 comes	 and	 shatters	you,	 just	 kills	 you.	But	 that	death	 is	 the
most	precious	thing	in	life.	To	be	killed	by	god	is	the	greatest	blessing	because
out	of	that	death	arises	a	totally	now	kind	of	life.
In	 fact	 then	you	know	that	whatsoever	you	have	been	calling	 life	was	not	 life.
Compared	 to	 that	 your	 old	 life	 looks	 like	 death,	 your	 old	 light	 looks	 like
darkness,	your	old	riches	look	like	poverty.	But	we	have	been	brought	up	not	to
be	vulnerable,	not	to	be	open,	to	remain	closed-fisted.	We	are	brought	up	in	fear,
and	fear	is	the	only	thing	that	prevents	love;	fear	is	the	direct	opposite	of	love.
To	live	in	fear	is	to	live	a	loveless	life,	and	a	loveless	life	cannot	taste	god.
So	drop	 all	 fears.	There	 is	 nothing	 to	 fear	because	nothing	 can	be	 taken	 away
from	you.	Remember	one	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
fundamental	law:	that	which	you	have	really	got	cannot	be	taken	away,	so	only
the	non-essential	can	be	taken	away;	the	essential	cannot	be	taken	away.	It	is	part
of	 your	 innermost	 existence,	 it	 is	 inseparably	 one	 with	 you.	 There	 is	 no
possibility	 of	 creating	 a	 division	 between	 the	 essential	 and	 you.	 The	 essential
means	you	--	the	essence.	That	is	your	real	richness,	and	nobody	can	rob	you	of
it,	not	even	god;	it	is	impossible	to	lose	it.	And	that	to	which	you	are	clinging	is
bound	to	be	taken	away	--	if	not	today	then	tomorrow,	is	not	tomorrow	then	the
day	after	tomorrow.	And	sooner	it	is	taken,	the	better,	because	if	it	is	not	taken
soon	then	you	will	be	worrying	about	 it;	once	 it	 is	 taken	the	worry	is	finished.
Then	there	is	no	more	worry	because	all	is	gone,	so	why	bother?	One	can	have	a
good	sleep,	can	rest	and	relax.
God	always	comes	as	a	death	to	the	ego.
In	 the	 ancient	 Indian	 scriptures	 the	 master	 is	 called	 death,	 and	 it	 is	 very
significant	 because	 the	master	means	one	who	 is	 going	 to	become	 the	door	 to
god:	 god	will	 enter	 through	 the	master.	 The	moment	 you	 are	 in	 tune	with	 the
master	you	are	available	to	god.	The	master	is	only	a	device	to	bring	you	into	a
certain	tuning	so	that	the	spear	of	god	can	go	directly	to	your	heart.
And	 the	most	precious	moment	 is	when	 the	ego	dies	 and	you	are	 left	 egoless.
Egolessness	is	love.	Then	love	flows	for	no	reason	at	all.	And	not	to	anybody	in
particular,	 it	 simply	 flows	 just	 as	 fragrance	 is	 released	 from	 a	 flowers
unaddressed,	to	whomsoever	it	may	concern.
Suryodaya	means	sunrise.
I	have	chosen	the	colour	red	with	all	its	shades	for	my	sannyasins.	It	symbolises
sunrise,	the	reddening	of	the	eastern	horizon	just	before	the	sun	arrives.	The	East
becomes	 full	 of	 colours,	 but	 they	 are	 all	 shades	 of	 red.	 It	 is	 getting	 ready	 to
welcome	the	sun.	The	night	 is	over,	 the	birds	have	started	singing,	 the	flowers
have	 started	opening,	 the	people	 and	 the	 animals	 and	 the	 trees	 are	waking	up.
Life	is	going	through	a	new	birth.
The	night	has	been	a	small	death;	 the	sun	heralds	 the	beginning	of	a	new	day.
Again	life	will	celebrate	and	dance	and	sing,	again	there	will	be	love	and	joy	and
all	that	is	beautiful	and	alive.
Sannyas	 is	 sunrise	 in	 the	 inner	 world,	 the	 early	 morning,	 the	 dawn,	 the
declaration	that	the	night	is	over	and	that	the	day	is	just	close	by,	at	hand	--	get
ready	to	welcome	it!
Purvodaya	means	the	rise	of	the	East.
The	East	is	a	symbol	for	the	inner,	just	as	the	West	is	the	symbol	for	the	outer.
The	East	 represents	 religion,	 the	West	 represents	 science.	Both	 are	 significant
and	a	great	meeting	of	the	two	is	needed.	And	it	will	be	the	greatest	blessing	for
humanity	when	Rudyard	Kipling	 is	 proved	wrong.	He	 says,	 "East	 is	 East	 and
West	is	West	and	n'er	the	twain	shall	meet."
Ordinarily	he	looks	right	because	how	can	the	inner	and	the	outer	meet,	and	how
can	 science	 and	 religion	 meet?	 --	 they	 look	 poles	 apart.	 But	 those	 who	 dive
deeper	find	a	strange	phenomenon,	that	all	polarities	are	joined	together,	already
joined	together,	 that	all	polar	opposites	are	really	complementaries.	It	 is	 just	as
the	negative	and	the	positive	poles	of	electricity	cannot	exist	in	separation	--	they
have	to	be	together.	It	is	just	as	man	and	woman	cannot	exist	separately,	just	as
night	and	day	and	summer	and	winter	and	life	and	death,	are	joined	together.
So	it	is	not	really	a	question	of	creating	a	synthesis	between	East	and	West;	it	is
only	a	question	of	discovering	it	--	it	is	already	there.	But	whether	the	meeting	is
discovered	or	not,	one	thing	has	to	be	remembered	--	that	the	West	has	fulfilled
its	 work,	 and	 now	 the	 time	 has	 come	 for	 the	 East	 to	 contribute,	 otherwise
humanity	will	remain	lopsided.
The	 West	 has	 given	 science,	 technology,	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 to	 make	 life
comfortable	 on	 the	 outside;	 the	 East	 has	 to	 give	 its	 part,	 so	 that	 life	 can	 be
blissful	inside.	So	a	great	rise	of	the	East	is	immensely	needed	and	immediately
needed.
And	only	when	both	have	contributed	 in	a	balanced	way	can	we	discover	 that
they	are	complementary.
My	effort	here	is	to	give	you	the	keys	of	eastern	mysticism.
It	 is	 not	 a	 coincidence	 that	 so	 many	 western	 intellectuals,	 artists,	 painters,
musicians,	 poets,	 scientists	 have	 gathered	 around	me.	 It	 is	 significant	 because
only	 they	 can	 understand	 that	 which	 is	 missing.	 The	 East	 is	 living	 in	 such
poverty,	 in	 such	 an	 ugly	 state	 of	 affairs	 that	 it	 has	 no	 time	 to	 think	 of	 higher
things.	 It	pays	 lip-service	 to	 the	Buddha,	 to	Krishna,	 to	Mahavira,	 to	Lao	Tzu,
but	it	is	only	lip-service.	It	has	lost	track	of	its	own	inheritance,	so	it	doesn't	feel
that	it	is	missing	something	on	the	inner.
You	can	only	feel	that	something	is	missed	on	the	inner	when	the	outer	is	there;
then	in	contrast	you	can	see	that	the	inner	is	missing.	If	the	outer	is	missing	then
you	will	never	be	able	to	see	that	the	inner	is	missing.	When	you	are	rich	on	the
outside	you	can	immediately	feel	that	inside	you	are	poor.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	East	is	poor	on	the	outside,	hence	it	cannot	feel	that	the	inner	is	also	poor	--
they	 look	alike,	 there	 is	no	contrast.	So	very	 few	people	 from	 the	East	will	be
benefitted	by	me.	They	will	 be	benefitted	 in	 a	very	 round-about	way:	 first	 the
West	has	to	be	given	the	keys	and	once	the	West	starts	becoming	spiritually	rich
then	 these	 eastern	 people	will	 start	 learning	 from	 the	West	 the	 same	keys	 that
they	always	had	with	them	but	which	they	had	completely	forgotten	about.
To	me,	East	 does	not	mean	 just	 the	East	 of	 today;	 to	me	 it	 symbolizes	 all	 the
great	 spiritual	 experiences	 that	 happened	 in	 the	 East.	 And	 tremendous	 is	 the
contribution	 of	 Lao	 Tzu,	 Chuang	 Tzu,	 Lieh	 Tzu,	 Buddha,	Mahavira,	Krishna,
Kabir	 --	 tremendous	 is	 the	 contribution.	 But	 the	 East	 is	 not	 in	 a	 state	 to
understand	it.
The	West	 is	 in	a	state	now	to	understand	 it.	For	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the	West	 it	 is
possible	to	understand	Lao	Tzu,	Zen,	Yoga,	Tantra.
The	East	has	to	rise	in	the	West.	It	looks	very	contradictory	but	that's	how	it	is:
the	sun	has	to	rise	in	the	West.	And	that's	what	is	slowly	happening	here.	And	in
the	new	commune	it	is	going	to	happen	on	a	vaster	scale.
You	all	have	 to	be	aware	 that	you	are	participating	 in	something	 tremendously
important.	 Its	 significance	 will	 become	 clear	 only	 very	 much	 later	 on;	 only
history	will	be	able	 to	 look	back	and	see	 its	 importance,	because	only	 later	on
can	you	see,	with	a	bigger	perspective,	what	has	happened.	When	it	 is	actually
happening	nobody	is	capable	of	understanding	unless	one	is	awakened.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 when	 Jesus	 was	 born	 Joseph	 came	 in	 and	 was	 very	 much
puzzled	because	Mary	was	crying	and	weeping.	He	said	"What	are	you	doing?
You	have	given	birth	 to	 such	 a	 beautiful	 child	 and	you	 are	 crying..."	She	 said
"Yes,	because	I	always	wanted	a	girl!"
It	is	difficult,	when	Jesus	is	there	it	is	difficult.	Even	his	mother	is	crying!
So	this	country	is	not	going	to	understand	me,	the	East	is	not	going	to	understand
me;	on	 the	contrary	 they	will	condemn	me.	 I	have	 to	depend	on	 the	West.	But
my	work	consists	in	giving	birth,	a	rebirth,	to	the	East.
Prem	Arti.	Prem	means	love.	Arti	means	worship,	prayer.
Love	is	the	only	true	worship.	One	need	not	go	to	any	church	or	synagogue	or
temple,	 one	 has	 just	 to	 become	 loving.	 Love	 needs	 no	 belief,	 no	 theology,	 no
priest.	We	 are	 born	with	 the	 energy,	we	 just	 have	 to	 be	 courageous	 enough	 to
share	it.
And	one	has	 to	share	 it	not	only	with	 the	person	one	has	fallen	 in	 love	with	--
because	 when	 you	 make	 your	 love	 very	 narrow	 and	 limited	 your	 soul	 also
becomes	very	narrow	and	 limited.	When	 love	becomes	 exclusive	 then	 it	 starts
dying.	It	has	 to	be	inclusive,	 it	has	 to	 include	all,	only	then	does	it	 reach	to	 its
full	flowering,	then	it	rises	to	the	highest	peak,	it	becomes	an	Everest.
So	 love	 the	 people	 you	 are	 in	 love	with,	 but	 love	 strangers	 too.	And	not	 only
people	 --	 love	 animals,	 trees,	 rocks,	 stars.	 In	 short,	 simply	 love	 --	 don't	 be
bothered	about	to	whom	it	is	addressed.	Any	excuse	is	enough	and	one	should	be
loving.	And	if	there	is	no	excuse,	invent	excuses,	but	be	loving!
The	whole	emphasis	is	on	being	loving.	And	these	are	the	three	stages:	first,	love
is	one-pointed,	exclusive;	second,	one	becomes	loving,	inclusive,	and	third,	one
simply	becomes	love.	That	is	the	moment	when	it	becomes	worship	and	that	is
the	moment	when	one	becomes	aware	of	god.
Satish	means,	your	very	being	is	God.	Sat	means	being,	ish	means	God.
God	 is	 not	 something	 outside	 you,	 God	 is	 your	 very	 being.	 And	 one	 has	 to
discover	God	inside	oneself.
Going	anywhere	is	pointless	unless	you	go	in.	Every	journey	to	some	other	place
is	an	escape	from	yourself;	you	are	going	farther	away	from	God.	When	you	are
not	 going	 anywhere,	 not	 even	 in	 thoughts	 and	 dreams	 and	 desires,	 when	 all
journeying,	 physical	 and	 psychological,	 has	 come	 to	 a	 full	 stop	 --	 when	 all
journeying	as	such	has	stopped	--	suddenly	you	discover	that	which	has	always
been	there,	but	you	were	never	there	so	the	meeting	was	not	happening.	It	is	at
the	very	center	of	your	existence	that	God	is	luminous.
Once	he	has	been	found	there	then	you	can	find	him	everywhere	else,	but	first	he
has	to	be	found	within.
Then	he	is	 in	every	person,	every	animal,	every	 tree,	every	rock;	 then	he	is	all
over	the	place.	And	to	know	that	your	being	and	the	being	of	the	whole	universe
are	one,	brings	 tremendous	rejoicing.	All	 fear	disappears,	all	worry	disappears,
all	anxiety	disappears	because	now	there	 is	no	death:	you	have	become	part	of
the	eternal.	You	are	no	more	a	part,	you	have	become	the	whole.
Kavya	Gunjano.	Kavya	means	poetry.	Gunjano	means	humming.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Man	 is	made	of	music.	There	 is	 a	deep	humming	 inside.	We	are	made	of	 that
song	--	it	is	wordless	it	is	pure	sound,	hence	I	call	it	humming.	It	has	no	meaning
but	tremendous	significance.	You	cannot	interpret	it,	you	cannot	describe	it,	you
cannot	define	 it,	but	once	you	have	experienced	 it	your	 life	becomes	 luminous
you	are	glowing	with	it,	it	is	a	glory.	It	brings	a	new	shine	to	your	being,	a	new
flavour	and	fragrance.
This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 secret	 discoveries	 of	 all	 the	 mystics,	 that	 basically	 life	 is
poetry,	not	prose,	music,	not	mathematics,	mystery,	not	science.	And	when	 the
whole	mind	has	 ceased	 and	 there	 is	 no	 functioning	 of	 the	mind,	 then	 you	 can
hear	 that	 humming	 sound	 rising	 upwards	 from	 the	 depths	 of	 your	 being.	One
becomes	overwhelmed	by	it.	One	feels	renewed,	reborn	--	it	is	so	refreshing,	it	is
such	a	rejuvenation.	One	is	bathed	with	the	divine.
In	the	East	we	have	called	that	humming	'omkar':	the	sound	of	om.	The	sound	of
om	comes	closest	to	it
--	it	is	not	exactly	it,	but	approximately	it.	If	you	hum	'om,	om...',	then	it	gives
you	some	feel	of	it,	but	just	approximately,	not	exactly.
So	get	more	and	more	 in	 tune	with	poetry	and	music	and	get	out	of	 the	mind.
Dance	 and	 sing	 and	 celebrate	 with	 great	 abandon.	 That	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your
meditation,	that	is	going	to	be	your	entry	into	sannyas:	be	drunk.
I	 am	 inviting	 all	 kinds	 of	 dangerous	 people	 --	 gamblers,	 drunkards,	 crazy
cuckoos	 all	 kinds	 of	 people	 (much	 laughter).	 but	 they	 are	 the	 most	 beautiful
people	 in	 the	world.	 The	 so-called	 sane	 are	 just	 ugly;	 they	 are	 too	 sane	 to	 be
alive,	to	calculative,	too	Jewish	--	they	cannot	be	human!
Satyam	means	the	truth.
Truth	 is	 not	 something	 which	 can	 be	 found	 by	 philosophizing,	 it	 is	 not	 a
conclusion	 of	 thought;	 on	 the	 contrary	 it	 is	 a	 realization	 of	 no-thought.
Philosophy	is	a	distraction:	one	has	to	stop	philosophizing.
Just	 today	 I	was	 reading	one	of	Rudolf	Steiner's	 statements	 that	 "If	 a	German
comes	to	a	crossroad	and	one	sign	says	'heaven'	and	the	other	says	'lecture	about
heaven',	the	German	always	goes	to	the	lecture	about	heaven."	Philosophy	is	that
kind	of	thing;	a	lecture	about	the	truth.
Be	less	a	thinker	and	more	an	experiencer.	That's	my	fundamental	message,	be
existential.	 Intellect	 can	 go	 on	 round	 and	 round	 but	 it	 never	 reaches	 the	 real
thing.	 It	 cannot,	 it's	not	possible	 for	 it.	Truth	has	 to	be	 found	 in	a	 state	of	no-
mind,	 so	 the	 whole	 work	 here	 consists	 in	 putting	 the	 mind	 aside,	 in	 living
beyond	mind,	in	just	living	and	rejoicing	in	living	without	thinking	about	it.
And	it	is	not	only	true	about	Germans,	it	is	true	about	almost	everybody	in	the
world;	 particularly	 about	 the	 educated	 people.	 And	 unfortunately	 now	 almost
everybody,	more	or	less,	is	educated.	For	one	hundred	years	universal	education
has	been	the	slogan	of	the	social	reformers	and	the	missionaries	and	the	servants
of	 the	 people	 and	 they	 have	 almost	 educated	 everybody.	 Now	 everybody	 is
thinking	and	nobody	is	living.
D.H.	Lawrence	has	a	good	suggestion	that	if	we	could	close	all	the	schools	and
all	the	universities	for	one	hundred	years	then	there	would	be	hope	for	humanity.
I	agree	perfectly	with	him;	it	would	be	a	tremendously	beautiful	experiment.	For
a	hundred	years	all	Oxfords	and	Cambridges	and	all	schools	and	colleges	from
Kindergarten	 to	 the	university,	would	be	closed	--	a	one-hundred-year	holiday!
And	 in	 those	 one	 hundred	 years	 man	 would	 regain	 his	 primitiveness,	 his
authenticity,	 his	 existential	 status.	 And	 I	 don't	 think	 that	man	will	 open	 those
schools	and	colleges	again	--	ever!
Truth	is	within	you,	just	be	silent	and	know	it.	It	is	a	question	of	being	silent	and
knowing.	Thinking	keeps	you	occupied,	so	much	so	that	you	cannot	know	that
truth	is	already	inside	you,	it	is	already	the	case.
Satyodaya	means	the	rise	of	truth.
Man	has	lived	in	beliefs	for	centuries,	and	beliefs	have	deprived	man	of	truth.	To
believe	simply	means	to	be	untruthful.	One	believes	only	because	one	does	not
know,	if	one	knows,	there	is	no	need	to	believe.
For	 example,	 I	 don't	 believe	 in	 god,	 because	 I	 know	 --	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
believe.	The	man	with	eyes	does	not	believe	in	light,	he	knows	it;	but	the	blind
man	believes.	He	believes	 there	 is	 light,	 there	are	colours	and	 there	are	people
with	eyes	--	that	is	his	belief.
Belief	is	a	deception,	it	keeps	you	deluded.	Truth	can	rise	in	you	if	you	are	ready
to	drop	all	the	beliefs
--	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Buddhist.	One	 should	 not	 choose.	Without
any	choice	put	all	the	beliefs	in	one	bag	and	throw	them	into	the	ocean.	And	do
it	 in	 a	 single	 blow,	 don't	 go	 gradually,	 slowly	 slowly	 throwing	 one	 belief	 and
then	another,	 then	another	 --	because	 then	 it	will	 take	many	 lives	 to	get	 rid	of
them.
There	are	millions	of	beliefs,	beliefs	within	beliefs.	They	are	like	Chinese	boxes,
boxes	within	boxes:	you	open	one	and	throw	it,	another	box	comes	up;	you	open
it,	then	another	and	it	goes	on	and	on.	And	the	smaller	the	box,	the	more	difficult
it	is	to	throw	it,	because	it	becomes	subtler	and	subtler.	So	it	is	better	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
throw	the	whole	box,	the	big	one,	because	it	contains	all	the	smaller	ones.
That's	why	people	think	I	am	destroying	their	religions.	In	a	way	they	are	right,
because	I	am	telling	people	to	throw	the	whole	box.	It	contains	all	their	ideals,
their	 churches,	 their	 temples,	 their	 Gitas,	 their	 Bibles,	 their	 Korans	 and	 I	 am
telling	 them	to	 throw	it	wholesale	--	don't	go	retail!	Go	all	 the	way	in	a	single
step	and	be	finished	with	it	and	you	will	be	surprised:	the	moment	all	beliefs	are
dropped	 suddenly	 there	 is	 a	 totally	 new	 light	 arising	 in	 you	 which	 you	 have
never	been	aware	of	--	and	that	is	truth.	That	truth	liberates	and	that	truth	brings
blessings	and	benediction.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012225
ShortTitle:	GREENR23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Prem	 Lorenzo.	 Prem	 means	 love.	 Lorenzo	 literally	 means	 laurel;	 the	 laurel
symbolises	victory	and	immortality.
It	is	only	through	love	that	one	becomes	aware	that	the	real	treasure	is	not	in	ego
possessions,	in	ego	trips,	in	ego	numbers;	the	real	treasure	is	in	surrendering	the
ego.
It	 simply	means	 you	 are	 relating	 to	 somebody	without	 the	 ego	 being	 present.
When	the	contact	with	somebody	is	without	the	ego,	it	is	love.	And	then	it	can
go	on	spreading.	One	can	relate	to	the	whole	existence	--	the	secret	is	the	same.
Whether	you	 relate	with	one	person	or	with	 the	whole	universe,	 it	 is	 the	same
key	--	that	the	ego	has	not	to	be	there.	And	it	is	a	simple	arithmetic;	when	you
have	 known	 bliss	 by	 relating	 to	 one	 person	 egolessly,	 you	 know	 how	 much
ecstasy	is	possible	if	you	relate	in	the	same	way	with	the	whole	universe	--	it	will
be	immeasurable,	it	will	be	infinite.
Love	gives	you	the	first	glimpse	of	your	real	 treasure.	That	 is	 the	victory.	And
those	moments	of	love	when	the	ego	does	not	exist,	does	not	function,	are	also
timeless	moments.	They	are	not	moments	of	time	but	moments	of	timelessness;
they	are	part	of	eternity.	In	those	moments	one	also	becomes	aware	that	there	is
no	death,	that	there	has	been	no	birth	in	the	first	place,	that	one	has	always	been
here	and	now.	Birth	and	death	are	just	episodes	in	the	eternal	celebration	of	life.
One	does	not	begin	with	birth,	one	does	not	end	with	death.
That	clarity	also	arises	out	of	egolessness,	out	of	love.	And	these	two	can	define
the	whole	of	religion:	to	know	that	'I	am	immortal,'	and	to	be	victorious.	One	has
come	home.	Now	there	is	nowhere	to	go,	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	The	begging
bowl	simply	disappears.	One	becomes	an	emperor...	but	this	is	a	kingdom	not	of
this	world.
Jesus	was	very	much	misunderstood	by	people	because	he	continuously	 talked
about	the	kingdom	of	god	and	the	politicians	thought	that	he	was	talking	about
the	kingdom	of	this	world;	the	political	mind	cannot	think	beyond	this	world.	As
his	 influence	 started	 growing	 the	 politicians	 became	 afraid	 that	 this	 man	 was
going	to	conquer	power	because	he	was	talking	in	terms	of	conquering	the	inner
world,	of	being	victorious.	They	misunderstood	him	completely,	totally.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 religious	 establishment	 became	 afraid,	 the	 political	 establishment	 became
afraid	and	both	conspired	to	kill	this	simple,	innocent	man.	His	only	crime	was
that	he	was	using	words	which	could	have	both	meanings.	But	that	problem	has
always	been	there	because	the	words	basically	are	meant	to	be	for	this	world,	so
whatsoever	 words	 you	 use,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 choose	 from	 these	 words,	 these
languages.	 You	 may	 try	 to	 give	 them	 a	 new	 meaning	 and	 a	 new	 colour	 but
people	will	go	on	understanding	them	according	to	their	conditioning.
But	these	are	the	basic	elements	of	a	true	religion:	victory	over	darkness	--	and
ego	is	nothing	but	darkness	--	and	the	experience	of	immortality.	You	can	call	it
god,	 you	 can	 call	 it	 nirvana,	 but	 the	 basic	 thing	 is	 that	 you	 have	 experienced
something	which	 is	 beyond	 time.	Whatsoever	 name	one	wants	 to	 use	 one	 can
use.
Lao	Tzu	says	'It	has	no	name,	hence	I	will	call	it	tao.'	A	very	beautiful	statement,
because	it	has	no	name	some	name	has	to	be	given	--	xyz.	Tao	means	xyz	--	it
does	not	mean	anything	at	all.	He	says	 'So	any	name	will	do.	I	prefer	to	call	 it
tao.	If	your	preference	is	different,	that's	perfectly	okay!'
Gyanveeto.	Gyan	means	knowledge.	Veeto	means	going	beyond.
One	of	the	most	significant	statements	in	the	Upanishads	is	that	ignorance	is	not
as	 dangerous	 as	 knowledge.	 The	 ignorant	 person	 falls	 into	 darkness	 but	 the
knowledgeable	person	falls	into	deeper	darkness.
The	ignorant	can	find	the	home	more	easily,	but	the	knowledgeable	person	is	lost
in	the	jungle	of	words,	theories,	hypotheses,	ideologies,	philosophies	--	there	is
no	end	to	it.
The	first	step	in	sannyas	is	to	get	rid	of	knowledge	and	the	second	step	is	to	get
rid	 of	 ignorance	 and	 the	 journey	 is	 complete.	 But	 first	 one	 has	 to	 get	 rid	 of
knowledge	 because	 it	 is	 knowledge	 that	 covers	 your	 ignorance,	 protects	 your
ignorance.	It	gives	you	a	false	notion	that	you	know,	when	in	reality	you	know
nothing.
But	people	are	even	afraid	to	ask	the	question	'Do	I	know?	Do	I	know	god?	Do	I
know	 truth?	 Do	 I	 know	 love?	 Do	 I	 know	what	 this	 universe	 is?	Who	 am	 I?'
People	are	afraid	of	asking	these	questions,	afraid	because	they	will	bring	you	to
your	 ignorance,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 encounter	 your	 ignorance,	 and	 ignorance	 is
very	shattering	to	the	ego.
Knowledge	 is	 a	 nourishment	 to	 the	 ego,	 so	 everybody	 wants	 to	 remain
knowledgeable.	People	go	on	accumulating	knowledge,	degrees,	only	in	order	to
hide	the	fact	that	they	are	ignorant	of	the	fundamental	things	of	life	and	all	their
knowledge	is	based	on	that	ignorance.	The	whole	edifice	of	their	knowledge	is
fundamentally	 wrong.	 It	 will	 collapse	 any	 moment,	 anybody	 can	 destroy	 it.
That's	 why	 people	 don't	 want	 to	 argue,	 don't	 want	 to	 listen	 to	 anything	 new.
Afraid,	their	house	starts	trembling,	shaking;	they	start	feeling	that	any	moment
their	whole	structure	can	collapse	--	it	is	better	to	be	deaf,	it	is	better	to	be	blind.
So	they	see	only	that	which	helps	to	keep	their	ego	intact	and	they	hear	only	that
which	nourishes	their	ego,	they	see	only	that	which	fits	with	their	knowledge	and
they	 hear	 only	 that	 which	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 of	 a	 support	 of	 their
knowledge.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 one	 has	 to	 change	 the	 whole	 process.	 All	 supports
have	 to	 be	withdrawn,	 all	 props	 have	 to	 be	 removed,	 so	 that	 your	 knowledge
collapses.	 Its	 collapse	 is	 a	 great	 achievement,	 because	 when	 you	 suddenly
discover	your	ignorance	you	have	discovered	your	childhood	too.
When	 you	 discover	 your	 ignorance	 you	 have	 discovered	 your	 innocence	 too.
And	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 so	 beyond	 ignorance	 because	 ignorance	 is	 a	 natural
phenomenon.	It	is	not	arbitrary,	it	is	not	ego-fulfilling.
The	 difference	 between	 ignorance	 and	 knowledge	 is	 like...	 if	 you	 are	 chained
with	golden	chains,	studded	with	diamonds,	that	is	knowledge.	You	would	cling
to	your	chains,	to	your	slavery	because	it	seems	it	is	so	precious.	You	would	not
like	anybody	to	tell	you	that	these	are	chains	and	you	are	imprisoned.	You	would
like	people	to	think	that	these	are	ornaments,	not	chains.	golden	chains	become
ornaments.	Ignorance	is	like	just	ordinary	steel	chains,	nothing	precious	in	them
except	their	ugliness;	there	is	nothing	to	protect,	there	is	nothing	to	brag	about,
one	wants	to	get	rid	of	them.
The	real	problem	is	to	get	rid	of	knowledge	because	we	have	put	so	much	effort
into	accumulating	it.
Our	 schools,	 colleges,	 universities	 exist	 and	 almost	 one-third	 --	 and	 the	 most
important	one-third	--	of	our	life	is	wasted	in	accumulating	information.	By	the
time	one	is	an	M.A.	or	a	Ph.D.,	one	has	lost	one-third	of	one's	life,	twenty-five
years	 --	and	 the	most	precious	 time,	 the	most	alive	 time.	One	will	never	be	so
alive	again,	one	will	never	be	so	daring	again,	and	all	 these	beautiful	years	are
wasted	 in	 accumulating	 stupid	 facts	 geography	 and	 history,	 which	 are	 utterly
meaningless.
But	if	one	is	ready	one	can	get	rid	of	knowledge	in	a	single	blow,	and	suddenly
your	beautiful	ignorance	arises.	It	is	beautiful	because	it	is	natural;	you	have	not
gone	to	any	school,	to	any	college,	to	any	university,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	learn	its	you	are	born	with	it.	It	is	a	gift	of	god.
Hidden	inside	it	is	wisdom,	it	is	a	seed,	the	shell	of	the	seed.	If	you	put	it	into	the
soil	and	the	seed	disappears	into	the	soil	a	plant	will	arise	and	soon	there	will	be
flowers	and	fragrance.
Ignorance	 is	 like	 a	 seed	 and	 when	 you	 put	 your	 ignorance	 into	 the	 soil	 of
meditation	your	life	becomes	full	of	roses.
So	these	two	steps	are	the	whole	journey	of	sannyas,	first	get	rid	of	knowledge
and	 then	 second,	 in	 the	 soil	 of	meditation	 let	 your	 ignorance	 disappear.	 Then
whatsoever	potential	you	have	got	will	start	growing	of	its	own	accord.	You	are
really	born	the	day	your	potential	starts	becoming	actual.
Deva	Dhirjo.	Deva	means	divine.	Dhirjo	means	patience.
There	are	things	which	can	be	achieved	by	our	effort	and	there	are	things	which
are	achieved	only	by	effortless	waiting.	Things	that	can	be	achieved	by	effort	--
money,	 power,	 prestige	 --	 are	 mundane.	 They	 are	 worldly	 things,	 not	 really
valuable,	 because	 according	 to	 those	 who	 have	 known	 the	 definition	 of	 the
valuable	 is	 that	 which	will	 go	with	 you	when	 you	 die.	When	 you	 leave	 your
body,	 that	moment	will	 be	decisive	 about	whether	you	have	anything	valuable
with	you	or	not.	Your	money	will	be	left,	your	power,	your	prestige	--	everything
will	 be	 left	 behind,	 you	 will	 go	 empty-handed.	 As	 far	 as	 these	 things	 of	 the
world	are	concerned	you	cannot	carry	any	with	you	so	they	are	valueless.
But	 there	 are	 a	 few	 things	 which	 will	 go	 with	 you,	 which	 are	 intrinsic	 love,
meditation,	 awareness,	 freedom.	 They	 are	 not	 on	 the	 outside,	 they	 are	 on	 the
inside;	they	are	part	of	your	being,	they	are	flowers	of	your	being.	These	are	the
really	valuable	things	but	they	cannot	be	achieved	by	effort,	will;	they	can	only
be	achieved	by	opening	up	 to	existence,	by	 just	being	vulnerable,	waiting,	not
being	in	a	hurry.	If	one	has	to	wait	forever	one	is	ready	to	wait	forever	--	such
trust	 is	 patience.	And	 the	miracle	 is	 that	 if	 one	 is	 ready	 to	wait	 forever	 it	 can
happen	right	now.
The	more	you	are	in	a	hurry,	the	less	is	the	possibility	of	its	happening,	because
when	 you	 are	 in	 a	 hurry	 you	 are	 closed.	You	 are	 not	 available	 to	 the	 present;
your	mind	 is	 somewhere	 in	 the	 future	 --	 expecting,	 desiring,	 rushing	 to	 get	 it.
You	are	not	 here,	 you	 are	not	 now.	But	when	 there	 is	 no	hurry	 and	when	you
know	that	 it	 is	not	going	to	happen	through	your	effort,	 it	 is	going	to	be	a	gift
from	the	whole	to	the	part,	from	the	universe,	just	a	gift...	If	life	is	a	gift...	You
have	 not	 earned	 it.	You	 suddenly	 found	one	 day	 that	 you	 are	 alive,	 breathing,
suddenly	 one	 day	 you	 find	 that	 love	 is	 arising	 in	 you,	 suddenly	 one	 day	 you
discover	 that	 there	 is	 a	 deep	 longing	 to	 know	 the	 truth	 of	 it	 all.	 These	 are	 all
gifts!
So	 one	 has	 to	 wait	 for	 the	 gifts.	 One	 has	 not	 even	 to	 ask,	 not	 even	 to	 pray.
Without	any	expectation	one	 simply	waits.	A	great	 silence	descends	when	one
learns	how	to	wait,	a	tremendous	silence,	abysmal,	a	bottomless	silence.	In	that
silence	one	can	hear	one's	own	heartbeats.
In	America	 in	 scientific	 labs	 they	 have	made	 an	 absolutely	 soundproof	 room.
There	 are	 soundproof	 rooms	 all	 over	 the	 world	 but	 this	 one	 is	 absolutely
soundproof.	It	is	a	space	research	centre	--	because	when	the	astronauts	go	into
space	 they	 will	 have	 to	 encounter	 one	 of	 the	 most	 difficult	 things:	 profound
silence.
We	are	accustomed	to	noise.	we	may	even	sometimes	complain	about	the	noisy
world	and	the	traffic	and	the	trains	and	the	aeroplanes,	but	you	don't	know,	if	all
this	noise	suddenly	disappears	and	you	are	left	in	silence	you	may	have	a	heart
attack!	You	may	simply	sink!	It	will	be	too	much	--	you	will	not	be	able	to	take	it
in.
So	before	the	astronaut	goes	into	space...	because	the	space	is	absolutely	silent.
No	music,	no	radios,	no	televisions,	no	loudspeakers	--	there	is	nothing.	In	all	the
directions	as	 far	as	you	can	 imagine	 it	 is	all	 silence,	because	 there	 is	no	air	 so
sound	 cannot	 travel.	 The	 air	 surrounds	 the	 earth	 only	 for	 two	 hundred	miles;
beyond	 two	 hundred	 miles	 sound	 cannot	 travel.	 The	 moment	 the	 spaceship
passes	that	barrier	at	two	hundred	miles,	it	is	in	absolute	silence.	So	the	astronaut
has	to	be	prepared,	otherwise	he	will	not	be	able	to	encounter	it;	he	may	die,	the
shock	may	be	too	much.	For	that	this	room	has	been	created.
Slowly	slowly,	first	for	a	few	seconds,	 then	for	a	few	minutes,	 then	for	half	an
hour,	then	for	an	hour,	then	for	a	day,	then	for	two	days,	then	for	a	week...	slowly
slowly	the	person	who	is	getting	ready	to	go	into	space	prepares	himself.
A	musician	went	 to	visit	 this	absolutely	sound-proof	room.	When	he	entered	 it
he	could	not	believe	what	was	happening.	They	had	told	him	it	was	absolutely
silent,	but	he	heard	two	sounds	very	clearly,	absolutely	clearly,	and	they	were	not
whisperlike	 --	 they	 were	 so	 much	 that	 he	 enquired	 of	 the	 director	 of	 the	 lab
'What	is	the	matter?	From	where	are	these	two	sounds	coming?'
And	the	director	laughed;	he	said	 'They	are	not	coming	from	anywhere.	One	is
your	heart	beating,	the	other	is	the	sound	of	your	blood	circulating.	They	are	not
coming	from	anywhere,	you	are	hearing	your	own	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
sounds;	 they	are	 inside	you	and	you	are	 inside	 the	room.	Nothing	can	be	done
about	 it	unless	your	heart	stops,	your	blood	circulates	no	more...'	Out	he	could
not	believe	it	at	first	that	the	blood	circulation	also	makes	sound;	and	the	heart
was	beating	like	a	drum	--	the	noise	was	so	loud!	The	absolute	silence	became	a
contrast.
The	meditator	also	has	to	be	ready.	He	is	also	a	kind	of	astronaut,	astronaut	of
the	inner	world,	of	the	inner	space,	which	is	far	bigger	than	the	outer	space	and
far	more	profoundly	 silent.	And	 the	best	way	 to	 taste	 it	 is	 just	 to	 be	herenow,
available,	with	no	desire,	no	expectation;	just	being	--	that	is	patience.	And	I	call
patience	divine	because	god	comes	through	it	God	is	experienced	only	by	those
who	are	ready	to	wait	forever!
Nishabdo	means	wordlessness.	That's	what	meditation	is	all	about.	We	are	full	of
words,	a	constant	stream	of	words	goes	on	flowing	inside.	You	may	be	occupied
with	any	kind	of	work	on	the	outside	but	inside	a	subtle	undercurrent	of	words
continues.
The	Old	Testament	 says	 in	 the	 beginning	was	 the	word	 and	god	was	with	 the
word	and	god	was	 the	word.	This	cannot	be	 the	 true	beginning,	because	 if	 the
word	was	 already	 present	 that	 presupposes	mind,	 so	 god	 already	 had	 a	mind.
And	when	you	have	a	mind	then	you	cannot	just	live	with	one	word.	Words	don't
believe	 in	 birth	 control	 one	 word	 creates	 a	 thousand	 words.	 They	 are	 very
reproductive.
Just	take	any	word	and	think	about	it,	ponder	over	it	and	you	will	be	surprised,	it
brings	up	other	words	immediately.	You	may	not	even	be	able	to	find	out	what
the	association	is.	For	example,	the	word	 'dog':	 just	ponder	over	the	word	 'dog'
and	you	will	be	puzzled	that	it	brings	up	so	many	things,	strange	things	that	you
would	 have	 never	 thought	 the	 word	 'dog'	 could	 trigger	 within	 you.	 You	 may
remember	your	girlfriend	who	had	a	dog	and	your	girlfriend	may	have	been	a
communist	(laughter)	and	you	may	remember	Karl	Marx	--
who	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 dog.	 And	 then	 DAS	 KAPITAL	 and	 the
Communist	Manifesto	and	Joseph	Stalin	and	Mao	Tse	Tung...	It	starts	and	then	it
never	stops!	Any	word	can	trigger	a	process	in	you	and	it	will	go	on	and	on.
So	 to	 say	 that	 in	 the	 beginning	 there	 was	 the	 word,	 is	 not	 right.	 If	 in	 the
beginning	the	word	was	there	 then	it	could	not	be	alone.	Whatsoever	 the	word
was	it	would	bring	other	words	in,	it	would	create	the	whole	world	of	the	mind,
the	 whole	 atmosphere	 of	 the	 mind.	 It	 would	 create	 the	 climate,	 all	 kinds	 of
associations;	 multi-dimensionally	 it	 will	 bring	 things.	 God	 would	 already	 be
going	insane	--	and	the	world	is	a	proof.	He	must	have	got	very	insane,	only	then
could	he	have	created	such	a	world	--	so	crazy,	so	miserable.
If	 I	were	 to	write	 the	Old	Testament	 then	 I	would	 start:	 in	 the	 beginning	was
silence	 --	 it	 cannot	 be	 the	word	 --	 and	 at	 the	 end	 again	 there	will	 be	 silence,
because	 the	beginning	 is	always	 the	end	 too.	 If	 in	 the	beginning	was	 the	word
then	 at	 the	 end	 also	 there	will	 be	 the	word.	So	 there	will	 be	 no	 end;	 you	will
continue,	you	will	go	on	thinking,	you	will	go	on	philosophising.
Meditation	means	reaching	to	the	very	beginning	or	to	the	very	end	--	which	is
the	same:	it	is	silence.
There	 is	 no	word,	 no	 thought,	 no	 ripple	 in	 the	 lake	of	 consciousness.	And	 the
lake	 functions	 like	 a	 mirror;	 it	 reflects	 all	 the	 stars	 as	 they	 are	 without
interpreting,	 because	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 interpret.	 There	 is	 only	 clarity,
sensitivity,	awareness.
So	beware	of	words.	They	will	not	go	easily	because	we	have	been	tending	them
for	 so	 long,	 for	 thousands	 of	 lives.	 They	 will	 not	 so	 easily.	 When	 you	 are
becoming	silent	suddenly	a	word	will	comes
'Look,	Nishabdo,	this	is	the	thing!'	But	these	are	words	and	they	have	disturbed
the	whole	thing,	even	if	you	say	'Right,	this	is	silence'	--	finished	(laughter),	then
the	word	has	come	 in	and	with	 the	word	comes	 the	whole	world.	 Immediately
you	will	say	'I	have	disturbed	it,'	and	the	train	has	started	moving,	shunting.
One	has	to	be	so	silent	that	there	is	not	even	any	idea	of	silence	--	just	silence,	no
labelling,	not	even
'aha!'	 otherwise	 it	 is	 finished!	 So	 one	 has	 to	 be	 very	 alert,	 very	 watchful	 of
words.	They	will	come	in	from	any	possible	way;	from	the	backdoor,	from	the
windows	they	will	 jump	in,	 from	the	ceiling	suddenly	 they	will	come	in.	They
are	 tricky	 fellows!	 (laughter)	 You	 may	 be	 silent	 and	 you	 may	 not	 have	 said
anything	 and	 then	 suddenly	 you	will	 say	 'So	 they	 have	 not	 come'	 --	 finished!
They	are	there.	They	were	just	watching	from	around	the	corner.
But	 if	 one	 is	 aware,	 slowly	 slowly	 one	 learns	 all	 their	 tricks,	 strategies,
diplomacies.	And	the	more	one	knows	how	the	mind	functions,	the	more	out	of
it	one	is.	A	day	certainly	comes	when	silence	prevails	without	any	interference,
any	 interpretation.	 In	 that	 very	 moment	 one	 becomes	 enlightened.	 To	 be
wordless	is	to	go	beyond	the	word.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Anand	Rupen.	Anand	means	bliss.	Rupen	means	beauty.
The	only	beautiful	 experience	 in	 life	 is	 that	of	bliss.	And	whenever,	wherever,
you	 experience	 beauty	 there	must	 be	 something	 of	 bliss	 present.	Looking	 at	 a
sunset	you	see	great	beauty	--	that	simply	means	the	sunset	has	been	so	stunning
that	your	mind	stopped,	that	its	constant	whirling	suddenly	disappeared.
Suddenly	you	were	silent	and	in	that	silence	you	tasted	bliss.	That	is	happening
within	you.	Because	you	are	focussed	on	the	sunset	or	the	starry	night	and	you
are	lost	in	the	grandeur	of	the	stars,	you	have	forgotten	your	ordinary	mind	and
ordinary	worries	and	anxieties.	You	are	 taken	 farther	away	from	your	ordinary
existence;	for	a	moment	you	are	no	more	the	same	person	as	you	ordinarily	are.
The	starry	night	was	too	much,	the	stars	pulled	you	like	magnets.
In	those	moments	the	juices	of	bliss	start	flowing	inside	you.	Of	course	because
you	are	not	aware	you	think	it	is	the	starry	night	that	has	given	you	bliss	or	the
sunset	or	the	flower	or	the	beautiful	woman	o	the	beautiful	music;	you	find	some
rationalisation	because	you	 felt	 so	good,	 such	a	well-being.	But	you	are	 really
putting	 the	 horses	 behind	 the	 cart.	 It	 is	 not	 beauty	 that	 creates	 bliss;	 it	 is
blissfulness	that	gives	you	the	sense	of	beauty.
Once	you	have	known	this	you	can	put	 the	horses	in	front	of	 the	cart	and	then
the	journey	starts	--
because	with	 the	horses	behind	 the	cart	 the	 journey	 is	 impossible;	 the	cart	will
block	 the	horses.	You	may	go	on	sitting	 in	 the	cart	 forever,	complaining	about
every	kind	of	 thing,	 that	 the	road	 is	not	good	and	 that	 the	horses	are	mad,	and
what	to	do	and	what	not	to	do	and	you	are	not	going	anywhere	and	what	is	this
all,	what	is	this	life	all	about?	The	whole	thing	is	that	you	are	sitting	in	the	cart
and	the	horses	are	at	the	back;	they	need	to	be	put	in	the	front.
Bliss	is	the	first	experience	in	our	being,	then	we	feel	beauty	outside.	Beauty	is
just	the	reflection	of	a	blissful	heart.	So	the	person	who	is	blissful	finds	beauty
everywhere.	When	bliss	 starts	 flowing	 in	you	 twenty-four	hours	a	day	you	are
surrounded	by	beauty	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	Then	everything	is	beautiful,	then
suddenly	the	whole	universe	is	immensely	beautiful.	Each	moment	brings	great
surprises,	great	gifts.	And	bliss	not	only	beautifies	the	universe,	it	beautifies	you
too.	It	is	very	alchemical;	it	changes	your	very	chemistry.
It	gives	you	grace,	 it	gives	you	 love,	 it	gives	you	courage,	 it	gives	you	both	a
kind	 of	 drunkenness	 and	 a	 kind	 of	 awareness	 together.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 most
beautiful	 experience	 in	 life:	 to	 be	 alert	 and	 drunk	 simultaneously.	 And	 that's
what	my	sannyasins	have	to	be,	drunk	and	alert	and	awake	simultaneously.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
24	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012235
ShortTitle:	GREENR24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Ole.	Anand	means	bliss.	Ole	means	peaceful
heart.
Peace	alone	is	not	enough	--	alone	it	is	dead;	it	is	alive	only	when	it	is	blissful.
Bliss	is	the	breath	for	peace;	without	bliss	there	is	no	heartbeat	in	peace,	then	it
is	just	a	corpse.	It	is	easier	to	attain	peace	if	one	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ready	to	renounce	bliss	--	and	that's	what	monks	and	nuns	have	been	doing	down
the	ages	all	over	the	world:	renouncing	bliss	in	order	to	gain	peace.	But	because
it	is	easy	and	cheap	it	has	no	significance	at	all.
One	 can	move	 into	 a	mountain	 cave	 and	 live	 peacefully	 but	 there	will	 be	 no
song,	there	will	be	no	joy,	there	will	be	no	disturbance	certainly	and	there	will	be
no	direction,	but	everything	will	be	just	okay.	It	will	not	be	a	dance,	it	will	not	be
something	overflowing.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 understand	 very	 clearly	 that	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 be
peaceful	but	not	without	bliss.
And	to	attain	bliss	and	peace	together	needs	great	skill	and	intelligence;	it	needs
meditativeness.	It	is	an	art	to	bring	these	two	poles	together	and	create	a	higher
synthesis	out	of	them.	Then	bliss	is	peaceful	and	peace	is	blissful.	Both	together
are	more	than	just	the	combination	of	the	two;	something	plus	descends	from	the
beyond.	That's	what	has	been	called	god.
You	 can	 call	 it	 life,	 truth,	 nirvana,	 but	 it	 only	 comes	 when	 both	 have	 been
balanced	and	both	are	together	like	two	wings	of	a	bird.
Anand	Mitzi.	Anand	means	bliss.	Mitzi	means	fragrance.
Pleasure	is	a	seed.	It	contains	all	possibilities	of	happiness	and	of	bliss,	but	they
are	all	hidden	and	dormant.	And	millions	of	people	die	only	knowing	the	seed,
but	the	seed	is	worthless	in	itself	unless	it	finds	the	right	soil	and	disappears	in
the	soil	and	dies,	only	then	is	the	plant	born.
Happiness	is	the	plant	with	many	branches	and	foliage.	And	when	the	tree	starts
flowering	--	 flowers	are	 like	 joy	--	 the	 tree	 is	 rejoicing!	Flowers	symbolise	 the
tree	being	ready	to	share.	It	has	too	much;	it	is	in	a	dance,	it	wants	to	share	its
being,	its	joy.	It	is	overflowing	energy	that	becomes	flowers.	An	undernourished
tree	wi	ll	not	give	flowers.	It	will	be	starving;	even	its	leaves	will	be	dull,	sad,
dying,	on	their	deathbed.	Its	branches	will	not	be	alive	and	swaying	in	the	wind
and	enjoying	the	sun.	Unless	it	blooms	it	is	not	fulfilled.
So	flowers	are	joyous,	but	bliss	is	like	fragrance,	even	beyond	the	flowers.	When
flowers	 release	 the	 fragrance	 that	 is	 the	 culmination,	 the	 realisation	 of	 the
potential	in	its	totality.
The	 seed	 was	 very	 visible,	 very	 material,	 the	 fragrance	 is	 invisible,	 very
immaterial.	The	 seed	was	 like	a	body	and	 the	 fragrance	 is	 like	a	 soul.	Bliss	 is
spiritual,	pleasure	is	physical.	Happiness	belongs	to	the	mind,	joy	belongs	to	the
heart.	And	these	are	the	four	things	to	be	understood,	from	the	seed	you	have	to
move	 to	 the	 plant,	 from	 the	 plant	 to	 the	 flowers,	 from	 the	 flowers	 to	 the
fragrance.	Then	life	has	arrived,	then	your	destiny	is	fulfilled.
In	 the	East	we	 have	 called	 that	moment	Buddhahood;	 in	 the	West	 it	 has	 been
called	 Christ-consciousness,	 but	 it	 is	 the	 same	moment.	 One	 has	 become	 just
fragrance,	and	the	fragrance	merges	with	the	whole,	it	disappears.	That's	exactly
the	meaning	of	the	word	'nirvana'.	It	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	words.
When	you	blow	out	a	candle	 it	 is	said	 in	Sanskrit	 that	 the	candle	has	achieved
nirvana	 --	 'nirvana'	 means	 blowing	 out	 a	 candle.	 The	 flame	 was	 there	 just	 a
moment	 before,	 now	 either	 it	 is	 nowhere	 or	 it	 is	 everywhere.	 Both	 mean	 the
same;	nowhere	and	everywhere	are	synonymous.	It	has	merged	with	the	whole
so	it	has	no	separate	entity.	Fragrance	is	nirvana.	All	 that	 is	gross	and	material
has	disappeared,	only	the	subtlest	has	remained	--	and	that	too	is	merged	with	the
whole.	 There	 is	 no	more	 any	 ego.	Then	 only	 does	 one	 know	what	 it	 is	 --	 the
bliss,	the	ecstasy	--	for	which	we	have	been	longing	for	thousands	of	lives.
It	is	possible!	It	needs	just	a	little	effort,	just	a	little	conscious,	deliberate	search	-
-	because	it	is	our	potential	so	it	can	become	actual.
Anand	Vincent.	Anand	means	bliss,	Vincent	means	a	conqueror.
A	man	without	bliss	is	a	beggar,	a	man	with	bliss	is	a	conqueror,	an	emperor.
While	 coming	 to	 India	 Alexander	 the	 Great	 went	 to	 see	 Diogenes	 --	 a	 rare
individual.	 He	 was	 lying	 naked	 on	 the	 bank	 of	 a	 river	 in	 the	 sun,	 taking	 a
sunbath.	He	didn't	even	get	up	to	welcome	Alexander.
Alexander	asked	him,	"Can	I	do	something	for	you?	I	have	heard	stories	about
you,	and	I	have	always	 longed	 to	see	you	and	I	am	really	happy	 to	see	such	a
blissful	man.	Can	I	do	something	for	you?"
Diogenes	thought	for	a	while	and	he	said,	"Yes,	 just	stand	a	 little	further	away
because	you	are	blocking	 the	sun.	Nothing	else	 is	needed	because	 I	am	utterly
fulfilled.	 This	 is	 the	 only	 difficulty	 that	 you	 are	 creating	 and	 it	 is	 you	who	 is
creating	it;	otherwise	there	is	no	difficulty	at	all!"
Alexander	was	 shocked	 and	 embarrassed;	 he	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 ears,	 could
not	 believe	 what	 Diogenes	 was	 saying.	 He	 could	 give	 Diogenes	 anything
because	he	was	the	richest	man	in	the	world	at	that	time,	a	world	conqueror,	but
this	man	had	not	asked	for	anything.	He	really	felt	a	beggar	before	Diogenes.	He
said,
"I	am	tremendously	happy	to	meet	you,	and	if	God	is	going	to	give	me	another
birth	I	will	tell	him,	'Don't	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
make	me	Alexander;	make	me	Diogenes.'"
There	 is	 a	 story	 that	 they	 died	 on	 the	 same	 day.	And	while	moving	 from	 the
earthly	plane	to	the	unearthly	world	one	has	to	cross	a	river	--	Diogenes	had	died
a	few	minutes	before	Alexander	so	he	was	ahead,	and	Alexander	was	following.
Diogenes	heard	a	noise	and	 looked	back.	Alexander	said,	"Strange	 that	we	are
meeting	 again!	 Perhaps	 on	 this	 river	 there	 has	 never	 been	 a	 meeting	 of	 an
emperor	and	a	beggar"
--	because	Diogenes	was	a	beggar.
Diogenes	laughed	and	said,	"You	are	right.	Just	one	correction	you	will	have	to
make.	You	misunderstand	who	 is	 the	emperor	and	who	 is	 the	beggar.	 I	am	 the
emperor	and	you	are	the	beggar!	Yes,	certainly	it	is	a	rare	incident	on	this	river,
it	 may	 not	 have	 happened	 before,	 it	 may	 not	 happen	 again,	 but	 I	 am	 the
conqueror	 and	 you	 are	 just	 a	 beggar."	 And	 Alexander	 could	 not	 say	 a	 single
word	against	 it	because	that	was	the	truth.	He	had	come	without	ever	knowing
what	bliss	was,	his	whole	life	went	down	the	drain,	and	this	man	had	lived	each
moment	of	it	so	blissfully	that	certainly	he	was	the	emperor.
Bliss	 makes	 one	 victorious;	 bliss	 and	 only	 bliss	 is	 worth	 achieving.	 Nothing
should	be	made	more	 important	 in	 life	 than	blissfulness.	 If	you	make	anything
else	more	important	you	will	live	in	misery,	you	will	never	be	a	conqueror.	And
my	sannyasins	have	to	be	emperors.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
-Two	more	days.
Then	come	back	again	 for	 at	 least	 three	days!	Because	one	has	 to	 achieve	 the
fourth!	(much	laughter)	You	have	to	give	at	least	three	days	for	three	stages	and
then	the	fourth	happens!	Next	time	come	for	three	days	--	right?	(much	laughter)
Jivan	Teng.	Jivan	means	life.	Teng	means	to	ascend.
Life	is	a	ladder	and	we	live	at	the	lowest	rung.	That's	where	we	find	ourselves	at
the	 time	 of	 birth,	 but	 we	 go	 on	 living	 there	 for	 the	 whole	 of	 our	 life.	 Many
people	think	that	just	to	be	born	is	enough.	Birth	is	only	the	beginning	of	a	long
pilgrimage,	but	the	majority	of	people	die	on	exactly	the	same	spot	where	they
were	 born.	 They	 have	 not	 moved	 even	 a	 single	 inch.	 Their	 life	 energy	 has
remained	on	the	same	plane;	it	has	not	ascended,	it	has	not	gone	upwards.	They
are	still	crawling	on	the	earth;	they	have	not	found	their	wings	yet,	they	have	not
even	looked	at	the	sky	and	the	stars.	They	are	too	occupied	with	their	own	small
things,	they	have	no	time	to	look	upwards;	and	life	really	begins	only	when	you
start	moving	on	the	higher	rungs	of	the	ladder.
Meditation	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 help	 you	 to	 move	 from	 one	 rung	 to	 another.
Meditation	means	awareness.
As	you	become	aware	of	the	body	you	move	beyond	the	body.	Awareness	means
transcendence.	When	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 your	 mind	 you	 move	 up	 another
rung	 of	 the	 ladder.	You	 are	 no	more	mind,	 you	 have	 gone	 beyond	mind.	 The
moment	you	become	aware	of	your	heart,	you	have	moved	beyond	the	heart.
These	three	are	the	most	fundamental	planes	to	be	transcended.	When	you	have
moved	 beyond	 these	 three	 you	 come	 to	 your	 real	 self,	 the	 fourth,	 turiya.	And
only	then	does	one	know	what	life	is	all	about.	One	comes	to	know	the	truth	of
life,	the	meaning	of	life	and	the	immense	splendour	of	life.
Dhyan	 Sadhana.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation.	 Sadhana	 means	 the	 practice,	 the
discipline.
My	whole	emphasis	is	on	meditation	because	it	is	the	master	key;	it	opens	all	the
locks,	it	opens	all	the	doors	and	all	the	mysteries.	Nothing	else	is	needed.	So	one
should	concentrate	one's	whole	energy	on	being	meditative.	And	by	meditation	I
means	the	art	of	watchfulness,	awareness,	alertness.
The	first	step	is	becoming	aware	of	your	bodily	activities	and	actions:	walking,
sitting,	 standing	 --	 just	 a	 silent	 awareness	 of	what	 is	 going	on	on	 the	physical
plane.	People	are	not	aware	of	that,	hence	you	can	see	many	contradictions.
For	 example,	 a	 man	 may	 be	 smiling	 and	 yet	 his	 eyes	 may	 show	 anger.	 He
himself	is	not	aware	of	it.	A	man	may	not	show	something	but	if	you	know	how
to	 read	 his	 face	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 decipher	 it	 immediately,	 because	 he	 is	 so
unaware	that	what	he	is	hiding	is	bound	to	be	expressed	in	some	way	or	other.
A	psychologist	was	 experimenting	 and	he	 talked	 to	many	people	 belonging	 to
different	occupations	--	a	few	monks,	a	few	priests,	a	few	rabbis,	a	few	ordinary
people,	businessmen,	bankers,	all	kinds	of	people.	He	gave	them	a	pack	of	cards
and	each	card	had	a	picture	of	a	sunset,	a	sunrise,	mountains,	this	and	that,	and
also	a	picture	of	a	naked	woman.
A	man	was	 looking	 at	 the	 cards,	 and	 the	 psychologist	 was	 not	 looking	 at	 the
cards,	he	was	sitting	in	front	of	the	man.	But	when	the	man	came	to	the	naked
woman	the	psychologist	would	immediately	say	'So	now,	you	have	come	to	the
naked	 woman?'	 And	 the	 man	 was	 puzzled	 as	 to	 how	 he	 came	 to	 know.	 And
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
people	who	have	been	practising	celibacy	and	saying	that	sex	is	sin	--	priests	and
the	monks	--	even	they	would	be	immediately	caught.
The	simple	trick	was	that	the	psychologist	was	watching	their	eyes.	Their	pupils
became	big	the	moment	they	saw	the	naked	woman.	Now,	they	didn't	know	what
was	happening	to	their	eyes.	And	in	fact	one	has	no	control	over	them.	Even	if
those	people	had	known	they	could	not	control	them;	they	are	beyond	control.
Immediately	their	pupils	would	become	big.	Your	pupils	become	big	only	when
you	want	to	take	something	totally	in,	when	you	don't	want	to	miss	anything	--
that	makes	your	pupils	bigger.
If	you	watch	people's	activities	you	will	be	surprised,	they	say	one	thing,	they	do
something	else	and	their	faces	express	something	else	again.	It	is	as	if	they	are
many	people.
A	psychoanalyst	said	to	a	patient	'Through	three	months	analysis	with	you	I	have
discovered	that	you	are	a	schizophrenic,	a	split	personality.'	The	man	said	'No,	I
am	not,'	then	stood	up	and	said	'Yes,	I	am,'	then	lay	down	again	and	said	'No,	I
am	not!'	Now	he	was	not	aware	what	he	was	doing;	by	saying	'I	am,	I	am	not,	I
am...'	he	was	simply	proving	that	the	psychoanalyst	was	right!
One	has	to	watch	one's	body	very	carefully.	That	gives	you	a	deep	understanding
and	makes	you	capable	of	watching	your	mind,	which	is	more	subtle.
The	second	step	is	that	the	mind	has	to	be	watched...	what	thoughts	pass	in	the
mind,	what	desires	cross	the	mind?	There	is	no	need	to	analyse,	there	is	no	need
to	evaluate,	no	need	to	judge.	Just	watching,	simply	taking	note	that	these	are	the
thoughts	 that	 pass,	 these	 are	 the	 dreams	 that	 pass,	 these	 are	 the	 fantasies	 that
pass,	without	 any	 evaluation	 of	 good,	 bad,	moral,	 immoral	 --	 just	watching	 --
will	again	give	you	a	deeper	capacity	 to	watch.	And	 then	one	can	watch	one's
feelings	of	the	heart,	moods	--	which	are	the	subtlest.
Suddenly	you	are	in	the	grip	of	a	mood	--	it	just	comes	like	a	breeze	and	you	are
sad	or	you	are	blissful	for	no	reason	at	all.
One	has	to	learn	to	watch	these	three	things,	body,	mind,	heart,	action,	thought,
feeling.	And	these	three	take	you	to	the	fourth,	which	is	the	highest	rung	of	the
ladder:	being.
Action	is	the	most	outside	thing	and	being,	the	most	inside;	action	the	outermost,
being	the	innermost.
So	start	with	action,	with	doing.	Watch	your	doings,	so	slowly	slowly	thinking,
then	feeling	and	then	being.
The	moment	you	reach	being	you	ascend	to	real	life.	For	the	first	time	you	taste
immortality,	eternity.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Three	months.
--	That's	good.	Exactly	the	right	time!
Nikhilananda	means	total	bliss.
One	 should	 not	 be	 satisfied	 with	 less	 than	 that.	 One	 should	 remain	 divinely
discontented	with	anything	less	than	that.	Sannyas	is	divine	discontentment.	It	is
the	search	for	total	bliss.
But	all	religions	have	been	teaching	contentment	and	because	of	their	preachings
people	 have	 become	 contented	with	whatsoever	 they	 have	 got,	wherever	 they
are.	 So	 you	 rarely	 come	 across	 a	 person	 who	 has	 attained	 bliss,	 intelligence,
freedom,	love,	truth.	It	has	become	very	rare	and	it	is	becoming	rarer	and	rarer
every	 day,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 religions	 don't	 teach	 you	 a	 divine
discontent,	they	don't	give	you	fire.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	afire	with	a	tremendous	longing	for	total	bliss.	And	I
say	don't	settle	with	less	than	that	because	it	is	your	birthright.	You	are	meant	to
achieve	 it.	 You	 have	 been	 given	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 to	 achieve	 it.	 You	 are
absolutely	 ready	 to	 take	 the	 jump.	So	gather	 courage	 and	 start	 the	 journey	 for
absolute	blissfulness.	Nothing	else	can	really	give	you	contentment.
You	can	console	yourself,	you	can	try	to	satisfy	yourself	in	some	way;	you	can
rationalize	and	you	can	remain	wherever	you	are,	thinking	that	this	is	all	there	is.
This	is	not	all	there	is,	there	is	far	more.
The	Upanishads	say	 'Charaiveti,	Charaiveti'	 --	go	on,	go	on,	 there	 is	no	end	 to
this	journey.	Go	on	until	you	become	a	god	yourself.
Sampurna	means	the	whole.
We	are	brought	up	with	 the	false	 idea	 that	we	are	separate	 from	existence.	We
are	brought	up	as	egos,	and	that	is	the	whole	problem,	the	root	cause	of	all	other
problems,	 because	 whatsoever	 we	 think,	 our	 thinking	 makes	 no	 difference	 to
reality;	 reality	 remains	 the	 same.	We	are	not	 separate	 from	 reality,	we	are	one
with	 it,	 but	 because	 of	 the	 idea	 that	 we	 are	 separate	 we	 get	 into	 unnecessary
anxieties	and	worries.	Our	whole	life	becomes	just	a	long	anguish,	a	nightmare.
Just	by	dropping	 the	 idea	 that	you	are	 separate,	 a	miracle	happens:	all	worries
suddenly	disappear.	They	used	to	look	so	big	and	so	important	and	suddenly	they
are	not	there.	Even	death	is	no	more	there,	because	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
if	we	 are	 part	 of	 the	whole	we	 cannot	 die;	we	 have	 always	 been	 and	we	will
always	be.
Surrender	the	ego	--	it	is	only	a	false	notion.	I	ask	my	sannyasins	to	give	to	me
that	which	you	don't	have,	so	that	I	can	give	you	that	which	you	already	have.
Give	your	ego	to	me	so	that	you	can	have	the	whole.	'Why	remain	tethered	to	a
small	thing?
This	whole	universe	 is	an	organic	unity.	That	 is	 the	meaning	of	Sampurna	and
that	 has	 to	 be	 dis-covered.	 Unless	 you	 discover	 it	 life	 is	 meaningless	 and	 a
meaningless	misery	--	on	one	hand	meaningless,	on	the	other	hand	miserable.	It
is	just	an	exercise	in	utter	futility.	But	it	all	depends	on	you	--
you	 can	 drop	 the	 ego	 in	 a	 single	moment	 of	 understanding,	 just	 as	 one	 drops
one's	clothes	--	because	it	is	a	false	idea.	Clothes	are	far	more	real.
You	will	have	to	unbutton	and	unbelt	and	do	a	few	things	before	you	can	drop
them,	 but	 the	 ego	 can	 be	 dropped	 instantly.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 unbutton	 it,
because	it	is	not	there	in	the	first	place,	it	is	just	an	idea.
But	the	idea	is	creating	so	much	hell	for	so	many	people.
Sannyas	 means	 getting	 rid	 of	 the	 ego	 and	 entering	 into	 the	 world,	 into	 the
universe.	Just	like	a	dewdrop	slipping	into	the	ocean	and	becoming	one	with	it.
Prem	Sagar.	Prem	means	love.	Sagar	means	ocean.
One	should	not	be	miserly	about	love,	because	the	law	of	love	is	that	the	more
you	give,	 the	more	you	have,	 the	 less	 you	give,	 the	 less	 you	have,	 and	 if	 you
don't	give	at	all	it	simply	disappears	from	your	heart.
And	 if	 you	go	on	pouring	 infinitely,	 it	 goes	on	growing	 in	you	 infinitely.	 It	 is
always	in	the	same	proportion	as	you	give.
Once	 the	 arithmetic	 of	 love	 is	 understood	 life	 goes	 through	 a	 radical	 change.
When	you	start	giving	love	for	no	reason	other	than	just	for	the	sheer	joy	of	it,
the	whole	universe	expands.	Thousands	of	songs	start	falling	on	you;	from	each
direction,	from	each	nook	and	corner	love	starts	flowing	towards	you.
Life	 can	 become	 a	 festival	 of	 lights	 through	 love.	 It	 can	 become	 a	 spring;
thousands	of	roses	can	bloom	in	your	being.	All	that	is	needed	is	to	share	your
love	without	any	conditions,	without	asking	for	anything	in	return.
So	let	that	be	your	work	upon	yourself:	become	loving	and	finally	become	love
itself.	 That's	 the	 moment	 one	 discovers	 god	 within	 one's	 own	 being.	 God	 is
another	name	of	absolute	love.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
A	very	long	time.
That's	good.	Be	here	a	very	long	time.	Forever	will	do	--	or	a	little	longer!
Akal	means	timelessness.
Mind	 is	 time.	 Time	 has	 two	 tenses,	 not	 three	 --	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future;	 the
present	is	not	part	of	time.
The	present	is	part	of	timelessness,	it	belongs	to	timelessness.	To	be	in	the	now
and	in	the	here	is	to	enter	into	eternity.	And	god	is	timeless	and	truth	is	timeless
and	we	are	timeless.	All	that	truly	exists	is	timeless.
That	which	does	not	exist	is	part	of	time.	The	past	does	not	exist,	it	is	no	more;
the	future	does	not	exist,	it	is	not	yet.	Only	the	present,	between	the	past	and	the
future,	 just	 a	 small	 interval	 between	 the	 two,	 exists;	 and	 that	 small	 interval
between	the	two	is	the	only	reality	there	is.	But	that	small	interval	is	infinite.
And	meditation	means	entering	into	the	present.
A	sannyasin's	lifestyle	has	to	be	completely	free	from	the	past	and	free	from	the
future.	The	moment	 you	 are	 free	 from	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future	 you	 are	 in	 tune
with	 the	 present.	 And	 that	 harmony	 with	 the	 present	 brings	 all	 joys,	 all
benedictions,	all	blessings.	It	brings	enlightenment.	It	brings	flowers	of	love	and
those	 flowers	 start	 showering	 on	 you;	 day	 in,	 day	 out,	 they	 go	 on	 showering.
Each	 moment	 becomes	 such	 an	 ecstasy,	 so	 exquisite,	 that	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to
imagine	it,	there	is	no	way	to	comprehend	it	through	the	mind;	because	the	mind
is	time	and	time	cannot	comprehend	that	which	is	beyond	time.
To	know	it,	one	has	to	enter	into	the	present.
That's	my	whole	teaching	here:	to	live	in	the	now.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
25	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012245
ShortTitle:	GREENR25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Shunyam	Renate.	Shunyam	means	zero.	Renate	means	born	anew.
One	can	have	a	new	being,	a	new	life,	but	one	has	to	be	ready	to	get	rid	of	all
that	 is	 old,	 to	 be	 utterly	 empty	 of	 the	 old,	 to	 be	 just	 a	 zero,	 nobody,	 a
nothingness.	Only	out	of	that	nothingness	does	the	new	begin.
The	new	is	not	the	modified	old,	it	 is	discontinuous	with	the	old.	So	it	 is	not	a
renovation	of	the	old;	the	old	simply	dies	without	leaving	any	trace	behind.	And
then	the	miracle	happens	the	new	sprouts	up.	The	grave	of	the	old	is	the	womb
for	the	new.
And	sannyas	is	nothing	but	a	process	of	emptying	you	of	all	that	you	have	been
up	 to	now	so	 that	you	can	have	a	new	beginning,	a	 fresh	beginning;	only	 then
can	misery	disappear,	only	then	is	bliss	possible.
The	 story	 of	 Jesus	 being	 crucified	 and	 then	 after	 three	 days	 resurrecting	 is
beautiful.	 Christians	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	make	much	 use	 of	 its	 symbolisms
crucifixion	means	death	and	resurrection	means	birth.	But	for	three	days	he	was
neither	alive	nor	dead,	for	three	days	he	was	in	a	state	of	being	a	zero.	And	those
three	represent	the	three	stages	of	the	mystics	getting	rid	of	the	body,	getting	rid
of	 the	 mind,	 getting	 rid	 of	 the	 heart;	 and	 then	 is	 the	 rebirth	 --	 the	 being	 is
discovered.
It	 is	 through	death	 that	one	comes	 to	know	that	which	 is	deathless,	 the	divine.
But	Christians	miss	the	point	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	started	emphasising
it	as	a	fact.	It	is	not	a	fact,	it	is	a	parable,	and	parables	are	far	more	significant
than	history.	Reducing	a	parable	is	very	pregnant,	a	fact	is	just	a	flat	thing.
There	 is	nothing	in	 it,	 just	an	event.	And	we	have	to	understand	life	 itself	as	a
parable,	as	a	prelude	to	a	new	life,	the	divine	life.
So	let	sannyas	become	both	a	crucifixion	and	a	resurrection.
Swami	Anand	Charlie.	Anand	means	bliss.	Charlie	means	of	noble	spirit.
Misery	is	always	mean;	it	cannot	be	noble.	It	is	the	root	cause	of	all	that	is	ugly.
One	has	to	drop	misery	if	one	wants	to	be	noble	--	and	it	can	be	dropped	because
it	is	our	choice.	We	have	chosen	it,	we	are	choosing	it	every	day,	every	moment.
Each	moment	both	alternatives,	 to	be	miserable	or	 to	be	blissful,	 are	 available
for	 you.	But	our	 conditioning	 is	 such	 that	we	 lean	 towards	 the	miserable.	Our
conditioning	is	such	that	we	choose	the	negative,	the	darker	side.	We	don't	look
at	the	lightning,	we	look	at	the	dark	cloud.	We	make	so	much	fuss	about	the	dark
that	we	forget	all	about	the	beauty	of	the	stars.	We	become	so	obsessed	with	the
thorns	that	the	roses	are	completely	forgotten.
One	has	to	change	this	gestalt.	Choose	the	flowers	and	slowly	slowly	you	will	be
surprised	 that	 the	 thorns	 start	 disappearing.	Choose	 the	 stars	 and	 one	 day	 you
will	find	that	all	darkness	is	finished.	It	is	a	question	of	choice.	And	the	moment
you	start	 choosing	 the	positive,	 the	affirmative,	 the	beautiful,	you	start	 leaning
towards	 the	 blissful,	 you	 start	 becoming	 noble.	 A	 blissful	 person	 cannot	 do
anything	that	is	ignoble.
Out	of	bliss	is	all	beauty,	all	grandeur.
So	I	teach	my	sannyasins	to	be	of	cheerful	heart,	to	be	blissful.	And	it	is	only	a
question	of	choosing.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Try	it	from	this	very	moment	and	you	will	be	surprised,	it	works!
Gautam	the	Buddha	has	defined	truth	as	that	which	works.	That's	a	tremendously
beautiful	 definition.	 It	 does	 not	 matter	 whether	 it	 is	 really	 true	 or	 not;	 the
question	 is	 whether	 it	 works	 or	 not	 --	 a	 very	 pragmatic	 definition,	 a	 very
American	definition!	(laughter)
So	try	it	from	this	very	moment	and	you	will	be	surprised	--	it	works.	And	if	it
works	it	is	true.
And	when	I	say	this	I	say	it	from	my	experience	and	the	experience	of	thousands
of	my	 sannyasins.	 But	 I	 am	 not	 telling	 you	 to	 believe	 it,	 I	 am	 telling	 you	 to
experiment,	to	enquire,	to	go	into	it.	There	is	no	need	to	believe,	because	it	really
works...	when	you	have	 experienced	 it	 then	 there	 is	 no	need	 to	 believe	 --	 you
know	it	is	so.
Prem	David.	Prem	means	love.	David	means	beloved.
One	who	loves	naturally	becomes	a	beloved.	Gut	people	try	the	other	way	round,
they	want	 love	 tn	 come	 first	 and	 then	 they	will	 give.	But	 that	 is	 not	 going	 to
happen	 because	 the	 other	 person	 also	 knows	 the	 same	 arithmetic,	 both	 have
learned	 the	wrong	arithmetic.	Both	are	 taught	by	 the	 same	kind	of	people,	 the
same	kind	of	parents,	the	same	kind	of	preachers.	Their	names	may	be	different	-
-	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan	--	but	the	real	thing	is	not	very	different.	They
are	just	different	labels	but	the	disease	is	the	same;	they	are	different	languages
but	what	they	are	doing	is	the	same.
We	have	been	conditioned	in	such	a	way	that	first	we	want	to	yet	and	then	we
will	give.	But	that	is	not	the	way	of	nature.
Give	and	you	will	get,	 and	you	will	get	 a	 thousand-fold.	Love,	 love	 for	 love's
sake.	 Don't	 ask	 for	 anything	 in	 return	 because	 it	 comes	 inevitably.	 It	 is	 the
fundamental	law	of	life	that	whatsoever	you	give	is	bound	to	bounce	back	upon
you.
There	 are	 a	 few	 things	which	don't	 bounce.	 If	 you	 throw	a	 tomato	 at	 the	wall
(much	laughter)	it	won't	bounce.	But	love	is	not	a	tomato!	Love	is	a	real	ball	--	it
bounces!	 I	 have	 tried	 tomatoes...	 (The	 rest	 of	 the	 sentence	Osho	completes	by
glancing	 at	 the	 wall	 on	 his	 right	 and	 making	 a	 throwing	 gesture.)	 Only	 with
tomatoes	does	the	law	of	nature	fail.
Love,	and	 love	starts	showering	on	you,	raining	on	you.	That's	 the	meaning	of
David.	 The	 ancient	 meaning	 is	 Jehovah's	 beloved,	 god's	 beloved.	 Mm,	 god
simply	means	the	whole,	the	whole	universe.	Love	and	the	whole	universe	loves
you	--	and	that	is	the	fulfilment.
Veet	Rainer.	Veet	means	surpass,	transcend.	Rainer	means	a	prudent	warrior.
A	sannyasin	has	to	learn	to	surpass	the	whole	idea	of	war	and	the	whole	idea	of
being	prudent.	A	sannyasin	has	to	learn	love	and	to	be	innocent,	not	prudent.	He
has	to	be	an	innocent	lover,	not	a	prudent	warrior.	Enough	of	the	warriors!	The
whole	 of	 human	 history	 has	 lived	 according	 to	 the	 idea	 rooted,	 oriented,	 in
violence,	in	war,	in	fight,	and	the	warrior	has	been	worshipped.	But	it	is	time	we
change	 the	 whole	 idea	 because	 warriors	 are	 no	more	 needed.	 Now	 the	 world
needs	 lovers;	 the	world	no	 longer	needs	weapons,	 it	needs	flowers.	 It	does	not
need	 any	 prudence,	 any	 cunning,	 any	 cleverness;	 it	 needs	 innocent	 people,
simple	people	who	can	trust	even	when	conditions	are	not	in	favour	of	trusting,
who	are	ready	to	be	cheated	but	who	are	not	ready	to	drop	their	trust.
Then	we	 can	 create	 a	 new	humanity,	 then	we	 can	 create	 a	 new	 earth.	We	 can
make	 paradise	 now	 and	 here.	 Because	 the	 whole	 of	 human	 history	 failed	 to
produce	 a	 paradise	 on	 earth,	 they	 invented,	 they	 projected,	 paradise	 being
somewhere	above	the	clouds.	It	was	simply	a	failure;	but	man	needs	some	hope
to	 live	 by	 so	 they	 projected	 the	 idea	 of	 paradise	 somewhere	 else.	 It	 is	 simply
nothing	but	something	to	cover	up	failure.
Man	can	create	paradise	here.	And	there	is	no	need	to	wait	until	after	death;	 if
you	cannot	 live	 in	paradise	while	alive,	what	 is	 the	point	of	hoping	for	 it	after
death?	When	 you	 failed	 in	 life	 you	 are	 not	 going	 to	 succeed	 in	 death.	 If	 you
succeed	 in	 life,	certainly	you	will	 succeed	 in	death	 too,	because	 life	and	death
are	 continuous.	Only	 the	 body	 dies,	 you	 remain	 the	 same,	 your	 consciousness
never	dies.
So	there	is	no	need	to	wait	for	the	future;	we	should	start	creating	paradise	now
and	here.	And	if	the	idea	of	war	disappears,	with	that	will	disappear	the	whole
politics	of	nations,	religions,	races,	colour	and	all	kinds	of	stupidities.	The	earth
can	be	one	--	it	needs	to	be	one.
In	fact	it	is	one;	we	have	made	it	divided	and	we	have	divided	it	to	create	war.
We	are	dividing	humanity	 to	 fight.	We	cannot	 live	without	 fight	 because	 fight
has	become	our	programme	in	 the	mind.	For	 thousands	of	years	we	have	been
programmed	for	war.	It	is	time	for	a	deprogramming.	And	that's	what	sannyas	is
all	about:	a	deprogramming	process.	And	it	leaves	you	without	any	programme,
free	to	live	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
according	to	your	own	light.
Antar	Svargo.	Antar	means	inner.	Svargo	means	paradise.
Jesus	says	again	and	again	that	the	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you	--	that's	exactly
the	meaning	of	your	name.	There	is	no	need	to	search	for	it	anywhere	else;	one
just	 has	 to	 dive	 deep	 within	 one's	 own	 depth.	 It	 is	 there	 that	 the	 treasure	 is
hidden.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 found	 it	 your	 whole	 life	 goes	 through	 a	 radical
revolution.	 Once	 you	 have	 known	 that	 insight	 there	 is	 inestimable	 treasure,
immeasurable	 treasure.	When	 you	 have	 found	 the	 paradise	 within,	 of	 course,
your	 whole	 character	 on	 the	 outside	 changes	 your	 relationships	 change,	 your
behaviour	changes	--	and	without	any	effort.	Because	your	consciousness	is	not
blissful,	your	actions	become	blissful.	Because	now	you	have	all	that	you	always
wanted	 there	 is	 such	 contentment	 that	 each	 breath	 is	 such	 a	 joy,	 such	 a
benediction,	 that	you	would	not	harm	anybody.	You	will	become	a	blessing	 to
others	too.	In	fact	that's	the	criterion	of	a	blissful	person:	if	he	is	really	blissful
he	becomes	a	blessing	to	others	too.
But	the	whole	journey	is	inward.	Going	to	the	moon	is	not	going	to	help.	Going
into	yourself	is	 the	only	way	to	be	redeemed	from	misery,	to	be	liberated	from
all	that	we	are	burdened	with.	The	weight	is	too	much,	it	is	almost	a	Himalaya,
and	we	 are	 crushed	 underneath	 it,	we	 cannot	move.	Once	 you	 have	 found	 the
source	of	joy	within	you,	you	are	free	from	all	weight,	you	become	weightless.
And	in	that	weightlessness	life	is	freedom,	life	is	joy,	life	is	a	celebration.
Anand	Bhagvato.	Anand	means	bliss.	Bhagvato	means	divine.
The	only	experience	worth	calling	divine	is	the	experience	of	bliss.	All	else	that
can	be	called	divine	--
for	 exaMple,	 love,	 truth,	 freedom	 --	 are	 divine	 only	 because	 they	 all	 enhance
blissfulness,	 they	 all	 have	 blissfulness	 as	 a	 basic	 ingredient,	 in	 fact	 their	 very
centre	is	blissfulness.	So	anything	that	has	bliss	in	it	is	divine.
And	pure	bliss	is	pure	godliness.	There	is	no	god	but	there	is	godliness.	There	is
no	 deity	 so	 all	 worship	 is	 foolish,	 but	 there	 is	 diviness;	 hence	 meditation	 is
meaningful.	And	that	is	the	difference	between	prayer	and	meditation....
Prayer	starts	with	the	belief	that	god	is	a	person,	and	meditation	starts	with	the
totally	different	assumption	that	god	is	nothing	but	a	name	for	the	ultimate	peak
of	bliss.	So	there	is	no	need	to	pray,	there	is	nobody	to	pray	to,	there	is	nobody	to
listen	to	your	prayer.	It	is	childish.	Meditation	is	maturity.
So	 now	 put	 your	 whole	 energy	 into	 meditation.	 Become	 more	 silent,	 more
aware.	As	you	become	silent,	as	you	become	aware,	simultaneously	you	go	on
becoming	more	blissful.	When	awareness	is	total	bliss	is	also	total.	Bliss	is	the
by-product	 of	 awareness.	 So	 grow	 more	 in	 awareness,	 in	 watchfulness,	 in
alertness.
If	one	is	not	watchful	one	goes	around	in	circles;	one	goes	on	repeating	the	same
things	 as	 one	 has	 been	 doing	 one's	 whole	 life	 or	 maybe	 for	 many	 lives.	 The
moment	 you	 become	watchful	 something	 new	 enters	 in	 your	 lifes	 you	 cannot
repeat	 the	 same	mistakes	 twice.	 It	 is	 good	 to	make	new	mistakes	because	one
learns,	but	 it	 is	very	stupid	 to	make	 the	same	mistake	 twice;	 that	means	one	 is
behaving	 unconsciously,	 unmeditatively.	 And	misery	 is	 nothing	 but	 behaviour
rooted	in	unconsciousness.	Bliss	is	behaviour	coming	out	of	consciousness.
From	this	moment	remember	blissfulness	as	the	only	divine	quality	so	the	very
idea	of	 prayer	 disappears;	 prayer	 has	 been	 an	 absolute	 exercise	 in	 futility.	But
millions	of	people	for	millions	of	years	have	been	praying	for	no	purpose	at	all.
If	 all	 these	 people	 had	 been	 meditating	 we	 would	 have	 created	 so	 much
consciousness	on	the	earth	that	the	whole	earth	would	have	been	aglow,	aflame.
We	would	have	filled	it	with	flowers	and	songs	and	dances.
But	it	can	still	happen!
Prem	Arpano.	Prem	means	love.	Arpano	means	surrender.
Sannyas	is	a	loving	surrender	to	existence.	It	is	dropping	the	habit	of	saying	no	--
which	is	very	deeply	engrained.	It	is	replacing	no	with	a	big	yes,	so	big	that	it	is
bigger	 than	 you,	 so	 overwhelmingly	 big	 that	 you	 disappear	 into	 it,	 that	 it
permeates	your	whole	being,	every	fibre,	every	cell;	it	arises	from	the	very	roots.
When	this	yes	to	existence	arises	life	becomes	an	ecstasy	--	and	to	me	that's	the
whole	 of	 religion.	 All	 churches,	 all	 temples,	 all	 mosques,	 are	 just	 for	 stupid
people;	for	intelligent	people	this	much	is	enough	of	a	religion,	this	single	word
'yes'.	But	it	should	become	your	whole	life.
Try	with	small	yeses	so	that	you	can	have	a	little	bit	of	experience,	a	little	taste
of	the	joy	of	saying	it.
Then	be	courageous	and	say	a	little	bigger	yes.	And	the	ultimate	is	a	single	yes
into	which	you	disappear	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
and	never	come	out	of.	That	is	the	merger,	the	union,	the	yoga,	with	the	whole.
Dhyan	Dipo.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Dipo	means	a	small	lamp.
Meditation	is	a	small	lamp	in	the	dark	light	of	life.	But	it	is	enough,	more	than
enough.	It	sheds	enough	light	for	you	to	walk	a	few	steps,	and	by	the	time	you
have	walked	those	few	steps	the	light	goes	ahead	of	you.
In	 the	 darkest	 night	with	 just	 a	 small	 lamp	one	 can	 travel	 thousands	 of	miles.
Meditation	is	a	small	lamp,	just	a	small	flame	of	light	inside	you,	but	it	is	more
than	 enough,	more	 than	 is	 needed,	 and	 one	 can	 pass	 through	 all	 darkness	 and
reach	to	the	dawn.
I	call	it	a	small	flame	because	awareness	is	exactly	a	flame.	The	people	who	are
living	without	 awareness	 are	 just	dark,	black	holes.	As	you	 start	meditating	 in
the	beginning	you	will	 feel	only	darkness	 inside	 and	nothing	else.	So	don't	 be
disturbed	by	 it	 --	 it	 is	 natural,	 because	we	have	never	 tried	 to	 create	 any	 light
inside.	 In	 the	beginning	 it	will	be	dark,	but	go	on	watching	 the	darkness.	That
watching	of	the	darkness	is	the	beginning	of	the	light.	That	watching	is	the	light.
As	you	watch	darkness	you	become	aware	you	are	not	it	and	the	first	ray	of	light
has	 entered.	Knowing	 that	you	are	not	 it,	 is	 the	 first	 small	beginning,	but	 it	 is
tremendously	pregnant	with	possibilities.
Seeing	that	there	is	darkness	inside	don't	turn	away.	Many	people	try	--	listening
to	 the	Buddha,	 to	 Jesus,	 to	 Socrates,	 they	 try	 to	 look	 in	 but	 the	moment	 they
close	their	eyes	it	is	all	dark.	Afraid	of	darkness	they	open	their	eyes;	at	least	on
the	outside	 there	 is	 some	 light,	 some	warmth,	people	 are	 there.	 Inside	you	are
alone,	no	warmth,	nobody	to	relate	to,	and	there	is	immense	darkness;	it	is	scary!
So	many	people	 once	 in	 a	while	 try	 but	 then	 they	 drop	 the	 idea;	 it	 seems	 too
risky.
In	the	beginning	one	has	to	insist,	one	has	to	go	on	entering,	undeterred	by	the
darkness.	So	accept	 the	 inner	darkness	as	a	challenge	and	go;	go	deeper	every
day.	Just	remember	one	key	be	watchful,	then	one	day	suddenly	you	will	see	the
light	has	arrived.	And	it	does	not	come	from	anywhere	else,	it	arises	inside	your
own	being.	Watchfulness	functions	as	a	catalytic	agent.
And	when	the	light	grows	inside	you	and	fills	your	whole	being,	that's	what	we
call	Buddhahood,	enlightenment	--	one	has	become	light	 itself!	And	that	 is	 the
goal	 of	 life.	without	 it,	without	 achieving	 it,	 one	 has	 not	 really	 lived,	 one	 has
only	dreamt	that	one	was	alive.
Dhyan	Pakhi.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Pakhi	means	a	bird.
Meditation	gives	 you	wings.	Once	you	have	 learned	 the	 art	 of	meditation	you
need	not	crawl	on	the	earth;	you	can	start	ascending	into	the	sky.	Then	the	whole
sky	is	yours.	And	the	higher	you	rise,	the	clearer	a	perspective	you	have.
The	meditator	has	a	bird's	eye	view,	he	can	see	things	in	their	total	context.	He
does	not	see	things	separately;	he	sees	things	interconnected.	In	his	vision	all	is
joined	together;	it	is	an	organic	vision,	nothing	is	separate.	And	only	out	of	such
a	vision	can	life	be	benefitted.
Thinkers	can't	help.	They	are	crawling	on	the	earth;	they	are	still	tethered	to	the
mind	 and	 mind	 is	 very	 earthly.	 Mind	 functions	 according	 to	 the	 law	 of
gravitation,	it	is	being	pulled	downward.	And	meditation	is	a	state	of	no-mind;	it
functions	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 way.	 It	 functions	 according	 to	 the	 law	 of
levitation,	 it	 rises	 upwards	 because	 it	 is	 weightless,	 there	 is	 no	 weight	 in
meditation.	Mind	is	a	weighty	thing,	the	more	mind	you	have,	the	more	weight
you	have.
Having	 no-mind	 suddenly	 all	 wei;ht	 disappears	 You	 have	 escaped	 from	 the
prison	of	gravitation;	now	you	can	rise	on	 the	wing,	as	high	as	you	desire.	No
height	is	a	limitation	for	you	any	more,	there	is	no	limit	any	more.
This	freedom	I	call	sannyas,	this	total	vision	I	call	sannyas.	To	me	sannyas	is	just
a	symbol	to	represent	all	that	is	beautiful,	all	that	is	true,	all	that	is	eternal.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#26
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
26	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012255
ShortTitle:	GREENR26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Shunyo	Angelika.	 Shunyo	means	 emptiness,	 nothingness,	 spaciousness,	 just	 a
deep	zero.
The	 ordinary	 connotation	 of	 emptiness	 is	 of	 negativity.	 People	 know	 only	 the
negative	kind	of	emptiness,	but	shunyo	 is	a	positive	kind	of	negativeness.	 It	 is
not	that	there	is	nothing;	on	the	contrary,
'nothing'	 has	 to	be	 split	 into	 two	words,	 then	 it	 is	 right.	There	 is	no	 thing,	but
there	is	space	because	there	is	no	thing,	no	content.	But	the	space	is	not	negative,
it	 is	 very	 pregnant.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 womb:	 warm,	 ready	 to	 give	 birth,	 available,
spacious.
And	Angelika	means	a	bringer	of	truth.	Nothingness,	in	its	positive	sense,	is	the
bringer	of	truth.	In	its	negative	sense	it	brings	sadness,	loneliness,	fear,	darkness,
an	 urge	 to	 commit	 suicide.	 In	 its	 positive	 sense	 it	 brings	 light,	 truth,	 love,
freedom	 and	 an	 immense	 ecstasy,	 an	 overwhelming	 ecstasy.	 Then	 it	 is	 not
loneliness,	it	is	pure	aloneness.	Then	it	is	not	solitariness,	it	is	solitude.	Then	you
are	not	in	a	sad	state,	depressed,	you	are	overflowing	with	silence	and	joy.	You
are	 for	 the	 first	 time	 an	 individual	 --	 and	 the	 birth	 of	 the	 individual	 is	 the
beginning	 of	 truth.	 When	 the	 individual	 has	 grown	 up,	 is	 settled,	 truth	 has
blossomed.	And	the	blossoming	of	truth	is	the	goal	of	life.
My	sannyas	is	synonymous	with	life,	it	is	not	life-negative,	it	is	life-affirmative.
Satyam	Gert.	Satyam	means	the	ultimate	truth.
The	 ultimate	 truth	 is	 one,	 but	 there	 are	 relative	 truths	 and	 relative	 truths	 are
many.	A	relative	truth	simply	means	a	mixture	of	a	lie	and	a	truth.
Even	 the	most	approximate	 truth	contains	 something	of	a	 lie	 in	 it.	Then	 truths
can	be	many.	You	can	mix	your	own	lie	 into	 it	and	you	can	concoct	your	own
truth.	 That's	 why	 there	 are	 so	 many	 religions	 in	 the	 world:	 these	 are	 all
concoctions,	 fabrications.	They	 all	 contain	 lies;	 something	 of	 truth	 certainly	 is
there,	 but	 something	of	 a	 lie	 is	 also	 there.	And	 time	passes	by,	 as	 the	 religion
becomes	more	and	more	established,	as	it	goes	farther	and	farther	away	from	the
original	master,	it	contains	less	and	less	truth	and	more	and	more	lies.	Beyond	a
certain	time	limit	it	is	one	hundred	percent	lies,	and	truth	simply	disappears.
Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 said	 to	 his	 disciples	 that	 his	 truth	 would	 live	 only	 five
hundred	years.	And	he	proved	absolutely	right,	his	prediction	came	true.	Only	up
to	 five	hundred	years	did	a	chain	of	enlightened	people	continue.	The	Buddha
left	 many	 disciples	 enlightened,	 then	 those	 disciples	 left	 a	 few	 disciples
enlightened.	Of	 course,	 fewer	 and	 fewer	 people	were	 enlightened,	 but	 even	 if
there	is	a	single	individual	enlightened	it	 is	enough	to	keep	the	truth	alive.	But
the	 last	enlightened	person	 in	 the	chain	died	after	 five	hundred	years;	 then	 the
religion	was	in	the	hands	of	the	priests.	They	are	the	sellers	of	lies	and	they	are
very	skillful	people,	the	most	cunning	in	the	world.	Basically	theirs	is	the	most
ancient	profession	in	the	world.
People	think	that	prostitution	is	the	most	ancient	profession	--	it	is	not,	because
without	the	priests,	how	can	you	create	prostitutes?	First	the	priest	is	needed	to
condemn	sex,	to	force	morality	on	people.	When	the	morality	is	forced	on	them
from	 outside	 they	 start	 finding	 ways	 in	 from	 the	 backdoor	 --	 that's	 how
prostitution	 comes	 in.	 Prostitution	 is	 preceded	 by	 the	 priests.	 Theirs	 is	 the
ancient	most	profession,	hence	they	are	very	skillful.
Once	the	enlightened	master	is	no	more	there	or	the	chain	has	disappeared,	then
the	 priest,	 who	 knows	 nothing	 of	 the	 truth,	 but	 who	 is	 capable	 of	 fabricating
beautiful	lies,	is	there.
There	are	three	hundred	religions	on	the	earth	and	there	is	only	one	truth.	These
three	hundred	religions	are	different	combinations	of	truths	and	lies.	And	all	the
religions	 are	 very	 old.	 Hinduism	 has	 existed	 for	 at	 least	 ten	 thousand	 years,
Buddhism	 for	 twenty-five	 centuries,	Christianity	 for	 twenty	 centuries,	 Judaism
for	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
thirty	centuries,	Jainism	for	fifty	centuries	--	so	there	are	almost	only	lies	left.
Satyam	means	 the	ultimate	 truth,	which	you	cannot	 find	 in	 the	 scriptures,	 you
cannot	find	in	the	holy	places,	you	cannot	find	through	scholarship,	knowledge;
it	can	only	be	discovered	within	yourself.
The	discovery	needs	two	qualities	in	the	seeker	--	and	these	are	the	meanings	of
Gert.	The	first	meaning	is	courage,	the	second	meaning	is	a	loyal	heart.
To	discover	 the	 truth	one	has	 to	be	courageous	enough	 to	drop	all	 the	 lies	 that
have	been	handed	over	to	you	by	others.	That	needs	courage	because	those	lies
give	 us	 comfort,	 consolation,	 they	 create	 a	 coziness	 around	 us;	 otherwise	 the
world	is	vast	and	the	space	seems	to	be	cold.	Those	lies	are	like	blankets,	warm
blankets,	and	one	feels	good.	Those	lies	are	our	wish-fulfillments.	We	desire	how
the	world	should	be.	They	are	our	dreams.	Those	blankets	are	woven	out	of	our
dreams	 and	 wishes	 and	 desires	 and	 fantasies.	 So	 they	 feel	 cosy,	 they	 feel
comfortable;	 they	 give	 consolation	 in	 difficult	 times,	 they	 give	 you
rationalizations.
Otherwise	life	becomes	just	a	big	question	mark	without	any	answers.
Courage	is	needed	to	accept	life	as	a	question	mark	and	to	drop	all	the	answers
that	have	been	given	by	others	to	you	--	because	they	are	not	your	answers.	The
question	is	yours,	 the	answer	has	also	 to	be	yours.	If	 the	question	is	yours	and
the	 answers	 are	 of	 others,	 there	 is	 going	 to	 be	 no	 enlightenment	 in	 your	 life,
because	 those	 questions	 and	 answers	will	 never	 fit.	 Howsoever	 beautiful	 they
are,	they	are	not	your	discoveries.	And	truth	has	to	be	discovered	through	one's
own	efforts.	It	is	already	there	inside	you	but	courage	is	needed,	courage	to	come
out	of	the	cosy	lies.
Secondly,	you	can	come	out,	you	can	have	this	courage,	only	if	you	trust	life,	if
you	have	a	loyal	heart.
Lies	are	in	the	mind	and	trust	is	of	the	heart.	If	you	get	out	of	the	mind,	then	you
get	 into	 the	 heart.	 Then	 for	 the	 first	 time	 your	 heart	 opens	 up	 and	 starts
functioning.	It	has	not	functioned	for	centuries.
People	who	have	lived	according	to	beliefs	given	by	others,	their	hearts	are	non-
functioning.	They	are	full	of	beliefs	but	there	is	no	trust	in	them.	Trust	is	not	a
quality	of	the	mind	at	all;	it	belongs	to	a	different	center	in	your	being,	it	belongs
to	the	heart.	Trust	 is	nothing	but	purified	love.	When	one	trusts	 life,	existence,
only	then	can	one	have	enough	courage	to	go	into	the	dark,	to	seek	the	light,	to
go	into	the	unknown,	to	seek	the	further	shore.
So	these	two	qualities	--	a	certain	courage	and	a	certain	trust	--	are	the	whole	of
religion.	And	then	truth	can	be	found,	because	it	is	not	far	away,	it	is	just	around
the	corner.
Prem	Zena.	Prem	means	love.	Zena	means	meditation.
Love	and	meditation	are	like	two	wings.	A	bird	cannot	fly	with	one	wing	--	and
for	thousands	of	years	man	has	tried	to	do	exactly	that.	Either	they	have	chosen
love	and	ignored	meditation	or	they	have	chosen	meditation	and	rejected	love.
I	 can	 understand	 why	 it	 happened	 so,	 because	 the	 two	 wings	 of	 the	 bird	 are
opposed	 to	 each	 other.	 One	 is	 on	 the	 right,	 the	 other	 is	 on	 the	 lefts	 one	 is	 a
rightist,	 the	other	 is	a	 leftist	--	 they	spread	in	diametrically	opposite	directions.
The	logical	mind	tries	to	be	consistent,	and	this	seems	to	be	inconsistent.	For	the
logical	 mind	 love	 and	 meditation	 seem	 to	 be	 opposites,	 contradictory.	 So	 the
logical	mind	 tries	 to	 choose	 one	 against	 the	 other.	 To	 choose	 both	 together	 is
illogical	--	and	sannyas	is	illogical,	because	existence	is	paradoxical	and	unless
you	have	the	guts	to	be	illogical	you	cannot	experience	existence.
Existence	consists	of	polar	opposites	--	day	and	night,	summer	and	winter,	 life
and	death.	Existence	 consists	 of	 polar	 opposites.	They	 appear	 opposites	 to	 the
logical	 mind;	 as	 far	 as	 existence	 is	 concerned	 they	 are	 complementaries,	 not
opposites.	Without	day	there	would	be	no	night	and	without	life	there	would	be
no	death	and	without	death	there	would	be	no	life.	They	are	together.
To	 see	 it	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 sannyas.	 Then	 you	 start	 having	 polar	 opposites
without	any	trouble.	One	need	not	be	consistent;	if	one	tries	to	be	consistent	one
will	 have	only	one	wing	 and	 then	 there	 is	 no	possibility	of	 flying	 towards	 the
ultimate	peak	--	it	is	impossible.
So	I	 teach	my	people	both	 together:	be	 loving	and	be	meditative.	Of	course	 in
the	beginning	it	is	troublesome	because	love	disturbs	meditation	and	meditation
requires	 that	you	forget	all	about	others,	 that	you	forget	all	about	 love.	So	one
has	to	become	a	little	liquid,	not	so	solid	as	people	are;	they	are	just	solid	blocks
of	concrete.	One	has	to	be	more	like	water,	easily	flowing	from	one	polarity	to
the	other,	finding	no	difficulty.
So	 when	 you	 are	 feeling	 to	 be	 alone,	 that	 is	 the	 moment	 to	 meditate.	 And
everybody	 feels	 those	 moments	 when	 one	 wants	 to	 be	 alone	 --	 those	 are	 the
natural	moments	which	are	to	be	devoted	to	meditation.	And	then	one	feels	to	be
together,	to	love,	to	share	--	those	are	the	moments	to	be	devoted	to	love.	There
is	no	need	to	create	any	conflict.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Once	this	harmony	settles	your	life	has	tremendous	beauty	while	loving	you	are
totally	loving,	while	being	silent,	you	are	totally	silent.	And	both	enhance	each
other,	both	help	each	other.	They	are	not	enemies,	they	are	friends,	because	when
you	love	you	are	becoming	hungry	for	aloneness,	because	love	is	an	excitement,
an	ecstasy	--	it	tires.	One	may	not	accept	it	but	it	is	tiring,	and	moreso	because
we	don't	know	how	to	relax,	we	don't	know	how	to	meditate.
Lovers	 start	 quarrelling	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 are	 tired,	 irritated,
exhausted,	and	they	don't	know	what	to	do	with	this	whole	situation.	And	they
certainly	love	each	other,	but	there	is	nobody	else	so	they	start	throwing	anger,
irritation,	at	each	other;	they	start	trying	to	make	the	other	responsible.
If	you	meditate	just	the	opposite	happens	after	a	time	you	are	so	full	of	energy,
so	refreshed,	so	overflowing,	 that	 there	 is	a	 tremendous	need	to	share.	You	are
just	like	a	cloud	so	full	of	rainwater	that	it	wants	to	shower	somewhere,	it	wants
to	unburden	itself.	Or	 like	a	flower	which	is	ready	for	any	breeze	 to	come	and
take	its	fragrance	away	--	it	is	too	full	of	it,	it	wants	to	share.
Meditation	 creates	 energy	 and	 out	 of	 that	 energy	 sharing	 arises.	 One	 feels	 a
tremendous	need	to	share	--
and	love	is	 the	only	way	to	share.	But	when	you	are	sharing	soon	you	exhaust
your	sources,	the	energy	starts	becoming	lower	and	lower	and	soon	it	touches	the
minimum	point.	After	that	point	if	you	don't	move	into	meditation	you	will	move
into	fight.
But	lovers	don't	give	space	to	each	other.	Even	to	say	to	your	lover	that	you	want
to	be	alone	 seems	as	 if	you	are	hurting	him.	He	 feels	 insulted,	 rejected.	There
seems	to	be	no	understanding	at	all	in	people.	It	is	nothing	to	do	with	him,	it	is
something	inner	to	you,	to	your	own	inner	process.
So	 people	 encroach	 on	 each	 other's	 space,	 they	 don't	 allow	 each	 other	 to	 be
alone,	they	don't	give	time	for	each	other	to	get	refreshed.	They	are	continuously
at	each	other's	neck	--	and	they	think	it	is	love!	It	is	only	up	to	a	point,	then	it	is
really	dangerous,	poisonous.
And	to	meditate	beyond	a	point	when	you	are	overflowing	becomes	repressive;
if	you	don't	share	you	will	have	to	repress	your	energy.	So	all	your	monks	and
nuns	are	repressive	and	all	your	worldly	people	are	exhausted.
Just	now	I	was	talking	to	Vivek	about	Champa,	one	of	my	mediums.	Since	she
has	been	in	love	she	has	looked	to	me	very	tired,	exhausted.	She	was	never	like
that.	She	must	really	be	in	love!	That's	a	clear-cut	sign.
Love	exhausts	and	unless	you	balance	the	energy	with	meditation	it	is	suicidal.
And	the	same	is	 true	about	meditation	 it	 fills	you	 too	much;	 if	you	don't	share
you	will	burst.
So	 they	both	have	 to	be	continuously	balanced.	Find	energy	 in	meditation	and
share	 it	 in	 love.	Love	will	 give	 you	 an	 appetite	 for	meditation	 and	meditation
will	give	you	a	deep	longing	for	love.	And	if	one	can	move	between	these	two
easily	one	has	learned	the	art	of	life.
Satyo	Sundram.	Satyo	means	the	truth.	Sundram	means	the	beautiful.
Truth	and	beauty	are	 two	aspects	of	 the	 same	coin.	Truth	cannot	be	ugly,	 it	 is
impossible;	and	 the	beautiful	cannot	be	untrue	 --	 that	 too	 is	 impossible.	Hence
one	 can	 find	 reality	 in	 two	ways;	 either	 one	 seeks	 the	 truth	 or	 one	 seeks	 the
beautiful.
The	 poet	 seeks	 the	 beautiful,	 the	 artist	 seeks	 the	 beautiful,	 the	 musician,	 the
dancer	--	they	all	seek	the	beautiful.	They	are	really	seeking	truth	but	their	vision
of	 truth	 is	 that	of	beauty.	The	philosopher	seeks	 the	 truth,	 the	mystic	seeks	 the
truth,	 the	scientist	seeks	 the	 truth.	They	are	also	seeking	 the	beautiful	but	 their
vision	of	beauty	is	that	of	truth.
But	 my	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 become	 multi-dimensional,	 because	 the
person	who	seeks	the	truth	and	finds	it	will	remain	a	little	dry	because	he	will	be
following	the	path	which	goes	through	a	desert.	He	will	become	dry,	he	will	not
be	green,	he	will	not	blossom,	he	will	be	old	and	full	of	dust.	He	will	arrive	but
something	will	be	missed.	And	 the	person	who	has	been	following	 the	path	of
beauty	 will	 be	 passing	 through	 beautiful	 gardens,	 he	 will	 be	 carrying	 some
fragrance	of	the	flowers	with	him,	he	himself	will	become	a	flower;	he	will	be	a
dancer,	a	singer,	a	poet.	But	he	will	not	be	able	to	figure	out	what	it	is	all	about;
he	will	remain	vague,	in	a	kind	of	mist.	His	vision	will	not	be	clear	because	he
has	not	learned	the	art	which	the	man	who	seeks	truth	knows.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 seekers	 of	 truth	 and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 seekers	 of
beauty.	They	have	 to	 be	 scientific	 and	poetic	 both;	 they	have	 to	 be	 absolutely
clear-cut	and	yet	available	 to	 the	mysterious.	And	 I	have	 found	 there	 is	a	way
which	goes	 just	 between	 the	desert	 and	 the	garden.	So	on	one	 side	you	go	on
enjoying	the	garden,	on	the	other	side	you	go	on	enjoying	the	desert	--	because
the	desert	has	its	own	beauty,	its	own	silence,	spaciousness,	vastness.	It	has	not
to	be	missed.	We	have	to	find	a	way	which	passes	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
just	on	the	boundary,	line	of	the	desert	and	the	garden.	Where	the	desert	and	the
garden	meet,	that	is	the	place	for	my	sannyasins	to	go	to	truth,	to	the	ultimate.
Hence	I	am	teaching	meditation	so	that	you	can	keep	contact	with	the	desert,	and
I	 am	 teaching	 love	 so	 that	 you	 can	 keep	 contact	 with	 the	 garden.	 And	 both
together	 bring	 out	 your	whole	 being	 to	 its	 total	 flowering.	 And	when	we	 can
have	both,	why	have	one?
I	am	always	for	richness.	Jesus	says	blessed	are	the	poor	in	spirit.	I	say	blessed
are	the	rich	in	spirit	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god	--	and	this	is	the	only	way	to
be	rich.
Shantibhadra	 means	 peace	 and	 nobleness.	 Shanti	 means	 peace,	 bhadra	 means
nobleness.
A	peaceful	person	has	a	nobility	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	birth.	It	is	not	the
aristocracy	of	the	outside,	it	is	the	aristocracy	of	the	inner.	And	those	who	have
found	 the	 source	 of	 grace	 and	 nobility	 within	 their	 own	 being	 are	 the	 real
aristocrats.	 Once	 you	 have	 found	 it	 it	 starts	 surfacing	 in	 your	 acts,	 in	 your
thoughts,	 in	 your	 feelings.	 It	 is	 natural;	 it	 remains	 hidden	 because	 we	 have
ignored	it.	Ignoring	your	own	inner	treasures	is	what	ignorance	is.
The	word	 'ignorance'	 is	beautiful;	 it	simply	means	you	are	ignoring	something,
something	which	is	very	precious	is	being	ignored;	and	the	most	precious	thing
that	we	can	ignore	is	our	own	life	juices.
Life	is	just	like	a	tree,	it	continuously	needs	juices	to	flow	from	the	earth	to	the
farthest	branch,	to	all	the	leaves,	to	the	flowers,	to	its	whole	being.	The	roots	are
deep	 in	 the	 earth	 and	 the	 branches	 are	 high	 in	 the	 heaven,	 but	 there	 is	 a
connection,	 a	 bridge,	 between	 the	 two.	 The	 tree	 is	 really	 living	 in	 two
dimensions,	it	is	part	of	heaven	and	part	of	earth.
We	 are	 also	 trees	 in	 a	 sense.	Our	 roots	 are	 invisible,	 that	 is	 true,	 but	 they	 are
there.	And	meditation	is	nothing	but	the	search	for	the	roots.	From	where	are	we
getting	 our	 life	 juices,	 our	 life	 energies,	 from	 where	 are	 we	 breathing,	 from
where	 is	our	consciousness	coming?	There	must	be	a	centre	 in	our	being.	And
there	 is	 a	 centre.	 Once	 you	 have	 found	 that	 centre	 life	 becomes	 absolutely
peaceful,	 a	 profound	 silence	 surrounds	 you.	A	 peaceful	 golden	 aura	 is	 always
present	around	you;	not	even	for	a	single	moment	is	the	golden	aura	absent.	And
that	is	nobility,	that	is	aristocracy	of	the	inner.
I	 teach	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 be	 emperors,	 less	 than	 that	 won't	 do.	 But	 to	 be	 an
emperor	 no	 outside	 empire	 is	 needed;	 all	 that	 you	 need	 is	 a	 discovery	 of	 the
kingdom	of	god	that	is	already	there	within	you.	You	have	carried	it	all	along	but
you	have	been	 ignoring	 it;	you	have	been	 looking	outside	and	 it	 is	 inside	you.
You	are	keeping	it	at	your	back.
Just	 a	 turn,	 just	 a	 one-hundred-and-eighty	 degree	 turn	 and	 immediately	 life	 is
transformed.	Instantly	you	are	transported	into	a	new	world,	a	new	experience,
of	eternity,	of	infinity,	of	bliss,	of	benediction.
Prem	Arya.	Prem	means	love.	Arya	means	the	noblest,	the	best,	the	highest.
Love	 brings	 whatsoever	 is	 precious	 in	 you	 into	 manifestation,	 otherwise	 it
remains	 dormant.	 Love	makes	 it	 active,	 dynamic,	 otherwise	 it	 remains	 asleep.
Love	 is	 a	 kind	of	 awakening,	 and	 even	 in	 ordinary	 love	 affairs	 you	 can	 see	 it
happening,	when	a	woman	falls	in	love	suddenly	she	becomes	more	beautiful	for
no	reason	at	all,	for	no	visible	reason	at	all.	When	a	man	falls	in	love	his	gestures
start	having	a	grace,	his	words	start	having	a	beauty,	he	walks	in	a	different	way.
His	 lifestyle	 starts	 changing;	 he	 looks	 cleaner,	 fresher.	 Suddenly	 his	 life	 has
become	meaningful.	 That	meaning	 gives	 him	 all	 these	 qualities	 --	 and	 this	 is
very	ordinary	love:	unconscious,	biological,	mechanical.
The	love	I	am	talking	about	is	 the	purest,	without	any	lust,	without	any	desire,
not	asking	for	anything.	It	is	not	addressed	to	the	individual;	it	is	unaddressed	or
addressed	to	the	whole	--	which	means	the	same	thing.	It	is	addressed	to	the	stars
and	to	the	trees	and	to	the	clouds	and	to	people	and	to	animals	and	to	rocks
--	it	is	addressed	to	the	whole	universe.	It	is	simply	an	overflowing	of	joy	which
you	would	like	to	share	with	all,	because	it	is	so	much	it	can	be	shared	only	with
all;	one	person	cannot	contain	it.	It	is	a	flood;	it	can	drown	the	whole	universe.
Each	 person	 has	 so	 much	 possibility	 of	 love	 that	 he	 can	 drown	 the	 whole
universe	in	it.	And	when	that	flood	starts	arising	all	your	imprisoned	splendour	is
released.	It	makes	you	an	Arya	--	the	noblest,	the	best.
Adolf	 Hitler	 chose	 the	 word	 'aryan'	 --	 it	 is	 a	 Sanskrit	 word	 --	 for	 the	 Nordic
German	 race,	because	he	believed	 that	 it	was	 the	best,	 the	highest	 race,	which
god	had	made	specially	to	dominate	the	world.
All	 others	were	 slaves,	 only	 the	 aryans	 --	 and	 by	 aryans	 he	meant	 the	Nordic
Germans	 --	were	 the	people	 to	 rule.	Hindus	have	called	 themselves	aryans	 for
centuries;	 he	 borrowed	 it	 from	 the	Hindus	 --	 they	 have	 called	 themselves	 the
best.
In	fact	that	is	the	disease	of	all	the	people	of	the	world.	Jews	think	they	are	the
chosen	people	--	they	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
also	 mean	 the	 same	 thing	 --	 but	 no	 race	 is	 aryan.	 Yes,	 once	 in	 a	 while	 an
individual	has	been	an	arya,	but	no	race	is	aryan.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	race;
it	 is	 an	 individual	 growth.	 It	 can	 happen	 anywhere.	 Anybody	 who	 comes	 to
release	his	love	totally,	unconditionally,	becomes	an	aryan	becomes	the	noblest,
the	highest,	 the	chosen!	And	certainly	he	is	 the	chosen	because	then	the	whole
universe	showers	all	its	joys	on	him.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
27	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012265
ShortTitle:	GREENR27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dhyan	Oliver.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Oliver	means	a	peaceful	heart.
It	is	possible	to	have	a	peaceful	heart	without	meditation	too,	but	that	peace	will
be	the	peace	of	death.	It	will	not	be	alive.	It	will	be	the	peace	of	a	cemetery,	not
of	a	garden	--	no	flowers,	no	birds	singing,	no	sound	of	the	wind	passing	through
the	pine	trees,	no	dance.	Something	empty	--	that	is	possible	without	meditation,
but	that	kind	of	peace	has	no	value	at	all.
Many	have	tried	it	and	many	have	achieved	it	but	it	is	not	worth	any	effort.	It	is
in	fact	suicidal,	 it	 is	dying	in	a	very	gradual,	slow	way;	 it	 is	crippling	yourself
and	 closing	 yourself.	 If	 you	 remain	 open	 then	 there	 are	 distractions	 and
distractions	 disturb	 your	 peace.	 So	 people	 have	 escaped	 to	 the	 caves,	 to	 the
mountains,	to	the	monasteries.	But	the	escapist	is	not	religious	--	never.	He	is	a
coward	and	cowardliness	is	not	a	religious	quality,	it	is	just	its	opposite.
I	am	against	that	kind	cf	peace.	Then	it	is	better	not	to	have	peace.	If	one	has	to
choose	between	 these	 two	 things,	a	 life	without	peace	and	a	death	with	peace,
then	it	is	better	to	choose	a	life	without	peace	--	at	least	you	are	alive!
But	there	is	a	third	alternative	available	one	can	be	alive	and	peaceful	both.	That
miracle	happens	through	meditation.	Meditation	is	not	an	escape,	it	is	the	science
of	 centering	 yourself,	 the	 science	 of	 becoming	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 cyclone.	You
remain	in	the	world,	but	still,	something	in	you	remains	out	of	it.
Meditation	 is	 the	 discovery	 of	 that	 something	 which	 is	 always	 out,	 beyond,
transcending.	 Its	 name	 is	 awareness.	 If	 one	 becomes	 aware,	 that	 awareness	 is
always	 transcending	 situations.	 And	 awareness	 cannot	 be	 disturbed	 by	 any
distraction;	 one	 becomes	 aware	 of	 the	 distraction.	 (A	 train's	 horns	 sound
mournfully.)	 For	 example,	 this	 train	 --	 it	 can	 disturb	 you	 if	 you	 are	 forcing
yourself	to	remain	peaceful,	but	if	you	are	available	to	the	noise,	alert,	there	is	no
distraction.	 It	 is	 there,	 it	 comes	 through	 your	 ears	 and	 passes;	 you	 remain
unaffected.	 In	 fact	 it	 can	 even	 deepen	 your	 silence	 and	 peace	 rather	 than
disturbing	it.	That's	what	I	mean	by	meditation.
Meditation	 is	 synonymous	 with	 awareness.	 And	 to	 be	 aware	 is	 the	 whole	 of
religion.
Atit	Herbert.	Atit	means	going	beyond,	because	Herbert	is	not	a	good	name,	but
it	has	been	very	good	in	the	past.	It	means	a	glorious	warrior,	it	means	an	army
hero.	It	contains	destruction	in	it.
The	days	of	 the	warrior	are	over.	We	need	a	 totally	different	kind	of	man	who
does	not	believe	in	war,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
who	 believes	 in	 love,	 who	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 destroying,	 who	 believes	 in
creating.	We	need	people	who	are	not	engaged	in	manufacturing	arms,	but	who
are	totally	absorbed	in	growing	roses	--	and	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.	It	is
just	the	opposite	of	the	warrior.
The	soldier	and	the	sannyasin	represent	two	different	lifestyles,	totally	opposed
to	 each	 other.	 The	 past	 belonged	 to	 the	 soldier,	 the	 future	 belongs	 to	 the
sannyasin.	And	we	are	passing	through	one	of	the	most	significant	times	because
we	are	passing	 through	a	 tremendous	 transformation.	The	old	 is	dying	and	 the
new	has	to	be	given	birth	to.	The	old	will	try	in	every	way	to	go	on	living,	the
old	always	insists	on	keeping	itself	alive,	somehow	--	even	if	it	cripples	people.
It	 tends	 to	exploit	 them;	 it	 is	a	parasite.	 It	does	not	 leave	you	easily,	 it	 follows
you	like	a	shadow,	and	it	is	heavy	because	it	is	big.	The	present	is	so	small	and
the	past	is	so	huge.	It	cripples	and	paralyses	the	present.	It	does	not	allow	you	to
fly.
The	 warrior	 was	 very	 much	 respected	 in	 the	 past	 because	 war	 was	 the	 only
business	that	humanity	had	been	doing	for	at	least	a	million	years.	We	only	know
about	 three	 thousand	 years,	 in	 three	 thousand	 years	 five	 thousand	 wars	 have
been	fought.	If	we	count	the	days	when	there	was	no	war	happening	anywhere
on	earth,	then	in	three	thousand	years	there	have	been	only	seven	hundred	years.
And	 these	have	not	been	 in	one	 stretch,	one	day	here,	 two	days	 there,	 a	week
here,	 a	week	 there.	 This	 is	 the	 total	 amount	 out	 of	 three	 thousand	 years	 there
were	seven	hundred	years	when	there	was	no	war.	But	that	too	was	not	peace,	it
was	only	preparation	time.	Between	two	wars	you	need	a	little	gap	to	prepare.
For	a	world	war	to	happen	at	least	ten	or	twelve	years	are	needed,	because	one
war	 destroys	 so	much	 that	 it	 takes	 time	 to	 reconstruct	 everything	 --	 and	 then
again	we	are	ready	to	fight.	So	what	is	known	in	history	as	peaceful	days	are	not
truly	peaceful	days	but	only	days	of	cold	war.	So	history	can	be	divided	into	two
cold	war	and	hot	war	--	but	 it	 is	all	war.	And	it	 is	 time	to	get	rid	of	 the	whole
absurd	past.
So	go	beyond	 the	 idea	of	war,	conflict,	 fight,	only	 then	can	your	 life	be	a	 joy.
And	there	is	nothing	glorious	about	being	a	warrior;	 it	 is	ugly.	Destruction	can
never	be	glorious,	only	creativity	is	glorious.
Just	 to	write	 a	 single	 song	 is	 far	better	 than	 to	 create	 the	 atom	bomb.	 It	 is	 far
more	valuable	just	to	write	a	beautiful	story,	a	parable,	than	to	go	to	the	moon.
We	have	to	change	our	values,	we	nave	to	re-evaluate	all	our	values,	only	then	is
a	sannyasin	born.
Initiation	 into	 sannyas	 is	 only	 the	 beginning	 --	 the	 beginning	 of	 many	 things
which	 have	 to	 be	 done,	which	we	 have	 not	 done	 before,	which	we	 have	 been
ignoring	up	 to	now.	But	 it	 is	possible.	 It	may	not	be	possible	 for	 the	whole	of
humanity	right	now,	but	it	is	possible	for	individuals	to	slip	out	of	the	past.	All
that	is	needed	is	a	little	courage,	a	little	trust,	a	little	love	for	life.	And	it	is	there
in	everybody,	we	just	have	to	allow	it	to	come	to	the	surface.
Nirdosh	means	innocent.
Sannyas	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 discover	 your	 intrinsic	 innocence.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 effort	 to
gain	 knowledge.	 The	 knowledgeable	 person	 is	 always	 a	 stupid	 person.	 The
knowledgeable	 starts	 depending	 on	 knowledge,	 he	 starts	 functioning	 through
knowledge.	Life	goes	on	changing	every	moment	and	knowledge	remains	static
and	life	is	growing.	So	there	comes	a	gap	between	knowledge	and	life.
Knowledge	means	ready-made	answers,	but	no	ready-made	answer	can	ever	fit
life.	 It	 is	 like	ready-made	clothes	you	can	purchase	 them	--	 today	 they	may	fit
the	child	but	the	child	is	growing	and	the	clothes	are	not	growing.	Soon	the	child
will	be	in	difficult	if	you	insist	that	'Don't	be	inconsistent;	if	these	clothes	were
perfectly	 okay	 two	 years	 before,	 why	 are	 they	 not	 okay	 now?	 --	 they	 are	 the
same	clothes!'	And	the	gap	between	knowledge	and	life	is	not	only	of	two	years;
it	is	of	thousands	of	years.
People	are	reading	the	Vedas,	the	Bible,	the	Koran;	they	are	deriving	their	ready-
made	answers	from	those	ancient	books,	and	life	has	gone	through	tremendous
changes.	If	the	people	who	wrote	the	Vedas	are	brought	to	the	earth	again,	I	don't
think	they	will	recognise	anything,	they	will	not	be	able	to	recognise	anything	at
all,	everything	has	changed.	But	this	is	the	trouble	with	a	knowledgeable	person,
he	tries	just	the	impossible,	he	tries	to	make	life	fit	with	his	knowledge.	It	cannot
happen,	and	then	he	is	frustrated,	and	in	his	frustration	he	starts	gathering	more
knowledge,	thinking	that	more	knowledge	is	needed.
In	fact	innocence	is	needed,	not	knowledge.	Innocence	means	your	just	being	a
clear	mirror	--	it	is	a	state	of	not-knowing,	and	your	functioning	o	ut	of	that	state
of	 not-knowing.	 Then	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 answers	 ready-made.	 Then	 life	 is
there,	a	challenge,	a	continuous	challenge,	and	you	are	here	to	respond,	so	you
respond	according	 to	 the	moment.	 It	 always	 fits;	 there	 is	no	gap	between	your
response	 and	 the	 situation,	 there	 is	 a	 deep	 harmony.	 But	 it	 is	 possible	 only
through	innocence.
So	 the	 really	 wise	 man	 is	 not	 knowledgeable,	 he	 is	 innocent.	 He	 drops	 all
knowledge	 and	 becomes	 just	 a	mirror.	 The	moment	 you	 become	 just	 a	mirror
you	are	enlightened,	because	suddenly	you	see	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
tremendous	beauty	of	life.	Its	very	truth	is	revealed	to	you,	all	its	mysteries	are
suddenly	open	to	you,	all	its	doors	are	open,	all	locks	disappear.
Anand	Urja.	Anand	means	bliss.	Urja	means	energy.
There	 is	 a	 great	 significant,	 pregnant	 statement	 of	 William	 Blake;	 he	 says
'Energy	is	delight.'	It	is	almost	a	seed	which	can	be	grown	into	a	total	philosophy
of	life.
People	are	living	in	such	a	stupid	way	that	they	go	on	wasting	their	energy.	They
are	always	low	in	energy	and	that	is	the	root	cause	of	their	misery,	because	if	the
energy	is	not	there,	there	cannot	be	any	dance	in	your	life.	Dance	is	overflowing
energy.	If	the	energy	is	not	there,	then	there	cannot	be	any	flowers	in	your	life,
because	 flowers	 are	 just	 a	 luxury.	 The	 tree	 has	 so	much	 that	 it	 flares	 up	 into
flowers.	It	has	to	share	--	 it	bursts	forth	into	flowers,	colours,	fragrance.	But	 if
you	keep	the	tree	undernourished	it	will	not	give	you	flowers.	It	may	survive	but
it	 will	 not	 give	 you	 flowers	 and	 fragrance.	 And	 that's	 how	 human	 beings	 are
living,	just	surviving,	and	the	reason	is	that	we	waste	our	energy	and	we	waste	it
unnecessarily,	on	non-essentials.
A	few	people	are	after	money	their	whole	life;	even	when	they	have	accumulated
too	much	money	they	don't	stop,	they	can't	stop.	It	has	become	a	dead	habit,	they
go	 on	 doing	 the	 same	 thing.	 Even	 on	 their	 deathbed	 they	will	 be	 thinking	 of
money.
A	Jew	was	dying.	The	sun	was	setting	and	it	was	getting	darker	and	suddenly	he
opened	his	eyes	and	asked	his	wife,	'Where	is	my	eldest	son?'	And	one	said	'He
is	sitting	on	your	right.	Don't	be	worried,	he	is	here	--	rest.'	He	said	'And	where
is	my	second	 son?'	And	 she	 said	 'He	 is	on	your	 left,	 don't	be	worried.'	But	he
started	 to	get	 up,	 he	 tried	hard.	His	wife	 forced	him	 to	 lie	 down	and	 told	him
'Rest,	because	the	doctors	say	this	is	the	last	hour	of	your	life.'	And	then	he	said
'Where	is	my	youngest	son?'
She	felt	that	he	was	asking	about	them	because	of	so	much	love.	Tears	came	to
her	 eyes	 and	 she	 said	 'He	 is	 sitting	near	 your	 feet,	we	 are	 all	 here.'	He	 said	 'I
know	you	are	all	here,	but	who	is	tending	the	shop?	If	this	is	happening	while	I
am	alive,	what	is	going	to	happen	when	I	am	dead?	At	least	let	me	die	in	peace	-
-
go	and	look	after	the	shop!'
This	man	is	dying	but	his	whole	concern	 is	 the	shop,	who	is	 tending	 the	shop.
Now	this	type	of	person	cannot	accumulate	enough	energy	to	bloom.	There	will
be	no	spring	in	this	type	of	man's	life.
People	are	running	after	power,	prestige,	respectability,	people	are	trying	hard	to
become	a	member	of	a	Rotary	club	or	if	they	cannot	become	Rotarians,	then	at
least	they	can	become	Lions	--	as	if	just	to	be	a	human	being	is	not	enough;	one
has	to	be	a	lion!
People	are	running	after	futile	things	and	wasting	precious	energy.	A	sannyasin
has	to	become	alert	and	capable	of	discriminating	between	what	is	essential	and
what	is	non-essential.	And	then	drop	the	non-essential.	And	the	essential	is	not
much;	 it	 only	 takes	 a	very	 small	 fragment	of	your	 energy	 and	 leaves	 so	much
energy	in	you	that	life	becomes	a	blissful	phenomenon.
Bliss	 is	 nothing	 but	 overflowing	 energy.	 William	 Blake	 is	 right:	 Energy	 is
delight!
Anand	Meena.	Anand	means	bliss.	Meena	is	a	precious	stone,	a	diamond.
Bliss	is	a	diamond	and	a	diamond	that	is	already	there	inside	us	--	we	are	born
with	it.	It	has	not	to	be	searched	for	anywhere	else.	We	are	not	to	beg	for	it,	we
are	not	 to	 fight	 for	 it,	we	are	not	 to	steal	 it	 from	somebody,	we	are	not	 in	any
need	 to	 go	 anywhere;	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 to	 search	within.	Hence	 it	 is	 not	 a
difficult	phenomenon,	because	it	is	the	closest	thing	to	you.	It	is	your	innermost
core.
Jesus	calls	it	the	kingdom	of	god	because	once	you	have	found	it	you	become	for
the	first	time	immeasurably	rich,	inexhaustibly	rich.	Then	you	can	go	on	sharing
and	 giving	 gifts	 to	 all	 and	 sundry	 and	 you	 will	 still	 have	 your	 treasures
absolutely	intact.	You	will	not	be	losing	anything;	on	the	contrary,	the	more	you
give,	the	more	you	will	have.	And	one	has	to	learn	a	simple	art	of	closing	one's
eyes	 and	 looking	 in,	watching	 inwards.	 It	 takes	 a	 little	 time	 because	we	 have
become	 accustomed	 to	 watching	 outside;	 our	 eyes	 have	 learned	 to	 focus	 on
objects.
When	 a	 child	 is	 born	 he	 cannot	 see	 clearly;	 everything	 is	 blurred.	 Naturally,
because	for	nine	months	in	the	mother's	womb	there	was	nothing	to	see,	it	was
all	dark;	his	eyes	were	closed	and	he	was	asleep	for	nine	months.	Now	when	he
suddenly	opens	his	eyes	he	cannot	focus.	Everything	 is	blurred,	all	colours	are
mixing,	things	are	mixing	--	that	is	natural.	It	takes	a	few	months	for	the	child	to
be	really	skilful	in	focussing.
Exactly	the	same	happens	to	the	sannyasin	because	he	is	a	child	again,	as	far	as
the	inner	world	is	concerned,	so	it	 takes	a	few	months	to	focus	and	just	a	little
patience.	One	should	not	feel	frustrated	if	one	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
does	not	 succeed	 in	 the	 first	 attempt.	One	 should	wait,	 be	patient;	 in	 the	 right
time	the	focussing	happens.
And	it	differs	from	individual	to	individual.	Some	people	can	focus	easily,	some
people	take	a	little	longer,	but	it	doesn't	matter,	it	is	irrelevant.
Once	you	have	become	able	to	focus	inside	you	discover	the	diamond,	and	then
all	kohinoors,	all	the	great	diamonds	of	the	world,	are	just	stones	compared	to	it.
Then	the	light	on	the	outside	is	almost	like	darkness	compared	to	it.	Then	the	life
that	you	have	been	living	is	almost	death	compared	to	it,	because	now	you	have
tasted	immortality,	eternity,	divinity.	Now	for	the	first	time	you	have	known	the
source	of	nectar	within	yourself.
Prem	Ami.	Prem	means	love.	Ami	means	nectar.
Love	gives	you	the	first	taste	of	the	eternal.	It	opens	you	to	the	timeless,	to	the
deathless,	 hence	 it	 is	 the	 only	 nectar	 available	 to	man.	 In	 fact	 there	 is	 a	 deep
longing	in	everyone	to	never	die,	everybody	wants	to	remain	forever.	But	this	is
not	 physically	 possible.	 And	 even	 if	 one	 day	 science	 makes	 it	 physically
possible,	only	fools	will	be	ready	to	become	physically	immoral;	the	wise	people
will	not	be	ready	to	accept	it.
There	 is	a	story:	Alexander	was	coming	 to	 India	and	some	philosophers,	some
alchemists,	 in	Greece	had	 told	him	 'You	may	meet	wise	 seers	 in	 the	East	who
can	show	you	the	way,	because	we	have	heard	that	there	are	places	in	the	East
where	you	 can	 find	 springs	of	 nectar	 and	 if	 you	drink	 from	 those	 springs	you
become	 an	 immortal.	 Naturally,	 he	 was	 immensely	 interested,	 he	 was	 asking
everybody	about	it.	And	the	story	is	beautiful,	a	wise	man	showed	him	the	way
and	he	reached	a	place	where	there	was	a	beautiful	small	pool.
He	had	never	seen	such	crystal-clear	water.
It	was	the	nectar,	and	he	was	just	going	to	drink	out	of	it	when	a	crow	sitting	on
a	tree	shouted	'Stop!'	He	was	very	puzzled	that	the	crow	was	speaking.	And	the
crow	said	'Wait	a	minute	before	you	drink,	then	you	can	drink.	I	have	drunk	from
it	and	I	have	become	immortal;	I	have	lived	for	millions	of	years.	Now	I	want	to
die	 but	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 die;	 I	 have	 tried	 all	 ways	 to	 commit	 suicide,	 but
nothing	succeeds.	And	now	it	is	such	a	boring	life,	living	the	same	routine	every
day.	And	there	is	no	hope	even	of	death	coming	and	finishing	it;	I	will	have	to
live	this	way	forever	and	forever	and	forever,	so	think	about	it,	and	decide.
And	 it	 is	 said	 that	Alexander	 became	 silent	 and	 ran	 away	 from	 the	 source	 of
nectar;	 he	 ran	 away	because	he	was	 afraid	 that	 he	might	be	 foolish	 enough	 to
drink	out	of	 it.	He	saw	the	point,	 that	 if	you	become	physically	immortal.	how
will	 you	 live	 for	 eternity?	 --	 it	will	 be	 tedious,	 tiring,	 everything	will	 become
boring.
So	 the	 desire	 in	 every	 human	 heart	 for	 immortality	 cannot	 be	 for	 physical
immortality	--	 it	 is	a	misunderstanding.	It	 is	a	desire	 to	find	something	beyond
the	 body,	 beyond	 the	 mind,	 beyond	 time.	 To	 become	 part	 of	 that	 which	 is
forever,	 to	dissolve	 into	 it.	And	 love	gives	you	 the	 first	glimpse	of	 it;	 the	 first
lesson	in	immortality	is	love.
So	to	me	love	is	nectar	--	there	is	no	other	nectar.	This	story	of	Alexander	is	just
a	parable	--	a	beautiful	parable,	significant,	but	still	a	parable.
Learn	 to	 love.	Very	 few	people	know	how	 to	 love.	They	all	 know	 that	 love	 is
needed,	they	all	know	that	without	love	life	is	meaningless,	but	they	don't	know
how	to	love.	And	whatsoever	they	do	in	the	name	of	love	is	not	love,	it	is	always
something	 else.	 It	 is	 mixed	 with	 so	 many	 things	 --	 jealousy,	 anger,	 hatred,
possessiveness,	domination,	ego.	All	these	poisons	destroy	the	very	nectar.
To	 love	 means	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 all	 these	 poisons.	 So	 drop	 jealousy,	 drop
possessiveness,	drop	all	ego	trips	and	then	slowly	you	will	see	a	new	quality	of
love	arising	in	you.	And	it	will	give	you	wings,	it	will	make	you	weightless.	And
as	love	goes	higher,	you	go	higher.	A	man	is	exactly	where	his	love	is.	If	his	love
exists	on	the	lowest	plane	then	a	man	is	on	that	plane.
Love	 at	 the	 lowest	 is	 sex,	 love	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 journey,	 exactly	 in	 the
middle,	is	love	and	love	at	the	very	end	is	prayer.	Love	has	to	become	prayer.
Prayer	is	the	pure	fragrance	of	love.	And	once	you	have	come	to	that	purity	you
will	know	within	yourself	there	is	something	which	is	already	immortal.	Love	is
the	way	to	find	it,	and	the	far	easier	way	to	find	it.	There	are	other	ways	too,	but
love	is	the	most	beautiful	way	to	find	it.
My	sannyasins	have	to	go	on	refining	their	love	so	that	one	day	love	is	simply
love	for	love's	sake,	without	any	motivation,	without	any	desire,	no	expectation
of	getting	anything	back,	but	a	simple	sharing.
In	that	very	moment	one	has	transcended	the	physical	and	psychological	and	has
entered	into	the	spiritual.
Brahmen.	Eastern	mythology	believes	in	three	aspects	of	god.	That	is	the	eastern
equivalent	of	the	Christian	trinity.	In	the	East	we	call	it	trimurti,	the	three	faces
of	god.	Reality	is	one	but	it	has	three	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
dimensions.
The	 first	 dimension	 is	 represented	 by	 the	 god	 Brahma;	 Brahma	 represents
creation.	 The	 second	 dimension	 is	 Vishnu;	 Vishnu	 represents	 maintaining	 the
universe.	 And	 the	 third	 dimension,	 the	 third	 aspect	 is	 Shiva;	 Shiva	 represents
destruction	--	because	existence	becomes	so	old	that	 it	has	to	be	destroyed	and
again	 recreated.	 So	 there	 are	 cycles	 of	 existence	 just	 as	 there	 is	 a	 cycle	 of
seasons	every	year,	summer	comes	and	winter	comes	and	the	rain,	and	the	cycle
goes	 on.	 In	 the	 same	 way	 these	 three	 are	 the	 ultimate	 dimensions	 of	 reality;
everything	 begins	 with	 Brahma	 and	 ends	 with	 Shiva	 and	 again	 begins	 with
Brahma;	between	the	two	is	Vishnu	who	maintains.
So	Brahmen	means	the	creative	aspect	of	existence.	The	only	way	to	be	really	in
tune	 with	 existence	 is	 to	 be	 creative.	 While	 you	 are	 creating	 something,
whatsoever	 it	 is	 --	poetry,	a	song,	some	music,	some	dance,	whatsoever	 it	 is	 --
whenever	you	are	creating	you	participate	in	existence.	You	are	no	more	separate
from	it,	 in	fact	you	disappear	and	existence	starts	creating	through	you.	And	if
you	 can	 catch	 hold	 of	 those	 moments,	 if	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 those	 rare
moments	when	there	is	no	ego	and	creation	is	simply	flowing	through	you,	then
creativity	becomes	meditative.
Every	creator	knows	those	moments,	but	in	a	vague	way.	Poets	know	that	there
are	moments	when	poetry	simply	flows;	even	if	you	want	to	stop	it	you	cannot
stop	 it.	And	 there	 are	moments	when	 you	 are	 simply	 dry,	 there	 are	 dry	 spells
when	 you	 want	 tn	 create	 something	 but	 nothing	 comes.	 The	 more	 effort	 you
make,	the	less	is	the	possibility...	because	the	effort	simply	means	ego	effort.
Creativity	happens	only	when	ego	is	absent,	when	you	are	relaxed,	in	deep	rest,
when	there	is	really	no	desire	to	do	something.	Suddenly	you	are	in	a	grip,	some
unknown	 force	 overwhelms	 you,	 takes	 possession	 of	 you.	 That	 is	 exactly	 the
right	word	you	are	possessed.
The	 poets,	 the	 painters,	 the	 sculptors,	 they	 all	 know	 these	 moments	 but	 they
know	them	only	when	they	are	gone,	they	only	remember	them.	They	look	back
and	 they	 feel	 that	 something	 of	 great	 importance	was	 there	 but	 it	 is	 no	more.
They	 catch	 hold	 of	 those	 moments	 only	 when	 they	 are	 gone,	 the	 meditator
catches	hold	of	them	while	they	are	there.	That's	the	only	difference	between	the
poet	 and	 the	 mystic,	 the	 poet	 remembers	 the	 creative	 moments,	 the	 mystic
becomes	aware	in	those	moments	themselves.	And	that	makes	a	great	difference.
Once	you	have	become	aware	that	you	are	not	and	still	you	are	--	that	the	ego	is
no	more	 there,	 the	self	 is	no	more	 there,	still	you	are	--	you	have	had	a	 totally
new	experience	of	your	own	being.	Buddha	calls	it	nirvana,	no-selfness.	And	the
creator	comes	to	it	many	times;	the	only	thing	is	he	should	catch	hold	of	it	while
it	is	there.
And	 that's	my	whole	work	here:	 I	want	my	 sannyasins	 to	be	 creators	 in	many
ways,	in	every	possible	way,	ana	meditators.	Meditation	is	just	to	catch	hold	of
those	moments	and	creativity	 is	 to	create	 those	moments.	When	creativity	and
meditation	meet	--	you	have	arrived	home,	the	journey	is	complete.	And	then	life
is	just	pure	contentment,	absolute	fulfilment.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
28	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012275
ShortTitle:	GREENR28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Anand	Pushpo.	Anand	means	bliss.	Pushpo	means	flowering.
The	experience	of	bliss	has	many	aspects	to	it.	The	first	and	the	most	significant
aspect	is	that	it	is	just	like	a	flower	opening.
We	are	born	as	buds,	our	petals	are	closed,	and	millions	of	people	die	as	they	are
born,	on	the	same	spot,	in	the	same	space,	without	opening	up	to	life.	And	unless
the	flower	opens	 to	 the	sun,	 to	 the	wind,	 to	 the	rain,	 it	does	not	 really	exist.	 It
comes	 into	 real	 being	 only	 when	 its	 fragrance	 is	 released.	 And	 bliss	 is	 a
fragrance.
Unless	 a	 person	 becomes	 blissful	 he	 has	 lived	 in	 vain,	 meaninglessly,
accidentally,	 just	 like	driftwood,	 at	 the	mercy	of	 the	winds	 and	 the	waves.	He
knows	nothing	about	who	he	is,	where	he	is	going,	why	he	is	going,	from	where
he	comes.	He	is	absolutely	unaware	of	the	origin,	of	the	goal,	of	the	journey.	Just
like	 a	 somnambulist,	 a	 sleepwalker,	 he	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 from	 the	 cradle	 to	 the
grave,	but	in	between	nothing	happens.	Life	remains	empty.
A	closed	life	is	an	empty	life.	The	open	life	--	all	the	doors,	all	the	windows	open
--	is	an	authentic	life.
Then	one	is	really	born.
The	first	birth	is	only	physical,	the	second	birth	that	happens	through	opening	up
is	spiritual.	Sannyas	is	the	alchemy	for	the	second	birth.	And	it	is	never	too	late;
it	is	only	a	question	of	making	it	a	commitment,	a	decision.	Once	the	decision	to
open	 to	existence	 is	 total,	 then	 it	can	happen	 to	 the	child,	 it	can	happen	 to	 the
young	 person,	 it	 can	 happen	 to	 the	 old	 person,	 it	 can	 even	 happen	 at	 the	 last
moment	of	 life.	If	 just	for	 the	last	moment	one	opens	up,	 life	 is	fulfilled.	Then
one	knows	there	is	no	death,	then	one	knows	that	life	goes	on	and	on,	in	different
forms.	It	is	an	eternal	process,	an	eternal	river.
Anand	Chhanda.	Anand	means	bliss.	Chhanda	means	a	song	that	springs	within
your	being	--	the	second	aspect	of	bliss.
Bliss	 cannot	 remain	 unexpressed;	 that	 is	 impossible,	 that	 is	 against	 the	 law	of
existence.	 You	 can	 keep	 misery	 unexpressed,	 but	 you	 cannot	 keep	 bliss
unexpressed;	it	starts	overflowing	from	you!	It	is	like	fire,	how	can	you	hide	it?
It	 is	 like	the	sunrise,	 it	 is	bound	to	radiate.	It	 is	 inevitable	 that	bliss	becomes	a
song,	a	dance;	music,	celebration	--	all	 that	 is	contained	 in	 the	word	 'chhanda'.
And	unless	your	heart	overflows	with	 joy,	you	are	not	even	aware	of	having	a
heart.
People	 think	 there	 is	 no	 heart	 and	 through	 medical	 examination	 no	 heart	 is
found.	The	heart	 the	mystics	have	been	 talking	about,	 the	heart	 the	poets	have
been	singing	about,	is	not	found	by	medical	analysis	in	any	post-mortem;	what
they	find	is	just	a	breathing	system,	lungs.	And	the	reason	why	they	cannot	find
it	is	that	it	is	not	part	of	the	body;	it	is	the	opening	up	of	your	soul,	it	is	a	dance
of	the	spirit.	Certainly	it	does	illuminate	the	body.
When	you	light	a	lamp	the	flame	is	separate	from	the	glass	but	the	glass	radiates
it;	 it	 filters	 through	the	glass	but	 the	glass	 is	not	 the	source	of	 the	 light.	 If	you
dissect	the	glass	you	will	not	find	the	light.	That's	exactly	the	situation	with	bliss,
bliss	happens	in	the	soul	--	the	soul	is	invisible,	no	dissection	is	possible	--
but	 the	blissful	person	mediates	 it	 even	 through	his	body.	Each	of	his	gestures
carries	 the	 grace	 of	 his	 inner	 song.	 His	 love	 will	 be	 full	 of	 joy.	 Even	 his
aloneness	will	not	be	desertlike;	it	will	be	the	silence	of	a	garden
--	very	pregnant,	not	dead.	Even	if	the	blissful	person	is	silent	something	within
his	being	goes	on	speaking.
One	only	needs	eyes	to	see	and	ears	to	hear	the	subtle,	 to	hear	the	very	subtle.
Very	 few	 people	 have	 those	 eyes	 and	 those	 ears,	 that's	 why	 very	 few	 people
gather	around	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ	or	a	Zarathustra.
The	 people	 who	 gather	 around	 these	 people	 are	 capable	 of	 seeing	 something
which	others	are	incapable	of	seeing.
Remember,	your	heart	starts	existing	only	when	you	bring	joy	to	your	being.	So	I
teach	the	religion	of	cheerfulness.	One	is	not	to	be	serious	or	sad	at	all,	there	is
no	need	to	be	serious	or	sad.	Life	has	to	be	taken	in	playfulness,	with	great	love,
laughter	and	with	a	sense	of	humor.
Anand	Suniti.	Anand	means	bliss.	Suniti	means	virtue	--	the	third	aspect	of	bliss.
There	 are	 two	kinds	 of	 virtues	 possible:	 one,	 that	 is	 imposed	 according	 to	 the
dictates	of	others	--	the	society,	the	state,	the	race,	the	religion,	the	church.	It	is
not	true	virtue,	deep	down	you	are	against	it.	It	really	creates	one	of	the	greatest
problems:	it	creates	a	split	in	your	being,	it	makes	you	doubt.
On	the	surface	you	are	one	person,	in	the	depths	you	are	just	the	opposite	of	it.
The	logical	conclusion	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
this	process	is	schizophrenia;	and	the	whole	humanity	is	living	in	a	mild	form	of
schizophrenia.	Once	 in	a	while	 the	 schizophrenia	 reaches	 to	 such	a	height	and
the	 insanity	 becomes	 so	much	 that	 the	 humanity	 has	 to	 commit	 a	 mad	 act,	 a
suicidal	act	--	that's	what	war	is.	After	every	ten	or	twelve	years	we	need	a	world
war;	it	is	a	kind	of	necessity.	We	are	living	in	such	a	wrong	way,	we	are	living
with	such	insanity	hidden	in	us	that	sooner	or	later	so	much	is	accumulated	that
it	explodes	and	then	man	goes	on	destroying	himself.
The	 real	 virtue	 is	 never	 according	 to	 other's	 dictates;	 it	 comes	 out	 of	 your
blissfulness.	A	blissful	 person	 cannot	 harm	anybody,	 it	 is	 impossible.	You	 can
give	to	others	only	that	which	you	have	got.	If	you	are	blissful	you	can	only	give
bliss;	if	you	are	not	blissful	you	may	intend	to	give	bliss	but	you	will	give	only
misery	 because	 that's	what	 you	 have	 really	 got.	 Intentions	 don't	 count.	 People
can	 create	 hell	 for	 each	 other	with	 very	 good	 intentions.	 That's	what	 they	 are
doing:	parents	are	doing	it	for	children,	children	are	doing	it	for	parents,	students
are	doing	 it	 for	 teachers,	 teachers	are	doing	 it	 for	students,	 leaders	are	doing	 it
for	 the	 led,	 and	 the	 led	 are	doing	 it	 for	 the	 leaders.	Everybody	 is	 full	 of	 good
intentions	but	so	full	of	misery	that	all	those	good	intentions	become	vehicles	of
misery.	They	prove	to	be	horses	and	the	misery	rides	on	them.
Only	a	blissful	person	can	help	others	to	be	blissful.
And	that's	what	virtue	is	all	about:	helping	others	 to	know	themselves,	helping
others	to	be	themselves,	helping	others	to	be	blissful,	to	be	creative.	But	this	is
possible	only	if	first	you	become	blissful.
Out	of	bliss	virtue	arises	naturally.	It	 is	a	by-product.	The	cultivated	virtue	is	a
false	virtue.	The	natural	virtue	 that	comes	out	of	blissfulness	 is	 real,	authentic,
sincere,	sane,	and	it	is	an	immense	benediction	to	others.
Anand	 Prema.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Prema	 means	 love	 --	 the	 fourth	 aspect	 of
bliss.
A	blissful	person	cannot	help	but	be	loving	and	a	miserable	person	cannot	help
but	be	angry,	full	of	hatred,	 jealousy,	aggression.	One	can	understand	why	it	 is
so.	The	miserable	person	has	nothing	to	be	grateful	for	--	how	can	he	love?	He
cannot	 even	 love	himself,	 how	can	he	 love	others?	He	 is	 so	miserable	 that	 he
hates	himself.	He	is	constantly	condemning	himself.	He	wants	to	avoid	himself,
he	 does	 not	want	 to	 look	 at	 his	 face.	He	 finds	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 excuses	 to
remain	as	far	away	from	his	own	being	as	possible
--	 that's	what	 all	 our	 occupations	 and	 businesses	 are	 trying	 to	 evade	 the	most
basic	thing,	an	encounter	with	oneself.
But	 it	 is	 understandable	 why	 people	 are	 trying	 to	 evade	 themselves;	 they	 are
afraid	to	see	that	much	misery.	And	then	they	know	that	if	they	are	so	miserable
and	they	become	aware	of	it,	then	it	will	be	impossible	to	live	at	all,	that	misery
will	drown	them.	Then	suicide	will	be	the	only	outlet.	So	it	is	better	not	to	look
at	it,	to	ignore	it,	to	repress	it,	to	throw	it	into	the	basement	of	the	unconscious.
But	whatsoever	you	do	with	it,	if	you	are	miserable,	you	are	miserable.	You	can
keep	 it	behind	you	but	 it	 is	 there	and	working	from	behind.	And	 it	 is	going	 to
influence,	contaminate	and	pollute	your	whole	life.
And	because	the	miserable	person	cannot	love	himself	he	cannot	love	others	--
although	he	tries	very	much	to	love	somebody.	That	too	is	a	strategy	to	evade	his
own	being;	he	wants	to	become	interested	in	somebody,	focussed	on	somebody	-
-	 that's	 what	 he	 calls	 love.	 But	 whomsoever	 he	 loves	 he	 cripples,	 paralyses,
destroys,	because	his	misery	is	there;	he	is	carrying	poison	within	himself.
In	 ancient	 India	 the	 kings	 used	 to	 have	 a	 few	poison	 girls	 --	 they	were	 called
poison	girls.	 From	 the	 very	 first	 day	 if	 a	 beautiful	 girl	was	 born	 to	 somebody
then	the	girl	was	slowly	fed	poison	in	very	small	doses,	and	the	doses	would	go
on	 increasing	 as	 she	 grew.	 By	 the	 time	 she	 was	 a	 young	 girl	 her	 whole
bloodstream	would	be	 full	 of	 poison.	All	 the	kings	used	 to	have	 a	 few	poison
girls	 to	use	 as	detectives	or	 to	use	 as	murderers.	 It	was	 a	very	 subtle	 strategy,
they	were	so	beautiful	that	anybody	was	bound	to	fall	 in	love	with	them.	They
would	be	 sent	 to	 the	 enemy	and	 the	 enemy	was	bound	 to	 fall	 in	 love.	 Just	 by
kissing	 the	 girl	 the	 person	 would	 become	 unconscious;	 making	 love	 to	 the
poison	girl	was	enough	to	kill	anybody!
This	 is	 really	our	 situation	people	are	 full	of	poison	 --	poison	girls	and	poison
boys,	 playgirls	 and	 playboys	 --	 all	 are	 full	 of	 poison,	 but	 because	 both	 are
poisonous	they	don't	kill	each	other,	they	somehow	survive.	But	survival	is	not
life.	They	make	each	other's	life	miserable.
It	is	only	through	bliss	that	real	love	moment	you	are	blissful	you	love	without
any	motivation.	It	is	not	an	escape	from	yourself;	it	is	sharing,	it	is	your	joy	to
share	it.	You	don't	put	any	conditions	on	it,	you	don't	ask	anything	in	return.	You
don't	even	create	the	feeling	in	the	other	person	that	he	or	she	is	obliged	to	you.
You	simply	give	with	no	motive,	with	no	desire.	You	give	because	you	have	so
much,	 you	 give	 out	 of	 your	 abundance	 --	 that	 is	 love.	And	whomsoever	 such
love	touches,	his	life	is	transformed,	his	life	also	starts	having	a	new	fragrance,	a
new	flavour.
It	is	a	magical	touch	--	but	this	magic	is	possible	only	if	one	is	overflowing	with
bliss.	And	that	is	our	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
birthright:	we	can	be	blissful,	we	have	all	 the	potential,	 it	 is	 just	 that	we	have
never	tried	it.	We	have	not	looked	at	it,	we	have	never	worked	it	out.	We	have
been	running	from	misery	rather	than	taking	hold	of	it	and	trying	to	understand
its	roots	and	its	causes.
Once	 you	 understand	 its	 roots	 and	 causes,	 in	 that	 very	 understanding	 is	 the
ending	 of	 misery.	 And	 the	 ending	 of	 misery	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 bliss.	 The
cessation	of	misery	is	the	birth	of	bliss,	and	bliss	brings	love.
Just	 as	 your	 shadow	 follows	 you,	 love	 follows	 bliss.	 And	 this	 is	 all	 a	 person
needs:	blissfulness	inside	and	the	sharing	of	love	outside.
Anand	Anubhava.	Anand	means	bliss.	Anubhava	means	experience	 --	 the	 fifth
quality	of	bliss.	It	is	not	a	thought,	it	is	an	experience.
One	 can	 think	 about	 water,	 and	 the	 thirsty	 person	 does	 naturally	 think	 about
water,	but	 thinking	 is	not	going	 to	quench	his	 thirst.	He	may	go	on	reading	all
that	is	written	about	water,	he	may	understand	the	formula	H2O,	he	may	go	into
every	aspect,	he	may	create	a	whole	philosophy	about	water;	he	may	even	try	to
build	a	whole	system	of	life	and	water	may	be	used	as	the	most	basic	element	--
Heraclitus	says	that	water	is	the	most	fundamental	element	--	but	his	thirst	will
remain	unquenched.	You	have	to	drink	water,	not	talk	about	it,	not	philosophise
about	it.	And	by	drinking,	the	thirst	disappears.	Whether	you	know	the	chemistry
of	the	water	or	not	does	not	matter;	what	matters	is	that	you	have	experienced	it.
The	same	is	true	about	bliss.
There	 are	 many	 people	 who	 go	 on	 thinking	 about	 it,	 about	 what	 it	 is.
Philosophers	do	great	work,	and	their	whole	work	is	an	exercise	in	utter	futility.
They	 write	 great	 treatises	 about	 every	 conceivable	 subject,	 but	 their	 own	 life
remains	absolutely	empty.
My	effort	here	is	not	to	help	you	to	become	capable	of	philosophising	but	to	be
fulfilled,	to	be	contented
--	 and	 that	 is	 possible	 only	 through	 experience.	Experience	 is	 not	 of	 the	mind
and	 experience	 is	 not	 of	 the	 heart;	 experience	 belongs	 to	 your	 totality.
Experience	is	very	inclusive	it	includes	your	body,	your	mind,	your	heart,	your
being.	Its	roots	are	in	your	being,	its	trunk	is	in	your	heart,	its	branches	in	your
mind,	 its	 flowers	 in	 your	 body,	 but	 your	whole	 being	 is	 involved,	 your	whole
existence	is	involved.
Each	experience	has	a	totality,	an	organic	unity,	it	is	not	fragmentary.	Thinking	is
only	 of	 the	mind,	 feeling	 is	 only	 of	 the	 heart,	 action	 is	 only	 of	 the	 body,	 and
meditation	is	only	of	the	being	--	but	these	are	all	fragments.	When	all	these	four
are	together	in	a	deep	harmony,	functioning,	humming,	in	organic	oneness,	then
there	is	experience.	And	bliss	is	an	experience.
So	nothing	has	 to	be	 rejected,	 all	 has	 to	be	absorbed.	That's	why	 I	 am	against
renunciation,	repression,	rejection.	One	has	to	say	yes	to	life	with	one's	totality
and	 then	one	becomes	worthy	of	 receiving	 the	gift	of	bliss.	 It	certainly	comes.
You	just	have	to	say	yes	so	totally	that	there	is	nowhere,	in	any	nook	and	corner
of	your	being,	where	any	no	 is	hiding.	when	your	whole	being	 is	 just	yes	and
nothing	else,	 immediately	bliss	 showers	on	you	and	 then	 it	goes	on	showering
forever!
Anand	Alok.	Anand	means	bliss.	Alok	means	light	--	this	is	the	sixth	aspect	of
bliss.
Misery	 is	 dark,	 it	 is	 darkness.	 In	 the	 miserable	 person	 you	 can	 see	 a	 certain
darkness,	a	certain	dark	aura	around	him.	You	can	feel	that	he	is	dragging	a	load,
a	weight;	you	can	see	that	he	is	living	but	reluctantly.
Somehow	he	 is	managing,	but	 it	 is	not	a	dance,	 it	 is	 just	a	management.	He	 is
keeping	himself	together,	otherwise	any	moment	he	can	fall	apart.
If	you	look	within	the	miserable	person	you	will	find	nothing	but	a	dark	night	of
the	 soul	 --	 no	 stars,	 no	moon,	 just	 pure	darkness.	 Just	 the	opposite	 is	 the	 case
with	 bliss,	 it	 is	 a	 full-moon,	 the	 sun	 is	 at	 its	 height,	 at	 its	 climax,	 your	whole
being	is	sunlit.
Darkness	is	cold,	hence	the	miserable	person	be-comes	cold,	cold	like	steel.	For
example,	Joseph	Stalin	must	have	been	very	miserable.	He	was.	Stalin	is	not	his
real	name.	In	Russian	Stalin	means	a	man	of	steel;	it	was	given	to	him	because
he	was	so	cold	and	so	hard	and	so	cruel.	Of	course	the	people	who	called	him
Stalin	were	praising	him	because	he	was	a	man	of	steel,	unbendable,	strong.	But
that	strength	is	ugly;	it	is	the	strength	of	violence.
The	miserable	 person	 is	 always	 violent.	He	 has	 a	 certain	 strength,	 there	 is	 no
doubt	 about	 it	 he	 can	 destroy,	 he	 enjoys	 destroying,	 he	 knows	 no	 other	 joy
except	destruction.	He	can	tortureS	he	can	torture	others,	he	can	torture	himself,
but	he	is	bound	to	torture.	He	has	nothing	else	in	life	--	no	creativity,	no	poetry,
no	rejoicing.	His	life	is	a	black	hole	in	which	everything	dies.
The	blissful	person	is	creative,	loving,	full	of	light	and	also	light	weight-wise,	he
is	weightless.	He	can	fly!	There	is	no	height	which	is	not	possible	for	him.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 change	 from	 darkness	 to	 light	 is	 very	 simple,	 because	 all	 the	 ingredients
which	are	needed	to	create	light	in	you	are	there.	The	lamp	is	there,	the	wick	is
there,	the	oil	is	there,	the	matchbox	is	there.	Just	a	little	intelligence	to	put	things
in	a	certain	order	is	needed.
And	 that's	what	 I	 call	 sannyas:	 a	 little	 intelligence	 to	 put	 things	 together.	You
need	not	go	outside	to	look	for	anything;	all	that	you	need	has	been	given	to	you
from	the	very	beginning.	But	things	are	upside-down.	It	is	like	a	jigsaw	puzzle;
there	 is	a	 solution	 to	 it	 --	 just	a	 little	 intelligence...	 It	 is	 like	a	 room	where	 the
furniture	 is	put	upside-down	and	 the	chandelier	 is	on	 the	floor	and	 the	chair	 is
hanging	in	place	of	the	chandelier	and	all	the	paintings	are	upside-down.	It	looks
crazy	but	a	little	intelligence	and	you	can	put	things	where	they	belong.
And	once	 this	 discrimination	 about	where	 a	 thing	 is	 needed	 has	 come	 to	 you,
you	can	sort	out	 the	mess	 inside.	And	 the	same	 things	which	were	making	 the
mess	make	 a	 beautiful	 cosy	 house	 to	 live	 in.	And	when	 there	 is	 light	 there	 is
warmth	 --	 and	 warmth	 is	 another	 name	 of	 love,	 another	 name	 of	 creativity,
another	name	of	prayer.	And	the	person	who	is	full	of	light	can	help	many	others
to	become	lighted.
It	is	not	accidental	that	we	call	this	state	enlightenment	--	one	is	just	pure	light	--
but	whenever	a	man	of	pure	light	comes	into	contact	with	somebody	who	is	not
yet	lighted,	a	process	is	triggered.	He	becomes	a	catalytic	agent.	And	that's	 the
relationship	between	the	master	and	the	disciple.	The	master	is	already	aflame.
The	disciple	comes	close	to	the	master	and	at	a	certain	closeness	the	flame	from
the	master	jumps	into	the	disciple	and	suddenly,	lo	and	behold	(he	says	this	as	if
it	is	in	inverted	commas;	we	laugh)	the	darkness	is	over	and	the	light	has	arrived,
and	with	light	comes	life.
Anand	 Divyo.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Divyo	 means	 divine	 --	 that's	 the	 seventh
aspect	of	bliss.	 It	 is	 the	most	divine	experience	 in	 life,	or	maybe	 it	 is	 the	only
divine	experience	in	life.	All	other	experiences	which	look	divine	are	bound	to
have	something	of	bliss	in	them.	Love	looks	divine	but	it	is	only	divine	because
it	shares	a	certain	space	with	bliss.	There	is	some	overlapping	with	bliss.	Truth
looks	divine	--	again	there	is	the	same	overlapping.	Creativity	is	divine	but	again
there	 is	 the	 same	 overlapping.	 Wherever	 you	 find	 any	 proof	 for	 more	 than
matter,	for	something	higher	than	matter,	then	one	thing	is	certain:	bliss	must	be
present	there.
There	 is	 no	 god	 as	 is	 being	 taught	 in	 the	 churches	 and	 the	 temples	 and	 the
schools.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 cock-and-bull	 story,	manufactured	 for	 childish	 people.	But
there	are	very	few	people	who	are	not	childish,	 there	are	very	few	people	who
are	 really	mature,	 hence	 a	mature	 religion	 is	 non-existential.	 All	 religions	 are
childish.	 Worshipping	 a	 statue	 is	 childish,	 praying	 to	 some	 god	 as	 if	 he	 is	 a
person	 somewhere	 above	 in	 the	 sky	 is	 childish.	There	 is	 nobody	 to	 listen	 and
nobody	 to	 answer;	 you	 are	 simply	 in	 a	 monologue	 but	 you	 can	 think	 it	 is	 a
dialogue.	 All	 prayers	 are	 monologues,	 but	 one	 can	 believe.	 Belief	 as	 such	 is
childish.
The	 mature	 person	 wants	 to	 know,	 not	 to	 believe;	 his	 whole	 effort	 is	 for
knowledge,	 he	 wants	 to	 experience	 on	 his	 own.	 He	 is	 not	 ready	 to	 believe
because	 some	 guy	 two	 thousand	 years	 ago	 experienced	 god.	 Who	 knows
whether	 he	 really	 experienced	 god	 or	 was	 just	 hallucinating?	 Who	 knows
whether	he	was	really	an	experienced	person	or	was	just	trying	to	exploit	people
and	their	gullibility?	And	who	knows	whether	he	really	existed	or	not?	--	there	is
no	guarantee.
Unless	you	yourself	experience	it,	god	does	not	exist.	And	when	you	experience
it	 you	 always	 experience	 godliness,	 not	 god.	 And	 that	 godliness	 comes	 as	 an
experience	of	bliss,	tremendous	bliss,	great	ecstasy.
So	remember	not	to	be	bothered	with	prayer,	not	to	be	bothered	with	statues,	not
to	be	bothered	with	rituals,	not	to	be	bothered	with	scriptures,	not	to	be	bothered
with	 the	 priests.	Only	 one	 thing	 is	 needed	 be	 silent,	 be	 utterly	 silent.	 I	 call	 it
meditation.	And	out	of	that	silence	bliss	starts	arising	in	you	and	goes	on	arising,
goes	on	reaching	higher	and	higher	planes.	And	as	bliss	reaches	higher	you	reach
higher.	A	moment	comes	when	bliss	becomes	just	like	an	Everest,	sunlit	peaks	of
virgin	snow.	Those	are	the	moments	for	which	we	have	all	been	longing	for	lives
together.	And	they	can	happen	any	moment	--	just	the	right	perspective	is	needed
and	the	right	direction.	One	can	go	on	searching	in	the	wrong	place,	in	the	wrong
direction,	and	one	will	never	find.
And	 one	 thing	 mores	 bliss	 is	 something	 feminine.	 Perhaps	 that's	 why	 all	 the
seven	sannyasins	(tonight,	awaiting	initiation)	were	women.	There	was	one	man
but	he	had	to	leave.	He	was	looking	really	out	of	tune
--	and	he	also	felt	that	and	started	coughing!	(laughter)	So	that	is	the	last	aspect
of	bliss	--	it	is	feminine.
Even	 if	 a	man	 is	 to	 attain	 it	 he	 has	 to	 become	 a	 little	 bit	 feminine,	 he	 has	 to
become	like	a	womb	so	that	he	can	be	pregnant	with	the	divine,	so	he	can	carry
the	divine	in	his	being.
The	male	mind	is	aggressive,	the	feminine	mind	is	receptive,	and	bliss	comes	to
those	who	are	receptive.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Open	the	door	--	and	it	is	already	standing	at	your	door.	Just	open	the	door,	say
hello	and	it	comes	in!
(laughter)	 It	 won't	 knock	 on	 the	 door	 and	 it	 certainly	 won't	 ring	 the	 bell
(laughter);	it	will	wait.	Unless	you	invite	it,	it	won't	make	any	noise.
One	has	to	invite	and	welcome	it;	one	has	to	become	a	host,	then	bliss	comes	as
a	guest.	And	the	moment	bliss	enters	your	being,	for	the	first	time	you	know	the
grandeur,	 the	splendour,	of	life.	For	the	first	 time	you	become	aware	of	what	a
gift	has	been	given	to	you.	And	out	of	that	experience	arises	gratitude,	gratitude
towards	the	whole.	To	me	that	is	prayer.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I'm	not	clear	about	that.	Maybe	until	the	end	of	January	or	longer.
--	Let	 it	 be	 longer.	Be	 clear	 about	 it:	 longer	 and	 longer	 and	 longer!	 (laughter)
Good.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
29	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012285
ShortTitle:	GREENR29
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dhyan	Wolfgang.	Dhyan	means	meditation	and	the	wolf	represents	two	qualities
cunningness	and	courage.
The	 first	 quality	 is	 a	 hindrance	 in	 meditation,	 but	 the	 second	 quality	 is	 of
tremendous	help.	So	just	be	half	of	the	wolf!	(laughter)
The	mind	is	cunning	but	meditation	cannot	be	cunning;	meditation	is	innocent.
Meditation	 simply	 means	 dropping	 the	 whole	 structure	 of	 the	 mind,	 and
cunningness	is	part	of	it.
Secondly,	courage	is	never	part	of	the	mind.	Mind	is	always	a	coward.	because
of	 its	 cowardliness	 it	 becomes	 cunning.	 Cunningness	 is	 not	 a	 quality	 of	 the
courageous.	The	courageous	person	is	never	calculating;	he	knows	how	to	risk,
he	enjoys	 risking.	And	he	 trusts	his	 intelligence	 --	why	should	he	be	cunning?
Cunningness	 simply	means	 you	 are	 not	 trusting	your	 own	 intelligence,	 so	 you
have	to	find	a	substitute	for	it.	Only	unintelligent	people	are	cunning.	And	mind
is	never	intelligent.	It	 is	cunning,	calculative	--	 intellectual,	certainly,	but	never
intelligent	--	and	very	cowardly.	That's	why	it	clings	to	the	known	and	is	always
afraid	of	the	unknown.	It	clings	to	the	past	and	is	afraid	of	the	new.	It	remains
within	the	boundary	of	the	familiar	and	never	wants	to	cross	the	boundary	of	the
familiar.
The	uncharted	is	scary	for	the	mind,	but	the	uncharted	is	real	life,	the	unknown
and	the	adventure	for	the	unknown	is	the	only	joy	there	is.	Immense	courage	is
needed.	 Meditation	 is	 intelligent,	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 cunningness.
Meditation	 releases	 your	 intelligence.	 It	 drops	 the	mind	 and	 encounters	 reality
directly.	And	dropping	the	mind	is	dropping	the	familiar,	the	past,	the	known.
Meditativeness	 is	 immense	 courage,	 but	 life	 belongs	 to	 the	 courageous,	 bliss
belongs	to	the	courageous,	love	belongs	to	the	courageous,	truth	belongs	to	the
courageous.
Anand	Bettina.	Anand	means	bliss.	Bettina	means	consecrated	to	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	only	possibility	of	one's	knowing	bliss	is	merging	with	the	whole,	dropping
all	separation,	dropping	the	very	idea	of	the	ego.	The	moment	you	drop	the	ego
bliss	explodes.	The	more	you	become	enclosed	 in	 the	ego,	 the	more	miserable
you	 become,	 the	 more	 dark,	 dismal,	 sad,	 frustrated,	 your	 life	 is,	 because	 ego
surrounds	 you	 like	 a	 capsule,	 it	 becomes	 an	 imprisonment;	 it	 destroys	 your
freedom.
Freedom	 is	 the	meeting	 and	merging	 and	melting	with	 all	 that	 is	 --	 stars	 and
flowers	and	rivers	and	mountains,	people	and	birds	and	animals,	with	all	that	is.
God	is	only	a	name	for	this	totality.
The	 moment	 you	 surrender	 yourself	 to	 the	 whole,	 immediately	 life	 is
transformed,	instantly	misery	disappears	and	bliss	arrives,	and	arrives	forever	--
because	once	you	have	 tasted	 it	 and	once	you	know	how	 it	 comes	 there	 is	 no
need	to	be	miserable	again.	It	is	impossible	really	to	be	miserable	again.
People	are	miserable	because	they	have	never	tasted	bliss,	so	they	have	become
accustomed	to	misery,	they	think	that's	what	life	is	all	about,	that	there	is	nothing
more	to	life.	And	once	they	start	settling	with	this	idea,	they	are	already	dead.
So	people	die	near	about	the	aye	of	twenty-one.	That's	why	every	country	thinks
a	person	becomes	adult	when	he	is	twenty-one;	in	fact	he	is	dead!	(laughter)	It	is
a	 strange	 thing	 that	all	over	 the	world	 twenty-one	seems	 to	be	accepted	as	 the
age	when	a	person	becomes	adult.	But	 the	reality	is	 that	 that	 the	time	when	he
drops	all	adventure,	when	he	drops	all	longings,	when	he	drops	all	dreams,	when
he	settles	with	the	ordinary,	mundane	life,	when	he	starts	thinking	that	this	is	all
there	 is.	Then	 the	society	 thinks	he	 is	not	adult;	but	he	 is	 really	dead.	He	may
actually	die	after	sixty	years	but	that	life	is	posthumous.	After	twenty-one	people
are	living	posthumous	existences.	But	if	they	can	drop	their	ego	any	moment,	at
any	 time,	at	any	age,	again	 they	become	young,	suddenly	 they	are	 fresh	again,
innocent,	again	there	is	awe	and	wonder,	again	the	aspiration	to	reach	the	stars.
Again	the	poetry	has	come	back!
It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 name,	 Bettina:	 it	 simply	 defines	 the	 whole	 idea	 of	 sannyas;
surrendering	 the	 ego	 to	 the	whole.	The	moment	you	are	not,	 for	 the	 first	 time
you	are	--	remember	it!
Veet	Barbara.	Veet	means	transcendence.	Barbara	means	a	stranger.
The	ordinary	life	gives	you	again	and	again	the	feeling	as	if	you	are	a	stranger
here,	 as	 if	 you	 don't	 belong	 to	 existence,	 as	 if	 you	 are	 alien,	 a	 foreigner,
something	like	an	accident,	that	you	were	not	supposed	to	be,	that	you	were	not
meant	to	be,	that	it	is	just	a	coincidence	that	you	have	happened,	that	existence
has	no	need	of	you.	This	is	the	predominant	idea	all	over	the	world,	and	moreso
in	the	modern	mind,	because	in	the	past	man	was	living	a	more	childish	life	--
more	primitive,	more	wild,	uncivilised,	raw,	and	people	were	not	thinking	much
about	life	--	there	was	no	time.
The	whole	energy	and	time	was	absorbed	by	the	struggle	to	survive.	For	the	first
time	 in	 the	modern	world	millions	 of	 people	 are	 having	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 time	 to
think	about	what	 this	 life	 is	all	 about	 --	 and	 they	are	all	 feeling	 like	 strangers.
They	 are	 all	 feeling	 unwanted	 and	 that	makes	 a	 very	 deep	wound.	 If	 you	 are
unwanted,	 the	 natural	 consequence	 is	 a	 suicidal	 tendency	 then	why	go	on,	 for
what?	Nobody	needs	you,	nobody	is	going	to	miss	you.	Stars	will	be	there	and
flowers	will	bloom	and	birds	will	sing	and	the	sun	will	rise,	and	everything	will
go	on	continuing;	summer	will	come	and	winter	will	come	and	rain.	You	will	not
be	 missed,	 and	 somebody	 will	 replace	 you!	 But	 this	 whole	 idea	 is	 basically
wrong.
We	are	not	accidental,	we	are	very	essential	--	far	more	essential	than	the	stars,
the	sun,	the	moon,	because	we	are	the	only	entities	which	have	become	a	little
bit	conscious.	Existence	has	come	to	flowering	in	man.	Yes,	 trees	are	beautiful
and	the	roses	are	beautiful,	but	nothing	compared	to	the	flower	of	consciousness.
It	is	just	a	small	flower	but	it	can	become	very	big;	it	can	become	a	Buddha,	a
Christ,	a	Zarathustra	--	it	all	depends	on	us.
The	basic	requirement	is	the	change	of	the	,	you	are	not	a	stranger,	not	accidental
--	you	are	 immensely	needed.	Existence	has	created	you	 for	a	certain	purpose.
There	is	a	hidden	hand	behind	you.	There	is	a	destiny	to	be	fulfilled,	a	message
to	be	delivered,	a	life	to	be	lived	in	deep	harmony	with	the	whole.	And	you	will
be	helping	the	whole	evolution.
The	greatest	need	of	man	 is	 to	be	needed.	And	when	one	 feels	 that	 the	whole
existence	needs	one,	a	great	respect	for	oneself	arises.	And	that	respect	triggers
respect	for	others.	A	great	love	for	oneself	arises	and	that	love	triggers	love	for
others.	 Then	 suddenly	 you	 find	 you	 are	 not	 a	 foreigner,	 not	 a	 stranger;	 this
existence	 is	yours,	you	belong	 to	 it,	 it	 belongs	 to	you.	And	 then	a	 totally	new
story	opens,	a	new	chapter	of	life.	That's	what	sannyas	is:	the	beginning	of	a	new
chapter.
So	 go	 beyond	 the	 idea	 of	 being	 a	 stranger,	 transcend	 that	 idea,	 drop	 it
completely.	And	it	can	be	dropped	very	easily	if	one	becomes	a	little	silent,	gets
out	of	 the	mind,	puts	 the	mind	 into	a	 state	of	non-functioning;	 in	 that	 stillness
one	 immediately	 experiences	 the	 at-tunement,	 the	 at-onement	 with	 existence.
And	from	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
moment	onwards	life	is	a	dance,	a	festival,	a	sheer	blessing.
(David	 is	 from	 the	States.	He	 is	 billed	 as	 a	 painter.	Osho	gives	 him	 the	 name
Premgit,	and	then	observes	without	any	preliminaries:)
You	look	angry	(Premgit's	face	breaks	into	a	smile.)...	but	that's	the	situation	all
over	 the	 world:	 the	 younger	 generation	 is	 an	 angry	 generation.	 Everybody	 is
angry	 --	 angry	at	god,	 angry	at	 existence,	 angry	at	 everything.	Such	anger	has
never	been	known	before.	For	 the	 first	 time	man	has	shown	his	anger	 towards
reality,	existence,	so	it	is	not	specific	to	you,	it	is	the	very	atmosphere	today.
But	through	anger	one	cannot	live	a	creative	life;	life	becomes	destructive.	And
before	you	destroy	anything	you	have	to	destroy	yourself.	And	people	are	being
destructive	in	every	possible	way.	All	over	the	world	there	is	anarchy,	chaos.	In
fact	 it	has	become	very	 symbolic	of	being	young,	 to	be	an	anarchist,	 to	create
chaos.
If	 there	 is	 some	 purpose	 behind	 destruction,	 if	 you	 are	 doing	 it	 to	 create
something,	 it	 is	 beautiful,	 but	 if	 destruction	 becomes	 a	 goal	 unto	 itself	 --
destruction	for	destruction's	sake	--	then	we	are	committing	suicide.
Sannyas	is	becoming	a	loving	being.	It	 is	just	the	opposite	of	being	angry,	it	 is
just	the	opposite	of	being	in	rage.	And	I	can	understand	why	people	are	angry,
their	life	is	so	unfulfilled.	It	is	absolutely	understandable.	Life	is	not	giving	them
anything	and	people	are	no	more	ready	to	believe	in	a	heaven	beyond	death,	they
want	it	right	now.	And	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	asking	for	it	right	now	but	it	is
not	a	question	of	asking,	you	have	to	create	it.
One	can	live	in	hell,	one	can	live	in	heaven	--	it	all	depends	on	how	you	live,	on
what	 lifestyle	 you	 choose.	 Sannyas	means	 love	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 life-style,
creativity	 is	going	 to	be	your	worship,	aesthetic	 sensibility	 is	going	 to	be	your
meditation.	 And	 sharing	 whatsoever	 you	 have	 brings	 many	 flowers	 to	 your
being.	They	happen	only	when	you	start	sharing.
If	a	tree	is	a	miser	it	will	not	blossom.	Fortunately	trees	are	not	misers,	they	are
not	 Jews,	 otherwise	 they	 would	 not	 blossom.	 Before	 blossoming	 they	 would
think	'Why?	For	what?	And	how	much	am	I	going	to	get	out	of	it?'	Because	trees
don't	 bother	 about	 getting	 anything,	 they	 blossom	 and	 release	 their	 fragrance.
But	in	that	release	they	come	to	a	fulfilment,	a	tremendous	contentment.
Share	your	life	--	that's	what	love	is.	Share	your	energies,	share	your	creativities
and	create	a	small	aesthetic	aura	around	yourself.	Instead	of	anger,	create	love.	It
is	 the	same	energy.	When	love	goes	sour	 it	becomes	anger.	So	 in	a	way	it	 is	a
good	indication	that	energy	is	there,	it	is	just	going	in	the	wrong	direction.	And
my	effort	here	is	to	change	the	younger	generation	into	flower	people!
Become	a	song	of	love,	not	a	curse	of	anger,	and	immediately	you	will	see	that
life	is	an	immense	gift.
We	 are	 not	worthy	 of	 it,	 yet	 some	unknown	 source	 of	 energy	has	 showered	 it
upon	us.	We	have	received	it	not	because	we	deserve	it	but	because	existence	has
it	in	such	abundance	and	out	of	its	abundance	it	has	given	to	us.
And	then	there	is	gratitude.	That	gratitude	I	call	prayer.	And	when	one's	heart	is
prayerful,	 one	 is	 religious,	 simply	 religious	 --	 not	 Christian,	 not	 Hindu,	 not
Mohammedan,	simply	religious.	I	teach	a	religionless	religiousness.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	don't	know.
--	Be	here	until	your	anger	turns	into	love!	(Premgit	grins	and	the	group	breaks
into	laughter.)	Good,	good.
Premdip	means	a	light	of	love.
Love	is	my	message.	Love	is	my	Gita,	my	Koran,	my	Bible.	And	a	man	without
love	is	a	man	without	light,	a	house	without	light,	just	full	of	darkness.	Gautam
the	Buddha	used	to	say	that	when	the	house	is	dark	and	there	is	no	lamp	inside	it
attracts	 thieves,	 enemies,	 the	wrong	kind	of	 people.	When	 the	house	 is	 full	 of
light	thieves	don't	dare	come	close	to	it.
The	same	is	true	about	man's	being,	if	there	is	the	light	of	love	inside	you	many
thieves	will	not	dare	come	close	to	you.	Hatred,	anger,	jealousy,	ambition,	ego	--
all	are	thieves	because	they	go	on	stealing	your	being	from	you,	your	joy	from
you.	 They	 are	 parasites,	 but	 they	 can	 come	 only	 because	 you	 are	 not	 lighted
within.
And	there	is	no	need	to	fight	with	them,	because	the	fight	is	not	going	to	help	at
all.	All	that	is	needed	is	to	light	a	candle	inside.	Love	is	just	a	small	candle,	but	it
is	enough.	It	dispels	darkness	and	it	creates	fear	 in	 the	enemies,	 in	 the	 thieves,
they	cannot	come	close	to	you.
And	 light	 is	not	only	 light,	 it	 is	also	warmth.	These	are	 the	 two	aspects	of	 the
same	thing	love	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
warmth,	 light	and	warmth.	Love	is	 the	coin;	 these	are	 the	 two	aspects,	warmth
and	light.
And	a	man	with	light	and	warmth	starts	living	at	the	maximum	for	the	first	time.
People	can	either	live	at	the	alpha	point	or	at	the	omega	point	--	both	paints	are
available.	People	live	at	the	alpha	point,	at	the	lowest.	They	live	minimally,	just
one	per	cent	at	the	most;	ninety-nine	per	cent	remains	unlived.
Psychologists	have	been	researching	and	they	say	that	 the	very	talented	people
live	five	per	cent	to	seven	per	cent,	and	the	people	we	call	geniuses	--	like	Albert
Einstein	or	Leonardo	da	Vinci	or	Shakespeare	or	Mozart	--	they	live	at	the	most
near	about	fifteen	per	cent.
Of	 course	 psychologists	 have	 not	 yet	 thought	 about	 people	 like	 Gautam	 the
Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	Zarathustra,	Jesus.	In	fact	they	don't	have	any	way	to	measure
these	 people.	 They	 cannot	 accept	 that	 they	 are	 lacking	 the	 methodology,	 so
rather	 than	 accepting	 their	 own	 limitations,	 they	 condemn	 Jesus	 as	 abnormal,
insane,	crazy.	But	the	real	thing	is	that	if	you	think	that	the	genius	lives	at	fifteen
per	cent	and	a	person	lives	at	one	hundred	per	cent	he	will	 look	crazy.	His	life
will	 be	 such	 a	 flame,	 his	 torch	 will	 be	 burning	 from	 both	 ends;	 he	 will	 look
crazy,	he	will	 look	 insane.	But	only	 these	 few	people	have	 really	 lived;	others
have	only	pretended	to	live,	others	have	gone	through	empty	gestures	of	living.
To	live	authentically	the	most	essential	thing	needed	is	a	heart	full	of	love.	And
the	heart	is	full	of	love,	we	just	have	to	allow	it	to	open	up.	It	is	like	a	bud:	if	we
allow	it	to	open	it	becomes	a	lotus	flower.
In	the	past	we	have	actually	called	the	fully	enlightened	person	a	one-thousand
petalled	 lotus.	You	must	have	 seen	 statues	of	Buddha	and	pictures	of	Buddha,
sitting	on	a	one-thousand	petalled	 lotus.	That	 represents	 the	ultimate	 flowering
of	consciousness.	But	love	is	the	beginning	and	love	is	the	end.
Sangit	Sarjano.	Sangit	means	music.	Sarjano	means	creativity.
Life	can	either	be	lived	as	mathematics	or	as	music,	either	as	prose	or	as	poetry.
And	the	choice	is	open.
One	comes	just	like	a	tabula	rasa,	a	clean	slate:	nothing	is	written	on	it,	you	have
to	write	your	story.	And	because	the	people	all	around	you	are	living	for	money,
for	 power,	 for	 prestige,	 respectability,	 and	 all	 that	 rubbish,	 one	 starts	 imitating
them,	life	becomes	just	mathematics.	It	loses	all	music.
And	 a	 life	 dominated	 by	 mathematics	 is	 not	 life	 at	 all.	 It	 is	 phony	 and	 it	 is
joyless.	 Life	 can	 have	 joy	 only	 if	 it	 is	 lived	 as	 music.	 mind	 is	 mathematics,
meditation	is	music.	Mind	is	prose,	meditation	is	poetry.
So	one	has	to	shift	from	the	mind	to	a	state	of	no-mind.	That	state	of	no-mind	I
call	meditation.
The	mathematical,	the	prose	life	can	accumulate	things	of	the	outside	world	but
it	cannot	be	creative.
One	can	become	wealthy,	one	can	even	become	the	conqueror	of	the	world,	but
deep	down	one	will	 remain	very	poor.	The	 inner	 richness	comes	 to	only	 those
few	people	who	 are	 creative.	What	 they	 create	 is	 not	 the	 point	 --	 it	may	 be	 a
painting,	it	may	poetry,	it	may	be	anything,	just	a	small	garden,	just	a	beautiful
house,	just	delicious	food.	Whatsoever	it	 is,	 it	 is	not	the	point,	but	they	are	not
doing	it	for	any	other	ulterior	motiveS	they	are	enjoying	doing	it.	The	very	doing
of	it	is	their	joy,	the	thing	in	itself	is	their	reward.	If	other	rewards	come,	that's
besides	the	point;	their	real	joy	is	in	doing	the	thing.	And	they	are	so	absorbed,
abandoned,	that	they	lose	their	ego.
So	 these	 two	 things	 are	 of	 great	 importance	 living	 life	 as	 music,	 creating	 a
harmony	 in	everything	 that	you	do,	 in	everything	 that	you	are,	 and	out	of	 that
harmony	not	relaxing	into	an	escape	--	which	religious	people	have	done	down
the	ages.	When	you	are	in	harmony	the	second	thing	is	that	your	harmony	has	to
be	creative.	You	have	 to	enrich	 the	world,	you	have	 to	 leave	 the	world	a	 little
better,	 a	 little	 more	 beautiful	 than	 you	 found	 it;	 only	 then	 does	 one	 feel
contentment,	only	then	does	one	live	and	die	joyously.
Dhyandas	means	surrendered	to	meditation.
Meditation	is	the	key	word,	it	is	a	master	key.	It	unlocks	all	the	mysteries	of	life.
Nothing	else	is	needed,	just	a	meditative	awareness,	and	one	finds	one's	home,
one's	 source	 and	 one's	 goal.	 The	whole	 of	 religion	 can	 be	 reduced	 to	 a	 single
word	and	that	is	'meditation'.
And	one	of	the	most	beautiful	things	about	meditation	is	that	it	can	be	done	by	a
child,	by	a	young	man,	by	an	old	man,	because	it	is	not	an	exercise	of	the	body
or	 the	mind;	 it	 is	 just	 the	 opposite:	 it	 is	 relaxation	 of	 body-mind.	 So	 even	 on
one's	deathbed	one	can	create	Buddhahood.	Even	in	the	last	moment	of	life	one
can	open	up	and	can	die	a	beautiful	death,	 a	death	 that	becomes	a	door	 to	 the
divine.
So	now	this	 is	going	 to	be	your	whole	work	--	and	I	say	 the	word	 'work'	with
inverted	commas,	because	it	is	not	like	work	at	all;	it	is	more	like	play:	relaxing,
sitting	or	lying	down,	doing	nothing,	just	being.	Be	alert	and	watchful,	watchful
of	 what	 is	 happening	 all	 around,	 the	 traffic	 noise,	 the	 train	 passing	 by,	 the
thunder	in	the	clouds,	a	dog	starting	to	bark,	a	child	starting	to	cry	--	just	silently
with	closed	eyes,	available	to	all	that	is	happening,	not	trying	to	concentrate	on
anything...	because	that	is	effort,	that	is	tiring.	And	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
concentration	 is	 of	 the	mind,	 it	 is	 not	meditation.	 Just	 relax,	 be	 available	 and
open.	Noises	will	come	and	go,	but	they	will	not	distract	you.	In	fact	they	will
enhance	your	silence,	they	will	become	a	background	to	your	silence.
The	moment	 you	 have	 found	 the	 knack	 of	 how	 to	make	 the	world,	 the	 noisy
world,	a	backdrop	to	your	silence,	a	contrast	to	your	silence,	you	have	found	the
secret.	 Then	 any	 moment	 one	 can	 close	 one's	 eyes	 and	 disappear	 into	 one's
centre.	Then	on	the	circumference	the	cyclone	goes	on	and	on,	but	one	remains
centred,	without	any	distraction.	Then	 life	has	no	disturbance	 in	 it,	neither	has
death	any	disturbance	in	it.
And	 if	 one	 can	 remain	 centred	 in	 life	 and	 death	 one	 has	 found	 god.	 That
centering	 is	 god.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 god.	 One	 has	 found	 eternity,	 immortality,
deathlessness.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	had	ten	days	here,	I	leave	tomorrow.
--	Good.	Then	if	you	can	find	time,	come	back,	otherwise	meditate	there	and	I
will	be	coming	there!
(laughter)	Good.
Vishnudas.	Vishnu	is	one	of	the	names	of	god.	Vishnudas	means	surrendered	to
god.
God	is	not	a	person,	not	a	creator;	god	is	the	soul	of	existence.	Existence	is	his
body,	his	periphery,	his	manifest	form,	and	god	is	existence's	hidden	centre,	 its
unmanifest	form.
So	 god	 is	 not	 separate	 from	 life	 but	 life's	 very	 centre,	 its	 very	 essential	 core.
Religions	have	done	a	disservice	to	humanity	by	teaching	people	to	renounce	life
because	 if	 you	 renounce	 life	 you	 are	 renouncing	 god.	 You	 cannot	 find	 god
anywhere	else.	God	has	tc	be	found	here	and	now	and	god	has	to	be	found	in	this
and	all	the	religions	have	been	teaching	you	about	that,	the	far	away,	the	beyond.
They	have	all	helped	man	to	postpone	because	the	beyond	is	far	away;	it	is	not	a
question	to	be	decided	today.	One	can	wait	--
tomorrow,	perhaps	 the	day	after	 tomorrow,	 in	old	age,	or	maybe	after	death	or
maybe	next	life	--	there	is	no	hurry.
Hence	religiousness	became	only	a	formality	and	churches	have	become	just	like
Rotary	clubs	where	a	few	phony	people	gather	together	and	start	saying	'Hello.
How	are	you?'	and	talk	about	the	weather.	In	the	Rotary	club	they	talk	about	the
weather,	in	the	churches	they	talk	about	god	--	but	it	is	the	same.	Whether	it	is
weather	or	god	makes	no	difference.
They	 don't	 mean	 it;	 something	 has	 to	 be	 said,	 otherwise	 silence	 becomes
awkward.	 And	 it	 is	 just	 a	 sunday	 phenomenon	 every	 Sunday	 you	 so	 to	 the
church.	 It	 is	 prestigious,	 respectable,	 and	 it	 is	 good	 to	 meet	 people,	 to	 shake
hands	and	to	exchange	gossips.
The	reason	why	it	happened	that	 the	whole	of	religion	became	phony	was	 that
these	people	were	teaching	a	life-negative	attitude.	Only	pathological	people	can
become	 interested	 in	something	 that	 is	against	 life;	hence	your	so-called	saints
are	 almost	 psychologically	 ill,	 neurotic.	 The	 really	 healthy	 people	 cannot	 be
against	list.	And	the	healthy	religion	can	only	be	life-affirmative.	To	me	god	is
synonymous	with	life.	Life	is	his	dance	and	he	is	the	dancer.	Life	is	his	song	and
he	is	the	singer.	And	if	you	want	to	find	the	singer	you	have	to	enter	the	song,	if
you	 want	 to	 find	 the	 dancer	 you	 have	 to	 learn	 the	 dance.	 And	 you	 have	 to
penetrate	into	the	dance	--	only	then	will	you	be	able	to	find	god.
That's	what	I	mean	by	surrendering	to	god:	surrender	to	this	beautiful	universe,
to	its	multi-dimensional	variety.	These	are	all	gods	in	different	forms,	all	aspects
of	god.	Live	it	totally,	intensely,	passionately	--
that's	what	I	call	surrender	to	god.
My	sannyasin	is	not	a	monk	and	nun	in	the	old	sense;	he	is	a	totally	new	kind	of
religious	person.	He	has	no	past	but	he	has	a	future	and	he	has	the	present.	And
the	monks	and	the	nuns	of	the	Catholics	and	the	Protestants	and	the	Jainas	and
the	Buddhists	have	the	past	but	they	don't	have	any	present	and	no	future	at	all.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#30
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
30	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012295
ShortTitle:	GREENR30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Prem	Visarjan.	Prem	means	love.	Visarjan	means	dissolution.
Love	consists	 in	dissolving	 the	ego,	hence	 love	 is	 the	only	phenomenon	which
cannot	be	converted	 into	an	ego	 trip.	They	cannot	exist	 together.	 It	 is	 just	 like
light	 and	 darkness	 is	 it	 is	 light,	 darkness	 disappears;	 if	 darkness	 is	 there	 then
light	is	not	there	--	they	are	never	together.	The	same	is	true	about	love	and	ego.
And	love	fails	because	we	try	to	do	the	impossible	we	want	them	both!	We	don't
want	to	dissolve	the	ego,	we	protect	it.	We	want	ego	to	follow	our	love	and	our
love	to	follow	our	ego.	Because	of	this	absurd	desire	love	becomes	impossible.
And	whenever	there	is	a	conflict	between	love	and	ego	then	ego	is	going	to	win,
for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 it	 is	 gross	 and	 love	 is	delicate,	 as	delicate	 as	 a	 rose
flower	and	ego	 is	as	gross	and	as	stupid	as	a	rock:	 the	rock	can	crush	 the	rose
very	easily.	So	one	has	to	be	very	watchful	and	alert.
Unless	the	rose	is	saved	life	is	lost.
My	whole	message	 is	 of	 love.	And	 the	 first	 and	 the	most	 fundamental	 law	of
love	is:	be	ready	to	drop	the	ego.	And	it	never	brings	anything	except	misery,	so
there	is	not	much	to	dropping	it.	It	is	sheer	foolishness	to	go	on	clinging	to	it.	A
little	bit	of	intelligence	and	one	can	see	the	point,	that	ego	brings	misery,	anger,
hatred,	jealousy,	possessiveness.	All	kinds	of	poisons	grow	out	of	it	and	it	makes
your	life	a	mess.
Love	 brings	 harmony,	 great	 joy,	 music,	 poetry,	 dance,	 and	 life	 becomes	 a
celebration.	Initiation	into	sannyas	is	initiation	into	a	life	of	celebration	and	that
is	 possible	 only	 through	 love.	 But	 one	 has	 to	 pay	 the	 price;	 and	 the	 price	 is
dropping	the	ego.
Prem	Arpito.	Prem	means	love.	Arpito	means	dedicated	to.
Sannyas	is	dedication	to	love.	It	is	a	love	affair.	It	is	not	religion	in	the	ordinary
sense.	 It	 is	not	a	cult,	a	creed,	a	dogma;	 it	 is	purely	a	 love	affair,	a	 love	affair
with	existence	itself.
The	religions	that	have	existed	on	the	earth	have	proved	not	bridges	but	walls.
They	have	prevented	people	from	merging	into	existence.	They	have	condemned
existence,	 they	have	all	been	 life-negative,	and	when	you	are	 life-negative	you
cannot	 be	 love-affirmative	 because	 life	 and	 love	 are	 synonymous.	 To	 be
dedicated	to	love	also	means	to	be	dedicated	to	life.	There	is	no	difference;	they
are	different	names	for	the	same	phenomenon.
I	teach	affirmation	of	life,	no	escape,	no	condemnation	but	rejoicing	in	all	that	is
--	 from	the	smallest	 to	 the	biggest,	 from	a	blade	of	grass	 to	 the	greatest	star	 --
enjoying	life	moment	to	moment,	merging	into	life	moment	to	moment	more	and
more,	not	holding	back	anything.	The	day	you	are	one	hundred	per	cent	in	tune
with	life	you	have	arrived.	You	have	arrived	at	the	goal	of	love.
And	Jesus	is	right	when	he	says	god	is	love.
Prem	Kusum.	Prem	means	love.	Kusum	means	a	flower.
Love	is	the	most	delicate	phenomenon.	There	is	nothing	more	delicate	than	love
in	existence,	hence	it	is	the	most	precious	thing.	It	is	the	flowering	of	your	heart,
the	 opening	 of	 your	 heart.	 And	 the	moment	 the	 heart	 opens	 like	 a	 flower	 the
whole	 existence	becomes	available	 to	 it.	Then	 it	 can	dance	 and	 sway	with	 the
wind,	with	 the	 rain,	with	 the	sun.	Suddenly	all	barriers	disappear;	as	you	open
up,	barriers	evaporate.
Opening	 up	 to	 existence	 like	 a	 flower	means	 coming	 out	 of	 an	 imprisonment,
otherwise	 we	 are	 living	 in	 encapsulated	 ways,	 closed	 to	 everything,	 hiding,
rationalising.
The	whole	 life	 of	 a	 closed	 person	 is	 fear-oriented.	He	 is	 afraid	 to	 open;	 he	 is
afraid	because,	who	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
knows?	 --	 if	 you	 are	 open	 and	 vulnerable,	 you	may	 be	 cheated	 and	 deceived.
Some	enemy	may	enter.	You	may	open	the	door	for	the	wind	but	who	knows?	--
instead	of	the	wind	some	disease	may	enter,	some	enemy	may	come	in;	instead
of	the	sun-rays	some	murderer	may	come	in.	It	is	better,	safer,	to	keep	the	doors
and	windows	closed.
Yes,	 it	 is	safer,	but	 then	your	 life	 is	enclosed	 in	a	grave,	you	are	already	dead.
And	millions	of	people	are	 living	posthumous	 lives.	They	have	died	 long	ago;
now	they	are	simply	dragging	within	a	grave.	They	just	somehow	manage,	 the
grave	surrounds	them.	Then	it	is	not	any	wonder	that	they	are	miserable	misery
is	 their	 own	 creation.	 A	 closed	 being	 is	 bound	 to	 be	miserable	 because	 he	 is
living	death,	not	life.
Open	up!	 Just	 as	 the	closed	 life	 is	 fear-oriented,	 the	open	 life	 is	 love-oriented.
Trust	existence.	And	what	have	we	got	to	lose?	Death	is	going	to	take	everything
away	anyway	so	in	fact	all	fear	is	stupid.	When	death	is	the	only	certainty	in	life
then	only	fools	can	be	afraid,	otherwise	what	is	there	to	lose?	And	anyway,	death
is	 going	 to	 come	 and	 take	 everything	 away	 --	 then	why	 not	 live	 and	why	 not
dance	and	why	not	sing	and	why	not	be	vulnerable?	If	you	are	cheated,	so	what?
If	 you	 are	 deceived,	 so	 what?	 At	 least	 you	 lived	 and	 through	 all	 those
experiences	you	will	learn,	you	will	grow,	you	will	become	mature.
Mistakes	 are	 not	 necessarily	 bad.	 One	 should	 not	 commit	 the	 same	 mistakes
again	and	again	--	that's	all.
If	 you	 can	 invent	 a	 new	mistake	 every	moment,	 that's	 just	 far	 out!	 (laughter)
Then	Buddhahood	is	not	very	far	away	because	each	mistake	is	a	lesson,	it	gives
you	a	maturity,	it	gives	you	ripeness	--	and	ripeness	is	all.
Prem	Samarpito.	Prem	means	love.	Samarpito	means	surrender.
There	are	two	kinds	of	surrender.	One	is	when	you	are	forced	to	surrender	--	that
is	ugly.	Never	allow	that	to	happen.	It	is	better	to	die	than	to	surrender	because
you	are	forced	to	surrender.	But	there	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	surrender:	you
are	not	forced	to	surrender,	you	simply	feel	like	surrendering.	That	is	love	when
on	your	own	you	 feel	 like	merging,	melting,	 becoming	one	with	 somebody	or
with	the	whole	of	existence.
Of	course	 it	 always	begins	as	a	 relationship	 --	 that	 is	natural.	The	 first	 step	of
love	 is	 relationship,	 the	 second	 state	 of	 love	 is	 relating	 --	 and	 there	 is	 a	 vast
difference	between	the	two.	In	relationship	you	exclude	everybody,	you	focus	on
one	 person.	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 concentration	 of	 the	 heart.	 But	 all	 concentration
becomes	a	concentration	camp!	(laughter)	Basically	it	is	fascist.	To	begin	with	it
is	okay	but	one	should	not	start	living	there,	in	a	concentration	camp.
But	 there	are	people	who	 like	concentration	camps.	Just	 today	I	was	 reading	a
news	 item:	 in	London	 they	have	made	a	Nazi	concentration	camp.	A	group	of
people	 has	 created	 all	 the	 conditions	 of	 a	 Nazi	 concentration	 camp	 and	 those
who	want	 to	become	prisoners	 there	 for	seven	days,	have	 to	pay	 thirty	pounds
(much	laughter)...	and	people	are	doing	that	for	lodging	and	boarding.	They	are
beaten	and	tortured.	Every	kind	of	thing	is	done	to	them	--	all	that	was	done	in
the	concentration	camps	in	Germany.	It	is	an	exact	replica	except	that	it	is	small,
it	is	on	a	smaller	scale.	Nobody	is	killed	or	burned	--	except	for	that	everything
is	being	done.	And	it	is	booked	far	ahead!	(laughter)	And	the	people	who	have
participated	in	it	have	almost	all	escaped	within	two	or	three	days.	Nobody	has
yet	been	able	to	complete	the	whole	seven	day	period.
But	all	those	who	have	participated	say	it	was	really	an	adventure,	thrilling.
Life	 has	 become	 so	dull,	 life	 has	 become	 so	 boring,	 that	 even	 a	 concentration
camp	 seems	 to	 be	 an	 adventure.	 It	 brings	 a	 thrill.	 You	 are	 beaten,	 you	 are
tortured.	People	are	awakened	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	They	have	to	be	naked
and	to	run	around	in	the	cold	and	be	whipped	--	and	they	call	it	adventure!	But	I
can	understand	what	exactly	the	case	is:	people's	 lives	are	so	dull	and	dead,	so
loveless,	so	juiceless,	that	they	are	ready	to	try	anything	new.	They	are	in	such	a
desperate	state.
That's	 why	 thousands	 of	 people	 are	 committing	 suicide	 around	 the	 world,
because	that	seems	to	be	the	only	thrill.	Jumping	from	a	fifty-storey-building	is
certainly	a	 thrill.	And	 it	 is	better	 than	working	 for	 fifty	years	 in	an	office	as	a
clerk,	far	better;	at	least	for	a	moment	you	will	feel	alive.	While	falling	down	to
the	 ground	 (much	 laughter)...	 you	 will	 feel	 'So	 far,	 so	 good!'	 And	 as	 the	 end
approaches	nearer,	the	thrill	becomes	more	and	more	of	a	crescendo.	And	when
you	crash,	 that	 is	 the	climax!	 (much	 laughter)	This	shows	what	we	have	made
out	of	life.
So	love	also	starts	as	a	concentration	camp	--	a	one-to-one	affair,	exclusive.	Both
are	 prisoners	 and	 both	 are	 the	 gaolers;	 they	 function	 in	 both	 ways.	 Each	 is
imprisoned	by	 the	other	and	each	 is	a	gaoler	 in	his	own	 right.	 It	 is	a	beautiful
game!	 But	 one	 should	 not	 remain	 there,	 otherwise	 life	 is	 wasted.	 One	 should
learn	 the	 lesson,	 the	beauty	of	 it,	 the	ugliness	of	 it	 --	both	have	 to	be	 learned.
And	the	ugliness	is	to	be	dropped	and	the	beauty	has	to	be	preserved.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That's	 what	 relating	 is:	 you	 drop	 all	 that	 is	 ugly	 in	 love	 --	 possessiveness,
exclusiveness,	 domination,	 suspicion,	 doubt,	 every	 effort	 to	 curtail	 the	 other's
freedom.	When	all	these	are	dropped	and	your	love	becomes	just	a	relating,	not	a
relationship,	 closer	 to	 friendship....	 You	 can	 have	 many	 friends,	 you	 can	 also
have	many	lovers	--	and	one	should	start	growing	from	one	to	many,	but	that	too
is	not	the	goal.
The	third	state	 is	when	love	is	 just	a	quality.	You	are	not	attached	to	one	or	 to
many:	love	is	just	like	breathing	--	it	is	your	nature	--	so	to	whosoever	come	in
contact	with	you	are	loving.	This	is	the	third	stage:	very	few	have	attained	to	the
third.	And	 there	 is	 a	 fourth	 state	which	 only	 so	 few	people	 have	 attained	 that
they	can	be	counted	on	fingers.
The	 fourth	 is	 when	 your	 very	 being	 is	 love	 --	 it	 is	 not	 a	 quality,	 your	 very
existence	 is	 love.	You	have	 forgotten	 all	 about	 love.	Because	you	yourself	 are
love	 there	 is	 no	need	 to	 remember	 it;	 now	you	 act	 out	 of	 it,	 simply,	 naturally,
spontaneously.	At	that	fourth	point	one	is	surrendered	to	existence.
At	the	first	you	are	surrendered	to	a	person,	but	there	is	a	condition	--	he	should
be	surrendered	to	you	--
so	the	surrender	is	not	total,	it	is	conditional.	In	the	second	you	are	surrendered
to	many	people.	It	is	better	than	the	first	because	now	surrender	is	not	focussed;
it	has	more	freedom,	it	has	grown	a	few	new	dimensions,	it	has	grown	wings.	In
the	third	you	are	simply	surrendered	to	existence,	to	the	trees,	to	the	mountains,
to	the	stars,	 to	all	 that	is.	And	in	the	fourth	you	become	the	surrender	itself.	In
the	fourth	 love	means	surrender	 it	 is	equivalent	 to	 it,	synonymous	with	 it.	And
this	is	the	state	of	being	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ.
Nothing	is	higher	than	that.	One	who	achieves	that	has	achieved	all.	His	life	is
fulfilled,	he	has	come	home!
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Nine	months	(then	she	corrects	herself)...	nine	weeks.
--	Let	it	be	months!	(laughter)	Otherwise	come	back	but	nine	months	is	the	right
time	to	be	in	the	womb	of	the	master!	(more	laughter)	Nine	weeks	is	a	little	bit
too	early!
Prem	Pujari.	Prem	means	love.	Pujari	means	a	worshipper.
Love	 is	 worship.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 in	 any	 temple	 or	 church	 or	 any
synagogue	 to	worship.	That	 is	 a	pseudo,	 false	kind	of	worship;	 cheap,	but	not
real.	It	is	like	plastic	flowers,	there	will	be	no	fragrance;	in	a	way	they	are	very
permanent	but	that	permanency	has	no	value.
If	 love	 can	 exist	 even	 for	 a	 single	 moment	 that	 is	 far	 more	 valuable	 than	 a
person's	 whole	 life	 of	 worshipping,	 of	 going	 through	 all	 kinds	 of	 rituals	 in
temples	and	churches.	A	single	moment	of	love	will	give	you	more	insight	into
reality	 than	a	whole	 life's	worship	can	give.	 In	 fact	 the	more	you	worship,	 the
more	dull	and	stupid	you	become.
You	can	go	and	watch	the	people	who	go	to	the	churches,	to	the	synagogues,	to
the	temples,	to	the	mosque	--	you	can	see	their	stupidity.	Humanity	has	suffered
much	 from	 these	 stupid	 people.	 And	 because	 they	 are	 hiding	 their	 stupidity
behind	a	very	beautiful	facade,	a	religious	facade,	they	have	been	able	to	do	all
kinds	of	nuisance	--	and	with	good	intentions.	They	kill	you	for	your	own	sake,
they	murder	people,	they	burn	people	alive	for	their	own	sake.
Christians	have	done	that,	Mohammedans	have	done	that,	Hindus	have	done	that
--	everybody	has	done	 that.	The	hands	of	all	 the	priests	of	all	 the	 religions	are
full	of	blood.	More	blood	has	been	shed	in	the	name	of	religion	than	in	the	name
of	anything	else.	This	cannot	be	true	religion;	something	is	basically	wrong.
Hence	 I	 say,	 create	 a	 temple	 in	 your	 heart.	 And	 in	 fact	 the	 temple	 is	 already
there,	you	only	have	to	discover	it.	And	be	loving,	loving	to	all	that	is.
Share	your	joy,	share	your	creativity,	share	whatsoever	you	can.	Let	that	be	your
only	worship	and	your	life	will	have	the	flavour	of	real	religiousness.	You	will
not	be	a	Christian,	certainly,	neither	a	Hindu	nor	a	Mohammedan;	you	will	be
simply	 religious.	And	 to	 be	 religious	 is	 beautiful;	 to	 be	Christian	 or	Hindu	 is
ugly.	every	dogma	creates	a	limitation,	it	gives	you	a	confinement;	it	imprisons
you	and	makes	a	slave	of	you.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	absolutely	free	beings	--	free	of	all	kinds	of	slaveries,
howsoever	 old,	 ancient,	 howsoever	 respectable,	 it	 doesn't	 matter,	 even	 if	 the
chains	are	made	of	gold	and	studded	with	diamonds,	they	have	to	be	thrown	they
are	chains	all	the	same.
There	is	no	got	other	than	love	and	there	is	no	other	worship	either.	So	just	be
loving	 and	 in	 that	 you	will	 find	both	 the	worshippers	 and	 the	worshipped,	 the
devotee	and	the	deity	--	both	will	be	discovered	through	love.	They	are	aspects
of	the	same	coin.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Prem	Viraga.	Prem	means	love.	Viraga	means	non-attachment.
Ordinarily	 love	 is	 found	 with	 deep	 attachment,	 but	 attachment	 functions	 like
cancer	to	love:	it	kills	it.
Attachment	 is	 a	 disease	 of	 love,	 it	 is	 poison	 to	 love.	 But	 there	 is	 a	 great
misunderstanding	people	 think	attachment	 is	 love,	 and	once	you	 think	 that	 the
illness	 is	health,	 then	 it	 is	very	difficult	 to	get	 rid	of	 it.	You	will	not	go	 to	 the
physician,	you	will	not	take	any	medicine,	you	will	not	go	through	any	surgery;
in	fact	you	will	protect	it	by	all	means.	It	is	a	treasure	to	be	protected.
So	the	first	thing	my	sannyasins	have	to	be	very	clear	about	is	that	attachment	is
not	love,	it	is	anti	--
love.	And	we	 have	 to	 drop	 attachment	 if	we	want	 to	 grow	 in	 love.	And	 I	 am
using	the	word	'cancer'	for	attachment	for	a	special	reason	if	you	leave	it	as	it	is,
it	will	go	on	growing.	It	has	to	be	immediately	removed.	Whenever	it	 is	found
that	one	has	cancer,	then	giving	it	any	time	is	dangerous.	It	is	to	be	removed	as
quickly	as	possible,	because	it	is	growing	every	moment.	Those	cancer	cells	go
on	 multiplying	 themselves.	 They	 are	 like	 Indians	 (laughter):	 they	 go	 on
reproducing	children	and	children	and	children	--
they	don't	believe	in	birth	control.
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 attachment,	 and	 it	 is	 far	 more	 dangerous	 than	 cancer
because	 cancer	 can	only	 destroy	your	 body;	 attachment	 can	destroy	your	 very
soul	because	love	belongs	to	the	soul,	love	is	your	soul.
So	never	be	attached	and	never	Force	anybody	to	be	attached	to	you	--	remain
unattached.	And	unattachment	does	not	mean	detachment.	Detachment	 is	cold;
one	is	indifferent,	one	doesn't	care.	Care,	care	as	much	as	possible,	remain	warm,
but	don't	cling	and	don't	allow	the	other	 to	cling	to	you.	All	clinging	has	to	be
dropped.	And	the	energy	that	goes	into	clinging	has	to	be	used	in	making	your
love	warmer.	The	same	energy	can	be	used	in	making	love	more	intense,	more
passionate,	more	total,	more	healthy,	more	sane.
Only	a	love	free	from	attachment	brings	health	and	wholeness.
Prem	Abhinava.	Prem	means	love.	Abhinava	means	eternally	new.
Love	is	always	new,	it	never	becomes	old.	It	cannot	become	old.	If	 it	becomes
old	it	is	no	more	there,	it	has	already	died.	One	can	go	on	carrying	the	corpses	--
that's	another	matter.	But	 love	as	such	has	an	 intrinsic	quality	of	newness.	The
newness	of	 the	 flowers,	 the	newness	of	 the	 stars,	 the	newness	of	 children,	 the
newness	 of	 dewdrops,	 the	 newness	 of	 the	 early	 morning	 sun	 --	 all	 those
newnesses	are	part	of	love.	But	love	can	remain	new	only	if	you	remain	new.	It
is	not	possible	for	love	to	remain	new	if	you	go	on	becoming	old.
Mind	is	always	old.	It	 is	 the	accumulation	of	 the	past,	 it	 is	 just	a	record	of	 the
past;	it	goes	on	keeping	the	past	filed.	So	whenever	you	need	to	use	it	you	can
use	it.	It	has	no	idea	of	the	new;	hence	love	is	not	of	the	mind,	it	cannot	be	of	the
mind.	It	arises	from	a	different	center	in	your	being;	it	arises	from	the	heart.
And	 the	 heart	 is	 always	 new	 as	 the	mind	 is	 always	 old.	 That's	why	 heart	 and
mind	never	met.	They	cannot	understand	each	other,	there	is	no	communication
between	the	mind	and	the	heart.	Their	languages	are	different;	the	mind	speaks
the	language	of	logic,	the	heart	is	very	illogical.	And	existence	is	illogical,	hence
the	heart	is	closer	to	existence	than	the	mind.
The	mind	speaks	the	language	of	arithmetic	and	calculation;	love	is	a	gambler,
the	heart	is	a	gambler	--
it	knows	no	calculation.	It	moves	into	the	uncharted	without	any	worry,	it	risks,
but	in	risking	is	adventure,	in	risking,	life	becomes	an	ecstasy.	If	you	can	go	into
a	new	adventure	each	moment,	then	your	life	becomes	a	dance,	then	it	 is	not	a
drag.
The	mind	 speaks	 the	 language	 of	 prose	 and	 the	 heart	 speaks	 the	 language	 of
poetry.	It	is	untranslatable.
By	the	time	it	is	translated	into	the	language	of	the	mind	it	loses	its	real	meaning,
its	significance,	its	flavor.
So	one	has	to	put	the	mind	aside	if	one	wants	to	understand	love.	And	the	only
way	to	understand	love	is	to	be	in	it,	to	be	drowned	in	it.	And	then	this	freshness
is	always	with	you.	Then	life	becomes	full	of	flowers,	 then	each	moment	is	so
new	that	there	is	always	wonder,	surprise,	awe.	And	to	live	a	life	of	wonder	and
awe	 is	 to	 live	 a	 spiritual	 life.	Others	 talk	 about	 spirituality;	 only	 lovers	 know
what	 it	 is!	 Lovers	 have	 encountered	 the	 divine.	 Logicians	 have	 only	 been
thinking	about	it,	philosophizing	about	it,	but	they	have	not	tasted	anything	of	it.
Love	 is	a	wine;	you	have	 to	 taste	 it,	you	have	 to	drink	 it,	you	have	 to	become
drunk	with	it,	only	then	do	you	know	what	it	is.
Prem	Artho.	Prem	means	love.	Artho	means	meaning,	significance.
One	of	the	greatest	problems	facing	humanity	today	is	that	of	meaning.	Almost
everybody	who	is	a	little	bit	intelligent	is	feeling	that	life	is	meaningless,	and	to
feel	that	life	is	meaningless	is	a	very	dangerous	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
situation.	Then	the	question	naturally	and	inevitably	arises:	why	go	on	living,	for
what?
Marcel	says	that	the	only	real	philosophical	problem	worth	considering	is	that	of
suicide	--	and	I	agree	with	him.	It	is	moreso	in	the	contemporary	context.	Men	in
the	 past	 have	 never	 felt	 this	way,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason...	 It	 is	 not	 that	 it	was
something	 great,	 that	 people	 were	 more	 spiritual	 and	 more	 religious,	 as	 the
phony	spiritualists	go	on	saying,	 it	 is	not	 that	people	were	better	 in	 the	past	so
they	never	felt	meaninglessness.	The	only	thins	is	that	people	were	so	occupied
with	their	very	survival,	they	were	continuously	working	to	somehow	exist,	that
there	was	no	possibility	for	them	to	think	about	the	meaning	of	life.
It	 is	a	higher	question,	it	belongs	to	a	higher	plane.	Still,	 in	the	poor	countries,
nobody	bothers	about	the	meaning	of	life.	The	question	is	not	of	the	meaning	of
life,	 the	question	 is	of	bread,	of	butter,	of	shelter,	of	clothes.	People	are	dying,
starving,	people	are	naked;	they	are	without	any	roofs.	They	are	sleeping	on	the
streets.	How	can	they	think	about	the	meaning	of	life?	--	there	is	no	time.	That's
why	in	the	past	it	was	not	a	problem	at	all.
Man	for	the	first	time	has	become	a	little	affluent,	a	little	rich,	particularly	in	the
western	 hemisphere,	 and	 the	 problem	has	 suddenly	 erupted.	Now	people	 have
enough	to	eat,	their	necessary	needs	are	fulfilled,	hence	they	have	time	to	think
about	significant	matters.	And	this	is	the	first	thing:	what	is	the	meaning	of	life?
Why	are	we	here	at	all,	why	do	we	go	on	existing?
Now,	 unless	 love	 becomes	 our	 experience	 life	 will	 remain	 meaningless.	 No
philosophy	 can	 give	 it	 meaning.	 Hence	 the	 future	 depends	 on	 releasing	 love
energies,	otherwise	man	is	bound	to	commit	suicide	--
global	suicide.	He	is	preparing	for	it	every	day.	mountains	of	atomic	weapons	are
in	existence.	We	can	destroy	seven	hundred	earths	 like	 this	 --	we	have	already
made	that	much	atomic	preparation.	In	other	words	each	man	can	be	killed	seven
hundred	times.	And	we	are	piling	up	our	arms	and	discovering	new	methods	of
killing.	 It	 seems	we	are	determined	 to	commit	a	global	suicide	sooner	or	 later.
And	I	don't	think	anybody	will	object	to	it;	in	fact	everybody	will	feel	relieved,
relieved	of	an	empty	life.
But	 if	 love	happens	life	becomes	so	full,	so	overflowingly	full,	 that	one	would
like	to	live	and	one	would	like	others	to	live.	Only	love	is	the	hope	for	the	future.
Hence	 I	 have	 decided	 that	 love	 has	 to	 become	 the	 basic	 message	 of	 my
sannyasins.	 Their	 whole	 life	 has	 to	 be	 grounded	 in	 love.	 If	 you	 can	 feel	 the
meaning	of	life	through	love	you	can	trigger	the	same	process	in	others.
I	am	preparing	sannyasins	so	that	they	can	go	around	the	world	with	flames	of
love	within	their	heart	and	can	share	their	light	and	their	fire	with	others	who	are
in	immense	need.	If	we	can	fill	the	world	with	a	few	million	meditators,	lovers,
rejoicing	and	dancing	and	celebrating,	humanity	can	yet	be	saved.	There	is	still	a
chance,	all	hope	is	not	lost.
Is	the	Grass	Really	Greener...?
Chapter	#31
Chapter	title:	None
31	December	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8012305
ShortTitle:	GREENR31
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sagaresh	means	the	god	of	the	ocean.
Man	 can	 live	 either	 as	 a	 dewdrop,	 as	 an	 ego	 or	 as	 a	 vast	 ocean.	 Both	 the
possibilities	are	open	and	available	--	it	is	our	choice.	The	only	condition	to	be
fulfilled	to	become	oceanic	is	to	let	the	dewdrop	disappear,	evaporate.	Unless	the
dew	 drop	 disappears	 into	 the	 ocean	 it	 remains	 very	 small,	 limited;	 and	 all
limitation	creates	misery.
Bliss	means	unlimitedness,	vastness;	bliss	is	oceanic.	And	one	can	be	as	vast	as
the	whole	universe;	just	a	small	thing	has	to	be	dropped	the	idea	of	the	I.	And	it
can	be	very	easily	done	because	it	is	a	false	idea,	it	is	our	own	invention.	It	does
not	exist	in	reality.
Veet	Tanha.	Veet	means	 transcendence.	 'Tanha'	 is	 a	word	 used	 by	Gautam	 the
Buddha	for	desire.
Transcending	 the	 desire	 of	 to	 be	 something,	 to	 reach	 somewhere,	 to	 possess
something,	to	become	something,	is	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	it	is	to	transcend
the	desiring	mind.	The	desiring	mind	is	a	beggar,	and	whatsoever	you	give	to	the
beggar	 it	makes	no	difference	 --	 it	 goes	on	begging,	 it	 is	 its	nature	 to	beg.	So
even	 if	 one	 possesses	 the	 whole	 world	 the	 mind	 will	 not	 feel	 contented.
Discontent	is	its	very	quality.	So	one	has	to	slip	out	of	the	mind	to	be	contented,
to	feel	fulfilled.
The	moment	you	stop	desiring	--	and	desire	comes	in	many	forms,	in	all	sizes,	in
all	 shapes...	There	are	people	who	have	 renounced	 the	world	but	now	they	are
desiring	 the	 pleasures	 of	 heaven	 --	 it	 is	 the	 same	 desire.	 They	 are	 not	 in	 the
marketplace,	they	have	moved	to	the	monastery,	to	the	mountains,	to	the	deserts,
but	the	desire	has	not	left.	It	has	only	taken	on	a	new	colour,	a	new	dimension;	it
has	come	in	again	from	the	backdoor.
So	 desire	 in	 all	 its	 forms,	 even	 the	 desire	 to	 attain	 the	 truth,	 is	 a	 barrier.	 The
desire	to	know	god	is	a	barrier.	Any	desire,	desire	as	such,	takes	you	away	from
your	reality.	The	moment	you	drop	all	desiring,	suddenly	you	explode	into	light,
into	love,	into	infinity,	into	eternity;	suddenly	all	that	you	have	been	desiring	and
not	finding	is	found.	No-desire	is	the	way	to	find,	desire	is	the	way	to	go	astray.
Aradhana	means	prayer,	but	not	the	prayer	that	goes	on	in	the	churches	and	the
temples	and	the	synagogues.
My	 definition	 of	 prayer	 is	 silence,	 because	 words	 are	 useless	 when	 you	 are
communicating	with	the	divine.	When	you	are	communicating	with	the	whole	no
language	is	needed.	Language	is	human.	Below	humanity	there	is	no	language,
above	 humanity	 also	 there	 is	 no	 language.	 So	 if	 you	 are	 communing	with	 the
trees	 no	 language	 is	 needed.	 You	 can	 hug	 a	 tree,	 you	 can	 kiss	 a	 tree,	 but	 no
language	 is	 needed.	 If	 you	 start	 talking	 with	 the	 tree	 you	 are	 simply	 crazy!
(laughter)
The	same	 is	 true	about	 that	which	 is	above	humanity,	 again	 language	 loses	all
meaning;	you	have	to	be	silent.	And	with	the	beyond...	you	cannot	even	kiss	it,
you	cannot	even	hug	it.	It	is	invisible,	so	you	can	be	in	utter	silence,	just	being,
and	that	is	prayer.	And	in	that	moment	of	silent	being	the	communion	happens.
So	forget	all	the	prayers	that	have	been	taught	to	you	--	they	are	all	false.	Learn
only	one	prayers	wordless	gratitude,	gratitude	for	the	whole,	for	all	the	beauty	of
existence,	for	all	the	joy	of	existence,	for	our	life,	for	all	the	gifts	that	the	whole
has	given	 to	us	 --	 the	 capacity	 to	 love,	 the	 capacity	 to	dance,	 to	 celebrate,	 the
capacity	 to	be	aware,	 to	be	silent,	 to	be	prayerful.	All	 these	are	 immeasurable,
inestimable	 gifts,	 and	we	 cannot	 return	 them	 in	 any	way.	We	 have	 nothing	 to
give	back,	but	we	can	be	thankful.
So	a	silent	thankfulness	is	my	definition	of	prayer.
Shunya	means	absolute	zero.
The	western	mind	associates	zero	with	nothingness.	The	eastern	understanding
of	 the	 zero	 is	 not	 of	 nothingness	 but	 of	 no-thingness	 --	 and	 there	 is	 a	 vast
difference	between	the	two.
Nothingness	gives	you	a	negative	idea;	no-thingness	gives	you	the	idea	of	space.
There	 is	no	 thing	 in	 it	 but	 there	 is	 spaciousness.	 It	 is	 full,	 full	 of	 space	 --	 and
that's	the	only	thing	that	a	sannyasin	is	required	to	create	in	himself,	the	space.
We	 are	 so	 full	 of	 rubbish,	 junk,	 garbage	 --	 all	 kinds	 of	 furniture.	 All	 our
thoughts,	 desires,	 memories,	 imagination,	 fantasies,	 are	 nothing	 but	 rotten
furniture.	We	have	to	throw	it	out	so	that	space	can	be	created.
Once	 you	 are	 full	 of	 space	 and	 nothing	 else,	 the	 miracle	 happens:	 the	 whole
universe	 rushes	 into	 you,	 Then	 the	 stars	 are	 within	 you	 and	 the	 flowers	 are
within	you	and	the	birds	are	singing	within	you.	Then	suddenly	you	are	in	a	deep
harmony	with	the	whole.	you	are	the	whole.	And	to	me	that's	the	only	possibility
of	being	holy:	to	become	one	with	the	whole.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Hence	 zero	 means	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 fullness.	 It	 is	 not	 empty.	 It	 is	 empty	 of	 all
rubbish,	 but	 the	 moment	 rubbish	 is	 removed,	 something	 immensely	 valuable
rushes	in.	It	was	always	waiting	at	the	gate	but	there	was	no	space	for	it	to	come
in.	 The	 guest	 has	 been	 waiting	 and	 waiting	 and	 waiting,	 but	 the	 host	 is	 so
occupied	inside	that	even	if	the	guest	knocks	on	the	door,	the	host	is	not	going	to
listen	--	it	is	so	noisy	inside.	And	even	if	he	listens	there	is	no	space	to	call	the
guest	in.
Meditation	means	creating	a	zero	within	you	and	the	moment	you	have	created
the	 zero	 you	 have	 invited	 god;	 that's	 the	 only	 invitation	 possible.	 He
immediately,	instantly	enters	in	and	your	whole	life	is	transformed.	Then	there	is
no	birth,	no	death,	no	misery,	no	anguish.	You	have	become	one	with	the	whole,
relaxed,	restful	--	you	have	found	your	home!
Dayananda	means	compassion	plus	bliss.
They	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin,	they	happen	simultaneously.	Bliss	happens
within,	 compassion	 happens	 without.	 Bliss	 is	 the	 inner	 side	 of	 compassion,
compassion	is	the	outer	side	of	bliss;	or,	compassion	is	the	body	and	bliss	is	the
soul.
It	 is	 better	 to	 begin	with	 the	 inner,	with	 the	 centre,	 because	once	 the	 centre	 is
transformed	the	circumference	follows	automatically,	but	not	vice	versa.	You	can
try	 to	be	compassionate	but	 it	will	 remain	 just	 an	effort,	 something	cultivated,
painted.	 It	will	 not	 change	your	 centre,	 in	 fact	 it	will	 create	 a	division	 in	you;
your	circumference	and	your	centre	will	become	enemies.
At	the	centre	there	will	be	misery,	at	the	circumference	you	will	be	trying	to	be
compassionate.	 You	 will	 start	 falling	 apart,	 you	 will	 become	 schizophrenic.
That's	what	the	whole	humanity	has	become,	schizophrenic.
So	never	start	from	the	circumference	--	that	is	one	of	the	most	significant	things
to	 remember:	 every	 beginning	 has	 to	 be	 from	 the	 centre	 towards	 the
circumference.
If	you	really	want	to	change	the	tree,	change	the	roots;	don't	go	on	painting	the
flowers	and	the	leaves	--
your	painting	won't	help.	If	the	leaves	are	looking	pale	you	can	paint	them	green,
but	they	will	die	sooner	because	of	your	paint.	You	can	deceive	people	but	you
cannot	 deceive	 the	 tree,	 you	 cannot	 deceive	 existence.	 If	 you	 really	 want	 the
leaves	to	be	green,	then	you	have	to	think	of	the	roots:	nourish	them,	water	them,
and	the	leaves	will	automatically	be	green	and	the	roses	will	become	bigger	and
bigger,	more	and	more	fragrant.
Start	with	the	centre,	start	with	bliss,	and	compassion	follows	like	a	shadow.
Krishnananda.	 Krishna	 is	 one	 of	 the	 names	 of	 god.	 Ananda	 means	 bliss.
Krishnananda	means	divine	bliss,	godly	bliss.
Man's	real	search	is	not	for	god,	it	is	for	bliss.	Of	course	when	you	have	found
bliss	you	have	found	god	too,	but	those	who	are	trying	to	find	god	have	started
the	 journey	 from	a	wrong	angle.	The	word	 'god'	does	not	 ring	any	bells	 in	 the
heart.	 If	 you	were	 not	 told	 about	 god	 from	your	 childhood	 you	may	 not	 have
ever	thought	about	it.
In	Communist	Russia	children	are	not	told	about	god	so	they	don't	bother	about
it	at	all.	Buddhists	don't	believe	in	god	so	their	children	don't	bother	about	god	at
all.	 Jainas	 in	 India	 don't	 believe	 in	 god	 so	 their	 religion	 is	 a	 godless	 religion,
there	 is	 no	 question	 about	 god	 at	 all.	 Not	 a	 single	 Jaina	 has	 ever	 asked	 me
whether	god	exists	or	not.	But	as	far	as	bliss	is	concerned,	whether	you	are	told
about	it	or	not,	you	will	seek	it.	You	will	seek	it	in	Communist	Russia,	you	will
seek	it	in	a	Buddhist	home,	you	will	seek	it	in	a	Christian	family;	you	will	seek	it
wherever	you	are.	Atheist,	theist,	communist,	fascist,	it	doesn't	matter.
So	bliss	 is	our	 true	search.	Of	course	when	bliss	 is	 found	much	more	 is	 found
with	it.	And	because	of	that	much	more	we	had	to	give	it	a	new	name,	because	it
is	not	only	bliss	 --	 it	 is	bliss	plus	many	 things,	many	 indefinable	 things,	many
mysterious	 things	 --	 so	 we	 had	 to	 coin	 the	 word	 'god'.	 But	 that	 word	 is
meaningful	 only	 when	 you	 have	 found	 bliss;	 before	 that,	 the	 word	 is	 utterly
meaningless,	there	is	no	need	to	talk	about	it.
If	one	goes	on	searching	 for	bliss	one	 finds	god	 too.	And	whenever	you	 think
about	god	you	always	 think	of	him	as	being	somewhere	outside	and	whenever
you	think	of	bliss	you	cannot	think	of	it	as	being	outside;	it	has	to	be	something
inner	--	an	inner	glow,	an	inner	rejoicing.	God	can	be	worshipped,	bliss	cannot
be	worshipped.	So	around	the	idea	of	god	religions	can	be	created,	anti-religions
can	be	created,	but	around	the	idea	of	bliss	no	religion	is	created,	no	religion	can
be	created.	hence	what	I	am	doing	here	is	not	creating	a	religion,	but	only	a	kind
of	religiousness.
My	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 searching	 for	 god,	 they	 are	 searching	 for	 bliss	 within
themselves.	But	once	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	found	bliss	simultaneously	you	have	found	many	more	things:	 truth,	god,
freedom,	love,	compassion	--
the	list	is	almost	endless!
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Not	so	long...	or	forever.
--	Be	here.	Forever	is	better	--	a	little	more!	Good.
Shunyananda.	Shunya	means	zero.	Anand	means	bliss.
To	be	absolutely	silent,	thoughtless,	is	the	meaning	of	zero.	And	out	of	that	no-
thingness,	 out	 of	 that	 zero,	 bliss	 arises.	 Bliss	 is	 our	 intrinsic	 nature,	 but	 it	 is
covered	with	layers	and	layers	of	rubbish.	It	has	to	be	excavated,	you	have	to	dig
it	out.	It	 is	 just	 like	making	a	well:	you	go	on	digging	layers	of	earth	and	then
rocks,	and	one	day,	you	find	 the	springs	of	water.	They	were	already	there	but
between	you	and	the	springs	of	water	there	was	this	earth	for	twenty	feet,	thirty
feet,	forty	feet.	It	differs	with	different	people.
Sometimes	there	are	big	rocks	and	they	have	to	be	dynamited	--	for	that	we	have
invented	dynamic	meditation.	When	you	really	do	'hoo,	hoo,	hoo,'	all	rocks	are
dynamited.	Just	sitting	silently,	doing	nothing	 it	won't	happen!	 (laughter)	 'Hoo'
really	hits	hard	and	it	hits	at	exactly	the	right	place,	where	one	needs	to	be	hit.
So	 one	 has	 to	 go	 on	 digging.	 All	 the	 methods	 of	 meditation	 are	 nothing	 but
methods	of	digging.
Bliss	 is	within	 you,	 you	 just	 have	 to	 become	 empty	 of	 all	 that	 is	 covering	 it.
Once	the	zero	is	found,	suddenly,	immediately,	instantly,	bliss	starts	overflowing
you.	And	 it	 comes	 like	 a	 flood;	 you	 cannot	 contain	 it.	 It	 becomes	 a	 dance,	 it
becomes	a	song,	it	becomes	a	sharing!
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Two	weeks.
--	Then	come	back	again,	because	in	two	weeks	you	will	be	able	to	find	only	the
rock	(much	laughter).	So	dynamite	it	a	little	more,	time	will	be	needed,	so	come
back	again.	Good!
Karunesha	means	goddess	of	compassion.
Compassion	makes	one	a	god	or	a	goddess,	but	to	achieve	compassion	is	a	long
pilgrimage.	 From	 passion	 to	 compassion	 the	 distance	 is	 great.	 Passion	 is	 very
gross,	 compassion	very	 subtle;	 but	 compassion	 is	 rooted	 in	passion	 so	passion
has	not	to	be	denied,	it	has	not	to	be	rejected.	Roots	are	always	ugly	and	passion
contains	the	roots	but	those	same	roots	can	create	beautiful	flowers.	Seeing	the
roots	one	cannot	conceive	that	 they	may	be	hiding	such	beautiful	flowers.	It	 is
impossible	to	conceive	--	roots	are	so	ugly!
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 passion	 and	 compassion:	 passion	 is	 like	 roots	 hidden
underground	in	the	unconscious;	and	compassion	is	like	a	flowering	branch	--	so
many	flowers	that	the	branch	cannot	carry	the	burden	of	it,	it	bends	and	touches
the	 earth.	 Passion	 can	 be	 transformed	 into	 compassion	 through	 the	 process	 of
meditation.	Meditation	is	the	bridge	from	this	shore	to	that	further	shore.
So	 I	 am	 not	 against	 passion,	 I	 am	 not	 against	 anything	 at	 all;	 I	 am	 for
transformation.	Take	hold	of	whatsoever	energies	are	given	to	you	by	the	whole
and	even	if	they	look	ugly	in	the	beginning,	don't	reject	them,	try	to	refine	them.
Try	to	find	out,	there	must	be	some	hidden	treasure	in	them.	If	nature	has	given
them	 to	 you	 they	 must	 carry	 some	 message,	 they	 must	 carry	 something	 of
immense	 value.	 But	 those	 messages	 have	 to	 be	 decoded;	 they	 are	 not	 given
directly	 but	 in	 a	 code	 language.	 And	meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 decoding	man's
animality.
Once	it	is	decoded	the	same	animality	becomes	man's	godliness.	Man	is	only	a
process	from	the	animal	 to	god.	Man	is	not	a	place	to	stay;	 it	 is	a	bridge	to	be
crossed.
One	of	the	most	significant	sayings	of	Jesus	is	Life	is	a	bridge	--	don't	make	your
house	on	it,	pass	over	it.	This	saying	is	not	contained	in	the	Bible,	but	Sufis	have
carried	it	down	the	ages.
One	of	the	great	emperors	of	India,	Akbar,	made	a	new	capital,	a	really	beautiful
capital	which	was	never	populated	because	he	died.	When	the	capital	was	ready
he	 died.	 That's	 how	 it	 happens:	 by	 the	 time	 you	 think	 to	 enjoy	 and	 you	 have
prepared	everything,	death	comes	and	knocks	you	down.	Death	always	comes	at
the	 right	moment	 --	and	 the	 right	moment	means	when	you	are	 ready	 to	 retire
and	relax.
He	had	made	 a	 beautiful	 capital,	 Fatehpur	Sikri,	 and	he	wanted	 to	 retire	 there
with	 his	 wise	 men	 and	 poets	 and	 singers	 and	 musicians;	 he	 was	 tired	 af	 the
kingdom	and	the	whole	politics	and	he	wanted	to	retire.
He	 had	 planned	 a	 beautiful	 town	with	 beautiful	 palaces	 and	 gardens,	 and	 the
entry	was	by	a	bridge	across	the	river	on	the	other	side.	On	the	bridge	he	wanted
some	message	and	he	told	his	wise	men	to	find	a	beautiful	message	which	could
be	written	just	at	the	gate.	And	this	was	the	sentence	chosen.	Life	is	a	bridge
--	pass	through	it	but	don't	make	your	house	on	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Man	 is	 only	 a	 bridge,	 a	 bridge	 between	 the	 unconscious	 and	 the	 conscious,
between	matter	and	spirit,	between	passion	and	compassion,	between	animal	and
god.	The	bridge	is	the	same	--	the	name	of	the	bridge	is	meditation.
So	put	your	total	energy	into	meditation.
Turiyananda.	Turiya	 is	 a	 special	word	used	by	 the	eastern	mystics;	 it	 does	not
mean	anything,	it	is	only	a	number	--	it	means	the	fourth.
George	Gurdjieff	used	to	call	his	path	the	fourth	way.
Man	can	be	divided	into	four	stages.	The	first	is	the	waking	stage,	the	second	is
dreaming,	the	third	is	dreamless	sleep	and	the	fourth	is	the	state	of	Buddhahood	-
-	that	is	called	turiya.	Turiyananda	means	the	bliss	that	happens	by	achieving	the
fourth	state	of	consciousness.
So	one	has	to	become	more	and	more	aware,	alert,	watchful,	so	aware	that	even
in	sleep	one	can	watch	one's	dreams,	and	one	can	remain	aware	that	the	dreams
are	passing	by.	The	day	it	happens	is	of	immense	importance.	The	day	you	can
watch	 your	 dreams	 just	 passing	 and	 you	 can	 be	 a	 witness	 to	 them,	 you	 have
come	half	 the	 journey	already	because	you	have	passed	two	stages:	 the	first	of
waking	and	the	second	of	dreaming.	And	then	 the	 third	 is	not	very	difficult:	 if
you	can	watch	dreams,	you	can	also	watch	a	dreamless	sleep.	The	sleep	is	there,
the	body	is	resting	and	you	are	fully	aware	of	the	restfulness.
And	then	the	fourth,	which	is	awareness	of	awareness	itself,	happens.	Then	the
journey	 is	 complete,	 the	 circle	 is	 complete.	 When	 you	 become	 aware	 of
awareness	itself	then	nothing	is	left.	You	have	come	to	the	source,	the	source	of
your	being,	and	one	source	of	your	being	is	also	the	source	of	all.	It	is	not	only
your	source,	it	is	the	source	of	the	whole	existence.	At	the	source	we	are	all	one.
That	one	can	be	called	god	--
that	oneness,	rather.
So	this	is	the	word	for	you	to	remember,	the	key	word	--	awareness.	It	will	bring
all	the	blessings	that	are	possible	and	impossible.	The	possible	happens	through
it	and	even	the	impossible	happens	through	it.
Vedananda.	Veda	means	wisdom	and	ananda	means	bliss.
Knowledge	is	a	barrier	to	wisdom,	the	only	barrier.	The	moment	one	is	ready	to
renounce	 knowledge	 one	 attains	 wisdom.	 Wisdom	 is	 innocence	 --	 one	 has
become	a	child	again	but	with	a	difference,	and	a	difference	that	really	makes	a
difference.	 A	 child	 is	 innocent	 because	 of	 ignorance	 and	 the	 wise	 man	 is
innocent,	not	because	of	ignorance	but	because	he	has	renounced	knowledge.
The	child	has	to	go	into	knowledge	and	the	wise	man	has	gone	beyond	it;	he	has
left	knowledge	behind.
So	in	a	way	they	are	ones	both	are	without	knowledge.	But	in	another	way	they
are	 very	 different	 from	 each	 other;	 the	 child	 is	 yet	 ignorant,	 he	 will	 have	 to
become	knowledgeable;	and	the	wise	man	is	tired	of	knowledge,	he	has	known
its	utter	futility	and	he	has	dropped	it.
This	is	the	second	birth.	Jesus	calls	it	being	born	anew.	He	told	one	of	the	rabbis,
a	professor	and	a	scholar,	Nicodemus,	 'Unless	you	are	born	again	you	shall	not
enter	into	my	kingdom	of	god.'
No	 knowledgeable	 person,	 no	 rabbi,	 no	 scholar,	 no	 pundit,	 no	 pope,	 has	 ever
entered	 into	 the	 kingdom	of	 god.	They	 cannot;	 they	 are	 so	 full	 of	 knowledge.
And	it	is	really	very	strange	that	these	same	people	--
the	popes,	the	bishops,	the	priests	--	go	on	telling	their	congregations	that	Adam
and	Eve	were	expelled	from	the	Garden	of	Eden	because	they	ate	the	fruit	of	the
Tree	of	Knowledge;	the	fruit	of	the	Tree	of	Knowledge	was	the	cause.	If	that	was
the	 cause	 then	 what	 are	 these	 fools	 doing?	 --	 they	 are	 spreading	 knowledge.
They	go	on	telling	people	'Read	the	Bible,	repeat	it	every	day...'
These	are	the	people	who	will	hinder	people	in	getting	into	the	kingdom	of	god
again.
My	work	here	 is	 to	 help	 you	become	 innocent,	 to	 be	 reborn.	That	 fruit	 of	 the
Tree	of	Knowledge	has	to	be	thrown	out.	Once	it	is	thrown	out	the	doors	of	the
kingdom	of	god	suddenly	open	for	you.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
