1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Talks	given	from	1/9/80	to	30/9/80
Darshan	Diary
29	Chapters
Year	published:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Unpublished
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009015
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Misery	pollutes,	bliss	purifies.	This	is	one	of	the	fundamentals	of	life	which	has
not	been	told	to	people;	on	the	contrary,	people	have	been	misled,	because	what
has	been	 told	 to	 them	 is	 impossible.	They	have	been	 told	 to	become	pure	 first
and	 then	bliss	will	 be	 the	 reward.	That	 is	 utterly	 absurd	 because	without	 bliss
there	is	no	possibility	of	purity.
Bliss	is	not	a	reward,	it	is	an	understanding.	It	is	looking	around	and	seeing	the
beauty	of	existence,	the	benediction	of	existence.	It	is	simply	feeling	the	joy	of
just	being	alive.	Then	each	breath	becomes	something	ecstatic.
Life	 is	 a	miracle.	 In	 fact	 there	 is	 no	 explanation	 for	 it,	 for	 why	 it	 should	 be.
Neither	the	philosopher	nor	the	theologian,	nor	even	the	scientist,	has	been	able
to	explain	why	 life	 should	exist	 at	 all.	And	 I	don't	 think	 it	 is	 ever	going	 to	be
explained;	 the	 mystery	 will	 remain.	 The	 mystery	 cannot	 be	 de-mystified,
because	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 knowing	more;	 in	 fact	 life	 is	 something	 like	 a
miracle.	It	should	not	exist	but	it	does.
What	is	the	need	of	roses	and	lotuses	and	thousands	of	flowers?	There	seems	to
be	no	intrinsic	necessity.	If	they	were	not	there	nothing	would	be	missed.	If	we
were	not	here	the	earth	would	go	round	and	round	the	sun	without	missing	us	at
all.	Existence	would	continue	 the	 same	way.	The	 stars	would	be	 there	 and	 the
moon	would	rise	and	the	trees	would	grow	and	everything	would	be	as	it	is.	But
life	has	happened	--
not	only	life	but	consciousness,	love.	These	are	all	miracles	upon	miracles.
To	 see	 this	 is	 to	 be	 blissful.	 Just	 seeing	 is	 blissful	And	 the	moment	 you	 start
feeling	and	 living	 this	bliss	you	are	purified,	purified	of	all	kinds	of	nonsense,
superstitions,	all	kinds	of	ideas	--	purified	of	the	mind	itself.
As	one	becomes	blissful	mind	starts	disappearing.	To	live	in	the	mind	is	to	know
nothing	or	just	to	know	the	superficial,	the	non-essential.	The	moment	you	enter
the	world	of	bliss	(Osho's	hands,	held	together,	fluttered	and	separated)	mind	has
no	 function	 there;	mind	 becomes	 utterly	 useless.	When	 you	 are	miserable	 the
mind	 is	 needed,	 hence	 the	mind	 clings	 to	misery	 because	 they	 can	 exist	 only
with	each	other.	The	moment	misery	is	not	there	mind	is	also	not	there.
In	a	blissful	state	one	lives	in	the	moment,	there	is	no	past	and	no	future;	hence
there	is	no	possibility	of	having	a	mind.	Mind	means	past	and	the	projections	for
the	future;	and	bliss	means	to	be	in	the	present,	to	be	as	utterly	herenow	as	if	you
have	never	existed	before,	as	if	there	is	going	to	be	no	other	moment	again	--
this	is	all.	And	then	one	comes	to	know	that	which	is.
Once	 it	 is	known)you	are	purified	of	all	darkness.	 (His	 fingers	 interlocked	and
covered	his	heart.)	Once	it	is	known	your	life	becomes	virtuous.	Then	virtue	is
not	to	be	cultivated,	it	is	simply	the	fragrance	arising	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
out	of	blissfulness,	the	fragrance	of	purity.
One	can	know	 it	but	one	cannot	express	 it,	words	are	not	adequate,	words	are
very	 inadequate.	 Hence	 the	 need	 of	 disciplehood,	 the	 need	 for	 sannyas:	 it	 is
simply	 a	way	 to	 hear	 ordinary	words	with	 a	 new	 vision,	with	 sympathy,	with
love.	Sannyas	means	falling	in	tune	with	the	master,	becoming	harmonious	with
the	master,	then	that	which	is	lacking	in	words	can	also	be	transmitted.
The	Zen	 people	 call	 it	 transmission	 of	 truth	 beyond	words,	 beyond	 scriptures.
Even	when	 it	 is	 transmitted	 between	 the	master	 and	 the	 disciple,	 the	 disciple
comes	to	know	of	just	the	tip	of	the	iceberg.
But	that	is	more	than	enough	to	transform	one.	Then	one	can	move	on	one's	own
journey.	The	master	has	triggered	the	process;	then	it	is	a	chain	phenomenon.
Two	sailors	were	sitting	on	the	beach.	One	was	an	old	man	and	the	other	was	a
very	 young	man.	 The	 young	man	 had	 come	 for	 the	 first	 time	 to	 join	 up	 as	 a
sailor.	He	told	the	old	man	"This	is	the	most	water	that	I	have	ever	seen	in	my
life."	The	old	man	said	"You	ain't	seen	nothin'	yet.	That's	just	the	top	of	it!"
The	 master	 can	 only	 show	 you	 just	 the	 top	 of	 it.	 But	 to	 see	 the	 top	 of	 it	 is
enough.	 Then	 you	 can	 dive	 deep,	 then	 you	 can	 go	 into	 the	 infinite	 depths	 of
existence.
My	 sannyas	 begins	 in	 bliss	 and	 ends	 in	 wisdom.	 Purity	 is	 just	 a	 small
consequence	of	being	blissful.	So	don't	strive	to	be	pure.	Try	to	understand	what
has	 happened,	what	 is	 happening	 every	moment,	 and	 feel	 the	 bliss	 of	 it.	 And
then	 you	 are	 in	 for	 a	 great	 surprise:	 purity,	meditativeness,	 love,	 compassion,
wisdom,	enlightenment	--	they	all	go	on	following	slowly	slowly.	Just	create	one
essential	quality,	blissfulness,	then	everything	comes	of	its	own	accord.
One	can	be	loyal	out	of	fear	but	that	is	not	true	loyalty.	That's	what	happens	in
the	life	of	a	soldier.	He	is	loyal	out	of	fear	because	if	he	is	loyal	he	is	rewarded;
if	he	is	not,	he	is	punished,	tortured.	That's	what	people	have	known	in	the	name
of	loyalty.
The	sannyasin	has	a	totally	different	quality	of	loyalty.	It	is	nothing	imposed	on
you,	it	is	something	that	you	are	longing	for.	And	it	is	not	out	of	any	fear	and	not
for	any	reward;	there	is	no	motivation	in	it.
One	simply	enjoys	trusting	existence	because	doubting	creates	conflict,	doubting
creates	darkness,	doubting	keeps	your	life	split.	Doubting	never	allows	you	to	go
with	 the	 flow	 of	 existence.	 You	 keep	 yourself	 aloof,	 you	 go	 on	 withholding
yourself.	 You	 only	 go	 so	 far,	 and	 that	 too	with	 great	 suspicion	 in	 your	 heart.
Then	you	will	miss	everything	because	life	is	only	for	those	who	can	be	totally
in	it,	who	can	live	intensely	and	passionately.
It	 is	possible	only	 through	trust.	The	untrusting	one	remains	afraid,	suspicious,
on	guard;	 the	 trusting	one	simply	starts	 flowing	with	 the	 river	of	 life.	And	 the
river	of	life	is	going	towards	the	ocean.	There	is	no	need	to	push	it,	it	is	already
going	there.	We	have	to	learn	the	art	of	let-go,	then	it	will	take	you	to	the	ocean,
to	the	ultimate.
Meditation	is	the	most	precious	gift	of	God.	It	is	so,	because	it	 is	only	through
being	meditative	 that	one	has	 the	capacity,	 the	 sensitivity,	 to	 appreciate	 all	 the
other	gifts	that	one	is	given.
Life	is	there,	but	you	will	never	understand	it	as	a	gift	without	meditation.	Love
is	 there,	 beauty	 is	 there,	 joy	 is	 there,	 but	 they	will	 all	 remain	 not	 understood
without	meditation.	Hence	meditation	is	the	gift	of	gifts.
And	 I	 teach	 only	 one	 thing:	 how	 to	 become	 meditative,	 because	 it	 is	 my
experience	that	nothing	else	is	needed	for	the	inner	transformation.	No	religious
ritual,	 no	more	 character,	 no	 outer	 discipline	 is	 going	 to	 help.	 In	 fact	 they	 all
hinder	because	when	you	become	focused	on	the	outside	you	forget	all	about	the
inside.
Meditation	 means	 a	 one-hundred-and-eighty	 degree	 turn.	 Ordinarily	 we	 are
focused	on	 the	outside;	 in	meditation	we	change	 the	 focus.	We	are	 focused	on
ourselves.	 Meditation	 means	 the	 experience	 of	 your	 own	 interiority;	 it	 is	 an
inward	journey.
And	once	you	have	tasted	even	a	single	drop	of	the	nectar	then	the	misery,	 the
anguish,	the	whole	problematic	life	dissolves.	Now	you	know	the	right	direction
in	which	to	go;	now	you	know	the	right	door	at	which	to	knock....
Jesus	says,	"Knock	and	the	door	shall	be	opened	unto	you."	But	the	question	is
on	what	door,	where	to	knock?	Knocking	on	just	any	door	is	not	going	to	help.
Unless	you	start	knocking	on	the	inner	door	nothing	is	going	to	happen.
Jesus	 says,	 "Ask	 and	 it	 shall	 be	 given."	 But	whom	 to	 ask?	 People	 have	 been
asking	 the	 sky,	 the	 heavens,	 God	 the	 Father,	 somewhere	 above	 there	 in	 the
clouds.	For	centuries	they	have	been	asking	and	nothing	has	been	answered.	One
has	to	ask	one's	own	inner	core.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Jesus	 says,	 "Seek	 and	 ye	 shall	 find."	 But	 where	 to	 seek?	 People	 have	 been
seeking	 in	 every	 sacred	 place;	 they	 are	 going	 to	 Jerusalem	 or	 to	Mecca	 or	 to
Kashi	or	to	Tibet.	That	is	not	going	to	help.	Wherever	you	go,	you	are	wasting
your	time.	One	has	to	go	within.	The	kingdom	of	God	is	within	you.
Meditation	 is	 the	whole	 art	 of	 transforming	 the	 gestalt;	 the	 consciousness	 that
goes	 outwards	 starts	 turning	 in.	 And	 then	 one	 becomes	 aware	 of	 millions	 of
gifts;	 then	 small	 things,	 very	 small	 and	 ordinary	 things,	 have	 tremendous
significance.	Just	a	dewdrop	slipping	from	the	lotus	leaf	into	the	lake	is	enough
to	fill	one	with	wonder	and	awe.	It	is	poetry,	pure	poetry!	It	is	music,	it	is	dance,
it	is	a	finger	pointing	to	the	moon.
This	is	how	you	have	to	slip	into	the	lake	of	consciousness,	just	like	a	dewdrop.
It	can	become	the	moment	of	sudden	enlightenment.
(Osho	explained	why	he	had	retained	Yoh	Hiroshi's	name.)
It	 is	 very	 pregnant	 with	 meaning.	 Yoh	 means	 yin-yang.	 That	 is	 the	 whole
philosophy	of	tao.
Existence	is	made	of	two	energies.	On	the	surface	they	are	polar	opposites;	deep
down	they	are	not	opposites	but	complementaries.	One	can	call	them	yin-yang	or
negative-positive	or	Shiva	and	Shakti	or	male	and	female.	In	fact	yin	and	yang
imply	all	possible	opposites,	with	the	underlying	meaning	that	opposites	are	not
opposites	but	complementaries.
The	moment	 it	 happens	 that	 the	 opposites	meet	within	 you,	 that	 yin	 becomes
yang,	yang	becomes	yin,	 that	 the	male	and	 female	 inside	you	meet	 and	merge
into	 one	 --	 or	 in	modern	 psychological	 jargon	 the	 conscious	 and	 unconscious
meet	 and	 merge	 into	 one	 --	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you	 experience	 your	 organic
wholeness.	And	that	is	the	meaning	of	Hiroshi;	Hiroshi	means	vastness,	oceanic
vastness.
Yin	and	yang	divided,	we	are	very	small;	yin	and	yang	together	and	we	contain
the	 whole	 universe.	 The	 art	 of	meditation	 is	 to	 help	 the	man	 and	 the	 woman
within	you	meet	and	merge	and	become	one.
When	man	meets	 even	with	his	outer	woman,	 for	 a	 single	moment	 a	different
quality	comes	to	his	being.
Just	for	a	split	moment	when	you	are	at	the	climax	of	your	orgasmic	joy,	when
you	are	not	separate	from	the	woman	and	the	woman	is	not	separate	from	you,
then	you	are	not	there,	she	is	not	there;	suddenly	a	duality	has	disappeared	and	in
that	disappearance	of	duality	you	have	the	first	glimpse	of	what	unity	can	be.
The	ultimate	secrets	of	meditation	have	been	discovered	 through	 this	orgasmic
joy.	The	whole	tradition	of	Tantra	is	a	proof	of	it.	But	the	meeting	with	the	outer
woman	or	outer	man	can	only	be	momentary.	The	same	can	happen	inside	you.
One	of	the	greatest	contributions	of	Carl	Gustav	Jung	to	modern	psychology	is
that	he	accepted	 this	ancient	 taoist	 idea	 that	 inside	man	has	both	 the	male	part
and	the	female	part.	And	the	same	is	the	case	with	the	woman,	she	has	both.	But
they	are	separate;	a	very	subtle	wall	keeps	them	separate	inside	you.	The	wall	is
really	 subtle.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 Japanese	paper	 curtain,	 it	 can	easily	be	 removed.
And	once	it	is	removed	the	whole	is	experienced.
To	remain	clinging	to	the	part	is	misery,	to	allow	the	whole	to	happen	is	bliss.
True	 religion	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Christianity,	 Hinduism,	 Buddhism.	 It
certainly	 has	 something	 to	 do	with	Christ,	Krishna	 and	Buddha.	 True	 religion
has	been	experienced	only	by	very	few	people	in	the	world;	others	have	simply
followed	borrowed	knowledge.
My	effort	here	is	not	to	make	a	Buddhist	out	of	you	but	a	Buddha.	Less	than	that
is	meaningless.	One	should	not	settle	for	anything	less.	If	you	can	be	a	Buddha,
why	be	a	Buddhist?	If	you	can	be	a	Christ,	why	be	a	Christian?	Leave	it	for	the
cowards	 to	 be	 Christians	 and	 Buddhists	 and	 Hindus	 and	Mohammedans.	 The
brave	one,	the	courageous	one,	would	like	to	know	the	truth	on	his	own.
(Osho's	eyes	were	wide	open,	his	eyebrows	arched	for	emphasis.)	He	would	not
like	 to	know	the	truth	 through	others,	he	would	like	 to	experience	it	himself	--
because	 unless	 you	 drink	 the	 water	 your	 thirst	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be	 quenched.
Buddha	 may	 have	 drunk	 the	 whole	 Ganges	 --	 that	 is	 not	 going	 to	 make	 any
difference	to	you.	Just	a	glass	of	water	will	do	for	you	but	you	have	to	drink	it.
But	people	are	so	foolish	that	they	go	on	worshipping	Buddha	and	Krishna	and
Christ,	 and	 hoping	 that	 their	 thirst	 will	 be	 quenched	 they	 go	 on	 worshipping
scriptures	--	Dhammapada,	Koran,	Bible.	It	 is	like	a	thirsty	man	worshipping	a
book	of	chemistry	which	explain	that	water	is	H2O.	You	can	go	on	worshipping
the	 book;	 you	 will	 remain	 thirsty.	 You	 are	 simply	 proving	 yourself	 silly	 and
nothing	else.
Or	 you	 can	 go	 on	 repeating	 the	 mantra	 "H2O,	 H2O,	 H2O...",	 "	 buddham
sharanam	 gachchhami,	 buddham	 sharanam	 gachchhami,	 buddham	 sharanam
gachchami".	It	is	not	going	to	help,	it	is	just	H2O	--
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you	have	to	drink	it	yourself.
That	 is	 the	whole	significance	of	sannyas,	 I	am	not	creating	any	religion,	 I	am
simply	imparting	to	you	a	glimpse	into	true	religion	and	helping	you	to	know	it
on	your	own.
Truth	liberates	but	 it	has	to	be	your	own	experience,	only	then	does	it	 liberate,
otherwise	it	creates	a	great	bondage.
(Osho	cautioned	the	Japanese	woman	who	followed,	that	not	all	that	goes	under
the	 name	of	meditation	 is	 really	meditation;	 in	 fact	 some	 so-called	meditation
methods	 are	 positive	 hindrances.)	 All	 methods	 of	 concentration	 are	 against
meditativeness.	All	that	is	known	as	contemplation	is	not	meditation	at	all.
These	three	words	(Osho	marked	them	off	on	his	fingers)	have	to	be	understood
well:	concentration,	contemplation	and	meditation.
Concentration	 means	 focussing	 the	 mind	 on	 one	 subject,	 on	 one	 object,	 not
allowing	the	mind	to	roam	here	and	there,	forcing	it,	excluding	everything	else
except	the	object	on	which	you	want	to	concentrate.
Of	course	many	distractions	will	arise	and	many	 times	you	will	go	on	missing
the	thread	because	you	are	doing	something	unnatural.
Mind's	very	nature	is	movement	and	you	are	trying	to	force	it	to	remain	still,	at
one	point.	 It	cannot	do	 it,	and	 if	you	manage	 to	do	 it	after	 long,	 long	practice,
then	it	will	be	very	tiring	and	exhausting.	It	won't	make	you	blissful,	it	will	make
you	very	mad.	It	will	give	you	a	long	saintlike	face.	It	will	make	you	a	saint	but
not	a	meditator;	it	will	make	you	dead	but	not	alive.
Going	 against	 nature	 never	 helps.	One	 can	 be	 victorious	 only	with	 nature	 and
through	nature.	There	is	no	victory	against	nature;	maybe	there	are	momentary
victories,	 but	 one	 should	 not	 rejoice	 in	 those	 momentary	 victories.	 They	 are
insignificant	 and	 the	 price	 that	we	 have	 to	 pay	 for	 them	 is	 immense.	 Time	 is
wasted,	energy	is	wasted	and	the	ultimate	result	is	zero.
Contemplation	 is	 a	 little	more	 liquid,	 a	 little	more	 fluid	 than	 concentration.	 In
concentration	 you	 have	 to	 remain	 fixed	 on	 one	 word	 or	 one	 object	 --	 for
example,	 the	word	 "love".	 In	 concentration	you	have	 to	 remain	 fixed	on	 these
four	 letters	 of	 love;	 in	 contemplation	 you	 can	 roam	 around,	 going	 into	 many
meanings	of	 love,	you	can	go	deep	or	high,	you	can	bring	in	many	other	 ideas
concerning	 love.	Of	course	 there	 is	 a	 limit	but	you	have	a	 longer	 rope	 than	 in
concentration.
So	in	contemplation	one	feels	a	little	bit	more	free	but	one	is	still	tethered.	You
cannot	 go	 out	 of	 the	 subject	 of	 love.	 Everything	 else	 is	 excluded.	You	 cannot
think	about	freedom	or	truth,	you	cannot	think	about	anything	else	except	love.
But	one	can	think	much	about	love,	one	can	ponder	over	it	for	hours	or	for	days
because	love	itself	is	an	oceanic	experience.	It	 is	less	tiring	than	concentration,
more	fulfilling	than	concentration,	but	it	is	still	not	the	real	thing.
The	 real	 thing	 is	 meditation.	 In	 meditation	 you	 are	 neither	 concentrating	 on
anything	nor	contemplating	anything;	you	are	 simply	open	and	available	 to	all
that	is.	The	distant	call	of	the	cuckoo,	a	dog	starts	barking,	a	child	starts	crying	--
all	is	included.	The	train	passes	by,	the	traffic	noise	.	somebody	is	playing	on	a
flute,	the	horn	of	the	car	.	the	neighbours	start	shouting,	fighting	--	everything	is
included.	You	 are	 just	 a	witness,	watching	 everything	without	 any	 judgement,
neither	condemning	nor	appreciating.
This	non-judgemental	awareness	is	what	I	mean	by	meditation.	It	is	inclusive	of
all,	it	excludes	nothing.
It	 is	 pure	 openness,	 vulnerability.	 All	 the	 windows,	 all	 the	 doors	 are	 open;
everything	 is	 welcome,	 everything	 is	 just	 a	 guest	 and	 you	 are	 a	 host.	 Many
guests	come	and	many	guests	go	but	the	host	remains	and	abides.
Slowly	 slowly	 one	 becomes	 aware	 that	 everything	 comes	 and	 goes	 but	 one	 is
always	 herenow.	This	 experience,	 that	 you	 are	 always	 herenow,	 gives	 you	 the
first	feel	of	eternity,	of	the	deathless,	of	the	immortal	truth.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#2
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
2	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009025
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Misery	is	simply	missing	the	best	of	existence	--	that's	what	Osho	explained	to
us	 tonight.)	Bliss	 is	 a	bridge,	misery	 is	 a	wall.	 It	 is	 everyone's	 experience	 that
whenever	 one	 feels	miserable	 one	 does	 not	 want	 to	 relate	 with	 anybody;	 one
wants	to	close	one's	doors	and	hide	somewhere.	Just	the	opposite	happens	when
you	are	blissful.	You	cannot	hide	somewhere;	you	would	 like	 to	 run	under	 the
open	sky,	in	the	sun,	on	the	beach,	you	would	like	to	meet	people,	relate,	share.
This	has	always	been	the	case.
When	Buddha	was	miserable	as	a	king	he	renounced	the	kingdom,	went	into	the
forest	and	lived	a	lonely	life,	but	when	he	became	blissful	he	came	back	to	the
people.	The	 same	happened	with	Mahavira,	he	was	also	a	king.	He	 renounced
his	kingdom,	went	into	loneliness	and	lived	for	twelve	years	without	speaking	a
single	word	--	absolutely	silent.
Not	 to	 speak	means	 to	 totally	 cut	 oneself	 off	 from	others	 --	 because	 language
relates.	 It	 is	because	of	 language	 that	 there	are	human	societies.	Animals	don't
have	any	society,	they	all	live	a	closed	life	because	they	cannot	speak.	Without
language	there	is	no	society,	no	culture,	no	civilisation.	To	be	silent	means	to	cut
oneself	off	from	society.	In	a	psychological	way	it	is	getting	into	one's	loneliness
absolutely,	closing	all	the	doors,	all	the	windows.
But	 when	 Mahavira	 became	 enlightened,	 when	 his	 heart	 was	 full	 of	 bliss,
overflowing,	he	went	back	to	the	people.	For	forty	years	continuously	he	spoke,
related,	shared	his	experience.
Bliss	always	helps	you	to	be	connected.	And	to	be	connected	with	people,	with
trees,	 with	 animals,	 with	 rivers,	 with	 mountains,	 is	 to	 be	 bridged	 with	 god
because	 there	 is	no	god	other	 than	 this	universe.	This	universe	 is	 the	manifest
form	of	god,	and	if	you	relate	and	love	the	manifest	form	finally	you	will	be	able
to	enter	into	the	unmanifest	too.
Once	you	have	seen	flowers	you	will	be	able	to	see	flowers	in	the	seed	too.	In
the	 seed	 they	 are	 unmanifest	 but	 they	 are	 there.	 So	 god	 exists	with	 these	 two
aspects.	The	visible	aspect	is	the	universe	but	to	reach	to	the	invisible	aspect	you
have	to	go	through	the	visible.	Hence	I	don't	teach	renunciation.
If	you	renounce	the	manifest	god,	the	visible	god,	the	universe,	you	will	never	be
able	to	relate	with	the	invisible	because	the	invisible	exists	as	the	centre	and	the
visible	as	the	circumference.	The	moment	you	run	away	from	the	circumference
you	are	renouncing	the	centre	too.
You	have	 to	penetrate	 into	 the	circumference;	you	have	 to	go	so	deeply	 into	 it
that	you	reach	the	centre.
Hence	my	approach,	my	sannyas,	is	a	way	of	bridging,	a	way	of	rejoicing,	a	way
of	bliss.
Be	blissful	and	god	is	not	far	away.	When	you	are	totally	blissful,	when	not	even
a	 trace	 of	 misery	 is	 left	 inside	 you,	 when	 only	 god	 is,	 within,	 without,
everywhere,	whatsoever	you	see	is	god	and	the	seer	also	is	god,	the	seen	and	the
seen,	 the	known	and	 the	knower,	all	become	one	 --	 that	experience	of	oneness
with	existence	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas.
(Osho	talked	of	true	royalty	not	being	something	that	one	inherits	but	a	fragrance
that	pervades	the	man	of	love.)
But	down	the	ages	we	have	been	taught	that	the	royal	family	is	the	noblest.	And
strange	fictions	have	been	created.
In	England,	in	the	Middle	Ages,	it	was	believed	that	the	queen's	legs	--	because
nobody	had	ever	seen	her	legs	and	the	way	of	dressing	was	such	that	you	could
not	see	her	feet	--	were	joined	together...	they	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
weren't	separate.	And	that	was	the	most	significant	thing	about	nobility!
But	 this	kind	of	 fiction	has	been	spread	all	over	 the	world.	These	are	 invented
nobilities:	king	or	queen,	or	whomsoever	he	is,	is	just	born	like	any	animal	--	but
with	a	great	potential.	That	potential	has	to	be	actualised.
Life	is	an	art.	One	has	to	go	on	learning	more	and	more	about	it.	And	the	best
way	to	transform	oneself	into	a	noble	spirit	is	love.	Love	is	the	very	alchemy	of
transformation.	But	up	to	now	religions	have	been	teaching	people	to	hate.	They
sermonize	 on	 love;	 in	 the	 churches,	 in	 the	 temples,	 in	 the	mosques,	 they	 talk
about	love	and	they	create	hate.
Now	Christians	have	killed	so	many	people	down	the	ages	and	they	still	go	on
saying	 that	 god	 is	 love,	 that	 Jesus	 taught	 the	way	 of	 love.	All	 that	 Christians
have	done	is	nothing	but	murder	people,	burn	people	alive,	for	stupid	reasons.
Hundreds	of	nuns	were	burned	alive	 in	 the	Middle	Ages	 for	 the	 stupid	 reason
that	they	were	thought	to	be	having	intercourse	with	the	devil.	In	fact	the	pope
should	have	been	burned	because	it	was	the	priest	and	the	whole	strategy	of	the
priests	that	created	that	state.
If	 a	 woman	 is	 continuously	 repressed,	 then	 naturally	 that	 repression	 starts
bringing	sexual	dreams.	Sex	was	 thought	 to	be	 the	devil's	work,	so	 the	 idea	of
sex	and	the	devil	were	associated.	It	was	a	perverted	state	of	mind	in	which	the
poor	woman	started	believing	 that	because	 in	her	dreams	she	made	 love	 to	 the
devil,	she	was	corrupted.	Not	only	that,	you	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	many
nuns	started	believing	 that	 they	had	become	pregnant.	Their	periods	stopped	--
mind	has	such	power	over	the	body	--	and	their	stomachs	started	showing	signs
of	 pregnancy.	 It	 was	 all	 hot	 air	 --	 nothing	 inside!	 But	 of	 course	 these	 were
enough	proofs.
They	started	walking	like	pregnant	women	and	they	themselves	confessed	before
the	church	that	yes,	they	had	made	love	with	the	devil	in	the	night	and	that's	why
they	were	pregnant.	They	were	burned	alive!
And	 the	 same	 has	 been	 the	 case	 with	 other	 religions;	 each	 religion	 has	 been
destroying	 people	 of	 other	 religions.	 Christians	 killed	 Mohammedans,
Mohammedans	 killed	 Christians,	 Mohammedans	 killed	 Hindus,	 Hindus	 have
killed	Mohammedans.	 It	 has	 been	 going	 on	 and	 on	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 It
seems	love	is	only	a	word.	And	mind	is	so	cunning,	it	can	even	rationalize.	It	can
say	 that	 to	 save	 our	 philosophy	 of	 love	we	 have	 to	 fight,	we	 have	 to	 destroy
those	who	want	to	destroy	our	philosophy	of	love.
And	 the	 Mohammedans	 were	 doing	 the	 same.	 The	 name	 of	 their	 religion	 is
Islam;	 Islam	means	 peace,	 and	Mohammedans	 have	 been	 the	 most	 trouble	 --
creating	 people	 in	 the	 world.	 They	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 peace,	 they	 have
created	more	turmoil	than	anybody	else.
Hindus	talk	about	tolerance,	but	my	experience	of	living	in	India	is	that	Hindus
are	the	most	intolerant	people	in	the	world.	Even	when	they	show	tolerance	their
tolerance	is	egoistic,	it	is	an	insult.	They	are	saying	we	are	tolerant	because	we
know	that	we	are	right	and	you	are	wrong;	we	can	tolerate	these	stupid	people,
these	 foolish	people.	We	have	 the	 truth	 and	nobody	else	has	 the	 truth.	We	are
spiritual	and	everybody	else	is	materialist,	so	of	course	a	spiritual	person	has	to
tolerate	 all	 kinds	of	 people.	But	 in	 their	 tolerance	 there	 is	 deep	 intolerance,	 in
their	tolerance	there	is	ego	and	nothing	else.
The	very	word	'tolerance'	is	ugly.	Who	are	you	to	tolerate	anybody	else?	One	has
to	 accept	 everybody	 the	 way	 they	 are,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 tolerance.
Tolerance	shows	hatred.	It	is	not	a	good	word,	it	is	not	a	virtue.
Up	 to	 now	 love	 has	 remained	 only	 a	 word	 and	 we	 have	 been	 brought	 up,
poisoned,	from	the	very	beginning.
My	effort	here	is	to	de-condition	you	so	that	all	the	heritage	of	the	past	which	is
ugly,	 inhuman,	can	be	put	aside	and	you	can	have	a	rebirth.	And	if	one	can	be
loving,	 there	 is	 no	 other	 religion	 needed,	 no	 other	 scripture,	 no	 god	 even	 is
needed;	 love	 is	 enough,	more	 than	 enough.	 It	will	 open	 all	 the	 secrets.	 It	 is	 a
small	key	but	capable	of	opening	all	 the	doors,	unlocking	all	 the	doors,	all	 the
mysteries	of	life.
Remember	it,	only	a	loving	soul	is	noble.	And	love	has	to	be	unconditional,	non-
dominating,	 non-possessive.	 Love	 has	 to	 be	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 sharing	 with	 no
desire	 to	 get	 anything	 in	 return.	 Much	 comes	 but	 that	 is	 another	 matter;	 the
desire	should	not	be	there.	One	should	love	for	love's	sake,	because	it	is	such	a
beautiful	 experience,	 it	 is	 such	 an	 ecstasy,	 that	what	more	 could	 one	 desire	 in
return?	It	has	intrinsic	value.
Stefano	means	the	crowned	one.	And	the	word	Christ	means	the	same	thing.
It	means	one	who	has	entered	into	the	kingdom	of	God.	It	means	one	who	has
become	victorious	over	himself.	It	means	one	who	has	attained	mastery	over	the
mind	and	is	no	longer	a	slave.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	 is	 possible	 only	 through	 meditation	 because	 meditation	 means	 a	 journey
towards	your	innermost	being.
The	world	 is	 tremendously	 beautiful	 but	 nothing	 compared	 to	 your	 interiority.
There	are	beautiful	flowers	and	stars	and	rainbows	--	the	world	is	really	colorful,
it	is	a	gift	of	God.	But	still,	it	is	nothing	compared	to	the	inner	universe.
The	 moment	 one	 experiences	 the	 inner	 world,	 the	 outer	 world	 fades	 away.
Seeing	the	inner,	hearing	the	inner,	one	comes	to	know	the	real	music,	 the	real
beauty.	And	that	experience	is	a	crowning	experience	because	it	takes	you	to	the
ultimate	peak.
A	Sufi	woman,	Rabiya,	was	sitting	under	her	roof	in	a	small	hut.	It	was	morning
and	 the	 sun	was	 just	 rising	 and	 the	 birds	were	 singing	 and	 it	 was	 a	 beautiful
morning.
Another	 Sufi	 saint,	 Hassan,	 knocked	 on	 the	 doors	 of	 Rabiya's	 hut	 and	 said,
"Rabiya,	 what	 are	 you	 doing	 inside?	 Come	 out!	 God	 has	 blessed	 us	 with	 a
beautiful	morning."
Rabiya	laughed	and	said,	"Hassan,	it	is	better	you	come	in.	I	know	that	the	world
is	 beautiful	 but	 I	 am	 enjoying	 the	 creator	 of	 the	 world	 inside.	 Creation	 is
beautiful	but	it	cannot	be	more	beautiful	than	the	creator."
Hassan	 was	 very	 much	 ashamed;	 he	 had	 never	 thought	 that	 his	 knocking	 on
Rabiya's	door	would	take	such	a	turn.	That	is	the	beauty	of	the	masters:	they	can
turn	a	very	ordinary	thing	into	something	extraordinary.
Hassan	went	in,	bowed	down	to	the	woman,	asked	to	be	forgiven,	and	sat	by	her
side	with	closed	eyes.
And	that	day	he	became	enlightened.
And	 Rabiya	 said,	 "Now	 you	 tell	 me:	 where	 is	 real	 beauty,	 where	 is	 real	 joy,
where	is	real	poetry?"
Hassan	said,	"Now	I	know,	the	outer	world	was	just	like	a	dream,	a	reflection	of
the	moon	in	the	lake.
Now	I	have	seen	the	real	moon,	not	the	reflection.	The	outer	was	just	an	echo;
now	I	have	come	to	 the	source,	 the	very	source	of	 the	music.	 I	have	heard	 the
inner	melody.	I	am	tremendously	grateful	to	you."
Meditate,	and	by	meditation	I	mean	become	more	aware	of	the	workings	of	the
mind.
Watch.
Observe.
Witness	without	any	judgment,	because	one	can	be	a	witness	only	if	one	is	non-
judgmental.
You	 are	 not	 to	 decide	 what	 is	 right	 and	 what	 is	 wrong,	 you	 just	 have	 to	 see
whatsoever	passes	on	the	screen	of	the	mind.	And	remember	that	you	are	only	a
witness;	you	have	nothing	to	do	with	what	is	going	on	in	the	mind.
As	this	witnessing	settles,	less	and	less	thoughts	will	pass,	more	and	more	gaps
will	come	in.	And	those	gaps	will	give	you	the	experience	which	is	the	ultimate
bliss,	 peace,	 silence.	 And	when	 the	 gaps	 have	 become	 permanent	 you	 are	 no
longer	 at	 the	mercy	 of	 the	 thoughts,	 a	 victim	of	 thoughts.	 So	 you	 can	 put	 the
traffic	 aside	 at	 any	 moment,	 you	 can	 stop	 the	 movement	 of	 thoughts	 at	 any
moment	and	can	become	thoughtless	--	you	have	come	home.
That	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 'Christ'.	And	 one	 becomes	 crowned	 because	 one	 is	 an
emperor	now.
When	 Jesus	 was	 crucified	 the	 enemies	 were	making	 fun	 of	 his	 name,	 Christ.
They	had	put	 a	 crown	of	 thorns	on	his	head.	They	were	 simply	poking	 fun	 at
him,	saying,	"Look,	this	is	the	crowned	one,	the	Christ!"
But	they	were	utter	fools;	hence	Christ	prayed	for	them	in	the	last	moment	of	his
life.	He	prayed	to	God:
"Forgive	 them	 for	 they	 know	 not	 what	 they	 are	 doing,"	 because	 he	 was	 the
crowned	one.	But	 the	world	has	always	behaved	in	 that	way	with	 the	crowned
ones.	The	world	has	forced	them	to	carry	their	own	crosses.
The	 world	 does	 not	 forgive	 the	 crowned	 ones,	 it	 cannot,	 because	 in	 their
presence	it	feels	very	much	humiliated.
So	every	sannyasin	has	 to	be	aware	of	 the	fact	 that	 there	will	be	difficulties	 in
the	world.	But	don't	be	deterred	by	anything,	because	even	if	all	is	lost,	nothing
is	lost.	If	you	can	know	yourself	you	have	known	that	which	is	worth	knowing.
If	you	can	be	yourself	you	have	attained	that	which	is	worth	attaining.	All	else	is
non-essential.
(Meditation	is	witnessing	the	mind,	or	to	put	it	another	way	for	Dhyan	Caterina,
it	is	a	state	of	no-mind,	Osho	explained.)
Mind	is	unawareness.	Its	functioning	is	unconscious,	hence	the	moment	you	start
becoming	aware	the	mind	starts	melting.	Awareness	functions	with	the	mind	just
as	 the	 sun	 functions	 with	 ice	 as	 the	 sun	 rises	 the	 ice	 starts	 melting.	 As	 you
become	aware,	a	certain	heat	is	created	in	you	and	that	heat	dissolves	the	minds
evaporates	the	mind.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	Caterina	means	spotless	purity.	That	is	the	ultimate	outcome	of	awareness.
Caterina	 also	 means	 beauty,	 grace,	 devotion.	 They	 are	 all	 by-products	 of
awareness.
The	beauty	of	the	body	is	nothing	much	it	is	not	even	skin	deep.	The	real	beauty
haq	to	be	of	the	soul,	it	has	to	be	of	the	inner.	It	has	to	be	something	not	tethered
to	the	physical	because	the	body	is	going	to	die	and	with	the	body	the	beauty	of
the	body	will	disappear.
We	have	to	create	a	beauty	that	can	transcend	death	--	and	it	is	within	our	reach.
All	 that	 is	needed	 is	 the	magic	of	awareness,	 the	magic	 I	call	meditation.	And
when	there	is	inner	beauty	there	is	grace;	whatsoever	you	do,	there	is	grace	in	it.
You	 start	 having	 a	 golden	 touch,	 whatsoever	 you	 touch	 becomes	 golden.	 The
mundane	 starts	 becoming	 the	 sacred,	 the	 ordinary	 starts	 becoming	 luminous,
even	 darkness	 starts	 becoming	 light.	 And	 out	 of	 these	 experiences	 comes
devotion.
Devotion	means	a	deep	thankfulness	towards	god.	He	has	given	so	much	and	we
don't	 even	deserve	 it;	 it	 has	been	 showered	on	us	 and	we	are	not	worthy	of	 it
This	 experience	 creates	 devotion,	 prayer.	 And	 to	 attain	 devotion	 is	 the	 most
precious	thing	in	life.
How	long	will	you	be	here?'	he	asked	the	Italian	sannyasin.
Only	two	or	three	days.
Come	back	for	a	longer	period.	I	am	creating	a	little	Italia	here.	Soon	you	will
find	all	the	intelligent	Italians	here!
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009035
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Prem	Sabine.	Sabine	was	 the	name	of	 a	now	extinct	 Italian	 tribe,	he	 told	us.)
Love	is	one	of	the	languages	which	has	been	forgotten	completely.	The	primitive
people	were	more	loving.	As	civilisation	has	grown	love	has	disappeared.	Sabine
simply	means	a	woman	from	the	tribe	which	has	disappeared,	which	is	no	more.
Love	also	has	disappeared	in	the	same	way.	Now	man	exists	like	a	desert;	hence
there	 is	 so	much	 sadness	 in	 the	world,	 so	much	 seriousness,	 so	much	 burden.
Everybody	is	carrying	a	load	of	rocks	on	their	hearts.
Death	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 relief	 to	 many	 people,	 hence	 so	 many	 people	 commit
suicide.	Life	must	have	 lost	 all	meaning.	And	 those	who	don't	 commit	 suicide
are	not	necessarily	alive;	they	may	just	be	afraid	of	death,	of	the	unknown.	They
may	simply	be	cowards.
So	people	who	commit	suicide	are	utterly	sad,	obviously,	so	sad	that	they	don't
want	 to	exist	a	single	moment	more.	And	those	who	do	exist,	at	 the	most	 they
survive,	they	don't	live	--	because	without	love	there	is	no	life.	One	can	survive
but	survival	is	not	enough.	There	is	no	dance	in	it,	no	poetry	in	it,	no	celebration
in	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	is	the	suprememost	value.	Think	of	love	as	god,	as	the	only	god,	and	make
every	 effort	 to	 live	 according	 to	 love.	Never	 allow	 anything	 that	 distracts	 you
from	love,	because	anything	that	distracts	you	from	love	distracts	you	from	life
too	and	from	god	too.	They	are	all	synonymous.
D.H.	Lawrence	used	 to	 say	 that	 it	would	be	good	 if	 for	one	hundred	years	we
closed	 all	 the	 schools,	 colleges,	 universities,	 so	 that	man	 can	 again	 become	 a
little	 primitive,	 a	 little	 less	 civilised,	 a	 little	 less	 sophisticated,	 a	 little	 less
cultured.
There	is	great	insight	in	it.	Of	course	it	cannot	be	done,	but	something	else	can
be	done,	and	that's	what	I	am	trying	to	do.	Let	the	universities	continue	and	let
civilisation	continue	--	they	cannot	be	stopped,	it	is	not	possible	to	stop	them	--
but	 we	 can	 persuade	 individuals	 to	 jump	 out	 of	 this	 garbage.	 And	 if	 a	 vast
number	 of	 people	 in	 the	 world	 start	 living	 the	 life	 of	 love	 then	 others	 will
automatically	be	attracted	to	it	It	is	bound	to	happen,	because	every	man	whose
heart	becomes	full	of	love	becomes	a	magnet.	He	becomes	an	energy	field,	and
whosoever	 comes	 in	 contact	with	 such	 a	 person	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 affected	 by	 it.
Love	is	infectious.
So	live	love	and	spread	love.	That's	my	message	to	the	sannyasins.
If	 you	 are	 courageous	 you	 can	 be	 blissful,	 if	 you	 are	 not	 courageous	 you	 are
bound	to	remain	miserable.
Misery	 simply	 shows	 that	 the	 person	 is	 a	 coward,	 because	 the	 coward	 cannot
drop	anything.	Even	though	he	is	miserable,	even	though	it	is	misery,	he	clings.
Whatsoever	is	there	he	clings	to	it.	He	is	unable	to	renounce	anything.	He	knows
it	hurts	but	he	 is	more	afraid	of	 the	unknown	 than	 the	known,	which	 is	giving
him	fear,	which	is	giving	him	misery,	which	is	giving	his	all	kinds	of	anguishes,
anxieties.
At	least	one	comfort	is	there,	it	is	known.	And	he	goes	on	clinging	to	it.	He	only
says	that	he	wants	to	be	blissful	but	he	does	nothing	because	he	cannot	take	the
basic	step.	The	basic	step	is	to	drop	misery	--
because	misery	is	not	clinging	to	anybody,	it	is	we	who	cling	to	it.
So	a	really	courageous	person	can	drop	it	instantly,	not	even	gradually,	because
that	too	shows	cowardliness.	That	shows	that,	we	will	drop	it	slowly	slowly	so
that	 we	 can	 become	 accustomed	 to	 the	 unknown	 first;	 as	 it	 becomes	 more
familiar	we	can	drop	a	little	bit	more.	But	then	it	can	take	lives!	And	even	then
he	will	not	be	transformed.
Transformation	 needs	 a	 discontinuity;	 not	 a	 gradual	 change	 but	 a	 jump,	 a
quantum	leap	from	the	known	into	the	unknown.	It	needs	the	heart	of	a	gambler.
So	 be	 courageous	 and	 drop	 all	 that	 creates	 misery	 in	 you.	 And	 drop	 it
immediately,	don't	postpone	it	for	tomorrow	The	coward	always	postpones.	The
courageous	 does	 it	 immediately;	 once	 he	 sees	 the	 point	 he	 is	 ready	 to	 do	 it
whatsoever	the	risk,	whatsoever	the	cost.
The	 cowardly	 only	 goes	 on	 wavering,	 lingering,	 thinking	 he	 will	 do	 it	 And
remember:	tomorrow	never	comes.
(Mind	--	your	master	or	your	manservant.	That's	what	Osho	talked	about	next.)
The	 moment	 one	 tastes	 the	 nectar	 of	 meditation	 all	 darkness	 disappears,	 all
misery	disappears,	all	beggarliness	disappears.	One	becomes	a	prince,	a	princess,
because	 one	 enters	 into	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god.	 In	 fact	 one	 becomes	 a	 god.	 But
meditation	is	the	alchemy,	the	whole	secret	is	in	meditation.
These	are	the	two	possibilities:	one	is	mind,	the	other	is	meditation.	Mind	keeps
you	 attached	 to	 the	 world,	 to	 things,	 to	 the	 visible,	 to	 the	 ordinary,	 to	 the
mundane.	Meditation	opens	 the	doors	 for	 the	 invisible,	 for	 the	sacred.	Mind	 is
tethered	 with	 the	 non-essential	 and	 meditation	 gives	 you	 the	 essential.	 The
distance	is	vast	in	a	sense	--	it	is	the	biggest	distance	possible	--	but	in	another
sense	 it	 can	happen	 in	a	 single	moment	or	even	 in	a	 split	 second	because	 it	 is
only	a	question	of	understanding	the	point.
Meditation	means	knowing	that	you	are	not	the	mind,	becoming	aware	that	mind
is	separate	from	you;	you	are	awareness	of	the	mind,	and	awareness	of	the	mind
is	not	mind,	cannot	be.	Mind	is	an	object	and	you	are	subjectivity.	You	can	see
your	mind	functioning	--	thought	coming	and	going.	It	is	just	like	a	road,	and	the
traffic	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 and	 people	 are	 passing	 --	 memories,	 faces,	 dreams,
thoughts,	desires.	It	is	a	queue,	a	continuous	queue,	non-ending;	day	in,	day	out
it	continues.	But	you	can	become	aware	of	it.
Ordinarily	we	are	not	 aware	of	 it;	 that's	what	 is	 known	as	metaphysical	 sleep.
The	moment	you	become	aware	of	the	traffic	of	the	mind	the	metaphysical	sleep
is	 broken,	 you	 are	 awake	 for	 the	 first	 time.	Knowing	 that	mind	 is	 separate	 is
enough	 to	 bring	 the	 revolution.	 The	moment	 it	 becomes	 your	 own	 experience
that	you	are	not	the	mind,	you	have	entered	into	the	kingdom	of	god.
So	 in	a	 sense	 the	distance	 is	vast,	 in	a	 sense	 there	 is	no	distance;	 just	 a	 single
insight	is	enough	and	like	a	blow	of	a	sword	one	is	cut	away	from	the	mind;	the
identity	with	the	mind	is	dropped.	Then	mind	remains;	you	can	use	it	whenever
you	want	and	you	can	turn	it	off	whenever	you	want.	On	or	off	--	it	depends	on
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you.	Mind	is	no	more	your	master.
Ordinarily	 it	 is	 the	 master	 and	 you	 are	 the	 slave.	 Meditation	 makes	 you	 the
master	and	mind	starts	functioning	as	a	slave.	And	as	a	slave	mind	is	beautiful,
as	a	master	it	is	very	dangerous.
(The	 next	 new	 sannyasin,	 listed	 as	 a	mathematician,	 was	 named	Gyan	Atit	 --
transcendence	of	knowledge!)
Knowledge	 is	a	barrier,	not	a	bridge.	 It	prevents	you	 from	knowing	because	 it
gives	 you	 a	 false	 sense	 of	 knowing.	And	 remember,	 the	 danger	 is	 never	 from
ignorance,	 the	 danger	 is	 from	 so-called	 knowledge.	The	 ignorant	 person	 is	 far
more	 innocent,	 in	 a	 far	 healthier	 state	 than	 the	 knowledgeable,	 because	 the
ignorant	knows	he	is	ignorant.	Knowing	that	he	is	ignorant	he	remains	humble,
he	 remains	 simple,	 and	 out	 of	 that	 humbleness	 and	 simplicity	 there	 is	 a
possibility	of	wisdom.
But	the	knowledgeable	person	covers	up	his	ignorance	and	starts	behaving	as	if
he	knows,	but	all	 that	he	knows	is	"as	 if".	Slowly	slowly	he	can	become	auto-
hypnotised	by	that	"as	if"	and	he	can	forget	the	"as	if"
completely	 and	 he	 can	 start	 believing	 that	 he	 knows.	Now	 this	man	 is	 in	 real
trouble	because	he	will	stop	enquiring	and	he	will	become	very	egoistic.
The	pundits,	the	scholars,	the	professors,	are	very	egoistic	people	for	the	simple
reason	that	they	believe	they	know	--	and	they	know	nothing.	And	everybody	is
knowledgeable,	more	or	less.
One	has	 to	 put	 aside	 all	 knowledge,	 one	 has	 to	 look	beyond	 it.	Beyond	 is	 the
world	of	the	stars.
Knowledge	keeps	you	tethered	to	the	earth,	it	never	allows	you	to	see	the	stars.	It
never	 allows	 you	 to	 see	 the	 beyond,	 and	 beyond	 is	 what	 god	 means	 --	 the
beyond.	Going	beyond	knowledge	is	going	into	the	beyond.
Going	 beyond	 knowledge	 is	 going	 into	 the	 beyond.	 Dropping	 knowledge	 is
creating	an	opportunity	to	know.
Socrates	says:	I	know	only	one	thing,	that	I	know	nothing.
This	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	wisdom,	 this	 is	 transcendence,	 this	 is	 the	meaning	 of
your	name.
(His	address	to	the	next	sannyasin,	Vedaprem,	was	in	a	similar	vein.)	The	only
criterion	of	wisdom	is	love.	The	knowledgeable	person	is	not	a	loving	person,	he
cannot	be.
He	is	so	full	of	rubbish,	he	is	so	much	in	his	head...	that	his	heart	functions	no
more.
His	whole	energy	has	moved	into	the	head.	He	has	become	just	his	head,	he	has
forgotten	the	way	to	his	heart.
Even	if	he	loves	he	loves	through	the	head;	he	thinks	he	loves.	Even	love	is	not
love	--	not	a	feeling.
That	 too	 is	 a	 conclusion,	 a	 logical	 conclusion	 that	 one	 needs	 love,	 that	 it	 is
nourishing,	that	it	is	a	necessity	of	life,	but	all	these	are	conclusions	of	the	mind.
A	man	of	love	is	bound	to	be	a	man	of	wisdom.	These	two	things	are	two	aspects
of	the	same	coin.	One	can	begin	from	either;	either	you	start	becoming	love,	then
wisdom	will	come	as	a	shadow	of	your	love,	or	you	start	by	becoming	wise	and
love	 will	 come	 as	 its	 shadow.	 But	 remember,	 by	 wise	 I	 mean	 intelligent,	 not
knowledgeable.
Intellect	 is	 not	 intelligence	 and	 to	 be	 an	 intellectual	 is	 not	 necessarily	 to	 be
intelligent.	Intelligence	is	a	totally	different	quality.	The	intellectual	only	repeats
whatsoever	he	has	learned.	In	any	situation	which	is	absolutely	new,	about	which
he	knows	nothing,	 he	 is	 an	utter	 fool.	He	 cannot	 act	 spontaneously,	 his	whole
activity	comes	from	his	memory.	If	there	is	something	in	his	memory	then	he	is
very	knowledgeable,	he	is	an	expert.	If	some	situation	arises	for	which	he	has	a
ready-made	 answer	 then	 he	will	 prove	 that	 he	 knows	much.	But	 even	 a	 small
problem	which	is	new	is	impossible	for	him;	he	cannot	solve	it.
The	intelligent	person	has	a	certain	immediacy.	He	can	respond	to	any	situation.
He	 does	 not	 depend	 on	 the	 memory,	 he	 depends	 on	 awareness.	 And	 wisdom
means	awareness,	intelligence,	meditativeness.	It	is	not	of	the	mind,	it	is	of	the
heart.	 In	 the	beginning	 it	 is	of	 the	heart	 and	 finally	 it	 is	not	even	of	 the	heart;
then	it	is	of	the	being,	ultimately	it	is	of	the	being.	And	these	are	the	three	most
important	centres,	upper	centres:	the	head,	the	heart,	the	being.
The	first	step	is	from	the	head	to	the	heart,	the	second	step	is	from	the	heart	to
the	being.	And	the	moment	you	reach	your	being	you	have	reached	to	the	very
centre	of	existence.	It	is	not	your	centre	alone,	it	is	the	centre	of	everything	that
is.	 In	religious	words	you	call	 it	god,	but	you	can	simply	call	 it	 t	centre	--	and
that	will	do.
Man's	whole	 life	 has	 become	 burdened	 too	much	with	words.	God	 is	 a	word,
truth	is	a	word,	love	is	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
word,	 beauty	 is	 a	 word.	 He	 has	 not	 experienced	 anything.	 He	 goes	 on
accumulating	these	words	just	as	a	few	stupid	people	go	on	accumulating	postal
stamps.
People	accumulate	words...	and	the	word	is	not	the	thing.	The	word	"fire"	is	not
fire;	 you	 cannot	 cook	 anything	 on	 it.	 The	 word	 'love'	 is	 not	 love.	 But	 if	 you
watch	you	will	be	surprised	how	we	are	living	in	words.	People	go	on	saying	to
each	other	"I	love	you"	without	meaning	anything.
A	lover	was	saying	to	his	beloved,	"No	force	of	the	world	can	prevent	me	from
loving	 you.	We	have	 to	 become	one.	 I	 can	 go	 through	 fire,	 I	will	 cross	 seven
oceans	 to	 reach	you."	When	he	was	departing	 the	girl	 asked	"Are	you	coming
tomorrow?"	He	said	"If	it	doesn't	rain."	And	he	was	going	to	cross	seven	oceans!
But	these	are	words,	and	people	live	and	exchange	words.	You	say	to	somebody
"I	love	you".	And	of	course	he	says	"The	same	to	you".	(laughter)	You	exchange
words.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 an	 army	man	who	 because	 of	 his	 courage	 in	 the	war	was
given	 a	 very	 high	 post.	He	 had	 been	 just	 an	 ordinary	 soldier;	 he	was	made	 a
major.	 When	 he	 became	 a	 major	 his	 friends	 --	 other	 majors	 and	 other	 top
officials	 --	 were	 puzzled	 because	 whenever	 another	 soldier	 would	 say	 to	 him
"Good	morning,	Sir,"	he	would	say	good	morning	and	quietly	he	would	say	"The
same	 to	 you"	 --	 so	 silently	 almost	 like	 a	whisper,	 "The	 same	 to	 you."	But	 he
always	said	it.
Finally	they	asked	"What	is	the	matter?	Why	do	you	say	'The	same	to	you'?"	He
said	"Because	I	have	been	a	soldier	myself."	They	said	"We	don't	understand."
He	said	"The	problem	is	I	have	been	a	soldier	so	whenever	I	used	to	say	'Good
morning,	Sir,'	deep	down	I	was	saying	 'You	bastard!	(laughter)	Son	of	a	Bitch!
Fuck	you!'	I	used	to	say	all	these	things,	and	they	must	be	saying	the	same	things
to	me!	So	I	know!	I	say	'The	same	to	you!'"
These	things	are	not	said;	what	we	say	is	"Good	morning,	Sir."
People	 are	 continuously,	 on	 the	 surface	 --	 even	 in	 the	 deeper	 layers	 --	 full	 of
words;	they	are	saying	one	thing,	thinking	another	thing;	on	a	third	layer	some
dream	is	passing	by.	And	these	are	all	layers	of	words.	If	you	watch	the	layers	of
words	you	will	be	surprised,	it	is	like	an	onion:	layers	and	layers.	You	peel	one
layer	 there	 is	another	 layer,	you	peel	 that	 layer	and	 there	 is	another	 layer.	 It	 is
like	Chinese	boxes,	boxes	within	boxes	--	and	we	are	lost	in	them.
A	sannyasin	has	to	transcend	all	words,	word	as	such	has	to	be	transcended.	You
have	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 wordless	 silence,	 you	 have	 to	 enter	 into	 that	 silence
where	the	word	has	disappeared.
The	Bible	begins:	In	the	beginning	there	was	the	word.	What	nonsense!	How	can
there	 be	 a	word	when	 there	was	 no	man?	 If	 I	 had	 to	 rewrite	 it	 I	would	write:
there	was	silence,	in	the	beginning	there	was	silence,	absolute	silence.
Word	 must	 have	 entered	 later	 on,	 only	 when	 god	 created	 man.	 He	 created
animals,	trees,	etcetera;	on	the	sixth	day	he	created	man.	And	they	say	he	created
man	 first	 and	 woman	 next	 because	 he	 wanted	 the	 poor	 guy	 at	 least	 to	 say
something	 to	 him.	Once	 the	woman	 is	 there	 she	won't	 allow	 it!	 (laughter)	 So
with	man	enters	the	word,	with	mind	enters	the	word.	And	the	moment	you	leave
the	word	aside,	mind	is	transcended,	man	is	transcended.	In	fact	the	word	"man"
comes	 from	 the	same	root	as	mind;	 it	 comes	 from	a	Sanskrit	 root	"man.	From
man	both	words,	mind	and	man,	are	derived.
Mind	 is	 man.	 And	 what	 is	 mind?	 --	 the	 word.	 To	 transcend	 the	 word	 is	 to
transcend	the	world	too,	because	once	you	are	beyond	words	you	are	beyond	the
world.	That	is	true	renunciation.	You	don't	escape	to	the	mountains	but	you	have
escaped	 into	 the	 deepest	 core	 of	 your	 being.	 Then	 you	 can	 live	 in	 the
marketplace	and	yet	you	will	not	be	of	the	marketplace.
(Love	 is	 the	 suprememost	 value,	 Osho	 said	 as	 a	 starter	 tonight.	 And	 he
concluded	by	returning	to	the	same	theme.)
Love	is	the	foundation	on	which	one's	life	can	become	a	temple	and	one's	being
can	become	a	host	for	the	divine	guest.
I	 teach	 love	 and	nothing	 else,	 because	 everything	 else	 can	 follow	without	 any
effort.	 If	you	are	capable	of	 love	you	are	capable	of	 the	 impossible.	 If	one	can
manage	to	be	loving	one	has	succeeded	in	finding	the	path,	in	finding	the	truth.
The	only	difficulty	is	that	love	demands	that	you	drop	the	barrier	of	the	ego.
The	ego	is	just	like	a	great	barrier	between	you	and	the	reality;	it	allows	you	only
glimpses	of	reality.
And	it	goes	on	interpreting	reality,	it	never	allows	it	as	it	is.	It	continuously	goes
on	 giving	 a	 commentary	 on	 it:	 "This	 is	 beautiful,	 that	 is	 ugly.	 Look	 --	 this	 is
good,	that	is	bad."	It	never	gives	you	any	opportunity	to	see	what	is	exactly	the
case.	Before	you	can	see	it	has	already	interpreted,	it	has	already	contaminated;
it	has	already	come	in.
Scientists	say	the	mind	allows	only	two	per	cent	of	reality	to	enter;	ninety-eight
per	cent	is	prevented.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	 is	 too	much!	The	mind	 is	 a	 great	 barrier,	 it	 is	 standing	 there	 at	 the	door,
watching	what	goes	in	and	allowing	only	that	which	fits	with	it,	which	adjusts	to
it.
Love	means	changing	 the	very	 focus	of	your	 life.	 It	 is	 coming	down	 from	 the
head	to	the	heart,	and	as	you	come	to	the	heart,	the	heart	allows	everything,	one
hundred	per	 cent.	 It	 is	 just	 an	opening,	 a	window	 into	 existence.	 It	 allows	 the
sun,	 the	moon,	 the	stars,	 the	flowers,	 the	birds,	 the	rain,	 the	wind	--	 it	goes	on
allowing	 everything.	 And	 the	 more	 existence	 reaches	 you,	 the	 more	 bliss
happens.	 The	more	 existence	 penetrates	 you,	 the	more	 you	 become	 alive,	 the
more	you	become	divine.	So	logic	has	to	be	dropped	and	love	has	to	be	learned.
Our	society	continuously	teaches	us	logic	and	prevents	us	from	moving	towards
the	world	of	love.	That	is	a	great	strategy	to	keep	people	hung	up	in	their	heads.
Heady	people	are	efficient	but	they	are	just	like	machines,	robots.
Sannyas	 means	 de-automatising	 yourself.	 The	 society	 has	 made	 you	 an
automatic	robot;	sannyas	has	to	uncondition	you,	to	make	you	your	natural	self
again,	the	way	god	wanted	you	to	be,	the	way	nature	intended	you	to	be	--	not
what	 society	wanted,	not	what	 the	politicians	and	 the	priests	have	desired,	but
what	nature	intended.
Love	 is	 a	natural	 phenomenon,	 logic	 is	man's	 invention.	Rely	more	on	nature,
trust	the	natural	more	and	your	life	will	become	full	of	benediction,	full	of	grace,
full	of	god.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009045
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Reza	means	pleasure.	Pleasure	 is	a	multidimensional	phenomenon.	 It	exists	on
the	 physical	 level.	 That	 is	 the	 lowest	 and	 is	 known	 to	 almost	 everybody.	 It	 is
animal,	because	animals	are	also	acquainted	with	it,	but	 to	know	pleasure	only
on	 the	 physical	 level	 is	 to	 miss	 the	 whole	 point.	 Pleasure	 also	 exists	 on	 the
psychological	level.
Listening	 to	 music	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 physiology,	 but	 sex	 does	 have
something	 to	 do	 with	 physiology;	 it	 is	 physiology,	 biology,	 chemistry,	 but
nothing	more.	Food	 is	physiological.	Almost	ninety-nine	point	nine	percent	of
humanity	is	divided	between	these	two	pleasures.
There	are	people	who	know	sex	as	their	only	pleasure,	and	there	are	people	who
know	 food	 as	 their	 only	 pleasure.	 The	 person	who	 represses	 sex	will	 become
interested	in	food,	and	the	person	who	represses	his	desire	for	food	will	become
interested	in	sex.	And	the	desire	goes	on	moving	like	a	pendulum	between	food
and	sex.
The	joy	that	arises	out	of	poetry,	or	seeing	a	beautiful	sunset,	or	listening	to	the
birds	 singing,	 or	 looking	 at	 a	 beautiful	 painting	 is	 certainly	 of	 a	 different
category.	No	animal	can	know	it,	only	man	is	capable	of	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 moment	 you	 start	 knowing	 something	 of	 psychological	 pleasure,	 man	 is
born;	otherwise	one	remains	animal.
Unfortunately	 many	 live	 as	 animal	 and	 die	 as	 animal;	 they	 never	 attain	 to
anything	higher	than	that.	But	to	know	psychological	pleasure	is	not	much	either,
because	every	man	can	easily	know	it;	it	is	not	something	of	great	significance.
It	is	better	than	the	physiological,	but	there	is	still	a	higher	peak	--	the	spiritual	--
and	that	happens	only	through	meditation.
On	the	physiological	level	we	call	it	pleasure	--	it	is	the	same	phenom-enon.	On
the	psychological	level	we	call	it	happiness,	and	on	the	spiritual	plane	we	call	it
bliss.	 But	 it	 is	 the	 same	 thing	 getting	more	 and	more	 refined,	moving	 higher,
becoming	less	and	less	gross,	becoming	more	and	more	subtle.
At	the	body	plane	it	is	just	like	a	seed.	At	the	mind	plane	it	is	like	a	flower.	At
the	spiritual	plane	it	is	like	fragrance.	And	to	know	bliss	is	to	know	God;	hence
my	whole	emphasis	is	on	meditation.
Going	above	the	animal	you	become	man.	Going	above	man	you	become	divine.
And	unless	one	becomes	divine,	unless	one	experiences	God,	 life	 is	 futile,	 life
has	no	depth,	no	height;	it	remains	only	a	survival.	But	in	knowing	bliss,	there	is
great	explosion	of	meaning	--	each	cell	of	your	being	starts	dancing.
For	the	first	time	you	know	what	a	benediction	it	is	to	be.
To	 become	 a	 sannyasin	means	 from	 this	moment	 onwards	 your	whole	 energy
will	be	focussed	on	meditation.	Meditation	is	the	womb	out	of	which	Godliness
is	born.	There	is	no	other	proof	for	God.	Only	meditation	gives	you	the	feeling
that	God	 is	 everywhere	 --	 not	 as	 a	 person	 but	 as	 a	 presence.	 But	 it	 is	 almost
tangible,	almost	visible.	Nobody	can	refute	it.
Even	 if	 the	whole	world	 says	 there	 is	 no	God,	 it	 does	 not	matter	 to	 a	man	of
meditation	because	he	knows	God	 is.	But	his	God	 is	 totally	different	 from	 the
God	of	the	priests,	the	God	of	the	churches,	temples,	mosques.	His	God	is	not	a
person,	his	God	is	a	new	quality	that	has	become	available	to	him	because	now
he	has	 a	 new	perspective.	 It	 is	Godliness,	 it	 is	more	 of	 an	 inner	 experience	 --
subjective	rather	than	objective.
So	this	has	to	become	your	longing	from	now	onwards.	This	has	to	become	the
fire	which	will	consume	you	on	the	lower	levels	and	will	give	birth	to	the	real
you,	to	the	real	I	--	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	ego,	but	which	transcends
the	ego.
Meditation	is	the	art	of	enjoying	your	aloneness	just	as	love	is	the	art	of	enjoying
togetherness.	These	two	things	--	love	and	meditation	--	are	the	most	important
in	life.	But	meditation	is	far	more	important	than	love,	because	love	is	possible
only	 if	meditation	becomes	possible.	A	person	who	cannot	enjoy	his	aloneness
will	not	be	able	to	enjoy	his	togetherness	with	anybody.
That's	why	lovers	are	always	in	such	conflict.	They	meet	out	of	a	desire,	out	of	a
need,	 because	 they	 cannot	 be	 alone,	 they	 are	 unable	 to	 be	 alone	 --	 it	 feels	 so
empty.	 They	 have	 only	 a	 negative	 experience	 of	 aloneness;	 the	 negative
experience	 is	 loneliness.	 When	 one	 experiences	 the	 positive	 side	 of	 it,	 It	 is
aloneness.
People	know	only	loneliness	and	of	course,	 loneliness	 is	 like	a	wound;	 it	hurts
and	one	starts	feeling	as	if	one	is	drowning	(his	hands	rolled	in	towards	his	chest
like	waves),	 and	 one	 needs	 some	 support,	 somebody	 to	 look	 to,	 somebody	 to
cling	 to.	 That's	 how	 lovers	 meet;	 but	 are	 desiring	 that	 the	 other	 will	 be	 the
support.	Sooner	or	 later	frustration	 is	bound	to	happen	because	both	are	 lonely
and	they	meet	out	of	the	motive	that	the	other	will	fill	 their	 loneliness.	But	the
other	is	also	lonely.
Maybe	in	the	beginning,	in	the	honeymoon	days,	one	can	dream	about	it	and	one
can	remain	excited	but	soon	the	excitement	disappears	and	the	reality,	that	both
are	lonely,	cannot	be	avoided.	And	when	two	lonelinesses	meet	there	cannot	be
any	joy.	Even	one	loneliness	 is	enough	to	create	hell.	Two	lonelinesses	are	not
only	 two,	 they	 multiply	 each	 other.	 Hence	 Jean	 Paul	 Sartre's	 statement	 has
significance;	he	says,
"The	other	is	hell."	That	is	the	experience	of	all	lovers	because	all	love	fails.	So
in	a	way	he	is	right	that	the	other	brings	hell.	But	in	a	way	he	is	wrong.
The	other	does	not	bring	hell,	the	other	only	becomes	a	mirror	in	which	you	can
see	your	hell.	You	bring	hell,	the	other	brings	hell.	You	become	a	mirror	for	the
other,	the	other	becomes	a	mirror	for	you;	you	start	reflecting	each	other	--	and
both	are	lonely	and	both	are	wounds	and	both	are	bored	with	themselves.	How
can	it	blossom	into	a	beautiful	relationship?	It	is	impossible.
But	if	two	meditator,	are	in	love	then	there	is	great	joy	because	both	have	known
a	positive	aloneness.
Both	are	capable	of	enjoying	 their	aloneness;	 there	 is	no	need	for	 the	other.	 In
fact	now	they	relate	because	they	have	to	share,	they	have	so	much	to	share.	It	is
not	out	of	need	but	out	of	abundance,	overflowing	joy.
Meditation	 is	more	 fundamental.	And	only	a	meditator	can	be	a	 lover	because
only	out	of	meditation	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
it	possible	to	enjoy	yourself	and	to	enjoy	the	other.
But	 the	 first	 lesson	has	 to	be	 learned	within	oneself.	 In	 fact	 a	person	who	can
enjoy	his	aloneness	can	enjoy	anything.	You	cannot	throw	a	man	like	Buddha	or
Krishna	or	Jesus	 into	hell.	Even	 if	you	 throw	them	into	hell	 they	will	enjoy	 it,
they	will	find	ways	to;	they	will	transform	hell	into	heaven.	And	your	so-called
saints	who	 all	 look	 sad,	 empty,	 full,	 stupid	 --	 if	 they	 reach	 heaven,	 heaven	 is
going	to	become	hell.	It	depends	on	the	person.
The	blissful	person	creates	his	own	space;	he	creates	something	around	himself.
It	 is	a	natural	phenomenon,	he	moves	with	an	energy	field.	Hence	the	ancients
used	 to	 say	 that	 wherever	 a	 real	 meditator	 sits	 the	 place	 becomes	 sacred,
wherever	he	moves	he	moves	with	his	energy	field.
It	is	said	about	Buddha	that	even	when	he	moved	in	a	forest	when	it	was	not	the
season	for	the	trees	to	blossom,	suddenly	the	trees	would	start	blossoming,	there
would	be	flowers.	Even	though	it	was	fall	and	leaves	were	falling,	suddenly	new
leaves	will	 sprout.	 It	 is	 symbolic.	Of	 course	when	a	Buddha	 is	 sitting	under	 a
tree	the	tree	has	to	respond	to	the	energy	that	Buddha	is.
I	 don't	 think	 it	 is	 factual,	 it	 cannot	 be	 factual	 because	 even	 men	 are	 not	 so
responsive	--	how	can	you	expect	trees	and	rocks	and	rivers	to	be	so	responsive?
But	it	is	a	beautiful	parable.
Those	 who	 can	 see,	 those	 who	 can	 feel,	 those	 who	 can	 understand,	 will	 be
immediately	 transformed	by	 the	person	who	 is	blissful.	Suddenly	his	bliss	will
start	penetrating	you,	reaching	you,	transforming	you.
That	 is	 his	 love.	 He	 gives	 because	 he	 has	 so	much	 to	 give.	 He	 is	 like	 a	 rain
cloud,	 so	 full	 that	 he	has	 to	 shower.	But	 then	 love	 is	 totally	 different,	 it	 has	 a
beauty.	It	is	no	more	needy,	no	more	greedy.	It	does	not	want	anything	from	the
other,	all	 that	 it	wants	 is	 that	 the	other	should	be	able	to	receive,	 that	 the	other
should	be	open.
And	that's	exactly	the	meaning	of	disciplehood:	to	be	open	to	the	master	so	that
you	can	receive	his	love,	so	that	you	can	receive	his	abundance,	so	that	he	can
shower	all	that	he	has	upon	you.
(Osho	 proceeded	 to	 talk	 about	 the	 different	 levels	 of	 awareness	 the	meditator
needs	to	experience.)	Man	ordinarily	exists	in	a	state	of	sleep.	He	is	not	alert,	he
is	not	aware	of	what	he	is	doing;	he	is	not	even	aware	of	who	he	is.	He	is	not
conscious	of	from	where	he	has	come	and	to	where	he	is	going.	He	is	an	utterly
deep,	deep	slumber.
Meditation	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 this	 somnambulistic	 state.	 It	 is	 bringing	 in
consciousness.	 It	 is	 becoming	 alert	 of	 three	 things:	 first,	 the	 body	 and	 its
activities	--	because	that	is	the	grossest	thing	and	it	is	easier	to	become	aware	of
it	 --	 second,	 the	mind	 --	 the	 thoughts,	 the	 desires,	 the	memories	 --	 and	 third,
feelings	--	the	sentiments,	the	emotions...	which	are	the	subtlest.
If	one	becomes	aware	of	these	three	layers	then	suddenly	the	fourth	happens	of
its	 own	 accord.	 You	 do	 these	 three	 and	 the	 fourth	 simply	 happens;	 you	 have
earned	it,	you	deserve	 the	fourth.	The	fourth	means	awareness	of	awareness,	 it
means	awareness	of	your	being.	And	that	is	the	greatest	experience	in	life.
And	 this	 is	 the	 gracious	 gift	 of	 god	 --	 the	 fourth	 state	 of	 awareness.	 George
Gurdjieff	used	to	call	his	way	the	fourth	way.	His	disciple,	P.D.	Ouspensky,	has
written	a	beautiful	treatise;	he	gave	it	the	name	THE
FOURTH	WAY.	But	 it	 has	 been	 a	 known	 secret	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 in	 the
East.	We	call	 the	ultimate	 state	of	meditation,	 turiya.	Turiya	means	 the	 fourth,
simply	the	fourth.	We	don't	give	it	a	name	but	a	number.
Begin	with	 the	body,	go	 to	 the	mind,	 then	 to	 the	heart	 and	 suddenly	you	have
come	to	your	centre,	to	your	very	being.	And	in	coming	to	your	very	being	you
transcend	all	misery,	all	darkness,	all	death.	You	transcend	both	time	and	space.
This	is	the	experience	of	god.	The	fourth	is	nothing	but	pure	godliness.
(Either	through	meditation	or	mentation	--	those	are	the	only	alternative	ways	to
live.	Or	 to	put	 it	another	way,	one	can	either	 live	blissfully	or	miserably,	Osho
told	us.)	Mind	 is	a	misery-creating	machine,	 it	manufactures	misery.	So	 if	you
are	 finished	 with	 one	 misery	 it	 manufactures	 another.	 By	 the	 time	 you	 are
finished	with	the	other,	many	more	are	coming.
The	 mind	 cannot	 create	 anything	 other	 than	 misery.	 There	 is	 a	 reason	 in	 it.
Because	 mind	 can	 only	 exist	 with	 misery	 it	 has	 to	 depend	 on	 misery.	 The
moment	misery	disappears	you	don't	need	the	mind	at	all.
I	have	heard	about	a	manager	of	a	very	big	office.	He	had	never	taken	a	single
day	off,	 he	had	never	gone	on	any	holiday.	Somebody	asked	him,	 "Why	don't
you	ever	go	for	a	holiday?	Go	to	the	Himalayas	or	to	some	summer	resort."	He
said,	 "I	cannot	do	 it	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 I	don't	want	 to	 let	 the	directors
know	that	I	am	absolutely	useless.	If	I	go	for	fifteen	days	they	will	all	come	to
know	that	I	am	not	needed	at	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
all	--	everything	will	go	on	without	me.	I	am	simply	sitting	here	doing	nothing.	I
am	simply	useless,	this	post	is	not	needed	at	all.	So	it	is	not	possible	for	me	to	go
for	a	holiday	because	that	will	expose	the	whole	thing,	that	this	post	is	absolutely
necessary.	So	I	have	to	cling	to	it.
The	mind	knows	perfectly	well	that	if	there	is	misery	it	will	be	needed,	you	have
to	depend	on	it	to	find	a	way	out.	It	goes	on	creating	new	miseries	so	you	need
its	help.
Once	you	know	through	meditation	 that	mind	can	be	 totally	put	aside	and	you
can	exist	 in	a	 tremendously	beautiful	space	without	 the	mind,	and	 there	are	no
problems	to	be	solved	because	when	there	is	no	mind	there	are	no	problems	...
once	you	have	experienced	this	you	will	never	again	enter	the	world	of	the	mind
The	mind	will	 be	 just	worthless,	 it	will	 lose	 all	 its	 power.	Right	 now	 it	 is	 the
master;	then	it	will	be	only	an	ordinary	memory	mechanism.	If	some	memory	is
needed	you	can	use	the	mind,	otherwise	you	can	turn	it	off.
Nobody	 wants	 to	 lose	 their	 job,	 and	 that	 is	 why	 mind	 goes	 on	 creating	 new
miseries.	There	are	many	professions	 like	 this.	For	example,	 the	physician,	 the
doctor:	on	the	one	hand	he	tries	to	help	people	to	get	rid	of	diseases;	on	the	other
hand	he	goes	on	discovering	new	diseases	 --	he	has	 to.	Even	 if	a	very	healthy
person	goes	to	the	doctor	the	doctor	is	bound	to	find	something	wrong.
One	woman	was	telling	another,	"My	son's	practice	is	going	so	well	that	now	he
has	 even	 started	 telling	 people,	 'You	 don't	 have	 any	 disease	 --	 go	 home!'"
Otherwise	he	can	always	find	something.	Hence	 it	 is	always	good	 to	go	 to	 the
doctor	whose	practice	is	good,	who	can	afford	to	lose	a	patient,	otherwise	he	will
find	something	--	it	is	his	business.	So	his	business	is	in	a	way	suicidal.
If	one	day	physicians	succeed	in	destroying	all	 illnesses	 in	 the	world	 they	will
have	 to	 commit	 suicide,	 they	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 exist	 any	more;	 their	 need	 is
finished.	So	they	are	not	going	to	do	that.	That's	why	there	are	strange	things....
For	 two	 thousand	 years	 medical	 science	 has	 been	 working	 and	 working	 and
working	but	diseases	are	not	finished;	if	one	disease	is	finished	they	immediately
discover	 two	 more.	 In	 fact	 there	 are	 many	 more	 new	 diseases.	 If	 some	 two-
thousand-year-old	person	could	be	found,	he	would	not	recognise	what	cancer	is;
he	would	never	have	heard	of	it	in	his	lifetime.
If	you	could	bring	out	somebody	alive	from	his	grave	he	would	not	be	able	 to
recognise	many	diseases
--	 they	 never	 existed	 before.	 In	 the	 old	 medical	 treatises	 there	 is	 not	 even	 a
mention.	The	physician	has	to	go	on	discovering	--	that's	the	only	way	for	him	to
exist.
And	 that's	 how	 mind	 is	 it	 is	 its	 work,	 its	 business,	 its	 investment,	 to	 go	 on
creating	misery,	to	invent	it	even	if	it	is	not	there.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	aware	of	this	fact.	Once	you	know	it,	it	is	not	very	difficult
to	slip	out	of	the	mind.
And	meditation	is	just	slipping	out	of	the	mind,	and	by	a	very	simple	technique.
Just	by	being	a	witness	to	the	mind	one	slips	out	of	it.	Just	by	being	a	witness,
just	 watching	 it	 doing	 nothing	 and	 one	 slips	 out,	 because	 the	 watcher
automatically	becomes	separate	from	the	watched.
You	are	already	out	--	the	moment	you	watch	your	mind,	you	are	watching	the
anger	in	your	mind,	you	are	no	more	angry.	You	will	be	surprised:	the	anger	is
there	 but	 it	 is	 only	 on	 the	 screen	 of	 the	 mind,	 just	 like	 a	 TV	 screen.	 It	 is
something	there	but	you	are	the	watcher,	you	are	not	it.	A	certain	desire	is	there,
a	certain	thought	is	moving,	but	you	are	the	watcher	--	you	cannot	be	it.
The	moment	this	is	realised	bliss	arises.	It	is	only	out	of	meditation	that	one	feels
blessed.	Then	life	is	a	festival,	a	continuous	celebration.
(Just	because	they	can't	be	proved,	that	doesn't	mean	there	aren't	such	things	as
inner	experiences,	Osho	said	in	his	last	address.	And	he	illustrated	the	point	with
a	 hilarious	 anecdote	 from	 his	 schooldays.)	 God	 cannot	 be	 proved	 by	 any
argumentation.
Philosophers	have	tried	but	they	have	all	failed.	Theologians	have	been	working
on	it,	on	how	to	find	proofs	for	god,	but	all	their	proofs	are	simply	stupid;	they
don't	prove	anything	at	all.	There	is	always	a	flaw	underneath	and	any	person	of
a	little	intelligence	can	see	it.
For	 example	 they	 say,	 their	 most	 important	 argument	 --	 Christians,	 Hindus,
Mohammedans,	all	--	 is	 that	 the	world	needs	a	creator	because	there	cannot	be
anything	uncreated.
On	the	superficial	level	it	seems	logical.	If	you	go	into	a	desert	and	suddenly	you
find	a	wristwatch,	you	cannot	believe	that	this	can	happen	just	by	chance.	Out	of
millions	 of	 years,	 just	 through	 a	 coincidence,	 a	 beautiful	 wristwatch,	 a	 Rolex
(laughter)	 ...	 and	 even	 Swiss-made....	 And	 if	 even	 a	 small	 thing	 like	 a	 wrist-
watch	cannot	happen	 then	how	can	 this	whole	universe,	 this	vast	universe	and
this	immense	harmony,	happen	just	through	coincidence?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	 the	 logic	 that	 there	must	be	a	 creator	 seems	 to	be	appealing.	But	 it	 is	very
superficial	 because	 then	 the	 question	 arises:	 who	 created	 the	 creator?	 The
theologian	 has	 only	 one	 answer,	 that	 the	 creator	 is	 not	 created;	 he	 has	 always
been	here,	he	is	uncreated.	But	then	his	whole	argument	falls	down	flat,	because
in	 the	 beginning	 he	 said	 there	 can	 be	 nothing	 which	 is	 uncreated.	 Now	 he
accepts	god	as	uncreated.
If	 the	world	cannot	be	uncreated	how	can	god,	which	is	a	higher	phenomenon,
be	 uncreated?	 A	 wrist-watch	 cannot	 be	 uncreated,	 the	 universe	 cannot	 be
uncreated,	then	how	can	god	be	uncreated?	There	must	be	a	higher	god	who	has
created	him.	And	then	it	is	absolutely	absurd;	you	go	on	from	one	god	to	another
and	you	fall	into	an	infinite	regress.
All	logic,	all	arguments,	all	proofs	for	god	are	like	this;	they	can	be	refuted	very
easily.	 The	 only	 way	 to	 prove	 that	 godliness	 exists	 is	 not	 through	 logic,	 not
through	mind,	 but	 through	 no-mind.	 It	 is	 not	 through	 philosophy,	 not	 through
intellectual	 gymnastics,	 but	 through	 a	 silent	 state	 --	 utterly	 silent,	 absolutely
silent	where	no	thought	moves,	where	the	lake	of	your	consciousness	is	so	calm
and	quiet	that	there	is	not	even	a	ripple	on	it,	that	the	moon	and	the	stars	can	be
reflected	in	it	as	if	it	is	a	mirror.
Meditation	 creates	 a	 mirror	 of	 your	 consciousness	 and	 then	 you	 can	 see	 that
which	is.	In	fact	god	is	an	ancient	code	word.	The	original	meaning	of	the	code
has	been	completely	lost.	G	stands	for	that,	O	stands	for	which,	D	stands	for	is:
that	which	is.	That	is	the	meaning	of	god;	it	is	a	code	word,	it	has	no	meaning	in
itself.	It	was	simply	used	by	mystics	as	a	code.	When	they	said	god	they	meant
that	which	is.
Now,	to	know	that	which	is	there	is	only	one	way,	and	that	is	to	become	a	mirror.
Meditation	makes	 a	mirror	 out	 of	 you	 and	 then	 the	whole	 --	 the	 stars	 and	 the
moon	and	 the	 trees	and	 the	birds	and	 the	clouds	and	everything	--	 is	 reflected.
You	 suddenly	 know,	 It	 is	 real	 knowing.	 It	 is	 not	 knowledge	 attained	 through
scriptures,	accumulated	through	others,	it	is	not	borrowed;	it	is	yours.	It	is	self-
evident.	One	need	not	have	any	proof	for	it	any	more.
When	you	have	a	headache	do	you	need	proof?
One	 of	 my	 teachers	 in	 my	 high	 school	 days	 was	 very	 strict.	 He	 was	 a
Mohammedan	 teacher	 --	 a	 very	 good	man	 but	 very	 strict.	 On	 the	 first	 day	 of
every	 year	 when	 his	 class	 started,	 the	 first	 thing	 that	 he	 would	 say	 was,
"Remember:	two	things,	headache	and	stomach-ache,	I	don't	believe	in	at	all.	So
never	say	'I	have	a	headache	and	I	want	to	go	home',	or	anything.	You	will	have
to	prove	it."
He	did	the	same	when	I	came	into	his	class.	On	the	first	day	he	said	"Remember
two	things.	I	can	believe	in	your	fever	because	I	can	feel	that	you	have	fever,	I
can	 believe	 that	 you	 have	 broken	 your	 leg,	 so	 you	 can	 go	 home.	 But	 I	 don't
believe	in	two	things:	headache	and	stomach-ache."
So	 I	 told	 him	 "Okay."	He	 said	 "What	 do	 you	mean?"	 I	 said	 "I	will	 prove	 it."
Every	day	in	the	early	morning	he	used	to	go	for	a	walk,	and	I	knew	where	he
would	go	so	I	went	up	a	tree	and	just	threw	a	stone	at	him.	It	hit	him	on	his	head
and	he	screamed	and	I	came	down.
I	 said	 "Can	 you	 prove	 that	 something	 is	 hurting	 inside	 your	 head?	 If	 you	 can
prove	it	then	I	will	never	ask	any	leave	for	a	headache	or	a	stomach-ache.	One
thing	 I	 have	 proved	 is	 that	 you	 cannot	 prove	 it;	 you	 cannot	 show	 it;	 it	 is	 not
something	objective."
And	 I	 asked	 him	 "Do	 you	 want	 me	 to	 prove	 some	 day	 that	 stomach-ache....
(laughter)"	He	said	"How	are	you	going	to	prove	that?"	I	said	"I	know	I	know
your	cook!	I	can	manage	to	give	you	a	stomach-ache."
He	 said	 "Don't	 tell	 this	 to	 anybody,	 but	 if	 you	have	 a	headache	or	 a	 stomach-
ache,	 still	 tell	 me	 that	 you	 have	 fever	 and	 I	 will	 let	 you	 go...	 because	 this
headache	business	is	difficult.	Everybody	starts	saying..."
A	headache	needs	no	proof.	You	know	it	and	only	you	know	it;	nobody	else	can
ever	know	anything	about	it.	Exactly	like	the	inner	experiences	cannot	be	put	on
a	table	for	exhibition,	they	cannot	be	made	observable	for	others.
God,	godliness,	is	an	inner	experience,	an	experience	of	your	interiority,	of	your
innermost	centre.	But	that	is	the	centre	of	the	whole	universe	too.	The	moment
you	become	a	mirror,	not	only	is	the	whole	reflected	in	you,	for	the	first	time	you
become	aware	of	who	you	are.	You	are	part	of	this	whole,	of	this	organic	unity.
And	that	is	the	day	one	is	born	anew,	one	has	a	rebirth.
Jesus	says,	 "Unless	you	are	born	again	you	will	not	enter	 into	my	kingdom	of
god."	This	is	the	birth	he	is	talking	about	and	his	is	the	birth	I	am	talking	about.
This	is	what	sannyas	is:	a	process	of	rebirth,	a	process	of	being	born	again.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009055
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Meditation	is	the	alchemy	of	dispelling	all	darkness.	If	one	enters	within	without
knowing	 meditation	 one	 will	 find	 only	 darkness.	 That's	 why	 people	 cannot
believe	Socrates,	Jesus,	Buddha	--	because	people's	experience	goes	against	the
experience	 of	 all	 the	 awakened	 ones.	 Whenever	 they	 look	 within	 there	 is
darkness,	and	all	these	people	who	have	meditated	deeply	say,	"All	is	light	--	just
go	in."
This	 has	 been	 one	 of	 the	 basic	 problems	 for	 all	 seekers:	 if	 you	 go	 in	without
meditation	you	will	find	darkness.	It	is	only	through	meditation	that	darkness	is
transformed	into	light;	hence,	before	entering	in	one	has	to	learn	the	whole	art	of
how	to	be	meditative,	how	to	be	silent,	without	thoughts,	how	just	to	be.	That's
what	meditation	is	all	about	--	how	just	to	be.	Once	you	know	that	point	where
thinking	disappears	 and	everything	comes	 to	 a	 full	 stop,	 then	 turn	 in	 and	 look
and	you	are	in	for	a	great	surprise:	there	is	all	light,	infinite	light.
That	is	the	moment	one	comes	to	know	that	this	is	our	source,	and	that	we	don't
belong	to	the	world	of	darkness,	we	belong	to	the	world	of	light,	that	we	belong
to	the	world	of	stars,	to	the	world	that	is	beyond.
That	we	are	not	bodies	and	not	minds,	that	we	are	divine.	Birth	is	not	birth,	death
is	not	death.	We	have	been	before,	we	will	be	afterwards;	we	are	eternal.
All	 these	 experiences	 immediately	 become	 actual	 when	 the	 light	 is	 there.	 In
darkness	 you	 cannot	 see	 yourself;	 only	 in	 the	 light	 can	 you	 see	who	 you	 are,
what	 your	 real	 constituents	 are,	 and	what	 immensity,	what	 treasure,	 is	 hidden
within	you.	Every	man,	every	being,	is	a	child	of	light	because	we	all	come	from
the	same	source.	We	are	rays	of	the	same	sun	and	we	go	back	to	the	same	source.
Society	starts	perverting	the	child,	society	starts	distracting	him	from	his	nature.
society	 starts	 creating	 barriers	 for	 him	 so	 his	 blissfulness	 becomes	 blocked.
Society	 goes	 on	 putting	 rocks	 around	 him	 because	 it	 is	 very	 much	 afraid	 of
blissful	 people.	Blissful	 people	 are	 the	most	 dangerous	 people	 in	 the	world	 --
they	are	pure	fire.	And	society	wants	robots,	machines.
It	 is	 not	 just	 an	 accident	 that	 science	 is	 continuously	 improving	machines	 and
substituting	man	with	machines.	Man	is	continuously	becoming	useless	because
machines	 can	 function	 more	 efficiently,	 and	 if	 man	 has	 to	 compete	 with
machines	he	has	to	forget	all	blissfulness,	all	intelligence,	all	love,	all	that	makes
him	a	man.	He	has	to	forget	about	it,	only	then	can	he	compete	with	machines;
he	 has	 to	 function	 like	 a	 robot.	 And	 that's	 what	 our	 schools,	 colleges	 and
universities	 are	 for,	 to	 destroy	 your	 humanity	 and	 to	 create	 an	 efficient
mechanism.
That's	why	great	effort	is	needed	to	be	that	which	you	already	are	because	you
have	to	remove	all	the	rocks	put	in	the	way	by	the	society.	And	they	are	heavy
rocks;	if	one	is	not	industrious	one	cannot	succeed	in	knowing	bliss.	And	to	fail
in	 knowing	 bliss	 is	 to	miss	 the	 whole	 opportunity	 of	 life.	 Then	 one	 exists	 in
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
vain,	there	is	no	point.
So	let	this	become	the	beginning	of	a	great	journey.	You	will	have	to	put	all	your
energy	into	it.	Once	you	decide	to	put	all	your	energy	into	it,	 it	 is	not	difficult.
Those	rocks	can	be	destroyed	because	they	are	unnatural	and	your	nature	is	just
hidden	beneath	 them.	If	you	start	 removing	rocks,	springs	of	 joy	start	 flowing,
you	 will	 have	 a	 second	 childhood	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 true
religiousness,	the	second	childhood.
So	you	have	undone	all	 that	 the	society	has	done	to	you,	you	are	free	from	all
that	bondage,	you	are	a	man	again.	You	are	again	on	the	right	track	you	are	again
moving	naturally,	spontaneously,	alert,	watchful.
You	are	no	more	mechanical,	now	you	are	awareness.	And	with	awareness	all
the	doors	of	all	the	mysteries	open.	You	become	a	welcome	guest	into	the	house
of	god.
[As	 the	photographer	 from	Switzerland	 sat	back	 to	 listen	 to	Osho's	 address	he
removed	 his	 glasses	 and	 placed	 them	 on	 the	 floor	 beside	 him.	 Nothing	 goes
unobserved...	)	Man	lives	in	lies.	He	believes	they	are	the	only	truth.	And	once
you	believe	in	a	certain	lie	you	make	it	a	truth.	But	it	is	an	invented	truth,	and	it
cannot	 liberate	 you	 and	 it	 cannot	 help	 you	 to	 know	 god	 --	 because	 truth	 is
another	name	for	god.
People	 are	Christians,	Hindus,	Mohammedans	 --	 these	 are	 all	 borrowed	 ideas,
and	truth	cannot	be	borrowed.	The	only	thing	in	life	which	cannot	be	borrowed
is	 truth.	 It	 is	 so	 delicate,	 it	 is	 so	 subtle,	 that	 the	moment	 it	 is	 given	 from	one
person	to	another	it	dies	in	the	communication.	It	never	reaches	the	other,	what
reaches	us	a	lie.
Truth	is	an	experience,	The	man	who	has	known	can	speak	about	it,	and	the	man
who	has	not	known	can	 remember	 those	words	but	 those	words	will	be	empty
words	 for	 the	man	who	 has	 not	 known.	How	 can	 they	 be	 full	 of	meaning?	 --
meaning	comes	from	experience.	So	for	people,	"good",	"love",	"truth",
"freedom"	are	all	beautiful	words;	they	use	them	and	they	believe	that	they	know
what	they	are	saying.
They	know	nothing.	Only	 very	 few	people	 have	known;	millions	 only	 believe
and	believing	is	not	knowing.
Knowing	is	totally	different	from	believing.
In	 fact,	 the	 first	 step	 towards	 knowing	 is	 dropping	 of	 all	 beliefs.	 Unless	 you
become	 unconditioned	 you	 cannot	 know	what	 actually	 is,	 because	 your	 belief
will	cover	your	eyes,	it	will	colour	everything.
The	Christian	looks	in	a	Christian	way	and	the	Hindu	in	a	Hindu	way.	And	the
truth	is	neither	Christian	nor	Hindu,	the	truth	is	simply	truth,	Both	have	coloured
glasses.
Just	as	you	have	nut	down	your	glasses,	in	exactly	the	same	way	all	beliefs	have
to	be	put	down.	Then	you	face	the	truth	as	it	 is.	And	to	know	truth	is	 to	know
god,	there	is	no	other	god.
(The	 master	 only	 gives	 you	 hints	 about	 how	 to	 be	 blissful	 --	 not	 because	 he
wants	 to	 keep	 you	 guessing	 but	 because	 it's	 a	 delicate	 business,	 the	 job	 of
directing	disciples,	Osho	confided.)	The	master	cannot	give	you	a	detailed	map
of	 the	 territory	 because	 no	map	 exists.	And	no	map	 can	 ever	 be	made	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	every	individual	is	so	unique	that	if	a	map	is	prepared	then	the
map	will	be	applicable	only	to	the	person	who	made	it.	If	Buddha	makes	a	map
it	 is	 true	 as	 far	 as	 he	 is	 concerned,	 if	 I	 make	 a	map	 it	 is	 true	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am
concerned.	 But	 the	 trouble	 arises	 when	 people	 start	 imitating	 and	 going
according	to	the	map.
My	 map	 will	 become	 a	 distraction	 for	 you	 from	 yourself	 --	 you	 will	 start
imitating.	 So	 seeing	 the	 uniqueness	 of	 every	 individual,	 the	 real	master	 never
gives	a	map.	The	real	master	always	respects	the	uniqueness,	the	individuality,	of
every	 individual.	 Hence	 we	 can	 only	 give	 you	 a	 few	 hints.	 You	 have	 to
understand	those	hints	and	go	on	the	journey	without	any	map.
That's	why	 only	 very	 few	 courageous	 people	 ever	 try	 to	 enter	 the	 territory	 of
bliss,	of	truth,	of	love	--
because	you	have	to	go	without	any	map.	And	the	mind	is	very	much	afraid	to
go	into	something	unknown,	to	go	beyond	the	boundary	to	take	the	jump	into	the
unknown.
And	whatsoever	I	am	saying	here	can	only	be	taken	as	hints.	They	are	helpful,
but	one	is	not	to	cling	to	them	because	you	are	not	made	for	the	clothes,	clothes
are	made	for	you.	You	are	not	made	for	principles,	principles	are	made	for	you.
But	Christianity	has	a	detailed	map;	 it	 tries	 to	cut	every	person	 to	 the	size	and
shape	of	Jesus.
Now,	if	you	are	a	little	taller	than	Jesus	you	will	be	in	trouble;	Christianity	will
cut	you	down,	either	from	the	feet	or	from	the	head.	If	you	are	a	little	fatter	than
Jesus	you	are	 in	 trouble;	 you	will	 have	 to	go	on	 a	diet,	 a	 fast.	And	nobody	 is
exactly	like	Jesus.	Hence	nobody	needs	to	be	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Mohammedan,	everybody	needs	to	be	just	himself.
My	 sannyasins	 are	 not	my	 followers	 but	 just	my	 lovers,	my	 friends.	 I	 am	not
here	 to	 give	 you	 detailed	 guidance,	 but	 just	 a	 few	hints	 here	 and	 there,	 a	 few
touches	here	and	there.	And	then	I	leave	you	alone	to	make	your	own	map,	to	cut
your	clothes	according	 to	your	 size	and	 shape	and	 to	move	 into	 that	unknown
territory	within	yourself	which	is	never	repeated.	It	is	yours	and	only	yours.
So	remember:	the	greatest	calamity	that	can	happen	to	a	person	is	that	he	starts
imitating	somebody.
Respect	Jesus	and	Buddha	and	Krishna	and	Lao	Tzu	and	Zarathustra	--	and	there
have	been	many	other	people	of	tremendous	insight.	Respect	them,	listen	to	their
music,	try	to	understand	their	hints,	but	never	be	an	imitator,	never	be	a	follower.
Just	be	yourself.
(Then	Osho	talked	about	another	aspect	of	how	we	loss	track	of	our	real	nature	-
-	 by	 trying	 to	 impose	 character	 on	 ourselves	 instead	 of	 allowing	 our
consciousness	to	flower.)	If	one	follows	the	first	route,	creating	a	character,	one
goes	pseudo,	one	becomes	false,	and	split	also.
One	becomes	two	persons	because	the	very	method	of	creating	a	character	is	that
of	 repression	 --	 there	 is	no	other	method.	You	have	 to	 repress	your	nature	and
you	have	to	act	according	to	certain	principles	decided	by	others.	They	tell	you
that	is	right	and	that	is	wrong,	what	is	good	and	what	is	bad.	They	have	already
given	you	ten	commandments	and	you	have	to	follow	them,	Now	what	will	you
do	with	your	nature?
The	only	thing	possible	is	that	you	repress	your	nature	you	neglect	it,	ignore	it.
But	nature	cannot	be	changed	in	 this	way;	 it	goes	on	nagging	you	from	within
and	It	goes	on	forcing	you	to	go	against	the	character	that	you	have	cultivated;
hence	 all	 the	 hypocrisy.	 It	 is	 very	 rare	 to	 find	 a	 religious	 person	who	 is	 not	 a
hypocrite.	And	a	person	is	really	religious	only	when	be	is	not	a	hypocrite.
Hypocrisy	means	you	pretend	to	be	something	which	you	are	not.	You	know	it,	it
hurts,	hence	 it	creates	sadness.	The	whole	world	 is	 full	of	sadness	because	 the
whole	world	has	been	directed	to	create	character,	morality.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 just	 the	 opposite.	 I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 character	 at	 all,	 in
morality	st	all.	I	sm	not	telling	people	to	be	immoral,	I	am	telling	people	to	be
conscious,	to	create	consciousness.
And	that	is	what	meditation	is	meant	for.	It	is	a	method	to	create	consciousness.
It	makes	you	more	alert,	more	aware,	and	as	you	become	more	aware	your	life
starts	 changing.	 But	 now	 you	 are	 not	 trying	 to	 change;	 it	 changes	 because	 of
your	 awareness.	 Now	 you	 can	 see	 more	 clearly;	 your	 clarity	 makes	 you	 go
towards	the	right.	Not	that	you	have	to	go	towards	the	right	according	to	Moses
or	 Manu	 or	 somebody	 else;	 you	 simply	 have	 to	 be	 clear	 and	 your	 clarity
determines	 everything.	 It	 becomes	 the	only	 source	of	 decision,	Now	decisions
are	not	coming	from	the	outside,	you	are	living	your	own	insight.	Your	life	will
not	be	divided,	vou	will	not	be	a	hypocrite.	You	will	be	one	thing	and	you	will
do	 the	 same	 thing,	Your	doing	 and	your	being	will	 have	 a	deep	harmony,	 and
when	doing	and	being	are	harmonious	life	is	a	joy,	it	is	a	dance.
Good	has	to	come	out	of	consciousness,	not	out	of	cultivation	or	character.	Real
morality	is	born	out	of	ccnsciousness.	So	that	has	to	be	the	focus,	everything	else
is	non-essential.	The	essential	thing	is	awareness.
(Osho	 spoke	 next	 to	 Prem	 Puneet,	 a	 town-planner	who	 hailed	 from	Holland.)
Love	 brings	 a	 purity,	 not	 vice	 versa.	 It	 has	 been	 said	 again	 and	 again	 by	 the
priests	 in	 the	past	 that	 if	you	are	pure	 then	your	 life	will	have	the	fragrance	of
love.	That	is	wrong.	If	one	waits	for	it,	it	is	never	going	to	happen,	because	how
will	you	be	pure?
Love	is	nothing	but	a	process	of	purification.	When	you	love	you	become	aware
of	 jealousy;	 if	 you	 don't	 love	 you	will	 never	 even	 become	 aware	 of	 jealousy.
That's	why	the	so-called	saints	decide	not	to	love	--
because	that	keeps	their	jealousy	fast	asleep.	It	is	there,	dormant,	and	because	it
is	dormant	they	are	not	aware	of	it	and	nobody	else	is	aware	of	it.	But	one	is	not
free	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 there,	 like	 a	 seed	waiting	 for	 its	 time,	 and	 any	moment	 it	 can
sprout;	any	situation	and	it	can	start	growing.	The	potential	is	there,	Love	makes
you	aware	of	jealousy,	of	possessiveness,	of	domination,	of	ego	and	a	thousand
other	 trips,	One	 can	 simply	 drop	 love	 and	 all	 those	 things	will	 disappear,	 but
only	from	your	consciousness.	They	will	become	part	of	your	unconscious,	they
will	go	underground.	But	you	are	not	free	of	them.
The	 saints	 have	 been	 very	 much	 afraid	 of	 love	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 it
makes	you	aware	of	things	which	you	don't	want	to	be	aware	of,
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	be	more	loving	because	love	brings	all	kinds	of
things	to	the	surface.	It	is	a	revelation.	Of	course	there	is	great	pain	in	it	because
to	know	that	you	are	jealous	is	to	know	that	you	are	ugly;	to	know	that	you	are
possessive	is	to	know	that	you	are	not	what	you	should	be;	to	know	that	you	are
always	trying	in	some	way	or	other	to	dominate	is	not	a	good	feeling,	It	hurts	to
see	all	this	madness	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
oneself.
The	saints,	the	so-called	saints,	have	chosen	a	cheap	way:	just	drop	love	and	all
things	will	disappear	from	your	vision.
My	 effort	 is	 for	 you	 to	 go	 deeper	 into	 love	 so	 you	 can	 bring	 all	 these	 things
totally	to	the	surface,	so	that	you	can	even	know	their	very	roots	--	not	only	the
leaves	and	the	branches	but	the	roots.	And	the	day	you	come	to	know	their	roots
you	can	throw	them	out.
Love	 is	 a	 process	 of	 purification,	 but	 a	 painful	 process.	All	 growth	 is	 painful,
hence	people	have	decided	not	to	grow,	it	is	too	painful.	But	then	you	miss	the
whole	opportunity.	Then	one	remains	retarded	--
psychologically,	 spiritually,	 very	 retarded.	 You	 can	 see	 the	 whole	 humanity
living	in	a	retarded	way.
Nobody	 is	 really	 grown-up	 because	 people	 have	 avoided	 the	 pain	 that	 is
inevitable	in	growth.
So	 one	 has	 to	 accept	 the	 pain	 very	 understandingly.	 No	 need	 to	 make	 a	 fuss
about	 it,	 no	 need	 to	magnify	 it;	 one	 just	 has	 to	 accept	 it,	 the	way	 you	 accept
surgery,	the	way	you	accept	an	operation.	You	know	that	there	is	going	to	be	a
little	pain	but	that	has	to	be	accepted.	You	understandingly	accept	it.
If	 one	 can	 accept	 the	 pain	 then	 one	 can	 soon	 go	 beyond	 it.	 The	 deeper	 your
acceptance	of	 it,	 the	quicker	you	go	beyond	 it.	A	man	of	 real	 intelligence	 can
even	go	beyond	it	in	a	single	moment.	But	in	that	single	moment	he	will	have	to
suffer	hell	 because	 the	whole	of	 the	pain	will	 explode	with	 such	 intensity	 that
you	will	feel	you	are	in	hell.	But	if	you	can	accept	it,	not	in	a	reluctant	way,	not
in	any	resistant	way,	if	you	allow	it	because	it	is	natural,	it	has	to	be	so;	nothing
can	be	done	about	it;	if	you	can	accept	it	in	a	relaxed	way	you	will	go	beyond	it,
you	will	transcend	it.	And	then	you	are	purified,	purified	of	all	poisons.	Use	love
as	a	process	of	purification.
Love	is	the	beginning	and	love	is	the	end,	or	course	in	the	middle	there	is	pain,
but	it	 is	worth	it.	Once	you	have	come	to	purification	you	will	know	what	you
have	attained	is	millions	of	times	more	valuable	than	all	the	pain	that	you	have
gone	 through,	 That	 pain	 seems	 so	 tiny.	 But	 it	 is	 later	 on	 only.	When	 you	 are
passing	 through	 the	 pain	 it	 looks	 very	 big	 because	 you	 have	 nothing	 else	 to
compare	it	with.
When	the	explosion	of	bliss	happens	then	you	know	that	the	pain	was	nothing,	it
was	just	a	nightmare.
But	passing	through	a	nightmare,	although	it	 is	only	a	dream,	is	painful.	When
you	wake	up	you	know,	you	laugh	at	it	--	but	that	happens	only	later	on.
The	first	thing	that	Bodhidharma	did	when	he	became	enlightened	was	to	laugh.
It	 is	 said	 that	 tor	 seven	days	he	was	 laughing	 and	 laughing.	His	 friends,	 other
meditators,	 started	enquiring,	 "Have	you	gone	mad	or	 something?"	He	said,	 "I
was	mad,	now	I	am	sane.	And	I	am	laughing	because	it	looked	so	big.	But	I	was
making	a	mountain	out	of	a	molehill;	it	was	nothing,	Now	that	I	have	gained	is
so	much	that	 that	price	was	almost	nothing.	Just	 for	a	song	I	have	attained	 the
ultimate."
Hence	the	presence	of	a	Master	is	helpful,	In	those	moments	of	pain	and	anguish
and	anxiety	you	can	always	 look	up	to	him,	you	can	always	see	 that	 there	 is	a
future	 because	 he	 represents	 your	 future.	 He	 is	 what	 you	 will	 be	 one	 day.	 In
seeing	 him	 trust	 arises,	 in	 loving	 him	 one	 passes	 through	 the	 pain	 more
comfortably,	more	easily.
Yes,	if	the	trust	is	total	one	can	pass	through	the	pain	almost	painlessly.	So	it	all
depends	 on	 how	much	 trust	 is	 there,	 how	much	 surrender	 is	 there	 Sannyas	 is
surrender,	sannyas	is	trust,	sannyas	is	a	deep	let-go!
(An	apt	name	for	a	child	psychologist,	Anand	Daya	means	bliss	and	compassion,
Osho	explained	to	the	Dutch	woman	before	him.)
Anand	Daya	means	bliss	and	compassion.
Bliss	happens	 inside,	compassion	 is	 its	outer	expression.	Bliss	happens	at	your
very	center	and	compassion	is	its	circumference.	A	man	of	bliss	is	inevitably	a
man	of	deep	compassion	and	love.
If	 there	 is	 no	 compassion	 that	means	 bliss	 has	 not	 happened,	 that	 that	man	 is
dreaming	 about	 it,	 he	 is	 hallucinating,	 he	 is	 in	 an	 illusion.	 Compassion	 is	 the
proof	that	something	real	has	happened.
Because	 of	 this	 fact,	 that	 compassion	 proves	 that	 bliss	 has	 happened,	 many
people	have	tried	to	be	compassionate.	So	they	have	tried	the	other	way	round
because	that	seems	easier.	You	can	be	very	compassionate	towards	the	poor	and
the	sick	and	the	old	and	the	miserable.	That's	what	all	the	Christian	missionaries
are	 doing.	 They	 are	 trying	 to	 be	 compassionate,	 but	 their	 compassion	 is
superficial,	very	superficial	and	shallow.	Bliss	has	not	happened.
Remember,	 if	 bliss	 happens	 compassion	 is	 bound	 to	 follow.	You	 can	 create	 a
compassionate	character	around	yourself	but	bliss	is	not	bound	to	follow	because
the	 center	 transforms	 the	 circumference,	 not	 vice	 versa.	 The	 circumference
cannot	transform	the	center.
The	roots	change	the	leaves	but	the	leaves	cannot	change	the	roots.	If	the	roots
are	healthy	the	leaves	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
healthy,	but	you	cannot	make	 the	 leaves	healthy.	You	can	paint	 them,	you	can
make	them	as	green	as	you	want,	you	can	paint	them,	but	those	leaves	are	dying.
Your	paint	will	kill	them	sooner	than	they	would	have	died	on	their	own.	It	will
quicken	their	death,	it	will	speed	up	their	death;	they	will	become	dead	sooner.
And	that's	what	has	happened	to	your	saints;	they	are	trying	to	paint	the	leaves,
they	are	trying	to	paint	the	flowers.
It	is	not	only	with	ordinary	people,	not	only	with	women;	the	saints	are	the	same.
Women	 are	 trying	 to	 paint	 their	 cheeks	 red	 and	 their	 lips	 with	 lipstick	 and
everything.	I	don't	know	who	they	are	befooling!
Lipstick	looks	so	ugly	that	only	a	stupid	woman	can	do	it.	But	stupidity	is	very
prevalent.	 Now	 they	 are	 trying	 to	 deceive	 people	 that	 they	 have	 such	 healthy
lips.	 If	your	 lips	are	healthy	 it	 is	perfectly	good,	but	by	painting	 them	you	are
really	destroying	 them.	You	are	not	allowing	 them	the	sun	and	 the	air	because
they	are	covered	by	some	ugly	paint.
But	the	same	is	the	case	with	your	so-called	saints	--	it	is	the	same	humanity	and
the	 same	 logic.	 They	 are	 painted	 people,	 their	 compassion	 is	 just	 something
painted.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 remember	 it.	 I	 don't	 teach	 compassion	 because	 it	 has
deceived	many	people.	I	teach	bliss.	Forget	all	about	others,	the	first	thing	has	to
happen	within	you.	And	 the	moment	 it	happens	you	will	be	able	 to	share	with
others.	That	is	going	to	happen	naturally;	there	is	no	need	to	worry	about	it.	It	is
an	absolute	inevitability,	it	is	a	by-product!
(Then	 Osho	 wound	 up	 the	 evening	 by	 talking	 about	 the	 beauty	 meditation
creates	in	and	around	the	meditator.)
Meditation	does	 two	things	 to	you:	one:	 it	makes	you	aware	of	 the	beauty	 that
exists	all	around,	it	makes	you	sensitive	to	it;	and	the	second	thing:	it	makes	you
beautiful,	it	gives	you	a	certain	grace.	Your	eyes	become	full	of	beauty	because
the	whole	existence	is	beautiful.	We	just	have	to	drink	out	of	it,	we	just	have	to
allow	the	beauty	to	enter	us.	Through	our	eyes,	through	our	ears,	through	all	our
senses;	the	beauty	has	to	be	allowed	to	enter	us.	It	gives	tremendous	nourishment
to	the	soul.
Ordinarily	 a	 person	 is	 not	 aware	 of	 the	 beauty	 that	 surrounds	 existence.	He	 is
more	 aware	 of	 all	 that	 is	 ugly	 because	 the	 mind	 always	 goes	 on	 finding	 the
negative.	It	counts	the	thorns,	it	misses	the	roses.	It	counts	the	wounds,	it	misses
the	blessings.	That's	the	way	of	the	mind.
Mind	basically	is	negative,	its	whole	approach	is	negative.	It	thinks	only	of	dark
things.	 From	 the	 past	 it	 goes	 on	 collecting	 dark	 things	 and	 about	 the	 future	 it
goes	on	projecting	dark	 things.	 It	 lives	 surrounded	by	a	dark	world	of	 its	own
creation.	And	of	course	then	life	seems	to	be	a	great	hell,	The	moment	you	move
into	meditation,	the	moment	you	become	a	little	more	silent,	a	little	more	calm
and	quiet,	more	relaxed,	more	resting	in	your	being,	you	suddenly	become	aware
of	 the	beauty	of	 the	trees,	of	 the	beauty	of	 the	clouds,	 the	beauty	of	people,	of
everything	that	is	there.
Everything	is	beautiful	because	it	is	all	full	of	god;	even	rocks	are	overflowing
with	godliness.	Nothing	 is	 empty	Or	god.	And	once	you	 start	 experiencing	 all
these	 beautiful	 dimensions	 the	 ultimate	 result	 is	 that	 you	 are	 so	 nourished	 by
your	beautiful	experiences	--	by	music,	by	poetry,	by	dance,	by	celebration,	by
love	that	you	become	beautiful.	A	natural	outcome	is	that	a	great	grace	arises	in
your	being.	It	starts	radiating.
Everybody	can	see	it,	unless	one	is	determined	not	to;	that	is	another	matter.	If
one	wants	to	see	it,	it	is	there.	That's	why	we	have	surrounded	all	the	pictures	of
Jesus	and	Buddha	and	Zarathustra	with	light:	a	grace	surrounds	them.	But	people
who	are	determined	to	remain	with	closed	eyes,	of	course,	they	cannot	see	it.
To	be	a	disciple	means	now	you	will	be	seeing	your	Master	with	open	eyes,	you
will	no	 longer	be	blind	 towards	 the	Master,	 that	you	will	put	your	mind	aside,
that	 you	 will	 look	 without	 the	 mind,	 without	 the	 interference	 of	 the	 mind,
without	any	interpretation,	that	you	will	look	directly.
With	the	master	one	relates	heart	to	heart,	not	mind	to	mind.	And	then	one	can
see	 the	 beauty	 that	 has	 happened.	 And	 if	 it	 can	 happen	 to	 one	 person	 it	 can
happen	to	everybody.	It	is	everybody's	birthright.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009065
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(It	was	to	a	social	worker	from	Holland	that	Osho	spoke	about	man's	relationship
to	existence.	We	are	loved	by	existence	but	its	ways	of	expressing	that	love	are
not	understood	by	us,	he	began.)	We	are	not	open,	that's	why	we	go	on	missing.
And	 one	 always	 feels	 that	 something	 is	 missing.	 This	 is	 what	 is	 missing:
existence	goes	on	pouring	love	over	us	but	we	remain	closed.
And	that	love	that	comes	from	the	whole	is	our	most	essential	nourishment,	so
the	soul	remains	starved.
That's	 what	 is	 missing.	 The	 soul	 is	 starving,	 it	 misses	 significance,	 it	 misses
meaning.
There	is	a	feeling	that	existence	is	totally	indifferent	to	us	--	it	is	not	so,	This	is	a
stupid	 idea	 that	has	come	 into	 the	mind	of	man	because	of	 scientific	progress,
science	has	given	many	blessings	 to	man	but	certain	curses	have	also	come	 in
the	wake	of	it.
It	 has	made	man's	 body	more	 healthy,	more	 nourished,	 but	 it	 has	made	man's
soul	 very	 undernourished,	 almost	 starving,	 It	 has	 given	 much	 but	 it	 has	 also
taken	much;	and	what	it	has	given	is	superficial,	non-essential,	and	what	it	has
taken	away	is	the	essential.	So	science	goes	on	giving	us	a	more	comfortable	life
but	at	the	same	time	a	tremendous	feeling	of	meaninglessness.
Any	intelligent	person	starts	feeling	that	to	exist	is	pointless.	And	the	reason	is
not	 that	 to	 exist	 is	 pointless,	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 we	 are	 not	 able...	 we	 have
completely	forgotten	the	language	to	relate	with	existence.
Sannyas	is	the	learning	of	the	forgotten	language	so	that	one	can	again	feel	the
joy	of	being,	so	that	one	can	feel	that	we	are	significant	to	existence,	that	we	are
needed	by	the	whole,	that	we	are	not	just	accidental,	that	we	are	favoured	sons.
That	is	why	Jesus	goes	on	emphasing	that	"I	am	the	son	of	god."	But	Christians
misunderstood	 him.	 They	 thought	 only	 he	 was	 the	 son	 of	 god.	 He	 is	 simply
telling	 you	 that	 wherever	 there	 is	 the	 feeling	 of	 "I	 am"	 the	 sentence	 is	 not
complete	 unless	 you	 make	 it	 "I	 am	 the	 favoured	 son	 of	 god,	 I	 am	 the	 only
begotten	son	of	god."	Unless	that	experience	happens	to	you,	just	"I	am"	is	not
enough.	The	sentence	has	to	be	completed.
He	 is	 not	 only	 saying	 something	 about	 himself,	 he	 is	 saying	 something	 about
every	 I.	 His	 I	 does	 not	 represent	 ego,	 his	 I	 simply	 represents	 the	 feeling	 of
authentic	being,	in	everybody,	But	Christians	got	mixed	up.	They	thought	he	and
nobody	else	was	the	begotten	son	of	god.
My	teaching	here	is	to	make	everybody	feel	as	if	they	are	the	only	begotten	son
of	 god.	 Nobody	 is	 lower,	 nobody	 is	 higher	 --	 everybody	 is	 immensely
significant.
(The	meaning	of	the	name	Antar	Rainer	is	what	the	search	called	meditation	is
for:	the	inner	voice,	Osho	explained.)
We	unnecessarily	go	on	seeking	advice	 from	 the	outside	when	god	 is	 really	 to
speak	 to	 us	 from	 the	 innermost	 core	 of	 our	 being.	He	 is	 already	 there	 but	we
never	 listen	 to	 that	 still,	 small	 voice.	 In	 fact,	we	 cannot	 listen	 because	we	 are
living	in	such	a	noisy	head,	there	is	so	much	chattering	going	on.	That	still	small
voice	cannot	penetrate	unless	you	make	your	mind	absolutely	silent.
In	many	universities	 in	America	 they	have	made	 a	 few	experiments	with	 total
silence.	Of	course	their	experiments	are	concerned	with	outer	noise.	It	happened
to	a	musician	that	he	went	into	a	chamber	which	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
was	absolutely	soundproof,	no	noise	penetrated	from	the	outside.	He	entered	the
chamber	and	he	was	surprised,	because	he	was	told	there	was	absolute	silence	--
and	he	was	a	 trained	musician,	he	was	not	deaf,	he	had	an	ear	 for	 sound...	He
was	very	much	puzzled;	he	started	hearing	two	sounds.	He	rushed	out	and	told
the	director,	"What	is	the	matter?	I	hear	two	sounds."
The	director	 laughed;	he	 said,	 "Yes,	 those	 two	 sounds	will	 be	 there.	One	 is	of
your	heart	functioning	and	the	other	is	of	the	blood	circulating.	Those	we	cannot
stop	because	 they	go	with	 you."	The	musician	 said,	 "I	 have	never	 heard	 them
before!"
Nobody	 ever	 hears	 them,	 hut	 if	 you	 so	 into	 an	 absolutely	 silent	 chamber,	 one
hundred	 percent	 soundproof,	 when	 you	 will	 suddenly	 hear	 your	 heart	 beating
loudly	--	you	cannot	imagine	that	the	heart	beats	so	loudly,	it	is	as	if	the	sound	is
almost	coming	from	the	outside	--	and	your	blood	circulating.	Blood	circulates
with	 very	 great	 speed,	 it	 is	 s	 constant	 flow.	 He	 drew	 a	 squiggly	 line.	 It	 is
riverlike;	it	has	its	own	sound.
The	same	happens	when	your	 inner	mind	 is	completely	 silenced	be	meditative
awareness.	Then	you	hear	the	innermost	advice	and	you	will	be	able	to	hear	it	in
every	situation	That	is	the	finding	of	the	inner	guide.
The	 function	of	 the	master	 is	 to	help	you	 to	 find	your	 inner	master.	The	outer
master	is	only	a	mirror	so	that	you	can	slowly	move	inwards	and	find	your	own
master.	 The	 real	Master's	work	 is	 to	 gradually	 become	 useless	 to	 the	 disciple.
Slowly	slowly,	gradually,	 the	master	starts	 receding.	As	your	 inner	voice	starts
working	he	starts	pulling	his	hands	back.	There	is	no	need	for	him,	he	has	done
his	work.	 That	 is	 his	work,	 to	make	 your	 inner	 voice	 heard	 by	 you,	 then	 you
know	 the	 source	 of	 all	 wisdom.	 Then	 in	 every	 situation	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to
immediately	 listen	 to	 the	 inner	 heart	 --	 and	 it	 is	 always	 right,	 it	 never	 goes
wrong.
The	whole	purpose	of	meditation	is	just	to	find	the	inner	guide.	Once	you	have
found	the	inner	guide	meditation	also	is	no	more	needed;	then	nothing	is	needed,
You	have	got	your	eyes	open,	now	you	can	live	your	life	with	total	spontaneity.
You	need	not	depend	on	the	memory	system	at	all,	now	your	answers	will	be	real
responses.	Your	actions	will	be	real	responses,	not	reactions.
Reactions	come	from	the	mind,	responses	come	from	the	innermost	core	--	and
there	is	a	vast	differences,	an	immense	distance	between	the	two.	A	reaction	is
borrowed,	 hence	 you	 are	 not	 your	 own	 self;	 the	 response	 is	 yours,	 hence	 it
fulfils,	it	helps	you	to	go	on	growing,	to	go	on	moving	higher	and	higher.
Finally,	 following	 the	 inner	advice	one	comes	 to	 the	point	where	one	becomes
absolutely	harmonious	with	 the	whole,	because	when	you	go	 right	always	you
become	 harmonious	 with	 the	 whole.	 That's	 exactly	 the	 meaning	 of	 right	 and
wrong.
Wrong	means	going	astray	from	the	whole,	becoming	discordant	with	the	whole,
and	right	means	falling	into	harmony	with	the	whole.	And	the	whole	has	a	direct
connection	with	your	being.
That's	the	meaning	of	your	name.	You	have	to	discover	it,	then	it	will	become	a
truth	to	you.
(Osho	 talked	 again	 tonight	 about	 meditation	 being	 the	 means	 by	 which	 we
discover	that	our	nature	is	light.	Once	we	know	that,	we	know	we	are	immortal
and	there	is	no	need	to	keep	returning	to	live	out	another	life.)
One	moves	into	the	vastness	of	existence	and	becomes	part	of	it.	That	is	what	is
called	meeting	with	god.	Just	as	a	river	goes	into	the	ocean,	the	meditator	enters
the	vastness	of	existence	and	becomes	one	with	it.	The	twoness	disappears	--	that
is	 the	experience	of	immortality.	Then	one	is,	but	not	separate	from	the	whole;
one	is	part	of	the	whole,	an	intrinsic,	organic	part	of	the	whole.	Those	who	have
attained	this,	they	are	the	awakened	ones.
Because	of	the	experience	of	light	the	awakened	person	is	called	enlightened.	He
has	come	 to	experience	 the	 inner	 light	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	greatest	 experience	 in
life.	Life	is	really	an	opportunity	to	experience	light,	to	become	enlightened.
(Then	he	talked	of	man's	dual	nature;	he	is	composed	of	both	light	and	darkness,
Osho	told	Melania,	an	Italian	woman.)
Man	 consists	 of	 both.	 The	 body	 consists	 of	 darkness	 and	 the	 soul	 consists	 of
light,	and	where	this	darkness	and	light	meet	that	is	the	territory	of	the	mind.	So
mind	has	both	a	little	bit	of	light	and	a	little	bit	of	darkness;	hence	mind	always
remains	in	tension,	because	it	is	being	pulled	in	two	opposite	directions.
The	 body	 pulls	 it	 towards	 itself,	 the	 soul	 pulls	 it	 towards	 self,	 And	 both	 are
almost	 equal	 magnetic	 forces	 so	 the	 mind	 remains	 hanging,	 in	 between.
Sometimes	it	chooses	the	body,	sometimes	it	chooses	the	soul.
But	whatsoever	it	chooses	there	is	always	the	feeling	that	it	is	wrong	because	the
other	has	been	left.	There	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	a	feeling	that	something	is	missing.
Mind	continuously	lives	in	choice.	And	every	choice	is	going	to	be	only	half	and
the	other	half	will	take	revenge,	hence	mind	is	anxiety,	anguish.	The	whole	effort
here	is	to	help	you	to	no	beyond	mind.
The	mind	cannot	become	part	either	of	the	body	or	of	the	soul.	One	has	to	get
out	 of	 the	 mind	 to	 be	 free	 of	 the	 tension.	 Unless	 one	 transcends	 mind,	 goes
beyond	it,	one	cannot	feel	peace,	There	is	no	such	thing	as	peace	of	mind.	People
talk	 about	 peace	 of	mind	 --	 that	 is	 nonsense.	Mind	means	 no	 peace,	 no-mind
means	peace.	So	the	right	expression	will	be	"peace	of	no-mind"	--	then	you	are
centred	in	your	real	being.
So	 I	 am	giving	 you	 a	 name	which	 represents	 both.	Up	 to	 now	you	have	 been
Melania,	darkness;	now	you	have	to	be	light.	It	is	a	quantum	leap,	a	jump.	It	is
possible,	although	difficult	--	but	that	difficulty	is	beautiful,	it	is	a	challenge.	It
makes	life	more	exciting,	it	makes	growth	an	adventure.
Love,	bliss,	awareness	--	these	are	things	that	come	from	the	beyond.	No	money
can	purchase	them,	no	power	can	purchase	them,	they	are	not	commodities.
And	 these	 are	 the	 only	 things	 worth	 having,	 so	 those	 who	 live	 only	 with
purchasable	things	are	simply	wasting	their	lives.	Life	takes	on	a	new	colour	and
new	flavour	and	new	beauty	the	moment	you	start	seeking	the	priceless.	And	the
most	important	of	all	the	priceless	values	is	meditation,	because	once	you	enter
into	meditation	all	other	values	follow	of	their	own	accord.
A	meditative	person	is	bound	to	be	blissful,	is	bound	to	be	loving,	is	bound	to	be
free,	so	he	has	freedom,	he	has	love,	he	has	bliss.	In	fact	all	the	treasures	of	life
become	 available	 to	 him,	Meditation	 functions	 as	 a	master	 key	 --	 so	 put	 your
whole	energy	into	meditation.
(By	 prefixing	 her	 name,	 Maria,	 with	 Atit	 (transcending)	 she	 had	 the	 whole
meaning	of	sannyas	in	a	nutshell,	Osho	told	the	next	sannyasin.)
Maria	 is	 a	 very	 paradoxical	 word,	 hence	 very	 significant.	 All	 paradoxes	 are
significant	because	they	come	very	close	to	the	truth.	Truth	contains	its	opposite.
Maria	has	three	meanings.	The	first	meaning	is	bitterness	--	that	is	where	we	all
are.	The	second	meaning	is	rebellion	--	we	have	to	rebel	against	bitterness,	we
have	 to	 drop	 bitterness.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 Atit	 Maria:	 to	 go	 beyond
bitterness.	The	very	going	is	rebellion.	And	the	third	meaning	is	fragrance.
When	 you	 have	 gone	 beyond	 bitterness,	 when	 you	 have	 passed	 through	 the
mutation,	that	revolution,	great	fragrance	is	released.
We	are	bitter	because	we	are	not	what	we	should	be.	Everybody	is	feeling	sour
because	everybody	is	feeling	this	is	not	what	life	should	be;	if	this	is	all	then	this
is	nothing.	There	must	be	something	more	to	it,	and	unless	that	something	more
is	 found	 one	 cannot	 drop	 one's	 bitterness.	 Out	 of	 this	 bitterness	 comes	 anger,
jealousy,	 violence,	 hatred	 --	 all	 kinds	 of	 negativities.	 One	 is	 continuously
complaining	 but	 the	 real	 complaint	 is	 somewhere	 else	 deep	 down.	 It	 is	 a
complaint	against	existence,	that	"What	am	I	doing	here?
Why	am	I	here?	--	nothing	is	happening.	Why	am	I	forced	to	be	alive,	because
nothing	is	happening."	Time	goes	on	passing	and	life	remains	without	any	bliss.
It	creates	bitterness.
It	is	not	accidental	that	old	people	become	very	bitter.	It	is	very	difficult	to	live
with	 old	 people,	 even	 if	 they	 are	 your	 own	parents.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 for	 the
simple	 reason	 that	 their	 whole	 life	 has	 gone	 down	 the	 drain,	 they	 are	 feeling
bitter.	They	jump	upon	everything	to	throw	their	negativity;	they	start	catharting
and	 freaking	 out	 over	 anything.	 They	 cannot	 tolerate	 children	 being	 happy,
dancing,	singing,	shouting	out	of	joy
--	 they	 cannot	 tolerate	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 nuisance	 for	 them,	 because	 they	 have	missed
their	life.	And	in	fact	when	they	are	saying,	"Don't	be	a	nuisance	to	us,"	they	are
simply	 saying,	 "How	dare	 you	be	 so	 joyous!"	They	 are	 against	 young	people,
and	whatsoever	the	young	people	are	doing,	the	old	always	think	they	are	wrong.
In	fact,	they	are	simply	feeling	bitter	about	the	whole	thing	called	life.	And	they
go	on	finding	excuses....	 It	 is	very	rare	 to	 find	an	old	person	who	 is	not	bitter,
that	means	he	has	lived	really	beautifully,	he	is	really	grown-up.	Then	old	people
have	 tremendous	beauty	which	no	young	man	can	ever	have.	He	has	a	certain
ripeness,	maturity,	he	is	seasoned.	He	has	seen	so	much	and	lived	so	much	that
he	is	tremendously	grateful	to	god.
But	it	is	very	hard	to	find	that	type	of	old	man,	because	it	means	that	man	is	a
Buddha,	a	Christ,	a	Krishna.	Only	an	awakened	person	can	be	non-bitter	in	old
age	--	because	death	 is	coming,	 life	 is	gone,	what	 is	 there	 for	one	 to	be	happy
about?	One	is	simply	angry.
You	have	heard	about	angry	people,	angry	young	men,	but	really	no	young	man
can	ever	be	as	angry	as	old	people.	Nobody	talks	about	angry	old	men,	but	my
own	experience	--	I	have	watched	young	people,	old	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
people	--	is	that	nobody	can	be	as	angry	as	the	old.
Bitterness	is	a	state	of	ignorance.	You	have	to	go	beyond	it,	you	have	to	learn	the
awareness	which	becomes	a	bridge	to	take	you	beyond.	And	that	very	going	is
revolution.	 The	moment	 you	 have	 really	 gone	 beyond	 all	 complaints,	 all	 no's,
there	arises	a	tremendous	yes	--	just	yes,	yes,	yes	--	there	is	great	fragrance.
The	same	energy	that	was	bitter	becomes	fragrance.
This	is	the	whole	process	of	sannyas.	Your	name	contains	the	whole	process	of
sannyas,	from	bitterness	to	fragrance.
(Her	 new	 name,	 Prabhati,	 means	 a	 morning	 song,	 Osho	 said	 and	 then	 he
described	the	Indian	custom	of	singing	to	welcome	the	new	day.)
Prabhat	 is	 sung	 in	 praise	 of	 the	morning	 sun.	 Prabhat	means	 the	morning,	 the
dawn,	when	the	sun	is	just	about	to	rise.	The	East	has	become	red	but	the	sun	has
not	yet	come	to	the	horizon.
In	India	we	have	songs	for	every	hour	--	different	melodies,	different	songs.	For
the	 evening	 we	 have	 one	 kind	 of	 song	 which	 has	 some	 attunement	 with	 the
evening;	for	the	night	we	have	different	songs,	different	melodies;	for	midnight
again	a	different	melody.
To	be	in	attunement	with	existence,	Indian	music	is	divided	into	hours.	There	are
different	songs	for	each	twenty-four	hours,	because	every	hour	existence	takes	a
new	birth.	It	is	different	--	morning	is	different.
In	 the	morning	birds	are	 singing	 --	 that	 is	prabhati.	 In	 the	night	 it	 is	all	 silent;
birds	 are	 asleep,	 trees	 are	 asleep,	 everybody	 is	 asleep	 --	 so	we	 have	melodies
which	will	help	you	to	go	into	deep	sleep.	The	prabhati	will	wake	you	up.
In	 the	 ancient	 days	 there	 was	 a	 routine	 in	 the	 ashrams,	 and	 that's	 what	 I'm
thinking	of	having	 for	 the	new	commune.	 In	 the	morning	when	 the	sun	 is	 just
about	to	rise,	there	should	be	singing,	dancing;	just	as	birds	and	trees	sway	in	the
wind	 and	 everybody	 is	 agog,	waiting	 for	 the	 sun	 to	 come	on	 the	horizon,	 and
then	suddenly	the	sun	comes.	It	is	a	welcoming	song.	The	most	beautiful	song	is
prabhati	because	it	is	the	beginning	of	the	day,	the	beginning	of	a	new	day,	a	new
birth.
In	the	East	we	have	thought	that	going	to	sleep	every	night	is	a	small	death.	It	is,
because	in	sleep	you	completely	forget	who	you	are.	If	you	die	in	your	sleep	you
will	never	know	when	you	died	or	whether	you	were	ever	alive.	So	 sleep	 is	 a
small	death,	a	mini-death.	And	every	morning	is	a	mini-birth,	a	new	birth,	and
you	have	to	praise	the	lord	--	he	has	given	you	another	day!	We	are	not	worthy,
we	have	wasted	yesterday,	all	the	yesterdays.	But	he	is	generous,	he	has	given	us
another	chance	to	try	again,	to	live,	to	rejoice,	to	be	total!
In	the	East	the	color	orange	is	the	color	of	the	morning,	of	the	dawn.	That's	why
I	have	chosen	it	for	my	sannyasins.	It	has	to	be	the	dawn	of	a	new	humanity.	My
sannyasin	has	to	prove	that	there	is	a	new	man	on	earth;	that	is	the	most	essential
thing	needed	today:	the	beginning	of	the	new	man.	The	old	is	finished	and	gone,
the	old	is	tired,	exhausted,	spent.	We	are	just	somehow	carrying	the	old	corpse.	It
needs	to	be	burned,	given	a	last	farewell.	We	have	to	say	goodbye	to	it	so	that	we
can	welcome	the	new.	The	evening	songs	are	goodbye	--	saying	goodbye	to	the
sun.	Maybe	we	will	never	see	the	sun	again;	so	it	is	the	last	goodbye,	every	day
we	say	a	last	goodbye.	But	in	the	morning	there	has	to	be	a	welcome	song	--	that
is	prabhati.
Meditation	brings	you	 to	 the	beginning	of	a	new	birth,	 an	 inner	birth;	 it	 is	 the
beginning	of	dawn	inside.
So	the	outer	orange	simply	represents	something	of	the	inside.	It	is	only	through
meditation	that	one	can	get	out	of	sleep	and	can	enter	the	day,	because	it	is	only
through	 meditation	 that	 one	 can	 become	 awake.	 So	 put	 your	 energies	 into
meditation,	focus	all	your	energies	on	meditation.
And	the	morning	is	never	far	away;	it	simply	needs	the	heart	to	open	a	song	of
welcome,	and	it	is	there.
It	 is	 just	waiting	for	you	to	sing	your	heart	out.	The	moment	you	start	dancing
the	sun	cannot	resist	the	temptation	to	come	up	on	the	horizon.
I	feel	sometimes	that	if	one	day	all	the	birds	decide	not	to	sing,	the	sun	will	not
rise.	For	what?	If	all	 the	trees	decide	not	to	open	their	flowers	saying,	"Let	the
sun	 come	 first,"	 the	 sun	 won't	 come.	 There	 has	 to	 be	 an	 inner	 connection;	 it
cannot	be	a	one-sided	affair.	It	is	not	only	that	the	sun	rises	and	the	flowers	open
and	the	birds	sing	--	no.	Vice	versa	is	also	true:	the	flowers	open,	the	birds	sing
and	the	sun	rises.	It	has	to	be	two-way.
Life	 is	always	interdependent;	 the	poets	have	felt	 it.	Tennyson	said,	"If	I	could
understand	 a	 single	 flower,	 root	 and	 all,	 then	 I	 would	 understand	 the	 whole
universe."
And	he	is	right	--	but	this	has	been	only	a	feeling	in	the	poets.	Mystics	have	seen
it,	experienced	it,	that	this	is	so.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Anahato,	his	new	name,	means	the	inner	music,	Osho	told	the	last	sannyasin.)
The	 inner	music	has	a	strange	quality.	The	outer	music	needs	an	 instrument,	 it
needs	 a	 duality	 --	 the	musician	 and	 the	 instrument.	 The	 inner	music	 does	 not
need	 duality	 --	 the	musician	 is	 the	music.	The	musician	 is	 the	 instrument,	 the
musician	is	all.	There	is	no	division.
The	Zen	people	call	it	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.	No,	one	hand	cannot	clap.
They	are	simply	showing	that	inside	it	happens,	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.
Two	hands	are	needed	to	clap.	That	is	the	outside	music,	two	hands	clapping.	It
is	 easy	 for	 two	hands	 to	clap;	 there	 is	 a	 conflict,	 there	 is	 a	 struggle,	 there	 is	 a
clash.	But	the	inner	music,	anahato,	means	silence,	the	sound	of	silence.
Silence	has	its	own	music.	It	can	be	heard	only	by	those	who	have	dropped	all
noise	 from	 the	 head.	 It	 can	 be	 heard	 only	 by	 the	 heart,	 not	 by	 the	 head.	 The
heady	person	 goes	 on	missing	 it.	Only	 the	 person	who	 is	 full	 of	 heart,	 full	 of
love,	can	hear	the	music.
This	 is	 the	music	 that	 helps	 you	 to	 go	 into	 the	 beyond.	 It	 becomes	 a	 rainbow
bridge.	You	cannot	grasp	 it	with	 the	mind,	you	cannot	comprehend	 it	with	 the
mind.	The	mind	has	to	be	put	aside,	completely	put	aside,	and	then	suddenly	it	is
there.
That	is	the	whole	art	of	meditation,	putting	the	mind	slowly	aside	and	getting	to
the	inner	music,	becoming	attuned	to	the	inner	world	of	oneness.	You	can	call	it
the	experience	of	god,	tao,	truth,	dhamma,	it	is	really	nothing	but	the	experience
of	the	ultimate	music.	All	names	for	it	are	good,	they	indicate	some	quality	of	it,
but	it	is	the	hidden	harmony	of	Heraclitus;	that	is	the	same	thing.
To	 me,	 Heraclitus	 is	 not	 a	 philosopher	 but	 a	 mystic	 and	 one	 of	 the	 greatest
mystics.	The	West	has	completely	misunderstood	him.	He	talks	about	the	hidden
harmony,	it	is	hidden	in	everybody,	and	once	you	have	known	it	inside	you,	you
will	be	able	to	know	it	everywhere	else.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009075
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Bliss	is	the	shadow	of	creativity.	You	cannot	find	bliss	unless	you	are	creative;	it
is	a	by-product.
whenever	one	creates	something,	bliss	automatically	follows.	Only	the	creators
know	what	it	is.	The	painter	knows	when	he	is	lost	in	his	painting.	Those	are	the
few	moments	of	creativity	when	the	window	opens	--
the	window	in	your	own	being	--	because	when	one	is	lost	in	creativity	the	ego
disappears.	 In	 the	 moment	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 there,	 you	 are,	 and	 to	 be	 is	 to	 be
blissful.
The	dancer	loses	himself	in	the	dance	and	suddenly	all	is	bliss.	It	does	not	matter
what	 one	 creates;	 one	 may	 be	 a	 potter,	 a	 poet,	 a	 physician,	 one	 may	 be	 a
mathematician,	a	musician,	a	mystic.	It	does	not	matter	what	one	creates,	what
matters	 is	 that	one	creates,	because	except	 through	creativity	one	cannot	know
one's	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
true	being.	And	that	very	knowing	is	bliss,	that	very	knowing	is	divine,	that	very
knowing	is	the	knowing	of	god.	Bliss	is	another	name	for	god.
We	 call	 god	 the	 creator;	 if	 we	 are	 also	 creative	 in	 our	 own	 way	 then	 we
participate	 in	 god's	 being.	 That	 is	 bliss	 --	 that	 participation,	 that	meeting,	 that
melting,	that	merger.
(Sannyas	 is	 a	 sort	 of	 spiritual	 striptease.	 This	 was	 the	 message	 to	 Anand
Raphela.)	Man	as	an	ego	is	a	wound	--	he	is	sick,	he	is	unhealthy.	It	continuously
hurts;	 there	 is	 pain	 and	 anguish,	 there	 is	 misery,	 anxiety,	 darkness.	 One	 feels
absolutely	useless.	But	this	whole	phenomenon	of	the	ego,	this	wound	that	hurts
so	much,	we	don't	allow	to	be	healed.	We	don't	open	it	to	the	sun,	to	the	rain,	to
the	wind;	we	keep	it	hidden,	we	are	afraid	to	expose	it.	We	go	on	covering	it,	we
hide	it	 from	everybody,	we	are	afraid	 that	somebody	may	know	our	wound.	In
fact	because	we	hide	it,	it	remains	unhealed;	because	we	keep	it	hidden	behind
layers	and	layers	of	hypocrisy	it	remains	like	a	cancer	--	continuously	growing
and	becoming	bigger	and	bigger.	And	the	bigger	it	is,	the	more	you	have	to	hide
it.	You	hide	one	side	and	then	another	side	starts	showing	you	still	another	side,
and	slowly	slowly	the	whole	of	your	life	becomes	just	a	black	hole.
That's	what	people	are,	just	black	holes.	And	they	are	responsible	for	this	whole
thing;	this	hell	is	their	own	creation.	Otherwise	God	is	always	ready	to	heal,	the
whole	is	always	ready	to	heal.	But	we	have	to	expose	ourselves.
That's	what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about;	 it	 is	 total	 exposure.	One	 has	 to	 stand	 naked,
utterly	naked	before	existence,	with	no	secrets,	with	no	privacy,	and	immediately
the	healing	happens,	the	miracle	happens.
When	it	happens	for	the	first	time	one	cannot	believe	that	the	whole	wound	has
evaporated	so	quickly.	It	 is	as	 if	 it	never	existed	in	the	first	place,	as	 if	 it	were
just	a	dream,	a	nightmare.	In	fact	that's	what	it	is	--	a	dream,	a	nightmare.
Sannyas	means	exposing	yourself,	whatsoever	you	are	--	without	feeling	guilty,
without	feeling	condemned,	without	feeling	that	you	are	wrong,	without	thinking
of	 what	 others	 will	 say,	 without	 thinking	 of	 others.	 Sannyas	 means	 to	 be
unselfconscious,	 to	open	up	 totally	without	 any	 fear.	And	one	 is	 in	 for	 a	great
surprise:	 all	 misery,	 all	 anguish,	 is	 simply	 not	 found;	 one	 is	 healed.	 But	 this
healing	 happens	 only	 through	 exposure	 to	 the	whole	 --	 and	 our	 religions,	 our
moralities,	all	make	us	hypocrites.	They	are	all	against	being	nude,	being	in	the
open.
It	 is	 not	 only	 that	 we	 are	 hiding	 our	 physical	 nudity	 behind	 clothes,	 that	 is
nothing	--	we	are	hiding	our	reality	also	behind	many	many	clothes.	We	want	to
appear	beautiful	and	we	hide	ugliness;	we	want	to	appear	knowledgeable	and	we
hide	 ignorance.	But	 remember,	whatsoever	you	hide	you	will	 remain;	you	will
remain	that	which	you	have	hidden	inside.	You	will	never	be	that	which	you	are
pretending	to	be.
It	 is	 better	 to	 drop	 all	 hypocrisy.	 I	 don't	 teach	 renouncing	 the	 world,	 I	 teach
renouncing	 hypocrisy.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 thing	 to	 be	 renounced,	 and	 everything
else	happens	on	its	own.	Be	sincere,	authentic,	true.
Whatsoever	you	are,	accept	it,	because	without	accepting	it	you	will	not	expose
yourself.
The	healing	is	always	done	by	God	but	you	have	to	allow	him;	you	have	to	show
him	your	wound,	where	it	hurts.	You	don't	deceive	the	physician,	you	have	to	tell
him	 the	whole	 thing,	whatsoever	 it	 is,	howsoever	ugly	 it	 appears.	You	have	 to
show	him	your	wounds;	only	then	can	he	take	the	pus	out,	only	then	can	he	help
the	healing	process.
Buddha	said	 that	he	was	not	a	philosopher	but	a	physician.	Nanak	too	said	 the
same,	 that	he	was	 just	a	physician.	And	 I	 see	 the	 truth	of	 it:	 every	master	 is	a
physician	because	 every	master	only	 functions	 as	 a	window	 to	God.	He	 is	 the
ultimate	physician.
To	be	a	disciple	means	you	will	not	be	at	all	afraid	of	me,	you	will	not	at	all	hide
in	any	way,	gross	or	subtle,	 that	you	will	be	authentic	and	open.	And	then	you
have	nothing	to	do	as	far	as	healing	is	concerned,	it	happens	on	its	own.	You	can
rely	on	God,	on	the	whole.	But	one	has	to	gather	courage	to	expose	one's	total
nakedness.
(God	has	given	us	so	many	gifts	but	they	are	hidden	in	the	most	obvious	place
and	 that's	 just	 where	 we	 don't	 look.	 Man	 is	 a	 curious	 creature,	 Osho
commended.)
Man	 is	 s	 strange	 animal,	 a	 little	 berserk.	 He	 goes	 to	 the	 Himalayas,	 climbs
Everest	and	goes	to	the	moon	Now	he	is	trying	to	reach	Mars,	and	he	will	go	to
the	farthest	stars	but	he	will	not	look	within.	And	there	is	the	whole	kingdom	of
god.
Love	is	there	ready	to	explode.	Bliss	is	there	just	waiting	for	you	to	come	in	and
it	 is	 yours.	 Truth	 is	 there,	 your	 immortal	 being	 is	 there.	 Nothing	 has	 to	 be
achieved	--	it	is	already	given,	it	is	already	part	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you.	Even	if	you	want	to	lose	it	you	cannot	lose	it,	it	is	an	intrinsic	part	of	you,
you	cannot	cut	it	yourself.
There	is	no	way	to	lose	it	but	there	is	a	way	to	forget	all	about	it.	It	will	remain
there	and	you	will	so	on	searching	for	it	in	the	outside	world,	and	because	you
never	look	in	the	direction	it	is,	howsoever	sincere	your	search	is,	it	is	going	to
fail.
Sannyas	means	the	beginning	of	an	inner	journey,	exploring	your	inner	universe.
And	 those	who	have	gone	within	have	 found	everything	 that	 is	worth	 finding.
Love	is	one	of	those	gifts	which	are	waiting	inside.
As	you	turn	in,	suddenly	spring	comes	and	flowers	start	coming,	love	blossoms,
truth	is	revealed,	bliss	explodes.	Suddenly	you	know	what	Christ	means	when	he
says	the	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you.
God	 is	 not	 like	 a	 flower	 but	 like	 a	 fragrance,	 not	 like	 a	 person	 but	 like	 a
presence.	You	can	feel	it	but	you	cannot	touch	it.	You	can	enjoy	it,	rejoice	in	it,
but	you	cannot	possess	it.
You	can	possess	a	flower,	but	you	cannot	possess	the	fragrance,	you	cannot	hold
the	fragrance	in	your	hand.	But	you	can	enjoy	it,	you	can	rejoice	in	it,	you	can
feel	it,	you	can	dance	with	it.
And	 Doris	 (the	 second	 part	 of	 her	 name)	 means	 bountiful,	 abundant,
overflowing.	This,	call	it	a	quality	called	godliness,	is	abundant,	it	is	infinite,	it	is
overflowing.	One	can	drink	as	much	as	one	wants,	it	is	inexhaustible.	So	there	is
no	need	to	be	miserly	about	bliss.	Be	as	blissful	as	you	can,	don't	put	any	limit
on	it;	you	cannot	exhaust	it.
Be	as	loving	as	you	can,	give	as	much	love	as	you	can.	You	cannot	exhaust	it;	on
the	 contrary,	 the	 more	 you	 give,	 the	 more	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 of	 the
inexhaustible	 source	 because	 it	 will	 be	 coming	 and	 coming.	 And	 the	 river
becomes	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 the	more	 you	 share.	The	more	 you	 sing,	 the	more
new	 songs	 arise	 from	 the	 depths	 of	 your	 own	 being;	 the	more	 you	 dance,	 the
more	dance	comes	in.
But	 people	 are	 living	 so	 miserly,	 so	 calculatively,	 so	 afraid	 that	 if	 they	 love
somebody	so	much	love	is	gone,	that	they	withhold.	The	other	is	doing	the	same,
and	both	 are	 in	 tremendous	need	 to	 be	 loved	 and	 in	 tremendous	need	 to	 love.
They	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 coin,	 to	 love	 and	 to	 be	 loved.	But	 both	 are
holding,	 both	 are	 trying	 to	 bargain,	 both	 are	 trying	 to	 be	 as	 calculative	 and
cunning	as	possible,	both	are	business-like.	The	whole	 idea	 is	 to	give	 less	and
take	more	so	you	are	in	profit.	The	other	is	also	thinking	the	same	way,
I	have	heard	about	a	Jew:	he	was	talking	to	a	friend	about	the	beauty	of	his	wife.
The	friend	said,
"Excuse	me,	but	do	you	know	that	your	wife	has	 four	 lovers?"	He	said,	"I	am
aware	of	it."	The	man	said,
"Then	I	don't	understand.	You	always	go	on	bragging	about	her	beauty...,	She	is
not	faithful	to	you,	she	has	four	other	lovers,	so	what	kind	of	love	is	this?"
He	said,	"You	don't	understand.	It	 is	better	 to	have	twenty	percent	 interest	 in	a
good	deal	than	to	have	one	hundred	percent	interest	in	a	rotten	deal."	Now	this	is
the	Jewish	mind:	twenty	percent	is	far	better	than	having	one	hundred	percent	in
a	rotten	deal.
But	 everybody	 is	 a	 Jew.	 The	 whole	 world	 is	 full	 of	 Jews,	 Christian	 Jews,
Mohammedan	Jews,	Hindu	 Jews.	 Jewishness	 is	not	 confined	 to	 the	 Jews	only,
the	Jew	is	very	comprehensive	--	it	includes	everybody,	There	are	many	religions
but	the	real	religion	seems	to	be	Judaic,	Now	all	other	religions	are	just	branches
because	 dig	 into	 anybody	 and	 you	 will	 find	 a	 Jew.	 Wherever	 you	 find	 a
calculator	the	Jew	is	present.
This	 calculation	 works	 in	 the	 world	 because	 in	 the	 world	 everything	 is	 in
scarcity.	It	is	perfectly	logical	in	the	world	to	give	less	and	get	more,	then	only
do	you	have	some	profit.	It	is	valid	economics	as	far	as	the	world	is	concerned
but	it	 is	absolutely	invalid	the	moment	you	start	moving	towards	the	beyond	--
this	economics	does	not	function.	You	need	a	meta-economics.
And	that's	what	I	teach,	the	meta-economics.	There	is	a	world	beyond	this	world
where	to	give	more	is	profitable.	The	more	you	give,	the	more	profit	you	have.	It
is	a	totally	different	arithmetic,	It	defies	all	rules	of	the	ordinary	arithmetics;	it	is
a	higher	arithmetic.
That's	 why	 Jesus	 says,	 "Love	 your	 enemies."	 It	 is	 not	 that	 he	 is	 saying	 that
loving	your	enemies	is	great	compassion	and	you	are	being	a	great	saint	--	that	is
all	nonsense.	He	is	simply	talking	about	a	higher	mathematics.	He	is	saying	don't
miss	 --	 even	 if	he	 is	 an	enemy,	don't	 be	bothered,	give,	because	 the	more	you
give,	the	more	you	will	get.	So	why	miss	the	opportunity?	It	does	not	matter	to
whom	you	are	giving;	 just	go	on	overflowing	and	your	 life	will	become	vaster
and	vaster.	The	more	you	give,	the	more	you	are.
And	when	you	can	give	totally	without	holding	anything,	you	become	whole.
And	that	is	the	moment	when	one	experiences	godliness,	liberation,	nirvana.
(Osho	 named	 the	 middle-aged	 German	 doctor	 Anand	 Praphulla,	 and	 then
explained	why.)	Bliss	is	like	a	flower;	the	bud	is	there,	it	only	needs	to	open	its
petals.	And	for	that	opening	you	have	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
drop	 all	 the	 barriers	 between	 you	 and	 the	 sun,	 between	 you	 and	 the	 moon,
between	 you	 and	 the	 stars,	 between	 you	 an	 the	 whole,	 otherwise	 the	 flower
cannot	open	If	you	hide	the	flower	in	a	room	where	no	sun	reaches	it,	no	wind
reaches	it,	no	rain	reaches	it,	you	may	think	that	you	are	protecting	it	but	you	are
killing	it,	you	are	committing	a	murder.	It	is	with	good	intentions,	of	course,	it	is
for	the	flower's	own	good,	because	outside	there	is	wind	and	there	is	too	much
rain	and	 too	much	sun	and	you	want	 to	protect	 the	delicate	bud.	So	 that	 it	can
become	a	flower	you	hide	it	in	your	bedroom	and	you	close	all	the	doors	and	all
the	windows....	It	will	die.
It	can	only	open	when	it	is	connected	with	the	sun	it	can	only	open	when	it	can
dance	in	the	wind,	it	can	only	open	when	it	can	enjoy	the	shower	of	rain,	when	it
can	have	a	dialogue	with	the	stars,	It	belongs	to	the	whole;	it	can	only	open	up	in
a	deep	rootedness	with	the	whole.
Man	remains	a	bud,	his	blissfulness	remains	a	bud	for	the	simple	reason	that	he
is	too	concerned	about	security,	concerned	that	he	does	not	go	into	any	danger,
afraid	of	danger,	insecurity,	risk.	So	he	keeps	himself	within	a	certain	boundary
and	encloses	himself	in	a	protective	wall.	This	is	how	he	becomes	a	prisoner.
Life	can	be	lived	only	as	insecurity,	life	can	be	lived	only	as	danger	--	there	is	no
other	way.	The	other	possibility	is	only	death.	These	are	the	two	alternatives.	To
be	 in	 a	 grave	 is	 very	 secure.	 Nothing	 will	 happen	 to	 you	 --	 no	 accident,	 no
disease,	no	death.	Nothing	can	happen	to	the	dead	person	he	is	completely	safe.
In	fact	insurance	companies	should	only	insure	the	dead.	It	is	a	risk	to	insure	an
alive	person	--
anything	can	happen.	Any	moment	 anything	 is	possible.	And	 the	more	alive	a
person	is,	the	greater	are	the	possibilities.
But	in	the	name	of	security,	we	miss	the	whole	opportunity	of	opening	up.	We
miss	immortality	because	we	are	afraid	of	death,	If	we	accept	the	danger	and	go
into	 it,	 in	 fact,	 rejoicing	 it,	making	 it	 into	an	adventure,	 then	 life	 is	bliss.	And
only	these	adventurous	souls	have	known	what	god	is.
It	teach	adventure,	courage,	risk.	I	teach	aliveness.
The	 older	 religions	 have	 been	 teaching	 a	 kind	 of	 death	 to	 people.	 They	 are
making	 them	more	 afraid	 than	 they	 are	 already.	 People	 are	 already	 afraid	 and
then	 the	priest	makes	 them	more	afraid	of	hell	and	all	 the	 tortures	of	hell.	The
priest	 exists	because	 fear	 can	be	exploited.	Once	you	are	 afraid	you	are	 in	his
hands;	you	can	be	exploited	in	every	possible	way.
I	 teach	 fearlessness,	 and	 freedom.	 Freedom	 from	 fear	 is	 the	 greatest	 quality
needed	to	know	god,	needed	to	know	bliss,	needed	to	know	truth.
So	come	 into	 the	open,	 into	 the	 sky.	Drop	all	 fears	because	all	 those	 fears	 are
false.	 And	 enjoy	 the	 adventure	 of	 life	 with	 all	 its	 dangers,	 with	 all	 its
insecurities.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 life;	 in	 fact	 it	 is	 beautiful	 only	 because	 of	 those
dangers	and	insecurities.
The	plastic	flower	is	not	 in	danger,	 the	real	flower	is	 in	danger.	But	 the	plastic
flower	is	not	a	flower	at	all.	It	is	far	more	significant	to	be	alive	for	only	one	day
--	from	the	morning	to	the	evening	and	then	the	petals	wither	away,	but	to	live
intensely	and	passionately	for	just	one	day,	in	the	sun,	under	the	sky,	is	enough,
rather	than	being	a	plastic	flower	and	living	for	thousands	of	years.	That	is	not
life	at	all,	It	is	not	a	question	of	length,	it	is	a	question	of	intensity.
One	 should	 burn	 one's	 life	 torch	 from	 both	 ends	 simultaneously.	 Let	 it	 be	 a
single	moment	but	let	it	be	totally	alive.	That	will	give	you	the	taste	of	god	and
the	taste	of	eternity.
(To	 the	 brewer	 from	 Japan,	 the	 Master	 divulges	 the	 secret	 ingredient	 of	 true
religion	--	meditation.)	One	needs	nothing	more	 than	 that.	Everything	else	 that
goes	on	in	the	name	of	religion	is	just	non-essential.	Know,	once	and	for	all,	that
meditation	contains	the	most	essential	part	of	religion.	And	if	one	can	fulfill	that
one	requirement	nothing	else	is	needed.	Then	everything	else	comes	following	it
of	its	own	accord.
And	meditation	means	 awareness.	Awareness	 of	 the	 three	 layers,	 the	 physical,
psychological	and	spiritual.
These	three	awarenesses	make	you	capable	of	jumping	into	your	own	being.	If
you	 can	manage	 these	 three	 things	 then	 the	 fourth	 happens	 of	 its	 own	 accord:
suddenly	one	is	just	a	witness,	just	awareness	and	nothing	else.	One	knows	that
one	is	not	the	body,	not	the	mind,	not	the	heart.
These	are	three	concentric	circles	around	the	center.	Of	course	the	heart	is	closer
to	being,	 so	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 in	 the	heart	 than	 to	be	 in	 the	mind.	The	mind	 is
closer	 than	 the	 body;	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 in	 the	mind	 than	 in	 the	 body.	 But	 the
ultimate	goal	 is	 to	be	 just	your	being	 --	no	action,	no	 thought,	no	 feeling,	 just
pure	witnessing.	And	then	the	satori	happens	and	one	becomes	full	of	light,	full
of	truth.	Then	to	live	is	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
blessing.	Before	it,	it	is	just	a	drag;	after	it,	it	is	a	dance.
(Really,	meditation	is	a	journey,	Osho	told	Bhavan,	from	your	head	to	your	heart
to	 your	 being.)	 Meditation	 is	 not-knowing,	 it	 is	 not	 like	 knowledge,	 It	 is	 far
closer	to	feeling.	It	is	not	like	logic,	it	is	far	more	like	love.	So	the	first	shift	has
to	happen	from	the	head	 to	 the	heart.	The	heart	 is	 the	bridge.	And	if	you	have
reached	the	heart	then	it	is	just	a	question	of	one	step	more	to	your	being.	You
are	standing	at	the	door	of	the	temple;	you	can	enter,	there	is	nothing	to	hinder
you.	And	nobody	has	 stayed	 there	 for	 even	a	 single	moment;	 the	moment	one
reaches	 the	 door	 of	 the	 temple,	 one	 runs,	 rushes	 in.	 This	 is	 the	 place	 one	 has
been	seeking	and	searching	for,	for	millions	of	lives.
Meditation	only	takes	you	up	to	the	door.	But	that	is	the	greatest	journey	--	from
the	 head	 to	 the	 heart,	 from	 logic	 to	 love,	 from	knowing	 to	 feeling.	Hence	 the
poet	is	closer	than	the	scientist,	the	dancer	is	closer	than	the	politician,	the	lover
is	 closer	 than	 the	businessman.	But	 it	 is	 only	 through	meditation	 that	 the	poet
will	become	aware	of	 that	one	step,	otherwise	one	can	stand	at	he	door	of	 the
temple	keeping	the	door	behind	one.
That's	how	the	poet	 is	standing:	standing	at	 the	door	of	 the	 temple	but	 looking
out.	 The	 mystic	 is	 also	 standing	 at	 the	 same	 door,	 but	 looking	 in.	 They	 are
standing	 on	 the	 same	 spot;	 the	 thing	 that	 makes	 the	 difference	 is	 meditation.
Meditation	 gives	 you	 a	 one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	 turn;	 you	 don't	 look
outside,	you	look	in.	The	poet	looks	outside,	he	is	exactly	on	the	same	spot.
It	is	as	if	you	are	going	up	a	staircase	and	somebody	else	is	coming	down.	You
meet	on	a	step,	you	say	hello	to	each	other.	You	are	on	exactly	the	same	step	but
one	is	going	down,	the	other	is	going	up.
The	directions	of	 the	poet	and	the	mystic	are	different.	They	are	 located	in	 the
same	space,	on	 the	same	step;	 the	post	and	 the	mystic	are	exactly	on	 the	same
step,	standing	at	the	same	door.	But	he	poet	is	looking	outside	and	the	mystic	is
looking	inside	--	and	that	makes	the	difference,	the	greatest	difference.
The	moment	the	mystic	looks	in,	he	rushes	in.	Then	he	cannot	stop,	nothing	can
stop	 him.	The	 urge	 to	 rush	 in	 is	 irresistible.	Meditation	makes	 you	 capable	 of
that	 ultimate	 step.	 So	 focus	 your	whole	 effort,	 your	whole	 being,	 on	 only	 one
thing,	keep	one	word	continuously	in	your	remembrance	--	meditation	--	and	put
your	total	energy	into	it	so	that	it	can	become	a	reality	to	you.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Mahaparanirvana	day
8	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009085
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
There	were	no	darshans	 this	 evening,	 celebrations	 in	Buddha	Hall	 instead	 for
Mahaparanirvana	Day.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009095
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Meditation	 is	 a	 way	 of	 disappearing	 into	 the	 whole.	 It	 is	 just	 as	 a	 dewdrop
disappears	 into	 the	 ocean.	 It	 loses	 something:	 its	 boundary,	 its	 limitation,	 its
bondage,	 its	 smallness.	 It	gains	 immensely;	 it	becomes	unbounded,	 it	becomes
oceanic,	it	becomes	the	whole.	So	the	loss	is	not	really	a	loss,	it	is	a	gain.
Meditation	means	 the	 loss	of	 the	ego	 --	 that	 is	one	side	of	 the	coin.	The	other
side	is	the	gain	of	the	whole.
Marina	means	the	sea,	the	ocean,	the	oceanic.	Meditation	leads	you	towards	the
oceanic,	 from	smallness	 to	vastness,	 from	 the	bounded	body-mind	 structure	 to
the	 unbounded	 consciousness,	 from	 the	 finite	 to	 the	 infinite,	 from	 time	 to
eternity,	from	birth	and	death	to	eternal	life.	The	only	requirement	is	to	drop	the
notion	 of	 the	 ego.	And	 it	 is	 not	 difficult	 for	 the	 intelligent	 person	 to	 do.	 It	 is
difficult	only	for	the	stupid	--	but	then	for	them	everything	is	difficult.
The	more	intelligent	one	is,	the	more	easily	he	can	drop	the	idea,	because	he	can
see	that	it	is	an	absolutely	wrong	notion,	We	cannot	be	separate,	we	cannot	exist
even	for	a	single	moment	in	separation.	If	the	breath	does	not	go	in	we	are	gone.
We	are	continuously	exchanging...	Breathing	means	 the	bridge	between	us	and
the	whole.	The	breath	is	something	like	roots	in	the	whole:	you	pull	the	tree	out
of	 the	 earth	 and	 it	 starts	 dying,	 it	 loses	 its	 roots	 --	 they	were	 its	 nourishment.
Stop	breathing	and	one	dies.	Breathing	is	a	subtle	way	of	our	being	rooted	in	the
whole.
The	very	word	"breath"	means	life,	because	without	 the	breath	there	 is	no	life.
That	is	the	only	indication	whether	a	man	is	alive	or	not.	If	he	is	breathing	he	is
alive,	if	he	is	not	breathing	he	is	dead.	But	because	the	breath	is	not	visible	we
don't	 take	 any	 account	 of	 it,	 otherwise	 we	 are	 continuously	 taking	 something
from	god	each	moment.
We	have	to	eat	--	that	comes	from	the	whole.	We	have	to	drink.	They	are	not	as
important	 as	 breathing	 but	 still	 they	 are	 very	 important.	 A	 person	 can	 live
without	food	for	three	months	at	the	most	because	if	the	body	is	healthy	enough
it	 accumulates	 enough	 fat	 inside.	 That	 is	 our	 energy	 reserved	 for	 some
emergency.
A	woman	is	more	capable	of	accumulating	fat	than	a	man,	because	when	she	is
pregnant	she	may	not	be	able	 to	eat	much,	hence	nature	has	provided	her	with
more	 facilities	 to	 accumulate	 fat	 so	 that	 in	 these	 nine	months	 even	 if	 she	 eats
very	little	she	can	survive.
A	healthy	person	can	survive	for	 three	months	without	food	but	 then	he	has	 to
die.	Without	water	maybe	one	can	survive	for	a	few	days,	but	without	breathing,
not	even	a	few	minutes.	And	these	are	all	our	connections	with	the	whole.	Even
if	 we	 go	 on	 giving	 him	 every	 physical	 nourishment,	 a	 child	 cannot	 survive
without	love.
They	have	experimented:	if	a	child	is	given	food,	air	and	everything,	but	nobody
hugs	the	child,	nobody	loves	the	child,	no	warmth	is	shown	towards	the	child,	he
starts	shrinking.	He	starts	feeling	deep	down	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
his	 guts	 that	 he	 is	 not	 needed;	 he	 starts	 dying.	Without	 the	 love	 something	 is
missing,	something	which	does	not	seem	to	be	at	all	visible.
The	 physical	 sciences	 cannot	 say	 what	 is	 missing	 because	 love	 cannot	 be
measured,	 experimented	 with,	 but	 now	 psychologists	 are	 perfectly	 aware	 that
without	love	the	child	dies.	He	loses	hope,	he	starts	getting	in	despair.	And	he	is
very	delicate;	he	needs	somebody	to	hug	him	and	hold	him,	somebody	to	give
him	hope	that	life	is	worth	living,	that	he	is	of	some	worth,	that	somebody	cares,
that	somebody	will	miss	him.
Then	 a	 longing	 to	 remain	 here	 arises,	 otherwise	 children	 die.	 Every	 physical
need	may	 be	 fulfilled,	 but	 something	 far	more	 important,	 some	 psychological
need,	is	not	fulfilled.
So	if	we	look	into	life	we	can	be	very	easily	aware	that	ego	is	a	false	idea.	and
the	moment	you	drop	the	ego	all	barriers	are	dropped;	you	rush	into	the	ocean,
you	become	one	with	 the	ocean.	That	experience	 is	 the	ultimate	experience	of
ecstasy,	of	freedom.	That	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
Philosophy	will	give	you	many	hypotheses,	 ideas;	 they	are	beautiful	 ideas,	but
mere	ideas.	You	will	never	arrive	at	any	conclusion.	Philosophy	is	inconclusive;
one	goes	on	and	on	thinking	and	one	can	go	on	endlessly	thinking.	But	thinking
has	nothing	to	do	with	truth.
Truth	is	an	experience,	it	is	not	speculation.	Thinking	is	good	as	far	as	science	is
concerned,	it	can	help.
Through	thinking	one	can	find	ways	to	know	about	matter	because	matter	is	an
outside	thing.	But	truth	is	something	within	your	very	being.	It	is	not	objective,
it	is	your	very	subjectivity.	You	cannot	see	it	with	the	physical	eyes,	you	cannot
touch	 it	with	 your	 physical	 hands	 and	 you	 cannot	 know	 it	with	 your	 physical
brain.
Science	 remains	 confined	 to	 the	 physical	 --	 philosophy	 also.	 Science
experiments,	philosophy	only	speculates;	it	goes	on	making	castles	in	the	air.	But
no	philosopher	has	ever	arrived,	has	found	truth,	has	become	a	realised	person.	It
is	a	path	that	goes	on	and	on	but	it	leads	nowhere.
Tolstoy	continuously,	repeatedly	used	to	have	a	dream	and	he	became	very	much
tortured	 by	 the	 dream	 because	 it	 was	 there	 almost	 every	 night.	 It	 was	 a
nightmare,	but	in	a	way	very	philosophical.
In	his	dream	he	would	see	a	desert,	an	unending	desert	and	two	feet	--	just	two
feet	with	 shoes	on;	 there	was	nobody	above	 the	 feet.	There	were	 just	 two	 feet
with	shoes	on	going	on	and	on,	leaving	footprints	in	the	sand.	They	would	go	on
and	on	and	they	would	never	reach	anywhere	because	the	desert	was	unending.
Tolstoy	would	always	wake	up	tired,	exhausted,	perspiring.	He	became	haunted
by	the	dream,	but	he	could	not	figure	out	what	it	meant.	It	was	really	a	message
from	the	deepest	sources	of	his	being	that	whatsoever	he	was	doing	was	exactly
like	that	dream.	That's	what	he	was	doing;	he	remained	a	philosopher.
He	 has	 written	 beautiful	 novels,	 very	 philosophical,	 of	 great	 importance	 as
literature,	but	of	no	importance	as	far	as	experience	is	concerned.	He	lived	a	very
tortured	 life,	 continuously	 in	 anguish,	 many	 times	 contemplating	 committing
suicide.	Every	philosopher	sometimes	contemplates	committing	suicide	because
whole	effort	goes	on	disappearing	and	nothing	comes	out	of	it;	his	being	remains
empty.
So	 one	 can	 go	 through	 thinking	 but	 then	 one	 is	 following	 a	 mirage,	 one	 is
rushing	to	touch	the	horizon	--
which	exists	not,	which	is	only	an	appearance.	As	you	move	forward	the	horizon
also	moves	forward;	 the	distance	between	you	and	horizon	always	remains	 the
same.	 That	 is	 the	world	 of	 the	 philosopher.	 It	 is	 a	 fool's	world.	 Philosophy	 is
really	fool-osophy.
If	one	wants	to	know	the	truth	then	one	has	to	get	out	of	the	mind	and	move	into
silence	--	not	thinking	but	silence.	And	that	is	available	in	everybody's	being.	We
just	 have	 to	 shift	 from	 mind	 to	 no-mind,	 from	 thinking	 to	 awareness,	 and
immediately	 the	 gestalt	 changes	 and	 you	 start	 experiencing	 from	 the	 very
beginning.
The	beginning	is	already	the	end	because	the	beginning	contains	the	end	like	the
seed	contains	the	flowers.	The	first	step	is	also	the	last	step	because	it	contains
the	last	step	in	it.	Once	you	are	out	of	mind,	just	a	witness,	a	silent	watcher,	truth
is	not	 far	 away	because	 this	watching	 in	 itself	 is	 truth,	 this	witnessing	 itself	 is
truth,	this	consciousness	itself	is	truth.
The	seeker	and	 the	sought	are	not	 two	different	 things,	 the	sought	 is	hidden	 in
the	seeker.
God	is	not	anybody's	real	longing.	People	seek	and	search	for	god	because	they
have	been	told	that	unless	you	find	god	you	will	not	find	bliss.	Otherwise	there	is
no	 natural	 desire	 in	man	 to	 search	 for	 god,	 the	 natural	 desire	 is	 to	 search	 for
bliss,	 hence	 bliss	 is	 really	 our	 goal.	 And	 if	 you	 can	 find	 bliss,	 god	 is	 found,
because	bliss	is	the	most	divine	experience	in	life.	It	is	the	only	proof	that	life	is
not	meaningless.	And	to	know	that	life	is	meaningful	is	to	know	god.
The	moment	you	are	delighted,	just	for	the	sheer	act	of	being,	joyous	moment	to
moment,	celebrating,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
your	existence	becomes	godly,	God	is	not	some	person	that	someday	you	are	to
have	an	interview	with,	god	is	only	a	quality	of	your	own	growth.	It	is	your	own
flowering.
Because	 of	 the	word	 "god"	 the	world	 is	 divided	 between	 the	 atheists	 and	 the
theists,	because	that	word	does	not	appeal	to	many	people.	It	does	not	ring	any
bells	 in	 their	 hearts.	 In	 fact	 even	 the	 people	who	 think	 themselves	 theists	 and
religious	are	not	 really	 interested	 in	god.	Their	whole	 life	proves	 that	 they	are
not	interested	in	god.	Even	if	they	pray,	they	pray	for	something	else;	they	pray
out	of	fear	or	out	of	greed.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	reading	a	story:	a	man	jumped	out	of	a	plane	because	the
plane	 had	 lost	 all	 control;	 the	 engines	 had	 gone	 berserk	 and	 the	 pilot	 had
announced	that	now	there	was	no	way	except	take	parachutes	and	jump.	But	the
man's	parachute	did	not	open.	He	was	an	atheist,	but	when	you	are	in	the	middle
of	the	sky	and	it	is	just	a	question	of	seconds	and	you	will	be	finished,	who	cares
about	 theism	 and	 atheism?	He	 thought	 "Maybe	 god	 can	 help	me,"	He	 started
crying	 for	 god,	 saying,	 "Please	 help	 me!	 Please	 help	 me!	 Forgive	 me!	 I	 will
never	be	an	atheist	again!	I	will	worship	you	and	pray	forever	and	forever."
He	was	brought	up	in	a	Christian	world.	Although	he	never	believed	in	god,	he
was	 brought	 up	 by	 a	Christian	 family,	 so	 he	was	 calling	 to	 the	Christian	 god,
naturally.	Nothing	happened,	nobody	appeared,	no	hand,	nothing.	So	he	thought,
"Maybe	I	should	try	Allah."	So	he	tried	Allah;	he	shouted,	"Allah,	save	me!"
and	suddenly	a	hand	came	out	of	the	clouds	and	saved	him	and	put	him	on	the
earth	completely	safe.
But	he	was	brought	up	by	Christians,	The	moment	he	was	put	on	 the	earth	he
said,	 "Thank	 god."	 The	 same	 hand	 appeared	 again	 and	 crushed	 him!	 (much
laughter)	People	are	in	fear.	Out	of	fear	they	become	Christians,	Mohammedans,
Hindus...	or	out	of	greed,	but	nobody	is	really	interested	in	god.	And	I	don't	see
that	 anything	 is	wrong	 in	 it.	 In	 fact	 humanity	will	 remain	 divided	 if	we	 don't
drop	this	idea	of	god.
Now	 almost	 half	 the	 world	 is	 communist,	 they	 don't	 believe	 in	 god,	 and	 the
people	who	believe	in	god	their	belief	is	also	just	a	belief.	It	is	very	rare	to	find	a
religious	person.
If	we	start	thinking	in	terms	of	bliss	this	division	can	disappear.	Whether	one	is	a
Russian	or	a	Chinese	or	American	or	Italian	or	Indian	does	not	matter;	bliss	 is
everybody's	heart's	 longing.	The	whole	of	humanity	can	become	one	 if	bliss	 is
the	goal.	Nobody	can	say	"I	have	not	desire	for	bliss."
And	my	own	experience	is	that	the	moment	you	have	found	bliss	you	have	found
god	too.	In	the	past	you	have	been	told	just	the	opposite;	find	god	and	you	will
be	blissful.	I	say	to	you,	find	bliss	and	you	will	be	godly.	Here	he	whole	search	is
for	bliss.
Of	 course	 I	 know	 the	 moment	 you	 arc	 overflowing	 with	 bliss	 suddenly	 you
become	aware	of	a	new	quality	in	your	life,	a	new	fragrance,	a	new	light.	And
for	that	light,	for	that	fragrance,	for	that	new	phenomenon,	"god"	is	a	beautiful
word.	But	 it	 (words	missing...)	Bliss	 is	more	 fundamental,	more	 essential;	we
can	forget	all	about	god.	Put	your	whole	energy	into	being	blissful	and	god	will
come	seeking	you,	There	is	no	need	to	go	after	him.
The	 experience	 of	 bliss	 will	 give	 you	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 a	 beauty	 that	 is
indestructible.	Not	only	that,	it	will	give	you	for	the	first	time,	an	insight	into	the
very	 phenomenon	of	 beauty.	Not	 only	 does	 it	make	 you	beautiful,	 it	 suddenly
transforms	 the	 whole	 world.	 The	 whole	 world	 becomes	 beautiful	 because	 the
world	reflects	you,	it	is	a	mirror.
If	 you	 are	 carrying	 ugly	 things	 inside	 you	 those	 ugly	 things	 are	 bound	 to	 be
reflected.	 From	 the	 trees,	 from	 the	mountains,	 from	 the	 rivers,	 you	 cannot	 get
more	than	that	which	you	put	in.	And	you	don't	have	anything	beautiful	to	put	in.
That's	why	people	live	such	monotonous,	bored	lives.
There	may	be	a	beautiful	sunset	and	they	go	on	not	looking	at	it	at	all,	the	birds
may	be	 singing	but	 they	are	deaf,	 the	 stars	may	be	dancing	but	 they	are	blind
because	they	have	no	insight	into	beauty.	It	is	only	an	empty	word	that	they	have
heard.	And	whatsoever	they	think	is	beauty	has	nothing	to	do	with	beauty.	It	has
much	 more	 to	 do	 with	 their	 biology,	 their	 chemistry,	 their	 physiology,	 their
hormones.
A	man	finds	a	woman	beautiful	and	the	same	man	does	not	find	any	beauty	in
the	sunset,	in	the	stars,	in	the	flowers.	I	cannot	trust	this	man's	understanding	of
beauty.	It	may	be	just	pure	instinct,	a	sexual	urge,	that	makes	him	hallucinate	.
Once	that	urge	is	gone	the	same	woman	becomes	ordinary,	the	same	woman	is
no	more	beautiful.
If	a	person	is	sexually	starved	then	even	an	ugly	woman	may	look	beautiful.	The
more	starved	you	are,	the	more	beautiful	she	will	look.	Once	your	sexual	urge	is
gone,	suddenly	you	will	become	aware	of	how	ugly	she	is.
And	the	same	is	true	about	the	man.	A	woman	finds	a	man	beautiful	--	it	is	not	a
real	 sense	of	beauty,	because	when	you	have	a	 real	 sense	of	beauty	 it	 is	not	 a
question	of	man	and	woman	at	all;	then	you	will	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
find	it	everywhere.	You	will	find	it	in	the	rock,	in	the	texture	of	the	rock,	in	the
perfume	of	the	flower,	in	the	freedom	of	a	cloud,	a	bird	on	the	wing.	You	will	be
enchanted.	 Your	 breath	 will	 stop,	 your	 mind	 will	 stop;	 you	 will	 be	 moved,
thrilled.
Of	course	then	your	experience	of	the	beauty	in	a	man	or	a	woman	has	a	totally
different	significance;	then	It	is	no	more	just	chemistry,	then	it	is	poetry,	But	to
know	what	 real	 beauty	 is	 one	 has	 to	 go	 into	 deep	 silence,	 one	 has	 to	 become
more	and	more	alert,	watchful,	silent.
As	 the	mind	disappears	you	are	 transformed.	All	 that	 is	ugly	 in	you	drops,	by
and	by	you	are	purified	in	your	heart.	You	start	feeling	yourself	not	as	a	body	but
as	consciousness,	not	as	a	mind	but	as	consciousness.	Then	there	is	beauty.	You
have	grace	and	the	whole	world	suddenly	becomes	graceful.
To	me	this	is	the	religious	experience,	the	pinnacle	of	religious	experience,	and
out	of	this	experience	is	all	creativity.	Without	this	experience	one	can	compose
a	 song	 but	 one	 cannot	 create	 a	 song.	One	 can	 compose	music	 but	 one	 cannot
create	music.	One	 can	paint	 a	 picture	 if	 he	knows	how	 to	paint	 --	 it	will	 be	 a
technical	thing-	but	one	cannot	create	a	painting	It	is	only	profound	silence	that
gives	you	the	experience	of	beauty	and	a	deep	longing	to	share	that	experience
with	others,	which	become	creativity.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 creators.	 I	 don't	 teach	 renunciation	 of	 life,	 I	 teach
creativity.	 I	 teach	 you	 to	 participate.	 Get	 passionately	 involved	 in	 existence
because	that	is	where	the	truth	of	life	is	hidden.	Going	away	from	life	you	cannot
find	it.
We	 have	 three	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 words	 to	 describe	 the	 ultimate:	 satyam,
shivam,	sunderam.	 Satyam	means	 truth,	 shivam	means	 good,	 sunderam	means
beautiful.	This	 is	 the	real	 trinity,	 this	 is	 the	 real	 face	of	god,	 three	 faces,	 three
aspects,	of	godliness.	And	sunderam	is	the	highest,	the	last,	the	ultimate	peak.
True	 love	 grows	 out	 of	 the	 experience	 nf	 nothingness,	 of	 nobodiness,	 of
egolessness,	otherwise	love	remains	superficial,	pseudo,	a	game.	At	the	most	one
can	remain	occupied	with	it	but	one	gains	nothing	out	of	it;	one	simply	loves	life
and	its	whole	of	*ortunity.	One	moves	from	one	dream	to	another	dream.
Unless	you	know	that	you	are	not	an	ego	you	cannot	really	love	because	the	ego
will	disturb	your	 love,	 it	will	pollute	 it,	 it	will	contaminate	 it,	 it	will	poison	 it;
hence	 jealousy,	possessiveness,	domination	and	all	kinds	of	 trips	and	numbers.
They	 are	 all	 because	 of	 the	 ego,	 they	 are	 not	 part	 of	 love.	But	 love	 is	 such	 a
delicate	phenomenon	and	the	ego	goes	on	throwing	rocks	on	that	delicate	flower.
Jealousy	is	like	a	rock	--	very	gross.	Possessiveness	is	a	rock	--	it	is	pure	poison.
Love	 is	 destroyed,	 crushed,	 shattered.	 And	 these	 monsters	 are	 dominating
people.	Love	has	to	be	freed	from	these	monsters.
The	only	way	is	to	kill	the	root	cause.
You	must	have	seen	children's	stories,	fables,	parables,	in	which	this	strategy	hes
been	applied	many	times:	there	is	a	monster	but	you	cannot	kill	him	because	his
life	is	not	in	him;	he	has	put	his	life	somewhere	else.	Maybe	it	is	in	a	parrot,	and
how	can	you	find	out	that	it	is	in	a	parrot?	Unless	you	kill	the	parrot	you	will	not
be	 able	 to	kill	 the	monster.	 you	can	go	on	killing	 the	monster	 and	 it	will	 start
rising	up	again	and	again.	 It	will	go	on	growing	new	heads	unless	you	kill	 the
parrot	or	wherever	the	life	secret	is	hidden.	Once	you	kill	the	parrot	the	monster
is	gone,	gone	forever.
Those	stories	are	beautiful;	they	say	something	about	our	inner	monsters.	Their
life	is	not	in	themselves.
Many	people	ask	me	how	to	drop	jealousy,	how	not	to	be	possessive,	how	not	to
be	 dominating,	 how	 to	 drop	 all	 this	 nonsense.	They	 cannot	 be	 dropped	 unless
you	kill	the	ego	because	their	life	is	in	the	ego.
Shunyam	 (the	 sannyasin's	 name)	 means	 dropping	 the	 ego	 and	 becoming	 a
nothingness.	When	there	is	no	ego,	when	you	are	not,	then	there	is	just	silence.
In	 that	 silence	 the	 flower	of	 love	 starts	opening.	 It	has	 tremendous	beauty	and
the	flavour	of	the	divine	and	the	colours	of	the	ultimate.	Then	it	does	not	create
any	bondage	for	you;	it	brings	great	freedom,	it	brings	pure	ecstasy.	It	delivers
you	from	all	darkness,	from	all	death,	it	delivers	you	from	all	misery,	all	anguish,
all	anxiety.	It	makes	you	what	you	are	supposed	to	be,	what	nature	intends	you
to	be.
And	the	moment	you	are	that	which	is	really	your	potential,	then	it	is	actualised,
there	is	great	contentment,	great	peace,	great	fulfilment.	One	hes	come	home.
Meditation	is	a	state	of	no-mind,	no-thought,	no-desire.	One	simply	is,	just	is	--
and	 that	 is	 the	 greatest	 experience.	 Once	 you	 have	 tasted	 that	 is-ness	 there	 is
nothing	more	to	be	experienced,	there	is	nothing	higher,	nothing	greater,	nothing
deeper	either.
Dhirjo	 means	 patience.	 To	 enter	 into	 meditation	 one	 of	 the	 most	 essential
qualities	is	patience.	One	cannot	be	in	a	hurry.	The	more	in	a	hurry	one	is,	 the
longer	it	takes.	If	one	is	capable	of	waiting	forever	--
lovingly,	 trustingly	 --	 it	 can	 happen	 even	 in	 a	 single	moment.	 Instantly	 it	 can
happen,	immediately	it	can	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
happen;	it	all	depends	on	how	patient	one	is.
But	remember,	while	doing	meditation	never	bother	about	the	result.	It	will	come
in	its	own	time,	Trust!
Enjoy	meditation	 for	 its	 own	 sake,	 don't	 be	 greedy	 about	 it,	 don't	 project	 any
ambition,	If	one	can	do	meditation	not	as	a	means	but	as	an	end	unto	itself	then
the	miracle	can	happen	immediately,	it	can	change	your	total	being.
The	 transformation	 is	 easy.	One	 has	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 being	 patient	 --	which
humanity	 has	 completely	 forgotten.	 Everybody	 is	 in	 such	 a	 hurry,	 everybody
wants	things	to	happen	quickly.	Nobody	is	ready	to	wait	That's	why	there	are	so
many	charlatans	in	the	world	of	religion.	You	ask	for	instant	coffee	so	there	are
pedlars	who	sell	instant	coffee	and	they	exploit	you.
My	approach	is	of	patience,	infinite	patience	--	and	then	the	miracle	is	that	it	can
be	like	instant	coffee.
But	the	requirement	has	to	be	fulfilled.	It	 is	a	paradox,	but	anything	concerned
with	the	truth	is	always	paradoxical,	it	has	to	be	paradoxical	because	truth	needs
to	be	inclusive	of	its	opposite.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
Half	a	year,	she	murmured.
That's	good	--	that	is	patience
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009105
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Blissfulness	is	like	a	bud	opening	as	a	flower.	In	misery	one	closes	up;	in	misery
one	starts	dying,	one	starts	withdrawing	from	life,	one	starts	shrinking.	In	bliss
one	expands,	one	relates;	one	dances,	sings,	celebrates.	And	that	is	the	only	way
to	find	truth,	god,	love	and	all	the	great	values.
One	has	to	drop	all	the	stupid	formality	of	civilization,	one	has	to	become	more
spontaneous,	like	primitive	man;	like	a	child.	The	child	represents	the	primitive
man,	the	child	has	yet	to	be	civilized.
Psychologists	are	aware	of	the	fact	that	we	cannot	remember	anything	before	the
age	of	four.	One	remembers	things	that	happened	only	after	one	was	four	years
of	 age;	 one	has	 lived	 those	 four	years	without	 leaving	 a	 trace	on	 the	memory.
The	reason	is	that	at	the	age	of	four	or	near	about	then,	the	child	becomes	part	of
civilization.	 His	 gestalt	 is	 changed	 by	 the	 parents,	 by	 education.	 He	 starts
behaving	 as	 he	 should;	 he	 loses	 his	 spontaneity,	 he	 becomes	 false	 and	 plastic.
And	from	that	moment	on	he	will	remember	everything	because	the	continuum
has	been	broken.
Only	in	deep	hypnotic	unconsciousness	can	we	revive	the	memories	of	the	years
before	the	age	of	four.
Then	one	can	even	remember	something	of	when	one	was	a	child	in	the	womb.
Not	only	that;	one	can	go	on	digging	deeper	and	one	can	remember	something	of
the	past	life.	And	in	the	East	we	have	tried	to	reach	as	deeply	as	possible	into	the
unconscious	realm	and	in	doing	this	we	became	aware	not	of	one	life	behind	this
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
life,	but	of	many	many	lives.	But	consciously	we	only	remember	that	which	has
been	forced	upon	us	by	others.
To	become	blissful	one	has	to	drop	all	that	has	been	forced	upon	one.	One	has	to
become	 primitive	 again,	 like	 a	 child,	 innocent,	 then	 there	 is	 spontaneity.	 And
spontaneity	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	experiences	in	life.	One	does	not	act	out
of	 the	mind,	one	 responds	 as	 a	 total	organism.	Then	 life	has	 totality,	 integrity.
Then	 one	 is	 really	 an	 individual	 and	 one	 has	 intelligence.	 One	 is	 no	 more	 a
parrot	repeating	others;	one	can	hear	one's	own	inner	voice.	And	that	is	always
blissful,	that	sound	is	always	blissful.
And	once	you	start	hearing	your	own	voice	you	are	on	the	right	track;	you	will
go	on	opening.	And	when	the	flower	of	consciousness	is	totally	open	you	know
for	the	first	time	what	a	gift	life	is	and	what	an	ecstasy.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
"I	don't	know."
Then	 be	 here	 forever,	 because	 this	 is	 the	 tribe	 of	 the	 ancient	 Italians.	 I	 am
reviving	it!
To	be	solitary	is	negative,	to	be	in	solitude	is	positive.	They	are	not	synonymous.
Solitude	is	sacred.
Solitariness	is	nothing	but	misery;	one	feels	that	one	is	missing	others.
The	 person	 imprisoned	 in	 jail	 lives	 in	 solitariness,	 not	 in	 solitude.	 Sometimes
they	punish	prisoners	with	three	weeks'	solitary	confinement.	Then	he	is	left	in	a
dark	cell	with	nobody	to	relate	to,	with	nothing	to	see.
In	those	three	weeks	it	seems	as	if	three	lives	have	passed;	he	loses	all	sense	of
time.	And	 slowly,	 slowly	 he	 starts	 becoming	 crazy.	After	 the	 second	week	 he
starts	talking	to	himself	-	loudly!
If	 he	 is	 kept	 in	 this	 way	 for	 three	 months	 he	 will	 go	 really	 mad,	 maybe
irrevocably	 mad.	 This	 is	 solitariness.	 He	 has	 been	 forced	 into	 a	 negative
darkness.
Only	a	meditator	can	transform	solitariness	into	solitude.	Then	when	he	is	totally
alone	he	is	not	lonely,	not	at	all.	He	is	full	of	his	own	being,	overflowing;	in	fact
more	 overflowing	 than	 ever,	 because	 when	 others	 are	 there	 they	 encroach	 on
your	space.	In	life	it	is	really	a	continuous	struggle	to	keep	your	space	intact.
Everybody	 is	 treading	 on	 everybody	 else's	 space;	 nobody	 is	 respectful	 of
anybody's	space.
This	is	one	of	the	greatest	problems	humanity	is	facing	today,	because	the	earth
has	 become	 overcrowded	 and	 people	 are	 really	 suffering	 from	 an	 immense
confinement.	 The	 crowd	 is	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer;	 you	 are	 in	 a	 crowd
everywhere	and	everybody	is	interfering	with	your	space.	Your	privacy	is	lost	-
and	when	privacy	is	lost	all	is	lost.
The	people	who	have	been	studying	animals	have	come	to	know	that	there	is	a
territorial	 imperative.	For	 example,	 if	you	 see	a	monkey	and	you	 start	moving
slowly	towards	the	monkey,	up	to	a	certain	point	he	will	not	take	any	notice	of
you,	but	only	up	to	a	certain	point.	Beyond	that	he	will	immediately	start	getting
angry	--	maybe	at	ten	feet,	twenty	feet.	You	will	be	surprised	that	every	monkey
behaves	 in	 the	 same	 way:	 they	 get	 angry	 always	 when	 you	 are	 at	 a	 certain
distance.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 the	 monkey	 has	 a	 certain	 sense	 of	 territory	 and	 he	 wants
nobody	to	come	into	his	space.
In	 zoos	 animals	go	berserk,	mad.	Only	 in	 zoos	do	animals	go	mad,	not	 in	 the
woods	 --	never.	Nobody	has	heard	of	any	 lion	going	mad	 in	 the	 jungle	or	any
elephant	 going	 mad	 in	 the	 jungle.	 But	 in	 a	 circus	 they	 do,	 in	 a	 zoo	 they	 do
because	they	are	confined.	If	you	go	to	the	zoo	you	will	see	the	lion	continuously
walking	around	 the	cage,	confined,	enraged,	angry	because	his	 space	has	been
taken	away	--	and	in	the	jungle	he	has	a	vast	space.	And	all	animals	respect	each
other's	spaces,	none	of	them	interfere	in	the	others'
realms.	The	moment	you	enter	their	space	you	are	in	danger;	if	you	don't	enter
their	 space	 there	 is	no	danger	 to	you.	The	 snake	will	not	bite	you	 if	you	don't
enter	his	space.
Now	 they	 have	measured	 how	much	 space	 every	 animal	 has	 for	 himself.	 But
man	has	no	sense	of	that;	he	has	completely	forgotten	the	language,	he	does	not
know	it,	he	has	lost	the	very	sense.	And	that's	why	humanity	is	almost	in	a	state
of	insanity.	It	needs	methods	to	create	space	again.
Meditation	 is	 a	method	 to	 create	 your	 own	 space.	 If	 it	 is	 not	 available	 on	 the
outside	then	create	it	inside.
Perhaps	it	is	no	longer	available	on	the	outside,	perhaps	it	will	never	be	available
on	 the	 outside	 again;	 on	 this	 earth	 it	 does	 not	 seem	 to	 be	 possible.	 Then	 find
space	 within.	 That's	 the	 whole	 alchemy	 of	 meditation:	 finding	 space	 within.
Then	even	in	the	crowd	you	remain	in	solitude	because	now	you	know	how	to
create	an	inner	space.
You	 remain	 centered.	Nobody	 can	 interfere	with	 your	 inner	 space.	 People	 can
interfere	with	your	outer	space;	the	wife	can	interfere,	the	husband	can	interfere,
the	children	can	interfere	--	everybody.	And	it	is	so	crowded	that	they	are	not	at
fault.	There	is	no	more	space	left	on	the	outside.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	 becomes	 something	 of	 absolute	 value	 when	 the	 earth	 is	 so
overcrowded.	Meditation	has	never	been	of	such	importance	before.	Only	a	few
very	intelligent	people	--	a	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Zarathustra
--	 had	 the	 sense	 to	 create	 some	 inner	 space.	 The	 other	 people	 lived	 outside.
There	was	enough	space	outside;	there	was	no	reason	to	find	it	inside.	But	now,
everybody	has	to	become	a	buddha	in	some	way	or	other;	otherwise	life	will	not
have	any	meaning.	It	will	not	have	any	salt,	it	will	not	have	any	taste	at	all.
So	by	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	will	be	working	in	the	inner	world	to	create	a
space	there.	And	infinite	space	can	be	created	there	because	you	can	throw	out
all	 the	 junk	 that	 is	 inside.	 You	 can	 throw	 out	 the	 thoughts,	 the	 desires,	 the
memories,	 the	 past,	 the	 future,	 the	 dreams,	 the	 imagination.	 You	 can	 go	 on
throwing	out	all	this	junk	and	you	can	create	great	space.	That's	what	meditation
is	all	about:	throwing	out	all	the	contents	that	we	are	carrying	inside	so	that	the
room	is	empty,	so	that	you	can	feel	yourself	surrounded	by	infinite	vastness.	And
that	vastness	is	divine.	That	is	solitude.
The	outer	solitude	 is	nothing	compared	 to	 the	 inner	solitude,	because	 the	outer
can	always	be	taken	by	others.	It	is	never	absolutely	yours,	you	have	to	depend
on	 others	 for	 it;	 anybody	 can	 interfere	 with	 it.	 Hence	 the	 man	 who	 has	 no
meditativeness	is	a	dependent	person,	he	has	to	depend	on	others.	For	love	he	is
dependent,	for	space	he	is	dependent;	for	everything	he	is	just	dependent.
The	meditator	 becomes	 independent.	Only	 the	meditator	 knows	what	 freedom
is...	the	freedom	of	a	bird	on	the	wing	in	the	infinite	sky.
Meditation	is	an	effort	to	attain	inner	emptiness,	inner	nothingness.
Nothingness	 means	 no-thing-ness.	 It	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 nothing	 is	 there,	 it
simply	means	that	all	 the	 things	that	were	there	have	been	thrown	out.	You	are
there	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 because	 things	 are	 no	 more	 there,	 you	 have	 a
vastness.	It	is	really	a	miracle	to	create	meditation,	but	once	the	miracle	happens
one	is	surprised	that	in	this	small	body	one	is	carrying	the	whole	sky,	the	whole
of	eternity,	an	infinity.	And	that	is	our	truth,	that	is	the	meaning	of	Hiltrud.
Hil	means	battle,	 trud	means	 truth	 --	battle	 for	 truth.	Meditation	 is	a	battle	 for
truth	 --	 your	 inner	 truth,	 your	 authenticity,	 your	 real	 being.	But	 for	 that	many
things	have	to	be	dropped.	To	know	the	real,	to	know	the	true,	all	that	is	false	has
to	be	dropped.
It	is	a	battle	because	the	false	has	lived	so	long	inside	you	that	it	is	not	going	to
leave	you	easily;	it	will	make	every	effort	to	remain	there.	It	is	like	a	guest	who
has	lived	for	so	long	in	your	house	that	you	have	forgotten	he	is	a	guest.	He	has
also	forgotten;	in	fact	he	is	behaving	like	the	host.	He	may	have	thrown	the	host
outside	because	of	course	when	the	guest	comes	the	host	respects	him,	gives	him
everything	that	is	good	in	the	house,	the	best	place	to	lie	down,	and	everything.
If	the	guest	goes	on	remaining	there	it	is	bound	to	happen	one	day	or	other	that
he	will	feel	that	"I	am	the	master	and	you	are	the	slave,	because,	look,	I	live	in
the	most	 beautiful	 space	 of	 the	 house,	 the	 best	 room,	 I	 eat	 the	 best	 food.	 Of
course	I	am	the	master	and	you	are	just	a	slave."	That's	what	has	happened:	the
host	 has	 become	 a	 guest	 and	 the	 guest	 has	 become	 the	 host.	 Everything	 is
upside-down.
Your	consciousness	is	the	host	and	your	mind	is	just	a	guest.	Thoughts	come	and
go,	you	remain.	Anger	comes	and	goes,	you	remain.	Greed	comes	and	goes,	you
remain.	The	only	thing	that	remains	is	your	being.
All	things	come	and	go.	How	many	things	have	come	and	gone?	But	when	they
are	there	they	behave	as	if	they	are	the	master.
The	meditator	 has	 to	 fight	 a	 real	 battle	 to	make	 the	mind	 understand	what	 its
place	is,	to	put	the	mind	in	its	place,	to	bring	it	to	its	senses	and	show	it	that	it	is
just	a	guest,	not	a	host;	it	is	not	the	master.	The	meditator	has	to	reclaim	from	the
mind	the	territory	which	it	has	possessed	for	long,	maybe	for	millions	of	lives.
The	battle	is	because	the	mind	will	not	budge	an	inch	unless	you	do	all	that	you
can	doc	If	you	are	really	intent,	if	you	put	all	your	energy	into	it,	only	then	can
you	 throw	 it	 away.	 Meditation	 has	 to	 be	 something	 very	 intensive,	 very
passionate,	total.	The	moment	it	is	total	the	mind	knows	that	it	Is	defeated.	And
once	the	mind	knows	it	is	defeated,	it	becomes	a	beautiful	slave;	otherwise	it	is
an	ugly	master.
The	 moment	 you	 have	 reclaimed	 your	 territory,	 your	 space,	 your	 truth,	 your
being,	you	are	a	king,	a	queen;	otherwise	one	is	a	beggar.
My	 sannyasins	have	 to	 attain	 the	kingdom	of	god,	 they	have	 to	become	kings
and	queens	--	 less	 than	 that	won't	do.	 I	am	not	creating	beggars,	 I	am	creating
emperors.
My	whole	effort	is	to	free	you	from	religions	and	help	you	to	become	religious.	I
don't	want	you	to	be	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	or	a	Buddhist	--
these	are	religions.	I	want	you	to	be	a	Christ,	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Buddha,	a	Krishna,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Mohammed	--	these	are	religious	people.
Never	forget	for	a	single	moment	that	Buddha	was	not	Buddhist	and	Jesus	was
not	Christian.	Hence	 those	who	 are	Christians	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 Jesus.
They	have	not	understood	even	 the	most	 fundamental	 thing,	 that	he	was	not	 a
Christian.	To	be	a	Christian	is	to	go	against	Jesus.
Jesus	 was	 simply	 a	 loving	 human	 being,	 full	 of	 light,	 full	 of	 joy,	 full	 of
awareness.	He	was	religious,	certainly,	but	his	religion	cannot	be	confined	to	any
dogma.	 No	 church	 can	 confine	 his	 vastness;	 every	 church	 will	 become	 a
falsification.	No	scripture	can	contain	him;	he	is	vast.	No	words	can	convey	him,
only	silence	can	convey	him.
The	Sufis	have	a	book	 --	 they	call	 it	 the	book	of	 the	books	 --	which	 is	utterly
empty,	nothing	is	written	in	it.	 I	 think	that	 is	 the	only	religious	scripture	in	the
world.	It	is	born	of	a	great	insight.	You	go	on	looking	at	the	empty	pages;	there
is	nothing	there,	not	a	single	word.	They	have	carried	that	book	for	centuries;	it
has	gone	from	master	to	the	disciple,	and	they	have	been	reading	that	scripture.
To	 read	an	empty	book	you	need	an	empty	mind.	 If	you	 just	go	on	 looking	at
empty	paper	you	will	become	empty.	How	long	can	you	go	on	looking	at	it?
It	 is	said	 that	Bodhidharma	 looked	at	an	empty	wall	 for	nine	years;	he	sat	and
looked	at	the	wall.	Of	course	he	became	enlightened!	What	can	you	think?	How
long	can	you	think,	just	looking	at	an	empty	wall?
Sooner	or	later	the	mind	will	become	bored	and	the	mind	will	say,	"I'm	going!"
The	mind	is	bound	to	say
"Good	bye	sir!	What	are	you	doing?	Are	you	mad?	Nine	years?"
That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 your	 name:	 go	 beyond	 all	 dogmas,	 all	 scriptures,	 all
ideologies,	and	become	centered	in	your	own	nothingness.	And	from	there	arises
the	truth	--	a	truth	that	liberates,	a	truth	that	is	liberation.
One	 cannot	 attain	 the	 truth	 through	 any	 activity.	 Activity	 is	 needed	 to	 attain
things	of	the	world.	Of	you	want	to	attain	the	inner	truth	you	have	to	learn	the	art
of	no	action,	of	effortlessness.	And	meditation	is	nothing	but	effortlessness,	it	is
inaction.	It	is	sitting	silently	doing	nothing.	It	is	not	a	doing,	remember.
If	you	are	doing	meditation	you	have	missed	the	point.	It	is	doing	nothing,	it	is
simply	 being,	 utterly	 restful,	 relaxed,	 as	 if	 there	 is	 nowhere	 to	 go,	 nothing	 to
attain,	nothing	to	do.	If	one	can	be	in	such	a	space	for	only	a	few	minutes	every
day,	that	will	do.	That	will	help	you	to	enter	your	source.
In	those	inactive	moments	you	will	be	thrown	into	your	own	source	because	you
will	not	have	any	other	place	to	go.	You	will	inevitably	enter	your	own	centre.	If
there	is	nothing	to	do	then	your	consciousness	is	automatically	withdrawn	from
its	 occupations.	Meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 unoccupied	 consciousness.	 It	 is	 going
beyond	activity.
I	am	not	against	action;	but	the	person	who	knows	how	to	go	beyond	action	can
be	active	and	yet	remain	inactive.	He	is	doing	all	kinds	of	things	but	deep	inside
there	is	no	doer.	He	will	live	in	the	world,	he	will	carry	the	water	from	the	well
and	 chop	 the	 wood,	 and	 still	 there	 is	 no	 doer.	 He	 remains	 in	 his	 absolute
inactivity;	his	 inactivity	 is	not	disturbed	by	his	 activities.	And	 that	 is	 the	most
significant	thing	about	sannyas.
It	 is	 easy	 to	 be	 active	 and	 in	 the	 world,	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 be	 inactive	 and	 in	 the
monastery,	but	my	effort	is	that	you	should	be	inactive	in	the	world,	you	should
be	inactive	in	action,	only	then	do	you	have	the	highest	peak	possible,	otherwise
something	will	be	missing.	 In	 the	monastery	you	will	miss	everything	 that	 the
world	can	give	to	you,	and	in	the	world	you	will	miss	all	those	values	that	only
the	monastery	can	give	to	you.	And	I	would	like	you	to	be	enriched	by	both,	the
inner	and	the	outer.
I	 don't	want	 to	 create	 any	 separation	between	 the	 inner	 and	 the	outer.	 I	would
like	you	to	transcend	both	and	come	to	a	higher	peak	where	the	inner	and	outer
are	no	more	separate.	And	that	is	possible	only	through	meditation.
So	 this	 has	 to	 be	 your	 work,	 to	 experience	 total	 inaction.	 And	 it	 can	 be
experienced	 because	 it	 has	 been	 experienced.	 I	 have	 experienced	 it,	 I	 am
continuously	in	it	--	and	that's	what	I	want	to	share	with	my	people.
A	sannyasin	is	a	person	who	lives	in	the	world	and	is	not	of	the	world.	He	lives
like	a	lotus	leaf	in	the	lake.	The	leaf	is	in	the	water	but	the	water	cannot	touch	it.
Even	when	dewdrops	gather	on	the	leaf	in	the	night	they	don't	touch	it.	They	are
there	 on	 the	 leaf	 and	 in	 the	 morning	 sun	 they	 look	 like	 pearls,	 but	 the	 leaf
remains	completely	untouched	by	them.	Just	a	breeze	comes	and	 they	slip	 into
the	lake	and	the	leaf	is	totally	dry.
Hence	 in	 the	East	 the	 lotus	has	become	 the	symbol	of	 the	sannyasin.	We	have
made	the	lotus	the	highest	flower	not	for	any	other	reason	except	that	the	lotus	is
a	sannyasin.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Of	course	it	is	easier	to	start	by	being	blissful	because	bliss	is	a	natural	longing.
Enlightenment	is	not	a	natural	longing.	One	wants	to	be	blissful.	Hence	I	don't
want	anybody	to	run	after	unnatural	goals,	Follow	the	natural	because	ultimately
it	leads	you	beyond	nature.
So	there	is	no	need	to	rush	for	something	that	is	beyond.	First	experience	bliss
and	 then	enlightenment	comes	of	 its	own	accord.	And	everybody	knows,	deep
down	everybody	 is	 aware,	 that	 to	 be	blissful	 or	 to	 be	miserable	 is	 our	 choice.
Next	time	you	are	miserable,	try	it	--	choose	not	to	be	miserable,	and	you	will	be
surprised,	it	can	be	done.	And	once	you	have	done	it	you	have	found	a	key.	Then
it	 is	 up	 to	 you.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 be	 miserable,	 if	 you	 enjoy	 misery,	 then	 it	 is
perfectly	good;	then	it	 is	bliss	to	you!	But	if	you	don't	enjoy	it	you	can	simply
drop	out	of	it.
Each	moment	a	person	has	to	choose	whether	to	be	blissful	or	to	be	miserable.
Misery	is	not	some	calamity	that	happens	to	you,	it	is	your	choice.	But	nobody
has	told	you	that	 it	 is	your	choice.	Everybody	goes	on	telling	you	why	you	are
miserable	and	you	also	start	thinking	in	the	same	way,	that	"There	must	be	some
causes,	 that's	 why	 I	 am	miserable."	 I	 say	 to	 you	 that	 there	 is	 no	 cause	 at	 all,
except	that	you	have	chosen	misery;	except	that	god	has	made	you	free,	he	has
given	you	freedom	to	choose,	and	you	are	mis-using	the	freedom.
So	make	it	a	point	from	this	moment,	to	always	choose	to	be	blissful.	Whenever
old	 habits	 are	 in	 the	way	 just	 tell	 them	 to	 shut	 up!	And	you	will	 be	 surprised
because	sooner	or	later,	one	day,	you	will	see	that	they	do	shut	up!	First	they	will
not	listen	but	one	day	it	happens,	and	that	day	is	a	great	revelation.	It	is	such	in
ecstatic	experience	to	say	"Shut	up!"	and	they	shut	up!	You	did	not	expect	it	to
happen	but	one	day	it	does.
So	just	go	on	trying	and	any	day	the	right	moment	can	come.	In	a	right	situation,
in	a	right	moment,	you	slip	out	of	the	misery	and	you	start	laughing	at	the	whole
ridiculousness	of	it.
So	from	this	very	moment,	watch	out!
Right?,(	Osho	chuckled).	Start!
Without	love	a	person	is	blind.	One	can	go	on	thinking	forever	and	ever	and	one
will	not	be	able	to	see.
Love,	 and	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 see	what	 is.	 It	 is	 only	 the	 loving	 heart	 that	 can
touch	the	heart	of	existence.
The	mind	 is	 shallow	 and	 superficial;	 it	 knows	 nothing	 of	 the	 heights	 and	 the
depths.	The	mind	is	idiotic,	it	is	always	mediocre.	It	cannot	give	you	any	insight
into	reality.	For	that	your	heart	needs	to	function	--	and	love	is	nothing	but	the
humming	of	the	heart.
Allow	 the	 heart	 to	 sing	 its	 song.	 Even	 if	 the	 mind	 condemns	 it,	 don't	 bother
about	the	mind.	The	mind	will	condemn	it,	the	mind	will	say	"This	is	irrational.
For	 example	 when	 the	 situation	 suggests	 that	 you	 be	miserable	 and	 you	 start
singing	a	song,	the	mind	will	say	"This	is	not	right,	this	is	not	how	things	should
be,	you	have	to	be	miserable	--	that	is	logical."
Somebody	has	died	and	you	dance...	That's	what	we	do	here.	We	just	wait	for	the
opportunity!	 (much	 laughter)	 People	 go	 on	 thinking,	 "Now	 whose	 number	 is
next?	Whom	are	we	going	to	celebrate	next?"	We	don't	miss	any	opportunity.
And	once	you	allow	the	irrational	heart	to	function,	slowly	slowly	the	mind	loses
its	grip.	It	will	take	a	time,	a	little	time,	because	the	mind	has	been	in	power	so
long;	it	will	condemn	you,	it	will	create	troubles	for	you.	But	listen	to	the	heart
and	let	the	mind	go	on	shouting.
In	India	we	have	a	saying	that	the	elephant	does	not	care,	it	goes	on	although	the
dogs	are	continuously	barking.	The	elephant	 takes	no	notice	at	all,	he	does	not
even	 look	 at	 the	 dogs	 --	 they	 go	 on	 barking,	 Dogs	 are	 great	 politicians.	 The
elephant	is	a	mystic!	(laughter)	He	goes	on	without	taking	any	note	of	the	dogs
and	sooner	or	later	the	dogs	leave	him,	because	what	is	the	point	of	staying?
They	may	console	themselves	that	"This	animal	looks	dumb	or	deaf;	he	does	not
understand.	It	is	very	illogical:	we	are	barking	and	he	is	not	even	looking	at	us,
so	what	is	the	point	of	barking?"	They	become	tired,	exhausted.
The	same	has	 to	be	 the	way	of	a	sannyasin:	 let	your	heart	sing,	dance,	rejoice.
The	dogs	from	the	head	will	go	on	barking	saying,	"This	is	irrational,	that	this,	it
is	not	expected,	this	is	immoral.	This	is	not	gentlemanly,	this	is	not	nice.	What
will	people	say,	what	are	you	doing?"	It	will	condemn	all	poetry	 inside	you,	 it
will	 condemn	 all	 love	 inside	 you.	 It	will	 try	 every	way	 to	 pull	 you	 out	 of	 the
heart	because	its	whole	power	is	at	risk.	But	don't	listen	to	it;	just	go	on	singing,
go	on	dancing	and	celebrating.	And	one	day	you	will	be	surprised,	the	dogs	are
no	more	barking,	they	have	been	left	far	behind.
The	day	it	happens	is	the	day	of	great	benediction.	Then	flowers	start	showering
on	you,	then	the	whole	existence	starts	pouring	all	kinds	of	joys	upon	you.	You
are	connected	with	the	whole,	you	have	become	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
seer.	Love	makes	one	a	seer,	it	gives	one	eyes.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009115
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
It	 is	dangerous,	 it	 is	 insecure,	 it	 is	going	into	the	unknown.	It	 is	only	for	 those
who	have	tremendous	courage,	it	is	not	for	the	cowards.	For	the	cowards	truth	is
not	possible;	they	will	have	to	live	in	lies.	They	don't	deserve	truth,	they	are	not
worthy	of	 it.	They	 live	 in	 fear	and	 they	are	always	afraid	 to	move	beyond	 the
familiar.	And	truth	is	always	beyond	the	familiar.
The	 familiar	 is	 where	 the	 crowd	 lives,	 in	 which	 the	 crowd	 lives.	 The	 crowd
consists	 of	 cowards	 and	 the	 crowd	 is	 the	 lowest	 as	 far	 as	 intelligence	 is
concerned.	One	cannot	fall	below	that,	hence	there	is	no	danger,	you	are	walking
on	plain	ground.
But	 when	 you	 start	 moving	 towards	 the	 Himalayan	 peaks,	 naturally	 there	 is
danger;	one	step	wrong	and	you	will	be	gone	forever.	But	in	that	very	risk	one	is
born,	 reborn.	 That	 very	 risk	 gives	 you	 sharpness,	 intelligence,	 because	 of	 the
challenge,	 and	 without	 the	 challenge	 intelligence	 goes	 on	 gathering	 rust	 and
dust.	When	there	is	challenge;	you	are	constantly	alert,	aware.
The	most	beautiful	thing	about	danger	is	it	gives	you	alertness,	awareness;	hence
the	people	who	go	climbing	an	unknown	peak,	unmapped,	are	really	searching
awareness.	They	are	not	aware	of	what	they	are	searching	for.	The	people	who
have	travelled	to	the	North	and	South	poles,	taking	all	kinds	of	risks,	the	people
who	have	gone	to	the	moon,	are	not	aware	of	what	their	search	is	really	for.	They
are	searching	for	awareness	but	their	search	is	not	conscious.
A	meditator	goes	consciously.	There	is	no	need	to	go	to	the	Himalayan	peaks	or
to	 the	 moon	 because	 there	 are	 higher	 peaks	 within	 you	 and	 greater	 distances
within	you	and	far	more	significant	stars	within	you;	the	whole	sky	is	there,	the
whole	cosmos	is	there.	But	it	is	far	more	risky	than	going	to	the	moon	or	going
to	Everest.
The	greatest,	 the	most	dangerous,	 the	 riskiest	 space,	 is	within;	hence	very	 few
people	dare	to	go	there.
Falling	from	those	peaks	which	are	inside	you	you	fall	into	a	deeper	abyss	than
one	has	ever	known	before.
When	you	 start	 knowing	 something	 about	 bliss,	 at	 the	 same	 time	you	become
aware	 that	 if	a	single	step	goes	wrong	you	will	 fall	 into	a	darkness	 into	which
you	 have	 never	 been.	 As	 you	 move	 towards	 the	 positive	 the	 negative	 also
becomes	 bigger.	 When	 you	 reach	 the	 peak	 the	 valley	 is	 the	 greatest	 that
surrounds	you.
When	you	were	on	plain	ground	there	was	no	valley	at	all;	there	was	not	much
risk.	Even	if	you	had	fallen	there	was	not	much	risk	--	maybe	a	fracture	or	two,
at	 the	 most.	 But	 if	 you	 fall	 from	 the	 peak	 you	 will	 be	 shattered,	 completely
shattered.
But	 nobody	 ever	 falls	 from	 the	 peaks	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 as	 you	move
higher,	you	become	more	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
alert,	more	conscious,	you	become	aware	of	the	razor's	edge.	You	are	walking	on
a	sword.	You	are	 like	a	 tightrope	walker	who	has	 to	be	aware,	very	aware.	He
has	 to	 live	 in	 the	moment;	 he	 cannot	 think	of	 the	past,	 he	 cannot	 think	of	 the
future.	The	moment	is	enough	unto	itself;	he	has	to	be	herenow.	Hence	there	is
no	fall,	I	have	never	heard	of	anybody	falling	from	the	peaks.	But	the	danger	is
there,	and	because	of	the	danger	very	few	people	go	into	the	inward	world,	the
interiority	of	one's	own	being.
They	cling	to	whatsoever	security	they	have	gott	money,	power,	prestige,	family,
the	Rotary	Club,	the	Lion's	Club	--	where	you	will	not	find	a	single	lion,	all	are
sheep.	But	sheep	like	to	call	themselves	lions,	they	like	pretending.	Comfortable,
beautiful	lies	they	live	in.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	said,	"Don't	take	away	the	lies	from	people,	otherwise	they
will	die."	And	in	a	way	he	is	right	that	people	cannot	live	without	lies,	they	need
comfortable	 lies;	 hence	 Christianity	 exists,	 Hinduism	 exists,	 Buddhism	 exists.
All	 these	 organised	 religions	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 truth.	 Their	 whole
existence	depends	on	there	being	cowards	who	constantly	need	to	be	comforted,
consoled.	They	 don't	want	 the	 truth	 because	 truth	means	 you	 have	 to	 go	 on	 a
long	 pilgrimage,	 the	 longest	 journey.	 But	 if	 you	 have	 courage	 the	 journey
becomes	smaller.
The	greater	the	courage,	the	shorter	is	the	journey.	If	the	courage	is	total	then	in
a	single	step,	like	sudden	lightning,	one	reaches	the	peak.	It	 is	worth	taking	all
the	 risks,	 it	 is	 worth	 it	 to	 go	 into	 the	 dangerous,	 it	 is	 worth	 it	 to	 go	 into	 the
uncharted	sea,	because	 it	 is	only	 through	 that	gambling	 that	one's	soul	 is	born,
otherwise	 man	 lives	 without	 a	 soul.	 And	 to	 live	 without	 a	 soul	 is	 not	 worth
anything.	 It	 is	 meaningless,	 it	 has	 no	 glory,	 no	 splendour,	 no	 fragrance,	 no
beauty,	no	bliss.	It	is	monotony,	sheer	monotony,	boredom.
The	 ultimate	 truth	 needs	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 hearing	 because	 god	 is	 constantly
speaking	 within	 you.	 But	 we	 don't	 hear,	 we	 are	 so	 full	 of	 noise.	 The	 mind
continuously	 chatters;	 day	 in,	 day	 out,	 whether	 awake	 or	 asleep,	 it	 goes	 on
chattering.	And	there	is	not	only	one	mind,	everybody	is	carrying	many	minds.
The	 idea	 of	 one	mind	 is	 absolutely	wrong;	we	 don't	 have	 one	mind,	we	 have
many	 minds.	 So	 it	 is	 not	 just	 a	 single	 mind	 chattering,	 it	 is	 many	 minds
chattering;	it	is	a	crowd	inside.	They	are	all	quarreling	with	each	other,	fighting
with	each	other	for	domination.	Each	mind	wants	to	be	the	dominant	one.
And	 in	 this	 conflict,	 confusion,	 chaos,	 you	 cannot	 hear	 the	 still	 small	 voice
within.	 It	 is	 very	 clear	 but	 it	 is	 a	 whisper:	 soft,	 delicate,	 like	 a	 flower,	 like	 a
breeze.	 You	 need	 a	 gracious	 hearing,	 you	 need	 a	 silence	 to	 hear	 it,	 a	 deep
transcendence	of	the	mind,	a	distance	from	the	mind,	so	that	the	chattering	goes
farther	and	farther	away.	You	can	hear	it	somewhere	in	the	neighbourhood	and	it
goes	on	receding.	As	you	become	more	and	more	silent	 it	 fades	away.	Finally,
when	you	are	really	silent,	there	is	no	mind	at	all;	it	has	gone	so	far	away,	like
the	farthest	star.	You	cannot	hear	anything.	From	the	mind	now	there	is	nothing,
no	problem.
Then	suddenly	the	heart	is	heard.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Simone:	when	one	listens	to	one's	own	heart.	The	heart
does	not	speak	any	language;	all	languages	belong	to	the	mind.	The	heart	has	its
own	way	of	conveying	its	messages	which	is	not	intellectual	but	intuitive.
The	word	 "intuition"	 is	 beautiful.	 The	mind	 needs	 tuition,	 it	 needs	 teachers	 --
schools,	colleges,	universities.	It	needs	tuition,	it	has	to	be	trained	by	others	by
the	society.	Intuition	means	it	is	already	there;	the	master	is	inside	you.	There	is
no	need	to	follow	the	ideas	given	by	others,	because	they	cannot	go	deeper	than
the	mind,	and	mind	is	just	the	periphery	of	your	being.	And	the	more	ideas	you
gather,	the	more	clumsy	you	become,	because	more	and	more	minds	are	created.
A	 scholar	 is	 almost	 in	 a	 state	 of	 insanity.	 There	 are	 scriptures	 which	 he	 can
quote.
There	was	 a	 great	 orator	 of	 England,	 Ingersoll.	He	was	 a	 very	 famous	 orator,
very	few	orators	have	been	of	 that	quality,	and	he	was	a	very	sincere	man	too.
Before	 he	 started	 speaking	 he	 would	 always	 raise	 a	 hand	 with	 two	 fingers
sticking	up,	and	when	he	ended	he	would	raise	his	other	hand	with	two	fingers
sticking	up.
Everybody	 asked	 "What	 is	 this	 gesture?	What	 do	 you	mean?"	 And	 he	 would
smile	and	never	answer.
When	he	was	dying	one	of	his	friends	said,	"Now	please,	it	is	a	question	of	only
a	few	minutes	or	at	the	most	a	few	hours	and	you	will	be	gone.	Now	tell	us,	what
was	the	secret	of	your	raising	two	fingers	of	your	left	hand	at	the	beginning	of
each	 speech	 and	 two	 fingers	 of	 your	 right	 hand	 at	 the	 end?	 What	 was	 the
meaning?"	 He	 said,	 "They	 are	 inverted	 commas,	 because	 whatsoever	 I	 was
saying	was	not	my	own.	I	could	not	say	that	so	I	had	to	hide	it,	but	now	I	can	say
I	was	just	repeating	others;	the	whole	thing	was	borrowed."
But	 he	 was	 a	 sincere	 man.	 At	 least	 he	 made	 an	 effort	 to	 make	 it	 clear	 that
whatsoever	he	was	saying	was	not	his	own.
The	mind	has	nothing	of	its	own,	it	is	always	within	inverted	commas;	whether
you	know	or	not,	whether	you	are	 sincere	or	not,	 it	 is	 so.	Mind	 is	 false	 thing,
never	original,	always	borrowed.
But	the	heart	is	your	own,	it	is	your	own	voice,	it	is	your	very	being	speaking	to
you.	But	its	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
communication	 is	 not	 through	 language.	 It	 is	 a	 silent	 communication.	 It	 is
communion	rather	than	communication.
Once	the	mind	is	silent	nothing	is	said	but	everything	is	heard.	Without	uttering
a	single	word,	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	start	moving	 in	 the	 right	way,	 in	 the	 right
direction.	 The	 heart	 goes	 on	 guiding	 you	 in	 subtle	 ways;	 you	 just	 have	 to	 be
silent,	that's	all.	And	your	life	is	transformed	through	silence.	I	teach	here	only
silence	 and	 nothing	 else,	 because	 out	 of	 silence	 everything	 else	 flowers.	 One
becomes	a	garden	and	all	kinds	of	flowers	bloom.	With	the	silence	comes	spring,
because	 with	 silence	 comes	 joy,	 with	 silence	 comes	 love,	 with	 silence	 comes
celebration,	with	silence	comes	god,	with	silence	comes	truth.
God	 can	 be	 attained	 through	 two	ways:	 either	 prayer	 or	meditation.	 They	 are
different	 ways,	 diametrically	 opposite	 but,	 strangely	 leading	 to	 the	 same
experience.
If	you	 look	at	 the	ways	 they	 look	antagonistic,	 and	 if	one	 thinks	 logically	one
will	think,	how	can	these	contrary	thoughts	lead	to	the	same	goal?	But	those	who
have	attained	have	seen	 that,	ultimately,	both	paths	 lead	 to	 the	same	goal.	And
those	two	paths	are	needed	because	there	are	two	types	of	people	in	the	world.
Humanity	can	be	divided	into	two	categories:	the	people	who	are	more	interested
in	 love	 and	 the	 people	 who	 are	 more	 interested	 in	 bliss.	 The	 person	 who	 is
interested	 in	 love	 has	 to	 follow	 the	 path	 of	 prayer.	 Then	 God	 is	 somewhere
outside	and	you	become	a	lover	or	a	beloved.	Both	things	have	been	done	in	the
past.
The	Indian	mystics	who	followed	the	path	of	prayer	have	always	thought	of	God
as	 the	 lover	 and	 themselves	 as	 the	 beloved.	 They	 thought	 of	 themselves	 as
feminine	because	God	is	the	only	male.	That	too	has	a	beauty	of	its	own	--	you
are	just	receptive	like	a	woman.
The	 Sufis	 have	 done	 just	 the	 opposite.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 path	 but	 they	 think	 of
themselves	as	lovers	and	God	as	a	beloved.	God	is	the	woman	--	that	too	has	its
beauty.	But	both	are	on	the	path	of	love.	Prayer	means	the	highest	form	of	love.
But	you	have	to	hypothesize	God	somewhere	outside,	then	you	can	relate.
The	people	who	are	interested	in	bliss	have	no	need	to	hypothesize	God	outside,
they	have	to	hypothesize	God	inside.	Buddha,	Mahavira	--	the	whole	tradition	of
Tao	mystics	and	Zen	mystics	follows	the	path	of	meditation.	In	meditation,	you
don't	need	any	outside	God	--	it	is	self-exploration.
Now,	these	two	things	look	totally	opposite;	one	is	focussed	on	the	inside	God.
How	can	they	reach	to	the	same	point?	--	But	they	do.
The	person	who	thinks	of	God	as	being	on	the	outside	dissolves	himself	into	his
God.	He	disappears,	and	the	moment	he	disappears	the	ego	is	dropped	and	there
is	oneness.	That	oneness	is	realization.
In	meditation	you	have	to	discard	the	ego,	you	have	to	become	aware	of	the	ego,
you	 have	 to	 become	 watchful	 of	 the	 ego	 and	 all	 its	 tricks	 and	 strategies	 and
cunning	ways.	As	you	watch	the	ego	and	its	subtle	ways	it	starts	disappearing.	It
cannot	 exist	 in	 the	 light	 of	 awareness.	 Awareness	 is	 just	 like	 light:	 you	 bring
light	in	and	the	darkness	disappears.	And	the	ego	is	nothing	but	darkness.
The	person	following	the	path	of	love	surrenders	his	ego	to	God.	"I	am	not,	you
are."	But	the	same	phenomenon	happens,	the	ego	is	surrendered.	And	the	person
on	 the	 path	 of	 meditation	 does	 it	 through	 awareness.	 The	 same	 phenomenon
happens,	the	ego	disappears.	And	the	moment	the	ego	disappears	you	have	come
to	find	oneness	with	existence.	So	both	reach	the	same	oneness,	both	paths	lead
to	the	disappearance	of	duality;	the	duality	is	dissolved.
My	 feeling	 is	 that,	 as	 man	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 mature,	 the	 path	 of
meditation	has	to	be	more	and	more	implemented.
A	child	cannot	understand	the	path	of	meditation;	he	can	understand	the	path	of
love	because	love	is	natural.	Every	child	knows	what	love	is.	Maybe	later	on	he
forgets	what	it	is,	but	every	child	knows	what	love	is;	it	is	an	intrinsic	feel.
Meditation	 is	 for	 a	 grown-up	 person.	 And	 humanity	 has	 come	 of	 age,	 hence
meditation	is	going	to	become	more	significant	than	prayer	in	the	future.	Buddha
is	going	to	become	more	significant	than	Jesus.
Zen	is	going	to	become	more	predominant	than	Sufism,	Hassidism.	Of	course	a
few	people	will	go	on	following	those	paths,	and	nothing	is	wrong	in	following
them	if	they	appeal	to	you	--	if	they	fit	you.	But	the	more	intelligent	you	are,	the
more	contemporary	you	are,	more	is	the	possibility	that	you	will	be	easily	moved
by	meditation;	hence	my	emphasis	on	meditation.
I	help	people	in	prayer	only	when	I	see	that	meditation	will	not	be	possible	for	a
certain	person.	But	it	is	becoming	more	secondary	every	day.
Dhyaneshwar	 means	 God	 that	 is	 attained	 through	 meditation.	 So	 remember,
meditation	is	going	to	be	your	way.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Experience	is	of	the	mind.	Mind	deals	only	with	dead	things.	Experience	means
something	 that	 has	 already	 become	 past.	 Experiencing	 means	 that	 which	 is
present,	which	is	already	here	and	now,	which	is	a	process,	not	a	thing.	And	this
has	to	be	understood	about	everything	that	is	valuable.	Love,	bliss,	awareness
--	these	are	all	processes,	not	things.	You	are	always	moving	from	one	perfection
to	another	perfection	but	 the	end	never	comes.	It	 is	an	endless	pilgrimage.	The
pilgrimage	itself	is	so	beautiful	that	there	is	no	need	for	any	end,	the	pilgrimage
itself	is	the	end.
Never	make	any	goal	 in	 life	because	 life	has	no	goal,	hence	all	goals	are	 false
and	those	who	are	running	after	goals	are	bound	to	be	disappointed.	Live	life	as
a	process,	not	as	a	dead	thing	but	as	something	alive,	growing,	like	a	tree	which
is	constantly	growing;	new	leaves	are	always	coming,	the	old	are	disappearing,
the	old	is	constantly	replaced	by	the	new.	Or	like	a	river	which	constantly	goes
on	flowing	towards	the	ocean,	 it	 is	a	continuum.	Life	is	a	river,	 love	is	a	river,
awareness	is	a	river.
Remember	always,	nouns	are	all	false.	Existence	consists	of	verbs,	not	nouns.	In
fact	if	we	want	to	make	language	really	true	--	true	to	life,	true	to	reality	--	then
we	have	to	drop	all	nouns,	all	pronouns.	Language	should	consist	only	of	verbs.
There	 is	no	 tree,	 there	 is	only	 treeing.	There	 is	no	 river,	 there	 is	only	 rivering;
there	is	no	life,	there	is	only	living;	and	there	is	no	love,	there	is	only	loving.
This	has	to	be	remembered	constantly	because	the	mind	tries	to	make	everything
a	noun.	 It	 lives	 in	nouns	 --	 that's	why	 it	goes	on	missing	 life.	 It	 is	very	happy
with	 dead	 things	 because	 dead	 things	 can	 be	 easily	manipulated.	 Dead	 things
become	objects.	You	can	 think	about	 them,	you	can	go	round	and	round	them,
you	 can	 dissect	 them,	 you	 can	 try	 to	 find	 out	 what	 their	 secret	 is.	 But	 when
something	is	alive	mind	simply	feels	impotent.
You	 cannot	 dissect	 an	 alive	 child.	 Yes,	 you	 can	 do	 a	 post-mortem	 when
somebody	is	dead.	And	mind	goes	on	doing	post-mortems.	It	goes	on	cutting	up
and	analysing	corpses.	But	when	a	child	is	dead	it	is	no	more	the	same	child.	The
real	has	already	left;	the	bird	is	no	more	in	the	cage,	only	the	cage	is	there.	And
by	dissecting	the	cage	you	cannot	find	the	bird.
That's	 why	 science	 goes	 on	 missing	 the	 soul.	 It	 goes	 on	 missing	 your	 centre
because	 it	 depends	 on	 dissection,	 analysis.	 Science	 lives	 in	 nouns.	 A	 person
becomes	 religious	when	he	becomes	aware	 that	all	nouns	are	 false,	only	verbs
are	real.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Prem	Anubhuti:	love	is	an	experiencing,	it	 is	a	process.
Never	try	to	make	it	permanent.	Never	try	to	change	its	natural	course,	its	flow,
because	a	canal	is	not	a	river.	There	is	a	tremendous	difference	between	the	two.
The	river	has	freedom,	the	canal	is	imprisoned.	It	only	has	the	appearance	of	a
river.
My	 sannyasins	have	 to	understand	 it	 as	deeply	 as	possible.	Never	destroy	 any
process	by	forcing	your	ideas	upon	it.	Remain	spontaneous,	alert,	receptive,	but
allowing	 life	 its	 own	 course,	 never	 interfering.	 Then	 all	 bliss	 is	 yours	 and	 all
benediction	is	yours.	Then	life	is	always	an	ongoing	ecstasy,	it	is	a	dance	of	such
tremendous	 beauty	 and	 grace	 that	 mind	 is	 absolutely	 incapable	 of
comprehending	it.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009125
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	 talked	 about	 the	meaning	 of	 the	word	 'shunyam'.	 It	means	 nothingness,
and	it	is	a	tremendously	positive	state.)
It	 simply	 means	 space	 is	 there	 without	 any	 content.	 But	 the	 space	 is	 very
positive,	in	fact	more	than	it	was	when	it	was	too	full	of	things	--	past,	desires,
memories,	imaginings,	expectations.	These	are	the	contents	of	your	inner	world.
We	are	 full	of	 these,	 and	 they	are	 so	many	 that	 they	don't	 leave	any	space	 for
ourselves	to	be.	We	are	very	much	overcrowded.
This	 is	 the	 real	problem,	how	 to	disperse	 this	crowd.	And	 this	crowd	does	not
believe	 in	 birth	 control;	 it	 is	 a	 very	 Indian	 crowd.	 Each	 thought	 goes	 on
generating	thousands	of	thoughts,	each	desire	goes	on	giving	birth	to	many	more
desires,	each	dream	brings	thousands	of	dreams	in	its	wake.	So	the	inner	world
goes	on	becoming	more	and	more	crowded,	more	and	more	clumsy,	more	and
more	chaotic.
The	child	comes	with	pure	silence.	His	slate	 is	empty.	It	has	a	grace,	a	beauty,
the	music	 of	 silence.	 But	we	 start	 stuffing	 each	 child	with	 religious	 ideology,
political	 ideology.	We	 start	 poisoning	 each	 child	 with	 an	 ambition.	We	 create
desires	in	him,	we	create	competition	in	him,	we	create	imitativeness	in	him.	We
tell	him,	"Look,	you	have	to	be	this,	you	have	to	be	the	president	or	 the	prime
minister	of	the	country,	you	have	to	be	the	richest	man."
That	must	have	been	 the	desire	of	your	parents	when	they	gave	you	the	name,
Max;	Max	means	the	greatest.	Every	parent	wants	his	child	to	be	the	greatest,	an
Alexander	 the	 Great.	 Each	 parent	 is	 living	 his	 unfulfilled	 desires	 through	 his
children.	He	has	not	been	able	to	fulfil	his	desires.	Nobody	has	ever	been	able	to
fulfil	 their	desires	because	desire	as	such	 is	unfulfillable.	Nothing	can	be	done
about	it;	it	is	not	in	the	nature	of	things,	it	is	not	the	law	of	life.
To	be	 full	of	desires	 simply	means	 to	 await	 thousands	of	 frustrations,	 failures.
Desires	bring	only	frustration.	They	create	great	expectation,	and	when	they	fall
apart	 --	 and	 they	are	bound	 to	 fall	 apart	 sooner	or	 later	 --	one	 is	disillusioned.
And	one	has	carried	the	illusion	for	so	long	and	has	become	so	attached	to	it	that
one	 feels	 lost.	 Whenever	 a	 desire	 gets	 frustrated	 one	 is	 wounded.	 And	 those
wounds	go	on	accumulating.
Each	 child	 comes	 into	 the	world	 healthy	 and	whole	 and	we	 immediately	 start
wounding	him.	Up	to	now	humanity	has	existed	in	a	very	wrong	way.	Something
basically,	 fundamentally,	 is	 wrong.	 Our	 whole	 education	 is	 ambitious,	 it	 is
political;	our	 religions	are	political.	Maybe	 they	are	 the	politics	of	 the	beyond,
but	they	are	politics.	You	have	to	reach	heaven,	you	have	to	be	a	great	achiever
there	in	the	other	world	too.
Nobody	says	 to	 just	be	empty	of	all	content,	because	 in	 that	emptiness,	 in	 that
nothingness,	flowers	the	ultimate
If	one	is	ready	to	become	a	nobody	then	one	becomes	the	greatest	--	that	is	the
meaning	of	Max.	So	I	am	giving	you	a	paradoxical	name.	Be	nothing	then	you
are	all,	be	nobody	then	you	attain	to	tremendous	extraordinariness.	Just	be	empty
and	 you	 will	 come	 to	 know	 the	 greatest	 in	 you,	 the	 highest	 in	 you.	 But
remember,	don't	be	nothing	to	become	the	greatest	because	then	you	cannot	be
nothing.	To	be	nothing	is	not	to	be	used	as	a	means	to	be	the	greatest.	It	cannot
be	a	means,	it	is	an	end	unto	itself.	The	greatness	is	a	by-product,	not	the	goal,
not	the	end.
It	is	like	a	fragrance.	The	flower	is	the	end,	the	flowering	of	your	consciousness
is	all,	and	then	suddenly	there	is	fragrance.	If	you	search	for	fragrance	you	will
miss	the	flower,	and	without	the	flower	there	is	no	fragrance.	If	you	search	for
the	flower	the	fragrance	comes	of	its	own	accord.
Hence	 the	 really	 great	 are	 not	Alexanders,	 the	 really	 great	 are	 Jesus,	Buddha,
Lao	 Tzu.	 They	 were	 very	 simple	 people,	 with	 no	 desire	 to	 be	 anybody	 in
particular	--	humble.	Jesus	says	"Blessed	are	the	meek	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom
of	god."	That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	your	name.	That	statement	is	paradoxical:
the	most	blessed	are	the	meek,	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god.
If	one	is	meek,	humble,	nobody,	then	the	doors	of	the	kingdom	open,	then	you
are	a	divine	guest.	Then	suddenly	you	are	raised	to	the	highest	pinnacle	of	life.
But	 that	 is	a	by-product.	To	attain	the	kingdom	of	god	is	not	a	goal.	Forget	all
about	it	--	just	be	nothing.
This	is	my	whole	teaching	here,	just	to	be	a	nobody.	Just	go	on	throwing	out	all
the	 rotten	 furniture	 from	 inside	 your	 being	 and	 become	 utterly	 spacious.	 And
that	space	is	very	overflowing,	overflowing	with	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
being,	because	the	being	can	grow,	it	has	space	to	grow.	The	being	can	open	its
petals,	 it	 can	 become	 a	 thousand-petalled	 lotus.	And	 then	 there	 is	 great	 dance
inside	 and	 great	music	 and	 great	 poetry	 and	 great	 beauty	 and	 grace.	Then	 the
whole	imprisoned	splendour	is	released	because	there	is	no	barrier	to	hinder	it.
You	become	expansive.	Life	becomes	an	explosion	of	light,	of	love,	of	bliss.
(And	love	is	another	way	of	learning	to	be	a	nobody,	Osho	went	on	to	say.)	Love
is	nothing	but	the	disappearance	of	the	dewdrop	into	the	ocean.	It	is	losing	one's
ego,	it	is	total	surrender	to	existence.	It	is	meeting	with	the	whole,	it	is	dropping
your	boundaries	and	your	 identity.	 It	 is	abandoning	yourself.	The	moment	you
abandon	yourself,	immediately	you	become	oceanic,	vast.
We	are	clinging	to	our	identity.	We	protect	it,	we	fight	for	it,	we	are	even	ready
to	die	for	it.	And	this	is	just	stupidity	because	the	ego	is	the	most	false	thing	in
existence.	It	is	just	hot	air,	it	has	no	real	existence.	It	is	like	darkness.
You	can	see	darkness,	every	day	you	see	it,	but	it	has	no	existence	as	such.	It	is
simply	absence	of	light
--	nothing	in	itself,	just	an	absence	of	light.	Bring	the	light	in	and	you	don't	find
any	darkness,	and	you	never	even	see	it	going	out	of	the	door.	Put	the	light	off
and	 it	 is	 suddenly	 there.	 It	 does	 not	 come	 in;	 you	 can	 keep	 the	 doors	 and
windows	closed.	It	comes	from	nowhere	because	it	is	non	--	existential,	it	is	just
absence.	It	does	not	come	and	go.	Light	comes	and	goes	because	light	is.
The	same	is	true	about	our	ego.	Ego	is	absence	of	love.	The	moment	you	bring
the	light	of	love	in,	ego	disappears.	You	need	not	do	anything	else	for	the	ego;
just	become	more	loving,	unconditionally	loving.
Love	is	not	to	be	addressed	to	somebody	in	particular,	just	be	loving	--	that	has
to	 be	 your	 quality.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 relationship.	 Love	 has	 to	 be	 like
fragrance.	Whether	anybody	comes	to	know	of	it	or	not,	does	not	matter	to	the
flower.	 Even	 in	 the	 farthest	 Himalayas,	 where	 nobody	 comes	 and	 goes,
thousands	of	flowers	bloom	and	spread	their	fragrance.
In	 the	Himalayas	 there	 is	 a	whole	valley	of	very	 strange	 flowers.	People	have
only	 seen	 it	 from	 the	 peaks,	 nobody	 has	 been	 able	 to	 reach	 it	 because	 it	 is
dangerous	 to	 go	 down	 into	 that	 valley.	 People	 know	 about	 those	 flowers	 but
nobody	has	smelled	their	perfume;	and	they	have	very	psychedelic	colours.	They
are	far	away,	but	they	are	not	worried	at	all	about	that;	the	flowers	are	perfectly
happy.
Love	has	to	be	just	your	quality.	Become	loving,	and	one	day	it	happens	that	you
are	simply	love;	not	even	loving	but	love.	That	is	the	day	of	great	revelation.	In
that	very	moment	the	dewdrop	disappears	into	the	ocean	and	becomes	the	ocean.
In	religious	terminology,	in	religious	jargon,	it	has	been	called	god-realisation.	If
one	 likes	 religious	 jargon	 one	 can	 use	 that	 word,	 otherwise	 it	 is	 far	 more
beautiful	 to	 say	 that	 one	 becomes	 oceanic;	 it	 is	 far	 more	 poetic.	 priests	 have
contaminated	 the	word	"god"	 too	much	and	 they	have	been	quarrelling	around
the	word	 "god"	 for	 so	many	centuries	 that	 the	very	word	 immediately	 raises	a
thousand	 and	 one	 questions.	 It	 simply	 creates	 more	 and	 more	 arguments	 and
controversies.	But	the	word	in	itself	was	beautiful	when	used	for	the	first	time;	it
simply	represented	the	beyond,	the	vast	beyond.
Now	 it	 does	 not	 represent	 the	 beyond	 any	 more.	 Even	 the	 beyond	 has	 been
exploited	by	priests.	Priests	are	the	most	cunning	people.	They	have	made	god	a
Christian	god,	a	Hindu	god,	a	Mohammedan	god.	Now	nothing	more	absurd	can
be	 done,	 it	 is	 the	 ultimate	 in	 absurdity.	 God	 cannot	 be	 Hindu	 or	 Jewish	 or
Buddhist.	God	simply	means	vastness,	and	to	make	vastness	Christian	is	to	make
it	small.	Any	adjective	will	make	it	limited.	God	has	to	be	without	any	adjective.
It	 simply	means	 the	 infinite	 existence,	 the	unbounded.	And	 love	will	give	you
the	first	taste	of	it.
Just	a	drop	of	the	nectar	is	enough	to	transform	one.	Once	you	have	tasted	love
you	will	automatically	drop	all	that	is	against	love	--	all	hatred,	anger,	jealousy,
all	 violence.	One	 cannot	 carry	 them	any	more	because	 they	 are	 your	 enemies.
One	 cannot	 go	 on	 nourishing	 them.	 One	 simply	 drops	 them	 out	 of	 the
understanding	that	arises	with	love,	that	love	brings	in.
All	these	things	--	violence,	hatred,	anger,	jealousy,	possessiveness	--	are	part	of
darkness.	So	bring	in	the	light	of	love.	That's	the	purpose	of	sannyas.
(Don't	be	part	of	 the	crowd	--	either	 the	 internal	one	we	call	 the	mind,	nor	 the
outer	that	is	society.
Having	touched	on	the	former	earlier	in	the	evening	Osho	turned	to	the	subject
of	society	versus	the	seer.)	Meditation	is	the	greatest	rebellion	in	the	world.	It	is
not	ordinary	revolution.	Revolution	has	a	political	colour	to	it.	Revolution	is	of
the	crowds	rebellion	is	of	the	individual.
Revolution	 is	 of	 necessity	 political,	 because	 a	 crowd	 means	 politics.	 The
communist	 revolution	 or	 the	 socialist	 revolution	 or	 the	 fascist	 revolution	 --
Russian,	French,	Chinese	--	it	does	not	matter	what	kind	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
revolution	 and	what	 type	 of	 ideology,	 one	 thing	 is	 essential,	 that	 the	 crowd	 is
there.	And	being	part	of	a	crowd	means	 that	you	are	 functioning	at	 the	 lowest
level	of	intelligence.
To	control	the	crowd,	to	be	appealing	to	the	crowd,	to	convince	the	crowd,	you
have	 to	come	down	very	 low.	You	have	 to	come	down	 to	where	 the	crowd	 is.
You	 have	 to	 speak	 their	 language.	 They	 understand	 violence,	 they	 understand
murder.	 The	 crowd	 consists	 of	 collective	 stupidity,	 hence	 all	 revolutions	 are
murderous,	violent,	unintelligent.	But	the	crowd	has	a	power	of	its	own	because
ninety-nine	per	cent	of	the	people	are	in	it.
The	rebel	stands	alone	--	that's	the	beauty	of	it.	A	Buddha,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Jesus
--	 these	are	 rebels,	not	 revolutionaries.	Karl	Marx,	Engels,	Lenin,	Mao,	Stalin,
Hitler,	Gandhi	--	these	are	revolutionaries.	They	have	to	go	with	the	crowd,	only
then	will	the	crowd	go	with	them.
A	 rebel	 does	 not	 bother	 about	 whether	 anybody	 comes	 with	 him	 or	 not.	 He
cannot	compromise	on	any	account;	he	cannot	come	down	from	his	heights.	He
gives	a	call,	certainly,	to	everybody	who	is	receptive,	but	he	remains	on	the	peak.
He	is	the	ultimate	peak	of	intelligence.
Meditation	 means	 the	 purest	 intelligence,	 uncontaminated	 intelligence,	 pure
intelligence	--	not	intellectuality.	Intellectuality	is	a	totally	different	matter.	You
can	become	an	 intellectual	by	going	 to	university,	visiting	 the	British	Museum
and	 going	 to	 the	 libraries	 and	 studying	 scriptures.	 You	 can	 become	 an
intellectual;	meditation	 is	not	needed	for	 intellect.	And	 the	 intellectual	goes	on
collecting	 rubbish.	 He	 becomes	 a	 great	 rubbish-collector;	 his	 mind	 is	 just	 a
junkyard,	and	everything	is	borrowed.
Intelligence	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	outside,	with	borrowing	from	the	Vedas
or	the	Bible	or	the	Koran
--	 no.	 It	 is	 discovering	 one's	 own	 inner	 sources.	 It	 is	 discovering	 one's	 own
centre.	That's	what	meditation	is	all	about:	a	discovery	of	one's	own	centre.	And
the	moment	you	know	who	you	are,	there	is	a	great	explosion	of	intelligence.
Buddha	 is	 not	 an	 intellectual,	 neither	 is	 Jesus	 nor	 is	 Lao	 Tzu,	 but	 they	 are
tremendously	 intelligent.	 They	 have	 the	 clearest	 insight	 into	 things,	 a	 direct
insight,	 an	 immediate	 insight.	 They	 don't	 go	 via	 anything,	 their	 eyes	 are
unclouded.	There	is	no	smoke	in	their	mind,	their	flames	are	without	any	smoke
--	 flames	 of	 intelligence	with	 no	 smoke.	Hence	wherever	 they	 look,	wherever
their	light	falls,	they	can	see	exactly	what	is,	they	know	what	is.
Meditation	is	sharpening	your	intelligence,	and	this	sharpening	happens	through
silence.	 Thoughts	 make	 the	 intellectual;	 no-thought	 is	 the	 way	 to	 attain
intelligence.
Thinking	is	of	the	head,	of	the	mind,	and	the	state	of	no-mind	is	the	beginning	of
a	 totally	 new	 dimension	 in	 you	 when	 all	 thoughts	 cease	 and	 there	 is	 simple
silence	as	if	a	full	stop	has	come.	Nothing	moves,	everything	has	stopped.	Time
has	stopped;	one	is	simply	in	the	present.	In	that	tremendous	moment
--	because	it	is	the	most	alive	moment	of	your	life	--	you	discover	yourself.	And
that	 brings	 a	 rebellion	 to	 your	 being.	 You	 are	 another	 person	 totally.	 You	 are
reborn.	You	are	no	more	the	same	old	person	--	 the	old	dies.	You	are	not	even
continuous	with	 the	 old.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 the	 old	 has	 become	 refined,	 the	 old	 has
simply	evaporated.
You	are	a	totally	new	person,	a	discontinuous	phenomenon.	With	this	aliveness
whatsoever	a	person	does,	whatsoever	he	says,	he	is	bound	to	be	rebellious.	Very
few	people	will	be	able	to	understand	him.	The	masses	cannot	understand.	They
will	be	against	him,	they	have	always	been	against	meditators.	They	have	been
afraid	of	people	like	Jesus	and	Socrates	and	Mansoor.	They	have	killed	them	for
the	simple	 reason	 that	 they	could	not	digest	 their	vision,	 they	could	not	accept
that	somebody	could	be	on	such	a	height.	To	accept	somebody	on	such	a	height
means	to	accept	that	you	are	living	in	darkness.	It	is	humiliating.
The	 mobs	 took	 revenge.	 They	 felt	 insulted;	 that's	 how	 the	 stupid	 person
functions,	 behaves.	When	 there	 is	 a	man	 like	 Jesus,	 only	 the	 very	 few	people
who	have	a	little	bit	of	intelligence,	who	can	see	what	he	is,	who	can	hear	and
understand,	 who	 have	 a	 little	 love	 and	 trust,	 who	 can	 go	 with	 him	 into	 the
beyond,	who	can	understand	his	message...	They	are	bound	to	be	very	few.	Rare
people	will	be	with	a	person	like	Jesus.
The	masses,	whether	Jews	or	Hindus	or	Mohammedans,	it	does	not	matter	--	will
feel	humiliated,	insulted.	And	the	only	way	to	regain	their	ego	is	to	destroy	such
a	person,	to	remove	him	from	the	scene,	because	his	very	presence	makes	them
feel	guilty	that	they	have	not	been	doing	what	they	should	be	doing,	that	they	are
not	what	 they	should	be.	His	presence	reminds	them	that	 they	have	missed	the
opportunity	of	life	--	and	they	cannot	forgive	him.
They	can	worship	him	when	he	is	gone	but	when	he	is	alive	they	cannot	forgive
him.	And	because	they	cannot	forgive	him	when	he	is	alive,	 they	are	bound	to
worship	him	when	he	is	gone.	They	will	destroy	the	person	themselves	and	then
they	will	feel	guilty	again,	a	new	guilt	will	arise.	All	these	religions	are	born	out
of	guilt.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Jews	killed	Jesus	and	then	started	feeling	guilty	about	what	they	had	done.
They	 looked	 at	 their	 hands	 and	 they	 were	 red	 with	 the	 blood	 of	 an	 innocent
person	 --	 and	 they	 started	 feeling	 shaken.	 Now	 the	 only	 way	 was	 to	 repent,
worship.	Worship	is	just	a	way	to	get	rid	of	guilt.	A	very	strange	world	this	is:
first	you	kill	a	person,	then	you	worship	him.
The	cross	even	became	part	of	their	worship;	the	cross	is	worshipped.	Even	after
two	 thousand	years	we	have	not	 forgotten	 the	guilt;	 somehow	everybody	 feels
that	 we	 have	 been	 part	 of	 that	 conspiracy.	 Judas	was	 not	 alone.	 Judas	 felt	 so
guilty	that	the	next	day,	within	twenty-four	hours,	he	committed	suicide.	But	the
whole	of	humanity	has	somehow	felt	that	had	a	part	in	it	--	even	now,	although
we	 were	 not	 present	 when	 Jesus	 was	 killed	 and	 Socrates	 was	 poisoned	 and
Buddha	was	stoned.	We	were	not	there.	But	we	know	that	if	a	man	like	Buddha
or	a	man	like	Jesus	 is	here,	we	will	do	the	same;	hence	 the	guilt.	To	cover	 the
guilt	we	worship	them.	Worship	is	not	religious,	it	is	out	of	a	guilty	conscience.
The	intelligent	person	loves	such	people	when	they	are	alive.	The	unintelligent
hates	such	people	when	they	are	alive,	it	tries	to	destroy	such	people	when	they
are	alive	and	when	they	are	gone,	it	worships	them.
The	 intelligent,	when	 such	 people	 are	 gone,	 do	 not	worship,	 there	 is	 no	 need;
there	is	no	guilt.	When	they	are	gone,	they	are	gone.	He	searches	again	to	see	if
there	is	somebody	else	who	can	help	him.	The	intelligent	person	never	becomes
a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan,	he	always	tries	to	find	an	alive	master
--	because	a	dead	master	is	no	more	there.	Remember	this:	the	stupid	worships
the	 dead	 and	 the	 intelligent	 searches	 for	 the	 alive.	 Initiation	 is	 possible	 only
through	an	alive	master.	How	can	the	dead	help?
You	can	worship	them	but	no	help	is	going	to	come.
With	meditation	your	 intelligence	will	start	functioning	--	 it	 is	dormant.	And	it
will	 bring	 a	 rebellion,	 first	 in	you	 and	 then	 it	 starts	 spreading	 and	 radiating	 to
others.	It	is	like	wildfire.
That's	why	I	have	chosen	the	colour	of	fire	for	my	sannyasins,	all	the	shades	of
fire	 --	 I	want	 to	 spread	 this	 fire	 all	 over	 the	 earth.	Let	 this	 fire	 reach	 to	 every
heart	 that	 is	 capable	 of	 transformation.	 Let	 the	 whole	 world	 go	 through	 a
rebellion.	 It	 needs	 it;	 in	 fact	 it	 should	 have	 happened	 by	 now.	We	 are	 already
late.	 The	 morning	 has	 gone,	 the	 afternoon	 has	 gone.	 It	 has	 already	 become
evening,	the	sun	is	almost	ready	to	set.
Any	day	the	third	world	war,	could	end	the	whole	thing.	It	is	time	to	hurry	and	to
transform	oneself	and	to	help	others	to	be	transformed.'
(Unless	truth	happens	to	you,	it's	a	lie;	and	the	only	way	to	allow	that	happening
is	meditation.	But	 that	 covers	 all	 sorts	of	 activities,	Osho	explained	 to	 the	 last
sannyasin.)	Knowledge	can	be	untrue	if	it	is	borrowed,	then	it	is	only	pseudo.	It
appears	 to	 be	 knowledge	 but	 because	 it	 has	 not	 happened	 to	 you	 it	 has	 no
meaning	 at	 all.	You	 are	 simply	 full	 of	words,	 theories,	 but	 they	 are	 all	 empty.
Unless	 something	 is	 your	 own	 authentic	 experience	 it	 never	 becomes	 true,	 it
remains	untrue.
What	Jesus	says	you	can	repeat,	you	can	repeat	it	in	exactly	the	same	words.	You
can	learn	the	language	that	Jesus	spoke,	Aramaic,	and	you	can	speak	Aramaic.
You	can	 repeat	 the	exact	words	but	 they	won't	have	any	meaning	because	you
don't	have	a	Christ-consciousness	behind	them.
Unless	 one	 becomes	 a	 Christ	 one's	 words	 cannot	 have	 the	 same	 meaning	 as
Jesus'.	Unless	one	becomes	 a	Buddha	one	 cannot	understand	what	 this	man	 is
saying.	Yes,	words	will	be	heard,	and	one	can	go	on	accumulating	words	in	one's
memory	system.	We	have	an	immense	memory	system;	in	fact	no	computer	has
yet	been	evolved	which	can	compete	with	our	memory	system.
It	is	said	that	a	single	memory	system,	a	single	man	of	average	intelligence,	can
contain	 in	his	mind	all	 the	 libraries	of	 the	world.	That	 is	a	possibility,	one	can
remember	so	much,	yet	that	will	be	only	in	the	head.
Your	heart	will	not	be	moved	by	it,	your	being	will	not	grow	through	it;	hence	I
call	it	false,	pseudo,	untrue.
True	knowledge	happens	through	meditation,	not	through	any	other	way;	there	is
no	alternative	to	meditation.	Meditation	means	discovering	your	being	--	that	is
the	first	thing	to	be	done.	If	we	don't	know	ourselves	what	else	can	we	know?	If
inside	there	is	darkness	what	is	the	meaning	of	light	on	the	outside?
The	scientist	knows	nothing	about	himself	and	he	knows	so	much	about	matter.
What	is	the	point	of	it	all?	If	the	knower	does	not	know	himself,	what	kind	of	a
knower	is	he?	Socrates	is	far	more	right	when	he	says:	the	first	thing	is	to	know
thyself	 then	 only	 are	 you	moving	 in	 the	 right	 direction;	 then	 whatsoever	 you
know	will	be	really	true.	But	begin	with	yourself.
So	being	here	with	me,	being	a	sannyasin,	simply	means	one	thing,	that	is,	being
a	meditator.	And	meditation	 can	 happen	 is	 thousands	 of	ways:	 dancing	 it	 can
happen,	 loving	 it	can	happen,	singing	 it	can	happen.	 If	 the	singer	 is	 lost	 in	 the
song	 and	 the	 ego	disappears	 it	 is	meditation.	 If	 the	 lover	 is	 lost	while	making
love	suddenly	there	is	meditation.	If	the	musician	is	lost	while	making	music	it	is
meditation.	 When	 the	 dancer	 is	 no	 more	 and	 only	 the	 dance	 remains	 it	 is
meditation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Hence	life	can	be	used	in	every	possible	way	to	help	meditation.	Meditation	does
not	mean	just	sitting	for	a	few	minutes	or	a	few	hours,	repeating	a	certain	stupid
mantra.	 Meditation	 means	 making	 your	 life	 meditative.	 Cooking,	 washing,
cleaning	 --	everything	should	be	 transformed	 into	a	meditativeness.	Do	 it	with
such	totality,	do	it	so	creatively,	that	you	become	absorbed	in	it	And	the	moment
you	are	absorbed	in	anything	--	it	may	be	just	rubbing	the	floor	or	washing	your
clothes	or	 taking	a	 shower...	The	activity	 is	 irrelevant,	 the	approach	 is	 the	 real
thing.
If	you	are	absorbed	in	it,	totally	in	it	here	and	now,	it	is	meditation.	And	out	of
meditation	 arises	 true	 knowledge,	wisdom	 --	wisdom	which	 liberates,	wisdom
which	transforms,	wisdom	which	gives	you	a	new	sense	of	meaning,	fulfilment,
contentment.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009135
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Don't	 follow	and	 imitate	Christ,	 love	and	flower	as	Christ	yourself,	Osho	 told
Veet	 Christiane.)	 Following	 is	 something	 wrong.	 The	 follower	 becomes	 an
imitator.	 He	 becomes	 like	 a	 parrot.	 He	 starts	 repeating	 the	 master's	 words
without	attaining	the	consciousness	that	the	master	had.
It	is	beautiful	to	be	a	lover	of	Christ	because	love	is	vast;	you	can	be	a	lover	of
Christ	and	at	the	same	time	a	lover	of	Buddha	and	a	lover	of	Lao	Tzu	and	a	lover
of	 Zarathustra	 and	 a	 lover	 of	 me.	 Love	 is	 so	 vast	 that	 it	 can	 contain	 all	 the
masters.	But	following	is	very	narrow.
The	follower	of	Christ	cannot	be	a	follower	of	Buddha,	the	follower	of	Buddha
cannot	be	 a	 follower	of	Christ.	Following	makes	you	 limited.	Why	not	 inherit
the	whole	earth?	Why	not	inherit	the	whole	history	of	consciousness?	Why	not
include	 all	 the	 dimensions	 possible?	 Why	 exclude	 anybody?	 Because	 if	 you
exclude	anybody	that	much	richness	is	lost.
Jesus	says,	"My	god's	mansion	has	many	doors,	many	doors.	But	people	are	so
foolish	 that	 they	cling	 to	one	door,	 they	become	confined	 to	one	 room,	 to	one
church,	 to	 one	 ideology,	 to	 one	 dogma.	 That	 is	 sheer	 stupidity.	 So	 go	 beyond
following.
Love	can	make	you	a	Christ	one	day.	And	only	when	you	have	tasted	something
of	the	consciousness	of	Christ,	will	you	be	able	to	understand	Jesus,	not	before
it.	 And	 that	 understanding	 will	 include	 all	 the	 masters	 --	 Jewish,	 Hindu,
Christian,	Mohammedan,	Jaina	--	it	will	not	exclude	anybody.
And	that's	my	effort	here.	My	sannyasins	are	not	to	be	my	followers,	just	lovers.
Love	has	a	dignity,	a	tremendous	splendour,	a	beauty,	because	it	gives	freedom.
Following	is	a	bondage	--	go	beyond	it.
(And	to	another	sannyasin	Osho	spoke	along	similar	lines.)	Let	it	be	something
of	 the	past,	your	being	a	Christian.	Cling	to	 it	no	more.	Die	 to	 the	past	so	 that
you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
can	open	in	the	present	and	you	can	allow	the	future	to	enter	you.
We	all	 live	 in	 the	past.	 Somebody	 is	 born	 in	 a	Christian	 family	or	 in	 a	Hindu
family	--	that	is	just	an	accident.	You	have	not	chosen	to	be	a	Christian,	you	have
been	forced	to	be	a	Christian.	Somebody	else	is	forced	to	be	a	Hindu,	somebody
else	a	Buddhist,	somebody	else	a	Mohammedan	--	these	are	conditionings.
Your	parents	have	given	you	a	certain	conditioning,	your	society	has	given	you	a
certain	 conditioning,	 and	 to	 live	 in	 that	 conditioning	 is	 to	 live	 the	 life	 of	 a
prisoner.	It	is	slavery,	spiritual	slavery.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	free	of	all	kinds	of	slaveries.	Freedom	is	my	message,
freedom	from	the	whole	structure	that	others	have	created	for	you,	from	all	the
shoulds	and	should-nots	that	others	have	giver	to	you.	Unless	you	are	free	of	that
you	will	never	be	able	to	hear	your	own	inner	voice.
Your	parents	will	go	on	telling	you,	"Do	this,	don't	do	that,"	even	to	the	very	last
moment	of	your	life.
Your	priests	will	go	on	nagging	you,	creating	guilt	 in	you;	 they	will	not	allow
you	 to	be	yourself.	Nobody	 in	 this	world	 is	 really	 interested	 in	anybody	being
given	 the	 freedom	 to	 be	 himself	 or	 herself.	Everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 impose	his
ideas	 on	 others.	 That's	 why	 we	 have	 created	 such	 a	 mess	 of	 a	 humanity,
otherwise	 human	 beings	 can	 be	 immensely	 beautiful.	We	 have	 created	 a	 very
ugly	 lot,	 and	 the	 simple	 reason	 is	 that	 we	 have	 not	 allowed	 children	 to	 be
themselves.	We	have	crushed	them	from	the	very	beginning,	imposed	structures
on	them.
A	certain	wall	surrounds	everybody,	a	subtle,	very	invisible	wall,	so	you	are	not
even	 aware	 that	 the	 wall	 is	 there.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 transparent	 wall.	 You	 can	 see
through	it	and	it	hangs	around	you.	So	you	can	move	and	you	can	think	that	you
are	free	but	you	are	not	free.	You	are	not	imprisoned	in	a	prison	made	of	stones
and	 bricks,	 you	 are	 imprisoned	 in	 a	 prison	 made	 of	 thoughts,	 concepts,
theologies,	philosophies.	It	is	a	very	invisible	thing	and	one	has	to	get	rid	of	it.
When	the	whole	sky	is	yours	with	all	its	stars,	then	the	whole	existence	is	yours.
That's	 exactly	 the	 teaching	 of	 all	 the	 masters	 --	 Jesus,	 Buddha,	 Zarathustra.
There	is	no	difference,	there	cannot	be.	If	truth	is	one,	how	can	the	teachings	of
those	who	have	awakened	to	truth	be	different?	Maybe	languages	are	different,
their	metaphors	 are	 different,	 their	 parables	 are	 different,	 but	 different	 fingers
can	point	to	the	same	moon.	Maybe	somebody's	fingers	are	long	and	somebody's
are	 short	 and	 somebody's	 are	 white	 and	 somebody's	 are	 black	 --	 that	 is
immaterial.
Look	at	what	 the	fingers	are	pointing	at,	don't	be	bothered	by	the	fingers.	And
you	will	be	surprised:	Buddha	is	indicating	towards	the	same	moon	as	Jesus,	as
Moses,	 as	 Lao	 Tzu.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 realise	 this,	 who	 wants	 to	 be	 a
Christian	 or	 a	Hindu	 or	 a	Mohammedan?	Then	 one	 just	wants	 to	 be	 freedom,
awareness,	 love,	bliss,	celebration.	And	 the	moment	you	are	 free	you	will	 find
Christ	in	you,	Buddha	in	you,	Lao	Tzu	in	you,	Moses	in	you	--	all	together!	In
that	 inner	 freedom	and	silence	 the	whole	heritage	of	humanity	becomes	yours.
So	don't	cling	to	the	past.
This	 is	 a	 second	birth.	The	 first	 birth	has	been	missed	because	people	 tried	 to
manipulate	you.	My	effort	here	is	to	uncondition	you	and	leave	you	totally	free.	I
don't	give	you	a	reconditioning,	I	don't	give	you	any	ideology;	I	simply	destroy
whatsoever	is	surrounding	you	so	that	you	are	free.	My	work	is	negative	because
I	know	the	truth	is	within	you	--	only	your	chains	have	to	be	broken	and	the	truth
will	reveal	itself.	One	need	not	look	for	it	anywhere	else.	You	are	born	with	it,	it
is	god's	gift.	It	is	already	the	case,	it	has	not	to	be	achieved	--	we	are	it.!
(Meditate	and	all	else	shall	be	added	unto	you	--	 that's	been	Osho's	 insistence.
Peace	and	silence	are	among	the	'all	else'	he	told	us	tonight.)
One	can	be	calm	and	silent	in	two	ways.	One	way	is	very	cheap	but	superficial
too,	easy	to	achieve	but	not	worth	achieving;	that	is,	cultivating	a	certain	quality
of	calmness	around	yourself	 just	on	 the	surface,	making	 it	 an	attribute	of	your
character	so	even	if	there	is	turmoil	within	at	least	to	the	outside	world	you	can
appear	calm	and	quiet.	That's	what	people,	as	far	as	 the	majority	 is	concerned,
have	been	doing.	They	only	cultivate	a	shallow	superficial,	not	even	skin-deep,
calmness	 around	 themselves.	 Just	 scratch	 them	 a	 little	 bit	 and	 they	 lose	 their
calmness.	 Any	 accident	 is	 enough	 and	 vou	 will	 see	 that	 they	 are	 childish,
immature.	 Somebody	 insults	 them	 and	 all	 calmness	 is	 gone;	 they	 go	 bankrupt
and	all	calmness	is	gone.
Then	you	can	see	the	child	immediately	taking	possession	of	them;	they	go	into
a	 tantrum.	 They	 forget	 all	 about	 their	 character.	 They	 become	 angry,	 violent,
they	can	murder,	they	can	commit	suicide	--	these	so-called	calm	ones.
But	the	society	only	wants	you	to	be	superficially	calm.	It	is	not	interested	much
in	your	real	transformation	because	it	deals	only	with	your	outside,	it	has	nothing
to	do	with	your	inner.	It	has	no	interest	in	your	inner	world.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Real	 calmness,	 authentic	 calmness,	 arises	 out	 of	 meditation	 --	 not	 out	 of
cultivating	 a	 character	 but	 out	 of	 awareness.	 Meditation	 means	 awareness.
Becoming	 aware	 of	 your	 anger	 dissolves	 it	 and	 dissolves	 it	 from	 your	 very
depths;	 it	 even	 disappears	 from	 your	 unconscious.	 Then	 you	 are	 really	 calms
calm	 from	 the	 centre	 to	 the	 circumference.	 Your	 whole	 being	 is	 calm.	 Then
nothing	can	disturb	you,	neither	life	nor	death.
Nothing	can	disturb	you.
Only	when	nothing	can	disturb	you,	when	it	becomes	impossible	to	be	disturbed,
when	 even	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be	 disturbed	 you	 become	 incapable	 of	 it,	 then
something	really	valuable	has	happened.	It	can	happen	only	through	awareness.
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 practising	 a	 certain	 character,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
pretending.	It	 is	a	question	of	inner	mutation,	a	radical	change,	a	change	at	 the
very	core	of	your	being.	Then	it	radiates	to	your	circumference	too,	it	transforms
the	circumference	automatically.
Once	the	centre	is	different	you	cannot	have	this	old	circumference	around	you.
But	vice	versa	is	not	true.	You	can	paint	the	circumference	with	different	colours
--	that	will	not	change	your	being.	It	will	be	only	a	painted	face,	a	mask.	That's
how	 people	 are	 living,	 with	 masks.	 They	 are	 pretending	 everything.	 They
pretend	 love	 and	 they	 have	 not	 tasted	 anything	 of	 love.	 They	 pretend
religiousness;	just	by	going	to	church	every	Sunday	they	thing	they	have	become
religious.	 It's	 not	 so	 easy;	 this	 Sunday	 religion	 is	 not	 religiousness.	 They	 can
even	 pray	 every	 night	 before	 going	 to	 bed	 and	 every	 morning,	 or	 like
Mohammedans	 they	 can	 pray	 five	 times	 a	 day.	 The	 same	Mohammedans	 can
kill,	murder.
The	 religion	 of	 the	 Mohammedans	 is	 called	 Islam;	 Islam	 means	 peace,	 and
Mohammedans	have	disturbed	the	peace	of	 the	world	more	 than	anybody	else.
Strange!
Christians	believe	in	Jesus	and	go	on	repeating	his	words,	that	"God	is	love,"	but
Christians	have	proved	a	calamity	to	the	world.	Just	look	at	history,	at	what	they
have	done.	Thousands	of	people	have	been	burned	alive	by	them	--	and	god	is
love!	They	have	murdered	millions	of	people.	"Blessed	are	the	meek	for	theirs	is
the	 kingdom	 of	 god"	 --	 and	 they	 have	 been	 the	 most	 arrogant	 people	 in	 the
world.	They	have	been	trying	to	show	to	the	world	that	the	only	right	religion	is
Christianity	--	and,	"Blessed	are	the	meek,	and	blessed	are	the	poor	in	spirit."
Poor	 in	 spirit	 means	 a	 man	 without	 ego	 --	 and	 Christians	 have	 been	 very
egoistic.	Declaring	that	Jesus	is	the	only	begotten	son	of	god	is	not	humbleness.
Then	what	is	Buddha?	Then	what	is	Zarathustra?	And	what	is	Mohammed	and
what	is	Krishna?	All	are	wrong,	only	Jesus	is	right,	and	those	who	follow	Jesus
will	go	to	heaven	and	those	who	don't	follow	will	suffer	in	hell	and	will	suffer
for	eternity.	And	these	people	say	that	to	be	humble,	to	be	meek,	to	be	poor	in
spirit	is	their	religion,	love	is	their	religion.
The	 so-called	 religious	 are	 not	 religious.	 The	 Hindus	 go	 on	 talking	 about
beautiful	things	--	that	god	is	in	everyone,	even	in	the	rocks,	in	the	trees,	but	god
is	not	 in	 the	Christians,	not	 in	 the	Mohammedans,	not	 in	 the	Buddhists.	 In	 the
rocks	they	can	allow	god,	in	the	trees	they	can	allow	god,	in	the	animals	they	can
allow	god,	but	not	 in	Christians,	not	 in	Mohammedans.	They	are	 so	 intolerant
and	they	preach	tolerance.	They	say	all	religions	are	basically	one,	and	they	go
on	arguing	that	their	religion	is	higher,	greater,	the	only	true	religion.	This	is	the
approach	of	all	the	so-called	religious	people.
Our	 love	 is	 false,	our	religiousness	 is	 false,	our	so-called	 truth	 is	 false	because
we	use	it	only	when	it	helps	us	in	attaining	something.	Whenever	it	does	not	help
we	forget	all	about	it	and	we	start	using	lies.	We	preach	honesty	and	at	the	same
time	we	say	honesty	 is	 the	best	policy;	so	we	make	honesty	also	 just	a	policy,
just	 politics.	 This	 is	 how	 humanity	 has	 lived	 up	 to	 now	 --	 it	 has	 been	 a	 very
pseudo	kind	of	existence.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 drop	 all	 pseudoness.	 About	 love,	 about	 bliss,	 about
peace,	about	calm,	they	have	to	drop	all	falseness,	they	have	to	accept	reality.	If
they	are	not	peaceful	it	is	better	to	be	aware	of	it.	If	you	are	not	loving	it	is	better
to	 be	 aware	 of	 it.	 If	 you	 are	 jealous	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 it	 rather	 than
repressing	it,	because	the	repressed	will	come	up	again	and	again.
You	 cannot	 get	 rid	 of	 anything	 by	 repression,	 and	 all	 morality	 is	 repressive;
hence	 I	 don't	 teach	 morality,	 I	 only	 teach	 meditation.	 Out	 of	 meditation	 a
morality	comes	like	fragrance.	When	the	rose	opens	there	is	fragrance,	when	the
lotus	opens	there	is	fragrance.	No	need	to	care	about	fragrance;	just	take	care	of
the	flower,	just	open	up.	And	in	awareness	one	opens.
Be	aware	and	you	will	be	surprised	that	whatsoever	you	become	aware	of,	if	it	is
wrong	it	evaporates,	if	it	is	right	it	becomes	deeply	rooted.	This	is	the	miracle	of
awareness.	 If	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 love	 it	 will	 not	 disappear;	 it	 will	 become
deeper	and	deeper,	it	will	attain	new	dimensions.	If	you	become	aware	of	hatred
it	 will	 simply	 evaporate.	 The	 false	 cannot	 stand	 before	 awareness;	 the	 real
becomes	more	clear	in	awareness.
It	 is	 as	when	 you	 bring	 light	 in	 a	 dark	 room:	 darkness	will	 disappear	 but	 the
painting	 on	 the	 wall,	 the	 beautiful	 furniture	 in	 the	 room	 --	 they	 will	 not
disappear.	In	fact	in	darkness	they	were	not	there	at	all	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
because	 you	 could	 not	 see	 them.	 It	 made	 no	 difference	 whether	 there	 was	 a
beautiful	Van	Gogh	painting	on	the	wall	or	not,	it	was	all	dark.	In	darkness	it	was
almost	as	if	absent.	As	you	bring	in	light,	even	a	small	candle,	the	beauty	of	the
painting	suddenly	explodes.	Darkness	disappears	because	darkness	 is	false,	but
the	painting	cannot	disappear;	it	is	a	reality.
The	same	is	true	about	our	inner	world.	Bring	the	light	of	awareness	in	and	anger
will	disappear	because	it	is	false,	hatred	will	disappear,	jealousy	will	disappear,
possessiveness	will	disappear,	ego	will	disappear	--
they	are	all	 false	entities.	Love	will	grow,	bliss	will	grow,	calmness	will	grow
and	for	the	first	time	your	life	will	become	authentic.	And	to	be	authentic	is	to	be
religious.	To	be	true	to	your	own	self	is	to	be	religious.
That	is	the	only	real	worship,	the	only	real	prayer.	That	is	the	only	offering	we
can	make	to	god	--	our	authenticity.	Except	for	that	everything	is	just	a	ritual	--
empty,	impotent.
(You	probably	never	 thought	of	 it	 like	 this,	but	 it	 is	always	 the	new,	never	 the
old,	that	brings	bliss.
Osho	explained	his	insight	in	detail.)
Misery	is	always	old	and	never	new.	It	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental	factors	to
be	understood:	because	misery	is	old	and	never	new	we	cling	to	it.	It	is	familiar,
we	are	well-acquainted	with	it.	We	have	lived	with	it	so	long	that	it	is	almost	part
of	us	and	we	are	part	of	 it	And	bliss	seems	to	be	a	new	territory	--	unfamiliar,
unknown.	And	the	unknown	always	gives	us	fear,	it	scares	us.	Who	knows	what
it	is	and	where	it	will	land	us?
Hence	people	cling	 to	misery.	They	suffer	and	 they	go	on	groaning	and	crying
and	weeping	and	they	go	on	saying	"We	want	bliss."	But	whenever	 there	 is	an
opportunity	 to	move	 into	 the	world	of	bliss	 they	close	 their	 eyes	because	 they
want	bliss,	but	they	want	it	in	the	old	way,	and	bliss	is	always	new	and	misery	is
always	old.
If	 you	 choose	 the	 old,	 you	 choose	misery;	 if	 you	 choose	 the	 new	 you	 choose
bliss.	Let	this	be	a	key:	always	choose	the	new,	the	unknown,	the	dangerous,	the
insecure,	because	it	is	only	through	risking	that	one	grows.	And	growth	is	bliss,
maturity	is	bliss.
Never	for	a	single	moment	cling	to	the	old.	Whatsoever	is	old	go	on	dropping.
The	moment	it	is	old,	be	finished	with	it,	put	a	full	stop	by	it.	Never	look	back,
there	 is	 nothing	worth	 looking	 back	 at.	 One	 cannot	 look	 back,	 one	 has	 to	 go
ahead,	 always	 ahead.	 And	 be	 adventurous.	 Sannyas	 means	 initiation	 into	 an
inner	adventure.
It	 is	 like	climbing	a	virgin	peak	of	a	mountain	--	dangerous,	certainly,	because
nobody	has	travelled	there	before.	Not	even	footprints	are	there,	no	maps	exist,
no	directions;	you	will	not	find	milestones	on	the	way.	You	will	have	to	grope,
you	 will	 have	 to	 find	 your	 way.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 create	 your	 way	 by	 going
towards	 the	peak.	And	of	course	 there	are	many	dangers,	but	danger	 is	always
beautiful	because	it	is	through	danger	that	we	become	alert,	aware,	conscious.
When	 there	 is	 no	 danger	 one	 tends	 to	 fall	 asleep.	When	 there	 is	 danger	 you
cannot	fall	asleep.	You	cannot	afford	to	be	asleep,	you	have	to	be	fully	awake.
When	your	house	 is	on	 fire	 can	you	 fall	 asleep?	You	may	be	 tired,	 exhausted,
everything,	but	you	cannot	fall	asleep.	When	the	house	is	on	fire	you	will	forget
all	about	sleep.
Just	 a	 moment	 before	 you	 were	 yawning	 and	 you	 were	 feeling	 tired,	 and
suddenly	a	great	rush	of	energy	comes	to	you	from	some	deeper	source	within
you,	 from	 some	 reservoir,	 from	 some	 reserve	 energy,	 and	 you	 are	 very	much
alive,	 alert,	 as	 you	 are	 not	 ordinarily.	 In	 your	 mundane	 activities,	 repetitive
activities,	you	need	not	be	alert,	aware;	you	can	go	on	snoring	and	you	can	go	on
doing	things.	People	are	driving	and	they	are	asleep.	People	are	doing	all	kinds
of	things	but	mechanically.	There	is	no	need	to	be	aware.
Risk	and	danger	and	insecurity	make	you	aware.	And	awareness	is	the	greatest
value	 because	 through	 awareness	 everything	 else	 comes	 in	 --	 love,	 joy,	 god,
truth,	liberation.
(Last	night	Osho	talked	about	the	meaninglessness	of	a	knowledge	that	isn't	your
own.	 But	 in	 his	 inimitable	 fashion	 he	 approached	 the	 subject	 with	 quite	 a
different	tack	tonight.)	Knowledge	is	futile	because	it	is	borrowed.	Wisdom	is	of
immense	value	because	it	is	your	own	discovery.	Never	go	for	knowledge;	that	is
going	astray	--	go	for	wisdom.	Knowledge	is	easily	available.	In	the	libraries	you
can	 find	 it,	 in	 the	 universities	 you	 can	 find	 it.	 Knowledge	 comes	 through
studying;	 wisdom	 comes	 through	 meditation	 not	 through	 study.	 Knowledge
comes	 through	 thinking	 and	wisdom	 comes	 through	 non-thinking.	One	 has	 to
drop	thinking	and	become	utterly	peaceful.	When	no	thoughts	disturb	you,	when
the	whole	traffic	of	 the	mind	stops,	wisdom	arises	in	you.	It	 is	your	own	inner
source	that	explodes.
When	 the	heavy	burden	of	 the	head	 is	 removed,	when	 the	 rock	of	 the	mind	 is
removed,	the	spring	comes	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
alive.	Then	one	lives	in	one's	own	light	and	to	live	in	one's	own	light	is	to	live
truly.	 Then	 life	 has	 meaning	 and	 significance,	 otherwise	 life	 is	 a	 drag,	 a
boredom.
It	 is	a	 long	long	boredom,	from	the	cradle	 to	 the	grave,	a	 tale	 told	by	an	idiot,
full	of	fury	and	noise,	signifying	nothing.
Don't	miss	the	opportunity	that	becomes	available	by	becoming	a	sannyasin.	The
opportunity	is	that	of	meditation.	Here	the	only	thing	to	be	learned	is	meditation.
My	whole	emphasis,	my	categorical	emphasis,	is	or	meditation.
If	you	can	learn	how	to	be	silent	and	aware	you	have	learned	everything	worth
learning.	All	else	will	follow,	you	need	not	bother	about	it;	all	else	is	just	a	by-
product.
(His	 address	 to	 the	 last	 sannyasin	 was	 an	 extension	 of	 the	 same	 theme.)
Meditation	 is	 the	 most	 valuable	 ruby,	 a	 diamond,	 the	 most	 precious	 treasure.
There	is	nothing	compared	to	meditation.	If	you	can	know	how	to	be	meditative,
the	inner	scripture	becomes	available	to	you.
Everybody's	 life	 contains	 a	 scripture,	 a	 bible.	The	outside	bible	 is	 not	 the	 real
bible.	The	word	"bible"
means	the	book	of	the	books.	It	is	not	the	book	of	books,	the	book	of	books	is
within	you;	it	cannot	be	outside.
The	 outside	 bible	 may	 have	 a	 few	 reflections	 of	 the	 inner,	 but	 they	 are	 only
reflections.	The	moon	reflected	in	the	waters	of	the	lake	is	not	the	real	moon	--
don't	be	deceived	by	it.	Although	it	is	a	reflection	of	the	real	moon,	so	it	has	a
certain	 resemblance	 to	 reality,	 don't	 be	 deceived	 by	 it	 and	 don't	 jump	 into	 the
lake	to	find	it,	otherwise	you	may	get	drowned.	And	you	are	not	going	to	find
the	moon	in	the	lake;	you	will	get	into	unnecessary	trouble.
People	have	 jumped	 into	 lakes.	 Into	 the	Bibles,	 into	 the	Vedas,	 into	 the	Gitas,
into	 the	 Korans,	 they	 have	 jumped.	 These	 are	 just	 lakes,	 beautiful	 lakes,
certainly,	 and	 capable	of	 reflecting	 something	of	 the	 real.	But	 a	 reflection	 is	 a
reflection.	The	face	in	the	mirror	is	not	your	real	face.	Don't	go	on	searching	in
the	mirror	for	your	real	face.	You	will	not	find	it	there	--	the	mirror	is	empty.	So
is	the	lake,	so	are	all	the	scriptures	--
empty.	They	are	beautiful	words	but	empty.
Unless	 you	 find	 the	 inner	 scripture	 that	 is	within	 you,	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to
understand	the	outer	Bibles,	Korans	and	Vedas.	Once	you	have	found	the	inner
then	 there	 is	 a	 possibility;	 then	 doors	 open	 up,	 then	 suddenly	 there	 is	 a	 great
opening.	 Whatsoever	 was	 closed	 and	 hidden	 becomes	 available,	 slowly	 the
curtain	is	removed.	You	can	see	that	which	is.	And	once	you	have	found	it	inside
you	will	find	it	in	the	words	of	Jesus,	in	the	words	of	Buddha,	very	easily.
The	man	who	knows	the	real	moon	is	bound	to	know	the	moon	in	the	lake.	He
will	understand	and	he	may	even	rejoice	because	he	is	not	deceived;	he	knows
perfectly	well	 it	 is	 a	 reflection	 but	 a	 beautiful	 reflection.	 Sometimes	when	 the
lake	 is	 utterly	 calm	 and	 quiet,	 when	 there	 is	 no	 disturbance	 on	 its	 surface,	 it
becomes	 a	mirror	of	 tremendous	beauty.	One	can	 enjoy	 the	 scriptures,	 but	 not
before	realizing	the	inner	truth.
So	 I	 call	meditation,	 the	greatest	 treasure,	 the	most	precious	 ruby.	 If	you	have
found	 it	 you	 have	 found	 all.	 So	 while	 you	 are	 here	 put	 all	 your	 energy	 into
understanding	matters	of	meditation.	Find	out	the	method	that	fits	you,	that	you
feel	attuned	with,	that	suddenly	starts	ringing	bells	in	your	heart.	And	then	go	on
moving	deeper	and	deeper	into	it.	And	be	patient.
Mind	will	create	all	kinds	of	distractions,	disturbances	--	don't	be	worried,	they
are	natural.	But	if	you	go	on	persisting,	if	you	go	on	patiently	digging	inwards,
sooner	or	later	--	if	your	intensity	is	enough,	if	you	are	totally	and	passionately
involved	in	meditation,	it	will	be	sooner	rather	than	later	--	the	mind	disappears.
And	 the	day	 the	mind	disappears	and	you	are	 left	without	a	mind,	 for	 the	 first
time	 you	 know	what	 it	 is	 to	 be.	 The	 beatitude	 of	 it,	 the	 benediction	 of	 it,	 the
ecstasy	of	it,	is	simply	incomprehensible;	it	cannot	be	communicated.	One	has	to
experience	it	--	there	is	no	other	way.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	every	possible	method	available	so	nobody	misses,	so
everybody	can	find	the	right	method	for	himself.	All	the	methods	that	have	been
tried,	all	the	methods	that	have	helped	individuals	to	attain	are	available	here.	It
is	something	rare,	something	that	has	never	happened	in	the	whole	of	history.
Buddhists	know	only	one	method,	Sufis	know	only	one	method,	Christians	know
only	 one	 method,	 Hindus	 know	 only	 one	 method	 and	 here,	 all	 methods	 are
available.	 This	 is	 a	 meeting	 place	 of	 all	 the	 great	 masters.	 A	 great	 merger	 is
happening,	a	great	synthesis	is	arising.
So	put	your	whole	 energy	 into	 finding	out	which	method	 suits	you.	Once	you
know,	 that	 one	method	 simply	 goes	 deep	 in	 you	without	 any	 effort,	 you	 have
found	the	right	track	for	you.
And	then	god	is	not	far	away;	it	is	just	around	the	corner.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009145
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(There	 were	 eight	 people	 tonight	 and	 between	 them	 quite	 an	 assortment	 of
professions.	The	first	in	the	line-up	was	Teresa	who	bore	the	modest	description
of	mother	 on	 the	 darshan	 list.)	Meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 total	 relaxation;	 not	 of
concentration,	not	of	contemplation,	but	of	relaxation.
When	one	is	so	absolutely	relaxed	that	there	is	no	tension	either	in	the	body	or	in
the	mind,	then	suddenly	there	is	an	opening	of	the	heart.	Only	in	total	relaxation
does	 the	 heart	 open,	 it	 becomes	 a	 flower.	 Without	 its	 opening	 one	 remains
unfulfilled,	discontented.
The	 opening	 of	 the	 heart	 as	 a	 flower	 is	 the	 ultimate	 ecstasy;	 there	 is	 nothing
more	than	that.	One	has	come	to	the	highest	peak,	one's	life	has	blossomed.	And
that	is	the	meaning	of	Teresa.	Teresa	means	a	reaper,	a	harvester.
When	one	has	come	to	the	blossoming,	the	flowering,	the	ripening,	then	one	can
reap	the	crop.	Then	life	is	tremendously	significant,	a	gift	of	god.	Otherwise	it	is
just	 a	 possibility,	 and	 nobody	 can	 be	 blissful	with	 only	 a	 possibility.	 It	 has	 to
become	actual,	it	has	to	become	a	realisation.
Being	with	me	means	only	one	 thing:	 learning	how	 to	 relax.	The	moment	you
relax	you	are	 in	 the	present.	The	past	 is	a	 tension.	Relaxation	 is	going	beyond
time	--	no	past,	no	future.	One	simply	disappears	into	the	infinity	of	the	now	and
the	 here.	 And	 that	 is	 springtime	 as	 far	 as	 the	 inner	 ripening,	 flowering,	 is
concerned.
(The	next	for	sannyas	was	Katja,	an	optician	from	Germany.)	It	is	only	through
meditation	that	one	can	arrive	at	spotless	purity	because	when	all	the	content	of
the	mind	 is	dropped,	when	 there	 is	nothing	 inside	 --	no	 thought,	 no	desire,	no
memory,	no	imagination	--	when	the	whole	traffic	of	the	mind	has	come	to	a	full
stop,	in	that	gap,	in	that	interval,	for	the	first	time	you	know	what	it	means	to	be
pure,	 what	 it	 means	 to	 be	 virgin,	 because	 you	 have	 reached	 virgin	 territory
within	 yourself.	 You	 have	 never	 been	 there.	 You	 penetrate	 to	 your	 innermost
core	for	the	first	time.	Then	purity	explodes.
Purity	is	not	attained	through	morality	--	never.	Morality	really	makes	a	person
very	 impure.	On	the	surface	 it	gives	 the	appearance	of	purity,	but	because	 it	 is
repressive	 all	 that	 has	 disappeared	 from	 the	 surface	 becomes	 part	 of	 your
unconscious.	You	become	more	impure	than	the	so-called	immoral	person.
The	immoral	person	is	not	as	impure	as	the	so-called	religious,	moral	person,	the
saint	 --	who	 live	 through	repression.	The	 immoral	person	goes	on	 throwing	all
his	impurity	out,	he	does	not	accumulate	it.
He	 is	 far	 more	 innocent	 than	 your	 so-called	 saints.	 The	 sinner	 is	 far	 more
innocent	because	he	has	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
accumulated,	and	the	saint	is	simply	accumulating.
So	 whenever	 the	 saint	 explodes	 it	 is	 a	 volcanic	 explosion.	 The	 sinner	 cannot
explode	that	way.	He	has	no	repressed	dirt	in	him,	he	has	always	been	throwing
it	 out	 in	 instalments;	when	 he	was	 angry	 he	was	 angry.	But	 the	 saint	 goes	 on
accumulating	anger.	When	anger	becomes	accumulated	then	one	is	constantly	in
rage.	Then	one	does	not	need	any	reason	to	be	angry,	one	is	simply	angry.	But
that	anger	is	inside,	it	becomes	part	of	your	blood	stream,	of	your	very	marrow.
Hence	the	saints	look	so	sad,	so	controlled,	so	uptight.	The	sinner	is	relaxed.
If	one	has	to	choose	between	the	so-called	saint	and	the	sinner,	it	is	better	to	be	a
sinner,	because	at	least	he	is	human	and	not	so	uptight.	It	is	one	of	the	important
facts	to	be	learned	from	history,	that	sinners	have	changed	into	real	saints	within
seconds	because	they	don't	have	much	to	throw	out.	Any	moment,	if	they	come
in	contact	with	a	man	like	Jesus	or	Buddha,	their	life	is	transformed.
That's	how	Mary	Magdalene	the	prostitute	was	transformed	by	Jesus.	One	great
murderer,	Angulimal,	who	killed	nine	hundred	and	ninety-nine	persons,	became
immediately	transformed	as	he	looked	into	Buddha's	eyes.	But	the	so-called	saint
is	not	so	easily	transformed.	It	is	very	difficult	for	saints	to	enter	heaven.	They
are	so	egoistic	and	full	of	bullshit.	Of	course	it	is	holy	bullshit.	Morality,	purity,
is	all	just	imposed.
Meditation	gives	you	 freedom	 from	being	a	 sinner	 and	 from	being	 a	 so-called
saint	too.	It	really	creates	a	pure	sky	within	you.	It	is	better	to	say	that	it	simply
discovers	that	which	is	already	there,	it	simply	uncovers	it.
So	learn	meditation	while	you	are	here.	That	single	word	is	enough.	It	is	a	key,	a
master	key.
(He	 reminded	 the	 librarian	 who	 followed	 next	 that	 not	 only	 was	 Christ	 not	 a
Christian,	 but	 that	 if	 you	 are	 a	 Christian	 you	 don't	 stand	 a	 chance	 of	 being	 a
Christ.)
Buddha	was	not	a	Buddhist.	If	you	are	a	Buddhist	you	will	never	be	a	Buddha.
And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 all	 the	masters,	 all	 the	 awakened	 ones:	 they	 don't
have	any	isms,	 they	don't	have	any	dogma,	they	are	not	confined	to	any	creed.
They	are	free	spirits,	absolutely	free.	No	church,	no	 temple,	 is	 large	enough	to
contain	them;	they	belong	to	the	infinity,	they	are	infinite.	But	this	is	a	tragedy
from	 which	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 is	 suffering:	 somebody	 has	 become	 a
Christian,	 somebody	 has	 become	 a	 Jew,	 somebody	 has	 become	 a	 Hindu,
somebody	has	become	a	Buddhist,	somebody	has	become	a	Mohammedan	and
so	 on,	 so	 forth.	And	 they	 are	 all	 in	 a	 very	 schizophrenic	 state.	 It	 is	 bound	 to
happen.	A	Christian	cannot	be	anything	but	schizophrenic.	And	the	same	is	true
about	 all	 other	 so-called	 religious	 people,	 because	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 impose
something	upon	yourself	which	has	not	grown	within	you.
What	Christ	says	is	his	own	experience	and	what	the	Christian	says	is	his	belief.
And	the	distance	between	experience	and	belief	is	vast.	It	is	unbridgeable.
Never	 be	 a	 believer	 if	 you	want	 to	 know	 the	 truth.	 I	 am	not	 saying	become	a
disbeliever,	because	that	is	again	a	belief	--	a	negative	belief,	anti-belief.
So	there	are	Christians	--	they	are	clinging	to	a	belief	--	and	there	are	people	like
Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 who	 used	 to	 sign	 his	 name	 "Anti-Christ,	 Friedrich
Nietzsche."	Now	 that	 is	 going	 to	 another	 extreme.	Why	 should	 you	 sign	 your
name	Anti-Christ?	Somebody	is	Christian,	somebody	is	anti-Christian,	but	both
are	confined,	one	in	a	positive	way,	another	in	a	negative	way.
My	effort	here	is	to	give	you	freedom	from	both	kinds	of	beliefs	--	the	positive
and	the	negative	--	so	that	you	can	explore	on	your	own.
The	truth	is	as	available	to	you	as	to	any	Jesus,	any	Buddha,	any	Krishna.	It	is
nobody's	property,	it	is	everybody's	birthright.	One	should	explore	it,	one	should
go	into	it.	Rather	than	believing	one	should	go	with	an	open	mind.	Belief	closes
you.	You	are	already	living	with	a	conclusion	which	is	not	yours,	which	is	given
by	 others,	which	 is	 really	 accidental.	 If	 you	were	 brought	 up	 by	 a	Hindu	 you
would	have	been	a	Hindu,	if	you	were	brought	up	by	a	Mohammedan	you	would
have	been	a	Mohammedan.	So	it	is	just	a	question	of	conditioning,	of	who	your
conditioners	were,	of	what	kind	of	people	you	were	accidentally	born	to.	They
have	conditioned	your	mind.	Their	minds	were	conditioned	by	their	parents,	and
so	on,	so	forth.
Come	out	of	all	conditioning,	become	free,	so	that	you	can	explore,	so	that	you
can	enquire.	A	man	who	already	has	a	conclusion	becomes	incapable	of	enquiry.
The	first	requirement	of	enquiry	is	to	drop	all	a	priori	conclusions	and	then	one
day	you	can	experience.
And	the	day	you	experience	you	become	a	Christ,	you	become	a	Buddha	on	your
own	--	and	that	has	beauty.	Christ	is	beautiful	but	a	Christian	is	ugly.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Rosemarie,	a	German	lawyer,	Osho	spoke	of	meditation	as	being	a	state	of
no-mind.)	Meditation	is	equivalent	to	a	state	of	no-mind.
The	state	of	no-mind	means	agnosia,	that	"I	know	nothing."	What	Socrates	says
is	exactly	the	meaning	of	no-mind,	agnosia.	He	says	"I	know	only	one	thing,	that
I	know	nothing."	All	knowledge	dropped,	one	immediately	becomes	free	of	all
kinds	of	imprisonments,	because	knowledge	is	borrowed	and	anything	borrowed
creates	a	bondage.
Truth	has	 to	be	one's	own,	not	borrowed.	 It	has	 to	be	born	 to	you,	you	cannot
adopt	it.	But	people	are	doing	that	everywhere.	If	a	woman	cannot	give	birth	to	a
child	 she	 adopts	 a	 child,	 hopefully	 believing	 that	 this	will	make	her	 a	mother.
But	 unless	 you	 carry	 a	 child	 in	 your	womb	 for	 nine	months	 you	 cannot	 be	 a
mother.	You	may	pretend	you	are,	 you	may	believe	you	are,	 you	may	deceive
others	and	yourself	too,	but	you	have	not	earned	it.	And	deep	do,	you	know	that
the	child	is	not	yours.
How	can	you	forget	 that,	 that	 the	child	 is	not	yours?	Those	nine	months	when
the	child	is	in	the	womb	are	significant	because	the	mother	and	the	child	live	in
deep	 harmony	 --	 no	 separation,	 a	 deep	 unity.	 The	 child	 breathes	 through	 the
mother,	 pulsates	 in	 the	 same	 rhythm	 as	 the	 mother,	 he	 goes	 on	 hearing	 the
heartbeat	of	the	mother.
Psychologists	 say	 that	 it	 is	because	 the	child	hears	 the	heartbeat	of	 the	mother
that	music	gives	us	so	much	enchantment.	Without	that...	If	a	child	is	brought	up
in	a	freezer	--	and	sooner	or	later	they	are	going	to	do	that	--	that	child	will	not
have	any	desire	for	music,	he	will	not	have	any	sense	of	rhythm.	He	will	be	cold,
utterly	cold.	He	will	not	have	any	warmth,	he	has	not	known	the	mother's	womb.
He	 will	 be	 almost	 inhuman,	 because	 the	 child	 continuously	 changes	 with	 the
mother's	moods.	And	 it	 is	not	one-way	 traffic	either.	The	mother	changes	with
the	 child's	 mood;	 it	 is	 a	 constant	 exchange.	 Those	 nine	months,	 the	 pain,	 the
heaviness,	the	sacrifice,	are	a	must,	otherwise	the	mother	will	miss	something.
The	same	is	true	about	truth:	you	have	to	mother	it,	you	cannot	adopt	it.
Meditation	 simply	means	dropping	 all	 that	 is	 adopted	 so	 that	 you	 can	become
free	to	know	that	which	is	within	you.
And	Rosemarie	means	dew	of	the	sea.	A	drop	of	water	contains	the	whole	sea,
so	 if	we	can	understand	a	single	drop	we	will	be	able	 to	understand	 the	whole
vast	world	of	oceans	because	we	can	discover	the	formula	of	H2O	from	a	single
drop	of	water.	Each	man	is	a	dewdrop	of	god.	He	belongs	to	the	oceanic,	to	the
vast,	 to	 the	 infinite.	 If	 we	 could	 understand	 ourselves	 we	 would	 be	 able	 to
understand	god	too.	And	there	is	no	other	way	to	understand	god,	categorically
there	is	no	other	way.	The	only	way	is	through	you.
If	 you	 can	 decode	 your	 innermost	 core	 --	 it	 is	 just	 a	 dewdrop,	 but	 if	 you	 can
understand	it	in	its	totality	--
you	have	discovered	god	already.	By	knowing	this	dewdrop	you	know	the	whole
sea.	And	then	it	is	so	easy	for	the	dewdrop	to	drop	into	the	sea	and	disappear	into
the	sea.	All	fear	disappears.	The	moment	we	know	that	we	belong	to	the	ultimate
then	there	is	no	fear,	no	insecurity,	no	danger.	We	can	drop	our	identity,	we	can
drop	our	ego.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about,	surrendering	the	ego.
And	once	you	surrender	the	ego	all	misery	is	gone,	all	nightmares	are	gone,	all
darkness	is	gone.	One	is	full	of	light	and	love	and	bliss.
(In	the	post-office	worker's	name,	Prem	Dieter,	was	the	reminder	that	only	love
can	be	 just.)	Without	 love	one	 is	bound	 to	be	unjust.	Love	cannot	be	unjust	 --
that	is	impossible	--	because	love	means	compassion,	love	means	consideration
of	the	other.	Love	cannot	use	the	other	as	a	means.
To	use	the	other	as	a	means	is	the	only	immoral	thing	in	existence.	The	moment
you	respect	the	other	as	an	end	unto	himself	love	has	arisen	in	you.	Love	cannot
exploit,	cannot	oppress,	cannot	dominate.
Justice	 comes	 almost	 like	 a	 shadow,	 it	 follows	 love,	 it	 is	 a	 by-product	 of
meditation;	 it	 is	 a	 chain.	 But	 everything	 begins	 with	 meditation.	 Meditation
triggers	many	processes	in	you,	it	opens	many	dimensions	in	you.	One	of	those
dimensions	is	love,	and	love	is	followed	by	justice,	friendliness	towards	all.	And
prayerfulness	 --	 not	 to	 any	 god	 in	 particular	 but	 there	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 gratitude
towards	existence.
A	man	who	knows	what	love	is,	is	a	blessing	to	himself	and	to	others	too.
(While	we	search	outside	 for	 that	which	 is	actually	our	 intrinsic	nature	we	are
never	going	to	find	bliss,	Osho	told	a	handicraft	teacher.)
The	more	you	search	for	 it	on	 the	outside,	 the	more	disillusioned	you	become,
the	more	disappointed,	the	more	depressed.	Life	goes	on	slipping	through	your
fingers.	And	as	life	starts	slipping	slowly	slowly	out	of	your	hands	and	you	have
not	 found	 anything,	 obviously	 you	 feel	 very	 miserable,	 cheated.	 One	 starts
feeling	angry	towards	existence,	angry	towards	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	our	century	is	very	angry	towards	god.	People	may	say	so,	they	may	not	say
so,	but	because	there	is	so	much	misery	how	can	they	forgive	god	and	how	can
they	feel	grateful?	For	what?	For	all	this	insanity,	for	all	these	wars,	for	all	these
murders	 and	 violence?	 Life	 seems	 to	 be	 absolutely	 meaningless,	 just	 a	 long
series	 of	 frustrations.	 And	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 you	 are	 looking	 in	 the	 wrong
direction.
God	 is	 not	 the	 cause	 of	 it	 It	 is	 futile	 to	 be	 angry	 with	 god.	 That's	 what	 my
sannyasins	have	to	understand
--	that	if	you	are	miserable,	except	for	yourself	nobody	is	responsible.
And	 the	basic	 thing	 is	 that	you	have	not	 looked	 in.	The	 intelligent	person	will
first	 look	in.	If	it	 is	not	found	there	then	he	will	go	everywhere	else.	But	those
who	 have	 looked	 in	 have	 always	 found	 it	 without	 any	 exception.	 It	 is	 just
waiting	for	you	to	come	in,	it	is	your	very	being.
Sannyas	 is	 an	 inner	 journey,	 it	 has	 no	 outer	 goal.	 One	 has	 to	 come	 to	 one's
source,	one	has	to	disappear	into	oneself.	And	once	you	have	reached	your	very
source,	your	very	roots,	you	are	transformed.	Then	you	can	live	on	the	outside,
you	have	to	live	on	the	outside.	Then	there	is	nothing	wrong	because	you	will	be
radiating	joy,	you	will	be	constantly	in	touch	with	your	inner	core.	Amidst	all	the
hustle	and	bustle	of	life	you	will	remain	calm	and	quiet	and	blissful.	Nothing	can
disturb	you,	nothing	can	distract	you.	That's	what	real	mastery	is.
Jesus	calls	it	the	kingdom	of	god	and	he	insists	again	and	again	that	it	is	within
you.
(Osho	gave	 the	name	Veet	Rago	 to	a	German	primal	 therapist.	 It	means	going
beyond	attachment	--	and	that	is	the	soil	in	which	love	blossoms,	he	said.)
Attachment,	clinging,	possessiveness	are	 like	rocks,	hindering	 the	path	of	your
inner	spring.	But	these	are	big	rocks	and	they	go	on	becoming	bigger	with	every
day.	As	time	passes,	the	rocks	go	on	becoming	heavier	and	heavier.
The	child	knows,	without	knowing,	what	love	is.	Without	being	aware	of	what
love	 is	he	knows,	he	knows	 love.	Of	course	he	does	not	know	 that	he	knows.
That's	the	difference	between	a	sage	and	a	child.
The	child	knows	love	but	knows	not	what	love	is;	the	sage	knows	love	and	also
knows	that	he	knows.	That	is	the	only	difference,	otherwise	the	sage	has	become
a	child	again.
Sannyas	has	to	be	a	second	birth.	And	all	that	you	have	accumulated	around	the
idea	 of	 attachment,	 clinging,	 possessiveness,	 domination,	 has	 to	 be	 dropped.
These	are	the	poisons.
Love	people	but	love	unconditionally.	Love	people	but	don't	expect	anything	in
return.	Love	people	for	the	sheer	joy	of	loving.	And	don't	bother	about	whether
tomorrow	the	same	is	going	to	continue	or	not.
Don't	sacrifice	today	for	any	tomorrow	because	tomorrow	exists	not.	Don't	try	to
make	your	 love	permanent	 in	any	way	because	love	is	not	plastic,	 it	cannot	be
permanent.	It	is	like	a	rose	flower:	it	opens	in	the	morning	and	in	the	evening	the
petals	 disappear.	 Tomorrow	 there	 will	 be	 another	 rose	 and	 the	 day	 after
tomorrow,	another	rose.	Roses	will	go	on	coming,	but	there	is	no	need	to	cling	to
this	rose.	That	is	stupidity.
If	 you	 cling	 to	 this	 rose	 you	may	 destroy	 even	 the	 possibility	 of	 another	 rose
coming	 on	 your	 rose	 bush	 tomorrow,	 because	 you	 will	 be	 constantly	 pouring
your	energy	around	that	which	is	no	more.
It	is	really	sad	to	see	people	when	their	love	dies	and	they	go	on	clinging	--	very
sad	--	because	now	nothing	can	come	out	of	it	any	more,	but	they	go	on	hoping
against	all	hope.	It	is	a	sheer	wastage	of	energy.
But	we	have	been	taught	for	centuries	that	love	is	permanent	if	it	is	real	--	and
that	is	nonsense.
If	 it	 is	 real	 it	 cannot	 be	 permanent.	 If	 it	 is	 unreal	maybe	 it	 can	 be	 permanent.
Reality	 is	momentary,	 it	 changes,	 it	 is	 a	 constant	 flux.	You	 cannot	 step	 in	 the
same	river	twice.	It	is	a	river,	constantly	moving.
A	lover	has	to	be	aware	of	this	dynamic	process	of	life,	so	he	loves	but	he	is	not
worried	 about	 the	 past	 or	 the	 future.	 If	 the	 next	 moment	 the	 flower	 is	 still
flowering,	the	perfume	is	still	there,	good.	If	it	has	gone,	then	say	goodbye	and
move,	 with	 no	 complaint,	 with	 no	 grudge,	 with	 no	 anger,	 with	 no	 sadness,
because	once	you	understand	 the	nature	of	 life	you	will	not	have	any	of	 these
problems.
And	then	love	goes	on	growing	in	you.	Lovers	may	change	but	the	river	of	love
goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger.	Or	they	may	not	change.	I	am	not	saying	to
change	them,	I	am	simply	saying	if	it	changes,	accept	it	with	joy.	If	it	does	not
change,	 accept	 that	 too	with	 joy.	 That	 is	 non-attachment,	 that	 is	 love	without
attachment.	Whatsoever	happens	one	 is	blissful	about	 it,	one	 is	 thankful	 for	 it,
one	is	always	grateful	for	it.
Then	 slowly	 slowly	 love	 is	 no	more	 a	 relationship,	 it	 becomes	 a	 state	 of	 your
being	--	you	are	simply	love.	And	that	is	how	it	should	be.	When	one	is	love,	one
is	god.
(Her	new	name,	Veet	Tanha,	means	going	beyond	desire,	Osho	told	the	computer
programmer	from	England,	the	last	for	sannyas.)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
"Tanha"	is	a	word	used	by	Gautam	the	Buddha.	His	whole	message	is	contained
in	going	beyond	desire.
It	does	not	matter	what	 the	desire	 is.	 If	 it	 is	money	that	 is	desired	or	power	or
prestige	or	love,	freedom,	truth,	god	--	it	doesn't	matter.	Whatsoever	you	desire
you	create	trouble	for	yourself.	Trouble	arises	around	desiring.
The	moment	 you	desire	 you	have	brought	 the	 future	 in,	 you	have	 lost	 contact
with	the	present.	Desire	can	never	be	of	the	present,	remember,	and	life	is	of	the
present,	hence	life	and	desire	never	meet.	Desire	is	in	the	mind	and	mind	lives	in
the	future	--	in	fantasy,	in	imagination,	in	dreams.	And	all	dreams	are	going	to	be
broken	 sooner	 or	 later.	 They	 are	 dreams,	 they	 are	 not	 realities.	 And	 desire	 is
dreaming.
Live	in	the	moment	--	 that	means	live	without	desire.	Live	now,	and	now	does
not	have	enough	space	for	desire.	It	has	space	enough	for	you	but	not	for	your
mind.
The	 moment	 you	 live	 herenow	 all	 problems	 disappear.	 We	 create	 problems
through	desiring.	First,	the	moment	you	start	desiring	something	there	is	anxiety,
tension	about	how	it	has	to	be	fulfilled.	Great	thinking	goes	around	and	around:
how	to	fulfil	it?	Then	you	start	trying	in	every	possible	way	to	fulfil	it.
Now,	there	are	only	two	possibilities:	either	you	fulfil	it	or	you	don't.	If	you	fulfil
it	then	there	is	frustration	because	you	attain	the	goal	of	desire	but	you	miss.	You
miss	 the	 thing	 that	 you	 thought	 was	 going	 to	 happen	 through	 it.	 You	 were
longing	 for	 a	 beautiful	 palace	 and	 after	 twenty	 years	 of	 working	 hard	 and
earning	money	the	palace	is	there.
But	inside	the	palace	you	are	the	same	person.	Do	you	think	a	palace	can	make
you	blissful	 if	you	have	been	in	misery	for	 twenty	years?	It	 is	 impossible.	The
palace	 cannot	 change	 you;	 you	 will	 be	 miserable	 in	 the	 palace.	 You	 were
miserable	in	your	small	house,	you	will	be	miserable	in	a	bigger	house,	in	fact
more	miserable	because	there	will	be	more	space,	more	room.
If	 you	 achieve	 the	desire	 there	 is	 frustration.	Of	 course	 if	 you	don't	 achieve	 it
there	is	frustration.	Both	alternatives	bring	frustration.
The	man	of	understanding,	seeing	that	whatsoever	you	do...	if	you	succeed	you
fail,	if	you	fail	you	fail,	goes	beyond	desire.
You	 have	 heard	 the	 saying	 that	 nothing	 succeeds	 like	 success.	 That	 is	 sheer
nonsense.	I	say	to	you	that	nothing	fails	like	success.	But	millions	of	people	will
not	agree	with	me	because	 they	have	not	 succeeded	 in	anything	so	 they	go	on
hoping	 that	 once	 they	 are	 successful	 all	will	 be	 settled.	Only	 very	 few	people
become	successful,	only	those	very	few	people	know	that	success	brings	nothing
to	 you.	 But	 by	 the	 time	 they	 succeed	 they	 have	 devoted	 their	 whole	 life	 to
success	and	now	they	are	very	embarrassed	to	confess	the	truth,	that	they	have
been	 fools.	 So	 they	 go	 on	 pretending	 and	 smiling	 as	 if	 they	 have	 really
succeeded	and	all	 their	desire	 is	 fulfilled	and	 they	are	happy.	But	 that	 is	 sheer
deception;	 they	 are	 not	 ready	 to	 accept	 that	 they	 have	 been	 foolish,	 that	 their
whole	 life	 has	 gone	 down	 the	 drain.	Now	 at	 the	 end	 of	 their	 life	 they	 cannot
confess	it.
But	a	 few	rare	 individuals	have	confessed.	Alexander	 the	Great	confessed	 that
his	life	had	been	in	vain
--	and	he	was	one	of	the	most	successful	persons	in	the	world.	But	he	confessed
at	the	very	last	moment	when	the	doctors	said	that	now	he	could	not	be	alive	for
more	 than	 a	 few	hours	 --	 not	 even	 twenty	 --	 four	 hours,	 just	 a	 few	hours.	He
wanted	to	be	alive	for	at	least	twenty-four	hours	because	he	was	just	twenty-four
hours	away	from	the	capital.	He	was	returning	from	India	to	Greece	and	he	had
promised	his	mother	that	he	would	come	back.	Just	twenty-four	hours	away	but
he	could	not	reach	home.
He	was	ready	to	give	his	whole	kingdom	--	and	that	consisted	in	those	days	of
the	whole	world,	the	whole	known	world	--	but	the	doctors	said,	"We	cannot	do
anything,	 even	 if	 you	 give	 us	 the	whole	 kingdom	 for	which	 you	 have	wasted
your	whole	life."	He	didn't	live	long,	he	only	lived	for	thirty-three	years.	He	died
exactly	 at	 the	 age	 that	 Jesus	 died.	 But	 he	 died	 on	 a	 bigger	 cross	 because	 he
succeeded.	He	died	with	a	golden	crown.
We	can	understand	Jesus	--	he	dies	with	a	crown	of	 thorns.	But	he	dies	with	a
deep	contentment,	with	a	relaxed	being,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	he	is	simply
disappearing	 into	 god,	 that	 he	 is	 coming	 home;	 he	 has	 found	 the	 door	 to	 his
home.	But	Alexander	dies	frustrated,	very	frustrated.
Buddha	renounced	his	kingdom.	Seeing	the	misery	of	his	father,	 just	before	he
was	 going	 to	 succeed	 him,	 he	 escaped.	 He	 must	 have	 been	 of	 tremendous
intelligence	 --	he	was	only	 twenty-seven	when	he	 left	his	kingdom.	His	 father
was	becoming	old	and	he	was	ready	to	give	him	the	kingdom	and	he	wanted	to
retire.	 The	 father	 wanted	 to	 retire,	 the	 son	 escaped,	 because	 he	 had	 seen	 his
father	and	his	misery;	"If	that	is	going	to	happen	to	me	too...	My	father's	life	is
wasted	 and	 mine	 will	 also	 be	 wasted."	 He	 escaped	 just	 a	 single	 day	 before,
before	the	crowning	ceremony.	The	invitations	were	sent	--	he	left	his	father	in	a
very	 embarrassing	 situation.	 The	 invitations	 had	 to	 be	 cancelled	 immediately
because	the	son	had	escaped.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Nobody	had	ever	heard	of	such	a	thing!	But	he	understood	that	it	was	futile,	it
was	not	of	any	significance	to	be	there	in	that	palace	with	that	kingdom.	He	had
seen	through	and	through;	he	must	have	had	very	clear	eyes.
He	went	beyond	all	desire.	First	he	went	into	the	forest	with	a	desire	to	find	truth
or	god.	After	six	years	of	constant	effort	he	dropped	that	too,	because	he	again
understood:	 "I	 am	 the	 same	 person:	 first	 I	 desired	 a	 kingdom,	money,	 power,
prestige,	then	I	saw	the	futility	of	that.	And	for	all	these	six	years	I	desired	truth,
god,	liberation	--	but	desire	is	the	same,	desiring	is	the	same.	Only	the	object	has
changed	 but	 I	 am	 the	 same	 person."	 Seeing	 it	 he	 dropped	 that	 desire	 too	 and
immediately,	that	very	night,	he	became	enlightened.
When	all	desire	disappears	one	becomes	enlightened.
So	I	am	giving	you	one	of	the	most	beautiful	names,	It	is	a	great	responsibility
for	you!	(laughter)	It	has	to	be	realised.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009155
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Your	 name,	 Sylvia,	 is	 a	 mythological	 name,	 and	 it	 symbolizes	 the	 profound
silence	to	be	found	amongst	the	trees.	But	that	is	nothing	compared	to	the	inner
silence.	The	outer,	howsoever	profound	 it	 is,	 remains	 shallow,	 it	has	no	depth.
One	can	go	 into	a	 forest,	one	can	go	 into	 the	mountains	 --	 there	 is	 certainly	a
silence,	but	it	is	in	fact	a	negative	silence.	The	marketplace	and	its	noise	is	not
there,	 the	 traffic	 noise	 is	 not	 there.	 The	 aeroplane	 passing	 by	 (an	 aeroplane
passes	by),	the	train	(a	train	hoots	from	far	off),	the	people	and	the	dogs	barking,
are	not	there.	It	is	absence	of	noise;	hence	it	cannot	be	profound.
When	you	go	in	your	touch	a	new	kind	of	silence	--	the	presence	of	silence	itself.
It	 is	 not	 only	 an	 absence	 of	 noise,	 it	 is	 something	 absolutely	 positive,	 almost
visible,	tangible	--	and	that	is	the	difference.
The	outer	silence	can	be	disturbed	any	moment,	but	the	inner	silence	can	never
be	disturbed.	No	noise	can	ever	penetrate	it.	And	once	you	have	felt	it,	even	in
the	 marketplace	 you	 will	 remain	 silent.	 It	 becomes	 an	 undercurrent.	 On	 the
surface	 you	may	 be	 involved	 in	 activities,	 in	working,	 but	 deep	 down	 it	 is	 all
silent.
Nothing	disturbs	it,	nothing	distracts	you	from	it;	you	remain	rooted	in	it.	That's
why	my	insistence	is	that	sannyasins	should	not	leave	the	world.
For	 thousands	 of	 years	 the	 monks,	 the	 nuns,	 have	 been	 leaving	 the	 world	 in
search	of	silence.	Of	course	they	find	a	certain	silence	in	the	jungles	and	forests,
in	the	monasteries	--	but	that	is	absence	of	noise,	it	is	not	true	silence.
True	silence	can	only	be	found	when	you	move	inwards.	 It	exists	 in	your	very
interiority.	Then	it	has	infinite	depth	and	infinite	height.	It	is	immeasurable.	And
to	know	it	is	to	know	all.	To	feel	it	is	to	feel	God.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	needs	great	courage.	It	is	not	for	cowards.	The	coward	can	always	ask	to
be	loved	but	he	cannot	love.	And	the	problem	is,	unless	you	love	you	cannot	get
love.	And	 the	world	 is	 full	 of	 cowards;	 everybody	 is	 asking,	 "Give	me	 love."
Every	I	is	begging,	"Give	me	love,"	every	heart	has	become	a	begging	bowl,
"Give	me	 love."	But	 beggars	 are	 begging	 from	other	 beggars	 --	 how	 can	 they
give?	Nobody	is	ready	to	give.
It	needs	courage	to	share	your	being.	And	we	are	brought	up	in	such	a	way	that
we	 become	 very	 miserly.	 We	 know	 only	 one	 kind	 of	 economics,	 worldly
economics.	If	you	give	your	money	you	will	lose	it.
You	have	to	cling	to	it.	You	have	to	snatch	it	away	from	others.	You	have	to	give
less	and	get	more,	then	you	are	in	profit.
But	the	inner	economics	is	totally	different,	just	the	polar	opposite	of	the	outer:
the	more	you	give,	the	more	you	have;	the	less	you	give,	the	less	you	have;	the
more	you	give,	the	more	the	whole	existence	goes	on	pouring	into	you.	You	have
to	be	constantly	giving,	sharing	for	the	sheer	joy	of	sharing.
It	needs	guts,	but	once	you	have	experienced	it,	once	you	have	come	to	know	the
inner	mathematics,	 then	 there	 is	no	problem.	The	first	step	needs	courage	 then
there	is	no	problem	at	all.	Once	you	know	that	the	more	you	give,	the	more	you
get,	then	it	is	very	easy.
The	first	step	 in	 love	cannot	be	 taken	by	a	coward.	 It	needs	somebody	bold	 in
spirit	who	can	 risk,	 because	 in	 the	beginning	 it	 is	 a	 risk.	Who	knows	whether
you	will	get	any	response	or	not?	Who	knows?	--
you	may	give	your	love	and	nothing	may	come	in	return.	There	is	no	guarantee.
But	that	first	step	has	to	be	taken	in	trust,	then	the	second	step	is	very	easy	and
you	 can	 move	 thousands	 of	 miles.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 problem	 at	 all;	 then	 the
whole	journey	is	very	simple	and	life	becomes	more	and	more	rich	at	each	step.
And	the	richer	you	are	inwardly	the	more	aware	you	become	of	the	existence	of
God.	When	 you	 have	 reached	 to	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 richness	God	 penetrates
you	 through	 and	 through,	 permeates	 you.	Then	you	 are	 divine,	 you	 are	 godly.
Then	God	is	not	somebody	outside	you,	it	is	something	at	the	very	core	of	your
being	--	an	eternal	light.	But	one	has	to	go	through	this	risk.
I	teach	only	how	to	live	dangerously,	how	to	go	into	the	uncharted	sea,	how	to
move	into	the	unknown.
And	 the	 person	who	moves	 into	 the	 unknown	 and	 into	 the	 unknowable	 is	 the
only	religious	person.	Others	are	only	creating	a	deception	of	being	religious	--
deceiving	others	and	deceiving	themselves.
(To	a	student	from	Italy	he	gave	the	name	victory	and	immortality.	They	can	be
known	via	meditation	only...)
Meditation	is	a	bridge	between	you	and	god,	and	to	know	god	is	to	be	victorious
and	to	know	god	is	to	be	immortal.	Victory	and	immortality	are	two	sides	of	the
same	coin.
We	cannot	be	victorious	on	our	own.	If	we	try	to	be	victorious	on	our	own	we
are	 bound	 to	 be	 defeated,	 we	 are	 doomed.	 The	 failure	 is	 absolutely	 certain,
inevitable.	It	is	like	a	small	wave	fighting	against	the	whole	ocean:	it	belongs	to
the	ocean	--	how	can	it	fight?	It	is	like	the	part	fighting	with	the	whole,	the	leaf
fighting	 the	 tree	 to	 which	 it	 belongs.	 The	 leaf	 can	 be	 victorious	 only	 in	 the
victory	of	the	tree,	not	separately.
The	wave	can	be	victorious	only	with	the	ocean,	not	against	it,	not	without	it.
Man	 is	victorious	when	he	 lives	not	according	 to	his	will	but	according	 to	 the
will	of	god.
Jesus	 prays	 in	 the	 last	 moments,	 "Thy	 kingdom	 come,	 thy	 will	 be	 done."	 He
drops	his	will.	Now	the	wave	is	no	more	separate	from	the	ocean;	now	there	is
no	 possibility	 of	 any	 frustration,	 any	 failure.	 And	 the	moment	 you	 drop	 your
will,	your	ego,	your	private	idea	of	achievement,	life	moves	on	a	totally	different
plane.	Then	each	step	is	of	victory	and	each	moment	you	come	closer	and	closer
to	immortality.
The	more	 you	 disappear	 as	 a	 separate	 entity,	 the	more	 you	 are	 victorious,	 the
more	god	starts	functioning	through	you,	flowing	through	you.	You	become	just
a	hollow	bamboo.	And	on	the	lips	of	god	the	bamboo	turns	into	a	flute	and	songs
start	pouring	through	you.
That's	what	a	sannyasin	has	to	be:	just	a	hollow	bamboo	--	surrendered	to	god,
ready	to	become	a	vehicle,	a	passage,	allowing	god	to	be.	A	sannyasin	needs	to
disappear	as	an	ego.	The	moment	 the	miracle	happens,	whenever	you	drop	 the
ego,	 suddenly	 god	 is	 active	 within	 you.	 It	 is	 only	 hindered	 by	 the	 ego.	 Ego
functions	like	a	curtain	between	you	and	god.
(A	messenger	of	god	can	only	be	a	bringer	of	truth,	he	told	Prem	Angela	when
outlining	the	meanings	of	her	name.)
The	 message	 of	 god	 is	 truth.	 It	 cannot	 be	 anything	 else.	 But	 one	 can	 only
become	a	bringer	of	truth	through	love,	not	through	logic.	Logic	is	a	pretender.	It
pretends	to	find,	to	conclude,	to	theorise	about	truth,	but	that	is	pseudo	activity.
Logic	can	never	give	you	the	truth.	Any	logical	conclusion	is	only	a	hypothesis,
an	inference.	And	truth	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	not	an	inference.	It	is	not	only	a	hypothesis	it	is	something	absolutely	certain.
It	 is	not	of	 the	mind,	 it	 is	not	 through	 logic	 that	you	can	arrive	at	 it;	 it	 is	only
through	the	heart,	through	love.
Logic	 can	 go	 on	 and	 on	 in	 circles.	And	 of	 course	 it	 can	 create	 the	 illusion	 of
some	conclusion	being	achieved.	But	nothing	is	ever	achieved.	No	philosopher
has	ever	known	what	truth	is,	although	they	have	all	been	thinking	and	thinking
about	it	But	it	is	like	a	blind	man	thinking	about	light.	He	can	think	for	his	whole
life,	he	can	theorise,	but	without	eyes	you	cannot	see	light,	and	light	can	only	be
known	by	seeing;	there	is	no	other	way.
Truth	 can	 only	 be	 known	 through	 loving,	 there	 is	 no	 other	way.	 Truth	 comes
directly	 to	 the	 heart,	 it	 never	 comes	 via	 the	 head.	 It	 has	 a	 direct	 route,	 an
immediate	contact	with	the	heart.	And	we	are	all	living	in	our	head,	that's	why
we	go	on	missing	it.
Love	and	 love	more.	Love	without	any	miserlinesss	 love	without	any	desire	 to
get	something	out	of	it.
Love	 as	 an	 end,	 but	 not	 as	 a	means	 --	 and	 then	 suddenly,	when	 your	 heart	 is
overflowing	with	 love,	 truth	descends.	 It	 is	 only	 through	 love	 that	we	become
worthy	 of	 receiving	 truth.	 Then	 one	 becomes	 a	messenger	 of	 god.	Then	 one's
whole	life	is	a	message,	a	divine	message.	One	lives	truth	--	only	then	is	one	a
messenger.
(Irene,	a	doctor	of	medicine	from	Germany,	had	been	looking	a	little	restless	in
her	place.	So	he	found	just	the	right	meaning	for	her	name:)
Anand	means	bliss.	Irene	means	peace.
It	is	easy	to	be	blissful	if	you	ignore	peace.	It	is	also	easy	to	be	peaceful	if	you
ignore	 bliss.	 But	 a	 bliss	without	 peace	 is	 feverish;	 it	 is	 excitement	 and	 tiring,
exhausting.	And	 a	 peace	without	 bliss	 is	 dead,	 it	 is	 cold,	 it	 has	 no	warmth.	 It
cannot	 dance,	 it	 cannot	 sing,	 it	 cannot	 celebrate.	Up	 to	 now	people	 have	 tried
either	bliss	or	peace.	Up	to	now	it	has	been	an	either	or	question.
My	effort	 is	 for	my	sannyasins	 to	bring	both	 together.	Unless	both	are	present
together	 your	 life	 will	 be	 lopsided.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 in	 immense	 peace	 and	 yet
capable	of	dance.	One	has	to	be	singing	and	dancing	and	yet	remaining	rooted	in
peace.	 When	 these	 two	 polar	 opposites	 meet	 and	 merge	 in	 you,	 the	 ultimate
height	 is	 achieved.	 And	 life	 then	 has	 a	 richness	 which	 could	 not	 have	 been
possible	if	you	chose	one	out	of	the	two.
Of	course	it	is	easier	to	choose	one	--	obviously,	because	to	be	alert,	to	be	aware,
and	to	bring	about	this	synthesis	within	you	is	a	more	complex	phenomenon;	it
needs	intelligence,	tremendous	intelligence.	But	that	intelligence	can	be	released
through	meditation.
So	you	have	to	remember	these	three	things....	Meditation	is	the	triggering,	the
process	 which	 can	make	 you	 so	 intelligent	 that	 you	 can	make	 the	 impossible
happen.
It	 has	 happened	 within	 me	 so	 I	 know	 it	 can	 happen	 in	 everybody	 else.	 Your
peace	need	not	be	cold,	it	can	be	full	of	warmth	and	love.	And	your	bliss	need
not	be	just	feverish,	it	can	be	ecstatic	and	yet	very	cool.
This	paradox	has	to	be	achieved,	only	then	is	one	worthy	of	God,	because	God
contains	all	 the	contradictions	and	 this	 is	 the	greatest	of	contradictions.	Unless
one	is	vast	enough,	one	cannot	allow	this	to	happen.
That	vastness	comes	through	meditation.	If	you	can	remember	these	three	words,
meditation,	 bliss	 and	 peace	 --	 this	 is	 my	 ABC	 --	 then	 the	 whole	 alphabet	 is
complete.
(Danish	Maj-Britt	became	a	love	song	--	Prem	Sugita.)
Love	cannot	grow	in	a	state	of	misery.	The	miserable	person	cannot	be	loving,
the	miserable	person	becomes	closed.	And	 love	needs	openness,	otherwise	 the
sources	of	your	energy	will	remain	imprisoned.
Without	love	a	man	is	an	imprisoned	splendour.	Love	opens	the	doors,	removes
the	rocks,	allows	the	springs	of	your	life,	your	laughter,	your	dance,	your	song,
to	flow.
Song	simply	represents	a	state	in	which	one	is	open	and	ready	to	pour	one's	heart
into	 existence.	 The	 song	 is	 symbolic	 --	 that	 one	 is	 not	 miserable.	 The	 birds
singing	in	the	morning	--	just	like	them,	one	has	to	be	constantly	in	the	mood	for
singing,	as	if	it	is	always	morning,	as	if	it	is	always	the	time	for	the	sun	to	rise.
Any	moment	the	sun	can	rise	and	you	have	to	be	welcoming	to	it,	you	have	to	be
in	a	receptive	mood.
You	have	 to	be	alert	 --	 the	guest	can	come	any	moment.	The	singing	birds	are
just	getting	ready	to	welcome	the	sun.	The	flowers	start	opening,	the	trees	start
swaying.	The	whole	earth	becomes	alive,	aflame,	ready	to	receive	a	new	day.
The	singing	heart,	 the	dancing	heart,	 the	 loving	heart,	 is	 ready	 to	 receive	God.
The	miserable	can	go	on	praying	but	out	of	misery	the	prayer	goes	wrong	from
the	very	beginning.	It	becomes	heavy	and	falls	back	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
down	on	the	earth.	It	has	no	wings;	it	cannot	go	to	the	ultimate,	it	cannot	reach	to
God.
When	one	is	blissful,	loving,	when	one	is	full	of	laughter,	joy,	when	one	is	not
serious	 about	 life	 but	 playful	 like	 a	 small	 child	 --	 innocent,	 wondering	 about
each	and	everything,	looking	at	everything	with	awe,	when	the	heart	is	singing
hallelujah	 --	 then	God	can	 come	any	moment.	There	 is	 no	need	 for	 you	 to	go
anywhere,	just	learn	how	to	be	receptive,	open,	loving,	singing,	cheerful	--	and
that's	 enough.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 become	 a	 Christian	 or	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a
Mohammedan,	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	any	church,	to	any	temple	or	mosque.	If
your	 heart	 is	 overflowing	with	 cheerfulness	 and	 love	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 even
believe	in	God,	he	is	bound	to	come.
Jesus	says	"Knock	and	the	doors	shall	be	opened,"	and	I	say,	don't	bother!	Just
sing	and	he	will	knock	on	your	door.	He	will	say,	"Can	I	come	in?"
Make	yourself	so	blissful	that	even	God	would	like	to	come	in.	Tempt	him	rather
than	knock	on	his	door!
(Then	 he	 transformed	 a	 student	 from	 Germany	 into	 a	 blissful	 meditator.)
Meditation	 is	 not	 a	 serious	 phenomenon.	Of	 course	 for	 centuries	 people	 have
taken	it	very	seriously.
That's	 why	 millions	 have	 tried	 meditation	 but	 very	 few	 have	 achieved	 it.
Seriousness	kills	the	whole	thing.
Seriousness	is	a	disease.
One	 should	 go	 into	 meditation	 cheerfully,	 joyously,	 blissfully,	 with	 a	 deep
longing	to	enquire,	a	sincere	longing	to	enquire,	but	no	seriousness	about	it
The	moment	you	start	taking	life	seriously	you	become	burdened;	and	religious
people	 have	 been	 very	 much	 burdened.	 Look	 at	 the	 faces	 of	 your	 saints	 --
Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan.	They	 look	so	serious,	 so	deadly	serious,	as	 if
life	 is	a	 torture,	as	 if	 they	are	burdened	with	mountains,	as	 if	 they	are	carrying
the	whole	responsibility	of	the	world.	That	is	sheer	foolishness.
Learn	the	art	of	being	a	child.	Take	life	as	fun,	and	meditation	comes	very	easily.
And	when	 it	 is	possible	 to	enter	 into	 the	world	of	 the	divine	dancing,	 singing,
laughing,	why	go	with	a	sad	face,	with	a	 long	face?	I	don't	 think	 that	your	so-
called	 saints	have	ever	 reached	heaven.	God	won't	 allow	 them	 there.	They	are
not	 worthy	 of	 being	 allowed	 in	 heaven.	 Their	 company	 would	 be	 absolutely
boring.	They	don't	know	how	to	laugh,	they	have	forgotten	all	laughter.
If	 god	 has	 been	 surrounded	 with	 all	 those	 so-called	 saints,	 he	 must	 have
committed	suicide.	Just	looking	at	those	saints	must	be	such	a	boring	affair.	He
must	have	 taken	shelter	 in	hell!	Your	so-called	saints	are	not	good	company	at
all.	I	have	lived	with	them,	I	have	been	with	them,	and	I	know:	they	are	not	good
company	at	all.	They	are	like	rocks,	dead	people	--	rotten,	stinking.
One	has	to	be	full	of	laughter	then	life	comes	to	its	totality.	And	in	laughter	the
ego	can	be	put	aside	so	easily.	In	fact	in	laughter	it	disappears.	When	you	really
laugh	there	is	no	ego.
So	be	cheerful	and	be	meditative.	And	meditation	simply	means	silence	--	but	a
laughing	 silence,	 a	 dancing	 silence,	 a	 singing	 silence,	 a	 silence	 not	 cold	 but
warm.
(Italian	Claudio	was	renamed	a	song	--	Pragito.	But	his	song	was	of	meditation
not	of	love,	and	turned	out	to	be	no	song	to	speak	of!)
Meditation	 is	 a	 state	of	 absolute	 silence	 --	no	 thought,	 no	desire,	 no	 ambition.
One	is	simply	in	the	present,	neither	in	the	past	nor	in	the	future.	One	is	herenow,
and	just	being	herenow	is	enough,	and	the	song	starts	arising	in	you	--	the	song
celestial,	the	song	divine.
It	is	not	your	song	--	you	are	no	more	there	--	it	comes	from	something	deeper
than	you.	 It	does	not	come	from	your	mind,	 from	your	ego,	 it	comes	 from	the
very	source	of	life.	It	 is	god's	song.	And	the	moment	you	hear	your	own	being
whispering	a	song	to	you	you	hear	god's	voice.
All	 that	 is	needed	on	our	part	 is	 to	become	silent	 so	 that	we	can	hear	 the	 still
small	voice	within.	 It	 is	pure	poetry,	 it	 is	pure	music,	and	once	 it	starts	arising
you	cannot	stop	it.
Gautam	the	Buddha	is	reported	to	have	said	that	misery	has	no	beginning	but	an
end	 and	 bliss	 has	 a	 beginning	 but	 no	 end.	 And	 I	 agree	 with	 him	 absolutely.
Misery	has	no	beginning.	Your	misery	is	beginningless	for	your	whole	past,	for
the	whole	eternity	that	has	passed,	you	have	been	miserable.	But	it	can	come	to
an	 end	 and	 it	 can	 come	 to	 an	 end	 right	 now,	 this	 very	 moment.	 Bliss	 has	 a
beginning	 but	 then	 there	 is	 no	 end	 to	 it	 It	 goes	 on	 and	 on,	 from	perfection	 to
perfection,	from	great	heights	to	greater	heights.
Meditation	 is	 simply	 a	 key	 to	 open	 the	 lock.	 The	moment	 your	 inner	 lock	 is
opened	misery	disappears,	bliss	arises,	darkness	is	no	more	found.	Suddenly	you
are	full	of	light	--	hence	the	word	"enlightenment".
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009165
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Language	 is	absolutely	futile	as	far	as	god	is	concerned,	hence	any	prayer	 that
consists	of	words	is	not	prayer;	it	will	never	be	heard	by	god.	Only	silence	can
be	the	bridge,	can	be	the	communion.	Hence	prayer	has	not	to	be	said.	One	has
to	be	prayerful	 --	 it	 is	a	quality.	 It	has	nothing	 to	do	with	what	you	say,	 it	has
something	to	do	with	what	you	are.
A	prayerful	person	is	religious,	not	a	person	who	goes	on	doing	prayer	--	that	is
not	going	to	be	heard.
And	 that	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 real	 prayer	 and	 false	 prayer:	 false	 prayer
consists	 of	 words,	 real	 prayer	 is	 nothing	 but	 pure	 meditation.	 It	 consists	 of
silence,	overflowing	with	 love;	no	word,	no	 language.	There	 is	nothing	 to	 say.
What	 can	 be	 said	 to	 god.	He	 knows	 it	 already.	 Before	we	 know	 about	 it	 god
knows	it.	It	is	absolutely	absurd	to	say	anything.	Just	to	be	silent	is	enough.
Meditation	 is	 real	 prayer,	 but	 meditation	 simply	 means	 becoming	 absolutely
silent,	still,	calm,	quiet.
Nothing	 is	 said	but	 everything	 is	heard	by	god.	The	head	disappears,	 only	 the
heart	goes	on	beating.	It	is	a	pulsation	of	the	heart	that	reaches	the	divine.	There
is	 surrender,	 there	 is	 trust,	 there	 is	 love,	 but	 no	word,	 no	 language,	 nothing	 to
say.	One	is	simple	in	a	state	of	absolute	stillness.
Hence	I	don't	 teach	prayer;	I	 teach	meditation,	because	to	me	meditation	is	 the
only	real	prayer	which	has	ever	been	heard	by	god.	What	goes	on	in	the	name	of
prayer	 in	 the	churches	and	the	synagogues	and	the	temples	and	the	mosques	is
just	pseudo.	People	are	shouting	as	if	god	is	deaf.
God	 understands	 no	 language.	 He	 understands	 trust,	 surrender,	 love,	 silence.
That's	his	language.
The	 idea	of	being	noble	by	birth	 is	 a	 substitute	 for	 real	nobility.	Everybody	 is
born	with	a	potential	for	nobility,	but	that	potential	can	only	grow	in	the	climate
of	 love.	And	 it	 is	unfortunate	 that	 the	 society,	 the	world,	 the	 state,	 the	church,
and	 all	 the	 organizations	 that	 exist	 on	 the	 outside,	 don't	 provide	 you	with	 the
right	climate.
They	 teach	 you	 hatred	 in	 such	 subtle	ways	 that	 you	 never	 become	 aware	 that
hatred	is	being	taught	and	you	are	being	poisoned,	your	very	sources	of	love	are
destroyed.
Nationality	means	hatred.	To	be	a	Christian,	to	be	a	Hindu,	to	be	a	Mohammedan
or	 to	be	a	 Jew	means	hatred.	To	believe	 in	 the	white	 skin	or	 in	 the	black	 skin
means	hatred.
Humanity	is	one	if	you	are	loving.
Then	 there	 are	 no	 countries,	 no	 boundaries,	 no	 divisions,	 no	 fragments.	 Love
unites,	 hatred	 divides.	 And	 the	 whole	 society	 is	 rooted	 in	 hatred.	 It	 is	 really
continuously	preparing	for	war.
History	can	be	divided	into	two	periods:	hot	war	and	cold	war.	When	it	is	cold
war	 it	 is	 preparation	 time	 for	 hot	war.	Don't	 think	 there	 is	 peace	 between	 two
wars.	No,	there	is	not,	not	at	all;	between	two	wars	there	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	only	preparation.	You	cannot	be	continuously	fighting;	you	have	to	have	little
gaps	 to	 rest	 and	 to	 revive	 and	 to	 accumulate	 arms	 and	 bombs	 again,	 because
every	 war	 is	 so	 destructive	 that	 it	 takes	 at	 least	 ten	 or	 twelve	 years	 to	 have
another	 big	 war.	 Without	 that	 time	 gap	 how	 can	 you	 go	 on	 fighting?	 But
somewhere	or	other	on	earth	war	has	always	continued.
In	three	thousand	years,	five	thousand	wars	have	been	fought.	Humanity	is	just
insane.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 we	 are	 existing	 here	 only	 to	 fight.	 And	 when	 people	 are
continuously	preparing	for	fight	they	become	like	animals,	worse	than	animals,
because	animals	also	have	a	certain	nobility.	But	man	falls	even	below	that.
Man	 can	 rise	 towards	 nobility	 only	 through	 love.	 I	 teach	my	 sannyasins	 to	 be
loving	 in	 every	 possible	 way.	 And	 because	 there	 are	 no	 outside	 sources
everybody	has	to	create	his	own	small	world	of	love,	like	an	island,	like	an	oasis
in	a	desert.	Then	you	have	nobility,	and	nobility	is	beautiful,	blissful.
The	 real	 aristocracy	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 birth.	 It	 is	 love	 that	 makes	 you
aristocratic	because	it	makes	you	rich,	it	makes	you	a	king.	It	gives	you	the	taste
of	the	kingdom	of	god.
Society	is	full	of	hatred.	It	may	talk	about	love	--	it	does	talk	about	love	--	but	it
only	 talks	 about	 it;	 it	 prepares	 for	 hate.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 cunning	 world,	 very
hypocritical.	 It	 gives	 you	 masks	 which	 look	 very	 beautiful,	 and	 behind	 those
masks	there	are	ugly	faces.	It	does	not	transform	your	face,	it	simply	hides	it.	It
creates	 a	 division	 in	 you,	 it	makes	 you	 schizophrenic,	 split.	You	 become	 two.
And	then	there	is	trouble,	then	there	is	continuous	conflict.
Love	is	a	rebellion,	a	rebellion	against	all	 these	stupid	structures	--	 the	church,
the	state.	This	whole	structure	is	stupid,	but	because	it	has	existed	for	thousands
of	years	we	have	become	accustomed	to	it,	we	think	this	is	the	only	possibility.	It
is	not	so.
Man	 can	 live	 in	 a	 totally	 new	 way	 --	 without	 wars,	 without	 hatred,	 without
killing	others,	without	murders.	There	is	no	need	for	all	that.	How	much	energy
is	wasted	 in	 that?	Almost	 ninety-nine	point	 nine	percent.	Then	nothing	 is	 left,
then	one	feels	exhausted.
Love	needs	overflowing	energy.	We	are	 like	 a	 rosebush	which	 is	 continuously
fighting	with	other	 rosebushes.	There	 is	not	 time	 to	grow	roses,	no	energy	 left
for	 roses.	Roses	come	only,	 remember,	when	 the	 rosebush	 is	overflowing	with
juice.	If	there	is	no	overflowing	of	juice	there	will	be	no	roses.	The	rosebush	will
exist	in	a	retarded	way	--	pale,	almost	on	its	deathbed.	How	can	it	grow	roses?
There	will	be	no	dance,	no	song,	 there	will	be	no	 joy.	 It	will	not	welcome	 the
sunrise,	 it	will	 not	 be	 receptive	 to	 the	 songs	of	 the	birds,	 it	will	 not	 sway	and
dance	in	the	wind.	Everything	will	look	like	a	drag.
That's	how	man	has	become:	a	rosebush	without	roses.	So	love	is	our	flowering.
But	flowering,	remember,	always	happens	only	when	you	have	more	energy	than
you	need	for	ordinary,	day-to-day,	routine	work;	only	then	can	you	blossom,	can
you	flower.	Flowering	is	a	luxury,	it	is	not	a	necessity.	Love	is	a	luxury,	it	is	not
a	necessity.	One	can	exist	without	love,	but	only	exist;	one	cannot	live.
Mere	 existence	 is	 not	 life.	And	people	 are	only	 existing,	 vegetating,	 somehow
surviving.	For	survival,	bread	and	butter	and	shelter	are	enough,	but	there	will	be
no	grandeur,	no	splendor.	Your	inner	sky	will	remain	utterly	dark.	There	will	be
no	stars,	no	full-moon	night	will	come.
One	has	 to	 rebel	 --	 rebel	against	all	 the	nonsense	 that	 is	being	 taught	 from	the
outside	 by	 the	 universities,	 by	 the	 churches,	 by	 the	 priests,	 by	 the	 politicians.
One	has	to	rebel	against	each	and	everything.
It	is	a	long,	long	conspiracy,	very	deep	rooted.
Unless	one	rebels	against	it	all	in	toto	--	you	cannot	even	say	that	we	can	choose
a	 few	 good	 things	 and	 we	 can	 drop	 the	 others,	 the	 bad	 things...	 They	 are	 all
interconnected.	If	you	choose	one	thing,	others	will	come	in	the	wake	of	it.	One
has	 to	 drop	 it	 totally;	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 choosing.	 They	 are	 all
interdependent,	they	exist	as	one	organism.
Rebellion	means	dropping	the	whole	past	and	living	in	the	present	without	any
tradition,	without	any	mind,	without	any	knowledge;	living	like	a	child,	as	if	you
are	the	first	man,	you	are	Adam.	That	is	rebellion.
Adam	 really	 rebelled	 --	 even	 against	 God	 he	 rebelled.	 He	 must	 have	 been	 a
beautiful	 man.	 He	 was	 the	 first	 man,	 but	 still,	 one	 thing	 that	 he	 did	 of
tremendous	 importance	was	 that	 he	 rebelled.	 He	 rebelled	 against	 some	 unjust
order	from	God;	it	was	unfair.	He	did	not	obey.	And	it	is	good:	if	he	had	obeyed,
we	would	 not	 be	 here	 at	 all.	We	 are	 here	 because	 he	 disobeyed.	We	owe	 that
much	 to	 Adam	 --	 and	 more	 particularly	 to	 Eve.	 That's	 why	 I	 have	 so	 much
respect	for	women:	it	is	really	my	respect	for	Eve.	And	I	have	even	more	respect
for	 the	serpent.	He	was	 the	first	enlightened	person,	 the	serpent	 that	persuaded
Eve	and	triggered	a	great	rebellion.
Each	human	being	has	to	be	an	Adam,	an	Eve,	again	and	again.	Drop	the	past	as
it	it	never	existed,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
always	start	from	ABC,	fresh,	from	scratch.	And	you	will	have	a	beautiful	life,
you	will	have	an	adventurous	life.	You	will	have	an	ecstatic	quality	in	your	life.
(Ralf's	 new	name	meant	 bliss	 and	wisdom.	They	 are	necessarily	 related,	Osho
explained.)	Bliss	and	wisdom	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin	--	become	blissful
and	you	will	be	wise.	But	the	so-called	religions	have	been	teaching	you	just	the
opposite;	they	teach	you	guilt	--	and	how	can	a	guilty	person	be	blissful?	He	is
bound	 to	 be	 sad,	 he	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 serious.	 This	 is	 a	 great	 calamity	 that	 has
happened	to	humanity.
That's	why	 your	 saints	 look	 so	 sad,	with	 such	 long	 faces.	 They	 cannot	 laugh,
they	cannot	rejoice,	they	cannot	dance,	they	cannot	sing.	They	are	incapable	of
love,	because	without	bliss	there	is	no	possibility	of	love.	And	whatsoever	they
think	is	their	knowledge	is	just	borrowed	rubbish;	they	don't	know	a	thing.	They
are	simply	like	parrots	repeating	scriptures.
My	effort	here	is	to	destroy	that	parrotlike	quality	in	you.	Unless	one	drops	all
borrowed	knowledge	one	cannot	be	wise.	At	the	beginning	of	wisdom	is	in	being
blissful.	 So	 drop	 all	 ideas	 of	 guilt	 --	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 feel	 guilty.	 You	 are
perfectly	 good	 as	 you	 are.	 This	 is	 the	 way	 god	 has	 made	 you	 --	 the	 whole
responsibility	is	his.
Rejoice	 in	 the	way	 you	 are	 --	what	 can	 you	 do?	The	moment	 you	 understand
this,	the	moment	you	accept	yourself	as	you	are,	a	tremendous	miracle	happens:
you	start	growing	immediately	because	guilt	disappears	and	cheerfulness	enters
your	being.	And	in	the	climate	of	cheerfulness	growth	becomes	possible.
Hence	I	say	laughter	is	one	of	the	most	religious	qualities.	A	man	incapable	of
laughter	is	irreligious.
Hence	 I	 cannot	believe	 the	Christians	who	 say	 that	 Jesus	never	 laughed.	 I	 say
categorically	they	are	wrong,	they	must	be	wrong,	they	are	bound	to	be	wrong.
In	fact	only	a	man	like	Jesus	knows	how	to	laugh,	how	to	love.	And	Jesus	goes
on	saying	again	and	again	to	his	disciples,	"Rejoice.	I	say	unto	you	rejoice,	again
and	again	rejoice."
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	pure	laughter	and	love	and	bliss.	Then	wisdom	comes
on	its	own.	It	does	not	come	from	the	outside,	 it	grows	within	you.	When	you
are	dancing	and	singing	with	joy,	with	deep	acceptability	of	yourself	as	you	are,
wisdom	starts	 happening.	You	have	 a	 clarity,	 an	unconfused	 clarity,	 you	 attain
insight	into	things.	Then	you	know	on	your	own	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong,
what	is	essential	and	what	is	non-essential.	And	the	moment	you	know	on	your
own,	you	cannot	do	the	wrong.
The	 non-essential	 starts	 withering	 away	 and	 the	 essential	 becomes	 more	 and
more	 settled	 in	you.	That's	what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about,	becoming	centred	 in	 the
essence.
(It	 might	 be	 just	 a	 spark	 but	 we	 all	 have	 the	 potential	 to	 love,	 Osho	 told	 a
Japanese	woman,	an	antique	dealer.)
Right	now	if	you	look	inwards	there	will	be	only	darkness.	If	you	start	becoming
more	and	more	loving	you	are	in	for	a	great	surprise:	in	moments	of	deep	love	if
you	look	in	you	will	find	light.	When	one	is	really	and	totally	in	love,	one	can	go
on	searching	inside	and	one	will	not	find	any	darkness	anywhere.
Hence	when	Buddha	says	"Look	within	--	there	is	light,"	and	we	try	to	look,	but
we	don't	find	light,	we	start	thinking	that	he	must	be	crazy,	because	millions	of
people	agree	with	you	that	there	is	no	light,	only	darkness.	Only	very	few	people
--	a	Jesus,	a	Buddha,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Rinzai	--	very	few	people	have	disagreed	with
the	majority.	Of	course	they	are	so	few	that	we	can	easily	ignore	them,	but	the
truth	is	with	those	few	people.
This	 is	my	 experience	 too:	when	 you	 are	 full	 of	 love	 there	 is	 no	 darkness.	 If
there	is	darkness	that	shows	only	one	thing,	you	have	not	yet	been	able	to	grow
your	love.
Love	more	and	more,	love	for	love's	sake.	Love	without	any	demand,	just	enjoy
loving	itself,	as	an	end	unto	itself,	and	the	time	is	not	very	far	away	when	you
will	 see	 the	 light.	 The	moment	 your	 love	 has	 become	 a	 fire	within	 you,	 your
whole	being	becomes	a	 flame.	Then	wherever	you	are	 there	 is	 light.	Then	not
only	from	within	but	from	without	also	darkness	disappears.
The	 last	 words	 of	 Buddha	 on	 earth	 were	 "Be	 a	 light	 unto	 yourself."	 And
Buddhists	have	been	trying	to	be	light	unto	themselves	without	love,	hence	they
have	failed.
The	secret	of	life,	the	secret	of	light,	is	in	love.	Love	is	the	key.
(Meditation	 is	spiritual	spring-cleaning	he	 told	a	cook	from	Japan.)	Meditation
simply	 means	 becoming	 empty	 of	 all	 the	 contents	 of	 mind:	 memory,
imagination,	 thoughts,	desires,	expectations,	projections,	moods.	One	has	 to	go
on	emptying	oneself	of	all	the	content.	The	greatest	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
day	in	life	is	when	you	cannot	find	anything	in	you	to	throw	out	--	all	has	been
thrown	 out	 --	 when	 there	 is	 only	 pure	 emptiness.	 In	 that	 emptiness	 you	 find
yourself,	in	that	emptiness	you	find	your	pure	consciousness.
That	 emptiness	 is	 empty	 only	 as	 far	 as	 mind	 is	 concerned,	 otherwise	 it	 is
overflowing,	 overfull;	 it	 is	 full	 of	 being	 --	 empty	 of	 mind	 but	 full	 of
consciousness.	 So	 don't	 be	 afraid	 of	 the	 word	 "empty",	 it	 is	 not	 negative.	 It
negates	 only	 the	 unnecessary	 luggage	 which	 is	 of	 no	 use	 and	 which	 you	 are
carrying	just	from	old	habit,	which	does	not	help	but	only	hinders,	which	is	just
a	weight,	a	mountainous	weight.
Once	it	is	removed	you	are	free	from	all	boundaries,	you	become	as	infinite	as
the	sky.	That	experience	is	the	experience	of	god	or	Buddhahood	or	whatsoever
word	one	likes.	Call	it	dhamma,	call	it	tao,	call	it	truth,	call	it	nirvana	--	they	all
mean	the	same	thing.
(Meditate	then	decorate	your	place	with	bliss	and	you've	made	a	space	that	god
simply	can't	resist.	Osho	was	addressing	the	third	member	of	the	Japanese	trio.)
People	who	are	living	in	misery,	living	a	life	like	a	desert,	cannot	hope	that	god
will	become	a	guest	in	their	being	--	it	is	impossible.	We	have	to	create	the	right
situation	for	truth	to	happen	to	us;	we	have	to	deserve	it,	we	have	to	be	worthy	of
it.	And	bliss	makes	one	worthy,	makes	one	attuned.	It	creates	the	right	situation.
Bliss	is	like	spring:	suddenly	all	the	trees	start	blooming,	life	takes	on	colors,	it
becomes	all-colorful.	I	have	chosen	orange	for	my	sannyasins	because	in	India
orange	 is	 the	 color	 of	 spring,	 because	 so	 many	 flowers	 of	 different	 shades
suddenly	 blossom.	 Out	 of	 nowhere	 they	 appear;	 when	 the	 climate	 is	 ready,
receptive,	they	come.	Exactly	like	that	god	comes,	truth	comes.
Just	create	the	right	climate.	Bliss	is	the	name	of	that	climate.
Meditation	helps	you	to	remove	all	the	layers	of	dust	that	have	gathered	on	the
mirror	 of	 your	 consciousness.	 It	 removes	 all	 the	 clouds,	 the	 sun	 starts	 shining
forth	and	there	is	great	clarity,	transparency.
You	can	see	through	and	through	without	any	barrier,	without	any	screen,	with
no	thought	interfering;	you	can	just	see.	In	that	seeing	bliss	becomes	very	clear,
so	clear	that	the	distance	starts	disappearing.	The	very	clarity	brings	it	closer	and
closer	to	you.
When	you	are	absolutely	clear	bliss	is	not	outside,	it	is	your	innermost	core	The
pilgrim	itself	is	the	goal,	the	seeker	is	the	sought,	but	because	we	are	confused
we	 go	 on	 searching	 for	 it	 somewhere	 else	 and	 of	 course	 we	 cannot	 find	 it
anywhere	else.
God	is	hiding	within	you,	he	is	waiting	there.	We	rush	everywhere	and	he	goes
on	giggling	within	you,	 laughing	at	 the	whole	 ridiculousness	of	 it.	He	goes	on
asking,	"Where	are	you	going?	What	are	you	doing?"
But	you	are	in	such	a	hurry	--	who	bothers	to	listen	to	the	innermost	core?	You
are	in	such	a	noise,	your	head	is	such	a	marketplace,	that	that	still,	small	voice
gets	 lost.	But	god	has	 infinite	patience;	he	goes	on	calling	you	forth	again	and
again.	He	goes	on	waiting	for	you:	some	day,	in	some	right	moment,	there	will
be	a	clarity	and	you	may	be	able	to	hear,	you	may	not	be	noisy.
All	 that	 I	 can	 do	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 become	 less	 noisy,	 more	 silent,	 less
confused,	more	clear.	I	don't	give	you	any	ideology	--	I	have	none,	I	don't	teach
any	theology	--	I	have	none.
My	whole	effort	is	to	help	you	to	get	rid	of	all	theology,	ideology,	philosophy,	to
get	rid	of	thinking	as	such,	because	thinking	is	just	smoke	and	in	that	smoke	you
cannot	see.	It	is	like	mist	surrounding	you.	You	cannot	see	even	your	own	hands,
you	cannot	even	see	your	own	self.	What	else	can	you	hope	to	see?	It	keeps	you
blind.
Meditation	simply	helps	you	to	become	clear,	helps	you	to	open	your	eyes,	helps
you	 to	 see	 things	 as	 they	 are	 --	 and	 immediately	 the	 miracle:	 bliss	 goes	 on
coming	closer	and	closer	and	closer,	and	the	moment	you	are	absolutely	clear,	it
is	within	you.
The	 day	 Bodhidharma	 became	 enlightened	 he	 laughed	 and	 for	 seven	 days	 he
could	not	stop	laughing.
His	 friends	 and	 colleagues	 who	were	 also	meditating	with	 him	 started	 asking
him,	"Are	you	mad	or	something?	What	has	gone	wrong?"	And	he	said,	"For	the
first	time	something	has	gone	right	and	I	am	laughing	because	of	how	ridiculous
it	appears!	 I	was	searching	 for	 something	which	 I	already	have	within	me	and
which	has	always	been	within	me.	And	for	millions	of	lives	I	have	searched	for
it	everywhere."
It	is	within	you!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009175
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	bear	is	a	symbol	of	resurrection,	and	meditation	begins	in	courage	and	ends
in	 resurrection.	 The	 coward	 cannot	 meditate	 because	 the	 first	 requirement	 of
meditation	is	to	be	absolutely	alone.	Not	that	one	has	to	go	to	the	mountains	--
that	is	not	real	aloneness.	One	has	to	go	inwards;	it	is	not	an	outward	journey	at
all.	But	to	go	in	means	to	leave	everybody	out.	You	cannot	be	accompanied	by
your	 friends,	by	your	beloved;	nobody	can	go	with	you.	And	 that	creates	 fear,
hence	very	few	people	ever	try	to	go	in.
Everybody	is	interested	in	travelling,	people	are	even	interested	in	going	to	the
moon	where	nothing	is	to	be	found.	But	the	inner	journey	which	can	give	you	a
new	 life,	 a	 resurrection,	 is	 not	 even	 attempted	by	millions	 --	 not	 even	 thought
about,	not	even	dreamt	about,	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	needs	guts,	courage.
You	will	be	all	alone,	absolutely	alone.	The	whole	world	will	disappear	as	if	 it
exists	not.	The	deeper	you	go,	 the	more	 illusory	 the	world	becomes,	 as	 if	you
had	seen	it	in	a	dream	and	it	is	no	more.	You	are	so	alone	that	nobody	else	exists.
But	this	is	a	basic	requirement	to	be	fulfilled.
Courage	is	the	foundation	of	all	religious	growth,	of	all	spiritual	growth.	And	if
one	 is	 courageous	 enough,	 then	 of	 course	 one	 can	 have	 infinite	 bliss,	 one	 can
have	absolute	freedom,	one	can	have	divine	life.
That	 is	 resurrection:	 dying	 to	 the	 old	 pattern,	 the	 old	 gestalt,	 the	 old	 you,	 and
beginning	anew.	It	is	a	rebirth.
Sannyas	is	the	whole	process	of	rebirthing.
(The	pointer	in	Prem	Wolfgang's	name	was	that	love	takes	guts!)
...	because	you	can	love	only	if	you	are	ready	to	drop	the	ego	--	and	that	is	the
hardest	 thing	 in	 life	 to	do,	 the	most	 difficult	 thing;.	One	 can	 renounce	money,
family,	power,	prestige,	everything,	but	when	it	comes	to	renouncing;	the	ego	it
becomes	almost	 impossible	 --	 -not	 impossible,	but	almost	 impossible.	One	can
renounce	 money	 because	 the	 ego	 can	 en	 joy	 it:	 "Look	 how	 much	 I	 have
renounced!"	 You	 can	 renounce	 the	 family,	 the	 society;	 you	 can	 go	 to	 the
mountains	or	to	a	monastery,	and	the	ego	will	be	going	with	you,	rejoicing	that
"I	am	not	an	ordinary	person	--	am	a	holy	man!"
But	when	it	comes	 to	renouncing	 the	ego,	 the	ego	resists.	 It	gives	you	a	 tough
fight,	a	tough	time.	You	push	it	out	from	one	side,	it	comes	back	in	from	another
side.	You	throw	it	out	from	the	front	door,	it	comes	in	from	the'	back	door.	You
try	 to	 be	 humble,	 it	 enters	 your	 humility;	 it	 starts	 bragging	 about	 humility.	 It
says,	"Look!	There	is	nobody	more	humble	than	me!"	Its	names	are	very	subtle.
One	needs	courage	because	it	is	almost	like	dying.	It	is	a	death	in	a	way,	because
we	have	lived	with	the	ego,	we	have	become	so	identified	with	it	--	there	is	not
even	an	inch's	difference.	It	is	not	like	taking	your	clothes	off,	it	is	like	peeling
your	skin	--	it	hurts.	Hence	courage	is	needed,	clarity	is	needed,	understanding	is
needed,	 awareness	 is	 needed,	 and	 tremendous	 love	 is	 needed,	 trust	 is	 needed.
Unless	you	know	what	love	is	you	will	not	be	able	to	drop	the	ego.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	many	so-called	saints	have	failed	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	tried	to	drop
the	ego	but	 they	never	 tried	simultaneously	 to	grow	 towards	 love.	Then	where
will	your	energy	go?	If	you	drop	the	ego,	great	energy	is	released,	and	if	you	are
against	love	then	that	energy	will	go	on	again	creating	a	new	ego.
So	 these	 are	 two	 parts	 of	 the	 same	 process:	 drop	 the	 ego	 and	 put	 your	 total
energy	into	love	so	that	nothing	is	left	for	the	ego	to	survive	on,	so	there	is	no
nourishment	 left	 and	 it	dies	of	 starvation.	As	 the	ego	dies	your	 love	explodes.
And	to	know	love	is	to	know	god.	To	love	is	the	only	religion.	One	need	not	be	a
Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan,	one	only	needs	to	be	loving	and	one	is
religious.
(Mind	 is	 doubt	 --	 and	 doubt	 is	 a	 drag	 was	 the	 gist	 of	 Osho's	 next	 address.)
Doubts	exploit	you;	 they	are	parasites.	They	leave	you	utterly	exhausted,	 tired,
bored.	They	suck	all	juice	out	of	you,	they	leave	you	just	like	a	dry	bone.
That's	why	so	many	people	in	the	world	look	so	serious,	so	sad.	The	world	is	not
serious,	 the	world	 is	 rejoicing.	Look	at	 the	 trees	and	 the	birds	and	 the	animals
and	the	stars	and	the	rivers.	The	whole	existence	is	in	a	continuous	celebration
except	for	man,	because	only	man	can	live	in	the	heart	and	only	man	can	live	in
the	head.	The	choice	is	open.	It	is	not	open	for	anybody	else;	only	man	has	the
freedom	 to	 choose.	And	we	 have	 chosen	 the	mind	 because	mind	 helps	 in	 the
world	 to	 have	 more	 money,	 to	 have	 more	 power,	 more	 prestige;	 it	 helps	 in
fulfilling	your	so-called	desires	and	ambitions.	But	it	destroys	you.	It	destroys	all
that	is	worth	having:	it	destroys	your	very	soul.
The	heart	has	to	be	chosen.	Once	you	choose	the	heart,	loyalty,	trust,	love,	start
flowering.	One	wonders	where	all	 the	doubts	have	 suddenly	gone.	 Just	 as	you
bring	light	into	a	room	and	the	darkness	disappears,	the	same	happens	with	the
heart.	Once	you	start	choosing	 the	heart	 instead	of	 the	head,	all	doubts	and	all
darkness	disappears.	Suddenly	your	life	is	full	of	light,	full	of	love.	And	love	is	a
rejoicing.	Love	 is	 festive,	 it	 is	playful.	And	 I	call	 this	quality	of	 love,	of	 trust,
godly,	divine.
There	 is	 no	way	 to	 prove	 god	 as	 far	 as	mind	 is	 concerned.	No	 argument	 can
quench	the	infinitely	doubting	quality	of	the	mind;	there	is	no	way.	But	the	heart
never	 doubts;	 the	 heart	 simply	 knows,	 it	 knows	 intuitively	 --	 no	 proofs	 are
required.	God	 is	 self-evident	 for	 the	 heart,	 just	 as	 light	 is	 self-evident	 for	 the
person	who	has	eyes.	Only	the	blind	person	thinks	about	light	and	only	the	blind
person	think's	about	god.
The	 heart	 has	 its	 own	 eyes,	 its	 own	 approach	 towards	 reality	 --	 a	 direct,
immediate	connection	with	reality.
Be	in	the	heart,	live	through	the	heart.	Enhance	the	qualities	of	the	heart,	nourish
them.	Even	 if	you	have	much	to	 lose	 in	 the	world	don't	be	worried,	because	 if
you	 gain	 in	 the	 inner	world	 you	 are	 gaining	 something	 eternal.	 In	 the	 outside
world	everything	is	momentary.	You	may	have	money	today	you	may	not	have
money	 tomorrow.	 You	 may	 be	 powerful	 today,	 tomorrow	 you	 may	 not	 be
powerful.	You	may	be	a	president	today,	tomorrow	you	may	be	nobody.
Before	 the	communist	 revolution	 in	Russia	 the	prime	minister	of	Russia	was	a
man	called	Kerensky.
After	 the	 revolution	everybody	 forgot	about	him;	he	escaped	 from	Russia,	and
then	nobody	ever	thought	about	what	happened	to	him.	Just	a	few	years	ago	he
died	in	New	York	--	he	was	a	grocer!	For	all	those	fifty	years	he	was	living	there,
just	running	a	small	shop,	and	nobody	was	even	aware	that	he	was	once	one	of
the	most	powerful	men	in	the	world.
Everything	is	momentary	on	the	outside.	And	one	thing	is	certain,	that	death	will
take	everything	away,	and	death	is	inevitable.	But	in	the	inner	world	whatsoever
you	gain	is	going	to	be	with	you;	even	death	cannot	destroy	it.	You	will	go	on
carrying	 it	 with	 you.	 The	 body	 will	 be	 consumed	 by	 death,	 the	 head	 will	 be
consumed	by	death,	but	your	love,	your	joy,	your	truth,	will	go	with	you.	That	is
the	real	treasure.
(My	religion	is	bliss,	Osho	told	Anand	Dharma,	and	if	it	has	any	commandment
it	is	to	celebrate	as	many	moments	of	your	life	as	you	possibly	can.)
Don't	think	that	a	few	things	are	mundane	and	a	few	other	things	are	sacred.	For
the	man	who	 knows	 how	 to	 rejoice	 everything	 is	 sacred.	There	 is	 no	 division
between	the	world	and	god	--	it	is	all	divine.
Perhaps	the	world	is	manifest	god	and	god	is	 the	unmanifest	world.	And	when
one	rejoices,	why	make	any	difference	between	the	manifest	and	the	unmanifest?
The	flower	is	the	manifest	seed	and	the	seed	is	the	unmanifest	flower	--	they	are
one.	 So	 is	 this	world	 and	 that,	 this	 shore	 and	 that.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 divide
materialism	and	spiritualism	--	they	are	all	together.
So	 rejoice	 in	 the	 smallest	 things:	 taking	 a	 shower	 or	 drinking	 tea.	Don't	make
any	 difference.	 To	 the	 man	 who	 knows	 how	 to	 be	 blissful	 drinking	 tea	 is	 as
sacred	as	any	prayer	can	be,	his	sleep	is	as	sacred	as	any	religious	activity.
Cheerfulness	 brings	 a	 new	 vision,	 a	 new	 perspective.	 It	 transforms	 the	 whole
world.	Then	chopping	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
wood	and	carrying	water	from	the	well	is	as	beautiful	as	the	greatest	creativity.
And	 this	 is	 the	 magic	 of	 sannyas,	 to	 transform	 the	 ordinary	 into	 the
extraordinary.	The	secret	lies	in	this	small	word,	"bliss".
So	you	have	to	enquire	deeply	into	the	world	of	bliss,	and	not	only	enquire	but
start	living	it,	so	that	for	twenty	--	four	hours	round	the	clock	whatsoever	you	are
doing	becomes	religious.	If	you	are	sad	you	miss	the	point.	So	don't	be	sad	and
serious.	Laughing,	 dancing	 singing	 live	your	 life	 in	 a	very	 simple	 and	humble
way,	without	any	desire	to	improve,	to	attain	something	to	be	ambitious,	because
life	 is	so	beautiful	 in	 its	ordinariness	 that	any	 improvement	 is	going	 to	destroy
that	beauty.
(The	birds	 and	 the	bees	 can	 teach	us	 a	 few	 things,	he	went	on	 to	 tell	 the	next
sannyasin.)	 Learn	 from	 the	 birds	 their	 song,	 learn	 from	 the	 trees	 their	 dance,
learn	from	the	rivers	their	music.	And	once	you	open	up	you	will	be	surprised,
the	whole	existence	is	such	a	poetic	phenomenon!
One	need	not	enquire	into	the	meaning	of	it	all;	then	it	becomes	a	philosophical
enquiry.	 The	moment	 you	 ask,	 "What	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 this?"	 you	 have	 lost
track	of	poetry.	The	moment	you	start	dancing	with	a	tree	without	asking	what	is
the	meaning	of	 this	 swaying	 tree	 in	 the	wind?"	 you	 are	 being	poetic.	And	 the
miracle,	the	miracle	of	miracles,	is	that	the	person	who	starts	thinking	"What	is
the	meaning	of	it	all?"	will	never	find	the	meaning,	and	the	person	who	does	not
care	about	the	meaning	immediately	finds	it.	Dance	with	the	trees,	sing	with	the
birds,	swim	in	the	ocean,	and	you	will	find	the	meaning	--	without	seeking	it.
Just	become	part	of	this	beautiful	existence.
Sing	your	song,	because	everybody	has	come	with	a	song	in	the	heart	and	unless
you	sing	it	vou	will	remain	unfulfilled.	You	have	to	do	your	thing	--	that's	what	I
mean	 by	 singing	 your	 song.	Be	 creative,	 in	whatsoever	way	 it	 is.	Whatsoever
you	 feel	 like	 doing,	 do	 it!	 Don't	 be	 bothered	 about	 what	 others	 say;	 that	 is
irrelevant.	Insist	that	this	is	what	you	want	to	do	and	this	is	what	you	are	going
to	do,	irrespective	of	all	the	consequences.	Don't	compromise.
The	poet	is	really	a	rebel,	he	never	compromises.	If	he	compromises	he	is	not	a
poet,	he	is	a	businessman.	And	if	you	don't	compromise	your	love	will	grow	in
leaps	and	bounds.	Sing	your	song	and	you	will	find	love	coming,	arriving	from
some	 hidden	 sources	 within	 you.	 It	 will	 fill	 you;	 overfill	 you!	 It	 will	 start
overflowing	you;	it	will	start	reaching	others.
That's	how	I	have	reached	millions	of	people.	I	never	go	anywhere.	I	simply	go
on	sitting	in	my	chair!
Buddha	 at	 least	 travelled	 from	 one	 village	 to	 another	 for	 forty-two	 years.
Mahavir	travelled,	Jesus	travelled.
I	may	be	the	first	man	who	simply	sits	in	his	chair	in	his	room,	never	even	going
outside!	 But	 my	 song	 is	 reaching	 people,	 without	 any	 effort	 it	 is	 reaching
millions.	You	just	have	to	be	loving,	and	then	you	have	such	infinite	energy	that
it	is	bound	to	affect	the	whole	quality	of	existence.
But	insist	on	one	thing	and	that	is,	"I	have	to	be	myself."	I	teach	my	sannyasins:
be	 yourself.	Never	 compromise,	 don't	 imitate	 --	 sing	 your	 song.	And	you	will
find	love	and	you	will	find	bliss,	and	ultimately	you	will	find	truth	and	god.
(The	natural	spring	of	wisdom	can	only	flow	when	it	is	unimpeded	by	the	rocks
of	knowledge,	Osho	explained.)
Everybody	 brings	 wisdom	 with	 him,	 but	 we	 become	 overburdened	 with
knowledge	 that	others	are	very	eager	 to	 impose	upon	us.	Parents,	 teachers,	 the
priests,	 the	politicians...	 everybody	 is	 eager	 to	 impose	his	knowledge	upon	 the
child,	 and	 they	 destroy	 the	 wisdom	 of	 the	 child.	 The	 wisdom	 becomes	 so
burdened	with	stupid	knowledge	--	with	geography	and	with	history	which	are
sheer	nonsense	--	and	with	scriptures.
The	Bible	and	the	Koran	and	the	Gita...	if	they	are	not	your	own	experience	they
only	 burden	 you.	 They	 can	 burden	 you	 so	much	 that	 you	 stop	moving	 --	 the
burden	can	be	mountainous.	And	as	you	grow	in	age,	more	and	more	knowledge
goes	on	accumulating.
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	get	rid	of	knowledge,	because	wisdom	is	your	very
nature.	If	you	can	get	rid	of	knowledge	you	will	be	surprised:	underneath	all	this
rubbish	there	is	a	diamond	which	you	have	brought	with	you,	which	has	not	to
be	given	to	you.	It	is	already	there,	it	has	to	be	brought	out.
That's	 exactly	 the	meaning	 of	 the	word	 'education':	 to	 draw	out.	But	what	 the
educationalists	 have	 been	 doing	 for	 centuries	 is	 just	 the	 opposite;	 it	 is
miseducation,	it	is	not	education.	They	are	not	drawing	out	your	nature,	they	are
stuffing	something	in	you	from	the	outside,	 they	are	forcing	you	to	swallow	it.
And	of	course	they	are	very	clever	in	forcing	you.	They	punish	you,	they	reward
you,	they	manipulate	you	in	every	possible	way.	And	the	child	is	really	innocent.
He	 starts	 doing	what	 he	 is	 told	 to	 do,	 and	 by	 the	 time	 he	 is	 capable	 of	 doing
something	on	his	own,	he	is	so	overburdened	that	he	completely	forgets	that	he
had	an	insight	of	his	own.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Wisdom	means	 your	 own	 insight.	 It	 has	 not	 to	 be	 taught	 to	 you,	 it	 needs	 no
tuition.	That's	why	we	call	it	intuition.	It	is	inner,	it	is	already	a	given	fact;	it	is	a
gift	from	God.
So	drop	all	knowledge	and	search	within	yourself	for	your	intrinsic	nature.	And
that's	what	wisdom	 is.	 It	 is	very	 innocent.	 It	gives	you	clarity,	 transparency;	 it
makes	you	more	and	more	aware	about	yourself,	about	others.	It	awakens	you.	It
creates	 an	 inner	 light.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 that	 light	 clear,	 unburdened,
unclouded,	your	life	starts	moving	in	the	right	direction.	You	need	not	force	it	to
move	 in	any	direction,	 it	 starts	moving	of	 its	own	accord.	You	have	 found	 the
key	--	it	is	hidden	in	you.
The	function	of	the	master	is	not	to	teach	you	anything,	not	to	help	you	to	learn
something,	but	 just	 the	opposite:	 to	help	you	unlearn	so	that	you	can	find	your
own	source.
(You	 can	 get	 to	 know	 god	 through	 prayer	 --	 but	 that's	 a	 somewhat
unsophisticated	way	 to	 get	 acquainted,	Osho	 told	 the	 last	 initiate,	 a	man	 from
Denmark.)	 Prayer	 is	 for	 immature	 persons,	 for	 childish	 persons,	 for	 retarded
people,	 because	 prayer	means	 hypothesising	 a	 god	 outside	 and	 talking	 to	 that
god	 and	 shouting	 and	 telling	 him,	 "I	 am	 miserable	 and	 you	 are	 great"	 and
praising	him.	The	whole	thing	is	childish	because	you	have	first	projected	a	god
--	 that	 god	 is	 your	 creation.	 Hence	 the	 Hindu	 has	 his	 own	 projection,	 the
Mohammedan	has	his	own,	the	Christian	has	his	own.
There	are	three	hundred	religions	in	the	world	and	at	least	three	thousand	sects
of	those	religions,	so	there	are	at	least	three	thousand	concepts	about	god.	God	is
one	--	how	can	there	be	three	thousand	concepts?	They	are	our	projections.	First
we	create	a	god,	an	idea,	a	dream,	and	then	we	start	talking	to	that	dream.	It	is
almost	like	auto-hypnosis:	you	are	hypnotising	yourself	by	your	own	words,	and
nobody	answers.	But	one	can	befool	oneself	totally.
It	is	a	very	childish	approach.	That's	why	we	call	god	the	father	because	the	child
needs	a	father;	or	we	call	god	the	mother	because	the	child	needs	a	mother.
Gautam	the	Buddha	says	there	is	no	god	forget	all	about	it.	In	fact	he	is	saying
prayer	 is	 not	 for	 the	 grown-up	 people	 it	 is	 not	 for	mature	 people.	 For	mature
people	meditation	is	the	way.	Meditation	means	no	hypothesising	about	god	on
the	 outside.	 Meditation	 simply	 means	 becoming	 silent	 a	 centering	 becoming
rooted	in	your	very	being.
And	in	that	rootedness	for	the	first	time	you	start	finding	a	new	quality.	That	new
quality	can	be	called	godliness	--	not	god	but	godliness.	Because	it	is	something
which	vou	have	never	known	some	new	name	has	to	be	given	to	it	--	call	it	truth,
liberation,	 freedom.	 It	 is	 such	 a	 transcendental	 quality,	 that	 "godliness"	 is	 a
perfectly	beautiful	word	for	it.	But	you	won't	find	any	god,	not	some	ancient,	old
man	sitting	somewhere	above	the	clouds.	That	is	very	childish.
Carl	Gustav	Jung	has	written	in	his	memoirs,	"Whenever	I	think	of	God	sitting
above	 the	 clouds	 I	 am	 reminded	 of	 my	 own	 childhood	 ideas"	 --	 because	 his
father	 was	 a	 priest	 so	 he	 had	 been	 continuously	 sermonising	 about	 god	 in
heaven.	 And	 the	 child	 was	 worried	 that	 if	 that	 god	 suddenly	 starts	 pissing
then?...
A	child	is	a	child!	Or	he	defecates?	So	Carl	Gustav	Jung	says	"I	used	to	dream
that	he	was	pissing	and	the	whole	world	was	drowned	in	his	piss!	I	would	come
out	of	my	dreams	so	afraid	and	scared.	"What	kind	of	god	is	this	sitting	there?
Sooner	or	later	he	will	piss!	How	long	can	he	control	it?	Unless	he	is	dead...	then
that	is	another	thing.
But	 the	whole	 idea	 is	 childish,	 stupid.	There	 is	 no	god	 sitting	 somewhere,	 but
there	 is	 certainly	 godliness	 within	 you.	 That	 is	 found	 through	meditation,	 not
through	prayer.	And	if	you	find	your	godliness	 through	meditation,	 then	a	new
understanding	about	prayer	arises	too.	Then	prayer	is	not	praise	of	god,	praise	of
the	lord.	Then	prayer	is	just	a	thankfulness	towards	the	whole	existence	for	how
much	it	has	given	to	us.	It	is	gratitude.	Then	prayer	also	has	a	different	quality.
You	don't	 say	anything	you	simply	bow	down	to	 the	earth,	 to	existence,	 to	 the
sun,	 to	 the	 moon,	 to	 the	 mountains	 not	 towards	 somebody	 in	 particular,	 not
towards	 some	 person	 but	 just	 towards	 the	 whole.	 It	 is	 pure	 gratitude!	 Then
prayer	is	also	beautiful	--	but	that	prayer	is	known	only	by	those	who	have	found
godliness	through	meditation.
Otherwise	the	people	who	have	gathered	in	the	churches	and	the	temples	and	the
mosques	are	all	retarded	people...	retarded	people	go	there.	If	you	want	to	count
how	many	retarded	people	are	in	the	world	you	can	simply	go	into	the	temples
and	churches	and	the	mosques	and	just	count	and	you	will	find	the	right	people
there!
Psychologists	 say	 that	 the	 average	 mental	 age	 of	 humanity	 is	 twelve	 years.
Certainly	it	is	a	retarded	thing,	this	humanity	is	very	retarded.	A	person	may	be
eighty	 years	 old	 and	 his	mental	 age	 is	 twelve.	Of	 course	 his	 religions	 attitude
cannot	be	more	than	that	of	a	twelve-year	old.	His	approach	towards	life	will	be
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
childish.
I	 teach	 meditation,	 and	 then	 one	 day	 prayer	 is	 possible,	 but	 that	 is	 a	 totally
different	phenomenon.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	prayer	as	you	have	known	it	I
insist	on	meditation.	Once	 the	 flower	of	meditation	opens	 in	you	and	you	 feel
godliness,	you	experience	godliness,	then	there	is	a	natural	gratitude.	It	is	neither
Christian	 nor	 Hindu	 nor	 Mohammedan	 nor	 Buddhist,	 it	 is	 simply	 gratitude
towards	the	whole.	That	is	prayer.	It	is	the	fragrance	of	meditation.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009185
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	 began	 the	 evening	 by	 talking	 about	 bliss	 as	 a	 flowering	 of	 aloneness.)
Bliss	means	courage,	nothing	else.	It	 is	already	there	inside,	but	to	go	inside	is
not	 for	 the	 cowards	 because	 the	 coward	 always	wants	 company,	 a	 crowd.	He
feels	at	ease	with	the	crowd;	surrounded	by	people	he	feels	secure.	The	coward
is	 like	a	 sheep.	The	 sheep	 is	perfectly	happy	with	 the	crowd;	alone,	great	 fear
arises.
An	 inside	 journey	 is	 a	 journey	 towards	 absolute	 aloneness;	 you	 cannot	 take
anybody	there	with	you.
You	cannot	share	your	centre	with	anybody,	not	even	with	your	beloved.	It	is	not
in	 the	 nature	 of	 things;	 nothing	 can	 be	 done	 about	 it.	 It	 is	 easier	 to	 go	 to	 the
moon	because	you	can	have	company.	Even	if	you	don't	have	company	you	can
have	a	connection	with	 the	earth;	you	can	phone	 the	people	here.	You	can	get
directions	from	the	outside,	from	the	far	away	earth,	but	still	you	are	connected.
The	moment	you	go	 in,	 all	 connections	with	 the	outside	world	 are	broken;	 all
bridges	are	broken.	In	fact,	the	whole	world	disappears.
That's	why	the	mystics	have	called	the	world	illusory,	maya,	not	that	it	does	not
exist	but	for	the	meditator,	one	who	goes	in,	 it	 is	almost	as	if	 it	does	not	exist.
The	silence	is	so	profound;	no	noise	penetrates	it.	The	aloneness	is	so	deep	that
one	needs	guts.	But	out	of	that	aloneness	explodes	bliss.	Out	of	that	aloneness,
the	experience	of	god.	There	is	no	other	way;	there	has	never	been	any	and	there
is	never	going	to	be.
(Because	John	was	the	name	of	the	most	 loved	disciple	of	Jesus,	 the	name	has
that	connotation,	Osho	explained	to	a	Dutch	analyst.	And	then	he	described	the
three	different	kinds	of	people	who	seek	truth.)	One	is	the	student.	His	enquiry	is
mental,	of	 the	head,	 intellectual.	He	wants	to	gather	a	little	knowledge	of	what
truth	 is	 all	 about;	 his	 enquiry	 is	 superficial.	 The	 second	 category	 consists	 of
disciples.	Their	enquiry	is	of	the	heart,	not	of	the	head.	They	really	want	to	know
truth,	not	 just	knowledge	about	 truth;	 they	want	 to	experience	 it.	They	are	not
satisfied	with	mere	 knowledge,	 they	want	 an	 authentic	 experience.	 Hence	 the
disciple	moves	 on	 a	 different	 plane	 from	 the	 student,	 the	 scholar.	 The	 student
collects	information,	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
disciple	asks	for	transformation.
And	 the	 third	 category	 consists	 of	 the	 devotees.	 They	 are	 those	 to	 whom	 the
transformation	has	happened	,	who	have	come	to	experience,	to	taste,	who	have
found	a	glimpse	of	 truth.	The	disciple	 is	 still	 seeking,	 the	devotee	has	arrived.
That	is	the	third	category.
Only	 a	 disciple	 can	 become	 a	 devotee.	The	 student	 cannot	 become	 a	 devotee;
first	he	will	have	 to	become	a	disciple.	 If	 the	student	remains	a	student	for	his
whole	 life	 he	will	 be	missing	 the	whole	 point.	He	will	 talk	 about	 truth,	 about
love,	about	god,	about	meditation.	But	all	knowledge	 is	borrowed,	 it	 is	not	his
own	 experience.	 The	 disciple	 has	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 experience	 because	 he	moves
from	logic	to	love,	from	head	to	heart.	The	heart	is	closer	to	being.	The	student
is	in	the	head,	the	disciple	in	the	heart,	and	the	devotee	reaches	his	very	being.
But	nobody	can	bypass	disciplehood	--	it	is	a	must.
And	the	only	thing	that	can	make	you	really	a	disciple	and	ultimately	a	devotee
is	 meditation.	 One	 has	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 be	 silent,	 still,	 calm	 and	 quiet.	 The
moment	you	know	the	art	of	being	silent,	the	miracle	starts	happening.	You	start
becoming	a	beloved	disciple,	you	are	no	more	an	ordinary	disciple.	And	when
meditation	 is	 complete,	 entire,	 you	 are	 transformed	 into	 a	 devotee.	 Then	 the
whole	world	is	divine.	For	a	devotee	all	is	god;	except	for	god,	nothing	exists.
That	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.	One	may	come	here	as	a	student,	but	one	should	not
go	from	here	as	a	student.	If	one	goes	as	a	disciple	one	has	taken	a	great	jump.
And	if	you	are	a	disciple	then	it	is	not	very	difficult	to	be	a	devotee.	The	first	gap
is	bigger	--	from	the	student	to	the	disciple.	The	first	change	is	very	radical;	the
second	change	is	very	gradual.	It	comes	on	its	own,	of	its	own	accord;	you	need
not	strive	for	it.
The	 disciple	 one	 day	 naturally	 becomes	 a	 devotee,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 so	 with	 the
student.	The	 student	may	 remain	a	 student	 for	his	whole	 life.	The	pundits,	 the
scholars,	the	theologians,	the	professors,	the	philosophers	--
they	remain	only	students.
Sannyas	means	disciplehood,	and	sannyas	is	fulfilled	when	you	have	become	a
devotee.	When	 the	 trees	 and	 the	mountains	 and	 the	 sun	and	 the	moon	and	 the
stars,	all	represent	one	reality,	one	god,	you	have	come	home.
Pankaj	 means	 a	 lotus,	 and	 the	 lotus	 has	 always	 represented	 something	 of
tremendous	 value.	 Two	 things	 particularly	 have	 to	 be	 remembered.	 One:	 the
lotus	grows	out	of	mud	--	 the	most	beautiful	flower	grows	out	of	dirty	mud.	It
means	that	the	dirty	mud	contains	something	beautiful.	So	don't	reject	the	dirty
mud,	because	it	contains	lotuses.
One	has	to	know	the	art	of	how	to	grow	lotuses.	And	it	is	a	miracle,	one	cannot
believe	it!	If	one	has	not	seen	a	lotus	growing	out	of	mud	one	cannot	believe	it;
one	 cannot	 conceive	 that	 this	 beautiful	 flower,	 this	 delicate	 flower,	 with	 such
fragrance,	with	such	colour,	has	come	out	of	ordinary	mud.
Man	is	born	as	ordinary	mud,	but	man	contains	a	lotus	--	just	in	the	seed.	Man
has	not	to	be	rejected,	man	has	to	be	accepted	and	transformed.	The	world	has
not	to	be	denied,	because	it	contains	something	infinitely	beautiful.	It	 is	not	on
the	surface,	it	has	to	be	brought	to	the	surface.
Hence	 I	 am	not	 against	 anything:	 not	 against	 body,	 not	 against	 the	world,	 not
against	 the	 outside.	 I	 am	 not	 against	 anything,	 but	 I	 am	 for	 transforming
everything.	 Whatsoever	 god	 has	 given	 is	 something	 valuable;	 if	 we	 cannot
understand	its	value	it	is	our	fault,	our	limited	vision.
The	second	thing	to	be	remembered	about	the	lotus	is:	it	lives	in	the	water,	but
the	water	touches	it	not.
It	 has	 such	 velvety	 petals	 that	 even	 if	 dewdrops	 gather	 on	 those	 petals	 they
remain	separate.	That's	why	on	a	 lotus	petal	 the	dewdrop	 looks	so	beautiful,	 it
looks	like	a	pearl	because	the	lotus	remains	untouched.
That's	why	I	say	 it	precisely	defines	my	vision	of	sannyas.	A	sannyasin	has	 to
live	 in	 the	 world	 but	 has	 to	 remain	 untouched	 like	 a	 lotus.	 I	 am	 not	 for
renunciation,	 I	 don't	 teach	 escapism.	 I	 teach	 live	 in	 the	world	but	 don't	 let	 the
world	enter	you.	Be	in	the	world	but	don't	be	of	the	world.	Remain	aloof,	remain
cool,	remain	untouched.	And	then	the	world	has	much	to	teach	you.	The	world	is
a	device	of	god;	it	is	a	situation	in	which	to	grow	and	mature.	Those	who	escape
remain	retarded.
I	have	come	across	many	people	in	the	Himalayas	who	have	lived	the	life	of	an
escapist	 for	 their	whole	 life,	 for	 thirty	 years,	 forty	 years,	 fifty	 years.	But	 they
look	 retarded,	 they	 don't	 look	 intelligent;	 they	 don't	 have	 the	 sharpness.	 Their
sword	has	gathered	rust	because	they	escaped	from	the	challenges	of	life.
Live	in	life	--	all	those	challenges	are	good.	It	is	only	through	those	challenges
that	 one	 grows.	 Growth	 comes	 through	 the	 hard	 way.	 Never	 choose	 the	 easy
way,	otherwise	you	will	remain	immature.	Never	choose	the	short-cut,	otherwise
you	 will	 miss	 many	 scenes	 and	 scenery	 on	 the	 way.	 Live	 life	 in	 its	 totality,
intensely	but	with	awareness.	Awareness	becomes	like	a	velvety	coating	on	you
and	keeps	you	separate	from	the	world.	And	that	very	art	is	sannyas.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(The	 real	 Christian	 is	 Christ,	 Osho	 told	 a	 German	 psychologist.)	 Friedrich
Nietzsche	 has	 said	 that	 the	 first	 and	 the	 last	 Christian	 died	 on	 the	 cross	 two
thousand	years	before	--	the	first	and	the	last!	And	he	is	right.	He	was	a	madman,
but	about	many	things	his	insight	is	far	deeper	than	that	of	your	so-called	pope!.
Sometimes	 it	 happens	 that	mad	 people	 have	 greater	 insight	 than	 the	 so-called
sane	people	because	the	so-called	sane	are	not	really	sane.
Christians	are	not	really	interested	in	Christ,	neither	are	Buddhists	interested	in
Buddha,	 nor	 are	 the	Hindus	 really	 interested	 in	Krishna	 --	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a
question	of	worship.	Christ	is	not	Jesus'	name,	his	name	is	Jesus.	He	attained	to	a
certain	 peak	 of	 consciousness.	 That	 peak	 is	 known	 in	 the	 West	 as	 Christ-
consciousness,	in	the	East	we	call	it	Buddha-consciousness.	It	is	the	same,	it	is
the	same	peak.	There	are	different	languages	describing	the	same	peak.
One	 can	 be	 a	 Christian	 only	 if	 one	 attains	 Christ-consciousness,	 and	 that	 is
possible	through	meditation.
Not	 by	 reading	 the	 Bible,	 not	 by	 going	 to	 the	 church,	 not	 by	 following	 the
Christian	ritual,	not	by	believing	in	a	certain	dogma	and	creed,	but	by	purifying
your	consciousness,	dropping	all	that	is	unnecessary,	non-essential,	so	that	only
the	essential	remains	in	you.	The	moment	only	the	essential	remains	in	you	there
is	a	great	explosion	of	light.	And	that	experience	makes	one	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha
or	a	Jina	or	a	Krishna;	it	matters	not	what	word	is	used.
Never	be	bothered	with	words.	Remember	the	meaning	and	forget	the	words.
A	 man	 without	 love	 is	 like	 a	 flower	 without	 fragrance.	 A	 flower	 without
fragrance	is	not	of	much	value.
A	man	without	 love	 is	 also	 not	 of	 any	 value	 at	 all.	A	man	without	 love	 is	 an
empty	temple	--	god	is	missing.
Jesus	says	god	 is	 love.	 I	 say	 love	 is	god,	 I	make	 love	 far	more	 important	 than
god,	 because	when	 love	 comes	 god	 automatically	 happens.	 So	 one	 can	 ignore
god	 but	 one	 cannot	 ignore	 love.	 Love	 is	 the	 very	 bridge.	And	 by	 love	 I	 don't
mean	the	love	that	is	known	ordinarily	--	that	is	lust,	it	is	not	love.	It	is	desire,	it
is	not	love.	It	is	exploitation	of	the	other	as	a	means,	it	is	not	love.
Love	knows	no	 lust;	 it	 is	not	a	desire.	Love	 is	never	a	beggar.	Love	gives	and
never	asks	for	any	return.
Love	 gives	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 giving.	 Love	 shares	 one's	 bliss,	 because	 one
comes	 to	know	slowly	slowly	 that	 the	more	you	share	 it,	 the	more	 it	happens.
The	more	you	give,	the	more	you	have.
So	it	is	not	a	question	of	whom	to	love,	it	is	a	question	of	being	in	a	state	of	love,
unaddressed,	to	whomsoever	it	may	concern.	No	need	even	to	put	the	name	on
it.	Love	addressed	to	a	particular	person	becomes	limited,	narrow.	And	a	narrow
love	is	not	real	love;	it	becomes	crippled.	Love	is	so	vast,	you	cannot	narrow	it
down.
It	is	as	stupid	as	somebody	deciding	"Because	I	love	you,	I	will	breathe	only	in
your	presence.	So	when	you	are	not	there	I	will	not	breathe."
Then	 the	next	 time	will	never	happen,	 the	next	meeting	 is	 impossible,	because
that	man	will	be	dead!
Even	when	the	lover	is	not	there	or	the	beloved	is	not	there,	one	has	to	breathe.
Love	should	be	like	breathing.	It	should	not	be	a	relationship	but	like	breathing	-
-	natural.	So	whosoever	comes	to	you,	your	love	is	there	just	is	as	your	breathing
is	there.	If	you	pass	by	the	side	of	a	tree,	your	love	showers	on	the	tree.	You	say
hello	 to	 the	 tree	 --	you	can	even	shake	hands!	And	when	you	sit	on	a	 rock,	of
course	you	enquire	"How	are	you?"
A	lover	is	continuously	in	a	state	of	love	--	that's	what	I	mean	by	love.	Then	it
takes	you	by	and	by	towards	god.	The	ultimate	peak	of	love	is	god.	God	is	not	a
person,	it	is	the	ultimate	fragrance	of	love,	a	living	fragrance.
I	 like	 to	 use	 the	word	 "godliness"	 rather	 than	 "god",	 because	 god	 gives	 you	 a
sense	of	a	person.
Godliness	 is	 far	 better	 because	 it	 gives	 you	 only	 a	 sense	 of	 fragrance	 --	 a
presence	not	a	person.
Love,	 and	 love	unconditionally.	Love,	 and	 love	without	 asking	 for	 any	 return.
Love	as	an	end	unto	itself,	and	that	is	true	prayer.	And	love	the	whole	existence
without	any	discrimination,	without	any	choice.	Love	choicelessly,	and	then	the
day	is	not	far	away	when	you	will	become	aware	of	godliness	surrounding	you,
reaching	 you	 from	 every	 nook	 and	 corner	 of	 existence.	 You	will	 become	 fire
with	it,	aflame!
(And	then	to	Prem	Peter	Osho	said:	)
Love	is	the	rock	on	which	the	temple	of	life	can	be	built.	Without	love	all	houses
are	made	 on	 sands,	 shifting	 sands.	One	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 disillusioned	 sooner	 or
later,	one	is	bound	to	be	disappointed	because	the	whole	effort	can	collapse	any
moment.	You	 don't	 have	 a	 real	 foundation	 to	 your	 house.	 It	 is	more	 or	 less	 a
house	made	 of	 playing	 cards.	 It	 looks	 beautiful	 but	 just	 a	 little	 breeze	 and	 it
collapses.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Make	 your	 life	 rooted	 in	 love	 and	 then	 it	 never	 collapses.	 Love	 is	 the	 only
experience	that	defies	death,	that	knows	no	death.	A	man	of	love	is	unafraid	of
death	because	in	knowing	love	he	has	known	something	of	immortal	existence.
Tasting	love	he	has	tasted	something	of	eternity	and	he	knows	that	in	him	there
is	something	which	is	going	to	persist.	No	death	can	destroy	it,	no	fire	can	burn
it.	There	is	no	possibility	of	its	being	erased	from	existence.	The	certainty	is	so
deep,	so	self-evident,	that	it	needs	no	other	proof.	You	simply	know	it	is	so.
But	the	people	who	make	their	houses	without	the	foundation	of	love	are	simply
fools.	 Life	 will	 go	 on	 slipping	 out	 of	 their	 hands,	 and	 sooner	 or	 later	 death
knocks	on	the	door	and	they	will	not	have	any	shelter	against	death.	They	will
not	 know	what	 to	 do.	They	will	 not	 know	 that	 something	 in	 them	 is	 going	 to
survive	so	there	is	no	need	to	fear.
Love	makes	one	fearless,	and	fearlessness	is	a	great	achievement.	It	means	you
have	known	something	of	deathlessness.
(Love	 is	 virtue'	was	 the	meaning	 of	 her	 new	name,	 Prem	Sunito,	Osho	 told	 a
German	student.)	Lovelessness	is	the	only	vice,	the	only	sin;	all	other	sins	arise
out	 of	 it.	 They	 are	 simply	 branches,	 offshoots,	 leaves,	 foliage;	 the	 root	 is
lovelessness.	Adolf	Hitler,	Joseph	Stalin,	Mao	Tse	Tung	--	all	these	criminals	are
rooted	in	a	state	of	lovelessness.	They	cannot	love,	they	have	become	incapable
of	love.
The	person	who	loves	cannot	harm;	it	is	impossible	to	harm.	How	can	you	harm
when	 you	 love?	You	 cannot	 even	 imagine	 harming	 anybody.	 Love	 transforms
your	whole	life;	it	gives	you	a	new	character.	And	the	character	is	not	imposed,
it	comes	from	your	very	innermost	core.	It	is	not	like	morality;	morality	is	just
superficial.	Religiousness	comes	from	within	--	that	is	authentic	virtue.	First	the
centre	 becomes	 full	 of	 love,	 then	 the	 love	 starts	 spreading	 towards	 the
circumference.	That	 is	 your	 character.	And	when	 love	glows	 in	your	 acts	 they
are	virtuous.
So	I	teach	you	only	love,	not	morality,	because	my	observation	is	that	if	love	is
there	 one	 is	moral	 automatically,	 inevitably.	 And	 if	 one	 is	 not	 loving	 then	 all
morality	 is	 pseudo,	 bogus.	 It	 only	 creates	 hypocrites,	 it	 does	 not	 create	 real
sages.
Love	 cleanses	 you	 of	 all	 impurities	 --	 anger,	 jealousy,	 hatred,	 possessiveness,
domination.	All	trips	and	all	numbers	of	the	ego	simply	disappear	just	like	dust
disappears	when	you	 take	a	 shower.	Love	 is	 a	 shower	of	 the	 spirit:	 it	 cleanses
you.	It	makes	you	pure	like	a	small	child,	innocent.	And	out	of	that	innocence	is
beauty,	out	of	that	innocence	is	grace,	and	out	of	that	innocence	ultimately	is	the
experience	of	god.
We	 have	 to	 be	worthy	 to	 experience	 god.	We	 have	 to	 create	 a	 right	 situation,
only	then	can	we	invite	him	to	come	in.	Even	if	an	ordinary	guest	comes	to	your
house	 you	 clean	 the	 house,	 you	decorate	 the	 house,	 you	 arrange	 the	 furniture;
you	 make	 everything	 give	 a	 sense	 of	 welcome	 so	 the	 guest	 feels	 at	 home,
welcomed,	 loved.	And	when	we	 invite	 god	we	have	 to	 prepare	 our	 own	 inner
being	because	that	is	the	place	into	which	we	can	invite	him.
And	love	cleanses	 the	inner	world.	Love	is	alchemical,	 it	 transforms	your	very
chemistry.	 It	makes	you	a	new	person,	 it	gives	you	a	new	birth.	One	becomes
twice-born	through	love.
My	message	contains	only	one	single	word:	love.	So	if	by	becoming	a	sannyasin
you	become	more	loving,	that's	enough.	Then	everything	will	be	taken	care	of.
Jesus	says,	"Seek	ye	the	kingdom	of	god	and	all	else	shall	be	added	unto	you."
What	he	means	by	god	is	love.	Read,	"Seek	ye	the	kingdom	of	love	and	all	else
shall	be	added	unto	you."
(To	an	artist	from	Canada	Osho	gave	the	name,	Prem	Gatha	--	a	story	of	love.)
Shakespeare	 says	 about	 life:	 A	 tale	 told	 by	 an	 idiot,	 full	 of	 fury	 and	 noise,
signifying	 nothing.	And	 he	 is	 right	 as	 far	 as	 ninety-nine	 point	 nine	 percent	 of
people	are	concerned:	their	life	is	a	tale	told	by	an	idiot;	it	makes	no	sense	at	all.
The	 ordinary	 life	 of	 the	 majority	 makes	 no	 sense	 at	 all,	 it	 is	 utterly	 stupid.
Somehow	they	go	on	and	on	dragging	themselves,	but	it	is	not	life	because	there
is	no	dance.	They	are	only	dragging,	they	are	vegetating	--	it	is	not	real	life.
Real	 life	must	have	 the	quality	of	godliness,	 the	fragrance	of	 lore.	Love	has	 to
become	your	inner	story,	 then	it	 is	no	more	a	tale	told	by	an	idiot.	Then	it	 is	a
tale	told	by	a	Buddha,	full	of	dance	and	music!	Then	it	releases	the	imprisoned
splendour	in	you.	And	you	have	such	a	vast	sky	within,	far	more	beautiful	than
the	 outer	 sky	with	 all	 its	 stars	 and	moon	 and	 sun.	You	 have	 a	 far	 bigger	 sky
within	you,	far	more	beautiful.
Rabiya,	 one	 of	 the	 Sufi	mystics,	was	 sitting	 in	 her	 small	 cottage,	 and	 a	 guest
mystic,	Hasan,	was	also	staying	with	her.	It	was	early	morning	and	Hasan	went
out.	It	was	a	beautiful	dawn	and	the	sky	was	red	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	birds	were	singing	and	the	flowers	opening	and	the	trees	swaying	in	the	cool
morning	breeze.	He	was	so	thrilled	that	he	called	Rabiya,	"Rabiya,	what	are	you
doing	inside?	Come	out!	God	has	given	us	such	a	beautiful	morning	--	don't	miss
it!"
And	 Rabiya	 laughed.	 She	 was	 a	 very	 strange	 woman,	 of	 the	 same	 calibre	 as
Christ	and	Buddha.	Her	laughter	was	so	loud	that	Hasan	felt	a	little	shocked	--
why	was	she	laughing?	He	asked,	"Why	are	you	laughing?"
She	said,	"Hasan,	you	come	in	--	because	you	are	seeing	a	painting	of	god	and	I
am	seeing	god	himself!
Yes,	 the	painting	 is	 beautiful,	 but	who	cares	when	you	have	 found	 the	painter
himself?	You	come	in,	rather	than	calling	me	out!"
She	 transformed	 a	 small,	 ordinary	 statement	 into	 a	 tremendously	 significant
message.	Hasan	went	 in;	 he	 saw	Rabiya	 --	 she	was	 sitting	with	 closed	 eyes	 --
surrounded	by	such	a	beautiful	aura.	He	fell	at	her	feet	and	said,	"Forgive	me!	It
was	 wrong	 on	 my	 part	 to	 call	 you	 out.	 I	 was	 not	 aware.	 I	 am	 not	 really	 a
meditator,"	he	said.	"I	have	 learned	much	from	the	scriptures	and	people	 think
that	I	am	a	great	mystic,	but	I	am	only	a	scholar.	Teach	me	the	art	of	going	in.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	about,	the	art	of	coming	in.	And	then	the	whole	story
changes.	It	is	no	more	full	of	noise	and	fury.	The	same	energy	starts	becoming	a
song,	a	tremendously	beautiful	music.	The	same	energy	that	was	sheer	nonsense
starts	becoming	a	profound	meaningfulness.	And	 the	same	 idiot	 is	no	more	an
idiot.	All	his	idiocy	is	gone	and	his	Buddhahood	explodes.	Each	idiot	is	carrying
a	Buddha	within	his	womb,	and	the	Buddha	has	to	be	released.
The	 head	 is	 always	 a	 failure;	 it	 cannot	 be	 victorious.	 The	 heart	 is	 always
victorious;	it	can	never	fail.
Love	never	fails;	logic	always	fails	because	logic	is	rooted	in	doubt.	How	can	it
succeed?	 Its	 very	 foundation	 is	 doubt.	And	 love	 is	 rooted	 in	 trust.	How	can	 it
fail?	There	is	no	possibility.
In	fact,	love	has	such	a	magical	quality	that	you	may	fail	in	the	eyes	of	the	world
but	 you	 are	never	 a	 failure	 as	 far	 as	 you	 are	 concerned	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	only
thing	 to	 be	 considered.	 Logic	 may	 succeed	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	 world	 --	 it	 is
cunning.	It	succeeds	politically;	 it	succeeds	as	far	as	prestige,	power,	money	is
concerned.	But	inside	you	know	that	you	have	failed.	Your	life	is	empty,	there	is
no	meaning	in	it.
And	doubt	goes	on	creating	darkness.	Doubt	is	another	name	for	darkness,	and
trust	 another	 name	 for	 light.	 And	 these	 are	 the	 two	 alternatives	 available	 for
every	person:	the	head	and	the	heart.	The	whole	humanity	can	be	divided	in	two
categories,	the	heads	and	the	hearts.	But	we	don't	divine	humanity	that	way,	we
divide	 humanity	 into	 hand&	and	 heads.	The	 labourer	 is	 called	 a	 hand	 and	 the
boss	is	called	the	head.	The	person	who	works	is	a	hand	and	the	person	who	is
cunning	enough	not	to	work	is	the	head.	But	there	is	no	category	for	the	heart	at
all.	This	is	a	strange	categorisation.	The	real	division	is	between	the	heads	and
the	hearts.
But	I	can	understand	why	the	heart	has	been	ignored	--	there	are	so	few	people
who	live	in	the	heart.
They	are	negligible,	they	are	exceptional,	they	can	be	ignored.	They	only	prove
the	rule;	 they	need	not	be	counted.	A	Buddha,	a	Christ,	a	Krishna	--	 they	need
not	be	counted.	We	can	ignore	them;	they	don't	consist	of	the	vast	humanity,	they
are	 not	 part	 of	 us.	We	 have	managed	 to	 cut	 them	 off	 from	 humanity.	We	 call
them	avataras,	 teerthankaras,	 descendants	 of	 god,	 sons	of	 gods,	messengers	 of
god,	but	not	human	beings.
And	they	are	really	human	beings	--	nobody	else	is!	But	to	save	our	ego,	we	say,
"We	are	human	beings;	 they	are	 far	 above	us,	 transcendental.	We	can	worship
them,	that's	okay,	but	we	cannot	live	according	to	them.	That	is	impossible."
I	 say	 to	 you,	 worship	 is	 stupid.	 Live	 like	 a	 Buddha	 --	 that	 is	 the	 only	 true
worship.	Live	like	a	Christ.
And	 you	 have	 every	 potential	 to	 be	 a	 Christ	 or	 a	 Buddha;	 you	 are	 not	 less
endowed.	You	have	a	heart,	but	it	is	not	functioning.	It	is	as	if	you	have	an	air-
conditioner	in	the	room	and	it	is	not	functioning,	and	you	are	perspiring	and	you
are	getting	hot	and	you	are	freaking	out!	And	it	is	just	that	you	don't	know	how
to	put	the	conditioner	on,	and	all	these	troubles	will	disappear.
The	heart	 is	 there,	 a	 given	 fact,	 but	 it	 is	 absolutely	 non-functioning.	We	 have
forgotten	how	to	put	it	on.
We	have	 forgotten	 two	 things:	we	don't	know	how	 to	put	 the	head	off	 and	we
don't	know	how	to	put	 the	heart	on.	So	 the	head	goes	on	continuously,	day	 in,
day	 out,	 year	 in,	 year	 out.	 Even	 in	 the	 night	 when	 you	 are	 asleep	 it	 goes	 on
chattering.	It	does	not	take	any	note	of	whether	you	are	awake	or	asleep,	whether
you	are	alive	or	dead	--	it	does	not	bother!
Even	people	in	their	graves	must	be	thinking,	still	thinking,	planning	what	they
have	 to	 do	 tomorrow.	 I	 cannot	 imagine	 that	 they	 have	 stopped	 --	 such	 a	 long
habit!	Habits	don't	die	so	easily.	You	can	die,	that's	another	matter,	but	the	habits
persist	and	many	things	continue.	So	I	think	the	head	must	be	continuing.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Nails	go	on	growing	 in	 the	grave	and	hair	goes	on	growing	--	old	habits!	So	I
think	the	head	must	continue	dreaming,	planning,	imagining,	having	memories.
We	have	completely	forgotten	how	to	put	it	off.	And	the	miracle	is	that	the	same
switch	which	puts	the	head	off,	puts	the	heart	on.	The	moment	you	put	the	head
off,	the	heart	goes	on.	There	are	not	two	switches!
And	this	is	the	whole	of	meditation:	to	help	you	find	the	switch,	so	you	can	put
the	head	off.	And	 then	 immediately	you	will	 start	having	a	different	humming
sound,	a	different	functioning.	A	different	dimension	opens	up.
The	heart	 can	make	you	victorious.	The	heart	 can	make	you	 a	master	 of	 your
own	being.	It	can	make	you	blissful,	peaceful,	divine.
(Bliss	is	inside	us,	Osho	reiterated	in	his	last	address,	which	was	to	an	Indian	ex-
police	 inspector.	 Turn	 in,	 he	 told	 him,	 and	 you	 will	 discover	 a	 whole	 new
perspective	 to	 life.)	 Then	 it	 is	 no	more	 confined	 by	 birth	 and	 death.	 Then	we
know	it	has	been	before	birth	and	it	will	be	there	after	death	too.	Then	birth	and
death	are	not	the	beginning	and	the	end	of	life	but	only	ordinary	episodes	in	an
eternal	journey.
People	are	sad	and	miserable	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	have	been	searching
outside.	They	cannot	find	 it	 there	because	 it	 is	not	 there	 in	 the	first	place.	You
have	 to	 look	 in	 the	 right	 place.	 Our	 consciousness	 contains	 all,	 the	 whole
kingdom	 of	 god	 is	 there.	Man	 comes	 with	 all	 that	 he	 needs,	 with	 all	 that	 he
desires.
But	 the	problem	 is	 that	 he	 starts	 rushing	here	 and	 there,	 hither	 and	 thither,	 all
over	 the	 world,	 thinking	 that	 by	 gaining	 more	 money	 or	 becoming	 more
powerful	he	will	be	blissful.	He	goes	on	and	on	wasting	energy.
The	moment	when	one	starts	looking	in	is	the	most	important	one	in	life;	nothing
is	more	important	than	that.	And	sannyas	has	to	be	that	turning-point.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	look	within.	The	moment	it	happens...	and
it	 can	 happen	 any	moment;	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 your	 cooperation	with	me.	 It
cannot	happen	 in	a	state	of	conflict.	That's	what	sannyas	 is	a	cooperation	with
the	master.	The	disciple	simply	becomes	so	attuned	with	the	master	that	he	starts
taking	hints.	He	is	no	more	in	an	argumentative	mood,	he	argues	no	more.	With
the	master	 there	 is	 no	 argument	 possible;	 one	 simply	 listens	 and	 follows.	And
things	are	so	simple	that	if	one	can	listen	and	follow	it	can	happen	immediately,
instantly.
So	be	here	for	a	few	days	and	learn	at	least	one	meditation,	Vipassana,	and	that
will	suit	you.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009195
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Bliss	exists,	but	it	is	part	not	only	of	the	unknown	but	of	the	unknowable.	These
are	the	three	realms:	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
known	and	the	unknowable,	and	between	the	two	is	the	territory	of	the	unknown,
The	first	step	is	from	the	know	into	the	unknown,	and	the	second	step	is	from	the
unknown	 into	 the	 unknowable.	 These	 are	 the	 only	 two	 steps	 and	 the	 whole
journey	 is	 complete.	The	 first	 step	 is	more	 difficult.	Once	 you	 have	 taken	 the
first	step	by	dropping	your	misery,	by	dropping	the	clinging	to	the	known,	you
will	feel	such	freedom,	such	weightlessness,	that	you	will	become	tempted	to	go
into	the	unknowable	--	naturally,	inevitably.	If	this	much	beauty	can	happen	and
this	much	bliss	can	happen	 just	by	moving	from	the	known	into	 the	unknown,
you	will	 become	 intrigued	with	 the	mystery	 of	 the	 unknowable.	And	 then	 the
second	step	is	very	easy;	it	comes	of	its	own	accord.
Sannyas	means	 risking	 --	 risking	misery	 for	 bliss.	 It	 looks	 like	 risking	 in	 the
beginning.	When	you	have	entered	 into	 it	 then	you	know	that	 that	was	not	 the
question	at	all,	because	what	you	have	lost	was	not	worth	keeping	at	all	and	what
you	have	gained	is	immense,	is	infinite,	is	immeasurable.
I	teach	how	to	live	dangerously,	how	to	live	the	life	of	a	gambler	and	a	drunkard
--	 drunk,	 of	 course,	 with	 the	 divine,	 and	 gambling	 continuously,	 staking	 the
known	for	the	unknown	and	then	finally	the	unknown	for	the	unknowable.	The
moment	you	enter	 into	 the	unknowable	you	have	entered	 into	god.	And	that	 is
the	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 bliss;	 there	 is	 nothing	 higher	 than	 that.	 You	 have	 come
home.
("Discipline"	 is	 something	 of	 a	 dirty	 word	 in	 the	 best.	 But	 the	 discipline	 he
teaches	 is	 that	which	arises	out	of	 the	consciousness	of	a	meditator,	Osho	 told
us.)
I	teach	only	awareness,	but	out	of	awareness	your	life	starts	settling	into	a	new
gestalt;	a	new	pattern	arises	naturally,	spontaneously.
When	one	lives	unconsciously	there	is	a	different	kind	of	life	--	it	is	bound	to	be
so.	It	comes	out	of	unconsciousness;	it	 is	all	haphazard,	accidental,	as	if	one	is
moving	in	deep	sleep,	walking	not	knowing	where,	not	knowing	from	where,	not
knowing	 why,	 just	 going	 because	 the	 whole	 crowd	 is	 going	 somewhere.
Everybody	believes	that	when	so	many	people	are	going	they	must	be	going	to
something	 significant	 --	 -everybody	 thinks	 in	 the	 same	way	 --	 and	 the	 whole
crowd	 is	 moving	 in	 sleep.	 This	 whole	 humanity	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 crowd	 of
somnambulists,	sleepwalkers.
The	moment	you	become	aware,	meditative,	your	lifestyle	changes.	You	are	no
more	part	of	 the	crowd,	you	become	for	 the	 first	 time	an	 individual.	And	 then
out	of	awareness	many	things	disappear.	All	that	is	wrong	withers	away	and	all
that	is	right	starts	attracting	you.	It	is	no	more	a	question	of	choice:	you	need	not
choose	 between	 the	 wrong	 and	 the	 right,	 you	 spontaneously	 start	 moving
towards	the	right.	The	wrong	becomes	impossible,	you	cannot	stumble	towards
the	wrong;	you	are	so	alert	that	it	is	no	more	possible.
Even	if	you	want	to	do	the	wrong	you	cannot	do	it,	you	can	only	do	the	right.
Out	of	this	awareness	comes	a	beautiful	discipline	not	imposed	from	the	outside.
Anything	imposed	from	the	outside	is	slavery;	anything	that	springs	from	your
very	being,	that	grows	from	your	inwardness,	has	a	beauty	because	it	is	freedom.
To	 be	 a	 disciple	 means	 to	 be	 meditative,	 nothing	 else,	 because	 the	 word
"disciple"	comes	from	the	same	root	as	discipline.	It	means	living	in	the	light	of
awareness.	 And	 the	 person	 who	 lives	 in	 the	 light	 of	 awareness	 is	 not	 only	 a
beloved	 of	 the	 master,	 he	 becomes	 the	 beloved	 of	 the	 whole	 existence.	 The
whole	existence	cooperates	with	him.	All	the	blessings	from	all	the	dimensions
start	showering	on	him.	He	is	for	the	first	time	blessed,	really	blessed.
(To	Mario	 from	Italy	Osho	 talked	about	 the	difference	between	 revolution	and
rebellion.)	 Revolution	 is	 political,	 rebellion	 is	 spiritual;	 revolution	 needs	 a
crowd,	rebellion	 is	 individual.	And	all	 revolutions	without	any	exception,	have
failed	because	 the	crowd	 is	 so	unconscious	 that	whatsoever	 it	does	 is	going	 to
fail.	 The	 crowd	 consists	 of	 the	 lowest	 intelligence.	 And	 how	 can	 anything
beautiful	come	out	of	the	lowest	intelligence?	Of	course	it	takes	revenge:	it	kills
the	czars	and	it	kills	the	kings;	it	destroys	property,	it	changes	the	government.
But	the	people	who	are	absolutely	unconscious,	whatsoever	they	do	is	going	to
be	 ultimately	 a	 failure.	 The	 French	 Revolution	 failed,	 the	 Russian	 Revolution
failed,	the	Chinese	Revolution	failed.	All	revolutions	have	failed.
And	 rebellion	 has	 always	 succeeded,	 but	 it	 is	 individual.	A	 Jesus	 is	 a	 rebel,	 a
Buddha	is	a	rebel,	a	Lao	Tzu	is	a	rebel.
We	need	more	rebels	in	the	world	and	less	revolutionaries.	And	that's	my	effort
through	 sannyas,	 to	 create	 rebels.	 Each	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 a	 rebel,	 but	 that
rebellion	is	individual.	You	are	not	fighting	with	any	structure	outside,	your	fight
is	 inner.	 You	 are	 fighting	 with	 the	 structure	 of	 unconsciousness;	 you	 are
destroying	 unconsciousness,	 darkness,	 and	 you	 are	 bringing	 light	 to	 yourself.
And	once	the	light	is	there	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
live	according	to	that	light.	And	more	and	more	people	living	according	to	their
light	 can	bring	 a	 new	dawn	 to	humanity;	 they	 can	bring	 a	 new	man	on	 to	 the
earth.
That	is	the	only	hope.	Revolutions	have	failed,	now	rebellion	has	to	be	tried	on	a
vast	scale.	Millions	of	sannyasins,	millions	of	meditators,	are	needed,	and	they
will	 all	 be	 working	 within	 themselves.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 fighting	 with
anything	outside,	 it	 is	 something	 inside	man	 that	goes	on	defying	all	efforts	 to
change,	and	again	and	again	we	are	in	the	same	rut.
In	Russia	 they	destroyed	 the	 capitalists	 and	 the	division	between	 the	poor	 and
the	 rich.	A	new	division	has	arisen,	 the	division	between	 the	powerful	and	 the
powerless,	 the	 people	 who	 are	 ruling	 and	 the	 people	 who	 are	 ruled.	 Another
class	has	started	happening	--	the	same	division	but	a	different	label.	And	this	is
going	 to	 happen	 again	 and	 again	 because	 inner	 consciousness	 is	 not	 there,	 so
people	are	bound	to	create	something	similar	again;	they	know	only	that.
I	teach	rebellion.	Rebellion	is	beautiful,	revolution	is	ugly.	Revolution	is	violent,
rebellion	 is	non-violent.	Rebellion	has	nothing	 to	do	with	 the	outside	world	at
all,	 yet	 it	 transforms	 the	 outside	 world	 because	 once	 the	 inner	 is	 changed	 it
consequently	starts	 triggering	many	things	 in	 the	outside	world.	But	 that	 is	not
our	purpose;	it	happens	as	a	by-product.	Even	if	a	single	man	changes,	thousands
are	 bound	 to	 change.	 Whosoever	 comes	 in	 contact	 with	 him	 is	 bound	 to	 be
transformed	in	some	way	or	other.	A	seed	will	fall	into	his	being	too.
So	in	a	way	I	am	preparing	for	a	great	revolution,	but	not	through	revolution	--
through	rebellion,	individual	transformation.
(In	 fact	 love	 is	 a	 bridge	 between	man	 and	 god,	Osho	 explained.)	 There	 is	 no
other	proof	of	god.	We	have	the	capacity	to	love	--	that's	the	only	proof,	because
the	very	capacity	shows	that	there	is	something	in	life	which	is	not	a	commodity,
which	is	not	material,	which	is	not	business.	There	is	something	in	life	which	is
not	a	means	to	something	else	but	an	end	unto	itself;	one	loves	for	love's	sake.
Now	 that	 is	 beyond	 economics,	 beyond	 politics,	 beyond	mathematics,	 beyond
logic.
Hence	lovers	have	already	looked	to	the	so-called	business-minded	to	be	a	little
bit	cuckoo,	crazy,	nuts!
And	 in	a	way	 they	are	out	of	 their	minds,	but	 they	are	out	of	 their	minds	 in	a
very	beautiful	way.	It	is	not	derogatory	to	be	out	of	the	mind.	In	fact,	a	buddha
happens	only	when	somebody	is	out	of	the	mind.
One	can	fall	out	of	the	mind	in	two	ways.	One	can	fall	below	the	mind,	then	one
goes	 to	 an	 insane	 asylum;	 one	 can	 go	 above	 the	 mind,	 then	 one	 becomes
enlightened.	But	 both	 are	 out	 of	 the	mind,	 so	 they	have	 a	 similarity.	They	 are
utterly	different,	yet	one	thing	is	similar:	both	are	out	of	the	mind.	One	has	fallen
below,	one	has	transcended.	Yes,	there	is	a	great	difference,	but	there	is	one	thing
common	too.	A	lover	knows	something	which	is	out	of	the	mind	--	and	it	is	not
below	the	mind,	it	is	above	the	mind.
Love	is	the	only	proof	for	god.	Love	more,	so	that	god	becomes	more	a	reality	to
you.	You	will	not	find	god	in	the	Bible	or	in	the	Koran	or	in	the	Gita;	you	will
find	god	only	in	love.	That	is	the	real	Bible,	the	real	Koran,	the	real	Gita,	the	real
song	of	life,	the	only	scripture	worth	studying.
(Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 self-awakening,	 Osho	 told	 a	 karate	 teacher	 from
Germany.)	Meditation	 needs	 a	 totality,	 an	 absolute	 devotion,	 perseverance	 and
continuous	effort	 to	awaken	yourself.	And	one	never	knows	when	it	will	bring
the	fruits,	the	flowering,	hence	one	has	to	go	on	and	on	waiting	with	patience	--
but	working,	working	for	it.
People	have	become	so	lethargic	that	they	don't	want	to	work	for	anything.	They
would	like	some	short-cut.	They	would	like	something	like	instant	coffee,	so	that
they	 need	 not	 do	 anything!	 But	meditation	 needs	 a	 great	 industrious	 spirit.	 It
needs	 intense	 inner	work	because	 it	 is	a	question	of	awakening	and	your	sleep
has	 been	 for	 millions	 of	 years;	 for	 thousands	 of	 lives	 you	 have	 slept.	 It	 has
become	a	habit,	it	has	almost	become	your	nature
To	awaken	yourself	great	effort	 is	needed.	You	have	to	shake	yourself	and	you
have	to	pull	yourself	out	of	your	dreams.	And	nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you,	on
your	behalf,	because	it	is	a	very	tricky	phenomenon.
If	 somebody	 else	 tries	 to	 wake	 you	 up	 you	 will	 resist	 and	 you	 will	 go	 even
deeper	 in	 your	 sleep,	 because	 you	will	 not	 like	 being	 interfered	with.	Nobody
wants	to	be	interfered	with.
The	master	is	in	a	very	strange	situation.	He	wants	to	wake	you	up,	but	he	cannot
do	it	directly.	If	he	tries	to	do	it	directly,	just	out	of	resistance	you	will	fall	deeper
into	 sleep;	your	ego	will	be	hurt.	The	master	 can	work	only	 in	a	very	 indirect
way.	He	has	 to	give	you	not	only	hints,	but	he	has	 to	persuade	you	to	do	it	on
your	own.	His	work	is	of	persuasion,	hence	it	takes	a	long	time.	It	can	be	done
very	easily	--	 the	awakened	person	can	awaken	the	sleepy	person	instantly,	but
the	problem	is,	the	sleepy	person	will	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
understand	 the	 compassion.	 In	 fact	 he	will	 feel	 offended,	 that	 "Who	 are	 you?
Why	are	you	disturbing	my	beautiful	dreams?	And	 if	 I	want	 to	sleep,	who	are
you	 to	 wake	 me	 up?"	 He	 will	 not	 say	 it	 so	 clearly	 because	 he	 cannot	 say
anything	clearly	--	he	is	asleep!	But	he	will	slip	deeper	into	sleep	just	 to	avoid
awakening,	 because	 whatsoever	 he	 sees	 he	 thinks	 is	 reality,	 and	 somebody	 is
pulling	him	out	of	his	reality.	Maybe	he	is	dreaming	that	he	is	an	emperor	with
golden	palaces,	and	you	start	waking	him	up.	Of	course	he	will	be	angry!
That's	one	of	the	things	that	Jesus	never	understood.	He	tried	directly.	And	I	can
understand	 why	 it	 happened.	 Buddha	 never	 tried	 it	 directly.	 We	 have	 a	 long
tradition	of	awakened	people	and	we	know	how	to	persuade	the	person	to	do	it
on	his	own.	We	have	to	throw	cold	water	on	him,	but	we	persuade	him	by	saying
"Throw	the	water	yourself.	This	is	the	bucket	--	take	a	jump	into	it	or	pour	the
bucket	over	your	head!n	We	persuade	him	in	such	a	way,	saying	"This	is	nectar,
not	water!	And	it	is	not	cold,	it	is	very	lukewarm	and	you	will	enjoy	it!n	Once	he
pours	it,	he	is	finished,	he	will	wake	up	--	because	it	is	really	ice-cold!
In	the	East	we	have	a	long	tradition,	a	ten-thousand-years	long	tradition	at	least,
of	thousands	of	awakened	people	working.	That's	why	nobody	was	crucified	like
Jesus.	In	India	he	learned	the	art	of	awakening	people.	For	eighteen	years	he	was
travelling	in	the	East,	that's	why	for	eighteen	years	the	Bible	has	no	account	of
him.	The	Bible	remembers	him	when	he	is	twelve,	and	then	suddenly	the	Bible
remembers	 him	when	 he	 is	 thirty.	 Eighteen	 years'	 gap	 is	 there,	 and	 they	 don't
have	any	way	to	explain	what	happened	in	these	eighteen	years.	Eighteen	years
is	 a	 long	 time	 in	 the	 life	 of	 a	man	who	 lived	 only	 thirty-three	 years;	 eighteen
years	 is	 his	 whole	 life!	 He	 was	 travelling	 in	 the	 East	 from	 Egypt	 to	 India,
continuously	being	with	many	awakened	masters,	so	he	learned	one	thing,	 that
people	have	to	be	awakened.
He	was	a	young	man	and	he	rushed	back	to	his	country	to	help	his	people	,	but
he	was	in	such	a	hurry	that	he	tried	direct	methods.	Of	course	people	crucified
him	--	 they	did	not	want	 to	be	awakened	 in	such	a	way.	He	simply	 told	 them,
"This	is	ice-cold	water	and	I	am	going	to	throw	it	in	your	eyes,	and	I	am	going	to
wake	you	up!"	This	is	not	the	right	way.
Buddha	says,	his	last	message	is,	"Be	a	light	unto	yourself."	At	the	very	end	also
he	is	persuading	"Be	a	light	unto	yourself."	He	is	saying	"You	can	be	a	light	unto
yourself,	I	am	just	helping	you.	If	you	want	to	be	awakened	I	can	give	you	a	few
hints,	but	the	longing	is	yours."
It	is	a	delicate	affair,	a	very	delicate	affair.	If	you	jump	immediately	jump...	and
that's	what	Jesus	did.
He	says	to	his	disciples,	"Go	and	shout	from	the	housetops."	That	is	not	the	way
to	persuade	people	--	to	shout	from	the	housetops.	They	will	pull	you	down	They
will	kill	you	immediately	if	you	shout	from	the	housetops.
The	master	has	to	work	very	slowly	and	the	disciple	has	to	be	industrious.	It	is
going	 to	 take	 time,	 although	 the	master	will	 go	 on	 saying	 it	 can	 happen	 right
now.	That	 is	part	 of	his	persuasion	 --	otherwise	you	will	 escape!	The	moment
you	start	escaping	he	will	 say	"Just	now	 it	 is	going	 to	happen!	Where	are	you
going?	Wait!"	And	he	knows	perfectly	well	it	is	not	going	to	happen	now!	It	will
take	time	because	you	have	slept	so	 long,	you	have	forgotten	how	to	wake	up.
You	have	forgotten	how	to	open	your	eyes,	how	to	get	rid	of	your	dreams.
Hence	patience	is	needed	on	the	part	of	the	disciple,	work	is	needed;	one	has	to
wait	and	one	has	not	to	be	in	a	hurry.	The	paradox	is	that	the	more	you	are	in	a
hurry,	the	more	time	it	takes;	the	less	you	are	in	a	hurry,	the	less	time	it	takes.	If
you	are	not	in	a	hurry	at	all	it	can	even	happen	right	now.	Watch	out!
(Osho	talks	about	his	vision	of	sannyas.)
It	is	not	the	old	idea	of	sannyas	at	all,	it	is	a	totally	new	vision.	The	old	sannyas
was	escapist,	and	I	am	against	all	escapism.	The	escapist	is	a	coward,	and	god	is
not	for	cowards.
My	 sannyas	 is	 to	 live	 in	 the	world,	 totally	 in	 the	world,	 and	 yet	 fully	 aware,
watchful	 --	 living	 in	 the	 world	 without	 any	 clinging.	 No	 need	 to	 renounce
anything.	Rejoice	in	everything,	enjoy	everything,	but	remember	to	be	aloof	too.
A	 part	 of	 your	 being	 should	 always	 be	 alert,	 watchful,	 so	 that	 you	 don't	 get
involved.	Act,	but	don't	become	a	doer.	Life	has	to	be	lived	as	if	you	are	an	actor
on	 a	 great	 stage,	 and	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 drama.	 But	 don't
become	identified	with	the	roles	you	are	playing	in	the	drama.	That's	where	the
problem	arises,	when	you	become	identified.
So	my	sannyas	can	be	reduced	to	a	simple	definition:	non-identification	with	any
role	you	are	playing,	whatsoever	it	is.	One	can	be	a	doctor	or	a	businessman,	one
can	be	an	engineer	or	a	painter	--	whatsoever	role	you	are	playing,	remember	it
is	a	play.	Don't	get	serious	about	it.	Success	and	failure	are	the	same	when	it	is	a
play.	 Whether	 you	 succeed	 or	 fail	 does	 not	 matter;	 what	 matters	 is	 that	 you
remained	alert	all	the	time.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Success	 comes,	 you	 watch	 it;	 failure	 comes,	 you	 watch	 it.	 Life	 is	 there,	 you
watch	it;	death	comes,	you	watch	it.	Your	whole	work	is	to	remain	a	witness	to
all	 that	happens	around	you,	within	and	without.	This	 is	 the	foundation	for	my
sannyas.
And	 the	 second	 thing	 to	 remember	 is:	 this	 witnessing	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you
slowly	move	 into	meditation.	Choose	one	meditation,	whichever	 fits	with	you,
and	then	go	on	working	on	it	without	any	desire	for	any	immediate	result;	forget
all	about	 result.	 Just	go	on	doing	 it,	enjoying	 it,	and	one	day	 the	result	comes.
But	 it	 comes	 only	 when	meditation	 has	 come	 to	 a	 certain	 intensity.	 It	 is	 like
water	evaporating:	when	it	comes	to	a	one-hundred-degree	heat	it	evaporates.	At
ninety-nine	degrees	 it	 still	 does	not	 evaporate,	 it	 is	 still	water;	 just	 one	degree
more	and	it	disappears.
The	 same	 happens	 with	 meditation:	 you	 go	 on	 working,	 a	 certain	 intensity
comes,	a	certain	degree	of	heat	is	created,	and	the	ego	evaporates.	And	when	the
ego	is	no	more,	god	is.
(The	next	initiate	was	a	German	actress.)
Man	 is	 born	with	 the	 light,	 every	 child	has	 that	 flame,	but	 slowly	 slowly	dust
gathers	around	it.	Clouds	are	created	by	the	society,	by	the	parents,	by	the	whole
establishment	 --	 religion,	 politics,	 culture,	 civilisation.	 They	 are	 all	 in	 a	 great
conspiracy	against	the	small	child.	And	the	child	is	helpless;	they	go	on	forcing
things	into	him.	They	destroy	his	innocence,	they	destroy	his	beauty,	his	grace.
They	cover	everything	in	his	being.	They	make	him	a	beggar,	and	he	had	come
as	an	emperor.
Sannyas	moans	 rediscovering	yourself.	 It	 is	 a	 journey	of	 rediscovery.	 In	 short,
whatsoever	the	society	has	done	to	you	has	to	be	undone	so	that	you	can	have	a
new	 birth,	 a	 second	 birth,	 a	 second	 childhood.	 Once	 you	 have	 a	 second
childhood	you	will	not	allow	anybody	to	interfere	with	you	again,	because	now
you	are	not	a	small	child,	you	can	protect	your	freedom,	you	can	fight	for	your
innocence.	 You	 cannot	 be	 forced	 by	 any	 power.	 You	 can	 be	 killed	 --	 that's
perfectly	okay	--	but	you	cannot	be	enslaved.
And	 my	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 become	 free	 from	 all	 that	 others	 have
imposed	 on	 you.	 And	 once	 you	 are	 unconditioned,	 once	 you	 have	 tasted
something	 of	 freedom	 and	 joy	 that	 comes	with	 it,	 you	will	 never	 again	 allow
anybody	 to	 interfere	 with	 your	 freedom.	 And	 not	 only	 that,	 you	 will	 never
interfere	with	anybody	else's	freedom	either.
That's	what	I	call	a	real	religious	person:	one	who	never	interferes	in	anybody's
freedom	and	one	who	never	allows	anybody	to	interfere	with	his	freedom	either.
(Deva	Dhyan.)
Meditation	is	a	state	of	absolute	silence.	It	is	not	concentration.	Concentration	is
a	tense	state,	and	in	tension	you	cannot	be	silent.	Silence	needs	relaxation,	total
relaxation.	Meditation	is	not	contemplation	either,	because	contemplation	means
you	are	still	thinking,	maybe	beautiful	thoughts	--	of	god,	love,	truth	--
but	 a	 thought	 is	 a	 thought;	 it	 does	 not	matter	 about	what.	 Every	 thought	 is	 a
cloud	and	destroys	your	clarity;	your	vision	is	blocked.
Meditation	 simply	 means	 no-thought,	 no-mind.	 It	 happens	 through	 watching
your	thought	process,	not	by	chanting	a	mantra	--	because	a	mantra	is	a	thought,
a	 seed-thought;	 not	 through	 prayer,	 because	 prayer	 is	 again	 thinking,	 talking,
words,	 language.	 One	 has	 to	 go	 beyond	 language,	 beyond	words.	 One	 has	 to
relax	so	totally	that	there	is	no	tension	--	physical	or	psychological.
In	that	silence,	in	that	restfulness,	one	comes	to	one's	very	source,	to	one's	very
roots.	And	 from	 there	 is	 the	mutation,	 the	 transformation.	 From	 there	 arises	 a
new	quality	 to	 your	 life	which	 is	 divine.	God	 is	 not	 somebody	outside,	 it	 is	 a
quality,	 a	 fragrance.	 It	 is	 around	 the	meditator.	 The	meditator	 is	 like	 a	 flower
which	has	opened,	and	godliness	is	a	fragrance	that	surrounds	the	meditator.
God	exists	only	once	in	a	while	when	there	is	a	Buddha,	when	there	is	a	Christ
or	 a	Lao	Tzu.	Then	 god	 disappears	 and	 becomes	 invisible	 again.	He	 becomes
visible	only	when	there	is	somebody	like	a	Buddha.
Buddha	becomes	the	opening,	and	from	Buddha's	window	god	can	start	looking
into	the	world.	But	otherwise	there	is	no	god.	No	atheist	can	be	convinced	that
there	 is	 a	 god	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 he	 does	 not	 know	 anything	 about
meditation.
Only	a	meditator	knows	god,	but	he	does	not	know	him	as	an	object,	as	a	person;
he	knows	him	only	as	his	own	fragrance,	his	own	music,	his	own	poetry,	his	own
juice.
(He	named	the	last	sannyasin,	Devaprem	--	divine	love.)
Love	can	be	either	animal	or	human	or	divine.	Millions	of	people,	the	majority,
know	only	about	the	first,	the	animal	love.	Animal	love	means	using	the	other	as
a	means,	exploiting	the	other	as	a	means.	It	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
lust,	pure	lust,	exploitation.	And	of	course	there	is	bound	to	be	conflict	because
you	are	exploiting	the	other	and	the	other	is	trying	to	exploit	you.	Both	are	trying
to	exploit	each	other	--	there	is	bound	to	be	a	conflict.
Hence	 the	 so-called	 lovers	 are	 continuously	 fighting.	 Psychologists	 have	 even
started	calling	them	intimate	enemies	--	not	even	friends	but	enemies!	Of	course
they	are	 intimate	because	 they	are	very	close	 to	each	other,	 living	 in	 the	 same
room,	overlapping	each	other's	space,	trying	to	strangle	the	other...(Right	on	cue,
sounds	 of	 love-making	 from	 what	 seemed	 to	 be	 the	 house	 of	 the	 next-door
neighbours'	rent	the	air	)...
both	are	doing	the	same!
This	is	the	so-called	love.
Only	very	few	know	the	second,	human	love.	Human	love	has	no	conflict.	When
conflict	ceases	and	harmony	arises,	when	you	are	not	using	the	other,	when	you
respect	the	other	and	the	other's	freedom	and	the	other's	individuality,	the	other's
uniqueness....	 Human	 love	 never	 interferes	with	 the	 other's	 space.	 It	 is	 not	 an
effort	to	dominate,	to	possess.	When	jealousy	falls	away	animal	love	disappears
and	human	love	arises.
But	 very	 few	 people	 know	 anything	 about	 human	 love,	 and	 unless	 you	 know
about	human	love	you	are	not	a	human	being.	You	only	look	human,	deep	inside
all	kinds	of	animals	are	there,	the	whole	jungle,	wild	animals.	Just	watch	others
or	watch	yourself	with	your	woman	or	with	your	man	and	you	will	see	all	kinds
of	 animals	 barking	 and	 fighting	 and	 doing	 all	 kinds	 of	 things	 to	 each	 other,
playing	all	kinds	of	tricks,	laying	their	trips	on	each	other,	and	at	the	same	time
trying	to	show	that	they	love.	Love	is	only	a	facade,	a	mask.
Human	love	is	totally	different.	There	is	no	fight,	no	question	of	fight.	There	is
respect	and	you	are	grateful	that	the	other	has	agreed	at	least	to	be	with	you.	The
other	has	agreed	for	a	few	moments	to	meet	and	mingle,	to	meet	and	merge	with
you.	 One	 is	 constantly	 grateful	 for	 those	 moments.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 desire	 to
possess,	there	is	no	desire	to	make	it	permanent	either.	If	tomorrow	it	disappears,
it	disappears	--
such	is	the	nature	of	things.	In	the	morning	the	flower	is	so	alive;	by	the	evening
it	is	gone.	Nothing	can	be	done	about	it.	But	one	is	still	thankful	that	the	flower
blossomed;	one	is	still	grateful	for	whatsoever	has	happened	through	it.	There	is
no	complaint,	no	grudge.	Human	love	knows	no	complaint,	no	grudge.
And	beyond	the	human	is	divine	love.	Only	once	in	a	while	has	a	person	reached
that	 high	 peak.	 In	 divine	 love	 you	 are	 not	 in	 a	 relationship	 at	 all.	 It	 is	 not	 a
question	of	 loving	 this	person	or	 that,	you	are	 simply	 love,	your	very	being	 is
loving.	It	has	become	your	aura,	it	 is	your	very	breathing,	so	wherever	you	are
your	love	showers.
That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 Devaprem:	 divine	 love,	 not	 addressed	 to	 anybody	 in
particular,	but	wherever	you	are	it	is	always	there,	anybody	can	share	it.	And	you
will	 feel	 obliged	 and	 grateful	 to	 the	 person	who	 shared	 your	 love	 because	 the
moment	 you	 reach	 to	 that	 height	 you	become	 aware	 of	 a	 strange	paradox:	 the
more	 you	 give,	 the	 more	 you	 have.	 The	 more	 you	 share,	 the	 more	 goes	 on
coming	to	you	from	some	unknown	source.	That	unknown	source	is	god.	Slowly
slowly	you	become	aware	of	that	unknown	source.	The	source	of	love,	life,	light,
the	source	of	all,	is	god.
At	that	height	there	is	no	ego.	You	are	no	more	an	entity,	you	are	just	a	hollow
bamboo	on	the	lips	of	god.	The	song	is	god's,	you	are	just	a	passage.	And	you
are	grateful	that	god	has	chosen	you	to	be	a	passage,	that	he	has	chosen	you	to	be
a	medium,	a	vehicle,	a	messenger.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009205
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	 coward	 is	 bound	 to	 live	 in	 lies.	 Lies	 are	 comfortable,	 cozy,	 because	 they
don't	ask	you	for	any	transformation.	You	need	not	change	yourself.	Lies	fit	with
you;	you	need	not	fit	with	them.
Truth	needs	courage	because	 truth	never	compromises.	You	have	 to	 fit	with	 it.
You	will	have	to	drop	many	things.	You	will	have	to	become	more	open,	more
silent,	more	loving,	only	then	can	truth	be	yours.
You	will	 have	 to	 go	 through	 a	 thorough	 cleaning.	 A	 total	 transformation	 is	 a
basic	requirement	for	truth,	and	that	needs	courage.
Hence	millions	have	chosen	to	 live	 the	 life	of	a	coward.	It	 is	comfortable;	you
remain	the	way	you	are.
And	the	lies	are	very	compromising;	they	are	ready	to	be	according	to	you.	They
fulfill	your	desires,	your	requirements,	but	because	they	are	lies	your	whole	life
is	wasted.	Ultimately	you	will	find	you	have	deceived	yourself.	But	that	comes
only	 at	 the	 end;	 that	 comes	 only	 when	 death	 knocks	 on	 the	 door.	 Then	 you
become	aware	of	what	you	have	done,	but	then	it	is	too	late.
Entering	 into	 sannyas	 means	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 drop	 the	 lies,	 howsoever
comfortable,	 and	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 risk	 everything	 for	 truth,	 because	 the	 final
victory	 is	with	 truth.	 Small	 battles	 you	 can	win	 through	 lies,	 but	 the	 ultimate
victory	is	only	with	truth.	And	for	that	sannyas	prepares	you.	But	much	has	to	be
changed.
Many	 prejudices	 have	 to	 be	 dropped.	 Your	whole	mind	 has	 to	 go	 through	 an
upheaval,	a	revolution,	a	radical	change.
Be	ready	for	it,	because	once	you	start	having	a	glimpse	of	truth,	even	a	glimpse
of	 truth,	your	 life	becomes	 so	blissful,	 such	a	benediction,	 so	meaningful,	 that
one	 starts	 feeling	 grateful	 to	 existence.	 Out	 of	 that	 gratefulness	 arises	 prayer.
Only	that	gratefulness	makes	a	person	religious.
(The	 two	 meanings	 of	 her	 name	 are	 very	 significant	 and	 also	 happen	 to	 be
related	 to	 each	 other,	 Osho	 told	 Jonda,	 because	 humbleness	 is	 needed	 by	 the
lover	of	truth.)	The	ego	is	a	barrier:	it	does	not	allow	you	to	know	that	which	is.
It	keeps	you	ignorant	because	it	can	exist	only	in	darkness;	when	there	is	light	it
dies.	It	is	like	darkness:	the	moment	light	comes	in,	darkness	disappears.	Hence
the	investment	of	the	ego	is	in	keeping	you	in	the	dark.
Humbleness	 means	 only	 one	 thing:	 drop	 the	 ego.	 Don't	 think	 in	 terms	 of
separation.	No	man	is	an	island;	we	are	all	together,	we	are	part	of	one	organic
whole.	We	are	not	separate,	hence	the	very	idea	of	ego	is	stupid.	Only	the	whole
can	use	the	word	"In;	the	parts	cannot	use	the	word.	The	parts	exist	only	through
the	whole;	 there	 is	no	 life	 in	separation.	Hence	 to	 live	with	an	ego	 is	 to	 live	a
very	superficial	life,	pseudo,	without	roots.	And	that	brings	misery.
The	moment	one	drops	the	ego	all	blocks	disappear	and	light	starts	penetrating
you.	The	doors	are	open,	the	windows	are	open.	The	sun	is	yours,	 the	moon	is
yours,	the	stars	are	yours.	Suddenly	you	become	vast.
And	 that's	what	 truth	 is:	 the	 experience	 of	 one's	 vastness,	 one's	 infinity,	 one's
eternity.	And	the	moment	one	knows	"I	am	eternal,"	there	is	bliss	because	there
is	no	more	any	death,	no	more	any	misery,	no	more	any	fear.	One	has	attained	to
immortality.	Bliss	is	just	a	shadow	of	immortality.
(Love	 is	 holy	 because	 it	 makes	 you	 whole.	 It	 is	 a	 bridge,	 Osho	 reiterated
tonight.)	A	man	without	love	lives	disconnected	from	the	whole.	And	one	needs
many	bridges	because	life	is	multi-dimensional,	and	the	more	bridges	you	have,
the	more	 rich	 you	 are.	When	 all	 the	 dimensions	 and	 all	 the	 planes	 of	 life	 are
connected	 with	 you,	 naturally	 you	 have	 immense	 richness	 --	 immeasurable,
inestimable.
That	richness	Jesus	calls	the	kingdom	of	god.	His	expression	is	beautiful.	It	is	a
kingdom,	and	not	an	ordinary	kingdom,	not	 the	kingdom	of	this	world,	not	 the
kingdom	 that	 exists	 in	 time	 and	 one	 day	 disappears	 but	 a	 kingdom	 that	 once
attained	is	forever	yours.
Hence	my	definition	of	religion	is	love.	Love	in	as	many	ways	as	possible.	Don't
be	a	miser	in	love.
Love	animals,	love	trees,	rocks,	rivers,	people.	Find	out	as	many	doors	for	love
as	 you	 can	 find.	 And	 the	more	 you	 love,	 the	more	 you	 are.	 Love	makes	 you
integrated;	it	gives	you	a	cent	ring,	a	rootedness,	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
groundedness.	It	creates	a	temple	out	of	you.	And	only	when	the	temple	is	ready
can	god	be	invited.
Many	 people	 search	 for	 god	 but	 in	 vain,	 because	 they	 never	 make	 the	 place
ready	to	receive	him.	You	need	a	certain	inner	space	for	god	to	come	in,	for	truth
to	come	in.	That	space	is	created	by	love.
His	name	meant	an	image	of	meditation,	the	Master	told	the	next	initiate	--	and
you	have	to	look	at	a	statue	of	Buddha	to	see	that.
It	 is	not	historically	 true;	 it	does	not	 represent	Buddha	 in	an	ordinary	 sense;	 it
does	not	resemble	his	physical	appearance	at	all.	But	still	it	is	true,	far	more	true
than	any	photograph	can	be.	It	is	not	pictorial;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	body.
It	 represents	 something	 of	 the	 inner:	 the	 stillness,	 the	 silence,	 the	 unwavering
quietness,	the	state	of	no-mind.
It	is	not	an	accident	that	Buddha's	statues	were	the	first	to	appear	on	the	scene,
on	 the	 earth.	 And	 they	 were	 made	 of	 white	 marble.	 Only	 white	 marble	 can
represent	Buddha;	 the	coolness	of	 the	marble,	 the	whiteness	of	 the	marble,	 the
stillness	 of	marble,	 the	 stillness	 of	 a	marble	 statue.	 They	 represent	 something
that	happened	to	Buddha's	 interiority.	They	are	not	physiological	but	symbolic,
metaphoric	--	poetry	written	in	marble	--	a	depiction,	a	scripture,	a	sermon.
Create	 a	 silent	 space	within	 you	where	 no	 thought	 exists;	 no	 desire,	 no	mind.
One	 is	 simply	 a	 pure	 being,	 a	 witness,	 a	 silent	 watcher.	 There	 is	 no	 past,	 no
future.	Time	 has	 stopped	 because	mind	 has	 stopped;	without	mind	 there	 is	 no
time.	Mind	is	time,	and	the	moment	you	get	beyond	mind	you	get	beyond	time;
you	are	simply	in	the	present.	The	present	is	not	part	of	time.	Now	is	not	part	of
time.	Time	consists	of	past	and	future,	and	the	reality	is	between	the	two.	Neither
the	past	is	real	nor	is	the	future.
The	meditator	 drops	 both,	 past	 and	 future	 both,	 memory	 and	 imagination;	 he
simply	exists	now	and	here.	In	that	state	one	penetrates	into	the	ultimate	core	of
existence,	one	comes	to	know	what	truth	is,	and	truth	liberates.	There	is	no	other
way	of	liberation.	Truth	makes	you	free	of	all	bondage;	the	bondage	of	the	body,
the	bondage	of	the	mind.	All	kinds	of	prisons	simply	evaporate.	You	are	as	vast
as	the	sky	--	no	limitation.	Not	even	the	sky	is	the	limit.
Unless	 that	 unlimited	 vastness	 is	 experienced	 one	 remains	miserable,	 because
that	is	our	nature	and	that	has	to	be	fulfilled.
Only	then	is	there	contentment.
Only	then	is	there	joy,	rejoicing.
(Accumulate	 knowledge	 and	 you	 have	 a	 head	 that's	 overloaded;	 experience
knowing	 and	 you	 have	 a	 heart	 that's	 overflowing.	 The	 only	 proof	 of	 truth	 is
blissfulness,	Osho	 reminded	us.)	The	knowledgeable	person	 is	not	blissful.	He
knows	about	truth	but	not	truth	itself.	He	knows	about	God,	but	to	know	about
God	 is	 not	 to	know	God.	To	know	about	God	 is	 information;	 to	know	God	 is
transformation,	it	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
And	the	moment	you	know	on	your	own	--	not	because	Jesus	says	so	or	Buddha
says	so	or	I	say	so	--
when	you	know	on	you	own,	great	bliss	explodes.	Thousands	of	flowers	open	up
within	 your	 being.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 your	 inner	world	 is	 no	more	 a	 desert,	 it
becomes	an	oasis.	For	the	first	time	you	experience	what	life	is	all	about	and	the
splendor	of	it	and	the	glory	of	it	and	the	tremendous	beauty	of	it.	It	 is	ecstatic.
And	the	moment	you	know,	you	are	bound	to	radiate	bliss;	it	is	just	natural.
Truth	 is	 experienced	 at	 the	 innermost	 core,	 but	 bliss	 starts	 overflowing	 you.
That's	the	only	proof	that	truth	has	been	experienced.	If	the	saint	is	sad	he	is	not
a	saint.	There	must	be	 rejoicing,	 there	must	be	 laughter,	 there	must	be	singing
and	dancing	and	celebration.	His	whole	life	is	a	celebration;	moment	to	moment
it	 is	a	continuum	of	celebration.	These	so-called	saints	with	 long	faces	are	 just
stupid	people	deceiving	others,	and	not	only	others	--	they	are	so	stupid	that	they
manage	 to	deceive	 themselves	 too.	They	start	believing	 that	 they	have	arrived,
but	nothing	has	happened	to	them.	Their	desert	is	so	clear,	there	seems	to	be	no
oasis	in	their	being.
My	whole	effort	here	 is	 to	make	you	a	garden,	 to	make	you	cheerful	 in	 every
possible	way.	But	 that	can	happen	only	when	you	have	experienced	something
of	truth	on	your	own.	It	is	not	going	to	help	if	one	goes	on	reading	the	Bible	and
the	Koran	and	the	Gita.	Unless	you	read	your	own	being	you	will	not	know	what
truth	is.	Truth	is	hiding	there	--	of	course	it	is	in	a	seed	form.	Once	you	go	there
your	very	going	transforms	the	seed	into	a	flower.	Your	very	presence	is	enough
to	bring	a	revolution.
So	my	sannyasins	have	to	do	only	one	thing,	I	ask	only	for	one	thing:	put	your
energy	 together	 for	an	 inner	 journey.	Move	 inwards,	because	unless	you	know
who	you	are,	all	knowledge	is	useless.	The	only	knowledge	worth	having	is	your
experience	of	yourself.	That	opens	the	door	towards	more	mysterious	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
experiences.	That	is	the	beginning	of	an	eternal	pilgrimage.
(Sannyas	 is	 the	 search	 for	 truth,	 Osho	 stressed	 again	 in	 his	 address	 to
Satyaprem.)	Man	has	lived	for	centuries	in	lies	--	beautiful	lies,	but	all	lies.	We
go	on	believing	in	heaven	and	hell,	we	go	on	believing	in	god,	in	immortality,	in
the	soul,	but	these	are	all	beliefs	--	beliefs	are	lies.	You	don't	know	anything	on
your	own,	whether	there	is	a	soul	within	you	or	not.	And	it	is	not	a	question	of
argumentation;	even	if	it	is	proved	logically	that	you	have	a	soul	it	will	not	make
any	difference	to	the	quality	of	your	life.	Or	if	it	is	proved	there	is	no	soul,	that
will	also	not	make	any	difference.
There	are	theists,	there	are	atheists,	and	they	are	all	living	almost	the	same	life	--
the	same	stupid	 life,	with	no	qualitative	change.	There	are	people	who	believe
that	god	exists	and	there	are	people	who	believe	 that	god	does	not	exist,	but	 if
you	look	into	their	lives	there	is	no	difference.	So	what	is	the	point	of	all	these
argumentations?	 It	 is	 futile.	 The	 only	 thing	 that	 matters	 is	 experience,	 not
argument.
And	if	you	don't	even	know	whether	the	soul	exists	within	you	or	not,	what	else
can	 you	 know?	 How	 can	 you	 know	 god	 and	 heaven	 and	 hell	 and	 all	 that
nonsense?	The	closest	thing	to	you	is	your	soul,	and	you	have	not	even	explored
that!	And	you	are	talking	about	some	heaven	somewhere	above,	in	the	sky	and
some	hell	somewhere	deep	down.	You	have	no	idea	what	you	are	talking	about!
In	 churches	 and	 temples	 and	 mosques	 people	 are	 continuously	 arguing,
discourses	 are	 being	 given	 about	 great	 things,	 and	 nobody	 bothers	 about	 the
most	simple	thing	--	knowing	who	you	are.
So	 I	 don't	 teach	 any	 philosophy	 here	 and	 I	 don't	 teach	 any	 dogma,	 creed.	My
whole	 teaching	 consists	 of	 experimenting,	 of	 experiencing,	 of	 going	 within
yourself	with	 an	 open	mind,	with	 no	 belief	 --	 because	 every	 belief	will	 be	 an
obstruction	to	knowing	the	truth.	Every	belief	is	inimical	to	the	enquiry	for	truth.
So	 don't	 be	 a	 Christian	 or	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a	Mohammedan;	 don't	 be	 theist	 or	 an
atheist.	There	is	no	need,	because	you	don't	know	anything.	Just	know	"I	don't
know"	 and	 go	 inside	with	 that	 state	 of	mind,	 just	 like	 an	 innocent	 child	 who
knows	nothing.	If	one	can	enter	into	one's	being	like	a	child,	innocent,	and	if	one
can	function	from	a	state	of	not-knowing,	then	it	is	not	far	away;	it	is	very	close
by.
And	the	moment	you	know	your	being	you	have	found	the	key,	the	master	key
which	can	unlock	many	many	doors.	In	fact	that	one	key	is	enough	to	unlock	all
the	doors.	I	call	that	key	the	truth,	your	truth,	your	experienced	truth.
So	drop	all	beliefs,	drop	all	lies	which	others	have	taught	you,	and	go	innocently,
empty,	 knowing	 nothing.	 And	 soon	 you	 will	 find	 a	 great	 treasure,	 a	 great
wisdom,	within	yourself.	It	is	already	there	just	waiting	for	you	to	come	empty-
handed.
Meditation	 means	 going	 inside	 empty-handed,	 empty	 of	 all	 belief,	 of	 all
knowledge.
(He	was	replaced	by	Satoshi,	whom	Osho	renamed	Dharmananda.	It	means	the
bliss	that	arises	out	of	knowing	the	nature	of	existence,	Osho	explained.)
Without	 knowing	 it,	 whatsoever	 we	 do	 is	 bound	 to	 create	 misery.	 The	 most
fundamental	 thing	is	 to	know	the	nature	of	existence	so	that	we	can	be	in	tune
with	 it.	Otherwise	everybody	 is	out	of	 step,	 and	 that	being	out	of	 step	 is	what
misery	is.	To	be	in	harmony	with	existence	is	bliss,	to	be	in	deep	accord	is	bliss.
To	be	in	discord	with	existence	is	misery.
So	the	only	thing	which	can	bring	a	total	transformation	in	your	life	is	to	become
aware	of	the	truth,	the	nature,	the	tao,	of	existence.	And	the	way	does	not	go	on
the	outside,	the	way	goes	through	you;	 it	 is	an	inner	 journey.	First	you	have	to
find	your	own	centre.	The	moment	you	have	found	your	centre	you	have	found
the	 centre	 of	 existence	 because	 they	 are	 not	 two.	 We	 differ	 only	 as
circumference,	at	 the	centre	we	are	all	meeting	and	merging.	At	 the	centre	we
are	all	one:	the	trees,	the	mountains,	the	people,	the	animals,	the	stars.
The	moment	you	penetrate	your	own	centre	you	come	to	know	the	tao	of	all	that
is.	And	once	you	have	known	the	tao,	nature,	the	dharma,	you	cannot	go	against
it	That	will	be	simply	suicidal.	But	without	knowing	it	of	course	one	is	bound	to
stumble,	bound	to	go	astray.	Meditation	is	a	way	to	find	your	centre.
And	 I	have	 reduced	 sannyas	 to	 the	very	bare	 essentials	 I	 have	dropped	all	 the
rituals,	 all	 the	 non-essentials,	 because	 modern	 man	 has	 no	 time	 for	 all	 that
nonsense.	And	the	essential	is	meditation.	If	you	can	learn	meditation	you	have
learned	all.
(We	have	the	intrinsic	capacity	to	love,	but	society	heads	us	away	from	realising
it,	Osho	told	Prem	Amrito,	who	sat,	or	rather	knelt	on	one	knee,	in	front	of	him
as	if	she	were	taking	her	mark	and	getting	set	to	run.)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Society	has	no	interest	in	your	love	energy.	Its	whole	interest	is	in	your	head,	in
your	 logical	 capacity,	because	 that	 can	be	used	as	 a	 commodity	 in	 the	market.
The	society	only	wants	you	to	be	efficient	--	not	meaningful,	simply	efficient,	as
efficient	as	a	machine.	Now,	the	machine	has	no	idea	of	love	and	will	never	be
able	to	have	any	idea	of	love.
As	far	as	the	head	is	concerned,	sooner	or	later	computers	are	going	to	replace	it.
What	the	head	does,	computers	can	do	in	a	far	better	way.	But	I	don't	think	that
any	computer	is	ever	going	to	fall	in	love.
Logic	is	a	mechanical	capacity	--	machines	can	do	it.	Love	is	really	the	human
element	in	you,	but	the	society	is	not	interested	in	it,	it	has	no	use	for	it;	hence	it
teaches	everybody	to	be	logical.	And	the	more	hung	up	in	the	head	you	become,
the	more	you	forget	your	heart.
My	work	here	is	to	bring	you	back	down	to	the	heart.	And	your	cooperation	is
needed,	that's	why	sannyas	is	a	requirement.	Sannyas	means	from	your	side	you
say,	"I	am	ready,	I	am	willing	to	come	down.
Just	show	me	the	way,	just	show	me	the	ladder."	Sannyas	is	simply	a	surrender,	a
let-go,	 a	 gesture	 that	 "I	 am	 ready,"	 that	 "I	 will	 not	 hesitate,"	 that	 "I	 will	 not
resist,"	that	"I	will	not	fight	you."	That's	all.	Because	unnecessary	time	is	wasted
in	resistance.
It	 is	as	 if	you	go	to	a	surgeon	and	you	start	fighting	with	him,	and	he	is	doing
surgery	on	you!	You	start	doing	karate	chops	and	things	like	that	--	then	how	can
the	surgery	be	done?	That's	why	the	surgeon	has	to	give	you	chloroform!
I	don't	give	chloroform,	but	it	 is	surgery,	and	your	total	acceptance	is	required.
That's	what	sannyas	is.	It	is	not	a	ritual,	it	is	a	deep,	meaningful	gesture.	Once	I
see	 that	 somebody	 is	 saying	 yes,	 then	 I	 can	 start	 the	 surgery.	 And	 it	 is	 the
greatest	surgery	to	bring	your	energy	from	the	head	to	the	heart	because	it	goes
against	all	your	conditioning,	education,	culture,	religion.	But	unless	your	heart
becomes	alive	again,	humming	again	with	the	music	of	love,	you	will	never	be
able	to	know	anything	of	significance.	God	is	known	through	the	heart,	truth	is
known	 through	 the	 heart.	 The	 heart	 is	 the	 center	 from	 where	 we	 can	 take	 a
plunge	into	existence.	It	becomes	the	jumping	board	to	go	into	the	oceanic.
Man	is	immortal.	There	is	no	death,	in	fact.	But	how	to	know	it	from	the	head?
Hence	I	say	love	is	the	only	experience	in	life	which	makes	you	aware	of	your
immorality.	And	once	you	know	there	is	no	death,	your	life	of	course	will	have	a
totally	different	quality	to	it	--	of	poetry,	of	dance,	of	song,	of	celebration.
Because	there	is	no	death	once	can	shout,	"Alleluia!"
(An	in-quest	is	needed	to	discover	the	cause	of	the	death	of	man's	happiness;	no
outer	search	will	help,	Osho	told	Gyandevi.)
Your	 silence	 is	 the	 only	 scripture.	 Your	 inner	 journey	 is	 the	 only	 sacred
pilgrimage.	And	 the	 truth	has	 to	be	known	not	with	open	eyes	but	with	closed
eyes,	 because	 it	 is	 inside.	 And	 the	 moment	 we	 withdraw	 ourselves	 from	 all
outside	 activities,	 bodily	 activities,	 mental	 activities,	 when	 we	 are	 completely
withdrawn	as	if	the	world	has	disappeared,	as	if	there	is	nobody	else	left,	we	are
all	alone	...	in	that	aloneness	wisdom	explodes.	You	become	full	of	light.
Then	you	can	live	in	the	outside	world,	but	now	nothing	can	disturb	you,	nothing
can	distract	you.	That	light	remains	with	you	and	goes	on	showing	you	the	path.
It	goes	on	again	and	again	indicating	to	you	the	right	way,	it	goes	on	choosing
for	you	what	is	right	and	dropping	what	is	wrong.
The	inner	wisdom	is	an	insight,	an	insight	into	everything	that	is	going	to	happen
to	you.	And	once	you	have	the	insight,	naturally	all	the	pitfalls	disappear,	all	the
mistakes	and	errors	disappear.	Your	 life	starts	 following	a	very	straight	way.	 It
becomes	simple,	natural,	spontaneous.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8009215
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(The	sense	of	'me'	is	misery,	Osho	told	Claude,	a	doctor	from	Switzerland.)	The
ego	is	misery,	the	root	cause	of	all	nightmares.	One	cannot	drop	misery	without
dropping	the	ego.
You	can	drop	one	misery	but	another	will	replace	it.	You	can	go	on	cutting	the
leaves	of	a	tree	--	other	leaves	will	go	on	coming.	One	has	to	cut	the	very	root;
and	 the	 root	 is	 hidden,	 it	 is	 underground.	You	 see	 the	branches	 and	 the	whole
tree	above	the	ground.
And	the	same	is	true	about	the	ego.	What	you	see	in	the	conscious	mind	are	only
branches	 and	 leaves	 and	 foliage.	 The	 ego	 is	 hidden	 in	 the	 unconscious,	 it	 is
underground.	One	has	to	dig	up	those	roots.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	finding	the	root	cause.	And	the	miracle	is,	the
moment	you	have	found	the	root	cause	you	are	already	beyond	it.	Then	it	starts
disappearing	 of	 its	 own	 accord	 because	 you	 no	more	 support	 it,	 you	 no	more
cooperate	with	it,	and	without	you	it	cannot	exist	even	for	a	single	moment.
When	the	ego	disappears	one	is	humble,	and	in	humbleness	grows	the	flower	of
bliss.
(Then	to	Patsy	from	Australia,	Osho	said:)
Meditation	 brings	 real	 aristocracy.	 It	 creates	 "aristos"	 --	 but	 real,	 authentic
aristos.	By	birth	nobody	is	an	aristocrat;	by	birth	everybody	is	born	as	a	beggar,
full	of	desires,	demands,	expectations.	And	those	expectations	are	impossible	to
fulfil,	 hence	 frustration	 sets	 in.	Those	demands	 are	 basically	 impossible	 hence
life	 becomes	 a	 constant	 misery	 a	 continuous	 misery,	 a	 chain	 of	 miseries,	 of
tragedies.
Those	desires	that	every	child	brings	into	the	world	are	intrinsically	unfulfillable.
The	 more	 you	 have,	 the	 more	 the	 desire	 jumps	 ahead	 of	 you	 for	 still	 more.
Desire	 simply	means	 desire	 for	more	 --	 how	 can	 you	 fulfil	 it?	 If	 you	 have	 so
much	money	the	desire	says,	"Have	ten	times	more."	When	you	have	ten	times
more	the	desire	has	jumped	ahead,	again	it	wants	ten	times	more,	and	so	on,	and
so	forth.	The	distance	between	you	and	your	desired	goal	remains	constantly	the
same.	Whether	 you	 are	 poor	 or	 rich,	 it	 makes	 no	 difference;	 the	 beggars	 are
beggars	and	the	Alexanders	are	also	beggars.
But	a	real	aristocracy	is	created	by	meditation	because	meditation	gives	you	the
whole	kingdom	of	the	inner	world.	Jesus	calls	it	the	kingdom	of	god.	It	opens	up
treasures	which	are	inexhaustible.	It	brings	tremendous	contentment	because	all
those	 desires	 which	 were	 creating	 discontent	 disappear.	 When	 you	 are	 silent
those	 desires	 wither	 away	 and	 what	 is	 left	 is	 uncontaminated	 contentment,
absolutely	virgin	contentment.
Meditation	 is	 like	 poison	 for	 expectations,	 demands,	 desires.	 It	 kills	 all	 those
stupidities.	It	cleanses	you	totally	from	all	begging.	Suddenly	one	is	an	emperor.
One	may	not	have	anything	as	far	as	the	outside	world	is	concerned	but	one	has
something	of	 the	 inner	which	nobody	 can	 steal,	which	nobody	 can	 take	 away,
which	even	death	cannot	destroy.
When	you	have	something	that	is	indestructible	then	you	are	really	an	aristocrat.
Then	 you	 have	 gone	 beyond	 ordinary	 sleeping	 humanity.	Then	 you	 are	 a	 new
man,	a	totally	new	man,	so	new	that	there	is	no	continuity	with	the	old	at	all.	It	is
discontinuous	with	the	old,	it	is	a	rebirth.
(There	are	two	kinds	of	loyalty,	Osho	told	Prem	Martin	--	that	of	the	soldier	and
that	of	the	sannyasin.
But	the	latter	is	more	of	a	disvalue	than	anything,	because	it	destroys	the	soul	of
the	person.)	The	soldier	is	born	when	the	soul	is	destroyed.	The	soldier	becomes
just	 a	 mechanical	 yea-sayer	 because	 he	 has	 been	 forced,	 manipulated,
conditioned.	He	has	forgotten	his	own	freedom.	He	is	reduced	to	a	non-human
entity;	he	has	fallen	below	the	human.
But	 throughout	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 man	 soldiers	 have	 been	 needed	 because
history	is	political.	All	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
societies	have	been	at	each	other's	throats,	all	the	countries	have	been	energies	of
each	 other,	 and	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 conquer	 the	world.	 This	 stupidity	 --	 of
conquering	the	world	--	has	been	the	root	cause...	because	of	it	humanity	has	not
become	mature;	 it	has	remained	retarded.	The	soldier	is	a	retarded	person.	The
whole	training	in	the	army	is	to	retard,	to	prevent,	your	spiritual	growth	so	that
you	become	incapable	of	saying	no.
That	is	a	wrong	kind	of	loyalty	--	I	am	against	it.
And	 just	 at	 the	 opposite	 polarity	 is	 the	 world	 of	 sannyas.	 The	 sannyasin	 is
exactly	 the	 polar	 opposite	 of	 the	 soldier.	 Sannyas	means	 a	 loyalty	 born	out	 of
love,	not	out	of	fear,	out	of	growth,	not	out	of	retardation,	out	of	your	freedom,
not	out	of	your	slavery.
I	give	you	total	freedom	because	my	trust	is	that	a	totally	free	person	is	capable
of	 a	 loyal	 heart;	 only	 a	 totally	 free	 person	 is	 capable	 of	 having	 a	 loyal	 heart.
Then	 that	 loyalty	 comes	 from	 his	 own	 innermost	 core,	 it	 is	 not	 imposed.	 It
enhances	his	being,	it	makes	him	graceful,	beautiful.	He	is	capable	of	saying	no,
but	 because	 of	 love	 he	 says	 yes.	His	 capacity	 to	 say	 no	 is	 not	 destroyed,	 it	 is
there;	if	needed	he	can	say	no.	But	he	says	yes	out	of	his	own	inner	choice,	out
of	his	own	decision.
Sannyas	 is	your	decision.	Yes,	 it	 is	a	 surrender,	but	 the	decision	 is	yours.	And
when	 surrender	 comes	 out	 of	 your	 decision	 it	 has	 a	 beauty	 because	 it	 doesn't
stink	of	slavery,	it	is	fragrant	with	freedom.
Hence	 I	 teach	 love.	Be	more	 loving.	And	 out	 of	 love	 slowly	 slowly	 your	 yes
becomes	bigger	and	bigger.
First	 you	 start	 saying	 yes	 to	 the	 master,	 to	 your	 friends,	 to	 the	 world	 of	 the
sannyasins,	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 learn	 the	 treasures	 of	 saying	 yes,	 the
blessings	 of	 saying	 yes.	 And	 then	 one	 day	 you	 can	 say	 yes	 to	 the	 whole
existence,	to	life	itself.
That	is	saying	yes	to	god	and	that	is	the	ultimate	peak	of	surrender,	of	love,	of
trust.	 It	 brings	 you	 to	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 consciousness,	 the	 Everest	 of
consciousness.
The	soldier	falls	below	humanity,	the	sannyasin	goes	above	humanity.
(To	Ned,	 a	 therapist	 from	America,	Osho	explained	 the	 seemingly	paradoxical
situation	 that	 probably	 all	 of	 us	who	 live	here	have	observed	 --	 that	while	 the
poor	of	India	are	perhaps	the	most	impoverished	people	of	the	world,	it	doesn't
seem	to	trouble	them	too	much.)
Meditation	opens	doors	to	inner	richness.	And	the	outer	richness	is	only	a	false
substitute:	 it	keeps	you	 in	a	kind	of	 illusion	 that	you	are	 rich.	Deep	down	you
remain	poor,	because	the	outer	richness	cannot	change	your	inner	world.	If	you
are	poor	in	a	hut,	miserable	in	a	hut,	you	will	be	poor	and	miserable	in	a	palace
too.	 The	 palace	 cannot	 change	 your	 misery,	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 your
misery.	Your	misery	can	only	be	changed	by	some	inner	transformation.
So	there	are	 two	kinds	of	poor	people	 in	 the	world;	 the	poor	poor	and	the	rich
poor	--	but	both	are	poor.
And	in	fact	the	rich	poor	person	is	far	more	poor,	poorer	than	the	poor	poor,	for
the	simple	reason	 that	he	has	contrast.	He	can	see	 that	 the	outside	has	become
rich	and	in	contrast	his	inner	poverty	shows	more	clearly.	The	poor	man	cannot
feel	that.	Both	sides	are	poor,	in	and	out,	so	there	is	no	contrast.	It	is	like	writing
with	 white	 chalk	 on	 a	 white	 wall	 --	 there	 is	 no	 contrast.	 You	 carl	 write
something,	but	you	cannot	read	it.	The	rich	man	is	 like	a	blackboard	on	which
you	write	with	white	chalk;	it	comes	clear	and	loud.
Hence	all	rich	societies	have	felt	a	tremendous	urge	to	find	inner	richness.	That's
how	religion	is	born	--
religion	 can	 be	 born	 only	 in	 a	 rich	 society.	 The	 poor	 society	 can	 only	 have	 a
pseudo	 kind	 of	 religion;	 it	 cannot	 have	 real	 religion	 because	 it	 cannot	 feel	 its
inner	poverty,	there	is	no	contrast.
That's	 why	when	 people	 from	 the	West	 come	 to	 India	 they	 are	 surprised	 and
puzzled:	 people	 are	 so	 poor	 and	yet	 they	don't	 seem	 to	 be	 so	miserable.	They
should	be	very	miserable,	but	they	don't	seem	to	be	as	miserable	as	people	in	the
West	are	--	and	they	are	rich.	They	have	all	the	technology	and	all	the	industry
and	all	the	scientific	gadgets,	but	they	are	very	very	miserable.	They	feel	that	life
is	a	meaningless	project,	they	feel	life	is	absurd.	So	when	they	come	to	the	East
and	see	poor	people	in	a	way	contented	they	start	thinking	it	must	be	because	of
religion.	It	is	not	so.	And	the	Indian	gurus	go	on	saying	it	is	because	of	religion	-
-	 that	 is	 sheer	nonsense!	 It	 is	 not	because	of	 religion,	 it	 is	 because	 there	 is	no
contrast.
The	poor	man	can	 still	 hope,	 the	 rich	man	cannot	hope,	he	becomes	hopeless.
The	poor	man	can	hope	 that	one	day	he	will	become	 rich	and	 then	everything
will	be	all	 right;	 so	he	can	go	on	dreaming,	he	has	 something	 to	dream	about.
The	rich	man	has	come	to	the	very	end	of	the	road.	He	has	all	that	he	had	ever
dreamt	of,	or	even	more	 than	he	ever	dreamt	of.	Now,	what	 to	do?	Nothing	 is
happening.	All	that	he	wanted	he	has,	and	the	emptiness	still	continues;	in	fact,	it
looks	very	clear	now.	One	thing	is	certain:	that	this	road	leads	nowhere;	he	has
come	to	a	full	stop.	Something	else	is	needed.	His	inner	search	begins.	When	the
outer	search	has	failed	completely	because	it	has	succeeded	--	nothing	fails	like
success	--	he	has	to	turn	in.
Religion	happens	only	in	a	rich	society.	Then	a	new	journey	starts,	a	journey	for
inner	treasures.	We	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	not	found	it	on	the	outside	so	maybe	it	is	not	on	the	outside	--	let	us	look	in.
It	is	simple	logic	--	turn	in.	And	those	who	have	gone	in	have	always	found	it,
without	exception.
Meditation	means	 turning	 in,	 and	 then	you	 immediately	 see	 explosions	of	 joy,
richness.	 Suddenly	 your	 life	 has	 meaning,	 splendour.	 Suddenly	 a	 quality	 of
dance,	of	rejoicing,	of	celebration,	arises	in	you.	All	meaninglessness	disappears
and	now	you	know	you	have	something	which	is	intrinsically	yours	and	there	is
no	 need	 to	 hanker	 for	 anything	 because	 nothing	 can	 be	 found	 to...	 any
improvement	is	not	possible.
Once	you	have	known	the	inner	there	is	nothing	more	to	know,	there	cannot	be
anything	 higher.	 You	 start	 overflowing	 with	 your	 richness;	 in	 fact	 you	 start
sharing	it	with	others.
Meditation	brings	you	 tremendous	 richness,	 inexhaustible	 richness,	 and	a	deep
longing	to	share	it,	to	give	it	to	everybody	for	no	reason	at	all,	for	the	sheer	joy
of	giving	it.
(To	 Irene	Osho	 spoke	on	a	 favourite	 theme	of	his	 --	 the	 synthesis	of	 love	 and
peace	 --	 and	 then	 turned	 to	 address	 Parambodhi,	 whose	 name	meant	 ultimate
enlightenment.)	Man	has	the	capacity	to	become	a	god	--	and	less	than	that	won't
do.	Less	 than	 that	will	 always	 keep	 you	 unsatisfied.	And	man	 becomes	 a	 god
when	the	inner	world	is	full	of	light.	Mind	is	darkness.	If	one	can	put	the	mind
aside,	light	explodes.	It	is	like	an	atomic	explosion.	One	becomes	a	fire,	aflame!
The	whole	being	suddenly	becomes	full	of	light.	It	is	our	nature,	but	the	mind	is
covering	 our	 light	 like	 a	 cloud	 covering	 the	moon;	 because	 of	 that	 cloud	 you
cannot	see	the	moon.
All	that	we	do	here	is	to	help	you	to	put	the	mind	aside.	All	the	meditations	are
nothing	but	devices	 to	put	 the	mind	aside.	And	once	you	have	got	 even	 just	 a
glimpse	of	your	inner	light,	then	things	become	very	easy.	Then	you	know	that
the	 light	 is	 inside.	And	 then	 to	put	 the	mind	aside	 is	not	difficult	because	now
you	know	there	is	no	risk	--	it	is	worth	putting	it	aside.	Only	in	the	beginning	is
it	difficult	because	you	only	know	 the	mind.	You	have	been	 identified	with	 it,
you	think	you	are	the	mind	so	to	put	it	aside	feels	very	dangerous.	It	feels	like
committing	suicide,	because	it	is	you!	But	you	are	not	it.	It	is	just	a	deep-rooted
misconception,	 a	 wrong	 calculation.	 You	 are	 simply	 making	 a	 mathematical
mistake.	 Two	 plus	 two	 are	 four,	 and	 you	 are	 putting	 five.	 The	 moment	 you
understand	it	 then	nothing	has	to	be	done,	you	simply	put	four	and	things	start
changing.
And	my	approach	is	not	that	of	implanting	a	belief	in	you.	I	don't	want	believers.
Believers	have	always	existed	and	nothing	has	happened	to	them.
I	 want	 you	 to	 experience.	 Believe	 only	 when	 you	 have	 experienced.	 Hence
meditation,	because	meditation	means	an	effort	to	experience	on	your	own.
So	while	you	are	here	try	to	learn	the	methods	to	put	the	mind	aside	as	deeply	as
possible.	And	all	the	methods	are	available	here,	all	the	methods	that	have	ever
been	tried	and	a	few	more	methods	which	have	never	been	tried	before.	So	this
is	a	great	opportunity.	If	you	put	your	energy	totally	into	it	something	is	bound	to
happen.
(And	 while	 we	 were	 on	 the	 subject,	 Osho	 pointed	 out	 that	 it	 is	 possible	 for
someone	 to	 think	 they	 are	 enlightened	 when	 actually	 they	 haven't	 really
attained.)
There	 are	 many	 pseudo	 enlightened	 people	 in	 the	 world	 and	 they	 sincerely
believe	that	they	are	enlightened.	So	one	has	to	be	very	aware	not	to	fall	into	that
mistake.	And	the	distinction	is	not	difficult,	the	criterion	is	very	simple.
The	criterion	is:	if	the	idea	of	enlightenment	gives	you	any	ego	then	it	is	false.	If
it	 makes	 you	 proud	 then	 it	 is	 false.	 If	 you	 start	 claiming	 some	 superiority	 --
holier	than	thou	--	then	it	is	false.	That	is	the	simple	criterion	to	be	remembered.
When	 it	has	no	claim	of	 superiority,	when	 it	 is	not	 a	question	of	being	proud,
when	it	is	not	an	achievement	at	all,	when	it	does	not	fulfil	your	ego	in	any	way,
when	 on	 the	 contrary	 you	 suddenly	 find	 the	 ego	 has	 disappeared,	 you	 look
within	 and	you	 cannot	 find	 the	 ego	 at	 all,	 then	 it	 is	 true	 enlightenment.	When
you	are	not	then	the	enlightenment	is	true;	when	you	are,	it	is	false.
(And	the	only	way	to	enlightenment	is	meditation,	Osho	told	Dhyanbodhi.)	One
should	not	waste	one's	energies	in	any	other	direction.	One	can	accumulate	much
knowledge	 but	 enlightenment	will	 not	 happen.	One	 can	 go	 on	 doing	 physical
exercises,	yoga	and	postures,	enlightenment	will	not	happen	 through	 it.	 It	may
give	you	a	better	physical	health	but	 that	 is	not	enlightenment.	One	can	go	on
chanting	mantras	and	enlightenment	will	not	happen	through	it.	It	can	give	you	a
better	 quality	 of	 sleep	 but	 sleep	 is	 not	 enlightenment,	Of	 course	 you	will	 feel
healthier,	you	will	have	a	certain	well-being,	but	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	not	enlightenment.
Enlightenment	 is	 possible	 only	when	 you	 go	 beyond	 thinking,	when	 you	 drop
the	mind.	 Then	 there	 is	 nobody	who	 can	 chant	 and	 nobody	who	 can	 do	 yoga
postures	and	nobody	who	can	accumulate	knowledge.
All	 those	 strategies	 are	 of	 the	mind.	When	 the	whole	mind	 is	 put	 aside,	 then
nothing	is	left	--	only	a	deep	silence,	an	unfathomable	silence.	In	that	silence	you
come	across	your	own	light,	your	own	innermost	core	starts	shining	forth	like	a
great	star.
So	remember,	meditation	is	the	key	and	everything	else	is	fooling	around.
(Putting	 the	 mind	 aside	 --	 that's	 actually	 what	 sannyas	 is,	 Osho	 told	 Veet
Chintan.)	Man	is	not	the	body,	not	the	mind.	Man	is	something	higher	than	both,
bigger	 than	 both,	 greater	 than	 both,	 vaster	 than	 both.	 There	 are	 people,	 the
materialists,	 who	 think	 that	 man	 is	 just	 the	 body;	 then	 there	 are	 people,	 the
psychologists,	who	think	man	is	just	the	mind.
But	man	is	consciousness,	because	man	can	watch	his	body-mind,	both,	and	the
watcher	cannot	be	the	watched,	the	observer	cannot	be	the	observed.	When	you
can	watch	the	mind	processes,	that	simply	says	that	you	are	separate	from	them,
you	are	not	them.
It	 is	 really	 a	 very	 strange	 phenomenon	 that	 even	 great	 psychologists	 like
Sigmund	 Freud	 and	 Adler	 and	 others	 have	 not	 looked	 at	 a	 simple	 fact.	 The
simple	fact	of	witnessing	would	have	been	enough	to	give	them	proof	that	man
is	consciousness	--	neither	body	nor	mind.
And	once	you	know	you	are	consciousness	you	start	existing	on	a	higher	plane,
and	of	course	with	that	higher	plane	your	whole	life	changes	accordingly.	Your
lifestyle	changes,	your	life-gestalt	changes.
And	I	don't	insist	that	you	should	change	your	lifestyle.	You	should	simply	move
higher	than	the	mind	and	you	will	see	the	miracle	happening	on	its	own	--	that
your	 lifestyle	 changes,	 that	 anger	 disappears,	 greed	 disappears,	 that	 jealousy
disappears.	There	is	no	need	to	drop	them.	You	simply	go	beyond	them	and	they
all	start	looking	so	stupid,	there	is	no	need	to	be	bothered	with	theme	There	is	no
question,	they	simply	wither	away,	they	simply	recede	farther	and	farther	away
and	disappear.
Sannyas	is	a	transcendence	of	the	mind,	and	that's	exactly	the	meaning	of	your
name.	 It	 precisely	 defines	 sannyas.	 Go	 beyond	 the	 mind	 and	 you	 will	 have
infinite	treasures	of	bliss.	By	going	beyond	the	mind	one	goes	beyond	birth	and
death	too,	one	becomes	part	of	eternal	life.
Religious	people	have	called	that	eternal	life	god;	one	can	call	it	truth,	one	can
call	it	enlightenment,	one	can	call	it	samadhi,	tao.	These	are	different	words	for
the	 same	 phenomenon;	 that	 one	 has	 become	 part	 of	 the	 eternal	 stream	 of
consciousness.	You	just	have	to	get	out	of	the	prison	of	the	mind	--	and	that	 is
the	only	prison.
(And	continuing	on	 the	same	 theme,	Osho	named	 the	next	 initiate	Veetkaya	 to
remind	her	that	she	is	neither	the	body	nor	the	mind	--	which	in	fact	aren't	two
separate	 things	 but	 just	 two	 faces	 of	 the	 one	 entity.)	 Man	 is	 living	 in	 a
psychosomatic	world	of	body-mind.	The	mind	is	the	inner	body	and	the	body	is
the	outer	mind.	So	the	moment	you	go	beyond	the	body	you	also	go	beyond	the
mind.
And	the	key	to	going	beyond	it	is	very	simple:	just	become	an	observer.	Observe
the	 body	 walking,	 sitting,	 going	 to	 sleep,	 eating.	 Just	 watch,	 become	 alert.
Remain	 alert	 as	 much	 as	 possible.	 It	 is	 difficult	 in	 the	 beginning;	 but	 it	 is	 a
knack;	 it	 comes	 soon.	Once	 you	make	 a	 little	 effort	 you	will	 see	 that	 you	 are
walking	and	at	the	same	time	there	is	an	undercurrent	in	your	watching,	that	you
are	eating,	that	you	are	drinking,	that	you	are	taking	a	shower.	Not	that	you	will
be	 saying	 all	 these	 words	 inside	 you,	 there	 is	 just	 an	 awareness	 of	 what	 is
happening.
And	with	that	awareness	a	separation	automatically	comes	in.	The	body	becomes
something	there	on	the	screen	and	you	are	the	onlooker,	just	a	spectator	looking
at	a	movie,	unidentified,	watching	the	traffic	or	watching	a	river	flowing	by.	You
are	not	 it.	And	suddenly	a	great	sense	of	freedom	comes	as	 if	you	are	out	of	a
prison.	And	that	sense	of	freedom	is	what	sannyas	is.
Sannyas	is	to	bring	you	great	freedom,	and	in	freedom	there	is	love,	in	freedom
there	 is	 truth.	 In	 freedom	 all	 that	 you	 have	 always	 wanted,	 starts	 happening
without	any	effort	on	your	part.
My	 whole	 approach	 is	 to	 change	 the	 foundation.	 I	 am	 not	 worried	 about	 the
circumference.	If	the	center	becomes	transformed	through	awareness,	the	whole
circumference	sooner	or	later	follows	it	--	it	has	to	follow,	inevitably.	Hence	my
insistence	 is	 not	 on	 character	 but	 on	 consciousness,	 not	 on	 morality	 but	 on
meditation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009225
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	addressed	Luca,	a	stage	designer	from	Switzerland.)	Mind	is	a	dark	hole.
If	 one	 looks	 inside	 one	will	 find	 only	 darkness	 because	 the	 first	 layer	 of	 our
inner	world	consists	of	the	mind.	The	second	layer	consists	of	the	heart,	and	the
third	 is	 our	 real	 being.	When	 you	 look	 in	 --	 and	 that's	 what	meditation	 is	 all
about	 looking	 in	 --	 first	you	will	 find	darkness.	 If	you	go	on	digging	 then	you
will	find	a	twilight,	neither	darkness	nor	light;	that	is	the	realm	of	the	heart.	It	is
just	as	when	the	night	is	no	more	and	the	sun	has	not	risen	yet	--	something	in
between.	It	has	its	own	beauty,	but	very	few	people	even	enter	into	that	twilight
land	of	the	heart.
If	one	goes	on	digging	still	deeper	then	one	enters	into	the	world	of	being.	Then
light	explodes,	and	that	light	dispels	all	darkness,	all	doubts.	That	darkness,	that
doubt,	 which	 has	 been	with	 you	 for	 thousands	 of	 lives	 disappears	 in	 a	 single
moment,	and	with	it	death	also.	They	are	all	part	of	one	organic	whole	--
darkness,	doubt	and	death;	 those	three	D's	have	to	be	remembered.	Light	 takes
you	beyond	all	the	three.
Luca	 also	 means	 the	 enlightened	 one.	 That's	 exactly	 the	 whole	 purpose	 of
sannyas:	to	help	you	to	discover	your	enlightened	state,	your	Buddhahood,	It	is
your	nature;	nothing	has	to	be	added	to	you.
Something	certainly	has	to	be	thrown	out,	but	nothing	has	to	be	taken	in.
Meditation	helps	you	to	reach	to	your	innermost	core.	Once	you	stand	there	you
are	beyond	the	reach	of	mind,	thought,	memory,	imagination,	suddenly	there	is
absolute	silence.	In	that	silence	truth	is	known.	That	silence	is	truth,	or	you	can
call	it	god	--	it	is	the	same.
Ma	 Prem	 Susanne	 means	 a	 white	 lily,	 it	 is	 representative	 of	 all	 that	 is	 most
beautiful:	grace,	totality,	flowering,	fragrance.
Man	is	also	a	seed,	just	as	there	are	seeds	of	trees.	But	the	misery	is	that	many
people	 die	 as	 seeds.	 They	 never	 change	 their	 potential	 into	 an	 actuality,	 they
never	 come	 to	 a	 flowering.	 And	 unless	 one	 flowers	 one	 remains	 unfulfilled.
Unless	the	fragrance	is	released	one	remains	imprisoned.
Love	 can	 give	 you	 the	 very	 secret	 of	 transforming	 the	 seed	 into	 a	 flowering
bush.	 It	 can	 help	 you	 to	 grow	 graceful	 flowers	 of	 consciousness,	 of	 bliss,	 of
godliness,	of	grace.
The	white	lily	is	one	of	the	very	graceful	flowers,	and	the	whiteness,	particularly,
represents	totality.	No	other	color	represents	totality:	white	means	all	the	colors
together.	White	in	itself	is	not	a	color,	it	is	a	synthesis	of	all	the	colors.	Black	is
absence	of	all	colors	and	white	is	presence	of	all	colors.	The	light	is	white;	when
it	passes	through	a	prism	it	is	divided	into	seven	colors.	That's	how	the	rainbow
is	created.
A	rainbow	happens	only	 in	a	particular	situation:	 in	 the	 rainy	season	when	 the
rainwater	 is	 hanging	 in	 the	 air,	 small	 droplets	 of	 water	 in	 the	 air,	 in	 the
atmosphere,	and	the	sun	suddenly	comes	out	of	the	clouds.
And	when	 the	 sunrays	 pass	 those	 hanging	 drops	 of	 water,	 the	 drops	 of	 water
function	as	a	prism,	they	divide	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	rays	into	seven	colors.	Hence	the	rainbow	is	created.
White	represents	totality,	unity,	oneness.	Love	gives	you	oneness	with	the	whole.
If	you	can	love	existence,	that	is	the	only	true	religion.	You	become	one	with	it;
then	all	distinctions,	divisions,	disappear.
The	 rainbow	 becomes	 a	 white	 ray	 again;	 it	 again	 becomes	 organically	 one,
integrated.
Love	 can	 do	miracles.	 It	 can	 unite	 you	with	 the	whole	 and	 it	 can	 help	 you	 to
transform	your	potential	into	the	real.	Love	is	the	path	of	self-realization.
(Build	your	life	with	bliss	bricks,	Osho	told	an	engineer	from	Holland.)	People
make	misery	their	foundation,	and	misery	is	like	shifting	sands.	Making	a	house
on	 shifting	 sands	 is	 creating	 hell	 for	 yourself.	 You	 will	 be	 crushed	 under	 it
because	it	is	going	to	fall	at	any	moment;	it	has	no	rock	as	a	foundation.
Why	do	people	choose	misery	to	be	their	foundation?	It	 is	really	amazing.	But
there	is	a	reason;	misery	is	helpful	for	one	thing,	it	helps	your	ego.	And	bliss	is
dangerous	for	the	ego,	it	kills	the	ego.	And	we	are	all	brought	up	in	such	a	way
that	 we	 become	 ego-oriented.	 Our	 whole	 education	 is	 to	 enhance	 the	 ego,	 to
make	us	ambitious	--	and	ambition	is	insanity.	Ego	is	nothing	but	sheer	madness,
and	the	egoist	is	bound	to	live	in	misery	because	he	will	be	afraid	of	bliss.
People	 talk	about	bliss;	 they	say	"We	want	bliss,"	but	 they	are	 really	afraid	of
bliss.	 Whenever	 bliss	 comes	 they	 close	 their	 doors,	 they	 shrink	 back,	 they
withdraw	into	themselves.	They	close	themselves	like	turtles,	they	go	into	their
shells	--	they	hide	in	their	shells	--	because	the	moment	bliss	happens	your	ego
simply	evaporates.	And	that	creates	panic,	one	is	scared,	because	we	think	that
we	are	egos	and	if	the	ego	is	gone	then	we	are	gone.	That	is	not	true.
You	are	not	the	ego.	In	fact,	when	the	ego	is	gone	you	will	really	know	who	you
are.	Unless	the	ego	goes	you	will	never	be	able	to	know	yourself.
Hence	I	teach	bliss,	because	I	know	bliss	is	sure	to	destroy	your	ego.	I	don't	tell
you	to	drop	the	ego;	I	persuade	you	to	be	blissful,	to	be	cheerful,	because	for	that
you	are	easily	 ready.	At	 least	 there	 is	a	desire	 for	bliss	 in	everybody;	one	may
have	repressed	it	but	it	is	there.	It	is	never	destroyed;	it	can	be	brought	up	again.
And	my	work	consists	in	bringing	your	desire	for	bliss	to	the	surface.	Once	it	is
there	ego	dies	of	its	own	accord.
And	that	is	the	most	significant	moment	in	one's	life,	to	see	ego	dying	and	being
arising.	 It	 is	 like	clouds	disappearing	and	 the	sun	shining	 forth.	And	only	 then
can	you	make	a	temple	out	of	your	life,	a	temple	into	which	God	can	be	invited,
can	be	welcomed,	can	be	received,	can	become	a	guest.
Blissfulness	will	make	you	a	host.	If	you	are	totally	blissful,	god	instantly	enters
you.	Only	total	blissfulness	makes	one	worthy	to	receive	the	ultimate	guest.
(Most	 of	 us	 leave	 home,	 never	 to	 find	 it	 again.	 But	 there	 have	 been	 a	 few
prodigal	sons	and	daughters	--
Osho	pointed	out.)
Those	 few	 are	 the	 awakened	 ones,	 the	 enlightened	 ones,	 the	 Buddhas,	 the
Christs.	 We	 can	 take	 hints	 from	 them,	 we	 can	 learn	 much	 because	 they	 are
constantly	 pointing	 towards	 the	 right	 track.	But	we	 are	 so	 stupid	 that	we	 start
worshipping	them	rather	than	taking	the	hint.	Rather	than	looking	at	the	moon	to
which	their	finger	is	pointing	we	start	worshipping	the	finger.
In	Japan	there	is	a	temple	a	very	ancient	temple,	a	very	strange	temple,	because
ordinarily	in	a	Buddhist	temple	there	is	a	Buddha	statue,	not	only	one	but	many.
There	 are	 temples	 of	 Buddha	 where	 there	 are	 thousands	 of	 statues.	 In	 China
there	 is	 one	 temple	 which	 has	 ten	 thousand	 statues	 of	 Buddha.	 For	 centuries
Buddhist	monks	have	carved	Buddha	statues	out	of	the	whole	of	the	mountain.
Even	to	go	around	all	those	statues	takes	days	--	ten	thousand	statues!
In	 this	 strange	 temple	 there	 is	not	 a	 single	 statue	 inside,	but	only	a	 finger	 and
nothing	else.	And	just	underneath	it	there	is	a	quote	from	Buddha:	I	only	point
the	way,	you	have	to	follow	it	Buddhas	only	show	the	way;	you	have	to	follow	it.
Bliss	is	already	our	nature,	our	intrinsic	nature,	but	we	have	become	so	artificial,
so	 unnatural,	 hence	 there	 has	 come	 a	 division	 between	 our	 reality	 and	 our
personality.	Our	personality	is	bogus,	false,	pseudo.
And	 the	 process	 of	 sannyas	 is	 of	 dropping	 the	 personality	 so	 that	 you	 can
discover	the	individuality.	And	that	is	a	gift	of	god.	In	that	individuality	bliss	is
the	 first	 encounter;	 the	 first	meeting	 is	 that	 of	 bliss.	And	 then	 there	 are	many
facets	and	dimensions	 to	your	 inner	being:	 love,	grace,	silence,	 truth,	 freedom.
There	 is	no	end,	 it	 is	a	multi-dimensional	phenomenon.	But	 the	first	 thing	 that
happens	is	a	tremendous	ecstasy.
But	 remember,	 it	 is	 not	 our	 achievement,	 it	 is	 god's	 gift.	 To	 know	 it	 and	 to
remember	it	keeps	one	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
humble.
(The	real	Christian	is	he	or	she	who	has	the	consciousness	of	a	celebrant,	Osho
told	 Kerstin.)	 Being	 a	 Christian	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Christianity.	 It	 has
nothing	 to	 do	with	 the	 church,	 a	 creed,	 a	 dogma;	 it	 has	 something	 to	 do	with
your	 own	 consciousness.	 If	 your	 consciousness	 becomes	 blissful	 you	 attain	 to
the	 same	 state	 as	Christ	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	only	way	 to	be	 a	Christian.	Being	a
Christ	is	the	only	way	to	be	a	Christian.
Believing	in	Christ	won't	help.	Millions	of	people	believe	in	Christ,	millions	of
others	 believe	 in	 Buddha,	 and	 so	 on,	 and	 so	 forth;	 neither	 the	 Buddhists	 are
Buddhas	nor	the	Christians	are	Christs	--	they	are	just	believers.	Belief	is	cheap;
it	does	not	transform	you.
Transformation	needs	guts.	That's	why	Jesus	 says	everybody	has	 to	carry	 their
cross	on	their	own	shoulders.	It	is	a	symbolic	message.	It	is	not	that	you	have	to
carry	a	wooden	cross	continuously	on	your	shoulders,	but	it	means	that	one	has
to	crucify	something	within	oneself,	the	ego;	it	is	the	barrier	in	bliss.
One	has	to	crucify	all	that	is	false	so	that	the	real	can	reveal	itself	as	it	is.
(Then	he	made	Jurgen	a	farmer	of	love.)
One	 of	 the	 greatest	 tragedies	 that	 has	 happened	 to	 humanity	 is	 that	 we	 are
brought	up	with	a	wrong	notion	 that	we	already	know	what	 love	 is.	We	don't.
And	because	of	this	false	notion	we	live	without	love.
Of	course	all	that	is	needed	to	know	is	provided,	all	that	is	needed	to	create	that
music	called	love	is	within	you.	But	it	is	like	a	guitar:	you	are	there,	the	guitar	is
there,	but	you	don't	know	how	to	play	upon	it.	Music	will	not	be	born.
The	potential	of	 love	 is	 there,	 the	 seed	of	 love	 is	 there,	but	you	have	 to	know
how	 to	cultivate	 it,	how	 to	be	a	 farmer,	how	 to	be	a	gardener;	what	climate	 is
needed,	 what	 season	 is	 right	 to	 sow	 the	 seeds	 and	 how	much	water	 and	 how
much	 manure	 and	 how	 much	 sun	 and	 how	 much	 shade.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 very
intelligent,	only	then	the	most	delicate	flower....
There	is	nothing	more	delicate	than	love;	even	roses	are	not	as	delicate.	Unless
one	is	very	intelligent	one	will	not	be	able	to	grow	into	love.
Life	 is	 an	opportunity	 to	grow	 the	qualities	of	 love,	 to	bring	 love	 to	a	 state	of
ultimate	 flowering.	But	one	should	not	 think	 from	 the	very	beginning	 that	one
knows	what	 it	 is.	That	 very	 idea	 prevents	 you	 from	moving	 into	 the	world	 of
transformation.
It	is	like	an	ill	person	who	thinks	he	is	healthy.	Now,	he	is	going	to	die	because
he	will	not	take	any	notice	of	illness.	In	fact	he	will	repress	it,	he	will	avoid	it,	he
will	not	look	at	it.	Even	if	it	comes	and	insists	on	being	taken	notice	of,	he	will
deny	it.	He	will	fight	with	it	and	he	will	say,	"You	are	not	there.	I	don't	believe	in
you.	I	am	perfectly	healthy."	Now,	this	man	is	in	a	really	dangerous	state	and	the
danger	is	not	coming	from	illness,	the	danger	is	coming	from	his	stubbornness	in
rejecting	it.	If	he	accepts	 it,	 then	something	can	be	done;	 then	cure	is	possible.
And	the	sooner	one	becomes	aware,	the	better.	Then	it	can	be	prevented	from	the
very	beginning.
In	a	better	human	society	we	will	tell	every	child,	"You	have	the	seeds	of	love,
of	 bliss,	 of	 truth,	 but	 they	 are	 seeds.	 Your	whole	 life	 has	 to	 be	 a	 tremendous
effort	to	sow	the	seeds,	to	learn	the	art	of	growing,	to	be	patient	to	wait	for	the
seeds	to	sprout,	then	to	take	care	of	the	plants	and	still	to	prayerfully	wait	for	the
right	season	when	the	flowering	happens."
And	that's	what	we	are	doing	here.	It	is	an	experiment	in	inner	farming,	in	inner
gardening,	in	inner	agriculture.	But	the	first	thing	has	to	be	the	shock	that	up	to
now	you	have	lived	in	vain	and	whatsoever	you	have	done	has	been	done	from
wrong	ideas.	And	we	have	to	make	the	slate	clean,	so	the	whole	past	is	simply
put	aside.
A	sannyasin	has	to	begin	from	scratch.	Sannyas	is	a	new	birth.	It	is	as	if	you	are
born	today	and	now	you	have	to	start	living.
Forget	the	past,	don't	go	on	carrying	it.	It	has	not	given	you	anything.	It	has	been
tragic	--	no	need	to	remain	burdened	with	it.	Become	free	of	it	so	that	you	can
experiment	afresh.	Then	sannyas	is	a	great	adventure.
(Meditation	 is	 not-minding.	This	was	 the	message	 to	Dhyan	Sandesh.	Mind	 is
our	 prison,	 said	 Osho.)	 We	 are	 imprisoned	 in	 our	 thoughts,	 ideologies,
philosophies.	We	have	to	go	beyond	words	and	scriptures	and	theories,	only	then
does	one	start	experiencing	the	truth.	Theories	are	about	truth,	but	to	know	about
truth	is	not	 to	know	truth	itself.	Meditation	makes	you	capable	of	knowing	the
truth	directly.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	 don't	 give	you	any	 ideas	 about	 truth,	 not	 even	definitions	 about	 truth.	 I	 only
give	you	certain	strategies,	devices,	which	can	help	you	to	go	beyond	the	mind.	I
provide	 ladders	 so	 the	 prisoners	 can	 jump	 out	 of	 their	 prisons.	 I	 help	 you	 to
know	 how	 to	 bribe	 the	 guards	 so	 that	 when	 you	 escape	 from	 the	 prison	 they
pretend	to	be	fast	asleep.	I	provide	you	with	keys	to	unlock	the	doors.
I	am	not	interested	in	philosophy	at	all.	My	approach	is	existential.	Meditation	is
something	existential,	not	theoretical,	not	intellectual.
So	 being	 a	 sannyasin	 means	 being	 a	 meditator,	 nothing	 else.	 Put	 all	 your
energies	into	meditation	because	when	one	is	imprisoned	the	first	thing	is	to	get
out	 of	 the	 prison;	 everything	 else	 is	 a	 sheer	 wastage	 of	 time.	 You	 can	 go	 on
reading	the	Bible	in	the	prison	--	Bibles	are	provided	for	the	prisoners!	You	can
go	on	reciting	the	Gita	or	 the	Koran,	and	they	can	help	you	to	forget	 the	walls
you	 are	 surrounded	 by.	 But	 that	 is	 living	 in	 a	 fool's	 world	 --	 those	 walls	 are
there.
Ladders	are	needed,	Bibles	are	not	needed.	Or	if	you	have	got	Bibles,	use	them
as	 stepping	 stones.	Put	Bibles	upon	each	other,	make	a	 ladder	 so	 that	you	can
reach	the	top	of	the	wall	and	jump!	That's	the	only	use	scriptures	can	be	put	to,
otherwise	they	are	useless.
The	only	priority,	the	first	priority,	is	to	get	free	of	the	mind,	then	everything	else
follows	of	its	own	accord.
(Osho	 returned	 to	 a	 favourite	 theme	 of	 his	 --	 the	 meaninglessness	 of	 outer
achievements	and	victories	unless	one	is	master	of	oneself.)
Alexander	 the	Great	 died	 crying	 because	 he	 became	 aware	 that	 his	whole	 life
had	been	a	sheer	wastage	because	death	was	going	to	destroy	everything	and	he
had	used	his	whole	 life	 chasing	 after	 things	which	death	was	 taking	 away.	So
what	was	 the	point?	He	had	never	allowed	himself	 to	 live.	He	 loved	a	woman
but	 he	 could	 not	 live	 with	 the	 woman	 because	 his	 whole	 interest	 was	 in
conquering	the	world.	He	loved	his	mother	but	he	could	not	be	with	her	because
he	constantly	had	to	go	on	conquering	new	lands.
He	promised	his	mother	 that	he	would	come	back,	once	he	had	conquered	 the
world	he	would	come	back	home.	But	he	could	not	reach	home	either.	That	was
a	great	wound.	He	died	on	the	way	back	from	India.	His	mother	was	not	very	far
away,	 only	 twenty-four	 hours	 away	 --	 just	 a	 journey	 of	 twenty-four	 hours.	He
told	his	physicians,	"I	can	give	you	my	whole	kingdom	--	help	me	to	fulfil	my
promise!"	But	 the	physicians	 said,	 "Even	 if	 you	give	your	whole	kingdom	we
cannot	 do	 anything	 --	 death	 has	 come.	 You	 cannot	 survive	more	 than	 two	 or
three	hours,	and	it	is	better	to	rest,	relax.	There	is	no	point	--	you	cannot	reach
your	mother."
Now	this	man	died	when	he	was	only	thirty-three.	A	small	life,	but	even	that	was
wasted	in	something	unessential.
Meditation	means	 going	 inwards,	 reaching	 your	 innermost	 core,	 entering	 your
interiority.	And	it	is	a	vast	phenomenon.	It	has	its	own	infinity,	eternity.	It	knows
nothing	of	birth	and	nothing	of	death.	It	knows	nothing	of	time;	it	is	beyond	time
and	space	both.	To	know	it	is	to	know	god	--	and	that	is	the	real	treasure,	the	real
kingdom.
(To	wind	 up	 the	 evening	Osho	 described	 the	 different	 levels	 of	 bliss,	 starting
with	what	we	know	as	pleasure	--	that	is	related	to	the	body.)
If	it	comes	through	the	mind	it	is	happiness,	we	know	it	as	happiness.	If	it	comes
through	meditation	--
that	 is	 through	being	--	 then	it	 is	bliss,	 then	it	 is	pure.	Pleasure	depends	on	the
body	and	the	body	is	not	trustworthy.	It	is	there	today,	tomorrow	it	is	gone.
Today	it	is	young,	tomorrow	it	is	old.	Today	it	is	healthy,	tomorrow	it	is	sick.	It
is	not	dependable;	one	should	not	trust	it	very	much.	It	is	a	very	temporary	abode
--	just	a	bamboo	hut.	A	small	earthquake	is	enough	to	finish	it!	Or	just	a	small
fire,	or	 just	a	strong	wind,	and	 it	 is	gone,	gone	with	 the	wind!	One	should	not
invest	too	much	in	the	physical	world.
And	happiness	 also	 is	not	of	 any	more	value	 --	 a	 little	higher	 than	pleasure,	 a
little	better,	but	just	a	little.
There	is	not	much	difference.	There	is	a	difference	but	that	difference	is	only	of
quantity	not	of	quality.	You	can	be	happy	with	poetry,	with	painting,	with	music,
but	the	same	song	repeated	again	and	again	will	create	boredom.	You	have	heard
the	music	and	it	was	beautiful,	but	if	you	hear	it	again	and	again	soon	you	will
be	 fed	up	with	 it.	 It	 is	momentary,	 it	 is	 constantly	changing.	You	cannot	be	at
ease	with	 it,	 at	 rest	with	 it.	 It	 creates	 tensions	 in	you	because	 the	old	pleasure
becomes	 pain,	 the	 old	 happiness	 becomes	 unhappiness.	 The	moment	 that	 you
were	happy	with	becomes	a	headache.
And	 the	 more	 intelligent	 you	 are,	 the	 sooner	 it	 happens	 It	 is	 only	 the	 dull
numbskulls	that	the	same	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
woman,	the	same	man,	can	go	on	giving	pleasure	for	their	whole	life.	It	is	simply
stupidity,	nothing	else!
Otherwise	once	you	have	known	the	whole	geography	of	the	woman	or	the	man
it	is	finished.	You	have	explored	the	whole	territory,	now	there	is	nothing	more
in	it.
Bliss	is	qualitatively	different.	It	does	not	depend	on	the	outside	world,	neither
on	woman	nor	on	wine,	neither	on	love	nor	on	music.	It	depends	on	nothing.	It	is
just	 the	 joy	of	sheer	existence.	You	are	simply	happy	for	no	reason	at	all.	 It	 is
uncaused,	unmotivated.	It	is	authentically	yours.
Hence,	 except	 for	 meditation,	 there	 is	 no	 door	 to	 real	 bliss;	 all	 others	 are
temporary	substitutes.	And	the	miracle	is,	if	you	have	known	bliss	then	you	can
transform	 even	 physical	 pleasure	 into	 bliss,	 then	 you	 can	 transform
psychological	happiness	into	bliss.	But	that	is	possible	only	if	you	have	known
the	ultimate	bliss.
Then	you	can	bring	 that	ultimate	bliss	 to	 the	dark	valleys	of	 the	mind	and	 the
still	darker	valleys	of	the	body.
A	meditator	loving	a	woman	or	a	man	has	a	different	quality	to	his	love.	It	is	that
of	sharing,	it	is	not	of	demand.	He	does	not	want	anything	from	the	other,	in	fact,
he	wants	to	give.	It	is	not	a	question	of	"Give	me	more,	this	is	not	enough."	He
wants	to	give	himself	because	he	has	too	much.	He	is	like	a	raincloud,	so	full	it
wants	 to	 shower.	 A	 meditator	 can	 transform	 the	 quality	 of	 music,	 painting,
poetry,	because	he	can	bring	something	of	the	beyond	into	them.
And	 that's	 the	difference	between	 real	 creativity	 and	pseudo	 creativity.	 pseudo
creativity	remains	of	the	mind	and	real	creativity	comes	out	of	being.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009235
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(The	way	to	truth	is	not	through	logic	but	luminosity.	This	was	the	message	for
Prabodh	Thomas.)	One	cannot	seek	truth	through	thinking	because	thinking	is	an
unconscious	activity.	It	is	groping	in	the	dark.
Only	when	 one	 is	 conscious,	 alert,	 aware,	 does	 seeing	 begin.	 Thinking	 is	 not
seeing;	it	is	a	substitute	for	seeing.	The	blind	man	thinks	about	light	but	the	man
who	 can	 see,	 sees	 light.	He	 does	 not	 think	 about	 it,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 think
about	it.
The	man	who	has	not	known	love	thinks	about	it,	the	man	who	has	tasted	love
knows	 it	 knowing	 and	 thinking	 are	 two	 diametrically	 opposite	 processes.
Thinking	 is	not	knowing	 --	and	we	go	on	 thinking	about	 truth.	That	 is	not	 the
way	for	the	seeker.
The	seeker	has	 to	drop	 thinking	and	become	aware.	And	awareness	 is	possible
only	when	you	drop	 thinking,	when	 there	 is	no	 thought	 in	your	consciousness,
your	 consciousness	 is	 pure,	 uncontaminated,	 unpolluted.	 In	 that	 clarity
everything	is	revealed.	All	the	mysteries	of	life,	all	the	secrets	of	existence,	are
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
yours.
(It's	 the	 greatest	 love,	 that	 of	 truth,	 Osho	 went	 on	 to	 say.)	 People	 live	 in
comfortable	 lies.	 They	 don't	 want	 truth,	 they	 want	 consolations,	 cosy
consolations;	 hence	 they	 remain	 clinging	 to	 superstitions,	 to	 traditions,	 to
conventions,	because	all	that	is	old	has	a	certain	prestige,	a	certain	credit	in	the
marketplace.	All	that	is	old,	they	say,	is	gold.	It	is	not	so.
The	old	looks	gold	only	to	the	fools,	to	the	cowards.
Life	is	new	every	moment,	it	is	never	old.	Existence	is	always	now	and	here.	It
has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 the	 past	 and	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 the	 future	 either.	 The
moment	you	are	also	now	and	here	there	is	a	meeting
--	and	that	meeting	becomes	the	truth.	Of	course	it	will	shatter	many	illusions,	it
will	 shatter	 many	 ideologies,	 it	 will	 shatter	 all	 conceptions,	 a	 priori	 beliefs,
because	 truth	cannot	 fit	with	you,	 truth	cannot	compromise	with	you	and	your
ideas	about	it.	You	have	to	be	ready	to	fit	with	truth	itself.	That's	what	I	call	love
for	truth,	a	readiness	to	go	with	truth	wherever	it	leads,	and	whatsoever	needs	to
be	dropped	one	is	ready	to	drop.	That	is	possible	only	if	there	is	love	for	truth.
Love	can	do	everything,	love	can	sacrifice	everything	--	and	truth	requires	total
sacrifice,	total	commitment.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 journey	 of	 love	 towards	 truth.	 So	 I	 am	here	 to	 shatter	 all	 your
beliefs,	 ideas,	 conceptions,	 projections.	 In	 a	 way	 my	 work	 looks	 very	 hard,
harsh,	 because	 I	 have	 to	 cut	 out	many	 chunks	which	 you	 have	 believed	 to	 be
your	very	being.
The	work	of	a	master	is	exactly	like	that	of	a	sculptor:	he	has	to	cut	the	rock	and
he	has	to	be	very	hard.
Only	 by	 his	 hardness,	 by	 cutting	 out	 all	 that	 is	 non-essential,	 is	 he	 capable	 of
transforming	the	rock	into	a	beautiful	statue.
When	you	come	to	me	you	come	as	a	raw	diamond.	It	needs	much	cutting,	much
polishing,	only	then	will	you	shine	in	your	splendour.	When	you	come	to	me	you
come	 full	 of	 superstitions	 --	 Christian,	 Hindu,	 Mohammedan,	 Buddhist,
Communist.	I	have	to	destroy	all	those,	mercilessly,	because	only	then	can	I	help
you	to	discover	your	real	being.
From	your	side	sannyas	means	a	green	signal	to	go	ahead.
(We're	here	to	die	--	and	born	tomorrow.	Sujate,	Patricia's	new	name,	gave	Osho
the	opportunity	to	talk	about	the	second	birth	a	sannyasin	passes	through.)
The	 first	 birth	 is	 only	 a	 so-called	 birth.	 It	 only	 gives	 you	 an	 opportunity,	 a
potential.	Unless	 the	second	birth	happens	you	are	not	well-born,	you	are	only
half-born.	Many	people	 think	 that	 they	are	fully	born	with	 the	first	birth.	They
are	 deceiving	 themselves.	 They	will	 die	without	 knowing	 anything	 about	 life,
without	 knowing	what	 it	 really	was	 to	 be.	 They	will	 only	 vegetate.	 They	will
exist	 but	 their	 existence	 will	 not	 have	 anything	 of	 value.	 It	 will	 be	 a	 very
superficial	existence	--	routine,	mundane.
A	second	birth	is	needed	and	that	birth	happens	through	love	because	love	means
only	one	thing,	the	dropping	of	the	ego.
With	the	first	birth	you	cannot	drop	the	ego.	In	fact,	each	child	has	to	learn	the
language	of	the	ego	just	to	survive.	It	is	only	for	a	grown-up	person	to	decide,	to
choose,	whether	to	live	in	the	ego	or	to	drop	it	and	live	in	total	humbleness.
Jesus	is	right	when	he	says,	"Blessed	are	the	meek	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of
god."	By	meek	he	means	 those	who	are	without	 any	ego.	And	 the	only	magic
that	can	help	you	to	drop	the	ego	is	love.
Jesus	also	says,	"Unless	you	are	born	again	you	will	not	enter	into	my	kingdom
of	god."	That's	 exactly	 the	meaning	of	Sujate:	unless	you	are	born	again.	And
love	is	going	to	be	the	very	process	of	your	second	birth.
Sannyas,	 to	 really	 be	 a	 transformation,	 a	 revolution,	 has	 to	 be	 nothing	 but	 a
jump,	a	quantum	leap	into	the	mysterious	dimension	of	love.
Drop	 the	 ego.	Don't	 think	 you	 are	 separate	 from	 existence.	Ego	 creates	walls,
love	creates	bridges.
Destroy	all	walls	and	use	the	same	material,	the	same	bricks,	to	create	bridges.
It	 is	 the	 same	 material	 that	 creates	 the	 ego.	 Dismantle	 it	 and	 use	 the	 same
material	in	making	bridges.
And	 make	 as	 many	 bridges	 as	 possible.	 The	 more	 bridges	 you	 have	 with
existence,	the	more	rich	you	are.
When	 you	 are	 related	 totally	 you	 are	 liberated:	 liberated	 from	 all	 sleep,
somnambulism,	unconsciousness.
Your	life	becomes	full	of	light.
Love,	 and	you	will	 know	what	 light	 is.	Love,	 and	you	will	 know	what	 life	 is.
Love,	and	you	will	know	what	god	is.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Osho	warned	us	that	although	meditation	is	a	must,	it	must	be	dropped	at	some
point.	He	was	addressing	Dhyanbodhi,	a	truck	driver	from	Holland.)
Meditation	is	a	method,	a	means.	Awareness	is	the	end,	the	goal.	Meditation	is
only	a	key.	It	opens	the	door	and	then	you	enter	into	the	world	of	awareness.
Meditation	 is	 not	 an	 end	 unto	 itself,	 so	when	 you	 have	 attained	 to	 awareness
meditation	disappears.
Meditation	 is	 complete	 only	 when	 it	 can	 be	 dropped,	 when	 you	 need	 not
meditate	any	more,	then	meditation	has	come	to	its	ultimate	peak,	it	has	released
your	awareness.	Its	work	is	done.
It	is	a	ladder	or	a	boat:	you	reach	the	other	shore	and	the	boat	is	no	more	needed.
You	simply	say	thank	you	to	the	boat.	Of	course	it	has	done	much	for	you,	you
feel	grateful,	but	 there	 is	no	need	 to	become	attached	 to	 it,	 there	 is	no	need	 to
carry	the	boat	on	your	head	wherever	you	go.	When	you	have	crossed	the	bridge,
the	bridge	is	no	more	needed.	When	you	have	climbed	the	ladder	and	reached	a
higher	plane	you	forget	all	about	the	ladder.
There	 are	 two	 types	 of	 people	 in	 the	 world	 who	 are	 interested	 in	meditation.
They	can	be	divided	into	two	categories.
One	type	is	people	like	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi;	their	idea	is	that	meditation	is
the	goal.	Then	the	other	category	is	like	J.	Krishnamurti	who	says	meditation	is
not	needed	at	all.	Both	are	right	in	a	way	and	both	are	also	wrong	in	a	way.	They
are	both	telling	half	the	truth.
Mahesh	Yogi	is	telling	the	first	part	of	the	truth:	meditation	is	needed,	and	he	is
right.	But	it	is	not	needed	forever,	it	is	just	a	means.	And	the	meditator	has	to	be
aware	of	it	from	the	very	beginning	otherwise	he	will	become	attached,	obsessed
with	meditation	 itself.	Then	 it	 becomes	 a	 ritual.	Then	 it	 is	 no	more	of	 help,	 it
becomes	a	hindrance.
If	you	cling	to	the	ladder,	even	if	you	have	reached	the	top	rung	of	the	ladder	and
you	cling	 to	 that,	you	have	not	 reached	 the	higher	plane.	Unless	you	 leave	 the
ladder	behind	you	will	not	be	able	to	move	on	the	higher	plane.
Krishnamurti	 is	 too	 cautious	 about	 this	 fear,	 because	many	meditators	 become
attached	 to	 their	meditation,	 so	he	 says	 there	 is	no	need	 for	meditation.	But	 if
there	is	no	need	for	meditation	you	will	remain	on	the	lower	level.	Without	the
ladder	you	cannot	reach	the	higher	level.
My	approach	is	total.	I	say	meditation	is	needed	and	I	also	say	a	moment	comes
when	 meditation	 has	 to	 be	 dropped.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 your	 name,
Dhyanbodhi.
Dhyan	means	meditation	 --	 that	 is	 the	 beginning	 part,	 half,	 and	 Bodhi	means
awareness	--	that	is	the	last	part,	the	other	half,	the	other	side	of	the	coin.	That's
why	Zen	people	say	effortless	effort:	effort	is	needed	but	they	remind	you	again
and	 again	 not	 to	 become	 attached	 to	 it,	 hence	 the	 paradox	 of	 effortless	 effort.
And	 I	 agree	with	 the	Zen	approach	 towards	 life.	 It	 is	 a	whole	 approach,	more
wholesome	than	any	approach	that	has	ever	existed	on	earth.
(Then	he	enlarged	on	the	nature	of	awareness.)
Awareness	is	what	the	alchemists	have	been	searching	for	--	the	elixir,	the	nectar,
the	magical	formula	that	can	help	you	to	become	an	immortal.
In	fact	everybody	is	immortal	but	we	are	living	in	a	mortal	body	and	we	are	so
close	to	the	body	that	the	identity	arises.	There	is	no	distance	to	see	the	body	as
separate.	 We	 are	 so	 immersed	 in	 the	 body,	 rooted	 in	 the	 body,	 that	 we	 start
feeling	we	are	the	body	--	and	then	the	problem	arises:	we	start	becoming	afraid
of	death.	Then	all	the	fears,	all	the	nightmares,	come	in	its	wake.
Awareness	 creates	 the	 distance	 between	 you	 and	 your	 body.	 It	 makes	 you
watchful	 of	 both	 your	 own	 body	 and	 mind,	 because	 body	 and	 mind	 are	 not
separate.	Body-mind	is	one	entity,	the	mind	is	the	inside	of	the	body.	And	when
you	become	aware	of	body-mind	you	immediately	know	you	are	separate	from
both	and	 the	distance	starts	happening.	Then	you	know	you	are	 immortal,	you
are	not	part	of	time,	you	are	part	of	the	eternal,	that	there	is	no	birth	for	you	and
no	death	either,	that	you	have	always	been	here	and	you	will	always	be	here.	You
have	been	in	many	bodies	because	you	desired	so	much.
Each	desire	brings	you	back	into	a	body	because	without	a	body	no	desire	car.	be
fulfilled.	 If	one	 is	very	much	attached	 to	food	one	will	need	a	body;	without	a
body	you	cannot	enjoy	food	--	souls	are	not	known	to	eat	food.	So	a	person	who
is	too	greedy	for	food	is	bound	to	come	back	in	a	body.	Or	the	person	who	is	too
attached	 to	sexual	pleasures	 is	bound	 to	come	back	 in	a	body,	because	nobody
has	ever	heard...	Except	for	one	thing,	that	the	holy	ghost	created	Jesus	Christ....
Otherwise	no	ghost	has	ever	been	able	to	do	anything	like	that.	And	it	is	just	a
myth:	ghosts	cannot	do	it.	Even	if	 they	want	 to	do	it	 they	will	have	to	possess
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
somebody's	 body.	Without	 a	 body	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 any	 pleasure,	 any
fulfilment	of	any	desire.
So	when	all	desires	disappear	you	will	not	come	back	into	the	body	but	you	will
remain	 in	 the	universal	consciousness	as	part	of	 the	 infinity.	That's	what	we	 in
the	East	call	nirvana,	the	ultimate	state	of	consciousness,	when	there	is	no	need
for	any	body,	no	need	to	be	 imprisoned	again.	We	call	 it	 the	ultimate	freedom,
because	to	be	in	a	body	is	a	bondage.	Of	course	it	is	a	very	limited	thing	and	you
are	unlimited;	it	is	forcing	the	unlimited	into	such	a	limited,	small	world	of	the
body.	That's	why	there	is	constant	tension,	uneasiness,	and	one	goes	on	feeling
crippled,	one	goes	on	feeling	crushed,	crowded,	imprisoned,	chained.
One	may	not	 be	 exactly	 aware	of	 it	 but	 vaguely	 everybody	 feels	 something	 is
wrong.	This	is	what	is	wrong:	we	are	infinite	and	are	trying	to	exist	through	the
very	small	world	of	the	body.
Awareness	frees	you	from	the	body.	And	the	moment	you	know	you	are	not	the
body,	in	that	very	moment	all	desires	that	can	be	fulfilled	through	the	body	also
disappear.	 It	 is	 like	 bringing	 light	 into	 a	 dark	 room	 --	 darkness	 disappears.
Awareness	functions	like	light	and	all	desires	are	nothing	but	darkness.	And	it	is
nectar.
Sannyas	 is	 an	 alchemical	 phenomenon.	 Our	 search	 is	 for	 that	 ultimate
transmutation	in	which	the	mortal	experiences	immortality.
(Osho	 continued	 on	 the	 subject	 of	 awareness	when	 explaining	 the	meaning	 of
her	 name	 to	 Gyanbodhi.)	 There	 is	 a	 possibility	 of	 becoming	 knowledgeable
without	awareness.	But	knowledgeability	is	not	wisdom,	it	is	mere	information	--
borrowed,	and	anything	borrowed	is	ugly,	anything	borrowed	is	a	burden.
It	does	not	enhance	your	growth,	it	hinders	it,	it	blocks	it.
True	 knowledge,	 wisdom,	 happens	 through	 awareness	 --	 not	 by	 accumulating
information	 but	 by	 going	 through	 a	 transformation.	 Awareness	 is	 a	 radical
transformation;	you	are	born	anew.
Ordinarily	one	exists	 in	a	very	 sleepy	 state.	One	 is	 aware	very	minimally,	 just
one	percent	or	not	even	that.	It	is	enough	for	your	day-to-day	work,	it	is	enough
to	earn	your	bread	and	to	make	a	shelter	and	to	have	children	and	a	family.	It	is
enough	for	 that,	but	more	than	that	 is	not	possible.	Ninety-nine	per	cent	 is	 just
darkness	in	you.	And	all	that	darkness	can	be	changed,	one	can	be	full	of	light.
And	then	one	knows	the	intensity	of	living,	the	tremendous	ecstasy	of	living.
Sannyas	means	 putting	 your	 total	 energy	 into	 awakening.	 Just	 a	 total	 effort	 is
needed	 --	 passionate,	 intense.	 From	 this	 moment	 think	 of	 awareness	 as	 a
question	 of	 life	 and	 death.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 life	 and	 death.	Without
awareness	you	are	simply	dying	every	day;	with	awareness	you	start	 living	for
the	first	time	and	then	life	goes	on	growing	bigger	and	bigger,	vaster	and	vaster.
One	day	it	is	so	abundant	that	not	only	are	you	alive,	whosoever	comes	close	to
you,	he	becomes	alive.
You	 start	 imparting	 some	magic	 to	 others	 too,	 you	 start	 overflowing	with	 life,
love,	light.	And	that	is	a	state	of	a	Buddha,	of	a	Christ,	of	a	wise	man	or	a	wise
woman.
In	 English	 there	 is	 no	 good	 word	 for	 wise	 woman.	 Somehow	 the	 word	 has
become	very	much	associated	with	wrong	things	--	witch.	A	witch	really	means
a	wise	woman.	And	you	will	find	many	witches	around	here.	(laughter)	But	they
are	wise	women,	remember,	not	witches	in	the	western	sense	of	the	word.
So	become	a	witch!
(Then	he	 ended	on	 a	 rather	more	 juicy	note	 --	 that	 of	 love.)	Love	 is	 the	most
blessed	state	because	it	is	a	state	beyond	the	mind.	Mind	is	logic.	Logic	is	a	very
low	phenomenon	--	worldly,	materialistic.	Logic	is	mathematics;	and	life	is	not
logic,	it	is	far	more	than	logic.
Life	is	love,	life	is	a	mystery.	No	logic	is	able	to	measure	it.	No	logic	can	fathom
its	depth	or	its	height.
Life	remains	a	mystery	for	logic,	because	the	very	beginning	of	logic	is	to	take
life	as	a	problem	--	and	it	is	not	a	problem.
A	 problem	 can	 be	 solved;	 a	mystery	 cannot	 be	 solved,	 it	 is	 unsolvable.	 Love
knows	how	to	live	the	mystery;	it	is	not	bothered	about	solving	it,	it	is	not	even
bothered	 about	 understanding	 it.	 Its	 whole	 approach	 is	 how	 to	 live	 it	 in	 its
totality,	 how	 to	 go	 into	 it	 deeply,	 fully,	 not	 holding	 anything	 back.	 Love	 is	 a
quantum	 leap.	 It	 is	 great	 courage.	 One	 needs	 a	 gambler's	 heart	 and	 one	 also
needs	the	quality	of	a	drunkard.
The	calculative	person	cannot	love,	he	is	cunning;	and	love	needs	simplicity.	The
calculative	person	is	always	a	Jew,	whether	he	knows	it	or	not	--	that	is	not	the
point,	 whether	 he	 is	 born	 a	 Jew	 or	 not	 --	 that	 is	 not	 the	 point.	 He	 is	 a
businessman,	 he	 always	 thinks	 in	 terms	 of	 profit.	And	 love	 is	 not	 a	 profitable
business,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 business	 at	 all.	 It	 is	 living	 life	 without	 the	 attitude	 of	 a
businessman.
It	 is	 living	 life	as	a	poet,	as	a	musician,	as	an	artist;	as	a	 lover	--	and	 then	 life
reveals	 all	 its	 mysteries	 and	 one	 becomes	 more	 rich	 as	 one	 becomes	 more
capable	of	love.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	unconditionally,	love	all,	without	any	discrimination.	Love	for	love's	sake,
not	bothering	about	any	reason	--	and	then	you	will	know	what	god	is.	It	is	only
to	 the	 lover's	 heart	 that	 god	 becomes	 available.	 For	 the	 logician	 god	 is	 non-
existential,	for	the	lover	only	god	exists.	That's	why	Jesus	says	god	is	love.	He	is
absolutely	right.
And	I	don't	thing	anybody	before	him	has	made	such	a	pregnant	statement.	That
one	 statement	 is	 enough	 to	 prove	 that	 this	 man	 knew	 that	 he	 was	 talking	 of
something	 that	 he	 had	 known	himself.	 It	was	 not	 borrowed,	 it	was	 not	 in	 any
scripture	of	the	world.	No	other	enlightened	person	has	ever	said	that	before.
And	 because	 of	 such	 statements	 he	 was	 crucified;	 he	 was	 going	 against	 the
whole	tradition	and	convention.
A	real	master	always	goes	against	the	conventional,	the	traditional.	He	is	bound
to	because	with	him	 the	whole	 existence	moves	 a	 step	 forward,	 closer	 to	god.
own	observation	is	that	love	is	the	most	blessed	phenomenon.
Blessed	are	those	who	know	what	love	is,	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
24	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009245
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Siggi,	a	 therapist	 from	Germany,	 received	 the	name	Dhyan	Anutoshen	 --	 then
Osho	took	off	from	there.)
Meditation	means	a	state	of	no-mind	--	where	all	the	functioning	of	the	mind	has
ceased.	 The	moment	 the	 functioning	 of	 the	mind	 ceases	 you	 have	 a	 profound
silence	such	that	you	have	never	known	before,	such	clarity,	such	transparency	--
because	all	the	clouds	are	gone,	all	the	smoke	is	gone,	there	is	nothing	to	hinder
your	insight.	All	is	absolutely	clear.
Meditation	gives	you	innocence,	clarity,	insight	into	your	own	being	and	into	the
very	being	of	the	existence	that	surrounds	you.	Suddenly	all	misery	disappears,
all	 desires	 disappear.	 Desires	 are	 by-products	 of	 misery;	 because	 you	 are
miserable	you	are	always	hankering	for	a	better	state	of	 things	--	more	money,
more	 power,	 more	 prestige	 and	 that	 more	 is	 non-ending.	When	 you	 attain	 it,
again	the	mind	is	there	asking	for	more.
Mind	 simply	means	 the	 desire	 for	more	 and	more,	 ad	 infinitum.	Mind	means
discontent,	 unquenchable	 thirst.	 The	 moment	 mind	 ceases	 there	 is	 suddenly
contentment,	absolute	contentment,	because	there	is	no	desire.	One	is	so	utterly
happy	in	the	now	and	the	here	that	one	cannot	even	conceive	that	things	could	be
better	than	this.	Then	one	moves	in	a	world	which	is	absolutely	perfect.	It	is	the
same	world,	only	you	are	not	the	same	person.
And	when	there	is	deep	contentment	inside	you,	of	course	it	changes	everything
in	 your	 life.	Your	 very	 aura	 becomes	 that	 of	 peace,	 you	 carry	 an	 energy	 field
around	you.	You	become	infectious.	Even	people	who	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
sit	by	your	side	will	start	feeling	that	something	very	strange	and	mysterious	is
there.
Those	 who	 are	 sensitive	 will	 be	 immediately	 moved,	 their	 hearts	 will	 start
beating	with	a	new	joy.	They	will	be	surprised	at	what	is	happening.	You	are	not
doing	 anything,	 it	 is	 simply	 happening;	 you	 become	 a	 triggering	 point,	 a
catalytic	agent.	Just	your	presence	triggers	some	process	in	them.
It	is	a	synchronicity.	You	don't	cause	it,	it	simply	happens.	You	are	not	a	doer	in
it.	It	is	like	the	sun	rising	and	the	birds	starting	to	sing;	suddenly	from	nowhere
the	trees	are	awake	and	the	flowers	start	opening.	The	sun	is	not	telling	them	to
do	it,	the	sun	is	not	doing	anything,	the	sun	is	simply	present,	but	the	presence	is
enough.	 It	 stirs	 the	 life	on	earth	 immediately,	 sleep	 starts	disappearing,	 a	deep
awakening	happens	in	nature.	When	one	is	contented	one	carries	the	climate	of
contentment	around	oneself.
First	 become	 contented,	 then	 your	 very	 life	 will	 become	 a	 source	 of	 joy	 for
others.	That's	the	only	true	service	--	not	the	service	that	Christian	missionaries
go	 on	 doing.	 That	 is	mischief	 and	 nothing	 else.	 It	 is	 exploiting	 people	 in	 the
name	of	 service,	 it	 is	converting	people,	 it	 is	a	political	game.	And	 the	people
who	are	converting	them	are	not	themselves	converted.
Conversion	 does	 not	 mean	 a	 change	 of	 religion;	 it	 means	 a	 change	 of
consciousness.	That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	conversion:	when	you	are	no	more
asleep	 but	 awake,	 when	 you	 are	 no	more	 full	 of	 the	 rubbish	 of	 thoughts	 and
memories	and	desires,	when	you	are	utterly	silent	--	that	is	conversion.	When	the
head	has	 disappeared	 --	 you	 are	 no	more	 a	 head	person	 --	when	 the	 heart	 has
taken	its	place	then	you	are	headless	and	just	a	pure	heart	--	that	is	conversion.	It
is	not	a	Hindu	becoming	a	Christian	or	a	Christian	becoming	a	Hindu	--	that	is
sheer	stupidity;	just	changing	prisons	from	one	prison	to	another	prison,	that	is
not	conversion.
Conversion	is	something	inner.	The	only	conversion	I	know	of	is	from	mind	to
meditation,	 because	 is	 changes	 your	 whole	 being;	 from	 discontent	 it	 brings
tremendous	contentment	to	you.
The	lifestyle	of	a	sannyasin	has	 to	be	 that	of	contentment.	He	lives	 in	 the	now
and	lives	fulfilled.	If	he	dies	the	next	moment,	he	happily	dies,	dancingly	dies	--
because	 there	 is	nothing	more!	All	 is	 already	complete!	He	does	not	need	any
more	 time	 to	 do	 anything,	 nothing	 is	 incomplete.	 At	 every	 moment	 all	 is
complete,	all	 is	accomplished.	He	 is	 ready	 to	go	at	any	 time.	He	will	not	even
want	to	linger	a	single	moment	more.
(Life's	ways	are	mysterious:	that	which	we	can	work	for	is	ultimately	worthless,
while	that	which	is	really	precious	is	given	to	us	as	a	present,	Osho	told	Jean,	a
rolfer	from	the	States.)	There	ar	things	which	are	not	achievements:	bliss,	truth,
love,	life,	consciousness.	These	are	things	which	man	has	to	be	ready	to	receive.
That's	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 on	 man's	 part:	 a	 welcoming	 heart,	 an	 open	 heart,	 a
receptivity,	 a	 sensitivity.	 You	 cannot	 achieve	 them	 by	 effort,	 you	 can	 receive
them	--	only	by	rest,	relaxation.	And	these	belong	to	a	world	of	a	totally	different
dimension.
The	 outside	world	 is	 the	world	 of	 achievement	 and	 this	 is	 the	 opening	 of	 the
interiority	of	your	own	being.	These	are	gifts	of	god.	Hence	the	more	man	tries
to	 be	blissful,	 the	more	miserable	 he	becomes,	 because	he	 is	 doing	 something
wrong,	something	absolutely	absurd.	You	cannot	try	to	love.	If	you	try	then	it	is
not	love;	it	may	be	acting.	If	you	are	ordered	to	love	somebody	you	can	make	an
effort	but	deep	do,	you	will	know	there	is	no	love.
Love	is	a	happening,	you	cannot	force	it.	You	can	only	be	available.	It	is	like	the
sun	rising	in	the	morning,	you	can	open	the	door	and	the	rays	will	come	in.	You
cannot	 force	 the	 sun	 to	 rise	 but	 you	 can	 prevent	 the	 rays	 from	 reaching	 you.
Even	if	the	door	is	open	you	can	keep	your	eyes	closed.	Everywhere	there	will
be	light	but	you	will	be	like	a	dark	island	in	the	ocean	of	light,	you	will	remain
in	darkness.	By	keeping	your	eyes	closed	you	are	not	welcoming,	you	are	not
receptive,	you	are	not	available.
The	 truly	 religious	 person	 is	 simply	 available	 to	 god.	And	 by	 god	 I	mean	 the
total	--	not	a	certain	person	somewhere	but	the	whole,	this	whole	universe,	this
infinity,	this	eternity.
If	you	are	receptive	to	it	you	will	be	showered	with	bliss,	with	love,	with	truth.
Thousands	of	flowers	will	go	on	falling	on	you.	But	these	are	not	achievements,
hence	ego	cannot	claim	them;	in	fact	ego	is	a	barrier.	Hence	the	achiever	cannot
meditate.	 For	meditation	 you	 have	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 non-achieving	 the	 art	 of
effortlessness,	 the	 art	 of	 relaxing,	 the	 art	 of	 not	 doing	 anything.	 That's	 what
meditation	is	--	just	a	total	rest.
Neither	 is	 the	 body	 doing	 something	 nor	 is	 the	 mind	 doing	 something,	 all
activity	as	such	has	ceased.	In	that	profound	silence	god	starts	penetrating	your
deepest	core.
(The	mind	is	prosaic,	the	heart	is	a	poet,	Osho	told	us.)	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 heart	 is	 not	 mathematics,	 it	 is	 something	 far	 more.	 It	 is	 not	 logic,	 it	 is
something	beyond	logic,	 it	 is	supralogical.	But	 it	has	 tremendous	beauty	and	it
contains	the	ultimate	truth.
So	poetry	to	me	is	just	a	metaphor	to	tell	you	to	come	down	from	the	head,	from
the	world	of	prose,	grammar	and	calculation,	to	the	world	of	the	heart,	of	love,
of	dance,	of	music.	That	is	the	transformation	that	is	the	most	fundamental	thing
in	sannyas.
A	sannyasin	functions	through	the	heart,	not	through	the	head.	He	uses	the	head
but	 in	 the	 service	 of	 the	 heart;	 the	 heart	 is	 the	master,	 the	 head	 becomes	 the
servant.	And	then	life	has	a	fragrance.	Otherwise	life	becomes	a	drag,	a	mundane
affair,	business.	It	loses	all	grandeur,	all	sacredness.	The	head	is	very	destructive
as	a	master	--	and	the	head	becomes	the	master.	It	has	completely	destroyed	the
heart.	That	 is	one	of	 the	greatest	calamities	 that	has	happened	 to	humanity,	all
over	the	world,	in	all	societies,	in	all	cultures,	in	all	the	religions	too.	People	are
all	living	in	the	head.	Religion	becomes	theology,	in	the	head.
Jesus	is	not	a	theologian...	but	the	popes	and	the	bishops	and	the	priests	--	they
are	all	theologians.
What	Jesus	says	is	his	love	affair,	his	love	affair	with	god.	and	what	these	people
go	 on	 saying	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 love.	 They	 are	 arguing,	 trying	 to	 prove
something	which	can	only	be	proved	by	experience,	which	cannot	be	proved	by
any	argument.
In	 fact	 the	 atheists	 go	 on	 succeeding	 because	 of	 these	 fools,	 because	 all	 their
arguments	 can	 be	 destroyed	 very	 easily.	 In	 fact	 no	 argument	 has	 an	 ultimate
value,	no	argument	is	self-evident,	a	better	arguer	can	destroy	it	immediately.	It
simply	 depends	 on	 how	 much	 acumen	 you	 have	 for	 logic.	 And	 logic	 is	 a
prostitute,	it	is	always	ready	to	go	with	anybody,	whosoever	is	powerful.
Atheists	go	on	succeeding	because	of	these	priests,	bishops,	popes.	These	people
are	the	cause	of	atheism	in	the	world	because	they	argue	for	god.	And	arguments
can	be	destroyed,	I	have	never	come	across	a	single	argument	which	cannot	be
destroyed.	So	it	all	depends	on	who	is	arguing.	If	 the	arguer	is	efficient	he	can
destroy	all	arguments.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	truth.
Jesus	is	not	arguing	about	god,	he	is	living	god.	His	very	presence	is	a	proof	of
god.	The	same	is	the	case	with	Buddha,	even	more	so	because	Jesus	at	least	uses
the	word	"god".	Buddha	never	uses	the	word
"god".	Buddha	 is	 the	 only	 person	 in	 the	whole	 history	 of	man	who	 cannot	 be
refuted	by	logic	because	he	never	gives	you	any	argument.	How	can	you	refute
him?	--	he	does	not	even	use	the	word	"god"
He	used	to	keep	silent	about	eleven	things,	one	of	 them	was	god...	and	heaven
and	hell,	etcetera,	eleven	things.	He	used	to	say	to	everybody	"Don't	ask	about
these	 eleven	 things	 --	 I	 am	not	 going	 to	 answer	because	 every	 answer	will	 be
wrong.	These	are	things	to	be	experienced."
And	he	never	answered	questions	about	them;	he	never	said	yes,	never	said	no.
He	 never	 took	 any	 part	 in	 the	 whole	 argumentative	 process.	 But	 his	 very
existence	was	proof	enough.
H.G.	Wells	has	said	about	Gautum	the	Buddha	that	he	was	the	most	godly	and
yet	the	most	godless	man.
And	it	is	true,	because	he	never	talks	about	god;	certainly	he	is	godless.	But	you
cannot	say	that	he	is	not	godly	--	his	very	existence	is	divine.
Make	 religion	 a	 love	 affair,	 that's	 my	message	 for	 my	 sannyasins.	 It	 is	 not	 a
question	of	logic	or	the	head,	it	is	something	of	the	heart.	You	need	not	prove	it,
you	have	to	live	it	--	that	is	the	only	proof	--	and	then	it	is	irrefutable.
(Meditation,	like	bliss,	is	ours	for	the	uncovering.)
Meditation	 is	 like	 peeling	 an	onion:	 you	go	on	 removing	 layer	 after	 layer	 and
finally	nothing	 is	 left.	That	nothing	 is	 silence,	 that	nothing	 is	meditation.	That
nothing	 is	 the	 greatest	 experience	 in	 life.	 There	 is	 nothing	 higher	 than	 it	 or
deeper	 than	 it	 or	 more	 valuable	 than	 it,	 because	 out	 of	 that	 nothingness
thousands	 of	 ecstasies	 are	 born.	 That	 nothingness	 is	 the	 womb	 of	 the	 whole
existence.
So	all	 that	I	 teach	here	 is	how	to	peel	 the	onion.	Hence	the	meditators	and	the
people	who	 are	working	 in	 the	 canteen	 are	 doing	 the	 same	 thing;	 there	 is	 no
difference-both	are	peeling	onions.	And	in	both	processes	tears	come	to	the	eyes
(laughter).	It	hurts!
So	get	ready	for	it.	First	try	with	the	meditations	and	if	you	don't	succeed	(much
laughter)...	then	you	will	be	sent	to	the	canteen!	In	any	way,	one	has	to	peel	the
onion.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
Half	a	year	or	longer.
That's	perfectly	good!	You	will	be	able	to	peel	the	onion,	don't	be	worried.
(He	renamed	Ursula	a	love	worshipper.)
Love	 is	 the	 only	 religion	 there	 is	 --	 not	 Christianity,	 nor	 Hinduism	 nor
Mohammedanism,	but	love.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Enough	of	all	these	isms	--	they	have	tortured	man	enough,	more	than	enough.	It
is	time	to	get	rid	of	all	these	isms	and	ideologies,	all	these	dogmas	and	creeds.	It
is	time	to	reject	all	that	is	non-essential	and	to	save	just	the	essential.	The	danger
is	 that	 because	 the	 non-essential	 has	 grown	 so	much	 and	man	 has	 become	 so
tired	of	it,	he	may	throw	out	the	whole	thing	--	even	the	essential	with	the	non-
essential,	the	baby	with	the	bathwater.	That	danger	is	there.
For	the	first	time	in	the	history	of	man	we	have	come	to	a	very	critical	moment.
If	we	want	to	save	the	essential	then	the	non-essential	has	to	be	rejected,	and	the
sooner	the	better,	because	almost	half	of	humanity	has	rejected	religion.	Russia
and	China	and	the	other	communist	countries	constitute	half	of	humanity.	They
have	 already	 rejected	 religion,	 in	 toto,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	 non-
essential	really	has	been	an	opium	for	the	people	--	Karl	Marx	is	right	but	he	is
right	only	about	the	non-essential.	But	the	non-essential	is	almost	ninety-nine	per
cent	or	even	ninety-nine	point	nine	per	cent.
Scientists	 say	 that	 in	 prehistoric	 times	 there	were	 very	 huge	 animals	 on	 earth,
bigger	 than	 elephants,	 bigger	 than	 whales	 --	 their	 skeletons	 have	 been	 found.
They	 were	 very	 powerful,	 immensely	 powerful.	 Why	 did	 they	 suddenly	 die?
What	 happened	 to	 them,	 that	 calamity	 happened	 to	 them?	The	 only	 thing	 that
scientists	 have	 concluded	 is	 that	 they	 became	 so	 huge	 that	 they	 could	 not
survive.	 Their	 very	 weight	 became	 a	 hindrance,	 they	 could	 not	 move,	 their
movement	became	impossible.	And	when	climates	changed	they	were	not	able
to	move	to	another	place	where	the	climate	was	right.	They	died	because	of	their
own	size.
Smaller	animals	survived	because	they	were	able	to	move.
Now	 the	 same	 is	 the	 situation	 with	 the	 religions,	 they	 have	 become	 huge
animals.	 Now	 Christianity	 is	 a	 huge	 animal,	 so	 is	 Hinduism	 and
Mohammedanism.	They	are	dying	under	their	own	weight.	Nobody	is	destroying
them,	they	are	committing	suicide	in	a	subtle	way.
The	non-essential	has	become	so	much	that	the	essential	is	almost	lost	in	it.	And
it	is	time	for	us	to	sort	it	out	before	the	essential	is	rejected.	Let	the	non-essential
be	dropped	and	same	the	essential.	And	to	me,	love	is	the	essential.
Jesus	says	god	is	love.	That's	enough,	that's	the	whole	Bible.	Even	if	the	whole
Bible	is	destroyed	nothing	will	be	destroyed	if	this	single	statement	is	preserved:
God	 is	 love.	 And	 out	 of	 this	 single	 statement	 the	 whole	 of	 life	 can	 be
transformed.
Live	a	life	of	love.	This	is	true	worship	and	true	prayer.	Then	you	need	not	go	to
the	church	or	the	temple,	then	the	whole	existence	is	your	temple.	And	then	you
can	worship	anywhere	because	everywhere	god	is.	Under	a	tree,	by	the	side	of	a
rock,	 listening	 to	 the	 roaring	 waves	 of	 the	 ocean	 --	 everywhere	 god	 is
manifesting	in	millions	of	forms.	This	whole	existence	is	a	temple.	There	is	no
need	to	create	idols	because	the	trees	are	enough;	the	flowers	are	there,	the	sun,
the	moon,	the	stars	are	there,	the	people,	the	animals,	the	birds.	What	is	the	need
to	create	statues,	temples,	mosques,	churches?	There	is	no	need.
The	whole	existence	 is	 sacred	 for	 the	man	who	knows	what	 love	 is.	So	go	on
growing	 in	 love.	 Love	 unconditionally,	 rejoice	 in	 loving	 and	 you	 will	 be
surprised	 to	 find	 that	without	 doing	 any	 ritualistic	 prayer,	without	 repeating	 a
certain	tradition,	without	quoting	any	scriptures,	you	have	found	god.	And	once
god	penetrates	your	being	once	there	is	an	experience	which	you	can	call	divine,
you	have	come	home.	Then	 there	 is	no	desire	any	more;	you	are	 fulfilled,	you
have	blossomed!
(Then	Osho	told	us	why	man	likes	to	live	in	lies.)
Man	lives	in	lies	because	to	seek	truth	is	troublesome;	it	is	risky,	it	is	dangerous.
It	 is	 adventuring	 into	 the	 unknown,	 into	 the	 unchartered	 sea.	 And	 man	 is	 a
coward,	 he	 clings	 to	 the	 familiar,	 to	 the	 known.	He	 is	 not	 really	 interested	 in
knowing	the	truth,	he	only	wants	consolations;	comfortable	lies	will	do.
In	fact	truth	is	never	comfortable	in	the	beginning,	it	is	very	uncomfortable.
Buddha	is	reported	to	have	said	that	lies	are	sweet	in	the	beginning,	bitter	in	the
end,	and	 truth	 is	bitter	 in	 the	beginning	and	sweet	 in	 the	end.	And	he	 is	 right,
absolutely	right.	Truth	is	bitter,	not	because	truth	is	bitter,	truth	is	bitter	because
we	have	lived	in	lies	for	so	long	that	when	truth	comes	our	lies	are	shattered,	and
that	hurts.
And	truth	never	compromises.	When	it	comes	all	lies	are	bound	to	be	shattered
and	demolished.	 In	 the	beginning	 it	creates	a	chaos,	but	out	of	 that	chaos	stars
are	 born,	 out	 of	 that	 chaos	 is	 creativity.	 So	 only	 very	 few	 daring	 souls	 have
known	 the	 truth.	Others	 have	 lived	 coddled	with	 their	 lies,	 holding	 their	 toys,
their	teddy	bears,	clinging	to	comfortable	ideas.
For	 example,	 man	 is	 afraid	 of	 death.	 Because	 he	 is	 afraid	 of	 death,	 knowing
nothing	 of	 immortality	 he	 clings	 to	 the	 idea	 of	 immortality.	He	 does	 not	 even
know	what	life	is,	although	he	is	alive.	He	does	not	know	what	death	is	although
he	has	died	many	times.	But	he	clings	to	the	idea	of	immortality.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
People	come	to	me	and	ask	"What	happens	after	death?"	And	I	tell	them,	"First
try	to	know	what	happens	before	death.	You	are	alive	--	right	now	your	concern
should	 be	with	what	 life	 is.	 Do	 you	 know	what	 life	 is?"	 They	 say	 they	 don't
know.	 And	 they	 are	 interested	 in	 knowing	 about	 something	 which	 has	 not
happened	yet:	after	death,	what	happens?
If	you	know	what	life	is,	if	you	know	that	which	is	right	now,	you	will	be	able	to
use	this	same	awareness	when	death	comes.	It	is	the	same	awareness;	the	same
mirror	that	reflects	life	will	reflect	death.
And	if	you	are	aware,	there	is	no	death,	there	is	no	birth,	there	is	only	eternity.
But	that	has	to	be	an	experience,	not	just	an	idea.
Truth	means	 experience.	Truth	 is	 never	 a	 belief.	Beliefs	 are	 always	 lies.	They
can	 make	 your	 life	 a	 little	 bit	 more	 convenient	 but	 that's	 all;	 they	 are	 like
tranquillisers.	Truth	is	awakening.	And	man	needs	awakening,	not	tranquillisers
to	fall	into	deep	sleep.	But	for	centuries	man	has	remained	attracted	to	alcohol,
to	other	kinds	of	intoxicants,	to	psychedelic	drugs;	from	the	time	of	the	Rig	Veda
up	to	now	he	has	remained	addicted.	In	the	times	of	the	Veda	he	was	addicted	to
soma	 and	 now	 he	 is	 addicted	 to	 LSD	 --	 there	 is	 no	 difference.	 And	 all	 these
intoxicants,	 psychedelic,	 alcoholic	 or	 whatsoever	 they	 are,	 are	 just	 efforts	 to
avoid	the	truth.	And	to	avoid	the	truth	is	to	remain	in	misery.
Yes,	we	can	make	a	life	which	is	surrounded	by	misery	a	little	comfortable,	but	it
is	stupid.	We	can	have	an	absolutely	blissful	life	but	that	is	possible	only	if	we
drop	the	lies	and	enquire	into	truth,	And	the	first	requirement	of	the	enquiry	is	to
not	carry	any	a	priori	ideas.	Go	in	absolute	ignorance,	knowing	nothing.
Whenever	a	person	moves	in	a	state	of	not-knowing	he	is	bound	to	know	truth.
And	truth	brings	bliss.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 not	 to	 be	 believers	 but	 adventurers,	 explorers	 of	 the
unknown.	So	I	am	not	giving	you	any	dogma,	any	creed	to	cling	to.	My	whole
effort	 is	 to	push	you	 into	enquiry,	because	 it	 is	enquiry,	authentic	enquiry,	 that
brings	 a	 man	 to	 truth,	 to	 the	 realisation	 of	 truth.	 And	 then	 bliss	 is	 yours,
benediction	is	yours.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
25	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009255
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(His	 idea	of	prayer	 is	 silence	 and	availability,	Osho	 told	Dhyan	Anna.)	To	me
silence	is	the	only	prayer	because	god	understands	no	other	language.	Hence	all
the	so-called	prayers	are	disturbances.	When	you	start	saying	something	to	god
you	miss	the	whole	point.
To	me	prayer	means	to	be	in	a	prayerful	mood,	a	loving	mood.	But	nothing	has
to	be	said.	One	has	to	be	simply	open,	open	to	existence,	to	the	trees,	to	the	sun,
to	the	wind,	to	the	rain,	to	the	stars.	When	one	is	open	and	silent	it	is	prayer.
Hence	 prayer	 cannot	 be	 Christian,	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan;	 prayer	 is	 simply
prayer,	because	it	is	silence.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	 you	 say	 something	 then	 it	 can	 be	Christian	 or	Hindu	 or	 Jewish.	But	 if	 you
don't	say	anything,	if	you	are	simply	full	of	gratitude	towards	existence,	no	word
crosses	your	mind,	that	is	prayer,	authentic	prayer.
Without	meditation	there	is	no	prayer.	Prayer	is	the	fragrance	of	meditation,	the
song	of	silence.	Nothing	 is	said	but	everything	 is	heard.	 If	you	say	something,
god	 cannot	 hear	 it;	 if	 you	 don't	 say	 it,	 it	 is	 heard.	One	 has	 to	 understand	 this
paradox,	only	then	can	one	understand	prayer.
(Love	is	an	overflow	of	bliss.)
A	 miserable	 person	 cannot	 be	 but	 unloving.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 your
intentions.	Even	 the	miserable	 person	wants	 to	 be	 loving,	 but	 it	 is	 impossible;
just	wanting	it	is	not	going	to	help.	It	is	impossible	in	a	state	of	misery	because
one	 is	 closed,	 one	 is	 shrinking	 and	 dying	 within,	 and	 love	 needs	 flowing,
opening.	And	love	is	possible	only	when	you	have	something	to	give.
The	 miserable	 person	 has	 nothing	 to	 give.	 In	 fact,	 he	 continuously	 demands
"Give	me	this,	give	me	that."	He	pretends	to	show	love,	but	the	reality	is	that	he
wants	to	be	loved.	And	the	other	party	may	be	in	the	same	situation,	hence	two
beggars	are	asking	from	each	other	"Give	me	something"	--	and	both	have	empty
bowls!	 Naturally	 there	 is	 going	 to	 be	 conflict,	 misery,	 fight.	 Lovers	 are
continuously	 fighting	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 everybody	wants	 the	 other	 to
love	and	nobody	is	ready	to	love.
I	 teach	 bliss,	 and	 then	 love	 comes	 inevitably.	When	you	 are	 overflowing	with
bliss	you	have	to	share	it.
It	has	an	intrinsic	need	to	share,	just	as	a	cloud	full	of	rainwater	has	to	shower	or
when	a	flower	opens	it	has	to	release	its	fragrance.
Love	is	the	release	of	your	grace,	of	your	beauty,	of	your	splendour.	Every	man
is	an	 imprisoned	splendour	 --	and	misery	 is	 the	prison.	 It	 is	only	a	question	of
understanding	and	misery	disappears.	It	is	our	choice	whether	to	be	miserable	or
to	be	blissful.	In	a	single	moment	of	understanding	one	can	drop	all	misery.	It	is
not	a	question	of	gradual	growth,	it	can	be	dropped	suddenly.	And	whenever	it	is
dropped	it	is	dropped	suddenly.	My	whole	effort	here	is	to	make	you	aware	and
understanding	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	 it	 is	 you	 who	 are	 creating	 your	misery	 by
choosing	it.	Once	you	have	accepted	the	total	responsibility	for	being	miserable
then	 it	 is	 just	 a	 question	 of	 not	 creating	 it	 anymore,	 and	 the	 same	 energy
becomes	bliss.	And	the	moment	you	are	blissful,	life	is	love.	When	life	is	love	it
is	religious,	it	is	divine.
(Real	 freedom	 is	 a	 state	 of	mind,	 or	 rather,	 mindlessness,	 was	 the	 gist	 of	 the
message	for	Dhyan	Svatantro.)
Meditation	 is	 a	 means;	 freedom	 is	 the	 goal,	 the	 ultimate	 goal.	 But	 without
meditation	 nobody	 can	 attain	 to	 freedom.	 I	 am	 not	 talking	 about	 political
freedom,	I	am	talking	about	spiritual	freedom.
Man	has	tried	in	thousands	of	ways	to	change	the	outer	structure	of	the	society,
to	 change	 the	 state,	 the	 economy.	 We	 have	 tried	 all	 kinds	 of	 economies,
Capitalist,	 communist,	 socialist,	 fascist	 --	 we	 have	 tried	 all	 kinds	 of	 political
ideologies.	And	all	have	failed,	without	any	exception,	for	the	simple	reason	that
if	man	remains	inwardly	a	slave	you	cannot	make	him	free	from	the	outside	that
is	 impossible.	We	will	again	create	a	new	kind	of	bondage,	he	will	move	from
one	prison	to	another	prison.	But	he	cannot	live	without	chains;	he	has	become
accustomed	to	chains.	And	the	root	cause	is	within	him.
Meditation	 simply	 destroys	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 all	 slavery.	 Meditation	 simply
means	a	state	of	no-mind.
Mind	means	all	that	society	has	given	to	you.	It	is	not	yours,	mind	is	something
borrowed.	It	is	basically	planted	in	you	by	the	society,	by	the	politicians,	by	the
priests,	by	the	pedagogues.	The	whole	educational	system	exists	just	to	condition
the	child	in	a	particular	pattern,	to	give	him	a	certain	gestalt,	to	imprison	him,	to
make	him	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	or	a	communist	 --	but	 to
make	SOMEthing	out	 of	 him,	 not	 to	 allow	him	 to	 be	 himself	 but	 to	 impose	 a
certain	structure.
Nobody	wants	anybody	to	be	himself.	Parents	have	their	ideas	about	how	their
children	should	be;	they	impose	their	ambitions,	their	ideologies.	Society	is	very
much	 afraid	 of	 free	 people.	 It	 wants	 to	 cripple	 everybody's	 consciousness,
because	 slaves	 are	 obedient.	 Slaves	 are	 not	 dangerous	 because	 they	 cannot	 be
rebels.
So	your	mind	is	basically	against	you.	Never	thing	of	 it	as	yours.	It	serves	the
society,	 it	serves	 the	state,	 it	serves	 the	church;	 it	 is	not	 in	your	service.	 It	 is	a
very	cunning	device.
Meditation	 means	 to	 put	 the	 mind	 aside	 so	 that	 the	 whole	 imposed	 world	 of
conditionings	is	put	aside.
When	you	are	not	a	Christian,	nor	a	Hindu,	you	are	neither	an	American	nor	a
German	nor	a	Chinese	nor	an	Indian.	All	nations	are	put	aside,	all	races	are	put
aside.	For	 the	 first	 time	you	are	 simply	a	human	being	with	no	 label.	And	 the
beauty	of	 that	 is	 immense	and	the	ecstasy	of	 it	 is	 immeasurable.	Suddenly	you
find	 yourself	 expanding.	 Even	 the	 sky	 is	 not	 the	 limit!	 You	 become	 vast.
Meditation	opens	doors	for	you,	doors	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	infinity,	of	eternity.	You	go	above	time	and	space.
The	moment	you	drop	the	mind	you	become	part	of	god	--	and	by	"god"	I	don't
mean	any	person.	God	is	not	a	person	at	all	 --	god	is	a	presence,	not	a	person.
God	 simply	 means	 a	 quality,	 a	 certain	 godliness	 that	 surrounds	 the	 whole
existence,	a	certain	sacredness,	a	purity,	a	fragrance.
The	moment	you	put	the	mind	aside,	the	barrier	between	you	and	the	whole	is	no
more	 there,	 the	wall	between	you	and	 the	whole	 is	no	more	 there.	Suddenly	a
meeting,	a	merger,	a	communion,	happens.	And	that	communion	brings	freedom
--	 freedom	 from	 the	 body,	 freedom	 from	 the	 mind.	 You	 are	 simply	 pure
consciousness.	 It	 brings	 freedom	 from	 birth	 and	 freedom	 from	 death	 too.
Suddenly	you	become	aware	that	you	were	before	birth	happened	and	you	will
be	 there	even	after	death.	The	house,	 the	body,	 is	 just	a	 temporary	abode.	You
have	 lived	 in	many	 bodies	 and	 you	 have	 lived	 in	many	minds.	 Those	minds,
those	 bodies	 are	 all	 gone,	 but	 you	 remain.	You	 are	 the	 only	 abiding	 factor	 in
existence.
This	consciousness	is	timeless,	beginningless,	endless.	And	it	brings	many	kinds
of	 freedom,	 a	 multi-dimensional	 freedom.	 It	 brings	 freedom	 from	 death,	 and
naturally,	 the	moment	you	are	 free	 from	death,	 the	moment	you	know	you	are
immortal,	as	immortal	as	the	whole	existence,	all	fears	disappear.
Freedom	from	death	means	freedom	from	fear.	And	when	there	is	no	fear	there
is	love	--	there	is	love	only	when	there	is	no	fear.
The	person	who	is	full	of	fear,	how	can	he	love?	And	the	person	who	is	full	of
fear,	he	cannot	enquire	into	truth.	All	that	he	wants	is	to	be	consoled	so	that	he
can	repress	his	fears.
The	people	who	are	in	the	churches,	in	the	temples,	in	the	mosques,	are	all	afraid
--	cowards.	They	are	simply	 there	out	of	 fear.	They	are	afraid	of	hell,	 they	are
afraid	they	may	lose	heaven;	they	are	afraid	of	a	thousand	and	one	things.	They
are	constantly	trembling	inside.	This	is	a	very	ill	state	of	affairs.
My	sannyasins	have	to	go	beyond	all	this.	They	have	to	drop	the	mind,	and	with
it	all	the	beliefs	and	all	the	knowledge	that	others	have	given	to	you,	because	it	is
not	true.	Truth	is	always	yours,	your	experience,	authentically	your	experience.
It	 cannot	be	given	by	 somebody	 to	you.	 I	 cannot	give	 it	 to	you.	My	 truth	 --	 I
cannot	give	it	to	you	--	will	remain	mine.	I	can	only	help	you	to	find	your	truth.	I
can	simply	give	you	a	few	hints,	a	few	guidelines.	Then	you	have	to	follow	those
guidelines	 in	 the	 inner	 world.	 It	 is	 inward	 exploration.	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 any
belief,	any	dogma,	any	creed.	I	simply	give	you	a	few	methods	which	can	help
you	to	go	inwards.
The	moment	you	have	 reached	your	own	centre	you	know	what	 is,	 you	know
that	which	is.	In	that	very	moment	you	are	free,	and	freedom	brings	love,	bliss,
truth,	 god.	 Freedom	 brings	 all	 the	 ecstasies	 that	 one	 has	 been	 longing	 for	 for
thousands	of	lives.	All	frustrations	disappear.	Life	becomes	a	blessing.	And	not
only	are	you	blissful,	you	also	become	a	blessing	to	the	whole	existence.
A	 blessed	 person	 is	 always	 a	 blessing	 to	 all.	 His	 very	 presence	 is	 enough	 to
enhance	other	people's	joy.
He	 triggers	 in	 other	 people's	 hearts	 blocked	 sources	 of	 energy.	 Just	 being	 in
contact	with	a	man	who	is	blissful	is	enough,	and	your	heart	will	start	singing	a
song;	some	bell	suddenly	starts	ringing	inside	you.
There	is	a	synchronicity,	and	immediately	a	transmutation	starts	happening.
That's	what	the	meaning	of	sannyas	is:	being	with	a	master	in	deep	attunement,
being	with	a	master	with	deep	love	and	trust	so	that	you	can	gather	courage	to
put	the	mind	aside.	It	is	the	greatest	courage	in	life,	but	if	once,	even	for	a	single
moment,	you	can	put	 the	mind	aside,	you	will	have	a	glimpse	of	 the	ultimate.
And	 then	 there	 is	 no	 trouble:	 you	 can	put	 the	mind	aside	whenever	you	want.
The	 first	 experience	 is	 very	 definitive,	 very	 decisive,	 but	 the	 first	 experience
needs	courage;	it	needs	courage	to	risk.
Sannyas	is	a	risk.	It	is	moving	in	danger,	moving	in	insecurity	--	but	life	grows
only	in	insecurity.	Only	gamblers	know	the	depth	of	life,	only	drunkards	know
the	 heights	 of	 life.	 The	 cowards	 just	 go	 on	 clinging	 to	 their	 miseries	 --	 they
cannot	know	anything	of	value.
(Love	is	an	alchemy	that	only	works	with	the	catalyst	of	egolessness,	Osho	told
Prem	Parivartan.)	Ego	is	like	a	rock	and	love	is	like	a	roseflower,	and	if	you	put
a	rock	on	the	roseflower	obviously	the	roseflower	will	be	crushed	and	will	die.
You	have	to	put	the	rock	aside.
People	have	chosen	egos	because	we	have	been	brought	up	in	such	a	stupid	way
that	 the	 whole	 effort	 is	 to	 create	 an	 ego	 in	 the	 child.	 It	 is	 created	 through
ambition.	 Ambition	 is	 fuel,	 food	 for	 ego,	 and	 we	 try	 to	 force	 every	 child	 to
become	ambitious.	And	once	the	child	becomes	ambitious	he	loses	track	of	his
heart;	 then	 he	 is	 hung	 up	 in	 the	 head	 o..	 because	 the	 heart	 is	 absolutely	 non-
ambitious.	The	head	is	ambitious;	it	is	always	on	an	ego	trip.	It	always	wants	to
be	first,	to	be	foremost.	It	wants	to	be	the	president,	the	prime	minister,	this	and
that.	It	is	always	desiring	more	and	more,	and	it	never	leaves	any	energy	for	you
to	 live,	 to	 love,	 to	 rejoice.	 It	 destroys	 your	 heart.	 Your	 heart	 is	 a	 delicate
phenomenon,	like	a	roseflower.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	approach	is:	see	clearly	and	choose	the	rose,	and	forget	all	about	ambition.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	this	change	has	to	happen	--	only	then	are	you	truly	a
sannyasin	 --	 that	 you	move	 your	whole	 energy	 from	 ambition,	 from	 the	 head,
and	allow	your	heart	to	grow.	And	then	thousands	of	flowers	grow.
Suddenly	the	spring	comes	to	your	being.	Then	one	knows	what	contentment	is
&nd	one	knows	what	sharing	is,	and	one	feels	grateful	to	god	for	giving	us	such
a	beautiful	life	and	such	a	tremendously	ecstatic	existence.
But	without	 love	one	simply	drags.	Love	brings	dance	 to	your	being,	 it	brings
celebration.
My	sannyasins	are	not	to	be	like	the	old	stupid	so-called	saints	--	sad	and	serious
and	ugly,	with	long	faces.	And	you	can	see	on	their	noses,	their	egos.	They	are
holier-than-thou,	always	condemning	others.
I	 want	 sannyasins	 to	 be	 lovers,	 dancers,	 singers,	 poets,	 sculptors,	 painters	 --
creative,	enjoying	creativity,	living	moment	to	moment	with	total	abandonment,
with	deep	surrender	to	existence.	Then	all	the	beauties	of	life	are	yours,	the	very
kingdom	of	god	is	yours.
There	is	no	need	to	live	in	misery.	One	can	go	on	from	one	peak	to	higher	peaks,
from	one	perfection	to	another	perfection	of	bliss.	There	is	no	end	to	it	--	it	is	an
unending	pilgrimage.
(Life's	a	laugh,	Osho	told	a	Japanese	sannyasin.)
Life	has	to	be	taken	non-seriously.	It	has	to	be	taken	joyfully,	it	has	to	be	taken
playfully,	and	only	then	will	you	be	able	to	know	what	it	is.	The	serious	person
is	dull,	dead.	The	serious	person	can	 think	about	what	 life	 is	but	he	will	never
know.
One	has	to	become	like	a	small	child	again,	full	of	wonder	and	awe	and	rejoicing
in	small	things.	Watch	a	child	collecting	seashells	on	the	beach,	coloured	stones,
with	 such	 joy,	 as	 if	 he	 has	 found	 diamonds.	 Look	 at	 the	 glee,	 the	 fun,	 the
laughter,	of	the	child!	Running	after	butterflies	or	collecting	wild	flowers	he	is	so
totally	in	it	that	there	is	no	past,	no	future	for	him.
Jesus	says	again	and	again:	Unless	you	are	like	a	small	child	you	shall	not	enter
into	my	kingdom	of	god.	What	he	really	means	is	to	take	life	playfully	e	a	child.
Rejoice	in	small	things.	It	is	a	gift	of	god	to	be	rejoiced!	It	is	not	a	problem	to	be
solved,	it	is	a	mystery	to	be	lived.	The	serious	person	makes	a	problem	out	of	it
and	then	he	gets	into	trouble	because	it	is	not	a	problem	in	the	first	place.	Hence
no	solution	is	going	to	be	a	solution;	each	solution	will	bring	more	problems.
The	whole	history	of	philosophy	is	proof	for	it.	Each	philosopher	has	given	more
problems	 to	 the	 world	 and	 he	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 solve	 a	 single	 problem
because	the	fundamental	approach	is	wrong.	Life	is	not	a	riddle	or	a	problem,	it
is	a	mystery.	It	cannot	be	de-mystified,	hence	there	can	e	no	solution	ever.
The	poets	are	closer	to	life	than	the	philosophers,	the	musicians	are	closer	to	life
than	the	mathematicians.	The	dancers	are	even	closer	because	in	a	real	dance	the
dancer	 disappears.	He	 himself	 becomes	 part	 of	 the	mystery.	He	 loses	 his	 ego,
and	with	the	ego	all	seriousness	is	lost.
I	teach	dance,	I	teach	music,	I	teach	poetry,	because	these	are	the	pillars	of	the
temple	of	celebration.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
26	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009265
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	reiterated	in	his	address	to	a	professor	from	Germany,	a	theme	on	which
he	touched	on	the	evening	of	the	twenty-first	--	the	synthesis	of	love	and	peace;
tonight	he	exchanged	"bliss"	 for	 love	but	 it	was	essentially	 the	 same	message.
The	 two	--	bliss	and	 love	--	can	be	experienced	 together,	he	said.)	When	I	say
this	is	possible	I	am	not	only	philosophising	about	it,	I	have	experienced	it	and	I
have	observed	thousands	of	sannyasins	experiencing	it.	Now	it	is	no	more	just	an
experiment,	it	is	a	proved	hynothesis.
(Meditation	is	not	 inimical	but	actually	medicinal	for	 the	mind,	observed	Osho
in	his	address	to	Dhyan	Rosalie.)
Mind	is	a	mechanism	--	a	beautiful	mechanism,	of	tremendous	importance,	but
there	is	no	need	to	keep	it	on	for	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	day	in,	day	out.	It	is
tiring,	it	becomes	too	hot.	It	starts	burning	its	own	tissues.
That's	why	children	seem	to	be	more	intelligent	than	older	people,	for	the	simple
reason	that	their	delicate	tissues	are	still	alive.	Their	engines	are	brand-new,	their
computers	are	not	yet	over-burdened.	And	mind	is	a	biological	computer.
And	 remember...	 Fifty	 years	 ago	 one	 of	 the	 great	 Indian	 scientists	 discovered
something;	 now	 many	 other	 scientists	 have	 come	 to	 the	 same	 discovery.	 His
name	was	Jagdish	Chandra	Bashu.	He	was	laughed	at.
He	said,	"Just	as	there	is	mental	fatigue	there	is	metal	fatigue.	Even	metal	gets
tired,	even	metal	needs	rest."
He	was	laughed	at.	Of	course	he	was	a	Nobel	prize-winner,	one	of	the	greatest
scientists	 India	 has	 ever	 given	 to	 the	 world,	 but	 it	 took	 fifty	 years	 for	 the
scientific	world	to	recognize	what	a	tremendous	insight	he	had	given	it.
Now	it	 is	a	well-established	 fact,	 that	everything	 tires,	and	 the	more	delicate	a
thing	is,	the	more	easily	it	tires.	And	your	mind	is	a	very	delicate	phenomenon.
In	 such	 a	 small	 space,	 the	 head,	 you	 are	 carrying	 a	 computer	 bigger	 than	 any
which	has	yet	been	invented.	Scientists	say	if	we	were	to	create	a	computer	like
the	human	brain	we	would	need	almost	 the	same	space	as	a	huge	city	 takes	 to
install	 it,	 because	 a	 single	 human	 brain	 can	 contain	 all	 the	 information	 that	 is
contained	in	all	the	books	of	the	world;	that	its	capacity.
It	 consists	 of	 seven	 hundred	 million	 cells	 and	 each	 cell	 can	 contain	 infinite
information,	almost	infinite	information.
So	I	am	not	against	the	mind,	in	fact	I	am	all	for	it.	4nd	that's	why	I	want	that	it
be	given	a	little	rest.	The	poor	mind	is	continuously	working.	You	are	sleeping;
the	body	rests	but	the	mind	continues	dreaming,	chattering.
I	sometimes	suspect	that	when	people	die,	even	in	their	graves	their	minds	must
be	 continuing	 ...	 old	 habits!	 The	 mind	 must	 be	 chattering,	 still	 planning	 for
tomorrow,	not	knowing	that	you	are	in	the	grave,	dreaming.	If	it	can	continue	in
your	 sleep	 it	 can	 continue	 in	 your	 death	 too.	 It	 has	 something	 like	 an
autonomous	authority,	and	we	have	completely	forgotten	how	to	put	it	off.
That's	 the	whole	secret	of	meditation:	 it	 is	a	method	of	putting	it	off.	It	can	be
put	off	very	easily,	you	just	have	to	be	a	witness.	Just	watching	your	mind	...	and
you	easily	become	aware	that	just	by	watching,	doing	nothing	else,	no	chanting
of	a	mantra	.o.	because	that	is	again	the	working	of	the	mind.	No	need	to	chant	a
mantra.	 That	 is	 stupid;	 you	 are	 again	 a	 victim	 of	 the	 same	mind.	No	 need	 to
repeat	and	recite	a	prayer,	because	that	is	mind-work.
Witnessing	the	mind,	listening	to	its	noise,	aware	of	it	all	--	thoughts	passing,	the
whole	 traffic	of	memories,	desires,	 imagination,	dreams	 --	 just	 standing	by	 the
side	of	the	road	and	seeing	the	whole	traffic...
And	 it	 is	always	rush	hour	as	 far	as	 the	mind	 is	concerned!	Just	watching	 it,	a
miracle	happens,	because	watching	is	the	only	thing	in	you	which	is	not	of	the
mind,	which	belongs	to	your	being,	to	your	soul.
The	 moment	 you	 watch	 you	 are	 just	 a	 consciousness,	 and	 immediately
something	 starts	 settling	 in	 your	 consciousness,	 and	 the	 mind	 and	 you	 are
separate.	The	moment	you	know	 that	you	are	not	 the	mind,	you	are	out	of	 the
mind,	 your	 cooperation	with	 the	mind	 stops.	And	 that	 is	 the	whole	method	of
putting	the	ignition	off.	It	is	your	energy	that	keeps	it	on.	When	you	are	separate
your	cooperation	disappears	and	the	mind	comes	to	a	halt,	immediately	to	a	halt.
That	is	the	state	of	meditation,	absolute	silence.	In	that	silence	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
start	opening	up	your	petals,	your	consciousness	becomes	a	roseflower.	And	that
is	the	meaning	of	Rosalie:	a	roseflower.
Only	 in	 deep	 silence	 does	 the	 spring	 come	 to	 your	 soul,	 flowers	 bloom,
fragrance	 is	 released.	 And	 when	 your	 consciousness	 blossoms	 there	 is
tremendous	 fulfilment,	 contentment,	 bliss,	 peace,	 truth,	 freedom.	All	 the	 great
values	come	as	a	by-product	of	meditation.
I	 don't	 think	 any	 communist	 has	 gone	 through	 all	 his	 books	 --	 they	 are	 tiring,
very	tiring.	I	don't	 think	that	even	he	himself	read	them	all!	Going	through	his
books	was	 a	 kind	 of	 self-torture,	 but	 I	 did	 it.	And	 after	 searching	 through	 his
great,	 voluminous	 works	 I	 agreed	 with	 only	 one	 statement,	 and	 that	 is	 the
statement	at	 the	end	of	his	Communist	Manifesto	where	he	says:	Proletariat	of
the	world	 unite,	 because	 you	 have	 nothing	 to	 lose	 but	 your	 chains.	With	 that
statement	I	agree.	Of	course	I	have	my	own	meaning	--	Karl	Marx	may	not	agree
with	it.
I	call	a	proletariat	a	person	who	is	miserable.	he	may	be	rich	or	poor,	that	is	not
important.	A	proletariat	is	one	who	has	not	known	his	inner	kingdom.	He	may	be
a	Rockefeller	or	a	Morgan	or	a	Ford.	Jesus	is	not	a	proletariat	although	he	comes
from	a	very	poor	family.	He	is	the	richest	man	the	world	has	ever	known	--
the	uneducated	son	of	a	carpenter.
The	proletariat	is	one	who	has	nothing.	His	whole	being	is	empty	--	no	joy,	no
peace,	no	understanding.
He	 is	 a	 beggar,	 and	 beggars	 have	 nothing	 to	 lose	 except	 their	 chains.	 But	 a
problem	arises:	we	become	so	accustomed	even	to	chains	that	we	cling	to	them.
It	 is	 a	well-known	 fact	 that	 once	 a	 person	 is	 imprisoned	 he	 returns	 again	 and
again	 to	 gaol.	That	 fact	 has	 not	 been	yet	 considered	by	our	 so-called	 lawyers,
judges.	They	still	go	on	punishing	people,	they	still	go	on	carrying	the	idea	that
punishment	is	going	to	prevent	them	from	committing	a	crime.	In	fact,	our	gaols
are	 universities	 to	 teach	 crime!	 because	 once	 a	 person	 is	 imprisoned	 for	 five
years	he	becomes	accustomed	to	gaol;	in	fact	he	starts	liking	it.	Life	is	very	easy:
you	 don't	 have	 to	 bother	 about	 employment,	 about	 the	 rising	 prices	 of	 things.
You	will	get	tea	every	day	at	the	right	time,	and	your	lunch	and	your	breakfast
and	 everything;	 you	 need	 not	 bother	 about	 shelter	 and	 clothes.	 And	 just	 by
paying	the	price	of	chains	life	becomes	so	easy,	comfortable,	that	who	wants	to
come	out?
So	once	a	prisoner	is	released	he	immediately	finds	another	excuse	to	go	in.	This
fact	has	not	yet	been	taken	into	account.	He	becomes	habituated	to	the	life	of	a
prisoner.	The	outside	world	scares	him;	he	feels	afraid.	The	moment	you	throw
him	out	of	gaol	you	throw	him	out	of	his	home!	Now	he	has	to	search	for	a	place
to	 live,	 some	 work	 to	 do.	 He	 has	 to	 earn	 money	 and	 the	 whole	 struggle	 to
survive....	Suddenly	he	sees	that	 it	 is	better	 to	be	back	in	gaol.	These	prisoners
are	 called	 gaolbirds	 --	 they	 always	 come	 back.	 And	 it	 is	 true	 about	 almost
ninety-eight	percent	of	criminals,	they	always	come	back.
People	 start	 clinging	 even	 to	 their	 chains	 --	 they	 give	 them	 a	 certain	 comfort.
People	cling	to	misery.	It	needs	courage	to	drop	the	known,	great	courage	to	risk
the	known	for	the	unknown.	It	is	a	gamble.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 gamble.	 It	 is	 risking	 your	 known	 life	 for	 something	 unknown,
That's	 why	 a	 master	 is	 needed	 to	 persuade	 you,	 to	 push	 you,	 to	 seduce	 you
towards	the	unknown.	A	master	is	needed	whom	you	can	trust,	whose	love	you
can	 trust,	 whose	 presence	 gives	 you	 the	 confidence	 to	 take	 the	 step	 into	 the
unknown,	to	take	your	small	boat	into	the	uncharted	sea.	Once	you	have	entered
into	the	unknown	then	there	is	no	problem:	you	know	that	is	bliss,	that	is	truth,
that	 is	god.	Then	one	never	 looks	back.	But	 to	drop	 the	safety	of	 the	shore,	 to
drop	the	safety	of	the	known	and	the	familiar,	one	needs	courage.
I	 don't	 say	 to	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 renounce	 the	 world,	 I	 say	 renounce	 misery,
renounce	the	known,	and	always	be	ready	to	go	into	the	unknown,	into	the	new,
because	that	is	the	way	to	god.
These	are	the	three	words	to	be	contemplated:	the	known,	which	is	misery;	the
unknown,	which	is	the	way	towards	god;	and	the	unknowable,	which	is	another
name	for	god.	Move	from	the	known	into	 the	unknown,	and	 the	unknown	will
take	you	to	the	unknowable,	to	the	ultimate	mystery	of	existence.
(Tomaso	 was	 described	 on	 the	 darshan	 list	 as	 being	 a	 teacher	 from	 Italy.)
Meditation	makes	you	innocent,	and	it	will	not	be	difficult	for	you	because	you
are	an	innocent	person.
You	are	just	like	a	child.	It	is	very	rare	to	come	across	a	child	of	your	age!	You
could	not	even	keep	your	eyes	closed!
That	is	beautiful	--	I	 loved	it	--	you	were	looking	in	between,	many	times.	But
that's	good!
And	 I	 have	 heard	 many	 stories	 about	 you...	 that	 every	 day	 you	 go	 to	 the
meditation	and	you	read	my	books	there.	That's	good!	That's	what	meditation	is
all	about!
Just	be	like	a	child	--	and	you	are.	Don't	be	worried	about	the	world.	The	world
is	 cunning	 and	 the	 world	 condemns	 simple	 people.	 You	 are	 a	 simple	 person,
hence	meditation	will	come	very	naturally	to	you	and	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
bound	to	happen.	Meditation	creates	 the	right	space	within	you,	 it	prepares	 the
ground.
And	for	you,	this	is	a	good	meditation;	you	can	just	sit	silently	with	closed	eyes.
That	will	be	a	little	hard	so	you	can	open	them	a	few	times	--	nothing	to	worry
about!	Once	in	a	while	looking	around	is	perfectly	okay!
And	truth	is	not	far	away;	 if	one	is	simple	it	 is	bound	to	happen.	It	 is	a	gift	of
god	to	all	simple	people.
You	have	come	to	the	right	place.	Italy	is	not	the	right	place	for	simple	people!	It
is	good	for	the	Mafia,	but	for....
So	now	enjoy	being	here.	Dance,	sing,	and	for	 the	first	 time	in	your	 life	relax,
because	there	is	no	need	to	be	clever	here.	Right?
So	be	here!
(His	way	lay	beyond	the	ego,	Osho	told	Veet	Atto,	an	agriculture	student	from
Italy.)	The	only	problem	is	the	ego,	but	it	creates	thousands	of	other	problems;	it
is	the	root	cause.	And	I	am	not	interested	in	pruning	the	leaves	and	the	branches
--	cut	the	root	--	because	that	is	a	futile	effort,	cutting	leaves	and	branches;	they
will	grow	again.	And	all	the	religions	have	become	too	much	concerned	with	the
leavres	and	the	branches,	and	by	cutting	them	nothing	is	going	to	happen.
The	problem	with	the	roots	is	that	they	are	always	underground;	you	cannot	see
them.	And	that's	how	ego	 is,	 it	 is	always	underground.	You	see	greed,	you	see
anger,	you	see	sex,	you	see	ambition;	 these	are	all	above	 the	ground.	Jealousy,
possessiveness,	 domination,	 they	 are	 all	 above	 the	 ground.	 But	 they	 are	 only
symptoms.	And	never	treat	the	symptoms	--	cut	the	root,	go	to	the	very	root,	and
then	in	a	single	blow	life	can	be	transformed.
The	ego	is	a	false	entity.	It	is	an	invented	centre	which	exists	not.	It	is	a	cheap
way	 to	 create	 some	 identity.	 To	 discover	 the	 real	 centre	 needs	 courage,	 needs
deep	meditation,	needs	inner	searching,	a	soul-searching.	So	people	have	found	a
short-cut:	 rather	 than	 finding	 the	 real	 centre	 they	 create	 a	 plastic	 centre.	 It	 is
cheap,	easy.	That's	what	ego	is.	Ego	simply	means	you	don't	know	who	you	are,
still	you	think	you	know.
This	false	knowing	has	to	be	dropped.	It	is	better	to	accept	that	you	don't	know;
that	 is	 a	 first	 step	 towards	 truth.	 Dionysius	 calls	 it	 "agnosia",	 a	 state	 of	 not-
knowing.
So	these	are	the	three	states:	ignorance....	In	ignorance	a	person	does	not	know
but	 thinks	he	knows.	The	 second	 is	 agnosia:	 a	 state	of	not-knowing.	A	person
still	does	not	know,	but	he	knows	that	he	does	not	know
--	and	 that	 is	a	 tremendous	growth.	And	the	 third	 is	 realisation,	enlightenment,
awakening	Buddhahood,	when	a	person	knows	that	he	knows.
Millions	are	living	in	the	first	state.	Sannyas	means	moving	to	the	second.	And
then	the	third	comes	or	its	own,	you	need	not	do	anything.	You	just	remain	in	the
second,	 watching	 so	 that	 the	 first	 does	 not	 come	 in	 from	 some	 back	 door.
Remain	in	a	state	of	not-knowing,	remain	innocent,	childlike,	wondering	about	it
all	 but	 not	 creating	 false	 knowledge	 to	 hide	 your	 ignorance,	 and	 the	 ego
disappears.
The	moment	the	ego	disappears	your	real	being	reveals	itself.	And	then	there	is
light	 and	 then	 there	 is	 abundant	 life	 and	 then	 there	 is	 an	 infinity	 of	 love
overflowing.	By	going	beyond	the	ego	one	goes	beyond	both	time	and	space	and
enters	 into	 the	 ultimate.	 Less	 than	 that	 cannot	 satisfy,	 less	 that	 that	 is	 not
worthwhile.
This	 is	 the	 goal	 for	 a	 sannyasin	 --	 the	 ultimate	 realisation	 of	 god	 or	 truth	 or
nirvana.
(Life	can	be	travelled	via	the	highway	of	the	head	or	of	the	heart,	Osho	told	us.)
The	method	of	the	head	is	analysis	and	the	method	of	the	heart	is	synthesis.
When	you	analyse	something	you	destroy	its	life.	For	example,	if	you	give	a	rose
flower	 to	a	chemist	 and	you	 tell	him	"Look,	what	a	beautiful	 flower	 it	 is!n	he
will	say	"I	will	have	to	dissect	it.	I	will	have	to	find	where	the	beauty	is."	And	he
will	 analyse	 the	 flower.	He	will	 find	 how	much	 earth	 is	 there	 and	 how	much
water	and	other	chemicals,	but	he	will	not	 find	beauty	because	beauty	 is	not	a
chemical,	 beauty	 is	 not	matter.	He	will	 simply	deny	 it,	 he	will	 say	 there	 is	 no
beauty.
But	the	poet	or	the	painter,	they	approach	life	through	a	totally	different	way.	For
them	chemicals	 do	 not	matter,	matter	 does	 not	matter.	 For	 them	 beauty	 is	 the
most	significant	phenomenon.	They	will	dance	and	rejoice.	Their	way	of	seeing
is	through	love.	Love	reveals	beauty,	logic	destroys	it.
All	that	medical	science	knows	about	man	is	about	dead	bodies,	because	they	go
on	 doing	 post-mortems	 on	 dead	 bodies.	 Even	 if	 you	 cut	 up	 a	 living	 body,	 the
moment	you	cut	it,	it	will	be	dead.	So	whatsoever	medical	science	knows	about
man	 is	 about	 a	 dead	man,	 not	 about	 an	 alive	man.	 That's	why	 they	will	 deny
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
that	there	is	a	soul,	because	they	have	not	found	it.	They	cannot	put	it	in	a	test
tube;	it	is	not	observable	either.	It	is	a	totally	different	world:	it	is	found	through
the	heart.
Analysis	 is	 not	 the	way	 to	 find	 the	ultimate	 truth,	 the	 living	 truth.	Analysis	 is
right	as	far	as	matter	is	concerned.	Synthesis	is	the	right	approach	towards	life.
And	that's	what	I	teach	here.
Bring	your	energy	from	the	head	to	the	heart,	move	from	logic	to	love.	And	love
will	 give	you	new	 insight;	 it	will	 open	your	 third	 eye.	 It	 is	 just	 a	metaphor	 --
there	is	not	a	third	eye	really.	Otherwise	there	are	fools	who	start	thinking	of	a
third	eye	as	if	something	like	these	two	eyes	is	there	inside.	Then	again	you	are
thinking	 in	 terms	of	matter,	 and	 the	medical	 science	will	 deny	 it	 because	 they
know	there	is	no	third	eye.
The	third	eye	is	only	a	metaphor,	it	is	poetry.	It	is	just	a	way	of	saying	that	love
has	its	own	way	of	knowing	and	seeing.
It	is	said	about	Majnu...	the	story	of	Majnu	is	a	Sufi	story,	a	great	love	story.	This
young	man	Majnu	 fell	 in	 love	with	 a	woman,	 Laila.	 These	 are	metaphors	 for
Sufis.	It	is	not	just	a	love	story,	it	has	a	deeper	meaning	too.	The	mundane	can
enjoy	it	as	a	love	story	and	the	meditators	can	enjoy	it	as	a	tremendous	story	of
the	love	between	man	and	god.
Laila	was	not	beautiful;	she	was	very	homely	or	maybe	she	was	even	ugly.	She
was	not	even	fair-skinned,	she	was	dark.	And	Majnu	was	so	mad	after	her	that
the	 whole	 town	 became	 compassionate	 towards	 Majnu.	 The	 parents	 were
absolutely	against	this	love	affair	--	parents	are	always	against	love	affairs.	And
they	were	rich	people	and	Majnu	was	poor	.
Even	the	king	became	interested	in	the	whole	phenomenon,	because	many	times
he	heard	Majnu	passing	by	the	side	of	the	palace	shouting	"Laila!	Laila!	Laila!"
He	was	continuously	repeating	the	name	of	Laila	as	if	it	were	a	name	of	god,	and
he	was	continuously	weeping	and	crying.
One	 day	 the	 king	 called	 him	 and	 said,	 "Because	 of	 you,	 I	 myself	 became
interested	 in	Laila.	Thinking	 that	 she	must	be	a	very	beautiful	woman	 I	called
her	to	the	court	and	I	was	surprised	--	you	must	be	mad	--
she	is	a	very	ordinary	woman,	in	fact	ugly,	and	I	feel	much	for	you.	So	look,	I
have	called	twelve	beautiful	girls	from	my	own	palace	and	you	can	choose	any.
These	are	the	most	beautiful	girls	in	the	whole	country."
Majnu	looked	very	closely	at	each	girl	and	shook	his	head.
The	king	said,	"You	must	be	insane!	These	are	the	most	beautiful	girls	and	you
are	saying	no	to	them	for	that	ugly	woman.	I	don't	see	the	point!"
Majnu	said,	"You	don't	understand,	sir.	To	know	the	beauty	of	Laila,	you	need
the	eyes	of	a	Majnu!
Unless	you	have	my	eyes	you	cannot	see	her	beauty.	I	love	her!"
This	is	a	tremendous	insight.	People	think	that	they	love	somebody	because	the
person	is	beautiful;	that	is	wrong.	The	person	looks	beautiful	because	you	love
them.	 Love	 comes	 first,	 then	 the	 person	 becomes	 beautiful.	 It	 is	 love	 that
beautifies	the	person,	not	vice	versa,	not	that	the	person	is	beautiful,	that's	why
you	have	fallen	in	love.	Just	the	opposite	is	the	case:	you	have	fallen	in	love	and
the	person	looks	beautiful.
Love	creates	beauty,	reveals	beauty.	For	love	there	is	nothing	ugly.	As	your	love
grows,	the	whole	existence	starts	becoming	beautiful.	When	your	love	is	perfect
this	is	the	most	perfect	existence	that	can	be.
When	your	 love	 is	 absolute	 then	everything	 is	divine,	 then	everywhere	 is	god,
because	the	eyes	of	love	can	only	see	god	and	nothing	else.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
27	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009275
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Misery	makes	misers	of	men	--	this	was	the	message	to	Heidi,	a	therapist	from
Norway.)	The	miserable	person	 is	bound	 to	be	mean,	he	cannot	be	noble.	One
should	not	expect	nobleness	out	of	misery.	That	is	impossible;	that	is	asking	for
something	 which	 is	 against	 nature.	 But	 this	 is	 what	 we	 have	 been	 doing	 for
centuries.	People	are	miserable,	and	society	in	every	way	creates	their	misery.	It
is	a	created	phenomenon,	it	is	not	natural.	Except	for	man	nobody	is	miserable.
All	the	animals,	birds,	trees,	rivers,	mountains,	stars,	they	are	all	in	tremendous
bliss.	Of	course	they	are	unconscious	of	it.
Man	 has	 one	 thing	 which	 is	 tremendously	 valuable:	 he	 can	 be	 conscious1y
blissful.	But	 there	 is	a	danger	also.	The	danger	 is	 that	he	may	get	 trapped	 in	a
pattern	of	misery.	No	animal	can	get	trapped	in	it,	no	tree	can	get	trapped	in	it.
When	one	is	capable	of	consciousness	one	is	also	capable	of	choosing.	That	 is
part	 of	 consciousness,	 one	 can	 choose.	Both	 alternatives	 are	 open:	 one	 can	 be
blissful,	one	can	be	miserable.
Society	is	for	miserable	people.	It	needs	miserable	people	because	they	are	good
slaves.	Their	whole	 energy	 is	 destroyed	by	 their	misery,	 hence	 they	 cannot	 be
rebels.	 Rebellion	 needs	 overflowing	 energy,	 vigour,	 courage.	 The	 miserable
person	 is	 so	 tired,	 so	 exhausted,	 he	 is	 willing	 to	 do	 anything,	 to	 follow	 any
commandment,	 any	 order,	 howsoever	 stupid	 it	 is.	 He	 has	 no	 energy	 to	 fight
against	 it;	 he	 cannot	 say	 no.	Out	 of	 the	 sheer	 necessity	 to	 survive	 he	 goes	 on
saying	yes	to	all	the	vested	interests.	And	the	society	consists	of	vested	interests:
priests,	 politicians.	All	 kinds	 of	 powerful	 people	 need	 everybody	 to	 remain	 in
misery.
Every	child	is	brought	up	in	such	a	way	that	he	gets	caught	in	misery.	And	then
we	expect	nobleness,	then	we	expect	grace,	then	we	expect	love,	beauty,	joy.	We
make	 the	 person	 even	 more	 burdened.	 First	 we	 destroy	 all	 possibility	 of
nobleness,	joy,	love,	grace,	truth,	intelligence...	we	destroy	everything	and	then
we	say	now	be	intelligent,	be	joyous,	be	courageous.	That	makes	the	people	even
more	 burdened,	more	miserable,	 because	 they	 try	 to	 impose	 a	 certain	 kind	 of
nobleness,	a	morality.	That	creates	hypocrisy	 in	 them.	If	 they	follow	the	moral
rules	 they	 go	 against	 their	 innermost	 core;	 if	 they	 don't	 follow	 them	 they	 feel
guilty.	Either	way	it	makes	the	misery	multiplied.
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	get	out	of	the	pattern	of	misery;	that	is	the	first
thing	--	because	it	is	a	choice.	You	can	get	out	of	it,	just	a	decision	is	needed.	It
is	simply	a	question	of	deciding	to	get	out	of	the	prison.	Nobody	can	prevent	you
--	there	is	nobody	to	prevent	you.	It	is	out	of	your	own	choice	that	you	are	in	it,
it	 is	out	of	your	own	clinging	that	you	are	 in	 it.	My	first	 teaching	is	get	out	of
this	trap.
And	the	moment	you	are	out	of	misery,	suddenly	you	are	noble.	There	is	grace,
beauty,	joy.	Life	starts	having	a	new	dimension,	a	new	richness.	It	becomes	more
festive,	 it	 starts	 taking	 on	 the	 colours	 of	 celebration.	 And	 that	 celebration	 is
sacredness,	that	celebration	is	godliness.
And	 the	way	 to	 come	out	 of	 your	misery	 is	meditation,	 because	 the	mind	has
been	created	by	the	society,	and	if	you	remain	inside	the	mind	you	remain	inside
the	 prison.	Mind	 is	 the	 prison,	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 all	 your	 slavery,	 of	 all	 your
despair,	anguish,	anxiety.	It	is	continuously	destroying	you	--	it	is	poison.
And	it	is	very	easy	to	get	out	of	the	mind	just	by	becoming	aware	of	the	whole
mechanism	of	mind	--
thinking,	desiring,	expecting.	All	 these	things	have	to	be	watched	as	if	you	are
just	a	mirror	reflecting	whatsoever	passes	by,	with	no	judgement,	with	no	desire
even	to	 judge,	 just	a	pure	witness	--	and	 immediately	you	are	out	of	 the	mind.
First	 it	will	come	 in	glimpses.	For	a	 few	seconds	you	will	be	out	of	mind,	but
those	few	seconds	will	give	you	a	taste	of	freedom,	of	tremendous	ecstasy.	And
then	 slowly	 those	 small	 moments	 will	 become	 bigger;	 the	 intervals	 when	 the
traffic	of	the	mind	completely	stops	will	become	bigger.
And	then	slowly	slowly	the	knack	is	learned.	If	you	want	to	put	the	mind	into	a
non-functioning	state	for	hours	or	even	for	days	you	can.	Whenever	it	is	needed
you	use	it,	whenever	it	is	not	needed	you	put	it	off.
Both	ways	it	is	healthy:	it	will	give	you	freedom	and	it	will	also	give	rest	to	your
mind.	And	when	the	mind	has	rest	it	becomes,	of	course,	a	better	mechanism,	it
functions	 better.	 Its	memory	 is	 clear,	 its	 functioning	 is	 in	 tune,	 its	 thinking	 is
logical,	it	functions	at	the	peak.
So	 it	 is	 not	 against	 mind	 to	 be	 a	 meditator.	 Meditation	 means	 going	 beyond
mind,	but	it	is	not	against	mind.	In	fact,	it	is	a	tremendous	boon	to	the	mind,	a
blessing,	because	the	mind	also	gets	tired:	it	does	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
continuous	work,	twenty-four	hours	a	day	unnecessary	work,	unneeded.	But	the
mind	goes	on	and	on	because	you	have	completely	forgotten	how	to	stop	it.	By
just	 being	 a	 witness	 you	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 stopping	 it.	 The	 moment	 you	 are	 a
witness	it	stops	on	its	own.	That's	the	whole	point.
Then	 nobleness	 is	 yours,	 and	 then	 to	 live	 is	 certainly	 a	 great	 gift.	 One	 feels
grateful	to	god.	Out	of	that	gratefulness	arises	prayer.
(Meditation	is	as	easy	as	pie,	as	Osho	tells	a	new	sannyasin,	who	has	been	riding
a	unicycle	around	the	ashram.)
It	 is	 slipping	out	of	your	mind	 like	a	snake	slips	out	of	 its	old	skin.	 It	 is	not	a
science,	it	is	an	art	or,	to	be	even	more	precise,	it	is	just	a	knack.
It	 is	 easy	 to	 teach	 science,	 very	 easy,	 because	 it	 consists	 of	 something
observable;	 it	 relates	 to	 the	 objective	 world.	 The	 student	 can	 see	 what	 is
happening	 with	 his	 own	 eyes.	 He	 can	 see	 water	 evaporating	 at	 one	 hundred
degrees.	There	is	not	much	of	a	trouble	in	teaching	science;	just	a	very	average
intelligence	is	needed.
To	teach	art	is	a	little	more	difficult	because	tremendous	intelligence	is	needed.
If	 a	person	wants	 to	be	 a	painter	he	will	 have	 to	 learn	 two	 things,	not	one.	 In
science	he	has	to	learn	only	one	thing:	he	has	to	become	informed.	If	he	wants	to
be	a	painter	he	has	to	learn	the	technique	of	painting	and	the	art	of	painting	--
which	 are	 two	 totally	 different	 things.	 For	 a	 technician	 painting	 is	 only	 a
question	 of	 arranging	 colours	 in	 a	 certain	 pattern,	 with	 a	 certain	 geometry,
certain	proportions;	it	is	almost	science.	But	then	it	cannot	be	a	great	piece	of	art.
It	may	be	perfect	technically,	but	something	will	be	missing	in	it.	It	will	not	be
original,	it	will	be	a	repeat,	because	for	originality	not	only	technique	is	needed,
for	originality	immense	intelligence	is	needed.
Zen	monks	have	been	painting	for	thousands	of	years	and	they	say	that	to	learn
real	painting	one	has	to	learn	the	technique	for	twelve	years	and	then	for	twelve
years	one	has	to	stop	painting	completely	and	forget	all	about	it.	And	then	after
those	 twenty-four	 years	 one	 has	 to	 start	 painting	 again,	 so	 the	 technique	 is
forgotten,	so	the	technique	does	not	come	in	between	you	and	the	painting.	Now
you	 can	 start	 painting	 as	 if	 you	 don't	 know	 painting,	 you	 don't	 know	 the
technique	of	painting,	so	you	can	be	original.
The	 second	 stage	 of	 twelve	 years	 is	 far	 more	 important	 than	 the	 first.	 The
technique	 has	 to	 be	 learned,	 certainly	 --	 without	 knowing	 about	 colours	 and
canvases	 you	 cannot	 paint	 --	 but	 that	 is	 only	 a	 preliminary	 process.	Then	 you
have	 to	 forget	 all	 about	 it	 so	you	don't	 become	addicted	 to	 the	 technique.	The
technique	 goes	 deep	 into	 your	 blood	 and	 bones,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 at	 all	 self-
conscious	about	it.	It	functions,	but	you	are	now	free	from	technique;	it	does	not
hinder	you.
Art	--	music,	poetry,	painting	--	 is	far	more	difficult	 to	 teach,	a	 longer	process.
And	a	knack	is	the	most	difficult	thing	to	teach	because	it	needs	three	things;	it
needs	 a	 certain	 technique,	 it	 needs	 tremendous	 intelligence	 and	 also	 it	 needs
some	 intuitiveness.	 Intuitiveness	 is	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 intelligence.	 The	 very
word	 'intuition'	 is	 significant.	 Education	 is	 tuition	 --	 somebody	 teaches	 you.
Intuition	 is	 something	 that	 happens	 to	 you;	 it	 cannot	 be	 brought	 in	 from	 the
outside.
The	master	can	create	a	certain	atmosphere,	 a	certain	energy	 field;	 it	 is	 a	very
indirect	process.	 It	 is	 just	as	a	gardener	prepares	 the	ground	and	 then	sows	 the
seed	 and	 then	waits;	 there	 is	 nothing	 else	 he	 can	do	 about	 it.	Now	everything
depends	 on	 the	 seeds.	 They	 will	 find	 their	 way	 in	 their	 own	 time.	 It	 will	 be
something	 like	 intuition.	 You	 cannot	 persuade	 the	 seeds	 to	 grow	 faster,	 you
cannot	tell	them	"This	is	the	time	--	go	ahead."	You	cannot	order	them;	you	have
simply	 to	 wait.	 Prepare	 the	 ground,	 remove	 all	 the	 barriers,	 rocks,	 weeds,
etcetera,	give	 them	a	beautiful	bed,	watering,	 sun,	and	 then	wait,	 then	wait	 for
their	own	intuition	to	unfold.	You	cannot	do	more	than	that.
That's	the	function	of	the	master;	to	create	a	certain	energy	field	in	which	your
intuition	 one	 day	 suddenly	 becomes	 aflame.	 It	 cannot	 be	 caused,	 it	 cannot	 be
forced.	It	can	only	be	helped,	and	that	too	in	a	very	soft	way.
That's	 the	 whole	 purpose	 of	 sannyas:	 to	 create	 an	 energy	 field,	 to	 create	 a
communion	of	people,	to	create	a	loving,	invisible	force,	a	have	of	love,	so	that
the	wave	can	take	you,	can	possess	you.
Meditation	 is	only	a	method:	 it	 helps	 to	 remove	 the	barriers.	 It	 is	 spade-work.
Weeds	 are	 removed,	 thoughts	 are	 removed,	 mind	 is	 removed.	 It	 is	 just	 a
removing	--	it	is	a	negative	process:	rejecting,	rejecting	everything	that	is	inside
so	one	day	there	is	nothing	to	reject.	All	that	can	be	thrown	out	has	been	thrown
out	and	you	have	a	pure	space,	just	space.	And	that	space	is	the	right	preparation.
In	that	space	your	intuition,	the	seed	of	intuition	which	you	have	been	carrying
all	 along,	 suddenly	 bursts	 forth	 unpredictably.	 One	 cannot	 say	 when	 it	 will
happen,	but	one	 thing	 is	 certain	 --	 it	 does	happen.	That	much	can	be	 said;	 the
time	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
cannot	be	predicted,	 but	 it	 happens.	 If	 the	 space	 is	 ready	 it	 happens	 sooner	or
later	--	and	it	is	always	sooner	rather	than	later.
And	your	name	Jack	 is	very	beautiful;	 it	means	god's	gracious	gift.	The	gift	 is
already	with	you,	but	you	have	not	opened	the	treasure,	the	doors	of	the	treasure.
The	 parcel	 has	 remained	with	 you	 unopened,	 and	 it	 has	 remained	 for	 so	 long
with	you	unopened	that	you	may	have	completely	forgotten	about	it.
My	work	is	to	help	you	to	find	where	you	have	put	it	and	to	find	how	to	open	it.
And	 then	 life	 becomes	 a	 splendour,	 a	 grandeur	 of	 inconceivable	 dimensions.
Then	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you	 know	what	 depth	means,	what	 height	means;	 then
you	are	no	more	flat.	Ordinarily	people	are	just	flat:	they	don't	have	any	depth,
they	don't	have	any	height	--	just	flat	ground.	They	don't	know	the	depths	of	the
Pacific,	 they	 don't	 know	 the	 heights	 of	 the	 Himalayas.	 They	 are	 missing
something.
The	 real	 adventure	begins	only	when	you	 start	moving	deeper	 into	your	being
and	also	higher	into	your	consciousness,	and	the	processes	are	two	sides	of	the
same	coin.	If	you	go	deeper	you	go	higher,	if	you	go	higher	you	go	deeper.	It	is
one	dimension,	the	vertical	dimension.	People	who	are	living	a	flat	life	are	living
horizontally,	 and	 of	 course,	 their	 life	 is	 just	 like	 a	 flat	 tyre,	 utterly	 punctured!
And	you	must	know	about	tyres	--	you	are	a	unicyclist!
Become	 something	 vertical.	 Sannyas	 is	 a	 change	 from	 being	 horizontal	 to
vertical.	And	then	life	is	really	bliss,	a	gift	of	god.	One	cannot	repay	god,	there	is
no	way.	One	can	only	be	thankful,	tremendously	thankful.	That's	what	prayer	is,
that's	what	religion	is:	a	deep	gratitude	to	existence	for	what	it	has	done	for	us.
(Love	is	 the	first	 lesson	in	learning	of	god,	Osho	told	Prem	Sanatana.)	Love	is
the	only	quality,	a	natural	quality,	that	has	something	of	eternity	in	it.	Hence	love
is	 the	 first	 experience	 of	 god,	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 experience	 of	 god.	God	 is
much	more	than	that,	but	love	opens	the	door.	God	is	inconceivable,	but	love	is
not	 inconceivable.	Love	 is	 natural,	 so	 love	 functions	 as	 a	bridge	between	man
and	god.	If	the	bridge	is	not	there	you	cannot	reach	god;	god	remains	simply	an
empty	word.
But	with	 love	 immediately	you	 start	 understanding	god	 in	 a	new	way.	 It	 is	no
more	 an	 empty	word;	 it	 starts	 having	 great	 content	 in	 it,	 great	meaning	 in	 it,
great	significance	in	it.
Knowing	 love	 is	 the	 first	 lesson	 in	 knowing	god.	That	 is	 the	beginning	of	 the
alphabet,	the	ABC.	Of	course	god	is	far	more,	because	the	alphabet	will	have	to
go	 to	XYZ,	but	 if	you	have	begun	 rightly	with	ABC,	XYZ	 is	not	 far	 away.	A
good	beginning	is	almost	half	the	journey,	a	right	beginning	is	half	the	journey.
Begin	 with	 love	 so	 one	 day	 you	 can	 know	 god.	 And	 never	 begin	 with	 god
because	you	cannot	begin	there.	That's	where	all	the	religions	have	failed:	they
begin	with	god,	which	is	not	possible.	You	are	stuck	on	this	bank	and	you	start
your	journey	on	the	other	bank,	where	you	are	not.	So	your	journey	remains	just
a	 fantasy,	 a	 journey	 of	 dreams	 --	 beautiful	 dreams,	 but	 dreams	 are	 dream,
beautiful	 or	 ugly.	When	 you	wake	 up	 you	will	 see	 that	 all	 that	 time	 has	 been
wasted.	Even	if	they	were	nice	dreams	they	have	not	given	you	anything.
So	there	are	worldly	people	who	dream	of	worldly	things,	and	there	are	so-called
religious	people	who	dream	of	religious	things,	but	both	are	dreamers	--	both	are
stuck	on	this	bank.	And	god	is	the	farther	shore.
A	 bridge	 is	 needed	 or	 a	 boat	 is	 needed	 if	 a	 bridge	 is	 not	 possible.	 Love	 can
function	both	ways.	Either	it	can	become	a	bridge	or	it	can	become	a	boat,	but	it
can	take	you	to	the	other	shore.
The	so-called	religions	teach	you	to	begin	with	god,	and	of	course	then	you	have
only	to	believe	in	god.
You	don't	know,	you	have	to	believe.	This	is	the	beginning	of	superstitution,	and
all	kinds	of	 stupidities	will	be	born	out	of	 it	 --	Christian	stupidities	and	Hindu
stupidities	 and	 Mohammedan	 and	 Jewish,	 and	 there	 are	 thousands	 of	 forms.
Stupidity	comes	in	every	size	and	shape,	in	all	colours;	whatever	you	choose	it	is
available.	The	market	is	full	of	stupidity	and	you	have	infinite	variety;	you	can
choose.	You	can	go	on	changing	from	one	stupidity	to	another.
But	 unless	 you	 know,	 you	 don't	 know.	 Belief	 is	 not	 knowing.	 Belief	 is	 a
deception,	deceiving	others	and	deceiving	yourself.	And	I	am	not	worried	about
others	 --	 if	 you	deceive	others	 it	 is	 okay	 --	 but	 don't	 deceive	yourself	 because
that	will	destroy	your	whole	life.	And	my	understanding	is	that	the	person	who
deceives	himself	is	the	person	who	will	deceive	others.	The	person	who	cannot
deceive	himself	cannot	deceive	others	either;	 it	becomes	 impossible	 for	him	to
deceive.	And	belief	is	the	greatest	deception.
The	 only	 way	 to	 begin	 is	 with	 love,	 because	 that	 is	 a	 natural	 phenomenon.
Everybody	is	born	with	a	loving	quality.	You	have	to	purify	it,	you	have	to	make
it	more	and	more	refined,	cultured,	so	it	loses	all	animality	and	lust,	and	slowly
slowly	starts	rising	higher	than	lust.	Drop	jealousies	because	those	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
poisons,	 heavy	 weights	 that	 keep	 your	 love	 low;	 it	 cannot	 rise	 high.
Possessiveness,	ego	trips,	domination	--
go	on	dropping	all	these,	and	slowly	slowly	your	love	will	become	weightless.	A
moment	comes	when	there	is	no	jealousy,	no	possessiveness,	no	lust,	and	love	is
pure.	You	have	wings,	you	can	fly.	Now	you	have	something	in	you	which	can
take	you	to	the	ultimate	source	of	life,	to	god.
Hence	I	say	love	is	the	first	glimpse	of	eternity,	and	the	last	glimpse	is	god.	Love
is	the	beginning	of	god	and	god	is	the	end	of	love.	Love	is	the	first	step	towards
god	and	god	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	love.
(Contrary	 to	 popular	 opinion,	 yoga	 isn't	 a	 set	 of	 strenuous	 exercises,	 just	 the
converse:	it's	total	let-go.
Osho	was	addressing	Anand	Yogendra.)
Yoga	means	 the	 art	 of	 communion,	 becoming	 one	 with	 the	 whole,	 dissolving
yourself	into	the	whole	like	a	dewdrop	slipping	from	the	lotus	leaf	into	the	lake.
The	moment	 it	 falls	 into	 the	 lake	 it	 becomes	 the	 lake.	 It	 loses	 one	 thing	 --	 its
small	 identity,	 its	 ego,	 its	 boundary	 --	 but	 it	 gains	 infinitely;	 it	 becomes	 the
whole	 lake.	 The	 dewdrop	 was	 always	 in	 danger,	 the	 sun	 will	 rise	 and	 it	 will
evaporate.	Dewdrops	are	always	on	 the	verge	of	death,	any	moment	death	can
happen.	 But	 once	 the	 dewdrop	 becomes	 part	 of	 the	 lake,	 death	 becomes
impossible.
Man	 is	 just	 a	dewdrop,	 and	 that's	why	he	 is	miserable,	 afraid;	 afraid	of	death,
afraid	 of	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things,	 constantly	 trembling	 inside.	 And	 it	 is
natural,	understandable.	The	only	way	to	get	rid	of	all	this	fear,	trembling,	is	to
become	one	with	the	whole.
That's	what	 yoga	 is:	 the	 art	 of	 dissolving	 yourself	 into	 the	whole,	 losing	 your
boundaries,	losing	your	ego,	your	identity.	In	the	beginning	it	seems	to	be	very
difficult	because	that's	all	we	know	about	ourselves.
The	function	of	 the	master	 is	 to	help	you,	 to	encourage	you,	 to	seduce	you,	 to
push	you	to	take	the	jump.
And	 if	 one	 loves	 the	 master,	 trusts	 the	 master,	 things	 become	 simple,	 very
simple.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about;	it	is	just	a	trust.	And	in	trust	it	is	easy	to
take	the	jump;	without	trust	it	is	impossible	to	take	the	jump.
In	doubt	you	cannot	take	the	jump	because	you	will	always	be	doubting	whether
to	take	it	or	not	and	it	will	always	remain	an	either/or,	either/or,	either/or.
And	there	is	no	way	to	decide	through	the	mind	because	the	mind	has	no	way	to
know	 the	 unknown,	 it	 remains	 confined	 in	 the	 known.	 And	 you	 have	 never
experienced	the	melting	with	the	whole,	so	it	is	a	gamble.	The	doubting	person
cannot	 risk.	 It	 really	 needs	 guts,	 great	 courage,	 to	 trust,	 to	 put	 all	 the	 doubts
aside.
In	spite	of	all	 the	doubts	one	 falls	 in	 love	with	someone	who	has	known,	who
has	taken	the	jump,	who	has	found.	And	in	trust	one	takes	the	quantum	leap.	It	is
a	single	step.	Once	you	have	jumped,	then	nothing	can	prevent	you.	Even	if	you
doubt	on	the	way	you	can	doubt	--	nothing	to	worry	about.	Now	you	will	reach
the	lake;	you	cannot	hang	somewhere	in	the	air.
So	once	somebody	has	jumped	I	don't	bother	about	it	at	all.	I	don't	even	look	--	it
is	finished,	I	start	working	with	somebody	else,	because	there	is	nowhere	in	the
air	you	can	stop,	you	have	to	go	to	the	very	bottom.	So	my	work	is	finished	once
somebody	has	taken	the	jump.
And	the	moment	you	become	one	with	the	whole	there	is	bliss.	Life	for	the	first
time	has	meaning	because	for	the	first	time	there	is	no	more	death.	For	the	first
time	you	know	you	have	always	been	here	and	will	always	be	here,	that	you	are
indestructible.	 In	 knowing	 it	 there	 is	 rejoicing,	 in	 knowing	 it	 there	 is	 freedom
from	fear,	in	knowing	it	one	starts	dancing.
Then	there	is	nothing	else	to	do	--	dance,	sing,	rejoice!
Then	this	whole	universe	belongs	to	you	because	you	are	part	to	it.
(The	 momentary	 ultimately	 proves	 misery-making;	 only	 the	 eternal	 can	 bring
ecstasy	--	this	to	Amrit	Satyam,	a	psychiatric	nurse	from	Holland.)
We	 live	with	momentary	 things.	 That's	why	 there	 is	 so	much	misery,	 because
whatsoever	is	momentary	is	not	going	to	satisfy.	By	the	time	you	become	aware
that	 it	 is	 there	 it	 is	 already	 gone.	 This	 life	 is	 almost	 a	 flux:	 it	 is	 continuously
moving,	 slipping	 out	 of	 your	 hands.	 Nothing	 is	 certain,	 nothing	 is	 stable.
Everything	is	in	a	constant	movement.
You	cannot	make	your	abode	in	this	momentary	world,	on	these	shifting	sands.
If	 you	make	 your	 abode	 on	 these	 shifting	 sands	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 collapse;	 it	 is
absolutely	 inevitable.	 The	 collapse	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 any	 moment,	 and	 you
cannot	live	at	peace.
You	 fall	 in	 love,	 then	 there	 is	 fear	 about	whether	 the	 love	 is	 going	 to	 remain
tomorrow	or	not.	Your	 lover	may	leave	you	or	you	may	start	 thinking	 to	 leave
your	lover.	So	we	start	making	arrangements	to	stabilise	it,	to	make	it	something
permanent,	and	in	that	very	effort	all	joy	is	lost.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Lovers	start	 trying	 to	possess	 the	other	so	 that	 tomorrow	it	 is	still	 there,	but	 in
trying	to	possess	love	you	are	already	destroying	it.	You	are	not	even	waiting	for
tomorrow	to	destroy	it,	you	have	destroyed	it	today...
because	 nobody	 wants	 to	 be	 possessed,	 nobody	 wants	 to	 be	 thought	 of	 as	 a
commodity.	Nobody	is	a	thing.
To	behave	with	 a	person	 as	 if	 he	or	 she	 is	 a	 thing	 is	 to	humiliate;	 it	 is	 utterly
disrespectful.	And	everybody	resists	it,	hence	the	fight	starts.
The	 desire	 is	 for	 something	 eternal,	 but	 that	 cannot	 be	 fulfilled	 in	 the	 outside
world.	Somebody	is	poor	and	he	thinks	that	if	he	becomes	rich	he	will	be	happy.
The	moment	he	becomes	rich	he	is	not	happy,	he	is	simply	more	worried.	Now
he	is	worried	about	whether	he	is	going	to	remain	rich	or	not,	because	things	go
on	changing.	The	market	goes	down,	the	prices	change,	the	banks	go	bankrupt,
governments	 become	 communist,	 so	 nothing	 can	 be	 certain.	 So	 there	 is	 a
constant	worry.	When	he	was	poor	at	least	he	used	to	sleep	well;	now	he	cannot
even	 sleep,	 his	 sleep	 becomes	 a	 restlessness.	 He	 is	 constantly	 worried,
nightmares	surround	him.
Through	great	effort	a	person	reaches	 the	highest	post	of	 the	country,	becomes
the	prime	minister	or	the	president...	and	then	the	fear.	Almost	the	whole	of	his
life	is	wasted	in	reaching	the	highest	post,	now	he	clings	to	the	chair,	afraid	that
others	are	pulling	his	legs.	There	is	a	long	queue	of	people	who	all	want	to	be	the
president	 or	 the	 prime	 minister	 .	 There	 is	 immense	 competition,	 cut-throat
competition,	and	everybody	is	against	everybody	else's	necks.	He	cannot	rest	at
peace.	He	has	reached	after	such	a	 long	effort	and	now	all	 that	he	can	do	is	 to
cling	to	the	chair,	to	somehow	survive	there.
This	 is	what	 goes	 on	 happening	 unless	we	 start	 looking	 inwards.	 The	 outside
world	is	not	going	to	satisfy	because	it	is	a	changing	world,	momentary,	and	our
innermost	longing	is	for	the	eternal.	And	that	cannot	be	fulfilled	on	the	outside.
I	am	not	against	the	outside	world.	All	that	I	want	my	sannyasins	to	be	aware	of
is	that	your	desire	is	for	the	eternal	and	that	cannot	be	fulfilled	on	the	outside.	So
on	 the	 outside	 remain	 joyful	 with	 the	 momentary,	 don't	 ask	 that	 it	 should	 be
eternal.	 Nothing	 can	 be	 eternal	 on	 the	 outside.	 Enjoy	 the	 momentary	 as
momentary,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	it	is	momentary.
The	flower	that	has	opened	up	in	the	morning	is	bound	to	die	by	the	evening.	It
has	come	with	the	sunrise,	it	will	go	with	the	sunset.	So	rejoice!	I	am	not	against
the	flower	--	rejoice!	But	remember,	don't	cling,	don't	hope,	otherwise	you	will
be	 disillusioned.	 Rejoice	 in	 the	momentary	 on	 the	 outside,	 and	 search	 for	 the
eternal	in	the	inside.
That's	my	message	to	my	sannyasins.	And	inside	you	will	find	amrit,	nectar,	the
immortal,	 the	 eternal,	 the	 divine.	And	 once	 you	 have	 found	 that	 then	 there	 is
nothing	more	to	be	found.	Then	all	is	bliss,	then	all	is	joy.	Life	is	fulfilled.	One
has	come	home.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
28	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009285
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	truth	is	beyond	the	mind.	All	that	is	significant	is	beyond	the	mind.	Mind	is
made	of	the	stuff	called	dreams.	Daydreams	are	known	as	thoughts,	but	they	are
not	 different;	 it	 is	 the	 same	 process	 --	 it	 is	 non-substantial.	 Thoughts	 are	 like
darkness,	they	appear	just	as	darkness	appears.	It	looks	so	real,	but	just	bring	the
light	in	and	it	is	no	more	there.	It	is	an	appearance,	something	very	illusory.
That's	why	you	cannot	do	anything	directly	with	darkness:	you	cannot	throw	it
out,	you	cannot	bring	it	in.	Absolutely	nothing	can	be	done	directly	to	darkness
because	it	does	not	exist	in	the	first	place.	It	has	no	weight	--	it	is	just	an	absence
of	 light.	 So	 when	 you	 bring	 the	 light	 in,	 because	 of	 its	 presence	 the	 absence
disappears.
The	same	is	true	about	mind:	mind	is	an	absence	of	meditation.	The	moment	you
enter	 into	meditation,	mind	 disappears	 just	 like	 darkness.	And	 only	 then	 does
one	know	that	one	has	lived	in	a	very	illusory	world.
The	mind	is	the	world	in	which	we	live.	The	real	world	is	far	away	from	us.	The
mind	is	between	us	and	the	real	and	it	goes	on	distorting	the	real,	interpreting	the
real,	projecting	itself	on	the	real.	It	never	allows	you	to	see	the	reality,	it	never
allows	you	to	see	even	your	own	self.	It	becomes	so	important	that	you	become
focused	on	 it,	 and	 the	 two	 realities,	 the	outside	and	 the	 inside,	both	disappear.
The	non-substantial	becomes	your	whole	life;	it	dominates	you.	You	live	through
the	mind,	you	live	as	the	mind.
And	 that's	 the	 only	 problem.	 To	 live	 in	 something	 illusory	 is	 to	 live	 in	 vain.
There	will	be	no	growth,	no	maturity,	no	richness,	no	understanding,	no	bliss,	no
truth,	no	beauty.
One	has	to	go	beyond	mind	--	and	that	cannot	be	done	by	fighting.	If	you	fight
you	have	already	accepted	mind	as	real.	The	moment	you	accept	the	mind	as	real
you	 are	 entrapped	 by	 it.	 If	 you	 fight	 with	 darkness,	 how	 can	 you	 win?	 Even
Mohammed	 Ali	 will	 not	 be	 of	 any	 use	 if	 he	 starts	 wrestling	 with	 darkness!
Darkness	will	destroy	--	although	it	does	not	exist.
When	you	fight	with	something	illusory	you	are	going	to	be	 the	 loser.	You	are
fighting	a	losing	battle.
You	are	simply	wasting	your	time	and	energy,	because	there	is	nobody	other	than
you	 --	 you	 are	 fighting	 against	 yourself.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 you	 put	 both	 your	 hands
against	each	other:	you	can	make	 them	clash,	but	 that	 is	unnecessarily	wasting
your	 energy.	 Both	 hands	 are	 yours.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 put	 your	 hands	 together	 in
cooperation	rather	than	in	conflict.	The	energy	is	saved;	one	becomes	a	reservoir
of	energy.
So	there	is	no	need	to	fight	the	mind	--	that	is	stupid.	One	only	has	to	watch	it,
and	 watchfulness	 functions	 just	 like	 light.	Watchfulness	 is	 light,	 awareness	 is
light.	It	makes	you	more	and	more	full	of	light.
It	 becomes	 a	 flame,	 and	 a	 flame	without	 any	 smoke	because	 it	 is	without	 any
fuel.
Hence	all	the	mystics	of	the	world	have	said	the	moment	you	enter	your	center
you	 know	what	 real	 light	 is.	 They	 have	 all	 defined	God	 as	 light,	 the	 ultimate
experience	as	enlightenment.	 It	simply	means	realization	of	 the	 light,	not	as	as
object	but	as	your	very	being,	your	very	nature.
So	 the	moment	you	become	conscious,	 alert,	 aware,	watchful	of	 the	mind,	 the
mind	starts	disappearing.
In	a	perfect	moment	of	watchfulness	 there	 is	no	mind	 to	be	found.	And	that	 is
the	beginning	of	a	transcendental	experience.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Veetmano:	transcend	the	mind.	Once	mind	is
transcended	the	kingdom	of	God	is	yours.	And	with	 the	mind	all	 the	problems
disappear,	 all	 the	 doubts	 disappear,	 all	 hatred,	 all	 violence,	 all	 misery.
Whatsoever	you	have	known	as	your	life	up	to	now,	the	whole	thing	will	simply
disappear	with	the	mind	and	you	are	born	anew.	It	is	a	resurrection.
Sannyas	means	resurrection,	the	birth	of	a	new	being.
(Religions	in	the	past	succeeded	only	in	making	man	unwholey,	Osho	told	us.)
The	 old	 idea	 of	 all	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 world	 was	 to	 renounce,	 to	 reject,	 to
condemn	 this	world	 in	 order	 to	 praise	 the	 other	world.	They	were	 creating	 an
unnecessary	opposition	between	this	and	that,	between	this	shore	and	the	further
shore.	And	they	are	not	in	opposition	at	all.	This	shore	and	the	further	shore	are
in	deep	cooperation	with	each	other.	They	help	the	same	river	to	flow	between
them.	They	belong	to	the	same	river,	they	are	not	separate.	Underneath	the	river
they	both	are	joined	together;	they	are	holding	he	river.	If	one	shore	disappears
the	river	will	die	--	it	needs	both	shores,	both	are	absolutely	needed.	But	they	are
not	 two,	 just	 two	 extremes	 of	 one	 energy,	 two	 polarities	 like	 positive	 and
negative	 electricity.	Both	 are	needed	 for	 the	 electricity	 to	 exist,	 but	 they	make
one	whole	--	it	is	one	phenomenon.
My	 approach	 towards	 life	 is	 that	 this	world	 and	 the	 other	world,	 the	material
world	 and	 the	 spiritual	world	 are	 not	 opposites	 but	 complementaries.	Without
this,	that	cannot	exist;	without	that,	this	cannot	exist.
Religions	have	created	an	unnecessary	split,	and	 the	split	has	created	a	split	 in
man	himself.	Man	has	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
become	 schizophrenic,	 he	 is	 divided.	 If	 you	 go	 into	 the	 old	 scriptures	 of	 the
world	religions,	they	all	talk	of	man	in	a	way	which	divides	him	into	the	lower
and	the	higher.	Even	the	body	is	divided:	below	your	navel	is	something	lower,
above	the	navel	is	something	higher.	This	is	sheer	stupidity!	It	is	the	same	body	-
-	the	same	blood	circulates.	It	is	nowhere	demarcated	as	higher	and	lower;	there
is	no	hierarchy	in	tile	body.	Even	the	head	is	not	higher	than	the	feet	--	they	are
both	together.	It	is	one	unity,	one	organic	unity.
And	 so	 is	 the	 case	 with	 the	 body	 and	 soul.	 They	 are	 not	 two	 separate
phenomena.	 The	 body	 is	 the	 manifested	 part	 of	 the	 soul	 and	 the	 soul	 is	 the
unmanifest	 part	 of	 the	 body	 The	 soul	 is	 the	 inner	 side	 of	 the	 same	 reality	 of
which	 the	 body	 is	 the	 outer	 side,	 and	 they	 both	 function	 in	 deep	 harmony,	 in
deep	 togetherness.	 It	 is	 tremendously	 beautiful	 how	 the	 soul	 and	 the	 body	 go
together	hand	in	hand,	in	a	dance.	It	is	one	rhythm.
But	religions	created	the	idea	that	this	world	has	to	be	renounced.	The	result	was
that	 religious	 people	 became	 escapists.	 They	went	 to	 the	monasteries	 and	 the
mountains.	In	the	first	place	they	became	afraid	of	love	because	love	means	the
other,	love	means	so	e	kind	of	relatedness;	for	that	you	need	the	world.	So	they
were	 against	 love	 although	 they	 all	 talked	 about	 love.	 But	 their	 love	 was
absolutely	 non-substantial,	 abstract.	 It	meant	 nothing	 --	 it	was	 ghost-like.	You
can	call	it	the	Holy	Ghost!	But	even	if	you	call	it	holy	it	is	a	ghost,	and	a	ghost	is
a	 ghost	 is	 a	 ghost!	 It	 does	 not	 exist	 --	 holy	 or	 unholy	 does	 not	 make	 any
difference.
They	talked	about	love	but	they	talked	about	love	in	such	an	abstract	way	that	it
really	makes	no	sense.
Love	has	to	be	earthly.	Just	as	trees	cannot	grow	without	earth	--	they	need	roots
in	the	earth	--	love	needs	roots	in	the	earth;	the	body	represents	the	earth.	But	the
tree	 goes	 high	 into	 the	 sky;	 it	 whispers	 with	 the	 clouds.	 Every	 tree	 has	 an
ambition	to	touch	the	stars!
But	remember	one	secret:	 the	higher	the	tree	goes,	 the	deeper	go	its	roots;	 it	 is
proportionate.	The	roots	have	 to	be	as	deep	as	 the	 tree	 is	high.	The	height	and
depth	have	to	be	absolutely	balanced.	With	small	roots	 the	 tree	cannot	go	very
nigh;	it	will	fall	down.
The	old	idea	of	love	was	abstract	--	a	tree	without	roots	in	the	earth,	just	going
higher	 and	 higher	 and	 touching	 the	 stars.	 It	 is	 nonsense!	Yes,	 love	 has	 to	 rise
above	 the	 earth	 but	 it	 cannot	 rise	 without	 the	 help	 of	 the	 earth.	 It	 needs	 the
earth's	support.	Love	has	to	become	something	higher	than	passion,	but	passion
has	 to	be	 its	support.	 It	 is	not	against	passion	--	higher	does	not	mean	against.
The	higher	contains	the	lower;	it	is	bigger	than	the	lower,	not	against.	The	lower
is	 contained	 in	 it.	 The	 higher	 transforms	 even	 the	 quality	 of	 the	 lower;	 it
beautifies	it.	It	makes	even	passion	transformed.
That	 is	 the	meaning	of	 the	word	 "compassion":	 it	 is	 passion	 transformed,	 it	 is
passion	become	 luminous;	 then	 it	 is	 compassion.	But	 it	 is	 not	 against	 passion.
The	flowers	 that	come	on	the	 top	of	 the	 trees	are	gifts	from	the	earth	although
they	 look	so	different.	Their	colour,	 their	 fragrance,	 their	beauty	 --	you	cannot
find	 them	anywhere.	 If	 you	 dig	 in	 the	 earth	 you	will	 not	 find	 the	 colours,	 the
beauty,	 the	 fragrance,	 but	 the	 earth	 contains	 them.	 The	 tree	 simply	 helps	 the
earth	 to	 reveal	 its	 secrets.	 Those	 flowers	 were	 contained	 in	 the	 earth,	 those
colours	are	part	of	the	earth,	of	the	earth's	chemistry.	It	is	the	earth's	gift	to	the
tree	--	the	earth	is	not	against	the	tree.
So	a	real	Buddha,	a	really	awakened	person,	is	a	bridge	between	the	two	--	this
world	and	that	world	--
between	the	material	and	the	spiritual.
Religions	created	fear	about	love.	Hence	monks	lived	separate	from	nuns,	nuns
lived	separate	from	monks.	There	was	tremendous	fear.	One	Catholic	monastery
still	exists	--	one	thousand	years	old	--	on	Mount	Athos.	For	one	thousand	years
not	 even	 a	 single	 woman	 has	 entered	 the	 monastery.	 What	 to	 say	 about	 a
woman?	They	don't	 allow	even	 a	 six-month-old	girl!	What	 kind	of	 people	 are
living	inside	--	monks	or	monsters?	They	are	even	afraid	of	a	six-month-old	girl.
They	must	be	boiling!	They	must	be	sitting	on	volcanoes	of	sexuality.	And	they
are	not	allowed	to	come	out.	Once	a	monk	enters	the	monastery	he	has	entered
forever.	It	has	an	entrance	but	no	exit.
So	first	those	religions	created	these	stupid	people,	devoid	of	love,	devoid	of	the
earth,	 devoid	 of	 roots;	 they	 are	 dead.	 And	 the	 second	 outcome	was	 that	 they
became	uncreative,	because	without	love	there	is	no	creativity,	without	the	world
there	is	no	creativity.	And	what	can	you	create?	--	you	will	be	afraid	of	beauty.
Even	the	beauty	of	a	rose	will	remind	you	of	the	beauty	of	a	woman	or	a	man.
Even	 the	 beauty	 of	 a	 sunrise	 will	 remind	 you,	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 moon	 will
remind	you,	and	some	faces	will	start	arising	in	your	memory.
You	cannot	paint,	you	cannot	sing,	you	cannot	play	on	musical	instruments,	you
cannot	create	poetry	--
because	without	love,	what	poetry	will	you	create?
Love	 is	 the	 source	 of	 all	 creativity,	 and	 all	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 world	 creates
people	who	were	uncreative.	That	 is	 a	calamity.	Millions	of	people	who	could
have	contributed	 immensely	 to	 the	world,	who	would	have	made	 it	a	beautiful
place,	a	paradise,	were	taken	out,	taken	away.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	effort	is	to	bring	this	whole	nonsense	to	a	stop,	to	a	complete	stop.	It	is	time
--	enough	is	enough!
We	should	create	a	new	kind	of	religious	person	who	knows	how	to	love,	who
knows	how	to	be	creative.
My	sannyasins	have	to	do	both.	They	have	to	be	lovers,	great	lovers,	and	great
creators	--	whatsoever	their	inner	feel,	their	inner	intuition,	is.	But	they	have	to
be	 creators.	They	 have	 to	 listen	 to	 their	 own	 possibilities,	 their	 own	 potential.
And	it	speaks.	hen	you	are	silent	your	potential	speaks	to	you,	whispers	to	you.
And	 those	whisperings	 are	absolutely	 categorical	 --	 there	 are	 no	 ifs	 and	 butts.
The	heart	knows	nothing	of	ifs	and	buts,	it	simply	says	that	this	is	your	destiny:
become	painter	or	a	poet	or	a	sculptor	or	a	dancer	or	a	musician.	It	simply	says
to	you	that	this	is	how	you	will	be	fulfilled.	It	starts	directing	you.
The	function	of	the	master	is	to	help	you	to	be	silent	so	that	you	can	hear	your
own	 inner	 whisperings,	 and	 then	 your	 life	 starts	 moving	 through	 an	 inner
discipline.	So	I	don't	give	you	any	outer	discipline.	I	help	you	to	discover	your
insight;	then	you	are	free,	then	you	move	in	freedom.
So	sannyas	is	not	a	bondage,	it	is	not	a	cult,	it	is	not	a	creed.	It	is	a	declaration	of
freedom.	 It	 is	 a	 declaration	 of	 individuality.	 It	 is	 a	 declaration	 of	 love	 and
creativity.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
29	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009295
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG29
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Osho	began	tonight	on	a	note	similar	to	the	one	on	which	he	ended	last	night	--
learning	to	listen	to	the	inner	whispering.)
Man	unnecessarily	seeks	for	knowledge	on	the	outside	because	the	source	of	all
wisdom	is	at	the	very	core	of	your	being.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	deep	silence	to
hear	it,	because	the	heart	cannot	shout,	it	only	whispers.	It	cannot	shout	for	the
simple	reason	that	it	is	not	aggressive.	Shouting	is	aggression,	violence.
The	mind	is	very	aggressive,	hence	it	is	constantly	shouting,	making	much	fuss
about	everything,	creating	great	noise.	And	because	of	this	noise	one	cannot	hear
the	still,	small	voice	within.	Once	this	noise	ceases,	when	we	have	put	the	mind
aside,	suddenly	the	whisper	comes	so	clearly	that	one	cannot	miss	it.
And	because	 there	 is	 no	mind	 one	 cannot	misinterpret	 it	 either.	 It	 comes	with
such	 certainty,	 with	 such	 absolute....	 Self-evident	 it	 is;	 it	 needs	 no	 proof,	 no
argument.	It	is	absolutely	categorical.	Once	you	have	heard	it	you	are	bound	to
follow	it.	One	will	never	go	against	it,	one	cannot.	It	is	one	of	the	fundamental
laws	of	life.
People	go	astray	because	they	don't	know	where	to	look	for	real	advice.	In	the
past	 they	 used	 to	 go	 to	 the	 priests,	 now	 they	 have	 started	 going	 to	 the
psychoanalist.	 The	 psychoanalyst	 is	 the	 new	 priest.	 Neither	 the	 priest	 nor	 the
psychoanalyst	 know	 anything.	 The	 priest	 himself	 was	 in	 confusion,	 so	 is	 the
psychoanalyst.	 In	 fact	 psychoanalysts	 go	 to	 each	 other	 to	 be	 psychoanalysed.
They	have	their	problems,	they	have	not	solved	their	problems	either.	They	have
their	difficulties,	their	own	mess.	In	fact	they	are	in	more	of	a	mess	than	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
anybody	 else,	 than	 any	 profession.	 No	 other	 profession	 commits	 so	 many
suicides	 and	no	other	profession	goes	 insane	as	much	as	 the	psychoanalysts	 --
and	they	are	trying	to	help	people!	They	themselves	are	not	healed.
The	old	proverb	is	absolutely	pertinent	about	them,	Physician	first	heal	thyself.
But	 their	 profession	 is	 very	 profitable,	 it	 always	 has	 been.	 The	 priest	 or	 the
witchdoctor	or	the	psychoanalyst	--	they	belong	to	the	same	chain,	they	exploit
one	thing	in	different	names,	that	is,	that	people	have	forgotten	to	listen	to	their
own	hearts.
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	find	your	own	voice	so	that	you	don't	need	any
other	 advice.	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 any	 advice,	 I	 don't	 try	 to	 solve	 your	 particular
problems.	My	effort	is	totally	radical;	I	simply	help	you	to	put	the	noise	inside
off	so	that	you	can	hear	your	own	voice.	And	then	you	cannot	go	wrong.	Then
you	live	in	your	own	light.	That	is	the	way	of	a	sannyasin.
The	sannyasin	is	not	a	follower,	the	sannyasin	is	not	an	imitator.	The	sannyasin
is	one	who	has	found	his	own	soul,	and	now	he	lives	accordingly.
(He	 only	wants	 drunkards	 and	 gamblers	 for	 company,	Osho	 said,	 That's	 what
you	have	to	be	if	you	want	to	love.)
Love	 is	 when	 the	 rock	 of	 the	 ego	 is	 removed.	 Then	 your	 life's	 juices	 start
flowing.	That's	what	love	is	all	about	your	life	juices.	And	they	come	with	such	a
flood	 that	you	start	overflowing	with	 them.	You	have	 to	 share.	And	when	you
share	 your	 love	 energy	with	 anybody,	 it	 is	 not	 that	 you	 are	 obliging	 the	 other
person,	in	fact,	just	the	contrary	is	the	case:	you	feel	obliged	to	the	other	because
he	accepted	your	love.	You	don't	ask	for	anything	in	return	because	love	in	itself
is	such	a	joy,	who	cares	for	any	reward?
Rewards	are	meant	for	purposes	where	the	process	itself	is	that	of	misery	--	then
a	reward	is	needed.	So	the	reward	is	like	a	carrot	hanging	in	front	of	you	and	to
get	 the	carrot	you	can	pass	 through	all	kinds	of	miseries.	The	Nobel	Prize,	 the
gold	 medals	 in	 universities,	 the	 presidencies,	 the	 prize	 minister-ships	 of	 the
world	 --	 these	 are	 just	 prizes.	 They	 are	 very	 childish	 because	 to	 hanker	 for	 a
prize	is	childish,	to	ask	for	a	reward	is	childish.
The	 really	mature	 person	 lives	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 each	moment	 in	 itself	 is	 a
reward.	It	is	not	that	the	reward	will	be	coming	later	on.	The	mature	person	has
such	an	insight	into	things	that	the	journey	and	the	goal	are	no	more	separate,	so
each	step	of	the	journey	is	a	goal	in	itself	--	tremendously	blissful,	beautiful.
who	cares	about	the	goal?	Every	moment	is	such	a	benediction	that	one	enjoys	it
as	an	end	unto	itself;	it	is	not	a	means	to	anything.
When	a	man	has	come	to	this	state,	when	everything	is	an	end	unto	itself,	only
then	has	he	lived	his	life	truly,	he	has	become	really	grown-up.	Growing	old	is
not	 becoming	grown-up.	Growing	old	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 you,	 it	 is	 not	 to
your	credit.	Every	donkey	becomes	old;	it	does	not	need	any	intelligence.	But	to
be	grown-up	needs	great	intelligence,	great	courage,	and	a	heart	which	is	ready
to	risk,	gamble.
One	can	be	my	sannyasin	only	if	one	is	ready	to	gamble,	if	one	is	ready	to	risk
without	holding	anything	back.	When	one	is	ready	to	be	totally	committed,	then
only	 is	 some	 transformation	 possible.	 But	 it	 brings	 infinite	 grace,	 it	 brings
celebration	 to	 your	 life.	 Flowers	 start	 showering	 on	 you,	 the	 whole	 existence
rejoices	in	your	joy.
(Osho	talked	again	tonight	about	how	we	can	live	either	as	lovers	or	logicians,
and	about	how	society	has	no	use	for	the	former	so	does	all	it	can	to	harness	the
heart's	energy	 in	 the	 service	of	 the	head.)	The	man	of	 the	heart	has	no	market
value.	He	has	immense	value	in	himself	but	 that	value	is	not	of	 the	market;	he
cannot	become	a	commodity.	When	people	are	poor	what	till	you	do	with	poetry
and	music,	what	will	you	do	with	painting	and	sculpture?	When	people	are	 ill
what	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do	 with	 poet?	 It	 cannot	 feed,	 it	 cannot	 give	 shelter,	 it
cannot	help	as	medicine.
Society	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 the	 values	 of	 the	 heart,	 its	whole	 interest	 is	 in	 tile
head,	so	society	forces	every	child	 to	move	 towards	 the	head.	Of	course	every
child	 basically	wants	 to	move	 towards	 the	 heart	 because	 that	 is	 a	 natural	 and
spontaneous	phenomenon.	But	we	have	 to	divert	him.	We	have	 to	punish	him,
reward	 him,	we	 have	 to	 create	 fear	 and	 the	 idea	 of	 profit	 in	 him,	we	 have	 to
persuade	him	 towards	 that	which	 is	practical	 and	utilitarian:	Become	a	doctor,
forget	all	about	dancing;	become	an	engineer,	forget	all	about	poetry;	become	a
mathematician,	forget	all	about	music	--	those	things	are	for	mad	people.
And	when	 you	 force	 the	 child	 and	 condition	 the	 child...	 and	 society	 has	 great
powers	to	condition.	The	schools,	the	colleges,	the	universities	--	they	exist	not
for	you,	they	exist	for	society,	they	serve	society;	they	are	agents	of	a	particular
establishment.	And	the	whole	process	is	a	long	process	--	it	is	twenty-five	years
at	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
least	by	the	time	you	become	a	Ph.D.;	that	means	one	third	of	your	life.	But	once
you	 are	 conditioned	 you	 completely	 forget	 about	 the	 heart.	 You	 by-pass	 the
heart.	 The	 heart	 remains	 at	 the	 side,	 you	 go	 directly	 to	 the	 head,	 your	 energy
starts	shooting	directly	to	the	head.	This	is	the	misery.
I	am	not	against	science,	not	against	mathematics.	My	observation	is	that	there
are	people	whose	heart	is	in	mathematics,	then	it	is	perfectly	good.	For	example,
Albert	Einstein:	his	heart	was	in	mathematics	so	it	was	not	a	head	question	for
Albert	 Einstein,	 it	was	 his	 love	 affair.	But	 to	 force	 every	 child	 is	 ugly.	 It	 is	 a
calamity,	it	is	coercion,	it	is	violence.
Just	think	of	a	society	where	every	child	is	forced	to	become	a	poet.	It	would	be
good	 for	 a	 Shakespeare,	 good	 for	 a	 Shelley	 or	 a	 Byron,	 but	 what	 about
everybody	else?	If	everybody	has	to	be	forced	and	trained	to	be	a	poet	they	will
not	 be	 poets;	 their	 heart	will	 not	 be	 in	 it.	 They	will	 be	 just	 third-rate	 or	 even
fourth-rate	people,	their	whole	life	will	be	of	misery.
Just	 think	 of	 Albert	 Einstein	 being	 forced	 to	 become	 a	 poet,	 then	 you	 will
understand	what	is	happening.
He	will	never	be	a	first-class	poet	--	that	much	is	certain.	He	can	be	a	first-class
mathematician,	he	will	be	a	 fourth-rate	poet,	or	even	 that	may	be	difficult.	He
will	remain	miserable	for	his	whole	life.	That	is	what	is	happening.
If	your	heart	is	in	something	then	for	you	it	is	perfectly	beautiful,	but	it	has	to	be
a	 natural	 phenomenon,	 a	 spontaneous	 urge.	 Then	 whatsoever	 it	 is	 you	 will
rejoice,	your	heart	will	feel	victorious,	your	life	will	have	a	splendour	and	glory
and	you	will	feel	that	your	life	has	been	of	tremendous	fulfilment.
But	society	exists	in	a	kind	of	regimentation;	everybody	has	to	be	forced	into	a
certain	thing.	So	for	a	few	people	it	is	good	but	for	the	majority	it	is	destructive.
To	ninety-nine	per-cent	of	people	society	is	destructive,	all	societies	are	the	same
in	that	way.	And	we	have	not	yet	been	able	to	create	a	society	where	everybody
is	 given	 the	 opportunity	 to	 be	 himself	 or	 herself	 --	 respected,	 valued	 and	 not
forced	to	be	somebody	else.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 just	 be	 his	 or	 her	 own	 self,	whatsoever	 the	 consequences,
then	even	to	live	a	poor	life	is	very	rich	because	your	heart	is	in	it.	If	your	heart
is	not	in	it	you	may	become	the	richest	person	in	the	world	but	you	will	be	very
poor	because	you	will	not	rejoice	in	it.	Just	think	of	Albert	Einstein	becoming	a
Rockefeller;	his	heart	will	not	be	 in	 it.	Or	Bernard	Shaw	becoming	a	Ford;	his
heart	will	not	be	in	it.	Or	Picasso	becoming	Adolf	Hitler;	his	heart	will	not	be	in
it,	he	will	be	utterly	miserable.	A	thousand	and	one	times	he	will	thing	to	commit
suicide,	and	if	he	does	not	commit	suicide	he	will	go	mad.
Everybody	 has	 brought	 a	 certain	 duality	with	 his	 birth	 and	 that	 quality	 has	 to
grow.	 Meditation	 helps	 you	 to	 find	 your	 natural	 urge,	 your	 intuitive	 feel.
Meditation	 simply	means	 a	 state	 of	 no-thought,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 disturbance,	 so
your	inner	world	is	completely	empty	and	you	can	see	and	search	for	where	your
heart	is.
The	moment	you	have	felt	the	heartbeat,	the	moment	you	have	found	your	inner
pulse,	then	you	are	on	the	right	track.	Then	whatsoever	you	do	will	bring	joy	to
you	 and	 ultimately	 god	 is	 yours.	 But	 it	 is	 only	 through	 the	 heart,	 never
otherwise.
(Osho	said,	If	one	enquires	into	love	ultimately	one	finds	god.)	One	should	go	on
deeper	and	deeper	into	the	phenomenon	of	love	and	at	the	ultimate	core	god	will
be	 found.	 But	 that	 is	 not	 to	 be	 made	 much	 of	 a	 concern,	 because	 once	 god
becomes	your	concern	you	start	going	astray	because	you	start	forgetting	about
love;	you	start	thinking	about	god,	believing	in	god,	worshipping	god.	And	that
is	all	false	because	you	don't	know	god	at	all.
The	 same	 is	 not	 true	 about	 love.	 You	 know	 something,	 everybody	 knows
something	about	 love.	Love	 is	a	natural	phenomenon.	Of	course	 it	needs	great
refinement,	it	is	very	crude;	it	is	like	a	raw	diamond.	But	the	diamond	is	there,
you	just	have	to	become	a	little	bit	of	a	jeweller.	You	have	to	learn	how	to	polish
it,	how	to	cut	it,	how	to	make	it	shine	--	and	that	is	not	very	difficult.
Once	 you	 have	 discovered	 the	 inner	 beauty	 of	 the	 diamond	 and	 you	 have	 cut
away	all	that	was	unessential,	you	have	found	god.	Love	is	like	a	raw	diamond
and	god	 is	a	 fully	polished,	cut,	 shining	diamond.	But	your	concern	 should	be
with	 love	because	 the	 journey	begins	 in	 love	and	ends	 in	god,	and	you	cannot
begin	at	 the	end.	That's	where	all	 the	religions	have	gone	wrong:	they	begin	at
the	 end	 --	 how	 can	 you	 begin	 at	 the	 end?	 You	 have	 to	 begin	 from	 the	 very
beginning.
So	all	religions	have	become	theologies.	Theology	means	logic	about	god.	That
is	 sheer	 stupidity,	 there	 is	 no	 logic	 about	 god.	 God	 is	 the	 most	 illogical
phenomenon.	It	is	as	illogical	as	love.	Is	there	any	logic	in	love?	You	fall	in	love
with	somebody	--	what	logic	is	there?	If	somebody	insists	"Why?",	you	can	only
shrug	 your	 shoulders,	 that's	 all.	 You	 can	 only	 say	 it	 has	 happened;	 it	 is	 a
happening,	not	a	doing.
It	is	something	bigger	than	you,	hence	it	is	incomprehensible.	And	it	is	not	of	the
mind,	it	is	of	the	heart,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
so	 the	mind	 knows	 nothing	 about	 it.	 The	mind	 condemns	 it,	 the	mind	 calls	 it
falling	in	love.	Mind	the	word
"falling",	it	is	a	condemnatory	word.	The	mind	says	you	have	fallen,	you	are	no
more	in	your	senses,	you	have	gone	a	little	bit	cuckoo.	It	is	a	condemnation.	And
all	the	languages	of	the	world	have	such	words,	about	this	they	all	agree.
I	don't	agree.	I	say	rising	in	love,	not	falling	in	love,	because	the	heart	is	a	higher
centre	than	the	mind.
Of	course	physiologically	the	mind	seems	to	be	at	the	top	and	the	heart	seems	to
be	in	the	middle,	a	little	below.	It	is	only	physiologically	so.	But	the	heart	is	at
the	innermost	core	because	the	most	precious	thing	is	always	kept	at	the	core,	at
the	 inner	centre,	and	 the	head	 is	on	 the	periphery.	 Just	 think	 that	way	 then	 the
total	evaluation	changes;	then	the	heart	becomes	the	centre	and	the	mind	is	just
something	 on	 the	 periphery,	 on	 the	 circumference.	 And	 when	 you	 have	 great
treasure	you	don't	keep	it	outside,	on	the	circumference	of	your	house;	you	keep
it	hidden	deep	in	the	innermost	chamber	of	your	house.
The	heart	 is	your	inner	chamber	where	all	 that	is	beautiful	and	great	is	hidden.
Jesus	calls	it	the	kingdom	of	god.	It	is	within	you.	It	has	to	be	discovered	--	not
by	logic.
Logic	 is	 good	 for	 discovering	 things.	 It	 is	 good	 for	 scientific	 enquiry,	 it	 is
absolutely	 impotent	 in	 subjective	 enquiry.	 For	 subjective	 enquiry	 you	 need	 a
totally	 different	 method	 --	 that	 is	 love.	 It	 is	 only	 through	 love	 that	 you	 will
become	aware	of	beauty,	not	through	logic.	It	is	only	through	love	that	you	will
become	aware	of	bliss,	not	 through	 logic.	 It	 is	only	 through	 love	 that	you	will
become	 aware	 of	 god,	 not	 through	 logic.	 All	 that	 is	 significant	 is	 discovered
through	love	and	all	that	is	insignificant,	mundane,	is	discovered	by	logic.
Logic	is	good	as	far	as	it	goes	but	it	does	not	go	far	enough,	it	has	a	limitation.
Love	has	no	limitations.
It	is	as	vast	as	the	sky,	or	even	vaster.
I	teach	only	one	thing	and	that	is	love.	Love	unconditionally,	love	for	the	sheer
joy	of	 loving,	 for	no	other	motive.	Love	people,	 love	animals,	 love	birds,	 love
trees,	 rocks,	 stars.	Don't	miss	any	opportunity	 to	 love.	Whatsoever	 is	available
shower	your	love	on	it,	because	the	more	you	shower	your	love,	the	more	love
grows	in	you.	The	more	you	share,	 the	more	you	have,	 the	more	you	give,	 the
more	you	have	--	that's	why	I	say	it	is	a	very	illogical	phenomenon.
Logic	will	 not	 agree	with	 it.	How	 can	 logic	 agree	with	 the	 statement	 that	 the
more	you	give,	 the	more	you	have?	It	will	say)of	course	you	will	have	 less.	 If
you	give)that	much	has	to	be	deduced,	you	will	have	less.	If	you	have	ten	rupees
and	you	give	away	five	you	have	only	five	left.
Love	is	 illogical.	 It	says	 if	you	have	ten	rupees,	give	 ten	and	you	have	twenty.
And	 all	 the	 great	 masters	 are	 absolutely	 in	 agreement	 with	 it.	 It	 is	 meta-
economics.	 It	 is	 something	 like	 a	 higher	mathematics,	 not	 comprehensible	 by
lower	mathematics	of	the	mind.
To	enquire	into	love	is	the	only	purpose	of	life.	Life	is	an	opportunity	to	enquire
into	 love.	 People	 go	 on	 accumulating	money,	 power,	 prestige	 --	 these	 are	 the
fools.	Death	will	 knock	 at	 their	 door	 any	moment	 and	 all	 their	money	 and	 all
their	power	and	prestige	will	collapse.	They	came	empty-handed	and	 they	will
go	empty-handed.	Only	a	 lover	goes	so	full.	He	comes	empty-handed	but	goes
very	full,	overflowingly	full.
His	death	is	a	celebration;	his	life	is	a	celebration	--	his	death	is	the	crescendo	of
his	life.
At	the	moment	of	death	when	a	man	like	Buddha	or	Jesus	or	Socrates	dies,	his
death	 is	 the	 ultimate	 in	 sharing	 because	 this	 is	 his	 last	 moment	 on	 earth,	 his
goodbye	to	existence.	He	gives	totally	and	in	that	total	giving	he	receives	god	as
a	guest.
Buddha	 has	 used	 two	words.	When	 a	 person	 starts	 moving	 into	 the	 world	 of
love,	becomes	loving,	he	calls	it	nirvana.	The	word	"nirvana"	means	cessation	of
the	ego	 --	and	of	course,	when	 the	ego	ceases	one	becomes	 loving.	And	when
such	a	person	dies	Buddha	calls	 it	mahaparinirvana,	 the	great	nirvana,	because
then	he	gives	totally.	We	gives	his	body,	his	mind,	his	heart,	his	life	--	he	gives
everything	back	to	existence.	He	simply	disappears	into	nothingness.	His	giving
is	absolute,	nothing	is	retained.	He	simply	evaporates,	he	is	no	more.	He	has	not
kept	anything,	not	even	himself;	hence	Buddha	calls	it	the	great	cessation.
These	 are	 the	 two	Moments	 which	 are	 the	most	 valuable:	 the	 first	 is	 nirvana
when	you	become	loving	and	you	start	sharing	and	the	ego	disappears,	and	the
second	is	the	great	nirvana	--	that	is	when	death	comes;	you	give	totally,	nothing
is	left	behind,	not	even	a	trace.	And	that	is	the	moment	when	one	becomes	part
of	god	or	part	of	 the	whole.	And	to	be	part	of	 the	whole	is	 the	only	way	to	be
holy.
To	 be	 whole	 is	 to	 be	 holy.	 Except	 for	 love	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 attain	 to	 this
infinity,	to	this	eternity.
(Bliss	can't	be	boxes	Osho	told	Anand	Nirupama.)
Bliss	has	no	form.	It	 is	not	an	object,	 it	 is	an	experience;	hence	science	cannot
verify	it,	science	cannot	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
collect	information	about	it.
Every	 scientist	 knows	 that	 there	 is	 something	 like	 bliss,	 something	 like	 love,
something	like	beauty,	but	as	long	as	he	is	a	scientist	he	will	deny	them;	he	will
say	 these	 are	 all	 fallacies,	 illusions,	 hallucinations.	 For	 him	matter	 is	 the	 only
reality,	the	object	is	the	only	reality;	he	denies	subjectivity.
It	is	a	very	strange	situation:	the	scientist	denies	himself,	accepts	the	objects	and
never	becomes	aware	that	without	a	subject	how	can	there	be	an	object?	Without
a	scientist	how	can	there	be	science?	But	he	cannot	put	himself	into	a	test	tube	so
he	cannot	verify	it,	he	cannot	examine	it,	he	cannot	dissect	it.
The	most	unverifiable	phenomenon	is	bliss.	It	is	absolutely	formless.	You	cannot
catch	hold	of	it.	It	i5
like	fragrance.	A	flower	you	can	catch	hold	of,	so	science	studies	the	flower.	But
religion	 studies	 the	 fragrance,	 and	 the	 fragrance	 is	 the	 very	 purpose	 of	 the
flower,	 the	 fragrance	 is	 its	 essential	 core,	 its	 truth,	 its	 celebration,	 its	 gift	 to
existence.	The	flower	exists	for	the	fragrance,	not	vice	versa.
Bliss	is	a	fragrance	but	it	can	happen	only	if	you	become	a	flower,	if	you	open	up
like	a	bud	opening.
The	bud	contains	fragrance	but	it	remains	hidden	inside;	unless	the	petals	open
the	fragrance	cannot	be	released.
Meditation	is	just	an	effort	to	trigger	the	process	of	opening	in	you,	so	you	are	no
more	 closed,	 so	 you	 start	 coming	 out,	 you	 start	 opening	 your	 doors	 and
windows,	you	become	available	to	the	sun,	to	the	moon,	to	the	stars,	to	the	wind,
to	the	rain.	You	start	becoming	open	to	people,	to	all	that	surrounds	you.	When
you	are	totally	open	life	is	bliss...	But	it	is	an	experience	and	very	formless.	You
cannot	prove	 it,	you	cannot	convince	anybody	of	 it,	but	you	can	experience	 it.
And	who	bothers	whether	anybody	is	convinced	or	not?
If	you	have	tasted	of	it	there	is	no	need	to	bother.
Once	a	very	great	 logician	came	to	see	Ramakrishna	and	he	argued	very	much
against	 god,	 against	 truth,	 against	 bliss,	 and	 all	 that	 is	 inner.	 Ramakrishna
laughed	 and	 enjoyed	 it.	 The	 logician	 started	 feeling	 a	 little	 bit	 embarrassed,
obviously,	because	he	thought	that	Ramakrishna	would	become	sad	because	he
could	not	argue	and	he	could	not	answer	him	--	but	he	was	rejoicing!	He	ashed
"What	 is	 the	 matter	 with	 you?	 Are	 you	 mad	 or	 something?	 --	 because	 I	 am
arguing	against	all	your	beliefs	and	you	go	on	laughing!"
Ramakrishna	said	"You	can	argue	but	how	can	I	deny	my	experience?	You	are
simply	showing	that	you	have	not	experiences,	that's	all.	And	I	am	enjoying	it,
your	arguments	are	beautiful,	but	they	cannot	convince	me	because	I	know	and
you	 don't	 know.	Your	 arguments	 are	 clever	 and	 I	 am	 enjoying	 them,	 they	 are
very	intellectual	and	I	appreciate	them.	But	I	cannot	answer	because	what	I	have
experienced	 is	 unarguable.	 And	who	 cares	 about	 convincing	 you?	 In	 the	 first
place	it	is	not	possible;	even	if	it	was	possible,	who	bothers?"
The	man	was	immensely	impressed.	This	was	the	first	time	he	had	found	a	man
who	 could	 not	 be	 dislodged	 from	 his	 cent	 mind,	 from	 his	 grounding;	 no
argument	affected	him.	Ramakrishna	said	"You	make	very	convincing	arguments
and	 they	can	convince	anybody	who	has	not	known.	But	what	can	 I	do?	 I	 am
helpless:	I	have	known	it!	You	are	like	a	blindman	who	is	arguing	against	light.	I
can	understand	your	arguments,	why	you	are	arguing	--	because	you	don't	have
any	eyes.	And	I	am	like	a	man	who	has	eyes	and	who	has	seen	the	light	and	I
know.	I	cannot	argue	about	it,	because	you	don't	have	any	eyes.
"Only	 eyes	 can	 give	 you	 an	 experience	 of	 light,	 so	 if	 you	 want	 to	 learn,"
Ramakrishna	 said,	 "what	 bliss	 is,	 you	will	 have	 to	 be	with	me	 and	drop	 these
arguments.	Just	once	taste	something	of	it	then	you	can	argue."
And	this	man,	Keshavchandra	Sen	was	his	name	--	one	of	the	greatest	logicians
of	the	past	century	--
became	 a	 disciple	 of	 Ramakrishna.	 The	 whole	 of	 Calcutta	 was	 shocked,	 they
could	not	believe	it,	because	Ramakrishna	was	absolutely	uneducated,	a	villager,
a	very	simple	person,	almost	a	simpleton.	And	Keshavchandra	Sen's	becoming	a
disciple	 was	 very	 shocking	 news	 to	 the	 intelligentsia.	 They	 asked	 again	 and
again	"Keshavchandra,	what	happened?"	And	he	said	"	Something	has	happened.
I	could	see	that	that	man	is	blissful.	I	tried	in	every	way	to	somehow	make	him
waver,	but	nothing	can	make	him	waver.	He	knows	something	which	I	have	not
known	and	for	the	first	time	I	have	become	interested	in	knowing	it.	I	thought	it
is	only	a	question	of	argument	--	it	is	not.
"I	have	seen	this	man	and	his	eyes	and	his	presence	and	I	certainly	feel	that	he
has	something	which	I	have	not	got.	But	this	is	a	feel."
So	remember,	bliss	is	a	fragrance,	a	feel.	But	one	can	learn	the	ways	to	find	it.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 beautiful	 beginning	 for	 this	 journey.	 Now	 remember	meditation,
because	 I	 teach	 only	 one	 thing.	 Once	 you	 are	 a	 sannyasin	 either	 I	 teach	 you
meditation	 or	 love	 --	 one	 of	 the	 two	 --	 because	 both	 lead	 to	 the	 same
phenomenon.	To	a	few	people	I	 teach	 love	because	for	 them	it	 is	more	natural
and	to	a	few	people	I	 teach	meditation;	for	them	that	is	more	natural.	But	both
lead	to	the	same	goal.	Meditation	helps	you	to	come	out	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	 the	mind,	 love	also	helps	you	 to	come	out	of	 the	mind.	Meditation	destroys
your	ego,	love	also	destroys	your	ego.	But	for	you	my	suggestion	is	meditation.
Pour	your	energy	into	meditativeness	and	bliss	is	not	far	away.
Just	the	Tip	of	the	Iceberg
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	None
30	September	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8009305
ShortTitle:	ICEBRG30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Our	nature,	pure	and	simple,	is	to	be	pure	and	simple,	Osho	reminded	us	in	his
first	 address	 tonight.)	 We	 come	 into	 the	 world	 absolutely	 pure	 and	 innocent,
absolutely	clear,	clean,	but	then	the	world	starts	writing	on	our	consciousness,	it
starts	 conditioning	 us.	 It	 pollutes	 everybody,	 it	 contaminates,	 poisons.	 By	 the
time	a	child	is	mature	enough	to	think	on	his	of	the	world	has	already	destroyed
him.	He	is	already	crippled,	paralysed;	the	world	has	already	taught	him	to	use
crutches	and	he	has	forgotten	to	use	his	own	insight.	He	cannot	stand	on	his	own
legs;	it	has	made	him	dependent.
This	is	 the	greatest	conspiracy	against	humanity,	 to	make	every	human	being	a
cripple	--	not	physically	but	spiritually.	And	the	strategy	 that	 is	used	 is	 to	give
you	a	mind	so	that	your	consciousness	becomes	covered	with	thoughts,	desires,
ambitions,	ego,	ideologies,	religion,	politics,	and	a	thousand	and	one	things	are
there,	layer	upon	layer.	Your	mirrorlike	consciousness	disappears	and	then	a	man
lives	a	life	of	indignity,	a	life	which	is	absolutely	graceless,	a	life	of	blindness,	a
life	of	utter	dependency.
First	the	child	depends	on	the	parents	and	they	enjoy	the	child	being	dependent
on	them.	Then	they	force	the	child	to	depend	on	the	teachers,	on	the	priests,	on
the	politicians	and	whosoever	is	in	authority.
You	always	have	 to	 look	up	 to	 the	authority,	you	have	 to	follow	orders	and	be
obedient.
Obedience	has	been	almost	like	a	cancer.	It	has	been	used	against	man	to	destroy
his	freedom,	to	destroy	his	very	soul.	And	once	they	have	destroyed	it	they	start
talking	about	purity:	Be	pure,	be	moral,	be	integrated,	be	sincere,	be	honest.	First
they	destroy	all	possibilities	and	then	they	start	talking	about	great	values.	That
is	another	strategy	to	make	you	feel	guilty,	because	you	cannot	manage	it.	They
have	destroyed	all	your	possibilities	and	now	they	are	expecting	you	to	be	pure.
You	were	pure	in	the	first	place	but	they	did	not	allow	it.	Once	they	covered	your
mind	with	great	 clouds;	now	 they	want	you	 to	be	pure	 --	 and	 it	becomes	very
difficult,	 almost	 impossible,	 and	 then	 a	 guilt	 arises	 in	 you.	 You	 start	 feeling
unworthy,	 you	 lose	 all	 self-respect.	 And	 once	 a	 man	 loses	 his	 self-respect	 he
loses	 all.	 Then	 he	 is	 just	 a	 slave;	 he	 will	 serve	 all	 the	 vested	 interests,	 the
establishment.	He	will	be	only	a	functionary,	a	machine,	he	will	not	be	a	human
being.
And	that's	what	 these	exploiters	and	oppressors	of	all	kinds	need	--	not	human
beings	but	machines.
They	don't	want	you	to	be	anything	more	than	your	functions,	your	duties.	You
should	 end	 at	 your	 functions,	 you	 should	 not	 have	 anything	more	 than	 them,
because	that	anything	more	could	be	dangerous;	You	may	start	thinking	on	your
own	 and	 then	 you	will	 no	 longer	 be	 able	 to	 support	 all	 kinds	 of	 superstitions
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
which	 have	 been	 imposed	 upon	 you.	 You	 may	 start	 contemplating	 and	 then
certainly	you	cannot	always	say	yes;	many	times,	in	fact	ninety-nine	times	out	of
one	hundred,	you	will	have	to	say	no.
You	 may	 even	 start	 meditating	 if	 you	 are	 allowed	 --	 and	 that	 will	 give	 you
absolute	freedom	because	 it	will	help	you	to	rediscover	your	nature.	Society	 is
very	much	afraid	of	giving	you	anything	more	 than	a	machine	needs.	 It	brings
you	 down	 to	 the	minimum	 and	 at	 the	minimum	nobody	 can	 be	 blissful.	Bliss
happens	only	at	 the	maximum,	when	you	have	 reached	 to	 the	optimum,	 to	 the
highest	peak	of	your	potential.
And	the	only	thing	to	be	done	is	to	undo	whatsoever	the	society	has	done	to	you.
That's	 the	 purpose	 of	 sannyas:	 it	 is	 an	 undoing,	 it	 is	 a	 dismantling,	 it	 is	 a
dispelling	all	pollutants	that	society	has	put	into	you.	It	is	a	kind	of	returning	to
the	source,	to	your	natural	purity.
So	I	don't	teach	purity,	I	don't	teach	morality	--	that	is	all	nonsense.	I	only	teach
meditation	 so	 you	 can	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 mind.	 The	 mind	 belongs	 to	 society	 and
meditation	 belongs	 to	 you.	 With	 meditation	 you	 are	 absolutely	 free,	 and
suddenly	you	start	discovering	your	intrinsic	treasures.	And	then	begins	a	great
pilgrimage	of	 joys,	beauty,	beauties,	songs,	celebrations.	And	it	 is	an	unending
process.	It	gives	you	the	vision	of	eternity.	It	gives	you	the	certainty	that	you	are
immortal.
And	to	know	it	is	to	become	part	of	god,	is	to	be	divine.
(And	 continuing	 the	 theme,	Osho	 turned	 to	 the	 next	 sannyasin	 --	 a	 taxi	 driver
from	Germany.)	Mind	 is	 a	 bondage,	 it	 is	 a	 prison,	 but	 a	 very	 subtle,	 invisible
one;	and	a	very	strange	one	too,	because	ordinarily	the	prison	is	outside	you	and
you	 are	 inside	 the	 prison.	 But	 with	 the	 mind	 it	 is	 just	 the	 opposite:	 you	 are
outside	 the	 prison	 and	 the	 prison	 is	 inside	 you.	 It	 goes	 on	deceiving	 you	very
easily	because	you	don't	see	any	walls	around	you;	you	can	believe	that	you	are
free.	But	 you	 are	 not	 free	 if	 your	mind	 dominates	 you.	And	 it	 does	 dominate
you;	it	goes	on	pulling	strings	from	behind	you	and	you	are	just	a	puppet.	The
puppet	can	think	it	is	free,	that	all	these	movements	are	his	--	they	are	not.
Unless	 one	 gets	 out	 of	 the	 mind,	 unless	 one	 puts	 the	 mind	 aside,	 one	 never
knows	what	freedom	is.
Freedom	is	the	very	taste	of	god;	there	is	nothing	higher	than	it.	Freedom	means
freedom	 from	 mind,	 freedom	 from	 body,	 freedom	 from	 birth,	 freedom	 from
death,	 freedom	from	all	kinds	of	 limitations.	When	you	 feel	you	are	unlimited
and	there	are	no	boundaries	to	you,	then	only	do	you	know	what	freedom	is.
Otherwise	 one	 is	 confined	 in	 a	 very	 small	 space	 which	 is	 overcrowded	 with
desires,	 ambitions,	 expectations,	 frustrations,	 dreams,	 memories.	 It	 is	 so
overcrowded	 that	 you	 are	 almost	 crushed	 by	 the	 crowd	 that	 you	 are	 carrying
within	yourself.	What	freedom	can	one	have	in	such	a	crowded	space?	There	is
no	space	even	to	move.
One	 needs	 spaciousness.	 Meditation	 brings	 space	 to	 you,	 it	 creates	 space,	 it
throws	out	all	 junk.	And	whatsoever	your	mind	has	 is	nothing	but	 junk.	 It	 is	a
junkyard,	 a	 graveyard	 carrying	 corpses	 of	 the	 past	 and	 carrying	 unnecessary,
stupid	dreams	about	the	future	which	are	never	going	to	happen;	they	have	never
happened.	Between	the	past	and	the	future	you	are	confined,	and	both	are	non-
existential.	The	past	is	no	more	and	the	future	is	not	yet,	and	between	these	two
non-existentials	you	are	crushed.
Meditation	means	 to	be	here,	 to	be	now	--	no	more	past,	no	more	 future.	This
very	moment	 is	 all.	 And	 suddenly	 there	 is	 freedom,	 suddenly	 you	 start	 rising
upwards	from	all	kinds	of	bondage.
Meditation	 is	 a	 simple	 phenomenon	 of	 being	 here	 and	 now,	 dying	 to	 the	 past
every	moment,	not	carrying	it	at	all	and	not	bothering	about	tomorrow,	because	it
never	comes.	It	is	always	now,	it	is	never	then.	It	is	always	here,	it	is	never	there.
There	and	then	don't	exist,	here	and	now	exist;	in	fact	they	are	two	sides	of	the
same	coin.	Even	physics	have	 come	 to	 the	 insight	 that	 time	and	 space	 are	not
separate.	Here	means	space,	now	means	time.
One	of	 the	greatest	contributions	of	Albert	Einstein	 is	 the	 theory	 that	 time	 is	a
fourth	dimension	of	space,	it	is	not	a	separate	thing.	Space	is	three-dimensional
and	time	is	the	fourth	dimension.	But	this	has	been	the	insight	of	the	mystics.	It
is	so	old	that	it	is	difficult	to	say	when	it	really	happened	for	the	first	time;	it	is
the	most	ancient	 insight	of	 the	mystics.	But	 it	 is	natural:	 science	has	 to	 follow
only	after	 thousands	of	years	because	its	very	procedure	is	a	very	long-winded
one.	But	now	physicists	are	saying	exactly	what	the	mystics	said	five	thousand
years	ago,	that	now	and	here	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	And	that's	the	only
thing	that	is	real;	all	else	is	either	imagination	or	memory.
Getting	out	of	memory	and	imagination	is	meditation,	and	the	moment	you	are
in	meditation	you	are	free,	you	are	released	from	the	prison.
(Tonight	 Osho	 compared	 morality	 that	 is	 imposed	 on	 a	 person	 to	 lipstick!)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	 can	 paint	 your	 lips	 red	 --	 that	 does	 not	mean	 that	 you	 are	 so	 healthy,	 so
young,	that	your	lips	are	red.	But	you	can	paint	them	red.	And	there	are	millions
of	foolish	women	all	over	the	world	--	one	wonders	whom	they	are	deceiving	--
whose	whole	face	shows	one	colour	and	their	lips	show	another	colour.	It	is	so
clear....	And	there	are	layers	of	lipstick.
I	even	wonder:	who	are	the	people	who	kiss	them?	(much	laughter)	Some	mad,
insane	people	--	they	must	be	--	otherwise,	who	wants	to	taste	lipstick?	But	that's
how	 it	 is	happening	on	many	many	planes	of	human	 life.	Morality	 is	 just	 like
lipsticks	you	paint	yourself	from	the	outside,	you	make	a	beautiful	face,	a	mask,
you	pretend	to	be	somebody	you	are	not.
When	you	are	full	of	tears	you	smile,	when	you	are	angry	you	don't	show	it,	you
go	on	repressing	it.
Naturally	 this	whole	process	 creates	 a	division	 is	you.	The	 tears	were	 real	but
you	did	not	allow	them,	you	pushed	them	back.	And	the	smile	was	false	but	you
tried	to	smile.	It	cannot	go	very	deep,	it	is	only	on	the	lips.	It	is	just	an	exercise
of	the	lips,	a	Jimmy	Carter	exercise.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	you.
You	must	have	heard	about	the	grin	of	 the	cheshire	cat.	The	cat	disappears	but
the	grin	remains.	I	always	think	that	even	if	Jimmy	Carter	disappears	the	smile
will	remain	there,	because	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	Jimmy	Carter;	the	smile	can
continue	on	its	own.	Jimmy	Carter	is	gone	but	the	smile	continues	because	it	is
something	separate,	totally	separate.	It	has	its	own	autonomy.
Morality	 is	 just	 like	 that:	a	 false	smile.	You	practise	morality	but	 that	does	not
give	you	dignity	of	character.
Dignity	of	character	comes	through	meditation.	You	are	not	practising	anything
as	 far	 as	your	character	 is	 concerned,	but	your	 insight	grows.	You	 start	 seeing
things	as	 they	are,	and	naturally	when	you	start	 seeing	 things	as	 they	are	your
whole	life	is	transformed	in	this	new	light,	in	this	new	vision.	You	cannot	behave
in	 the	 old	way.	You	 cannot	 deceive	 anybody	 because	 now	 through	meditation
one	knows	that	we	are	not	separate	--	who	are	you	deceiving?	You	are	deceiving
yourself.	 You	 cannot	 be	 violent,	 you	 cannot	 hurt,	 you	 cannot	 enjoy	 hurting
anybody	because	now	you	know	that	the	other	is	part	of	you	as	you	are	part	of
the	other.	We	are	part	of	one	organic	universe,	we	are	not	separate	entities	at	all.
Then	 of	 course	 you	 will	 have	 a	 dignity	 of	 character	 and	 a	 dignity	 will	 come
through	integrity.	You	will	not	be	divided,	you	will	be	one.	Your	vision	will	be
one,	 your	 lifestyle	 will	 simply	 be	 a	 consequence	 of	 it,	 not	 against	 it,	 nothing
imposed.	 It	 is	 like	 healthy	 lips	 the	 redness	 comes	 from	 the	 blood	 circulating
inside.	It	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
So	remember,	meditation	has	to	be	the	source	of	real	character.	One	can	forget
all	 about	 character	 --	 just	 put	 your	whole	 energy	 into	meditation	 and	out	 of	 it
arises	 a	 character.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 put	 together	 by	 you,	 it	 comes
spontaneously.	And	when	character	is	spontaneous	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own,	it
is	a	joy.	It	is	not	a	means	to	any	end,	it	is	an	end	unto	itself.
(How	long	will	you	be	here?	Osho	added.
Two	months,	maybe	more,	was	the	reply.)
Let	it	be	more!'
(Bliss	 is	 the	 fragrance	 of	 inner	 unfolding,	 Osho	 told	 Anand	 Sugandha.)
Ordinarily	people	 live	a	closed	 life.	They	don't	open	 their	doors	and	windows.
They	 live	 in	 fear,	 hiding,	 always	 afraid	 of	 the	 unknown.	They	 don't	 allow	 the
sun,	the	rain,	the	wind,	to	enter	their	being.	But	if	you	put	a	rose	plant	in	your
room	and	you	close	all	the	windows	and	all	the	doors	and	no	wind,	no	rain,	no
sun	reaches	it,	you	cannot	hope	that	the	rose-bush	will	survive;	it	will	die.	That's
how	people	are	--	almost	dead.
They	are	living	a	dead	life,	just	dragging	somehow.
To	 really	 live	 one	 has	 to	 be	 available	 to	 all	 that	 is.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 open	 and
vulnerable,	one	has	to	drop	all	fears.	There	is	only	one	thing	one	should	be	afraid
of,	 and	 that	 is	 fear.	 Except	 for	 that	 never	 be	 afraid	 of	 anything,	 because	 fear
cripples,	kills.	And	the	moment	you	start	moving	towards	the	unknown,	in	spite
of	all	the	fears,	your	life	starts	having	many	new	thing,	of	which	you	were	never
aware,	because	as	the	adventure	deepens,	your	thrill,	your	ecstasy,	deepens	with
it.
As	you	start	moving	into	the	unknown	there	are	so	many	challenges	to	be	faced,
encountered,	that	naturally	you	become	more	aware,	more	alert,	more	cautious,
more	conscious.	You	have	to	be.	It	is	walking	on	a	razor's	edges	how	can	you	be
sloppy?	 Sloppy?	You	 have	 to	 be	 cautious	 and	 alert,	 it	 is	 risky.	And	whenever
there	 is	 risk,	your	 intelligence	becomes	 sharp.	And	when	 intelligence	 is	 sharp,
ecstasy	is	great	and	you	are	 thrilled	at	each	movement;	at	each	step	your	 inner
being	starts	unfolding.
Only	 in	 this	 climate	 of	 adventure,	 ecstasy,	 integrity,	 risk,	 danger,	 intelligence,
awareness,	does	the	inner	being	open.	The	bud	becomes	a	flower.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
In	 the	East	we	have	called	it	a	one-thousand-petalled	lotus,	 this	opening	of	 the
inner	flower.	There	is	no	flower	like	it	because	it	is	the	flower	of	consciousness,
it	is	unique.	And	the	perfume	of	it	is	what	is	called	enlightenment,	Buddhahood,
Christ-consciousness.	That's	the	fragrance.
Bliss	is	the	fragrance	of	a	life	lived	totally,	dangerously,	exploring	the	unknown
and	the	unknowable.
(We	nave	 to	remember	 two	words	and	 the	difference	between	them,	he	 told	us
tonight	--	information	and	transformation.)
People	go	on	collecting	information	--	they	think	it	is	knowledge.	It	is	not.	It	it
deception,	self	--
deception.	Knowing	 happens	 through	 transformation,	 not	 through	 information.
Information	 can	make	 you	 a	 scholar,	 a	 pundit,	 a	 knowledgeable	 person,	 but	 it
cannot	make	you	wise.	You	will	be	as	stupid	as	ever,	or	maybe	more.
Scholars	 have	 only	 repressed	 their	 ignorance.	 It	 has	 not	 left	 them,	 it	 is	 deep
inside	them.	Of	course	they	have	accumulated	much	knowledge,	but	because	it	is
not	their	own	it	has	no	value,	no	validity,	no	truth.
One	can	repeat	the	Bible	like	a	parrot	--	that	does	not	mean	that	one	becomes	a
Moses	or	a	Jesus,	otherwise	all	the	universities	would	be	creating	many	Jesuses,
Buddhas,	Krishnas.	Universities	have	utterly	failed	in	creating	wise	people.
If	 once	 in	 a	while	 a	 person	who	 has	 passed	 through	 the	 universities	 becomes
wise,	 that	 simply	 means	 he	 has	 become	 wise	 in	 spite	 of	 the	 university,	 not
because	of	the	university;	he	must	have	been	very	very	cautious.	The	university
could	not	destroy	him,	because	the	universities	can	only	impart	information.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 transformation.	 It	 is	 a	 change	of	 the	 very	 base	 of
your	life,	it	is	a	change	of	your	very	outlook,	it	is	a	change	at	the	deepest	core	of
your	 being.	 It	 is	 a	 shift	 from	 mind	 to	 no-mind,	 from	 noise	 to	 silence,	 from
continuous	chattering	inside	to	profound	silence.	This	change	of	gestalt	releases
your	wisdom.	And	to	live	in	one's	own	light	is	the	most	glorious	thing;	only	then
can	one	feel	grateful	to	god,	never	before	it.
The	animal	love	is	unconscious.
Divine	 love	 is	absolutely	conscious.	Human	 love	 is	half	way	between	 the	 two,
hence	 in	 human	 love	 there	 is	 always	 a	 conflict,	 one's	 being	 feels	 torn	 apart.
That's	 why	 although	 love	 gives	 people	 great	 hopes,	 those	 hopes	 are	 never
fulfilled.	On	the	contrary,	every	hope	brings	great	frustrations,	disillusionment.
Love	promises	ecstasies	but	what	it	really	brings	is	agony.	It	is	human	love,	so	it
is	bound	to	be	so,	because	human	love	is	a	tense	affair.	A	part	of	it	is	absolutely
ready	 to	go	back	 to	 the	animal	world	 --	 that's	 the	 sexual	part	 in	 love.	And	 the
other	part	wants	to	transcend,	to	go	beyond	even	the	human	--	that	is	the	prayer
part	 in	 it.	 Lovers	 become	 very	 much	 confused;	 they	 cannot	 figure	 out	 what
actually	is	the	case,	because	sometimes	they	feel	love	as	just	lust	and	sometimes
they	feel	it	as	such	a	profound	prayerfulness	that	they	are	puzzled.
Hence	love	has	never	been	defined.	How	to	define	it?	If	you	define	it	according
to	 the	 highest	 peaks	 it	 is	 prayer,	 but	 those	 are	 rare.	 If	 you	 define	 it	 by	 its
ordinary,	 day-to-day	 existence,	 then	 it	 is	 just	 lust	 and	 nothing	 else.	 And	 one
cannot	conceive	how	the	lust	can	be	prayerful	or	how	the	prayer	can	fall	so	low
that	it	becomes	just	an	animal	desire.
So	lovers	are	 in	a	very	great	confusion,	but	 it	 is	not	 their	fault.	My	sannyasins
have	 to	 understand	 that	 human	 love	 is	 inevitably	 a	 tense	 affair	 because	 it	 is
neither	 wholly	 animal	 nor	 wholly	 divine.	 It	 is	 in	 a	 continuous	 conflict.	 It	 is
divided,	it	is	split;	it	is	in	a	way	schizophrenic.
Either	you	have	 to	fall	back	and	behave	 like	animals	--	 then	 there	 is	not	much
conflict...	 but	 that	 is	 not	 possible,	 one	 cannot	 fall	 back,	 one	 cannot	 go	 back.
People	 have	 tried	 all	 methods	 to	 fall	 back	 --	 alcohol,	 psychedelic	 drugs...	 all
kinds	 of	 intoxicants	 are	momentary	 successes	 in	 falling	 back,	 but	 after	 a	 few
hours	you	are	again	in	the	same	situation.
One	 can	 only	 go	 ahead,	 one	 cannot	 go	 back.	 Human	 love	 has	 to	 go	 towards
divine	love,	but	that	is	an	arduous	task,	it	is	going	uphill.	The	first	is	impossible
but	it	looks	easy;	the	second	is	possible	but	it	looks	impossible.	So	many	choose
the	 first	 because	 it	 looks	 easy,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 at	 all.	The	 possible	 is	 the
second	 but	 it	 is	 not	 easy.	 All	 upward	 movement	 is	 arduous.	 It	 needs
consciousness,	it	needs	sincerity,	it	needs	commitment,	it	needs	perseverance	and
patience.
I	am	giving	you	this	name	Devapriti,	just	so	that	you	can	be	reminded	again	and
again.	You	very	name	will	remind	you,	will	become	a	reminder	that	one	has	to
go	to	the	highest	peak	of	love,	only	then	is	there	fulfillment,	only	then	does	one
feel	at	ease,	at	home.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	will	stay	until	the	end	of	October.
Till	the	end	of	October?	Then	come	back	again.	And	this	is	your	home	--	come
back	forever!
(In	 Indian	mythology	Gandharv	 is	 the	name	of	god's	musicians,	Osho	 told	 the
newest	swami	--	Prem	Gandharv.	And	then	he	spoke	to	us	of	love.)
Music	is	pure	when	even	instruments	are	not	needed.	And	because	of	that	I	feel
that	Indian	mythology	has	more	insight	than	any	other	mythology.	The	angels	in
the	Christian	heaven	go	on	playing	on	harps	--
everybody	is	carrying	a	harp.	They	must	be	really	tired	by	now.	(laughter)	And
the	whole	day	 there	 is	no	other	work,	you	have	 to	go	on	playing	hallelujah.	 It
must	be	boring.
Indian	mythology	says	that	the	musicians	of	the	gods	don't	need	any	instruments,
they	 don't	 even	 sing	 songs.	 Their	 silence	 is	 their	 song,	 their	 silence	 is	 their
prayer.	That	seems	to	be	far	more	significant,	far	more	dignified.
Silence	is	music,	pure	music.
The	Zen	people	say	that	the	ultimate	enlightenment	is	like	the	sound	of	one	hand
clapping.	One	hand	clapping...	 If	 two	hands	clap	then	there	 is	a	clash,	conflict.
When	 only	 one	 hand	 is	 clapping	 it	 is	 of	 course	 absolutely	 silent,	 there	 is	 no
sound	at	all,	and	that	silence	is	the	ultimate	music.
Love	is	the	ultimate	music	to	me.	It	does	not	need	even	the	other.	If	the	other	is
needed	 then	 it	 is	 either	 animal	 love	 or	 at	 the	most	 human	 love.	But	when	 the
other	 is	 not	 needed	 at	 all,	 then	 it	 is	 divine	 love.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
relationship,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 your	 even	 being	 loving:	 you	 become	 love
itself.	Then	you	are	the	music,	you	are	the	song.	It	is	no	more	a	quality,	no	more
an	activity.	It	is	your	very	being.
And	when	love	becomes	your	being	there	is	great	celebration	inside.	There	is	no
sound,	there	are	no	instruments,	but	one	hears	a	celestial	music,	a	music	which	is
not	a	created	one	--	uncreated	music.	We	are	made	of	it	so	if	we	go	deep	in	our
beings	we	are	bound	to	find	it.	It	is	already	there	like	an	undercurrent.
Once	in	a	while	in	certain	situations	we	become	aware	of	it.	Seeing	a	beautiful
sunset	suddenly	you	fall	silent	--	not	that	you	practise	being	silent	or	that	you	try
to	be	silent,	no	--	it	simply	happens.	The	beauty	is	so	tremendous,	it	is	such	an
awe	 that	 you	 forget	 to	 blink	 your	 eyes.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 for	 a	moment	 the	 heartbeat
stops;	 for	 a	 moment	 time	 stops,	 mind	 stops,	 everything	 stops;	 you	 are	 in	 a
complete	nothingness.	And	then	you	feel	great	beauty,	great	joy.
Of	course	you	logically	think	it	is	coming	from	the	beautiful	sunset	--	it	is	not	so.
The	 beautiful	 sunset	 may	 have	 functioned	 as	 a	 triggering	 point.	 It	 may	 have
triggered	a	process	in	you	but	it	is	not	the	cause	of	it.
And	once	you	understand	that	there	is	no	cause	to	it	,	you	can	simply	close	your
eyes	and	you	can	fall	into	deep	silence	any	moment.	That's	what	meditation	is	all
about:	creating	a	situation	independent	of	the	outside	world.	No	sunset	is	needed,
no	beautiful	full-moon	is	needed,	no	beautiful	woman	or	man	is	needed,	no	roses
,	no	lotuses	are	needed.	Nothing	is	needed	because	you	have	found	that	these	are
only	triggering	points	--	and	it	can	be	done	by	yourself.
Just	 by	 becoming	 attuned	 to	 the	 inner,	 you	 immediately	 hear	 something,	 you
immediately	become	full	of	something	which	cannot	be	expressed	in	any	words
whatsoever.	It	remains	unexpressed,	inexpressible.	But	love	comes	closest	to	it.
So	remember,	love	has	to	become	the	music	of	your	life.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	Mahaparanirvana	day
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
