
Lead	Kindly	Light
Some	Enlightened	Moments	with	Osho
Talks	given	from	1972?
Miscellaneous
1	Chapter
Year	published:	1972
This	 is	 a	 small	 booklet	 of	Osho's	words	 as	 reported	 by	Ma	Yoga	Kranti.	 It	 is
considered	to	be	very	accurate	reporting.
ShortTitle:
LEAD01
Audio:
No
Video:	No
Question	1
QUESTION:	WHY	IT	IS	THAT	EVEN	SILENCE	BECOMES	ELOQUENT	IN
YOUR
PRESENCE.
Words	are	impotent	to	express	Truth.	Truth	can	be	expressed	only	in	silence.	The
moment	we	enter	silence,	the	mystery	of	Truth	is	revealed.	Man's	misfortune	is
that	 he	 has	 forgotten	 to	 be	 silent;	 and	 therefore	 his	 entire	 relationship	 with
Nature	 has	 been	 vitiated.	Nature	 knows	 only	 the	 language	 of	 silence.	He	who
knows	 not	 that	 language,	 ipso	 facto,	 loses	 touch	 with	 Nature.	 And	mankind's
misery	is	due	to	man's	distance	from	nature.
Only	with	the	dissolution	of	ego,	we	can	enter	silence.	when	ego	--	alias	'I'	--	is
dissolved,	there	is	possibility	of	communion	and	integration	with	Nature.
Question	2
QUESTION:	BUT	HOW	TO	ACHIEVE	THIS	SILENCE?
Just	be	silent.	It	is	not	a	matter	of	procedure	or	planning.	See	with	your	eyes	and
hear	 with	 your	 ears	 the	 sights	 and	 sounds	 around	 you;	 do	 this	 with	 full
consciousness,	but	without	any	reaction	to	these	sights	and	sounds.	Silence	will
be	 spontaneous	 if	 there	 is	 full	 awareness	 of,	 but	 no	 reaction	 to,	 the	 external
stimuli.
Silence	does	not	mean	non-use	of	the	faculty	of	speech.	The	basis	of	silence	is
not	the	throat,	but	the	thought.	The	root	and	centre	of	silence	is	in	the	mind	and
not	 in	 the	vocal	apparatus.	You	may	be	silent	without,	but	verbose	within;	and
then	 you	 are	 not	 silent.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 even	 if	 you	 are	 loquacious,	 but
without	thoughts	which	overwhelm	your	mind	--	so	that	you	are	silent	within	--
then	you	are	truly	silent.
It	 is	 like	 this:	supposing	you	decide	to	fast;	you	may	successfully	abstain	from
food;	but	you	are	not	truly	fasting	if	you	keep	thinking	about	food	all	the	time.
But	 there	 may	 be	 another	 person	 who	 may	 eat	 without	 indulgence	 and	 eat
consciously;	 in	 reality,	 though	 not	 apparently,	 he	 is	 fasting.	 What	 matters
ultimately	and	always	is	the	man	within,	and	not	his	actions."
What	matters	ultimately	and	always	is	the	man	within,	and	not	his	actions.
[Somebody	had	brought	beautiful	flowers	for	Osho.]
The	 flowers	are	beautiful,	but	your	plucking	 them	was	not	a	beautiful	act.	For
whom	beauty	 is	 equivalent	 to	Love,	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 sever	 the	 flowers	 from
their	plants.	The	plucking	of	 flowers	hastens	 their	death;	 and	nothing	 is	uglier
than	taking	life,	even	of	a	flower.	Non-violence	is	the	acme	of	beauty;	violence
is	the	nadir	of	ugliness.
[Someone	quipped,	"But	we	like	flowers:	that	is	why	we	pluck	them!"]
Love	 is	 opposed	 to	 the	 act	 of	 plucking	 flowers.	Love	 and	plucking	of	 flowers
can	not	co-exist.	Plucking	is	not	symbolic	of	love,	but	of	cruelty.	It	is	symbolic
of	 our	 authoritarian	 nature;	 we	 want	 to	 possess	 whatever	 seems	 beautiful,
regardless	of	the	possibility	of	destroying	that	object	of	beauty.	This	is	true	not
only	 of	 flower-plucking,	 but	 of	 all	 our	 dealings	 in	 life,	 and	 of	 all	 our	 human
relationships.	We	practise	 the	 same	cruelty	with	even	 the	human	beings	whom
we	profess	to	love.	For	example,	even	with	the	beloved,	a	lover	seeks	to	enforce
authority.	We	 all	 seek	 to	 pluck	 the	 human	 flower,	 and	 in	 the	 process,	 rob	 that
flower	of	the	sap	or	life,	leading	to	its	premature	wilting"
Where	 there	 is	 love,	 there	 is	 no	 possessiveness	 or	 bondage;	 and	 bondage
separates	one	person	from	the	other.	Love	is	what	unites	and	not	what	separates;
Love	 is	 what	 protects,	 not	 what	 destroys	 life;	 Love	 is	 what	 frees,	 not	 what
enslaves.	If	you	love	flowers,	you	give	yourself	to	flowers;	you	do	not	try	to	own
them	 by	 plucking.	 Love	 knows	 only	 giving;	 it	 knows	 not	 the	 language	 of
receiving	--	to	say	nothing	of	the	language	of	robbing.	And	please	note	that	this
is	an	axiom	applicable	to	all	aspects	of	life.	Those	who	know	not	this	truth,	look
upon	their	cruelty	and	violence	as	a	form	of	love.	Though	they	do	not	realise	it,
their	 hatred	 lies	 latent	 in	 their	 so-called	 love.	 And	where	 they	 lay	 claim	 to	 a
sense	of	beauty,	their	outward	aesthetics	is	just	a	cloak	hiding	crass	ugliness.
[The	writer	felt	Osho	had	touched	a	sore	spot	in	her	heart.]
Do	not	think;	do	not	brood.	Just	watch.	Thoughts	lead	you	away	from	the	Truth.
Thinking	 is	 a	 device	 to	 escape	 from	 yourself.	 It	 will	 be	 better	 if	 you	 observe
within	yourself	 the	 truth	of	what	 I	 say.	Open	out	 in	 love,	 and	make	your	own
discoveries;	they	may	corroborate	mine.
[A	learned	pandit	wished	to	discuss	Godly	matters.]
"Once	upon	a	time,	in	an	emperor's	court,	a	poet	came	to	recite	his	compositions;
these	were	in	praise	of	the	emperor.	The	words	of	the	songs,	as	well	as	the	voice
of	the	singer	enchanted	the	emperor,	who	announced	a	gift	of	five	thousand	gold
coins	to	the	poet.	The	gift	was	to	be	presented	the	next	day.	The	poet	who	was	a
poor	man	living	in	a	small	hut,	returned	home	overjoyed	on	being	a	successful
bard.	The	 thought	 five	 thousand	gold	coins	did	not	allow	him	to	sleep.	During
the	night,	he	kept	planning	and	 re-planning	how	he	would	 spend	 the	windfall;
and	this	kept	him	tossing	in	bed	till	the	dawn.
In	 the	morning	he	 presented	himself	 before	 the	 emperor.	The	 emperor	 greeted
him	and	inquired,	'What	brings	you	here,	Oh	poet?	What	do	you	want?'	The	poet
was	confused;	he	queried	anxiously,	'Your	Majesty!	Have	you	already	forgotten
that	 only	 yesterday	 you	 had	 announced	 a	 gift	 of	 five	 thousand	 gold	 coins	 in
appreciation	of	my	poems?'	The	 emperor	 said,	 'You	are	 a	 silly	 simpleton.	You
had	 pleased	me	 by	 your	words;	 so	 I	 thought	 it	 proper	 to	 please	 you	with	my
words.	The	give	and	take	is	over!'
In	our	 relationship	with	God	also,	 this	 is	 true.	Results	 are	 achieved	neither	 by
thoughts	 nor	 by	 words	 nor	 by	 plans,	 but	 by	 the	 life	 lived.	 In	 living	 lies	 the
reward.
[On	 a	 long	 train	 journey	 with	 Osho	 they	 noticed	 that	 each	 passenger	 readied
himself	 to	alight,	much	before	he	 reached	his	destination.	Commenting	on	 this
common	practice,	Osho	said:]
How	alert	we	remain	in	an	ordinary	train	journey!	And	how	we	lack	totally	this
alacrity	 in	 the	 important	 journey	of	 life!	We	neither	know	our	destination,	 nor
are	we	prepared	 to	 alight.	When	death	 comes	 to	 rob	 us	 of	 life,	we	 are	 caught
unawares.	And	then,	belatedly,	we	realise	that	we	had	forgotten	about	death;	we
had	forgotten	to	prepare	ourselves	for	dying.
Question	3
SOMEONE	QUESTIONED,	"WHAT	DO	YOU	MEAN	BY	THIS	ALERTNESS
AND
PREPAREDNESS?
First	 thing	 to	bear	 in	mind	 is	 that	 life	 is	 a	 journey.	We	begin	at	one	point	 and
move	 on	 to	 some	 other	 point.	We	 are	 not	 perfect,	 but	we	 have	 to	 strive	 to	 be
perfect.	 For	 the	 perfect,	 there	 is	 no	 travel	 and	 no	 destination.	 But,	 for	 the
majority	of	us,	who	are	far	from	being	perfect,	the	journey,	the	quest,	the	search,
--	call	it	what	you	will	--	-is	essential.	When	we	feel	that	life	is	a	journey,	it	is	a
sign	of	imperfection.	But	this	feeling	is	important.
Concentrate	on	this	imperfection;	see	the	limitation;	or	at	least	have	a	glimpse	of
your	 incomplete	 state.	 He	 who	 realises	 he	 is	 imperfect,	 will	 be	 filled	 with
ambition	 to	 be	 perfect;	 just	 as	 he	who	 is	 ill	 and	 ailing	wishes	 fervently	 to	 be
well;	or	just	as	he	who	enters	a	dark	room,	instinctively	thinks	of	switching	on
the	light.
Question	4
SOMEONE	 ASKED:	 EVEN	 IF	 THE	 REALISATION	 OF	 OUR
IMPERFECTION
DAWNS	UPON	US,	WHAT	GOOD	DOES	IT	DO?
When	you	feel	thirsty,	what	do	you	do?	Does	not	the	thirst	rouse	you	to	search
for	water?
Similarly,	 the	 realisation	 of	 one's	 imperfect	 state	 rouses	 one	 to	 seek	 for
perfection.	Then	life's	goal	is	sighted,	and	one	begins	move	towards	that	goal.
Whereas	meaningful	life	is	a	yoga,	aimless	life	is	a	'bhoga'	or	all	indulgence.	The
life	of
'bhoga'	is	like	a	lake	which	has	stagnant	water,	which	flows	nowhere,	and	which,
in	time,	dries	up.	But	the	life	of	yoga	is	 like	a	river,	which,	for	ever	is	rushing
towards	the	ocean.
To	you	 I	 suggest:	Be	 like	 the	 river	which	moves	 towards	 the	ocean,	only	 then
you	will	 find	 life	worthwhile.	The	 lake	exists	 in	 its	narrow	confines;	 it	 travels
not.	It	has	nowhere	to	go,	and	nothing	to	become.	On	the	other	hand,	the	river	is
not	confined;	it	is	expansive;	it	likes	to	move	and	flow,	because	it	aims	to	be	the
ocean.	It	is	not	satisfied	with	being	a	river;	it	aims	at	being	a	vast,	limitless	body
of	 water.	 When	 a	 man	 realises	 his	 inadequate	 condition,	 he	 also	 becomes
ambitious	 like	 a	 river.	 Therefore,	 it	 is	 a	 fortunate	 thing	 to	 be	 dissatisfied	with
imperfection;	this	dissatisfaction	is	the	first	step	towards	the	goal	of	perfection.
[Walking	with	Osho,	they	see	some	fish	on	the	river	bank	which	had	been	caught
by	fishermen.]
Like	 fish	out	of	water,	man	also	gasps	 for	breath	when	he	 is	not	 in	his	divine
element.
Question	5
SOMEONE	ASKED:	WHAT	IS	THE	CAUSE	OF	OUR	MISERIES?
Don't	say	miseries;	say	'misery',	since	there	is	only	one	misery,	i.e.	isolation	from
God.
We	are	not	aware	of	 this	fact;	surrounded	by	a	multitude	of	miseries	we	forget
the	 original	 misery.	 The	 one	 root	 misery	 creates	 the	 illusion	 of	 a	 number	 of
miseries.	We	have	to	be	radical,	and	deal	with	this	root	misery.	If	a	tree	is	to	be
destroyed	 completely,	 one	 does	 not	 cut	 a	 branch	 here	 and	 a	 branch	 there,	 but
either	uproots	the	tree,	if	that	is	possible,	or	cuts	the	main	trunk	near	the	roots.
Similarly,	we	have	to	destroy	the	root	of	all	miseries.
We	certainly	are	like	fish	out	of	water,	--	like	the	fish	we	saw	dying	on	the	sands.
We	can	well	imagine	those	around	us	and	even	ourselves	as	the	dying	fish	on	a
river	bank.
Come	to	think	of	it,	man	is	both	the	fish	that	is	dying	on	the	sands,	as	also	the
fisherman	who	casts	his	net	in	the	river.	Man	is	both	the	fisherman	and	his	catch.
Man	has	himself	to	blame	for	his	bondage	and	unhappiness.	But	in	this	very	fact
of	he	himself	being	the	cause	of	his	miseries	lies	the	hope	and	possibility	of	his
freedom	 and	 happiness.	 It	 is	 all	 up	 to	 him.	 The	 day	 he	 decides,	 he	 can	 be
reunited	with	his	creator.	It	is	simply	a	matter	of	resolution;	what	appears	far,	can
be	quite	near.	Man's	freedom	lies	buried	just	underneath	his	seeming	thralldom.
Question	6
SOMEONE	EXPRESSED	HIS	DEJECTION	ON	THE	SPIRITUAL	PATH	TO
OSHO.
Once,	in	a	prolonged	warfare,	a	king	was	given	the	news	that	he	had	lost	a	battle.
Naturally,	 his	 disappointment	was	 abysmal.	He	 almost	 fainted	 on	 hearing	 this
sad	news.
When	he	 recovered,	 he	 felt	 depressed	 and	gloomy;	 his	 palace	 and	possessions
suddenly	 lost	 all	 charm	 for	 him.	The	queen	 tried	 to	 console	 him,	 but	 the	king
kept	mumbling,	 'My	army	has	been	defeated;	I	have	lost	all	my	artillery,'	so	on
and	 so	 forth.	The	 queen	 in	 trying	 to	 assuage	 him	 said,	 'My	 sir!	 I	 have	 known
about	all	 this.	But	 I	have	even	worse	news	 to	give	you!'	The	king	 stopped	his
soliloquy,	and	asked	 in	amazement,	 'Worse	 than	 this	news!	What	can	be	worse
than	this	news!'	The	queen	said,	'You	have	lost	a	battle,	but	you	can	still	win	the
war.	What	worries	me	is	not	the	loss	of	your	army,	but	the	loss	of	your	courage.
And	that	is	by	far	a	worse	loss.	The	loss	of	hope,	enthusiasm	and	courage	spells
a	sure	doom,	whereas	the	loss	of	military	power	is	comparatively	nothing.	The
future	is	bleak	for	him	who	is	hopeless.	Take	heart,	therefore,	my	lord!'
The	queen's	words	were	not	meant	for	the	king	only;	they	apply	to	us	all.	Instead
of	 taking	 things	 to	heart,	we	have	 to	 learn	 to	 take	heart.	We	have	 to	overcome
depression	and	defeatism	and	despondency;	for	he	who	loses	hope	has	no	future
ahead	of	him."
Like	the	sun	disappearing	in	the	sea,	religion	too	is	gradually	disappearing	from
our	midst	these	days.	And	that	is	the	basis	of	all	the	woes	of	mankind.
The	 waning	 of	 religion	 is	 due	 to	 lack	 of	 unity	 amongst	 divergent	 faiths.	 The
forces	of	religion	and	all	that	is	good	in	life	are	very	much	scattered.	That	is	why
religion	seems	to	suffer	defeat	at	the	hands	of	its	opponents;	and	mankind	is	the
loser	by	this	defeat.	This	state	of	affairs	cannot	last	for	ever.	Now	is	the	time	in
the	history	of	mankind,	when,	 if	 the	forces	of	good	and	truth	do	not	bury	their
differences	and	unite,	we	shall	perish.	The	decisive	battle	against	forces	of	evil
can	be	fought	and	won	only	by	complete	unity	of	all	the	forces	for	good.
Question	7
QUESTION:	 IT	 DOES	 NOT	 ENHANCE	 HUMAN	 DIGNITY	 TO	 CREATE
FRICTION
BETWEEN	 FAITHS	 --	 AND	 THAT	 TOO	 IN	 THE	 NAME	 OF	 RELIGION!
THERE
SHOULD	BE	NO	CONFLICT	AMONGST	VARIOUS	FAITHS;	BUT,	COME
TO
THINK	OF	 IT,	 THE	WORLD	HISTORY	OF	 FAITHS	 IS	 FULL	OF	 STRIFE
AND
WARS.	NOT	ONLY	THAT,	EVEN	IN	ONE	AND	THE	SAME	FAITH,	THE
VARIOUS	SECTS	MALIGN	ONE	ANOTHER	AND	QUARREL	AMONGST
THEMSELVES!	WHY?
Ego	is	the	root	of	all	evil.	There	can	not,	and	need	not,	be	any	friction	between
faiths.	The	differences	lie	only	in	the	egoism	of	so-called	followers	of	faiths.	It	is
ego	that	is	militant.
And	 it	 is	ego	 that	creates	 frictions	and	factions	even	amongst	 followers	of	one
and	the	same	faith.	Actually,	not	only	in	religious	matters,	but	in	all	spheres	of
life,	the	underlying	cause	of	conflict	and	disharmony	is	ego;	and	the	solution	to
these	 fissiparous	 tendencies	 is	dissolution	of	 ego;	because	 love	 --	which	 is	 the
opposite	 of	 ego	 --	 creates	 a	 common	meeting	 ground	 for	 divergent	 groups	 of
human	beings.
Ego	is	irreligion.	Religion	is	not	the	cause	of	quarrels	or	battles	or	so-called	holy
crusades;	 these	are	caused	by	 the	 lack	of	 religion	 in	 the	 so-called	 followers	of
religion.
And	 this	 will	 continue	 to	 be	 the	 state	 of	 affairs	 so	 long	 as	 religion	 is
predetermined	at	birth,	and	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	life	lived.	The	trouble	is
that	without	having	to	be	religious,	people	inherit	a	ready-made	religion.	History
of	 mankind	 would	 not	 have	 been	 so	 gory	 if	 religion	 were	 not	 familial	 or
heriditary	 by	 birth.	 Those	 for	whom	 religion	 is	 not	 a	 living	 experience	 create
chasms	between	the	various	faiths.	No	faith	is	ever	harmed	by	irreligious	people
outside	its	folds	so	much,	as	by	people	within	it.	The	harm	comes	from	the	inner
group	 that	 is	 irreligious.	 The	 ignorant	 believe	 that	 the	 danger	 to	 faith	 is	 from
outside	 the	 group,	 whereas,	 in	 reality,	 the	 risk	 is	 always	 from	 within.	 People
mistakenly	 try	 to	 safeguard	 their	 religion	 from	 outside	 assault,	 completely
disregarding	the	risk	from	within.	It	is	my	observation	that	there	are	no	enemies
of	any	 faith	outside	 that	 faith;	 faiths	are	destroyed	by	 the	 foes	within	 the	 fold.
These	inside	groups	do	not	consider	religion	a	way	to	self-realisation,	but	as	an
association	or	alliance,	which	can	be	given	a	distinct	 social	or	political	colour.
And,	 unfortunately,	 if	 they	 succeed	 in	 creating	 a	 distinct	 association,	 religion
fails;	yes,	sad	but	true	it	is,	that	if	they	succeed,	religion	fails.	And	the	reason	of
this	failure	is	simple;	it	is	that	religion	is	not	an	association.
All	associations	are	 in	opposition	 to	somebody	or	some-thing;	 the	 life-force	of
all	groupism	is	hatred	of	other	groups;	without	opposition	and	acrimony,	groups
can	 neither	 exist	 nor	 function.	Religion	 implies	 self-realisation;	 religion	 is	 the
science	whereby	one's	life	can	be	bettered.	Religion,	in	reality,	has	nothing	to	do
with	any	group	or	 society;	 it	 is	 concerned	only	with	 the	 individual.	Therefore,
the	various	religions	--	better	to	call	them	faiths	as	we	have	done	so	far	--	are	in
opposition	 to	one	another,	only	when	viewed	as	 separate	groups;	but	 the	 same
faiths,	if	they	are	understood	to	be	the	diverse	ways	of	self-realisation,	are	found
to	he	paths	converging	towards	the	same	Truth.
Question	8
QUESTION:	DO	YOU	CONSIDER	ALL	FAITHS	SAME	AND	EQUAL?
There	is	only	one	religion,	because	there	is	only	one	Truth.	But	the	paths	to	that
one	Truth,	that	peak	experience,	can	be	several.	In	fact,	there	are	as	many	paths
as	there	are	seekers	of	Truth.	Each	individual	has	to	create	his	own	path,	because
there	 are	 none	 already	 laid	 out.	 The	 individual	 has	 to	 start	 from	where	 he	 is.
Others	can	not	be	expected	to	start	from	the	same	place,	simply	because	others
are	not	in	the	same	place.	The	starting	points	are	all	different,	but	the	destination
is	 the	 same.	 The	 starting	 points	 are	 different	 because	 the	 mental	 make-up	 is
different	in	us	all;	 the	destination	is	the	same	because	religion	is	one,	and	only
one.	The	diversity	 in	 faiths	 can	not	be	 laid	 at	 the	door	of	 religion	because	 the
diversity	 belongs	 to	 the	 individuals;	 sects	 are	 born	 of	 this	 diversity.	 There	 are
factions	called	sects	because	of	individual	diversity,	and	not	because	the	Truth	is
diverse.
It	should	be	noted,	however,	that	the	diversity	does	not	imply	conflict.	The	paths
to	 the	 same	 goal	 can	 be	 different,	 but	 that	 is	 no	 reason	 why	 they	 should	 be
considered	at	cross-purpose	to	one	another.	In	fact,	since	they	lead	to	the	same
destination,	they	should	be	considered	companionate.	Immense	good	can	accrue
to	us	all	if,	with	the	above	understanding,	the	various	religious	sects	fraternise.
Just	as	the	stars	are	all	different,	but	the	light	they	give	us	is	the	same;	so	also,
the	sects	are	numerous,	but	the	religion	there-in	is	the	same.
Question	9
QUESTION:	HOW	SHOULD	LIFE	BE	LIVED?
Life	is	to	be	lived	as	if	it	were	a	mirror.	Welcome	everybody	and	every	thing,	but
hold	 on	 to	 nothing.	 That	 life	 is	 pure	 in	 which	 the	 mind	 does	 not	 cling	 to
influences	and	impressions.	Let	bygones	be	bygones;	and	worry	not	for	what	is
yet	 to	 come.	 This	 is	 the	 path	 of	 'sadhna',	 wherein	 the	 individual	 associates
himself	with	the	present,	and	his	what	is	yet	to	come.	This	is	the	path	of	'sadhna',
wherein	roots	are	anchored	firmly	in	his	true	being.	The	past	and	the	future	are
the	domains	of	the	mind;	he	who	is	engrossed	in,	or	engulfed	by	the	past	and	the
future,	can	not	know	life.	Life	is,	alter	all,	here	and	now;	not	there	and	then.	He
who	seeks	life	not	in	'here	and	now'	is	wasting	time.
Like	trees,	be	rooted	in	the	same	place,	be	steady.	But	live	like	birds	in	the	pure
present.
The	door	to	the	Truth	opens	by	living	naturally	and	innocently.
[Referring	to	a	rainbow,	Osho	said,	This	world,	this	body,	this	mind,	all	are	like
the	 rainbow,	 beautiful	 but	 unreal.	 Know	 their	 beauty,	 but	 also	 know	 their
ephemeral	quality;	and	 then	 these	 three	 --	 the	world,	 the	body	and	 the	mind	--
will	not	enslave	you.
Unfortunately,	we	do	not	separate	the	lasting	from	the	transitory,	and	the	reality
from	the	dream.	Whilst	we	are	dreaming,	we	feel	dreams	are	real.
Question	10
QUESTION:	DURING	SLEEP,	 IS	 IT	POSSIBLE	TO	BEAR	IN	MIND	THAT
WHAT
WE	SEE	IS	MERELY	A	DREAM?
Yes;	it	 is	possible.	If	in	your	waking	state,	you	bear	in	mind	that	whatever	you
see	is	as	unreal	as	a	dream,	gradually	in	your	sleeping	state	also,	you	will	know
dreams	 to	 be	 dreams.	 It	 is	 only	 because	we	 do	 not	 consider	 the	world	 in	 our
waking	state	to	be	a	dream,	that	we	feel	dreams	in	our	sleeping	state	to	be	real.
aur	mental	attitude	during	the	waking	hours	is	carried	on	into	the	sleeping	stage
also.
Question	11
QUESTION:	 IS	 IT	NECESSARY	TO	MAKE	SOMEONE	A	GURU	 IN	OUR
QUEST
FOR	KNOWLEDGE?
Do	not	make	only	one	person	a	guru;	make	everyone	a	guru.	If	you	care	to	move
about	with	wide-open	 eyes,	 and	 are	willing	 to	 learn	with	 an	 open	 and	 relaxed
mind,	you	discover	that	the	whole	world	is	a	,guru.
You	may	have	heard	the	name	of	Saint	Maluk.	He	has	noted	about	how	ashamed
he	 had	 to	 feel	 before	 three	 persons:	 an	 alcoholic,	 a	 small	 child,	 and	 a	woman
madly	 in	 love	with	a	man.	The	saint	has	called	all	 three	his	gurus.	How	so,	 is
interesting	to	know.	Once	Maluk	saw	a	drunk	on	a	road,	walking	with	unsteady
gait.	Maluk	told	him,	'Friend!
Steady	 yourself,	 lest	 you	 should	 fall.'	 The	 drunk	 laughed	 loudly	 and	 said,
'Brother!	Why	don't	you	steady	yourself?	If	I	fall	and	dirty	my	clothes,	I	shall	be
able	 to	wash	 them	clean;	but	 if	you	 fall,	your	purification	will	be	quite	a	 job!'
Maluk	was	aghast	at	these	words	of	wisdom	from	a	drunken	sot!
Another	 time,	Maluk	met	a	child	with	a	 lighted	wick-lamp	 in	his	hand.	Maluk
asked	the	child,	 'Where	did	you	get	this	lamp?'	No	sooner	had	Maluk	said	this,
than	a	gust	of	wind	extinguished	the	lamp.	The	child	said,	'Now	you	tell	me	first
where	the	light	is	gone,	then	I	shall	tell	you	whence	I	got	the	lamp.'	For	Maluk
the	child	was	another	guru.
In	the	third	episode,	once	when	Maluk	was	on	the	outskirts	of	a	town,	a	young
girl	 came	 running	 to	him,	 searching	 for	her	 lost	 lover,	 and	 inquiring	 about	his
whereabouts.	Her	clothes	were	in	disarray,	and	she	was	not	aware	of	her	partially
exposed	 body.	 Seeing	 her	 in	 this	 condition,	 Maluk	 remarked,	 'First	 dress
properly;	 then	 approach	me	 and	 have	 your	 say.'	 The	 girl	 said,	 'Brother!	Being
intoxicated	by	the	love	of	a	God-made	creature,	I	lost	awareness	of	my	body	and
my	dress;	 if	you	had	not	drawn	my	attention,	I	would	have	run	to	 the	bazar	 in
this	 semi-nude	 condition;	 thanks	 for	 bringing	 me	 to	 my	 senses.	 But	 is	 not	 it
surprising	 that	 even	 though	you	are	 supposed	 to	be	 intoxicated	by	God's	 love,
you	 are	 conscious	 of	my	 body	 and	my	garments?	Can	 he	who	 is	 lost	 in	God,
notice	clothed	or	lack	of	them?'	Maluk	felt	like	he	had	been	awakened	out	of	his
sleep.	He	 realised	how	 impossible	 it	 is	 to	 gain	 divine	 knowledge	 if	 one	keeps
noticing	insignificant	trifles.
[At	 the	beach	while	 the	writer	 and	 friends	were	drawing	 figures	on	 the	 sands,
Osho	said:]
So	many	of	us	waste	our	lives	drawing	ciphers	on	the	sands.
[They	stopped	to	listen	to	him.]
None	heeds	and	stops	so	quickly!	Except	man,	all	other	creatures	listen.	Life	is
an	 opportunity	 for	 gaining	 everlasting	 peace	 and	 joy;	 it	 is	 an	 opportunity	 to
gather	the	nectar	of	life.	But	we	while	it	away	in	playing	with	the	sands	of	time.
This	our	playfulness	is	costly.	The	lines	we	draw	on	the	sands	are	obliterated	by
our	own	feet	when	we	leave	the	sea-shore.	The	winds	and	the	others	come	here
and	they	too	draw	figures	on	the	canvas	of	sands.
Where	vou	doodled	on	 the	sands	 just	now,	many	generations	before	you,	have
doodled	in	their	times;	this	sand-writing	has	been	the	hobby	of	mankind	for	ages.
I	appeal	to	you	to	come	out	of	this	playfulness.	I	beseech	you	not	to	waste	life,
but	to	live	it.	If	you	go	on	playing,	you	lose	life;	if	you	stop	playing	and	realise
your	destiny,	your	life	takes	a	triumphant	turn.
Question	12
AN	OLD	MAN	ASKED:	I	AM	CONSTANTLY	HARASSED	BY	THOUGHTS.
THIS
WAS	NOT	SO	TILL	I	STARTED	MEDITATING.	DAY	AND	NIGHT,	ALL
TWENTY-FOUR	HOURS,	 I	AM	CONSCIOUS	OF	DISTURBED	STATE	OF
MY
MIND;	IN	FACT,	AT	TIMES	I	DOUBT	IF	I	AM	SANE!	PLEASE	TELL	ME
WHAT	I	SHOULD	DO;	SHOW	ME	THE	CURE	FOR	MY	FEVERISH	MIND.
This	experience	has	its	benefits,	because	when	you	feel	disturbed	by	the	constant
traffic	 of	 thoughts,	 you	 realise	 the	 futility	 of	 over-thinking.	You	 are	 fortunate,
because	 others	 not	 in	 the	 same	 category	 as	 you,	 are	 so	 dull,	 they	 do	 not	 feel
disturbed	by	such	mental	hyperactivity.	Your	disturbance	 is	a	welcome	sign;	 it
shows	that	the	trouble	can	be	remedied.
Normally,	so	long	as	you	are	carried	away	by	your	speeding	thoughts,	you	do	not
feel	 disturbed	 by	 the	 thoughts.	 But	 if	 you	 pause	 in-between,	 and	 study	 your
mind,	you	realise	how	feverishly	it	works,	and	disturbs	your	peace.	This	pause	is
essential	for	curbing	the	over-activity	of	mind.	You	have	to	halt	and	watch	your
thoughts;	for,	if	your	thoughts	are	running	fast,	you	cannot	know	your	mind.
Therefore,	I	reiterate,	your	experience	is	a	good	omen.	Do	not	be	worried	about
it,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 be	 glad.	 But	 then	 take	 the	 next	 step:	 take	 a	 completely
impersonal	view	of	the	thought	process.	Be	only	an	observer	of	thoughts;	have
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 them	 except	 to	 observe	 them.	When	 thoughts	 cloud	 your
mind,	and	harass	you,	ask	them,	'Oh	thoughts!
To	whom	do	you	belong?	Do	you	belong	 to	me?'	You	will	get	no	reply	 to	 this
inquiry!
Because	the	thoughts	do	not	belong	to	you!	Try	and	find	out.
Thoughts	are	your	guests.	They	have	made	a	lodging	house	of	your	mind.	It	 is
wrong	 to	 think	 of	 them	 as	 yours;	 and	 this	 same	mistake	 comes	 in	 the	way	 of
getting	rid	of	them.	If	you	identify	as	yours,	you	stand	in	the	way	of	their	exit.
And	the	thoughts	which	are	your	temporary	guests.	become	permanent	lodgers.
By	looking	at	thoughts	impersonally,	you	sever	connection	with	them.	Whenever
a	thought	or	desire	is	born	in	you,	watch	its	birth,	see	it	grow	before	the	mind's
eye,	and	then	observe	its	decline,	and	the	final	departure.
Repeat	this	observation	with	the	second	thought	that	enters	the	mind;	watch	also
its	birth,	and	growth,	decline	and	death.	Thus,	in	a	quiet	and	detached	manner	--
-that	 is,	 as	 a	witness	 --	 observe	 the	 constant	 stream	Of	 thoughts.	 Feel	 nothing
about	 them,	 good	 or	 bad.	 Form	 no	 opinions	 about	 them,	 favourable	 or
unfavourable.	 Just	watch.	Thus,	 by	 silent	 choiceless	 observation,	 the	 traffic	 of
thoughts	slows	down;	and	finally,	a	state	of	thoughtless	Bliss	is	achieved.	In	this
state	of	 'Samadhi'.	All	 thoughts	vanish,	and	yet,	paradoxically,	 the	capacity	 for
clear	thinking	develops.	This	capacity	is	what	I	call
'pragna'.	It	is	essential	to	from	oneself	of	all	thoughts,	to	develop	this	faculty	of
wisdom.
Question	13
THE	QUESTIONER	THEN	ASKED:	WOULD	YOU	SUGGEST	ANYTHING
ELSE
FOR	ME?
Yes;	 I	would	 like	 to	 give	 you	 two	pointers.	They	 are	 important	 for	 those	who
seek	 truth,	 or	 want	 to	 realise	 themselves.	 One:	 make	 a	 beginning.	 Two:	 keep
going.
Question	14
QUESTION:	 WHAT	 TYPE	 OF	 LIFE	 IS	 LIVED	 BY	 A	 PERSON	 WHO	 IS
WITHOUT
ANY	KIND	OF	DESIRE?
Outwardly	 there	 are	 no	 changes.	 But	 inwardly	 all	 is	 changed.	 In	 a	 sense,
everything	remains	as	before;	but	in	a	different	sense,	nothing	remains	as	before;
all	is	changed.
The	same	question	was	put	to	a	saint	by	a	person	like	you.	The	saint	asked	that
person	 to	 bring	 a	 square	 piece	 of	 cloth,	 and	 a	match-box.	 Then	 he	 spread	 the
cloth	 on	 ground	 and	 nailed	 its	 four	 corners.	 Next	 he	 set	 the	 cloth	 afire.	 This
reduced	 the	 cloth	 to	 ashes;	 but	 its	 fibres	 and	 design	 still	 remained	 visible.	 It
could	 be	 said	 of	 the	 cloth	 now,	 that	 it	 was	 there	 and	 yet	 it	 was	 not	 there.	 A
'jeevan-mukta's	 life	 is	 also	 like	 that.	 In	 the	 fire	 of	 knowledge,	 everything	 is
destroyed;	only	the	frame	of	ashes	remains.
Question	15
A	 MONK	 ASKED,	 IS	 THERE	 NO	 EASY	 AND	 CONVENIENT	 WAY	 TO
ATTAIN
THE	TRUTH?
It	is	the	law	of	life	that	we	have	to	pay	price	of	everything.	Nothing	is	free.	And
the	 more	 valuable	 an	 object,	 the	 more	 we	 have	 to	 pay	 for	 it.	 The	 price	 for
knowing	the	Truth	 is	our	own	self	 --	yes,	nothing	 less	 than	our	own	self.	Lose
yourself	 and	 find	 the	 Truth.	 In	 other	words,	 you	 find	 yourself	 when	 you	 lose
yourself.	If	you	do	not	lose	yourself,	you	neither	gain	the	Truth,	nor	yourself.	All
this	 may	 sound	 complicated,	 but	 it	 can	 be	 sorted	 out	 by	 deep	 contemplation.
Haven't	you,	at	times,	felt,	that	whom	you	consider	yourself	is	not	your	true	self?
No,	if	the	'I'	we	so	often	refer	to	in	our	daily	life,	were	our	true	self,	there	was	no
question	of	searching	for	the	Truth.	Only	because	that	'I'	is	not	true,	there	is	the
thirst	for	the	Truth.
Within	ourselves,	on	some	conscious	or	unconscious	 level,	we	do	have	a	hazy
inkling	of	the	fact	that	our	'I'	is	unreal.	This	so-called	'I'	must	cease	to	be,	before
we	can	uncover	the	Truth	lying	underneath	it.	On	the	outside	is	the	'I',	the	ego,
the	 unreal	 self;	 inside	 is	 the	 true	 self.	 The	 true	 self	 existing	 in	 our	 innermost
being	is	the	Truth,	because	at	that	depth,	the	self	extant	is	universal.	He	who	can
go	deep	within	himself	will	reach	the	same	depth	in	others	also.	The	Truth	--	call
it	God	--	resides	in	this	inner	centre.	The	circumference	has	to	be	left	behind,	if
we	would	move	towards	the	centre	of	a	circle:	same	is	the	case	here.	There	is	no
other	way	to	reach	the	goal.	And	the	greatest	ordeal	is	this	losing	of	oneself,	the
losing	 of	 the	 'I'	 or	 the	 ego.	 But,	 ah!	 the	 gain	 compensates	 a	 thousand	million
times	the	small	loss	of	'I'.	For,	the	gain	is	eternal	peace,	bliss	and	consciousness.
Coming	back	to	your	question,	I	do	not	know	if	I	have	shown	you	an	easy	and
convenient	way	 to	know	 the	Truth;	but	easy	or	not,	 it	 is	 the	way.	Find	out	 for
yourself.
Question	16
SOMEONE	ASKED	OSHO'S	VIEWS	ON	DEATH	AND	DYING.
There	is	nothing	as	sure	as	death.	Where	there	is	life,	there	is	bound	to	be	death.
He	who	bears	not	this	fact	in	mind,	wastes	life,	whereas	he	who	knows	this	truth,
obtains	that	which	is	immortal.
I	 do	 not	 feel	 depressed	 at	 anybody's	 death,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 feel
anything	 about	 it.	 However,	 it	 is	 a	matter	 of	 sorrow,	 no	 doubt,	 if	 I	 see	 a	 life
wasted.	We	have	not	to	grieve	after	a	dead	body,	but	over	a	wasted	life.
You	know,	King	Janak	was	called	'videh',	i.e.,	without	or	beyond	the	body.	Once,
a	 young	 minister	 of	 his	 asked	 him,	 'Your	 Excellency!	 How	 can	 you	 be
considered	without	a	body,	when	you	do	have	a	physical	body?	The	king	smiled
but	 said	 nothing.	After	 a	 few	 days,	 however,	 the	 king	 invited	 the	minister	 for
lunch.	Such	an	 invitation	 from	 the	king	himself	was	 a	great	 honour;	 naturally,
therefore,	the	minister	was	overjoyed.	But	the	next	day,	on	his	way	to	the	palace
for	lunch,	the	minister's	joy	completely	evaporated,	when	he	heard	in	the	market,
the	 town-crier's	 announcement	 that	 the	 same	 evening,	 the	 minister	 was	 to	 be
executed	for	some	political	 faux	pas!	What	a	calamity!	What	a	 tragedy!	 In	 the
afternoon	the	king	honoured	him	by	inviting	to	lunch;	and	in	the	evening	ordered
his	execution!!
Any	way,	 despite	 his	 confusion	 and	 anguish,	 he	 somehow	 reached	 the	 palace.
Now,	the	king	had	purposely	got	the	dishes	prepared	without	salt!	He	sat	down
to	lunch	with	the	minister	and	fed	him	with	all	affection.	The	minister	somehow
ate	the	food,	finished	the	lunch;	but	all	absent-mindedly,	for,	with	every	minute
that	passed,	he	was	coming	closer	to	death!	After	the	lunch,	the	king	asked,	'My
man!	Was	there	anything	lacking	in	the	meal	you	had?'	As	though	coming	out	of
unconsciousness	or	sleep,	the	young	minister	said,	'Sorry,	Your	Excellency!	You
fed	me	well,	but	I	have	no	recollection	of	the	taste	of	various	dishes.	The	thought
of	dying	this	evening	has	deprived	me	of	all	other	thoughts.
Please	 excuse	 my	 absentmindedness.'	 King	 Janak	 laughed	 on	 hearing	 the
minister's	 reply,	 and	 said,	 'This	was	 in	 answer	 to	 your	 question	 of	 a	 few	days
ago.	Do	not	worry:	you	are	not	going	to	die	today.	I	had	planned	this	strategy	lo
make	 you	 confront	 death.	 He	 who	 sees	 death	 close-by,	 becomes	 body-less
despite	having	a	body.	And	he	who,	by	practice,	loses	awareness	of	the	body,	is
not	aware	of	death	either.	In	such	a	state	of	consciousness,	the	individual	attains
that	which	is	immortal.
Question	17
SOMEONE	ASKED	OSHO	TO	EXPLAIN	THE	THINKING	MECHANISM.
First	of	all,	let	me	tell	you	that	most	of	us	do	not	know	how	to	think.	Possibly	the
most	 subtle	 science	 is	 the	 science	of	 thinking	and	we	have	 to	know	about	 this
science.	We	 have	 to	 learn	 to	 think.	At	 the	 outset,	 bear	 in	mind	 the	 difference
between	 accumulating	 thoughts,	 and	 developing	 the	 faculty	 of	 thinking.	 The
notion	is	that	collection	of	thoughts	and	the	ability	to	think	are	one	and	the	same.
But	accumulation	of	anything	is	not	real	gain;	accumulation	is	only	the	means	of
hiding	one's	lack,	and	thereby	deceiving	oneself.
And	 self-deception	 is	 self-destruction.	 This	 self-deception	 is	 universal;	 and
because	of	it,	though	there	is	phenomenal	worldwide	increase	in	the	number	of
ideas,	there	is,	at	the	same	time,	marked	decrease	in	the	ability	to	think.	Seldom
do	we	come	across	an	independent	thinker.
Question	18
QUESTION:	 BUT	 WHAT	 ABOUT	 OUR	 UNIVERSITIES?	 DON'T	 THEY
TEACH	US
TO	THINK?
No!	They	 teach	us	only	 to	 learn	by	rote	what	others	have	 thought,	 they	do	not
teach	us	to	think	for	our-selves.	They	teach	us	to	memorise.
When	 thoughts	 rise	 from	within,	 you	 gain	 knowledge.	 And	 thoughts	 can	 rise
from	within,	in	all	of	us.	This	thinking	power	which	lies	dormant	in	us	all,	can
be	invoked	and	arisen	if	we	have	the	know-how	of	it.	The	first	thing	necessary
for	this	awakening,	is	that	we	should	stop	filling	the	mind	with	others'	thoughts.
It	is	a	pity	that	we	are	so	full	of	thoughts	all	the	time,	yet	seldom	think!	Yes,	it	is
true	that	we	seldom	think!	Most	of	us	are	not	even	aware	of	our	ability	to	think.
After	all,	we	can	be	aware	only	of	 those	of	our	capabilities	of	which	we	make
some	 use.	 The	 capabilities	 can	 become	 realities	 by	 utilising	 them;	 it	 is	 not
surprising	 if	 the	 inactive	 capabilities	 are	 forgotten	 and	 lost.	 In	most	 of	 us,	 the
ability	to	think	is	also	that	type	of	an	inactive,	unused	faculty.	Usually,	we	react
like	 automatic	machines	we	 do	 not	 think.	 The	 external	 stimuli	make	 us	move
like	a	machine;	we	do	not	pause	to	think.
If	 you	 doubt	 my	 words,	 study	 yourself	 all	 day	 long.	 You	 find	 no	 time	 I	 gap
between	the	external	stimuli	that	strike	your	consciousness,	and	your	reaction	to
the	same.	Is	 there	any	pause	for	 thought	between	somebody	insulting	you,	and
your	becoming	angry?	No;	 there	 is	no	 time-gap,	and	 therefore	no	 thought-gap.
This	is	because	there	is	no	place	for
'thinking'	in	your	life.	My	meaning	of	'thinking'	is:	every	reaction	should	be	with
awareness.	Reaction	without	awareness	 is	a	 thoughtless	action;	 therefore,	 react
with	awareness.	Reaction	with	awareness	is	an	indication	of	the	active	thinking
faculty	of	 an	 individual.	Before	 reacting	 to	 any	external	 stimulus,	 the	 thinking
individual	will	think	about	his	action,	will	think	out	what	his	reaction	should	be,
and	why	it	should	be	that	particular	reaction	and	none	other.	He	will	be	awake	to
the	movements	of	his	mind;	he	will	be	conscious	about	his	actions.	There	will	be
full	awareness	about	all	his	doings.	He	will	not	be	a	tool	in	the	hands	of	external
stimuli.	He	will	not	do	anything	unconsciously.
In	short,	 that	 individual	will	be	an	individual	 in	 true	sense	of	 the	 term.	For,	he
who	acts	unawares,	 is	not	 an	 individual	 (in=not:	 dividuus=divisible);	 he	 is	not
whole,	or	complete.
Where	 there	 is	no	discriminatory	 thinking,	 there	 is	no	existence	of	 that	 faculty
which	 introduces	 one	 to	 oneself,	 and	 which	 frees	 one	 from	 mechanical,
automatic	or	unconscious	actions.
You	get	out	of	life	what	you	put	into	it.	There	is	no	meaning	to	life,	unless	we
make	 it	meaningful.	He	who	merely	wishes	 to	make	 life	worth-while,	without
doing	anything	positive	about	it,	will	not	succeed.
The	 worthwhileness	 of	 life	 is	 the	 result	 of	 creative	 activity,	 and	 not	 indolent
passivity.
Question	19
QUESTION:	I	SCULPT	IDOLS;	I	AM	A	CREATIVE	ARTIST,	YET	I	DO	NOT
GET
ANY	 DEEP	 SATISFACTION	 OUT	 OF	MY	 LIFE-WORK.	WHAT	 SHALL	 I
DO?
Production	 is	 not	 creation.	 True	 creation	 is	 that	 which	 recreates	 you.	 To
transform	stones	into	idols	is	much	easier	than	transforming	oneself	into	a	divine
image.	Harder	and	tougher	than	stones	is	personality	of	ours	which	we	have	to
chisel	 out;	 no	 stone	 is	 that	 difficult	 to	 work	 on.	 True	 creativity	 lies	 in	 giving
shape	to	this	petrified	self	of	ours;	satisfaction	lies	only	therein;	lasting	joy	flows
only	thereof.	You	asked	me.	'What	shall	I	do?'	I	suggest	now	you	begin	work	on
the	stone	that	is	your	own	self	and	create	your	new	form.	leave	aside	the	usual
sculpting;	you	made	enough	statues	so	far	in	life.
A	poet	pours	beauty	in	his	words;	a	painter	gives	life	to	dead	piece	of	canvas;	a
sculptor	breathes	life	in	stones	and	wood:	but	the	greatest	art	is	life	itself,	and	the
greatest	artist	is	he	who	brings	to	his	own	life,	beauty	as	well	as	creativity.
Question	20
A	YOUNG	MAN	SAYS:	 I	 AM	VERY	UNHAPPY	AND	WORRIED;	 BUT	 I
CALL
NOT	PIN-POINT	THE	REASON	OF	MY	MISERY.	I	AM	SICK	AND	TIRED
OF	MY
CIRCUMSTANCES,	 AND	 WANT	 TO	 CHANGE	 THEM;	 PERHAPS	 IN	 A
NEW
ENVIRONMENT.	I	MAY	GET	SOME	PEACE.
Happiness	and	unhappiness	are	not	dependent	on	external	circumstances.	There
is	 neither	 happiness	 nor	 unhappiness	 in	 things	 external;	 our	 glad	 or	 sad	 states
depend	upon	our	reaction	to	these	external	things.	Actually,	things	do	not	matter;
what	matters	 is	 our	 view	 of	 things;	 all	 depends	 upon	 how	we	 look	 at	 things.
Therefore,	 in	 final	 analysis,	 the	 importance	 is	of	 the	 individual,	 and	not	of	 the
object:	the	importance	is	of	yourself,	and	not	the	object	you	possess.	Hence,	so
to	say,	happiness	or	unhappiness	reside	within	us.
Epictectus	has	said:	'If	you	are	unhappy,	know	for	sure	that	you	yourself	are	the
cause	of	it.'	I	would	say	the	same	thing.	We	are	the	cause	of	our	misery,	because
whatever	we	are,	we	have	made	ourselves	such.	Please	bear	in	mind	this	 truth,
because	you	cannot	transform	your	life	without	it.	If	you	feel	unhappy,	know	that
something	 is	 wrong	 with	 your	 viewpoint.	 A	 miserable	 life	 is	 the	 result	 of	 a
wrong	way	of	looking	at	things;	and	a	happy	life	is	the	result	of	a	right	approach
to	 life.	 If	 the	 mental	 attitude	 does	 not	 change	 with	 your	 proposed	 change	 in
circumstances,	you	may	not	 feel	any	more	happy	 than	at	present.	Please	 try	 to
search	for	the	cause	of	your	unhappiness	within	yourself,	not	without,	whenever
you	 feel	miserable.	And	 then,	 gradually,	 you	will	 discover	 the	 causes	 of	 your
unhappiness,	hidden	in	your	own	reactions;	then	a	new	life	will	start	for	vou.	He
who	 seeks	 for	 faults	 outside,	 goes	 astray;	 he	who	 sees	 for	 them	 in	 himself,	 is
sure	to	succeed	in	transcending	them.
I	 see	 in	 the	 world	 today	 a	 decline	 in	 thinking.	 By	 thinking,	 I	 do	 not	 mean
thoughts;	 for	 thoughts	are	aplenty.	There	 is	a	 flood	of	 thoughts,	as	 it	were;	but
what	I	call	'thinking'
tends	to	be	drowned	in	this	flood.	We	have	to	save	'thinking'	from	this	flood.
Question	21
QUESTION:	WHAT	DO	YOU	MEAN	BY	'THINKING'?
By	'thinking'	I	mean	discretion;	the	ability	to	distinguish	between	the	ephemeral
and	the	eternal,	between	the	mortal	and	the	immortal,	between	the	unreal	and	the
real.	 He	 who	 has	 lost	 this	 type	 of	 ability	 to	 think,	 wastes	 his	 life	 on	 the
transitory;	whereas,	he	who	is	able	to	think,	seeks	for	the	permanent	and	not	the
illusory.	 After	 all,	 what	 is	 transient	 has	 no	 real	 existence;	 only	 that	 which	 is
permanent	really	exists.	Life	belongs	to	that	which	is	eternal:	death	to	that	which
is	ephemeral.
The	 non-thinking	 masses	 run	 after	 dreams;	 and	 sleep	 is	 the	 necessary	 pre-
requisite	 for	 dreams.	That	 is	why	 the	 thoughtless	 need	 all	 types	 of	 sleep	 alias
unconsciousness.	 In	 other	 words,	 the	 search	 for	 sleep	 is	 a	 symptom	 of	 the
thoughtless	being.	The	'thinking'
being	inquires	about	the	Truth,	and	for	inquiry,	it	 is	necessary	to	stop	sleeping,
and	 to	 be	 wide	 awake.	 The	 'thinking'	 person	 is	 all	 for	 consciousness,	 and	 all
against	unawareness.
The	wide	awake	life	is	symbolic	of	'thinking'.	'Thinking'	means	awareness.
Once,	 when	 Siddharth	 was	 coming	 out	 of	 the	 house	 of	 Gautami,	 she	 said,	 O
Siddharth!
Blessed	is	the	mother	who	has	a	son	like	you;	blessed	is	the	father	whose	image
you	are;	blessed	is	the	wife	who	chose	you	her	husband.'	Like	that	she	blessed	a
number	of	persons.	Siddharth	did	not	 say	anything:	but	he	 thought	 to	himself:
This	blessedness	is	transitory;	is	there	any	blessing	which	is	permanent?	Is	there
no	way	whereby	one	can	be	permanently	blessed?	--	and	be	for	ever	tranquil	and
in	 eternal	 bliss'?	 For,	 that	 which	 is	 here	 today,	 and	 gone	 tomorrow,	 is	 really
speaking,	not	here	even	today.'
This	 is	what	I	call	 'thinking',	 true	 thinking,	deep	--	as	opposed	 to	superficial	 --
thinking.
In	 Siddharth's	mind	 flashed	 the	 right	 thought;	 and	 he	 realised	 that	 so	 long	 as
there	was	desire	or	craving	for	anything,	there	was	no	peace	of	mind.	So	long	as
the	 fires	 of	 desire	 burnt	 hot	 inside,	 the	 cool	 serenity	 of	 Truth	 could	 not	 be
experienced.	Such	Thinking	opens	 the	door	 for	 the	awakened	consciousness	 to
move	forward	to	its	goal.
A	new	resolution	crystallised	in	Siddharth's	mind;	it	was:	'I	shall	extinguish	the
fires	of	desire,	and,	know	that	which	is	the	Truth.	Getting	out	from	any	slumber
of	momentary	existence,	I	shall	realise	that	which	is	eternal.'	Thus	'thinking',	he
removed	a	valuable	necklace	 from	round	his	neck	and	gave	 it	 to	Gautami	as	a
Guru-dakshina.	Such	'thinking'
leads	 to	 turning-points	 in	 life	 --	 even	 to	 revolutionary	 changes	 in	 life.	 Now
search	within	yourself;	do	you	really	think?
[Once	visited	a	jail,	and	talked	to	its	inmates.]
Brethren!	 Do	 not	 be	 under	 the	 delusion	 that	 you	 alone	 are	 in	 fetters;	 those
outside	 this	 prison,	 who	 are	 apparently	 free,	 are	 also	 in	 chains,	 though	 their
shackles	are	of	a	different	kind.	Their	desires	are	their	chains;	their	ignorance	is
their	 imprisonment.	 Man's	 bondage	 is	 of	 man's	 own	 making.	 Man	 himself
labours	at	making	the	walls	and	bars	for	his	prison.
Though	what	I	say	may	surprise	you,	the	truth	is	that	most	of	us	spend	our	lives
creating	prison-houses	for	ourselves.
Thinking	from	another	angle	about	this,	I	would	say,	lack	of	religion	means	lack
of	freedom.	Most	of	us	do	not	live	in	religion	means	lack	of	freedom.	Most	of	us
do	not	 live	 in	religion,	but	 in	 the	 lack	of	 it;	of	course,	we	are	not	conscious	of
this	 fact.	 Those	 that	 do	 not	 travel	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 self-enlightenment,
gradually	go	deeper	and	deeper	in	the	abyss	of	darkness,	and	this	darkness	can
be	destructive.
He	who	has	no	thirst	for	the	Truth	can	not	be	free.	Truth	leads	to	freedom;	nay,
more	correctly,	Truth	is	freedom.	And	please	remember	that	he	who	is	not	free	is
not	for,	but	against.	God.	In	the	soil	of	consciousness	that	is	not	free,	the	plants
of	divinity	can	not	grow.	For	 these	plants	 to	grow,	 to	bloom	and	to	bear	fruits,
the	soil	needed	is	of	freedom;	 the	manure	needed	is	of	a	simple,	unpretentious
life,	the	water	needed	is	of	purity;	and	the	seed	required	is	of	living	silence.	But
above	all,	there	should	be	the	care	of	the	gardener	by	the	name	of	Awareness.
He	who	shows	the	courage	to	fulfil	the	above	conditions,	finds	himself	free	of	all
bondage.	From	within	his	 self,	 the	 latent	 fire	of	God	burns	bright,	because	 the
ashes	 of	 dependence	 have	 been	 blown	 away.	 And	 in	 that	 fire,	 misery	 and
dissatisfaction,	 pain	 and	 turmoil,	 all	 are	 burnt	 out	 completely.	 The	 ashes	 left
thereafter,	act	as	a	fertiliser	for	the	blossoming	of	flowers	of	ever-lasting	joy	and
bliss.
I	invite	you	to	participate	in	a	wonderful	search.	The	moment	your	heart	echoes
this	invitation	of	mine,	you	will	be	transformed	into	a	new	being	who	hears	the
call	divine;	then	you	won't	heed	any	call	from	lesser	or	baser	sources.	The	calls
from	the	low	are	heard	only	so	long	as	the	call	from	the	high	is	disregarded.	The
call	from	the	high	or	from	the	above,	is	a	challenging	call!	The	ways	of	the	beast
exist	only	because	 the	 sight	not	 turned	 towards	God.	Only	 they	are	 tied	 to	 the
mundane	 and	 the	 terrestrial,	who	 do	 not	 dream	of	 soaring	 to	 celestial	 heights.
Raise	 your	 sights	 to	 the	 firmament,	 and	 see	 how	 vast,	 how	 immense	 and
limitless	is	the	sky;	and	also	how	near	it	is	to	you!	Isn't	it	height	of	folly	--	sort	of
insult	 to	 your	 intelligence	 --	 that	 you	 remain	 earth-bound	 worms	 crawling	 in
muck,	despite	your	having	the	wings	to	fly	to	the	most	distant	horizons,	and	the
spirit	that	can	encompass	the	sky?
This	spirit	is	mysterious;	it	can	be	as	small	or	as	large	as	it	chooses	to	be.	It	can
be	 smaller	 than	 the	 tiniest	 atom,	 the	more	 immense	 than	 the	 skies.	 It	 can	be	a
dog,	 and	 it	 can	 be	 also	 a	 god;	 it	 si	 its	 own	 creation.	 Therefore,	 those	 who
concentrate	on	the	lowly,	become	lowly.	Whereas,	those	who	yearn	to	soar	in	the
infinite	realms,	become	the	Infinite.
I	appeal	to	you:	If	you	would	fall	in	love,	let	it	be	with	God!	And	if	you	must	be
in	bonds,	 let	 the	bonds	be	of	 the	 limitless	 firmament!	And	 if	you	must	be	 in	a
prison-house,	let	nothing	less	than	cosmos	be	your	jail!	And	if	you	must	confine
yourself	to	any	limits,	let	these	be	the	frontiers	of	freedom!	And	if	you	must	seek
manacles,	then	seek	the	ties	of	love,	because	love	means	freedom	absolute!
Table	of	Contents
1	Chapter
