
- 1 -
- 2 -
LSD:
A Shortcut to False Samadhi
Acharya Rajneesh
Compilation by:
Ma Yoga Laxmi
Edited by:
Dolly Diddee
- 3 -
Publisher:
I. N. Shah
Secretary
Jeevan Jagruti Kendra
53, Empire Building
146, Dr. D. N. Road
BOMBAY-1
© Jeevan Jagruti Kendra
First Edition
Copies: 5000
February 1971
Price:
In India - Rs. 2.00
Foreign - $ 0 75
Sh. 6
Printer:
Indian Press (P.) Ltd.
Varanasi-Branch
Varanasi-2
- 4 -
An interview with Acharya Rajneesh
by Ma Ananda Prem
Instructor, Sivananda Ashram, New York, U. S. A.
on 25th. October 1970, Bombay (India)
- 5 -
LSD: A Short Cut to False
Samadhi
Ma Ananda Prem: Acharayaji, before asking a
question I would like to tell you my experience in
meditation with special reference to controlled
LSD-experimentation I underwent.
In New York I used to study psycho-analysis.
As a result of that, I became a subject in a
Government sponsored experiment to study the
effects of LSD. In this experiment, I was given
seven small doses of LSD, over a period of two
years, in a controlled situation. I had learned
how to use it to awaken the Kundalini and bring
meditation.
Three times I had a certain experience,
which I am sure was Samadhi - of the variety
with seed, in the sixth body, where I became the
whole existence. I would like to describe the
experience to you to get your opinion on whether
or not what I experienced was true cosmic
consciousness.
I sat in a meditative asana, after taking the
drug, and meditated. Shortly, thereafter, the
Kundalini began coming up the Sushumna from
the Muladhara. I concentrated on Agna Chakra,
and all the energy flowed there. From Agna,
some flowed down to Anahat, releasing various
tension knots there. All was very blissful.
- 6 -
I was aware of four colours: the colour
saffron, like my clothes, was the main one, and I
seemed to be enveloped in it. This was mixed
with a yellow colour. Under the yellow was white,
still more subtle. And beyond the saffron,
without, was a deep blue. Everything seemed to
be mainly saffron though.
Suddenly, the Kundalini shot up the spine,
very fast and powerful, and there was an
explosion in the Agna Chakra. As a result of this,
I felt that I became the whole existence, and was
one with everything. Or rather, that I had
dissolved completely, and the universe, was all
there was. This I experienced with complete
awareness and clarity such as I never had
before.
This state was completely desireless, as all
the cravings and desires had melted away. The
feeling was one of perfect harmony. There was
nothing to be desired, as everything was therein
one vast present. It was as if a fog had lifted, and
that the curtain of subjectivity called ego, that
usually coloured my view of the outer reality,
(thus separating me from it), was no longer
there. All barriers and separateness between the
inner and the outer were gone.
At that point, I stopped meditating because it
felt as if I had reached the end of meditation and
of bliss. It was thus no longer possible to
meditate. My spine seemed melted down to zero
tension level. Everything was perfect love, so
- 7 -
there was no longer any craving for love. For the
first time, love was not the result of any ego
need, as I had no desires or needs any longer. All
creation seemed to be a joyous, blissful light-
hearted prank. It seemed as if the creation
wanted to have fun with itself through its
multitudes of energy atoms.
I then got up and walked about, but though
my body was walking, it was very clear that I was
not the body but the universe. The body seemed
to move in front of me and all identity with it was
gone.
I remained this way some twelve hours
during each of the three experiences. Then the
body tensions returned, drawing me back to my
former way. However, I had a lot of Kundalini
and very blissful meditation for two months after
each experiment, such as I have never gotten
with any yoga practice. When I do yoga and the
usual meditation, it feels as if these practices are
taking me in the same direction as these LSD
experiences. I see no difference. Also, these
experiences seem to match all descriptions of
Samadhi with seed, or the Jivanmukta state,
that I have ever read.
My questions then are:
1. In your opinion was the experience
genuine Samadhi, as I feel it was? If not,
how does genuine Samadhi at the sixth
- 8 -
body level differ, other than it being
permanent?
2. Is there any harm in occasionally using
LSD only for spiritual purposes, in a
controlled situation, to help meditation?
3. Is permanent self-realization possible with
the help of a chemical like LSD?
4. What do the colours mean?
Acharya Rajneesh: It was not genuine. It was
not Samadhi, but a chemical change. The mind
can project anything it likes to project - even an
unconscious desire of Samadhi! So whatsoever
you have known about Samadhi and have read
about it, will be projected through the chemical
help of LSD. LSD or any other chemical drug is
nothing but a help to make the mind more
projective. All the hindrances, all the ordinary
hindrances are withdrawn. The ordinary reason
and conscious mind are withdrawn. You are
completely in the hold of the unconscious. But
the unconscious itself will not bring Samadhi
through LSD. It can only be possible, if the
unconscious has been fed with conceptions,
colours and vital experiences. Everything that
has been put into it can be projected.
If you have not known anything about
Kundalini, it is impossible to feel it through LSD.
A person who is suffering from any Phobia will
project his phobia. A person who is under some
suppressed fear will feel the actual phenomenon
to take place. So LSD will bring different
experiences to different persons.
- 9 -
LSD can only be a help to project whatsoever
is in the seed form of your unconscious mind. If
it is love, then love will be projected - if it is
hatred, then hatred will be projected. LSD is an
expanding drug; whatsoever is in the seed form
will be expanded into a tree. You could feel
Kundalini, you could feel Chakras, and you
could feel harmony or the totality, only because
these are the seeds already in your unconscious
mind. If they are not there, then LSD will not
project these.
The projection is because of LSD, but this is
not Samadhi. Samadhi comes from your
unconscious longing. If you have longed for it
then LSD will help you. LSD can be a help to
anything unconscious, to be psychically realised,
but it is not a spiritual revelation. What you have
seen is something which you wanted to realize,
projected on the psychic canvas, so it is not
Samadhi and it is not genuine. It is neither; and
it is nothing else than dreaming. It is just a
dreaming phenomenon.
In the night you dream because the
conscious barriers are withdrawn. So whatever
in your mind is suppressed, desired, longed for,
begins to take shape and form and begins to be
imagined. But when you are in a dream, you
never know that it is a dream. It is so lifelike, it
is so real. It seems so authentically real, that you
can never conceive within a dream that you are
dreaming. LSD is a chemical way of dreaming. It
- 10 -
is not a natural way of dreaming, but a chemical
way of dreaming.
So you can see things which you have never
seen, know things that you have not known,
realise things that you have never realised. But
all these realisations are only apparent
realisations. They are not real. They are
beautiful; they have their own charm, just like
nice dreams. But LSD can project a nightmare
also. It depends on you, not on LSD. If your
mind is hallucinating and is suffering from some
untoward images, these will be projected. So
there are persons who have seen hell in their
LSD trip, and there are persons who have seen
demons. It depends on persons. All that chemical
drugs can do is to project whatsoever is there to
be projected.
So do not mistake it for samadhi and do not
cling to such experiences, otherwise they will be
obstructions in meditation. You have felt so
much in LSD dreams that, when you go in real
meditation it is faint. It is not so vital that the
feeling is not of such a great upsurge. Compared
to your dream experiences meditation will look
faint. This will create a depressive mood. You will
feel something is being lost. You have known
something and this something is not coming
through meditation. Then the mind will say,
“LSD is better”. And if you go on taking LSD your
mind will become less and less meditative. And
meditation and its experiences will go on
- 11 -
becoming fainter and fainter. So don't take LSD
again.
Ma A. P.: It was just an experiment.
Acharya Rajneesh: Yes it was, but it has made
an impact on your mind. And the impact is
dangerous because you will always be
comparing. The comparison will always be there.
The real meditation will seem unreal because
unreal has appeared to you as authentic.
Ma A. P.: I can't find the real difference?
Acharya Rajneesh: There are so many things.
First, the comparison can never be accurate. It
can never be right; because what you have seen
in your LSD trip you cannot remember exactly
when you are awakened. You cannot remember a
dream exactly when you are out of your dream.
The dream is again imagined. You add much to
it. It is not the same; because when you are out
of LSD, you cannot remember it exactly as it
was. Only a faint feeling of blissfulness will be
there. And now you will imagine the whole
experience again. This is not exactly the
experience that it was. It can never be. You have
a feeling that you have known something. That
feeling is illusory and you will again imagine
what you have seen, what you have known in the
experience itself. But there will be a blissfulness,
because of revelation through the chemical
drugs.
- 12 -
You are totally relaxed. Your tensions at that
moment are withdrawn. They are not non-
existential; they are awaiting you to come back.
But they are not in focus, so you are relaxed
totally. The revelation is so great; you will have a
blissful feeling afterwards. You will feel it. The
hangover bliss will be there. In this bliss you will
imagine again what you have seen, what you
have known.
Now this is all imaginary - 90% of it will be
imagination and the greater the distance
between the experience and the remembrance,
the more beautiful, the more blissful, it will look
to you. It will become a cherished memory. Now
each time in meditation you will compare it.
Meditation will be a faint thing in comparison
because it is real. It is not a dreamland. The
progress is step by step. It is not so sudden. It
will never overtake you. You will always be
prepared in-between, and the progress is very
slow. It will seem slow because now in the real
world, there is time; but in LSD experiences or in
ordinary dreams, there is no such time, as it
exists in our waking hours. So you can dream in
a single moment, a dream that will take years
together in reality to pass. So in LSD, the thing
is sudden. It is so sudden that it overwhelms
you. It shatters your total memory. All the
tensions are non-existential for the moment. You
are relaxed and the cosmic harmony is felt. The
barriers are not there. You do not exist as an I;
and the world and you have become one. This is
so sudden and blissful that you will have a
- 13 -
cherished memory of it afterwards. And you will
go on adding to it each time you compare it with
reality. It will become more and more beautiful,
and the reality will become fainter. So don't
compare it.
Firstly, you cannot compare it, because you
are in two states of mind and the memory cannot
be brought from one state to another. It cannot
be brought. Only faint remembrances are there.
Secondly, when you compare retro-spectively, it
is the same mind which has projected these
experiences of LSD, the same unconscious mind,
the same medium. You have taken LSD and you
are meditating. All the time the unconscious
seeds are there which you can project in your
meditation. The second thing to be remembered
is, don't conceive any pre-formulated, ready-
made conceptions. What is to be the result?
Don't think about it. To go in meditation is to go
in an uncharted sea. You can’t know beforehand
what is going to happen, and if you know already
what is going to happen, it will begin to happen;
and it will still be a projection.
You can project in LSD. You can project in
meditation also, because the unconscious is the
projector. So all the knowledge about Kundalini,
all the knowledge of Chakras, all the knowledge
that you have of knowing must be thrown out;
because your ordinary mind can also project it.
When you are meditating, you can project the
same thing. The process will be slow because
there is no chemical help. It will take longer
- 14 -
time but the phenomena is the same. I am not
saying that kundalini is not. I am not saying that
chakras are not. I am not saying that there are
no experiences. There are, but you must not
know beforehand, otherwise you will project
them.
You must be completely unknowing. You
must be ignorant. There’s a basic condition to
proceed further, you must not know beforehand.
Each thing must be known directly, must be
experienced, not taken for granted. Information
should not be made knowledge. So throw away
all information. Cease to know things and
proceed as a vacuum. Proceed in ignorance - you
don't know. So everything will be a surprise,
everything must be a surprise. If it is not a
surprise then you say, “Yes, I have known it, this
has happened before.”
There is a great possibility of self-delusion,
for the mind is deceptive. And the unconscious
goes on playing tricks! It is not only in LSD that
the deception is possible, even in ordinary
meditation, the deception is possible. The
unconscious is the same. You must change it.
You must make it vacant. It must not be a
knowing unconscious. It must be openly
vulnerable, ready to face the unknown.
Meditation is going into the unknown. So you
need a purge, you need a cleansing, you need a
complete overhaul.
- 15 -
The unconscious must be cleaned. It must
not be pre-burdened - it must not have seeds.
Sabeej Samadhi is a Samadhi with seeds. A
Samadhi with seeds means a Samadhi with your
projections. It is not a Samadhi at all. It is just a
name-sake. There is another term - Nirbeej
Samadhi, a Samadhi which is seedless. Only a
seedless Samadhi is Samadhi, which is authentic
because there is nothing to be projected. It is not
that you are projecting - something has come to
you. You have encountered something. You have
known something new, completely fresh,
absolutely unknown before, not even imagined;
because whatsoever you can imagine you can
project.
So knowledge is a hindrance in Samadhi and
a person who is a 'knowing-person', can never
reach Samadhi. You must not go burdened with
knowledge. You must reach the door of Samadhi
completely empty handed, naked, vacant, only
then the authentic thing happens. Otherwise,
you are meditating with the projections. You
have been projecting in meditation, and you have
been projecting in your LSD experiences. Both
are projections.
You must unburden yourself. You must
understand this. Forget all that you have known.
Don't conceive Samadhi in any way. Do not
conceive, do not conceptualize, just go like a
child in an unknown country. The language is
not known, there is no one acquainted,
everything is new and you have no guide book
- 16 -
with you. Only in this way things will begin to
happen, which are authentic. Otherwise this will
take a long time, and you will go on, encircling
yourself and the projection will go on. In this way
LSD will be more forceful. LSD will be more vital.
LSD will be an experience and meditation will be
something faint compared to it. But if you
unburden your knowledge, forget all these
names - 'Kundalini', 'Chakras', etc., everything,
put it aside and proceed just like a child, only
then meditation will happen. Otherwise
meditation too will be imaginary and a dream.
The difference is very subtle. It is really
difficult to know what the difference is, although
there is a difference. But one thing could be
understood correctly and that is, if things are
happening according to your knowledge, then
you must not take them seriously; because they
can never happen according to your knowledge.
They happen to each individual so differently,
that no scripture, no ‘Guru', can exactly say
what will happen. Everything that is being said
is just a generalization. To no one it happens
exactly like that. The seven Chakras or the
‘Kundalini' or the passage, are so different, that
they are bound to be different in each individual.
So, if things are happening according to a
pattern, you must not take them seriously. You
are imagining. Things will be different for you.
They will never be the same to anyone else. The
happening is individual and there are no
generalizations.
- 17 -
Everybody's experiences are different and
incomparable, and all these things which are
being said are generalizations. Generalizations
never happen. We are twenty persons here. We
can calculate the average age of all here, but no
one will be exactly of that age. Average is a myth.
It is a generalization. We can have the average
height; but no one will correspond exactly with
it. We can have average knowledge, but no one
may possess it. All the generalizations are
myths. They help to formulate things but they
don't help to be life-springs. They help to make
systems, they help to make scriptures, and they
help to make maps. But you can never take a
map as a country. You must not. You must have
seen the map of India; but nowhere in India will
you find it. The map is there, with its
formulation. When you enter India, you will
never encounter it. It is just a generalization - it
helps formulation, but it never helps experience.
Rather, it becomes obstructive. So knowledge
can be gathered without knowing that knowledge
is dangerous. If it is concerned with outward
information, it is all right, it makes no difference;
but if it is inner experience, it makes a lot of
difference. Because the mind projects. It makes a
lot of difference.
So you begin your meditation as if you have
never heard anything about ‘kundalini', 
‘Chakras' - just be without this information.
Make it a point - a first condition to enter
meditation - that you are not supposing
anything, that you do not know anything, that
- 18 -
you are ready and open to anything that
happens. You have nothing to compare. First,
your information (your preconceived ideas) must
go. You must not cling to them. If you do not
cling to them they will go - die. The seed will die.
It will burn. But if you cling to it, it will seem like
knowledge, it will seem as a help, it will seem as
a guide. So don't cling to them and they will
become redundant. Then it will not be a living
seed. It will not project itself.
Secondly, forget your LSD experiences as
dreams, otherwise they will be coming between
you and your meditation and comparison will go
on. That comparison will be suicidal. It must not
be compared, otherwise meditation will cease;
and you will lean over to LSD. Any chemical help
can only create psychic phenomena. It can never
be an authentic realization. Realisation is
something to which you have happened.
Realisation is not something which has
happened to you. Realisation is something in
which you have jumped. It is not that something
has penetrated into you.
In LSD you go nowhere; you are just where
you were. Something happens to you because of
chemical changes; because your ordinary mind
is not functioning. It has been de-functioned.
The ordinary reasoning, the ordinary checks are
numbed. They are put off and the unconscious is
put on. This has been done through a chemical
agent. You are not the controller but the
chemical agent is the controller. You are under
- 19 -
its influence. You are not a free agent - now LSD
is free in you and LSD will work something in
you. It is not that you are working, but you are
being worked upon and something will happen to
you - not that you have happened to something.
Realisation means you have happened to
something - you have jumped, you have
encountered, you have gone! You are not where
you were. You have changed. This change is a
conscious change, with full awareness; and the
change is your effort. Because you have done it,
you have traveled, you have gone to some peak,
you can be on the Everest. There are two ways:
1. That you are on the Everest but you will
be in your bed. You have gone nowhere;
and
2. You can go and the very going is the
change.
The very struggle to go upward will change
you and the peak will not only be a peak of
Everest; but will also be a peak of your efforts.
When you have reached the Everest, you have
reached the Everest of your will power. In your
dreams you have gone nowhere, you exist in the
same state, in the same time, only something
has happened to you. A dream has come to you.
This dream can come in two ways - you can
create it through LSD. That is why they look
similar. Both ways you are creating it. The
unconscious must not be a burden - the
unconscious with seeds, with projections, with
longings. Only then meditation is possible.
- 20 -
Another difference: when you have taken
LSD, your conscious mind has gone to sleep and
your unconscious mind begins to work over you.
But in meditation, your unconscious is not
asleep; rather your conscious is expanding and
making your unconscious also conscious. The
light of the conscious is going into the
unconscious, and a time comes when your whole
mind is one. Then meditation has happened. But
in LSD the conscious goes to sleep and your
unconscious takes charge of you.
Ma A.P.: What do the colours and their sequence
mean?
Acharya Rajneesh: They have some meaning
but the order is always different for each
individual. The order is never the same. But they
do have meaning. Colours, perfumes, sounds -
everything has a meaning. The first thing that is
to be noticed is, the moment you go deep
inwards, your each sense has got a
corresponding inner organ. We have got an outer
sense just like eyes. They see what is without;
but when we close our eyes they can see what is
within. Every outward experience is stored
inward also. The essence of it is stored.
So all your senses have reservoirs of
experience in your mind. When you travel
inwards, these reservoirs will be met. When you
come to the reservoir of colours, you will see
beautiful colours which you have never seen with
your eyes. But these are essences of all the past
- 21 -
experiences - just like a painter painting a
beautiful woman. This is not any particular
woman. He has seen so many women. This is the
essence of them all. All that he has seen, all that
he has known, is being depicted in this one
figure. Something is from somewhere and
something is from somewhere else. This
particular figure is nowhere to be met. It is not
imaginary and yet, it is nowhere to be found. It is
authentic because it has been taken from
experiences and yet, it is just an image. It is real
and unreal both.
Our senses have stored all the experiences,
not only of this life, but of all the lives that have
been lived. These are certain essences in us. The
eyes have stored colours, light, etc. Ears have
stored sounds, harmonies, silences, etc. All the
essences have their store-rooms. Now even
Science confirms this. They say that if you can
touch a particular brain cell with an electrode,
then that particular brain cell will explode. A
person falling down may see stars. The shock
may create stars, if particular brain cells which
store light-experiences are being touched. With
an electrode, your memories can be touched. If
with an electrode I touch a cell which conserves
your memory of childhood, you will again become
a child and everything will be replayed on the
canvas of the mind.
So when you go inwards, these essential
essences will explode; and you will know many
things which are unknown in such sure form in
- 22 -
the outward world. Outward world is always
impure with substances, but the inward experie-
nces are pure essences. There is no impurity of
matter. They are just electrical phenomena. As
phenomenon is just energy, it is pure, and
nothing obstructs it. It is transparent. Don't take
these experiences seriously. They are only
meaningful as indications that you are going
deep down. But it is only the way, it is not the
destination. When you really reach deep down,
and in, there will be no experiences - neither of
light, nor of sound, nor of anything. Unless all
these experiences cease, you cannot transcend
the mind. It is the psyche which is displaying its
experiences, conserved through endless lives. So
first, each person will feel different things
because each one is differently oriented, as far
as his senses are concerned.
Just two days back someone came, who had
no sense of taste; had never known what taste
means, so he cannot feel in his inner
experiences any feeling of taste. There are
persons who are blind, or colour-blind. One
person in twelve is colour-blind. A colour-blind
person means he cannot see a particular colour.
He sees everything else but only a particular
colour is not seen by him. Bernard Shaw could
not see yellow. He could not make any diffe-
rence between yellow and green. So he was
colour blind as far as yellow was concerned. He
could never see yellow in his inner experiences.
There was no reservoir of yellow colour. There
was no essence of yellow. He had never seen it.
- 23 -
To him it was non-existential. We do not see all
the colours. These seven colours are not all the
colours. We see only up to these seven colours.
Beyond them, we are colour-blind. Below these
seven and beyond these seven, there are infinite
ranges of colours. We have not seen them, so we
will not feel them in our inward journey;
because all that is felt in the store-room, is of
the without. So, if a musician goes in
meditation, he will know sounds which we can
ever know. A painter will know colours, which
we can never know. If Van Gogh goes into
meditation, we cannot conceive what colours he
will see, what new combinations he will know!
So this too will differ from individual to
individual. There can be no order. One thing is
certain, when you go deep down in your inner
path, things will begin to happen. You will have
experiences of colours, sound, perfumes, smells.
These are all stored experiences. The whole
mind is a storehouse. Every cell is a bundle of
experiences ready to explode. Go on, touch it
and it will explode! This is meaningful as far as
it indicates inwardness. But it will become a
hindrance if you cling to it. As the feeling is
lovely, the mind will long to cling to it, to repeat
it. Then it will be a hindrance to further
progress.
A state of mind is to be reached where there
is no experience. Rather you say - state of mind
with no experience; or you can say - a state of
mind with experience of nothingness.
Experience itself is the last barrier. One must
- 24 -
come to the point where one IS, and there is no
experience. Experience has ceased. Only when
experience has ceased, duality ceases. When
you are experiencing something, duality is
there. You are there, so the experience is there.
Something without is there. Even if you
experience oneness with the world, this
experience is duality.
So in meditation, there will be no
experiences. When meditation takes its full
flowering, there will be no experience at all.
YOU WILL BE - and just being is the experience.
Nothing is, except just your being - your exis-
tence only. And when the experience is not, the
experiencer explodes; because it can exist only
as a second polarity to experience. When the
object is not, the subject explodes itself. There
is no subject, no object. Only then the
existential is achieved - only then you can say
God IS. You are not, and the World is not - GOD
IS. The very ISNESS is God. So these
experiences will come, they will come.
Ma A. P.: Acharyaji, I am trying yogic
meditation since a long time, but I am not
getting any clear and basic result. What is
wrong with me?
Acharya Rajneesh: There can be so many
reasons. The method used is somewhere wrong;
or the way in which it is used is wrong; or
neither method, nor the way is wrong, but the
unconscious longing behind the method is
- 25 -
wrong. The unconscious must be changed. If
you have been using the method for so many
years and only getting shallow results, change
the method. There are so many methods - one
should not cling to one method only. May be the
method is not wrong but just not right for you.
The method may be all right, but it is not for
you. As far as you are concerned, it may be
wrong.
So change the method. Change is always
helpful. Sometimes one becomes accustomed to
the method, and then the experiences will be
shallow. Sometimes we become conditioned to a
method, and it becomes a shallow affair. Where
nothing is new, you go on repeating it as a
routine. When it becomes a routine, you will
never achieve anything through it. When a
method becomes a routine, nothing significant
can be achieved. So what I have to say is: if you
use this method, the method itself is such that it
can never become a routine. It is so disorderly
and chaotic, that you can never make it a
routine.
All those methods which have disciplined
and orderly systems behind them always become
routine. You must use a chaotic method, so that
you are never settled in it. It always remains
something new, something new to be faced each
day. So the method I have been talking to you
about will help you. It is chaotic. And for the
modern mind, no disciplined method can be
helpful. For the modern mind is basically
- 26 -
chaotic. It is basically a change in pattern. The
old mind was a non-changing, fixed mind. A
person was always settled. Today nothing is
settled. Two centuries ago a person born a
Christian, would die a Christian. Today it is not
so. A person born a Christian may become a
Hindu. Everything becomes chaotic. His
childhood mind is something else, his young
mind something else. He may become a
communist and then some day, he may come to
the Himalayas to meditate.
Today's mind is a mind which is not fixed. It
is in chaos. So all old methods which were meant
for the fixed minds are out of date. For the
chaotic mind a chaotic method is needed. Only
then, it can lead to deeper realms. Otherwise the
results are bound to be shallow. Once it becomes
settled, we will be bored with it. And if you go on
prolonging it, it is suicidal. Don’t prolong it. 
Method is for you. You are not for the method –
change it.
Ma A.P.: Acharyaji, then I should use only this
method for my Sadhana?
Acharya Rajneesh: Yes, you use this method
and awareness of breathing. And in a very short
period you will feel the change. But you need a
chaotic method which should not become a
routine.
