

Meditation
THE	FIRST	and	LAST	FREEDOM
A	practical	guide	to	OSHO	meditations
OSHO
Copyright	©	1987,	2004	(revised	edition),	2009.	Osho	International
Foundation,	Switzerland.	www.osho.com/copyright.	All	rights	reserved.
OSHO	and	ancillary	rights	are	registered	trademarks	of	Osho
International	Foundation
Apart	from	descriptive	text	written	by	the	editors,	the	text	in	this	book	is	selected
from	various	discourses	by	Osho,	given	to	live	audiences	over	a	period	of	more
than	thirty	years.	All	of	the	Osho	discourse	series	have	been	published	in	full	as
books,	and	are	also	available	as	original	audio	recordings.	Audio	recordings	and
the	complete	text	archive	can	be	found	via	the	online	OSHO	Library	at
www.osho.com
eBook	Edition
ISBN	13:	978-0-88050-772-1
ISBN	10:	0-88050-772-1
OSHO	MEDIA	INTERNATIONAL
is	an	imprint	of
OSHO	INTERNATIONAL
New	York—London	-	Mumbai
www.osho.com/oshointernational
MEDICAL	DISCLAIMER
Advice	or	teachings	given	in	this	book	are	not	intended	to	replace	the	services	of
a	physician,	therapist,	or	psychiatrist.	Nor	is	the	book	meant	to	provide	an
alternative	to	professional	medical	treatment.	This	book	offers	no	medical
diagnosis	of,	or	treatment	for,	any	specific	medical	or	psychological	problems
you	may	have.	Some	of	the	meditations	include	strenuous	physical	activity—if
you	have	any	reason	to	be	concerned	about	the	effects	of	such	activity	on	your
health,	you	should	consult	your	physician	before	trying	these	meditations.
Foreword
Meditation	is	a	science,	not	a	superstition.	Meditation	says	that	if	you
experiment	with	your	mind—it	is	too	full	of	thoughts—thoughts	can	be
dispersed.	The	clouds	can	be	dispersed	and	you	can	attain	to	an	empty	sky	of
your	inner	being.	And	it	needs	just	a	little	courage,	a	little	effort,	a	little	daring,	a
little	persistence	and	perseverance.	A	little	patience,	yes,	but	no	trust—you	don’t
believe	in	God?	That	is	not	a	hindrance	to	meditation.	You	don’t	believe	in	the
soul?	That	is	not	a	hindrance	in	meditation.	You	don’t	believe	at	all?	That	is	not
an	obstacle.	You	can	meditate,	because	meditation	simply	says	how	to	go
withinward:	whether	there	is	a	soul	or	not	doesn’t	matter;	whether	there	is	a	God
or	not	doesn’t	matter.	One	thing	is	certain:	that	you	are.	Whether	you	will	be
after	death,	or	not,	does	not	matter.	Only	one	thing	matters:	right	this	moment,
you	are.
Who	are	you?	To	enter	into	it	is	meditation,	to	go	deeper	into	your	own	being.
Maybe	it	is	just	momentary;	maybe	you	are	not	eternal,	maybe	death	finishes
everything.	We	don’t	make	any	condition	that	you	have	to	believe,	we	say	only
that	you	have	to	experiment.	Just	try.	One	day	it	happens:	thoughts	are	not	there.
And	suddenly,	when	thoughts	disappear,	the	body	and	you	are	separate,	because
thoughts	are	the	bridge.	Through	thoughts	you	are	joined	with	the	body;	it	is	the
link.	Suddenly	the	link	disappear—you	are	there,	the	body	is	there,	and	there	is
an	infinite	abyss	between	the	two.	Then	you	know	that	the	body	will	die	but	you
cannot	die.	Then	it	is	not	something	like	a	dogma;	it	is	not	a	creed,	it	is	an
experience—self-evident.
OSHO
TABLE	OF	CONTENTS
Title	Page
Copyright
Foreword
MEDICAL	DISCLAIMER
Introduction
Part	1:	ABOUT	MEDITATION
What	is	meditation?
Witnessing,	the	spirit	of	meditation
The	flowering	of	meditation
The	great	silence
Growing	in	sensitivity
Love,	the	fragrance	of	meditation
Compassion
Abiding	joy	for	no	reason	at	all
Intelligence:	the	ability	to	respond
Aloneness:	your	self-nature
Your	real	self
Part	2:	THE	SCIENCE	OF	MEDITATION
Methods	and	Meditations
Techniques	are	helpful
Begin	with	effort
These	methods	are	simple
First	understand	the	technique
The	right	method	will	click
When	to	drop	the	method
Suggestions	for	beginners
Enough	space
The	right	place
Be	comfortable
Begin	with	catharsis
Guidelines	to	Freedom
The	three	essentials
Be	playful
Be	patient
Don’t	look	for	results
Appreciate	unawareness
Machines	help,	but	don’t	create	meditation
You	are	not	your	experiences
Meditation	is	a	knack
Part	3:	THE	MEDITATIONS
THE	OSHO	ACTIVE	MEDITATIONS
Why	active	meditation?
Powerful	Methods	for	Awakening
An	Energy	Phenomenon
OSHO	DYNAMIC	MEDITATION:	Catharsis	and	Celebration
Remember,	remain	a	witness
OSHO	KUNDALINI	MEDITATION
OSHO	NATARAJ	MEDITATION
OSHO	NADABRAHMA	MEDITATION
Anything	Can	Be	a	Meditation
Running,	Jogging	and	Swimming
Laughing	Meditation
Gibberish	Meditation
Smoking	Meditation
Breath—a	Bridge	to	Meditation
Vipassana
Throwing	things	out
Opening	the	Heart
From	head	to	heart
The	heart	of	peacefulness
Atisha’s	Heart	Meditation
Inner	Centering
Abdullah
Finding	the	real	source
Center	of	the	cyclone
Who	am	I?
OSHO	WHIRLING	MEDITATION
Meditations	on	Light
Golden	Light	meditation
Heart	of	light
Meditations	on	Darkness
Inner	darkness
Meditations	in	Sound
Aum
Devavani
The	center	of	sound
Finding	the	Space	Within
Enter	the	clear	sky
Include	Everything
A	meditation	for	the	jet	set
Watching	with	the	Third	Eye
OSHO	GOURISHANKAR	MEDITATION
OSHO	MANDALA	MEDITATION
Finding	the	Witness
Touching	as	a	Feather
Just	Sitting
Zazen
Just	Listening
OSHO	MEDITATIVE	THERAPIES
The	OSHO	MYSTIC	ROSE	MEDITATION
The	OSHO	NO-MIND	MEDITATION
OSHO	BORN	AGAIN
OSHO	REMINDING	YOURSELF	OF	THE	FORGOTTEN	LANGUAGE
OF	TALKING	TO	YOUR	BODYMIND
Part	4:	OBSTACLES	TO	MEDITATION
The	two	difficulties
The	ego
The	chattering	mind
False	methods
Meditation	is	not	concentration
Meditation	is	not	introspection
Tricks	of	the	mind
Don’t	be	fooled	by	experiences
Mind	can	enter	again
Mind	can	deceive	you
Part	5:	RESPONSES	TO	QUESTIONS	ABOUT	MEDITATION
Only	a	witness	can	really	dance
The	goose	has	never	been	in
The	watcher	on	the	hill
Where	did	you	leave	your	bicycle?
Just	a	180°	turn
All	paths	merge	on	the	mountain
Celebrating	consciousness
Count	the	moments	of	awareness
Make	things	as	simple	as	possible
Witnessing	is	like	sowing	seeds
Witnessing	is	enough
Appendix:	OSHO	Active	Meditations	Music
For	More	Information
About	the	Author
OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort
Introduction
Just	as	the	science	and	technology	that	has	transformed	our	outer	lives	has
been	largely	a	Western	phenomenon,	so	the	East	has	provided	the	main	source	of
the	science	that	can	transform	our	inner	lives.	Today,	just	like	the	light	bulb,
meditation	is	a	universal	phenomenon—one	helps	illuminate	our	outer	world,
the	other	our	inner	world.
But	in	the	process	of	becoming	universal,	many	misconceptions	about
meditation	have	arisen:	that	it	is	“religious,”	that	it	is	about	sitting	in	difficult
postures,	perhaps	with	your	ankle	round	your	neck	and	a	holy	look	on	your	face
to	hide	the	discomfort;	maybe	even	humming,	or	chanting	some	esoteric-
sounding	mantra.
If	that	doesn’t	appeal	to	you,	then	this	book	is	for	you.
Here,	meditation	is	made	simple,	ordinary,	and	the	natural	component	of	a
contemporary	life	style.	And	increasingly,	an	essential	component	too.
Meditation	in	its	essence	is	the	art	of	being	aware—aware	of	what	is	going
on	inside	you	and	around	you.
Although	meditation	itself	is	not	a	technique,	there	are	many	methods	here
to	help	you	learn	this	awareness,	and	as	you	acquire	this	knack,	it	can	be	your
companion	wherever	you	are—at	work,	at	play,	wherever.
Most	of	us	have	been	taught	that	in	order	to	be	successful	in	life	we	need	to
struggle,	to	fight,	to	focus,	to	concentrate.	The	trouble	with	this	approach	is	that
the	more	we	struggle,	the	more	tense	we	become.	And	the	more	tense	we	are,	the
worse	we	perform.	The	meditative	approach	is	to	understand	that	in	order	to	be
at	our	best,	in	order	to	give	each	moment	our	best—and	to	receive	the	best	from
each	moment—we	need	to	be	as	aware	as	possible.	And	to	be	aware	we	need	to
be	relaxed.
Usually	we	think	that	in	order	to	relax,	we	have	to	go	out.	Meditation	offers
another	possibility:	to	go	in	to	relax.
Such	are	the	pressures	of	modern	life	that	there	has	never	been	a	more
restless	world	to	live	in.	Never	have	people	been	so	tense.	It	is	exactly	for	the
modern	mind	that	these	techniques	have	been	devised—a	contemporary
approach	to	suit	contemporary	people.
If	you	are	a	high-energy	individual,	for	example,	for	whom	“just	sitting”
seems	impossible,	then	try	the	Osho	Active	Meditations:	Osho	Dynamic	or	Osho
Kundalini.	Exert	yourself	to	the	maximum	and	let	the	relaxation	follow	of	its
own	accord.	Perhaps	your	pent-up	emotions	make	it	difficult	to	sit	quietly?	Or
you	feel	too	tired	and	lethargic	to	stay	awake	while	trying	to	sit?	Or	perhaps	you
just	want	to	move	your	body.	Then,	again,	these	Active	Meditations	are	just	for
you.
The	knack	of	remaining	relaxed	in	the	midst	of	our	busiest	day	is	what	has
been	called	“alertness	with	no	effort”—the	essential	experience	of	meditation.
So	even	if	you	are	convinced	you	have	absolutely	no	time	to	set	aside	for
meditation,	you’ll	find	plenty	of	techniques	in	this	book	that	can	be	seamlessly
integrated	into	your	day.
Meditation	is	based	on	a	simple	understanding:	Rather	than	fighting	with
darkness,	which	is	impossible	anyway,	switch	on	the	light.	Rather	than	fighting
with	ourselves,	trying	to	improve	ourselves,	trying	to	live	up	to	others’	ideas	of
who	or	what	we	should	be,	we	can	start	by	simply	accepting	ourselves	as	we	are
now.
Osho	often	reminds	us	that	if	existence	has	invited	us	to	be	here,	who	else’s
permission	do	we	need	to	accept	ourselves	as	we	are?	Once	we	relax	into	this
acceptance,	once	we	stop	pretending	to	be	other	than	who	and	how	we	are,	once
we	stop	struggling	to	impress	others	(who	are	struggling	equally	hard	to	impress
us),	once	we	stop	trying	to	defend	ourselves,	justify	ourselves.…	Once	we	stop
trying	to	hide	our	wounds,	even	from	ourselves,	but	rather	open	them	to	the	air
and	the	light,	the	healing	happens	on	its	own.
In	this	book	you	will	read	of	calming	the	mind,	of	learning	how	this
invaluable	bio-computer	can	be	your	greatest	friend.	And	how	to	find	the	“off”
button.	When	you	need	the	mind,	you	can	use	it.	When	you	don’t	need	it,	you
can	let	it	rest	quietly—ready	for	when	you	need	it	again—free	from	its	endless
chattering	quality.
Someone	insults	you.	Imagine	being	able	to	choose	when	and	how	to
respond,	free	from	the	usual	knee-jerk	reaction	to	strike	back,	creating	those
endless	vicious	spirals	in	which	our	relationships	can	slowly	drown.
And	what	of	freedom?	There	is	no	greater	freedom	than	to	be	that	which	we
were	meant	to	be.	There	is	no	greater	freedom	than	to	be	free	of	others’
expectations,	to	be	able	to	live	our	lives	spontaneously,	with	awareness.
And	the	ultimate	paradox	of	meditation	is	that	when	we	finally	learn	to	love
ourselves—in	fact	only	when	we	can	love	ourselves—are	we	able	to	share	that
love	with	others.	But	first	we	must	start	with	ourselves.
This	book	contains	a	wide	range	of	techniques,	approaches,	and	insights	to
help	you	on	that	journey.	We	are	all	individuals,	and	different	methods	suit
different	people.	Here,	there	is	something	for	every	type	of	modern	mind,
uniquely	tailored	for	these	hectic	times.
As	Osho	puts	it:	“The	long	drawn-out	yoga	practices	will	not	do	for	the
world;	now	people	do	not	have	days	or	even	hours	to	spare.	We	need	methods
that	yield	quick	results.	If	a	man	makes	a	seven-day	commitment,	by	the	end	of
that	period	he	should	begin	to	feel	that	something	has	happened	to	him.	He
should	become	a	different	man	in	seven	days’	time….	So,	I	say,	practice	today
and	feel	the	result	immediately.	Now	it	is	the	jet	age;	now	meditation	cannot
afford	to	be	slow.	It	has	to	pick	up	speed.”
Part	1:	ABOUT	MEDITATION
What	is	meditation?
Meditation	is	an	adventure,	adventure	into	the	unknown,	the	greatest
adventure	the	human	mind	can	take.
Meditation	is	just	to	be,	not	doing	anything—no	action,	no	thought,	no
emotion.	You	just	are	and	it	is	a	sheer	delight.	From	where	does	this
delight	come	when	you	are	not	doing	anything?	It	comes	from	nowhere,	or
it	comes	from	everywhere.	It	is	uncaused,	because	existence	is	made	of	the
stuff	called	joy.
Witnessing,	the	spirit	of	meditation
When	you	are	not	doing	anything	at	all—bodily,	mentally,	on	no	level—
when	all	activity	has	ceased	and	you	simply	are,	just	being,	that’s	what
meditation	is.	You	cannot	do	it,	you	cannot	practice	it:	you	have	only	to
understand	it.
Whenever	you	can	find	time	for	just	being,	drop	all	doing.	Thinking	is	also
doing,	concentration	is	also	doing,	contemplation	is	also	doing.	Even	if	for	a
single	moment	you	are	not	doing	anything	and	you	are	just	at	your	center,	utterly
relaxed—that	is	meditation.	And	once	you	have	got	the	knack	of	it,	you	can
remain	in	that	state	as	long	as	you	want;	finally	you	can	remain	in	that	state	for
twenty-four	hours	a	day.
Once	you	have	become	aware	of	the	way	your	being	can	remain
undisturbed,	then	slowly	you	can	start	doing	things,	keeping	alert	that	your	being
is	not	stirred.	That	is	the	second	part	of	meditation—first,	learning	how	just	to
be,	and	then	learning	little	actions:	cleaning	the	floor,	taking	a	shower,	but
keeping	yourself	centered.	Then	you	can	do	complicated	things.
For	example,	I	am	speaking	to	you,	but	my	meditation	is	not	disturbed.	I	can
go	on	speaking,	but	at	my	very	center	there	is	not	even	a	ripple;	it	is	just	silent,
utterly	silent.
So	meditation	is	not	against	action.	It	is	not	that	you	have	to	escape	from
life.	It	simply	teaches	you	a	new	way	of	life:	you	become	the	center	of	the
cyclone.
Your	life	goes	on,	it	goes	on	really	more	intensely—with	more	joy,	with
more	clarity,	more	vision,	more	creativity—yet	you	are	aloof,	just	a	watcher	on
the	hills,	simply	seeing	all	that	is	happening	around	you.
You	are	not	the	doer,	you	are	the	watcher.
That’s	the	whole	secret	of	meditation,	that	you	become	the	watcher.
Doing	continues	on	its	own	level,	there	is	no	problem:	chopping	wood,
drawing	water	from	the	well.	You	can	do	small	and	big	things;	only	one	thing	is
not	allowed	and	that	is,	your	centering	should	not	be	lost.
That	awareness,	that	watchfulness,	should	remain	absolutely	unclouded,
undisturbed.
In	Judaism	there	is	a	rebellious	school	of	mystery	called	Hassidism.	Its
founder,	Baal	Shem,	was	a	rare	being.	In	the	middle	of	the	night	he	was	coming
from	the	river—that	was	his	routine,	because	at	the	river	in	the	night	it	was
absolutely	calm	and	quiet.	And	he	used	to	simply	sit	there,	doing	nothing—just
watching	his	own	self,	watching	the	watcher.	This	night	when	he	was	coming
back,	he	passed	a	rich	man’s	house	and	the	watchman	was	standing	by	the	door.
And	the	watchman	was	puzzled	because	every	night	at	exactly	this	time,	this
man	would	come	back.	He	came	out	and	he	said,	“Forgive	me	for	interrupting
but	I	cannot	contain	my	curiosity	any	more.	You	are	haunting	me	day	and	night,
every	day.	What	is	your	business?	Why	do	you	go	to	the	river?	Many	times	I
have	followed	you,	and	there	is	nothing—you	simply	sit	there	for	hours,	and	in
the	middle	of	the	night	you	come	back.”
Baal	Shem	said,	“I	know	that	you	have	followed	me	many	times,	because
the	night	is	so	silent	I	can	hear	your	footsteps.	And	I	know	every	day	you	are
hiding	behind	the	gate.	But	it	is	not	only	that	you	are	curious	about	me,	I	am	also
curious	about	you.	What	is	your	business?”
He	said,	“My	business?	I	am	a	simple	watchman.”
Baal	Shem	said,	“My	God,	you	have	given	me	the	key	word.	This	is	my
business	too!”
The	watchman	said,	“But	I	don’t	understand.	If	you	are	a	watchman	you
should	be	watching	some	house,	some	palace.	What	are	you	watching	there,
sitting	in	the	sand?”
Baal	Shem	said,	“There	is	a	little	difference:	you	are	watching	for	somebody
outside	who	may	enter	the	palace;	I	simply	watch	this	watcher.	Who	is	this
watcher?	This	is	my	whole	life’s	effort;	I	watch	myself.”
The	watchman	said,	“But	this	is	a	strange	business.	Who	is	going	to	pay
you?”
He	said,	“It	is	such	bliss,	such	a	joy,	such	immense	benediction,	it	pays	itself
profoundly.	Just	a	single	moment,	and	all	the	treasures	are	nothing	in	comparison
to	it.”
The	watchman	said,	“This	is	strange.	I	have	been	watching	my	whole	life.	I
never	came	across	such	a	beautiful	experience.	Tomorrow	night	I	am	coming
with	you.	Just	teach	me.	Because	I	know	how	to	watch—it	seems	only	a
different	direction	is	needed;	you	are	watching	in	some	different	direction.”
There	is	only	one	step,	and	that	step	is	of	direction,	of	dimension.	Either	we
can	be	focused	outside	or	we	can	close	our	eyes	to	the	outside	and	let	our	whole
consciousness	be	centered	inwards—and	you	will	know,	because	you	are	a
knower,	you	are	awareness.	You	have	never	lost	it.	You	simply	got	your
awareness	entangled	in	a	thousand	and	one	things.	Withdraw	your	awareness
from	everywhere	and	just	let	it	rest	within	yourself,	and	you	have	arrived	home.
§
The	essential	core,	the	spirit	of	meditation	is	to	learn	how	to	witness.
A	crow	crowing…you	are	listening.	These	are	two—object	and	subject.	But
can’t	you	see	a	witness	who	is	seeing	both?—the	crow,	the	listener,	and	still
there	is	someone	who	is	watching	both.	It	is	such	a	simple	phenomenon.
You	are	seeing	a	tree:	you	are	there,	the	tree	is	there,	but	can’t	you	find	one
thing	more?—that	you	are	seeing	the	tree,	that	there	is	a	witness	in	you	which	is
seeing	you	seeing	the	tree.	§
Watching	is	meditation.	What	you	watch	is	irrelevant.	You	can	watch	the
trees,	you	can	watch	the	river,	you	can	watch	the	clouds,	you	can	watch	children
playing	around.	Watching	is	meditation.	What	you	watch	is	not	the	point;	the
object	is	not	the	point.
The	quality	of	observation,	the	quality	of	being	aware	and	alert—that’s	what
meditation	is.
Remember	one	thing:	meditation	means	awareness.	Whatsoever	you	do	with
awareness	is	meditation.	Action	is	not	the	question,	but	the	quality	that	you	bring
to	your	action.	Walking	can	be	a	meditation	if	you	walk	alert.	Sitting	can	be	a
meditation	if	you	sit	alert.	Listening	to	the	birds	can	be	a	meditation	if	you	listen
with	awareness.	Just	listening	to	the	inner	noise	of	your	mind	can	be	a
meditation	if	you	remain	alert	and	watchful.
The	whole	point	is,	one	should	not	move	in	sleep.	Then	whatsoever	you	do
is	meditation.	§
THE	FIRST	STEP	IN	AWARENESS	is	to	be	very	watchful	of	your	body.
Slowly,	slowly	one	becomes	alert	about	each	gesture,	each	movement.	And	as
you	become	aware,	a	miracle	starts	happening:	many	things	that	you	used	to	do
before	simply	disappear;	your	body	becomes	more	relaxed,	your	body	becomes
more	attuned.	A	deep	peace	starts	prevailing	even	in	your	body,	a	subtle	music
pulsates	in	your	body.
Then	start	becoming	aware	of	your	thoughts;	the	same	has	to	be	done	with
thoughts.	They	are	more	subtle	than	the	body	and,	of	course,	more	dangerous
too.	And	when	you	become	aware	of	your	thoughts,	you	will	be	surprised	what
goes	on	inside	you.	If	you	write	down	whatsoever	is	going	on	at	any	moment,
you	are	in	for	a	great	surprise.	You	will	not	believe	that	this	is	what	is	going	on
inside	you.
And	after	ten	minutes	read	it—you	will	see	a	mad	mind	inside!	Because	we
are	not	aware,	this	whole	madness	goes	on	running	like	an	undercurrent.	It
affects	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	it	affects	whatsoever	you	are	not	doing;	it
affects	everything.	And	the	sum	total	of	it	is	going	to	be	your	life!	So	this
madman	has	to	be	changed.	And	the	miracle	of	awareness	is	that	you	need	not
do	anything	except	just	become	aware.
The	very	phenomenon	of	watching	it	changes	it.	Slowly,	slowly	the	madman
disappears;	slowly,	slowly	the	thoughts	start	falling	into	a	certain	pattern;	their
chaos	is	no	more,	they	become	more	of	a	cosmos.	And	then	again,	a	deeper
peace	prevails.	And	when	your	body	and	your	mind	are	at	peace	you	will	see
that	they	are	attuned	to	each	other	too,	there	is	a	bridge.	Now	they	are	not
running	in	different	directions,	they	are	not	riding	different	horses.	For	the	first
time	there	is	accord,	and	that	accord	helps	immensely	to	work	on	the	third	step
—that	is,	becoming	aware	of	your	feelings,	emotions,	moods.
That	is	the	subtlest	layer	and	the	most	difficult,	but	if	you	can	be	aware	of
the	thoughts	then	it	is	just	one	step	more.	A	little	more	intense	awareness	is
needed	and	you	start	reflecting	your	moods,	your	emotions,	your	feelings.	Once
you	are	aware	of	all	these	three	they	all	become	joined	into	one	phenomenon.
And	when	all	these	three	are	one—functioning	together	perfectly,	humming
together,	you	can	feel	the	music	of	all	the	three;	they	have	become	an	orchestra
—then	the	fourth	happens,	which	you	cannot	do.	It	happens	on	its	own	accord.	It
is	a	gift	from	the	whole,	it	is	a	reward	for	those	who	have	done	these	three.
And	the	fourth	is	the	ultimate	awareness	that	makes	one	awakened.	One
becomes	aware	of	one’s	awareness—that	is	the	fourth.	That	makes	a	buddha,	the
awakened.	And	only	in	that	awakening	does	one	come	to	know	what	bliss	is.
The	body	knows	pleasure,	the	mind	knows	happiness,	the	heart	knows	joy,	the
fourth	knows	bliss.	Bliss	is	the	goal	of	sannyas,	of	being	a	seeker,	and	awareness
is	the	path	towards	it.	§
The	important	thing	is	that	you	are	watchful,	that	you	have	not	forgotten	to
watch,	that	you	are	watching…watching…watching.	And	slowly,	slowly,	as	the
watcher	becomes	more	and	more	solid,	stable,	unwavering,	a	transformation
happens.	The	things	that	you	were	watching	disappear.
For	the	first	time,	the	watcher	itself	becomes	the	watched,	the	observer	itself
becomes	the	observed.
You	have	come	home.
The	flowering	of	meditation
Meditation	is	not	an	Indian	method;	it	is	not	simply	a	technique.	You
cannot	learn	it.	It	is	a	growth:	a	growth	of	your	total	living,	out	of	your
total	living.	Meditation	is	not	something	that	can	be	added	to	you	as	you
are.	It	cannot	be	added	to	you;	it	can	only	come	to	you	through	a	basic
transformation,	a	mutation.	It	is	a	flowering,	a	growth.	Growth	is	always
from	the	total;	it	is	not	an	addition.	Just	like	love,	it	cannot	be	added	to
you.	It	grows	out	of	you,	out	of	your	totality.	You	must	grow	towards
meditation.
The	great	silence
Silence	usually	is	understood	to	be	something	negative,	something	empty,	an
absence	of	sound,	of	noises.	This	misunderstanding	is	prevalent	because	very
few	people	have	ever	experienced	silence.
All	that	they	have	experienced	in	the	name	of	silence	is	noiselessness.	But
silence	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	It	is	utterly	positive.	It	is	existential,	it
is	not	empty.	It	is	overflowing	with	a	music	that	you	have	never	heard	before,
with	a	fragrance	that	is	unfamiliar	to	you,	with	a	light	that	can	only	be	seen	by
the	inner	eyes.
It	is	not	something	fictitious;	it	is	a	reality,	and	a	reality	which	is	already
present	in	everyone—just	we	never	look	in.
Your	inner	world	has	its	own	taste,	has	its	own	fragrance,	has	its	own	light.
And	it	is	utterly	silent,	immensely	silent,	eternally	silent.	There	has	never	been
any	noise,	and	there	will	never	be	any	noise.	No	word	can	reach	there,	but	you
can	reach.
Your	very	center	of	being	is	the	center	of	a	cyclone.	Whatever	happens
around	it	does	not	affect	it.	It	is	eternal	silence:	days	come	and	go,	years	come
and	go,	ages	come	and	pass.	Lives	come	and	go,	but	the	eternal	silence	of	your
being	remains	exactly	the	same—the	same	soundless	music,	the	same	fragrance
of	godliness,	the	same	transcendence	from	all	that	is	mortal,	from	all	that	is
momentary.
It	is	not	your	silence.
You	are	it.
It	is	not	something	in	your	possession;	you	are	possessed	by	it,	and	that’s	the
greatness	of	it.	Even	you	are	not	there,	because	even	your	presence	will	be	a
disturbance.
The	silence	is	so	profound	that	there	is	nobody,	not	even	you.	And	this
silence	brings	truth,	and	love,	and	thousands	of	other	blessings	to	you.
Growing	in	sensitivity
Meditation	will	bring	you	sensitivity,	a	great	sense	of	belonging	to	the	world.
It	is	our	world—the	stars	are	ours,	and	we	are	not	foreigners	here.	We	belong
intrinsically	to	existence.	We	are	part	of	it,	we	are	the	heart	of	it.
You	become	so	sensitive	that	even	the	smallest	blade	of	grass	takes	on	an
immense	importance	for	you.	Your	sensitivity	makes	it	clear	to	you	that	this
small	blade	of	grass	is	as	important	to	existence	as	the	biggest	star;	without	this
blade	of	grass,	existence	would	be	less	than	it	is.	This	small	blade	of	grass	is
unique,	it	is	irreplaceable,	it	has	its	own	individuality.
And	this	sensitivity	will	create	new	friendships	for	you—friendships	with
trees,	with	birds,	with	animals,	with	mountains,	with	rivers,	with	oceans,	with
stars.	Life	becomes	richer	as	love	grows,	as	friendliness	grows.
Love,	the	fragrance	of	meditation
If	you	meditate,	sooner	or	later	you	will	come	upon	love.	If	you	meditate
deeply,	sooner	or	later	you	will	start	feeling	a	tremendous	love	arising	in	you	that
you	have	never	known	before—a	new	quality	to	your	being,	a	new	door
opening.	You	have	become	a	new	flame	and	now	you	want	to	share.
If	you	love	deeply,	by	and	by	you	will	become	aware	that	your	love	is
becoming	more	and	more	meditative.	A	subtle	quality	of	silence	is	entering	in
you.	Thoughts	are	disappearing,	gaps	appearing…silences!	You	are	touching
your	own	depth.
Love	makes	you	meditative	if	it	is	on	the	right	lines.
Meditation	makes	you	loving	if	it	is	on	the	right	lines.	§
YOU	WANT	A	LOVE	THAT	IS	BORN	OUT	OF	MEDITATION,	not	born
out	of	the	mind.	That	is	the	love	I	continually	talk	about.
Millions	of	couples	around	the	world	are	living	as	if	love	is	there.	They	are
living	in	a	world	of	‘as	if.’	Of	course,	how	can	they	be	joyous?	They	are	drained
of	all	energy.	They	are	trying	to	get	something	out	of	a	false	love;	it	cannot
deliver	the	goods.	Hence	the	frustration,	hence	the	continuous	boredom,	hence
the	continuous	nagging,	fighting	between	the	lovers.	They	are	both	trying	to	do
something	which	is	impossible:	they	are	trying	to	make	their	love	affair
something	of	the	eternal,	which	it	cannot	be.	It	has	arisen	out	of	the	mind	and
mind	cannot	give	you	any	glimpse	of	the	eternal.
First	go	into	meditation,	because	love	will	come	out	of	meditation—it	is	the
fragrance	of	meditation.	Meditation	is	the	flower,	the	one-thousand-petaled	lotus.
Let	it	open.	Let	it	help	you	to	move	in	the	dimension	of	the	vertical,	no-mind,
no-time,	and	then	suddenly	you	will	see	the	fragrance	is	there.	Then	it	is	eternal,
then	it	is	unconditional.	Then	it	is	not	even	directed	to	anybody	in	particular,	it
cannot	be	directed	to	anybody	in	particular.	It	is	not	a	relationship,	it	is	more	a
quality	that	surrounds	you.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	other.	You	are	loving,
you	are	love;	then	it	is	eternal.	It	is	your	fragrance.	It	has	been	around	a	Buddha,
around	a	Zarathustra,	around	a	Jesus.	It	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	love,	it	is
qualitatively	different.
Compassion
Buddha	has	defined	compassion	as	‘love	plus	meditation.’	When	your	love	is
not	just	a	desire	for	the	other,	when	your	love	is	not	only	a	need,	when	your	love
is	a	sharing,	when	your	love	is	not	that	of	a	beggar	but	that	of	an	emperor,	when
your	love	is	not	asking	for	something	in	return	but	is	ready	only	to	give—to	give
for	the	sheer	joy	of	giving—then	add	meditation	to	it	and	the	pure	fragrance	is
released,	the	imprisoned	splendor	is	released.	That	is	compassion;	compassion	is
the	highest	phenomenon.
Sex	is	animal,	love	is	human,	compassion	is	divine.	Sex	is	physical,	love	is
psychological,	compassion	is	spiritual.
Abiding	joy	for	no	reason	at	all
For	no	reason	at	all	you	suddenly	feel	yourself	joyous.	In	ordinary	life,	if
there	is	some	reason,	you	are	joyful.	You	have	met	a	beautiful	woman	and	you
are	joyous,	or	you	have	got	the	money	that	you	always	wanted	and	you	are
joyous,	or	you	have	purchased	the	house	with	a	beautiful	garden	and	you	are
joyous,	but	these	joys	cannot	last	long.	They	are	momentary,	they	cannot	remain
continuous	and	uninterrupted.
If	your	joy	is	caused	by	something	it	will	disappear,	it	will	be	momentary.	It
will	soon	leave	you	in	deep	sadness;	all	joys	leave	you	in	deep	sadness.	But	there
is	a	different	kind	of	joy	that	is	a	confirmatory	sign:	you	are	suddenly	joyous	for
no	reason	at	all.	You	cannot	pinpoint	why.	If	somebody	asks,	“Why	are	you	so
joyous?”	you	cannot	answer.
I	cannot	answer	why	I	am	joyous.	There	is	no	reason.	It’s	simply	so.	Now
this	joy	cannot	be	disturbed.	Now	whatsoever	happens,	it	will	continue.	It	is
there,	day	in,	day	out.	You	may	be	young,	you	may	be	old,	you	may	be	alive,
you	may	be	dying—it	is	always	there.	When	you	have	found	some	joy	that
remains—circumstances	change	but	it	abides—then	you	are	certainly	coming
closer	to	buddhahood.
Intelligence:	the	ability	to	respond
Intelligence	simply	means	ability	to	respond,	because	life	is	a	flux.	You	have
to	be	aware	and	to	see	what	is	demanded	of	you,	what	is	the	challenge	of	the
situation.	The	intelligent	person	behaves	according	to	the	situation	and	the	stupid
behaves	according	to	the	ready-made	answers.	Whether	they	come	from	Buddha,
Christ	or	Krishna,	it	does	not	matter.	He	always	carries	scriptures	around
himself,	he	is	afraid	to	depend	on	himself.	The	intelligent	person	depends	on	his
own	insight;	he	trusts	his	own	being.	He	loves	and	respects	himself.	The
unintelligent	person	respects	others.
Intelligence	can	be	rediscovered.	The	only	method	to	rediscover	it	is
meditation.	Meditation	only	does	one	thing:	it	destroys	all	the	barriers	that	the
society	has	created	to	prevent	you	from	being	intelligent.	It	simply	removes	the
blocks.	Its	function	is	negative:	it	removes	the	rocks	that	are	preventing	your
waters	from	flowing,	your	springs	from	becoming	alive.
Everybody	is	carrying	the	great	potential,	but	society	has	put	great	rocks	to
prevent	it.	It	has	created	China	Walls	around	you;	it	has	imprisoned	you.
To	come	out	of	all	prisons	is	intelligence—and	never	to	get	into	another
again.	Intelligence	can	be	discovered	through	meditation	because	all	those
prisons	exist	in	your	mind;	they	cannot	reach	your	being,	fortunately.	They
cannot	pollute	your	being,	they	can	only	pollute	your	mind—they	can	only	cover
your	mind.	If	you	can	get	out	of	the	mind	you	will	get	out	of	Christianity,
Hinduism,	Jainism,	Buddhism,	and	all	kinds	of	rubbish	will	be	just	finished.	You
can	come	to	a	full	stop.
And	when	you	are	out	of	the	mind,	watching	it,	being	aware	of	it,	just	being
a	witness,	you	are	intelligent.	Your	intelligence	is	discovered.	You	have	undone
what	the	society	has	done	to	you.	You	have	destroyed	the	mischief;	you	have
destroyed	the	conspiracy	of	the	priests	and	the	politicians.	You	have	come	out	of
it,	you	are	a	free	man.	In	fact	you	are	for	the	first	time	a	real	man,	an	authentic
man.	Now	the	whole	sky	is	yours.
Intelligence	brings	freedom,	intelligence	brings	spontaneity.
Aloneness:	your	self-nature
Aloneness	is	a	flower,	a	lotus	blooming	in	your	heart.	Aloneness	is
positive,	aloneness	is	health.	It	is	the	joy	of	being	yourself.	It	is	the	joy	of
having	your	own	space.
Meditation	means:	bliss	in	being	alone….	One	is	really	alive	when	one	has
become	capable	of	it,	when	there	is	no	dependence	any	more	on	anybody,	on	any
situation,	on	any	condition.	And	because	it	is	one’s	own	it	can	remain	morning,
evening,	day,	night,	in	youth	or	in	old	age,	in	health,	in	illness.	In	life,	in	death
too,	it	can	remain	because	it	is	not	something	that	is	happening	to	you	from	the
outside.	It	is	something	welling	up	in	you.	It	is	your	very	nature…it	is	self-
nature.	§
AN	INSIDE	JOURNEY	is	a	journey	towards	absolute	aloneness;	you	cannot
take	anybody	there	with	you.	You	cannot	share	your	center	with	anybody,	not
even	with	your	beloved.	It	is	not	in	the	nature	of	things;	nothing	can	be	done
about	it.	The	moment	you	go	in,	all	connections	with	the	outside	world	are
broken;	all	bridges	are	broken.	In	fact,	the	whole	world	disappears.
That’s	why	the	mystics	have	called	the	world	illusory,	maya,	not	that	it	does
not	exist,	but	for	the	meditator,	one	who	goes	in,	it	is	almost	as	if	the	world	does
not	exist.	The	silence	is	so	profound;	no	noise	penetrates	it.	The	aloneness	is	so
deep	that	one	needs	guts.	But	out	of	that	aloneness	explodes	bliss.	Out	of	that
aloneness—the	experience	of	God.	There	is	no	other	way;	there	has	never	been
any	and	there	is	never	going	to	be.	§
CELEBRATE	ALONENESS,	celebrate	your	pure	space,	and	a	great	song
will	arise	in	your	heart.	And	it	will	be	a	song	of	awareness,	it	will	be	a	song	of
meditation.	It	will	be	a	song	of	a	lone	bird	calling	in	the	distance—not	calling	to
somebody	in	particular,	but	just	calling	because	the	heart	is	full	and	wants	to
call,	because	the	cloud	is	full	and	wants	to	rain,	because	the	flower	is	full	and	the
petals	open	and	the	fragrance	is	released…unaddressed.	Let	your	aloneness
become	a	dance.
Your	real	self
Meditation	is	nothing	but	a	device	to	make	you	aware	of	your	real	self—
which	is	not	created	by	you,	which	need	not	be	created	by	you,	which	you
already	are.	You	are	born	with	it.	You	are	it!	It	needs	to	be	discovered.	If	this	is
not	possible,	or	if	the	society	does	not	allow	it	to	happen…and	no	society	allows
it	to	happen,	because	the	real	self	is	dangerous:	dangerous	for	the	established
church,	dangerous	for	the	state,	dangerous	for	the	crowd,	dangerous	for	the
tradition,	because	once	a	man	knows	his	real	self,	he	becomes	an	individual.
He	no	longer	belongs	to	the	mob	psychology;	he	will	not	be	superstitious,
and	he	cannot	be	exploited,	and	he	cannot	be	led	like	cattle,	he	cannot	be	ordered
and	commanded.	He	will	live	according	to	his	light;	he	will	live	from	his	own
inwardness.	His	life	will	have	tremendous	beauty,	integrity.	But	that	is	the	fear	of
the	society.
Integrated	persons	become	individuals,	and	the	society	wants	you	to	be	non-
individuals.	Instead	of	individuality,	the	society	teaches	you	to	be	a	personality.
The	word	‘personality’	has	to	be	understood.	It	comes	from	the	root,	persona
—persona	means	a	mask.	The	society	gives	you	a	false	idea	of	who	you	are;	it
gives	you	just	a	toy,	and	you	go	on	clinging	to	the	toy	your	whole	life.	§
As	I	see	it,	almost	everybody	is	in	the	wrong	place.	The	person	who	would
have	been	a	tremendously	happy	doctor	is	a	painter	and	the	person	who	would
have	been	a	tremendously	happy	painter	is	a	doctor.	Nobody	seems	to	be	in	his
right	place;	that’s	why	this	whole	society	is	in	such	a	mess.	The	person	is
directed	by	others;	he	is	not	directed	by	his	own	intuition.
Meditation	helps	you	to	grow	your	own	intuitive	faculty.	It	becomes	very
clear	what	is	going	to	fulfill	you,	what	is	going	to	help	you	flower.	And
whatsoever	it	is,	it	is	going	to	be	different	for	each	individual—that	is	the
meaning	of	the	word	‘individual’:	everybody	is	unique.	And	to	seek	and	search
for	your	uniqueness	is	a	great	thrill,	a	great	adventure.
				Part	2:	THE	SCIENCE	OF	MEDITATION
Methods	and	Meditations
Techniques	are	helpful	because	they	are	scientific.	You	are	saved	from
unnecessary	wandering,	unnecessary	groping;	if	you	don’t	know	any
techniques,	you	will	take	a	long	time.
Techniques	are	helpful
With	a	master,	with	scientific	techniques,	you	can	save	much	time,
opportunity	and	energy.	And	sometimes	within	seconds	you	can	grow	so	much
that	even	within	lives	you	would	not	have	been	able	to	grow	that	much.	If	a	right
technique	is	used,	growth	explodes.	And	these	techniques	have	been	used	in
thousands	of	years	of	experiments.	They	were	not	devised	by	one	man;	they
were	devised	by	many,	many	seekers,	and	only	the	essence	is	given	here.	§
You	will	reach	the	goal,	because	the	life	energy	within	you	will	move	unless
it	comes	to	the	point	where	no	movement	is	possible;	it	will	go	on	moving	to	the
highest	peak.	And	that	is	the	reason	why	one	goes	on	being	born	again	and
again.	Left	to	yourself	you	will	reach,	but	you	will	have	to	travel	very,	very	long,
and	the	journey	will	be	very	tedious	and	boring.	§
All	techniques	can	be	helpful	but	they	are	not	exactly	meditation,	they	are
just	a	groping	in	the	dark.	Suddenly	one	day,	doing	something,	you	will	become
a	witness.	Doing	a	meditation	like	Dynamic,	or	Kundalini	or	Whirling,	suddenly
one	day	the	meditation	will	go	on	but	you	will	not	be	identified.	You	will	sit
silently	behind,	you	will	watch	it—that	day	meditation	has	happened;	that	day
the	technique	is	no	longer	a	hindrance,	no	longer	a	help.	You	can	enjoy	it	if	you
like,	like	an	exercise;	it	gives	a	certain	vitality,	but	there	is	no	need	now—the
real	meditation	has	happened.
Meditation	is	witnessing.	To	meditate	means	to	become	a	witness.
Meditation	is	not	a	technique	at	all!	This	will	be	very	confusing	to	you	because	I
go	on	giving	you	techniques.	In	the	ultimate	sense	meditation	is	not	a	technique;
meditation	is	an	understanding,	awareness.	But	you	need	techniques	because	that
final	understanding	is	very	far	away	from	you;	hidden	deep	in	you	but	still	very
far	away	from	you.	Right	this	moment	you	can	attain	it.	But	you	will	not	attain
it,	because	your	mind	goes	on.	This	very	moment	it	is	possible,	and	yet
impossible.	Techniques	will	bridge	the	gap;	they	are	just	to	bridge	the	gap.
So	in	the	beginning	techniques	are	meditations;	in	the	end	you	will	laugh—
techniques	are	not	meditation.	Meditation	is	a	totally	different	quality	of	being,	it
has	nothing	to	do	with	anything.	But	it	will	happen	only	in	the	end;	don’t	think	it
has	happened	in	the	beginning,	otherwise	the	gap	will	not	be	bridged.
Begin	with	effort
Meditation	techniques	are	doings,	because	you	are	advised	to	do	something
—even	to	meditate	is	to	do	something;	even	to	sit	silently	is	to	do	something,
even	to	not	do	anything	is	a	sort	of	doing.	So	in	a	superficial	way,	all	meditation
techniques	are	doings.	But	in	a	deeper	way	they	are	not,	because	if	you	succeed
in	them,	the	doing	disappears.
Only	in	the	beginning	it	appears	like	an	effort.	If	you	succeed	in	it,	the	effort
disappears	and	the	whole	thing	becomes	spontaneous	and	effortless.	If	you
succeed	in	it,	it	is	not	a	doing.	Then	no	effort	on	your	part	is	needed:	it	becomes
just	like	breathing,	it	is	there.	But	in	the	beginning	there	is	bound	to	be	effort,
because	the	mind	cannot	do	anything	which	is	not	an	effort.	If	you	tell	it	to	be
effortless,	the	whole	thing	seems	absurd.
In	Zen,	where	much	emphasis	is	put	on	effortlessness,	the	masters	say	to	the
disciples,	“Just	sit.	Don’t	do	anything.”	And	the	disciple	tries.	Of	course—what
can	you	do	other	than	trying?
In	the	beginning,	effort	will	be	there,	doing	will	be	there—but	only	in	the
beginning,	as	a	necessary	evil.	You	have	to	remember	constantly	that	you	have
to	go	beyond	it.	A	moment	must	come	when	you	are	not	doing	anything	about
meditation;	just	being	there	and	it	happens.	Just	sitting	or	standing	and	it
happens.	Not	doing	anything,	just	being	aware,	it	happens.
All	these	techniques	are	just	to	help	you	to	come	to	an	effortless	moment.
The	inner	transformation,	the	inner	realization,	cannot	happen	through	effort,
because	effort	is	a	sort	of	tension.	With	effort	you	cannot	be	relaxed	totally;	the
effort	will	become	a	barrier.	With	this	background	in	mind,	if	you	make	effort,
by	and	by	you	will	become	capable	of	leaving	it	also.
These	methods	are	simple
Each	of	these	methods	which	we	will	be	discussing	has	been	told	by
someone	who	has	achieved.	Remember	this.	They	will	look	too	simple,	and	they
are.	To	our	minds,	things	which	are	so	simple	cannot	be	appealing.	Because	if
techniques	are	so	simple	and	the	abode	is	so	near,	if	you	are	already	in	it,	and	the
home	is	so	near,	you	will	look	ridiculous	to	yourself—then	why	are	you	missing
it?	Rather	than	feel	the	ridiculousness	of	your	own	ego,	you	will	think	that	such
simple	methods	cannot	help.
That	is	a	deception.	Your	mind	will	tell	you	that	these	simple	methods
cannot	be	of	any	help—that	they	are	so	simple,	they	cannot	achieve	anything.
“To	achieve	divine	existence,	to	achieve	the	absolute	and	the	ultimate,	how	can
such	simple	methods	be	used?	How	can	they	be	of	any	help?”	Your	ego	will	say
that	they	cannot	be	of	any	help.
Remember	one	thing—ego	is	always	interested	in	something	which	is
difficult,	because	when	something	is	difficult,	there	is	a	challenge.	If	you	can
overcome	the	difficulty,	your	ego	will	feel	fulfilled.	The	ego	is	never	attracted
toward	anything	which	is	simple—never!	If	you	want	to	give	your	ego	a
challenge,	then	you	have	to	have	something	difficult	devised.	If	something	is
simple,	there	is	no	appeal,	because	even	if	you	can	conquer	it	there	will	be	no
fulfillment	of	the	ego.	In	the	first	place,	there	was	nothing	to	be	conquered:	the
thing	was	so	simple.	Ego	asks	for	difficulties—some	hurdles	to	be	crossed,	some
peaks	to	be	conquered.	And	the	more	difficult	the	peak,	the	more	at	ease	your
ego	will	feel.
Because	these	techniques	are	so	simple,	they	will	not	have	any	appeal	to
your	mind.	Remember,	that	which	appeals	to	the	ego	cannot	help	your	spiritual
growth.
These	techniques	are	so	simple	that	you	can	achieve	all	that	is	possible	to
human	consciousness	to	achieve,	at	any	moment	that	you	decide	to	achieve	it.
First	understand	the	technique
I	have	heard	a	story	about	an	old	doctor.	One	day	his	assistant	phoned	him
because	he	was	in	very	great	difficulty:	his	patient	was	choking	to	death;	a
billiard	ball	was	stuck	in	his	throat,	and	the	assistant	was	at	a	loss	for	what	to	do.
So	he	asked	the	old	doctor,	“What	am	I	supposed	to	do	now?”	The	old	doctor
said,	“Tickle	the	patient	with	a	feather.”
After	a	few	minutes	the	assistant	phoned	again,	very	happy	and	jubilant,	and
said,	“Your	treatment	proved	wonderful!	The	patient	started	laughing	and	he	spat
the	ball	out.	But	tell	me—from	where	have	you	learned	this	remarkable
technique?”
The	old	doctor	said,	“I	just	made	it	up.	This	has	always	been	my	motto:
when	you	don’t	know	what	to	do,	do	something.”
But	this	will	not	do	as	far	as	meditation	is	concerned.	If	you	don’t	know
what	to	do,	don’t	do	anything.	Mind	is	very	intricate,	complex,	delicate.	If	you
don’t	know	what	to	do,	it	is	better	not	to	do	anything,	because	whatsoever	you
do	without	knowing	is	going	to	create	more	complexities	than	it	can	solve.	It
may	even	prove	fatal,	it	may	even	prove	suicidal.
If	you	don’t	know	anything	about	the	mind…and	really,	you	don’t	know
anything	about	it.	Mind	is	just	a	word.	You	don’t	know	the	complexity	of	it.
Mind	is	the	most	complex	thing	in	existence;	there	is	nothing	comparable	to	it.
And	it	is	the	most	delicate;	you	can	destroy	it,	you	can	do	something	which	then
cannot	be	undone.	These	techniques	are	based	on	a	very	deep	knowledge,	on	a
very	deep	encounter	with	the	human	mind.	Each	technique	is	based	on	long
experimentation.
So	remember	this:	don’t	do	anything	on	your	own,	and	don’t	mix	two
techniques,	because	their	functioning	is	different,	their	ways	are	different,	their
bases	are	different.	They	lead	to	the	same	end,	but	as	means	they	are	totally
different.	Sometimes	they	may	even	be	diametrically	opposite.	So	don’t	mix	two
techniques.	Really,	don’t	mix	anything;	use	the	technique	as	it	is	given.
Don’t	change	it,	don’t	improve	it—because	you	cannot	improve	it,	and	any
change	you	bring	to	it	will	be	fatal.
And	before	you	start	doing	a	technique,	be	fully	alert	that	you	have
understood	it.	If	you	feel	confused	and	you	don’t	really	know	what	the	technique
is,	it	is	better	not	to	do	it,	because	each	technique	is	for	bringing	about	a
revolution	in	you.
First	try	to	understand	the	technique	absolutely	rightly.	When	you	have
understood	it,	then	try	it.	And	don’t	use	this	old	doctor’s	motto	that	when	you
don’t	know	what	to	do,	do	something.	No,	don’t	do	anything.	Non-doing	will	be
more	beneficial.
The	right	method	will	click
Really,	when	you	try	the	right	method	it	clicks	immediately.	So	I	will	go	on
talking	about	methods	here	every	day.	You	try	them.	Just	play	with	them:	go
home	and	try.	The	right	method,	whenever	you	happen	upon	it,	just	clicks.
Something	explodes	in	you,	and	you	know	that	“This	is	the	right	method	for
me.”	But	effort	is	needed,	and	you	may	be	surprised	that	suddenly	one	day	one
method	has	gripped	you.
I	have	found	that	while	you	are	playing,	your	mind	is	more	open.	While	you
are	serious	your	mind	is	not	so	open;	it	is	closed.	So	just	play.	Do	not	be	too
serious,	just	play.	And	these	methods	are	simple.	You	can	just	play	with	them.
Take	one	method:	play	with	it	for	at	least	three	days.	If	it	gives	you	a	certain
feeling	of	affinity,	if	it	gives	you	a	certain	feeling	of	well-being,	if	it	gives	you	a
certain	feeling	that	this	is	for	you,	then	be	serious	about	it.	Then	forget	the
others.	Do	not	play	with	other	methods;	stick	to	it—at	least	for	three	months.
Miracles	are	possible.	The	only	thing	is	that	the	technique	must	be	for	you.	If
the	technique	is	not	for	you,	then	nothing	happens.	Then	you	may	go	on	with	it
for	lives	together,	but	nothing	will	happen.	If	the	method	is	for	you,	then	even
three	minutes	are	enough.
When	to	drop	the	method
All	the	great	masters	say	this,	that	one	day	you	have	to	drop	the	method.
And	the	sooner	you	drop	it,	the	better.	The	moment	you	attain,	the	moment
awareness	is	released	in	you,	immediately	drop	the	method.
Buddha	used	to	tell	a	story	again	and	again.	Five	idiots	passed	through	a
village.	Seeing	them,	people	were	surprised,	because	they	were	carrying	a	boat
on	their	heads.	The	boat	was	really	big;	they	were	almost	dying	under	the	weight
of	it.	And	people	asked,	“What	are	you	doing?”
They	said,	“We	cannot	leave	this	boat.	This	is	the	boat	that	helped	us	to
come	from	the	other	shore	to	this	shore.	How	can	we	leave	it?	It	is	because	of	it
that	we	have	been	able	to	come	here.	Without	it	we	would	have	died	on	the	other
shore.	The	night	was	coming	close,	and	there	were	wild	animals	on	the	other
shore;	it	was	as	sure	as	anything	that	by	the	morning	we	would	have	been	dead.
We	will	never	leave	this	boat.	We	are	indebted	forever.	We	will	carry	it	on	our
heads	in	sheer	gratitude.”
Methods	are	dangerous	only	if	you	are	unaware;	otherwise	they	can	be	used
beautifully.	Do	you	think	a	boat	is	dangerous?	It	is	dangerous	if	you	are	thinking
to	carry	it	on	your	head	for	your	whole	life,	out	of	sheer	gratitude.	Otherwise	it	is
just	a	raft	to	be	used	and	discarded,	used	and	abandoned,	used	and	never	looked
back	at	again;	there	is	no	need,	no	point!
If	you	drop	the	remedy,	automatically	you	will	start	settling	in	your	being.
The	mind	clings;	it	never	allows	you	to	settle	in	your	being.	It	keeps	you
interested	in	something	that	you	are	not:	the	boats.
When	you	don’t	cling	to	anything,	there	is	nowhere	to	go;	all	boats	have
been	abandoned,	you	cannot	go	anywhere;	all	paths	have	been	dropped,	you
cannot	go	anywhere;	all	dreams	and	desires	have	disappeared,	there	is	no	way	to
move.	Relaxation	happens	of	its	own	accord.
Just	think	of	the	word	relax.	Be…settle…you	have	come	home.
One	moment	all	is	fragrance,	and	the	next	moment	you	are	searching	for	it
and	you	cannot	find	it,	where	it	has	gone.
Only	glimpses	will	happen	in	the	beginning.	Slowly,	slowly,	they	become
more	and	more	solid,	they	abide	more	and	more.	Slowly	slowly,	slowly	slowly,
very	slowly,	they	settle	forever.	Before	that,	you	cannot	be	allowed	to	take	it	for
granted;	that	will	be	a	mistake.
When	you	are	sitting	in	meditation,	a	session	of	meditation,	this	will	happen.
But	it	will	go.	So	what	are	you	supposed	to	do	between	sessions?
Between	sessions,	continue	to	use	the	method.	Drop	the	method	when	you
are	deep	in	meditation.	The	moment	comes,	as	awareness	is	getting	purer	and
purer,	when	suddenly	it	is	utterly	pure:	drop	the	method,	abandon	the	method,
forget	all	about	the	remedy,	just	settle	and	be.
But	this	will	happen	only	for	moments	in	the	beginning.	Sometimes	it
happens	here	listening	to	me.	Just	for	a	moment,	like	a	breeze,	you	are
transported	into	another	world,	the	world	of	no-mind.	Just	for	a	moment,	you
know	that	you	know,	but	only	for	a	moment.	And	again	the	darkness	gathers	and
the	mind	is	back	with	all	its	dreams,	with	all	its	desires	and	all	its	stupidities.
For	a	moment	the	clouds	had	separated	and	you	had	seen	the	sun.	Now	the
clouds	are	there	again;	it	is	all	dark	and	the	sun	has	disappeared.	Now	even	to
believe	that	the	sun	exists	will	be	difficult.	Now	to	believe	that	what	you	had
experienced	a	moment	before	was	true	will	be	difficult.	It	may	have	been	a
fantasy.	The	mind	may	say	it	might	have	been	just	imagination.
It	is	so	incredible,	it	looks	so	impossible	that	it	could	have	happened	to	you.
With	all	this	stupidity	in	the	mind,	with	all	these	clouds	and	darknesses,	it
happened	to	you:	you	saw	the	sun	for	a	moment.	It	doesn’t	look	probable,	you
must	have	imagined	it;	maybe	you	had	fallen	into	a	dream	and	seen	it.
Between	sessions	start	again,	be	in	the	boat,	use	the	boat	again.
Suggestions	for	beginners
Enough	space
When	you	are	trying	to	meditate,	put	the	phone	off	the	hook,	disengage
yourself.	Put	a	notice	on	the	door	that	for	one	hour	nobody	should	knock,	that
you	are	meditating.	And	when	you	move	into	the	meditation	room	take	your
shoes	off,	because	you	are	walking	on	sacred	ground.	Not	only	take	your	shoes
off,	but	everything	that	you	are	preoccupied	with.	Consciously,	leave	everything
with	the	shoes.	Go	inside	unoccupied.
One	can	take	one	hour	out	of	twenty-four	hours.	Give	twenty-three	hours	for
your	occupations,	desires,	thoughts,	ambitions,	projections.	Take	one	hour	out	of
all	this,	and	in	the	end	you	will	find	that	only	that	one	hour	has	been	the	real
hour	of	your	life;	those	twenty-three	hours	have	been	a	sheer	wastage.	Only	that
one	hour	has	been	saved	and	all	else	has	gone	down	the	drain.
The	right	place
You	should	find	a	place	which	enhances	meditation.	For	example,	sitting
under	a	tree	will	help.	Rather	than	going	and	sitting	in	front	of	a	movie	house	or
going	to	the	railway	station	and	sitting	on	the	platform,	go	to	nature,	to	the
mountains,	to	the	trees,	to	the	rivers	where	tao	is	still	flowing,	vibrating,
pulsating,	streaming	all	around.	Trees	are	in	constant	meditation.	Silent,
unconscious,	is	that	meditation.	I’m	not	saying	to	become	a	tree;	you	have	to
become	a	buddha!
But	Buddha	has	one	thing	in	common	with	the	tree:	he’s	as	green	as	a	tree,
as	full	of	juice	as	a	tree,	as	celebrating	as	a	tree—of	course	with	a	difference.	He
is	conscious,	the	tree	is	unconscious.	The	tree	is	unconsciously	in	tao;	a	buddha
is	consciously	in	tao.	And	that	is	a	great	difference,	the	difference	between	the
earth	and	the	sky.
But	if	you	sit	by	the	side	of	a	tree	surrounded	by	beautiful	birds	singing,	or	a
peacock	dancing,	or	just	a	river	flowing,	and	the	sound	of	running	water,	or	by
the	side	of	a	waterfall,	and	the	great	music	of	it….
Find	a	place	where	nature	has	not	yet	been	disturbed,	polluted.	If	you	cannot
find	such	a	place,	then	just	close	your	doors	and	sit	in	your	own	room.	If	it	is
possible,	have	a	special	room	for	meditation	in	your	house.	Just	a	small	corner
will	do,	but	especially	for	meditation.	Why	especially	for	meditation?	Because
every	kind	of	act	creates	its	own	vibration.	If	you	simply	meditate	in	that	place,
that	place	becomes	meditative.
Every	day	you	meditate	it	absorbs	your	vibration	when	you	are	in
meditation.	Next	day	when	you	come,	those	vibrations	start	falling	back	on	you.
They	help,	they	reciprocate,	they	respond.
When	a	person	has	really	become	a	meditator	he	can	meditate	sitting	before
a	movie	house,	he	can	meditate	on	the	railway	platform.
For	fifteen	years	I	was	continuously	traveling	around	the	country,
continuously	traveling—day	in,	day	out,	day	in,	day	out,	year	in,	year	out—
always	on	a	train,	on	a	plane,	in	a	car.	That	makes	no	difference.	Once	you	have
become	really	rooted	in	your	being,	nothing	makes	a	difference.	But	this	is	not
for	the	beginner.
When	the	tree	has	become	rooted,	let	winds	come	and	let	rains	come	and	let
clouds	thunder;	it	is	all	good.	It	gives	integrity	to	the	tree.	But	when	the	tree	is
small,	tender,	then	even	a	small	child	is	dangerous	enough,	or	just	a	cow	passing
by,	that	is	enough	to	destroy	it.
Be	comfortable
A	posture	should	be	such	that	you	can	forget	your	body.	What	is	comfort?
When	you	forget	your	body,	you	are	comfortable.	When	you	are	reminded
continuously	of	the	body,	you	are	uncomfortable.	So	whether	you	sit	in	a	chair	or
you	sit	on	the	ground,	that	is	not	the	point.	Be	comfortable,	because	if	you	are
not	comfortable	in	the	body	you	cannot	long	for	other	blessings	which	belong	to
deeper	layers:	the	first	layer	missed,	all	other	layers	closed.	If	you	really	want	to
be	happy,	blissful,	then	start	from	the	very	beginning	to	be	blissful.	Comfort	of
the	body	is	a	basic	need	for	anybody	who	is	trying	to	reach	inner	ecstasies.
Begin	with	catharsis
I	never	tell	people	to	begin	with	just	sitting.	Begin	from	where	beginning	is
easy.	Otherwise,	you	will	begin	to	feel	many	things	unnecessarily—things	that
are	not	there.
If	you	begin	with	sitting,	you	will	feel	much	disturbance	inside.	The	more
you	try	to	just	sit,	the	more	disturbance	will	be	felt.	You	will	become	aware	only
of	your	insane	mind	and	nothing	else.	It	will	create	depression;	you	will	feel
frustrated,	you	will	not	feel	blissful.	Rather,	you	will	begin	to	feel	that	you	are
insane.	And	sometimes	you	may	really	go	insane!
If	you	make	a	sincere	effort	to	‘just	sit’,	you	may	really	go	insane.	Only
because	people	do	not	really	try	sincerely	does	insanity	not	happen	more	often.
With	a	sitting	posture	you	begin	to	know	so	much	madness	inside	you	that	if	you
are	sincere	and	continue	it,	you	may	really	go	insane.	It	has	happened	before,	so
many	times.	So	I	never	suggest	anything	that	can	create	frustration,	depression,
sadness…anything	that	will	allow	you	to	be	too	aware	of	your	insanity.	You	may
not	be	ready	to	be	aware	of	all	the	insanity	that	is	inside	you.
You	must	be	allowed	to	get	to	know	certain	things	gradually.	Knowledge	is
not	always	good.	It	must	unfold	itself	slowly,	as	your	capacity	to	absorb	it
grows.
I	begin	with	your	insanity,	not	with	a	sitting	posture.	I	allow	your	insanity.	If
you	dance	madly,	the	opposite	happens	within	you.	With	a	mad	dance,	you	begin
to	be	aware	of	a	silent	point	within	you;	with	sitting	silently,	you	begin	to	be
aware	of	madness.	The	opposite	is	always	the	point	of	awareness.
With	you	dancing	madly,	chaotically,	with	crying,	with	chaotic	breathing,	I
allow	your	madness.	Then	you	begin	to	be	aware	of	a	subtle	point,	a	deep	point
inside	you	which	is	silent	and	still,	in	contrast	to	the	madness	on	the	periphery.
You	will	feel	very	blissful;	at	your	center	there	is	an	inner	silence.	But	if	you	are
just	sitting,	then	the	inner	one	is	the	mad	one.	You	are	silent	on	the	outside,	but
inside	you	are	mad.
If	you	begin	with	something	active—something	positive,	alive,	moving—it
will	be	better.	Then	you	will	begin	to	feel	an	inner	stillness	growing.	The	more	it
grows,	the	more	it	will	be	possible	for	you	to	use	a	sitting	posture	or	a	lying
posture—the	more	silent	meditation	will	be	possible.	But	by	then	things	will	be
different,	totally	different.
A	meditation	technique	that	begins	with	movement,	action,	helps	you	in
other	ways	also.	It	becomes	a	catharsis.	When	you	are	just	sitting,	you	are
frustrated:	your	mind	wants	to	move	and	you	are	just	sitting.	Every	muscle	turns,
every	nerve	turns.	You	are	trying	to	force	something	upon	yourself	that	is	not
natural	for	you.	Then	you	have	divided	yourself	into	the	one	who	is	forcing	and
the	one	who	is	being	forced.	And	really,	the	part	that	is	being	forced	and
suppressed	is	the	more	authentic	part;	it	is	a	more	major	part	of	your	mind	than
the	part	that	is	suppressing,	and	the	major	part	is	bound	to	win.
That	which	you	are	suppressing	is	really	to	be	thrown,	not	suppressed.	It	has
become	an	accumulation	within	you	because	you	have	been	constantly
suppressing	it.	The	whole	upbringing,	the	civilization,	the	education,	is
suppressive.	You	have	been	suppressing	much	that	could	have	been	thrown	very
easily	with	a	different	education,	with	a	more	conscious	education,	with	a	more
aware	parenthood.	With	a	better	awareness	of	the	inner	mechanism	of	the	mind,
the	culture	could	have	allowed	you	to	throw	many	things.
For	example,	when	a	child	is	angry	we	tell	him,	“Do	not	be	angry”,	He
begins	to	suppress	anger.	By	and	by,	what	was	a	momentary	happening	becomes
permanent.	Now	he	will	not	act	angry,	but	he	will	remain	angry.	We	have
accumulated	so	much	anger	from	what	were	just	momentary	things.	No	one	can
be	angry	continuously	unless	anger	has	been	suppressed.	Anger	is	a	momentary
thing	that	comes	and	goes;	if	it	is	expressed,	then	you	are	no	longer	angry.	So
with	me,	I	would	allow	the	child	to	be	angry	more	authentically.	Be	angry,	but	be
deep	in	it.	Do	not	suppress	it.
Of	course,	there	will	be	problems.	If	we	say,	“Be	angry,”	then	you	are	going
to	be	angry	at	someone.	But	a	child	can	be	molded.	He	can	be	given	a	pillow	and
told,	“Be	angry	with	the	pillow.	Be	violent	with	the	pillow.”	From	the	very
beginning,	a	child	can	be	brought	up	in	a	way	in	which	the	anger	is	just	deviated.
Some	object	can	be	given	to	him:	he	can	go	on	throwing	the	object	until	his
anger	goes.	Within	minutes,	within	seconds,	he	will	have	dissipated	his	anger
and	there	will	be	no	accumulation	of	it.
You	have	accumulated	anger,	sex,	violence,	greed—everything.	Now	this
accumulation	is	a	madness	within	you.	It	is	there,	inside	you.	If	you	begin	with
any	suppressive	meditation—for	example,	with	just	sitting—you	are	suppressing
all	of	this,	you	are	not	allowing	it	to	be	released.	So	I	begin	with	a	catharsis.
First,	let	the	suppressions	be	thrown	into	the	air.	And	when	you	can	throw	your
anger	into	the	air,	you	have	become	mature.
“If	I	cannot	be	loving	alone,	if	I	can	be	loving	only	with	someone	I	love,
then	I	am	not	really	mature	yet.	Then	I	am	depending	on	someone	even	to	be
loving.	Someone	must	be	there;	only	then	can	I	be	loving.	That	loving	can	be
only	a	very	superficial	thing.	It	is	not	my	nature.	If	I	am	alone	in	the	room	I	am
not	loving	at	all,	so	the	loving	quality	has	not	gone	deep;	it	has	not	become	a	part
of	my	being….”
You	become	more	and	more	mature	when	you	are	less	and	less	dependent.	If
you	can	be	angry	alone,	you	are	more	mature.	You	do	not	need	any	object	to	be
angry.	So	I	make	a	catharsis	in	the	beginning	a	must.	You	must	throw	everything
into	the	sky,	into	the	open	space,	without	being	conscious	of	any	object.
Be	angry	without	the	person	with	whom	you	would	like	to	be	angry.	Weep
without	finding	any	cause.	Laugh,	just	laugh,	without	anything	to	laugh	at.	Then
you	can	just	throw	the	whole	accumulated	thing.	You	can	just	throw	it!	And	once
you	know	the	way,	you	are	unburdened	of	the	whole	past.
Within	moments	you	can	be	unburdened	of	the	whole	life—of	lives	even.	If
you	are	ready	to	throw	everything,	if	you	can	allow	your	madness	to	come	out,
within	moments	there	is	a	deep	cleansing.	Now	you	are	cleansed:	fresh,
innocent.	You	are	a	child	again.	Now,	in	your	innocence,	sitting	meditation	can
be	done—just	sitting	or	just	lying	or	anything—because	now	there	is	no	mad	one
inside	to	disturb	the	sitting.
Cleansing	must	be	the	first	thing—a	catharsis.	Otherwise,	with	breathing
exercises,	with	just	sitting,	with	practicing	asanas,	yogic	postures—you	are	just
suppressing	something.	And	a	very	strange	thing	happens:	when	you	have
allowed	everything	to	be	thrown	out,	sitting	will	just	happen,	asanas	will	just
happen.	It	will	be	spontaneous.
Begin	with	catharsis	and	then	something	good	can	flower	within	you.	It	will
have	a	different	quality,	a	different	beauty—altogether	different.	It	will	be
authentic.
When	silence	comes	to	you,	when	it	descends	on	you,	it	is	not	a	false	thing.
You	have	not	been	cultivating	it.	It	comes	to	you;	it	happens	to	you.	You	begin	to
feel	it	growing	inside	you	just	like	a	mother	begins	to	feel	a	child	growing.	§
When	I	used	to	lead	meditation	camps	myself,	there	was	one	method	where
every	afternoon	all	the	participants	in	the	camp	used	to	sit	together	and
everybody	was	allowed	to	do	whatsoever	he	wanted—no	restriction,	just	he	was
not	to	interfere	in	anybody	else’s	work.	Whatever	he	wants	to	say,	he	can	say;	if
he	wants	to	cry,	he	can	cry;	if	he	wants	to	laugh,	he	can	laugh—and	one
thousand	people!	It	was	such	a	hilarious	scene!	People	you	could	never	have
imagined—serious	people—doing	such	stupid	things!	Somebody	was	making
faces,	putting	out	his	tongue	as	far	as	he	can,	and	you	know	that	this	man	is	a
police	commissioner!
One	man	I	cannot	forget,	because	he	used	to	sit	in	front	of	me	every	day.	He
was	a	very	rich	man	from	Ahmedabad,	and	because	his	whole	business	was	the
share	market,	he	was	just	continually	on	the	phone.	Whenever	this	one-hour
meditation	would	begin,	within	two	or	three	minutes	he	would	take	up	the
phone.	He	would	start	dialing	the	numbers:	“Hello!”	And	he	would	say—it
looked	from	his	face	as	if	he	was	getting	the	answer—“Purchase	it.”
This	would	continue	for	one	hour,	and	he	was	again	and	again	phoning	to
this	place,	to	that	place,	and	once	in	a	while	he	would	look	at	me	and	smile:
“What	nonsense	I’m	doing!”	But	I	had	to	keep	absolutely	serious.	I	never	smiled
at	him.	So	he	would	again	start	phoning:	“Nobody	is	taking	any	notice,
everybody	is	engaged	in	his	own	work.”
One	thousand	people	doing	so	many	things…and	these	things	were
continuously	going	on	in	their	minds.	This	was	a	great	chance	for	them	to	bring
them	out.	It	was	such	a	drama.
Jayantibhai	used	to	be	in	charge	of	the	camp	in	Mount	Abu,	and	one	of	his
closest	friends	took	off	all	his	clothes.	That	was	a	surprise!	Jayantibhai	was
standing	by	my	side,	and	he	could	not	believe	it.	That	man	was	a	very	serious
man,	very	rich;	what	was	he	doing,	taking	off	his	clothes	in	front	of	a	thousand
people?	And	then	he	started	pushing	the	car	in	which	I	had	come	to	the	place—it
was	Jayantibhai’s	car.	We	were	in	the	mountains,	and	just	ahead	there	was	a
thousand-foot	drop,	and	he	was	naked,	pushing	the	car.
Jayantibhai	asked	me,	“What	has	to	be	done?	He	is	going	to	destroy	the	car,
and	I	had	never	thought	that	this	man	was	against	my	car.	We	are	close	friends.”
So	I	told	him,	“You	push	it	from	the	other	side;	otherwise	he	is	going	to
destroy	it.”
So	Jayantibhai	was	stopping	the	car,	and	his	friend	was	jumping	around	and
shouting,	“Get	out	of	my	way!	I	have	always	hated	this	car”—because	he	did	not
have	an	imported	car,	and	this	was	an	imported	car,	which	Jayantibhai	was
keeping	for	me.	I	was	going	to	Mount	Abu	three	or	four	times	a	year,	so	he	was
keeping	that	car	just	for	me.	His	friend	must	have	been	feeling	jealous	inside	that
he	did	not	have	an	imported	car.	Then	a	few	people,	seeing	the	situation,	rushed
to	help.	When	the	man	saw	that	so	many	people	were	preventing	him,	just	out	of
protest	he	climbed	a	tree	in	front	of	me.	Naked,	he	sat	in	the	top	of	the	tree	and
he	started	shaking	the	branches.	There	was	every	danger	that	he	would	fall,	with
the	tree,	on	top	of	all	those	people.	Jayantibhai	asked	me,	“What	has	to	be	done
now?”
I	said,	“He	is	your	friend.	Let	him	be,	don’t	be	worried.	Just	move	the	people
to	this	side	and	that,	and	let	him	do	whatsoever	he	is	doing.	Now	at	least	he	is
not	destroying	the	car.	At	the	most	he	will	have	multiple	fractures.”
As	people	moved	away,	the	man	also	stopped.	Silently	he	sat	in	the	tree.
After	the	meditation	was	over,	he	was	still	sitting	in	the	tree,	and	Jayantibhai
said,	“Now	get	down.	The	meditation	is	over.”
As	if	he	woke	up	from	a	sleep,	he	looked	all	around	and	saw	that	he	was
naked!	He	jumped	out	of	the	tree,	rushed	to	his	clothes,	and	said,	“What
happened	to	me?”	In	the	night	he	came	to	see	me	and	he	said,	“This	was	a	very
dangerous	meditation!	I	could	have	killed	myself	or	somebody	else.	I	could	have
destroyed	the	car.	And	I	am	a	great	friend	of	Jayantibhai’s,	I	had	never	thought
…but	certainly	there	must	have	been	this	idea	in	me.	I	hated	the	idea	that	you
always	come	in	his	car,	and	I	hated	the	idea	that	he	has	an	imported	car,	but	it
was	not	at	all	conscious	in	me.	And	what	was	I	doing	in	the	tree?	I	must	have
been	carrying	so	much	violence	in	me,	I	wanted	to	kill	people.”
That	meditation	was	immensely	helpful.	It	relaxed	people	so	much	in	one
hour	that,	they	told	me,	“It	seems	a	heavy	load	has	disappeared	from	the	head.
We	were	not	aware	what	we	were	carrying	in	the	mind.”	But	to	become	aware	of
it,	there	was	no	other	way	except	an	unlimited	expression.
It	was	only	a	small	experiment;	I	told	people	to	continue	it:	“Soon	you	will
come	to	many	more	things,	and	one	day	you	will	come	to	a	point	where	all	is
exhausted.	Remember	only	not	to	interfere	with	anybody,	not	to	be	destructive.
Say	anything	you	want	to	say,	shout	abuse,	whatever	you	want—and	exhaust	all
that	you	have	been	collecting.”
But	this	is	a	strange	world.	The	government	of	Rajasthan	passed	a	resolution
in	their	assembly	that	I	could	not	have	meditation	camps	in	Mount	Abu,	because
they	had	heard	all	these	things	were	happening	there—“people	who	are	perfectly
all	right	become	almost	mad,	start	doing	all	kinds	of	things.”	Now,	the
politicians	in	the	assembly	don’t	have	any	idea	of	the	human	mind,	its
inhibitions	and	how	to	exhaust	them,	how	to	burn	them.	I	had	to	stop	that
meditation	because	otherwise	they	were	not	going	to	allow	me	to	have	camps	in
Mount	Abu.
Guidelines	to	Freedom
The	three	essentials
Meditation	has	a	few	essential	things	in	it,	whatever	the	method,	but	those
few	essentials	are	necessary	in	every	method.	The	first	is	a	relaxed	state:	no	fight
with	the	mind,	no	control	of	the	mind,	no	concentration.	Second,	just	watch	with
a	relaxed	awareness	whatever	is	going	on,	without	any	interference—just
watching	the	mind,	silently,	without	any	judgment,	evaluation.
These	are	the	three	things:	relaxation,	watching,	no	judgment,	and	slowly,
slowly	a	great	silence	descends	over	you.	All	movement	within	you	ceases.	You
are,	but	there	is	no	sense	of	‘I	am’—just	a	pure	space.	There	are	one	hundred	and
twelve	methods	of	meditation.	I	have	talked	on	all	those	methods.	They	differ	in
their	constitution,	but	the	fundamentals	remain	the	same:	relaxation,
watchfulness,	a	non-judgmental	attitude.
Be	playful
Millions	of	people	miss	meditation	because	meditation	has	taken	on	a	wrong
connotation.	It	looks	very	serious,	looks	gloomy,	has	something	of	the	church	in
it;	it	looks	as	if	it	is	only	for	people	who	are	dead,	or	almost	dead—those	who
are	gloomy,	serious,	have	long	faces,	who	have	lost	festivity,	fun,	playfulness,
celebration….
These	are	the	qualities	of	meditation:	a	really	meditative	person	is	playful;
life	is	fun	for	him,	life	is	a	leela,	a	play.	He	enjoys	it	tremendously.	He	is	not
serious.	He	is	relaxed.
Be	patient
Don’t	be	in	a	hurry.	So	often,	hurrying	causes	delay.	As	you	thirst,	wait
patiently—the	deeper	the	waiting,	the	sooner	it	comes.
You	have	sown	the	seed,	now	sit	in	the	shade	and	watch	what	happens.	The
seed	will	break,	it	will	blossom,	but	you	cannot	speed	the	process.	Doesn’t
everything	need	time?	Work	you	must,	but	leave	the	results	to	God.	Nothing	in
life	is	ever	wasted,	especially	steps	taken	towards	truth.
But	at	times	impatience	comes;	impatience	comes	with	thirst,	but	this	is	an
obstacle.	Keep	the	thirst	and	throw	the	impatience.
Do	not	confuse	impatience	with	thirst.	With	thirst	there	is	yearning	but	no
struggle;	with	impatience	there	is	struggle	but	no	yearning.	With	longing	there	is
waiting	but	no	demanding;	with	impatience	there	is	demanding	but	no	waiting.
With	thirst	there	are	silent	tears;	with	impatience	there	is	restless	struggle.
Truth	cannot	be	raided;	it	is	attained	through	surrender,	not	through	struggle.
It	is	conquered	through	total	surrender.
Don’t	look	for	results
The	ego	is	result-oriented,	the	mind	always	hankers	for	results.	The	mind	is
never	interested	in	the	act	itself,	its	interest	is	in	the	result.	“What	am	I	going	to
gain	out	of	it?”	If	the	mind	can	manage	to	gain	without	going	through	any
action,	then	it	will	choose	the	short-cut.
That’s	why	educated	people	become	very	cunning,	because	they	are	able	to
find	short-cuts.	If	you	earn	money	through	a	legal	way,	it	may	take	your	whole
life.	But	if	you	can	earn	money	by	smuggling,	by	gambling,	or	by	something
else—by	becoming	a	political	leader,	a	prime	minister,	a	president—then	you
have	all	the	short-cuts	available	to	you.	The	educated	person	becomes	cunning.
He	does	not	become	wise,	he	simply	becomes	clever.	He	becomes	so	cunning
that	he	wants	to	have	everything	without	doing	anything	for	it.
Meditation	happens	only	to	those	who	are	not	result-oriented.	Meditation	is	a
non-goal-oriented	state.
Appreciate	unawareness
While	aware	enjoy	awareness,	and	while	unaware	enjoy	unawareness.
Nothing	is	wrong,	because	unawareness	is	like	a	rest.	Otherwise	awareness
would	become	a	tension.	If	you	are	awake	twenty-four	hours,	how	many	days	do
you	think	you	can	be	alive?	Without	food	a	man	can	live	for	three	months;
without	sleep,	within	three	weeks	he	will	go	mad,	and	he	will	try	to	commit
suicide.	In	the	day	you	are	alert;	in	the	night	you	relax,	and	that	relaxation	helps
you	in	the	day	to	be	more	alert,	fresh	again.	Energies	have	passed	through	a	rest
period	so	they	are	more	alive	in	the	morning	again.
The	same	will	happen	in	meditation:	for	a	few	moments	you	are	perfectly
aware,	at	the	peak,	and	for	a	few	moments	you	are	in	the	valley,	resting.
Awareness	has	disappeared,	you	have	forgotten.	But	what	is	wrong	in	it?
It	is	simple.	Through	unawareness	awareness	will	arise	again,	fresh,	young;
and	this	will	go	on.	If	you	can	enjoy	both	you	become	the	third,	and	that	is	the
point	to	be	understood:	if	you	can	enjoy	both,	it	means	that	you	are	neither—
neither	awareness	nor	unawareness—you	are	the	one	who	enjoys	both.
Something	of	the	beyond	enters.	In	fact,	this	is	the	real	witness.
Happiness	you	enjoy,	what	is	wrong	with	it?	When	happiness	has	gone	and
you	have	become	sad,	what	is	wrong	with	sadness?	Enjoy	it.	Once	you	become
capable	of	enjoying	sadness,	then	you	are	neither.
And	this	I	tell	you:	if	you	enjoy	sadness,	it	has	its	own	beauties.	Happiness	is
a	little	shallow;	sadness	is	very	deep,	it	has	a	depth	to	it.	A	man	who	has	never
been	sad	will	be	shallow,	just	on	the	surface.	Sadness	is	like	a	dark	night,	very
deep.	Darkness	has	a	silence	to	it,	and	sadness	also.	Happiness	bubbles;	there	is
a	sound	in	it.	It	is	like	a	river	in	the	mountains;	sound	is	created.	But	in	the
mountains,	a	river	can	never	be	very	deep;	it	is	always	shallow.	When	the	river
comes	to	the	plain	it	becomes	deep,	but	the	sound	stops.	It	moves	as	if	not
moving.	Sadness	has	a	depth.
Why	create	trouble?	While	happy,	be	happy,	enjoy	it.	Don’t	get	identified
with	it.	When	I	say	be	happy,	I	mean	enjoy	it.	Let	it	be	a	climate	which	will
move	and	change.	The	morning	changes	into	noon,	noon	changes	into	evening,
and	then	comes	night.	Let	happiness	be	a	climate	around	you.	Enjoy	it,	and	then
when	sadness	comes,	enjoy	that	too.	I	teach	you	enjoyment	whatsoever	is	the
case.	Sit	silently	and	enjoy	sadness,	and	suddenly	sadness	is	no	longer	sadness;	it
has	become	a	silent	peaceful	moment,	beautiful	in	itself.	Nothing	is	wrong	in	it.
And	then	comes	the	ultimate	alchemy,	the	point	where	suddenly	you	realize
that	you	are	neither—neither	happiness	nor	sadness.	You	are	the	watcher:	you
watch	peaks,	you	watch	valleys;	but	you	are	neither.
Once	this	point	is	attained	you	can	go	on	celebrating	everything.	You
celebrate	life,	you	celebrate	death.
Machines	help,	but	don’t	create	meditation
So	many	machines	are	being	developed	around	the	world,	pretending	that
they	can	give	you	meditation;	you	just	have	to	put	on	earphones	and	relax,	and
within	ten	minutes	you	will	reach	the	state	of	meditation.
This	is	utter	stupidity,	but	there	is	a	reason	why	such	an	idea	has	come	to	the
minds	of	technical	people.	Mind	functions	on	a	certain	wavelength	when	it	is
awake.	When	it	is	dreaming	it	functions	on	another	wavelength.	When	it	is	fast
asleep	it	functions	on	a	different	wavelength.	But	none	of	these	are	meditation.
For	thousands	of	years	we	have	called	meditation	turiya,	‘the	fourth.’	When
you	go	beyond	the	deepest	sleep	and	still	you	are	aware,	that	awareness	is
meditation.	It	is	not	an	experience;	it	is	you,	your	very	being.
But	these	hi-tech	mechanisms	can	be	of	tremendous	use	in	the	right	hands.
They	can	help	to	create	the	kind	of	waves	in	your	mind	so	that	you	start	feeling
relaxed,	as	if	half	asleep…thoughts	are	disappearing	and	a	moment	comes	that
everything	becomes	silent	in	you.	That	is	the	moment	when	the	waves	are	those
of	deep	sleep.	You	will	not	be	aware	of	this	deep	sleep,	but	after	ten	minutes,
when	you	are	unplugged	from	the	machine,	you	will	see	the	effects:	you	are
calm,	quiet,	peaceful,	no	worry,	no	tension;	life	seems	to	be	more	playful	and
joyous.	One	feels	as	if	one	has	had	an	inner	bath.	Your	whole	being	is	calm	and
cool.
But	if	you	think	this	is	meditation	then	you	are	wrong.	I	will	say	this	is	a
good	experience,	and	while	you	are	in	that	moment	of	deep	sleep,	if	you	can	also
be	aware	from	the	very	beginning,	as	the	mind	starts	changing	its	waves….	You
have	to	be	more	alert,	more	awake,	more	watchful—what	is	happening?—and
you	will	see	that	mind	is	by	and	by	falling	asleep.	And	if	you	can	see	the	mind
falling	asleep…the	one	who	is	seeing	the	mind	falling	asleep	is	your	being,	and
that	is	the	purpose	of	all	authentic	meditation.
These	machines	cannot	create	that	awareness.	That	awareness	you	will	have
to	create,	but	these	machines	can	certainly	create	within	ten	minutes	a	possibility
that	you	may	not	be	able	to	create	in	years	of	effort.
So	I	am	not	against	these	hi-tech	instruments,	I	am	all	for	them.	It	is	just	that
I	want	the	people	who	are	spreading	those	machines	around	the	world	to	know
that	they	are	doing	good	work,	but	it	is	incomplete.
It	will	be	complete	only	when	the	person	in	the	deepest	silence	is	also	alert,
like	a	small	flame	of	awareness	which	goes	on	burning.	Everything	disappears,
all	around	is	darkness,	and	silence,	and	peace—but	an	unwavering	flame	of
awareness.	So	if	the	machine	is	in	the	right	hands	and	people	can	be	taught	that
the	real	thing	will	come	not	through	the	machine,	the	machine	can	create	the
very	essential	ground	in	which	that	flame	can	grow.	But	that	flame	depends	on
you,	not	on	the	machine.
You	are	not	your	experiences
One	of	the	most	fundamental	things	to	remember	is	that	whatever	you	come
across	in	your	inner	journey,	you	are	not	it.	You	are	the	one	who	is	witnessing	it.
It	may	be	nothingness,	it	may	be	blissfulness,	it	may	be	silence…ut	one	thing
has	to	be	remembered—however	beautiful	and	however	enchanting	an
experience	you	come	to,	you	are	not	it.	You	are	the	one	who	is	experiencing	it.
And	if	you	go	on	and	on	and	on,	the	ultimate	in	the	journey	is	the	point	when
there	is	no	experience	left—neither	silence,	nor	blissfulness,	nor	nothingness.
There	is	nothing	as	an	object	for	you	but	only	your	subjectivity.	The	mirror	is
empty,	it	is	not	reflecting	anything.	It	is	you.
Even	great	travelers	of	the	inner	world	have	got	stuck	in	beautiful
experiences,	and	have	become	identified	with	those	experiences	thinking,	“I
have	found	myself.”	They	have	stopped	before	reaching	the	final	stage	where	all
experiences	disappear.
Enlightenment	is	not	an	experience.	It	is	the	state	where	you	are	left
absolutely	alone,	nothing	to	know.	No	object,	however	beautiful,	is	present.	Only
in	that	moment	does	your	consciousness,	unobstructed	by	any	object,	take	a	turn
and	move	back	to	the	source.
It	becomes	self-realization.	It	becomes	enlightenment.
I	must	remind	you	about	the	word	object.	Every	object	means	hindrance.
The	very	meaning	of	the	word	is	hindrance,	objection.
So	the	object	can	be	outside	you,	in	the	material	world;	the	object	can	be
inside	you	in	your	psychological	world.	The	objects	can	be	in	your	heart,
feelings,	emotions,	sentiments,	moods,	and	the	objects	can	even	be	in	your
spiritual	world.	And	they	are	so	ecstatic	that	one	cannot	imagine	there	can	be
more.
Many	mystics	of	the	world	have	stopped	at	ecstasy.	It	is	a	beautiful	spot,	a
scenic	spot,	but	they	have	not	arrived	home	yet.	When	you	come	to	a	point	when
all	experiences	are	absent,	there	is	no	object,	then	consciousness	without
obstruction	moves	in	a	circle—in	existence	everything	moves	in	a	circle,	if	not
obstructed—it	comes	from	the	same	source	of	your	being,	goes	around.	Finding
no	obstacle	to	it—no	experience,	no	object—it	moves	back	to	the	source,	and	the
subject	itself	becomes	the	object.
That	is	what	J.	Krishnamurti	continued	to	say	for	his	whole	life:	when	the
observer	becomes	the	observed,	know	that	you	have	arrived.
Before	that	there	are	thousands	of	things	in	the	way.	The	body	gives	its	own
experiences,	which	have	become	known	as	the	experiences	of	the	centers	of
kundalini;	seven	centers	become	seven	lotus	flowers.	Each	is	bigger	than	the
other	and	higher,	and	the	fragrance	is	intoxicating.	The	mind	gives	you	great
spaces,	unlimited,	infinite.	But	remember	the	fundamental	maxim,	that	still	the
home	has	not	come.
Enjoy	the	journey	and	enjoy	all	the	scenes	that	come	on	the	journey—the
trees,	the	mountains,	the	flowers,	the	rivers,	the	sun	and	the	moon	and	the	stars
—but	don’t	stop	anywhere,	unless	your	very	subjectivity	becomes	its	own
object.	When	the	observer	is	the	observed,	when	the	knower	is	the	known,	when
the	seer	is	the	seen,	the	home	has	arrived.
This	home	is	the	real	temple	we	have	been	searching	for,	for	lives	together,
but	we	always	go	astray.	We	become	satisfied	with	beautiful	experiences.
A	courageous	seeker	has	to	leave	all	those	beautiful	experiences	behind,	and
go	on	moving.	When	all	experiences	are	exhausted	and	only	he	himself	remains
in	his	aloneness…no	ecstasy	is	bigger	than	that,	no	blissfulness	is	more	blissful,
no	truth	is	truer.	You	have	entered	what	I	call	godliness,	you	have	become	a	god.
An	old	man	went	to	his	doctor.	“I	have	got	toilet	problems”,	he	complained.
“Well,	let	us	see.	How	is	your	urination?”
“Every	morning	at	seven	o’clock,	like	a	baby.”
“Good.	How	about	your	bowel	movement?”
“Eight	o’clock	each	morning,	like	clockwork.”
“So,	what	is	the	problem?”	the	doctor	asked.
“I	don’t	wake	up	until	nine.”
You	are	asleep	and	it	is	time	to	wake	up.
All	these	experiences	are	experiences	of	a	sleeping	mind.	The	awakened
mind	has	no	experiences	at	all.
Meditation	is	a	knack
Meditation	is	such	a	mystery	that	it	can	be	called	a	science,	an	art,	a	knack,
without	any	contradiction.
From	one	point	of	view	it	is	a	science	because	there	is	a	clear-cut	technique
that	has	to	be	done.	There	are	no	exceptions	to	it,	it	is	almost	like	a	scientific
law.
But	from	a	different	point	of	view	it	can	also	be	said	to	be	an	art.	Science	is
an	extension	of	the	mind—it	is	mathematics,	it	is	logic,	it	is	rational.
Meditation	belongs	to	the	heart,	not	to	the	mind—it	is	not	logic,	it	is	closer
to	love.	It	is	not	like	other	scientific	activities,	but	more	like	music,	poetry,
painting,	dancing;	hence,	it	can	be	called	an	art.
But	meditation	is	such	a	great	mystery	that	calling	it	‘science’	and	‘art’	does
not	exhaust	it.	It	is	a	knack—either	you	get	it	or	you	don’t	get	it.	A	knack	is	not	a
science,	it	cannot	be	taught.	A	knack	is	not	an	art.	A	knack	is	the	most
mysterious	thing	in	human	understanding.§
In	my	childhood	I	was	sent	to	a	master,	a	master	swimmer.	He	was	the	best
swimmer	in	the	town,	and	I	have	never	come	across	a	man	who	has	been	so
tremendously	in	love	with	water.	Water	was	god	to	him,	he	worshipped	it,	and
the	river	was	his	home.	Early—at	three	o’clock	in	the	morning—you	would	find
him	on	the	river.	In	the	evening	you	would	find	him	on	the	river	and	at	night	you
would	find	him	sitting,	meditating	by	the	side	of	the	river.	His	whole	life
consisted	of	being	close	to	the	river.
When	I	was	brought	to	him—I	wanted	to	learn	swimming—he	looked	at	me,
he	felt	something.	He	said,	“But	there	is	no	way	to	learn	swimming;	I	can	just
throw	you	in	the	water	and	then	swimming	comes	of	its	own	accord.	There	is	no
way	to	learn	it,	it	cannot	be	taught.	It	is	a	knack,	not	knowledge.”
And	that’s	what	he	did—he	threw	me	in	the	water	and	he	was	standing	on
the	bank.	For	two,	three	times	I	went	down	and	I	felt	I	was	almost	drowning.	He
was	just	standing	there,	he	would	not	even	try	to	help	me!	Of	course,	when	your
life	is	at	stake,	you	do	whatsoever	you	can.	So	I	started	throwing	my	hands	about
—they	were	haphazard,	hectic,	but	the	knack	came.	When	life	is	at	stake,	you	do
whatsoever	you	can	do…and	whenever	you	do	whatsoever	you	can	do	totally,
things	happen!
I	could	swim!	I	was	thrilled!	“Next	time”,	I	said,	“you	need	not	throw	me
into	it—I	will	jump	myself.	Now	I	know	that	there	is	a	natural	buoyancy	of	the
body.	It	is	not	a	question	of	swimming,	it	is	only	a	question	of	getting	in	tune
with	the	water	element.	Once	you	are	in	tune	with	the	water	element	it	protects
you.”
And	since	then	I	have	been	throwing	many	people	into	the	river	of	life!	And
I	just	stand	there….	Almost	nobody	ever	fails	if	he	takes	the	jump.	One	is	bound
to	learn.	§
It	may	take	a	few	days	for	you	to	get	the	knack.	It	is	a	knack!	It	is	not	an	art!
If	meditation	were	an	art,	it	would	have	been	very	simple	to	teach.	Because	it	is
a	knack,	you	have	to	try;	slowly	you	get	it.	One	of	the	Japanese	professors	of
psychology	is	trying	to	teach	small	children,	six	months	old,	to	swim,	and	he	has
succeeded.	Then	he	tried	with	children	three	months	old—and	he	has	succeeded.
Now	he	is	trying	with	the	newly	born,	and	I	hope	that	he	succeeds.	There	is
every	possibility—because	it	is	a	knack.	It	does	not	need	any	other	kind	of
experience:	age,	education…it	is	simply	a	knack.	And	if	a	six-month	or	three-
month-old	baby	can	swim,	that	means	we	are	naturally	endowed	with	the	idea	of
‘how’to	swim…it	is	just	that	we	have	to	discover	it.	Just	a	little	bit	of	effort	and
you	will	be	able	to	discover	it.	The	same	is	true	about	meditation—more	true
than	about	swimming.	You	just	have	to	make	a	little	effort.
				Part	3:	THE	MEDITATIONS
THE	OSHO	ACTIVE	MEDITATIONS
All	OSHO	Active	Meditations	involve	a	beginning	stage	of	activity?
sometimes	intense	and	physical*—followed	by	a	period	of	silence.	All	are
accompanied	by	music	that	has	been	specially	composed	to	guide	the
meditator	through	the	different	stages.	Different	meditations	are
recommended	for	different	times	of	the	day.
A	complete	list	of	available	music	CD’s	for	different	OSHO	ACTIVE
MEDITATIONS	can	be	found	in	the	back	of	this	book.	This	music	has
been	specially	developed	to	support	the	energy	of	each	stage	in	the
corresponding	technique,	and	to	signal	when	one	stage	ends	and	the	next
stage	begins.
*	Always	consult	with	a	physician	before	starting	intense	exercise
activities.
Why	active	meditation?
If	you	can	sit,	there	is	no	need	for	meditations.	In	Japan,	for	meditation	they
have	the	word	“Zazen”.	It	means	just	sitting,	doing	nothing.	If	you	can	sit,	not
doing	anything,	this	is	the	ultimate	in	meditations.	There	is	no	need	for	any	other
thing.
But	can	you	sit?	There	is	the	crux	of	the	whole	problem.	Can	you	sit?	Can
you	just	sit	doing	nothing?	If	that	is	possible—just	sit,	do	nothing—everything
settles	by	itself,	everything	simply	flows	by	itself.	You	are	not	needed	to	do
anything.	But	the	problem	is—can	you	sit?	§
People	come	and	ask	me	why	I	teach	active	meditations—because	that	is	the
only	way	to	find	inaction.	Dance	to	the	uttermost,	dance	in	a	frenzy,	dance
madly,	and	if	your	whole	energy	is	involved	in	it,	a	moment	comes	when
suddenly	you	see	the	dance	is	happening	on	its	own—there	is	no	effort	in	it.	It	is
action	without	action.	§
You	can	move	into	passivity	only	when	all	that	is	there	like	junk	has	been
thrown	out.	Anger	has	been	thrown	out,	greed	has	been	thrown	out…	layer	upon
layer,	these	thins	are	there.	But	once	you	have	thrown	them	out,	you	can	easily
slip	in.	There	is	nothing	to	hinder	you.	Suddenly	the	bright	light	of	the	buddha
land…	and	suddenly	you	are	in	a	totally	different	world—the	world	of	the	Lotus
Law,	the	world	of	Dharma,	the	world	of	Tao.	§
Powerful	Methods	for	Awakening
These	are	not	really	meditations.	You	are	just	getting	in	tune.	If	you	have
seen	Indian	classical	musicians	playing	you	will	notice	that	for	half	an	hour,	or
sometimes	even	more,	they	simply	go	on	adjusting	their	instruments.	They	will
move	the	knobs,	they	will	make	the	strings	tight	or	loose,	and	the	drum	player
will	go	on	checking	his	drum,	whether	it	is	perfect	or	not.	For	half	an	hour	they
go	on	doing	this.	This	is	not	music,	this	is	just	preparation.
The	first	part	of	one	of	the	active	meditations,	for	example,	is	not	really
meditation.	It	is	just	preparation.	You	are	preparing	your	instrument.	When	it	is
ready,	then	you	stand	in	silence,	then	meditation	starts.	Then	you	are	utterly
there.	You	have	woken	yourself	up	by	jumping,	by	dancing,	by	breathing,	by
shouting—these	are	all	devices	to	make	you	a	little	more	alert	than	you
ordinarily	are.	Once	you	are	alert,	then	the	waiting.	Waiting	is	meditation.
Waiting	with	full	awareness.	And	then	it	comes,	it	descends	on	you,	it	surrounds
you,	it	plays	around	you,	it	dances	around	you,	it	cleanses	you,	it	purifies	you,	it
transforms	you.
An	Energy	Phenomenon
Meditation	is	an	energy	phenomenon.	One	very	basic	thing	has	to	be
understood	about	all	types	of	energies,	and	this	is	the	basic	law	to	be	understood:
energy	moves	in	a	dual	polarity.	That	is	the	only	way	it	moves;	there	is	no	other
way	for	its	movement.	It	moves	in	a	dual	polarity.
For	any	energy	to	become	dynamic,	the	anti-pole	is	needed.	It	is	just	like
electricity	moving	with	negative	and	positive	polarities.	If	there	is	only	negative
polarity,	electricity	will	not	happen;	or	if	there	is	only	positive	polarity,
electricity	will	not	happen.	Both	poles	are	needed.	And	when	both	poles	meet,
they	create	electricity;	then	the	spark	comes	up.
And	this	is	so	for	all	types	of	phenomena.	Life	goes	on:	between	man	and
woman,	the	polarity.	The	woman	is	the	negative	life-energy;	man	is	the	positive
pole.	They	are	electrical—hence	so	much	attraction.	With	man	alone,	life	would
disappear;	with	woman	alone	there	could	be	no	life,	only	death.	Between	man
and	woman	there	exists	a	balance.	Between	man	and	woman—these	two	poles,
these	two	banks—flows	the	river	of	life.
Wherever	you	look	you	will	find	the	same	energy	moving	in	polarities,
balancing	itself.
This	polarity	is	very	meaningful	for	meditation	because	mind	is	logical,	and
life	is	dialectical.	When	I	say	mind	is	logical,	it	means	mind	moves	in	a	line.
When	I	say	life	is	dialectical,	it	means	life	moves	with	the	opposite,	not	in	a	line.
It	zigzags	from	negative	to	positive—positive	to	negative,	negative	to	positive.	It
zigzags;	it	uses	the	opposites.
Mind	moves	in	a	line,	a	simple	straight	line.	It	never	moves	to	the	opposite
—it	denies	the	opposite.	It	believes	in	one,	and	life	believes	in	two.
So	whatsoever	mind	creates,	it	always	chooses	the	one.	If	mind	chooses
silence—if	mind	has	become	fed	up	with	all	the	noise	that	is	created	in	life	and	it
decides	to	be	silent—then	the	mind	goes	to	the	Himalayas.	It	wants	to	be	silent,
it	doesn’t	want	anything	to	do	with	any	type	of	noise.	Even	the	song	of	the	birds
will	disturb	it;	the	breeze	blowing	through	the	trees	will	be	a	disturbance.	The
mind	wants	silence;	it	has	chosen	the	line.	Now	the	opposite	has	to	be	denied
completely.
But	this	man	living	in	the	Himalayas—seeking	silence,	avoiding	the	other,
the	opposite—will	become	dead;	he	will	certainly	become	dull.	And	the	more	he
chooses	to	be	silent,	the	duller	he	will	become,	because	life	needs	the	opposite,
the	challenge	of	the	opposite.
There	is	a	different	type	of	silence	which	exists	between	two	opposites.
The	first	is	a	dead	silence,	the	silence	of	the	cemetery.	A	dead	man	is	silent,
but	you	would	not	like	to	be	a	dead	man.	A	dead	man	is	absolutely	silent.
Nobody	can	disturb	him,	his	concentration	is	perfect.	You	cannot	do	anything	to
distract	his	mind;	his	mind	is	absolutely	fixed.	Even	if	the	whole	world	goes	mad
all	around,	he	will	remain	in	his	concentration.	But	still,	you	would	not	like	to	be
a	dead	man.	Silence,	concentration,	or	whatever	it	is	called…you	would	not	like
to	be	dead—because	if	you	are	silent	and	dead	the	silence	is	meaningless.
Silence	must	happen	while	you	are	absolutely	alive,	vital,	bubbling	with	life
and	energy.	Then	silence	is	meaningful.	But	then	silence	will	have	a	different,
altogether	different	quality	to	it.	It	will	not	be	dull.	It	will	be	alive.	It	will	be	a
subtle	balance	between	two	polarities.
One	who	is	seeking	a	live	balance,	a	live	silence,	would	like	to	move	to	both
the	market	and	the	Himalayas.	He	would	like	to	go	to	the	market	to	enjoy	noise,
and	he	would	also	like	to	go	to	the	Himalayas	to	enjoy	silence.	And	he	will
create	a	balance	between	these	two	polar	opposites,	and	he	will	remain	in	that
balance.	And	that	balance	cannot	be	achieved	through	linear	efforts.
That	is	what	is	meant	by	the	Zen	technique	of	effortless	effort.	It	uses
contradictory	terms—effortless	effort,	or	gateless	gate,	or	pathless	path.
Zen	always	uses	the	contradictory	term	immediately,	just	to	give	you	the	hint
that	the	process	is	going	to	be	dialectical,	not	linear.	The	opposite	is	not	to	be
denied	but	absorbed.	The	opposite	is	not	to	be	left	aside—it	has	to	be	used.	Left
aside,	it	will	always	be	a	burden	on	you.	Left	aside,	it	will	hang	with	you.
Unused,	you	will	miss	much.
The	energy	can	be	converted	and	used.	And	then,	using	it,	you	will	be	more
vital,	more	alive.	The	opposite	has	to	be	absorbed,	then	the	process	becomes
dialectical.
Effortlessness	means	not	doing	anything,	inactivity—akarma.
Effort	means	doing	much,	activity—karma.	Both	have	to	be	there.
Do	much,	but	don’t	be	a	doer—then	you	achieve	both.	Move	in	the	world,
but	don’t	be	a	part	of	it.	Live	in	the	world,	but	don’t	let	the	world	live	in	you.
Then	the	contradiction	has	been	absorbed….
And	that’s	what	I’m	doing.	Dynamic	meditation	is	a	contradiction.	Dynamic
means	effort,	much	effort,	absolute	effort.	And	meditation	means	silence,	no
effort,	no	activity.	You	can	call	it	a	dialectical	meditation.
OSHO	DYNAMIC	MEDITATION:	Catharsis	and	Celebration
“When	the	sleep	is	broken	the	whole	of	nature	becomes	alive.	The	night
has	gone,	the	darkness	is	no	more,	the	sun	is	coming	up,	and	everything
becomes	conscious	and	alert.	So	this	first	meditation	is	a	meditation	in
which	you	have	to	be	continuously	alert,	conscious,	aware,	whatsoever
you	do.
“Remain	a	witness.	Don’t	get	lost.	It	is	easy	to	get	lost.	While	you	are
breathing	you	can	forget;	you	can	become	one	with	the	breathing	so	much
that	you	can	forget	the	witness.	But	then	you	miss	the	point.	Breathe	as
fast,	as	deep	as	possible,	bring	your	total	energy	to	it,	but	still	remain	a
witness.	Observe	what	is	happening	as	if	you	are	just	a	spectator;	as	if	the
whole	thing	is	happening	to	somebody	else;	as	if	the	whole	thing	is
happening	in	the	body	and	the	consciousness	is	just	centered	and	looking.
“This	witnessing	has	to	be	carried	in	all	the	three	steps.	And	when
everything	stops—and	in	the	fourth	step	you	have	become	completely
inactive,	frozen—then	this	alertness	will	come	to	its	peak.”
—Osho
Instructions
The	Osho	Dynamic	Meditation	lasts	one	hour	and	is	in	five	stages.
It	can	be	done	alone,	but	the	energy	will	be	more	powerful	if	it	is
done	in	a	group.
It	is	an	individual	experience	so	you	should	remain	oblivious	of
others	around	you	and	keep	your	eyes	closed	throughout,	preferably
using	a	blindfold.
It	is	best	to	have	an	empty	stomach	and	wear	loose,	comfortable
clothing.
First	Stage:	10	minutes
Breathe	chaotically	through	the	nose,	concentrating	always	on	exhalation.
The	body	will	take	care	of	the	inhalation.	Do	this	as	fast	and	as	hard	as	you
possibly	can—and	then	a	little	harder,	until	you	literally	become	the	breathing.
Use	your	natural	body	movements	to	help	you	to	build	up	your	energy.	Feel	it
building	up,	but	don’t	let	go	during	the	first	stage.
Second	Stage:	10	minutes
Explode!	Let	go	of	everything	that	needs	to	be	thrown	out.	Go	totally	mad.
Scream,	shout,	cry,	jump,	shake,	dance,	sing,	laugh;	throw	yourself	around.	Hold
nothing	back;	keep	your	whole	body	moving.	A	little	acting	often	helps	to	get
you	started.	Never	allow	your	mind	to	interfere	with	what	is	happening.	Be	total.
Third	Stage:	10	minutes
With	raised	arms,	jump	up	and	down	shouting	the	mantra,	‘HOO!	HOO!
HOO!’	as	deeply	as	possible.	Each	time	you	land,	on	the	flats	of	your	feet,	let	the
sound	hammer	deep	into	the	sex	center.	Give	all	you	have;	exhaust	yourself
totally.
Fourth	Stage:	15	minutes
Stop!	Freeze	wherever	you	are,	in	whatever	position	you	find	yourself.
Don’t	arrange	the	body	in	any	way.	A	cough,	a	movement—anything	will
dissipate	the	energy	flow	and	the	effort	will	be	lost.	Be	a	witness	to	everything
that	is	happening	to	you.
Fifth	Stage:	15	minutes
Celebrate	and	rejoice	with	music	and	dance,	expressing	your	gratitude
towards	the	whole.	Carry	your	happiness	with	you	throughout	the	day.
Note:	If	your	meditation	space	prevents	you	from	making	a	noise,	you	can	do
this	silent	alternative:	Rather	than	throwing	out	the	sounds,	let	the	catharsis	in
the	second	stage	take	place	entirely	through	bodily	movements.	In	the	third
stage,	the	sound	‘HOO’	can	be	hammered	silently	inside,	and	the	fifth	stage	can
become	an	expressive	dance.
“Someone	has	said	that	the	meditation	we	are	doing	here	seems	to	be
sheer	madness.	It	is!	And	it	is	that	way	for	a	purpose.	It	is	madness	with	a
method;	it	is	consciously	chosen.	Remember,	you	cannot	go	mad
voluntarily.	Madness	takes	possession	of	you.	Only	then	can	you	go	mad.
If	you	go	mad	voluntarily,	that’s	a	totally	different	thing.	You	are	basically
in	control,	and	one	who	can	control	even	his	madness	will	never	go	mad.”
Some	reactions	can	happen	in	the	body	as	a	result	of	the	deep	catharsis	of
Dynamic	Meditation.	Osho	has	said	this	about	it:
If	you	feel	pain,	be	attentive	to	it;	don’t	do	anything.	Attention	is	the
great	sword;	it	cuts	everything.	You	simply	pay	attention	to	the	pain.
For	example,	you	are	sitting	silently	in	the	last	part	of	the	meditation,
unmoving,	and	you	feel	many	problems	in	the	body.	You	feel	the	leg	is
going	numb,	there	is	some	itching	in	the	hand,	you	feel	ants	are	creeping
on	the	body,	and	many	times	you	have	looked	but	there	are	no	ants.	The
creeping	is	inside,	not	outside.	What	you	should	do?	You	feel	the	leg	is
going	dead—be	watchful,	just	give	your	total	attention	to	it.	You	feel
itching;	don’t	scratch,	that	will	not	help.	You	just	give	it	your	attention.
Don’t	even	open	your	eyes.	Just	give	your	attention	inwardly,	just	wait
and	watch,	and	within	seconds	the	itching	has	disappeared.
Whatsoever	happens—even	if	you	feel	pain,	severe	pain	in	the
stomach	or	in	the	head….	It	is	possible,	because	in	meditation	the	whole
body	changes.	It	changes	its	chemistry.	New	things	start	happening	and
the	body	is	in	a	chaos.	Sometimes	the	stomach	will	be	affected,	because	in
the	stomach	you	have	suppressed	many	emotions,	and	they	are	all	stirred
up.	Sometimes	you	will	feel	like	vomiting,	nausea.	Sometimes	you	will
feel	a	severe	pain	in	the	head	because	the	meditation	is	changing	the	inner
structure	of	your	brain.	Soon	things	will	settle.	But	for	the	time	being,
everything	will	be	unsettled.
So	what	are	you	to	do?	You	simply	see	the	pain	in	the	head;	watch	it.
You	be	a	watcher.	You	just	forget	that	you	are	a	doer	and,	by	and	by,
everything	subsides,	and	subsides	so	beautifully	and	so	gracefully	that	you
cannot	believe	it	unless	you	experience	it.	Not	only	does	the	pain
disappear	from	the	head,	but	the	energy	that	was	creating	pain,	if	watched,
disappears	and	becomes	pleasure.	The	energy	is	the	same.	Pain	or	pleasure
are	two	dimensions	of	the	same	energy.
If	you	can	remain	silently	sitting	and	paying	attention	to	distractions,
all	distractions	disappear.	And	when	all	distractions	disappear,	you	will
suddenly	become	aware	that	the	whole	body	has	disappeared.
Osho	has	also	warned	against	turning	this	witnessing	approach	into	another
fanaticism.	If	unpleasant	physical	symptoms—aches	and	pains	or	nausea—
persist	beyond	three	or	four	days	of	daily	meditation,	there	is	no	need	to	be	a
masochist.	Seek	medical	advice.
This	applies	to	all	Osho	meditation	techniques.	Have	fun!
Helpful	hints
Dynamic	Meditation	begins	with	breathing,	because	breathing	has	deep	roots
in	the	being.	You	may	not	have	observed	it,	but	if	you	can	change	your
breathing,	you	can	change	many	things.	If	you	observe	your	breathing	carefully,
you	will	see	that	when	you	are	angry	you	have	a	particular	rhythm	of	breathing.
When	you	are	in	love,	a	totally	different	rhythm	comes	to	you.	When	you	are
relaxed	you	breathe	differently;	when	you	are	tense	you	breathe	differently.	You
cannot	breathe	the	way	you	do	when	you	are	relaxed	and	be	angry	at	the	same
time.	It	is	impossible.
When	you	are	sexually	aroused,	your	breathing	changes.	If	you	do	not	allow
the	breathing	to	change,	your	sexual	arousal	will	drop	automatically.	This	means
that	breathing	is	deeply	related	to	your	mental	state.	If	you	change	your
breathing,	you	can	change	the	state	of	your	mind.	Or,	if	you	change	the	state	of
your	mind,	breathing	will	change.
So	I	start	with	breathing	and	I	suggest	ten	minutes	of	chaotic	breathing	in	the
first	stage	of	the	technique.	By	chaotic	breathing	I	mean	deep,	fast,	vigorous
breathing,	without	any	rhythm—just	taking	the	breath	in	and	throwing	it	out,
taking	it	in	and	throwing	it	out,	as	vigorously,	as	deeply,	as	intensely	as	possible.
Take	it	in;	then	throw	it	out.
This	chaotic	breathing	is	to	create	a	chaos	within	your	repressed	system.
Whatever	you	are,	you	are	with	a	certain	type	of	breathing.	A	child	breathes	in	a
particular	way.	If	you	are	sexually	afraid,	you	breathe	in	a	particular	way.	You
cannot	breathe	deeply	because	every	deep	breath	hits	the	sex	center.	If	you	are
fearful,	you	cannot	take	deep	breaths.	Fear	creates	shallow	breathing.
This	chaotic	breathing	is	to	destroy	all	your	past	patterns.	What	you	have
made	out	of	yourself,	this	chaotic	breathing	is	to	destroy.	Chaotic	breathing
creates	a	chaos	within	you	because	unless	a	chaos	is	created,	you	cannot	release
your	repressed	emotions.	And	those	emotions	have	now	moved	into	the	body.
You	are	not	body	and	mind;	you	are	body/mind,	psycho/somatic.	You	are
both	together.	So	whatever	is	done	with	your	body	reaches	to	the	mind	and
whatever	is	done	with	the	mind	reaches	to	the	body.	Body	and	mind	are	two	ends
of	the	same	entity.
Ten	minutes	of	chaotic	breathing	is	wonderful!	But	it	must	be	chaotic.	It	is
not	a	type	of	pranayama,	yogic	breathing.	It	is	simply	creating	chaos	through
breathing.	And	it	creates	chaos	for	many	reasons.
Deep,	fast	breathing	gives	you	more	oxygen.	The	more	oxygen	in	the	body,
the	more	alive	you	become,	the	more	animal-like.	Animals	are	alive	and	man	is
half-dead,	half-alive.	You	have	to	be	made	into	an	animal	again.	Only	then	can
something	higher	develop	in	you.
If	you	are	only	half-alive,	nothing	can	be	done	with	you.	So	this	chaotic
breathing	will	make	you	like	an	animal:	alive,	vibrating,	vital—with	more
oxygen	in	your	blood,	more	energy	in	your	cells.	Your	body	cells	will	become
more	alive.	This	oxygenation	helps	to	create	body	electricity—or,	you	can	call	it
bio-energy.	When	there	is	electricity	in	the	body	you	can	move	deep	within,
beyond	yourself.	The	electricity	will	work	within	you.
The	body	has	its	own	electrical	sources.	If	you	hammer	them	with	more
breathing	and	more	oxygen,	they	begin	to	flow.	And	if	you	become	really	alive,
then	you	are	no	longer	a	body.	The	more	alive	you	become,	the	more	energy
flows	in	your	system	and	the	less	you	will	feel	yourself	physically.	You	will	feel
more	like	energy	and	less	like	matter.
And	whenever	it	happens	that	you	are	more	alive,	in	those	moments	you	are
not	body-oriented.	If	sex	has	so	much	appeal,	one	of	the	reasons	is	this:	that	if
you	are	really	in	the	act,	totally	moving,	totally	alive,	then	you	are	no	longer	a
body—just	energy.	To	feel	this	energy,	to	be	alive	with	this	energy,	is	very
necessary	if	you	are	to	move	beyond.
The	second	step	in	my	technique	of	Dynamic	Meditation	is	a	catharsis.	I	tell
you	to	be	consciously	insane.	Whatever	comes	to	your	mind—whatever—allow
it	to	express	itself;	cooperate	with	it.	No	resistance;	just	a	flow	of	emotions.
If	you	want	to	scream,	then	scream.	Cooperate	with	it.	A	deep	scream,	a	total
scream	in	which	your	whole	being	becomes	involved,	is	very	therapeutic,	deeply
therapeutic.	Many	things,	many	diseases,	will	be	released	just	by	the	scream.	If
the	scream	is	total,	your	whole	being	will	be	in	it.	So	allow	yourself	expression
through	crying,	dancing,	screaming,	weeping,	jumping,	laughing—‘freaking	out’
as	they	say.	Within	a	few	days,	you	will	come	to	feel	what	it	is.
In	the	beginning	it	may	be	forced,	an	effort,	or	it	may	even	be	just	acting.	We
have	become	so	false	that	nothing	real	or	authentic	can	be	done	by	us.	We	have
not	laughed,	we	have	not	cried,	we	have	not	screamed	authentically.	Everything
is	just	a	facade—a	mask.	So	when	you	begin	to	do	this	technique—in	the
beginning—it	may	be	forced.	It	may	need	effort;	there	may	be	just	acting.	But	do
not	bother	about	it.	Go	on.	Soon	you	will	touch	those	sources	where	you	have
repressed	many	things.	You	will	touch	those	sources,	and	once	they	are	released,
you	will	feel	unburdened.	A	new	life	will	come	to	you;	a	new	birth	will	take
place.
This	unburdening	is	basic	and	without	it	there	can	be	no	meditation	for	man
as	he	is.	Again,	I	am	not	talking	about	the	exceptions.	They	are	irrelevant.
With	this	second	step—when	things	are	thrown	out—you	become	vacant.
And	this	is	what	is	meant	by	emptiness:	to	be	empty	of	all	repressions.	In	this
emptiness	something	can	be	done.	Transformation	can	happen;	meditation	can
happen.
Then	in	the	third	step	I	use	the	sound	hoo.	Many	sounds	have	been	used	in
the	past.	Each	sound	has	something	specific	to	do.	For	example,	Hindus	have
been	using	the	sound	aum.	This	may	be	familiar	to	you.	But	I	won’t	suggest
aum.	Aum	strikes	at	the	heart	center,	but	man	is	no	longer	centered	in	the	heart.
Aum	is	striking	at	a	door	where	no	one	is	home.
Sufis	have	used	hoo,	and	if	you	say	hoo	loudly,	it	goes	deep	to	the	sex
center.	So	this	sound	is	used	just	as	a	hammering	within.	When	you	have	become
empty	and	vacant,	this	sound	can	move	within	you.
The	movement	of	the	sound	is	possible	only	when	you	are	empty.	If	you	are
filled	with	repressions,	nothing	will	happen.	And	sometimes	it	is	even	dangerous
to	use	any	mantra	or	sound	when	you	are	filled	with	repressions.	Each	layer	of
repression	will	change	the	path	of	the	sound	and	the	ultimate	result	may	be
something	of	which	you	never	dreamed,	never	expected,	never	wished.	You	need
a	vacant	mind;	only	then	can	a	mantra	be	used.
So	I	never	suggest	a	mantra	to	anyone	as	he	is.	First	there	must	be	a
catharsis.	This	mantra	hoo	should	never	be	done	without	doing	the	first	two
steps.	It	should	never	be	done	without	them.	Only	in	the	third	step	(for	ten
minutes)	is	this	hoo	to	be	used—used	as	loudly	as	possible,	bringing	your	total
energy	to	it.	You	are	to	hammer	your	energy	with	the	sound.	And	when	you	are
empty—when	you	have	been	emptied	by	the	catharsis	of	the	second	step—this
hoo	goes	deep	down	and	hits	the	sex	center.
The	sex	center	can	be	hit	in	two	ways.	The	first	way	is	naturally.	Whenever
you	are	attracted	to	a	member	of	the	opposite	sex,	the	sex	center	is	hit	from
without.	And	that	hit	is	also	a	subtle	vibration.	A	man	is	attracted	to	a	woman	or
a	woman	is	attracted	to	a	man.	Why?	What	is	there	in	a	man	and	what	is	there	in
a	woman	to	account	for	it?	A	positive	or	negative	electricity	hits	them,	a	subtle
vibration.	It	is	a	sound,	really.	For	example,	you	may	have	observed	that	birds
use	sound	for	sex	appeal.	All	their	singing	is	sexual.	They	are	repeatedly	hitting
each	other	with	particular	sounds.	These	sounds	hit	the	sex	centers	of	birds	of
the	opposite	sex.
Subtle	vibrations	of	electricity	are	hitting	you	from	without.	When	your	sex
center	is	hit	from	without,	your	energy	begins	to	flow	outward—toward	the
other.	Then	there	will	be	reproduction,	birth.	Someone	else	will	be	born	out	of
you.
Hoo	is	hitting	the	same	center	of	energy,	but	from	within.	And	when	the	sex
center	is	hit	from	within,	the	energy	starts	to	flow	within.	This	inner	flow	of
energy	changes	you	completely.	You	become	transformed:	you	give	birth	to
yourself.
You	are	transformed	only	when	your	energy	moves	in	a	totally	opposite
direction.	Right	now	it	is	flowing	out,	but	then	it	begins	to	flow	within.	Now	it	is
flowing	down,	but	then	it	flows	upward.	This	upward	flow	of	energy	is	what	is
known	as	kundalini.	You	will	feel	it	actually	flowing	in	your	spine,	and	the
higher	it	moves,	the	higher	you	will	move	with	it.	When	this	energy	reaches	the
brahmarandhra—the	last	center	in	you:	the	seventh	center,	located	at	the	top	of
the	head—you	are	the	highest	man	possible.
In	the	third	step,	I	use	hoo	as	a	vehicle	to	bring	your	energy	upward.	These
first	three	steps	are	cathartic.	They	are	not	meditation,	but	just	preparation	for	it.
They	are	a	‘getting	ready’	to	take	the	jump,	not	the	jump	itself.
The	fourth	step	is	the	jump.	In	the	fourth	step	I	tell	you	to	stop!	When	I	say
“Stop!”	stop	completely.	Don’t	do	anything	at	all	because	anything	you	do	can
become	a	diversion	and	you	will	miss	the	point.	Anything—just	a	cough	or	a
sneeze—and	you	may	miss	the	whole	thing	because	the	mind	has	become
diverted.	Then	the	upward	flow	will	stop	immediately	because	your	attention	has
moved.
Don’t	do	anything.	You	are	not	going	to	die.	Even	if	a	sneeze	is	coming	and
you	do	not	sneeze	for	ten	minutes,	you	will	not	die.	If	you	feel	like	coughing,	if
you	feel	an	irritation	in	the	throat	and	you	do	not	do	anything,	you	are	not	going
to	die.	Just	let	your	body	remain	dead	so	that	the	energy	can	move	in	one	upward
flow.
When	the	energy	moves	upward,	you	become	more	and	more	silent.	Silence
is	the	by-product	of	energy	moving	upward	and	tension	is	the	by-product	of
energy	moving	downward.	Now	your	whole	body	will	become	so	silent—as	if	it
has	disappeared.	You	will	not	be	able	to	feel	it.	You	have	become	bodiless.	And
when	you	are	silent,	the	whole	existence	is	silent	because	the	existence	is
nothing	but	a	mirror.	It	reflects	you.	In	thousands	and	thousands	of	mirrors,	it
reflects	you.	When	you	are	silent,	the	whole	existence	has	become	silent.
In	your	silence	I	will	tell	you	to	just	be	a	witness—a	constant	alertness:	not
doing	anything,	but	just	remaining	a	witness,	just	remaining	with	yourself;	not
doing	anything—no	movement,	no	desire,	no	becoming—but	just	remaining
then	and	there,	silently	witnessing	what	is	happening.
That	remaining	in	the	center,	in	yourself,	is	possible	because	of	the	first	three
steps.	Unless	these	three	are	done,	you	cannot	remain	with	yourself.	You	can	go
on	talking	about	it,	thinking	about	it,	dreaming	about	it,	but	it	will	not	happen
because	you	are	not	ready.
These	first	three	steps	will	make	you	ready	to	remain	with	the	moment.	They
will	make	you	aware.	That	is	meditation.	In	that	meditation	something	happens
that	is	beyond	words.	And	once	it	happens	you	will	never	be	the	same	again;	it	is
impossible.	It	is	a	growth;	it	is	not	simply	an	experience.	It	is	a	growth.
Remember,	remain	a	witness
This	is	a	meditation	in	which	you	have	to	be	continuously	alert,	conscious,
aware,	whatsoever	you	do.	The	first	step,	breathing;	the	second	step,	catharsis;
the	third	step,	the	mantra,	the	mahamantra	‘hoo’.	Remain	a	witness.	Don’t	get
lost.
It	is	easy	to	get	lost.	While	you	are	breathing	you	can	forget.	You	can
become	one	with	the	breathing	so	much	that	you	can	forget	the	witness.	But	then
you	miss	the	point.	Breathe	as	fast,	as	deep	as	possible,	bring	your	total	energy
to	it,	but	still	remain	a	witness.
Observe	what	is	happening,	as	if	you	are	just	a	spectator,	as	if	the	whole
thing	is	happening	to	somebody	else,	as	if	the	whole	thing	is	happening	in	the
body	and	the	consciousness	is	just	centered	and	looking.
This	witnessing	has	to	be	carried	in	all	the	three	steps.	And	when	everything
stops,	and	in	the	fourth	step	you	have	become	completely	inactive,	frozen,	then
this	alertness	will	come	to	its	peak.
OSHO	KUNDALINI	MEDITATION
This	is	the	much-loved	sister	meditation	of	the	Osho	Dynamic	Meditation.
It	consists	of	four	stages	of	15	minutes	each.
First	stage:	15	minutes
Be	loose	and	let	your	whole	body	shake,	feeling	the	energies	moving	up
from	your	feet.	Let	go	everywhere	and	become	the	shaking.	Your	eyes	may	be
opened	or	closed.
Second	stage:	15	minutes
Dance	…	any	way	you	feel,	and	let	the	whole	body	move	as	it	wishes.
Third	stage:	15	minutes
Close	your	eyes	and	be	still,	sitting	or	standing…	witnessing	whatever	is
happening	inside	and	out.
Fourth	stage:	15	minutes
Keeping	your	eyes	closed,	lie	down	and	be	still.
If	you	are	doing	Osho	Kundalini	Meditation,	allow	the	shaking,	don’t	do	it.
Stand	silently,	feel	it	coming	and	when	your	body	starts	a	little	trembling,	help	it
but	don’t	do	it.	Enjoy	it,	feel	blissful	about	it,	allow	it,	receive	it,	welcome	it,	but
don’t	will	it.
If	you	force	it,	it	will	become	an	exercise,	a	bodily	physical	exercise.	Then
the	shaking	will	be	there,	but	just	on	the	surface.	It	will	not	penetrate	you.	You
will	remain	solid,	stone-like,	rock-like	within;	you	will	remain	the	manipulator,
the	doer,	and	the	body	will	just	be	following.	The	body	is	not	the	question—you
are	the	question.
When	I	say	shake,	I	mean	your	solidity,	your	rock-like	being	should	shake	to
the	very	foundations	so	that	it	becomes	liquid,	fluid,	melts,	flows.	And	when	the
rock-like	being	becomes	liquid,	your	body	will	follow.	Then	there	is	no	shaker,
only	shaking.	Then	nobody	is	doing	it,	it	is	simply	happening.	Then	the	doer	is
not.
OSHO	NATARAJ	MEDITATION
Disappear	in	the	dance
Forget	the	dancer,	the	center	of	the	ego;	become	the	dance.	That	is	the
meditation.	Dance	so	deeply	that	you	forget	completely	that	‘you’	are
dancing	and	begin	to	feel	that	you	are	the	dance.	The	division	must
disappear;	then	it	becomes	a	meditation.	If	the	division	is	there,	then	it	is	an
exercise:	good,	healthy,	but	it	cannot	be	said	to	be	spiritual.	It	is	just	a
simple	dance.	Dance	is	good	in	itself—as	far	as	it	goes,	it	is	good.	After	it,
you	will	feel	fresh,	young.	But	it	is	not	meditation	yet.	The	dancer	must	go,
until	only	the	dance	remains.
So	what	to	do?	Be	totally	in	the	dance,	because	division	can	exist	only	if
you	are	not	total	in	it.	If	you	are	standing	aside	and	looking	at	your	own
dance,	the	division	will	remain:	you	are	the	dancer	and	you	are	dancing.
Then	dancing	is	just	an	act,	something	you	are	doing;	it	is	not	your	being.
So	get	involved	totally,	be	merged	in	it.	Don’t	stand	aside,	don’t	be	an
observer.
Participate!
Instructions
Nataraj	is	dance	as	a	total	meditation.	There	are	three	stages,	lasting	a	total
of	65	minutes.
Let	the	dance	flow	in	its	own	way;	don’t	force	it.	Rather,	follow	it;	allow	it
to	happen.	It	is	not	a	doing	but	a	happening.	Remain	in	the	mood	of	festivity.
You	are	not	doing	something	very	serious;	you	are	just	playing,	playing	with
your	life	energy,	playing	with	your	bioenergy,	allowing	it	to	move	in	its	own
way.	Just	like	the	wind	blows	and	the	river	flows—you	are	flowing	and	blowing.
Feel	it.
And	be	playful.	Remember	this	word	‘playful’	always.	With	me,	it	is	very
basic.	In	India	we	call	creation	God’s	leela—God’s	play.	God	has	not	created	the
world;	it	is	his	play.
First	stage:	40	minutes
With	eyes	closed,	dance	as	if	possessed.	Let	your	unconscious	take	over
completely.	Do	not	control	your	movements	or	be	a	witness	to	what	is
happening.	Just	be	totally	in	the	dance.
Second	stage:	20	minutes
Keeping	your	eyes	closed,	lie	down	immediately.	Be	silent	and	still.
Third	stage:	5	minutes
Dance	in	celebration	and	enjoy.
OSHO	NADABRAHMA	MEDITATION
Nadabrahma	is	based	on	Tibetan	techniques	done	in	the	early	hours	of	the
morning.	It	can	be	done	at	any	time	of	the	day,	alone	or	with	others,	but
have	an	empty	stomach	and	remain	inactive	for	at	least	15	minutes
afterwards.	The	meditation	lasts	an	hour,	and	there	are	three	stages.
First	stage:	30	minutes
Sit	in	a	relaxed	position	with	eyes	closed	and	lips	together.	Start	humming,
loudly	enough	to	be	heard	by	others	and	create	a	vibration	throughout	your	body.
You	can	visualize	a	hollow	tube	or	an	empty	vessel,	filled	only	with	the
vibrations	of	the	humming.	A	point	will	come	when	the	humming	continues	by
itself	and	you	become	the	listener.	There	is	no	special	breathing	and	you	can
alter	the	pitch	or	move	your	body	smoothly	and	slowly	if	you	feel	it.
Second	stage:	15	minutes
The	second	stage	is	divided	into	two	7½-minute	sections.	For	the	first	half,
move	the	hands,	palms	up,	in	an	outward	circular	motion.	Starting	at	the	navel,
both	hands	move	forwards	and	then	divide	to	make	two	large	circles	mirroring
each	other	left	and	right.	The	movement	should	be	so	slow	that	at	times	there
will	appear	to	be	no	movement	at	all.	Feel	that	you	are	giving	energy	outwards
to	the	universe.
After	7½	minutes	turn	the	hands,	palms	down,	and	start	moving	them	in	the
opposite	direction.	Now	the	hands	will	come	together	towards	the	navel	and
divide	outwards	to	the	sides	of	the	body.	Feel	that	you	are	taking	energy	in.	As	in
the	first	stage,	don’t	inhibit	any	soft,	slow	movements	of	the	rest	of	your	body.
Third	stage:	15	minutes
Sit	absolutely	quiet	and	still.
Nadabrahma	for	couples
Osho	has	given	a	beautiful	variation	of	this	technique	for	couples.	Partners
sit	facing	each	other,	covered	by	a	bedsheet	and	holding	each	other’s	crossed
hands.	It	is	best	to	wear	no	other	clothing.	Light	the	room	only	by	four	small
candles	and	burn	a	particular	incense,	kept	only	for	this	meditation.	Close	your
eyes	and	hum	together	for	30	minutes.	After	a	short	while	the	energies	will	be
felt	to	meet,	merge	and	unite.
Anything	Can	Be	a	Meditation
This	is	the	secret:	de-automatize.	If	we	can	de-automatize	our	activities,
then	the	whole	life	becomes	a	meditation.	Then	any	small	thing,	taking	a
shower,	eating	your	food,	talking	to	your	friend,	becomes	meditation.
Meditation	is	a	quality;	it	can	be	brought	to	anything.	It	is	not	a	specific
act.	People	think	that	way,	they	think	meditation	is	a	specific	act—when
you	sit	facing	to	the	east,	you	repeat	certain	mantras,	you	burn	some
incense,	you	do	this	and	that	at	a	particular	time	in	a	particular	way	with
a	particular	gesture.	Meditation	has	nothing	to	do	with	all	those	things.
They	are	all	ways	to	automatize	it	and	meditation	is	against
automatization.
So	if	you	can	keep	alert,	any	activity	is	meditation;	any	movement	will
help	you	immensely.
Running,	Jogging	and	Swimming
It	is	natural	and	easy	to	keep	alert	while	you	are	in	movement.	When	you	are
just	sitting	silently,	the	natural	thing	is	to	just	fall	asleep.	When	you	are	lying	on
your	bed	it	is	very	difficult	to	keep	alert	because	the	whole	situation	helps	you	to
fall	asleep.	But	in	movement	naturally	you	cannot	fall	asleep,	you	function	in	a
more	alert	way.	The	only	problem	is	that	the	movement	can	become	mechanical.
Learn	to	melt	your	body,	mind	and	soul.	Find	ways	where	you	can	function
as	a	unity.	It	happens	many	times	to	runners.	You	might	not	think	of	running	as	a
meditation,	but	runners	sometimes	have	felt	a	tremendous	experience	of
meditation.	And	they	were	surprised,	because	they	were	not	looking	for	it—who
thinks	that	a	runner	is	going	to	experience	God?	But	it	has	happened.	And	now,
more	and	more,	running	is	becoming	a	new	kind	of	meditation.	It	can	happen	in
running.
If	you	have	ever	been	a	runner,	if	you	have	enjoyed	running	in	the	early
morning	when	the	air	is	fresh	and	young	and	the	whole	world	is	coming	back
from	sleep,	awakening—you	were	running	and	your	body	was	functioning
beautifully,	the	fresh	air,	the	new	world	born	again	out	of	the	darkness	of	the
night,	everything	singing	all	around,	you	were	feeling	so	alive…a	moment
comes	when	the	runner	disappears,	and	there	is	only	running.	The	body,	mind
and	soul	start	functioning	together;	suddenly	an	inner	orgasm	is	released.
Runners	have	sometimes	come	accidentally	on	the	experience	of	the	fourth,
turiya,	although	they	will	miss	it—they	will	think	it	was	just	because	of	running
that	they	enjoyed	the	moment:	that	it	was	a	beautiful	day,	the	body	was	healthy
and	the	world	was	beautiful,	and	it	was	just	a	certain	mood.	They	will	not	take
note	of	it—but	if	they	do	take	note	of	it,	my	own	observation	is	that	a	runner	can
come	close	to	meditation	more	easily	than	anybody	else.
Jogging	can	be	of	immense	help,	swimming	can	be	of	immense	help.	All
these	things	have	to	be	transformed	into	meditations.
Drop	the	old	ideas	of	meditations—that	just	sitting	underneath	a	tree	in	a
yoga	posture	is	meditation.	That	is	only	one	of	the	ways,	and	it	may	be	suitable
for	a	few	people	but	it	is	not	suitable	for	all.	For	a	small	child	it	is	not
meditation,	it	is	torture.	For	a	young	man	who	is	alive	and	vibrant	it	is
repression,	it	is	not	meditation.
Start	running	in	the	morning	on	the	road.	Start	with	half	a	mile	and	then	one
mile	and	come	eventually	to	at	least	three	miles.	While	running	use	the	whole
body;	don’t	run	as	if	you	are	in	a	straitjacket.	Run	like	a	small	child,	using	the
whole	body—hands	and	feet—and	run.	Breathe	deeply	and	from	the	belly.	Then
sit	under	a	tree,	rest,	perspire	and	let	the	cool	breeze	come;	feel	peaceful.	This
will	help	very	deeply.
Sometimes	just	stand	on	the	earth	without	shoes	and	feel	the	coolness,	the
softness,	the	warmth.	Whatsoever	the	earth	is	ready	to	give	in	that	moment,	just
feel	it	and	let	it	flow	through	you.	And	allow	your	energy	to	flow	into	the	earth.
Be	connected	with	the	earth.
If	you	are	connected	with	the	earth,	you	are	connected	with	life.	If	you	are
connected	with	the	earth,	you	are	connected	with	your	body.	If	you	are
connected	with	the	earth,	you	will	become	very	sensitive	and	centered—and
that’s	what	is	needed.
Never	become	an	expert	in	running;	remain	an	amateur	so	that	alertness	may
be	kept.	If	you	feel	sometimes	that	running	has	become	automatic,	drop	it;	try
swimming.	If	that	becomes	automatic,	then	try	dancing.	The	point	to	remember
is	that	the	movement	is	just	a	situation	to	create	awareness.	While	it	creates
awareness	it	is	good.	If	it	stops	creating	awareness,	then	it	is	no	more	of	any	use;
change	to	another	movement	where	you	will	have	to	be	alert	again.	Never	allow
any	activity	to	become	automatic.
Laughing	Meditation
Laughter	brings	some	energy	from	your	inner	source	to	your	surface.	Energy
starts	flowing,	follows	laughter	like	a	shadow.	Have	you	watched	it?	When	you
really	laugh,	for	those	few	moments	you	are	in	a	deep	meditative	state.	Thinking
stops.	It	is	impossible	to	laugh	and	think	together.	They	are	diametrically
opposite:	either	you	can	laugh	or	you	can	think.	If	you	really	laugh,	thinking
stops.	If	you	are	still	thinking,	laughter	will	be	just	so-so,	lagging	behind.	It	will
be	a	crippled	laughter.
When	you	really	laugh,	suddenly	mind	disappears.	As	far	as	I	know,	dancing
and	laughter	are	the	best,	natural,	easily	approachable	doors.	If	you	really	dance,
thinking	stops.	You	go	on	and	on,	you	whirl	and	whirl,	and	you	become	a
whirlpool—all	boundaries,	all	divisions	are	lost.	You	don’t	even	know	where
your	body	ends	and	where	existence	begins.	You	melt	into	existence	and
existence	melts	into	you;	there	is	an	overlapping	of	boundaries.	And	if	you	are
really	dancing—not	managing	it	but	allowing	it	to	manage	you,	allowing	it	to
possess	you—if	you	are	possessed	by	dance,	thinking	stops.	The	same	happens
with	laughter.	If	you	are	possessed	by	laughter,	thinking	stops.	Laughter	can	be	a
beautiful	introduction	to	a	non-thinking	state.
Instructions	for	Laughing	Meditation
Every	morning	upon	waking,	before	opening	your	eyes,	stretch	like	a	cat.
Stretch	every	fiber	of	your	body.	After	three	or	four	minutes,	with	eyes	still
closed,	begin	to	laugh.	For	five	minutes	just	laugh.	At	first	you	will	be	doing	it,
but	soon	the	sound	of	your	attempt	will	cause	genuine	laughter.	Lose	yourself	in
laughter.	It	may	take	several	days	before	it	really	happens,	for	we	are	so
unaccustomed	to	the	phenomenon.	But	before	long	it	will	be	spontaneous	and
will	change	the	whole	nature	of	your	day.
Gibberish	Meditation
This	is	a	cathartic	technique,	which	encourages	expressive	body	movements.
It	should	be	distinguished	from	the	gentle	Devavani	Meditation.
Instructions
First	stage:	15	minutes
Either	alone	or	in	a	group,	close	your	eyes	and	begin	to	say	nonsense	sounds
—gibberish.	Allow	yourself	to	express	whatever	needs	to	be	expressed	within
you.
Throw	everything	out.	The	mind	always	thinks	in	terms	of	words.	Gibberish
helps	to	break	this	pattern	of	continual	verbalization.	Without	suppressing	any	of
your	thoughts,	you	can	throw	them	out—in	gibberish.	Likewise,	let	your	body	be
expressive.
Second	stage:	15	minutes
Then	for	fifteen	minutes,	lie	down	on	your	stomach	and	feel	as	if	you	are
merging	with	the	Earth.	With	each	exhalation,	feel	yourself	merging	with	the
ground	beneath	you.
(Also	see	OSHO	NO-MIND	MEDITATION)
Smoking	Meditation
A	man	came	to	me.	He	had	been	suffering	from	chain-smoking	for	thirty
years;	he	was	ill	and	the	doctors	said,	“You	will	never	be	healthy	if	you	don’t
stop	smoking.”	But	he	was	a	chronic	smoker;	he	could	not	help	it.	He	had	tried
—not	that	he	had	not	tried—he	had	tried	hard,	and	he	had	suffered	much	in
trying,	but	only	for	one	day	or	two	days,	and	then	again	the	urge	would	come	so
tremendously,	it	would	simply	take	him	away.	Again	he	would	fall	into	the	same
pattern.
Because	of	this	smoking	he	had	lost	all	self-confidence:	he	knew	he	could
not	do	a	small	thing;	he	could	not	stop	smoking.	He	had	become	worthless	in	his
own	eyes;	he	thought	himself	just	the	most	worthless	person	in	the	world.	He
had	no	respect	for	himself.	He	came	to	me.
He	said,	“What	can	I	do?	How	can	I	stop	smoking?”	I	said,	“Nobody	can
stop	smoking.	You	have	to	understand.	Smoking	is	not	only	a	question	of	your
decision	now.	It	has	entered	into	your	world	of	habits;	it	has	taken	roots.	Thirty
years	is	a	long	time.	It	has	taken	roots	in	your	body,	in	your	chemistry;	it	has
spread	all	over.	It	is	not	just	a	question	of	your	head	deciding;	your	head	cannot
do	anything.	The	head	is	impotent;	it	can	start	things,	but	it	cannot	stop	them	so
easily.	Once	you	have	started	and	once	you	have	practiced	so	long,	you	are	a
great	yogi—thirty	years	practicing	smoking!	It	has	become	autonomous;	you
will	have	to	de-automatize	it.”
He	said,	“What	do	you	mean	by	‘de-automatization’?”
And	that’s	what	meditation	is	all	about:	de-automatization.
I	said,	“You	do	one	thing:	forget	about	stopping.	There	is	no	need	either.	For
thirty	years	you	have	smoked	and	lived;	of	course	it	was	a	suffering	but	you	have
become	accustomed	to	that	too.	And	what	does	it	matter	if	you	die	a	few	hours
earlier	than	you	would	have	died	without	smoking?	What	are	you	going	to	do
here?	What	have	you	done?	So	what	is	the	point—whether	you	die	Monday	or
Tuesday	or	Sunday,	this	year,	that	year—what	does	it	matter?”
He	said,	“Yes,	that	is	true,	it	doesn’t	matter.”	Then	I	said,	“Forget	about	it;
we	are	not	going	to	stop	it	at	all.	Rather,	we	are	going	to	understand	it.	So	next
time,	you	make	it	a	meditation.”
He	said,	“Meditation	out	of	smoking?”
I	said,	“Yes.	If	Zen	people	can	make	a	meditation	out	of	drinking	tea	and	can
make	it	a	ceremony,	why	not?	Smoking	can	be	as	beautiful	a	meditation.”
He	looked	thrilled.	He	said,	“What	are	you	saying?”
He	became	alive!	He	said,	“Meditation?	just	tell	me—I	can’t	wait!”
I	gave	him	the	meditation.	I	said,	“Do	one	thing.	When	you	are	taking	the
packet	of	cigarettes	out	of	your	pocket,	move	slowly.	Enjoy	it,	there	is	no	hurry.
Be	conscious,	alert,	aware;	take	it	out	slowly	with	full	awareness.	Then	take	the
cigarette	out	of	the	packet	with	full	awareness,	slowly—not	in	the	old	hurried
way,	the	unconscious	way,	mechanical	way.	Then	start	tapping	the	cigarette	on
your	packet—but	very	alertly.	Listen	to	the	sound,	just	as	Zen	people	do	when
the	samovar	starts	singing	and	the	tea	starts	boiling	…	and	the	aroma.	Then
smell	the	cigarette	and	the	beauty	of	it….”
He	said,	“What	are	you	saying?	The	beauty?”
“Yes,	it	is	beautiful.	Tobacco	is	as	divine	as	anything.	Smell	it;	it	is	God’s
smell.”
He	looked	a	little	surprised.	He	said,	“What!	Are	you	joking?”
No,	I	am	not	joking.	Even	when	I	joke,	I	don’t	joke.	I	am	very	serious.
“Then	put	it	in	your	mouth,	with	full	awareness,	light	it	with	full	awareness.
Enjoy	every	act,	every	small	act,	and	divide	it	into	as	many	acts	as	possible,	so
you	can	become	more	and	more	aware.
“Then	have	the	first	puff:	God	in	the	form	of	smoke.	Hindus	say,	‘Annam
Brahm’—‘Food	is	God’.	Why	not	smoke?	All	is	God.	Fill	your	lungs	deeply—
this	is	a	pranayam.	I	am	giving	you	the	new	yoga	for	the	new	age!	Then	release
the	smoke,	relax,	another	puff—and	go	very	slowly.
“If	you	can	do	it,	you	will	be	surprised;	soon	you	will	see	the	whole	stupidity
of	it.	Not	because	others	have	said	that	it	is	stupid,	not	because	others	have	said
that	it	is	bad.	You	will	see	it.	And	the	seeing	will	not	just	be	intellectual.	It	will
be	from	your	total	being;	it	will	be	a	vision	of	your	totality.	And	then	one	day,	if
it	drops,	it	drops;	if	it	continues,	it	continues.	You	need	not	worry	about	it.”
After	three	months	he	came	and	he	said,	“But	it	dropped.”
“Now,”	I	said,	“try	it	on	other	things	too.”
This	is	the	secret,	the	secret:	de-automatize.	Walking,	walk	slowly,
watchfully.	Looking,	look	watchfully,	and	you	will	see	trees	are	greener	than
they	have	ever	been	and	roses	are	rosier	than	they	have	ever	been.	Listen!
Somebody	is	talking,	gossiping:	listen,	listen	attentively.	When	you	are	talking,
talk	attentively.	Let	your	whole	waking	activity	become	de-automatized.
Breath—a	Bridge	to	Meditation
If	you	can	do	something	with	the	breath,	you	will	suddenly	turn	to	the
present.
If	you	can	do	something	with	breath,	you	will	attain	to	the	source	of	life.	If
you	can	do	something	with	breath,	you	can	transcend	time	and	space.	If
you	can	do	something	with	breath,	you	will	be	in	the	world	and	also
beyond	it.
Vipassana
Vipassana	is	the	meditation	that	has	made	more	people	in	the	world
enlightened	than	any	other,	because	it	is	the	very	essence.	All	other	meditations
have	the	same	essence,	but	in	different	forms;	something	non-essential	is	also
joined	with	them.	But	vipassana	is	pure	essence.	You	cannot	drop	anything	out
of	it	and	you	cannot	add	anything	to	improve	it.
Vipassana	is	such	a	simple	thing	that	even	a	small	child	can	do	it.	In	fact,	the
smallest	child	can	do	it	better	than	you,	because	he	is	not	yet	filled	with	the
garbage	of	the	mind;	he	is	still	clean	and	innocent.
Vipassana	can	be	done	in	three	ways—you	can	choose	which	one	suits	you
the	best.
The	first	is:	awareness	of	your	actions,	your	body,	your	mind,	your	heart.
Walking,	you	should	walk	with	awareness.	Moving	your	hand,	you	should	move
with	awareness,	knowing	perfectly	that	you	are	moving	the	hand.	You	can	move
it	without	any	consciousness,	like	a	mechanical	thing…you	are	on	a	morning
walk;	you	can	go	on	walking	without	being	aware	of	your	feet.
Be	alert	of	the	movements	of	your	body.	While	eating,	be	alert	to	the
movements	that	are	needed	for	eating.	Taking	a	shower,	be	alert	to	the	coolness
that	is	coming	to	you,	the	water	falling	on	you	and	the	tremendous	joy	of	it—just
be	alert.	It	should	not	go	on	happening	in	an	unconscious	state.
And	the	same	about	your	mind.	Whatever	thought	passes	on	the	screen	of
your	mind,	just	be	a	watcher.	Whatever	emotion	passes	on	the	screen	of	your
heart,	just	remain	a	witness—don’t	get	involved,	don’t	get	identified,	don’t
evaluate	what	is	good,	what	is	bad;	that	is	not	part	of	your	meditation.
The	second	form	is	breathing,	becoming	aware	of	breathing.	As	the	breath
goes	in,	your	belly	starts	rising	up,	and	as	the	breath	goes	out,	your	belly	starts
settling	down	again.	So	the	second	method	is	to	be	aware	of	the	belly:	its	rising
and	falling.	Just	the	very	awareness	of	the	belly	rising	and	falling…and	the	belly
is	very	close	to	the	life	sources	because	the	child	is	joined	with	the	mother’s	life
through	the	navel.	Behind	the	navel	is	his	life’s	source.	So,	when	the	belly	rises
up,	it	is	really	the	life-energy,	the	spring	of	life	that	is	rising	up	and	falling	down
with	each	breath.	That	too	is	not	difficult,	and	perhaps	may	be	even	easier
because	it	is	a	single	technique.
In	the	first,	you	have	to	be	aware	of	the	body,	you	have	to	be	aware	of	the
mind,	you	have	to	be	aware	of	your	emotions,	moods.	So	it	has	three	steps.	The
second	approach	has	a	single	step:	just	the	belly,	moving	up	and	down.	And	the
result	is	the	same.	As	you	become	more	aware	of	the	belly,	the	mind	becomes
silent,	the	heart	becomes	silent,	the	moods	disappear.
And	the	third	is	to	be	aware	of	the	breath	at	the	entrance,	when	the	breath
goes	in	through	your	nostrils.	Feel	it	at	that	extreme—the	other	polarity	from	the
belly—feel	it	from	the	nose.	The	breath	going	in	gives	a	certain	coolness	to	your
nostrils.	Then	the	breath	going	out…breath	going	in,	breath	going	out.
That	too	is	possible.	It	is	easier	for	men	than	for	women.	The	woman	is	more
aware	of	the	belly.	Most	of	the	men	don’t	even	breathe	as	deep	as	the	belly.	Their
chest	rises	up	and	falls	down,	because	a	wrong	kind	of	athletics	prevails	over	the
world.	Certainly	it	gives	a	more	beautiful	form	to	the	body	if	your	chest	is	high
and	your	belly	is	almost	non-existent.
Man	has	chosen	to	breathe	only	up	to	the	chest,	so	the	chest	becomes	bigger
and	bigger	and	the	belly	shrinks	down.	That	appears	to	him	to	be	more	athletic.
Around	the	world,	except	in	Japan,	all	athletes	and	teachers	of	athletes
emphasize	to	breathe	by	filling	your	lungs,	expanding	your	chest,	and	pulling	the
belly	in.	The	ideal	is	the	lion	whose	chest	is	big	and	whose	belly	is	very	small.
So	be	like	a	lion;	that	has	become	the	rule	for	athletic	gymnasts,	and	the	people
who	have	been	working	with	the	body.
Japan	is	the	only	exception	where	they	don’t	care	that	the	chest	should	be
broad	and	the	belly	should	be	pulled	in.	It	needs	a	certain	discipline	to	pull	the
belly	in;	it	is	not	natural.	Japan	has	chosen	the	natural	way,	hence	you	will	be
surprised	to	see	a	Japanese	statue	of	Buddha.	That	is	the	way	you	can
immediately	discriminate	whether	the	statue	is	Indian	or	Japanese.	The	Indian
statues	of	Gautam	Buddha	have	a	very	athletic	body;	the	belly	is	very	small	and
the	chest	is	very	broad.	But	the	Japanese	Buddha	is	totally	different;	his	chest	is
almost	silent,	because	he	breathes	from	the	belly,	but	his	belly	is	bigger.	It
doesn’t	look	very	good—because	the	idea	prevalent	in	the	world	is	so	old,	but
breathing	from	the	belly	is	more	natural,	more	relaxed.
In	the	night	it	happens	when	you	sleep;	you	don’t	breathe	from	the	chest,
you	breathe	from	the	belly.	That’s	why	the	night	is	such	a	relaxed	experience.
After	your	sleep,	in	the	morning	you	feel	so	fresh,	so	young,	because	the	whole
night	you	were	breathing	naturally…you	were	in	Japan!
These	are	the	two	points:	if	you	are	afraid	that	breathing	from	the	belly	and
being	attentive	to	its	rising	and	falling	will	destroy	your	athletic	form…men	may
be	more	interested	in	that	athletic	form.	Then	for	them	it	is	easier	to	watch	near
the	nostrils	where	the	breath	enters.	Watch,	and	when	the	breath	goes	out,	watch.
These	are	the	three	forms.	Any	one	will	do.	And	if	you	want	to	do	two	forms
together,	you	can	do	two	forms	together;	then	the	effort	will	become	more
intense.	If	you	want	to	do	all	three	forms	together,	you	can	do	all	three	forms
together.	Then	the	possibilities	will	be	quicker.	But	it	all	depends	on	you,
whatever	feels	easy.
Remember:	easy	is	right.
As	meditation	becomes	settled	and	mind	silent,	the	ego	will	disappear.	You
will	be	there,	but	there	will	be	no	feeling	of	‘I.’	Then	the	doors	are	open.
Just	wait	with	a	loving	longing,	with	a	welcome	in	the	heart	for	that	great
moment—the	greatest	moment	in	anybody’s	life—of	enlightenment.	It	comes…
it	certainly	comes.	It	has	never	delayed	for	a	single	moment.	Once	you	are	in	the
right	tuning,	it	suddenly	explodes	in	you,	transforms	you.	The	old	man	is	dead
and	the	new	man	has	arrived.
Sitting
Find	a	reasonably	comfortable	and	alert	position	to	sit	for	40	to	60	minutes.
Back	and	head	should	be	straight,	eyes	closed	and	breathing	normal.	Stay	as	still
as	possible,	only	changing	position	if	it	is	really	necessary.
While	sitting,	the	primary	object	is	to	be	watching	the	rise	and	fall	of	the
belly,	slightly	above	the	navel,	caused	by	breathing	in	and	out.	It	is	not	a
concentration	technique,	so	while	watching	the	breath,	many	other	things	will
take	your	attention	away.	Nothing	is	a	distraction	in	vipassana,	so	when
something	else	comes	up,	stop	watching	the	breath,	pay	attention	to	whatever	is
happening	until	it’s	possible	to	go	back	to	your	breath.	This	may	include
thoughts,	feelings,	judgments,	body	sensations,	impressions	from	the	outside
world,	etc.	It	is	the	process	of	watching	that	is	significant,	not	so	much	what	you
are	watching,	so	remember	not	to	become	identified	with	whatever	comes	up;
questions	or	problems	may	just	be	seen	as	mysteries	to	be	enjoyed!
Vipassana	walk
This	is	a	slow,	ordinary	walk	based	on	the	awareness	of	the	feet	touching	the
ground.
You	can	walk	in	a	circle	or	a	line	of	10	to	15	steps	going	back	and	forth,
inside	or	out	of	doors.	Eyes	should	be	lowered	to	the	ground	a	few	steps	ahead.
While	walking,	the	attention	should	go	to	the	contact	of	each	foot	as	it	touches
the	ground.	If	other	things	arise,	stop	paying	attention	to	the	feet,	notice	what
else	took	your	attention	and	then	return	to	the	feet.
It	is	the	same	technique	as	in	sitting—but	watching	a	different	primary
object.	You	can	walk	for	20	to	30	minutes.
Throwing	things	out
Whenever	you	feel	that	the	mind	is	not	tranquil—tense,	worried,	chattering,
anxious,	constantly	dreaming—do	one	thing:	first	exhale	deeply.	Always	start	by
exhaling.	Exhale	deeply;	as	much	as	you	can,	throw	the	air	out.	Throwing	out
the	air,	the	mood	will	be	thrown	out	too,	because	breathing	is	everything.	And
then	expel	the	breath	as	far	as	possible.	Pull	the	belly	in	and	retain	for	a	few
seconds;	don’t	inhale.	Let	the	air	be	out,	and	don’t	inhale	for	a	few	seconds.
Then	allow	the	body	to	inhale.	Inhale	deeply,	as	much	as	you	can.	Again	stop	for
a	few	seconds.	The	gap	should	be	the	same	as	when	you	retain	the	breath	out—if
you	retain	it	out	for	three	seconds,	retain	the	breath	in	for	three	seconds.	Throw
it	out	and	hold	for	three	seconds;	take	it	in	and	hold	for	three	seconds.	But	it	has
to	be	thrown	out	completely.	Exhale	totally	and	inhale	totally,	and	make	a
rhythm.	Breathe	in,	hold;	breathe	out,	hold.	Breathe	in,	hold;	breathe	out,	hold.
Immediately	you	will	feel	a	change	coming	into	your	whole	being.	The	mood
will	go;	a	new	climate	will	enter	into	you.
Opening	the	Heart
The	heart	is	the	gateless	gate	to	reality.	Move	from	the	head	to	the	heart.
We	are	all	hung	up	in	the	head.	That	is	our	only	problem,	the	only	one
problem.	And	there	is	only	one	solution:	get	down	from	the	head	into	the
heart	and	all	problems	disappear.	They	are	created	by	the	head.	And
suddenly	everything	is	so	clear	and	so	transparent	that	one	is	surprised
how	one	was	continuously	inventing	problems.	Mysteries	remain	but
problems	disappear.	Mysteries	abound	but	problems	evaporate.	And
mysteries	are	beautiful.	They	are	not	to	be	solved.	They	have	to	be	lived.
From	head	to	heart
The	first	point:	try	to	be	headless.	Visualize	yourself	as	headless;	move
headlessly.	It	sounds	absurd,	but	it	is	one	of	the	most	important	exercises.	Try	it,
and	then	you	will	know.	Walk,	and	feel	as	if	you	have	no	head.	In	the	beginning
it	will	be	only	‘as	if.’It	will	be	very	weird.	When	the	feeling	comes	to	you	that
you	have	no	head,	it	will	be	very	weird	and	strange.	But	by	and	by	you	will
settle	down	at	the	heart.
There	is	a	law.	You	may	have	seen	that	someone	who	is	blind	has	keener
ears,	more	musical	ears.	Blind	men	are	more	musical;	their	feeling	for	music	is
deeper.	Why?	The	energy	that	ordinarily	moves	through	the	eyes	now	cannot
move	through	them,	so	it	chooses	a	different	path—it	moves	through	the	ears.
Blind	men	have	a	deeper	sensitivity	of	touch.	If	a	blind	man	touches	you,
you	will	feel	the	difference,	because	we	ordinarily	do	much	work	with	touch
through	our	eyes:	we	are	touching	each	other	through	our	eyes.	A	blind	man
cannot	touch	through	the	eyes,	so	the	energy	moves	through	his	hands.	A	blind
man	is	more	sensitive	than	anyone	who	has	eyes.	Sometimes	it	may	not	be	so,
but	generally	it	is	so.	Energy	starts	moving	from	another	center	if	one	center	is
not	there.
So	try	this	exercise	I	am	talking	about—the	exercise	in	headlessness—and
suddenly	you	will	feel	a	strange	thing:	it	will	be	as	if	for	the	first	time	you	are	at
the	heart.	Walk	headlessly.	Sit	down	to	meditate,	close	your	eyes	and	simply	feel
that	there	is	no	head.	Feel,	“My	head	has	disappeared.”	In	the	beginning	it	will
be	just	‘as	if’,	but	by	and	by	you	will	feel	that	the	head	has	really	disappeared.
And	when	you	feel	that	your	head	has	disappeared,	your	center	will	fall	down	to
the	heart—immediately!	You	will	be	looking	at	the	world	through	the	heart	and
not	through	the	head.
When	for	the	first	time	Westerners	reached	Japan,	they	couldn’t	believe	that
the	Japanese	traditionally	have	been	thinking	for	centuries	that	they	think
through	the	belly.	If	you	ask	a	Japanese	child—if	he	is	not	educated	in	Western
ways—“Where	is	your	thinking?”	he	will	point	to	his	belly.
Centuries	and	centuries	have	passed,	and	Japan	has	been	living	without	the
head.	It	is	just	a	concept.	If	I	ask	you,	“Where	is	your	thinking	going	on?”	you
will	point	toward	the	head,	but	a	Japanese	person	will	point	to	the	belly,	not	to
the	head—one	of	the	reasons	why	the	Japanese	mind	is	more	calm,	quiet	and
collected.
Now	this	is	disturbed	because	the	West	has	spread	over	everything.	Now
there	exists	no	East.	Only	in	some	individuals	who	are	like	islands	here	and	there
does	the	East	exist.	Geographically,	the	East	has	disappeared.	Now	the	whole
world	is	Western.
Try	headlessness.	Meditate	standing	before	your	mirror	in	the	bathroom.
Look	deep	into	your	eyes	and	feel	that	you	are	looking	from	the	heart.	By	and	by
the	heart	center	will	begin	to	function.	And	when	the	heart	functions,	it	changes
your	total	personality,	the	total	structure,	the	whole	pattern,	because	the	heart	has
its	own	way.
So	the	first	thing:	try	headlessness.	Secondly,	be	more	loving,	because	love
cannot	function	through	the	head.	Be	more	loving!	That	is	why,	when	someone
is	in	love,	he	loses	his	head.	People	say	that	he	has	gone	mad.	If	you	are	not	in
love	and	mad,	then	you	are	not	really	in	love.	The	head	must	be	lost.	If	the	head
is	there	unaffected,	functioning	ordinarily,	then	love	is	not	possible,	because	for
love	you	need	the	heart	to	function—not	the	head.	It	is	a	function	of	the	heart.
It	happens	that	when	a	very	rational	person	falls	in	love,	he	becomes	stupid.
He	himself	feels	what	stupidity	he	is	doing,	what	silliness.	What	is	he	doing!
Then	he	makes	two	parts	of	his	life;	he	creates	a	division.	The	heart	becomes	a
silent,	intimate	affair.	When	he	moves	out	of	his	house,	he	moves	out	of	his
heart.	He	lives	in	the	world	with	the	head	and	only	comes	down	to	the	heart
when	he	is	loving.	But	it	is	very	difficult.	It	is	very	difficult,	and	ordinarily	it
never	happens.
I	was	staying	in	Calcutta	at	a	friend’s	house,	and	the	friend	was	a	justice	of
the	High	Court.	His	wife	told	me,	“I	have	only	one	problem	to	tell	you.	Can	you
help	me?”
So	I	said,	“What	is	the	problem?”
She	said,	“My	husband	is	your	friend.	He	loves	you	and	respects	you,	so	if
you	say	something	to	him	it	may	be	helpful.”
So	I	asked	her.	“What	is	to	be	said?	Tell	me.”
She	said,	“He	remains	a	High	Court	judge	even	in	bed.	I	have	not	known	a
lover,	a	friend	or	a	husband.	He	is	a	High	Court	judge	twenty-four	hours	a	day.”
It	is	difficult:	it	is	difficult	to	come	down	from	your	pedestal.	It	becomes	a
fixed	attitude.	If	you	are	a	businessman,	you	will	remain	a	businessman	in	bed
also.	It	is	difficult	to	accommodate	two	persons	within,	and	it	is	not	easy	to
change	your	pattern	completely,	immediately,	any	time	you	like.	It	is	difficult,
but	if	you	are	in	love	you	will	have	to	come	down	from	the	head.
So	for	this	meditation	try	to	be	more	and	more	loving.	And	when	I	say	be
more	loving,	I	mean	change	the	quality	of	your	relationship:	let	it	be	based	on
love.	Not	only	with	your	wife	or	with	your	child	or	with	your	friend,	but	toward
life	as	such,	become	more	loving.	That	is	why	Mahavira	and	Buddha	have	talked
about	non-violence:	it	was	just	to	create	a	loving	attitude	toward	life.
When	Mahavira	moves,	walks,	he	remains	aware	not	even	to	kill	an	ant.
Why?	Really,	the	ant	is	not	concerned.	Mahavira	is	coming	down	from	the	head
to	the	heart,	creating	a	loving	attitude	toward	life	as	such.	The	more	your
relationship	is	based	on	love—all	relationships—the	more	your	heart	center	will
function.	It	will	start	working;	you	will	look	at	the	world	through	different	eyes:
because	the	heart	has	its	own	way	of	looking	at	the	world.	The	mind	can	never
look	in	that	way:	that	is	impossible	for	the	mind.	The	mind	can	only	analyze!
The	heart	synthesizes;	the	mind	can	only	dissect,	divide.	It	is	a	divider.	Only	the
heart	gives	unity.
When	you	can	look	through	the	heart	the	whole	universe	looks	like	one
unity.	When	you	approach	through	the	mind,	the	whole	world	becomes	atomic.
There	is	no	unity:	only	atoms	and	atoms	and	atoms.	The	heart	gives	a	unitary
experience.	It	joins	together	and	the	ultimate	synthesis	is	God.	If	you	can	look
through	the	heart,	the	whole	universe	looks	like	one.	That	oneness	is	God.
That	is	why	science	can	never	find	God.	It	is	impossible,	because	the	method
applied	can	never	reach	to	the	ultimate	unity.	The	very	method	of	science	is
reason,	analysis,	division.	So	science	comes	to	molecules,	atoms,	electrons,	and
they	will	go	on	dividing.	They	can	never	come	to	the	organic	unity	of	the	whole.
The	whole	is	impossible	to	look	at	through	the	head.
The	heart	of	peacefulness
A	very	simple	method	but	it	works	miraculously—try	it.	And	anyone	can	try
it,	there	is	no	danger.	In	an	easy	position:	the	first	thing	is	to	be	in	a	relaxed
position—easy,	whatsoever	is	easy	for	you.	So	don’t	try	some	particular	position
or	asana.	Buddha	sits	in	a	particular	posture.	It	is	easy	for	him.	It	can	also
become	easy	for	you	if	you	practice	it	for	a	time,	but	in	the	very	beginning	it	will
not	be	easy	for	you.	And	there	is	no	need	to	practice	it:	start	from	any	posture
that	comes	easy	to	you	right	now.	Don’t	struggle	with	posture.	You	can	sit	in	an
easy	chair	and	relax.	The	only	thing	is	your	body	must	be	in	a	relaxed	state.
Just	close	your	eyes	and	feel	all	over	the	body.	Start	from	the	legs	feeling
whether	there	is	some	tension.	If	you	feel	somewhere	there	is	some	tension,	do
one	thing:	make	it	more	tense.	If	you	feel	that	in	the	leg,	in	the	right	leg,	there	is
tension,	then	make	that	tension	as	intense	as	possible.	Bring	it	to	a	peak	and	then
suddenly	relax	so	that	you	can	feel	how	relaxation	settles	there.	Then	go	all	over
the	body	just	finding	if	there	is	some	tension	somewhere.	Wherever	you	feel	the
tension	make	it	more,	because	it	is	easy	to	relax	it	when	it	is	intense.	In	just	a
mid-state	it	is	very	difficult	because	you	cannot	feel	it.
It	is	easy	to	move	from	one	extreme	to	another,	very	easy,	because	the	very
extreme	creates	the	situation	to	move	to	the	other.	So	if	you	feel	some	tension	in
the	face	then	strain	all	the	face	muscles	as	much	as	possible,	create	tension	and
bring	it	to	a	peak.	Bring	it	to	a	point	where	you	feel	that	now	no	more	is	possible
—then	suddenly	relax.	So	see	that	all	parts	of	the	body,	all	the	limbs,	are	relaxed.
Be	particular	about	the	face	muscles,	because	they	carry	ninety	per	cent	of
the	tensions—the	rest	of	the	body	carries	only	ten	per	cent—because	all	your
tensions	are	in	the	mind	and	the	face	becomes	the	storage.	So	strain	your	face	as
much	as	possible,	don’t	be	shy	about	it.	Intensely	make	it	in	anguish,	anxiety—
and	then	suddenly	relax.	Do	it	for	five	minutes	so	you	can	feel	now	the	whole
body,	every	limb,	is	relaxed.	You	can	do	it	lying	on	the	bed,	you	can	do	it	sitting
also—however	you	feel	is	easy	for	you.
The	second	thing:	when	you	feel	that	the	body	has	come	to	an	easy	posture,
don’t	make	much	fuss	about	it.	Just	feel	that	the	body	is	relaxed,	then	forget	the
body.	Because	really,	remembering	the	body	is	a	sort	of	tension.	So	that’s	why	I
say	don’t	make	much	fuss	about	it.	Relax	it	and	forget	it.	Forgetting	is
relaxation,	because	whenever	you	remember	too	much,	that	very	remembering
brings	a	tension	to	the	body.
Then	close	your	eyes	and	just	feel	the	area	between	the	two	armpits:	the
heart	area,	your	chest.	First	feel	it,	just	between	the	two	armpits,	bring	your	total
attention,	total	awareness.	Forget	the	whole	body,	just	the	heart	area	between	the
two	armpits,	your	chest,	and	feel	it	filled	with	great	peace.
The	moment	the	body	is	relaxed,	automatically	peace	happens	in	your	heart.
The	heart	becomes	silent,	relaxed,	harmonious.	And	when	you	forget	the	whole
body	and	bring	your	attention	just	to	the	chest	and	consciously	feel	that	it	is
filled	with	peace,	much	peace	will	happen	immediately.
There	are	two	areas	in	the	body,	particular	centers	where	particular	feelings
can	be	created	consciously.	Between	the	two	armpits	is	the	center	of	the	heart,
and	the	heart	center	is	the	source	of	all	peace	that	happens	to	you,	whenever	it
happens.	Whenever	you	are	peaceful,	the	peace	is	coming	from	the	heart.	The
heart	radiates	peace.	That’s	why	people	from	all	over	the	world,	without	any
distinction	of	caste,	religion,	country,	cultured	or	uncultured,	every	race,	have
felt	this:	that	love	arises	somewhere	from	the	heart.	No	scientific	explanation
exists.
So	whenever	you	think	of	love	you	think	of	the	heart.	Really,	whenever	you
are	in	love	you	are	relaxed,	and	because	you	are	relaxed	you	are	filled	with	a
certain	peace.	And	that	peace	arises	from	the	heart.	So	peace	and	love	have
become	joined,	associated.	Whenever	you	are	in	love	you	are	peaceful;
whenever	you	are	not	in	love	you	are	disturbed.	Because	of	peace	the	heart	has
become	associated	with	love.
So	you	can	do	two	things.	Either	you	can	search	for	love,	then	sometimes
you	will	feel	peace.	But	the	path	is	dangerous,	because	the	other	person	whom
you	love	has	become	more	important	than	you.	The	other	is	the	other,	and	you
are	becoming	dependent	in	a	way.	So	love	will	give	you	peace	sometimes	but	not
always.	There	will	be	many	disturbances,	many	moments	of	anguish	and	anxiety,
because	the	other	has	entered	and	whenever	the	other	enters	there	is	bound	to	be
some	disturbance	because	you	can	meet	with	the	other	only	on	your	surface,	and
the	surface	will	be	disturbed.	Only	sometimes—when	the	two	of	you	will	be	so
deeply	in	love	with	no	conflict—only	sometimes	you	will	be	relaxed	and	the
heart	will	glow	with	peace.
Atisha’s	Heart	Meditation
Atisha	said:
Train	in	joining,	sending	and	taking	together.	Do	this	by	riding	the	breath.
Atisha	says:	start	being	compassionate.	And	the	method	is,	when	you
breathe	in—listen	carefully,	it	is	one	of	the	greatest	methods—when	you	breathe
in,	think	that	you	are	breathing	in	all	the	miseries	of	all	the	people	in	the	world.
All	the	darkness,	all	the	negativity,	all	the	hell	that	exists	anywhere,	you	are
breathing	it	in.	And	let	it	be	absorbed	in	your	heart.
You	may	have	read	or	heard	about	the	so-called	positive	thinkers	of	the
West.	They	say	just	the	opposite—they	don’t	know	what	they	are	saying.	They
say,	“When	you	breathe	out,	throw	out	all	your	misery	and	negativity.	And	when
you	breathe	in,	breathe	in	joy,	positivity,	happiness,	cheerfulness.”	Atisha’s
method	is	just	the	opposite:	when	you	breathe	in,	breathe	in	all	the	misery	and
suffering	of	all	the	beings	of	the	world—past,	present	and	future.
And	when	you	breathe	out,	breathe	out	all	the	joy	that	you	have,	all	the
blissfulness	that	you	have,	all	the	benediction	that	you	have.	Breathe	out,	pour
yourself	into	existence.	This	is	the	method	of	compassion:	drink	in	all	the
suffering	and	pour	out	all	the	blessings.
And	you	will	be	surprised	if	you	do	it.	The	moment	you	take	all	the
sufferings	of	the	world	inside	you,	they	are	no	longer	sufferings.	The	heart
immediately	transforms	the	energy.	The	heart	is	a	transforming	force:	drink	in
misery,	and	it	is	transformed	into	blissfulness…then	pour	it	out.
Once	you	have	learned	that	your	heart	can	do	this	magic,	this	miracle,	you
would	like	to	do	it	again	and	again.	Try	it.	It	is	one	of	the	most	practical
methods,	simple,	and	it	brings	immediate	results.	Do	it	today,	and	see.
Inner	Centering
Nobody	can	exist	without	a	center….	It	has	not	to	be	created	but	only
rediscovered.	Essence	is	the	center,	that	which	is	your	nature,	that	which
is	God-given.	Personality	is	the	circumference,	that	which	is	cultivated	by
society;	it	is	not	God-given.	It	is	by	nurture,	not	by	nature.
Abdullah
One	Sufi	mystic	who	had	remained	happy	his	whole	life—no	one	had	ever
seen	him	unhappy—he	was	always	laughing.	He	was	laughter,	his	whole	being
was	a	perfume	of	celebration.	In	his	old	age,	when	he	was	dying—he	was	on	his
deathbed,	and	still	enjoying	death,	laughing	hilariously—a	disciple	asked,	“You
puzzle	us.	Now	you	are	dying.	Why	are	you	laughing?	What	is	there	funny	about
it?	We	are	feeling	so	sad.	We	wanted	to	ask	you	many	times	in	your	life	why	you
are	never	sad.	But	now,	confronting	death,	at	least	one	should	be	sad.	You	are
still	laughing!	How	are	you	managing	it?”
And	the	old	man	said,	“It	is	a	simple	clue.	I	had	asked	my	master.	I	had	gone
to	my	master	as	a	young	man;	I	was	only	seventeen,	and	already	miserable.	And
my	master	was	old,	seventy,	and	he	was	sitting	under	a	tree,	laughing	for	no
reason	at	all.	There	was	nobody	else,	nothing	had	happened,	nobody	had	cracked
a	joke	or	anything.	And	he	was	simply	laughing,	holding	his	belly.	And	I	asked
him,	‘What	is	the	matter	with	you?	Are	you	mad	or	something?’
“He	said,	‘One	day	I	was	also	as	sad	as	you	are.	Then	it	dawned	on	me	that	it
is	my	choice,	it	is	my	life.	Since	that	day,	every	morning	when	I	get	up,	the	first
thing	I	decide	is,	before	I	open	my	eyes,	I	say	to	myself,	“Abdullah”—that	was
his	name—‘what	do	you	want?	Misery?	Blissfulness?	What	are	you	going	to
choose	today?	And	it	happens	that	I	always	choose	blissfulness.’”
It	is	a	choice.	Try	it.	The	first	moment	in	the	morning	when	you	become
aware	that	sleep	has	left,	ask	yourself,	“Abdullah,	another	day!	What	is	your
idea?	Do	you	choose	misery	or	blissfulness?”	And	who	would	choose	misery?
And	why?	It	is	so	unnatural—unless	one	feels	blissful	in	misery,	but	then	too
you	are	choosing	bliss,	not	misery.
Finding	the	real	source
When	you	see	a	friend	and	suddenly	feel	a	joy	rising	in	your	heart,
concentrate	on	this	joy.	Feel	it	and	become	it,	and	meet	the	friend	while	being
aware	and	filled	with	your	joy.	Let	the	friend	be	just	on	the	periphery,	and	you
remain	centered	in	your	feeling	of	happiness.
This	can	be	done	in	many	other	situations.	The	sun	is	rising,	and	suddenly
you	feel	something	rising	within	you.	Then	forget	the	sun;	let	it	remain	on	the
periphery.	You	be	centered	in	your	own	feeling	of	rising	energy.	The	moment
you	look	at	it,	it	will	spread.	It	will	become	your	whole	body,	your	whole	being.
And	don’t	just	be	an	observer	of	it;	merge	into	it.	There	are	a	few	moments	when
you	feel	joy,	happiness,	bliss,	but	you	go	on	missing	them	because	you	become
object-centered.
Whenever	there	is	joy,	you	feel	that	it	is	coming	from	without.	You	have	met
a	friend—of	course,	it	appears	that	the	joy	is	coming	from	your	friend,	from
seeing	him.	That	is	not	the	actual	case.	The	joy	is	always	within	you.	The	friend
has	just	become	a	situation.	The	friend	has	helped	it	to	come	out,	has	helped	you
to	see	that	it	is	there.	And	this	is	not	only	with	joy,	but	with	everything:	with
anger,	with	sadness,	with	misery,	with	happiness,	with	everything,	it	is	so.	Others
are	only	situations	in	which	things	that	are	hidden	in	you	are	expressed.	They	are
not	causes;	they	are	not	causing	something	in	you.	Whatsoever	is	happening,	it	is
happening	to	you.	It	has	always	been	there;	it	is	only	that	meeting	with	this
friend	has	become	a	situation	in	which	whatsoever	was	hidden	has	come	out	in
the	open—has	come	out	from	the	hidden	sources—it	has	become	apparent,
manifest.	Whenever	this	happens	remain	centered	in	the	inner	feeling,	and	then
you	will	have	a	different	attitude	about	everything	in	life.
Even	with	negative	emotions,	do	this.	When	you	are	angry,	do	not	be
centered	on	the	person	who	has	aroused	it.	Let	him	be	on	the	periphery.	You	just
become	anger.	Feel	anger	in	its	totality;	allow	it	to	happen	within.	Don’t
rationalize;	don’t	say	that	this	man	has	created	it.	Do	not	condemn	the	man.	He
has	just	become	the	situation.	And	feel	grateful	toward	him	that	he	has	helped
something	which	was	hidden	to	come	into	the	open.	He	has	hit	you	somewhere,
and	a	wound	was	hidden	there.	Now	you	know	it,	so	become	the	wound.
With	negative	or	positive,	with	any	emotion,	use	this,	and	there	will	be	a
great	change	in	you.	If	the	emotion	is	negative,	you	will	be	freed	of	it	by	being
aware	that	it	is	within	you.	If	the	emotion	is	positive,	you	will	become	the
emotion	itself.	If	it	is	joy,	you	will	become	joy.	If	it	is	anger,	the	anger	will
dissolve.
And	this	is	the	difference	between	negative	and	positive	emotions:	if	you
become	aware	of	a	certain	emotion,	and	by	your	becoming	aware	the	emotion
dissolves,	it	is	negative.	If	by	your	becoming	aware	of	a	certain	emotion	you
then	become	the	emotion,	if	the	emotion	then	spreads	and	becomes	your	being,	it
is	positive.	Awareness	works	differently	in	both	cases.	If	it	is	a	poisonous
emotion,	you	are	relieved	of	it	through	awareness.	If	it	is	good,	blissful,	ecstatic,
you	become	one	with	it.	Awareness	deepens	it.
Center	of	the	cyclone
When	desire	grips	you,	you	are	disturbed.	Of	course,	that	is	natural.	Desire
grips	you,	then	your	mind	starts	wavering	and	many	ripples	go	on,	on	the
surface.	The	desire	pulls	you	somewhere	into	the	future;	the	past	pushes	you
somewhere	into	the	future.	You	are	disturbed:	you	are	not	at	ease.	Desire	is,
therefore,	a	‘dis-ease.’
This	sutra	says,	“In	moods	of	extreme	desire	be	undisturbed.”	But	how	to	be
undisturbed?	Desire	means	disturbance,	so	how	to	be	undisturbed—and	in
extreme	moments	of	desire!	You	will	have	to	do	certain	experiments;	only	then
will	you	understand	what	it	means.	You	are	in	anger:	anger	grips	you.	You	are
temporarily	mad,	possessed:	you	are	no	longer	in	your	senses.	Suddenly
remember	to	be	undisturbed—as	if	you	are	undressing.	Inside,	become	naked,
naked	from	the	anger,	undressed.	Anger	will	be	there,	but	now	you	have	a	point
within	you	which	is	not	disturbed.
You	will	know	that	anger	is	there	on	the	periphery.	Like	fever,	it	is	there.
The	periphery	is	wavering;	the	periphery	is	disturbed,	but	you	can	look	at	it.	If
you	can	look	at	it,	you	will	be	undisturbed.	Become	a	witness	to	it,	and	you	will
be	undisturbed.	This	undisturbed	point	is	your	original	mind.	The	original	mind
cannot	be	disturbed;	it	is	never	disturbed.	But	you	have	never	looked	at	it.	When
anger	is	there,	you	become	identified	with	the	anger.	You	forget	that	anger	is
something	other	than	you.	You	become	one	with	it,	and	you	start	acting	through
it,	you	start	doing	something	through	it.
Two	things	can	be	done.	In	anger	you	will	be	violent	to	someone,	to	the
object	of	your	anger.	Then	you	have	moved	to	the	other.	Anger	is	just	in	between
you	and	the	other.	Here	I	am,	there	is	anger,	and	there	you	are—the	object	of	my
anger.	From	anger	I	can	travel	in	two	dimensions.	Either	I	can	travel	to	you:	then
you	become	my	center	of	consciousness,	the	object	of	my	anger.	Then	my	mind
becomes	focused	on	you,	the	one	who	has	insulted	me.	This	is	one	way	that	you
can	travel	from	anger.
There	is	another	way:	you	can	travel	to	yourself.	You	don’t	move	to	the
person	whom	you	feel	has	caused	the	anger.	You	move	to	the	person	who	feels	to
be	angry;	you	move	to	the	subject	and	not	to	the	object.
Ordinarily,	we	go	on	moving	to	the	object.	If	you	move	to	the	object,	the
dust	part	of	your	mind	is	disturbed,	and	you	will	feel,	“‘I’	am	disturbed.”	If	you
move	within	to	the	center	of	your	own	being,	you	will	be	able	to	witness	the	dust
part:	you	will	be	able	to	see	that	the	dust	part	of	the	mind	is	disturbed,	but	“I	am
not	disturbed.”	And	you	can	experiment	upon	this	with	any	desire,	any
disturbance.
A	sexual	desire	comes	to	your	mind;	your	whole	body	is	taken	by	it:	you	can
move	to	the	sexual	object,	the	object	of	your	desire.	The	object	may	be	there,	it
may	not	be	there.	You	can	move	to	the	object	in	imagination	also,	but	then	you
will	get	more	and	more	disturbed.	The	further	away	you	go	from	your	center,	the
more	you	will	be	disturbed.	Really,	the	distance	and	disturbance	are	always	in
proportion.	The	more	distant	you	are	from	your	center,	the	more	you	are
disturbed;	the	nearer	you	are	to	the	center,	the	less	you	are	disturbed.	If	you	are
just	at	the	center,	there	is	no	disturbance.
In	a	cyclone,	there	is	a	center	which	is	undisturbed—in	the	cyclone	of	anger,
the	cyclone	of	sex,	the	cyclone	of	any	desire.	Just	in	the	center	there	is	no
cyclone,	and	a	cyclone	cannot	exist	without	a	silent	center.	The	anger	also
cannot	exist	without	something	within	you	which	is	beyond	anger.
Remember	this:	nothing	can	exist	without	its	opposite.	The	opposite	is
needed	there.	Without	it,	there	is	no	possibility	of	it	existing.	If	there	were	no
center	within	you	which	remains	unmoved,	no	movement	would	be	possible
there.	If	there	were	no	center	within	you	which	remains	undisturbed,	no
disturbance	could	happen	to	you.	Analyze	this	and	observe	this.	If	there	were	no
center	of	absolute	undisturbance	in	you,	how	could	you	feel	that	you	are
disturbed?	You	need	a	comparison.	You	need	two	points	to	compare.
Suppose	a	person	is	ill:	he	feels	illness	because	somewhere	within	him,	a
point,	a	center	of	absolute	health	exists.	That	is	why	he	can	compare.	You	say
that	your	head	is	aching:	how	is	it	that	you	know	about	this	ache,	this	headache?
If	you	were	the	headache,	you	could	not	know	it.	You	must	be	someone	else,
something	else—the	observer,	the	witness,	who	can	say,	“My	head	is	aching.”
In	the	Book	of	Secrets,	Shiva	says:	“In	moods	of	extreme	desire,	be
undisturbed.”	What	can	you	do?	This	technique	is	not	for	suppression.	This
technique	is	not	saying	that	when	there	is	anger,	suppress	it	and	remain
undisturbed—no!	If	you	suppress,	you	will	create	more	disturbance.	If	the	anger
is	there	and	an	effort	to	suppress	is	there,	it	will	double	the	disturbance.	When
anger	is	there,	close	your	doors,	meditate	on	the	anger,	allow	the	anger	to	be.
You	remain	undisturbed,	and	don’t	suppress	it.
It	is	easy	to	suppress;	it	is	easy	to	express.	We	do	both.	We	express	if	the
situation	allows,	and	if	it	is	convenient	and	not	dangerous	for	you.	If	you	can
harm	the	other	and	the	other	cannot	harm	you,	you	will	express	the	anger.	If	it	is
dangerous,	if	the	other	can	harm	you	more,	if	your	boss	or	whoever	you	are
angry	at	is	more	strong,	you	will	suppress	it.
Expression	and	suppression	are	easy:	witnessing	is	difficult.	Witnessing	is
neither.	It	is	not	suppressing,	it	is	not	expressing.	It	is	not	expressing	because
you	are	not	expressing	it	to	the	object	of	anger.	It	is	not	being	suppressed	either.
You	are	allowing	it	to	be	expressed—expressed	in	a	vacuum.	You	are	meditating
on	it.
Stand	before	a	mirror	and	express	your	anger—and	be	a	witness	to	it.	You
are	alone,	so	you	can	meditate	on	it.	Do	whatsoever	you	want	to	do,	but	in	a
vacuum.	If	you	want	to	beat	someone,	beat	the	empty	sky.	If	you	want	to	be
angry,	be	angry;	if	you	want	to	scream,	scream.	But	do	it	alone,	and	remember
yourself	as	a	point	which	is	seeing	all	this,	this	drama.	Then	it	becomes	a
psychodrama,	and	you	can	laugh	at	it	and	it	will	be	a	deep	catharsis	for	you.
Afterwards	you	will	feel	relieved	of	it—and	not	only	relieved	of	it:	you	will	have
gained	something	through	it.	You	will	have	matured;	a	growth	will	have	come	to
you.	And	now	you	will	know	that	even	while	you	were	in	anger	there	was	a
center	within	you	which	was	undisturbed.	Now	try	to	uncover	this	center	more
and	more,	and	it	is	easy	to	uncover	it	in	desire.
This	technique	can	be	very	useful,	and	much	benefit	can	happen	to	you
through	it.	But	it	will	be	difficult	because	when	you	become	disturbed,	you
forget	everything.	You	may	forget	that	you	have	to	meditate.	Then	try	it	in	this
way:	don’t	wait	for	the	moment	when	anger	happens	to	you.	Don’t	wait	for	that
moment!	Just	close	the	door	to	your	room,	and	think	of	some	past	experience	of
anger	when	you	went	mad.	Remember	it,	and	re-enact	it.	That	will	be	easy	for
you.	Re-enact	it	again;	do	it	again;	relive	it.	Don’t	just	remember	it:	relive	it.
Remember	that	someone	had	insulted	you	and	what	was	said	and	how	you
reacted	to	him.	React	again;	replay	it.	This	re-enacting	something	from	the	past
will	do	much.	Everyone	has	scars	in	his	mind,	unhealed	wounds.	If	you	re-enact
them,	you	will	be	unburdened.	If	you	can	go	to	your	past	and	do	something
which	has	remained	incomplete,	you	will	be	unburdened	from	your	past.	Your
mind	will	become	fresher;	the	dust	will	be	thrown	away.
Remember	in	your	past	something	which	you	feel	has	remained	suspended.
You	wanted	to	kill	someone,	you	wanted	to	love	someone,	you	wanted	this	and
that,	and	that	has	remained	incomplete.	That	incomplete	thing	goes	on	hovering
around	the	mind	like	a	cloud.
Gurdjieff	used	this	technique	a	great	deal.	He	created	situations,	but	to	create
situations	a	school	is	needed.	You	cannot	do	that	alone.	Gurdjieff	had	a	small
school	in	Fontainebleau,	and	he	was	a	taskmaster.	He	knew	how	to	create
situations.	You	would	enter	the	room	where	a	group	was	sitting,	and	something
would	be	done	so	that	you	would	get	angry.	And	it	would	be	done	so	naturally
that	you	would	never	imagine	that	some	situation	was	being	created	for	you.	But
it	was	a	device.	Someone	would	insult	you	by	saying	something,	and	you	would
get	disturbed.	Then	everyone	would	help	the	disturbance	and	you	would	become
mad.	And	when	you	were	right	at	the	point	where	you	could	explode,	Gurdjieff
would	shout,	“Remember!	Remain	undisturbed!”
You	can	help.	Your	family	can	become	a	school;	you	can	help	each	other.
Friends	can	become	a	school	and	they	can	help	each	other.	You	can	decide	with
your	family.	The	whole	family	can	decide	that	now	a	situation	has	to	be	created
for	the	father	or	for	the	mother,	and	then	the	whole	family	works	to	create	the
situation.	When	the	father	or	mother	goes	completely	mad,	then	everyone	starts
laughing	and	says,	“Remain	completely	undisturbed.”	You	can	help	each	other,
and	the	experience	is	simply	wonderful.	Once	you	know	a	cool	center	within	you
in	a	hot	situation,	you	cannot	forget	it.	And	then	in	any	hot	situation	you	can
remember	it,	reclaim	it,	regain	it.
In	the	West,	one	therapeutic	technique	is	used:	it	is	called	psychodrama.	It
helps,	and	it	is	also	based	on	techniques	like	this.	In	psychodrama	you	just	enact,
you	just	play	a	game.	In	the	beginning	it	is	a	game,	but	sooner	or	later	you
become	possessed.	And	when	you	become	possessed	your	mind	starts
cooperating,	because	your	mind	and	your	body	function	automatically.	They
function	automatically!	So	if	you	see	an	actor	acting	in	a	psychodrama	who,	in	a
situation	of	anger,	really	becomes	angry,	you	may	think	that	he	is	simply	acting,
but	it	is	not	so.	He	might	have	really	become	angry;	it	may	not	be	acting	at	all
now.	He	is	possessed	by	the	desire,	by	the	disturbance,	by	the	feeling,	by	the
mood,	and	if	he	is	really	possessed,	only	then	does	his	acting	look	real.
Your	body	cannot	know	whether	you	are	playing	or	you	are	doing	it	for	real.
You	may	have	observed	yourself	at	some	time	in	your	life	that	you	were	just
playing	at	being	angry,	and	you	didn’t	realize	when	the	anger	became	real.	Or,
you	were	just	playing	and	you	were	not	feeling	sexual:	you	were	playing	with
your	wife	or	with	your	girlfriend,	or	with	your	husband,	and	then	suddenly	it
became	real.	The	body	took	over.	The	body	can	be	deceived.	The	body	cannot
know	whether	it	is	real	or	unreal,	particularly	with	sex.	If	you	imagine	it,	your
body	thinks	it	is	real.	Once	you	start	doing	something,	the	body	thinks	it	is	real
and	it	starts	behaving	in	a	real	way.
Psychodrama	is	a	technique	based	on	such	methods.	You	are	not	angry;	you
are	simply	acting	angry	and	then	you	get	into	it.	But	psychodrama	is	beautiful
because	you	know	that	you	are	simply	acting.	And	then	on	the	periphery	the
anger	becomes	real,	and	just	behind	it	you	are	hidden	and	looking	at	it.	Now	you
know	that	you	are	not	disturbed	but	the	anger	is	there,	the	disturbance	is	there.
The	disturbance	is	there,	and	yet	the	disturbance	is	not.	This	feeling	of	two
forces	working	simultaneously	gives	you	a	transcendence,	and	then	in	real	anger
also	you	can	feel	it.	Once	you	know	how	to	feel	it,	you	can	feel	it	in	real
situations	also.
Use	this	technique.	This	will	change	your	life	totally.	Once	you	know	how	to
remain	undisturbed,	the	world	is	not	misery	for	you.	Then	nothing	can	create	any
confusion	in	you,	nothing	can	hurt	you,	really.	Now	there	is	no	suffering	for	you,
and	once	you	know	it	you	can	do	another	thing.	Once	you	can	detach	your	center
from	the	periphery,	you	can	do	it.	Once	the	center	is	detached	completely,	if	you
can	remain	undisturbed	in	anger,	in	desire,	you	can	play	with	desires,	with	anger,
with	disturbances.
This	technique	is	to	create	a	feeling	of	two	extremes	within	you.	They	are
there:	two	polar	opposites	are	there.	Once	you	become	aware	of	this	polarity,	you
become	for	the	first	time	a	master	of	yourself.	Otherwise	others	are	your
masters;	you	are	just	a	slave.	Your	wife	knows,	your	son	knows,	your	father
knows,	your	friends	know	that	you	can	be	pushed	and	pulled.	You	can	be
disturbed,	you	can	be	made	happy	and	unhappy.	If	someone	else	can	make	you
happy	and	unhappy,	you	are	not	a	master.	You	are	just	a	slave.	The	other	has	a
hold.	Just	by	a	single	gesture,	he	can	make	you	unhappy;	just	by	a	small	smile	he
can	make	you	happy.	So	you	are	just	at	the	mercy	of	someone	else;	the	other	can
do	anything	to	you.	And	if	this	is	the	situation,	then	all	your	reactions	are	simply
reactions,	not	actions.
This	knowledge	of	the	center	or	this	grounding	in	the	center	makes	you	a
master.	Otherwise	you	are	a	slave,	and	a	slave	of	so	many—not	only	of	one
master,	but	of	many.	Everything	is	a	master,	and	you	are	a	slave	to	the	whole
universe.	Obviously,	you	will	be	in	trouble.	With	so	many	masters	pulling	you	in
so	many	directions	and	dimensions,	you	are	never	together;	you	are	not	in	a
unity.	And	pulled	in	so	many	dimensions,	you	are	in	anguish.	Only	a	master	of
oneself	can	transcend	anguish.
Who	am	I?
Gurdjieff	tried	from	one	angle.	He	said,	just	try	to	remember	you	are.
Ramana	Maharshi	tried	from	another	angle.	He	made	it	a	meditation	to	ask,	to
inquire,	“Who	am	I?”	And	don’t	believe	in	any	answers	that	the	mind	can
supply.	The	mind	will	say,	“What	nonsense	are	you	asking?	You	are	this,	you	are
that,	you	are	a	man,	you	are	a	woman,	you	are	educated	or	uneducated,	rich	or
poor.”	The	mind	will	supply	answers,	but	go	on	asking.	Don’t	accept	any	answer
because	all	the	answers	given	by	the	mind	are	false.	They	are	from	the	unreal
part	of	you.	They	are	coming	from	words,	they	are	coming	from	scriptures,	they
are	coming	from	conditioning,	they	are	coming	from	society,	they	are	coming
from	others.
Go	on	asking.	Let	this	arrow	of	“Who	am	I?”	penetrate	deeper	and	deeper.	A
moment	will	come	when	no	answer	will	come.	That	is	the	right	moment.	Now
you	are	nearing	the	answer.	When	no	answer	comes	you	are	near	the	answer,
because	mind	is	becoming	silent—or,	you	have	gone	far	away	from	the	mind.
When	there	will	be	no	answer	and	a	vacuum	will	be	created	all	around	you,	your
questioning	will	look	absurd.	Whom	are	you	questioning?	There	is	no	one	to
answer	you.	Suddenly,	even	your	questioning	will	stop.	With	the	questioning,	the
last	part	of	the	mind	has	dissolved	because	this	question	was	also	of	the	mind.
Those	answers	were	of	the	mind	and	this	question	was	also	of	the	mind.	Both
have	dissolved,	so	now	you	are.
Try	this.	There	is	every	possibility,	if	you	persist,	that	this	technique	can	give
you	a	glimpse	of	the	real—and	the	real	is	ever-living.
OSHO	WHIRLING	MEDITATION
Sufi	Whirling	is	one	of	the	most	ancient	techniques,	one	of	the	most
forceful.	It	is	so	deep	that	even	a	single	experience	can	make	you	totally
different.	Whirl	with	open	eyes,	just	like	small	children	go	on	twirling,	as
if	your	inner	being	has	become	a	center	and	your	whole	body	has	become
a	wheel,	moving,	a	potter’s	wheel,	moving.	You	are	in	the	center,	but	the
whole	body	is	moving.
Instructions
It	is	recommended	that	no	food	or	drink	be	taken	for	three	hours	before
whirling.	It	is	best	to	have	bare	feet	and	wear	loose	clothing.	The	meditation	is
divided	into	two	stages,	whirling	and	resting.	There	is	no	fixed	time	for	the
whirling—it	can	go	on	for	hours—but	it	is	suggested	that	you	continue	for	at
least	an	hour	to	get	fully	into	the	feeling	of	the	energy	whirlpool.
The	whirling	is	done	on	the	spot	in	an	anti-clockwise	direction,	with	the
right	arm	held	high,	palm	upwards,	and	the	left	arm	low,	palm	downwards.
People	who	feel	discomfort	from	whirling	anti-clockwise	can	change	to
clockwise.	Let	your	body	be	soft	and	keep	your	eyes	open,	but	unfocused	so	that
images	become	blurred	and	flowing.	Remain	silent.
For	the	first	15	minutes,	rotate	slowly.	Then	gradually	build	up	speed	over
the	next	30	minutes	until	the	whirling	takes	over	and	you	become	a	whirlpool	of
energy—the	periphery	a	storm	of	movement	but	the	witness	at	the	center	silent
and	still.
When	you	are	whirling	so	fast	that	you	cannot	remain	upright,	your	body
will	fall	by	itself.	Don’t	make	the	fall	a	decision	on	your	part,	nor	attempt	to
arrange	the	landing	in	advance;	if	your	body	is	soft	you	will	land	softly	and	the
earth	will	absorb	your	energy.
Once	you	have	fallen,	the	second	part	of	the	meditation	starts.	Roll	onto	your
stomach	immediately	so	that	your	bare	navel	is	in	contact	with	the	earth.	If
anybody	feels	strong	discomfort	lying	this	way,	he	should	lie	on	his	back.	Feel
your	body	blending	into	the	earth,	like	a	small	child	pressed	to	the	mother’s
breasts.	Keep	your	eyes	closed	and	remain	passive	and	silent	for	at	least	15
minutes.
After	the	meditation	be	as	quiet	and	inactive	as	possible.
Some	people	may	feel	nauseated	during	the	Whirling	Meditation,	but	this
feeling	should	disappear	within	two	or	three	days.	Only	discontinue	the
meditation	if	it	persists.
Meditations	on	Light
In	your	heart	a	flame	is	burning,	and	your	body	is	just	a	light	aura	around
the	flame.
Golden	Light	meditation
Do	this	at	least	twice	a	day—the	best	time	is	early	in	the	morning,	just
before	you	get	out	of	bed.	The	moment	you	feel	you	are	alert,	awake,	do	it	for
twenty	minutes.	Do	it	first	thing	in	the	morning!—don’t	get	out	of	bed.	Do	it
there,	then	and	there,	immediately!—because	when	you	are	coming	out	of	sleep
you	are	very,	very	delicate,	receptive.	When	you	are	coming	out	of	sleep	you	are
very	fresh,	and	the	impact	will	go	very	deep.	When	you	are	just	coming	out	of
sleep	you	are	less	in	the	mind	than	ever.	Hence	some	gaps	are	there	through
which	the	method	will	penetrate	into	your	innermost	core.	And	early	in	the
morning,	when	you	are	awakening	and	the	whole	earth	is	awakening,	there	is	a
great	tide	of	awakening	energy	all	over	the	world.	Use	that	tide;	don’t	miss	that
opportunity.
All	ancient	religions	used	to	pray	early	in	the	morning	when	the	sun	rose,
because	the	rising	of	the	sun	is	the	rising	of	all	the	energies	in	existence.	In	that
moment	you	can	simply	ride	on	the	rising	energy	wave;	it	will	be	easier.	By	the
evening	it	will	be	difficult,	energies	will	be	falling	back;	then	you	will	be
fighting	against	the	current.	In	the	morning	you	will	be	going	with	the	current.
So	the	best	time	to	begin	is	in	the	early	morning,	immediately,	just	when	you	are
half-asleep,	half-awake.	And	the	process	is	so	simple.	It	needs	no	posture,	no
yogasana,	no	bath	is	needed,	nothing.
You	simply	lie	down,	as	you	are	lying	down	in	your	bed,	on	your	back.	Keep
your	eyes	closed.
When	you	breathe	in,	just	visualize	great	light	entering	from	your	head	into
your	body,	as	if	a	sun	has	risen	just	close	to	your	head—golden	light	pouring
into	your	head.	You	are	just	hollow	and	the	golden	light	is	pouring	into	your
head,	and	going,	going,	going,	deep,	deep,	and	going	out	through	your	toes.
When	you	breathe	in,	do	it	with	this	visualization.
And	when	you	breathe	out,	visualize	another	thing:	darkness	entering
through	your	toes,	a	great	dark	river	entering	through	your	toes,	coming	up,	and
going	out	through	the	head.	Do	slow,	deep	breathing	so	you	can	visualize.	Go
very	slowly.	And	just	out	of	sleep	you	can	have	very	deep	and	slow	breaths
because	the	body	is	rested,	relaxed.
Let	me	repeat:	breathing	in,	let	golden	light	come	into	you	through	your
head,	because	it	is	there	that	the	Golden	Flower	is	waiting.	That	golden	light	will
help.	It	will	cleanse	your	whole	body	and	will	make	it	absolutely	full	of
creativity.	This	is	male	energy.
Then	when	you	exhale,	let	darkness,	the	darkest	you	can	conceive,	like	a
dark	night,	river-like,	come	from	your	toes	upward—this	is	feminine	energy:	it
will	soothe	you,	it	will	make	you	receptive,	it	will	calm	you,	it	will	give	you	rest
—and	let	it	go	out	of	the	head.	Then	inhale	again,	and	golden	light	enters	in.
Do	it	for	twenty	minutes	early	in	the	morning.
And	then	the	second	best	time	is	when	you	are	going	back	to	sleep,	in	the
night.
Lie	down	on	the	bed,	relax	for	a	few	minutes.	When	you	start	feeling	that
now	you	are	wavering	between	sleep	and	waking,	just	in	that	middle,	start	the
process	again,	and	continue	for	twenty	minutes.	If	you	fall	asleep	doing	it,	that	is
the	best,	because	the	impact	will	remain	in	the	subconscious	and	will	go	on
working.
After	a	three-month	period	you	will	be	surprised:	the	energy	that	was
constantly	gathering	at	the	muladhar,	at	the	lowest,	the	sex	center,	is	no	longer
gathering	there.	It	is	going	upwards.
Heart	of	light
While	waking,	moving,	eating,	working,	remember	yourself	as	light,	as	if	in
your	heart	a	flame	is	burning,	and	your	body	is	nothing	but	the	aura	around	the
flame.	Imagine	it:	in	your	heart	a	flame	is	burning,	and	your	body	is	nothing	but
a	light	aura	around	the	flame;	your	body	is	just	a	light	around	the	flame.	Allow	it
to	go	deep	within	your	mind	and	your	consciousness.	Imbibe	it.
It	will	take	time,	but	if	you	go	on	thinking	about	it,	feeling	it,	imagining	it,
within	a	certain	period	you	will	be	able	to	remember	it	the	whole	day.	While
awake,	moving	on	the	street,	you	are	a	flame	moving.	No	one	else	will	be	aware
of	it	in	the	beginning,	but	if	you	continue	it,	after	three	months	others	will	also
become	aware.	Only	when	others	become	aware	can	you	then	be	at	ease.	Don’t
say	anything	to	anyone.	Simply	imagine	a	flame,	and	your	body	as	just	the	aura
around	it—not	a	physical	body,	but	an	electric	body,	a	light	body.	Go	on	doing	it.
If	you	persist,	within	three	months,	or	somewhere	near	about	then,	others
will	become	aware	that	something	has	happened	to	you.	They	will	feel	a	subtle
light	around	you.	When	you	come	near	them,	they	will	feel	a	different	warmth.	If
you	touch	them,	they	will	feel	a	fiery	touch.	They	will	become	aware	that
something	strange	is	happening	to	you.	Don’t	tell	anyone.	When	others	become
aware,	then	you	can	feel	at	ease,	and	then	you	can	enter	the	second	step,	not
before	it.
The	second	step	is	to	take	it	into	dreaming.	Now	you	can	take	it	into
dreaming.	It	has	become	a	reality.	Now	it	is	not	an	imagination.	Through
imagination	you	have	uncovered	a	reality.	It	is	real.	Everything	consists	of	light.
You	are	light—unaware	of	the	fact—because	every	particle	of	matter	is	light.
The	scientists	say	it	consists	of	electrons;	it	is	the	same	thing.	Light	is	the
source	of	all.	You	are	also	condensed	light:	through	imagination	you	are	simply
uncovering	a	reality.	Imbibe	it—and	when	you	have	become	so	filled	with	it,	you
can	carry	it	into	dreams,	not	before.
Then,	while	falling	asleep,	go	on	thinking	of	the	flame,	go	on	seeing	it,
feeling	you	are	the	light.	Remembering	it…remembering…remembering	you
fall	into	sleep,	and	the	remembrance	continues.	In	the	beginning	you	will	start
having	some	dreams	in	which	you	will	feel	you	have	a	flame	within,	that	you	are
light.	By	and	by,	in	the	dreams	also	you	will	move	with	the	same	feeling.	And
once	this	feeling	enters	the	dreams,	dreams	will	start	disappearing.	There	will	be
fewer	and	fewer	dreams	and	more	and	more	deep	sleep.
When	in	your	dreaming,	this	reality	is	revealed—that	you	are	light,	a	flame,
a	burning	flame—all	dreams	will	disappear.	Only	when	dreams	disappear	can
you	carry	this	feeling	into	sleep,	never	before.	Now	you	are	at	the	door.	When
dreams	have	disappeared	and	you	remember	yourself	as	a	flame,	you	are	at	the
door	of	sleep.	Now	you	can	enter	with	the	feeling.	And	once	you	enter	sleep
with	the	feeling	that	you	are	a	flame,	you	will	be	aware	in	it—the	sleep	will	now
happen	only	to	your	body,	not	to	you.
Yoga	and	tantra	divide	the	life	of	the	human	mind	into	three	divisions—the
life	of	the	mind,	remember.	They	divide	mind	into	three	divisions:	waking,
sleeping,	dreaming.	These	are	not	the	divisions	of	your	consciousness,	these	are
the	divisions	of	your	mind,	and	consciousness	is	the	fourth.
They	have	not	given	any	name	to	it	in	the	East;	they	call	it	simply	the	fourth,
turiya.	The	first	three	have	names;	these	are	the	clouds.	They	can	be	named—a
waking	cloud,	a	sleeping	cloud,	a	dreaming	cloud.	They	are	all	clouds,	and	the
space	in	which	they	move—the	sky—is	unnamed,	left	simply	as	the	fourth.
This	technique	is	to	help	you	go	beyond	these	three	states.	If	you	can	be
aware	that	you	are	a	flame,	a	light,	that	sleep	is	not	happening	to	you,	you	are
conscious.	You	are	carrying	a	conscious	effort;	now	you	are	crystallized	around
that	flame.	The	body	is	asleep,	you	are	not.
This	is	what	Krishna	says	in	the	Gita:	that	yogis	never	sleep.	While	others
are	asleep,	they	are	awake.	Not	that	their	bodies	never	sleep,	their	bodies	sleep—
but	only	bodies.	Bodies	need	rest,	consciousness	needs	no	rest;	because	bodies
are	mechanisms,	consciousness	is	not	a	mechanism.	Bodies	need	fuel,	they	need
rest.	That’s	why	when	they	are	born,	they	are	young,	then	they	become	old,	and
then	they	die.	Consciousness	is	never	born,	never	becomes	old,	never	dies.	It
needs	no	fuel,	it	needs	no	rest.	It	is	pure	energy,	perpetual	eternal	energy.	If	you
can	carry	this	image	of	flame	and	light	through	the	doors	of	sleep,	you	will	never
sleep	again,	only	the	body	will	rest.	And	while	the	body	is	sleeping,	you	will
know	it.	Once	this	happens,	you	have	become	the	fourth.	Now	the	waking	and
the	dreaming	and	the	sleeping	are	parts	of	the	mind.	They	are	parts,	and	you
have	become	the	fourth—one	who	goes	through	all	of	them	and	is	none	of	them.
Meditations	on	Darkness
Just	like	the	seed	that	starts	its	life	in	the	darkness	of	the	soil,	or	the	child
that	starts	its	life	in	the	darkness	of	the	womb,	all	beginnings	are	in	the	dark,
because	darkness	is	one	of	the	most	essential	things	for	anything	to	begin.
The	beginning	is	mysterious,	hence	darkness	is	needed.	And	the	beginning	is
so	delicate,	that’s	also	why	darkness	is	needed.	The	beginning	is	also	very
intimate,	that’s	also	why	darkness	is	needed.	Darkness	has	depth	and	a
tremendous	power	to	nourish.	The	day	tires	you;	the	night	rejuvenates.
The	morning	will	come,	the	day	will	follow,	but	if	you	are	afraid	of	the
darkness	then	the	day	will	never	come.	If	one	wants	to	skip	darkness	then	the
day	is	impossible.	One	has	to	go	through	the	dark	night	of	the	soul	to	reach	to
the	dawn.	Death	is	first,	then	life	is.
In	the	ordinary	sequence	of	things	birth	is	first,	then	is	life,	but	in	the	inner
world,	in	the	inner	journey,	it	is	just	the	opposite:	death	is	first,	then	is	life.
Inner	darkness
How	can	you	enter	blackness?	Three	things.
Step	1:
Stare	into	blackness.	Difficult.	It	is	easy	to	stare	at	a	flame,	at	any	source	of
light,	because	it	is	there	as	an	object,	pointed;	you	can	direct	your	attention	to	it.
Darkness	is	not	an	object;	it	is	everywhere,	it	is	all	around.	You	cannot	see	it	as
an	object.	Stare	into	the	vacuum.	All	around	it	is	there;	you	just	look	into	it.	Feel
at	ease	and	look	into	it.	It	will	start	entering	your	eyes.	And	when	the	darkness
enters	your	eyes,	you	are	entering	into	it.
Remain	with	open	eyes	when	doing	this	technique	in	the	dark	night.	Don’t
close	your	eyes,	because	with	closed	eyes	you	have	a	different	darkness	that	is
your	own,	mental;	it	is	not	real.	Really,	it	is	a	negative	part;	it	is	not	positive
darkness.
Here	is	light:	you	close	your	eyes	and	you	can	have	a	darkness,	but	that
darkness	is	simply	the	negative	of	the	light.	Just	as	when	you	look	at	the	window
and	then	you	close	your	eyes,	you	have	a	negative	figure	of	the	window.	All	our
experience	is	of	light,	so	when	we	close	our	eyes	we	have	a	negative	experience
of	light	which	we	call	darkness.	It	is	not	real,	it	won’t	do.
Open	your	eyes,	remain	with	open	eyes	in	darkness,	and	you	will	have	a
different	darkness—the	positive	darkness	that	is	there.	Stare	into	it.	Go	on
staring	into	darkness.	Your	tears	will	start,	your	eyes	will	get	sore,	they	will	hurt.
Don’t	get	worried,	just	go	on.	And	the	moment	the	darkness,	the	real	darkness
which	is	there,	enters	in	your	eyes,	it	will	give	you	a	very	deep	soothing	feeling.
When	real	darkness	enters	in	you,	you	will	be	filled	by	it.
And	this	entering	of	darkness	will	empty	you	of	all	negative	darkness.	This
is	a	very	deep	phenomenon.	The	darkness	that	you	have	within	is	a	negative
thing;	it	is	against	the	light.	It	is	not	the	absence	of	light;	it	is	against	the	light.	It
is	not	the	darkness	that	Shiva	is	speaking	of	as	the	form	of	all	forms—the	real
darkness	that’s	there.
We	are	so	afraid	of	it	that	we	have	created	many	sources	of	light	just	as
protection,	and	we	live	in	a	lighted	world.	Then	we	close	our	eyes	and	the
lighted	world	reflects	negatively	inside.	We	have	lost	contact	with	the	real
darkness	that	is	there—the	darkness	of	the	Essenes,	or	the	darkness	of	Shiva.	We
have	no	contact	with	it.	We	have	become	so	much	afraid	of	it	that	we	have
turned	ourselves	completely	away.	We	are	standing	with	our	backs	to	it.
So	this	will	be	difficult,	but	if	you	can	do	it,	it	is	miraculous,	it	is	magical.
You	will	have	a	different	being	altogether.	When	darkness	enters	you,	you	enter
into	it.	It	is	always	reciprocal,	mutual.	You	cannot	enter	into	any	cosmic
phenomenon	without	the	cosmic	phenomenon	entering	into	you.	You	cannot
rape	it,	you	cannot	force	any	entry.	If	you	are	available,	open,	vulnerable,	and	if
you	give	way	for	any	cosmic	realm	to	enter	in	you,	then	only	will	you	enter	into
it.	It	is	always	mutual.	You	cannot	force	it;	you	can	only	allow	it.
It	is	difficult	to	find	real	darkness	in	cities	now;	difficult	in	our	houses	to
find	real	darkness.	With	the	unreal	light	we	have	made	everything	unreal.	Even
our	darkness	is	polluted,	it	is	not	pure.	So	it	is	good	to	move	to	some	remote
place	only	to	feel	darkness.	Just	go	to	a	very	remote	village	where	there	is	no
electricity,	or	move	to	a	mountain	peak.	Just	be	there	for	one	week	to	experience
pure	darkness.
You	will	come	back	a	different	person,	because	in	those	seven	days	of
absolute	darkness	all	the	fears,	all	the	primitive	fears,	will	come	up.	You	will
have	to	face	monsters,	you	will	have	to	face	your	own	unconscious.	The	whole
humanity	will…it	will	be	as	if	you	are	passing	through	the	whole	passage	that
has	passed,	and	deep	from	your	unconscious	many	things	will	arise.	They	will
look	real.	You	may	get	afraid,	scared,	because	they	will	be	so	real—and	they	are
just	your	mental	creations.
You	have	to	come	to	terms	with	your	unconscious.	And	this	meditation	on
darkness	will	absorb	all	your	madness	completely.	Try	it.	Even	in	your	home	you
can	try	it.	Every	night,	for	one	hour	remain	with	darkness.	Don’t	do	anything,
just	stare	into	darkness.	You	will	have	a	melting	feeling,	and	you	will	feel	that
something	is	entering	you	and	you	are	entering	into	something.
Staying,	living	with	darkness	for	three	months,	for	one	hour	a	day,	you	will
lose	all	feeling	of	individuality,	of	separation.	Then	you	will	not	be	an	island;
you	will	become	the	ocean.	You	will	be	one	with	darkness.	And	darkness	is	so
oceanic:	nothing	is	so	vast,	nothing	is	so	eternal.	And	nothing	is	so	near	you,	and
of	nothing	are	you	so	scared	and	afraid.	It	is	just	by	the	corner,	always	waiting.
Step	2:
Lie	down	and	feel	as	if	you	are	near	your	mother.	The	darkness	is	the
mother,	the	mother	of	all.	Think:	when	there	was	nothing,	what	was	there?	You
cannot	think	of	anything	other	than	darkness.	If	everything	disappears,	what	will
still	be	there?	Darkness	will	be	there.
Darkness	is	the	mother,	the	womb,	so	lie	down	and	feel	that	you	are	lying	in
the	womb	of	your	mother.	And	it	will	become	real,	it	will	become	warm,	and
sooner	or	later	you	will	start	feeling	that	the	darkness,	the	womb,	is	enveloping
you	from	everywhere,	you	are	in	it.
Step	3:
Moving,	going	to	work,	talking,	eating,	doing	whatsoever,	carry	a	patch	of
darkness	within	you.	The	darkness	that	has	entered	in	you,	just	carry	it.	As	we
were	discussing	about	the	method	of	carrying	a	flame,	carry	darkness.	As	I	said
to	you,	if	you	carry	a	flame	and	feel	you	are	light,	your	body	will	start	radiating
a	certain	strange	light	and	those	who	are	sensitive	will	start	feeling	it;	the	same
will	happen	with	darkness.
If	you	carry	darkness	within	you,	your	whole	body	will	become	so	relaxed
and	calm,	so	cool,	that	it	will	be	felt.	And	as	when	you	carry	light	within	you
some	people	will	become	attracted	to	you,	when	you	carry	darkness	within	you,
some	people	will	simply	escape	from	you.	They	will	become	afraid	and	scared.
They	will	not	be	able	to	bear	so	silent	a	being;	it	will	become	unbearable	to
them.
Carrying	darkness	within	for	the	whole	day	will	help	you	very	much,
because	then	when	you	contemplate	and	meditate	on	darkness	in	the	night,	the
inner	darkness	that	you	have	carried	the	whole	day	will	help	you	to	meet—the
inner	will	come	to	meet	the	outer.
And	just	by	remembering	that	you	are	carrying	darkness—you	are	filled
with	darkness,	every	pore	of	the	body,	every	cell	of	the	body	is	filled	with
darkness—you	will	feel	so	relaxed.	Try	it.	You	will	feel	so	relaxed.	Everything
in	you	will	be	slowed	down.	You	will	not	be	able	to	run,	you	will	walk,	and	that
walk	will	be	slowed	down	also.	You	will	walk	slowly,	just	as	a	pregnant	woman
walks.	You	will	walk	slowly,	very	carefully.	You	are	carrying	something.
And	quite	the	opposite	will	happen	when	you	are	carrying	a	flame:	your
walk	will	become	faster;	rather,	you	would	like	to	run.	There	will	be	more
movement,	you	will	become	more	active.	Carrying	darkness	you	will	be	relaxed.
Others	will	start	feeling	that	you	are	lazy.
In	the	days	when	I	was	at	the	university,	I	was	doing	this	experiment	for	two
years.	I	became	so	lazy	that	even	to	get	out	of	bed	in	the	morning	was	difficult.
My	professors	became	very	much	disturbed	about	it,	and	they	thought	something
had	gone	wrong	with	me—either	I	was	ill,	or	I	had	become	absolutely
indifferent.	One	professor	who	loved	me	very	much,	the	head	of	my	department,
became	so	worried	that	on	my	examination	days	he	would	come	to	fetch	me
from	the	hostel	in	the	morning	just	to	lead	me	to	the	examination	hall	so	that	I
would	be	there	on	time.	Every	day	he	would	see	that	I	had	entered	the	hall,	and
only	then	would	he	feel	okay	and	go	home.
Try	it.	It	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	experiences	in	life	to	carry	darkness	in
your	womb,	to	become	dark.	Walking,	eating,	sitting,	doing	whatsoever,
remember,	the	darkness	is	filled	in	you;	you	are	filled	with	it.	And	then	see	how
things	change.	You	cannot	get	excited,	you	cannot	be	very	active,	you	cannot	be
tense.	Your	sleep	will	become	so	deep	that	dreams	will	disappear	and	the	whole
day	you	will	move	as	if	intoxicated.
Meditations	in	Sound
The	meditations	concerned	with	ear	energy	are	feminine	meditations,
passive—you	have	just	to	listen,	not	to	do	anything.	Listening	to	the	birds,
the	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees,	or	to	some	music,	or	to	the	noise
of	the	traffic—just	listening,	doing	nothing—great	silence	comes	in,	and
great	peace	starts	falling	and	showering	on	you.	It	is	easier	through	the
ear	than	through	the	eye.	It	is	easier	through	the	ear	because	the	ear	is
passive,	non-aggressive.	It	cannot	do	anything	to	existence,	it	can	only	let
it	happen.	The	ear	is	a	door:	it	allows.
Aum
AUM	is	one	of	the	basic	sounds.	A-U-M:	these	three	sounds	are	combined	in
it.	A-U-M	are	three	basic	sounds.	All	sounds	are	made	of	them	or	derived	from
them;	all	sounds	are	combinations	of	these	three	sounds.	So	these	three	are	basic.
They	are	as	basic	as	the	claim	of	physics	that	the	electron,	neutron	and	proton
are	basic.	This	has	to	be	deeply	understood.
The	intoning	of	a	sound	is	a	very	subtle	science.	First	you	have	to	intone	it
loudly,	outwardly.	Then	others	can	hear	it,	and	it	is	good	to	start	loudly.	Why?
Because	you	can	also	hear	it	clearly	when	you	intone	it	loudly:	because
whatsoever	you	say,	it	is	to	others—and	this	has	become	a	habit.	Whenever	you
are	talking	you	are	talking	to	others,	and	you	hear	yourself	talk	only	when	you
are	talking	to	others.	So	start	from	the	natural	habit.
Intone	the	sound	‘Aum’,	then	by	and	by,	feel	attunement	with	the	sound.
When	you	intone	the	sound	Aum,	be	filled	with	it.	Forget	everything	else.
Become	the	Aum,	become	the	sound.	And	it	is	very	easy	to	become	the	sound
because	sound	can	vibrate	through	your	body,	through	your	mind,	through	your
whole	nervous	system.	Feel	the	reverberation	of	Aum.	Intone	it	and	feel	it	as	if
your	whole	body	is	being	filled	with	it,	every	cell	is	vibrating	with	it.
And	when	you	begin	to	feel	harmonious	with	it,	you	can	drop	intoning
loudly.	Then	close	your	lips	and	intone	it	inwardly,	but	inwardly	also	first	try
loudly.	Intone	inwardly,	but	loudly,	so	that	the	sound	spreads	all	over	your	body,
touches	every	part,	every	cell	of	your	body.	You	will	feel	vitalized	by	it,	you	will
feel	rejuvenated,	you	will	feel	a	new	life	entering	you,	because	your	body	is	a
musical	instrument.	It	needs	harmony,	and	when	the	harmony	is	disturbed	you
are	disturbed.
That	is	why,	when	you	hear	music,	you	feel	good.	Why	do	you	feel	good?
What	is	music	but	just	some	harmonious	sounds!	Why	do	you	feel	such	a	well-
being	when	there	is	music	around	you?	And	when	there	is	chaos,	noise,	why	do
you	feel	so	disturbed?	You	yourself	are	deeply	musical.	You	are	an	instrument,
and	that	instrument	re-echoes	things.
If	a	sound	is	musical,	harmonious,	subtle,	then	you	will	have	to	listen	to	it
inside	and	you	will	have	to	be	very	alert	to	listen	to	it.	If	you	are	not	alert,	you
will	go	to	sleep	and	miss	the	whole	point.	That	is	the	problem	with	mantra,	with
any	chanting,	with	any	use	of	sound:	it	can	create	sleep.	It	is	a	subtle	tranquilizer.
If	you	continuously	repeat	any	sound	without	being	alert	about	it,	you	will	fall
asleep	because	then	the	repetition	becomes	mechanical.	‘Aum-Aum-Aum’
becomes	mechanical,	and	then	repetition	creates	boredom.
So	two	things	have	to	be	done:	sound	has	to	be	slowed	down	and	you	have
to	become	more	alert.	The	more	sound	becomes	subtle,	the	more	alert	you	are.
Devavani
Every	night	before	you	go	to	sleep,	you	can	do	a	small	technique	that	will
help	tremendously.	Put	the	lights	out,	sit	in	your	bed	ready	to	sleep,	but	sit	for
fifteen	minutes.	Close	your	eyes	and	then	start	any	monotonous	nonsense	sound,
for	example:	la,	la,	la—and	wait	for	the	mind	to	supply	new	sounds.	The	only
thing	to	be	remembered	is	that	those	sounds	or	words	should	not	be	of	any
language	that	you	know.	If	you	know	English,	German	and	Italian,	then	they
should	not	be	of	Italian,	German	or	English.	Any	other	language	that	you	don’t
know	is	allowed—Tibetan,	Chinese,	Japanese.	But	if	you	know	Japanese	then	it
is	not	allowed,	then	Italian	is	wonderful.	Speak	any	language	that	you	don’t
know.	You	will	be	in	a	difficulty	for	a	few	seconds	only	for	the	first	day,	because
how	do	you	speak	a	language	you	don’t	know?	It	can	be	spoken,	and	once	it
starts,	any	sounds,	nonsense	words,	just	to	put	the	conscious	off	and	allow	the
unconscious	to	speak….
When	the	unconscious	speaks,	the	unconscious	knows	no	language.	It	is	a
very,	very	old	method.	It	comes	from	the	Old	Testament.	It	was	called	in	those
days	glossolalia,	and	a	few	churches	in	America	still	use	it.	They	call	it	‘talking
in	tongues.’	And	it	is	a	wonderful	method,	one	of	the	most	deep	and	penetrating
into	the	unconscious.	You	start	with	‘la,	la,	la’,	and	then	you	can	go	on	with
anything	that	comes.	Just	for	the	first	day	you	will	feel	it	a	little	difficult.	Once	it
comes,	you	know	the	knack	of	it.	Then	for	fifteen	minutes,	use	the	language	that
is	coming	to	you,	and	use	it	as	a	language;	in	fact	you	are	talking	in	it.	This
fifteen	minutes	will	relax	the	conscious	mind	so	deeply	and	then	you	just	simply
lie	down	and	go	to	sleep.	Your	sleep	will	become	deeper.	Within	weeks	you	will
feel	a	depth	in	your	sleep,	and	in	the	morning	you	will	feel	completely	fresh.	§
Devavani	is	the	“Divine	Voice”	which	moves	and	speaks	through	the
meditator,	who	becomes	an	empty	vessel,	a	channel.	This	meditation
relaxes	the	conscious	mind	so	deeply	that,	when	done	last	thing	at	night,	it
is	sure	to	be	followed	by	a	profound	sleep.
There	are	four	stages	of	15	minutes	each.
Keep	your	eyes	closed	throughout.
Instructions	for	Devavani	Meditation
First	stage:	15	minutes
Sit	quietly,	preferably	with	gentle	music	playing.
Second	stage:	15	minutes
Start	making	nonsense	sounds,	for	example	“la…la…la”,	and	continue	until
unfamiliar	word-like	sounds	arise.	These	sounds	need	to	come	from	the
unfamiliar	part	of	the	brain	used	as	a	child,	before	words	were	learned.	Allow	a
gentle	conversational	intonation;	do	not	cry	or	shout,	laugh	or	scream.
Third	stage:	15	minutes
Stand	up	and	continue	to	speak,	allowing	your	body	to	move	softly	in
harmony	with	the	sounds.	If	your	body	is	relaxed	the	subtle	energies	will	create	a
Latihan	outside	your	control.
Fourth	stage:	15	minutes
Lie	down,	be	silent	and	still.
The	center	of	sound
This	technique	can	be	done	in	many	ways.	One	way	is	to	begin	by	just
sitting	anywhere.	Sounds	are	always	present.	It	may	be	in	a	market	or	it	may	be
at	a	Himalayan	retreat:	sounds	are	there.	Sit	silently,	and	with	sound	there	is
something	very	special.	Whenever	there	are	sounds,	you	are	the	center.	All	the
sounds	come	to	you	from	everywhere,	from	all	directions.
With	sight,	with	eyes,	this	is	not	so.	Sight	is	linear.	I	see	you,	then	there	is	a
line	toward	you.	Sound	is	circular;	it	is	not	linear.	So	all	sounds	come	in	circles
and	you	are	the	center.	Wherever	you	are,	you	are	always	the	center	of	sound.
For	sounds,	you	are	always	‘God’,	the	center	of	the	whole	universe.
Every	sound	is	coming	to	you,	moving	toward	you,	in	circles.
This	technique	says,	bathe	in	the	center	of	sound.	Wherever	you	are,	if	you
are	doing	this	technique,	just	close	your	eyes	and	feel	the	whole	universe	filled
with	sound.	Feel	as	if	every	sound	is	moving	toward	you	and	you	are	the	center.
Even	this	feeling	that	you	are	the	center	will	give	you	a	very	deep	peace.	The
whole	universe	becomes	the	circumference,	and	you	are	the	center	and
everything	is	moving	toward	you,	falling	toward	you.
If	you	are	sitting	by	the	side	of	a	waterfall,	close	your	eyes,	and	feel	the
sound	all	around	you,	falling	on	you,	from	every	side,	creating	a	center	in	you
from	every	side.	Why	this	emphasis	on	feeling	that	you	are	in	the	center?
Because	in	the	center	there	is	no	sound.	The	center	is	without	sound;	that	is	why
you	can	hear	sounds.	Otherwise,	you	could	not	hear	them.	A	sound	cannot	hear
another	sound.	Because	you	are	soundless	at	your	center,	you	can	hear	sounds.
The	center	is	absolute	silence:	that	is	why	you	can	hear	sounds	entering	you,
coming	to	you,	penetrating	you,	encircling	you.
If	you	can	find	out	where	the	center	is,	where	in	you	the	field	is	to	which
every	sound	is	coming,	suddenly	sounds	will	disappear	and	you	will	enter	into
soundlessness.	If	you	can	feel	a	center	where	every	sound	is	being	heard,	there	is
a	sudden	transference	of	consciousness.	One	moment	you	will	be	hearing	the
whole	world	filled	with	sounds,	and	another	moment	your	awareness	will
suddenly	turn	in	and	you	will	hear	the	soundlessness,	the	center	of	life.
Once	you	have	heard	that,	then	no	sound	can	disturb	you.	It	comes	to	you,
but	it	never	reaches	you.	It	comes	to	you,	it	is	always	coming	to	you,	but	it	never
reaches	you.	There	is	a	point	where	no	sound	enters.	That	point	is	you.
Do	it	in	a	market:	there	is	no	other	place	like	a	market.	It	is	so	much	filled
with	sounds—mad	sounds.	But	do	not	start	thinking	about	sounds—that	this	is
good	and	this	is	bad	and	this	is	disturbing	and	that	is	very	beautiful	and
harmonious.	You	are	not	supposed	to	think	about	sounds.	You	are	simply
supposed	to	think	of	the	center.	You	are	not	supposed	to	think	about	every	sound
moving	toward	you—whether	it	is	good,	bad,	beautiful.	You	are	just	to
remember	that	you	are	the	center	and	all	the	sounds	are	moving	toward	you—
every	sound,	whatsoever	the	sort.
Sounds	are	not	heard	in	the	ears.	They	are	not	heard	in	the	ears;	ears	cannot
hear	them.	They	only	do	a	transmission	work,	and	in	the	transmission	they	cut
out	much	which	is	useless	for	you.	They	choose,	they	select,	and	then	those
sounds	enter	you.	Now	find	out	within	where	your	center	is.	Ears	are	not	the
center.	You	are	hearing	from	somewhere	deep	down.	The	ears	are	simply
sending	you	selected	sounds.	Where	are	you?	Where	is	your	center?
If	you	are	working	with	sounds,	then	sooner	or	later	you	will	be	surprised—
because	the	center	is	not	in	the	head.	The	center	is	not	in	the	head!	It	appears	in
the	head	because	you	have	never	heard	sounds:	you	have	heard	words.	With
words	the	head	is	the	center;	with	sounds	it	is	not	the	center.	That	is	why	in
Japan	they	say	that	man	thinks	not	through	the	head,	but	through	the	belly—
because	they	were	working	with	sounds	since	a	long	time.
You	have	seen	in	every	temple	a	gong.	That	was	placed	there	to	create
sounds	around	a	seeker.	Someone	would	be	meditating,	and	the	gong	would	be
sounded	or	a	bell	would	be	rung.	The	very	disturbance	seems	to	have	been
created	by	the	sound	of	the	bell.	Someone	is	meditating,	and	this	bell	or	gong
seems	disturbing.	This	seems	disturbing!	In	a	temple,	every	visitor	who	comes
will	hit	the	gong	or	ring	the	bell.	With	someone	meditating	there,	this	would
seem	to	be	a	constant	disturbance.	It	is	not—because	the	person	is	waiting	for
this	sound.
So	every	visitor	is	helping.	Again	and	again	the	bell	is	hit,	and	the	sound	is
created	and	the	meditator	again	enters	himself.	He	looks	at	the	center	where	this
sound	goes	deep.	There	is	one	hit	on	the	bell:	the	visitor	has	done	that.	Now	the
second	hit	will	be	inside	the	meditator,	somewhere	inside.	Where	is	it?	The
sound	always	hits	at	the	belly,	at	the	navel,	never	in	the	head.	If	it	hits	in	the
head,	you	can	understand	well	that	it	is	not	sound:	it	is	words.	Then	you	have
started	thinking	about	the	sound.	Then	the	purity	is	lost.
You	can	also	create	the	sound	just	by	using	your	fingers,	or	with	anything
which	closes	your	ears	forcibly.	Then	a	certain	sound	is	heard.	What	is	that
sound	and	why	do	you	hear	it	when	the	ears	are	closed,	when	the	ears	are
plugged?
Just	as	there	are	negatives	of	photographs,	there	are	negative	sounds.	Not
only	can	the	eyes	see	the	negative:	the	ears	can	even	hear	the	negative.	So	when
you	close	your	ears,	you	hear	the	negative	world	of	sounds.	All	the	sounds	have
stopped.	Suddenly	a	new	sound	is	heard.	This	sound	is	the	absence	of	sound.	A
gap	has	come	in.	You	are	missing	something,	and	then	you	hear	this	absence.
That	negative	sound	is	known	as	the	sound	of	sounds—because	it	is	not	really	a
sound,	but	its	absence.	Or,	it	is	a	natural	sound	because	it	is	not	created	by
anything.
This	absence	of	sound	is	a	very	subtle	experience.	What	will	it	give	to	you?
The	moment	there	are	no	sounds,	you	fall	back	upon	yourself.	With	sounds	we
move	away;	with	sounds	we	move	to	the	other.	Try	to	understand	this:	with
sounds	we	are	related	to	the	other,	we	communicate	with	the	other.
If	sound	is	the	vehicle	to	move	to	the	other,	then	soundlessness	becomes	the
vehicle	to	move	to	oneself.	With	sound	you	communicate	with	the	other,	with
soundlessness	you	fall	down	into	your	own	abyss,	into	yourself.	That	is	why	so
many	techniques	use	soundlessness	to	move	within.
Become	absolutely	dumb	and	deaf—even	if	only	for	a	few	moments.	And
you	cannot	go	anywhere	else	than	to	yourself:	so	suddenly	you	will	find	that	you
are	standing	within;	no	movement	will	be	possible.	That	is	why	silence	was
practiced	so	much.	In	it,	all	the	bridges	for	moving	to	the	other	are	broken.
So	one	approach	is	to	hear	the	sounds	coming	to	your	center,	another
approach	is	to	stop	all	sounds	and	feel	the	soundless	center.	These	both	have
been	given	in	one	technique	for	a	special	purpose—so	that	you	can	move	from
one	to	another.
The	or	is	not	a	choice	to	do	this	or	that.	Do	both!	That	is	why	both	have	been
given	in	one	technique.	First	do	one	for	a	few	months,	then	do	the	other	for	a
few	months.	You	will	be	more	alive,	and	you	will	know	two	extremes.	And	if
you	can	move	to	the	two	extremes	easily,	you	can	remain	young	forever.
Finding	the	Space	Within
Emptiness	is	your	innermost	center.	All	activity	is	on	the	periphery:	the
innermost	center	is	just	a	zero.
Enter	the	clear	sky
Meditate	on	the	sky:	a	summer	sky	with	no	clouds,	endlessly	empty	and
clear,	nothing	moving	in	it,	in	its	total	virginity.	Contemplate	on	it,	meditate	on
it,	and	enter	this	clarity.	Become	this	clarity,	this	space-like	clarity.
To	meditate	on	the	sky	is	beautiful.	Just	lie	down	so	you	forget	the	earth;	just
lie	down	on	your	back	on	any	lonely	beach,	on	any	ground,	and	just	look	at	the
sky.	A	clear	sky	will	be	helpful—unclouded,	endless.	Just	looking,	staring	at	the
sky,	feel	the	clarity	of	it—the	uncloudedness,	the	boundless	expanse—and	then
enter	that	clarity,	become	one	with	it.	Feel	as	if	you	have	become	the	sky,	the
space.
This	technique—to	look	into	the	clarity	of	the	sky	and	to	become	one	with	it
—is	one	of	the	most	practiced.	Many	traditions	have	used	this.	And	particularly
for	the	modern	mind	it	will	be	very	useful,	because	nothing	is	left	on	earth	to
meditate	on—only	the	sky.	If	you	look	all	around,	everything	is	man-made,
everything	is	limited,	with	a	boundary,	a	limitation.	Only	the	sky	is	still,
fortunately,	open	to	meditate	on.
Try	this	technique,	it	will	be	helpful,	but	remember	three	things.	One:	don’t
blink—stare.	Even	if	your	eyes	start	to	feel	pain	and	tears	come	down,	don’t	be
worried.	Even	those	tears	will	be	a	part	of	unloading;	they	will	be	helpful.	Those
tears	will	make	your	eyes	more	innocent	and	fresh-bathed.	You	just	go	on
staring.
The	second	point:	don’t	think	about	the	sky,	remember.	You	can	start
thinking	about	the	sky.	You	can	remember	many	poems,	beautiful	poems	about
the	sky—then	you	will	miss	the	point.	You	are	not	to	think	about	it—you	are	to
enter	it,	you	are	to	be	one	with	it—because	if	you	start	thinking	about	it,	again	a
barrier	is	created.	You	are	missing	the	sky	again,	and	you	are	enclosed	in	your
own	mind	again.	Don’t	think	about	the	sky.	Be	the	sky.	Just	stare	and	move	into
the	sky,	and	allow	the	sky	to	move	into	you.	If	you	move	into	the	sky,	the	sky
will	move	into	you	immediately.
How	can	you	do	it?	How	will	you	do	it—this	moving	into	the	sky?	Just	go
on	staring	further	and	further	away.	Go	on	staring—as	if	you	are	trying	to	find
the	boundary.	Move	deep.	Move	as	much	as	you	can.	That	very	movement	will
break	the	barrier.	And	this	method	should	be	practiced	for	at	least	forty	minutes;
less	than	that	will	not	do,	will	not	be	of	much	help.
When	you	really	feel	that	you	have	become	one,	then	you	can	close	the	eyes.
When	the	sky	has	entered	in	you,	you	can	close	the	eyes.	You	will	be	able	to	see
it	within	also.	So	only	after	forty	minutes,	when	you	feel	that	the	oneness	has
happened	and	there	is	a	communion	and	you	have	become	part	of	it	and	the
mind	is	no	more,	close	the	eyes	and	remain	in	the	sky	within.
Include	Everything
This	technique	is	a	little	difficult,	but	if	you	can	do	it,	then	it	is	very
wonderful,	beautiful.	Sitting,	don’t	divide.	Sitting	in	meditation,	be	inclusive	of
all—your	body,	your	mind,	your	breath,	your	thinking,	your	knowing,
everything.	Be	inclusive	of	all.	Don’t	divide,	don’t	create	any	fragmentation.
Ordinarily	we	are	fragmenting;	we	go	on	fragmenting.	We	say,	“The	body	is	not
me.”	There	are	techniques	which	can	use	that	also,	but	this	technique	is	totally
different,	rather	it	is	the	opposite.
Don’t	divide.	Don’t	say,	“I	am	not	the	body.”	Don’t	say,	“I	am	not	the
breath.”	Don’t	say,	“I	am	not	the	mind.”	Just	say,	“I	am	all”—and	be	all.	Don’t
create	any	fragmentation	within	you.	This	is	a	feeling.	With	closed	eyes	include
everything	that	exists	in	you.	Don’t	get	yourself	centered	anywhere—be
uncentered.	The	breath	comes	and	goes,	the	thought	comes	and	moves.	The	form
of	your	body	will	go	on	changing.	You	have	not	observed	this.
If	you	sit	with	closed	eyes,	you	will	feel	that	sometimes	your	body	is	big,
sometimes	your	body	is	small;	sometimes	it	is	very	heavy,	sometimes	just	light,
as	if	you	can	fly.	You	can	feel	this	increasing	and	decreasing	of	the	form.	Just
close	your	eyes	and	sit	and	you	will	feel	that	sometimes	the	body	is	very	big—
filling	the	whole	room;	sometimes	it	is	so	small—just	atomic.	Why	does	this
form	change?	As	your	attention	changes,	the	form	of	the	body	changes.	If	you
are	inclusive,	it	will	become	big;	if	you	exclude—“This	is	not	I,	this	is	not	I”—
then	it	will	become	very	minute,	very	small,	atomic.
Include	everything	in	your	being	and	don’t	discard	anything.	Don’t	say,
“This	is	not	I.”	Say,	“I	am”,	and	include	everything	in	it.	If	you	can	do	this	just
sitting,	wonderful,	absolutely	new	happenings	will	happen	to	you.	You	will	feel
there	is	no	center;	in	you	there	is	no	center.	And	with	the	center	gone,	there	is	no
self,	there	is	no	ego;	only	consciousness	remains—consciousness	like	a	sky
covering	everything.	And	when	it	grows,	not	only	your	own	breath	will	be
included,	not	only	your	own	form	will	be	included;	ultimately	the	whole
universe	becomes	inclusive	to	you.
The	basic	point	is	to	remember	inclusiveness.	Don’t	exclude.	This	is	the	key
for	this	technique—inclusiveness,	include.	Include	and	grow.	Include	and
expand.	Try	it	with	your	body,	and	then	try	it	with	the	outside	world	also.
Sitting	under	a	tree,	look	at	the	tree,	then	close	your	eyes	and	feel	that	the
tree	is	within	you.	Look	at	the	sky,	then	close	your	eyes	and	feel	that	the	sky	is
within	you.	Look	at	the	rising	sun,	then	close	your	eyes	and	feel	that	the	sun	is
rising	within	you.	Feel	more	inclusive.
A	tremendous	experience	will	happen	to	you.	When	you	feel	that	the	tree	is
within	you,	immediately	you	will	feel	more	young,	more	fresh.	And	this	is	not
imagination,	because	the	tree	and	you	both	belong	to	the	earth.	You	are	both
rooted	in	the	same	earth	and	ultimately	rooted	in	the	same	existence.	So	when
you	feel	that	the	tree	is	within	you,	the	tree	is	within	you—this	is	not
imagination—and	immediately	you	will	feel	the	effect.	The	tree’s	aliveness,	the
greenery,	the	freshness,	the	breeze	passing	through	it,	will	be	felt	within	you	in
your	heart.	Include	more	and	more	existence	and	don’t	exclude.
So	remember	this:	make	it	a	style	of	life	to	include—not	only	meditation,	but
a	style	of	life,	a	way	of	living.	Try	to	include	more	and	more.	The	more	you
include,	the	more	you	expand,	the	more	your	boundaries	recede	to	the	very
corners	of	existence.	One	day	only	you	are;	the	whole	existence	is	included.	This
is	the	ultimate	of	all	religious	experience.
A	meditation	for	the	jet	set
You	cannot	find	a	better	situation	in	which	to	meditate	than	while	flying	at	a
high	altitude.	The	higher	the	altitude,	the	easier	is	the	meditation.	Hence,	for
centuries,	meditators	have	been	moving	to	the	Himalayas	to	find	a	high	altitude.
When	gravitation	is	less	and	the	earth	is	very	far	away,	many	pulls	of	the
earth	are	far	away.	You	are	far	away	from	the	corrupted	society	that	man	has
built.	You	are	surrounded	by	clouds	and	the	stars	and	the	moon	and	the	sun	and
the	vast	space.	So	do	one	thing:	start	feeling	one	with	that	vastness,	and	do	it	in
three	steps.	The	first	step	is:	for	a	few	minutes	just	think	that	you	are	becoming
bigger…you	are	filling	the	whole	plane.	Then	the	second	step:	start	feeling	that
you	are	becoming	even	bigger,	bigger	than	the	plane,	in	fact	the	plane	is	now
inside	you.	And	the	third	step:	feel	that	you	have	expanded	into	the	whole	sky.
Now	these	clouds	that	are	moving,	and	the	moon	and	the	stars—they	are	moving
in	you;	you	are	huge,	unlimited.	This	feeling	will	become	your	meditation,	and
you	will	feel	completely	relaxed	and	non-tense.
Watching	with	the	Third	Eye
It	is	one	of	the	contributions	of	the	East	to	the	world:	the	understanding
that	between	these	two	eyes,	there	is	a	third	eye	inside	which	normally
remains	dormant.
One	has	to	work	hard,	bring	his	whole	sexual	energy	upward,	against
gravitation,	and	when	the	energy	reaches	the	third	eye,	it	opens.	Many
methods	have	been	tried	to	do	that,	because	when	it	opens	there	is
suddenly	a	flash	of	light,	and	things	which	have	never	been	clear	to	you
suddenly	become	clear.
When	I	emphasize	watching,	witnessing…that	is	the	finest	method	to	bring
the	third	eye	into	action,	because	that	watching	is	inside.	These	two	eyes
cannot	be	used,	they	can	only	look	outward.	They	have	to	be	closed.	And
when	you	try	to	watch	inside,	that	certainly	means	there	is	something	like
an	eye	which	sees.	Who	sees	your	thoughts?	Not	these	eyes.	Who	sees	that
anger	is	arising	in	you?	That	place	of	seeing	is	called,	symbolically,	the
third	eye.
OSHO	GOURISHANKAR	MEDITATION
This	technique	consists	of	four	stages	of	15	minutes	each.	The	first	two
stages	prepare	the	meditator	for	the	spontaneous	Latihan	of	the	third	stage.	Osho
has	said	that	if	the	breathing	is	done	correctly	in	the	first	stage,	the	carbon
dioxide	formed	in	the	bloodstream	will	make	you	feel	as	high	as	Gourishankar
(Mt.	Everest).	NOTE:	Those	with	a	history	of	neurological	disorders	such	as
epilepsy	should	never	use	a	strobe	or	flashing	light	for	this	meditation.
First	stage:	15	minutes
Sit	with	closed	eyes.	Inhale	deeply	through	the	nose,	filling	the	lungs.	Hold
the	breath	for	as	long	as	possible,	then	exhale	gently	through	the	mouth	and	keep
the	lungs	empty	for	as	long	as	possible.	Continue	this	breathing	cycle	throughout
the	first	stage.
Second	stage:	15	minutes
Return	to	normal	breathing	and	with	a	gentle	gaze	look	at	a	candle	flame	or
a	flashing	blue	light.	Keep	your	body	still.
Third	stage:	15	minutes
With	closed	eyes,	stand	up	and	let	your	body	be	loose	and	receptive.	The
subtle	energies	will	be	felt	to	move	the	body	outside	your	normal	control.	Allow
this	Latihan	to	happen.	Don’t	you	do	the	moving:	let	moving	happen,	gently	and
gracefully.
Fourth	stage:	15	minutes
Lie	down	with	closed	eyes,	silent	and	still.
The	first	three	stages	should	be	accompanied	by	a	steady	rhythmic	beat,
preferably	combined	with	a	soothing	background	music.	The	beat	should	be
seven	times	the	normal	heartbeat	and,	if	possible,	the	flashing	light	should	be	a
synchronized	strobe.
OSHO	MANDALA	MEDITATION
This	is	another	powerful,	cathartic	technique	that	creates	a	circle	of	energy
that	results	in	a	natural	centering.	There	are	four	stages	of	15	minutes	each.
First	stage:	15	minutes
With	open	eyes	run	on	the	spot,	starting	slowly	and	gradually,	getting	faster
and	faster.	Bring	your	knees	up	as	high	as	possible.	Breathing	deeply	and	evenly
will	move	the	energy	within.	Forget	the	mind	and	forget	the	body.	Keep	going.
Second	stage:	15	minutes
Sit	with	your	eyes	closed	and	mouth	open	and	loose.	Gently	rotate	your	body
from	the	waist,	like	a	reed	blowing	in	the	wind.	Feel	the	wind	blowing	you	from
side	to	side,	back	and	forth,	around	and	around.	This	will	bring	your	awakened
energies	to	the	navel	center.
Third	stage:	15	minutes
Lie	on	your	back,	open	your	eyes	and,	with	the	head	still,	rotate	them	in	a
clockwise	direction.	Sweep	them	fully	around	in	the	sockets	as	if	you	are
following	the	second	hand	of	a	vast	clock,	but	as	fast	as	possible.	It	is	important
that	the	mouth	remains	open	and	the	jaw	relaxed,	with	the	breath	soft	and	even.
This	will	bring	your	centered	energies	to	the	third	eye.
Fourth	stage:	15	minutes
Close	your	eyes	and	be	still.
Finding	the	Witness
This	was	the	technique	given	to	Pythagoras.	Pythagoras	went	with	this
technique	to	Greece.	And,	really,	he	became	the	fountainhead,	the	source,	of	all
mysticism	in	the	West.	He	is	the	father	of	all	mysticism	in	the	West.
This	technique	is	one	of	the	very	deep	methods.	Try	to	understand	it.
Modern	physiology,	scientific	research,	says	that	between	the	two	eyebrows
is	the	gland	which	is	the	most	mysterious	part	in	the	body.	This	gland,	called	the
pineal	gland,	is	the	third	eye	of	the	Tibetans—Shivanetra:	the	eye	of	Shiva,	of
tantra.	Between	the	two	eyes	there	is	a	third	eye	existing,	but	ordinarily	it	is	non-
functioning.	You	have	to	do	something	about	it	to	open	it.	It	is	not	blind.	It	is
simply	closed.	This	technique	is	to	open	the	third	eye.
Close	your	eyes,	then	focus	both	of	your	eyes	just	in	the	middle	of	the	two
eyebrows.	Focus	just	in	the	middle,	with	closed	eyes,	as	if	you	are	looking	with
your	two	eyes.	Give	total	attention	to	it.
This	is	one	of	the	simplest	methods	of	being	attentive.	You	cannot	be
attentive	to	any	other	part	of	the	body	so	easily.	This	gland	absorbs	attention	like
anything.	If	you	give	attention	to	it,	both	your	eyes	become	hypnotized	with	the
third	eye.	They	become	fixed;	they	cannot	move.	If	you	are	trying	to	be	attentive
to	any	other	part	of	the	body,	it	is	difficult.	This	third	eye	catches	attention,
forces	attention.	It	is	magnetic	for	attention.	So	all	the	methods	all	over	the
world	have	used	it.	It	is	the	simplest	to	train	attention	because	not	only	are	you
trying	to	be	attentive:	the	gland	itself	helps	you;	it	is	magnetic.	Your	attention	is
brought	to	it	forcibly.	It	is	absorbed.
It	is	said	in	the	old	tantra	scriptures	that	attention	is	food	for	the	third	eye.	It
is	hungry;	it	has	been	hungry	for	lives	and	lives.	If	you	pay	attention	to	it,	it
becomes	alive.	It	becomes	alive!	The	food	is	given	to	it.	And	once	you	know
that	attention	is	food,	once	you	feel	that	your	attention	is	magnetically	drawn,
attracted,	pulled	by	the	gland	itself,	attention	is	not	a	difficult	thing	then.	One	has
only	to	know	the	right	point.	So	just	close	your	eyes,	let	your	two	eyes	move	just
in	the	middle,	and	feel	the	point.	When	you	are	near	the	point,	suddenly	your
eyes	will	become	fixed.	When	it	will	be	difficult	to	move	them,	then	know	you
have	caught	the	right	point.
If	the	attention	is	between	the	eyebrows,	for	the	first	time	you	will	come	to
experience	a	strange	phenomenon.	For	the	first	time	you	will	feel	thoughts
running	before	you;	you	will	become	the	witness.	It	is	just	like	a	film	screen:
thoughts	are	running	and	you	are	a	witness.	Once	your	attention	is	focused	at	the
third	eye	center,	you	become	immediately	the	witness	of	thoughts.
Ordinarily	you	are	not	the	witness:	you	are	identified	with	thoughts.	If	anger
is	there,	you	become	anger.	If	a	thought	moves,	you	are	not	the	witness—you
become	one	with	the	thought,	identified,	and	you	move	with	it.	You	become	the
thought;	you	take	the	form	of	the	thought.	When	sex	is	there	you	become	sex;
when	anger	is	there	you	become	anger;	when	greed	is	there	you	become	greed.
Any	thought	moving	becomes	identified	with	you.	You	do	not	have	any	gap
between	you	and	the	thought.
But	focused	at	the	third	eye,	suddenly	you	become	a	witness.	Through	the
third	eye,	you	become	the	witness.	Through	the	third	eye,	you	can	see	thoughts
running	like	clouds	in	the	sky	or	people	moving	on	the	street.
Try	to	be	a	witness.	Whatsoever	is	happening,	try	to	be	a	witness.	You	are	ill,
the	body	is	aching	and	painful,	you	have	misery	and	suffering,	whatsoever:	be	a
witness	to	it.	Whatsoever	is	happening,	do	not	identify	yourself	with	it.	Be	a
witness—an	observer.	Then	if	witnessing	becomes	possible,	you	will	be	focused
in	the	third	eye.
Secondly,	vice	versa	is	also	the	case.	If	you	are	focused	in	the	third	eye,	you
will	become	a	witness.	These	two	things	are	part	of	one.	So	the	first	thing:	by
being	centered	in	the	third	eye	there	will	be	the	arising	of	the	witnessing	self.
Now	you	can	encounter	your	thoughts.	This	will	be	the	first	thing.	And	the
second	thing	will	be	that	now	you	can	feel	the	subtle,	delicate	vibration	of
breathing.	Now	you	can	feel	the	form	of	breathing,	the	very	essence	of
breathing.
First	try	to	understand	what	is	meant	by	‘the	form’,	by	‘the	essence	of
breathing’.	While	you	are	breathing,	you	are	not	only	breathing	air.	Science	says
you	are	breathing	only	air—just	oxygen,	hydrogen,	and	other	gases	in	their
combined	form	of	air.	They	say	you	are	breathing	“air!”	But	Tantra	says	that	air
is	just	the	vehicle,	not	the	real	thing.	You	are	breathing	prana—vitality.	Air	is
just	the	medium;	prana	is	the	content.	You	are	breathing	prana,	not	only	air.
By	being	focused	in	the	third	eye,	suddenly	you	can	observe	the	very
essence	of	breath—not	breath,	but	the	very	essence	of	breath,	prana.	And	if	you
can	observe	the	essence	of	breath,	prana,	you	are	on	the	point	from	which	the
jump,	the	breakthrough	happens.
Touching	as	a	Feather
Use	both	your	palms,	put	them	on	your	closed	eyes,	and	allow	the	palms	to
touch	the	eyeballs—but	just	like	a	feather,	with	no	pressure.	If	you	press	you
miss	the	point,	you	miss	the	whole	technique.	Don’t	press;	just	touch	like	a
feather.	You	will	have	to	adjust,	because	in	the	beginning	you	will	be	pressing.
Put	less	and	less	pressure	until	you	are	just	touching	with	no	pressure	at	all—just
your	palms	touch	the	eyeballs.	Just	a	touch,	just	a	meeting	with	no	pressure,
because	if	the	pressure	is	there,	then	the	technique	will	not	function.	So—like	a
feather.
Why?—because	a	needle	can	do	something	which	a	sword	cannot	do.	If	you
press,	the	quality	has	changed—you	are	aggressive.	And	the	energy	that	is
flowing	through	the	eyes	is	very	subtle:	a	small	pressure	and	it	starts	fighting	and
a	resistance	is	created.	If	you	press,	then	the	energy	that	is	flowing	through	the
eyes	will	start	a	resistance,	a	fight;	a	struggle	will	ensue.	So	don’t	press;	even	a
slight	pressure	is	enough	for	the	eye	energy	to	judge.
It	is	very	subtle,	it	is	very	delicate.	Don’t	press—like	a	feather,	just	your
palm	is	touching,	as	if	not	touching.	Touching	as	if	not	touching,	no	pressure;
just	a	touch,	a	slight	feeling	that	the	palm	is	touching	the	eyeball,	that’s	all.
What	will	happen?	When	you	simply	touch	without	any	pressure,	the	energy
starts	moving	within.	If	you	press,	it	starts	fighting	with	the	hand,	with	the	palm,
and	moves	out.	Just	a	touch	and	the	energy	starts	moving	within.	The	door	is
closed;	simply	the	door	is	closed	and	the	energy	falls	back.	The	moment	energy
falls	back,	you	will	feel	a	lightness	coming	all	over	your	face,	your	head.	This
energy	moving	back	makes	you	light.
And	just	between	these	two	eyes	is	the	third	eye,	the	wisdom-eye,	the
prajna-chakshu.	Just	between	the	two	eyes	is	the	third	eye.	The	energy	falling
back	from	the	eyes	hits	the	third	eye.	That’s	why	one	feels	light,	levitating,	as	if
there	is	no	gravitation.	And	from	the	third	eye	the	energy	falls	on	the	heart.	It	is	a
physical	process:	just	drip,	drip,	it	drops,	and	you	will	feel	a	very	light	feeling
entering	in	your	heart.	The	heartbeats	will	slow	down,	the	breathing	will	slow
down.	Your	whole	body	will	feel	relaxed.
Even	if	you	are	not	entering	deep	meditation,	this	will	help	you	physically.
Any	time	during	the	day,	relax	on	a	chair—or	if	you	don’t	have	a	chair,	when
just	sitting	in	a	train—close	your	eyes,	feel	a	relaxed	being	in	the	whole	of	your
body,	and	then	put	both	your	palms	on	your	eyes.	But	don’t	press—that’s	the
very	significant	thing.	Just	touch	like	a	feather.
When	you	touch	and	don’t	press,	your	thoughts	will	stop	immediately.	In	a
relaxed	mind	thoughts	cannot	move;	they	get	frozen.	They	need	frenzy	and
fever,	they	need	tension	to	move.	They	live	through	tension.	When	the	eyes	are
silent,	relaxed,	and	the	energy	is	moving	backwards,	thoughts	will	stop.	You	will
feel	a	certain	quality	of	euphoria,	and	that	will	deepen	daily.
So	do	it	many	times	in	the	day.	Even	for	a	single	moment,	touching	will	be
good.	Whenever	your	eyes	feel	exhausted,	dry	of	energy,	exploited—after
reading,	seeing	a	film,	or	watching	TV—whenever	you	feel	it,	just	close	the	eyes
and	touch.	Immediately	there	will	be	the	effect.	But	if	you	want	to	make	it	a
meditation,	then	do	it	for	at	least	forty	minutes.	And	the	whole	thing	is	not	to
press.	It	is	easy	for	a	single	moment	to	have	a	feather-like	touch;	it	is	difficult	for
forty	minutes.	Many	times	you	will	forget	and	you	will	start	pressing.
Don’t	press.	For	forty	minutes,	just	remain	aware	that	your	hands	have	no
weight;	they	are	just	touching.	Go	on	being	aware	that	you	are	not	pressing,	only
touching.	This	will	become	a	deep	awareness,	just	like	breathing.	As	Buddha
says	to	breathe	with	full	awareness,	the	same	will	happen	with	touching,	because
you	have	to	be	constantly	mindful	that	you	are	not	pressing.	Your	hand	should
just	be	a	feather,	a	weightless	thing,	simply	touching.
Your	mind	will	be	totally	there,	alert,	near	the	eyes,	and	the	energy	will	be
flowing	constantly.	In	the	beginning	it	will	be	just	dropping	in	drops.	Within
months	you	will	feel	it	has	become	a	river-like	thing,	and	within	a	year	you	will
feel	it	has	become	a	flood.
And	when	you	touch	you	will	feel	lightness.	You	can	feel	it	right	now.
Immediately,	the	moment	you	touch,	a	lightness	comes.	And	that	lightness
penetrates,	opens	into	the	heart.	In	the	heart,	only	lightness	can	enter;	nothing
heavy	can	enter.	Only	very	light	things	can	happen	to	the	heart.
This	lightness	between	the	two	eyes	will	start	dropping	into	the	heart,	and
the	heart	will	open	to	receive	it.	As	the	falling	energy	becomes	a	stream	and	then
a	river	and	then	a	flood,	you	will	be	washed	completely,	washed	away.	You	will
not	feel	that	you	are.	You	will	feel	simply	the	cosmos	is.	Breathing	in,	breathing
out,	you	will	feel	you	have	become	the	cosmos.	The	cosmos	comes	in	and	the
cosmos	goes	out.	The	entity	that	you	have	always	been,	the	ego,	will	not	be
there.
Just	Sitting
You	are	simply	sitting	there,	doing	nothing	…	and	all	is	silence	and	all	is
peace	and	all	is	bliss.	You	have	entered	godliness,	you	have	entered	truth.
—Osho
Zazen
The	Zen	people	say	just	sit,	don’t	do	anything.	The	most	difficult	thing	in	the
world	is	just	to	sit	doing	nothing.	But	once	you	have	got	the	knack	of	it,	if	you
go	on	sitting	for	a	few	months	doing	nothing	for	a	few	hours	every	day,	slowly,
slowly	many	things	will	happen.	You	will	feel	sleepy,	you	will	dream.	Many
thoughts	will	crowd	your	mind,	many	things.	The	mind	will	say,	“Why	are	you
wasting	your	time?	You	could	have	earned	a	little	money.	At	least	you	could
have	gone	to	a	film,	entertained	yourself,	or	you	could	have	relaxed	and
gossiped.	You	could	have	watched	the	TV	or	listened	to	the	radio,	or	at	least	you
could	have	read	the	newspaper	you	have	not	seen.	Why	are	you	wasting	your
time?”
Mind	will	give	you	a	thousand	and	one	arguments,	but	if	you	just	go	on
listening	without	being	bothered	by	the	mind…it	will	do	all	kinds	of	tricks;	it
will	hallucinate,	it	will	dream,	it	will	become	sleepy.	It	will	do	all	that	is	possible
to	drag	you	out	of	just	sitting.	But	if	you	go	on,	if	you	persevere,	one	day	the	sun
rises.
One	day	it	happens,	you	are	not	feeling	sleepy,	the	mind	has	become	tired	of
you,	is	fed	up	with	you,	has	dropped	the	idea	that	you	can	be	trapped,	is	simply
finished	with	you!	There	is	no	sleep,	no	hallucination,	no	dream,	no	thought.
You	are	simply	sitting	there,	doing	nothing	…	and	all	is	silence	and	all	is	peace
and	all	is	bliss.	You	have	entered	God,	you	have	entered	truth.
YOU	CAN	SIT	ANYWHERE,	but	whatsoever	you	are	looking	at	should	not
be	too	exciting.	For	example	things	should	not	be	moving	too	much.	They
become	a	distraction.	You	can	watch	the	trees—that	is	not	a	problem	because
they	are	not	moving	and	the	scene	remains	constant.	You	can	watch	the	sky	or
just	sit	in	the	corner	watching	the	wall.
The	second	thing	is,	don’t	look	at	anything	in	particular—just	emptiness,
because	the	eyes	are	there	and	one	has	to	look	at	something,	but	you	are	not
looking	at	anything	in	particular.	Don’t	focus	or	concentrate	on	anything—just	a
diffuse	image.	That	relaxes	very	much.
And	the	third	thing,	relax	your	breathing.	Don’t	do	it,	let	it	happen.	Let	it	be
natural	and	that	will	relax	even	more.
The	fourth	thing	is,	let	your	body	remain	as	immobile	as	possible.	First	find
a	good	posture—you	can	sit	on	a	pillow	or	mattress	or	whatsoever	you	feel	to,
but	once	you	settle,	remain	immobile,	because	if	the	body	does	not	move,	the
mind	automatically	falls	silent.	In	a	moving	body,	the	mind	also	continues	to
move,	because	body-mind	are	not	two	things.	They	are	one	…	it	is	one	energy.
In	the	beginning	it	will	seem	a	little	difficult	but	after	a	few	days	you	will
enjoy	it	tremendously.	You	will	see,	by	and	by,	layer	upon	layer	of	the	mind
starting	to	drop.	A	moment	comes	when	you	are	simply	there	with	no	mind.
Instructions
Sit	facing	a	plain	wall,	approximately	at	your	arm’s	length	away.	Eyes
should	be	half-open	allowing	the	gaze	to	rest	softly	on	the	wall.	Keep	your	back
straight,	and	rest	one	hand	inside	the	other	with	thumbs	touching	to	form	an
oval.	Stay	as	still	as	possible	for	30	minutes.
While	sitting,	just	allow	a	choiceless	awareness,	not	directing	the	attention
anywhere	in	particular,	but	remaining	as	receptive	and	alert	as	possible,	moment
to	moment.
Just	Listening
Hundreds	of	extemporaneous	talks	by	Osho	have	been	recorded	on	audio	and
video.	He	has	suggested	that	sitting	silently	and	listening	to	these	talks	can	be
used	as	a	daily	tool	for	meditation.	Here,	he	talks	about	the	role	of	listening	in
meditation,	both	in	terms	of	listening	to	his	talks	and	in	terms	of	“just	listening.”
When	I	am	speaking	to	you,	I	am	not	trying	to	have	a	communication	with
your	intellectual,	rational	mind.
My	purpose	is	unique—I	am	using	words	just	to	create	silent	gaps.	The
words	are	not	important.	So	I	can	say	anything	contradictory,	anything	absurd,
anything	unrelated,	because	my	purpose	is	just	to	create	gaps.	The	words	are
secondary;	the	silences	between	those	words	are	primary.	This	is	simply	a	device
to	give	you	a	glimpse	of	meditation.	And	once	you	know	that	it	is	possible	for
you,	you	have	traveled	far	in	the	direction	of	your	own	being.
Most	of	the	people	in	the	world	don’t	think	that	it	is	possible	for	the	mind	to
be	silent.	Because	they	don’t	think	it	is	possible,	they	don’t	try.	How	to	give
people	a	taste	of	meditation	was	my	basic	reason	to	speak.	So	I	can	go	on
speaking	eternally—it	does	not	matter	what	I	am	saying.	All	that	matters	is	that	I
give	you	a	few	chances	to	be	silent,	which	you	find	difficult	on	your	own	in	the
beginning.
I	cannot	force	you	to	be	silent,	but	I	can	create	a	device	in	which
spontaneously	you	are	bound	to	be	silent.	I	am	speaking,	and	in	the	middle	of	a
sentence,	when	you	were	expecting	another	word	to	follow,	nothing	follows	but
a	silent	gap.	And	your	mind	was	looking	to	listen,	waiting	for	something	to
follow,	and	does	not	want	to	miss	it—naturally	it	becomes	silent.	What	can	the
poor	mind	do?	If	it	were	known	at	what	points	I	would	be	silent,	if	it	were
declared	to	you	that	at	such-and-such	points	I	will	become	silent,	then	you	could
manage	to	think.	You	would	not	be	silent;	then	you	would	know:	“This	is	the
point	where	he	is	going	to	be	silent,	so	now	I	can	have	a	little	chit-chat	with
myself.”	But	because	it	comes	absolutely	suddenly….	I	don’t	know	myself	why
at	certain	points	I	stop.
Something	like	this	happening	to	any	orator	in	the	world	will	be	condemned,
because	an	orator	stopping	again	and	again	means	he	is	not	well	prepared,	he	has
not	done	his	homework.	It	means	that	his	memory	is	not	reliable,	that	he	cannot
find,	sometimes,	what	word	to	use.	But	because	it	is	not	oratory,	I	am	not
concerned	about	that—I	am	concerned	with	you.
And	it	is	not	only	here	in	this	assembly,	but	far	away…	anywhere	in	the
world	where	people	will	be	listening	to	the	video	or	to	the	audio,	they	will	come
to	the	same	silence.
My	success	is	not	to	convince	you,	my	success	is	to	give	you	a	real	taste	so
that	you	can	become	confident	that	meditation	is	not	a	fiction,	that	the	state	of
no-mind	is	not	just	a	philosophical	idea,	that	it	is	a	reality;	that	you	are	capable
of	it,	and	that	it	does	not	need	any	special	qualifications.	§
When	you	listen	meditatively	you	understand,	when	you	listen
concentratedly	you	learn.	If	you	listen	with	concentration,	you	will	gain
knowledge;	if	you	listen	meditatively,	you	will	lose	knowledge.	And	the
difference	is	very	subtle.
When	you	listen	with	concentration	it	means	you	are	tense,	too	eager	to
learn,	to	absorb,	to	know.	You	are	interested	in	knowledge;	concentration	is	the
way	towards	knowledge.	When	the	mind	is	focussed	on	one	thing,	of	course,	it
learns	more.
Meditation	is	unfocussed	mind.	You	simply	listen	silently—not	with	a
tension	in	the	mind,	not	with	an	urge	to	know	and	learn,	no.	But	with	total
relaxedness,	in	a	let-go,	in	an	opening	of	your	being.
You	listen	not	to	know,	you	simply	listen	to	understand.	These	are	different
ways	of	listening.
If	you	are	trying	to	know,	then	you	are	trying	to	memorize	what	I	am	saying.
Deep	down	you	are	repeating	it,	you	are	taking	notes	inside	the	mind.	You	are
writing	it	in	the	world	of	your	memories,	you	are	interested	in	letting	it	become
deeply	rooted	in	you	so	you	don’t	forget.	Then	it	will	become	knowledge.
The	same	seed	could	have	become	unlearning,	understanding.	Then	you
simply	listen,	you	are	not	interested	in	accumulating	it,	you	are	not	interested	in
writing	it	in	your	memory,	in	your	mind.	You	simply	listen	open,	as	you	listen	to
music,	as	you	listen	to	birds	singing	in	the	trees,	as	you	listen	to	wind	passing
through	ancient	pines,	as	you	listen	to	the	sound	of	water	in	a	waterfall—there	is
nothing	to	remember,	nothing	to	memorize,	you	don’t	listen	with	a	parrot	mind,
you	simply	listen	without	any	mind—the	listening	is	beautiful,	it	is	ecstatic,
there	is	no	goal	in	it,	in	itself	it	is	ecstatic,	it	is	blissful.
Listen	meditatively,	not	with	concentration.	All	schools,	colleges,
universities,	teach	concentration,	because	the	goal	is	to	memorize.	Here	the	goal
is	not	to	memorize,	the	goal	is	not	to	learn	at	all.	The	goal	is	to	unlearn.
Listen	silently,	and	don’t	think	that	you	will	forget.	There	is	no	need	to
remember;	only	that	which	is	rubbish	has	to	be	remembered,	because	you	go	on
forgetting	it.	Whenever	you	hear	the	truth	there	is	no	need	to	remember	it
because	it	cannot	be	forgotten.	You	may	not	be	able	to	remember	the	words	but
you	will	remember	the	essence—and	that	will	not	be	part	of	your	memory,	it	will
be	part	of	your	being.	§
The	art	of	listening	has	not	been	taught	to	you.	Nobody	has	told	you	how	to
listen.
When	I	became	a	professor	of	philosophy,	this	was	the	first	thing	I	did	in	all
my	classes.	Every	year,	for	the	first	month	I	would	not	be	teaching	anything.	For
the	first	month,	those	who	wanted	to	participate	in	my	classes	had	to	learn	how
to	listen.	Some	of	the	students	would	complain,	“This	is	not	part	of	the
university	course	syllabus;	nowhere	is	it	mentioned	that	for	one	month	we	have
to	learn	to	listen.”
The	vice-chancellor	asked	me,	“What	is	this,	that	you	ask	students	just	to	sit
and	learn	to	listen	for	one	month?”
I	said,	“	What	can	I	do?	I	have	to	deal	with	the	whole	burden	of	your	society.
This	should	have	been	done	earlier	in	their	education;	it	would	have	been
easier.”
“But,	he	said,	“they	all	hear	perfectly,	their	ears	are	perfect.”
I	said,	“It	is	not	a	question	of	ears….”
You	can	hear	something	while	you	are	thinking	inside;	then	that	thinking
gets	mixed	with	your	hearing—it	is	contaminated,	corrupted.	Then	what	you
carry	with	you	as	if	you	have	heard	it	is	not	what	has	been	said.	It	is	something
else;	it	can	be	even	just	the	opposite.
You	have	prejudices	inside,	which	go	on	screening	everything	that	passes
through	your	ears.	They	prevent	all	that	is	against	their	prejudices,	and	they
allow	only	that	which	supports	their	prejudices.
I	told	the	vice-chancellor,	“Now,	in	this	way	you	certainly	cannot	understand
philosophy.	I	am	not	concerned	about	other	subjects,	but	in	my	subject	it	is
impossible,	because	philosophy	basically	is	an	awareness	of	a	problem	from	all
its	aspects.	If	you	already	have	a	set	mind	about	it…	For	example,	if	we	are
discussing	God	and	you	already	think	that	you	know	God	exists,	or	you	know
that	God	does	not	exist,	then	you	cannot	understand	all	the	possible	aspects.
What	will	it	mean	if	God	exists	or	not?	What	will	it	mean	if	we	simply	remain
indifferent	to	the	question?	What	it	will	mean	if	we	conclude	that	it	is	impossible
to	know	whether	God	exists	or	not	and	we	remain	agnostic?	And	there	are
hundreds	of	other	implications.	But	these	are	only	possible	to	consider	if	you
don’t	have	a	predetermined	idea.”
In	the	beginning	it	was	very	difficult	for	the	students	to	sit	for	one	hour
silently	listening.	The	birds	outside,	any	noise…	some	professor	shouting,	some
car	passing,	some	airplane	zooming	by,	and	you	just	listen.	Nothing	has	to	be
done,	just	pure	listening.
Many	of	them	left	before	the	month	was	finished.	If	thirty	started,	it	was
almost	certain	that	only	ten	would	be	left.	But	those	ten	have	remained	grateful
—not	for	what	was	taught	after	that	one	month,	but	for	what	they	learned	in	that
one	month.	What	was	taught	afterwards	was	good	to	get	the	university
certificate,	but	what	they	learned	in	that	one	month	of	silent	listening	became	a
new	way	of	seeing	things,	of	feeling,	of	being.	§
The	truth	happens	when	you	are	in	the	mood	of	right	listening.	It	has	nothing
to	do	with	the	object	of	listening;	it	has	everything	to	do	with	the	quality	of
listening.	But	we	have	forgotten	how	to	listen.	Even	when	we	are	silent	we	are
not	listening.	Even	when	we	pretend	to	show	that	yes,	we	are	listening,	we	are
not	listening;	we	are	doing	a	thousand	and	one	things	in	the	mind.	Many
thoughts	are	crowding	in.	Politely	we	show	that	yes,	we	are	listening,	politely
sometimes	we	nod	also—“we	are	listening”—but	deep	inside	us	is	a	madhouse.
How	can	you	listen?
To	listen	you	will	have	to	drop	your	thinking.	With	thoughts,	listening	is	not
possible.	If	you	are	speaking	inside	while	I	am	speaking	to	you,	how	can	you
listen	to	me?	Because	you	are	closer	to	yourself	than	to	me,	your	thoughts	will
be	closer	to	you;	they	will	make	a	ring	around	you	and	they	will	not	allow	my
words	to	enter.	They	will	allow	only	those	ideas	that	are	in	tune	with	them,	they
will	choose	and	select.	They	will	not	allow	anything	that	is	strange,	unfamiliar,
unknown.
Then	it	is	not	worth	listening	because	you	are	simply	listening	to	your	own
thoughts.	And	it	is	dangerous,	because	you	will	think	that	you	have	heard	me.
Right	listening	means	to	be	in	a	totally	receptive,	silent	mood.
In	Zen	the	disciple	sits	for	many	months,	sometimes	years,	before	he
becomes	capable	of	listening.	Whenever	anybody	came	to	Buddha	he	would	say,
“For	one	year	or	two	years	you	simply	sit	here.	Nothing	else	has	to	be	done.	You
simply	learn	how	to	sit.”	People	would	say,	“We	know	already	how	to	sit.”	And
Buddha	would	say,	“I	have	never	come	across	a	person	who	knows	how	to	sit,
because	when	I	say	sit,	I	mean	sit—no	turmoil,	no	movement	of	thought.	Totally
silent,	utterly	silent,	no	movement	in	the	body,	no	movement	in	the	mind.	A	pool
of	energy	with	no	ripples.”
Then	there	comes	a	moment	when	you	become	so	silent	that	the	listener
disappears.	First	your	thoughts	disappear,	then	your	thinker	disappears.	The
thinker	is	nothing	but	the	one	who	makes	the	links	between	thoughts.	The
thinker	cannot	exist	without	thoughts;	when	thoughts	are	no	longer	there,
suddenly	the	thinker	evaporates.
When	you	are	listening	so	totally	that	there	is	no	thought	arising,	passing,
coming	and	going,	then	the	listener	also	disappears.
Note:	The	meditation	of	listening	to	Osho	talks	takes	place	every	evening	at	the
Osho	International	Meditation	Resort	in	Pune,	India	and	is	an	integral	part	of
the	daily	meditation	program	offered	there.	In	addition,	there	are	several
distributors	of	Osho	audio	and	video	recordings	around	the	world.	For
information	about	where	to	obtain	these	recordings,	see	www.osho.com
OSHO	MEDITATIVE	THERAPIES
The	ancient	methods	of	meditation	were	all	developed	in	the	East.	They
never	considered	the	Western	man….	I	am	creating	techniques	which	are
not	only	for	the	Eastern	man,	but	which	are	simply	for	every	man—
Eastern	or	Western.
—Osho
Osho	has	created	a	series	of	“meditative	therapies”—The	Mystic	Rose,	No-
Mind,	and	Born	Again.	Uniquely	simple	and	effective,	they	involve	a	minimum
of	interaction	among	the	participants,	but	the	energy	of	the	group	helps	each
individual	go	more	deeply	into	his	or	her	own	process.	A	fourth	meditative
therapy	is	Reminding	Yourself	of	the	Forgotten	Language	of	Talking	to	Your
BodyMind,	which	can	be	done	with	a	group	or	alone.	All	Osho	Meditative
Therapies	are	offered	as	part	of	the	program	at	the	Osho	International	Meditation
Resort	in	Pune,	India.	From	time	to	time,	they	are	also	offered	by	trained
facilitators	at	various	locations	around	the	world.
The	OSHO	MYSTIC	ROSE	MEDITATION
The	symbol	of	the	mystic	rose	is	that	if	a	man	takes	care	of	the	seed	he	is
born	with,	gives	it	the	right	soil,	gives	it	the	right	atmosphere	and	the	right
vibrations,	moves	on	a	right	path	where	the	seed	can	start	growing,	then	the
ultimate	growth	is	symbolized	as	the	mystic	rose—when	your	being	blossoms	and
opens	all	its	petals	and	releases	its	beautiful	fragrance.
The	Mystic	Rose	Meditative	Therapy	is	a	three-hour-a-day	process	which
lasts	for	three	weeks.	It	is	offered	monthly	as	a	part	of	the	Multiversity	program
at	the	Osho	Meditation	Resort	in	Pune,	India,	and	in	many	Osho	Meditation
Centers	throughout	the	world.	At	Osho’s	request,	the	meditative	therapies	are
always	led	by	a	facilitator	who	has	been	trained	in	the	process	at	the	Meditation
Resort.	Three	months	of	OSHO	Dynamic	Meditation	are	recommended	before
embarking	on	The	Mystic	Rose	meditative	therapy.
The	following	instructions	are	for	the	Mystic	Rose	Meditation,	which	can	be
done	by	individuals	after	they	have	participated	in	the	Mystic	Rose	Meditative
Therapy.
Instructions
This	meditation	in	three	parts,	lasting	for	21	days,	can	be	done	by	anyone	who
has	already	participated	in	The	Mystic	Rose	Meditative	Therapy.	It	can	be	done
alone	or	with	friends.
1.	Instructions	for	Laughter
The	authentic	laughter	is	not	about	anything.	It	is	simply	arising	in	you	as
a	flower	blossoms	in	a	tree.	It	has	no	reason,	no	rational	explanation.	It	is
mysterious;	hence	the	symbol	of	the	mystic	rose.
For	seven	days,	begin	by	shouting	“Yaa-Hoo!”	a	few	times,	then	just	laugh
for	no	reason	at	all	for	45	minutes.	You	can	sit	or	lie	down.	Some	people	find
lying	on	their	back	helps	to	relax	the	stomach	muscles	and	allows	energy	to
move	more	easily.	Some	people	find	that	covering	themselves	with	a	sheet,	or
holding	their	legs	in	the	air	helps	to	bring	out	the	laughing,	giggling	child	in
them.	The	emphasis	is	on	finding	your	inner	laughter,	laughter	for	no	reason	at
all,	so	your	eyes	are	generally	closed.	However,	some	eye	contact	with	your
friends	to	spark	off	laughter	is	also	fine.
Let	your	body	roll	about	in	a	light,	playful	way,	with	the	innocence	of	the
child	within	you,	and	allow	yourself	to	laugh	with	totality.
At	times,	you	may	come	up	against	blocks,	which	have	been	there	for
centuries,	preventing	your	laughter.	When	this	happens,	shout	“Yaa-Hoo!”	or	do
gibberish	(nonsense	sounds)	until	laughter	arises	again.
Let-go:	At	the	end	of	the	laughing	stage,	sit	perfectly	still,	with	eyes	closed,
for	a	few	minutes.	The	body	is	frozen,	like	a	statue,	gathering	all	the	energy
within.	Then	let	go:	relax	your	body	completely	and	allow	it	to	fall	without	any
effort	or	control.	When	you	feel	ready,	sit	up	again	and	sit	silently,	watching	for
15	minutes.
2.	Instructions	for	Tears
Once	the	laughter	is	over	you	will	find	yourself	flooded	with	tears,	agony.
But	that	too	will	be	a	great	unburdening	phenomenon.	Many	lives	of	pain
and	suffering	will	disappear.	If	you	can	get	rid	of	those	two	layers	you
have	found	yourself.
For	the	second	week,	begin	by	saying	“Yaa-Boo”	softly	a	few	times,	then
just	allow	yourself	to	cry	for	45	minutes.	You	may	want	to	have	the	room
slightly	darkened	to	help	you	move	into	your	sadness.	You	can	sit	or	lie	down.
Close	your	eyes	and	move	deeply	into	all	the	feelings	that	make	you	cry.
Allow	yourself	to	cry	really	deeply,	cleansing	and	unburdening	the	heart.
Feel	that	the	dam	of	all	your	pent-up	hurts	and	sufferings	is	breaking	open—let
the	tears	flood	out.	If	you	feel	blocked	or	feel	sleepy	after	crying	for	a	while,	do
gibberish.	Rock	your	body	back	and	forth	a	little,	or	say	“Yaa-Boo”	again	a	few
times.	The	tears	are	there,	just	don’t	prevent	them.
Let-go:	At	the	end	of	the	crying	stage	each	day,	sit	perfectly	still	for	a	few
minutes	and	then	move	into	let-go,	the	same	as	you	did	after	the	laughter.
During	this	week	of	tears,	be	open	to	any	situation	which	might	bring	tears.
Allow	yourself	to	be	vulnerable.
3.	Instructions	for	The	Watcher	on	the	Hills
For	the	third	week,	sit	in	silence	for	45	minutes,	or	for	longer	if	it	feels
comfortable	for	you,	and	then	dance	to	light,	heartful	music	for	15	minutes.	You
may	sit	on	the	floor	or	use	a	chair.	Your	head	and	back	should	be	as	straight	as
possible,	your	eyes	closed	and	your	breathing	natural.
Relax,	be	aware,	become	like	a	watcher	on	the	hills,	just	witnessing
whatever	passes	by.	It	is	the	process	of	watching	which	is	the	meditation;	what
you	are	watching	is	not	important.	Remember	not	to	become	identified	with	or
lost	in	whatever	comes	by:	thoughts,	feelings,	body	sensations,	judgments.
After	sitting,	play	some	gentle	music	of	your	own	choice	and	dance.	Allow
the	body	to	find	its	own	movement,	and	continue	watching	as	you	are	moving;
do	not	get	lost	in	the	music.
4.	A	Few	Points	to	Help
•	During	the	entire	twenty-one	day	period,	it	is	best	to	avoid	cathartic
therapies	like	breath,	emotional	release	and	bioenergetics	sessions.	Dynamic	and
Kundalini	meditations	are	optional	during	the	first	2	weeks	and	recommended
during	the	last	week.
•	If	you	are	doing	The	Mystic	Rose	Meditation	with	friends,	do	not	talk	to
each	other	during	the	meditation.
•	Many	people	come	to	a	layer	of	anger	during	the	week	of	laughter	or
during	the	week	of	tears.	There	is	no	need	to	stay	stuck	there.	Let	it	be	expressed
with	gibberish	and	body	movements,	then	return	to	the	laughter	or	tears.
•	Celebrate	your	laughter,	celebrate	your	tears,	celebrate	your	moments	of
silent	watching!
Laughter	and	Tears:	A	Cleansing	of	the	Heart
For	those	who	want	to	go	deeper,	I	have	chosen	to	create	a	new	meditative
therapy.	The	first	part	will	be	laughter—for	three	hours,	people	simply	laugh	for
no	reason	at	all.	And	whenever	their	laughter	starts	dying	they	again	say	“Yaa-
Hoo!”	and	it	will	come	back.	Digging	for	three	hours	you	will	be	surprised	how
many	layers	of	dust	have	gathered	upon	your	being.	It	will	cut	them	like	a	sword
in	one	blow.	For	seven	days	continuously,	three	hours	every	day…you	cannot
conceive	how	much	transformation	can	come	to	your	being.
And	then	the	second	part	is	tears.	The	first	part	removes	everything	that
hinders	your	laughter—all	the	inhibitions	of	past	humanity,	all	the	repressions,	it
cuts	them	away.	It	brings	a	new	space	within	you.	But	you	still	have	to	go	a	few
steps	more	to	reach	the	temple	of	your	being,	because	you	have	suppressed	so
much	sadness,	so	much	despair,	so	much	anxiety,	so	many	tears—they	are	all
there,	covering	you	and	destroying	your	beauty,	your	grace,	your	joy.
In	old	Mongolia	they	had	an	ancient	idea	that	every	life,	whatever	pain	is
suppressed…and	pain	is	suppressed,	because	nobody	wants	it.	You	don’t	want	to
be	painful,	so	you	suppress	it,	you	avoid,	you	look	somewhere	else.	But	it
remains.
And	the	Mongolian	idea	was—and	I	agree	with	it—that	life	after	life	it	goes
on	accumulating	in	you;	it	becomes	almost	a	hard	shell	of	pain.	If	you	go	in	you
will	find	both	laughter	and	tears.	That’s	why	sometimes	it	happens	that	by
laughing,	suddenly	you	find	tears	also	start	coming	together	with	it—very
confusing,	because	ordinarily	we	think	they	are	contrary.	When	you	are	full	of
tears	it	is	not	a	time	to	laugh,	or	when	you	are	laughing	it	is	not	the	right	season
for	tears.	But	existence	does	not	believe	in	your	concepts,	ideologies;	existence
transcends	all	your	concepts,	which	are	dualistic,	which	are	based	on	duality.
Day	and	night,	laughter	and	tears,	pain	and	blissfulness,	they	both	come	together.
When	a	man	reaches	into	his	innermost	being	he	will	find	the	first	layer	is	of
laughter	and	the	second	layer	is	of	agony,	tears.
So	for	seven	days	you	have	to	allow	yourself	to	weep,	cry,	for	no	reason	at
all—just	the	tears	are	ready	to	come.	You	are	preventing	them;	just	don’t
prevent.	And	whenever	you	feel	they	are	not	coming,	just	say,	“Yaa-Boo!”	These
are	pure	sounds,	used	as	a	technique	to	bring	all	your	laughter	and	all	your	tears
and	clean	you	completely,	so	that	you	can	become	an	innocent	child.
Finally,	the	third	part	is	witnessing—the	watcher	on	the	hills.	Finally,	after
the	laughter	and	the	tears,	there	is	only	a	witnessing	silence.	Witnessing	on	its
own	is	automatically	suppressive.	Weeping	stops	when	you	witness	it,	it
becomes	dormant.	This	meditation	gets	rid	of	the	laughter	and	tears	beforehand,
so	that	there	is	nothing	to	suppress	in	your	witnessing.	Then	the	witnessing
simply	opens	a	pure	sky.	So	for	seven	days	you	experience	simply	a	clarity.
This	is	absolutely	my	meditation.
You	will	be	surprised	that	no	meditation	can	give	you	so	much	as	this	small
strategy.	This	is	my	experience	of	many	meditations,	that	what	has	to	be	done	is
to	break	two	layers	in	you.	Your	laughter	has	been	repressed;	you	have	been	told,
“Don’t	laugh,	it	is	a	serious	matter.”	You	are	not	allowed	to	laugh	in	a	church,	or
in	a	university	class….
So	the	first	layer	is	of	laughter,	but	once	laughter	is	over	you	will	suddenly
find	yourself	flooded	with	tears,	agony.	But	that	too	will	be	a	great	unburdening
phenomenon.	Many	lives	of	pain	and	suffering	will	disappear.	If	you	can	get	rid
of	these	two	layers	you	have	found	yourself.
There	is	no	meaning	in	the	words	‘Yaa-Hoo’	or	‘Yaa-Boo’.	These	are	simply
techniques,	sounds	which	can	be	used	for	a	certain	purpose	to	enter	into	your
own	being.
I	have	invented	many	meditations,	but	perhaps	this	will	be	the	most	essential
and	fundamental	one.	It	can	take	over	the	whole	world….
Every	society	has	done	so	much	harm	by	preventing	your	joys	and	your
tears.	If	an	old	man	starts	crying	you	will	say,	“What	are	you	doing?	You	should
feel	ashamed;	you	are	not	a	child,	that	somebody	has	taken	your	banana	and	you
are	crying.	Have	another	banana,	but	don’t	cry.”
Just	see—stand	on	the	street	and	start	crying	and	a	crowd	will	gather	to
console	you:	“Don’t	cry!	Whatever	has	happened	forget	all	about	it,	it	has
happened.”	Nobody	knows	what	has	happened,	nobody	can	help	you,	but
everybody	will	try—“Don’t	cry!”	And	the	reason	is	that	if	you	go	on	crying,
then	they	will	start	crying,	because	they	are	also	flooded	with	tears.	Those	tears
are	very	close	to	the	eyes.
And	it	is	healthy	to	cry,	to	weep,	to	laugh.	Now	scientists	are	discovering
that	crying,	weeping,	laughter	are	immensely	healthful,	not	only	physically	but
also	psychologically.	They	are	very	much	capable	of	keeping	you	sane.	The
whole	of	humanity	has	gone	a	little	cuckoo	for	the	simple	reason	that	nobody
laughs	fully,	because	all	around	there	are	people	who	will	say,	“What	are	you
doing?	Are	you	a	child?—at	this	age?	What	will	your	children	think?	Keep
quiet!”
If	you	cry	and	weep	without	any	reason,	just	as	an	exercise,	a	meditation,
nobody	will	believe	it.	Tears	have	never	been	accepted	as	meditation.	And	I	tell
you,	they	are	not	only	a	meditation,	they	are	a	medicine	also.	You	will	have
better	eyesight	and	you	will	have	better	inner	vision.
I	am	giving	you	a	very	fundamental	technique,	fresh	and	unused.	And	it	is
going	to	become	worldwide,	without	any	doubt,	because	its	effects	will	show
anybody	that	the	person	has	become	younger,	the	person	has	become	more
loving,	the	person	has	become	graceful.	The	person	has	become	more	flexible,
less	fanatic;	the	person	has	become	more	joyful,	more	a	celebrant.
All	that	this	world	needs	is	a	good	cleansing	of	the	heart	of	all	the	inhibitions
of	the	past.	And	laughter	and	tears	can	do	both.	Tears	will	take	out	all	the	agony
that	is	hidden	inside	you	and	laughter	will	take	all	that	is	preventing	your
ecstasy.	Once	you	have	learned	the	art	you	will	be	immensely	surprised:	why	has
this	not	been	told	up	to	now?	There	is	a	reason:	nobody	has	wanted	humanity	to
have	the	freshness	of	a	roseflower	and	the	fragrance	and	the	beauty.
The	OSHO	NO-MIND	MEDITATION
No-mind	means	intelligence.	And	when	I	am	asking	you	to	do	gibberish,	I
am	simply	asking	you	to	throw	out	the	mind	and	all	its	activity	so	you
remain	behind—pure,	clean,	transparent,	perceptive.
—Osho
I	am	introducing	you	to	a	new	meditation.	It	is	divided	in	three	parts.
The	first	part	is	gibberish.	The	word	‘gibberish’	comes	from	a	Sufi	mystic,
Jabbar.	Jabbar	never	spoke	any	language,	he	just	uttered	nonsense.	Still	he	had
thousands	of	disciples	because	what	he	was	saying	was,	“Your	mind	is	nothing
but	gibberish.	Put	it	aside	and	you	will	have	a	taste	of	your	own	being.”
Use	gibberish	and	go	consciously	crazy.	Go	crazy	with	absolute	awareness
so	that	you	become	the	center	of	the	cyclone.	Simply	allow	whatever	comes,
without	bothering	whether	it	is	meaningful	or	reasonable.	Just	throw	out	all	mind
garbage	and	create	the	space	in	which	the	buddha	appears.
In	the	second	part,	the	cyclone	is	gone	and	has	taken	you	also	away.	The
buddha	has	taken	its	place	in	absolute	silence	and	immobility.	You	are	just
witnessing	the	body,	the	mind	and	anything	that	is	happening.
In	the	third	part	I	will	say,	“Let	go!”	Then	you	relax	your	body	and	let	it	fall
without	any	effort,	without	your	mind	controlling.	Just	fall	like	a	bag	of	rice.
Each	segment	will	begin	with	the	sound	of	a	drum.
Instructions
Try	the	meditation	for	seven	days	at	first,	as	that	will	be	a	long	enough
period	to	experience	its	effects.	Allow	for	approximately	40	minutes	of	gibberish,
followed	by	40	minutes	of	witnessing	and	Let-Go,	but	you	can	continue	both
stages	for	a	further	20	minutes	if	you	wish.
First	stage:	Gibberish	or	Conscious	Craziness
Standing	or	sitting,	close	your	eyes	and	begin	to	say	nonsense	sounds—
gibberish.	Make	any	sounds	you	like,	but	do	not	speak	in	a	language,	or	use
words	that	you	know.	Allow	yourself	to	express	whatever	needs	to	be	expressed
within	you.	Throw	everything	out,	go	totally	mad.	Go	consciously	crazy.	The
mind	thinks	in	terms	of	words.	Gibberish	helps	to	break	up	this	pattern	of
continuous	verbalization.	Without	suppressing	your	thoughts,	you	can	throw
them	out	in	this	gibberish.
Everything	is	allowed:	sing,	cry,	shout,	scream,	mumble,	talk.	Let	your	body
do	whatever	it	wants:	jump,	lie	down,	pace,	sit,	kick,	and	so	on.	Do	not	allow
there	to	be	any	gaps.	If	you	cannot	find	sounds	to	gibber	with,	just	say	la	la	la	la,
but	don’t	remain	silent.
If	you	do	this	meditation	with	other	people,	do	not	relate	or	interfere	with
them	in	any	way.	Just	stay	with	what	is	happening	to	you,	and	don’t	bother	about
what	others	are	doing.	You	can	wear	a	blindfold	if	it	helps.
Second	stage:	Witnessing
After	the	gibberish,	sit	absolutely	still	and	silent	and	relaxed,	gathering	your
energy	inwards,	letting	your	thoughts	drift	further	and	further	away	from	you,
allowing	yourself	to	fall	into	the	deep	silence	and	peacefulness	that	is	at	your
center.	You	may	sit	on	the	floor	or	use	a	chair.	Your	head	and	back	should	be
straight,	your	body	relaxed,	your	eyes	closed	and	your	breathing	natural.
Be	aware,	be	totally	in	the	present	moment.	Become	like	a	watcher	on	the
hills,	witnessing	whatever	passes	by.	Your	thoughts	will	try	to	race	to	the	future
or	back	to	the	past.	Just	watch	them	from	a	distance—don’t	judge	them,	don’t
get	caught	up	in	them.	Just	stay	in	the	present,	watching.	It	is	the	process	of
watching	which	is	the	meditation,	what	you	are	watching	is	not	important.
Remember	not	to	become	identified	with	or	lost	in	whatever	comes	by:	thoughts,
feelings,	body	sensations,	judgments.
Third	stage:	Let-Go
Gibberish	is	to	get	rid	of	the	active	mind,	silence	is	to	get	rid	of	the	inactive
mind,	and	Let-Go	is	to	enter	into	the	transcendental.
After	the	witnessing,	allow	your	body	to	fall	back	to	the	ground	without	any
effort	or	control.	Lying	back,	continue	witnessing,	being	aware	that	you	are	not
the	body	nor	the	mind,	that	you	are	something	separate	from	both.
As	you	travel	deeper	and	deeper	inside,	you	will	eventually	come	to	your
center.
When	you	feel	ready,	sit	up	again	and	for	a	few	minutes	remember	the	space
you	have	been	in—the	silence	and	the	peace.
If	you	would	like	to	experience	this	technique	more	deeply,	you	can
participate	in	the	No-Mind	Meditative	Therapy,	a	week-long	process	consisting
of	one	hour	of	gibberish,	followed	by	one	hour	of	silent	sitting.	This	is	offered	in
the	Osho	International	Meditation	Resort	and	some	Osho	Meditation	Centers.
OSHO	BORN	AGAIN
Remember	this:	regain	your	childhood.	Everyone	longs	for	it,	but	no	one	is
doing	anything	to	regain	it.	Everyone	longs	for	it!	People	go	on	saying	that
childhood	was	paradise	and	poets	go	on	writing	poems	about	the	beauty	of
childhood.	Who	is	preventing	you?	Regain	it!	I	give	you	this	opportunity	to
regain	it.
Be	playful.	It	will	be	difficult,	because	you	are	so	much	structured.	You	have
an	armor	around	you—it	is	so	difficult	to	loose	it,	to	relax	it.	You	cannot	dance,
you	cannot	sing,	you	cannot	just	jump,	you	cannot	just	scream	and	laugh	and
smile.	Even	if	you	want	to	laugh,	you	first	want	something	there	to	be	laughed
at.	You	cannot	simply	laugh.	There	must	be	some	cause;	only	then	can	you
laugh.	There	must	be	some	cause;	only	then	can	you	cry	and	weep.
Put	aside	knowledge,	put	aside	seriousness.	Be	absolutely	playful	for	these
days.	You	have	nothing	to	lose!	If	you	don’t	gain	anything,	you	will	not	lose
anything.	What	can	you	lose	in	being	playful?	But	I	say	to	you:	you	will	never
be	the	same	again.
My	insistence	on	being	playful	is	because	of	this.	I	want	to	throw	you	back
to	the	very	point	from	where	you	stopped	growing.	There	has	been	a	point	in
your	childhood	when	you	stopped	growing	and	when	you	started	being	false.
You	may	have	been	angry—a	small	child	in	a	tantrum,	angry—and	your	father
or	your	mother	said,	“Don’t	be	angry!	This	is	not	good!”	You	were	natural,	but	a
division	was	created	and	a	choice	was	there	for	you:	If	you	want	to	be	natural,
then	you	will	not	get	the	love	of	your	parents.
In	these	eight	days	I	want	to	throw	you	back	to	the	point	where	you	started
being	“good”	against	being	natural.	Be	playful	so	your	childhood	is	regained.	It
will	be	difficult	because	you	will	have	to	put	aside	your	masks,	your	faces;	you
will	have	to	put	aside	your	personality.	But	remember,	the	essence	can	assert
itself	only	when	your	personality	is	not	there,	because	your	personality	has
become	an	imprisonment.	Put	it	aside!	It	will	be	painful,	but	it	is	worth	it
because	you	are	going	to	be	reborn	out	of	it.	And	no	birth	is	without	pain.	If	you
are	really	determined	to	be	reborn,	then	take	the	risk.
Instructions
First	stage:
For	the	first	hour	you	behave	like	a	child,	just	enter	into	your	childhood.
Whatever	you	wanted	to	do,	do	it—dancing,	singing,	jumping,	crying,	weeping
—anything	at	all,	in	any	posture.	Nothing	is	prohibited	except	touching	other
people.	Don’t	touch	or	harm	anyone	else	in	the	group.
Second	stage:
For	the	second	hour	just	sit	silently.	You	will	be	more	fresh,	more	innocent,
and	meditation	will	become	easier.
Two	hours	a	day	for	seven	days.
Decide	that	for	these	days	you	will	be	as	ignorant	as	you	were	when	you
were	born—just	a	child,	a	new	babe,	knows	nothing,	asks	nothing,	discusses
nothing,	argues	nothing.	If	you	can	be	a	little	babe,	much	is	possible.	Even	that
which	looks	impossible	is	possible.
OSHO	REMINDING	YOURSELF	OF	THE	FORGOTTEN
LANGUAGE	OF	TALKING	TO	YOUR	BODYMIND
Once	you	start	communicating	with	your	body,	things	become	very	easy.
The	body	need	not	be	forced,	it	can	be	persuaded.	One	need	not	fight	with
the	body—that’s	ugly,	violent,	aggressive,	and	any	sort	of	conflict	is	going
to	create	more	and	more	tension.	So	you	need	not	be	in	any	conflict—let
comfort	be	the	rule.	And	the	body	is	such	a	beautiful	gift	from	God	that	to
fight	with	it,	is	to	deny	God	himself.	It	is	a	shrine…	we	are	enshrined	in	it;
it	is	a	temple.	We	exist	in	it	and	we	have	to	take	every	care	of	it—it	is	our
responsibility.
—Osho
This	Meditative	Therapy	is	about	making	friends	with	yourself,	with	your
body	and	also	with	your	mind.	You	will	become	aware	of	how	your	mind,	its
thoughts	and	feelings,	express	themselves	through	your	body.	Pain,	diseases,
addictions	(eg.	eating	too	much,	alcohol,	sugar	etc.)	will	be	dealt	with	and	can	be
healed.	This	process	is	a	chance	to	mobilize	your	self-healing	energies	and	to
relax	deeply.
A	seven-day	guided	meditation	and	relaxation	process,	“Talking	to	Your
BodyMind”	is	offered	regularly	in	a	group	setting	at	the	Osho	Meditation	Resort.
It	is	a	technique	that	can	also	be	practiced	alone,	using	the	instructions	plus
audio	CD	that	are	contained	in	the	book,	BodyMind	Balancing	by	Osho.	See	the
back	of	this	book	for	details.
				Part	4:	OBSTACLES	TO	MEDITATION
The	two	difficulties
There	are	only	two	difficulties	on	the	path	of	meditation:	one	is	the	ego.	You	are
continuously	prepared	by	the	society,	by	the	family,	by	the	school,	by	the	church,
by	everybody	around	you,	to	be	egoistic.	Even	modern	psychology	is	based	on
strengthening	the	ego.
The	ego
The	whole	idea	of	modern	psychology,	modern	education,	is	that	unless	a
person	has	a	very	strong	ego	he	will	not	be	able	to	struggle	in	life	where	there	is
so	much	competition	that,	if	you	are	a	humble	man,	anybody	will	push	you
aside;	you	will	always	remain	backward.	You	need	a	very	steely,	strong	ego	to
fight	in	this	competitive	world;	then	only	can	you	become	a	success.	In	any	field
—it	may	be	business,	it	may	be	politics,	it	may	be	any	profession—you	need	a
very	assertive	personality,	and	our	whole	society	is	geared	to	produce	the
assertive	personality	in	the	child.
From	the	very	beginning	we	start	telling	him,	“Come	first	in	your	class”;
when	the	child	does	come	first	in	the	class,	everybody	praises	him.	What	are	you
doing?	You	are	feeding	his	ego	from	the	very	beginning.	You	are	giving	him	a
certain	ambition:	“You	can	become	the	president	of	the	country,	you	can	become
the	prime	minister	of	the	country.”	He	starts	the	journey	with	these	ideas,	and	his
ego	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger	as	he	succeeds.
In	every	way	the	ego	is	the	greatest	disease	that	can	happen	to	man.	If	you
succeed,	your	ego	becomes	big—that	is	a	danger,	because	then	you	will	have	to
remove	a	big	rock	which	is	blocking	the	path.	Or	if	the	ego	is	small,	you	have
not	been	successful,	you	have	proved	to	be	a	failure,	then	your	ego	will	become
a	wound.	Then	it	hurts,	then	it	creates	an	inferiority	complex—then	too	it	creates
a	problem.	You	are	always	afraid	to	enter	into	anything,	even	meditation,
because	you	know	you	are	a	failure,	that	you	are	going	to	fail—that	has	become
your	mind.	Everywhere	you	have	failed,	and	meditation	is	such	a	great	thing…
you	cannot	succeed.
If	you	enter	into	meditation	with	this	idea—that	failure	is	bound	to	be,	that	it
is	your	destiny,	that	it	is	your	fate—then	of	course	you	cannot	succeed.	So	if	the
ego	is	big	it	prevents	you.	And	if	the	ego	is	very	small	it	becomes	a	wound
which	also	prevents	you.	In	each	case	the	ego	is	one	of	the	problems.	§
In	the	mother’s	womb	each	child	is	profoundly	blissful.	Of	course	he	is
unaware	of	it,	not	knowing	anything	about	it.	He	is	so	one	with	his	bliss	that
there	is	no	knower	left	behind.	Blissfulness	is	his	being,	and	there	is	no
distinction	between	the	knower	and	the	known.	So	of	course	the	child	is	not
aware	that	he	is	blissful.	You	become	aware	only	when	you	have	lost	something.
It	is	so.	It	is	very	difficult	to	know	something	without	losing	it,	because
when	you	have	not	lost	it	you	are	so	totally	one	with	it.	There	is	no	distance:	the
observer	and	the	observed	are	one;	the	known	and	the	knower	are	one.
Every	child	is	in	a	profoundly	blissful	state.	Psychologists	also	agree	with
this.	They	say	that	the	whole	search	of	religion	is	nothing	but	a	way	to	again	find
the	womb	of	the	mother.	They	use	it	as	a	criticism	of	religion,	but	to	me	it	is	not
criticism	at	all.	It	is	simply	true.	Yes,	the	search	for	religion	is	again	a	search	for
the	womb.	The	search	for	religion	is	again	a	search	to	make	this	whole	existence
a	womb.
The	child	is	absolutely	in	tune	with	the	mother.	The	child	is	never	out	of	tune
with	the	mother.	The	child	does	not	know	that	he	is	separate	from	the	mother.	If
the	mother	is	healthy	the	child	is	healthy;	if	the	mother	is	ill	the	child	is	ill.	If	the
mother	is	sad	the	child	is	sad;	if	the	mother	is	happy	the	child	is	happy.	If	the
mother	is	dancing	the	child	is	dancing;	if	the	mother	is	sitting	silently	the	child	is
silent.	The	child	has	no	boundaries	of	his	own	yet.	This	is	the	purest	bliss,	but	it
has	to	be	lost.
The	child	is	born,	and	suddenly	he	is	thrown	off-center.	Suddenly	he	is
uprooted	from	the	earth,	from	the	mother.	He	loses	his	moorings	and	he	does	not
know	who	he	is.	There	was	no	need	to	know	it	when	he	was	with	the	mother.
There	was	no	need	to	know—he	was	all,	and	there	was	no	need	to	know,	there
was	no	distinction.	There	was	no	‘you’,	so	there	was	no	question	of	‘I.’	The
reality	was	undivided.	It	was	adwaita—pure	adwaita,	pure	non-duality.
But	once	the	child	is	born,	the	umbilical	cord	is	cut	and	he	starts	breathing
on	his	own;	suddenly	his	whole	being	becomes	a	quest	to	know	who	he	is.	It	is
natural.	Now	he	starts	becoming	aware	of	his	boundaries—his	body,	his	needs.
Sometimes	he	is	happy,	sometimes	unhappy;	sometimes	he	is	fulfilled,
sometimes	not	fulfilled;	sometimes	he	is	hungry	and	crying	and	there	is	no	sign
of	mother	anywhere;	sometimes	he	is	on	the	mother’s	breast,	again	enjoying
oneness	with	the	mother.	But	now	there	are	many	moods	and	many	climates,	and
he	will	start,	by	and	by,	to	feel	the	separation.	A	divorce	has	happened;	the
marriage	is	broken.
He	was	absolutely	married	to	the	mother;	now	he	will	always	be	separate.
And	he	has	to	find	out	who	he	is.	For	the	whole	life	one	goes	on	trying	to	find
out	who	one	is.	This	is	the	most	fundamental	question.
First	the	child	becomes	aware	of	‘mine’,	then	of	‘me’,	then	of	‘you’,	then	of
‘I.’	This	is	how	it	proceeds.	This	is	precisely	the	procedure,	exactly	in	this	order.
First	he	becomes	aware	of	‘mine.’	Watch	it,	because	this	is	your	construction,	the
structure	of	your	ego.	First	the	child	becomes	aware	of	‘mine’—this	toy	is	mine,
this	mother	is	mine.	He	starts	possessing.	The	possessor	enters	first;
possessiveness	is	very	basic.	Hence	all	the	religions	say:	become	non-possessive,
because	with	possession	hell	starts.
Watch	small	children:	very	jealous,	possessive,	each	child	trying	to	snatch
everything	from	everybody	else	and	trying	to	protect	his	own	toys.	And	you	will
see	children	who	are	very	violent,	almost	indifferent	to	others’	needs.	If	a	child	is
playing	with	his	toy	and	another	child	comes	you	can	see	an	Adolf	Hitler,	a
Genghis	Khan,	a	Nadirshah.	He	will	cling	to	his	toy;	he	is	ready	to	hit,	he	is
ready	to	fight.	It	is	a	question	of	territory,	a	question	of	domination.
Possessiveness	enters	first;	that	is	the	basic	poison.	And	the	child	starts
saying,	“This	is	mine.”	Once	the	‘mine’	enters,	then	you	are	a	competitor	with
everybody.	Once	the	‘mine’	enters,	your	life	will	now	be	a	life	of	competition,
struggle,	conflict,	violence,	aggression.
The	next	step	after	‘mine’	is	‘me.’	When	you	have	something	to	claim	as
yours,	suddenly	through	that	claim	arises	the	idea	that	now	you	are	the	center	of
your	possessions.	The	possessions	become	your	territory,	and	through	those
possessions	arises	a	new	idea:	‘me.’	Once	you	are	settled	with	‘me’,	you	can	see
clearly	that	you	have	a	boundary,	and	those	who	are	outside	the	boundary	are
‘you.’	The	other	becomes	clear;	now	things	start	falling	apart.
The	universe	is	one,	it	is	a	unity.	Nothing	is	divided.	Everything	is	connected
with	everything	else;	it	is	a	tremendous	connectedness.	You	are	connected	with
the	earth,	you	are	connected	with	the	trees,	you	are	connected	with	the	stars;
stars	are	connected	with	you,	stars	are	connected	with	the	trees,	with	the	rivers,
with	the	mountains.	Everything	is	interconnected.	Nothing	is	separate;	nothing
can	be	separate.	Separation	is	not	possible.
Each	moment	you	are	breathing—you	breathe	in,	you	breathe	out—
continuously	there	is	a	bridge	with	existence.	You	eat,	existence	enters	into	you;
you	defecate,	it	becomes	manure—the	apple	on	the	tree	will	become	part	of	your
body	tomorrow,	and	some	part	of	your	body	will	go	and	become	manure,	will
become	food	for	the	tree…a	continuous	give-and-take.	Not	for	a	single	moment
does	it	stop.	When	it	stops,	you	are	dead.
What	is	death?—separation	is	death.	To	be	in	unity	is	to	be	alive,	to	be	out	of
unity	is	to	be	dead.	So	the	more	you	think,	“I	am	separate,”	the	less	sensitive	you
will	be,	more	dead,	dragging,	dull.	The	more	you	feel	you	are	connected,	the
more	this	whole	existence	is	part	of	you	and	you	are	part	of	this	whole	existence.
Once	you	understand	that	we	are	members	of	each	other,	then	suddenly	the
vision	changes.	Then	these	trees	are	not	alien;	they	are	continuously	preparing
food	for	you.	When	you	breathe	in,	you	take	oxygen	in,	when	you	breathe	out,
you	give	carbon	dioxide;	the	trees	breathe	in	carbon	dioxide	and	breathe	out
oxygen—there	is	a	continuous	communion.	We	are	in	tune.	The	reality	is	a	unity,
and	with	the	idea	of	‘me’,	‘you’,	we	are	falling	out	of	reality.	And	once	a	wrong
conception	settles	inside,	your	whole	vision	becomes	upside	down….
‘Me’,	then	‘you’,	and	then	as	a	reflection	arises	‘I.’	‘I’	is	the	subtlest,	the
most	crystallized	form	of	the	possessiveness.	Once	you	have	uttered	‘I’,	you
have	committed	sacrilege.	Once	you	have	said	‘I’,	you	are	broken	completely
from	existence—not	really	broken,	otherwise	you	would	die;	but	in	your	ideas
you	are	completely	broken	from	reality.	Now	you	will	be	in	a	continuous	fight
with	reality.	You	will	be	fighting	your	own	roots.	You	will	be	fighting	with
yourself.
That’s	why	Buddha	says:	“Be	a	driftwood.”	You	can	be	a	driftwood	only	if
you	have	dropped	the	idea	of	‘I’—otherwise	you	cannot	be	a	driftwood;	struggle
will	persist.	That’s	why	it	becomes	so	difficult	when	you	come	to	meditate.	If	I
say	to	just	sit	silently,	you	cannot	do	that—such	a	simple	thing.	One	would	think
it	is	the	most	simple	thing;	there	should	be	no	need	to	teach	it.	One	should
simply	sit	and	be.	But	you	cannot	sit	because	the	‘I’	cannot	allow	you	a	moment
of	relaxation.	Once	a	moment	of	relaxation	is	allowed,	you	will	be	able	to	see
reality.	Once	reality	is	known,	the	‘I’	will	have	to	be	dropped.	Then	it	cannot
persist.	So	the	‘I’	never	even	allows	you	a	holiday.	Even	if	you	go	to	the	hills,	to
the	summer	resorts,	the	‘I’	never	allows	you	a	holiday	even	there.	You	take	your
radio,	you	take	your	TV	set;	you	take	all	your	problems	and	you	remain
occupied.	You	had	gone	there	to	relax,	but	you	continue	your	whole	pattern	in
the	same	way.	You	don’t	relax.
The	‘I’	cannot	relax.	It	exists	through	tensions.	It	will	create	new	tensions,	it
will	create	new	worries;	it	will	constantly	manufacture	new	problems,	it	won’t
allow	you	any	rest.	Even	a	minute’s	rest	and	the	whole	house	of	the	‘I’	starts
toppling	down—because	the	reality	is	so	beautiful	and	the	‘I’	is	so	ugly.
One	continues	to	fight	his	way	unnecessarily.	You	are	fighting	for	things
which	are	going	to	happen	of	their	own	accord.	You	are	unnecessarily	fighting.
You	are	desiring	things	which	are	going	to	be	yours	if	you	don’t	desire.	In	fact,
by	desiring	you	will	lose	them.	That’s	why	Buddha	says:	“Float	with	the	stream.
Let	it	take	you	to	the	ocean.”
‘Mine’,	‘me’,	‘you’,	‘I’—this	is	the	trap.	And	this	trap	creates	misery,
neurosis,	madness.
Now	the	problem	is:	the	child	has	to	go	through	it,	because	he	does	not	know
who	he	is	and	he	needs	some	sort	of	identity—maybe	a	false	identity,	but	it	is
better	than	no	identity.	He	needs	some	identity.	He	needs	to	know	exactly	who
he	is,	so	a	false	center	is	created.	The	‘I’	is	not	your	real	center.	It	is	a	false
center—utilitarian,	make-believe,	just	manufactured	by	you.	It	has	nothing	to	do
with	your	real	center.
Your	real	center	is	the	center	of	all.	Your	real	self	is	the	self	of	all.	At	the
center,	the	whole	existence	is	one—just	as	at	the	source	of	light,	the	sun,	all	rays
are	one.	The	farther	away	they	go,	the	farther	away	they	are	from	each	other.
Your	real	center	is	not	only	your	center,	it	is	the	center	of	the	whole.	But	we	have
created	small	centers	of	our	own,	homemade,	manufactured	by	ourselves.	There
is	a	need…because	the	child	is	born	without	any	boundary,	with	no	idea	of	who
he	is.	It	is	a	survival	necessity.	How	will	he	survive?	He	has	to	be	given	a	name;
he	has	to	be	given	an	idea	of	who	he	is.	Of	course	this	idea	comes	from	the
outside:	somebody	says	you	are	beautiful,	somebody	says	you	are	intelligent,
somebody	says	you	are	so	vital.	You	gather	the	things	that	people	say.
Out	of	all	that	people	say	about	you,	you	gather	a	certain	image.	You	never
look	into	yourself,	at	who	you	are.	This	image	is	going	to	be	false—because
nobody	else	can	know	who	you	are,	and	nobody	else	can	say	who	you	are.	Your
inner	reality	is	not	available	to	anybody	else	except	you.	Your	inner	reality	is
impenetrable	to	anybody	else	except	you.	Only	you	can	be	there.
The	day	you	realize	that	your	identity	is	false,	put	together,	that	you	have
collected	opinions	from	people…sometime	just	think;	just	sit	silently	and	think
who	you	are.	Many	ideas	will	arise.	Just	go	on	watching	from	where	they	come
and	you	will	be	able	to	find	the	source.	Some	things	come	from	your	mother—
much,	about	eighty	to	ninety	percent.	Something	comes	from	your	father,
something	comes	from	your	schoolteachers,	something	comes	from	your	friends,
something	from	the	society.	Just	watch:	you	will	be	able	to	divide	from	where	it
comes.	Nothing	comes	from	you,	not	even	one	percent	comes	from	you.	What
type	of	identity	is	this,	in	which	you	have	not	contributed	at	all?	And	you	are	the
only	one	who	could	have	contributed,	in	fact,	the	whole	hundred	per	cent.
The	day	you	understand	this,	meditation	becomes	important.	The	day	you
realize	this	you	start	seeking	for	some	technique,	some	method	to	enter	into	your
being;	how	to	know	exactly,	really,	existentially,	who	you	are.	No	more
collections	of	images	from	the	outside,	no	more	asking	others	to	mirror	your
reality—but	to	face	it	directly,	immediately;	to	enter	into	your	nature,	to	feel	it
there.	What	is	the	need	to	ask	anybody?	And	whom	are	you	asking?	They	are	as
ignorant	about	themselves	as	you	are	about	yourself.	They	don’t	know
themselves;	how	can	they	know	you?
Just	see	how	things	are	functioning,	how	things	go	on	functioning,	how
things	go	on	happening:	one	falsity	leads	to	another	falsity.	You	are	almost
swindled,	duped.	You	are	conned,	and	those	who	have	swindled	you	may	not
have	done	it	knowingly.	They	may	have	been	swindled	by	others.	Your	father,
your	mother,	your	teachers,	have	been	duped	by	others—their	fathers,	their
mothers,	their	teachers.	And	they	have	duped	you	in	turn.	Are	you	going	to	do
the	same	to	your	children	too?
In	a	better	world,	where	people	are	more	intelligent,	more	aware,	they	will
teach	the	child	that	the	idea	of	identity	is	false:	“It	is	needed,	we	are	giving	it	to
you,	but	it	is	only	for	the	time	being,	before	you	yourself	discover	who	you
are.”It	is	not	going	to	be	your	reality.	And	the	sooner	you	find	out	who	you	are,
the	better.	The	sooner	you	can	drop	this	idea,	the	better—because	from	that	very
moment	you	will	really	be	born,	and	you	will	be	really	real,	authentic.	You	will
become	an	individual.
The	ideas	that	we	gather	from	others	give	us	a	personality,	and	the
knowledge	that	we	come	to	know	from	within	gives	us	individuality.	Personality
is	false,	individuality	is	real.	Personality	is	borrowed;	reality,	individuality,	your
authenticity,	can	never	be	borrowed.	Nobody	can	say	who	you	are.
At	least	one	thing	can	never	be	done	by	anybody	else—that	is,	to	give	you
the	answer	to	who	you	are.	No,	you	have	to	go,	you	have	to	dig	deep	into	your
own	being.	Layers	and	layers	of	identity,	false	identity,	have	to	be	broken.	There
is	fear	when	one	enters	into	oneself,	because	chaos	comes	in.	Somehow	you
have	managed	with	your	false	identity.	You	have	settled	with	it.	You	know	your
name	is	this	or	that;	you	have	certain	credentials,	certificates,	degrees,
universities,	colleges,	prestige,	money,	heritage.	You	have	certain	ways	to	define
yourself.	You	have	a	certain	definition—howsoever	workable,	but	it	works.
Going	in	means	dropping	this	workable	definition…there	will	be	chaos.
Before	you	can	come	to	your	center,	you	will	have	to	pass	through	a	very
chaotic	state.	That’s	why	there	is	fear.	Nobody	wants	to	go	in.	People	go	on
teaching:	“Know	thyself”;	we	listen,	but	we	never	listen.	We	never	bother	about
it.	There	is	a	very	certain	idea	in	the	mind	that	chaos	will	be	let	loose	and	you
will	be	lost	in	it,	you	will	be	engulfed	in	it.	Because	of	the	fear	of	that	chaos,	we
go	on	clinging	to	anything	from	the	outside.	But	this	is	wasting	your	life.
The	chattering	mind
You	cannot	sit	even	for	a	single	minute,	the	mind	goes	on	chattering:
relevant,	irrelevant,	meaningful,	meaningless	thoughts	go	on.	It	is	a	constant
traffic	and	it	is	always	rush	hour.	You	see	a	flower	and	you	verbalize	it;	you	see	a
man	crossing	the	street	and	you	verbalize	it.	The	mind	can	translate	every
existential	thing	into	a	word,	everything	is	being	transformed.	These	words
create	a	barrier,	these	words	become	an	imprisonment.	This	constant	flow
toward	the	transformation	of	things	into	words,	of	existence	into	words,	is	the
barrier.	It	is	an	obstacle	to	a	meditative	mind.
So	the	first	requirement	toward	a	meditative	growth	is	to	be	aware	of	your
constant	verbalizing,	and	to	be	able	to	stop	it.	Just	see	things;	do	not	verbalize.
Be	aware	of	their	presence,	but	do	not	change	them	into	words.
Let	things	be	without	language;	let	persons	be	without	language;	let
situations	be	without	language.	It	is	not	impossible,	this	is	natural	and	possible.
It	is	the	situation	as	it	now	exists	that	is	artificial,	it	is	a	created	situation,	but	we
have	become	so	habituated	to	it,	it	has	become	so	mechanical,	that	we	are	not
even	aware	of	the	transformation,	of	the	translation	of	experience	into	words.
The	sunrise	is	there.	You	are	never	aware	of	the	gap	between	seeing	it	and
verbalizing.	You	see	the	sun,	you	feel	it,	and	immediately	you	verbalize	it.	The
gap	between	seeing	and	verbalizing	is	lost;	it	is	never	felt.	In	that	interval,	in	that
gap,	one	must	become	aware.	One	must	be	aware	of	the	fact	that	the	sunrise	is
not	a	word.	It	is	a	fact,	a	presence,	a	situation.	The	mind	automatically	changes
experiences	into	words.	These	words	are	accumulated	and	then	come	between
existence	(the	existential)	and	consciousness.
Meditation	means	living	without	words,	living	non-linguistically.	Then	these
piled	up	memories,	these	linguistic	memories,	become	obstacles	towards
meditative	growth.	Meditation	means	living	without	words,	living	in	a	situation
non-linguistically.	Sometimes	it	happens	spontaneously.	When	you	are	in	love
with	someone	it	happens.	If	you	are	really	in	love,	then	presence	is	felt—not
language.	Whenever	two	lovers	are	intimate	with	one	another	they	become
silent.	It	is	not	that	there	is	nothing	to	express;	on	the	contrary,	there	is	an
overwhelming	amount	to	be	expressed.	But	words	are	never	there;	they	cannot
be.	They	come	only	when	love	has	gone.
If	two	lovers	are	never	silent,	if	they	are	always	talking,	it	is	an	indication
that	love	has	died.	Now	they	are	filling	the	gap	with	words.	When	love	is	alive,
words	are	not	there,	because	the	very	existence	of	love	is	so	overwhelming,	so
penetrating,	that	the	barrier	of	language	and	words	is	crossed.	And	ordinarily,	it
is	only	crossed	in	love.
Meditation	is	the	culmination	of	love:	love	not	for	a	single	person,	but	love
for	the	total	existence.	To	me,	meditation	is	a	living	relationship	with	the	total
existence	that	surrounds	you.	If	you	can	be	in	love	with	any	situation,	then	you
are	in	meditation….
Society	gives	you	language,	it	cannot	exist	without	language;	it	needs
language.	But	existence	does	not	need	it.	I	am	not	saying	that	you	should	exist
without	language.	You	will	have	to	use	it,	but	the	mechanism	of	verbalization
must	be	a	mechanism	that	you	can	turn	on	and	off.	When	you	are	existing	as	a
social	being,	the	mechanism	of	language	is	needed;	without	it	you	cannot	exist	in
the	society.	But	when	you	are	alone	with	existence,	the	mechanism	must	be
turned	off;	you	must	be	able	to	turn	it	off.	If	you	can’t	turn	it	off	the	mechanism
has	gone	mad.	If	you	can’t	turn	it	off—if	it	goes	on	and	on,	and	you	are
incapable	of	turning	it	off,	then	the	mechanism	has	taken	hold	of	you.	You	have
become	a	slave	to	it.	Mind	must	be	an	instrument,	not	the	master.	But	it	has
become	the	master.
When	mind	is	the	master,	a	non-meditative	state	exists.	When	you	are	the
master,	your	consciousness	is	the	master,	a	meditative	state	exists.	So	meditation
means	mastering	the	mechanism,	becoming	a	master	to	the	mechanism.
Mind,	and	the	linguistic	functioning	of	the	mind,	is	not	the	ultimate.	You	are
beyond	it	and	existence	is	beyond	it.	Consciousness	is	beyond	linguistics;
existence	is	beyond	linguistics.	When	consciousness	and	existence	are	one,	they
are	in	communion.	This	state	is	called	meditation.	The	communion	between
consciousness	and	existence	is	meditation.
Language	must	be	dropped.	I	don’t	mean	that	you	must	push	it	aside,	that
you	must	suppress	it	or	eliminate	it.	What	I	mean	is	that	something	which	is
needed	in	society	has	become	a	twenty-four-hour-a-day	habit	for	you	and	is	not
needed	as	such.
When	you	walk,	you	need	to	move	your	legs	but	they	must	not	move	when
you	are	sitting.	If	your	legs	go	on	moving	while	you	are	sitting	then	you	are	mad,
then	the	legs	have	gone	insane.	You	must	be	able	to	turn	them	off.	In	the	same
way,	when	you	are	not	talking	with	anyone,	language	must	not	be	there.	It	is	a
talking	instrument,	a	technique	to	communicate;	when	you	are	communicating
something,	language	should	be	used;	but	when	you	are	not	communicating	with
anybody	it	should	not	be	there.
If	you	are	able	to	do	this—and	it	is	possible	if	you	understand	it—then	you
can	grow	into	meditation.	I	say	“you	can	grow”	because	life	processes	are	never
dead	additions,	they	are	always	a	growing	process.	So	meditation	is	a	growing
process,	not	a	technique.	A	technique	is	always	dead;	it	can	be	added	to	you,	but
a	process	is	always	living.	It	grows,	it	expands.
Language	is	needed,	it	is	necessary,	but	you	must	not	always	remain	in	it.
There	must	be	moments	when	you	are	existential	and	there	is	no	verbalizing.
When	you	just	exist,	it	is	not	that	you	are	just	vegetating—consciousness	is
there,	and	it	is	more	acute,	more	alive,	because	language	dulls	consciousness.
Language	is	bound	to	be	repetitive	but	existence	is	never	repetitive.	So	language
creates	boredom.	The	more	important	language	is	to	you,	the	more	linguistically-
oriented	the	mind	is—the	more	bored	you	will	be.	Language	is	a	repetition,
existence	is	not.
When	you	see	a	rose,	it	is	not	a	repetition.	It	is	a	new	rose,	altogether	new.	It
has	never	been	and	it	will	never	be	again.	For	the	first	time	and	the	last	time,	it	is
there.	But	when	we	say	this	is	a	rose,	the	word	‘rose’	is	a	repetition:	it	has	always
been	there;	it	will	always	be	there.	You	have	killed	the	new	with	an	old	word.
Existence	is	always	young,	and	language	is	always	old.	Through	language
you	escape	existence,	through	language	you	escape	life,	because	language	is
dead.	The	more	involved	you	are	with	language,	the	more	you	are	being
deadened	by	it.	A	pundit	is	completely	dead	because	he	is	language,	words	and
nothing	else.	Sartre	has	written	his	autobiography.	He	calls	it:	Words.
Meditation	means	living,	living	totally,	and	you	can	live	totally	only	when
you	are	silent.	By	being	silent	I	do	not	mean	unconscious.	You	can	be	silent	and
unconscious,	but	that	would	not	be	a	living	silence—again,	you	would	have
missed.
So	what	to	do?	The	question	is	relevant.	Watch—don’t	try	to	stop.	There	is
no	need	to	do	any	action	against	the	mind.	In	the	first	place,	who	will	do	it?	It
will	be	mind	fighting	mind	itself.	You	will	divide	your	mind	into	two:	one	that	is
trying	to	boss	over,	the	top-dog,	trying	to	kill	the	other	part	of	itself—which	is
absurd,	it	is	a	foolish	game.	It	can	drive	you	crazy.	Don’t	try	to	stop	the	mind	or
the	thinking—just	watch	it,	allow	it.	Allow	it	total	freedom.	Let	it	run	as	fast	as
it	wants.	You	don’t	try	in	any	way	to	control	it.	You	just	be	a	witness.	It	is
beautiful!
Mind	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	mechanisms.	Science	has	not	yet	been	able
to	create	anything	parallel	to	mind.	Mind	still	remains	the	masterpiece—so
complicated,	so	tremendously	powerful,	with	so	many	potentialities.	Watch	it!
Enjoy	it!	Don’t	watch	like	an	enemy,	because	if	you	look	at	the	mind	like	an
enemy,	you	cannot	watch.	You	are	already	prejudiced;	you	are	already	against.
You	have	already	decided	that	something	is	wrong	with	the	mind—you	have
already	concluded.	And	whenever	you	look	at	somebody	as	an	enemy	you	never
look	deep.	You	never	look	into	the	eyes;	you	avoid.
Watching	the	mind	means:	look	at	it	with	deep	love,	with	deep	respect,
reverence—it	is	a	gift	from	existence	to	you!	Nothing	is	wrong	in	mind	itself.
Nothing	is	wrong	in	thinking	itself.	It	is	a	beautiful	process	as	other	processes
are.	Clouds	moving	in	the	sky	are	beautiful—why	not	thoughts	moving	in	the
inner	sky?	Flowers	coming	to	the	trees	are	beautiful—why	not	thoughts
flowering	in	your	being?	The	river	running	to	the	ocean	is	beautiful—why	not
this	stream	of	thoughts	running	somewhere	to	an	unknown	destiny?	Is	it	not
beautiful?
Look	with	deep	reverence.	Don’t	be	a	fighter,	be	a	lover.	Watch	the	subtle
nuances	of	the	mind;	the	sudden	turns,	the	beautiful	turns;	the	sudden	jumps	and
leaps;	the	games	that	mind	goes	on	playing;	the	dreams	that	it	weaves—the
imagination,	the	memory;	the	thousand	and	one	projections	that	it	creates.
Watch!	Standing	there,	aloof,	distant,	not	involved,	by	and	by	you	will	start
feeling….
As	your	watchfulness	becomes	deeper,	your	awareness	becomes	deeper,
gaps	start	arising,	intervals.	One	thought	goes,	another	has	not	come;	there	is	a
gap.	One	cloud	has	passed,	another	is	coming;	there	is	a	gap.
In	those	gaps,	for	the	first	time	you	will	have	glimpses	of	no-mind,	you	will
have	the	taste	of	no-mind.	Call	it	the	taste	of	Zen,	or	Tao,	or	yoga.	In	those	small
intervals,	suddenly	the	sky	is	clear	and	the	sun	is	shining.	Suddenly	the	world	is
full	of	mystery	because	all	barriers	are	dropped.	The	screen	on	your	eyes	is	no
longer	there.	You	see	clearly,	you	see	penetratingly;	the	whole	existence
becomes	transparent.
In	the	beginning	these	will	be	just	rare	moments,	few	and	far	in	between.	But
they	will	give	you	glimpses	of	what	samadhi	is.	Small	pools	of	silence—they
will	come	and	they	will	disappear.	But	now	you	know	that	you	are	on	the	right
track—you	start	watching	again.
When	a	thought	passes,	you	watch	it;	when	an	interval	passes,	you	watch	it.
Clouds	are	beautiful;	sunshine	also	is	beautiful.	Now	you	are	not	a	chooser.	Now
you	don’t	have	a	fixed	mind:	you	don’t	say,	“I	would	like	only	the	intervals.”
That	is	stupid—because	once	you	become	attached	to	wanting	only	the	intervals,
you	have	decided	again	against	thinking.	And	then	those	intervals	will	disappear.
They	happen	only	when	you	are	very	distant,	aloof.	They	happen,	they	cannot	be
brought.	They	happen,	you	cannot	force	them	to	happen.	They	are	spontaneous
happenings.
Go	on	watching.	Let	thoughts	come	and	go—wherever	they	want	to	go—
nothing	is	wrong!	Don’t	try	to	manipulate	and	don’t	try	to	direct;	let	thoughts
move	in	total	freedom.	And	then	bigger	intervals	will	be	coming.	You	will	be
blessed	with	small	satoris,	mini-satoris.	Sometimes	minutes	will	pass	and	no
thought	will	be	there;	there	will	be	no	traffic—a	total	silence,	undisturbed.
When	the	bigger	gaps	come,	you	will	not	only	have	clarity	to	see	into	the
world—with	the	bigger	gaps	you	will	have	a	new	clarity	arising;	you	will	be	able
to	see	into	the	inner	world.	With	the	first	gaps	you	will	see	into	the	world:	trees
will	be	more	green	than	they	look	right	now.	You	will	be	surrounded	by	an
infinite	music—the	music	of	the	spheres.	You	will	be	suddenly	in	the	presence	of
godliness—ineffable,	mysterious,	touching	you	although	you	cannot	grasp	it;
within	your	reach	and	yet	beyond.	With	the	bigger	gaps,	the	same	will	happen
inside.	Godliness	will	not	only	be	outside,	you	will	be	suddenly	surprised—it	is
inside	also.	It	is	not	only	in	the	seen;	it	is	in	the	seer	also—within	and	without.
But	don’t	get	attached	to	that	either.	Attachment	is	the	food	for	the	mind	to
continue.	Non-attached	witnessing	is	the	way	to	stop	it	without	any	effort	to	stop
it.	And	when	you	start	enjoying	those	blissful	moments,	your	capacity	to	retain
them	for	longer	periods	arises.
Finally,	eventually,	one	day,	you	become	master.	Then	when	you	want	to
think,	you	think;	if	thought	is	needed,	you	use	it;	if	thought	is	not	needed,	you
allow	it	to	rest.	Not	that	mind	is	simply	no	longer	there—mind	is	there,	but	you
can	use	it	or	not	use	it.	Now	it	is	your	decision.	Just	like	legs:	if	you	want	to	run
you	use	them;	if	you	don’t	want	to	run	you	simply	rest—legs	are	there.	In	the
same	way,	mind	is	always	there.
No-mind	is	not	against	mind;	no-mind	is	beyond	mind.	No-mind	does	not
come	by	killing	and	destroying	the	mind;	no-mind	comes	when	you	have
understood	the	mind	so	totally	that	thinking	is	no	longer	needed.	Your
understanding	has	replaced	it.
False	methods
Meditation	is	not	concentration
Meditations	can	be	wrong.	For	example,	any	meditation	that	leads	you	deep
into	concentration	is	wrong.	You	will	become	more	and	more	closed	rather	than
becoming	open.	If	you	narrow	down	your	consciousness,	concentrate	on
something,	and	you	exclude	the	whole	of	existence	and	become	one-pointed,	it
will	create	more	and	more	tension	in	you.	Hence	the	word	‘attention.’	It	means
‘at-tension.’	Concentration,	the	very	sound	of	the	word,	gives	you	a	feeling	of
tenseness.	§
Concentration	has	its	uses	but	it	is	not	meditation.	In	scientific	work—in
scientific	research,	in	the	science	lab—you	need	concentration.	You	have	to
concentrate	on	one	problem	and	exclude	everything	else—so	much	so	that	you
almost	become	unmindful	of	the	remaining	world.	Only	the	problem	that	you	are
concentrating	upon	is	your	world.	That’s	why	scientists	become	absent-minded.
People	who	concentrate	too	much	always	become	absent-minded	because	they
don’t	know	how	to	remain	open	to	the	whole	world.
I	was	reading	an	anecdote.
“I	have	brought	a	frog,”	said	a	scientist,	a	professor	of	zoology,	beaming	at
his	class,	“fresh	from	the	pond,	in	order	that	we	might	study	its	outer	appearance
and	later	dissect	it.”
He	carefully	unwrapped	the	package	he	carried	and	inside	was	a	neatly
prepared	ham	sandwich.	The	good	professor	looked	at	it	with	astonishment.
“Odd!”	he	said,	“I	distinctly	remember	having	eaten	my	lunch.”
That	goes	on	happening	to	scientists.	They	become	one-pointed	and	their
whole	mind	becomes	narrow.	Of	course,	a	narrow	mind	has	its	use:	it	becomes
more	penetrating,	it	becomes	like	a	sharp	needle;	it	hits	exactly	the	right	point,
but	it	misses	the	great	life	that	surrounds	it.
A	buddha	is	not	a	man	of	concentration;	he	is	a	man	of	awareness.	He	has
not	been	trying	to	narrow	down	his	consciousness;	on	the	contrary,	he	has	been
trying	to	drop	all	barriers	so	that	he	becomes	totally	available	to	existence.
Watch…existence	is	simultaneous.	I	am	speaking	here	and	the	traffic	noise	is
simultaneous.	The	train,	the	birds,	the	wind	blowing	through	the	trees—in	this
moment	the	whole	of	existence	converges.	You	listening	to	me,	I	speaking	to
you,	and	millions	of	things	going	on—it	is	tremendously	rich.
Concentration	makes	you	one-pointed	at	a	very	great	cost:	ninety-nine	per
cent	of	life	is	discarded.	If	you	are	solving	a	mathematical	problem	you	cannot
listen	to	the	birds—they	will	be	a	distraction.	Children	playing	around,	dogs
barking	in	the	street—they	will	be	a	distraction.	Because	of	concentration,
people	have	tried	to	escape	from	life—to	go	to	the	Himalayas,	to	go	to	a	cave,	to
remain	isolated,	so	that	they	can	concentrate	on	God.	But	God	is	not	an	object,
God	is	this	wholeness	of	existence,	this	moment;	God	is	the	totality.	That’s	why
science	will	never	be	able	to	know	God.	The	very	method	of	science	is
concentration	and	because	of	that	method,	science	can	never	know	God.
So	what	to	do?	Repeating	a	mantra,	doing	Transcendental	Meditation,	is	not
going	to	help.	Transcendental	Meditation	has	become	very	important	in	America
because	of	the	objective	approach,	because	of	the	scientific	mind—it	is	the	only
meditation	on	which	scientific	work	can	be	done.	It	is	exactly	concentration	and
not	meditation,	so	it	is	comprehensible	for	the	scientific	mind.	In	the
universities,	in	the	science	laboratories,	in	psychological	research	work,	much	is
being	done	about	TM,	because	it	is	not	meditation.	It	is	concentration,	a	method
of	concentration.	It	falls	under	the	same	category	as	scientific	concentration;
there	is	a	link	between	the	two.	But	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	meditation.
Meditation	is	so	vast,	so	tremendously	infinite,	that	no	scientific	research	is
possible.	Only	if	a	man	becomes	compassion	will	it	show	whether	he	has
achieved	or	not.	Alpha	waves	won’t	be	of	much	help	because	they	are	still	of	the
mind	and	meditation	is	not	of	the	mind,	it	is	something	beyond.
So,	let	me	tell	you	a	few	basic	things.	One,	meditation	is	not	concentration
but	relaxation—one	simply	relaxes	into	oneself.	The	more	you	relax,	the	more
you	feel	yourself	open,	vulnerable,	the	less	you	are	rigid.	You	are	more	flexible,
and	suddenly	existence	starts	penetrating	you.	You	are	no	longer	like	a	rock,	you
have	openings.
Relaxation	means	allowing	yourself	to	fall	into	a	state	where	you	are	not
doing	anything,	because	if	you	are	doing	something,	tension	will	continue.	It	is	a
state	of	non-doing:	you	simply	relax	and	you	enjoy	the	feeling	of	relaxation.
Relax	into	yourself,	just	close	your	eyes,	and	listen	to	all	that	is	happening	all
around.	No	need	to	feel	anything	as	a	distraction.	The	moment	you	feel	it	is	a
distraction,	you	are	denying	the	godliness	of	existence.
This	moment	godliness	has	come	to	you	as	a	bird—don’t	deny	it.	It	has
knocked	at	your	door	as	a	bird.	The	next	moment	it	has	come	as	a	dog	barking,
or	as	a	child	crying	and	weeping,	or	as	a	madman	laughing.	Don’t	deny;	don’t
reject—accept,	because	if	you	deny	you	will	become	tense.	All	denials	create
tension—accept.	If	you	want	to	relax,	acceptance	is	the	way.	Accept	whatsoever
is	happening	all	around;	let	it	become	an	organic	whole.	It	is—you	may	know	it
or	you	may	not	know	it—everything	is	interrelated.	These	birds,	these	trees,	this
sky,	this	sun,	this	earth,	you,	me,	all	are	related.	It	is	an	organic	unity.
If	the	sun	disappears,	the	trees	will	disappear;	if	the	trees	disappear,	the	birds
will	disappear;	if	the	birds	and	trees	disappear,	you	cannot	be	here,	you	will
disappear.	It	is	an	ecology.	Everything	is	deeply	related	with	each	other.
So	don’t	deny	anything,	because	the	moment	you	deny,	you	are	denying
something	in	you.	If	you	deny	these	singing	birds	then	something	in	you	is
denied.
If	you	relax,	you	accept;	acceptance	of	existence	is	the	only	way	to	relax.	If
small	things	disturb	you	then	it	is	your	attitude	that	is	disturbing	you.	Sit	silently;
listen	to	all	that	is	happening	all	around,	and	relax.	Accept,	relax,	and	suddenly
you	will	feel	immense	energy	arising	in	you.
And	when	I	say	watch,	don’t	try	to	watch;	otherwise	you	will	become	tense
again,	and	you	will	start	concentrating.	Simply	relax,	remain	relaxed,	loose,	and
look…because	what	else	can	you	do?	You	are	there,	nothing	to	be	done,
everything	accepted,	nothing	to	be	denied,	rejected.	No	struggle,	no	fight,	no
conflict.	You	simply	watch.	Remember,	simply	watch.
Meditation	is	not	introspection
Introspection	is	thinking	about	yourself.	Self-remembering	is	not	thinking	at
all:	it	is	becoming	aware	of	yourself.	The	difference	is	subtle,	but	very	great.
Western	psychology	insists	on	introspection,	and	Eastern	psychology	insists
on	self-remembering.	When	you	introspect,	what	do	you	do?	For	example,	you
are	angry:	you	start	thinking	about	anger,	how	it	is	caused.	You	start	analyzing
why	it	is	caused.	You	start	judging	whether	it	is	good	or	bad.	You	start
rationalizing	that	you	had	been	angry	because	the	situation	was	such.	You	brood
about	anger,	you	analyze	anger,	but	the	focus	of	attention	is	on	the	anger,	not	on
the	self.	Your	whole	consciousness	is	focused	on	the	anger:	you	are	watching,
analyzing,	associating,	thinking	about	it,	trying	to	figure	out	how	to	avoid,	how
to	get	rid	of	it,	how	not	to	do	it	again.	This	is	a	thinking	process.	You	will	judge
it	“bad”	because	it	is	destructive.	You	will	take	a	vow	that	“I	will	never	commit
the	same	mistake	again.”	You	will	try	to	control	this	anger	through	will.	That’s
why	Western	psychology	has	become	analytical:	analysis,	dissection.
Eastern	psychology	says,	“Be	aware.	Don’t	try	to	analyze	anger,	there	is	no
need.	Just	look	at	it,	but	look	with	awareness.	Don’t	start	thinking.”	In	fact	if	you
start	thinking	then	thinking	will	become	a	barrier	to	looking	at	the	anger.	Then
thinking	will	garb	it.	Then	thinking	will	be	like	a	cloud	surrounding	it;	the	clarity
will	be	lost.	Don’t	think	at	all.	Be	in	a	state	of	no	thought,	and	look.
When	there	is	not	even	a	ripple	of	thinking	between	you	and	the	anger,	the
anger	is	faced,	encountered.	You	don’t	dissect	it.	You	don’t	bother	to	go	to	its
source,	because	the	source	is	in	the	past.	You	don’t	judge	it,	because	the	moment
you	judge	it,	thinking	starts.	You	don’t	take	any	vow	that	“I	will	not	do	it,”
because	that	vow	leads	you	into	the	future.	In	awareness	you	remain	with	the
feeling	of	anger,	exactly	herenow.	You	are	not	interested	in	changing	it,	you	are
not	interested	in	thinking	about	it—you	are	interested	to	look	at	it	directly,	face
to	face,	immediate.	Then	it	is	self-remembering.
And	this	is	the	beauty	of	it:	that	if	you	can	look	at	anger	it	disappears.	It	not
only	disappears	in	that	moment—the	very	disappearance	of	it	by	your	deep	look
gives	you	the	key—there	is	no	need	to	use	will,	there	is	no	need	to	make	any
decision	for	the	future,	and	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	the	original	source	from
which	it	comes.	It	is	unnecessary.	You	have	the	key	now:	look	at	anger,	and
anger	disappears.	And	this	look	is	available	forever.	Whenever	anger	is	there	you
can	look;	then	this	looking	grows	deeper.
There	are	three	stages	of	looking.	First,	when	the	anger	has	already
happened	and	gone;	as	if	you	look	at	a	tail	disappearing—an	elephant	has	gone;
only	the	tail	is	there.	When	the	anger	was	there,	you	were	so	deeply	involved	in
it	you	could	not	really	be	aware.	When	the	anger	has	almost	disappeared,	ninety-
nine	per	cent	gone—only	one	per	cent,	the	last	part	of	it,	is	still	going,
disappearing	into	the	far	horizon—then	you	become	aware.	This	is	the	first	state
of	awareness—good,	but	not	enough.
The	second	state	is	when	the	elephant	is	there—not	the	tail—when	the
situation	is	ripe.	You	are	really	angry	to	the	peak,	boiling,	burning—then	you
become	aware.
Then	there	is	still	a	third	stage:	the	anger	has	not	come,	is	still	coming—not
the	tail	but	the	head.	It	is	just	entering	your	area	of	consciousness	and	you
become	aware,	then	the	elephant	never	materializes.	You	killed	the	animal
before	it	was	born.	That	is	birth	control!	The	phenomenon	has	not	happened;
then	it	leaves	no	trace.
Tricks	of	the	mind
Don’t	be	fooled	by	experiences
All	experiences	are	just	tricks	of	the	mind,	all	experiences	are	just	escapes.
Meditation	is	not	an	experience,	it	is	a	realization.	Meditation	is	not	an
experience;	rather,	it	is	a	stopping	of	all	experience.	§
Experience	is	something	outside	you.	The	experiencer	is	your	being.	And
this	is	the	distinction	between	true	spirituality	and	false:	if	you	are	after
experiences,	the	spirituality	is	false;	if	you	are	after	the	experiencer,	then	it	is
true.	And	then	you	are	not	concerned	about	kundalini,	not	concerned	about
chakras,	not	concerned	about	all	these	things.	They	will	happen,	but	you	are	not
concerned,	you	are	not	interested,	and	you	will	not	move	on	these	by-paths.	You
will	go	on	moving	towards	the	inner	center	where	nothing	remains	except	you	in
your	total	aloneness.	Only	the	consciousness	remains,	without	content.
Content	is	the	experience;	whatsoever	you	experience	is	the	content.	I
experience	misery;	then	the	misery	is	the	content	of	my	consciousness.	Then	I
experience	pleasure;	the	pleasure	is	the	content.	I	experience	boredom;	then
boredom	is	the	content.	You	can	experience	silence;	then	silence	is	the	content.
You	can	experience	bliss;	then	bliss	is	the	content.	So	you	go	on	changing	the
content—you	can	go	on	changing	ad	infinitum—but	this	is	not	the	real	thing.
The	real	is	the	one	to	whom	these	experiences	happen—to	whom	boredom
happens,	to	whom	bliss	happens.
The	spiritual	search	is	not	what	happens,	but	to	whom	it	happens.	Then	there
is	no	possibility	for	the	ego	to	arise.
Mind	can	enter	again
In	meditation	sometimes	you	feel	a	sort	of	emptiness	that	is	not	really
emptiness.	I	call	it	just	“a	sort	of	emptiness.”	When	you	are	meditating,	for
certain	moments,	for	a	few	seconds,	you	will	feel	as	if	the	thought	process	has
stopped.	In	the	beginning	these	gaps	will	come.	But	because	you	are	feeling	as	if
the	thought	process	has	stopped,	this	is	again	a	thought	process,	a	very	subtle
thought	process.	What	are	you	doing?	You	are	saying	inside,	“The	thought
process	has	stopped.”	But	what	is	this?	This	is	a	secondary	thought	process
which	has	started.	And	you	say,	“This	is	emptiness.”	You	say,	“Now	something
is	going	to	happen.”	What	is	this?	Again	a	new	thought	process	has	started.
Whenever	this	happens	again,	don’t	become	a	victim	of	it.	When	you	feel	a
certain	silence	is	descending,	don’t	start	verbalizing	it,	because	you	are
destroying	it.	Wait—not	for	something—simply	wait.	Don’t	do	anything.	Don’t
say,	“This	is	emptiness.”	The	moment	you	have	said	that,	you	have	destroyed	it.
Just	look	at	it,	penetrate	into	it,	encounter	it—but	wait,	don’t	verbalize	it.	What
is	the	hurry?	Through	verbalization	the	mind	has	again	entered	from	a	different
route,	and	you	are	deceived.	Be	alert	about	this	trick	of	the	mind.
In	the	beginning	it	is	bound	to	happen,	so	whenever	this	happens,	just	wait.
Don’t	fall	in	the	trap.	Don’t	say	anything,	remain	silent.	Then	you	will	enter	into
emptiness,	and	then	it	will	not	be	temporary,	because	once	you	have	known	the
real	emptiness	you	cannot	lose	it.	The	real	cannot	be	lost;	that	is	its	quality.
Once	you	have	known	the	inner	treasure,	once	you	have	come	in	contact
with	your	deepest	core,	then	you	can	move	in	activity,	then	you	can	do
whatsoever	you	like,	then	you	can	live	an	ordinary	worldly	life	but	the	emptiness
will	remain	with	you.	You	cannot	forget	it.	It	will	go	inside.	The	music	of	it	will
be	heard.	Whatsoever	you	are	doing,	the	doing	will	be	only	on	the	periphery;
inside	you	will	remain	empty.
Mind	can	deceive	you
There	are	patterns	the	seeker	gets	entangled	with.
The	first	thing	is:	most	seekers	get	lost	in	an	illusory	feeling	that	they	have
arrived.	It	is	like	the	kind	of	dream	in	which	you	feel	you	are	awake.	You	are
still	dreaming—your	feeling	of	being	awake	is	part	of	the	dream.	The	same	kind
of	thing	happens	to	the	seeker.
The	mind	is	capable	of	creating	the	illusion	that	“now	there	is	nowhere	to
go,	you	have	arrived.”	The	mind	is	a	deceiver,	and	the	function	of	the	master	for
one	in	this	condition	is	to	make	him	alert	that	this	is	not	the	reality	but	only	a
dream,	that	he	has	not	arrived.	This	can	happen	at	many	points,	again	and	again.
And	one	can	get	very	irritated	and	annoyed	with	the	master	for	the	simple	reason
that	whenever	you	feel	you	have	got	it,	he	simply	takes	it	away	and	puts	you
back	into	your	ignorant	state.
For	example,	it	was	happening	to	a	German	disciple	continually—he	would
get	the	feeling	that	he	had	become	enlightened.	And	the	force	of	the	illusion	was
so	much	that	he	could	not	keep	it	to	himself,	he	would	tell	others.	He	was	so
certain.	This	happened	three	times,	and	because	of	his	certainty	he	came	to	India
to	get	my	blessings.	Naturally,	it	shows	his	certainty	that	he	came	for	my
blessings.
Each	time	I	had	to	tell	him,	“You	are	just	being	deceived	by	your	own	mind.
Nothing	has	happened	to	you,	you	are	simply	the	old	man—the	new	man	has	not
arrived.	And	all	that	you	are	doing—writing	letters	to	the	UN.,	to	other
governments—are	just	ways	of	the	ego.	You	are	in	the	grip	of	the	ego.”
It	is	very	easy	to	live	in	a	beautiful	dream.	It	is	hard	to	see	your	dreams
shattered	by	reality.	In	the	ancient	scriptures	of	the	East	it	is	called	the	power	of
maya.	Mind	has	the	hypnotic	power	to	create	any	illusion.	If	you	are	after	a
certain	thing,	desperately,	it	is	one	of	the	functions	of	the	mind	to	create	the
illusion	to	stop	your	desperateness.	It	happens	every	day	to	everybody	in	their
dreams,	but	people	don’t	learn	things.
If	at	night	you	go	to	bed	hungry,	that	night	you	are	going	to	have	a	dream
about	eating	delicious	food.	The	mind	is	trying	to	help	you	so	that	your	sleep	is
not	disturbed;	otherwise	you	are	hungry	and	you	are	bound	to	be	awakened	by
your	hunger.	The	mind	gives	you	a	dream	that	you	are	eating	delicious	food	of
your	choice,	which	satisfies	your	mind.	The	hunger	remains	but	sleep	is	not
disturbed.	The	hunger	is	covered	by	the	illusion	of	the	dream;	it	protects	your
sleep.
You	feel	in	sleep	that	your	bladder	is	full.	If	the	mind	does	not	create	the
dream	that	you	have	gone	to	the	toilet,	come	back	and	gone	to	sleep	again,	then
your	sleep	will	be	disturbed—and	sleep	is	a	great	necessity	for	the	body.	The
mind	is	taking	care	that	you	are	not	disturbed	again	and	again;	you	can	have	a
long	sleep,	rest,	so	in	the	morning	you	are	rejuvenated.
This	is	the	ordinary	function	of	the	mind;	on	a	higher	plane	the	same	thing
happens.	One	is	an	ordinary	sleep	and	an	ordinary	awakening	that	mind
prevents.	On	the	path,	it	is	an	extraordinary	sleep	and	an	extraordinary
awakening,	but	the	mind	is	programmed—it	is	just	a	mechanical	thing.	It	simply
does	its	work	without	bothering,	because	it	has	no	way	of	checking	whether	it	is
ordinary	sleep	or	spiritual	sleep,	ordinary	awakening	or	spiritual	awakening.
To	the	mind	it	is	all	the	same.	Its	function	is	to	keep	your	sleep	intact	and
create	a	barrier	for	anything	that	disturbs	your	sleep.	If	you	are	hungry	it	gives
you	food;	if	you	are	desperately	in	search	of	truth,	it	gives	you	truth,	it	gives	you
enlightenment.	You	ask	for	anything,	and	it	is	ready	to	give	it	to	you.	It	can
create	the	illusion	of	the	real	thing—that	is	its	intrinsic	power.
Part	5:	RESPONSES	TO	QUESTIONS	ABOUT	MEDITATION
Only	a	witness	can	really	dance
You	continually	encourage	us	to	“be	aware,”	to	“be	a	witness.”	But	can	a
witnessing	consciousness	really	sing,	dance	and	taste	life?	Isn’t	a	“witness”	a
mere	spectator	of	life	and	never	a	participant?
Mind	is	bound	to	raise	this	question	sooner	or	later,	because	mind	is	very
much	afraid	of	you	becoming	a	witness.	Why	is	the	mind	so	much	afraid	of	you
becoming	a	witness?	Because	becoming	a	witness	is	the	death	of	the	mind.	Mind
is	a	doer—it	wants	to	do	things—and	witnessing	is	a	state	of	non-doing.	The
mind	is	afraid	that,	“If	you	become	a	witness,	I	will	not	be	needed	any	more.”
And	in	a	way	the	mind	is	right.
Once	the	witness	arises	in	you	the	mind	has	to	disappear,	just	as	when	you
bring	light	into	your	room	and	the	darkness	has	to	disappear;	it	is	inevitable.
Mind	can	exist	only	if	you	remain	fast	asleep	because	mind	is	a	state	of
dreaming,	and	dreams	can	exist	only	in	sleep.
By	becoming	a	witness	you	are	no	longer	asleep;	you	are	awake.	You
become	awareness—so	crystal-clear,	so	young	and	fresh,	so	vital	and	potent.
You	become	a	flame,	intense,	as	if	burning	from	both	ends.	In	that	state	of
intensity,	light,	of	consciousness,	mind	dies,	mind	commits	suicide.
Hence	the	mind	is	afraid,	and	mind	will	create	many	problems	for	you.	It
will	raise	many,	many	questions.	It	will	make	you	hesitate	to	take	the	jump	into
the	unknown;	it	will	try	to	pull	you	back.	It	will	try	to	convince	you:	“With	me	is
safety,	security;	with	me	you	are	living	under	a	shelter,	well	guarded.	I	take
every	care	of	you.	With	me	you	are	efficient,	skillful.	The	moment	you	leave	me
you	will	have	to	leave	all	your	knowledge,	and	you	will	have	to	leave	all	your
securities,	safeties.	You	will	have	to	drop	your	armor	and	you	will	be	going	into
the	unknown.	You	are	unnecessarily	taking	a	risk	for	no	reason	at	all.”	It	will	try
to	bring	beautiful	rationalizations.	This	is	one	of	the	rationalizations	which
almost	always	happens	to	every	meditator.
It	is	not	you	who	is	asking	the	question;	it	is	the	mind,	your	enemy,	who	is
putting	the	question	through	you.	It	is	mind	who	is	saying	“Osho,	you
continuously	tell	us	to	‘be	aware’,	to	‘be	a	witness.’	But	can	a	witnessing
consciousness	really	sing,	dance	and	taste	life?”
Yes!	In	fact,	only	a	witnessing	consciousness	can	really	sing,	dance	and	taste
life.	It	will	appear	like	a	paradox—it	is!	But	all	that	is	true	is	always	paradoxical.
Remember:	if	truth	is	not	paradoxical	then	it	is	not	truth	at	all,	then	it	is
something	else.
Paradox	is	a	basic,	intrinsic	quality	of	truth.	Let	it	sink	into	your	heart
forever:	truth	as	such	is	paradoxical.	Although	all	paradoxes	are	not	truths,	all
truths	are	paradoxes.	The	truth	has	to	be	a	paradox	because	it	has	to	be	both
poles,	the	negative	and	the	positive,	and	yet	a	transcendence.	It	has	to	be	life	and
death,	and	plus.	By	‘plus’	I	mean	the	transcendence	of	both—both,	and	both	not.
That	is	the	ultimate	paradox.
When	you	are	in	the	mind,	how	can	you	sing?	The	mind	creates	misery;	out
of	misery	there	can	be	no	song.	When	you	are	in	the	mind,	how	can	you	dance?
Yes,	you	can	go	through	certain	empty	gestures	called	dance,	but	it	is	not	a	real
dance.
Only	a	Meera	knows	a	real	dance,	or	a	Krishna,	or	a	Chaitanya;	these	are	the
people	who	know	real	dance.	Others	know	only	the	technique	of	dancing,	but
there	is	nothing	overflowing;	their	energies	are	stagnant.	People	who	are	living
in	the	mind	are	living	in	the	ego,	and	the	ego	cannot	dance.	It	can	make	a
performance	but	not	a	dance.
The	real	dance	happens	only	when	you	have	become	a	witness.	Then	you	are
so	blissful	that	the	very	bliss	starts	overflowing	you;	that	is	the	dance.	The	very
bliss	starts	singing,	a	song	arises	on	its	own	accord.	And	only	when	you	are	a
witness	can	you	taste	life.
I	can	understand	your	question.	You	are	worried	that	by	becoming	a	witness
you	will	become	merely	a	spectator	of	life.	No,	to	be	a	spectator	is	one	thing,
and	to	be	a	witness	is	a	totally	different	thing,	qualitatively	different.
A	spectator	is	indifferent;	he	is	dull,	he	is	in	a	kind	of	sleep.	He	does	not
participate	in	life.	He	is	afraid,	he	is	a	coward.	He	stands	by	the	side	of	the	road
and	simply	goes	on	seeing	others	living.	That’s	what	you	are	doing	all	your	life:
somebody	else	acts	in	a	movie	and	you	see	it.	You	are	a	spectator!	People	are
glued	to	their	chairs	for	hours	together	before	their	TVs—spectators.	Somebody
else	is	singing,	you	are	listening.	Somebody	else	is	dancing,	you	are	just	a
spectator.	Somebody	else	is	loving	and	you	are	just	seeing,	you	are	not	a
participant.	Professionals	are	doing	what	you	should	have	done	on	your	own.
A	witness	is	not	a	spectator.
Then	what	is	a	witness?	A	witness	is	one	who	participates	yet	remains	alert.
A	witness	is	in	the	state	of	wei-wu-wei.	That	is	Lao	Tzu’s	word;	it	means	action
through	inaction.	A	witness	is	not	one	who	has	escaped	from	life.	He	lives	in
life,	lives	far	more	totally,	far	more	passionately,	but	yet	remains	a	watcher	deep
down,	goes	on	remembering,	“I	am	a	consciousness.”
Try	it.	Walking	on	the	road,	remember	that	you	are	a	consciousness.	Walking
continues,	and	a	new	thing	is	added—a	new	richness	is	added,	a	new	beauty.
Something	interior	is	added	to	the	outward	act.	You	become	a	flame	of
consciousness,	and	then	the	walking	has	a	totally	different	joy	to	it:	you	are	on
the	earth	and	yet	your	feet	are	not	touching	the	earth	at	all.
That’s	what	Buddha	has	said:	Pass	through	a	river	but	don’t	let	the	water
touch	your	feet.
That’s	the	meaning	of	the	Eastern	symbol	of	the	lotus.	You	must	have	seen
Buddha’s	statues,	pictures,	sitting	on	a	lotus;	that	is	a	metaphor.	A	lotus	is	a
flower	that	lives	in	the	water	and	yet	the	water	cannot	touch	it.	The	lotus	does
not	escape	to	the	Himalayan	caves;	he	lives	in	the	water	and	yet	remains	far,	far
away.	Being	in	the	marketplace	but	not	allowing	the	marketplace	to	enter	into
your	being,	living	in	the	world	and	yet	not	of	the	world:	that	is	what	is	meant	by
‘witnessing	consciousness.’
That’s	what	I	mean	by	saying	to	you	again	and	again:	Be	aware!	I	am	not
against	action,	but	your	action	has	to	be	enlightened	by	awareness.	Those	who
are	against	action,	they	are	bound	to	be	repressive,	and	all	kinds	of	repressions
make	you	pathological,	not	whole,	not	healthy.
The	monks	living	in	the	monasteries—Catholic	or	Hindu,	the	monks	of	the
Jainas	and	the	Buddhists—who	have	escaped	from	life	are	not	true	sannyasins.
They	have	simply	repressed	their	desires	and	they	have	moved	away	from	the
world,	the	world	of	action.	Where	can	you	be	a	witness	if	you	move	away	from
the	world	of	action?	The	world	of	action	is	the	best	opportunity	to	be	aware.	It
gives	you	a	challenge,	it	remains	constantly	a	challenge.	Either	you	can	fall
asleep	and	become	a	doer—then	you	are	a	worldly	man,	a	dreamer,	a	victim	of
illusions;	or	you	can	become	a	witness	and	yet	go	on	living	in	the	world.	Then
your	action	has	a	different	quality	to	it:	it	is	really	action.	Those	who	are	not
aware,	their	actions	are	not	real	actions	but	reactions.	They	only	react.
Somebody	insults	you	and	you	react.	Insult	the	Buddha—he	does	not	react,
he	acts.	Reaction	is	dependent	on	the	other:	he	pushes	a	button	and	you	are	only
a	victim,	a	slave;	you	function	like	a	machine.
The	real	person	who	knows	what	awareness	is	never	reacts;	he	acts	out	of	his
own	awareness.	The	action	does	not	come	from	the	other’s	act;	nobody	can	push
his	button.	If	he	feels	spontaneously	that	this	is	right	to	do,	he	does	it;	if	he	feels
nothing	is	needed	he	keeps	quiet.	He	is	not	repressive;	he	is	always	open,
expressive.	His	expression	is	multi-dimensional:	in	song,	in	poetry,	in	dance,	in
love,	in	prayer,	in	compassion,	he	flows.
If	you	don’t	become	aware,	then	there	are	only	two	possibilities:	either	you
will	be	repressive	or	indulgent.	In	both	ways	you	remain	in	bondage.
A	nun	was	raped	just	outside	the	monastery.	When	she	was	finally	found,
she	was	carried	inside	and	the	nearby	physician	was	called.
He	came,	raised	his	hands	and	said,	“This	is	work	for	a	plastic	surgeon!”
A	plastic	surgeon	was	called.	When	he	saw	the	poor	nun	he	exclaimed.	“Oh,
my	God!	What	a	mess!	Where	should	I	start?”
The	Mother	Superior	replied,	“Well,	that	is	easy.	First	get	that	smile	off	her
face!”	1
The	goose	has	never	been	in
Sometimes,	when	dark	sides	of	my	mind	come	up,	it	really	scares	me.	It	is	very
difficult	for	me	to	accept	that	it	is	just	the	polar	opposite	of	the	bright	ones,	I	feel
dirty	and	guilty	and	unworthy.	I	want	to	face	all	facets	of	my	mind	and	accept
them	because	I	hear	you	often	say	that	acceptance	is	the	condition	to	transcend
the	mind.	Can	you	please	talk	about	acceptance?
The	basic	thing	to	be	understood	is	that	you	are	not	the	mind—neither	the
bright	one	nor	the	dark	one.	If	you	get	identified	with	the	beautiful	part,	then	it	is
impossible	to	disidentify	yourself	from	the	ugly	part;	they	are	two	sides	of	the
same	coin.	You	can	have	it	whole,	or	you	can	throw	it	whole,	but	you	cannot
divide	it.
And	the	whole	anxiety	of	man	is,	he	wants	to	choose	that	which	looks
beautiful,	bright.	He	wants	to	choose	all	the	silver	linings,	leaving	the	dark	cloud
behind.	But	he	does	not	know	silver	linings	cannot	exist	without	the	dark	cloud.
The	dark	cloud	is	the	background,	absolutely	necessary	for	the	silver	linings	to
show.
Choosing	is	anxiety.	Choosing	is	creating	trouble	for	yourself.	Being
choiceless	means:	the	mind	is	there	and	it	has	a	dark	side	and	it	has	a	bright	side
—so	what?	What	has	it	to	do	with	you?	Why	should	you	be	worried	about	it?
The	moment	you	are	not	choosing,	all	worry	disappears.	A	great	acceptance
arises,	that	this	is	how	the	mind	has	to	be,	this	is	the	nature	of	the	mind.	And	it	is
not	your	problem,	because	you	are	not	the	mind.	If	you	were	the	mind,	there
would	have	been	no	problem	at	all.	Then	who	would	choose	and	who	would
think	of	transcending?	And	who	would	try	to	accept	and	understand	acceptance?
You	are	separate,	totally	separate.	You	are	a	witness	and	nothing	else,	an
observer	who	gets	identified	with	anything	that	he	finds	pleasant—and	forgets
that	the	unpleasant	is	coming	just	behind	it	as	a	shadow.	You	are	not	troubled	by
the	pleasant	side—you	rejoice	in	it.	The	trouble	comes	when	the	polar	opposite
asserts;	then	you	are	torn	apart.	But	you	started	the	whole	trouble.	Falling	from
being	just	a	witness,	you	became	identified.
The	biblical	story	of	the	fall	is	just	a	fiction.	But	this	is	the	real	fall:	the	fall
from	being	a	witness	into	getting	identified	with	something	and	losing	your
witnessing.
Just	try	once	in	a	while:	let	the	mind	be	whatever	it	is.	Remember,	you	are
not	it.	And	you	are	going	to	have	a	great	surprise.	As	you	are	less	identified,	the
mind	starts	becoming	less	powerful	because	its	power	comes	from	your
identification;	it	sucks	your	blood.	But	when	you	start	standing	aloof	and	away,
the	mind	starts	shrinking.	The	day	you	are	completely	unidentified	with	the
mind,	even	for	a	single	moment,	there	is	the	revelation:	mind	simply	dies,	it	is	no
longer	there.	Where	it	was	so	full,	where	it	was	so	continuously—day	in,	day
out;	waking,	sleeping,	it	was	there—suddenly	it	is	not	there.	You	look	all	around
and	it	is	emptiness,	it	is	nothingness.	And	with	the	mind	disappears	the	self.
Then	there	is	only	a	certain	quality	of	awareness	with	no	‘I’	in	it.	At	the	most
you	can	call	it	something	similar	to	‘am-ness’,	but	not	‘I-ness.’	To	be	even	more
exact,	it	is	‘is-ness’,	because	even	in	‘am-ness’	some	shadow	of	the	‘I’	is	still
there.	The	moment	you	know	its	is-ness,	it	has	become	universal.	With	the
disappearance	of	the	mind	disappears	the	self.	And	so	many	things	disappear
which	were	so	important	to	you,	so	troublesome	to	you.	You	were	trying	to	solve
them	and	they	were	becoming	more	and	more	complicated;	everything	was	a
problem,	an	anxiety,	and	there	seemed	to	be	no	way	out.
I	will	remind	you	of	the	story,	“The	Goose	is	Out.”	It	is	concerned	with	the
mind	and	your	is-ness.
The	master	says	to	the	disciple	to	meditate	on	a	koan.	A	small	goose	is	put
into	a	bottle,	fed	and	nourished.	The	goose	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger
and	bigger,	and	fills	the	whole	bottle.	Now	it	is	too	big;	it	cannot	come	out	of	the
bottle’s	mouth,	the	mouth	is	too	small.	And	the	koan	is	that	you	have	to	bring	the
goose	out	without	destroying	the	bottle,	without	killing	the	goose.
Now,	it	is	mind-boggling.	What	can	you	do?	The	goose	is	too	big;	you
cannot	take	it	out	unless	you	break	the	bottle,	but	that	is	not	allowed.	Or,	you	can
bring	it	out	by	killing	it;	then	you	don’t	care	whether	it	comes	out	alive	or	dead.
That	is	not	allowed	either.
Day	in,	day	out,	the	disciple	meditates,	finds	no	way,	thinks	this	way	and
that	way—but	in	fact	there	is	no	way.	Tired,	utterly	exhausted,	a	sudden
revelation—suddenly	he	understands	that	the	master	cannot	be	interested	in	the
bottle	and	the	goose;	they	must	represent	something	else.	The	bottle	is	the	mind,
you	are	the	goose…but	with	witnessing	it	is	possible.	Without	being	in	the	mind,
you	can	become	identified	with	it	so	much	that	you	start	feeling	you	are	in	it!
He	runs	to	the	master,	to	say	that	the	goose	is	out.	And	the	master	says,	“You
have	understood	it.	Now	keep	it	out.	It	has	never	been	in.”
If	you	go	on	struggling	with	the	goose	and	the	bottle	there	is	no	way	for	you
to	solve	it.	It	is	the	realization	that	“It	must	represent	something	else;	otherwise
the	master	cannot	give	it	to	me.	And	what	can	it	be?”	…Because	the	whole
function	between	the	master	and	the	disciple,	the	whole	business	is	about	the
mind	and	awareness.
Awareness	is	the	goose,	which	is	not	in	the	bottle	of	the	mind.	But	you	are
believing	that	it	is	in	it,	and	asking	everyone	how	to	get	it	out.	And	there	are
idiots	who	will	help	you	with	techniques	to	get	out	of	it.	I	call	them	idiots
because	they	have	not	understood	the	thing	at	all.
The	goose	is	out,	has	never	been	in;	so	the	question	of	bringing	it	out	does
not	arise.
Mind	is	just	a	procession	of	thoughts	passing	in	front	of	you	on	the	screen	of
the	brain.	You	are	an	observer.	But	you	start	getting	identified	with	beautiful
things—those	are	bribes.	And	once	you	get	caught	in	the	beautiful	things	you	are
also	caught	in	the	ugly	things,	because	mind	cannot	exist	without	duality.
Awareness	cannot	exist	with	duality,	and	mind	cannot	exist	without	duality.
Awareness	is	non-dual,	and	mind	is	dual.	So	just	watch.
I	don’t	teach	you	any	solutions.	I	teach	you	the	solution.	Just	get	back	a	little
and	watch.	Create	a	distance	between	you	and	your	mind.	Whether	it	is	good,
beautiful,	delicious,	something	that	you	would	like	to	enjoy	closely,	or	it	is	ugly
—you	remain	as	far	away	as	possible.	Look	at	it	just	the	way	you	look	at	a	film.
But	people	get	identified	even	with	films.
I	have	seen,	when	I	was	young—I	have	not	seen	any	movie	for	a	long	time
—but	I	have	seen	people	weeping,	tears	falling.	It	is	good	that	it	is	dark	in	a
movie	house;	it	saves	them	from	feeling	embarrassed—and	nothing	is
happening!	I	used	to	ask	my	father,	“Did	you	see?	The	fellow	by	your	side	was
crying!”
He	said,	“The	whole	hall	was	crying.	The	scene	was	such….”
“But”,	I	said,	“there	is	only	a	screen	and	nothing	else.	Nobody	is	killed,	there
is	no	tragedy	happening—just	a	projection	of	a	film.	Just	pictures	moving	on	the
screen;	and	people	laugh,	and	people	weep,	and	for	three	hours	they	are	almost
lost.	They	become	part	of	the	movie,	they	become	identified	with	some
character.”
My	father	said	to	me,	“If	you	are	raising	questions	about	people’s	reactions,
then	you	cannot	enjoy	the	film.”
I	said,	“I	can	enjoy	the	film,	but	I	don’t	want	to	cry,	I	don’t	see	any
enjoyment	in	it.	I	can	see	it	as	a	film,	but	I	don’t	want	to	become	a	part	of	it.
These	people	are	all	becoming	part	of	it.”
You	get	identified	with	anything.	People	get	identified	with	other	persons
and	then	they	create	misery	for	themselves.	They	get	identified	with	things,	then
they	get	miserable	if	that	thing	is	missing.
Identification	is	the	root	cause	of	your	misery.	And	every	identification	is
identification	with	the	mind.
Just	step	aside,	let	the	mind	pass.
And	soon	you	will	be	able	to	see	that	there	is	no	problem	at	all—the	goose	is
out.	You	don’t	have	to	break	the	bottle,	you	don’t	have	to	kill	the	goose	either.
The	watcher	on	the	hill
I	seem	to	be	neither	totally	“in	the	world,”	nor	the	“watcher	on	the	hill.”	How
to	be	someplace?	I	feel	like	I	am	in	between	everything	I	do.
Then	that	is	exactly	the	place	you	should	be.
You	go	on	creating	problems.	Wherever	you	are,	be	there.	There	is	no	need
to	be	a	watcher	on	the	hills.	There	should	be	no	‘should.’	Once	‘should’	enters
life	you	are	already	poisoned.	There	should	be	no	goal.	There	should	be	no	right
or	wrong.	This	is	the	only	sin:	to	think	in	terms	of	division,	values,
condemnation,	appreciation.
Wherever	you	are…nothing	is	wrong	in	between	the	watcher	on	the	hills	and
a	man	in	the	world.	That’s	exactly	where	you	should	be.
And	I	say:	wherever	you	are,	if	you	can	accept	it,	immediately	then	and	there
you	have	become	the	watcher	on	the	hills.	Even	in	hell,	if	you	accept	it,	hell
disappears,	because	hell	can	remain	only	through	your	rejection.	Hell	disappears
and	heaven	appears.	Whatsoever	you	accept	becomes	heavenly,	and	whatsoever
you	reject	becomes	hell.
It	is	said	that	a	saint	cannot	be	thrown	into	hell	because	he	knows	the
alchemy	to	transform	it.	You	have	heard	that	sinners	go	to	hell	and	saints	to
heaven—but	you	have	heard	the	wrong	thing.	The	case	is	just	the	other	way
around:	wherever	sinners	go,	they	create	hell	and	wherever	saints	go,	they	create
heaven.	Saints	are	not	sent	to	heaven.	There	is	nobody	to	send	and	manage	all
this—there	is	nobody.	But	wherever	they	go,	this	is	the	way	they	are:	they	create
their	heaven.	They	carry	their	heaven	with	them,	within	them.	And	sinners?—
you	can	send	them	to	heaven:	they	will	create	hell.	They	cannot	do	otherwise.
So	what	is	the	definition	of	a	saint	or	a	sinner?	My	definition	is:	a	saint	is
one	who	has	come	to	know	the	alchemical	secret	of	transforming	everything	into
heaven.	And	a	sinner	is	one	who	does	not	know	the	secret	of	transforming	things
into	beautiful	existences.	Rather,	on	the	contrary,	he	goes	on	making	things	ugly.
Whatsoever	you	are	will	be	reflected	around	you.	So	don’t	try	to	be	anything
else.	And	don’t	try	to	be	some	other	place.	That	is	the	disease	called	man:	always
to	become	somebody,	to	be	some	other	place,	always	rejecting	that	which	is,	and
always	hankering	for	that	which	is	not.	This	is	the	disease	called	man.
Be	alert!	Do	you	see	it?!	It	is	a	simple	fact	to	be	seen.	I	am	not	theorizing
about	it;	I	am	not	a	theoretician.	I	am	simply	indicating	a	bare,	naked	fact—that
if	you	can	live	in	this	moment	wherever	you	are	and	forget	about	the	future,
goals,	the	idea	of	becoming	something	else,	immediately	the	whole	world
around	you	is	transformed;	you	have	become	a	transforming	force.
Acceptance…a	deep,	total	acceptance	is	what	religiousness	is	all	about.
A	wants	to	become	B;	B	wants	to	become	C.	Then	the	fever	of	becoming	is
created.	You	are	not	a	becoming;	you	are	a	being.	You	are	already	that	which
you	can	be,	which	you	can	ever	be—you	are	already	that.	Nothing	more	can	be
done	about	you;	you	are	a	finished	product.
This	is	the	meaning	I	give	to	the	story	that	God	created	the	world:	when	the
perfect	creates,	the	creation	is	perfect.	When	God	creates,	how	can	you	improve
upon	it?	Just	think	of	the	whole	absurdity;	the	whole	idea	is	absurd.	You	are
trying	to	improve	upon	God;	you	cannot	improve.	You	can	be	miserable,	that’s
all.	And	you	can	suffer	unnecessarily.	And	you	will	suffer	diseases	that	are	just
in	your	imagination	and	nowhere	else.	God	creating	means:	out	of	perfection
comes	perfection.	You	are	perfect!	Nothing	else	is	needed.	Look	right	now,	this
very	moment,	within	yourself.	Have	a	direct	insight.	What	is	needed?	Everything
is	simply	perfect	and	beautiful.	Not	even	a	cloud	can	I	see.	Just	look	within
yourself—not	even	a	cloud	in	your	inner	space.	Everything	is	full	of	light.
But	the	mind	will	tell	you,	sooner	or	later,	to	be	something	else,	to	be
somewhere	else,	to	become.	The	mind	doesn’t	allow	you	to	be.	The	mind	is
becoming,	and	your	soul	is	being.	That’s	why	buddhas	go	on	saying:	“Unless
you	drop	all	desiring	you	will	not	attain!”	Desiring	means	becoming.	Desiring
means	to	be	something	else.	Desiring	means	not	to	accept	the	case	as	you	are,
not	to	be	in	a	total	‘yes’	mood—no	matter	what	the	situation.
To	say	yes	to	life	is	to	be	religious;	to	say	no	to	life	is	to	be	irreligious.	And
whenever	you	desire	something	you	are	saying	no.	You	are	saying	that
something	better	is	possible.
The	trees	are	happy	and	the	birds	are	happy	and	the	clouds	are	happy—
because	they	have	no	becoming.	They	are	simply	whatsoever	they	are.	The	rose
bush	is	not	trying	to	become	a	lotus.	No,	the	rose-bush	is	absolutely	happy	to	be
a	rose	bush.	You	cannot	persuade	the	rose	bush.	Howsoever	you	advertise	the
lotus,	you	will	not	be	able	to	corrupt	the	mind	of	the	rose	bush	to	become	a	lotus.
The	rose	bush	will	simply	laugh—because	a	rose	bush	is	a	rose	bush	is	a	rose
bush.	It	is	simply	settled	and	centered	in	its	being.	That’s	why	the	whole	of
nature	is	without	any	fever,	calm	and	quiet	and	tranquil.	And	settled!
Only	the	human	mind	is	in	a	chaos,	because	everybody	is	hankering	to	be
somebody	else.	This	is	what	you	have	been	doing	for	a	thousand	and	one	lives.
And	if	you	don’t	awaken	now,	when	are	you	thinking	to	awaken?	You	are
already	ripe	for	awakening.	Just	start	from	this	very	moment	to	live	and	enjoy
and	delight.	Drop	desiring!	Whatsoever	you	are,	enjoy	it.	Delight	in	your	being.
And	then	suddenly	time	disappears,	because	time	exists	only	with	desiring.
Future	exists	because	you	desire.
Then	you	will	be	like	birds;	listen	to	them.	Then	you	will	be	like	trees;	look
—the	freshness,	the	greenery,	the	flowers.
Please	be	where	you	are.	I	am	not	here	to	create	a	new	desire	in	you;	I	am
simply	here	to	make	you	aware	of	the	whole	absurdity	of	desiring.	Desiring	is
sansar.	Understanding	the	futility	of	desire	is	to	become	enlightened.	One	who
has	found	out	that	he	is	already	that	which	he	always	wanted	to	be	is	a	buddha.
And	you	are	all	buddhas;	howsoever	fast	asleep	and	snoring	makes	no
difference.
Let	me	be	your	alarm.	Open	your	eyes.	You	have	slept	long	enough.	It	is
time	to	awaken.	The	morning	is	knocking	at	the	door.
Where	did	you	leave	your	bicycle?
During	the	meditations,	my	mind	still	goes	five	hundred	miles	per	hour.	I	never
experience	silence,	and	whatever	witnessing	happens	is	very	short,	like	flashes.
Am	I	wasting	my	time?
Your	mind	is	mighty	slow.	Five	hundred	miles	per	hour,	only?!	And	do	you
think	this	is	speed?	You	are	mighty	slow.	Mind	goes	so	fast	it	knows	no	speed.	It
is	faster	than	light.	Light	travels	186,000	miles	in	one	second;	mind	is	faster	than
that.	But	nothing	to	be	worried	about—that	is	the	beauty	of	the	mind,	that	is	a
great	quality!	Rather	than	taking	it	negatively,	rather	than	fighting	with	it,
befriend	the	mind.
You	say:	“During	the	meditations,	my	mind	still	goes	five	hundred	miles	per
hour”—let	it	go!	Let	it	go	faster.	You	be	a	watcher.	You	watch	the	mind	going
around	so	fast,	with	such	speed.	Enjoy	this!	Enjoy	this	play	of	the	mind.	In
Sanskrit	we	have	a	special	term	for	it;	we	call	it	chidvilas—the	play	of
consciousness.	Enjoy	it!—this	play	of	mind	rushing	towards	the	stars,	moving	so
fast	from	here	and	there,	jumping	all	over	existence.	What	is	wrong	in	it?	Let	it
be	a	beautiful	dance.	Accept	it.
My	feeling	is	that	what	you	are	doing	is	trying	to	stop	it—you	cannot	do
that.	Nobody	can	stop	the	mind!	Yes,	mind	stops	one	day,	but	nobody	can	stop	it.
Mind	stops,	but	that	is	not	out	of	your	effort.	Mind	stops	out	of	your
understanding.
You	just	watch	and	try	to	see	what	is	happening,	why	this	mind	is	rushing.	It
is	not	rushing	without	any	reason.	Try	to	see	why	this	mind	is	rushing,	where	it
is	rushing—you	must	be	ambitious.	If	it	thinks	about	money,	then	try	to
understand.	Mind	is	not	the	question.	You	start	dreaming	about	money,	that	you
have	won	a	lottery	or	this	and	that,	and	then	you	even	start	planning	how	to
spend	it,	what	to	purchase	and	what	not.	Or,	the	mind	thinks	you	have	become	a
president,	a	prime	minister,	and	then	you	start	thinking	what	to	do	now,	how	to
run	the	country,	or	the	world.	Just	watch	the	mind!—what	mind	is	going
towards.
There	must	be	a	deep	seed	in	you.	You	cannot	stop	the	mind	unless	that	seed
disappears.	The	mind	is	simply	following	the	order	of	your	innermost	seed.
Somebody	is	thinking	about	sex;	then	somewhere	there	is	repressed	sexuality.
Watch	where	mind	is	rushing.	Look	deep	into	yourself,	find	where	the	seeds	are.
I	have	heard:	The	parson	was	very	much	worried.	“Listen,”	he	said	to	his
verger,	“somebody	has	stolen	my	bicycle.”
“Where	have	you	been	on	it,	Rector?”	inquired	that	worthy.
“Only	around	the	parish	on	my	calls.”
The	verger	suggested	that	the	best	plan	would	be	for	the	rector	to	direct	his
Sunday	sermon	to	the	ten	commandments.	“When	you	get	to	‘Thou	shalt	not
steal’	you	and	I	will	watch	the	faces—we	will	soon	see.”
Sunday	came,	the	rector	started	in	fine	flow	about	the	commandments,	then
lost	his	thread,	changed	his	subject,	and	trailed	off	lamely.
“Sir,”	said	the	verger,	“I	thought	you	were	going	to…”
“I	know,	Giles,	I	know.	But	you	see,	when	I	got	to	‘Thou	shalt	not	commit
adultery’,	I	suddenly	remembered	where	I	had	left	my	bicycle.”
Just	see	where	you	have	left	your	bicycle.	The	mind	is	rushing	for	certain
reasons.
The	mind	needs	understanding,	awareness.	Don’t	try	to	stop	it.	If	you	try	to
stop	it,	in	the	first	place	you	cannot	succeed;	in	the	second	place,	if	you	can
succeed—one	can	succeed	if	one	makes	persevering	effort	for	years—if	you	can
succeed,	you	will	become	dull.	No	satori	will	happen	out	of	it.
In	the	first	place,	you	cannot	succeed;	and	it	is	good	that	you	cannot	succeed.
If	you	could	succeed,	if	you	managed	to	succeed,	that	would	be	very	unfortunate
—you	would	become	dull,	you	would	lose	intelligence.	With	that	speed	there	is
intelligence,	with	that	speed	there	is	continuous	sharpening	of	the	sword	of
thinking,	logic,	intellect.	Please	don’t	try	to	stop	it.	I	am	not	in	favor	of	dullards,
and	I	am	not	here	to	help	anybody	to	become	stupid.
In	the	name	of	religion,	many	people	have	become	stupid,	they	have	almost
become	idiots—just	trying	to	stop	the	mind	without	any	understanding	about
why	it	is	going	with	such	speed…why	in	the	first	place?	The	mind	cannot	go
without	any	reason.	Without	going	into	the	reasons,	in	the	layers,	deep	layers	of
the	unconscious,	they	just	try	to	stop.	They	can	stop,	but	they	will	have	to	pay	a
price,	and	the	price	will	be	that	their	intelligence	will	be	lost.
You	can	go	around	India,	you	can	find	thousands	of	sannyasins,	mahatmas;
look	into	their	eyes—yes,	they	are	good	people,	nice,	but	stupid.	If	you	look	in
their	eyes	there	is	no	intelligence,	you	will	not	see	any	lightning.	They	are
uncreative	people;	they	have	not	created	anything.	They	just	sit	there.	They	are
vegetating,	they	are	not	alive	people.	They	have	not	helped	the	world	in	any	way.
They	have	not	even	produced	a	painting	or	a	poem	or	a	song,	because	even	to
produce	a	poem	you	need	intelligence,	you	need	certain	qualities	of	the	mind.
I	would	not	suggest	that	you	stop	the	mind,	rather,	that	you	understand	it.
With	understanding	a	miracle	happens.	The	miracle	is	that	with	understanding,
by	and	by,	when	you	understand	the	causes	and	those	causes	are	looked	into
deeply,	through	looking	deeply	into	those	causes,	those	causes	disappear,	mind
slows	down.	But	intelligence	is	not	lost,	because	mind	is	not	forced.
What	are	you	doing	if	you	don’t	remove	the	causes	by	understanding?	You
are	driving	a	car,	for	example,	and	you	go	on	pressing	the	accelerator	and	at	the
same	time	you	try	to	press	the	brake.	You	will	destroy	the	whole	mechanism	of
the	car.	And	there	is	every	possibility	you	will	have	some	accident.	This	cannot
be	done	together.	If	you	are	pushing	the	brake,	then	leave	the	accelerator	alone;
don’t	push	it	any	more.	If	you	are	pushing	the	accelerator,	then	don’t	push	the
brake.	Don’t	do	both	the	things	together,	otherwise	you	will	destroy	the	whole
mechanism;	you	are	doing	two	contradictory	things.
You	carry	ambition—and	you	try	to	stop	the	mind?	Ambition	creates	the
speed,	so	you	are	accelerating	the	speed—and	putting	a	brake	on	the	mind.	You
will	destroy	the	whole	subtle	mechanism	of	the	mind,	and	mind	is	a	very	delicate
phenomenon,	the	most	delicate	in	the	whole	of	existence.	So	don’t	be	foolish
about	it.
There	is	no	need	to	stop	it.
You	say:	“I	never	experience	silence,	and	whatever	witnessing	happens	is
very	short,	like	flashes.”
Feel	happy!	Even	that	is	something	of	tremendous	value.	Those	flashes,	they
are	not	ordinary	flashes.	Don’t	just	take	them	for	granted!	There	are	millions	of
people	for	whom	even	those	small	glimpses	have	not	happened.	They	will	live
and	die	and	they	will	never	know	what	witnessing	is—even	for	a	single	moment.
You	are	happy,	you	are	fortunate.
But	you	are	not	feeling	grateful.	If	you	don’t	feel	grateful,	those	flashes	will
disappear;	feel	grateful,	they	will	grow.	With	gratitude,	everything	grows.	Feel
happy	that	you	are	blessed—they	will	grow.	With	that	positivity,	things	will
grow.
“And	whatever	witnessing	happens	is	very	short.”	Let	it	be	very	short!	If	it
can	happen	for	a	single	split	moment,	it	is	happening;	you	will	have	the	taste	of
it.	And	with	the	taste,	by	and	by,	you	will	create	more	and	more	situations	in
which	it	happens	more	and	more.
“Am	I	wasting	my	time?”	You	cannot	waste	time,	because	you	don’t	possess
time.	You	can	waste	something	that	you	possess.	Time	you	don’t	possess.	Time
will	be	wasted	anyway	whether	you	meditate	or	not—time	will	be	wasted.	Time
is	rushing	by.	Whatsoever	you	do,	do	anything	or	don’t	do	anything,	time	is
going.	You	cannot	save	time	so	how	can	you	waste	time?	You	can	waste	only
something	which	you	can	save.	You	don’t	possess	time.	Forget	about	it!
And	the	best	use	you	can	have	of	time	is	to	have	these	small	glimpses—
because	finally	you	will	come	to	see	only	those	moments	have	been	saved	which
were	moments	of	witnessing,	and	all	else	has	gone	down	the	drain.	The	money
that	you	earned,	the	prestige	that	you	earned,	the	respectability	that	you	earned,
is	all	gone	down	the	drain.	Only	those	few	moments	that	you	had	some	flashes
of	witnessing,	only	those	moments	are	saved.	Only	those	moments	will	go	with
you	when	you	leave	this	life—only	those	moments	can	go,	because	those
moments	belong	to	eternity,	they	don’t	belong	to	time.
Feel	happy	it	is	happening.	It	always	happens	slowly,	slowly.	One	drop	by
one	drop,	a	great	ocean	can	become	full.	It	happens	in	drops;	in	drops	the	ocean
is	coming.	You	just	receive	it	with	gratitude,	with	celebration,	with	thankfulness.
And	don’t	try	to	stop	the	mind.	Let	the	mind	have	its	speed—you	watch.
Just	a	180°	turn
Two	Polacks	were	driving	along	in	the	front	seat	of	their	car.	As	they	approached
a	corner,	the	one	who	was	driving	said	to	his	friend,	“Will	you	look	out	of	the
window	and	see	if	the	indicator,	the	turn	signal,	is	working?”
He	promptly	leaned	out	of	the	window	and	looked	at	the	indicator	light	and
shouted	back	at	his	friend,	“Yes	it	is—no	it’s	not,	yes	it	is—no	it’s	not,	yes	it	is—
no	it’s	not.”
Osho,	if	anybody	were	to	ask	me	whether	I	was	witnessing	or	not,	my	answer
would	have	to	be	the	same:	Yes	I	am,	no	I’m	not;	yes	I	am,	no	I’m	not.	Is	it	like
that	all	the	way	home?
It	is	not,	because	as	far	as	your	witnessing	is	concerned,	it	may	be	coming
and	going,	and	your	answer	may	be	perfectly	the	same	as	the	Polack	who	said
that	the	indicator	is	working,	“Yes—no—yes	again…”	That	is	the	function	of	the
indicator;	to	be,	not	to	be;	to	be,	not	to	be.	But	don’t	laugh	at	the	poor	Polack.	As
far	as	his	awareness	is	concerned,	he	is	fully	aware.	Whenever	it	is	working	he
says	yes;	whenever	it	is	not	working	he	says	no.	His	awareness	of	the	indicator	is
continuous.	The	indicator	goes	on	changing,	but	the	Polack	remains	fully	aware
of	when	it	is	working,	when	it	is	not	working,	when	it	is	on,	when	it	is	off.	His
awareness	is	a	continuity.
If	you	can	give	the	same	answer	about	your	witnessing:	“Yes	I	am
witnessing,	no	I	am	not	witnessing,	yes	I	am	witnessing,	no	I	am	not
witnessing,”	then	you	have	to	remember	that	there	is	something	more	behind
these	witnessing	moments	that	is	witnessing	all	this	process.	Who	is	witnessing
that	sometimes	you	are	witnessing	and	sometimes	you	are	not	witnessing?
Something	is	constant.
Your	witnessing	has	become	just	an	indicator;	don’t	be	bothered	by	it.	Your
emphasis	should	be	on	the	eternal,	the	constant,	the	continuum—and	it	is	there.
And	it	is	in	everyone,	we	have	just	forgotten	it.	But	even	in	times	when	we	have
forgotten	it,	it	is	there	in	its	absolute	perfection.	It	is	like	a	mirror	which	is	able
to	mirror	everything,	is	still	mirroring	everything,	but	you	are	standing	with	your
back	towards	the	mirror.	The	poor	mirror	is	mirroring	your	back.
Turn,	it	will	mirror	your	face.
Open	your	heart,	it	will	mirror	your	heart.
Put	everything	on	the	table,	don’t	hide	even	a	single	card	and	it	will	reflect
your	whole	reality.	But	if	you	go	on	standing	with	your	back	to	the	mirror
looking	all	around	the	world	asking	people,	“Who	am	I?”	then	it	is	up	to	you.
Because	there	are	idiots	who	will	come	and	teach	you	that	“This	is	the	way.	Do
this	and	you	will	know	who	you	are.”
No	method	is	needed,	just	a	180-degree	turn—and	that	is	not	a	method.
And	the	mirror	is	your	very	being.
You	may	not	have	looked	at	the	joke	in	this	light.	If	you	tell	the	joke	to
anybody	he	is	going	to	laugh	because	the	Polack	is	so	stupid,	because	that	is	the
function	of	the	indicator—to	be	on,	off,	on,	off.	But	you	have	brought	me	a	joke
—I	cannot	simply	laugh	at	it	because	I	see	something	more	in	it,	which	perhaps
nobody	else	will	see.	The	Polack	is	constant,	alert.	He	does	not	miss	a	single
point,	a	single	moment.
And	when	you	say	“witnessing,	yes”	and	then	it	disappears	and	you	say
“no”—again	it	appears,	you	say	“yes”…it	simply	shows	that	there	is	something
behind	all	these	moments	of	witnessing	and	not	witnessing.	The	true	witness,
which	is	reflecting	the	changing	process	of	what	you	think	is	your	witness,	is
behind.	It	is	not	the	true	witness,	it	is	only	the	indicator.
Forget	the	indicator.	Remember	the	constant	mirroring	that	goes	on	twenty-
four	hours	within	you,	silently	watching	everything.	Slowly,	slowly	clean	it—
there	is	so	much	dust	on	it,	centuries	of	dust.	Remove	the	dust.	And	one	day,
when	the	mirror	is	completely	clean,	those	moments	of	witnessing	and	not-
witnessing	will	disappear;	you	will	be	simply	a	witness.	And	unless	you	find	that
eternity	of	witnessing,	all	other	kinds	of	witnessing	are	part	of	mind.	They	have
no	value.
All	paths	merge	on	the	mountain
Is	awareness	a	higher	value	than	love?
The	highest	peak	is	the	culmination	of	all	values:	truth,	love,	awareness,
authenticity,	totality.	At	the	highest	peak	they	are	indivisible.	They	are	separate
only	in	the	dark	valleys	of	our	unconsciousness.	They	are	separate	only	when
they	are	polluted,	mixed	with	other	things.	The	moment	they	become	pure	they
become	one;	the	more	pure,	the	closer	they	come	to	each	other.
For	example,	each	value	exists	on	many	planes;	each	value	is	a	ladder	of
many	rungs.	Love	is	lust—the	lowest	rung,	which	touches	hell;	and	love	is	also
prayer—the	highest	rung,	which	touches	paradise.	And	between	these	two	there
are	many	planes	easily	discernible.	In	lust,	love	is	only	one	per	cent:	ninety-nine
per	cent	are	other	things:	jealousies,	ego	trips,	possessiveness,	anger,	sexuality.	It
is	more	physical,	more	chemical;	it	has	nothing	deeper	than	that.	It	is	very
superficial,	not	even	skin	deep.
As	you	go	higher,	things	become	deeper;	they	start	having	new	dimensions.
That	which	was	only	physiological	starts	having	a	psychological	dimension	to	it.
That	which	was	nothing	but	biology	starts	becoming	psychology.	We	share
biology	with	all	the	animals;	we	don’t	share	psychology	with	all	the	animals.
When	love	goes	still	higher—or	deeper,	which	is	the	same—then	it	starts
having	something	of	the	spiritual	in	it.	It	becomes	metaphysical.	Only	Buddhas,
Krishnas,	Christs,	know	that	quality	of	love.
Love	is	spread	all	the	way,	and	so	are	other	values.	When	love	is	one
hundred	per	cent	pure	you	cannot	make	any	distinction	between	love	and
awareness;	then	they	are	no	more	two.	You	cannot	make	any	distinction	even
between	love	and	God;	they	are	no	more	two.	Hence	Jesus’	statement	that	God	is
love.	He	makes	them	synonymous.	There	is	great	insight	in	it.
On	the	periphery	everything	appears	separate	from	everything	else;	on	the
periphery	existence	is	many.	As	you	come	closer	to	the	center,	the	manyness
starts	melting,	dissolving,	and	oneness	starts	arising.	At	the	center,	everything	is
one.
Hence	your	question	is	right	only	if	you	don’t	understand	the	highest	quality
of	love	and	awareness.	It	is	absolutely	irrelevant	if	you	have	any	glimpse	of
Everest,	of	the	highest	peak.
You	ask:	“Is	awareness	a	higher	value	than	love?”
There	is	nothing	higher	and	nothing	lower;	in	fact,	there	are	not	two	values
at	all.	There	are	two	paths	from	the	valley	leading	to	the	peak.	One	path	is	of
awareness,	meditation:	the	path	of	Zen.	The	other	is	the	path	of	love,	the	path	of
the	devotees,	the	bhaktas,	the	Sufis.	These	two	paths	are	separate	when	you	start
the	journey;	you	have	to	choose.	Whichever	you	choose	is	going	to	lead	to	the
same	peak.	And	as	you	come	closer	to	the	peak	you	will	be	surprised:	the
travelers	on	the	other	path	are	coming	closer	to	you.	Slowly,	slowly,	the	paths
start	merging	into	each	other.	By	the	time	you	have	reached	the	ultimate,	they
are	one.
The	person	who	follows	the	path	of	awareness	finds	love	as	a	consequence
of	his	awareness,	as	a	by-product,	as	a	shadow.	And	the	person	who	follows	the
path	of	love	finds	awareness	as	a	consequence,	as	a	by-product,	as	a	shadow	of
love.	They	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
And	remember:	if	your	awareness	lacks	love	then	it	is	still	impure;	it	has	not
yet	known	one	hundred	per	cent	purity.	It	is	not	yet	really	awareness;	it	must	be
mixed	with	unawareness.	It	is	not	pure	light;	there	must	be	pockets	of	darkness
inside	you	still	working,	functioning,	influencing	you,	dominating	you.	If	your
love	is	without	awareness,	then	it	is	not	love	yet.	It	must	be	something	lower,
something	closer	to	lust	than	to	prayer.
So	let	it	be	a	criterion:	if	you	follow	the	path	of	awareness,	let	love	be	the
criterion.	When	your	awareness	suddenly	blooms	into	love,	know	perfectly	well
that	awareness	has	happened,	samadhi	has	been	achieved.	If	you	follow	the	path
of	love,	then	let	awareness	function	as	a	criterion,	as	a	touchstone.	When
suddenly,	from	nowhere,	at	the	very	center	of	your	love,	a	flame	of	awareness
starts	arising,	know	perfectly	well….	Rejoice!	You	have	come	home.	6
Celebrating	consciousness
After	working	with	the	cathartic	techniques	for	a	few	years,	I	feel	that	a	deep
inner	harmony,	balance	and	centering	is	happening	to	me.	But	you	said	that
before	entering	into	the	final	stage	of	samadhi,	one	passes	through	a	great
chaos.	How	do	I	know	if	I	am	finished	with	the	chaotic	stage?
First,	for	hundreds	of	lives	you	have	lived	in	a	chaos.	It	is	nothing	new.	It	is
very	old.	Secondly,	the	dynamic	methods	of	meditation	which	have	catharsis	as
their	foundation	allow	all	chaos	within	you	to	be	thrown	out.	That	is	the	beauty
of	these	techniques.	You	cannot	sit	silently,	but	you	can	do	the	dynamic	or	the
chaotic	meditations	very	easily.	Once	the	chaos	is	thrown	out,	a	silence	starts
happening	to	you.	Then	you	can	sit	silently.	If	rightly	done,	continuously	done,
then	the	cathartic	techniques	of	meditation	will	simply	dissolve	all	your	chaos
into	the	outside	world.	You	will	not	need	to	pass	through	a	mad	stage.	That’s	the
beauty	of	these	techniques.	The	madness	is	being	thrown	out	already.	It	is	in-
built	in	the	technique.
But	if	you	sit	silently	as	Patanjali	suggests…Patanjali	had	no	cathartic
methods;	it	seems	they	were	not	needed	in	his	time.	People	were	naturally	very
silent,	peaceful,	primitive.	The	mind	was	not	yet	functioning	too	much.	People
slept	well,	lived	like	animals.	They	were	not	very	much	thinking,	logical,
rational,	they	were	more	centered	in	the	heart,	as	primitive	people	are	even	now.
And	life	was	such	that	it	allowed	many	catharses	automatically.
For	example,	a	woodcutter:	he	need	not	have	any	catharsis	because	just	by
cutting	wood,	all	his	murderous	instincts	are	thrown	out.	Cutting	wood	is	like
murdering	a	tree.	A	stone-breaker	need	not	do	cathartic	meditation.	He	is	doing
it	the	whole	day.	But	for	modern	man	things	have	changed.	Now	you	live	in	such
comfort	that	there	is	no	possibility	of	any	catharsis	in	your	life,	except	that	you
can	drive	in	a	mad	way.
That’s	why	in	the	West	more	people	die	every	year	through	car	accidents
than	by	anything	else.	That	is	the	greatest	disease.	Neither	cancer	nor
tuberculosis	nor	any	other	disease	takes	such	a	toll	of	lives	as	car	driving.	In	one
year	of	the	second	world	war,	millions	of	people	died;	more	people	die	every
year	around	the	earth	just	because	of	mad	automobile	drivers.
You	may	have	observed,	if	you	are	a	driver,	that	whenever	you	are	angry	you
go	fast.	You	go	on	pushing	the	accelerator,	you	simply	forget	about	the	brake.
When	you	are	very	hateful,	irritated,	the	car	becomes	a	medium	of	expression.
Otherwise	you	live	in	such	comfort,	doing	less	and	less	with	the	body,	living
more	and	more	in	the	mind.
Those	who	know	about	the	deeper	centers	of	the	brain	say	that	people	who
work	with	their	hands	have	less	anxiety,	less	tension;	they	sleep	well	because
hands	are	connected	with	the	deepest	mind,	the	deepest	center	of	the	brain—
your	right	hand	with	the	left	brain,	your	left	hand	with	the	right	brain.	When	you
work	with	the	hands,	energy	is	flowing	from	the	head	into	the	hands	and	being
released.	People	who	are	working	with	their	hands	don’t	need	catharsis.	But
people	who	work	with	their	heads	need	much	catharsis	because	they	accumulate
much	energy,	and	there	is	no	way	in	their	body,	no	opening	for	it	to	go	out.	It
goes	on	and	on	inside	the	mind;	the	mind	goes	mad.
In	our	culture	and	society—in	the	office,	in	the	factory,	in	the	market—
people	who	work	with	heads	are	known	as	heads:	head	clerk,	or	head
superintendent,	and	people	who	work	with	hands	are	known	as	hands.	It	is
condemnatory.	The	very	word	‘hands’	has	become	condemnatory.
When	Patanjali	was	working	on	these	sutras,	the	world	was	totally	different.
People	were	‘hands.’	There	was	no	need	for	catharsis	specifically;	life	was	itself
a	catharsis.	Then	they	could	sit	silently	very	easily,	but	you	cannot	sit.	Hence,	I
have	been	inventing	cathartic	methods.	Only	after	them	can	you	sit	silently,	not
before.
“After	working	with	the	cathartic	techniques	for	a	few	years,	I	feel	that	a
deep	inner	harmony,	balance,	and	centering	is	happening	to	me.”
Now	don’t	create	trouble;	let	it	happen.	Now	the	mind	is	poking	in	its	nose.
The	mind	says,	“How	can	it	happen?	First	I	must	pass	through	chaos.”	This	idea
can	create	chaos.
This	has	been	my	observation:	people	hanker	for	silence,	and	when	it	starts
happening,	they	can’t	believe	it.	It	is	too	good	to	be	true,	and	particularly	people
who	have	always	condemned	themselves	cannot	believe	that	it	is	happening	to
them:	“Impossible!	It	may	have	happened	to	a	Buddha	or	a	Jesus,	but	to	me?	No,
it	is	not	possible.”	They	come	to	me;	they	are	so	disturbed	by	silence,	that	it	is
happening:	“Is	it	true,	or	am	I	imagining	it?”	Why	bother?	Even	if	it	is
imagination,	it	is	better	than	imagining	anger,	it	is	better	than	imagining	sex,
lust.
And	I	tell	you,	nobody	can	imagine	silence.	Imagination	needs	some	form;
silence	has	no	form.	Imagination	means	thinking	in	images,	and	silence	has	no
image.	You	cannot	imagine	it.	There	is	no	possibility.	You	cannot	imagine
enlightenment,	you	cannot	imagine	satori,	samadhi,	silence,	no.	Imagination
needs	some	base,	some	form,	and	silence	is	formless,	indefinable.	Nobody	has
ever	painted	a	picture	of	it;	nobody	can	paint	one.	Nobody	has	carved	an	image
of	it;	nobody	could	do	it.
You	cannot	imagine	silence.	The	mind	is	playing	tricks.	The	mind	will	say,
“It	must	be	imagination.	How	can	it	be	possible	for	you,	such	a	stupid	man	as
you,	and	silence	happening	to	you?—must	be	you	are	imagining,”	or,	“This	guy
Osho	has	hypnotized	you.	You	must	be	deceived	somehow.”
Don’t	create	such	problems.	Life	has	enough	problems.	When	silence	is
happening,	enjoy	it,	celebrate	it.	It	means	the	chaotic	forces	have	been	thrown
out.	The	mind	is	playing	its	last	game.	It	plays	to	the	very	end;	to	the	very,	very
end	it	goes	on	playing.	At	the	last	moment,	when	enlightenment	is	just	about	to
happen,	then	too	the	mind	plays	the	last	game,	because	it	is	the	last	battle.
Don’t	worry	about	it,	whether	it	is	real	or	unreal,	or	whether	chaos	will	come
after	it	or	not,	because	by	thinking	in	this	way	you	have	already	brought	the
chaos.	It	is	your	idea	which	can	create	chaos,	and	when	it	is	created,	the	mind
will	say,	“Now	listen,	I	told	you	so.”
Mind	is	very	self-fulfilling.	First	it	gives	you	a	seed,	and	when	it	sprouts	the
mind	says,	“Look,	I	was	telling	you	beforehand	that	you	are	deceived.”	The
chaos	has	come,	and	it	has	been	brought	by	the	idea.	So	why	bother	about
whether	the	chaos	is	still	to	come	in	the	future	or	not,	or	whether	it	has	passed	or
not?	Right	this	moment,	you	are	silent—why	not	celebrate	it?	And	I	tell	you,	if
you	celebrate,	it	grows.
In	this	world	of	consciousness,	nothing	is	so	helpful	as	celebration.
Celebration	is	like	watering	a	plant.	Worry	is	just	the	opposite	of	celebration,	it
is	just	like	cutting	the	roots.	Feel	happy!	Dance	with	your	silence.	This	moment
is	there—enough.	Why	ask	for	more?	Tomorrow	will	take	care	of	itself.	This
moment	is	too	much;	why	not	live	it,	celebrate	it,	share	it,	enjoy	it?	Let	it
become	a	song,	a	dance,	a	poetry;	let	it	be	creative.	Let	your	silence	be	creative;
do	something	with	it.
Millions	of	things	are	possible	because	nothing	is	more	creative	than	silence:
no	need	to	become	a	very	great	painter,	world	famous,	a	Picasso;	no	need	to
become	a	Henry	Moore;	no	need	to	become	a	great	poet.	Those	ambitions	of
being	great	are	of	the	mind,	not	of	the	silence.
In	your	own	way,	howsoever	small,	paint.	In	your	own	way,	howsoever
small,	make	a	haiku.	In	your	own	way,	howsoever	small,	sing	a	song,	dance	a
little,	celebrate,	and	you	will	find	the	next	moment	brings	more	silence.	Once
you	know	that	the	more	you	celebrate,	the	more	is	given	to	you;	the	more	you
share,	the	more	you	become	capable	of	receiving	it,	each	moment	it	goes	on
growing,	growing.	The	next	moment	is	always	born	out	of	this	moment,	so	why
worry	about	it?	If	this	moment	is	silent,	how	can	the	next	moment	be	chaos?
From	where	will	it	come?	It	is	going	to	be	born	out	of	this	moment.	If	I	am
happy	this	moment,	how	can	I	be	unhappy	in	the	next	moment?
If	you	want	the	next	moment	to	be	unhappy,	you	will	have	to	become
unhappy	in	this	moment,	because	out	of	unhappiness,	unhappiness	is	born;	out	of
happiness,	happiness	is	born.	Whatsoever	you	want	to	reap	in	the	next	moment,
you	will	have	to	sow	right	now.	Once	the	worry	is	allowed	and	you	start	thinking
that	chaos	will	come,	it	will	come;	you	have	already	brought	it.	Now	you	will
have	to	reap	it;	it	has	already	come.	No	need	to	wait	for	the	next	moment;	it	is
already	there.
Remember	this,	and	this	is	really	something	strange:	when	you	are	sad	you
never	think	that	it	may	be	imaginary.	Never	have	I	come	across	a	man	who	is	sad
and	who	says	to	me	that	maybe	it	is	just	imaginary.	Sadness	is	perfectly	real.	But
happiness?	Immediately	something	goes	wrong	and	you	start	thinking,	“Maybe
it	is	imaginary.”	Whenever	you	are	tense,	you	never	think	it	is	imaginary.	If	you
can	think	that	your	tension	and	anguish	are	imaginary,	they	will	disappear.	And
if	you	think	your	silence	and	happiness	are	imaginary,	they	will	disappear.
Whatsoever	is	taken	as	real,	becomes	real.	Whatsoever	is	taken	as	unreal,
becomes	unreal.	You	are	the	creator	of	your	whole	world	around	you;	remember
this.	It	is	so	rare	to	achieve	a	moment	of	happiness,	bliss—don’t	waste	it	in
thinking.	But	if	you	don’t	do	anything,	the	possibility	of	worry	is	there.	If	you
don’t	do	anything—if	you	don’t	dance,	if	you	don’t	sing,	if	you	don’t	share—the
possibility	is	there.	The	very	energy	that	could	have	been	creative	will	create	the
worry.	It	will	start	creating	new	tensions	inside.
Energy	has	to	be	creative.	If	you	don’t	use	it	for	happiness,	the	same	energy
will	be	used	for	unhappiness.	And	for	unhappiness	you	have	such	deep-rooted
habits	that	the	energy	flow	is	very	loose	and	natural.	For	happiness	it	is	an	uphill
task.
So	the	first	few	days	you	will	have	to	be	constantly	aware.	Whenever	there
is	a	happy	moment,	let	it	grip	you,	possess	you.	Enjoy	it	so	totally;	how	could
the	next	moment	be	different?	From	where	would	it	be	different?	From	where
would	it	come?
Your	time	is	created	within	you.	Your	time	is	not	my	time.	There	exist	as
many	parallel	times	as	there	are	minds.	There	is	no	one	time.	If	there	were	one
time,	then	there	would	be	difficulty.	Then	amidst	the	whole	miserable
humankind,	nobody	could	become	a	buddha	because	we	belong	to	the	same
time.	No,	it	is	not	the	same.	My	time	comes	from	me—it	is	my	creativity.	If	this
moment	is	beautiful,	the	next	moment	is	born	more	beautiful—this	is	my	time.	If
this	moment	is	sad	for	you,	then	a	sadder	moment	is	born	out	of	you—that	is
your	time.	Millions	of	parallel	lines	of	time	exist.	And	there	are	a	few	people
who	exist	without	time—those	who	have	attained	to	no-mind.	They	have	no	time
because	they	don’t	think	about	the	past;	it	is	gone,	so	only	fools	think	about	it.
When	something	is	gone,	it	is	gone.
There	is	a	Buddhist	mantra:	Gate	gate,	para	gate—swaha;	“Gone,	gone,
absolutely	gone;	let	it	go	to	the	fire.”	The	past	is	gone,	the	future	has	not	yet
come.	Why	worry	about	it?	When	it	comes,	we	will	see.	You	will	be	there	to
encounter	it,	so	why	worry	about	it?
The	gone	is	gone,	the	not-come	has	not	come	yet.	Only	this	moment	is	left,
pure,	intense	with	energy.	Live	it!	If	it	is	silence,	be	grateful.	If	it	is	blissful,
thank	God,	trust	it.	And	if	you	can	trust,	it	will	grow.	If	you	distrust,	you	have
already	poisoned	it.	7
Count	the	moments	of	awareness
You	tell	us	to	be	aware	of	everything—which	means	to	be	a	witness	to
everything,	every	act.	When	I	decide	to	be	aware	in	work,	I	forget	about
awareness,	and	when	I	become	aware	that	I	was	not	aware,	I	feel	guilty;	I	feel
that	I	have	made	a	mistake.	Could	you	please	explain?
It	is	one	of	the	basic	problems	for	anybody	who	is	trying	to	be	aware	while
at	work—because	work	demands	that	you	should	forget	yourself	completely.
You	should	be	involved	in	it	so	deeply…as	if	you	are	absent.	Unless	such	total
involvement	is	there,	the	work	remains	superficial.	All	that	is	great,	created	by
human	beings—in	painting,	in	poetry,	in	architecture,	in	sculpture,	in	any
dimension	of	life—needs	you	to	be	totally	involved.	And	if	you	are	trying	to	be
aware	at	the	same	time,	your	work	will	never	be	first-rate,	because	you	will	not
be	in	it.
So	awareness	while	you	are	working	needs	a	tremendous	training	and
discipline,	and	one	has	to	start	from	very	simple	actions,	for	example,	walking.
You	can	walk,	and	you	can	be	aware	that	you	are	walking—each	step	can	be	full
of	awareness.	Eating…just	the	way	they	drink	tea	in	Zen	monasteries—they	call
it	the	‘tea	ceremony’,	because	sipping	the	tea,	one	has	to	remain	alert	and	aware.
These	are	small	actions	but	to	begin	with	they	are	perfectly	good.	One
should	not	start	with	something	like	painting,	dancing—those	are	very	deep	and
complex	phenomena.	Start	with	small	actions	of	daily	routine	life.	As	you
become	more	and	more	accustomed	to	awareness,	as	awareness	becomes	just
like	breathing—you	don’t	have	to	make	any	effort	for	it,	it	has	become
spontaneous—then	in	any	act,	any	work,	you	can	be	aware.
But	remember	the	condition:	it	has	to	be	effortless;	it	has	to	come	out	of
spontaneity.	Then	painting	or	composing	music,	or	dancing,	or	even	fighting	an
enemy	with	a	sword,	you	can	remain	absolutely	aware.	But	that	awareness	is	not
the	awareness	you	are	trying	for.	It	is	not	the	beginning;	it	is	the	culmination	of	a
long	discipline.	Sometimes	it	can	happen	without	discipline	too.	But	this	can
happen	only	rarely—in	extreme	conditions.	In	everyday	life	you	should	follow
the	simple	course.
First	become	aware	about	actions	which	do	not	need	your	involvement.	You
can	walk	and	you	can	go	on	thinking;	you	can	eat	and	you	can	go	on	thinking.
Replace	thinking	by	awareness.	Go	on	eating,	and	remain	alert	that	you	are
eating.	Walk,	replace	thinking	by	awareness.	Go	on	walking;	perhaps	your
walking	will	be	a	little	slower	and	more	graceful.	But	awareness	is	possible	with
these	small	acts.	And	as	you	become	more	and	more	articulate,	use	more
complicated	activities.	A	day	comes	that	there	is	no	activity	in	the	world	in
which	you	cannot	remain	alert	at	the	same	time,	doing	the	act	with	totality.
You	are	saying,	“When	I	decide	to	be	aware	in	work,	I	forget	about
awareness.”	It	has	not	to	be	your	decision,	it	has	to	be	your	long	discipline.	And
awareness	has	to	come	spontaneously;	you	are	not	to	call	it,	you	are	not	to	force
it.
“And	when	I	become	aware	that	I	was	not	aware,	I	feel	guilty.”	That	is
absolute	stupidity.	When	you	become	aware	that	you	were	not	aware,	feel	happy
that	at	least	now	you	are	aware.	For	the	concept	of	guilt,	there	is	no	place	in	my
teachings.	Guilt	is	one	of	the	cancers	of	the	soul.	And	all	the	religions	have	used
guilt	to	destroy	your	dignity,	your	pride,	and	to	make	you	just	slaves.	There	is	no
need	to	feel	guilty,	it	is	natural.	Awareness	is	such	a	great	thing	that	even	if	you
can	be	aware	for	a	few	seconds,	rejoice.	Don’t	pay	attention	to	those	moments
when	you	forgot.	Pay	attention	to	that	state	when	you	suddenly	remember,	“I
was	not	aware.”	Feel	fortunate	that	at	least,	after	a	few	hours,	awareness	has
returned.
Don’t	make	it	a	repentance,	a	guilt,	a	sadness—because	by	being	guilty	and
sad,	you	are	not	going	to	be	helped.	You	will	feel,	deep	down,	a	failure.	And
once	a	feeling	of	failure	settles	in	you,	awareness	will	become	even	more
difficult.
Change	your	whole	focus.	It	is	great	that	you	became	aware	that	you	had
forgotten	to	be	aware.	Now	don’t	forget	for	as	long	as	possible.	Again,	you	will
forget;	again,	you	will	remember—but	each	time,	the	gap	of	forgetfulness	will
become	smaller	and	smaller.	If	you	can	avoid	guilt,	which	is	basically	Christian,
your	gaps	of	unawareness	will	become	shorter,	and	one	day	they	will	simply
disappear.	Awareness	will	become	just	like	breathing	or	heartbeat,	or	the	blood
circulating	in	you—day	in,	day	out.
So	be	watchful	that	you	don’t	feel	guilty.	There	is	nothing	to	feel	guilty
about.	It	is	immensely	significant	that	the	trees	don’t	listen	to	Catholic	priests.
Otherwise,	they	would	make	the	roses	feel	guilty:	“Why	do	you	have	thorns?”
And	the	rose,	dancing	in	the	wind,	in	the	rain,	in	the	sun,	would	suddenly
become	sad.	The	dance	would	disappear;	the	joy	would	disappear;	the	fragrance
would	disappear.	Now	the	thorn	would	become	his	only	reality,	a	wound—“Why
do	you	have	thorns?”	But	because	there	are	no	rose	bushes	so	foolish	as	to	listen
to	any	priest	of	any	religion,	roses	go	on	dancing,	and	with	the	roses,	thorns	also
go	on	dancing.
The	whole	existence	is	guiltless.	And	the	moment	you	become	guiltless,	you
become	part	of	the	universal	flow	of	life.	That	is	enlightenment,	a	guiltless
consciousness,	rejoicing	in	everything	that	life	makes	available:	the	light	is
beautiful;	so	is	darkness.
When	you	cannot	find	anything	to	be	guilty	about,	to	me	you	have	become
religious.	To	the	so-called	religions,	unless	you	are	guilty	you	are	not	religious;
the	more	guilty	you	are,	the	more	religious	you	are.	People	are	torturing
themselves	as	punishment,	as	penance.	People	are	fasting;	people	are	beating
their	chests	with	their	fists	till	blood	oozes	from	their	chests.	These	people,	to
me,	are	psychopaths;	they	are	not	religious.	Their	so-called	religions	have	taught
them	that	if	you	commit	anything	wrong,	it	is	better	to	punish	yourself	than	to	be
punished	by	God	on	Judgment	Day—because	that	punishment	is	to	be	thrown
into	the	abysmal	darkness	of	hell	for	eternity.	There	is	no	escape,	no	exit—once
you	enter	hell,	you	have	entered.
The	whole	humanity	has	been	made	guilty	in	some	measure	or	other.	It	has
taken	away	the	shine	from	your	eyes;	it	has	taken	away	the	beauty	from	your
face;	it	has	taken	away	the	grace	of	your	being.	It	has	reduced	you	to	a	criminal
—unnecessarily.
Remember:	people	are	frail	and	weak,	and	to	err	is	human.	And	the	people
who	invented	the	proverb,	“To	err	is	human”,	have	also	invented	the	proverb,
“To	forgive	is	divine.”	I	don’t	agree	with	the	second	part.	I	say,	“To	err	is	human
and	to	forgive	is	also	human.”	And	to	forgive	oneself	is	one	of	the	greatest
virtues,	because	if	you	cannot	forgive	yourself,	you	cannot	forgive	anybody	else
in	the	world—it	is	impossible.	You	are	so	full	of	wounds,	of	guilt,	how	can	you
forgive	anybody?	Your	so-called	saints	go	on	saying	that	you	will	be	thrown	into
hell.	The	reality	is,	they	are	living	in	hell!	They	cannot	allow	even	God	to
forgive	you!
One	great	Sufi	poet,	Omar	Khayyam,	has	written	in	his	Rubaiyat,	his	world-
famous	collection	of	poetry:	“I	am	going	to	drink,	to	dance,	to	love.	I	am	going
to	commit	every	kind	of	sin	because	I	trust	God	is	compassionate—he	will
forgive.	My	sins	are	very	small;	his	forgiveness	is	immense.”
When	the	priests	came	to	know	about	his	book—because	in	those	days
books	were	written	by	hand,	there	were	no	printing	presses….	The	priests
discovered	that	he	was	writing	such	sacrilegious	things,	that	he	was	saying,
“Don’t	be	worried,	go	on	doing	anything	you	want	because	God	is	nothing	but
pure	compassion	and	love.	How	much	sin	can	you	commit	in	seventy	years	of
life?	In	comparison	to	his	forgiveness,	it	is	nothing.”
He	was	a	famous	mathematician	too,	renowned	in	his	country.	The	priests
approached	him	and	said,	“What	kind	of	things	are	you	writing?	You	will
destroy	people’s	religiousness!	Create	fear	in	people,	tell	people	that	God	is	very
just:	if	you	have	committed	a	sin,	you	will	be	punished.	There	will	be	no
compassion.”
Omar	Khayyam’s	book	was	burned	in	his	day.	Whenever	a	copy	was	found,
it	was	burned	by	the	priests,	because	this	man	was	teaching	such	a	dangerous
idea.
If	it	spreads	among	human	beings	and	everybody	starts	rejoicing	in	life,
what	will	happen	to	the	priests?	What	will	happen	to	the	saints?	What	will
happen	to	their	mythologies	of	hell	and	heaven	and	God?	All	will	disappear	into
thin	air.
At	least	with	me,	Omar	Khayyam	is	one	of	the	enlightened	Sufi	mystics,	and
what	he	is	saying	has	immense	truth	in	it.	He	does	not	mean	that	you	should
commit	sin.	What	he	means	simply	is	that	you	should	not	feel	guilty.	Whatever
you	do—if	it	is	not	right,	don’t	do	it	again.	If	you	feel	it	hurts	somebody,	don’t
do	it	again.	But	there	is	no	need	to	feel	guilty,	there	is	no	need	to	be	repentant,
there	is	no	need	to	do	penance	and	torture	yourself.
I	want	to	change	your	focus	completely.	Rather	than	counting	how	many
times	you	forgot	to	remember	to	be	aware,	count	those	few	beautiful	moments
when	you	were	crystal	clear	and	aware.	Those	few	moments	are	enough	to	save
you,	are	enough	to	cure	you,	to	heal	you.	And	if	you	pay	attention	to	them,	they
will	go	on	growing	and	spreading	in	your	consciousness.	Slowly,	slowly	the
whole	darkness	of	unawareness	will	disappear.
In	the	beginning	you	will	also	find	many	times	that	perhaps	it	is	not	possible
to	be	working	and	to	be	aware	together.	But	I	say	unto	you	that	it	is	not	only
possible,	it	is	very	easily	possible.	Just	begin	in	the	right	way.	Just	don’t	start
from	XYZ;	start	from	ABC.
In	life,	we	go	on	missing	many	things	because	of	wrong	starts.	Everything
should	be	started	from	the	very	beginning.	Our	minds	are	impatient;	we	want	to
do	everything	quickly.	We	want	to	reach	the	highest	point	without	passing
through	every	rung	of	the	ladder.
But	that	means	an	absolute	failure.	And	once	you	fail	in	something	like
awareness—it	is	not	a	small	failure—perhaps	you	will	not	try	it	again,	ever.	The
failure	hurts.
So	anything	that	is	as	valuable	as	awareness—because	it	can	open	all	the
doors	of	the	mysteries	of	existence,	it	can	bring	you	to	the	very	temple	of	God—
you	should	start	very	carefully	and	from	the	very	beginning	and	move	very
slowly.
Just	a	little	patience	and	the	goal	is	not	far	away.
Make	things	as	simple	as	possible
How	can	I	tell	the	difference	between	one	part	of	the	mind	watching	another	part
of	the	mind,	and	the	watcher.	Can	the	watcher	watch	itself?	One	time,	I	thought	I
had	got	it,	and	then	that	same	day	I	heard	you,	“If	you	think	you’ve	got	the
watcher,	you’ve	missed.”	Since	then,	I’ve	tried	watching	feelings	in	the	body,
thoughts	and	emotions.	Mostly,	I’m	just	caught	in	them,	but,	once	in	a	while,
rarely,	I	feel	tremendously	relaxed,	and	nothing	stays—it	just	keeps	moving.	Is
there	anything	else	to	do?
One	has	to	start	watching	the	body	walking,	sitting,	going	to	bed,	eating.
One	should	start	from	the	most	solid	because	it	is	easier.	And	then	one	should
move	to	subtler	experiences.	One	should	start	watching	thoughts.	And	when	one
becomes	an	expert	in	watching	thoughts,	then	one	should	start	watching	feelings.
After	you	feel	that	you	can	watch	your	feelings,	then	you	should	start	watching
your	moods,	which	are	even	more	subtle	than	your	feelings,	and	more	vague.
The	miracle	of	watching	is	that	as	you	are	watching	the	body,	your	watcher
is	becoming	stronger;	as	you	are	watching	the	thoughts,	your	watcher	is
becoming	stronger;	as	you	are	watching	the	feelings,	the	watcher	is	becoming
even	more	strong.	When	you	are	watching	your	moods,	the	watcher	is	so	strong
that	it	can	remain	itself—watching	itself,	just	as	a	candle	in	the	dark	night	not
only	lights	everything	around	it,	it	also	lights	itself.
To	find	the	watcher	in	its	purity	is	the	greatest	achievement	in	spirituality,
because	the	watcher	in	you	is	your	very	soul,	the	watcher	in	you	is	your
immortality.	But	never	for	a	single	moment	think,	“I	have	got	it”,	because	that	is
the	moment	when	you	miss.
Watching	is	an	eternal	process;	you	always	go	on	becoming	deeper	and
deeper,	but	you	never	come	to	the	end	where	you	can	say	“I	have	got	it.”	In	fact,
the	deeper	you	go,	the	more	you	become	aware	that	you	have	entered	into	a
process	which	is	eternal—without	any	beginning	and	without	any	end.
But	people	are	watching	only	others;	they	never	bother	to	watch	themselves.
Everybody	is	watching—that	is	the	most	superficial	watching—what	the	other
person	is	doing,	what	the	other	person	is	wearing,	how	he	looks.	Everybody	is
watching;	watching	is	not	something	new	to	be	introduced	in	your	life.	It	has
only	to	be	deepened,	taken	away	from	others	and	arrowed	towards	your	own
inner	feelings,	thoughts,	moods—and	finally,	the	watcher	itself.
A	Jew	is	sitting	in	a	train	opposite	a	priest.
“Tell	me,	your	worship,	why	do	you	wear	your	collar	back	to	front?”
“Because	I	am	a	father,”	answers	the	priest.
“I	am	also	a	father,	and	I	don’t	wear	my	collar	like	that”,	says	the	Jew.
“Ah,”	says	the	priest,	“but	I	am	a	father	to	thousands.”
“Then	maybe”,	replies	the	Jew,	“it	is	your	trousers	you	should	wear	back	to
front.”
People	are	very	watchful	about	everybody	else.
Two	Polacks	went	out	for	a	walk	when	suddenly	it	began	to	rain.	“Quick,”
said	one	man,	“open	your	umbrella.”
“It	won’t	help,”	said	his	friend,	“my	umbrella	is	full	of	holes.”
“Then	why	did	you	bring	it	in	the	first	place?”
“I	did	not	think	it	would	rain.”
You	can	laugh	very	easily	about	ridiculous	acts	of	people,	but	have	you	ever
laughed	about	yourself?	Have	you	ever	caught	yourself	doing	something
ridiculous?	No,	you	keep	yourself	completely	unwatched;	your	whole	watching
is	about	others,	and	that	is	not	of	any	help.
Use	this	energy	of	watchfulness	for	a	transformation	of	your	being.	It	can
bring	you	so	much	bliss	and	so	much	benediction	that	you	cannot	even	dream
about	it.	A	simple	process,	but	once	you	start	using	it	on	yourself,	it	becomes	a
meditation.
One	can	make	meditations	out	of	anything.	Anything	that	leads	you	to
yourself	is	meditation.	And	it	is	immensely	significant	to	find	your	own
meditation,	because	in	the	very	finding	you	will	find	great	joy.	And	because	it	is
your	own	finding—not	some	ritual	imposed	upon	you—you	will	love	to	go
deeper	into	it.	The	deeper	you	go	into	it,	the	happier	you	will	feel—peaceful,
more	silent,	more	together,	more	dignified,	more	graceful.
You	all	know	watching,	so	there	is	no	question	of	learning	it,	it	is	just	a
question	of	changing	the	objects	of	watching.	Bring	them	closer.	Watch	your
body,	and	you	will	be	surprised.	I	can	move	my	hand	without	watching,	and	I
can	move	my	hand	with	watching.	You	will	not	see	the	difference,	but	I	can	feel
the	difference.	When	I	move	it	with	watchfulness,	there	is	a	grace	and	beauty	in
it,	a	peacefulness,	and	a	silence.	You	can	walk	watching	each	step,	it	will	give
you	all	the	benefit	that	walking	can	give	you	as	an	exercise,	plus	it	will	give	you
the	benefit	of	a	great	simple	meditation.
The	temple	in	Bodhgaya	where	Gautam	Buddha	became	enlightened	has
been	made	in	memory	of	two	things—one	is	a	bodhi	tree	under	which	he	used	to
sit.	Just	by	the	side	of	the	tree	there	are	small	stones	for	a	slow	walk.	He	was
meditating,	sitting,	and	when	he	would	feel	that	sitting	had	been	too	much—a
little	exercise	was	needed	for	the	body—he	would	walk	on	those	stones.	That
was	his	walking	meditation.
When	I	was	in	Bodhgaya,	having	a	meditation	camp	there,	I	went	to	the
temple.	I	saw	Buddhist	lamas	from	Tibet,	from	Japan,	from	China.	They	were	all
paying	their	respect	to	the	tree,	and	I	saw	not	a	single	one	paying	his	respect	to
those	stones	on	which	Buddha	had	walked	miles	and	miles.	I	told	them,	“This	is
not	right.	You	should	not	forget	those	stones.	They	have	been	touched	by
Gautam	Buddha’s	feet	millions	of	times.	But	I	know	why	you	are	not	paying	any
attention	to	them,	because	you	have	forgotten	completely	that	Buddha	was
emphasizing	that	you	should	watch	every	act	of	your	body:	walking,	sitting,
lying	down.”
You	should	not	let	a	single	moment	go	by	unconsciously.	Watchfulness	will
sharpen	your	consciousness.	This	is	the	essential	religion—all	else	is	simply
talk.	But	you	ask	me,	“Is	there	something	more?”	No,	if	you	can	do	only
watchfulness,	nothing	else	is	needed.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	religion	as	simple	as	possible.	All	the	religions
have	done	just	the	opposite:	they	have	made	things	very	complex—so	complex
that	people	have	never	tried	them.	For	example,	in	the	Buddhist	scriptures	there
are	thirty-three	thousand	principles	to	be	followed	by	a	Buddhist	monk;	even	to
remember	them	is	impossible.	Just	the	very	number	thirty-three	thousand	is
enough	to	freak	you	out:	“I	am	finished!	My	whole	life	will	be	disturbed	and
destroyed.”	I	teach	you:	just	find	a	single	principle	that	suits	you,	that	feels	in
tune	with	you—and	that	is	enough.
Witnessing	is	like	sowing	seeds
How	does	watching	lead	to	no-mind?I	am	more	and	more	able	to	watch	my	body,
my	thoughts	and	feelings	and	this	feels	beautiful.	But	moments	of	no	thoughts
are	few	and	far	between.	When	I	hear	you	saying	“Meditation	is	witnessing,”	I
feel	I	understand.	But	when	you	talk	about	‘no-mind,’	it	doesn’t	sound	easy	at
all.	Would	you	please	comment?
Meditation	covers	a	very	long	pilgrimage.	When	I	say	“Meditation	is
witnessing,”	it	is	the	beginning	of	meditation.	And	when	I	say	“Meditation	is	no-
mind”,	it	is	the	completion	of	the	pilgrimage.	Witnessing	is	the	beginning,	and
no-mind	is	the	fulfillment.	Witnessing	is	the	method	to	reach	to	no-mind.
Naturally	you	will	feel	witnessing	easier.	It	is	close	to	you.	But	witnessing	is
only	like	seeds	and	then	is	the	long	waiting	period—not	only	waiting,	but
trusting	that	this	seed	is	going	to	sprout,	that	it	is	going	to	become	a	bush,	that
one	day	the	spring	will	come	and	the	bush	will	have	flowers.	No-mind	is	the	last
stage	of	flowering.
Sowing	the	seeds	is	of	course	very	easy.	It	is	within	your	hands.	But	bringing
the	flowers	is	beyond	you.	You	can	prepare	the	whole	ground,	but	the	flowers
will	come	on	their	own	accord.	You	cannot	manage	to	force	them	to	come.	The
spring	is	beyond	your	reach.	But	if	your	preparation	is	perfect,	spring	comes.
That	is	absolutely	guaranteed.
The	way	you	are	moving	is	perfectly	good.	Witnessing	is	the	path	and	you
are	starting	to	feel	a	thoughtless	moment	once	in	a	while.	These	are	glimpses	of
no-mind,	but	just	for	a	moment.
Remember	one	fundamental	law:	that	which	can	exist	just	for	a	moment	can
also	become	eternal,	because	you	are	given	always	one	moment—not	two
moments	together.	And	if	you	can	transform	one	moment	into	a	thoughtless
state,	you	are	learning	the	secret.	Then	there	is	no	hindrance	why	you	cannot
change.	The	second	moment	will	also	come	alone	with	the	same	potential	and
the	same	capacity.
If	you	know	the	secret,	you	have	the	master	key	which	can	open	every
moment	into	a	glimpse	of	no-mind.	No-mind	is	the	final	stage,	when	mind
disappears	forever,	and	the	thoughtless	gap	becomes	your	intrinsic	reality.	If
these	few	glimpses	are	coming,	they	show	you	are	on	the	right	path	and	you	are
using	the	right	method.	But	don’t	be	impatient.	Existence	needs	immense
patience.	The	ultimate	mysteries	are	opened	only	to	those	who	have	immense
patience.
Once	a	man	is	in	a	state	of	no-mind,	nothing	can	distract	him	from	his	being.
There	is	no	power	bigger	than	the	power	of	no-mind.	No	harm	can	be	done	to
such	a	person.	No	attachment,	no	greed,	no	jealousy,	no	anger,	nothing	can	arise
in	him.	No-mind	is	absolutely	a	pure	sky	without	any	clouds.
You	say,	“How	does	watching	lead	to	no-mind?”	There	is	an	intrinsic	law:
thoughts	don’t	have	their	own	life.	They	are	parasites.	They	live	on	your
identification	with	them.	When	you	say,	“I	am	angry”,	you	are	pouring	life
energy	into	anger,	because	you	are	getting	identified	with	anger.
But	when	you	say,	“I	am	watching	anger	flashing	on	the	screen	of	the	mind
within	me”,	you	are	not	giving	any	life,	any	juice,	any	energy	to	anger	any	more.
You	will	be	able	to	see	that	because	you	are	not	identified.	The	anger	is
absolutely	impotent,	has	no	impact	on	you,	does	not	change	you,	does	not	affect
you.	It	is	absolutely	hollow	and	dead.	It	will	pass	on	and	it	will	leave	the	sky
clean	and	the	screen	of	the	mind	empty.
Slowly,	slowly,	you	start	getting	out	of	your	thoughts.	That’s	the	whole
process	of	witnessing	and	watching.	In	other	words,	George	Gurdjieff	used	to
call	it	‘non-identification.’	You	are	no	longer	identifying	with	your	thoughts.	You
are	simply	standing	aloof	and	away—indifferent,	as	if	they	may	be	anybody’s
thought.	You	have	broken	your	connections	with	them.	Only	then	can	you	watch
them.
Watching	needs	a	certain	distance.	If	you	are	identified,	there	is	no	distance,
they	are	too	close.	It	is	as	if	you	are	putting	the	mirrors	too	close	to	your	eyes—
you	cannot	see	your	face.	A	certain	distance	is	needed,	only	then	can	you	see
your	face	in	the	mirror.	If	thoughts	are	too	close	to	you,	you	cannot	watch,	you
become	impressed	and	colored	by	your	thoughts.	Anger	makes	you	angry,	greed
makes	you	greedy,	lust	makes	you	lustful,	because	there	is	no	distance	at	all.
They	are	so	close	that	you	are	bound	to	think	that	you	and	your	thoughts	are	one.
Watching	destroys	this	oneness	and	creates	a	separation.	The	more	you
watch,	the	bigger	is	the	distance;	the	bigger	the	distance,	the	less	energy	your
thoughts	are	getting	from	you	and	they	don’t	have	any	other	source.	Soon	they
start	dying,	disappearing.	In	these	disappearing	moments	you	will	have	the	first
glimpses	of	no-mind—as	you	are	experiencing.	You	say,	“I	am	more	and	more
able	to	watch	my	body,	my	thoughts	and	feelings.	And	this	feels	beautiful.”	This
is	only	just	the	beginning.	Even	the	beginning	is	immensely	beautiful.	Just	to	be
on	the	right	path,	even	without	taking	a	single	step,	will	give	you	immense	joy
for	no	reason	at	all.
And	once	you	start	moving	on	the	right	path,	your	blissfulness,	your
beautiful	experiences	are	going	to	become	more	and	more	deep,	more	and	more
wide	with	new	nuances,	with	new	flowers,	with	new	fragrances.
You	say,	“But	moments	of	no-thoughts	are	few	and	far	between.”	It	is	a	great
achievement,	because	people	don’t	know	even	a	single	gap.	Their	thoughts	are
always	in	a	rush	hour.	Thoughts	upon	thoughts,	bumper	to	bumper.	The	line
continues—whether	you	are	awake	or	asleep.	What	you	call	your	dreams	are
nothing	but	thoughts	in	the	form	of	pictures,	because	the	unconscious	mind	does
not	know	alphabetical	languages.
What	you	are	feeling	is	a	great	indication	that	you	are	on	the	right	path.	It	is
always	a	question	for	the	seeker	whether	he	is	moving	in	the	right	direction	or
not.	There	is	no	security,	no	insurance,	no	guarantee.	All	the	dimensions	are
open;	how	are	you	going	to	choose	the	right	one?
These	are	the	ways	and	the	criterion	of	how	one	has	to	choose.	If	you	move
on	any	path,	any	methodology,	and	it	brings	joy	to	you,	more	sensitivity,	more
watchfulness	and	gives	a	feeling	of	immense	well-being,	this	is	the	only	criterion
that	you	are	going	on	the	right	path.	If	you	become	more	miserable,	more	angry,
more	egoist,	more	greedy,	more	lustful,	those	are	the	indications	you	are	moving
on	a	wrong	path.
On	the	right	path	your	blissfulness	is	going	to	grow	more	and	more	every
day.	And	your	experiences	of	beautiful	feelings	will	become	tremendously
psychedelic,	more	colorful,	colors	that	you	have	never	seen	in	the	world,
fragrances	that	you	have	never	experienced	in	the	world.	Then	you	can	walk	on
the	path	without	any	fear	that	you	can	go	wrong.
These	inner	experiences	will	keep	you	always	on	the	right	path.	Just
remember	that	they	are	growing.	That	means	you	are	moving.	Now	you	have
only	a	few	moments	of	thoughtlessness.	It	is	not	a	simple	attainment,	it	is	a	great
achievement	because	people	in	their	whole	life	know	not	even	a	single	moment
when	there	is	no	thought.	These	gaps	will	grow.	As	you	will	become	more	and
more	centered,	more	and	more	watchful,	these	gaps	will	start	growing	bigger	and
the	day	is	not	far	if	you	go	on	moving	without	looking	back,	without	going
astray.	If	you	keep	going	straight,	the	day	is	not	far	away,	when	you	will	feel	for
the	first	time	that	the	gaps	have	become	so	big	that	hours	pass	and	not	even	a
single	thought	arises.	Now	you	are	having	bigger	experiences	of	no-mind.
The	ultimate	achievement	is	when	you	are	surrounded	with	no-mind	for
twenty-four	hours.	That	does	not	mean	that	you	cannot	use	your	mind.	That	is	a
fallacy	propounded	by	those	who	know	nothing	about	no-mind.
No-mind	does	not	mean	that	you	cannot	use	the	mind.	It	simply	means	that
the	mind	cannot	use	you.	No-mind	does	not	mean	that	the	mind	is	destroyed.
No-mind	simply	means	that	the	mind	is	put	aside.	You	can	bring	it	into	action
any	moment	you	need	to	communicate	with	the	world,	then	it	will	be	your
servant.	Right	now,	it	is	your	master.	Even	when	you	are	sitting	alone,	it	goes	on:
yakkety-yak,	yakkety-yak,	and	you	cannot	do	anything.	You	are	so	utterly
helpless.	No-mind	simply	means	that	the	mind	has	been	put	in	its	right	place.	As
a	servant,	it	is	a	great	instrument.	As	a	master,	it	is	very	unfortunate.	It	is
dangerous.	It	will	destroy	your	whole	life.
Mind	is	only	a	medium	when	you	want	to	communicate	with	others.	But
when	you	are	alone,	there	is	no	need	of	the	mind.	So	whenever	you	want	to	use
it,	you	can	use	it.	And	remember	one	thing	more:	when	the	mind	remains	silent
for	hours,	it	becomes	fresh,	young,	more	creative,	more	sensitive,	rejuvenated
through	rest.
Ordinary	people’s	minds	start	somewhere	around	three	or	four	years	of	age
and	then	they	go	on	continuing	for	seventy	years,	eighty	years	without	any
holiday.	Naturally	they	can	not	be	very	creative.	They	are	utterly	tired,	and	tired
with	rubbish.	Millions	of	people	in	the	world	live	without	any	creativity.	And
creativity	is	one	of	the	greatest	blissful	experiences.	But	their	minds	are	so	tired.
They	are	not	in	a	state	of	overflowing	energy.
The	man	of	no-mind	keeps	the	mind	in	rest,	full	of	energy,	immensely
sensitive,	ready	to	jump	into	action	the	moment	it	is	ordered.	It	is	not	a
coincidence	that	the	people	who	have	experienced	no-mind	…their	words	start
having	a	magic	of	their	own.	When	they	use	their	mind,	it	has	a	charisma,	it	has
a	magnetic	force.	It	has	tremendous	spontaneity	and	the	freshness	of	the
dewdrops	in	the	early	morning	before	the	sun	rises.	And	the	mind	is	nature’s
greatest	evolved	medium	of	expression	and	creativity.
So	the	man	of	meditation,	or	in	other	words,	the	man	of	no-mind,	changes
even	his	prose	into	poetry.	Without	any	effort—his	words	become	so	full	of
authority	that	they	don’t	need	any	arguments,	they	become	their	own	arguments.
The	force	that	they	carry	becomes	a	self-evident	truth.	There	is	no	need	for	any
other	support	from	logic	or	from	scriptures.	The	words	of	a	man	of	no-mind
have	an	intrinsic	certainty	about	them.	And	if	you	are	ready	to	receive	and	listen,
you	will	feel	it	in	your	heart:	the	self-evident	truth.
You	say,	“When	I	hear	you	say	‘meditation	is	witnessing’,	I	feel	I
understand.	But	when	you	talk	about	no-mind,	it	doesn’t	sound	easy	at	all.”	How
can	it	sound	easy?	It	is	your	future	possibility.	Meditation	you	have	started,	it
may	be	in	the	beginning	stages,	but	you	have	a	certain	experience	of	it	that
makes	you	understand	me.	But	if	you	can	understand	meditation,	don’t	be
worried	at	all.	Meditation	surely	leads	to	no-mind,	just	as	every	river	moves
towards	the	ocean	without	any	maps,	without	any	guides.
Every	river,	without	exception,	finally	reaches	to	the	ocean.	Every
meditation,	without	exception,	finally	reaches	to	the	state	of	no-mind.
But	naturally	when	the	Ganges	is	in	the	Himalayas	wandering	in	the
mountains	and	in	the	valleys,	it	has	no	idea	what	the	ocean	is,	cannot	conceive
the	existence	of	ocean,	but	it	is	moving	towards	the	ocean	because	water	has	the
intrinsic	capacity	of	always	finding	the	lowest	place,	and	the	oceans	are	the
lowest	place.	So	the	rivers	are	born	on	the	peaks	of	the	Himalayas	and	start
moving	immediately	towards	lower	spaces	and	finally	they	are	bound	to	find	the
ocean.
Just	the	reverse	is	the	process	of	meditation—it	moves	upwards	to	higher
peaks.	And	the	ultimate	peak	is	no-mind.	No-mind	is	a	simple	word,	but	it
exactly	means	enlightenment,	liberation,	freedom	from	all	bondage,	the
experience	of	deathlessness	and	immortality.
Those	are	big	words	and	I	don’t	want	you	to	be	frightened.	So	I	use	a	simple
word:	no-mind.	You	know	the	mind.	You	can	conceive	a	state	when	this	mind
will	be	non-functioning.	Once	this	mind	is	non-functioning,	you	become	part	of
the	mind	of	the	cosmos,	the	universal	mind.	When	you	are	part	of	the	universal
mind	your	individual	mind	functions	as	a	beautiful	servant.	It	has	recognized	the
master.	And	it	brings	news	from	the	universal	mind	to	those	who	are	still
chained	by	the	individual	mind.
When	I	am	speaking	to	you,	it	is	in	fact	the	universe	using	me.	My	words	are
not	my	words.	They	belong	to	the	universal	truth.	That	is	their	power,	that	is
their	charisma,	that	is	their	magic.
Witnessing	is	enough
I	have	always	heard	You	say,	“Stop	doing.	Watch.”	Several	times	lately	I’ve
heard	You	say	that	the	mind	should	be	the	servant	instead	of	our	master.	It	feels
that	there	is	nothing	to	do	except	watch.	But	the	question	still	arises:	Is	there
anything	to	do	with	this	unruly	servant	but	to	watch?
There	is	nothing	else	to	do	with	this	unruly	servant,	but	just	to	watch.
Apparently	it	appears	too	simple	a	solution	for	too	complex	a	problem.	But	this
is	part	of	the	mysteries	of	existence.	The	problem	may	be	too	complex,	the
solution	can	be	very	simple.
Watching,	witnessing,	being	aware	seem	to	be	small	words	to	solve	the
whole	complexity	of	mind.	Millions	of	years	of	heritage,	tradition,	conditioning,
prejudice,	how	will	they	disappear	just	by	watching?	But	they	disappear.
As	Gautam	Buddha	used	to	say,	if	the	lights	of	the	house	are	on,	thieves
don’t	come	close	to	that	house—knowing	that	the	master	is	awake	because	the
light	is	shown	from	the	windows,	from	the	doors,	you	can	see	that	the	light	is	on.
It	is	not	the	time	to	enter	into	the	house.	When	the	lights	are	off,	thieves	are
attracted	to	the	house.	Darkness	becomes	an	invitation.	As	Gautam	Buddha	used
to	say,	the	same	is	the	situation	about	your	thoughts,	imaginations,	dreams,
anxieties,	your	whole	mind.
If	the	witness	is	there,	the	witness	is	almost	like	the	light.	These	thieves	start
dispersing.	And	if	these	thieves	find	there	is	no	witness,	they	start	calling	their
brothers,	and	cousins	and	everybody	saying,	“Come	on.”	It	is	as	simple	a
phenomenon	as	the	light.	The	moment	you	bring	the	light	in,	the	darkness
disappears.	You	don’t	ask,	“Is	just	light	enough	for	darkness	to	disappear?”	Or,
“When	we	have	brought	the	light,	will	we	have	to	do	something	more	for	the
darkness	to	disappear?”
No,	just	the	presence	of	the	light	is	the	absence	of	the	darkness	and	the
absence	of	the	light	is	the	presence	of	darkness.	The	presence	of	the	witness	is
the	absence	of	the	mind	and	the	absence	of	the	witness	is	the	presence	of	the
mind.
So	the	moment	you	start	watching,	slowly,	slowly	as	your	watcher	becomes
stronger,	your	mind	will	become	weaker.	The	moment	it	realizes	that	the	watcher
has	come	to	maturity,	the	mind	immediately	submits	as	a	beautiful	servant.	It	is	a
mechanism.	If	the	master	has	arrived,	then	the	machine	can	be	used.
If	the	master	is	not	there	or	is	fast	asleep,	then	the	machine	goes	on	working
things,	whatsoever	it	can	do	on	its	own.	There	is	nobody	to	give	orders,	there	is
nobody	to	say:	“No,	stop.	That	thing	has	not	to	be	done.”	Then	the	mind	is
slowly	convinced	that	it	itself	is	the	master,	and	for	thousands	of	years	it	has
remained	your	master.
So	when	you	try	to	be	a	witness,	it	fights,	because	it	is	a	question	of	survival
of	the	mind.	It	has	completely	forgotten	that	it	is	only	a	servant.	You	have	been
so	long	absent—it	does	not	recognize	you.	Hence	the	struggle	between	the
witness	and	the	thoughts.	But	final	victory	is	going	to	be	yours,	because	nature
and	existence	both	want	you	to	be	the	master	and	the	mind	to	be	the	servant.
Then	things	are	in	harmony.	Then	the	mind	cannot	go	wrong.	Then	everything	is
existentially	relaxed,	silent,	flowing	towards	its	destiny.
You	don’t	have	to	do	anything	else	but	to	watch.
Paddy	bought	a	parrot	at	an	auction.	He	asked	the	auctioneer:	“I	have	spent	a
great	deal	of	money	for	this	parrot—are	you	sure	he	can	talk?”
The	auctioneer	replied,	“Of	course	I	am	sure;	he	was	bidding	against	you.”
Such	is	the	unawareness	of	the	mind	and	such	are	the	stupidities	of	the	mind.
I	have	heard	that	the	Irish	atheists—seeing	that	the	theists	have	started	a	dial-a-
prayer	service—also	started	one	although	they	are	atheists.	The	competitive
mind…they	have	also	started	a	dial-a-prayer	service.	When	you	phone	them	up,
nobody	answers.
Two	tramps	were	sitting	by	a	campfire	one	night.	One	of	them	was	very
depressed.	“You	know	Jim,”	he	mused,	“the	life	of	a	tramp	is	not	as	great	as	it	is
made	out	to	be.	Nights	on	park	benches,	or	in	a	cold	barn.	Traveling	on	foot	and
always	dodging	the	police.	Being	kicked	from	one	town	to	another.	Wondering
where	your	next	meal	is	coming	from;	being	sneered	at	by	your	fellow	man….”
His	voice	trailed	off	and	he	sighed	heavily.
“Well,”	said	the	other	tramp,	“if	that	is	how	you	feel	about	it,	why	don’t	you
go	and	find	yourself	a	job?”
“What!”	said	the	first	tramp	in	amazement,	“and	admit	that	I’m	a	failure?”
Mind	has	become	accustomed	to	being	a	master.	It	will	take	a	little	time	to
bring	it	to	its	senses.	Witnessing	is	enough.	It	is	a	very	silent	process,	but	the
consequences	are	tremendously	great.	There	is	no	other	method	which	can	be
better	than	witnessing	as	far	as	dispersing	the	darkness	of	the	mind	is	concerned.
About	the	Author
The	Osho	teachings	defy	categorization,	covering	everything	from	the
individual	quest	for	meaning	to	the	most	urgent	social	and	political	issues	facing
society	today.	His	books	are	not	written	but	are	transcribed	from	audio	and	video
recordings	of	extemporaneous	talks	given	to	international	audiences	over	a
period	of	35	years.	Osho	has	been	described	by	the	Sunday	Times	in	London	as
one	of	the	“1000	Makers	of	the	20th	Century”	and	by	American	author	Tom
Robbins	as	“the	most	dangerous	man	since	Jesus	Christ.”
About	his	own	work	Osho	has	said	that	he	is	helping	to	create	the	conditions
for	the	birth	of	a	new	kind	of	human	being.	He	has	often	characterized	this	new
human	being	as	“Zorba	the	Buddha”—capable	both	of	enjoying	the	earthy
pleasures	of	a	Zorba	the	Greek	and	the	silent	serenity	of	a	Gautam	Buddha.
Running	like	a	thread	through	all	aspects	of	Osho’s	work	is	a	vision	that
encompasses	both	the	timeless	wisdom	of	the	East	and	the	highest	potential	of
Western	science	and	technology.
Osho	is	also	known	for	his	revolutionary	contribution	to	the	science	of	inner
transformation,	with	an	approach	to	meditation	that	acknowledges	the
accelerated	pace	of	contemporary	life.	His	unique	“Active	Meditations”	are
designed	to	first	release	the	accumulated	stresses	of	body	and	mind,	so	that	it	is
easier	to	experience	the	thought-free	and	relaxed	state	of	meditation.
Osho	International	Meditation	Resort
The	Osho	International	Meditation	Resort	is	a	great	place	for	holidays	and	a
place	where	people	can	have	a	direct	personal	experience	of	a	new	way	of	living
with	more	alertness,	relaxation,	and	fun.	Located	about	100	miles	southeast	of
Mumbai	in	Pune,	India,	the	resort	offers	a	variety	of	programs	to	thousands	of
people	who	visit	each	year	from	more	than	100	countries	around	the	world.
Originally	developed	as	a	summer	retreat	for	Maharajas	and	wealthy	British
colonialists,	Pune	is	now	a	thriving	modern	city	that	is	home	to	a	number	of
universities	and	high-tech	industries.	The	Meditation	Resort	spreads	over	40
acres	in	a	tree-lined	suburb	known	as	Koregaon	Park.	The	resort	campus
provides	accommodation	for	a	limited	number	of	guests,	in	a	new	‘Guesthouse’
and	there	is	a	plentiful	variety	of	nearby	hotels	and	private	apartments	available
for	stays	of	a	few	days	up	to	several	months.
Resort	programs	are	all	based	in	the	Osho	vision	of	a	qualitatively	new	kind
of	human	being	who	is	able	both	to	participate	creatively	in	everyday	life	and	to
relax	into	silence	and	meditation.	Most	programs	take	place	in	modern,	air-
conditioned	facilities	and	include	a	variety	of	individual	sessions,	courses	and
workshops	covering	everything	from	creative	arts	to	holistic	health	treatments,
personal	transformation	and	therapy,	esoteric	sciences,	the	“Zen”	approach	to
sports	and	recreation,	relationship	issues,	and	significant	life	transitions	for	men
and	women.	Individual	sessions	and	group	workshops	are	offered	throughout	the
year,	alongside	a	full	daily	schedule	of	meditations.	Outdoor	cafes	and
restaurants	within	the	resort	grounds	serve	both	traditional	Indian	fare	and	a
choice	of	international	dishes,	all	made	with	organically	grown	vegetables	from
the	resort’s	own	farm.	The	campus	has	its	own	private	supply	of	safe,	filtered
water.	www.osho.com/resort.
For	more	information	visit	www.osho.com
a	comprehensive	web	site	in	several	languages	that	includes	information	about
the	Osho	International	Meditation	Resort	including	a	calendar	of	program
offerings,	contact	email	addresses,	and	information	on	travel	and	lodging.	You
will	also	find	a	catalog	of	Osho	books	and	meditation	music,	and	more
information	about	the	Osho	Active	Meditations	including	video	instructions.
Appendix:	OSHO	Active	Meditations	Music
Music	has	been	composed,	under	Osho’s	direction,	to	support	each	of	the	active
meditations	described	in	this	book.	The	music	signals	the	beginning	of	each	new
stage	of	the	different	meditations.	CDs	of	this	music	are	available	in	the	trade
and/or	from	many	on-line	web	shops.	You	can	find	details	at
www.osho.com/shop	or	the	publisher	website,	www.newearthrecords.com.
The	CDs	also	include	instructional	mpeg	videos.
OSHO	DYNAMIC	MEDITATION
An	energizing	morning	meditation	that	opens	breathing,	body,	and	inner
energies,	followed	by	witnessing	and	dancing.
OSHO	KUNDALINI	MEDITATION
A	popular	evening	meditation	practice.	Includes	loosening	the	body,	dancing,
witnessing	and	resting	stages.
OSHO	NATARAJ	MEDITATION
A	liberating	meditation	with	relaxation	and	celebration	stages	for	freeing	the
spirit.	Nataraj	is	dance	as	total	meditation.
OSHO	NADABRAHMA	MEDITATION
A	meditation	based	on	ancient	Tibetan	techniques	offers	humming	and
witnessing	stages	and	flowing	circular	hand	movements	and	a	period	of	stillness
center	your	energy.
OSHO	GOURISHANKAR	MEDITATION
This	four-part	meditation	includes	a	breathing	technique,	witnessing,	a	letting-go
stage,	and	a	final	resting	stage,	leading	one	toward	a	state	of	openness	and	peace.
OSHO	WHIRLING	MEDITATION
Drawing	upon	an	ancient	Sufi	technique,	this	active	meditation	practice	uses
whirling	and	witnessing.	While	the	whole	body	is	moving,	the	center	remains
silent	and	still.
OSHO	CHAKRA	BREATHING	MEDITATION
This	meditation	opens	and	empowers	the	self	by	leading	one	in	a	breathing
practice	through	the	seven	chakras,	followed	by	a	witnessing	stage.
OSHO	NO	DIMENSIONS	MEDITATION
A	patterned	centering	dance	grows	in	intensity	and	is	followed	by	whirling	and
rest.	This	practice	is	based	on	Gurdjieffian	movements	and	the	whirling
movements	of	the	dervishes.
OSHO	CHAKRA	SOUNDS	MEDITATION
By	vocalizing	in	attunement	with	the	seven	chakras,	followed	by	a	witnessing
stage,	the	practice	leads	to	balance	and	harmonization	of	the	seats	of	inner
strength.
OSHO	MANDALA	MEDITATION
With	the	body	as	its	own	mandala,	this	practice	brings	one	to	the	center	by
creating	a	circle	of	energy.	Included	are	a	breathing	stage,	a	centering	circle
stage,	a	third	eye	circle	stage,	and	a	witnessing	stage.
OSHO	REMINDING	YOURSELF	OF	THE	FORGOTTEN
LANGUAGE	OF	TALKING	TO	YOUR	BODYMIND
A	CD	with	music	and	the	guided	meditation	process,	“Reminding	Yourself	of	the
Forgotten	Language	of	Talking	to	Your	BodyMind”	has	been	published	in	many
languages	as	part	of	a	book	titled	BODY	MIND	BALANCING.	The	English
edition	is	published	St.	Martin’s	Press	and	available	in	most	bookshops.	More
information	at	www.osho.com/shop
			For	more	information:
www.osho.com
This	comprehensive	multi-language	website	includes	a	magazine,	OSHO	Books,
OSHO	talks	in	audio	and	video	formats,	the	OSHO	Library	text	archive	in
English	and	Hindi	and	extensive	information	about	OSHO	Meditations.	You	will
also	find	the	program	schedule	of	classes	and	workshops	offered	by	the	OSHO
Multiversity,	and	information	about	the	OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort.
To	contact	OSHO	International	Foundation	go	to:
www.osho.com/oshointernational
About	the	Author
Osho’s	teachings	defy	categorization,	covering	everything	from	the
individual	quest	for	meaning	to	the	most	urgent	social	and	political	issues	facing
society	today.	His	books	are	not	written	but	are	transcribed	from	audio	and	video
recordings	of	extemporaneous	talks	given	to	international	audiences	over	a
period	of	35	years.	Osho	has	been	described	by	the	Sunday	Times	in	London	as
one	of	the	“1000	Makers	of	the	20th	Century”	and	by	American	author	Tom
Robbins	as	“the	most	dangerous	man	since	Jesus	Christ.”
About	his	own	work	Osho	has	said	that	he	is	helping	to	create	the	conditions
for	the	birth	of	a	new	kind	of	human	being.	He	has	often	characterized	this	new
human	being	as	“Zorba	the	Buddha”—capable	both	of	enjoying	the	earthy
pleasures	of	a	Zorba	the	Greek	and	the	silent	serenity	of	a	Gautam	Buddha.
Running	like	a	thread	through	all	aspects	of	Osho’s	work	is	a	vision	that
encompasses	both	the	timeless	wisdom	of	the	East	and	the	highest	potential	of
Western	science	and	technology.
Osho	is	also	known	for	his	revolutionary	contribution	to	the	science	of	inner
transformation,	with	an	approach	to	meditation	that	acknowledges	the
accelerated	pace	of	contemporary	life.	His	unique	“Active	Meditations”	are
designed	to	first	release	the	accumulated	stresses	of	body	and	mind,	so	that	it	is
easier	to	experience	the	thought-free	and	relaxed	state	of	meditation.
Two	autobiographical	works	by	the	author	are	available:
Autobiography	of	a	Spiritually	Incorrect	Mystic	(St.	Martin’s	Press,	New
York)
Glimpses	of	a	Golden	Childhood	(Rebel	Publishing	House,	India)
OSHO	INTERNATIONAL	MEDITATION	RESORT
The	OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort	is	a	great	place	for	holidays	and	a
place	where	people	can	have	a	direct	personal	experience	of	a	new	way	of	living
with	more	alertness,	relaxation,	and	fun.	Located	about	100	miles	southeast	of
Mumbai	in	Pune,	India,	the	resort	offers	a	variety	of	programs	to	thousands	of
people	who	visit	each	year	from	more	than	100	countries	around	the	world.
Originally	developed	as	a	summer	retreat	for	Maharajas	and	wealthy	British
colonialists,	Pune	is	now	a	thriving	modern	city	that	is	home	to	a	number	of
universities	and	high-tech	industries.	The	Meditation	Resort	spreads	over	40
acres	in	a	tree-lined	suburb	known	as	Koregaon	Park.	The	resort	campus
provides	accommodation	for	a	limited	number	of	guests,	in	a	new	‘Guesthouse’
and	there	is	a	plentiful	variety	of	nearby	hotels	and	private	apartments	available
for	stays	of	a	few	days	up	to	several	months.
Meditation	Resort	programs	are	all	based	in	the	Osho	vision	of	a
qualitatively	new	kind	of	human	being	who	is	able	both	to	participate	creatively
in	everyday	life	and	to	relax	into	silence	and	meditation.	Most	programs	take
place	in	modern,	air-conditioned	facilities	and	include	a	variety	of	individual
sessions,	courses	and	workshops	covering	everything	from	creative	arts	to
holistic	health	treatments,	personal	transformation	and	therapy,	esoteric	sciences,
the	“Zen”	approach	to	sports	and	recreation,	relationship	issues,	and	significant
life	transitions	for	men	and	women.	Individual	sessions	and	group	workshops	are
offered	throughout	the	year,	alongside	a	full	daily	schedule	of	meditations.
Outdoor	cafes	and	restaurants	within	the	resort	grounds	serve	both	traditional
Indian	fare	and	a	choice	of	international	dishes,	all	made	with	organically	grown
vegetables	from	the	resort’s	own	farm.	The	campus	has	its	own	private	supply	of
safe,	filtered	water.
See:	www.osho.com/resort
