1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Nirvana	now	or	never
Talks	given	from	1/2/81	to	21/2/81
Darshan	Diary
28	Chapters
Year	published:
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002025
ShortTitle:	NEVER02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
[Note:	 There	 is	 no	 transcript	 for	 February	 1st;	 probably	 no	 darshan	 that
evening.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Swami	 Anand	 Peter.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Peter	 literally	 means	 a	 rock,	 but
symbolically	it	means	eternity.
The	rock	represents	the	unchanging	element.	Ordinarily	everything	is	changing,
constantly	--	even	rocks	are	changing.	So	it	is	only	a	metaphor,	but	it	has	great
significance.
Man	 can	 live	 either	 in	 time	 or	 in	 eternity.	 Both	 alternatives	 are	 open	 because
there	is	nothing	like	destiny,	nothing	like	fate.	Man	is	freedom:	he	comes	without
a	fate.	The	future	is	open,	always	open;	it	is	not	determined	when	you	are	born	--
each	act	determines	it.	In	each	act	is	your	choice,	and	each	step	you	can	change
the	very	direction	of	your	life.
Millions	 of	 people	 live	 in	 time,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 are	 born	 in	 a
crowd	which	knows	nothing	of	eternity.	Their	parents	have	 lived	 in	 time,	 their
teachers	have	 lived	 in	 time,	 their	 leaders	have	 lived	 in	 time,	 the	whole	society
around	 them	 lives	 in	 time,	 between	 birth	 and	 death;	 hence	 every	 child	 starts
imitating.	 That's	 the	 way	 the	 child	 learns,	 but	 that's	 also	 how	 he	 becomes
conditioned.
It	 is	 rare	 phenomenon	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 rut	 of	 time,	 only	 a	 few	 people	 have
managed	up	to	now.	Not	even	all	the	names	which	are	thought	to	have	escaped,
not	all	the	so-called	saints	and	mahatmas	and	sages,	not	more	than	one	per	cent
of	 your	 so-called	 saints,	 have	 been	 able	 to	 escape	 from	 the	 prison	 of	 time.
Although	 it	 creates	much	misery	 its	walls	 are	 very	 invisible;	 hence	 there	 is	 a
desire	and	 longing	 to	get	 ride	of	 the	misery,	but	you	need	great	 intelligence	 to
see	that	the	misery	is	bound	to	be	there	if	you	choose	time	as	your	lifestyle.	Time
means	change	--	and	when	everything	is	changing	you	cannot	cling	to	anything,
you	don't	have	any	support,	no	security.	There	is	no	earth	underneath	your	feet,
you	are	on	shifting	sands;	hence	one	feels	afraid,	worried,	anxious,	and	all	 this
becomes	the	root	cause	of	one's	misery,	despair,	hopelessness.
But	there	is	a	way,	and	the	way	is	not	to	fight	with	misery,	the	way	is	to	get	out
of	 the	 wheel	 of	 time.	 In	 a	 way	 it	 is	 very	 simple,	 but	 sometimes	 the	 simplest
thing,	 the	very	obvious	 thing,	 is	missed	because	 it	 is	 too	obvious	and	our	eyes
are	searching	for	something	great,	something	far	away	--	and	it	is	very	close	by!
Everybody	has	been	 told	 that	 time	consists	of	 three	 tenses	 --	past,	present	 and
future	--	and	that	is	absolutely	wrong;	time	consists	only	of	past	and	future.	The
present	 is	 a	 penetration	 of	 eternity,	 the	 present	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 time;	 it	 is
transcendental.	To	live	in	the	present	is	to	get	out	of	time,	to	be	herenow,	totally
herenow,	is	to	be	out	of	the	wheel.	And	the	miracle	is	that	the	moment	you	are
out	of	time	you	are	out	of	misery.	Misery	is	a	by-product	of	time	and	bliss	is	a
by-product	of	eternity,	of	timelessness.
And	 one	 can	 decide	 to	 move	 into	 eternity	 any	 moment,	 because	 it	 is	 always
there.	In	fact	the	past	is	never	there	but	we	cling	to	it,	the	future	is	never	there,
but	 we	 cling	 to	 it;	 we	 cling	 to	 non-entities.	 And	 because	 both	 our	 hands	 are
clinging	 to	 non-entities	 we	 miss	 exactly	 what	 is	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 both:	 the
present,	the	real,	the	existential.	And	both	our	hands	are	full:	one	hand	is	full	of
the	past,	 the	other	is	full	of	the	future.	A	part	of	our	being	is	full	of	memories,
another	part	 is	 full	 of	 fantasies,	 dreams,	projections;	 and	between	 these	 two	 is
the	 very	 subtle	 and	 delicate	 moment.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 rose	 flower	 --	 crushed,
missed.
Meditation	simply	means	not	to	miss	it,	to	get	in	tune	with	it.
Slowly,	slowly	empty	your	hands	of	the	past	and	the	future	so	you	can	be	full	of
the	now	 --	 and	 that	 is	 transformation.	 It	brings	 immense	bliss,	 infinite	bliss.	 It
opens	the	doors	of	the	divine.
Sw	Anand	Erhard	,	Anand	means	bliss.	Erhard	means	noble.
Misery	always	makes	a	person	mean.	A	miserable	person	cannot	be	noble	--	that
is	impossible.	He	has	nothing	to	be	noble	for,	he	has	nothing	to	share.
Misery	maketh	man	mean.
He	is	just	a	black	hole.	He	sucks	people.	Even	his	presence	is	enough	to	make
people	sick.
The	miserable	person	goes	on	creating	around	himself	a	dark	aura	of	misery,	and
because	 he	 is	miserable	 he	 cannot	 forgive	 the	world.	 There	 is	 no	 question	 of
being	 grateful	 to	 existence;	 he	 cannot	 even	 forgive	 it.	 And	 I	 can	 understand.
Why	he	forgive	 it?	He	 is	 just	a	victim	of	unknown	forces,	he	has	been	 thrown
into	 existence	 without	 his	 consent.	 Nobody	 has	 ever	 asked	 him.	 One	 day
suddenly	he	finds	himself	here,	surrounded	by	misery	--	not	only	on	the	outside
but	 on	 the	 inside	 too.	 He	 goes	 on	 living	 because	 he	 cannot	 gather	 enough
courage	to	destroy	himself,	but	he	fantasizes	destroying	himself.
The	miserable	person	also	lacks	courage.	The	reason	is	very	clear:	the	miserable
lacks	courage	because	he	hopes	"Tomorrow,	things	may	be	different	--	don't	risk
everything,	wait	for	tomorrow!	Who	knows?
Things	may	change,	life	may	become	beautiful";	hence	he	cannot	risk,	he	cannot
gamble.	Only	 a	 blissful	 person	 can	 risk	 and	 gamble	 because	 he	 knows	 "What
more	can	there	be	tomorrow?"	He	knows	it	cannot	be	improved	upon,	so	there	is
no	fear	in	risking	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	miserable	person	cannot	gather	courage	so	he	 lives	but	his	 life	 is	 just	 flat,
dull,	dead.	He	cannot	love,	he	cannot	sing,	he	cannot	dance;	at	the	most	he	can
only	 pretend.	 Even	 his	 pretensions	 cannot	 be	 very	 deep.	 Anybody	who	 has	 a
little	 bit	 of	 intelligence	 can	 see	 behind	 the	 mask.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 see	 tears
behind	 people's	 smiles;	 they	 are	 smiling	 just	 to	 hide	 their	 tears	 --	 there	 is	 no
other	reason.	They	are	afraid	if	they	don't	smile	they	may	start	crying.
But	up	to	now	all	the	so-called	religions	have	been	praising	poverty	and	misery.
They	have	been	calling	the	poor,	the	children	of	good,	they	been	saying	that	the
people	who	 are	 exploited,	 oppressed	will	 be	 rewarded	 greatly	 in	 heaven.	This
was	 just	 opium	 to	 keep	 them	 subdued,	 to	 make	 their	 lives	 a	 little	 more
comfortable,	 a	 little	 more	 cosy.	 The	 so-called	 religions	 have	 been	 giving
consolations	to	people,	not	revolutions.
That	 is	 not	 my	 function	 at	 all.	 I	 don't	 console	 anybody,	 in	 fact	 I	 do	 just	 the
opposite:	I	tale	away	all	your	consolations,	because	your	consolations	are	taken
away	 and	 you	 are	 shown	where	 you	 really	 are,	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 your
ever	becoming	blissful.
Bliss	is	possible,	but	the	misery	has	to	be	understood,	not	avoided,	not	escaped
from,	 not	 rationalised	 away,	 not	 put	 into	 beautiful	 words,	 not	 hidden	 behind
esoteric	jargon.	It	has	to	be	seen	in	its	utter	nudity.	It	hurts	in	the	beginning,	but
only	 in	 the	beginning.	 It	 is	bitter;	but	once	you	see	 the	point	 that	 if	you	 really
want	to	get	rid	of	it,	you	have	to	understand	the	roots	of	it,	the	causes	of	it	--	why
you	have	chosen	it,	why	you	have	become	miserable...	And	once	you	see	exactly
the	 reasons	 of	 your	misery	 it	 starts	 disappearing.	 It	 is	 almost	 like	magic,	 you
need	 not	 do	 anything	 to	 make	 disappear,	 you	 have	 just	 to	 see	 clearly.	 Your
perception	has	to	be	absolutely	clean,	innocent,	direct	and	penetrating.
When	you	have	seen	misery	to	its	very	core,	suddenly	you	are	out	of	it:	the	very
seeing	is	freedom.	And	then	bliss	arises	--	 it	 is	your	nature.	Misery	is	 imposed
from	then	outside,	it	is	something	learned;	bliss	is	not	learned,	it	is	an	explosion.
It	is	finding	your	own	inner	sources	of	life,	love,	light.
When	there	is	bliss	 there	is	dance,	 there	is	celebration	--	and	that	dance	makes
one	noble.	And	when	you	are	so	full	naturally	tend	to	share,	for	no	purpose	at	all
--	just	for	the	sheer	joy	of	sharing.	when	you	have	too	much	you	want	to	give	it.
In	fact	one	has	to	give	it,	otherwise	it	becomes	a	burden.	When	the	flower	is	full
of	fragrance	the	fragrance	has	to	be	released	to	the	winds.	It	is	not	a	loss	to	the
flower;	it	is	a	fulfillment.
Nobility	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 character;	 it	 has	 something	 to	 do	 with
blissfulness.	Nobility	has	nothing	at	all	to	do	with	birth	--	because	even	kings	are
miserable,	more	miserable	 than	anybody	else.	They	are	 rich	beggars,	 that's	all,
having	beautiful	facades,	but	behind	the	facades	are	all	kinds	of	uglinesses.
Bliss	 is	 the	only	quality	out	of	which	nobility	 arises.	Nobleness	 simply	means
the	joy	of	giving,	the	joy	of	sharing,	without	even	making	the	other	feel	obliged	-
-	 that	 is	 nobleness.	You	give	 and	you	 also	 thank	 the	person	who	has	 accepted
your	gift	--	that	is	nobility.	You	thank	him	because	he	could	have	rejected	it.	He
has	been	really	good	to	you	in	that	he	accepted	your	gift,	in	that	he	heard	your
song,	in	that	he	paid	a	little	attention	to	you,	in	that	he	received	your	love	with
welcome;	in	that	when	you	had	so	much	to	give	he	has	not	closed,	he	was	open,
available.	He	danced	with	you,	he	laughed	with	you	--	you	are	obliged!
When	 this	 process	 is	 triggered	 in	 one's	 being	 one	 starts	 feeling	 obliged	 to	 the
whole	existence:	 to	 the	 trees	and	 to	 the	 rivers	and	 to	 the	mountains	and	 to	 the
stars.	 To	me	 this	 is	 religion	 --	 not	 going	 to	 the	 church	 or	 to	 a	 temple	 or	 to	 a
mosque,	 not	 reading	 the	 Bible	 or	 Koran	 or	 Gita,	 not	 worshipping	 Krishna,
Buddha,	Mahavira,	but	getting	 into	a	deep	 ,	 loving	relationship	with	existence,
offering	oneself	totally	to	existence.
That	is	the	only	prayer	I	know	of,	and	that's	what	nobility	is	all	about.
Swami	Anand	Neil:	Anand	means	bliss.	Neil	means	a	chief.
Life	ordinarily	is	very	competitive:	everything	on	the	outside	has	to	be	struggled
for.	You	have	to	fight	tooth	and	nail	only	then	can	you	reach	the	top,	 then	you
become	 a	 chief.	 It	 is	 ugly.	 So	 all	 chiefs	 are	 really	 nothing	 but	 mischiefs!
(laughter)
But	 the	 inner	 world	 has	 a	 totally	 different	 quality.	 There	 is	 no	 competition
because	you	are	alone;	there	is	nobody	else	to	compete	with,	there	is	no	struggle.
Everything	happens	very	easily,	in	a	relaxed	manner.
And	bliss	represents	all	the	inner	qualities.
Love	is	love	only	because	it	is	part	of	bliss.	If	love	were	not	part	of	bliss	nobody
would	ever	hanker	for	it.	Love	is	not	loved;	it	 is	the	bliss	in	love	that	is	loved.
Who	would	 care	 about	 freedom	 if	 bliss	were	 not	 in	 it?	 Because	 freedom	 and
bliss	 go	 together,	 they	 are	 inseparable,	 that`s	 why	 freedom	 is	 desired.	 Who
would	even	search	for	god?	Who	would	care?	For	what?	If	bliss	were	not	in	the
very	 experience,	 in	 the	 very	 search,	 in	 the	 very	 encounter	with	 the	 divine.	 So
bliss	represents	the	whole	spectrum	of	all	inner	qualities.
And	one	can	become	an	emperor	without	any	fight	with	anyone,	without	taking
away	anything	from	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
anybody,	 without	 interfering	 in	 anybody`s	 territory.	 If	 you	 want	 more	 money
then	somebody	will	have	less.
But	if	you	want	bliss,	nobody	will	have	less;	in	fact,	on	the	contrary:	if	there	is	a
blissful	person	the	possibility	for	every	human	being	to	be	blissful	increases.	The
very	 presence	 of	 a	 blissful	 person	 raises	 the	 whole	 level	 of	 consciousness	 in
existence.
A	single	buddha	becomes	a	tremendous	step	in	evolution.	It	is	not	only	his	own
consciousness	 that	 reaches	 a	 higher	 peak,	 with	 him	 the	 whole	 humanity,
knowingly,	unknowingly,	goes	ahead.	The	moment	a	person	becomes	blissful	he
loses	his	ego,	he	is	no	more	separate.	His	being	is	not	his	any	more,	it	becomes
part	of	the	whole.	It	spreads	all	over	existence.
When	 a	 man	 like	 Buddha	 or	 Jesus	 disappears	 from	 the	 body	 then	 he	 is
everywhere,	 then	 the	 whole	 space	 is	 his	 home	 and	 his	 presence	 everywhere
certainly	affects	the	very	quality	of	life	in	existence.
Think	in	 terms	of	 the	 inner	kingdom	and	there	 it	 is	good	to	be	a	chief,	 to	be	a
king,	or	be	an	emperor,	to	be	the	first.
Jesus	says	"Blessed	are	the	meek	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god".	He	is	talking
about	 the	 outside	world	 to	make	 you	 aware	 that	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	meek,	 to	 be
humble,	to	be	the	last	rather	than	to	be	the	first.	But	that	is	only	half	of	the	story:
the	other	half	has	to	be	remembered.	The	other	half	is:	Blessed	are	the	blissful,
blessed	are	 the	kings	of	 the	 inner	world,	blessed	are	 those	who	are	 the	 first	 in
their	 subjectivity,	who	 have	 reached	 to	 the	 highest	 peak,	 because	 theirs	 is	 the
kingdom	of	god."
On	 the	outside	 it	 is	good	 to	be	 the	 last,	but	 it	 is	not	good	 to	be	 the	 last	 in	 the
inner	world.	 To	 be	 the	 last	 in	 the	world	 and	 to	 be	 the	 first	 in	 your	 being	 are
perfectly	in	tune	with	each	other	--	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	In	fact	those	who
have	 no	 inner	 integrity,	 those	 who	 are	 really	 suffering	 from	 some	 inferiority
complex	 want	 to	 be	 powerful	 in	 the	 world	 through	 money,	 through	 prestige,
through	respectability,	through	politics.
These	people	are	all	suffering	from	an	inferiority	complex.	The	whole	of	politics
is	rooted	in	an	inferiority	complex.	In	that	way	Jesus	is	perfectly	right:	"Blessed
are	 those	 who	 are	 meek"	 --	 because	 they	 are	 not	 suffering	 from	 inferiority
complex	 (laughter).	 Jesus	did	not	 say	 that	 (laughter)	 because	he	knew	nothing
about	the	inferiority	complex	--	but	I	can	say	it,	and	I	can	say	on	his	behalf!
In	the	inner	world	just	the	opposite	is	true:	be	blissful	and	you	are	an	emperor,	be
blissful	and	everything	else	that	you	have	ever	desired	follows	like	a	shadow	to
your	blissfulness.
Blissfulness	is	the	very	key	that	unlocks	the	door	to	the	kingdom	of	the	beyond.
Ma	Anand	Saroja.	Anand	means	bliss.	Saroja	means	a	lotus	flower.
The	lotus	flower	is	the	most	beautiful	flower	in	the	East;	hence	we	have	chosen
it	as	 the	ultimate	expression	of	 the	unfolding	of	human	consciousness.	Human
consciousness	when	in	blossom	is	as	vast	as	the	whole	universe,	not	a	bit	less	--
maybe	a	little	more	but	never	a	bit	less.
Human	 consciousness	 closed	 is	 like	 a	 seed;	 open,	 it	 is	 like	 a	 lotus	 flower.	We
have	called	 the	 inner	 lotus,	 a	one-thousand	petalled	 lotus;	 one	 thousand	 in	 the
East	represents	infinity.
When	consciousness	really	comes	to	its	total	flowering	then	stars	are	within	you,
then	the	whole	sky	is	within	you,	then	you	are	no	more	confined	in	the	body,	in
the	mind,	in	the	thoughts,	in	the	feelings,	in	the	moods	--	you	are	not	confined	at
all.	And	since	 the	ancient-most	days	 this	 freedom	has	been	 the	goal	of	all	 true
seekers.	Of	course	 there	have	been	very	 few	 true	seekers,	because	 to	be	a	 true
seeker	a	certain	quality	is	needed	which	is	missing	--	missing	because	we	are	not
trained	 for	 it.	 We	 are	 trained	 for	 the	 marketplace,	 we	 are	 trained	 to	 be
businessmen,	 we	 are	 trained	 to	 be	 calculative,	 to	 be	 cautious,	 or	 be	 always
suspicious,	doubtful,	because	that's	how	the	marketplace	functions.	But	there	is	a
beyond	 too:	 beyond	 arithmetic,	 beyond	 calculations,	 beyond	 the	 way	 the
marketplace	functions.
It	is	not	logical,	it	is	closer	to	love.	It	is	not	mathematical,	it	is	closer	to	music.	It
needs	the	heart	of	a	gambler,	only	then	can	one	open	up,	because	to	open	up	is
dangerous;	 you	 become	 vulnerable.	 The	 coward	 cannot	 open	 up:	 he	 remains
closed,	 he	 remains	 always	 hiding.	 He	 is	 always	 armoured,	 he	 has	 created	 a
certain	armour	around	himself	--	very	subtle.	These	people	miss	the	joy	of	life,
they	miss	the	very	flavour	and	the	fragrance	of	life.
Sannyas	is	a	risk.	It	 is	 the	way	of	the	gambler	is	the	way	of	the	drunkard.	It	 is
only	for	those	few	who	are	ready	to	go	into	the	uncharted	without	any	map,	not
knowing	 whether	 the	 other	 shore	 exists	 at	 all	 or	 not.	 In	 fact	 they	 are	 not
concerned.	 The	 journey	 itself	 is	 so	 beautiful,	 each	 step	 on	 the	 journey	 is	 so
ecstatic,	who	cares	about	the	goal?
A	sannyasin	lives	life	moment	to	moment,	as	if	this	is	the	goal,	as	if	this	is	the
end.	 He	 lives	 with	 totality,	 intensity	 and	 passion.	 And	 when	 each	 moment	 is
lived	with	totality,	intensity	and	passion,	the	heart	opens	like	a	lotus.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Ma	Anand	Sarod.	Anand	means	 bliss.	 Sarod	 is	 an	 eastern	musical	 instrument,
one	of	the	most	beautiful	musical	instruments.	it	represents	music.
The	state	of	bliss	is	a	state	of	inner	music,	accord,	harmony.
Man	ordinarily	 lives	 in	deep	discord.	He	 is	divided	 in	so	many	fragments,	and
each	 fragment	 goes	 on	 trying	 to	 dominate	 all	 the	 others;	 hence	 there	 is	 great
politics	 inside.	The	body	 tries	 to	dominate	 the	whole,	 the	mind	 tries,	 the	heart
tries.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 so	 simple	 either,	 because	mind	 is	 not	 one	mind,	 there	 are
many	minds	--	it	is	a	crowd,	and	each	mind	tries	to	dominate.	The	heart	is	also
not	 one	 --	 there	 are	 so	many	 feelings	 and	moods,	 and	 every	 felling	 and	 every
mood	tries	to	be	on	the	top.	The	body	itself	is	not	one,	it	has	different	divisions.
When	 you	 are	 eating	 food	 the	 stomach	 says	 "Enough!"	 but	 your	 tongue	 says
"No.	A	little	bit	more.	The	ice-cream	is	so	good!"	(laughter)	The	stomach	goes
on	crying	"Stop!"
If	you	listen	to	the	body	you	will	find	there	are	many	voices.	When	you	want	to
sleep	a	part	of	your	body	says	"Get	up!	It	is	time	to	get	up,	and	I	am	perfectly
refreshed	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 lie	 down."	 The	 other	 part	 says	 "A	 little	 bit
more.	 Just	 five	 minutes..."	 (laughter)	 And	 this	 trick	 if	 five	 minutes	 works	 on
almost	 everybody!	 (laughter)	 I	 have	 observed	 many	 people:	 it	 is	 always	 five
minutes.	But	then	after	five	minutes	again	it	is	five	minutes.
The	 body	 is	 divided,	 the	mind	 is	 divided,	 the	 heart	 is	 divided	 --	 it	 is	 really	 a
miracle	how	people	go	on	carrying	themselves	together!	Everybody	is	a	humpty-
dumpty	(laughter).	And	who	has	put	these	people	together?	It	is	really	strange	to
see	 that	 people	 are	 going	with	 all	 parts	 together.	Otherwise	 it	 would	 be	more
logical:	one	leg	going	to	the	north,	one	leg	going	to	the	south,	the	head	going	to
the	east	and	 the	heart	going	 to	 the	west,	and	all	saying	 to	each	other	"See	you
soon!"	(much	laughter).	That	would	be	far	more	natural.
Maybe	it	is	just	the	skin	that	keeps	you	together;	because	everything	is	inside	the
bag	and	 there	 is	no	way	 to	get	out	 --	 the	whole	credit	goes	 to	 the	skin!	 (much
laughter)	This	situation	is	bound	to	be	very	noisy	and	chaotic	--	and	that's	what
people	are,	a	chaps.
When	 I	 say	 bliss	 is	 harmony	 I	mean	 that	we	 have	 to	 bring	 all	 these	warring,
conflicting	camps	together.
We	 have	 to	 make	 an	 orchestra	 out	 of	 them.	 And	 when	 they	 all	 are	 playing
together	 as	 if	 they	 have	 fallen	 into	 a	 deep	 organic	 unity,	 then	 life	 for	 the	 first
time	has	meaning,	for	the	first	time	it	has	a	subtle	significance.
For	the	first	time	one	starts	feeling	"We	are	not	accidental."	One	can	call	it	inner
harmony	or	one	can	call	it	bliss	--	it	is	the	same.
Sannyas	is	the	art	of	creating	this	orchestra.	So	my	work	consists	of	working	on
your	 body,	 on	 your	mind,	 on	 your	 heart;	 first	 separately	 and	 then	 on	 all	 three
dimensions	together	so	that	the	fourth	dimension	can	be	created	in	you,	or,	can
be	discovered.	Once	the	fourth	dimension	is	discovered	you	have	arrived	home.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002035
ShortTitle:	NEVER03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Swami	Dhyan	Apurvo.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Apurvo	means	unique.
The	experience	of	meditation	is	only	unique	experience	in	life.	Everything	else
is	repetitive.	Meditation	is	never	repeated,	because	it	is	forever.	Once	it	happens,
it	remains	--	there	is	no	way	to	fall	out	of	it.	One	can	fall	on	love,	one	can	fall
out	of	love;	one	can	fall	in	meditation,	but	one	cannot	fall	out	of	meditation.
The	 reason	 one	 cannot	 fall	 out	 of	 it	 is	 because	 the	 moment	 you	 fall	 in,	 you
disappear	--	there	is	nobody	to	fall	out,	nobody	remains	to	fall	out.
Meditation	means	 the	disappearance	of	 the	mind	and	 its	centre,	 the	ego;	hence
all	other	experiences,	howsoever	beautiful	they	may	be,	become	repetitive.	And
anything	 that	 is	 repeated	 loses	 blissfulness,	 it	 loses	 newness,	 it	 loses
youthfulness,	aliveness	--	slowly	slowly	it	becomes	flat.	The	peak	that	was	once
there	 in	 the	beginning	disappears.	Then	one	can	go	on	repeating	 it	 in	 the	hope
that	the	same	thing	will	happen	again,	but	it	is	not	possible.
Repetition	 is	 mechanical,	 and	 our	 whole	 life	 is	 mechanical.	 Your	 love,	 your
hobbies,	 your	 work,	 your	 relationships,	 your	 friendships	 --	 yes,	 they	 give	 a
certain	pleasure,	a	certain	happiness,	but	the	honeymoon	is	soon	over.	And	then
a	 great	 frustration	 sets	 in,	 a	 tremendous	 hopelessness,	 because	 one	 cannot	 see
why	 the	 joy	disappeared:	 "I	 am	doing	 the	 same	 thing,	 everything	 is	 the	 same,
and	yet	nothing	is	the	same."
In	fact	 the	moment	you	repeat	something,	even	a	second	time,	you	are	already
losing	ground	because	now	you	know	what	it	is.	When	it	happened	for	the	first
time	you	were	in	for	a	great	surprise;	that	element	of	surprise	was	very	essential
in	the	joy.	Now	there	is	no	surprise.	It	is	like	going	to	see	the	same	movie	again:
now	you	know	all	the	sequences	--	from	the	very	beginning,	you	know	the	end,
you	know	what	is	going	to	happen	next.	There	is	no	excitement,	you	cannot	even
pretend	that	you	are	excited.
It	is	like	listening	to	the	same	joke:	the	first	time	it	really	triggers	laughter.	The
reason	 is	 surprise.	 The	whole	 art	 of	 a	 joke	 is	 that	 it	 takes	 a	 sudden	 turn,	 ;the
punchline	 is	a	 sudden	 turn.	You	were	expecting	a	certain	 logical	 sequence	and
then	it	takes	such	an	absurd	turn	that	you	could	not	have	imagined	it.	That	very
shock	 releases	 your	 tension.	 You	 were	 becoming	 tense:	 "What	 is	 going	 to
happen?	What	 is	 going	 to	 happen?"	You	were	 coming	 to	 an	 inner	 climax	 and
then,	suddenly,	what	happens	is	so	unexpected	that	you	cannot	do	anything	else
but	 laugh	 --	 laugh	 at	 the	whole	 ridiculousness	 of	 logic	 --	 because	 life	 always
takes	such	turns.	But	listening	to	the	same	joke	again	cannot	be	the	same.	How
can	it	be	the	same?	--	you	know	the	punchline	already.	In	life	everything	turns
out	to	be	a	repetition	of	the	same	joke;	hence	people	live	utterly	bored.
This	is	unique	about	meditation:	only	the	person	who	knows	meditation	is	never
bored.	 Then	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 him	 to	 be	 bored,	 because	 meditation	 is	 the
disappearance	of	your	personality,	of	your	mind,	of	your	thinking	process.	It	 is
falling	 into	such	an	abyss	 that	 the	deeper	you	fall,	 the	 less	you	are.	A	moment
comes	when	you	are	no	more	--	and	when	you	are	no	more	you	come	home.
That	 state	 of	 nothingness,	 nobodiness,	 is	meditation.	 Hence	 I	 don't	 know	 any
other	 experience	which	 can	 be	 called	 unique,	 except	 meditation.	 And	 the	 real
seeker	 will	 search	 for	 this	 unique	 dimension	 because	 only	 this	 can	 be	 a
fulfilment.	Unless	 one	 finds	 a	 source	 of	 joy	 that	 is	 infinite,	 inexhaustible,	 one
cannot	be	contented,	one	cannot	be	at	ease	with	existence.	And	to	be	at	ease	with
existence,	 to	be	utterly	 relaxed	and	at	ease	with	existence,	with	no	conflict,	no
anguish,	no	desire	to	be	victorious	or	to	be	the	first	--	all	that	nonsense	is	gone,
one	is	simply	enjoying	of	being	a	sannyasin.
With	nothingness	inside,	outside	you	gain	the	whole	universe.	The	moment	you
are	no	more,	the	whole	belongs	to	you.
Ma	 Dhyan	 Gandharvo.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation.	 Gandharvo	 is	 an	 eastern
metaphysical	 word	 --	 part	 of	 religious	 mythology,	 but	 significant.	 The
gandharvas	 are	 the	 celestial	 musicians,	 the	 musicians	 who	 play	 for	 god.
Gandharvo	means	the	ultimate	musician,	whom	there	is	no	surpassing.
Meditation	 is	 the	 ultimate	music.	 It	 is	 the	music	which	 is	 not	 created	 by	 any
instrument,	it	is	the	music	that	arises	in	your	silence.	It	is	the	sound	of	silence.	It
is	the	harmony	that	is	hear	when	all	noise	has	disappeared.	When	the	mind	with
its	thousands	of	voices	is	gone	and	your	inner	space	is	utterly	empty,	silent,	still,
that	 stillness	 itself	 has	 a	 tremendous	music	 to	 it.	And	 out	 of	 that	music	 is	 all
creativity,	true	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
creativity.
Ordinary	creativity	is	out	of	the	mind.	Then	one	can	compose	a	poem,	one	can
paint	a	picture,	one	can	do	a	thousand	and	one	things;	but	because	they	are	done
by	the	mind,	they	are	more	or	less	compositions	rather	than	creations.	The	mind
always	 gathers	 things	 from	everywhere	 and	 goes	 on	 trying	 new	 combinations.
Certainly	the	new	combination	looks	as	if	it	is	something	original:	it	never	is,	it
is	only	a	new	combination.
But	 there	 is	 another	 creativity	 that	 comes	 from	 the	 silence	 of	meditation,	 that
comes	from	the	music	of	your	inner	space.	It	is	not	done	by	you,	you	are	not	the
doer.	The	mind	is	a	doer;	meditation	is	a	state	of	non-doing,	it	is	effortlessness,
but	out	of	that	non-doing	great	things	have	come	into	the	world.	All	that	is	truly
beautiful	--	if	may	be	painting,	it	may	be	poetry,	music	or	architecture,	sculpture
--	 has	 come	 not	 from	 the	 mind	 but	 from	 meditation.	 Meditation	 is	 just	 the
opposite	 of	 mind,	 it	 is	 the	 absence	 of	 the	mind.	 And	 when	 something	 comes
spontaneously	out	of	you,	without	any	effort	on	your	part,	it	has	a	beauty	of	its
own,	a	grace.	It	has	the	touch	of	the	beyond,	a	ray	of	the	divine	is	present	in	it.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	creators,	not	through	the	mind	but	through	meditation.
And	 it	 comes	 of	 its	 own	 accord,	 one	 need	 not	 even	 think	 about	 it.	 So	 I	 don't
teach	creativity,	I	only	teach	silence.	And	then	out	of	that	silence	much	creativity
comes.	One	 is	surprised	oneself	at	how	much	one	was	carrying	 in	one's	being,
unexpressed,	 at	 how	great	was	 one's	 potential.	When	 one	 comes	 across	 it	 one
cannot	believes	it!
My	 observation	 is	 that	 everybody	 is	 a	 born	 genius,	 but	 very	 few	 people	 have
been	able	to	discover	it.
And	the	people	who	have	discovered	it	are	the	people	who	have	known	moments
of	silence	in	some	way,	either	accidentally,	as	with	scientists,	poets,	musicians,
painters;	or	deliberately,	 as	with	 the	mystics.	For	a	poet	 it	 is	 just	 accidental	 to
feel	silence.	He	does	not	know	how	it	comes,	when	it	comes,	why	it	comes	and
why	it	disappears.	He	has	no	understanding	about	it.	It	is	something	mysterious
that	visits	him,	overwhelms	him,	and	in	those	moments	of	silence,	poetry	starts
flowing,	songs	arise	and	he	can	see	that	they	are	not	coming	from	him,	they	are
coming	from	some	other	source.	That's	why	Mohammed	says	that	the	Koran	is
not	his	creation,	it	has	come	from	god.	The	Vedic	seers	say	that	god	has	created
the	Vedas,	and	the	same	is	true	about	all	the	religious	scriptures:	they	all	say	god
has	created	them.	That	is	just	a	way	of	seeing	it.
The	scientific	fact	is	that	it	was	coming	from	some	unknown	source,	it	was	not
coming	 from	 them;	naturally	 they	called	 that	unknown	source	god.	But	 I	don't
call	 it	god.	That	unknown	source	 is	your	real	being,	your	authentic	being.	 It	 is
really	 coming	 from	you.	When	something	comes	 from	 the	mind	 it	 is	not	 from
you	because	mind	is	all	borrowed;	 it	 is	 information,	knowledge,	education.	All
that	has	been	put	together	by	others	--	the	parents,	the	teachers,	the	priests	--	is
implanted	 in	 you	 from	 the	 outside.	 So	 whatsoever	 comes	 out	 of	 mind	 is	 not
yours,	 and	 whatsoever	 comes	 from	 your	 silence	 is	 truly	 yours.	 In	 that	 way
Mohammed,	Jesus,	the	Vedic	mystics,	are	all	saying	something	which	is	a	little
bit	primitive.
A	far	more	refined	version	is	to	say	that	it	was	coming	from	their	own	innermost
core	of	which	 they	were	not	clearly	aware.	Somehow	they	were	still	 identified
with	 their	mind.	 Some	 hangover,	 some	 small	 attachment	with	 the	mind,	 some
illusory	idea	was	still	haunting	them	that	they	were	the	mind;	hence	that	which
came	from	somewhere	else	must	have	come	from	god	--	that	was	their	inference.
But	my	own	experience	is	that	the	moment	you	are	disidentified	with	the	mind
you	 suddenly	 become	 aware	 that	 now	whatsoever	 is	 coming,	 is	 coming	 from
your	real	source.	Of	course	you	cannot	call	it	"my"	or
"mine",	because	those	words	belong	to	the	mind,	but	this	is	your	true	being.
A	sannyasin	has	to	learn	only	one	thing:	how	to	be	silent	and	meditative,	how	to
be	separate	from	the	mind,	disidentified	from	the	mind.	And	then	everything	else
follows	--	a	great	creativity,	a	great	sensitivity.
And	whatsoever	 is	 you	potential	 starts	 blossoming	 as	 if	 suddenly	 a	 spring	has
come	to	your	inner	world.
Sannyas	is	springtime.	It	is	a	new	climate	in	which	seeds	sprout,	buds	open	up
and	become	flowers,	in	which	the	potential	self	becomes	the	actualised	self.
Swami	Dhyan	Yogesh.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Yogesh	means	god	of	yoga.
Yoga	 means	 union,	 the	 science	 of	 union;	 hence	 your	 full	 name	 will	 mean:
meditation	 is	 the	 suprememost	 phenomenon	 as	 far	 as	 union	 with	 reality	 is
concerned,	meditation	is	the	god	of	yoga.	But	yoga	has	fallen	into	wrong	hands,
and	not	only	recently	--	for	centuries	it	has	been	in	the	wrong	hands.
The	original	fault	must	go	to	the	founder,	Patanjali	himself.	Patanjali	has	divided
yoga	into	eight	parts.
His	division	 is	clear-cut,	very	scientific,	but	he	was	not	really	aware	of	human
stupidity.
He	started	with	the	body	--	and	that's	the	right	way	to	start	The	first	part	of	yoga
must	be	physiological	because	man	lives	on	 the	circumference,	 in	 the	body,	so
the	work	has	to	start	there,	only	then	can	it	reach	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	mind.	And	when	one	has	gone	beyond	the	body	and	beyond	the	mind,	then
the	third,	meditation,	happens.
So	 according	 to	 Patanjali	 the	 first	 part	 belongs	 to	 the	 body.	 But	 he	 was	 not
clearly	aware	that	millions	of	people	would	remain	entangled	with	the	first	part.
Hence	 yoga	 has	 become	 synonymous	with	 yoga	 postures:	 people	 standing	 on
their	 heads	 and	 doing	 all	 sorts	 of	 contortions	 --	 that	 has	 become	 synonymous
with	yoga.
It	 is	not	a	true	yoga,	it	 is	just	the	preface,	the	introductory	part;	and	the	person
who	 thinks	 the	 introduction	 is	 the	whole	 book	 is	 idiotic.	But	Patanjali	 did	 not
warn	people.	If	he	had	warned	people	it	would	have	been	better.
People	 like	 Patanjali	 believe	 in	 other's	 intelligence	 --	 which	 is	 not	 there!
(laughter)	 They	 trust.	 Their	 trust	 is	 immense,	 their	 trust	 is	 as	 immense	 as
people's	 stupidity	 is!(more	 laughter)	 They	 respect	 people's	 intelligence.	 So	 he
did	 not	 warn	 people,	 but	 the	 warning	 was	 absolutely	 necessary:	 "Don't	 get
entangled	in	the	physiological	part".
A	few	people,	only	very	 few	--	 if	a	hundred	people	become	 interested	 in	yoga
then	only	one	person	will	get	out	of	physiological	entanglement.	And	 that	one
person	 will	 become	 entangled	 in	 the	 psychological.	 If	 a	 hundred	 persons	 are
entangled	 in	 the	psychological	 then	only	one	person	gets	 out	 of	 it	 --	 and	only
when	you	get	out	of	the	mind	does	the	real	yoga	begin.
The	physiological	part	of	yoga	will	give	you	great	physiological	powers;	it	can
make	you	 live	a	 really	 long,	healthy	 life.	But	what	are	you	going	 to	do	with	a
long	life?	If	you	are	idiotic,	instead	of	being	idiotic	for	seventy	years	you	will	be
idiotic	 for	 two	 hundred	 years.	 It	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help	 anybody,	 it	 will	 be	 a
calamity.
There	was	a	man	called	Nadir	Shah	--	one	of	the	most	notorious,	murderous	men
in	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 humanity.	 He	 invaded	 India	 at	 least	 one	 hundred	 and
eight	 times.	He	killed	more	people	 in	India	 than	anybody	else.	And	he	had	his
own	ways	of	 torturing:	he	would	put	 the	whole	 town	on	 fire	and	 surround	 the
town	with	his	army	so	nobody	could	escape	--	and	he	would	enjoy	it!
This	man	asked	an	astrologer,	because	he	had	heard	of	his	fame,	"What	do	you
say?	What	 is	your	advice?	--	should	a	man	live	 long,	very	 long,	or	should	one
live	 only	 the	 average,	 seventy	 years?"	The	 astrologer	must	 have	 really	 a	wise
man.	 He	 said,	 "It	 all	 depends.	 If	 a	 man	 like	 you	 lives	 long,	 it	 is	 bad,	 it	 is
unfortunate.	 In	 the	 first	 place	 a	 man	 like	 you	 should	 not	 be	 born;	 and	 in	 the
second	 place,	 if	 he	 is	 born,	 then	 he	 should	 die	 immediately.	 And	 in	 the	 third
place,	if	he	manages	to	live	somehow,	then	the	sooner	he	dies,	the	better."
Nadir	Shah	was	very	angry.	This	was	the	first	man	who	had	not	bothered	about
his	murderous	attitude,	 this	was	 the	first	man	who	had	said	 the	 truth	as	 it	was.
Nadir	Shah	said	"I	will	kill	you."	The	astrologer	said
"That	doesn't	matter,	you	can	kill	me,	but	I	have	to	tell	the	truth.	The	truth	is	that
if	men	like	you	do	live,	they	should	sleep	twenty-four	hours	a	day	(laughter)	and
drink	as	much	as	they	can!"
Nadir	Shah	was	 so	 shocked	but	 the	man	was	 so	 truthful	 that	 even	Nadir	Shah
had	to	leave	him	alone.
Even	 he	 could	 not	 gather	 courage	 to	 kill	 such	 a	 man.	 He	 felt	 shaken	 and	 he
remembered	him	again	and	again:"What	a	man!	Almost	a	dragon!	He	made	me
tremble	 --	 the	 way	 he	 looked	 at	 me	 and	 the	 way	 he	 said	 things.	 I	 had	 never
expected	anybody	would	have	such	courage."	But	he	respected	the	astrologer.
Yoga	can	make	a	person	live	long,	but	what	will	you	do?	That	physiological	part
should	not	be	paid	so	much	attention.	Yes,	a	little	bit	is	good	to	keep	physically
fit,	 but	 just	 a	 little	 bit;	 otherwise	 it	 is	 a	 vast	 jungle:	 one	 can	 be	 lost	 in	 its
subtleties,	in	its	complexities.
And	the	second	part	is	even	vaster	than	the	physiological.	If	you	get	into	it	you
can	have	many	psychic	powers,	you	can	read	people's	thoughts	--	but	what	is	the
point?	Your	rubbish	is	so	much	(laughter),	what	is	the	point	of	reading	somebody
else's	rubbish?	He	is	tortured	by	his	rubbish	and	you	are	reading	his	thoughts
--	and	you	think	you	are	doing	something	great!
The	real	thing	is	to	get	rid	of	thoughts,	not	to	read	them.	One	even	has	to	get	rid
of	one's	own	thoughts;	what	is	the	point	of	reading	other	people's	thoughts?	And
what	 is	 there?	You	can	stand	by	the	side	of	 the	road	and	you	can	see	a	man	is
walking	along	and	thinking	of	his	dog	--	so	what?	(laughter)	Just	this	morning	I
was	telling	a	story.	A	postmaster	was	being	tortured	by	his	wife.	It	was	a	usual
phenomenon	--	the	poor	postmaster.	And	his	wife	was	a	real	amazon!	(laughter)
Once	 she	 started	 it	 was	 impossible	 to	 stop	 her	 unless	 some	 accident,	 some
calamity	happened	--	earthquake	or	something	like	that	--
otherwise	she	would	go	on	and	on....	And	the	poor	postmaster	was	sitting	there,
listening.	After	half	an	hour	the	wife	said	"What	is	the	matter	with	you?	I	have
been	talking	and	talking	and	you	have	not	said	even	a	single	word	--	can't	you
hear	me?	Are	you	deaf	or	dumb?	What	is	the	matter	with	you?"
And	 the	 poor	 postmaster	 said	 "I	 am	 hearing	 every	 single	 word	 --	 not	 only
hearing,	in	fact	I	am	counting	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
how	much	it	would	have	cost	if	you	had	sent	a	telegram	(much	laughter):	eighty-
four	rupees	and	thirty	paise.	I	have	been	counting!"	(much	laughter)
If	you	listen	to	people's	thoughts,	what	will	you	find?	The	postmaster	is	counting
how	much	it	will	cost,	somebody	is	thinking	of	his	cow,	somebody	is	thinking	of
his	buffalo,	somebody	is	thinking	of	his	wife,	somebody	is	thinking	of	somebody
else's	wife!	(much	laughter)	And	you	are	thinking	what	they	are	thinking!	Maybe
the	 other	 person	 is	 also	 a	 yogi	 and	 is	 reading	 somebody	 else's	 thoughts
(laughter)...	then	things	become	very	complicated!
The	physiological	part	 is	ordinary,	 the	psychological	part	 is	ordinary.	Both	can
give	power,	but	power	is	not	the	goal	of	meditation.	Power	is	politics,	all	kinds
of	 power	 is	 politics.	 And	 power	 corrupts	 --	 all	 kinds	 of	 power	 --	 it	 corrupts
unconditionally	and	absolutely;	it	always	corrupts.	Hence	I	say	the	only	essential
thing,	 the	 real	 core	 of	 all	 religion,	 of	 all	 yoga,	 of	 all	 methods	 of	 search,	 is
meditation.
One	 should	put	 aside	everything	non-essential.	You	can	use	 things	as	 stepping
stones,	but	not	more	than	that	--	 just	like	jumping	boards.	You	need	not	bother
too	much	 about	 them.	Your	whole	 concern	 should	be	one-pointed;	 you	 should
move	like	an	arrow	towards	meditation,	only	then	in	this	small	life,	with	so	little
time,	power	and	energy	available	and	with	so	many	problems	surrounding	you,
can	you	hope	that	the	arrow	will	reach	the	target.
And	the	moment	you	know	something	of	meditation	--	not	about	it,	but	the	very
taste	of	 it	 --	 a	great	 release	 comes.	 a	great	 relief	 comes.	Suddenly	all	 tensions
disappear:	anxieties,	anguishes,	are	found	no	more.	Even	if	you	want	them	just
for	a	change,	you	cannot	find	them.	I	have	tried	and	failed!	(laughter)	Sometimes
I	try	very	hard	to	find	some	anxiety	but	I	cannot,	it	simply	does	not	work.	I	have
tried	all	possible	ways,	from	this	side	and	that	side,	but	I	come	to	the	same	end:
it	does	not	work.
Once	you	have	 tasted	meditation	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 you	 to	 be	 in	 any	misery.
Bliss	 becomes	 inevitable,	 a	 natural	 showering,	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 showering	 like
flowers	showering	from	the	sky.
Swami	Dhyan	Manish.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Manish	means	the	wise	one.
Mind	can	never	impart	wisdom	to	you.	It	can	give	you	immense	knowledge,	 it
can	 make	 you	 very	 knowledgeable,	 it	 can	 make	 you	 a	 great	 thinker,	 a
philosopher,	a	scientist,	but	it	cannot	make	you	wise	--
that	is	beyond	its	capacity.	And	unless	you	are	wise	you	remain	a	fool.
The	philosopher	is	only	a	philosopher	on	the	surface;	deep	down	you	will	find	a
foolosopher.	 Just	 scratch	 him	 a	 little	 bit	 and	 you	 will	 find	 all	 kinds	 of
foolishnesses	in	him.
Aristotle	 is	one	of	 the	greatest	philosophers	of	 the	world,	but	he	says	so	many
foolish	things.	For	example,	he	writes	that	women	have	fewer	teeth	than	men	--
and	he	had	two	wifes,	not	only	one	but	two	so	he	could	have	counted	them.	And
it	 is	 so	 easy	 to	 count	 women's	 teeth	 because	 their	 mouths	 are	 always	 open!
(much	 laughter)	 The	 greatest	 problem	 is	 how	 to	 keep	 a	woman's	mouth	 shut!
(more	laughter)	He	could	have	counted	any	time!	If	not	while	they	were	awake	-
-	if	he	was	afraid	--	then	he	could	have	counted	while	the	women	were	asleep	--
but	he	never	bothered.	Jest	the	idea	that	a	woman	cannot	have	anything	equal	to
man,	that	man	is	a	superior	being,	prevented	him.
This	is	foolishness,	utter	stupidity.	But	there	is	a	foundation	in	that	foolishness:
the	foundation	is	that	man	is	superior	in	every	way,	so	how	can	he	have	the	same
number	of	teeth?	The	woman	must	have	fewer	teeth	than	a	man	--	it	is	a	logical
conclusion	on	his	part.	He	could	have	done	a	small	experiment	but	he	never	did.
You	will	find	so	many	foolish	things	in	philosophers,	unbelievably	foolish	--	but
to	me	 the	 reason	 is	 clear:	 they	 are	 not	wise.	 That	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 a
Buddha	 and	 a	 Aristotle,	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 Bodhidharma	 and	 an
Emmanuel	 Kant.	 The	 East	 has	 respected	 the	 mystic,	 not	 the	 philosopher.	We
have	also	produced	many	philosophers	but	nobody	had	taken	any	note	of	them.
They	 have	 been	 ignored.	 Although	 they	 have	 written	 great	 treatises,
interpretations,	theologies,	nobody	has	taken	any	note	of	them.	In	the	West	just
the	 opposite	 has	 happened:	 the	 philosopher	 has	 been	 taken	 into	 much
consideration	and	the	mystic	has	been	neglected,	ignored.
For	example,	Dionysius	or	Pythagoras	or	Plotinus	or	Eckhart	--	these	people	are
not	counted	at	all.	You	will	not	find	their	names	mentioned	even	in	the	history	of
philosophy	taught	in	the	western	universities.
They	are	not	in	the	main	current.
Mind	 seems	 to	be	more	 important	 in	 the	West.	And	of	 course	mind	has	given
many	 things:	 great	 scholarship,	 knowledge,	 science.	 But	 if	 basically	 man
remains	foolish,	then	all	knowledge	and	all	science	is	going	to	turn	against	him.
It	 is	 like	giving	a	naked	sword	 to	a	 small	child.	And	 that's	what	 is	happening:
two	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
world	wars,	so	much	destruction,	and	the	third	is	imminent,	any	moment.	We	are
always	on	the	verge	of	it:	just	any	fool...
Mm,	 now	 this	 cowboy	 (laughter),	 Ronald	 Reagan...	 He	 has	 been	 a	 third-rate
actor.	In	those	films	in	which	he	was	working	it	was	his	job	to	kill	as	many	times
as	possible	and	 to	be	killed	as	many	 times	as	possible.	Now	 this	man	can	 just
trigger	 a	 button	 and	 can	 involve	 the	whole	 earth	 in	 total	 destruction.	 Just	 one
single	fool,	and	for	some	small	reason....
Maybe	 he	 had	 a	 very	 tiring	 day	 and	 his	 wife	 says	 something	 and	 then	 he
becomes	angry	and	just	pushes	the	button!	(much	laughter)	"Enough	is	enough!"
Or	perhaps	he	has	a	migraine,	or	just	like	Maneesha	he	is	suffering	from	stomach
pain	 and	 amoebas,	 (Bhagwan's	 hand	 gestures	 towards	 me,	 sitting	 just	 by	 his
right.	I	laugh	and	love	the	intimacy	of	the	mention.)	then	he	just...	And	the	world
is	finished!	(much	laughter)	Unless	you	kill	humanity	you	cannot	kill	amoebas!
That	power	is	possible	through	the	mind	but	where	will	you	find	the	wisdom	to
use	it	rightly?	There	is	only	one	source,	I	call	it	meditation.	Meditation	does	not
make	 you	 more	 knowledgeable.	 It	 simply	 makes	 you	 more	 sensible,	 more
sensitive,	 more	 alert,	 more	 intelligent,	 more	 aware	 --	 not	 more	 informed,	 but
more	transformed,	more	illumined.
A	deep	illumination	--	that	is	the	meaning	of	Manish.	It	means	your	inner	world
is	 no	 longer	 dark,	 it	 has	 become	 full	 of	 light.	And	when	 you	 live	 out	 of	 your
inner	light	all	that	you	do	is	good	--	good	for	you,	good	for	others,	a	blessing	to
you	and	also	a	blessing	to	the	whole	universe.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002045
ShortTitle:	NEVER04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Swami	Anand	Avinasho.	Anand	means	bliss.	Avinasho	means	eternal.
Pleasure	is	momentary:	hence	it	 is	always	followed	by	misery,	 it	 is	surrounded
by	misery.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 an	 island,	 a	 small	 island	 in	 the	 ocean	 of	misery.	You
cannot	stay	on	it,	it	comes	and	goes.	When	it	comes	for	a	moment	there	is	relief,
but	only	for	a	moment,	and	then	you	are	again	plunged	into	the	darkness,	deeper
than	 before,	 because	 now	 you	 have	 tasted	 something	 against	 which	 you	 can
compare.
Pleasure	 only	 deepens	 people's	 misery	 because	 it	 becomes	 a	 contrast,	 a
backdrop.	Hence	the	very	strange	phenomenon:	the	richer	a	society	is,	the	more
miserable;	 the	 poor	 a	 society	 is,	 the	 less	miserable.	 In	 other	 words:	 the	more
miserable	people	are,	 the	 less	miserable	 they	are	 (laughter),	because	 they	don't
have	anything	with	which	to	compare.	They	have	never	known	pleasure	so	they
think	this	is	what	life	is	all	about.
They	are	accustomed	to	misery.
This	you	will	see	in	the	East	everywhere,	particularly	in	India.	And	the	so-called
Indian	gurus	go	on	bragging	about	it	as	if	it	is	something	spiritual.	It	is	nothing
spiritual,	it	is	simply	that	people	are	so	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
unacquainted	with	pleasure	that	they	don't	have	any	idea	of	what	it	can	be	like,
even	 for	 a	 moment,	 to	 be	 without	 misery.	 They	 have	 become	 attuned	 with
misery,	accustomed	to	it.	There	has	arisen	a	certain	lifestyle	which	goes	hand	in
hand	with	misery.	It	is	not	spirituality.	It	is	a	very	negative	state,	it	has	nothing
positive	about	it.	Spirituality	comes	in	only	when	you	have	tasted	pleasure	and
now	you	want	something	more	than	pleasure,	something	that	is	going	to	abide,
something	that	comes	and	never	goes	again.
The	momentary	taste	of	pleasure	 is	a	must	for	 the	spiritual	seeker	because	that
triggers	in	him	an	enquiry.	If	it	is	possible	to	be	happy	for	a	moment	then	why	is
it	not	possible	to	be	happy	forever?	--	there	seems	to	be	no	intrinsic	impossibility
about	 it.	But	 the	miserable	 person	 is	 absolutely	unaware	of	 it;	 hence	 I	 am	not
against	pleasure,	I	am	all	for	it,	because	I	know	it	is	only	pleasure	that	gives	you
a	push	 towards	bliss.	 It	 is	only	pleasure	 that	helps	you	 to	go	on	a	 tremendous
journey	to	find	the	eternal.
Pleasure	is	like	bliss	seen	in	a	dream;	but	if	you	have	seen	it	in	a	dream	then	the
desire	is	natural	to	make	it	a	reality.	The	poor	and	the	miserable	have	not	even
seen	a	dream,	have	not	even	tasted	in	a	dream,	what	pleasure	is.	They	are	really
to	be	pitied.	They	are	not	blessed,	they	are	really	cursed.
In	my	vision	materialism	and	spiritualism	are	not	against	each	other,	they	are	not
enemies.	Materialism	 is	 the	 foundation	of	a	 real	 spirituality,	or	 in	other	words,
science	is	the	foundation	of	religion	--	there	is	no	contradiction.	Hence	I	can	see
a	 deep	 significance	 between	 the	 polar	 opposites	 of	 materialism,	 spirituality,
science,	religion,	the	outside	world	and	the	inside	world,	the	body	and	the	soul,
the	world	and	god.	 I	don't	 think	 they	are	 really	contradictory	 --	or	only	on	 the
surface:	deep	down	they	are	complementaries.	Hence	I	may	be	 the	first	person
who	 can	 accommodate	 Epicurus	 and	 Buddha	 together,	 Marx	 and	 Mahavir
together	(laughter).	It	has	never	been	tried,	the	time	was	not	right,	but	now	the
moment	has	come.
First	we	should	make	people	more	and	more	capable	of	enjoying	pleasure	--	that
is	a	device	--	so	that	they	can	start	slowly	slowly	a	journey	towards	the	ultimate
bliss.	 The	 definition	 of	 bliss	 is	 that	when	 pleasure	 becomes	 eternal	 it	 is	 bliss.
When	bliss	is	only	temporary,	momentary,	it	is	pleasure.	The	difference	is	only
of	 quantity	 --	 for	 a	 moment	 or	 for	 eternity,	 but	 that	 which	 is	 possible	 for	 a
moment	is	also	possible	for	the	whole	of	eternity.
The	so-called	spiritualists	cannot	understand	what	I	am	saying,	what	I	am	doing
here,	because	my	people	don't	 seem	to	be	 fitting	with	 their	 idea	of	spirituality.
Their	idea	of	spirituality	is	simply	out	of	date!
It	does	not	belong	to	 this	century,	 it	 is	not	contemporary.	And	the	same	is	 true
about	 the	 so-called	materialists,	 they	 also	 cannot	 understand	what	 I	 am	doing.
They	both	disagree	with	me	--	of	course,	on	different	grounds.
The	spiritual,	the	so-called	spiritual	person,	is	against	me	because	I	am	teaching
spirituality	also.	But	the	moment	they	understand	what	I	am	doing	they	are	in	for
a	 great	 surprise:	 this	 is	 the	 highest	 synthesis	 that	 has	 ever	 been	 tried.	 My
sannyasins	have	to	be	living	syntheses	of	all	the	polar	opposites.
It	is	possible.	If	it	is	possible	within	me,	it	is	possible	within	you,	because	there
is	no	distinction,	no	intrinsic	separation.	What	is	possible	for	one	human	being	is
possible	for	all	human	beings.
Swami	Prem	Dipamo.	Prem	means	love.	Dipamo	means	a	lamp,	a	light,	a	flame.
Love	is	the	light	of	the	inner	world.	A	man	without	love	is	a	man	without	light	--
he	is	just	a	dark	night,	and	a	long,	long	dark	night.	There	comes	no	dawn	to	such
a	man	because	only	 love	 can	bring	 light	 in.	Love	 is	 both	 light	 and	warmth.	 It
makes	you	livelier,	it	makes	you	more	intense,	passionate,	total;	it	gives	a	certain
flavour	and	fragrance	to	your	being.
A	man	without	 love	 is	 dull,	 flat.	 A	man	with	 love	 becomes	mysterious.	 Love
gives	him	new	dimensions,	 and	 the	most	 important	 of	 those	dimensions	 is	 the
dimension	of	light.	There	are	other	dimensions	also:	freedom,	bliss,	compassion,
truth,	godliness,	but	they	are	all	by-products	of	light.
But	 the	way	man	is	brought	up	 is	against	 the	possibility	of	 love.	 It	hinders	 the
growth	of	the	potential	of	love,	it	prevents	the	spring	coming	to	your	being.	The
whole	 educational	 system	 that	 exists	 today	 in	 all	 the	 countries	 and	which	 has
existed	 for	 ages	 is	nothing	but	 a	 conspiracy	against	 love.	 It	makes	you	 logical
but	 loveless,	 it	 makes	 you	 mathematical	 but	 it	 destroys	 your	 inner	 music.	 It
makes	you	calculative,	cunning,	but	it	does	not	give	you	intelligence,	wisdom.	It
makes	you	efficient;	 its	whole	effort	 is	 to	create	efficient	machines,	not	 loving
human	beings,	because	 the	 status	quo,	 the	establishment,	 the	 state,	 the	church,
the	nation,	the	society,	they	all	need	efficient	machines.
In	fact	they	are	afraid	of	authentic	human	beings	because	a	real	human	being	is
always	rebellious.	He	has	 to	be	rebellious;	he	has	to	continuously	rebel	against
all	 kinds	 of	 superstitions,	 stupidities.	He	 has	 to	 fight	 against	 the	 tradition,	 the
past,	the	burden	of	the	past;	he	has	to	shake	himself	free	of	the	burden.	He	has
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	cleanse	his	mirror	constantly	so	no	dust	gathers.	But	such	a	person	cannot	be
exploited,	 cannot	 be	 manipulated,	 cannot	 be	 regimented.	 Such	 a	 man	 is
dangerous	to	the	establishment.
The	 establishment	 does	 not	 want	 intelligent	 people:	 and	 love	 is	 the	 greatest
source	 of	 intelligence.	 The	 moment	 you	 are	 loving,	 your	 intelligence	 starts
reaching	 to	 its	 ultimate	 heights.	 Love	 is	 a	 new	way	 of	 seeing,	 a	 new	way	 of
being,	a	new	way	of	relating,	a	new	way	of	sharing.	It	is	a	transformation.
Logic	is	perfectly	good	for	the	society	because	if	you	are	logical	you	are	a	good
computer,	 if	 you	 are	mathematical	 you	 are	 usable,	 you	 are	 a	 commodity.	And
machines	never	rebel,	 they	never	say	no,	they	are	always	obedient	--	and	that's
what	the	society	has	always	wanted.	And	the	educational	system	is	an	agency	of
the	past	to	manipulate	the	present.
I	am	against	this	educational	system.	A	totally	new	kind	of	education	is	needed	-
-	 an	 education	which	helps	 a	man	 to	be	 an	 individual;	which	helps	 a	man	not
only	to	be	more	informed	but	more	transformed.
And	this	whole	miracle	can	happen	through	love.	Love	is	 the	most	 logical	and
the	most	magical	thing,	simultaneously.	It	is	a	paradox.	Because	it	is	logical	and
magical	 both,	 it	 contains	 contradictions	 within	 itself,	 but	 those	 contradictions
give	it	beauty,	they	give	it	grandeur,	they	make	it	something	of	a	splendour.
They	give	it	some	poetic	sensitivity,	some	aesthetic	understanding.
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	be	more	loving.	I	am	not	much	concerned	about
god	and	not	much	concerned	about	what	happens	after	death.	My	whole	concern
is	 what	 happens	 before	 death.	 And	 if	 love	 can	 happen	 then	 god	 is	 bound	 to
happen	to	you.
Jesus	says	god	of	love.	I	have	changed	it	a	little	bit;	I	say	love	is	god.	In	a	say	it
is	 a	 very	 small	 change,	 just	 the	 words	 have	 been	 arranged	 differently,	 but	 in
another	 say	 it	 is	 a	great	 change.	When	you	 say	god	 is	 love	 that	 simply	means
love	is	an	attribute	of	god	and	there	may	be	other	attributes	 too	--	 love	is	only
one	of	the	attribute.	But	when	you	say	love	is	god,	then	god	himself	is	nothing
but	an	attribute	of	love,	then	god	is	not	a	person,	then	god	is	only	the	fragrance
of	love,	a	quality.	You	cannot	worship	fragrance,	you	cannot	worship	a	quality.
The	old	idea	of	god	being	love	has	only	created	worshippers,	not	true	religious
people.	When	you	think	of	love	as	god	then	it	is	not	a	question	of	worshipping	or
going	 into	 a	 church	 or	 into	 a	 temple,	 praying,	 falling	 down	 before	 a	 statue,
talking	to	the	sky	--	which	is	all	simply	idiotic,	there	is	nobody	to	hear	you.	All
your	prayers	are	monologues,	they	are	not	dialogues	at	all;	you	are	talking	to	the
walls.	 It	 is	 childish,	 but	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religion	 that's	what	 people	 have	 been
doing	for	thousands	of	years.
To	me	love	has	to	be	lived,	there	is	no	other	prayer.	You	have	to	live	in	a	loving
way	--	and	that's	what	prayer	is.	You	need	not	go	to	the	church,	there	is	no	point.
Wherever	you	are	and	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	do	it	with	great	love,	with	great
care,	 and	 you	will	 be	 surprised:	when	 you	 do	 it	with	 love	 and	 care	 you	 do	 it
intelligently,	 you	do	 it	 in	 a	 totally	 new	way,	 as	 you	have	never	 done	 anything
before.
A	 sannyasin	 is	 one	 who	 changes	 his	 whole	 life	 into	 a	 loving	 phenomenon
twenty-four	hours	a	day.	Then	godliness	comes	as	a	shadow.	You	need	not	seek
it,	it	comes	of	its	own	accord.
Swami	 Gyan	 Atito.	 Gyan	 means	 knowledge.	 Atito	 means	 one	 who	 has	 gone
beyond.
Sannyas	is	a	transcendence	of	knowledge,	it	 is	going	beyond	knowledgeability.
It	is	again	becoming	like	a	child-innocent,	full	of	wonder	and	awe.	The	moment
you	have	 the	 idea	 that	you	know,	you	lose	your	 innocence,	Knowledge	 is	very
destructive	of	innocence	is	the	greatest	treasure.
Knowledge	is	nothing,	it	is	rubbish.	Just	knowing	where	Timbuctoo	is	or	where
Constantinople	is	or	who	Henry	the	Eighth	was...	and	losing	your	innocence	for
all	these	stupid	facts,	is	really	unbelievable!
What	has	man	been	doing?	Innocence	has	the	quality	of	flowers,	the	freshness	--
don't	destroy	it	by	unnecessary	rubbish.	And	people	go	on	accumulating	so	much
unnecessary	knowledge.
There	 must	 be	 some	 reason	 why	 people	 go	 on	 accumulating	 knowledge.	 The
only	 reason	 is	 that	 it	 gives	 you	 a	 sense	 of	 ego:	 "I	 know!"	 Knowledge	 is
secondary	but	 it	 feeds	 the	 idea	of	 the	I;	hence	one	goes	on	accumulating	more
and	more.	just	as	people	try	to	accumulate	money,	power,	prestige,	respectability,
they	accumulate	knowledge.	It	is	the	same	game,	the	same	ego	trip.
Socrates	 says	 at	 the	 very	 end	 of	 his	 life	 "I	 know	 only	 one	 thing,	 that	 I	 know
nothing."	That	 is	 the	moment	 he	 becomes	 a	wise	man,	 that	 is	 the	moment	 he
regains	his	childhood.	He	has	rediscovered	his	innermost	wonder,	again	his	eyes
are	 full	 of	 wonder.	 And	 the	 moment	 your	 eyes	 are	 full	 of	 wonder,	 existence
becomes	 mysterious.	 It	 happens	 simultaneously:	 if	 your	 eyes	 are	 full	 of
knowledge,	existence	is	demystified	--	and	a	demystified	existence	has	nothing
in	it,	just	bare	facts:	geography,	history,	chemistry,	physics,	;etcetera,	etcetera	--
all	 only	 facts,	 and	 you	 gave	 lost	 in	 those	 facts	 something	 which	 was	 really
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
precious,	you	have	lost	the	wonder,	the	awe.
Just	watch	a	small	child	 looking	at	a	 rose	flower:	he	stands	 there	 in	such	awe.
That	is	true	religiousness.
Watch	him	seeing	a	bird	on	the	wing:	he	looks	at	the	bird,	he	cannot	believe	it	--
he	 is	 so	 wide-eyed!	 His	 whole	 being	 has	 stopped	 for	 the	 moment,	 he	 is	 not
breathing.	Those	moments	when	you	come	to	a	full	stop	because	the	beauty	of
what	 you	 are	 experiencing	 is	 so	overwhelming	 that	 you	 forget	 to	 breathe,	 you
may	miss	a	heartbeat	 --	 those	are	 the	rare	moments	of	 life	when	man	becomes
aware	that	this	existence	is	not	just	facts,	there	is	a	truth	hidden	behind	the	facts.
And	that	truth	is	its	miraculousness,	its	mysteriousness!	Those	are	the	moments
when	you	can	say	"Ahhhh!"	with	your	whole	being.	Each	 fibre	of	your	being,
each	 cell	 of	 your	 being	 is	 dancing	 with	 "Ahhhh!"	 That	 moment	 makes	 one
enlightened.
Go	beyond	knowledge	because	it	is	all	rubbish,	go	beyond	mind	because	mind	is
nothing	 bur	 knowledge,	 go	 beyond	 all	 that	 you	 have	 accumulated	 to	 feed	 the
ego.
Once	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 fed	 it	 dies.	And	 to	 be	 egoless,	 innocent,	 is	what	 Buddha
Jesus,	Zarathustra,	Socrates,	have	been	trying	to	convey	to	the	world.
Swami	 Dhyan	 Siddho.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation.	 Siddho	 means	 one	 who	 has
arrived.
Meditation	is	the	goal.	We	are	all	moving	towards	it,	knowingly	or	unknowingly.
If	you	move	unknowingly	it	is	almost	impossible	for	you	to	reach,	because	there
are	thousands	of	ways	to	go	astray	and	only	one	way	to	reach	it.
There	 is	 a	 beautiful	 story	 about	 Diogenes	 --	 there	 are	 many	 beautiful	 stories
about	 this	 man.	 The	 Greeks	 have	 never	 produced	 another	 man	 of	 the	 same
quality.	 He	 was	 really	 a	 man	 who	 could	 have	 introduced	 the	 whole	 Zen
approached	 to	 the	 West,	 but	 nobody	 listened	 to	 him.	 People	 listened	 to	 his
antagonist,	Aristotle	--
they	were	the	enemies.
Aristotle	represented	logic,	and	of	course	logic	can	always	be	easily	understood,
and	it	is	useful	too.
Diogenes	 represented	 the	 illogical,	 but	 in	 his	 very	 illogicality	 he	 shows
tremendous	 insights.	 This	 story	 is	 very	 illogical	 and	 yet	 tremendously	 logical,
but	you	have	to	dug	deep	to	find	its	logic.
An	 amateur	 archer	was	 showing	 his	 archery	 in	 the	marketplace.	A	 crowd	 had
gathered	 and	 people	were	 laughing	 and	 enjoying	 the	whole	 foolishness	 of	 the
man,	because	not	a	single	arrow	was	reaching	the	target.
Diogenes	went	 there,	 looked	around	at	what	was	happening,	 and	 then	he	went
and	 sat	 just	 underneath	 the	 target.	 People	 said	 "Diogenes,	 are	 you	mad?	 That
man	can	kill	you!"	Diogenes	said	"This	is	the	last	place	he	will	ever	be	able	to
reach!	His	arrows	are	going	in	all	directions,	every	place	is	dangerous	--	this	is
the	only	place	which	 is	 secure!"	And	he	was	 right	 because	not	 a	 single	 arrow
reached	Diogenes	or	the	target!	It	is	said	that	not	only	did	he	sit	there,	he	went	to
sleep	(laughter):	he	was	so	safe	there,	so	secure.
Man	searching	unconsciously	has	no	possibility	of	ever	reaching,	because	only
one	door	reaches	 the	right	place	and	there	are	millions	of	wrong	doors.	Unless
one	starts	seeking	and	searching	consciously	there	is	no	hope.
Sannyas	is	a	deliberate	enquiry.	It	is	a	conscious	search,	so	conscious	that	we	can
reject,	eliminate,	all	 the	paths	 that	 lead	us	astray,	and	we	can	pinpoint	 the	goal
and	 move	 towards	 the	 goal	 with	 deep	 intensity	 and	 totality.	 The	 goal	 is
meditation.
Meditation	means	a	state	of	absolute	silence	where	not	even	a	single	thought	is
creating	 any	 noise,	 any	 flutter;	 where	 no	 desire	 is	 creating	 any	 ripple;	 where
there	 is	 no	 memory,	 no	 desire,	 no	 past,	 no	 future,	 no	 thought	 process	 at	 all;
where	 you	 are	 simply	 relaxed,	 totally	 at	 rest,	 utterly	 silent	 --	 that	 state	 is
meditation.
And	this	is	the	goal,	because	once	you	are	absolutely	silent	you	become	aware	of
the	 immense	 beauty	 of	 existence,	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 part	 of	 the
whole.	 You	 also	 become	 aware	 that	 you	 have	 never	 been	 separate,	 that	 the
separation	 was	 only	 an	 idea,	 a	 dream	 --	 you	 have	 always	 been	 one	 with	 the
whole.
Existence	is	an	organic	unity,	it	is	a	cosmos.
And	 because	 you	 thought	 yourself	 separate	 you	 created	 so	many	 unnecessary
anxieties,	problems,	worries.	They	were	all	by-products	of	the	basic	error	that	"I
am	separate".	Then	the	fear	of	death	arises:	if	you	are	separate	you	are	going	to
die.	If	you	are	not	separate	then	how	can	you	die?	If	you	are	not	separate	in	the
first	place,	you	were	never	born,	so	how	can	you	die?	You	were	before	your	birth
--	of	course,	not	in	this	form	--	and	you	will	be	here	after	your	death	--	of	course,
not	in	this	form.	So	only	forms	come	and	go,	the	reality	remains.	Only	the	non-
essential	changes,	the	essential	abides,	is	eternal	--	so	there	is	nothing	to	worry
about.
When	Maharishi	Ramana	was	dying,	a	disciple	asked	him	"Bhagwan,	after	your
death	where	will	you	go?"	Ramana	was	 in	great	physical	pain	because	he	had
cancer	of	the	throat.	In	his	last	days	it	had	become	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
almost	 impossible	 for	him	even	 to	 speak	a	 single	word.	He	could	not	 swallow
anything,	he	could	not	even	drink	water;	his	whole	throat	was	blocked	with	the
cancerous	growth.	But	when	this	disciple	asked	him
"Where	will	you	be	after	your	death?",	he	laughed.	It	was	a	miracle;	the	doctors
were	present	and	they	could	not	believe	how	he	could	laugh.	The	laughter	was
so	total	that	his	whole	body	was	laughing,	and	he	even	said	a	sentence.	For	days
he	had	not	 spoken,	but	 it	was	as	 if	 life	came	 rushing	back	 in.	He	 laughed	and
said
"Where	can	I	go?	I	have	always	been	here	and	I	will	always	be	here!	There	 is
nowhere	to	go!	Before	my	birth	I	was	here,	after	my	death	I	will	be	here."	And
this	was	his	last	statement	before	he	died.
Now	such	a	man	cannot	have	any	anxiety.	Such	a	man	cannot	be	worried,	cannot
have	any	nightmares.
Even	death	cannot	frighten	him.	He	has	dropped	the	idea	of	the	ego,	the	idea	of
reparation.
Meditation	 means	 the	 disappearance	 of	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 ego	 and	 all	 the
problems	that	are	created	by	the	ego	and	the	mind.	It	is	the	ultimate	goal.	Those
who	 have	 arrived	 are	 called	 siddhas;	 siddhas	mean	 those	who	 have	 found	 the
home.
Sannyas	is	a	journey	towards	the	home	--	and	the	home	is	not	far	away.	If	we	go
deliberately,	consciously,	we	are	bound	to	reach	it,	it	is	just	around	the	corner.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002055
ShortTitle:	NEVER05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Inger.
Anand	means	bliss.	Inger	means	inner	beauty.
It	is	easy	to	be	beautiful	on	the	outside,	it	is	difficult	to	be	beautiful	on	the	inside,
because	 the	 outer	 beauty	 belongs	 to	 the	 physical	 existence.	 It	 is	material,	 it	 is
visible	 --	 something	 can	 be	 done	 about	 it.	 It	 is	 an	 object:	 you	 can	 make	 it,
unmake	it,	change	it,	give	it	a	new	shape	--	everything	is	possible	--	but	the	inner
is	invisible,	intangible.	It	is	not	an	object.	It	is	your	very	subjectivity,	it	is	your
very	 being	 --	 it	 is	 you!	You	 cannot	 do	 anything	 about	 it,	 and	 that	 is	 the	most
important	 thing	 to	 understand:	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 about	 it,	 so	 one	 has	 to
learn	non-doing,	one	has	to	learn	being	still,	silent,	in	a	state	of	utter	non-doing,
no	effort.	And	in	that	very	state	of	non-doing	bliss	explodes.
It	 is	not	an	achievement,	because	you	have	not	done	anything	 for	 it.	You	have
just	to	be	available	for	it.
It	 comes	 from	 the	beyond,	 it	 is	 a	grace,	 a	gift.	But	once	you	have	 tasted	bliss
your	inner	world	blossoms.	It	becomes	fragrant,	luminous,	and	when	your	inner
world	has	a	beauty	it	certainly	affects	your	outer	side	too.
The	 outer	 can	 be	 painted	 in	 a	 beautiful	 way	 --	 it	 will	 not	 change	 the	 inner
because	the	inner	is	deeper.
But	if	you	change	the	inner	the	outer	is	bound	to	be	affected	by	it.	The	inner	is
the	 centre	 and	 the	 outer	 is	 the	 circumference.	 If	 the	 centre	 is	 transformed,	 the
circumference	follows	like	a	shadow.
But	you	can	go	on	changing	the	circumference:	the	centre	will	not	come	like	a
shadow	following	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sannyas	 is	 the	 search	 for	 inner	 beauty.	 Your	 name	 exactly	 defines	 the	 very
essence	of	sannyas.	To	me	beauty	is	a	far	more	significant	word	than	truth.
Truth	is	dry,	desertlike,	juiceless.	It	is	a	logical	concept.	Beauty	is	full	of	juice,
life,	love,	warmth.	It	is	an	aesthetic	experience.
God	is	more	approximately	defined	by	beauty	 than	by	 truth,	and	 to	understand
god	as	the	ultimate	beauty	is	to	have	a	totally	different	kind	of	religion.	Then	it	is
not	 philosophical,	 it	 becomes	 poetic.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 theological,	 then	 it	 is	 not
unnecessarily	 splitting	 hairs,	 argument,	 systematising	 words	 and	 thoughts.	 it
becomes	creativity,	it	becomes	more	of	a	dance,	more	of	a	love,	more	of	a	song,
more	of	a	celebration.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Bill.
Anand	means	bliss.	Bill	means	resolution.
Misery	 or	 bliss,	 both	 are	 our	 resolutions.	We	 don't	 come	 in	 the	 world	 with	 a
programme,	we	come	totally	free	to	decide	our	own	destiny.	We	don't	come	with
a	fate,	with	a	predetermined	future.	We	come	with	an	open	future.	And	each	act
defines	our	being,	but	the	action	is	our	choice;	hence	nobody	is	responsible	for
your	bliss	or	for	your	misery.
This	is	the	first	step	of	sannyas	that	"I	am	responsible	and	totally	responsible."
Once	 this	 is	 understood	 that	 "I	 am	 responsible	 for	 whatsoever	 I	 am,"	 a	 great
freedom	becomes	available.	Then	each	moment	you	can	choose	to	be	miserable
or	to	be	blissful.	Each	moment	both	the	paths	are	available,	each	moment	both
the	doors	open,	but	because	we	live	with	this	idea	--	and	we	have	lived	with	this
idea	for	thousand	of	years	that	everything	is	determined...
First	 all	 the	 religions	 of	 the	world	 gave	 the	 idea	 of	 fate,	 kismet,	 destiny,	 god
determines	 --	 then	 we	 become	 simply	 puppets.	 All	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 world
have	made	man	 unfree,	 puppetlike.	 They	 have	 destroyed	 the	 most	 significant
phenomenon,	 the	 phenomenon	 of	 responsibility.	 It	 is	 responsibility	 that	makes
you	really	human.	All	other	animals	have	no	such	freedom.	They	have	fate.
A	 dog	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 a	 dog,	 a	 lion	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 a	 lion.	 Everything	 is
programmed	 by	 nature	 or	 god	 or	whatsoever	 name	 one	wants	 to	 use,	 but	 one
thing	 is	 certain:	 they	 come	 with	 a	 programme	 and	 they	 simply	 unfold	 the
programme.
It	is	only	man	and	his	prerogative	that	he	comes	without	a	programme.	This	is	to
be	 the	declaration	of	a	 sannyasin,	 this	 is	going	 to	be	 the	basic	 foundation	of	a
future	religiousness:	responsibility.
Religions	 told	 man	 that	 it	 is	 fate,	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 about	 it;	 hence
religious	 societies,	 for	 example,	 India,	 has	 lived	 in	 a	 misery,	 in	 a	 slavery,	 in
poverty,	 in	 every	 kind	 of	 degradation,	 oppression,	 exploitation,	 with	 no
complaint,	thinking	that	it	is	all	determined,	you	cannot	do	anything	about	it,	it
has	 to	be	so.	This	degrades	man,	 it	does	not	make	man	spiritual.	 it	makes	him
mechanical,	 and	even	 the	people	who	area	not	 religious	 in	 same	way	or	other,
have	supported	the	idea.
They	 will	 not	 use	 the	 name	 of	 god	 and	 fate,	 then	 they	 will	 say	 nature,
physiology,	 chemistry...	 but	 you	 are	 programmed	 still.	Who	 programmes	 does
not	matter.	Or	even	people	who	are	anti-religious,	deliberately	against	religion,
for	example,	Karl	Marx,	Sigmund	Freud	and	others,	 they	are	again	 talking	 the
same	thing	in	different	words.	Only	the	jargon	changes.
Karl	 Marx	 says	 it	 is	 the	 society,	 the	 economic	 structure,	 that	 determines.
Individuality	 is	 completely	 destroyed,	 there	 is	 no	 individuality	 possible
according	 to	 communism.	 Even	 consciousness	 is	 just	 a	 by-product	 of	 social
conditions	--	what	can	you	do?	You	are	born	in	a	certain	social	structure	and	you
have	to	follow;	the	way	you	are	made,	the	way	you	are	programmed,	you	have	to
unfold	it.	Hegel	calls	it	History,	with	a	capital	H.	It	becomes	the	same:	God,	with
a	capital	G.	History	determines.	And	Sigmund	Freud	says	it	is	your	unconscious,
you	cannot	do	anything	about	it	--	what	can	you	do?	It	is	your	unconscious.	All
your	activity	 is	 confined	 to	a	 small	piece	of	consciousness	 that	 is	one-tenth	of
your	 being;	 nine-tenth	 of	 your	 being	 is	 unconscious	 and	 everything	 is
determined	from	the	unconscious.
Gustav	Jung	goes	a	little	even	deeper:	he	says	it	is	not	only	your	unconscious	but
there	 is	 beneath	 your	 unconscious	 a	 collective	 unconscious	 that	 determines
everything.
This	has	been	up	to	now,	the	idea	around	which	all	 the	philosophies,	religions,
psychologies,	 have	 revolved.	 They	 are	 all	 in	 agreement	 about	 one	 basic	 thing
that	man	 is	not	 responsible,	and	 they	were	 thinking	 this	 is	helping	man,	 this	 is
taking	 away	 his	 burden.	 Yes,	 in	 a	 way	 man	 feels	 unburdened	 if	 he	 is	 not
responsible,	but	 at	 the	 same	 time	he	 loses	his	 freedom.	The	burden	disappears
but	he	become	a	slave.
It	 is	better	 to	be	burdened	and	be	a	 free	man,	 than	 to	be	unburdened	and	be	a
slave.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	you	totally	free!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	a	great	risk	to	be	totally	free,	to	be	responsible	for	each	act,	to	be	one's	own
creator,	to	be	one's	own	god,	in	other	words,	but	this	is	how	a	real	being	is	born.
And	this	is	my	own	experience,	because	whatsoever	I	say,	I	say	only	if	it	is	my
experience.
I	am	not	an	intellectual,	I	am	not	a	philosopher.	Whatsoever	I	say	has	its	roots	in
my	own	experience.
This	is	how	one	day	I	dropped	to	be	miserable,	I	decided	not	to	be	miserable,	in
a	single	moment	(laughter)	and	since	then	I	not	been	miserable!(more	laughter)
Every	 day	 there	 are	 opportunities,	 thousand	 and	 one	 opportunities	 (laughter)...
Once	 you	 decide	 totally,	 once	 you	 resolve	 that	 from	 now	 on	 towards	 bliss	 is
going	to	be	your	very	lifestyle,	you	will	be	surprised:	it	starts	happening!	(more
laughter)	 For	 few	 days	 one	 cannot	 believe	 one's	 own	 eyes	 that	 it	 is	 really
happening,	 one	 cannot	 believe	 where	 all	 that	 misery	 has	 gone,	 and	 all	 those
causes	 and	 psychoanalysts	 were	 going	 into	 dreams	 and	 unconscious	 and	 the
collective	unconscious	--
where	all	they	have	disappeared?	(much	laughter)	Just	like	that:	wipe	the	whole
misery	away,	and	let	there	be	laughter	and	love	and	joy!
How	long	you	will	be	here?	How	long	you	will	be	staying?
-I'll	be	here	two	months.
-And	now	...	you	will	be	staying?
-Two	months.
-More?
-Yeah,	 I've	 been	 here	 three	weeks.	 I'll	 be	 staying	 (much	 laughter)	 (lost	 in	 the
visual	and	in	the	laughter...)
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Robert.
Anand	means	bliss.	Robert	means	bright.
Bliss	is	the	brightest	experience.	There	is	nothing	more	luminous	than	bliss.	One
of	the	great	mystics,	Kabir,	says	"When	I	felt	bliss	for	the	first	time	I	thought	as
if	thousands	of	suns	have	risen	suddenly	inside
--	thousands	of	suns!"
Ordinarily	man	 lives	 in	 darkness.	Bliss	 brings	 the	 day,	 the	 dawn.	The	English
word	"day"	and	the	word
"divine"	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 Sanskrit	 root	 "div".	 Light	 is	 divine;	 hence	 the
word	"day",	and	hence	the	word	"divine".
Light	 is	 the	most	 godly	 experience.	 There	 is	 no	 god	 to	 be	 seen,	 god	 is	 not	 a
person,	but	only	a	quality.
When	you	start	feeling	an	inner	brightness,	when	the	inner	darkness	disappears,
you	know	god	is,	because	you	are	it.	That's	the	only	way	to	know.	God	cannot	be
proved	in	any	other	way.	When	you	experience	inner	light	you	know.	Seeing	is
knowing;	 it	 is	not	a	question	of	belief,	 it	 is	a	question	of	seeing.	The	believers
are	 deceiving	 others	 and	 themselves.	No	 believer	 is	 religious,	 no	 believer	 can
ever	be	religious.	He	is	a	hypocrite.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 not	 to	 be	 believers.	 they	 have	 to	 be	 enquirers,	 explorers.
Sannyas	begins	 in	a	certain	 state	of	agnosticism,	neither	atheist	nor	 theist,	 just
open	and	available,	carrying	no	prejudice	--	that	is	the	meaning	of	agnostic:	one
who	 believes	 nothing.	 That	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 he	 disbelieves,	 he	 neither
believes	 nor	 disbelieves.	 He	 simply	 says	 "I	 don't	 know,	 so	 I	 am	 ready	 to
explore."	He	 starts	with	 a	 state	 of	 not-knowing,	 and	 that	 is	 the	most	 profound
phenomenon	--	to	begin	with	a	state	of	not-knowing.	And	then	the	day	is	not	far
away	because	you	have	 taken	 the	most	 intelligent	 step	possible.	The	 fools	 are
either	believers	or	disbelievers,	either	Catholics	or	communists,	but	they	are	the
same.	Their	flags	are	different,	their	popes	are	different,	their	bibles	are	different,
their	gods	are	different,	but	their	belief	is	the	same.
Somebody	 is	 carrying	 the	 Holy	 Bible	 and	 somebody	 is	 carrying	Das	Kapital,
somebody	believes	in	Moses,	somebody	believes	in	Marx,	somebody	believes	in
Kaaba	 and	 somebody	 believes	 in	 Kremlin	 --	 it	 is	 the	 same	 stupidity	 because
every	disbelief	is	in	some	way	or	other	a	belief.
Somebody	believes	god	 is	without	knowing	and	somebody	believes	god	 is	not
without	knowing:	both	are	travelling	in	the	land	of	the	fools.
A	sannyasin	has	 to	drop	all	belief,	 and	belief	 includes	disbelief	 too.	He	has	 to
unburden	himself	from	all	prejudices	so	that	his	eyes	are	open,	alert,	ready	to	see
whatsoever	is	 the	case.	This	is	 the	beginning	of	intelligence.	Intelligence	is	 the
seed	of	brightness,	and	when	intelligence	blossoms	life	becomes	divine,	the	dark
night	of	the	soul	is	over.	The	day	has	begun!
How	long	you	will	be	here?
-One	month.
-That's	good.	Good.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Sankirtan.
Anand	means	bliss.	Sankirtan	means	a	sacred	song.
Life	can	be	 lived	either	as	a	mundane	affair	or	 as	a	 sacred	phenomenon.	 It	 all
depends	on	us.	If	one	is	running	after	money,	power,	prestige,	then	life	remains
mundane,	then	life	remains	in	the	marketplace	--
ugly,	 violent,	 aggressive,	 inhuman	 --	 because	 all	 those	 desires	 can	 be	 fulfilled
only	if	you	are	cruel,	competitive	and	violently	competitive,	because	life	is	short
and	the	competitors	are	millions.	And	they	are	all	searching	for	the	same	goals:
the	 same	 money,	 the	 same	 power,	 the	 same	 prestige.	 So	 it	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a
cutthroat	competition.	Everybody	is	at	everybody	else	neck.
To	live	a	life	in	this	way	is	to	miss	a	great	opportunity.	Life	can	be	a	beautiful
experience,	 but	 it	 becomes	 a	 nightmare	 instead.	 To	 live	 life	 as	 a	 sacred
phenomenon	one	has	to	drop	these	constant	ugly	monsters	which	are	implanted
by	 the	society	 in	our	head.	They	are	almost	 like	electrodes,	 implanted,	and	we
think	that	we	are	desiring	--	that's	not	true.
No	 child	 is	 interested	 in	 money.	 No	 child	 is	 interested	 in	 ego.	 No	 child	 is
interested	 in	power.	But	we	drive	 them	towards	 these	goals.	We	educate	 them,
we	call	this	education.	This	whole	process	of	corruption	we	call	it	education.	We
make	them	ambitious,	egoistic,	full	of	lust	for	power,	and	slowly	slowly	by	the
time	they	come	home	from	the	university	their	one-third	life	is	already	wasted	in
programming	 them,	 and	 it	 is	 a	 long	 process,	 twenty-five	 years;	 now	 to
deprogramme	 it	 becomes	 difficult.	And	 if	 the	 person	 himself	 is	 not	willing	 to
deprogramme	it,	it	is	impossible.
Sannyas	simply	means	your	willingness	to	be	deprogrammed.	If	one	is	willing	it
can	be	done	very	quickly,	 if	one	is	clinging	to	one's	programme	then	it	 is	very
difficult;	it	cannot	be	done	against	you.	It	can	be	done	only	through	your	willing
co-operation,	only	through	your	deep	surrender,	commitment,	to	have	a	new	life.
When	a	man	 is	 not	 searching	 toys,	when	he	 starts	 really	 involved	 in	 the	 inner
search,	of	love,	of	bliss,	of	beauty,	of	truth,	of	freedom,	then	his	life	becomes	a
sacred	song.	Then	thousands	of	songs	arise	in	his	being!
Then	 it	 is	 something	 really	 precious.	 Even	 death	 cannot	 destroy	 this	 beauty.
Death	 is	 incapable	 against	 it.	 Death	 will	 take	 away	 everything	 that	 you
accumulate	on	 the	outside,	 but	 that	which	you	have	 experienced	 in	your	 inner
consciousness	 is	 beyond	 death,	 it	 is	 beyond	 time	 itself.	 It	 is	 part	 of	 eternity.
That's	why	I	call	it	a	sacred	song.
One	can	sing	a	mundane	song	--	millions	of	people	are	doing	 that	 --	but	 those
songs	are	not	going	to	last.
Death	will	 come	 and	destroy!	And	when	death	 is	 going	 to	 destroy	 all	 that	we
have	done	was	futile,	an	exercise	in	utter	futility.	The	only	thing	worth	doing	is
that	which	cannot	be	destroyed	by	death	--	that	should	be	the	criterion.
Love	cannot	be	destroyed,	bliss	cannot	be	destroyed,	truth	cannot	be	destroyed,
beauty	 cannot	 be	 destroyed,	 consciousness	 cannot	 be	 destroyed,	 and	 these	 are
the	aspects	of	your	inner	diamond.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Dhyanesh.
Anand	means	bliss.	Dhyanesh	means	god	of	meditation.
Bliss	 is	 the	god	of	meditation.	We	are	not	searching	for	any	other	god.	We	are
not	searching	god	as	a	person,	because	there	is	nobody	like	that.	those	are	all	just
childish	fantasies.	The	god	of	Christians	and	the	Hindus	and	the	Mohammedans
and	the	Jews,	is	nothing	but	our	projection.	The	Bible	says	god	created	man	in
his	own	image.	The	truth	is	just	the	contrary:	man	created	god	in	his	own	image
And	it	is	so	obvious.
Look	 in	 the	 Old	 Testament	 and	 you	will	 find	 all	 the	 Jewish	 qualities	 in	 god!
Look	in	the	Bhagavad	Gita	and	you	will	find	all	the	Hindu	qualities	in	god.	Look
in	the	Koran	and	you	will	find	all	the	qualities	of	Mohammedans	in	their	concept
of	god.
These	 are	 not	 truths,	 these	 are	 just	 wish-fulfilments.	We	 are	 creating	 our	 god
according	to	our	desires	No	such	gods	exits.	The	only	god	that	truly	exists	is	an
experience	of	bliss.	And	 to	 experience	bliss	 the	way	 is	meditation,	 not	 prayer,
but	meditation.	Prayer	belongs	to	the	idea	of	god	as	a	person.	When	you	think	of
god	as	a	person	somewhere	there	above	the	clouds	then	prayer	becomes	relevant,
then	it	is	an	I-thou	dialogue.	You	say	something	to	god	and	hope	that	some	day
the	answer	will	come	--	it	never	comes,	or	if	it	comes	that	simply	means	you	are
hallucinating	(laughter),	that	you	are	putting	the	question	and	you	are	answering
it	 too.	 You	 are	 hearing	 voices	 which	 are	 not	 there,	 your	 own	 voices	 you	 are
hearing.
In	 fact	 this	 whole	 attitude	 is	 insane,	 and	 religions	 have	 created	 a	 very	 insane
humanity.	Their	words	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
beautiful	prayer.	If	you	go	into	a	mad	asylum	you	will	find	mad	people	talking	--
sitting	alone	--	and	having	great	argument	with	somebody.	You	cannot	see,	but
they	must	be	seeing.	They	are	not	only	saying	 things	 to	 the	person	who	 is	not
there.	They	are	even	answering	from	his	side.	And	the	very	articulate	madmen
use	different	voices.
If	 you	 are	 listening	 from	 far	 away	 or	 not	 seeing	 the	 person	 actually,	 from	 a
distance	or	behind	a	wall	you	are	standing,	you	may	really	 think	 there	are	 two
persons,	 but	 it	 is	 a	monologue.	The	 person	 is	 really	 a	 ventriloquist.	But	when
you	call	it	prayer	suddenly	it	seems	very	great,	nothing	insanity	in	it,	no	madness
in	it.
Prayer	 simply	 means	 you	 are	 talking	 to	 the	 sky.	 The	 answer	 is	 not	 going	 to
come.	There	is	nobody	to	answer	it!
Meditation	is	a	totally	different	approach.	It	is	not	a	dialogue,	it	is	a	silence.	You
are	 not	 saying	 anything	 to	 anybody,	 you	 are	 stopping	 the	 very	 process	 of
thought,	you	are	dispersing	the	crowd	of	words	inside	you.
You	are	emptying	yourself,	creating	inner	space.	And	when	your	inner	space	is
totally	free	from	all	junk	--
words,	 thoughts,	memories,	desires,	dreams,	 imaginations	 --	when	all	 are	gone
and	 you	 are	 simply	 there,	 silently	 there,	 experiencing	 this	 tremendous
nothingness,	 that	 is	 the	moment	when	bliss	is	felt	for	the	first	 time.	And	to	me
bliss	 is	 the	 true	 god.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 call	 it	 godliness	 because	 it	 is	 a	 quality,	 an
experience,	not	an	object.
Meditation	means	 silence	 and	 bliss	means	 the	 experience	 that	 happens	 in	 that
silence.	And	once	you	have	experienced	bliss	you	have	experienced	everything
worth	experiencing,	you	have	touched	the	very	essential	core	of	existence.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Sudhiyo.
Anand	means	bliss.	Sudhiyo	means	remembrance.
The	experience	of	bliss	is	not	something	that	is	unknown	to	us;	we	have	known
it.	We	came	into	the	world	full	of	bliss,	but	we	have	forgotten	the	experience,	we
have	forgotten	the	way	to	it.	We	got	lost	into	other	things.	It	is	just	like	a	small
child	 entering	 into	 a	 supermarket	 with	 the	 mother	 and	 he	 becomes	 so	 much
interested	 in	 the	 thousands	 of	 things	 around	 him	 that	 he	 forgets	 all	 about	 the
mother.	He	becomes	so	 involved	with	 the	 toys	and	 this	and	 that,	 that	when	he
feels	hungry	or	thirsty	or	some	other	need	for	the	mother,	he	looks	all	around	and
he	is	in	a	panic.	He	does	not	know	where	he	has	lost	the	mother	and	where	he
can	find	her.
Actually,	the	same	is	the	case	with	every	human	being.	We	come	with	bliss,	but
the	world	is	so	big	and	has	so	many	things	and	they	are	all	beautiful,	attractive,
enchanting....	 It	 is	 a	 magic	 world,	 and	 every	 child	 is	 bound	 to	 get	 lost;	 it	 is
natural,	 it	 is	 inevitable.	 The	 only	 thing	 that	 is	 unfortunate	 is	 that	 millions	 of
people	never	remember	that	they	came	with	a	great	experience	in	their	being	and
they	have	lost	track	of	it.	They	go	on	moving	from	one	object	to	another	object,
from	 the	 cradle	 to	 the	 grave.	 They	 live	 and	 they	 die	 without	 ever	 becoming
aware	that	this	was	not	the	real	life.	They	got	distracted.
Sannyas	 means	 remembrance	 of	 that	 innocence	 which	 was	 once	 ours,	 of	 that
bliss	which	was	once	ours,	of	that	love	which	was	once	ours.
It	 is	natural	 to	get	 lost,	but	 it	 is	not	natural	 to	remain	 lost.	One	day	one	has	 to
recollect,	remember,	search	for	a	way	back	home.	Sannyas	is	a	home	sickness.	It
is	the	deep	feeling	that	something	is	missing,	which	was	there	in	the	first	place,
but	it	has	been	misplaced	and	it	has	to	be	rediscovered.
Sudhiyo	means	rediscovery,	remembering,	regaining,	reclaiming.	And	it	is	there
inside	us.	We	have	not	 lost	 it	 somewhere	else,	 it	 is	our	very	essence,	our	very
being.	 So	 we	 have	 not	 lost	 it	 anywhere	 else,	 it	 is	 still	 inside	 us	 but	 we	 have
forgotten	how	to	go	in.	We	know	only	how	to	go	out,	we	know	only	how	to	do
things.
We	have	forgotten	how	to	relax	and	not	to	do.	We	know	how	to	open	the	eyes,
but	we	have	forgotten	how	to	close	them.	We	know	how	to	use	the	mind,	but	we
have	forgotten	how	to	put	it	off.
And	this	is	the	whole	process	of	meditation:	the	art	of	looking	in,	the	art	of	non-
doing,	the	art	of	resting,	relaxing	into	one's	own	being;	the	art	of	putting	a	stop	to
the	 constant	 noise	 of	 the	mind.	 Then	 suddenly	 the	music	 is	 heard	 --	 our	 own
music,	our	own	humming	sound,	the	sound	of	our	own	juices	flowing,	the	sound
of	which	we	are	made.
It	 is	also	a	 light,	 it	 is	also	a	bliss,	 it	 is	also	a	 tremendous	ecstasy,	and	once	we
have	experienced	it	knowingly...	The	child	had	it	without	knowing	it;	when	we
rediscover	it	we	have	it	knowingly.	Then	there	is	no	way	to	forget	it	again.	That's
why	I	say	it	is	natural	for	the	child	to	lose	it,	but	it	is	also	natural	to	regain	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 intelligent	 person	 is	 one	 who	 regains	 it.	 The	 stupid	 person	 is	 one	 who
remains	miserable,	searching	everywhere	else	except	within	himself.	He	is	ready
to	go	to	the	moon	in	search	of	something	which	he	has	already	inside	him.	He
will	 not	 find	 it	 even	on	 the	moon,	 because	 he	will	 be	 the	 same	person.	That's
why	I	don't	suggest	to	my	people	to	go	to	the	monasteries	or	to	mountains	or	to
the	deserts.	I	want	them	to	live	in	the	world	--	very	much	in	the	world,	and	yet
going	on	searching	within	themselves.
Then	a	miracle	happens:	one	day	you	have	again	found	your	center	and	you	start
living	out	 of	 that	 center.	You	 live	 in	 the	world	but	 now	your	 life	has	 a	 totally
different	 quality	 to	 it.	Now	 it	 has	 joy	 surrounding	 it,	 now	 each	 act	 is	 blissful.
Each	 response	 is	 full	 of	 love,	 and	whatsoever	you	do	has	grace,	beauty,	 and	a
touch	of	the	beyond.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002065
ShortTitle:	NEVER06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Gloria.
Anand	means	bliss.	Gloria	means	glory,	glorious.
Man	is	born	with	a	potential	to	be	blissful	but	it	is	only	a	potential.	Unless	one
works	upon	it,	it	never	becomes	actual.	it	is	only	a	seed,	with	great	possibilities,
with	many	 flowers,	 but	 they	 are	 not	 yet	 real.	 They	 exist	 in	 the	 invisible;	 they
have	to	be	brought	into	the	world	of	visibility,	tangibility.
Very	 few	 people	make	 any	 effort	 to	 transform	 their	 potential	 into	 reality.	 The
reason	is	they	think	that	this	is	what	life	is	all	about.	They	take	it	for	granted	that
birth	is	the	beginning	of	an	opportunity	in	which	life	is	possible	but	only	if	you
work	for	it,	if	you	make	efforts	towards	it,	if	you	dig	deep	into	your	being.
The	seeds	needs	a	soil,	a	certain	climate.	In	the	same	way	man	deeds	a	certain
soil,	a	certain	climate,	a	certain	methodology,	a	certain	art,	to	blossom.	And	the
moment	 one	 blossoms	 there	 is	 bliss,	 fulfillment,	 contentment,	 and
simultaneously	there	is	glory,	otherwise	people	only	live	an	undignified	life	with
no	glory,	but	only	guilt.	They	live	in	darkness,	they	live	closed,	and	nobody	else
is	responsible	except	themselves.
You	can	carry	a	flute	your	whole	life	without	playing	upon	it,	you	can	have	the
most	beautiful	musical	instrument	with	you,	but	you	will	have	to	learn	the	art	to
play	it,	otherwise	it	is	an	unnecessary	burden.	The	same	thing	that	can	become	a
glory	can	also	become	just	a	burden	--	and	that's	what	is	happening	to	millions	of
people:	their	potential	is	like	a	mountainous	burden	for	them	--	they	would	like
to	get	rid	of	it,	not	knowing	its	hidden	treasures.	Sannyas	means	the	beginning	of
the	effort	 towards	transformation,	a	commitment,	an	involvement,	a	decision,	a
resolution,	that	"I	will	make	every	possible	effort	to	know	my	hiddenmost	core,
to	discover	my	kingdom	of	god."
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Satyabhakta.
Satyabhakta	means	devoted	only	to	the	truth.
People	 are	 living	 in	 lies.	 Of	 course	 those	 lies	 are	 beautiful,	 comfortable,
convenient,	they	give	a	certain	consolation.	But	lies	are	lies	after	all;	they	cannot
help.	They	function	like	opium.	They	can	help	to	forget	the	misery,	they	can	be
used	 as	 tranquilizers,	 but	 they	 are	 not	 really	 going	 to	 change	 the	 real	 disease.
They	only	hide	the	symptoms.
And	millions	 of	 people	 in	 the	 world	 have	 lived	 according	 to	 convenient	 lies.
They	call	 them	truths,	 they	have	to	call	 them	truth.	If	 they	know	that	it	 is	a	lie
then	it	is	impossible	to	live	with	it.	They	insist	it	is	truth,	but	the	basic	quality	of
truth	is	that	it	has	to	be	your	own	discovery.
Truth	is	not	transferable;	nobody	can	give	it	to	you.	You	have	to	discover	it	by
your	 own	 effort.	 Hence	 whatsoever	 one	 gets	 from	 others	 can	 at	 the	 most	 a
beautiful	 lie,	 a	 nice,	 sweet	 lie.	 And	 one	 can	 surround	 oneself	 with	 sweet
nothings,	but	this	is	a	dangerous	game,	because	one	is	losing	the	opportunity,	the
time,	the	energy,	which	could	have	made	the	world	of	truth	available	to	you.
Devotion	 to	 truth	means:	 "Now,	 I	 will	 not	 belong	 to	 any	 tradition,	 I	 will	 not
belong	to	any	cult,	any	creed;	I	will	inquire.	I	will	believe	only	when	I	know	--
not	before	that."
Unless	you	decide	this,	truth	remains	far	away.	The	moment	the	decision	settles
in	your	heart,	 it	 is	not	 far	away;	 then	you	 just	have	 to	 remove	a	 few	cobwebs,
that's	 all.	 It	 is	 a	 simple	 phenomenon:	 a	 little	 dust	 has	 to	 be	 removed	 from	 the
mirror	and	it	immediately	reflects	the	real.
A	sannyasin	does	not	belong	to	any	religion,	does	not	belong	to	any	philosophy,
does	not	belong	to	any	dogma,	any	church.	He	simply	belongs	to	the	inquiry,	to
the	only	god	--	the	truth	--	whatsoever	the	cost.
Even	if	one	has	to	lose	one's	life	for	it,	it	is	worth	it,	because	this	life	is	going	to
be	 lost	 anyway.	 It	 is	 already	 going	 down	 the	 drain.	 Every	 moment	 death	 is
coming	closer	and	life	is	disappearing.	Losing	it	is	inevitable,	so	if	you	can	lose
it	on	the	way	to	truth,	it	is	worth	it.	Once	you	know	the	truth,	you	know	eternal
life,	you	know	that	which	begins	and	ends	never.
And	 that	 should	 be	 the	 only	 devotion,	 the	 only	 surrender.	 So	 let	 your	 name
become	a	reality.	Good.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Dhyan.
Anand	means	bliss.	Dhyan	means	meditation.
Man	has	been	concerned	with	meditation	for	 thousands	of	years.	Man	has	also
been	concerned	about	bliss,	since	the	very	beginning	if	there	was	any	beginning
ever,	but	somehow	either	a	man	has	tried	towards	the	goal	of	bliss	or	towards	the
goal	of	meditation.	The	reason	is	clear	why	it	happened:	they	became	either/or,
they	became	alternatives.	Somehow	it	became	settled	 is	human	mind	 that	both
cannot	be	possible	together.	It	did	not	happen	accidentally,	I	can	see	the	reason
why	it	did	happen:	it	is	easier	to	be	meditative	if	you	forget	about	blissfulness;
one	can	be	silent,	one	can	be	calm	and	quiet,	because	blissfulness	has	a	certain
element	of	excitement.
It	is	a	beautiful	turmoil,	it	is	a	beautiful	chaos.	It	has	something	passionate	in	it.
It	disturbs	the	so-called	silence,	the	calmness,	the	quietness,	the	equilibrium.
Bliss	brings	dance	 in,	 it	brings	songs	 in,	 it	brings	celebration	 in,	and	 the	silent
person	feels	distracted,	He	wants	 to	go	 to	 the	desert,	 to	 the	monasteries,	 to	 the
mountains	so	that	there	is	no	distraction	--	and	bliss	seems	to	be	one	of	the	most
powerful	distractions,	very	magnetic,	very	tempting.	So	it	was	easier	to	drop	the
whole	idea	of	bliss	and	just	settle	with	the	idea	of	silence.	And	the	same	was	true
for	 the	 other	 alternative:	 the	 people	who	decided	 to	 be	 blissful,	who	were	 not
ready	to	drop	the	joys,	the	pleasures,	the	excitements,	the	sensations	of	life,	who
were	not	ready	to	renounce	the	beauty,	love	who	were	tremendously	interested	in
creativity,	 in	music,	 in	poetry,	 they	decides	 that	 it	 is	better	not	 to	bother	about
silence,	because	silence	becomes	a	distraction	from	the	goal	of	bliss.
It	 was	 easier	 to	 follow	 one,	 so	 whichever	 one	 has	 chosen,	 one	 has	 chosen	 it
against	the	other	--	and	this	became	a	calamity,	because	bliss	without	silence	is
feverish.	Yes,	there	is	excitement	but	it	is	tiring,	there	is	no	real	nourishment	in
it.	Bliss	without	silence	sooner	or	later	exhausts	one,	makes	one	utterly	fed	up.
The	man	who	has	been	seeking	only	bliss	and	avoiding	meditativeness	may	end
up	 in	suicide,	because	sooner	or	 later	he	has	experienced	all	 the	 joys	and	 then
they	 become	 repetitive	 and	 repetition	 brings	 boredom.	 Then	 there	 is	 no
excitement	 and	 when	 you	 are	 enjoying	 many	 joys	 you	 start	 getting	 fed	 up,
because	from	where	you	can	find	new	sensations	every	day?	And	all	those	joys
create	stress,	 strain,	 tension;	 they	keep	you	always	 in	a	state	of	 fever,	an	 inner
trembling.	It	cannot	be	prolonged	for	long	One	starts	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
thinking	 "It	 is	 better	 to	 finish	 this	 whole	 game."	 One	 starts	 seeing	 the	 utter
futility	of	it.
And	the	people	who	have	chosen	to	be	silent	without	bliss	start	becoming	more
and	more	dull	 and	dead,	 stale,	 stagnant.	Their	 life	 juices	are	no	more	 flowing,
they	are	no	more	rivers;	 they	have	become	muddy	ponds,	very	 limited,	closed,
afraid,	always	afraid	--	afraid	because	they	have	renounced	joys	and	whatsoever
you	have	 renounced	 becomes	more	 attractive.	 they	 have	 repressed	 their	 desire
for	pleasure,	and	whatsoever	 is	 repressed	comes	again	and	again,	asserts	again
and	 again.	 That's	why	 the	 saints,	 the	 so-called	 saints	 are	 so	much	 tempted	 by
devil.
There	 is	 no	 devil	 at	 all.	 I	 have	 searched	 everywhere	 (laughter)	 --	 I	 have	 not
found	any	devil.	Because	I	never	did	the	basic	thing	in	which	you	are	bound	to
find	 the	 devil:	 I	 never	 repressed.	 It	 is	 repression	 that	 becomes	 devil.	 If	 you
repress	then	the	temptation,	if	you	repress	the	desire	for	anything	then	that	desire
remains	 inside	 you.	You	 can	 force	 it	 for	 a	 time-being	 but	 you	 cannot	 force	 it
forever,	because	 to	keep	 it	 repressed	energy	 is	needed	 -	you	 start	getting	 tired.
Sometimes	 you	 need	 rest	 and	when	 you	 are	 resting	 the	 repressed	 desire	 starts
uncoiling	like	a	serpent.	Hence	the	serpent	became	the	symbol	of	the	devil;	it	is
significant	that	it	was	the	serpent	who	seduced	Adam	and	Eve	in	the	beginning.
Serpent	represents	the	repressed,	coiled	energy.	You	have	forced	it,	it	is	there	in
the	unconscious.	The	moment	you	rest,	relax-that's	why	the	saints	cannot	go	for
a	holiday,	the	saints	cannot	have	a	holiday.	They	have	to	be	twenty-four	hours,
seven	days	a	week,	three-hundred-sixty-five	days	a	year,	on	guard,	because	that
serpent	is	there-	they	know	--	they	are	keeping	it	down,	holding	it	down.	And	it
is	 wriggling	 and	 it	 wants	 to	 come	 up	 and	 they	 know,	 if	 they	 go	 to	 the	 Blue
Diamond	it	will	come!	(much	laughter)	If	they	go	to	the	swimming	pool	it	will
come.	 They	 have	 to	 remain	 hidden	 in	 a	 cave	 so	 no	 opportunity,	 but	 still	 it	 is
there.
Whether	you	allow	it	to	come	or	not	it	is	there,	and	this	constant	conflict	makes
the	saint	look	miserable.
This	is	a	wrestling	with	oneself,	this	too	is	tiring,	this	too	is	exhausting,	this	too
is	a	strain;	hence	the	silence	that	the	saint	achieves	is	not	very	valuable.	It	is	the
silence	of	 the	cemetery,	silence	of	 the	dead	person.	Of	course	a	dead	corpse	 is
silent,	but	corpse	cannot	laugh,	cannot	even	smile,	cannot	do	anything;	they	are
utterly	silent.
The	saint	 is	 living	in	a	grave.	His	whole	life	becomes	his	grave.	The	man	who
runs	after	pleasure	comes	to	the	same	end,	but	a	little	late,	to	the	state	of	suicide.
The	question	arises	sooner	or	 later;	now	what	 is	 there	 left?	 I	have	experienced
everything,	I	have	known	every	joy	--	now	there	is	nothing	else,	it	will	be	only
repetition	--	so	why	go	on	living?	For	what?
And	the	man	who	is	living	the	life	of	a	meditator	from	the	very	beginning	starts
committing	suicide,	slow	suicide.	Withdrawal	means	slow	suicide,	renunciation
means	 slow	suicide.	 In	 separation,	meditation	and	 bliss	both	 lead	 to	 a	 suicidal
state.	My	sannyasins	have	not	to	choose	between	the	two.	It	is	not	a	question	of
either-or;	both-and.	Both	have	to	be	lived	together.
It	is	hard,	it	is	arduous,	it	is	a	challenge,	but	worth	accepting.	It	is	an	adventure,
in	fact	 the	greatest	adventure	 there	 is:	 to	 live	both,	 to	be	blissful	silently,	 to	be
silently	blissfully.	Only	then	a	human	being	knows	what	wholeness	is,	only	then
one	comes	to	know	life	in	its	totality,	only	then	you	have	both	the	wings	and	you
can	fly	into	the	sky	towards	the	stars.	With	one	wing	no	bird	can	fly!
Yes,	he	can	try,	flutter	a	little	bit,	jog,	jump	(laughter),	but	he	will	fall	back,	he
will	 hurt	 himself.	One	wing	 is	 not	 enough	 to	 fly.	 Two	wings	 are	 needed,	 and
remember,	 both	 the	 wings	 spread	 in	 opposite	 directions...	 but	 they	 are	 not
contradictory,	apparently	 they	are,	 spreading	 into	polar	opposites	as	 if	 they	are
against	 each	 other,	 but	 that	 is	 only	 appearance.	 Deep	 down	 they	 are
complementary,	helping	each	other.
My	sannyasins	have	to	achieve	this	synthesis	between	meditation	and	bliss.	And
this	 synthesis	 is	going	 to	become	 the	 foundation	of	 a	new	 religiousness	 in	 the
whole	world,	in	the	coming	future	of	humanity.
All	 old	 religions	 have	 lived	with	 the	 religion	 --	 they	were	 split.	 Epicurus	 had
chosen	bliss	but	he	is	against	meditation.	Buddha	has	chosen	meditation	but	he	is
against	 bliss.	My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 bring	 together	 both,	 because	 I	 see	 there	 is
something	 beautiful	 in	 Epicurus	 which	 is	 missing	 in	 Buddha	 and	 there	 is
something	 beautiful	 in	 Buddha	 which	 is	 missing	 in	 Epicurus.	 Both	 are
complementary,	not	contradictory;	both	can	become	two	wings,	and	they	should
be	made	two	wings.
Your	 name	 precisely	 defines	my	 approach,	my	whole	 philosophia,	my	 vision,
how	a	man	can	be	total:	blissful	silence,	silent	bliss!
This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	Veet	Nitam.	Veet	means	 transcendence,	 going	 beyond.
Nitam	means	morality,	puritanism.
These	 two	 words	 have	 to	 be	 understood	 deeply:	 One	 is	 'conscience',	 and	 the
other	is	'consciousness'.
Conscience	represents	morality,	consciousness	represents	religion.	Conscience	is
a	social	strategy.	It	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
created	by	others,	it	is	a	trick	to	manipulate	the	person.	Conscience	means	others
have	 told	 you	 what	 is	 right	 and	 what	 is	 wrong;	 they	 have	 not	 given	 an
opportunity	to	you	to	explore,	to	know,	to	experiment.	They	have	not	given	you
freedom	 to	 judge	 on	 your	 own.	They	 have	 given	 you	 fixed	 ideas,	 ready-made
answers,	ten	commandments.
Morality	is	given	by	others	from	the	outside.	It	is	not	an	inner	growth;	because	it
is	not	an	inner	growth	it	remains	like	a	plastic	flower.	You	can	hang	the	plastic
flower	on	the	rose	bush	--	maybe	it	can	deceive	a	few	fools,	but	it	cannot	deceive
the	 rose	 bush.	 It	 cannot	 deceive	 the	 bees	 and	 the	 butterflies,	 and	 certainly	 it
cannot	deceive	you,	because	you	have	planted	those	false,	phony	flowers	on	the
rose	bush.
Conscience	 is	a	plastic	 flower,	planted	by	others	 --	 the	society,	 the	church,	 the
state.	 Consciousness	 is	 your	 inner	 growth;	 it	 is	 a	 real	 rose,	 alive,	 unfolding,
fragrant,	 each	moment	 growing,	 breathing.	 It	 has	 a	 beauty,	 because	 it	 has	 life,
and	it	 is	yours,	authentically	yours.	 It	 is	not	borrowed.	Everything	borrowed	is
always	ugly.	The	borrowed	becomes	a	burden	on	your	head;	it	cannot	allow	you
freedom,	 it	 can	 only	 repress	 you,	 oppress	 you,	 exploit	 you.	Morality	 is	 being
used	for	psychological	slavery.	Other	kinds	of	slavery	have	disappeared	from	the
world,	 but	 the	 psychological	 slavery	 still	 exists,	 in	 fact	 more	 so	 than	 before,
because	before	there	were	many	other	kinds	of	slaveries	available;	now	there	is
only	one	kind	of	slavery	available	and	that	is	psychological.	So	the	people	who
want	 to	 exploit	 --	 all	 their	 efforts	 have	become	 concentrated	on	 a	 single	 point
and	that	is	psychological	exploitation.
So	every	 child	 is	being	programmed	by	 the	 society,	 given	 fixed	 ideas,	what	 is
right,	what	 is	wrong,	 and	 this	 is	utterly	absurd.	Something	may	be	 right	 today
and	may	not	be	right	tomorrow,	something	may	be	wrong	this	moment	and	may
not	be	wrong	the	next	moment.	Life	continuously	goes	on	changing,	it	is	a	flux,
it	 is	 a	 constant	movement,	nothing	 is	 static;	hence	no	 static	 answers	can	be	of
any	help.	All	static	answers	will	prevent	you	in	seeing	the	reality	and	responding
spontaneously	to	that	which	is.
Consciousness	 helps	 you	 to	 become	 responsible,	 and	 I	 am	not	 using	 the	word
'responsible'	 in	 the	sense	of	dutiful,	etcetera.	I	use	 the	word	 'responsible'	 in	 the
literal	sense:	the	capacity	to	respond.
The	man	who	is	burdened	with	conscience	has	no	capacity	to	respond,	he	only
reacts.	Before	 the	 question	 is	 there	 he	 already	 has	 an	 answer.	His	 answer	will
never	fit	 the	question	because	the	question	is	always	new.	Even	if	 the	question
appears	 the	 same	 it	 cannot	 be	 the	 same	 because	 the	 context	 is	 different,	 the
situation	is	different,	the	whole	reference	is	different	--	and	you	have	to	be	very
alive,	unprejudiced,	you	have	to	be	just	like	a	mirror,	reflecting	whatsoever	is	the
case	and	responding	accordingly,	not	according	to	a	preconceived	idea.
Morality	is	a	phony	lie,	because	the	ideas	are	given	by	others	and	you	are	living
them	--	you	are	just	an	imitator.	I	am	against	all	morality	--	that	does	not	mean
that	I	am	for	immorality.	In	fact	it	is	morality	that	creates	immorality	too.	I	am
for	 transcendence,	 transcendence	of	 the	very	 idea	of	morality	 --	and	of	course,
this	implies	immorality	too.
I	am	for	consciousness,	not	for	conscience.	I	don't	want	to	give	you	any	shoulds
or	should	nots.	I	simply	want	you	to	become	more	aware,	alert,	watchful,	clear,
unclouded.	When	you	are	like	a	flame	without	smoke,	whatsoever	you	do	will	be
right.	In	a	state	of	clarity	the	wrong	is	impossible,	but	then	your	character	comes
from	your	consciousness,	not	from	your	conscience,	then	it	comes	from	yourself.
Then	 it	 is	 a	 real	 rose,	 growing	 out	 of	 your	 being,	 and	 everything	 real	 has	 a
beauty	--	it	has	a	fragrance.
Jesus	was	not	moral,	that's	why	he	was	crucified.	He	did	not	follow	the	old	idea
given	by	the	society.	He	started	living	on	his	own,	he	was	an	individual,	a	rebel.
Socrates	was	not	moral,	that	was	his	crime.	The	society	could	not	forgive	him.
No	authentic	person	has	ever	been	moral	in	that	sense;	although	in	another	sense
only	 those	 few	 authentic	 people	 have	 been	 really	moral,	 but	 then	 you	 have	 to
write	the	word	'moral'	with	inverted	commas.
It	is	a	totally	different	thing,	it	is	not	the	so-called	'morality'.	Authentic	people's
morality	comes	from	their	consciousness;	hence	they	never	feel	the	puritan's	ego.
You	can	never	see	in	their	eyes	the	holier-than-thou	look,	you	can	never	see	in
them	any	condemnation	for	anybody.	They	have	immense	respect,	even	for	those
who	 are	 fast	 asleep	 and	 snoring,	 because	 they	 know	 that	 once,	 they	 too	were
sleeping	 and	 they	 too	 were	 snoring,	 and	 if	 they	 can	 awake,	 others	 also	 can
awake.
The	moment	 a	 person	 becomes	 awakened,	 becomes	 a	 buddha,	 he	 knows	 that
everybody	 has	 the	 potential	 of	 being	 a	 buddha,	 and	 he	 becomes	 tremendously
respectful	to	the	buddhahood	of	everybody	--	awake	or	asleep	it	doesn't	matter	--
buddhahood	is	buddhahood!
So	 I	 teach	 you	 buddhahood,	 awareness,	 awakening,	 but	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 any
discipline.	And	that	is	my	revolution.	Religions	have	given	only	conscience,	and
that's	 how	 they	 all	 have	 cheated	 human	beings.	They	 have	 created	 hypocrites,
they	have	also	created	a	very	schizophrenic	humanity,	a	mad	world.	The	people
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
who	 are	 responsible	 for	 all	 this	 insanity	 are	 your	 so-called	 saints,	 sages,
mahatmas.
I	am	against	all	this	nonsense.	My	approach	is	very	simple	and	clear-cut.	I	give
you	a	single	key	but	 it	 is	a	master	key;	 it	unlocks	all	 the	doors:	Be	aware!	Be
more	and	more	aware.	Bring	that	moment	closer	and	closer	when	you	can	feel
that	your	whole	being	is	full	of	awareness.	When	there	is	not	even	a	single	spot
inside	you	which	is	dark,	unconscious	--	then	you	have	come	home.
This	is	the	goal	of	sannyas:	to	be	enlightened,	to	be	fully	aware	and	full	of	light.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002075
ShortTitle:	NEVER07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Sindhu.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Sindhu	means	the	ocean.
Man	without	meditation	is	just	like	a	dewdrop:	very	small,	confined,	limited,	and
that's	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 misery,	 to	 feel	 bounded,	 to	 feel	 encapsulated,	 to	 feel
small.	Because	of	this	feeling	one	starts	compensating;	hence	the	ego.	One	feels
small,	one	does	not	want	to	feel	small.	One	feels	inferior,	one	feels	hurt	because
of	inferiority,	and	the	inferiority	complex	creates	its	opposite,	the	ego.
The	ego	is	an	illusion	that	"I	am	not	limited",	that	"I	am	omnipotent",	that	"I	am
tremendously	 powerful",	 that	 "I	 am	 this,	 I	 am	 that".	 Through	 money,	 power,
prestige,	one	goes	on	proving	that	"I	am	not	inferior.	Who	says	I	am	inferior?"
The	 ego	 exists	 in	 the	 same	 proportion	 as	 you	 feel	 inferior.	 The	 proportion	 is
exactly	the	same.	The	more	inferior	you	feel,	the	more	egoistic	you	become.	The
ego	is	a	compensation,	but	because	it	is	illusory	it	does	not	help	in	the	long	run.
It	 is	 a	very	 short-sighted	measure.	 It	 can	keep	you	 in	delusion	 for	 a	while	but
again	and	again	the	reality	asserts.	Deep	down,	hidden	behind	the	facade	of	the
ego	you	know	the	wound,	 that	you	are	small,	 that	you	are	limited	by	birth	and
death,	that	you	are	limited	by	the	body,	by	the	mind,	that	you	are	limited	by	time
and	space.	It	is	impossible	to	hide	it	forever.	It	is	such	a	reality.
But,	 if	one	enters	 into	meditation	a	great	 revolution	happens:	 a	 radical	 change
sets	in.	The	dewdrop	disappears;	instead	one	finds	something	oceanic.
Man	 is	 a	 dewdrop	 because	 he	 feels	 identified	 with	 the	 body,	 with	 the	 mind.
Meditation	 is	 the	 awareness	 that	 "I	 am	 not	 the	 body	 and	 not	 the	 mind!"	 The
moment	you	become	aware	that	you	are	not	the	body	and	the	mind,	suddenly	all
boundaries	disappear;	they	were	created	by	your	identification.	Suddenly	you	are
no	more	in	the	prison.
The	 prison	 was	 illusory,	 it	 was	 your	 creation.	 And	 because	 the	 prison	 was
illusory	all	your	efforts	to	get	our	of	it	were	illusory.	The	ego	is	an	effort	to	get
out	of	an	illusory	prison.	It	is	like	a	medicine	which	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
itself	illusory	but	is	trying	to	cure	some	illusory	disease.	And	an	illusory	disease
always	finds	some	illusory	medicine...
Meditation	is	a	simple	process	of	knowing	the	reality	as	it	 is.	It	 is	silence,	 it	 is
awareness,	it	is	watchfulness,	it	is	witnessing.	And	witnessing	is	the	key,	because
when	you	witness	something	you	cannot	remain	identified	with	it.	The	moment
you	 witness	 something	 you	 are	 separate	 from	 it.	 The	 witnessing	 is	 never	 the
witnessed.	 If	 you	 can	 witness	 your	 body	 you	 are	 transcendental	 to	 the	 body,
beyond	the	body.	If	you	can	watch	your	mind	you	are	beyond	the	mind.	If	you
can	 watch	 your	 feelings	 you	 are	 beyond	 the	 heart,	 and	 these	 are	 the	 three
limitations.
Once	you	know	your	transcendence	you	feel	oceanic,	vast.	Then	there	is	no	need
for	the	ego.	The	ego	cannot	be	dropped,	because	in	the	first	place	it	doesn't	exist.
But	in	meditation	it	disappears.
And	 this	 is	where	 I	differ	 from	all	 so-called	 traditions.	They	all	 say	"Drop	 the
ego,	then	you	can	enter	into	meditation".	That	is	sheer	nonsense!	It	is	lying,	like
telling	a	person	that	"First	you	get	healthy	then	you	can	use	the	medicine.	First
you	get	healthy".	 If	 that	 is	 the	requirement	 to	use	 the	medicine	 then	 the	whole
thing	is	absurd.	For	what	the	medicine	has	to	be	used	then?	And	this	is	what	has
been	 taught	 for	 centuries:	 drop	 the	 ego,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 enter	 into	meditation.
This	is	not	possible.
So	the	people	who	try	to	drop	the	ego	they	start	having	a	new	kind	of	ego,	far
more	 subtler	 --	 the	ego	of	humbleness,	 the	ego	of	 egolessness.	Again	 they	are
trapped.	It	is	bound	to	happen,	it	is	inevitable.
My	approach	is	just	the	opposite:	do	not	be	bothered	by	the	ego.	Go	to	the	roots.
Why	you	have	created	the	ego?	--	because	you	feel	inferior	so	you	want	to	create
something	big	around	yourself	to	hide	your	limitedness.	You	want	to	brag,	you
want	to	puff	your	ego	as	big	as	possible;	like	a	balloon	you	go	on	puffing	it.	But
inside	the	cause	is	inferiority	and	inferiority	is	caused	because	of	identification.
So	the	deeper	you	go	into	the	roots	you	will	find	the	basic	disease	of	humanity	is
identification;	 hence	 the	 only	 medicine	 that	 is	 going	 to	 cure	 is	 witnessing.
Witnessing	destroys	identification,	and	then	you	need	not	drop	the	ego	because
there	is	no	ego	to	be	found.
And	to	experience	oneself	 in	one's	vastness,	 infinity,	eternity,	 is	 the	moment	of
bliss,	the	moment	of	truth,	the	moment	of	realisation.	That	is	the	ultimate	goal	of
sannyas.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Pratika.
Anand	means	bliss.	Pratika	means	a	symbol.
Blissfulness	 is	 the	 symbol	of	 self-realisation.	Blissfulness	 is	 the	 indication	 that
one	 has	 arrived	 home.	 It	 is	 blissfulness	 which	 proves	 godliness.	 Without
blissfulness	 life	 is	meaningless;	 one	 is	 simply	 groping	 in	 darkness,	 stumbling,
somehow	managing	to	live,	but	there	is	no	significance,	no	joy.	Life	is	felt	like	a
burden,	like	a	curse.
Jean	Paul	Sartre	 says	man	 is	 condemned,	cursed,	 to	be.	Obviously,	 that	means
one	 will	 be	 constantly	 thinking	 of	 committing	 suicide	 --	 and	 that's	 what	 is
happening	 to	 the	 modern	 mind:	 suicide	 has	 become	 the	 most	 significant
problem.	The	question	is	why	to	live,	for	what?
Blissfulness	 has	 totally	 disappeared,	 and	 the	 strangest	 thing	 is	 that	 it	 has
disappeared	because	of	the	so-called	religious	people	in	the	world.	The	religious
people	 have	 created	 a	 kind	 of	 seriousness.	 They	 have	 destroyed	 cheerfulness,
they	 have	 condemned	 cheerful	 as	 something	 mundane,	 profane,	 sacrilegious.
They	have	raised	sadness,	seriousness,	to	the	heights	of	saintliness.
Christians	say	that	Jesus	never	laughed.	This	is	an	utter	lie!	But	for	two	thousand
years	Christians	have	believed	in	that.	And	if	Jesus	himself	never	laughed,	how
anybody	else	can	dare	to	laugh?	To	be	a	Christian	means	to	be	sad,	and	if	you
are	 a	 Christian	 saint	 that	 means	 you	 have	 to	 be	 utterly	 sad,	 dead,	 a	 living,
walking	corpse,	with	no	joy,	with	no	song,	with	no	celebration.
In	a	very	subtle	way	religions	have	condemned	 life	and	all	 that	belongs	 to	 life
and	 they	 have	 praised	 death	 and	 all	 belongs	 to	 death.	 They	 were	 all	 death-
oriented.
My	sannyas	 is	 life-oriented,	 life-affirmative.	 I	 am	against	 seriousness,	 I	 am	all
for	 laughter.	 i	am	all	 for	cheerfulness,	 I	am	all	 for	 light-heartedness!	The	 truly
religious	person	will	live	his	ordinary	life	with	immense	joy	and	ecstasy.	He	will
not	call	it	ordinary.	He	will	live	it	with	extraordinary	sensitivity.	It	is	a	gift	from
the	 whole,	 it	 is	 a	 gift	 from	 the	 beyond	 --	 it	 has	 to	 be	 respected,	 loved,
appreciated!	And	it	 is	 really	an	 immense	gift.	All	 these	 tress	and	 the	birds	and
the	people	and	 the	rivers	and	 the	mountains	and	 the	stars	and	 this	vast	sky,	all
this	eternity...	It	seems	really	strange,	sink,	that	somebody	can	be	serious	in	this
celebrating	existence!
But	 seriousness	has	been	praised,	and	because	 it	has	been	praised	people	have
tried	to	be	serious.	They	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	 repressed	 their	 cheerfulness,	 they	 have	 repressed	 their	 dances,	 they	 have
made	themselves	cripples,	they	have	paralysed	their	being	in	every	possible	way.
They	 have	 cut	 themselves	 so	 that	 they	 can	 fit	 into	 the	 pattern	 of	 being	 a
respectable	saint.
To	me	 this	has	been	a	calamity.	Religions	have	been	committing	a	great	crime
against	man,	and	it	is	time	that	it	should	be	corrected.	It	is	already	late.
A	 total	 rebellion	 is	needed.	My	sannyasins	have	 to	be	 rebels;	 rebellion	against
life-negative	 attitudes,	 rebellion	 against	 seriousness,	 rebellion	 against	 the	 so-
called	other-world.	This	is	the	only	world,	and	we	have	to	live	now	and	here.	We
are	not	to	sacrifice	now	and	here	for	some	fantasy	of	a	heaven	or	a	paradise	or	a
moksha.	We	 are	 not	 to	 sacrifice	 the	 present	 for	 the	 future	 --	 that	 is	 stupid	 --
because	 the	 future	 is	 born	 out	 of	 the	 present;	 if	 you	 kill	 the	 present	 you	 are
killing	 the	 future	 too,	 because	 you	 are	 killing	 the	 mother	 and	 the	 mother	 is
pregnant.	You	are	killing	the	child	too.
Each	 moment	 functions	 as	 a	 mother	 for	 the	 next	 moment.	 Condemning	 it	 is
dangerous.	Appreciate	it,	love	it,	rejoice	in	it.
Blissfulness	has	to	be	the	very	flavour	of	sannyasins,	the	symbol	of	my	sannyas.
Dance,	 sing,	 laugh,	 love,	 live,	 and	 live	 totally	 and	passionately.	Live	 intensely
because	who	knows?	--	the	next	moment	may	never	come.	This	may	be	the	last
moment.	So	drink	out	of	it,	don't	leave	a	single	drop	of	the	wine	in	the	cup	of	the
present!	Don't	postpone	it	for	tomorrow	because	the	tomorrow	never	comes.
And	 if	 it	 comes	 it	will	bring	 its	own	wine	 --	why	be	worried?	 It	will	bring	 its
own	songs	and	dances.
This	moment	has	its	own	taste	--	rejoice	in	it	--	and	next	moment	will	bring	its
own	world.	And	if	you	know	how	to	rejoice	you	will	be	able	to	rejoice	that	too,
and	if	there	is	another	world	after	death	you	have	prepared	yourself;	by	rejoicing
in	this	world	you	will	be	ready	to	rejoice	that	too.
Sometimes	I	wonder,	if	your	so-called	saints	enter	into	paradise,	what	they	will
so	there?	Just	sitting	like	fools!	They	cannot	dance,	they	cannot	sing,	they	cannot
laugh,	 they	 cannot	 even	 exchange	 jokes	with	 each	 other,	 and	 for	 eternity	 they
have	to	live	there	(laughter).	Now	there	is	no	coming	back!	Once	you	enter	into
paradise	 you	 enter	 forever,	 so	 beware!	 Either	 don't	 enter	 or	 if	 you	 enter	 then
learn	the	art	of	being	blissful.
Then	 wherever	 you	 are	 it	 is	 paradise.	 Even	 the	 hell	 will	 be	 heaven	 to	 my
sannyasins:	 they	will	 paint	 it	 orange	 (laughter),	 they	will	 sing	 hallelujah,	 they
will	dance.	Either	the	devil	will	have	to	become	a	sannyasin	or	he	will	have	to
leave!	(laughter)	There	is	no	other	alternative!
The	question	is	not	of	going	to	heaven;	the	question	is	learning	the	art	of	being
in	heaven,	wherever	you	are.	Right	now	we	are	here,	so	this	place	this	moment,
has	to	be	divine.	This	moment	has	to	be	squeezes	to	its	totality.
I	teach	only	blissfulness	because	to	me	that	is	the	symbol	of	true	religion.	And	it
is	only	a	question	of	understanding.	Once	you	understand	that	it	is	unnecessary
to	be	miserable,	your	energy	starts	turning	into	bliss.	Once	you	understand	that
there	is	no	need	to	be	bothered	for	respectability...	the	society	is	playing	a	game,
the	game	is	it	respects	if	you	are	serious,	and	if	you	want	respectability	you	have
to	 be	 serious.	 But	 then	 you	 will	 remain	 miserable.	 That	 respectability	 is	 not
worth.	Don't	be	bothered	about	respectability.	Just	think	of	one	thing,	and	that	is
how	to	be	blissful,	whatsoever	the	cost.
And	the	blissful	person	naturally	helps	others	to	be	blissful.	The	blissful	person
is	a	blessing	to	himself	and	also	a	blessing	to	whole	existence.	Perhaps	you	nay
not	be	respected,	perhaps	the	traditionalists,	the	orthodox	people	may	not	think
you	religious	--	who	cares?	Those	who	understand,	they	will	respect	you.
But	the	people	who	understand	are	very	few.	The	crowd	consists	of	blind	people.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 very	 clear	 about	 it	 that	 you	 are	 getting	 out	 of	 the	mob
psychology.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 are	 dropping	 out	 of	 the	 crowd	 mind,	 you	 are
becoming	an	individual.
Now,	from	this	moment	inwards	you	will	be	living	the	life	of	a	rebel,	but	it	is	a
joy,	it	is	an	ecstasy	to	be	rebellious.	Only	the	rebellious	people	know	what	life	is,
only	the	rebellious	know	what	god	is,	because	god	is	the	very	centre	of	life.	In
fact	life	and	god	are	synonymous.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Bhagwat.
Prem	means	love.	Bhagwat	means	divine,	godly.
Love	is	a	multi-dimensional	phenomenon.	It	can	be	animal,	it	can	be	human,	it
can	be	divine.	These	are	the	three	main	dimensions.
Love	 is	 animal	when	you	 are	 exploiting	 the	other	 as	 a	means,	 and	millions	of
people	know	only	animal	 love.	We	can	call	 it	 lust.	 It	 is	 the	 lowest	 love,	below
human	beings,	more	physiological,	chemical,	hormonal,	 than	psychological.	At
the	most	 it	 can	 bring	 you	 a	 certain	 sexual	 relief,	 the	 same	 kind	 of	 relief	 that
comes	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
from	 a	 good	 sneeze!	 (laughter)	 Sometimes	 a	 good	 sneeze	 brings	 even	 better
relief!	(more	laughter)	But	it	is	the	same	time,	type	of	thing:	there	is	not	much	in
it.
One	 becomes	 burdened	 with	 sexual	 energy	 and	 one	 needs	 the	 release	 of	 the
energy.	And	when	 the	 energy	 is	 released	 you	 feel	 unburdened.	 This	 is	 a	 very
physiological	 process.	 To	 remain	 in	 this	 kind	 of	 love	 is	 to	 miss	 the	 great
opportunity	of	life.	One	has	to	rise	above	the	animals,	but	very	few	people	rise	--
remember	--	because	people	think	this	is	all	there	is	to	love.	All	these	husbands
and	wives	and	all	 these	marriage	ceremonies,	and	all	 these	priests	and	 temples
and	churches	and	wedding	bells	and	all	this	nonsense	(laughter)...	So	much	ado
about	nothing!
And	these	fools	say	that	these	marriages	are	made	in	heaven.	if	these	marriages
are	made	in	heaven,	then	what	is	made	in	hell?	then	I	cannot	conceive	because
one	cannot	fall	below	this!
Very	 rare	 and	 few	 people	 rise	 to	 the	 level	 of	 human	 love.	 Human	 love	 is
friendship,	animal	 love	 is	possessiveness.	Animal	 love	reduces	 the	other	 into	a
thing,	into	a	commodity.	Human	love	raises	the	other,	helps	the	other,	to	some	to
one's	flowering.	It	does	not	use	the	other	as	a	means;	it	respects	the	other	as	an
end	unto	itself.	It	is	pure	friendship.
Sex	may	be	a	part	 in	 it,	but	a	very	 secondary	part,	 almost	negligible,	does	not
play	the	central	role.	In	the	animal	love	it	is	all	and	all.	It	is	simply	sex	parading
behind	the	word	"love",	but	in	human	love	there	are	many	more	things.	There	is
sensitivity,	caring,	compassion.	there	is	a	certain	psychological	at-onement:	two
psyches	are	feeling	in	deep	tune,	a	subtle	dance	of	energies.
Sexual	energies	also	are	there	but	only	a	minor	part.	If	 in	animal	love	they	are
ninety-nine	per	cent,	 then	in	a	human	love	they	are	only	one	per	cent.	And	the
miracle	 is	when	 higher	 qualities	 start	 growing	 in	 your	 loving	 relationship,	 sex
itself	is	transformed;	it	is	no	more	animal,	it	also	starts	having	a	new	quality	to	it.
It	is	now	only	one	of	the	ways	of	sharing.	There	are	many	ways.	Two	lovers	may
be	 just	 sitting	 there,	 holding	 hands,	 looking	 at	 the	moon,	 and	 that	 nay	 be	 far
more	 satisfying	 than	 anything	 sexuality	 can	 ever	 give.	 Or	 maybe	 listening	 to
each	other's	song	or	 reading	poetry	 together	or	watching	a	painting	or	creating
something	 together	 --	 a	 sculpture	 --	or	making	a	garden,	planting	 seeds,	doing
something	together	in	deep	harmony,	in	deep	accord,	a	subtle	music.
In	 this	music	even	 sex	 starts	having	a	new	 flavour:	 It	may	happen,	 it	may	not
happen;	it	can	happen,	it	is	not	prohibited,	but	it	is	no	more	animal.	It	is	not	the
goal	of	the	relationship.	Relationship	has	far	higher	goals.	it	is	one	of	the	ways
of	relating,	and	there	are	thousand	and	one	other	ways	of	relating.
The	animal	love	is	continuously	a	struggle,	conflict:	the	struggle	to	dominate	the
other,	 the	 struggle	 not	 to	 be	 dominate	 by	 the	 other.	There	 is	 some	violence	 in
this.	 Just	 animal	 sexuality	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 violent.	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 oppression,
exploitation,	and	one	wants	to	posses	the	person	for	future	use.
And	particularly	man,	because	he	is	physically	more	powerful	--	not	in	any	other
way,	 just	 only	 physically.	 And	 that	 too	 is	 not	 a	 natural	 fact;	 that	 too	 is	 only
because	 of	 a	 certain	 conditioning	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 Because	 he	was	 the
hunter,	the	food	gatherer,	the	woodcutter,	naturally,	he	started	growing	muscles,
started	growing	more	physical	strength.
There	are	matriarchal	societies	still	alive	where	man	is	weaker	than	the	woman,
because	they	have	lived	in	a	different	way.	The	woman	is	the	food	gatherer,	she
is	the	hunter;	the	man	takes	care	of	the	children,	looks,	takes	care	of	the	house.
The	 man	 is	 a	 housewife	 and	 the	 woman	 is	 really	 the	 husband.	 And	 strange
phenomenon:	in	these	matriarchal	societies	the	man	is	weaker	than	the	woman.
It	is	just	because	of	certain	historical	situations	that	man	became	more	powerful
--	 it	 is	not	natural	 --	but	once	he	became	more	powerful	he	used	his	power	 to
dominate	the	woman.
Now	 all	 over	 the	 world	 the	 married	 woman	 carries	 signboards	 that	 she	 is
married;	no	man	carries	any	signboard.	It	is	a	strange	thing.	You	cannot	judge	by
seeing	 a	 man	 whether	 he	 is	 married	 or	 not,	 but	 you	 can	 judge	 immediately
whether	the	woman	is	married	or	not.
In	India	the	woman	who	is	married	can	be	judged	immediately.	She	used	certain
ornaments	 which	 only	married	 women	 are	 allowed	 to	 use,	 she	 uses	 colourful
clothes	which	widows	 are	 not	 allowed	 to	 use,	 she	 uses	 few	 ornaments	 which
virgin	 girls	 are	 not	 allowed	 to	 use,	 so	 she	 is	 a	 walking	 signboard	 that	 she	 is
married;	that	she	is	somebody	else	property:	nobody	should	look	at	her.	But	the
man	carries	no	signboard.
Obviously,	 the	 reason	 is	clear:	you	put	a	 signboard	on	your	house	 --	 it	 is	your
property	--	you	put	your	name	on	it,	but	the	house	cannot	put	its	name	on	you.
You	are	the	owner	and	the	house	is	the	owned.	The	woman	is	property,	so	you
have	to	put...
In	India	when	a	man	dies,	in	the	old	days,	the	woman	had	to	die	with	him.	Just
the	fear	and	the	suspicion	that	she	may	be	used	by	somebody	else;	it	is	better	that
she	should	be	destroyed	with	the	man.	That	was	prevented.	Still	it	happens	once
in	a	while,	but	because	of	the	Britishers	it	was	prevented.	If	India	would	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	been	in	the	hands	of	the	Hindus	it	would	have	never	been	prevented.	It	was
so	 ugly	 an	 act,	 it	was	 pure	murder	 and	 far	more	murderous	 to	 throw	 a	 living
woman	into	burning	fire,	with	the	dead	body	of	the	husband.
It	 was	 forcibly	 prevented,	 legally	 prevented,	 but	 still	 the	 widow	 has	 to	 show
immediately	 few	 things:	 she	has	 to	 remove	 the	signboard	 that	 she	 is	a	married
woman,	she	has	 to	shave	her	head	so	she	becomes	ugly,	and	everybody	knows
that	 she	 is	 a	widow,	 untouchable:	 The	 owner	 has	 died	 and	 nobody	 should	 do
anything	 to	 hes	 property.	 Just	 to	 respect	 the	 dead	 she	 cannot	 wear	 any	 other
colour	than	white,	she	cannot	use	ornaments,	she	cannot	participate	in	marriage
ceremonies,	she	cannot	go	wherever	there	is	some	festival	is	happening	because
even	her	presence	is	a	curse.	She	is	condemned	in	every	way	--	although	she	is
allowed	to	live,	but	in	such	a	humiliation.
This	is	all	animal.	This	is	not	human.
Human	love	is	not	a	marriage.	Human	love	is	a	meeting,	a	merger,	a	melting,	out
of	freedom.	Two	persons	out	of	their	freedom	decide	to	be	together,	just	for	the
sheer	joy	of	being	together.	It	is	a	psychological	relatedness.	This	is	the	second
dimension	of	love.
And	the	third	is	the	ultimate	dimension;	I	call	it	divine,	godly.	When	the	other	is
not	even	particularised,	when	your	love	is	not	addressed	to	anybody	in	particular,
when	your	love	is	simply	a	quality,	not	a	relationship	at	all.
In	the	first	it	is	a	possessiveness,	the	relationship	of	the	owner	and	the	owned.	In
the	second	it	is	a	relatedness	between	two	friends,	addressed	towards	each	other.
In	 the	 third	 it	 is	 simply	 your	 quality:	 lovingness.	 Now	 it	 is	 not	 love	 but
lovingness.	Wherever	you	are	you	are	in	a	state	of	lovingness	--	even	withe	the
trees	you	are	loving,	with	the	rocks	you	are	loving,	with	people	you	are	loving.	It
is	just	a	quality	to	you.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	other.	It	is	unaddressed	love
or,	in	another	words,	addressed	to	god	--
both	mean	the	same	thing	because	god	is	not	a	person.
God	means	simply	 the	whole	universe,	addressed	 to	 the	whole	or	addressed	 to
nobody	 in	 particular,	 but	 arising	 from	 you,	 spreading	 all	 over,	 reaching	 to	 all
nooks	and	corners	of	existence.	I	call	it	prayer.
First	is	lust,	second	is	love,	third	is	prayer.	And	when	one	reaches	to	the	state	of
prayer	one	has	found	the	real	source	--	of	life,	of	truth,	of	freedom,	of	all	that	is
valuable.	One	has	entered	into	the	temple	of	god.
That	is	our	deepest	longing:	Every	human	being	is	searching	for	it,	but	one	may
search	 consciously	 or	 unconsciously.	 Everybody	 is	 searching	 unconsciously.
Sannyas	 means	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 make	 your	 search	 a	 conscious	 search,	 a
conscious	enquiry.
And	 remember	 one	 thing:	 only	 those	who	 consciously	 search	 ever	 reach.	 The
unconscious	searchers	go	on	stumbling,	go	on	getting	diverted,	distracted;	there
are	thousands	of	wrong	doors	and	there	is	only	one	right	door.	Unless	one	is	very
alert	one	is	going	to	miss	 it.	 If	one	is	constantly	alert	and	aware	only	then	one
can	avoid	 the	wrong	doors	and	can	 reach	slowly	slowly	 like	an	arrow	 towards
the	right	door.
Sannyas	is	a	conscious	enquiry	into	the	phenomenon	of	love.	And	the	moment
you	 have	 reaches	 to	 its	 peak	 you	 have	 reached.	 Then	 there	 is	 nowhere	 to	 go:
Immense	 contentment	 happens,	 just	 flowers	 go	 on	 showering,	 life	 becomes	 a
sheer	ecstasy.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002085
ShortTitle:	NEVER08
Audio:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Ma	Dhyan	Renate.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Renate	means	reborn.
The	first	birth	is	not	the	real	birth.	One	certainly	comes	our	of	the	physiological
womb	of	the	mother,	starts	functioning	as	a	independent,	physiological	unit,	but
there	is	still	a	deeper	womb	--	the	psychological.
Unless	one	comes	our	of	that	too,	the	real	birth	has	not	happened.
Meditation	is	the	process	of	coming	our	of	the	psychological	womb,	coming	out
of	the	mind.	The	moment	you	are	out	of	the	mind,	you	are	free	of	all	limitations.
There	are	only	two	kinds	of	limitations:	the	limitations	imposed	by	the	body	and
the	limitations	imposed	by	the	mind.	These	are	the	only	prisons,	the	only	chains.
Once	you	are	out	of	these	two	you	are	as	vast	as	the	universe	itself.	Then	you	are
just	pure	awareness,	with	no	beginning,	no	end.
The	pure	awareness	is	beyond	time	and	space	both.	This	is	the	beginning	of	true
life,	 a	 life	 that	 is	 eternal,	 a	 life	 that	knows	no	death.	The	 first	birth	 is	not	 true
birth	because	it	will	come	to	an	end.	It	 is	bound	to	be	followed	by	death.	How
can	one	call	it	a	birth?	It	implies	death.	It	is	not	the	beginning	of	life,	in	fact	it	is
the	beginning	of	death.	The	moment	a	child	is	born	he	starts	dying;	when	he	is
one	day	old	 it	means	he	has	died	one	day.	 If	he	 is	going	 to	 live	 seventy	years
now	there	is	one	day	less.	Every	day	life	will	be	running	out	of	his	hands.	Each
birthday	will	be	really	a	death	day.
A	life	that	ends	to	death	is	not	true	life.	Only	a	life	that	knows	no	death,	knows
no	end,	can	be	called	a	true	life.	Sannyas	is	the	search	for	the	true,	the	search	for
the	second	birth.
In	India	we	have	called	the	seers	twice-born,	vija.	And	that's	exactly	what	Jesus
means	when	 he	 says	 to	Nicodemus	 "Unless	 you	 are	 born	 again	 you	 shall	 not
enter	 into	 my	 kingdom	 of	 god."	 His	 way	 of	 saying	 is	 old,	 metaphorical,
religious.	 What	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 the	 same	 thing,	 just	 the	 words	 are	 more
contemporary,	they	belong	to	this	century;	hence	I	will	not	call	it	the	kingdom	of
god,	 because	 that	 unnecessarily	 creates	 troubles,	 I	 will	 call	 it	 the	 kingdom	 of
awareness	 --	 which	 is	 more	 relevant,	 more	 acceptable,	 to	 the	 modern
consciousness.
Man	has	grown	up,	man	has	come	of	age.	The	way	Jesus	is	speaking	is	a	little
childish.	He	calls	god	the	father.	his	own	word	was	"abba",	which	should	not	be
translated	as	father,	it	can	only	be	translated	as	daddy.	All	the	old	religions	are	in
a	way	childish	--	and	it	is	natural	--	religion	was	just	beginning,	but	now	we	have
to	use	a	more	mature	language.	So	I	say	"Unless	you	are	born	again	you	shall	not
enter	into	the	kingdom	of	awareness,	deathlessness,	eternal	life."
(To	Hilton)	Good!	You	look	crazy!	(much	laughter)
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Giten.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Giten	means	a	song.
When	I	say	you	look	crazy	I	mean	you	belong	to	me!	(laughter)	Where	you	have
been	for	such	a	long	time?	(much	laughter)
-(Can't	get	it)
-You...	you	have	come	home.	I	am	collecting	all	the	crazy	people	from	(laughter)
(?)	nook	and	corner	of	the	world,	and	I	immediately	recognise	(can't	get	it)
So	now	there	is	nowhere	to	go!	Say	yes!
-Yes!	(much	much	laughter)
-Meditation	 (much	 laughter)...	 exactly	 drives	 you	 crazy,	 because	 it	 takes	 you
beyond	the	mind,	but	crazy	in	a	very	beautiful	sense.	It	is	a	transcendence	from
all	logic,	and	all	the	stupidities	that	are	involved	in	the	logical	style	of	life.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Logic	 is	 applicable	 to	 the	 mundane	 world,	 for	 calculation,	 for	 arithmetic,	 for
business,	for	science	--	for	the	world	of	the	objects	it	 is	perfectly	okay,	but	the
moment	you	start	entering	into	higher	planes	of	being,	the	moment	you	become
interested	in	poetry,	 in	singing,	 in	music,	 in	dance,	 in	 love,	 in	prayer,	 then	you
have	to	leave	the	world	of	logic	behind.	Then	you	have	to	take	a	quantum	leap,
because	unless	you	are	capable	of	containing	contradictions	within	yourself	you
will	not	be	able	to	be	a	poet.	You	will	not	be	able	to	be	really	a	creator.
Logic	cannot	create.	It	can	analyse,	it	can	dissect.
There	 is	 a	 story	 of	 a	 Sufi	 mystic,	 Farid:	 one	 king	 came	 to	 visit	 the	 mystic.
Somebody	 has	 presented	 him	 a	 golden	 scissor,	 studded	 with	 very	 precious
diamonds.	It	was	a	piece	of	tremendous	beauty	and	art,	so	he	brought	the	scissor
as	a	gift	 to	 the	saint.	When	he	presents	 it	 to	Farid,	Farid	 looked	at	 the	scissor,
said	"It	 is	beautiful	and	I	don't	want	 to	offend	you,	but	 it	 is	useless	 to	me.	You
keep	it.	Next	time	when	you	come	rather	bring	a	needle	for	me."
The	 king	was	 a	 little	 puzzled.	He	 asked	 "I	 don't	 understand."	 Farid	 said	 "It	 is
very	simple.	The	function	of	the	scissor	is	the	function	of	logic	--	it	cuts	--	and	I
belong	 to	 the	 world	 not	 of	 analysis	 but	 of	 synthesis,	 where	 we	 join	 pieces
together.	A	needle	is	needed.	The	needle	is	more	symbolic,	more	representative
for	my	approach,"	he	said	"than	a	scissor.	My	function	is	to	create	higher	unities
and	 the	 ultimate	 unity	 when	 the	 whole	 universe	 becomes	 one	 organic
phenomenon	is	bound	to	be	illogical,	because	it	will	contain	summer	and	winter,
man	and	woman,	yin	and	yang,	Shiva	and	Shakti,	the	positive	and	the	negative,
the	creative	and	the	destructive,	life	and	death,	day	and	night	--	it	will	contain	all
contradictions.	But	that's	its	beauty	that	even	though	it	contains	all	contradictions
they	are	contained	in	such	a	beautiful,	organic	say	that	they	create	an	orchestra.
The	total	effort	is	of	unity:	they	become	complementaries.
And	 that's	 exactly	 the	 function	of	meditation:	 the	 function	of	a	needle,	not	 the
function	of	a	scissor.
Mind	is	like	a	scissor.	Meditation	is	like	a	needle.	Meditation	simply	means	go
on	 joining	 things	 together	 which	 logic	 has	 put	 apart.	 The	 moment	 you	 can
conceive	the	whole	as	one	you	have	arrives	home
--	say	meditation	is	a	song,	is	a	dance,	is	a	love	affair,	love	affair	with	the	whole!
It	is	celebration.
And	hitherto	all	the	religions	have	tried	to	be	logical;	hence	they	all	have	created
theologies.	Now	that	 is	an	absurdity:	 theology	means	logic	about	god	--	 that	 is
sheer	nonsense.	There	is	no	logic	about	god.	If	you	move	through	logic	there	is
no	god.	 If	 you	 experience	god	you	have	 to	drop	 logicalness.	You	 cannot	 have
both.
Theology	 is	 a	 contradiction	 in	 terms.	 Theo	 means	 god,	 logy	 means	 logic.
Nobody	has	 ever	been	 to	prove	god	 logically	 and	nobody	will	 ever	be	 able	 to
prove.	And	 it	 is	good	 that	god	 is	not	provable	 through	 logic.	 If	you	prove	god
through	logic	hi	will	become	part	of	science,	physics,	chemistry,	biology.
Religion	will	disappear	the	moment	god	is	proved	logically.	Because	god	is	not
provable	he	is	not	disprovable	either.	One	needs	not	intellect	to	penetrate	into	the
ultimate;	 one	 needs	 intelligence.	 Intellect	 is	 of	 the	mind,	 intelligence	 is	 a	 by-
product	of	meditation.
Intelligence	is	not	of	the	mind,	it	is	of	no-mind.	It	comes	out	of	silence,	when	the
mind	has	completely	ceased,	when	you	have	fallen	into	a	deep	abysmal	silence,
then	 your	 intelligence	 comes	 to	 its	 highest	 peak,	 and	 that	 intelligence	 brings
clarity,	 perceptiveness,	 it	 gives	 you	 eyes	 to	 see	 that	 which	 cannot	 be	 seen,	 it
gives	you	ears	to	hear	that	which	cannot	be	heard.	It	makes	you	capable	to	touch
the	intangible	to	hold	the	unholdable,	to	contain	the	uncontainable.
This	 is	 the	beginning	of	 the	world	of	mystery,	of	 the	miraculous,	and	 then	 life
becomes	a	song,	then	each	breath	brings	a	new	song	to	you,	then	each	moment
opens	a	new	door,	a	new	dimension.	Then	there	are	surprises	and	surprises.	One
lives	constantly	from	one	wonder	to	another	wonder.	And	it	is	inexhaustible.	It's
ecstatic	and	it	is	not	a	ecstasy	that	comes	and	goes;	once	it	comes	it	stays,	once	it
is	there	it	is	forever.
All	 the	 religions	have	made	people	sad.	They	have	made	people	serious.	They
have	made	people	 less	 sensitive	 than	 they	were	before.	They	have	dulled	 their
sensitivity,	their	awareness,	their	loving	quality.
They	have	killed	in	many	says,	they	have	been	murderous	and	they	have	taught
people	methods	which	are	methods	of	suicide.
Renunciation	 is	 suicide	 and	 nothing	 else	 --	 slow	 suicide.	 I	 teach	 rejoicing	 not
renunciation.	 My	 sannyas	 is	 a	 totally	 new	 phenomenon	 on	 the	 earth.	 Never
before	 there	has	ever	been	anything	 like	 it.	 it	 is	a	new	challenge,	 it	 is	a	 totally
new	vision.
I	don't	separate	the	mundane	and	the	sacred,	I	don't	separate	the	ordinary	and	the
extraordinary.	 To	 me	 everything	 is	 one.	 Yes,	 there	 is	 a	 way	 to	 live	 life	 in	 a
mundane	style	--	that	is	logic,	arithmetic,	calculation,	cunningness	--	and	there	is
also	a	way	to	live	life	as	a	sacred	love	affair,	but	then	one	has	to	be	a	little	bit
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
crazy!
And	you	have	found	the	right	master!	(laughter)	Good.	I	will	not	ask	how	long
you	will	be	here	--	you	are	going	to	be	here.
-I	hope	till	the	end	of	March.
-No,	that	is	not	possible!	(much	laughter)
-(can't	get	it)
-That	is	not	possible	--	you	will	see!	(much	laughter)
-I	(can't	get	it)
-Good!
(To	Stefan)	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Premen.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Premen	means	the	loving	one.
Meditation	 brings	many	 flowers,	millions	 of	 flowers.	Love	 is	 one	 of	 the	most
beautiful	flowers	that	it	brings.	Without	meditation	whatsoever	is	known	as	love
is	 not	 love.	 It	 is	 something	 else	 parading	 as	 love,	masquerading	 as	 love.	And
because	it	is	something	else	it	creates	trouble,	it	brings	misery.	it	gives	you	great
hopes	of	joy	but	those	goods	are	never	delivered,	because	that	is	only	a	facade	of
love.	 Behind	 it,	 behind	 the	 thin	 curtain	 --	 and	 it	 is	 really	 thin,	 almost	 like	 a
Japanese	rice	paper	curtain.	Just	scratch	it	a	little	bit	and	you	will	see	monsters
hidden	behind!	Possessiveness,	jealousy,	domination,	all	kinds	of	ego	trips,	even
hatred,	anger,	destructiveness,	violence	--	all	are	there,	just	waiting	for	their	time
to	erupt.
Yes,	for	the	moment	the	volcano	is	silent,	but	the	volcano	is	there,	and	any	small
excuse	and	it	starts	erupting.	This	is	not	love.
Without	meditation	love	is	not	possible	at	all.	So	I	am	not	condemning	people;	I
am	simply	saying	that	what	they	are	trying	to	do	is	impossible,	it	cannot	be	done
in	the	very	nature	of	things.	First	you	have	to	kill	those	monsters	--	and	they	can
be	killed	only	by	meditation.	Meditation	functions	in	two	ways.
For	all	that	is	wrong	in	you	it	functions	as	a	poison	and	for	all	that	is	right	in	you
it	functions	as	a	nectar.
As	you	go	deeper	 into	meditation,	silence,	awareness,	you	will	be	surprised	by
one	thing:	few	things	start	disappearing,	and	few	things	start	growing.	Your	inner
scenery	changes	totally,	radically.	The	same	energy	that	was	growing	weeds	now
grows	roses;	the	same	soil	and	the	same	climate	and	the	same	sun,	and	the	same
water.	Anger	changes	into	compassion.
Greed	changes	into	sharing.	Sadness	changes	into	festivity	and	slowly	slowly	the
miracle	goes	on	deepening.	And	as	you	come	closer	and	closer	to	your	centre	of
being	there	are	more	and	more	miracles	to	be	encountered,	and	at	the	very	centre
of	your	being,	the	last	and	the	ultimate	miracle:	the	ego	disappears.
And	 the	 moment	 ego	 disappears	 love	 arrives!	 Love	 is	 the	 fragrance	 of
egolessness,	and	love	is	the	culmination,	crescendo	of	life	and	its	joy.	One	who
has	 attained	 to	 love	 has	 attained	 to	 god.	Then	 nothing	 is	missing,	 for	 the	 first
time	one	feels	nothing	is	missing,	for	 the	first	 item	one	feels	an	home,	at	ease,
totally	relaxed.	For	 the	first	 time	one	feels	 immensely	grateful	 to	existence.	To
me	that	gratefulness	is	prayer.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002095
ShortTitle:	NEVER09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Andrea.
Anand	means	bliss.	Andrea	means	courageous.
Man	has	lived	in	misery	for	centuries.	It	has	become	his	way	of	life;	hence	great
courage	is	needed	to	be	blissful	because	the	whole	crowd	that	surrounds	you	is
miserable.	 It	 is	 dangerous	 to	 be	 blissful,	 because	 it	 is	 going	 against	 the	 mob
mind.	They	cannot	forgive	a	blissful	person,	they	have	never	done	such	a	thing
in	 the	 whole	 history.	 They	 are	 very	 sympathetic	 if	 you	 are	 miserable.	 If	 you
create	misery	for	yourself	they	even	respect	you,	if	you	torture	yourself,	 if	you
are	a	masochist,	they	worship	you	like	a	saint.	But	to	be	blissful	is	risky!	THen
the	whole	 crowd	 is	 against	 you,	 they	want	 to	 destroy	 you,	 because	 your	 very
existence	is	a	question	mark	on	their	way	of	life.	Somehow	they	have	accepted
that	to	be	miserable	is	natural,	that	that's	what	life	is	all	about.
Now	 suddenly	 there	 comes	 a	 person	who	 is	 blissful:	 he	 creates	 confusion,	 he
disturbs	 their	 settledness,	 he	 stirs	 their	 minds.	 Questions	 start	 arising,	 doubts
about	their	own	life	and	the	philosophies	of	life	they	have	created	start	becoming
bigger	and	bigger.	Their	philosophies	start	crumbling.	A	simple	blissful	man	is
enough	to	prove	the	whole	crowd	wrong,	and	nobody	wants	to	be	proved	to	be
wrong.	 People	would	 love	 to	 remain	miserable	 but	 they	would	 not	 like	 to	 be
proved	to	be	wrong,	and	the	very	presence	of	a	blissful	person	is	proof	enough.
He	 need	 not	 argue.	 He	 is	 his	 argument;	 hence	 the	 crucifixion	 of	 Jesus,	 the
poisoning	of	Socrates'	the	murdering	of	Al	Hillaj	Mansoor	--	and	things	have	not
changed	even	now.	Hence	I	say	it	needs	courage	to	be	blissful,	it	needs	guts	to	be
blissful.
Bliss	is	very	simple,	but	because	you	will	be	going	against	the	accepted	attitude
and	approach	of	people,	against	their	very	foundation;	hence	courage	is	needed,
otherwise	it	is	a	very	simple	and	natural	phenomenon.
Misery	 is	unnatural,	bliss	 is	natural,	but	people	have	accepted	 the	unnatural	as
their	 nature.	 And	 it	 has	 become	 such	 a	 long,	 long	 conditioning.	 It	 is	 almost
eternal.	It	has	been	there	forever.	Only	very	few	people	have	been	able	to	escape
from	this	wheel	of	repetitive	misery.	But	if	one	decides,	one	can	get	out	of	it.	All
that	is	needed	is	courage;	the	courage	of	a	gambler,	the	courage	of	a	person	who
leaves	this	shore	for	the	further	shore	without	any	map,	not	even	knowing	wether
the	other	shore	exists	or	not.	but	it	is	really	beautiful	to	go	on	such	an	adventure.
Only	this	adventure	brings	meaning	to	your	life,	significance	to	your	being.	Only
this	adventure	starts	a	pilgrimage	in	your	life	towards	the	divine.
Bliss	is	divine!
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Kavyen.
Anand	means	bliss.	Kavyen	means	a	poet.
The	experience	of	bliss	makes	everyone	a	poet.	One	may	not	compose	poetry	but
one	starts	living	poetry.	One	becomes	poetry	--	that's	my	definition	of	a	poet.	It
is	not	confined	to	those	people	who	compose	songs.	It	is	a	far	wider	world	with
greater	significance,	with	more	implications,	with	more,	many	more	dimensions
that	have	ever	been	conceived	about	 it.	 It	 is	more	a	concern	about	your	being;
not	what,	with	what	you	so,	but	what	you	are.
Bliss	 makes	 a	 poet.	 His	 whole	 life	 starts	 becoming	 a	 song,	 a	 melody,	 a
celebration.	To	live	without	bliss	is	to	live	a	very	stupid	life	--	very	grammatical,
very	mathematical,	very	calculative,	but	all	 these	things	are	insignificant.	They
can	make	you	a	good	businessman	but	they	cannot	give	you	anything	more	than
money,	power,	prestige,	and	all	those	things	are	really	just	rubbish.
I	am	not	against	money,	I	am	not	against	ANYthing.	Use	it,	but	don't	be	used	by
it.	Live	as	richly	as	possible.	I	am	not	only	for	inner	richness,	I	am	also	for	outer
richniess.	There	is	no	contradiction	between	the	two.	In	fact	both	should	go	hand
in	hand,	but	don't	just	be	a	beggar,	accumulating	money,	don't	just	be	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
a	constant	discontent	for	power,	prestige,	respectability.	There	are	higher	values.
And	only	those	higher	values	make	life	worth	living,	otherwise	it	is	just	burden:
one	can	carry	it	as	a	duty,	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave,	one	can	go	on	dragging
oneself,	somehow.	Everybody	is	dragging,	the	whole	crowd	is	dragging,	so	you
can	go	on	imitation	others	but	there	will	be	no	dance	in	your	life.
And	the	moment	dance	enters	your	life	god	enters.	To	me	god	is	a	dancer,	a	poet,
a	musician,	a	lover.
The	 idea	 of	 god	 as	 a	 father	 --	 the	Christian	 idea	 or	 the	 Jewish	 idea	 --	 is	 very
childish.	The	very	word	"father"
is	 a	 projection	 of	 an	 orphan,	 of	 a	mind	which	 is	 not	 grown-up,	 a	mind	which
needs	a	father	figure.
My	sannyasins	have	to	learn	the	art	of	growing	up,	becoming	mature.	then	god
has	 a	 totally	 different	meaning.	 It	 is	 no	more	 a	 person;	 it	 becomes	more	 and
more	 a	 quality;	 love,	 bliss.	 freedom,	 creativity.	 But	 all	 these	 things	 happen
through	bliss.
Unless	you	have	abundant	bliss	 in	you	 --	 so	much	 that	you	have	 to	 share	 it	 --
there	cannot	be	any	poetry,	there	cannot	be	any	flowers.	Flowers	are	luxuries.	A
tree	blooms	only	when	it	has	too	much	juice,	too	much	life,	that	it	has	to	burst
forth	into	colours,	it	has	to	sing	and	dance	and	sway,	it	has	to	share	its	joy	with
the	whole	universe.	That's	exactly	what	happens	to	a	blissful	person.
My	whole	teaching	is	for	bliss.	And	it	is	everybody's	choice.	If	one	wants	to	be
blissful	nobody	can	prevent,	if	one	is	miserable	it	is	one's	own	decision	to	be	so.
This	 is	 the	 first	 principle	 of	 sannyas,	 then	 whatsoever	 you	 are	 is	 your
responsibility.	Don't	shirk	it	and	don't	throw	it	upon	other	people's	shoulders.	It
is	 your	 and	only	your	 responsibility.	To	 accept	 it	 as	 your	 responsibility	 totally
brings	 tremendous	 freedom,	 because	 then	 you	 can	 change,	 you	 can	 choose	 a
different	way	of	life.	There	is	no	need	to	be	miserable.	We	create	it	hence	we	are
miserable.	Don't	create	misery	and	bliss	erupts	in	you	like	a	volcano!
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Anand	 Sudhi.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Sudhi	 means
remembrance.
Bliss	 is	not	something	new	that	we	have	to	achieve.	It	 is	a	forgotten	language;
we	have	only	to	remember.	Each	child	has	known	it	in	the	mother's	womb.	Each
child	has	experienced	it	but	then	the	moment	he	enters	into	the	world,	he	starts
losing	contact	with	it.	We	start	changing	him	into	an	extrovert,	we	start	forcing
him	not	to	be	an	introvert.	In	the	mother's	womb	he	was	an	introvert;	he	was	just
living	 within	 himself.	 There	 was	 nobody	 else.	 He	 was	 in	 total	 aloneness,	 in
tremendous	silence,	in	profound	peace.
There	was	no	anxiety,	no	thought,	no	desire,	no	mind	as	such	--	not	even	dreams,
so	no	question	of	nightmares.	He	was	just	in	a	deep	meditative	state.
But	the	moment	he	is	born,	he	opens	his	eyes	and	he	finds	a	big	world	around
himself,	and	naturally,	he	himself	becomes	interested	in	the	big	world.	And	the
whole	society	wants	him	to	come	out	of	himself.	So	slowly	slowly	we	lead	him
out	of	his	inner	being	into	all	kinds	of	relationships.	We	teach	him	extroversion.
This	extroversion	makes	him	forget	his	bliss,	and	the	purpose	of	sannyas	is	again
to	help	you	to	reach	to	your	 innermost	core,	again	 to	have	that	experience	that
you	had	once,	again	to	be	in	that	space	which	was	once	yours.	In	fact	that's	why
there	is	such	a	search	for	bliss,	because	we	have	known	it.	One	can	search	only
for	 that	 which	 one	 has	 experienced	 in	 some	 way,	 somewhere.	 It	 haunts,	 it
follows	you,	in	the	deep	unconscious	somewhere	it	is	still	intact,	still	calling	you
to	come	in.
Meditation	is	only	a	simple	process	of	turning	inwards,	a	one	hundred	and	eighty
degree	turn.
I	am	not	against	the	outside	world,	but	first	one	should	become	centered	inside
one's	 being	 and	 then	 you	 can	 live	 outside.	 That	 centering	 should	 not	 be
forgotten,	because	that	is	our	real	life,	our	kingdom.	We	should	remain	centered
in	 it,	 grounded	 in	 it,	 and	 then	 we	 can	 live	 in	 the	 outside	 world.	 There	 is	 no
problem	in	it.
So	I	don't	teach	my	sannyasins	to	escape	from	the	world;	I	only	teach	them	how
to	 remain	centered	and	yet	 in	 the	world,	how	 to	 remain	blissful	and	yet	 in	 the
marketplace.	And	the	true	bliss	is	not	disturbed	by	the	marketplace.	That	which
is	disturbed	by	the	marketplace	is	not	true;	it	is	phony,	cultivated,	it	is	something
believed,	 something	 that	 you	 have	 created	 through	 auto-hypnosis;	 only	 then	 it
can	be	destroyed	and	you	can	be	directed	from	it.
Remember,	 that	 bliss	 is	 not	 an	 ambition,	 it	 is	 not	 an	 achievement,	 it	 is	 not
something	 to	 be	 found,	 created.	 It	 is	 something	 that	 is	 already	 the	 case	 in	 the
deepest	part	of	your	being;	we	have	just	to	step	back	to	find	it.	It	is	ours.	Even
though	we	have	forgotten	it,	it	is	there.	It	cannot	be	lost,	only	forgotten.	Hence
sannyas	is	only	a	remembrance,	not	a	discovery	but	a	rediscovery.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Bijen.
Anand	means	bliss.	Bijen	means	a	seed,	a	potentiality.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Bliss	is	a	seed	with	all	potentiality,	with	millions	of	flowers	hidden	in	it.	One	has
just	 to	 find	a	 right	climate,	 right	 soil	 for	 it,	 and	 it	 starts	growing.	Sannyas	 is	a
climate,	a	soil.
To	be	a	sannyasin	simply	means	to	fall	in	the	soil	like	a	seed,	and	to	die	in	the
soil	like	a	seed.	Unless	the	seed	dies	it	cannot	grow,	it	cannot	attain	its	potential,
it	cannot	become	actual;	hence	the	death	of	the	seed	is	not	really	a	death,	but	a
birth.	A	seed	as	a	 seed	 is	dead.	When	 the	seed	dies	 it	 starts	 living	 --	 that's	 the
meaning	of	Jesus	crucifixion	and	resurrection.	I	don't	think	it	is	a	historical	fact,
it	cannot	be.
Only	superstitious	people	can	believe	in	such	stupid	things,	but	it	is	a	beautiful
metaphor.	And	because	Christians	have	insisted	that	this	is	a	historical	fact	they
have	missed	 the	whole	point,	 they	have	missed	 the	metaphor,	which	 is	 its	 real
essence.	The	metaphor	is	Jesus	dies	on	the	cross	and	then	there	is	a	resurrection,
after	three	days.
Those	three	days	are	significant,	that	number	is	significant.	In	the	East	he	must
lave	learned	the	idea,	because	he	has	been	in	the	East,	for	eighteen	years.	There
is	 no	 record	 in	 the	Bible,	 it	 is	 a	 big	 gap	 --	where	 he	 has	 been?	But	 there	 are
records	 available	 in	 eastern	 scriptures.	 He	 has	 been	 to	 Egypt,	 he	 has	 been	 to
Kashmir,	he	has	been	to	Ladakh.	In	an	ancient	library	of	Ladakh,	still,	there	are
records.
These	eighteen	years	from	the	age	twelve	up	to	the	age	thirty	he	lived	with	great
masters,	 and	 he	 learned	 many	 secrets.	 He	 must	 have	 carried	 the	 idea	 of	 the
number	three,	because	in	the	East	we	say	you	have	to	die	three	deaths.	Each	day
represents	 one	 death.	 First,	 the	 death	 of	 the	 body,	 the	 outer	 shell	 of	 the	 seed;
second,	the	death	of	the	mind,	the	inner	shell	of	the	seed;	and	third,	the	death	of
the	heart,	the	innermost	layer	of	the	seed.	When	these	three	have	died	the	fourth
is	born	--	 that	 is	 resurrection,	 the	fourth.	We	have	called	 it	 in	 the	East,	Turiya.
Exactly	it	means,	the	fourth	--	it	is	just	a	number.	We	have	not	given	it	a	name
knowingly,	 because	 all	 names	 are	 bound	 to	 be	misinterpreted	 sooner	 or	 later;
hence	 a	 number	 has	 been	 given.	 You	 cannot	 so	 anything	 with	 a	 number,	 the
fourth.
God	can	be	misrepresented,	soul	can	be	given	meaning,	self	can	become	just	an
ego	--	maybe	a	holy	ego,	a	holy	ghost	--	but	what	you	will	so	with	the	fourth?
There	seems	to	be	nothing	to	do	with	the	fourth.	It	is	simply	a	number.	It	simply
represents	you	have	passed	the	three	layers	and	reached	the	fourth.
Those	three	days	represent	three	deaths,	and	fourth	is	the	resurrection.
Bliss	is	a	resurrection.	Misery	is	living	like	a	seed	and	bliss	is	like	blossoming.
When	 a	 man	 becomes	 actualised,	 realised,	 when	 all	 his	 potential	 becomes	 a
reality,	then	only	there	is	bliss,	then	only	there	is	contentment.	That's	exactly	the
meaning	of	paradise.	The	word	"paradise"	comes	from	a	Persian	word,
"firdaus".	Firdaus	means	a	beautiful	garden.
A	 man	 becomes	 a	 beautiful	 garden.	 A	 seed	 is	 just	 ugly,	 but	 it	 contains
tremendous	beauty.	You	cannot	 find	 it	 by	dissecting	 the	 seed.	The	 seed	has	 to
find	a	right	way	to	die.	You	can	cut	it	by	knife,	but	that	is	a	wrong	way	to	die.
Millions	of	people	die	but	they	die	wrongly,	hence	they	don't	become	Buddhas
or	Christs;	very	few	people	have	died	articulately,	artfully,	scientifically.
Sannyas	is	both;	a	process	of	right-dying	and	a	process	of	resurrection.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Mani.
Anand	means	bliss.	Mani	means	a	diamond.
The	 greatest	 diamond	 in	 the	world	 is	 Kohinoor.	 It	 is	 in	 the	 possession	 of	 the
British	 queen.	 It	was	 found	 in	 a	 small	 village	 in	 India,	Golconda.	 The	 person
who	had	found	it	was	a	farmer.	he	had	found	it	in	his	own	farm;	a	small	stream
used	 to	 flow,	 and	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 stream	 he	 found	 the	 beautiful	 stone.	 He
thought	it	will	be	good	for	the	children,	 they	will	play	with	it,	so	he	brought	it
home.	And	for	three	years	it	was	lying	around;	children	sometimes	were	playing,
throwing	it	here	and	there.	It	was	just	by	a	chance	that	a	sannyasin	--	a	wanderer
sannyasin	--	stayed	in	the	poor	man's	hut	one	night.
He	used	to	be	a	jeweller	when	he	was	not	a	sannyasin.	He	could	not	believe	his
eyes:	he	had	seen	thousand	of	diamonds	but	never	such	a	big	diamond.	he	must
have	lost	a	beat	(laughter)...	he	remained	in	a	shock!	And	children	were	throwing
that	 precious	 thing	 here	 and	 there,	 and	 he	 asked	 the	 farmer	 "Are	 you	mad	 or
what?	This	must	be	the	greatest	diamond	in	the	world.	I	cannot	believe	there	can
be	a	greater	diamond	than	this.	You	can	become	the	richest	man."
The	man	 said	 "It	 has	 been	 lying	 here	 for	 three	 years."	Then	 the	 diamond	was
given	 to	 the	 king.	 Now	Kohinoor	 that	 exists	 is	 only	 one-third	 of	 his	 original
weight,	but	millions	of	times	more	precious	because	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
much	had	been	cut,	polished;	in	cutting	and	polishing	it	had	remained	only	one-
third	of	its	original	weight,	but	as	it	has	been	cut	and	polished	more	and	more,	it
has	become	more	and	more	precious.
Each	man	 is	 a	 raw	diamond,	and	each	man	 is	 in	 the	hands	of	 those	who	don't
know	that	what	a	precious	phenomenon	life	is.	It	is	just	lying	around,	people	are
wasting	it.	It	needs	a	jeweller	to	recognise,	to	see,	the	beauty,	the	possibility,	the
future.	 It	 needs	a	visionary,	 a	great	poet	 to	 see	what	 it	 can	become.	That's	 the
function	of	a	master,	to	help	each	disciple	to	recognise	the	preciousness	of	life,
its	infinite	treasures,	its	hidden	kingdom.
Every	man	is	a	Kohinoor	and	every	man	is	in	wrong	hands.	Every	man	needs	to
be	 reminded,	every	man	needs	 to	be	awakened	so	 that	one	can	 recognise	what
life	can	be!	Of	course	then	much	cutting	and	polishing	will	needed,	but	once	you
have	recognised	the	preciousness	of	your	being	then	one	can	do	everything	for	it.
The	whole	process	that	happens	between	a	master	and	a	disciple	is	exactly	that
of	 a	 jeweller	 and	 the	 diamond:	 the	 master	 has	 to	 cut	 in	 many	 ways,	 because
much	is	unnecessary,	non-essential,	much	is	ugly,	much	is	not	needed	--	it	has	to
be	eliminated.
The	ego	has	to	be	eliminated,	the	anger	has	to	be	eliminated,	the	violence	has	to
be	eliminated,	the	hatred,	the	possessiveness,	the	jealousy,	the	greed.	And	when
all	these	are	eliminated	then	there	is	bliss,	love,	awareness,	freedom,	godliness.
They	are	there	but	hidden	behind	layers	of	the	non-essential	and	the	ugly.	But	all
these	 layers	 can	 be	 removed.	Yes,	 sometimes	 it	 hurts,	 because	 sometimes	 one
things	this	is	very	essential	and	it	should	not	be	eliminated.
This	 phenomenon	 of	 the	 master	 and	 the	 disciple	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest
contributions	of	the	East	to	humanity.	In	the	West	there	have	been	only	teachers
and	 students.	Even	a	man	 like	Socrates	 is	 thought	only	as	 a	great	 teacher,	 and
Plato	and	others	are	his	students.	In	the	East	we	have	a	great	distinction	between
a	teacher	and	a	master.
A	 teacher	 is	 only	 to	 give	 you	 information.	 A	 master	 has	 to	 give	 you
transformation	--	it	is	a	totally	different	process.	Information	is	not	difficult:	you
can	go	on	memorising	 it.	That's	what	 schools,	 colleges,	universities	are	doing:
they	 go	 on	 feeding	 your	 biocomputer,	 they	 go	 on	 putting	 more	 and	 more
information	 in	 you.	The	master	 has	 to	 transform	you;	 hence	 deep	 surrender	 is
needed,	because	the	master	will	start	working	on	you	and	it	hurts	--	it	is	surgical.
And	 the	 moment	 he	 takes	 his	 sword	 and	 starts	 cutting	 you,	 if	 there	 is	 not
surrender	 and	 love,	 you	 will	 escape!	 And	 remember,	 it	 is	 very	 dangerous	 to
escape	from	the	surgeon's	table!	(laughter)	He	may	have	already	(laughter)....	but
few	things,	opened	few	places,	and	if	you	escape...
I	 have	heard	 it	 happened	once!	 (much	 laughter)	A	politician's	 brain	was	being
changed.	His	whole	brain	has	been	taken	out	and	they	were	searching	for	another
brain	 to	be	 transplanted.	Meanwhile	 a	man	came	 running	 to	 the	politician	 and
said	"What	are	you	doing	here?	--	you	have	been	elected	the	prime	minister,"
so	the	politician	escaped.	After	seven	years	he	turned,	and	the	doctors	said	"And
what	you	have	been	doing?
It	 is	 a	 miracle,	 because	 your	 brain	 is	 here,	 and	 we	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to
transplant	another	brain!"
The	politician	said	"But	I	didn't	need	it	--	I	was	the	prime	minister.	Now	I	am	no
more	 the	prime	minister,	 so	 I	have	come	back.	Please	 fix	 some	brain,	because
now	I	will	need	it!"
It	 is	 dangerous	 to	 escape	 from	 a	 surgeon's	 table	 --	 unless	 you	 are	 going	 in
politics,	then	it	is	okay	(laughter).
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	in	a	total	surrender,	in	deep	love.	It	is	a	love	affair.	Only
then	it	 is	possible	for	him	to	allow	to	cut	 the	unnecessary,	 the	ugly,	so	that	 the
essential	can	start	shining	in	its	immense	beauty	and	splendour.	Every	man	is	an
imprisoned	splendour!	--	but	imprisoned	and	the	walls	have	to	be	removed.	And
they	 can	 be	 removed;	 just	 a	 deep	 and	 total	 co-operation	 from	 the	 disciple	 is
needed,	a	total	yes	is	the	need,	and	once	you	can	say	yes,	 transformation	starts
immediately,	instantly.	In	the	very	saying	of	yes	--	when	your	heart	says	yes	you
are	already	a	new	person,	because	ordinarily	we	are	always	saying	no.	Even	 if
we	say	yes	on	the	outside	deep	down	there	is	no.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 song	of	 saying	yes,	 first	 to	 the	master,	 then	 to	 community	of	 the
master,	 the	 commune	 of	 the	master,	 and	 then	 to	 the	 law	 that	 has	made	 one	 a
master	and	that	runs	through	the	commune	as	a	foundation.	These	are	the	three
shelters	 the	disciples	of	Buddha	used	 to	pray	before	 their	 sannyas.	These	were
the	 three	 prayers	 they	 had	 to	 assert:	 "Buddham	 sharanam	 gauchchami"	 --	 that
was	the	first	step:	I	take	refuge	into	the	feet	of	the	Buddha	--	that	is	surrender	to
the	master;	"Sangham	sharanam	gauchchami"	--	I	take	refuge	in	the	commune	of
the	Buddha	--	that	is	the	second	surrender.
And	remember	the	second	is	more	difficult	than	the	first,	because	to	surrender	to
a	man	like	Buddha	or	a	Jesus	is	not	difficult:	they	are	so	beautiful	people	--	one
can	surrender.	But	to	surrender	to	the	commune	(laughter)	is	far	more	difficult,
because	then	you	are	surrendering	to	people	who	are	almost	like	you!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(laughter)	 But	 that	 helps	 tremendously:	 if	 one	 can	 surrender	 to	 the	 commune,
then	really	one's	ego	is	destroyed.
And	the	third	surrender	is	even	more	difficult:	"Sangham	sharanam	gauchchami"
is	the	second	and
"Dhammam	sharanam	gauchchami"	is	the	third:	I	go,	I	take	shelter,	refuge,	into
the	 ultimate	 law.	 the	 realisation	 of	which	 has	made	 the	master	 the	master,	 the
realisation	 of	 which	 has	 created	 the	 commune.	 The	 ultimate	 law	 runs	 like	 a
thread	in	a	garden	of	flowers.	You	can	see	the	flowers,	you	cannot	see	the	thread,
but	 it	 is	 the	 thread	 that	 keeps	 them	 together	 --	 it	 is	 invisible.	 Because	 it	 is
invisible	it	is	very	difficult.
But	once	one	has	become	able	 to	do	 the	 first	 two	surrenders,	 the	 third	 is	 also,
becomes	 possible.	 And	 with	 these	 three	 surrenders	 one	 becomes	 a	 sannyasin,
and	 then	 it	 is	not	very	 far	 away	when	 the	 raw	diamond	can	be	 transformed	 to
reveal	its	true	beauty,	its	true	colour,	its	true	glory,	its	splendour.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Udghosh.
Anand	means	bliss.	Udghosh	means	declaration.
Man	can	hide	one's	misery.	Man	cannot	hide	one's	bliss:	it	has	to	be	declared!	If
you	don't	declare	it,	it	declares	itself.
Misery	 is	 like	 a	 thief:	 it	 tries	 to	 hide,	 it	 does	 not	 want	 to	 show,	 it	 feels	 its
ugliness,	 it	 remains	 behind	 beautiful	 facades,	 but	 bliss	 is	 so	 beautiful	 and	 so
overflowing	with	energy,	it	wants	to	dance	in	the	moon,	in	the	sun,	in	the	wind,
in	 the	 rain.	 It	 wants	 to	 sing	 thousands	 of	 songs,	 it	 wants	 to	 share.	 It	 is	 a
declaration.
But	because	we	have	lived	in	misery	for	long,	when	even	bliss	happens	we	try	to
hide	it	--	just	out	of	old	habit.
One	should	learn	one	very	basic	law:	if	you	hide	your	bliss	it	dies;	it	has	to	be
expressed,	then	it	grows.
The	more	you	share,	the	more	you	have	it.	The	less	you	share,	the	less	you	have
it.	 If	 you	 don't	 share	 it	 at	 all	 it	 disappears.	 If	 you	 can	 share	 it	with	 the	whole
existence	 without	 any	 conditions	 it	 becomes	 universal.	 Then	 you	 have
inexhaustible	sources,	you	can	go	on	giving,	and	you	cannot	exhaust	it.
So	start	sharing.	Whatsoever	small	bliss	comes	to	you,	sing	it,	dance	it,	give	it	to
somebody	 --	 to	 anybody	 --	 don't	 make	 any	 distinctions.	 And	 you	 will	 be
surprised:	as	you	start	giving	it,	it	goes	on	coming	more	and	more	to	you!	And
once	you	have	learned	that	it	comes	by	giving,	then	one	is	never	miserly	about	it.
My	sannyasins	have	to	shout	it	from	the	housetops,	they	have	to	sing	and	dance
in	the	marketplaces,	on	the	streets,	in	the	crowds.	They	have	to	make	the	whole
world	aware	that	something	tremendously	significant	is	happening.	They	have	to
knock	on	each	door	--	who	knows?	The	person	who	is	behind	the	door	may	be
the	person	who	is	searching	and	seeking	exactly	for	what	you	have	brought	for
him.	He	may	have	been	searching	and	not	finding	it,	and	just	seeing	you,	he	may
recognise	his	own	original	face:	you	may	become	the	mirror!
So	don't	be	miserly	and	don't	follow	the	ordinary	law	of	 the	economics,	 that	 if
you	 share	 you	 will	 lose,	 so	 accumulate,	 be	 greedy,	 hide	 it,	 don't	 let	 anybody
know	about	it	--	somebody	may	steal	it.	This	is	not	the	law	of	inner	world.
Leave	all	the	doors	and	windows	open	and	send	the	invitations	to	all	the	thieves
that	it	its	available	--
don't	miss	the	opportunity!	You	see	I	have	gathered	all	kinds	of	thieves	around
me.	These	are	all	thieves!
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8002105
ShortTitle:	NEVER10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Hilde.
Prem	means	love.	Hilde	means	courageous	spirit.
The	greatest	courage	in	life	is	to	drop	one's	ego	and	unless	ones	drops	 the	ego
one	cannot	know	what	love	is.	Love	is	the	absence	of	ego.	It	is	the	experience	of
egolessness	 --	and	 that's	what	creates	 the	whole	problem	around	 the	subject	of
love.
People	want	to	love,	people	want	to	be	loved.	It	is	natural,	it	is	their	basic	need,
to	 love	and	 to	be	 loved,	but	 the	problem	arises	 that	 they	have	 to	drop	 the	ego.
And	 they	 want	 to	 do	 the	 impossible:	 they	 want	 to	 keep	 the	 ego	 and	 yet	 be
capable	of	loving	and	capable	of	receiving	love.	That	is	not	possible,	it	is	not	in
the	nature	of	things.	It	is	like	you	can't	have	darkness	and	light	both	in	the	room
together.	 If	 the	 light	 is	 there	 the	 darkness	 is	 not	 there,	 cannot	 be	 there.	 If	 you
want	 darkness	 then	 you	 have	 to	 extinguish	 the	 light.	 They	 exist	 only	 in	 each
other's	 absence.	The	 absence	of	 one	becomes	 the	presence	of	 the	other;	 hence
both	cannot	co-exist.
And	this	is	one	of	the	basic	anxieties	of	man:	he	wants	them	together,	he	would
like	to	have	his	ego.	Not	only	that,	he	would	like	to	feel	more	egoistic	because	of
his	love,	because	he	is	such	a	great	lover,	because	he	loves	and	he	is	being	loved.
Now	this	 is	sheer	stupidity!	And	when	both	the	persons	who	are	 in	 love	doing
the	same	stupid	thing,	it	becomes	a	constant	conflict.	That	is	another	meaning	of
Hilde,	battle,	fight,	war.	Avoid	that	meaning!
Courageous	spirit	is	only	the	symbolic	meaning.	The	literal	meaning	is	war,	but
in	a	way	both	are	relevant	as	far	as	 love	is	concerned.	If	you	want	 to	keep	the
ego	also	then	love	will	become	a	war;	if	you	can	drop	the	ego	then	love	becomes
peace,	but	to	drop	the	ego	one	needs	great	guts.
I	think	that	is	the	greatest	courage	in	life,	to	put	one's	ego	aside.	And	what	is	true
about	 love	 is	 true	 about	 sannyas	 too,	 because	 it	 is	 a	 love	 affair	 on	 a	 different
plane,	on	the	highest	plane	possible.	Is	you	want	to	keep	your	ego	then	that	will
be	the	barrier	between	you	and	me	too.	Then	you	can	learn	few	things,	you	can
become	knowledgeable,	but	that	is	not	the	purpose	of	sannyas.
The	purpose	of	sannyas	 is	a	 total	 transformation	of	being	--	not	 just	 learning	a
little	 bit	 of	 knowledge,	 accumulating	 few	 more	 beautiful	 words,	 theories,
philosophies,	ideologies,	becoming	more	informative	--
that	is	not	the	purpose	of	sannyas.	Information	is	not	its	goal	but	transformation.
And	all	transformation	needs	egolessness,	or	in	other	words,	it	needs	love.
Be	courageous	and	let	it	happen!
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Yogena.
Prem	 means	 love.	 Yogena	 means	 the	 meeting,	 the	 merger,	 the	 ultimate
immersion	in	the	absolute.
Just	as	a	dewdrop	dips,	slips	from	the	lotus	leaf	into	the	lake	and	becomes	one
with	 the	 lake,	 loses	 all	 its	 boundary	 loses	 all	 its	 smallness,	 its	 definition,	 its
name,	 its	 form,	 its	personality,	 its	 ego.	But	 that	 loss	 is	not	 really	a	 loss	but	an
immense	 gain.	 By	 losing	 boundaries	 it	 becomes	 unbounded,	 by	 losing	 its
finitude	 it	 becomes	 infinite.	 By	 losing	 its	 definition	 it	 becomes	 a	 tremendous
mystery.	By	losing	itself	it	becomes	the	lake	itself.	It	is	immense	gain,	and	only
those	who	are	 ready	 to	 lose	 themselves	can	find	god,	because	god	 is	not	some
entity,	somewhere.
It	is	the	name	of	the	ultimate	merger.	Remember,	just	a	name,	a	symbol	--	god	is
only	a	symbol	for	the	ultimate	merger.	The	moment	the	ego	disappears	and	you
become	part	of	the	whole,	that	moment	is	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
experience	of	something	so	vast	you	have	never	known,	so	incredible.	It	needs
some	specific	name.	It	is	really	a	milestone,	it	is	an	end	and	a	beginning.	It	is	a
death	and	a	resurrection.	It	really	draws	a	line	before	it	you	were	just	a	miserable
ego;	after	it	you	are	blissfulness	itself.
Before	it,	it	was	all	dark	night;	now	it	is	all	light.	The	change	is	so	qualitative.	It
is	not	only	a	change	of	quantity,	not	of	degrees;	it	is	a	quantum	leap,	it	is	a	jump,
nothing	 gradual.	 You	 become	 discontinuous	 with	 the	 past,	 you	 attain	 to
something	 absolutely	 dew	 you	were	 not	 even	 aware	 of	 that	 it	 exists;	 hence	 it
needs	a	name	to	indicate	it.	God	is	that	name.	god	is	not	a	person.	It	is	just	that
experience	of	merger,	when	you	are	disappearing	on	the	one	hand,	and	you	are
appearing	 in	 a	 totally	 new	 vision,	 on	 the	 other	 hand.	 The	 experience	 is	 so
remarkable	so	unique,	so	inexpressible;	hence	we	have	given	it	some	names.
Lao	Tzu	calls	it	tao	--	that	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	names	ever	given	to	it,	far
better	 than	 god,	 because	 the	 very	 word	 "god",	 particularly	 in	 Judaic	 and
Christian	and	Mohammedan	tradition,	has	become	associated	with	a	despot	kind
of	person.	In	the	Old	Testament	the	god	declares	"I	am	a	very	jealous	god."
Jealous	simply	means	Jewish,	nothing	else!	(laughter)
Lao	Tzu	says	"I	would	like	to	call	it	tao,"	and	the	reason	he	gives	"Why	I	should
call	 it	 tao,	because	it	has	no	name."	Tao	does	not	mean	anything.	It	 is	 just	 like
calling	 something	 xyz.	He	 says	 I	will	 call	 it	 xyz	 because	 it	 has	 no	 name	 and
something	has	to	be	called.	So	I	call	it	tao.	In	India	we	have	called	it	aum	--	that
exactly	is	what	Lao	Tzu	means	by	tao.	Aum	is	just	a	sound,	not	even	a	word.	Tao
at	least	is	a	word;	aum	is	just	a	sound,	a	humming	sound.
Actually	 it	 is	 very	 representative:	 when	 the	 person	 disappears	 into	 the
impersonal	 existence	 great	 explosion	 of	music	 happens.	 It	 is	 the	 release	 of	 an
imprisoned	 splendour.	 Suddenly	 there	 is	 dance	 and	 song	 and	 celebration,	 not
only	 in	 the	person	who	 is	disappearing,	but	 the	whole	 rejoices	 it.	Aum	simply
represents	a	musical	sound.	That	too	is	again	just	like	xyz.	Xyz	is	the	end	of	the
alphabet,	aum	represents	the	whole	alphabet.	Aum	consists	of	three	sounds;	a,	u,
m.	 According	 to	 the	 science	 of	 sound	 these	 are	 the	 basic	 sounds.	 All	 other
sounds	are	by-products	of	these	three.	These	are	the	root	sounds	--	a,	u,	m.	Aum
is	simply	a,	u,	m;	the	combination	of	all	these	three	sounds,	and	something	more,
something	plus.
When	you	say	"Aum",	first	a,	u,	m,	and	then	the	"m"	is	prolonged,	"aum",	then
the	"m"	is	prolonged.	It	is	just	a	vibration.	It	goes	on	disappearing.	Just	like	that
the	individual	disappears	into	the	aum:	Aum-that	am	disappearing.
Slowly	slowly	you	hear	it	less	and	less	and	less.	And	a	moment	comes,	suddenly
it	is	no	more	there,	it	is	gone.	In	Sanskrit	it	is	represented	by	a	simple	dot.	So	a,
u,	m,	and	a	dot,	just	a	dot.	A,	u,	m,	represent	three	things	in	you:	the	body,	the
mind,	the	heart,	and	the	dot	represents	your	centre.	When	the	body	is	gone,	mind
is	gone,	the	heart	is	gone,	then	there	is	just	the	centre,	the	essential	core	of	your
being	--	that	remains.
It	is	not	part	of	your	ego.	It	is	transcendent	of	the	ego.
Love	 and	 only	 love	 is	 the	 door	 to	 this	 ultimate	 merger,	 meeting,	 melting,
disappearing.	That's	the	goal	of	sannyas.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Mouni.
Prem	means	love.	Mouni	means	the	silent	one.
Love	is	inexpressible.	It	is	impossible	to	say	it.	You	can	live	it,	you	can	be	it,	but
you	cannot	say	it.	The	moment	you	say	it	you	drag	it	down,	from	the	world	of
the	stars,	to	the	muddy	earth.
The	world	 of	 stars	 is	 silent.	 Love	 belongs	 to	 the	 beyond,	 to	 the	 farther	 shore.
When	you	bring	it	into	words	you	destroy	all	that	is	significant	into	it.	The	words
are	very	small	and	love	is	like	the	sky.	And	to	force	the	sky	into	a	word	is	not
possible.	You	will	destroy	the	whole	beauty.
And	what	will	remain	in	the	word	will	not	be	even	a	far	away	echo.	It	will	not	be
the	echo	of	 the	echo	of	 the	echo;	hence	 those	who	have	known	love	have	also
known	its	intrinsic	inexpressibility.	Now,	that	can	become	a	tremendous	insight;
once	understood	it	can	give	you	a	clue.	The	clue	is:	if	you	become	silent	you	will
know	what	love	is	or	if	you	become	loving	you	will	know	what	silence	is,	as	if
they	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	Hence	my	insistence	is	on	only	two	things,
meditation	and	love.
Meditation	is	synonymous	with	silence.	It	simply	means	to	be	still,	to	be	silent,
to	be	without	any	thoughts,	words,	without	any	mind,	just	to	be	herenow.	When
that	 silence	 settles	 in	you,	you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 a	great	 explosion	of	 love
happens!
Either	one	can	travel	to	silence	through	love	or	through	love	to	silence.	Both	are
valid.	It	 is	easier	to	travel	from	lobe	to	silence	that	from	silence	to	love;	hence
my	 experience	 is	 that	more	 people	 reach	 to	 silence	 through	 love	 --	 that	 is	 the
way	of	the	Sufis.	Yes,	few	people	have	reached	through	silence	to	love	--
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
that	is	the	way	of	Zen.	And	these	are	the	only	two	ways	in	fact;	all	other	ways
can	be	categorised	either	belonging	to	the	Sufi	way	or	to	the	Zen	way.	But	with
me,	all	 the	ways	are	existing	 together.	 I	am	not	 trying	 to	synthesise,	because	 I
don't	 see	 the	need	 to	 synthesise	 --	 they	 are	 one!	The	need	 to	 synthesise	 arises
only	when	they	are	not	one.	I	see	their	organic	unity.
There	have	been	people	who	have	been	trying	to	synthesise	all	the	religions,	all
the	paths	--	these	are	the	blind	people.	They	don't	see	the	unity	which	is	already
there.	If	somebody	comes	and	tries	to	synthesise	your	hands	with	your	legs,	and
your	head	with	your	hands,	he	is	going	to	create	a	mess,	because	you	are	already
in	a	synthesis,	there	is	no	need	to	fix	you.
But	if	somebody	tries	to	fix	you	thinking	that	hands	are	so	far	away	from	the	feet
(laughter)	and	they	may	not	be	in	a	unity,	and	the	hands	may	go	this	side	and	the
feet	may	go	that	side,	and	the	hands	may	want	to	do	one	thing	and	the	head	may
not	want	it	to	do	that	thing,	and	there	will	be	great	difficulty	for	this	poor	woman
"So	let	us	fix	her,"	then	they	will	destroy	you!
That's	 what	 the	 do-gooders	 have	 been	 doing:	 they	 have	 been	 creating	 great
mischief	in	the	world,	and	there	are	all	kinds	of	do-gooders.
There	 was	 one	 very	 old	 scholar	 in	 India,	 Doctor	 Bhagwandas.	 I	 was	 a	 very
young	man	when	I	saw	him
--	 he	 was	 a	 great	 world-known	 indian	 philosopher.	 His	 whole	 life	 work	 was
synthesis	of	all	religions.	When	I	saw	him	he	was	very	old.	I	asked	him	only	one
thing	and	he	became	very	angry.	He	almost	threw	me	out	of	his	home!	I	asked
him	only	 this	much	 that	 "If	 there	 is	already	 an	organic	unity,	 then	whatsoever
you	have	been	doing	is	sheer	nonsense.	If	there	is	no	unity	already	then	what	you
are	doing	is	impossible."
He	could	 see	 the	point	but	he	was	 surrounded	by	his	disciples	 and	he	ordered
that	"This	young	man	should	be	removed."	I	said	"At	least	let	us	be	synthesised
with	 each	 other!	 You	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 synthesise	 Hinduism	 with
Mohammedanism	and	Christianity	and	all	 the	 religions,"	and	his	whole	 life	he
did	it.	I	said	"You	have	wasted	your	life.	I	have	just	come	to	say	to	you	--	I	was
just	 passing	 (laughter)	 and	 a	 friend	 told	me	 that	 this	 place	 belongs	 to	 Doctor
Bhagwandas,	so	I	said	"Let	us	come	in.	Let	us	have	a	little	chitchat."
And	he	was	surrounded	by	his	disciples,	he	was	very	angry!	I	said	"There	is	no
need	to	throw	me	out.	I	will	go.	My	body	is	synthesised.	I	can	go	myself.	There
is	 no	need	 to	 throw	me	out!	But	whatsoever	you	have	been	doing,	 remember:
you	are	a	blind	man	and	you	have	not	seen	the	point:	it	is	already	one!"
Love	and	silence	are	deeply	one,	but	you	can	move	from	different	directions.
One	can	move	to	a	single	point	from	many	directions.	From	all	over	the	world
one	can	move	to	a	single	point.	And	these	two	are	the	basic	approaches.	You	can
choose,	 you	 can	have	your	 pick:	 either	 through	 love	 reach	 to	 silence	 --	 if	 you
follow	the	path	of	love	then	silence	has	to	be	used	as	a	criterion.	As	you	become
more	 and	 more	 silent	 you	 can	 be	 certain	 that	 you	 are	 moving	 in	 the	 right
direction.	Follow	love	but	use	silence	as	criterion	whether	you	are	going	in	the
right	direction,	or	become	more	meditative	and	silent	then	use	love	as	a	criterion.
If	you	become	more	loving	then	you	are	in	the	right	direction.
So	whether	one	follows	the	path	of	silence	or	the	path	of	love,	the	other	has	to	be
used	as	a	criterion.
And	one	reaches	to	the	same	point.	And	when	one	reaches	one	can	see	the	unity
of	all	 the	Buddhas,	of	 all	 the	awakened	ones.	Their	whole	 life	 can	be	 reduced
into	loving	silence	or	silent	love.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Soni.
Prem	means	love.	Soni	means	golden.
The	alchemists	all	over	the	world	have	used	the	symbol	of	gold.	The	symbol	of
gold	 means	 the	 hidden	 in	 man	 is	 the	 most	 precious.	 Man	 lives	 in	 the	 non-
essential,	and	then	his	life	remains	trivia,	mundane.	If	he	starts	moving	from	the
non-essential	 towards	 the	 essential,	 his	 life	 starts	 becoming	 golden,	 he	 starts
gathering	a	golden	aura	around	himself.
The	 alchemists	 say	 their	 science	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 process	 of	 transforming	 the
baser	 metal	 into	 gold.	 We	 are	 all	 born	 with	 both,	 the	 centre	 and	 the
circumference,	 but	 the	 world	 uses	 only	 our	 circumference.	 It	 needs	 only	 our
circumference,	it	comes	only	in	contact	with	our	circumference,	and	because	the
whole	world	uses	only	your	circumference	--	your	parents,	your	sisters,	brothers,
husbands	 wives,	 children,	 people	 all	 around,	 in	 all	 your	 relationships	 your
circumference	 plays	 a	 great	 role	 --	 naturally,	 one	 becomes	 more	 and	 more
identified	with	 the	 circumference	 and	 forgets	 the	 centre.	And	 the	 centre	 is	 the
real	goal	--	that	is	our	most	precious	treasure.
And	 it	 is	 only	 at	 the	 centre	 that	 love	 exists;	 hence	 people	 living	 on	 the
circumference	can	hanker	for	love	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
but	they	cannot	get	it.	They	can	try	to	give	but	they	cannot	give	it	either.	It	does
not	 exist	 on	 the	 circumference.	 On	 the	 circumference	 cunningness	 exists,
domination	exists,	all	ego	trips	exists	--	but	not	love.
Love	is	so	precious	that	nature	has	put	it	at	the	innermost	core	of	your	being.	It
has	been	hidden	so	it	cannot	be	destroyed,	so	it	cannot	be	stolen,	so	it	cannot	be
easily	available	to	anybody.	That	seems	to	be	very	logical.
If	you	have	a	precious	diamond	you	will	put	it	in	the	most	secure	and	safe	place
in	 your	 house;	 you	will	 not	 throw	 it	 outside.	You	will	 put	 it	 in	 the	 innermost
room	of	your	house	and	 there	 too,	 in	a	safe,	and	you	will	 lock	 it	and	you	will
keep	it	absolutely	private	so	nobody	knows	about	it.	That's	what	nature	has	done:
love	 is	 so	 delicate,	 so	 precious,	 so	 divine,	 that	 it	 has	 hidden	 it	 as	 the	 deepest
recesses	of	your	being.	And	unless	you	start	digging	for	it	you	will	not	find	it.
Sannyas	is	a	tremendous	effort	to	find	one's	own	treasures,	to	find	the	kingdom
of	god	within	you.	But	 if	one	wants	 to	 find	 the	centre	one	has	 to	start	moving
from	 the	 circumference,	 facing	 towards	 the	 centre.	 We	 are	 standing	 on	 the
circumference,	our	back	is	at	the	centre,	and	we	are	facing	the	world	--	the	whole
world,	 the	vast	world.	A	hundred-eighty-degree	 turn	 is	needed,	and	that	 turn	 is
meditation:	you	close	your	eyes	and	you	look	withinwards,	you	still	your	mind
and	you	dive	deep	within	you,	you	become	calm	and	quiet	--	in	the	body,	in	the
mind,	in	the	heart	--	and	slowly	slowly	you	start	settling	to	the	very	bottom	rock
of	your	being.	It	is	there	you	will	find	the	goal	of	love,	the	kingdom	of	love	or
the	kingdom	of	god.	Love	and	god	are	synonymous,	and	love	is	a	far	better	word
than	 "god",	 because	 god,	 the	 word	 "god"	 has	 been	 so	much	 exploited	 by	 the
priests	that	 it	 is	 time	that	at	 least	for	one	hundred	years	it	should	be	put	out	of
use.	My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 replace	 the	 word	 "god"	 by	 love.	 Love	 has	 not	 been
exploited	by	the	priests	and	I	don't	think	they	will	ever	be	able	to	exploit	it.	Love
is	 the	word	 that	belongs	 to	 the	world	of	poetry,	not	 to	 the	world	of	priestcraft!
(laughter)	Priests	cannot	use	it,	they	cannot	even	understand	it,	they	cannot	make
a	theology	around	it.	They	cannot	make	temples	around	it.
Love	is	dangerous.	Priests	have	always	kept	the	energy	of	love	repressed.	They
are	very	much	afraid	of	love,	because	a	person	who	knows	what	love	is	cannot
ever	 be	 victim	 of	 any	 priest,	 of	 any	 church,	 of	 any	 religion.	 He	 will	 remain
independent,	he	will	be	living	his	life	according	to	his	love	and	according	to	his
light.	That's	what	my	sannyasins	are.
This	 is	not	a	church,	 this	 is	not	a	dogma,	 this	 is	not	 in	any	way	a	doctrine.	By
belonging	to	me	you	are	not	belonging	to	any	philosophy.	By	belonging	to	me
you	are	only	belonging	to	the	purest	energy	of	love.	It	is	not	a	temple	at	all.	It	is
not	a	place	for	worship.	We	don't	have	any	rituals,	any	prayers	--	we	can't	have.
Love	needs	nothing.	Love	is	enough	unto	itself.	It	is	the	prayer,	it	is	the	temple,
it	is	the	deity	in	the	temple.	It	is	all	in	all.	It	covers	the	whole	reality.	it	is	in	itself
the	 total	 dimension	 of	 mysticism.	 Start	 moving	 towards	 love,	 towards	 your
centre.	Keep	aware	 so	 that	you	don't	 so	anything	which	goes	against	 love.	Do
everything	that	helps	your	love	to	become	more	and	more	manifest,	to	be	more
nourished	--	and	you	will	find	the	gold,	you	will	become	golden.	Everybody	 is
born	with	the	capacity	to	be	golden	--	that	is	our	birthright.
All	that	is	needed	is	a	determined	commitment	to	claim	our	birthright.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Sambodhi.	Prem	means	love.	Sambodhi	means
enlightenment.
Love	is	the	light	of	the	inner	world.	A	man	without	love	is	without	light.	He	may
have	light	on	the	outside	but	as	far	as	his	inner,	his	interiority	is	concerned,	it	is
all	 dark,	utterly	dark,	 so	dark	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 see	 anything.	That's	why
many	people	would	like	to	go	in	but	they	never	go.	Once	in	a	while	they	have	a
little	peek	in,	and	then	they	become	scared	because	it	is	so	dark.	They	escape.
In	fact	 the	whole	humanity	can	be	divided	into	two	categories:	 the	people	who
are	escaping	from	themselves	and	the	people	who	are	escaping	to	themselves.	A
sannyasin	is	one	who	is	escaping	to	himself	and	a	non-sannyasin	is	one	who	is
escaping	from	himself.
To	escape	from	oneself	is	extroversion.	To	escape	to	oneself	is	introversion.	And
unless	you	come	in	you	will	not	find	the	source	of	light;	it	will	remain	dark.	It	is
dark	not	because	 there	 is	no	 light	 --	 there	 is	 light	 --	but	 it	 is	a	 totally	different
kind	of	light	and	you	have	to	get	accustomed.	It	 is	like	when	you	come	after	a
long	walk	 in	 the	 hot	 sun	 to	 your	 house,	 it	 looks	 dark	 inside;	 compared	 to	 the
outside	light,	the	inside	of	the	house	looks	dark	and	dismal.	For	a	few	moments
you	 feel	 it,	 but	 if	 you	 settle,	 if	 you	 rest	 a	 little	 bit,	 soon	 that	 darkness	 starts
disappearing,	your	eyes	become	accustomed,	adjusted.
Eyes	are	very	flexible.	When	there	is	too	much	light	your	pupils	start	shrinking,
because	only	so	much	light	can	be	allowed	in.	When	there	is	less	light	then	your
eyes	start	opening	more.	It	is	just	like	the	shutter	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	K.B.'s	camera	(laughter)	just	the	lens,	if	there	is	too	much	light	then	you	have
to	 keep	 it	 according	 to	 the	 light.	 If	 it	 is	 less	 light	 then	 you	 have	 to	 keep	 it
exposed	for	a	longer	period,	a	bigger	exposure	is	needed.
Eyes	simply	function	automatically	like	a	camera,	and	the	inner	world	is	really
so	different	from	the	outer	world	that	it	is	not	only	a	question	of	adjusting,	it	is	a
question	of	a	radical	change.	So	it	takes	a	little	while	to	settle	inside.
Sit	in	the	inside	darkness	and	don't	be	worried!	Enjoy	it!	It	is	peaceful,	it	is	vast,
it	 is	very	velvety!	It	has	 its	own	beauty,	 its	own	silence,	 its	serenity	--	enjoy	it
and	just	sit	there	and	don't	be	in	a	hurry,	and	you	will	be	surprised	one	day	that
your	eyes	have	started	changing.	A	new	vision	has	started	arising	in	you.	In	the
East	we	have	called	it	the	third	eye.	It	is	symbolic.	It	is	not	that	there	is	a	third
eye	 somewhere	 inside.	 A	 few	 foolish	 people	 even	 have	 tried	 to	 dissect	 dead
bodies	 to	 find	out	where	 the	 third	eye	 is.	 It	 is	not	anything	physiological;	 it	 is
only	a	metaphor.	"Third	eye"	simply	means	a	new	kind	of	seeing.
It	 takes	 a	 little	 time	 for	 that	 new	 kind	 of	 seeing	 to	 arise	 but	 it	 arises.	 I	 am	 a
witness	for	it.	I	am	not	talking	about	the	scriptures;	I	say	only	that	which	I	have
known	myself.	I	never	say	anything	that	is	not	my	experience.	If	it	goes	against
my	experience	then	I	don't	care	--	whosoever	has	said	it,	I	criticize	it	outrightly.
Even	 though	 it	 looks	outrageous,	 it	 is	perfectly	okay	with	me.	 I	have	only	one
commitment	and	that	is	to	my	own	experience,	to	nobody	else.
If	I	find	that	Krishna	is	saying	something	which	does	not	go	with	my	experience,
then	 Krishna	 is	 condemned.	 Then	 I	 will	 hit	 him	 as	 hard	 as	 I	 can!	 If	 it	 goes
against	 Jesus	 then	 it	 goes	 against	 Jesus	 because	 I	 cannot	 vouch	 for	 anybody
else's	 experience.	 I	 can	vouch	only	 for	my	own	experience.	 I	know	 if	one	can
wait	and	the	waiting	seems	very	long.	It	is	not	that	long,	it	only	appears,	because
sitting	 inside	 doing	 nothing,	 it	 seems	 as	 if	 time	 is	 not	moving	 at	 all,	 as	 if	 the
clock	is	gong	very	slow	--	maybe	it	needs	a	new	battery	or	what	has	happened.
Time	goes	so	slowly	because	there	is	nothing	to	engage	you,	nothing	to	keep	you
occupied.	So	even	a	little	waiting	looks	almost	endless,	but	it	is	not	endless	and
it	is	not	that	big	as	people	think,	but	it	appears	certainly.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 learn	 to	wait,	 and	 to	wait	 lovingly,	with	 no	hurry,	with	 no
impatience	--	and	then	one	day,	when	the	eye	is	ready	you	know	a	new	kind	of
light,	 that	 is	 love.	Inside	becomes	full	of	 light	and	then	it	starts	filtering	out	of
you,	 it	 starts	 radiating	 out	 of	 you.	 The	 radiation	 of	 inner	 light	 is	 love	 in	 your
outer	 relationships.	When	you	meet	 a	man	who	 is	 full	 of	 light	you	experience
love.	But	it	is	a	strange	world:	two	persons	fall	in	love	and	both	are	in	immense
darkness,	then	there	is	bound	to	be	constant	struggle,	fight,	and	they	are	at	each
other's	neck.
Love	becomes	almost	murderous,	tiring,	exhausting.	One	wonders	why	one	has
got	 caught	 into	 it,	 but	 one	 cannot	 get	 even	out	 of	 it,	 because	 outside	 also	 one
feels	miserable.	Then	one	 is	 in	 a	 fix:	 if	 you	are	out	of	 love	you	are	miserable
because	you	are	lonely,	if	you	are	in	love	you	are	miserable	because	the	other	is
always	there	to	create	trouble	for	you.	If	the	other	is	there	there	is	trouble,	if	the
other	 is	 not	 there	 there	 is	 trouble.	Anyway	man	 is	 condemned,	 but	 the	whole
thing	happens	only	because	we	don't	know	that	love	is	only	the	outer	expression
of	 inner	 light.	 It	 is	possible	only	 if	you	are	full	of	 inner	 joy,	bliss,	 insight,	 that
you	can	be	loving;	otherwise	it	is	not	possible.
When	 love	 explodes	 it	 is	 enlightenment,	 because	 it	 is	 disappearance	 of	 the
darkness	and	beginning	of	the	day.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002115
ShortTitle:	NEVER11
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Premendra	Bo.
Premendra	means	love	is	god.	And	Bo	means	to	live.
Life	basically	is	an	expression	of	love.	Love	is	the	fragrance	of	the	flower	of	life.
They	 are	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 coin.	 The	 person	 who	 avoids	 love	 is
simultaneously	avoiding	life	too;	hence	the	people	who	have	been	life-negative
have	 also	 been	 love-negative.	 In	 fact	 escaping	 from	 the	 world	 was	 really
escaping	from	any	situation	where	love	can	arise.
For	thousands	of	years	man	has	lived	in	tremendous	fear	of	love	--	and	love	is
god,	and	love	is	life,	and	love	is	the	very	core	of	existence.	But	one	has	to	learn
the	art	of	loving.	It	is	an	art.	The	capacity	is	inborn	but	it	can	be	refined,	it	can	be
slowly	slowly	helped	to	grow,	to	become	an	Everest,	a	peak.	and	only	when	love
comes	to	its	crescendo	you	experience	godliness.	Then	life	becomes	a	sheer	joy,
then	 each	moment	 is	 ecstatic.	 Then	 all	 this	 nonsense	 of	 calling	 life	 a	misery,
condemning	 life	 as	 sin,	 trying	 to	 escape	 from	 life,	 avoiding	 life,	 looking	 so
idiotic	that	one	cannot	believe	that	for	thousands	of	years	man	had	 lived	under
this	impact.
This	 very	 life/love-negative	 attitude	 proves	 that	 man	 has	 not	 allowed	 his
intelligence	to	bloom.	He	has	lived	in	a	retarded	way,	like	an	imbecile.
My	own	approach	is	that	religion	is	the	name	of	the	art	which	teaches	you	how
to	 love,	 how	 to	 live,	 which	makes	 you	 capable	 of	 loving	without	 attachment,
without	 possessiveness,	 without	 any	 manipulation,	 without	 any	 ego	 trip.	 It
makes	you	understanding	the	complexities	of	existence,	it	helps	you	to	work	out
your	 way	 in	 the	 jungle	 of	 life.	 It	 is	 a	 great	 challenge.	 It	 is	 worth	 accepting,
because	only	those	who	accept	it	grow.	Those	who	turn	their	hips	towards	life.
they	never	grow.	The	remain	juvenile.
All	escapists	are	basically	hippies.	Hippies	means	those	who	have	shown	the	hip
to	 the	 life.	All	your	saints,	mahatmas,	sages	are	hippies.	They	are	real	hippies,
howsoever	serious	and	sombre	they	may	look,	but	they	have	shown	their	hips	to
the	world.	They	are	cowards.
But	they	have	been	worshipped,	they	have	been	imitated	by	others.	Every	effort
has	been	made	to	make	the	whole	humanity	follow	these	stupid	people.	It	is	time
enough	to	say	a	total	"Stop!",	a	full	stop	to	all	this	nonsense	that	has	been	going
on	and	on.	Enough	is	enough.
And	my	sannyas	is	a	full	stop	to	the	whole	life-denying	approach;	in	place	of	it	I
teach	 you	 to	 love,	 to	 live,	 to	 be	 a	 light	 unto	 yourself.	 That's	 the	 only	way	 to
become	awakened,	 to	 be	 enlightened.	That's	 the	only	way	 that	 one	 can	 realise
one's	potential	of	becoming	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ.	Not	be	following	Christianity
one	 becomes	 a	 Christ,	 but	 by	 living	 one's	 own	 life	 authentically,	 without	 any
hypocrisy,	without	any	pretensions,	utterly	naked	in	the	sun,	in	the	wind,	in	the
rain,	open	and	available.	Because	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 fear	 --	 it	 is	your	 life	and
you	are	not	accountable	to	anybody	else,	you	are	the	master	of	your	life	--	then
why	create	misery?	And	why	live	life	in	such	a	way	that	it	becomes	a	sad	affair?
The	same	energy	can	become	a	dance	and	the	same	energy	can	become	a	death.
It	 is	 the	 same	 energy:	 all	 depends	 on	 you.	You	 can	 accumulate	 the	manure	 in
your	living	room,	then	it	will	stink,	it	will	be	horrible	to	live	there.	But	the	same
manure	 can	 be	 used	 in	 the	 garden	 and	 then	 it	will	 bring	 beautiful	 roses,	 great
lotuses.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 manure	 which	 will	 stink	 in	 the	 room	 but	 will	 create
perfume	 in	 the	garden.	One	 just	needs	 to	arrange	one's	 life	 in	a	beautiful	way,
then	there	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.	Paradise	is	herenow!
This	very	body	is	the	Buddha	and	this	very	land	the	lotus	paradise.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Satyam	Bharti.
Satyam	means	the	ultimate	truth.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	 is	 only	 one	 truth,	 because	 there	 is	 only	 one	 existence.	 Existence	 is	 the
circumference	and	the	truth	is	its	centre.	Unless	one	knows	the	truth	whatsoever
you	 do	 always	 goes	 wrong.	 It	 is	 bound	 to	 go	 wrong.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 blind	 man
groping	in	darkness	to	find	a	door.
They	define	philosophy	as	a	blind	man	searching	for	a	black	cat	in	a	dark	room
where	in	the	first	place	that	cat	is	not	(laughter).	Now	the	blind	man	can	go	on
searching	forever	and	forever.	The	cat	is	not	there,	it	is	black,	the	room	is	dark,
the	man	is	blind	--	this	is	what	philosophy	is.
One	needs	eyes	to	see,	one	needs	light	to	see.	Only	two	things	are	needed:	light
and	eyes.	Thinking	is	not	going	to	help,	philosophising	is	of	no	use;	because	a
blind	man	can	think	about	light	there	is	no	intrinsic	difficulty	in	it.	He	can	think
about	light,	he	can	gather	all	kinds	of	information	about	light,	he	can	become	a
great	scholar	about	light,	he	may	even	start	concocting	few	theories	about	light.
He	may	be	very	 logical,	 capable,	 to	 create	 a	 systematic	 idea	what	 light	 is,	 but
still,	he	has	never	experienced	it.
He	may	 know	 everything	 about	 it	 but	 he	 knows	nothing	 about	 it.	 He	 has	 not
known	it,	it	is	not	his	own	experience.	It	is	all	borrowed.	He	is	blind.
Thinking	is	not	going	to	help	and	people	go	on	thinking	about	truth,	about	god,
about	love,	about	beauty,	about	everything,	and	all	these	things	are	experiences.
Clarity,	understanding,	insight.(???)
Meditation	 simply	 means	 dropping	 all	 the	 knowledge	 that	 is	 there,	 that	 has
accumulated,	that	has	been	taught,	that	you	have	learned,	that	you	have	read,	that
you	have	been	told	by	others.	Dropping	all	that	is	meditation.	Emptying	yourself
of	 all	 knowledge,	 knowledgeability,	 is	 meditation.	 Becoming	 spaciousness,
throwing	 all	 the	 furniture	 known	 as	 knowledge	 outside	 the	 room,	 making	 it
utterly	empty	--	that's	what	meditation	is.
Only	 in	 that	 spaciousness	 your	 inner	 eyes	 start	 functioning.	 And	 then	 light	 is
needed.
Light	is	created	by	love,	eyes	are	created	by	meditation.	Love	is	the	inner	way	of
creating	light.	The	loving	person	becomes	light-full.	His	darkness	disappears.
So	I	 teach	only	 two	 things;	meditation	and	 love.	Meditation	 to	see	and	 love	 to
create	 light.	And	 nothing	 else	 is	 needed!	 The	moment	 you	 have	 eyes	 and	 the
light	 truth	 is	 revealed.	 And	 truth	 liberates.	 Truth	 brings	 bliss,	 truth	 brings
immortality,	deathlessness.	It	takes	you	beyond	the	ephemeral	to	the	eternal.	It	is
a	radical	transformation,	from	the	circumference	to	the	centre.	And	the	moment
you	 are	 at	 the	 centre	 there	 is	 no	 problem,	 no	 anxiety,	 no	 anguish.	 The	whole
energy	 that	 was	 involved	 and	 entangled	 into	 anxieties,	 turns	 into	 an	 eternal
celebration,	a	festival	of	lights.
In	 fact,	 in	 India	 the	 festival	 of	 lights	 has	 lost	 its	 meaning.	 It	 has	 gone	 to
something,	 to	 its....	 not	 to	 its	 real	 meaning	 but	 to	 its	 very	 opposite.
(sp?)"Deepavali"	the	light	festival,	started	by	the	enlightenment	of	Mahavira.	It
is	Mahavira's	enlightenment	day.
He	is	a	rare	person	in	that	sense	because	almost	all	the	enlightened	persons	have
become	enlightened	 either	on	 the	 full-moon	night	or	 just	 close	 to	 it.	He	 is	 the
only	person	who	became	enlightened	on	the	no-moon	night.
Because	he	became	enlightened,	because	he	found	the	inner	festival	of	lights,	to
represent	it	we	started	the	whole	celebration.	But	because	he	was	a	Jaina	Hindus
never	accepted	the	story,	how	the	light	festival	came	into	existence.	They	have
created	 their	 own	 story	 about	 it	 which	 is	 just	 very	 ordinary,	 that	 Rama	 has
become	 victorious	 over	 Ramana,	 and	 that's	 why	we	 are	 celebrating.	 This	 is	 a
very	mundane	story,	nothing	of	inner	significance,	just	ordinary.	But	Mahavira's
story	has	true	significance.
It	actually	happens:	when	you	are	in	a	meditative	state	and	love	starts	growing	in
you,	you	can	see	a	line	of	lights	unending	and	without	any	beginning.	Kabir	says
"When	I	became	enlightened	I	saw	as	if	thousands	of	suns	have	suddenly	arisen
in	my	inner	horizon.
It	 is	 the	 same	 energy	 that	 was	 our	 darkness,	 it	 was	 our	 misery,	 it	 was	 our
blindness.	The	same	energy	was	upside-down.
My	work	here	is	 to	help	you	to	put	your	energy	in	a	right	combination,	 then	it
becomes	an	orchestra.
And	when	life	is	an	orchestra,	life	itself	then	is	the	ultimate	truth!
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Anando.
Prem	means	love.	Anando	means	bliss.
These	are	the	two	most	important	values.
Bliss	has	to	be	the	quality	of	your	inner	being	and	love	has	to	be	the	expression
of	your	inner	being,	into	the	outside	world.	Love	is	bliss	radiating	and	reaching
to	others.	Without	bliss	there	is	no	love,	that's	why	so	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
many	people	want	to	love	and	desire	to	be	loved	but	they	all	feel	frustrated,	for
the	simple	reason	that	they	never	look	for	the	basic	requirement	without	which
love	is	not	possible.
You	 never	 sow	 the	 seeds	 and	 you	 go	 on	 waiting	 for	 the	 flowers.	 And	 when
flowers	 don't	 come	 and	 you	 so	 much	 jogging	 and	 running	 and	 wrestling	 and
yoga	and	all	kinds	of	stupidities,	but	flowers	won't	come	still.	They	need	seeds-
yoga	postures	won't	help!	(laughter)	Your	jogging	is	not	going	to	help,	wrestling
is	not	going	to	help.	One	has	to	do	the	right	thing.
People	want	love	--	and	it	is	a	basic	need.	Just	as	the	body	needs	food	the	soul
needs	 love.	 Love	 is	 the	 soul's	 nourishment.	 It	 starts	 shrinking.	 And	 many
people's	soul	dies	before	their	bodies	die.	In	fact	near	about	 the	age	twelve	the
soul	dies,	then	only	the	body	goes	on	living.	It	is	only	the	container;	the	content
is	 no	 more	 there;	 hence	 the	 average	 physiological	 age	 is	 twelve.	 That's	 the
moment	when	you	stop	growing	inwardly.
And	remember	one	thing:	a	river	is	river	only	if	it	is	flowing.	If	it	stops	flowing
it	 is	 no	 more	 a	 river,	 it	 becomes	 just	 a	 muddy	 pond.	 It	 is	 river	 only	 if	 it	 is
reaching	towards	the	ocean,	but	once	it	stops	flowing	it	 is	no	more	reaching	to
the	ocean.	It	(?)
The	moment	your	 inner	being	stops	growing	you	are	no	more	a	 river	 reaching
towards	god.	So	people	go	on	growing	only	physiologically.	Their	age	may	be
eighty,	 eighty-five,	 ninety,	 but	 their	 souls	 are	 left	 far	 behind	 when	 they	 were
twelve,	 thirteen	 fourteen,	 at	 the	 most.	 There	 is	 such	 a	 gap	 between	 their
spirituality	 and	 their	 physiology,	 unbridgeable	 gap,	 but	 somehow	 they	 go	 on
managing	pretending	that	they	are	grown-ups.	But	you	can	see	that	their	grown-
upness	 is	 only	 phony;	 they	 have	 aged	 but	 they	 have	 not	 become	 grown-ups.
These	two	things	are	totally	different.
To	 grow	 in	 age	 is	 one	 thing,	 to	 grow	 up	 in	 maturity	 is	 a	 totally	 different
phenomenon.
Love	 is	a	 fundamental	need.	Because	 it	 i	 a	 fundamental	need	everybody	 longs
for	it,	but	just	longing	is	not	enough.	You	have	to	prepare	the	ground,	you	have
to	understand	 the	 fundamental	 laws.	These	 three	 laws	have	 to	be	 remembered.
One	is:	you	cannot	get	love	if	you	don't	give	it	in	the	first	place.	It	always	comes
as	an	echo:	first	you	have	to	give,	 then	it	comes,	 it	comes	thousandfold.	But	 it
comes	only	when	you	give.
If	you	want	to	get	without	giving	it,	it	is	not	going	to	happen.	It	is	against	the	law
of	nature,	it	is	against	tao.	The	second	law	to	be	remembered	is:	you	can	give	it
only	if	you	have	it;	you	cannot	give	something	which	you	don't	have.
What	you	are	doing	to	give	to	people	if	you	are	miserable?	You	will	give	your
misery.	And	to	give	misery	to	somebody	is	not	love.	And	in	return	you	will	get
thousandfold	misery.	One	has	to	be	blissful	then	one	can	share.
You	 can	 give	 bliss,	 then	 bliss	 comes	 back.	 That's	 what	 love	 is	 all	 about:	 an
exchange	of	bliss.
So	the	second	law	is	--	first	you	have	to	have	it	--	and	with	the	second	law	comes
meditation	in.	It	is	through	meditation	that	you	create	bliss.	It	is	there	but	there
are	few	hindrances	to	be	removed.	The	ego	has	to	be	removed,	the	greed	has	to
be	 removed,	 the	 jealousy	 has	 to	 be	 removed	 --	 these	 are	 all	 hindrances,	 and
meditation	is	capable.	Meditation	is	like	a	sword:	it	cuts	the	very	roots	of	all	that
is	ugly	in	you	all	that	creates	misery	in	you.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 go	 on	 sharpening	 his	 sword	 and	 go	 on	 uprooting	 all	 the
weeds.	Once	you	have	 thrown	all	 that	 is	ugly	 in	you	you	will	be	 surprised:	 in
that	very	moment	bliss	explodes.	It	is	your	intrinsic	nature	but	it	was	hindered,
prevented,	blocked.	Those	blocks	have	to	be	removed.
And	 the	 third	 law	 is	 that	 when	 you	 have	 got	 bliss	 don't	 hold	 it	 in,	 don't	 be
miserly,	because	the	more	you	give,	the	more	you	have	it.	That	is	the	third	law:
the	less	you	give,	the	less	you	have	it.	If	you	don't	give	at	all	it	dies.	If	you	give
it	 totally	you	will	be	 surprised	 that	you	have	 found	 infinite	 streams	coming	 to
you	from	some	unknown	beyond.	You	go	on	giving	and	it	goes	on	coming,	and	it
always	comes	more	than	you	give.
The	ordinary	laws	of	economics	are	not	applicable.	Just	the	opposite	is	the	inner
law.	 In	 economics	 if	 you	want	 to	have	 something,	 be	greedy,	hold	 to	 in,	 don't
give	 it,	otherwise	you	will	 lose	 it.	But	 in	 the	 inner	world	 just	 the	opposite	 law
functions:	hold	it,	be	greedy	and	you	will	destroy	it.	Share	it,	dance	it,	sing	it,	be
festive	about	 it,	declare	 it	and	don't	make	any	conditions	when	you	give.	Give
unconditionally,	because	to	put	conditions	is	again	miserly.
Just	give	for	the	sheer	joy	of	giving	and	it	will	be	coming	more	and	more,	more
and	more.
Bliss	has	to	be	your	innermost	core	and	love	has	to	be	your	radiation	of	it.	And
between	these	two	transpires	something	which	people	have	called	god	or	tao	or
nirvana.	No	word	is	adequate	enough	to	express	it,	but	something	beyond	words,
beyond	our	imagination,	beyond	our	dreams,	happens.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	 it	happens	between	 these	 two:	bliss	 inside,	 love	outside.	And	 just	between
the	two,	in	some	strange	moment	--	I	call	it	strange	because	it	is	unpredictable,	I
call	 it	 strange	because	when	 it	comes	 it	comes,	you	cannot	bring	 it	 in,	 I	call	 it
strange	because	 it	 is	 not	within	our	grasp.	 It	 comes	as	 a	gift,	 as	 a	grace,	 from
nowhere.	Suddenly,	a	moment	before	 it	was	not	 there	and	a	moment	after	 it	 is
there,	 for	 no	 visible	 reason,	 why	 it	 is	 there	 and	 why	 it	 is	 not	 there	 --	 it	 is
mysterious.	And	once	this	mysterious	moment	has	been	tasted,	one	has	arrived,
one	has	found	the	home.	Only	then	this	homesickness	disappears.
That's	the	goal	of	sannyas.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002125
ShortTitle:	NEVER12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Hans.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Hans	means	god's	gracious	gift.
Life	gives	many	gifts	--	love,	bliss,	freedom,	truth	--	but	no	gift	is	more	precious
than	meditation.
Meditation	functions	almost	like	a	master	key:	it	unlocks	all	the	doors,	the	doors
of	love,	freedom,	truth,	awareness.
In	the	gift	of	meditation	all	the	gifts	are	implied.	It	is	the	very	essence;	hence	it	i
incomparable.	Just	to	become	interested	in	meditation	is	a	great	blessing.	There
is	an	old	Egyptian	saying	that	it	 is	not	the	disciple	that	chooses	the	master,	but
the	master	who	chooses	the	disciple.
The	 disciple	 thinks	 he	 is	 choosing	 --	 on	 the	 surface	 it	 is	 obviously	 so	 --	 but
unless	the	master	has	chosen	the	disciple	already,	even	the	desire	to	choose	the
master	will	not	arise.
There	is	another	Egyptian	saying	from	the	same	mystery	school.	There	exited	a
great	 mystery	 school	 in	 Egypt.	 Pythagoras	 has	 visited	 that	 school	 and	 people
travelled	 from	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 The	 pyramids	 were	 really	 created	 by	 the
mystics	for	a	certain	process	of	meditation.
The	shape	of	the	pyramids	is	such	that	if	you	sit	inside	you	can	meditate	for	days
together,	you	will	not	feel	hungry,	you	will	not	feel	thirsty.	It	has	been	recently
discovered	 just	 by	 accident	 that	 few	 explorers	 were	 working	 excavating	 one
pyramid.	Their	dog	got	lost	inside	and	they	forgot	about	the	dog	and	went	home.
After	 many	 days	 they	 thought	 maybe	 the	 dog	 is	 lost.	 They	 were	 searching
everywhere	 but	 nobody	 thought	 about	 the	 pyramid.	 Then	 they	went	 there	 and
they	were	surprised:	the	dog	was	dead	(laughter).	He	must	have	died	simply	out
of	fear	because	he	must	rushed	here	and	there	and	could	not	find	the	way,	but	his
body	was	still	warm,	his	body	was	not	deteriorating	at	all.
No	sign	of	death	as	far	as	the	body	was	concerned.	The	body	was	protected	by
some	mysterious	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
phenomenon.
Then	 they	 discovered	 the	 shape;	 the	 shape	 of	 the	 inside	 of	 the	 pyramids	 was
created	for	meditators.
Even	for	many	day	or	months	 they	could	 live	without	 food	or	water.	This	was
the	same	school	from	which	these	sayings	have	come.
The	second	saying	is	that	when	the	disciple	is	ready	the	master	appears	--	never
before.	And	when	the	disciple	is	ready	the	master	appears	immediately.	It	is	not
coincidental.	Just	to	be	interested	in	truth	is	a	sign	that	you	are	already	blessed
by	existence.	The	basic	 and	 the	 fundamental	 step	has	 already	been	 taken.	You
will	 discover	 it	 only	 in	 the	 end,	 you	will	 recapitulate	 only	 in	 the	 end,	 that	 the
whole	search	that	you	were	thinking	you	are	doing,	was	being	done	through	you.
That's	the	meaning	of	god's	gracious	gift:	it	does	not	come	directly,	it	comes	in
such	indirect	and	subtle	ways	that	the	person	who	receives	it	never	knows	that	he
has	been	a	recipient;	in	fact	he	goes	on	thinking	he	has	earned	it,	he	deserves	it.
The	people	who	start	meditating	think	they	are	searching,	enquiring.	It	is	not	so.
It	is	existence	through	you	or	call	it	god	or	life	or	tao	or	whatsoever	one	wants	to
call	 it.	 It	 is	 something	 inexplicable,	 some	energy,	you	can	call	 it	 "x",	which	 is
searching	through	you.	You	are	just	a	vehicle.
And	 the	 moment	 this	 is	 understood	 tremendous	 growth	 happens,	 because	 the
barrier	 of	 the	 ego	 is	 dissolved.	 Even	 the	 idea	 that	 "I	 am	 the	 seeker,	 I	 am	 the
searcher,"	is	a	hindrance.	If	we	are	just	like	hollow	bamboo	flutes	and	the	song
belongs	 to	 some	 unknown	 energy,	 and	we	 are	 just	 passages	 to	 the	 song,	 then
there	 is	 no	 point	 in	 carrying	 the	 unnecessary	 weight	 of	 the	 ego.	 It	 can	 be
dropped.
Think	of	meditation	as	a	gift	of	god,	and	it	becomes	so	easy	then,	because	all	the
difficulties	 are	 created	 by	 the	 ego.	 Meditation	 is	 not	 difficult;	 the	 ego	 is	 the
difficulty.	So	the	tight	beginning	is	think	it	as	a	gift.	In	the	beginning	it	is	only	as
if	it	is	a	gift;	in	the	end	you	will	discover	that	it	was	a	gift,	it	was	not	a	question
of	as	if.	But	even	thinking	it	as	if	it	is	a	gift	helps	immensely:	slowly	slowly	the
ego	gets	 out	 of	 the	way,	 and	meditation	becomes	more	 and	more	 an	 effortless
process.
It	is	no	more	aggressiveness	on	your	part.	You	are	just	at	the	receiving	end.	And
the	very	idea	that	it	is	a	gift	never	makes	you	pious	egoists	--	that	is	one	of	the
greatest	 dangers	 in	 spiritual	 search:	 people	 become	pious	 egoists.	And	 to	 be	 a
pious	 egoist,	 holier-than-thou,	 is	 far	 more	 dangerous	 than	 to	 be	 an	 ordinary
egoist,	because	the	ordinary	ego	is	very	gross	and	on	the	surface,	but	the	pious
ego	is	very	subtle	and	very	deep	inside	you,	hiding	in	the	deepest	realms	of	your
unconscious.
Once	we	start	with	a	basic	assumption	--	I	call	it	assumption	because	it	will	be
only	an	assumption	right	now,	a	hypothesis;	although	it	is	proved	true	in	the	end,
but	in	the	beginning	it	is	only	a	hypothesis	--	but	it	gives	you	a	right	direction,	it
makes	 you	 relaxed,	 receptive,	 available,	 and	 the	 most	 significant	 thing	 is:	 it
makes	 you	 grateful.	 And	 gratitude	 helps	 greatly,	 thankfulness	 helps
tremendously.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Natascha.
Dhyan	 means	 meditation	 and	 Natascha	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 names
possible:	 it	 means	 the	 birth	 of	 Christ.	 It	 does	 not	 mean	 the	 birth	 of	 Jesus,
remember.	It	means	the	birth	of	Christ	which	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
The	birth	of	Christ	has	happened	many	times	before	Jesus,	has	happened	many
times	after	Jesus,	will	go	on	happening	in	the	future	too.
Jesus'	 birth	 is	 a	 historical	 phenomenon.	 The	 birth	 of	 Christ	 is	 a	 spiritual
phenomenon.	 The	 Buddha	 is	 a	 Christ,	 Krishna	 is	 a	 Christ,	 in	 fact	 the	 word
"Christ"	is	only	a	form	of	Krishna.	It	has	travelled	long	from	Krishna	to	Christ.
In	 one	 of	 the	 English	 languages,	 Bengali,	 Krishna	 is	 called	 Christo	 and	 from
Christo	to	Christ	it	is	very	easy.
There	 is	 every	 possibility	 that	 the	 word	 "Christ"	 has	 its	 origin	 in	 the	 word
"Krishna".	Mohammed	 is	 a	 Christ,	 Zarathustra	 is	 a	 Christ,	 Lao	 Tzu	 is	 Christ.
There	have	been	many	Christs	but	only	one	Jesus.	You	can	never	be	a	Jesus	but
you	can	be	a	Christ	--	that	is	everybody's	birthright.
To	be	a	Christ	simply	means	to	reach	to	the	ultimate	peak	of	consciousness,	 to
become	crowned,	to	become	an	emperor	of	the	inner	kingdom.	And	sannyas	is
nothing	but	an	inner	journey,	a	beginning	of	a	new	dimension.	In	this	dimension
the	ultimate	happening	is	the	birth	of	Christ,	and	all	that	one	has	to	prepare	for
the	 birth	 --	 in	 other	words,	 all	 that	 one	 has	 to	 do	 to	 become	 pregnant	 --	 is	 to
meditate.
Meditation	 is	a	kind	of	pregnancy.	One	becomes	pregnant	with	 the	divine,	one
becomes	pregnant	with	the	ultimate.	One	carries	the	ultimate	inside	one's	being
just	like	a	mother	carries	a	child	in	the	womb.	And	continuous	meditation	goes
on	nourishing	the	child	inside:	the	child,	Christ.
And	there	comes	a	moment	when	the	child	simply	transforms	the	very	being	of
the	person	who	was	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
carrying	it.
Kabir	 has	 a	 very	 strange	 statement.	He	 had	many,	 he	 has	made	many	 strange
statements.	He	is	one	of	the	most	significant	mystics	in	the	whole	history,	a	very
poor	man,	a	very	uneducated	man	--	he	was	 just	a	poor	weaver,	abandoned	by
his	 parents,	 so	 nobody	 knows	 whether	 he	 was	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a	 Mohammedan,
because	these	were	the	two	religions	there.	His	name	seems	to	be	Mohammedan.
Kabir	is	one	of	the	names	of	god	in	Koran.	Kabir	means	the	great	one,	the	vast
one.	His	name	is	Mohammedan,	 the	name	certainly	is	not	Hindu,	but	he	was	a
disciple	and	was	brought	up	by	a	Hindu	mystic,	Ramananda,	so	he	was	thought
that	he	was	a	Hindu,	and	nobody	knew	about	his	parents.
Ramananda	was	not	only	his	spiritual	father;	he	was	also	his	father	in	every	way.
He	was	his	father,	mother,	master,	everything.
Hindu	claim	that	he	is	a	Hindu,	Mohammedans	claim	that	he	is	a	Mohammedan.
His	statements	are	tremendously	significant	for	a	single	reason	that	they	are	the
most	 absurd	 --	 on	 the	 surface	 --	 but	 if	 you	 go	 deep	 into	 them	 you	 will	 find
precious	treasures.
To	explain	your	name,	one	of	his	statements	 is	worth	remembering;	he	says	"I
have	 seen	many	wonders	 but	 the	 greatest	 wonder	 that	 I	 have	 seen	 is	 that	 the
child	has	eaten	the	mother."	Now	this	never	happens,	but	it	can	be	significant	if
you	understand	what	I	am	saying	about	your	name:	the	child	grows	so	big,	 the
child	Christ	grows	so	big	that	the	mother	disappears	in	it.	First	the	child	is	small
as	is	inside	the	mother,	then	the	child	is	so	big	that	the	mother	is	inside	the	child.
That's	what	he	means	 that	 the	child	 eats	 the	mother;	 that	 is	 the	birth	of	Christ
when	 you	 innermost	 being	 overwhelms	 you,	 when	 you	 are	 absorbed	 and
consumed	by	your	innermost	core,	when	your	circumference	is	eaten	up	by	your
centre,	when	your	circumference	disappears	into	the	centre,	is	absorbed	into	the
centre,	when	you	no	more	have	any	outside,	when	you	are	all	and	all	just	inside,
just	a	deep	interiority,	with	no	outside	corresponding	to	it.
Yes,	 that	miracle	 happens.	Kabir	 is	 right	 that	 he	 has	 seen	 a	 great	miracle,	 the
greatest	 of	 all:	 the	 child	 consuming	 the	mother;	 eating	 the	mother	 totally,	 not
leaving	even	a	little	trace	behind.	This	happens	through	the	art	of	meditation	or
the	magic	of	meditation.	It	is	a	magical	art.
Meditation	simply	means	becoming	so	silent	 that	 there	 is	no	sound	inside	you,
no	word	because	words	consist	of	sounds,	no	thoughts,	because	thoughts	consist
of	 words,	 no	 ideologies	 because	 ideologies	 consist	 of	 thoughts.	 If	 there	 is	 no
sound,	there	is	no	philosophy,	no	religion,	no	dogma,	no	creed,	no	word	at	all.	It
is	 a	 wordlessness	 state.	 In	 that	 pure	 space	 one's	 consciousness	 starts	 rising,
finding	no	hindrance	 anywhere	 it	 goes	 on	 rising,	 it	 reaches	 to	 its	 crescendo	 --
that	is	the	birth	of	Christ.	One	becomes	a	Christ.
I	am	against	of	anybody	becoming	a	Christian	or	a	Buddhist	for	that	matter	or	a
Mohammedan,	but	I	am	all	 for	somebody	becoming	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha	or	a
Mohammed.	 I	 am	 not	 creating	 here	 a	 religion	 or	 a	 church.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to
create	a	religion	or	a	church	here,	because	somebody	will	blossom	into	a	Buddha
and	 somebody	 will	 blossom	 into	 a	 Christ	 and	 somebody	 will	 blossom	 into	 a
Mahavira,	and	you	cannot	make	a	church	out	of	these	people.	These	people	are
bound	to	remain	individuals.	They	cannot	be	part	of	any	crowd	psychology.
They	 are	 out	 of	 necessity,	 rebels.	 They	 have	 their	 original	 face,	 they	 never
borrow	anybody's	face,	anybody's	mask.	They	don't	live	somebody	else	life;	they
live	their	own	life.	If	they	are	roses	they	are	roses,	if	they	are	marigolds	they	are
marigolds,	if	they	are	lotuses	they	are	lotuses.	In	my	vision	this	is	going	to	be	the
future	 of	 humanity.	 Religions	 will	 disappear	 but	 there	 will	 be	 a	 new	 kind	 of
religiousness	--	and	that	day	when	it	will	happen	will	be	one	of	the	greatest	day
in	 the	 history	 of	 humanity	 and	 consciousness,	 just	 a	 kind	 of	 religiousness,
diffused	religiousness.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Viram.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Viram	means	a	full	stop.
Meditation	 is	 a	 full	 stop	 for	 the	mind	 process.	Mind	 is	 continuously	working,
day	in	and	day	out.	You	may	be	awake,	you	may	be	asleep,	it	goes	on	working.
You	 may	 be	 doing	 this,	 your	 may	 be	 doing	 that,	 underneath	 it	 continues	 its
activity.	From	the	cradle	to	the	grave,	untiring	the	mind	goes	on	and	on.	This	is
the	cause	of	humanity's	madness.
Everybody	is	mad.	Madness	is	not	something	that	happens	to	few	people;	it	is	a
very	 normal	 state.	 Yes,	 when	 somebody	 goes	 too	 far,	 beyond	 the	 limits	 of
ordinary	normal	madness	we	call	 it	mad,	but	 the	difference	 is	only	of	degrees.
Maybe	the	normal	person	is	only	ninety-nine	degrees	mad	and	the	mad	person	is
one	 hundred	 one	 degree	 --	 just	 a	 little	 boundary	 to	 be	 crossed	 which	 can	 be
crossed	by	any	small	thing.
Just	a	push:	your	wife	dies	and	wives	are	never	reliable!	(laughter)	And	they	die
at	such	a	strange	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
moments...	For	example,	they	may	die	on	Sunday	and	you	were	planning	to	go
to	the	swimming	pool	or	to	the	river	and	the	wife	dies!	(laughter)	She	could	have
died	 any	 other	 day	 but	 she	 had	 chosen	 to	 die	 on	 Sunday	 --	 now	 she	 had
destroyed	your	(?	can't	get	it)...	and	she	will	have	a	good	giggle!	(more	laughter)
Or	your	bank	may	fail	--	they	are	meant	to	fail;	your	business	may	flop,	anything
can	happen,	 thousand	and	one	 things	are	 there.	And	any	small	 thing	can	drive
you	mad.	Just	a	little	push,	one	degree	more,	just	a	little	heat	is	needed.
The	difference	between	 the	mad	people	 in	 the	madhouses	 and	 the	mad	people
outside	the	madhouses	is	only	of	degrees,	not	much	--	not	of	quality	but	only	of
quantity.	And	you	 can	 easily	 experiment	with	 it:	 just	 put	 on	 the	 tape-recorder,
close	 the	doors	and	start	 talking	 to	 it.	Whatsoever	comes	 into	your	mind,	don't
edit	it.	Just	whatsoever	comes,	even	if	a	sentence	comes	only	half,	its	okay,	then
another	sentence	comes	and	they	start	overlapping,	don't	be	worried,	don't	start
rationalising,	 putting	 things	 in	 a	 systematic	way;	 let	 them	come	as	 they	 are	 to
represent	the	sheer	chaos	within,	then	after	half	an	hour	listen	to	it,	and	you	will
not	believe	that	this	is	you.
In	fact	nobody	ever	looks	within	oneself	otherwise	everybody	will	start	freaking
out.	Maybe	that	is	the	reason	why	nobody	looks	in.	Everybody	is	subconsciously
aware	that	to	look	inside	means	to	see	one's	madness.	So	they	listen	to	Socrates
telling	again	and	again	"Know	thyself,"	and	they	nod	their	heads	but	they	never
try	 to	know.	They	know	perfectly	well	 that	 if	we	 look	within	we	are	bound	 to
encounter	our	madness.
They	 cannot	 argue	 with	 people	 like	 Socrates	 --	 these	 people	 are	 very
argumentative.	Just	 to	avoid	the	argument	 they	say	"Yes,	when	the	time	comes
we	will	 look	 in.	You	are	 right:	one	has	 to	know	oneself,	we	absolutely	agree,"
but	they	never	try!	Because	once	in	a	while	even	without	making	any	effort	they
have	come	across	their	mind	and	what	they	have	seen	is	enough.	It	is	a	maniac,
Ayatollah	Khomeiniac.	 It	 is	 jumping	 and	 jogging	 and	 doing	 all	 kinds	 of	 yoga
postures	and	making	faces,	and	it	will	drive	you	crazy	if	you	look	at	it.
So	 it	 is	better	 somehow	to	sit	on	 top	of	 it	and	pretend	 that	everything	 is	okay,
everything	 is	 fine,	everybody	 is	 saying	 to	everybody	else	"Everything	 is	 fine,"
and	they	are	all	sitting	on	volcanos	(laughter),	and	everything	is	fine!	And	then
somebody's	volcano	erupts	and	all	others	say	"Poor	fellow,"	and	they	still	go	on
telling	to	each	other	"Everything	is	fine,"	and	they	know	perfectly	well	they	are
sitting	on	the	same	kind	of	volcanos...	but	what	else	to	do?	Where	else	to	sit?
This	 is	 the	 only	 place!	 You	 have	 to	 be	 yourself.	 Meditation	 simply	 means
learning	the	art	to	putting	the	stop	to	this	maniac	mind	--	and	yes,	there	are	ways.
A	full	stop	is	possible.
It	is	just	like	putting	the	light	on	and	off:	you	have	to	know	where	the	button	is;
if	 you	 know	 the	 button	 it	 is	 so	 simple.	Meditation	 is	 simple,	 just	 you	 have	 to
learn	where	the	button	is.	I	call	the	button	witnessing.
If	you	start	witnessing	your	mind	you	will	 learn	how	to	put	 it	off	or	on.	THen
whenever	you	want	to	use	it,	put	it	on	--	it	has	its	uses.	But	when	you	don't	want
to	 use	 it	 put	 it	 off	 and	 remain	 in	 utter	 silence.	 That	 silence	 preserves	 energy,
makes	 you	 a	 reservoir	 of	 energy.	 And	 William	 Blake	 is	 right	 when	 he	 says
energy	is	delight.	It	is	light	also,	it	is	delight	too.
When	you	are	full	of	energy,	more	than	you	can	contain,	when	the	energy	starts
overflowing	you	it	is	bliss.	When	you	have	so	much	that	you	have	to	share	it	it	is
love.	And	when	you	come	 in	contact	with	 this	 infinite	energy	within	you,	you
have	come	 in	contact	with	god.	The	only	way	 to	know	 that	 something	beyond
matter	exists,	something	like	godliness	exists,	is	to	put	a	full	stop	to	the	mind.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Anuprem.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Anuprem	means	love	that	follows	meditation.
The	 only	 criterion	 that	 one's	meditation	 is	 fulfilled	 is	 the	 shadow	 of	 love	 that
follows	it.
Meditation	we	 cannot	 see.	 It	 happens	 in	 the	 innermost	 core.	Only	 you	 can	 go
there;	nobody	can	be	 invited	 there,	nobody	can	be	a	guest	 there,	not	even	you
best	friend,	you	beloved	--	nobody	can	go	there,	it	is	absolutely	private.
But	 when	 meditation	 happens	 inside	 something	 immediately	 happens	 on	 the
outside	too,	simultaneously;	what	Karl	Gustav	Jung	calls	synchronicity.	It	is	one
of	the	greatest	facts	supporting	his	hypothesis.
Science	 believes	 in	 cause	 and	 effect,	 it	 believes	 in	 causality	 --	 that	 is	 its
foundation:	 if	you	heat	 the	water	 to	a	certain	degree	 it	will	evaporate,	hundred
degrees	 and	 it	 evaporates.	 Heating	 water	 to	 hundred	 degrees	 is	 the	 cause.
Hundred	degree	heat	is	the	cause,	evaporation	is	the	effect.	It	is	bound	to	follow.
This	is	the	law	of	causality.	The	whole	science	is	rooted	in	the	law	of	causality.
If	that	is	the	only	law	then	there	is	no	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
possibility	of	any	love,	any	freedom,	any	awareness,	any	godliness.	In	short	then
there	is	no	base	for	religion.	Then	religion	simply	becomes	utterly	meaningless.
Unless	some	other	law	is	also	working	--	that	other	law	Jung	calls	synchronicity.
It	 is	 tremendously	 significant.	 That	 is	 his	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important
contributions.
The	 law	 of	 synchronicity	 says	 that	 it	 is	 not	 a	 causal	 relationship.	 Something
happens	and	then	something	corresponding	to	it	happens,	but	they	are	not	related
as	cause	and	effect.	It	is	a	strange	law,	but	it	happens.
For	 example,	 if	 a	 husband	 and	wife	 really	 love	 each	 other,	 deeply,	 intimately,
then	you	will	find	few	things	happening	between	them	which	will	prove	the	law
of	synchronicity:	even	before	the	husband	has	said	anything	the	wife	has	heard
it;	she	knows	what	he	is	going	to	say,	she	knows	what	he	wants,	she	knows	what
is	 his	 need.	 Lovers	 start	 having	 a	 certain	 inner	 connectedness	 which	 is	 not
causal,	which	is	non-causal.
It	 happens	 between	 the	master	 and	 the	 disciple	 even	more	 deeply	 than	 it	 can
happen	between	 lovers,	because	 the	disciple-master	 relationship	 is	 the	ultimate
in	a	love	affair.
The	disciple	sitting	by	the	side	of	a	master	slowly	slowly	starts	getting	into	the
very	tune	of	the	master.
His	heartbeat	starts	beating	in	the	same	rhythm,	he	starts	breathing	in	the	same
rhythm.	 It	 is	 not	 causal,	 it	 cannot	 be	 causal.	 They	 start	 having	 some	 kind	 of
relatedness	which	is	not	material	at	all.
There	 is	a	story	 in	 the	 life	of	a	great	musician	of	South	 India.	He	had	become
very	old,	one	hundred	years	old	and	he	had	thousands	of	disciples.	They	all	had
gathered	because	it	may	be	the	last	birthday.	There	was	not	much	hope	that	he
will	 survive	 one	 year	 more,	 so	 from	 far	 away	 corners	 of	 the	 country,	 all	 his
disciples	who	have	learned	music	from	him	--	and	his	 life	has	been	a	 long	life
and	 he	 had	 created	 many	 beautiful	 musicians	 --	 they	 all	 came	 and	 they	 all
brought	 many	 gifts,	 precious	 gifts.	 They	 were	 all	 well-known	 musicians,
belonging	to	this	king	or	that,	they	were	all	rich,	respected,	and	when	they	were
all	offering	their	gifts	a	beggar	came	who	was	also	a	disciple	of	the	master,	but
instead	of	becoming	famous,	instead	of	becoming	somebody	well-known	in	the
county,	he	had	remained	a	beggar.	He	must	have	been	a	man	of	different	values
and	qualities,	a	rebel.
When	he	came	all	other	disciples	who	knew	him	they	asked	him,	just	jokingly,
teasing	him	--	 they	knew	that	he	 is	a	beggar	and	he	has	remained	a	beggar,	he
had	never	accepted	any	post,	he	had	never	accepted	any	reward;	he	will	just	sing
on	the	streets,	play	on	his	sitar	on	the	streets,	for	anybody	to	hear.	And	he	will
never	 accept	 anything	 except	 food,	 and	 that	 too,	 only	 for	 today.	 So	 he	 had
nothing	to	give	to	the	master.
They	 just	 teased	him	 --	 and	he	was	 a	 rare	musician,	 all	 other	musicians	were
nothing	compared	to	him,	but	he	wanted	to	live	a	life	of	a	vagabond,	of	a	beggar,
and	he	had	lived	that	way	and	he	was	tremendously	happy.	He	was	not	tethered
to	 anything	 and	 he	 was	 not	 fulfilling	 somebody	 else	 desires;	 he	 was	 living
according	to	his	light.	It	was	his	joy,	not	his	business	to	sing,	to	play,	to	create
music.
So	they	asked	"What	gift	you	have	brought	to	the	master?"	He	said	"I	don't	have
much,	 I	 don't	 have	 anything	 in	 fact,	 but	 still	 I	 can	 give	 something."	 They
wondered	what	he	can	give	so	they	all	gathered,	and	when	he	went	to	the	master
he	sat	unto	his	feet	and	told	the	master	that	"You	are	hundred	years	old,	your	life
is	more	precious	than	my	life,	and	I	am	only	fifty	years	old,	and	I	am	certain	that
at	least	thirty	years	I	can	easily	live,	or	maybe	more:	I	want	to	give	these	thirty
years	or	whatsoever	is	left	to	you.	This	is	my	gift
--	what	else	can	I	give?	I	am	a	beggar	--	you	know,	everybody	knows."
Then	 he	 bowed	 down	 in	 the	 feet	 of	 the	 master	 and	 died,	 then	 and	 there.
Everybody	was	shocked,	what	has	happened?	And	the	master	lived	exactly	thirty
years	more.	This	is	synchronicity,	this	is	a	historical	fact.
It	is	not	a	parable.	The	disciple	must	have	been	in	deep	synchronicity.	This	is	not
cause	and	effect.	There	cannot	be	any	cause	and	effect	in	it.
But	he	must	have	been	in	such	deep	tune,	in	such	deep	attunement,	at-onement,
that	the	moment	he	said
"Accept	my	life,"	was	enough!	He	surrendered	his	life	and	that	very	moment	he
died,	instantly	he	died.	He	never	breathed	again.
Meditation	is	not	part	of	the	world	of	cause	and	effect;	it	is	part	of	the	world	of
synchronicity.	And	 the	most	 significant	 thing	 that	 happens,	 simultaneously;	 as
you	go	deeper	in	meditation	inside,	on	your	outside	love	starts	blossoming.	That
is	 the	 only	 proof	 that	 meditation	 is	 growing,	 there	 is	 no	 other	 proof:	 those
flowers	of	love.
A	meditator	cannot	be	unloving	and	if	a	meditator	tries	to	be	unloving,	he	kills
his	 meditation.	 The	 vice	 versa	 has	 also	 to	 be	 understood:	 a	 lover	 cannot	 be
without	meditation;	if	he	tries	his	love	is	just	a	mask,	a	pretension	--	it	cannot	be
true.
Love	always	follows	meditation	as	a	shadow,	so	wherever	meditation	is,	love	is
and	wherever	love	is	meditation	is.	Hence	my	whole	philosophia	consists	only	of
two	words:	meditation	and	love.	This	is	my	whole	scripture,	my	whole	Bible,	my
Koran.	Nothing	more	is	needed	in	fact.	if	you	can	materialise	these	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
two	things	in	your	life	you	would	have	known	all	that	is	worth	knowing,	all	that
is	worth	being.
Ma	Dhyan	Anugita
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Anugita.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Anugita	means	the	song	that	follows	it,	the	music	that
follows	it,	the	celebration	that	follows	it.
Many	things	follow	meditation.	Meditation	is	a	multi-dimensional	phenomenon.
It	 is	 the	 spring:	not	only	one	 flower	but	 thousands	of	 flowers	bloom,	not	only
one	tree	but	the	whole	forest	blooms.	In	India	we	have	a	certain	flower,	palash	is
its	name.	When	the	palash	flower	opens	its	buds	the	whole	forest	appears	as	if	on
fire,	 because	 when	 palash	 blossoms	 all	 the	 leaves	 disappear;	 only	 flowers
remain.	 It	 is	 really	 a	 total	 expression.	Nothing	 is	 being	 held	 back;	 there	 is	 no
division	 at	 all,	 otherwise	 the	 energy	 will	 be	 divided	 into	 leaves	 and	 flowers.
Palash	lives	a	total	life,	utterly	intense.	The	leaves	disappear,	the	whole	energy	is
poured	 into	flowers,	 the	whole	 tree	 loaded	with	flowers,	 just	 flowers,	and	 they
are	 the	color	of	sannyasins.	This	 is	 the	color	 that	I	have	chosen	-	a	very	 lively
red,	the	color	of	the	flames.	And	each	tree	has	thousands	of	flowers,	and	palash
always	grows	in	forests,	not	one	tree	but	thousands	of	trees	together.
So	when	the	time	comes	for	it	to	blossom,	its	spring,	then	the	whole	forest	is	on
fire.	 That's	what	 happens	 in	meditation	 :	 so	many	 flowers	 -	 love	 is	 only	 one,
awareness	 another,	 freedom	 still	 another,	 godliness,	 compassion,	 service,
creativity,	sensitivity.	But	all	these	can	be	put	together	in	a	single	word	and	that
is	a	certain	quality	of	dance	and	song,	a	certain	fragrance	of	celebration.
The	person	who	is	a	meditator	is	in	a	state	of	dance.	Not	that	he	is	dancing,	only
dance	is	there,	he	is	not.	He	has	disappeared	into	the	dance.	He	sings	but	he	is	no
more	 there,	only	 the	song.	And	when	such	 totality	and	such	 intensity	and	such
passion	is	there,	life	is	ecstatic.	And	to	me	that	is	the	goal	of	sannyas:	ecstasy!
Each	 moment	 a	 growing	 ecstasy,	 from	 perfection	 to	 more	 perfection,	 from
totality	to	more	totality,	from	one	infinity	to	another	infinity.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002135
ShortTitle:	NEVER13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Runa.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dhyan	means	meditation	.	Runa	means	mysterious.
Life	can	be	approached	either	 through	the	mind	or	 through	a	state	of	no-mind.
These	are	the	only	two	alternative	approaches.
Science	approaches	 life	 through	the	mind,	religion	 through	the	no-mind;	hence
science	 comes	 only	 to	 know	 the	 superficial,	 the	 factual,	 the	mathematical,	 the
measurable.	 Its	very	approach	prohibits	 it	 to	enter	 into	 the	mysterious.	 Its	very
presupposition	is	against	the	mysterious.
Science	has	been	endeavouring	 to	demystify	existence.	That's	 its	aim.	 It	 is	not
said	so	obviously	but	if	you	look	into	scientific	researches,	discoveries,	it	is	not
difficult	 to	 find	 the	 essential	 core.	 Science	 is	 trying	 to	 find	 answers	 for	 every
question	 possible.	 It	 divides	 existence	 into	 two	 categories:	 the	 known	 and	 the
unknown.	 That	 which	 is	 known	 today	 was	 unkown	 yesterday.	 That	 which	 is
unknown	 today	 will	 become	 known	 tomorrow.	 That's	 the	 only	 difference
between	the	two.	There	is	no	basic	difference,	no	qualitative	difference;	only	a
difference	of	quantity.
A	little	more	effort,	a	little	more	work,	a	little	more	research	and	a	day	is	not	far
away	when	all	will	become	known.	The	unknown	is	being	reduced	slowly	into
the	known,	the	unknown	is	becoming	less	and	less	and	the	known	is	becoming
bigger	 and	 bigger.	 Soon	 the	whole	 territory	will	 be	 known.	 That's	 the	 goal	 of
science.	In	other	words	that's	what	I	call	demystification.
But	we	are	moving	towards	a	very	dangerous	state.	If	it	is	all	becomes	possible,
that	 all	 is	 known,	 life	 will	 become	 absolutely	 futile.	 Life's	 meaning	 is	 in	 its
mystery,	but	science	prohibits	it.	Its	very	methodology	debars	it,	makes	it	blind
for	 the	mysterious.	The	mysterious	 is	 a	 third	category;	 it	does	not	come	under
the	category	of	the	known	nor	under	the	category	of	the	unknown;	it	belongs	to
the	 totally	 different	 category:	 the	 unknowable	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 dimension	 of
religion,	the	unknowable.
It	cannot	be	known	but	it	can	be	experienced.	It	cannot	be	known	but	it	can	be
lived.	 You	 cannot	 reduce	 it	 into	 an	 answer,	 into	 a	 system	 of	 thought,	 into	 a
logical	proposition,	into	a	philosophy.	It	is	vast,	it	is	infinite,	it	is	eternal,	but	you
can	drink	of	it,	you	can	become	utterly	drunk	with	it,	you	can	dance	it,	you	can
sing	it.	You	can	love	it,	but	knowing	is	not	possible.
And	to	move	towards	the	unknowable	you	have	to	make	a	great	change	within
yourself:	 you	 have	 to	move	 you	 energy	 from	 the	mind	 to	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.
That's	what	I	call	meditation.	Meditation	simply	means	putting	the	mind	aside,
looking	into	reality	without	any	idea	what	it	is,	without	any	presupposition
,without	any	a	priori	knowledge,	 looking	into	existence	innocently	like	a	small
child.	That	very	look	becomes	a	transformation.	That	seeing	with	innocent	heart,
with	wonder	in	your	eyes,	with	a	deep	overwhelming	awe,	and	you	are	falling	in
tune	with	the	mysterious,	you	are	moving	beyond	the	known	and	the	unknown,
towards	the	unknowable.
God	 is	 another	 name	 for	 the	 unknowable;	 so	 is	 truth,	 so	 is	 love,	 so	 is	 beauty.
Different	names	but	 indicating	 to	 the	same	moon.	Different	 fingers	pointing	 to
the	same	moon.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Veet	Cecile.
Veet	means	transcendence,	surpassing,	going	beyond.	Cecile	means	blind.
Everybody	is	born	blind,	but	with	the	capacity	to	go	beyond	it,	with	the	potential
to	transcend	it.	Very	few	people	have	transcended	the	blindness,	for	the	simple
reason	because	 they	 take	 it	 for	granted	 that	 this	 is	what	 life	 is	 all	 about.	They
misunderstand	birth	with	 life.	Birth	 is	not	 life,	neither	birth	 is	 the	beginning	of
life	nor	the	death	its	end.	Life	is	not	something	between	birth	and	death;	on	the
contrary,	birth	and	death	are	just	small	episodes	in	the	long	journey	of	life.	Many
times	 birth	 has	 happened,	 many	 times	 death	 has	 happened:	 life	 continues
unhindered,	undistracted.
So	 those	who	 take	 birth	 as	 if	 this	 is	 life	will	 remain	 blind,	 and	 then	 they	 are
bound	 to	be	 continuously	 afraid	 and	 trembling	 about	death,	 because	 if	 birth	 is
life,	then	death	is	the	end.	One	fallacy	leads	to	another	fallacy,	and	between	these
two	 fallacies	 --	birth	and	death	 --	 the	whole	opportunity	 is	 lost.	Between	birth
and	 death	 there	 is	 only	 an	 opportunity	 to	 realise	 your	 potential.	 But	 it	 is	 not
given.
The	seed	is	there	but	the	seed	is	not	the	flower.	The	seed	contains	the	flower.	If
you	cut	 the	seed	you	will	not	find	the	flower;	you	have	to	find	right	soil,	 right
climate,	right	time,	so	that	the	seed	can	die	and	disappear	into	the	soil	and	can
become	a	plant.
Once	 the	 seed	has	 started	growing,	 the	 seed	has	 lost	 its	blindness.	The	seed	 is
blind.	 It	 is	 completely	 closed	 from	 everywhere.	 It	 lives	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 grave,
encapsulated,	but	the	tree	is	not	encapsulated.	It	has	come	out	of	the	grave.	It	is
alive,	 it	 is	 open	 --	 open	 to	 the	 sun,	 open	 to	 the	moon,	 open	 to	 the	 stars.	 It	 is
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
available	 to	 the	wind,	 to	 the	 rain,	 to	 the	 songs	of	 the	birds.	 It	 is	 vulnerable.	 It
sways	and	dances	and	rejoices.
It	 has	 moods	 of	 sadness,	 of	 joy.	 Yes,	 there	 are	 moments	 of	 mourning	 and
moments	of	festivity.
Now	these	are	scientific	facts,	even	science	has	become	aware	about	the	living
element	in	the	trees	which	is	very	sensitive,	ultimately	of	 the	same	category	as
man;	 a	 different	 expression	 of	 consciousness,	 a	 different	 form	 of	 sensitivity,
different	kind	of	eyes,	different	kind	of	ears,	but	the	tree	hears,	the	tree	sees,	the
tree	feels.	When	you	touch	it	with	love	it	recognises	your	warmth,	 it	responds.
When	you	come	with	an	axe	to	cut	 it,	 it	shivers,	 trembles,	 it	knows	the	enemy
and	the	friend,	it	knows	the	lover,	it	knows	just	the	bypasser.	It	has	its	own	eyes.
Every	 man	 is	 born	 as	 a	 seed	 and	 every	 man	 has	 the	 capacity	 to	 become	 a
rosebush	 with	 hundreds	 of	 roses	 available	 to	 existence,	 in	 communion	 with
existence.	That's	what	I	call	the	eyes.	When	you	are	blossoming	then	you	have
many	eyes,	because	existence	is	multidimensional.
These	two	eyes	that	we	have	are	nothing.	That	is	only	one	small	dimension,	the
physiological,	 but	 there	 are	 many	 dimensions,	 many	 planes,	 many	 aspects	 of
reality.	And	 if	 a	man	works	 upon	one's	 own	 energies,	 he	 starts	 growing	many
kinds	of	eyes.	He	starts	becoming	perceptive	in	thousand	and	one	ways.
When	 you	 have	 reached	 to	 the	 optimum	 of	 your	 potential,	 when	 you	 have
realised	 all	 that	 was	 unrealised	 in	 you,	 then	 we	 call,	 one	 is	 enlightened,
awakened,	is	a	Christ	or	is	a	Buddha.
Your	name	is	significant;	it	is	the	situation	--	everybody	is	born	blind,	but	there
is	no	need	to	stop	there.
In	fact	it	should	become	a	challenge	to	go	beyond	it.	If	a	person	can	know	that	"I
am	blind,"	then	he	is	bound	to	do	something	about	it.	The	moment	one	knows	"I
am	 ignorant,"	 he	 has	 already	 taken	 a	 very	 significant	 step	 towards	 knowing,
because	nobody	wants	to	be	ignorant,	nobody	wants	to	be	blind,	nobody	wants
to	be	unconscious,	mechanical,	robotlike.	That	is	not	our	nature,	that	is	not	our
fulfilment.	 Everybody	 wants	 to	 grow	 in	 consciousness,	 awareness;	 only	 then
slowly	slowly	bliss	arises,	love	arises,	freedom	arises.
These	are	all	the	flowers,	these	are	all	different	eyes.
And	when	you	are	able	 to	see	all	 that	 is	possible	 to	be	seen,	 then	only	there	is
contentment,	immense	contentment,	and	great	gratitude	for	existence.	To	me	that
gratitude	is	prayer,	and	that	contentment	is	the	goal	of	all	religion.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Purnam	Seth.
Purnam	means	the	perfect,	the	ultimate,	the	absolute,	the	whole.	Seth	means	the
appointed.
We	are	all	appointed	by	the	whole;	and	life	should	not	be	thought	as	an	accident.
That's	 what	 science	 goes	 on	 telling	 to	 every	 child.	 It	 is	 unfortunate	 that	 the
children	 from	 their	 very	 small	 age	 are	 being	 conditioned	 with	 a	 very	 wrong
attitude	 which	 is	 going	 to	 darken	 their	 whole	 life.	 And	 from	 the	 Kg	 to	 the
university	 this	 is	 the	climate,	 that	 life	 is	accidental,	 that	 there	 is	no	meaning	in
existence,	 that	we	are	 just	by-products	of	accidental	 situations,	 that	we	are	not
needed	really.	If	we	disappear	nothing	is	lost;	if	we	are	nothing	is	added.
The	whole	existence	according	to	the	scientific	attitude	is	accidental.	There	is	no
intrinsic	significance.
It	is	a	chaos	according	to	science,	not	a	cosmos.	Cosmos	needs	some	meaning,
some	 intrinsic	 truth.	 It	 is	 only	 through	 religious	 experience	 that	 this	 chaos	 is
transformed	into	a	cosmos.
Religion	gives	meaning,	significance,	a	sense	of	being	needed.	And	remember:	it
is	one	of	the	greatest	needs	in	life,	to	be	needed.	And	if	one	can	feel	that	"The
whole	 existence	 needs	 me,"	 that	 "I	 am	 here	 not	 by	 accident,"	 that	 "I	 am
appointed	to	be	here,"	that	"I	have	a	certain	message	to	deliver,"	that	"I	have	to
fulfil	 a	 certain	 mission,"	 that	 "My	 life	 has	 to	 deliver,	 contribute,	 something
beautiful	to	existence,	only	then	I	will	feel	fulfilled,	only	then	I	will	feel	I	have
done	 my	 work"	 --	 and	 the	 joy	 that	 comes	 when	 you	 have	 done	 any	 work	 to
perfection;	any	work	in	which	you	have	put	your	total	heart.
When	 you	 have	 done	 it	 well,	 finished	 it	 well,	 a	 great	 ecstasy	 arises.	 It	 is	my
observation	that	only	creative	people	know	what	ecstasy	is.	And	by	creativity	I
mean	fulfilling	something	hidden	in	you,	discovering	it	and	fulfilling	it	in	your
life.	Then	you	have	contributed,	you	have	added	some	beauty	 to	 the	existence,
some	joy.
Existence	 is	 a	 little	more	 enriched	by	you	 that	 it	was	before	you.	You	will	 be
leaving	existence	a	little	better,	a	little	higher,	a	little	more	poetic,	a	little	more
magical,	a	little	more	golden	than	you	have	found	it	when	you	had	arrived.	That
is	fulfillment,	that's	ecstasy.
The	experience	comes	as	you	become	silent.	The	more	 silent	you	become,	 the
more	 you	 start	 feeling	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 ultimate	 behind	 you.	 When	 you	 are
totally	silent	you	suddenly	some	to	see	that	you	are	just	a	bamboo	flute	on	the
lips	of	 the	ultimate:	 the	song	is	flowing	through	you.	Your	only	work	is	not	 to
hinder	it,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
not	to	distort	it;	to	allow	it	pass	through	you,	in	its	purity.
As	it	is,	it	should	be	delivered.
Sannyas	means	living	a	life	of	pure	silence,	living	life	through	silence,	and	then
this	is	the	first	experience	that	comes	to	oneself,	that	"I	am	part	of	a	great	cosmic
plan,"	that	"I	belong	to	an	organic	universe,"	that	"I	am	not	just	a	cog	in	a	wheel,
that	any	other	cog	can	replace	me."	In	fact	nobody	is	replaceable,	everybody	is
unique.	The	moment	it	is	felt,	life	comes	to	its	ultimate	peak	of	rejoicing.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Henry.
Anand	means	bliss.	Henry	means	home.
The	deepest	desire	 in	every	heart	 is	 to	 find	bliss;	a	bliss	 that	 is	eternal,	a	bliss
that	 comes	 but	 never	 goes,	 a	 bliss	 that	 is	 forever.	But	we	 all	 are	 groping,	 not
knowing	where	 to	 go,	 there	 to	 find	 it,	 not	 knowing	what	 direction	 is	 the	 right
direction,	 what	 path	 to	 follow.	 But	 in	 darkness,	 in	 blindness,	 still,	 we	 all	 are
groping.
The	 drunkard	 is	 groping,	 the	 gambler	 is	 groping,	 the	 priest	 is	 groping,	 the
philosopher	is	groping,	the	saint	is	groping	--	they	are	all	groping	--	in	different
ways,	in	different	corners.
My	only	 teaching	here	 is	 that	before	you	start	groping	create	 some	awareness.
Don't	 waste	 your	 time	 in	 groping.	 First	 requirement	 is	 to	 be	 alert,	 aware,
watchful,	because	awareness	 is	a	kind	of	 light	 inside.	Once	you	have	the	 light,
even	if	it	is	a	small	candle,	you	can	find	the	way.	You	can	find	the	door	out	of
the	mess	you	are,	out	of	the	misery	you	are,	you	can	find	the	door	to	the	temple
of	 bliss.	But	 the	 basic	 requirement	 is	 not	 groping.	THe	basic	 requirement	 is	 a
small	light	within	you.
Groping	is	endless	and	there	is	more	possibility	that	you	will	stumble	with	this
wall	and	that	wall,	that	you	will	have	this	fracture	and	that	fracture,	that	you	will
fall	upon	this	thing	and	upon	that,	and	you	will	be	continuously	in	a	frustration
and	misery	will	be	multiplied.	And	slowly	slowly	a	desperation	sets	in.
The	child	 trusts	very	much	 that	he	will	be	able	 to	 find;	 the	young	man	 is	very
enthusiastic,	 very	 romantic,	 a	 dreamer,	 and	 he	 feels	 that	 he	will	 be	 able	 to	 do
what	nobody	else	has	been	ever	able	to	do	--	but	look	at	the	old	man:	he	knows
that	 it	 is	 all	 groping,	 he	 knows	 all	 the	 pains	 he	 has	 suffered,	 he	 has	 knows,
known	all	the	pitfalls,	he	has	broken	every	limb,	he	has	accumulated	nothing	but
frustrations	and	failures,	he	has	become	utterly	hopeless.
It	 is	not	 accidental	 that	old	people	are	always	angry.	 It	 is	very	difficult	 to	 live
with	old	people;	they	are	always	irritated,	angry.	They	are	not	angry	with	you	in
particular,	they	are	simply	angry	at	themselves.
Their	whole	life	has	gone	down	the	drain.	You	have	to	forgive	their	anger.
The	angry	young	man	is	a	very	latest	arrival	on	the	earth,	but	the	angry	old	man
is	very	ancient.	Old	people	have	always	been	angry,	that's	why	it	is	so	difficult
for	people	to	cope	with	their	parents:	 the	gap	is	big;	they	are	enthusiastic,	 they
are	still	hopeful,	they	are	dreaming,	they	want	to	do	this	and	that,	and	they	feel
they	 will	 be	 able	 to	 do	 it,	 and	 the	 old	 people,	 the	 parents	 know	 that	 it	 is	 all
nonsense.	"It	has	never	happened,	it	is	never	going	to	happen,	we	have	lost	our
lives	and	you	are	going	to	lose	your	life,"	but	the	young	man	has	to	go	through
his	 experiences,	 he	 cannot	 borrow	 them	 from	 the	 old,	 and	 the	 old	 person
becomes	 angry	 because	 he	 is	 not	 listened,	 and	 he	 is	 really	 saying	 a	 truth.	He
becomes	angry	because	nobody	pays	any	heed	to	him.	He	is	discarded,	ignored.
Nobody	wants	to	talk	to	him,	nobody	wants	to	sit	at	his	bedside	and	listen	to	him
attentively.
Who	wants	to	listen	to	a	failure,	to	a	desperate	person,	drowning?	Who	wants	to
listen	to	somebody	who	will	give	some	taste	of	his	hopelessness	to	you?	--	Who
will	create	some	frustration	in	you,	who	will	destroy	your	dreams	which	are	so
beautiful.	 So	 nobody	 wants	 to	 communicate:	 this	 is	 the	 generation	 gap.	 One
generation	cannot	communicate	with	another	generation,	and	 the	 reason	 is	 that
older	 you	 get,	 the	 more	 aware	 you	 become	 that	 all	 groping	 is	 futile,	 that	 the
whole	life	is	a	sheer	exercise	of	futility	and	nothing	else.
There	is	a	truth	in	it.	The	truth	is	 that	 they	have	only	been	groping,	 they	never
create	a	light	within	themselves.
We	 call	 the	 old	man	wise	who	 has	 the	 freshness	 of	 the	 young	 person	 and	 the
innocence	of	the	child,	who	is	not	feeling	hopeless.	Even	encountering	death	he
is	in	absolute	bliss:	he	has	arrived,	he	has	found	the	home.	And	the	only	way	to
find	the	home	is	to	create	light.	The	energy	should	not	be	wasted	in	groping.
The	 whole	 energy	 should	 be	 concentratedly	 put	 into	 meditation,	 because
meditation	is	the	art	of	creating	light.	Once	the	light	is	there	the	path	is	simple.
Sometimes	it	happens,	the	door	may	be	just	by	the	corner,	maybe	just	you	had	to
bypass	some	furniture	and	the	door	was	there.	Maybe	you	were	just	standing	on
the	 door,	 but	 the	 door	 needed	 to	 be	 opened.	Maybe	 on	 the	 door	 was	 written
"pull"	and	you	were	pushing.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Maybe	just	something	simple;	just	a	little	light	and	you	can	read	what	is	written
on	the	door.	If	it	is	written
"pull"	 and	 you	 are	 pushing,	 your	 whole	 life	 will	 be	 wasted.	 You	 can	 go	 on
pushing	and	pushing	and	everybody	is	pushing	hard.
Don't	 waste	 you	 energy	 in	 groping.	 First	 settle	 down	 wherever	 you	 are,
accumulate	 your	 energy.	 Don't	 waste	 it	 in	 any	 way;	 become	 a	 reservoir	 of
energy.	And	be	silent,	silently	aware.	Just	go	on	settling	inside.
When	all	turmoil	has	settled,	when	there	is	no	noise	within,	in	that	very	moment
suddenly	 a	 flame	bursts	 forth	 in	you.	And	 this	 is	 the	greatest	miracle	 there	 is,
when	you	inner	world	becomes	full	of	light.
The	moment	your	inner	world	is	full	of	light	you	can	walk	in	that	light	anywhere
you	want.	You	can	 find	 everything	 that	 you	want;	 you	 can	 find	bliss,	 you	 can
find	truth,	you	can	find	beauty,	you	can	find	love.
All	possibilities	are	suddenly	open,	and	it	is	only	a	question	of	creating	light.
So	 I	 don't	 say	 philosophise,	 think,	 study,	 grope,	 search,	 seek.	 I	 simply	 say	 sit
silently,	gather	all	you	energies,	become	centred,	still,	and	out	of	that	centering
and	stillness	is	the	beginning	of	a	light	and	that	light	then	goes	on	growing.	One
day	you	are	just	pure	light	and	nothing	else.
That	is	the	day	one	has	found	the	home,	one	had	found	the	ultimate	bliss	which
begins	but	never	ends.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Neha.
Dhyan	means	meditation	and	Neha	means	love.
Meditation	 is	your	 inner	 experience,	 absolutely	private.	Love	 is	 its	 expression.
Meditation	is	the	inner	side	of	the	experience;	love	is	its	outer	side.	It	is	through
love	 that	 your	meditation	 shines	 forth,	 it	 is	 through	 love	 that	 your	meditation
flows	and	starts	reaching	to	others.
Meditation	is	the	flower,	invisible	flower.	Love	is	its	fragrance.
A	man	without	 love	cannot	 really	be	a	meditator;	hence	 that	 is	 the	criterion	 to
judge	whether	a	meditator	is	really	a	meditator:	his	lovingness	will	prove	it.	And
out	 of	 hundred	 so-called	 saints,	 ninety-nine	 are	 absolutely	 unloving,	 not	 only
unloving	but	full	of	hate:	hate	for	the	world,	hate	for	the	ordinary	life,	hate	for
this	and	hate	for	that.	This	is	not	possible	to	meditators.	A	meditator	is	simply	a
lover:	he	loves.
It	 is	 said	of	Rabiya	el	Adawiya,	one	of	 the	Sufi	mystic	woman,	 that	when	she
came	across	her	copy	of	the	Koran	a	small	sentence	which	says	"Hate	the	devil,"
she	 crossed	 it,	 she	 corrected	 it.	 As	 far	 as	 Mohammedans	 are	 concerned	 it	 is
sacrilegious,	you	cannot	correct	the	Koran	--	it	is	god's	word!
A	mystic	was	 staying	with	Rabiya.	He	 saw	 this	 happening,	 he	 said	 "What	 are
you	 doing?	 Have	 you	 gone	 mad?	 Koran	 cannot	 be	 corrected	 --	 it	 is	 god's
message	given	by	his	 final	prophet,	and	this	 is	 the	last	message.	Now	no	more
message	is	going	to	come.	You	cannot	correct	it!"
Rabiya	 said	 "I	 don't	 care	 whose	 message	 it	 is.	 Something	 is	 wrong	 in	 it,
something	is	wrong	because	my	experience	is	something	else.	It	says	"Hate	the
devil",	but	I	cannot	hate!	It	is	absolutely	irrelevant	to	me.	It	is	my	copy.	I	am	not
correcting	 anybody	 else	 copy.	 It	 is	 my	 copy,	 it	 has	 to	 correspond	 to	 my
experience.
Since	I	have	known	silence,	meditation,	I	know	only	love!	If	devil	comes	to	me	I
will	love	in	the	same	way	as	if	god	comes	to	me.	There	will	be	no	distinction.	In
fact	I	will	not	be	able	to	make	a	distinction	at	all,	that	who	is	the	god	and	who	is
the	 devil.	 How	 I	 am	 going	 to	 distinguish?	 I	 will	 love	 both	 in	 the	 same	 way
because	now	I	am	love."
This	 is	 the	ultimate	flowering	of	meditation:	you	simply	become	love.	Hence	I
say	 a	 man	 without	 love	 is	 not	 a	 meditator.	 And	 the	 so-called	 saint	 of	 all	 the
religions	have	been	doing	that:	trying	to	meditate	but	avoiding	love.
And	 the	worldly	people	 are	 trying	 to	do	 the	opposite:	 trying	 to	 love,	 avoiding
meditation.	Now	 that	 too	 is	 not	 possible;	 you	 cannot	 love	without	meditation.
They	 always	 go	 together.	 They	 are	 not	 even	 like	 two	 wheels	 of	 a	 bicycle,
because	some	sunning	fellow	can	use	only	one	wheel.
I	have	one	sannyasin	here	(laughter)...	he	moves	only	on	one-wheel	bicycle;	it	is
not	a	BIcycle,	it	is	a	monocycle.	It	is	not	even	like	two	wheels	of	a	bullock	cart.
It	is	like	two	sides	of	a	coin:	you	cannot	avoid	the	other	side.	You	can	hide	it	but
you	cannot	avoid	it;	it	is	bound	to	be	there.	Either	you	have	to	have	both	or	you
have	to	throw	the	whole	coin.
So	anybody	who	chooses	love	or	meditation	is	throwing	both.	It	is	not	a	question
of	 either-or.	You	 cannot	 choose.	They	 come	 inseparably	 --	 and	 that's	what	my
sannyasins	 have	 to	 prove,	 that's	 how	my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 live.	 It	 has	 never
been	done.	It	is	time	that	it	should	be	done,	and	should	be	done	on	a	very	large
scale	 so	 the	 whole	 world	 becomes	 aware	 that	 meditation	 and	 love	 are
complementary	to	each	other,	that	there	is	no	need	to	renounce	the	world.	In	fact
a	real	sannyasin	will	rejoice	in	the	world.	He	will	love	and	his	love	will	strength
his	meditation,	and	he	will	meditate	and	his	meditation	will	nourish	his	love.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	and	meditation	are	like	two	wings	of	a	bird.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prasad	Devama.
Prasad	means	a	gift.	Devama	means	divine.
Life	is	a	divine	gift,	but	we	are	very	unthankful	people.	Love	is	a	divine	gift,	but
we	have	not	thanked	the	whole	for	it.	All	that	we	have	got	is	a	gift.	We	have	not
earned	it;	we	don't	even	deserve	it,	we	are	not	worthy	of	it.	It	is	given	to	us	by
the	whole	 just	because	 the	whole	 is	overflowing.	 It	 is	out	of	 the	abundance	of
god	that	we	get	all	that	we	are.
A	sannyasin	has	to	become	aware	of	all	of	this.	The	moment	you	start	becoming
aware	all	complaints	disappear,	all	grumbling	disappear.	Instead	of	complaints	a
prayer	arises	in	the	heart.	To	me	the	prayer	that	is	being	done	in	the	churches	and
the	 temples	and	 the	mosques	 is	not	 true	prayer,	because	people	are	asking	and
asking,	desiring,	demanding.	Their	prayers	are	nothing	but	applications	for	more.
Deep	 down	 there	 is	 that	 complaining	 mind	 which	 is	 saying	 "I	 have	 not	 got
enough	yet,	others	are	having	more.	Be	just,	be	fair	to	me.	This	is	not	justice."	It
is	not	said	so,	but	actually	it	comes	to	it:	"Give	me	more!"	This	is	not	prayer	--
begging	maybe,	but	not	prayer.
Prayer	has	a	 totally	different	 flavour.	 It	 is	 thankfulness	 for	 all	 that	has	already
been	given	to	us.	It	is	not	a	demand.	And	the	miracle	is	the	more	you	demand	the
less	you	will	get,	because	you	become	a	pain	in	the	neck	of	god!	(laughter)	What
you	are	doing	in	prayer	is	just	nagging!	God	is	being	tortured	by	these	religious
people.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	 says	god	 is	 dead	 and	 then	he	 says	 "Do	you	know	how	he
died?	We	have	killed	him!"
God	is	dead	--	 that	seems	to	be	right	--	but	we	have	not	killed	him,	 that	 is	not
right:	he	has	committed	suicide!	 (laughter)	Because	of	all	 these	naggers	 --	and
there	are	millions	and	this	is	only	one	earth.	Scientists	say	there	are	at	least	fifty
thousand	planets	which	have	life	there.	So	just	think	of	a	poor	god,	one	god,	only
one	begotten	son.	(laughter)...	a	very	small	family,	planned	family.	Whatsoever
was	 discardable	 they	 have	 discarded:	 no	 mother,	 no	 wife	 --	 just	 god	 and	 the
begotten	son,	and	the	holy	ghost!	(laughter)	Maybe	just	needed	for	doing	small
things	for	both,	running	here	and	there,	doing	errands	(laughter),	or	cooking	food
or	washing	clothes!
And	ghosts	are	good	 for	 such	 things:	 they	need	constant	occupation.	They	ask
again	 and	 again	 "Give	 us	 work."	 They	 are	 workoholics!	 (laughter)	 Just	 the
smallest	 family	 possible,	 the	most	 essential	 family...	 They	must	 have	 become
tired	 listening	 to	 all	 these	 prayers.	 If	 god	 is	 dead	 he	 must	 have	 committed
suicide.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 explanation:	 if	 he	 is	 dead,	 then	 that	 is	 the	 only
explanation.
My	understanding	of	prayer	is	it	has	to	be	just	a	gratefulness.	In	fact	there	is	no
need	to	say	anything;	just	a	heart	full	of	gratefulness	is	enough!	Bowing	down	to
the	earth	or	to	the	trees	or	to	the	stars	is	enough!
Existence	understands	only	one	 language,	 the	 language	of	silence.	 It	knows	no
other	languages,	neither	Greek	nor	Latin,	nor	Hebrew	nor	Sanskrit	nor	Chinese	-
-	it	knows	no	other	languages,	not	even	English!	It	knows	no	languages	at	all.
The	only	possibility	is	to	commune	in	silence,	and	a	grateful	heart	is	enough.	But
that	 gratefulness	 i	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 start	 seeing	 all	 the	 gifts	 that	 are
continuously	 being	 showered	 on	 you.	 Then	 each	 moment	 there	 is	 a	 surprise,
because	each	moment	the	gifts	are	coming.	All	that	is	needed	is	eyes	to	see,	ears
to	hear,	a	heart	to	feel.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8002145
ShortTitle:	NEVER14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Bernadette.
Dhyan	 mean	 meditation.	 Bernadette	 literally	 means	 a	 bear's	 heart,	 but
metaphorically	it	means	resurrection,	the	beginning	of	a	new	life.
Meditation	is	a	beginning	of	a	new	life.	It	is	a	resurrection.	We	love	through	the
mind	 --	 that	 is	 one	way	 of	 life:	 dull,	 sterile,	 unoriginal,	 imitative,	mechanical,
repetitive,	 because	 mind	 is	 a	 machine.	 To	 function	 through	 the	 mind	 is	 to
become	a	routine,	a	rut;	hence	living	through	the	mind	brings	boredom.	As	one
grows	older	one	becomes	more	and	more	bored.	And	 the	more	 intelligent	you
are,	 the	 sooner	 you	 feel	 the	 shadow	of	 boredom.	 It	 is	 only	 the	 idiots	who	 are
never	bored.	Animals	are	not	bored.	A	certain	 intelligence	 is	needed	to	see	 the
futility	of	what	you	are	doing.
The	moment	meditation	starts	you	start	 living	directly,	you	bypass	 the	mind	 --
that's	the	whole	art	of	meditation:	mind	remains	there	but	it	is	no	more	your	door
to	existence.	It	is	used	as	a	computer,	as	a	memory	system,	you	can	always	refer
to	it,	it	is	your	past,	it	contains	all	the	files	of	the	past,	but	there	is	no	need	to	live
through	those	files.	They	can	be	piled	by	the	side	and	you	can	relate	to	existence
directly,	 through	 awareness,	 not	 through	 thought.	That's	what	meditation	 is	 all
about.
And	 the	 moment	 you	 relate	 with	 existence	 directly,	 immediately,	 without	 the
interference	 of	 the	 past,	 when	 you	 relate	 to	 existence	 now	 and	 here,	 it	 is	 a
resurrection.	It	is	a	beginning	of	a	life	which	is	eternal,	which	is	infinite,	which
is	divine.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Lena.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	 Lena	means	 light.	 It	 also	means	 the	 bright	 one,	 the
intelligent	one.
The	 inner	 light	consists	of	 intelligence.	The	more	 intelligent	you	are,	 the	more
light-full.	The	more	unintelligent,	the	more	dark.
People	are	living	lives	in	darkness,	because	they	don't	apply	their	intelligence	at
all.	Meditation	means	applying	intelligence	to	each	of	your	act,	to	each	of	your
thought,	to	each	of	your	feeling.	These	are	the	three	dimensions	of	your	life:	the
body,	 the	mind	and	 the	heart.	And	 the	moment	you	start	applying	 intelligence,
your	intelligence	becomes	more	and	more	sharpened.
The	ultimate	 sharpening	of	 intelligence	 is	meditation.	These	 three	 --	 the	body,
the	mind	and	the	heart	--
are	three	schools	to	learn	meditation.	Once	you	have	learned	you	can	go	beyond
the	 school;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 remain	 inside	 the	 school	 any	more.	 You	 have
passed,	you	have	learned	the	art.
People	go	on	living	repetitively	--	 that's	a	way	of	destroying	one's	 intelligence.
One	should	try	in	every	possible	way	to	be	original,	to	be	one's	own	self,	not	an
imitation.	A	Christian	is	trying	to	imitate	Christ	--
that	is	an	unintelligent	way	of	life.	Christ	never	tried	to	imitate	anybody.	He	was
not	 imitating	 Abraham	 or	 Moses,	 the	 old	 prophets;	 he	 was	 not	 imitating
anybody,	 he	was	 not	 imitating	 even	his	 own	master,	 John	 the	Baptist.	He	was
living	according	to	his	own	intelligence,	that's	what	brought	him	to	the	ultimate
peak	 of	 consciousness.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 Buddha,	 Zarathustra,	 Lao
Tzu,	Kabir,	Nanak,	to	all	the	awakened	ones.
But	 the	 strange	 thing	 is	 that	 the	people	who	never	 imitated	anybody	are	being
imitated	by	millions!
There	 are	 Hindus,	 there	 are	 Mohammedans,	 there	 Christians,	 there	 are	 Jews,
there	are	Buddhists	--	all	imitators!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	sannyasins	have	not	to	imitate	ANYbody,	including	me.	They	have	to	be	just
themselves,	totally,	utterly.
Live	your	life	as	if	you	are	the	first	person	on	the	earth,	live	as	if	you	are	Adam
or	Eve	--	nobody	has	there	been	before	so	there	of	no	way	to	imitate.	Once	you
start	living	your	life	according	to	your	own	light	without	any	fear	of	committing
mistakes	--	mistakes	are	bound	to	be	committed,	they	are	natural,	inevitable	and
beneficial	 too.	 Unless	 one	 commits	mistakes	 one	 never	 learns.	 Of	 course	 one
should	not	commit	the	same	mistake	again,	because	that	is	stupid.	Go	on	finding
new	mistakes,	mew	errors,	new	ways	of	going	astray.
It	is	better	to	go	astray	on	a	new	path	than	to	follow	the	crowd	on	the	right	path,
because	 it	 is	not	a	question	of	 right	and	wrong;	 the	question	 is	of	authenticity,
sincerity	to	oneself,	responsibility	towards	one's	own	being.
Meditation	is	application	of	intelligence	into	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	and	then
slowly	slowly	you	intelligence	becomes	a	light	unto	itself.	Last	words	of	Buddha
to	the	world	were	"Be	a	light	unto	yourself."
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Surya.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Surya	means	the	sun,	the	source	of	all	light.
A	man	without	meditation	lives	in	a	dark	night	of	the	soul.	The	moment	you	start
meditating	the	sung	already	starts	rising	on	the	eastern	horizon.	The	colour	that	I
have	chosen	for	my	sannyasins	is	the	colour	of	the	dawn,	when	the	sung	is	just
rising.	All	the	shades	of	red	are	there	on	the	horizon,	projected	on	the	clouds.
The	colour	of	the	dawn	is	the	colour	of	revolution.	Communists	have	chosen	it
for	the	outer	revolution;	I	have	chosen	it	for	the	inner	revolution.	And	the	outer
revolution	 is	 nothing	 compared	 to	 the	 inner	 revolution.	 The	 outer	 revolution
proves	only	a	reform;	it	never	proves	to	be	really	a	revolution,	because	the	man
remains	 the	 same.	 You	 only	 go	 on	 changing	 the	 structures	 around	 him.	 The
prison	 is	 changed	 but	 the	 prisoner	 remains	 the	 same,	 and	 still	 imprisoned	 --
maybe	in	a	more	comfortable	prison,	more	convenient,	with	television	sets	and
football	grounds	and	utter	facilities	which	are	available	to	the	free	people	--	but
still	he	is	in	the	prison,	the	freedom	is	not	there.
The	 inner	 revolution	 brings	 freedom	 and	 the	 only	 way	 to	 make	 oneself	 go
through	the	inner	revolution	is	meditation.	Meditation	simply	means	learning	to
forget	all	 that	you	have	 learned.	 It	 is	a	process	of	deconditioning,	a	process	of
dehypnosis.
The	 society	 has	 burdened	 everybody	 with	 thousands	 of	 thoughts.	 Meditation
simply	helps	you	to	come	you	of	that	world	of	thoughts,	into	a	state	of	silence.	It
is	 a	process	of	 cleaning	your	 slate	 completely,	 it	 is	 emptying	all	 that	has	been
forced	and	stuffed	inside	you.
Once	you	are	empty,	spacious,	silent,	clean,	the	revolution	has	happened,	the	sun
has	risen;	then	you	live	in	its	light!	And	to	live	in	the	light	of	your	inner	sun	is	to
live	rightly.	In	fact	that	is	the	only	way	to	live.
Others	are	only	dying,	just	dying	slowly,	moving	in	a	queue	goes	on	becoming
shorter	and	shorter	every	moment,	and	any	moment	you	may	be	the	first	in	the
queue.	In	fact	everybody	is	trying	to	be	first	in	the	queue;	a	great	desire	to	be	the
first	everywhere.
The	 ordinary	 life	 is	 only	 called	 life,	 it	 is	 not.	 It	 is	 only	 so-called	 life.	 It	 is	 a
process	of	gradual	death	or	to	be	more	accurate,	a	process	of	gradual	suicide.
The	moment	you	become	silent	and	aware	and	clear	and	your	inner	sky	is	full	of
delight,	you	know	the	first	taste	of	true	life.	One	can	call	it	god,	one	can	call	it
enlightenment,	one	can	call	it	liberation.	The	experience	of	truth,	love,	freedom,
bliss	--	different	names,	but	the	phenomenon	is	the	same.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Dhyan	 Amritam.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation.	 Amritam
means	the	experience	of	immortality.
Man	 lives	 under	 the	 illusion	 of	mortality.	 Of	 course	 there	 are	 reasons	 for	 the
illusion,	because	he	 sees	people	dying,	disappearing.	Somebody	was	 alive	 just
the	 other	 day	 and	 today	 he	 is	 no	 more:	 there	 is	 death	 everywhere.	 Trees	 are
dying,	animals	are	dying,	flowers	are	dying,	people	are	dying,	and	one	also	sees
people	are	born,	trees	are	born,	and	seeing	this	all	around	on	infers	--	remember,
it	 is	an	 inference	 --	one	assumes	 that	"The	same	 is	going	 to	be	 the	 truth	about
me;	one	day	I	was	not,	then	I	was	born,	one	day	I	will	not	be	again,	I	will	die."	It
is	very	logical.
In	 all	 the	 books	written	 about	 logic	 you	will	 find	 this	 statement:	All	men	 are
mortal,	Socrates	is	a	man,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
therefore	Socrates	is	mortal.	This	is	our	whole	logical	process.	If	everybody	dies
then	obviously	I	cannot	be	the	exception,	nobody	has	ever	been	the	exception,	so
everybody	lives	under	the	shadow	of	death.	It	is	one	of	the	most	strange	things,
that	we	are	believing	that	we	are	born	and	that	we	will	die.	In	fact	we	were	never
born	and	we	will	never	die	birth	and	death	are	not	the	boundaries	of	our	life.	Life
is	eternal.
The	birth	is	only	the	birth	of	the	body	and	the	mind	structure,	not	the	birth	of	our
real	being.	And	death	is	also	the	death	of	the	body-mind	structure	not	the	death
of	our	inner	being,	but	we	are	not	aware	of	our	inner	being;	hence	the	illusion.
We	 go	 on	 feeling	 identified	 with	 the	 body-mind	 structure.	 This	 identification
creates	fear,	anxiety,	trembling.
Meditation	simply	helps	you	to	become	disidentified	with	body-mind	structure.
It	makes	you	aware	of	a	single	thing,	that	you	are	not	the	body,	that	you	are	not
the	mind,	that	you	are	a	consciousness	which	is	absolutely	separate.
The	moment	it	is	realised	you	have	discovered	your	original	face,	and	then	there
is	no	birth,	no	death.
With	 the	discovery	of	 the	original	 faith,	 face,	 all	 fears,	 all	 anxieties	 disappear.
Then	 life	 is	 a	 sheer	 dance,	 a	 rejoicing.	 Then	 it	 is	 a	 celebration,	 a	 festival	 of
lights,	flowers,	songs.
And	that's	my	whole	effort	here:	to	help	my	people	to	see	their	immortality,	their
eternalness,	their	eternity,	their	timelessness,	deathlessness.	And	it	is	not	difficult
because	it	is	the	reality.	To	dispel	the	idea	of	mortality	is	not	difficult	because	it
is	 not	 a	 real	 thing;	 it	 is	 just	 an	 inference;	 looking	 somebody	 dying	 you	 think,
"You	will	have	to	die."	But	when	you	see	somebody	dying	what	you	are	seeing
is	only	his	body	is	no	more	breathing,	his	body	is	no	more	capable	of	walking,
talking,	doing	anything	--	that's	all	that	you	know.
You	 don't	 know	 that	 something	 within	 him	 has	 disappeared.	 What	 you	 are
watching	is	only	the	cage,	not	eh	invisible	bird	--	and	that	was	his	real	life.
From	the	outside	you	can	only	see	the	cage,	and	of	course	a	cage	is	there	--	it	is
dead,	 it	 was	 always	 dead.	 The	 song	 belonged	 to	 the	 bird.	 You	 had	 heard	 the
song.	The	bird	 is	no	more	 there;	hence	the	song	has	disappeared	--	but	 it	 is	an
inference,	 looking	 at	 other's	 death.	 This	 is	 not	 a	 true	 experience	 of	 reality...	 a
logical	conclusion,	but	logic	is	very	limited	and	life	is	unlimited.
Logic	 is	very	superficial	and	 life	has	abysmal	depth.	Life	has	 such	an	 infinity,
unfathomable,	immeasurable,	that	logic	is	just	like	a	teaspoon	and	you	are	trying
to	measure	the	ocean	with	the	teaspoon	--
it	is	absurd.
The	 only	 right	way	 is	 to	 go	within	 yourself	 and	 see	whether	 you	 are	 just	 the
body-mind	 or	 is	 there	 something	 more	 to	 it?	 There	 is	 something	 more,
something	plus,	and	that	something	more	is	your	essence,	your	reality,	your	soul.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Gyano.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Gyano	means	knowing.
There	 is	 no	 other	 way	 of	 knowing	 the	 truth	 except	 meditation.	 One	 can
accumulate	 much	 knowledge	 without	 meditation,	 but	 that	 knowledge	 is	 dead,
because	it	is	not	your	own	--	it	is	borrowed	--	and	truth	cannot	be	borrowed.
Truth	is	untransferrable,	inexpressible.	One	can	experience	it,	one	can	see	it,	one
can	feel	it,	but	it	remains	with	the	person	who	has	experienced	it.	he	cannot	give
it	 to	anybody	else.	He	can	show	the	way	how	to	reach	 to	 it,	but	he	cannot	say
what	 it	 is	exactly,	precisely,	 there	 is	no	possibility	of	defining	 it.	Hence	all	 the
scriptures	are	roundabout:	they	go	round	and	round	in	circles.	They	are	beautiful
words,	 very	 well-spun	 theories,	 systematically,	 logically-made	 structures,	 but
truth	is	not	to	be	found	there.
You	will	find	only	theories,	ideologies.	you	can	become	knowledgeable	through
scriptures	 but	 you	 cannot	 become	 a	 knower.	 The	 only	 way	 to	 know	 is
meditation,	the	only	way	too	know	is	to	get	out	of	knowledge,	out	of	mind,	out
of	 all	 words	 and	 scriptures	 and	 theories,	 and	 to	 be	 innocent	 like	 a	 child:	 just
watching,	remaining	open,	available.
If	truth	knocks	on	the	door	then	it	will	not	find	you	asleep,	that's	all.	That's	what
a	sannyasin	is	supposed	to	do:	becoming	silent	and	waiting.	When	the	moment	is
ripe,	truth	knocks	on	the	door.	When	the	moment	is	ripe,	god	walks	in.	Not	even
a	 single	 minute	 is	 lost,	 the	 happening	 is	 simultaneous:	 here	 you	 are	 ripe	 and
suddenly	you	see	all	 that	you	have	been	seeking	has	arrived.	You	need	not	go
anywhere	for	searching,	you	need	not	go	outside	yourself	to	look	for	it.	You	have
just	to	become	settled,	calm,	quiet,	still,	and	wait!	--
and	wait	 patiently,	 don't	 be	 in	 a	 hurry.	Because	 if	 you	 are	 in	 a	 hurry	 you	will
remain	in	a	turmoil,	disturbed,	distracted.
Just	 waiting,	 doing	 nothing,	 remaining	 silent,	 waiting	 for	 the	 footsteps	 --	 any
moment,	the	guest	can	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
come.	So	one	 is	alert,	watchful,	 and	 there	comes	a	certain	 stage	of	awareness,
when	 the	guest	 simply	walks	 in.	And	 the	moment	 the	guest	walks	 in,	 the	host
and	the	guest	are	no	more	separate;	then	there	is	great	laughter,	because	for	the
first	 time	you	meet	yourself,	for	the	first	 time	you	are	the	host	and	you	are	the
guest.	 And	 of	 course,	 what	 else	 there	 is	 except	 to	 have	 a	 good	 laugh?	 Only
Buddhas	can	laugh,	laugh	totally,	at	the	beautiful	ridiculousness	of	life,	beautiful
absurdity	of	life	--	that	the	seeker	is	the	sought,	that	the	goal	is	not	there	but	here
within	you,	that	you	are	carrying	your	goal	within	yourself,	that	the	person	you
are	 looking	for	 is	hiding	within	you,	 that	 the	person	you	are	 looking	for	 is	 the
person	who	 is	 looking	 for	 (laughter).	Obviously	 it	 is	 absurd,	 but	what	 can	 be
done	about	it?	--	it	is	so!
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Atmo.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Atmo	means	the
supreme	self,	the	ultimate	reality	of	your	being,	your	very	essential	core.
Man	 can	 live	 either	 on	 eh	 circumference	 or	 at	 the	 centre.	 To	 live	 at	 the
circumference	is	easy,	cheap,	because	everybody	is	living	there.	But	to	live	at	the
centre	is	a	great	challenge,	because	you	will	be	living	there	all	alone.	You	will
not	find	a	crowd	there.	And	to	be	alone	needs	the	greatest	courage	in	the	world,
that's	why	very	few	people	have	been	able	to	know	their	innermost	core,	because
the	journey	is	absolutely	solitary.
So	meditation	prepares	 you	 for	 this	 journey.	 It	 transforms	your	 loneliness	 into
aloneness,	 your	 solitariness	 into	 solitude	 --	 that's	 the	 miracle	 of	 meditation.
There	is	vast	difference	between	the	feeling	of	loneliness	and	the	experience	of
aloneness,	between	solitariness	and	solitude.
Solitariness	is	negative,	solitude	is	positive.
Solitariness	is	ugly,	solitude	is	beautiful.
Solitariness	is	like	a	wound,	a	black	hole	inside	you,	which	hurts.	One	wants	to
cover	it,	one	wants	 to	escape	away	from	it,	one	wants	somebody	to	be	with	so
one	can	forget	one's	solitariness.	Solitude	is	like	Everest:	it	is	a	virgin	peak.	Just
a	 single	moment	 of	 it	 is	more	 valuable	 than	 the	whole	 life	 of	 living	with	 the
crowds.	the	whole	life	of	so-called	relationships	is	just	sheer	madness	compared
to	a	single	moment	of	solitude.	 It	 is	so	healthy	and	so	whole.	And	the	same	is
true	about	loneliness	and	aloneness:	loneliness	is	negative,	aloneness	is	positive;
loneliness	means	you	are	missing	 the	other,	 aloneness	means	you	are	enjoying
yourself.	And	meditation's	whole	 function	 is	 to	 transform	 the	negative	 into	 the
positive,	 to	 transform	 the	miserable	 into	 the	blissful.	Once	you	have	 tasted	 the
joy	 of	 being	 alone,	 the	 beauty	 of	 solitude,	 you	 can	 rush	 in	 --	 then	 there	 is	 no
problem,	 then	 the	 journey	 is	 a	 joy.	That	 each	moment	 the	 joy	becomes	bigger
and	bigger,	each	moment	it	is	more	and	more	incredible,	each	moment	you	are
surprised	because	you	were	thinking	that	you	had	reached	the	last	--	now	what
more	there	can	be?	But	again	there	is	more:	once	you	reach	one	peak	suddenly
you	 see	 another	 peak	 waiting	 ahead	 of	 you,	 higher.	 And	 it	 goes	 on,	 it	 is	 an
endless	journey.
As	 you	 start	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 your	 centre,	 your	 behaviour	 on	 the
circumference	changes.	It	becomes	more	and	more	loving,	compassionate,	calm,
friendly.	 It	 becomes	 less	 greedy,	 less	 angry,	 less	 jealous,	 less	 possessive.	 It
becomes	more	and	more	a	song,	a	dance,	as	if	suddenly	a	spring	has	come	to	you
and	thousands	of	flowers	has	burst	forth.
And	when	you	have	reached	to	the	very	centre	of	your	being	you	have	known	all
that	is	worth	knowing
--	 knowing	 oneself	 one	 knows	 all.	 The	 name	 of	 that	 innermost	 core	 is	 the
supreme	self.	It	is	not	YOURself.
You	are	 left	 far	behind,	you	are	 lift	on	 the	circumference.	The	ego	 is	no	more
there	 so	 you	 are	 no	 more	 there,	 but	 in	 a	 way	 you	 are	 for	 the	 first	 time	 but
egolessly.	That	 is	 the	meaning	of	 the	supreme	self:	egoless	experience	of	one's
being.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Anatto.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Anatto	means	egolessness.
Meditation	and	egolessness	are	synonymous,	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	Ego	is
synonymous	with	the	mind,	egolessness	is	synonymous	with	meditation,	because
meditation	is	a	state	of	no-mind,	no-thought,	no-desire,	no	ambition,	no	memory,
no	past,	no	future;	one	simply	is,	one,	one's	utter	nudity,	nakedness.
All	 the	 clothes	 of	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future	 are	 discarded.	 One	 is	 just	 herenow.
There	is	no	push	from	the	behind,	from	the	past,	and	no	pull	of	the	future	either.
One	 is	not	going	anywhere,	as	 if	 suddenly	 the	clock	has	stopped,	 the	 time	has
stopped.	In	the	stopping	of	the	time	ego	disappears.
Ego	 can	 live	 only	 with	 the	 tick	 tock	 of	 the	 clock,	 it	 can	move	 only	 with	 the
movement	of	the	clock,	with	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	past	and	the	future.	Just	think,	if	you	withdraw	your	past	how	much	ego	will
be	 left	 there.	 Then	 you	 don't	 know	 even	 who	 you	 are	 --	 Christian,	 Hindu,
Mohammedan,	 Indian,	 Chinese,	 Russian	 --	 you	 don't	 know	 at	 all.	 Past	 is
removed.	Then	remove	the	future	also	--	what	is	left?	No	ambition,	no	goal,	no
destiny	 to	 be	 fulfilled,	 nowhere	 to	 go,	 nothing	 to	 be	 found,	 nothing	 to	 be
discovered	 --	 you	have	pulled	 the	whole	 earth	 underneath	 the	 ego	 structure:	 it
will	 collapse,	 it	 will	 simply	 collapse	 like	 a	 palace	 made	 of	 playing	 cards.	 It
cannot	remain	even	for	a	single	moment.
Just	 a	 small	breeze	of	meditativeness	 and	 the	whole	palace	disappears,	 as	 if	 it
has	never	been	there,	as	if	it	was	just	a	mirage,	a	dream	--	and	in	fact	that's	what
it	is.	Our	mind	is	made	of	the	stuff	dreams	are	made	of,	our	whole	ego	is	nothing
but	a	long-projected	dream.
The	mind	functions	like	a	screen	and	we	project	on	the	screen	our	ego.	The	past
is	half	of	the	ego,	the	future,	the	other	half.	Take	both	the	halves	apart	and	in	the
interval	you	discover	your	reality.	In	between	the	past	and	the	future	is	the	gap.
In	 that	 gap	 is	 meditation,	 in	 that	 gap	 is	 egolessness.	 That	 gap	 is	 the	 most
pregnant	gap	because	out	of	that	gap	Buddhas	are	born.	Out	of	that	gap	arises	the
experience	of	god.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002155
ShortTitle:	NEVER15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Sarjano.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Sarjano	means	creativity.
Meditation	opens	many	doors	in	life.	It	is	a	multidimensional	phenomenon.	The
most	 important	dimension	 is	 creativity.	Those	who	 think	 that	 they	are	 creators
without	knowing	anything	of	meditation	are	not	really	creators.	At	the	most	they
will,	can	be	called	composers:	they	take	fragments	from	here	and	there	and	put
them	 together.	 Their	 creativity	 is	 not	 something	 original.	 It	 is	 more	 or	 less	 a
collage.	 It	 is	not	original	because	mind	cannot	be	original.	That	 is	 intrinsically
impossible,	that	is	not	the	nature	of	the	mind.
Mind	is	always	borrowed,	it	is	always	old.	It	is	never	new,	never	fresh,	because
mind	is	nothing	but	a	memory	system.	It	accumulates	the	past,	it	is	the	record	of
the	past.
Yes,	 you	 can	 find	 few	 things	 from	 that	 record	 and	 put	 them	 together	 --	 call	 it
poetry,	painting,	sculpture,	but	it	is	not	creativity.
Creativity,	to	be	creativity,	has	to	be	fresh,	young,	of	the	present,	of	the	now,	of
the	here.	It	has	to	be	an	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
overflowing	ecstasy	and	it	can	come	only	from	the	depth	of	meditation,	not	from
the	surface	of	the	mind.
Mind	is	 just	your	superficial	part	and	meditation	takes	us	 to	your	very	core,	 to
the	 innermost	 shrine,	 to	 our	 consciousness.	 Our	 of	 that	 consciousness
whatsoever	happens	has	something	unique	about	 it.	 It	 is	 for	 the	first	 time,	 it	 is
always	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 Then	 whether	 one	 writes	 poetry	 or	 paints	 does	 not
matter.
Buddha	never	wrote	a	single	word,	never	painted,	never	made	any	sculpture,	yet,
his	whole	life	is	creative.	Even	if	he	sits	silently	doing	nothing	there	is	that	aura
of	creativity	around.	Even	in	his	non-doing	immensities	are	happening,	even	his
silence	 is	 a	 song.	When	 he	 does	 not	 say	 something	 even	 by	 not	 saying	 he	 is
saying,	he	is	giving	a	message.	The	way	he	sits,	 the	way	he	walks,	 the	way	he
looks,	it	is	all	creative.
Each	single	gesture	of	a	man	like	Buddha	or	Jesus	has	the	flavour	of	creativity	in
it.
And	it	is	possible	only	if	one	goes	to	the	deepest	core	of	one's	being.	One	has	to
shift	from	the	mind	and	dive	deep.	One	has	to	stop	clinging	to	the	mind.
The	 clinging	 with	 the	 mind	 is	 our	 problem;	 the	 moment	 when	 we	 uncling,
immediately	meditation	happens.	Meditation	can	be	defined	as	non-clinging	 to
the	mind,	getting	unidentified	with	the	mind,	entering	an	inner	space	where	there
is	no	thought,	no	desire,	no	memory,	no	imagination,	where	all	 the	functioning
of	the	mind	has	simply	ceased.
In	 that	 absolute	 silence	 god	 starts	 flowing	 through	 you.	 That	 is	 creativity,	 the
flow	of	the	divine	through	you.	You	simply	become	a	hollow	bamboo	flute	and
something	from	the	beyond	takes	possession	of	you.
Real	creativity	has	not	your	signature	on	it;	it	has	god's	signature	on	it.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Anand.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Anand	means	bliss.
Mind	 is	 misery	 and	 cannot	 be	 otherwise,	 because	 mind	 lives	 in	 desires,
ambitions,	 it	 is	always	hankering	 for	 the	more	 --	and	 that	hankering	cannot	be
satisfied.	It	always	goes	on	jumping	ahead	of	you,	wherever	you	would	be,	the
mind	will	be	asking	for	more.	It	 is	always	ahead	of	you.	The	distance	between
you	 and	 the	 mind	 always	 remains	 the	 same.	 You	 have	 this	 much	 money,	 the
distance	 is	 there.	You	 can	 have	 that	much	money,	 the	 dame	 distance	 is	 there.
Mind	 is	 just	 like	 the	 horizon:	 it	 looks	 you	 can	 reach,	 it	 seems	 just	 few	miles
away,	 but	 by	 the	 time	 you	 have	 reached	 there	 it	 has	 gone	 ahead	 of	 you.	 it	 is
moving	with	you.	The	distance	remains	constant,	not	even	a	single	inch	less.	The
beggar	is	in	the	same	misery	as	the	emperor,	because	the	distance	is	the	same.
And	 it	 is	 the	 distance	 that	 creates	 the	misery	 because	 it	 is	 always	 frustration,
always	a	wound.	It	hurts	that	"I	have	not	been	able	to	fulfil	myself,"	but	nobody
has	ever	been	able	to	fulfil	through	the	mind.
Mind's	very	texture	consists	of	unfulfilment.	Hence	the	people	who	teach	peace
of	 mind	 are	 doing	 simply	 something	 very	 absurd.	 Nothing	 like	 that	 has	 ever
existed.	It	cannot	exist.	Peace	of	mind	is	a	contradiction	in	terms.
One	very	famous	Jewish	thinker,	Joshua	Liebman	has	written	a	book.	The	title	is
PEACE	OF	MIND.	 It	 is	 a	well-known	book	but	 from	 the	very	beginning	 it	 is
absurd.	Peace	of	mind	is	almost	equivalent	to	saying
"healthy	disease".	Either	you	are	healthy	or	you	are	not	healthy,	but	one	cannot
be	healthily	sick.	It	is	impossible.
Mind	is	sick.	It	 is	very	sickness.	One	can	get	out	of	the	mind,	and	that	is	what
meditation	is.	Meditation	is	not	peace	of	mind,	it	is	transcendence	of	mind,	and
that	distinction	has	to	be	remembered.	Because	the	Christian	priests,	the	Jewish
rabbis,	the	Mohammedan	priests,	the	Hindu	priests,	they	all	talk	about	peace	of
mind,	and	this	is	not	the	way	the	awakened	ones	have	said.
The	awakened	ones	are	all	agreed	about	one	thing,	that	you	have	to	go	beyond
mind,	only	 then	there	 is	peace.	In	mind	there	 is	no	peace.	Mind	is	 the	 turmoil,
the	noise.	It	is	the	very	hell,	but	it	can	be	transcended.
Because	we	are	not	our	mind,	we	are	something	totally	different,	so	we	can	step
over	it,	we	can	go	beyond	it,	we	can	use	it	as	a	stepping	stone,	as	a	ladder.
The	hell	of	the	mind	can	become	a	ladder	to	the	heaven	of	meditation-and	that's
my	whole	work	here:	to	use	the	mind	in	such	a	way	that	you	can	go	beyond	it.
And	 once	 you	 have	 tasted	 even	 a	 single	 moment	 of	 that	 beyondness,	 of	 that
transcendence,	 then	 everything	becomes	 clear.	Then	one	knows	why	 there	 has
been	misery:	it	was	the	cause	that	was	causing	it.
The	moment	you	are	no	more	on	the	mind	suddenly	there	is	bliss.	Not	that	you
have	to	seek	for	it	--	it	is	already	there	--	just	we	are	so	much	engrossed	in	the
mind	that	we	cannot	look	at	our	own	centre.	At	the	centre	there	is	absolute	bliss
and	nothing	else.	It	is	waiting	for	us.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	one-hundred-eighty-
degree	turn.	Right	now	our	back	is	towards	our	centre	and	our	face	is	toward	the
world	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
--	this	is	the	state	of	mind.
Just	the	opposite	is	the	state	of	meditation:	when	your	back	is	towards	the	world
and	your	face	is	towards	your	centre,	suddenly	you	become	aware	of	something
that	has	always	been	there.	You	have	not	lost	it	even	for	a	single	moment.	It	is
your	very	nature	to	be	blissful.	Meditation	gives	you	only	that	which	you	have
had	always.	It	simply	makes	you	aware	of	your	reality.	It	does	not	bring	anything
new	 in.	 It	 simply	 reveals	 you	 the	 treasure	 that	 is	 lying	 there	 ignored	 and
neglected,	 and	 you	 are	 running	 all	 over	 the	 world	 for	 it.	 You	will	 not	 find	 it
anywhere	else	because	it	is	within	you.
Mind	 is	misery,	meditation	 is	bliss.	Mind	 is	misery	because	 it	 takes	you	away
from	 your	 nature	 and	 meditation	 is	 bliss	 because	 it	 brings	 you	 back	 to	 your
nature,	it	brings	you	back	home.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Nirmal.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Nirmal	means	innocence.
Mind	is	knowledge,	meditation	is	innocence.	It	is	childlike	innocence;	hence	the
significance	of	Jesus'
statement,	 "Unless	 you	 are	 like	 small	 children	 you	 shall	 not	 enter	 into	 my
kingdom	of	god."	It	is	very	pregnant.
This	sentence	defines	the	very	essence	of	meditation.
Become	 again	 innocent.	Unlearn	 all	 that	 has	 been	 imposed	 upon	you.	Be	 in	 a
state	of	not-knowing	and	suddenly	the	kingdom	of	god	is	yours.	You	have	not	to
wait	for	it.	It	is	immediately	yours.
Innocence	 opens	 your	 heart	 to	 existence;	 knowledge	 keeps	 you	 closed.
Knowledge	 is	 cunning,	 calculating.	 Knowledge	 is	 always	 like	 a	wall	 between
you	and	existence.	Innocence	is	a	bridge.	In	innocence	nothing	divides	you	from
existence.	You	are	part	of	 the	 flowers	and	 the	 stars,	 the	animals,	 the	birds,	 the
rocks,	 the	 rivers,	 you	 are	 part	 and	 they	 are	 part	 of	 you.	A	 certain	 communion
starts	happening.
You	start	having	a	rhythmic	relationship	with	existence;	then	everything	rejoices
in	you.
Just	a	small	flower,	a	grass	flower	and	it	opens	doors	to	mysteries	-	it	awakens
great	wonders	in	you.
Small	things	of	life	start	 turning	into	something	extraordinary	and	sacred,	once
you	have	the	mirror	of	innocence	to	reflect	them.
Meditation	can	be	reduced	to	a	single	word:	innocence,	a	state	of	not-knowing.
Don't	 be	 a	 Hindu,	 don't	 be	 a	 Christian,	 don't	 be	 a	 Mohammedan,	 don't	 be	 a
communist,	a	fascist,	a	socialist;	just	be	innocent,	childlike,	someone	who	knows
nothing.
In	 that	 not-knowing	 real	 knowing	 becomes	 possible.	 In	 that	 not-knowing
wisdom	happens.	Wisdom	is	not	information,	it	is	transformation.
You	become	new,	you	are	born	anew.	It	is	a	resurrection.	The	old	dies,	and	each
moment	 the	old	goes	on	dying	and	each	moment	 the	new	goes	on	being	born,
life	 becomes	 such	 an	 alive	 phenomenon	 that	 each	moment	 the	 dead	 simply	 is
dropped,	and	the	new	asserts.	The	old	leaves	go	on	falling	and	the	new	leaves	go
on	 growing,	 the	 old	 flowers	 go	 on	 disappearing,	 new	 flowers	 go	 on	 opening.
When	 life	 is	 such	 a	 continuum,	 a	 process,	 a	 riverlike	 phenomenon,	 then	 the
ocean	is	yours.	Then	sooner	or	later	you	will	become	the	ocean.
In	my	observation	even	sinners	are	far	closer	than	the	scholars	-	to	god,	to	truth,
to	freedom.	The	pundits,	the	rabbis,	the	imams,	the	ayatollahs,	the	popes,	these
are	the	people	who	can	never	know	what	truth	is.
Swami	 Dhyan	 Chinmaya.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation.	 Chinmaya	 means
consciousness.
Man	ordinarily	lives	a	very	unconscious	life,	almost	like	a	robot,	a	sleepwalker,	a
somnambulist.	He	goes	on	doing	 things	but	all	 is	mechanical.	He	 is	not	aware
what	he	is	doing,	he	is	not	watchful	of	his	own	acts,	he	is	not	alert	about	his	own
thoughts.	He	 is	 so	much	 identified	with	his	 feelings,	 emotions,	moods,	 that	he
cannot	watch.	Watching	needs	a	certain	distance.	And	he	is	so	closed	that	when
he	 becomes	 angry	 he	 really	 becomes	 anger,	 not	 just	 angry.	 And	 when	 he	 is
greedy	he	is	not	just	greedy,	he	is	greed.
And	the	same	is	the	case	with	all	his	emotions,	feelings,	thoughts,	actions.	The
identification	 is	 a	 state	 of	 unconsciousness	 and	 this	 identification	 has	 to	 be
broken,	hammered,	 so	 a	distance	 can	be	 created,	 so	you	 can	 see	what	you	 are
doing.
Eating	you	can	see,	walking	you	can	see.	A	moment	comes	when	even	while	you
are	 sleeping	 you	 can	 see.	 Something	 in	 you	 remains	 still	 alert	 and	 aware,	 just
like	a	small	flame	inside.	The	body	is	fast	asleep,	you	may	be	snoring,	you	can
hear	 it	 yourself.	 It	 is	 a	 rare	 phenomenon	 but	 it	 happen,	 it	 happens:	 hearing
yourself	 snoring	 is	 something	 like	 a	 miracle,	 but	 it	 is	 possible.	 As	 your
awareness	grows	slowly	slowly	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
become	capable	of	watching	your	body	in	all	 its	acts,	 then	your	mind	in	all	 its
activities,	then	your	heart.
Of	course,	the	hardest	to	watch	is	the	heart	and	the	easiest	to	watch	is	the	body,
and	 between	 the	 two	 is	 the	mind;	 hence	 begin	with	 the	 body	 and	 end	 on	 the
heart.	 Once	 you	 can	watch	 all	 the	 three,	 these	 three	 concentric	 circles	 around
your	centre,	meditation	has	started	growing	in	you,	the	spring	has	come.
When	one	is	capable	of	watching	all	 the	three	without	any	mistake,	constantly,
with	 no	 lapse,	 with	 no	 gaps,	 then	 the	 fourth	 happens.	 That	 fourth	 is	 called
Chinmaya,	 the	 real	 consciousness,	 the	 enlightenment,	 the	 Buddhahood,	 the
Christ-consciousness.
In	 the	East	we	 have	 only	 called	 it	 the	 fourth;	we	 have	 not	 given	 it	 any	 name
because	 names	 create	 trouble,	 words	 create	 trouble.	 Words	 are	 immediately
caught	 by	 the	 scholars,	 philosophers,	 theologians,	 and	 they	 start	 spinning	 and
weaving	theories	around	them	and	they	distort	everything.
Hence	we	have	decided	in	the	East	to	call	it	only	by	a	number,	the	fourth.	Now
you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 with	 the	 number,	 fourth.	 There	 is	 no	 possibility	 of
interpretation,	you	cannot	impose	any	idea	on	it	--	the	fourth	is	simply	the	fourth,
it	is	only	a	number.	It	simply	indicates	only	one	thing,	that	you	have	passed	the
three	concentric	circles	and	has	reached	to	the	fourth,	the	centre.	And	that	centre
is	the	beginning	of	god	or	the	experience	of	godliness,	the	beginning	of	eternity
or	 the	 experience	 of	 timelessness,	 the	 beginning	 of	 true	 life	 which	 knows	 no
death,	which	is	beyond	birth	and	death	both.	This	is	the	search,	the	search	of	all
the	true	seekers:	to	taste	the	eternal,	the	absolute,	the	immortal.	And	it	is	possible
because	it	is	part	of	us.
We	 are	 both,	 the	 world	 and	 the	 beyond.	 The	 world	 is	 those	 three	 concentric
circles.	Those	are	the	three	dimensions	of	the	world	and	the	fourth	is	the	beyond,
penetrating	the	world,	a	ray	of	light	penetrating	the	layers	of	darkness.
Getting	unidentified	and	becoming	aware	--	that's	the	whole	process	of	sannyas.
Swami	 Dhyan	 Premda.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation;	 Premda	 means	 one	 who	 is
capable	of	giving	love.
Meditation	makes	you	so	blissful,	so	OVERflowingly	blissful	that	after	it	there
is	only	one	thing	left	and	that	is	sharing	of	your	bliss	--	and	that's	what	love	is	all
about.
True	love	is	not	a	beggar	but	an	emperor.	It	is	the	untrue	love	which	begs,	which
desires,	which	wants	 something	 should	be	given.	And	 the	 strange	 thing	 that	 is
happening	 in	 the	 world	 always	 is	 that	 all	 are	 beggars,	 beggars	 begging	 from
other	beggars.	Nobody	had	anything	to	give	and	everybody	wants	everything	to
get.	Naturally	 there	 is	 chaos,	 conflict,	misery,	 and	 everybody	 feels	 cheated.	 In
fact	 nobody	 is	 cheating;	 all	 are	 beggars.	 Everybody	 feels	 sooner	 or	 later
disillusioned	but	the	disillusionment	is	for	wrong	reasons.
They	 think	 that	 the	 people	 they	 loved	 deceived	 them.	 It	 is	 not	 so;	 nobody	 is
deceiving	you,	except	yourself.	Unless	one	is	full	of	bliss	one	cannot	be	loving.
One	can	only	desire	love	but	one	cannot	share.
Done	has	nothing	to	share.
Meditation	releases	your	love	juices,	it	releases	your	loving	fragrance,	and	then
you	 can	 share,	 you	 can	 give.	 Of	 course	 when	 you	 give	 existence	 returns	 it
thousandfold.	Existence	 is	 not	misery,	 but	 you	 have	 first	 to	 give.	You	have	 to
fulfil	that	basic	requirement	--	then	you	get.	It	is	like	you	sow	few	seeds	and	then
things	grow,	and	each	tree	brings	millions	of	seeds.
You	had	grown	only	one	seed	and	each	single	seed	brings	millions	of	seeds.	You
just	give	a	little	love	and	wait	and	see:	love	starts	flowing	towards	you	from	all
nooks	 and	 corners	 of	 existence,	 but	 for	 that	 you	 have	 to	 have	 first.	 Hence
meditation	comes	first;	love	is	its	shadow,	its	by-product,	its	consequence.
Meditation	has	to	happen	within	you	so	your	imprisoned	splendour	is	released,
then	 love	 comes	 on	 its	 own	 accord.	 And	 a	 life	 with	meditation	 and	 love	 is	 a
fulfilled	life.
Swami	Dhyan	Nartano.	Dhyan	means	meditation;	Nartano	means	a	dance.
Meditation	 has	 not	 to	 be	 taken	 seriously	 (laughter);	 take	 it	 sincerely	 but	 not
seriously.	Meditation	has	to	be	a	playfulness,	it	has	to	be	rejoiced	in.	One	has	to
dance,	to	celebrate.	Life	is	known	only	by	those	who	are	capable	of	celebrating
it.	And	don't	wait	for	miracles	to	happen,	then	you	will	not	celebrate.	Then	you
will	never	celebrate.
Miracles	 certainly	 happen	 but	 they	 happen	 only	 to	 people	 who	 know	 how	 to
celebrate!	And	there	are	millions	of	fools	around	the	world	who	are	waiting	for
some	miracle	to	happen,	then	 they	will	celebrate,	but	 this	 is	not	possible.	They
are	putting	the	horses	behind	the	cart.	The	cart	is	never	going	to	move.	Even	the
horses	will	not	be	able	to	move	because	of	the	cart.	Freed	from	the	cart	at	least
the	horses	could	have	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
moved,	and	the	owner	will	be	stuck	in	the	cart.	Everything	has	become	stagnant
because	some	basic	misunderstandings	which	have	become	very	prevalent,	deep-
rooted.
There	 have	 been	 people	 who	 have	made	 them	 established	 because	 they	 serve
their	vested	interests.	All	the	priests	around	the	world	have	been	trying	to	make
man	serious,	sad,	sombre,	a	long	face.	They	are	all	afraid	of	laughter	--	laughter
is	really	dangerous,	 it	 is	almost	 like	a	dynamite.	If	 the	world,	even	for	 twenty-
four	hours	decides	 that	"We	will	 laugh	at	everything"	(laughter)	--	 just	 twenty-
four	 hours	 --	 and	 all	 your	 politicians	will	 commit	 suicide,	 and	 all	 your	 priests
will	 jump	 into	 the	ocean,	and	all	your	 saints	will	hang	 themselves.	 Just	within
twenty-four	hours	 there	will	be	such	a	great	 revolution	 in	 the	world.	 It	will	be
such	 a	 deep	 cleansing	 phenomenon,	 it	 will	 clean	 all	 dirt.	 But	 people	 have
completely	forgotten	low	to	laugh;	in	fact	they	think	to	laugh	is	profane:	one	has
to	be	serious,	when	you	enter	the	church	even	if	you	are	laughing,	you	become
serious,	you	become	stiff,	you	become	uptight.
Church	should	be	a	place	of	dancing	and	singing,	 rejoicing.	One	should	 invite
Jesus	also	to	participate,	and	call	god	the	father	also,	but	"Have	a	little	fun!	Why
you	are	hanging	above	 the	clouds	 so	 long?	Come	down!"	But	all	 the	 religious
places	have	become	sad.	They	are	in	the	hands	of	ill	people,	sick	people.
Laughter	 is	 tremendously	 healthy.	 Playfulness	 is	 as	 sacred	 as	 any	 prayer	 or
maybe	 more	 sacred	 than	 any	 prayer,	 because	 playfulness,	 laughter,	 singing,
dancing,	will	relax	you.	And	only	the	truth	is	possible	in	a	relaxed	state	of	being.
When	 you	 are	 totally	 relaxed,	 in	 a	 state	 of	 let-go,	 the	 impossible	 starts
happening,	the	miracle	starts	happening.	Let-go	is	the	secret	of	meditation.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002165
ShortTitle:	NEVER16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Ma	Dhyan	Rabia.	Dhyan	means	meditation;	Rabia	means	the	spring.
Meditation	is	certainly	the	spring	of	the	inner	world,	because	it	is	only	through
meditation	that	the	hidden	flowers	burst	forth,	that	the	seeds	are	no	more	seeds,
the	 potential	 is	 actualised,	 you	 are	 no	more	 only	 a	 possibility.	 You	 become	 a
realised	phenomenon.	That's	exactly	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	creating	the	right
climate	for	the	potential	to	become	a	realisation.
If	 the	potential	remains	the	potential	 life	remains	a	misery,	because	deep	down
one	 knows	 --	 one	 may	 recognise,	 may	 not	 recognise	 --	 but	 somewhere	 deep
down	one	continues	to	know	that	'I	am	not	being	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
which	I	am	meant	for.	That	something	is	missing.'
That	 missing	 thing	 keeps	 one	 miserable,	 unfulfilled,	 discontented.	 Meditation
simply	 brings	 fulfilment	 because	 it	 brings	 flowering.	 The	 moment	 of	 inner
silence,	awareness,	is	what	I	mean	by	meditation.
Rabia	also	means	a	breeze.	That	too	is	significant.	It	is	the	breeze	of	the	beyond.
Once	 you	 are	 silent,	 absolutely	 silent,	 the	 world	 disappears,	 a	 fresh	 breeze,	 a
totally	new	phenomenon	starts	happening	inside	you.	You	have	transcended	the
material,	 the	phenomenal.	You	have	entered	 the	nominal,	you	have	entered	 the
invisible.
This	 is	 what	 is	 called	 god-realisation.	 Actually	 it	 is	 nothing	 but	 your	 own
potential	becoming	actualised.
Ma	Dhyan	Blair.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Blair	means	a	peaceful	spirit.
Meditation	 is	 just	 a	 simple	 art	 of	 becoming	 available	 to	 the	 mysterious	 that
surrounds	us,	and	the	contact	with	the	mysterious	brings	peace,	bliss,	love	light,
and	thousand	and	one	more	things.
Peace	is	not	something	that	you	can	create,	that	you	can	cultivate.	A	cultivated
peace	is	a	false	thing,	just	superficial.	Scratch	a	little	and	it	is	gone,	and	suddenly
the	 turmoil	erupts.	hence	 the	so-called	peaceful	people	are	 just	peaceful	 if	you
don't	scratch	them,	if	you	don't	create	anything	that	goes	beyond	their	surface.	If
everything	 goes	 according	 to	 them	 then	 they	 are	 peaceful,	 otherwise	 they	 are
sitting	on	volcanos,	 and	 just	 a	 small	 thing	 can	 trigger	 the	whole	 eruption.	But
there	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	peace	too.	It	is	not	created,	it	comes;	it	comes
as	a	gift	from	the	beyond.	What	you	have	to	create	is	a	state	of	receptivity.
Meditation	makes	you	vulnerable,	receptive,	open,	available.	Meditation	makes
you	a	host.	You	are	ready	to	welcome	the	guest	from	the	beyond.	The	moment
you	open	your	doors	the	light	comes	in.	You	cannot	create	the	light,	you	cannot
create	the	sun,	but	you	can	open	your	doors	or	you	can	keep	your	doors	closed,
or	even	with	open	doors	you	can	sit	with	closed	eyes	--	that	is	up	to	you.
A	man	without	meditation	 is	a	man	sitting	 in	 the	sun	with	closed	eyes.	A	man
with	meditation	is	just	a	little	bit	different	--	nothing	much	of	a	difference...	He	is
sitting	in	the	same	sun,	a	same	kind	of	person;	the	only	difference	is	that	his	eyes
are	open.	Because	his	eyes	are	open	he	is	experiencing	light	and	the	splendour	of
light.
Meditation	is	a	simple	art	of	opening	the	inner	eye.	All	that	you	have	to	do	is	to
start	 looking	 in.	 The	 only	 way	 to	 open	 the	 inner	 eye	 is	 to	 give	 it	 a	 little
functioning.	Anything	not	used	goes	out	of	functioning.	If	somebody	never	uses
his	hands	they	will	go	out	of	functioning,	if	somebody	never	uses	one's	eyes	he
will	become	blind,	if	somebody	never	uses	his	ears	he	will	become	deaf.
All	 these	sensitivities	have	to	be	continuously	used	to	keep	fresh,	and	we	have
not	used	the	inner	eye	for	thousands	of	lives.
That's	 why	 it	 is	 not	 functioning;	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 to	 start	 using	 it.	 So
whenever	you	have	time	close	your	eyes	and	try	to	look	in.
In	 the	 beginning	 you	 will	 find	 only	 darkness	 or	 absurd,	 irrelevant	 thoughts,
dreams	floating	here	and	there.	It	will	look	like	a	chaos	but	go	on	watching,	go
on	looking.	We	are	not	worried	about	what	you	are	seeing.	Our	whole	effort	is	to
see.	Remember,	the	emphasis	is	on	seeing,	not	on	the	seen,	so	it	does	not	matter
what	you	see.	Thoughts,	desires,	memories,	dreams	--	it	doesn't	matter	what	you
are	seeing.
Everything	is	just	an	opportunity	to	make	the	inner	eye	function.
So	remember	 the	emphasis	otherwise	people	become	tired;	 they	 think	 'What	 is
the	 point?	We	don't	 see	 any	 light,	we	 don't	 see	 god,	we	 don't	 see	 the	 soul	we
don't	see	this,	we	don't	see	that.	Just	ordinary	thoughts	are	 there	so	what	 is	 the
point?	They	have	missed	the	whole	message.'
It	is	not	what	you	are	seeing	that	is	significant;	the	significant	thing	is	that	you
are	seeing,	that	you	are	trying	to	use	the	faculty	of	inner	seeing,	giving	it	some
opportunity	 to	 function	 again,	 so	 the	 wheels	 can	 start	 moving	 --	 they	 are
jammed.	so	much	dust	has	gathered	they	have	gone	rusty.	Just	a	little	use	and	the
rust	will	disappear,	and	the	dust	will	disappear,	disappear	and	you	will	be	able,
slowly	slowly,	 to	penetrate	 the	fog	of	 the	mind.	As	your	seeing	becomes	more
clear,	sharper,	your	penetration	becomes	deeper.
And	 once	 you	 can	 see	 deeply	 then	 thoughts	 are	 just	 a	 thin	 layer,	 just	 like	 a
curtain:	you	can	penetrate	beyond	the	curtain,	you	can	see	behind	the	curtain	and
behind	the	curtain	is	the	world	of	the	Buddhas,	the	world	of	the	awakened	ones.
Then	 a	 peace	 descends	 --	 a	 peace	 which	 is	 unlimited,	 a	 peace	 which	 is
unfathomable.	And	then	nothing	can	disturb	it,	then	there	is	no	way	to	disturb	it.
It	goes	to	the	very	core	of	your	being,	it	transforms	you.
It	is	a	miracle,	but	it	is	possible	only	through	meditation.	There	is	no	other	way
to	it!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Ma	Dhyan	Usha.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Usha	means	the	dawn.
Just	the	end	of	the	night	and	the	beginning	of	the	day	--	that	boundary	line	when
the	East	horizon	starts	becoming	red.	Those	beautiful	moments	when	the	whole
earth	awaits	breathlessly	for	the	rising	sun:	a	great	silence	descends,	everything
seems	to	have	come	to	a	stop.	That	moment	is	very	significant,	not	only	on	the
outside	but	on	the	inside	too,	because	it	is	the	same.	The	outside	and	the	inside
are	parallel	lines.
Whatsoever	is	on	the	outside	is	also	on	the	inside	too.
In	the	inner	world	we	are	living	in	a	dark	night.	We	have	completely	forgotten
that	 the	 dawn	 is	 possible...	 but	we	 have	 to	work	 for	 it.	We	 have	 to	 create	 the
necessary	situation	in	which	it	can	happen.	It	cannot	happen	on	its	own.	It	is	not
a	natural	phenomenon	like	the	outside	dawn;	it	is	something	which	goes	beyond
nature,	which	transcends	nature.
And	that's	what	the	function	of	religion	is:	to	help	you	to	go	beyond	the	natural.
Because	the	natural	is	the	world	of	the	science	and	the	natural	is	the	world	of	the
inner,	but	for	that	each	individual	has	to	prepare.
And	the	preparation	is	not	so	arduous	as	it	has	been	told.	It	is	really	very	simple.
It	is	just	the	egoists	who	have	been	telling	to	people	that	the	inner	transformation
is	very	arduous.	It	 is	not	arduous	at	all.	Yes,	a	 little	effort	 is	needed,	but	 just	a
little	effort.	Once	you	have	been	able	to	kindle	just	a	little	flame	then	the	whole
forest	goes	on	fire.
Meditation	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 inner	 dawn.	 Meditation	 simply	 means
becoming	 more	 aware	 in	 all	 that	 you	 are	 doing	 --	 small,	 ordinary	 activities,
cleaning	the	floor	or	cooking	the	food	or	washing	your	clothes	or	drinking	tea	or
going	 for	 a	 walk.	 Whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing	 just	 do	 it	 with	 a	 little	 more
awareness	and	you	will	be	immediately	able	to	see	the	distinction.
For	example,	you	can	move	this	hand	without	awareness	--	just	as	people	do	--
then	 move	 it	 slowly	 with	 awareness	 and	 feel	 the	 difference.	 When	 you	 are
moving	 it	with	awareness	 there	 is	a	grace	and	 there	 is	a	subtle	 joy	even	 in	 the
hand;	 even	 the	 hand	 feels	 the	 silence,	 the	 peace,	 the	 blissfulness	 of	 your
awareness.
And	if	all	your	activities	of	the	body	and	the	mind	and	the	heart	become	full	of
awareness,	you	can	imagine	how	much	grace,	how	much	beauty,	how	much	bliss
will	be	experienced.	Just	the	movement	of	your	hand	which	is	nothing...	You	are
moving	your	hand	the	whole	day	in	thousands	of	ways	--	just	try	once	in	a	while
to	walk	ten	steps	with	awareness,	with	absolute	awareness	as	if	you	have	nothing
else	 to	 do,	 just	 these	 ten	 steps,	 so	 concentratedly	 in	 the	 moment	 and	 see	 the
difference.
Those	ten	steps	will	give	you	more	joy	than	any	dance	can	ever	give.	And	then
slowly	 slowly	 let	 this	 awareness	 penetrate	 all	 your	 activities	 --	 outer,	 inner,
physical	and	mental,	emotional.
The	day	you	are	twenty-four	hours	full	of	awareness,	 the	dawn	has	come.	And
the	 experience	 of	 the	 sun	 rising	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 becoming	 a	Buddha	 or	 a
Christ.
Swami	Dhyan	Aviram.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Aviram	means	a	continuum,	a
riverlike	eternal	process	which	goes	on	and	on.
Meditation	begins	but	it	never	ends.	Gautam	the	Buddha	is	reported	to	have	said
that	misery	has	no	beginning	but	there	is	an	end	to	it,	and	bliss	has	a	beginning
but	there	is	no	end	to	it	--	and	he	is	perfectly	right.
You	can	go	on	digging	for	the	causes	of	misery;	you	will	never	succeed	to	find
the	ultimate	cause.
Sigmund	 Freud	 was	 trying	 to	 dig	 and	 he	 discovered	 the	 unconscious.	 His
disciple,	Carl	Gustav	Jung,	goes	on	digging	and	finds	the	collective	unconscious.
Now	somebody	is	expected	to	dig	a	little	more	and	find	the	cosmic	unconscious,
and	so	on	and	so	forth	you	can	go	on	digging.
It	is	like	peeling	an	infinite	onion,	so	layer	upon	layer	and	each	layer	gives	you
the	idea	as	if	you	have	come	to	the	end.	And	each	person	who	finds	a	new	layer
declares	he	has	found	the	truth.	But	there	is	no	beginning	to	the	misery:	you	can
go	on	digging.
For	example,	Janov	has	been	digging	and	he	came	to	 the	Primal	Scream	--	 the
first	scream	the	child	experiences	while	coming	out	of	the	womb	of	the	mother.
But	dig	a	little	more	because	in	the	East	we	have	done	much	work	on	those	lines
and	finally	we	got	fed	up	of	the	whole	nonsense.
If	you	dig	 a	 little	more	 then	 that	 is	not	 the	 first	 scream,	because	 the	 child	has
lived	nine	months	in	the	mother's	womb	and	he	had	experienced	all	the	moods	of
the	mother.	 If	 the	mother	was	 crying	 he	was	 affected	 by	 it,	 if	 the	mother	was
rejoicing	 he	 was	 affected	 by	 it,	 because	 he	 was	 part	 of	 the	 mother's	 body,
connected,	so	each	mood,	feeling,	emotion,	experience	was	filtering	to	him.	He
was	just	as	much	a	part	as	your	hand	is	part	of	yours.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	you	are	sad	your	hand	is	sad,	if	you	are	happy	your	hand	is	excited,	if	you	are
ecstatic	 your	 hand	 is	 also	 feeling	 a	 dance	 inside	 it.	Each	 cell	 and	 fibre	 is	 in	 a
dance,	in	a	celebration	--	but	that	too	is	not	the	end.
If	 you,	 even	 if	 you	 dig	 nine	 months	 in	 the	 mother's	 womb;	 the	 first	 scream
happens	when	the	soul	enters	in	the	mother's	womb	not	when	the	child	is	born,
because	that	is	even	more	difficult	a	process.
Janov	thinks	coming	out	of	the	mother's	womb	is	painful	because	the	passage	is
very	narrow	and	the	child	feels	tremendously	crushed.	He	has	lived	in	the	womb
--	 it	was	 spacious	 --	 and	 then	 he	 has	 to	 pass	 through	 a	 very	 narrow	 tunnel.	 It
certainly	 is	 painful	 but	 that	 is	 nothing	 compared	 to	 the	 soul	 entering	 into	 the
mother's	womb	when	 the	mother	became	pregnant.	Then	 the	cell	 in	which	 the
soul	entered	was	so	small	that	you	cannot	see	it	by	naked	eyes	and	entering	into
it	must	have	been	a	hell.
That's	what	we	have	been	working	in	the	East	and	we	have	found	that	is	the	real
hell.
So	in	the	East	all	the	mystics	have	been	saying	and	praying	to	god	'Help	us	never
to	enter	into	the	womb	again'	--	that	is	the	prayer	for	thousands	of	years	in	the
East:	'Help	us	not	to	enter	in	the	womb	again.'
They	must	have	discovered	 the	misery	of	 entry.	But	 that	 is	 not	 the	 end	 either,
because	before	that	you	had	died	and	death	was	not	a	very	beautiful	experience.
And	 then	 starts	 another	 life	 and	 boxes	within	 boxes,	 boxes	within	 boxes,	 and
there	is	no	end	to	it!
In	the	East	we	say,	before	a	soul	becomes	a	human	being	it	has	to	pass	through
eight-hundred-forty	million	lives.	Maybe	it	is	a	little	bit	exaggerated...	but	there
is	some	truth	in	it.
Even	 if	 you	 have	 not	 lived	 eight-hundred-forty-million	 lives	 --	maybe	 eighty-
four-million	or	even	eight	million	or	maybe	only	 four	million	 --	 then	 too,	 four
millions	lives!	It	is	not	a,	a	small	experience.	You	can	go	on	digging.	And	when
your	human	 lives	 are	 finished	 then	your	monkey	 lives	 and	donkey	 lives...	 and
cockroaches	and	the	mosquitoes	and	the	bedbugs	--	there	is	no	end	to	it!
In	the	East	we	say	one	can	go	on	digging:	it	is	futile.	We	have	tried	it	and	found
it	 there	is	no	beginning	to	it,	and	Buddha	is	not	saying	without	any	reason.	He
says	because	he	knows:	there	is	no	beginning	to	misery.	Yes,	but	there	is	an	end	-
-	and	that	is	a	good	news!
And	 just	 the	 opposite	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 bliss:	 it	 begins	 but	 it	 never	 ends.
Meditation	is	the	beginning	of	an	eternal	pilgrimage.'
The	first	step	you	have	to	take,	and	then	the	journey	continues.	If	you	can	take
one	 step	 that's	 enough,	 because	 each	 time	 you	 will	 be	 taking	 only	 one	 step;
nobody	can	take	two	steps	together.
And	 if	 you	 know	 how	 to	 take	 one	 single	 step,	 that's	 enough	 for	 the	 whole
journey	 --	 it	may	be	 infinite.	 It	goes	on	growing	bigger	and	bigger,	vaster	and
vaster,	but	there	is	no	end	to	it.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Aviram:	a	continuum,	endless	continuum.	Hence	sannyas
begins	but	never	ends.
Ma	Dhyan	Archano	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Archano	means	prayer.
I	 know	 only	 of	 one	 prayer	 and	 that	 is	 absolute	 silence.	 The	moment	 you	 say
something	you	have	destroyed	 it;	hence	 the	prayers	 that	go	on	 in	 the	churches
and	 the	 temples	 and	 the	 mosques	 and	 the	 synagogues	 are	 not	 true	 prayers,
because	you	are	saying	something.
What	 is	 there	 to	 say	 to	 the	 whole?	 --	 the	 whole	 knows	 it	 already.	 Before	 we
know	it	the	whole	knows	it.
It	is	just	stupid	to	go	on	saying	things	to	God.	It	is	meaningless.
One	 can	 simply	 sit	 silently.	 As	 far	 as	 the	 whole	 is	 concerned,	 language	 is
meaningless,	language	has	to	be	put	aside.	And	to	put	aside	language	means	you
have	put	everything	aside	 --	your	mind,	your	knowledge,	your	scriptures,	your
religion,	your	church	--	because	they	all	belong	to	the	world	of	language.
The	 moment	 you	 are	 silent	 you	 are	 not	 a	 Christian,	 nor	 a	 Hindu	 nor	 a
Mohammedan.	The	moment	you	are	silent	there	is	no	Bible,	no	Koran,	no	Gita.
The	 moment	 you	 are	 silent	 you	 are	 not	 an	 atheist,	 a	 theist,	 a	 communist,	 a
socialist.	 Silence	 simply	 erases	 all	 that	 you	 have	 learned	 and	 accumulated.	 It
makes	you	again	a	child,	innocent,	and	innocence	is	prayer.
In	 that	 innocence	something	starts	arising	in	your	being	with	no	effort	on	your
part.	Effortlessly	a	fragrance	starts	rising,	the	fragrance	of	gratitude.
It	is	not	that	you	are	doing	it	--	you	are	just	a	watcher,	you	see	it	happening.	Just
as	perfume	is	rising	above	the	rose	flowers,	going	towards	the	stars,	in	that	same
way	 gratitude,	 gratefulness,	 thankfulness,	 wordlessly	 starts	 rising	 from	 your
innermost	core	--	and	that	is	the	only	prayer	that	is	heard	that	reaches	to	God	or
to	the	whole.
And	once	you	know	the	prayer	of	silence,	once	you	know	the	music	of	silence
you	have	known	all	that	is	worth	knowing!
It	contains	all	the	scriptures	in	it,	it	contains	Christ	and	Buddha	and	Zarathustra
and	Lao	Tzu.	It	contains	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	experience	of	all	 the	awakened	ones;	hence	 I	don't	 teach	you	any	scripture
and	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 any	 doctrine	 and	 I	 don't	 enforce	 any	 discipline.	 I	 simply
persuade	you	 to	be	 silent	 because	 there	 is	 nothing	more	valuable	 than	 silence.
Silence	is	the	door	to	the	divine.
Swami	 Dhyan	 Vardhan.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation,	 Vardhan	 means	 that	 which
goes	on	growing,	that	which	goes	on	expanding.
Physicists	say,	and	only	recently	they	have	come	to	this	understanding,	that	the
universe	 is	 expanding	 every	 moment,	 with	 tremendous	 speed,	 with	 the	 same
speed	as	 the	 light	moves	--	and	 light	 really	moves	with	a	 tremendous	speed.	 It
seems	 to	 be	 the	 ultimate	 speed,	 because	 up	 to	 now	 there	 has	 not	 been	 any
indication	of	another	speed	which	is	more	than	the	speed	of	light.
The	light	 travels	one-hundred-eighty-six-thousand	miles	per	second.	Multiplied
by	sixty	that	is	the	space	it	covers	in	one	minute,	then	multiply	that	by	sixty	--
that	is	the	space	it	covers	in	one	hour.	Multiply	it	by	twenty-four	then	that	is	the
space	it	covers	in	one	day,	and	then	multiply	it	by	three-hundred-sixty-five	days
--	that	is	the	speed	it	covers	in	one	year	--	and	that	is	the	smallest	unit	to	measure
the	speed	of	light.
It	is	measured	not	in	yards	or	metres;	it	is	measured	in	light	years.	One	light	year
means	 that	much	 space	 that	 light	will	 travel	 in	 one	 year.	 From	 the	 sun	 to	 the
earth	it	 takes	ten	minutes	to	travel	and	the	closest	star	is	four	light	years	away.
And	there	are	stars	whose	light	has	not	yet	reached	earth;	it	has	been	travelling
and	travelling	and	travelling.
The	 earth	 has	 been	 here	 for	 four-hundred	million	 years,	 but	 the	 light	 has	 not
reached	yet.	It	will	reach	sometime.	There	are	few	stars	whose	light	will	never
reach	 earth,	 because	 the	 earth	 was	 created	 at	 one	 point,	 the	 light	 started
travelling,	and	at	one	point	the	earth	will	disappear,	will	die,	and	the	light	would
not	have	reached	yet.
This	universe	is	vast!	And	the	most	amazing	fact	that	has	been	discovered	is	that
it	 is	 expanding	with	 the	 same	 speed	 as	 light.	 Per	 second	 it	 is	 running	 farther
away	from	it	centre.
The	same	is	true	for	the	inner	experience	of	meditation,	for	the	inner	universe:	it
is	an	expanding	universe,	it	 is	not	an	static	entity.	Once	you	become	silent	you
are	 amazed.	You	 cannot	 believe	 that	 there	 can	 be	more	 to	 it,	 but	 each	 second
there	 is	more	and	each	second	you	 think	 'Now	 this	 is	 the	end,	 there	cannot	be
more	 to	 it,'	 and	 each	 second	 again,	 you	 are	 proved	wrong:	 there	 is	more	 and
there	is	still	more,	and	there	is	no	end.	It	goes	on	expanding.
Vardhan	means	 expanding.	 It	 is	 like	 you	 throw	 a	 stone	 in	 a	 silent	 lake.	 Just	 a
small	 ripple	 arises,	 a	 small	 circle	 and	 then	 it	 goes	 on	 spreading	 towards	 the
source,	it	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger.	Of	course
the	river	has	shores,	the	lake	has	shores,	even	the	ocean	has	shores,	so	one	day	it
will	come	to	the	shores,	but	the	inner	world	has	no	shores,	and	the	outer	world
also	 has	 no	 shores..	 There	 is	 no	 boundary-line	 either	 on	 the	 outside	 or	 on	 the
inside;	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 your	 experience	 stopping	 at	 a	 certain
point.	It	will	go	on	deepening,	becoming	more	and	more	profound,	vaster.
The	word	that	we	use	in	India	for	god	is	'brahma',	and	the	word	'brahma'	means
the	expanding	one.
The	 discovery	 of	 physics	 is	 very	 recent;	 just	 in	 this	 century,	 just	 fifty	 years
before	it	was	discovered	by	Albert	Einstein	that	the	universe	is	expanding.	But	in
the	East	we	have	called	god	brahma,	the	expanding	one	for	at	least	ten	thousand
years.
And	you	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	the	word	in	Sanskrit	for	god	is	'brahma'
and	for	the	universe	is
'brahmand',	 the	 same	 word.	 Brahma	means	 the	 inner	 universe	 which	 goes	 on
expanding	and	brahmand	means	the	outer	universe	which	goes	on	expanding.
There	is	a	possibility	that	what	Albert	Einstein	has	discovered	is	not	a	discovery
but	a	REdiscovery.
Sources	are	lost,	but	the	very	word	'brahma'	is	an	enough	proof	that	the	people
who	coined	the	word
'brahma'	must	have	known	the	expanding	quality	of	the	universe	--	and	they	have
called	 the	 same	 word	 for	 both,	 just	 with	 a	 little	 difference:	 for	 the	 outer
'brahmand',	for	the	inner	'brahma'.	But	they	are	made	from	the	both,	both	words
from	the	same	root.
Remember,	initiation	into	sannyas	is	initiation	into	an	expanding	inner	universe.
You	are	going	on	a	journey	which	will	never	end	--	and	that's	the	beauty	of	it,	the
ecstasy	of	it,	the	adventure	of	it.
Swami	Dhyan	Kavyam.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Kavyam	means	the	poetry.
Meditation	 is	 not	 a	 prose	 experience,	 it	 is	 a	 poetic	 experience.	 It	 is	 not
mathematics,	it	is	music,	pure	music.	It	is	not	logic,	it	is	love.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
All	this	is	covered	by	the	word	'poetry'.	It	is	an	aesthetic	experience	of	beauty,	of
love,	 of	 splendour.	 It	 is	 moving	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 world	 than	 the	 ordinary
world	of	the	marketplace	where	calculation	is	significant,	arithmetic	is	dominant,
where	logic	is	 the	only	god.	Anything	illogical	 is	rejected,	anything	illogical	 is
thought	to	be	insane.
But	 in	 the	 world	 of	 poetry	 logic	 does	 not	 matter;	 what	 matters	 is	 love,	 what
matters	is	transcendence	of	calculation,	cunningness,	cleverness.	What	matters	is
innocence,	taking	a	jump,	a	plunge,	uncalculatedly	into	the	unknowable.	It	is	not
for	the	businesslike	people,	it	is	not	for	the	logicians.	It	is	only	for	the	lovers.
It	is	only	for	the	mad	ones!
Sannyas	is	a	jump	into	a	certain	different	dimension	which	is	not	taught	in	any
school,	 college,	 university,	 in	 fact	 which	 is	 prevented	 from	 growing	 by
everybody	--	the	parents,	the	society,	the	church,	the	state.	Everybody	is	against
the	 heart,	 everybody	 is	 for	 the	 head,	 because	 head	 is	 useful	 and	 the	 heart	 is
useless.	 The	 heart	 is	 as	 useless	 as	 the	 stars,	 use,	 as	 useless	 as	 the	 flowers,	 as
useless	 as	music.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 commodity.	 You	 cannot	 become	 a	 president	 of	 a
country	or	a	prime	minister	by	being	poetic,	by	being	loving.	You	will	be	a	loser.
You	will	not	be	able	to	become	the	richest	man	in	the	world.	You	may	succeed	in
becoming	a	madman,	but	you	cannot	succeed	 in	becoming	powerful.	You	may
succeed	in	being	blissful	but	you	will	not	succeed	in	any	ego	trip.	And	the	whole
world	lives	for	 the	ego	trip.	Our	whole	education	is	nothing	but	a	nourishment
for	the	ego.
Sannyas	is	an	effort	to	undo	what	the	society	has	done	to	you.	It	is	putting	aside
all	the	values	that	have	been	forced	upon	you	and	giving	a	new	valuation,	a	re-
evaluation	of	all	the	values.	It	is	putting	things	in	a	totally	different	order	where
love	is	more	significant	than	money,	where	dance	is	more	significant	than	power,
where	to	be	nothing,	just	a	zero,	a	nobody,	is	more	significant	than	to	be	a	prime
minister	 or	 a	 president,	 where	 to	 be	 blissful	 is	 more	 significant	 than	 to	 be
Alexander	the	Great.
All	this	is	implied	in	the	word	'poetry'.	To	me	it	is	a	very	vast	word.	It	does	not
end	only	by	the	so-called	poetry.	That	is	included	in	it	but	it	is	far	more	than	that.
It	 is	 a	poetic	way	of	 living,	of	being,	of	 existing,	of	 relating	 --	 and	 it	happens
through	meditation.	 If	you	become	silent,	 aware,	poetry	 starts	 flowing	 through
you.	You	become	a	vehicle	of	unknown	forces,	of	mysterious	experiences.
Swami	Dhyan	Vikas.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Vikas	means	evolution.
Nature	 has	 done	 its	 work.	 It	 has	 created	 the	 human	 being.	 And	 since	 it	 has
created	the	human	being	all	evolution	has	stopped.	For	thousands	of	years	nature
has	 not	 been	 doing	 anything	 as	 far	 as	 evolution	 is	 concerned.	Monkeys	 have
become	 man,	 but	 it	 seems	 a	 full-point	 has	 come,	 and	 certainly	 man	 is	 not
contented	by	just	being	man;	man	is	not	fulfilled.
So	 this	 full-stop	 cannot	 be	 accepted.	Nature	has	done	 all	 that	 it	 can	do.	 It	 has
been	up	 to	 now	an	unconscious	 process	 of	 evolution.	Now	a	 different	 kind	of
evolution	 is	 needed	 that	 will	 be	 a	 conscious	 evolution.	 Now	 man	 has	 to	 do
something	to	go	beyond	man,	to	surpass	man.	We	cannot	wait	and	rely	on	nature
any	more.	That's	where	meditation	comes	in:	meditation	is	the	art	of	surpassing
man,	it	is	the	art	of	becoming	god.
And	unless	one	becomes	god...	And	to	know	god	is	to	become	god	--	there	is	no
difference.	Knowing	is	being!
The	 moment	 man	 experiences	 godliness	 he	 becomes	 it	 and	 suddenly	 there	 is
fulfilment,	absolute	contentment.	But	this	step	has	to	be	taken	by	man	himself.
Nature	cannot	do	it.	And	the	reason	is	obvious:	nature	is	unconscious	so	it	has
done	 the	 part	 that	 unconsciousness	 can	 do.	 And	 God	 means	 absolute
consciousness:	now	the	work	has	 to	be	done	by	us.	And	unless	man	 takes	 this
work	of	creating	himself,	of	transforming	himself,	he	will	remain	stuck.	And	that
stuckness	is	creating	a	boredom,	a	meaninglessness,	but	the	ice	can	be	broken.
Sannyas	is	the	beginning	of	breaking	the	ice.	The	religions	have	not	been	able	to
do	it.	They	have	utterly	failed.
Christ	 attained	 it,	 Buddha	 attained	 it,	 but	 Christians	 and	 Buddhists	 have
completely	failed.
Now	sannyas	has	not	 to	be	 the	 same	mistake	again;	 it	 has	 to	become	a	global
phenomenon	 and	 millions	 of	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 peak	 of	 their
consciousness.	It	won't	do	that	one	person	becomes	enlightened.	It	has	happened
many	times	in	the	past	and	around	the	enlightened	person	a	certain	theology,	a
church	 arises	 --	 and	 that's	 where	 everything	 stops	 --	 and	 people	 start
worshipping,	imitating,	and	forget	completely	the	real	message	that	you	have	to
become	enlightened.
Now	 no	 Christian	 thinks	 that	 he	 has	 to	 become	 Christ	 --	 no,	 not	 at	 al.	 No
Buddhist	thinks	that	he	has	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
become	a	Buddha.	 In	 fact	 if	you	 tell	 the	Christian	 that	 'You	have	 to	become	a
Christ,'	 he	 will	 think	 that	 you	 are	 being	 profane,	 you	 are	 being	 sacrilegious:
'Jesus	is	the	only	begotten	son	of	god,	nobody	else	can	be	Christ	again.'	He	will
think	that	you	are	against	Christ.	In	fact	he	is	against	Christ.
So	 this	 has	 not	 to	 happen	 with	 the	 sannyasins.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 church,	 it	 is	 not	 a
dogma.	It	is	a	revolution.	And	I	am	not	giving	you	any	principles	to	live	by;	just
an	insight	so	that	you	can	be	conscious.	And	out	of	your	consciousness	you	have
to	live	--	that	has	to	be	decisive.
You	are	not	to	be	responsible	to	me,	you	are	not	answerable	to	me	or	to	anybody
else.	 You	 are	 just	 responsible	 to	 your	 own	 consciousness,	 to	 your	 own	 very
being.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002175
ShortTitle:	NEVER17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Ma	Anand	Satyo.	Anand	means	bliss,	Satyo	means	the	ultimate	truth.
The	whole	 life	 in	 all	 its	 forms	 is	 searching	 for	bliss	 --	 the	 trees,	 the	birds,	 the
animals.	It	is	not	only	man	who	is	longing	for	bliss,	it	is	the	longing	of	life	itself.
Life	becomes	fulfilled	only	when	the	flower	of	bliss	opens;	hence	in	the	East	we
have	 called	 it	 the	 one-thousand	 petalled	 lotus.	 In	 the	 lake	 of	 life	 the	 lotus	 of
bliss.	 It	 is	 everybody's	 birthright	 because	 it	 is	 everybody's	 potential.	 Hence
nobody	has	more	of	it	or	less	of	it.	The	potential	is	equal.	In	that	sense	existence
is	very	communistic.
But	very	few	people	attain	to	their	ultimate	potential,	very	few	people	reach	to
those	 heights.	 That's	why	 there	 is	 so	much	 difference.	You	will	 see	miserable
people,	almost	living	in	hell,	and	you	will	also	find	people	like	Buddha,	Christ,
Krishna,	 almost	 living	 with	 the	 same	 people	 who	 are	 living	 in	 hell,	 they	 are
living	in	heaven.	hell	and	heaven	are	not	geographical.
If	 your	 potential	 remains	 potential	 you	 are	 in	 hell;	 if	 your	 potential	 becomes
actual	you	are	in	heaven.
Or	better	will	be	to	say,	you	are	heaven,	you	are	paradise.
How	long	will	you	be	here?	How	long	you	will	be	staying?
(I	don't	know)
Let	it	be	forever!	Less	than	that	is	miserly.	Good.
Ma	Anand	Sudhir.	Anand	means	bliss,	Sudhir	means	patience.
The	bliss	is	possible	only	to	those	who	are	patient	enough	to	wait	for	the	seed	to
disappear	in	the	soil	for	the	sprouts	to	come,	for	the	bush	to	grow,	for	the	buds	to
appear,	and	for	the	season,	the	right	climate	when	buds	will	open	and	the	hidden
perfume	will	be	released.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Life	is	not	a	seasonal	flower,	remember.	So	those	who	are	in	a	hurry	they	miss	it.
Those	who	are	patient,	absolutely	patient,	they	cannot	miss	it.	The	more	you	are
in	a	hurry,	the	less	is	the	possibility	of	your	ever	reaching	to	the	goal.	If	you	are
not	in	a	hurry	at	all,	if	you	are	ready	to	wait	for	infinity,	then	it	can	happen	even
right	now.	This	paradox	has	to	be	understood.
Patience	is	the	door,	impatience	is	a	barrier.
How	long	you	will	be	here?
(Two	weeks)
That	 is	what	 I	have	been	 telling	 to	you.	 It	 is	 too	much	hurry.	Then	come	back
again	for	a	longer	period.
Next	time	be	patient.	Good.
Swami	anand	Dhyanam.	Anand	means	bliss,	Dhyanam	means	meditation.
Bliss	is	possible	to	everyone	but	a	basic	requirement	has	to	be	fulfilled	and	that
requirement	is	meditation.	Meditation	means	awareness,	watchfulness,	alertness.
One	 should	 not	 live	 life	 as	 if	 one	 is	 asleep;	 one	 should	 live	 life	 a	 little	more
awake.	 Just	 a	 little	 effort	 and	 slowly	 slowly,	 chunk	 by	 chunk,	 the	 sleepiness
disappears.	 And	 as	 the	 sleepiness	 disappears	 you	 are	 surprised:	 life	 becomes
more	 and	more	 a	 benediction,	 a	 blessing;	 a	 bliss,	more	 light,	more	 love,	more
celebration.	But	without	fulfilling	 the	basic	condition	nobody	has	ever	attained
bliss.
Everybody	tries	to	attain	it,	but	very	few	people	try	to	fulfil	the	basic	condition;
hence	the	immense	failure	in	the	world	and	tremendous	misery	everywhere.
People	are	 trying	 to	 reach	 to	higher	planes	without	a	 ladder.	 It	 is	not	possible.
You	can	 jump	and	 for	 a	moment	you	can	 think	 that	you	are	 reaching	but	next
moment	 you	will	 fall	 down	 flat	 on	 the	 ground	 and	meanwhile	 you	may	 have
broken	few	bones	too.
And	as	 time	passes	people	stop	even	 jumping;	 seeing	 that	every	 time	 they	 fall
back	and	they	fall	back	in	a	far	more	miserable	condition	than	before,	they	stop
they	drop	the	whole	project.	Their	frustration	is	such,	their	hopelessness	is	such,
that	they	start	thinking	there	is	no	bliss	possible,	no	meaning,	no	significance.
That's	what	 Jean-Paul	Sartre	 says	 'Life	has	no	meaning,	no	 significance.'	Now
this	 is	 the	 tone	of	 the	whole	modern	philosophy.	 It	 is	 not	 few	people	who	 are
saying	 it.	 Few	 people	 are	 only	 mouthpieces.	 This	 is	 the	 whole	 century's
experience.	And	not	only	this	century	is	involved.	This	century	contains	all	the
past,	all	the	centuries	that	have	preceded	before.
It	 is	 a	very	critical	moment	 in	 the	history	of	 life.	Either	we	will	 settle	 for	 this
hopelessness	--	then	only	suicide	is	the	way	--	or	we	will	try	to	find	out	another
way	of	reaching	to	higher	planes.	Not	just	by	jumping	but	by	creating	the	ladder.
I	call	that	ladder	meditation.
Ma	Anand	Tira.	anand	means	bliss.	*Tira	means	an	arrow.
The	state	of	bliss	is	attained	by	only	those	who	move	straight	like	an	arrow,	who
don't	go	zigzag.
Jesus	says	'The	bridge	to	the	kingdom	of	god,	the	way	to	the	kingdom	of	god	is
very	 narrow	 but	 straight.'	 Another	 great	 mystic	 of	 the	 same	 calibre	 as	 Jesus,
Kabir,	says	that	'The	path	is	straight	and	so	narrow	that	it	cannot	contain	two;	it
can	only	contain	one.'	so	if	I	and	thou	are	there	you	cannot	pass	through	it;	you
have	to	drop	the	duality.
One	has	to	become	single-minded,	totally	committed,	utterly	involved,	then	life
has	intensity	like	an	arrow,	arrows	shooting	from	a	bow.	it	flies,	goes	direct,	hits
the	target.
Very	 few	 people	 live	 a	 life	 of	 intensity,	 totality,	 commitment.	 They	 are	 just
accidental.	They	go	on	moving	anywhere	for	no	reason	in	particular,	victims	of
chance.	Their	life	is	only	coincidental,	victims	of	the	winds,	of	the	waves	--	they
are	just	driftwood.
A	sannyasin	has	not	 to	be	driftwood.	he	has	 to	be	an	arrow.	And	 the	beauty	 is
that	you	can	make	an	arrow	out	of	driftwood.
Ma	Anand	Amit.	anand	means	bliss,	Amit	means	unique.
The	experience	of	bliss	is	always	unique,	incomparable.	You	have	never	known
anything	like	it	before	and	you	will	never	know	anything	like	it	again,	because
bliss	 happens	 once	 and	 then	 remains	 forever;	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of
repetition.	It	becomes	your	constant	inner	climate,	it	is	always	there.	In	fact	right
now	it	is	there,	just	you	are	not	aware.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	difference	between	a	Buddha	and	a	sleepy	person	is	not	much	--	just	a	little
difference,	 a	 small	 curtain	 of	 sleepiness	 shrouds	 the	 vision	 of	 the	 ordinary
person.	Buddha	simply	throws	that	small	shroud,	that	curtain,	comes	out	of	that
sleep,	 start	 seeing	 things	 as	 they	 are	without	 any	 preconceptions,	without	 any
expectations,	desires,	and	immediately	there	is	bliss.
Remember	the	word	'immediately';	not	even	a	single	moment	one	has	to	wait	if
one	is	clear.	If	one	is	not	clear	one	may	have	to	wait	for	thousands	of	lives.	We
have	already	waited!
And	it	is	not	going	to	happen	on	its	own.	If	it	was	going	to	happen	on	its	own	it
would	have	happened	already	long	before.	You	have	to	do	something,	something
is	needed	from	your	side.
A	chinese	saying	 is	 'You	take	one	step	 towards	god	and	he	 takes	one	 thousand
steps	towards	you,'	but	you	have	to	initiate	the	process.
Because	 of	 this	 fact	 the	 Sufi	mystics	 have	 called	 god	 the	 beloved,	 saki.	 They
have	called	god	the	woman,	not	the	man,	for	this	reason	because	god	never	takes
initiative;	hence	he	is	just	like	a	woman.	The	woman	never	comes	to	you	and	tell
you	 'I	 love	you';	she	waits.	You	have	to	take	the	initiative,	 the	man	has	to	take
the	 initiative.	 He	 has	 to	 run	 after	 the	woman	 and	write	 love	 letters	 and	 bring
roses	and	she	will	simply	wait.	In	fact	when	you	propose	she	will	say	 'No,	no.'
You	have	to	understand	'Yes,	yes.'	--	That	is	another	matter	--	but	she	will	say	no.
And	you	have	to	show	intelligence	to	understand	that	the	no	is	not	no.
The	way	it	is	said	has	to	be	figured	out.
If	you	simply	are	a	scholar	and	you	think	she	is	saying	no	 'So	let	us	go	home,'
then	your	life	is	finished!
You	have	to	be	persistent.	Sooner	or	later	she	will	say	'This	is	the	last	time	I	am
saying	no	to	you.'	then	you	can	be	happy,	then	you	can	rejoice,	but	you	have	to
see	the	gesture	behind	the	no.	The	gesture	is	always	yes.
A	man	was	talking	to	one	of	his	friends.	he	was	very	sad,	in	deep	despair.	The
friend	'What	is	the	matter	with	you?'	asked	him.	He	said	'The	woman	I	love	has
said	what	 I	 never	wanted	 to	 hear.'	 The	man,	 the	 friend	 consoled	 him.	He	 said
'You	are	a	fool.	The	woman	always	says	no	and	you	have	to	understand	that	no
does	not	mean	no.'	And	the	man	said	'I	know	it	--	no	does	not	mean	no	--	but	she
didn't	say	no.	she	said	'Phew!'
Now	what	to	understand?'
But	god	never	says	that,	that	'Phew!'	That	much	I	can	say	to	you.	Up	to	now	he
has	never	said	--	unless	you	are	very	exceptional	and	he	says	'Phew!'	He	may	say
no	but	you	go	on	understanding	yes,	Sufis	are	right:	you	take	one	step,	the	first
step,	the	initiative	has	to	be	from	your	side,	and	then	god	comes	running.
But	if	you	are	not	taking	that	first	step	then	nothing	happens	in	life.	It	remains
empty	canvas	which	could	have	been	a	beautiful	painting.
How	long	you	will	be	here?
(I	don't	know)
THAT'S	good!	Good.
Swami	anand	Divyam.	Anand	means	bliss,	Divyam	means	divine.
The	most	divine	phenomenon	in	the	world	is	the	experience	of	bliss.	Everything
else	falls	short,	everything	is	a	little	lower	than	it.	In	fact	we	desire	other	things
only	 as	 means	 towards	 bliss.	 Even	 wrong	 things	 are	 desired	 but	 the	 goal	 is
always	 right.	People	desire	money	 thinking	 that	 it	will	bring	bliss	 in	 their	 life;
they	desire	power,	they	want	to	conquer	the	whole	world,	dreaming	that	it	will
bring	bliss.	it	is	another	matter	that	what	they	are	doing	has	no	connection	with
bliss	and	it	is	not	going	to	happen,	but	their	end	was	always	right.	As	far	as	the
end	is	concerned	the	saints	and	the	sinners	are	similar.
Alexanders	and	Buddhas	are	similar	but	the	means	are	different.	Buddhas	used
the	 right	 means	 and	 Alexanders	 used	 the	 wrong	 means,	 and	 the	 whole	 thing
depends	on	the	means.
One	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 words	 Buddha	 continuously	 used	 was	 the	 word
'right'.	Whenever	he	will	say	anything	he	will	always	use	that	word	'right'.	If	he
will,	he	will	say	awareness	he	will	not	simply	say	awareness;	he	will	say	right-
awareness,	 if	 he	 will	 say	 compassion	 he	 will	 say	 right-compassion,	 because
everything	can	go	wrong,	so	he	has	to	be	reminded	about	the	right,	continuously
he	has	to	be	hammered.	It	is	only	a	question	of	right	means,	the	end	is	always	the
same,	so	one	can	forget	about	the	end.	The	end	is	bliss.
Bliss	is	divine,	another	name	for	god,	a	better	name	than	god,	because	god	can
be	 denied	 by	 the	 communists,	 by	 the	 atheists,	 by	 the	 materialists,	 by	 the
scientists,	but	bliss	cannot	be	denied	by	anybody.
Nobody	can	deny	it.	It	is	a,	a	far	greater	god	and	its	vastness	is	such	that	it	can
be	comprehensive	of	all	kinds	of	people.	It	is	not	limited	to	a	particular	kind	or
to	a	particular	category	but	the	means	have	to	be	very	rightly	understood.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	first	thing	that	Buddha	calls	is	right-remembrance;	that	is	his	word	for	right-
meditation.	Meditation	 can	be	wrong,	 one	 can	use	 a	 process	 of	 auto-hypnosis,
thinking	 that	 it	 is	Meditation.	That	 is	what	 transcendental	meditation	 is:	 just	 a
process	of	auto-hypnosis.	Repeating	a	certain	mantra	continuously	you	become
hypnotised.	 It	 functions	 like	alcohol,	opium,	and	other	drugs.	Of	course	 if	one
has	to	choose	between	drugs,	TM	is	a	better	drug	than	any	other	drug,	but	why
choose	between	drugs.	It	is	not	meditation	at	all.
Meditation	 means	 not	 a	 repetitive	 mantra	 but	 a	 constant	 awareness,	 a
remembrance	'Who	am	I?'	'I	am	not	the	body	--	if	you	can	remember	this,	that	is
meditation.	If	you	can	remember	 'I	am	not	 the	mind,'	 that	 is	meditation.	If	you
can	 remember	 'I	 am	 not	 the	 feeling	 and	 the	 moods.'	 that	 is	 meditation.	 This
three-dimensional	meditation	 is	 the	 right	way	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 ultimate	 goal	 of
bliss.	And	the	moment	you	have	found	bliss	you	have	found	the	kingdom	of	god.
Anand	means	bliss.	Shunya	means	zeroness,	to	be	absolutely	spacious.
Bliss	is	vast.	It	needs	your	whole	inner	being	to	be	absolutely	empty,	only	then	it
can	enter.	You	have	to	remove	the	whole	furniture	--	and	there	is	much	furniture
inside,	all	rotten;	it	is	sheer	junk	but	people	go	on	accumulating	it.	People	are	so
greedy,	they	never	throw	anything	away,	hoping	that	sometimes	maybe	it	can	be
used	 again,	 that	 in	 a	 certain	 situation	 it	 may	 be	 needed,	 so	 they	 go	 on
accumulating.
They	use	their	inner	being	like	a	basement	where	they	go	on	throwing	all	kinds
of	rubbish.	It	becomes	piled	up.	There	is	so	much	there	that	even	if	you	want	to
enter	inside	you	will	not	find	space	enough	to	move,	what	to	say	about	bliss?
Bliss	needs	a	totally	empty	temple	of	your	being.	Less	than	that	won't	do.	When
your	inner	world	is	utterly	empty	--	empty	of	thoughts,	empty	of	dreams,	empty
of	 knowledge,	 empty	 of	 scriptures,	 empty	 of	 all	 that	 you	 have	 learned	 before,
just	empty	--	then	it	has	a	purity,	a	deep	innocence,	a	virginity.	It	is	just	like	the
sky,	vast	and	 infinite,	unlimited,	unbounded.	Only	 then	 in	 that	unboundedness,
unlimitedness,	 bliss	 descends.	 It	 comes	 from	 the	 above.	We	need	 to	 be	 on	 the
receptive	 end;	we	have	 to	be	 just	 open	 to	 the	beyond.	As	you	 are	open	 to	 the
beyond,	the	beyond	starts	falling	like	flowers,	showering	like	flowers,	and	then	it
goes	on	showering.	It	begins,	but	it	never	ends.
The	 process	 of	 emptying	 yourself	 is	 meditation.	 It	 is	 simply	 a	 process	 of
throwing	things	away	--	the	unnecessary,	the	non-essential	--	so	that	the	essential
can	have	space.	When	you	make	a	garden	--	first	you	have	to	uproot	the	weeds,
remove	the	rocks	and	the	stones	from	the	soil,	you	have	to	prepare	--	and	that's
what	is	meant	by	zero;	preparation,	a	readiness,	receptivity.
The	 zero	 represents	 the	 inner	 womb,	 and	 when	 the	 inner	 womb	 is	 ready,	 the
unknown	 is	born	 into	you,	bliss	 is	born	 into	you.	 It	 comes	 inevitably,	 it	 is	 the
ultimate	law.
Buddha	 says	 "Es	 dhammo	 sanantano,"	 --	 this	 is	 the	 law	 and	 there	 are	 no
exceptions	to	the	law.
Just	be	a	zero	and	you	will	be	full,	overfull	with	bliss.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002185
ShortTitle:	NEVER18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Ma	Dhyan	Leslie.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Leslie	means	calm	spirit.
Man	 has	 tried	 many	 ways	 to	 be	 calm,	 quiet,	 but	 all	 other	 efforts	 except
meditation	have	 failed,	because	all	other	efforts	 are	basically	of	cultivation,	of
practice.	One	can	cultivate	 a	 certain	 calmness,	 one	can	make	 it	 a	discipline	of
life,	but	it	will	be	only	superficial.	Behind	the	thin	layer	of	calmness	there	will
always	be	turmoil	and	any	small	accident,	any	small	scratch	on	the	surface	and
you	will	erupt	like	a	volcano.
In	 fact	 the	people	who	murder,	 the	people	who	commit	 suicide	 are	 the	people
who	are	normally	very	calm.	The	people	who	are	normally	easily	angered	never
commit	murder,	never	commit	suicide,	for	the	simple	reason	because	they	never
accumulate	 so	 much	 anger.	 They	 go	 on	 throwing	 their	 anger	 every	 day,	 they
flush	it	out	of	their	system.	But	the	people	who	try	to	be	calm,	repress,	and	the
repressed	remains	alive,	not	only	alive,	in	it	becomes	more	and	more	powerful	as
time	passes	by,	because	you	are	repressing	every	day.	it	goes	on	piling	up	within
and	there	is	a	limit	to	everything.	One	day	the	balloon	is	bound	to	burst.
But	meditation	works	 in	a	 totally	different	way:	 it	 is	not	cultivation,	 it	 is	not	a
discipline	from	the	outside,	it	has	nothing	to	do	directly	with	calmness,	silence,
equilibrium.	On	the	contrary,	meditation	works	in	a	totally	different	dimension,
the	dimension	of	awareness.	One	simply	becomes	more	and	more	aware	of	one's
acts,	thoughts,	feelings.	As	this	awareness	deepens,	as	a	by-product	calmness	of
spirit	comes	on	its	own	accord.	Then	it	comes	from	your	innermost	core.
The	cultivated	calmness	remains	on	the	circumference,	the	calmness	that	comes
as	a	consequence	of	meditation	grows	from	the	centre	and	spreads	towards	the
circumference;	 hence	 there	 is	 never	 any	 hypocrisy,	 never	 any	 split,	 never	 a
schizophrenic	 state.	 You	 are	 not	 divided	 in	 two:	 the	 surface	 is	 one	 and	 your
reality	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 it.	 Humanity	 has	 suffered	 too	 much	 from	 that
cultivated	calmness.
It	is	time	that	we	should	get	rid	of	all	the	methods	of	cultivation	and	we	should
go	for	a	direct	approach,	we	should	go	to	the	very	root	of	the	matter	and	the	root
is	 in	 the	 centre,	 not	 on	 the	 circumference.	 on	 the	 circumference	 only	 flowers
show.	And	if	you	want	real	flowers	then	you	have	to	nourish	the	roots,	you	have
to	water	 the	 roots,	you	have	 to	 take	care	of	 the	 roots	 --	 that's	what	meditation
does	--	and	then	roses	come	on	the	surface.
If	 you	 don't	work	 on	 the	 roots,	 in	 the	 centre,	 if	 you	 don't	 get	 centred	 through
meditation	and	grounded,	then	at	the	most	that	you	can	do	is,	you	can	buy	plastic
flowers	 and	 arrange	 them	 around	 your	 circumference.	 But	 that	 is	missing	 the
whole	opportunity	of	life.
Life	 is	 an	 opportunity	 to	 grow	 your	 centre,	 your	 potential,	 your	 very	 being,
because	only	your	being	in	its	total	flowering	is	god.	There	is	no	other	god.
How	long	you	will	be	here?
(Probably	about	two	months	this	time)
Two?
(About	two	months	I	think	this	time)
You	will	be	here?
Yes
And	then	come	back	again	for	a	longer	period.	I	will	need	you	here.	Good.
Swami	Dhyan	simon.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Simon	means	gracious	being.
Jesus	says	again	and	again	'If	you	have	ears	then	hear,	if	you	have	eyes	then	see.'
Certainly	he	was	not	talking	to	deaf	and	to	the	blinds;	he	was	talking	to	ordinary
people	just	like	you	and	everybody	else.	They	had	ears	and	they	had	eyes.	Then
what	he	means	by	having	ears	and	by	having	eyes?	He	means	a	totally	different
way	of	seeing	and	hearing.
One	can	hear	in	three	ways.	Either	in	a	very	indifferent	attitude,	as	if	one	cannot
care	 less	 --	 that	 is	 ungracious	hearing,	 that	 is	 not	 the	way	 to	 commune	with	 a
Jesus	or	a	Buddha,	that	is	not	the	way	to	be	in	the	presence	of	a	master.	That	is
not	the	way	of	a	disciple.
The	 second	 way	 of	 hearing	 is	 antagonistic	 hearing.	 You	 are	 already	 full	 of
prejudices,	 you	have	 already	 concluded	 that	what	 is	 right	 and	what	 is	 not,	 not
knowing	 at	 all	 what	 is	 right	 and	 what	 is	 wrong	 you	 have	 accepted	 certain
assumptions	given	by	others,	by	 the	 society	which	has	brought	you	up,	by	 the
education,	by	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
your	parents,	by	the	church,	certain	a	priori	beliefs.	Clinging	to	those	beliefs	one
can	hear	but	that	is	again	ungracious	hearing,	because	you	are	not	hearing,	you
are	 fighting.|	 It	 is	 better	 than	 the	 first	 --	 indifferent	 hearing	 --	 because	 it	 is
impossible	to	change	any	person	who	is	indifferent.
It	is	possible	to	change	the	second	person;	even	if	though	he	is	antagonistic,	he	is
getting	a	certain	negative	kind	of	relationship.	He	is	becoming	an	enemy	and	an
enemy	can	be	made	a	friend.
The	 indifferent	 is	 unapproachable.	 he	 is	 not	 even	 an	 enemy	 --	 how	 can	 you
expect	him	to	be	a	friend?
He	is	not	even	ready	to	hate	you	--	how	can	he	love	you?	That	is	the	impossible
case.
But	 the	 second	 can	 be	 converted,	 but	 it	 will	 take	 unnecessarily	 long	 time,
because	 the	 fight	will	 destroy	 the	 energy.	And	 even	 if	 sometimes	he	 comes	 to
acceptance	 it	 will	 be	 very	 reluctantly	 and	 he	 will	 always	 go	 on	 watching	 for
some	 flaw	 so	 that	 he	 can	 again	 go	 back	 to	 his	 old	 pattern.	He	will	 be	 always
wavering.	He	will	be	not	really	surrendered.	Even	if	he	comes	to	surrender	his
surrender	will	be	with	strings	attached	to	it.
He	can	withdraw	any	moment.
A	real	master	never	 takes	any	note	of	 the	first.	he	simply	drops	the	idea	of	 the
first	 category.	 he	 takes	 a	 little	bit	 notice	of	 the	 second	category	but	only	 for	 a
short	time,	just	to	see	whether	it	is	possible	or	the	case	is	too	time-absorbing,	too
much	unnecessary	hassle	--	then	he	drops	the	second	also.
He	accepts	only	 the	 third	 --	 the	gracious	person	 --	who	can	hear,	 simply	hear,
without	any	prejudice	for	or	against.	Remember,	gracious-hearing	does	not	mean
what	 Christians	 and	 Hindus	 and	 Mohammedans	 have	 been	 telling	 to	 people.
They	are	telling	wrong	things;	they	are	telling	gracious-hearing	means	hearing	as
a	believer.	That	is	not	gracious.
Whether	you	believe	or	disbelieve	you	have	already	taken	a	standpoint,	you	are
already	prejudiced,	you	have	already	got	a	certain	mind	and	with	the	mind	there
is	no	grace.
Gracious	 hearing	 is	 with	 meditation,	 with	 no-mind.	 You	 don't	 have	 any
prejudice,	 for	 or	 against.	 You	 are	 non-judgemental.	 You	 are	 simply	 available,
open,	vulnerable.	You	have	not	decided	anything;	you	are	just	an	enquirer.	Then
the	hearing	has	tremendous	grace.
And	 truth	 has	 one	 intrinsic	 quality:	 if	 you	 hear	 it	 with	 unprejudiced
consciousness	 it	 immediately	 reaches	 to	 your	 heart,	 it	 immediately	 triggers	 a
process	of	transformation	in	you.	An	immediate	contact	with	the	master	becomes
possible	if	one	can	hear	without	any	belief,	disbelief,	without	any	idea	of	what
truth	is,	if	one	can	hear	just	like	a	child,	from	a	state	of	not-knowing.	that	state	is
meditation	and	it	is	only	through	meditation	that	the	master	becomes	available,
the	truth	becomes	available,	and	ultimately,	everything	that	is	of	value	happens
through	it.
I	say	to	you	that	if	you	hear	silently	without	any	prejudice	you	will	immediately
know	what	is	true.
Another	thing	has	to	be	also	added:	you	will	also	immediately	know	without	any
thought	 process	what	 is	 not	 true.	Truth	 is	 self-evident,	 it	 needs	 no	 proof.	And
because	truth	is	self-evident,	untruth	is	also	self-evident.
All	that	is	needed	on	your	part	is	to	be	totally	available	and	immediately	you	will
know	what	 is	 truth	 and	what	 is	 not.	And	 to	know	what	 is	 truth	 liberates!	 It	 is
deliverance.	 It	 brings	 to	 your	 life	 the	 ultimate	 joy,	 the	 ultimate	 flowering,	 the
ultimate	fragrance	of	existence.
Ma	 Dhyan	 Sylvie.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation.	 Sylvie	 comes	 from	 Sylvanus.
Sylvanus	 is	 a	 mythological	 god	 of	 the	 woods	 an	 the	 forest.	 It	 symbolises
profound	solitude.	A	virgin	solitude	which	prevails	in	a	forest	where	nobody	has
gone.	It	is	a	beautiful	name.
Meditation	takes	you	to	your	inner	woods,	inner	forest,	where	nobody	has	ever
gone.	Only	you	can	go	and	you	have	not	gone	yet.	It	is	not	possible	for	anybody
else	to	go	to	your	innermost	core;	it	 is	absolutely	private,	categorically	private.
That	is	the	only	place	which	is	private,	everything	else	can	be	shared.
Sooner	or	later	there	will	be	ways	to	reach	people's	minds,	mechanically.	If	it	is
possible	to	make	a	cardiogram	it	is	not	very	far	that	it	will	be	possible	to	read	the
mind	waves,	 just	 like	a	cardiogram.	You	have	 to	be	attached	 to	a	machine	and
the	 machine	 immediately	 will	 start	 screening.	 Much	 will	 be	 just	 doodling
because	inside	much	is	doodling	but	once	in	a	while	something	relevant	will	turn
up.	Ninety	per	cent	will	be	rubbish,	but	mind	too	cannot	remain	for	long	private.
There	is	only	one	place	in	you	which	will	always	remain	private,	and	that	which
is	intrinsically	private	is	yours.	Everything	else	belongs	to	the	public.	Even	your
mind	belongs	to	the	public	because	it	is	created	by	your	parents,	the	priests,	the
politicians.	 Even	 your	 conscience	 belongs	 to	 the	 public	 because	 they	 have
created	it.	What	is	wrong,	what	is	not	to	be	done,	what	should	be	done,	all	 the
commandments,	the	idea	of	sin	an	virtue	--	it	is	created	by	others.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	 concern	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 discover	 your	 innermost	 solitude,	 the	 profound
silence	that	prevails	at	the	very	centre	of	your	being	--	the	centre	of	the	cyclone.
Only	then	one	knows	what	life	is	all	about.	Only	then	one	knows	the	meaning,
the	significance,	only	then	one	knows	the	beauty,	the	truth,	only	then	one	knows
all	that	is	worth	knowing.
Meditation	is	a	passage	from	the	circumference.	it	is	a	bridge.	Its	another	name
is	awareness.	Learn	to	be	aware.
As	 your	 awareness	 becomes	more	 and	more	 clear,	more	 and	more	 sharp,	 you
will	 become	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 a	 place	 where
immense	 silence	has	prevailed	 for	 eternity.	That	 is	 the	 real	 temple	of	 god.	All
other	temples	are	man's	creations	and	all	other	gods	are	creations	of	man	in	his
own	 image.	 If	 one	wants	 to	 discover	 the	 true	 god,	 then	 one	 has	 to	 go	within
oneself.
Your	own	original	face	is	the	face	of	the	true	god.
Ma	Dhyan	Elisabeth.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Elisabeth	means	consecrated	to
god,	surrendered	to	god,	totally	devoted	to	god.
One	cannot	be	surrendered	 to	god	 just	by	believing	 in	a	certain	god	--	 Jewish,
Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan.	how	can	one	be	surrendered	to	a	belief.	Deep
down,	hidden	behind	the	belief	there	is	always	doubt.	They	exist	together,	they
are	 two	sides	of	 the	 same	coin.	On	one	 side	 it	 is	belief,	on	 the	other	 side	 it	 is
doubt.	In	fact	the	belief	is	needed	only	to	repress	doubt.	if	there	is	no	doubt	there
is	no	need	for	belief	at	all.
So	 all	 believers	 are	 bogus,	 all	 believers	 are	 phony	 they	 are	 simply	 repressing
their	 doubt	 by	 making	 a	 great	 system	 of	 belief	 to	 repress	 it,	 creating	 a	 big
structure	 of	 believe,	 repeating	 the	 Bible	 every	 day	 or	 the	 Gita	 or	 the	 Koran,
chanting	mantras	of	the	Vedas	and	just	making	much	fuss,	creating	much	smoke
so	 they	can	 forget	 that	 there	 is	doubt	 inside	 them.	And	 the	worm	of	 the	doubt
goes	on	and	on	working	and	working	inside,	 it	goes	on	eating	their	very	heart.
And	they	go	on	befooling	themselves	and	others	by	superficial	beliefs.
I	don't	teach	belief	because	belief	can	never	become	a	surrender.	It	is	only	love
that	becomes	surrender.
And	love	is	not	a	question	of	belief,	because	love	is	not	of	the	mind	at	all.	Love
is	a	question	of	experience.
In	 religious	 terms	 love	 can	 be	 called	 trust.	That	 is	 the	 same	word;	 there	 is	 no
difference	between	love	and	trust.	Love	is	always	trusting,	trust	is	always	loving.
That	 is	 only	 a	 religious	 way	 of	 saying	 that	 it	 is	 love	 that	 makes	 surrender
possible.	But	how	love	will	happen	if	you	have	not	seen	god?	How	can	you	love
a	 god	 that	 you	 have	 not	 seen,	 that	 you	 have	 not	 heard,	 that	 you	 have	 not
experienced	 not	 even	 in	 your	 dreams,	 not	 even	 a	 far	 away	 echo?	 --	 it	 is
impossible.	 It	 is	 asking	 for	 something	 superhuman	 from	 poor	 human	 beings;
asking	something	so	illogical,	simply	creates	trouble	for	them.	They	are	already
in	much	trouble	and	religions	create	even	more	troubles	for	them.
That's	why	you	will	see	religious	people	much	more	in	anxiety	than	the	so-called
irreligious.	You	will	find	religious	people	much	more	sad	and	miserable	than	the
so-called	irreligious.	The	irreligious	laugh	too,	dance	too,	sing	too;	the	religious
has	no	time.	He	is	so	guilt-ridden,	so	much	worried,	because	what	he	wants	to	do
he	 cannot	 do.	 Even	 a	 man	 like	 Saint	 Augustine	 says	 in	 his	 CONFESSIONS,
'God	help	me,	because	what	I	do	is	that	which	should	not	be	done	and	what	I	do
not	 do	 is	 that	 which	 should	 be	 done,	 and	 I	 have	 tried	 my	 best,	 but	 it	 seems
impossible	for	me	--	unless	you	help	me	I	will	not	be	able	to	make	it.'
If	 this	is	the	situation	of	Augustine,	a	so-called	great	Christian	saint,	 then	what
about	 the	 poor	Christians,	 how	 they	 can	make	 it?	When	 they	 cannot	make	 it,
when	 they	 fall	 short,	 they	 feel	 guilty,	 they	 feel	 that	 they	 are	 sinners.	And	 the
whole	problem	is	absolutely	unnecessary.	it	is	fabricated	by	our	stupidity;	hence
I	wan	you	to	be-pass	all	this	nonsense.
The	simple	thing,	the	simplest	is	to	be	silent,	to	be	aware,	to	be	watchful,	forget
all	about	beliefs	and	religions	and	dogmas	and	philosophies	and	ideologies;	just
become	silent,	aware.	And	you	will	be	surprised:	in	those	moments	of	awareness
and	silence	you	start	having	glimpses	of	the	divine.	And	those	glimpses	make	it
possible	--	not	that	you	have	to	surrender,	the	surrender	happens,	just	as	you	fall
in	love.	Not	that	you	have	to	fall	in	love	with	somebody	--	it	is	not	a	question	of
doing	something.
If	you	are	ordered	 that	 'Elisabeth,	go	and	fall	 in	 love	with	 this	man,'	what	you
will	do?	You	will	be	at	a	loss.	How	one	can	fall	in	love?	One	can	pretend,	one
can	act	but	one	cannot	 fall	 in	 love	and	deep	down	one	will	know	 that	 it	 is	 all
false,	 pseudo.	And	people	have	been	 told	 to	 fall	 in	 love	with	god,	whom	 they
have	never	seen,	whom	they	don't	know	whether	he	exists	at	all.	They	have	no
idea	about	god	or	godliness.	They	are	not	even	aware	of	their	own	selves,	what
they	 can	 say	 about	 god?	 And	 these	 poor	 human	 beings	 are	 tortured	 by	 the
priests,	 continuously	 sermonised,	 'Surrender	 to	 god	 and	 surrender	 totally	 and
surrender	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
perfectly.'
This	is	not	possible;	only	through	meditation	glimpses	start	happening	and	then
you	have	 to	 fall.	Not	 that	you	have	 to	do	something,	 it	 simply	happens.	 it	 is	a
happening.	And	when	it	happens	on	its	own	accord	it	has	a	tremendous	beauty	to
it.
Swami	 Dhyan	 Earle.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation,	 Earle	 means	 a	 noble	 man,
nobleness,	nobility.
Meditation	 certainly	 brings	 great	 nobility	 but	 not	 according	 to	 the	 ideas	 of
people,	not	according	to	the	traditional	concept.	For	example,	jesus	will	not	look
very	gentlemanly,	very	noble,	for	many	reasons.	The	first	traditional	idea	about
nobility	is	that	it	has	to	be	from	birth	--	he	is	a	son	of	a	carpenter,	poor	carpenter,
and	that	too	is	not	the	whole	truth.	he	is	the	son	of	the	Holy	Ghost!	Now	who	is
this	fellow,	Holy	Ghost?
Must	have	been	some	playboy	around.	poor	Joseph	is	deceived!
Now	the	virgin	birth	cannot	make	anybody	noble.	Christians	have	tried	hard	to
prove	 that	he	 is	god's	 son	and	 the	only	begotten	 son.	They	have	been	creating
much	 fuss	 about	 it	 for	 two	 thousand	 years	 and	 they	 have	 been	 even	 trying	 to
prove	that	he	belongs	to	the	royal	family	of	David	--	that	is	all	nonsense!
This	poor	Joseph,	a	carpenter,	has	nothing	to	do	with	David.	Moreover,	he	is	not
a	legitimate	child.	So	the	first	idea	of	a	noble	man,	of	an	aristocrat,	of	an	earle	is
not	 there.	He	 does	 not	 fulfil	 the	 first	 requirement	 and	 he	 does	 not	 fulfil	 other
requirements	either,	because	his	way	of	behaving	is	outrageous.
With	a	whip	in	his	hand	he	drove	out	all	the	moneychangers	from	the	temple	--
must	have	created	chaos	there!	Now	this	is	not	a	gentlemanly	way	of	behaving.
But	 I	 can	 see	 his	 nobleness	 still!	 It	 is	 really	 a	 noble	 act	 to	 throw	 the
moneychangers	out	of	the	temple,	forcibly,	because	the	temple	was	not	meant	for
these	moneychangers;	the	temple	was	meant	for	something	totally	different,	for
something	beyond,	for	something	transcendental	--	for	god!
It	 is	 a	 noble	 act,	 but	 a	 noble	 act	 which	will	 not	 fit	 with	 the	 ordinary	 idea	 of
nobility.
Meditation	 brings	 nobility	 to	 you,	 but	 it	will	 be	 so	 new,	 unique,	 that	 it	 is	 not
going	to	fit	with	any	idea.	it	gives	tremendous	grace,	but	that	grace	will	have	its
own	 unique	 expression.	 It	 will	 not	 be	 traditional.	 Even	 you	 will	 be	 surprised,
even	you	will	be	in	a	awe	--	what	is	happening?	Even	your	own	idea	of	nobility
will	be	shattered	into	thousand	pieces,	because	when	real	nobility	happens	it	 is
always	 rebellious,	 always	 outrageous.	 It	 hit	 s	 hard	 on	 all	 that	 is	 nonsensical,
superstitious.
Real	 nobility	 is	 not	 to	 belong	 to	 the	 creed	 but	 to	 belong	 to	 the	 whole.	 Real
nobility	 is	 not	 to	 be	 part	 of	 the	mob	 psychology	 but	 to	 be	 an	 individual.	 The
word	 'individual'	 is	 beautiful.	 it	 means	 indivisible,	 to	 be	 one	 place,	 collected,
together,	integrated	--	and	this	miracle	happens	through	meditation.
Meditation	is	a	new	birth	and	I	call	a	person	noble	only	if	he	has	attained	it,	his
birth,	the	second	birth,	through	meditation.
Gautam	Buddha	loved	the	word	 'noble'	very	much,	so	much	so	that	he	used	to
call	 his	 way	 the	 way	 of	 the	 noble	 man,	 the	 way	 of	 the	 Arya.	 He	 called	 the
ultimate	truth	also	the	Aryasatya,	the	noble	truth.
His	concept	of	Arya	or	noble	is	born	out	of	meditation.	Whosoever	came	to	him
and	became	a	meditator	became	an	Arya,	a	noble	man.	He	may	have	been	born
to	 beggar	 parents,	 he	 may	 have	 been	 born	 to	 an	 emperor	 --	 it	 makes	 no
difference.	The	second	birth	 is	decisive	and	 the	second	birth	has	nothing	 to	do
with	 the	 first	birth.	The	second	birth	you	have	 to	give	 to	yourself.	The	second
birth	 is	psychological;	 the	 first	birth	 is	physiological	 --	only	your	body	 is	born
out	of	your	mother's	womb.	Your	 father	and	mother	create	your	physical	body
you	come	out	of	the	physical	womb	of	the	mother	--	that	is	first	birth.
The	second	birth	will	be	--	and	only	you	can	do	it,	nobody	else	can	do	it	on	your
behalf	 --	 the	 second	 birth	 will	 be	 when	 you	 come	 out	 of	 your	 psychological
womb,	out	of	your	mind.	And	that's	what	meditation	is:	a	state	of	no-mind.
Swami	Dhyan	Sampuro.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Sampuro	means	perfect.
Meditation	makes	one	perfect	--	not	a	perfectionist,	remember.	A	perfectionist	is
a	neurotic.
Meditation	makes	you	perfect,	but	not	a	perfectionist.	Perfection	comes	just	like
a	shadow	to	meditation:	you	need	not	bother	about	it,	you	need	not	care	about	it.
it	is	simply	there,	it	will	follow	you.
The	perfectionist	has	an	 idea	of	a	goal	 ahead	of	him	and	 the	meditator	has	no
idea	of	perfection;	perfection	follows	him	from	the	beyond	like	a	shadow.	That	is
the	difference	between	a	perfectionist	and	a	perfect	man.
Perfection	is	behind	the	perfect	man	and	ahead	of	the	perfectionist.	Because	it	is
ahead	it	drives	him	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
nuts.	 he	 is	 trying	 to	 become	 it,	 he	 is	 sacrificing	 his	 present	 for	 the	 future	 and
once	 you	 become	 accustomed	 of	 sacrificing	 your	 present	 for	 the	 future	 your
whole	life	will	be	rained;	not	only	this	but	your	future	lives	will	be	ruined.
Unless	some	enlightened	master	 really	hits	hard	on	your	head	and	breaks	your
skull	there	is	no	other	hope.	And	a	real	sledgehammer	will	be	needed!	It	cannot
be	 done	 by	 the	 goldsmith's	 hammer.	 That	 small	 hammer	 won't	 effect;	 people
have	 grown	 thick	 skulls.	 people	 are	 really	 thick	 and	 dense,	 they	 have	 grown
shock	absorbers.
The	 perfectionist	 goes	 on	 sacrificing	 every	moment	 for	 the	 future	 and	 that	 he
will	be	doing	in	the	future	too,	because	future	never	comes	--	that	which	comes
is	always	present	--	and	he	becomes	addicted	in	sacrificing	it.
Meditation	has	nothing	to	do	with	perfectionism,	but	perfection	comes	as	a	by-
product.	As	you	become	silent	it	follows	you,	wherever	you	go	it	is	there	--	and
it	 is	 not	 something	 dead,	 hanging	 around	 you.	 It	 is	 growing.	That	 is	 the	most
miraculous	thing	about	it,	because	we	always	think	of	perfection	as	the	dead	end.
What	more	there	can	be?
Logically	 it	 seems	 right	 that	 perfection	 means	 the	 full-stop.	 It	 is	 not	 so.
Existentially	perfection	is	also	a	growing	phenomenon,	from	perfection	to	more
perfection	to	more	perfection	--	there	is	no	end	to	it.
Become	 a	 meditator	 and	 see	 the	 miracle	 happening.	 Many	 miracles	 happen
through	meditation.	 It	 is	 the	magic	 key.	One	 of	 the	 greatest	miracles	 is	 that	 it
brings	perfection	for	which	you	were	not	even	 thinking,	 for	which	you	had	no
desire.	you	were	not	asking,	you	were	not	searching;	it	simply	comes	as	a	reward
from	the	whole.
Swami	Dhyan	Asango.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Asango	means	one	who	knows
that	 one	 is	 alone	 and	 not	 only	 knows	 that	 one	 is	 alone,	 but	 is	 tremendously
happy,	tremendously	blissful	about	one's	aloneness.
It	 is	 only	 through	 meditation	 that	 this	 alchemical	 change	 happens:	 loneliness
becomes	 aloneness,	 solitariness	 becomes	 solitude.	 Loneliness	 is	 ugly,	 it	 is
misery,	 it	 is	 a	 hankering	 for	 the	 other.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 wound	 which	 needs	 to	 be
healed.
Aloneness	 is	 a	 tremendous	 joy.	One	 is	overflowing	with	his,	 one's	 own	being,
one	 needs	 nobody,	 one	 is	 enough	 unto	 oneself.	 That	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 one
escapes	to	the	mountains	--	why	one	should	escape	to	the	mountains?	Wherever
one	 is,	 one	 is	 blissful.	 And	 bliss	 has	 an	 intrinsic	 quality,	 that	 is	 overflows,	 it
reaches	to	others.	It	is	like	fragrance	of	the	flowers:	it	rises	in	the	winds	towards
the	 stars,	 it	 seeks	and	searches	 the	others,	whosoever	 is	 available.	The	blissful
person	shares	his	bliss	with	the	other.
The	other	may	be	a	 tree,	an	animal,	a	man,	a	woman,	a	mountain,	a	 river	 --	 it
makes	 no	 difference.	 There	 may	 be	 nobody,	 the	 person	 may	 be	 just	 sitting
silently,	alone,	but	he	goes	on	radiating	his	blissfulness.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Asango:	one	who	has	come	from	loneliness	to	aloneness,
from	 solitariness	 to	 solitude,	 one	 who	 has	 known	 one's	 beauty	 and	 one	 who
enjoys	to	be	with	oneself.
Meditation	 makes	 it	 possible.	 Meditation	 is	 really	 the	 discovery	 of	 your
aloneness	and	its	beauty,	and	its	eternity.	Then	you	can	be	in	the	crowd	but	you
are	alone,	you	can	be	in	love	but	you	are	alone.	But	it	is	no	more	a	problem,	in
fact	 it	 is	 freedom,	because	when	you	 feel	 lonely	you	have	 to	be	dependent	on
somebody	who	helps	you	to	forget	your	loneliness.
And	 remember	one	 fundamental	 law	of	 life:	one	can	never	 forgive	a	person	 if
one	 has	 to	 be	 dependent	 on	 the	 person.	 The	 person	 you	 depend	 upon	 is
unforgivable,	because	he	is	the	cause	of	your	bondage.
Only	meditation	makes	 it	 possible	 that	 you	 can	 forgive	 all;	 in	 fact	 there	 is	 no
question	of	 forgiving	because	you	are	not	more	dependent.	You	are	 absolutely
independent.	You	are	as	 blissful	 alone	 as	 you	 are	 in	 togetherness.	 There	 is	 no
difference	at	all.	You	rejoice	each	moment,	whatsoever	it	is:	in	the	marketplace,
in	 the	mountains,	 with	 people	 or	 alone,	 it	 remains	 a	 constant	 phenomenon	 in
you,	undisturbed,	undistracted.
It	gives	you	immense	freedom,	and	freedom	is	the	highest	value.	In	fact	that	is
the	very	goal	of	sannyas.
Nirvana	now	or	never
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002195
ShortTitle:	NEVER19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Swami	Anand	Prabhu.	Anand	means	bliss,	Prabhu	means	the	god.
The	 longing	 for	 bliss	 is	 a	 natural	 longing.	 It	 exists	 in	 the	whole	 of	 existence.
Nobody	really	 longs	 for	god	or	 for	 truth	or	 for	paradise	or	 for	eternity;.	These
things	are	longed	for	because	they	are	aspects	of	bliss.
The	 real	 god	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 bliss.	 That	 is	 the	 very	 centre	 of	 the	 whole
existence;	 the	 whole	 centre	 of	 bliss	 has	 dominated	 not	 only	 humanity	 but	 all
beings.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 quarrel	 about	 it.	 Christians,	 Hindus,	 Mohammedans,
theists,	atheists,	spiritualists,	materialists	--	they	all	agree	only	on	one	point	and
that	is	bliss.
And	my	observation	is	if	that	is	the	only	point	on	which	everybody	agrees	--	not
only	human	beings	but	animals,	birds,	trees	--	then	all	other	gods	are	inventions,
the	real	god	is	bliss.
So	I	don't	 teach	worship,	 I	don't	 teach	prayer,	 I	don't	 teach	any	dogma,	 I	don't
give	you	any	proof	for	god.	I	only	indicate	the	way	towards	bliss;	hence	I	don't
ask	you	whether	are	you	Hindu,	Christian,	Mohammedan,	whether	you	believe
in	god	or	not.	These	are	all	irrelevant	things.	All	that	I	want	to	know	is	are	you
interested	in	bliss.	If	you	are	interested	in	bliss	then	there	is	no	need	for	anything
else;	 you	 are	 on	 the	 right	 track	 that	 leads	 to	 god.	 God	 is	 another	 name	 for
ultimate	bliss.
Ma	Anand	Anupa
Anand	means	bliss.	Anupa	means	unique.
The	experience	of	bliss	is	the	only	unique	experience	in	existence	for	the	simple
reason	 because	 it	 is	 unrespectable.	 It	 is	 unrespectable	 because	 it	 happens	 only
once.	Once	it	has	happened,	it	is	forever	yours	--
it	never	goes	away.	That	which	comes	and	goes	is	pleasure.	That	which	comes
and	 abides	 is	 bliss	 --	 that's	 the	 only	 difference	 between	 pleasure	 and	 bliss;
pleasure	is	something	within	time,	it	is	temporal;	bliss	is	something	beyond	time,
it	is	eternal.
And	the	experience	of	bliss	is	also	unique	because	in	all	other	experiences	you
remain.	In	pleasure	you	are	there,	enjoying	--	it	is	something	extraneous	to	you	--
but	in	bliss	you	dissolve.	There	is	no	observer.
The	observer	and	the	observed	become	one	--	that's	its	uniqueness.	The	seer	and
the	seen	become	one,	the	object	and	the	subject	lose	their	boundaries,	melt	and
merge	and	create	a	new	kind	of	organism.
No	 other	 experience	 does	 it;	 hence	 no	 other	 experience	 is	 fulfilling.	No	 other
experience	dissolves	your	ego;	hence	the	misery	continues.	Misery	is	nothing	but
the	functioning	of	the	ego.	No	other	experience	cures	you,	heals	you;	bliss	cures
all	your	anxieties	because	you	are	no	more	--	how	can	anxieties	exist?
They	were	hanging	around	you.	The	very	center	has	given	way.	Now	they	cannot
hang	around	anything.
There	is	nothing	to	hang	to.
The	ego	is	no	more	found	and	with	the	ego	the	dark	night	of	the	soul	is	over.	The
ego	 gone,	 the	 day	 has	 come	 in;	 hence	 the	 only	 thing	 worth	 searching,	 worth
seeking,	is	bliss	and	nothing	else.
Monika
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Ma	Anand	Surjya
Anand	means	bliss.
Surjya	means	the	sun,
the	source	of	all	light.
Just	as	the	sun	there	in	the	outer	sky	is	very	essential	for	life	to	exist,	for	flowers
to	bloom,	for	trees	to	grow,	for	animals	to	survive;	life	in	all	its	forms	is	nothing
but	solar	energy.	And	the	function	of	the	sun	outside	is	exactly	the	same	as	the
function	of	bliss	inside.	The	outer	life	needs	the	solar	energy	and	the	inner	life
needs	blissfulness,	the	spiritual	energy.
Just	as	the	earth	and	the	planets	go	around	the	sun	your	whole	inner	being	goes
rotating	 around	 the	 center	 of	 bliss.	 Once	 it	 is	 recognized	 things	 become	 very
simple,	clear,	 then	you	don't	go	zigzag,	 then	you	don't	grope	 in	darkness;	 then
you	 can	 directly	 go	 towards	 the	 center.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 start	 moving
towards	the	center	your	life	starts	becoming	light.
These	are	 the	 four	L's	 that	 I	 teach:	 life,	 love,	 laughter,	 light.	And	 they	happen
exactly	in	that	sequence.
First	life	--	one	has	to	become	more	and	more	alive,	full	of	zest,	gusto,	intensity.
One	should	not	withhold.	When	you	are	full	of	life	love	starts	happening	on	its
own	 accord,	 because	 what	 you	 will	 do	 with	 life,	 what	 you	 will	 do	 with	 that
overflowing	energy?	You	will	have	to	share	 it	 --	 that's	what	 love	is:	sharing	of
your	 life	 energy.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 share	 your	 life	 energy	 all	 sadness
disappears,	then	life	is	just	a	heartfelt	laughter.	And	these	three	l's	fulfilled,	the
fourth	 I	automatically	happens.	Three	 l's	you	have	 to	 fulfil.	Those	 three	 l's	are
just	 like	 three	 r's	 of	 the	 educationalist,	 and	 the	 fourth	 is	 the	 reward	 from	 the
beyond.	Then	light	descends.
And	the	moment	light	has	entered	you,	you	are	enlightened	--	that	is	the	meaning
of	the	word
'enlightenment'.
Ma	Anand	Anubhava.	Anand	means	bliss,	Anubhava	means	experience.
Bliss	is	not	an	intellectual	concept;	hence	thinking	about	it	is	an	exercise	in	utter
futility.	It	is	like	a	blind	man	thinking	about	light	or	a	deaf	person	contemplating
about	music:	it	is	not	possible	for	the	blind	man	to	have	any	idea	of	light.	He	can
have	thousands	of	thoughts	about	it,	but	they	will	be	all	guesswork.
For	 the	 experience	 of	 light	 one	 needs	 eyes,	 not	 thinking.	 Thinking	 goes	 in
circles,	round	and	round	--
that's	the	meaning	of	the	word	'about':	whenever	you	think	about	something	that
means	you	are	going	round	and	round.	About	means	round	and	round.	 it	 leads
nowhere.	The	centre	always	remains	far	away	and	the	distance	between	you	and
the	centre	remains	the	same,	because	you	are	moving	in	a	circle.
Bliss	 is	not	a	concept;	hence	thinking	is	of	no	use.	It	 is	an	experience,	 like	the
experience	of	light	or	music	or	love.	it	is	a	taste	on	the	tongue.
This	 is	 very	 basic	 to	 understand	 because	 I	 am	 not	 in	 any	 way	 interested	 in
philosophy,	speculation.	My	whole	effort	is	to	bring	you	out	of	all	philosophical
jargon	 and	 to	 help	 you	 enter	 into	 the	 world	 of	 experiencing.	 And	 the	 way	 to
experience	bliss	is	the	way	of	meditation.	Then	you	have	to	be	silent,	you	have
to	be	aware,	you	have	to	put	your	mind	and	its	noise	aside.	Mind	is	much	ado
about	nothing.	It	is	just	smoke	and	clouds	and	dust.
Meditation	 is	 only	 putting	 all	 that	 dust	 and	 smoke	 aside	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see
clearly.	The	moment	the	clarity	to	see	is	there,	bliss	instantly	happens,	because	it
is	our	nature;	not	only	it	is	our	nature,	it	is	the	very	nature	of	existence	itself.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8002205
ShortTitle:	NEVER20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Swami	Dhyan	Leo.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Leo	means	a	lion.
Gautam	the	Buddha	exactly	has	said	that	meditation	is	the	lion's	roar,	because	it
is	an	explosion	like	atomic	explosion.	It	is	the	explosion	of	your	consciousness
which	is	far	more	deeper,	far	more	vaster,	than	any	atomic	explosion	can	ever	be.
Yes,	there	is	a	difference	between	these	two	explosions.	The	atomic	explosion	is
destructive.	 We	 have	 yet	 to	 find	 a	 creative	 use	 for	 it,	 but	 the	 explosion	 that
happens	in	consciousness	through	meditation	is	inevitably	creative.	There	is	no
possible	way	to	use	it	in	a	destructive	direction.
The	 atomic	 explosion	 sooner	 of	 later	will	 be	 used	 for	 creativity	 but	 the	 basic
requirement	for	that	use	will	be	if	many	many	people,	particularly	the	scientists
who	 are	 involved,	 become	meditators.	Only	 than	 the	 experience	 of	meditation
will	 bring	 creativity	 to	 their	 destructive	 energy	 that	 they	 have	 unconsciously
released	in	the	world.
It	is	a	lion's	roar	because	the	moment	a	man	knows	the	deepest	experience	of	his
being	 --	 that's	what	meditation	 is	 all	 about	 --	 he	 becomes	 fearless,	 because	 he
knows	there	is	no	death	any	more;	he	was	never	born	and	he	will	never	die	--	he
is	eternal.	It	is	a	lion's	roar	because	now	nobody	can	enslave	you.	Yes,	you	can
kill	 him	 but	 you	 cannot	 enslave	 him.	 And	 when	 you	 are	 killing	 him	 you	 are
killing	only	the	outer	shell	of	his	being,	not	his	soul.	You	can	imprison	his	body
but	not	his	being;	now	he	knows	 freedom	and	a	 freedom	 that	 cannot	be	 taken
away.	It	releases	immense	courage.	He	can	fight	with	the	whole	world.	In	fact	all
the	 great	 meditators	 have	 been	 fighting	 this	 stupid	 world,	 all	 alone,	 single-
handedly.	 Jesus,	 Buddha,	 Lao	 Tzu,	 Kabir	 --	 down	 the	 ages	 the	meditator	 has
stood	there	fighting	the	collective	stupidity	of	humanity.	he	has	been	butchered,
crucified,	killed,	poisoned,	but	that	makes	no	difference.
Whenever	 a	 man	 again	 attains	 to	 meditation,	 the	 lion's	 roar	 again	 explodes.
Again	 there	 is	 one	 real,	 authentic	 human	 being,	 who	 is	 ready	 to	 sacrifice
everything	for	truth.
Ma	Dhyan	Radhay.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Radhay	is	a	form	of	Radha.
Mythologically	the	story	is	that	Radha	was	the	most	devoted	disciple	and	lover
of	 Krishna.	 Her	 devotion	 was	 so	 total	 that	 she	 never	 said	 anything	 about	 it,
because	to	say	anything	about	something	which	is	total	disfigures	it.
Words	 are	 very	 inadequate.	 They	 can	 contain	 small	 things	 but	 not	 things	 like
love,	things	like	awareness,	things	like	blessings,	blissfulness,	ecstasy.	We	have
these	words	but	they	don't	convey	the	reality	of	the	experience.
She	remained	silent	but	she	followed	Krishna	 like	a	shadow;	so	silent	she	was
that	these	are	the	actual	words	used	in	the	scriptures	'She	followed	Krishna	like	a
shadow,	 not	making	 any	 noise.'	 The	 shadow	 follows	 you	without	making	 any
declaration	 about	 itself,	 without	 in	 any	 way	 interfering	 with	 you,	 interrupting
your	work.	It	simply	remains	there.
If	you	go	to	the	North	it	goes	to	the	North	if	you	go	to	the	South	it	goes	to	the
South.	It	does	not	even	say	that	'This	is	inconsistent.	Just	now	you	were	going	to
the	North	and	now	you	start	going	to	the	South	--
why?'	Even	there	is	no	why.
The	 surrender	 is	 so	 total	 that	 in	 the	 old	 scriptures	 even	 her	 name	 is	 not
mentioned	only	this	 is	said	 'A	woman	was	in	immense	love	with	Krishna,	who
followed	him	like	a	shadow,'	because	to	give	her	any	name	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
will	not	be	right.
There	 are	 experiences	which	 are	 beyond	 name,	 beyond	 form;	 hence	Radha	 or
Radhay	--	Radhay	is	only	a	loving	way	of	calling	Radha.	It	makes	it	more	round,
more	loving,	more	intimate.
The	name	was	given	after	thousands	of	years	and	the	name	was	also	given	with	a
tremendous	significance.	In	Sanskrit	Dhara	means	the	river	that	moves	from	the
mountains,	 high	 above	 from	 the	Himalayan	 peaks,	 and	 then	 goes	 towards	 the
ocean.	This	is	called	Dhara;	Dhara	is	exactly	the	opposite	of	Radha.	If	you	read
Dhara	 from	 backwards	 it	 becomes	 Radha.	 So	 Radha	 is	 a	 symbolic	 name.	 It
simply	means	the	river	has	started	moving	upstream,	the	miracle	has	happened,
that	the	river	is	not	going	towards	the	ocean	but	is	going	towards	the	source,	that
it	is	rising	high	towards	the	peaks.
In	all	the	languages	of	the	world	we	use	the	expression	'falling	in	love'	because
our	love	is	like	Dhara:	it	falls	from	the	peaks	of	the	mountains,	than	comes	to	the
valleys,	then	to	the	plains	and	then	ultimately	to	the	lowest	place,	the	ocean.
Water	 seeks	 the	 lowest	place.	The	man	who	 is	 trying	 to	 find	god,	 truth,	 is	not
really	trying	to	find	the	goal	of	life;	he	is	in	fact	trying	to	find	the	source	of	life
because	the	source	and	the	goal	are	one.
If	you	cannot	find	the	source,	from	where	you	have	come,	you	can	never	find	the
goal,	to	where	you	are	going,	because	life	is	a	circle;	we	go	to	the	same	source
from	where	we	have	come.	it	is	easier	to	find	the	source	than	to	find	the	goal.	By
finding	the	source	one	finds	the	goal	and	there	is	a	quality	of	love	which	cannot
be	 implied	 by	 our	 phrase	 'falling	 in	 love'.	 For	 that	 quality	 of	 love	we	 have	 to
invent	 a	 totally	 different	 phraseology,	 'rising	 in	 love',	 and	 that's	what	 happens
between	the	disciple	and	the	master,	rising	in	love	--
and	that	is	the	meaning	of	Radhay.
Meditation	helps	you	to	turn	the	whole	tide.	It	changes	the	very	direction	of	life.
It	 changes	 the	 very	 law	 of	 life.	 Instead	 of	 reaching	 to	 the	 lowest	 you	 start
reaching	to	the	highest.
Swami	Dhyan	Vestrohi.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Vestrohi	means	a	rebel.
Meditation	 brings	 many	 flowers	 to	 life,	 it	 opens	 up	 many	 dimensions	 which
were	closed	before.	It	makes	you	aware	of	many	aspects	of	your	own	being	of
which	you	were	never	aware,	not	even	in	your	dreams.	And	the	most	important
aspect	is	that	it	releases	your	rebellious	energy,	it	makes	you	a	rebellious	spirit.
And	 only	 the	 rebel	 knows	 what	 life	 is;	 the	 orthodox	 never	 knows	 it,	 the
conformist	cannot	know	it.
He	knows	only	the	trodden	path	of	the	crowd,	of	the	mob.
And	 the	mob	 is	subhuman,	 the	mob	psychology	 is	not	yet	human,	what	 to	say
about	 superhuman?	 It	 is	 a	 far-away	 distant	 goal,	 just	 a	 fantasy	 as	 far	 as	mob
psychology	is	concerned.	Sometimes	it	is	lower	than	the	animal	psychology	but
it	 always	 remains	 subhuman	 and	 is	 always	 ready	 to	 fall	 from	 even	 that
subhuman	state	towards	animal.
It	happens	every	day;	in	war	you	see	it	happening,	in	riots	you	see	it	happening.
Mohammedans	 and	 Christians	 have	 been	 fighting	 and	 killing	 each	 other,
Mohammedans	 and	Hindus	 have	 been	 fighting	 and	 killing	 each	 other,	Hindus
and	 Buddhist	 and	 so	 on,	 so	 forth.	 Even	 the	 so-called	 religious	 mobs	 never
become	human:	 they	 remain	subhuman,	and	 just	a	small	excuse	and	 they	even
fall	 from	 there.	Then	 they	can	do	anything	 --	 they	can	burn	people	alive,	 they
have	 burned.	 And	 the	 people	 who	 burned	 people	 alive	 were	 not	 bad	 people.
They	were	priests,	popes,	imams,	very	respectable,	knowledgeable.
The	 people	 who	 crucified	 Jesus	 were	 not	 bad	 people.	 They	were	 the	 greatest
rabbis	of	 the	Jews.	As	far	as	 their	ordinary	day-to-day	life	was	concerned	they
were	 respectable	citizens,	but	what	happened?	Why	 they	crucified	Jesus?	Why
so	many	people	 have	been	burned	by	 the	 churches,	 alive,	 and	with	 no	 shame,
with	no	guilt?	--	-because	it	is	being	done	in	the	name	of	god,	it	is	being	done	in
the	 name	 of	 love,	 it	 is	 being	 done	 in	 the	 name	 of	 the	 truth,	 in	 the	 name	 of
religion.
The	mob	psychology	remains	animalistic	hidden	behind	a	garbage	of	so-called
religious	jargon.
To	become	part	of	it	is	ugly.	It	is	a	betrayal	to	your	own	self.	It	is	suicidal.	To	be
part	of	a	mob	psychology	simply	means	you	have	committed	a	spiritual	suicide,
you	are	no	more	an	individual.	You	have	lost	your	intelligence.
I	have	observed	 it,	 I	 have	asked	people,	because	 I	have	been	witness	 to	many
things.	 Hindus	 burning	 a	 Mohammedan	 mosque,	 and	 I	 watched	 the	 whole
process	 and	 the	 people	 who	 were	 burning	 were	 respectable	 people.	 Nobody
could	have	ever	thought	that	these	people	can	burn,	destroy.	Than	I	asked	them
individually,	later	on,	'Could	you	have	done	it	alone?',	and	they	immediately	said
'No.	 Even	 to	 think	 of	 doing	 such	 a	 thing	 alone	 is	 not	 possible.	 We	 cannot
imagine	ourselves	doing	it.	We	did	it	because	everybody	was	doing	it.	We	were
just	part	of	it,	we	are	not	responsible'.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	have	seen	Mohammedans	killing	HIndus	and	I	have	asked	them,	'Can	you	do	it
individually?'	And	they	have	said	'No,	we	can	do	it	only	when	we	are	part	of	a
mob,	when	we	are	no	more	separate	from	the	mob	--
then	 there	 is	 no	 responsibility,	 then	 it	 is	 being	 already	 done.	 Whether	 we
participate	or	not	makes	no	difference.'
Meditation	brings	you	out	of	the	mob	psychology.	First	it	makes	you	human	and
then	it	takes	you	towards	the	superhuman,	which	is	divine	in	other	words,	but	it
is	 rebellion;	 hence	 the	 crowd	has	 never	 been	 able	 to	 forgive	meditators	 and	 it
will	never	be	able.
I	am	not	a	pessimist;	I	am	immensely	optimist,	for	the	simple	reason	because	I
see	humanity	growing,	coming	of	age,	but	this	is	a	fact	--	even	optimism	cannot
hide	 it	 --	 that	 the	mob	 psychology	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 rise	 to	 the	 levels	 of
individual	psychology.	It	may	become	a	little	better,	but	the	difference	between
the	individual	and	the	crowd	will	remain	constantly	the	same.
When	the	crowd	psychology	will	go	a	little	higher,	the	individual	rebellion	will
also	go	a	little	higher.
The	distance	will	remain	the	same.	And	it	is	really	a	joy	to	rebel	against	all	that
is	rotten,	ugly,	against	all	that	is	dead,	stinking.	It	is	a	joy,	it	is	a	challenge,	and	it
is	a	great	opportunity	to	grow.	Only	individuals	can	grow	into	godliness.	And	I
insist	and	emphasise	that	only	individuals	can	be	religious;	religion	can	never	be
a	cult,	a	creed,	a	church.	The	moment	it	becomes	a	church,	cult,	creed,	it	is	not
religion	at	all.	it	is	just	camouflaged	politics.
Ma	Dhyan	Agni.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Agni	means	fire.
Meditation	 is	 a	 fire.	 It	 does	 two	 things:	 it	 burns	your	past	 totally,	 it	 consumes
your	 mind	 absolutely	 without	 even	 leaving	 a	 trace	 behind	 it,	 and	 your	 past
contains	 everything	 --	 your	 religion,	 your	 politics,	 your	 nationality,	 your	 race,
and	 all	 that.	 It	 contains	 all	 that	 is	 wrong.	 It	 is	 just	 junk	which	we	 have	 been
loaded	by	others.
The	fire	of	meditation	consumes	 it	 totally	and	 the	moment	 it	has	consumed	all
that	is	not	part	of	you	but	has	been	forced	upon	you,	which	is	just	a	conditioning
but	not	your	being,	the	moment	it	is	destroyed	your	being	for	the	first	time	rises
above	because	it	is	no	more	burdened,	no	more	crushed	under	the	weight	of	the
past	--	and	the	weight	of	the	past	is	big,	it	is	mountainous	and	your	being	is	just
like	a	rose	flower,	very	delicate.
The	 moment	 rocks	 are	 removed	 the	 rose	 starts	 growing;	 hence	 the	 fire	 of
meditation	does	two	work.
One;	it	is	a	death	and	second,	it	is	a	resurrection,	a	new	beginning,	a	rebirth.
Jesus	says	to	Nicodemus	'Unless	you	are	born	again	you	shall	not	enter	into	my
kingdom	of	god.'	That's	what	exactly	meditation	does;	it	destroys	you	as	you	are
and	it	resurrects	you	as	you	should	be.
Swami	 Dhyan	 Dheeren.	 Dhyan	means	meditation,	 Dheeren	means	 the	 patient
one.
Meditation	needs	infinite	patience.	One	cannot	grow	into	meditation	in	a	hurry.
It	can	never	be	like	instant	coffee.	It	 is	not	a	seasonal	flower.	It	 is	 like	the	star
touching	big	Cedars	of	Lebanon:	it	takes	hundreds	of	years	for	those	trees	to	rise
above	into	the	sky.	And	they	live	for	thousands	of	years.
Meditation	is	going	to	give	you	the	whole	eternity;	hence	it	cannot	be	achieved
in	a	hurry;	One	has	to	be	really	patient.	And	this	is	one	of	the	qualities	modern
humanity	 has	 completely	 lost	 track	 of,	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 contributions	 of	 the
western	mind	to	the	whole	world;	this	hurry,	this	constant	rush.
There	is	a	basic	reason	for	it.	The	Judaic	religion	and	it	offshoots	--	Christianity
and	Islam	--	these	three	religions	are	the	root	cause	of	it,	because	they	have	been
talking	about	only	one	life.	If	this	is	the	only	life	than	naturally	one	is	in	a	rush.
Just	 seventy	years,	 if	you	are	 fortunate,	 and	 if	you	calculate	you	will	 find	 that
that	is	not	much;	one-third	of	it	will	be	lost	in	sleep.	Much	of	it	will	be	lost	in	the
schools,	 colleges,	 university,	 reading	 all	 kinds	 of	 stupid	 things	 --	 geography,
history,	geology,	zoology	and	what	not!
Much	of	it	will	be	lost	in	earning	bread	and	butter,	much	of	it	will,	will	be	lost	by
going	to	the	factory	or	the	office	from	the	home	and	coming	back	--	almost	there
are	people	who	are	travelling	two,	three	hours	every	day	from	the	office	to	the
home.	The	remaining	little	bit	will	be	lost	in	seeing	that	idiot	box,	TV	or	going
to	 a	 movie	 or	 shaving	 your	 beard	 every	 day	 or	 twice	 a	 day,	 taking	 bath	 and
eating	food	and	all	kinds	of	things	--	if	you	simply	go	on	calculating	it	will	be	a
miracle	 if	you	can	save	seven	minutes	out	of	 seventy	years	 life.	Than	 it	 is	 too
short:	 seven	minutes	 between	 birth	 and	 death	 and	 all	 is	 finished	 and	 finished
forever!	It	is	bound	to	create	panic	--	and	that"	what	has	happened	in	the	West.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	 the	 disease	 has	 become	 now	 contagious,	 all	 over	 the	world.	 It	 has	 never
been	so	in	the	East	because	we	had	a	vast	canvas,	there	was	no	hurry.	Thousands
of	life	--	actually	India	has	been	talking	about	eight-hundred-forty-million	lives.
That	created	 its	own	 trouble;	 it	 created	 lethargy,	 lousiness.	You	cannot	 rely	on
anybody.	He	will	 say	 'I	will	 come	 five	o'clock'	 and	he	may	not	 turn	 for	 seven
days	and	still	he	will	not	feel	guilty	or	ashamed.	he	will	say	'What	is	there?	If	not
that	Sunday	this	Sunday	I	have	come,	if	not	five,	then	six,	then	seven	--	it	doesn't
matter	much.'	All	trains	are	running	late...
A	man	once	asked	the	station	master	'That	whenever	I	come	the	train	is	late,	than
why	 do	 you	 publish	 the	 timetable?'	 The	 station	 master	 said	 'We	 publish	 the
timetable	so	we	can	know	how	much	the	train	is	late!
Otherwise	how	we	will	know?	It	has	nothing	to	do	for	the	train	to	come	in	time;
it	is	just	to	know	that	how	much	late	it	is.'
Everything	is	lousy,	everything	is	lazy	--	that	is	a	bad	implication	of	it	--	but	one
thing	 was	 great	 in	 it,	 that	 nobody	 was	 in	 a	 hurry.	 That	 helped	 immensely
meditation.	It	is	not	an	accident	that	meditation	grew	in	the	East.	It	is	inevitable
that	it	could	have	only	grown	in	the	East	where	people	are	ready	to	wait.	There
is	no	expectation	in	waiting;	they	simply	enjoy	waiting.
I	know	that	both	the	attitudes	have	their	good	points	and	bad	points.	The	West
has	been	able	to	bring	things	in	order,	it	has	been	able	to	discipline	things.	Trains
are	 in	 time,	people	are	efficient,	nobody	is	 lazy	or	 lousy-that's	good	about	 it	 --
but	then	it	creates	a	certain	tension	inside.
The	whole	 life	you	are	 running	so	when	somebody	says	 that	meditation	 is	 just
sitting	 silently,	 doing	 nothing,	 the	 spring	 comes	 and	 the	 grass	 grows	 by	 itself,
you	listen	it	but	you	cannot	understand	it	--	how	the	grass	can	grow	by	itself	if
you	don't	pull	it	up?	And	just	sitting	silently?	I	used	to	have	this	darshan	in	my
lawn,	 I	 had	 to	 change,	 because	 people	 were	 continuously	 pulling	 the	 grass	 --
they	were	destroying	the	lawn!
They	were	simply	trying	to	help	the	grass...	nothing.	How	the	grass	is	going	to
grow	by	itself?	They	were	in	a	hurry.
You	just	watch	people:	they	are	in	a	hurry	for	no	reason.	Hurry	has	become	their
lifestyle.
I	want	my	 sannyasins	 to	 understand	 this	 very	 clearly.	 I	 don't	want	 them	 to	 be
lazy	and	lousy,	I	don't	want	them	to	be	in	constant	hurry	and	tension	and	always
running,	not	exactly	knowing	why.
Two	old	man	were	talking	with	each	other:	'Do	you	remember	in	our	young	days
we	used	to	chase	women?'	The	other	said	 'Yes,	I	remember	perfectly	well.	The
only	thing	I	don't	remember	is	why	we	used	to	chase	them'
Nobody	 exactly	 knows	why	 you	 are	 running	 and	 nobody	 has	 time	 to	 ask	 you
either.	Everybody	is	saying
'See	you	soon,'	(can't	get	it??)	they	are	on	the	way.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 create	 a	 synthesis.	 As	 far	 as	 the	 outside	 world	 is
concerned	the	western	attitude	is	absolutely	right;	everything	should	be	done	as
totally,	 as	 perfectly	 as	 possible,	 because	 there	 may	 be	 no	 other	 moment	 to
improve	upon,	and	don't	leave	this	world	with	something	incomplete.	That	will
be	your	signature.	Leave	this	world	with	something	complete,	perfected,	to	your
heart's	 content	 --	 that's	 perfectly	 beautiful	 as	 far	 as	 the	 outside	 world	 is
concerned.	The	western	approach	is	absolutely	correct.	For	the	outside	existence
I	would	like	the	whole	world	to	become	the	West.
And	for	the	inside	world	I	would	like	the	whole	world	to	become	the	East:	there
don't	be	in	a	hurry,	there	just	sit	and	don't	pull	the	grass.	Just	sit	silently,	wait,	let
things	happen.	You	watch,	you	don't	be	a	doer
--	 that	 watching	 is	 meditation,	 that	 non-doing	 is	 meditation,	 that	 waiting	 is
meditation.
Up	to	now	we	have	been	dividing	the	world	in	a	geographical	way,	in	East	and
West,	 in	two	hemispheres.	I	would	like	to	divide	in	a	totally	different	way:	not
the	earth,	not	the	globe,	not	geography,	but	each	man,..	his	outside	is	the	West,
his	inside	is	the	East.	And	each	man	has	to	be	a	total	world.	When	he	is	working
on	 the	 outside,	 work	 perfectly,	 efficiently	 and	when	 you	 are	 inside,	 forget	 all
about	the	outside	world	and	its	methods,	than	relax.	Then	just	fall	into	a	let-go	--
that	is	the	meaning	of	your	name:	falling	into	a	deep	let-go.
And	 then	 it	 happens	 --	 remember,	 it	 happens.	 It	 cannot	 be	 done.	 It	 is	 a
happening!
How	long	you	will	be	here?
(at	least	a	year)
That's	good.	This	is	what	I	mean	by	becoming	eastern	as	far	as	the	inner	side	is
concerned.	Perfectly	good!	Help	him.
Help	him.	Come	her.	Good.	I	have	been	waiting	for	YOU	...	and	finally	you	have
come.
Swami	Dhyan	Sakshi.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Sakshi	means	a	witness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	 is	basically	 the	process	of	witnessing:	 looking	 from	your	centre	all
that	is	happening.	Many	things	are	happening	on	the	outside	--	the	noise	of	the
train	far	away;	something	is	happening	in	you	body	--
your	knees	are	hurting	--	right?	Your	mind	is	churning	many	thoughts,	that	'What
am	I	doing	here?'	Your	heart	is	feeling	many	emotions,	you	have	waited	for	this
moment	 for	 so	 long.	 There	 is	 joy	 in	 the	 heart,	 a	 certain	 ecstasy,	 a	 mood,	 a
receptivity.	All	 those	 things	have	 to	be	watched	very	minutely.	Watching	 them
opens	your	inner	being.	Just	watching	them	opens	your	inner	eye	and	that	is	the
real	eye;	the	outside	eyes	are	of	not	much	use.	You	are	fortunate	that	you	don't
have	them.	You	are	blessed!	Blessed	are	the	blind	for	they	shall	not	be	forced	to
see	this	ugly	world!	And	it	is	really	ugly	--	believe	me!
And	 you	 can	 put	 your	 total	 energy	 for	 the	 inner	 eye.	 The	 outside	 eyes	 are
wasting	 eighty	 percent	 of	 energy	 --	 it	 is	 the	major	 part.	Man	 has	 five	 senses,
eighty	per	cent	is	taken	away	by	the	eyes	and	only	twenty	per	cent	is	left	for	the
other	four	senses.	They	are	very	poor	people,	those	four.	Eyes	are	very	rich,	they
have	monopolised	the	whole	thing;	hence	it	is	good	--	eighty	per	cent	energy	is
saved	--	and	that	can	be	immediately	used	for	witnessing,	for	seeing	your	inner
world.	hence	in	the	East	we	call	a	person	who	is	blind	 'pragyanshakshu'	--	 this
word	 is	 untranslatable.	 It	 simply	means	 one	who	has	 the	 inner	 eye:	The	 outer
eyes	 are	 not	 there	 but	 that	 is	 a	 great	 opportunity	 because	 eighty	 per	 cent	 of
energy	 is	available	 for	 the	person	and	he	can	easily	become	a	meditator,	more
easily	then	anybody	else.
It	 is	 a	 well-known	 fact	 that	 blind	 people	 have	 better	 ears	 than	 anybody	 else.
They	become	beautiful	musicians,	good	singers,	for	the	simple	reason,	for	their
eighty	per	cent	energy	is	diverted	towards	the	ears.
Ears	are	 the	closest	 to	 the	eyes,	 so	when	 the	eyes	are	not	using	 the	energy	 the
ears	start	using	it.
But	that	is	again	a	misuse	because	ears	will	again	take	it	outside.	It	is	better	to
use	this	available	energy	for	your	observation,	inner	observation.
Just	watch	everything	 --	and	 it	 is	good	because	you	have	nothing	much	 to	do.
You	have	not	to	go	here	and	there	and	visit	people	and	become	a	member	of	the
Rotary	Club.	You	are	saved	from	so	much	nonsense	that	I	felt	really	jealous	of
you!	Enjoy	it!	And	feel	sorry	for	everybody	else!	They	are	poorer	and	you	can
become	immensely	rich.	And	the	art	of	that	richness	is	witnessing.
Witnessing	is	another	name	for	meditation.
How	long	you	will	be	here?
(Three	weeks)
That's	good.	And	when	you	are	coming	back	again?
(In	November)
That's	good.	help	him.	Good!
Ma	 Dhyan	 Anutoshi.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation,	 Anutoshi	 means	 absolutely
contented.
Meditation	and	contentment	are	 like	 the	flower	and	its	 fragrance;	meditation	 is
the	flower	and	contentment	is	its	fragrance;	hence	the	people	who	try	to	cultivate
contentment	 are	 starting	 on	 a	 wrong	 journey.	 A	 cultivated	 contentment	 is	 not
contentment	at	all;	it	is	like	a	spraying	perfume	on	a	plastic	flower.
you	can	deceive	others	but	how	can	you	deceive	yourself?	And	what	is	the	point
of	deception?	It	is	dangerous	because	time	is	lost,	opportunity	is	lost.
One	can	cultivate	contentment,	there	are	millions	of	people	who	have	cultivated
contentment.	Seeing	that	the	grapes	are	too	far	way	they	have	started	consoling
themselves	 that	 the	 grapes	 are	 sour	 --	 that's	 what	 they	mean	 by	 contentment:
seeing	that	they	cannot	be	rich	they	start	saying	'Poverty	is	spiritual,'	because	to
be	rich	one	needs	guts.
Everybody	 is	 born	 poor-	 that	 is	 nothing	 much	 --	 but	 to	 be	 rich	 it	 is	 a	 very
competitive	world,	 it	 is	 a	 cut-throat	 competition.	 Everybody	 is	 at	 everybody's
throat.	 The	 cowards	 escape	 but	 they	 have	 also	 to	 invent	 some	 consolation	 for
themselves.	They	start	saying	'What	is	there	in	richness?	Gold	is	nothing	but	dust
and	money	is	for	the	worldly	people;	it	is	not	fort	the	spiritual	ones.'	They	start
greeting	a	new	kind	of	ego.	They	are	other-worldly,	spiritual,	religious;	they	are
not	interested	in	money,	in	power.	They	have	renounced	it	all,	as	if	they	had	it	in
the	first	place.
This	is	a	very	pseudo	state.	One	has	created	a	subtle	wall	of	consolations	around
oneself	to	hide	one's	wounds.
And	people	will	respect	such	a	person,	 they	will	call	him	a	saint.	And	because
people	respect	and	honour	and	start	 thinking	that	he	 is	religious,	a	very	saintly
person,	holy,	the	ego	feels	even	more	satisfied,	more	nourished.	It	becomes	just	a
ego-number	--	and	how	ego	can	ever	be	contented?	Hence	a	new	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
discontent	 starts\:	 how	 to	 be	more	 spiritual,	 how	 to	 be	more	 holy,	 how	 to	 be
holier	then	other	holier	people?
Just	tell	any	saint	that	'some	other	saint	is	higher	then	you.'	and	immediately	you
will	see	where	his	contentment	is	gone;	immediately	he	is	angry,	immediately	he
is	enraged,	all	his	humbleness	is	lost,	all	his	simplicity	gone.	It	is	a	new	kind	of
power	 struggle,	 a	 very	 subtle	 one;	 hence	 I	 don't	 tell	 to	 my	 sannyasins	 that
cultivate	 anything	 --	 contentment,	 joy,	 peace,	 compassion,	 service,	 duty	 --
nothing	should	be	cultivated.
Everything	cultivated	remains	phony.	The	true	comes	only	through	meditation.
First	become	more	aware,	more	alert,	more	watchful,	more	observant	of	life	and
all	 its	 workings,	 of	 mind	 and	 all	 its	 processes,	 of	 the	 heart	 and	 all	 its	 subtle
undercurrents	--	of	feelings,	moods	--	become	aware	of	the	world	and	how	you
react	 to	 the	world.	 Just	go	on	becoming	more	and	more	 like	a	mirror.	To	be	a
mirror	is	to	be	meditative.	Reflect	everything	without	any	judgement,	and	then	a
moment	 comes	 when	 all	 the	 thoughts	 disappear,	 just	 by	 watching	 them	 --
nothing	else	is	needed.	All	the	feelings	disappear,	all	the	moods	disappear.	One
becomes	utterly	empty,	clean,	clear,	and	in	that	clarity	flowers	start	showering	--
flowers	of	contentment,	of	 joy,	of	ecstasy.	Then	you	are	not	doing	anything	 to
bring	them.	They	are	coming	on	their	own	accord.	They	come	as	a	gift	from	the
god.	And	when	something	comes	as	a	gift	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002215
ShortTitle:	NEVER21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Swami	Dhyanmurti
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyanmurti.	Dhyanmurti	means	image	of	meditation.
The	image	of	Gautam	the	Buddha	is	exactly	the	image	of	meditation,	carved	into
marble.	It	represents	something	of	the	inner.	The	statues	of	Buddha	were	the	first
statues	ever	made	in	the	world.	They	don't	represent	the	physiology	of	Buddha;
it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 his	 body.	 It	 represents	 in	 a	 symbolic	 way	 that	 had
happened	 to	his	 interiority	 --	 the	 silence,	 the	peace,	 the	 tranquillity,	 the	purity,
the	innocence,	the	state	of	no-mind.
If	you	observe	the	statue	of	Buddha	you	will	see	many	things.	One	is,	it	is	made
of	 white	marble.	White	 represents	 all	 the	 colors;	 it	 is	 the	 synthesis	 of	 all	 the
colors.	It	has	the	whole	spectrum	of	the	rainbow	hidden	within	it.	It	is	the	color
of	 light,	and	 it	 is	 light	 that	can	be	divided	 into	seven	colors.	Or	 if	 those	seven
colors	are	again	synthesized	you	will	have	white.	So	the	first	 thing	is	the	color
white	--	it	represents	the	synthesis.
Life	 should	 be	 a	 totality,	 nothing	 should	 be	 rejected;	 everything	 should	 be
absorbed,	transformed.
Everything	has	some	significance,	only	you	have	to	put	it	 in	the	right	place,	in
the	right	context.
The	white	color	is	the	orchestra	of	all	the	colors.	Many	people	have	to	work	in
an	orchestra.	They	can	work	in	discord,	every	player	can	go	in	his	own	way	--
then	 there	 will	 be	 only	 noise,	 insanity,	 chaos,	 ugliness.	 But	 they	 all	 can	 join
together,	 they	can	create	 a	 rhythm	 in	which	 they	all	 are	participants.	Then	 the
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
same	noise	becomes	music	and	 the	 same	energy	 that	was	 turning	 into	 insanity
becomes	the	peak	of	insanity,	of	health,	of	wholeness.
The	second	thing	is	that	Buddha	statues	are	carved	out	of	marble.	The	marble	is
something	 on	 the	 earth	 but	 as	 if	 not	 belonging	 to	 the	 earth,	 as	 if	 part	 of	 the
beyond.	When	you	see	the	Taj	Mahal	in	a	full-moon	night	you	will	understand
what	I	am	saying.	Then	the	Taj	Mahal	does	not	seem	to	be	part	of	this	world.
Suddenly	 you	 are	 transported	 to	 a	 fairyland.	 It	 is	 so	 beautiful	 that	 it	 is	 almost
unbelievable.
I	 lived	 in	 one	 place,	 Jabalpur,	 for	 twenty	 years.	 Near	 Jabalpur	 there	 is	 one
miracle	 of	 nature.	 I	 don't	 think	 there	 exists	 anywhere	 in	 the	 world	 anything
comparable	 to	 it	 --	 it	 is	 just	 unique.	 The	 river	 Narmada	 flows	 between	 two
mountains	 of	 marble;	 for	 at	 least	 four	 or	 five	 miles	 it	 flows	 between	 two
mountains	of	marble.
It	 is	a	 rare	 thing.	And	 in	 the	 full-moon	night	when	you	enter,	 in	a	boat,	 inside
that	world,	suddenly	another	dimension	of	life...	As	if	God	is	real	and	the	world
is	unreal,	as	if	dreams	are	real	and	matter	is	unreal.
I	took	one	of	my	teachers	of	philosophy	--	he	was	a	lover	of	nature	so	I	invited
him	and	took	him;	he	was	an	old	man.	I	took	him	to	the	marble	rocks.	When	he
saw	them	he	said,	"Take	 the	boat	very	close.	 I	want	 to	 touch	and	feel	whether
they	really	exist	or	you	are	playing	a	trick."	He	said	to	me,	"I	have	heard	that	you
can	hypnotize	people.	Don't	do	such	tricks	on	an	old	man	like	me.	And	at	least
be	respectful	to	me	--	I	have	been	your	teacher	in	the	university.	Take	me	very
close."
I	 took	him	very	close	 to	 the	mountains;	he	had	 to	 touch	 them	to	believe	 them.
Actually	that	is	the	case:	unless	you	touch	them	you	cannot	believe.	It	seems	so
much	a	dreamland.
The	statues	of	Buddha	were	carved	in	pure	white	marble	in	the	beginning,	just	to
show	 that	 this	 earth	 can	 have	 something	 of	 the	 beyond.	And	 the	 shape	 of	 the
Buddha	statue	is	so	symmetrical	that	one	can	see	the	balance,	that	everything	is
balanced.	He	talked	about	meditation	as	the	middle	way,	majjhim	nikaya..
Meditation	is	really	the	golden	mean,	neither	leaning	to	the	right	too	much	nor	to
the	left	too	much,	remaining	exactly	in	the	middle	of	all	the	extremes	of	life.
There	 is	success	and	there	 is	failure,	and	there	 is	richness	and	there	 is	poverty,
and	one	day	you	are	 full	of	 life	 and	one	day	 slips	out	of	your	hands.	There	 is
respect	 and	 there	 is	 insult.	 Life	 consists	 of	 polar	 opposites.	 The	 man	 of
meditation	walks	exactly	 in	 the	middle;	neither	success	excites	him	nor	 failure
depresses	him.	He	remains	absolutely	untouched	--	that	is	his	symmetry,	that	is
his	balance,	and	that	balance	you	will	see	in	the	statue	of	Buddha.
Buddha's	eyes	in	the	statue	are	half-closed	and	half-open.	The	meditator	should
not	close	his	eyes	completely	 towards	the	outer,	because	that	 too	is	our	reality.
And	he	 should	 not	 open	his	 eyes	 too	much	 so	 that	 he	 has	 nothing	 left	 for	 the
inner	world.
Half-closed	eyes	represent	that	one	is	standing	just	in	between,	available	to	both
the	 worlds:	 the	 objective	 and	 the	 subjective,	 with	 no	 division,	 with	 no
judgement.	He	will	live	in	the	world	but	will	not	be	of	the	world.
And	this	whole	thing	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Dhyanmurti.	Create	a	golden
mean	 in	 your	 life,	 create	 balance,	 symmetry,	 create	 a	 synthesis	 of	 all	 the
conflicting	 elements	within	 you	 so	 that	 they	become	pure	white,	 the	 summum
bonum,	the	highest	combination,	of	all	the	opposites,	so	that	they	can	become	a
cosmos	instead	of	a	chaos.	Then	one	becomes	an	image	of	meditation	itself.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	an	image,	a	living	image	of	meditation,	in	his	moment-to-
moment	 life.	 In	 his	 relationship	 to	 the	world,	 to	 people,	 in	 his	 relationship	 to
himself,	while	he	is	alone,	when	he	is	with	people;	in	every	kind	of	situation	he
has	to	remain	still,	silent,	perceptive,	clear,	alert,	aware,	and	then	life	becomes	a
celebration.	 So	many	 flowers	 shower	 from	 the	 beyond	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 to
count	them,	as	if	the	whole	infinity	starts	failing	upon	you.
Kabir	has	a	very	beautiful	statement.	He	says,	"When	meditation	happened	for
the	first	time,	I	thought,
'The	 dewdrop	 has	 slipped	 into	 the	 ocean'	 --	 that	 was	 my	 first	 contact	 with
meditation,	as	if	the	dewdrop	had	slipped	into	the	ocean.	But	as	I	became	more
and	more	accustomed	to	the	experience,	I	had	to	change	my	statement.	Finally	I
discovered	that	it	is	just	vice	versa:	the	ocean	has	slipped	into	the	dewdrop."
Both	are	true.	You	can	say	the	dewdrop	has	slipped	into	the	ocean	--	that	is	the
experience	of	the	beginner;	you	can	say	the	ocean	has	slipped	into	the	dewdrop	-
-	that	is	the	experience	of	the	siddha,	of	one	who	has	arrived.
But	 the	beginning	is	 the	end,	because	the	beginning	contains	 the	end.	The	first
step	is	also	the	last	step.
Ma	Dhyana	means	meditation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind,	 of	 no-thought,	 of	 no-desire,	 of	 no-dream.
Looked	 from	 the	 outside	 it	 is	 absolutely	 empty	 --	 empty	 of	 all	 that	 you	were
clinging	to,	empty	to	all	that	you	were	full	of	--	but	looked	from	the	other	side,
from	 the	 other	 end,	 it	 is	 overflowing,	 over-full.	But	 over-full	 and	 overflowing
with	 things	 you	 have	 never	 even	 dreamt	 about:	 blissfulness,	 truthfulness,
authenticity,	freedom,	love,	godliness.
Thousand	and	one	flowers	go	on	blossoming	and	their	fragrance	is	so	much	that
one	cannot	contain	it;	it	has	to	be	shared.	It	starts	reaching	to	others	on	its	own
accord.	You	have	not	even	to	share	it,	it	shares	itself.
The	sannyasin	has	to	do	the	first	part,	emptying,	and	existence	does	the	second
part,	filling.	You	have	to	empty	yourself	of	all	junk	that	we	are	cluttered	with.	It
is	 certainly	 junk,	 rubbish.	 Everybody	 is	 clinging	 to	 garbage.	 People	 love
garbage!	 (Laughter).	 Because	 they	 don't	 know	 the	 real	 treasures	 so	 they
accumulate	 colored	 stones,	 seashells	 on	 the	 seashore	 and	 they	 think	 they	 are
collecting	something	immensely	valuable.
What	is	there	in	our	thoughts,	what	is	there	in	our	desires?	Everybody	has	those
thoughts,	everybody	has	those	desires,	everybody	has	those	ambitions	--	they	are
so	ordinary.	And	not	only	 today;	 since	man	has	existed	he	has	not	changed.	 It
seems	evolution	stopped	the	day	monkeys	turned	into	man.	Since	then	there	has
been	no	evolution.	Nothing	has	happened	to	prove	that	man	has	grown.	Not	only
that	but	seeing	man	so	stuck	even	monkeys	have	stopped	becoming	man;	since
then	no	monkey	has	tried	to	become	man	either.
That's	very	strange!	(Laughter).
They	get	the	idea	that	it	is	foolish	to	become	man	because	everything	stops.	And
I	don't	think	they	think	that	man	has	a	higher	status.	It	is	impossible	for	them	to
think	that.	They	must	be	giggling	that	man	has	fallen,	and	in	a	way	literally	he
has	fallen	--	from	the	trees,	on	the	ground.	What	kind	of	evolution	is	this?
Christians	may	have	got	the	idea	from	the	monkeys:	the	original	fall.	Adam	and
Eve	used	to	live	in	trees	it	seems	--	in	the	Garden	of	Eden	but	in	the	trees.	And
expulsion	from	the	Garden	of	Eden	simply	means	they	have	been	thrown	from
the	trees	and	it	seems	multiple	fractures	happened,	and	they	have	not	been	able
to	go	back	 to	 the	 trees,	so	 they	are	consoling	 themselves	 that	"We	are	evolved
beings,"	but	just	fight	with	a	monkey	and	you	will	know	who	is	more	powerful.
Since	man	has	 existed	he	has	been	 carrying	 the	 same	 stupid	desires,	 the	 same
ugly	ambitions,	the	same	stinking	ego.	A	sannyasin	has	to	decide	that	enough	is
enough,	that	"I	will	throw	all	this	nonsense	out."
The	first	part	has	to	be	done	by	you	and	the	second	part	comes	as	a	grace	of	god.
It	is	the	reward:	you	empty	yourself,	clean	the	place,	make	it	ready	for	the	gift
and	the	gift	inevitably	comes!	And	once	you	know	the	gift	then	you	understand
how	ridiculous	you	have	been	before,	because	whatsoever	you	were	collecting
was	simply	useless;	not	only	useless	but	a	positive	hindrance	for	 this	 immense
gift;	the	gift	of	immortality,	the	gift	of	eternal	life,	the	gift	of	a	constant	flow	of
blissfulness,	the	gift	of	consciousness.	And	when	you	are	absolutely	empty	and
your	whole	being	becomes	full	of	consciousness,	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:
to	help	you	to	become	so	full	of	consciousness,	so	full	of	light,	so	full	of	love,
that	 you	 start	 feeling	 that	 nothing	 is	 missing,	 that	 a	 tremendous	 contentment
descends	over	you,	that	life	becomes	a	relaxed,	restful	experience,	as	if	one	has
come	home	--	a	home	that	he	has	been	searching	for	centuries.
How	long	you	will	be	here?
-	It's	open.
That's	good.	Keep	it	open	forever!
Right?	Good!	Never	close	it!
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Sunando.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Sunando
means	blissfulness.
Everybody	 is	 seeking	 bliss	 and	 only	 very	 few	 people	 have	 found	 it.	 Life	 is
miserable	for	the	simple	reason	because	everybody	seeks	bliss	and	never	finds	it.
That	not	 finding	 it	 creates	misery,	 frustration,	 failure,	a	 sense	of	unworthiness,
futility,	meaninglessness.	But	the	reason	why	we	are	not	able	to	find	bliss	is	not
that	we	don't	seek	it,	we	seek	it	in	wrong	direction.	In	fact	we	go	everything,	we
do	everything	which	prevents	bliss.
We	 always	 go	 against	 the	 current	 and	 sooner	 or	 later	 we	 become	 tired,
exhausted.	Why	we	go	against	the	current?	--	Because	ego	can	exist	only	if	we
go	against	the	current	and	ego	is	the	enemy	of	bliss.
Bliss	happens	in	a	state	of	let-go,	but	let-go	simply	means	the	death	of	the	ego.
So	one	has	to	choose.	if	one	chooses	the	ego	then	one	chooses	misery	--	that	is
part	 of	 it,	 you	 cannot	 separate	 them.	 If	 you	 choose	 blissfulness	 you	 have	 to
choose	let-go	--	They	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin	--	but	then	ego	cannot	exist.
And	 the	 problem	 that	man	 has	 created	 for	 himself	 is	 that	 he	 wants	 to	 do	 the
impossible:	he	want	 the	ego	and	also	blissfulness,	he	want	 to	eat	 the	cake	and
save	it	too,	and	then	he	is	in	a	difficulty.	If	he	eats	he	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
miserable	 --	 the	 cake	 is	 gone;	 if	 he	 saves	 he	 is	 continuously	 hungry...	 and	 the
smell	 of	 the	 cake,	 and	 the	 so	 closeness	 of	 the	 cake,	 that	 the	whole	 time	 he	 is
oppressed,	the	whole	time	he	is	looking	at	the	cake,	but	he	knows	if	he	eats	it	is
gone	and	he	wants	to	have	both.
It	 is	not	possible,	 simply	not	possible;	 seeing	 this	 impossibility	 things	become
very	 clear:	 either	 have	 it	 then	 forget	 about	 eating	 it,	 or	 eat	 it	 and	 forget	 about
having	it.	And	my	suggestion	is	eat	it!	Because	what	is	the	point	of	having	it?	If
you	are	never	going	to	eat	it,	somebody	else	will	eat	it.	You	will	starve	to	death
and	somebody	will	enjoy	your	cake.	So	before	somebody	else	snatches	it	away,
eat	it	quickly	--	don't	waste	time	--	because	who	knows	about	the	next	moment?
You	 may	 not	 be	 here.	 You	 may	 not	 be	 capable	 to	 eat,	 you	 may	 have	 some
stomach	trouble.	All	kinds	of	things	are	possible.
So	 I	 tell	 to	my	 sannyasins	whenever	 you	 have	 the	 cake	 to	 eat	 it;	 if	 you	 don't
have,	eat	somebody	else	because	the	fools	who	are	saving	it,	they	are	saving	for
you!	Somebody	else	will	eat	it,	so	why	not	you?
Meditation	simply	means	the	art	of	eating	the	cake!	So	start	--	don't	wait!
How	long	you	will	be	here
(Three	days)
So	eat	your	cake	and	if	you	can	find	somebody	else	saving,	finish	it.	And	back
home	 you	 will	 find	 many	 people	 saving	 it.	 Here	 it	 may	 be	 difficult,	 almost
impossible.	People	have	eaten	their	own...	and	be	careful!
Somebody	may	 eat	 it.	 Somebody	may	 have	 already	 eaten	 it!	That's	 the	whole
trick:	 they	 send	you	 to	 take	 sannyas	 and	 they	will	 be	 eating	your	 cake!	So	be
intelligent.
Three	days	--	that's	actually	the	whole	life,	just	three	days:	childhood,	youth,	old
age	--	and	the	cake	is	gone!	And	come	back	again.
This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	Dhyan	Anugraha.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Anugraha
means	gratitude.
I	know	only	one	kind	of	prayer	and	that	is	the	prayer	of	the	heart,	with	no	words
--	because	the	heart	knows	no	language	--	but	the	heart	can	show	its	gratitude	in
absolute	 silence.	 Gratitude	 to	 the	 existence	 or	 to	 god	 or	 to	 truth,	 whatsoever
name	 one	 prefers	 --	 these	 are	 just	 names	 for	 the	 same	 reality.,	 Hence	 all	 the
prayers	 that	 go	 on	 in	 the	 temples	 and	 churches	 and	 synagogues	 are	 not	 true
prayers;	 they	 are	 just	 desires	 of	 the	 mind,	 parading	 as	 prayers.	 Everybody	 is
asking	for	somebody.
Nobody	is	grateful,	nobody	has	gone	there	to	say	thank	you.	In	fact	if	you	want
to	say	thank	you	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	the	church	or	wait	for	Sunday.	You	can
do	it	every	moment.	it	is	only	a	question	of	undercurrent	thankfulness;	just	like
breathing:	you	don't	wait	for	Sunday,	even	while	asleep	you	are	breathing.
So	 is	 the	 case	 with	 real	 gratitude:	 even	while	 asleep	 one	 is	 grateful.	 But	 this
gratefulness,	 this	prayer	comes	only	through	meditation.	It	 is	 the	by-product	of
meditation.	One	has	 just	 to	be	 silent,	 aware,	 relaxed,	 then	all	your	perceptions
become	clear,	all	your	senses	become	sensitive.	Your	eyes	for	the	first	time	see
and	your	ears	for	the	first	time	hear:	your	hands	for	the	first	time	touch.
There	 is	 immense	 difference...	 Bring	 a	 painter	 into	 the	 garden;	 he	 will	 see
hundreds	of	green	colours	because	each	tree	has	a	different	shade	of	green,	but
only	 a	 painter	 has	 that	 sensitivity,	 that	 subtle	 sensitivity	 which	 can	 see	 the
difference	between	two	subtle	shades	of	the	green.
Ordinarily	 people	will	 come	 and	 they	will	 see	 only	 green,	 all	 trees	 are	 green.
Eyes	 can	 be	 so	 sensitive	 that	 you	 can	 start	 feeling	 god	 in	 everything.	 God	 is
present	in	everything;	god	is	not	a	person	but	only	a	presence	--	in	the	flowers,	in
the	stars,	 in	 the	birds,	 in	 the	rivers,	 in	people,	 in	you,	 in	everything.	Even	 in	a
rock	god	is	fast	asleep.	If	you	have	the	capacity	to	feel	 the	texture	of	the	rock,
the	warmth	of	the	rock,	you	will	be	surprised:	it	responds.
But	to	understand	its	response	you	have	to	be	very	sensitive.	Meditation	releases
all	your	 sensitivities.	 It	makes	you	aware	of	god	and	all	 the	gifts	 that	god	has
given	--	and	then	naturally	there	is	gratitude.
I	call	that	gratitude	the	only	authentic	prayer.	That	gratitude	is	neither	Christian
nor	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan	--	it	cannot	be.	Gratitude	is	simply	gratitude.	One's
whole	being	wants	to	shout	to	existence
'Thank	you!'	And	the	moment	this	really	happens,	not	just	a	parrotlike	repetition
of	a	prayer	but	when	it	comes	out	of	your	meditation,	an	explosion	of	you	heart,
it	 transforms	 not	 only	 you	 but	 the	whole	world	 in	which	 you	 had	 lived	 up	 to
now,	because	now	you	can	see	much	more	into	it,	deeper	into	it,	to	the	very	core
of	it,	and	you	are	surprised:	everywhere	god	is,	in	millions	of	forms.
All	are	manifestations...	then	this	very	world	is	paradise	then	one	has	not	to	go
anywhere	else.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 swami	Dhyan	Lalit.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Lalit	means
beautiful,	graceful.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	 brings	 immense	 beauty	 to	 the	 person,	 infinite	 grace,	 and	 a	 beauty
which	is	not	something	painted	on	the	surface,	a	beauty	which	has	nothing	to	do
with	the	body,	a	beauty	that	radiates	from	the	very	centre	of	your	being.
Of	 course	 the	 body	 is	 also	 transformed	 by	 it:	 it	 becomes	 luminous.	 The	 body
also	 becomes	 surrounded	 by	 a	 light	 aura,	 but	 that	 is	 secondary.	 The	 most
important	thing	is	to	reach	to	your	centre.	The	moment	you	reach	to	your	centre
many	 things	 suddenly	 start	 happening,	 as	 if	 you	 touched	 the	 right	 spot	 and
triggered	a	revolution.
Beauty,	bliss,	benediction,	love,	compassion,	service,	freedom,	truth,	sincerity	--
they	 all	 come	 rushing	 towards	 you.	 You	 need	 not	 cultivate	 them,	 because
anything	cultivated	is	always	phony.	They	come	naturally,	spontaneously.
Lalit	means	 that	 spontaneous	grace,	 that	natural	beauty,	 that	 is	known	only	by
the	meditators	and	by	nobody	else.
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002225
ShortTitle:	NEVER22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Peter.	Deva	means	divine.	Peter	means	a	strong
spirit,	a	rocklike	spirit.
God	is	not	for	the	cowards.	God	is	not	for	the	weak.	God	is	only	for	those	who
have	guts	and	a	joy	in	adventure.	God	is	for	 the	gamblers,	 the	people	who	can
risk	all	for	something	unknown.	It	is	not	for	the	calculating	ones.	The	calculating
ones	say	that	one	bird	in	your	hand	is	better	than	two	bird	in	the	bush.	But	the
gambler	thinks	just	in	the	opposite	way:	whatsoever	is	in	his	hand	he	is	ready	to
risk	for	that	which	is	not	in	his	hand.	Hence	only	he	comes	to	know	the	unknown
and	the	unknowable	--	and	that's	what	god	is	all	about.
These	are	the	two	steps	in	entering	the	world	of	god.	The	first	step	is	from	the
known	 into	 the	 unknown,	 and	 the	 second	 step	 is	 from	 the	 unknown	 to	 the
unknowable.	A	strong	spirit	is	needed.
It	is	not	without	any	reason	that	very	few	people	have	experienced	god.	Millions
have	believed	but	only	very	few	have	experienced,	and	belief	 is	of	no	value	at
all.	It	is	a	question	of	knowing,	experiencing,	living.
Sannyas	 means	 getting	 ready	 for	 being	 a	 gambler,	 getting	 ready	 for	 an
uncalculated	 jump,	 getting	 ready	 to	 go	beyond	 the	 cunning	mind,	 and	 trusting
the	adventurous	heart.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Margit.	Anand	means	bliss,	Margit	means	a	child
of	light.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 crowd	 lives	 in	 darkness	 and	 the	 child	 of	 darkness	 is	missing.	 The	 crowd
lives	 unconsciously	 and	 the	 child	 of	 unconsciousness	 is	 missing.	 but	 man	 is
capable	 of	 living	 in	 light,	 he	 has	 the	 potential,	 but	 the	 potential	 has	 to	 be
transformed	onto	a	reality.	He	has	the	seed	but	the	seed	alone	is	not	enough;	the
seed	 needs	 a	 soil,	 the	 seed	 needs	 a	 gardener,	 the	 seed	 needs	 care,	 watering,
protection	 till	 it	 becomes	 strong	 enough,	 then	 only	 one	 day	 when	 the	 spring
comes	it	will	blossom,	it	will	burst	forth	into	thousands	of	songs.
The	flowers	are	songs	of	 the	 trees.	They	were	all	 lying	fast	asleep,	dormant	 in
the	 seed	 and	 the	 same	 is	 the	 situation	 of	man.	Man	 has	 the	 potential	 seed	 of
becoming	full	of	light,	becoming	enlightened,	becoming	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ	or
a	Mohammed,	but	it	 is	only	a	seed.	Much	work	is	needed.	Sannyas	means	that
you	have	found	a	soil:	rejoice,	risk,	and	let	the	seed	die	into	the	soil	of	sannyas.
Sannyas	means	that	you	have	found	a	gardener;	now,	if	you	trust	then	the	seed
can	open	up,	if	you	cannot	trust	the	seed	will	remain	closed.
The	 closedness	 simply	 indicates	 one	 thing:	mistrust,	 doubt,	 fear.	And	 opening
shows	 trust,	 love,	 readiness	 to	 go	 with	 the	 master,	 not	 knowing	 where	 he	 is
taking	you,	because	 there	 is	 no	way	 to	know	 it	 beforehand.	 In	 fact	 the	master
cannot	even	convince	you	that	there	exists	something	beyond	the	matter.	It	is	a
love	affair.	He	can	take	your	hand	in	his	hand	and	lead	you	to	the	window	from
where	you	can	look	towards	the	beyond.	And	just	a	glimpse	of	the	starry	sky	is
enough,	 and	 tremendous	 joy	 arises!	 Just	 a	 small	 ray	 of	 light	 penetrating	 your
innermost	core	like	an	arrow	is	enough:	the	night	is	over	and	with	the	night	the
misery	 is	 over.	 And	 the	 same	 energy	 that	 was	 involved	 in	 a	 misery	 becomes
blissfulness.
Bliss	 is	 a	 child	 of	 light;	 hence	 those	who	 try	 to	 be	 blissful	without	 becoming
light-full,	 are	 searching	 in	 vain.	 They	 will	 find	 only	 frustration	 and	 failure,
because	bliss	can	be	found	only	if	you	have	found	the	light.
It	 is	a	by-product	of	 light,	a	child	of	 light.	Every	body	longs	for	bliss	but	very
few	people	try	to	find	out	the	science.
It	is	just	like	this:	everybody	wants	a	child	and	nobody	takes	care	that	first	you
need	 a	mother,	 you	 need	 a	 womb.	 If	 the	 world	 continued	 to	 look	 for	 a	 child
everywhere	--	in	the	mountains	and	in	the	moon	and	on	the	Mars,	everywhere	--
it	won't	 find	a	 single	child.	you	have	 to	 find	 the	mother,	because	child	will	be
born	out	of	the	mother	and	light	is	the	mother	of	bliss.
Those	who	have	looked	for	light	they	have	found	both,	light	and	bliss;	those	who
have	looked	only	for	bliss	have	found	nothing,	neither	bliss	nor	light.	Their	life
remains	a	darkness,	a	long,	long	misery,	a	nightmare.	From	cradle	to	the	grave	it
is	sheer	tragedy	and	nothing	else.	It	can	become	a	dance,	it	can	become	a	festival
of	lights,	but	it	all	depends	on	you.	One	has	to	search	in	the	right	direction.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Anughosh.	Prem	means	love,	Anughosh	means
declaration.
Sannyas	 is	a	declaration	of	 love,	 that	 'I	 love	 the	world,'	 that	 'I	 love	 life,'	 that	 'I
love	 existence,'	 that	 'Love	 is	 going	 to	 be	 my	 very	 lifestyle,	 my	 approach	 to
everything.'
The	so-called	religions	have	been	 talking	about	 love	but	 teaching	hatred.	They
have	followed	a	very	cunning	strategy:	talk	about	love	but	teach	hatred.
They	teach	you	hatred	for	the	world	because	they	say	'Unless	you	renounce	the
world	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	god.'	Now	this	is	sheer	stupidity!	If	god	has
created	 the	 world	 then	 renouncing	 the	 world	 is	 renouncing	 god	 himself,
condemning	the	world	is	condemning	god	himself.	It	is	his	creation.	When	you
love	 the	painting	you	 are	 showing	 appreciation	 and	 love	 for	 the	painter,	when
you	 appreciate	music	 you	 have	 appreciated	 the	musician.	 If	 you	 condemn	 the
music	 how	 can	 you	 appreciate	 the	 musician?	 --	 That's	 impossible.	 If	 you
renounce	 the	dance	 then	you	have	also	renounced	 the	dancer,	because	 they	are
one	phenomenon,	inseparably	one.
So	religions	 talk	about	 love	but	 teach	hatred	--	hatred	for	 the	world,	hatred	for
the	material	existence.
And	material	 existence	 is	 a	 absolute	 necessity;	 without	 it	 nothing	 is	 possible.
Without	 the	body	you	are	not	possible.	 Just	 take	 the	matter	out	 and	 the	whole
tree	disappears,	the	tree	is	not	possible.	Take	the	matter	out	and	the	beauty	and
the	flower	both	disappear;	 they	needed	matter	to	exist.	Certainly	they	are	more
than	the	matter,	but	that	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	denounce	the	matter	and
the	material.
And	 the	 religions	 have	 been	 teaching	 hatred	 for	 each	 other:	 Christians	 have
hated	 Mohammedans,	 Mohammedans	 have	 hated	 Hindus,	 Hindus	 have	 hated
Buddhists	--	everybody	has	been	creating	hatred	and	on	the	surface	they	all	go
on	sermonising	about	love...
Sannyas	 is	 really	 not	 only	 a	 declaration	 of	 love,	 but	 living	 it	 too.	 And	 the
beginning	 is	 love	 existence,	 love	 life,	 love	 all	 that	 life	 implies	 and	 destroy	 all
beliefs	 that	are	deep-rooted	 in	you	which	carry	 the	seeds	of	hatred.	Don't	be	a
Christian,	 don't	 be	 a	 Hindu,	 don't	 be	 a	 Mohammedan;	 just	 being	 human	 is
enough.	God	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
created	 you	 as	 a	 human	being,	 not	 as	 a	Catholic,	 not	 as	 a	 Protestant,	 not	 as	 a
witness	 of	 Jehovah.	What	 kind	 of	 things	 people	 have	 created?	He	 has	 simply
created	you	just	like	a	small	innocent	human	being,	and	all	these	stupidities	have
been	imposed	upon	you.
Throw	 them	 all	 away!	 If	 you	 want	 to	 love,	 to	 grow,	 remove	 all	 the	 barriers,
because	love	is	the	only	way	towards	god.	In	fact	love	is	the	first	experience	of
god	and	the	last	 too.	In	the	beginning	it	 is	 just	a	ray,	in	the	end	it	becomes	the
whole	source	of	love.	The	beginning	and	the	end	cannot	be	separate,	they	cannot
be	qualitatively	different.	The	only	difference	can	be	of	quantity.
In	the	beginning	it	is	just	a	dewdrop	of	love	--	of	course	it	is	a	beginning	--	but
the	dewdrop	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger;	it	becomes	a	stream,	a	river,
and	finally	the	infinite	ocean.
I	teach	only	one	thing	and	that	is	love!
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyaneshar.	Dhyaneshwar	means	god	of	meditation.
There	is	no	other	proof	for	god	except	meditation,	because	meditation	gives	you
the	 taste	 of	 god.	All	 other	 arguments	 about	 god	 are	 empty,	 containers	without
any	content.	Philosophers	have	been	arguing	for	centuries,	for	and	against,	and
nothing	has	been	decided	by	them	yet	and	I	don't	 think	they	will	ever	come	to
any	conclusion.	Philosophy	basically	is	bound	to	remain	inconclusive,	because	it
is	trying	to	find	arguments	for	something	which	is	not	a	question	of	logic	at	all.
For	 example,	 how	 can	 you	 come	 to	 a	 conclusion	 through	 logical	 reasoning
whether	sugar	tastes	sweet	or	not?	The	only	way	to	come	to	a	conclusion	is	 to
have	a	taste	of	it	and	then	only	you	know.
God	is	a	taste,	is	an	experience,	and	meditation	is	only	preparing	you	so	that	you
can	avoid	the	whole	complexities	of	logic,	mind,	thinking	and	you	can	dive	deep
into	the	ocean	of	god.	Just	a	single	experience	and	everything	is	settled	forever.
One	 can	 go	 on	 arguing	 for	 lives	 and	 one	 arrives	 to	 no	 conclusion,	 and	 just	 a
single	moment	of	meditation	 and	 everything	 is	 absolutely	 clear.	And	only	 that
certainty,	that	absolute	certainty,	transforms	life	--	not	belief	--	because	belief	is
always	a	cover-up	for	your	doubt.	Deep	down	there	is	doubt	and	nobody	wants
to	be	 in	a	doubt	because	 it	hurts,	 it	creates	shakiness,	 trembling,	one	 feels	one
does	not	know,	one	covers	it	up	with	a	belief.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Premshanti.	Premshanti	means	peace	and	love;	two	sides
of	the	same	coin.
The	heart	full	of	love	is	out	of	necessity	peaceful,	or	vice	versa	is	also	true:	when
one	is	peaceful	one	is	loving.	From	the	other	side	also	it	can	be	said:	when	one	is
full	of	hatred,	anger,	violence,	 jealousy	 --	which	are	all	aspects	of	hate	 --	 then
one	cannot	be	peaceful.	That's	impossible.	Or	if	one	is	not	peaceful	then	one	will
be	full	of	hatred,	because	the	energy	cannot	remain	unused.	Either	you	have	to
use	 it	 positively	 or	 it	 turns	 sour	 and	 becomes	 negative.	 Either	 you	 use	 it
creatively	or	it	becomes	destructive.
Hate	 is	destructive,	 love	 is	creative.	You	can	start	 from	either	end,	either	 from
being	peaceful	or	from	being	loving	or	you	can	start	simultaneously	--	there	is	no
contradiction	in	them.	Be	lovingly	peaceful,	be	peacefully	loving	and	forget	all
about	 religious	 jargon,	 forget	 all	 about	 esoteric	 nonsense.	 Be	 simple.	 Truth	 is
very	simple.
Just	 be	 peaceful	 and	 loving	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 tot	 go	 to	 any	 church,	 to	 any
temple,	no	need	to	carry	the	load	of	scriptures,	theologies,	no	need	to	be	a	victim
of	priests	 and	 the	popes;	you	can	be	absolutely	 independent,	 free	 from	all	 this
oppressive	exploitative	mechanism	 that	has	been	sucking	 the	very	soul	of	man
for	 centureis.	You	can	get	out	of	 this,	 and	getting	out	of	 this	 is	very	essential.
Only	 then	 you	will	 feel	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the	 fresh	 air,	 the	 sun,	 the	moon,	 the
stars.	And	from	that	 fresh	experience	one	can	borrow	the	belief	 --	 there	are	so
many	people	selling	the	beliefs	all	around	the	world.	In	fact	one	need	not	borrow
it:	parents	give	it	to	every	child	without	even	asking	the	child.	'Whether	you	like
it	 or	 not,	whether	 you	want	 it	 or	 not.'	 In	 fact	 they	 force	 him	 to	 swallow	 their
beliefs.
My	purpose	here	is	to	help	you	to	get	rid	of	all	systems	of	thought.	Howsoever
beautiful	they	are,	they	are	impotent,	howsoever	appealing	they	are,	their	appeal
is	only	to	the	head	and	head	does	not	count	at	all.
All	 that	 counts	 is	 the	 heart,	 the	 opening	 of	 the	 lotus	 of	 the	 heart	 --	 and	 that
happens	in	meditation.
Meditation	 simply	means	 becoming	 silent,	 utterly	 silent,	 thoughtless	mindless,
reaching	to	such	a	profound	stillness	within	yourself	where	nothing	moves,	not
even	 a	 ripple	 in	 the	 lake	 of	 consciousness,	 where	 the	 whole	 lake	 of
consciousness	is	so	still	 that	it	functions	like	a	mirror.	When	the	consciousness
functions	like	a	mirror	it	reflects	god,	inevitably,	without	any	exception.
Those	who	have	been	 silent,	 they	have	know	god	 --	whatsoever	 their	 country,
whatsoever	their	colour,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
whatsoever	their	race,	makes	no	difference,	whatsoever	their	time,	age,	makes	no
difference.	 the	 basic	 requirement	 fulfilled	 and	 suddenly	 god	 is	 reflected	 in	 the
lake	of	your	consciousness.	And	that	very	experience	transforms	you	from	time
to	eternity,	 from	death	 to	deathlessness,	 from	misery	 to	bliss,	 from	darkness	 to
light.
One	 of	 the	 most	 famous	 prayers	 of	 Upanishadic	 seers	 is:	 Tamso	 ma
Jyotirgamaya	--	oh	my	lord,	lead	me	from	darkness	to	light;	Asto	ma	sadgamaya
--	oh	my	lord,	lead	me	from	the	untruth	to	the	truth;	Mrityorma	amritamgamaya
--	oh	my	lord,	lead	me	from	death	to	deathlessness.'
These	three	small	sutras	can	be	said	to	contain	all	the	religions	of	the	world,	the
whole	religious	quest.
How	long	you	will	be	here?
(I	have	no	idea)
That's	good.	That's	what	I	like!	Good
Ma	Gyan	Viten
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Gyan	 Viten.	 Gyan	 means	 knowledge.	 Viten	 means
transcendence.
Knowledge	 has	 to	 be	 transcended.	 Knowledge	 is	 a	 hindrance	 on	 the	 path	 of
wisdom.	Mind	 is	a	barrier	 for	 the	meditator.	The	more	you	know,	 the	 less	you
know;	 the	 less	 you	 know,	 the	 more	 you	 know.	 And	 to	 bring	 it	 to	 its	 logical
conclusion:	 the	 moment	 you	 can	 say	 "I	 know	 nothing,"	 you	 know	 all.	 That's
what	Socrates	is	reported	to	have	said	at	the	very	end	of	his	life.	He	says	"I	know
only	 one	 thing	 that	 I	 know	nothing."	This	 is	 the	 ultimate	 state	 of	wisdom:	 all
knowledge	has	been	transcended.	Just	there	is	a	little	flaw	in	it.
If	sometimes	I	meet	Socrates	I	am	going	to	tell	it	to	him.	This	flaw	was	possible
because	he	was	not	in	India,	he	was	in	Greece,	and	he	had	to	speak	the	language
that	Greeks	understood	--	the	language	of	logic.
Had	he	been	in	India	he	would	not	have	done	that.
The	Upanishads	say	"The	person	who	says	'I	know',	knows	not;	one	who	says	'I
know	not,'	knows."	The	flaw	is	in	Socrates	statement	when	he	says	"I	know	only
one	thing"	--	that	much	ignorance	is	still	there,	that	one	thing,	that	he	thinks	he
knows.	He	 should	have	 simply	 said	 that	 'I	 don't	 know	anything.'	Why	make	 it
this	way	that	'I	know	only	one	thing'?
When	 Bodhidharma,	 one	 of	 the	 great	 mystics	 of	 India,	 was	 asked	 by	 the
Emperor	Wu	of	China,	"Who	are	you?",	he	simply	stood	there	and	said	"I	don't
know."	That	is	the	most	profound	statement	ever	made.
This	 is	 transcendence	 of	 knowledge;	 the	moment	 you	 transcend	 knowing	 you
experience	being	--	and	that	is	true	wisdom,	wisdom	that	liberates,	wisdom	that
brings	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 blessings	 to	 you,	 and	 through	 you	 to	 the	 whole
existence.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Shantideva.	Shantideva	means	god	of	silence.
The	 experience	 of	 silence	 is	 the	 most	 profound	 experience	 in	 life	 --	 not	 the
silence	of	the	desert	and	the	mountains.	That	is	not	your	silence.	You	can	go	to
the	Himalayas	and	you	will	feel	tremendous	silence,	but	that	is	the	silence	of	the
Himalayas.	 The	moment	 you	 start	 coming	 down	 from	 the	mountains	 you	will
start	 losing	 track	of	 it.	Back	 in	 to	 the	marketplace	you	are	 the	same	person,	 in
fact	 in	 a	 worse	 condition	 than	 before,	 because	 now	 you	 will	 hanker	 for	 that
silence,	now	the	marketplace	and	its	noise,	in	contrast,	will	look	very	crazy,	mad.
That's	 why	 for	 centuries	 so	 many	 religious	 people	 have	 been	 escaping	 to	 the
deserts,	to	the	mountains,	to	the	monasteries,	to	find	silence.	but	what	they	were
finding	was	something	that	was	not	really	theirs.
They	were	 really	 cheating,	 themselves.	 The	 only	 criterion	 is	 the	marketplace;
they	 should	 have	 come	 back	 to	 the	 marketplace	 and	 they	 would	 have	 found
immediately	it	is	gone.
My	effort	with	my	sannyasins	is	that	you	should	remain	in	the	marketplace	and
yet	 be	 silent	 so	 there	 is	 no	possibility	 of	 losing	 it	 once	you	gain	 it.	Of	 course
gaining	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a	 little	 bit	 difficult,	 but	 then	 losing	will	 be	 impossible.
Gaining	it	into	a	monastery,	into	a	mountain	retreat	will	be	very	easy,	very	cheap
but	losing	it	will	be	also	very	easy	and	very	simple.
And	the	time	that	you	wasted	believing	that	you	have	attained	it	is	simply	gone
out	of	your	hand.
Once	 a	 Sufi	 fakir	 was	 brought	 to	 me	 --	 he	 had	 many	 followers.	 Few	 of	 his
followers	had	become	interested	in	me	and	they	wanted	their	master	 to	see	me
and	meet	me.	And	they	were	continuously	praising	him.	They	were	saying	that
for	thirty	years	he	sees	god	everywhere	--	everything.	He	talks	to	the	trees,	to	the
rocks,	he	stands	in	ecstasy	by	the	side	of	a	tree,	tears	of	joy	flowing	from	is	eyes
--	he	experiences	god	everywhere.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	said	'You	bring	him	to	me;'	they	brought	him	to	me	and	I	told	all	the	disciples
that	'You	disperse.
Leave	him	alone	with	me	 for	 three	 days.'	They	 said	 'But	why?'	 I	 said	 'That	 is
something	to	do	with	me	and	him.'	And	I	asked	him	'Are	you	willing	to	be	here
for	three	days?'	He	could	not	say	no	because	he	had	to	see	god	everywhere,	 in
everybody,	so	he	had	to	see	god	even	in	me.	I	said	'Do	you	see	god	in	me?'	He
said
'Yes.'	And	I	said	 'You	have	to	follow	me.	Be	here	for	three	days.'	He	could	not
say	no.	How	can	you	say	no	to	a	god?	He	looked	a	little	puzzled	and	afraid	also,
because	 being	 three	 days	 with	 me,	 who	 knows	 what	 will	 happen?	 And	 I	 am
dispersing	 his	 disciples...	 I	 dispersed	 the	 disciples	 and	 I	 asked	 him	 only	 one
question	that
'Now	 you	 will	 be	 three	 days	 with	 me	 --	 I	 ask	 you	 only	 one	 thing:	 how	 this
started,	your	experience	of	seeing	god	in	everything?	It	started	on	its	own	or	you
practised	it?'
He	said	 'How	it	can	start	on	its	own?	For	years	I	had	to	practise.'	I	said	 'That's
okay.	Now	you	have	 stopped	practising	or	you	are	 still	 practising?'	He	 said	 'It
has	to	be	practised	continuously	otherwise	one	starts	losing	it.'	Then	I	said	'You
do	one	thing:	for	three	days	you	stop	practising.	Thirty	years	you	have	practised,
three	days	you	stop	practising	it.	If	it	is	real	after	three	days	it	will	be	with	you;
if	it	is	not	real	but	just	a	constant	hypnosis,	then	after	three	days	it	will	be	gone.'
He	said	 'It	 is	real.'	 I	said	 'That,	perfectly	good:	 then	stop	practising.'	He	had	to
agree	 for	 that	 too,	 because	 he	was	 insisting	 it	 is	 real.	 In	 fact	 the	way	 he	was
insisting	was	enough	a	proof	 that	 it	was	not	 real.	He	was	over-insisting	 that	 it
was	real	--	that	was	compensation.	he	was	afraid	himself,	I	could	see	the	fear	in
his	eyes,	and	after	three	days	he	was	very	angry	with	me,	because	for	three	days
I	didn't	allow	him	to	pray,	I	was	constantly	watching	him,	I	didn't	allow	him	to
go	to	the	trees	and	talk,	I	was	always	with	him	and	he	had	to	talk	with	me,	not
with	 the	 trees.	 And	 in	 three	 days	 I	 destroyed	 whatsoever	 he	 thought	 he	 had
attained	in	thirty	years.	After	three	days	he	was	really	angry	and	he	said	 'What
have	you	done	to	me?	--	My	thirty	years	practise	destroyed.'
I	said	'You	just	think:	if	not	practising	three	days	and	something	disappears,	that
simply	means	it	was	phony.	You	were	just	hypnotising	yourself.	It	 is	good	that
now	you	will	be	able	to	see	the	foolishness	of	it.
Thirty	years	are	wasted	but	whatsoever	 is	gone	 is	gone.	You	are	still	alive	and
there	 is	 still	 life	ahead:	you	can	use	 that	opportunity.	No	more	practising	of	 it.
Don't	befool	yourself	by	talking	to	the	trees	and	the	rocks;	you	know	deep	down
they	 are	 rocks	 and	 they	 are	 trees,	 because	 I	 don't	 see	 you	 talking	 with	 the
donkeys	 and	 the	 buffaloes.	 If	 you	 see	 god	 everywhere,	 why	 not	 donkeys	 and
buffaloes?	You	 always	 talk	 to	 the	 roses...	 It	 is	 a	 choice,	 you	 are	 practising	 it.
Those	tears	are	phony,	they	are	not	true,	they	are	crocodile	tears.'
He	was	angry	but	he	understood	the	point.	He	said	'But	you	have	made	me	very
ordinary.'	I	said	'I	have	done	my	work	--	that's	my	work:	making	people	ordinary,
bringing	them	down	from	their	holier-than-thou	heights	which	don't	exist	really
but	are	only	in	their	beliefs.'
For	my	sannyasins	this	is	a	basic,	a	fundamental	to	be	understood:	peace	has	to
be	attained,	silence	has	to	be	experienced,	but	 in	the	world.	It	will	take	al	little
longer	 because	 there	 are	 so	 many	 distractions,	 so	 many	 problems,	 so	 many
worries	and	so	many	challenges,	but	it	is	worth	because	once	you	attain	it,	then
wherever	you	are	silence	pervades	you	very	being,	it	moves	with	you.
Once	Buddha	was	asked	'What	happens	when	a	meditator	dies	--	does	he	go	to
heaven?;	He	said	'No,	but	wherever	he	goes	it	is	heaven.'	That	seems	to	be	a	real,
authentic	statement:	wherever	he	goes	there	is	paradise.
And	only	when	you	know	silence	 in	 the	 noise,	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 experience
god,	otherwise	not,	because	 if	 the	silence	 itself	 is	phony	-*-(words	missing)-*-
Christian	god,	Hindu	god,	Mohammedan	god	--
phony,	 synthetic,	 plastic.	 But	 when	 the	 silence	 is	 real	 then	 you	 will	 know	 a
certain	quality	of	godliness	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	Christianity,	Hinduism,
Buddhism,	 Jainism,	 which	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 any	 ideology.	 It	 is	 your
experience,	your	flowering,	your	blossoming	--	you	have	come	home.	It	is	your
home,	it	is	not	a	church.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
(Till	tomorrow)
That's	great!	Come	back	again.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002235
ShortTitle:	NEVER23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Yoga	 Sudhiro.	 Yoga	 means	 the	 ultimate	 union.	 And
Sudhiro	means	the	wise	one.
Wisdom	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 the	 ultimate	 union	 with	 the	 whole.	 Remaining
bounded	by	the	ego	is	the	only	cause	of	our	ignorance.	Separate	from	existence
nobody	 can	 be	 wise,	 but	 one	 with	 the	 existence	 everybody	 can	 be	 wise.	 The
whole	secret	is	in	melting,	merging,	becoming	one,	but	people	are	fighting	with
the	whole;	they	are	trying	to	save	their	egos	in	every	possible	way.	They	want	to
remain	separate	entities.
The	very	effort	 is	doomed,	doomed	because	of	 the	nature	of	existence.	We	are
part	 of	 it,	 we	 cannot	 be	 apart	 from	 it.	We	 can	 only	 think,	 we	 can	 live	 in	 an
illusion,	but	illusion	is	ignorance.	The	moment	we	drop	the	illusion,	the	notion
of	being	separate,	suddenly	the	discovery	that	 'I	am	one	with	the	whole	--	with
the	 trees,	 with	 the	 clouds,	 with	 the	 sky,	 with	 the	 stars.	 And	 the	 moment	 that
feeling	 arises	 in	 you	 it	 brings	 tremendous	 insight,	 wisdom,,	 enlightenment,
Buddhahood.
Sannyas	means	getting	ready	to	allow	the	dewdrop	to	disappear	into	the	ocean	so
that	the	ocean	can	disappear	into	the	dewdrop.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Yoga	Ananto.	Yoga	means	the	ultimate	union.	Ananto
means	the	experience	of	infinity.
Ego	 is	 finite,	 it	 is	 very	 small.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 soap	 bubble;	 a	 small	 pinprick	 and	 it
disappears.	 it	 has	 no	 real	 existence	 and	 because	 it	 has	 no	 real	 existence	 it
constantly	afraid	of	death.
Man	lives	 in	 the	fear	of	death.	Deep	down	there	 is	a	 trembling,	and	all	 the	so-
called	religions	have	been	simply	trying	to	console	man	that	'Don't	be	afraid;	you
are	immortal.	Only	the	body	dies,	your	soul	will	always	live.'	To	believe	in	these
things	does	not	mean	 that	 you	 are	 religious.	 It	 simply	means	 that	 you	 are	 still
carrying	 the	 ego	 and	 because	 the	 ego	 creates	 the	 fear	 of	 death;	 hence	 you	 are
trying	 to	 cover	 up	 that	 fear.	 Because	 the	 ego	 is	 small	 it	 tries	 in	 every	way	 to
pretend	to	be	big.
Hence	 the	 whole	 struggle	 to	 be	 superior	 than	 others.	 It	 arises	 out	 of	 a	 deep
inferiority	 complex.	 The	whole	 politics	 of	 being	 superior	 to	 others,	 the	whole
trip,	whether	through	money	or	power	or	knowledge,	is	the	same.	it	is	the	same
number.	Behind	it	all	is	the	small	ego	which	feels	hurt	because	of	its	smallness;
hence	it	wants	to	expand.
But	you	can	become	the	richest	man	in	the	world,	still,	the	wound	will	be	there.
No	 riches	 can	make	 that	wound	disappear.	You	can	become	 the	president	of	 a
country,	the	wound	will	be	there.	In	fact	when	one	becomes	the	president	or	the
richest	man	or	the	most	knowledgeable	man,	then	one	can	see	the	wound	more
clearly,	 in	 contrast.	On	 the	 one	 side	 he	 can	 see	 the	 pile	 of	wealth	 that	 he	 has
accumulated,	and	compared	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
that	wealth	now	he	 looks	even	more	smaller	 than	before.	He	looks	 just	 like	an
ant	creeping	by	the	side	of	a	hill.
That	 is	 one	 of	 the	 problems	 every	 success,	 successful	 man	 has	 to	 face	 and
encounter.
I	say	again	and	again	 that	nothing	fails	 like	success.	at	 the	pinnacle	of	success
suddenly	you	 realise	 that	everything	has	 failed,	everything	 that	you	had	hoped
for.	But	there	is	an	another	route,	there	is	an	another	dimension.	There	is	no	need
to	become	bigger,	richer,	powerful.	All	that	is	needed	is	to	remove	the	cause	of
this	whole	nonsense,	to	drop	the	idea	of	being	finite.	Disappear	into	the	whole	so
that	you	can	feel	infinity,	eternity.
Then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 belief,	 then	 it	 is	 an	 experience,	 and	 it	 is	 only	 experience	 that
liberates.	Beliefs	are	all	superstitious;	I	say	all	without	any	condition.	All	beliefs
are	blinding,	destructive,	immensely	poisonous.
The	only	thing	that	releases	one	from	all	imprisonment,	all	misery,	is	experience,
but	for	experience	one	needs	the	courage	to	jump	into	the	whole.
And	 that's	what	yoga	 is,	 that's	what	sannyas	 is.	Sannyas	 is	 the	very	essence	of
yoga:	the	science	of	meeting	with	the	whole.
Just	a	 little	 taste	of	 it	 and	all	your	past	and	 its	miseries	and	worries	disappear,
instantly,	 as	 if	 they	 had	 never	 existed	 before.	 it	 is	 just	 like	 waking	 up	 in	 the
morning	and	the	dreams	simply	disappear.
Sannyas	 is	an	awakening	from	the	dream	of	 the	ego.	And	the	moment	you	are
awake	you	are	not,	the	whole	is.
In	sleep	you	are,	the	whole	is	not;	hence	the	whole	science	is	very	simple:	if	you
want	 to	be	blissful,	 if	you	want	 to	be	eternal,	 infinite,	deathless,	 then	don't	be,
just	learn	not	to	be.	Be	a	nothing,	a	nobody,	and	immediately	you	are	all,	you	are
the	whole!
This	 is	your	name:	Ma	Yoga	Nandita.	Yoga	means	 the	ultimate	union.	Nandita
means	blissfulness.
Ego	 is	 misery,	 egolessness	 is	 blissfulness.	 These	 two	 sutras	 are	 enough	 to
transform	the	whole	life.	The	first	part	is	the	part	where	we	are	and	the	second
part	is	the	part	where	we	should	be.
We	are	in	misery,	in	darkness,	in	the	world	of	the	ego,	but	we	can	wake	up	The
most	 fortunate	 thing	 is	 that	 it	 is	 only	 a	 nightmare.	Howsoever	 horrible	 it	may
appear,	but	is	only	a	dream.	Of	course	when	one	is	in	a	nightmare	one	suffers.	If
a	 tiger	 is	 chasing	 you	 there	 is	 suffering	 and	 you	 are	 running	 and	 the	 tiger	 is
coming	closer	and	closer;	you	can	start	feeling	his	hot	breath	just	on	your	back,
and	then	you	feel	his	hand	on	your	back	and	you	know	you	are	finished,	all	 is
finished.	But	that	is	the	moment	when	you	wake	up,	that's	the	good	thing,	that's
the	good	thing	about	nightmares:	exactly	at	the	right	moment	one	wakes	up	and
suddenly	 you	 find	 it	 is	 nobody	 but	 your	 husband!	 Who	 may	 be	 having	 his
nightmare,	so	he	is	breathing	hard	and	hot	and	it	is	nobody's	hand	but	his	hand.
And	 then	 one	 can	 laugh	 at	 the	 whole	 thing.	 When	 Bodhidharma	 became
enlightened	he	laughed,	it	is	said,	for	seven	days	continuously...	without	even	for
a	tea-break,	without	going	to	sleep,	because	he	could	not.
He	will	sleep	and	he	will	laugh	and	roll,	and	he	would	not	allow	even	others	to
sleep.	And	they	all	thought	that	he	has	gone	mad!
And	he	will	in	every	way,	was	simply	showing	that	all	his	life	that	he	has	been
thinking	 is	 a	 reality	 was	 just	 only	 a	 dream.	 It	 was	 so	 easy	 to	 wake	 up	He	 is
laughing	at	the	whole	ridiculousness	of	it	all,	at	the	whole	absurdity,	that	how	he
suffered,	how	much	he	suffered,	and	there	was	nothing	to	suffer,	but	he	imagined
the	whole	thing.	The	whole	scene	was	imaginary.
All	those	ghosts	were	created	by	him	--	holy	and	unholy	both	--	all	those	dreams
were	 nothing	 but	 his	 projections.	 his	 laughter	 is	 significant.	 He	 is	 not	 only
laughing	at	himself;	he	is	laughing	at	all	those	who	are	seeking	and	searching.
The	person	who	becomes	awakened	has	a	very	strange	experience:	he	feels	sorry
for	you	and	still,	deep	down,	he	giggles	 --	 at	 the	 same	 time.	He	cannot	giggle
loudly	 because	 he	 sees	 your	 sadness,	 your	 misery,	 he	 knows	 that	 you	 are
suffering	but	he	also	knows	that	your	suffering	is	your	creation	and	it	is	only	the
idea.But	as	far	as	you	are	concerned,	there	is	no	difference	between	the	idea	and
the	reality,	so	he	feels	sorry	for	you,	but	as	far	as	he	himself	is	concerned,	now
he	knows	perfectly	well	 that	he	has	 suffered	also	and	 that	was	 just	 in	his	own
mind.
In	 fact	 the	 whole	 humanity	 is	 a	 mental	 case.	 And	 to	 come	 out	 of	 it	 is	 not
difficult:	 just	a	 little	effort	of	 tossing	and	 turning	 in	 the	bed	and	you	will	open
your	mind,	you	will	open	your	eyes.
All	 these	 methods	 that	 are	 being	 used	 here	 are	 nothing	 but	 to	 bring	 your
nightmare	to	a	climax	where	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you	 have	 to	 wake	 up.	 Mm?	 what	 is	 Dynamic	 mediation?	 Can	 anybody	 do
Dynamic	 meditation	 in	 sleep?	 He	 will	 disturb	 even	 other's	 sleep.	 What	 is
Kundalini	meditation?	If	you	toss	and	turn	so	much	you	are	bound	to	wake	up.
You	may	 fall	 from	 the	bed,	but	 that	 fall	 is	of	 immense	help,	because	suddenly
you	open	your	eyes	and	all	those	dreams	of	misery,	anguish,	hell,	are	gone,	and	a
tremendous	peace	descends	on	you,	an	immense	bliss	surrounds	you.
And	it	is	something	that	comes	but	never	goes	--	it	abides!
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Yoga	Swatantro.	Yoga	means	the	ultimate	union	with
reality,	with	existence,	with	the	whole.	And	Swatantro	means	freedom.
It	 is	a	very	paradoxical	phenomenon	that	when	we	are	separate	from	existence
we	are	in	bondage.	Our	very	separation	becomes	our	bondage.	Of	course	every
boundary	is	a	bondage,	every	limit	is	a	limitation.
The	moment	 you	withdraw	your	 boundary,	 you	 dismantle	 your	 fence	 that	 you
have	created	around	yourself,	you	are	free;	 then	the	whole	sky	is	yours	and	all
the	stars.	And	with	that	freedom	one	can	experience	truth,	love,	god.
With	the	boundary	of	the	ego	we	can	live	only	in	lies,	in	hatred,	in	evil,	because
we	are	rooted	in	a	totally	wrong	conception.	Our	very	existence	is	topsy-turvy.	It
is	like	a	leaf	of	the	tree	which	thinks	it	is	separate	from	the	tree.	The	very	idea
that	 it	 is	 separate	 from	 the	 tree	will	make	 it	 go	pale,	 because	 the	nourishment
comes	from	the	tree,	the	greenness	comes	from	the	tree,	the	juice	comes	from	the
tree;	the	very	idea	will	become	a	barrier.
The	 juices	will	not	be	flowing,	 the	greenness	will	not	be	coming	to	 it,	 the	 leaf
will	start	dying,	shrinking.
The	moment	it	drops	that	idea	of	being	separate	and	understands	that	'I	am	part
of	 the	 tree	 and	 the	 tree	 is	 part	 of	 the	 earth,	 and	 the	 earth	 is	 part	 of	 the	 solar
system,	and	the	solar	system	is	part	of	the	cosmos,'	then	even	the	small	leaf	is	as
much	essential	part	of	the	whole	as	the	greatest	sun.	And	in	existence	there	is	no
hierarchy,	because	existence	is	one,	so	how	can	there	be	any	hierarchy.
Hierarchy	 needs	 numbers	 --	 somebody	 higher,	 somebody	 lower	 --	 but	 it	 is	 all
one!	Hence	the	smallest	blade	of	grass	is	as	significant	as	the	greatest	star.	There
is	no	higher,	no	 lower.	This	understanding	releases	your	 imprisoned	splendour.
Suddenly	you	start	feeling	so	vast	that	you	cannot	do	but	rejoice,	celebrate.	You
cannot	do	but	sing	and	dance.
My	 sannyasins	dancing	 and	 singing	 are	not	 just	 dancing	and	 singing.	There	 is
something	deep	in	it,	something	tremendously	significant	in	it.	They	have	started
feeling	 a	 deep	 attunement	 with	 the	 whole	 --	 and	 that	 attunement,	 that	 very
attunement,	brings	them	dances,	songs.	And	these	flowers	go	on	showering.
Once	you	are	free	from	yourself,	then	everything	is	possible,	even	the	impossible
is	possible.
So	when	I	say	 'Be	free,'	 remember,	I	don't	mean	the	ordinary	kind	of	freedom,
because	the	ordinary	kind	of	freedom	means	freedom	of	the	self.	When	I	say	'Be
free,'I	mean	be	free	from	the	self.	Then	only	there	is	ecstasy	and	life	abundant.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Yoga	Premal.	Yoga	means	the	ultimate	union.
Premal	means	the	loving	one.
One	 cannot	 love	 if	 one	 thinks	 in	 terms	 of	 separation	 from	 the	 whole.	 If	 you
cannot	 be	 one	with	 the	 stars,	 one	with	 the	mountains,	 one	with	 the	 trees,	 one
with	the	rocks	and	the	rivers,	how	can	you	be	one	with	any	other	human	being?
It	will	be	almost	impossible.
If	it	is	difficult	to	be	one	with	the	moon,	it	is	going	to	be	almost	impossible	to	be
one	 with	 any	 man	 or	 woman	 --	 husband,	 wife,	 child,	 father,	 mother,	 brother,
friend	--	impossible.	Because	the	stars,	the	moon,	the	sun,	the	rivers,	won't	create
any	trouble	 to	you	if	you	are	 loving	 towards	 them;	 if	you	are	 loving	 them	you
will	 find	 your	 love	 returning	 to	 you	 a	 thousandfold.	 They	 will	 function	 like
mirrors.
If	 you	 can	 have	 a	 torch	 and	 you	 flash	 the	 light	 on	 the	 river,	 the	 mirror
immediately	reflects	 it	back.	 It	 is	not	so	about	human	beings,	because	 they	are
not	mirrors	--	unless	you	find	a	buddha	to	love,	then	he	will	reflect	because	he
will	be	a	mirror.	He	will	be	 just	 like	a	moon	or	 the	sun	or	 the	star	or	 the	 rose
flower:	 he	 will	 be	 simply	 a	 mirror.	 So	 if	 you	 pour	 love	 your	 love	 will	 be
immediately,	instantly	returned	and	much	more	will	be	added	to	it.
But	 ordinary	human	beings	 are	 not	mirrors;	 they	 are	 parasites,	 suckers.	 If	 you
give	them	love	they	will	suck	it	--	they	are	like	vacuum	cleaners!	And	not	only
that;	 they	 are	 like	milking	machines:	 they	will	 go	 on	milking	 you.	And	when
there	 is	 a	 milking	 machine	 its	 capacity	 is	 infinite,	 because	 they	 are	 just	 like
black-holes:	 you	 cannot	 fulfil	 their	 desire,	 the	more	will	 always	 be	 there.	The
more	you	give,	the	more	they	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
will	 expect;	 they	 will	 never	 feel	 grateful	 for	 what	 you	 have	 done.	 They	 will
always	 complain	 about	 what	 you	 have	 not	 done;	 hence	 it	 is	 really	 the	 most
difficult	experience	in	life	to	love	a	human	being.
Gurdjieff	used	 to	say	 love	starts	with	animals	for	 the	simple	reason	 that	 if	you
love	a	dog	he	will	respond.	You	can	trust	a	dog.	At	least	he	will	wag	his	tail!	But
you	 cannot	 trust	 human	 beings.	 You	 cannot	 even	 trust	 your	 self	 as	 a	 human
being,	 because	 what	 they	 are	 doing	 to	 you,	 you	 are	 doing	 to	 them:	 milking
machines	milking	 each	 other,	 vacuum	 cleaners	 encountering	 each	 other	 --	 and
then	you	can	see	all	kinds	of	calamities	happening	in	the	world.	Every	marriage
is	just	a	preface	to	a	divorce.	Soon	the	vacuum	cleaners	will	be	in	the	court!
Yes,	human	beings	can	also	be	loved	but	only	when	you	have	learned	the	art	of
loving	--	and	that	art	has	to	be	learned	with	the	whole.	When	you	have	been	able
to	dissolve	your	ego	in	the	whole,	 then,	you	can	be	a	loving	one,	because	now
you	are	no	more	expecting	anything	--	not	even	a	thank	you!	So	you	can	go	on
giving.	Of	course	the	people	you	give	will	ask	more	and	you	can	go	on	giving
more	too,	because	you	will	have	now	a	deep	connection	with	the	whole	which	is
infinite.	 You	will	 have	 an	 inexhaustible	 source	 of	 energy,	 so	 you	 can	 give	 as
much	 as	 possible.	 Nobody	 can	 ask	more	 than	 you	 give;	 you	 can	 always	 give
more	than	they	can	ask	--	then	begin	with	human	beings,	then	it	will	not	create
trouble.
Two	things	more	to	be	remembered.
When	you	have	known	the	union	with	the	whole	these	two	things	happen;	one,
the	more	you	give,	the	more	you	are	one	with	the	whole,	the	more	you	give,	the
more	you	have	it,	so	giving	is	no	more	a	problem	but	a	joy.	When	you	give	your
love	to	somebody	there	is	no	grudge,	you	are	not	waiting	for	any	response,	you
are	not	at	all	interested	what	comes	back.	In	fact	you	are	not	even	feeling	that	the
other	 is	 obliged	 to	 you;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 you	 feel	 obliged	 and	 thankful	 to	 the
other	because	he	accepted	your	love.	He	would	have	rejected	it	but	he	accepted
it.	He	had	shown	such	a	beautiful	gesture	by	accepting	it.
This	is	one	of	the	fundamental	laws	that	once	you	are	one	with	the	whole,	then
whatsoever	you	have	--
love,	truth	--	you	can	go	on	giving,	you	have	an	inexhaustible	treasure.	And	the
more	 you	 share,	 the	 more	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 hidden	 treasures	 behind
treasures;	hence	it	becomes	a	joy	to	give.
The	second	fundamental	law	is,	if	you	give	without	any	expectation,	without	any
desire	to	get	something	back	in	return,	you	transform	the	other	person.	The	way
you	are	giving	is	bound	to	transform	the	other	person	because	he	has	never	met
anybody	like	such.	He	has	always	met	people	who	were	just	replicas	of	himself
or	herself.
For	 the	 first	 time	 the	other	 is	encountering	somebody	who	belongs	 to	a	 totally
different	 dimension	 --	 and	 that	 experience	 is	 going	 to	 transform	 the	 other	 too.
The	other	will	also	become	less	miserly,	less	greedy,	and	will	see	how	joyful	it	is
to	give	and	may	start	giving.	In	the	beginning	a	little	hesitantly,	reluctantly,	but
soon	he	will	learn	the	art	that	the	more	you	give,	the	more	you	have	it.
True	 love	 transforms	 people.	 If	 Buddha	 transformed	 so	 many	 people	 it	 was
because	of	his	love.	If	Lao	Tzu	transformed	many	people	it	was	because	of	his
love.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 sermonizing	 great	 philosophies;	 what	 really
transforms	people	is	love.
Love	is	my	fundamental	message.	First	know	what	love	is	and	then	share	it,	so
that	 you	 can	 transform	 people	 into	 mirrors.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 greater	 joy	 than
transforming	people	into	mirrors.
Swami	Yoga	Mangal
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Yoga	Mangal.
Yoga	means	the	ultimate	union	with	the	whole.
Mangal	 means	 the	 crescendo	 of	 well-being,	 the	 highest	 point	 of	 fulfillment,
contentment.
One	can	feel	fulfilled	only	when	one	becomes	part	of	this	tremendously	beautiful
existence.	 Less	 than	 that	 won't	 do.	 Less	 than	 that	 and	 you	 will	 always	 feel
something	is	missing.	You	have	to	be	vast,	so	vast	that	the	stars	and	clouds	are
within	you;	then	there	is	contentment.
When	you	contain	the	whole	existence	naturally	nothing	is	missing.	All	is	within
you,	 so	 there	 cannot	 be	 anything	missing.	And	when	 there	 is	 nothing	missing
that	is	the	point	of	ultimate	well-being.
Well-being	cannot	go	higher	than	that;	you	have	reached	to	the	very	Everest	of
well-being.	It	is	the	pinnacle,	the	crescendo,	and	one	cannot	fall	from	it.	The	fall
is	impossible	because	one	becomes	it.	You	are	no	longer	separate	so	you	cannot
fall.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 that	 you	 are	 feeling	well-being	 but	 that	 you	 are	well-
being	itself,	and	that's	the	most	significant	thing	to	understand.
Anything	 that	you	have	can	be	 lost,	can	be	stolen,	can	be	 taken	away.	At	 least
death	will	make	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
separate	 from	 your	 possessions.	 Only	 that	 which	 you	 have	 become	 cannot	 be
taken	away.	Even	death	cannot	separate	you	from	it.
You	don't	have	it,	you	are	it.
Hence	the	great	sages	of	the	Upanishads	say,	"The	moment	one	knows	God,	one
becomes	God."
The	 Bible,	 the	 Koran,	 the	 Talmud...	 don't	 have	 that	 much	 courage.	 Knowing
God,	 one	 becomes	God,	 because	 knowing	God	 is	 not	 like	 having	 knowledge.
That	 you	 can	 forget,	 that	 you	 have	 to	 remember,	 that	 you	 have	 to	 keep	 notes
about.	Knowing	God	 simply	means	 that	you	have	 reached	 to	 a	new	quality	of
being.
It	becomes	part	of	your	breathing,	your	very	heartbeat.
The	ultimate	union	with	 the	whole	simply	means	you	have	become	the	whole;
hence	that	is	the	point	when	one	feels,	"I	have	arrived.	This	was	the	goal	that	I
have	been	seeking	for	thousands	of	lives.	This	is	the	home	that	I	was	searching
for.	I	have	made	many	many	homes,	but	no	home	really	proved	to	be	a	home.
They	were	only	caravanserais	and	always	I	had	to	leave.	Now	I	cannot	leave	this
home	because	I	am	it!"
Nirvana	now	or	never
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
28	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002285
ShortTitle:	NEVER28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Edvaldo.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Edvaldo
means	rich.
Jesus	 says:	 "Blessed	 are	 the	 poor	 in	 spirit,	 for	 theirs	 is	 the	 kingdom	 of	 God.'
Now,	 it	 is	 a	 very	 paradoxical	 statement	 and	 has	 not	 been	 understood	 by	 the
followers	 of	 Christ	 at	 all.	 It	 is	 the	 destiny	 of	 all	 paradoxical	 statements.	 But
religion	can	only	be	expressed	in	paradoxes,	there	is	no	other	way.	It	cannot	be
logical,	it	has	to	be	supra-logical.	Existence	is	not	logical	so	nothing	can	be	done
about	it.	And	religion	is	the	purest	expression,	at	least	an	effort,	to	come	closest
to	the	truth,	hence	it	becomes	paradoxical.
The	statement	 that	 'Blessed	are	 the	poor	 in	spirit'	 really	means	 'Blessed	are	 the
rich	in	spirit,	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	God.'	One	who	has	the	kingdom	of	God
cannot	 be	 poor.	 Then	 who	 else	 shall	 be	 rich	 if	 he	 is	 poor?	 Then	 what	 Jesus
means	 is	 simply	one	 thing:	 'Blessed	are	 the	poor	 in	spirit'	means	 'Blessed	who
have	dropped	their	ego.'
People	think	ego	is	their	richness	--	that	is	really	their	poverty.	The	moment	you
drop	the	ego	you	feel	as	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
if	you	are	becoming	poor,	because	of	your	preconception	of	the	ego	as	richness.
Once	you	have	dropped	it,	suddenly	you	discover	a	totally	new	kind	of	richness.
Immediately,	the	whole	kingdom	of	God	is	yours.
So	 I	 would	 like	 to	 say	 to	 you:	 Blessed	 are	 the	 rich	 in	 spirit,	 for	 theirs	 is	 the
kingdom	of	god.	And	the	only	way	to	be	rich	in	spirit	is	meditation,	because	the
only	way	to	drop	the	ego	is	meditation.	It	is	only	through	meditation	that	one	an
drop	 all	 egoistic	 ambitions,	 all	 egoistic	 trips	 and	 numbers	 --	which	 are	 utterly
futile,	 lead	nowhere,	 simply	destroy	your	whole	 life	opportunity	and	keep	you
poor.
You	may	accumulate	wealth,	power,	prestige	on	the	outside.	but	that	is	not	going
to	help	you	to	become	rich.	Richness	is	something	of	the	inner.	When	your	inner
lotus	blossoms	and	the	fragrance	is	released,	that's	the	kingdom	of	god,	the	true
richness.
This	is	your	name:	swami	Dhyan	Sjaak.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Sjaak	means
one	who	is	protected	by	god.
The	ego	is	an	effort	to	protect	yourself;	meditation	is	a	surrender	to	the	whole.	It
is	 dropping	 the	 very	 idea	 of	 separation,	 hence	 no	 question	 of	 protection.	 It	 is
living	in	tune	with	the	whole,	wherever	it	leads.	It	is	living	like	a	white	cloud	--
wherever	 the	winds	 take	 it,	 it	 is	 available.	That	 availability	 is	meditation.	Not
even	 for	a	 single	moment	any	 reluctance,	 resistance,	 just	going	with	 the	wind,
not	pushing	the	river	but	going	with	the	river.
And	then	the	miracle	happens:	the	whole	existence	starts	protecting	you,	in	life,
in	 death,	 in	 every	 situation.	 we	 belong	 to	 existence,	 existence	 belongs	 to	 us;
there	is	no	separation	anywhere.
Hence	 all	 fear	 is	 our	 invention,	 like	 a	 nightmare.	 and	 when	 you	 are	 in	 a
nightmare	 you	 believe	 in	 the	 nightmare,	 and	 you	 start	 running,	 protecting
yourself.	All	that	is	needed	is	that	you	should	wake	up.
Protection	is	not	needed	because	there	is	nothing	against	you;	there	is	no	enemy.
Once	you	wake	up	suddenly	you	start	laughing	about	the	whole	ridiculousness	of
the	nightmare	--	it	never	existed	in	the	first	place!	And	with	the	disappearance	of
the	nightmare,	 life	starts	having	a	 totally	different	colour,	a	new	beauty,	a	new
blissfulness.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Dhyan	 Nehesh.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation,	 Nehesh
means	god	of	love.
Man	 can	 either	 live	 in	 fear	 or	 in	 love;	 these	 are	 the	 two	 alternatives,	 the	only
alternatives.	One	who	lives	in	fear	lives	in	hell;	he	creates	his	own	hell,	there	is
no	other	hell.	Hell	is	not	part	of	geography,	part	of	existence,	neither	is	heaven
part	of	geography	or	part	of	existence.	It	is	all	up	to	you,	it	is	your	choice.	It	is
your	 creativity	what	 you	 create	 around	yourself.	 If	 you	 live	 in	 fear	 you	go	on
constantly	creating	hell;	if	you	live	in	love	you	create	heaven.
And	the	only	way	to	move	from	fear	 to	 love	is	meditation,	because	meditation
gives	you	a	quantum	leap	from	mind	to	no-mind,	from	the	head	to	the	heart.	The
heart	is	your	heaven	and	the	head	is	your	hell.	The	difference	is	not	very	big,	just
few	inches,	but	the	jump	is	really	a	quantum	leap	--	as	if	you	are	going	from	one
existence	into	another	existence,	so	close	yet	so	far.
But	it	has	been	managed,	it	can	be	managed;	it	is	everybody's	birthright.	Just	a
little	courage...	and	a	push	of	a	loving	master	from	the	back!	A	kick	in	the	pants,
and	before	you	have	realized	it	has	happened!
You	be	ready,	and	rest	assured	it	will	happen!
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Gyanesh.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Gyanesh
means	god	of	wisdom.
Knowledge	 is	 a	 pretender	 --	 it	 pretends	 to	 be	 wise	 --	 in	 fact	 it	 is	 just	 the
otherwise!	It	is	stupidity	masquerading	as	intelligence.	It	is	not	wisdom	because
it	is	not	yours	own;	it	is	borrowed,	it	is	information.
Wisdom	 happens	 only	 through	 TRANSformation,	 not	 through	 information.	 It
does	not	come	from	the	outside,	it	springs	within	you.	It	is	your	intrinsic	nature.
The	 seed	 is	 there,	 the	 soil	 is	 needed.	And	 that's	 what	meditation	 is	 all	 about:
giving	a	right	soil	to	the	seed	of	wisdom.
If	 you	become	 silent,	 relaxed,	unpossessed	by	 the	past	 and	 the	 future,	 you	are
providing	 the	 right	 soil,	 the	 right	 climate.	 Then	 the	 seed	 bursts	 on	 its	 own
accord,	and	then	suddenly	you	realize	that	all	that	you	have	been	seeking	on	the
outside	you	had	contained	it	already	always.	The	whole	search	was	futile.
Meditation	means	a	new	dimension	of	the	search:	not	looking	out	but	looking	in,
a	hundred	eighty	degree	turn.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Garimo.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Garimo	means
the	glory,	the	splendour.
A	man	without	meditation	knows	nothing	of	the	splendour	of	existence,	knows
nothing	of	the	glorious	opportunity	that	has	been	given	to	him.	He	is	fast	asleep.
The	sky	is	full	of	stars,	but	he	is	fast	asleep,	unaware	of	the	beauty	of	the	sky.
The	birds	are	singing	but	he	is	fast	asleep,	unaware	of	the	songs	and	the	music.
The	 flowers	are	blooming	but	he	 is	 fast	 asleep	 --	 in	 the	garden	of	Eden	 itself!
The	flowers	are	not	for	him,	they	are	there.
All	that	is	needed	is	an	wakening	so	he	can	see	the	flowers,	the	stars,	the	birds,
the	trees,	and	this	immense	glory	of	existence.	It	is	unbelievable,	incredible!
But	 people	 are	 living	 as	 if	 there	 is	 nothing	 worth	 living.	 People	 are	 living
meaninglessly,	without	any	joy,	without	any	dance,	as	if	simply	waiting	for	death
to	come	and	relive	them	from	the	burden.	This	is	a	very	topsy-turvy	state!
We	have	been	given	the	most	beautiful	and	the	most	perfect	existence	possible	--
existence	cannot	be	more	perfect	than	it	is	--	but	we	have	to	discover	it.	That	is	a
challenge!	And	it	is	good	that	there	is	a	challenge	in	life,	otherwise	life	will	be
dead;	it	is	the	challenge	that	makes	it	alive.
And	 meditation	 is	 the	 greatest	 challenge	 in	 life:	 it	 is	 discovering	 your
wakefulness;	 it	 is	 destroying	 your	 sleepiness,	 your	 somnambulism;	 it	 is	 a
tremendous	awakening	of	the	soul.	And	the	moment	you	are	awake	you	simply
cannot	belive	 the	story	 that	Adam	and	Eve	have	been	 thrown	out	of	heaven	or
out	of	the	garden	of	Eden.	They	are	still	there,	just	fast	asleep.
The	 fruit	 of	 the	 tree	 of	 knowledge	 has	 functioned	 as	 a	 very	 big	 dose	 of
sleepiness,	and	they	are	asleep.
Nobody	has	driven	 them	out	of	Eden	--	because	 there	 is	nowhere	else	 to	drive
you	out!	And	in	fact,	in	those	days	even	cars	were	not	available,	so	even	if	God
wanted	to	drive	you	out	he	could	not!	Even	the	Ford	T-model	was	not	available!
Everybody	 is	 where	 we	 belong,	 just	 we	 are	 asleep.	 So	 meditation	 is	 only	 a
challenge	to	wake	up.	Wake	up	in	all	your	activities,	thoughts,	feelings.	Make	it
a	constant	effort	so	that	nothing	goes	in	sleepiness,	every	moment	is	used	as	an
opportunity	 to	be	more	awake.	It	 is	an	art;	 if	you	practise	 it	 it	comes.	It	 is	 just
like	 practising	 music	 --	 you	 have	 to	 practise	 continuously.	 Once	 Mozart	 was
asked	that	'If	you	don't	practise	three	days,	what	will	happen?'	Because	eight	to
twelve	hours	every	day	he	was	practising,	even	when	he	has	become	a	world-
known	master.
He	 said,	 'If	 I	 don't	 practise	 three	 days,	 I	 will	 notice	 the	 difference;	 if	 I	 don't
practise	for	four	days,	critics	will	notice	the	difference;	if	I	don't	practise	for	six
days,	even	a	 layman	will	know	the	difference;	and	 if	 I	don't	practise	 for	seven
days,	 even	 those	 who	 are	 fast	 asleep,	 they	 will	 immediately	 notice	 the
difference.'
Life	 is	 a	 musical	 instrument,	 and	 awareness	 is	 its	 greatest	 music.	 One	 has	 to
practise	it	continuously.
And	it	is	such	a	joy	to	enter	more	and	more	deeper	into	it	that	it	is	not	tedious,
tiring,	 exhausting;	 it	 is	 very	 fulfilling,	 nourishing,	 because	 it	 takes	 you	 every
moment	to	higher	peaks	of	ecstasies.
This	is	your	name:	swami	Dhyan	Virato.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Virato	means
the	infinite.
Man's	 only	misery	 is	 to	 be	 enclosed	 in	 a	 very	 finite	 existence:	 the	 bodymind
structure.	 He	 is	 vast,	 his	 consciousness	 is	 vast,	 but	 he	 has	 become	 too	 much
identified	with	the	bodymind.	Nothing	is	wrong	with	bodymind	structure	--	it	is
a	beautiful	structure	--	but	identification	is	wrong.
It	 is	 like	you	are	 standing	on	 the	window,	nearby	 the	window,	 looking	outside
towards	the	sky,	and	rather	than	looking	at	the	sky	you	become	attached	to	the
window-frame	--	then	you	will	be	in	trouble.
Window-frame	is	not	at	fault,	it	is	a	blessing:	it	makes	you	available	the	whole
sky	beyond	 it,	 the	 sunrise,	 the	moon,	 the	 trees,	 the	people.	But	 if	 you	become
attached	with	the	window-frame	and	you	forget	all	about	that	the	window	allows
you	to	see,	then	it	is	your	fault.
Bodymind	 is	 just	 a	window-frame,	and	people	have	become	 identified	with	 it;
they	think	it	is	what	they	are.
Sannyas	means	getting	unidentified	with	bodymind	structure.	use	it	to	its	fullest
potential,	 but	 remember	 you	 are	 far	 greater	 than	 it.	 It	 is	 only	 a	window	 to	 go
beyond,	to	surpass,	to	transcend.	It	is	a	window	from	where	you	can	fly	towards
the	sky.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyanpriya.	Dhyanpriya	means	one	who	loves	silence.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	 are	 very	 few	 people	 who	 love	 silence,	 although	 many	 people	 say	 they
would	like	to	be	silent.	But	the	moment	they	are	silent	they	are	not	happy;	they
start	 immediately	 searching	 for	 some	 diversion,	 distraction,	 some	 occupation.
They	are	afraid	of	being	silent	and	there	is	a	reason	why	they	are	afraid,	because
the	more	silent	you	become	the	more	you	disappear.
You	are	noise	because	you	are	your	mind,	you	are	noise	because	you	are	your
ego.	When	 the	mind	 disappears,	 the	mind	 and	 the	 ego	 both	 start	 evaporating.
Then	there	is	silence.	Then	you	are	really	close	to	your	authentic	centre,	but	you
are	unaware	of	it	so	you	don't	know	where	you	are	going.	It	seems	like	you	are
falling	 into	 an	 abysmal	 depth,	 a	 bottomless	 phenomenon.	 Fear	 grips	 and	 one
starts	searching	for	some	diversion,	some	occupation	--	anything	to	cling	to.
And	 these	 are	 the	 people	who	 hanker	 for	 immortality	 --	 and	 they	 don't	 know
what	to	do	on	their	off	day!
Just	think:	if	they	are	really	allowed	to	be	immortals,	what	they	will	do?	People
talk	about	beautiful	things,	not	knowing	what	they	are	talking.
But	if	one	loves	silence	then	one	loves	god,	then	one	loves	existence,	then	one
loves	 truth.	 Then	 one	 loves	 religion	 in	 its	 purest	 essence,	 because	 it	 is	 only
through	silence	that	one	discovers	the	scriptures	--
scriptures	 that	are	hidden	within	you,	sermons	that	are	ready	to	explode	within
you,	light	that	is	waiting	and	waiting	for	you	to	come	home,	but	you	are	roaming
and	 groping	 in	 darkness.	 Everywhere	 people	 are	 going	 to	 the	 Everest,	 to	 the
moon,	to	the	Mars;	nobody	seems	to	be	interested	to	go	within.
Meditation	 is	 the	art	of	going	within,	and	 to	 love	 is	what	 sannyas	 is	all	 about.
Sannyas	can	be	defined	as	a	 tremendous	 love	 for	silence.	Your	name	precisely
defines	silence:	Dhyanpriya,	one	who	loves	meditation,	silence,	peace.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Dhyan	 Saritam.	 Dhyan	 means	 meditation,	 saritam
means	continuum,	a	riverlike	continuity.
There	is	a	beginning	but	there	is	no	end.	Meditation	begins	but	never	ends.	How
can	 silence	 end?	How	 can	 blissful	 end..blissfulness	 end?	How	 can	 lovingness
end?	They	begin;	if	they	end	that	simply	shows	they	never	had	begun	in	the	first
place.	You	must	have	believed	that	they	have	started,	but	the	very	start	was	false.
Everything	that	is	true	is	eternal.
And	 meditation	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 things	 in	 life,	 nothing	 is	 more
significant	than	that,	because	it	leads	you	to	all	that	is	our	longest	desire,	deepest
longing,	 for	which	we	 have	 been	 searching	 for	 lives	 together.	 It	 opens	 all	 the
doors	 of	 existence	 --	 freedom,	 love,	 awareness,	 beauty,	 truth	 --	 everything
suddenly	becomes	available.
Only	one	thing	you	have	to	do:	you	have	to	turn	the	key	of	meditation	--	and	it	is
within	you	hands!	The	key	is	there,	the	lock	is	there.	But	people	are	standing	like
fools,	holding	their	key,	not	knowing	that	the	lock	is	there,	looking	at	the	lock,
not	knowing	that	the	key	is	there	in	their	hands.	A	strange	situation	in	the	world!
Buddha	 said	 the	day	he	became	 enlightened	 that	 'I	 am	 surprised	why	 I	 had	 to
wait	 so	 long,	 because	 all	 that	 was	 needed	was	 always	with	me	 --	 just	 a	 little
combination.	And	now	I	am	at	a	loss	what	to	say	to	people,	because	they	don't
need	anything!	They	have	been	already	provided	for.'
Existence	 has	 taken	 every	 care	 that	whatsoever	 you	will	 need	 on	 the	way	 has
been	given	to	you,	even	the	ultimate	key	to	reach	to	the	goal.	And	that	ultimate
key	 is	 silence,	 becoming	utterly	 silent,	 and	 then	 a	 riverlike	 undercurrent	 starts
flowing	in	you.	You	will	remain	in	the	world,	you	will	be	in	the	marketplace,	but
nothing	will	disturb	it.	It	will	be	there	and	it	will	affect	everything	that	you	will
say,	you	will	do,	you	will	be.
So	 I	 am	 not	 for	 my	 sannyasins	 that	 they	 should	 escape	 to	 the	 mountains,
monasteries	 --	no,	 they	should	be	 in	 the	world,	 it	 is	a	beautiful	world.	All	 that
you	 need	 to	 know	 is	 how	 to	 remain	 centered,	 grounded,	 silent,	 amidst	 all	 the
noise	and	the	turmoil,	how	to	be	a	centre	of	the	cyclone.	That's	the	whole	art	of
sannyas.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Bodhisattva.	Dhyan	means	meditation.
Meditation	is	a	state	of	no-mind.	We	are	born	in	a	state	of	meditation:	the	nine
months	in	the	mother's	womb	are	of	immense	meditation,	deep	meditation.	But
once	we	are	out	of	the	womb	the	society	jumps	upon	us,	starts	creating	a	mind
around	meditation,	because	meditation	cannot	be	used.	It	is	not	a	commodity;	it
cannot	 be	 sold,	 cannot	 be	 purchased.	 It	 has	 no	 relevance	 with	 the	 world	 of
politics,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
economics,	etcetera.	The	society	is	not	interested	in	it	--	not	only	not	interested,
it	 is	 absolutely	 against	 it,	 because	 it	 is	 dangerous.	 A	 man	 who	 is	 meditative
cannot	be	manipulated;	he	has	such	intelligence,	you	cannot	manipulate	him.
In	the	whole	Bible	not	a	single	statement	exists	in	praise	of	intelligence.	Strange!
Such	a	big	scripture	and	not	a	single	statement	--	and	full	of	all	kinds	of	rubbish,
but	 not	 a	 single	 statement	 in	 praise	 of	 intelligence.	And	 the	 same	 is	 the	 truth
about	 other	 scriptures	 of	 other	 religions	 too:	 they	 support	 superstition,	 they
support	 belief,	 they	 support	 indirectly	 all	 kinds	 of	 ignorance,	 but	 they	 don't
support	 intelligence.	 Intelligence	 is	a	danger	 to	 the	whole	establishment	 --	and
meditation	is	pure	intelligence,	fresh	intelligence.
Hence	 all	 the	 societies	without	 any	 exception	 --	Eastern	 or	Western,	Hindu	or
Mohammedan,	 Christian	 or	 Buddhist	 --	 they	 have	 all	 destroyed	 intelligence.
Their	structures	may	differ,	their	ideologies	may	differ,	but	about	all	thing	they
are	 all	 agreed	 --	 the	 basic	 conspiracy	 against	 man	 --	 that	 man	 should	 not	 be
allowed	 to	 be	 meditative.	 He	 should	 be	 forced	 into	 a	 certain	 structure	 of	 the
mind	 --	 Hindu	 mind,	 Christian	 mind,	 Mohammedan	 mind,	 Indian	 mind,
American	mind,	German	mind	 --	 some	structure	has	 to	be	 imposed	so	 that	we
can	manipulate	through	the	structure.	That	structure	is	just	like	electrodes	which
can	be	manipulated	by	remote	control.
The	 moment	 somebody	 says	 something	 against	 Jesus,	 The	 Christian	 starts
feeling	disturbed	--	a	remote	control;	somebody	says	in	praise	of	Jesus	and	the
Christian	is	elated.	it	is	a	remote	control	system	--
primitive	type.	Now	we	have	better	remote	control	systems,	and	sooner	or	later
governments	are	going	to	use	them....
It	is	not	far	away	when	each	child	will	be	fixed	with	an	electrode	in	the	hospital
when	he	 is	born	 --	 a	 small	 electrode	of	which	he	will	never	be	aware	because
inside	 the	skull	 there	 is	no	sensation.	You	can	put	 just	a	small	electrode	 inside
and	he	will	 never	know.	And	 from	 the	Moscow	or	Washington	or	New	Delhi,
any	 fool	 --	 any	Nixon,	 any	Adolf	Hitler,	 any	Morarji	Desai	 --	 can	 control	 the
whole	 country,	 can	 make	 people	 violent,	 can	 make	 people	 silent,	 can	 make
people	very	obedient,	can	manipulate	without	those	people	ever	becoming	aware
that	they	are	being	used	as	machines.
But	this	is	what	has	been	done	up	to	now.	The	priest	and	the	politician	both	have
been	in	deep	conspiracy	to	create	mind	and	destroy	meditation.
My	effort	here	is	to	undo	what	the	society	has	done	to	you,	to	bring	back	to	your
primal	innocence,	to	your	innocence	that	you	had	before	you	were	born,	to	bring
you	back	that	innocence	which	you	had	in	your	womb...	in	your	mother's	womb
--	 that	clean	slate;	nothing	was	written	on	 it.	Once	 that	 is	discovered	you	have
discovered	Buddha	in	you.
That	 is	 the	meaning	of	 bodhisattva:	 bodhi	means	 awakening,	 sattva	means	 the
essence.
Meditation	 is	 the	 essence	 of	 awakening.	 Once	 you	 have	 learned	 how	 to	 be
innocent,	silent,	once	you	can	put	the	mind	aside	--	that	means	all	the	society	and
all	the	establishment	aside	--	suddenly	you	discover	your	authentic	individuality,
your	 freedom,	 your	 beauty,	 your	 wings.	 Then	 the	 whole	 sky	 is	 yours	 ...	 or
perhaps	even	the	sky	is	not	the	limit!
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Dhyan	 Sanatan.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	 Sanatan
means	the	eternal.
Thousands	of	sciences	have	existed	 in	 the	world	and	disappeared.	There	was	a
day	magic	 dominated,	 now	 it	 is	 no	more	 so.	There	was	 a	 day	when	 astrology
dominated,	now	it	 is	no	more	so.	Many	sciences	have	come	into	existence	and
gone	out	of	existence..
Only	one	science	has	been	eternally	there	and	that	is	the	science	or	meditation	--
and	it	 is	going	 to	be	eternally	 there	because	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	anything
else	 but	 your	 very	 essential	 core.	 And	 unless	 every	 man	 has	 discovered	 his
consciousness	 meditation	 is	 going	 to	 remain	 of	 the	 supermost	 value.	 And	 it
seems	 almost	 impossible	 that	 every	man	 one	 day	will	 attain	 --	 or	 even	 if	 you
attain	your	child	will	have	to	attain	again	--	so	meditation	is	going	to	remain	as
the	 essential	 core	 that	 joins	 us	 with	 the	 whole	 humanity	 that	 will	 come
afterwards.
That	is	 the	meaning	of	Sanatano:	eternal.	All	other	sciences	are	mundane:	they
make	you	capable	of	earning	more,	becoming	respectable	more,	becoming	more
powerful.	Meditation	does	not	help	you	 in	 the	outside	world,	but	 it	 immensely
enriches	your	inner	being.	It	makes	you	divine!	It	gives	you	god	himself.
So	only	fools	are	interested	in	outside	things;	the	wiser	ones	sooner	or	later	turn.
And	the	more	wise	they	are,	sooner.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Dhyan	 Puratan.	 Dhyan	means	 meditation,	 Puratan
means	the	ancient	one.
We	are	not	new	 in	 the	world;	we	are	not	born	with	our	birth	and	we	don't	die
with	our	death.	Birth	and	death	are	small	events	in	the	continuity	of	eternal	life.
We	are	the	ancient	ones:	we	have	always	been	here,	we	will	always	be	here.
But	 this	 revelation	happens	only	 through	meditation.	 If	you	 remain	clinging	 to
the	mind	 then	 birth	 and	 death	 is	 your	whole	 span	 of	 life,	 because	mind	 starts
after	birth	and	dies	in	death.	That	is	really	the	mind's	life,	not	your	life,	but	if	you
think	you	are	the	mind	then	naturally	the	corollary	is	that	birth	and	death	are	the
limits.
The	moment	you	slip	out	of	the	mind	like	a	snake	slipping	out	of	the	old	skin,
suddenly	you	see	that	birth	is	not	your	beginning,	neither	death	is	your	end.	You
are	beginningless,	endless.	And	that	very	experience	transports	you	beyond	time
into	the	world	of	eternity.	And	that	is	our	deepest	desire:	to	be	immortals,	to	go
beyond	death,	to	be	deathless.
All	sciences	belong	to	the	world,	confined	between	birth	and	death;	meditation
belongs	beyond	birth	and	death.	The	real	seeker	is	always	searching	for	it;	only
the	 stupid	 ones	 are	 searching	 for	 money,	 power,	 prestige	 --	 which	 all	 will	 be
taken	away.	Only	meditation	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.	It	cannot	be	stolen,
it	 cannot	 be	 burnt,	 it	 cannot	 be	 destroyed	 even	 by	 atom	 bombs	 or	 hydrogen
bombs.	To	find	it	is	to	have	found	the	rock-bottom	of	existence.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Sagaresh.	Dhyan	means	meditation,	Sagaresh
means	god	of	the	ocean
--	literally;	metaphorically	it	means	the	oceanic.
Man	 without	 meditation	 is	 just	 a	 dewdrop;	 with	 the	 meditation	 the	 dewdrop
suddenly	 becomes	 the	 ocean.	 It	 is	 the	 greatest	 magic,	 the	 greatest	 miracle.	 It
takes	 you	 beyond	 all	 confinement,	 all	 limitation,	 all	 bondage.	 And	 we	 are
suffering	 in	 a	 prison;	 there	 are	 limitations	 everywhere.	 Even	 the	 riches	 has
limitations.
Even	the	greatest	conqueror,	Alexander	the	Great,	has	limitations....
At	the	last	moment	of	his	life	he	recognized	that	he	has	wasted	his	life.	he	died
very	early,	he	was	only	thirty-three,	and	he	had	promised	to	reach	to	his	capital.
Particularly	to	his	mother	he	has	promised	that	he	will	bring	a	gift	to	her	no	son
has	ever	brought:	 the	whole	kingdom	of	 the	world!	And	he	has	conquered	 the
then-known	world,	and	he	was	just	twenty-four	hours	away	from	the	capital.	Just
twenty-four	hours	more	and	he	would	have	fulfilled	his	promise,	and	he	wanted
to	fulfil	it	at	any	cost.	He	told	to	his	physicians,	 'I	am	ready	to	give	everything
that	you	want.'
They	said,	 'Even	 if	you	give	your	whole	kingdom	nothing	can	be	done	--	only
few	minutes	more	and	you	will	be	gone.'
Then	he	wept.	For	 the	 first	 time	people	 saw	 tears	coming	out	of	his	 eyes,	 and
they	 asked,	 'Why	 are	 you	 weeping?	 A	 man	 of	 such	 courage!	We	 have	 never
thought	that	you	will	be	afraid	of	death!'
He	said,	 'I	 am	not	afraid	of	death,	 I	am	 just	weeping	 that	 I	wasted	my	 life	 for
something	absolutely	useless	--	which	cannot	even	help	me	to	live	twenty-four
hours	more!	 I	 am	 ready	 to	 give	 the	 whole	 kingdom	 for	 which	 I	 have	wasted
thirty-three	 years	 --	 because	 of	 that	wastage	 I	 am	 dying.	What	 is	 the	 point	 of
gaining	all	this	wisdom	(?)	this	victory,	this	richness,	this	wealth?	I	am	crying	for
it,	not	for	death	--	that	this	opportunity	has	gone	down	the	drain.
'Leave	my	hands	hanging	outside	my	coffin	so	that	everybody	can	see	that	I	am
going	empty-handed,	that	I	was	a	fool!'
The	 only	 thing	 that	 you	 can	 take	 away	 with	 you	 is	 meditation,	 your	 inner
experience	of	consciousness,	 joy,	silence,	and	your	inner	experience	of	oceanic
vastness.	In	other	words,	the	religions	call	it	god;	that	is	just	a	word.	There	is	no
person	like	god.	hence	my	insistence	is	always	on	godliness.	God	is	not	a	person
but	a	presence,	not	an	ocean	but	oceanicness,	not	somebody	who	is	infinite	but
something	like	infinity,	not	someone	who	is	eternal	but	something	like	eternity.
And	that	is	everybody's,	just	for	the	asking!
Jesus	says:	Knock	and	the	doors	shall	be	opened	unto	you.	And	I	say	there	is	no
need	to	knock	--	just	open	your	eyes,	the	doors	are	open.	Jesus	says:	Ask	and	it
shall	be	given	to	you.	I	say	to	you	there	is	no	need	to	ask,	just	see	--	it	is	already
given	 to	you!	Jesus	says:	Seek	and	ye	shall	 find,	and	I	 say	 there	 is	no	need	 to
seek	anywhere	--	just	sit	silently,	you	have	found	it.
Sitting	silently,
Doing	nothing,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	spring	comes
And	the	grass	grows	by	itself.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
