1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
No	Man	is	an	Island
Talks	given	from	1/5/80	to	31/5/80
Darshan	Diary
31	Chapters
Year	published:
Unpublished
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005015
ShortTitle:	ISLAND01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Veet	Silke.
Veet	means	going	beyond.	Silke	means	blind.
Man	is	blind,	not	because	he	has	no	eyes	but	only	because	his	eyes	are	covered
with	 much	 dust.	 That	 dust	 has	 to	 be	 removed	 and	 with	 the	 dust	 blindness
disappears.	Man	is	 like	a	mirror	and	it	 is	but	natural	 to	collect	dust.	All	 that	 is
needed	is	a	constant	cleaning	of	the	mirror.	That's	what	meditation	is	all	about,
the	art	of	cleaning	your	inner	mirror	of	consciousness.
Meditation	has	to	become	just	like	eating,	drinking,	taking	your	bath,	sleeping:	a
natural	part	of	your	life,	of	your	ordinary	life	-	nothing	special,	nothing	spiritual,
nothing	 to	 brag	 about.	 Then	 only	 slowly	 slowly	 blindness	 disappears;	 one
becomes	able	to	see.
People	 ask,	 "Where	 is	 god?"	 They	 should	 simply	 ask,	 "Where	 are	 our	 eyes?"
God	 is	 everywhere,	 it	 is	 unquestionably	 everywhere,	 only	 god	 is,	 but	 we	 are
blind.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
We	 are	 like	 a	 blind	man	 asking,	 "Where	 is	 light?"	No	 argument	 can	 convince
him,	no	proof	can	be	given	to	him.	All	that	he	needs	is	a	physician	who	can	cure
his	eyes.
The	 master	 is	 not	 a	 teacher,	 the	 master	 is	 not	 a	 philosopher,	 the	 master	 is	 a
physician.	And	to	be	a	disciple	simply	means	to	be	under	a	master's	treatment.	It
means	to	be	a	patient;	literally	too	because	it	needs	great	patience.	But	one	can
go	beyond	blindness	because	it	is	nothing	to	do	with	our	nature,	it	is	something
imposed	from	the	outside.	It	can	be	dropped.	And	the	moment	it	is	dropped	your
life	has	a	tremendous	glory	to	it.	It	becomes	a	dance	of	gratitude.
Experiencing	 god	 is	 the	 only	 bliss	 in	 existence.	 Everything	 else	 is	 just
momentary.	 Only	 the	 experience	 of	 god	 is	 eternal;	 is	 something	 that,	 once
attained,	is	forever.
(To	Dieter)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Dieter.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Dieter	means	full	of	justice.
Meditation	is	the	only	possibility	of	someone	becoming	full	of	justice.	Because
the	 basic	 requirement	 of	 meditation	 is	 dropping	 of	 all	 prejudices.	 When	 all
prejudices	are	dropped	you	cannot	be	unjust,	you	cannot	be	unfair.	 It	becomes
impossible.	With	 thousand	 and	 one	 prejudices	 inside	 you	 howsoever	 hard	 you
try,	you	cannot	be	just.	Your	prejudice	will	interfere.
Just	 today	 I	 received	 a	 letter	 from	 an	 Irish	 mother	 to	 her	 daughter	 who	 is	 a
sannyasin	here.	The	mother	says,	I	am	reading	the	books	you	have	sent	of	Osho	-
-	everything	is	beautiful.	Just	I	have	to	ask	one	question:	"Is	he	a	catholic?
If	 he	 is	 a	 catholic,	 then	 everything	 is	 okay.	 If	 he	 is	 not,	 then	 everything	 is
wrong."
This	 is	 how	 a	 prejudiced	mind	 functions.	 The	 same	 books	 will	 be	 right.	 The
same	person	will	be	right,	only	he	has	to	be	a	Catholic.	The	same	book	will	be
wrong	if	he	is	not	a	Catholic.	She	writes,	'If	he	is	a	catholic,	be	there	if	he	is	not
a	Catholic,	then	come	back	home.	Don't	waste	your	time.'
And	this	is	not	that	the	mother	does	not	love.	She	is	completely	unaware	of	her
prejudice.	 The	 prejudice	 has	 gone	 so	 deep	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 her	 to
conceive	 that	 anybody	 who	 is	 not	 a	 Catholic	 can	 also	 be	 right	 --	 that	 is
impossible.	If	he	is	right,	he	has	to	be	Catholic.	To	be	Catholic	and	to	be	right
has	become	synonymous	--	that's	how	prejudices	function.
In	 fact	 in	 a	 better	 world	 every	 magistrate	 should	 have	 to	 go	 through	 a	 long
process	 of	meditation,	 otherwise	 he	 should	 not	 be	 allowed	 to	 be	 a	magistrate
because	he	cannot	be	 just.	A	Hindu	magistrate	cannot	be	 just,	a	Mohammedan
magistrate	cannot	be	just	--	their	ideas	are	there.	He	may	try	his	hard	but	who	is
going	to	interpret	the	law?	The	mind	will	interpret	the	law	and	the	mind	is	full	of
opinions	 already,	 so	 those	 opinions	 will	 colour	 your	 interpretations.	 Only	 a
meditator	 can	 be	 just.	 Unless	 every	 law	 college	 also	 becomes	 a	 temple	 of
meditation	there	is	no	possibility	of	any	justice	in	the	world.	It	has	not	existed	up
to	 now.	We	 have	 been	 only	 lipped	 (lived)	 with	 the	 idea	 but	 the	 idea	 has	 not
become	a	reality	yet.
Drop	all	 prejudices,	 drop	 the	whole	mind	because	 it	 is	 nothing	but	prejudices.
Why	carry	the	junk?	--
Be	clean.	And	;out	of	all	that	cleanliness	you	will	be	able	to	see	things	as	they
are:	Your	life	will	be	full	of	justice,	full	of	love,	full	of	compassion.	And	those
will	be	natural	consequences	of	your	meditation	--	you	are	not	to	practice	them.
Anything	practised	is	always	ugly.
(To	Klaus)	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Navino.
Navino	means	the	absolutely	new.
Ordinarily	we	are	 taught	 that	all	 that	 is	old	 is	gold	and	 that	 is	 sheer	nonsense.
Just	 the	 opposite	 is	 true	 because	 truth	 is	 always	 new,	 always	 fresh,	 always
young.	It	is	as	fresh	as	dewdrops	on	the	grass	and	leaves	early	in	the	morning,	as
fresh	as	the	lotus	petals	just	opening	in	the	pond;	as	fresh	as	the	eyes	of	a	child.
Truth	is	never	old	because	truth	is	never	part	of	time.	Truth	is	eternal,	hence	it	is
always	now.	Truth	knows	only	one	time	and	that	is	now	and	only	one	space	and
that	 is	here.	 It	knows	no	past,	no	 future	and	 that's	how	a	sannyasin	should	be:
absolutely	 new.	 Never	 gather	 the	 past,	 every	 day	 die	 to	 the	 past,	 every	 day
cleanse	yourself	of	the	past,	get	rid	of	it,	don't	collect	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
People	are	great	collectors	and	they	go	on	collecting	junk	and	they	give	beautiful
names	 to	 junk.	And	 if	you	want	 to	collect	anything	you	can	always	 find	some
rationalization:	 you	 can	 call	 it	 something,	 it	 is	 antique	 -	 the	 first	 car	 in	which
God	drove	Adam	out	of	heaven.
It	is	written	in	the	Bible	-	I	don't	know	how	he	drove!	Must	have	used	some	Ford
car!	And	somebody	must	have	it	-	it	is	the	greatest	vintage	car.	You	may	have	to
carry	it	on	your	heads,	that's	another	matter,	but	the	more	ancient	it	is	the	more
valuable	it	becomes.	Avoid	these	rationalizations,	and	every	day	slip	out	of	the
old.	In	the	night	when	you	go	to	sleep	say	goodbye	to	the	day	that	is	no	more;	be
finished	with	it,	close	the	chapter.	Really	make	it	closed,	never	open	it	again.	It
is	finished!	And	tomorrow	morning	begin	afresh,	as	if	you	are	born	anew.	And
you	will	suddenly	see	your	life	starts	to	have	new	qualities	which	you	had	never
suspected	 were	 hidden	 in	 you.	 Your	 potential	 will	 start	 becoming	 actual,	 and
every	 day	will	 bring	 new	 surprises,	 and	 every	 day	will	 become	 a	 tremendous
mystery.
It	 is	 the	old	 that	 does	not	 allow	 the	mystery	 to	 be	 experienced.	Remain	 fresh,
young,	new	and	it	is	not	very	far	-	that	one	day	suddenly	you	will	stumble	upon
god	 because	 god	 is	 always	 new.	When	 you	 are	 also	 new,	meeting	 is	 possible
because	you	are	both	in	the	same	space.
That's	my	whole	effort	here:	 to	help	my	sannyasins	 to	be	 in	 the	same	space	 in
which	god	exists.	There	is	no	need	to	believe	in	god,	just	exist	in	the	same	space,
in	the	same	eternity	and	you	are	bound	to	meet	him.
There	is	no	way	of	not	meeting	him.
(To	Erwin)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Pravino.
Dhyan	means	meditation;	Pravino	means	skill	--	skill	is	meditation.
Meditation	is	an	art,	in	fact	the	greatest	art	there	is.	Painting	is	a	great	art,	poetry
is	a	great	art,	but	meditation	 is	 the	greatest	because	painting	creates	something
outside,	music	too,	poetry	too,	but	meditation	creates	something	inside.	Painting
will	create	only	a	painting	--	 the	painter	will	 remain	 the	same.	And	music	will
create	 music,	 but	 the	 musician	 will	 remain	 the	 same,	 the	 same	 old	 miserable
person.	 Poetry	 may	 great	 but	 if	 you	 meet	 the	 pet	 you	 may	 start	 suspecting
whether	he	is	really	the	man	who	has	written	such	great	poetry?
It	is	advisable,	if	you	love	somebody's	poetry	avoid	the	poet!
If	 you	 love	 somebody's	 painting	 avoid	 the	 painter,	 otherwise	 you	will	 be	 in	 a
confusion	because	 the	poet	will	 fall	very	short	of	his	poetry.	He	 is	an	ordinary
human	 being.	 Sometime	 even	 far	 below	 than	 ordinary	 human	 beings:	 He	 has
only	 moments	 of	 flight,	 moments	 of	 glimpses	 and	 then	 he	 falls	 back,	 and	 of
course	he	falls	back	with	a	revenge.	So	he	goes	deeper	then	the	ordinary	human
beings.	So	you	will	find	him	in	all	kinds	of	stupid	things	--	gambling,	drinking.
You	 will	 find	 him	 in	 the	 whore	 houses...	 And	 he	 has	 written	 such	 beautiful
poetry	 that	 if	 you	 just	 know	 the	 poetry	 you	will	 think	 he	 is	 a	 realized	 soul,	 a
godman,	a	man	of	god.
Meditation	really	is	the	greatest	art	because	it	creates	your	subjectivity,	it	paints
your	inner	being,	it	creates	the	poetry	of	your	being,	it	creates	the	music	of	your
heart,	it	transforms	you!
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasins	 your	 are	 taking	 a	 great	 decision,	 a	 decision	 to
transform	yourself.	A	 commitment	 that,	 'Now	 I	will	 pour	 all	my	 energies	 into
one	direction.'	And	once	you	 start	 pouring	all	 your	 energies	 into	one	direction
even	 the	 impossible	 becomes	 possible.	 And	 it	 is	 your	 birthright;	 it	 is	 not
impossible.
(To	Hans)	--	Your	name:	Swami	Gyandip.	Gyandip	means	a	lamp	of	wisdom.
Man	 is	 born	 with	 intrinsic	 capacity	 of	 being	 wise.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 to	 be
learned.	It	is	already	there.
Maybe	it	needs	a	little	polishing	here	and	there	but	that's	all,	otherwise	it	is	there.
It	is	not	like	knowledge;	knowledge	is	not	there.	You	have	to	learn	it,	;you	have
to	learn	it	from	others.	You	need	teachers	for	knowledge.	For	wisdom	you	need	a
master.
A	master	is	not	a	teacher	--	the	difference	is	great.	The	teacher	teaches	you,	helps
you	to	learn	more	and	more,	informs	you.	The	master	helps	you	to	unlearn.	He
UNteaches	you,	he	helps	you	to	unburden,	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
drop	all	rubbish	called	knowledge.	His	function	is	just	the	opposite.
Ordinarily	 people	 think	 a	 teacher	 and	 a	master	 are	 the	 same	 thing.	 They	will
even	 call	 Buddha	 a	 great	 teacher.	 They	 are	 not	 same	 things,	 their	 function	 is
totally	 opposite.	 The	 teacher	 heaps	 you	 to	 become	 aware	 that	 there	 is	 much
within	 you	 which	 is	 not	 your	 own:	 Drop	 it,	 disconnect	 yourself	 from	 it,	 get
disidentified	 from	 it	 so	 that	your	 inner	being	can	have	more	space	 for	 itself	 to
grow.	You	 are	 hampered,	 cripples	 by	 knowledge,	 so	much	 burdened	 that	 your
self-nature	cannot	assert.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	little	space	for	you	to	grow	and
then	 the	 light	 burns	 bright	within	 you	 and	 in	 that	 light,	 whatsoever	 you	 so	 is
right.	In	that	light	you	cannot	do	anything	wrong.	That	light	is	the	only	certainty
for	a	true	virtue,	for	a	true	morality,	for	a	true	character.
(To	Lis)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Bhagvatta.	Bhagvatta	means	godliness.
There	is	no	god	as	a	person.	The	idea	of	god	as	a	person	is	a	childish	idea.	Good
to	help	children	to	understand.	It	is	like	the	illustrated	books	which	we	prepare
for	children:	Colour	pictures	are	more	because	they	are	more	interested	in	colour
and	 pictures	 and	 through	 those	 colored	 pictures	 we	 can	 help	 them	 to	 learn
language	--	For	example	if	we	want	 to	 teach	them	what	a	potato	is	we	have	to
give	them	a	beautiful	picture	of	a	potato	--	they	will	be	immediately	interested	in
the	picture	of	the	potato.	And	then	we	can	tell	them
'This	 is	 potato.'	 Then	 they	 become	 aware	 of	 the	word	 'potato'.	 They	 learn	 the
word	through	the	picture.
Primitive	people	live	in	a	pictorial	world.	That's	why	the	very	ancient	languages
are	pictorial	--	Chinese	is	a	pictorial	language.	There	is	no	alphabet,	no	A,	B,	C,
D	--	just	pictures.	Hence	it	is	very	difficult.	To	be	really	a	scholar	in	Chinese	one
needs	at	least	a	dozen	years	great	effort,	arduous	effort	because	you	must	know
at	 least	 one	 hundred	 thousand	 pictures.	 Only	 then	 you	 can	 claim	 some
knowledge.
Alphabets	 have	 helped	 other	 languages	 tremendously.	 They	 are	 grown	 up
languages.	In	dreams	we	all	regress	back	to	pictorial	language.	We	again	become
primitive	 because	 dreams	 come	 from	 the	 unconscious	 and	 the	 unconscious	 is
still	 primitive,	 except	 for	 those	 few	who	have	become	enlightened.	They	don't
have	any	unconscious,	hence	then	can't	dream.
One	thing	that	one	misses	when	one	becomes	enlightened	is:	dreaming.	Even	if
you	 want	 to	 dream,	 you	 cannot	 dream	 because	 the	 whole	 being	 becomes
conscious.	There	is	no	unconscious	left,	so	there	is	no	question	of	any	pictorial
languages.	 And	 the	 more	 primitive	 people	 dream	 in	 colour.	 The	 more
sophisticated	people	dream	in	black	and	white.
God	 is	 just	 a	 picture	 of	 primitive	 people.	The	 very	 idea	 of	 god	 as	 a	 person	 is
primitive,	anthropocentric
--	 we	 have	 imagined	 god	 in	 our	 own	 image;	 that	 is	 not	 true,	 but	 certainly
existence	 is	 full	 of	 something	 very	 mysterious.	 I	 call	 that	 mysteriousness
bhagvatta,	godliness	--	not	god,	but	godliness.	A	fragrance	surrounds	the	whole
existence	not	 like	 a	 person,	 not	 like	 a	 flower	but	 like	 a	 fragrance.	You	 cannot
catch	 hold	 of	 it	 but	 it	 is	 still	 there.	 You	 can	 only	 smell	 it,	 you	 can	 be
overwhelmed	 by	 it,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 very	 sensitive.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
worshipping	god	because	 there	 is	nobody	 to	be	worshipped.	 It	 is	a	question	of
becoming	more	and	more	sensitive,	so	sensitive	and	vulnerable,	so	open	that	all
the	mysteries	that	surround	you	can	penetrate	you.	Then	suddenly	one	becomes
aware	that	existence	is	not	what	it	appears.	It	is	far	more,	tremendously	far	more.
It	 is	simply	far	out!	It	 is	unbelievably,	 incredibly	beautiful.	We	cannot	 imagine
its	beauty,	its	bliss,	its	benediction.
I	am	giving	you	one	of	the	most	beautiful	names	possible.	Try	to	live	up	to	it.
No	Man	is	an	Island
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005025
ShortTitle:	ISLAND02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Paul)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Anand	Paul.	Anand	means	 bliss.	 Paul
means	rest.
Bliss	 it	 a	 by-product	 of	 relaxation,	 of	 rest.	Misery	 comes	 out	 of	 tension.	 It	 is
nothing	but	tension,	anxiety,	anguish.	And	just	the	opposite	is	bliss:	When	there
is	no	tension	in	your	being,	when	all	is	at	rest,	when	you	are	not	worried	about
the	past,	nor	concerned	about	the	future,	when	you	are	relaxed,	utterly	herenow,
bliss	 arises	 on	 its	 own	 accord.	 One	 cannot	 achieve	 it,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 goal	 to	 be
achieved.	It	is	simply	a	by-product.
Everybody	 seeks	 for	 bliss,	 hence	 everybody	 misses	 it,	 or	 almost	 everybody.
Those	who	have	found	it	can	be	counted	on	fingers,	and	they	have	found	it	not
by	making	a	goal	of	it	but	by	dropping	the	very	idea	of	a	goal.	Not	by	making	an
object	 of	 desire	 but	 by	 understanding	 desiring	 and	 seeing	 that	 desiring	 brings
conflict,	 desiring	 brings	 tension,	 anxiety,	 misery.	 They	 drop	 desiring,	 and
suddenly	from	all	nooks	and	corners	of	existence	bliss	rushes	towards	you.	It	is
your	 self-nature,	 not	 a	 goal	 to	 be	 achieved.	When	 the	 achieving	mind	 ceases,
bliss	is.	When	the	achieving	mind	functions,	bliss	is	not.	That's	the	whole	secret
of	 all	 the	 religions,	 of	 all	mysticism.	 If	 one	 can	 understand	 this	 simple	 secret
there	is	nothing	more	to	understand	in	life.	It	is	enough	--	this	is	a	master	key.
(To	Marjolijn)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	Deva	Marjolijn.	Deva	means	 divine.
Marjolijn	 is	 a	 form	 of	 Mary:	 it	 means	 fragrance.	 Your	 full	 name	 will	 mean:
Divine	fragrance.
As	long	as	man	is	man,	he	stinks.	Only	when	he	surpasses	humanity	fragrance
arises	in	him	because	to	be	a	man	means	to	be	an	egoist,	to	be	a	man	means	to	be
separate	from	the	whole.	And	to	transcend	humanity	means	to	dissolve	into	the
whole,	to	surpass	the	ego.	The	moment	you	are	one	with	the	whole	there	is	grat
fragrance,	infinite	fragrance,	eternal	fragrance.
Man	 is	 bound	 to	 remain	 in	misery	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 because	 he	 thinks	 in
terms	 of	 his	won	 identity,	 he	 thinks	 in	 term	 of	 separation,	 and	 remember:	No
man	is	an	island.	The	think	oneself	separate	from	the	whole	is	the	only	illusion.
All	other	 illusions	arise	out	of	 it.	We	are	part	of	 the	vast	continent,	we	are	not
islands.	To	remember	it	is	the	only	way	to	be	transformed.	We	have	not	really	to
drop	anything	because	the	very	idea	of	separation	is	false.	It	is	just	an	idea,	it	is
like	 somebody	 is	 calculating	 and	 goes	 on	 doing	 the	 same	 mistake	 again	 and
again:	Two	plus	two	and	he	puts	five.	All	that	is	needed	is	to	understand	that	two
plus	 two	 is	 not	 five;	 two	 plus	 two	 is	 four.	 Once	 it	 is	 understood	 everything
becomes	clear.	This	is	just	a	mathematical	error,	a	mistake.	It	arises	because	of
certain	 reasons:	We	have	 separate	bodies	 that	gives	 the	 idea	of	 separation.	We
have	separate	mind,	that	gives	the	idea	of	separation,	but	we	are	neither	the	body
nor	the	mind.	We	are	consciousnesses.	The	moment	you	start	feeling	yourself	as
a	consciousness,	 then	 there	 is	no	separation	 ,	 then	 two	plus	 two	is	 four;	before
that	two	plus	two	is	everything	except	four.	Sometimes	it	is	three,	sometimes	it	is
five,	but	it	is	never	four.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	to	live	in	this	illusion	is	bound	to	create	problems	and	all	those	problems	go
on	 and	 on	 accumulating.	 They	 cannot	 be	 solved	 unless	 we	 change	 our	 very
approach	from	the	beginning.	A	radical	change	is	needed	not	some	reformation
and	that	radical	change	happens	when	we	drop	our	personality	into	the	ocean	of
the	god,	when	the	dewdrop	of	the	ego	disappears	into	the	ocean.	We	don't	lose
anything,	we	gain.	We	simply	lose	our	small	boundaries	and	we	become	vast	and
infinite.	In	that	vastness	is	fragrance.
To	live	in	an	ego	is	to	live	in	a	very	small	dark	hole	--	it	is	ugly,	it	stinks.	To	be
initiated	as	a	sannyasin	means	taking	the	first	step	out	of	the	cave	of	the	ego	into
the	 open	 sky,	 under	 the	 stars.	 Suddenly	 you	 start	 growing	 wings.	 They	 have
always	been	 there	but	 there	was	not	 space	enough	 to	use	 them.	Sannyas	gives
you	space,	it	gives	you	the	whole	sky.	It	makes	you	the	infinite	available	and	just
a	small	price	has	to	be	paid:	The	false	ego	has	to	be	dropped.
(To	David)	 --	Your	 name:	 Swami	Anando	David.	Anando	means	 bliss.	David
means	beloved	of	god,	beloved	of	Jehovah.
We	are	not	aware	at	all	 that	existence	goes	on	pouring	its	 love	for	us,	 in	every
possible	 way.	 Hence	 we	 remain	 ungrateful,	 hence	 we	 remain	 continuously
complaining,	hence	prayer	cannot	arise	 in	our	hearts	because	prayer	 is	nothing
but	 another	 name	 for	 gratitude,	 for	 thankfulness.	 The	 complaining	 mind	 can
never	 be	 religious,	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 the	 complaining	 mind	 to	 be	 religious,
because	 the	 complaining	 mind	 hat	 not	 become	 aware	 of	 a	 basic	 reality:	 that
existence	 loves	 you,	 that	 it	 takes	 care	 of	 you,	 that	 your	 are	 befriended	 by	 the
winds,	by	 the	 rain,	by	 the	 sun,	by	 the	moon.	That	whatever	happens	 --	 it	may
appear	a	curse	to	you,	but	it	is	never	a	curse,	 it	 is	always	a	blessing.	Maybe	in
the	 beginning	 it	 appears	 like	 a	 curse	 because	 our	 vision	 is	 very	 limited,	 our
perspective	 is	 very	 small:	 We	 can't	 see	 the	 whole	 thing,	 we	 can't	 see	 all	 the
implications	of	it,	we	can't	see	the	whole	series	of	events	that	will	be	followed	by
it.	Otherwise	we	will	always	be	grateful,	we	will	always	feel	blessed.
Even	in	death,	a	man	who	understand	find	tremendous	thankfulness	towards	god
because	for	him	death	is	a	rest	for	him.	For	him	death	is	not	the	end	of	life	but
the	beginning	of	a	far	greater	like	than	this	one.
This	was	just	a	rehearsal	of	the	real	life	--	it	was	not	real.	Real	drama	starts	after
the	death	--	for	those	who	understand.	For	those	who	don't	understand	they	think
the	rehearsal	is	the	real	thing,	and	when	the	rehearsal	end,	they	cry	and	weep	and
they	cling	and	they	don't	want	to	leave	it.
Everything	is	a	blessing!
One	of	the	contemporary	British	philosophers	C.E.M.	Jode	(sp.	not	checked)	fell
ill,	very	seriously	ill.
Somebody	gave	him	a	book	of	Georges	Gurdjieff.	He	had	come	across	Georges
Gurdjieff's	books	before	too,	but	he	had	never	bothered	about	them.	He	had	no
time.	He	was	more	interested	in	academic	philosophy
--	Hegel,	Kant	and	Bradley	and	people	like	that.	And	this	man	Gurdjieff	looked
almost	 a	 madman.	 But	 he	 was	 ill	 and	 nothing	 else	 to	 do,	 so	 he	 just	 started
looking	 into	 the	 book	 by	 the	 way,	 to	 pass	 time	 and	 he	 became	 immensely
interested.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 he	 had	 come	 across	 something	 really	 authentic.
Hegel,	 Kant	 and	 Bradley	 --	 those	 were	 only	 thinkers.	 This	 man	 knows!	 Each
single	word	had	the	impact	of	tremendous	authenticity	and	authority.	This	man
was	 speaking	 like	 Jesus,	 like	 Buddha.	 He	 was	 not	 infering,	 he	 was	 simply
sharing	his	experience.	And	that	one	month's	seriousness	transformed	his	whole
being.	Lying	down	on	the	bed	he	started	meditating	the	way	Gurdjieff	proposes.
Gurdjieff	used	to	call	meditation	self-remembering:	Whatsoever	you	do,	do	with
deep	 remembering	 that	 you	 are	 doing	 it;	 don't	 forget	 yourself.	 Walking,
remember	 that	 you	 are	 walking.	 Talking,	 remember	 that	 you	 are	 talking.
Listening,	 remember	 that	 you	 are	 listening.	 Each	 act	 has	 also	 to	 be	 an	 act	 of
remembrance.	 Lying	 down	 on	 the	 bed,	 tossing	 and	 turning	 he	 started
remembering	that	'I	am	lying	on	the	bed,'	that	'My	head	is	aching,'	that	'My	back
is	 aching.'	There	was	nothing	 else	 to	 do	 --	 he	 thought,	 'Why	not	 try	what	 this
man	 is	 saying?'	 And	 just	 trying	 those	 small	 ideas	 he	 became	more	 and	more
intrigued.
By	the	time	he	was	cured	he	was	a	different	man.	Just	remembering	he	became
aware	that	he	is	not	the	body	at	all.	Then	he	used	to	say	to	his	friends	that,	'I	had
never	been	 ill	 and	 I	was	very	 angry	when	 I	 became	 ill	 because	 I	 have	 always
followed	all	the	rules	and	regulations	that	a	man	should	follow	who	wants	to	be
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
always	healthy	and	still	I	fell	ill	and	seriously	ill	--	I	was	almost	on	the	deathbed.
I	started	cursing	god,	I	started	doubting	god.	I	started	thinking	that,	"This	is	all
nonsense.	Life	is	an	accident	and	death	is	an	accident,	everything	is	an	accident."
But	meditating	I	realized	that	this	was	a	great	gift	from	god.	In	my	whole	life	I
have	never	been	so	blessed	as	this	illness	has	proved.'
That's	 the	meaning	of	David:	God	loves	you,	so	whatever	happens	to	you,	feel
grateful.	 Even	 sometimes	when	 you	 find	 it	 very	 difficult	 to	 feel	 grateful,	 feel
grateful,	because	you	can	be	wrong,	god	cannot	be	wrong	--	existence	cannot	be
wrong.
If	 this	 climate	 --	 that	 god	 loves	 you	 goes	 on	 deepening	 inside	 you	 ,	 if	 this
becomes	your	very	being	you	will	be	 reborn	out	of	 it.	 It	will	become	a	rebirth
and	that's	what	real	sannyas	is:	a	rebirth,	a	new	perspective	about	things	and	life
and	existence,	a	new	vision.
(To	Monika)	--	Your	name:	Ma	Monika.	It	is	a	tremendous	beautiful	name;	it	has
two	meanings.	One	comes	from	Greek,	the	other	from	Latin.
The	 first	 meaning	 is	 aloneness;	 not	 loneliness,	 remember,	 but	 aloneness.
Loneliness	is	emptiness,	aloneness	is	fullness.	In	loneliness	you	are	missing	the
other,	in	aloneness	you	are	enjoying	yourself.
Aloneness	is	the	most	sacred	experience	of	life.
And	the	second	meaning	comes	from	Latin;	through	Latin	it	means	a	woman	of
wisdom.	Wisdom	can	arise	only	if	you	know	how	to	be	alone.	Wisdom	is	your
self-nature.	When	you	are	absolutely	alone	when	you	have	forgotten	the	whole
world,	when	you	are	just	yourself	utterly	blissful	within	yourself	there	is	no	need
for	the	other,	no	hankering	for	the	other,	no	desire	for	anything	else.	In	that	rest
within	one's	being,	wisdom	arises.	Wisdom	does	not	mean	knowledge.	Wisdom
means	 insight,	 wisdom	 means	 clarity.	 Wisdom	 does	 not	 mean	 information,
wisdom	means	 transformation.	Wisdom	means	a	 totally	new	way	of	 looking	at
life.	 Ant	 this	 is	 the	 whole	 of	 sannyas:	 to	 learn	 to	 be	 alone	 and	 to	 allow	 the
wisdom	to	surface	in	your	being.
Then	 you	 can	 live	 in	 the	world	 but	 then	 even	 in	 the	 crowd	 you	will	 be	 alone
unaffected,	 undistracted,	 unimpressed.	You	will	 be	 in	 the	world	 but	 not	 of	 the
world	and	you	will	have	the	capacity	to	see	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.	You
will	 not	 depend	 on	 outside	 commandments.	 You	 will	 not	 depend	 on	 outside
commandments.	You	will	not	depend	on	 the	Bible,	on	 the	Gita,	on	 the	Koran:
You	have	found	your	own	scripture,	you	have	found	god's	voice	within	your	own
heart.	Now	there	is	no	need	to	go	for	second-rate	second-hand	information.	Now
you	have	a	direct	line	to	god.	That's	the	whole	purpose	of	sannyas:	To	help	you
to	be	connected	with	god	directly.
(To	Manuel)	 --	This	 is	 your	 name:	Swami	Ananto.	Ananto	means	 the	 infinite,
another	name	for	god.
God	is	indefinable,	so	no	word	is	really	adequate	enough	to	describe	him,	but	we
have	 to	 use	 words	 This	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 beautiful	 word	which	 comes	 very
close	in	describing	god.	God	is	as	infinite	as	the	sky	as	unbounded	as	the	whole
universe.	 No	 boundaries,	 no	 limits	 --	 and	 that's	 your	 nature	 too:	 god	 is	 your
nature.
God	is	not	something	outside,	not	something	that	belongs	to	the	existence.	It	is
the	centre	of	all,	it	is	as	much	yours	as	it	is	anybody	else.	We	are	different	on	the
circumference	 but	we	 are	 one	 at	 the	 centre.	No	 difference	 at	 all	 at	 the	 centre.
Farther	we	go	 from	 the	 centre	we	 start	 becoming	different;	we	 start	 becoming
persons,	 we	 start	 gathering	 personality,	 we	 start	 becoming	 faces,	 masks.	 The
closer	we	come	to	the	centre	the	masks	start	disappearing,	the	personality	starts
evaporating,	we	start	becoming	one.
That's	 what	 I	 mean	 when	 I	 say:	 No	 man	 is	 an	 island.	We	 are	 part	 of	 a	 vast
continent,	of	an	infinity,	on	an	eternity,	beginningless,	endless.	To	know	it	brings
great	rejoicing,	obviously,	because	to	know	it	means	there	is	no	death,	to	know	it
means	 you	 have	 been	 here	 forever	 and	 you	 will	 be	 here	 forever.	 To	 know	 it
means	your	inner	purity	is	absolutely	virgin,	it	has	not	been	polluted.	Thousands
of	lives	have	happened	but	it	has	not	polluted	to	you.	Those	lives	have	been	just
dreams.	You	have	dreamed	many	dreams	in	the	night	but	in	the	morning	you	are
not	polluted	by	your	dreams.	You	may	have	been	a	murderer	in	the	dream	or	you
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
may	have	been	a	mahatma	in	the	dram	--	it	doesn't	matter.	whether	you	were	a
mahatma	or	a	murderer,	 in	 the	morning	you	find	both	were	dreams,	both	were
false	 and	 your	 reality	 has	 remained	 unaffected.	 Many	 stories	 we	 have	 lived,
many	dramas	we	have	played.	Many	 roles	we	have	passed	 through,	but	 this	 is
the	miracle	that	we	are	absolutely	unaffected,	we	are	virgin.	Our	inner	purity	is
incorruptible.
Meditation	will	give	you	a	taste	of	that	incorruptible	purity,	of	that	incorruptible
innocence	and	from	there,	one	can	jump	into	the	ultimate,	into	the	infinite.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005035
ShortTitle:	ISLAND03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	 Maitena)	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Asti	 Maitena.	 Asti	 means	 existence.
Maitena	means	esteemed	by,	loved	by.
Existence	care	for	everybody.	Without	existence	loving	us	we	cannot	exist	even
for	a	single	moment.	It	goes	on	pouring	life	into	us
We	are	immensely	esteemed	by	existence
Although	we	go	on	taking	it	for	granted	--
That's	where	our	stupidity	lies.
If	we	take	it	for	grated	there	is	no	gratitude
We	think	as	if	we	deserve
We	think	as	if	it	is	our	right;	in	fact
We	 think	 as	 if	 we	 are	 not	 getting	 as	 much	 as	 we	 deserve,	 hence	 there	 is	 A
constant	undercurrent	of	complaints.
This	is	the	state	of	the	irreligious	man.
The	religious	man	feels	gratitude
Immense	gratitude.
Just	for	sheer	being	he	is	grateful.
And	once	you	start	feeling	gratefulness
There	are	thousand	and	one	things
To	feel	grateful	for.
And	the	more	you	feel	grateful
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	more	gifts	go	on	arriving.
Many	gifts	are	not	reaching	to	us
Because	of	our	complaining	mind.
If	this	complaining	mind	is	put	aside
All	the	stars	are	ours	and	all	the	mysteries
That	existence	contains	are	ours.
(To	 Rinie)	 --	 Your	 name:	My	 Dhyan	 Rinie.	 Dhyan	 means	 means	Meditation.
Rinie	is	a	beautiful	name;	It	has	many	meanings	and	all	meanings	are	of
Significance.
The	first	meaning	is	pure,	purity.
Man	needs	a	pure	heart	to	commune	with	existence.
The	heart	becomes	pure
When	the	mind	is	no	more	dominant	within	you.
Till	the	mind	dominates
The	heart	remains	impure.
The	mind	clings	to	the	heart
Like	dust	clinging	to	a	mirror.
Mind	is	nothing	but	thought-dust.
Each	thought	is	just	dust	and	nothing	else.
One	has	to	clean	all	thoughts
Then	purity	is	attained.
Purity	has	nothing	to	do	with	morality.
Of	course,	a	pure	heart	is	moral	but
A	moral	person	need	not	be	pure.
A	moral	person	is	still	living	in	his	head
His	morality	is	still	a	domination	of	the	head.
The	head	is	saying,	'Do	this,	don't	do	that.'
And	the	head	is	very	calculative:
It	calculates	about	this	world
It	calculates	bout	the	other	too.
It	does	not	know	purity	because
it	is	not	innocent,	hence	remember:
Morality	does	not	lead	to	purity,
The	vice	versa	is	not	true.
Purity	certainly	leads	to	mortality
But	first	comes	purity,	then	morality	follows.
And	the	second	meaning	is	clean
Spotlessly	clean.
Mind	is	cunning,	it	cannot	be	clean.
It	is	crafty,	it	is	continuously	playing	tricks
With	others	and	with	oneself	--	it	is	a	politician.
Heart	is	love	and	only	love	can	be	clean.
Diplomacy	is	bound	to	be	dirty.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	third	meaning	is	crystal.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say,	'Unless	a	man
Becomes	crystalized,	he	has	no	soul.'
If	he	was	giving	you	the	name,	he	would	have
Simply	jumped	upon	the	word	'crystal',	because
That	contains	his	whole	philosophy.
Ordinarily	a	man	is	a	crowd,	fragments	--
He	is	not	one,	he	is	many,	he	is	multi-psychic
And	that	is	his	misery:
There	is	constant	war	inside
All	the	fragments	are	fighting	for	supremacy.
And	this	is	how	our	whole	life	is	wasted:
Our	all	energies	go	down	the	drain
And	man	needs	a	single	centre	of	being
And	that	is	crystallization.
Meditation	brings	crystallization
It	melts	the	many	fragments
Into	one	integral	whole.
And	there	are	other	three	meanings	also:
Beauty,	grace	and	devotion	--	they	are	by-products.
One	who	is	pure,	clean	and	crystallized
He	is	bound	to	be	beautiful.
A	tremendous	inner	beauty	arises
And	it	radiates	outside.	Life	becomes	graceful.
All	ugliness	and	meanness	disappears
One	starts	enjoying	sharing	whatsoever	one	has
One	is	always	ready	to	share	and	give
Just	for	giving's	sake.
And	the	ultimate	consequence	of	all	this	process
Is	devotion:	one	comes	to	know	what	devotion	is.
Devotion	means	the	feeling
That	god	surrounds	you;,	that	god	is	everywhere
That	you	are	within	and	without,	full	of	god
Everything	is	overflowing	with	god!
Seeing	it,	feeling	it	--
What	you	can	do,	except	surrender!
That	surrender	is	devotion.
And	all	these	things
Can	become	possible	through	meditation.
Meditation	is	the	magic	key.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Gebhard)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Atit	Gebhard.	Atit	means	go	beyond,
surpass,	because	Gebhard	is	a	dangerous	word.	It	means	the	gift	of	being	hard.
Hitherto	humanity	has	praised	hardness	very	much
Particularly	in	man.
For	centuries	man	has	been	a	male	chauvinist	pig!
He	has	praised	all	that	is	aggressive,	cruel
Violent,	warlike,	and
He	has	condemned	all	that	is	feminine.
And	it	is	because	of	this
A	great	problem	has	arisen.	The	problem	is:
All	that	is	beautiful	is	feminine
And	if	you	condemn	the	feminine
Then	the	beautiful	disappears	from	the	world.
And	we	have	struggled	hard
To	destroy	the	beautiful.
The	ugly	has	dominated	the	beautiful
And	he	hard	has	been	praised	against	the	soft.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin
You	have	to	change	all	priorities.
Lao	Tzu	says,	'Don't	be	hard	like	a	rock
But	be	soft	like	water.'
He	calls	his	way	of	life	the	watercourse	way.
And	he	says,	'Ultimately	the	soft
Wins	over	the	hard,
The	rock	will	disappear	one	day.
Let	the	water	go	on	falling	on	it
And	the	rock	will	be	reduced	to	sand.'
Of	course,	right	now	you	cannot	see	it	happening
It	will	take	time
But	the	rock	cannot	destroy	the	water.
For	that	one	needs	a	little	deeper	insight.
A	longer	vision,	a	bigger	perspective.
And	we	are	very	short-sighted,
We	only	see	so	far.
Because	of	this	shortsightedness
The	rock	seems	to	be	worth	choosing,	not	water.
Those	who	have	seen	reality
Into	true	perspective	of	eternity
They	say	something	totally	different.
Let	softness	be	the	gift.
A	soldier	needs	to	be	hard
An	sannyasin	needs	to	be	soft.
A	soldier	needs	to	be	aggressive
Violent,	destructive.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	sannyasin	needs	to	be	just	the	opposite:
Receptive,	loving.
A	sannyasin	basically	lives	in	a	kind	of	let-go.
So	go	beyond	your	old	name.
It	is	good,	so	I	am	keeping	the	old
So	it	will	remind	you	that
You	have	to	go	beyond	it.
And	I	am	adding	the	new	too
That	you	have	to	go	beyond.
Your	name	has	both,	your	past	and	your	future.
Not	only	your	past	but	the	past	of	humanity
And	not	only	your	future
But	the	future	of	humanity.
We	have	to	absorb	feminine	qualities.
The	woman	has	to	be	accepted.
Without	the	woman	man	is	half
Just	as	woman	is	half	without	the	man.
And	when	both	energies	meet	and	mingle
They	are	not	opposites,	they	are	complementaries.
And	they	help	and	a	higher	synthesis	arises.
The	effort	to	live	in	a	man-oriented	world
Has	failed,	utterly	failed.
Our	whole	history	is	a	history	of	failure.
Now	we	have	to	try	something	else.
It	is	time	we	should	try	--	if	we	don't	try
Then	humanity's	future	is	doomed.
We	have	come	to	a	cul-de-sac.
Man	and	woman	have	to	merge	their	energies
Into	one	so	that	we	can	have	a	human	world
Neither	male-oriented	nor	female-oriented
Neither	a	patriarchy	nor	a	matriarchy	--
Simple	human.
And	that's	my	effort	here.
My	sannyasins	have	to	become
Heralds	of	a	new	age,	of	a	new	man.
(To	Sylvie)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Subhadro.
Subhadro	means	grace.
Grace	is	beauty	of	the	inner.
It	filters	out	too	but	it	originates
At	the	very	centre	of	your	being.
And	slowly	slowly	it	starts	radiating
Through	your	mind,	through	your	body
But	it	is	not	of	the	body
It	comes	from	somewhere	deeper	than	the	body.
It	is	not	of	the	mind	either.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	are	physically	beautiful	people
We	give	them	awards	--	a	Miss	Universe.
There	are	psychologically	beautiful	people
We	give	them	Nobel	prizes.
But	we	have	not	yet	recognized
A	spiritually	beautiful	person.
We	have	not	been	able	to	ignore	them
But	we	have	not	been	able	to	recognize	them.
We	have	crucified	them,	that's	why	I	say
We	have	not	been	able	to	ignore	them.
We	have	poisoned	then,	killed	them,	murdered	them
We	have	done	all	kinds	of	thing
That	is	their	reward.
but	it	doesn't	matter	to	a	spiritual	person.
He	rejoices	even	in	his	death.
One	who	has	attained	to	grace
Rejoices	in	everything
Even	the	darkest	night	is	not	dark	for	him,
It	is	luminous.
Even	the	thorn	is	transformed	into	his	vision
In	a	flower.
Grace	cannot	be	cultivated,	obviously.
You	can	go	to	the	beautician	for	the	body
You	can	go	to	the	universities	for	the	mind
but	for	the	inner	grace
You	will	have	to	go	inwards.
Buddhas	can	only	point	the	way
They	can	only	give	you	vague	hints
Not	specific	programmes
Because	the	inner	journey	is	a	mysterious	journey
No	maps	can	be	made
No	fixed	programmes	can	be	given
Because	each	individual
Has	to	travel	in	a	different	way
And	each	individual
Has	to	go	in	a	different	inner	world
Because	each	individual
Has	a	unique	inner	territory.
Meditation	is	the	only	way	that	brings	you
To	grace,	in	inner	beauty,	it	inner	realization.
But	once	attained
Your	whole	life	becomes	flooded	with	it.
Then	whatsoever	you	touch	turns	into	gold.
(To	Herbert)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Vinamaro.
Deva	means	divine.	Vinamaro	means	humbleness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Humbleness	is	never	a	human	achievement
It	cannot	be	by	its	very	nature.
If	it	is	your	achievement,	the	ego	will	pretend
That	'I	have	achieved	humbleness,'
And	that	is	a	contradiction.
The	ego	will	say,	'Look.	I	have	become	humble.
Nobody	is	more	humble	than	me.
I	am	the	humblest	person	on	the	earth.'
And	the	ego	can	go	on	playing	the	game.
Just	few	days	before,	Pope	Paul
Played	the	drama	of	being	Jesus:
He	carried	the	corss	to	a	hill	nearby	the	Vatican
And	thousands	of	people	followed	him
And	he	touched	the	feet	of	a	poor	beggar
Washed	the	feet	and	kissed	the	feet	--
And	this	is	pure	exhibitionism.
This	is	showing	that	'Look,	how	humble	am	I.
Nobody	is	more	humble	than	me.'
But	it	is	all	drama,	it	is	only	for	the	show.
Real	humbleness	comes	as	a	gift	from	god.
All	that	man	can	do	is	an	effort	to	understand
The	ways	of	the	ego	--	that's	all.
One	can	watch	how	the	ego	functions
One	can	see	its	cunning	and	subtle	strategies
Tactics,	its	trips,
And	one	can	watch	it	in	all	possible	ways.
And	the	miracle	is:	The	more	you	become	aware
Of	its	strategies	and	tricks	and	trips
The	more	and	more	those	trips
And	tricks	and	strategies	start	evaporating.
Just	be	sheer	awareness	this	miracle	happens
And	one	day	suddenly,	there	is	no	ego
And	in	that	moment	something	from	the	beyond
Descends	in	you	as	a	gift,	just	as	a	shower.
You	cannot	say	'I	am	humble,'	you	can	simply	say
'I	am	no	more,	humbleness	has	happened.'
You	cannot	claim	it	as	your	own	achievement.
Meditation	helps	you
To	become	aware	of	the	ways	of	the	ego
And	then	everything	else	can	be	left	to	god.
(To	William)	--	Deva	Yogen.	Deva	means	divine;
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Yogen	means	meeting	--	meeting	with	the	divine.
It	is	possible	any	moment;	there	is	no	particular
Fixed	moment	for	it	to	happen
Hence	it	is	unpredictable	--	it	can	happen	right	now.
All	that	is	needed	is	the	courage	to	drop	the	ego.
Whatsoever	time	one	wants	to	take
To	gather	courage	to	drop	the	ego
That	is	the	time	that	the	meeting
Has	to	be	postponed	for	that	time	only.
Once	you	are	ready	to	drop	the	ego
To	lose	your	identity,
To	say	totally	with	the	heart
'I	am	no	more'	--	suddenly,	god	is!
It	is	a	very	strange	meeting.
Ordinarily	in	a	meeting	two	persons	are	needed.
This	is	a	very	strange	meeting.
This	meeting	happens	only	when	one	is	absent.
If	two	are	present	it	never	happens.
Of	you	are	there	and	god	is	there
Then	it	won't	happen
Because	you	will	be	the	barrier.
If	you	are	not	there	then	it	happens.
In	your	absence	the	barrier	falls
The	block	disappears
Suddenly	you	are	one	with	god
There	is	nothing	to	divide,	nothing	to	separate.
It	is	like	a	dewdrop
Slipping	from	a	lotus	leaf	into	the	lake.
Be	a	dewdrop	--	allow	yourself
To	slip	from	the	lotus	leaf
Don't	cling	to	the	lotus	leaf.
This	buddhafield	is	only	a	lake
Sannyas	is	only	a	lotus	leaf
You	are	a	dewdrop	on	the	lotus	leaf
Don't	cling!	Slip!
And	go	dancing,	go	singing,	die	into	the	lake!
And	immediately	you	are	no	more	but	god	is.
And	that's	what	you	in	reality	are>
You	are	that	--	'Tat-tvam-asi'
That	is	one	of	the	greatest	statements	ever	made;
Thou	art	that.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005045
ShortTitle:	ISLAND04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Iris)	--	Your	name:	Ma	Iris.	Iris	is	a	beautiful	Name;	it	means	rainbow.
In	Greek	mythology
The	rainbow	represents	the	messenger	of	gods
Because	it	is	a	bridge	between	man	and	god.
It	joins	the	earth	and	heaven
And	it	is	seven-colored.
Man	also	has	seven	planes	of	being.
Existence	is	seven-layered	and	the	rainbow
Connects	existence	in	every	dimension.
My	sannyasin	has	to	be	a	multi-colored
Multi-dimensional	person	--	not	one-dimensional.
The	ancient	idea	of	monks	and	nuns
Was	one-dimensional.
they	were	escapists,	they	were	avoiding	life.
My	sannyasin	has	to	live	in	the	life
With	all	its	sweetness	and	bitterness
With	all	its	days	and	nights
With	all	its	summers	and	winters.
My	sannyasin	has	to	taste	everything
Nothing	has	to	be	left	untasted,	unexperienced.
Only	when	one	experiences	life	in	its	totality
One	becomes	aware	of	god;	hence	rainbow
Is	also	symbolic	of	my	approach	towards	life.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Hette)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Veet	Hette.
Veet	means	going	beyond.	Hette	is	a	dangerous	name.
It	means	dispute,	conflict.
And	a	sannyasin	is	to	go	beyond	all	dispute
And	beyond	all	conflict.
People	are	continuously	in	dispute
About	everything:
They	are	in	dispute	with	others
They	are	in	dispute	with	themselves,
Quarreling	is	their	very	style	of	life.
They	are	in	conflict	with	others
And	they	are	in	conflict	with	themselves.
Even	the	so-called	saints	don't	drop	conflict.
On	the	contrary;	they	escape	from	the	world
To	escape	from	conflict	with	others.
That	is	easy	--	you	can	escape	from	the	world.
And	when	there	is	nobody	else	to	fight	with
Of	course,	you	cannot	fight	with	others
But	then	your	whole	energy	turns	upon	yourself.
Your	whole	violence	turns	upon	yourself.
Hence	the	so-called	saints
Are	more	in	inner	conflict
Than	the	ordinary	people	because
The	ordinary	people	have	at	least	a	division.
A	major	part	of	their	life
Is	wasted	in	fighting	with	others.
Only	a	minor	energy	remains	to	fight	with	oneself
Very	little,	not	more	than	five	per	sent.
But	the	saint
Has	hundred	per	cent	energy	available
And	what	to	do	with	that	energy?
He	knows	only	one	way
And	that	is	to	put	the	energy	into	fight:
He	starts	fighting	with	himself
He	becomes	destructive,	self-destructive.
He	does	violence	to	himself
He	becomes	a	masochist,	he	tortures	himself.
And	it	is	a	very	ugly	fact	of	the	history
That	we	have	respected	these	pathological	people
For	centuries.
And	of	we	respect	these	people,	of	course
We	try	to	imitate	them.
If	we	respect	them,	they	become	our	ideals.
Somehow	we	would	like	to	live
Their	way	of	life	one	day.
And	whatsoever	we	can	do	in	our	own	small	way
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
We	try	to	do.
My	sannyasin	has	to	drop,
Not	the	world,	but	conflict	itself.
He	has	to	transform	his	energy
From	conflict	into	harmony
From	dispute	into	trust.
Life	is	too	short	to	waste	it	in	dispute
It	is	too	short	to	waste	it	in	fighting
This	small	bit	of	energy	what	we	have	got
Has	to	be	transformed	into	a	celebration	because
Theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god.
But	celebration	is	possible
Only	when	all	conflict	has	been	dropped.
So	don't	fight	with	others
And	don't	fight	with	yourself	--	stop	fighting!
Start	loving!	Love	is	my	message.
(To	Diethelm)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Diethelm.
Deva	means	god	or	more	exactly,	godliness.	Diethelm
Means	protector.
Or	if	;you	really	want
to	be	very	close	to	the	truth
Then	godliness	is	our	protection.
We	are	continuously	protected	by	divine	energy
In	every	possible	way,	because	we	are	part	of	it.
No	man	is	an	island	--	separate,	apart.
We	are	part	of	the	whole,
Intrinsic	part	of	the	whole.
The	whole	takes	every	care
Just	we	have	to	learn	to	trust.
The	more	we	trust
The	more	care	flows	from	the	whole.
The	more	we	distrust
We	stop	the	care	that	was	flowing	towards	us.
Our	distrust	closes	us,	our	trust	opens	us.
If	we	distrust	we	live	in	fear
And	we	live	in	darkness	and	we	live	in	misery.
If	we	trust	we	live	in	joy,	we	live	in	bliss
We	live	in	light;	life	becomes
A	non-serious	affair,	it	becomes	laughter.
Then	it	has	a	beauty	and	tremendous	grandeur
And	utter	splendor,	indescribable	in	words
Inexpressible	in	language	--
It	can	only	be	experienced.
And	the	whole	secret	is	in	a	single	word	'trust'.
Trust	existence	and	you	will	be	able
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	taste	the	greatest	joys	of	your	life
The	ultimate	peaks	of	bliss.
(To	Wim)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Wim.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Wim	means	resolution,
Unwavering,	absolute	determination.
Meditation	is	possible	only
When	one	takes	a	jump	into	absolute	commitment.
It	is	not	possible
If	you	are	only	curious	about	it.
It	is	possible	only
If	you	risk	everything,	if	you	risk	all.
The	curious	person	cannot	risk	anything.
He	simply	wants	to	know
But	he	does	not	want	to	get	involved.
He	wants	to	know	from	the	outside.
He	does	not	want	to	become	a	participant
Because	to	become	a	participant	is	risky.
First	he	wants	to	become	sure.
One	cannot	move	into	the	world	of	meditation
in	a	lukewarm	way.
One	has	to	boil	at	the	hundred	degree	heat
Only	then	there	is	evaporation.
And	meditation	is	a	kind	of	evaporation.
You	evaporate.	What	is	left	is	totally
Something	new	that	you	had	never	known	before
That	it	ever	existed
You	had	not	even	suspected	about	it.
The	old	is	gone,	completely	gone
And	something	absolutely	new	has	arrived.
There	is	a	discontinuity.
It	is	not	continuous	with	the	old	that's	why	I	call
Meditation	is	the	only	revolution.
All	other	revolutions	are	only	called	revolutions,
They	are	reformations.
They	are	just	renovating	the	old	building.
Meditation	is	dismantling	the	whole	old	building
And	creating	a	totally	new	house,	totally	new
Which	has	no	connection	with	the	old.
It	does	not	even	resemble	with	the	old.
For	that	certainly,	great	resolution	is	needed.
When	the	intensity	is	total
Meditation	can	happen	in	a	single	moment.
Sannyas	means	you	are	becoming	committed
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Your	are	becoming	involved
You	are	no	more	a	spectator	now,
Your	are	becoming	a	participant
In	a	tremendous	journey	of	the	unknown.
Even	the	courage	to	become	a	sannyasin
Is	something	very	precious	because	it	is
The	most	significant	decision	of	one's	life.
It	is	an	effort	to	change	the	mundane	into	sacred.
(To	Ilene)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Devagarbha.
Devagarbha	means	pregnant	with	god.
Everybody	is	pregnant	with	god	--
We	may	know,	we	may	not	know
but	god	exists	in	us	as	a	potentiality.
We	can	make	it	a	reality	any	time	we	decide.
It	is	only	a	question	of	deciding
Of	being	decisive.
A	wavering	mind	can't	help
Otherwise	one	moment	one	thinks	one	thing
Another	moment	one	thinks	another	thing.
A	rabbi	was	being	interviewed.
The	old	rabbi	has	died
And	the	synagogue	needed	a	new	rabbi.
The	committee	asked	the	rabbi,
'Are	you	capable	of	taking	decisions?'
He	said,	'Sometimes	yes,	sometimes	no.'
But	that's	how	the	mind	works.
Sannyas	is	something	of	the	heart
Not	of	the	mind.
When	it	is	of	the	mind	it	is	of	no	value
When	it	is	of	the	heart
It	is	the	most	valuable	thing	in	life
Because	when	it	is	of	the	heart
You	start	moving	towards	transforming
Your	potential	into	the	actual
You	start	becoming	more	and	more	aware
Of	what	you	are	and	what	you	can	be.
Every	being,	howsoever	fast	asleep	and	snoring
Is	a	god	incarnate:
He	needs	only	a	little	awakening
Just	a	little	shaking
A	little	cold	water	thrown	into	his	eyes.
But	the	ultimate	decision	is	always	yours.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	can	throw	cold	water	in	your	eyes	--
That's	what	I	go	on	doing.
And	in	a	winter	morning	it	hurts
And	nobody	want	to	get	up:	One	wants	to	have
A	little	more	sleep,	just	few	minutes,
And	the	mind	goes	on	postponing.
Few	minutes	more	--	that's	how	we	have	lived
For	many	lives	--	postponing,	postponing.
We	have	not	lived
We	have	been	only	postponing	life.
By	becoming	a	sannyasins	one	is	taking	a	decision
That	'Now	no	more	postponement.
We	want	to	live	right	now.
We	want	to	transform	our	being	this	very	moment	And	we	are	bent	upon	it.
And	this	can	happen
Only	though	your	own	decision.
Outer	help	is	possible
But	without	inner	decision,	no	help	is	of	any	help
Because	a	person	may	be	awake
And	still	may	continue	to	hide	behind	the	blanket
Keep	his	eyes	closed.
And	it	is	easy	to	wake	up	a	man	who	is	asleep
It	is	very	difficult	to	wake	up	a	man
Who	is	awake	and	pretending	to	be	asleep.
It	is	almost	impossible.
And	this	happens	many	time	to	sannyasins:
when	they	wake	up	for	the	first	time
They	don't	want	to	recognize	the	fact
So	they	go	on	keeping	their	eyes	closed.
They	go	on	hoping	that	those	dreams
That	have	disappeared,	may	come	back	again.
They	were	beautiful	dreams,	sweet	dreams.
They	toss	and	turn,	they	pull	the	blanket
They	go	underneath	the	blanket
They	pretend	that	they	are	fast	asleep
They	pretend	to	snore.
But	once	you	are	a	sannyasin
I	am	really	after	you.
So	be	aware	of	it	from	the	very	beginning.
(To	Angelo)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Punito.
Deva	means	divine;	Punito	means	purity	--	divine	purity.
It	is	achieved	when	you	have	accepted
The	failure	of	all	human	effort.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	you	have	accepted	that
'There	is	no	way	for	me	to	know	the	truth,	'	that
'Whatsoever	I	do	is	bound	to	go	wrong,'
Because	the	doer	itself	is	the	greatest	fallacy
And	anything	that	comes	out	of	the	ego	--
And	that	is	our	doer	--
Leads	into	more	and	more	fallacies.
When	this	is	recognized
When	this	is	clearly	seen,	one	stops	all	efforts
One	becomes	still,	effortless
One	stops	all	searching,	all	seeking
And	when	everything	is	still
Something	from	the	beyond	descends	in	our	being
Floods	our	being.
That	is	divine	purity,	that	is	divine	bliss.
There	are	thousand	and	one	names	for	it
You	can	call	it	enlightenment,	salvation
God	realization,	self-realization
But	one	thing	is	absolutely	certain
That	man	has	to	accept	his	total	failure
Only	then	surrender	happens.
In	that	surrender	the	ego	disappears.
And	out	of	that	surrender	is	victory.
(To	Roberto)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Sagaro.
Deva	means	divine.	Sagaro	means	ocean.
Man	appears	from	the	outside
Just	like	a	small	drop
but	from	the	inside	he	is	totally	different.
The	inside	view	is	that	of	an	ocean.
From	the	outside	we	appear	like	small	dewdrops
Because	only	our	body	is	visible.
But	from	the	inside	when	one	is	rooted
And	centered	into	one's	being
When	in	deep	silence	the	clarity	happens
When	in	deep	meditation
One	is	able	to	seek	uncloudedly
When	all	smoke	of	desires	and	thoughts	disappears
When	the	mirror	is	absolutely	clean
And	it	reflects	that	;which	is,	then	suddenly
One	becomes	aware	of	one's	consciousness
Not	of	one's	body.
In	fact	one	forgets	one's	body	in	that	moment.
Not	only	the	body,	but	the	mind	is	also	forgotten.
In	that	moment	one	comes	to	know
The	unbounded	consciousness.
That	unbounded	consciousness
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	oceanic	consciousness,	is	our	true	being
That's	what	we	are.	We	are	not	what	we	appear.
So	don't	be	deceived	by	the	appearance
Don't	decide	by	looking	in	the	mirror	who	you	are
Because	the	mirror	can	only	reflect	the	physical.
You	will	have	to	cleanse	the	inner	mirror
And	then	only	you	will	know	how	vast	you	are.
You	are	as	vast	as	the	universe	itself.
That's	why	Jesus	says,	'I	and	my	father	are	one.'
That	is	a	very	old	way	of	saying.
In	the	East	mystics	have	used
Far	more	contemporary	language.
The	Upanishadas	say,	'Thou	art	that.'
Mansoor	says,	'I	am	the	truth,	I	am	God.'
And	he	does	not	mean	the	ordinary	I.
That	I	is	left	behind,	log	before;	in	fact
Mansoor	is	not	saying	anything	on	his	own.
It	is	god	himself	declaring	through	him
It	is	the	ocean	itself	roaring.
Of	course	the	ocean	roars	though	the	waves
There	is	no	other	way	for	the	ocean
To	express	itself.
All	the	mystics	are	just	waves	in	the	ocean
Different	waves,	different	expressions
But	the	message	is	the	same.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name.
You	have	to	make	it	also	your	experience.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005055
ShortTitle:	ISLAND05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Dolf)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Dolf.
Anand	means	bliss.	Dolf	means	courageous	spirit.
Bliss	is	only	for	the	courageous
The	coward	is	destined	to	live	in	misery.
He	cannot	get	out	of	it
Not	that	misery	clings	to	him
But	just	the	contrary:	he	clings	to	misery.
The	coward	is	a	clinger
He	always	clings	to	whatsoever	it	is
He	is	afraid	to	let	go	anything
Even	though	it	is	misery.
His	reasoning	is	that
Whatsoever	is	known,	will-known	is	good	and
whatsoever	is	unknown	is	fearful,	makes	him	scared.
He	always	chooses	the	known
And	rejects	the	unknown.
Misery	is	known,	bliss	is	unknown.
Matter	is	known,	god	is	unknown.
Science	is	known,	religion	is	unknown.
It	is	only	for	the	courageous	spirit
To	go	beyond	the	known
And	to	have	a	taste	of	the	unknown.
(To	Uli)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Svatmo	Uli.
Svatmo	means	of	the	self.	Uli	means	a	noble	ruler.
To	rule	others	is	ignoble
To	rule	others	is	violence
The	rule	others	is	inhuman	because
It	destroys	the	other,	his	freedom,	his	dignity
Because	it	reduces	the	other
From	a	human	being	into	a	thing.
Unless	you	reduce	the	other	into	a	thing
You	are	never	in	the	possession	of	him.
To	be	in	total	possession
You	have	to	destroy	his	soul.
This	is	the	ugliest	act	in	life	one	can	do
Hence	the	real	ruler	never	rules	others.
He	rules	himself,	he	is	a	master	of	himself.
His	kingdom	is	not	of	this	world
His	kingdom	is	not	of	the	outside
His	kingdom	is	of	the	inner.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Renate)	--	Your	name:	Ma	Renate.	This	is	a
Beautiful	name.	It	exactly	defines	sannyas,
Renate	means	born	anew	--	and	that's	what	sannyas
Is	all	about.
It	is	a	process	of	rebirth
Of	becoming	twice-born.
The	first	birth	only	gives	you
A	possibility,	a	potential,	an	opportunity.
The	second	birth	makes	the	potential	actual
Transforms	the	possible	into	the	real.
Only	the	second	birth
Makes	the	first	birth	meaningful.
Without	the	second
The	fist	is	a	lost	opportunity.
With	the	second	the	opportunity	is	fulfilled
You	have	risen	to	the	occasion
You	have	accepted	the	challenge	of	life.
The	first	birth	ends	into	death
The	second	birth	knows	no	death	at	all.
It	leads	you	into	eternal	life.
It	is	the	real	birth	because
It	is	the	beginning	of	real	life.
(To	Adelheid)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Abhinava.
Abhinava	means	the	new	one.
From	this	moment
Disconnect	yourself	from	the	past.
Start	counting	your	life	from	this	moment.
After	one	year	you	will	be	only	one	year	old.
The	life	that	has	passed	before
Was	just	a	dream	phenomenon.
Now	you	have	to	awaken
You	have	to	become	more	alert
More	watchful,	more	conscious	--	that's	the	work
A	sannyasin	has	to	do	upon	himself;
It	is	the	most	beautiful	work.
Incredible	are	the	results	of	it
The	rewards	are	unbelievable.
Once	you	have	started	moving
Towards	being	more	conscious
You	become	more	loving,	you	become	more	blissful
You	become	more	divine!
For	the	first	time	you	start	feeling	that	life	is	a	great	gift,	a	benediction	from	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	a	great	thankfulness	arises	in	the	heart.
That	is	true	prayer.
(To	Thomas)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Tathagato.
Tathagato	is	one	of	 the	names	given	to	Gautam	the	Buddha.	It	means	one	who
lives	 in	 the	 suchness	 of	 life,	who	 accepts	whatsoever	 is	 the	 case.	who	 accepts
everything	totally.
Even	death	is	absolutely	accepted	because
His	trust	in	existence	is	infinite	--
It	knows	no	bounds,	it	is	unconditional.
It	is	the	highest	peak	of	meditation.
To	accept	all	--	all	the	sweetness	of	life
And	all	the	bitterness	of	life
With	equanimity,	choicelessly
With	no	like,	no	dislike	--
Once	this	starts	happening	you	become	a	rejoicing
You	become	a	serenity,	you	become	utter	silence;
And	a	silence	which	is	not	dead
A	silence	which	sings,	a	silence	which	dances.
A	silence	which	is	not	empty.
A	silence	which	is	over	full.
This	is	going	to	be	your	method:
Learn	to	accept	life	as	it	comes.
When	something	happens,	accept	it.
When	it	disappears,	accept	it.
When	pleasure	comes,	accept	it.
When	it	evaporates,	accept	it.
And	the	same	with	pain:	remain	non-judgmental,
Just	a	silent	witness	to	all.
This	is	the	most	profound	secret
Of	all	the	buddhas,	of	all	the	awakened	ones.
(To	Kathleen)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Arihanto.
Arihanto	is	also	a	name	of	Gautam	the	Buddha.
Arihanto	means	one	who	has	conquered	all	his	enemies.
There	are	two	kinds	of	enemies;	the	first	category
Consists	of	enemies	who	are	outside	you.
Buddha	conquers	them.
The	awakened	person	conquers	them:
Because	he	drops	his	enmity
Because	he	no	more	thinks	of	them	as	enemies	--
That	is	his	victory.
They	may	still	think	him	as	the	enemy	but
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
For	him	there	is	no	enemy	at	all	in	the	world.
He	is	friendly	to	everything.
That's	why	Jesus	could	say
In	the	last	moments	of	his	life
'Father,	forgive	these	people
Because	they	know	not	what	they	are	doing.'
He	is	praying	for	those	who	are	crucifying	him.
This	is	the	meaning	of	Arihanto,	first	meaning:
Conquering	the	outer	enemies
Not	that	they	are	conquered	in	the	ordinary	way
Not	in	the	way	of	Alexander	the	great
But	in	a	totally	different	way
They	are	no	more	enemies.
The	enlightened	person
Has	no	enmity	towards	anybody.
And	there	is	a	deeper	meaning	also
The	second	category:
He	has	conquered	all	his	inner	enemies	--
The	ego,	the	greed,	the	anger,	the	jealousy,
All	those	inner	enemies.
They	consist	in	fact	of	one
And	the	name	of	that	one	enemy
Which	is	hidden	behind	all	these	faces
Is	unconsciousness	--	He	has	conquered	it
By	becoming	absolutely	conscious.
He	is	full	of	light
There	is	no	darkness	any	more.
He	is	only	consciousness
There	is	no	unconscious	in	him
Hence	inside	all	the	enemies	have	disappeared.
From	the	outside	he	has	dropped	all	enmity.
He	is	arihanto	--	he	has	conquered	all	the	enemies.
The	whole	existence	is	his	friend
And	he	is	a	friend	to	the	whole	of	existence.
He	is	a	lover	hand	he	loves	unconditionally.
(To	Sylvie)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Vijayo.	Vijayo	Means	the	victorious	one.
There	is	only	one	victory	worth	achieving
And	that	is	of	becoming	conscious
Of	becoming	more	meditative,	of	becoming
More	silent,	calm	and	quiet	and	collected.
All	other	victories	are	false,	pseudo.
They	don't	have	any	meaning.
Money,	power,	prestige	--	they	are	all	playthings
They	are	not	for	people
Who	are	really	intelligent
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
They	are	for	the	stupid	ones:	Stupid	ones
Also	need	few	things	to	keep	them	occupies
Otherwise	they	will	create	more	nuisance.
But	the	really	intelligent	person	soon	becomes
Disinterested	into	all	that	nonsense.
He	starts	moving	inwards
He	starts	enquiring	'Who	am	I?'
He	starts	digging	deep	within	his	own	being
To	find	his	center.
And	the	day	the	center	is	found
One	is	victorious	because	one	has	overcome	death.
Once	you	know	who	you	are	there	is	no	death	--
That	is	true	victory.
(To	Kirsten)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Samudro.	Samudro	means	the	oceanic.
One	 should	 not	 think	 in	 terms	 of	 limits	 one	 should	 get	 rid	 of	 all	 ideas	 of
limitations,	that's	the	whole	phenomenon	of	sannyas.	Knowing	that	"I	am	not	the
body,"	is	the	beginning	of	a	great	pilgrimage.	Then	knowing	that	"I	am	not	the
mind	 either,"	 is	 a	 further	 step;	 then	 finally	 knowing	 that	 "I	 am	 not	 even	 my
feeling,"	is	the	last	step.	In	these	three	steps	the	journey	is	over	because	on	the
fourth	 step	 you	 discover	 your	 being.	 And	 that	 is	 vast,	 infinite	 as	 vast	 as	 the
ocean,	as	vast	as	the	sky.	To	experience	it	is	to	experience	god.
And	 to	 experience	 it	 is	 to	 exercise	 bliss,	 ecstasy.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 experience
worth	trying	for;	all	else	is	just	sheer	wastage,	wastage	of	a	great	opportunity	in
which	one	can	find	 the	real	 treasure.	And	one	goes	on	collecting	seashells	and
colored	stones	on	the	seabeach	while	the	treasure	is	within	you,	the	kingdom	of
god	is	within	you.
So	drop	thinking	in	terms	of	limitations	so	that	you	find	more	and	more	that	you
are	closer	to	the	unlimited	being,	to	the	infinite	being.
(To	Frederike)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Arpano.	Arpano	means	the	surrendered
one.
All	 that	 I	 ask	 is	 --	 give	 your	 ego	 to	me	 --	 nothing	 else.	 And	 the	 ego	 is	 your
misery,	 your	 problem,	 your	 anguish.	 Just	 give	 it	 to	me	 and	 forget	 all	 about	 it.
Once	you	can	gather	the	courage	to	give	the	ego	to	the	master,	all	the	problems
that	 have	 been	 following	 you;	 and	 you	 have	 never	 been	 able	 to	 solve	 any	 of
them,	 simply	 evaporate	 because	 the	 very	 root	 is	 cut.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of
Arpano;	let	it	also	become	your	experience.
Sannyas	is	true	only	when	you	are	ready	to	offer	your	ego	to	me.	And	I	don't	ask
for	anything	else,	I	am	asking	only	for	the	ugly	in	you,	the	pathological	in	you,
the	 psychotic	 in	 you,	 the	 mad	 in	 you.	 The	 real	 master	 only	 demands	 your
madness,	and	once	you	have	given	your	madness,	sanity	arises	of	its	own	accord.
It	 is	 your	 self-nature,	 nobody	 can	 give	 it	 to	 you.	 Just	 the	 arbitrary	 has	 to	 be
removed	and	the	natural	starts	growing	of	its	own	accord.	Only	the	rocks	have	to
be	removed	and	the	stream	of	your	consciousness	starts	flowing.
(To	Johan)	--	Just	look	at	me.	Good.
--	Osho,	just	now	I	have	so	many	resistance.
--	Mm?
--	Just	now	I	have	so	many	resistances	happening.
--	They	all	will	disappear	--	everybody	has	them!
No	need	to	worry	about	them.	When	you	are	ready	to	take	sannyas,	that	means
you	have	already	overcome	a	great	resistance,	one	of	the	greatest.	The	remaining
one	are	small	ones,	they	are	not	that	big.	And	once	you	are	a	sannyasin,	then	I
stat	hitting	you.	Unless	you	are	a	sannyasins,	I	resist	myself!	I	am	very	polite!...
very	 loving,	 seductive!	 Once	 you	 are	 a	 sannyasin,	 then	 I	 come	 into	 my	 true
colors!	--	you	don't	be	worried.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anandmurti.	Anand	means
Bliss;	Murti	means	image	of	--	image	of	bliss.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That's	what	we	are	potentially	bound	to	be.
But	we	go	astray,	we	become	something	else.
We	become	that	which	we	are	not
We	become	that	which	nature	has	not	provided	for
Hence	the	misery
Because	we	become	schizophrenic,	we	become	double.
One	is	our	natural	self
Which	remains	hidden	behind	the	artificial	self.
The	artificial	self	is	the	ego	and	the	real	self
We	have	completely	forgotten.
We	have	become	so	much	identified
With	the	artificial.
Once	in	a	while	we	have	glimpses	of	the	real
Because	howsoever	we	forget	it
We	cannot	destroy	it	--	the	artificial	is	artificial	And	the	real	is	real.
The	real	is	going	to	abide
The	artificial	is	just	a	make-believe.
We	are	miserable	because	of	the	artificial	self
Otherwise	we	are	pure	bliss
But	we	are	living	double	lives.
A	schizophrenic	fell	in	love	with	a	woman
And	asked	the	woman,	'Kiss	me	twice	--
I	am	schizophrenic!'
But	that	is	the	situation	of	everybody.
And	even	if	you	go	to	the	psychiatrists
They	are	even	in	a	far	worse	mess.
One	schizophrenic	went	to	a	psychiatrist
And	he	said,	'Help	me!	I	am	always	thinking
I	am	two	persons.'
The	psychoanalyst	looked	over	the	room
And	said,	'All	four	of	you?'
Everybody	is	split
And	the	split	is	there	for	the	simple	reason	that
We	have	become	too	much	identified	with	the	false
And	the	false	is	the	top	layer,
Easily	available,	just	on	the	circumference.
And	the	real	is	far	deeper	--	you	have	to	dig	it
It	needs	effort,	arduous	effort,	patient	effort.
And	grat	insistence,	determination,	resolution
That	'I	am	bound	to	find	it,'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	'I	have	to	find	it,'
That	'I	cannot	live	without	finding	it.'
Unless	it	becomes	a	question	of	life	and	death
One	never	finds	it.
But	you	have	some	in	the	right	hands.
Nothing	to	be	worried.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	 I	 go	 home	 about	 three	 days	 and	 then	 I	 will	 come	 back	 in	 November	 or
December.
--	Come	back	in	November,	December.	And	by	that	time	I	will	be	sharpening	my
sword	and	...
(inaudible)	Come	back!	Good.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005065
ShortTitle:	ISLAND06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Grazia)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Grazia.
Deva	means	divine.	Grazia	means	grace.
Beauty	is	human,	grace	is	divine.
Beauty	is	earthly,	it	is	of	the	body,	of	the	form
Grace	is	of	the	spirit,	of	the	formless
It	is	unearthly;;	it	can	appear	on	the	earth
but	is	does	not	belong	to	the	earth.
It	happens	only	when	one	is	ready
To	receive	god	into	one's	heart	--
To	a	Jesus,	to	a	Buddha,	to	a	Lao	Tzu.
Once	you	become	empty	of	yourself
God	rushes	in,	fills	you,	starts	overflowing
Because	we	are	too	small	and	he	is	so	vast.
That	overflowing	divineness
Is	felt	as	grace	by	others.
Something	starts	radiating
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
From	the	person	whose	heart	is	full	of	god.
Only	those	who	are	utterly	blind
May	not	be	able	to	see	it,	but	if	they	have	even
Just	a	little	bit	of	intelligence
They	will	be	able	to	feel	it.
And	grace	is	not	something	that	can	be	proved
Because	it	is	immaterial,	immeasurable.
Science	can	have	no	approach,	it	is	not	an	object.
Hence	if	somebody	wants	to	deny
It	is	very	easy	to	deny;	to	say	that	Jesus	is	mad
Not	god-possessed,	but	simply	insane
Is	very	easy;	it	can	be	proved.
But	to	prove	that	he	is	god-possessed
it	almost	impossible,	because	even	god	cannot	be	proved.
Cannot	be	proved	--	How	a	man	of	god	can	be	proved?
Jesus	can	only	be	felt
And	that's	the	function	of	being	a	disciple:
Allowing	yourself	to	feel	the	grace
Of	the	one	who	has	tasted	it.
Seeing	through	the	eyes	a	the	master
Feeling	through	his	hands	--	that	is	the	only	way
To	have	an	indirect	proof	that	god	exists.
Once	you	have	fallen	in	love
with	the	grace	of	a	master
Your	life	changes	radically
but	one	has	to	be	available	and
One	has	to	be	courageous	to	die	to	the	past
So	that	the	new	can	be	born	in	you.
(To	Christiano)	--	Your	name:	Swami	Christiano.
It	is	a	beautiful	name	but	for	centuries	has	been
Misinterpreted.	It	has	been	given	a	wrong	meaning.
Almost	in	all	the	languages
Something	parallel	to	Christiano	exists
And	everywhere	with	the	wrong	meaning.
The	meaning	given	in	the	dictionaries	is:
A	follower	of	Christ	--	which	is	absolutely	wrong.
A	lover	of	Christ,	not	a	follower	of	Christ	--
That	is	the	true	meaning.
A	follower	is	very	ordinary	thing.
There	is	a	grat	distance
Between	the	follower	and	the	followed.
In	politics	it	is	okay
There	are	followers	and	the	leaders.
In	religion
There	are	not	leaders	and	no	followers;
There	are	the	awakened	ones	and	their	lovers.
People	who	have	fallen	in	love	with	them.
Following	is	very	ordinary
Following	means	you	are	convinced	logically
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	what	Christ	is	saying	is	right,
but	this	is	only	an	intellectual	conviction.
A	lover	means	you	are	convinced
Not	intellectually,	not	through	the	head
But	through	the	heart.
You	have	felt	the	poetry	of	Jesus
You	have	experienced	his	tremendous	quality
That	he	brings	to	the	world	of	the	beyond.
You	have	tasted
Something	of	the	farther	shore	in	him
You	have	imbibed	his	spirit:	it	is	not	a	question
Of	intellectual	conviction	at	all.
Because	one	who	is	intellectually	convinced
Can	be	unconvinced	very	easily.
If	you	have	few	arguments
Which	prove	that	Christ	is	right
then	those	arguments	can	be	criticized.
Those	arguments	can	be	destroyed.
Logic	is	a	double-edged	sword	--
It	is	very	easy	to	destroy	any	argument
And	once	your	arguments	are	destroyed
Your	doubts	will	arise.
A	follower	can	become	a	doubter	any	moment.
Just	a	small	logic	is	enough	to	create	doubt.
For	example,	those	who	were	followers	of	Jesus
Were	waiting	that	he	will	do	some	miracle
When	he	was	crucified	--	it	was	obvious
Very	obvious	to	the	followers:
If	he	can	raise	the	dead
If	he	can	cure	the	blind
Why	he	cannot	do	a	miracle
When	his	own	life	is	concerned?
They	were	there	waiting
That	some	great	miracle	is	going	to	happen	--
It	did	not	happen,	all	their	arguments	collapsed.
They	became	convinced
they	were	following	a	charlatan:
Jesus	died	and	ordinary	man.
They	went	home	--	happy	in	a	way
That	a	burden	has	fallen	from	their	heads
They	are	free	from	this	man.
No	need	to	waste	any	more	time	with	this	man.
When	the	body	of	Jesus
Was	brought	down	from	the	cross
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
All	those	followers	were	not	there.
Three	women	were	there	to	bring	his	body	down.
This	is	not	just	coincidence	because
Those	three	women	were	not	followers	--
They	were	lovers.
It	was	not	a	question	of	being	convinced.
It	was	a	question	of	love!	--	love	needs	no	proofs.
In	fact	they	felt	more	love	for	this	man	because
He	was	so	humble,	so	simple,	so	ordinary
Such	a	non-egoist	--	he	died	like	an	ordinary	man.
These	are	not	followers,	these	are	livers.
Hence	my	meaning	of	your	name	is
A	lover	of	Christ.
And	then	one	more	thing	has	to	be	understood:
A	follower	of	Christ
Cannot	be	a	follower	of	Buddha	--	obviously
Because	both	the	philosophies
Are	different,	totally	different.
A	follower	of	Christ
Cannot	be	a	follower	of	Lao	Tzu	--	it	is	impossible	To	make	any	syntheses	out	of
these	two
Unique	persons.
But	a	lover	of	Christ	can	be	a	lover	of	Buddha
Can	be	a	lover	of	Zarathustra
Can	be	a	lover	of	Lao	Tzu.
Love	is	vast	enough	to	contain	contradictions
Love	is	vast	enough	to	contain	inconsistencies.
Mind	is	a	very	small	phenomenon.
So	be	a	lover	of	Christ
Then	there	is	no	problem	--	you	can	also	love	me!
But	if	you	are	a	followers	of	Christ
If	you	are	a	Christian,	then	there	is	difficulty
Then	you	cannot	be	a	sannyasin.
So	change	the	meaning,	at	least	in	your	heart
Drop	the	idea	of	being	a	follower.
You	are	not	a	follower	of	either,	just	a	lover.
To	be	a	lover	is	beautiful
To	be	a	follower	is	ugly
To	be	a	follower	is	political
To	be	a	lover	is	religious.
(To	Fritz)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Fritz.
Anand	means	bliss;	Fritz	means	peace	-	a	blissful	peace.
Peace	alone	is	not	enough,	neither	bliss	alone	is	enough.	Bliss	alone	can	become
feverish,	 it	 can	 lose	 its	 cool.	 It	 can	 become	 too	 hot,	 unbearably	 hot.	 That	 has
happened	 to	 many	 people.	 Those	 who	 have	 tried	 to	 reach	 bliss	 without	 ever
making	any	preparation	for	peace;	a	great	difficulty	arises	 later	on.	When	bliss
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
starts	happening,	they	fall	in	a	kind	of	swoon,	they	fall	unconscious.	This	used	to
happen	even	to	a	man	like	Ramakrishna;	and	the	simple	reason	was	that	he	had
never	 prepared	 himself	 for	 peace.	He	 had	 prepared	 only	 for	 bliss.	He	worked
hard	in	prayer,	but	he	never	meditated.	His	whole	effort	was	towards	prayer.	It	is
through	prayer	that	he	attained	to	bliss,	but	the	bliss	was	so	much,	that	he	would
fall	unconscious	for	hours,	even	for	days	-	once	for	thirteen	days	continuously.
He	was	in	an	unconscious	state,	like	a	coma.	The	physiologists	would	say,	"It	is
a	coma."	The	doctors	were	absolutely	certain	it	was	a	coma.	It	was	not	a	coma	at
all;	 it	was	simply	too	much,	and	the	body	was	not	ready	and	the	mind	was	not
ready.	It	was	as	if	a	big	voltage	was	going	through	a	wire	which	was	not	meant
for	so	big	a	voltage.	It	will	go	berserk.	He	had	to	learn	the	art	of	peace	very	late
in	his	life.
Bliss	alone	is	dangerous.	It	 is	excitement,	ecstasy,	but	too	hot;	 it	 is	sun	energy.
Peace	alone	is	also	dangerous.	There	have	been	people	who	have	tried	for	peace.
They	become	so	peaceful	that	they	are	almost	cold,	dead.	The	Jaina	monks	have
done	it	for	centuries	in	India.	Their	whole	effort	is	for	peace.	Bliss	they	avoid	-
they	 think,	 the	very	desire	 for	bliss	 is	 something	 lower;	 the	desire	 for	peace	 is
higher.	They	become	peaceful,	 very	peaceful;	 in	 fact	 so	peaceful	 that	 they	 are
like	a	corpse.	Their	peace	is	the	peace	of	a	cemetery,	not	the	peace	of	a	garden
where	flowers	are	blooming	and	birds	are	singing	and	butterflies	are	flying	-	not
a	peace	that	is	alive	and	dancing.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 avoid	 these	 extremes	 and	 to	 create	 a	 higher	 synthesis	 of
both,	 a	 synchronicity	 between	 these	 two.	 One	 should	 be	 peaceful.	 And	 one
should	grow	simultaneously;	both	the	qualities	in	one's	being.	So	peace	will	help
you	 to	 contain	more	 and	more	 bliss,	 and	 bliss	will	 help	 you	 to	 remain	warm,
alive,	dancing,	singing,	celebrating.
This	is	going	to	be	your	work:	attain	to	a	blissful	peace	or	a	peaceful	bliss.
(To	Regina)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Daya.
Anand	means	bliss.	Daya	means	compassion.
Compassion	without	bliss	is	a	cultivated	quality.
It	is	a	duty:	We	are	taught
From	our	very	childhood	to	be	compassionate	--
To	the	poor,	to	the	suffering
To	the	ill,	to	the	starving.
This	is	a	morally	that	is	taught
It	is	a	kind	of	conditioning.
If	you	don't	feel	compassionate	towards	a	beggar
Your	own	conscience	starts	pricking	you.
In	fact	you	are	always	in	a	double-bind:
If	you	give	something	to	the	beggar
You	know,	this	is	not	right
This	is	helping	people	to	beg.
This	is	not	solving	their	problem.
If	you	don't	give	anything
Then	your	conscience	says
You	are	not	being	compassionate.
You	are	not	being	human.
So	whatever	you	do,	you	are	in	trouble.
If	you	give	him	something	you	feel	bed
That	he	has	exploited	;you;	if	you	don't	give
A	bad	taste	in	the	mouth,	a	bitterness	is	felt
You	start	being	angry	at	yourself
You	start	condemning	yourself
That	you	are	a	miser	or	something.
I	don't	teach	this	kind	of	compassion.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Compassion	to	me	arises	out	of	bliss
It	is	not	a	duty,	it	is	bliss	radiating.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	person
To	who	you	are	being	compassionate.
It	has	something	to	do	with	your	inner	being.
You	are	overflowing	with	love
That	you	want	to	share.
It	is	coincidental	that	the	other	is	in	need.
Even	if	the	other	is	not	in	need
Still	you	will	be	compassionate.
He	may	not	need	your	money
But	you	can	hold	his	hand	and	sit	by	his	side.
You	can	hug	him	--	who	is	not	in	need	of	a	hug?
Who	will	not	appreciate
Just	a	small	gesture	of	love?
He	may	not	be	in	need	of	money	but
You	can	give	him	a	rose	flower	--	Who	is	so	rich
That	he	does	not	need	a	rose	flower?
So	it	is	not	a	question
Whether	the	other	needs	or	not.
The	basic,	the	most	fundamental	thing	is
Whether	you	have	more	energy	than	you	need
So	that	you	can	share	it.
Bliss	releases	tremendous	energy
Inexhaustible	energy	--	you	can	go	on	sharing.
In	fact	the	more	you	share,	the	more	you	have	it.
(To	Klaus-Peter)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Sahajanand.	 Sahajanand	means
spontaneous	bliss.
Bliss	 cannot	 be	 achieved	 through	 effort.	 Through	 effort	 we	 can	 remove	 the
barriers	that	prevent	bliss	from	happening,	but	we	cannot	achieve	bliss	through
efforts.	That	 is	 a	 very	 significant	 point	 to	 be	 always	 remembered:	Bliss	 is	 our
self-nature;	 hence	 it	 cannot	 be	 achieved.	 It	 is	 already	 the	 case,	 but	 we	 are
missing	it	because	there	are	a	few	barriers	which	are	preventing	it	from	flowing.
Those	barriers	have	to	be	removed.
All	spiritual	work	consists	in	removing	the	barriers,	in	removing	the	rocks.	Once
the	rocks	are	 removed,	 the	river	of	bliss	starts	 flowing.	 It	 is	waiting	 there,	 just
knocking	on	your	doors:	Open	the	doors!	It	is	like	the	sun	has	risen	but	you	are
sitting	in	you	room	in	darkness.	You	cannot	make	the	sun	rise	-	 that	 is	beyond
you.	But	you	can	open	your	doors	or	you	can	keep	you	doors	shut;	that	is	within
you	power.	If	you	can	keep	you	doors	shut	you	will	remain	in	darkness.	If	you
open	the	doors	and	the	windows,	suddenly	the	sun	comes	dancing	in!
So	is	the	case	with	bliss.	It	is	something	spontaneous	-	not	a	by-product	of	effort.
But	effort	is	needed	for	something	else	-	to	open	the	door,	to	open	the	windows.
And	maybe	we	have	not	opened	the	doors	and	windows	for	many	lives.	We	have
even	 forgotten	 where	 they	 are.	 So	 we	 have	 to	 search	 for	 them.	 And	 it	 is	 not
going	to	be	easy	to	open	them,	because	they	have	not	been	opened	for	so	long.
Maybe	there	are	 locks	on	them,	we	have	lost	 the	keys.	Or	even	if	 the	keys	are
available,	the	locks	have	gathered	so	much	rust	that	those	keys	don't	work	-	so
there	is	much	work	to	be	done,	but	it	is	all	negative	work.
As	far	as	bliss	is	concerned,	it	is	our	self-nature.	No	positive	work	is	needed	to
achieve	 it,	 only	 a	 few	 negative	 approaches.	 This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 ancient
dilemmas	 faced	by	all	 the	mystics:	how	 to	approach	bliss	 -	via	positiva	or	via
negativa	?	Those	who	have	tried	via	positiva	live	only	in	imagination.	They	have
never	reached	to	the	true	bliss.	They	only	imagine,	they	hallucinate,	they	dream.
The	people	who	have	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
achieved	have	 found	 it	 through	via	negativa.	Bliss	cannot	be	achieved	 through
positive	 thinking.	 Remember	 it,	 because	 positive	 thinking	 has	 become	 too
influential,	particularly	in	the	West.	It	is	very	childish.	Bliss	is	achieved	through
negative	 thinking.	 In	 fact	 the	 very	 idea	 is	 unheard	 of.	 Nobody	 has	 written	 a
single	book	called	"Negative	Thinking"	and	there	are	hundreds	of	books	written
on	positive	thinking.	They	are	all	rubbish!
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005075
ShortTitle:	ISLAND07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Linda)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Linda.
Anand	means	bliss.	Linda	means	beautiful.
Bliss	is	the	only	real	beauty	in	existence
Everything	else	is	superficial
Everything	else	is	phony.
Only	bliss	is	our	ultimate	truth
Only	bliss	is	not	false	because
It	comes	from	our	deepest	core
From	the	very	roots	of	our	being.
It	arises	out	of	the	center.
Everything	else	is	on	the	circumference
Except	bliss	--	hence	the	search	for	bliss:
It	is	really	the	search	for	one's	own	being,
It	is	the	search	for	self-knowledge
It	is	the	search	to	discover	one's	own	nature.
The	moment	we	know	who	we	are,	bliss	happens
Or	vice	versa:	The	moment	we	are	blissful
We	know	who	we	are.
Bliss	is	the	taste	of	our	being,	the	flavour
The	fragrance	of	our	being.
And	once	the	bliss	has	happened	--
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	everybody	is	entitled	for	it
It	is	everybody's	birthright...
If	it	doesn't	happen,	only	we	are	responsible:
We	are	not	searching	and	seeking	for	it
We	are	not	really	interested
Involved	into	the	search,
We	are	not	intense	enough	to	go	into	the	depth.
We	talk	about	it	but	we	don't	risk	anything.
Sannyas	is	the	first	step
Of	risking	for	the	search.
And	the	more	you	risk,	the	more	you	gain.
When	one	is	ready	to	risk	all,	unconditionally
Immediately	bliss	happens.
Suddenly	it	starts	welling	up.
One's	whole	being	becomes	full	of
A	new	kind	of	joy,	untasted	before,	unknown	before.
And	it	transforms	everything:
It	makes	everything	beautiful
It	transforms	everything	into	golden.
(To	Elizabeth)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Elizabeth.
Anand	means	bliss.	Elizabeth	means	consecrated	to	god,	Surrendered	to	god.
One	can	be	surrendered	to	god
Out	of	despair	or,	out	of	bliss.
And	from	the	outside	both	appear	to	be	the	same,
They	are	not;	they	are	diametrically	opposite.
The	surrender	that	comes	out	of	despair
Is	of	no	value	at	all:	It	is	no	surrender,
It	is	failure,	it	is	frustration.
One	is	doing	it	as	the	last	resort
Not	out	of	joy.
One	is	not	going	into	it	dancingly
One	is	not	moving	into	it	as	a	celebration.
Misery	is	never	a	bridge	between	you	and	god
And	the	strangest	thing	is	that
People	remember	god	only	in	misery.
When	they	are	happy	they	forget	all	about	god	--
Who	cares	about	god?	For	what?
They	don't	need,	they	are	already	happy
Things	are	going	perfectly	well.
When	things	are	not	going	well
Then	they	start	thinking	of	god.
They	want	to	use	god	as	a	means
And	god	cannot	be	used	as	a	means	--	that	is	ugly
That	is	profane,	that	is	very	irreligious.
God	is	the	ultimate	end.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	can	consecrate	yourself
Out	of	joy	only,	out	of	bliss	only
Then	only	you	will	not	use	god	as	a	means,
There	is	no	question	of	using	god.
You	are	simply	surrendering	to	him	because
He	has	given	you	so	much	--	it	is	out	of	gratitude
It	is	out	of	thankfulness.
You	are	not	asking	anything
You	are	not	desiring	anything.
He	has	already	given	so	much	--
What	can	we	desire?
A	real	religious	person	has	no	desire
To	be	fulfilled	from	god:	he	surrenders
In	joy,	in	gratitude.
And	that's	my	whole	approach	here
That's	why	I	don't	want	to	believe	in	god.
I	want	to	love,	to	live,	to	laugh
To	enjoy	life	so	totally	that
Out	of	that	very	enjoyment
You	start	becoming	aware
Of	the	great	gift	that	existence	has	given	to	you.
And	then	the	natural	outcome	is	that
A	thankful	starts	arising	out	of	your	heart
Out	of	the	very	depths	of	your	being	--
It	is	not	something	in	the	head
It	is	not	cultivated	by	the	priests.
One	cannot	avoid	it,	it	is	inevitable.
If	you	have	tasted	life	in	its	totality
If	you	are	drunk	with	life
It	is	impossible	not	to	feel	thankful
It	is	impossible	not	to	bow	down	to	the	ultimate
Not	to	say	yes	to	the	ultimate.
And	when	yes	comes	out	of	joy
It	has	tremendous	beauty.
An	sannyasin	has	to	be	blissful
And	out	of	blissfulness,	prayer
And	out	of	prayer,	the	experience	of	god.
(To	Daniel)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Jayesh.
Anand	means	bliss.	Jayesh	means	the	victorious	one.
Bliss	makes	one	victorious.
Money	cannot	make	one	victorious;	at	the	most
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	covers	up	your	property
It	does	not	make	you	rich,	remember.
It	simply	helps	you	to	forget	your	poverty,
That's	all	--	poverty	remains,	persists
But	becomes	repressed.
Wealth	is	a	way	to	repress	poverty
Power	is	a	way
To	repress	your	inferiority	complex,
But	you	remain	inferior
Power	cannot	make	you	superior.
You	can	become	the	president	of	a	country
You	can	become	a	prime	minister	of	a	country
But	you	remain	the	same	person,
Only	the	label	changes,	nothing	else.
It	changes	nothing	in	you	but
One	can	become	hypnotised	by	the	label.
People	live	by	labels
People	become	very	hypnotized	by	labels.
Vincent	Van	Gogh's	paintings	were	not	sold
So	he	used	to	give	to	his	friends	--
What	else	to	do	with	the	paintings?
Not	even	a	single	painting	was	sold.
When	he	died	even	friends
Were	not	ready	to	hang	his	paintings
In	their	sitting	rooms,	in	their	drawing	rooms
Because	those	paintings	were	very	strange.
To	hang	them	there
Was	thought	to	become	a	laughing	stock.
Anybody	will	see	and	he	will	think,
'Have	you	gone	mad	or	something?	What	is	this?
What	nonsense	is	this?'
So	they	will	accept
Just	not	to	hurt	the	feeling	of	Van	Gogh
But	they	will	throw	the	paintings	in	the	basement
And	then	Van	Gogh	became	famous	when	he	died
And	then	people
Started	searching	for	his	paintings	and	suddenly
Paintings	started	coming	into	the	drawing	rooms
Of	the	kings	and	the	emperors
And	the	prime	minister	and	the	presidents	--
Even	ordinary	people	were	not	ready!
One	man	was	hanging	a	painting	in	his	bathroom
Because	nobody	else	will	see	except	himself.
And	he	can	tolerate	it	--	he	is	a	friend	of	Van	Gogh	And	the	man	is	dead:	Just	in
his	memory
He	can	suffer	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	Van	Gogh's	name	started	becoming	famous
The	painting	moved	to	the	drawing	room	and
He	was	jubilant	that	he	has	a	real	painting.
But	some	critic	wrote	an	article	and	proved	that
It	is	phony,	it	is	not	true,	it	is	not	authentic
So	he	threw	it	into	the	basement	--
The	same	painting.
But	then	there	was	great	controversy
And	other	critics	proved	that	it	was	authentic
Other	scholars	proved	it	was	authentic.
When	it	was	proved	authentic
It	came	back	again	into	the	drawing	room.
People	live	by	labels!	Nobody	seems
To	be	interested	in	the	painting	itself.
The	man	is	more	concerned	what	others	say.
And	these	are	the	power	seekers:
They	are	always	concerned	what	others	are	saying
And	they	completely	forget	who	they	are.
These	are	not	the	victorious	people.
They	may	have	money,	they	may	have	power
But	they	are	poor	people,	very	poor
They	are	beggars.
They	real	victorious	people	are	very	few.
They	are	the	Buddhas,	the	awakened	ones.
The	are	the	people	who	have	achieved	bliss.
And	the	miracle	is	that
If	you	want	to	conquer	the	world
It	is	a	very	very	arduous	task	because
There	are	so	many	competitors
And	if	you	want	to	conquer	yourself
There	is	no	competition	at	all.
You	can	simply	go	in	and	conquer	yourself	--
No	fight	with	anybody
No	competition	with	anybody
No	jealousy,	no	question	of	any	politics...
But	people	never	go	inside.
Sannyas	means	a	radical	change	in	your	life	style
Turning	your	energies	inwards
A	one-hundred-eighty	degree	turn	is	needed.
And	bliss	is	there,	just	you	have	to	turn	in.
You	have	to	become	again	rooted	in	your	being.
You	have	become	uprooted,
That's	why	you	are	miserable.
Once	you	gain	roots	again
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Into	the	soil	of	your	being
There	will	be	great	greenery	and	great	flowering
And	life	will	become	a	joy.
Each	moment	then	is	so	lovely,	is	so	ecstatic
That	even	Alexander	the	Great
Will	find	himself	poorer	in	comparison.
He	had	really	found	him	poorer	in	comparison
When	he	came	to	India	and	met	few	mystics.
He	wept!	--	because	he	could	see	the	point
That	he	has	wasted	his	life
And	these	people	have	nothing,	still
They	are	so	blissful,	so	peaceful
As	if	they	own	the	whole	world.
And	I	own	the	whole	world	and	I	am	so	miserable.
So	what	is	the	point	of	owning	the	whole	world?
In	fact	there	is	no	point	--	but	it	was	to	late.
He	had	gone	back	with	a	deep	decision	in	his	mind
That	one	he	is	back	home
He	will	start	pondering	over	the	matter
Of	inner	journey,	of	inner	conquest	because
He	has	heard	many	stories	here...
Buddha	was	still	in	the	air	--
Just	three	hundred	years	had	passed:
Buddha	was	still	very	much	alive.
When	Alexander	came,	Buddha's	vibe
Was	still	very	much	all	over	the	country.
Wherever	he	went	he	found	many	enlightened	people
Buddha	had	left	a	great	chain
Of	enlightened	people.
And	wherever	he	went	he	heard	the	name	of	Buddha
And	the	bliss	that	he	had	attained
And	the	truth	and	the	ultimate.
He	went	with	the	decision
But	 he	 could	 not	 reach	 home	 --	 he	 died	 in	 the	middle	He	 never	 reached	 back
home,	it	was	too	late.
Otherwise	this	man	had	power,	had	the	energy.
If	he	could	conquer	the	whole	world
He	could	have	conquered	himself	too,
But	nobody	had	told	him.
He	was	being	taught	by
A	stupid	philosopher,	Plato.
He	was	just	a	philosopher,	he	was	not	a	mystic.
Although	he	had	lived	with	Socrates
And	he	had	 reported	Socrates	very	 authentically	He	was	 a	good	 tape	 recorder,
but	that's	all,
A	good	computer,	but	that's	all.
He	himself	was	not	a	mystic.
He	himself	was	in	search	of	some	mystic.
When	Alexander	was	coming	to	India
He	had	asked	him	that,	'At	least
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Bring	one	sannyasin	from	India	for	me	as	a	gift.'
But	no	sannyasin	was	ready	to	go.
Sannyasins	are	not	interested	in	going	anywhere
They	are	interested	in	going	only	inwards
Because	that	is	where	their	real	home	is.
To	go	in	and	become	victorious.
(To	 Elke)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	 Anand	 Pakhi.	 Anand	 means	 bliss;	 pakhi
means	a	bird	--	a	bliss	bird.
And	you	look	like	a	bird!	--	just	ready	to	be	pushed	out	of	the	nest	and	you	will
be	able	to	fly	into	the	sky.
We	have	wings	but	we	have	not	used	them	yet.	And	because	we	have	not	used
them,	we	have	become	oblivious	 that	 they	 are	 there.	And	 small	wings	 are	 not
that	 small;	 because	 they	 can	 cover	 the	 whole	 sky,	 their	 capacity	 is	 infinite,
immense,	 immeasurable.	 There	 is	 nothing	 more	 beautiful	 than	 a	 bird	 on	 the
wing.
That's	what	a	buddha	is:	a	bird	on	the	wing	--	containing	the	whole	sky	under	his
small	wings.	Moving	towards	the	ultimate	frontier	of	existence,	always	moving
from	 the	 known	 towards	 the	 unknown,	 never	 afraid	 of	 the	 unknown;	 in	 fact,
always	 intrigued	with	 the	unknown.	Always	dropping	the	known	because	once
you	have	known	it,	it	is	only	for	stupid	people	to	repeat	it.	It	is	sheer	stupidity	to
go	 on	 repeating	 an	 experience.	 The	 intelligent	 person	 would	 like	 new
experiences,	new	vistas	to	open	up,	new	visions.	And	that's	what	the	bird	on	the
wing	represents.
So	keep	that	as	a	symbol	deep	in	your	heart:	all	my	sannyasins	have	to	become
birds.	We	are	all	living	in	cages	--	Christian	cages,	Hindu	cages,	Mohammedan
cages,	 beautifully	 decorated:	 on	 some	 cages	 the	 Koran	 is	 inscribed,	 on	 some
other	cages	the	Gita	is	inscribed,	on	some	other	cages	there	is	something	else...
sayings	of	Buddha,	Confucius,	Moses.	And	there	are	golden	cages	studded	with
diamonds	--	but	cages	are	cages.	We	are	not	made	to	live	in	cages.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 all	 cages:	 of	 religion,	 of	 nation,	 of	 caste,	 of
ideology.	You	have	 to	go	on	dropping	all	cages	so	 that	one	day	 the	whole	sky
opens	up	and	becomes	available	to	you.
That's	what	god	is	all	about:	the	whole	open	sky.	And	freedom	is	the	only	thing
worth	trying	for.
Freedom	achieved,	everything	follows;	without	freedom	there	is	no	possibility	of
anything.
Jesus	says,	"First	ye	seek	the	kingdom	of	god	then	all	else	shall	be	added	unto
you."	That	 is	an	old	 type	of	expression,	but	what	he	means	by	 the	kingdom	of
god	is	exactly	what	I	mean	by	freedom.	So	if	I	have	to	say,	I	will	say,	"First	seek
ye	the	ultimate	freedom	then	all	else	shall	be	added	unto	you."
(To	Marinus)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Vissarjan.
Anand	means	bliss.	Vissarjan	means	dissolved	in.
Bliss	is	possible	only
If	you	are	ready	to	dissolve	into	it.
Just	like	a	river	dissolves	into	the	ocean
If	you	are	ready	to	dissolve	into	the	whole
Bliss	is	the	outcome.
If	you	resist	dissolution
If	you	try	to	remain	a	separate	entity	--
That's	what	everybody	is	doing:
Trying	to	be	an	ego
Trying	to	protect	oneself,	defend	oneself.
Everybody	is	fencing	oneself	against	the	whole
Everybody	is	afraid	of	the	whole	because
The	whole	is	vast,	surrounds	you	from	everywhere
And	we	are	creating	great	walls,	China	Walls
To	protect	ourselves
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Otherwise	it	will	flood	us,	it	will	overwhelm	us
So	we	make	great	China	Walls
And	hide	behind	them	and	remain	small.
This	is	the	way	of	the	stupid	man
But	the	majority	consists	of	the	stupid	people.
The	intelligent	person	knows	that
This	is	futile,	it	is	an	exercise
In	futility,	utter	futility.
We	are	not	separate,	no	man	is	an	island.
We	are	part	of	the	continent
So	it	is	useless	to	fight	with	the	continent.
There	is	no	need	to	waste	your	energy	in	fighting
The	same	energy	can	be	used	into	celebrating.
Dissolve	into	the	whole,	drop	the	ego
Forget	yourself	that	you	are	separate
And	that	is	the	beginning	of	sannyas.
Feel	yourself	as	part	of	the	whole.
In	the	beginning	it	is	only	a	feeling
Slowly	slowly	it	deepens.
One	day	it	is	not	a	feeling:
It	is	a	truth,	it	is	your	being.
That	day	sannyas	is	fulfilled
You	have	arrived	--	you	have	arrived	home!
Then	bliss	is	yours	and	eternal	bliss	is	yours.
Then	there	is	not	death	because
Once	ego	is	dropped	you	cannot	die
It	is	the	ego	that	dies.
It	is	a	false	entity,	it	is	bound	to	die.
You	can	put	all	your	energies	into	saving	it
Still,	it	is	going	to	die.
Don't	try	to	do	the	impossible
See	the	point	of	it:	Live	the	whole
And	forget	yourself	as	a	separate	entity
And	then	see	how	beautiful	it	is
And	how	sweet	it	is
And	how	each	moment	becomes	a	benediction.
(To	Gerda)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Geha
Anand	means	bliss.	Geha	means	home.
Bliss	is	our	true	home;	without	bliss
We	are	homeless	wanderers,	wanderers	in	a	desert.
Without	bliss	we	are	refugees
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
We	don't	have	a	home.
And	man's	foolishness	is	such	that	he
Is	carrying	everything	he	needs	within	himself
But	he	does	not	look	in.
He	goes	on	searching	everywhere	else
Except	in	his	own	being...	and	bliss	is	there!
Hence	he	never	finds	bliss.
He	will	find	everything	else	except	bliss
But	that	is	the	only	thing	worth	finding.
Sannyas	has	to	become	a	revolution	in	your	life.
After	sannyas	you	have	to	live
In	a	totally	new	style.
Things	that	you	were	never	concerned	about
Will	become	valuable	now;	for	example
Money	will	not	be	so	valuable	as	meditation
Power	trips	will	not	be	valuable	any	more
Then	inner	ecstasies,
Prestige	will	not	be	of	your	concern	any	more,
But	integrity,	an	inner	integration.
You	will	become	less	and	less	interested
In	the	outer	concerns	of	the	day	to	day	world
And	you	will	become	more	and	more	concerned
About	your	subjective	world,
Which	has	been	ignored,	neglected	for	lives
But	it	contains	the	real	treasure
It	contains	the	very	kingdom	of	god
It	contains	your	real	home.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005085
ShortTitle:	ISLAND08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Jagdeesh)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Jagdeesh	Bharti.
Only	two	things	have	to	be	remembered.
One	is	meditation	and	the	other	is	love.
If	these	two	things	are	fulfilled
Nothing	else	is	needed,	no	other	religion.
This	is	the	whole	of	religion:
Meditation	for	yourself	and	love	for	others
Meditation	to	go	in	and	love	to	go	out.
It	is	the	same	door;	these	are	not	two	things.
It	is	like	a	door:	When	you	enter
On	the	door	it	is	written	'entrance'
And	when	you	come	out
On	the	same	door	is	written	'exit'.
When	you	go	in	the	door	is	meditation
When	you	come	out	it	is	the	same	door
But	now	it	is	called	love.
And	both	have	to	be	simultaneously	grown
Otherwise	one	becomes	lopsided.
That	has	happened	for	centuries:	The	people
Who	have	tried	to	meditate	have	become	unloving
They	become	closed	to	the	world
They	become	self-centered.
Their	spirituality	becomes	very	selfish.
It	seems	they	are	not	at	all	interested
In	anybody,	only	interested	in	themselves.
It	is	a	kind	of	morbidity,	it	is	ill
It	is	not	healthy,	they	are	no	more	flowing.
Their	life	has	become	static,	undynamic,	dead.
Slowly	slowly	they	become	very	cold
Because	without	love	you	lose	warmth.
That's	what	happens	to	Jaina	monks:	They	are
Absolutely	concerned	only	with	themselves,
The	world	is	not	a	concern.
That	is	one	of	the	basic	causes
Of	this	country's	fall	because
All	the	so-called	spiritual	people	become
So	much	selfish	that	nobody	cared	what	is	happening
To	the	whole	country,	to	the	people.
Everybody	was	concerned	only	for	his	own	salvation
And	let	all	else	go	to	hell.
That	is	none	of	our	business
That's	not	really	a	spiritual	attitude
It	is	very	unspiritual.
Or	if	people	are	very	loving
They	forget	meditation.
Then	they	become	superficial
They	become	indulgent;	then	eat,	drink,	be	merry
Then	that	becomes	their	whole	life.
They	are	good,	nice	people,	good	company
But	they	have	no	depth,	they	are	very	shallow
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	their	life	remains	just	mundane
Nothing	sacred.
And	the	world	has	lived
In	these	two	extremes,	divided:
One	we	call	the	worldly
And	the	other	we	call	the	other-worldly.
My	sannyasin	has	to	become	a	bridge
He	is	neither	worldly	nor	other-worldly
He	is	both	and	neither,	he	is	a	bridge
He	is	a	constant	flow
And	he	is	capable	of	moving	in	and	out	easily.
Whenever	he	wants	to	go	in,	he	goes	in
And	forgets	the	whole	world,
But	whatsoever	he	attains	within	his	being	--
The	joy,	the	blessings,	the	peace,	the	silence,
He	is	not	a	miser,	he	does	not	hoard	it.
He	starts	sharing	it,	he	immediately	comes	out
Because	he	is	very	loving.
Love	keeps	him	warm,	meditation	keeps	him	deep
And	this	is	the	ultimate	balance.
To	attain	it	is	the	goal	of	my	sannyas.
Remember	these	two	things;
This	is	the	whole	of	religion.
(To	Dirk)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Dirk.	Prem	means	love.	Dirk	means
full	of	justice.
Only	love	can	be	just,	because	only	love	can	understand.	Without	love	there	is
no	understanding	and	without	understanding	how	there	can	be	any	justice?	One
cannot	be	just;	but	for	thousands	of	years	this	has	been	told	to	people	that	if	you
want	 to	 be	 just,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 indifferent;	 you	 have	 to	 be	 utterly	 detached,
unloving.	You	have	to	be	just	an	onlooker.
That's	perfectly	 right	as	 far	as	 science	 is	concerned	because	you	are	observing
objects	--	there	is	no	question	of	loving	objects.	If	you	are	observing	water	and
hydrogen	and	oxygen,	it's	perfectly	okay.	Nobody	can	ask	you	to	be	in	deep	love
with	oxygen	you	can	remain	detached;	 in	fact	you	will	be	detached	unless	you
are	mad.	Mad	people	fall	in	love	with	strange	things!
One	madman	was	saying	 to	 the	other	 that:	 "This	psychiatrist	 seems	 to	be	very
strange.	He's	talking	all	nonsense.	When	I	went	to	him	he	told	me	that;	'You	are
in	love	with	your	umbrella'	--	that	is	utter	nonsense!
What	do	you	 think?"	He	said,	"Certainly	--	 that	 is	absolutely	absurd."	And	 the
man	 said,	 "Yes,	 that's	 what	 I	 think!	 It	 is	 absolutely	 absurd.	We	 care	 for	 each
other,	we	are	tender	about	each	other	--	that's	one	thing	but	love	is	another	thing!
I	am	not	in	love	with	my	umbrella!"
So	it	is	okay	with	the	scientific	observation	but	as	you	move	higher,	higher	than
the	objective	world,	you	cannot	 remain	detached;	 if	you	are	detached	you	will
miss	the	whole	point.	That's	why	science	cannot	know	anything	about	love	and
cannot	know	anything	about	man's	inner	being	and	cannot	know	anything	about
god.	It	is	impossible	because	the	scientific	approach	itself	inhibits	it,	prohibits	it.
The	very	approach	is	such,	the	requirement	is	such,	the	methodology	is	such	that
these	 things	 are	 debarred.	 Science	 cannot	 understand	 beauty	 and	 science	 is
absolutely	 incapable	 of	 understanding	 what	 music	 is.	 Science	 can	 understand
what	sound	 is	but	science	 is	absolutely	 incapable	of	understanding	what	music
is.	Science	can	understand	linguistics	but	cannot	understand	poetry.	Science	can
understand	language,	grammar	--	everything,	but	what	is	poetry?	That	simply	is
missed.	For	that	one	needs	a	loving	approach.	If	you	want	to	understand	the	truth
you	have	to	be	very	loving.	If	you	really	want	to	understand	the	whole	of	life	in
all	its	dimensions,	you	have	to	approach	with	great	love	and	care;	you	have	to	be
very	tender,	soft.
And	then	a	new	phenomenon	arises	in	you:	your	life	becomes	full	of	justice	you
cannot	 be	 unjust	 then;	 you	 cannot	 be	 unfair	 then;	 it	 is	 impossible.	 A	 loving
person	cannot	be	unfair.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	 love	 as	 deeply	 as	 possible	 but	 remember	 that	 love	 should	 not	 become	 an
attachment,	 otherwise	 you	 become	 prejudiced.	 Love	 should	 not	 become
demanding	 otherwise	 you	 start	 imposing	 your	 ideas.	 Love	 should	 not	 be
possessive	 otherwise	 it	 becomes	 violent.	 If	 love	 can	 be	 non-possessive,	 non-
demanding,	 unconditional	 then	 your	 whole	 life	 has	 a	 tremendous	 beauty;	 you
radiate	something	of	godliness	and	that	radiation	is	what	justice	is:	Only	god	is
just	and	when	you	start	radiating	god,	you	are	just,	never	before	it.
(To	Paul)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Anand	Svabhavo.	Anand	means	 bliss.
Svabhavo	means	self-nature.
Bliss	 is	 our	 self-nature.	 It	 has	 not	 to	 be	 found	 somewhere	 else.	 It	 has	 to	 be
discovered	within	yourself.	It	 is	already	a	gift	by	god.	You	are	carrying	it	with
yourself.	 It	 has	been	 all	 along	with	you	 from	 the	very	beginning;	 still	 you	 are
miserable.	For	the	simple	reason	that	you	never	search	within.	You	search	where
it	is	not	and	you	never	search	where	it	is.	That's	how	one	goes	on	missing	bliss
and	one	goes	on	stumbling	more	and	more	into	misery.
Sannyas	 means	 a	 radical	 change;	 a	 change	 in	 the	 very	 direction	 of	 your	 life
energies.	 It	 is	 a	 turning	 in,	 it	 is	 a	 pilgrimage	 to	 one's	 own	 center.	 Sannyas	 is
nothing	but	the	very	essence	of	meditation.
Once	you	have	known	yourself,	you	have	known	all.	And	once	you	have	known
yourself	 you	 are	 the	 possessor	 of	 an	 eternal	 kingdom,	 of	 an	 inexhaustible
treasure.
(To	Robyn)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyanprem.
Dhyanprem	means	lover	of	meditation.
That	is	the	greatest	love
That	can	happen	to	a	person.
All	other	loves	are	small	things.
The	greatest	love	is	the	love	for	meditation.
Meditation	means	the	search	for	oneself.
We	have	completely	forgotten	who	we	are
We	have	forgotten	the	very	language
How	to	commune	with	ourselves.
Whatsoever	we	know	about	ourselves
Is	all	false,	arbitrary.
You	are	given	a	name	and	you	think	that
This	is	you	--	but	nobody	is	born	with	a	name.
The	name	gives	you	an	identity.
You	are	given	a	religion	--
Your	parents	impose	a	certain	religion	on	you
They	impose	a	certain	nationality	on	you
And	these	things	become	your	identities:
One	is	a	Hindu,	an	Indian
With	a	certain	name,	with	a	certain	caste
And	these	become	definitions	but
These	are	all	arbitrary,	absolutely	artificial.
You	are	born	without	them
But	we	remain	befooling	ourselves.
This	is	not	acquaintance	with	oneself
And	this	is	our	whole	misery
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	life	goes	on	slipping	out	of	our	fingers
And	we	go	on	remaining
As	ignorant	of	ourselves	as	ever.
In	fact	the	more	time	passes
The	more	ignorant	we	become.
The	children
Are	a	little	more	aware	of	themselves.
It	is	not	an	exceptional	thing	to	find	children
Calling	their	own	name	in	a	third	person.
An	little	boy	can	say,	'Mommy,	Johnny	is	hungry.'
He	is	not	still	identified	with	Johnny,
He	does	not	say,	'I	am	hungry.'
He	says,	'Johnny	is	hungry.'
His	understanding	is	far	more	deeper;
He	still	keeps	himself	aloof	from	Johnny.
Johnny	is	as	far	aware	as	anybody	else.
He	is	just	a	watcher:
He	has	come	to	know	that	Johnny	is	hungry
But	he	is	not	saying,	'I	am	hungry.'
Soon	he	will	forget,	the	distance	will	dissolve:
He	will	become	one	with	Johnny.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	have	to	do	two	things.
One,	the	first	essential	step	is:
To	become	aware	of	all	false	identities	because
To	know	the	false	as	the	false
Is	the	beginning	of	the	journey	towards	the	real.
Once	you	become	aware
That	all	these	things	are	false	--
Being	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan
Indian,	German,	Chinese	--
These	are	all	just	arbitrary,	accidental,
They	have	nothing	to	do	with	you.
Your	consciousness	remains
Absolutely	untouched	by	them,
Then	the	question	arises,	'Who	am	I?'
You	are	not	your	education
And	you	are	not	your	money
And	you	are	not	your	post	--
Your	are	nothing	of	these	things
Then,	'Who	am	I'	--	then	the	question	becomes
More	and	more	poignant.
Then	it	takes	an	insistence
Then	it	becomes	a	constant	undercurrent	in	you
That	'Life	is	running	out
And	I	have	not	yet	even	known	myself,
What	am	I	doing	here?
At	least	one	thing	should	be	done
That	I	should	become	aware	who	I	am.'
Once	this	deep	longing	arises	in	you	to	know
Then	knowing	is	not	difficult.
As	it	becomes	intense
You	start	moving	towards	meditation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	simply	means
Becoming	silent,	utterly	silent
Getting	unidentified	with	the	mind
Remaining	absolutely	still	and	trying	to	see
What	is	this	consciousness	that	I	am.
It	takes	a	little	time	for	the	mind	to	quiet
To	calm	down;	it	has	been	noisy	for	lives
It	has	become	a	habit,	but	it	disappears.
And	the	day	it	disappears,	suddenly
All	is	light,	all	is	joy,	all	is	benediction!
You	have	arrived	home,
You	have	penetrated	your	own	being.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name.
(To	Sally)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Avinash.
Anand	means	bliss.	Avinash	means	eternal.
Bliss	is	eternal.	Happiness	is	momentary	--
It	comes	like	a	breeze	and	goes.
When	it	comes,	it	feels	good
But	when	it	goes	it	leaves	you
In	a	far	more	miserable	state
Than	you	were	before,	obviously
Because	now	you	have	tasted	something
And	now	you	know	the	taste	of	happiness
And	the	misery	hurts	more.
People	who	attain	few	glimpses	of	happiness
Are	far	more	miserable
Than	the	people	who	have	never	had	any	glimpses
Hence	the	very	strange	phenomenon	that
Poor	people	don't	look	so	miserable.
It	is	very	illogical
They	should	be	more	miserable
But	they	don't	look	so	miserable
As	rich	people	look	miserable.
They	live	in	misery,	in	other's	eyes.
If	a	Westerner	comes	to	India
He	can	see	the	whole	misery	of	the	land.
Everybody's	living	in	misery	but
People	who	are	living	are	not	even	aware	of	it.
Even	the	beggar	on	the	street
Does	not	think	that	he	is	miserable
He	accepts	it	just	as	matter	of	course.
That's	how	life	is:
He	has	known	it	this	way	from	the	very	beginning.
His	father	was	a	beggar
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
His	father's	father	was	a	beggar;
This	is	his	karma	and	he	is	utterly	contented.
He	has	no	desire	to	be	anything	else.
He	may	have	money	in	the	bank,	he	may	have
Every	opportunity	to	change	his	business
But	he	is	no	more	interested
He	is	perfectly	happy,	things	are	going	well.
He	has	never	tasted	anything	else
So	he	lives	into	whatsoever	condition	he	is
In	a	state	of	a	dull	kind	of	satisfaction.
But	the	people	who	have	tasted	some	joy
Some	happiness,	some	glimpses	--	they	feel	misery.
Now	America
Is	the	most	miserable	country	in	the	world
For	the	simple	reason	because
It	has	more	glimpses	available.
I	am	all	for	richness,	for	the	simple	reason
Because	once	you	are	aware	of	misery
Once	you	see	the	momentariness	of	happiness,
A	desire	arises	to	seek	and	search	the	eternal.
Otherwise
There	is	no	desire	to	search	for	the	eternal.
If	you	have	tasted	for	a	single	moment
Something	of	joy,	you	are	bound	to	look;
How	you	can	make	it	an	eternal	state	of	life?
How	you	can	be	in	it	permanently,	forever?
And	that	is	possible.
The	whole	art	of	meditation	is
To	bring	eternal	peace,	silence,	joy	to	you.
And	the	miracle	is:
It	(can't	read,	words	missing)	from	anywhere	else.
It	wells	up	within	you.
Meditation	simply	removes
All	the	barriers	in	its	path.
It	removes	all	the	rocks
And	the	stream	starts	flowing.
And	once	you	have	known	that
It	is	nothing	to	do	with	anything	on	the	outside
You	have	a	great	independence,	great	freedom,
You	don't	depend	on	anybody.
You	can	be	absolutely	joyous	in	your	aloneness.
Your	aloneness	becomes	luminous.
It	is	no	more	lonely,	it	is	full	of	joy
It	is	a	dancing	aloneness
It	is	a	singing	aloneness,	it	has	great	beauty
And	great	poetry	and	great	music.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005095
ShortTitle:	ISLAND09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Usha)	--	Your	name:	Ma	Anand	Usha.
Remember	only	one	 thing	because	I	want	my	sannyasins	 to	be	concerned	only
with	the	very	essential.
The	non-essentials	 have	destroyed	 the	whole	 beauty	 of	 religion.	And	once	 the
non-essentials	 start	 becoming	 important	 the	 essential	 is	 lost.	 And	 there	 are	 a
thousand	and	one	non-essential	 things	 in	 life.	All	 the	 religions	have	become	a
great	chaos,	for	the	simple	reason	that	the	essential	is	lost	sight	of.	The	essential
is	 meditation,	 everything	 else	 is	 non-essential.	 All	 beliefs	 are	 non-essential.
Whether	one	believes	 in	god	or	does	not	believe,	 it	matters	not	at	 all,	because
those	who	have	believed	-	they	have	reached,	and	those	who	have	not	believed	-
they	 have	 also	 reached.	 Buddha	 never	 believed	 in	 god,	 yet	 he	 became
enlightened.	Jesus	believed	in	god,	yet	he	became	enlightened,	hence	the	belief
in	 god	 is	 a	 non-essential	 thing;	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 like	 and	 dislike.	 But
neither	Buddha	nor	Jesus	nor	Mahavira	nor	Patanjali	can	avoid	meditation.
Anybody	who	avoids	meditation	misses	the	goal.	Then	he	can	go	on	believing	in
a	thousand	things	but	nothing	is	going	to	help	-	the	naked	truth	is	that	all	beliefs
are	 decorations.	 The	 essential	 thing	 is	 that	 one	 should	 become	 silent,	 utterly
silent;	thoughtless,	alert,	aware.	And	one	should	start	moving	inwards,	when	one
reaches	one's	center	then	all	is	revealed;	there	is	no	need	to	believe	beforehand.
In	fact	to	believe	beforehand	is	a	disturbance.	Then	you	are	prejudiced	and	any
mind	that	is	prejudiced	cannot	go	very	far.
One	 needs	 an	 absolutely	 unprejudiced	 approach	 with	 no	 conclusions,	 no
knowledge,	no	belief	and	you	will	attain	to	the	ultimate	very	easily.	If	one	gets
entangled	 into	beliefs	and	what	 is	 right	and	what	 is	wrong	and	what	 to	do	and
what	not	to	do,	then	it	becomes	impossible.
In	Buddhist	scriptures	there	are	thirty-three	thousand	rules	for	a	monk.	Even	to
remember	them	is	impossible.	There	is	no	question	of	following	-	how	can	one
remember	 thirty-three	 thousand	 rules?	And	 one's	whole	 life	will	 be	wasted	 in
remembering	those	rules.	And	if	you	have	to	follow	thirty-three	thousand	rules
you	will	become	a	 robot,	you	will	 lose	all	 spontaneity,	you	will	not	be	able	 to
move	a	single	inch!
Your	 whole	 life	 will	 be	 cramped,	 paralyzed	 you	 will	 live	 in	 a	 prison.	 And
Buddha	was	teaching	freedom,	ultimate	freedom,	and	the	outcome	is	thirty-three
thousand	 rules.	 The	 moment	 he	 died	 scholars	 started	 collecting	 all	 the	 rules.
How	they	collected	thirty-three	thousand	rules	that	too	is	a	miracle,	a	feat!
The	 way	 they	 followed	 was	 that	 of	 Buddha	 who	 was	 talking	 to	 millions	 of
people	in	his	long	life,	forty-two	years	he	was	a	master,	an	enlightened	master.
He	became	enlightened	when	he	was	forty	and	remained	alive	up	to	the	age	of
eighty-two.	So	for	forty-two	years	he	was	teaching	and	he	was	telling	different
people	different	 things	 -	 their	 needs	were	different.	They	collected	 everything,
whatsoever	he	has	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
said.	It	is	as	if	you	go	on	collecting	all	the	prescriptions	of	a	doctor	which	have
been	given	to	different	patients	for	different	illnesses	-	of	course	you	will	be	able
to	 collect	 thirty-three	 thousand	 prescriptions	 and	 then	 if	 you	 deliver	 those
prescriptions	to	one	single	person,	you	will	kill	him	immediately.	Just	the	load	of
the	 prescriptions	 will	 be	 enough.	 He	 will	 not	 be	 able	 even	 to	 reach	 to	 the
chemist!	 And	 he	 will	 be	 in	 such	 a	 contradiction,	 he	 will	 not	 know	 what	 is
happening.	He	will	be	in	a	mess	-	if	he	follows	this	rule	then	some	other	rules	are
broken.	If	he	follows	that	rule	then	some	other	rule	is	broken.	You	will	drive	him
crazy!	Or	 if	he	 is	a	 sensible,	 intelligent	person	he	will	become	a	hypocrite:	he
will	pretend	that	he	follows	the	rules	and	he	will	live	his	own	private	life	utterly
ignoring	all	those	rules.
So	there	is	no	rule	in	my	sannyas,	no	ritual;	I	don't	prescribe	anything.	My	whole
insistence	 is	 for	 a	 single	 medicine	 and	 that	 medicine	 is	 meditation.	 Both	 the
words	meditation	 and	medicine	 come	 from	 the	 same	 root.	Medicine	 cures	 the
body,	meditation	cures	the	soul.
So	from	today	you	keep	only	one	thing	in	your	mind.	And	whenever	you	have
time	 -	and	 there	 is	no	need	 to	make	a	 fixed	 time,	 that	creates	difficulties.	One
day	 you	 may	 have	 some	 work,	 you	 may	 have	 somewhere	 to	 go	 and	 then	 it
becomes	a	 trouble:	 if	you	don't	 follow	the	routine	you	feel	guilt;	 if	you	follow
the	 routine	your	ordinary	 life	 is	disturbed.	There	 is	no	need	 to	make	 it	 so	 that
you	have	to	do	every	day	in	the	morning,	six	to	seven	-	there	is	no	need	to	make
any	particular	 time.	Any	 time	will	do.	And	 there	 is	no	need	even	 to	 think	 that
you	have	to	do	it	only	once	or	twice.	As	many	times	as	you	get	the	opportunity
just	 close	 your	 eyes	 and	 disappear	 within.	 Slowly	 slowly	 the	 knack	 starts
happening.	 Slowly	 slowly	 something	 opens	 up.	 And	 that	 opening	 leads	 you
beyond	the	body,	beyond	the	mind,	to	the	farther	shore.
Good,	Usha!	Good.
(To	Martha)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Dhyana.
Anand	means	bliss.	Dhyana	means	meditation.
Bliss	is	a	flowering	of	meditation.
Meditation	is	like	a	rose	bush
And	bliss	is	like	roses.
Without	meditation
There	are	no	flowers	in	life	and	no	fragrance,
One	lives	utterly	empty,	meaningless.
One's	whole	life	remains	just	like	a	driftwood;
Accidental,	with	no	sense	of	direction.
One	does	not	know	why	one	is	doing	this	or	that
Why	one	is	alive	at	all	--	for	what?
One	has	no	answers	and	because	to	know
That	'I	have	no	answers,'
One	never	raises	the	questions
Because	those	questions	hurt,
They	make	you	aware	of	your	ignorance.
One	avoids	the	questions	so	that	one	can	remain
Unaware	that	one's	life	is	absolutely	pointless
One	keeps	oneself	occupied
Into	thousand	and	one	small	things,	tiny	goals:
Achieve	money,	power,	prestige
Do	this,	do	that	--	very	short-sighted	goals.
And	you	can	achieve	money	and	you	can	have	power
But	nothing	happens	out	of	it
Because	you	remain	the	same.
Then	have	no	money,	then	have	more	power
And	there	is	no	end	to	it.
It	is	chasing	shadows.	It	is	such	a	stupid	act
But	everybody	goes	into	it	because	one	finds
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Everybody	else	going	into	it
And	people	are	imitators.
I	don't	know
Whether	Charles	Darwin	is	right	or	not
But	when	I	look	at	people's	imitativeness
Then	I	start	thinking	maybe	he	is	right,	that
Man	has	come	from	the	monkeys.
Maybe	biologically	it	is	not	true
But	psychologically	it	seems	to	be	very	true.
All	men	are	monkeys:
Just	to	see	somebody	purchasing	a	new	car
And	you	have	to	purchase	a	new	car
Somebody	has	a	new	house
You	have	to	have	a	new	house.
This	is	how	you	go	on	and	on:
You	go	on	following	others
And	others	are	following	you.
It	is	such	a	foolish	game
And	we	are	moving	in	circles.
And	one	can	waste	one's	life	very	easily
Because	it	is	so	short;	but	it	is	strange.
If	you	ask	people,	'Why	are	you	playing	cards?
Why	are	you	playing	poker?
Why	you	are	so	deeply	engaged	into	chess?'
They	say,	'To	kill	time.'
As	if	they	have	more	time	than	they	need.
As	if	time	is	so	useless	that	you	have	to	kill	it.
Time	is	the	most	precious	thing!
Once	gone	it	is	gone	forever.
And	we	don't	have	much	time;
Life	is	really	very	short.
It	flies	so	fast	that	between	birth	and	death
There	is	not	much	gap
And	people	are	killing	time	not	knowing	at	all
That	in	fact	it	is	just	the	other	way	round:
Time	is	killing	you.
In	Hindu	language
We	have	the	same	word	for	both	time	and	death
Song	word	'kal'	means	both,	time	and	death
Because	time	brings	death,	time	is	killing	you
Time	is	death.
The	moment	a	child	is	born	he	starts	dying.
If	he	has	been	there	just	for	five	minutes
That	means	he	has	died	a	little	bit.
Out	of	his	seventy	years	life
Five	minutes	are	gone,	he	is	less	alive
Than	he	was	just	five	minutes	before.
And	it	is	slipping	out	of	our	fingers.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Something	has	to	be	done
And	something	has	to	be	done	very	determinedly
With	great	determination	and	commitment
Only	then	meditation	is	possible.
It	needs	a	focussed,	intense	effort.
You	have	to	put	all	your	energies	into	it.
People	start	meditation
Thousands	of	people	start	meditation
But	only	out	of	curiosity	hence	nothing	happens.
One	or	two	days	or	three	days	they	will	meditate
And	they	will	say,	'Nothing	is	happening.'
Meditation	is	not	like	going	into	a	movie
Or	watching	TV	--	that	just	you	sit	and	you	watch
And	something	starts	happening,
You	have	nothing	to	do.
You	have	to	transform
Your	whole	structure	of	mind.
You	have	to	dismantle	the	whole	edifice
You	have	to	find	out	where	your	reality	is	hiding
You	have	to	uncover	it,	discover	it.
It	needs	a	persistent	and	patient	effort.
But	if	one	works	it	pays	tremendously.
It	is	worth	--	even	if	you	have	to	put
Your	whole	life	energy	into	it	to	attain	it
It	is	worth	because	it	is	far	more	valuable
Than	your	whole	life.
A	single	moment	of	meditation
Is	more	valuable	than	your	whole	life
Because	in	that	single	moment
You	attain	to	eternal	life
Which	knows	no	birth,	no	death
And	that	is	the	flowering
That	is	where	one	becomes	blissful.
Without	knowing	it	one	remains	in	misery
Because	if	one	is	going	to	die
How	can	one	be	blissful?
How	can	one	avoid	death?
Its	shadow	falls	continuously.
In	everything	you	are	doing
There	is	the	shadow	of	death
And	it	is	deepening	every	moment.
Even	when	you	are	in	love	with	somebody
Even	making	love,	death	is	present.
Sometimes	it	is	more	present
In	those	moments	when	you	are	silent
When	you	are	enjoying	it	is	more	present
Because	in	those	moments
You	are	a	little	more	alert,	you	can	feel	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	almost	always	happens	to	intelligent	people
That	while	making	love	they	become	sad
And	if	not	while	making
Then	afterwards	they	become	sad.
And	they	become	very	much	puzzled
Because	it	was	a	beautiful	experience
And	why	they	have	become	sad?
That	beautiful	experience
Has	made	them	a	little	alert	and	now	they	know
Death	will	take	everything	away.
All	these	beautiful	moments
Are	not	going	to	save	them
And	all	these	beautiful	moments
Are	fleeting	moments,	they	are	not	going	to	abide
Sooner	of	later	all	will	be	gone.
A	miserable	person
Who	has	never	know	a	single	glimpse	of	joy
Will	not	be	so	aware	of	death
Because	he	lives	in	misery,
He	himself	lives	in	such	darkness
That	death	cannot	make	its	shadow.
When	you	are	in	darkness,	you	don't	make	a	shadow
When	you	come	into	light
Immediately	the	shadow	disappears.
That's	why	when	ever	you	are	happy
Feeling	good,	healthy,	suddenly	a	shadow	appears
And	that	shadow	is	of	death
And	that	makes	one	sad.
One	cannot	be	really	happy
Unless	one	comes	to	know
That	one's	innermost	core	is	beyond	death.
To	know	that	is	the	only	bliss
And	that's	the	goal	of	sannyas.
Meditation	is	the	way	to	attain	it.
Bliss	is	the	goal.
(To	Michael)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Amoha.
Anand	means	bliss.	Amoha	means	non-attachment.
Misery	comes	out	of	attachment.
We	become	attached	to	things
To	people,	to	places.
We	are	addicted	with	attachment
We	cling	to	anything	and	clinging	brings	misery
Because	life	goes	on	changing
It	is	in	an	constant	movement,	it	is	never	static
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Even	for	two	consecutive	moments.
So	to	cling	to	such	a	life	is	to	create	misery
Because	it	can't	remain	as	you	want	it:
Whether	you	cling	or	not,	it	is	going	to	change.
Except	change,	everything	changes.
In	life	only	change	is	a	non-changing	phenomenon.
So	the	man	of	understanding
Never	clings	to	anything.
Seeing	that	everything	changes
These	is	no	point	in	clinging.
It	is	foolish,	it	is	unintelligent
And	you	create	your	own	misery
And	then	you	condemn	the	whole	world.
The	world	is	not	responsible
Nobody	is	responsible	for	your	misery
Except	your	own	unawareness
Unawareness	of	this	absolutely	certain	fact
That	life	is	a	constant	change
Seeing	it	one	stops	clinging
Then	whatsoever	comes,	one	watches.
One	remains	a	witness
One	enjoys	it	while	it	is	there.
When	the	beautiful	sunset	is	there,	enjoy	it
But	don't	cling	to	it	--	it	is	not	a	photograph
Soon	it	will	disappear,	it	is	disappearing
While	you	are	watching,	it	is	disappearing.
Soon	the	night	will	fall,	but	why	be	worried
Because	the	night	has	its	own	beauty.
The	stars	will	appear.
But	the	clinger	is	such	a	fool	that
He	will	try	to	cling	with	the	beautiful	sunset
He	would	like	that	it	remains	static	forever.
It	is	good	that	what	he	asks	does	not	happen
Otherwise	we	would	have	been	bored	by	things.
Life	never	listens	to	our	stupid	demands
It	goes	on	its	own	way
Undistracted	by	millions	of	fools
Calling	to	stop:	shouting,	crying,	weeping.
Life	never	listens	to	anybody	because
Those	fools	don't	know	what	they	are	asking	for
They	will	cry	for	the	sunset
Because	it	is	no	more	there	and	in	that	crying
They	will	miss	the	new	appearing	stars.
By	the	time	they	get	free	of	that	misery	and
They	start	looking	at	the	beautiful	starry	night.
Again	the	same	foolishness	is	there:
They	start	clinging	to	it,	but	it	is	fleeting,
Soon	it	will	be	gone.
Otherwise	the	sunrise	will	not	happen
They	will	again	cry.
Their	eyes	are	always	red
And	because	of	their	tears
They	cannot	see	what	is	the	real.
Then	they	will	miss	the	beauty	of	the	sunrise
And	so	on,	so	forth,	it	goes	on.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	fool	goes	on	missing	everything
The	wise	man	enjoys	everything.
He	enjoys	the	day,	he	enjoys	the	night
He	enjoys	the	summer,	he	enjoys	the	winter.
He	enjoys	life,	he	enjoys	death.
He	is	a	non-clinger;	in	con-clinging	is	bliss.
That's	the	way	of	sannyas:
Non-attachment,	non-clinging.
Learn	the	art	of	being	non-attached
And	you	have	learned	the	greatest	secret	of	life.
(To	Sanatano)	--	Laxmi,	Sanatano	wants	his	name	to	be	explained?
--	Yes,	he	wants.
--	Sanatano?	Call	Sanatano	first	--	just	call	him.
--	(Mukta	calls;)	Sanatano.
--	Come	here,	Sanatano!	So	you	have	come	finally!	Good!	How	long	you	will	be
here?
--	One	life.
--	Mm?
--	One	life.
--	Be	a	 little	 longer!	 (laughter)	Be	a	 little	 less	miserly	--	 just	one	 life	you	say?
Forever!	--	And	a	little	longer!	That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name.
Sanatano	means	the	eternal
That	which	has	no	beginning	and	no	end
Which	has	always	been	and	will	always	be.
That	is	our	reality,	that's	our	truth.
And	to	live	it
Is	the	only	bliss,	the	only	benediction.
And	it	is	not	far	away;	it	is	so	close
That's	why	we	go	on	missing	it.
It	is	like	a	fish	missing	the	ocean
Because	it	is	in	the	ocean.
We	are	in	the	eternal,	inseparably	in	it.
The	eternal	is	in	us
In	fact,	there	is	no	division	at	all:	Each	moment
We	are	merging	and	melting	in	the	whole.
To	know	it	and	life	immediately	becomes
A	dance,	a	song	--	and	that	is	true	revolution!
You	have	been	a	revolutionary
But	that	was	not	true	revolution.
Now	you	have	come	in	the	most	dangerous	hands!
This	is	true	revolution.
It	does	not	change	the	outer	structure
It	is	not	concerned	with	outer	structures,
It	changes	the	very	consciousness	of	man.
And	if	the	consciousness	changes
Then	the	outer	structures
Will	change	themselves.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	good	that	you	have	come	here	--
I	was	waiting	for	you!
Come	close	you	call	one	more.	Come	close.
Good.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005105
ShortTitle:	ISLAND10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Klaus)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Klaus.
Prem	means	love.	Klaus	means	a	victorious	heart.
The	whole	structure	of	the	society
Is	against	the	heart;	it	trains	the	head
It	disciplines	the	head,	it	educates	the	head.
It	neglects	and	ignores	the	heart
For	the	simple	reason
Because	the	heart	is	a	dangerous	phenomenon.
The	head	is	a	machine.
Machines	are	never	rebellious,	they	cannot	be.
They	simply	follow	the	orders.
Machines	are	good	in	that	way	--	they	are	obedient
Hence	the	state,	the	church,	the	parents
Everybody	is	interested	in	the	head.
It	is	convenient	for	all.
The	heart	creates	inconvenience
For	the	status	quo,	for	the	established	order
Of	things,	for	the	vested	interest.
Head	functions	through	logic
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	can	be	convinced	for	certain	purposes
It	can	be	argued,	persuaded,	conditioned.
It	can	be	made	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan
It	can	be	made	Communist,	Fascist,	Socialist.
Anything	can	be	done	with	the	head.
And	whatsoever	you	feed	the	head
It	goes	on	repeating	it.
It	can't	bring	a	single	thing	new
It	is	never	original.
The	heart	lives	through	love
And	love	cannot	be	conditioned.
It	is	essentially	rebellion.
One	never	knows	where	love	will	lead	you.
It	is	unpredictable,	it	is	spontaneous
It	never	repeats	the	old
It	always	responds	to	the	present	moment.
The	heart	lives	in	the	present
The	head	lives	in	the	past,	hence	the	head
Is	always	traditional,	conventional	and	the	heart
Is	always	revolutionary,	rebellious.
But	you	can	be	victorious	only	though	the	heart
Through	love,	not	though	logic.
Your	victory	means
The	defeat	of	all	the	structures
That	have	been	imposed	upon	you.
Their	victory	means	your	defeat
Hence	there	is	a	subtle	struggle
Between	the	individual	and	the	collective.
And	a	sannyasin	has	to	be	aware	of	that	struggle
Because	to	be	a	sannyasin	means	you	are	moving
Towards	being	your	own	self,	whatsoever	the	cost.
Sannyas	means
Now	you	are	not	going	to	be	ruled	by	the	mass
By	the	crowd,	by	the	objective	mind.
Sannyas	means
That	now	you	will	live	into	your	own	light
According	to	your	own	vision;	your	are	ready
Even	to	commit	mistakes,	even	to	go	astray
But	you	will	not	lose	your	independence.
And	the	miracle	is	that
When	you	rebel	against	the	crowd	psychology
And	you	become	more	and	more	independent
Suddenly	you	start	feeling	that
You	are	becoming	one	with	the	whole
With	the	universal.
So	these	are	the	three	things:
The	collective,	the	mass,	the	crowd,
The	tradition,	the	church,	the	state,
The	individual	and	the	universal.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	individual	is	a	passage,	is	a	bridge
From	the	collective	to	the	universal.
It	frees	you	first	from	the	collective
And	once	you	are	free	from	the	collective
There	is	no	need	for	you	to	be	an	individual.
You	can	dissolve	into	the	whole.
That	is	the	miracle	of	individuality:
It	frees	you	first	from	the	collective
And	then,	it	dies	in	its	own	accord	because
Its	needs	are	fulfilled,	it	is	no	more	needed.
It	is	medicinal,	it	kills	the	disease
Then	you	drop	the	medicine.
Your	true	victory	means	god's	victory
Your	true	victory	means	god	has	won
Over	the	collective,	over	the	dead.
But	you	will	have	to	pass	through
A	process	of	individuation.
It	looks	paradoxical:
The	sannyasin	first	has	to	become	an	individual	--
That's	what	all	the	growth	groups	are	meant	here.
They	are	to	help	you
To	become	more	authentic	individuals,	to	free	you
From	all	the	social	nonsense,	rubbish.
Once	you	are	freed	from	the	social	rubbish
And	you	start	feeling	yourself	alive
As	an	individual,	then	the	second	work
Has	to	be	done	by	meditative	process:
They	dissolve	your	individuality.
First	become	free	from	the	society
And	then	become	free	from	the	self.
And	to	be	in	the	no-self,	in	the	no-mind
Is	to	be	in	god	--	that	is	our	victory.
Then	there	is	no	misery,	no	anguish
Then	all	is	joy	and	bliss	and	peace
And	it	is	eternal,	it	is	forever.
(To	Iris)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Iris.
Anand	means	bliss;	Iris	means	rainbow	--	a	bliss	rainbow.
Bliss	is	never	one-dimensional
It	is	multi-dimensional.
It	is	not	like	a	solo	guitarist
It	is	an	orchestra.
The	solo	player	has	its	own	beauty
But	it	is	one-dimensional.
The	solo	flute	player
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Certainly	has	its	own	place	but	it	is	not	so	rich.
When	it	becomes	part	of	a	big	orchestra
Then	there	is	great	richness.
The	rainbow	represents
All	the	seven	planes	of	being
All	the	seven	possibilities.
Man	consists	of	seven	planes.
The	lowest	is	sex	and	the	highest	is	samadhi.
And	between	those	two
There	are	five	other	centers.
From	sex	one	has	to	move	upwards	towards	samadhi
Towards	the	ultimate	flowering	of	your	inner	lotus.
It	is	the	same	energy
The	energy	is	not	different	but
It	manifests	differently	on	different	planes.
When	the	same	energy	comes	to	the	heart
That	is	the	fourth	center,	it	becomes	love.
When	the	same	energy	moves	to	the	fifth	center
That	is	the	throat,	it	becomes	prayer.
When	the	same	energy	moves	to	the	sixth	center
That	is	between	the	two	eyebrows,	the	third	eye
It	becomes	clarity,	vision,	one	is	a	seer	--
One	can	see	everything	as	it	is.
All	mist	disappears.
And	when	the	same	energy	moves
To	the	highest	plane,	the	seventh
That	is	the	pinnacle	--	the	inner	lotus	opens	up
One	is	ready	to	move	into	god.
Now	there	is	no	need	to	return	back
No	need	to	be	again	in	the	body
No	need	to	be	born
The	lesson	of	life	has	been	learned
One	has	ripened,	one	has	matured,
One	has	become	grown	up.
But	millions	of	people
Live	at	the	lowest	center	--	sex.
Hence	the	work	of	a	sannyasin
Begins	at	the	sex	center
Because	there	is	the	energy.
Hence	I	don't	condemn	sex	because	it	is	energy
Just	we	have	to	move	it	upwards.
And	it	can	be	moved	upwards	only
If	you	have	a	deep	respect	for	it
If	you	have	affection	for	it
If	you	are	friendly	with	it.
All	the	religions	of	the	world
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Have	been	teaching	just	the	opposite:
They	teach	antagonism	with	sex	energy
And	once	you	become	antagonistic	to	sex	energy
You	lose	all	track	of	spiritual	growth	because
You	lose	contact	with	your	own	energy	source.
You	become	uprooted	from	your	own	sources.
That's	why	your	saints	look	so	dead	and	dull,
So	stupid	and	unintelligent:
They	don't	have	the	flavour	and	the	fragrance
Of	one	who	has	arrived.
They	stink	of	guilt,	they	are	guilty	people,
They	are	feeling	far	more	guilt
Than	anybody	else	in	the	world.
They	are	burdened	with	guilt	because
Whatsoever	they	have	been	condemning	is	there;
Just	be	condemning	your	sex	energy
You	cannot	get	rid	of	it.
The	only	way	to	get	rid	of	it
Is	to	transform	it	to	a	higher	plane
So	that	it	disappears	from	the	lower.
The	work	of	a	sannyasin
Begins	with	the	sex	energy	and	it	ends
With	samadhi,	with	superconsciousness.
This	is	the	rainbow,	these	seven	centers,
This	is	the	bridge,	this	is	the	ladder
That	joins	the	earth	with	the	heaven
This	shore	with	the	other	shore	--	the	bridge.
And	as	you	move	higher
You	become	more	and	more	blissful.
In	fact	bliss	is	the	only	criterion	to	know:
Whether	you	are	moving	higher	or	not.
As	you	move	higher	you	feel	more	bliss
More	peace,	more	silence,	more	tranquillity
More	centeredness,	simply	joyous
For	no	reason	at	all.
Slowly	slowly	joy	becomes	your	very	climate.
You	even	start	forgetting	that	you	are	joyous.
You	are	so	joyous
And	the	contrary	has	stopped	happening,
You	start	forgetting	about	it.
It	is	just	like	breathing:
One	never	remembers	it,
Unless	something	goes	wrong.
If	your	breathing	is	not	as	it	should	be
Then	you	remember	it.
If	it	is	going	perfectly	normal	and	healthy
There	is	no	question	of	remembering	it.
As	you	go	higher	you	start	forgetting	--
Bliss,	peace,	silence,	they	become	so	natural
That	you	remember	them	only	when	you	see	others;
When	you	see	others	in	deep	misery
Then	suddenly,	the	recognition	comes	to	you
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	you	are	no	more	in	misery.
When	you	see	other	sad	faces
Then	suddenly	you	recognize
That	your	heart	is	always	dancing
Continuously	dancing,	that	you	are
In	a	constant	jubilation,	in	a	celebration.
(To	Brigitte)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Vandano.
Anand	means	bliss.	Vandano	means	prayer.
Bliss	is	the	only	prayer	I	know	of.
All	other	prayers	are	just	pseudo	prayers.
A	prayer	need	not	be	sad	--	it	has	to	be	lived.
If	one	really	feels	god,	one	should	be	blissful	Because	god	is	--	that's	enough	to
be	blissful.
If	one	feels	surrounded	by	god
Overwhelmed	by	god
One	will	radiate	joy,	one	will	radiate	gratitude.
There	will	be	a	constant	thankfulness	--
That	is	prayer!
There	is	no	need	to	go	to	the	church
Or	to	the	temple	or	to	the	mosque	to	say	prayers.
Prayers	cannot	be	said.
What	you	say	in	the	name	of	prayers
Are	just	stupid	things.
You	are	trying	to	bribe	god
You	are	praising	god,	as	if	you	can	buttress	him.
All	the	prayers	have	been	made
In	the	same	way	as	people	used	to
Worship	the	kings	and	the	emperors:
They	will	go	and	praise	the	kings
They	will	exaggerate	in	their	praises
And	of	course,	the	kings'	ego	will	be	puffed	up
And	these	people	will	be	rewarded.
It	happened	once:	A	Sufi	mystic	was	sent	to	India
By	the	king	of	Iran
As	a	messenger	to	the	Indian	king.
The	other	members	of	his	court	were	very	jealous
Because	they	were	not	chosen	and
This	strange	man,	a	Sufi	mystic	has	been	chosen.
So	they	were	trying	to	find	out
Some	way	of	other	to	condemn	this	man.
They	had	put	spies	and	the	spies	followed	him
And	they	were	sending	reports	what	is	happening
And	they	found	many	things
Particularly	one	thing	that
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Sufi	mystic	had	said	to	the	Indian	emperor
That,	'You	are	the	full	moon;	our	king	is	just
The	moon	of	the	second	day,	when	you	can	hardly	see.
From	third	day	it	becomes	more	visible
Fourth	day	it	is	more	clear
So	our	king	is	second	day's	moon
And	you	are	the	perfect	moon.'
The	detectives	were	very	happy,
They	immediately	sent	a	message	that
'This	man	is	praising	the	Indian	king	like	this
And	humiliating	our	king.'
So	when	the	mystic	went	back
He	was	immediately	arrested
Brought	to	the	court	and	the	king	asked,
'How	you	dared?	--	you	called	the	Indian	emperor
The	full	moon	and	me,	just	the	second	day	moon?!'
The	mystic	started	laughing	and	he	said,
'You	did	not	understand.
The	Indian	king	was	a	fool	because
After	the	full-moon	there	is	only	death.
He	is	just	on	the	verge	of	death	--
That's	what	I	was	saying.
And	after	the	second	day	moon	there	is	growth.
You	are	a	growing	person,	your	empire	is	growing.
That's	what	my	meaning	was.'
The	king	was	very	happy,	the	Sufi	was	rewarded.
The	Sufi	got	rewards	from	both	the	kings.
Must	have	been	a	clever	man;
He	managed	to	befool	both!
Our	prayers	have	been	also	made	in	the	same	way:
We	are	trying	to	befool	god;	that,
'You	are	great,'	that
'You	are	father	of	the	whole,'	that
'You	are	compassionate,'	that
'You	will	forgive	our	sins.'
We	do	two	things	in	our	prayers:
We	condemn	ourselves	and	we	praise	god.
That	is	the	way,	the	way	of	buttressing	the	egos
But	god	is	not	an	ego
Hence	all	these	prayers	are	stupid
They	are	feudalistic
They	have	nothing	to	do	with	religion.
They	simply	remind	us	that
We	have	created	the	idea	of	god	as	great	king.
And	god	is	not	a	person	even
What	to	say	about	that	he	is	a	a	great	king.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
God	is	a	godliness,	a	quality.
So	when	I	say	prayer
I	mean,	you	have	to	live
Blissfully	and	peacefully	and	joyfully
That	is	prayer!	Your	life	should	be	a	prayer!
You	should	show	by	your	very	existence
That	god	exists,	that	you	are	happy
That	you	feel	blessed.	Become	a	prayer.
Don't	pray	--	become	a	prayer!
Never	pray	--	be	a	prayer!
(To	Hedy)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Darshano.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Darshano	means	the	capacity	to	see.
Meditation	creates	clarity
It	creates	the	capacity	to	see
To	see	that	which	is
Without	any	interference	from	the	mind.
Ordinarily	the	mind	is	continuously	interfering.
It	goes	on	interpreting
Everything	that	comes	into	you.
It	goes	on	imposing	its	old	prejudices.
It	never	allows	anything
To	reach	to	you	directly.
It	distorts,	colours,	changes
Bits	here,	bits	there
Drops	few	things,	adds	few	things
And	the	whole	process	it	so	automatic	that
You	are	not	even	aware	what	your	mind	is	doing.
The	scientists	say	the	mind	allows
Only	two	per	cent	reality	to	penetrate	in.
Ninety-eight	per	cent	is	prevented.
So	we	don't	know	what	our	mind	allows	us	to	know.
Hence	a	Christian	knows	a	different	way
And	the	Hindi	in	a	totally	different	way
And	the	reality	is	the	same.
The	scientist	knows	in	one	way
The	poet	in	another	--	the	reality	is	the	same!
But	their	minds	are	different,	so	different
That	if	you	listen	to	the	poet	and	the	scientist
You	will	think	as	if
They	are	talking	about	two	different	realities.
It	is	only	through	meditation
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	one	drops	the	whole	mind
With	all	its	prejudices,	ideologies.
To	stop	the	mind	from	interfering
Is	what	meditation	is	all	about
So	you	can	see	directly.
And	the	moment	you	are	able	to	see	directly
Immediately	you	are	freed,	you	are	liberated
Because	truth	liberates.
To	know	truth	is	to	be	transformed.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005115
ShortTitle:	ISLAND11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Francesco)	--	Your	name:	Swami	Francesco.
It	is	a	beautiful	name;	it	precisely	defines	sannyas:	It	means	living	in	freedom.
The	only	freedom	is	the	freedom	from	the	mind.
All	other	freedoms	are	false.
Political,	economical,	ideological	--
They	are	simply	changing
From	one	prison	into	another.
While	you	are	changing	it	looks	like	freedom
The	newness	of	the	new	prison,	the	novelty	of	it
Gives	you	a	sense	of	freedom	but
Soon	one	realizes	that	one	is	trapped	again.
This	has	been	the	whole	history
Of	human	revolutions.
The	very	few	people	who	have	attained	freedom
Are	those	who	have	attained	by	dropping	the	mind;
Becoming	absolutely	silent	is	freedom.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Living	out	of	that	silence	is	freedom.
(To	Ivan)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Ivan.
Prem	means	love.	Ivan	means	god's	gracious	gift.
Love	is	the	greatest	gift	of	god
But	we	go	on	carrying	it	as	a	potential,
We	never	actualize	it;	the	seed	remains	a	seed.
We	never	help	it	to	grow	into	a	tree
We	never	work	hard	to	bring	it	to	flowering
Hence	the	misery	of	life.
The	blissful	person	is	one
Who	has	bloomed,	blossomed
Whose	love	is	released
Whose	love	has	become	a	fragrance
Who	has	expressed	his	heart
Who	has	sung	his	song.
(To	Anna)	--	Your	name:	Ma	Anna.	Anna	means	prayer.
God	has	no	language
Except	the	language	of	silence,	so	if	you	talk
In	Hebrew	or	in	Arabic	or	in	Sanskrit
You	are	wasting	your	time	--	he	won't	understand.
There	are	three	thousand	languages	on	the	earth
And	scientists	say	there	are	at	least
Fifty	thousand	earths	where	life
Has	evolved	almost	to	the	same	point	as	here.
So	you	can	think	how	many	languages
There	must	be	in	the	whole	universe.
To	talk	to	god	is	stupid.
And	by	prayer	it	has	been	always	thought
That	you	have	to	say	something	--
That	is	absolutely	wrong:	You	have	to	learn
To	be	silent,	in	a	deep	surrender
And	unsaid	thankfulness,	unuttered	love,
That	is	prayer.
Say	it	and	you	have	to	destroy	it
Say	it	and	you	have	to	falsify	it.
Say	it	and	you	have	to	make	it	mundane.
Leave	it	unsaid,	unmanifested
Because	god	is	unmanifest.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	you	can	leave	your	love
For	existence	unmanifest
Then	there	is	immediate	communion
And	that	communion	is	prayer.
To	me,	meditation	and	prayer	are	not	different
They	are	two	names	for	the	same	phenomenon.
Be	silent	--
You	can	call	it	meditation,	you	can	call	it	prayer
But	learn	to	be	silent,
Learn	to	listen	to	existence.
Rather	than	talking	to	god,	listen	to	him!
And	he	is	speaking:
Through	the	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees
And	the	sound	of	running	water
And	the	fragrance	of	flowers
And	the	songs	of	the	birds	--
These	are	all	his	messages.
On	each	leaf	is	his	signature
The	whole	existence	it	his	scripture.
Learn	to	be	silent,	learn	how	to	listen
Thankfully,	gratefully,	in	a	deep	trust	and	love
And	then	you	will	know	what	prayer	is.
It	is	a	very	subtle	phenomenon
It	is	a	flame	in	the	heart,	a	light	in	the	heart
A	radiance	in	the	heart,	a	dance	in	the	heart!
(To	Helga)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Helga
Helga	means	holy.
But	the	word	'holy'
Has	been	misused	by	the	priests	for	centuries.
They	have	made	it	synonymous
With	the	virtuous,	the	pious,	the	religious	--
It	is	not	synonymous	with	those	words.
It	is	a	far	bigger	phenomenon.
Piousness,	religiousness,	virtuousness
Are	simply	few	aspects	of	holiness.
They	are	not	synonymous	with	it
Just	few	fragments	of	it.
Holiness	really	means	wholeness;
A	person	who	is	whole	is	holy.
A	person	who	lives	life	in	its	wholeness	is	holy.
Your	saints	are	not	holy	--	they	may	be	religious
They	may	be	very	virtuous,	they	may	be	pious
But	they	are	not	holy	because
Their	life	is	a	very	paralysed	life
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Crippled	life,	one-dimensional.
They	don't	live	life	in	its	totality.
They	reject	much
They	choose	only	few	parts	of	life	and	they	try
To	remain	confined	to	those	few	parts.
They	are	choosers
And	a	chooser	can	never	be	holy.
To	be	holy	means
To	live	in	a	choiceless	awareness
And	to	live	life	in	all	its	colors
In	all	its	possibilities.
One	has	to	be	a	rainbow,	all	the	seven	colors.
One	has	to	live
All	the	sweetness	and	the	bitterness
The	days	and	the	nights,	the	good	and	the	bad.
A	really	whole	person
Is	as	much	a	saint	as	he	is	a	sinner
Because	he	is	whole!
The	sinner	is	not	whole,	the	saint	is	not	whole
They	are	partial,	they	have	chosen.
They	are	against	each	other:	What	the	saint	has	chosen	The	sinner	has	rejected
What	the	sinner	has	chosen
The	saint	has	rejected
But	the	whole	person	does	not	reject	because
To	reject	anything	is	to	reject	god
Because	god	is	total:	to	really	love	god
One	needs	courage,	the	guts
To	live	life	in	its	wholeness	without	any	choice
And	that's	what	I	teach	here.
My	sannyasin	has	to	be	really	holy
Holy	in	the	sense	of	wholeness.
(To	Heidi)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Heidi.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Heidi	means	nobleness.
Nobleness	arises	out	of	meditation
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	birth.
It	certainly	has	to	do	something	with	a	new	birth
Not	the	ordinary	birth	but	a	birth
That	happens	inside	you	though	meditation.
When	the	mind	dies,	the	ego	dies
And	you	are	born	anew,	egoless
Mindless,	as	pure	consciousness,	then
The	fragrance	of	that	consciousness	is	nobleness;
Then	your	life	has	a	beauty,	a	grace	of	its	own.
It	radiates	peace
It	creates	an	atmosphere	around	it	of	bliss.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	very	presence	of	such	a	person
Brings	a	climate	of	joy.
Wherever	he	goes	spring	follows	him	--
That	is	true	nobleness.
(To	Michael)	--	Your	name:	Swami	Michael.
Michael	means	godly.
Everyone	is	godly
But	very	few	people	are	aware	of	the	fact.
People	are	fast	asleep
And	dreaming	all	kinds	of	things.
In	their	dreams
They	have	become	something	else	than	they	are.
The	dream	is	a	distraction	from	your	nature
The	dream
Always	takes	you	away	from	where	you	are.
Have	you	watched	this	quality	of	the	dream?	--
If	you	are	sleeping	in	a	room
You	never	dream	of	the	same	room	--	never.
I	have	observed	thousands	of	people's	dreams:
They	never	dream	of	the	same	room,	the	same	bed
The	same	woman	they	are	sleeping	with	--	never.
They	may	be	on	the	moon
They	may	be	even	on	the	sun,	but	they	can't
Be	in	the	same	room	where	they	are	sleeping.
They	may	be	with	Sophia	Loren
But	not	with	the	woman	they	are	sleeping	with.
And	they	may	be	elephants,	lions,	centipedes
Anything	--	but	never	the	person	they	are.
That	is	one	of	the	basic	quality	of	a	dream	that
It	takes	you	away	from	where	you	are
It	distracts	you	from	your	nature.
That's	why	very	few	people
Are	aware	of	their	godliness
Otherwise	everyone	is	a	god.
We	come	from	god,	we	are	born	out	of	him
We	are	part	of	him,	we	can't	be	alive	without	him.
He	is	our	life,	he	is	our	breath
He	is	our	heartbeat,	but	we	are	absolutely	unaware.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means
A	tremendous	effort	to	wake	up
So	that	you	can	know	who	you	are.
And	the	day	it	is	known
Your	life	is	transformed.
You	live	in	the	same	world
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	you	are	no	more	the	same
Hence	the	world	is	no	more	the	same.
Right	now	it	is	all	misery	and	a	night	mare
Once	you	are	awake	it	is	paradise
The	very	paradise;	suddenly	you	know
That	Adam	and	Eve	never	left	paradise
They	had	only	fallen	asleep	and	started	dreaming
That	they	had	been	expelled.
It	is	a	dream	that	the	serpent	has	persuaded	Eve
That	'Eat	this	apple.'
Now	how	apple	can	take	you	out	of	paradise?
I	have	been	eating	so	many	apples,	just	to	see
Whether	it	can	drive	me	out	of	paradise.
It	has	not	done	anything	of	that	sort!
After	at	least	thirty	years	of	experimentation
I	can	tell	you:	That	is	all	nonsense!
They	dreamt,	otherwise	serpents	don't	speak.
But	in	dreams	everything	is	possible
Serpents	speak.	It	is	only	a	dream	story.
Adam	and	Eve	are	still	in	paradise	because
There	is	nowhere	else	to	go.
Even	if	god	wants	to	expel,	where	will	he	expel?
The	whole	is	full	of	him,	the	whole	belongs	to	him
There	is	no	other	place.
There	is	no	place	where	he	is	not.
So	everywhere	is	paradise
All	that	is	needed	is	an	awakening
And	that	can	easily	be	done.
Very	small	devices	can	help,	mm?
Just	an	alarm	clock	can	do	it.
All	techniques	of	meditation
Are	nothing	but	alarm	clocks
Simple	devices	to	wake	you	up.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Ten	days	more,	then	I	leave.
--	Try	 to	wake	up!	 (much	 laughter)	And	 if	 you	 cannot	 then	 come	back	 again!
Good!
(To	Eckhard)	--	Your	name:	Swami	Eckhard.
Eckhard	means	courageous	spirit.
That	is	the	only	requirement
For	being	a	sannyasin	--	nothing	else	is	required.
I	don't	ask	you	to	be	virtuous
A	man	of	great	character,	moral,	pious;
I	simply	ask	one	thing:
If	you	are	courageous	enough
Then	everything	is	possible,
Even	the	impossible	is	possible.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Courage	is	the	most	fundamental	religious	value
Although	it	has	never	been	accepted	like	that.
On	the	contrary,	all	the	religions
Have	exploited	man's	cowardice:
They	make	you	afraid
And	once	you	are	trembling	in	fear
You	are	easily	exploitable,	manipulatable.
Then	the	priests
Can	take	you	under	their	protections
And	they	can	say,	'Son,	don't	be	worried	--
We	will	protect	you,	we	will	pray	for	you.
You	just	follow	what	we	say,	you	do	what	we	say
And	we	will	see	that	you	reach	heaven.
If	you	don't	follow	us,
If	you	don't	listen	to	us,	you	will	fall	into	hell.'
And	they	have	depicted	hell	so	colorfully	that
Anybody	will	become	afraid.
And	they	have	described	heaven	so	beautifully
It	creates	greed.
Hell	creates	fear,	heaven	creates	greed.
And	between	these	two	the	whole	humanity
Has	been	reduced	into	a	spiritual	slavery.
My	sannyasin	is	not	a	spiritual	slave
He	is	a	rebel.
Religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	slavery
It	is	pure	rebellion;	hence	I	say
Courageousness	is
The	most	fundamental	quality.
And	we	need	now	courageous	people	in	the	world
So	that	they	can	destroy	all	these	strategies
Which	are	rooted	in	man's	consciousness.
They	have	exploited	humanity	so	long,	it	is	time
That	it	all	should	be	stopped
And	stopped	forever.
(To	Nelly)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	Anand	Nelly.	 Anand	means	 bliss.	 Nelly
means	a	vigilant	spirit.
Bliss	is	a	by-product	of	awareness,	of	vigilance.	Vigilance	is	the	very	essence	of
meditation;	 one	 has	 to	 be	 watchful,	 alert,	 awake.	 The	 watchfulness	 has	 to	 go
slowly	slowly	deeper.	First	be	watchful	of	your	actions,	that	means	watchfulness
of	your	body	--	walking,	sitting,	lying	down,	taking	a	shower.	In	all	the	gestures
of	the	body	you	should	keep	a	little	alertness,	of	what	is	happening,	of	what	you
are	doing.	And	you	will	be	surprised,	as	you	become	watchful	your	actions	take
on	 a	 new	 quality;	 they	 become	 graceful,	 they	 are	 no	more	 hurried.	 They	 start
radiating	 a	 certain	 peace,	 a	 certain	 joy.	 And	 then	 the	 second	 watchfulness	 is
about	the	thoughts,	what	thoughts	are	moving	in	the	mind.	No	effort	to	interfere,
no	need	to	stop,	no	need	to	fight,	just	remain	vigilant	--	that	is	awareness	of	the
mind.	And	if	the	first	becomes	possible,	the	second	is	not	difficult;	but	start	from
the	first.
Many	people	start	from	the	second	and	find	it	very	difficult	--	it	is	natural.	If	you
start	from	the	second	it	will	be	difficult.	One	should	start	from	the	gross	and	then
go	on	to	the	subtle	and	then	to	the	subtlest.	When	you	have	become	capable	of
being	 vigilant	 of	 thoughts,	 you	 will	 be	 surprised,	 they	 are	 disappearing.	 The
more	you	become	aware	 the	 less	 they	are.	When	you	are	perfectly	aware,	 they
simply	evaporate,	a	silence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
prevails.	Bodily	actions	become	graceful	when	you	become	watchful	and	when
you	 become	 watchful	 of	 the	 mind,	 mind	 becomes	 utterly	 non-existential.	 All
turmoil	ceases.	There	is	pure	silence,	a	soundless	silence.
Then	 turn	 to	your	 feelings,	 the	 subtlest;	 your	 emotions,	 your	 sentiments.	Then
become	vigilant	of	them.
These	are	the	three	watchfulnesses	and	if	one	can	become	watchful	of	all	these
three	then	the	fourth	happens	on	its	own	accord	--	that	you	have	not	to	do.	When
you	 succeed	 in	 all	 these	 three,	 the	 fourth	 is	 the	 reward:	 you	become	 aware	 of
your	 being.	 That	 is	 a	 gift	 from	 god,	 that	 is	 self-realization.	 Watching	 your
feelings,	 feelings	will	 also	 disappear.	And	when	 there	 are	 no	 thoughts	 and	 no
feelings	then	you	are	only	body	and	being.	These	two	are	realities:	body	belongs
to	the	earth	and	the	being	belongs	to	the	beyond.
These	are	two	realities,	they	cannot	disappear.	Thoughts	and	feelings	are	just	by-
products,	 epiphenomena;	 they	 are	 not	 realities	 they	 are	 both	 shadows,	 so	 both
disappear.	Body	remains	but	now	it	 is	very	graceful;	being	 resides	 in	 the	body
and	the	body	becomes	the	temple	of	the	being.	Now	you	know	the	body	will	die.
But	you	die	gracefully	and	you	know	also	that	your	being	is	undying	so	there	is
no	fear	left.
Make	your	name	your	sadhana,	your	very	practise,	your	very	spiritual	effort.
(To	Thomas)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Atmanand.
Atmanand	means	self	is	bliss.
Bliss	is	not	something	outside	you
It	is	your	very	nature.
Hence	it	has	not	to	be	achieved
It	has	only	to	be	discovered.
It	is	already	the	case
Just	you	have	to	dig	within	your	own	being.
You	have	to	go	inwards	and	you	will	find	it.
Right	now	it	is	there
Just	a	connection	has	to	be	made
A	bridge	has	be	created.
And	all	the	meditations	are	nothing	but	bridges;
Bridges	between	you	and	your	own	self.
Once	this	is	understood
That	bliss	is	not	somewhere	outside
Your	life	takes	a	radical	change
Your	search	becomes	inner,	otherwise
People	are	running	after	money,	power,	prestige
Hoping	that	by	attaining	these	things
They	will	find	bliss	-	they	will	not	find	anything
They	will	only	find
That	their	whole	life	has	been	a	wastage.
With	the	same	effort	they	would	have	arrived
At	the	very	kingdom	of	god.
(To	Heidi)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Devi.
Devi	means	goddess.
One	has	to	be	reminded
That	one	is	a	god	or	a	goddess.
It	is	only	a	question	of	remembering
It	is	not	something	that	you	have	to	become.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	are	that	from	the	very	beginning
You	have	never	been	otherwise.
The	function	of	the	master	is	to	remind	you
To	help	you	to	be	aware	of	the	fact	that	you	are.
The	master	is	not	to	indoctrinate	you
He	does	not	give	you	creeds	and	dogmas
And	doctrines	and	philosophies.
He	simply	shakes	you,	shocks	you,	so	that
You	can	become	a	little	awake,	alert
And	something	that	you	have	forgotten
Can	be	remembered	again.
It	is	a	forgotten	language
Which	can	be	remembered;	it	is	just	there
But	on	top	of	it	there	is	much	rubbish
Which	has	gathered	in	many	many	lives:
Experiences,	knowledge,	scriptures,	ideologies	--
All	that	rubbish	has	to	be	thrown	out
You	have	to	be	emptied	of	that	rubbish.
Once	that	rubbish	is	thrown	out
Your	innermost	core
Shines	forth	like	a	Kohinoor.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005125
ShortTitle:	ISLAND12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Gertie)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Gertie.
Anand	means	bliss.	Gertie	means	courageous	spirit.
Bliss	is	only	for	the	courageous
The	cowards	live	in	misery;
They	have	to,	because	they	cling	to	misery.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
They	think	misery	clings	to	them	--
That	is	sheer	nonsense.
Misery	has	no	interest	in	anybody	but
They	are	cowardly	people
They	cannot	let	go	of	anything
Even	though	it	is	misery.
They	think,	at	least	it	is	familiar	and	they	are
Afraid	of	the	unfamiliar,	of	the	unknown.
Courage	simply	means	one	thing:
Being	in	love	with	the	unknown.
And	that	is	the	way	of	the	sannyasin:
Always	being	ready	to	go	into	the	unknown
Always	ready	to	leave	the	known	behind.
Then	life	becomes	moment	to	moment	bliss
And	the	bliss	goes	on
Reaching	higher	and	higher	peaks
Because	there	is	no	end	to	the	unknown.
It	is	not	exhaustible
Hence	bliss	is	inexhaustible.
(To	Agnes)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Agnes.
Deva	means	divine.	Agnes	means	gentleness.
Gentleness	is	one	of	the	most	divine	qualities
Because	the	first	requirement	for	being	gentle
It	to	drop	the	ego	--	ego	is	never	gentle.
Ego	is	always	aggressive,	it	cannot	be	gentle.
It	is	never	humble
It	is	impossible	for	it	to	be	humble.
Its	whole	project	crumbles	if	it	becomes	humble.
And	gentle	is	the	way	to	reach	to	god.
One	should	be	more	like	water	than	like	a	rock
And	remember	always:	In	the	long	run
The	water	becomes	victorious	over	the	rock.
One	should	be	feminine	rather	than	masculine.
To	be	feminine	is	to	be	gentle
Hence	even	if	a	man	becomes	gentle
He	starts	having	the	grace	of	a	woman.
And	if	the	woman	becomes	hard,	aggressive
Violent,	then	she	loses	all	gentleness
She	becomes	masculine.
Friedrich	Nietzsche
Has	condemned	Jesus	and	Buddha	as	feminine.
I	don't	condemn	them	but	I	agree	with	him:
They	were	really	so	gentle
That	it	is	absolutely	true	to	call	them	feminine.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	take	it	as	a	compliment,	not	as	a	condemnation.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	gentle.
He	is	not	a	soldier,	he	is	not	a	rock.
He	is	water;	his	way	is	the	watercourse	way.
(To	James)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Samarpan	James.
Samarpan	means	surrender,	total	surrender,	a	state	of	Ultimate	let-go.	And	James
means	god	is	our	protector.
But	only	a	man	of	deep	surrender
Knows	that	god	is	our	protector.
If	you	are	not	surrendered
You	can	never	come	to	know	that	beautiful	truth.
The	unsurrendered	man	tries	to	protect	himself,
Obviously,	there	is	nobody	else	to	protect	him
He	is	alone	and
He	has	to	struggle	and	fight	against	everybody:
Against	nature,	against	society.
His	whole	life	is	a	struggle	to	survive.
Charles	Darwin	says
The	whole	history	of	life	on	the	earth
Is	nothing	but	the	struggle	for	survival
And	the	fittest	survive.
So	you	have	not	only	to	be	fighting	continuously
You	have	to	prove	your	mettle.
You	have	to	be	more	aggressive	than	others
You	have	to	be	more	cunning	than	others
You	have	to	be	more	destructive	than	others,
Only	then	you	can	succeed.
Charles	Darwin	knew	nothing	of	surrender.
He	has	seen	only	the	superficial	history	of	life
He	has	not	looked	into	the	depths.
There	have	been	people
Like	Jesus,	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu
Who	have	lived	without	any	struggle
With	no	idea	to	survive
Who	were	ready	to	die	any	moment
Who	were	so	surrendered	to	the	whole	that
There	was	no	question	to	protect	themselves
Or	to	fight	for	their	protection
Or	even	to	fight	for	their	existence,	yet
They	lived	the	highest	quality	of	life
They	reached	the	ultimate	pinnacle	of	joy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Bertrand	Russell	says
There	are	three	struggles	in	life.
One	is	with	nature;	science	arises	out	of	it.
Another	is	with	society;
Sociology,	morality,	ethics,	these	arise	out	of	it.
And	the	third	is
The	struggle	of	man	with	his	own	instincts;
Out	of	that	struggle	religion	arises.
Now	he	has	explained	everything
With	a	single	idea	of	struggle.
These	is	no	need	for	any	concept,	for	any
Hypothesis	for	surrender	in	his	vision	of	life
But	his	vision	of	life	is	not	of	much	depth.
It	is	the	same:	It	is	really	nothing	but
A	reinterpretation	of	the	Darwinian	hypothesis.
Bertrand	Russell	also	lived
Without	knowing	anything	of	meditation.
Meditation's	whole	secret	is	surrender,	trust
And	then	a	totally	different	dimension	opens	up.
Suddenly	you	know	god	protects	you
You	are	safe,	you	have	always	been	safe
You	were	unnecessarily	struggling.
There	was	no	need	to	struggle
You	were	simply	wasting	your	energy.
You	would	have	rejoiced	with	the	same	energy.
You	would	have	danced	with	the	same	energy.
Your	life	would	have	been
A	beautiful	flowering	and	a	fragrance
With	the	same	energy
That	you	wasted	in	fighting,	all	kinds	of	fights.
(To	Detlef)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Veet	Detlef.
Veet	means	go	beyond,	transcend,	surpass.	Detlef
Means	the	son	of	the	people.
Sannyas	is	a	rebellion:
Rebellion	against	the	mass	psychology
Rebellion	against	conventions,	traditions
Rebellion	against	all	that	is	old	and	rotten,
And	the	people	represent	the	old,	the	rotten.
They	live	by	it,	that	is	their	way	of	life.
They	live	in	superstitions
All	kinds	of	superstitions.
They	call	those	superstitions	religions:
They	may	be	Christians,	Hindus,
Mohammedans,	Jews	--	it	makes	no	difference.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	different	traditions,	different	superstitions
But	superstitions	all	the	same.
Different	traditions
But	traditionalism	is	the	same.
Different	conventions
But	the	mind	of	a	conventionalist	is	the	same.
They	are	all	conformists
They	cling	to	the	status	quo,	the	established.
They	are	not	courageous	enough	to	be	individuals.
So	from	this	moment
You	are	no	more	son	of	the	people	but	son	of	god.
Enough	is	enough	--	be	finished	with	the	people!
Get	out	of	the	crowd	and	start	living	on	your	own
According	to	your	own	light.
It	is	going	into	danger
It	is	going	into	insecurity
But	tremendous	is	the	joy	of	danger
And	great	is	the	adventure	of	insecurity.
Only	those	few	fortunate	ones	grow
Who	dare	to	drop	out	of	the	crowd.
Jesus,	Buddha,	Zarathustra
These	are	all	dropouts
Otherwise	Jews	are	not	so	bad	people:
They	would	not	have	crucified	Jesus.
He	must	have	become	really	dangerous:
Dangerous	to	the	very	structure	of	the	society
Dangerous	to	all	the	values	that
The	rabbis	have	lived	for	centuries.
If	they	decided	to	kill	Jesus,	he	must	have
Provided	all	kinds	of	reasons	for	them.
Ordinarily	they	are	not	that	bad	people
Because	before	Jesus
They	have	not	done	anything	like	that
And	since	Jesus	also
They	have	not	done	anything	like	that.
Jesus	just	have	travelled	really
Towards	individuality,	total	freedom.
I	call	Jesus	a	real	sannyasin.
And	so	is	the	case	with	Buddha
And	Zarathustra	and	Lao	Tzu,	all	the	great	ones
They	have	not	followed	the	masses.
To	follow	the	mass,	to	follow	the	crowd
Is	to	remain	stupid,	is	to	remain	adjusted	to
The	lowest	intelligence
The	lowest	strata	of	the	society.
If	you	really	want	to	be	a	peak	of	intelligence
You	have	to	be	all	alone.
So	from	this	moment	drop	that	idea
Of	being	a	song	of	the	people
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Transcend	that	very	idea.
(To	Diane)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Swargo.
Swargo	means	paradise.
We	have	never	lost	paradise
We	are	still	in	paradise	because
There	is	nowhere	else	to	go;
Just	we	have	fallen	asleep	and	we	have	started
Dreaming	thousands	of	other	things	--
They	are	all	dreams.
Somebody	is	dreaming	he	is	a	tiger
And	somebody	is	dreaming	he	is	a	dog
And	somebody	is	dreaming	he	is	a	man
And	somebody	is	dreaming	something	else
But	these	are	all	dreams.
The	moment	you	wake	up
You	are	nothing	but	a	drop	of	god.
And	a	drop	of	god
Is	as	much	godly	as	the	whole	of	god.
If	you	can	understand	a	single	dewdrop
You	have	understood	all	the	oceans
Because	it	contains	the	whole	secret.
If	you	can	understand	the	formula	H20
And	that	formula	contains	all	the	oceans,
Not	only	of	this	earth;	wherever	water	exists
That	formula	contains	in	miniature
The	whole	of	god.
But	that	awareness	comes	only	through
A	constant	persistent	effort	for	awakening.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
It	is	not	learning	a	new	philosophy
It	is	learning	a	new	way	of	being	conscious.
All	that	we	know	up	to	now
Is	only	ways	of	how	to	fall	asleep
How	to	remain	asleep
How	to	make	your	sleep	more	comfortable
That's	all.
Our	education,	our	society,	they	all	teach	us
How	to	remain	comfortably	asleep.
The	more	comfortably	asleep	you	are
The	more	in	a	coma	you	are.
To	be	in	contact	with	a	master	means
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	disturbance.
Ouspensky	has	dedicated	one	of	his	books
To	George	Gurdjieff,	his	master.
In	his	dedication	he	says
'To	Georges	Gurdjieff,	my	master
The	disturber	of	my	sleep	and	dreams.'
A	master	has,	out	of	necessity
To	disturb	your	dreams	and	your	sleep.
So	only	very	few,	chosen	few,	who	have	guts
Can	remain	with	the	master
Otherwise	others	escape.
Those	who	are	seeking	consolation
This	is	not	the	place	for	them.
Those	who	are	seeking	awakening
Then	this	is	the	place	for	them.
This	may	be	the	only	place	right	now
Upon	the	whole	earth
Where	awakening	is	possible.
Consolation	is	available	anywhere
Thousands	of	people	are	offering	consolation.
So	let	that	decision
Take	a	deep	root	in	your	heart:
That	this	is	a	decision	to	wake	up
And	whatsoever	the	risk	and	whatsoever	the	cost.
Once	you	have	become	absolutely	decisive
It	is	not	difficult,	but	all	depends	on	you.
I	can	help,	I	can	show	the	way
But	you	have	to	follow	it.
The	Buddhas	can	only	show	the	way.
(To	Joe)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anutoshen.
Anutoshen	means	deep,	deep	contentment.
A	sannyasin	has	to	learn
A	very	paradoxical	thing:
He	has	to	be	utterly	discontented
With	the	outside	life:	With	the	society
With	the	state,	with	the	church
With	all	that	is	established
And	he	has	to	be	at	the	same	time,
Utterly	contented	with	himself.
If	you	are	discontented	with	the	outside
And	contented	with	yourself
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	revolution	starts	happening.
People	are	living	just	the	other	way	round:
They	are	contented	with	the	society
With	the	established	values,
They	are	discontent	with	themselves;
Continuously	condemning	themselves
Continuously	devaluating	themselves.
It	has	to	be	changed.
Love	yourself,	respect	yourself.
Unless	you	love	and	respect	yourself
You	cannot	enquire	withinwards
You	cannot	penetrate	the	inner	mystery.
The	doors	open	only
For	those	who	are	in	deep	love	with	themselves.
And	you	can	move	in	your	interiority	only	if	you
Have	become	utterly	frustrated	with	the	outside.
If	some	hope	is	still	there
You	will	linger	upon;	you	will	say,
'Let	us	try	this,	let	us	try	that.
Maybe	something	still	can	happen;	I	may	still
Get	some	joy,	some	bliss	from	the	outside.'
Be	utterly	hopeless	about	the	outside.
There	is	no	hope.
When	you	have
Completely	become	hopeless	about	the	outside	then
The	energy	starts	turning	in	on	its	own	accord,
There	is	nowhere	else	to	go!
You	are	no	more	interested
In	money,	power,	prestige
Then	your	whole	energy	turns	in
And	that	turning	in	is	sannyas
That	turning	in	is	meditation.
And	once	you	have	tasted	your	own	being
Then	life	is	a	sheer	joy,	an	utter	beauty
A	tremendous	benediction.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005135
ShortTitle:	ISLAND13
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Anna)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Anna.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Anna	means	prayer.
It	has	been	the	ancient	idea	that
Meditation	and	prayer	are	totally	different,
Not	only	different	but	polar	opposites.
Hence	in	the	past	religions	became	divided.
There	were	two	kinds	of	religions.
One,	those	who	belong	to	prayer	--
Christianity,	Judaism,	Mohammedanism,	Hinduism;
And	the	other	category	was
The	religions	that	belonged	to	meditation	--
Taoism,	Buddhism,	Jainism.
But	in	my	vision	the	very	division	is	wrong.
Meditation	itself
Is	the	essential	core	of	prayer.
There	is	no	prayer	without	meditation
And	there	is	no	meditation
Without	a	prayerful	heart;	they	are	indivisible.
To	divide	them	is	to	kill	both	of	them.
It	is	like	cutting	a	man	into	two	parts,
The	left	and	the	right:	The	man	will	be	dead!
You	can	keep	the	parts
But	the	parts	will	not	be	alive.
Life	is	possible	only	with	the	whole
Only	the	whole	is	alive,	never	the	parts.
The	parts	are	also	alive
When	they	function	in	the	whole.
Take	them	out	of	the	whole
And	they	lose	all	meaning.
Meditation	is	beautiful,	prayer	is	beautiful
But	in	a	deep	togetherness.
Meditation	means	getting	beyond	the	mind
And	that's	exactly	what	prayer	means.
Their	ways	are	a	little	bit	different
But	they	enter	into	the	same	temple
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
From	different	doors.
The	doors	are	not	so	relevant.
Prayer	also	gets	beyond	the	mind
By	entering	into	the	heart.
Its	emphasis	is	on	the	heart.
Meditation	also	gets	beyond	mind	but
Its	emphasis	is	on	getting	beyond	the	mind.
The	ultimate	result	is	the	same:
Both	bring	to	you	a	profound	silence
A	wordless	state	of	consciousness.
Only	in	that	state	of	silence
One	can	encounter	reality
Because	one's	vision	becomes	absolutely	clear,
There	is	nothing	to	debar,	nothing	to	obstruct.
So	I	am	giving	you	a	name	which	means
Meditative	prayer	or	prayerful	meditation.
My	sannyasins	have	to	become
The	ultimate	syntheses.
The	future	needs	a	religion
Which	is	not	divided	on	any	point;
A	kind	of	universal	religiousness,
And	this	will	become	the	very	cornerstone.
(To	Dennis)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Dennis.
I	am	giving	you	a	very	paradoxical	name
Because	reality	is	paradoxical;
It	contains	all	the	polar	opposites	in	it.
Seen	in	the	right	perspective
They	are	not	thought	to	be	as	opposites,
They	start	looking	as	complementaries.
Hence	the	paradox
Is	only	from	the	lower	world	of	thinking.
When	you	reach	yourself
To	the	peak	of	no-thought,	there	is	no	paradox;
You	suddenly	see	the	unity	of	all	the	opposites.
In	the	ultimate
The	day	and	night	meet	and	merge
Life	and	death	meet	and	merge
Summer	and	winter	meet	and	merge	--
There	is	no	difference.
Meditation	means	awareness
Watchfulness,	vigilance.
And	Dennis	represents	the	god	of	wine;
It	means	drunkenness.
If	you	think	about	them	they	are	opposites:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Either	you	can	be	drunk	or	you	can	be	aware
If	you	are	aware	you	cannot	be	drunk
But	this	is	from	the	lower	world	of	thought.
From	the	ultimate,	looked	from	the	high	above
The	meditator	is	the	real	drunkard:
He	is	drunk	with	the	divine,
He	is	drunk	and	aware	at	the	same	time
Simultaneously	--	that	is	one	of	the	most
Incredible	experiences	of	life,
To	be	both	together.
It	is	very	difficult
To	understand	it	intellectually
Because	intellectually	they	are	opposites.
Intellect	cannot	conceive
That	they	can	happen	together
But	that	is	intellect's	limitation.
When	physicists	for	the	first	time	discovered
That	the	ultimate	particle,	electron
Which	is	the	constituent	of	all	matter,
Behaves	very	paradoxically
They	were	at	a	loss	--	to	describe	it:
It	behaves	as	a	particle
And	also	as	a	wave	--	simultaneously.
It	was	impossible
For	the	scientists	to	describe	it.
Either	something	can	be	a	particle	--
A	particle	means	simply	a	dot,
It	can't	be	a	line,	simultaneously.
A	line	means	many	dots
A	single	dot	is	not	a	line.	A	wave	is	a	line.
For	many	years	there	was	a	great	controversy
How	to	describe	it
Because	it	does	not	fit	in	the	ordinary	logic.
Then	they	have	to	listen	to	reality.
What	can	they	do?
If	reality	is	behaving	in	that	mad	way
We	have	to	describe	it	the	way	it	is	behaving
We	have	to	put	our	logic	aside;
Our	logic	can't	be	that	important.
They	tried	in	every	possible	way
To	make	some	logical	statement
But	is	was	impossible.
Finally	they	decided,	that	it	is	both	together.
Since	that	day,	physics	has	become	metaphysics.
Since	that	day
Physicists	have	started	talking	like	mystics,
They	had	to.	And	now	no	great	physicist	can	say
That	mystics	are	paradoxical;
Now	they	know	themselves	that
You	cannot	avoid	paradox
When	you	encounter	reality.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	physicists
Have	encountered	reality	in	an	objective	way
The	mystics
Have	encountered	reality	in	a	subjective	way.
The	physicist	has	gone	into	the	object
Deep	to	the	ultimate	core
And	the	mystic	has	gone	into	consciousness
Deep	into	the	ultimate	core
And	both	have	come	the	same	conclusion:
That	it	is	paradoxical.
So	your	name	will	mean	alert	drunkenness.
Now	it	is	up	to	you
To	figure	it	out	what	is	means!
It	may	take	your	whole	life	to	find	out!
But	if	you	can	find	it	out
You	would	have	discovered	something
Of	immense	value.
(To	Margret)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Dwaro.
Anand	means	bliss.	Dwaro	means	a	door.
Bliss	is	the	door	to	the	divine.
It	is	only	through	bliss	what	we	can
Create	a	bridge,	between	us	and	the	ultimate.
Never	try	to	approach	god	through	misery	--
And	that's	how	people	try:
They	go	on	crying	and	weeping	in	deep	anguish,
They	remember	god	only
When	they	are	in	utter	misery.
Whenever	life	is	going	good,	who	cares	about	god?
But	those	are	the	real	moments	to	remember	god
When	life	is	going	good.
Almost	everybody	thinks	once	in	a	while
Of	religion,	meditation,	prayer,	god,
But	almost	at	the	wrong	time:
When	you	are	in	some	misery.
A	beloved	has	died	-	then	you	remember
But	not	while	making	love
And	the	right	moment	is	while	making	love.
But	that	is	the	time
We	don't	bother	at	all	about	god.
Even	if	he	knocks	on	the	door,	we	won't	open;
We	will	tell	him,	'Wait!	Don't	disturb!
Leave	us	alone,	Don't	you	have	any	sense?
Is	this	the	time	to	disturb,	to	interfere?'
But	those	are	the	moments
When	you	are	enjoying,	flowing,	flowering
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	you	are	in	a	dance	--	right	moments
When	just	a	little	bit	of	remembering
And	the	door	can	be	open	unto	you.
Jesus	is	right;	he	says,
'Knock	and	the	door	shall	be	opened	unto	you.'
But	he	has	forgotten	one	thing	that
Don't	knock	at	the	wrong	times.
Knock	at	the	right	time.
He	says,	'Ask	and	it	shall	be	given	to	you.'
He	is	perfectly	right	but
This	is	a	half	statement.
The	other,	far	more	important	half	is	missing:
Never	ask	at	the	wrong	time.
And	the	right	time	to	ask	is
When	there	is	nothing	to	ask	but	only	to	thank.
In	fact	god	functions	almost	like	banks:
If	you	need	money,	they	won't	give	it	to	you
If	you	don't	need,	they	will	chase	you!
So	whenever	you	ask	something
You	desire	something,	god	escapes	immediately!
He	is	the	oldest,	ancientmost	Jewish	banker!
When	you	don't	need	ANYthing
When	your	life	is	fulfilled	and	contented
Just	remember	him
And	he	is	just	standing	by	your	side
Ready	to	shower	everything	upon	you.
This	is	one	of	the	fundamental	laws	of	life:
It	is	not	for	beggars,	it	is	for	emperors.
My	sannyasins
Have	to	learn	the	way	of	the	emperors.
(To	 Gottfried)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Anand	 Chaitanyo.	 Anand	 means
bliss.	Chaitanyo	means	consciousness.
Remember	these	two	words	--	they	are	key	words:
Be	blissful	and	be	conscious
Be	blissfully	conscious,	be	consciously	blissful
And	then	you	need	not	bother	about	anything	else.
The	whole	of	religion
Is	contained	in	these	two	simple	words.
No	need	to	believe	in	any	god
No	need	to	believe	is	any	afterlife
No	need	to	believe	in	any	heaven	or	hell,
In	fact,	no	need	to	believe	at	all.
If	you	can	follow	these	two	words	in	your	life
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	they	can	become	a	climate	around	you
If	you	can	imbibe	them	as	a	style	of	your	life
Then	all	else	will	follow	on	its	own	accord.
(To	Gudrun)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Sonyo
Prem	means	love.	Sonyo	means	gold.
Love	is	the	most	precious	thing	in	life.
Love	as	much	as	you	can,
Don't	be	a	miser	in	loving.
People	are	miserly;
They	want	everybody	else	to	love	them
But	they	don't	give	anything.
This	is	the	misery	of	the	whole	world.]
This	world	can	OVERflow	with	love
But	the	problem	is:	everybody	wants	to	grab
And	nobody	is	ready	to	give;
Hence	people	start	starving.
And	this	is	a	far	greater	starvation.
Just	as	the	body	needs	nourishment
Your	soul	also	needs	nourishment;
Love	is	your	soul's	nourishment.
But	for	thousands	of	years
We	have	been	conditioned	against	love.
And	everybody	goes	on	hoarding,	as	if
If	you	can	give	love,	you	will	be	losing	something	--
That	is	not	the	economics	of	love.
If	you	give	you	will	have	more.
It	is	an	inexhaustible	source
You	cannot	exhaust	it.	You	can	go	on	giving
You	will	never	be	empty	of	it.
If	everyone	starts	giving	love
instead	of	talking	about	love
This	very	earth	can	become	a	paradise.
One	old	man	went	to	the	doctor.
He	was	looking	very	fragile,	very	weak.
The	doctor	examined	him,	a	thorough	examination	--
Must	have	been	a	German	hospital
Because	in	India	you	cannot	find
Anything	like	'thorough	examination'!
German	doctors	really	go	to	the	very	roots.
Even	he	had	not	said	what	he	was	suffering	from,
The	doctor	immediately	told	him,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
'Undress,'	so	he	undressed.
He	examined	his	whole	body	and	then	said,
'But	I	don't	see	anything	wrong.'
The	man	started	giggling	and	he	said,
'But	my	teeth	are	aching!'
The	doctor	said,	'Why	didn't	you	say	it	before?'
And	the	man	said,	'I	thought	you	were	going
To	the	very	root	of	the	problem.'
But	the	doctor	said,	'It	is	good.
I	have	looked	at	your	body.
Teeth	will	be	taken	care	of
But	one	thing	more	I	have	to	suggest	to	you
That	you	cut	your	sex	life	to	half
Because	you	are	old	and	you	are	weak
And	if	you	don't	cut	your	sex	life	to	half
You	will	die	soon.'
The	man	said,	'Okay,	but	which	half?	--
Thinking	about	it	or	talking	about	it?'
But	that's	how	people's	love	life	is:
Thinking	about	it	and	talking	about	it.
That	is	their	whole	love	life.
Nobody	is	really	sharing,	giving.
My	sannyasins	have	to	love	to	give,	share,
And	share	with	the	whole	existence.
Not	only	with	human	beings	--
With	trees,	with	rocks,	with	the	stars
With	the	moon,	with	the	sun.
Be	in	a	loving	state	constantly
In	a	deep	love	affair	with	existence.
That	is	prayer,	that	is	meditation
And	that	will	transform	you,
That	will	bring	a	totally	new	being	in	you:
You	will	be	reborn	through	it.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005145
ShortTitle:	ISLAND14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Shakuntala)	--	Your	name:	Ma	Shakuntala	Bharti.
Remember	only	one	thing	because
I	have	reduced	sannyas	to	its	bare	minimum	--
And	that	is	meditation.
Everything	else	is	peripheral.
Everything	else	can	be	dropped
But	meditation	cannot	be	dropped.
That	is	the	only	essential	thing
Which	no	religion	can	dare	to	drop.
There	are	religions	which	believe	in	god
There	are	religions	which	don't	believe	in	god;
Even	the	concept	of	god
Is	not	very	essential	for	a	religion.
There	are	religions	who	believe	in	many	lives
And	there	are	religions
Who	believe	only	in	one	life;
Even	that	is	not	essential.
Those	are	all	hypothetical	things.
But	there	in	so	religion	possible
Which	can	drop	meditation
Which	can	be	non-meditative.
All	the	religions	meet	on	one	point	only
And	that	is	meditation.
Whether	they	call	it	prayer	or	meditation
It	doesn't	matter.
Those	are	different	names	for	the	same	state,
A	state	of	inner	silence.
And	the	miracle	is:
Ordinarily	your	inner	world
Is	full	of	thoughts,	desires,	dreams;
When	all	these	have	been	dropped
Through	being	aware	of	the	whole	process	of	mind;
Nobody	can	drop	them	by	any	act,
They	drop	on	their	own	accord
If	you	are	simply	watching	them
With	no	effort	to	drop	them.
Just	by	watching	a	distance	is	created.
Slowly	slowly
The	watcher	becomes	different	from	the	watched
And	the	moment	the	distance	is	absolute	clear
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	watcher	disappears,	it	becomes	disconnected.
It	becomes	uprooted	from	your	being.
This	moment	it	the	moment	of	radical	change:
Here	thoughts,	desires,	the	whole	mind	disappears
And	suddenly	a	new	being	explodes	in	you.
That	being	can	only	be	called	love.
The	word	that	comes	closest	is	'love'.
A	man	who	has	no	mind	to	cling	to
Becomes	full	of	love.
Meditation	helps
To	get	rid	of	the	mind,	on	the	one	hand,
And	on	the	other	hand
It	helps	you	to	become	receptive
For	the	energy	called	love;
It	descends	from	the	beyond.
It	is	alight,	eternal	light	and	delight	too.
And	the	moment	one	knows	what	love	is
One	has	tasted	eternity,	on	has	tasted	god!
Jesus	is	perfectly	right	when	he	says,
God	is	love.	He	is	talking	about
This	innermost	experience	of	meditation.
So	my	sannyas	has	no	other	peripheral	hypothesis.
Nothing	has	to	be	believed	in
No	rituals	to	be	performed
But	a	constant	watchfulness.
And	whenever	you	have	time
Then	sit	silently,	just	looking	at	your	own	mind.
Let	your	mind	be	the	screen	on	which
Pictures	move	and	you	are	just	a	witness	--
Don't	forget	the	witness,	go	on	remembering	that
'I	am	only	a	witness.'
This	simple	process
Can	do	the	greatest	miracle	on	the	earth	because
It	brings	buddhahood,	it	brings	enlightenment
It	brings	awakening.
(To	Yves)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Yves.
Anand	means	bliss,	blissfulness.	Yves	means	a	beloved	disciple.
Bliss	is	possible	only	if	you	become	a	disciple.
The	process	of	becoming	a	disciple
Is	the	process	of	renouncing	the	ego.
Ego	is	the	cause	of	all	misery.
Once	ego	is	surrendered	there	is	nothing
To	prevent	you	from	becoming	blissful.
The	master-disciple	relationship
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Is	only	a	device,	a	strategy
To	help	the	disciple	to	drop	the	ego.
It	is	very	difficult
To	drop	it	by	yourself,	all	alone.
It	is	possible,	it	is	not	impossible.
Once	in	a	while	it	has	happened
But	those	are	exceptions
And	exceptions	only	prove	the	rule.
The	rule	is	that	you	will	need	a	certain	device
To	support	you,	to	help	you	because
To	drop	the	ego	means
To	become	so	vulnerable,	so	insecure,	so	open
That	one	becomes	frightened,	one	again	closes	up
One	again	clings	to	the	ego	because
You	don't	know	anything	else	except	the	ego.
Dropping	the	ego	is	like	death.
It	is	possible	only
In	a	deep	love	affair	with	a	master
That	slowly	slowly	you	can	gather	courage.
As	you	trust	in	the	master	grows
It	becomes	possible	for	you	to	risk.
And	the	moment	you	are	ready	to	risk	the	ego
Bliss	starts	flowing	from	every	nook
And	corner	of	existence	towards	you.
It	is	the	rock	of	ego
That	prevents	bliss	from	reaching	to	you
To	be	a	disciple	is	the	whole	science	of	religion
Because	through	being	a	disciple
The	ultimate	bliss	opens	its	mysteries	to	you.
In	fact,	except	your	ego
There	is	no	other	problem	in	the	world.
All	other	problems	are	by-products	of	the	ego.
You	have	a	beautiful	name
Now	this	name	has	to	be	made	a	reality.
Sannyas	is	a	first	step	towards	that	realization.
(To	Nasser)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Nasser.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Nasser	means	victorious.
It	is	one	of	the	qualities	of	god
Described	in	Koran.
Koran	describes	ninety-nine	qualities	of	god.
One	of	them	is	nasser,	the	victorious.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
We	can't	be	victorious.
If	we	allow	god	to	pass	through	us
Then	the	victory	is	ours,
We	can't	be	victorious	on	our	own.
On	our	own	we	are	going	to	be	defeated
On	our	own	there	is	no	hope.
We	are	so	tiny,	like	dewdrops,
Dewdrop	on	a	leaf	of	grass	--
That's	how	Mahavira	used	to	describe	man's	life.
A	little	breeze	and	the	dewdrop	is	gone
Or	the	sun	rises	and	the	dewdrop	evaporates.
We	are	very	small:
Unless	we	drop	ourselves	in	the	ocean	of	god
Unless	we	become	oceanic,	we	can't	be	victorious.
We	can't	be	victorious	as	ourselves
We	can	be	victorious	only	through	god.
And	that's	what	meditation	is:
It	is	allowing	god	to	pass	through	you
Not	preventing	him.	Removing	all	the	barriers,
Barriers	of	thoughts,	desires
Memories,	imagination;	removing	all	 the	barriers	So	you	can	simply	become	a
pure	passage
And	god	can	flow	though	you.
Then	your	life	will	have	the	taste	of	victory
Of	tremendous	joy,	of	bliss,	of	benediction.
(To	Peter)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Nirmal.
Nirmal	means	pure.
Man's	consciousness	is	eternally	pure
But	it	becomes	covered	with	many	layers	of	dust;
Like	a	mirror.
Although	the	mirror	remains	pure
The	dust	cannot	destroy	the	mirror
But	the	dust	can	destroy	one	thing:
It	can	hide	the	quality	of	the	mirror
The	quality	of	reflecting	reality.
The	mirror	remains	the	same
No	change	in	the	mirror	happens
Through	the	layer	of	dust
But	is	no	more	functioning
It	becomes	non-functional;	it	cannot	reflect.
The	sun	rises	but	not	for	it
The	night	becomes	full	of	stars	but	not	for	it
The	rose	opens	but	not	for	it
The	lake	reflects	the	moon	but	not	for	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	there	but	a	layer	of	dust
Is	preventing	its	qualities	to	function.
That's	our	situation:	Our	consciousness	is	pure
But	our	mind	is	a	layer	of	dust	and	nothing	else.
Sannyas	means	becoming	aware	of	this	fact
And	putting	the	mind	aside.
Use	it	when	it	is	needed;	it	has	its	utility
It	is	a	good	machine,	it	is	a	biocomputer
It	has	all	the	memories,	all	the	information	--
So	whenever	you	need	it,	use	it.
But	there	is	no	need	to	allow	it
To	cover	you	for	twenty-four	hours
Day	in,	day	out,	year	in,	year	out.
It	should	be	put	aside	when	it	is	not	being	used
And	the	consciousness	should	be	allowed
To	reflect	reality	--	then	god	is	everywhere.
Once	your	consciousness	reflects	that	which	is
You	know.	God	need	no	proof.
Only	god	is	and	nothing	else	is
Every	form	is	a	manifestation	of	god.
And	to	know	it,	is	to	rejoice	because	that	means
There	is	no	death,	no	misery,	no	darkness.
One	has	arrived	home!
(To	Paolo)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Nirdosh.
Nirdosh	means	innocent,	innocent	like	a	child.
Man	has	to	become	a	child	again
Only	then	he	is	really	aware
Of	the	beauty	of	existence
Of	the	wonder	of	existence.
That	very	awe	is	the	beginning	of	religion.
But	it	happens
And	it	is	bound	to	happen,	it	cannot	be	avoided,
It	is	almost	a	necessary	evil	that
Every	child	will	have	to	lose	his	innocence
Because	he	will	have	to	be	educated
He	will	have	to	be	taught	certain	languages,
Science,	geography,	mathematics
Certain	essential	subjects.
He	will	have	to	be	an	expert	in	a	certain	branch,
A	doctor,	an	engineer,	a	scientist.
Life's	requirements	are	such:
He	cannot	be	left	alone.
And	all	this	education	takes	away	his	innocence;
He	becomes	knowledgeable
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
He	becomes	full	of	information
And	he	forgets	the	joy	of	wonder
Because	now	he	thinks	he	knows
So	what	is	the	point	of	wonder?
He	forgets	the	immense	dimension	of	awe.
Nothing	surprises	him	--
That	is	a	kind	of	spiritual	death.
He	becomes	very	useful	for	the	world
He	become	clever,	cunning,	he	becomes	powerful
Because	he	has	a	certain	utility	in	the	world.
He	becomes	a	commodity	in	the	marketplace,
He	is	purchasable,	sellable.
The	greater	his	knowledge,	the	more	is	his	price,
But	something	of	great	value	is	lost	--
That	has	to	be	regained.
Sannyas	is	nothing	but
An	effort	to	regain	the	paradise	lost.
It	is	a	conscious	effort	to	put	aside	knowledge
So	that	you	can	again	look	like	a	child:
Innocent,	with	the	same	eyes	of	wonder.
The	day	it	happens	you	are	transformed
Your	life	starts	having	a	dance
Your	heart	starts	singing	again,
A	forgotten	language	is	remembered
Again	everything	is	full	of	surprise.
The	whole	existence	is	full	of	wonder
Everything	is	mysterious,	miraculous.
This	whole	mystery	and	miracle
Is	condensed	in	a	single	name,	god.
God	is	not	a	person
But	this	whole	experience	of	mystery
This	unending	pilgrimage	from	one	peak	of	wonder
To	another	higher	peak	of	wonder
From	one	awe	into	another	awe,
This	is	what	god	is	all	about.
Jesus	says,	'Unless	you	are	reborn	again
You	will	not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of	god.'
That's	exactly	what	he	means:
Be	innocent	like	a	child.
That	is	going	to	be
The	work	for	you	to	do	upon	yourself.
(To	Doris)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Sindhu.
Anand	means	bliss;	Sindhu	means	ocean	--	an	ocean	of	bliss.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Our	body	is	small,	out	mind	is	small
But	our	being	is	vast	--	as	vast	as	the	ocean;
In	fact,	vaster	than	any	ocean	because
Even	the	greatest	ocean	has	its	limits
But	our	being	has	no	limits,	it	is	infinite.
It	has	three	qualities.
The	first	quality	is	truth.
When	you	experience	your	being
For	the	first	time	you	taste	something	of	truth.
Before	that
You	had	known	only	theories	about	truth.
It	was	like	a	man	who	has	known	much	about	food
But	has	no	experience	of	eating	anything	at	all.
It	is	like	a	man
Who	understands	everything	about	water
And	is	thirsty:	He	knows	the	formula,	H2O
But	that	formula	is	not	going	to	quench	his	thirst.
He	understands	intellectually	what	water	is,
Of	what	it	is	constituted
But	he	has	never	seen	water
He	has	never	drank	water
He	has	never	tasted	the	coolness,	the	contentment
That	comes	when	your	thirst	is	quenched.
Truth	we	have	not	known
We	have	only	heard	many	theories	about	it.
Those	are	all	hypotheses.
When	you	enter	your	being
Beyond	the	body,	beyond	the	mind
The	first	taste	is	of	truth
And	the	second	taste	is	of	consciousness.
Otherwise	consciousness	is	only	a	word.
People	are	fast	asleep,
They	don't	know	what	consciousness	is.
They	are	not	conscious	at	all,
They	are	like	robots,	functioning	like	machines.
And	the	ultimate,	the	third	thing
Is	bliss,	anand	--	that	is	the	peak.
As	you	go	deeper	into	yourself
First	you	encounter	truth
Then	you	encounter	consciousness
And	at	the	very	core	of	it,	you	encounter	bliss.
The	way	to	this	bliss	is
To	this	oceanic	bliss	is
Becoming	unidentified	with	the	body-mind	complex.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
One	has	to	remember	constantly	that
'I	am	not	the	body,'	that	'I	am	not	the	mind,'
That	'I	am	the	watcher,	the	witness.'
Slowly	slowly	it	becomes	so	natural
That	you	need	not	remember	it,
It	is	simply	there,	an	undercurrent;
Even	in	your	sleep	you	know	that,
'I	am	not	the	body,	I	am	not	the	mind,
I	am	the	witness.'
Even	in	your	dreaming	you	know
'I	am	the	witness	of	the	dreams.'
When	this	witness	has	deepened	so	greatly
You	are	on	the	verge	of	a	breakthrough.
Then	any	moment	all	boundaries	disappear
And	suddenly	you	are	unbounded,	infinite.
That's	the	goal	of	sannyas
That's	the	goal	of	all	religion	as	such:
To	become	infinite.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005155
ShortTitle:	ISLAND15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Valeria)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Valeria.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Valeria	means	determined	resolution.
Meditation	needs	a	very	determined	heart.
The	wavering	mind
Is	incapable	of	going	into	meditation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	needs	an	unwavering	perseverance
Because	it	takes	time.
For	so	many	lives	we	have	lived	non-meditatively
That	is	has	become	almost	our	nature.
That	non-meditativeness	surround	us	like	a	rock
And	it	has	to	be	broken.
And	unless	we	break	the	rock
Our	inner	nature	will	never	manifest	itself.
So	if	one	meditates	one	day
And	hopes	to	attain	something	and	finds
That	nothing	has	been	achieved	and	drops	the	idea
Then	he	will	never	be	able	to	go
Into	the	world	of	meditation.
It	needs	an	absolute	commitment	that
Whatsoever	happens,	irrespective	of	any	results
I	am	determined	to	go	into	it	and
I	am	ready	to	wait	and	I	am	ready	to	risk	all.
The	deeper	the	resolution
Greater	the	determination
Easier	becomes	the	process.
If	the	determination	is	total
And	the	intensity	is	absolute
It	can	even	happen	in	a	single	moment.
It	all	depends	on	your	intensity:
A	passionate	love	affair	it	has	to	be.
One	cannot	just	play	around	with	the	idea	of	it.
It	has	to	become	one's	life.
And	it	is	worth	risking	all	because
There	is	nothing	more	precious	than	it.
It	opens	the	door	to	the	divine	treasures
To	the	eternal	kingdom	of	god.
(To	Mario)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Mario	Dhyan	means	meditation.
Mario	means	rebellion.
Meditation	is	the	only	rebellion	there	is,
The	true	rebellion.
All	others	are	only	pseudo	coins.
One	can	change	 the	 social	 structure,	 the	political	 structure	But	 if	man	 remains
the	same	inside
Nothing	is	changed.
He	will	again	do	the	same	things,
Maybe	labels	will	be	different	now.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
For	example,	in	Russian	revolution
Capitalists	disappeared
The	proletariat	disappeared,	the	division
Between	the	poor	and	the	rich	disappeared;
A	new	division	appeared:	The	division
Between	the	powerful	and	the	powerless.
It	is	the	same	game
Now	just	the	names	are	different.
Now	those	who	are	in	power
They	are	the	rich	people.
And	those	who	are	not	in	power
They	are	the	poor	people;	revolution	has	failed.
And	that	has	been	the	case	always:
All	revolutions	have	failed.
Only	few	rebellious	people	have	succeeded.
A	Buddha,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Jesus,
They	transformed	their	consciousness
And	they	lived	in	a	total	different	way.
If	we	really	want
To	change	the	whole	earth	into	a	paradise
The	only	possible	way
And	I	say	the	only	possible	way
Is	to	create	as	great	a	meditative	force
In	the	world	as	possible.
If	millions	of	people	are	meditators
Then	we	can	change	the	world	because
The	meditator	is	no	more	interested	in	ego	trips
Otherwise,	you	distribute	the	money	--
The	ego	trip	comes	in	a	new	form:
It	becomes	a	power	trip
Or	some	other	form,	but	the	division	will	continue.
Unless	from	your	innermost	core
The	ego	disappears,	it	dies	totally
Without	leaving	any	trace
No	revolution	can	succeed.
Hence	I	am	not	interested	in	changing	the	society.
My	whole	interest	is	in	the	individual.
All	social	revolutions	have	failed,
Now	the	time	has	come	to	think	of	the	individual
And	focus	whole	energy	on	the	individual.
The	individual	is	the	only	hope.
If	millions	of	individuals	can	change
Through	meditation	if	they	can	realize
A	kind	of	egolessness
Then	they	will	create	a	society,	naturally
Spontaneously,	which	will	be	classless.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	Burkhart	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Burkhart.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Burkhart	means	courageous	spirit.
Courageous	spirit	is	one	of
The	most	essential	things	for	a	religious	man.
Without	courage	nobody	can	be	religious.
Cowards	can't	afford	to	be	religious
Because	it	is	a	journey	into	the	unknown
Into	the	uncharted.
It	is	going	to	the	farther	shore.
There	is	no	guarantee	that	one	will	reach
No	guarantee	even
Whether	the	farther	shore	exists	at	all.
It	needs	really	guts	to	drop	that	which	you	have
For	that	which	is	just	an	idea	right	now.
It	needs	tremendous	idealism
It	needs	a	poet	not	a	mathematician.
It	is	not	calculation,	it	is	a	love	affair.
It	is	almost	mad	in	the	eyes	of	those
Who	are	calculating.
And	meditation	is	the	way	to	go	into	the	unknown.
It	is	going	beyond	the	mind.
Mind	consists	of	the	known
Of	the	familiar,	of	the	experienced.
To	go	beyond	the	mind	means
Go	beyond	all	boundaries.
It	is	risking,	it	is	jumping	into	an	abyss
But	blessed	are	those	who	can	gather	that	courage
Because	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god.
--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyano	Frank.
Dhyano	means	meditation.	Frank	means	living	in	freedom.
A	man	lives	in	slavery	without	meditation
Because	he	lives	unconsciously
He	lives	like	a	robot.
Meditation	starts	changing	you:	It	transforms
Your	unconsciousness	into	consciousness
It	changes	your	darkness	into	light.
It	is	the	only	alchemy	which	transforms
The	raw	energy	into	a	refined	world	of	mysteries.
Meditation	is	a	great	art.
One	has	to	be	very	very	skillful	and	intelligent
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	be	meditative.
It	is	not	for	the	unintelligent
It	is	not	for	the	mediocre.
It	requires	intelligence,	and	the	irony	is	that
Only	mediocre	people	go	to	the	temples
And	the	churches	and	the	mosques.
Temples	are	full	of	mediocres	and	cowards.
They	are	there	simply	because
They	are	afraid	of	life,	afraid	of	death
Afraid	of	anything!
They	live	in	a	kind	of	phobia.
In	fact	thousands	of	phobias	around	them
And	they	are	not	intelligent	enough
To	solve	any	problem
So	they	go	on	asking	the	stupid	priests
Who	are	just	like	parrots
Who	go	on	repeating	the	scriptures.
They	have	not	solved	their	problems	either.
But	this	is	a	strange	game	--	this	goes	on	and	on.
There	are	fools	and	there	are	charlatans
To	exploit	those	fools.
And	the	charlatans	are	bound	to	remain	there
Unless	fools	disappear	from	the	world.
Meditation	requires	only	two	things:
You	should	be	courageous
You	should	be	a	little	intelligent.
And	these	are	the	essential	religious	qualities.
Once	courage	and	intelligence	are	there
Then	there	is	no	problem.
Meditation	is	bound	to	happen,	is	inevitable	--
Just	a	little	effort,	a	very	little	effort
And	tremendous	is	the	outcome.
And	once	you	become	conscious
You	can	live	in	freedom
Otherwise	you	live	like	a	slave,
Slave	of	thousand	and	one	things.
Slave	of	the	crowd,	slave	of	the	tradition
Slave	of	the	church,	slave	of	your	own	instincts.
There	are	so	many	layers	of	slavery
But	we	accept	them
We	have	taken	them	for	granted	so	we	don't	think
That	they	are	bad,	ugly,	disgusting.
Once	you	have	tasted	a	little	freedom
You	will	be	surprised:
What	kind	of	life	you	had	lived	before?
It	was	not	life	at	all.
Sannyas	means
Entering	into	a	totally	new	kind	of	life
Bringing	a	new	quality	of	life	in	your	being.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Walter)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Siddho.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Siddho	means	one	who	has	achieved.
Sannyas	is	a	pilgrimage:	A	pilgrimage
From	the	dark	night	of	the	soul
Towards	the	dawn	of	the	spirit.
It	is	not	a	ritual,	it	is	an	inner	revolution.
It	is	not	a	formality,	it	is	a	love	affair.
Unless	it	is	something	form	your	very	heart
It	won't	work.	It	is	not	a	question	of	believing
It	is	not	a	question	of	intellectual	conviction.
It	is	a	question	of	falling	in	love
With	something	which	one	can	feel
But	one	cannot	understand	by	intellect	itself.
It	is	a	quantum	leap.
You	may	never	have	done
Anything	like	that	before.
But	good	that	you	have
Gathered	courage	enough	to	go	into	it;
One	hesitates	in	the	beginning.
The	mind	pulls	backwards...
Don't	listen	to	the	mind	--	listen	to	the	heart!
Learn	more	and	more	listening	the	heart
And	follow	the	heart.
The	mind	is	not	yours,
It	is	given	by	the	society.
The	heart	is	yours,	it	is	given	by	god	himself!
If	you	listen	to	the	heart
Meditation	will	not	be	difficult
It	can	be	achieved.
And	once	meditation	is	achieved
Then	there	is	no	problem	left
You	have	clarity,	you	can	see	things	as	they	are.
Then	there	is	no	question
Of	choosing	what	to	do	and	what	not	to	do;
You	immediately	know	what	to	do.
There	is	no	question	of	alternatives.
You	simply	know	this	is	the	right	thing	to	do
And	one	never	repents.
That	is	the	state	of	siddho:
One	never	repents,	one	never	commits	a	mistake.
The	whole	world	may	think
That	you	are	committing	a	mistake
But	as	far	as	your	heart	is	concerned
You	are	totally	in	it
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	know	it	from	your	very	being
That	it	is	not	a	mistake	and	you	never	repent.
You	know	ultimately	it	is	going	to	be	good.
Maybe	right	now	it	is	impossible
To	conceive	what	will	be	the	ultimate	outcome
But	the	heart	knows	far	better	because	the	heart
Lives	in	the	deepest	of	the	mysteries	of	existence.
For	the	heart	there	is	not	past	and	no	future,
There	is	only	present.
Once	meditation	is	fulfilled
Once	you	have	achieved	meditation
Your	life	has	a	smoothness,	a	grace,	a	beauty.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005165
ShortTitle:	ISLAND16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Michael)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Sangit	Michael.
Sangit	means	music.	Michael	means	godly.
Music	comes	very	close
To	the	experience	of	godliness	because	godliness
Is	the	ultimate	music	of	existence.
It	is	another	name	for	the	harmony
That	exists	in	the	universe.
What	we	call	music	is	only	a	tiny	drop	of	it.
But	even	though	it	is	a	tiny	drip
It	contains	the	whole	secret	of	the	ocean.
That's	the	attractiveness	of	music:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	releases	meditation	in	you
It	releases	the	imprisoned	splendor.
For	a	moment
All	the	walls	of	the	prison	disappear.
For	the	moment
You	are	transported	into	another	world.
For	the	moment
You	transcend	time	and	space
You	become	infinite,	unbounded.
That	is	the	beginning
Beginning	of	a	journey	that	never	ends.
Music	was	born	in	deep	meditation.
Music	is	an	effort	to	create	on	the	outside
The	same	circumstance	as	it	happens
In	deep	meditation	within	you.
Hence	a	real	meditator	is	the	true	musician.
He	may	play,	he	may	not	play.
He	may	compose,	he	may	not	compose.
But	he	knows	the	secret,	he	has	the	golden	key.
And	the	true	musician	is	bound	to	stumble
Sooner	of	later
On	the	fact	of	meditation.
He	cannot	avoid	it	long,	it	is	inevitable
Because	the	outer	provokes	the	inner
It	challenges	the	inner	music
That	is	fast	asleep.
And	the	same	music	is	hidden
In	the	whole	existence;	hence	I	call	music
One	of	the	most	divine	phenomenon	in	existence.
God	is	not	philosophy,	god	is	more	music.
God	is	not	theology,	god	is	more	poetry.
God	is	not	a	hypothesis,	it	is	more	a	dance.
Start	searching	god	in	these	directions
And	you	will	be	moving	rightly
You	will	arrive	home.
Follow	music	in	the	outer	world
And	in	the	inner	world.
These	is	no	need	to	go	to	any	other	temple,
Music	is	enough.
Learn	to	listen	to	the	music	of	existence:
The	wind	passing	though	the	pine	trees
Or	the	sound	of	water
Or	the	ocean	in	a	tremendous	dance.
Listen	carefully,	attentively
Listen	mindlessly,	listen	without	thinking
So	that	it	can	penetrate
To	the	very	core	of	your	being.
And	you	will	be	surprised:
What	the	Bible	cannot	give	to	you
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
What	the	Gita	cannot	give	to	you
Music	can	give	to	you.
My	Buddhafield	has	to	be	a	field
Of	deep	harmony,	love,	life,	laughter.
A	great	orchestra	of	different	capacities
Talents	meeting	and	merging
And	creating	something	organically	one.
(To	Maria	Rosaria)	--	Your	name:	Ma	Maria	Rosaria.
Maria	means	fragrance.	Rosaria	means	a	rosary;
It	represents	prayer.
Prayer	is	the	fragrance	of	life.
That	is	the	ultimate	expression
Of	beauty	and	grace;	it	has	nothing	to	do
With	the	so-called	prayers
Taught	in	the	churches	and	the	temples.
They	are	nothing	but	words
And	all	words	are	alike.
No	word	is	holy,	no	word	is	profane.
Silence	is	holy.	Disturbance	is	profane.
And	all	words	are	a	kind	of	disturbance.
Hence	Lao	Tzu	says:	'Truth	cannot	be	said.
The	moment	you	say	it	you	falsify	it.
Truth	can	be	talked	only	in	a	roundabout	way.
You	cannot	say	it	directly
Because	no	word	is	adequate	enough
No	word	can	contain	that	infinite	silence,
Obviously
Because	the	word	cannot	contain	wordlessness.'
Prayer	means
A	silent	gratitude	toward	existence
A	deep	heartfelt	communion	with	existence	--
Nothing	of	the	mind;
A	meeting	and	merging	with	the	whole.
Just	like	a	river	falling	into	the	ocean,
That	is	prayer.
When	you	disappear	into	the	whole
That	is	prayer.
And	whatsoever	causes	it
Is	only	a	help,	a	device.
Once	you	understand	the	essence	of	it
There	is	no	need	for	any	device.
Even	the	idea	of	god
Is	only	a	device	for	people	to	surrender.
For	more	important	is	surrender	than	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
God	is	just	an	excuse	to	surrender
But	once	you	have	surrendered	then	you	will	know.
In	the	beginning	people	think	god	is	important
And	surrender	is	a	means	to	attain	god.
The	truth	is	just	the	vice	versa:
Surrender	is	the	end
And	god	is	just	a	means,	an	excuse
Because	if	I	say	to	you,	'Surrender,'
You	will	immediately	ask,	'To	whom?	To	what?'
You	cannot	simply	surrender,	hence	a	hypotheses.
God	is	only	a	hypothesis;	it	helps.
Once	surrender	has	happened
When	you	have	put	your	ego	aside,
You	immediately	become	aware:	there	is	no	god.
There	is	certainly	godliness	--
The	whole	existence	is	full	of	godliness
But	god	is	not	a	person
It	is	a	quality,	a	fragrance
But	you	will	know	the	fragrance	only
When	you	have	become	a	fragrance.
We	can	only	know	that	which	we	have	become.
(To	Joan)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Nityam.
Anand	means	bliss.	Nityam	means	eternal.
Pleasures	are	momentary,	bliss	is	eternal.
Whatsoever	is	momentary,
don't	waste	your	life	on	it	because
whatsoever	you	do,	it	is	going	to	disappear.
It	is	not	in	the	nature	of	things
that	it	will	keep	forever	--	it	is	bound	to	go.
Just	as	it	comes,	it	goes.
So	those	people	who	go	on	putting
their	life	energies	into	attaining	pleasures
are	the	only	fools	in	the	world.
They	are	playing	with	soap	bubbles,
and	collecting	soap	bubbles,
hoping	that	they	are	diamonds.
Nothing	will	be	left	in	your	hands.
Those	soap	bubbles	are	empty.
They	may	shine	for	a	moment	or	two;
the	sun	rays	may	pass	through	them
and	may	create	the	illusion
of	a	beautiful	experience.
A	rainbow	may	be	created,	but	all	that	is	a	mirage.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	wise	person	puts	his	energies
into	that	which	lasts	forever.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:
It	is	an	endeavor,	a	tremendous	endeavor;
a	great	enquiry,	a	longing	for	the	ultimate,
for	that	which	once	attained	is	always	yours.
It	cannot	be	lost.
Only	then	you	become	a	conqueror,
only	then	you	become	rich.
Otherwise	people	are	just	imagining	things
and	wasting	their	great	opportunity.
This	same	life	can	be	used	as	an	opportunity
to	become	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ,
or	you	can	waste	it	by	playing	cards
and	sitting	in	a	pub	--	it	all	depends	on	you.
It	has	to	be	your	decision.
We	create	ourselves.
Sannyas	is	a	great	decision	that	we	are	now
going	to	be	sculptors	of	our	own	being.
And	we	have	decided	that	right	now
we	are	only	a	rock	but	we	are	going
to	carve	a	Buddha	out	of	it.
And	every	rock	carries	a	hidden	Buddha	--
it	has	just	to	be	discovered.
Just	a	few	chunks	have	to	be	removed	here	and	there
and	the	Buddha	will	be	discovered.
It	is	already	there	--	we	have	to	free	the	Buddha
from	the	rock,	from	its	imprisonment.
(To	Ivoree)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyano	Sanatan.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Sanatan	means	that	which	has
Always	been	with	you,	the	ancientmost	truth	of	your	being.
You	have	never	lost	it
You	have	just	forgotten	about	it.
It	has	always	been	there,	it	is	still	there.
Even	if	you	want	to	lose	it	you	cannot	lose	it
Because	it	is	your	nature,	your	very	being	--
How	can	you	lose	it?
But	you	can	forget	about	it.
You	can	become	too	much	focused	on	other	things.
You	can	keep	your	won	nature	at	your	back
And	slowly	slowly	you	can	become
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	accustomed	of	being	an	extrovert
That	your	neck	becomes	paralyzed
And	you	cannot	move	in,	you	cannot	look	in
You	forget	even	the	fact
That	there	is	something	inside	you	--
Millions	of	people	are	living
In	that	forgetfulness.
It	is	a	kind	a	metaphysical	sleep
That	we	are	unaware	of	our	own	interiority
Of	our	own	subjectivity.
My	work	here	is	to	help	you	to	turn	in.
So	every	effort	should	be	made
To	remove	your	paralysis.
Every	effort	should	be	mad	to	help	your	neck
To	become	again	capable	to	turn	is
Your	eyes	to	turn	in.
In	the	beginning	it	is	painful
But	once	you	have	learned	the	art
It	is	tremendously	paying.
For	the	first	time	you	start	feeling	blissful
For	the	first	time
You	start	feeling	some	significance	in	life
Some	meaning	arises	in	you
And	for	the	first	time	you	know	that
You	are	deathless,	there	is	nothing	to	fear
That	you	are	eternal	life,	that	you	partake
Something	with	the	ultimate	reality.
You	are	part	of	it!
(To	Christine)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyano	Gitam.
Dhyano	means	meditation;	gitam	means	a	song	--	a	song	Of	meditation.
Man	without	meditation
Is	a	man	without	any	song	in	his	heart
Without	any	poetry	in	his	being
Without	any	celebration.
His	spring	has	not	come	yet
His	flowers	are	still	waiting
They	have	not	yet	materialized
He	has	not	yet	bloomed,
He	fragrance	is	not	released.
He	is	just	like	a	seed:	encapsulated
Within	himself	--	unaware,	completely	unaware
Of	what	he	can	be,	of	what	he	is.
And	he	goes	on	living	an	ordinary	life
With	no	joy,	with	no	bliss,	with	no	dance.
He	drags,	life	is	like	a	burden:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
He	somehow	manges	to	carry	it.
In	fact	death	looks	like	a	relief
That	sooner	of	later	everything	will	be	finished
And	one	will	be	able	to	rest	in	the	grave.
Go	to	any	cemetery	and	look	at	the	gravestones.
Many	have	the	inscription:	Rest	in	peace.
What	does	it	mean?
What	they	were	doing	their	whole	life?
Now	they	are	resting	in	peace	--	now,	finally
In	the	grave	they	can	rest	in	peace.
But	is	seems	difficult	if	you	whole	life
You	have	practiced	not	to	live	in	peace
It	is	impossible	that	you	will	be	able
To	live	in	peace	even	in	your	grave,
You	will	toss	and	turn.
A	woman	died,	went	to	heaven,	asked	Saint	Peter
That,	'Can	you	tell	me	anything	about	my	husband?'
Peter	asked,	'What	is	the	name	of	your	husband?'
She	said,	'My	husband's	name	is	John.'
Peter	said,	'That	is	very	difficult
Because	there	are	millions	of	Johns	here.
You	give	me	some	more	details,	particulars.
What	were	your	last	words	to	your	husband?'
The	woman	said,	'The	last	words,
I	don't	remember	what	I	said	to	him
But	I	remember	what	he	said	to	me.'
Peter	 asked,	 'Okay,	 tell	 me	 what	 he	 said	 to	 you	 Because	 the	 last	 words	 are
important.'
And	the	woman	said,	'My	husband	said,
"Remember	one	thing:	I	am	dying
But	don't	befool	around	otherwise
I	will	toss	and	turn	in	my	grave.'
Peter	said,	'Then	don't	be	worried	--
You	mean	whirling	John?!
He	is	continuously	whirling.
Everybody	knows	about	him.
I	will	find	him	immediately	--	you	don't	worry.
He	is	very	famous	around:	He	can't	sit	--
He	is	continuously	whirling!'
If	you	have	practiced	your	whole	life
A	certain	kind	of	boredom
A	certain	kind	of	meaninglessness	then
That	is	going	to	be	even	in	the	grave
Even	in	the	afterlife.
Life	is	a	school:
We	are	here	to	learn	something
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	the	most	important	thing	is	to	learn
How	to	sing,	how	to	dance,	how	to	rejoice;
And	all	that	becomes	possible	through	meditation.
Meditation	releases	all	those	energies	in	you.
And	thousands	of	flowers
Start	blooming	in	you	being.
Then	paradise	is	not	more	after	death,
Then	paradise	is	now	and	here.
And	when	paradise	is	now	and	here
Only	then	it	is	a	truth.
My	sannyasins	live	here	and	now.
I	don't	teach	any	future
I	teach	only	the	present
And	meditation	is	the	way	to	live	in	the	present
To	be	totally	in	tune	with	the	present.
Forgetting	the	past	because	it	is	no	more
And	dropping	the	future	because	it	is	not	yet
And	living	in	the	real,	that	which	is	--
That	is	the	door	to	the	ultimate.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005175
ShortTitle:	ISLAND17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Arno)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Arno.
Anand	means	bliss.	Arno	means	eagle.
The	eagle	represents	many	things.
It	represents	the	enquiry	into	the	unknown
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
lt	represents	the	courage
To	take	the	jump	into	the	unbounded.
It	remains,	represents	strength,	might,	power
And	all	these	qualities
Are	needed	for	a	sannyasin	too.
He	is	also	an	eagle,	eagle	of	the	inner	sky.
He	has	to	go	deeper	and	deeper
Into	one's	own	being.
It	needs	great	courage
Because	you	will	be	all	alone.
It	needs	the	joy	of	risking	because	every	moment
You	will	be	leaving	the	known	behind.
It	is	a	constant	movement
From	the	known	into	the	unknown
And	ultimately,	from	the	unknown	to	the	unknowable.
The	moment	you	enter	into	the	unknowable
You	have	reached	god.
Remember	these	qualities.
(To	Ulrike)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Ulrike.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Ulrike	means	a	wolf.
It	represents	courage	and	loyalty.
A	disciple	needs	both:	He	needs	immense	courage
Because	he	is	going	to	travel	a	path
Which	has	no	maps.
It	is	not	like	a	superhighway
With	milestones	and	arrows
Showing	where	you	are	and	where	you	are	moving.
It	is	like	going	into	a	deep	jungle,
Not	even	a	labyrinth	exists.
You	have	to	walk	and	create	it.
There	is	nothing	readymade.
Truth	is	a	discovery
And	naturally	all	that	we	know	about	truth
Has	to	be	dropped
Because	we	have	not	discovered	it.
Anybody	else	truth	is	not	your	truth
And	can	never	be	your	truth.
To	believe	in	others'	truths
Is	to	remain	in	bondage.
Meditation	is	the	way	of	dropping
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
All	knowledge,	all	belief,	all	that	is	borrowed
So	that	you	can	discover	on	your	own.
Unless	truth	is	found	by	you
It	cannot	liberate	you.
Meditation	simply	is	a	method
Which	does	two	things.
First,	it	destroys	all	knowledge,
Leaves	you	like	a	child,	utterly	innocent
In	a	state	of	not-knowing.
This	is	the	negative	part	of	meditation,
And	then	the	positive	follows	on	its	own	accord,
Then	great	wonder	arises	in	you
And	that	wonder	leads	to	discovery.
Life	is	such	a	great	mystery
And	we	are	missing	the	mystery
Because	of	our	knowledge.
One	has	to	be	a	child	again
And	one	has	to	trust	existence.
If	you	trust	existence
You	need	not	trust	the	scriptures	--
They	are	pseudo,	even	though	they	have	come	from
People	who	had	known	because
One	of	the	strangest	quality	of	truth	is:
The	moment	you	put	it	in	words,	it	becomes	a	lie.
Truth	is	not	transferrable,	not	communicable.
The	master	does	not	give	you	the	truth
He	only	gives	you	a	thirst	for	it
An	immense	longing	for	it,
A	tremendous	enquiry	he	triggers	in	you.
You	need	courage	to	drop	the	knowledge
To	drop	the	beliefs,	to	drop	your	conditionings
And	you	need	great	trusting	heart.
But	remember	when	I	say	trusting	heart
I	don't	mean	trust	in	the	church
Trust	in	the	Bible	or	the	Gita	or	in	me	--
Trust	in	existence!
Anything	else	is	not	going	to	help	but	to	hinder.
(To	Trond)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Pathik.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Pathik	means	pilgrim,	a	traveler.
Meditation	 is	 an	 inner	 journey.	 It	 is	moving	 from	 your	 circumference	 to	 your
own	 center.	 We	 live	 on	 the	 circumference	 and	 we	 have	 lived	 on	 the
circumference	for	so	many	lives	that	we	have	become	completely	oblivious	even
of	the	fact	that	a	center	exists.
A	man	living	on	the	circumference	is	a	man	without	soul,	is	a	man	without	roots,
is	a	man	who	remains	a	victim	of	accidents.	His	life	is	at	the	mercy	of	a	thousand
and	 one	 accidental	 causes;	 his	 life	 has	 no	 intrinsic	 value.	 He	 is	 just	 like
driftwood	 --	 he	 knows	not	where	 he	 is	 going,	 he	 knows	not	 from	where	 he	 is
coming,	he	knows	not	where	he	is.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
I	have	heard	that	once	a	great	politician	lost	his	way	while	he	was	driving	--	he
had	gone	for	a	pleasure	drive.	He	asked	an	old	man	who	was	sitting	under	a	tree,
"Where	is	the	way	to	the	capital?"
The	old	man	said,	"I	don't	know."
Then	he	asked,	"Where	does	this	way	lead	to?"
And	the	old	man	said,	"I	don't	know."
Of	course	 the	politician	became	very	angry.	He	said,	"You	don't	seem	to	know
anything	at	all.	Are	you	some	kind	of	idiot	or	what?"
The	old	man	laughed	and	said,	"But	I	am	not	lost!	I	know	where	I	am	and	you
don't	know	even	that!	So	who	is	an	idiot?"
It	 is	 very	 rare	 to	 find	 a	man	who	 knows	where	 he	 is.	 People	 are	 somewhere,
certainly,	but	absolutely	in	a	state	of	sleep	--	like	zombies	they	go	on	moving.
Sannyas	 means	 making	 a	 deliberate	 effort	 to	 become	 conscious.	 That's	 what
meditation	is	all	about	--	a	great	effort	to	create	the	fire	of	awareness	in	you.	It	is
there;	 it	 has	 just	 to	 be	 discovered,	 helped,	 nourished,	 nurtured.	 The	 center	 is
there.
Once	we	have	found	it,	we	are	centered,	we	are	rooted.	Suddenly	we	have	a	soul,
we	 know	 where	 we	 are,	 and	 we	 know	 who	 we	 are.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 greatest
moment	in	a	man's	life.	There	is	nothing	else	greater	than	that	--	to	know	"Who
am	I?"	With	that,	the	doors	of	the	ultimate	mystery	open	up.	Then	God	becomes
available	in	all	its	splendor	and	beauty.	Then	life	is	no	longer	a	drag,	it	becomes
a	dance!	Then	life	is	no	longer	momentary,	it	becomes	eternity.	Than	there	is	no
death.
Then	you	live	beyond	time	and	beyond	space,	and	that	is	true	life.	Jesus	calls	it
life	in	abundance,	overflowing	life,	life	in	spring,	in	a	state	of	celebration.	And
that's	my	whole	teaching	here	--	how	to	make	your	life	a	celebration.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005185
ShortTitle:	ISLAND18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Oliver)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Oliver.
Anand	means	bliss.	Oliver	means	a	peaceful	heart.
It	is	easy	to	be	blissful	without	being	peaceful
It	is	also	easy	to	be	peaceful
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Without	being	blissful.
The	problem	and	the	challenge	is
To	be	both	together.
And	unless	one	is	both	together
One	remains	half,	incomplete.
When	both	are	together,
Merging,	melting	into	each	other
That	it	is	absolutely	impossible
Even	to	demarcate	which	is	which,
Then	only	a	person	is	total,
Then	only	one	is	whole
And	to	be	whole	is	to	be	holy.
Because	it	was	easy	to	be	peaceful
Many	religions	chose	it,	just	to	be	peaceful
Hence	the	escapist	tendency	for	centuries
Has	prevailed	in	religions:
Escape	from	the	world	because
If	you	are	in	the	world	the	peace	is	disturbed
There	are	thousand	and	one
Causes	for	disturbance;	it	is	better
To	go	to	the	mountains,	to	the	monasteries
Disappear	behind	the	walls	of	a	monastery
Avoid	all	provocations,	temptations
And	remain	peaceful.
Slowly	slowly	it	becomes	a	habit
But	that	peace	it	cold,
It	is	almost	like	death.
Hence	if	you	go	to	an	old	monastery
You	will	find	people	like	corpses,	utterly	cold;
Peaceful,	but	no	joy,	no	dance,	no	song.
It	is	the	peace	of	the	cemetery
It	is	a	kind	a	suicide:	Escape	is	suicide.
Life	is	in	the	world	and	real	peace
Has	to	happen	in	the	world,	not	outside	it.
Few	schools	of	mystics
Have	chosen	the	other	part,	to	be	blissful.
For	example,	Sufis:	they	live	in	the	world
In	fact	it	is	very	difficult
To	find	out	who	is	a	Sufi	because
They	live	in	the	world	in	the	ordinary	way.
The	only	thing	that	can	create	suspicion	in	you
That	something	is	special	about	them
It	their	blissfulness;	they	are	always
In	a	kind	of	ecstasy,	a	certain	excitement
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Something	is	happening	inside	them.
But	because	it	is	not	peaceful
That	excitement	creates	a	state	of	fever
It	becomes	to	hot,	they	become	almost	mad.
Hence	only	in	Sufis
There	is	a	certain	state	of	mystics	called
The	mad	ones,	the	mastas.
It	can't	happen	in	a	Catholic	monastery
It	can't	happen	in	the	life	of	a	Jaina	monk
It	can't	happen	to	a	Buddhist,
It	can	happen	only	to	a	Sufi:
He	can	go	mad	because	he	becomes	to	excited
And	there	is	nothing	to	hold	him	back.
The	excitement	reaches	to	such	an	extreme
That	it	is	maddening!
He	is	very	alive,	but	it	is	not	a	state	of	health
Something	is	berserk	about	it
Something	is	crazy	about	it.
He	looks	drugged,	stoned.
My	effort	here	is	to	bring	a	synthesis:
One	should	be	blissful	and	peaceful	together.
Then	the	peace	will	prevent	any	kind	of	madness
And	the	bliss	will	prevent	any	kind	of	death.
The	peace	will	keep	you	cool
And	the	bliss	will	keep	you	warm.
And	when	you	are	cool	and	warm	together
There	is	tremendous	beauty
Your	life	is	silent
Yet	there	is	a	song	in	that	silence.
To	me	that	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas.
(To	Eldine)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Amrita.
Anand	means	bliss.	Amrita	means	nectar.
The	experience	of	bliss
Is	the	experience	of	immortality;
They	are	not	two	things,	they	are	not	separate.
They	are	not	separable.
Once	you	have	tasted	bliss
You	have	also	tasted	the	deathless	in	you.
Bliss	is	possible	only
When	you	reach	to	the	very	center	of	your	being
And	that	center	is	beyond	death,	beyond	birth.
It	does	not	exist	in	time
It	does	not	exist	in	space	either,
It	is	beyond	both.
It	is	non-temporal,	non	spatial
It	is	eternity	itself;	in	other	words:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	godliness,	it	is	divineness.
Man's	whole	neurosis	consists	of	fear.
Fear	of	death
Is	the	root	cause	of	all	other	fears,
Other	fears	are	just	branches.
But	if	you	go	to	the	root	of	any	fear
You	will	find	death	somewhere
Hidden	behind.
Hence	the	mystery,	the	anxiety,	the	anguish.
Even	though	one	has	money,	power,	prestige
Everything	--	but	something	is	missing:	one	knows
All	these	things	will	go	down	the	drain
One	knows	'I	am	myself	going	down	the	drain
Every	day,	every	moment.
One	knows	that	this	life	is	unreliable;
Tomorrow	I	may	not	be	at	all.'
Hence	there	is	a	shadow	of	death
Continuously	following	you
And	there	is	no	way	to	escape	from	it;
Wherever	you	go	it	is	with	you.
There	is	only	one	way	to	get	rid	of	it
And	that	is	to	go	within
Nowhere	else	but	within.
That	is	the	way	of	meditation:	going	inwards
Tasting	your	own	subjectivity
Going	slowly	slowly	out	of	the	mind
In	a	state	of	no-mind
Where	you	are	only	conscious
And	these	is	nothing	to	be	conscious	about;
No	object	remains,	only	pure	subjectivity
Just	a	mirror	reflecting	nothing.
In	that	very	moment,	bliss	explodes!
It	is	just	like	atomic	explosion:	you	become
Full	of	light	and	full	of	joy	and	full	of	life
And	life	that	knows	no	beginning	and	no	end
And	light	that	once	known	remains	forever.
Hence	I	say,	to	know	bliss	is	the	same
As	to	know	immortality.
That's	why	everybody
Is	seeking	and	searching	for	bliss.
It	is	really	the	search	for	immortality.
All	the	religions	are	nothing	but
Groping	for	something	deathless
Because	unless	the	deathless	is	found
Man	remains	in	misery.
There	is	no	other	way,	there	is	no	other	remedy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
In	these	five	thousand	years	men	have	found
everything	that	he	thought	may	be	helpful
But	nothing	seems	to	help.
Now	science	has	provided	everything:
Better	health,	longer	life
Better	roads,	better	houses,	better	technology
Gadgets,	everything	--	but	man	remains
In	the	same	anguish	as	he	was	in	the	jungles
No	difference	at	all;	in	fact	today
Man	is	more	miserable	than	he	was	ever	before
For	the	simple	reason	that	before	there	was	hope.
Now	even	that	hope	is	gone.
Now	we	know,	even	science	cannot	help.
Just	three	hundred	years	before
People	were	very	excited:
Darwin	and	others	were	very	excited
Because	they	were	thinking,
'Now,	we	are	just	very	close	to	find	the	secret.'
Even	in	the	beginning	of	this	century
Scientists	were	so	full	of	hope	and	optimism
That	the	goal	is	very	close	by,
Just	be	the	corner	--	we	have	already	arrived,
Now	every	misery	will	end.
And	we	have	found	many	secrets	of	;matter
And	man	is	in	a	far	more	mess
Than	he	was	ever	before.
Now	it	is	for	the	first	time
That	man	can	turn	inwards
But	very	few	individuals:
A	Jesus,	a	Buddha,	a	Zarathustra
Because	it	needed	great	intelligence	to	see
That	all	that	is	outside	is	futile.
But	now	even	those
Who	are	not	that	much	intelligent
They	can	see	the	point,	that	all	is	futile.
You	can	have	the	biggest	house
You	can	have	a	palace
You	can	have	all	the	money	and	still,
You	don't	have	anything:
Death	is	there,	continuously	following	you.
It	will	snatch	away	everything
It	will	crush	you	any	moment.
You	are	not	protected,	you	are	not	secure.
You	can	have	the	insurance	policy	but
That	makes	no	sense.
Nothing	is	secure,	nothing	is	safe
Hence	there	is	a	trembling	inside.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	only	through	meditation
That	this	trembling	disappears	because
One	come	to	know	something
That	nothing	can	destroy,	no	fire	can	burn	it.
That	is	your	innermost	being
That	is	you,	you	reality	--
Call	it	the	soul,	the	self,	god.
To	know	it	is	to	know	bliss,	is	to	know	peace
To	know	it	to	enter
Into	a	world	of	celebration.
The	same	energies	that	were	becoming	anxieties
Start	turning	into	dance.
(To	Joe)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Dhyanam.
Anand	means	bliss.	Dhyanam	means	meditation.
Bliss	is	the	goal	of	life,
Knowingly,	unknowingly
Consciously,	unconsciously
We	are	all	searching	for	bliss.
Not	only	human,	beings:	animals,	birds
Trees,	even	rocks	--
The	whole	existence	is	a	search	for	bliss.
But	only	man	is	conscious	enough
To	penetrate	into	that	ultimate	mystery.
But	not	all	man	either
Because	very	few	people	are	really	conscious.
The	majority	lives	like	a	robots.
Meditation	is	a	process	of	transforming
Your	mechanicalness	into	consciousness.
Changing	your	robotlike	existence	into	awareness.
Meditation	can	be	defined
As	a	scientific	method	of	de-automatisation
Otherwise	we	have	all	become	automatic.
We	function	like	machines:	Push	a	button	here
Push	a	button	there	and	things	go.
Sometimes	you	run	out	of	gas
Sometimes	buttons	get	mixed	up
Sometimes	wires	are	loose
Then	we	call	a	man	is	mad;
Then	we	have	to	send	him	to	the	workshop	--
We	call	it	the	hospital	or	the	mental	asylum,
We	have	to	give	him	electric	shocks.
That	is	just	to	shake	him	with	the	hope	that
Maybe	just	shaking	him	may	put	his	wires	right.
It	is	hooping	for	the	best
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	expecting	the	worse	because
It	is	just	accidental;	Sometimes	it	happens:
A	good	shock	may	put	your	things	right
Sometimes	it	may	not	work.
It	is	all	depending	on	one	approach:
The	whole	modern	psychology
Ninety	per	cent	of	it	is	rooted	in	the	idea
That	man	is	also	a	machine.
Even	Darwin	will	be	shocked.
At	least	he	used	to	think	that
Man	has	come	out	of	the	monkeys.
Even	he	will	be	shocked
Because	Skinner	and	Pavlov	don't	think
That	man	is	that	great;
He	is	just	another	kind	of	machine,
So	are	the	monkey!
Meditation	is	the	only	way
To	give	you	an	experience,	a	glimpse	that
You	are	not	a	machine
That	you	are	something	more,	far	more.
And	the	moment	the	first	glimpse	happens
The	first	window	opens
The	first	fresh	breeze	comes	in,
Your	life	becomes	blissful.
You	feel	for	the	first	time	to	be	really	born.
That's	the	whole	function	of	sannyas:	a	rebirth.
(To	Ulrike)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Karuna.	Anand	means	bliss.	Karuna
means	compassion.
There	are	two	kinds	of	compassion	possible.	One	is	concerned	with	the	misery
of	the	other	person:	you	feel	compassionate	because	the	other	is	miserable;	it	is
other-oriented.	The	other	kind	of	compassion	is:	you	feel	compassionate	because
you	are	full	of	bliss;	it	has	no	reference	with	the	other.	It	is	self-oriented.
The	first	kind	of	compassion	is	called	service.	That's	what	Christian	missionaries
go	 on	 doing.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 ugly.	 Although	 it	 serves	 a	 certain	 purpose	 but	 deep
down	it	is	based	on	an	ugly	idea:	you	are	exploiting	the	other	person's	misery.	In
fact,	 if	 nobody	 is	 miserable	 in	 the	 world,	 one	 wonders:	 what	 Christian
missionaries	will	 do	 then?	They	will	 be	 at	 a	 loss!	They	will	 be	 really	 in	great
misery	 because	 there	 will	 be	 nothing	 to	 do,	 no	 way	 to	 reach	 to	 paradise,	 the
whole	ladder	is	taken	away.
In	the	East	we	have	developed	the	second	kind	of	compassion	which	is	authentic
compassion.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	other's	misery;	it	has	something	to	do
with	 your	 bliss.	You	 are	 so	 full	 of	 bliss	 that	 you	want	 to	 share	 it.	 It	 does	 not
matter	whether	the	other	is	miserable	or	not,	it	has	no	relationship	with	others'
misery.	You	 are	 not	 exploiting	 the	 other's	misery	 for	 your	 own	 spiritual	 ends.
You	are	not	using	the	other	as	a	means;	it	is	not	service,	it	is	sharing.
And	my	effort	here	is	to	help	you	get	rid	of	the	idea	of	service	and	to	shift	your
whole	consciousness	towards	sharing:	share	your	joy,	your	love,	your	bliss,	but
don't	 feel	 that	you	are	serving	the	other,	because	that	creates	a	subtle	ego.	You
start	 feeling	holier-than-thou,	you	start	 feeling	you	are	doing	a	great	service	 to
humanity,	 that	 you	 are	 attaining	 some	 virtue,	 that	 your	 heaven	 is	 becoming
guaranteed	--	and	that	is	all	nonsense!	The	very	ego	is	going	to	prevent	you,	the
very	ego	will	drown	you!
The	man	of	real	compassion	 is	not	a	man	of	service.	He	 is	a	man,	certainly	of
great	 sharing,	but	he	has	no	 idea	 that	he	 is	doing	 something	good	 for	you.	He
does	 not	 even	 expect	 any	 thankfulness	 from	 you.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 he	 feels
thankful	to	you	that	you	accepted	his	joy,	that	you	accepted	his	love,	that	you	are
generous	enough	to	allow	him	to	share	his	compassion.
This	second	kind	of	compassion	 is	 true	spirituality,	but	 it	has	no	 idea	of	being
spiritual	at	all.	And	that	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	 meaning	 of	 your	 name;	 let	 it	 become	 the	 meaning	 of	 your	 life	 too:	 be	 a
blissful	compassion.
(To	Dorothea)	 --	This	 is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Chandrika	Anand	means	bliss.
Chandrika	means	moonlight.
Bliss	is	not	like	the	sun
It	is	more	like	the	moonlight;
It	is	cool	and	soothing.
The	sun	is	hot,	the	sun	is	fire
The	moon	is	not	fire,	the	moon	is	a	miracle;
It	receives	the	sun	rays
And	transforms	them	into	coolness.
The	moon	represents	the	whole	process	of	alchemy.
We	are	born	with	the	sun	energy	--
That	is	our	sexuality
It	is	sun	energy,	it	is	fire
And	unless	it	passes	through	meditation
It	remains	fire.
Meditation	functions	like	the	moon:
Once	the	sun	energy	passes
Through	the	meditative	process
Slowly	slowly	its	whole	nature	is	transformed:
It	becomes	cool,	soothing,	it	becomes	a	beauty.
You	cannot	stare	at	the	sun	directly	--
It	will	burn	your	eyes.
But	you	can	stare	at	the	moon	--
It	will	cure	your	eyes
It	will	give	you	more	insight.
It	is	not	an	accident
That	many	enlightened	people
Became	enlightened	on	the	full-moon	night.
On	the	full-moon	night
It	is	not	only	the	ocean	that	is	affected;
Deep	down	something	in	man's	consciousness
Is	also	affected.
If	you	cannot	contain	it,	you	can	go	mad.
That's	why	many	people	go	mad
On	the	full-moon	night
Hence	in	all	the	languages	of	the	world
Words	like	'lunatic'	exist.
Lunatic	means	struck	by	the	moon.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	madman	is	called	lunatic	--
Not	sunstruck	but	moonstruck.
He	was	not	able	to	contain
He	was	not	meditative	enough
He	missed	the	point,	otherwise
He	may	have	moved	into	a	new	dimension.
The	breakdown	may	have	proved	a	breakthrough;
He	may	have	become	enlightened
Bu	he	became	simply	mad
Because	the	meditative	bridge	was	missing.
Many	more	people	commit	suicide
On	the	full-moon	night,	remember
Than	on	any	other	night:	The	moon
Has	immense	impact	on	human	consciousness	but
It	can	be	destructive	if	there	is	no	meditation.
But	if	meditation	is	there,
If	you	know	how	to	be	silent
If	you	know	how	to	absorb	its	energy
If	you	know	how	to	be	in	tune	with	it
If	you	know	how	to	be	without	thoughts,
Then	madness	becomes	enlightenment
Then	suicide	becomes	sannyas.
Certainly	you	die	but
You	are	immediately	reborn	on	a	far	higher	plane.
My	sannyas	is	simple	in	a	way.
My	whole	emphasis	is	on	meditation.
Because	it	is	the	only	science
To	transform	your	sun	energies	into	moon	energies
To	transform	your	heart	energy	into	cool	energies
To	transform	the	lower	into	the	higher
To	transform	the	base	metal	into	gold.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005195
ShortTitle:	ISLAND19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Juliane)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Juliane.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Juliane	means	youthful.
Youthfulness	has	nothing	to	do	with	age
Youthfulness	is	a	transcendence	of	time.
Whenever	you	are	not	in	time,	you	are	youthful
Whenever	you	are	in	time,	you	are	old.
Even	a	one-day-old	child	is	old	enough	--
He	is	no	more	youthful,	he	has	aged,
He	has	died	already	twenty-four	hours.
One	day	is	less	in	his	life
Something	has	slipped	by
He	has	lost	already	something
Utterly	unaware	of	it.	And	that's	what
Millions	of	people	go	on	doing	their	whole	life
In	fact	a	person	becomes	aware	that	he	was	alive
Only	when	he	dies;	when	death	knocks	on	the	door	The	shock	of	it	makes	him
alert	for	the	first	time
'What	have	I	missed?	I	have	lost	my	life
And	now	nothing	can	be	done	about	it.'
The	only	use	of	life	is	to	transcend	time.
Life	is	an	opportunity
In	time,	to	transcend	time;
A	ladder	has	to	be	created.
Time	moves	horizontally,
Just	like	an	alphabet,	a	b	c,
Linear,	in	one	line.
Transcendence	is	vertical,
It	is	like	a	ladder,	not	linear	--
You	go	higher	or	deeper
Which	ultimately	means	the	same.
If	you	go	higher,	you	go	deeper
If	you	go	deeper,	you	go	higher
But	you	start	moving	in	a	totally	new	dimension.
You	are	no	more	moving	horizontally
You	are	moving	vertically.
That	movement	happens	through	meditation
Mediation	is	the	ladder	I	am	talking	about.
It	takes	you	beyond	time	and	suddenly
Great	youthfulness	explodes	in	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	touch	of	eternity	is	youthfulness.
Then	you	know	that	you	belong	to	the	eternal.
The	experience	of	the	eternal
Is	the	experience	of	god.	And	these	are
The	only	two	possibilities	available	for	man:
Either	he	moves	in	time,
Then	he	moves	horizontally,	linear	--
That	is	the	way	of	the	mind,
Time	is	the	way	of	the	mind.
Or,	one	moves	vertically	--
That	is	the	way	of	no-mind,
Timelessness	it	the	way	of	no-mind.
And	meditation	is	nothing	but	an	art
Of	how	to	take	a	jump	from	mind	to	no-mind.
From	horizontal	to	the	vertical.
It	is	the	greatest	quantum	leap	possible
It	is	the	most	radical	phenomenon;
Just	a	glimpse	of	it	and	you	are	full	of	god
Just	a	glimpse	of	it	and	you	are	not	more	the	same.
And	you	will	never	be	the	same	again.
You	will	live	in	the	same	world
But	you	will	live	out	of	it.
You	will	be	in	the	world
But	the	world	will	not	be	in	you.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:
Being	in	the	world	yet	not	of	it.
(To	Margarita)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Sangitamo.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Sangitamo	means	music.
Meditation	is	music,	the	ultimate	music:
Music	without	sound,	music	of	silence.
It	is	far	richer,	far	more	deeper
Than	any	music	that	we	can	create	through	sound
Because	sound	is	after	all,	a	disturbance.
Each	vibration	is	a	disturbance.
We	can	make	the	disturbance	lovable
But	still	it	is	a	disturbance.
Silence	means	no	disturbance,	nothing	stirs
But	there	is	great	music,	there	is	great	harmony
In	that	wordless,	soundless	state.
Meditation	leads	into	that	state	of	silence
And	unless	a	man	knows	that	silence
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
He	is	not	aware
Of	what	he	is	carrying	in	his	heart
He	remains	unaware	of	his	own	kingdom
Of	his	own	richness,	of	his	own	treasures.
He	remains	a	beggar	while	he	can	be	an	emperor
Any	moment	--	just	a	turning	in.
Silence	is	alchemical:
Once	you	have	penetrated	the	barrier	of	sound
Once	you	have	passed	the	barrier	of	sound
And	reached	to	the	very	core	of	your	being
You	have	reached	to	the	very	center	of	existence.
Those	who	have	heard	it
They	have	called	it	by	many	names.
One	of	the	names	is	god.
Zen	people	call	it	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.
It	is	an	absurdity:
One	hand	cannot	make	any	sound
But	Zen	people	enjoy	absurdities
They	express	themselves	in	paradoxes.
In	fact	the	ultimate	truth
Can	only	be	expressed	through	paradoxes.
It	is	so	vast	that
It	has	to	contain	all	contradictions	in	it
It	can't	leave	anything	outside	of	it.
The	outer	music	is	only	a	remembrance
An	effort	to	remind	you,	of	the	inner.
Hence	I	use	outside	music	for	all	meditations:
It	can	trigger	a	process	inside	you
It	can	create	a	situation.	It	is	a	device.
If	you	know	how	to	listen	to	the	outer	music
Just	listening	it,	listening	it,	listening	it,
Suddenly	the	outer	disappears	and
You	are	transported	into	the	inner.
If	the	outer	music	is	really	beautiful
It	provokes	something	in	you.
Carl	Gustav	Jung	has	the	right	term	for	it.
He	calls	it	synchronicity.	That's	true
Because	it	is	not	like	cause	and	effect,
There	is	no	certainty	about	it.
The	outer	music	may	be	beautiful,
It	may	be	Beethoven,	it	may	be	Mozart
But	is	does	not	work	like	a	cause;
It	may	not	create	the	effect	at	all	and	sometimes
Even	the	wind	passing	through	the	trees
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Or	just	dry	leaves	creating	noise	in	the	wind
May	be	enough	--	something	may	synchronize	in	you.
Something	may	suddenly	start	happening.
It	happened	one,	a	Zen	disciple
Worked	for	twenty	years	with	the	master
And	nothing	happened.	And	he	had	a	great	master
One	of	the	greatest,	Rinzai	was	his	master.
Rinzai	is	one	of	the	very	few	great	masters
Very	few	people	who	can	be	counted	on	fingers
But	nothing	happened	because
It	is	not	a	question	of	cause	and	effect
Even	Rinzai	is	there
And	whatsoever	he	could	do,	he	did,
But	everything	failed,	nothing	synchronized.
The	disciple	became	a	great	scholar
Listening	to	the	master	for	twenty	years,
His	beautiful	discourses,	his	tremendously
Significant	commentaries	on	Buddhist	sutras
But	that	was	all.
Nothing	else	was	happening	in	him.
He	became	knowledgeable	but	not	wise.
And	one	day,	he	was	passing	through	the	market
And	just	by	chance	he	heard	a	shopkeeper,
A	meat-seller,	talking	to	his	customer.
The	customer	was	asking,
'Is	this	the	best	meat	that	you	have	got?'
And	the	shopkeeper	said,
'Everything	I	have	got	here	is	the	best!'
Now	this	has	nothing	to	do	with	Zen
Nothing	to	do	with	meditation
But	the	disciple	suddenly	became	enlightened:
'Everything	I	have	got	here	is	the	best!'
He	came	running	to	the	master
And	even	before	he	had	said	anything
The	master	hit	him	in	great	joy	and	he	said,
'You	have	got	it	--	no	need	to	say	anything!
Keep	quiet!	How	did	it	happen?'
He	said,	'It	is	very	strange
That	it	should	happen	in	a	marketplace
And	at	a	meat-seller's	shop;	in	fact
I	should	not	be	passing	through	that	market.
Buddhist	monks	are	not	allowed
To	pass	though	a	market	where	meat	is	sold.
But	I	was	not	aware	that	it	is	a	meat-market
So	I	was	passing	from	there
And	the	shopkeeper	said,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
"Everything	that	is	sold	here	is	the	best."'
And	Rinzai	said,	'You	fool!
That's	what	I	have	been	telling	you
For	twenty	years:
Everything	that	is	being	sold	here	is	the	best!'
But	one	needs	right	time...
This	is	synchronicity:	The	outer	music
Can	sometimes	give	you	a	glimpse	of	the	inner.
But	once	you	have	caught	the	inner	thread
Then	there	is	no	need	for	the	outside	help:
You	go	on	following	it,	then	you	are	on	the	way.
Sannyas	is	a	journey
Towards	the	innermost	core	of	your	being
The	ultimate	silence,	the	soundless	silence
The	wordless	silence	--	and	the	harmony	of	it!
(To	Peter)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Pritamo.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Pritamo	means	beloved.
A	man	without	meditation	remains	an	outsider:
He	exists	but	not	as	part	of	existence
He	exists	but	exists	as	a	stranger
He	exists	in	deep	alienation.	There	seems	to	be	no	bridge	Between	him	and	the
whole.
He	seems	to	be	uprooted
Just	like	a	tree	which	is	uprooted
And	has	lost	contact	with	the	soil:
It	is	bound	to	die
It	goes	on	shrinking	every	moment.
What	we	call	life
It	more	or	less	dying	than	living.
In	fact,	people	take	seventy	years	to	die
That's	all.	That	is	the	normal	time
People	take	in	dying.
Few	people	are	speedy	--	they	do	it	quick.
Few	people	are	lazy	--	they	do	it
With	a	lazy	pace:	ninety-hundred,
Even	sometimes	hundred-ten,	hundred-twenty.
But	it	is	only	a	question
Of	how	long	you	take	to	die;	it	is	not	life.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Life	begins	only	with	meditation
Because	meditation	creates
The	bridge	between	you	and	the	whole
It	gives	you	roots	in	the	whole.
But	without	meditation	you	are	like	an	island.
With	meditation	you	become
Part	of	the	continent,	the	infinite	continent.
(line	missing)
And	remember:	No	man	is	an	island
But	ego	tries	to	live	like	an	island.
The	ego	is	very	much	afraid
Of	being	lost	into	something	bigger	than	itself,
It	keeps	aloof,	from	everything
That	is	bigger	than	itself.
Hence	it	is	afraid	of	love
Because	love	is	bigger	than	ego;
It	is	afraid	of	losing	its	identity.
Meditation	is	far	bigger	than	even	love
And	ego	is	very	much	afraid.
Whatsoever	is	bigger	than	the	ego
The	ego	tries	to	avoid.
It	is	always	interested	in	doing	small	things
Smaller	than	itself.	It	can	control	them.
It	needs	not	be	afraid	of	them
But	then	one	lives	in	misery
Because	joy	happens	only
When	you	become	connected	with	something
Bigger	than	yourself.
The	leaf	is	green	because	it	is	part	of	a	branch
The	branch	is	green	because	it	is	part	of	a	tree
The	tree	is	green	because	it	is	part	of	the	earth
The	earth	is	alive	because	it	is	part	of	the	sun
And	the	sun	is	alive
Because	of	some	other	greater	sun.
The	whole	is	interconnected.
It	is	only	the	foolishness	of	man
The	stupidity	of	man
That	he	tries	to	live	isolatedly
Tries	to	live	in	a	sort	of	encapsulated	way	but
Then	he	is	suffering,	then	he	feels	suffocated
Then	he	is	constantly	in	misery
But	he	clings	to	misery
Because	misery	goes	perfectly	well	with	the	ego
Bliss	is	dangerous	for	the	ego.
Misery	feeds	the	ego,
They	are	partners	in	the	same	business.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	meditation	will	give	you	a	taste	of	bliss
A	taste	of	something	bigger	than	you
A	taste	of	infinity,	a	taste	of	the	oceanic.
And	that	immediately	transforms	you
You	become	beloved	of	the	existence,
Otherwise	you	exist	like	an	enemy.
And	to	exist	as	an	enemy	is	an	ugly	way	to	exist.
Exist	like	a	lover:	Love	the	whole	existence
So	that	the	whole	existence	can	love	you.
(To	Michael)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Samarpano.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Samarpano	means	surrender.
Meditation	is	a	way	of	surrendering	your	ego.
Meditation	is	surrender,
The	very	essence	of	surrender.
Ordinarily	we	are	clinging	to	our	ego:
In	every	possible	way	we	try	to	prove	it.
Meditation	means	we	drop	the	whole	trip
We	drop	the	whole	number.
We	are	no	more	interested	in	proving	the	ego
Because	we	can	see	the	falsity	of	it
And	the	whole	absurdity.
Seeing	it,	one	allows	it	to	drop,	seeing
The	futility	and	the	misery	that	it	brings
One	surrenders	it	and	immediately
A	transformation	takes	place.
Whenever	you	are	emptied	of	the	ego
Something	from	the	beyond	rushes	in,
Immediately	fills	your	inner	vacuum.
That	rush	of	energy	from	the	beyond	is	god.
Meditation	makes	the	way
For	the	rush	of	the	beyond.
But	we	are	so	full	of	ourselves
That	we	go	on	missing.
We	have	to	empty	ourselves	totally
And	it	has	to	be	a	total	effort
Not	half-hearted,	not	lukewarm
Because	even	if	a	part	of	the	ego	remains	in
That	is	enough	to	keep	the	beyond	away	from	you.
The	ego	has	to	be	dropped	in	toto
The	emptiness	has	to	be	utterly	utterly	empty
And	then	there	is	no	barrier;
Then	the	guest	comes	in
The	emptiness	becomes	the	host	for	god
And	there	is	no	other	way	to	know	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Knowledgeable	people	never	know	god
In	fact,	they	cannot	know	god.
Sinners	can	know,	but	not	knowledgeable	people.
Hence	I	love	the	biblical	story
That	the	original	sin	was
Eating	the	fruit	from	the	Tree	of	Knowledge.
It	is	really	of	great	insight
But	Christians	have	completely	missed	it,
It	had	fallen	into	wrong	hands.
If	it	had	been	in	the	hands	of	Zen	masters
They	would	have	made
Something	beautiful	out	of	it.
That	is	the	original	sin	because
Knowledge	fills	oneself,	feeds	the	ego.
One	has	to	be	innocent,	one	has	to	function
From	the	state	of	not-knowing,
One	has	to	feel	that	'I	know	nothing'
Then	only	one	can	feel	the	wonder	and	the	awe.
And	to	stand	in	awe	and	wonder
Is	to	face	god,	is	to	encounter	god
Is	to	be	ready	for	god!
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005205
ShortTitle:	ISLAND20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Gunther)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Veet	Gunther.
Veet	means	go	beyond,	transcend.	Gunther	means	war.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
No	more	war;
Neither	on	the	outside	nor	on	the	inside
Neither	with	others	nor	with	oneself.
Instead	of	war	create	love,
Love	for	others	and	love	for	yourself.
A	soldier	lives	in	the	climate	of	war
And	a	sannyasin
Is	just	the	polar	opposite	of	a	soldier:
He	lives	in	the	climate	of	love.
And	the	beauty	of	love	is
That	it	conquers	without	conquering
It	becomes	victorious	without	any	effort
It	becomes	victorious	through	surrender.
(To	 Gregory)	 --	 You	 have	 a	 beautiful	 name	 --	 it	 exactly	 Defines	 sannyas.
Gregory	means	to	be	watchful,	to	be
Aware,	to	be	vigilant.
This	will	be	your	full	name:	Swami	Anand	Gregory.
Anand	means	bliss.	Gregory	means	awareness.
Bliss	is	a	by-product	of	awareness.
The	more	aware	you	are,	the	more	blissful
The	less	aware	you	are,	the	more	miserable.
You	can	measure	your	blissfulness
And	you	can	know	how	much	aware	you	are.
If	there	is	no	bliss	in	your	life
It	means	you	are	fast	asleep.	Then	don't	make
Any	direct	effort	to	become	blissful,
Nobody	can	succeed	in	that
Because	bliss	is	a	by-product,
You	cannot	achieve	it	directly.
You	have	to	go	via	awareness.
If	you	feel	you	are	miserable
That	simply	shows	one	thing
It	is	an	indication	that	you	are	unaware
So	become	more	aware,	become	more	meditative.
And	as	meditation	will	deepen
Misery	will	disperse
And	the	same	energy	that	becomes	misery
Becomes	bliss.	All	that	is	needed	is
The	mechanism	of	awareness.
It	transforms	energy,	it	is	a	transformer.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	a	very	scientific	process:
It	refines	the	energy,	it	transforms	the	energy
It	purifies	the	energy.
It	takes	out	everything	that	is	not	needed
And	only	the	essential	is	left.
And	once	your	energy
Has	passed	through	awareness,	bliss	explodes.
Misery	is	an	indication,	so	is	bliss
They	are	not	goals.
Nobody	can	avoid	misery
And	nobody	can	avoid	unawareness,
One	can	achieve	awareness.
That	is	the	right	direction	to	work.
(To	Bernd)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Bernd.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Bernd	means	brave	as	a	bear.
Meditation	needs	great	courage	because
It	is	the	journey	towards	the	ultimate,
It	is	no	ordinary	journey.	It	is	entering
Into	the	most	mysterious,	the	miraculous
Hence	it	is	not	for	the	cowards.
The	cowards	can	only	pray,	they	cannot	meditate
And	their	prayer	is	false	because
Unless	the	prayer	is	rooted	in	meditation
It	can	never	be	real	and	authentic.
The	temples	and	the	churches	and	the	mosques
Are	full	of	cowards.
They	are	praying	god	to	help	them
And	god	has	given	you	everything	you	need.
And	he	is	not	going	to	listen
To	all	this	nonsense
That	goes	on	in	the	name	of	prayer.
He	has	given	you	intelligence:	Now	use	it!
Man	has	used	intelligence
And	he	has	created	great	science,
And	for	thousands	of	years	he	was	praying
For	the	same	things
And	nothing	happened,	nothing	materialized.
Man	has	dreamt	of	flying
For	thousands	of	years,	as	long	as	you	go	back
Man	has	been	always	enchanted
With	the	idea	of	flying	--
But	praying	...	it	has	not	worked.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Once	we	applied	intelligence
Man	has	become	able	to	fly.
Man	has	always	wanted
To	reach	to	the	moon,	to	the	stars
But	he	was	praying.	Prayer	is	impotent
Because	god	has	given	you	the	intelligence	--
Use	it!	That's	what	meditation	is:
It	is	use	of	intelligence	for	the	inner	journey.
When	you	use	intelligence	for	the	objective	world
Science	is	created,
When	you	use	intelligence
For	the	inner	world,	subjective	world
Religion	is	created.
Religion	is	as	much	scientific	as	any	science,
But	certainly	it	needs	more	courage	than	science
Because	with	science	you	are	not	involved,
You	remain	just	an	observer.
But	when	you	enter	in	your	own	being
You	have	to	become	a	participant;	it	is	risky.
The	religions	of	prayer	are	false
Only	the	religions	of	meditation	are	true.
And	if	prayer	arises
Out	of	intelligence,	out	of	meditation
Then	prayer	too	is	true,	but	then
It	has	a	totally	different	flavor.
Then	it	is	not	asking	for	something:
On	the	contrary,	it	is	simply	thanking	god
For	all	that	he	has	already	given	us.
(To	Francis)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Francis.
Deva	means	divine.	Francis	means	freedom.
Freedom	is	the	most	divine	phenomenon
Hence	never	sacrifice	your	freedom
For	anything	whatsoever,	not	even	for	love
Because	noting	is	higher	than	freedom.
Everything	can	be	sacrificed	for	freedom
Even	life
But	freedom	cannot	be	sacrificed	for	anything.
Even	god	can	be	sacrificed	for	freedom
But	freedom	cannot	be	sacrificed	for	god.
Buddha	does	not	believe	in	god
But	he	believes	in	freedom.
Mahavira	never	believed	in	god
But	he	believes	in	freedom.
They	could	discard	the	hypothesis	of	god
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	they	could	not	discard
The	hypothesis	of	freedom;
In	fact,	freedom	is	the	real	god.
And	the	whole	effort	of	sannyas	is
To	help	you	to	be	free
To	be	free	from	all	traditions
All	orthodoxies,	all	conventions
To	be	free	from	all	your	inner	darkness
Unconsciousness,	instincts,	mechanicalness.
In	a	single	word,	to	be	free.
And	to	live	in	freedom
Is	to	live	a	spiritual	life
But	your	so-called	saints	live	in	slavery.
They	are	not	free	people,	they	are	really
The	greatest	slaves	on	the	earth,
Slaves	of	dead	ideas,	ideologies.
Here	you	have	to	learn
How	to	be	free,	free	of	everything.
Once	your	consciousness	is	completely	free
It	is	no	more	imprisoned,
The	imprisoned	splendor	is	released.
For	the	first	time	you	know
Who	you	are,	your	glory,	your	beauty.
And	that	experience	is	the	experience	for	which
Jesus	lived	and	died
Buddha	lived	and	taught	his	whole	life
Socrates	sacrificed	himself.
Up	to	now	only	for	very	few	people
It	has	been	possible
To	taste	that	joy	of	freedom.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	it	available
To	as	many	people	as	possible.
The	time	has	come
That	the	fragrance	of	freedom
Should	be	spread	all	over	the	earth.
(To	Edda)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Sonar.
Deva	means	divine.	Sonar	means	gold.
Man	is	both	dust	and	gold,	dust	and	divine.
Form	the	outside	he	is	just	dust.
If	you	observe	him	you	cannot	find	any	gold
If	scientifically	you	analyse	him
You	will	find	nothing	else	but	matter.
But	if	you	meditatively	go
Into	your	own	interiority
You	will	not	find	dust	at	all
You	will	not	find	matter	at	all.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	will	find	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
You	will	find	something
Which	is	absolutely	non-material:
You	will	find	energy,	pure	energy
You	will	find	godliness,	spirituality.
That	is	your	true	being
Dust	only	make	you	...	(inaudible)
So	when	you	die	it	is	right	to	say	dust	unto	dust
But	that	is	only	half	truth:
The	inner	being	never	dies
But	it	can't	be	seen	from	the	outside.
You	can	see	it
Only	from	the	innermost	core	of	your	being.
Once	you	have	seen	it	within	yourself
You	can	see	it	in	others	also
But	the	first	experience
Has	to	happen	within	yourself.
The	moment	you	know	that
You	are	more	than	the	body,	suddenly
The	whole	existence	is	more	than	it	appears
And	that	more	is	its	reality,
And	that	more	is	eternal,	immortal.
It	knows	no	death,	no	birth.
And	that	more	is	blissful,	it	knows	no	misery.
That	more	is	pure	light,
It	has	never	known	any	darkness.
(To	Anton)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Purno.
Purno	means	the	perfect	one.
Nobody	is	imperfect
Hence	nobody	need	to	be	perfect.
All	that	is	needed	is	to	live	your	life	totally.
Perfection	is	already	there
We	come	from	the	perfect
Hence	we	can't	be	imperfect
We	are	born	out	of	the	ultimate
We	are	waves	in	the	ocean	of	god
So	whatsoever	is	the	quality	of	god
Is	the	quality	of	the	waves:
If	god	is	perfect,	we	are	perfect.
So	the	very	idea	of	becoming	perfect	is	absurd.
There	is	no	need	to	become	perfect
Everyone	is	already	perfect
But	we	are	not	living	that	perfection
In	its	totality,	we	are	living	at	the	minimum.
We	are	not	using	our	potential
We	are	using	only	a	minor	part	of	it;
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Scientists	say,	not	more	that	seven	per	cent,
Ninety-three	per	cent	potential	is	simply	lost.
And	it	was	always	there,	available	for	us	to	use.
We	have	all	the	money	that	we	need
But	we	are	living	like	a	beggar,
For	the	simple	reason	that
We	have	completely	forgotten	about	the	treasure.
The	function	of	meditation	is:
To	remember	it,	to	discover	it.
And	the	only	way	to	discover	it
The	only	way	to	remember	it,	is	to	live
More	totally,	more	intensely,	more	passionately
So	that	more	and	more	potential
Is	transformed	into	the	actual.
When	you	live	hundred	per	cent	you	are	really
Using	the	great	opportunity
That	god	has	given	to	you.
And	only	at	the	hundred	per	cent
The	transformation	happens,	never	before	it.
So	my	effort	here	is	not	to	make	you	escapists
But	in	the	contrary
To	make	you	love	life	as	intensely	as	possible
To	live	each	moment	as	holy	as	possible
And	slowly	slowly
Something	starts	unfolding	in	you
And	you	start	discovering	yourself.
The	more	challenges	you	give	to	yourself,
The	more	you	discover.
(To	Marijke)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anuraga.
Anuraga	means	love.
Love	is	my	message,	the	whole	message.
The	small	word	contains
Everything	that	I	want	to	convey	to	you.
If	you	can	live	lovingly,	nothing	else	is	needed.
If	you	can	understand	the	ways	of	love
You	will	understand	everything	else.
If	you	can	go	on	purifying	your	love
From	all	that	is	unclean,	from	all
That	is	not	love	but	pretends	to	be	love,
At	the	peak	of	that	purification
You	will	find	god.
God	is	nothing	but	love	in	its	purest	form
In	its	most	essential	form.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love,	your	so-called	love
Is	very	much	contaminated,	polluted.
The	ego	is	there	which	is	like	a	poison
And	the	ego	never	comes	alone;
It	comes	with	a	great	army.
It	comes	with	anger,	with	jealousy,	with	hatred
With	all	kinds	of	numbers,	trips;
It	wants	to	dominate
It	is	ready	to	destroy	one's	peace
It	is	ready	to	be	destructive
To	oneself	and	to	the	other.	It	is	very	suicidal
But	pretends	to	be	love
And	because	it	pretends	to	be	love
We	go	on	being	deceived	by	it.
Beware	of	it!
It	is	the	ego	that	does	not	allow	people
Flowering,	fulfillment,	fruition,	otherwise
Everybody	has	the	seed	to	become
A	beautiful	flower	of	love,	a	lotus.
But	very	few	people	have	been	able	to	become
For	the	simple	reason
That	very	few	people	are	alert;
They	can't	discriminate	what	is	what.
Watch	how	many	things	are	pretending	to	be	love
Which	are	not	love,	which	cannot	be	love.
If	they	are	love;	they	cannot	create	misery	--
Let	that	be	the	criterion:	If	they	create	misery
Then	they	are	not	love,	then	get	rid	of	them.
Love	always	gives	bliss,
It	can	never	give	misery	--	remember	it	always
Never	forget	it	for	a	single	moment.
But	people	are	so	stupid:
Rather	than	dropping	those	ugly	things
Which	go	on	masquerading	as	love
They	are	ready	to	drop	love	itself.
That's	what	for	thousands	of	years
Monks	and	nuns	have	done:	They	dropped	love.
They	were	ready	to	drop	love	but
They	were	not	ready	to	drop	jealousy,
Possessiveness,	domination,	ego.
They	saved	ego	and	they	dropped	love,
They	escaped	from	the	world
Because	world	means	opportunities	for	love.
They	moved	into	the	monasteries.
Monks	lived	separately
Nuns	lived	separately	--	they	will	not	meet.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	are	monasteries
Where	no	woman	has	ever	entered
Has	never	been	allowed	to	enter
For	the	simple	reason
That	any	opportunity	for	love	is	dangerous.
They	are	so	much	afraid	of	love.
And	these	stupid	people	have	been	called	saints
For	centuries.
Hitherto,	man's	history	has	been
such	a	history	of	stupidity	that
Future	is	going	to	laugh	at	the	whole	thing,
Our	children	will	not	be	able	to	believe
That	people	were	ready
To	drop	the	real	thing	for	the	unreal
But	they	were	not	ready
To	drop	the	unreal	for	the	real.
That	you	have	to	remember.
Your	name	will	remind	you	again	and	again.
(To	Ernst)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anuragi.
It	means	love.
Love	has	nothing	to	do	with	relationship
It	is	more	a	state	of	being.
You	have	to	become	a	loving	person.
It	is	not	a	question	of	being	in	relationship	--
I	am	not	saying	don't	be	in	relationships;
Be	in	as	many	relationships	as	possible
Because	each	relationship	has	its	own	uniqueness
And	each	relationship	has	its	own	beauty
And	each	relationship	contributes	its	own	joy
And	of	course	its	own	suffering,	its	own	pain
It	has	its	own	dark	nights
And	its	own	beautiful	days,
But	that's	how	one	grows:
Through	darkness,	through	light
Through	sweetness,	through	bitterness.
I	am	not	against	relationships
But	one	thing	has	to	be	clearly	in	our	vision,
That	ultimately
Love	is	more	a	question	of	inner	state:
You	have	to	be	loving,
Whether	in	relationship	or	not
That	is	not	the	question.
And	you	have	to	be	loving	to	all:
To	the	trees,	to	the	birds,	to	the	animals
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	people	--	you	have	to	be	loving	in	general.
Even	if	there	is	nobody
And	you	are	sitting	silently,	alone,	still
You	have	to	radiate	love:	Just	a	flower
Will	go	on	releasing	its	perfume
Whether	anybody	is	there	or	not,
Just	as	a	candle	will	go	on	giving	its	light
Whether	there	is	anybody	or	not.
So	is	a	loving	person:
His	love	is	a	perfume,	his	love	is	a	light.
If	there	is	nobody	to	share,
It	still	radiates,	it	still	goes	on	spreading
Because	the	loving	person	can't	do	otherwise.
Once	that	state	is	attained	you	become	religious.
Religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	rituals
Nothing	to	do	with	churches	and	temples,
And	the	Bibles	and	the	Gitas	and	the	Korans.
Religion	has	something	to	do
With	an	inner	state	of	love.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	god	really.
If	you	are	loving
If	you	reach	to	the	pinnacle	of	love
God	is	bound	to	happen	to	you.
That	is	inevitable
So	we	need	not	bother	about	it
We	need	not	even	take	any	note	of	it
We	need	not	even	discuss	about	it.
It	is	inevitable,	it	follows	love	like	a	shadow.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005215
ShortTitle:	ISLAND21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Nika)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Nika.
Anand	means	bliss.	Nika	has	two	meanings.	Both
Are	beautiful	and	both	are	interdependent.	The
First	meaning	is	born	on	Sunday	and	the	second
Meaning	is	belonging	to	god.
God	created	the	world	in	six	days.
The	seventh	day	was	his	day	--	he	rested.
The	seventh	day	belonged	to	him
Hence	it	is	called	a	holy	day,	it	is	divine.
And	rest	has	something	about	it	which	is	divine:
Relaxation	is	divine.
The	hold	of,	the	whole	art	of	meditation	is	nothing	but	The	art	of	creating	a	deep
inner	rest
A	relaxed	state	of	being.
Six	days	you	are	involved	in	the	world
Thousand	and	one	things	have	to	be	done.
Seventh	day	you	relax	into	yourself
You	rest	into	yourself;
It	rejuvenates,	it	again	resurrects	you.
That's	why	I	say	both	are	related:
Born	on	Sunday	and	belonging	to	god.
Rest	is	the	way	to	belong	to	god
And	if	one	knows	the	art	of	restfulness
One	can	act	and	yet	be	in	rest.
The	Jewish	god
And	the	Christian	and	the	Mohammedan	god
Which	are	by-products	of	the	Jewish	god
Is	not	so	clear	about	it	as	the	Eastern	god	is.
The	Eastern	concept	of	god	is	not	that
Sometimes	he	works	and	sometimes	he	rests.
The	eastern	concept	of	god	is:
His	work	is	his	rest.
That	is	a	far	higher	dimension,
Then	every	day	is	a	holy	day
Then	there	is	no	division,
Your	action	and	your	meditation
Are	not	two	separate	things.
Your	creativity	and	your	relaxation
Are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.
And	that's	how	my	sannyasins	have	to	be.
There	is	no	need	to	find
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	separate	corner	in	your	life	for	meditation.
Meditation	should	spread	all	over	your	life
Each	moment	should	have	the	color	of	meditation.
Even	while	working
You	should	be	at	rest,	you	should	remain	centered.
You	should	not	get	disturbed,	distracted.
Hence	in	the	East	there	is	no	idea	of	a	holy	day.
Before	Christians	came	to	the	East
There	was	no	question	of	a	holiday	because
The	Eastern	god	continuously	is	creative.
A	Sannyasin	has	to	learn	the	art
Of	being	active	and	inactive	at	the	same	time.
It	is	a	very	paradoxical	phenomenon
But	once	you	know	the	knack	of	it
It	is	the	most	beautiful	thing
That	can	happen	to	a	man.
Then	you	can	be	in	the	world
And	yet	be	free	of	it
Then	you	can	be	anywhere,	even	in	hell
And	still	you	will	be	in	heaven.
Then	one	does	not	care	where	one	is;
Wherever	one	is
One	carries	one's	paradise	within	oneself.
(To	Lieve)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Asti	Lieve.
Asti	means	existence.	Lieve	means	a	dear	one.
Existence	loves	all.
Existence	is	not	indifferent	to	us
But	is	appears	indifferent	for	the	simple	reason
Because	we	are	indifferent.
Existence	only	reflects.
It	is	a	mirror:	It	echoes	us	back.
If	we	shout	at	it,	it	shouts	at	us.
If	we	sing	to	it,	the	song	is	returned.
Whatsoever	we	do	to	it
Is	returned	in	a	thousandfold	way
Because	it	is	returned	from	all	the	directions
From	all	the	dimensions
From	all	the	planed	of	existence.
It	appears	indifferent	because	we	are	not	loving.
Once	you	start	loving	all	that	is	--
The	river,	the	mountain,	the	stars,
The	people,	the	animals,
Once	you	start	getting	involved	into	life
With	deep	love,	with	great	intensity
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
With	a	fire	in	your	heart,
Once	you	become	warmed	up
The	whole	existence	becomes	warm	towards	you.
It	always	pays	in	the	same	coin.
It	looks	meaningless
Because	we	don't	create	meaning.
It	looks	as	if	it	is	very	dull	and	drab
Because	we	are	dull	and	drab.
To	a	Buddha	it	does	not	appear	like	that.
Buddha	has	said,
'The	moment	I	became	enlightened
The	whole	existence	became	enlightened.'
And	I	can	vouch	for	him.	I	am	a	witness:
What	he	says	is	absolutely	true.
That's	my	experience	too:
Whatsoever	you	are,	existence	is	that	for	you.
Now	all	over	the	world
Thinkers	are	very	much	worried
That	existence	has	no	meaning
And	the	only	thing	they	should	be	worried	is
That	man	has	lost	the	capacity	to	create	meaning.
Existence	seems	to	be	indifferent
And	the	only	thing	is
That	we	have	become	indifferent	and	cold.
Meditation	will	teach	you	two	things:
Meditation
As	far	as	you	inner	world	is	concerned,
And	love
As	far	as	the	whole	existence	is	concerned.
Meditation	has	to	be	your	center,
Awareness,	a	silent	watchfulness
And	love	has	to	be	your	circumference,
A	warmth,	for	no	reason	at	all	--
Because	it	is	so	beautiful	to	be	warm
It	is	so	delightful	to	be	warm.
At	the	center	be	meditative
At	the	circumference	be	loving
And	you	will	see	the	whole	existence	change.
It	is	the	same	existence;
In	fact	you	are	changing
But	immediately,	as	you	change
The	whole	existence	changes	with	you.
(To	Rita)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Gito.
Anand	means	bliss;	gito	means	a	song	--	a	song	of	bliss.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	definition	of	a	sannyasin	is	a	song	of	bliss.
The	old	definition	of	sannyas	was	escapist.
The	old	saints	used	to	be	very	sad
Serious,	with	long	faces.
And	naturally	they	had	to	be	sad
Because	they	were	torturing	themselves
They	were	practicing	masochism
In	the	name	of	asceticism.
In	the	name	of	religion	they	were	really
Practicing	neurotics.
And	their	neurosis	was	of	their	own	creation
Hence	they	were	incurable	because
If	a	neurosis	happens	to	you	as	a	disease
You	can	be	cured,	but	if	you	practise	it
And	you	think	it	is	something	holy
And	something	sacred
Then	it	is	impossible	to	cure	you.
And	they	were	respected	and	worshipped	for	it
So	why	they	should	think	of	being	cured	of	it?
Their	egos	were	fulfilled	by	it,
But	they	were	no	saints.
The	whole	idea	was	stupid
The	whole	idea	was	wrong,	basically	wrong
Wrong	from	the	very	beginning,
And	that	idea	has	persisted	up	to	now.
That's	why	my	sannyasins
Have	to	be	condemned	all	over	the	world.
Christians	will	condemn	them
Hindus	will	condemn	them
Mohammedans	will	condemn	them	--
Everybody	is	going	to	condemn	them
Because	they	all	have	a	certain	idea	of	how
A	sannyasin,	a	monk,	a	saint	should	be.
And	what	they	call	a	saint,	I	call	a	masochist	And	what	I	call	a	sannyasin,	they
think	that
My	sannyasins	are	materialists,	indulgent.
Our	values	are	different
Our	perceptions	are	different.
Life	has	to	be	rejoiced
Life	has	to	be	lived	in	its	totality.
It	is	not	indulgence	and	if	it	is	indulgence
Then	god	is	very	indulgent	--	what	can	you	do?
He	has	created	this	life
And	he	does	not	seem	to	be	an	ascetic
Otherwise	why	those	flowers
And	rainbows	and	butterflies	--	for	what?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	think	an	ascetic	god
Will	create	so	may	flowers,	so	many	colors
So	many	trees,	so	may	stars?
Darkness	would	have	been	perfectly	sacred.
In	fact,	an	ascetic	god
Would	not	have	created	any	kind	of	beauty;
He	would	have	made	everybody
So	ugly	and	disgusting	that
Nobody	would	have	ever	thought	of	love.
But	he	makes	people	beautiful
He	makes	people	lovely.
God	is	not	an	ascetic	--
That	much	is	absolutely	certain.
God	is	a	lover,	a	creator,	a	poet
A	singer,	a	dancer.
God	is	not	a	neurotic	person
And	he	is	not	perfectionist	at	all,	otherwise
He	would	have	created	the	perfect	world.
In	the	very	beginning.
There	would	have	been	no	evolution	at	all
He	would	have	created	everybody	a	saint.
Everybody	would	have	been	a	born-saint
There	would	have	been	so	need
Of	any	religion,	of	any	growth,
But	god	creates	opportunities	to	grow.
He	is	not	a	perfectionist	either:
He	loves	growth,	he	loves	enquiry
He	loves	people	discovering	themselves.
He	is	tremendously	interested
In	people	growing	on	their	own	accord.
He	accepts	it	that	sometimes	they	will	go	astray;
Otherwise	they	cannot	grow.
And	he	accepts	that	they	will	commit	mistakes;
Without	committing	mistakes
Nobody	can	ever	learn.
God	is	not	a	saint	--	that	much	is	certain.
If	there	is	any	god
He	is	going	to	be	something	like	my	sannyasin:
Utterly	in	love	with	existence	and	life
Otherwise	he	would	not	have	created.
And	you	have	to	learn	a	new	kind	of	religiousness.
A	religiousness	that	can	sing,	dance,	celebrate.
(To	Connie)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Sarjana.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Sarjana	means	creativity.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	is	inevitable	creative,
It	cannot	be	otherwise.
First	it	creates	you	and	then
It	creates	thousand	and	one	things	around	you.
And	it	goes	on	creating
It	goes	on	finding	new	ways	to	be	creative
New	methods	to	be	creative;	it	never	tires
It	is	never	bored	with	creativity.
It	is	always	thrilled	with	new	projects
It	is	always	full	of	new	dreams
Which	have	to	be	materialized.
But	the	old	idea	of	meditation
Was	very	uncreative,	hence	I	say
It	was	not	meditation,	it	was	a	kind	of	suicide.
Real	meditation	cannot	be	uncreative.
Creativity	is	the	criterion
Whether	the	meditation	is	true	or	false.
If	it	releases	creative	energy	in	you
Whatsoever	you	are	doing,
If	you	start	enjoying	it	more
If	you	start	getting
More	and	more	involved	into	life,	if	you	start
Squeezing	each	moment	its	total	juice
If	you	start	living	moment	to	moment
With	such	utter	abandon
As	if	there	is	no	other	moment	left,
This	is	the	last	moment
So	you	have	to	live	it	totally
Otherwise	you	will	never	live	again	--
Then	your	meditation
Is	moving	in	the	right	direction.
If	it	makes	you	uncreative,	escapist
If	it	creates	the	idea	of	renunciation	in	you	--
Renounce	life	and	run	away	from	life
Become	a	dropout	and	go	to	the	mountains,
That	means	it	is	not	meditation	--
Something	else	masquerading	as	meditation.
It	is	just	a	slow	kind	of	suicide
And	the	old	idea	of	religion
Has	been	very	suicidal
That's	why	you	will	be	surprised:
In	the	East	very	few	people	commit	suicide
In	the	West	more	people	commit	suicide.
And	the	Eastern	so-called	mahatmas	and	saints
Brag	about	it.	They	say,	'Look!
Our	people	are	so	religious
They	don't	commit	suicide,
And	Western	people	are	so	materialist,	that's	why
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
They	are	going	mad	and	they	are	committing	suicide.'
But	their	argument	is	utterly	false.
My	own	observation	is	totally	different:
In	the	East	you	need	not	commit	suicide
You	can	become	religious	--	that	is	an	alternative.
You	can	go	to	the	Himalayas:	There	are
Five	hundred	thousand	Hindu	monks	in	India.
If	these	people	were	in	the	West,
They	would	have	committed	suicide
Because	there	is	no	alternative.
And	this	is	easier	than	committing	suicide.
Committing	suicide	needs	a	little	courage
It	needs	really	guts;	it	is	not	for	cowards.
Cowards	go	on	lingering,
They	take	their	time,	they	die	slowly
But	religion	provides	them
A	slow	kind	of	suicide,	a	gradual	kind	of	suicide.
Escape	form	the	world	--	that	is	a	suicide.
Live	in	a	cave	in	the	Himalayas	--
That	is	almost	living	in	your	grave!
What	is	the	difference
Between	a	grave	and	a	cave?
The	only	difference	is	that	you	are	breathing
But	why	bother	about	breathing?
Why	so	much	trouble?
Just	lie	down	in	the	grave	and	be	finished.
That	seems	to	be	far	easier
Far	more	comfortable	and	convenient,
For	you	and	for	others	too.
Because	if	you	live	in	a	cave	then
Somebody	else	has	to	carry	food	to	the	cave,
Some	fool	is	bound	to	serve	you	...
And	it	is	unnecessary.
The	reason	why	people
Don't	commit	suicide	in	the	East	is
Because	here	is	a	religious	alternative;
In	the	West	the	religious	alternative
Is	no	more	available;	in	the	past	it	was	there.
Christians	monasteries	were	there
And	people	were	not	committing	suicide
Now	Christianity	has	lost	its	relevance	but
In	the	East	the	grip	of	religion	is	still	great.
My	religion	is	not	suicidal.
It	is	life-affirmative
It	is	tremendous	love	for	life
It	is	rejoicing	in	life.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	meditate
And	release	all	your	potential	of	creativity.
That's	my	message.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005225
ShortTitle:	ISLAND22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Sanjay)	--	Your	name:	Swami	Sanjay	Bharti.	Sanjay	means	victory	and	not
just	victory	but	right	victory.
That	 word	 right,	 'sam'	 is	 of	 immense	 importance.	 All	 the	 great	 words	 are
composed	 of	 it.	 Sambodhi,	which	means	 enlightenment	 comes	 from	 the	 same
root	'sam'.	Samadhi,	which	means	ultimate	achievement,	self-realization,	comes
from	the	same	root	'sam'.
Gautam	Buddha	was	immensely	in	love	with	the	word	'sam';	whatsoever	he	will
say	he	will	always	use	 the	word	 'sam'.	The	eightfold	path	 that	he	preached,	all
the	eight	 links	 start	with	 sam:	Samyaksmrati,	 right	 remembrance,	Samyakahar,
right	food	--	whatsoever	he	will	say	he	will	always	emphasize	that	it	should	be
right	because	 the	problem	is	with	man's	unconsciousness.	With	 this	everything
can	go	wrong.	Even	beautiful	things	can	go	wrong,	they	have	gone	wrong.	You
give	 them	gold	 and	 the	moment	 their	 unconsciousness	 touches	 it,	 it	 turns	 into
dust;	 they	 have	 to	 be	 constantly	 reminded	 how	 to	 use	 it	 rightly,	 how	 not	 to
destroy	it.
And	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 problems	 of	 life	 is	 that	 light	 is	 not	 destroyed	 by
darkness.	 Light	 has	 no	 danger	 from	 darkness.	What	 can	 darkness	 do	 to	 light?
Light	is	in	danger	from	a	false	light.	The	flower	has	no	danger	from	the	leaves
and	the	thorns.	The	flower	has	danger	from	pseudo	flowers;	 the	paper	flowers,
the	plastic	flowers.	And	they	are	cheap	and	they	are	easily	available.	Religion	is
not	in	any	danger	from	irreligiousness.	Religion	is	always	in	danger	from	pseudo
religion.	Hence	just	to	say	religion	is	not	enough,	it	has	to	be	preceded	by	right	--
right	religion	so	that	you	remember	always,	so	that	you	can	always	check	and	be
absolute	 certain	 before	 you	 start	 moving	 into	 anything,	 whether	 it	 is	 false	 or
right,	whether	it	is	pseudo	or	real.
The	pseudo	victory	is	through	violence	and	the	right	victory	is	through	love.	The
pseudo	victory	 is	enforced	on	 the	other.	The	right	victory	 is	never	enforced	on
the	other;	on	the	contrary	there	is	no	effort	to	enforce	anything	at	all.	Not	in	the
least,	not	even	in	any	indirect,	subtle	way.	There	is	no	desire	to	impose	anything.
But	when	you	love	deeply,	victory	comes	on	its	own	accord.
Love	 is	 victorious	 and	 it	 brings	 right	 victory	 because	 it	 does	 not	 destroy	 the
other.	On	the	contrary,	it	enhances	the	other.	It	makes	the	other	more	valuable,	it
makes	the	other's	freedom	more	solid,	more	crystallized.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	gives	you	an	insight	into	rightness.	Then	you	can	apply	that	rightness
to	all	dimensions	of	 life.	Then	whatsoever	you	do,	 remember,	 it	 should	not	be
false	and	pseudo,	it	should	not	be	a	pretension;	it	should	be	authentic	and	true.
And	once	you	start	living	a	life	of	truth,	there	is	great	joy!	Joy	follows	truth	like
a	shadow.	Now	start	meditating.	Good.
(To	Koya)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Vandan.
Prem	means	love.	Vandan	means	prayer.
The	only	prayer	worth	calling	prayer	is	love;
All	other	prayers	are	only	so-called	prayers.
They	are	pseudo,	they	are	just	poor	substitutes:
Because	people	cannot	love,	they	pray.
Of	course	their	prayer	gives	them
A	certain	consolation.
Man	is	so	cunning	in	deceiving	others
That	ultimately	he	starts	deceiving	himself.
He	cannot	love	human	beings
So	he	starts	loving	humanity.
Now	that	is	a	strategy:
The	mind	is	befooling	you.
Where	you	are	going	to	find	humanity?
Whenever	you	will	find
You	will	always	find	a	concrete	human	being.
Humanity	is	only	an	abstract	concept
Just	an	idea	--	you	cannot	love	an	idea
But	it	is	easy	to	love	an	idea
Because	it	creates	no	trouble
You	are	not	expected	to	sacrifice	anything,
You	can	remain	the	same	and	you	can	brag
That	you	are	a	great	lover	of	humanity.
People	who	cannot	love	existence
Start	loving	god.
Now	existence	is	here	now
And	god	is	just	in	your	mind,	just	a	concept.
It	does	not	exist	but	it	is	easy	to	love	god.
It	is	difficult	to	love	a	tree:	Even	a	tree
Will	create	trouble	for	you	if	you	love	the	tree
Because	it	has	its	own	moods.
And	if	you	love	a	tree
You	are	risking	many	things	because
One	day	the	tree	can	die	--
That	is	the	greatest	risk
And	you	will	be	left	alone
And	you	will	feel	empty.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
People	are	afraid	of	love.
It	is	easy	to	love	god.	God	never	dies,
Because	god	never	is	in	the	first	place.
It	is	impossible
For	something	that	does	not	exist	to	die.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	declared
In	the	beginning	of	this	century
That	god	is	dead.
And	I	say	he	was	utterly	wrong
Because	god	can	be	dead	only	if	he	was	alive!
He	has	never	been	alive	in	the	first	place.
Nietzsche	must	have	been
A	far	more	religious	man	that	I	am.
At	least	he	believed
That	god	has	lived	up	to	now..
And	he	gave	a	long	life	to	god,
Since	the	very	beginning,	almost	an	eternity.
He	does	not	allow	any	future	to	him
But	he	allows	the	past.
But	I	say	to	you
That	god	neither	has	a	past	nor	future.
Godliness	is	true
But	god	is	only	a	philosophical	concept.
Hence	Buddha
Who	was	the	most	enlightened	man	in	the	world	Never	talked	of	god.
He	certainly	talked	about	godliness
But	to	love	godliness,	you	will	have	to	love
All	the	manifestations:	The	river,	the	mountain
The	stars,	the	people,	the	animals...
And	I	call	this	love	prayer.
The	people	who	pray	in	the	churches
In	the	temples,	in	the	mosques
Are	simply	deceiving	themselves	and	nobody	else.
They	are	simply	wasting	their	time.
It	has	no	more	value	that	playing	cards;
Playing	cards	is	a	mundane	way
Of	wasting	your	time
And	going	to	a	church	on	the	Sunday
Is	a	religious	way	of	wasting	your	time.
But	a	real	religious	man	lives	his	prayer.
It	is	a	question	of	living,	breathing.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Breathe	prayer,	live	prayer
Love	this	beautiful	existence,
And	it	is	through	this	love
You	will	become	aware
Of	the	immense	presence	of	godliness	everywhere.
And	I	repeat	again:	not	of	god	but	of	godliness.
(To	Tomoko)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Prartho.
Anand	means	bliss.	Prartho	means	prayer.
To	be	blissful	is	to	be	prayerful.
To	live	blissfully,	is	a	dancing	way,
Enjoying	each	moment	of	life
Is	the	way	of	sannyas.
I	am	not	against	the	world,	not	against	life.
I	am	in	tremendous	love	with	the	world	and	life
And	I	teach	my	sannyasins
To	be	great	lovers	of	life.
Dance	with	the	wind,	dance	when	it	is	raining
Dance	with	the	trees
And	you	will	be	surprised	that
Religion	is	not	in	the	scriptures,
It	is	spread	all	over	existence
From	the	dance	of	a	peacock
Or	a	cuckoo	calling	from	a	faraway	distance
Or	somebody	playing	on	a	flute.
Religion	is	not	something	dead
And	scriptures	are	all	dead.
Religion	is	very	much	alive
And	you	have	to	be	alive
To	make	contact	with	it.
If	you	live	in	misery,	you	live	in	death,
If	you	live	in	bliss
You	become	more	and	more	alive.
When	your	bliss	reaches	to	a	peak
To	an	orgasmic	peak,	then	you	contact	existence.
And	that	contact	gives	you	the	proof
That	live	is	not	only	matter	but	something	more.
And	that	something	more	is	indefinable.
You	can	call	it	XYZ,	enlightenment,	tao,
Truth,	godliness,	but	these
Are	just	words	to	indicate	to	something
Which	cannot	be	contained	in	any	word.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	only	way	to	know	it	is	through	bliss.
So	here,	learn	to	be	blissful.
This	is	not	a	place	to	be	sad	and	serious.
This	is	a	place	to	be	playful
This	is	a	place	to	take	life	as	fun
And	death	too	as	fun!
(To	Michael)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Gitam.
Prem	means	love;	gitam	means	a	song	--	a	love	song.
That's	all	one	needs	to	become
And	life	is	fulfilled!
If	one	is	not	able	to	become	a	song
Life	remains	empty,	meaningless.
And	people	try
To	become	everything	except	a	song.
They	want	to	become	rich,	powerful,	famous
But	in	becoming	rich
In	becoming	politically	powerful
In	becoming	famous	they	lose	all	qualities
That	can	make	their	life	joyous;
They	lose	all	cheerfulness,	they	become	serious
They	have	to	become	serious	because
The	things	that	they	are	trying	to	achieve
Are	competitive,	they	are	all	ego	trips,
And	ego	is	a	very	serious	thing.
Ego	never	takes	anything	as	fun.
Fun	seems	to	be	dangerous	for	the	ego.
Ego	is	never	playful,	it	is	very	serious.
Hence	egoists	tend	to	become	saints
Because	that	seems	to	be	the	easiest	way
To	become	powerful,	respected,	famous	--
And	without	losing	your	seriousness	at	all:
In	fact,	you	can	become	more	and	more	serious
As	you	become	a	bigger	saint.
But	you	become	more	and	more	dead	too...
Have	you	ever	seen	a	dead	man	laughing?
Dead	men	are	very	serious,	bound	to	be!
They	can't	laugh.	That	will	be	out	of	place.
And	they	follow	all	the	manners
That	dead	people	should	follow.
There	is	a	famous	story	about	a	Sufi	mystic
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Who	was	a	great	philosopher	also.
He	was	always	worried	that,
'How	I	will	know	when	I	die	that	I	am	dead?'
Philosophers	are	always	worried
About	such	stupid	things.
His	wife	told	him,	'This	is	all	nonsense,
I	don't	think	this	is	philosophy	because
When	you	are	dead,	you	will	know.'
But	the	man	said,	'How?
How	I	will	be	certain	that	I	am	really	dead?'
The	wife	said,	'You	will	know	because
You	will	become	cold.	So	don't	bother	me!
You	will	know	perfectly	well.
You	will	become	cold.'
So	he	said,	'Okay.	If	this	is	an	indication
Then	the	problem	is	solved.'
One	day	he	was	in	the	forest	and	lost	the	way
And	it	was	a	cold	night
And	he	started	shivering	and	becoming	very	cold
And	he	was	on	his	donkey.	He	told	to	the	donkey,
'Listen	--	it	seems	I	am	dying.
That's	what	my	wife	has	said
And	she	has	never	said	anything	wrong.
She	is	always	right,	always	I	prove	to	be	wrong,
So	she	must	be	right.	So	...
And	she	had	told	me	that
You	will	know	perfectly	well
And	now	I	am	knowing	it	perfectly	well
That	everything	is	becoming	cold
So	goodbye	friend!	You	served	me	many	days
And	I	have	to	leave	you	in	this	jungle
And	I	don't	know	what	will	happen	to	you,
But	god	will	take	care	of	you!'
So	he	lies	down	underneath	a	tree
Because	he	thought,
'That's	how	dead	people	are	expected	to	behave.'
He	has	always	seen	them	lying	down!
You	don't	see	dead	people
Riding	on	their	donkeys	or	sitting	or	standing.
He	remembered	--	he	has	seen	many	dead	people
So	this	is	the	way	how	one	should	behave.
So	he	told	to	the	donkey	that,
'You	can	stand	or	whatsoever	you	want	you	can	do
But	I	have	to	lie	down	--	I	am	dead!'
And	of	course	when	he	laid	himself
Down	under	a	tree,	he	became	more	cold
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	it	was	absolutely	certain	that	death	has	come.
At	that	very	moment
Two	wolves	came	and	attacked	the	donkey.
Now	he	is	seeing.
He	became	very	puzzled	--	what	to	do?
In	such	a	situation
What	a	dead	man	is	expected	to	do?
That	is	the	problem:	'Now	the	wife	is	not	here
I	cannot	ask	anybody	else.
My	donkey	is	being	attacked	and	I	am	dead!'
So	at	the	most	he	said	to	the	wolves,
'Listen	--	you	can	do	whatsoever	you	can	do
But	this	is	not	good:	having	in	such	a	way
With	a	dead	man's	donkey!	Had	I	been	alive
I	would	have	taught	you	a	lesson!
But	now	it	is	too	late,
I	cannot	do	anything	else.'
And	he	said	to	the	donkey,	'Forgive	me	,sir.
Don't	have	any	expectations	from	me
Because	I	am	dead!'
Dead	people	have	their	own	manners,	etiquette.
And	one	thing	is	absolutely	certain:
Nobody	has	ever	seen	a	dead	man	laughing.
That	seems	to	be
An	absolute	commandment	for	dead	people:
Don't	laugh.	Laughter	is	not	allowed.
But	the	people	who	stop	laughter
While	they	are	alive,	start	becoming	dead.
Rejoice!	Rejoice	as	much	as	you	can,
Become	more	and	more	alive	as	much	as	you	can.
To	me,	to	be	religious	means
To	be	overflowing	with	life
So	abundantly	overflowing
That	you	can	share	your	life	with	others
That	you	can	make	a	few	dead	people	alive.
That	should	be	the	way	of	a	sannyasin:
He	should	become	himself	alive
And	he	should	make	others	alive.
He	should	trigger	the	process	of	being	alive
Into	others	--	and	there	are	many	who	are	dead
There	are	many	who	are	cold
Who	has	lost	all	warmth,	who	has	lost	all	love
Who	has	lost	all	laughter.
(To	Bruno)	--	Hello,	Bruno!	Come	here.
So	finally	you	have	come!
Yes.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That's	 good	 --	 I	 was	 waiting	 for	 you.	 Good.	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Veet
Niten.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Niten	means	morality.
Morality	is	not	religion.	Of	course,	religious	people	are	moral	but	the	vice	versa
is	not	true:	moral	people	are	not	religious;	moral	people	are	simply	pretending	to
be	religious.	They	are	wearing	a	mask,	a	face.	The	mask	may	be	beautiful,	 the
face	 may	 be	 beautiful,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 veil:	 it	 hides	 your	 reality.	 It	 gives	 you	 a
beautiful	appearance	but	you	lose	all	track	of	your	authentic	being.
The	moral	person	lives	according	to	the	social	dictates.	He	is	not	a	free	man.	He
lives	according	to	the	ten	commandments:	Do	this,	don't	do	that.	His	whole	life
is	being	 ruled	by	others:	 the	powerful,	 the	orthodox,	 the	priest,	 the	politicians,
the	people	who	are	dominating	 the	establishment.	But	he	 is	moral	only	on	 the
surface,	 his	morality	 is	 not	 even	 skin-deep.	 If	 you	 scratch	 him	 a	 little	 deeper,
immediately	 his	 immorality	 comes	 up.	 His	 unconscious	 is	 full	 of	 all	 kinds	 of
scorpions	and	snakes	and	all	kinds	of	wild	animals.	And	he	is	afraid	of	them,	he
has	repressed	them.	He	is	sitting	on	top	of	them	as	if	on	top	of	a	volcano.	And	he
is	very	fearful,	trembling	constantly	because	the	volcano	can	erupt	any	moment.
His	life	is	a	life	of	misery	and	he	has	to	live	a	double	kind	of	life.	On	the	front
door	he	is	one	person,	on	the	back	door,	he	is	a	totally	different	person.
My	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 live	 a	 single	 life,	 integrated,	 true	 to	 the	 very	 core.
Whatsoever	he	is,	he	is.	He	has	no	need	of	any	masks,	no	desire	to	hide	behind
anything.	He	simply	allows	himself	--	he	exposes	himself	to	the	world	as	he	is,
in	his	total	nudity,	without	any	fear.	He	stands	before	god	utterly	naked.	And	that
is	 the	only	way	 to	 encounter	god,	 that	 is	 the	only	way	 to	 encounter	 existence.
And	then	a	totally	different	kind	of	morality	arises,	which	is	not	imposed	from
the	outside	but	arises	from	within	one's	own	heart.	It	has	the	touch	of	your	own
heartbeats,	 it	has	 the	 flavor	of	your	own	experience	and	being.	 It	 arises	out	of
your	own	meditation.	 It	 is	 not	 your	 conscience,	 it	 is	 your	 consciousness.	Now
you	 do	 whatsoever	 you	 see	 is	 right.	 You	 don't	 do	 what	 others	 say	 is	 right;
because	others	are	simply	repeating	cliches	handed	over	to	them	by	others.
And	so	on,	and	so	forth,	for	centuries	the	same	cliches	have	been	handed	over	by
people	 from	 one	 generation	 to	 another	 generation.	 These	 cliches	 are	 like
hereditary	diseases.	And	people	go	on	suffering	from	them.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	to	be	free	from	the	past,	free	from	traditions,	free	from
orthodoxies.	To	be	on	one's	own	and	to	live	in	freedom,	to	risk	whatsoever	the
freedom	 requires.	 And	 then	 slowly	 slowly	 your	 own	 conscience	 starts
functioning	 because	 you	 give	 an	 opportunity	 for	 it	 to	 function;	 it	 starts
responding	to	challenges	that	you	have	to	encounter	every	day	in	 life.	Because
you	don't	have	any	readymade	answers	--
you	 have	 to	 search	 within.	 Your	 intelligence	 has	 to	 function	 and	 as	 your
intelligence	functions,	you	grow.
A	religious	person	becomes	moral	but	his	morality	is	his	own.	He	is	the	source
of	it,	he	is	his	own	authority,	he	does	not	believe	in	any	other	authority.
My	function	here	is	not	to	be	an	authority	to	you,	but	to	help	you	to	become	your
own	authority.
Now	you	have	come	forever?	That's	good.
Start	working.	Good!
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005235
ShortTitle:	ISLAND23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Benita)	--	Your	name:..She	follows?
Ma	Dhyan	Benita.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Benita
Means	the	blessed	one.
Everyone	is	a	blessed	being
But	it	is	only	through	meditation
That	one	recognizes	the	face
Otherwise	the	treasure	remains	hidden
Unknown,	unrecognized	and	we	remain	beggars.
We	are	born	of	god
There	can	be	no	other	higher	blessing.
We	carry	eternity	in	our	being,
Nothing	more	can	be	desired.
We	have	all	the	seeds	which	can	become
Great	lotuses	of	bliss,	benediction
But	they	will	remain	seeds	unless	we	provide	them
The	right	soil	of	meditation.
Meditation	is	the	only	way	for	transforming
Our	unconscious	state	into	a	conscious	one,
The	only	way	to	know	ourselves.
There	has	never	been	any	other	way
And	there	will	never	be	another
Because	the	problem	is	the	mind
And	meditation	helps	you	to	transcend	the	mind
It	helps	you	to	go	beyond	it
Suddenly	all	problems	disappear,
All	darkness	disappears.	You	are	full	of	light.
In	that	light	you	recognize	who	you	are.
That	very	recognisation
Is	a	declaration	of	one's	blessedness
(To	Manfred)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Manfred.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Manfred	means	man	of	peace.
Everybody	would	like	to	be	a	man	of	peace
But	just	by	liking
One	cannot	become	a	man	of	peace.
People	go	on	shouting	for	peace
And	the	same	people	go	on	preparing	for	war.
The	same	people	go	on	talking	about	peace
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	the	same	people
Go	on	piling	up	atom	bombs,	hydrogen	bombs;
They	are	not	different	people.
It	is	a	very	strange	phenomenon:
Man	lives	in	such	a	contradiction
For	the	simple	reason	that
It	is	easy	to	desire	good	and	beautiful	things
But	to	materialize	them
Is	a	totally	different	thing.
To	dream	is	one	thing,
To	make	the	dream	a	reality	is	another.
And	everybody	can	afford	dreams
And	when	you	are	dreaming
You	can	dream	beautiful	dreams
But	dreams	are	dreams:	when	you	wake	up
They	have	not	changed	your	reality
Even	by	an	iota	--	the	reality	remains	the	same.
And	man	becomes	split:	He	dreams	good	things
About	god,	about	peace,	about	love,	and	he
Prepares	for	war,	for	destruction,	for	violence.
Even	in	the	name	of	peace
He	is	ready	to	plunge	into	a	war;	in	fact
All	wars	have	been	fought	in	the	name	of	peace
All	countries	prepare	for	war	but	they	all	say	that
'We	are	only	preparing	for	war	to	save	peace
We	are	not	preparing	for	war.'
They	all	call	their	war	ministries
'Defence	ministries'.	Then	one	wonders:
Who	has	the	aggressive	ministry?
No	country	has	any	aggressive	ministry,
All	are	defense	ministries,
They	are	all	preparing	for	defense	--
Who	attacks	them?
In	fact,	even	when	the	war	has	been	fought
And	millions	of	people	have	been	killed
It	remains	an	undecided	phenomenon;
Who	started	it?	So	whosoever	wins	the	war
Writes	the	history	and	he	proves
That	the	defeated	one	was	the	cause	of	it.
So	all	history	is	rubbish
Because	it	is	written	by	the	victorious.
It	is	not	true,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	truth;
It	is	simply	one	standpoint,	the	standpoint
Of	the	one	who	has	become	victorious.
If	the	other	party	had	won
The	history	would	have	been	totally	different.
If	Adolf	Hitler	had	won	the	war
Then	Churchill	and	Roosevelt	and	Stalin,
These	would	have	been	the	war	criminals.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Then	the	history	would	have	been
Totally	different;	then	these	people
Would	have	been	the	proved	that
They	were	the	aggressive	people
And	Adolf	Hitler	was	the	saviour	of	humankind.
But	now	because	he	has	lost	the	war
He	is	a	criminal.
The	other	criminals	have	become	heroes.
They	are	all	criminals	in	fact.
All	politicians	are	criminals
And	all	politicians	talk	about	peace
And	they	go	on	deceiving	people.
A	real	man	of	peace
Will	have	to	go	through	an	inner	transformation,
Only	then	the	dream	becomes	a	reality.
Meditation	is	the	alchemy
Of	transforming	your	aggressive	energies
Into	peaceful	energies.
It	transforms	your	violence	into	love.
They	are	not	different,	it	is	the	same	energy.
And	remember	always:	energy	is	neutral,
It	is	neither	good	nor	bad.
Energy	used	non-meditatively	becomes	dangerous
It	is	a	sword	in	a	small	child's	hand:	Either
He	is	going	to	harm	himself	or	somebody	else.
If	no	harm	happens
That	will	be	simply	an	accident.
If	harm	happens	that	is	not	an	accident	at	all,
That	was	bound	to	happen,	it	was	inevitable.
We	have	energies	but	we	are	not	grown-ups.
Hence	our	energies	go	berserk.
Meditation	is	the	process	of	growing	up.
And	never	forget	the	simple	fact
But	which	is	always	forgotten,
That	growing	old	is	not	growing	up.
Growing	old	is	simple.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	you,
It	happens	on	its	own.
You	go	on	aging	because	time	goes	on	passing.
It	depends	on	the	clocks	and	the	calendars,
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	you.
If	it	has	something	to	do	with	you
Nobody	will	ever	grow	old.
Who	would	like	to	become	old?
Everybody	would	have	been	young.
But	growing	up	is	a	totally	different	process;
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	needs	a	deliberate,	conscious	effort
On	your	part.
So	it	happens,	a	man	may	be	only
Twelve-year-old	psychologically.
Then	he	is	in	difficulty
And	not	only	he	is	in	difficulty.
And	these	are	the	senior	citizens	of	the	world.
By	the	time	these	fools	are	becoming	senile
They	attain	to	great	power.
It	takes	time	to	attain	to	power:
To	become	a	president
Or	to	become	a	prime	minister,	it	takes	time.
By	the	time	you	are
A	prime	minister	of	a	country
You	may	be	at	least	sixty
Or	more	--	seventy,	eighty.
Morarji	Desai	became	prime	minister	of	India	--
He	was	eighty-four,	whole	life's	struggle
To	become	prime	minister,	a	childish	idea.
An	eighty-four	years	is	just	a	physiological	age
Because	the	childish	idea	is	there.
And	these	people	wield	the	power
And	they	create	destruction	in	the	world
Growing	up	means:	psychologically	you	become
Mature,	centered,	integrated	and	all	integration
All	centering,	all	maturity	comes
By	becoming	more	and	more	watchful	of	your	mind
And	all	its	stupidities.	Mind	is	a	monkey.
You	have	to	watch	it	and	you	have	to	see
All	kinds	of	foolishnesses	that	it	goes	on	doing
And	goes	on	manipulating	you	to	follow	it.
Meditation	is	simply
The	art	of	watching	the	mind.
Once	you	start	watching
The	monkey	stops	manipulating	you.
Once	you	become	more	and	more	watchful
Distance	is	created
Between	you	and	your	own	mind,
You	are	no	more	identified.
A	moment	comes	when	you	are	simply	consciousness
And	that	very	moment	mind	disappears
Because	it	has	no	more	any	hold	over	you.
That	moment	is	the	moment
When	for	the	first	time	you	know	what	it	is
To	be	a	man	of	peace.
Peace	starts	overflowing	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
In	a	thousand	ways	peace	radiates	through	you.
You	live	peace,	you	breathe	peace,
Whatsoever	you	do	has	the	grace	and	the	beauty
And	the	touch	of	godliness	in	it!
(To	Maia)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Maia.
Deva	means	divine.	Maia	means	rebellion.
The	ordinary	revolution
Is	apparently	revolutionary	--	only	apparently.
It	gives	you	a	false	feeling	of	change
But	it	never	changes	anything	in	fact.
Man	has	seen	many	revolutions:
The	French	revolution	and	the	Russian	revolution
And	the	Chinese	revolution,	but	all	have	failed;
For	the	simple	reason	that
Revolution	never	takes	account	of	consciousness.
It	tries	to	change	the	structure	of	the	society
Not	the	consciousness	of	human	beings.
Structure	is	superficial,
It	is	not	the	center	of	life.
So	you	can	change	the	structure,
It	is	like	changing	the	house:
You	live	in	one	house,
Thinking	that	you	are	a	very	bad	person
You	change	the	house,	you	go	into	another	house
But	that	is	not	going	to	change	you,
You	will	remain	the	same	person.
Only	the	house	will	be	different:
The	windows	will	be	in	different	places
And	the	doors	will	be	in	different	places
Maybe	it	is	made	of	marble	and	very	beautiful
But	what	about	you?	--	you	are	the	same	person.
You	will	go	on	doing
The	same	stupid	things	as	you	were	doing	before.
Revolution	changes	the	houses	people	live	in,
Rebellion	changes	consciousness.
Hence	rebellion	is	divine,	it	is	inner.
Revolution	is	outer,	mundane
Rebellion	is	sacred.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sannyas	is	a	rebellion
And	that	is	the	only	thing
That	has	ever	succeeded,
But	very	few	people	have	tried	it.
Still,	its	impact	has	been	tremendous.
Had	a	little	more	people	tried	it
Life	would	have	been	totally	different.
We	can	count	those	people	on	fingers:
A	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Moses,	a	Zarathustra,
Only	few	names	here	and	there.
But	those	few	names	have	transformed	humanity.
With	those	few	people
Humanity	has	gone	higher	and	higher.
It	is	a	miracle
That	just	a	man	like	Buddha	changes	so	much
Without	changing	anything	on	the	outside;
He	simply	changes	himself
But	his	change	triggers	a	process
Which	still	continues;	it	becomes	a	chain.
He	is	not	a	Karl	Marx,	he	is	not	a	Lenin
He	is	not	a	Stalin,	he	is	not	a	Mao	Tse	Tung,
But	these	people	will	be	forgotten
These	people	will	remain
Just	footnotes	somewhere	in	the	history
These	people	will	be	remembered	only	as	nightmares
But	Buddha	will	always	be	remembered
As	a	cool	breeze	which	still	goes	on	blowing,
A	river	which	still	is	alive
Which	is	eternal	in	a	way.
And	those	who	are	capable	of	drinking	out	of	it
Can	still	drink	out	of	it.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	great	lights,
Great	rebels,	great	ecstatic	people
Who	are	not	concerned	with	the	outside	things
But	to	change	themselves	and	create
A	process	of	change	through	that.
It	is	an	individual	to	individual	effort,
Heart	to	heart	phenomenon	but	that's
The	only	thing	that	is	going	to	change	one	day
The	whole	face	of	the	earth.
(To	Jochen)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Jochen.
Anand	means	bliss.	Jochen	means	appointed	by	god.
Everyone	is	appointed	by	god
But	we	have	forgotten	completely	our	mission
We	have	forgotten	even	why	we	are	here
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
We	have	forgotten	the	message
That	has	to	be	delivered.
We	have	forgotten	who	has	sent	us	and	we	have
Forgotten	to	whom	the	message	has	to	be	delivered
We	have	forgotten	everything!
We	are	living	in	a	deep	forgetfulness
And	we	call	it	life.
And	people	who	are	so	utterly	forgetful,
Of	everything
Think	themselves	intelligent	people.
If	you	ask	the	awakened	ones	they	will	call
This	is	sheer	foolishness.
We	have	to	wake	up	out	of	this	foolishness,
We	are	here	to	fulfil	a	certain	purpose.
Everyone	is	here	to	sing	a	song
To	dance	a	dance,	to	release	a	certain	perfume
But	that	is	possible	only
If	you	become	very	very	conscious,
That	is	possible	only
If	you	become	so	much	alert	that
You	can	see	yourself	directly,	not	via	others.
Right	now
Whatsoever	you	know	about	yourself	is	via	others:
Somebody	says	you	are	very	nice
And	you	believe	it.	Of	course,
Everybody	wants	to	believe	that	one	is	nice.
And	somebody	says	you	are	very	intelligent
And	you	believe	it.
There	are	troublesome	people	also
Who	say	you	are	not	intelligent,
You	are	stupid,	you	are	a	fool;
Nobody	believes	them	but
They	create	a	disturbance.
That's	why	we	get	angry:
Everything	was	running	so	smoothly,
Your	father,	your	mother,	your	uncle,	everybody
Was	saying	you	are	so	nice,	so	beautiful,
Then	somebody	turns	up	and	says	that
You	are	just	a	fool	--	how	he	annoys	you.
And	he	may	be	right!
There	is	far	more	possibility	that	he	is	right
Because	the	world	is	full	of	fools.
But	no	mother	can	think	that	her	son	is	a	fool.
She	will	realize	it	only	but	later	on	when	the	son
Has	fallen	in	the	hands	of	another	woman.
Then	she	will	realize	that	he	was	a	fool
Because	then	she	will	see	that
'I	have	made	so	much	effort	and	worked	hard	...
It	took	twenty-five	years	for	me
To	make	him	intelligent	enough
And	here	comes	another	woman
And	within	five	minutes
She	make	a	fool	out	of	the	same	man!'
But	till	that	happens,	she	will	believe	in	you
That	you	are	a	great	hero,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	you	are	somebody	special
Because	through	your	speciality
She	becomes	unique:	Her	son	is	special.
Your	father	believes	that	you	are	great
Because	though	you	he	is	great!
So	anybody	who	disturbs	you,	annoys	you
Says	anything	against	your	beautiful	beliefs
Enrages	you	--	you	may	not	believe	him
But	he	creates	a	contradiction	in	you,
You	become	confused.
That's	why	everybody	is	in	confusion
Bound	to	be	because	contradictory	opinions
Are	coming	from	every	side
From	every	nook	and	corner.
One	person	says	on	thing
Another	person	says	another	thing
And	you	go	on	collecting	all	these	things.
And	it	is	impossible
To	make	any	sense	out	of	the	whole
So	you	are	just	like	a	patchwork:
Mm?	You	drop	all	that	is	not	good	and	nice,
You	drop	it	into	the	unconscious.
It	remains	there	and	you	make
A	beautiful	image	out	of	public	opinion
But	it	is	not	self-knowledge,
You	don't	know	anything	about	yourself	directly.
You	know	your	face	through	the	mirror.
Zen	masters	say	to	their	disciples,
'Discover	your	original	face.'
It	happened	once,	a	great	Zen	master,	Bokoju
Told	one	if	his	disciples,
'Discover	your	original	face.'
And	another	day	he	came	with	a	mirror
And	he	said,	'Yes,	sir
I	have	looked	into	the	mirror	--
This	is	my	original	face!'
And	the	master	threw	him	out	and	said	that
'Never	come	back	again
Because	this	is	not	a	place
For	such	damned	fools	as	you	are.
I	accept	fools	but	not	damned	fools!
How	can	the	mirror	show	your	original	face?
It	can	only	reflect	your	mask.
For	the	original	face	you	have	to	go	inwards
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	have	to	discover	it
At	the	very	core	of	your	being.
No	mirror	can	help,	no	scripture	can	help,
All	the	Buddhas	can	only	indicate	the	way
But	no	Buddha	can	go	with	you	there.
I	can	show	you	the	way
But	you	will	have	to	follow,
You	will	have	to	do	it	on	you	own.'
Once	you	know	your	original	face
A	great	joy	arises,	great	bliss	is	born.
Suddenly	you	see	that	you	are	not	accidental
You	are	appointed	by	god,	that	you	are	carrying
Some	important	message	for	existence,
That	you	are	needed
That	you	are	fulfilling	a	certain	deep	purpose
In	this	great	scheme	of	things
You	are	fulfilling
Some	intrinsic,	organic	utility
That	gives	great	peace,	great	joy.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
24	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005245
ShortTitle:	ISLAND24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
To	(Ricardo)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Atit	Ricardo.
Atit	means	past.	Ricardo	means	hard,	hardness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Let	hardness	be	your	past
Discontinue	yourself	with	it.
Let	softness	be	your	future.
Sannyas	has	to	be	a	discontinuity:
One	has	to	die	to	the	past
So	that	one	can	be	reborn.
Hardness	is	a	quality
Which	is	very	much	praised	in	the	world,	in	fact
All	that	is	violent,	masculine	pays	in	the	world
Because	we	have	created	such	an	ugly	society.
It	is	rooted	into	our	animal	heritage.
Physically	we	have	come	far
Away	from	animals,	but	psychologically
We	re	still	there,	in	the	jungle.
The	psychological	revolution
Has	to	yet	happen;	it	has	not	happened.
Once	a	man	was	saying	to	Bertrand	Russell	that
'What's	your	opinion	about	civilization?'
Russell	said,	'It	is	a	good	idea	--
Somebody	has	to	practise	it.'
It	has	not	yet	happened
It	is	just	a	good	idea,	it	is	utopia.
Man	lives	in	a	very	uncivilized	way.
Hence	qualities	which	are	warlike	are	praised
Qualities	which	are	flowerlike	are	condemned.
To	be	soft	is	thought	to	be	feminine.
It	is	feminine,	but	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	it.
In	fact	it	should	be	praised
Because	it	is	feminine.
We	have	to	create	a	new	world,	a	new	society
In	which	qualities	rooted	in	love	are	praised,
Not	rooted	in	war.
Then	softness,	openness,	vulnerability
will	become	great	values.
They	are	values	for	a	sannyasin.
The	sannyasin	has	to	live	the	future	now.
He	belongs	to	the	future	hence
He	will	have	to	go	through	many	difficulties
Because	he	will	have	to	live	with	people
Who	are	clinging	to	the	past	--
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	they	are	the	majority.
A	Sannyasin	is	bound	to	find	himself	an	outsider,
But	it	is	good:	all	pioneers	are	outsiders.
So	drop	all	that	is	hard	in	you,
Become	very	conscious	--
Don't	carry	anything	hard	in	you
And	transform	all	the	qualities
Into	softness,	into	tenderness,	into	love.
(To	Hildegard)	--	This	is	a	beautiful	name	hence
I	will	keep	it	exactly	as	it	is:	Ma	Hildegard.
It	means	protected	by	the	mother	goddess	Hilde.
Two	things	are	implied	in	it.
One	is	that	god	is	conceived	as	a	mother,
Not	as	father	--	which	is	far	more	truer.
God	as	a	father	is	not	so	true;	in	fact
The	very	institution	of	father	is	arbitrary.
It	is	created	by	the	society
Hence	it	has	gone	through	many	changes.
There	is	every	possibility	in	future
The	very	institution	may	disappear;
Father	may	become	almost	irrelevant.
In	fact	the	very	idea	of	father	arises
Out	of	private	property.
Because	man	became
Very	conscious	of	possessing	property
He	started	possessing	the	woman;
He	won't	allow	the	woman
The	freedom	to	move	freely
Without	being	possessed	by	anybody	in	particular.
And	of	course,	man	is	in	a	certain	way
Stronger	than	the	woman;
In	an	animal	way	he	is	stronger,
In	a	muscular	way	he	is	stronger,	obviously.
If	you	put	Buddha	and	Mohammed	Ali
Against	each	other
Mohammed	Ali	is	stronger
Buddha	is	bound	to	be	defeated,
He	may	be	even	killed.
He	is	stronger	in	a	totally	different	dimension.
Mohammed	Ali	may	not	be
Even	aware	of	that	dimension.
The	woman	is	stronger	in	a	different	way.
She	has	more	loving	qualities,	more	heart,
More	capacity	to	be	patient
Great	capacity	to	resist
All	kinds	of	misfortunes,	immense	power
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	pass	through	suffering	unaffected.
Man	s	very	weak	in	that	way.
But	muscularly	he	is	powerful.
His	height	is	a	little	bigger
His	bones	are	a	little	stronger
He	can	overpower	physically	any	woman
Hence	he	started	possessing	other	properties.
And	he	wanted	to	be	absolutely	certain	that
Only	his	children
Should	be	the	owner	of	his	property.
That	was	the	beginning
Of	the	institution	of	fatherhood.
Mother	is	a	natural	phenomenon
Father	is	artificial.
In	animals	there	is	no	father,	only	the	mother.
In	birds,	only	the	mother;
The	father	is	only	accidental
It	is	not	so	intrinsic.
The	same	is	possible	once	women	become
More	freer	economically
More	freer	psychologically,
The	same	is	going	to	happen	again.
In	the	future,	fatherhood	is	going	to	disappear.
It	can	be	predicted
And	very	confidentially	predicted
That	father	has	outlived.
Because	in	the	past
The	male	became	very	important	--
He	created	all	the	institutions
Around	the	idea	of	the	masculine.
Even	god	became	masculine.
The	Christian	Trinity	has	no	woman	in	it.
All	the	three	are	male	members.
It	is	a	gay	club!	And	must	be	utterly	boring!
At	least	one	woman	is	needed
To	make	things	a	little	juicy!
Even	if	one	woman	was	there
There	must	have	been	many	gossips	and
Things	would	have	started	moving.
Nothing	has	happened	since	god	created	the	world.
All	those	three	--	god	the	father
And	god	the	son,	and	the	holy	ghost	--
They	go	on	sitting.	What	they	are	doing?
They	must	be	feeling	very	empty.
Just	the	entry	of	a	single	woman
And	there	will	be	trouble
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	there	will	be	problems
And	jealousies	and	fight	will	start
And	triangles	will	be	created:
Holy	ghost	will	fall	in	love	and	fight!
And	there	will	be	some	story	in	it.
You	cannot	write	a	novel	without	a	woman	--
I	have	never	seen,	you	cannot
That	is	not	possible
But	the	masculine	mind	imposes	the	idea.
It	is	far	more	truer	that	god	is	a	woman
Because	god	is	a	womb.
Out	of	the	womb	everything	has	arisen
Out	of	god's	womb	the	whole	creation
These	millions	of	forms:	Trees
Birds	and	animals	and	rivers	and	mountains
And	stars,	suns	and	moons,	millions	of	forms.
God	must	have	a	womb	of	infinite	capacity.
Only	a	womb	can	be	creative
No	man	can	create	a	single	child.
Cannot	give	birth	to	a	single	child.
A	woman	will	be	needed.
And	this	is	accepted	in	the	story	of	Jesus'	birth:
The	father	is	discarded,	it	can	be	discarded.
Joseph	is	not	needed
But	virgin	mother	cannot	be	discarded.
Even	the	male	chauvinists
Could	not	discard	the	mother	because
Then	the	whole	idea	would	have	been	so	absurd.
It	is	already	fifty	per	cent	absurd	but	then
It	would	have	been	hundred	per	cent	absurd.
Then	Jesus	will	have	to	come	suddenly
From	nowhere,	not	even	out	of	virgin	mother.
That	story	unknowingly	accepts	one	thing	that
Father	is	discardable	but	the	mother	is	not.
So	this	is	one	implication	of	Hildegard
That	god	is	mother
And	motherly	qualities	should	be	developed
If	one	wants	to	come	closer	to	god.
The	second	thing	to	remember	is
That	god	is	always	protecting;
We	are	not	aware	--	that	is	our	fault.
And	because	we	are	not	aware
So	we	are	never	grateful,	otherwise
He	is	constantly	protecting,	he	is	caring
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
He	is	surrounding	us
In	every	possible	way	to	help	us	grow,
He	is	a	constant	nourishment.
He	is	our	very	life.	We	are	not	alone.
If	these	two	things	you	can	remember
They	will	transform	your	whole	life.
Develop	womanly	qualities.
There	is	a	danger	to	womanly	qualities
Very	great	danger:
First	man	destroys	womanly	qualities	because
He	was	very	much	afraid	of	womanly	qualities;
They	were	competitive	to	his	qualities
And	they	were	certainly	softer,	more	beautiful
More	aesthetic	--	he	destroys	them.
He	destroyed	woman	as	much	s	he	could.
He	paralyzed	all	his	...
He	used	all	his	power	to	paralyze	woman.
And	now	the	modern	woman
Is	committing	the	same	mistake	on	her	own	accord.
Now	she	is	trying	to	become	like	man
She	is	trying	to	become	a	competitor
So	she	is	trying	to	develop	hardness
The	fighting	attitude.
The	modern	woman	is	trying	to	be
Strong,	as	strong	as	man	is
But	that	is	going	to	destroy	her	totally.
Man	has	already	done	much	harm.
And	the	remaining	will	go	because
Of	this	so-called	woman's	liberation	movement.
It	is	suicidal.
Woman	certainly	needs	freedom:
Freedom	to	be	a	woman
Not	freedom	to	become	a	man.
That	is	not	freedom,	that	is	imitation
And	imitation	is	not	going	to	help.
The	woman	need	not	become
A	secondary	type	of	man.
She	should	remain	herself
Her	own	self,	her	authentic	self.
Real	woman's	liberation	has	not	yet	started.
I	hope	that	my	sannyasins
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Will	trigger	that	process	too.
Then	the	problem	will	be	totally	different
It	is	not	a	question	of	becoming	another	man.
The	question	is	how	to	be	uniquely	woman.
So	develop	womanly	qualities
And	they	are	totally	different	from	man
Utterly	different,	the	polar	opposite	of	man.
So	no	woman	can	really	become	a	woman
By	imitating	a	man;
She	will	be	only	a	carbon	copy
And	carbon	copies	are	ugly.
And	the	second	thing	to	remember	that
Never	feel	alone,	god	is	always	with	you:
In	each	of	your	breath,
In	each	heartbeat	god	is	with	you
The	whole	existence	supports	you
So	never	feel	alienated,	alone.
Even	in	moments	of	despair,	anguish,	anxiety
Remember,	that	you	are	well-protected,
That	there	is	no	need	to	become	a	pessimist.
Never	allow	your	hope	to	die!
Go	on	hoping	even	against	hope,	against	all	hope.
Go	on	believing	in	the	dawn
Howsoever	the	night	is	dark	--
That's	the	beginning	of	sannyas.
(To	Philip)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Philip.	Dhyan	means	meditation.
Philip	means	strong	in	spirit.
Meditation	 is	 possible	 only	 for	 those	 who	 are	 really	 strong	 in	 spirit.	 It	 has
nothing	to	do	with	physical	strength	but	it	certainly	has	to	do	something	with	an
unwavering	determination.	The	wavering	person	 cannot	 go	deep	 in	meditation
because	meditation	takes	time	to	grow.	It	is	not	like	seasonal	flowers;	it	is	like	a
cedar	of	Lebanon,	it	takes	years,	one	has	to	be	very	patient.
There	is	a	Sufi	story.	A	king	was	passing	on	his	horse,	he	had	gone	for	a	morning
round	of	the	capital,	disguised.	He	saw	a	very	old	man,	very	very	old	man.	He
had	 never	 seen	 an	 ancient	 man,	 watering	 a	 small	 plant	 of	 a	 mango	 tree.	 He
wondered,	he	stopped.	He	said,	"Old	man,	you	seem	to	be	really	a	great	optimist.
You	are	so	old	that	I	don't	think	you	will	survive	even	a	week	and	what	are	you
doing?	 --	watering	such	a	small	plant	of	a	mango	 tree?	 It	will	 take	years!	You
will	not	be	here	to	taste	those	fruits."
The	 old	man	 laughed	 and	 he	 said	 that,	 "My	 father	 lived	 a	 hundred	 and	 forty
years	and	I	am	only	a	hundred	and	thirty.	And	he	was	planting	trees	even	when
he	 was	 a	 hundred	 and	 forty.	 And	 it	 is	 because	 of	 him	 that	 I	 have	 enjoyed
beautiful	fruits	and	flowers.	So	what	does	it	matter	whether	I	am	here	or	not?
Somebody	will	enjoy!	I	have	enjoyed	trees	planted	by	others.	Others	will	enjoy
my	planted	trees.	This	is	the	only	way	to	repay,	otherwise	I	will	be	dying	in	debt.
And	who	knows?	If	my	father	could	live	to	a	hundred	and	forty,	I	am	still	very
young	--	just	a	hundred	and	thirty.	I	may	live	to	see	this	tree	flower."
The	king	 said,	 "If	you	 live	 then	don't	 forget	me.	Bring	 the	 first	 fruits	 to	me.	 I
would	like	to	see.	This	will	be	a	miracle."
And	after	ten	years	the	old	man	knocked	on	the	king's	gate	with	a	bucket	full	of
mango	fruits.	The	king	had	completely	forgotten.	He	asked,	"Who	are	you?"	He
said,	"You	have	forgotten	me"	-	he	reminded	him.
"And	 these	are	 the	fruits,	 the	 first	 fruits	of	 the	 tree.	And	do	you	see,	 I	am	still
alive	and	I	am	still	planting	new	trees.	Who	knows?	--	I	may	still	live."
And	 the	 king	was	 surprised	 because	 the	man	 looked	 younger	 than	 before.	He
asked,	"I	am	more	puzzled	even	than	before.	I	was	puzzled	that	time	but	now	I
am	even	more	puzzled,	you	look	younger!"
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	man	said,	"One	who	lives	with	hope	remains	always	young.	I	am	growing
younger	every	day	because	a	new	day,	every	day	surprises	me	--	I	am	still	alive!
What	wonder!	And	that	wonder	keeps	me	young,	but	you	have	grown	very	old.	I
knew	that	very	day	that	you	will	grow	very	old,	very	soon	and	you	will	die	very
soon.	And	I	tell	you	that	you	will	die	before	me.	You	don't	have	a	strong	spirit,
you	live	in	pessimism,"	the	old	man	said.
Meditation	needs	that	kind	of	strong	spirit,	then	certainly	one	comes	to	taste	the
fruits	of	the	ultimate.
One	comes	to	taste	nectar,	one	comes	to	know	eternity.
So	 put	 all	 your	 energies	 with	 great	 hope,	 with	 great	 patience	 and	 with	 an
unwavering	determination	to	create	a	meditative	energy	in	you.
(To	Arlene)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Anubhuti.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Anubhuti	means	experience.
Meditation	is	not	a	thought,	it	is	not	philosophy.
It	is	existential,	it	is	an	experience.
It	is	like	love:	just	by	thinking	about	love
You	cannot	know	love.
You	may	know	much	about	love
But	to	know	about	love	is	not	to	know	love
To	know	love	there	is	only	one	way:
To	fall	in	love,	to	experience	it	--
And	that's	how	it	is	with	meditation:
You	can	think	about	it,	you	can	study	about	it,
There	are	thousands	of	books	on	meditation.
People	have	written	down	the	centuries
Great	treatises	on	meditation.
You	will	become	a	great	scholar
About	meditation,	but	that	is	not	knowing	it.
Knowing	means	experiencing.
There	is	no	need	to	go	in	the	scriptures;
One	needs	to	go	into	oneself
One	has	to	fall	into	one's	being.
In	love	you	fall	into	somebody	else	being,
In	meditation	you	fall	into	your	own	being.
They	are	very	alike,	the	fall	is	the	same
Just	the	direction	is	different:
Love	is	other-directed
Meditation	is	self-directed.
The	process	is	the	same
That	you	fall	from	the	head.
In	love	you	fall	from	thinking	into	feeling
In	meditation	you	fall	from	thinking	into	being.
This	is	the	inner	triangle,	the	inner	trinity:
Thinking,	feeling,	being.
People	live	in	thinking;
Very	few	people	come	to	know	what	feeling	is
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	even	rarer	are	those	people
Who	come	to	know	what	being	is.
Sannyas	means	the	great	adventure	into	being
It	is	the	greatest	adventure	there	is
Because	it	releases	the	greatest	ecstasy
And	it	allows	you	to	know
Your	ultimate	reality,	your	immortality.
It	allows	you	to	know
That	you	are	birthless,	deathless.
It	makes	you	free	from	all	fear,	anxiety
It	opens	the	doors	of	blessings:
Millions	of	blessings
Start	showering	on	you	like	flowers
And	they	go	on	showering	forever
And	forever.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
25	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005255
ShortTitle:	ISLAND25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Moni)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Moni.
Anand	means	bliss.	Moni	means	aloneness.
Bliss	is	possible	in	two	ways:
Either	it	can	happen	in	a	relationship,	in	love,
Or	it	can	happen	in	total	aloneness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	bliss	that	happens	in	love
Is	bound	to	be	momentary;
It	will	come	and	it	will	go
Because	it	will	depend	on	each	other
It	creates	a	subtle	kind	of	bondage.
And	any	bliss	that	depends
On	something	on	the	outside
Is	always	unreliable:
One	day	it	may	be	there,	next	day	it	may	be	gone.
One	cannot	make	it	permanent
Although	people	try	their	best.
Their	very	effort	makes	it	even	more	impossible
Because	whatsoever	they	do
Destroys	it	sooner
Than	it	would	have	happened	on	its	own.
People	become	clingers
And	the	more	you	cling	to	the	other,
The	other	becomes	afraid
The	other	wants	to	escape	because
There	is	a	tremendous	inner	need	to	be	free.
The	desire	for	freedom
Is	higher	than	any	other	desire
Is	deeper	than	any	other	desire.
So	one	can	even	sacrifice	love
But	one	cannot	sacrifice	freedom;
It	is	not	in	the	nature	of	things,
Nothing	can	be	done	about	it.
Hence	the	real	bliss	can	happen
Only	in	your	aloneness.
Aloneness	is	an	art,	the	whole	art	of	meditation.
To	be	utterly	centered	into	one's	own	being
Without	any	desire	for	the	other
No	hankering	for	the	other,
To	be	in	such	a	deep	rest	with	oneself
That	nothing	else	is	needed,
One	is	enough	unto	oneself	--	that	is	aloneness.
It	brings	the	eternal	bliss.
Once	you	have	it
You	can	enjoy	your	love	also	because	then
You	need	not	depend	on	the	bliss
That	comes	through	love	--	you	already	have	it.
Then	love	has	a	totally	different	dimension
A	different	flavor,	a	different	quality	to	it.
It	is	sharing,	it	does	not	create	bondage.
Hence	meditation	is	first	and	love	is	second.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Those	who	try	love	first
Are	bound	to	fail,	are	doomed	to	fail;
They	will	go	deeper	and	deeper	into	misery.
All	lovers	end	into	misery
And	it	is	nothing	to	do	with	them.
It	is	just	the	nature	of	things.
You	cannot	change	the	nature	of	things.
But	if	first	you	are	rooted	in	your	being
And	then	you	move	into	relationship
It	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon:
Now	you	can	share,	you	can	love
And	you	can	enjoy	this	love	too.
Even	though	if	it	is	momentary,
You	can	dance,	you	can	sing
And	when	it	is	gone,	it	is	gone	--
You	don't	look	back.
You	are	capable	of	creating	another	love
So	there	is	no	need	to	cling.
You	don't	carry	any	grudge
You	don't	have	any	complaint;
You	are	thankful	to	the	lover
You	are	thankful	to	the	love
That	is	no	more	there	because
It	has	enriched	you,
It	has	given	you	some	glimpses	of	life
It	has	made	you	more	mature.
But	it	is	possible	only	if	you	have
A	certain	grounding	in	your	being,	otherwise
If	love	is	all	that	you	have
And	no	meditative	grounding
Then	you	will	suffer,	then	each	love	affair
Will	become	a	nightmare	--	sooner	or	later.
And	one	hopes	that	it	will	be	later
But	it	is	never	later,	it	is	sooner!
You	have	a	very	beautiful	name....
Learn	the	art	of	how	to	be	alone
And	blissfully	alone	--
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about....
And	then	everything	is	possible.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Herman.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Herman	means	a	man	of	diligence.
Meditation	needs	total	effort.	One	cannot	achieve	meditation	halfheartedly.	You
have	 to	 go	 into	 it	 without	 holding	 anything	 back,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 go	 into	 it
without	 any	 hurry.	 You	 have	 to	 go	 into	 it	 with	 immense	 patience.	 And	much
effort	will	 be	needed	because	we	have	gathered	 such	 a	mind	 in	 so	many	 lives
that	it	surrounds	our	being	like	many	layers	of	rocks.	All	those	rocks	have	to	be
broken,	chipped	away.	It	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
hard	work,	but	it	pays	tremendously.
So	 those	who	 think	 that	meditation	will	happen	 just	by	sitting	 for	 ten	minutes,
fifteen	minutes	 in	 the	morning,	 fifteen	minutes	 in	 the	 evening...	 and	 you	will
know	what	transcendental	meditation	is	-	are	simply	fools.	All	that	you	can	learn
from	 those	 fifteen	minutes	 is	 a	 certain	 technique	 of	 falling	 asleep.	Nothing	 is
wrong	with	falling	asleep.	If	you	enjoy	it,	it	is	perfectly	good,	but	don't	mistake
it	for	meditation.
All	kinds	of	chanting,	all	kinds	of	mantras	are	nothing	but	lullabies;	they	create	a
deep,	auto-hypnotic	state.	Repeating	a	certain	word	constantly	-	you	fall	 into	a
certain	state	of	trance	which	is	not	meditation.
Meditation	means	awareness.	Meditation	is	not	a	trance.	It	is	not	auto-hypnosis;
it	is	just	the	opposite	of	it.
It	 means	 silence,	 but	 fully	 alert.	 It	 means	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.	 There	 is	 no
chanting,	no	chanter.	The	whole	mind	has	been	dropped.	It	is	possible,	but	it	has
happened	to	just	a	few	people	in	the	whole	history	of	humanity.	Only	to	very	few
people,	 because	 very	 few	 people	were	 diligent	 enough,	 very	 few	 people	were
ready	to	pay	for	it.
It	needs	a	total	commitment,	it	is	a	life-long	work.	So	one	has	to	be	very	patient,
and	one	has	to	learn	not	to	bother	about	the	results;	otherwise	every	day	thinking
about	the	result,	that,	"It	has	not	happened	yet...,	it	has	not	happened	yet...,"	is	an
unnecessary	disturbance	and	a	distraction.
Krishna	says	to	his	disciple	Arjuna:	"Don't	think	of	the	result	-	just	do	it!	Don't
bother	about	the	result.
The	result	will	take	its	own	course,	it	will	come	in	its	own	time.	Trust	existence
and	go	on	doing	your	work,	and	whenever	the	time	is	ripe	and	you	are	ready,	the
gift	arrives	and	the	transformation	happens."
And	you	 are	 transformed	 into	 another	world,	 a	 new	being	 is	 born;	 you	 are	 no
more	part	of	time	-	you	become	part	of	eternity!
(To	Tim)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Dhyana.
Anand	means	bliss.	Dhyana	means	meditation.
One	can	start	meditation	in	a	wrong	way.
And	if	the	first	step	is	wrong
Then	every	thing	will	go	wrong.
One	can	start	meditation	in	a	state	of	misery
Out	of	despair	--	that	is	the	wrong	step.
Then	you	are	simply	trying
To	avoid	and	escape	from	the	misery.
Meditation	is	only
A	beautiful	name	for	that	escape.
It	is	not	true	meditation.
True	meditation	begins	in	a	state	of	bliss.
So	the	first	thing	to	learn	is
To	be	cheerful,	to	be	rejoicing
Into	small	things	of	life!
The	people,	the	trees,	the	sun,	the	moon
The	stars,	the	flowers,	the	butterflies,	mm?
Small	things	of	life	...
Just	a	walk	on	the	beach
Just	the	chirping	of	the	birds	in	the	morning
Just	he	taste	of	the	salty	air	on	the	beach	--
One	should	learn	to	enjoy	all	these	small	things
One	should	become	more	and	more	sensitive,
Alert	of	all	that	surrounds	you.
And	one	should	rejoice
One	should	not	be	sad	and	serious.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Religions	ordinarily	make	people	serious	and	sad.
I	teach	you	just	the	opposite:	Rejoice
Don't	be	sad	and	serious	--
Those	are	pathological	states.
And	if	you	are	in	a	pathological	state
Whatsoever	you	do	will	go	wrong.
You	are	in	a	wrong	state,	you	are	in	a	confusion:
Out	of	confusion	anything	done
Will	create	more	confusion.
So	the	first	thing	is
To	get	in	tune	with	existence.
Don't	bother	about	god
And	afterlife	and	the	soul;
Don't	be	bothered	by
Great	metaphysics	and	esoteric	truths.
Don't	be	concerned	at	all	about	all	that	rubbish.
Just	enjoy	moment	to	moment
That	which	is	available::
A	distant	call	of	the	cuckoo	--
Let	it	sink	deep	in	you.
Just	a	cup	of	tea	--	the	flavor	of	it,
The	taste	of	it	--	enjoy	it!
And	by	enjoying	these	small	things
You	create	a	right	state	of	mind	and	from	there
You	can	take	the	jump	into	meditation.
That	state	has	to	be	used	as	a	jumping	board.
And	when	meditation	starts	--
Not	as	an	escape	but	as	an	enquiry	for	deeper	joys
Because	you	have	tasted	something	of	the	joyous
In	the	ordinary	way	...
Now	you	would	like	to	lean
Some	extraordinary	ways	to	enjoy	life.
You	would	like	to	know	some	other	perspectives
From	where	you	can	look	to	life
And	see	its	beauty.
You	would	like	to	become	more	and	more	enriched.
Meditation	gives	you
The	deepest	vision	of	the	reality.
The	ordinary	simply	disappears
And	everything	becomes	extraordinary.
But	first	you	have	to	enjoy	the	ordinary.
If	you	don't	enjoy	the	ordinary
Then	there	is	nothing	else.
The	extraordinary	is	hidden	in	the	ordinary
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	sacred	is	hidden	in	the	profane.
And	this	is	where	religions	have	gone	wrong:
Their	sacred	is	against	the	ordinary,
My	sacred	is	in	the	ordinary
Hence	religions	have	condemned	people
Who	say	life	is	eating,	drinking,	merrying	--
Religions	have	condemned	these	people
As	materialists	--	I	don't	condemn	them.
I	say	that	is	the	right	approach
That	is	a	good	beginning:
If	you	can	enjoy	eating,	drinking,	merrying,
Then	sooner	or	later
You	are	going	to	become	intrigued
Sooner	or	later	the	enquiry	is	bound	to	arise
In	an	intelligent	person's	heart:
Is	this	more	or	there	is	more	to	it?
Then,	when	that	question	has	arisen	in	you,
That	there	must	be	more	--	because	you	start
Having	some	glimpses	of	the	more,
And	now	you	start	moving	towards	that	more
To	discover	it,	to	experience	it	--
Then	meditation	is	very	natural
And	you	will	never	go	wrong.
The	first	step	is	the	most	important	step
In	fact	the	fist	step
Is	almost	half	the	journey.
So	while	you	are	here	to	learn	to	enjoy	everything
And	drop	all	kinds	of	sadness	and	seriousness.
Dance,	sing,	celebrate	and	slowly	slowly
Meditate	to	find	out	because
There	is	certainly	more	but	for	that	more
You	need	a	deeper	intelligence
Meditation	is	nothing	but
It	gives	depth	to	your	intelligence
It	gives	you	clarity,	that's	all
It	cleanses	your	mirror
And	you	start	reflecting	life	more	clearly.
(To	Christopher)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Bhagwat.
Anand	means	bliss.	Bhagwat	means	divine.
Bliss	is	divine,	hence	a	sannyasin	has	to	learn
All	possible	ways	of	being	blissful.
Don't	miss	a	single	opportunity.
Each	moment	one	has	to	live	so	deeply
That	one	drinks	the	whole	juice	of	it,
Nothing	is	left	behind.
Squeeze	the	whole	juice
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Out	of	each	moment	of	your	life
Whatsoever	you	are	doing.
It	is	not	question	of	what	you	are	doing.
You	may	be	cleaning	the	floor,	singing	a	song
Shopping	wood,	carrying	water	from	the	well
Playing	cards	with	a	friend,	gossiping
Whatsoever,	enjoy	it	to	the	uttermost!	...
As	if	this	is	the	last	moment.
Who	knows?	--	the	next	moment	may	not	come.
Live	each	moment	as	if	this	is	the	last	moment
So	that	you	can	put	your	total	energy	into	it.
And	then	slowly	slowly
Life	starts	becoming	wider,	intenser,	deeper,
It	starts	gaining	new	dimensions
It	starts	having	new	richnesses
Which	it	has	never	known	before.
And	when	you	have	fulfilled	your	whole	potential
You	know	what	god	is.
God	is	not	something	there,	outside	you,
God	is	the	realization
The	actualization	of	your	total	potential
When	you	have	come	to	a	flowering
You	have	experienced	god.
To	flower	is	to	be	religious.
God	is	not	somebody
It	is	not	something	separate	from	you;
It	is	your	own	inner	fulfillment
Just	a	name	for	that	fulfillment.
And	it	cannot	happen
Just	by	going	into	a	monastery
Or	just	by	repeating	old,	rotten	cliches
Or	just	by	doing	formal	prayers	--
It	can't	happen	that	way.
One	has	to	live	life,	one	has	to	be
One's	own	being,	one's	own	self
Not	a	carbon	copy.
It	can't	happen	to	a	Christian
Or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan.
It	can	happen	only	to	a	person
Who	has	become	an	individual
Who	has	no	clinging	to	any	ideology
Who	is	utterly	free	form	all	ideological	prisons
Who	is	absolutely	free,	his	soul	in	unburdened.
In	that	unburdening
You	will	know	the	taste	of	sannyas.
When	you	are	utterly	unburdened
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	are	capable	of	flying
You	lose	all	weight,	you	become	weightless.
And	in	that	weightlessness
Everything	that	you	come	across	is	divine.
But	begin	from	being	blissful,	cheerful	--
That	is	the	first	lesson,
That	is	the	fist	lesson	of	being	divine.
Misery	is	very	undivine.
And	your	so-called	saints	look	so	miserable
That	I	cannot	even	call	them	saints.
They	need	electric	shocks	so	that
They	can	be	brought	out	of	their	coma;
They	have	gone	dead!
But	they	think	they	are	practicing	spirituality.
They	are	only	practicing	slow	suicide.
So	I	teach	a	totally	new	kind	of	religion
Which	has	never	been	taught
The	way	I	am	teaching	it.
So	you	have	to	be	very	alert
Because	it	is	very	easy	to	misunderstand	me.
As	if	I	am	just	teaching	the	old	truths
In	a	new	language	--	that	is	one	misunderstanding.
The	other	misunderstanding	is
As	if	I	am	teaching	something
Which	is	not	religious	at	all	because
It	does	not	correspond	to	your	idea	of	religion;
Both	are	misunderstandings.
What	I	m	teaching	is	pure	religion
But	it	has	never	been	taught
The	way	I	am	teaching	it	because
It	could	not	have	been	taught	the	way
It	can	be	taught	now	--	Man	has	become	of	age!
Mm,	Jesus	was	talking	to	very	immature	people.
He	had	to	speak	the	language	of	immature	people.
Two	thousand	years	is	a	long	time
And	it	is	really	a	pity	to	see	people
Still	clinging	to	those	childish	parables.
Five	thousand	years	have	passed	since	Krishna
And	it	is	really	sad	to	see
People	still	repeating	Krishna
Thinking	that	that's	what	religion	is.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
These	people	are	not	contemporaries	at	all;
They	should	have	been	born
Five	thousand	years	back.
They	can't	understand	me,
Only	one	who	is	contemporary	can	understand	me.
That's	why	only	very	young	people
Can	have	a	communion	with	me.
It	is	not	an	accident
That	thousands	of	young	people
Are	gathering	around	me.
And	of	course,	the	more	intelligent	they	are
The	more	they	are	capable	of
Making	a	contact	with	me,	immediately.
(To	Biek)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Gyana.
Anand	means	bliss.	Gyana	means	wisdom.
The	only	criterion	of	wisdom	is	bliss.
If	your	wisdom	is	not	radiating	bliss
Then	it	is	mere	knowledge,	not	wisdom.
And	knowledge	is	just	the	opposite	of	wisdom.
It	is	far	worse	than	ignorance.
Ignorance	is	better
Because	the	ignorance	is	unpretentious.
The	ignorant	person	is	unteachable
Because	he	already	knows!
He	is	egoistic,	he	is	full	of	scriptures
And	all	kinds	of	jargon	--	it	is	all	gibberish!
But	he	is	full	of	it	and	he	thinks,
'This	is	knowledge,'	so	he	clings	to	it.
And	he	is	utterly	ignorant	but
Because	of	this	so-called	knowledge
He	is	not	even	aware	of	his	ignorance.
The	ignorant	person	is	at	least	innocent.
The	ignorant	person	is	at	least	available;
He	will	say,	'I	don't	know,	so
I	am	ready	to	enquire,	to	go	into	any	discovery.'
The	knowledgeable	person
Is	the	most	difficult	person.
But	there	is	a	criterion	to	judge
Because	sometimes	knowledge	looks	like	wisdom:
You	can	repeat	Buddha's	words
And	those	words	came	from	a	wise	man
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	those	words	have	all	the	appearance	of	wisdom;
You	can	repeat	them	like	a	parrot.
And	you	can	befool	others
And	you	can	befool	yourself	also
That	you	have	become	wise.
But	the	criterion	is:
Is	it	making	you	blissful	or	not?
Is	it	helping	you	to	dance,	so	sing
To	love,	to	laugh	or	not?
If	it	is	not	making	you	blissful
Then	it	is	all	bullshit!
Drop	it	as	soon	as	possible	and	take	a	good	bath!
Cleanse	yourself	of	it	because
There	are	people	who	even	worship	bullshit	--
They	call	it,	they	call	it	holy	cow	dung!
People	are	so	stupid,	they	can	worship	anything.
In	India,	cow	dung	is	worshipped	and	India
Is	the	most	religious	country	in	the	world	--
That's	what	they	say	...
And	they	worship	cow	dung	and	they	drink	...
The	urine	of	the	cow	because	it	is	holy!
Now	these	people	can't	be	blissful	--	they	stink!
And	one	can	fall	into	the	trap	of	these	people
Because	they	have	a	long	tradition	behind	them.
So	beware	of	it!
While	you	are	in	India	be	very	alert	--
It	is	really	dangerous	to	be	here!
One	can	easily	become	religious.
And	my	whole	effort	here	is
Not	to	allow	anybody	to	become	religious
In	that	sense.
I	teach	a	rebellious	kind	of	religion
A	religion	that	is	intelligent
A	religion	that	is	rooted	in	awareness
A	religion	that	teaches	blissfulness,.
I	don't	teach	any	superstition	--
It	is	all	scientific	whatsoever	I	teach.
You	can	experiment
You	are	not	expected	to	believe	in	it
You	are	only	seduced	to	experiment	with	it.
And	 if	your	experience	shows	you	 that	 it	 is	so	Then	of	course,	 it	 is	 for	you	 to
decide
Whether	to	go	further,	deeper	into	it	or	not.
Wisdom	is	an	experience,	knowledge	is	borrowed,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	always	remember	that.
And	the	criterion	is	blissfulness.
Go	on	checking.	Whenever	you	feel
That	you	are	becoming	wise,	check	it:
Are	you	blissful	or	not?
And	immediately	you	will	know	that
If	it	is	knowledge,	you	are	not	blissful	at	all.
If	it	is	wisdom,	you	will	be	full	of	bliss.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
26	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005265
ShortTitle:	ISLAND26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Enzo)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Enzo.
Deva	means	divine,	Enzo	means	victory.
All	victory	is	god's,	all	defeat	is	ours.
Whenever	you	fail,	remember	it.
Whenever	you	succeed,	remember	it:
Failure	belongs	to	you
Success	does	not	belong	to	you.
Failure	is	a	shadow	of	the	ego	and
True	victory	is	the	disappearance	of	the	ego.
Whenever	there	is	no	ego
God	starts	flowing	through	you,
Then	all	is	golden,	then	even	dust	is	divine.
Then	whatsoever	you	touch
Is	transformed	into	gold.
Then	life	has	a	magic
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Then	your	life	becomes	a	miracle;
But	the	secret	is	simple
Secrets	are	always	simple.
If	we	can	understand	this	simple	secret	that
Frustration,	failure
Is	because	we	are	keeping	ourselves
Separate	from	god;
We	cannot	succeed	against	the	whole.
We	can	be	victorious	with	the	whole.
But	never	against	the	whole.
But	to	be	with	the	whole
You	need	to	sacrifice	one	thing
And	that	is	the	ego.
And	sannyas	can	be	condensed	into	a	single	word:
'Surrender'	--	surrender	of	the	ego,
Then	all	victory	is	available,
Then	there	is	no	frustration,	no	failure	possible.
Then	for	the	first	time	you	start	tasting
The	glory	of	life,	the	eternal	majesty	of	life,
And	all	the	mysteries
Open	up	their	doors	for	you.
Don't	be	an	ego	--	and	then	nothing	is	impossible.
Be	an	ego	and	everything	is	impossible.
(To	Ilse)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Ilse.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Ilse	means	one	who	worships	god.
Meditation	is	the	only	way	to	worship	god,
And	I	repeat	emphatically	that
It	is	the	only	way;	all	else	is	pseudo.
What	goes	on	in	the	name	of	religion
Is	simply	false
But	the	false	has	an	appeal	because	it	is	cheap
You	have	nothing	to	do	--	it	is	formal:	You	become
A	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan...
And	to	be	a	Christian	what	is	needed?
Just	you	have	to	go	every	Sunday	to	the	church,
It	is	a	Sunday-religion.
It	does	not	affect	your	life,
It	does	not	change	you:
Deep	down	you	remain	the	same.
Deep	down,	the	Hindu,	the	Mohammedan
The	Christian,	the	Jew,	are	all	the	same:
Boiling	with	the	same	anger,	violence
Rage,	greed,	lust	but
Their	surfaces	are	painted	in	different	ways
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	it	is	only	a	painted	face.
Real,	authentic	transformation	happens	only
When	you	start	going	deep	into	your	own	being	--
That's	what	meditation	is.
One	need	not	go	to	the	church
Or	to	the	temple	or	to	the	mosque
But	one	certainly	needs	to	go	within	oneself.
There	is	the	real	temple
Where	god	resides,	where	god	is	still	alive.
In	the	temples,	in	the	churches
He	has	been	dead	long	--	only	corpses	are	there
But	people	go	on	worshipping	the	corpses:
It	is	easier,	convenient,
It	does	not	require	any	transformation	in	you.
Meditation	means	a	death	and	a	resurrection.
(Can't	get	this	part)	crucifixion.
It	means	dying	as	an	ego
And	being	born	as	an	egoless	entity.
That	is	the	only	true	way	to	worship	god
Because	that	is	the	only	way	to	know	god.
(To	Lalou)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Lalou.
Anand	means	bliss.	Lalou	means	god's	gracious	gift;
That	is	half	part	of	the	meanings.	And	the	other	half	Means	victorious	spirit	--	it
is	made	of	two	words.
So	your	full	name	will	mean:	Bliss	is	a	victorious	spirit	Given	as	a	gift	from	god
to	you.
Bliss	is	not	an	achievement,	it	is	a	gift.
One	can	prepare	oneself	to	receive	it
But	one	cannot	prepare	oneself	to	achieve	it.
And	remember	the	difference
Between	achievement	and	receiving:
Achievement	is	masculine,	receiving	is	feminine.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	feminine,
He	is	not	a	soldier.
He	has	to	be	open	to	existence,	vulnerable.
The	whole	art	of	sannyas	is
To	be	more	and	more	receptive
To	all	that	surrounds	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	soldier	is	aggressive
The	soldier	is	just	the	opposite	pole	of	sannyas.
The	soldier	is	ambitious;	he	fights,	struggles.
The	sannyasin	waits,	prays,	loves,	hopes
But	simply	waits	--	his	patience	is	infinite.
And	when	the	receptivity	is	total
When	there	is	no	trace	of	aggression	left	in	you
The	gift	arrives	on	its	own	accord,
It	descends	form	the	above	and	transforms	you!
(To	Andre)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Sandesh.
Anand	means	bliss.	Sandesh	means	message.
My	sannyas	is	a	message	of	bliss.
It	is	not	the	old	idea	of	monkhood.
The	traditional	idea
Of	all	the	religions	about	the	monk
Was	that	of	anti-life.
My	sannyas	is	life-affirmative;	it	loves	life,
It	rejoices	in	life,	it	celebrates	life,
Because	to	me	life	and	god	are	synonymous;
They	are	two	names	of	the	same	phenomenon.
And	in	fact,	life	is	far	more	beautiful
Than	the	word	'god'	because	the	word	'god'
Has	been	used	by	the	priests
In	such	ugly	ways	down	the	centuries	--
They	have	contaminated	it
They	have	destroyed	its	beauty
They	have	corrupted	it.
Life	--	they	have	never	used	the	word
That	because	they	have	been	anti-life.
So	fortunately	that	word	has	remained
Unpolluted,	uncontaminated	by	the	priests
Unpoisoned	by	the	priests.	And	life	is	god!
And	the	beauty	is	that	if	you	believe	in	life
You	need	not	be	a	Hindu
Or	a	Mohammedan	or	a	Christian.
If	you	rejoice	life
There	is	no	need	of	any	ideology.
You	need	not	even	be	a	believer	of	god,	a	theist
You	can	even	be	an	atheist
And	still	rejoice	in	life.
Buddha	was	an	atheist;	he	never	believed	in	god
And	I	think	he	did	perfectly	well
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That	he	never	believed	in	god
Because	he	came	to	see	that	how	the	word	'god'
Has	been	exploited	by	the	priests;
He	simply	dropped	the	word,	he	never	used	it.
My	whole	vision	is	that
Of	a	dancing,	singing,	loving,	laughing	humanity.
I	would	like	to	fill	the	whole	earth
With	laughter,	with	music,
With	poetry,	with	paintings,
With	creativity,	with	more	sensitivity.
And	the	more	a	person	is	sensitive,	creative
The	more	he	is	close	to	the	creator,	obviously.
So	rejoice	in	life	--	remember
That	is	my	message	to	you!
(To	Bernhard)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Sadhu.
Anand	means	bliss.	Sadhu	means	one	who	is	very	simple.
An	embodiment	of	simplicity.
Be	blissful	and	be	simple.
A	complex	person	is	bound	to	be	cunning
Because	he	has	so	many	personalities.
He	is	a	crowd	--	how	he	can	be	simple?
And	he	has	to	manage
The	whole	madhouse	within	himself	--
He	cannot	be	simple,	and	of	course,
He	cannot	be	blissful	either	because
Those	so	many	faces,	so	many	personalities,
Those	so	many	small	selves
Are	constantly	at	each	other's	neck.
There	is	constant	war	inside,
People	are	living	in	a	civil	war
Fighting	within	themselves	--
One	hand	fighting	with	another	hand
One	leg	fighting	with	another	leg
One	part	fighting	with	another	part.
Hence	the	mess	in	which	humanity	lives,
Hence	the	misery.
Bliss	and	simplicity
Are	like	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
Bliss	means	you	are	one
There	is	no	crowd,	you	don't	have	many	faces,
You	have	simply	your	original	face.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	don't	pretend	to	be	anything	else
You	are	simply	whatsoever	you	are.
You	live	in	total	acceptance	of	it
In	the	very	suchness	of	it.
You	have	no	desire	to	be	somebody	else.
Complexity	arises
With	the	desire	of	being	somebody	else.
Complexity	arises	with	the	ideas:
You	are	this	and	you	would	like	to	be	that
You	are	A	and	you	would	like	to	be	B;
Now	you	will	be	in	trouble	--	you	can	never	be	B.
You	are	A	and	you	are	going	to	remain	A.
Now	there	are	only	two	possible	ways	of	being	A:
One	is,	being	in	constant	conflict	with	it
And	suffering,	miserable;
Another	is,	in	total	acceptance	of	it.
Bliss	is	the	by-product
Of	that	deep	acceptance	of	whatever	you	are.
That	is	simplicity.
A	simple	person	is	one
Who	has	no	hankering	to	be	anybody	else
Who	simply	rejoices	whatsoever	he	is.
He	never	compares	himself	with	anybody.
He	knows	everybody	is	different
Hence	there	is	no	point	in	comparison.
He	never	puts	himself	above	others
Or	below	others.
He	knows,	'I	am	myself,	they	are	themselves.'
There	is	no	question
Of	inferiority	or	superiority;
Nobody	is	inferior	and	nobody	in	superior.
Then	great	simplicity	arises	in	you
And	with	that	simplicity
Comes	the	fragrance	of	bliss!
(To	Alfons)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Dhyano.
Anand	means	bliss.	Dhyano	means	meditation.
Being	blissful	is	being	meditative
And	vice	versa:
Being	meditative	is	being	blissful.
One	can	start	from	anywhere:
Either	by	being	blissful
One	can	enter	into	meditation
Or	by	being	meditative	one	can	enter	into	bliss.
Two	doors
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Leading	to	the	same	temple,	to	the	same	shrine.
My	suggestion	for	you	is:
Enter	from	the	door	of	bliss
And	let	meditation	happen	through	it.
My	experience	and	observation	is	that
Younger	people	can	easily	enter
From	the	door	of	bliss	and	reach	meditation.
Older	people	can	easily	enter
Through	the	door	of	meditation
And	reach	blissfulness	--	it	depends	on	the	age.
Before	thirty-five	it	is	easier	to	be	cheerful
Far	more	easier!	In	fact	it	is	very	difficult
To	be	sad	and	serious.
As	you	grow	in	age,	as	life	becomes
More	and	more	a	burden	on	you,
It	starts	destroying	many	things	in	you:
It	destroys	your	qualities	to	wonder,
It	destroys	your	qualities	to	laugh,
It	destroys	your	qualities	to	enjoy	small	things	of	life.
As	you	grow	older
You	become	so	knowledgeable,	so	egoistic
That	you	lose	all	innocence.
And	with	your	innocence	gone
Bliss	becomes	impossible,
Cheerfulness	becomes	impossible.
Older	people	have	to	make	an	effort	to	laugh;
Children	are	giggling	constantly	--
For	no	reason	at	all,	or	any	excuse	will	do.
You	start	being	cheerful	--	dance,	sing...
And	this	place	is	a	place
Of	dancers	and	singers	and	musicians...
This	place	is	not	a	serious	place.
Don't	at	all	think
That	you	have	entered	in	a	monastery	--
It	is	not	a	monastery,	it	is	just	its	opposite:
It	may	be	a	carnival	but	it	is	not	a	monastery!
And	I	love	carnivals	more	than	monasteries.
Monasteries	are	for	dead	people
And	one	can	be	serious	when	one	is	dead;
In	your	grave	you	can	remain	serious	forever.
A	disciple	of	Confucius	asked	him,
'Master,	how	to	be	serious?'
And	Confucius	scolded	him;	he	said,
'You	can	be	serious	when	you	are	dead,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
In	your	grave.'
It	does	not	seem	to	be	accidental
That	graveness	also	means	seriousness.
Nobody	has	ever	seen	a	dead	person	laughing
And	nobody
Who	has	become	incapable	of	laughing	is	alive.
Confucius	said,
'You	can	be	serious	when	you	are	dead
But	right	now	there	is	no	need	to	be	serious.
Birds	are	not	serious,	trees	are	not	serious
Stars	are	not	serious,	so	why	should	you	be?'
And	I	perfectly	agree	with	him.
So	be	here	in	a	very	non-serious	way.
Enjoy	the	fun	of	it.
How	long	you	will	be	here?
--	Half	a	year.
--	That's	good!	We	will	destroy	your	seriousness.
You	have	something	serious	inside	you	--
maybe	carrying	something	from	your	past	lives...
But	we	will	destroy	it!	Just,	this	seriousness	can't	be	from	this	life	--	that	much	is
certain.	It	must	be	a	hangover!	Good.	Do	many	groups!
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
27	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005275
ShortTitle:	ISLAND27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	 Folkert)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Dhyan	 Folkert.	 Dhyan	 means
meditation.	Folkert	means	strong	spirit.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	is	not	for	the	weaklings;
It	is	not	for	the	cowards
It	is	not	for	those	who	are	full	of	fear,
Because	it	is	the	ultimate	adventure.
It	is	going	into	the	uncharted	--
No	maps	exist,	no	guidelines	either.
The	master	can	only	create	a	thirst	in	you,
A	tremendous	thirst	for	truth
But	he	cannot	give	you	a	programme
He	cannot	give	you	a	discipline.
He	can	give	you	an	insight,	a	longing,	a	love
But	then	you	have	to	go	all	alone
Because	it	is	an	inner	journey	--
Nobody	can	accompany	you.	That's	why
Many	people	become	interested	in	meditation
But	very	few	people	ever	do	ANYthing	about	it.
Their	interest	remains
Only	an	intellectual	curiosity,
It	never	becomes	an	experiment.
Or	even	if	sometimes	people	try
They	try	with	half-hearted	efforts,	lukewarm
And	meditation	needs	your	total	commitment.
Unless	you	are	boiling	at	hundred	degrees
You	will	not	evaporate.
And	meditation	is	a	kind	of	evaporation	into	god:
You	disappear	and	only	god	remains.
Remember:	the	meditator	never	meets	god.
If	the	meditator	is,	god	is	not
If	god	is,	the	meditator	is	no	more,
Hence	a	really	strong	spirit
A	really	brave	man	is	needed	--
A	man	who	is	ready	to	die	in	the	search
Because	it	is	only	out	of	that	death
That	a	new	life	is	born.
It	is	only	through	crucifixion
That	resurrection	happens.
Meditation	is	like	a	cross:
You	have	to	carry	it	on	your	shoulders.
(To	Johannes)	--	Your	name	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	names,	hence	I	will	not
change	it	in	any	way;	it's	perfect	as	it	is:	Swami	Johannes.	Johannes	means	the
beloved	disciple.
One	can	be	a	disciple	only	if	one	drops	all	knowledge.	Disciplehood	means	that
you	accept	the	fact	that	you	know	nothing.	It	begins	in	a	state	of	not-knowing.	If
you	know	then	you	cannot	be	a	disciple.	Then	your	knowledge	will	be	a	constant
disturbance	and	whatsoever	you	know	is	nothing	but	rubbish;	it	is	all	borrowed	-
-	from	traditions,	from	conventions,	from	the	society,	from	the	scriptures	--	it	is
all	conditioning	and	a	disciple	needs	as	a	first	step	to	be	totally	unconditioned.
He	has	to	drop	his	whole	mind,	he	has	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
behead	himself.	Unless	 that	much	readiness	 is	 there	one	can	only	be	a	student,
not	a	disciple,	and	that	is	the	difference	between	these	two	words.	The	difference
is	immense.
A	student	is	only	intellectually	interested,	he	wants	to	know	more.	The	disciple
is	 not	 intellectually	 interested,	 he's	 existentially	 interested;	 he	 is	 not	 after
accumulating	more	 information	 and	 knowledge.	 He	 wants	 to	 be	 more;	 not	 to
know	more,	but	to	be	more.	Knowledge	is	something	of	the	mind	and	being	is	a
totally	different	phenomenon.	One	can	know	all	the	scriptures	of	the	world	and
yet	may	remain	ignorant	--
that's	how	scholars	are:	they	are	just	donkeys	carrying	a	big	burden	of	scriptures.
That	 burden	 has	 not	 transformed	 them,	 that	 burden	 has	 really	 hindered,
hampered	their	progress.	It	is	like	with	rocks	hanging	around	your	neck.	You	are
trying	to	swim:	You	are	creating	unnecessary	hurdles	for	yourself.
Socrates	is	right	when	he	says,	'I	know	only	one	thing,	that	I	know	nothing.'	That
is	the	state	of	a	disciple	and	in	that	state	great	things	happen:	Ego	disappears,	it
can't	exist	--	How	it	can	exist?	There	is	no	claim	left.	One	becomes	utterly	empty
and	in	that	emptiness	god	comes	to	you;	you	become	a	host,	he	becomes	a	guest.
To	be	a	true	disciple
Is	one	of	the	greatest	experiences	of	life,
The	greatest	experience.
There	is	nothing	greater	than	that
But	it	requires	courage;
Courage	to	be	egoless,	courage
To	discriminate	exactly
What	you	know	and	what	you	don't	know.
And	if	you	really	look	into	yourself
You	will	be	surprised:
You	know	only	about	trivia
You	know	nothing	about	anything	essential.
God,	soul,	love	bliss,	truth,	freedom	--
You	know	nothing	about	them
And	those	are	the	essential	things	of	life.
Become	a	beloved	disciple.
And	when	I	say	become	a	beloved	disciple
I	don't	mean	be	my	disciple.
My	sannyasins	are	my	friends...
You	have	to	be	a	disciple	of	existence
You	have	to	be	a	disciple	to	the	sun
To	the	moon,	to	the	stars,	to	the	trees
To	all	this	beautiful	existence	that	surrounds	you
You	have	to	be	a	disciple	to	god	himself.
The	true	master	only	helps	you
To	discover	your	hidden	secrets.
And	this	is	the	key:	Function
Out	of	a	state	of	not-knowing
And	you	will	become	wise;
Function	out	of	knowledge
And	you	will	remain	stupid.
All	scholars	are	stupid,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Universities	are	full	of	them.
Universities	are	factories	to	create	stupidity.
My	work	is	just	the	opposite:	Here	we	try
To	bring	your	intelligence	back	to	you
Which	has	been	crushed	,	destroyed
Covered,	in	thousands	of	ways.
(To	Stella)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Stella.
Prem	means	love.	Stella	means	a	shining	star.
Love	is	the	most	shining	star
In	the	inner	sky	of	your	being.
The	outer	stars	are	nothing	compared	to	it.
Once	it	happened
A	Sufi	mystic	woman,	Rabiya	el	Adawiya
Was	sitting	in	her	room
Meditating	with	closed	eyes.
A	friend,	another	mystic,	Hasan
Was	staying	with	her.
He	went	out	--	it	was	a	beautiful	morning...
The	sunrise	was	so	beautiful,	so	colorful
The	birds	were	singing
And	the	flowers	were	opening
And	the	air	was	fragrant.
He	called	to	Rabiya,
'Rabiya,	what	are	you	doing	there
Sitting	in	your	room	with	closed	eyes?
Come	out	--	god	has	created	a	beautiful	morning!
Come	and	see	his	beautiful	creation.'
Rabiya	laughed	and	said,
'Hasan,	I	know.	When	you	are	saying
You	must	be	true
But	I	am	seeing	inside	god	himself!
So	rather	calling	me	outside
Why	don't	you	come	in?!'
Hasan	felt	ashamed.
He	came	in,	fell	in	the	feet	of	Rabiya	and	said,
'Forgive	me.	I	have	never	known	the	inner.
I	have	wasted	my	whole	life	seeing	the	outer.'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	outer	is	beautiful
But	nothing	compared	to	the	inner.
And	in	the	inner	world
Love	is	the	most	shining	star,	the	sun!
It	is	the	very	soul	of	your	inner	world
The	very	source	--	go	in	and	find	it!
And	when	you	have	found	it
Share	it,	celebrate	it!
That's	my	whole	message
In	a	single	word,	love	is	my	message
Because	love	it	god!
(To	Franz)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Prasad.
Deva	means	divine.	Prasad	means	a	gift.
Life	is	a	gift	from	god.
We	have	not	earned	it,
In	fact	we	don't	deserve	it	even.
But	we	are	so	ungrateful	creatures	that
Not	even	a	simple	thank	you	arises	in	us.
We	are	not	grateful	that	we	are	alive
We	are	not	grateful	that	we	have	given
This	opportunity	to	grow,	to	see,
To	love,	to	laugh,	to	enjoy
The	music	of	existence,	the	beauty	of	the	world.
We	are	not	at	all	grateful;	on	the	contrary
We	are	continuously	complaining.
If	you	listen	to	peoples'	prayer
You	will	be	surprised:
All	their	prayers	are	not	out	of	thankfulness,
They	are	asking	for	something	more
They	are	saying,	'This	is	not	enough,'
And	in	fact,	it	is	never	going	to	be	enough
Because	the	poor	person	is	asking
The	rich	person	is	asking,	the	beggar	is	asking
The	emperor	is	asking	--	everybody	is	asking!
Once	it	happened,	a	great	mystic,	Farid
Was	asked	by	the	villagers	that,
'Akbar	--	one	of	the	greatest	emperors	of	India
Respects	you	so	much...	Why	don't	you	say	to	him
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
At	least	he	can	open	a	school	for	the	village!
If	you	say	he	will	do	it	immediately.'
Farid	said,	'Okay,	so	I	will	go.
I	have	never	gone	to	him,
He	has	always	been	coming	to	me
But	when	I	have	to	ask	something
It	is	better	I	should	go.'
So	he	went,	it	was	early	morning...
He	entered	the	palace,	everybody	knew	him,
Respectfully	they	took	him
Into	the	king's	chambers.
He	entered,	the	king	was	praying
So	he	stood	behind	and	listened
What	he	was	saying.
The	greatest	emperor	of	India,
The	man	who	ruled	over	the	biggest	empire	ever
Was	praying	for	more;	he	was	asking	god,
'Give	me	more	money,	more	power,	more	prestige
More	land,	more	victory.'
Farid	turned	back.
As	Akbar	finished	his	prayers	he	turned	back
And	saw	Farid	going	out	of	the	room.
He	said,	'How	you	came	and	why	you	are	leaving?'
He	said,	'I	have	come	to	ask	something	from	you
But	I	saw	that	you	yourself	are	a	beggar.
So	what	is	the	point	of	asking	a	beggar?
I	don't	want	to	reduce	your	riches.
I	have	come	to	ask	for	a	small	school
To	be	opened	in	the	village,	but	no	more	--
I	won't	ask.	And	moreover,
If	you	are	asking	god,	we	can	ask	him	directly;
Why	have	a	mediator?'
Akbar	tried,	persuaded	him	in	every	possible	way.
He	said,	'No,	I	won't	allow	you
To	open	the	school	in	my	village.
I	was	mistaken,	I	used	to	think
You	are	an	emperor	--	you	are	not!'
But	this	is	the	situation:
Everybody	is	asking	for	more.
That	simple	means	'Whatsoever	you	have	given
Is	not	enough	--	I	deserve	more,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	have	not	been	fair	to	me!'
I	call	this	irreligiousness,
Hence	to	me	all	the	prayers
That	go	on	in	the	temples
And	the	mosques	and	the	churches	are	irreligious.
The	true	prayer	is	only	of	thankfulness,
Just	a	simple	thank	you	is	enough.
Learn	how	to	say	thank	you	to	existence:
For	all	that	it	has	already	done	to	us,	for	us
And	it's	continuously	doing
And	you	will	come	closer	and	closer	to	god.
The	only	bridge	towards	god	is	deep	gratitude.
(To	David)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Dhyan.
Prem	means	love.	Dhyan	means	meditation.
Let	love	be	your	meditation,	love	more	and	more
And	love	for	no	reason	at	all.
Love	for	the	sheer	joy	of	loving.
Love	people,	love	animals,
Love	trees,	rocks,	rivers	--
It	is	not	the	question	what	is
Your	object	of	love	--	any	object	will	do.
The	real	question	is
That	you	are	continuously	loving
That	you	are	showering	your	love.
This	is	the	miracle	of	love
That	the	more	you	give,	the	more	you	get.
It	is	a	very	different	kind	of	economics.
The	ordinary	economics	is:
If	you	give	you	will	have	less.
The	ordinary	economics
Teaches	you	to	be	a	miser,	hoard
Snatch,	take	away	from	people;
Give	less	and	get	more.
That's	the	whole	art	of	business
But	there	is	a	higher	economics	--
Call	it	religion,	spirituality
Or	whatsoever	you	like,	in	which
The	law	is	completely	reversed:
Give	and	you	will	have	more,	don't	give
And	you	will	even	lose	that	which	you	have.
And	what	I	am	saying
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Is	not	a	question	of	believing	--	experiment
And	you	will	be	surprised:
If	you	go	on	giving	your	love
You	will	find	more	and	more	love	arising	in	you
Which	was	never	there	before.
You	will	see	so	many	new	sources	opening	up,
New	dimensions	becoming	alive	that
You	are	in	for	a	surprise,	for	a	big	surprise!
And	then;	you	know	the	secret
That	we	are	connected
With	the	farther	away	ocean	of	god's	love.
If	we	give	it
That	ocean	goes	on	filling	us
Again	and	again	and	again.
If	we	don't	give,	whatsoever	we	have
Becomes	poisoned,	becomes	stale,	dead.
Love	alive	is	the	greatest	joy
And	love	dead,	is	the	greatest	burden.
(To	Carlos)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Divyo.
Anand	means	bliss.	Divyo	means	divine.
Bliss	is	the	most	divine	quality
And	misery	the	most	undivine.
But	for	thousands	of	years	sadness	has	been
Praised	by	the	so-called	religious	people.
If	you	look	at	their	saints
The	look	so	serious,	so	sad,	so	sombre
They	have	such	long	faces
That	sometimes	I	wonder:
God	may	have	escaped	and	hidden	somewhere	(?)	with	himself(?)	Just	because
of	these	saints.
And	one	thing	is	certain:
These	saints	cannot	be	allowed	in	paradise;
They	will	make	a	hell	out	of	it.
For	centuries	religion	has	lived
With	a	totally	wrong	attitude
And	approach	towards	life.
The	approach	has	been	negative.
I	affirm	life,	I	am	life-affirmative.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That's	my	conflict	with	the	tradition:
The	 tradition	 is	 life-negative,	 all	 traditions:	 Hindu,	 Christian,	 Mohammedan,
Jaina,	Buddhist,
All	traditions	are	life-negative
They	deny	life,	they	teach	you	to	renounce	life.
I	reach	you	how	to	live	it	totally
How	to	love	it,	because	to	me
God	can	be	found	in	only	one	way
And	that	is	through	life
Not	by	escaping	from	it.
Celebrate	life	and	then	you	will	be	blissful.
If	you	escape	from	life
You	will	be	sad	and	you	will	be	miserable.
The	so-called	religions	have	done	two	things:
One,	few	fools	have	tried	to	practice	them
And	they	have	turned	into	zombies,
They	are	corpses.
They	walk	and	they	breathe,	of	course
But	their	whole	life	is	mechanical.
And	the	remaining	majority
Although	it	has	not	become	so	sad
But	its	bliss	has	been	poisoned.
Whenever	you	are	feeling	happy
Something	inside	you	says,
'You	are	doing	something	wrong.'
This	is	the	impact,
The	poisoning	impact	of	thousand	of	years
Of	life-negative	teachings.
One	feels	a	certain	unease	when	one	is	blissful	--
This	is	strange.
If	you	are	miserable	everything	is	okay,
You	never	feel	guilty.
I	have	never	come	across	a	person
Who	feels	guilty	because	of	misery.
But	if	you	are	feeling	happy	you	feel	guilty.
I	happens	every	day,	almost	every	day:
People	go	on	writing	to	me	letters	that
'Since	we	have	come	here	we	are	feeling	so	happy
But	a	certain	guilt	is	there	--	why	is	this	guilt?'
You	are	feeling	guilty
Because	you	have	been	told
Not	to	be	happy,	not	to	rejoice
Not	to	love,	not	to	laugh,	not	to	live!
Death	has	been	worshipped
And	life	has	been	condemned.
My	approach	is	totally	opposite:
Worship	life	because	life	is	god.
There	is	no	other	god	except	life.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Herman)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Satyam	Anubhav.
Satyam	means	truth.	Anubhav	means	experience.
Truth	is	not	a	concept
You	cannot	think	about	it.
It	is	an	experience:	you	have	to	live	it.
It	is	not	through	philosophy
That	you	will	come	to	know	what	truth	is;
It	is	only	through	religion
That	you	will	come	to	encounter	truth.
You	can	read	about	it
You	can	ponder	about	it,	you	can	think	about	it
But	remember:
Thinking	about	truth	is	not	knowing	truth
Thinking	about	god	is	not	knowing	god
Thinking	about	love	is	not	knowing	love.
To	know	love	you	have	to	fall	in	love
You	have	to	experience	it	--
There	is	no	other	way	except	the	existential.
And	to	experience	truth
You	need	a	radical	change	of	your	vision:
You	have	to	get	down	from	your	head
And	enter	in	your	heart,
You	have	to	exist	as	the	heart	not	as	the	head	Because	the	head	can	only	think.
It	can	think	beautiful	thoughts
But	beautiful	thoughts	are	just
Mere	thoughts,	empty	and	impotent.
It	is	through	the	heart
That	you	feel,	that	you	experience.
My	work	here	consists
In	shifting	your	energy
From	the	head	to	the	heart.
And	all	kinds	of	devices	and	methods
Are	being	used	here.	And	there	will	be
Great	resistance	in	the	beginning	because
The	head	has	been	so	powerful	for	so	long;
It	has	been	the	ruler,	the	supreme	ruler.
It	can't	lose	its	grip	so	easily.
And	the	heart	has	been	repressed
But	the	heart	is	your	real	center,
The	head	is	only	your	circumference.
The	head	is	good	as	a	machine	--	it	is	a	computer.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Use	it	when	needed	but	don't	be	possessed	by	it.
Be	a	master	of	your	mind
Never	be	a	slave	of	your	mind.
Let	the	heart	be	the	master
And	the	mind,	the	slave.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
That's	my	definition	of	sannyas.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
28	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005285
ShortTitle:	ISLAND28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Torsten)	--	This	is	your	name.	Swami	Anando	Torsten.
Anand	means	bliss.	Torsten	means	god's	jewel.
Bliss	is	the	most	precious	phenomenon.
There	is	nothing	higher	to	it
Nothing	deeper	to	it.
To	attain	bliss	is	the	goal	of	life,
To	miss	it	is	to	miss	all.
And	very	few	people	have	attained	it
While	it	is	everybody's	birthright
It	is	our	very	nature:
We	are	destined	to	attain	it.
We	lose	it	by	our	own	great	effort
We	make	all	kinds	of	hindrances
We	obstruct,	we	create	walls
We	create	prisons	around	our	being,
And	then	we	live	in	darkness	and	misery.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	work	here	consists	in	destroying
All	the	walls	of	your	prison
All	the	walls	that	surround	you,	gross	and	subtle
Of	concepts,	ideologies,	religions,	philosophies,
To	make	you	totally	free
From	all	that	mind	has	given	to	you.
To	be	free	from	mind	is	the	beginning	of	bliss
To	be	totally	free	from	mind	is	its	attainment.
This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Ennio.	Anand	means	bliss.	Ennio	means	 the
number	nine.
The	number	nine	represents	the	highest	number;
After	that	there	is	repetition.
Nine	means	the	climax.	Bliss	is	the	climax.
And	people	live	in	misery.
Misery	can	be	represented	by	a	zero,	emptiness.
But	not	the	emptiness	of	a	Buddha
Because	Buddha's	emptiness	is	very	full,
It	is	not	empty	at	all.
It	is	simply	empty	of	the	ego
But	is	full	of	egolessness.
It	is	empty	of	misery	but	full	of	bliss.
It	is	empty	of	noise,	but
full	of	silence	and	the	music	of	silence.
I	am	talking	about	the	ordinary	emptiness;
Everybody	feels	it,	that's	why	people	don't	go	in.
Masters	from	immemorial	times
have	been	telling	people:	go	within,
know	thyself,	the	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you.
People	listen	and	yet,	they	don't	listen	at	all
Because	their	own	experience	is
Of	a	totally	negative	emptiness;
they	don't	see	any	kingdom	within
they	don't	see	any	light
they	see	only	death	and	darkness.
When	I	am	saying	zero
I	am	referring	to	the	ordinary	man's	experience
Of	an	empty,	meaningless	life.
But	zero	is	also	a	very	mysterious	figure:
It	can	also	represent	the	Buddha,	the	Christ.
It	can	also	represent	the	ultimate	but	then
It	has	a	totally	different	meaning
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	a	different	context;	then	it	means	fullness
Totality,	wholeness,	perfection.
But	ordinarily	we	live	at	the	negative	zero.
And	you	have	to	reach
To	the	ninth	plane	of	existence,
you	have	to	go	beyond	your	misery.
People	go	on	living	in	misery
For	the	simple	reason	that	they	think
it	is	created	by	others;	it	is	not	so.
You	are	the	creator.
Once	this	is	understood,	misery	can	be	dropped.
Then	it	is	up	to	you:	you	can	drop	it	gradually
Or	you	can	drop	it	in	a	single	blow.
If	you	drop	it	gradually,	then	you	go
From	zero	to	one,	from	one	to	two,
slowly	slowly,	step	by	step.
If	you	are	courageous	enough
you	can	take	a	quantum	leap,	you	can	jump
from	the	negative	zero	to	ninth	plane,	directly.
There	is	no	need	to	go	gradually
But	everybody	has	to	follow	his	own	pace.
Hence	there	are	two	kinds	of	people	in	the	world
Who	are	really	divided	spiritually.
The	one	category	is	of	those
Who	go	very	cautiously,	gradually,	slowly.
Nothing	is	wrong	about	it;	they	take	their	time.
But	there	is	also	the	other	category:
the	people	who	can	take	a	jump	from
the	known	into	the	unknown
who	can	risk,	who	are	like	gamblers.
And	I	think	gambling	will	suit	you...
It	suits	the	Italians!
So	don't	go	gradually.	Jews	go	gradually
Because	they	are	business-minded	people,
they	function	through	calculation.
But	Italians	are	not	calculators...
even	if	they	want	to	be,	they	cannot	calculate	--
So	why	bother:	from	one	to	two,	two	to	three,
all	that	mathematics.
Just	take	a	jump,	from	zero	to	nine.
My	sannyas	is	really	for	the	gamblers.
I	accept	the	other	kind	of	people	also...
and	I	slowly	persuade	them	to	be	gamblers!
--	How	long	you	will	be	here?
--	I	don't	know.
--	 That's	 good.	Do	many	 groups.	And	 Italians	 don't	 go	 back.	And	 don't	 be	 so
much	afraid!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Michael)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Jivano.
Anand	means	bliss.	Jivano	means	life.
Misery	is	death,	the	only	death.
What	we	know	as	death	is	not	a	reality;
You	are	simply	changing	a	house,
From	one	body	to	another
Or	you	are	changing	your	garments
From	the	old	to	the	new.
The	so-called	death	is	not	really	a	death
But	there	is	a	far	more	real	death	--
I	call	that	real	death	misery.
To	live	in	misery	is	not	to	live	at	all.
To	live	in	misery
Is	simply	to	move	like	a	corpse,
To	drag	oneself	somehow	to	one's	own	grave.
And	that's	how	the	majority	of	people	live	--
No	wonder	they	never	come	across	bliss:
Misery	becomes	their	habit
Their	very	style	of	existing.	To	vegetate
Becomes	synonymous	for	them	with	life.
Because	they	breathe,	they	eat,
They	sleep,	they	reproduce	children
So	they	think	they	are	alive	--	that's	no	life.
That	can	be	done	in	a	far	better	way
By	any	computer.
A	computer	can	do	all	these	things.
He	can	drink,	he	can	eat,	he	can	go	to	sleep
He	can	even	write	love	letters,	make	love
And	sooner	of	later
Computers	will	produce	children
And	they	will	be	far	better	children
Than	we	have	ever	produced	because
The	computers	will	go	very	scientifically	at	it.
And	they	can	do	all	mind	work
That	we	think	makes	man	special;	in	fact
A	computer	can	do	within	a	single	minute
The	work	of	one	thousand	scientists...
And	more	reliably.
Live	begins	only	when	bliss	enters	your	being
But	for	that	you	have	to	be	vulnerable:
Open	to	the	winds	and	the	rain	and	the	sun,
Open	to	existence.	It	needs	guts	to	be	open
Because	it	is	dangerous,	to	live	is	dangerous;	To	die	is	very	comfortable.	In	fact
there	is
No	place	more	comfortable	than	the	grave	--
No	problems,	no	anxieties,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
One	simply	has	gone	to	sleep	forever.
People	like	deathlike	life	--
Comfortable,	convenient,	but	they	miss
The	whole	thrill,	the	adventure
The	zest,	the	juice.
Remember	it
That	the	first	and	the	foremost	thing
For	a	man	of	intelligence
Is	to	seek	and	search	for	bliss.
Once	you	are	in	contact	with	bliss
Once	you	have	tasted	it,	you	are	reborn.
Then	real	life	begins
Then	you	know	what	it	is	all	about.
(To	Bernd)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Dwariko.
Anand	means	bliss,	Dwariko	is	the	city	of	god	Krishna	In	Indian	mythology	it	is
the	city	of	the	gods.
Literally	it	means	the	door.	The	English	word	'door'
Comes	from	the	same	root	as	dwariko.
God's	door	--	bliss	is	god's	door.
And	once	you	have	entered	into	bliss
You	live	in	the	city	of	gods.
You	can	call	it	paradise,	the	garden	of	Eden	--
These	are	different	names	of	the	same	thing.
The	thing	that	is	referred	by
So	many	different	names	is	bliss.
Man	has	lost	track
He	has	lost	completely	who	he	is
From	where	he	comes,	where	he	is	going.
He	lives	without	an	identity
But	to	live	without	an	identity	is	difficult
So	he	creates	false	identities:
A	name,	an	address	--	and	he	believes	in	them	that
'This	is	what	I	am.'	You	are	not	that.
You	live	on	the	earth	but
You	belong	to	the	city	of	gods
You	belong	to	the	beyond.
And	the	beyond	is	always	ready	to	welcome	you
But	you	keep	your	back	towards	it	and
You	go	on	rushing,	running	after	trivia,
Mundane	things:	money,	power,	prestige.
If	you	don't	get	them	you	are	miserable
If	you	get	them	then	too	you	are	miserable.
Whether	you	fail	or	succeed
You	fail	all	the	same.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	only	victorious	person	is	one
Who	enters	within	his	being	and	comes	to	know
'Who	am	I'	--	he	has	entered	into	paradise	again,
He	regains	paradise	lost.
Meditation	is	the	only	way
To	enter	into	your	own	being;	just	as	mind
Is	the	only	way	to	enter	into	the	world
Meditation	is	the	only	way
To	enter	into	your	own	self.
And	paradise	is	not	outside	you;
It	is	within	you.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Dharma.
Anand	means	bliss.	Dharma	means	religion.
Bliss	is	my	religion.	I	don't	teach	you	God,	I	don't	teach	you	any	other	ideology,
I	simply	teach	you	the	art	of	being	blissful.	Once	you	are	blissful	everything	else
follows	on	its	own	accord.	You	will	come	to	know	God,	you	will	come	to	know
truth,	 you	 will	 come	 to	 know	 everything	 that	 is	 worth	 knowing.	 But	 it	 all
happens	in	the	climate	of	bliss.
So	first	create	 that	climate.	Let	 the	spring	of	bliss	come	and	 then	 thousands	of
flowers	start	blooming.
Then	 there	 is	peace	and	silence,	 and	 love	and	compassion.	Then	 there	 is	great
sensitivity,	 creativity,	 great	 joy,	 the	 experience	 of	 bliss,	 and	 life	 becomes	 a
celebration.
(To	Lino)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Upasani.
Anand	means	bliss.	Upasani	means	one	who	is	in	prayer.
Bliss	it	the	only	right	kind	of	prayer.
You	need	not	say	any	prayer
You	need	not	utter	a	single	word;	in	fact
God	understands	no	language,
He	understands	silence,	but	silence	can	be	dead
Then	it	cannot	communicate	with	god.
It	has	to	be	alive,	it	has	to	be	dancing
It	has	to	be	blissful.	Then	there	is	communion.
Whenever	your	heart	is	full	of	joy
You	are	closest,	closest	to	god.
The	word	'upasani'
Literally	means	to	sit	close	by.
Metaphorically	it	means	prayer
But	both	meanings	have	to	be	understood.
Prayer	brings	you	close	to	god
But	to	be	close	to	god	there	is	only	one	way
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	that	is	being	blissful.
Misery	creates	distance
Disconnects	you	with	existence,	isolates	you
Makes	you	an	island	unto	yourself	--
Closed,	alienated,	and	of	course	then
There	is	great	anxiety	and	fear
Because	you	are	so	alone.
Bliss	connects,	bliss	becomes	a	bridge:
You	are	no	more	an	island	when	you	are	blissful
You	become	part	of
The	whole	continent	of	existence
You	become	part	of	this	vastness.
And	that	is	to	be	close	to	god
To	sit	close	to	him.	And	that	is	prayer	also;
Prayer	in	the	truest	sense
Not	the	so-called	prayer
That	you	will	come	across	in	the	temples
And	the	churches	and	the	mosques;
Those	prayers	are	false,	pseudo,
Creations	of	human	imagination	and	desire.
Be	blissful	and	you	will	be	prayerful.
And	then	there	is	no	need	to	pray
In	the	morning	or	in	the	evening
Or	five	times	a	day	like	a	Mohammedan	does:
You	are	twenty-four	hours	in	prayer
Your	very	breathing	becomes	prayerful
Your	every	being	is	prayerful.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
29	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005295
ShortTitle:	ISLAND29
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Anand	 Franco.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Franco	 means
freedom.
Bliss	 is	 freedom	 and	 vice	 versa	 is	 also	 true:	 freedom	 is	 bliss.	 In	 fact	 they	 are
inseparable	--	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	If	you	are	blissful	you	are	bound	to	be
free,	if	you	are	free	you	cannot	be	other	than	blissful.
Freedom	 and	 misery	 can't	 exist	 together,	 neither	 can	 bliss	 and	 bondage	 exist
together.	Attain	to	one	and	the	other	follows.	And	one	can	enter	from	any	door,
both	the	doors	are	the	same,	they	lead	to	the	same	shrine.
Buddha	 enters	 from	 the	 door	 of	 freedom,	 so	 does	 Mahavira	 --	 hence	 their
ultimate	 truth	 is	 freedom;	 not	 god,	 not	 bliss,	 not	 love,	 but	 moksha.	 Moksha
exactly	means	what	Franco	means:	absolute	 freedom,	 infinite	 freedom	with	no
conditions	attached	to	it.	But	people	have	entered	from	the	door	of	bliss	too.
Jesus	 enters	 from	 the	 door	 of	 bliss.	 Hence	 he	 says	 again	 and	 again	 to	 his
disciples,	"Rejoice,	rejoice!	I	say	again	and	again	to	you,	rejoice!"
The	Upanishadic	mystics	 in	 India	 entered	 from	 the	 door	 of	 bliss.	Hence	 their
ultimate	 god,	 the	 ultimate	 idea	 of	 god	 is	 satchidanand:	 truth,	 consciousness,
bliss.	Bliss	is	the	ultimate.	Even	truth	is	lower,	even	consciousness	is	lower.	That
is	their	trinity:	truth,	consciousness,	bliss	--	but	bliss	is	the	very	pinnacle.
The	door	that	you	enter	through	becomes	your	experience	of	the	ultimate	and,	of
course,	 your	 expression	 of	 the	 ultimate	 too.	 Hence	 there	 are	 so	 many
expressions,	 different	 expressions,	 but	 they	 are	 all	 aspects	 of	 the	 same
phenomenon	 of	 the	 same	 reality.	Once	 this	 is	 understood	 then	 the	message	 of
Buddha,	 Krishna,	 Jesus,	 Lao	 Tzu,	 Zarathustra	 is	 only	 verbally	 different,
conceptually	 different	 --	 not	 in	 reality.	 Their	words	 are	 different	 because	 they
have	entered	from	different	doors.	Their	language	is	different	but	not	the	content.
Their	 containers	 are	 different	 but	 not	 the	 content.	 It	 is	 the	 same	message,	 the
same	truth,	the	same	freedom,	the	same	bliss.
The	real	seeker	of	truth	cannot	be	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	or	a
Buddhist	for	the	simple	reason	that	there	are	not	two	truths.	You	cannot	make	a
cult	out	of	truth,	you	cannot	make	a	creed	out	of	truth.	All	dogmas	are	anti-truth
and	 all	 churches	 are	 anti-truth.	 The	 real	 seeker	 becomes	 free	 of	 all	 creeds,
churches,	theologies.	He	drops	that	whole	rubbish,	he	simply	moves	into	his	own
innermost	being	--	 in	silence,	prayerfully,	singing	and	dancing.	And	the	goal	is
not	far	away,	it	is	very	close-by.	We	are	carrying	it	within	our	own	selves.
(To	Lorenzo)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Lorenzo.
Dhyan	 means	 meditation.	 Lorenzo	 symbolizes	 two	 things;	 One	 is	 victory,
another	is	immortality	--	and	both	are	attained	through	victory.
Meditation	does	not	mean	concentration	--	remember.
Millions	of	people
Live	under	the	wrong	impression
That	meditation	means	concentration.
And	if	one	starts
With	a	wrong	concept	from	the	very	beginning
Then	the	whole	journey	goes	wrong.
The	first	step	is	the	most	important	step
It	is	almost	half	the	journey.
If	the	first	step	is	right
The	second	follows	it	automatically.
And	the	first	step	is
To	understand	precisely	and	exactly
What	meditation	is	all	about.
It	is	not	concentration.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Concentration	is	something	of	the	mind
And	meditation	is	going	beyond	the	mind.
Concentration	is	needed	in	scientific	work;
You	have	to	focus	your	mind
On	one	thing	exclusively.
You	cannot	include	many	things	otherwise
Those	many	things	will	become	distractions.
You	have	to	exclude	everything	out
You	have	to	bracket	everything	out
You	have	to	focus	as	closely	as	possible
On	one	point.
They	define	science	as
Knowing	about	less	and	less.
If	that	is	true
Then	ultimate	science	will	be	defined	as
Knowing	everything	about	nothing.
Meditation	means
Not	excluding	anything	out	of	your	vision
Not	bracketing	out	anything
But	including	everything.	It	is	inclusive
It	is	not	afraid	of	distraction.
The	whistle	of	the	railway	train,	a	dog	barking
The	horn	of	a	car,	the	traffic	noise
The	birds	,	the	people,	the	children	playing
Somebody	shouting,	somebody	singing	--
Everything	is	included	in	it;
You	are	simply	a	witness	of	it	all
Not	concentrating	on	anything	in	particular
Just	a	diffused	awareness
Just	being	watchful,	whatsoever	is	happening.
All	doors	and	all	windows	are	open
And	you	are	available	to	everything.
In	concentration	distraction	is	bound	to	happen
But	in	meditation
There	is	no	possibility	of	distraction
Because	meditation	is	vast	enough
To	include	destructions	also.
That's	the	beauty	of	meditation:
You	cannot	disturb	a	meditator	--	impossible.
That	is	impossible
From	the	very	definition	of	meditation.
If	he	is	disturbed,	that	simply	means
He	was	concentrating,	not	meditating;
He	has	not	yet	understood	what	meditation	is.
If	you	concentrate	then	naturally,	anything	else
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Trying	to	get	your	attention	is	a	destruction;
You	cannot	think	of	two	things	simultaneously
So	when	you	think	of	the	other
You	miss	the	first,
For	the	moment	you	are	no	more	there.
But	meditation	is	not	thinking	at	all
Hence	everything	is	included,	simultaneously,
And	existence	is	simultaneous,	remember;
Thinking	is	linear.
If	somebody	asks	you,	'What	happened	today
In	darshan,	when	you	were	taking	initiation?
How	many	people	were	there?'
The	description	will	be	linear,
A	B	C	D,	that	way
But	they	are	all	present	here,	simultaneously.
In	description
They	will	not	be	present	simultaneously.
A	will	be	followed	by	B
B	will	be	followed	by	C
C	will	be	followed	by	D;
Thinking	is	linear,	one-dimensional,
And	reality	is	multi-dimensional,
Reality	is	simultaneous
It	is	all	happening,	all	together.
A	meditator	allows	this	simultaneousness
And	becomes	simply	watchful,	serene,	silent
Alert,	but	not	focussing	at	all.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	reading	a	joke.
Two	girls	from	a	village	came	to	a	big	town.
The	first	thing	they	wanted	to
Was	to	be	photographed
So	they	went	to	the	photographer	--
That	was	their	first	experience	of	life
Of	being	photographed.	The	photographer
Threw	his	black	cloth	over	his	head
Looked	inside	his	camera...
One	girl	asked	the	other,	'What	is	he	doing?'
The	other	said,	'He	is	going	to	focus?'
So	the	first	said,	'Both	of	us?'
First	he	should	photograph	and	then
He	can	do	whatsoever	he	wants...
But	not	right	now!
Meditation	is	not	focussing.
It	is	just	awareness,	just	watchfulness
And	out	of	it	these	both	things	are	possible:
You	will	become	victorious	over	yourself
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	you	will	come	to	know	that	you	are	immortal.
Not	that	you	have	to	believe	in	immortality	--
No	belief	is	needed;	it	becomes	your	experience.
As	you	go	deeper	into	awareness
You	become	aware	of	both	the	things:
A	deep	inner	victory,	a	sense	of	victoriousness
That	you	have	conquered	the	inner	world
That	you	have	come	home,	that	there	is
Nothing	more	beautiful	than	this
Nothing	higher	than	this
Nothing	more	precious	that	this	--
What	Jesus	calls	the	kingdom	of	god,
You	have	conquered	it.
Knowing	it	is	conquering	it
And	at	the	same	moment	suddenly	you	become	aware
That	you	were	never	born	and	you	will	never	die.
You	belong	to	eternity,	not	to	time.
Meditation	takes	you	beyond	the	mind	--
Time	belongs	to	mind.
Once	you	are	beyond	mind,	time	disappears,
You	become	part	of	eternity.
--	How	long	you	will	be	here?
--	I	don't	know.
--	Be	here	as	long	as	possible.
--	I	didn't	get	what	Lorenzo	means	--	I	was	too	much	in...
--	What	Lorenzo	means?
--	Victory...
--	Huh?
--	Victory.
--	Ah,	victory!!
--	And	immortality...
--	And?
--	Immortality.
--	Oh,	okay!
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	None
30	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005305
ShortTitle:	ISLAND30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Thomas)	--	This	is	you	name:	Swami	Anand	Thomas.
Anand	means	bliss.	Thomas	is	the	seeker	of	truth.
The	enquiry	into	truth
Is	the	most	blissful	activity	of	life
Because	it	is	only	through	realizing	the	truth
That	one	becomes	capable
Of	dropping	all	the	miseries.
Miseries	are	shadows	of	lies.
We	live	in	lies,	hence	we	are	miserable.
Nobody	wants	to	be	miserable
But	nobody	wants	to	drop	his	lies.
And	people	don't	see
The	relationship	between	the	two;
There	is	a	cause	and	effect	relationship.
For	example	the	greatest	lie	of	your	life
Everybody's	life,	is	the	ego
And	it	poisons	your	whole	life.
Nobody	wants	to	be	miserable
Yet	everybody	wants	to	protect	his	ego.
Unless	one	sees	this	contradiction
One	will	never	be	able	to	get	rid	of	miseries.
You	want	to	get	rid	of	the	effect
But	you	go	on	nursing	the	cause
You	go	on	watering	the	tree
And	you	are	against	the	fruits!
The	fruits	are	bitter
But	you	don't	see	the	relationship
That	if	you	stop	watering	the	tree
The	fruits	will	disappear	on	their	own	accord.
Just	as	lies	are	causes	of	misery
Truth	is	the	cause	of	bliss.
Once	you	know	what	truth	is,
Your	whole	life	becomes	blissful.
Each	moment	a	moment	of	rejoicing,	a	moment	of	celebration.
(To	Rudi)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Rudi.
Prem	means	love.	Rudi	means	the	loyal	one.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	one	of	the	greatest	qualities	of	life,
Loyalty	--	but	it	is	disappearing	from	the	world,
For	the	simple	reason	that	love	is	dying;
Without	love	there	can	be	no	loyalty.
Loyalty	is	the	fragrance	of	love.
Yes,	a	certain	kind	of	loyalty
Can	be	enforced	upon	you	even	without	love
But	then	it	is	pseudo,	then	it	is	ugly
Then	it	is	violent	--	that's	the	difference
Between	a	soldier	and	a	sannyasin.
The	soldier	is	also	loyal
But	his	loyalty	is	only	enforced;
He	is	manipulated	to	be	loyal
He	is	conditioned	to	be	loyal.
In	thousand	and	one	ways
A	crust	of	loyalty	is	created	around	him
His	own	soul	is	crushed,	he	loses	his	soul.
A	soldier	has	no	soul	of	his	own,
He	lives	like	a	robot.	His	whole	training	is
Of	destroying	the	man	and	creating	the	machine.
A	sannyasin	is	just	the	opposite	pole.
The	whole	process	of	sannyas	is
Destroying	your	mechanicalness
And	reviving	your	humanity
Reviving	your	consciousness.
It	is	a	process	of	de-automatisation.
The	soldier	is	loyal	because	he	has	to	be	loyal.
He	is	as	loyal	as	a	machine:
You	push	the	button	and	the	lights	are	on,
You	push	the	button	and	the	lights	are	off;
They	are	loyal,	they	never	disobey,
They	are	perfectly	obedient.
A	sannyasin	is	also,	lives	in	loyalty
But	his	loyalty	is	so	totally	different
That	in	fact,	the	same	word
Should	not	be	used	for	both	--
It	can	create	confusion
But	we	don't	have	another	word.
He	is	loyal	because	he	loves
He	is	loyal	because	he	understands
He	is	loyal	because	he	is	surrendered	--
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Not	forced	to	surrender;
On	his	own	accord,	out	of	his	own	freedom.
When	loyalty	comes	out	of	love
It	is	as	beautiful	as	a	rose	flower.
When	loyalty	comes
Through	a	certain	kind	of	cultivation
Then	it	is	like	a	plastic	flower:
May	look	like	a	rose	but	it	is	not	a	rose
And	it	has	no	fragrance	at	all.
Loyalty	is	dying	in	the	world
Because	love	is	dying:	love	has	to	be	revived.
It	is	only	through	spreading	love
That	we	can	make	human	beings	again
Loyal	to	each	other.
Then	loyalty	is	not	for	small	things;
The	country,	the	state,	the	church	--
These	are	ugly	institutions
These	are	hangovers	from	the	past
These	are	dead	things	--	they	should	be	burned!
We	should	get	rid	of	all	of	them.
They	are	torturing	humanity.
They	are	like	mountainous	burden
On	the	small	heart	of	man.	They	are	destructive.
Their	weight	is	destructive.
Man	should	be	freed
From	all	these	small,	mundane	loyalties.
Man	should	have	only	one	loyalty
And	that	is	towards	existence;
Less	than	that	is	not	good
More	than	that	is	not	possible
Because	existence	contains	all!
Existence	means	god
But	I	am	not	using	the	word	'god'	deliberately
Because	it	is	being	used	by	the	churches
And	by	the	politicians	and	by	the	priests
And	in	their	mouths
Even	the	beautiful	word	'god'	stinks.
For	few	years	we	should	drop	the	word	completely
We	should	forget	about	it;
Existence,	nature,	life	--
These	should	be	our	gods
And	we	should	be	loyal	to	life	itself.
We	will	find	finally	that	life	is	god
And	that	finding	is	possible	only
Through	love	and	through	loyalty.
(To	Brigitte)	This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	Dhyan	Brigitte.	Dhyan	means	meditation
and	Brigitte	is	a	Celtic	goddess,	goddess	of	wisdom	and	songs.	That's	very	rare
because	ordinarily	in	the	past,	wisdom	has	never	been	connected	with	songs.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	saints	look	so	sad	--	how	can	they	sing?	They	can	cry,	they	can	weep;	they
cannot	 laugh,	 they	 cannot	 dance,	 they	 cannot	 sing.	 But	 this	 name,	 Brigitte,	 is
beautiful;	that's	my	idea	of	wisdom.
Wisdom	should	be	a	dancing	phenomenon,	a	singing	phenomenon;	it	should	not
be	 sad	 and	 serious.	 If	 it	 is	 sad	 and	 serious,	 it	 is	 not	wisdom	 at	 all,	 it	 is	mere
knowledge.	And	this	kind	of	wisdom	which	can	sing	and	dance,	can	arise	only
through	meditation;	 it	 cannot	 come	 through	 studying	 the	 scriptures.	 Then	 you
accumulate	 knowledge,	 and	 all	 knowledge	 is	 false	 because	 truth	 cannot	 be
borrowed,	 you	 have	 to	 discover	 it	 yourself.	 It	 is	 yours	 only	 when	 you	 have
discovered	it.
The	truth	of	Jesus	cannot	be	yours,	the	truth	of	Buddha	cannot	be	yours.	You	can
repeat	those	beautiful	words	but	they	will	be	empty	words	on	your	tongue;	they
won't	 have	 any	 meaning	 because	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 experience	 their
innermost	core.	They	will	be	just	words	without	any	content,	empty	containers.
That's	how	scholars	are	made:	They	know	all	the	beautiful	words	but	their	life	is
the	life	of	unconsciousness.	They	are	as	stupid	as	anybody	else,	in	fact	more	so;
they	are	not	 intelligent	people,	 they	cannot	be.	Their	mind	 is	 so	 full	of	 jargon,
there	 is	no	escape	 left	 for	 intelligence	 to	grow.	Their	mind	only	grows	weeds.
You	cannot	grow	roses	when	 there	are	so	many	weeds.	Wisdom	is	a	 rose:	you
need	to	get	rid	of	all	knowledge.
Meditation	 does	 two	 things:	 First,	 it	 gets	 rid	 of	 all	 knowledge	 --	 that's	 its
negative	function.	And	secondly,	it	helps	you	to	enter	into	your	own	being,	into
your	inner	truth	--	that's	its	positive	function.	Both	things	fulfilled,	one	becomes
wise.	And	that	wisdom	certainly	knows	how	to	sing,	knows	how	to	love,	knows
how	to	rejoice!
(To	 Candida)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	 Anand	 Candida.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.
Candida	means	white.
The	white	represents	innocence,	purity
A	childlike	spirit.	And	bliss	is	possible	only
When	you	are	a	child	again.
When	you	are	innocent.
The	knowledgeable	person	can	never	be	blissful.
He	knows	too	much
Without	knowing	anything	at	all
But	because	he	thinks	he	knows
He	loses	all	capacity	to	wonder,
He	loses	something	of	immense	value:
He	cannot	feel	awe,	nothing	surprises	him
He	becomes	absolutely	incapable
Of	feeling	the	mysterious.
Just	because	he	thinks
That	he	knows,	he	knows	everything,
And	all	in	fact	that	he	knows	is
Nothing	but	mere	words
But	those	words	clamor	in	his	mind
And	befool	him	and	deceive	him.
In	his	knowledgeability	he	cannot	see
The	flowers,	the	stars,	the	beauty	of	existence
The	benediction	that	life	goes	on	showering	on	us.
He	cannot	feel	any	gratitude.
He	loses	all	contact	with	his	own	heart.
He	remains	hung	up	in	the	head.
That	can	be	presented	by	the	color	black.
It	seems	very	significant	that	in	universities
Particularly	in	their	convocations
The	vice	chancellors,	the	chancellors,	the	deans
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
All	use	black	robes.
They	may	not	be	aware	of	the	fact	that
That	black	color	really	represents	their	state:	It	represents	their	stupid	knowledge
Their	so-called	knowledge
They	have	lost	their	innocence.
And	when	you	graduate	from	a	university
You	have	also	to	wear	black	robes.
The	university	is	declaring	now,
'You	are	also	no	more	capable	of	wondering;
You	have	become	knowledgeable
You	have	become	part	of	a	dead	society.
You	are	included	in	the	dead	people	--
Now	you	are	no	more	alive.'
My	function	here	is	to	make	you	alive	again.
It	is	really	a	process	of	resurrection.
Sannyas	is	resurrection.
All	blackness	has	to	be	dropped	from	your	being
You	have	to	become	white	again,	pure	white	--
That	is	the	color	of	innocence,
A	state	of	not	knowing,	Then	suddenly
Your	eyes	are	again	full	of	joy,	full	of	wonder
Full	of	curiosity,	enquiry,	quest.
Again	small	things	of	life	start	surprising	you
Again	you	start	collecting	seashells
On	the	sea	beach,	like	a	child,	playfully
Again	you	start	running	after	butterflies.
Again	you	start	dreaming	like	a	child	--
The	poet	is	back	again
The	scholar	is	gone,	the	philosopher	is	gone.
The	heart	is	a	poet,	the	head	is	a	philosopher
And	all	that	is	significant
Happens	through	the	heart
Never	through	the	head.	Remember	it!
Being	a	sannyasin	means	becoming	a	child	again
Dropping	the	whole	burden
Dropping	your	head	completely,	beheading	yourself.
Then	life	is	sheer	joy,	an	unending
An	eternal	journey	from	bliss	to	bliss
(To	Girgel)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Pragyan	Anubhavo.
Pragyan	means	wisdom.	Anubhavo	means	experience.
Wisdom	comes	through	experience
Not	through	thinking,	not	through	studying.
Wisdom	is	not	cerebral,	not	mental
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Not	of	the	mind	at	all.	It	is	existential.
You	can	know	everything	about	love
By	reading	all	the	books	that	have	been	written
And	thousands	of	books
Have	been	written	about	love,	but	still
You	will	not	know	love	by	knowing	all	those	books.
You	may	be	able	to	write
A	great	dissertation	on	love	--
Any	university	will	feel	fortunate
To	confer	a	D.Lit.	on	you,	a	Ph.D
Or	something	like	that...
But	you	will	not	know	love!
You	may	become	a	scholar	on	love
You	may	be	able	to	give	long	discourses	on	love
But	as	far	as	love	is	concerned
You	don't	know	any	taste	of	it
It	has	not	happened	to	you.
It	is	like	a	blind	man	talking	about	light:
Yes,	a	blind	man	can	talk	about	light
He	can	study	about	light.	He	can	study
Everything	that	has	been	written	about	light
He	can	memorize	everything
He	may	become	a	great	expert	on	light
But	one	thing	is	certain
That	he	does	not	know	exactly	what	light	is.
And	a	man	who	has	eyes	may	not	be	able
To	say	a	single	word	about	light
But	he	knows	what	light	is.
He	has	experienced	it
And	that	experience	is	valuable.
Even	a	great	scholarship
Is	of	no	value	compared	to	a	small	experience
Because	only	experience	gives	you	authenticity.
Truth	experienced	liberates
And	truth	unexperienced	is	only	a	theorization
It	is	only	a	hypothesis.
It	creates	a	kind	of	bondage
It	does	not	bring	freedom.
That	is	one	of	the	most	important	things
To	understand	for	a	sannyasins	that
Truth	is	an	experience,	wisdom	is	existential.
Hence	my	emphasis	here	is
To	help	you	to	experience.
I	want	to	cure	your	eyes,	I	don't	want	you
To	become	knowledgeable	about	light	--
That	is	absolutely	irrelevant.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Buddha	used	to	say	that,	'I	am	a	physician,'
And	I	perfectly	agree	with	him:
A	real	master	is	always	a	physician.
He	treats	your	eyes,	he	helps	your	eyes	to	see
He	helps	your	heart	to	function.
He	makes	you	aware	of	many	things	which	are	there	But	you	are	not	sensitive	to
them.
And	slowly	slowly
Your	windows	and	doors	open	up
To	the	wind,	to	the	rain,	to	the	sun
And	life	becomes	available	to	you
And	you	become	available	to	life.
When	this	communion	happens
Life	is	a	great	blessing.
All	misery	disappears	on	its	own	accord
And	one	starts	feeling	grateful	to	god	--
Prayer	arises.
Prayer	is	gratitude.
(To	Marianne)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Surya.
Surya	means	meditation.	Surya	means	the	sun,	the	source	of	all	light.
Meditation	is	the	inner	sun
The	source	of	inner	light.
We	live	as	extroverts:
We	are	acquainted	with	the	outer	light
But	we	are	not	acquainted	with	our	inner	light.
Our	inner	light	remains	in	complete	darkness
And	that	is	the	root	cause
Of	all	our	misery,	of	all	our	anguish.
We	have	to	become	aware	of	our	inner	light.
There	is	an	eternal	flame	inside	you.
Once	seen	you	start	living
Through	a	totally	different	perspective.
Then	there	is	no	need
To	follow	anybody	else	commandments:
Then	you	have	your	own	light
And	you	live	according	to	your	own	light.
Then	there	is	no	question
Of	anybody	else	to	decide	for	you
What	is	right	and	what	is	wrong;
You	know	instantly,	each	moment
What	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.
It	is	never	a	question	of	deciding,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	are	no	alternatives	for	a	wise	man.
For	a	man	who	has	seen	his	inner	light
There	are	no	alternatives;
He	simply	knows	what	is	right
And	he	cannot	go	against	the	right	--	impossible.
You	cannot	do	the	wrong
If	you	know	yourself	that	it	is	wrong.
People	go	on	doing	the	wrong	because
It	is	somebody	else	knowing	that	it	is	wrong.
People	go	on	going	against	the	right	because
It	is	somebody	else	--	Moses,	Christ,	Buddha
Saying	that	this	is	wrong
But	it	is	not	their	experience.
In	fact,	deep	down	they	think,
'Buddha	is	right,
Christ	may	have	been	a	great	man
But	he	can't	be	right.'
Their	darkness	goes	on	showing	them
A	totally	different	path
And	they	go	on	falling	in	it
Hence	their	life	becomes	split:
On	the	one	hand	they	agree
With	Christ	and	Buddha;	on	the	other	hand
They	go	on	against	their	teachings.
They	become	split	and	they	become	hypocrites.
My	whole	effort	here	is
Not	to	create	hypocrites	any	more.
The	world	is	full	of	them:	Christians,
Hindus,	Mohammedans,	Jainas,	Buddhists	--
They	are	all	hypocrites
For	the	simple	reason
That	they	are	trying	to	live
According	to	somebody	else	experience.
And	because	it	is	not	their	own	experience
How	can	they	live	according	to	it?
So	they	are	always	wavering:
One	moment	they	decide	this
Another	moment	they	decide	that;
They	are	in	a	constant	inner	conflict
And	whatsoever	they	do,	they	will	feel	miserable.
If	they	do	what	they	think	is	right
They	will	feel	miserable	because
They	are	going	against	all	the	prophets,
If	they	follow	the	prophets
They	will	feel	miserable	because
They	are	not	following	their	own	nature.
So	whatsoever	they	do	brings	misery	--
This	is	inevitable.	The	only	way	out	is
To	search	for	your	own	light	first.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Jesus	says,	'See	ye	first	the	kingdom	of	god
Then	all	else	shall	be	added	unto	you.'
This	is	an	old	way	of	saying	the	same	thing.
If	I	am	to	say	it	I	will	say:
Seek	ye	first	your	inner	light
Then	all	else	shall	be	added	unto	you.
It	means	the	same.	I	am	using
A	far	more	modern	phraseology,	that's	all.
Jesus	was,	of	course,
Using	the	language	of	his	day	--
'The	kingdom	of	god'.
It	simply	means	your	inner	light.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	means
You	are	becoming	committed	to	an	inner	search
You	are	going	for	a	great	journey;,
The	greatest	adventure	of	life.
Move	with	your	totality,	not	halfheartedly
Not	in	a	lukewarm	way.
No	Man	is	an	Island
Chapter	#31
Chapter	title:	None
31	May	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8005315
ShortTitle:	ISLAND31
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Paola)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Paola.
Deva	means	divine.	Paola	means	rest.
Relaxation,	rest	is	the	door	to	the	divine.
Action	leads	you	into	the	world
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Rest	leads	you	inwards.
In	total	rest	you	sink	within	yourself
You	can't	go	anywhere	else;
To	go	anywhere	you	will	need	action.
Hence	meditation	basically	is	total	rest
Total	relaxation	--	not	of	the	body
But	of	the	mind	too,	then	it	is	total.
We	can	act	physically,	we	can	act	mentally
The	body	can	be	at	rest	but	the	mind
Can	go	on	through	thousand	and	one	activities:
Desiring,	imagining,	remembering,
The	past,	the	future.
There	is	a	constant	traffic	of	dreams.
Total	rest	means
The	body	is	at	rest,	the	mind	is	at	rest,	as	if
The	body	and	the	mind	both	have	disappeared,
All	activity	has	ceased
Then	you	cannot	go	anywhere	except
To	your	own	center
You	will	naturally	sink	into	your	own	center
You	will	disappear	from	the	circumference
And	you	will	appear	at	the	center
And	the	center	of	your	being
Is	the	door	to	the	divine.
The	circumference	is	the	bridge	with	the	world
And	the	center	is	the	bridge	with	god.
And	the	only	problem	for	a	real	seeker	of	truth
Is	how	to	shift	your	energy
From	the	circumference	to	the	center	--
That's	the	whole	art	of	religion
Or	you	can	call	it	the	science	of	religion;
It	is	the	same	(inaudible)
That's	what	I	teach	you	here.
I	am	not	against	action;
Action	is	good	if	it	arises	out	of	rest.
Words	are	beautiful	if	they	come
Out	of	silence.
Then	they	have	some	fragrance	of	truth	in	them,
Then	they	have	meaning,	otherwise
They	are	just	empty	shells.
Action	is	also	meaningful
When	it	comes	out	of	a	deep	rest.
Then	you	bring	something	of	god	into	the	world;
You	become	a	passage,	you	become	a	vehicle,
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about
Becoming	vehicles	for	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Ellen)	--	This	is	our	name:	Ma	Dhyan	Ellen.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Ellen	means	light.	It	also
Means	the	bright	one.
Meditation	brings	you
A	tremendous	explosion	of	light.
It	is	just	like	atomic	explosion;
It	is	not	of	atomic,	it	is	of	consciousness.
It	is	not	material,	it	is	not	outer
It	is	inner.	But	meditation	is	the	key.
And	once	your	inner	consciousness	explodes
Your	life	radiates	bliss,	radiates	intelligence
Radiates	creativity,	love,	compassion.
Thousand	and	one	flowers	bloom	suddenly.
Before	that	person	lives
A	life	of	utter	emptiness
A	life	which	has	no	meaning,	no	significance
A	life	which	is	impotent,	which	creates	nothing
which	cannot	be	creative.
Meditation	makes	you	aware
Of	your	great	potential;	makes	you	aware
Of	the	kingdom	of	god	what	is	within	you.
Sannyas	and	meditation	are	synonymous.
Sannyas	is	only	a	declaration
That	from	now	onwards
Your	life	will	be	devoted	to	meditation
That	everything	else	will	secondary
That	everything	else	will	be	used
As	a	means	to	meditation	--
Even	love	will	be	secondary
Even	love	will	be	used	as	a	means	for	meditation.
Unless	meditation	becomes	your	only	one	goal
It	is	impossible	to	attain	it.
It	needs	your	total	energy
One	cannot	go	halfheartedly	on	the	path.
It	is	not	for	people
Who	are	wavering,	ambiguous,	uncertain.
It	is	only	for	those	who	know	what	commitment	is
Who	are	courageous	enough
To	commit	themselves	totally
Whose	surrender	is	not	pseudo,	of	the	mind.
Whose	surrender	is	that	of	love	and	the	heart.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Then	meditation	is	a	very	simple	process
But	you	have	to	make	it
The	centering	fact	of	your	life.
It	can	not	be	just	one	of	the	things
Amongst	many	things.
It	cannot	be	just	one	of	the	items
On	the	big	shopping	list	of	your	life.
It	has	to	be	the	only	one	target
And	you	have	to	go	like	an	arrow,	unwavering,
Persistently	towards	it,	patiently
With	your	total	energy.
Whatsoever	you	can	put	into	it
You	have	to	put	into	it.
The	moment	you	are	hundred	per	cent	devoted
A	sudden	flash	of	light
And	your	life	is	transformed:
You	are	no	more	the	old	one,
The	old	one	is	gone	and	the	new	is	born.
And	then	only	one	knows	what	life	is
Then	only	one	tastes	the	immortality	of	life
The	tremendous	joy	of	it,
The	moment	to	moment	ecstasy	of	it	all.
(To	Masafumi)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Virago.
Anand	means	bliss.	Virago	means	non-attachment.
For	centuries	it	has	been	told
That	non-attachment	brings	bliss.
My	teaching	is	just	the	opposite;
I	say	bliss	brings	non-attachment.
The	old	teaching	made	non-attachment
The	basic	phenomenon	of	a	religious	life,
Hence	it	taught	escapism,	renunciation,
Dropping	out	of	life	--	but	it	was	all	repressive.
You	can	escape	from	the	world
But	where	will	you	escape	from	yourself?
And	the	world
Is	not	the	problem	in	the	first	place.
You	are	the	problem.
One	can	renounce	money
But	by	renouncing	money
The	greed	does	not	disappear.
Even	a	beggar	is	as	much	greedy	as	an	emperor.
So	whether	you	have	money
Or	you	don't	have	money,	does	not	matter.
In	fact	a	beggar	will	be	more	greedy
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Because	we	hanker	for	that	which	we	don't	have.
You	can	renounce	your	wife
Your	children,	your	family
But	what	are	you	going	to	do	with	your	sexuality?
Just	by	renouncing	your	wife
You	cannot	drop	your	sexuality	--
It	will	go	with	you
And	you	will	be	continuously	repressing	it.
It	will	not	create	a	healthy	being	in	you,	It	will	create	pathology.
Hence	my	teaching	is:	first	become	blissful...
And	bliss	comes	through	meditation
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	non-attachment.
Non-attachment	is	not	a	condition
For	being	blissful.
Become	blissful	and	then	many	things
Will	disappear	from	you	life
On	their	own	accord	because
It	is	misery	that	creates	greed;
If	you	are	blissful	you	will	be	non-greedy
And	non-greed	will	come	naturally,
As	a	by-product.
If	you	are	blissful	sex	will	become
Automatically	less	and	less	significant
Because	you	will	know
Something	higher,	something	deeper
Than	sex	can	ever	give	to	you.
Sex	can	give	only	moments	of	joy
But	meditation	can	make	that	joy	something
Like	a	constant	undercurrent	in	your	life.
Sex	can	give	you	a	momentary	orgasmic	experience
But	meditation	can	give	you	an	orgasmic	being	--
You	are	twenty-four	hours	in	ecstasy,	drunk.
Then	slowly	slowly	as	a	consequence
Sex	disappears.
And	when	it	disappears	on	its	own	accord
There	is	beauty	because
There	is	no	presentation	at	all.
Hence	my	approach	is	totally	new,
It	is	diametrically	opposite	to	the	old	approach.
Bliss	is	a	precondition	for	non-attachment
Not	vice	versa.
Become	blissful	through	meditation
And	then	all	that	is	meaningless	will	drop
And	all	that	is	meaningful	will	(can't	get	it)
You	need	not	bother	about	that.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 live	 life,	 have	 to	 live	 life	 in	 its	 totality	 I	 don't	 teach
escapism.	Escapism	is	cowardly.
It	is	not	the	way	of	the	courageous
And	it	is	not	the	way	of	the	sane.
(To	Grant)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Svarupo.
Anand	means	bliss.	Svarupo	means	self-nature.
Bliss	 is	 not	 something	 that	 comes	 from	 the	 outside.	 It	 grows	within	 you,	 it	 is
your	self-nature.	You	are	born	with	 it.	Of	course	 it	 is	only	a	potential,	but	 it	 is
within	you	and	it	can	be	actualized.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 process	 of	 self-actualization.	 It	 simply	 means	 to	 make	 you	 that
which	you	are	potentially	capable	of	becoming.	Nothing	has	to	be	imposed	upon
you	from	the	outside;	hence	I	don't	give	you	any	discipline.	I	simply	share	my
insight	with	you,	 then	 it	 is	 up	 to	 you	 to	 create	 your	 discipline.	That	 has	 to	 be
your	own	choice.
The	 old	 idea	 of	 sannyas	 was	 that	 a	 certain	 fixed	 routine,	 a	 certain	 static
discipline	has	to	be	given,	and	one	has	to	follow	it	mechanically.	Of	course,	they
used	 to	 call	 it	 "religiously,"	 but	 it	 simply	 means	 mechanically.	 Religiously
means,	you	are	not	allowed	any	freedom;	you	have	to	do	it	and	you	are	not	 to
ask	why,	because	that	is	showing	intelligence.	You	are	supposed	--	according	to
the	 old	 traditions	 all	 over	 the	 world	 --	 to	 be	 obedient	 not	 intelligent.	 And
remember,	 the	 intelligent	person	cannot	be	obedient	 in	 the	ordinary	 sense,	 and
the	obedient	 person	 cannot	 be	 intelligent	 in	 the	ordinary	 sense.	The	 intelligent
person	can	be	obedient	only	to	his	intelligence.
So	 the	 real	 master	 helps	 you	 to	 become	 intelligent,	 and	 then	 you	 follow
according	to	your	light,	you	move	according	to	your	light.	And	each	individual
is	so	unique	that	no	fixed	pattern	can	be	given.	All	fixed	patterns	are	crippling,
paralyzing,	and	there	is	no	need	in	fact.
I	 give	 you	 freedom,	 I	 help	 you	 to	 be	 intelligent,	 alert,	 aware,	 silent	 and	 to
discover	your	potential	and	then	go	accordingly.
You	have	to	be	yourself.	You	are	not	to	be	Jesus,	you	are	not	to	be	Buddha,	you
are	not	to	be	me.	You	have	to	be	just	yourself,	you	are	not	to	be	an	imitator.
Thomas	a	Kempis	has	written	one	of	 the	most	 famous	Christian	 treatises,	The
Imitation	of	Christ.	The	very	title	is	ugly.	As	far	as	imitation	is	concerned	it	can
create	 only	 pseudo	 people,	 hypocrites.	 About	 that,	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 is	 far
more	right	than	Kempis.	Nietzsche	says	that	the	only	Christian	died	on	the	cross
two	 thousand	years	ago.	He	says	 the	only	Christian	 --	and	he	 is	 right.	Nobody
else	can	be	a	Jesus.	Nobody	else	was	before	him,	nobody	else	will	be	again.	And
that	is	beautiful,	that	each	individual	has	such	uniqueness;	nobody	else	has	to	be
imitated	by	you.
That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 self-nature.	 Bliss	 is	 your	 nature,	 intelligence	 is	 your
nature.	Meditation	 is	 only	 a	way	 to	 discover	 it,	 to	 uncover	 it.	Once	 you	 have
found	it	you	become	free	from	all	imposed	patterns	--
Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan.	You	become	free	from	all	ideologies.	You	start
living	moment	to	moment,	responding	to	the	challenges	of	life	according	to	your
light.	And	then	there	is	no	repentance,	no	guilt.	Then	whatsoever	you	do	is	right.
Not	that	you	are	following	a	certain	pattern	which	says,	"This	is	right	and	this	is
wrong."	 You	 are	 not	 following	 those	 ten	 commandments,	 you	 are	 simply
following	your	own	consciousness,	your	own	awareness.
So	 I	 give	 you	 the	 eleventh	 commandment,	 the	 only	 one	 commandment	 really,
your	consciousness:	Be	a	light	unto	yourself.
(To	Ralf)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Anand	 Parivartan	Anand	means	 bliss.
Parivartan	means	constant	change.
Misery	 arises	 because	 we	 don't	 allow	 change	 to	 happen.	 We	 cling,	 we	 want
things	 to	be	static.	 If	you	 love	a	woman	you	want	her	 tomorrow	too,	 the	same
way	as	she	is	yours	today.	That's	how	misery	arises.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Nobody	can	be	certain	about	the	next	moment	--	what	to	say	about	tomorrow?
A	man	of	awareness	knows	that	life	is	constantly	changing.	Life	is	change.	There
is	only	one	thing	permanent,	and	that	is	change.	Everything	else	except	change,
changes.	To	accept	this	nature	of	life,	to	accept	this	changing	existence	with	all
its	seasons	and	moods,	this	constant	flow	which	never	stops	for	a	single	moment,
is	 to	 be	 blissful.	 Then	 nobody	 can	 disturb	 your	 bliss.	 It	 is	 your	 hankering	 for
permanency	 that	 creates	 troubles	 for	 you.	 You	 want	 to	 live	 in	 a	 life	 with	 no
change,	and	that	is	not	possible	--	you	are	asking	the	impossible.
The	child	will	become	young,	the	young	man	will	become	old,	the	one	who	was
alive	yesterday	will	be	dead	today.	If	you	accept	all	this	change,	this	suchness	of
things,	and	you	allow	it	to	happen	joyously	--
knowing	 that's	 how	 life	 is	 --	 then	 nobody	 can	 distract	 you	 from	 your	 bliss.
Nobody	can	disturb	your	bliss.
Then	you	move	each	moment	with	the	flow	of	life.
Otherwise,	people	are	always	lagging	behind.	Life	is	always	running	ahead	and
they	are	far,	far	behind.
They	are	simply	dragging	themselves.	And	they	are	so	far	behind	that	 they	are
bound	to	be	miserable	--
because	 they	will	 be	 almost	 dead,	 and	 by	 the	 time	 they	 reach	 to	where	 life	 is
right	now,	life	has	moved	again.	It	is	like	a	river:	it	is	not	stagnant,	it	is	dynamic.
A	 sannyasin	has	 to	 see	 it	 clearly	 that	 everything	 changes,	 nothing	 remains	 the
same,	 even	 for	 two	 consecutive	moments.	 Then	 the	 whole	 desire	 for	 keeping
things	as	they	are	forever	drops.	And	in	that	dropping	you	are	free.	Suddenly,	a
great	freedom	is	felt.	Then	you	are	no	longer	disturbed	by	anything,	nothing	can
disturb	you.
Things	 disturb	 you	 because	 you	were	 hoping	 for	 something	 else	 and	 it	 is	 not
happening	that	way.	Things	frustrate	you	because	you	were	expecting	something
else	and	it	has	not	happened	the	way	that	you	were	expecting,	it	is	happening	in
some	other	way.	 It	 is	not	 fulfilling	your	desire;	 it	 is	going	on	 its	own.	It	 is	not
listening	to	you.
In	almost	all	the	languages	of	the	world	such	proverbs	exist:	"Man	proposes	and
God	disposes."	That	is	sheer	nonsense.	The	moment	you	propose	something	you
yourself	 are	 getting	 into	 trouble.	Nobody	 is	 there	 to	 dispose	 it!	But	 your	 very
proposition	creates	trouble,	because	life	is	unpredictable;	one	never	knows	what
is	 going	 to	 happen.	And	 it	 is	 beautiful	 that	 one	 never	 knows	what	 is	 going	 to
happen.	 That's	 the	 excitement	 and	 the	 ecstasy	 of	 life,	 that	 it	 is	 a	 constant
surprise.	If	it	was	predictable	it	would	be	mechanical.	It	is	not	predictable,	there
are	always	surprises	in	store.	And	the	more	alert	you	are	the	more	surprises	there
are;	 hence	 people	 avoid	 being	 aware	 --	 they	 become	 insensitive	 to	 protect
themselves	against	this	change.
Scientists	say	we	allow	only	two	per	cent	of	life	to	enter	into	us;	ninety-eight	per
cent	we	keep	outside.
We	exclude	 it	 so	 that	we	can	go	on	 living	 in	our	dreams,	 in	our	hopes,	 in	our
expectations.	But	how	long	can	you	live	in	a	dream?	It	is	going	to	be	shattered
sooner	or	later,	and	it	is	good	that	it	is	shattered	sooner.
A	 man	 of	 awareness	 becomes	 courageous	 enough	 to	 accept	 the	 changing
phenomena.	In	that	very	acceptance	is	bliss;	then	all	is	good,	then	you	are	never
frustrated	because	in	the	first	place	you	never	asked	anything.	Jesus	says,	"Ask
and	 it	 shall	 be	 given	 to	 you."	 He	 must	 be	 talking	 to	 very	 immature	 people;
people	were	 immature	 in	 those	 days.	 I	 say	 to	 you,	 "Ask	 and	 it	 shall	 never	 be
given	to	you.	Ask	and	you	are	asking	for	trouble.	Don't	ask	and	it	shall	be	given
to	you."
Great	 blessings	 come	 to	 people	 who	 don't	 ask,	 because	 then	 everything	 is	 a
blessing.	If	some	stranger	on	the	street	gives	you	a	rose	flower	--	a	stranger	you
have	 never	 known	 before,	 you	 have	 never	 even	 been	 introduced...	 he	 simply
smiles	and	gives	a	rose	flower	to	you	and	walks	on,	not	even	waiting	for	a	thank
you
--	 how	much	 joy	 that	 simple	 rose	 flower	 brings	 to	 you!	 But	 you	 will	 not	 be
surprised	if	your	wife	gives	you	a	rose	flower	--	you	will	not,	because	you	were
expecting.	If	your	friend	gives	you	a	rose	flower	you	will	not	be	surprised,	you
will	not	feel	thankful;	you	will	say,	"So	what?"	It	is	the	expectation	that	destroys
your	 gratitude.	But	with	 a	 stranger,	 because	 you	were	 not	 expecting,	 a	 simple
rose	flower	becomes	such	a	beautiful	gift.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	moment	you	drop	all	your	expectations,	the	whole	of	life	becomes	a	gift	of
God.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
