1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Talks	given	from	01/11/79	to	01/12/79
Darshan	Diary
42	Chapters
Year	published:
Unpublished
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911015
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Osho	 (to	 Kirsten):	 Christ	 says	 God	 is	 love.	 God	 is	 not	 known	 to	 us.	 God	 is
absolutely	unknown.	When	we	utter	the	word	"god"	it	is	hollow,	empty,	because
we	 have	 not	 experienced	 anything	 of	 God.	 But	 the	 word	 "love"	 is	 full	 of
meaning;	it	is	warm.
There	is	something	in	love	which	has	been	experencied	by	everybody.	It	may	not
be	 in	 its	 purest	 form,	 it	 may	 be	 much	 adultered	 --	 but	 whater	 is	 water	 even
though	it	is	muddy,	and	love	is	love	even	though	it	is	full	of	lust.	Something	of
the	divine	 remains	 always	present	 in	 it.	Howsoever	 dark	 the	night	 is,	 a	 ray	of
light	is	still	light	and	not	darkness.	So	it	is	the	case	with	love.
Love	more	 and	 you	will	 be	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 the	 understanding	 of
Christ-consciousness.	 By	 being	 a	 Christian	 nothing	 is	 achieved,	 one	 simply
follow	a	dead	dogma.	But	by	being	a	lover	something	certainly	opens	up,	your
heart	 starts	 growing.	And	when	 the	heart	 blooms	 in	 its	 absolute	glory	you	 are
Christ.
I	am	not	here	to	create	Christians	but	to	create	Christs;	my	effort	is	not	to	make
Buddhists	but	Buddhas.
(to	 Cristine):	 Love	 is	 the	 ultimate	 state	 of	 feeling.	 We	 live	 in	 the	 world	 of
thoughts,	 in	 thinking,	 and	 we	 are	 so	 engrossed	 in	 thinking	 that	 we	 have
completely	forgotten	the	language	of	feeling.	Love	is	the	essence	of	feeling.	One
has	to	learn	how	not	think	and	how	to	feel.
Think	less	and	feel	more.	Use	logic	less,	use	emotion	more.	If	you	use	logic	and
thinking,	at	the	most	you	can	communicate	with	human	beings,	and	that	too	on	a
superficial	level.	You	can't	be	logical	with	a	child	who	does	not	know	language
yet.	What	 do	 you	do	with	 a	 child?	You	 relate	with	 the	 child	 through	 feelings,
through	love.
You	cannot	relate	with	the	trees	through	logic;	but	there	are	ways	to	relate	with
trees.	If	you	can	become	open,	 if	you	can	feel	 the	being	of	the	tree,	 if	you	can
feel	the	texture	of	the	tree,	if	you	can	hug	the	tree,	if	you	can	close	your	eyes	and
simply	feel	its	being,	you	will	be	contacting	it	on	a	totally	different	plane.	Then
even	 rocks	 start	 speaking	 to	 you;	 then	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 alive,	 suddenly
alive.	It	comes	alive,	it	is	no	more	dead.	That	life	is	Christ-consciousness.	In	the
East	we	call	 it	Buddhahood.	Christ	and	Buddha	are	synonymous.	They	are	not
confined	to	persons,	remember,	they	are	states	of	being.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Man	can	live	on	three	levels;	man	is	a	three-tiered	being.	The	most	superficial	is
thinking	and	the	deepest	is	being;	between	the	two	is	feeling	--	so	feeling	is	the
bridge.	 From	 thinking	move	 to	 feeling	 --	 that	 is	 love;	 and	 from	 love	move	 to
being.	The	thinking	and	feeling	all	disappear	because	you	are	no	more	a	separate
entity,	you	become	one	with	the	whole.	That's	when	one	becomes	a	Christ.
It	 is	 of	 no	 use	 to	 follow	 anybody.	 The	 real	 thing	 is	 to	 love	 Christ,	 to	 love
Buddha,	to	love	Zarathustra	--
not	 as	 followers,	 but	 as	 fellow-travelers	because	 it	 is	 the	 same	pilgrimage,	 the
same	 journey,	 you	 will	 be	 passing	 through	 the	 same	 places	 that	 Jesus	 passed
through	before	he	became	a	Christ.
The	greatest	thing	in	becoming	a	Christ	is	the	movement	from	thinking	to	love;
then	the	second	step	is	very	easy.	The	first	step	is	more	difficult	because	we	have
lived	in	thinking	for	so	long	that	we	have	become	identified	with	our	minds.	If
we	can	get	out	of	the	mind	--	and	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about	--	and	enter
the	heart,	then	the	second	step	is	very	simple,	at	any	moment	one	can	easily	slip
from	the	heart	into	being.
And	to	be	is	to	be	a	Christ,	to	be	is	to	be	a	Buddha	--	just	to	be.
(to	 Bianca):	 Love	 is	 pure	 when	 there	 are	 not	 conditions	 in	 it,	 when	 it	 is
unconditional,	 when	 there	 is	 no	 demand,	 no	 expectation,	 no	 begging,	 no
bargaining,	no	business.	When	you	simply	give	out	of	 the	sheer	 joy	of	giving,
you	don't	expect	even	a	thank	you,	then	love	is	pure.	And	pure	love	is	prayer.
Pure	love	is	the	closest	phenomenon	to	God.	One	who	knows	what	pure	love	is,
is	 bound	 to	 know	what	God	 is.	 Love	will	make	 you	 aware	 that	 the	whole	 of
existence	is	full	of	godliness.	When	the	heart	is	full	of	love,	existence	is	full	of
God;	when	the	heart	is	loveless,	existence	is	godless.	God	is	missing	in	existence
when	love	is	missing	in	the	heart.	There	is	a	syncronicity	between	love	and	God.
Love	 has	 to	 be	 your	 preparation,	 and	 then	God	 is	 the	 answer	 of	 the	whole	 of
existence.	 To	 the	 loving	 heart	 only	 God	 is;	 everuthing	 starts	 turning	 into
godhood.	Then	there	are	scriptures	in	silence	and	sermons	in	stones.
But	the	basic	thing	is	to	be	loving	for	the	sake	of	love.
(to	Lorna):	Love	is	victory	but	it	is	a	very	strange	victory:	it	is	victory	through
surrender,	 it	 is	 not	 victory	 through	 conquering.	 It	 is	 not	 ordinary	 victory.	 The
ordinary	victory	 is	violent:	you	have	 to	defeat	 the	other,	you	have	 to	dominate
the	other,	you	have	to	enforce	yourself	upon	the	other.
The	 ordinary	 victory	 can	 keep	 the	 other's	 body	 captive	 but	 cannot	 reach	 the
other's	soul.	You	can	destroy	the	body	but	the	soul	remains	unconquerable;	even
in	death	the	soul	can	remain	free	...	it	does	remain	free.
But	 love	 knows	 a	 totally	 different	 way	 of	 being	 victorious:	 it	 is	 through
surrender,	it	is	through	let-go.
To	be	victorious	through	surrender	is	a	paradox;	but	life	is	full	of	paradoxes,	that
is	 its	mistery.	It	 is	not	simple	mathematics,	otherwise	science	would	have	been
able	to	discover	all	that	is	there.	But	science	can	never	discover	all;	something,
the	most	 essential,	will	 always	 go	 on	 being	missed.	 Science	will	 discover	 the
peripheral	but	the	central	will	be	unavaible	to	science.	It	is	possible	only	through
religion	because	religion	accepts	the	paradox,	it	accepts	the	mysterious.	and	the
most	mysterious	phenomenon	is	victory	through	surrender.
Surrender	 means	 dropping	 the	 ego.	 When	 you	 drop	 the	 ego	 in	 relation	 to
someone	you	become	victorious	within.	When	you	drop	the	ego	in	the	context	of
the	whole	you	become	victorious	with	the	whole.
In	the	East	we	have	created	many	schools	of	mistery.	One	of	the	greatest,	one	of
the	 ancientmost,	 was	 created	 by	 the	 Jainas.	 The	 very	word	 "jaina"	means	 the
victorious	one,	one	who	has	conquered.	But	to	conquer	you	have	to	learn	how	to
be	conquered	by	the	whole,	how	to	be	available	to	the	whole,	how	to	be	at	the
service	of	the	whole,	how	to	efface	yourself	so	totally	that	you	are	no	more	there
but	God's	will	is	done	through	you.	That	is	the	greatest	moment	in	life	--	when
you	 disappear	 and	 God	 appears	 in	 you.	 That	 is	 the	 most	 victorious	 moment
possible.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
Lorna:	I	don't	know.
Be	here	as	long	as	possible...	or	be	here	forever.	Because	my	place	is	for	people
who	don't	know.
Bliss	needs	great	courage.	Any	courage	can	afford	misery	--	that's	why	there	are
so	many	miserable	people.	It	costs	nothing	to	be	miserable,	it	is	not	a	risk	at	all.
It	 is	 very	 convenient	 to	 be	miserable;	 in	 fact,	 comfortable	 to	 be	miserable.	 It
feels	secure	to	be	miserable.	But	to	be	blissful	is	dangerous,	risky.	It	is	dangerous
because	 it	 is	 going	 into	 the	 unknown.	 It	 is	 taking	 your	 small	 boat	 onto	 the
uncharted	sea.	One	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
knows	nothing	of	the	other	shore	--	it	may	be,	it	may	not	be.	Even	if	it	is,	one	has
no	map,	one	can't	be	certain	 that	one	will	ever	be	able	 to	 reach	 it.	The	boat	 is
small,	our	energies	limited,	and	the	ocean	is	vast.	It	really	needs	guts	to	get	into
the	boat	one	day	and	just	move,	not	looking	back,	not	looking	at	all	the	securities
on	this	shore.
This	shore	is	familiar;	altough	there	is	misery	we	have	become	familiar	with	it.
We	have	lived	together	for	so	long	that	it	is	almost	difficult	to	say	goodbye	to	it.
We	are	"married"	to	misery.	It	needs	great	courage	to	divorce	misery	because	it
is	 divorcing	 the	 known,	 the	 familiar,	 the	 accustomed,	 the	 conventional.	 It	 is
divorcing	that	which	nobody	else	is	divorcing.	The	whole	crowd	is	living	in	it.
One	has	to	learn	how	to	be	alone;	for	miles	and	miles	there	is	nobody.	One	has	to
learn	how	to	be	alone;	hence	bliss	needs	courage,	the	courage	to	die	to	the	past
and	be	reborn.
Sannyas	 is	 a	great	 leap	 into	 the	unknown.	Gather	yourself	 together	 for	 a	great
journey.	 Yes,	 there	 is	 risk	 but	 with	 risk	 is	 life.	 Yes,	 there	 is	 insecurity	 but
insecurity	 is	 adventure.	Yes,	 there	 is	danger	but	with	danger	millions	of	 thrills
arise,	and	you	are	always	in	for	a	surprise	because	you	are	moving	into	unknown
territory.
Danger	is	there,	risk	is	there,	but	boredom	--	never.	In	hell	you	will	have	great
company.	The	path	to	heaven	is	of	deep	aloneness.
Remember	 it,	 because	 entering	 onto	 the	 path	 is	 a	 momentous	 phenomenon.
Buddha	 used	 to	 say	 that	 to	 enter	 into	 the	 river	 --	 "srotaapanna",	 that	 was	 his
word	--	to	enter	into	the	river	that	is	going	to	the	ocean	is	risky,	dangerous.	But
those	who	dare	are	the	blessed	ones.	Once	you	enter	the	river	sooner	or	later	you
will	reach	the	ocean.
This	is	entering	the	river.
Bliss	is	not	something	that	you	can	think	about;	you	cannot	philosophize	about
it.	There	 is	no	way	 to	 speculate	 about	 it,	 and	whatsoever	you	 think	about	 it	 is
going	to	be	wrong.	It	is	an	existential	experience.	It	is	just	as	a	blind	man	cannot
think	anything	about	 light.	Unless	his	eyes	are	cured	he	will	never	know	what
light	 is.	He	can	go	on	guessing,	 inferring,	 listening	 to	great	dialogues	on	 light,
reading	 books	 on	 light,	 talking	 to	 people	 about	 light,	 accumulating	 great
information	and	knowledge	about	light	--	but	still	he	will	not	have	any	glimpse
of	what	it	is.	The	only	way	to	know	light	is	to	open	your	eyes	and	see	it.
That	exactly,	precisely	the	case	with	bliss:	one	has	to	experience	it.	One	has	to
prepare	oneself	for	the	great	experience.	Meditation	simply	prepares	the	ground,
it	helps	you	to	open	your	eyes,	it	is	medicinal.
And	once	your	eyes	are	cured	you	know	what	it	is.
Many	times	many	people	asked	Buddha	"What	 is	bliss?"	and	he	would	always
say	"Just	be	with	me	and	be	silent	for	a	few	months,	a	few	years,	and	whenever
you	are	right,	ripe,	mature	enough	to	know	it,	I	will	tell	you."	Many	stayed	with
him	and	he	would	never	tell	them	what	it	was.	One	day	he	would	ask	them
"Now	do	you	want	to	know	what	bliss	is?"	And	they	would	say	"It	can't	be	said,
but	we	ourselves	know	we	are	grateful	that	you	tricked	us	into	bliss.	You	never
said	anything	about	it	but	you	helped	us	to	be	silent,	to	be	still."
When	you	are	silent	and	still	something	wells	up	within	you	--	that	is	bliss.	It	is
your	innermost	nature.
But	remember	it	 is	an	experience;	 it	 is	not	a	 theory,	 it	 is	not	a	dogma,	it	 is	not
contained	in	any	scriptures.
Though	it	is	written	all	over	existence,	on	each	leaf	of	a	tree,	on	each	pebble	on
the	seashore,	you	will	only	be	able	to	see	it	when	you	have	experienced	it	in	the
innermost	shrine	of	your	being.	Then	you	will	see	it	everywhere.	Then	the	whole
existence	is	made	of	bliss	and	nothing	else.
Let	bliss	be	a	song	that	resounds	in	you.
My	sannyasin	has	to	be	a	song	of	bliss.	My	sannyasin	is	not	entering	into	a	sad,
monastic	life;	on	the	contrary	he	is	entering	into	a	life	of	rejoincing.	God	is	not
against	life	so	there	is	no	need	to	renounce	life	to	attain	God;	in	fact	to	renounce
life	 is	 to	 renounce	God	 forever.	Those	who	 renounce	 life	will	 never	 find	God
anywhere	because	he	 is	 always	here	 and	now.	He	 is	 in	 the	 thick	of	 life,	 in	 its
colors,	in	its	days	and	in	its	nights.
God	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 name	 of	 the	 totality,	 that	which	 is.	 Renouncing	 life	 is
going	against	God.
Renouncing	 life	will	make	 you	more	 egoistic.	The	 ego	 is	 always	 sad:	 it	 has	 a
long	face,	it	is	very	serious.	It	is	never	joyful,	it	has	no	sense	of	humor.	It	cannot
laugh,	it	cannot	dance,	it	cannot	sing,	it	cannot	love,	it	cannot	live.	It	is	suicidal,
it	 wants	 to	 die.	 Slowly	 slowly	 it	 commits	 suicide.	 That's	 what	 has	 been	 done
down	the	ages	by	the	escapists	who	renounced	life	and	went	to	the	monasteries
or	into	the	caves.
I	am	against	renounciation.	Ma	sannyas	is	a	tremendous	love	affair	with	life.	So
become	a	song	of	bliss,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
a	dance	of	bliss,	a	celebration.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911025
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Lesley	and	her	 two-year-old	son,	Gudiya,	who	is	sound	asleep)	This	 is	 the
perfect	posture	for	a	sannyasin!
Anand	means	bliss.	Svarupa	means	self-nature.
Bliss	 is	 not	 an	 achievment.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 in	 the
future.	One	cannot	desire	 it,	 one	 cannot	be	 ambitious	 for	 it	 --	 it	 is	 already	 the
case,	it	is	our	very	being.	We	just	have	to	look	in,	we	just	have	to	turn	in	and	it	is
discovered.	It	is	a	discovery	not	an	achievment.
This	 is	 the	 whole	 foundation	 of	 meditation.	Meditation	 means	 that	 all	 that	 is
worth	achieving	need	not	be	achieved	because	 it	 is	 already	 inside	you,	and	all
that	 can	 be	 achieved	 is	 not	worth	 achieving.	Money	 can	 be	 achieved,	 prestige
can	be	achieved,	but	they	are	not	worth	achieving	because	all	will	be	left	behind;
death	will	come	and	snatch	you	away.
So	that	which	can	be	achieved	is	not	worth	achieving,	and	that	which	is	worth
achieving	need	not	be	achieved	at	all	because	it	is	already	there	--	you	are	made
of	 it.	 Love,	 bliss,	 God	 --	 these	 are	 our	 intrinsic	 ingredients.	 They	 are	 given;
nothing	is	to	be	done	about	them.	But	the	misery	is,	the	irony	is	that	man	goes	on
seeking	 and	 searching	 for	 bliss	 too	 because	 he	 knows	 only	 one	 way	 --	 the
outside.	He	can	move	only	in	one	direction.	He	has	no	reverse	gear	--	or	maybe
he	has	forgotten	about	it.
When	Ford	made	his	 first	car	 it	had	no	 reverse	gear;	 that	was	a	 later	addition.
Only	by	experience	did	he	come	to	feel	that	it	 is	very	difficult	 to	go	back:	you
have	 to	go	around	for	miles!	You	could	have	gone	back	within	a	minute	but	 it
took	hours.	Then	the	reverse	gear	was	added.
Man	has	 it	already	--	you	can	go	 immediately.	But	we	have	forgotten	about	 it.
We	have	not	used	it	 for	so	many	lives	 that	unless	we	start	using	it	we	will	not
become	aware	of	it.	The	function	of	the	Master	is	to	find	the	reverse	gear.
And	this	is	his	name:	Swamy	Anand	Gudiya.	Anand	means	bliss.	Gudiya	means
white	boy.
White	 is	 significant.	 It	 is	 the	 color	 of	 bliss.	White	 contains	 all	 the	 colors,	 the
whole	spectrum	.	White	is	not	a	single	color,	it	is	all	colors	together.	It	is	such	a
synthesis	of	all	colors	that	in	the	synthesis	they	all	disappear	and	a	totally	new
phenomenon	appears,	white.	One	cannot	 imagine	 it;	 it	 is	 a	miracle	 that	 all	 the
colors	 together	 create	 something	which	 looks	 colorless,	 it	 is	 the	 total	 negative
state.	White	is	presence	of	all	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
colors	but	in	such	a	synthesis	that	no	single	color	can	show	--	it	is	an	orchestra.
Bliss	is	an	orchestra.	It	 is	not	a	solo	flute	player,	it	 is	the	whole	orchestra.	It	is
multidimensional,	it	is	not	one-dimensional.
(Maitri's	brother,	John	and	his	wife	Annie).
Maitry,	you	can	come	and	help	them	...	come	and	sit	between	them.	Be	a	support
for	their	new	journey.
Bliss	 is	 the	 juice	 of	 life.	 Bliss	 has	 already	 been	 given	 to	 you.	 It	 is	 your	 very
center;	without	it	you	cannot	exist	at	all.	It	is	an	undercurrent;	we	exist	because
of	it.
Existence	 is	 impossible,	 you	 cannot	 exist	 even	 for	 a	 single	 moment,	 if	 bliss
disappears	 as	 an	 undercurrent.	 To	 be	 aware	 of	 it	 is	 to	 become	 a	Buddha.	 The
only	 difference	 between	 an	 ordinary	man	 and	 a	Buddha	 or	 a	Christ	 is	 that	 of
awareness.	Both	are	blissful;	one	knows,	one	knows	not.	When	you	know,	great
gratefulness	 arises,	 gratitude	 arises.	 When	 you	 don't	 know	 you	 go	 on
complaining	;	you	go	on	unnecessarily	carrying	a	grudge,	as	if	life	is	a	burden.
Life	is	a	dance,	not	a	burden!	But	we	carry	it	like	a	burden,	and	when	we	carry	it
like	a	burden	it	becomes	a	burden,	at	least	for	our	minds.
Underneath	 the	 current	 of	 bliss	 continues.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 breathing	 or	 blood
circulating	in	the	body.	If	the	circulation	stops	for	a	single	moment	you	will	be
dead	--	but	you	never	become	aware	of	the	circulation.	In	fact	for	thousands	of
years	doctors	used	to	think	that	blood	was	simply	contained	inside	the	body.	Just
three	hundred	years	ago	 they	became	aware	 that	 it	circulates,	 that	 it	 is	not	 just
there	like	a	liquid	in	a	bottle	but	that	it	is	continuously	moving.	Your	body	will
die	if	the	breathing	stops.
Just	 as	 breathing,	 blood	 circulation,	 food,	 nourishment	 are	 necessary	 for	 the
existence	of	 the	body,	so	bliss	 is	necessary	 for	 the	existence	of	 the	soul.	But	a
little	digging	inside	is	needed	so	that	we	can	uncover	the	undercurrent.	Once	you
have	known	your	blissfulness,	the	source	of	it,	your	whole	vision	changes,	your
whole	 perspective	 is	 new.	 Then	 you	 look	 at	 existence	 with	 new	 eyes.	 Then
whatsoever	 you	 have	 found	 inside	 yourself	 you	will	 find	 everywhere	 because
whatsoever	we	are,	we	find	in	existence.	Existence	is	simply	a	mirror:	it	reflects
our	real	face	with	a	mask,	the	mask	is	reflected.
Existence	only	echoes	our	beings.	Once	you	have	known	that	bliss	is	your	nature
then	the	whole	nature	of	the	universe	becomes	blissful.	That	is	what	is	meant	by
realization,	liberation.
Sannyas	is	not	prayer	with	sadness,	seriousness.	It	is	not	prayer	as	a	ritual,	as	a
formality.	It	is	prayer	as	playfulness.	It	is	prayer	as	cheerfulness.	The	birds	in	the
morning	singing	--	that	is	prayer.	They	are	not	Christians,	they	are	not	Hindus,
they	are	not	Mohammedans;	they	don't	know	anything	about	the	church	and	the
temple	and	the	mosque,	and	they	have	never	heard	that	there	are	scriptures	--	but
their	singing	is	prayer.
The	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees	is	prayer;	although	it	knows	nothing	of
prayer	it	is	prayerful.
The	prayer	is	all	over	the	space.	The	stars	are	prayerful,	the	trees	are	prayerful,
the	oceans	are	prayerful.
Except	 for	man	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 always	 in	 a	 state	 of	 prayer;	 only	man
needs	 to	move	 towards	 it	 consciously	 --	 for	 a	 certain	 reason:	man	 is	 the	 only
conscious	animal.	Hence	man	has	a	choice:	he	can	fall	out	of	the	natural	flow	of
existence	 or	 he	 can	 become	part	 of	 it.	No	 other	 animal	 has	 that	 freedom.	The
birds	 in	 the	morning	 are	 not	 singing	 out	 of	 their	 own	 choice,	 they	 are	 simply
singing	instinctively.	The	trees	are	prayerful	and	the	mountains	are	prayerful,	but
that	prayer	is	just	a	natural	phenomenon.
Man's	dignity	is	 that	he	can	choose	to	be	prayerful	--	but	that	can	also	become
his	 fall	 because	 he	 can	 also	 choose	 not	 to	 be	 prayerful.	Man	 is	 always	 at	 the
crossroads:	each	step	and	there	is	a	choice,	each	step	and	you	can	go	wrong	or
right.	When	sadness	and	cheerfulness	confront	you,	always	choose	cheerfulness.
When	seriousness	and	playfulness	confront	you,	always	choose	playfulness.	And
remember:	we	become	whatsoever	we	choose.	It	is	simply	a	question	of	choice.
A	Sufi	mystic	was	 dying.	His	 disciples	 gathered	 and	 they	 said	 "One	 thing	we
always	wanted	to	ask	but	we	could	never	gather	enough	courage	to	ask	...	If	we
don't	ask	now	we	will	never	be	able	to	ask	because	you	will	be	leaving	the	body.
So	now	whatsoever	you	think	of	us	...	you	can	think	of	us	as	fools,	but	we	have
to	ask	the	question.	How	did	you	manage	your	whole	life?	--	because	we	have
never	seen	you	serious,	sad,	unhappy;	you	have	always	been	blissful.	How	did
you	manage?	--	because	it	is	impossible	to	be	so	blissful	day	in,	day	out."
The	 old	 man	 laughed	 and	 he	 said	 "Early	 in	 my	 life	 I	 discovered	 that	 it	 is	 a
question	of	choice.	So	this	has	become	my	daily	routine:	every	morning	--	this
morning	too	--	the	first	thing	in	the	morning,	before	I	open	my	eyes,	I	think	'Now
a	new	day	is	going	to	be	there	--	what	do	you	want,	old	man?	Do	you	want	to	be
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
happy	or	unhappy?'	And	I	always	choose	happiness."
If	you	know	 that	 it	 is	a	question	of	choice	you	are	bound	 to	choose	happiness
always.	People	think	that	we	are	victims;	that	is	wrong,	we	are	not	victims.	It	is
not	 that	 situations	 go	 on	 dragging	 us	 into	 unhappiness	 and	 sometimes	 into
happiness,	 that	 we	 are	 just	 at	 the	 mercy	 of	 blind	 forces	 --	 no,	 not	 at	 all,	 a
thousand	 times	 no.	 Every	 moment	 we	 are	 choosing.	 Maybe	 our	 choie	 is
unconscious,	we	may	not	ve	consciously	choosing,	but	choice	is	there.
From	 this	 moment	 start	 becoming	 aware	 of	 it	 and	 you	 will	 be	 surprised:
sometimes	in	the	middle	of	your	sadness	suddenly	the	clouds	disperse	and	it	is
sunny,	because	suddenly	you	see	the	point	--	that	you	have	chosen	to	be	sad	and
there	is	no	need	to	be	sad!	Life	is	such	a	beautiful	gift	that	one	should	not	waste
a	single	moment	in	sadness,	in	anger,	in	jealousy,	in	possessinveness.	One	should
dance	one's	way	to	God.
One	should	laugh	one's	way	to	God!
So	I	am	giving	a	totally	new	concept	to	sannyas.	The	old	sannyas	was	sad	and
serious;	 Hindu,	 Christian,	 Mohammedan,	 Buddhist	 --	 all	 old	 approaches	 of
sannyas	 were	 of	 renunciation.	 My	 approach	 is	 that	 of	 rejoicing.	 Rejoice	 and
rejoice	and	rejoice	again	and	again!
The	moment	you	decide	to	be	blissful	misery	starts	escaping	from	you,	but	the
decision	has	to	be	total.	It	is	worth	getting	involved	in	being	blissful.	There	can't
be	anything	more	valuable.
So	drop	all	sadness,	all	seriousness.	And	don't	ask	how	to	drop	them.	That	is	a
strategy	of	the	mind	to	go	on	keeping	them,	it	is	a	way	of	postponement.	"How"
is	a	way	of	post-ponement.	Simply	drop	misery.	Don't	linger	on,	don't	post-pone
it.	 Say	 goodbye	 and	 don't	 look	 back.	 And	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 that	 it	 is	 so
simple.	It	is	so	natural	to	be	blissful.	It	is	unnatural	to	be	miserable.	It	is	really	a
very	 difficult	 job	 to	 be	 miserable,	 but	 people	 are	 so	 skillful,	 so	 intelligent	 at
being	miserable.	They	have	become	great	artists	of	misery.	If	there	is	nothing	to
be	miserable	about	they	will	invent	something.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 a	 psychiatrist	 advised	 his	 patient	 to	 go	 to	 the	mountains	 for
three	 or	 four	weeks	 for	 a	 rest.	 The	 third	 day	 he	 received	 a	 telegram	 from	 the
patient:	"I	am	feeling	wonderful	--	why?	"
People	cannot	accept	bliss	easily;	misery	is	okay.
Remember	that	it	 is	only	a	question	of	your	decision;	in	a	single	blow	one	can
cut	the	Gordian	knot,	and	one	can	be	free	on	a	single	quantum	leap.
Sannyas	is	not	practicing	bliss,	it	is	simply	renouncing	misery.
Bliss	takes	a	lion's	heart.
It	 is	said	 that	when	Bodhidarma	became	enlightened	he	roared	like	a	 lion.	The
people	of	 the	nearby	village	became	so	afraid	because	 they	 thought	 that	a	 lion
had	 come.	 They	 were	 just	 thinking	 of	 escaping	 to	 some	 other	 place	 when
somebody	informed	them:	"Don't	be	worried,	this	is	that	old	monk	--	something
has	happened	to	him.	He	is	roaring!"	Then	they	all	slowly	slowly	went	into	the
forest,	 gathered	 around	 him	 and	 asked	 "What	 is	 happening?	 Have	 you	 gone
crazy	or	something?"	He	said	"I	was	crazy	before:	I	used	to	think	that	I	was	just
a	sheep	--	and	I	am	a	lion!"
Buddha	 himself	 has	 said	 that	when	 one	 becomes	 enlightened	 one	 roars	 like	 a
lion.	One	becomes	a	rebel,	and	to	rebel	against	misery	is	the	greatest	rebellion.
Misery	is	very	comfortable,	remember,	cozy.	It	is	so	familiar	and	you	have	lived
with	 it	 so	 long	 that	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 (de)part,	 to	 divorce	 it.	 Thousands	 of
husbands	would	like	to	divorce	and	thousand	of	wives	would	like	to	divorce	but
they	 symply	 carry	 on.	 They	 just	 cannot	 gather	 enough	 courage;	 they	 go	 on
remaining	miserable.	And	this	is	not	only	about	marriage,	this	is	their	very	style
of	life	in	everything.
Even	when	they	can	come	out	of	the	darkness	into	the	light	they	will	not.	They
are	afraid	of	getting	into	anything	new	because	who	knows?	--	the	new	may	be
more	 miserable.	 Who	 knows?	 At	 least	 the	 old	 is	 known,	 familiar;	 you	 have
become	accustomed	to	it,	you	have	become	adjusted	to	it	--	why	bother	with	the
new?	 but	 the	 courageous	 person	 is	 always	 ready	 to	 go	with	 the	 new	 that	 one
grows.	It	is	not	a	question	of	whether	you	have	chosen	rightly	or	wrongly.
Remember,	always	choose	the	new	against	the	old	and	you	will	still	be	growing.
In	being	with	the	old,	although	it	may	be	right,	one	remains	stuck.	In	being	with
the	new,	even	if	it	is	wrong,	one	grows.	What	to	say	about	when	you	can	choose
the	 new	 and	 the	 right?	 Then	 you	 grow	 in	 leaps	 and	 bounds.	 Then	 your	 life
becomes	a	great	adventure,	a	great	ecstasy.
Let	sannyas	be	the	first	step	in	that	direction	--	always	choosing	the	new	against
the	old,	always	choosing	the	unknown	against	the	known,	always	moveing	into
new	pastures	even	at	the	risk	of	losing	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
life.	 Because	 only	 those	 who	 are	 ready	 to	 risk	 their	 life	 are	 able	 to	 attain	 to
abundant	life,	to	eternal	life.
A	meditator's	eye	is	needed	to	see	bliss.
These	two	eyes	which	you	have	won't	help	much;	a	 third	eye	is	needed.	These
two	eyes	go	outwards.
They	don't	know	how	to	look	in;	they	are	not	meant	for	that.
The	meditator	starts	growing	a	third	eye.	Just	between	these	two	eyes,	exactly	in
the	middle,	 there	 is	a	 subtle	center	which	starts	 functioning	as	an	eye:	 it	 starts
looking	in.
To	look	outside	two	sides	are	needed	because	the	outside	consists	of	duality;	to
look	in	only	one	eye	is	needed	because	the	inside	consists	of	the	non-dual.
From	the	very	beginning	your	meditation	has	to	be	on	the	third	eye.	With	closed
eyes	look	in	and	try	to	remember	that	just	exactly	in	the	middle	of	both	eyes	--
the	spot	 I	 just	 touched	--	 there	 is	a	hiddeen	center;	 it	 is	 the	sixth	chakra	of	 the
yoga	psichology.	Once	it	starts	functioning	and	moving	you	become	capable	of
seeing	 within.	 Sitting	 silently,	 look	 at	 the	 third	 eye	 center;	 as	 you	 pour	 your
energy	 towards	 it,	 it	 will	 start	moving.	 In	 the	 beginning	 you	may	 feel	 a	 little
strange	because	something	mew	is	happening	which	has	never	happened	in	your
body;	but	soon	it	settles,	and	once	it	settles	great	calmness	descends.
It	 is	possible	for	you.	Just	a	 little	effort	and	the	wheel	will	start	moving,	 just	a
little	effort	and	much	will	be	the	benefit.	The	benefit	is	going	to	be	so	much	that
the	little	effort	is	nothing	compared	to	it.	So	let	that	be	your	concentration	point:
with	closed	eyes	look	at	the	third	eye.	Looking	at	it	you	start	feeling	great	light
spreading	inside	you	--	and	with	the	light	comes	delight!
Man	can	have	many	kinds	of	happinesses.	There	are	at	least	three	very	clear-cut
planes	of	happiness.
One	 is	 animal	 happiness:	 good	 food	 --	 enjoing	 good	 food	 --	 bodily	 pleasures,
sex.	They	are	all	animal	happinesses,	the	lowest	kind.	Nothing	is	wrong	with	it	--
I	have	no	condemnation	for	the	animal,	I	have	all	respect	for	the	animal	--	but	it
is	the	lowest	strata	of	happiness.	It	has	not	to	be	denied,	because	it	becomes	the
foundation	of	the	temple.
The	second	happiness	is	human:	the	joy	that	you	derive	from	music,	art,	beauty,
from	singing,	 from	dancing,	or	 from	just	being	with	a	 friend,	having	a	 relaxed
conversation.	 These	 are	 human	 joys:	 higher	 than	 the	 animal,	 that	 has	 to	 be
remembered.	The	animal	becomes	the	soil	in	which	much	can	grow	that	will	go
beyond	 the	 soil,	 it	 starts	 reaching	 to	 the	 sky;	 it	 becomes	 a	 bridge	between	 the
earth	 and	 the	 sky.	And	 so	 are	human	pleasures	 and	human	happiness	 a	 bridge
between	the	animal	and	the	divine.
And	 the	 third	 kind	 of	 happiness	 is	 divine.	 Divine	 happiness	 has	 no	 object	 --
neither	food	nor	woman	nor	man,	neither	paintings	nor	music	nor	poetry	 ...	no
object.	 It	 is	 your	 pure	 subjectivity.	 You	 are	 simply	 silent,	 enjoying	 your	 very
being.	 Just	 to	 be	 is	 such	 an	unbearable	 bliss.	 It	 is	 a	miracle	 that	we	 are	 alive;
there	was	no	necessity.	You	may	not	have	been,	but	you	are.	Somebody	else	may
have	been	in	your	place,	but	that	somebody	else	is	not	there:	you	are.	It	is	such	a
miracle	that	one	is!	But	we	don't	enjoy	it,	we	take	it	for	granted	and	that's	why
we	go	on	missing	it.
Stop	taking	life	for	granted.	Every	moment	is	a	gift	from	God.	And	just	in	being
with	oneself,	 sitting	silently,	doing	nothing,	 just	enjoying	nothing	 in	particular,
for	no	reason,	for	no	motive,	a	subtle	joy	arises	from	one's	deepest	recesses	and
overfloods	one.	That	 is	divine	happiness.	That	 is	 the	goal	of	all	 religion,	of	all
meditation;	that	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
God	is	another	name	for	that	bliss.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	7911035
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(Vega,	fourteenth-month	old,	with	his	younger	brother	Rosario)	(To	their	father):
Now	bring	the	new	sannyasin	here!
(To	Vega):	You	can	come	and	be	a	witness	...	come	here!
This	 is	 his	 name,	 Swami	 Prem	 Tosho.	 Prem	 means	 love.	 Tosho	 means
contentment.	Just	teach	two	things	to	him:	love	and	contentment	--	contentment
in	himself	and	 love	for	others.	 In	fact	only	somebody	who	is	deeply	contented
can	be	loving.	Out	of	contentment	love	starts	flowing:	love	is	a	sharing	of	your
contentment.
Love	is	the	only	way	to	become	a	follower	of	Christ	or	of	Buddha	or	of	Lao	Tzu
or	of	any	enlightned	Master.	They	are	all	the	same.	Essentially	their	message	is
never	 different,	 it	 cannot	 be	 because	 the	 truth	 is	 one.	Lies	 are	many,	 thruth	 is
one;	 hence	 religions	 must	 be	 based	 in	 some	 lies	 because	 there	 are	 so	 many
religions.	If	truth	is	to	be	the	foundation	of	anything	then	there	can	be	only	one
thing.	That's	why	there	is	only	one	science,	because	science	is	based	in	thruth,	in
objective	 truth.	 There	 is	 only	 one	 art	 because	 art	 is	 also	 based	 in	 subjectivity
truth.	But	religions	are	many.
Mind	has	played	a	great	trick	on	man.	Priests	have	exploited	humanity;	they	are
the	 greatest	 enemies,	 the	 parasites.	 They	 have	 created	 so	 many	 religions	 to
distract	 people;	 otherwise	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 Christians,	 Hindus,
Mohammedans,	Buddhists.	 Just	 a	 religious	quality	 is	 enough,	 it	 need	not	have
any	adjective	to	it.	The	name	of	that	quality	is	love.
Home	is	the	hereandnow.
The	 guest	 is	 always	 ready	 to	 come	 in	 but	 the	 host	 is	 missing.	 Either	 he	 is
somewhere	else	dreaming,	desiring	....	He	is	never	at	home,	never	herenow	--	he
is	either	in	the	past	or	in	the	future.
There	are	only	 two	ways	 to	get	astray:	 into	 that	which	 is	already	past	and	 into
that	which	has	not	 yet	 come.	Past	 and	 future	 are	 the	only	 two	ways	 to	 escape
from	the	present.	And	God	knows	only	one	time.	He	has	no	acquaintance	with
the	past	and	the	future;	the	present	is	the	only	time	for	him	--	and	we	are	never	in
the	present.	Hence	 the	host	goes	on	knocking	and	cannot	 find	God	because	he
knocks	on	the	past,	in	the	future.	And	God	goes	on	knocking	and	cannot	find	the
host	because	he	knocks	in	the	present	and	the	host	is	never	in	the	present.
We	are	very	close	to	God	but	like	parallel	lines	we	go	on,	never	meeting.	Once
we	stop	going	into	the	past	and	the	future	the	parallel	 lines	start	coming	closer
and	 closer	 together.	 One	 day	 suddenly	 there	 is	 only	 one	 line:	 two	 lines	 have
disappeared.	 That	 is	 the	 moment	 of	 great	 joy,	 great	 benediction.	 That's	 what
everyone	 is	seeking,	 longing	for.	and	because	people	go	on	missing	 it	 they	are
miserable.
Be	 ready.	And	 the	only	way	 to	be	 ready	 is	 to	 live	 in	 the	present,	and	you	will
become	a	home.	That	is	the	fulfillment	of	life.
(To	Gianpietro):	This	is	your	name	....	You	have	a	beautiful	name	so	I	am	going
to	keep	it	exactly	as	it	is.	There	is	no	meed	to	add	anything	to	it,	it	is	more	than
enough:	Swami	Giampietro.	Giam	means	God's	gracious	gift;	it	comes	from	the
Hebrew,	 John.	 And	 pietro	 comes	 from	 the	 Greek;	 it	 means	 strong	 in	 spirit,
rocklike	strenght.	The	strenght	of	the	spirit	is	God's	grace,	God's	gift.
The	 first	 thing	 to	 remember	 is	 that	 life	 has	 been	 given	 to	 us,	 it	 is	 not	 our
achievment.	 In	 fact	we	don't	know	deserve	 it	at	all.	 It	 is	a	very	strange	 law	of
existence	that	those	who	deserve	it	--	a	Buddha,	a	Christ	--
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
disappear	from	life,	and	those	who	don't	deserve	it	go	on	getting	life	again	and
again.	Once	you	deserve	 it	you	are	ready	to	disappear	 into	 the	ultimate.	 If	you
don't	deserve	it	you	will	have	to	come	back.	Only	those	who	fail,	come	back	--
obviously.	 Those	 who	 fail	 have	 to	 come	 back	 to	 the	 same	 class,	 to	 the	 same
school	again.	Those	who	pass	move	to	higher	planes	of	being,	to	higher	schools
which	are	not	ordinarily	visible.
This	is	the	first	thing	to	remember,	that	life	is	a	gift.	Don't	waste	it,	use	it.	Use	it
in	deserving	it.
And	the	second	thing	to	remember:	strenght	of	the	spirit.	It	is	not	something	that
is	yours	either.	It	is	God's	constant	flowing	in	you.	You	are	breathing	him	every
moment,	unconsciously	of	course.	The	moment	you	become	conscious	you	will
be	surprised:	we	eat	God,	we	drink	God,	we	breath	God	--	there	is	nothing	else
but	God.	He	is	our	nourishment.	He	is	our	roots,	he	is	our	branches,	the	folliage,
the	flowers,	the	fruit.
He	is	all	and	we	are	nothing.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Dharmen.	Anand	means	bliss.	Dharmen	means
in	 tune	with	 the	ultimate	 law,	 the	dhamma.	The	universe	 is	a	great	harmony	--
everything	 fits	 with	 everything	 else.	 It	 is	 a	 tremendous	 miracle,	 so	 vast,
immeasurable,	infinite,	yet	everything	fits	with	everything	else	absolutely.
Except	for	man.	Man	is	the	only	black	sheep	in	existence.	And	the	reason	why
man	 does	 not	 fit	 is	 that	 man	 has	 been	 given	 a	 great	 gift:	 the	 gift	 of
consciousness.
Everything	else	has	 to	fit.	 It	 is	 just	natural	 to	fit	with	 the	universe.	Man	has	 to
decide	whether	to	be	in	tune	or	not	 to	be	in	tune.	And	man	has	his	freedom	of
choice.	It	is	a	great	gift	but	it	can	be	misused,	it	is	being	misused	by	millions	of
people.	They	choose	not	to	be	in	tune	with	existence.	They	choose	conflict	with
existence,	 struggle	 with	 existence.	 Obviously	 they	 suffer	 for	 it,	 they	 have	 to
suffer.	 You	 cannot	 fight	 the	 whole;	 the	 whole	 is	 to	 vast,	 too	 big.	 It	 is	 like	 a
dewdrop	fighting	the	ocean:	it	is	just	stupid	,	utter	stupidity,	but	that's	what	many
have	 decided	 to	 do.	 The	 ego	 is	 just	 a	 dewdrop	 fighting	 with	 God,	 trying	 to
conquer	the	universe.
Dharmen	 means	 dropping	 the	 fight,	 dropping	 the	 struggle,	 surrendering,
becoming	part.	Consciously	choose	to	be	part	of	the	whole	and	great	bliss	arises
out	of	it.	To	remain	separate	is	misery;	to	become	one	is	bliss.
Man	constantly	 remains	 in	 fight.	There	 is	 a	 reason	why	 it	 is	 so.	Nobody	 likes
fighting,	 still	 everybody	goes	on	 fighting.	The	 reason	 is	 that	 the	 ego	 can	 exist
only	 through	fighting.	The	more	you	fight,	 the	more	you	feel	you	are;	 the	 less
you	 fight,	 the	 less	 you	 feel	 you	 are.	 If	 you	 stop	 fighting	 completely	 the	 ego
disappears,	evaporates.
That	creates	fear;	it	scares	people	not	to	be.	And	in	reality	that	is	our	very	nature:
not	to	be.	It	is	the	ultimate	paradox	of	being	that	being	is	revealed	only	when	we
have	come	to	the	point	of	non-being.
Shakespeare	 says:	 To	 be	 or	 not	 to	 be	 is	 the	 question.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 question	 ...
because	they	are	not	alternatives.	Not	to	be	is	the	way	to	be.	It	 is	only	through
non-being	that	one	arrives	at	being.	It	is	by	dissolving	that	you	are,	and	you	are
for	 the	 first	 time.	 It	 is	by	disappearing	 that	you	appear.	 It	 is	by	dissolving	 that
you	are,	and	you	are	for	the	first	 time.	It	 is	by	dying	that	you	gain	eternal	 life.
That's	the	meaning	of	your	name	--	let	it	become	your	experience	too.
The	day	you	experience	ego	disappearing	and	still	you	are,	with	no	sense	of	it,
just	 a	 pure	 existence	 --	 in	 that	 moment	 all	 boundaries	 are	 transcended,	 all
miseries	disappear.	In	that	moment	you	can	say	"I	am	and	my	father	are	one."	In
that	moment	you	are	God:	Aham	Brahamani.	In	that	moment	it	can	be	said	"I	am
God,	because	I	am	no	more."	God	is	possible	only	when	you	become	absolutely
absent,	utterly	empty;	when	there	is	nobody	inside	you	suddenly	God	is	found.
That	very	nobodiness	is	another	name	for	God.
So	if	you	want	to	be,	choose	not	to	be.	And	that's	the	whole	process	of	sannyas.
It	is	the	death	because	death	is	the	door	to	the	divine	life.	I	teach	the	art	of	dying
because	there	is	no	other	way	to	teach	you	the	art	of	living.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
(Samarpano):	Ten	days	more.
That	will	be	enough!	Next	time	come	for	a	longer	period.	It	 is	very	difficult	to
die	 in	 ten	 days	 (laughter)	Next	 time	 come	 for	 a	 longer	 period	 ...	 and	 don't	 be
afraid!
(To	Abraham):	Abraham	was	chosen	by	god	to	be	the	father	of	a	new	spirituality,
to	 become	 the	 source	 of	 a	 new	 spiritual	 dimension.	 He	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest
mystics	the	world	has	ever	known.	He	created	one	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	most	precious	secret	schools	of	transformation.
This	too	is	a	mystery	school	and	the	beginning	of	a	new	spirituality.	All	the	old
spiritualities	have	become	irrelevant.	Man	has	progressed	much,	man	has	come
of	 age;	 those	 spiritualities	 that	were	 created	 by	Abraham,	 by	Krishna,	 by	Lao
Tzu,	by	Phytagoras,	by	Heraclitus,	by	Jesus	have	all	become	out-of-date.
They	 need	 a	 rebirth;	 they	 need	 to	 be	 given	 a	 new	 form,	 a	 new	 shape.	 They
require	a	new	language,	a	new	expression.	Too	much	dust	has	gathered	down	the
centuries.	It	is	natural,	but	that	dust	has	to	be	removed.
Each	age	needs	a	new	kind	of	spirituality	because	each	age	is	different	from	any
other,	hence	messangers	go	on	coming.	A	messanger	is	nothing	but	a	man	who
translates	 the	eternal	 truth	for	 the	contemporary	man.	Abraham	is	one	of	 those
great	 messangers	 of	 god.	 It	 is	 good	 to	 be	 associated	 with	 Abraham,	 but
remember	now	that	Abraham	also	needs	a	new	birth.	That's	what	sannyas	is.
By	 passing	 through	 sannyas	 you	 will	 be	 coming	 a	 new	 man,	 you	 will	 be
attaining	new	qualities,	qualities	which	have	never	been	thought	to	be	religious.
For	 example,	 love	 for	 life,	 a	 great	 affirmation	 of	 life	 has	 never	 been	 thought
spiritual.	On	the	contrary,	all	so-called	spiritualities	have,	in	some	way	or	other,
created	 the	 atmosphere	 of	 renounciation	 --	 as	 if	 life	 has	 to	 be	 sanctioned,
renounced,	to	attain	god.
There	is	no	need,	at	least	there	is	no	more	any	need	of	that	kind	of	spirituality.
Renounciation	is	dead.
We	 have	 to	 give	 sannyas	 a	 totally	 new	 vision,	 that	 of	 rejoicing.	 That	 is	 the
meaning	of	anand:	rejoice,	be	blissful.
My	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 a	 dancing	 one.	 A	 sense	 of	 humor	 has	 never	 being
thought	to	be	religious.	That	has	to	be	introduced	into	religion	because	without	a
sense	of	humor	a	man	becomes	dry,	dull,	desertlike.
With	 a	 sense	 of	 humor	 so	 many	 flowers	 start	 blooming	 in	 you.	 The	 old
spirituality	was	serious,	 the	new	spirituality	has	to	be	playful.	The	old	spiritual
person	 thought	 that	 he	 was	 something	 very	 great.	 My	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be
completely	 finished	 with	 that	 holier-than-thou	 attitude.	 We	 are	 not	 doing
anything	special.	We	have	to	transform	the	ordinary	into	the	sacred	--	that	is	the
new	spirituality,	that	is	the	new	message	of	god.
My	function	here	is	to	be	another	Abraham.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911045
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(to	nine-year-old	Lisa):	You	need	a	big	mala	or	a	small	one?
(Lisa):	A	big	one!
Big?	--	That's	good.	This	 is	your	new	name:	Ma	Anand	Rupam.	Anand	means
bliss.	Rupam	means	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
beauty.	Bliss	is	beautiful;	in	fact	the	only	real	beauty	comes	out	of	being	blissful.
It	is	not	of	the	body,	it	is	of	the	soul,	but	it	transforms	the	body	too.	When	one	is
miserable	 inside,	 the	 body	 also	 goes	 into	 an	 ugly	 form.	When	 one	 is	 blissful
inside,	 the	 body	 follows	 like	 a	 shadow:	 it	 becomes	 beautiful.	 The	 body	 is	 a
shadow	of	the	soul,	the	body	simply	reflects	that	which	is	inside	us.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	be	 totally	beautiful	 --	 inside,	outside,	 in	every	possible
way	--	because	beauty	is	divine,	beauty	is	another	name	for	God!
How	long	will	you	be	here?
(Rupam):	About	a	year.
That's	very	good,	Rupam.	Good!
Everybody	is	potentially	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha.	Feel	blessed	that	god	has	already
given	you	the	seed	of	the	ultimate.	All	that	is	needed	is	to	find	the	right	soil	and
to	be	ready	to	die	in	the	soil.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 right	 soil,	 and	 to	be	with	 a	Master	means	 to	be	 ready	 to	die	 in
him.	The	moment	the	seed	dies	a	tree	is	born.	The	tree	cannot	be	born	without
the	death	of	the	seed.	It	is	only	through	death	that	the	new	arrives.
One	 who	 knows	 this	 secret	 of	 life	 goes	 on	 dying	 every	 day,	 every	 moment,
because	then	death	is	the	process	of	renewal,	of	renewing	yourself,	of	rebirth.
Feel	blessed	that	Christ	is	within	you.	One	need	not	be	Christian	-that	is	also	one
of	the	meanings	of	Christoph.	One	need	not	be	a	Christian.	Why	settle	for	being
a	Christian	when	you	can	be	a	christ?	Why	settle	for	being	a	Buddhist	when	to
be	a	buddha	is	within	your	grasp?
My	suggestion	to	all	of	my	sannyasins	is:	never	settle	for	any	small	thing.	Only
the	ultimate	can	make	you	contented	and	fulfilled.
(to	 Moshe)	 Basically	 Moshe	 comes	 from	 the	 Egyptian;	 the	 Egyptian	 form	 is
Moses.	 The	 child	 was	 saved	 from	 the	 water,	 hence	 he	 was	 called	Moses,	 the
saved	one.	Moshe	is	the	Hebrew	form	of	Moses.
Be	blissful	because	we	are	already	saved,	from	the	very	beginning	we	are	saved.
There	is	really	no	way	to	go	astray	because	all	ways	lead	to	God,	they	can't	lead
anywhere	else.	Even	those	who	go	astray	are	simply	taking	a	longer	route,	that's
all.	Where	else	can	they	go?	There	is	nowhere	else,	God	is	everywhere.
So	you	can	go	south	or	north	or	east	or	west	--	or	you	need	not	go	anywhere.	Sit
wherever	you	are:	God	is	there	too!
The	word	"moshe"	has	a	beautiful	fragrance	around	it.	It	means	that	one	need	not
be	 saved,	 one	 is	 already	 saved.	 One	 needs	 no	 savior;	 God	 is	 our	 savior	 and
because	we	belong	to	him	we	cannot	belong	to	anybody	else.	Even	if	we	wish
and	want	 to,	 it	 is	 impossible	--	 it	 is	not	 in	 the	nature	of	 things.	Those	who	say
they	 don't	 believe	 in	 God,	 they	 also	 belong	 to	 God.	 And	 as	 far	 as	 god	 is
concerned	they	are	all	saved.	This	whole	universe	is	already	in	the	ultimate	state:
we	have	just	forgotten.	We	have	forgotten	that	we	need	not	do	anything;	we	have
forgotten	that	we	are	already	there,	where	we	would	like	to	be.	we	have	forgotten
that	we	are	already	that	which	we	want	to	be,	which	we	dream	about	and	desire;
and	we	have	never	been	otherwise.
In	 Zen	 they	 have	 a	 saying:	 From	 the	 very	 beginning	 all	 are	 saved,	 all	 are
Buddhas.	But	deep	deep	sleep	has	fallen	over	us.
The	function	of	the	Master	is	not	to	save	you	but	just	to	remind	you.
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Simon	means	one	who	is	capable	of	hearing,	one	who
is	capable	of	listening,	rather.
There	 is	 a	 difference	 between	 hearing	 and	 listening.	 Anybody	whose	 ears	 are
functioning	can	hear,	but	unless	your	heart	is	also	there	you	can't	listen.	Simon
means	listening	with	deep	obedience,	listening	with	deep	trust,	listening	without
any	thoughts.	Because	if	you	have	thoughts	they	will	interfere,	they	will	distort.
They	will	change	the	meanings	of	the	words,	they	will	impose	their	own	ideas.
They	will	only	allow	you	to	hear	that	which	your	mind	wants	to	be	said	to	you.
Meditation	 is	 the	art	of	 listening	 to	existence.	The	wind	 is	passing	 through	 the
trees	--	listen	to	it	and	listen	obediently,	as	if	God	has	called	you.	God	has	really
called	you	because	the	wind	belongs	to	him	and	the	trees	belong	to	him	and	the
sound	of	the	passing	wind	though	the	pines	is	his	sound.	Listen	to	the	water,	the
running	water,	and	the	sound	of	it;	listen	to	the	clouds	and	listen	to	the	silence	of
the	night.	And	in	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
same	way	listen	to	the	noise	of	the	marketplace	...	the	train	passing	by.	Listen	to
everything	with	such	deep	silence	that	you	become	capable	of	not	distorting	the
messages	 that	 are	 arriving	 every	moment.	 God	 goes	 on	 pouring	 his	messages
from	everywhere.	The	leaf	falling	from	the	tree	is	his	message.
Lao	 Tzu	 became	 enlightened	 seeing	 a	 dry	 leaf	 falling	 from	 the	 tree.	He	must
have	 been	 a	 man	 of	 tremendous	 silence.	 Just	 seeing	 the	 pale,	 old,	 dead	 leaf
falling	from	the	tree	he	realized	that	all	is	momentary,	that	life	is	going	to	end	in
death,	 that	 there	 is	nothing	 to	cling	 to,	nothing	worth	clinging	 to,	 that	 this	 life
which	ends	in	death	is	not	the	true.	The	leaf	became	the	message	of	God.	In	that
very	moment	 he	 became	 a	 sannyasin.	 In	 that	 very	moment	 the	worthless	was
renounced.	Not	that	he	made	a	deliberate	decision	to	renounce;	that	is	not	needed
--	 the	 very	 understanding	 that	 life	 is	momentary,	 that	 life	 is	 futile,	 that	 life	 is
meaningless	is	enough;	one	starts	searching	for	another	kind	of	life,	on	another
plane.	 One	 has	 been	 moving	 outwards,	 now	 one	 starts	 moving	 inwards.	 You
have	 been	 searching	 for	 joy,	 bliss	 and	 have	 been	 founding	 frustration,	misery
because	 that's	what	 the	 outside	 can	 give	 to	 you.	The	moment	 you	 turn	 in,	 the
moment	you	start	exploring	your	interiority,	great	joy	arises.
Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 listening	 to	 existence	with	 deep	 obedience,	with	 such
totality	 that	between	you	and	 the	song	of	 the	bird	 there	 is	no	barrier.	Then	 the
song	of	the	bird	becomes	the	message	of	the	Buddha.
Then	in	every	silence	there	is	a	scripture;	then	every	moment	of	life	is	a	contact
with	 the	 divine.	Then	on	 every	 leaf	 is	God's	 signature	 --	 and	 in	 every	 stone	 a
beautiful	song	is	asleep,	is	hidden.
If	 you	 become	 silent	 the	 hidden	 starts	 becoming	 manifest.	 You	 start	 hearing
things	which	are	not	heard	ordinarily	and	you	start	 seeing	 thing	which	are	not
seen	ordinarily,	as	if	new	eyes	were	growing	in	you,	new	ears	were	growing	in
you.
And	the	definition	of	meditation	is	also	the	definition	of	the	disciple:	the	art	of
listening	to	the	master.
So	really	be	a	Simon!
Crucify	the	head,	crown	the	heart.
(to	Vincente):	If	you	surrender	to	existence	you	are	victorious;	immediately	you
are	the	crowned	one	--
that	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 word	 "christ.".	 But	 Christ	 was	 crucified.	 His
crucifixion	 was	 really	 his	 crowing	 ceremony.	 For	 those	 who	 understand,	 for
those	who	have	eyes	to	see,	his	crucifixion	is	a	crowing	ceremony	because	at	the
last	moment	on	the	cross	he	surrendered	totally.	He	said:	"Thy	kingdom	come,
thy	will	be	done."	That	was	his	last	prayer.	That	is	surrender.
To	 have	 one's	 own	 will	 is	 egoistic;	 to	 allow	 God's	 will	 to	 happen	 to	 you	 is
surrender.	To	be	with	God	and	in	God	is	to	be	victorious;	there	can	be	no	other
victory	greater	than	his.
A	sannyasin	has	to	live	this	paradox:	the	paradox	of	surrendering	and	realizing
victory.
(Veet	Stanley:	beyond	the	stony	field)
We	have	all	been	stony	fields,	hence	nothing	has	grown.	We	are	all	rocky	inside
--	so	many	blocks,	so	many	stones	and	so	many	hindrances	to	growth.	But	we	go
on	 accumulating	 them,	 thinking	 them	 to	 be	 precious,	 thinking	 them	 to	 be
diamonds.	And	they	are	not	diamonds.	They	become	more	and	more	weighty	on
our	soul;	the	heart	is	crushed	underneath.	But	in	the	past	all	the	societies	all	over
the	world	have	praised	 those	qualities	 --	 of	 being	hard	 like	 a	 rock.	They	have
been	 thought	 to	be	very	manly.	They	have	been	praised,	 honored,	 because	 the
society	needed	 soldiers.	 It	 needed	people	 to	kill	 people	 and	be	killed	by	other
people.	It	needed	hard	people	living	in	the	head	and	not	in	the	heart.	It	needed
people	who	couldn't	feel,	couldn't	be	sensitive.	Only	such	people	can	be	forced
to	be	slaves	because	they	will	function	like	machines.
Efficient	they	will	be,	but	human	they	will	not	be.
The	history	of	humanity	up	to	now	is	not	really	a	history	of	humanity.	Humanity
has	yet	to	be	born.	Yes,	once	in	a	while	there	has	been	a	human	being	but	that	is
nothing	much	to	brag	about;	if	after	thousands	of	years	one	Christ	or	one	Buddha
is	born,	that	is	nothing	much.	In	fact	each	one	should	be	a	Buddha	and	a	Christ.
If	once	in	a	while	a	person	is	not,	that	can	be	forgiven,	that	can	be	allowed	--	to
err	is	human.	But	millions	of	people	are	just	like	rocks,	robots:	functioning	from
birth	 to	 death,	 but	 not	 knowing	 what	 life	 is,	 not	 really	 living,	 not	 enjoying,
because	to	enjoy	life	you	will	need	totally	different	qualities.
You	will	have	to	be	more	sensitive,	you	will	have	to	be	soft,	you	will	have	to	be
vulnerable.	You	will	have	to	be	more	feminine,	and	you	will	have	to	come	closer
and	closer	to	the	heart.	You	will	have	to	be	less	calculative,	less	logical.	You	will
have	 to	 risk	 your	 head,	 only	 then	 can	 you	 attain	 to	 the	 heart.	 Hence	 I	 say:
Enough	 is	 enough.	Now	 go	 beyond	 it:	 become	 a	 fertile	 field.	 I	 want	 to	 grow
roses	in	you!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Prem	Sangit)
No	music	is	higher	than	love,	no	music	is	more	musical	than	love.	All	music	is	a
pale	reflection	of	love,	a	very	faraway,	distant	echo,	because	love	simply	means
the	art	of	playing	on	the	veena	of	your	heart.	The	heart	is	a	musical	instrument.	It
is	a	veena	 --	 the	most	exquisite	musical	 instrument,	with	 immense	potential:	 it
can	contain	all	the	harmony	of	existence	and	it	can	express	that	harmony.	But	we
never	learn	the	art	of	love.	We	learn	all	other	arts	which	are	useful	for	life	but	we
don't	 learn	the	art	of	 love	because	love	has	no	utility.	It	 is	 like	a	rose	flower	--
what	utility	does	 it	have?	 It	 is	 like	a	beautiful	 star:	 it	 is	not	a	commodity;	you
cannot	sell	it,	you	cannot	purchase	it	--	you	cannot	make	money	out	of	it.	Hence
nobody	 is	 interested	 in	 love;	 people	 are	 interested	 in	 money,	 and	 people	 are
interested	in	things	which	will	bring	more	and	more	money.
Love	may	do	just	the	opposite:	rather	than	bringing	anything	to	you	it	may	take
everything	 that	 you	 have.	 You	 may	 have	 to	 sacrifice	 your	 very	 life	 for	 it.	 It
demands	 your	 totality.	Hence	 very	 few	 courageous	 people	 ever	move	 into	 the
dimension	 of	 love.	 Everybody	 thinks	 that	 he	 loves	 but	 that	 is	 only	 thinking;
otherwise	 the	 world	 would	 be	 a	 paradise	 --	 if	 everybody	was	 right.	 So	many
people,	millions	of	people,	 loving	each	other:	parents	 loving	children,	children
loving	 parents,	 husbands	 loving	 wives,	 wives	 loving	 husbands,	 friends	 loving
friends	 ...	 the	whole	world	would	be	overflowing	with	 love,	flooded	with	 love.
But	 love	 seems	 to	 be	 nowhere	 at	 all,	 there	 is	 not	 even	 a	 trace.	 The	 world	 is
absolutely	 love-less,	 a	 desert,	 with	 not	 even	 an	 oasis.	 So	 our	 love	 must	 be
something	pseudo.
We	believe	that	we	love	and	that	belief	helps	us	not	to	love,	that	belief	helps	us
never	to	learn	the	art	of	love.	It	is	the	subtlest	art.	I	call	religion	nothing	but	an
insight	into	the	phenomenon	of	love.	When	you	love	a	person	you	are	becoming
religious	without	your	knowing	 it.	When	you	start	 loving	more	people	you	are
becoming	 more	 religious.	 Without	 your	 knowing	 it	 at	 all,	 God	 has	 already
entered	in	you	so	silently	that	you	have	not	even	heard	his	footsteps.
When	you	fall	 in	love	with	a	Master	that	 is	 the	most	precious	love	possible	on
the	earth.	The	God	takes	possession	of	you.	Then	he	has	really	made	a	way	into
your	heart.	Not	only	on	the	periphery,	he	is	no	more	scratching	on	the	periphery:
he	has	dug	the	well	to	the	very	core	of	your	being.	There	is	only	one	step	more
and	love	comes	to	its	perfection.
The	love	between	a	Master	and	a	disciple	is	just	the	last	but	one,	and	then	you
enter	 from	 the	door	of	 the	Master	 into	 the	divine.	You	disappear	as	you	are;	a
totally	new	being	is	born.	You	will	not	be	able	to	recognise	the	new	being	at	all
because	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	old,	with	the	past.	It	is	so	totally	new,	it	is
discontinuous	 with	 the	 past.	 This	 is	 how	 one	 becomes	 a	 Buddha,	 how	 one
becomes	a	Christ,	a	Krishna:	dying	to	the	old	absolutely	so	that	one	can	be	born.
Sannyas	 has	 to	 be	 a	 death	 and	 a	 resurrection	 .	 Be	 ready	 to	 die!	 Resurrection
follows	 automatically,	 of	 its	 own	 accord.	All	 that	 is	 needed	 from	 your	 side	 is
readiness	 to	 die.	 Die	 as	 an	 ego,	 die	 as	 a	 separate	 entity,	 and	 then	 the	 whole
universe	 is	 yours	 with	 all	 its	 beauty	 and	 grandeur,	 with	 all	 its	 blessings	 and
benediction.
A	 sense	 of	 humour	 has	 never	 been	 thought	 to	 be	 religious.	 That	 has	 to	 be
introduced	into	religion	because	without	a	sense	of	humour	a	man	becomes	dry,
dull,	desertlike.	With	a	sense	of	humor	so	many	flowers	start	blooming	in	you.
The	old	spirituality	was	serious,	 the	new	spirituality	has	 to	be	playful.	The	old
spiritual	person	thought	that	he	was	doing	something	very	great.	My	sannyasin
has	 to	 be	 completely	 finished	 with	 that	 holier-than-thou	 attitude.	 We	 are	 not
doing	anything	special.	We	have	to	transform	the	ordinary	into	the	sacred	--	that
is	the	new	spirituality,	that	is	the	new	message	of	God.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	7911055
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	the	parents	of	fourteenth-month	old	Sapra)
Helping	 the	child	 to	go	beyond	sleep,	beyond	dreaming,	beyond	desiring.	This
should	be	the	basic	function	of	the	mother,	the	father,	the	parents.	Normally	we
do	just	the	contrary:	we	help	the	child	to	become	more	ambitious,	more	egoistic.
Our	 whole	 effort	 is	 to	 project	 our	 desires	 through	 the	 child.	 Our	 dreams	 are
unfulfilled	 --	 dreams	 are	 never	 going	 to	 be	 fulfilled	 --	 so	 we	 project	 them
through	the	children,	we	hope	that	what	has	not	happened	to	us	will	happen	to
them.	The	 same	has	been	 the	case	with	your	parents	 and	 the	 same	will	be	 the
case	 with	 your	 children	 when	 they	 become	 parents.	 For	 centuries,	 from	 one
generation	 to	 another	 generation,	 wh	 have	 gone	 on	 giving	 hopes,	 ambitions,
desires	which	are	basically	unfulfillable.
To	 be	 really	 helpful	 to	 the	 child	 we	 have	 to	 understand	 this.	 Have	 no	 more
projections;	don't	load	the	child	with	your	dreams.	Help	him	to	see	the	futility	of
all	dreams.	Then	each	child	can	become	a	buddha	--
each	child	 is	meant	 to	 become	 a	 buddha.	 It	 is	 because	 of	wrong	 conditioning,
wrong	society,	wrong	education,	that	we	hinder	the	growth.
In	Japan	they	have	a	certain	art	...	it	should	not	be	called	art	--	it	is	butchery	--
but	they	call	it	art.	They	grow	trees	in	small	pots.	Big	trees	which	if	grown	in	the
soil	would	reach	to	the	clouds	are	grown	in	small	pots	which	have	no	bottoms,
and	they	go	on	cutting	their	roots.	so	there	are	trees	in	Japan,	four-hundred-year-
old	trees,	just	six	inches	high.	If	you	cut	the	roots	how	can	the	grow?	They	think
that	 this	 is	 an	 art	 and	 it	 is	 appreciated	 by	 foolish	 people	 all	 over	 the	 world.
People	go	to	see	those	trees	and	they	think	something	great	has	been	done!	They
are	 centuries	 old	 and	 the	 gardeners	 have	 been	 keeping	 them	 generation	 after
generation.	The	older	 the	 tree,	 if	 it	 is	not	alowed	 to	grow,	 the	more	artful	 it	 is
understood	to	be.	It	is	ugly	to	see	those	trees.
But	 that	 is	 the	 situation	 of	 every	 child	 in	 the	 world;	 those	 trees	 are	 very
representative.	What	do	we	do	to	children?	--	we	cut	their	roots	...	unknowingly,
of	 course.	 We	 want	 to	 help	 but	 we	 are	 so	 unconscious	 that	 our	 help	 is	 a
hindrance,	not	a	help.
So	this	is	going	to	be	your	work.	This	will	help	you	to	wake	up	and	this	will	help
the	child	to	grow	in	the	right	direction.
(To	Hugo)
The	time	has	now	come	to	go	beyond	mind.	Mind	is	our	bondage.	Mind	means
the	past,	and	to	go	beyond	the	mind	means	to	live	in	the	present.	Slip	out	of	the
past,	don't	allow	ot	to	interfere	anymore,	because	to	love	through	the	past	is	 to
live	a	dead	life.	The	past	is	dead.	Living	through	it	is	living	in	a	grave.
That's	 why	 there	 is	 so	 much	 misery	 in	 the	 world	 and	 so	 much	 deadness,
insensivity,	unconsciousness:	people	are	not	really	alive.	They	are	not	flowering;
there	seems	to	be	no	growth	happening.	They	are	simply	born,	and	vegetate	and
one	 day	 die.	 Their	 whole	 life	 consists	 of	 very	 meaningless	 actovities,	 trivia.
They	don't	attain	any	significance.	They	can't	say	in	the	end	that	life	has	been	a
great	benediction.	They	go	frustrated,	disappointed,	disillusioned	--	but	nobody
is	responsible	for	 it	except	 themselves.	If	we	live	 through	the	mind	is	going	to
happen.
Now	we	start	living	the	life	of	meditation	--	and	meditation	means	the	life	of	no-
mind.	Don't	allow	thoughts	to	interfere.	Be	in	direct	contact	with	existence:	with
trees,	with	rocks,	rivers,	people.	Become	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
child	again;	then	the	circle	is	complete.	One	is	born	as	a	child,	one	should	die	as
a	child.	Jesus	sys:	Unless	you	are	like	small	children	you	will	not	enter	into	my
kingdom	of	God	...	And	he	is	absolutely	right.	The	really	ripe	and	mature	person
is	 one	who	 in	 his	 old	 age	 again	 becomes	 as	 innocent	 as	 a	 child.	The	 circle	 is
complete:	life	has	come	to	its	ultimate	peak	and	we	are	ready	to	go	back	home.
If	the	circle	is	incomplete	you	will	have	to	be	born	again,	because	the	circle	has
to	be	completed;	that	is	the	task	that	has	been	given	to	us.	Unless	we	fulfil	it	we
cannot	be	called	back	by	God.	This	is	our	work	in	life:	to	become	a	child	again	--
innocent,	full	of	wonder	an	awe.
Mind	 is	 good	 as	 a	mechanism;	 use	 it	 but	 don't	 be	 used	 by	 it.	Don't	 become	 a
servant	of	it,	don't	be	possessed	by	it.	Remain	the	master.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about;	becoming	the	master	of	your	own	mind	so
that	when	you	want	to	put	it	aside	you	can	put	it	aside,	when	you	want	to	turn	it
off	you	can	turn	it	off.
(to	Marko)
In	India	we	have	one	of	the	greatest	scriptures,	the	BHAGAVAD	GITA.	It	is	the
story	of	a	great	warrior,	Arjuna,	trying	to	escape	from	the	war-field.	His	master,
who	was	functioning	as	a	charioteer	for	Arjuna	in	the	war,	persuades	him	to	stay
in	the	war;	 there	is	no	need	to	renounce	it.	The	basic	argument	that	 the	Master
gives,	that	Krishna	gives	to	Arjuna,	is	that	if	you	fight	for	your	own	self	then	the
war	 is	 ugly,	 but	 ifyou	 allow	 God	 to	 fight	 through	 you	 then	 you	 need	 not	 be
worried;	then	you	are	simply	a	vehicle,	a	medium.	Then	if	God	decides	to	escape
from	the	war	it	is	perfectly	okay;	of	he	decides	to	be	in	the	war	that's	perfectly
okay.
Life	 becomes	 a	 blissfulness	 whenever	 you	 allow	 God	 to	 flow	 through	 you,
whenever	you	are	just	an	instrument	in	his	hands,	when	you	don't	have	any	will
of	your	own.	That	is	real	war:	not	to	have	one's	own	will,	not	to	have	one's	own
ego.	And	that	is	real	victory:	to	drop	it,	 to	get	rid	of	it,	and	to	be	utterly	in	the
hands	of	god.
(to	Nick)
Love	 is	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the	 victorious	 heart.	Ordinarily	 the	 head	 is	 victorious
over	the	heart,	hence	man	becomes	incapable	of	love.	Love	cannot	arises	out	of
the	head.	Out	of	 the	head	 logic	 is	possible,	mathematics	 is	possible,	 science	 is
possible,	business	is	possible,	politics	is	possible	--	but	not	love,	not	poetry,	not
music,	not	dance.	They	are	 the	qualities	of	 the	heart,	 they	are	 the	petals	of	 the
flower	of	the	heart.	And	man	can	live	either	trough	the	head	or	through	the	heart.
The	 whole	 transformation	 consists	 of	 moving	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the	 heart.
Becomes	 less	calculative,	 less	clinging	 to	 the	 logical	pattern,	 less	businesslike.
Be	more	of	a	lover.	Learn	to	risk,	learn	to	live	dangerously
--	only	then	there	is	dance	and	there	is	music	and	there	is	poetry.	Lose	the	head
to	gain	the	heart,	and	you	will	be	a	sannyasin.
(to	Pratibha)
Intellect	and	 intelligence	are	 two	totally	different	 things.	 Intellect	 is	part	of	 the
head;	 intelligence	 is	 part	 of	 the	 heart.	 One	 can	 be	 a	 great	 intellectual	 and	 yet
unintelligent,	and	one	can	be	very	 intelligent	and	may	not	be	an	 intellectual	at
all.	A	man	can	be	a	great	scholar,	a	great	pundit,	with	no	intelligence.	He	is	just
like	a	parrot:	he	can	quote	scriptures	but	he	functions	 like	a	machine.	He	does
not	understand	what	he	is	saying	because	he	has	not	experienced	it	himself;	it	is
all	 borrowed.	And	 anything	 borrowed	burdens	 you,	 chains	 you,	 imprison	 you.
Only	your	own	experience	is	liberating.
Move	towards	the	heart.	Let	love-intelligence	arise	in	you.	It	can't	come	through
scriptures,	 books,	 libraries,	 universities,	 academic	 degrees.	 It	 can	 only	 come
through	being	more	and	more	meditative,	still,	silent.	It	is	not	an	extrovert	effort
but	an	introvert	search.	And	when	love-intelligence	blooms	life	is	fulfilled;	there
is	 great	 contentment.	 In	 that	 contentment	 one	 feels	 gratitude	 to	God,	 and	 that
gratitude	is	prayer.	Before	that	all	prayers	are	false.
(Ma	Prem	Vishran:	love	and	relaxation)
These	are	 the	 two	 things	you	have	 to	enter	 into:	 love	and	 relaxation.	They	are
helpful	to	each	other,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
supportive	 of	 each	 other:	 if	 you	 are	 loving	 you	 become	 relaxed,	 if	 you	 are
relaxed	you	become	 loving.	And	 this	goes	on	and	on:	you	 love	more,	you	can
relax	more;	you	relax	more,	you	love	more.	It	becomes	like	a	pyramid,	you	start
going	towards	some	unknown	peak	where	love	and	relaxation	become	one.	Then
the	goal	 is	achieved.	When	your	very	being	 is	 relaxed	and	knows	no	 tensions,
then	your	whole	being	is	just	radiating	love	--	not	to	any	particualr	person	but	to
the	 whole	 existence	 ...	 Even	 if	 you	 are	 sitting	 alone	 in	 a	 room	 you	 go	 on
radiating	love,	the	room	becomes	full	of	the	vibe	of	your	love.	People	who	have
eyes	to	see	and	hearts	to	feel,	if	they	come	into	the	room	they	will	simply	fell	a
different	vibe	in	the	room.
Sometimes	 even	 unconscious	 and	 blind	 people	 have	 glimpses	 of	 that.	 If	 in	 a
certain	house	 there	has	been	a	murder	and	you	go	 in,	you	know	nothing	about
the	murder	but	suddenly	you	feel	a	tension	growing	in	you	for	no	reason	at	all.
The	whole	air	seems	to	be	somehow	heavy,	dark,	evil.	If	 in	some	place	people
have	 been	 fighting,	 have	 been	 angry,	 shouting	 at	 each	 other	 --	 they	may	 have
gone,	but	when	you	enter	the	room	it	is	still	echoing,	resounding,	with	the	anger,
rage,	hatred.	You	will	feel	it,	as	if	the	room	were	not	empty.
So	 is	 the	 case	 if	 a	 loving	person	has	been	 sitting	 there	 in	 the	 room	alone,	 if	 a
meditative	 person	 has	 been	 sitting	 in	 the	 room	 alone.	 You	 enter	 the	 room,
suddenly	you	are	showered	with	a	totally	new	kind	of	energy
--	nourishing.	A	joy	arises	in	you.	You	may	have	been	sad	but	suddenly	entering
into	the	room	you	feel	great	joy.
That's	 how	 temples	 were	 created	 in	 the	 beginning,	 but	 soon	 they	 became
instruments	 for	 cunning	 people	 to	 exploit	 the	 innocent.	 Otherwise	 the	 motive
was	 beautiful,	 there	 must	 be	 a	 place	 where	 nobody	 fights,	 nobody	 becomes
angry,	 where	 everybody	 goes	 with	 a	 worshipful	 heart,	 love,	 gratitude,	 prayer.
Slowly	slowly	the	temple	accumulates	all	these	vibrations,	it	becomes	richer	and
richer.	Hence	the	idea	that	the	more	ancient	the	temple	is,	the	more	significant	it
is,	 because	 it	 contains	 so	many	people	 and	 their	 beautiful	 vibes.	That	was	 the
motive.	It	didn't	come	true:	priests	jumped	in	and	destroyed	all	the	temples.
So	 remember	 these	 two	 things:	 be	 loving	 and	 be	 relaxed.	 These	 two
commandments	are	for	being	a	sannyasin.
(Joost	becomes	Swami	Anand	Svarup)
Bliss	 is	 not	 something	 external	 to	 you,	 it	 is	 something	 intrinsic	 to	 your	 very
being,	it	is	something	that	you	are	made	of.	So	it	is	not	a	question	of	achieving	it,
it	is	only	a	question	of	recognizing	it,	remembering	it.	It	is	as	if	we	had	forgotten
sothing.	It	is	just	on	the	tip	of	the	tongue,	you	say,	and	yet	you	can't	remember	it.
It	 is	 a	 very	weird	 feeling	when	 it	 happens	 --	when	 you	 know	 that	 you	 know,
when	you	know	that	it	is	just	on	the	tip	of	your	tongue	and	still	can't	remember
it.	You	remember	this	much	--	that	you	know.	It	is	so	clearly,	so	loudly	there,	that
one	feels	simply	mystified	by	the	phenomenon	--	why	is	it	not	coming	up?
You	try	this	way	and	that	and	the	more	you	try,	the	more	difficult	it	seems.	Out
of	 sheer	 tiredeness	 you	 drop	 the	 whole	 subject,	 you	 forget	 all	 about	 it.	 Then
some	 time	 just	 listening	 to	 music	 or	 walking	 in	 the	 garden	 or	 just	 taking	 a
shower	suddenly	 it	comes	up.	Then	 it	 is	more	mystifying:	why	has	 it	 suddenly
come	and	when	you	were	trying	why	was	it	not	coming?	In	fact	when	you	were
trying	you	became	too	tense,	and	whenever	you	are	too	tense	you	shut	up	within
yourself,	 everything	 closes;	 and	 when	 you	 are	 relaxed	 everything	 opens	 up.
Because	you	were	too	tense	and	you	wanted	it	to	happen,	you	really	wanted	to
force	 it	 to	come	up,	it	simply	slipped	into	the	unconscious.	but	when	you	were
not	thinking	about	it	at	all,	not	desiring,	not	longing	for	it	--	you	had	completely
forgotten	the	whole	matter	--	suddenly	it	popped	up	in	the	head.	That's	how	bliss
is:	we	have	simply	forgotten;	only	a	little	relaxation	is	needed	to	remember	it.
All	 meditation	 techniques	 are	 nothing	 but	 techniques	 for	 relaxation,	 for	 rest.
Learn	more	relaxation,	more	rest.	The	more	relaxed	you	become,	the	closer	you
are	 to	 God.	When	 you	 are	 totally	 relaxed	 your	 whole	 being	 simply	 becomes
flooded	with	light,	flooded	with	love,	flooded	with	bliss.	Those	are	the	proofs	of
God	and	those	are	the	only	proofs	of	God.
(Anand	Amito:	infinite	bliss)
Bliss	has	no	beginning,	no	end.	It	is	always	there.	It	is	within	and	it	is	without,
but	we	are	blind	to	it.	It	is	just	like	a	blind	man	sitting	in	the	sun:	all	is	light	but
he	can't	see	a	thing,	he	can't	see	the	light.	The	light	is	showering	on	him,	he	can
even	feel	the	warmth,	but	he	cannot	see	the	source	of	it.	And	that	is	the	situation
of	all	human	beings:	 in	 rare	moments	we	can	 feel	a	certain	warmth	of	bliss,	 a
certain	wave,	but	 it	 remains	vague.	 It	 looks	 like	a	 faraway	echo	of	 something,
but	we	cannot	put	our	hands	on	it.	We	call	it	happiness.	Happiness	is	the	blind
man's	experience	of	light;	the	blind's	man	experience	of	bliss,	that	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
happiness.
Meditation	is	the	way	to	cure	your	eyes,	to	help	you	to	open	your	eyes.	Maybe
they	don't	need	any	treatment,	you	have	just	forgotten	how	to	open	them.	Maybe
for	centuries	and	 lives	you	have	kept	 them	closed.	Or	maybe	you	are	going	 to
see;	 it	 is	 better	 to	 remain	 in	 your	 closed	world,	 it	 is	 cozy.	Otherwise	 the	 vast
infinite	world	will	be	encountered;	it	will	be	challenging,	and	one	shrinks	from
facing	the	infinite.	But	without	facing	the	infinite	we	will	never	know	what	bliss
is,	and	our	hearts	long	for	it!
So	no	happiness	satisfies,	 in	fact	 it	 leaves	a	bitter	 taste	 in	your	mouth.	It	gives
you	a	glimpse	and	 then	 it	disappears.	 It	disappears,	 it	 frustrates.	The	heart	can
only	be	satisfied	with	bliss	--	nothing	less	can	make	it	feel	contended.
And	 bliss	 is	 already	 there.	 The	 whole	 existence	 is	 an	 ocean	 of	 bliss.	We	 are
swimming	 in	 it,	 living	 in	 it,	 but	 we	 are	 never	 seen	 it.	 I	 would	 like	 to	 see	 it!
Because	 the	 fish	 is	born	 in	 the	ocean,	 lives	 in	 the	ocean,	 the	ocean	 is	 so	close
that	there	is	no	gap,	no	distance	to	perceive	it.
That's	 the	situation	with	us	 too:	we	are	 living	 in	an	 infinite,	 invisible	ocean	of
bliss.	Just	a	little	perceptiveness,	a	little	sensitivity,	a	little	more	awareness,	and
you	will	 start	 seeing	 the	 invisible	and	you	will	 start	hearing	 the	silent	and	you
will	be	able	to	touch	and	feel	the	texture	of	the	intangible.
(Satyam	John:	truth,	God's	gracious	gift)
Truth	 is	 not	 a	 conclusion	 or	 our	 own	 efforts,	 of	 our	 own	 thinking.	We	 cannot
come	to	truth	by	logical	reasoning.	Through	logical	reasoning	we	can	only	arrive
at	a	certain	hypothesis.	An	hypothesis	is	only	tentatively	true,	aproximately	true,
but	never	 the	 truth.	That	 is	not	 the	way	 to	come	 to	 the	 truth,	because	 thruth	 is
beyond	 human	 comprehension,	 beyond	 our	 grasp.	 It	 can	 come	 only	 as	 a	 gift
from	God.	We	have	to	be	open	to	receive	it.	It	is	not	an	effort	but	an	effortless
surrender:	a	totally	open	heart,	ready	to	receive	--
just	like	a	woman's	womb,	ready	to	receive.	And	then	the	child	grows.
The	real	seeker	has	to	become	just	like	a	womb	ready	to	receive	the	seed	from
God.	 It	comes,	 the	moment	you	open	 it	comes.	 It	 inevitably	comes	and	 then	 it
grows	inside	you.
Once	the	seed	has	reached	your	heart	it	starts	growing.	Soon	there	will	be	great
greenery	in	your	heart	and	roses	will	start	opening.	But	truth,	the	seed	of	truth,
comes	from	God	himself.	We	cannot	arrive	at	it	through	any	effort	of	our	own.	It
is	not	an	achievment,	it	is	a	gift.
It	is	very	difficult	to	be	ready	to	receive	the	gift	because	it	goes	against	the	ego.
Ego	wants	 to	 achieve,	 ego	wants	 to	 conquer;	 hence	 ego	 can	only	 achieve	 that
which	is	not	true,	it	can	achieve	only	fictitious	phenomena.	The	ego	can	become
the	president	of	a	country	--	which	is	a	fiction.	We	are	playing	a	great	drama;	the
whole	 earth	 functions	 as	 the	 stage.	 One	 can	 become	 the	 prime	 minister	 of	 a
country,	 but	 that	 is	 a	 fiction.	 It	 is	 supported	by	 everybody	else,	 hence	 it	 looks
true,	but	it	is	not	true.	Ego	can	achieve	only	fictions.
To	achieve	the	truth,	that	which	is,	we	have	to	be	ready,	courageous	enough	to
put	the	ego	aside,	to	be	egoless,	to	be	humble.	And	truth	comes	inevitably	--	just
our	 readiness	 is	missing.	Truth	goes	on	knocking	on	our	hearts	but	not	even	a
window	is	open;	all	is	closed.
My	work	here	consists	of	opening	a	few	windows	in	your	heart	so	that	the	sun
and	the	wind	and	the	rain	can	come	in.	With	the	sun	and	with	the	wind	and	with
the	rain	comes	God,	and	his	seed	which	becomes	truth	one	day	blooms	in	you,
and	you	are	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ.
Those	who	say	they	don't	believe	in	God,	they	also	belong	to	God.	Those	who
turn	 their	 back	 towards	 God,	 they	 also	 belong	 to	 God;	 and	 as	 far	 as	 God	 is
concerned	they	are	all	saved.	This	whole	universe	is	already	in	the	ultimate	state:
we	have	just	forgotten.	We	have	forgotten	that	we	need	not	do	anything;	we	have
forgotten	 that	 we	 are	 already	 there,	 where	 we	 would	 like	 to	 be.	 We	 have
forgotten	that	we	are	already	that	which	we	want	to	be,	which	we	dream	about
and	desire;	and	we	have	never	been	otherwise....	But	a	deep	deep	sleep	has	fallen
over	us.
The	function	of	the	Master	is	not	to	save	you	but	just	to	remind	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911065
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(to	Puratan)
Love	 is	 the	 ancientmost	 religion,	 the	 original	 religion;	 all	 other	 religions	 are
offshoots.	Love	is	the	root;	all	other	religions	are	like	leaves	or	at	the	most,	small
branches.	Even	the	greatest	religions	--	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Islam,	Buddhism
are	big	branches,	but	they	are	visible.	You	can	see	the	churches	and	you	can	see
the	temples	and	you	can	read	the	scriptures.
Love	 has	 no	 temple	 and	 love	 has	 no	 scripture.	 It	 is	 like	 the	 roots	 hidden
underneath:	 it	 is	underground,	but	 it	 is	 the	nourishement.	Without	 it	 the	whole
tree	will	 die.	 It	 is	 love	 that	 goes	on	 creating	more	 and	more	 leaves,	more	 and
more	foliage,	more	flowers,	more	fruits.	Love	is	the	original	religion.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 introduce	 you	 to	 the	 original.	You	 are	 all	 clinging	 to	 the
branches.	Branches	are	beautiful	but	they	are	not	the	source.	A	Buddha,	a	Jesus,
a	Zarathustra,	goes	 to	 the	very	 roots;	 it	 is	 from	 there	 that	he	experiences	God.
And	the	only	way	to	experience	God	is	to	go	to	the	roots	of	life,	of	existence.
Find	the	roots,	be	more	loving	and	you	will	enter	into	the	invisible	temple.	You
will	be	able	to	read	scriptures	in	silence	and	sermons	in	the	stones.
(to	Eileen)
Prem	 means	 love.	 Anu	 means	 an	 atom,	 the	 smallest	 particle	 that	 is	 no	 more
divisible.	 It	 is	 just	a	dewdrop	of	 love,	but	 the	dewdrop	contains	all	 the	oceans
because	the	dewdrop	contains	the	secret	of	all	water.
If	 we	 could	 understand	 the	 dewdrop	 we	 would	 understand	 all	 that	 is	 in	 the
oceans	on	the	earth	or	on	some	other	planets.	We	would	have	understood	water
as	 such.	Water	 cannot	 be	 anything	 else,	 anywhere	 it	will	 be	H2O.	That	 secret
formula	is	contained	in	the	smallest	particle.
Man	is	an	atom	of	love.	He	contains	God	because	he	contains	the	secret	formula.
The	secret	formula	that	man	contains	is	not	physical,	is	not	chemical,	is	not	even
psychological,	 otherwise	we	would	 have	 understood	 it.	 It	 is	 spiritual.	Nobody
else	can	tell	you	what	it	is;	you	will	have	to	experience	it	on	your	own.
All	other	knowledge	is	transferable:	physical,	chemical,	scientific,	psychological
--	 all	 other	 knowledge	 is	 easily	 transferable,	 one	 can	 educate	 the	 other.	 Only
spiritual	knowledge	is	untransferrable.
The	Master	 can	 give	 you	 a	 few	 hints,	 just	 hints	 --	 and	 they	 too	 will	 be	 very
vague.	Then	you	have	to	find	your	way	very	carefully,	very	cautiously.	Love	is
just	a	hint,	but	if	you	follow	love	slowly	slowly	you	will	be	surprised	that	God	is
becoming	more	and	more	of	a	reality	to	you	--	no	more	a	thought,	no	more	an
idea,	but	almost	something	that	you	can	touch.	The	deeper	you	go	into	love,	the
closer	you	come	to	God.	The	day	you	dissolve	into	love	you	have	arrived	home.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	is	the	secret	of	all	religion	--	and	people	are	lost	in	logic,	theology.	Is	logic
about	God?	Theology	is	far	away	from	religion,	as	far	away	as	anything	can	be,
because	there	can	be	no	logic	about	God,	only	love.	Yes,	poetry	is	possible	and
music	i1s	possible,	dance	is	possible,	but	not	logic.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 absolutely	 anti-theological	 because	 God	 is	 not	 an	 idea	 and
cannot	be	arrived	at	through	logical	processes.	God	is	an	interior	experience,	so
deeply	interior	that	you	will	have	to	go	there	alone,	absolutely	alone.
Love	refined:	friendship	defined
Friendship	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 important	 spiritual	 qualities,	 far	more	 important
than	love	itself.	Love	is	a	little	gross	because	it	has	some	biological	roots,	it	has
a	physical	part	to	it.	but	friendship	is	totally	free	of	the	groo,	it	is	pure	fragrance:
it	is	just	spiritual,	there	is	no	physical	part	to	it.
Be	 friendly	 to	 the	whole	existence	and	when	you	befriend	existence,	existence
befriends	you.	AES
DHAMMO	SANATANO:	This	is	the	ultimate	law.
(to	Anand	[?])
Bliss	 is	 possible	 only	 to	 those	who	 know	 how	 to	 trust,	 who	 know	 how	 to	 be
surrendered,	who	know	how	 to	be	 loyal,	obedient.	Bliss	 is	possible	only	when
your	 heart	 says	 yes,	 when	 the	 no	 completely	 disappears	 from	 your	 being	 --
because	no	is	darkness,	yes	is	light;	no	is	ego,	yes	is	egolessness.	No	is	the	way
of	the	unconscious	man;	yes	is	the	way	of	the	awakened	one.
Sannyas	is	nothing	but	a	discipline	of	saying	yes	totally	to	all	that	is,	forgetting
the	 language	 of	 no.	 Then	 great	 harmony	 arises;	 all	 conflict	 disappears.	 All
conflict	 is	because	of	our	no-saying.	No	 is	 fight,	war.	Yes	 is	 love.	Yes	 is	deep
accord	with	the	totality.	Bliss	is	another	name	of	that	accord,	that	harmony.
(to	Anand	Jan)
One	can	get	bliss	only	if	one	deserves	it,	if	one	is	worthy.	and	the	way	to	deserve
it	is	to	disappear,	not	to	be.	To	be	is	a	hindrance.
The	 ego	 is	 the	 root	 of	 all	misery.	When	 the	 ego	 is	 not,	 from	 every	 nook	 and
corner	of	existence	bliss	starts	reaching	you	as	if	it	were	just	waiting	for	the	ego
to	 disappear.	 Ego	 is	 a	 closed	 state	 of	 consciousness:	 all	 window,	 doors,	 are
closed.	You	are	living	almost	insulated,	encapsulated;	ego	surrounds	you	like	a
capsule.	Ego	is	like	the	egg:	there	is	not	even	a	small	window	to	allow	anything
to	enter.	Ego	is	very	much	afraid;	out	of	fear	it	closes	itself,	it	shrinks	into	itself.
That	 is	 how	we	 create	misery.	Bliss	 is	 to	 be	 in	 the	 flow	with	 existence,	 to	 be
totally	with	it.
Ego	is	like	frozen	ice	and	egolessness	is	melted	ice.	Then	you	become	part	of	the
ocean.	Then	you	don't	have	any	private	goal,	you	have	no	destination.	Then	each
moment	is	so	blissful,	so	incredibly	ecstatic,	that	the	mind	cannot	comprehend	it,
cannot	conceive	 it.	Mind	 is	part	of	 the	ego.	 It	knows	how	to	close,	 it	does	not
know	how	to	open	up.
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 means	 that	 now	 your	 whole	 effort	 will	 be	 to	 open	 up	 to
existence	--	to	the	flowers	and	to	the	bees	and	to	the	stars;	how	to	open	to	this
beautiful	music	 that	 fills	 the	whole	of	 existence;	how	 to	open	 to	 this	beautiful
music	 that	 fills	 the	whole	of	existence;	how	to	open	up	 to	 this	celebration	 that
goes	on	and	on	--	flowers	dancing	in	the	wind	and	trees	enjoying	the	wind	and
the	 stars,	 always	 in	 a	 state	 of	 bliss.	Except	 for	man	 everything	 is	 in	 harmony.
Man	falls	out	harmony	because	he	has	consciousness.
Consciousness	can	do	two	things:	it	can	create	ego,	it	can	create	egolessness.	If	it
creates	 ego	 you	 live	 in	 hell,	 if	 it	 creates	 egolessness	 you	 are	 in	 paradise.	 The
whole	world	is	in	paradise	without	knowing	it.	When	man	enter	paradise	he	will
be	entering	with	full	knowing.	That	is	the	grandeur,	the	beauty	of	man	--	and	that
is	the	danger	also,	because	out	of	thousands	of	people	only	once	in	a	while	does
a	person	enter;	others	simply	go	on	falling	into	the	trap	of	the	ego.
Be	egoless	and	all	the	grace	of	God	is	yours.
Bliss	is	by	the	grace	of	god
(to	Sindhu)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
We	 have	 forgotten	 who	 we	 are.	 We	 are	 emperors	 but	 we	 dream	 that	 we	 are
beggars.	We	 have	 the	whole	 kingdom	of	God	within	 our	 being	 and	we	 go	 on
begging	 for	 rubbish,	 for	 junk.	We	 go	 on	 collecting	 junk	 not	 knowing	 that	we
contain	 treasures,	 infinite	 treausures,	 inexhaustible	 treasures	 within	 our	 own
being.	We	are	oceans	yet	we	are	thirsty	because	we	have	become	disconnected
from	our	own	selves.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 bridge	 between	 you	 as	 you	 are	 and	 you	 as	 you	 have	 become,
between	 your	 real	 face	 and	 the	 unreal,	 between	 your	 personality	 and
individuality.
Personality	 is	what	you	have	become;	 individuality	 is	what	you	 really	are.	We
have	to	move	from	personality	to	individuality,	from	the	false,	the	pseudo,	to	the
real,	 to	the	authentic.	The	search	for	 the	authentic	is	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
And	 it	 is	 possible,	 easily	 possible,	 because	 howsoever	 disconnected	 we	 are,
howsoever	we	have	forgotten	it	and	for	howsoever	long	we	have	forgotten	it,	it
can	 be	 rememmbered	 in	 a	 single	 moment	 and	 immediately	 you	 become
connected.	 The	 wires	 have	 just	 become	 a	 little	 loose	 and	 they	 have	 to	 be
tightened	--	a	few	nuts	here	and	a	few	bolts	there.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	One	year.
That's	 very	 good.	 That	 is	 enough	 time	 ...	 to	 tighten	 you	 up!	 (Laughter)	 (Veet
Vishvas:	Beyond	belief)
Religion	 is	 faith	 but	 not	 belief.	 Ordinarily	 faith	 and	 belief	 are	 used	 as	 if
synonymous.	 They	 are	 not	 synonyms;	 they	 are	 antonyms,	 they	 are	 just	 the
opposite	of	each	other.	The	man	of	belief	is	not	a	man	of	faith.	The	man	of	faith
knows	nothing	of	belief.	Belief	is	borrowed,	faith	is	your	own	experience.	Belief
is	of	the	head,	faith	is	of	the	heart.	Belief	is	close	to	logic,	faith	is	of	the	heart.
Belief	 simply	means	 that	 you	 have	 repressed	 your	 doubt,	 you	 have	 covered	 a
dark	hole	of	doubt	with	a	beautiful	belief;	but	it	is	still	there.
This	 is	 not	 the	 way	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 it.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 more	 dangerous	 to	 cover	 it
because	then	you	become	unaware	of	it	and	it	goes	on	spreading	inside	you	like
a	hidden	cancer.	It	is	better	to	know	it	because	then	something	can	be	done	about
it.
To	forget	it,	to	cover	it	up,	is	really	dangerous,	it	can	spread	all	over	your	being.
The	Christian,	 the	Hindu,	 the	Mohammedan	--	 they	are	all	believers,	and	deep
down	there	is	doubt.	Their	beliefs	don't	make	them	religious	at	all;	their	beliefs
make	them	very	irreligious.
Up	to	now	this	has	been	history,	the	beliefs	of	people	have	shed	more	blood	on
the	 earth	 than	 anything	 else	 has	 done:	 Christian	 destroying	 Mohammedans,
Mohammedans	killing	Hindus	and	so	on,	so	forth.	It	seems	that	every	religious
person	is	at	somebody	else,	someone	else's	neck,	ready	to	kill,	ready	to	murder.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini	 of	 Iran	 asked	 the	 Mohammedans,
particularly	the	Iranians	of	America,	to	dismember	the	Shah	of	Iran:	to	kill	him
and	cut	him	into	pieces	and	to	bring	those	pieces	to	Teheran,	to	Iran.	Now	this	is
the	religious	head	...	 .	And	these	people	are	thought	to	be	spiritual	people!	The
most	 irreligious	people	have	been	 the	so-called	 religios.	They	are	murderers	 ...
but	beautifully	garbed,	behind	masks.
When	this	Ayatollah	Khomeini	heard	that	the	Shah	had	cancer	he	said,	inshallah,
God	willing,	 I	 hope	 it	 is	 true;	 I	 hope	 that	 he	dies	 through	cancer	 --	 all	 people
think	these	are	the	religious	heads!
But	 the	 basic	 reason	 is	 theat	 belief	 never	 makes	 anybody	 religious.	 It	 makes
Mohammedans,	 it	 makes	 Christians,	 but	 it	 makes	 nobody	 religios.	 It	 simply
covers	up	your	face	with	beautiful	slogans	and	deep	down	you	remain	ugly.	But
the	people	who	believe	in	your	belief	--	the	fellow	travelers	--	they	will	respect
you,	they	will	worship	you,	because	they	are	also	in	the	same	boat,	in	the	same
paper	boat	which	is	going	to	sink.	But	they	support	each	other.	Now	millions	of
Christians	 supporting	 each	 other	 ...	 .	 It	 gives	 a	 good	 feeling	 that	 there	 are	 so
many	people	who	are	Christians	--	how	can	Christianity	be	wrong?
Once	a	man	said	to	George	Bernard	Shaw	"When	there	are	so	many	Christians,
millions	 of	Christians,	 how	 can	 it	 be	wrong?"	He	 retorted	 that	 if	 there	 are	 so
many	Christians,	one-third	of	humanity,	how	can	they	be	right?	--	because	truth
has	never	been	a	quality	of	the	crowds.	Rarely,	once	in	a	while,	a	man	has	arisen,
in	 spite	 of	 the	 crowd,	 against	 the	 crowd,	 and	 has	 attained	 the	 peaks	 of	 truth.
Crowds	 have	 always	 lived	 in	 the	 valleys;	 and	 they	 help	 each	 other,	 they	 have
become	props	for	each	other.
Just	 today	 I	 read	 a	 statement	 of	 Idi	Amin:	Newspapers	 are	 very	much	 against
me;	they	print	pictures	that	make	me	look	like	a	monkey,	although	my	mother,
my	wife,	my	girlfriends,	all	say	that	I	am	the	most	beautiful	person	in	the	world!
Now	 your	 mother	 (Laughter),	 you	 wife	 and	 your	 girlfriends	 --	 they	 are	 the
proofs?	Then	everybody	is	the	most	beautiful	person	in	the	world,	everybody.	Idi
Amin	does	not	look	like	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
monkey,	that	is	true	--	he	looks	like	a	gorilla!	(Much	Laughter).
But	it	helps	to	live	with	the	same	type	of	people	with	the	same	belief;	it	makes
you	feel	protected,	secure.
Faith	is	totally	different.	My	insistence	is	not	on	belief.	Don't	believe	in	what	I
say	--	try	to	live	it,	try	to	experiment	with	it,	try	to	experience	it.	When	you	have
experienced	it	then	it	is	faith,	then	it	is	trust.	And	trust	liberates,	belief	binds.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911075
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Deva	means	God;	staffan	means	crowned	by	--	crowned	by	God.	That's	exactly
the	meaning	of	the	word
"christ":	 crowned	 by	 God.	 But	 Christ	 had	 to	 go	 trough	 a	 very	 rare	 crowing
ceremony:	 crucifixion	was	 the	 first	 step.	That	 has	 always	 been	 so	 and	will	 be
always	so:	unless	one	dies,	unless	the	ego	dies,	god	cannot	crown	you.	You	can
be	crowned	only	when	you	are	not.
Meditate	 on	 that	 paradox.	 When	 you	 are,	 you	 are	 as	 far	 away	 from	 God	 as
possible:	when	you	are	not,	you	are	God	 --	 that	 is	 the	crowing.	When	you	are
absolutely	empty	god	starts	filling	you	from	every	nook	and	corner,	from	every
direction	and	dimension.	You	are	overflooded.	That	is	the	crowing.
And	 unless	 a	man	 is	 crowned	 by	God	 he	 lives	 in	 vain.	He	 lives	 not;	 he	 only
exists,	and	to	only	exist	is	to	live	in	hell.	To	live	is	a	higher	state	of	existence;	it
is	a	conscious	state	of	existence.	The	rock	exists.	The	ordinary	man	believes	that
he	 lives	but	he	only	exists	 like	 the	 rock.	Only	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ	 lives.	But
how	 to	 live,	 how	 to	 come	 to	 this	 ultimate	 glory?	Only	 through	 disappearance
does	one	come	to	it.
Be	 ready	 to	 be	 annihilated	 --	 and	 that's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about.	 It	 is
surrendering	 to	 the	Master	 to	be	annihilated.	Once	you	are	not,	 everything	 fits
perfectly;	 a	 deep	 harmony	 arises.	 When	 you	 are	 not	 there	 are	 no	 discordant
notes.	When	you	are	not	it	is	all	music	and	all	poetry,	all	celebration.
Antar	means	inner,	innermost,	and	stefan	means	a	voice	--	the	innermost	voice	of
your	 being.	 It	 is	 the	 same	word	 as	 "staffan".	 In	Greek	 Stefan,	 Staffan,	means
crowned.	 This	 is	 the	 Teutonic	 meaning	 of	 the	 same	 word:	 voice.	 We	 go	 on
listening	to	the	outside	hence	we	go	on	missing	the	inner	voice,	and	God	speaks
from	your	innermost	core.
In	 the	 Master	 you	 only	 hear	 the	 echo	 of	 your	 innermost	 being.	 The	 Master
functions	as	a	mirror:	he	reflects	your	original	face.	He	says	what	God	wants	to
say	to	you	because	you	are	not	ready	to	listen	to	your	own	inner	self.	Listening
to	the	Master	slowly	slowly	you	become	aware	of	the	tremendous	phenomenon
that	 there	 is	a	 synchronicity	between	 the	Master	and	your	 inner	voice,	 that	 the
master	only	speaks	on	behalf	of	your	own	inner	self.	Hence	surrendering	to	the
Master	is	not	surrendering	to	anybody	else,	but	to	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
own	center.
We	live	on	 the	periphery,	we	 live	 in	 the	mind,	and	 the	mind	 is	so	noisy	 that	 it
does	not	allow	us	to	hear	the	still,	small	voice	within.	A	Master	is	needed	only	as
a	device	because	you	hear	 the	outside.	The	Master	 says	 from	 the	outside	what
God	has	been	trying	to	tell	you	from	the	inside	for	centuries.	But	you	don't	listen
to	the	inner.
Listening	 to	 the	 inner	Master	 slowly	 slowly	 one	 becomes	 conscious:	What	 is
happening?	The	Master	is	speaking	the	same	things	that	somehow	you	feel	to	be
your	 own,	 more	 your	 own	 than	 your	 mind,	 more	 your	 own	 than	 your	 body.
That's	 why	 the	 East	 calls	 the	 Master,	 God.	 The	West	 is	 absolutely	 unable	 to
understand	 the	phenomenon.	The	East	knows	why	 the	Master	 is	called	god:	he
represents	God,	he	reflects	God,	because	he	reflects	your	reality,	your	true	being.
Being	with	the	Mater	is	simply	getting	ready	to	turn	in	one	day	so	that	you	can
close	 your	 eyes	 and	 look	 in,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 start	 hearing	 what	 your	 own
intuition	goes	on	telling	you.	And	the	intuition	is	always	right.	The	intellect	may
be	 right,	 may	 be	 wrong,	 it	 is	 always	 either-or,	 doubt	 persists,	 it	 is	 never
undubitable.
But	intuition	is	without	any	doubt,	 it	simply	knows.	The	intuitive	person	never
repents	 because	 he	 never	 does	 anything	wrong,	 he	 cannot.	He	 simply	 follows
God's	voice	within	him.
(Anand	Manish:	bliss,	wisdom)
There	is	a	possibility	of	being	blissful	without	being	wise,	but	that	blissfulness	is
not	 true	 blissfulness;	 it	 is	what	 people	 call	 happiness.	 It	 comes	 and	 goes,	 it	 is
momentary.	And	it	always	leaves	you	in	deep	frustration	and	despair.	The	cost	is
too	much	and	not	worth	it.
There	 is	 also	 the	 possibility	 of	 being	 wise	 without	 being	 blissful,	 but	 that
wisdom	is	also	pseudo	and	false.	It	is	known	as	knowledge.	It	is	borrowed,	it	is	a
burden.	Anything	that	has	not	arisen	out	of	your	experience	is	always	a	bondage.
It	can	nourish	your	ego	but	is	cannot	reveal	your	self	to	you.	The	true	seeker	has
to	find	bliss	and	wisdom	together.	And	both	can	be	easily	found	together	because
they	are	like	two	wings	of	the	bird,	meditation.
Meditate:	on	one	hand	you	become	blissful	and	on	the	other	hand	you	become
wise;	both	grow	simultaneously	in	a	kind	of	deep	synchronicity.	In	the	ultimate
state	bliss	becomes	wisdom,	wisdom	becomes	bliss.
(Dorothy	becomes	Anand	Vandan:	bliss,	prayer)
As	far	as	I	am	concerned	to	be	blissful	is	to	be	prayerful.	All	other	prayers	are
formal.	You	can	say	beautiful	words	but	they	are	only	on	the	lips.	Words	belong
to	the	mind;	the	heart	knows	no	words.	It	is	wordless,	it	is	silent;	it	is	lovefull	but
wordless.	 It	 is	 cheerful;	 it	 can	 sing,	 but	 in	 silence.	 It	 can	 dance,	 but	 in	 a	 very
invisible	way.
The	 head	 is	 gross;	 hence	 everything	 of	 the	 head	 is	 visible;	 it	 is	 matter,	 it	 is
machine.	 The	 heart	 is	 the	 center	 of	 the	 invisible.	 It	 is	 not	 matter,	 it	 is
consciousness.	 The	 heart	 knows	 how	 to	 be	 blissful,	 how	 to	 be	 longing.	 And
being	blissful	opens	the	doors.
People	 go	 to	 God	 only	 in	 despair.	 That	 is	 the	 wrong	 moment	 to	 go	 to	 him
because	 when	 you	 are	 in	 despair	 you	 are	 closed.	He	 is	 available	 but	 just	 his
being	 available	 to	 you	 is	 of	 no	 use	 unless	 you	 are	 availablr	 to	 him.	 People
remember	God	only	when	 they	 are	 in	misery,	 and	 that	 is	 not	 the	 right	 time	 to
remember	him.	Hence	their	prayers	go	down	the	drain,	they	never	reach	to	God.
And	their	prayers	are	more	or	less	complaints,	complaints	against	the	misery	and
demands,	desires	that	things	should	be	better.	Those	are	not	real	prayers.
A	real	prayer	has	only	one	flavor,	that	of	gratitude;	only	one	frangrance,	that	of
immense	 gratefulness.	 It	 knows	 no	 demand,	 no	 desire.	 And	 because	 God	 has
given	so	much,	because	God	has	been	so	gracious,	 the	heart	 is	silently	bowing
down	 to	 the	 ultimate.	 That	 is	 vandan;	 that	 is	 real	 prayer,	 the	 very	 essence	 of
prayer!
Be	blissful	and	 let	 that	be	your	prayer.	And	God	 is	not	 far	away;	he	never	has
been:	he	is	just	around	the	corner.	The	moment	the	heart	is	ready	he	immediately
enters.	 He	 will	 not	 knock	 on	 the	 doors	 because	 that	 is	 interfering	 in	 your
freedom.	He	will	not	trespass	on	his	own,	he	respects	human	dignity.	Unless	you
invite	him	he	will	wait.
Prayer	is	a	way	of	inviting	him.	And	the	bet	way	to	invite	him	is	to	invite	him
when	you	are	in	a	dance,	when	your	whole	being	is	singing,	when	you	are	just
joy,	when	every	fiber	is	pulsating	with	celebration.
Then	he	 is	 ready	to	come	in	 immediately.	There	 is	not	even	a	single	moment's
gap:	instantly	it	happens.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Fulfil	the	only	condition:	be	blissful.
(Ma	Prem	Kavisho:	love	poet)
Love	 is	 the	 only	 real	 poetry.	When	 the	 heart	 is	 full	 of	 love	 your	whole	 life	 is
transformed	from	prose	to	poetry,	from	noise	to	music,	from	discord	to	harmony.
A	heart	without	love	is	a	desert,	and	the	man	with	a	heart	without	love	remains
ugly.	His	approach	towards	life	is	very	unpoetic.	He	has	no	aesthetic	sensibility,
no	sense	to	apreciate	the	beauty	of	existence	and	no	awareness	to	be	grateful	for
all	 that	God	has	done,	for	all	 that	 the	universe	 is.	Only	the	poet	knows	how	to
praise	and	how	to	be	grateful	and	how	to	dance	and	sing	and	how	to	celebrate
life	and	its	tremendous	blissfulness.
It	 is	such	a	sheer	 joy	 to	be.	Just	 to	be	 is	enough,	more	 than	is	needed,	but	one
needs	to	be	sensitive	to	feel	it,	one	needs	to	grow	feelers.	That's	my	work	here:
to	help	grow	feelers	in	you	so	that	life	is	no	longer	a	thought	but	becomes	more	a
feeling.	Once	 you	 have	moved	 from	 thinking	 to	 feeling	 then	 is	 only	 one	 step
more,	and	that	is	from	feeling	to	being;	and	that	is	very	simple.	The	first	step	is
very	difficult.	The	second	comes	almost	automatically:	there's	nothing	you	have
to	 do	 for	 it.	 The	 first	 is	 very	 arduous:	 you	 have	 to	 do	 much	 to	 move	 from
thinking	to	feeling.	But	from	feeling	to	being	the	distance	is	none	at	all.	 It	can
happen	any	moment.	The	poet	can	become	the	mystic	at	any	moment.	The	real
problem	is	how	to	get	out	of	your	thinking	and	get	more	and	more	into	feeling.
Love	more,	 feel	more,	enjoy	more,	 so	 that	you	can	feed	your	heart.	Watch	 the
sunrise,	the	sunset,	the	clouds,	the	rainbows,	the	birds	on	the	wings,	the	flowers,
the	 animals,	 the	 rocks,	 the	 people	 --	 look	 into	 their	 eyes.	 It	 is	 such	 a
multidimensional	 existence.	 Look	 into	 every	 dimension	 but	 look	 as	 a	 poet:	 to
praise,	to	feel.	Be	ecstatic!
(to	Gourishankear)
Much	is	going	to	happen	--	get	ready!	And	don't	be	afraid	when	it	happens.	The
only	 barrier	 is	 fear,	 because	when	 things	 start	 happening	 one	 becoems	 afraid.
One	 is	 moving	 into	 the	 unknown,	 and	 the	mind	 wants	 to	 cling	 to	 the	 known
because	 the	 mind	 is	 clever	 with	 the	 known.	With	 the	 unknown	 the	 mind	 has
nothing	to	say.	With	the	unknown	the	mind	is	absolutely	at	a	loss	as	to	what	to
do.	It	looses	all	its	expertise.
It	is	simply	shocked	into	silence	as	it	encounters	the	unknown.
It	 is	 a	 great	 expert	 as	 far	 as	 the	 familiar	 and	 the	 known	 is	 concerned	 because
mind	 is	nothing	but	memory.	 It	can	give	you	all	kinds	of	 information	but	only
about	the	known.	It	is	just	like	a	computer:	first	you	feed	the	information	to	the
computer,	then	the	computer	is	always	ready	to	give	the	information	back	--
but	 only	 that	much,	 that	which	 you	 have	 fed	 to	 it,	 nothing	more,	maybe	 new
combinations	 of	 the	 old	 things	 but	 nothing	 really	 original.	 Mind	 knows	 no
originality,	but	with	the	known	it	can	pretend,	it	can	feel	great;	it	is	an	expert.
A	child	was	asking	his	mother	"What	is	an	expert?"	The	mother	said	"The	expert
does	the	same	thing	that	we	women	do,	but	when	we	do	it,	men	call	it	nagging."
Mind	is	a	great	expert,	a	great	nagger.	It	goes	on	goading	you,	nagging	you:	Do
this.	Do	that.	It	opens	many	many	alternatives	and	is	constantly	persuading	you,
seducing	you,	corrupting	you:	Go	this	way.
Purchase	this.	Enjoy	that.	It	keeps	you	occupied	with	the	known.
The	work	 that	you	are	entering	 into	now	as	a	 sannyasin	 is	 concerned	with	 the
unknown,	the	uncharted,	the	unmapped	territory;	so	fear	will	be	there.	That	is	the
only	barrier.	In	spite	of	it	go	on.	Let	the	fear	be	there.	It	will	hang	around	you	for
a	while,	and	when	you	do	not	listen	to	it,	it	will	leave	you.	The	day	fear	of	the
unknown	leaves	is	a	great	day.	From	that	day	growth	becomes	simple	and	easy
and	spontaneous.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#8
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
8	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911085
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Love	is	the	energy	that	can	be	transformed	into	joy;	and	love	is	the	only	energy
that	 we	 have,	 there	 is	 no	 other	 energy	 available.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 energy	 on
different	planes.	Sex	 is	 the	crudest	 form	of	 love	energy	and	God	is	 the	highest
form	of	love	energy,	but	it	is	the	same	energy,	crude,	gross,	subtle,	hard,	wordly,
spiritual.	It	is	the	same	energy	that	moves	in	all	the	planes.	It	is	like	a	ladder:	one
part	of	the	ladder	touches	the	lowest	and	the	other	part,	the	highest.
Without	love,	life	would	be	impossible,	without	love	the	universe	itself	would	be
impossible.	Things	would	fall	apart;	it	is	love	that	keeps	them	glued	together.
This	has	been	one	of	 the	most	basic	 insights	of	all	 the	mystics	of	all	 the	ages:
that	even	matter	is	glued	together	with	love.	Atoms	are	together,	molecules	are
together,	not	falling	apart;	some	invisible	force	keeps	them	together.	Science	has
still	 to	 discover	 that	 ultimate	 energy.	 It	 has	 come	 across	 a	 few	 of	 its
manifestations	 --	 gravitation,	 electricity	 --	 but	 these	 are	 very	 gross
manifestations.	But	the	day	is	not	far	off	when	science	will	be	able	to	see	deeper
and	will	 find	 that	 the	ultimate	 source	of	 all	 energy	 is	 love.	That	day	will	 be	 a
great	day	for	humanity;	on	that	day	religion	and	science	will	be	able	to	commune
with	each	other	because	their	language	will	be	the	same	--	that	of	love.
I	 am	 introducing	 the	 language	 of	 love	 to	my	 people.	 Rejoice	 because	 love	 is
possible.	 Be	 joyful	 becaue	 love	 is	 your	 inner	 potential.	 You	 can	 rise	 to	 the
ultimate	heights.	Nothing	is	impossible	for	love	because	love	can	even	transform
itself	into	god.
(to	Gabriele)
Love	is	divine,	lust	is	animal.	Many	go	on	confusing	lust	with	love.	That	is	one
of	 the	 greatest	 calamities,	 becaue	 the	 person	 who	 thinks	 lust	 is	 love	 remains
confined	to	the	world	of	lust	and	never	rises	higher	than	that.	He	has	no	idea	that
there	is	a	higher	plane	too.	He	remains	in	the	basement	of	his	house.
Sex	is	 the	basement	of	 the	house.	It	 is	not	 the	place	 to	 live.	You	can	use	 it	 for
other	purposes	but	it	is	not	your	home:	your	home	is	above	it.
Man	 has	 three	 planes	 of	 being.	Lust	 is	 animal,	 but	 remember	 it	 is	 the	 crudest
form	 of	 love.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 there	 is	 no	 love	 present	 in	 it	 but	 it	 is	 very	mixed,
muddy,	 polluted	 by	 many	 other	 things:	 jealousy,	 possessiveness,	 anger.	 As	 it
becomes	 a	 little	 more	 refined	 it	 becomes	 human	 love:	 less	 possessive,	 less
jealous,	more	 understanding,	more	 capable	 of	 not	 using	 the	 other	 as	 a	means,
more	capable	of	thinking	of	the	other	as	an	end	unto	himself	or	herself.	And	love
in	its	highest	form,	when	it	is	divine,	is	prayer.	Then	there	is	no	possessiveness	at
all,	then	there	is	nothing	earthly	in	it.	It	becomes	an	absolutely	invisible	force.
And	when	love	becomes	prayer	one	comes	to	feel	contentment	for	the	first	time.
Lust	keeps	you	always	hankering,	desiring,	 for	more	--	 for	more	sensation,	 for
more	thrill,	for	more	kick.	Human	love	gives	you	a	little	bit	of	satisfaction.	One
starts	cooling	down	a	little	bit	of	satisfaction,	on	is	not	so	hot,	not	so	fiery.	But
prayer	is	absolutely	cool,	a	cool	breeze	from	the	beyond.	When	it	starts	blowing
it	takes	you	away	from	the	mundane	to	the	sacred.	You	can	open	your	wings	and
just	float	with	the	wind	and	it	will	take	you	to	the	ultimate	goal	of	all	life.
As	 you	 go	 higher	 in	 love	 your	 life	 becomes	more	 and	more	 significant.	More
songs	start	happening	in	your	heart;	more	ecstasies	are	born.	And	in	the	ultimate
sense	of	love,	when	it	is	godly,	you	are	just	a	lotus	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
flower,	 releasing	 its	 fragrance,	 its	 ecstasy.	Then	 there	 is	 no	death,	 no	 time,	 no
mind;	then	you	are	part	of	eternity.	Then	there	is	no	fear,	of	course;	when	there	is
no	death	how	can	 there	be	 fear?	There	 is	no	anxiety,	of	 course;	because	when
there	 is	 no	mind	 how	 can	 there	 be	 anxiety?	There	 is	 great	 trust,	 contentment,
fulfillment.
(to	Brigitte)
Love	 is	both	a	strength	and	a	bridge.	 It	 is	a	strenght	because	 it	 is	pure	energy,
and	it	 is	also	 the	bridge,	 the	bridge	between	man	and	God,	 the	bridge	between
the	earth	and	the	sky,	the	bridge	between	the	known	and	the	unknown.
Seek	your	strenght	in	love	because	it	is	a	very	different	kind	of	strenght.	Love	is
power	 but	 is	 not	 political	 power,	 it	 is	 religious	 power	 --	 and	 there	 is	 a	 great
difference.	 There	 is	 not	 only	 a	 difference,	 they	 are	 polar	 opposites.	 Political
power	is	that	of	domination	over	the	other.	It	tries	to	reduce	the	other	to	a	thing
to	be	possessed;	it	destroyes	the	soul	of	the	other.
Religious	 power,	 power	 that	 comes	 through	 love	 is	 not	 violent,	 it	 is	 not
aggressive.	It	does	not	dominate,	it	has	no	idea	of	reducing	the	other	to	a	thing.
On	the	contrary	it	frees	the	other.
Love	liberates:	it	helps	the	other	to	be	himself	or	herself.	Love	is	the	power	that
knows	how	to	surrender.	It	knows	nothing	of	conquering.	It	knows	only	one	way,
and	that	is	of	surrender.	But	the	beauty	and	the	paradox	is	that	by	surrendering
one	 conquers,	 but	 then	 that	 conquest	 is	 not	 destructive.	 The	 other	 remains
absolutely	free,	more	free	than	ever.	The	other	becomes	more	of	a	soul	than	ever.
Love	releases	him	from	all	his	bondages.	In	the	ultimate	sense	love	releases	him
from	the	body	and	the	mind	too;	it	makes	him	a	pure	spiritual	force.	But	still	it
gives	you	great	conquest:	you	disappear,	you	are	no	more	 there	as	an	ego,	and
when	the	ego	is	not	there	politics	is	impossible.
Politics	 is	 the	projection	of	 the	 ego.	When	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 there,	 there	 is	 a	 joy,
energy	flowing,	energy	communing,	energy	dancing	with	other	energies,	energy
meeting	 and	 merging.	 There	 is	 great	 orgasmic	 joy,	 and	 that	 very	 orgasmic
joyfulness	becomes	the	bridge	that	takes	you	from	this	shore	to	the	other	shore.
And	the	other	shore	is	our	real	home.
(to	Ramo)
Bliss	is	the	way	to	God.	Bliss	is	the	means	towards	God	and	also	the	end;	it	 is
the	way	and	the	goal,	both.
Be	blissful	so	that	you	can	be	more	blissful.	Start	by	being	blissful	so	that	you
can	end	by	being	totally	blissful.	And	the	first	step	is	the	last	step.	Remember	it,
it	 is	 one	of	 the	most	 fundamental	 laws	of	 life:	 the	 first	 step	 is	 almost	 half	 the
journey.	If	you	start	it	wrongly	you	will	arrive	home;	and	the	right	step	means	to
take	it	blissfully,	dancing,	rejoicing.
Sannyas	is	your	first	step	towards	God.	Don't	be	serious	about	it.	Be	sincere	but
don't	be	serious.
Seriousness	is	not	really	sincerity	but	pseudo	sincerity.	And	seriousness	is	a	kind
of	 disease;	 it	 is	 illness,	 it	 is	 pathological.	 Health	 is	 never	 serious.	 Health	 is
always	playful	because	health	 is	so	full	of	energy,	so	overflowing	with	energy,
that	it	naturally	has	to	be	a	play.	One	can't	help	it	--	one	has	to	dance	and	sing,
one	has	to	love	and	laugh.
My	 sannyas	 starts	 with	 laughter,	 starts	 with	 love,	 starts	 with	 being	 cheerful,
starts	with	being	playful,	because	in	the	East	we	conceive	of	God	as	the	ultimate
player	and	we	conceive	of	existence	as	his	play,	leela.	It	is	not	a	serious	affair	as
it	is	in	the	Judaic,	Christian,	Mohammedan	concepts.
The	Jewish	God	is	really	very	serious.	He	does	not	seem	to	be	a	Jew	--	he	is	so
serious!	 Jews	 have	 never	 been	 so	 serious.	 Sometimes	 it	 happens:	 we
compensate,	 we	 become	 attracted	 to	 the	 opposite.	 Jews	 have	 been	 very	 life-
affirmative,	 their	 religion	has	been	 that	of	 joy.	 It	 is	only	 in	 the	 tradition	of	 the
Judaic	religion	that	Hassidism,	something	like	Hassidism,	was	possible:	dancing,
singing,	hugging,	rejoicing	in	each	other's	beings.	But	their	god	is	very	serious.
It	 seems	 that	 they	 have	 dumped	 all	 their	 seriousness	 on	 the	 god!	 He	 is	 very
ferocious:	he	gets	angry	about	small	things.
Adam	and	Eve	had	not	done	much	wrong,	they	were	just	being	children.	A	little
bit	of	disobedience	is	part	of	being	a	child,	is	part	of	being	innocent.	They	were
simply	being	innocent,	they	were	not	sinners.	Out	of	curiosity	they	ate	the	fruit
which	was	denied	to	them,	and	when	you	deny	somebody	something	--
particularly	 children	 --	 they	 become	 very	 interested	 in	 it.	 The	 whole
responsability	 is	God's:	he	should	not	have	denied	 it	 to	 them	in	 the	first	place.
But	he	denied	it:	"Don't	eat	from	the	tree	of	knowledge	and	don't	eat	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
from	the	tree	of	life"	-	two	trees	he	was	very	much	afraid	of.
And	the	moment	Adam	and	Eve	had	eaten	from	the	tree	of	knowledge	he	drove
them	out	of	heaven,	out	of	paradise,	because	of	the	fear	that	now	they	would	try
the	 other	 tree.	 And	 once	 they	 ate	 from	 the	 other	 tree	 they	 would	 become
immortal,	they	would	be	like	gods.	That	means	that	God	felt	jealous.	They	have
become	half	like	God	because	now	they	know,	they	are	no	more	immortal	then
there	 would	 be	 no	 difference	 between	 god	 and	 them:	 they	 would	 know,	 God
knows;	 they	would	be	 immortal,	God	is	 immortal.	So	a	great	 jealousy	arose	 in
God's	mind.	It	was	out	of	jealousy	that	they	were	thrown	out	of	paradise.
This	 is	 not	 a	 very	 healthy	 concept	 of	God.	He	 could	 not	 forgive	 such	 a	 small
thing	....	Where	is	his	kindness,	where	is	his	compassion,	where	is	his	love?	But
the	whole	reason	is	that	he	is	serious,	too	serious
--	like	an	old-type	headmaster.
But	the	eastern	concept	of	God	is	totally	different:	he	is	hilarious.	He	laughs,	he
plays;	he	is	ready	to	forgive	all	sins,	forgivness	is	his	very	nature.
So	don't	be	 serious	 --	 that	 is	going	 to	be	your	work.	Seriousness	 is	your	main
characteristic;	that	has	to	be	dropped.	You	have	to	become	non-serious;	take	life
more	 as	 fun.	And	 don't	 be	worried:	 the	 fruits	 that	 are	 denied	 are	 sweeter.	 Eat
them,	and	with	no	fear	because	God	is	love	and	god	is	compassion:	all	is	going
to	be	forgiven.	In	the	end	the	saints	are	going	to	be	very	miserable:	when	they
see	 that	 sinners	 have	 also	 entered	 heaven	 and	 that	 they	 are	 enjoying	 the	 same
privileges	as	the	saints,	they	are	bound	to	repent	that	for	the	whole	of	their	lives
they	 were	 fools!	 These	 sinners	 enjoyed	 the	 world	 and	 now	 they	 are	 enjoying
paradise	too.	And	in	fact	the	sinners	will	be	able	to	enjoy	paradise	more	because
they	will	know	the	art	of	enjoying	it!	Just	think:	even	if	a	man	who	has	been	a
saint	for	his	whole	life	gets	into	paradise,	what	is	he	going	to	do	there?	He	will
just	be	at	a	loss.	He	will	go	on	doing	his	old	tricks:	standing	on	his	head,	fasting,
et	cetera.
That's	what	he	knows!
Sinners	will	really	be	the	possessors	of	paradise.	Once	they	enter	they	will	enjoy
paradise	because	 they	will	know	how	 to	enjoy.	They	will	drink	 to	 their	heart's
content,	they	will	dance,	they	will	sing.	Now	there	is	no	fear,	no	responsability,
no	death	who	can	prevent	them	from	dancing	and	singing	and	rejoicing?
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	prepare	you	for	paradise.	So	we	are	creating	a	little	bit
of	paradise	here.
Enjoy!	Nothing	is	denied;	all	is	accepted	and	affirmed.
(to	Sangam)
In	India	a	place	where	three	rivers	meet	becomes	a	sacred	palce.	It	is	a	metaphor,
because	man	is	a	meeting	place	of	three	forces:	the	physical,	the	psychological,
and	the	spiritual.	And	when	these	three	forces	really	meet	there	is	great	joy,	great
bliss.
Ordinarily	we	 live	 in	compartments:	body	 lives	 in	one	comportments,	mind	 in
another,	soul	in	another.
The	body	is	not	aware	of	the	mind,	the	mind	is	not	aware	of	the	body,	the	soul	is
not	 known	 to	 the	mind,	 the	 body	 is	 completely	 oblivious	 of	 the	 soul.	The	are
together	but	are	not	even	introduced	to	each	other.
The	first	step	of	meditation	is	to	bring	them	closer	to	be	introduced	to	each	other,
to	be	linked	in	a	kind	of	deep	friendship	so	that	a	merger	becomes	possible.	And
when	 all	 three	dimensions	merge	 into	one	point	 the	 fourth	 is	 born.	Out	 of	 the
meeting	of	the	three	the	fourth	is	born,	and	that	fourth	is	called	God.	In	India	we
simply	call	him	the	fourth:	turiya,	the	fourth.	We	don't	give	him	any	name.	These
three	have	names	but	the	fourth	has	no	name,	The	fourth	is	transcendental.
The	whole	work	of	religion	consists	of	creating	an	alchemy	in	which	your	body
melts	into	the	mind,	the	mind	melts	into	the	soul,	the	soul	melts	into	the	mind,
the	mind	melts	into	the	soul,	the	soul	melts	into	the	body.	And	by	and	by,	slowly
slowly,	 they	 become	 one	 integrated	 phenomenon.	 Hence	 our	 work	 is	 three-
dimensional:	we	work	 on	 the	 body	 through	many	 techniques;	we	work	 on	 the
mind	through	many	therapies;	we	work	on	the	soul	through	many	meditations.
For	the	body	there	is	Rolfing,	Acupunture,	Shiatsu,	Karate.	These	are	techniques
to	 help	 the	 body	 to	 come	 closer	 to	 integration.	 And	 then	 are	 all	 kinds	 of
psychotherapies	available;	they	are	means	to	bring	the	mind	to	a	clarity;	to	give
mind	a	certain	order	and	discipline	out	of	confusion	and	chaos.	And	then	there
are	meditations	 --	Vipassana,	Zazen,	 and	other	meditations	 --	which	make	you
aware	 of	 the	 soul.	 All	 these	 three	 together	 slowly	 slowly	 mold	 you	 into	 one
unity.	That	unity	leads	to	the	fourth,	and	the	fourth	is	the	name	of	God.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(her	replay	is	inaudible)
Be	here	till	the	fourth	happens!
(to	Prashanta)
When	are	you	living?
I	don't	know.
Mm	mm.
I	was	ready	to	go	but	now	I	don't	know.
Then	don't	go!	What	is	the	point	of	going?	Or	if	you	want	to	finish	things	there,
finish	things	and	come	back.
I'm	not	sure.
Mm?
I'm	confused	now.
No,	then	it	is	better	to	go.	If	there	is	confusion,	go,	because	I	only	want	people
here	 when	 they	 are	 no	 more	 confused	 about	 this	 going	 business.	 Go	 --	 no
problem.	First	go;	soon	this	confusion	will	be	finished.
Here	you	are	accepted	only	when	there	is	no	problem	about	going,	when	it	has
been	settled	completely.
Only	then	is	useful	to	be	here,	otherwise	it	is	not	going	to	be	of	any	use.	If	the
mind	goes	on	thinking	about	going	then	it	is	better	to	go	and	be	finished.	Soon	it
will	be	finished.	Don't	be	worried	--	I	will	take	care.
Just	go,	mm?
Okay.
If	 even	one	percent	of	 confusion	 remains	my	suggestion	 is:	go.	When	you	are
one	 hundred	 percent	 here	 then	 only	 be	 here.	Otherwise	 it	 is	 not	 of	much	 use,
because	I	can	only	work	on	you	when	you	are	at	the	one-hundred-degree	point;
below	that,	work	is	not	possible.	And	that	point	will	come	soon.
Everybody	goes	through	this	confusion	--	that's	natural.	The	only	way	to	get	rid
of	 it	 is	 to	 go.	 If	 you	 remain	 here	 this	will	 remain:	 you	will	 go	 on	 thinking	 of
going	there.	Going	there	you	will	see	that	there	is	nothing.	You	unnecessaryly	....
The	whole	futility	will	be	clear	to	you.
[Here	follows	a	line	which	has	not	been	xerocopied]
...	finished.	When	you	see	the	point	absolutely	clearly,	come	back!
Hello,	Sambuddho.	When	did	you	arrive?
A	few	days	ago.
Good!	And	how	long	will	you	be	here?
That's	the	miracle:	I	can	be	here	forever	now.	(Tears)
Be	here	forever,	mm?	There	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere.
I	just	want	to	tank	you.
Just	 be	 here!	 Come	 close	 to	 me,	 turn	 towards	 Mukta	 and	 raise	 your	 hands.
(touches	his	forehead)	You	are	one-hundred	per	cent	ready	--	there	is	no	need	to
go	anywhere!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911095
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(to	Victoria)
One	 can	 know	 God	 not	 by	 conquering	 but	 by	 surrendering.	 You	 have	 to	 go
beyond	the	idea	of	victory,	conquest.	Those	are	all	ego	trips.	Blessed	are	those
who	 have	 no	 idea	 of	 any	 conquest,	 who	 have	 no	 ambitions	 to	 be	 somebody
special,	who	are	humble.	Jesus	says:	Blessed	are	 the	poor	 in	spirit	 for	 theirs	 is
the	kingdom	of	God.	I	say	the	same	unto	you.
Drop	 the	 ambitious	 mind.	 Mind	 is	 always	 ambitious.	 When	 you	 drop	 the
ambitious	mind,	mind	itself	is	dropped	because	ambition	is	mind,	desire	is	mind,
dreaming	is	mind.	Desiring	gone,	dreaming	gone,	ambitions	dropped,	mind	dies
of	its	own	accord;	and	in	that	state	of	no-mind	God	arrives.	God	is	always	ready
to	 come	 in,	 we	 just	 have	 to	 open	 the	 door.	 No-mind	 is	 the	 door	 open;	 mind
means	the	door	closed.
(to	Ignacio)
Love	is	the	fire	that	can	make	you	aflame.	Without	love	a	man	is	an	unlit	lamp
capable	of	great	 light,	but	 the	 light	 is	not	yet	actual;	 it	 is	dormant,	 fast	asleep.
Love	 comes	 and	 spring	 comes.	 And	 as	 love	 enters	 your	 being	 it	 is	 fire:	 it
enkindles	you,	and	the	whole	of	life	becomes	light.
All	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 world	 have	 defined	 God	 as	 light	 because	 it	 is	 an
experience	of	becoming	totally	aflame.	And	anything	that	makes	you	more	fiery
is	helpful;	anything	that	makes	you	more	passionate,	more	intense,	more	total	is
a	bridge.
People	 live	 very	 dull	 lives.	 They	 live	 as	 if	 they	 are	 sleepwalkers.	 They	 live
unconsciously	as	if	they	themselves	don't	live,	but	their	biological	instincts	go	on
goading	them	to	live	in	a	certain	way.
The	ordinary	man	is	a	 robot,	he	 is	a	machine;	man	has	not	yet	been	born.	The
machine	becomes	man	only	with	the	entry	of	love	in	to	your	life.	The	machine
can	do	all	that	your	brain	can	do.	So	the	old	definition	of	man	as	a	rational	being
is	 no	more	 relevant	 because	 a	 computer	 is	 far	more	 rational	 than	you	 are.	We
will	have	to	change	the	definition	of	man.	That's	what	we	are	doing	here,	that's
what	sannyas	is	all	about;	a	redefining	of	man.
Man	is	not	a	rational	animal.	Machines	cannot	love;	no	computer	is	capable	of
feeling.	Hence	 in	 the	future	 thinking	 is	not	going	 to	be	 the	defining	factor,	but
feeling.	One	day	 the	 computer	may	 substitute	 the	 scientist,	 the	mathematician,
the	physicist,	but	the	computer	cannot	substitute	the	lover,	the	poet.
Love	is	the	door	from	where	we	enter	into	a	higher	plane	of	being.	It	is	through
love	that	all	creativity	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
born.	 It	 is	 through	 love	 that	 man	 starts	 feeling	 significant,	 attains	 to	 glory,
becomes	meaningful.	Love	is	the	only	ultimate	law.
The	color	orange	is	the	color	of	love,	because	in	the	East	it	is	the	color	of	spring.
Spring	is	the	season	of	love.	Up	to	now	you	have	been	Ignacio	in	name	only,	but
my	effort	will	be	to	make	it	a	reality.	Help	me!
How	long	will	you	be	here?
I'm	leaving	tomorrow.
And	when	will	you	be	back?
As	soon	as	possible.	Perhaps	in	ten	days,	thirty	days,	forty	days!
Good	--	come	back	as	soon	as	possible.	Now	this	is	your	home!
(to	Jan)
Everything	 is	 a	 gift	 of	God.	We	don't	 deserve	 anything,	we	 are	 not	worthy	 of
anything.	God	gives	us	life,	the	capacity	to	love,	the	capacity	to	feel	beauty,	the
capacity	 to	 find	 truth	 --	 not	 because	 we	 are	 worthy,	 not	 because	 we	 deserve
them,	 but	 because	 he	 has	 too	much.	He	 is	 like	 a	 cloud	 full	 of	 rain:	 he	 has	 to
shower.
It	 is	 out	 of	 his	 abundance	 that	 we	 receive.	 He	 is	 like	 a	 flower	 that	 has
inxehaustible	perfume;	it	is	bound	to	be	released	to	the	winds.	He	is	like	a	light	-
-	beginningless,	endless.	It	has	to	be	shared	otherwise	it	becomes	a	burden.
The	 ancient	 stories	 of	 all	 the	 nations	 say	 that	 God	 was	 alone;	 he	 felt	 his
loneliness	and	created	the	world.
If	I	were	to	write	those	stories	again	I	would	say	that	God	was	not	simply	alone;
he	was	so	full	of	joy,	so	abundantly	rich,	that	he	needed	somebody	to	share	it.	He
needed	a	whole	universe	to	share	it	with.
The	 old	 stories	 have	 something	wrong	with	 them.	God	was	 alone,	 he	 felt	 the
loneliness	--	 it	has	a	tinge	of	sadness	in	it.	He	was	not	happy	being	alone	with
himself	so	he	created	the	world	as	he	wanted	a	certain	occupation,	as	if	the	other
was	needed	to	become	occupied,	engaged,	involved	in	...	so	he	could	forget	his
own	 loneliness.	 These	 stories	 must	 have	 been	 created	 by	 people	 who	 have
suffered	from	loneliness.	And	who	has	not	suffered?	Almost	everybody	suffers
from	loneliness.	And	out	of	loneliness	we	hanker	for	the	other.
These	stories	are	not	written	by	Buddha	--	that	much	is	certain.	About	that	I	can
be	absolutely	authoritative:	these	stories	are	written	by	ordinary	people	who	are
suffering	 from	loneliness.	They	project	 their	 loneliness	onto	God.	They	cannot
be	happy	when	they	are	alone,	 they	think	"How	can	God	be	happy	when	he	is
alone?"	It	is	just	a	human	projection,	anthropocentric.	They	think	of	God	in	the
same	 way	 as	 they	 think	 about	 themselves:	 they	 need	 the	 other,	 they	 need
company.	The	man	needs	the	woman,	the	woman	needs	the	man:	the	other	is	a
must	otherwise	one	starts	drowing	in	one's	own	loneliness.
These	stories	must	have	been	written	by	people	who	don't	know	what	it	is	to	be
god,	 what	 it	 is	 to	 be	 aware,	 what	 it	 is	 to	 be	 awakened.	 If	 Buddha	 wrote	 the
stories	they	would	have	a	totally	different	flavor.
That's	why	 I	 am	 saying	 that	 if	 I	were	 to	write	 I	would	write	 that	 god	was	 so
happy,	so	joyous,	so	cheerful,	with	so	much	laughter,	that	he	wanted	somebody
to	share	it.	Not	that	he	needed	the	other,	he	was	enough	unto	himself,	but	it	was
too	much.	 It	was	unbearable	bliss,	hence	he	created	 the	world.	Everything	 is	a
gift	out	of	his	abundance.	To	feel	it	is	to	be	grateful,	to	feel	it	is	to	be	prayerful.
Let	 this	be	your	work	upon	yourself:	 feel	more	and	more	grateful.	Gratitude	is
the	essence	of	prayer,	and	gratitude	 is	possible	only	when	you	see	 that	all	 is	a
gift,	each	breath	is	a	gift.	And	what	a	gift!	--	so	valuable	that	there	is	no	way	to
purchase	it.	It	has	no	price.	You	can't	purchase	life;	you	can't	purchase	love;	you
can't	 purchase	 aesthetic	 sensibility;	 you	 can't	 purchase	 creativity;	 you	 can't
purchase	intelligence	--	but	they	are	all	given.	Even	before	you	ask	for	them	you
have	been	provided	for.	Just	a	 little	search	within	oneself	and	one	comes	upon
treasures	and	treasures.
Yes,	Jesus	is	right:	the	kingdom	of	God	is	within	you.
(to	Veetasmi)
Ego	consists	of	feeling,	of	thinking	that	we	are	separate	from	existence,	that	we
are	like	islands.	It	is	absolutely	false.	We	don't	exist	in	separation,	we	can't	exist
even	for	a	single	moment	in	separation.	The	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
breath	 that	 comes	 in	 keeps	 us	 joined	 with	 the	 outside.	 And	 we	 are	 not	 only
breathing	with	the	nose,	we	are	breathing	from	every	pore	of	 the	body.	We	are
thirsty:	 we	 drink	 water	 and	 the	 water	 quenches	 the	 thirst;	 it	 is	 continuously
moving	from	the	outer	 towards	the	inner	and	from	the	inner	 towards	the	outer.
Food	 is	 continuously	 in	 circulation,	 breathing	 is	 in	 circulation.	 We	 are	 in
constant	exchange	with	reality.	We	are	not	separate,	we	are	bridged	in	a	thousand
and	one	ways.
To	understand	it	is	to	go	beyond	the	ego.	Then	one	never	thinks	"I	am	separate,"
but	"I	am	one	with	the	whole."	And	that's	what	true	religiousness	is:	this	feeling
of	great	union	with	existence,	of	oneness.
Then	 anxiety	 disappears	 automatically;	 then	 sadness	 disappears	 automatically.
These	are	the	by-products	of	the	ego.	The	ego	makes	you	frustrated	because	first
it	 makes	 you	 expect	 things	 and	 then	 they	 don't	 happen.	 They	 can't	 happen
because	in	the	beginning	the	ego	is	false,	all	its	expectations	are	false	--
they	 cannot	 be	 fulfilled.	 Hence	 frustration	 settles	 in,	 one	 becomes	 sad.	 One
suffers	great	despair.
The	 ego	 is	 constantly	 afraid	 of	 death	 because	 ...	 it	 is	 a	 false	 entity.	 You	 are
somehow	holding	onto	it.	It	can	disappear	any	moment;	it	is	very	fragile.	Hence
the	fear	of	death	and	with	the	fear	the	anxiety,	the	anguish.
Once	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 there,	 there	 is	 no	 expectation,	 frustration,	 no	 desire,	 no
despair.	Suddenly	one	finds	oneself	falling	into	a	deep	harmony	with	the	cosmos.
And	that	harmony	is	God;	that	harmony	is	nirvana;	that	harmony	is	tao.
God	 is	 not	 a	 theological	 concept	 but	 a	 deep	 experience	 of	 communion	 with
existence.	Meditation	 prepares	 the	 way	 because	 it	 helps	 you	 to	 dismantle	 the
false	 ego.	Love	helps	because	 love	 also	makes	you	aware	of	 the	 falsity	of	 the
ego.	Love	gives	you	a	few	glimpses	of	egolessness;	meditation	gives	you	a	solid
ground	on	which	to	stand	without	the	ego.
And	between	love	and	meditation	sannyas	grows.	Between	these	two	challenges
sannyas	happens.	On	one	side	it	is	love;	on	the	other	side	it	is	meditation.	And
exactly	in	the	middle	of	love	and	meditation	is	sannyas.
(Deva	Pradipam:	divine	light)
Man	 is	made	of	 light;	 the	whole	universe	 is	made	of	 light.	Mystics	have	been
experiencing	it	for	centuries.	Then	ancientmost	records	which	are	at	least	six	or
seven	thousand	years	old	state	the	same	phenomenon	as	the	modern	mystic	does:
that	existence	 is	nothing	but	an	expression	of	 light	energy,	 that	 the	universe	 is
made	of	the	stuff	called	light.	But	mystics	have	never	been	listened	to;	nobody
takes	much	note	of	them.	They	are	thought	to	be	mad	peole	or	at	the	most	poets,
dreamers,	 visionaries.	 But	 now	 modern	 science	 says	 the	 same	 thing	 --	 that
existence	consists	of	the	basic	element	of	light,	electricity.
When	 science	 says	 it	 people	 immediately	 start	 believing	 it,	 because	 then	 it	 is
coming	 from	 people	 who	 are	 thought	 to	 be	 sane,	 logical,	 calculative,	 more
dependable.	But	one	thing	should	be	thought	about	now:	that	six,	seven	thousand
years	of	continuous	teaching	of	the	saints,	of	the	mystics,	was	not	insane;	it	was
based	in	reality.	It	was	one	of	the	most	fundamental	truths.	Science	is	lagging	far
behind,	seven	thousand	years	behind.	There	are	many	more	things	that	mystics
have	been	saying	and	with	which	science	has	not	yet	agreed.	Science	will	have
to	agree	but	it	may	take	another	seven	thousand	years.
Science	grows	very	 slowly,	 at	 a	 snail's	 pace,	 because	 it	 is	 very	 cautious.	Each
step	has	 to	be	 taken	so	calculatively	 that	 for	years	 the	 scientist	waits	 to	 take	a
single	step,	to	move	even	a	single	inch.	In	that	way	mystics	are	mad:	they	trust
existence	so	much	that	 they	drop	all	cautiousness.	Their	 trust	 is	so	infinite	that
they	 rush	 into	 any	unknown	direction,	hence	 they	are	 the	 first	discoverers,	 the
most	adventurous	people.
That's	 what	 I	 want	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 be:	 mystics	 --	 adventurous,	 courageous,
always	ready	to	go	into	the	uncharted,	always	ready	to	forget	the	past,	to	leave
this	shore	for	the	unknown	shore	which	is	not	visible	at	all.	Maybe	it	is	,	maybe
it	 is	not	 ...	but	 in	 that	very	risking	one	grows.	Whether	 the	other	shore	 is	or	 is
not,	 is	not	 the	point	at	all.	 If	one	risks	so	much,	 if	one	has	 that	much	courage,
such	guts,	that	brings	one	a	new	life.
It	brings	a	soul	into	your	body;	otherwise	people	are	just	bodies	without	souls.	It
creates	an	integrity,	an	integration.	It	crystallizes	your	consciousness	--	and	that
is	 the	 other	 shore;	 it	 is	 not	 that	 the	 other	 shore	 is	 somewhere	 else.	 The
crystallized	 consciousness	 is	 the	 other	 shore.	 Then	 even	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the
ocean	you	are	on	the	other	shore	because	then	there	is	no	death	for	you.
Death	is	only	for	cowards.	For	the	courageous	there	is	no	death;	there	never	has
been,	there	never	will	be.
(Japanese	artist,	Meera,	is	back.	She	runs	a	meditation	center	and	an	art	gallery
and	it	seems	she	sent	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
some	samples	of	her	work	to	Osho.
Hello,	Meera!	When	did	you	arrive?
Five	days	ago.
Very	 good!	 I	 looked	 into	 your	 paintings	 and	 pictures	 --	 really	 beautiful!	 You
have	done	a	good	job.
Now	 you	 also	 have	 to	 create	 a	 group	 of	 painters	 here	 --	 just	 like	 the	 theatre
group.
Good,	Meera.	Now	start	working	on	it.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911105
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(to	Susan)
Grace	 is	 a	 by-product;	 it	 cannot	 be	 achieved	 directly.	 It	 is	 achieved	 through
achieving	the	truth.	To	be	pseudo	is	to	be	ungraceful,	to	be	phony	is	to	be	ugly.
To	be	truthful	is	to	be	beautiful	because	truth	transforms	your	whole	being	from
the	earthly	to	the	heavenly.	It	destroys	all	that	is	poisonous	in	you	and	releases
all	that	is	worth	releasing.	It	releases	your	perfume,	your	fragrance.
Truth	 is	 like	 the	 Spring:	 all	 the	 trees	 suddenly	 start	 blooming.	 As	 you	 arrive
closer	 to	 truth	you	become	more	graceful,	more	blissful,	more	beautiful,	more
harmonious.	Then	life	is	a	dance,	a	constant	celebration.
But	grace	is	a	by-product:	it	comes	as	a	shadow	of	the	experience	of	truth.	One
cannot	attain	to	it	directly.
So	the	search	has	to	be	for	the	truth	and	then	all	else	follows.
Jesus	says:	First	seek	ye	the	kingdom	of	God	then	all	else	shall	follow	of	its	own
accord.	What	he	means	by	the	kingdom	of	God	is	exactly	what	I	mean	by	truth,
the	ultimate	truth.
(Nirupam:	unique,	incomparable)
Each	 individual	 is	 unique,	 no	 two	 individuals	 are	 ever	 alike;	 hence	 the	 most
dangerous	thing	in	life	is	to	imitate	somebody.
Imitation	means	 that	you	will	be	 trying	 to	be	 like	somebody	else,	which	 is	not
possible,	which	 is	 impossible	 in	 the	very	mature	of	 things.	So	all	 that	you	will
attain	to	is	a	phony	personality;	you	will	become	false.	Imitation	makes	people
false.
My	sannyasins	are	not	my	followers.	They	are	not	to	imitate	me,	not	at	all.	They
have	to	understand	me	and	then	find	out	for	themselves	who	they	are.	You	can
only	be	yourself	and	nobody	else.	It	is	something	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
great	 bliss,	 of	 the	 great	 benediction	 of	 God,	 that	 you	 can	 be	 only	 yourself;
nobody	 else	 can	 do	 it.	 If	 you	 don't	 do	 it	 then	 your	 place	 will	 remain	 empty,
something	in	existence	will	remain	missing.	Nobody	can	fulfill	it.
Nobody	can	replace	you,	neither	can	you	replace	anybody	else.	Each	one	has	his
unique	 contribution	 to	make.	 This	 is	 great	 dignity.	 But	 down	 the	 ages	 people
have	 been	 told	 to	 imitate:	 be	 Christians,	 be	 Buddhists,	 be	Hindus.	 They	 have
been	given	dead	formulas	to	follow.
By	becoming	a	 sannyasin	you	are	 entering	 into	 a	very	 alive	 religion.	No	dead
formulas	 are	 prescribed,	 no	 ideals	 are	 handed	 over	 to	 you,	 no	 blueprints,	 no
maps,	 are	 made	 available.	 On	 the	 contrary	 I	 take	 all	 the	 maps	 away,	 all	 the
blueprints	away,	all	the	scriptures	away,	and	leave	you	utterly	alone	because	that
is	the	only	way	to	find	yourself.
Thousands	of	years	of	rubbish	has	to	be	taken	away	from	you	so	that	your	mirror
can	be	cleaned	and	cleared	and	you	can	see	 things	as	 they	are.	And	 then	 there
arises	 great	 gratitude	 that	 God	 has	 made	 you	 absoltely	 unique.	 You	 are	 not
superior	 to	 anybody,	 neither	 are	 you	 inferior	 to	 anybody:	 you	 are	 simply
yourself.
No	 question	 of	 superiority	 or	 inferiority	 is	 relevant.	 One	 is	 just	 one's	 self	 --
incomparable;	 hence,	 how	 can	 you	 call	 somebody	 inferior	 and	 somebody
superior?
My	effort	is	to	help	you	to	accept	yourself	as	you	are	and	to	go	on	searching	and
seeking	 for	 your	 authentic	 soul.	 It	 is	 burdened	with	 so	many	 stupid	 ideas	 that
you	will	 have	 to	unburden	yourself,	 empty	yourself.	Only	by	 emptying	 all	 the
nonsense	that	have	been	given	to	you	by	others	will	you	be	able	to	have	the	first
contact,	the	first	connection,	with	your	being.
It	 is	 a	 tremendous	 freedom.	 It	 is	 freedom	 from	 time,	 freedom	 from	 mind,
freedom	from	death.	Suddenly	you	enter	into	the	dimension	of	eternity;	suddenly
you	become	contemporaries	of	God.	Less	than	that	is	not	worthwhile.
(to	Bernard)
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Sandhan.	Sandhan	means	an	enquiry.	Truth	is	not
available	ready-made,	it	is	neither	in	the	traditions	nor	in	the	scriptures.	It	has	to
be	enquired	into,	explored;	and	everyone	has	to	enquire	into	it.	I	may	have	found
it	but	I	cannot	give	it	to	you.	It	is	not	that	I	don't	want	to	give	it	to	you,	but	it	is
untransferrable,	it	simply	can't	be	given.	There	is	no	way	to	give	it.	The	moment
you	give	it,	it	becomes	a	lie.	You	have	to	discover	it	on	your	own.	Buddhas	can
show	the	way	but	you	will	have	to	travel	the	whole	journey.	It	is	a	long,	arduous
jorney	 but	 tremendously	 beautiful.	 Each	 moment	 is	 full	 of	 surprise,	 each
moment	is	so	full	of	wonder.
A	Zen	Master	was	dying.	His	disciples	had	gathered.	The	 chief	disciple	 asked
the	old	man	"	Master,	where	would	you	like	to	be	buried	--	in	your	birthplace	or
under	the	tree	where	you	became	enlightened	or	here	in	this	place	where	are	you
going	 to	 leave	your	body?"	The	Master	opened	only	one	eye,	winked,	 laughed
and	said	"Surprise	me!"	Closed	his	eyes	and	was	gone.	(laughter)	Each	moment
is	a	thrill,	a	surprise.	The	old	man	was	right;	he	said	"Surprise	me."
How	long	will	you	be	here,	Sandhan?
(tears	muffle	his	reply)
Surprise	me!	(much	laughter)	Next	time	come	for	a	longer	period.	Good	Sadhan!
Good,	Sandhan!
This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Veet	Roman.	Veet	means	going	beyond,	surpassing.
Roman	 means	 from	 Rome.	 Get	 rid	 of	 all	 small	 boundaries:	 Roman,	 Greek,
Indian,	Chinese.	Just	be	a	citizen	of	the	earth,	be	a	citizen	of	the	whole	universe.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	be	aware	of	 it,	 that	 they	don't	belong	 to	any	caste,	any
creed,	any	state,	any	nation.	They	belong	only	to	God.
Get	rid	of	the	idea	of	being	--	that	it	 the	meaning	of	your	name.	Go	beyond	it,
surpass	 it	 transend	 it.	And	Rome	is	a	very	dangerous	place	anyway.	Rome	has
killed	 Jesus	 twice.	 First	 is	 was	 the	 Roman	 governor,	 Pontious	 Pilate,	 who
ordered	Jesus	to	be	crucified	because	he	was	afraid	of	Jesus.	He	wanted	him	to
be	 destroyed.	He	 thought	 that	 he	was	 trying	 to	 sabotage	Rome,	 that	 he	was	 a
rebel,	that	all	his	spiritality	was	a	camouflage,	that	he	was	really	a	politician,	a
revolutionary.
First	Jesus	was	crucified	because	of	Roman	politics	....	And	the	irony	of	history
is	such	that	finally	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Rome	 became	 the	 citadel	 of	 Christianity.	 Then	 Jesus	 was	 killed	 again.	 He	 is
being	killed	every	day	by	the	vatican,	the	pope;	for	two	thousand	years	now,	the
murder	has	continued.	It	is	a	very	slow	murder.	In	that	way	Pontious	Pilate	was
more	kind:	within	hours	everything	was	finished.	But	the	popes	and	the	priests
and	 the	 churches	 have	 not	 been	 so	 kind,	 they	 have	 been	 killing	 Jesus	 very
slowly,	in	such	a	small	doses	that	nobody	has	become	aware	of	it.
Get	 rid	 of	 being	Roman	 so	 that	 you	 can	 be	 free	 and	 you	 can	 be	 human.	And
ultimately	even	to	be	human	is	a	bondage:	one	has	just	to	be	a	being.	Then	one
belongs	to	the	stars	and	to	the	clouds	and	to	the	trees	and	to	the	flowers.	Then
this	whole	vast	 universe	 is	 yours.	Why	become	confined?	Why	create	 a	 small
boundary	around	yourself?	Go	beyond	all	boundaries	--	that's	my	message.	Drop
all	boundaries,	become	infinite.
Think	 only	 in	 terms	 of	 infinity,	 eternity.	 Less	 than	 that	 has	 never	 satisfied
anybody	and	is	not	going	to	satisfy	anybody	--	ever.
The	 boundary	 of	 the	 body	 has	 to	 be	 dropped.	We	 are	 too	 identified	 with	 our
bodies.	We	think	that	we	are	the	body,	and	we	are	not.	This	is	the	first	falsehood
that	has	to	be	dropped.	Out	of	this	falsehood	many	other	falsehoods	arise.	If	one
is	identified	with	the	body	then	one	will	be	afraid	of	old	age,	disease,	death.
They	grow	out	if	this	identification	with	the	body.
Think	of	yourself	as	pure	consciousness.	You	are	not	the	body,	you	are	the	one
who	is	aware	of	the	body.	And	you	are	not	the	mind	either.
First	start	working	with	the	body	because	it	is	easier	to	start	with	the	gross.	Then
move	to	the	subtle:	look	at	the	mind	as	separate	from	yourself.	As	you	become
aware	 that	you	are	neither	 the	body	nor	 the	mind,	you	will	 feel	great	 freedom
arising	 in	 you,	 unhindered.	 There	 will	 be	 no	 obstruction,	 no	 walls,	 but	 in	 all
directions	open	space.	Then	the	most	subtle	barrier	has	to	be	dropped	--	that	is
that	of	feeling.	That	is	the	subtlest.	First	body,	then	mind,	then	heart.	And	to	be
free	from	the	heart	is	to	be	enlightened.
(to	Thomas)
Sargan	 means	 music,	 harmony,	 accord.	 Literally	 it	 means	 the	 seven	 notes	 of
music.	Just	as	color	has	seven	colors,	sound	has	seven	notes.	When	all	the	seven
colors	are	in	deep	harmony	white	is	born.	When	all	the	seven	notes	of	music	are
in	deep	harmony	silence	is	born,	and	silence	is	the	ultimate	in	music.
White	does	not	look	like	color,	neither	does	silence	look	like	music.	White	is	the
ultimate	color	because	it	contains	all	 the	colors	but	 in	such	harmony,	 in	such	a
synthesis,	 that	 no	 color	 shows	up;	 all	 disappear	 into	 each	other.	 In	 exactly	 the
same	way	silence	is	music,	the	ultimate	music,	but	the	harmony	is	so	deep	that
nothing	is	heard.
Zen	 people	 call	 it	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand	 clapping.	You	 cannot	 hear	 anything.
When	you	don't	hear	anything	the	ultimate	music	is	there.	You	just	need	a	little
more	sensitivity,	a	little	more	awareness,	a	little	more	meditativeness.	When	one
starts	hearing	that	which	cannot	be	heard	one	comes	to	know	that	which	cannot
be	known.
God	 is	 fundamentally	 the	 unknowable,	 the	 mysterious,	 but	 God	 too	 becomes
known	to	those	who	disappear	in	deep	harmony,	who	are	no	more	noisy	inside.
When	 all	 noise	 stops	 inside	 and	 there	 is	 absolute	 silence,	 then	God	 is	 known.
The	unknowable	becomes	known	to	those	who	disappear	in	deep	harmony,	who
are	 no	 more	 noisy	 inside.	 When	 all	 nose	 stops	 inside	 and	 there	 is	 absolute
silence,	then	God	is	known.	The	unknowable	becomes	knowable,	the	unseen	is
seen,	the	unheard	is	heard.	That	is	the	whole	goal	of	sannyas.
All	the	techniques	of	meditation	are	nothing	but	methods	to	make	you	aware	of
this	 ultimate	 music	 which	 is	 inside	 you	 and	 also	 outside	 you,	 which	 fill	 the
whole	existence.
Anand	means	 bliss.	Martin	means	 loyal	 spirit,	 obedience,	 total	 obedience,	 the
capacity	 to	 say	 yes	without	 any	 conditions.	And	 that	 is	 the	most	 fundamental
quality	of	a	sannyasin:	to	trust	so	deeply	that	the	no	simply	disappears	from	your
being.	When	trust	overwhelms	you	each	cell	of	your	body	pulsates	with	amen,
with	yes.
That	obedience	is	not	something	forced	from	the	outside.	If	it	is	forced	from	the
outside	it	makes	you	a	soldier,	if	it	arises	from	your	own	inner	core	it	makes	you
a	sannyasin.	Both	are	loyal,	both	are	obedient,	both	know	how	to	say	yes,	both
are	ready	to	sacrifice	totally	--	but	still	there	is	a	great	difference.	The	distance	is
as	much	 as	 there	 can	 be.	The	 soldier	 is	 forced,	 compelled,	 conditioned	 to	 say
yes.	The	yes	 is	 being	 squeezed	out	of	him.	He	has	 to	 say	 it	 otherwise	he	will
suffer.
The	 sannyasin	 says	 yes	 of	 his	 own	 accord.	Nobody	 is	 forcing	 him,	 nobody	 is
imposing	anything.
Nobody	 is	 threatening	 you	 with	 any	 hell;	 nobody	 is	 making	 you	 afraid	 and
nobody	is	bribing	you	with	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
rewards,	heavenly	reawards	in	 the	other	world	--	nothing	is	promised.	There	 is
no	 fear,	no	greed.	When	yes	comes	 into	you	without	 fear	and	without	greed	 it
has	a	tremendous	beauty.	That	yes	is	prayer	and	that	yes	is	blissfulness	and	that
yes	is	God.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911115
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(to	Klaus,	Osho	adds	Satyam)
It	is	always	truth	that	wins.	Untruth	promises	but	cannot	fulfill	its	promises.	Lies
are	 very	 very	 alluring	 but	 ultimately	 they	 are	 going	 to	 ditch	 you	 into	 failure,
frustration.	They	can't	lead	to	victory.	How	can	the	false	ever	be	victorious?	--	it
is	impossible.	Only	the	true	can	be.	And	without	victory	life	is	meaningless.
Victory	brings	many	flowers;	it	is	victory	that	becomes	a	spring	to	the	soul.	But
always	 remember	 that	untruth	may	win	small	battles	 --	 for	 the	moment	 it	may
seem	that	you	are	winning	with	untruth	--	but	it	never	wins	the	war.	The	ultimate
victory	is	always	of	truth.
In	 India	 they	 have	 an	 ancient	 saying,	 satyameva	 jaivate:	 Truth	 is	 always
victorious.	This	is	the	trust	of	a	sannyasin,	that	truth	is	always	victorious.	Be	true
of	yourself	and	to	the	world.	Don't	be	phony,	don't	be	pseudo,	don't	pretend.	Let
things	be	as	they	are.	Don't	hide	--	be	authentic.
(To	Rosie)
Anand	 means	 bliss,	 Rosie	 means	 two	 things.	 The	 first	 meaning	 is	 rose;	 the
second	meaning	is	a	giver	of	love,	and	both	menaings	are	beautiful.	But	neither
of	them	is	possible	without	bliss	as	your	foundation.	It	is	out	of	bliss	that	roses,
roses	 of	 the	 heart,	 grow.	 And	 it	 is	 out	 of	 roses	 that	 the	 fragrace	 of	 love	 is
released.
You	can't	give	that	which	you	don't	have.	If	the	inner	rose	has	not	yet	opened	all
your	love	is	nothing	but	words.	If	the	inner	rose	has	opened	there	is	no	need	to
say	 anything,	 no	words	 are	 needed.	Wherever	 you	 are,	with	whomsoever	 you
are,	 love	goes	on	 radiating,	 goes	on	pulsating.	 It	 becomes	 a	 constant	 dance	of
energy	around	you	--	and	it	can	open	only	if	you	provide	the	basic	needs;	that	is
blissfulness.
People	love	out	of	despair.	That	is	the	most	impossible	thing.	It	can't	happen	in
the	very	nature	of	existence,	it	is	not	possible.	People	love	because	they	are	sad.
They	seek	the	other	because	they	are	lonely,	and	love	is	possible	only	when	you
are	blissful.	Love	is	possible	only	when	you	are	not	lonely,	but	alone;	not	bored
with	yourself,	but	enchanted,	ecstatic,	with	yourself.
Meditation	helps	you	to	be	blissful;	bliss	helps	the	rose	of	the	heart	to	open;	and
then	love	comes	of	its	own	accord,	just	as	the	fragrance	comes	to	the	rose.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
In	the	right	hands	even	a	rock	becomes	a	rose;	in	the	wrong	hands	even	a	rose
becomes	a	rock	--	it	all	depends	on	you.	To	show	and	to	emphasize	this	fact,	in
Zen	monasteries	they	make	rock	gardens.	Now	before	Zen	tried	that,	nobody	had
ever	 thought	 that	 there	could	be	something	 like	a	rock	garden.	A	garden	needs
trees,	 needs	 flowers,	 needs	 lawns!	 But	 Zen	 people	 have	 done	 something
tremendously	beautiful.	They	make	rock	gardens;	no	 tree,	no	plant	 --	 just	sand
and	rock.	But	they	arrange	the	sand	and	rock	in	such	beautiful	patterns	that	the
sand	becomes	as	beautiful	 as	 any	 lawn	can	ever	be.	And	 the	 rocks	become	 so
tremendously	graceful	that	even	trees	may	feel	jealous.
In	Zen	rock	gardens	moss	grows	on	ancient	rocks	like	flowers;	and	the	sand	is	so
silent	 --	naturally,	 there	 is	nothing	 to	make	any	sound.	 It	 is	so	 innocent	and	so
cool.	When	you	sit	in	a	rock	garden	slowly	slowly	you	become	part	of	it:	sitting
silently,	doing	nothing	you	also	become	a	rock.	You	start	feeling	a	deep	affinity
with	the	rocks,	with	the	sand.
Many	mystics	have	moved	to	the	desert.	The	desert	has	been	like	a	magnet;	for	a
few	 people	 it	 has	 always	 been	 calling.	 The	 infinity	 of	 the	 desert,	 the
unchangingness,	the	eternity	of	the	desert	and	the	beauty	of	the	night	in	a	desert
is	 something	 incomparable,	 because	 the	 air	 is	 so	 clean,	 unpolluted	 --	 and	 the
stars	look	so	close	that	if	you	try	just	a	little	you	can	touch	them.	The	stars	don't
look	very	 close	 by,	 as	 if	 some	 distance	 is	 bridged.	 The	 other	world,	 the	 other
shore,	is	not	far	away:	it	is	visible.
So	remember	it:	in	the	right	hands,	with	the	right	approach,	the	desert	also	has	a
beauty	of	its	own.	In	the	wrong	hands	even	the	rose	bushes	are	nothing.	Unless
you	have	the	aesthetic	sensibility	 the	flowers	can't	do	anything.	and	one	has	 to
keep	it	as	a	goal:	the	day	a	rock	in	your	hand	turn	into	a	rose	...	the	texture	of	it,
the	coolness	of	it,	the	feel	of	it	and	you	are	enchanted,	you	fall	in	love	with	the
rock	 ....	That	day	 is	of	great	significance.	From	that	day	onwards	 there	will	be
nothing	ugly	for	you,	nothing	hard	for	you,	because	your	heart	is	soft	now.	Even
in	a	rock	it	can	find	a	sermon;	even	in	a	rock	it	can	find	a	song;	even	in	a	rock	it
can	find	some	hidden	beauty.
(adding	Anand	to	her	old	name)
Shedma	means	 a	 field,	 a	 vineyard,	 but	 is	 used	 poetically	 as	 a	 symbol	 for	 the
mother	earth.	So	your	name	will	mean	blissful	mother	earth.
And	 it	 is	 very	 significant,	 because	my	 sannyas	 is	 not	 other-wordly;	 it	 is	 very
earthly.	It	is	down	to	earth.
I	am	in	tremendous	love	with	the	earth.	I	am	not	against	this	world.	I	don't	teach
any	 renunciation;	 I	 teach	 rejoicing,	 I	 teach	 celebration.	 Celebrate	 the	 earth
because	this	earth	is	part	of	God:	to	condemn	it	is	to	condemn	God	himself.	And
most	of	 the	 religions	of	 the	world	have	condemned	 the	earth.	They	knew	only
one	way	 to	 praise	 the	 other	world,	 and	 that	was	 first	 to	 condemn	 this	 earth	 --
then	in	contrast	you	can	praise	the	other	world.	That	is	a	very	stupid	attitude.
In	 my	 vision	 you	 can	 praise	 the	 other	 world	 only	 if	 you	 praise	 this	 world,
because	 this	world	 is	 a	 steppingstone	 to	 the	 other.	 If	 this	 shore	 of	 the	 river	 is
condemned,	 the	other	 is	condemned	too,	because	they	both	belong	to	 the	same
river.	Love	this	shore	so	that	you	can	love	the	other	too.
The	 earth	 is	 a	 symbol	 of	 tremendous	 significance.	 It	 is	 the	 symbol	 of	 the
material,	the	solid,	the	existential,	the	manifest.	It	is	the	symbol	of	creation.	And
the	earth	has	evolved	highest	in	consciousness.
We	are	fortunate	 that	we	are	part	of	 this	earth.	Other	stars,	however	 they	 look,
are	dead.	In	fact	up	to	now	there	has	been	no	certainty	that	life	exists	anywhere
else;	 there	 are	 only	 assumptions.	 Assumptions	 are	 there,	 guesswork	 is	 there,
great	guesswork	--	even	scientists	are	getting	involved	in	that	guessing	and	they
say	that	there	are	at	least	fifty	thousand	planets	in	the	whole	universe	where	life
has	happened.	But	 it	 is	 all	 sheer	guesswork.	 It	 is	out	of	mathematics	 that	 they
come	to	these	conclusions;	otherwise	there	is	no	solid	ground	for	them.
Except	for	this	earth	the	whole	universe	is,	in	a	way,	dead:	the	moon	is	dead,	the
sun	is	dead,	the	stars	are	dead.	God	must	be	closer	to	this	earth	than	to	anything
else.	And	it	is	not	only	that	life	has	happened,	Moses,	Abraham,	Jesus,	buddha,
Krishna	--	people	who	have	reached	the	ultimate	peak,	who	are	godly,	as	godly
as	one	can	be.	This	earth	has	produced	such	beautiful	flowers.
Buddha	 has	 said:	 this	 very	 earth,	 the	 lotus	 paradise,	 and	 this	 very	 body,	 the
Buddha.	The	earth	represents	the	body.
Love	the	earth,	love	the	body.	And	remember:	this	very	earth,	the	lotus	paradise
....	If	we	can	learn	how	to	live	on	this	earth	beautifully,	lovingly,	blissfully,	then
there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 worried	 about	 the	 after-life;	 it	 will	 take	 care	 of	 itself
because	it	is	going	to	be	a	continuity	of	this	life.	Nothing	ever	really	dies.
Everything	continues	in	new	forms,	on	new	planes.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(Anand	Vajay:	blissful	victory)
The	only	thing	worth	being	[victorionized]	is	bliss.	Everything	else	is	just	a	toy:
you	can	play	with	it	 for	 the	moment	but	not	for	 long.	Soon	you	will	be	fed	up
with	it,	bored.	Soon	you	will	 throw	it	 into	the	corner	of	the	room	and	you	will
start	searching	for	a	new	toy.	That's	how	ordinary	humanity	lives:	moving	from
one	toy	to	another	in	the	hope	that	these	gadgets	are	going	to	give	us	bliss.	They
cannot.
Bliss	has	nothing	 to	do	with	your	outer	 achievements.	 It	 is	 a	 journey	 inwards.
The	farther	you	are	from	yourself,	 the	more	miserable	you	are.	The	closer	you
come	 to	 your	 center	 of	 being,	 the	 more	 blissful	 you	 become.	 When	 you	 are
absolutely	 centered	 in	 yourself	 tremendous	 bliss	wells	 up.	 That	 is	 the	 victory,
true	victory:	not	 the	victory	of	 the	Alexanders,	but	 the	victory	of	 the	Buddhas.
And	that's	the	whole	purpose	of	being	a	sannyasin.
(Sabine	becomes	Anand	Sugandha)
Bliss	 is	 a	 fragrance,	 it	 is	 a	 perfume.	When	you	 are	 at	 home,	 at	 ease,	 it	 arises;
whenever	you	are	relaxed,	in	rest,	it	arises.	The	only	requirement	for	bliss	is	to
be	at	rest,	to	be	at	home,	to	be	totally	relaxed.
People	are	in	misery	because	they	go	on	doing	just	the	opposite;	they	are	never
at	home,	 they	are	always	somewhere	else.	Home	 is	 in	 the	present	but	 they	are
either	in	the	past	or	in	the	future;	they	are	never	at	home.	Their	house	is	empty;	it
goes	on	gathering	dust.	It	is	almost	a	ruin	because	there	is	nobody	to	take	care	of
it.	And	people	are	miserable	because	they	are	always	tense,	always	in	a	hurry	to
reach	somewhere	--
and	there	is	nowhere	to	reach,	nowhere	to	go.	The	world	is	not	going	anywhere.
It	 is	not	a	 journey	in	fact,	but	a	dance.	It	has	no	destination	as	such;	otherwise
once	 the	 destination	 was	 achieved	 the	 world	 would	 die,	 then	 there	 would	 be
nothing	to	do.	It	is	a	playfulness;	there	is	no	destination.
People	live	with	an	idea	that	they	have	to	achieve	this,	to	achieve	that,	to	be	this,
to	be	 that.	That	keeps	 them	 tense	and	 that	very	 tension	 is	 the	cause	of	misery.
And	because	they	are	so	tense	they	cannot	relax,	they	cannot	rest;	they	toss	and
turn	even	in	their	sleep.	Even	on	their	holidays	they	become	occupied	with	some
nonsense	or	other.
Pshychologists	 are	 very	 concerned	 about	 the	 coming	 century	 because	 as
technology	is	taking	over	man's	work	the	greatest	problem	tha	psychologists	are
going	 to	 encounter	 is:	 what	 is	 man	 going	 to	 do	 without	 occupation?	 He	 will
create	 nuisance.	 He	 may	 turn	 destructive,	 murderous,	 suicidal.	 He	 may	 start
doing	 things	 he	 has	 never	 done,	 he	may	 become	 absolutely	 perverted	 because
being	restful	is	the	only	thing	he	is	almost	incapable	of.
There	is	a	possibility	in	the	future	century	--	in	just	twenty	years'	time,	many	of
us	will	be	there	to	see	it
--	that	the	people	who	are	ready	not	to	ask	for	any	employment	will	be	paid	more
that	 the	 people	 who	 ask	 for	 employment,	 because	 you	 can't	 have	 both
employment	and	pay.	You	have	to	choose.
This	is	a	strange	world	...	where	people	talk	about	being	restful	but	whatsoever
they	do	 for	 the	whole	of	 their	 lives	makes	 them	more	and	more	 restless.	They
hope	that	one	day	they	will	 retire	and	then	everything	will	be	put	right,	but	by
the	time	they	retire	they	have	accumulated	such	habits	of	restlessness	that	 they
are	at	a	complete	loss:	what	to	do	with	their	retirement?
Doctors	say	that	retired	people	die	ten	years	earlier	than	they	would	have	died	if
they	had	remained	occupied.	Not	knowing	anything	else	they	start	slipping	into
death.
Meditation	 is	 going	 to	 become	more	 and	more	 important	 in	 the	 future.	 It	 has
never	been	so	important	in	the	past	as	it's	going	to	be	in	the	future.	Sannyas	is
going	to	be	the	only	way	for	the	future	humanity	because	it	will	teach	you	how
to	be	playful,	how	to	be	restful,	how	to	be	without	any	goals	and	yet	happy.
So	 that	 is	 your	 work:	 drop	 all	 tensions,	 drop	 all	 hurring;	 drop	 all	 goals	 and
destinations.	 Drop	 the	 achieving	 mind	 and	 start	 enjoying	 the	 moment.
Whatsoever	you	are	doing	in	the	moment	or	not	doing	--
start	enjoying	it	so	that	you	can	slowly	come	back	to	the	right	place	where	really
belong,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 become	 more	 centered.	 And	 out	 of	 that	 centering	 a
perfume	arises.	That	perfume	is	bliss!
(to	Judith)
Pramila	means	the	loving	one	--	and	that	is	the	work	for	you.	Become	more	and
more	 loving.	Love	 for	 love's	 sake.	Love	unconditionally,	with	no	expectations,
with	 no	 hopes	 --	 not	 even	 unconscious	 ones	 --	 that	 it	 will	 be	 responded	 to,
returned.	 Love	 unaddressedly.	 Love	 the	 whole	 existence.	 It	 is	 one	 reality:	 the
trees	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
and	 the	 mountains	 and	 the	 people	 are	 not	 really	 different.	We	 all	 partecipate
together,	 we	 exist	 in	 a	 deep	 harmony.	 We	 go	 on	 breathing	 in	 oxigen	 and
breathing	 out	 carbon	 dioxide;	 trees	 go	 on	 breathing	 in	 carbon-dioxide	 and
breathing	out	oxygen.	Now	without	trees	we	will	not	be	able	to	exist	and	without
us	trees	will	not	be	able	to	exist.	We	are	joined	together,	we	interpenetrate.	And
that's	how	the	whole	existence	is	interlinked.
So	 love	 unaddressedly,	 the	 trees,	 the	 stars,	 the	 mountains,	 the	 people,	 the
animals.	 The	 point	 is	 not	 to	whom	 you	 are	 loving,	 the	 point	 is	 that	 you	 are
loving.	That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name:	just	a	loving	one.
That	is	your	meditation,	and	that	will	be	the	key	for	you	to	open	the	doors.	It	can
unlock	the	very	mistery	of	life	and	existence.
(Hansraj,	the	raya	swan)
The	 East	 has	 tremendous	 respect	 for	 the	 swan.	 It	 has	 become	 a	 symbol	 for
certain	spiritual	qualities.	The	most	important	quality	for	a	spiritual	person	is	to
constantly	remember	that	god	is	our	home.	The	remembrance	has	to	become	so
deep,	has	to	go	to	such	depths	that	you	need	not	remember	it	deliberately;	it	goes
on	resounding	in	you.
The	myth	is	that	the	swan	always	remembers	its	home.	In	India	the	home	of	the
wwans	is	deep	in	the	Himalayas.	Only	when	it	is	too	cold	and	the	swan	cannot
survive	there	does	it	come	to	the	plains	for	a	few	months.	But	it	never	forgets	its
home;	 it	never	becomes	entangled	here.	 It	will	 live	on	 the	 lakes	and	 the	ponds
and	the	rivers	for	those	three	or	four	months	when	there	is	too	much	snow	and
life	 is	 impossible	and	 the	 lake	from	where	 the	swans	come	is	 frozen.	But	after
three	or	four	months,	suddenly	one	day	they	start	moving	back	to	the	Himalayas,
as	if	a	deep	remembrance	goes	on	through	them,	like	an	undercurrent.	Not	only
do	they	remember	the	place,	they	remember	the	exact	date	when	they	have	to	go
back.	Suddenly,	all	over	India,	swans	will	start	moving	towards	the	Himalayas.
The	swans	are	back	exactly	in	time	for	the	lake	to	be	melting	again	and	things
are	getting	warmer.
Because	of	this	quality	the	swan	has	become	symbolic	of	the	religious	man.	He
has	to	remember	that	we	are	visitors	here,	guests	at	the	most.	We	come	from	a
totally	different	world	and	we	should	not	forget	about	it.
Live	in	the	world	byt	go	on	remembering	god	--	that's	your	work.	Live	life	in	its
totality	but	still	never	forget	for	a	single	moment	that	god	is	our	home,	that	we
have	to	go	one	day,	and	that	the	day	is	not	far	off.
And	when	the	day	comes	don't	cling.	When	death	comes	don't	cling	to	the	world.
Go	joyously,	dancingly,	because	death	in	nothing	but	a	calling	of	god.	You	have
been	called	home.	It	is	your	invitation,	it	is	not	an	enemy.
Death	is	a	friend	--	as	much	a	friend	as	life	is,	because	both	are	given	to	us	from
the	same	source.	God	gives	us	life	and	god	gives	us	death.
(to	Dick)
Devasharan	 means	 at	 the	 feet	 of	 God.	 That's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about:	 a
surrender,	a	deep,	total	surrender,	to	the	feet	of	God.
Those	feet	are	not	visible.	You	cannot	find	them,	you	cannot	touch	them,	but	you
can	still	surrender	to	them.	The	more	you	surrender,	the	more	you	become	aware
that	they	are	everywhere.	When	the	surrender	is	really	total	you	will	find	that	the
whole	existence	is	nothing	but	 the	feet	of	God.	And	in	that	surrender	is	 joy,	 in
that	let-go	is	beauty.	All	fight	disappears,	and	with	all	fight	disappearing	the	ego
dies.
The	 ego	 can	 exist	 only	 if	 you	 fight.	 Surrender	 is	 poison	 to	 the	 ego;	 hence	 the
emphasis	on	surrender.
Fight	is	food;	surrender	is	poison.	And	the	ego	has	to	die,	only	then	can	you	be
born.	In	one	sheath	there	can't	be	two	swords.	Either	you	can	live	inside	yourself
or	the	ego	does.	If	the	ego	lives	you	have	to	go	underground	lives,	and	the	egos
are	sitting	on	the	throne.	In	surrender	the	ego	disappears	and	your	underground
self	starts	surfacing	back	to	its	natural	status,	its	natural	state.
Devasharan	means	that	now	you	are	not	more	important,	only	God	is	important;
that	now	your	life	is	only	to	be	an	instrument	of	God,	a	bamboo	flute	on	his	lips.
You	just	have	to	be	hollow	and	let	him	sing	the	song	if	he	wants.	Or	if	he	does
not	want,	then	silence	is	as	beautiful	as	the	song.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911125
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(to	five-and-half-year-old	Sunny)
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Nartan.	Nartan	means	dance,	and	that	you	have
to	do	as	much	as	you	can:	dance	--	dance	till	you	drop!
(to	six-year-old	Ocean)
Come	here.	Sit	and	close	your	eyes.
(He	does,	but	then	begins	to	peek)
Don't	cheat!	(laughter)
Come	close	 to	me.	Now	you	can	open	your	eyes.	Look	at	me!	You	have	been
really	cheating	many	times!
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Prem	 Ocean.	 Prem	 means	 love	 and	 ocean	 means
unbounded	sea.
Anand	means	bliss.	Frederique	means	peace.
These	 both	 have	 to	 be	 attained	 together.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 attain	 one,	 separate
from	the	other	--	very	cheap,	simple,	but	not	of	any	significance.	Peace	without
bliss	is	dead,	and	bliss	without	peace	is	mad.
When	both	are	attained	together	--	the	synthesis,	the	symphony	of	the	two	when
one	is	as	mad	as	one	should	be	and	as	peaceful	as	it	is	possible	to	be,	that	is	the
point	where	sanity	and	insanity	are	transcended,	where	ingnorance	and	wisdom,
both,	are	 transcended,	where	 life	and	death,	both,	 are	 transcended.	But	 it	 is	 an
ardous	task.
In	 the	past	many	people	have	 tried	 to	be	peaceful:	 those	were	 the	monks.	The
monasteries	 all	 over	 the	world	were	 full	 of	 such	 people.	 But	 they	were	 dead;
they	 could	not	 laugh,	 they	 could	not	 love,	 they	 could	not	 sing,	 they	 could	not
dance.	 They	 attained	 peace	 at	 the	 cost	 of	 their	 life;	 they	 became	 utterly	 cold.
Their	peace	was	not	a	cool	phenomenon,	it	was	ice-cold;	it	was	the	peace	of	the
cemetery.
And	there	have	been	people	who	tried	to	attain	to	bliss:	painters,	poets,	dancers,
musicians	 --	 all	 kinds	 of	 artists	 --	 who	 lived	 in	 the	 world	 as	 passionately	 as
possible.	 They	 were	 alive	 but	 very	 feverish.	 They	 were	 passionate,	 but	 the
passion	was	such	a	fire	that	it	only	burned	them.	Many	artists,	many	poets,	went
mad;	many	have	committed	suicide	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	had	no	idea
how	to	be	peaceful.	Their	bliss	shattered	them,	they	could	not	contain	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 a	 totally	 different	 person	 from	 these	 two.	 He	 has	 to
become	the	beginning	of	a	new	man:	peaceful	at	 the	very	core	of	his	being;	at
the	 center,	 peaceful,	 at	 the	 circumpherence,	 blissful.	 This	 is	 the	 ultimate
harmony.	This	harmony	can	be	called	God,	enlightenment,	nirvana,	or	any	name
that	you	want	to	give	to	it:	truth,	beauty,	liberation.
(to	Trish)
My	understanding	 is	 that	 it	 is	only	 through	meditation	 that	one	becomes	well-
born.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	family,	it	as	nothing	to	do	with	the	blood.	You
cannot	 find	 any	 difference	 between	 the	 blood	 of	 an	 aristocrat	 and	 that	 of	 a
beggar.	There	is	no	aristocratic	blood	as	such;	that	is	all	rubish	and	nonsense.
A	 man	 certainly	 becomes	 an	 aristocrat	 when	 he	 moves	 into	 the	 world	 of
meditation	because	now	he	is	no	more	of	the	crowd.	He	is	no	more	part	of	the
mob	and	the	mob	psychology:	he	has	gone	beyond.	And	that	is	really	becoming
noble.
Remember:	meditation	 gives	 you	 a	 new	 birth,	 you	 become	 twice	 born,	 and	 it
gives	you	a	new	being	--
very	individual,	unique.	It	gives	you	the	quality	of	the	chosen	few:	a	Buddha,	a
Jesus,	 a	Pythagoras.	These	people	 are	noble,	 these	people	 are	well-born;	 these
people	are	real	aristocrats.	Become	a	real	aristocrat.
The	way	of	transformation	is	meditation.
(Saritam:	the	river)
Life	is	a	river.	It	does	not	something	static;	it	is	not	a	thing	at	all,	but	a	process.
Existence	 does	 not	 consist	 of	 things	 but	 of	 events.	 To	 understand	 it	 is	 of
tremendous	value	because	then	you	stop	clinging.
When	everything	is	changing	what	is	the	point	of	clinging?	By	clinging	we	can
only	create	frustration.
When	 everything	 is	 bound	 to	 change	 one	 accepts	 it	 joyously,	 and	 one	moves
with	life	because	not	to	move	is	to	be	dead.	Then	remains	is	a	kind	of	let-go.
That	 is	 really	 the	 way	 of	 becoming	 free	 of	 all	 attachment,	 all	 greed,	 all
possessiviness.	And	 the	man	who	 is	 free	 of	 these	 poisons	 is	 ready	 to	 become
enlightened!
(Wouter	becomes	Punitan,	the	pure	one)
Purity	is	not	something	that	you	have	to	practive,	it	is	something	that	is	already
at	the	very	core	of	your	being.	But	we	have	never	allowed	it	to	surface;	on	the
contrary,	 we	 have	 been	 repressing	 it.	 Our	 society	 teaches	 us	 repression.	 And
when	you	repress	you	become	divided,	you	become	two,	you	become	split;	then
your	whole	life	is	going	to	be	just	a	conflict,	an	inner	war,	a	civil	war.	And	the
whole	war	is	absolutely	absurd	because	you	are	fighting	with	yourself.	It	is	self-
destructive.
By	purity	I	mean	innocence	--	not	 the	purity	of	 the	moralists,	not	 the	purity	of
the	puritans,	but	just	the	simplicity,	the	innocence,	of	a	child.	The	child	remains
pure	 till	 we	 force	 him,	 till	 we	 initiate	 him	 into	 our	 so-called	 society,	 culture,
education.
One	of	 the	 strangest	 things	 is	 that	 if	 you	 try	 to	 remember	your	 childhood	you
cannot	 go	 beyond	 the	 age	 of	 four,	 or	 at	 the	most	 the	 age	 of	 three.	 You	 have
completely	 forgotten	 all	 that	 happened	 in	 those	 three	 or	 four	 years.	You	were
alive	--	more	alive	than	you	will	ever	be;	you	were	curious	--	more	curious	than
you	will	ever	be;	you	lived	intensely	--	more	intensely	 than	you	will	ever	 live.
But	what	happened?	Why	can't	you	 remember	 it?	The	only	 reason	 is	 that	 they
left	 no	 trace	 behind.	After	 those	 four	 years	 you	 became	 cunning,	 you	 became
clever:	you	became	a	mind.	Since	then	the	mind	has	had	memory.	Before	those
days,	 before	 the	mind	 started,	 you	 were	 a	 clean	 slate,	 a	 tabula	 rasa	 --	 that	 is
purity.
One	has	to	become	a	child	again.	The	mind	is	impurity.	If	you	can	attain	to	no-
mind	you	will	be	pure	again.	Purity	is	inside,	the	mind	is	blocking	it;	it	does	not
allow	it	to	be	expressed.	It	distorts	is,	corrupts	it,	poisons	it.	Hence	the	emphasis
of	all	the	mystics	on	meditation:	meditation	simply	means	a	way	of	putting	the
mind	aside,	nothing	less,	nothing	more	simply	that.	Once	the	mind	is	put	aside
your	innocence	starts	blossoming.
And	 there	are	 such	 flowers	and	 such	 fragrance	 ...	which	are	not	of	 this	world,
which	belong	to	the	beyond.
(to	Inge)
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
In	all	the	western	languages	the	word	"emptiness"	has	a	very	negative	quality.	It
is	not	so	in	the	East:	Shunyam	is	absolutely	positive	--	empty,	yet	positive.	One
wonders	how	emptiness	can	be	positive.
The	East	has	discovered	that	when	you	are	utterly	empty	of	everything	you	are
full	of	emptiness;	emptiness	 itself	 fills	you.	So	you	are	not	 in	a	negative	state:
you	 are	 overfull	 --	 overfull	 with	 silence,	 overfull	 with	 purity,	 innocence,
stillness,	overfull	with	nobodiness.	And	that	is	the	basic	requirement	for	God	to
happen	 to	you.	When	you	are	utterly	 empty	of	 the	world	you	become	open	 to
God.	Otherwise	our	minds	are	so	cluttered	with	unnecessary	furniture	...	what	to
say	about	God?	--	even	the	devil	cannot	enter!
There	is	no	place	for	him.
In	the	West	it	has	a	very	wrong	connotation.	They	say	"The	empty	mind	is	the
devil's	workshop".	 It	 is	 absolutely	wrong:	 the	 empty	mind	 is	god's	 workshop.
But	in	the	West,	the	person	who	is	not	occupied	with	something	is	called	empty-
minded;	he	is	not	empty-minded.	In	fact	he	is	more	full	of	mind	than	the	person
who	 is	 occupied	 with	 something.	 The	 proverb	 has	 arisen	 to	 condemn	 his
laziness.
But	 the	East	has	known	a	 totally	different	kind	of	emptiness:	 the	emptiness	of
the	Buddhas.	They	are	utterly	empty.	If	you	go	inside	you	will	not	find	anybody
there.	You	can	go	from	one	corner	to	another,	you	can	seek	and	search	inside	a
Buddha	 all	 over	 the	place,	 you	will	 not	 come	 across	 anybody:	 just	 a	 pure	 sky
unclouded.	But	in	that	pure	sky	is	the	secret	of	the	whole	of	life.	That	purity,	that
silence,	is	the	door	to	God.
Hence	in	the	East	we	have	called	Buddhas,	gods	...	not	less	than	that.	A	Buddha
is	a	god	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	has	disappeared.	He	has	no	ego	any	more.
So	be	empty	of	the	ego,	be	empty	of	the	mind,	and	become	a	workshop	of	God.
That's	what	sannyas	 is	all	about:	becoming	empty	on	 the	one	hand	so	 that	you
can	become	full	on	the	other.
(to	Bernard)
Purnam	means	the	full.	It	is	the	other	side	of	emptiness.	Fullness	and	emptiness
are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	But	first	one	has	to	pass	through	emptiness,	then
only	can	we	come	to	fullness.	Why	has	one	to	pass	first	 through	emptiness?	--
because	we	have	a	wrong	idea	that	we	are	already	full.	We	are	full	of	rubbish,
certainly,	 but	 that	 is	 not	 our	 fullness,	 not	 the	 fullness	 of	 being;	 it	 is	 not	 a
plenitude	of	being.
Thoughts,	desires,	ideologies,	prejudices,	religions,	philosophies	--	we	are	full	of
all	this,	which	is	sheer	nonsense.	It	is	nonsense	because	it	pretends	to	know,	and
it	 knows	 nothing.	 But	 we	 go	 on	 accumulating	 more	 and	 more	 information.
Slowly	slowly	we	think	"This	is	foolish.	This	is	not	foolish".
We	have	to	empty	ourselves	of	all	 this	in	toto.	The	moment	we	have	done	that
we	are	ready	and	immediately	the	whole	sky	drops	into	our	being.	The	whole	of
heaven	 becomes	 loose.	 Suddenly	we	 are	 transported	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time	we
know	what	fullness	is.	Then	we	are	full	of	love	and	full	of	joy	and	full	of	god.
That	is	purnam:	to	be	full	of	god!	That	fullness	knows	no	beginning,	no	end;	it	is
eternal,	it	is	timeless.
Nothing	can	destroy	it.	Once	you	have	achieved	it	you	have	achieved	something
before	which	death	is	impotent.
(Divipan,	the	divine	one)
The	word	 "divyam"	 and	 the	word	 "divine"	 come	 from	 the	 same	Sanskrit	 root.
They	 are	 not	 different,	 they	 come	 from	 div.	 Also	 from	 div	 come	 the	 English
word	"day"	and	the	Sanskrit	word	divas	that	means	day.	Div	means	light,	divyam
means	full	of	light	...	as	if	the	inner	sun	has	risen	and	the	darkness	has	dissipated.
Ordinarily	the	inside	is	completely	dark,	entirely	dark;	but	the	darkness	contains
the	morn,	the	dawn.	It	is	the	womb	out	of	which	the	sun	rises.	So	don't	be	against
it,	because	 it	 is	 like	a	seed	out	of	which	 the	 flower	of	 light	 is	going	 to	bloom.
The	real	man	of	understanding	loves	darkness	as	much	as	light,	because	they	are
not	 separate.	 He	 loves	 the	 devil	 as	 much	 as	 the	 divine,	 because	 they	 are	 not
separate.	The	word
"devil"	also	comes	from	the	same	root	div:	a	fallen	divinity	--	that	is	the	meaning
of	 the	 devil.	 He	 was	 an	 angel	 and	 because	 he	 disobeyed,	 he	 fell	 from	 God's
grace.	But	even	though	he	has	fallen	he	is	divine.
That	 is	 the	situation	of	man.	Man	can	be	 in	deep	darkness,	man	can	go	astray;
that	 is	 his	 freedom.	Man	 can	 come	 back	 home;	 the	 home	 is	 his.	 If	 he	 knocks
back	home,	the	doors	will	be	open	for	him.	And	he	will	be	received	with	great
joy	because	he	had	gone	astray	and	he	has	come	back.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Jesus's	parable	of	the	prodigal	son.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	blessed	one	is	one	who	is	a	blessing	to	existence.	Unless	one	is	a	blessing	to
existence	one	can't	be	blessed.	We	have	to	deserve	it,	we	have	to	be	worthy	of	it.
And	the	only	way	to	deserve	it	is	to	lose	yourself	in	love	with	existence.
Religion	is	nothing	but	a	love	affair	with	existence.	It	is	not	ritual.	It	has	nothing
to	do	with	churches	and	temples	and	mosques,	and	nothing	to	do	with	the	Vedas
and	 the	 Koran	 and	 the	 Bible.	 It	 has	 a	 totally	 different	 meaning:	 you	 become
married	 to	 existence.	 You	 are	 in	 love	 with	 the	 stars	 and	 the	 trees	 and	 the
mountains	and	the	clouds,	because	these	are	the	different	spaces	of	God.	You	are
in	love	with	people	and	animals	--	you	are	simply	in	love	with	all	that	is!
If	 that	 is	 possible	 great	 benediction	 happens,	 great	 showering	 of	 joy	 from	 the
beyond	--	you	are	bathed	in	bliss.	That	is	the	meaning	of	manglam	--	one	who	is
bathed	in	bliss.
([Ratuam]:	the	diamond)
The	diamond	is	within	and	we	are	searching	for	it	without.	It	is	part	of	our	being
but	we	 are	 looking	 everywhere	 else	 except	 there;	 hence	 the	misery,	 hence	 the
frustration,	hence	the	despair.
Look	 within,	 look	 into	 yourself,	 and	 the	 kingdom	 of	 God	 is	 yours.	We	 have
never	lost	it,	not	even	for	a	single	moment.	In	fact	even	if	we	want	to	lose	it	we
cannot,	 it	 is	 our	 very	 being.	 But	 we	 have	 become	 beggars	 through	 our	 own
decision,	through	our	own	stupidity.	We	have	forgotten	how	to	read	the	language
of	the	inner	scripture,	and	we	are	searching	in	the	Vedas	and	the	Korans,	and	the
Bibles	....	We	will	become	great	sholars,	but	not	rich;	we	will	remain	as	poor	as
ever.	Richness	 comes	only	 in	one	way,	 and	 that	 is	 by	going	 in,	 because	 is	 the
mine,	the	treasure,	the	inexhaustible	treasure.
Turn	in,	tune	in,	and	then	there	is	great	joy	--	unending.	Life	is	significant	only
then,	never	before.	Life	is	life	only	then,	never	before.
(Swami	Prem	Satyaparthy:	love,	a	seeker	of	truth)
Logic	 is	not	 the	way	 to	seek	 truth,	 love	 is	 the	way	 to	seek	 truth.	Many	people
seek	 but	 very	 few	 find,	 because	many	 seek	 through	 logic,	 through	mind,	 and
very	few	seek	through	love	and	through	the	heart.	But	except	through	the	heart
there	is	no	way	to	God.	The	head	is	as	far	away	as	one	can	be.	The	head	and	God
never	meet.	It	has	never	happened	before	and	it	is	not	going	to	happen	ever;	it	is
impossible.	 But	 the	 heart	 and	God	 are	 always	 in	 communion.	 They	 are	 never
separate;	they	are	always	meeting,	each	moment.	It	is	God	who	is	beating	in	the
heart.
So	move	more	and	more	towards	the	heart	and	God	is	not	far	away.	God	has	to
be	found,	otherwise	life	is	futile.	Make	it	a	point	to	find	God	in	this	life,	not	in
the	after-life,	because	if	we	cannot	find	him	right	now	there	is	no	hope	of	finding
him	after	death,	because	we	will	be	the	same.	We	have	been	repeating	the	same
stupid	 game	 again	 and	 again.	Each	 time	we	 are	 born	we	go	 through	 the	 same
vicious	circle:	again	we	die	and	the	same	thing	starts	moving.	Hence	Buddha	has
called	this	world	a	wheel.
Jump	out	of	the	wheel:	it	is	time	--	the	right	time	--	and	it	is	right	to.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911135
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(to	Alan)
Sahajam	means	spontaneity	--	and	that's	exactly	the	definition	of	sannyas.	To	be
spontaneous	is	to	be	a	sannyasin.	To	be	spontaneous	means	to	be	responsible	to
the	present.
People	 are	 dominated	 by	 the	 past.	 Life	 goes	 on	 changing	 every	 moment	 and
mind	 remains	 clinging	 to	 the	 past.	 There	 is	 a	 gap	 between	 the	mind	 and	 life.
Anything	that	comes	out	of	the	mind	is	never	going	to	be	a	real	response;	it	 is
only	 reaction.	And	 it	 always	 falls	 short,	 it	 can't	 reach	 the	 target,	 it	 either	 goes
above	or	goes	below	the	past,	which	knows	nothing	of	the	present,	or	the	arrow
is	directed	by	the	future,	which	knows	nothing	of	the	present.
To	be	spontaneous	means	to	live	moment	to	moment,	to	respond	to	that	which	is,
with	 no	 prejudice,	with	 no	mind,	with	 no	 past,	 no	 future,	with	 no	 time	 at	 all.
Then	 suddenly	 there	 is	 a	meeting	 a	meeting	 between	 you	 and	 existence.	 That
meeting	is	bliss,	that	meeting	is	God.
(to	Vincent)
Anand	means	bliss	--	not	pleasure,	not	happiness,	not	even	joy.	Bliss	is	a	totally
different	phenomenon.
It	is	not	pleasure,	because	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	body.	It	is	not	happiness;
happiness	 is	 of	 the	mind	 and	 very	momentary.	 It	 is	 just	 comes	 and	 goes	 and
keeps	 you	 in	 a	 turmoil.	You	 can	 never	 be	 secure,	 you	 can	 never	 trust	 it;	 it	 is
bound	to	betray	you.	That	is	its	very	nature.
Mind	 is	 in	 flux,	 and	 anything	 that	 happens	 through	 the	mind	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a
flux.	 It	 can't	 be	 eternal;	 it	 can	 only	 be	 momentary,	 within	 time.	 Hence	 every
happiness	brings	unhappiness.	It	is	like	day	and	night,	summer	and	winter.	The
wheel	goes	on	moving:	again	the	day	comes	and	the	night	follows	and	the	day
comes	and	the	night	follows.
Bliss	is	not	even	joy,	because	joy	is	of	the	heart.	Joy	is	far	superior	to	pleasure,
to	happiness.	It	is	far	more	delicate,	more	soft,	more	like	flowerlike.	If	one	has	to
choose	 between	 the	 three	 then	 one	 should	 choose	 joy.	 It	 is	 a	 subtle	 harmony.
When	 your	 body,	 your	 mind	 and	 your	 heart	 are	 functioning	 together	 in	 deep
accord,	 joy	 arises.	 In	 joy	 something	 is	 contributed	 by	 the	 body,	 something	 is
contributed	 by	 the	 mind,	 but	 the	 major	 part	 is	 contributed	 by	 the	 heart.	 Joy
contains	something	of	pleasure,	something	if	happiness	and	something	more.
Bliss	is	beyond	all	three;	it	is	of	the	spirit.	To	experience	it	one	has	to	disidentify
oneself	from	body,	mind	and	heart.	It	is	eternal.	Once	it	comes	it	is	forever.	Then
one	can	trust	and	relax	and	rest.	It	can't	be	stolen,	it	can't	be	taken	away,	it	can't
be	 burned.	 Even	 death	 is	 impotent	 as	 far	 as	 bliss	 is	 concerned.	 One	who	 has
known	bliss	has	known	something	deathless.
Joy	dies	very	soon.	It	is	like	a	roseflower,	very	delicate.	It	can	be	crushed	very
easily;	anybody	can	pluck	it.	Just	hit	it	with	a	stone	and	it	is	gone.	To	depend	on
joy	 is	 to	 live	 in	a	glasshouse;	anybody	can	 throw	a	stone	and	 the	whole	house
will	collapse.
That's	why	you	see	women	suffering	so	much.	Men	don't	suffer	so	much	because
men	 depend	 on	 pleasure	 --	 which	 is	 gross,	 bodily,	 tangible,	 can	 even	 be
purchased	in	the	marketplace	....	Or	at	the	most	men	depend	on	happiness,	which
is	of	the	mind	--	and	still	has	a	certain	strengh,	certain	solidity.	But	the	woman
depends	on	joy;	it	is	of	the	heart	--	hence	her	joy	can	be	crushed	very	easily:	a
single	gesture,	a	single	word,	is	enough.
And	because	they	depend	on	different	dimensions	communication	is	impossible.
The	man	cannot	understand.	He	has	not	done	anything	and	the	woman	is	crying
and	she	is	all	in	tears,	and	the	man	thinks	"Is	she	crazy	or	something?	--	because
I	have	not	said	anything,	I	have	not	done	anything."	He	may	have	uttered	just	a
wrong	word,	made	a	wrong	gesture;	he	may	not	have	even	uttered	a	word,	he
may	have	just	remained	silent,	but	silent	in	a	way	that	hurts	the	woman's	heart.
Men	can	understand	body	and	mind	very	well.	With	the	heart	he	moves	into	an
alien	territory.	The	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
woman	understand	the	heart,	hence	she	can	become	very	joyful.	But	she	goes	in
ups	and	downs:	sometimes	she	is	ecstatic,	so	joyful	that	you	cannot	believe	she
will	ever	weep	and	cry	and	scream	--	and	the	next	moment	she	is	screaming	and
crying	and	 throwing	 things.	 It	 seems	 impossible	how	she	manages	 to	move	so
quickly	from	one	point	to	another.
The	same	is	the	case	with	small	children:	they	also	live	in	the	heart,	hence	one
moment	 they	are	angry,	another	moment	 they	are	so	 loving.	One	moment	 they
are	 in	 rage;	 another	moment	 they	 are	 hugging	 and	 kissing	 you	 and	 they're	 all
love,	all	beautiful	and	sweet.	But	the	heart	has	that	problem:	it	is	fragile.
The	 search	 is	 to	 find	 something	which	 is	 eternal:	 that	 is	 bliss	 and	 the	way	 is
meditation.	Meditation	takes	you	beyond	the	body-mind-heart	complex,	because
meditation	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 disidentification	 from	 all	 that	 which	 you	 have
become	 identified:	 I	 am	 not	 the	 body	 nor	 the	 mind	 nor	 the	 heart.	When	 this
understanding	arises	in	you	meditation	has	flowered.	In	that	flowering	is	bliss.
(to	Pragitam)
Life	can	be	lived	in	tears	--	many	have	chosen	that	way	to	live.	Life	can	also	be
lived	as	laughter	--	very	few	choose	that.	It	is	strange;	one	would	have	thought
that	many	would	choose	life	to	be	a	song,	not	a	sadness,	a	bliss,	not	a	misery	--
but	that's	not	the	case.	In	reality	millions	of	people	choose	misery,	tears,	anxiety,
anguish,	as	their	lifestyle.	They	invest	their	whole	energy	in	creating	hell	around
themselves.
From	the	outside	it	looks	stupid,	but	there	is	a	reason	for	it.	The	reason	is	that	the
more	 miserable	 you	 are,	 the	more	 you	 are.	 The	 more	 miserable	 you	 are,	 the
bigger	your	ego	becomes.	The	ego	feeds	on	misery,	on	negativity,	on	darkness	--
that	is	its	food	and	nourishment.	If	you	choose	to	be	blissful,	if	you	choose	to	be
a	song,	you	will	have	to	risk	one	thing,	only	one	thing:	the	ego	--	because	that	is
the	 only	 discordant	 note	 in	 your	 being.	You	will	 have	 to	 drop	 the	 idea	 that	 "I
am."	You	will	have	to	learn	a	totally	different	language
--	 that	 "God	 is	 and	 I	 am	 not."	 I	 and	 God	 cannot	 exists	 together.	 That	 is	 an
impossibility.	Either	I	can	exist	or	God.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	that	now	you	are	choosing	God	instead	of	I.	This	is	a
new	way	of	life	and	a	new	vision.	And	great	is	the	bliss	of	the	person	who	can
gather	the	courage	of	the	ego	because	with	that	dropping	all	darkness	disappears,
with	 that	 dropping	 all	 is	 light,	 because	 your	 eyes	 become	 open.	You	 attain	 to
tremendous	sensitivity,	awareness.	That	is	the	moment	when	you	hear	the	song,
the	divine	song,	the	SONG	OF	SOLOMON.
Very	 few	 people	 have	 understood	 the	 SONG	 OF	 SOLOMON.	 Jews	 and
Christians	 both	 feel	 a	 little	 embarrassed	 whenever	 the	 question	 of	 Solomon's
song	arises.	It	looks	as	if	it	is	something	that	should	not	be	in	the	Bible.	In	fact	it
is	the	real	Bible.	Everything	else	can	be	dropped;	just	Solomon's	song	is	enough.
All	else	is	secondary.	But	the	problem	with	Christians	and	Jews	is	that	Solomons
song	talks	of	love,	passionate	love,	earthly	love.	It	talks	not	in	terms	of	the	other
world,	 but	 in	 terms	 of	 this	 world.	He	must	 have	 been	 a	 real	 Buddha	 --	 not	 a
pseudo,	phony	saint	or	mahatma.
I	 have	 tremendous	 respect	 for	 Solomon	 and	 his	 song,	 because	 I	 want	 my
sannyasins	 to	 live	 his	 song	 as	 their	 life	 --	 a	 life	 of	 intense	 love,	 of	 passionate
cheerfulness,	of	ecstasy;	not	a	life	of	renunciation	but	a	life	of	rejoicing.
(to	Sangitam)
Music	 is	 a	 simbol	 of	 harmony,	 accord.	Man	 ordinarily	 lives	 a	 very	 unmusical
life:	a	life	of	conflict,	a	life	of	discord.	Man	is	not	one	but	many.	Man	is	a	crowd
and	 there	 is	 constant	 fight	 inside;	 day	 in,	 day	 out,	 the	 fight	 continues.	One	 is
fighting	 with	 oneself	 violently.	 It	 is	 very	 destructive,	 but	 that's	 how	 we	 are
brought	up	to	become	soldiers,	not	sannyasins.
A	 soldier	 has	 to	 live	 continuously	 is	 such	 a	 tension	 and	 anguish	 that	 he	 can
sacrifice	life	any	moment	for	any	stupid	excuse.	In	fact	sacrifing	life	feels	a	great
relief	for	the	soldier.
A	sannyasin	 is	a	 totally	different	world.	He	has	 to	 live	 life	with	such	abandon,
with	 such	 ecstasy,	 with	 such	music,	 that	 each	moment	 becomes	 a	moment	 of
paradise.	Paradise	is	not	there	somewhere	at	the	end	of	the	journey,	it	is	spread
all	over	the	way.	You	have	to	transform	each	moment	of	your	life	into	paradise
only	then	you	can	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	God.
It	 is	not	possible	 to	 live	your	whole	 life	 in	misery,	 then	suddenly	one	day	you
knock	on	the	doors	of	God
....	Jesus	says:	Knock	and	the	doors	shall	be	opened	....	True,	but	where	will	you
find	the	doors?	Unless	you	are	tremendously	blissful	you	will	not	find	the	doors.
They	are	found	only	in	great	joy,	they	are	found	only	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
in	 ecstasy.	When	you	 are	dancing	 to	 such	 intensity	 that	 the	dancer	 has	melted
into	it,	when	you	are	singing	with	such	passion	that	the	singer	is	no	more	there,
only	the	song	--	that	is	the	moment	when	you	find	the	door.	Then	certainly	Jesus
is	right:	Knock	and	the	door	shall	be	opened.	In	fact	there	is	no	need	to	knock,
the	doors	are	always	open.	God	is	always	standing	there	waiting	to	welcome	you
home.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911145
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[Note:	There	is	no	transcript	for	November	14th;	probably	there	was	no	darshan
that	evening]
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911155
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Love	 is	 the	 only	 virtue	 for	me,	 the	 only	 religion,	 the	 only	morality.	 If	 love	 is
missing	then	one	can	have	all	the	morality	and	still	one	will	be	dead;	still,	deep
down	one	will	be	 immoral.	Without	 love	one	can	have	all	 the	virtues	but	 they
will	be	superficial.	They	will	be	just	like	a	painted	smile,	a	mask	--	maybe	good
to	become	respectable,	but	God	cannot	be	deceived	in	such	superficial	ways.	In
fact	he	cannot	be	deceived	in	any	way.	He	looks	at	the	very	center	of	your	being,
not	at	your	circumference.	He	looks	not	at	what	you	do	but	what	you	are.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	transforms	your	being,	and	then	your	acts	are	transformed	automatically.	a
loving	person	cannot	by	 immoral,	he	cannot	hurt	anybody,	he	cannot	cheat,	he
cannot	lie.	It	is	impossible	for	him	to	be	cruel.
Compassion	will	be	simply	his	way	of	life.
The	priests	and	 the	politicians	are	not	 interested	 in	 love;	 they	are	 interested	 in
imposing	a	 certain	 character	on	you.	They	don't	want	 real	 human	beings,	 they
want	phony	people.	Phony	people	are	not	dangerous	to	the	establishment.	They
are	 so	 phony	 --	 how	 can	 they	 be	 dangerous?	 They	 have	 no	 fire	 in	 them,	 no
passion	for	life,	no	passion	for	truth.
Without	love	one	never	knows	what	life	is	--	and	to	know	life	in	its	total	beauty
is	to	live	beautifully,	gracefully.	That	is	virtue.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	November	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7911165
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy	typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
There	are	two	sources	of	knowing;	one	is	 logic,	another	is	 love.	Through	logic
you	 arrive	 at	 knowledge;	 through	 love	you	 arrive	 at	wisdom.	Knowledge	only
gives	 you	 superficial	 information;	wisdom	gives	 you	 a	 deep,	 profound	 insight
into	 things.	Knowledge	 is	only	 accumulation.	One	can	accumulate	 as	much	as
one	 wants:	 the	 human	 brain	 is	 such	 a	 biocomputer	 that	 it	 can	 contain	 all	 the
libraries	of	the	world.	But	still,	you	remain	the	same.	It	is	like	a	donkey	carrying
the	 load	 of	 many	 scriptures.	 That's	 what	 scholars	 are:	 donkeys	 loaded	 with
scriptures.	 They	 know	 much	 but	 they	 don't	 know	 themselves.	 All	 their
knowledge	is	borrowed.
Love	 gives	 you	 true	 knowledge.	 It	 makes	 your	 life	 a	 scripture.	 It	 makes	 you
awakened	to	the	beauty	of	existence,	to	the	tremendous	grace	of	life	and	all	that
it	contains,	to	the	presence	of	God.	Logical	cannot	do	it,	and	those	who	depend
on	knowledge	remain	poor.
Depend	on	love	and	all	the	riches	of	the	world	are	yours.	Depend	on	love	and	the
kingdom	of	God	is	yours.	Knowledge	becomes	a	bondage,	wisdom	is	liberation.
Knowledge	is	very	noisy,	wisdom	is	absolutely	silent.	It	knows,	but	it	knows	in	a
silent	way;	 it	does	not	brag.	Knowledge	brags	because	it	 is	nothing	but	an	ego
trip.	 Wisdom	 cannot	 brag	 because	 before	 wisdom	 happens	 the	 ego	 has	 to
disappear.
Exactly	that	is	the	meaning	of	love:	surrendering	the	ego,	dropping	it,	becoming
egoless.	And	whenever	you	are	egoless	love	starts	flowing	through	you.	You	can
call	that	love	God	or	light	or	bliss	or	wisdom.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
5	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912055
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
[From	 November	 18th	 to	 December	 4th	 Osho	 did	 not	 give	 darshan.	 A	 few
sannyasins	had	contracted	chicken	pox,	and	to	avoid	any	infection	being	passed
to	Osho,	he	did	not	give	darshan	again	until	5th	December	1979.]
(Kavita.)
Life	 can	 either	 be	 prose	 or	 it	 can	 be	 poetry.	 Science	makes	 it	 prose,	 religion
transforms	it	into	poetry.	To	live	life	as	prose	is	to	live	in	a	mundane	way,	and	to
live	 life	 as	poetry	 is	 to	 live	 in	a	 sacred	way.	One	need	not	be	a	Christian	or	a
Mohammedan	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Jew	to	be	religious,	but	once	certainly	has	to	learn
the	way	of	poetry.	If	one	wants	to	be	religious	one	has	to	know	how	to	be	poetic
--	that	cannot	be	avoided.
All	these	religions	are	different	ways	of	becoming	poetic,	of	approaching	life	not
through	 logic,	but	 through	 love,	of	 looking	at	existence	not	with	fear,	but	with
wonder.	And	it	is	only	eyes	which	are	full	of	wonder	and	awe	that	are	capable	of
knowing	the	truth.
The	scientist	only	knows	the	fact,	but	never	the	truth.	The	fact	is	useful	but	not
liberating;	 the	 fact	 is	 needed	 but	 it	 does	 not	 give	 life	 significance.	 It	 is	 a
necessity,	 but	 one	 cannot	 live	 for	 it	 and	 one	 cannot	 die	 for	 it.	 and	 unless	 you
have	something	to	live	for	and	to	die	for	you	have	nothing.
In	 giving	 you	 sannyas	 I	 am	 giving	 you	 something	 to	 live	 for	 and	 to	 die	 for,
something	so	valuable	that	one	can	risk	all	for	it.	And	in	that	very	risking	one	is
born,	 born	 anew.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 one	 really	 becomes	 a	 self,	 one	 becomes
integrated.	 Otherwise	 people	 are	 living	 just	 wishy-washy	 lives,	 hodgepodge
lives.	They	are	living	a	king	of	mess,	a	confusion,	a	madness	--	utterly	futile.
My	 first	 and	 last	 lesson	 to	my	sannyasins	 is	 to	be	poetic:	 to	 sing,	 to	dance,	 to
celebrate,	to	love,	because	these	are	the	ways	one	comes	closer	and	closer	to	god
and	one	day	becomes	one	with	god,	merges	 into	his	 ocean.	We	are	dewdrops,
dropping	into	the	ocean.	Fear	arises;	one	hesitates	because	one	can	see	that	one
is	going	to	disappear	--	that	it	is	going	to	be	death.	But	what	is	death	on	one	side
is	life,	eternal	life,	on	another.	The	dewdrop	disappears	as	a	dewdrop	but	appears
as	the	ocean	itself.	It	is	worth	it.
Prem	means	love.	Chequesh	means	eagle.
Love	is	a	flight	from	the	known	to	the	unknown,	hence	the	fear.	It	is	because	of
this	fear	that	millions	of	people	decide	not	to	love	at	all.	Life	seems	to	be	safer,
more	secure,	manageable,	controlled,	without	love.
You	 seem	 to	 be	 able	 to	 possess	 life.	 The	moment	 love	 enters,	 you	 disappear.
Then	you	are	no	more	the	controller,	then	there	is	no	controller	at	all.	Then	it	is	a
beautiful	chaos.	It	has	its	own	order	but	it	knows	no	outer	order.	It	has	its	own
discipline	but	that	is	intrinsic,	it	is	not	imposed	from	outside.	And	because	it	is	a
constant	movement	from	the	known	to	the	unknown,	unless	one	is	courageous,
so	courageous	that	one	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ready	to	risk	life	for	it,	one	cannot	really	love.	To	love	is	the	greatest	courage	in
life.	 Yes,	 one	 becomes	 an	 eagle	 and	 starts	 soaring	 higher	 and	 higher	 into	 the
realms	of	the	unknown.	How	long	will	you	be	staying?
--	Another	week	after	your	birthday.	I	have	to	go	back	to	my	American	Indian
people	and	tell	them	about	you.
--	Tell	them	about	me.	They	will	understand	me	more	than	anybody	else.
--	I	was	afraid	at	first,	but	I'm	not	any	more.
--	Good,	good!
Bliss	is	the	noblest	quality.	Misery	the	ugliest.	To	remain	miserable	means	that
one	 is	 clinging	 to	 ugliness.	And	 to	 remain	miserable	 you	will	 have	 to	 remain
confined	 in	 the	 dark	 cells	 of	 the	 unconscious,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 remain	 in
bondage,	 in	 chains.	 It	 is	 your	 decision,	 because	 that	 bondage	 is	 self-imposed,
those	 chains	 are	 self-created.	 You	 are	 the	 prisoner	 and	 you	 are	 the	 jailer	 too;
hence	it	is	only	a	question	of	self-determination	to	come	out	of	the	misery.	It	can
be	 dropped	 in	 a	 single	 instant	 of	 understanding.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 never	 dropped
gradually:	it	is	sudden	enlightenment.	The	moment	you	see	that	you	are	creating
it,	that	you	are	the	creator	of	it,	the	very	seeing	is	the	dropping,	and	immediately
there	is	a	rebirth.
All	ugliness	disappears,	all	darkness	disappears,	and	your	life	starts	opening	like
a	rose	flower.	Then	you	have	all	the	beauty	of	the	world	and	all	the	nobility	of
the	world	and	all	the	godliness	of	the	world.
Be	blissful	and	god	is	yours.	In	the	old	times	it	was	said	that	if	you	attain	to	god
you	will	be	blissful.	I	say	just	the	opposite:	be	blissful	and	you	will	attain	to	god.
There	is	no	other	way	to	god.	Bliss	is	the	way	to	god.	One	can	forget	all	about
god	 if	one	can	only	 remember	 to	be	blissful.	Then	god	 is	bound	 to	happen,	 is
inevitable.
Prem	Niraj:	love	cloud.
Love	has	many	qualities	which	are	similar	to	the	qualities	of	a	cloud.
The	first	and	the	most	important	is	freedom.	A	cloud	is	not	confined	to	anything,
not	tethered.	So	is	the	case	with	love;	it	is	free	to	move	in	all	directions.	It	is	so
free	that	it	has	no	destination.	Destination	means	slavery.	Destination	means	that
you	are	predetermined.	Love	has	no	destination.	It	is	sheer	play.	It	is	not	work,	it
is	not	duty.	It	is	never	a	means	to	anything	else;	it	is	the	very	end	itself.
The	cloud	has	no	fixed	form.	It	constantly	changes,	it	is	never	the	same	for	two
consecutive	 moments.	 so	 is	 the	 case	 with	 love.	 And	 we	 will	 try	 to	 give	 it	 a
certain	 form	and	 shape.	We	are	 trying	 to	do	 the	 impossible;	 then	we	 fail,	 then
frustration	 is	 the	 result.	 Love	 never	 frustrates	 anybody.	 It	 is	 our	 expectations,
impossible	expectations	of	love,	which	creates	frustration.
Never	try	to	give	a	form	and	a	shape	to	your	love.	Allow	it	to	remain	shapeless,
formless,	because	it	is	not	a	thing,	it	is	an	experience.	It	cannot	be	defined,	and	it
is	not	gross;	it	is	very	subtle,	the	subtlest	experience	of	life.
The	cloud	is	always	in	a	state	of	let-go.	If	the	wind	says	to	it	"Come	along,	I	am
going	 to	 the	 north,"	 it	 has	 no	 resistance,	 it	 doesn't	 know	no.	 It	 is	 always	 yea-
saying.	 It	 simply	 goes	 to	 the	 north.	 It	 does	 not	 ask	why,	 it	 does	 not	 insist	 on
knowing	 the	 reason.	 It	 does	 not	 say,	 "I	 have	 other	 plans.	 I	 want	 to	 go	 to	 the
south,	not	to	the	north."	The	cloud	has	no	plans,	no	purposes	for	the	future.	It	is
available	to	the	winds.	It	is	so	totally	available	that	in	the	very	total	availability	it
knows	the	ultimate	taste	of	liberation.
So	is	the	case	with	love:	it	is	a	state	of	let-go.	It	allows	the	whole	existence	to	do
whatsoever	it	wants	to	do,	to	take	one	wherever	it	wants	to.	It	has	no	idea	of	how
things	 should	 be.	 It	moves	moment	 to	moment,	with	 no	 idea,	 no	 prejudice,	 it
moves	without	any	concepts.
The	English	word	 "concept"	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 root	 as	 the	word	 "conceit."
Love	 knows	 no	 concepts	 or	 conceits.	 It	 is	 simply	 free	 from	 all	 these	 burdens,
hence	 it	 can	 float	 like	 a	 cloud	 in	 an	 infinite	 sky.	 The	whole	 sky	 belongs	 to	 it
because	it	claims	nothing.	It	possesses	the	whole	sky	because	it	tries	to	possess
nothing.
(Hank	becomes	Deva	Sahaj.)
The	door	to	the	divine	is	spontaneity.	To	be	spontaneous	is	to	be	in	god.	Mind	is
never	spontaneous.	It	is	either	in	the	past	or	in	the	future,	either	in	that	which	is
no	more	or	in	that	which	is	not	yet.	Between	these	two	it	goes	on	missing	that
which	is,	and	that	is	the	door.	The	present	moment	is	not	part	of	time,	hence	the
present	moment	is	not	available	to	mind	either.	Mind	and	time	are	synonymous.
You	can	say	that	mind	is	time	inside	your	being,	and	time	is	mind	outside	you,
but	they	are	one	phenomenon.
The	present	moment	is	neither	part	of	time	nor	part	of	mind.	When	you	are	in	the
present	moment	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are	in	god.	What	is	the	true	meaning	of	meditation,	the	true	meaning	of	prayer,
the	true	meaning	of	love.
And	 when	 one	 acts	 out	 of	 the	 present	 moment,	 that	 action	 is	 never	 binding
because	 it	 is	 not	 your	 action,	 it	 is	 god	 acting	 through	 you,	 it	 is	 god	 flowing
through	you.
To	be	spontaneous	is	to	be	a	sannyasin.	That's	my	definition	of	a	sannyasin,	so
one	has	to	remember	it	constantly.
When	 P.	 D.	 Ouspensky.	 one	 of	 the	 chief	 disciples	 of	 George	 Gurdjieff,	 was
dying,	his	disciples	 and	 friends	were	very	puzzled	because	he	was	doing	 such
stupid	things.	They	could	not	believe	it,	because	he	was	a	very	logical	man.	He
was	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 mathematicians	 of	 his	 time,	 absolutely	 rational.	 The
doctors	 told	him	not	 to	 leave	America	because	it	was	dangerous,	his	body	was
not	 in	a	state	 to	 travel.	But	he	 left	America.	There	was	no	reason	 to	go	but	he
insisted	 irrationally.	 And	 when	 he	 went	 to	 England	 he	 started	 travelling	 all
around	the	country	in	his	car.	His	friends	said,	"Are	you	trying	to	commit	suicide
or	what?	--	because	doctors	say	'Don't	move	at	all.'"	But	he	wouldn't	listen.
Even	then	they	would	stay	for	one	or	two	days	in	a	hotel	somewhere,	in	a	guest
house,	in	a	rest	house,	he	would	not	sit,	he	would	continuously	walk.	Even	in	his
room	he	would	walk	till	he	almost	fell	dead	on	the	bed.
Then	finally	they	asked,	"We	don't	understand	--	have	you	gone	mad	or	what?"
He	 said,	 "If	 you	 have	 understood	 my	 teaching	 and	 the	 teaching	 of	 George
Gurdjieff...	I	am	trying	to	do	it,	I	am	trying	to	remember	that	I	am	dying.	I	want
to	die	remembering.	I	have	died	many	times	before	not	remembering.	This	time	I
want	to	die	remembering,	and	the	only	way	to	remember	is	to	do	something	that
keeps	me	awake,	otherwise	I	am	bound	to	fall	asleep."
And	he	died	almost	walking.	He	fell,	but	there	was	a	smile	on	his	face,	he	died
remembering,	he	died	in	the	present	moment	knowing	what	was	happening.
And	 to	 die	 in	 the	 present	moment	means	 there	 is	 going	 to	 be	 only	 one	more
birth,	that's	all.	This	is	just	the	last	but	one.	The	next	birth	will	be	in	awareness,
and	the	whole	of	the	next	life	will	be	of	awareness.	If	one	can	live	alert,	moment
to	moment,	one	can	also	die	in	alertness,	awareness.	To	live	and	to	die	and	to	be
born	--	these	three	are	the	most	important	moments.	If	one	can	manage	all	three
in	 awareness	 then	 one	 never	 comes	 back	 to	 the	wheel	 of	 life	 and	 death.	 One
becomes	free	of	it,	one	becomes	a	Buddha.
It	 is	very	symbolic	 that	 the	story	of	Buddha	says	 that	he	was	born	on	 the	full-
moon	night,	he	became	enlightened	on	the	same	full-moon	night,	he	died	on	the
same	 full-moon	night.	 It	may	not	have	happened	 so	but	 it	 is	very	 symbolic.	 It
may	have	happened	--	it	is	possible.	But	even	if	it	did	not	happen	historically,	it
is	symbolic.	It	is	simply	saying	that	he	died	in	the	same	moment	as	he	was	born
and	 he	 became	 enlightened	 in	 the	 same	 moment.	 That	 same	 moment	 is	 the
present	moment.	That	is	the	full-moon	night,	because	in	the	present	moment	you
are	full	of	light.
So	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 works	 be	 more	 and	 more	 alert.	 Act	 not	 out	 of
memory,	not	out	of	imagination,	but	out	of	the	actual	present.	You	may	be	able
to	experience	some	very	extraordinary	experiences	which	are	available	 to	only
very	few	people.	If	you	work	hard,	this	life	can	be	just	the	last	but	one.
(Swarga	means	paradise.)
Paradise	is	not	somewhere	else.	Paradise	is	not	geographical.	It	is	not	above	the
clouds	 in	 the	 heavens	 it	 is	within	 you.	And	 it	 is	 not	 in	 some	other	 time,	 after
death.	It	is	in	you	right	now,	you	are	made	of	it,	so	there	is	no	need	to	seek	and
search	anywhere	else.	All	that	is	needed	is	to	relax	and	to	be	in	one's	self,	to	dive
into	one's	own	being	deeply,	so	deeply	 that	 the	whole	world	disappears	as	 if	 it
did	not	 exist	 for	 the	moment,	 so	 that	 your	 consciousness	 is	 all	 that	 exists.	All
existence	 becomes	 non-existential,	 just	 your	 life	 is	 all...	 and	 the	 purity	 of	 it,
because	 it	 is	 uncontaminated	by	 anything.	Nothing	 is	 reflected	 in	 your	mirror.
Your	 consciousness	 is	 simply	 pure,	without	 any	 ripple,	without	 any	waves.	 In
that	moment	one	comes	to	know	what	paradise	is.
We	have	not	lost	it	somewhere	else,	we	have	not	been	driven	out	of	paradise.	It
already	exists	inside	us,	it	has	always	existed	inside	us,	but	we	never	look	within
ourselves.
We	go	on	looking	outwards,	hence	we	go	on	missing	our	own	treasures,	our	own
kingdom	of	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
6	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912065
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Prem	Vanilla.	Prem	means	love.	Vanilla	is	an	orchard	which	brings	fruits	of	great
fragrance.	Love	is	that	orchard.	Love	is	the	fulfillment	of	man.	It	is	only	through
love	that	man	flowers	and	comes	to	great	fragrance.	I	teach	love	--	that's	the	only
religion.	All	other	religions	are	just	pseudo	religions.	The	true	religion	can	only
be	of	love.
Hans.
Feel	blissful,	because	today	you	are	becoming	a	beloved	disciple.
Feel	blessed.
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 is	 a	 rare	 phenomenon	 because	 to	 seek	God	 is	 rare,	 to	 seek
truth	is	rare.	People	are	concerned	with	the	superficial,	with	the	mundane,	with
the	mediocre.	To	be	a	seeker	of	truth	is	the	real	beginning	of	life.	Then	life	takes
wings,	one	starts	soaring	higher.	There	are	planes	upon	planes.
Man	is	not	meant	to	crawl	and	creep	on	the	earth.	He	has	the	capacity	to	fly	to
the	ultimate.	And	that	is	possible	only	when	one	becomes	an	initiate,	a	disciple.
Disciple,	the	word	"disciple"	comes	from	a	root	which	means	readiness	to	learn,
readiness,	 receptivity,	 openness	 to	 learn.	 There	 is	 much	 to	 learn:	 the	 whole
infinity.	There	is	much	to	know:	this	tremendously	beautiful	existence.	There	is
much	to	love	and	to	live.
One	should	not	be	satisfied	with	the	ordinary.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	a
deep,	divine	discontent	with	the	ordinary.
Peter.
Love	should	be	the	rock	of	everybody's	life,	it	should	be	the	foundation.	Without
love	your	 life	 is	made	without	any	foundation;	 it	 is	bound	to	collapse.	You	are
making	 sandcastles	 or	 you	 are	 making	 palaces	 of	 playing	 cards:	 just	 a	 little
breeze	and	the	whole	palace	will	fall	down.	But	if	love	is	the	foundation	of	a	life
that	not	even	death	can	destroy,	love	opens	the	door	to	life	eternal.	The	life	of	the
soul	 is	 possible	 only	 through	 the	 life	 of	 love.	 Love	 is	 the	 bridge	 between	 the
body	and	the	soul,	hence	love	has	a	paradoxical	nature.	On	the	one	hand,	if	you
look	at	it	through	the	body	it	is	sex;	on	the	other	hand,	if	you	look	at	it	through
the	soul	it	is	prayer.	But	it	is	the	same	energy.	Love	functioning	physiologically
is	sex	and	functioning	spiritually	is	prayer.
Deva	Lucy.
Man	is	a	seed,	but	only	a	seed	of	great	potential,	but	nothing	is	actual.	The	seed
can	 die	 as	 a	 seed	 without	 ever	 becoming	 a	 tree,	 without	 ever	 coming	 to
flowering.	Man	is	the	seed	of	light.	But	ordinarily	man	is	not	resplendent,	man	is
not	 luminous,	 for	 the	simple	reason	 that	 the	shell	of	 the	seed	 is	hard	and	 there
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are	 no	windows.	Man	 remains	 enclosed	 in	 himself;	 hence	 the	 darkness	 on	 the
faces	of	people,	in	the	eyes	of	people.	But	if	the	shell	can	be	broken	--	and	it	can
be	 --	 then	 great	 light	 is	 released.	 It	 is	 an	 explosion!	 That	 explosion	 brings
ecstasy.	 That	 explosion	 brings	 you	 to	 the	 eternal.	 That	 explosion	 makes	 you
aware	of	your	eternity,	of	your	immortality,	of	your	godliness.
There	 is	no	other	way,	except	meditation,	 to	break	 the	 seed.	One	has	 to	go	on
hammering	 with	 meditation.	 One	 never	 knows	 how	 long	 it	 will	 take	 because
each	 individual	 is	 different.	 And	 no	 individual	 is	 predictable,	 because	 people
have	 lived	 different	 lives	 in	 their	 past	 and	 they	 have	 accumulated	 different
personalities	around	themselves.	A	few	people	have	very	thin	layers:	just	a	little
hit	 is	 enough,	 just	 the	 shadow	 of	 the	 whip	 is	 enough,	 not	 even	 the	 whip	 is
needed.	But	a	few	people	are	really	thick-skinned:	unless	you	go	on	hammering,
their	inner	light,	their	inner	splendour,	cannot	be	released.	And	one	never	knows
how	thick	the	layer	is.
One	thing	is	certain	--	it	may	take	a	little	longer	time	or	a	little	less,	that	doesn't
matter	--	the	shell	of	the	seed	can	be	broken,	the	breakthrough	is	possible.	And
that	 is	 the	only	hope	 for	man,	 because	only	 through	 that	 breakthrough	do	you
become	 aware	 that	 god	 is.	 Then	 life	 has	 meaning,	 significance,	 beauty,
benediction.
Erik	has	 two	meanings:	one	 is	Teutonic	 --	 it	means	kingly,	 the	other	 is	Anglo-
Saxon	--	it	means	brave.
But	both	are	part	of	one	phenomenon:	the	courageous	person,	the	brave	person,
is	always	kingly,	and	the	kingly	person	cannot	be	other	than	brave.
Bliss	is	only	for	those	who	are	really	courageous.	It	needs	the	greatest	courage	in
the	world	to	be	blissful.	It	is	a	paradox!	bliss	is	a	natural	phenomenon;	it	should
not	need	any	courage,	it	should	be	very	simple.	It	is	not	an	achievement,	it	is	our
very	being.	But	 the	society	creates	 in	us	a	pseudo	personality	which	 is	against
the	natural,	which	 is	against	 the	 real.	And	 the	 society's	 effort	 is	great:	 through
parental	education,	through	the	church	through	the	state	and	through	the	schools,
colleges,	universities,	one-third	of	a	man's	 life,	 twenty-five	years	 is	devoted	 to
creating	a	false	self.	It	is	because	of	that	false	self	that	great	courage	is	needed	to
take	 the	 jump	 into	 the	 natural.	 Twenty-five	 years	 of	wrong	 training,	 of	wrong
conditioning,	create	 the	problem.	Every	child	 is	born	blissful,	but	we	drag	him
out	of	his	nature;	we	make	him	miserable.	And	unless	we	succeed	we	don't	rest.
The	whole	strategy	of	civilization	is	to	create	miserable	people,	and	the	way	to
create	miserable	people	is	to	give	them	an	ego.	Then	they	will	remain	miserable
for	ever.	The	ego	can	never	be	satisfied,	it	is	impossible	to	satisfy	it.	It	goes	on
demanding	more	and	more;	hence	it	is	always	in	misery.	It	always	longs	for	the
impossible,	 and	when	 the	 impossible	 cannot	 happen	 there	 is	 great	 frustration,
there	is	hell.
We	give	the	ego	to	each	individual,	and	through	the	ego	the	society	manipulates
each	individual,	makes	him	so	miserable	that	he	remains	a	slave	to	the	powers,
to	the	establishment,	to	the	church,	to	the	state,	to	the	politicians,	to	the	priests.	A
miserable	person	cannot	rebel,	a	miserable	person	clings	to	whatsoever	he	has.	A
miserable	person	is	always	a	beggar,	he	cannot	be	a	king,	And	he	cannot	risk.	He
cannot	 even	 risk	his	miseries	because	he	 is	 afraid:	 "Who	knows?	 --	 I	may	get
into	deeper	misery.	At	least	this	misery	is	well-known,	I	am	acquainted	with	it.	I
have	 become	 adjusted	 to	 it,	 I	 can	 cope	 with	 it.	 Who	 knows	 about	 the	 new
misery?	It	is	better	to	remain	confined	to	the	old."	The	miserable	person	always
remains	orthodox;	he	never	explores.
And	 that's	what	 the	 society	wants:	 nobody	 should	 be	 an	 explorer	 and	 nobody
should	 be	 an	 adventurous	 soul.	 Nobody	 should	 ask	 what	 is	 truth.	 Everybody
should	be	a	believer,	not	a	seeker,	not	an	enquirer.
Nobody	should	be	a	rebel,	a	revolutionary.	everybody	should	be	a	slave,	 just	a
machine	--	efficient,	very	efficient	-	from	birth	the	death.	All	that	society	asks	of
you	is	efficiency.
I	have	heard	about	an	efficiency	expert.	He	died	and	when	he	was	being	taken
out	of	the	hospital	he	asked,	"How	many	people	are	carrying	me	out?"	There	was
great	panic,	 because	he	was	dead.	Somebody	 said	 "Six."	He	 said	 "There	 is	no
need	for	six;	you	can	put	me	on	wheels.	One	is	enough."	And	then	he	lay	down
and	died	again.	Efficiency	experts	don't	die.
All	 that	 this	society	requires	from	you	from	birth	 to	death	 is:	be	efficient,	be	a
good	machine,	not	a	man.
And	a	machine	cannot	be	blissful.	If	you	are	really	a	machine	then	you	cannot	be
miserable	 either,	 but	 because	 man	 is	 not	 a	 machine	 and	 has	 to	 function	 as	 a
machine,	 misery	 is	 created.	 If	 man	 were	 really	 a	 machine	 there	 would	 be	 no
problem;	 no	 machine	 is	 miserable.	 But	 man	 is	 a	 consciousness	 and	 has	 to
function	as	a	machine.	This	is	the	misery	--	the	only	misery	the	only	hell.
Courage	is	needed	to	go	beyond	the	familiar,	to	go	beyond	the	conditioning	that
the	society	has	enforced	on	you,	to	go	beyond	that	which	has	been	taught	to	you,
to	go	beyond	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Buddhism,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Mohammedanism,	 to	 go	 beyond	 all	 cultures,	 to	 go	 beyond	 all	 the	 past.	 That's
exactly	my	work	here:	to	help	you	to	go	beyond	all	conditionings.
A	sannyasin	 is	 a	person	who	drops	all	 conditionings	and	never	 substitutes	 any
other	conditioning	again,	who	 remains	unconditioned	and	 functions	out	of	 that
unconditioned	 state	 of	 consciousness.	 Then	 action	 is	 tremendously	 beautiful,
liberating,	and	then	life	becomes	a	poem,	a	painting,	a	work	of	art.	Then	it	has
value.	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	According	to	the	conditioning,	about	three	months.
--	Be	here	three	months	--	three	months	will	do!
Peter	 is	 the	name	of	one	of	 the	disciples	of	 Jesus,	one	of	 the	 twelve	disciples.
Jesus	called	him	Peter	because	he	was	the	most	determined	disciple	out	of	all	of
them;	he	called	him	Peter	because	he	was	like	a	rock.	He	said	to	him:	You	will
be	a	rock	for	my	work.	You	will	become	the	foundation	stone	for	the	temple	that
I	 am	 raising.	 Love	 should	 be	 the	 rock	 of	 everybody's	 life,	 it	 should	 be	 the
foundation.	Without	love	your	life	is	made	without	any	foundation;	it	is	bound	to
collapse.	 You	 are	 making	 sandcastles	 or	 you	 are	 making	 palaces	 of	 playing
cards:	just	a	little	breeze	and	the	whole	palace	will	fall	down.	But	if	love	is	the
foundation	of	a	life	that	not	even	death	can	destroy,	love	opens	the	door	to	life
eternal.	The	life	of	the	soul	is	possible	only	through	the	life	of	love.	Love	is	the
bridge	between	the	body	and	the	soul,	hence	love	has	a	paradoxical	nature.	On
the	one	hand,	 if	you	look	at	 it	 through	the	body	it	 is	sex;	on	 the	other	hand,	 if
you	 look	 at	 it	 through	 the	 soul	 it	 is	 prayer.	 But	 it	 is	 the	 same	 energy.	 Love
functioning	physiologically	is	sex	and	functioning	spiritually	is	prayer.	The	work
of	a	sannyasin	consists	in	transforming	sexual	energy	into	prayer.	That	day	is	the
greatest	in	your	life	when	your	sex	is	transformed	into	prayer,	when	your	sex	has
no	 sexuality	 in	 it	 but	 becomes	 prayerful,	 when	 your	 sex	 does	 not	 drag	 you
downwards,	is	no	more	part	of	the	gravitational	field,	but	starts	helping	you	rise
upwards.
There	are	two	laws:	one	of	gravitation,	that	which	pulls	you	down;	and	the	other
of	grace,	that	which	pulls	you	up.	Sex	has	to	be	transformed	from	gravitation	to
grace.	This	is	real	alchemy.
My	sannyas	is	not	a	renunciation	of	life	but	a	transformation.	It	is	not	an	escape
but	a	great	adventure.
Satyo.
Bliss	 is	 truth.	 Don't	 seek	 truth,	 seek	 bliss,	 and	 truth	 will	 find	 you	 of	 its	 own
accord.
Those	 who	 seek	 truth	 directly	 never	 find	 it.	 Their	 search	 becomes	 more	 and
more	 intellectual	 and	 logical;	 it	 becomes	 intellectual	 gymnastics.	 That's	 how
philosophy	is	born.
Seek	bliss.	Then	it	is	a	totally	different	search.	Then	you	will	come	across	love,
not	 across	 logic;	 then	you	will	 come	 across	music,	 not	mathematics;	 then	you
will	be	more	close	to	poetry	than	to	prose.	Your	dimension	will	start	changing.
You	will	be	more	and	more	celebrating,	you	will	be	more	and	more	festive,	less
and	less	serious.
Let	cheerfulness	be	your	only	discipline.	Then	one	day	one	is	surprised:	truth	has
knocked	on	one's	door.	when	you	are	totally	in	bliss	time	ceases.	when	you	are
totally	in	bliss	you	disappear,	you	melt	away	--
and	that	is	the	moment,	the	momentous	moment,	when	truth	enters.	Call	it	God,
nirvana,	enlightenment,	tao,	or	whatsoever	name	you	choose:	It	has	no	name,	it
is	a	nameless	experience.	But	it	comes	only	to	those	who	are	dancing,	singing,
celebrating.	 It	 never	 comes	 to	 serious	 people.	 Seriousness	 is	 illness,	 it	 is
pathological.
Blissfulness	is	wholeness,	health.
Narayanyo
You	are	made	of	the	stuff	called	God.	Of	course	we	are	not	aware	of	it	but	that
does	 not	 make	 any	 difference:	 aware	 or	 unaware,	 awake	 or	 asleep,	 you	 are
divine.	and	one	who	is	asleep	this	moment	can	be	awake	the	next.
The	 function	 of	 the	 master	 is	 to	 wake	 you	 up	 and	 the	 whole	 approach	 of	 a
disciple	 is	 to	be	 ready	 to	be	 awakened.	 In	 the	beginning	 it	 is	 arduous	because
you	are	having	beautiful	dreams	and	 the	master	goes	on	shaking	and	shocking
you.	It	is	cold	and	too	early	and	you	would	like	to	sleep	a	little	more.	And	you
feel	angry	with	the	master	many	times	because	he	goes	on	persisting:	Wake	up!
To	be	a	disciple	means	that	you	will	allow	the	master	to	force	you,	to	wake	you
up;	that	the	more	he	hammers	you,	the	more	grateful	you	will	be.	Of	course	once
in	a	while	you	will	 feel	 angry	but	 then	you	have	 to	 remember	 that	by	being	a
disciple	you	have	chosen	to	be	hit,	 to	be	hammered,	 to	be	dragged	out	of	your
sleep.	All	kinds	of	devices	 are	bound	 to	be	used:	 cold	water	has	 to	be	 thrown
over	 you,	 your	 blankets	 have	 to	 be	 taken	 away.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 pulled	 and
pushed,	and	all	kinds	of	imaginable	and	unimaginable	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
things	have	to	be	done	to	you.	All	that	is	implied	in	being	a	disciple.	But	if	one
cooperates	 with	 the	 master	 it	 can	 happen	 very	 easily.	 The	 difficulty	 becomes
more	 and	 more	 complex	 because	 of	 resistance.	 Don't	 resist,	 cooperate,	 and
something	of	immense	value	is	possible...	something	for	which	you	will	remain
eternally	grateful.
George	Gurdjieff	 remembers	 that	when	 his	 grandmother	was	 dying	 she	 called
him	to	the	side	of	her	bed.
He	was	very	young,	 just	nine	years	old,	and	 the	very	old	woman	whispered	 in
the	ears	of	this	boy....	She	had	loved	this	boy	more	than	anybody	else.	She	said
to	 him,	 'I	 have	 a	message	 for	 you	 --	 remember	 it,	 never	 forget.	 It	 is	 a	 simple
message,	but	 if	you	can	practise	it,	 it	will	open	the	doors	of	great	 treasures	for
you.	 And	 the	 message	 is	 really	 simple.'	 She	 simply	 said,	 'Remember	 this
sentence	 'Never	 do	 as	 others	 do,'	 and	 follow	 it."	 Whenever	 anybody	 asked
Gurdjieff,	 'How	did	 you	become	 enlightened?	How	did	 you	become	what	 you
have	 become?"	 he	 always	 said,	 'The	 whole	 credit	 goes	 to	 my	 grandmother,
because	 she	 said	 to	me	 'Never	 do	 as	 others	 do.'	 So	 I	made	 it	 a	 point	 if	 others
were	going	to	the	north	I	would	go	to	the	south,	if	others	were	standing	on	their
feet	 I	would	 stand	 on	my	 head.	Through	 following	 her	 advice	 I	 have	 attained
whatsoever	I	have	attained.'
The	crowd	consists	of	sleepwalkers.	Be	unique,	be	 individual.	That	 is	 the	only
way	to	be	a	sannyasin.	So	never	do	as	others	do	--	 that	 is	 the	meaning	of	your
name!	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Two	months.
--	 Good.	 Do	 a	 few	 groups,	 mm?	 And	 choose	 the	 groups	 which	 nobody	 else
chooses!
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
7	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912075
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Surat.
We	have	not	 lost	 anything;	God	 is	not	 lost	 and	hence	has	not	 to	be	 found.	we
have	 only	 forgotten;	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 remembrance.	 It	 is	 there	 in	 the
deepest	 core	 of	 our	 being.	 Call	 it	 truth,	 God,	 bliss,	 beauty:	 all	 those	 thing
indicate	 the	 same	 phenomenon.	 There	 is	 something	 eternal	 in	 our	 beings,
something	immortal,	something	divine.
All	that	we	have	to	do	is	to	go	deep,	dive	deep,	into	our	own	being,	and	to	see,
realize,	 recognize.	Hence	 the	 journey	 is	 not	 really	 a	 journey.	we	 are	 not	 to	 go
anywhere;	we	have	simply	to	sit	silently	and	be.
Nicole	 means	 victorious	 heart,	 the	 victory	 of	 the	 heart.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 only
victory	 in	 life;	everything	else	 is	 futile.	Let	 the	heart	be	victorious,	 let	 love	be
victorious.	Money	is	of	no	use;	power,	prestige	all	are	of	no	use.	One	is,	from	the
very	beginning,	to	be	aware	of	the	phenomenon	that	love	is	the	only	treasure	to
be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
sought.
We	 are	 all	 searching	 for	 the	 home.	We	 are	 all	missing	 something.	We	 are	 not
certain	exactly	what	it	is,	but	the	feeling	is	there	in	everybody's	inner	being	that
something	 is	 missing.	 And	 we	 go	 on	 accumulating	 things	 --	 money,	 power,
prestige	--	hoping	that	by	gaining	all	these	things	that	feeling	will	disappear,	that
gap	 will	 be	 filled,	 that	 emptiness	 will	 not	 be	 there	 any	 more,	 it	 won't	 hurt
anymore.	 But	 nothing	 from	 the	 outside	 can	 ever	 fill	 the	 gap,	 because	 money
cannot	enter	into	your	being,	neither	can	power,	nor	prestige.
Nothing	from	the	outside	is	of	any	help.	Hence	the	more	you	have,	the	more	the
feeling	becomes	a	constant	haunting:	 in	contrast	you	go	on	feeling	it	more	and
more.
Poor	people	don't	feel	so	much	in	need	of	spiritual	growth.	They	look	contented
in	a	way,	but	their	contentment	is	false;	their	contentment	is	exactly	like	that	of
the	cow	just	munching	the	grass.
In	India	people	feel	very	proud	that	they	are	contented:	"Look	how	poor	we	are
and	 still	we	 are	 contented."	This	 is	 not	 contentment.	You	 can't	 feel	 your	 inner
poverty	 because	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 contrast	 to	 it.	 It	 is	 like	writing	with	white
chalk	on	a	white	wall:	you	can't	see	it.	Write	on	a	blackboard,	then	you	will	be
able	 to	 see	 it	 and	 read	 it.	Hence	 the	 richer	one	grows,	 the	poorer	one	 feels.	A
strange	 paradox	 starts	 happening:	 the	 richer	 a	 society	 is,	 the	 more	 searching
there	 is	 for	a	home,	 the	more	searching	 there	 is	 for	 roots.	 It	 is	not	an	accident
that	only	affluent	 societies	become	 religious.	Poor	 societies	only	pretend;	poor
societies	cannot	be	religious.	They	are	not	even	materialists	--	how	can	they	be
spiritualists?
Spritualism	can	only	be	a	higher	stage	of	materialism,	there	is	no	other	way.	But
the	search	is	there:	the	poor	searches	through	money,	a	good	house,	family,	this
and	 that	 --	 but	 by	 the	 time	 you	 have	 arranged	 all	 these	 things	 suddenly	 you
become	aware	that	life	is	gone	and	you	are	exactly	where	you	have	always	been:
as	empty	as	ever,	as	hollow	as	ever.	Then	a	great	 frustration	sets	 in.	You	have
missed	 life.	Nothing	 from	 the	outside	can	ever	 fulfill	 the	 search.	But	 I	 am	not
against	the	outside,	I	am	all	for	it,	for	the	simple	reason	that	when	you	have	all
on	the	outside	your	search	for	the	inner	becomes	acute.
Ava.
Life	is	synonymous	with	God.	God	is	not	the	creator	of	life,	but	life	itself;	he	is
not	separate	from	life.
The	very	idea	of	the	creator	is	false.	He	is	not	like	a	painter,	because	the	painter
becomes	separate	 from	 the	painting.	He	 is	more	 like	a	dancer:	he	 remains	one
with	it.
Hence	 to	 worship	 God,	 one	 need	 not	 go	 to	 a	 temple,	 to	 a	 mosque,	 to	 a
synagogue.	Life	is	more	than	is	needed.	This	whole	earth,	this	whole	existence,
is	full	of	God,	overflooded	with	God.	He	is	the	green	and	the	red	and	the	gold	of
the	 trees.	He	 is	all	over	 the	place;	you	cannot	avoid	him.	We	collide	with	him
every	moment.	 It	 is	 just	because	we	have	some	idea	of	God	we	go	on	missing
him.	We	have	some	idea	that	he	is	somewhere	far	away	in	heaven:	hence	we	go
on	missing	him.	Drop	that	stupid	idea	and	you	will	find	him	everywhere.	He	is
very	close	by.
Once	Ramakrishna	was	asked,	"Where	is	God?"	And	he	said	"You	tell	me	where
he	is	not.	I	have	been	searching	for	the	place	where	he	is	not	and	I	have	failed:	I
have	not	yet	found	a	place	where	he	is	not."
Francesca
To	be	totally	free	one	needs	to	be	totally	aware,	because	our	bondage	is	rooted	in
our	unconsciousness;	it	does	not	come	from	the	outside.	Nobody	can	make	you
unfree.	You	can	be	destroyed	but	your	 freedom	cannot	be	 taken	away...	unless
you	give	 it	away.	 In	 the	ultimate	analysis	 it	 is	always	your	desire	 to	be	unfree
that	makes	you	unfree.	It	is	your	desire	to	be	dependent,	your	desire	to	drop	the
responsibility	of	being	yourself,	that	makes	you	unfree.
The	moment	one	 takes	 responsibility	 for	oneself....	And	 remember	 it	 is	not	 all
roses,	there	are	thorns	in	it;	and	it	is	not	all	sweet,	there	are	many	bitter	moments
in	it.	The	sweet	is	always	balanced	by	the	bitter,	they	always	come	in	the	same
proportion.	 The	 roses	 are	 balanced	 by	 the	 thorns,	 the	 days	 by	 the	 nights,	 the
summer	by	the	winters.	Life	keeps	a	balance	between	the	polar	opposites,	so	one
who	 is	 ready	 to	accept	 the	 responsibility	of	being	oneself	with	all	 its	beauties,
bitternesses,	its	joys	and	agonies,	can	be	free.	Only	he	can	be	free...
Live	 it	 in	 all	 its	 agony	 and	 all	 its	 ecstasy	 --	 both	 are	 yours.	 And	 always
remember:	ecstasy	cannot	live	without	exist	without	death,	and	joy	cannot	exist
without	sadness.	That's	how	things	are	--	nothing	can	be	done	about	it.	That's	the
very	nature,	the	very	tao	of	things.
Accept	the	responsibility	of	being	yourself	as	you	are,	with	all	that	is	good	and
with	all	 that	 is	bad,	with	all	 that	 is	beautiful	and	that	which	is	not	beautiful.	In
that	acceptance	a	transcendence	happens	and	one	becomes	free.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Freedom	means	 transcendence,	 going	 above	 the	 duality.	 Then	 you	 are	 neither
ecstasy	 or	 agony;	 you	 are	 just	 a	 witness	 to	 all	 that	 happens	 to	 you.	 That
transcendence	is	real	freedom	and	that	makes	one	enlightened,	liberated.
Andrew	 is	 the	 first	 disciple	 of	 Jesus,	 the	 first	 initiate,	 the	 first	man	 called	 by
Jesus	 to	become	his	disciple...	And	you	 look	as	 if	you	have	 just	walked	out	of
the	New	Testament!
The	greatest	courage	in	the	world	is	to	not	imitate	others,	to	live	one's	own	life
as	 authentically	 as	 possible,	 whatsoever	 the	 cost.	 Even	 if	 life	 is	 lost	 in	 living
your	own	 life	 it	 is	worth	 it,	because	 that	 is	how	 the	soul	 is	born.	When	one	 is
ready	to	die	for	something,	in	that	very	agony	--	the	word	"agony"	comes	from
agon;	it	means	struggle	--	in	that	very	struggle	one	is	born.	It	is	a	birth	pain.	It
takes	courage,	it	takes	guts.
Live	your	 life	without	being	bothered	by	 the	moralists,	puritans,	priests,	stupid
people	who	go	on	advising.	Live	your	life.	Even	if	you	live	in	error,	then	too	it	is
better	to	live	your	own	life	than	to	be	right	according	to	somebody	else,	because
the	man	who	 is	 right	according	 to	somebody	else	 is	 false,	and	 the	man	who	 is
wrong	according	to	his	own	decision	is	going	to	learn	from	his	error	sooner	or
later.	He	will	grow	out	of	it,	he	will	be	benefited	by	it.
The	only	person	who	learns	is	the	person	who	is	ready	to	commit	errors,	and	the
best	way	to	commit	errors	is	not	to	listen	to	others	--	just	go	on	doing	your	thing!
Sandip	means	a	lamp,	a	light.	The	last	words	of	Buddha	to	his	disciples	were:	Be
a	lamp	unto	thyself.
People	search	in	scriptures,	but	in	vain;	and	people	go	searching	for	guides,	but
they	will	be	disappointed	because	 the	real	guide	 is	within	you,	 the	real	 light	 is
within	you.	Your	own	consciousness	has	to	become	a	light	unto	itself....
Never	be	an	imitator.	Listen	to	the	enlightened	ones	just	to	find	your	own	light.
Don't	become	a	parrot,	don't	 repeat	 them.	That's	what	has	been	done	down	the
ages	by	millions	of	people.	They	have	become	Christians,	Mohammedans	 and
Hindus	and	Buddhists,	but	they	have	not	become	enlightened.	Their	life	goes	on
remaining	in	the	same	dark	state,	in	the	same	hell.
Remember	it:	I	am	here	to	help	you	to	be	yourself.	I	don't	give	you	a	character,	I
don't	give	you	any	discipline.	I	don't	give	you	any	clear-cut	indications	of	what
to	 do	 and	 what	 not	 to	 do.	 I	 only	 give	 you	 vague	 hints,	 indications,	 fingers
pointing	to	the	moon,	the	moon	that	is	within	you.
Peggy	means	a	child	of	light.
We	are	born	of	light,	we	live	in	light,	we	die	in	light	--	we	are	made	out	of	light.
This	 has	 ben	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 insights	 of	 the	 mystics	 of	 all	 the	 ages.	 The
scientists	have	also	agreed	to	it	just	now,	within	these	twenty	years;	they	had	to
agree.	Just	twenty	years	ago	they	were	laughing	at	the	mystics,	thinking	that	they
were	talking	nonsense.	Man	made	of	light?	They	must	be	talking	metaphorically,
not	literally.	But	mystics	were	really	talking	literally.
Now	science	not	only	says	that	man	is	made	of	light	but	that	everything	is	made
of	 light,	 all	 is	 made	 of	 electrons,	 electricity.	 Science	 has	 come	 to	 this
understanding	 from	a	very	very	 long	 route.	The	objective	 route	 is	 a	 very	 long
route;	the	subjective	route	is	very	easy,	the	shortest	possible,	because	you	have
only	 to	 look	 within.	 Nothing	 else	 is	 required:	 no	 lab,	 no	 instruments,	 no
sophisticated	devices,	nothing	else	is	required	--	just	the	art	of	closing	your	eyes
and	looking	in.
And	 that's	 what	 meditation	 is:	 the	 art	 of	 looking	 in.	 The	 moment	 thoughts
disappear	and	the	mind	is	utterly	quiet	and	silent,	the	inner	light	is	seen.	That	is	a
revelation.
And	once	you	have	seen	your	light,	you	will	be	surprised:	you	can	see	it	now	in
everybody	else.	Then	the	whole	existence	is	nothing	but	an	ocean	of	light.	It	is
not	matter,	it	is	pure	energy.
Barbara.
Bliss	is	a	stranger	in	the	world.	People	are	well	acquainted	with	misery,	they	live
in	it.	Bliss	is	an	absolute	stranger	to	them.
Whenever	they	see	a	blissful	person	they	think	he	must	have	gone	mad,	because
all	sane	people	are	miserable.	Only	once	in	a	while	do	you	see	an	insane	person
really	enjoying	himself.	Or,	once	in	a	while	there	is	a	Buddha,	a	Christ;	they	are
also	thought	by	the	so-called	wise	people,	the	worldly-wise,	to	be	mad.
There	 are	 still	 people	who	go	on	writing	books	on	 Jesus	 calling	him	neurotic.
Buddha	was	thought	to	be	a	madman	in	his	own	day	for	the	simple	reason	that
he	was	so	blissful.
People	 can	 understand	 misery	 --	 that	 is	 their	 language.	 Bliss	 is	 not	 their
language.	But	I	teach	you	bliss,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
in	the	eyes	of	the	world	I	teach	you	madness.	Even	if	the	so-called	worldly-wise
are	 sometimes	 happy,	 their	 happiness	 is	 superficial.	 It	 is	 more	 or	 less	 a
pretension,	a	deception,	they	are	deceiving	others	and	deceiving	themselves;	or
maybe	it	is	a	strategy	to	hide	their	misery,	to	cover	up	their	wounds.
You	may	 have	 heard	 one	 of	 the	 very	 famous	maxims	 of	Murphy	 --	Murphy's
principle.	 It	 says:	 Smile,	 because	 tomorrow	 is	 going	 to	 be	 worse!	 So	 even	 if
people	 smile	 it	 is	 just	 in	 deep	 fear:	 they	 don't	 know	what	 is	 going	 to	 happen
tomorrow.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	is	reported	to	have	said,	"I	smile	in	order	to	hide	my	tears.	I
laugh	only	 so	 that	 I	may	not	 start	 crying."	This	 is	 a	very	ugly	 situation.	What
kind	of	 sanity	 is	 this?	What	kind	of	health	 and	wholeness?	We	have	created	a
very	unwholesome	society.
My	sannyasins	have	to	become	the	foundation	of	a	new	society,	of	a	new	man,
who	will	live	bliss	as	his	life,	whose	goal	will	not	be	otherworldly,	who	will	live
the	paradise	here	and	now,	who	will	 transform	 this	very	moment	 into	a	 sacred
moment.	 And	 the	 miracle	 happens:	 whenever	 a	 person	 is	 really	 blissful	 he
transforms	the	space	that	surrounds	him	into	a	sacred	space.	Then	it	is	no	longer
ordinary.
Entering	into	sannyas	means	entering	into	my	space,	becoming	part	of	me.	It	is	a
merger,	a	melting,	a	meeting	where	boundaries	disappear.	And	that's	what	 love
is.	Sannyas	is	a	love	affair.
Arupa.
Remember:	we	are	not	the	body	and	we	are	not	the	mind	either.	The	body	has	a
gross	form;	the	mind	has	s	subtle	form.	But	we	are	a	formless	witness	--	just	an
infinite	witness,	and	infinite	mirror	which	reflects	everything	and	which	is	never
contaminated	by	anything	that	it	reflects.
The	 mirror	 can	 reflect	 the	 beautiful	 flower,	 it	 does	 not	 become	 the	 beautiful
flower.	 It	 can	 reflect	 something	 ugly,	 it	 does	 not	 become	 ugly.	 It	 remains
unpolluted,	 it	 remains	 untouched.	 and	 that's	 how	 we	 are:	 we	 are	 pure
consciousness,	pure	mirrors.	But	if	we	become	identified	with	the	body	and	the
mind	 then	 misery	 arises,	 then	 clinging,	 then	 fear,	 then	 ultimately	 the	 fear	 of
death.
If	you	are	not	identified	with	the	body-mind	complex	there	is	no	fear.	And	being
without	fear	 is	freedom,	to	be	free	from	fear	 is	freedom.	So	this	 is	going	to	be
your	 meditation:	 become	 more	 and	 more	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 a	 formless
consciousness,	just	a	watcher	--	never	a	doer,	just	a	watcher.
To	know	oneself	is	to	be	victorious.	Not	to	know	oneself	is	to	be	a	failure;	then
one	may	be	an	Alexander	the	Great,	still	one	is	a	failure.	In	knowing	oneself	one
may	be	absolutely	anonymous,	a	beggar,	and	still	one	has	conquered	the	world,
because	 by	 knowing	 oneself	 one	 comes	 to	 know	 the	 very	 secret	 of	 life.	 In
knowing	oneself	one	comes	 to	know	not	only	oneself,	one	comes	 to	know	 the
very	self	of	existence.
And	that	knowing	liberates	--	liberates	you	from	all	fears,	liberates	you	from	all
miseries,	liberates	you	from	birth	and	death.	It	makes	life	abundant,	available	to
you.
Jesus	calls	that	life	the	kingdom	of	god.	It	is	within	you.	No	army	is	needed,	you
are	not	expected	to	conquer	anybody.	It	 is	a	very	strange	victory.	It	happens	at
the	inner-most	core	of	your	being:	no	army,	no	enemy,	no	arms.	And	suddenly
one	is	victorious,	one	has	conquered	life,	because	one	has	known	life.	To	know
is	to	conquer.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
8	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912085
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Surati	Barbara.
The	 beginning	 of	 religious	 consciousness	 is	 in	 the	 remembrance	 that	 we	 are
outsiders	here,	 that	we	don't	belong	to	 the	material	world,	 that	our	home	is	 far
away,	that	we	have	fallen	from	some	paradise,	that	we	have	been	expelled.	This
is	what	Christians	call	the	original	sin,	the	expulsion	from	the	home.
The	 word	 "sin"	 is	 very	 significant;	 the	 root	 from	 which	 it	 comes	 means
forgetfulness.	We	 have	 forgotten	 who	 we	 are	 --	 that	 is	 our	 original	 sin.	 And
because	we	have	forgotten	ourselves	we	have	forgotten	all	that	is	ours,	the	inner
kingdom	of	God	that	is	our	home.	The	Garden	of	Eden	is	not	somewhere	else,	it
is	in	the	innermost	center	of	your	being.	But	one	can	search	for	it	only	when	one
becomes	aware	that	one	is	a	foreigner,	that	one	is	not	at	home,	that	one	is	living
in	a	foreign	country,	that	one	cannot	belong	here,	that	all	is	momentary.
We	are	trying	our	best	to	settle	in	time	somehow,	but	nobody	can	settle	in	time.
The	 very	 process	 of	 timing	 is	 unsettling,	 it	 is	 a	 flux.	 We	 can	 settle	 only	 in
eternity,	 in	 timelessness,	 in	 God.	 It	 is	 a	 blessing	 to	 remember	 that	 we	 don't
belong	here	because	 then	 the	 journey	can	begin.	And	sannyas	 is	nothing	but	a
journey	towards	the	real	home.	It	is	a	homesickness.
A	 child	was	 visiting	 his	 grandparents.	 He	was	 very	 restless	 and	 very	 sad	 and
very	depressed.	The	grandmother	 asked	him,	 "Are	you	 feeling	homesick?"	He
said,	 "No,	 I	 am	 feeling	here-sick."	But	 that's	what	homesickness	 is:	when	you
start	feeling	here-sick	then	the	journey	is	bound	to	start,	it	is	inevitable.
Theodore.
Life	 is	 a	 gift,	 birth	 is	 a	 gift,	 love	 is	 a	 gift,	 death	 is	 a	 gift.	 If	we	know	how	 to
appreciate,	all	is	a	gift;	if	we	don't	know	how	to	appreciate	then	there	is	nothing
but	complaints	and	complaints	in	life.	There	are	only	two	types	of	people:	those
who	know	how	to	appreciate	the	beauty	of	that	which	is,	of	that	which	has	been
given	 to	 them	 and	 those	who	 have	 no	 sense	 of	 appreciation.	 They	 are	 always
condemning,	complaining,	asking	for	more	and	more.
Only	 the	 first	 kind	 of	 people	 can	 become	 religious,	 the	 second	 kind	 cannot
become	religious.	The	second	kind	is	bound	to	deny	God	sooner	or	later,	because
God	becomes	an	enemy	who	is	not	fulfilling	your	desires.	It	is	these	people	who
have	made	the	proverb	"Man	proposes	and	God	disposes."	The	proverb	is	made
by	non-religious	people.	They	are	always	feeling	frustrated.	whatsoever	happens
is	wrong.	 It	 is	never	up	 to	 the	mark,	 it	 is	never	fulfilling,	never	 to	 their	heart's
content;	it	is	always	falling	short.	They	live	in	misery	because	there	is	always	a
grudge,	as	 if	 they	are	deprived	of	something.	How	can	 they	feel	grateful?	And
without	gratefulness	there	is	no	prayer,	without	prayer	there	is	no	religion.
Prayer	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 religion	 and	 it	 is	 prayer	 realized	 that	 becomes	 the
experience	of	God.	The	seed	of	prayer	is	gratitude:	feel	grateful,	because	great	is
the	gift	of	God	and	it	is	constantly	showering	on	you,	but	we	start	taking	it	for
granted.	That	 is	 one	of	 the	most	 stupid	 things	 that	 a	 human	being	 can	do,	 but
mind	is	always	doing	it:	it	starts	taking	things	for	granted.
The	sun	rises,	the	dawn	has	tremendous	beauty,	but	your	mind	says,	"So	what?	It
happens	every	day.	It	is	just	another	morning,	just	like	others."	The	whole	east	is
red	with	 the	rising	sun	and	 the	clouds	are	full	of	color,	but	 the	mind	says,	"So
what?	It	is	nothing	new.	Millions	of	times	it	has	happened	and	millions	of	times
it	is	going	to	happen	again."
If	this	is	the	way	of	looking	at	things....	And	this	is	how	mind	looks	at	things:	it
becomes	insensitive	--
insensitive	 to	 beauty,	 insensitive	 to	music,	 insensitive	 to	 poetry,	 insensitive	 to
love,	 insensitive	 to	 everything	 that	 is	 valuable.	 The	 naturally	 you	 live	 in
darkness,	you	live	in	ugliness.	It	is	your	own	creation.
Start	feeling	grateful.	Grow	the	sense	of	appreciation.	Praise	existence	for	what
has	 already	been	done	and	 then	much	more	will	 go	on	happening	 to	you.	The
more	you	praise,	 the	more	you	become	capable	of	seeing,	 the	more	perceptive
you	 become.	 A	 prayerful	 person	 becomes	 so	 perceptive	 that	 he	 sees	 God
everywhere,	he	finds	his	signature	everywhere:	scriptures	in	silence,	sermons	in
stones.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Jan.
Millions	 are	 his	 gifts	 but	 love	 is	 the	 greatest,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 it	 is
through	love	that	all	that	is	significant,	valuable,	becomes	possible.	Without	love
there	would	be	no	poetry,	no	music,	no	dance,	no	song;	without	love	there	would
be	nothing	valuable	in	life.	Without	love	life	would	be	just	mechanical.
Love	 is	 the	 only	 non-mechanical	 phenomenon;	 hence	 the	 computer	 can	 do
everything	 except	 love.	 It	 can	do	great	mathematics.	Sooner	or	 later	 it	will	 be
doing	all	 the	scientific	work.	Within	a	 few	years	 the	scientist	will	 find	himself
out	 of	 work,	 unemployed.	 His	 own	 invention	 will	 throw	 him	 out	 of	 his	 job,
because	the	computer	can	do	things	in	afar	better	way,	far	more	efficiently	than
the	scientist	himself.
It	 can	 be	 very	 logical,	 absolutely	 logical,	 in	 fact	 it	 can	 never	 be	 illogical.
Because	man	 is	 illogical	 I	 say	 that	he	 is	not	 a	machine;	his	 illogicality	proves
that	he	is	non-mechanical.	And	the	greatest	illogical	phenomenon	in	man's	life	is
love.	It	 is	beyond	all	 logic,	 it	 is	beyond	all	arithmetic.	That's	why	people	think
that	lovers	are	blind,	that	they	are	mad.	In	a	sense	they	are	mad	because	they	are
no	 more	 functioning	 through	 their	 intellects.	 They	 function	 from	 a	 totally
different	centre	of	their	being.
Love	is	the	only	phenomenon	that	gives	man	the	dignity	of	being	a	non-machine.
Other	than	that,	anything	that	man	can	do,	machines	can	do	in	a	better	way,	in	a
cheaper	way,	in	a	quicker	way	--	only	love	is	impossible.	It	is	inconceivable	that
two	machines	could	be	in	love.
Love	is	the	greatest	gift	because	it	is	love	that	makes	you	really	human.	But	very
few	people	are	really	loving.	And	unless	you	love	you	will	not	live	your	life,	you
will	only	drag.	Your	life	will	be	superficial,	stale,	dull.	You	will	live	and	yet	you
will	not	live.	You	will	die,	but	even	your	death	will	be	dull,	because	unless	you
really	live	how	can	you	really	die?	Only	when	a	person	lives	intensely	does	he
die	intensely.
Then	life	is	beautiful	and	death	too.	But	it	is	love	that	makes	both	life	and	death
beautiful.
Let	love	be	the	only	law,	the	only	commandment.	And	it	 is	enough:	if	you	can
fulfil	 one	 commandment	 the	 other	 ten	 commandments	 will	 be	 fulfilled
automatically.
Andy.
Bliss	is	only	for	those	who	are	courageous,	daring,	brave,	because	bliss	happens
only	when	you	have	moved	beyond	the	known	into	the	unknown.	Whenever	you
become	confined	to	the	known	your	life	becomes	routine,	repetitive.	It	goes	on
moving	in	the	same	rut,	it	goes	around	in	circles,	and	slowly	slowly	it	dulls	all
your	sensitivities,	all	your	receptivities.	It	harden	people.	It	makes	them	blind,	it
makes	 them	 deaf,	 it	 makes	 them	 dumb,	 because	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 see	 and
nothing	to	hear	and	nothing	to	taste	and	nothing	to	feel.	They	have	known	it	all;
it	 is	 the	same	repetition.	How	can	there	be	bliss	 in	such	a	 life?	Such	a	 life	has
only	one	taste	--	that	of	misery,	depression,	a	sadness,	a	settled	sadness.
But	if	one	is	courageous	enough	to	move	continuously	from	the	known	into	the
unknown,	from	the	familiar	into	the	unfamiliar....	It	is	risky,	because	the	familiar
is	 secure,	 safe.	 And	 who	 knows	 what	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 if	 you	 go	 into	 the
unknown,	 into	 the	 uncharted?	 You	 take	 your	 small	 boat	 and	 you	 go	 into	 the
uncharted	 sea.	who	knows	 if	 you	will	 ever	 come	back	 to	 the	old	 shore	 again?
Who	can	give	you	a	guarantee?	There	is	no	guarantee.
But	 unless	 one	 is	 ready	 to	 live	 in	 such	 a	 dangerous	 state	 one	 cannot	 remain
blissful....	Live	dangerously
--	because	life	knows	no	other	way:	it	has	to	be	lived	dangerously.
Remember	 that	 as	 one	 of	 the	most	 fundamental	 qualities	 of	 a	 religious	 life	 --
particularly	 the	 way	 I	 see	 religion.	 For	 the	 sannyasin	 courage	 is	 the	 greatest
virtue.	and	then	bliss	goes	on	happening:	you	need	not	seek	or	search	for	it,	it	is
a	 by-product	 of	 a	 courageous	 life.	 If	 one	 is	 ready	 to	 live	 dangerously	 many
flowers	of	bliss	are	going	to	bloom.
Chitprem	means	conscious	love.
Ordinarily	 love	 is	 unconscious,	 it	 is	 instinctive;	 hence	 it	 is	 not	 love	 but	 lust.
Unless	we	transform	our	love	into	a	conscious	phenomenon	it	is	not	really	love.
and	 to	 make	 love	 conscious	 takes	 great	 effort.	 That	 effort	 is	 meditation:
meditation	is	the	process	of	changing	love	into	a	conscious	phenomenon.
Become	 more	 alert	 to	 everything	 in	 your	 life.	 Only	 then	 can	 you	 ultimately
become	conscious	of	your	love.	Walk	consciously,	eat	consciously.	Talk,	listen,
consciously,	 with	 great	 alertness,	 intensity,	 attentiveness.	 Let	 attentiveness	 be
spread	all	over	your	life,	from	very	small,	ordinary	acts	like	taking	a	bath.
When	you	can	transform	these	ordinary	things	into	conscious	acts	then	it	will	be
possible	to	bring	consciousness	to	love	energy.
Love	 energy	 is	 the	 deepest	 energy	 of	 your	 being.	 First	 transform	 the
circumference,	 then	 the	 center.	 But	 the	 process	 is	 the	 same;	 the	 name	 of	 the
process	is	awareness	of	meditation.	and	that	has	to	be	your	work:	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
meditative.	It	is	meditation	that	is	going	to	give	you	a	new	birth.
Satgyan	means	true	knowledge.
Knowledge	 borrowed	 from	 others	 is	 untrue,	 knowledge	 gathered	 from	 the
outside	 is	 untrue.	 It	 hides	 your	 ignorance	 but	 it	 does	 not	 make	 you	 wise.	 It
covers	 up	 your	 wounds	 but	 it	 does	 not	 heal.	 In	 a	 way	 it	 is	 very	 dangerous
because	one	tends	to	forget	one's	wounds,	and	the	wounds	go	on	growing	inside;
they	can	become	canceric.	It	is	better	to	know	them.	It	is	better	to	open	them	to
the	winds,	to	the	rains,	to	the	sun.
Hiding	 them	 is	 protecting	 them,	 and	 they	 are	 your	 enemies.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 let
them	 be	 exposed	 --	 nature	 heals.	Hence	 the	 first	 step	 of	 true	 knowledge	 is	 to
know	"I	know	nothing";	that	is	exposing	your	ignorance.
And	 from	 that	moment	 a	 turning	 happens,	 a	 great	 change	 happens:	 one	 starts
looking	inwards.
True	knowledge	has	to	happen	within	you.	It	can't	come	through	thoughts,	it	has
to	 come	 through	 a	 thoughtless	 space	 within	 you.	 It	 cannot	 come	 through
studying,	 it	 comes	 through	meditation.	 It	 comes	only	when	 the	mind	becomes
absolutely	 contentless,	 so	 utterly	 empty	 and	 pure,	 uncontaminated,	 unpolluted,
that	your	own	inner	sources	start	flowing	because	all	 the	hindrances	have	been
removed.
The	source	from	where	the	spring	can	flow	is	there,	but	there	are	many	rocks	in
the	way,	and	those	rocks	are	thought	to	be	knowledge.	They	are	not	knowledge
but	enemies	of	knowledge.	Drop	all	 that	you	have	learned	from	the	without	so
that	 the	 within	 can	 speak	 to	 you,	 and	 then	 you	 will	 know	 the	 flavor	 of	 true
knowledge,	knowing.	True	knowing	liberates.
Gyanprem.
That's	 exactly	 the	 meaning	 of	 philosophy	 --	 love	 of	 knowing,	 and	 of	 a
philosopher	 --	 a	 lover	 of	 truth,	 a	 lover	 of	 knowledge.	 The	 only	 thing	 to	 be
remembered	is	that	knowledge	does	not	consist	of	accumulating	information.	It
does	not	consist	of	learning	from	others;	on	the	contrary	it	consists	of	a	process
of	unlearning.	One	really	becomes	a	knower	when	one	becomes	as	innocent	as	a
child	 again.	When	 the	mirror	 of	 consciousness	 is	 absolutely	 contentless,	when
the	lake	of	consciousness	has	no	waves,	no	ripples	even,	then	the	whole	sky,	the
whole	 existence,	 is	 reflected	 in	 you	 in	 all	 its	 glory,	 in	 all	 its	 beauty,	 in	 all	 its
grandeur;	and	that	experience	is	God.
Be	 empty,	 be	 still.	 In	 fact	 be	 not.	 Be	 just	 nothingness	 so	 that	 the	 whole	 can
descend	in	you,	so	that	the	whole	can	be	reflected	by	your	consciousness.	That
experience	 is	 the	 only	 religious	 experience,	 the	 only	 mystical	 experience.	 It
gives	you	a	certainty	about	God,	not	a	belief	but	absolute	certainty.	It	gives	you
absolute	clarity.	God	becomes	your	own	experience.	It	is	not	that	Jesus	says	so
or	Buddha	says	so	or	I	say	so,	but	that	you	know	it.	The	experience	penetrates
into	your	very	guts,	it	becomes	part	of	your	being.	Only	then	is	the	goal	achieved
and	is	life	fulfilled.
Deva	Stephan	means	the	voice	of	the	divine.
God	speaks	in	everyone's	heart,	but	we	are	so	occupied	in	the	head	that	we	never
listen	to	that	still,	small	voice	within.	There	is	so	much	clamoring,	chattering,	so
much	unnecessary	noise	--	we	have	made	the	head	a	marketplace	--	that	the	heart
goes	on	calling	and	we	remain	deaf	to	it.	God	is	not	far	away,	he	is	very	close.
All	that	is	needed	is	the	art	of	making	the	mind	a	little	silent,	a	little	less	noisy,	a
little	more	 peaceful,	 relaxed.	 as	 the	mind	 settles	 into	 relaxation,	 suddenly	 you
start	 hearing	 a	 divine	 music	 within	 you.	 God	 has	 started	 playing	 on	 the
instrument	 of	 your	 heart,	 on	 the	 harp	 of	 your	 heart	 --	 and	 that	 music	 is
transforming.
Once	heard	 it	 is	never	forgotten;	once	heard	 life	 is	never	 the	same	again;	once
heard	you	have	become	part	of	immortal	existence;	you	are	no	more	a	mortal.
And	this	is	my	whole	work	here:	to	help	you	to	get	out	of	the	mind,	to	put	the
mind	into	deep	silence	so	that	the	heart	can	start	functioning,	to	come	closer	to
the	heart	so	that	you	can	hear	what	its	message	is.
All	 the	Bibles,	 all	 the	Vedas,	 all	 the	Gitas,	 all	 the	Korans,	 are	 hidden	 in	 your
heart.	Every	heart	has	all	that	is	worth	knowing;	one	need	not	go	anywhere	else.
Lao	Tzu	says,	"To	know	truth	you	need	not	go	outside	your	room,"	and	by	room
he	really	means	your	body.	You	need	not	go	out	of	your	house	 --	by	house	he
means	your	body	--	"You	are	already	provided	for."
Truth	 is	our	 intrinsic	heritage,	but	we	go	on	 living	 in	 the	mind,	 in	dreams	and
desires	and	all	kinds	of	stupid	 ideas,	noises.	We	go	on	 living	 in	 that	confusion
called	mind.
By	becoming	a	 sannyasin	you	are	 taking	 the	 first	 step	 towards	 the	heart,	 from
confusion	towards	clarity.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
9	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912095
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Wisdom	 is	 rare,	 knowledge	 is	 cheap.	Knowledge	 is	 available	 everywhere;	 you
can	gather	it	from	the	books,	from	the	schools,	from	the	teachers.	It	is	a	simple
process:	 it	 is	 just	 feeding	your	biocomputer,	 your	brain,	with	 information,	 and
the	 brain	 goes	 on	 accumulating	 it.	 The	 brain	 is	 really	 a	 very	 sophisticated
complex	instrument,	the	most	sophisticated.	Man	has	not	been	able	to	make	any
computers	so	complicated	yet.
A	 single	man's	 brain	 cells	 can	 contain	 all	 the	 information	 available	 in	 all	 the
libraries	 in	 the	whole	world.	But	you	 remain	 the	 same.	Your	memory	goes	on
growing	but	your	being	remains	a	cipher.
Wisdom	 means	 the	 growth	 of	 the	 being;	 knowledge	 means	 the	 growth	 of
memory....
Forget	 knowledge	 and	 get	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into	wisdom.	Obviously	 nobody
can	teach	it	to	you.	You	have	to	open	your	heart	to	the	wind,	to	the	rain,	to	the
sun,	 to	the	whole	of	existence,	 in	deep	trust.	And	in	that	very	opening	wisdom
arises.	In	that	very	opening,	in	that	very	surrender	to	the	whole,	one	starts	seeing,
one	is	no	more	blind.
David	 means	 beloved	 of	 god.	 It	 comes	 from	 a	 Hebrew	 word	 dodavehu.
Dodavehu	means	beloved	of	Jehovah.	It	 is	one	of	 the	most	 important	 things	 to
remember,	and	to	remember	constantly:	god	loves	you.
One	tends	to	forget.
There	 are	 problems	 in	 life	 and	 there	 are	 agonies	 to	 be	 encountered	 and	 to	 be
surpassed.	Life	is	not	just	a	bed	of	roses;	hence	many	times	one	tends	to	forget
that	god	loves	you.	In	fact	great	doubt	arises:	"How	can	there	be	a	god	if	I	am	in
such	 suffering?	 How	 can	 god	 allow	 such	 suffering?	 If	 he	 is	 omnipotent,
omniscient,	omnipresent,	then	why	does	suffering	exist	at	all?	He	can	see	that	it
is	 there	 because	 he	 is	 omniscient,	 he	 can	 feel	 that	 it	 is	 there	 because	 he	 is
omnipresent,	and	he	can	change	it	immediately	because	he	is	omnipotent.
Then	why	does	the	world	go	on	living	in	suffering?"
There	 is	every	 reason	 to	disbelieve	 in	god	and	 there	 is	no	 reason	 to	believe	 in
god.	The	mind	can	supply	a	thousand	and	one	reasons	why	god	cannot	be,	but
the	mind	cannot	 supply	 even	a	 single	 reason	 for	god's	 existence.	 In	 fact,	 from
mind	there	is	no	way	towards	god.	Mind	is	just	the	opposite	of	god:	it	is	keeping
your	back	towards	god	--	and	if	you	keep	your	back	towards	god	how	can	you
see?	Hence	the	importance	of	constantly	remembering	that	god	loves	you,	that	if
there	is	suffering	then	there	must	be	meaning	in	suffering,	otherwise	there	would
be	no	 suffering.	And	 there	 is	meaning	 in	 suffering.	 It	 is	 through	 suffering	 that
one	becomes	integrated.
Suffering	is	a	challenge.	It	is	not	a	disease	to	be	destroyed,	it	is	a	challenge	to	be
accepted,	it	is	an	adventure.	In	the	very	effort	to	transcend	suffering	one	arrives
at	 one's	 real	 being.	 It	 has	 a	 purpose:	 without	 it	 there	 will	 be	 no	 evolution	 of
consciousness.	 Pain	 is	 not	 without	 purpose;	 hence	whatsoever	 the	world	 is,	 it
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	as	it	should	be.	It	is	the	most	perfect	world	there	can	be.	It	cannot	be	improved
upon.
But	I	can	understand	--	it	is	very	human	to	forget	that	god	loves	you.	When	you
are	in	misery	how	can	you	remember	it?	But	those	are	the	moments	to	remember
that	god	loves	you.	And	if	misery	has	come	to	you,	then	it	is	because	he	has	sent
it.	It	has	to	be	accepted	with	gratitude.
At	the	last	moment	on	the	cross	Jesus	said	"Why?	Why	have	you	forsaken	me?"
Even	Jesus	questioned.
In	a	way	I	love	his	questioning.	It	shows	his	humanity,	it	shows	that	he	was	just
part	of	us,	one	of	us.	He	asked	god	"Why?	Why	have	you	forsaken	me?	Why	am
I	going	 through	such	suffering?	What	 is	 the	purpose	of	 it?	What	wrong	have	I
done?	For	what	am	I	being	punished?"
But	 immediately	 he	 remembers	 --	 immediately,	 instantly,	 he	 remembers.	Only
for	a	moment	does	the	agony,	the	suffering,	possess	him;	again	he	transcends	it
and	he	says,	"Let	thy	kingdom	come,	let	thy	will	be	done."	He	has	remembered
that	god	loves,	that	if	the	cross	has	happened,	if	he	is	crucified,	then	it	is	god's
will;	then	there	must	be	something	hidden	behind	it,	then	it	must	be	a	blessing	in
disguise.	He	has	become	surrendered.	Just	a	moment	before,	the	last	part	of	the
human	mind	was	still	 trying	 to	struggle;	now	he	has	dropped	 that	 too.	He	dies
enlightened,	he	dies	a	Buddha,	he	dies	a	Christ.
So	go	on	remembering.	You	may	not	be	crucified,	but	the	whole	of	life	is	a	cross
and	 every	moment	 there	 is	 suffering	 and	 there	 are	 problems,	 there	 is	 anguish,
anxiety.	 In	 fact	 to	 suffer	 crucifixion	 is	 easier	 because	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of
minutes	or,	at	 the	most,	hours.	 In	Jesus'	 time	it	was	a	question	of	a	few	hours,
because	 the	 Hebrew	 way	 of	 crucifying	 a	 person	 was	 very	 ugly.	 The	 person
would	remain	hanging	for	hours:	six	hours,	eight	hours,	twelve	hours.	Now	there
are	electric	chairs.	We	have	found	better	ways:	you	can	simply	relax	in	a	chair
and	you	are	gone!	Not	even	for	a	single	moment	will	you	be	able	to	say	"Why?
Why	have	you	forsaken	me?"
But	 the	 whole	 of	 life	 is	 a	 crucifixion.	 Each	 moment,	 at	 each	 step,	 there	 is
suffering,	there	is	agony.
Remember:	 god	 loves	 you,	 and	 all	 that	 happens	 has	 to	 be	 accepted	 with
gratefulness.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
God	is	always	new,	never	old,	always	young.	Truth	is	always	fresh	--	as	fresh	as
the	dewdrops	 in	 the	early	morning	sun,	as	 fresh	as	 the	newly	opened	bud	of	a
rose.	Truth	 is	not	a	 tradition,	because	 tradition	means	 the	old.	Truth	cannot	be
contained	by	any	scripture	because	all	scriptures	are	old.	Truth	has	no	past	and
no	future;	truth	has	only	one	tense,	the	present.	And	to	know	the	truth	you	also
have	to	be	as	fresh	as	truth,	only	then	is	there	the	possibility	of	communion.
So	drop	the	past,	forget	the	past,	and	don't	brood	about	the	future.	That	which	is
no	more	is	no	more,	and	that	which	is	not	yet	is	not	yet.	Live	in	the	moment.	In
that	 very	 living	 one	 penetrates	 into	 the	 very	 core	 of	 existence.	 One	 comes	 to
know	God	and	one	comes	to	know	what	liberation	is.
They	say,	"You	reap	as	you	sow."	If	we	are	miserable	that	simply	means	that	we
have	ben	sowing	misery.	Nobody	else	creates	misery	for	you.	Of	course	there	is
a	 gap	 between	 sowing	 and	 reaping,	 and	 because	 of	 that	 gap	 we	 think	 that
somebody	else	is	responsible.	The	gap	deceives	us...
Take	the	whole	responsibility	for	your	life.	If	it	is	ugly	feel	responsible	for	it.	If
it	is	nothing	but	anguish	take	responsibility	for	it.	In	the	beginning	it	is	hard	to
accept	that	"I	am	the	cause	of	my	own	hell"...	but	only	in	the	beginning.	Soon	it
starts	opening	doors	of	transformation,	because	if	I	am	responsible	for	my	hell,
then	I	can	create	my	heaven	too.	If	I	have	created	so	much	anguish	for	myself	I
can	create	so	much	ecstasy	too.	Responsibility	brings	freedom	and	responsibility
brings	creativity..
The	moment	you	see	that	whatsoever	you	are	is	your	own	creation,	you	are	freed
from	 all	 outer	 causes	 and	 circumstances.	Now	 it	 is	 up	 to	 you:	 you	 can	 sing	 a
beautiful	 song,	 you	 can	 dance	 a	 beautiful	 dance,	 you	 can	 live	 a	 life	 of
celebration,	 your	 life	 can	be	 a	 constant	 festival;	 nobody	 can	disturb	 it.	This	 is
human	dignity.	God	is	a	great	respector	of	individuals,	and	a	person	becomes	an
individual	only	when	he	takes	the	whole	responsibility	for	himself	upon	himself.
It	is	only	through	bliss	that	one	can	be	really	noble.	It	is	only	through	bliss	that
one	can	have	a	really	noble	birth.	Physically	al	births	are	the	same:	you	may	be
born	a	king	or	to	a	beggar,	it	doesn't	matter.
Physiologically	nobody	is	noble	or	ignoble,	nobility	is	something	spiritual.	It	is
not	given	to	you	with	birth,	it	has	to	be	earned,	it	has	to	be	created.	One	has	to
work	for	it.	It	is	an	arduous	journey,	an	uphill	task.	One	has	to	rise	above	many
things.
It	 is	easy	 to	 fall;	 it	 is	difficult	 to	 rise,	because	when	you	fall	nature	helps	you,
gravitation	 helps	 you.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 rolling	 stone	 from	 the	 hill:	 gravitation	 is
enough.	But	when	you	are	rising	towards	the	peaks	you	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
moving	 against	 gravitation.	 Although	 there	 is	 another	 nature,	 a	 higher	 nature,
which	will	help	you,	you	will	become	aware	of	it	only	later	on.	The	initial	work
has	 to	be	done	 first,	 then	you	will	 become	aware	of	 another	 law	 --	 the	 law	of
grace	--	which	pulls	you	upwards	just	as	gravitation	pulls	your	downwards.	But
for	 that	one	has	 to	be	utterly	pure.	One	has	 to	 learn	how	to	 trust,	how	to	 love,
how	to	surrender.	Then	a	moment	comes	in	 life	when	falling	upwards	is	really
falling	 --	 although	 it	 is	 falling	upwards.	There	 is	no	effort	needed:	you	simply
relax	 and	 some	 grace	 starts	 taking	 you,	 starts	 pulling	 you	 up.	 You	 are	 given
wings.
Sannyas	is	the	initial	work	to	purify	you,	to	help	you	learn	how	to	be	available	to
the	beyond	so	that	grace	can	possess	you.	Sannyas	is	a	new	birth;	one	becomes
noble,	in	the	real	sense	of	the	word.
So	let	this	be	a	second	birth.	Jesus	says	'Unless	you	are	born	again	you	shall	not
enter	 into	 my	 kingdom	 of	 god.	What	 does	 he	 mean	 by	 'Unless	 you	 are	 born
again'?	He	is	indicating	the	birth	of	initiation.	He	is	talking	about	sannyas	in	his
own	way.
So	now	the	real	 journey	starts.	Up	to	now	you	have	lived	only	in	sleep	--	now
there	is	a	possibility	of	waking	up.	And	without	waking	up	one	never	becomes
aware	of	the	meaning	of	existence,	of	the	great	poetry	of	life,	of	the	great	ecstasy
of	existence.	 It	 is	 tremendously	beautiful,	but	we	are	 fast	asleep	and	we	go	on
missing	it.	God	goes	on	knocking	on	the	door	but	we	are	snoring	inside.
So	now	let	sannyas	become	a	real	effort,	real	work	to	be	born	again.
Herman.
A	warrior	can	be	of	two	types:	one	is	engaged	in	external	war,	war	with	others;
the	other	 is	 interior	war,	war	with	one's	own	 sleep,	unconsciousness,	war	with
one's	own	stupidity,	lethargy.
Don't	 be	 a	 warrior	 in	 the	 external	 sense	 of	 the	 word,	 that	 is	 violence;	 but
certainly	be	a	warrior	in	the	internal	sense,	because	there	is	much	which	has	to
be	overcome	and	there	is	much	which	has	to	be	transformed	and	there	is	much
which	has	to	be	released.
One	 is	almost	 in	prison	and	a	great	 fight	 is	needed	 to	get	out	of	 it.	The	prison
consists	of	our	mind.
Consciousness	 is	 the	 prisoner;	 the	 mind	 is	 the	 prison.	 The	 whole	 process	 of
meditation	is	to	dissolve	the	mind,	to	dissolve	the	walls	of	the	prison,	to	help	you
to	become	no-mind.	and	 the	moment	you	know	 that	even	 for	a	 single	moment
you	 can	 become	 a	 no-mind,	 you	 have	 known	 your	 potential,	 you	 have
recognized	your	 possibility,	 your	 future	 has	 dawned.	Now	you	 can	move	with
the	absolute	guarantee	that	the	morning	is	not	far	away,	because	the	first	ray	has
been	experienced.	The	first	ray	is	difficult.	The	whole	difficulty	consists	 in	 the
first	 glimpse.	 we	 have	 lived	 in	 the	 mind	 for	 centuries,	 we	 have	 become	 so
accustomed	to	it.
Day	in,	day	out,	we	are	surrounded	by	thoughts,	desires,	memories,	imagination.
Seek	 the	 gaps	 between	 two	 thoughts	 and	 start	moving	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into
those	 intervals,	 into	 those	 gaps:	 those	 gaps	 are	 the	windows	 into	God.	That	 is
going	 to	 be	 your	war	 from	 now	 onwards....	 attain	 to	 thoughtless	moments,	 to
contentless	consciousness,	and	then	everything	else	follows	of	its	own	accord.
You	create	the	space	of	no-mind	and	god	comes	and	fills	it.
Melanie.
In	 the	 beginning	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 understand	 that	 darkness	 can	 also	 be
divine.	 But	 it	 has	 to	 be	 because	 only	God	 exists,	 so	whatsoever	 is,	 is	 divine.
Light	is	divine,	so	is	darkness;	white	is	divine,	so	is	blackness;	life	is	divine,	so
is	death.	It	 is	difficult	 to	accept	because	for	centuries	we	have	been	taught	this
dichotomy:	 that	 light	 is	good	and	dark	is	bad,	white	has	some	nobility	about	 it
and	black	is	evil.	But	that	is	sheer	stupidity.	You	can't	divide	life	in	that	way	--	it
is	all	one.	The	day	 turns	 into	night,	 the	night	 turns	 into	day;	 the	young	person
becomes	 old,	 the	 child	 becomes	 a	 young	man;	 life	 turns	 into	 death	 and	 death
opens	 the	 door	 for	 a	 new	 birth.	 Things	 are	 not	 separate;	 all	 divisions	 are
utilitarian,	artificial,	arbitrary.	Life	is	an	undivided	whole.
The	 Old	 Testament	 says	 that	 god	 created	 the	 world	 in	 six	 days	 and	 then	 he
looked	around,	he	saw	his	own	creation	and	he	said	"Good,	very	good!"
My	sannyasins	ask	me	why	I	say	"Good,	very	good!"	so	many	times	--	it	is	an
old	habit!
He	must	have	seen	darkness,	he	must	have	seen	death,	he	must	have	seen	thorns.
He	must	have	seen	everything,	because	in	those	six	days	he	created	everything.
All	that	we	see	in	life	was	created,	and	he	said
"Good";	 he	 blessed	 it	 all.	 That	 is	 a	 tremendous	 statement.	 That	 means	 that
nothing	is	bad.	Even	the	bad	has	something	good	in	it;	there	must	be	something
hidden	in	it.	We	may	not	have	been	able	to	discover	it	--
that's	another	thing,	that	is	our	fault.	Otherwise	even	in	darkness	one	can	see	a
kind	of	luminosity	and	in	death	one	can	see	eternal	life.
Remember	it:	life	is	an	undivided	whole.	And	the	devil	is	also	divine.	In	fact	the
words	"divine"	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
"devil"	come	from	the	same	root:	they	both	mean	divine,	they	both	come	from
the	Sanskrit	root	div,	which	means	divine.
The	devil	was	also	an	angel	first.	God	created	him	and	he	must	have	created	in
him	the	desire	 to	 rebel,	otherwise	from	where	could	 the	desire	have	come?	He
must	 have	 seduced	 him	 to	 rebel,	 persuaded	 him	 to	 rebel;	 there	 is	 no	 other
explanation	 possible.	 The	 devil	 is	 nothing	 but	 God's	 agent,	 CIA,	 working	 in
secrecy.
Once	 we	 can	 see	 the	 wholeness	 then	 our	 inner	 divisions	 also	 disappear.	 Our
condemnations,	 that	 this	 is	 bad	 and	 this	 is	 good	 and	 this	 is	 higher	 and	 this	 is
lower	--	they	all	disappear.	Then	a	beautiful	chaos	arises.
Yes,	a	chaos,	but	a	chaos	which	contains	the	cosmos	in	it,	a	chaos	out	of	which
stars	are	born.
My	effort	here	is	to	teach	my	sannyasins	to	love	the	whole	as	it	is,	without	any
condemnation,	 without	 any	 renunciation,	 without	 any	 rejection...	 a	 total
affirmation,	an	absolute	yes,	a	categorical	yes.	That's	my	whole	message	to	my
sannyasins:	a	categorical	yes	to	the	whole	of	life.	and	then	there	is	joy,	then	there
is	only	joy,	then	there	is	no	other	possibility.	Then	even	in	sadness	you	will	be
able	 to	 find	something	beautiful	 to	dance	about,	 to	sing	for,	 to	be	 thankful	 for.
That	is	the	beauty	of	the	religious	man:	he	can	be	thankful	in	every	situation	--
he	is	grateful	in	every	situation.
Veetkarmo	means	 transcending	 action,	 going	 beyond	 action.	 It	 does	 not	mean
becoming	inactive.	it	simply	means	knowing	that	you	are	only	a	witness	of	the
action,	not	getting	identified	with	the	action.	There	is	no	need	to	escape	from	life
into	a	monastery,	 into	 the	Himalayan	caves.	Live	 in	 life	and	 live	 intensely	and
passionately,	but	still	remember	that	your	consciousness	is	only	a	mirror	which
reflects	and	which	 is	never	 identified	with	anything	 that	 it	 reflects.	The	mirror
can	 reflect	 the	 tree-it	never	becomes	 the	 tree;	 it	 can	 reflect	 the	cow	--	 it	never
becomes	the	cow.	It	never	clings	to	any	reflection;	it	remains	empty,	it	remains
pure.
Our	consciousness	is	an	absolutely	pure,	mirrorlike	phenomenon,	just	reflecting.
Don't	 get	 identified	 with	 your	 actions.	 Act,	 and	 act	 totally,	 but	 without
identification....	 Once	 I	 was	 asked,	 "Is	 God	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a	Mohammedan	 or	 a
Jaina	or	a	Buddhist	or	a	Jew	or	a	Rajneesh	sannyasin?"
I	 said:	God	 is	not	 a	Hindu	because	he	 is	not	 so	 lousy.	 If	 he	were	 a	Hindu	 the
world	would	 be	 a	 chaos,	 it	would	 have	 disappeared	 long	 ago.	Nothing	would
have	worked	 out,	 everything	would	 have	 gone	wrong,	 everything	would	 have
been	 topsy-turvy.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 Mohammedan	 because	 he	 is	 not	 a	 fanatic.	 He
allows	for	even	those	who	don't	believe	in	God,	who	are	against	him.	He	allows
them	as	much	freedom	and	as	much	life	and	as	much	energy	as	 those	who	are
devotees.	He	is	not	against	the	atheist:	he	can't	be	a	Mohammedan.	He	is	not	a
Christian	either.	Christians	cannot	say	of	him	that	he	is	a	saint.	He	is	not	so	long-
faced,	he	is	not	so	sad.	He	is	in	tremendous	love	with	the	whole	of	life,	from	the
lowest	to	the	highest.
He	 is	 not	 a	 Jaina,	 otherwise	 he	would	 have	 renounced	 the	world.	He	 is	 not	 a
Buddhist,	otherwise	he	would	have	turned	away.
The	only	possibility	is	that	he	may	be	a	Jew...	because	who	else	works	six	days	a
week?	And	 he	 is	 not	 a	Rajneesh	 sannyasin,	 certainly	 because	 they	work	 eight
days	 per	 week!	 They	 have	 out-jewed	 Jews!	 But	 he	 is	 totally	 in	 the	 world,
working,	 just	 taking	 one	 day's	 rest.	He	 is	 not	 against	 action,	 but	 he	 is	 beyond
action.
In	the	East	we	have	a	metaphor	for	him:	God	is	like	a	lotus	leaf.	The	lotus	leaf	is
in	 the	water	 but	 remains	 untouched	 by	 the	water.	 Be	 in	 the	world	 but	 remain
untouched	by	it.
Man	 tries	 to	 be	 a	master.	His	whole	 life	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 attain	mastery,	 power,
prestige.	He	tries	to	accumulate	money	to	be	powerful,	to	have	fame,	or	to	make
a	great	empire.	This	is	the	worldly	man's	effort,	this	is	how	Alexander	the	Great
moves,	he	 is	 the	paradigm.	But	 there	 is	a	 totally	different	approach	 to	 life	 toot
the	life	of	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ.	They	don't	try	to	be	the	masters	of	the	world;	on
the	contrary	they	try	to	become	just	servants	of	the	whole.	The	miracle	and	the
paradox	 is	 that	Alexander	dies	 a	 beggar	 and	Buddha,	 the	beggar,	 lives	 like	 an
emperor	and	dies	 like	an	emperor.	The	paradox	 is	 that	 those	who	 try	 to	be	 the
masters	 are	 reduced	 to	 servants,	 and	 those	who	 try	 to	 be	 the	 servants	 become
masters.
Jesus	says:	Those	who	are	 the	 last	here	will	be	 the	 first	 in	 the	kingdom	of	my
god.	That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	your	name	--	let	it	become	your	life	too.
Premdas	 means	 a	 servant	 of	 love	 --	 and	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 work	 on
yourself.	Just	dissolve	yourself	into	a	loving	energy,	just	become	a	loving	energy
--	 not	 in	 love	with	 something	 in	 particular	 ;but	 just	 having	 love	 for	 each	 and
everything,	even	for	nothing!	It	is	not	a	question	of	an	object	of	love	but	of	just
an	overflowing	loving	energy.
If	 you	 are	 sitting	 silently	 in	 your	 room	 let	 the	 room	 be	 full	 of	 loving	 energy,
create	an	aura	of	love	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
around	yourself.	And	you	can	do	it,	that's	why	I	am	saying	it.	I	only	give	things
to	you	which	I	can	see	are	possible.	 I	don't	ask	 the	 impossible	--	never!	I	only
indicate	what	is	going	to	happen	to	you	very	naturally.	It	is	very	simple	and	very
naturally	possible	for	you	to	become	just	love.	That	will	be	your	prayer	and	that
will	be	your	meditation.
If	you	are	looking	at	the	trees,	you	are	in	love	with	the	trees;	if	you	are	looking
at	the	stars,	you	are	in	love	with	the	stars.	You	are	 love,	 that's	all.	So	wherever
you	are	go	on	pouring	your	love...	onto	rocks,	and	when	you	pour	love	on	rocks
even	 rocks	 are	 no	 more	 rocks.	 Love	 is	 such	 a	 miracle,	 such	 magic,	 that	 it
transforms	everything	into	the	beloved.	You	become	love	and	existence	becomes
your	beloved,	existence	becomes	god
People	seek	and	search	for	god	without	becoming	love.	How	can	they	find	him?
They	 don't	 have	 the	 necessary	 equipment,	 the	 necessary	 context	 and	 space.
Create	love	and	forget	all	about	god.	Suddenly	one	day	you	will	encounter	him
everywhere.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
10	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912105
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Shella.
Man	is	born	blind.	Eyes	have	to	be	earned.	Eyes	have	to	be	achieved.	Life	is	an
opportunity	 to	 achieve	 eyes.	 Physiologically,	 we	 have	 eyes	 and	 ears,	 but
spiritually,	we	have	no	eyes	and	no	ears	and	no	heart.	The	physiological	is	only	a
condition	--	a	necessary	condition	but	only	a	condition,	a	context,	 in	which	the
spiritual	is	possible.
It	can	happen	but	there	is	no	inevitability	about	it.	Unless	we	work	for	it,	it	is	not
going	 to	 happen.	And	 nobody	 can	 give	 you	 eyes;	 you	 have	 to	 attain	 them	 on
your	own.	The	Buddhas	only	point	the	way.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	not	becoming	part	of	a	creed,	because	I	have
none;	 you	 are	 not	 becoming	 part	 of	 a	 sect,	 because	 this	 is	 not	 a	 sect	 at	 all.	 I
believe	in	the	individual,	my	belief	 in	the	individual	 is	absolute.	This	is	not	an
organization.	The	relationship	is	personal	and	intimate;	each	sannyasin	is	related
to	me	directly	--	there	is	no	via.	But	I	can	only	indicate,	I	can	become	a	finger
pointing	 to	 the	moon:	 then	 you	 have	 to	make	 the	whole	 journey.	 It	 is	 a	 long,
arduous	journey	but	tremendously	ecstatic	too,	with	many	thrills	and	adventures.
It	is	not	a	boring	journey	--	arduous	certainly	but	tremendously	interesting:	there
is	nothing	more	mysterious	than	the	path	of	spiritual	growth.
In	 the	 East	 philosophy	 is	 called	 darshan;	 darshan	means	 capacity	 to	 see.	 The
English	word	'philosophy'
is	poor	compared	to	the	Eastern	darshan.	Philosophy	gives	the	idea	of	thinking,
of	intellectual	effort,	Darshan	is	totally	different,	it	is	the	existential	capacity	to
see.	And	 that's	 exactly	 the	meaning	 of	 your	 name	 now:	 go	 beyond	 blindness,
attain	to	eyes.	The	potential	is	there	in	everyone,	the	seed	is	there;	now	the	time
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
has	come	to	sow	it.	And	sooner	or	later,	if	one	goes	on	following	the	path	rightly,
intensely,	passionately,	 lovingly,	 the	 time	of	 reaping	also	arrives.	 It	will	not	be
long.
I	can	see	the	possibility,	the	future.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	total	commitment.	And
you	can	do	it,	you	are	capable	of	it.
I	 ask	 only	 that	 which	 you	 can	 do,	 that	 of	 which	 you	 are	 capable.	 The	 more
capable	you	are,	the	more	I	ask;	from	you	I	ask	total	commitment.
Judy.
Prayer	is	praising	the	lord	for	all	that	is.	It	is	an	approach	of	a	yes-saying	heart
which	knows	no	doubt,	no	skepticism,	no	negativity,	which	can	dance	and	sing
because	the	world	is	so	beautiful.	It	is	such	a	gift...
of	 which	we	 are	 not	 worthy.	We	 cannot	 repay	 the	 lord;	 all	 that	 we	 can	 do	 is
praise.	We	can	sing	hallelujah	and	if	one	becomes	a	full	hallelujah	nothing	else	is
needed,	then	everything	is	possible.	Then	even	the	impossible	is	possible.
So	 let	 prayer	 be	 your	 path.	 Praise	 in	 as	 many	 ways	 as	 possible,	 and	 never
complain;	 drop	 the	 complaining	 mind.	 And	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 decision.
Once	 it	 is	 decided,	 one	 starts	 dropping	 the	 old	 habit	 of	 complaining	 and	 the
whole	energy	starts	moving	in	praise	--	and	praise	brings	blessings,	benediction.
Praise	in	all	possible	ways:	praise	the	sunset	and	the	clouds	and	the	trees	and	the
birds	 and	 the	 people.	 Don't	 be	 a	miser	 in	 praising.	 Praise	 whole-heartedly,	 as
totally	as	possible,	and	it	will	bring	you	closer	and	closer	to	God.	It	will	become
the	bridge.	It	is	the	shortest	route	to	God.	Meditation	is	a	long	route,	prayer	is	a
short-cut.
Margje	has	two	meanings;	both	are	beautiful.	One	is	a	pearl,	a	precious	stone,	a
diamond.
The	other	is	a	child	of	light,	which	means	a	child	of	god,	because	god	is	 light.
Down	 the	ages	 light	has	been	 the	metaphor	 for	god.	Both	meanings	are	 joined
together,	both	come	from	Persian.	To	be	a	child	of	light,	to	be	a	child	of	god,	is
to	be	precious,	 'Without	god	 there	 is	no	value	 in	 life.	Unless	we	are	 related	 to
god,	unless	there	is	god,	there	is	no	significance	in	life.	Without	god	life	is	only
accidental,	 a	 mundane	 affair:	 a	 tale	 told	 by	 an	 idiot,	 full	 of	 fury	 and	 noise,
signifying	nothing.	But	if	god	is	there	then	everything	becomes	meaningful;	god
becomes	the	context	in	which	everything	gains	meaning,	becomes	precious.
Without	 god	 we	 are	 orphans,	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 an	 orphan.	 With	 god
existence	is	a	home.	Then	we	are	children	of	god.
The	 world	 is	 suffering	 too	 much	 because	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the	 history	 of
human	consciousness	man	has	lost	track	of	god.	Nobody	has	ever	suffered	like
us.	People	have	been	poor	in	the	past,	very	poor,	people	have	starved,	but	people
have	 never	 been	 spiritually	 so	 poor.	 People	 have	 never	 starved	 spiritually	 so
much	as	today.
My	 whole	 work	 here	 is	 to	 give	 you	 back	 an	 insight	 into	 god.	 Unless	 man
becomes	rooted	in	god	again	man	has	no	future.
Man	can	 live	 in	 two	ways.	He	can	 live	as	an	extrovert	 --	 then	he	can	have	 the
whole	world	but	he	will	miss	himself.	And	to	miss	one's	self	is	to	miss	all.	One
can	 become	 an	 Alexander	 the	 Great	 but	 deep	 down	 one	 will	 remain	 just	 a
beggar,	utterly	poor.	And	it	hurts,	it	hurts	very	much,	because	one	cannot	drown
it	in	any	oblivion.	In	fact	the	more	riches	you	have	on	the	outside,	the	more	clear
it	becomes	to	you	that	inside	you	are	just	a	wound.
The	other	way	is	to	live	an	inward	life:	man	can	live	as	an	introvert	--	then	man
lives	in	his	own	being.
Then	one	lives	rooted	in	one's	own	self	and	a	great	richness	arises	because	one	is
nourished.
It	is	from	our	inner	core	that	we	are	joined	to	god,	and	if	we	live	from	our	inner
core	we	allow	god	to	live	through	us.	I	am	not	against	the	world.	Be	in	the	world
but	don't	be	of	it,	be	in	the	world	but	remain	above	it,	be	in	the	world	but	remain
transcendental	to	it.	Remain	a	witness	--	that	is	true	interiority.
Prashant	means	profound	silence,	deep	silence	--	and	that	is	the	key	for	you.	Be
as	silent	as	possible,	sit	more	and	more	in	stillness.	Not	only	in	bodily	stillness...
that	 too	 is	 helpful	 and	 creates	 a	 situation	 but	 it	 is	 not	 the	 end;	 it	 is	 just	 the
beginning.	 It	 is	 more	 important	 that	 the	 mind	 should	 be	 still,	 that	 the	 mind
should	stop	its	constant	chattering.	And	it	does	stop	-	we	have	just	never	tried.
All	that	is	needed	is	a	very	simple	process:	you	sit	inside	yourself	and	watch.	Let
the	mind	do	 all	 kinds	 of	 old	 tricks	 and	you	 simply	watch	non-judgmentally	 --
neither	saying	good	nor	bad,	neither	choosing	nor	 rejecting,	utterly	 indifferent,
cool.	Slowly,	slowly	the	knack	is	learned	by	remaining	cool	and	indifferent.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
First	 the	 mind	 tries	 all	 its	 old	 tricks	 and	 then	 by	 and	 by	 it	 starts	 feeling
embarrassed	because	you	are	not	getting	affected	 in	any	way,	 this	way	or	 that.
Even	if	you	become	affected	against	it,	then	too	the	mind	is	perfectly	at	ease;	it
has	 disturbed	 you.	 So	 don't	 be	 against	 it,	 don't	 fight	 with	 it,	 and	 don't	 fall	 a
victim	to	its	tricks;	just	remain	aloof.
Many	times	you	will	get	involved.	The	moment	you	remember,	pull	yourself	out,
again	compose	yourself,	again	start	watching.	A	thought	arises;	see	it.	It	comes
in	front	of	you;	see	it.	The	it	passes	by;	see	it.	Coming,	staying,	going,	just	watch
it.	Take	note	of	it,	with	no	idea	of	whether	it	is	good	or	bad,	whether	it	should	be
or	should	not	be	--	with	no	moral	attitude,	just	a	scientific,	cool	observation.
Within	three	to	nine	months	time	the	mind	stops	chattering.	One	day	suddenly	it
is	 not	 there,	 and	 that	 day	 such	 a	 silence	 descends	 as	 you	 have	 never	 known
before.	That	silence,	 that	 infinite	silence	 that	comes	and	overwhelms	you	from
all	 sides.	Then	 it	 never	 leaves	you;	 it	 remains	with	you,	 it	 becomes	your	very
soul.	It	is	very	liberating.
Sudhiro	means	the	wise	one.	It	does	not	mean	the	man	of	knowledge,	it	means
the	man	of	insight.	It	does	not	mean	one	who	knows	much,	it	simply	means	one
who	is	so	innocent,	so	open,	so	vulnerable	to	existence	that	nothing	can	remain
hidden	from	him.	Existence	reveals	 itself	 to	him.	It	does	not	mean	a	scholar,	 it
means	a	seer.
And	 the	 path	 is	 taking	 a	 jump	 from	 mind	 to	 no-mind.	 Mind	 can	 make	 you
knowledgeable	 but	 never	 wise;	 no-mind	will	 never	make	 you	 knowledgeable,
but	it	can	make	you	wise.	It	is	wisdom	that	brings	freedom	and	it	is	wisdom	that
brings	god	to	you.	It	is	wisdom	that	brings	immortality	to	you.	Knowledge	is	all
rubbish.	 Avoid	 knowledge	 and	 enter	 into	 the	 world	 of	 wisdom.	 The	 way	 is
meditation,	the	way	from	mind	to	no-mind	is	meditation.
Arthur.
Man	has	 lived	 too	much	 in	war.	Outside	he	 fights	with	others,	 inside	he	 fights
with	 himself,	 as	 if	 he	 knows	 only	 one	way	 to	 live	 and	 that	 is	 fighting:	 In	 the
name	of	 politics	 fight	with	 others,	 in	 the	 name	of	 religion	 fight	with	 yourself.
This	 is	why	we	 have	 created	misery.	 Fighting	 cannot	 bring	 peace.	One	 has	 to
learn	how	to	drop	these	old	patterns	of	constant	fighting.
My	approach	 is	 that	of	non-resistance,	of	no-fight.	No	 fight	 is	needed	because
this	is	our	existence	--	we	are	part	of	it.	It	is	not	inimical	to	us,	it	is	not	against
us,	it	is	not	going	to	devour	us.	It	has	given	birth	to	us.
It	nourishes	us.	It	is	very	friendly,	very	motherly.	Your	body	is	your	friend,	and
your	mind	too	--	you	just	have	to	know	how	to	use	it.
Let	 this	 be	 your	 foundation:	 be	 friendly	 with	 existence,	 outside,	 inside,	 be
friendly	with	everybody,	with	yourself	too	--	which	is	the	hardest....	People	don't
love	themselves.	That	is	the	last	thing	they	ever	do.	It	is	easy	to	love	the	enemy;
it	is	very	difficult	to	love	yourself.	You	know	yourself	too	well	--	how	can	you
love	yourself?	But	 the	person	who	can	 love	himself	can	 love	all.	Love	 thyself,
and	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 love	 your	 enemies	 and	 everybody	 else.	 If	 you	 can	 love
yourself	you	have	fulfilled	the	basic	condition	of	love,	and	out	of	that	love	arises
peace.	And	peace	is	the	door	from	which	we	start	having	our	messages	of	God.
Sundram.
Think	of	God	in	terms	of	beauty	--	not	in	terms	of	truth	and	not	in	terms	of	good,
but	in	terms	of	beauty.
Then	 poetry	 becomes	 prayer,	 then	 music	 becomes	 worship,	 then	 painting
becomes	meditation;	then	aesthetics	is	religion.	And	that	is	my	first	hint	for	you.
Think	of	God	in	terms	of	beauty.	Worship	beauty:	in	a	rose	flower,	a	bird	on	the
wing,	a	cloud	floating	in	the	sky,	a	rock,	a	river,	a	child	playing.	Wherever	you
find	beauty,	remember	God	--	bow	down	to	beauty.
Just	today	I	was	reading	about	a	Hassidic	mystic,	He	was	so	beautiful.	Mystics
naturally	 become	 beautiful	 because	 something	 inside	 them	 starts	 filtering
through	 their	 bodies,	 they	 become	 luminous.	 He	 was	 dying,	 and	 one	 of	 his
friends,	another	Hassidic	mystic,	had	come	to	see	him.	The	friend	started	crying.
The	dying	mystic	asked,	"Why	are	you	crying?	Because	I	am	going	to	my	home
--	I	am	not	dying!	There	is	no	death,	and	you	know	that	perfectly	well.	You	have
experienced	the	immortal,	so	why	are	you	crying?"
And	the	other	mystic	said	"I	am	not	crying	for	the	soul,	I	am	weeping	for	your
beautiful	body.	Now	it	will	rot	in	the	earth."	And	then,	the	story	says,	both	wept.
I	loved	it...	Then	both	the	mystics	wept.
Beauty	is	an	expression	of	god,	in	whatsoever	form	it	appears.	So	this	is	the	way
that	you	have	to	seek	and	search	for	your	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Devo.
All	is	divine.	In	fact	there	is	no	God,	only	godliness.	God	is	not	a	person	but	a
quality,	not	a	person	but	a	presence.
The	idea	of	God	as	a	person	is	anthropomorphic:	we	have	made	hat	image	in	our
own	 image.	 It	 is	nothing	but	man-projected;	 it	 is	not	 the	 true	God.	That's	why
Buddha	is	silent	about	God.	He	talks	about	godliness	but	never	about	God.
My	own	experience	 is	exactly	 the	same:	 there	 is	no	God	but	here	 is	godliness,
the	whole	existence	is	overflowing	with	godliness.	There	is	no	division	between
God	and	the	world;	existence	is	divine.
Start	 looking	 at	 existence	 with	 this	 vision,	 with	 these	 eyes,	 and	 you	 will	 be
surprised	 because	 you	will	 start	 seeing	 things	 you	 had	 never	 sen	 before.	 You
have	been	passing	the	same	things	every	day:	the	same	trees	and	the	same	birds
and	the	same	people.	But	once	you	have	this	vision,	that	all	is	divine,	you	start
looking	at	things	in	a	new	light.	Then	the	world	is	no	more	a	puzzle,	no	more	a
problem,	no	more	a	question
-	not	a	question	to	be	solved	but	a	mystery	to	be	lived.
Premo.
Love	is	the	very	essence	of	all	religion.	It	contains	all.	It	is	the	seed	out	of	which
Bibles,	Korans	and	Gitas	have	grown.	It	is	the	seed	out	of	which	Jesus,	Buddha,
Lao	Tzu	have	blossomed.	There	is	no	need	to	think	fo	god.	That	is	unnecessary.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	worried	 about	 life	 after	 death.	 That	whole	 thing	 is	 for
stupid	people.
The	really	religious	person	thinks	only	of	love,	and	not	only	thinks	of	it	but	lives
it;	 love	 becomes	 his	 life.	 And	 in	 that	 life	 all	 is	 fulfilled.	 God	 comes	 one	 day
when	the	time	is	ripe,	and	insights	about	the	other	shore,	the	further	shore,	start
happening	of	their	own	accord.	Whatsoever	is	provided	for	your	growth	goes	on
happening	to	you.	Everything	is	provided	for	the	lover,	every	care	is	taken	of	the
lover.
Love	unconditionally	--	love	for	love's	sake.
Rikto.
The	moment	you	are	empty	of	yourself,	you	are	full	of	God.	Both	cannot	exist
together,	remember.
Remember	again	and	again:	both	cannot	exist	 together;	it	 is	either	you	or	God.
And	it	is	the	foolish	person	who	chooses	himself.	Choose	God:	disappear	as	an
ego.	 Forget	 yourself	 as	 a	 separate	 entity	 from	 existence,	 and	 in	 that	 very
disappearance	you	are	reborn.
It	is	a	very	paradoxical	state:	the	moment	you	are	empty	of	yourself	you	become
full,	and	full	for	the	first	time,	overflowingly	full,	inexhaustibly	full.
And	 the	 ego	 is	 just	 a	 shadow,	 it	 has	 no	 substance.	 It	 is	 a	 dream,	not	 a	 reality.
Drop	the	shadow	so	that	you	can	attain	to	the	substance.	Drop	the	false	so	that
the	real	can	be	attained.	All	that	I	teach	here	is	how	to	be	empty	of	yourself	so
that	you	can	be	full	of	God.	And	that	fullness	is	fulfillment.
Veet	Asmito	means	going	beyond	ego.
Ego	is	our	hell,	and	the	irony	is	that	we	are	the	creators	of	it.	We	create	it	and	we
suffer.	 But	 it	 is	 within	 our	 capacity	 not	 o	 create	 it	 and	 to	 move	 away	 from
suffering.
The	moment	the	ego	is	not	there	and	the	suffering	is	not	there,	you	are	in	bliss.
Bliss	 is	 our	 nature;	 suffering	 is	 a	 created	 phenomenon,	 arbitrary.	 Bliss	 is
uncreated:	it	is	there	right	now,	underneath	suffering,	like	an	undercurrent.	You
need	not	create	it,	it	is	already	the	case.	Just	don't	create	suffering.	and	the	secret
of	creating	suffering	is	in	the	formula	of	the	ego.
Being	a	sannyasin	means	dropping	the	ego.	From	this	first	moment	don't	think	of
yourself	as	superior,	or	as	inferior;	both	are	ego	attitudes.	Don't	think	of	yourself
as	somebody	or	as	nobody;	both	are	ego	attitudes.
Try	to	understand	the	cunningness	of	the	ego;	it	can	even	become	humble,	it	can
say,	"I	am	humble,	here	is	nobody	more	humble	than	me."	It	has	come	in	from
the	backdoor.
Great	 understanding	 is	 needed	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 ego.	 In	 fact	 that	 is	 the	whole
work.	Once	you	are	out	of	the	ego	nothing	else	needs	to	be	done.
Garimo	means	glory...
Each	being	has	a	tremendous	glory	to	be	released,	great	fragrance	to	be	released.
Man	looks	small	but	he	is	not.	He	contains	oceans,	oceans	of	bliss;	he	contains
skies,	skies	of	freedom.
The	 spiritual	 experience	 is	 like	 an	 atomic	 explosion:	 the	 atom	 is	 so	 small,	 but
when	it	explodes	it	is	so	big,	so	huge.	The	experience	of	one's	own	self	is	exactly
like	that.	It	is	an	explosion,	an	explosion	of	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
atomic	 consciousness.	 Suddenly	 you	 see	 yourself	 as	 the	 whole:	 unbounded,
infinite.	That	is	our	glory	--	it	has	to	be	attained.	Without	attaining	it	we	can't	be
contented.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
11	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912115
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Literally,	Jacob	means:	God	is	our	protection,	or,	may	God	protect	you.
It	is	a	blessing.
Jacob	 was	 also	 one	 of	 the	 twelve	 disciples	 of	 Jesus,	 and	 that	 has	 far	 more
significant	a	meaning.	To	be	a	disciple	is	one	of	the	greatest	experiences	of	life,
because	 it	 is	 an	 experience	 of	 trust,	 love,	 surrender.	 And	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful
comes	to	those	who	trust,	who	love,	who	surrender.
To	be	a	disciple	is	an	absolutely	necessary	step;	it	can't	be	avoided.	If	one	really
wants	to	know	the	truth,	to	know	God,	to	know	what	it	is	all	about,	then	to	be	a
disciple	is	a	bridge.	It	needs	courage	-	love	needs	courage.	And	it	is	the	ultimate
in	love	because	it	has	no	instinctive	part	to	it.
Sex	 is	 closer	 to	 animals	 -	 so	 is	 greed.	 But	 no	 animal	 has	 been	 said	 to	 be	 a
disciple.	That	 is	 an	 absolutely	human	phenomenon,	 something	non-instinctive,
something	 that	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the	 physiology	 and	 the	 chemistry	 of	 your
body.	 It	does	not	 even	belong	 to	your	psychology;	 it	belongs	 to	your	 spirit,	 to
your	being,	to	your	real	core.
Be	blessed	because	this	rare	moment	of	becoming	a	disciple	has	arisen	in	your
life.	And	if	you	take	this	jump,	God	certainly	will	protect	you.
Pritam.
Love	existence	and	you	will	become	a	beloved	of	existence,	because	existence
only	echoes	and	re-echoes,	 it	 reflects	and	rebounds.	Whatsoever	we	do	 to	 it,	 it
goes	on	doing	to	us	a	thousandfold.
"Hate	life"	--	that's	what	has	been	said	by	the	pseudo	religious.	Then	you	will	be
hated	by	life.	Love	and	you	will	be	loved.	and	when	the	whole	existence	showers
on	you	as	love	--	a	rain	of	love,	flowers	of	love	raining	on	you	--	then	life	is	true
life,	 because	 then	 it	 is	 ecstasy.	 Then	 only	 do	 you	 know	 the	 significance,	 the
meaning,	the	purpose,	of	why	you	are,	of	why	this	existence	is.
Nobody	else	can	answer	 the	why,	but	when	love	showers	on	you	from	the	sky
and	from	the	stars	and	from	the	trees,	you	know	it;	in	your	very	heart	of	hearts
you	 feel	 it.	 And	 that's	 exactly	 the	 deepest	 desire	 of	 your	 very	 being:	 to	 be
beloved	of	the	whole.	But	it	has	to	be	earned,	and	the	way	to	earn	it	 is	 to	be	a
great	lover.	Then	you	will	be	loved.
But	we	go	on	doing	just	stupid	things.	We	want	 to	be	loved	but	we	don't	 love.
We	want	to	see	a	beautiful	face	in	the	mirror	but	we	don't	make	a	beautiful	face;
we	go	on	making	an	ugly	face	and	then	we	are	angry	at	the	mirror.	The	mirror
simply	reflects.	So	does	existence	--	it	is	just	a	mirror.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Helmut.
Bliss	is	possible	only	if	you	are	a	daredevil.	Less	than	that	won't	do.	Misery	is
cheap,	any	coward	can	afford	it;	hence	you	will	find	all	cowards	miserable.	All
the	miserable	people	are	cowards.	Nothing	is	keeping	them	imprisoned	in	misery
except	their	cowardliness	--	because	they	can't	go	beyond	the	limits	drawn	by	the
society,	the	state,	the	church.
And	 bliss	 is	 not	 something	 that	 can	 be	 experienced	within	 such	 limitations.	 It
needs	entry	into	the	unlimited,	into	the	unknown,	into	the	uncharted.	Courage	is
a	 must;	 only	 courageous	 people	 become	 blissful.	 And	 whenever	 there	 is	 a
blissful	person	and	a	courageous	person,	fame	follows	like	a	shadow.	Bliss	and
courage	 shine	 forth.	 That's	why	 centuries	 have	 passed	 but	we	 cannot	 forget	 a
Jesus,	we	cannot	forgive	him	because	he	showed	us	that	we	are	cowards,	and	we
cannot	 forget	 him	 because	 he	 showed	 us	 our	 possibility	 --	 that	 we	 also	 can
become	blissful.
Sandhano	means	enquiry,	quest,	adventure.
Man	 is	 born	 as	 a	 quest.	Man	 is	 not	 born	 as	 a	 complete	 being.	A	 dog	 is	 born
complete.	A	tree,	a	rock	--
the	whole	 of	 existence,	 except	 for	man	 --	 have	 one	 similar	 thing	 about	 them:
they	 are	 all	 complete.	 Only	 man	 is	 incomplete;	 hence	 man	 has	 an	 opening.
Everything	else	is	closed.	A	rose	is	a	rose	is	a	rose,	but	man	may	be	a	thousand
and	one	things.	A	man	can	be	a	Judas,	a	man	can	be	a	Jesus.	All	possibilities	are
open,	all	alternatives,	available.
So	those	who	take	their	life	for	granted	miss	the	whole	point.	Life	is	a	quest,	it	is
an	enquiry,	an	enquiry	into	how	to	be	total,	how	to	be	whole.	This	is	the	dignity
of	man,	this	is	his	uniqueness:	because	is	not	complete	he	can	grow;	because	he
is	not	yet	entire	he	can	blossom,	he	can	learn,	he	can	become.	Only	man	evolves.
I	 don't	 agree	 with	 Charles	 Darwin.	 He	 says	 that	 man	 has	 evolved	 out	 of
monkeys,	but	what	have	the	other	monkeys	been	doing?	Why	don't	they	evolve
into	 human	 beings?	 It	 has	 been	 a	 long	 time	 but	 they	 simply	 go	 on	 being
monkeys!	 There	 seems	 to	 indication	 at	 all.	 At	 least	 they	 should	 start	 learning
their	ABC
but	they	have	not	even	started	that!
Hence	I	say	 that	Charles	Darwin	 is	utterly	wrong.	Man	has	not	evolved	out	of
monkeys,	 man	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 being.	 Only	 man	 knows	 how	 to
evolve.	No	monkey	knows,	no	ape	knows.	They	simply	remain	 the	same;	 they
go	on	reproducing	themselves.	For	millions	of	years	they	have	been	doing	it.	No
single	 monkey	 has	 risen	 higher	 than	 normal	 monkeyhood,	 a	 But	 man	 grows,
evolves.	Man	is	a	quest.	Man	is	not	a	being	but	a	becoming,	an	enquiry.	That's
his	beauty,	his	glory	--	a	gift	from	god.
Prem	Roelof
Fame	is	poisoned	if	it	comes	without	love.	Fame	is	nectar	if	it	comes	out	of	love.
One	 can	 be	 famous	 like	 a	 Genghis	 Khan,	 a	 Tamerlane,	 like	 Joseph	 Stalin	 or
Adolf	Hitler,	that	fame	is	ugly.	It	would	have	been	far	better	if	Adolf	Hitler	had
died	absolutely	unknown,	anonymous.	It	would	have	been	a	great	blessing	to	the
world.	Their	fame	is	full	of	blood,	murder,	butchery.	We	don't	need	such	famous
people	anymore.
But	 a	Buddha	also	becomes	 famous,	 a	 Jesus,	 a	Zarathustra.	Their	 fame	comes
from	a	 totally	 different	 quality	 of	 being.	Their	 love	makes	 them	 famous,	 their
fragrance	is	such	that	they	share	their	joy	totally.
Adolf	Hitler	stinks;	hence	he	becomes	famous.	Buddha	has	a	perfume;	hence	he
becomes	famous.
Be	loving,	be	love,	and	then	fame	or	no	fame,	it	doesn't	matter.	But	it	comes,	it
comes	inevitably.	One	becomes	a	star	in	the	dark	night	of	existence.	One	cannot
hide	it;	it	shines	forth.	From	thousands	of	light	years	away,	still	you	will	see	it.
This	is	the	case	with	the	man	of	love.	Love	is	the	most	luminous	experience	of
life.	Let	that	be	your	prayer	and	your	religion.
Joseph.
Bliss	is	an	increasing	faithfulness,	in	trust....	Misery	is	in	doubt.	There	more	you
doubt,	the	more	your	life	becomes	surrounded	by	darkness.	the	more	you	doubt,
the	more	your	being	becomes	negative	--	and	to	be	negative	is	to	be	incapable	of
receiving	god.	To	be	negative	is	to	be	rejecting,	to	be	negative	is	to	be	closed,	to
be	negative	is	to	be	resistant.
Faith	 means	 being	 open,	 available,	 receptive	 like	 a	 womb;	 then	 only	 is	 bliss
possible.	when	you	are	open	to	the	wind	and	the	rain	and	to	the	sun	of	existence,
when	there	is	no	resistance	at	all,	when	you	are	in	a	state	of	let-go	--	that	is	trust,
the	state	of	 let-go.	When	you	are	moving	with	existence,	 just	 floating	with	 the
river	towards	the	ocean	with	no	idea	of	your	own	about	where	you	would	like	to
go,	with	no	idea	that	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are,	so	utterly	relaxed	with	the	river	of	life	that	you	are	no	more	separate,	just	a
ripple	in	the	river,	a	wave	--
that	is	faith.
Joseph	is	the	name	of	Jesus'	father.	It	is	very	symbolic:	only	trust	can	give	birth
to	Christ,	only	trust	can	become	the	right	space	for	Christ-consciousness.
Paul	has	two	meanings:	one	comes	from	Latin	--	it	means	small;	the	other	comes
from	 Greek	 --	 then	 it	 means	 rest,	 relaxation.	 Both	 meanings	 are	 significant,
significant	for	the	seeker	of	truth,	significant	for	those	who	really	want	to	grow.
One	has	to	be	both.	One	has	to	be	so	small,	as	if	one	were	not,	one	has	to	be	a
nobody.	If	you	really	want	to	be	somebody	you	will	have	to	fulfill	the	condition
of	 being	 a	 nobody.	 And	 only	 if	 you	 are	 a	 nobody	 can	 you	 relax.	 The	 ego	 is
always	tense	and	keeps	you	tense;	when	there	is	no	ego	there	is	rest.
And	in	rest	is	all,	because	when	you	are	totally	restful	God	is	available	to	you.
You	 enter	 into	 the	 kingdom	 of	 God	 only	 when	 you	 are	 totally	 relaxed	 --	 no
tension,	 no	 desire,	 no	 mind	 --	 just	 like	 a	 small	 child,	 a	 nobody,	 and	 totally
relaxed.	Let	that	be	your	work	on	yourself.
Arihant	means	one	who	has	killed	the	real	enemy.
Self-ignorance	is	the	real	enemy,	unconsciousness	is	the	real	enemy.	To	live	like
a	 somnambulist	 is	 to	be	one's	own	enemy.	The	enemy	 is	not	outside	you,	 it	 is
hidden	in	your	own	mind.	It	is	your	mind	--	and	one	has	to	go	beyond	it.
The	only	way	to	go	beyond	the	enemy,	to	kill	the	enemy,	is	to	be	more	and	more
alert,	more	and	more	conscious	of	your	thoughts,	of	your	acts,	of	your	desires,	of
your	 feelings.	 Even	 walking,	 walk	 consciously,	 even	 eating,	 eat	 consciously.
These	 acts	 can	 be	 done	 without	 any	 consciousness,	 we	 can	 do	 them
mechanically.	 De-automatize	 your	 acts,	 bring	 consciousness	 to	 each	 act;	 then
you	can	bring	consciousness	to	each	thought,	because	action	is	gross,	thought	is
subtle.	And	when	you	have	become	conscious	of	your	 thoughts	you	can	bring
consciousness	to	your	feelings	--	they	are	the	subtlest.	These	are	the	three	layers
of	our	bondage.	These	three	constitute	the	enemy.	If	you	can	become	conscious
of	all	these	three	you	have	become	a	conqueror.
That's	 the	 whole	 purpose	 of	 sannyas:	 to	make	 you	 a	 conqueror,	 to	 make	 you
victorious.
Gyanam	 means	 wisdom...	 not	 the	 so-called	 knowledge,	 but	 knowing;	 not
knowledge	but	knowing.
Knowledge	is	available	from	the	outside.	Knowing	needs	an	inner	purification.
Knowledge	 is	 information,	 knowing	 is	 your	 capacity	 to	 see,	 to	 understand.
Knowledge	never	transforms	anybody.	It	can	make	you	a	great	scholar,	but	to	be
a	 scholar	 is	 to	 be	 nothing	 but	 a	 parrot.	 The	 scholar	 simply	 repeats:	 he	 is	 a
gramophone	record,	neither	more	nor	 less.	But	a	knower	knows,	knows	on	his
own	authority.	He	does	not	believe,	he	sees.	He	is	not	a	Christian,	he	is	a	Christ;
he	is	not	a	Buddhist,	he	is	a	Buddha.
Remember	it,	it	needs	a	radical	change	in	your	consciousness,	a	totally	new	kind
of	 consciousness:	 alert,	 aware,	 meditative,	 loving.	 These	 are	 the	 foundations
which	will	make	you	able	 to	see.	You	will	not	become	more	informed	but	you
will	become	totally	transformed.
My	work	is	not	to	inform	you	but	to	transform	you.	And	that's	what	sannyas	is
all	about.
Pragito	means	a	song.
In	the	past	religions	have	been	destroying	the	beauty	of	life,	they	have	been	anti-
life.	 They	 have	 taught	 people	 how	 to	 be	 sad;	 all	 their	 practices	 are	 to	 make
people	serious	and	sad.	This	has	been	a	pathological	history,	and	because	of	this,
millions	 of	 people	 turned	 away	 from	 religion.	 It	 was	 natural.	 The	 intelligent
people	became	anti-religious	because	they	could	not	see	the	point	of	being	anti-
life.	 Only	 mediocre	 and	 stupid	 people	 became	 anti-life;	 hence	 religion	 has
remained	in	the	domain	of	fools.
My	 effort	 is	 to	 transform	 the	 very	 quality	 of	 religion,	 to	 make	 it	 a	 song,	 a
celebration,	 a	multi-dimensional	 celebration	 of	 life,	 and	 existence,	 of	 love,	 of
beauty,	 of	 poetry,	 of	 painting,	 of	 dance,	 of	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful,	 of	 all	 that
enhances	creativity.
My	sannyasins	have	to	become	creators	of	beauty,	singers,	mad	singers,	ecstatic
dancers.	 Only	 then	 is	 religion	 true	 and	 the	 approach	 towards	 God	 valid;
otherwise	our	approach	 towards	God	 is	pathological.	 It	 is	not	healthy,	 it	 is	not
whole,	it	is	not	wholesome.
Nirup.
God	is	formless	and	so	are	you,	and	so	is	everybody!	The	form	is	an	illusion;	it
is	imposed	by	our	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
limited	senses.	It	is	as	if	you	look	out	of	a	window	and	the	frame	of	the	window
gives	a	frame	to	the	sky.
The	 sky	 has	 no	 frame,	 it	 is	 unlimited,	 but	 because	 you	 are	 standing	 behind	 a
window,	your	window-frame	becomes	a	 frame	 for	 the	 sky,	 at	 least	 for	 the	 sky
that	you	see.
If	you	think	that	the	frame	of	the	window	is	the	frame	of	the	sky	you	are	living
in	 an	 illusion.	 Our	 eyes	 are	 windows,	 so	 are	 our	 senses:	 they	 give	 forms	 to
things.
In	 fact	 everything	 is	 formless,	 and	 to	understand	 the	 formless	 is	 to	understand
God.	God	is	nothing	but	another	name	for	this	formlessness.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
13	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912135
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Bliss	 is	 a	 vision	 of	 beauty.	 It	 is	 seeing	 the	 tremendous	 grace	 that	 surrounds
existence.	 It	 is	 seeing	 the	dance	of	 the	universe,	 the	 song	of	 the	universe,	 it	 is
penetrating	 into	 the	 harmony.	 The	 whole	 existence	 is	 harmonious,	 it	 is	 an
orchestra:	everything	is	in	tune	with	everything	else,	except	for	man.	Man	falls
out	of	step	and	then	he	suffers,	becomes	miserable.	Fall	 in	step	again	and	then
there	is	bliss.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	falling	in	step	again,	becoming	part	of	the	harmony	of
the	whole.
Man's	well-being	 is	with	God.	 If	we	become	 rooted	 in	God	we	are	whole	and
healthy.	 If	 we	 remain	 without	 God	 we	 remain	 without	 roots,	 without
nourishment.	God	is	more	a	mother	than	a	father,	more	a	she	than	a	he.	It	is	just
the	male	chauvinist	attitude	that	has	made	him	a	he.
God	 is	 the	 earth,	 our	 nourishment,	 our	 well-being.	 And	 the	 whole	 of	 life	 is
nothing	but	an	exploration	--
an	exploration	of	the	source	of	our	well-being.
Reinhard.
The	pure	heart	is	a	basic	condition	for	bliss	to	happen,	but	by	purity	I	don't	mean
something	moral;	by	purity	I	mean	innocence.	A	moralist	is	never	innocent,	he	is
very	 calculating.	His	morality	 is	 nothing	 but	 his	 calculation.	He	 is	 bargaining
with	God,	he	is	earning	virtue	so	that	he	can	achieve	paradise	and	the	joys	and
the	 pleasures	 of	 paradise.	 He	 is	 really	 cunning,	 his	 morality	 is	 rooted	 in	 his
arithmetic.	He	is	not	innocent;	no	moralist	is	ever	innocent.
It	sometimes	happens	that	an	immoral	person	may	be	more	innocent	than	the	so-
called	moral.	The	immoral	may	be	immoral	only	because	he	has	not	calculated
about	his	life.	He	is	simply	living,	with	no	idea	of	the	consequences.	He	may	be
simple,	but	the	moralist	is	never	simple,	he	is	very	complex.	The	so-called	saints
are	 the	 most	 complex,	 cunning,	 calculative	 people.	 You	 will	 not	 find	 the
innocence	of	a	child	in	their	being	--	and	that's	what	purity	is.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	 child	 is	 neither	 aware	 of	 the	 good	 nor	 the	 bad,	 that	 is	 his	 innocence.	 To
become	transcendental	to	good	and	bad	again	is	purity,	purity	of	the	heart.	The
transcendence	 of	 duality	 is	 purity.	 The	 moralist	 chooses;	 the	 pure	 heart	 lives
spontaneously	without	choosing.	He	lives	in	a	choiceless	way:	fully	alert,	aware,
but	 absolutely	 choiceless;	 available	 to	 the	 situation,	 responsible,	 responding	 --
but	 not	 out	 of	 calculation.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 basic	 space	 in	 which	 bliss	 starts
pouring	in.
Love	 is	 the	 most	 precious	 diamond	 there	 is.	 All	 kohinoors	 are	 worthless
compared	 to	 love.	me	man	 of	 love	 is	 the	 richest.	And	 everybody	 can	 be	 rich,
everybody	can	be	an	emperor	through	the	door	of	love.	But	people	are	afraid	to
enter	it.
They	 are	 afraid	 because	 at	 the	 very	 entrance	 one	 thing	 is	 demanded:	 leave
yourself	out,	then	come	in.
The	demand	is	paradoxical	but	it	can	be	fulfilled	because	you	are	two:	the	real
you	and	the	unreal	you.	The	unreal	you	has	to	be	left	outside	the	gate	and	then
the	real	you	can	enter	the	temple,	the	kingdom	of	god.	But	we	have	become	so
identified	 with	 the	 unreal	 that	 we	 think,	 "How	 can	 it	 be	 made	 possible?	 The
demand	seems	to	be	impossible,	How	can	one	leave	oneself	behind?"	Yes,	it	can
be	done.	It	has	to	be	done.
That's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about.	 It	 is	 entering	 into	 the	 world	 of	 love.	 It	 is
becoming	committed	to	the	ultimate	adventure	--	the	adventure	of	dropping	the
ego	 and	 becoming	 utterly	 egoless,	 The	 moment	 you	 are	 no	 more	 an	 ego	 the
whole	benediction	of	god	is	yours.
That	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 be	 rich,	 otherwise	 everybody	 lives	 a	 beggar's	 life.,
Jagannatha	Das	means	servant	of	god,	or	it	is	even	better	to	say,	a	slave	of	god.
But	in	English	the	word
"slave"	 has	 wrong	 connotations.	 It	 has	 no	 positive	 meaning	 to	 it;	 only	 the
negative.	Servant	is	a	little	milder,	but	that	too	has	only	negative	connotations.
In	Eastern	languages	each	word	has	a	double	meaning,	at	least,	the	negative	and
the	 positive.	 A	 slave	 is	 an	 ugly	 phenomenon	 if	 the	 slavery	 has	 been	 imposed
upon	you	--	that	is	its	negative	meaning.	But	if	you	have	surrendered	out	of	love
and	 become	 a	 slave	 voluntarily,	 of	 your	 own	 accord,	 then	 it	 has	 a	 positive
meaning.	 It	has	a	 tremendous	beauty	about	 it,	because	by	becoming	a	slave	of
your	own	accord	you	are	simply	dropping	your	ego.	You	are	not	really	becoming
a	 slave;	 on	 the	 contrary	you	are	becoming	a	master	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 because
once	the	ego	is	dropped	you	are	part	of	god.	It	 is	 the	ego	that	keeps	you	away
from	 god,	 It	 is	 the	 ego	 that	 goes	 on	 dominating	 you,	 it	 is	 the	 ego	 that	 really
makes	you	a	slave,	So	on	the	surface	dropping	the	ego	looks	like	surrendering	to
god.	But	what	are	you	surrendering?	--
You	are	 simply	surrendering	your	disease.	And	by	surrendering	 it	you	become
whole,	you	become	holy.
Nirakar,	the	formless.
God	 has	 no	 form,	 although	 all	 forms	 are	 his.	 This	 paradox	 becomes	 possible
only	because	 he	 has	 no	 form.	 If	 he	 had	 any	particular	 form	 then	he	 could	not
have	 all	 the	 forms.	He	 is	 liquid,	 utterly	 liquid.	Because	 he	 is	 formless	 he	 can
move	into	all	forms,	he	can	take	on	all	forms,	and	yet	he	is	not	exhausted	by	the
forms.
He	is	inexhaustible	energy.
Matter	has	form,	energy	has	no	form	--	and	God	is	energy.	In	fact	matter	 is	an
illusion.	It	exists	not,	it	is	only	an	appearance.	This	has	been	said	by	the	mystics
for	centuries	but	now	scientists	have	agreed	to	it,	on	scientific	grounds	too,	that
matter	does	not	exist.	It	is	only	energy	moving	with	such	speed	that	you	can't	see
the	movement;	hence	you	feel	as	if	nothing	is	moving.	It	 is	like	an	electric	fan
going	at	full	speed:	you	can't	see	its	blades.	But	that	is	nothing.	The	speed	with
which	the	energy	is	moving	is	tremendous.	It	is	the	speed	of	light:	one-hundred-
and-eighty-six-thousand	 miles	 per	 second.	 With	 such	 tremendous	 speed,
disappearance	of	matter	arises.	You	can	see	 the	wall	because	you	can't	 see	 the
movement	of	the	atoms,	but	in	fact	there	is	no	matter.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	declared	"God	is	dead,"	hoping	that	science	would	prove
that	there	is	no	God.
But	within	one	hundred	years,	just	the	opposite	has	happened:	God	is	not	dead,
but	matter	is	dead.	Matter	is	not	even	dead,	it	is	no	more.	From	modern	science
the	concept	of	matter	has	disappeared,	 and	God	 is	 fully	alive,	more	alive	 than
ever.
Nirakar	means	look	into	forms	for	the	formless,	seek	and	search	for	the	formless
--	both	outside	and	inside.	You	also	don't	have	any	form;	look	within	and	search
for	 the	 formless.	The	day	you	 contact	 the	 formless	 is	 the	greatest	 day	of	 your
life.	After	that	experience,	after	that	impact,	one	is	never	the	same	again;	then	all
values	 change,	 all	 visions	 change.	You	 start	 living	on	a	 totally	different	plane:
the	plane	of	deathlessness,	the	plane	of	timelessness.	You	enter	into	eternity.	And
to	be	part	of	eternity	is	the	enquiry,	the	intrinsic	enquiry	of	every	being.	Unless	it
is	fulfilled	one	remains	in	a	deep	anguish,	in	deep	discontent.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	this	can	be	fulfilled	--	it	is	our	birthright	--	because	we	are	it.
Darshano	means	a	vision.
God	is	not	a	belief	but	a	vision.	To	believe	in	God	is	absolutely	nonsensical.	It	is
like	a	blind	man	believing	in	light	or	a	deaf	person	believing	in	music:	they	can't
conceive	what	they	are	believing	in,	they	can't	even	imagine	it.	Their	beliefs	are
deceptions	 to	 themselves,	 they	 are	 self-deceptions.	All	 believers	 are	deceivers.
They	 are	 deceiving	 others,	 but	 that	 is	 not	 so	 important:	 they	 are	 deceiving
themselves	too,	which	is	far	more	important.
God	has	to	be	an	experience.	and	my	whole	effort	is	not	to	give	you	a	doctrine
but	to	help	you	to	wake	up.	to	help	you	so	that	you	can	open	your	eyes	and	see
on	your	own.
Pritamo.
God	has	not	to	be	approached	through	logic	but	through	love.	To	approach	him
through	logic	is	to	miss	him.	The	sure	way	to	miss	God	is	logic.	It	prohibits,	it
hinders;	God	cannot	be	caught	in	a	logical	net.	The	logical	net	is	too	crude	--	and
God	is	so	subtle.	He	is	not	like	a	fish,	he	is	more	like	water.	You	can	catch	the
fish	in	the	net	but	not	the	water,	the	water	will	escape.
The	only	way	to	know	God	is	through	love,	and	remember	I	say:	the	only	way.
Because	 it	 is	only	 love	 that	opens	your	heart	 to	 the	beauty	of	existence,	 to	 the
grandeur	of	all	that	is.	and	that	grandeur	is	God.	The	glory	of	existence	is	God.
There	 is	 a	 constant	 celebration	 going	 on:	 it	 is	 dance	 --	 beginningless,	 endless.
But	are	hearts	are	closed,	and	we	go	on	 thinking	about	God	 through	 the	head.
The	 head	 is	 the	wrong	 place.	As	 far	 as	God	 is	 concerned,	 be	 headless!	That's
what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about:	 dropping	your	head.	 and	you	 can	 see	here	 so	many
headless	people	running	all	around.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Till	the	end	of	December.
--	That's	good.	We	will	do	our	best	to	destroy,	to	cut	your	head	off!	Next	time...
come	again,	because	 if	 surgery	 remains	half	completed	 it	 is	dangerous.	 If	only
half	 your	 head	 is	 cut	 off	 and	 then	 you	 go	 away,	 you	will	 be	 neither	 there	 nor
here!	Next	time	come	for	a	longer	period.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
14	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912145
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Bliss	is	never	an	achievement	on	our	part.	Whatsoever	we	do	is	doomed	to	fail.
Because	it	comes	out	of	the	ego	it	comes	out	of	the	stupid	mind,	it	comes	out	of
our	anguish,	anxiety,	desire,	ambition,	it	comes	out	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	our	confusion.	It	can't	bring	bliss	to	us,	it	can	bring	only	misery.
And	people	go	on	moving	from	one	misery	to	another	misery.	Just	while	they	are
changing	from	one	misery	to	another	misery	they	think	that	they	are	blissful.	It	is
just	in	those	small	gaps	when	they	are	changing	trains,	that's	all.
Bliss	comes	 from	 the	beyond	as	a	gift,	always	as	a	gift.	We	have	 to	be	on	 the
receptive	end.	We	are	not	to	be	aggressively	active	for	it,	but	just	receptive	like	a
womb.	We	have	 to	 be	 feminine	 to	 receive	 bliss.	We	have	 to	 become	pregnant
with	god.
Today	you	are	becoming	a	follower	of	Christ.	Up	to	now	you	may	have	been	a
Christian	 but	 not	 a	 follower	 of	 Christ.	 A	 Christian	 is	 one	 who	 is	 a	 follower
formally,	 superficially;	 one	 who	 has	 not	 risked	 anything,	 who	 is	 not	 really
committed.	His	religion	is	a	Sunday	religion,	a	kind	of	social	phenomenon.	It	is
good	 to	 go	 to	 the	 church	 every	 su	 day	 and	meet	 people	 and	 say	 "Hello"	 and
"How	are	you?"	In	the	society	it	is	good	to	keep	the	religious	face;	it	pays.	It	is	a
good	policy,	good	politics,	but	it	is	not	religion.	Religion	is	dangerous.
Today	you	are	becoming	a	follower	of	Christ.	By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are
becoming	 committed	 to	 spiritual	 growth.	 You	 are	 becoming	 involved	 in	 the
tremendous	process	of	transforming	your	being	into	a	Christ-consciousness.
Bliss	is	a	by-product	of	trust,	of	total	trust	in	existence	or	in	God.	God	is	not	a
person	but	the	impersonal	presence.	The	very	life	of	existence	is	God,	the	living
energy	is	God.	And	to	trust	in	it	means	to	stop	struggling	against	it.	Struggling
against	it	creates	misery;	it	is	trying	to	go	upstream.	But	trust	means	surrender,
going	with	the	stream.	And	going	with	the	stream	is	bliss.
All	misery	is	because	of	the	ego	and	its	struggle,	its	resistance.	Trust	means	that
resistance	 has	 been	 dropped.	You	 don't	 think	 of	 yourself	 as	 separate	 from	 the
whole;	you	are	 just	an	intrinsic	part	of	 the	great	harmony	of	existence,	a	small
note	in	this	great	orchestra.	Then	bliss	is	natural.
There	is	no	need	for	war	and	there	is	no	need	to	be	a	warrior.	Relax.	Drop	those
attitudes	which	have	made	man	a	 fighter	with	others	or	with	himself.	Drop	all
those	attitudes.	There	is	no	need	to	fight	with	anything.	Accept.	Whatsoever	is,
is	good.
Jesus	 prays	 on	 the	 cross	 "Thy	 will	 be	 done,	 thy	 kingdom	 come."	 That	 is
dropping	all	fight,	 that	is	surrendering	to	god.	In	that	surrendering,	for	the	first
time	 you	 will	 taste	 what	 joy	 is,	 what	 truth	 is,	 what	 godliness	 is.	 A	 warrior,
worldly	or	religious,	remains	in	misery.	He	is	fighting	a	losing	battle.	We	cannot
win	against	the	whole,	remember	it.	We	can	win	only	with	the	whole,	not	against
the	whole.	Hence	the	stupid	one	fights	and	the	wise	one	surrenders.
The	most	 important	 thing	 to	remember	 in	 life	 is	 that	God	loves	us,	 that	he	has
not	forsaken	us,	that	he	is	not	indifferent	to	us,	that	he	is	continuously	concerned
about	us,	that	he	cares.
The	deeper	this	idea	enters	your	heart,	the	better,	because	when	you	start	feeling
more	 and	more	 loved	 by	God	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 love	 others.	 That's	 how	we
become	able	to	love:	if	we	are	loved	we	can	love;	if	we	are	not	loved	we	don't
know	how	to	love,	we	don't	know	what	love	is.
In	the	world	today	love	is	disappearing	because	God	has	disappeared.	The	sky	is
empty.	It	used	to	be	full	of	love.	For	centuries	people	prayed	looking	at	the	sky.
They	were	 uplifted,	 they	 felt	 love	 pouring,	 raining,	 showering	 on	 them.	 They
were	moved	and	touched	by	it,	they	were	transformed	by	it.	And	then	they	were
able	to	 love	others	--	because	when	you	have	love	you	can	give	it	 to	others.	If
you	don't	have	 it,	how	can	you	give	 it	 to	others?	And	the	only	source	 to	get	 it
from	is	God	because	he	is	the	only	inexhaustible	source.
Narayani	simply	means	goddess.
God	is	our	substance,	our	very	being.	He	is	not	something	outside	us,	he	is	our
innermost	core,	our	interiority.	We	are	not	to	seek	and	search	for	him.	Only	this
has	to	be	remembered:	we	have	forgotten	it.
God	is	not	lost,	it	is	only	that	we	have	forgotten	who	we	are.
Nartano	 simply	means	 the	 dance	 --	 and	 that's	my	 definition	 of	 a	 sannyasin:	 a
pure	dance.
A	dance	is	pure	when	the	dancer	dissolves	into	it,	when	the	dancer	is	no	more,
when	 you	 cannot	 find	 the	 dancer	 and	 only	 the	 dance	 remains.	 That's	 what
meditation	is,	sannyas	is,	ecstasy	is,	and	ultimately	that's	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
what	god	is.
Slowly	slowly	learn	how	to	dissolve.	Dissolve	in	any	act,	then	that	act	becomes	a
dance.	If	you	are	jogging	and	you	disappear	in	the	jogging	and	there	is	no	jogger,
only	jogging	remains;	or	if	you	are	running	in	the	early	morning	and	there	is	no
runner	but	only	the	running	--	you	are	so	possessed	by	the	act	itself	there	is	only
the	act	and	no	doer	inside	--	then	it	is	dance.
Wherever	you	can	lose	yourself	there	is	dance	and	there	is	sannyas.	And	slowly
slowly	let	it	become	your	very	heart.	Then	god	comes	seeking	and	searching	for
you.	You	need	not	go	anywhere	--	one	day	he	knocks	on	your	door.
Prayer	has	nothing	to	do	with	what	is	known	all	around	the	world	as	prayer.	Real
prayer	is	not	a	ritual.
Real	prayer	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	church	or	the	temple	or	the	mosque;	the
real	prayer	is	neither	Christian	nor	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan.	The	real	prayer	has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 words,	 it	 is	 not	 verbal.	 It	 is	 silent	 gratitude.	 It	 is	 a	 silent
bowing	to	existence.
So	wherever,	whenever	you	feel	like	bowing	to	the	earth,	to	the	trees,	to	the	sky,
bow.	That	bowing	will	help	you	slowly	slowly,	to	disappear.`Prayer	is	one	of	the
greatest	methods	of	destroying	the	ego,	and	when	the	ego	is	gone,	God	is	left.	It
is	ego	that	is	hiding	God	in	a	dark	cloud.	when	the	cloud	is	gone	the	sun	shines
forth	in	all	its	glory,	beauty,	grandeur,	splendor.
Niranjan	is	one	of	the	names	of	god.
The	East	has	given	many	beautiful	names	to	god.	Although	god	has	no	name	we
still	have	to	call	him,	invoke	him,	pray	to	him,	so	we	have	invented	many	names
knowing	perfectly	well	that	they	are	all	arbitrary.
But	still,	those	names	signify	some	quality	in	god.
Niranjan	means	 the	 quality	 of	 remaining	 aloof,	 untouched	 in	 the	midst	 of	 all,
remaining	in	the	crowd	and	yet	remaining	alone.	God	is	in	the	world	and	yet	the
world	touches	him	not,	He	remains	above	it	--	 in	it	and	yet	above	it.	He	is	not
colored	by	it.	The	dust	does	not	gather	on	him,	he	remains	pure,	unpolluted.	And
that's	how	a	sannyasin	should	be.
Sannyas	is	the	art	of	living	in	the	world	and	yet	not	allowing	the	world	to	enter
you,	living	in	the	world	and	yet	not	being	a	part	of	it.
Bliss	has	a	luminosity	of	its	own.	Misery	is	dark,	bliss	is	bright.	The	miserable
person	 casts	 a	 shadow	 on	 others	 too.	 He	 comes	 like	 a	 black	 hole,	 he	 sucks
people's	energy;	his	very	presence	 is	destructive.	But	 the	presence	of	a	blissful
person	 is	 creative,	 nourishing.	 It	 showers	 light	 on	 others.	 It	 is	 a	 blessing,	 a
benediction	to	existence.
Every	being	is	a	divine	flame.	We	are	made	of	the	fire	called	God.	We	are	small
flames	but	the	smallness	does	not	matter;	the	flame	is	a	flame,	big	or	small.	Even
the	 dewdrops	 contain	 oceans,	 even	 a	 small	 wave	 is	 as	 oceanic	 as	 the	 biggest
wave.	We	are	small	flames	but	the	fire	is	eternal,	infinite.	Our	quality	is	exactly
that	of	God,	although	our	quantity	may	be	small.
Science	inquires	into	the	quantity	of	things	because	only	quantity	is	measurable.
Religion	inquires	into	the	quality,	but	the	quality	is	immeasurable:	it	can	only	be
experienced.
(To	his	father	accompanying	him)	Help	him	from	the	very	beginning	to	feel	like
a	divine	flame!
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
15	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912155
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Parijat	 is	 a	 beautiful	 flower.	 And	 my	 people	 are	 flower	 people,	 because	 we
believe	in	peace	and	not	in	war!	We	believe	in	love.
Palash	 is	 a	 flower.	 It	 is	 a	very	beautiful	 flower,	 and	 so	 red	 that	 it	 looks	 like	 a
flame.	That's	the	colour	of	my	sannyasins:	the	colour	of	fire.
We	are	creating	a	 fire	 in	which	 the	old	will	be	consumed	and	 the	new	will	be
born.
(To	a	four-year-old.)
Anand	means	bliss.	Ged	means	good	 fortune.	 It	 is	 the	greatest	 fortune	 to	be	a
sannyasin	--	although	it	will	take	time	for	you	to	realise	it	and	to	recognise	it!
Veet	William:	Transcendence	of	the	Will.
The	 will	 has	 to	 be	 transcended.	 The	 will	 is	 the	 problem,	 because	 my	 will	 is
bound	to	be	against	the	will	of	the	whole.	If	it	is	not	against	the	whole	then	it	is
no	longer	needed.	If	I	am	with	the	whole,	totally	with	the	whole,	then	what	is	the
point	of	having	my	own	will?	--	it	is	utterly	irrelevant.	But	it	is	very	relevant	if	I
am	struggling,	fighting.
Sannyas	means:	drop	 the	 fight,	drop	 the	struggle.	There	 is	no	point	 in	 fighting
with	the	whole	--	we	can't	win.	The	part	cannot	win	against	the	whole,	the	part
can	win	only	with	the	whole.
Let	the	ego	and	its	shadow,	the	will,	disappear.	In	that	disappearance	God	starts
flowing	through	you.
Then	you	are	no	longer	your	self,	then	you	are	the	cosmic	self.	Then	you	are	just
a	 vehicle,	 a	 medium,	 a	 song	 sung	 by	 the	 divine	 --	 a	 song	 not	 of	 your	 own
creation	 but	 a	 song	 which	 comes	 from	 the	 beyond.	 And	 whenever	 a	 song	 is
allowed	to	pass	through	you	and	you	don't	hinder	it,	tremendous	bliss	arises.
Bliss	is	nothing	but	being	totally	in	tune	with	the	whole.
Love	is	not	something	that	we	have	to	create,	it	is	already	given,	it	is	part	of	our
being.	We	have	only	to	discover	it.	The	gift	has	been	already	given	but	we	are	so
asleep	 that	we	don't	 know	anything	 about	 it.	We	have	 to	become	a	 little	more
wakeful	to	see	and	recognize	what	has	been	given	us.
The	gift	is	gracious	because	we	have	not	earned	it.	It	is	not	a	reward,	it	is	simply
a	gift.	A	reward	is	that	which	we	earn;	a	gift	is	that	which	God	gives	out	of	his
abundance,	not	because	we	have	earned	it.	We	don't	even	deserve	it,	but	he	goes
on	pouring	because	he	has	too	much.	He	is	like	a	cloud	heavy	with	water,	ready
to	 pour	 anywhere,	 even	 on	 the	 rocks...	 and	we	 are	 rocks.	We	don't	 deserve	 it.
That	 is	why	one	should	be	grateful	 to	God:	we	don't	deserve	 it	yet	he	goes	on
giving.	Worthy	or	unworthy,	he	makes	no	distinctions.
Sinners	or	saints,	he	has	no	preferences.	He	has	so	much	that	he	has	to	share.
And	a	sannyasin	has	to	learn	to	live	in	the	same	way.	That	is	a	religious	life:	the
life	 of	 sharing,	 without	 any	 preference,	 without	 thinking	 whether	 somebody
deserves	it	or	not,	but	giving	out	of	your	joy.	The	sheer	joy	of	giving	is	enough.
That	is	the	only	lesson	we	have	to	learn	from	God,	to	give	the	way	that	he	gives.
And	that	is	love:	giving	unconditionally.
And	if	one	can	learn	the	art	of	giving	unconditionally	one's	bliss	will	be	infinite,
unbounded.
The	 past	 of	 humanity	 has	 been	 a	 disaster	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 many
religions	arose	in	the	world	which	were	against	life.	In	fact	all	the	religions	that
have	existed	up	to	now	have	been	against	life.
Buddha	was	not	against	life,	nor	was	Jesus	against	life,	but	Christians	are	against
life	and	Buddhists	are	against	life.	The	originators	were	all	for	life,	but	the	priest
cannot	afford	that.	The	priest	lives	on	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
division	between	God	and	 life;	not	only	on	 the	division	but	on	 the	antagonism
between	life	and	god.	The	priest	condemns	life,	makes	people	feel	guilty	about
being	alive,	teaches	them	to	be	destructive	towards	their	own	lives.	This	is	how
he	becomes	powerful,	this	is	his	strategy.	Then	he	places	God	far,	far	away	in	the
sky,	and	he	becomes	the	agent,	the	mediator.	He	exploits	in	the	name	of	God:	he
makes	man	 feel	guilty	and	makes	God	so	 far	 away	 that	 the	guilty	man	cannot
conceive	 that	 he	 can	 approach	 God	 directly,	 immediately.	 Then	 the	 priest	 is
needed	to	function	as	a	viamedia.
But	 the	 true	 religion	 is	 always	 life-affirmative.	 I	 say	 life	 is	God	 --	 there	 is	 no
other	 God	 except	 life.	 Then	 he	 is	 very	 close,	 so	 close	 that	 there	 is	 no	 space
between	 you	 and	 him	 for	 the	 priest	 to	 stand.	 The	 priest	 becomes	 absolutely
superfluous.	The	temples	and	the	mosques	and	the	churches	need	not	exist	at	all,
because	the	whole	existence	becomes	his	temple.	Wherever	you	are,	you	are	in
God:	when	the	sun	rises	it	is	God	rising,	and	when	the	flower	blooms	it	is	God
blooming,	and	when	a	child	giggles	it	is	God	giggling.
My	whole	effort	is	to	bring	God	back	into	your	neighbourhood,	to	make	him	also
so	close,	just	like	breathing,	that	he	can	beat	in	your	heart.	Then	there	is	no	need
to	 escape	 from	 life	 or	 to	 be	 destructive	 or	 to	 be	 negative.	 Then	 to	 be	 alive	 is
worship,	and	to	be	more	alive	is	to	be	more	religious.	To	be	totally	alive,	to	be
wholly	alive	is	to	be	holy.
There	is	no	other	God	than	life.	All	other	gods	are	false,	manufactured	by	man.
Only	life	is	not	manufactured	by	man.
But	life	is	invisible:	you	see	the	tree	but	you	don't	see	its	life;	you	see	the	man,
the	woman,	but	you	don't	see	their	lives	--	you	only	see	the	house	in	which	their
life	lives.	The	house	is	visible	but	the	guest	is	invisible.
There	are	two	types	of	people:	One	which	believes	in	the	house,	the	materialist...
they	 say	 that	 there	 is	 no	 guest	 within.	 Their	 idea	 is	 sheer	 nonsense	 because
without	 the	 guest	 the	 house	 loses	 all	 meaning,	 it	 is	 empty,	 it	 can't	 have	 any
significance.	 Then	 there	 are	 the	 so-called	 spiritualists.	 They	 are	 against	 the
house;	they	say	that	the	house	is	an	illusion,	that	the	visible	is	an	illusion	and	the
invisible	is	the	only	truth.	The	invisible	cannot	exist	without	the	house,	it	needs
something	as	a	support	for	it.	Both	are	wrong.
My	 approach	 is	 that	 the	 house	 is	 beautiful	 and	 the	 house	 is	 true.	The	 guest	 is
invisible	but	there	are	ways	to	feel	him:	meditation,	love,	prayer.	There	are	ways
to	see	him	--	not	through	the	ordinary	eyes	of	course,	but	there	are	possibilities
in	man's	consciousness	to	grow	new	kinds	of	eyes.	And	that's	the	function	of	the
Master:	to	help	you	grow	new	insights	in	you.
I	 teach	you	 the	 love	of	 both.	 I	 am	a	materialist-spiritualist.	 Such	 a	 person	has
never	existed	before.	But	 the	 future	belongs	 to	 this	vision.	The	materialist	 and
the	spiritualist	are	both	finished,	their	days	are	gone.
The	 future	needs	 a	new	kind	of	 synthesis,	 a	new	vision	 in	which	all	 polarities
disappear.	And	each	of	my	sannyasins	has	to	become	that	synthesis.
Life	is	meaningless	without	the	experience	of	truth.	And	by	truth	I	don't	mean	a
logical	 conclusion	 but	 the	 experience	 of	 existence	 itself;	 not	 speculation	 but
experience,	not	philosophical	thinking	but	a	poetic,	aesthetic	feeling	for	it.
Truth	can	have	two	dimensions:	one	is	of	the	head,	and	the	other	is	of	the	heart.
In	the	head	truth	becomes	a	logical	process;	in	the	heart	a	song	of	love.	and	it	is
only	in	the	heart	that	one	really	comes	to	know.
Life	 is	 always	new,	mind	 is	 always	old.	Life	 is	 never	 old,	mind	 is	 never	 new.
Hence	 they	 never	 meet,	 they	 can't	 meet.	 Mind	 moves	 backwards,	 life	 moves
forwards.	 So	 those	 who	 try	 to	 live	 life	 through	 the	 mind	 are	 simply	 doing
something	 so	 utterly	 stupid,	 that	 the	 day	 they	 recognize	what	 they	 have	 been
doing	to	themselves	they	will	not	be	able	to	believe	that	they	could	have	been	so
stupid,	so	ridiculous,	so	absurd.
Life	can	be	known	only	by	a	state	of	no-mind.	That's	what	meditation	is:	putting
the	mind	 aside,	 being	without	 thoughts,	 just	 being,	 silent	 --	 not	 even	 a	 single
word	moving	in	the	mind,	no	traffic,	al	is	empty,	quiet,	still.	Then	suddenly	you
are	in	contact	with	life	and	then	you	know	its	tremendous	freshness,	its	liberating
freshness.	That	is	God,	that	is	nirvana.	To	live	life	in	its	totality,	to	know	life	in
its	absolute	freshness,	is	to	be	blissful,	is	to	be	peaceful.
Man	can	live	in	two	ways:	either	he	can	live	partially,	fragmentarily,	or	he	can
live	 totally.	 Ordinarily	 people	 live	 in	 a	 partial	 way,	 half-heartedly,	 lukewarm.
They	 don't	 know	what	 intensity	 is,	 they	 don't	 know	what	 passionate	 living	 is.
They	never	get	involved	in	anything.	They	go	only	so	far,	never	whole-heartedly
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	the	very	end	of	it.	They	are	too	clever	and	cunning	to	do	that,	too	calculative
to	risk	that	much.	But	unless	you	risk	all	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	the	beauty
of	life.	One	has	to	be	one	hundred	per	cent	involved,	committed,	then	only	does
life	reveal	its	secrets.
Be	total	in	whatsoever	you	do.	Each	act	has	to	become	an	opportunity	to	be	total.
That's	my	whole	teaching	--	the	long	and	the	short	of	it.
Love	has	 its	 own	way	of	 knowing.	 It	 is	 totally	 different	 from	 the	ways	of	 the
mind.	For	example,	if	you	try	to	know	a	rose	flower	through	the	mind	you	will
have	to	dissect	it,	and	in	dissecting	it	you	will	destroy	its	beauty.	You	will	come
to	 know	 about	 its	 chemistry	 but	 you	 will	 miss	 its	 poetry,	 which	 was	 the	 real
thing.
You	will	kill	 the	spirit	and	you	will	have	only	the	corpse;	hence	that	 is	not	 the
right	way	to	know	a	rose	flower.
The	 right	 way	 is	 the	 way	 of	 the	 poet,	 the	 way	 of	 the	 lover,	 the	 way	 of	 the
musician,	the	way	of	the	dancer.	If	you	are	a	musician	you	will	sing	a	song,	you
will	get	in	tune	with	the	dancing	flower	in	the	wind,	you	will	sit	silently	by	the
side	of	the	flower	and	you	will	try	to	listen	to	its	music.
Yes,	there	is	music	around	it.	It	is	very	silent	but	music	is	there.	There	is	poetry.
It	 is	not	written	 in	a	book,	but	 the	very	being	of	 the	 flower,	 its	whispering,	 its
dancing,	its	playing	with	the	sunrays	--	al	that	is	poetry,	great	poetry.	And	if	you
can	 love	 the	 flower	you	will	be	able	 to	know	 the	poetry,	 the	music,	 the	dance
which	 is	 the	soul	of	 the	 flower.	Certainly	you	will	not	know	 its	chemistry,	but
you	will	know	its	very	soul.
Existence	has	to	be	known	through	love,	then	you	know	God.	God	is	nothing	but
existence	approached	through	love.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
16	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912165
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
One	can	be	blissful	only	if	one	has	attained	a	certain	discipline	over	oneself,	 if
one	has	become	a	ruler	of	one's	own	body-mind.	And	it	needs	more	effort,	more
persistent	work,	 than	 creating	 a	 kingdom	 outside.	 The	work	 of	Alexander	 the
Great	is	nothing	compared	to	the	work	of	Jesus	Christ,	Buddha	or	Mohammed.
Their	 work	 is	 really	 the	 pinnacle	 of	 human	 effort,	 human	 endeavour;	 human
potential	has	come	to	its	peak.
The	real	 ruler	 rules	himself,	not	others.	The	desire	 to	 rule	others	 is	 just	a	poor
substitute.	It	is	to	keep	yourself	occupied	so	that	you	remain	forgetful	about	your
inner	chaos,	so	that	you	need	not	work	upon	yourself.	It	is	an	escape.	The	desire
to	rule	over	others	is	an	escape.
The	victory	 is	 through	knowing	 the	 secret.	And	 there	 is	only	one	 secret	worth
knowing	--	that	is	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
own	innermost	self.	That	is	the	secretmost	place.	People	go	on	traveling	far	and
wide;	that	is	not	difficult.
Man	has	 reached	 the	moon;	 it	 is	 so	easy.	But	 it	 is	very	difficult	 to	 reach	one's
own	center.	and	the	secret	of	the	secret	is	hidden	there,	the	master	key	which	can
unlock	all	the	mysteries.
By	being	 a	 sannyasin	you	 are	 entering	 the	path	of	 self-discovery.	 It	 is	 already
there,	 we	 have	 only	 to	 discover	 it.	 Just	 a	 few	 unnecessary	 things	 have	 to	 be
removed,	a	few	curtains,	and	suddenly	we	are	face	to	face	with	God	himself.	The
secret	is	that	we	are	Gods,	and	the	misery	is	that	we	have	become	beggars.
Love	contains	my	whole	message.	Love	yourself	 --	 that	 is	 the	beginning,	 then
love	 those	 who	 are	 close	 to	 you,	 then	 love	 the	 world,	 then	 love	 the	 whole
cosmos;	only	then	will	you	be	able	to	love	God.
The	 journey	 begins	 from	 one's	 own	 self	 and	 ends	 in	 God.	 These	 are	 the	 two
banks	 of	 the	 river.	You	 are	 on	 the	 bank,	God	 is	 on	 the	 other,	 and	 love	 is	 the
bridge.	The	bridge	passes	over	the	whole	of	the	river,	but	people	are	very	afraid
of	 love;	 that's	 why	 they	 go	 on	 praying.	 They	 never	 understand	what	 they	 are
doing;	their	prayer	is	just	ignorance.	Unless	it	is	full	of	love	it	can't	be	true.	Their
life	misses	 love	but	 they	go	on	going	 to	 the	churches	and	 the	 temples.	That	 is
absolutely	absurd.
Unless	you	live	in	love	you	can't	enter	any	temple	of	God;	and	one	who	lives	in
love	need	not	enter	a	temple,	he	is	already	in	it.
Remember	this	simple	message	and	try	to	live	it,	because	this	is	not	a	doctrine	to
be	believed	in	but	a	 life	 to	be	evolved.	Bloom	in	love,	release	the	fragrance	of
love	--	that	is	prayer.	And	only	the	fragrance	of	love	reaches	God,	nothing	else.
My	sannyasin	has	to	become	a	living	message	of	bliss,	not	only	in	words	but	in
deed.	His	 very	 being	 has	 to	 radiate	 bliss.	He	 has	 to	 be	 blissful	 and	 he	 has	 to
create	an	atmosphere	of	bliss	around	himself	wherever	he	is,	so	that	whomsoever
comes	in	contact	with	him	immediately	starts	feeling	the	cool	breeze	of	bliss.
The	real	message	cannot	be	conveyed	through	words.	Words	can	help	--	they	are
secondary;	the	real	message	can	be	communicated	only	through	being	--	that	is
primary.	 Be	 cheerful,	 be	 blissful,	 be	 a	 song	 and	 a	 dance,	 and	 transform	 your
whole	 life	 into	 a	 sacred	 celebration,	 into	 a	 sacred	 ceremony.	 This	 is	 what	 is
meant	by	being	initiated	into	sannyas.
The	 moment	 one	 starts	 seeking	 and	 searching	 for	 oneself	 one	 becomes	 the
blessed	one.	The	enquiry	itself	is	the	beginning	of	the	transformation.	The	more
passionate	 the	 enquiry	 is,	 the	 sooner	 the	 transformation	 will	 come.	 Make	 it
intense,	make	it	total...
Sannyas	has	 to	be	 a	deep	 commitment.	Sannyas	has	 to	become	more	valuable
than	anything	else	in	life,	even	more	valuable	than	life	itself.
This	is	one	of	the	fundamental	secrets	of	life	and	existence:	you	live	only	when
you	 have	 something	 for	which	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 sacrifice	 even	 your	 life.	 Life
begins	only	when	you	have	something	more,	higher,	bigger,	holier	 than	 life,	 in
your	life.	When	life	itself	becomes	just	a	means	to	a	higher	end,	then	your	life
starts	having	a	context.	And	in	that	context	only	is	there	meaning,	significance,
joy.
Zena	comes	from	a	Sanskrit	root	dhyana.	It	means	meditation,	not	in	the	Western
sense	of	the	word,	meditation	with	the	Eastern	approach.
The	Western	meditation	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 kind	 of	 thinking:	 thinking	 of	 higher
things	is	called	meditation.
When	you	think	of	God,	when	you	think	of	Christ,	when	you	think	of	Love,	it	is
called	meditation.	 In	 the	East,	 thinking	 is	 not	meditation	 at	 all	 --	whether	 you
think	 of	 God	 or	 of	 money	 doesn't	 matter.	 Any	 thinking	 of	 any	 object	 is	 a
disturbance	in	meditation.	In	the	East,	meditation	means	a	state	of	no	thought...
just	 pure	 being.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 greatest	 experience	 in	 life,	 when	 you	 simply
exist:	 no	 thought	 crosses	 your	 being,	 the	 whole	 traffic	 stops,	 the	 mind
disappears.	But	consciousness	is	there	and	more	than	ever,	because	whatsoever
was	hidden	behind	the	thoughts	is	no	more	hidden,	whatsoever	was	involved	in
thoughts	 is	 no	more	 involved.	All	 energy	 is	 released.	One	 is	 simply	 a	 pool	 of
energy,	and	so	silent	that	not	even	a	ripple	arises.
In	that	silent	pool	of	consciousness,	of	energy,	existence	is	reflected;	we	come	to
know	that	which	is.
And	God	is	another	name	for	that	which	is.
The	full	moon	represents	enlightenment,	it	represents	perfection,	it	represents	the
ultimate	 explosion	 of	 light.	 Exactly	 as	 the	 full	moon	 rises	 in	 the	 sky,	 in	 deep
meditation	a	full	moon	rises	within	your	inner	sky.	It	is	not	like	the	sun,	because
the	sun	is	hot;	it	is	like	the	moon,	because	the	moon	is	cool.
The	 sun	 represents	male	 energy,	 the	moon	 reflects	 female	 energy.	Science	 is	 a
male	approach	towards	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
reality,	religion	is	a	female	approach.	Science	is	aggressive,	religion	is	receptive;
hence	 science	 has	 made	 the	 world	 more	 and	 more	 violent.	We	 have	 violated
nature,	polluted	the	atmosphere,	poisoned	the	oceans;	in	the	name	of	science	we
have	been	really	aggressive.
Religion	brings	grace.	Religion	is	love,	science	is	war.	Science	thinks	in	term	of
conquest,	 religion	 thinks	 in	 terms	 of	 surrender.	 The	moon	 represents	 all	 these
things	 --	 that's	 why	 I	 have	 chosen	 the	 moon	 to	 be	 on	 the	 flag	 of	 the	 new
commune.
Punitam	 means	 the	 sacred	 --	 and	 that	 is	 one	 of	 the	 qualities	 that	 is	 missing,
missing	very	much	in	the	modern	world,	in	modern	consciousness.
Modern	man	is	the	first	man	in	the	whole	history	to	have	no	idea	of	sacredness,
to	be	living	a	very	mundane	life.	He	is	interested	in	money,	power,	prestige,	and
he	thinks	that's	all.	It	is	such	a	stupid	notion.
His	 life	 is	 surrounded	by	small	 things,	very	 small.	He	has	no	 idea	of	anything
bigger	 than	himself.	He	had	denied	God,	he	has	said	 that	God	 is	dead.	He	has
denied	 life	 after	 death,	 he	 has	 denied	 life	 within.	 He	 believes	 only	 in	 the
superficial;	 he	 believes	 in	 the	 circumference	 but	 goes	 on	 denying	 the	 center;
hence	we	see	such	boredom	all	around.	It	is	natural,	because	without	something
bigger	 than	 you	 to	 relate	 to,	 your	 life	 is	 going	 to	 be	 tedious,	 boring.	 A	 life
becomes	a	dance	only	when	it	is	an	adventure.	And	it	can	become	an	adventure
only	when	there	is	something	higher	than	you	to	achieve,	to	reach.
The	sacred	simply	means	that	we	are	not	the	end,	that	we	are	only	a	passage,	that
all	 has	 not	 happened,	 that	 much	 has	 yet	 to	 happen.	 In	 fact	 the	 real	 has	 not
happened	yet.	We	are	only	seeds.	The	seed	has	 to	become	a	sprout,	 the	sprout
has	 to	 become	 a	 tree,	 the	 tree	 has	 to	 wait	 for	 the	 spring	 and	 the	 tree	 has	 to
explode	into	thousands	of	flowers	and	release	its	soul	into	the	cosmos.	Only	then
will	there	be	fulfillment....
and	 the	 sacred	 is	not	 far	 away;	we	 just	have	 to	 start	 enquiring	about	 it.	 In	 the
beginning	we	are	groping	in	the	dark,	of	course,	but	soon	things	start	falling	in
tune,	 soon	we	 start	having	glimpses	of	 the	beyond,	 some	unheard	music	 starts
reaching	our	hearts.	It	stirs	our	being,	it	starts	giving	us	a	new	color,	a	new	joy,	a
new	life.
Man	has	the	potential	of	becoming	a	song	of	love,	a	dance	of	love,	but	very	few
people,	very	rare	people,	transform	their	potential	into	the	actual.	They	are	born
as	seeds,	they	die	as	seeds.	Their	life	remains	nothing	but	a	long	experiment	in
futility.	 And	 the	 older	 they	 grow,	 the	 more	 frustrated	 they	 become,	 naturally,
because	all	their	hopes	are	being	shattered,	all	their	desires	are	bringing	nothing
but	tears,	agony,	anguish.	As	the	time	passes	they	become	aware	that	whatsoever
they	have	ben	doing	with	their	life	has	ben	of	no	value.	How	can	they	sing?	How
can	they	dance?	How	can	they	feel	grateful	to	God?	It	is	impossible.
My	 observation	 is	 that	 people	 go	 to	 the	 temples	 and	 the	 synagogues	 and	 the
churches	 only	 out	 of	 fear,	 not	 out	 of	 love.	 Yes,	 older	 people	 go	 more	 often
because	they	have	become	more	afraid	of	death.	They	don't	go	to	the	church	or
the	 temple	because	 they	have	known	 something	 tremendously	valuable	 in	 life,
but	because	life	is	slipping	out	of	their	hands	and	the	great	darkness	of	death	is
coming	closer	and	they	are	afraid;	they	want	someone	to	protect	them.	Now	they
know	that	their	money	is	not	going	to	be	with	them,	their	friends	are	not	going	to
be	 with	 them,	 their	 families	 will	 leave	 them.	 Out	 of	 desperation	 they	 start
clinging	 to	 the	 idea	 of	God.	But	 this	 is	 not	 out	 of	 love	 and	 this	 is	 not	 out	 of
gratitude.	And	a	God	born	out	of	fear	is	a	false	God.	A	God	born	out	of	love	is	a
true	God.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	make	windows	into	God	available	so	that	you	don't	go
to	God	out	of	fear,	so	that	you	can	go	through	the	experience	of	beauty,	through
the	experience	of	creativity,	through	the	experience	of	love.	And	when	a	person
goes	through	these	experiences	the	contact	is	tremendous,	transforming.	A	single
living	contact	with	God	is	enough;	you	will	never	be	the	same	again.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
17	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912175
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Sambodh	means	right	awareness.	That	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental	keys.
More	people	have	become	enlightened	through	that	key	than	by	any	other.	Right
awareness	means	not	only	awareness	--	because	awareness	can	become	a	strain	-
-	right	awareness	means	awareness	without	any	strain,	relaxed.	One	can	try	to	be
aware	but	can	create	tension	on	the	way,	and	that	tension	will	destroy	the	whole
work.	 So	 these	 two	 things	 have	 to	 be	 remembered:	 awareness	 with	 no	 strain,
with	no	tension.
Our	 very	 word	 'attention'	 has	 tension	 in	 it,	 because	 whenever	 we	 try	 to	 be
attentive	we	become	tense,	but	that	tension	destroys	the	whole	beauty	of	it.	Right
awareness	means	attention	without	tension,	a	relaxed	kind	of	watchfulness,	just
seeing,	 not	 making	 an	 effort,	 not	 striving;	 an	 effortless	 awareness.	 In	 the
beginning	 it	 looks	very	paradoxical	 --	effortlessness	and	awareness	 --	but	once
you	start	working	on	 it,	 slowly	slowly	 the	knack	 is	 learned.	 It	 is	a	knack.	And
once	you	have	learned	the	knack,	once	you	have	known	even	a	single	moment	of
awareness	without	tension,	you	are	on	the	right	track;	you	will	never	be	the	same
person	again.
A	sannyasin	has	to	create	as	much	fire	in	himself	as	possible.	He	has	to	become
just	fuel.	He	has	to	become	such	an	intense	fire	that	everything	is	consumed	in
him:	the	whole	past,	the	whole	future,	time	itself.	Life	is	consumed	in	it,	death	is
consumed	 in	 it,	 the	 idea	 of	 I	 and	 thou	 is	 consumed	 in	 it.	 The	 mind	 itself	 is
consumed	with	all	its	philosophies,	ideologies.	And	when	the	fire	is	total	and	all
is	consumed	only	god	is	left	behind.	God	is	the	purest	gold.	We	are	made	of	god
but	 we	 are	 carrying	 so	 many	 impurities;	 a	 fire	 is	 needed	 to	 purify	 the	 gold.
Hence	I	have	chosen	the	colour	of	fire	for	sannyasins'	robes.	It	is	just	a	symbol
that	you	have	 to	pass	 through	a	 fire.	The	fire	has	 to	be	 inner;	and	nobody	else
can	create	it	except	you.	It	is	your	very	deep	effort	to	transform	yourself	that	will
ignite	it.
Once	 it	 is	 ignited	 it	becomes	huge,	 and	once	 it	 is	 ignited	 it	 cannot	be	put	out.
Then	it	has	the	quality	of	the	eternal.
God	 is	 our	 only	 security.	Money,	 power,	 prestige	 --	 nothing	 is	 secure;	 family,
friends,	even	life	itself	--
nothing	is	secure.	We	are	surrounded	by	insecurity.	But	there	is	one	thing	which
is	secure,	and	 that	one	 thing	cannot	be	 found	anywhere	outside;	 that	one	 thing
can	 only	 be	 found	 at	 the	 innermost	 core.	 God	 resides	 there,	 that	 is	 God's
dwelling	place:	 the	heart	of	your	hearts!	And	to	know	God	is	 to	go	beyond	all
security;	 then	 everything	 is	 safe	 and	 secure.	And	when	 everything	 is	 safe	 and
secure,	 misery	 disappears	 naturally,	 anxiety	 disappears,	 and	 great	 bliss	 arises.
That	bliss	is	the	deepest	longing	of	your	being.
Inka	 comes	 from	 'ing'.	 In	 Norse	 mythology	 Ing	 is	 the	 goddess	 of	 fertility,
prosperity,	peace	--	in	short,	of	creativity.
Bliss	is	a	by-product	of	creativity.	Bliss	is	known	only	by	those	who	are	creative
people.	It	is	not	something	that	you	can	catch	hold	of,	it	is	not	a	thing	at	all.	It	is
the	moment	of	exhilaration	when	something	 is	created	by	you,	because	 in	 that
moment	you	disappear	and	God	appears	--	because	all	creation	is	through	him,
by	him.	God	is	another	name	for	the	energy	that	we	call	creativity.
So	whenever	you	create	anything	--	poetry,	painting,	sculpture	--	you	disappear,
God	starts	functioning	through	you.	And	in	those	moments	of	egolessness	there
is	joy,	there	is	bliss.	Once	this	is	understood	one	can	transform	one's	whole	life
into	creativity....
It	 does	 not	 matter	 whether	 you	 become	 famous	 or	 not,	 whether	 anybody
appreciates	your	creations	or	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
not;	that	is	secondary,	absolutely	non-essential.	The	essential	thing	is	that	while
creating	 something	 you	 disappear	 and	 for	 a	 moment	 God	 takes	 possession	 of
you.	That	being	possessed	by	God	is	bliss.
Veet	means	transcendence.	Markus	means	a	warrior,	a	warlike	person,	martial.
The	 full	 name	 will	 mean:	 go	 beyond	 the	 qualities	 that	 make	 one	 warlike.
Transcend	 those	 qualities	 because	 they	 are	 the	 cause	 of	 all	 misery,	 violence,
anger,	hatred,	ego;	these	are	the	very	pillars	of	hell.
Instead	of	being	warlike,	be	peaceful,	be	loving,	be	human,	be	compassionate.
To	be	warlike	 is	 to	be	animal-like;	 to	be	peaceful	 is	godlike.	And	man	can	be
both:	either	he	can	fall	below	humanity	and	can	function	as	an	animal	or	he	can
transcend	 humanity	 and	 function	 like	 a	 god.	 man	 is	 only	 a	 bridge	 between
animal	and	god.	And	remember	that	we	have	to	become	gods.	Less	than	that	is
not	going	to	fulfill	you,	make	you	blissful,	with	less	than	that	you	will	remain	in
anguish,	something	will	go	on	being	missed.	When	one	becomes	godlike	all	 is
fulfilled,	 a	great	 rest	 descends	 and	great	 silence	prevails.	 In	 those	moments	of
silence	and	grace	one	knows	what	like	is	all	about.
Anand	means	bliss.	Theo	means	god's	gift.
The	most	 difficult	 thing	 in	 life	 is	 to	 receive	 a	 gift,	 because	 it	 goes	 against	 the
ego.	It	is	easier	to	give,	very	easy	to	give	but	to	receive	is	very	difficult.	And	to
receive	when	you	don't	deserve...	 then	 it	 becomes	even	more	difficult.	 and	we
don't	deserve.	We	have	not	earned	it,	we	are	not	worthy	of	bliss,	but	God	goes	on
giving	--	not	because	we	deserve	but	because	he	has	in	such	abundance.
The	moment	you	receive	his	bliss	he	feels	thankful	to	you:	you	have	unburdened
him,	 you	 have	 taken	 a	 little	 weight	 from	 his	 being.	 But	 remember,	 it	 is	 very
difficult	 to	 receive	 a	 gift.	 It	 feels	 like	 a	 humiliation,	 one	 feels	 a	 little
embarrassed.	And	a	sannyasin	has	to	learn	that:	how	to	receive	a	gift	in	great	joy
and	celebration,	because	the	more	you	become	receptive,	the	more	will	be	given
to	you.	 If	you	are	 totally	 receptive	 the	whole	of	heaven	can	descend	 into	your
being	 this	 very	 moment,	 herenow.	 All	 that	 is	 needed	 on	 your	 part	 is	 to	 be
absolutely	open	and	ready.
The	most	godly	quality	 in	 life	 is	bliss	and	 the	most	ungodly	quality	 is	misery;
hence	 the	miserable	person	cannot	have	any	bridge	with	God.	 It	 is	 impossible.
He	 can	 pray,	 he	 can	 go	 to	 church,	 he	 can	 read	 the	 Bible,	 but	 it	 is	 all	 futile
because	misery	makes	you	closed,	misery	makes	you	shrink.	Bliss	opens	you	up,
bliss	expands	you,	and	only	in	that	expanding	consciousness	can	be	bridged	with
God.
Whether	you	pray	or	not,	whether	you	go	to	church	or	not,	whether	you	read	the
scriptures	or	not,	whether	you	are	formally	a	religious	person	or	not	--	all	those
things	are	irrelevant.
If	your	consciousness	is	expanding,	sooner	or	later	you	will	have	the	connection,
the	communion.	It	 is	bound	to	happen,	 it	 is	 inevitable;	hence	I	say	that	bliss	 is
the	most	godly	quality.
They	say	 that	 in	hell	people	are	 in	great	misery.	The	 truth	 is	 just	 the	opposite:
hell	has	nothing	to	do	with	misery.	It	is	not	that	in	hell	you	are	in	misery	but	that
whenever	you	are	in	misery,	that	is	hell.	And	they	say	that	in	heaven	everybody
is	blissful;	again	they	are	wrong:	heaven	has	nothing	to	do	with	bliss.
Whenever	you	are	in	bliss	you	are	in	heaven,	heaven	is	in	you.	Heaven	and	hell
are	inner	states.
Remind	 yourself	 of	 it	 again	 and	 again,	 that	 bliss	 is	 the	 key.	 And	 be	 blissful!
There	is	so	much	to	be	blissful	about.	Just	look	at	life	and	you	will	be	surprised:
there	are	so	many	things	 that	one	need	not	search	for	anything	more.	So	much
beauty,	so	much	splendor,	so	much	grace	all	around....	These	are	all	expressions
of	God.	And	as	you	start	becoming	cheerful,	as	you	start	becoming	a	song	more
and	 more,	 you	 will	 see:	 God	 is	 coming	 closer.	 You	 need	 not	 have	 any	 other
proof.
Proofs	are	asked	for	only	by	foolish	people;	the	wise	ones	experience,	the	fools
argue.
Love	needs	great	courage.	In	fact	nothing	needs	more	courage	than	love	because
the	basic	requirement	of	love	is	to	die	as	an	ego.	Only	when	you	dissolve	your
ego	does	 love	 start	 flowing	 in	you.	The	ego	 is	 the	barrier	 and	 it	needs	guts	 to
drop	it.	One	clings,	one	thinks	that	one	is	nothing	but	 the	ego;	hence	one	feels
great	fear:	"What	is	going	to	happen	to	me	is	I	drop	my	ego?	--	I	will	 lose	my
identity."
Yes,	 there	will	be	a	 time	when	you	will	 lose	your	 identity,	 the	old	 identity,	 the
false	identity,	an	interval	of	time	when	you	will	not	know	who	you	are,	and	then
the	true	identity	will	evolve.
In	Zen	they	say:	Before	you	meditate	rivers	are	rivers,	mountains	are	mountains;
when	you	meditate	rivers	are	no	more	rivers,	mountains	are	no	more	mountains;
and	 when	 the	 meditation	 is	 completed,	 when	 you	 have	 attained	 it,	 rivers	 are
again	rivers,	mountains	are	again	mountains.
There	is	a	gap	between	the	two	--	the	old	leaving	and	the	new	coming	--	which	is
going	to	be	a	little	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
chaotic;	hence	the	need	of	a	master	to	help	during	those	days,	to	keep	on	holding
your	hand,	to	go	on	encouraging	you:	"Don't	be	afraid.	The	dawn	is	not	far	off.
Don't	 turn	 back,	 look	 ahead...	 because	 there	 is	 no	 way	 back.	 Life	 never	 goes
back,	it	is	always	a	forward	movement."
Buddha	says,	charaiveti,	charaiveti:	Go	on,	go	on	--	until	you	have	arrived	at	the
point	where	there	is	no	desire	left.	That	is	the	moment	of	fulfillment,	of	bliss,	of
benediction.
Bliss	makes	you	a	king:	it	crowns	you.	Without	bliss	one	is	just	a	beggar,	and	to
be	a	beggar	is	misery;	it	hurts.	But	even	the	richest	people	are	beggars.	They	are
rich	 beggars,	 of	 course,	 but	 their	 minds	 are	 continuously	 desiring	 more	 and
more.	that's	what	makes	one	a	beggar.	Only	a	desireless	person	is	a	king.
And	the	moment	you	are	desireless	you	are	totally	blissful,	because	bliss	is	not
something	to	be	achieved,	it	is	your	very	nature.	You	are	missing	it	because	of	so
many	desires,	you	are	being	pulled	in	so	many	directions.	You	are	so	occupied
with	the	desires	that	you	cannot	look	within.
The	moment	desires	are	dropped	you	are	bound	to	see	your	nature.	A	great	well-
being	arises	in	you	--
and	that	is	the	ultimate	goal.
Truth	is	available	only	to	the	innocent	consciousness:	a	consciousness	which	is
as	innocent	as	a	child,	a	consciousness	which	knows	nothing.	When	you	know,
your	mirror	is	full	of	dust,	knowledge	gathers	dust	like	a	mirror.	When	you	don't
know	anything	you	are	 full	 of	wonder	 and	awe,	your	mirror	 is	 clean.	 and	 that
clean	mirror	reflects	the	truth.
Jesus	says:	Be	like	a	small	child,	because	unless	you	are	like	a	child	you	will	not
enter	into	my	kingdom	of	god.
Purity	 is	 when	 you	 live	 in	 a	 choiceless	 awareness:	 when	 you	 are	 neither
concerned	with	 the	 good	 nor	 the	 bad,	when	 you	 don't	 divide	 at	 all,	when	 you
accept	 everything	 as	 divine,	 when	 divisions	 have	 ben	 dropped,	 when	 you	 see
only	the	one.	even	in	the	devil	you	see	God	and	even	in	darkness,	light,	and	even
in	 death,	 eternal	 life.	 When	 the	 ordinary	 ways	 of	 seeing	 things	 as	 dual	 are
dropped,	 you	become	pure	because	 then	nothing	 can	 contaminate	you.	That	 is
the	 ultimate	 state	 of	 consciousness....	We	have	 to	 transcend	 all	 duality:	moral-
immoral,	 good-bad,	 life-death,	 summer-winter.	 All	 have	 to	 be	 transcended	 so
that	one	can	see	the	one.	One	can	see	the	one	in	so	many	millions	of	forms;	one
is	capable	of	recognizing	the	one	wherever,	in	whatsoever	form	he	appears.
It	is	possible.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	little	effort	to	become	more	awake,	a	little
effort	 to	 be	 aware	 and	 choiceless;	 just	 sitting	 inside,	 watching	 the	 mind,	 not
choosing	anything.	The	traffic	passes	on,	you	sit	by	the	side	unconcerned,	cool.
Slowly	slowly	a	purity	starts	descending	on	you.	That	purity	is	liberation.
Kalyani:	one	who	is	a	blessing	to	existence.
One	can	be	a	blessing	to	existence	only	if	one	is	full	of	bliss,	full	of	light,	full	of
god,	because	you	can	give	to	others	only	that	which	you	already	have.
If	you	are	miserable	you	cannot	make	others	happy;	you	can	try,	but	whatsoever
you	do	will	be	wrong.
Your	 intentions	will	be	good	but	 the	consequences	will	be	bad.	Hence	 the	first
thing	 to	 be	 done	 is	 to	 be	 blissful,	 to	 be	 fragrant.	 Then	 naturally	 the	 fragrance
starts	reaching	others,	starts	making	them	also	sing,	celebrate.
People	 are	 hard.	 Life	 prepares	 them	 to	 be	 hard	 because	 life	 prepares	 them	 to
fight.	Slowly	 slowly	 they	 lose	 all	 inner	 softness;	 they	become	 rocklike.	And	a
rocklike	person	is	a	dead	person.	He	lives	only	in	name,	he	does	not	truly	live.
True	 life	 consists	 of	 softness,	 vulnerability,	 openness.	 Don't	 be	 afraid	 of
existence:	existence	cares	for	you,	loves	you.	There	is	no	need	to	fight	with	God:
God	 is	 already	 ready	 to	 give	more	 than	 you	 can	 ever	 ask	 for	 or	 you	 can	 ever
imagine.	But	God	 can	 give	 only	 if	 you	 are	 soft,	 vulnerable.	 If	 you	 are	 porous
then	he	can	enter	from	everywhere.
Be	porous,	be	available	to	existence,	unafraid.	There	is	no	need	to	be	afraid.	It	is
our	existence,	we	belong	to	it,	it	belongs	to	us.
Love	 is	 always	 blessed	 by	 god	 and	 always	 condemned	 by	 the	 society.	 The
society	 is	against	 love,	god	 is	 for	 love;	hence	deep	down	the	society	 is	against
god.	It	pretends	to	be	religious	but	it	is	only	a	facade.	The	religion	that	exists	in
the	society	is	a	Sunday-religion,	a	formality,	something	very	pseudo,	phony.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	real	religion	is	totally	different.	But	the	moment	you	are	really	religious	the
society	is	absolutely	against	you	because	you	become	a	danger	to	the	society	--
to	 the	state,	 to	 the	church,	 to	all	 the	vested	 interests,	 to	all	 the	powers	 that	are
exploiting,	oppressing	people.
Jesus	was	pure	love.	He	was	blessed	by	god,	but	crucified	by	the	society.	Love	is
always	crucified	by	the	society.	And	society	has	created	por	substitutes	for	love	-
-	marriage,	etcetera.	Those	are	just	plastic	substitutes	to	keep	you	engaged,	toys
to	keep	you	occupied	so	that	you	don't	feel	the	need	for	real	love.	But	real	love	is
a	totally	different	phenomenon,	and	it	is	not	ordinarily	available	unless	you	raise
the	level	of	your	consciousness.
To	attain	to	real	love	you	have	to	go	through	many	transformations,	because	love
is	 the	ultimate	flowering	of	your	consciousness.	It	 is	no	ordinary	phenomenon.
That	 it	 happens	 is	 a	 miracle.	 That	 it	 happens	 is	 magic,	 but	 whenever	 it	 does
happen	blessings	shower	on	you	from	god.
God	is	not	available	through	thinking,	he	is	available	only	through	feeling.	One
cannot	connect	oneself	with	god	 through	 the	head.	The	only	possible	bridge	 is
through	the	heart.	One	can	argue	for	years	or	for	lives,	but	one	will	not	come	to
any	conclusion	about	god.	Logic	is	not	in	that	direction,	that	dimension.	It	is	not
logic	but	love	that	brings	you	to	a	conclusion.	In	fact	logic	never	brings	one	to
any	 conclusion,	 it	 goes	 around	 in	 circles.	 Love	 takes	 a	 quantum	 leap	 and
immediately	arrives	at	a	conclusion.	It	is	not	through	a	process,	it	is	intuitive,	it
is	sudden.
God	 has	 disappeared	 from	 the	 world	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 love	 has
disappeared,	 and	 god	 cannot	 be	 brought	 back	 to	 the	 world	 unless	 we	 start
creating	more	 and	more	 vibrations	 for	 love,	 unless	we	 change	 the	milieu	 that
exists	 on	 earth	 today,	 the	 atmosphere,	 the	 neo-sphere.	 It	 is	 very	 logical,
scientific,	 but	 it	 is	 absolutely	 anti-god.	Even	 those	who	believe	 in	god	believe
only	through	logic.	And	to	believe	in	logic	is	not	to	believe	at	all,	it	is	worthless.
Unless	it	is	a	love	affair,	a	mad,	mad	love	affair,	it	means	nothing.
I	teach	the	madness	that	love	brings	and	the	sanity	that	love	brings.	They	are	the
same	 thing,	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 coin.	The	world	will	 think	you	 insane,	 and
those	who	know,	they	will	think	you	sane.
Prayer	has	to	be	something	absolutely	individual.	It	has	to	be	spontaneous,	it	has
not	to	be	learned.	A	learned	prayer	is	a	false	prayer.	Then	you	are	repeating	like
a	parrot.	It	is	meaningless,	senseless	--	empty	words.	But	when	a	prayer	arises	in
your	 heart,	 when	 it	 has	 something	 of	 you	 in	 it	 then	 it	 has	 tremendous
significance.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 tale	 told	 by	 an	 idiot,	 full	 of	 fury	 and	 noise,
signifying	nothing.	It	has	tremendous	meaning	and	music.
One	 has	 to	 learn	 to	 communicate	with	 existence.	 Talk	 to	 the	 stars,	 talk	 to	 the
rivers,	talk	to	the	trees,	talk	to	the	rocks.	And	don't	feel	embarrassed	because	this
is	how	god	has	manifested	himself.	Everything	that	is,	is	a	manifestation	of	god.
Start	communication	with	 the	manifest	god	and	only	 then	one	day	will	you	be
able	to	communicate	with	the	unmanifest.	Start	with	the	visible	and	then	you	can
take	a	quantum	leap	into	the	invisible.	Talk	to	the	earth,	to	the	grass.
It	may	not	 look	religious	at	all	 in	 the	beginning,	but	 just	saying	hullo	 to	a	 tree
has	something	beautiful	in	it,	something	spiritual,	something	holy,	because	you
recognize	the	spirit	of	the	tree,	you	recognize	the	presence	of	the	tree,	you	don't
ignore	it.	And	if	a	person	can	learn	only	one	thing	--	not	to	ignore	god	in	all	his
manifestations	--	then	ignorance	disappears	and	wisdom	arises,	arises	from	your
innermost	core.
The	very	idea	of	fighting	and	conquering	is	ugly.	The	part	cannot	win	against	the
whole.	 It	 is	 utterly	 stupid.	The	 part	 can	 only	win	with	 the	whole,	 through	 the
whole.	The	part	can	only	win	if	it	allows	the	whole	to	win	through	it	--	allowing
god	 to	 function	 through	 you,	 letting	 his	 will	 be	 your	 will,	 not	 having	 any
separate	will	of	one's	own,	not	having	any	separate	goal,	destiny	of	one's	own,
moving	with	the	whole	in	total	accord,	flowing	with	the	whole	wherever	it	leads.
In	 that	 let-go	 all	 fear,	 anxiety,	 anguish,	 disappears.	 and	when	 there	 is	 no	 fear
there	 is	 love,	and	when	 there	 is	no	anguish	 there	 is	 joy.	And	when	you	are	no
more	separate	there	is	no	death.
Man	never	really	dies.	Nothing	dies.	The	very	idea	that	we	are	separate	creates,
as	 a	by-product,	 the	phenomenon	of	death.	 In	 the	 first	 place	 the	 idea	of	being
separate	is	false	and	so	is	death,	its	by-product.
Death	is	one	of	the	most	false	things	in	existence,	but	it	looks	very	real	if	the	ego
is	there;	it	is	the	shadow	of	the	ego.	Drop	the	ego	--	and	dropping	the	ego	is	the
beginning,	 the	beginning	of	 a	 tremendously	 significant	 pilgrimage.	And	 in	 the
very	first	step,	you	have	arrived.	The	first	step	 is	 the	 last	step.	 In	dropping	 the
ego	one	becomes	victorious.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
18	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912185
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT29
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	clearned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Love	is	a	song,	because	basically	it	is	an	uprising	in	the	heart,	it	is	an	explosion
of	 feeling,	 it	 is	 sensitivity	 to	 beauty.	 And	 to	 be	 sensitive	 to	 beauty	 is	 to	 be
available	to	joy.	That's	the	only	window	through	which	joy	comes	in.
Joy	cannot	enter	into	a	being	without	love.	Many	have	tried	--	millions	in	fact,
down	 the	 ages.	All	 the	monasteries	 have	 been	 full	 of	 such	 people.	 They	 have
tried	 to	 be	 joyful	without	 love.	 It	was	 a	 great	 experiment	 but	 it	 failed.	 It	was
bound	 to	 fail:	 their	 joy	 was	 phony,	 a	 pretension,	 their	 smile	 remained	 just	 a
painted	smile,	there	was	no	soul	in	it	because	the	window	was	closed.	They	were
not	available	to	existence,	they	were	closed,	they	were	living	a	closed	life.	And
when	you	are	closed	you	are	sad,	sad	deep	down.
Bliss	 happens	 only	 when	 you	 are	 open,	 multitdimensionally,	 on	 all	 planes	 of
being,	 on	 all	 levels.	When	 you	 are	 open	 to	 all	 the	 possibilities	 then	 life	 is	 a
constant	surprise,	a	constant	jubilation.
My	sannyas	is	a	totally	new	experiment	in	the	world	of	religion.	It	is	against	the
old	experiment.	They	tried	to	be	blissful	without	love,	and	they	failed.	Now	the
only	hope	is	to	try	to	be	blissful	with	love,	through	love.	It	is	not	going	to	fail,	it
can't	fail:	it	is	a	natural	process.	They	were	trying	something	unnatural.
Religion	has	not	succeeded	in	the	world	because	it	was	not	in	tune	with	nature,
not	in	tune	with	tao,	dhamma.
Love	is	divine.	Lust	is	animal,	love	is	divine	--	and	man	hangs	between	the	two.
Whatsoever	 he	 knows	 as	 love	 is	 a	mixture	 of	 lust	 and	 love:	 something	 of	 the
animal	 and	 something	 of	 the	 divine.	Hence	man	 remains	 very	 confused	 about
love,	 about	what	 exactly	 it	 is.	 If	you	want	 to	 condemn	 it	 you	can	condemn	 it;
then	you	can	magnify	the	animal	part	--	that's	what	the	priests	have	been	doing
down	the	ages.	If	you	want	to	glorify	it	you	can;	you	can	magnify	the	divine	part
--	that's	what	the	poets	have	been	doing	down	the	ages.	The	poets	and	the	priests
have	 been	 enemies.	 They	 have	 never	 agreed	 on	 anything.	 Priests	 have	 always
been	 afraid	 of	 the	 poets.	 They	 have	 always	 thought	 them	 dangerous	 because
while	 they	 condemn	 love	 as	 lust,	 as	 sexuality,	 poets	 praise	 love	 as	 divine,	 as
godly,	as	all	that	is	beautiful,	all	that	is	uplifting,	transforming.	The	conflict	has
persisted.	 Both	 are	 partly	 right;	 and	 a	 partial	 truth	 is	more	 dangerous	 than	 an
absolute	lie.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	you	aware	that	love	can	manifest	in	both	ways:	as	lust,
as	animal	desire	--	then	it	is	possessiveness,	jealousy,	then	it	is	a	subtle	effort	to
dominate	the	other,	exploit	the	other;	or	it	can	express	itself	as	divine	--	then	it	is
pure	 fragrance,	 prayer.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 very	 aware	 not	 to	 get	 these	 two	 things
mixed.	 And	 one	 has	 to	 constantly	 move	 onwards	 so	 that	 the	 animal	 is	 left
behind.
Slowly	 slowly	 a	 point	 comes,	 a	 point	 of	 no-return,	 from	 where	 the	 animal
disappears,	it	does	not	follow	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you	any	more.	That	 is	 the	moment	of	samadhi,	satori,	enlightenment.	Then	all
that	you	are	is	purely	divine,	godly.	But	love	is	the	door,	love	is	the	enorgy	to	be
transformed.	Love	is	the	only	energy	available	to	man.
Through	it	you	can	fall,	through	it	you	can	rise.	It	is	like	a	staircase:	you	can	go
downwards,	 you	 can	 go	 upwards.	 The	 same	 staircase	 can	 be	 used	 in	 both
possible	ways;	 it	 depends	 on	 you	 how	you	 use	 it.	 Love	 is	 a	 great	 art.	The	 art
consists	 in	 dropping	 the	 animal	 more	 and	 more	 and	 evolving	 divine
consciousness	in	your	being.
Oriana	is	a	beautiful	word,	with	three	meanings.	The	first	meaning	is	risen.	Bliss
has	 risen.	 That's	 what	 initiation	 is:	 the	 beginning	 of	 a	 great	 pilgrimage,	 the
sunrise.	 The	 second	meaning	 is	 golden.	 Of	 coursewhen	 bliss	 rises	 everything
turns	 into	 gold,	 the	 whole	 existence	 becomes	 golden.	 All	 matter	 as	 such
disappears,	only	god	remains.	And	the	third	meaning	is	sunrise,	dawn,	just	those
few	moments	before	the	dawn	when	the	birds	start	singing	and	the	flowers	start
opening	 and	 the	 earth	 prepares	 itself	 to	 receive	 the	 sun	 and	 the	 east	 becomes
orange.	There	is	great	joy	because	the	sun	is	rising	again:	another	beautiful	day,
another	opportunity	to	live,	to	breathe,	to	be.
Sannyas	is	exactly	all	these	three	things:	it	is	a	rising	bliss,	it	is	a	dawn,	a	dawn
of	light,	and	it	is	golden.
It	is	the	art	of	transforming	baser	metals	into	gold,	it	is	alchemy.
Life	 can	 be	 understood	 in	 two	 ways:	 either	 through	 mathematics	 or	 through
music.
Through	 mathematics	 you	 will	 know	 only	 the	 periphery	 of	 it	 because
mathematics	can	know	only	that	which	can	be	measured,	calculated.	It	can	know
only	 the	 quantitative	 part	 of	 life.	 The	 quality	 cannot	 be	 caught	 hold	 of	 by
mathematics.	It	is	only	through	music	that	you	come	to	know	the	quality	--	the
unweighable,	the	immeasurable,	the	inexpressible.
Music	 is	meditation;	 and	my	 path	 is	 that	 of	music.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with
calculation.	It	is	the	way	of	the	gambler,	not	of	the	businessman.	It	is	the	way	of
risking	totally,	risking	that	which	you	have	for	that	which	may	be,	may	not	be.
Hence	it	attracts	only	the	adventurous,	it	is	only	for	those	chosen	few.	But	they
are	the	salt	of	the	earth!
The	cloud	symbolises	freedom,	absolute	freedom.	It	is	not	tethered	to	anything,
it	simply	floats.	It	has	no	destiny	either,	because	that	too	is	a	subtle	slavery.	It	is
not	in	any	hurry	to	reach	anywhere;	there	is	nowhere	to	reach.	So	wherever	it	is
it	 is	 totally	 there	 --	 no	 future,	 no	 achieving	mind,	 no	 desire,	 no	 ambition,	 just
being	here	and	now	--	that's	its	absolute	freedom.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	like	a	cloud:	tethered	to	nothing,	going	nowhere,	having
no	projected	future,	living	in	the	moment	for	the	moment,	enjoying	the	moment
in	 its	 totality	as	 if	 this	were	 the	 last,	 living	 it	 in	utter	 intensity.	Then	god	 is	so
closely	 felt,	 so	 deeply	 experienced	 that	 one	 need	 not	 have	 any	 proof	 for	 god,
one's	own	experience	becomes	the	proof.
And	 all	 other	 proofs	 are	 just	 childish.	 No	 proof	 is	 of	 any	 significance	 except
your	own	experience.
Be	a	cloud	and	you	will	be	able	to	know	god	and	you	will	be	able	to	know	all
that	is	worth	knowing.
And	 the	moment	 you	 are	 not	 trying	 to	 achieve	 anything,	 you	will	 achieve	 all.
That's	 the	 ultimate	 paradox	 of	 existence:	 it	 is	 available	 to	 those	 who	 are	 not
desirous	of	it.
Surrender	 yourself	 to	 existence.	 Don't	 fight	 it.	 All	 fighting	 is	 futile	 and
ultimately	 frustrating.	 If	you	want	 to	win,	donlt	 fight;	 if	you	want	 to	 lose	 then
fighting	is	 the	sure	way.	All	 tho	fighters	are	losers.	The	winners	are	those	who
are	ready	to	surrender.
Surrender	 to	 existence.	 We	 are	 not	 separate	 from	 it.	 How	 can	 we	 fight	 the
whole?	--	we	are	part	of	 it,	an	 intrinsic	part	of	 it.	We	are	 just	 like	drops	 in	 the
ocean.	The	very	idea	of	fighting	the	ocean	is	so	utterly	stupid.	But	man	lives	in
that	stupid	way.	We	are	brought	up	in	that	stupid	way:	we	are	taught,	educated,
in	such	a	way	that	the	idea	that	we	are	separate	egos	becomes	deeply	engrained
in	us.	And	the	ego	is	the	greatest	myth	there	is.
Sannyas	does	not	mean	renouncing	the	world	but	it	certainly	means	renouncing
the	myth	of	the	ego.	The	moment	the	ego	is	renounced	godis	yours.	In	fact	it	has
always	been	yours,	 but	 because	of	 the	 ego	you	were	not	 able	 to	 recognise	 the
reality	of	it.
Peace	is	something	on	the	circumference	and	silence	is	something	at	the	centre.
A	man	can	be	very	peaceful	but	may	not	be	silent.	And	vice	versa:	a	man	may	be
silent	but	may	not	be	peaceful.	But	the	person	who	is	peaceful	and	is	not	silent	is
not	a	total	personality,	he	is	only	half-grown.	He	has	a	beautiful	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
circumference	but	 the	centre	 is	 in	 turmoil.	And	 the	person	who	 is	 silent	 at	 the
centre	but	not	peaceful	on	the	periphery	is	also	half,	he	is	not	whole.	He	has	a
beautiful	interior	but	the	outer	expression	of	his	being	does	not	correspond	with
it.
A	sannyasin	has	 to	be	whole,	because	 to	be	whole	 is	 to	be	holy.	He	has	 to	be
peaceful	on	the	circumference	and	silent	at	the	centre.	When	silence	and	poace
both	meet,	 great	 bliss	 arises,	 and	 in	 that	meeting	 you	 become	 one,	 integrated,
bridged,	all	 split	disappears.	That	disappearance	of	divisions,	 splits,	 fragments,
that	 becoming	 one,	 one	 piece,	 is	 the	 greatest	 achievement	 in	 life,	 because
everything	significant	can	happen	only	after	it.
George	 Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 call	 it	 crystallization;	 that's	 exactly	 the	 right	 word.
When	 your	 centre	 and	 your	 circumference	 become	 crystallized,	 when	 they
function	 as	 one	 unity	 in	 deep	 harmony	 and	 accord,	 your	 life	 has	 joy,	 grace,
beauty.	And	these	are	the	qualities	which	are	needed	before	one	can	attempt	to
know	god.
Everyone	is	a	manifestation	of	god.	In	the	tree	god	has	become	the	tree,	 in	the
rock	god	has	become	the	rock.	All	that	is,	is	god.	This	has	to	be	remembered.	me
mind	does	not	want	to	remember	it	becauseto	remember	it	means	that	the	mind
cannot	 play	 its	 games	 any	 more.	 Then	 with	 whom	 to	 fight?	 Of	 whom	 to	 be
jealous?	With	whom	to	be	angry?	With	whom	to	be	inimical?	If	all	is	god,	if	all
forms	are	god's,	then	the	mind	simply	has	to	disappear;	it	can't	function,	it	can't
go	on	in	the	old	way.	Hence	the	mind	tries	to	create	a	fog	around	you	so	that	you
can't	see	that	which	is.
We	have	to	dispel	the	fog	and	to	go	on	remembering	as	deeply	as	possible	that
all	 is	 divine.	 In	 the	beginning	one	 tends	 to	 forget	 again	 and	 again.	But	 slowly
slowly	 the	 remembrance	 becomes	 deeper,	 and	 one	 day	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
remember:	it	i9	simply	there,	you	know	it.	That	day	is	a	day	of	great	celebration.
One	is	born	anew.
So	this	is	going	to	be	the	key	for	you	to	work	upon,	this	is	your	work:	remember
that	all	forms	are	god's	forms.
Premdeva	means	god	is	love	or,	love	is	god.
The	second	is	far	better	than	the	first.	When	we	say	god	is	love	it	is	possible	that
he	may	be	many	more	things	too.	But	when	we	say	love	is	god,	then	god	is	only
love,	 there	 is	 nothing	 else.	 Then	 there	 is	 only	 one	 quality	 which	 becomes
supreme.	Then	love	is	not	one	of	the	attributes	of	god	but	his	very	soul.
And	that's	my	message:	love	is	the	very	soul	of	god.	If	you	can	understand	love
you	will	be	able	to	understand	god;	if	you	can	live	love	you	will	be	able	to	live
god.
Being	a	sannyasin	means	taking	a	jump	into	the	world	of	love,	a	quantum	leap
from	 the	 world	 of	 mundane	 things:	 money,	 power,	 prestige.	 Jumpirg	 into	 the
world	of	love	means	a	tremendous	change,	a	radical	change,	because	love	has	no
concern	with	the	mundane	things,	with	ordinary	things,	with	trivia.
Love	 is	 certainly	 concerned	 with	 the	 highest	 values	 of	 life:	 with	 poetry,	 with
beauty,	with	music,	with	painting,	with	 life,	with	death.	Love's	concerns	are	of
the	ultimate.	 It	 is	 love	 that	 opens	 the	door	 for	 the	ultimate.	And	 if	 one	 allows
oneself	to	be	possessed	by	love	then	nothing	else	is	needed.	Love	does	the	work
for	you:	it	consumes	all	that	is	meaningless	in	you.	It	is	a	fire	that	purifies,	and
out	of	it	comes	pure	gold.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	None
19	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912195
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(A	Malaysian	couple	with	two	children,	all	take	sannyas.)
Dhyan	Yogi:	Dhyan	means	meditation;	yogi	means	on	the	path	of	--	on	the	path
of	meditation.
Meditation	 is	 a	 very	 simple	 process.	 It	 is	 getting	 unidentified	 with	 the	 mind;
seeing	 the	 mind	 as	 separate	 from	 yourself,	 watching	 it,	 witnessing	 it,	 and
remembering,	"I	am	not	it."	Slowly	slowly	the	remembrance	becomes	stronger,
the	 distance	 becomes	 bigger,	 and	 one	 day	 you	 know	 absolutely,	 categorically
that	mind	 is	a	mechanism	with	which	you	had	become	identified	--	and	 that	 is
our	metaphysical	sleep.
To	become	awakened	means	to	know,	"I	am	not	the	mind,	I	am	the	master."	Then
one	can	use	the	mind	but	one	is	not	used	by	the	mind	any	more.
(To	a	child)
Prem	means	love,	and	love	is	the	most	meaningful	thing,	in	existence;	nothing	is
more	significant	than	love.	Now	you	have	a	name	worth	having!
Dhyan	Yogini.	It	means	exactly	the	same	as	Dhyan	Yogi;	it	is	the	feminine	form.
Yogi	is	masculine,	yogini	is	feminine.	The	meaning	is	exactly	the	same:	on	the
path	of	meditation.	Help	each	other	to	be	on	the	path	of	meditation.	In	fact	love
cannot	 give	 more,	 you	 cannot	 expect	 more	 than	 that.	 If	 love	 can	 help	 in
meditation	then	it	has	contributed	the	greatest	treasure	possible.
Ordinarily	 lovers	 contribute	 by	 disturbing	 each	 other,	 disturbing	 each	 other's
peace,	 disturbing	 each	 other's	 consciousness.	 They	 manipulate,	 they	 possess,
they	try	to	dominate,	and	that's	how	love	loses	all	glory	and	becomes	ugly.
Love	can	be	beautiful	only	when	lovers	help	each	other	to	be	meditative,	when
they	help	each	other	to	go	towards	god.	That's	exactly	the	function	of	love.	Help
each	other	to	be	more	peaceful,	to	be	more	silent,	and	be	alert	not	to	disturb,	be
alert	not	to	create	misery	for	the	other,	because	it	will	rebound	on	you.
Whatsoever	you	give	to	the	lover	will	come	back	to	you	manifold.
Anando.	Anando	means	bliss.	Help	him	from	the	very	beginning	to	be	blissful,
create	the	situation	where	he	can	be	more	cheerful.	And	don't	do	what	ordinary
parents	 do	 to	 children;	 they	 make	 them	 sad,	 they	 make	 them	 serious.	 Their
whole	 effort	 is	 to	 make	 them	 obedient.	 They	 enforce	 rules,	 regulations,	 and
because	freedom	is	destroyed,	blissfulness	disappears.	Bliss	can	exist	only	in	the
atmosphere	of	freedom.
Help	the	children	to	be	free.	Don't	be	worried	about	obedience,	more	important
is	 their	 awareness.	 Help	 them	 to	 become	 responsible,	 help	 them	 to	 become
individuals.	 That's	 all	 that	 can	 be	 done.	 And	 if	 parents	 can	 do	 that	 they	 have
fulfilled	their	duty.
Bliss	is	the	essential	core	of	all	prayer.	If	you	can	be	blissful	you	are	in	prayer,
wherever	 you	 ares	 in	 the	 temple	 or	 in	 the	marketplace,	 cleaning	 your	 floor	 or
reading	the	Bible	or	the	Koran,	reciting	the	Vedas	or	just	listening	to	music,	or	to
the	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees	or	to	the	sound	of	running	water.
Everything	becomes	prayer	if	you	are	blissful.
And	without	your	being	blissful	all	is	futile.	You	can	know	all	the	scriptures,	you
can	repeat	them,	you	can	repeat	the	official	prayer	prescribed	by	your	particular
church,	every	day,	 regularly,	 for	 the	whole	of	your	 life;	nothing	 is	going	 to	be
gained	out	of	it.	It	is	a	sheer	wastage	of	time,	energy,	and	it	is	a	hopeless	effort
because	 in	 the	end	you	will	 feel	very	 frustrated;	 all	 those	prayers	have	 simply
disappeared	into	the	desert,	because	the	basic	thing	was	missing,	 the	spirit	was
missing.
My	 insistence	 is	 on	 the	 spirit	 and	 not	 on	 the	 clothing.	 What	 words	 you	 use
doesn't	 matter:	 Hebrew,	 Sanskrit,	 Sanskrit	 Greek,	 Mohammedan,	 Christian,
Jewish,	it	doesn't	matter.	You	may	not	use	words	at	all,	because	you	are	closest
to	god	when	you	are	utterly	silent,	when	there	is	nothing	to	say.	Ordinarily	it	is
thought	that	prayer	is	something	you	say	to	god	--	something	has	to	be	said.	In
fact	just	the	opposite	is	the	case:	it	is	when	you	listen	to	god.	And	one	can	listen
only	in	silence.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Be	blissful,	be	silent,	and	let	that	be	your	prayer.	When	it	is	non-sectarian,	then	it
is	 not	 concerned	 with	 any	 tradition.	 When	 it	 is	 purified	 of	 all	 garbage	 that
gathers	naturally	in	every	tradition.	When	it	 is	free	of	priests	and	their	politics.
Then	 it	 is	 simply	 your	 individual	 expression,	 and	 then	 it	 has	 intimacy,
immediacy.
And	god	has	to	be	addressed	directly,	not	through	a	mediator.
We	are	not	the	body.	We	live	in	the	body	but	we	are	separate	from	it.	The	body	is
only	the	house,	we	reside	in	it.	Every	care	has	to	be	taken	of	the	body	--	it	has	to
be	loved,	respected	--	but	one	has	not	to	forget	the	truth,	 that	we	are	not	it.	As
this	 insight	 deepens	 you	 lose	 all	 fear	 of	 death,	 because	 only	 the	 body	will	 be
dying.	 You	 will	 only	 be	 changing	 the	 house,	 you	 will	 be	 moving	 into	 a	 new
body.
Our	 journey	 is	 eternal.	We	have	been	 in	many	bodies	and	we	will	be	 in	many
bodies.	But	we	are	taught,	brought	up	in	such	a	way	that	we	become	identified
with	the	body.	That	identification	creates	great	misery,	fear.	And	the	fear	cannot
be	avoided,	because	death	is	always	there.
The	only	way	to	get	rid	of	death	is	to	get	rid	of	the	idea	'I	am	the	body.'
The	source	is	within	but	we	go	on	searching	for	it	outside,	in	the	world;	hence
there	is	so	much	frustration.
We	cannot	find	it	there.	The	roots	are	within.	The	branches	and	the	foliage	and
the	 flowers	 are	 on	 the	 outside,	 and	 they	 are	 beautiful.	 But	 their	 source	 of
nourishment	 is	 not	 there	 on	 the	 outside,	 it	 is	 hidden	 deep	 in	 our	 being.	 And
unless	 one	 understands	 the	 roots	 one	 remains	 ignorant,	 To	 know	 oneself	 is	 to
know	he	only	knowledge	worth	calling	knowledge	is	self-knowledge.
So	turn	in,	search	within.	The	source	is	not	very	far	away.	We	just	have	to	turn	in
the	 right	 direction	 and	 immediately	 it	 is	 there	 in	 all	 its	 beauty	 and	glory.	And
once	you	have	known	the	source	of	your	life	you	know	that	it	is	eternal.	There	is
no	death,	there	is	no	birth,	you	were	there	before	birth	and	you	will	be	there	after
death.
Then	life	starts	having	new	values	because	a	new	perspective	opens	up.	With	this
new	 vision	 of	 eternity	 you	 can't	 remain	 concerned	 with	 trivia.	 Your	 concerns
change,	you	become	concerned	with	the	ultimate.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	the	ultimate	concern.
Veetrago	means	going	beyond	all	detachment,	all	attachment,	becoming	utterly
transcendental	 to	 attachment	 and	 detachment	 both,	 becoming	 so	 cool	 and
unconcerned	about	the	ordinary	matters	of	life	--
money,	 power,	 prestige	 --	 becoming	 so	 transcendental	 that	 nothing	 really
matters.	 Whether	 one	 has	 anything	 or	 not,	 it	 is	 all	 the	 same.	 whether	 one	 is
famous	or	remains	anonymous,	it	is	all	the	same.	Whether	one	has	power	or	no
power,	there	is	no	difference	inside.	A	deep	equanimity	arises.	In	success	and	in
failure	 one	 remains	 the	 same.	 That	 is	 veetrago	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 path	 of	 a
sannyasin.
Become	 more	 and	 more	 unconcerned	 about	 ordinary	 things	 of	 life.	 People
become	so	disturbed	about	such	small	 things.	A	one	rupee	note	 is	missing	and
they	can't	sleep	for	the	whole	night.	And	when	death	comes	everything	will	be
left	 behind.	Somebody	has	 said	 something	 to	you	and	 it	 hurts.	 Just	words...	A
man	 of	 understanding	 remains	 utterly	 transcendental	 to	 all	 that	 goes	 on
happening.	It	is	all	just	a	game;	whether	you	win	or	you	lose,	it	is	all	the	same.
Desire	 is	 the	 root	 of	 all	 misery.	 Desire	 is	 a	 trick	 of	 the	 mind	 to	 keep	 you
occupied	with	the	future	so	that	you	go	on	missing	the	present.	And	the	present
is	all	that	really	is;	tomorrow	never	comes.	And	desire	is	always	for	tomorrow,
hence	the	person	who	remains	desiring	goes	on	hoping	but	his	hopes	are	never
fulfilled.	 In	 the	end	only	 frustration	 is	 in	his	hands.	His	whole	being	 is	 full	of
shattered	dreams	and	nothing	else.
The	way	to	live	is	in	the	present.	Now	is	the	only	time	--	and	desire	destroys	the
now.	So	this	is	the	choice:	desire	or	now.	If	you	desire	then	you	miss	the	now.	If
you	drop	desiring	then	suddenly	the	now	opens	up	all	its	mysteries	before	you.
Now	is	another	name	for	god.	And	now	is	the	door	to	eternity,	 it	 is	not	part	of
time.
Anamo	means	the	nameless	one.
God	has	no	name;	all	his	names	are	arbitrary.	We	also	have	no	names.	We	come
in	 the	world	nameless,	 then	 a	name	has	 to	be	given;	 it	 has	 certain	utility,	 it	 is
needed	in	the	world.	But	it	is	formal,	it	is	not	part	of	reality.	It	is	labelling	reality,
categorising	it.	Certainly	it	is	needed,	but	it	is	not	true,	it	is	a	lie.
So	use	the	name	but	remember	constantly	that	the	nameless	one	resides	in	you.
That	is	your	truth,	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
truth	of	your	being.	And	the	whole	search	is	for	the	nameless	one.
The	moment	 you	 dive	 deep	 within	 your	 soul	 your	 name	 will	 disappear,	 your
religion	will	disappear,	your	country	will	disappear,	your	race,	your	colour,	your
body,	your	mind	--	all	will	go	on	disappearing.
Ultimately	what	 remains	 is	 a	nameless	 consciousness.	That	 is	your	 true	being.
And	 to	 know	 it	 is	 to	 be	 liberated	 from	 all	 misery.	 That	 very	 knowing	 is	 a
transformation.
God	has	no	attributes.	All	attributes	are	his	in	a	sense,	and	in	another	sense	god
has	 no	 attributes,	 no	 qualities.	 He	 is	 neither	 good	 nor	 bad,	 neither	 white	 nor
black,	 neither	 this	 nor	 that.	 He	 transcends	 all	 dualities.	 You	 can't	 call	 him
beautiful	and	you	can't	call	him	ugly;	all	these	qualities	become	irrelevant.	He	is
neither	man	nor	woman,	neither	young	nor	old,	neither	close	nor	distant.	All	our
words	 become	 meaningless,	 our	 words	 don't	 describe	 him.	 Our	 words	 are	 so
small,	and	god's	existence	is	so	vast,	it	is	so	huge,	so	enormous,	so	unlimited,	so
unbounded,	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	condense	him	to	a	word,	 to	a	quality,	 to	an
attribute.
The	search	for	god	is	the	search	for	the	oceanic,	the	immense,	and	the	only	way
to	find	it	is	to	dissolve	yourself	in	it.	You	can't	find	him	by	remaining	separate,
you	 can't	 find	 him	 as	 an	 observers	 you	 nave	 to	 become	 him.	 Just	 as	 the	 river
disappears	into	the	ocean,	you	have	to	disappear	into	the	attributeless,	nameless
existence.	Then	only	will	you	have	 the	 taste	of	 infinity,	of	eternity,	of	divinity.
And	that's	what	meditation	is:	a	dissolution,	a	disappearance,	getting	lost	in	the
whole,	losing	your	identity,	your	separateness,	your	ego.
God	 is	 perfect	 as	 he	 is,	 and	 by	 god,	 I	 don't	 mean	 somebody	 separate	 from
existence.	 I	 don't	 mean	 a	 creator	 separate	 from	 creation.	 By	 god,	 I	 mean	 the
energy,	the	very	creativity	of	existence;	not	the	creator	but	the	creativity.
God	is	not	a	person	but	a	presence.	It	is	better	to	say	godliness	rather	than	god.
And	 the	universe	 is	perfect	as	 it	 is,	hence	we	can	relax	and	enjoy.	There	 is	no
need	to	improve	upon	it.	The	very	idea	of	improving	upon	it	 is	an	ego	project.
Nothing	needs	to	be	improved,	all	is	as	perfect	as	it	can	ever	be.
Once	you	have	understood	 this	 tensions	 start	 disappearing;	you	can	 relax,	you
can	 be	 in	 a	 let-go.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 only	 that	 god	 is	 perfect,	 that	 the	 universe	 is
perfect:	 you	 are	 also	 perfect	 as	 you	 are.	Then	great	 acceptance	 of	 yourself,	 of
others	 arises.	 That	 acceptance	 is	 the	 fundamental	 religious	 quality.	 If	 you
condemn	 yourself	 you	 are	 not	 religious,	 if	 you	 condemn	 others	 you	 are	 not
religious.	If	you	think	in	terms	of	sinners	and	saints	you	are	far	away	from	relig
on.	You	may	be	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	but	you	are	not	religious	at	all.
The	religious	person	knows	no	distinction	between	the	sinner	and	the	saint.	They
are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 coin,	 and	 both	 are	 absolutely	 needed.	 They	 are
inseparable.	They	are	like	day	and	night.
Without	 the	 sinner	 existence	would	not	 be	 so	 rich,	 neither	would	 it	 be	 so	 rich
without	the	saint.	If	there	were	only	saints	and	saints	on	the	earth...	just	conceive
of	the	earth:	only	saints	and	saints.	It	would	be	tremendously	poor.	It	would	lose
all	joy,	it	would	lose	all	taste;	it	would	become	stale,	dull	and	dead.
Existence	 is	 perfect	 as	 it	 is,	 with	 all	 its	 duality,	 with	 all	 its	 days	 and	 nights,
summers	and	winters,	with	birth	and	death.
To	see	it	 is	one	of	 the	greatest	moments	of	 life,	because	after	 that	relaxation	is
very	easy,	there	is	no	need	to	be	disturbed,	to	be	worried	about	anything;	things
are	being	taken	care	of.	They	are	already	in	perfect	hands.
Let	this	become	your	basic	approach.	Buddha	calls	it	tathata,	suchness.	See	the
suchness	of	 things,	 and	 there	 is	no	need	 to	be	worried	about	 anything.	Accept
and	rejoice!
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#31
Chapter	title:	None
20	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	7912205
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT31
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Love	 brings	 freedom.	 Love	 that	 does	 not	 bring	 freedom	 is	 not	 love	 but
something	else.	It	must	be	hate	masquerading	as	love.	And	ninety-nine	per	cent
of	the	time	this	is	the	case.	People	tell	each	other	that	they	love	but	all	that	they
want	is	to	dominate	the	other.	Love	is	only	a	strategy:	they	want	to	possess	the
other,	then	want	to	reduce	the	other	to	a	thing.	They	destroy	the	freedom	of	the
other;	hence	love	which	should	bring	great	bliss	instead	brings	great	misery.	This
is	not	love.	One	has	to	learn	the	difference	between	true	love	and	false	love.
Before	you	can	know	the	true	you	have	to	understand	the	false	as	the	false.	To
see	the	false	as	the	false	is	the	first	step	towards	knowing	the	true	as	the	true.	A
few	 ingredients	 can	 be	 indicated.	 The	 most	 important	 of	 all	 is:	 love	 gives
freedom.	 It	 never	 possesses	 the	 other,	 it	 never	 reduces	 the	 other	 to	 a	 thing.	 It
enhances	the	other's	soul.	It	gives	significance	and	meaning	to	the	other	person.
It	transforms	the	other	person	into	an	end,	not	a	means.
Love	 in	such	a	way	 that	whomsoever	you	 love	you	help	 to	be	more	free.	That
will	do	two	things:	first,	it	will	give	you	a	taste	of	true	love,	and	second,	it	will
also	give	you	the	great	joy	of	sharing	freedom,	of	giving	freedom	to	others.	And
the	more	 you	make	 others	 free,	 you	 become	 free;	 the	 more	 you	make	 others
slaves,	the	more	you	become	a	slave.	Whatsoever	you	do	to	others	will	be	done
to	you.	Hence	Jesus	is	right	when	he	says,	'Do	unto	others	what	you	would	like
to	be	done	to	you.'
Franz	means	freedom.
Freedom	 is	 the	 most	 significant	 phenomenon	 in	 existence.	 Except	 for	 man
nobody	can	be	 free;	only	man	has	 the	potential	 to	be	 free.	Except	 for	man	 the
whole	existence	is	unfree,	it	is	bound	by	the	law	of	cause	and	effect.	Everything
is	 determined.	 That's	 why	 science	 is	 possible.	 At	 one	 hundred	 degrees	 water
evaporates,	always.	There	is	no	change	in	it;	it	is	a	determined	phenomenon.	The
water	 is	not	 free	 to	choose,	 it	 cannot	decide,	 it	 cannot	change	 its	course.	Only
man	has	 the	 capacity	 to	be	unpredictable.	But	not	 all	men	achieve	 it;	with	 the
majority	it	remains	only	a	potentiality,	it	never	becomes	an	actuality.
Being	initiated	into	a	mystery	school	simply	means	that	now	you	are	taking	the
first	 step	 towards	 actualising	 your	 potential	 for	 freedom.	When	man	 becomes
really	 free	 --	 free	 from	 the	 cause-and-effect	 chain	 --	 he	 is	 a	 Buddha,	 he	 is	 a
Christ.	Then	he	lives	in	freedom.
That	is	another	meaning	of	franz:	living	in	freedom.	But	only	a	Buddha	lives	in
freedom.	 All	 other	 freedoms	 are	 just	 pseudo,	 political	 freedom,	 economic
freedom,	 social	 freedom	 --	 these	 are	 all	 pseudo	 freedoms.	 The	 real	 freedom
consists	only	of	one	thing,	and	that	is	spiritual	freedom.
It	 is	possible.	 It	 is	a	great	gift	of	god	 to	man.	But	 it	 is	dangerous	 too,	because
man	can	fall.	No	other	animal	can	fall.	Adam	and	Eve	fell	from	grace.	They	had
the	possibility	to	be	free	but	they	chose	a	wrong	course.	They	could	have	freely
obeyed	god	or	freely	disobeyed	god;	it	was	up	to	them.	If	you	freely	choose	to
disobey,	that	is	sin.	if	you	freely	decide	to	obey,	to	surrender	to	existence,	to	be
part	of	it,	that	is	enlightenment.
Constance	means	perseverance,	 constancy,	 devoted	 spirit	 --	 all	 these	meanings
are	there.
Love	needs	all	three.	It	needs	perseverance,	the	greatest	perseverance,	because	it
is	moving	towards	great	heights.	One	can	lose	the	track	very	easily.	It	is	an	uphill
task.	One	 can	 be	 lethargic,	 lazy,	 one	 can	 go	 on	 postponing,	 for	 tomorrow,	 but
tomorrow	never	comes	and	the	peak	remains	far	away,	just	a	dream.	The	dream
can	 become	 a	 reality,	 but	 constant	 effort	 will	 be	 needed;	 hence	 the	 second
meaning.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
One	has	to	go	on	and	on	making	efforts.	Many	times	one	fails,	but	if	one	persists
and	 remains	 constant	 in	one's	 efforts,	 one	day	 the	great	 phenomenon	happens:
one	bursts	forth	into	a	flame	of	love.
And	yes,	the	third	meaning	is	also	important:	great	devotion	is	needed.	Love	is
not	lust,	it	is	basically	devotion.	Just	is	a	pseudo	entity:	it	gives	you	a	feeling	as
if	you	were	in	love.	You	are	not	in	love,	you	are	just	exploiting	the	other	person.
Devotion	 is	 totally	 different,	 you	 are	 surrendered	 to	 the	 other,	 there	 is	 no
question	of	exploitation.	You	are	not	using	the	other	as	a	means,	the	other	is	an
end	 unto	 himself.	 You	 are	 totally	 surrendered.	 It	 is	 trust,	 it	 is	 devotion,	 it	 is
prayer.
Let	 love	 be	 your	 religion,	 then	 no	 other	 religion	 is	 needed,	 because	 it	 is	 the
essence	of	all	the	religions,	the	very	innermost	core	of	all	the	Buddhas,	Christs,
Krishnas.
Love	is	 the	only	real	way	of	praising	god.	If	you	really	want	 to	praise	god	the
only	way	is	to	love	existence,	to	love	it	unconditionally.	The	more	you	love,	the
more	mysteries	will	be	revealed	to	you;	the	more	you	love,	 the	more	existence
becomes	lovable,	because	you	become	more	and	more	open.	And	the	more	you
love,	 the	more	you	feel	 the	presence	of	god	everywhere.	Then	whatsoever	you
do	 becomes	 praise:	 your	 sitting,	 your	 standing,	 your	walking.	Even	 small	 acts
become	prayerful.	Your	whole	 life	 becomes	 deep	 gratitude.	And	 certainly	 that
gratitude	brings	contentment,	fulfilment,	fruition,	flowering.
Bliss	is	born	out	of	infinite	light.	It	is	a	ray	of	light	entering	into	the	darkness	of
our	soul.	We	are	a	dark	continent,	and	when	god	reaches	us	as	a	ray	of	light,	that
becomes	 the	 moment	 of	 metamorphosis;	 we	 are	 transformed	 from	 ordinary
sleepy	 human	 beings	 into	 fully	 awake,	 divine	 beings.	 The	 moment	 the	 light
enters	we	become	light	ourselves.	We	belong	to	the	world	of	light	--	although	we
have	chosen	to	reside	in	darkness.	That	is	our	choice.	We	have	decided	to	be	part
of	hell	while	we	can	be	part	of	heaven.
From	 this	moment	 you	 have	 to	 start	 changing	 your	 choice,	 your	 style	 of	 life,
your	ways	 of	 looking	 at	 things,	 so	 that	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 become	 capable	 of
creating	more	bliss	in	your	being.
The	most	 fundamental	need	 is	 to	be	open	 to	 the	beyond,	because	 light	 always
descends,	we	are	at	the	receiving	end.	And	the	meeting	of	light	with	our	being	is
what	bliss	is	all	about.	Darkness	is	misery,	light	is	bliss.
Christ	is	an	ultimate	state	of	consciousness,	just	like	Buddha.	In	the	East	we	call
it	Buddha,	in	the	West	the	same	consciousness	is	called	Christ.
Christ	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Jesus,	 Buddha	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Gautam
Siddhartha.	Gautam	Siddhartha	became	Buddha;	anybody	can	be	a	Buddha,	you
can	be	a	Buddha.	Jesus'	became	Christ;	anybody	can	be	a	Christ,	you	can	be	a
Christ.	The	East	has	not	forgotten	this	but	the	West	has	completely	forgotten	it.
In	the	East	Buddha	has	not	become	confined	to	Gautam	Siddhartha.	There	have
been	Buddhas	before	him,	there	have	been	Buddhas	after	him,	and	there	will	be
Buddhas	 in	 the	 future.	 It	 simply	 indicates	 the	ultimate	 flowering,	 the	spring	of
consciousness.
But	 the	West	 has	 completely	 forgotten	 it.	Christians,	 particularly	 the	Christian
church,	 has	 been	 the	 cause	 of	 destroying	 this	 possibility.	 They	 have	 been
fanatically	 claiming	 that	 there	 is	 only	 one	Christ,	 and	 that	 is	 Jesus	Christ,	 the
only	begotten	son	of	god.	This	is	a	fanatical	attitude,	political.	It	is	not	religious
at	all.
There	 have	 been	 Christs	 before:	Moses	 was	 a	 Christ,	 Abraham	was	 a	 Christ.
There	have	been	Christs	since:	Francis	 is	a	Christ,	Eckhart	 is	a	Christ.	But	 the
church	 goes	 on	 denying	 it,	 the	 church	 says	 there	 has	 been	 one	 and	 only	 one
Christ,	 and	 there	will	 never	 be	 another.	This	 is	 the	 language	of	 a	 fanatic,	 of	 a
lunatic.
You	have	to	remember	it.
Christ	has	to	be	freed	from	the	church;	the	church	has	become	his	imprisonment.
He	made	all	possible	efforts	to	make	people	free	and	people	have	done	just	the
opposite	to	him;	they	have	made	a	prisoner	of	him.
Carrying	 Christ	 in	 the	 heart	 means	 carrying	 the	 ultimate	 possibility	 of
blossoming.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Christianity	 or	 Hinduism	 or
Mohammedanism.	 The	 ultimate	 possibility	 of	 consciousness	 means:
consciousness	without	content,	a	pure	mirror,	so	that	it	can	reflect	that	which	is,
so	that	it	can	reflect	god.
Grace	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 meditation.	 The	more	 silent	 you	 become	 inside,	 the
more	graceful	you	become	on	the	outside.	When	you	become	an	absolute	pool	of
silence,	an	aura	of	grace	arises	around	you	and	 follows	you	 like	your	 shadow;
that	is	the	shadow	of	your	soul.	Just	as	the	body	makes	a	shadow,	the	soul	also
makes	a	shadow.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	shadow	of	the	body	is	visible	to	everybody,	the	shadow	of	the	soul	is	visible
only	to	those	who	have	inner	vision.	Its	beauty	is	tremendous.	Physical	beauty	is
nothing	 compared	 to	 it,	 physical	 beauty	 is	 almost	 ugliness	 compared	 to	 the
beauty	of	spiritual	grace.	And	that's	the	goal	of	a	sannyasin.	It	has	to	be	attained,
it	is	our	right	to	attain	it.	To	miss	it	is	sheer	stupidity.
The	 most	 significant	 spiritual	 quality	 is	 contentment,	 There	 are	 only	 two
possibilities,	 either	 you	 are	 continuously	desiring	more	 and	more	 --	 that	 keeps
you	 in	 a	 turmoil,	 in	 tension,	 in	 anxiety	 --	 or	 you	 are	 utterly	 contented,	 not
desiring	anything.	Whatsoever	 is	 is	more	 than	enough,	you	are	 thankful	 for	 it.
Then	 all	 tensions	 simply	 disappear.	 They	 cannot	 grow	 in	 the	 climate	 of
contentment.	All	anxieties	wither	away.	The	contented	person	knows	nothing	of
anguish,	agony.	He	knows	peace,	he	knows	silence.	And	god	can	be	contacted
only	when	you	are	in	absolute	silence	and	peace.
To	be	 in	desire	means	 to	be	away	 from	god;	 to	be	without	desire	means	 to	be
close	 to	god.	When	you	are	 full	 of	desires	your	back	 is	 towards	god.	With	no
desires	you	are	facing	god,	encountering	god	--	and	the	greatest	bliss	is	to	face
god.	That's	my	whole	work	here,	to	help	you	turn	towards	god.	A	one-hundred-
and-eighty-degree	turn	is	needed.
The	first	birth	is	physical.	It	is	nothing	special:	animals	are	also	born,	trees	are
also	born.	But	for	man	there	is	a	possibility	of	a	second	birth,	the	spiritual	birth.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.	When	one	surrenders	to	a	master	one	is	reborn.
That	rebirth	is	real	birth.	In	the	East	we	call	it	twice-born	or	well-born.
With	 this	birth	 life	 really	 starts;	before	 it	was	only	a	kind	of	 sleep.	This	 is	 the
first	step	towards	awakening.	Now	much	more	has	to	be	done.	It	is	an	arduous,
long	journey,	but	full	of	great	blessings,	great	benedictions,	great	joys,	ecstasies,
adventures,	 thrills;	at	each	step	there	are	thrills,	at	each	step	there	are	surprises
waiting	 for	 you.	 But	 great	 effort	 is	 needed,	 perseverance	 is	 needed.	 It	 is	 like
digging	a	well:	you	will	have	to	remove	much	earth,	rocks,	and	only	then	slowly
slowly	will	you	reach	the	sources	of	water.
They	are	there,	but	much	has	to	be	removed	first.
God	 is	within	you,	but	much	has	become	accumulated	around	your	being;	 that
has	 to	be	 removed,	 chunk	by	chunk.	 It	 hurts	 too,	 it	 is	painful,	but	whenever	 a
chunk	 is	 removed	 you	 feel	 a	 new	weightlessness	 arising,	 new	wings	 growing.
And	when	all	this	garbage	is	dropped	you	are	born	anew.
That	is	our	effort,	to	help	people	to	be	reborn,	to	be	pure	beings,	to	be	Buddhas.
It	 is	everybody's	right,	but	one	has	to	claim	it.	 It	 is	not	 just	given,	you	have	to
prepare	yourself,	 you	have	 to	get	 ready	 for	 it.	The	moment	you	 are	 ready,	 the
host	is	ready,	the	guest	arrives.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#32
Chapter	title:	None
21	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912215
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT32
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Holly	has	two	meanings;	one	is	holy,	sacred,	spiritual.	It	is	a	beautiful	word	but
it	has	very	wrong	associations.	It	has	the	smell	of	holier-than-thou,	it	has	some
subtle	egoistic	flavour	to	it.	The	word	in	itself	is	beautiful;	it	comes	from	whole,
the	 total.	 To	 be	 holy	 means	 to	 be	 whole.	 That's	 my	 whole	 approach,	 my
messages	be	whole	and	you	will	be	holy.
But	 for	 centuries	 the	 word	 has	 been	 in	 the	 wrong	 hands.	 The	 church	 has
destroyed	 its	 beauty,	 the	 so-called	 saints	 have	 polluted	 its	 meaning.	 It	 has
become	poisoned.	Even	beautiful	words	in	wrong	hands	become	ugly,	and	ugly
words	in	right	hands	become	beautiful.	It	all	depends	on	who	is	using	them.
The	second	meaning	is	far	more	beautiful.	The	second	meaning	is	English;	 the
first	is	Anglo-Saxon.	The	English	meaning	is...	it	is	a	name	of	an	evergreen	tree.
I	like	that	more.
Love	 is	an	evergreen	 tree,	always	young	and	always	 fresh;	 it	never	grows	old.
Time	does	not	affect	 it,	 time	 leaves	no	 traces	on	 it.	Love	 is	non-temporal,	 it	 is
beyond	time.	The	moment	you	enter	love	you	enter	eternity,	and	god	is	an	ever-
green	tree.
Remember	both	meanings;	but	the	first	has	become	contaminated,	the	second	is
still	pure.	Love	has	both	qualities:	 love	makes	you	whole	and	makes	you	holy,
and	love	takes	you	beyond	time;	hence	it	is	evergreen.
It	is	never	old,	it	never	dies,	it	knows	no	death.
The	people	who	are	afraid	of	death	are	people	who	have	not	known	love.	Lovers
are	never	afraid	of	death.	They	have	known	something	beyond	death.	Once	you
have	 known	 something	 beyond	 death,	who	 cares	 about	 death?	You	 know	 that
you	will	be.	The	body	will	be	gone,	the	mind	will	be	gone,	but	not	you;	you	are
transcendental.	Even	through	the	fire	of	death	your	evergreenness	is	not	going	to
be	destroyed,	it	is	going	to	abide.
Love	 is	 always	 protected	 by	 god.	 Only	 those	 who	 are	 not	 in	 love	 are
unprotected;	those	who	are	not	in	love	are	always	in	insecurity.	The	moment	you
enter	 love,	you	enter	absolute	security,	safety,	because	 love	 is	another	name	of
god	and	god	is	protection.	That	is	one	of	the	greatest	insights	of	the	mystics.
The	 ordinary	man	 lives	 in	 fear,	 anxiety.	 He	 tries	 to	 protect	 himself,	 hence	 he
becomes	very	tense.	The	problems	are	too	big	and	his	hands	are	too	small.	The
moment	he	loves	existence,	the	moment	he	surrenders	to	existence.	That's	what
love	 is:	 a	 deep,	 total	 surrender	 to	 that	 which	 is,	 a	 deep	 let-go.	 In	 that	 very
moment	all	anxiety	disappears,	fear	disappears,	tensions	wither	away.	Then	you
are	part	of	the	cosmos,	and	immediately	the	feeling	arises:	I	am	protected,	god	is
always	surrounding	me.	Now	there	is	no	death.
Once	 god	 is	 known,	 tasted,	 death	 disappears.	Death	 exists	 only	 for	 those	who
have	not	known	love.
Those	who	have	known	love	are	beyond	death.
Love	is	divine,	 lust	 is	animal.	And	between	lust	and	love	there	is	something,	a
mixture	of	both,	which	is	human.
Human	 love	 is	neither	 love	nor	 lust,	 it	 is	both:	hence	 it	has	all	 the	darkness	of
lust	 and	 all	 the	 brightness	 of	 love.	 It	 has	 all	 the	 jealousies,	 possessivenesses,
anger,	hatred,	of	lust,	and	it	has	all	the	poetry,	all	the	beauty,	all	the	joy	of	love.
Man	 is	 torn	 apart	 between	 these	 two	 --	 the	 body	 and	 the	 soul,	 the	 animal	 and
god.
If	one	does	not	work	upon	oneself	deliberately,	consciously,	one	is	easily	pulled
downwards,	because	we	have	a	long	long	past	of	lust.	Love	is	only	in	poetry,	lust
is	in	every	cell	of	our	body.	Lust	is	our	past,	 love	is	our	future;	and	the	past	 is
very	 big,	 it	 has	 tremendous	weight	 --	 it	 can	 pull	 you	 very	 easily.	 The	 past	 is
habit,	memory,	experience	--	that's	all	we	have	known.	One	has	to	be	very	alert
to	 go	 beyond	 lust.	 And	 one	 has	 to	 be	 constantly	 aware	 of	 jealousy,	 of
possessiveness,	 of	 domination,	 because	 those	 are	 the	 strategies	 of	 lust.	 If	 you
drop	jealousy,	possessiveness,	ego	trips,	then	slowly	slowly	lust	disappears	and
love	arises.
Love	is	a	pure	flame	without	any	smoke.	It	 is	prayer,	it	 is	divine,	and	it	makes
you	divine.
In	ancient	 times	 the	wolf	 represented	 loyalty	and	courage	 --	and	 these	are	 two
qualities	which	are	always	found	together,	Without	courage	you	cannot	be	loyal
and	without	being	loyal	you	cannot	grow	in	courage.
Both	qualities	are	needed	for	bliss	to	happen,	one	needs	to	be	courageous	enough
to	go	into	the	unknown,	and	loyal	enough,	trusting	enough	in	existence,	in	god,
not	thinking	of	oneself	as	a	stranger,	an	outsider,	but	trusting	that	"I	am	part	of
the	 whole	 and	 the	 whole	 is	 always	 with	me."	 Only	 then,	 with	 such	 trust	 and
courage,	can	one	open	up	to	bliss.	And	bliss	is	such	a	tremendous	phenomenon
that	 it	 is	not	possible	with	a	cowardly	heart,	 it	 is	not	possible	with	a	cowardly
heart,	it	is	not	possible	with	a	deceiving	mind.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Bliss	means	the	ocean	descending	into	the	dewdrop.	One	has	to	be	really	open	to
take	in	the	whole	sky.
And	 it	 is	 a	 death	 because	 the	 dewdrop	 will	 disappear;	 courage	 and	 trust	 are
needed	because	you	can't	know	what	is	going	to	happen	after	this	death.	Much
trust	 is	needed	so	 that	you	can	visualize	a	 resurrection,	 so	 that	death	will	only
take	away	the	non-essential	from	you,	so	that	surrender	will	be	the	surrender	of
the	non-essential	and	the	essential	will	evolve,	will	grow.	All	the	hindrances	in
its	path	will	be	removed	by	surrender.
Bliss	is	possible,	but	let	those	two	qualities	be	there	--	not	in	a	calculative	way:
innocently,	be	courageous	and	trusting.
Be	a	friend	to	existence,	to	all	that	is,	and	you	will	be	blissful.	Bliss	is	the	reward
for	being	friendly	to	all.
We	 are	 brought	 up	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 all	 possibilities	 of	 friendliness	 are
destroyed.	On	the	contrary,	we	are	taught	to	be	enemies	of	each	other;	our	whole
education	 depends	 on	 competition,	 and	 competition	 is	 enmity,	 competition	 is
jealousy,	competition	is	envy.
Yes,	formally	we	show	great	friendship,	courtesy,	culture,	but	that	is	all	formal.
Deep	down	we	are	all	enemies	of	each	other,	ready	to	kill	each	other	if	needed,
trying	to	use	each	other	as	a	means,	reducing	everybody	to	just	a	stepping	stone
for	your	ego	trip.
Our	society	destroys	friendship,	it	creates	a	very	ugly	world,	There	is	a	constant
underground	war	going	on,	a	cold	war:	it	does	not	always	surface	but	it	remains
there.	It	has	to	be	changed,	then	only	does	a	person	become	religious.
Really	be	a	friend.	There	is	no	need	to	compete,	no	need	to	be	jealous,	no	need
to	 be	 envious.	 God	 has	 given	 you	 enough,	more	 than	 you	will	 ever	 need.	 Be
thankful	for	that!	And	open	your	heart	to	friendship.
Become	a	host	 to	 the	whole	existence	--	 to	 the	trees,	 to	 the	birds,	 to	 the	rocks.
Create	 an	 atmosphere	 around	 you,	 a	 climate	 of	 friendship,	 and	 bliss	 is	 yours.
Then	nobody	can	prevent	it	from	happening.
Peace	 is	 always	 victorious,	 it	 knows	 no	 defeat.	 But	 to	 be	 peaceful	 is	 very
difficult,	arduous,	it	needs	a	total	transformation	of	your	interiority.
War	is	easy,	fight	is	easy,	violence	is	easy.	Nature	has	given	us	all	those	qualities
already,	we	are	born	with	them.	But	peace	is	something	which	has	to	be	created.
Out	 of	 violence	 peace	 has	 to	 be	 created.	 That's	 the	 whole	 work	 of	 spiritual
transformation,	of	alchemy:	from	poison,	nectar	has	to	be	created.
In	 the	 beginning	 it	 looks	 almost	 impossible	 --	 how	 can	 nectar	 come	 out	 of
poison?	 But	 in	 the	 right	 hands,	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 a	 physician	 poison	 becomes
nectar.	 And	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 a	 stupid	 person	 even	 nectar	 may	 prove	 to	 be
poisonous,	 It	all	depends	on	how	you	use	your	energies,	on	how	you	use	your
natural	endowments.	If	you	use	them	in	their	crude	form	they	are	ugly.	They	are
like	 raw	 diamonds	 direct	 from	 the	 mine,	 only	 a	 jeweller	 may	 be	 able	 to	 see
something	 of	 beauty	 in	 them,	 otherwise	 they	 are	 just	 ordinary	 stones.	 Before
everybody	can	recognize	the	beauty,	they	have	to	be	polished,	cut.
The	 greatest	 diamond	 in	 the	world	 is	 the	 kohinoor.	 It	was	 found	 in	 a	mine	 in
India,	in	the	mines	of	Golconda.	It	remained	with	a	poor	man	for	three	years.	His
children	 were	 playing	 with	 it,	 thinking	 it	 was	 just	 an	 ordinary,	 good-looking
colourful	 stone.	 And	 the	 man	 remained	 poor.	 Nobody	 was	 aware...	 It	 was	 a
visitor	who	told	the	man,	"This	is	the	rarest	diamond	I	have	ever	seen	in	my	life	-
-	what	are	you	doing	with	it?	Your	children	are	playing	with	it!"
Now	it	is	in	the	crown	of	the	British	Queen,	although	its	size	and	weight	are	no
more	the	same:	it	is	one-third	of	the	original.	Two-thirds	have	been	cut	away;	the
more	 it	has	been	cut,	 the	more	valuable	 it	has	become.	The	weight	 is	 less,	 the
value	is	more.
And	 that's	 exactly	 the	 case	 with	 human	 beings:	 we	 are	 raw	 diamonds,	 great
polishing	is	needed.	And	we	have	to	learn	the	art	of	how	to	change	the	ugly	into
the	beautiful.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	it	is	learning	a	very	subtle	skill,	a	craft,	an	art,
the	most	precious	art.
Nothing	can	be	more	valuable	than	this,	because	you	will	be	transforming	your
own	 energies.	 Slowly	 slowly,	 through	 meditations,	 through	 prayer,	 through
silence,	through	love,	through	song,	through	music,	 through	dance,	you	will	be
changing	 your	 inner	 qualities.	 One	 day	 the	 very	 poison	 of	 violence	 becomes
peace.	And	peace	is	victorious,	and	peace	is	divine,	God	has	entered	you.	Peace
means	 that	 god	 has	 entered	 you,	 peace	means	 that	 god	 has	 chosen	 you	 as	 his
vehicle	--	and	that	is	victory.
To	be	chosen	by	god	as	a	vehicle.	Nothing	can	be	more	important	than	that.
God	is	always	new.	You	cannot	say	that	god	was,	the	past	tense	is	irrelevant.	You
cannot	say	that	god	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
will	 be,	 the	 future	 tense	 is	 irrelevant.	 You	 can	 only	 say	 that	 god	 is.	 Only	 the
present	 tense	 is	 relevant	 because	 god	 is	 in	 the	 present,	 always.	 Now	 is	 his
quality;	 here	 is	 his	 space.	 The	 moment	 you	 also	 become	 now-here,	 you	 start
experiencing	 the	 newness	 of	 the	whole	 existence.	 It	 is	 continuously	 bathed	 in
newness.
Except	 for	 man's	 mind	 nothing	 ever	 gets	 old;	 only	 man's	 mind	 accumulates
memory	and	becomes	old.	It	is	through	memory	that	aging	happens.
A	meditator	comes	to	know	how	to	put	the	mind	aside,	The	moment	he	can	see
himself	separate	from	the	mind	he	is	no	longer	old,	no	longer	of	the	past,	he	is
no	longer	memory.	And	then	great	freshness	explodes.	The	joy	and	the	thrill	and
the	bliss	of	it	is	indescribable.
There	are	two	kinds	of	sounds:	one	is	that	which	is	created	by	the	clash	of	two
things....	That's	 how	we	produce	 sound	on	musical	 instruments,	 that's	 how	we
speak;	it	is	a	clash.	There	is	another	sound	which	is	heard	in	deep	silence,	at	the
innermost	 core	 of	 your	 being.	 You	 don't	 produce	 it,	 you	 simply	 hear	 it;	 you
discover	it.	It	has	always	been	there.	That	is	called	the	soundless	sound.	That	is
the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping	--	that	is	nadamo.
And	this	is	going	to	be	your	work:	you	have	to	hear	that	which	cannot	be	heard,
you	have	to	see	that	which	cannot	be	seen,	you	have	to	grasp	the	ungraspable,	to
conceive	 the	 inconceivable,	 to	 know	 the	 unknowable.	 That's	 the	 enquiry,	 the
fundamental	enquiry	of	a	seeker.	That	enquiry	makes	you	a	sannyasin.
Shunyo	 means	 nothingness,	 emptiness,	 void.	 It	 is	 Buddha's	 word	 for	 your
innermost	core.
At	the	very	core	of	our	being	there	is	nothing,	just	a	pure	emptiness.	Because	of
this	emptiness	we	are	afraid	to	go	in.	Buddhas	go	on	saying	to	people,	"Go	in."
People	hear	them	but	nobody	follows,	people	worship	them	but	nobody	follows.
People	say,	"You	must	be	right	but	our	time	has	not	come	yet."	The	fundamental
reason	 is	 that	people	 are	 afraid	of	going	 in.	Somehow	unconsciously	 they	 feel
that	the	experience	is	going	to	be	too	much,	it	may	prove	unbearable.	And	they
are	right:	 the	experience	is	tremendous,	it	 is	unbearable.	It	kills	you	as	you	are
and	gives	you	a	birth.	A	new	being	arrives,	 the	old	completely	disappears.	For
the	old	it	is	really	drastic,	it	is	death.	But	the	old	is	not	worth	keeping.	It	is	ugly
and	it	is	the	source	of	all	kinds	of	miseries	and	nightmares.
It	 is	good	that	 it	dies.	On	its	death	a	new	being	arises.	But	before	 the	new	can
arrive,	the	old	has	to	go.	For	the	new	to	be,	the	old	has	to	cease.
Sannyas	is	a	death	and	a	resurrection.
Sanatano	means	 the	eternal	one;	one	who	has	always	been,	 is	and	will	be,	one
who	is	unchanging.
Changes	happen	but	nothing	affects	you.	Things	come	and	go,	you	 remain	 the
same...	like	the	sky,	clouds	come	and	go;	days	come	and	nights	come;	in	the	day
it	 is	 sunny	and	 there	 is	 light,	and	 in	 the	night	 it	 is	dark	and	 there	are	so	many
stars;	and	sometimes	it	is	cloudy	and	sometimes	there	is	not	a	single	cloud.
But	the	sky	remains	the	same,	unaffected,	untouched.
That's	 exactly	 the	 quality	 of	 god,	 like	 the	 sky.	And	 that	 is	 the	 quality	 of	 your
inner	 being	 too	 --	 because	we	 participate	 in	 god,	 our	 consciousness	 is	 part	 of
him.	We	are	not	separate	from	him,	we	are	absolutely	one	with	him.
Meditation	is	a	discovery	of	this	eternal	element	in	your	being.	Once	you	have
known	 this	 eternal	 element	 in	 your	 being	 you	 know	 that	 it	 is	 everywhere,	 in
everything.	 That	 day	 becomes	 a	 day	 of	 great	 blessings.	 After	 that	 there	 is	 no
misery,	no	pain,	no	agony,	no	nightmare,	you	are	awakened.
To	know	the	eternal	is	to	be	awakened.	To	know	the	eternal	is	to	be	enlightened.
To	know	the	eternal	is	to	be	a	Buddha,	is	to	be	a	Christ.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#33
Chapter	title:	None
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
22	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912225
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT33
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	is	born	as	a	seed.	The	fragrance	is	there,	but	hidden,	unmanifest.	The	seed
has	to	grow,	the	seed	has	to	become	a	tree,	 the	seed	has	to	wait	for	 the	spring.
And	then	suddenly	one	day,	the	fragrance	is	released,	it	becomes	manifest.
To	be	a	disciple	means	that	you	are	falling	as	a	seed	into	the	soil	of	the	master,
you	are	dissolving	yourself	 in	 the	soil.	To	be	a	disciple	requires	such	trust	 that
one	is	ready	to	die.	The	seed	has	to	die	before	it	can	start	growing	into	a	tree.	So
the	first	need	is	trust.
The	second	need	is	to	continuously	grow	in	every	possible	way.	People	remain
stuck,	they	go	only	so	far	and	they	think	that	this	is	the	end,	there	is	no	more	to
life.	In	fact	there	is	no	ends	life	is	an	eternal	pilgrimage.	The	deeper	you	go	into
it,	more	and	more	mysteries	will	be	encountered.	The	more	you	know,	the	more
you	 will	 be	 wonderstruck;	 much	 more	 has	 to	 be	 known.	 It	 is	 a	 non-ending
process.
So	the	second	thing	to	remember	is:	go	on	growing.	Grow	in	love,	grow	in	bliss,
grow	in	meditation.
Grow	in	all	possible	ways	--	in	sensitivity,	in	awareness,	in	creativity.
And	 the	 third	 thing	 is	 to	wait.	 Impatience	 is	a	hindrance.	Make	every	effort	 to
grow	but	wait	for	the	right	time,	because	nothing	happens	before	the	right	time
and	one	never	knows	when	 the	 right	 time	comes.	Wait	 for	 the	 spring,	because
flowers	cannot	be	forced	to	come	out	of	the	trees;	 they	come	when	they	come.
We	have	to	learn	patience.
If	these	three	thing	are	fulfilled,	the	day	when	your	fragrance	will	be	released	is
not	far	away.
Let	 this	sink	deep	 into	 the	heart,	 this	 is	very	 fundamental	 to	sannyas:	once	we
start	 feeling	 that	god	cares	 for	us,	 anxieties	disappear,	 anguish	dies	of	 its	 own
accord.	The	deeper	we	feel	god's	love,	the	more	and	more	open	we	become.	It	is
fear	 that	makes	us	closed	and	 it	 is	 love	 that	makes	us	open.	God's	 love	means
that	 the	whole	 existence	 loves	you:	 the	 sun,	 the	moon,	 the	 stars,	 the	 trees,	 the
people.	From	all	directions	love	is	being	showered	upon	you.
Start	seeing	it,	feeling	it.	When	the	sunrays	fall	on	your	face,	remember	it.	When
the	 lake	 reflects	 your	 face,	 remember	 it.	 When	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the	 flowers
reaches	you,	 remember	 it.	Remember	 it	 as	many	 times	as	possible	 in	 as	many
situations	as	possible	so	that	slowly	slowly	it	becomes	a	constant	phenomenon,
an	undercurrent.	It	will	give	you	roots	in	god.	It	will	make	you	rooted,	centred,
and	 it	will	help	you	 to	dissolve	 the	mind	with	all	 its	problems,	easily,	with	no
effort.
Entering	onto	the	path	is	a	divine	decision.	It	is	not	yours,	it	is	god's.
There	 is	an	ancient	saying:	Before	a	man	decides	 to	seek	god,	god	has	already
decided	to	seek	him.
Without	his	decision,	our	decisions	are	impotent.	It	is	only	when	he	decides,	that
our	decisions	have	power,	power	enough	to	become	fulfilled.	When	we	decide	it
is	always	wavering,	it	is	always	divided.	Our	decision	is	at	the	most	a	majority
decision,	a	parliamentary	decision.	But	that	which	is	in	the	minority	may	become
the	majority	tomorrow,	and	that	which	is	in	the	majority	today	may	not	be	in	the
majority	tomorrow.	So	our	decisions	are	not	reliable,	they	are	not	total.
But	 when	 god	 decides,	 in	 our	 innermost	 core	 the	 decision	 is	 total,	 the
commitment	 is	 total,	 the	 involvement	 is	 irrevocable;	 you	 cannot	 go	 back.	The
decision	 is	bigger	 than	you.	 It	 possesses	you,	you	become	overwhelmed	by	 it.
And	 then	 only	 is	 true	 discipleship	 born.	 Without	 god	 deciding	 for	 us,	 our
decisions	are	not	of	much	value.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Remember	 it,	 that	 this	 is	 god's	 decision	 on	your	 behalf,	 that	 you	 are	 simply	 a
medium,	a	vehicle	 for	his	decision	 to	be	fulfilled	 in	 life.	Then	 things	will	start
happening	with	such	intensity,	depth,	and	speed,	that	one	remains	constantly	in
surprise	at	what	 is	happening	and	why	it	 is	happening	--	because	we	don't	 feel
ourselves	worthy	enough	and	yet	is	happening.
Blissful	 effort	 is	 needed	 for	 growth.	 Ordinary	 effort	 won't	 do,	 it	 has	 to	 be
blissful.	The	moment	your	effort	is	blissful	it	is	almost	effortless.	It	is	effortless
effort	when	it	is	blissful;	when	it	is	not	blissful	it	is	a	strain.	And	one	can	enter
into	 the	world	of	god	only	 in	a	deep,	 restful	mood.	Hence	a	paradox	has	 to	be
fulfilled	by	the	seeker:	he	has	to	make	efforts,	certainly,	he	has	to	be	industrious
--	there	is	no	question	about	it	--	but	his	effort	has	to	be	a	very	special	kind	of
effort.	It	has	to	be	effortless,	 there	should	be	no	strain	in	it,	 there	should	be	no
tension	in	it.	It	should	be	more	like	play	than	like	work.
One	should	enjoy	it,	one	should	not	do	it	like	a	duty.	One	should	make	it	a	joy
unto	itself,	as	if	one	is	not	concerned	about	the	result	at	all.	The	result	comes	--	it
comes	whenever	we	are	ripe	--	so	there	is	no	need	to	think	about	it.	It	comes	of
its	own	accord.	Existence	is	very	fair	and	very	just;	it	gives	you	that	which	you
deserve.	There	 is	not	 even	a	 single	moment's	delay.	 If	you	don't	 deserve	 it,	 of
course,	 it	doesn't	happen.	You	can	go	on	making	as	much	effort	as	you	can:	 it
won't	happen.
And	right	effort	 is	effort	which	 is	not	an	effort,	but	 joy,	play,	 love,	bliss.	Then
miracles	start	happening.
We	are	entitled	 to	miracles	but	we	never	 fulfill	 the	basic	condition.	This	 is	 the
basic	condition.	Then	miracles	are	as	ordinary	as	everything	else.
Sannyas	is	a	summons:	it	is	god	calling	you...	And	it	is	good	that	you	have	heard
it!
People	are	very	deaf	and	very	blind;	although	they	appear	to	have	ears	and	eyes
they	don't	listen,	they	don't	hear.	And	god	goes	on	calling.	To	hear	him	means	a
radical	change	in	life;	then	you	can't	live	the	old	way.	Then	all	priorities	changes
that	which	was	important	before	becomes	very	unimportant,	and	that	which	was
never	important	before	becomes	very	important,	that	which	was	life	before	is	no
longer	 life,	 And	 that	 which	was	 not	 even	 in	 your	 dreams	 becomes	 your	 very
existence.
Sannyas	 is	a	call	of	god.	And	everybody	 is	being	called!	The	Sufis	 say	 that	 if
one	hundred	people	are	called,	only	ten	hear;	ninety	never	hear.	And	out	of	the
ten	only	one	acts,	responds;	nine	never	respond.
That's	why	there	are	so	few	people	whose	existence	can	become	a	proof	for	god,
so	few	people	who	are	full	of	the	light	and	the	perfume	of	the	beyond.
I	want	 all	 of	my	 sannyasins	 to	 be	 proofs	 of	 god	 --	 not	 arguments	 for	 god	 but
existential	proofs	for	god.
All	beauty	is	basically	rooted	in	truth.	Without	truth,	beauty	is	false.	Unless	it	is
part	of	truth	it	is	only	a	dream,	a	fantasy,	a	projection.
The	poet	lives	in	dreams.	His	vision	of	beauty	is	not	that	of	truth.	He	creates	his
beauty,	he	is	inventive.
The	seer	does	not	create	truth.	Truth	cannot	be	created,	you	can	only	discover	it	-
-	 it	 is	 already	 there.	But	 the	moment	you	discover	 truth	great	beauty	 explodes
both	within	and	without.	The	experience	of	truth	makes	you	beautiful	and	it	also
transforms	the	whole	experience	into	great	splendour.
That	is	the	difference	between	the	poet	and	the	seer:	the	poet	dreams	of	beauty,
the	seer	 sees	 it.	The	poet	 remains	 far,	 far	away;	he	 talks	about	beauty	but	 it	 is
only	 about	 beauty.	 The	 seer	 talks	 beauty;	 it	 is	 not	 about	 beauty.	 He	 talks	 the
truth.	And	truth	is	necessarily	beautiful	and	it	is	necessarily	good.
Meditation	 is	 a	 way	 to	 discover	 the	 truth.	 Then	 beauty	 is	 discovered
automatically.	It	follows	truth	like	a	shadow.
Existence	 can	 be	 lived	 in	 two	ways:	 as	 prose	 or	 as	 poetry.	 These	 are	 the	 two
possible	approaches.	You	can	live	it	as	logic;	then	it	is	prose;	or	you	can	live	it	as
love,	then	it	 is	poetry.	You	can	live	it	as	mathematics,	then	it	 is	prose;	you	can
live	 it	 as	magic,	 then	 it	 is	poetry.	And	only	 if	 one	 lives	 life	 as	poetry	 can	one
discover	god.
On	the	way	of	mathematics,	logic,	calculation,	there	is	no	god;	and	without	god
there	is	no	meaning,	no	significance.	Life	becomes	a	burden.	One	lives	because
one	 has	 to	 live,	 one	 lives	 because	 it	 doesn't	 feel	 right	 to	 commit	 suicide.	One
lives	because	one	cannot	gather	courage	to	commit	suicide.
One	drags,	one	does	not	really	live.	One	slowly	dies,	because	without	poetry	you
can't	 have	 any	 thrill	 in	 your	 heart,	 you	 can't	 have	 any	 adventures.	 All	 is
mundane,	nothing	 is	 sacred.	Temples	disappear	 from	your	 life...	 there	are	only
shopping	centres.	Calculation	is	left,	a	bank	balance	is	left,	power	and	prestige,
but	something	in	the	deepest	core	of	your	being	remains	unfulfilled,	empty,	life	a
wound	which	goes	on	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
becoming	bigger	and	bigger	every	day.	One	wants	to	drown	it	in	occupation,	in
constant	worrying,	 in	alcohol,	 in	sex.	One	wants	to	drown	the	very	memory	of
something	missing.	But	you	cannot	drown	it.	It	goes	on	knocking	on	your	doors,
it	goes	on	haunting	you.	It	is	something	so	essential	that	it	has	to	be	fulfilled.
Carl	Gustav	Jung	used	to	say,	"In	my	whole	life's	practice	I	have	observed	that
the	patients	who	came	to	me	after	their	fortieth	year	were	not	really	in	any	need
of	 psychological	 treatment.	 They	 needed	 some	 sort	 of	 religion,	 they	 needed
some	sort	of	meaning	in	their	life."	But	psychology	cannot	provide	meaning.	It
can	provide	a	certain	adjustment	to	the	society,	but	the	society	itself	is	neurotic,
so	to	be	adjusted	to	it	is	to	be	neurotic	--	normally	neurotic.	Psychology	can	help
you	 to	 accept	 the	drudgery	of	 life,	 the	 routine,	 the	dullness,	but	 it	 cannot	help
you	to	transform	it.
And	Jung	is	right:	his	insight	is	right.	In	Eastern	scriptures,	forty-two	is	exactly
the	year	when	the	need	for	religion	arises.	Just	as	at	the	age	of	fourteen	the	need
for	sex	arises,	at	the	age	of	forty-two	the	need	for	religion	arises.	And	if	it	is	not
fulfilled	one	feels	uprooted.	It	can	only	be	fulfilled	by	religion...	but	religion	is
poetry,	it	is	music,	it	is	song,	it	is	dance.
There	is	no	need	to	argue	for	it.	You	don't	argue	for	music:	either	you	like	it	or
you	don't	like	it.	Nobody	can	prove	the	beauty	of	music	to	anybody	else.	Either
you	like	a	rose	flower	or	you	don't	like	it;	either	it	appears	beautiful	to	you	or	it
doesn't	appear	beautiful	to	you.	And	it	is	there	that	the	matter	ends.	If	it	does	not
appear	 beautiful	 to	 you	 a	 rose	 flower	 loses	 nothing,	 but	 you	 are	 losing	 some
great	opportunity	to	be	in	communion	with	nature,	with	god.
So	let	poetry	be	your	path	--	and	in	poetry	everything	is	included:	music,	dance,
song,	 love.	All	 that	 is	 illogical	 is	 included.	All	 that	 is	crazy	is	 included	and	all
that	is	sane	is	excluded.	I	teach	people	how	to	be	blissfully	mad!
Ordinarily	man	is	a	slave,	a	slave	of	his	own	unconscious	instincts,	a	slave	of	his
own	 biology,	 a	 slave	 of	 his	 own	mind:	 it	 is	 a	multi-dimensional	 slavery.	 The
whole	 slavery	 has	 to	 be	 destroyed	 from	 the	 very	 roots,	 only	 then	 will	 your
consciousness	arise	in	all	its	beauty	and	glory,	in	all	its	light	and	fragrance.	And
the	way	discovered	by	all	the	awakened	ones	is	meditation.
Be	 watchful,	 because	 by	 being	 watchful	 the	 territory	 of	 he	 unconscious	 is
reduced	every	day.	The	more	conscious	you	become,	 the	 less	 territory	of	your
being	 is	unconscious.	One	day,	when	you	are	one	hundred	per	cent	conscious,
the	unconscious	disappears.	And	with	that	disappearance	the	slavery	disappears,
the	biological,	the	physiological,	the	psychological	--	all	kinds	of	slavery	exist	in
the	 unconscious.	So	by	 cutting	 the	 unconscious	we	 cut	 the	 very	 root.	And	 the
key	to	self-mastery	is	meditation.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#34
Chapter	title:	None
23	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912235
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT34
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Grace	can	only	be	blissful.	It	cannot	be	sad,	it	cannot	even	be	serious,	it	can	only
be	cheerful,	laughing.
And	 bliss	 cannot	 be	 other	 than	 graceful;	 it	 can't	 be	 ugly.	 It	 has	 tremendous
beauty	to	it,	 it	 is	the	very	spirit	of	beauty;	they	are	both	two	sides	of	one	coin.
And	a	sannyasin	has	to	be	blissful	and	graceful.
Bliss	is	an	inner	phenomenon,	grace	is	its	outer	expression.	Bliss	is	the	flower,
grace	is	the	perfume.
Ordinarily	people	think	about	bliss	as	a	peak,	never	as	a	valley,	but	bliss	has	both
sides.	No	 peak	 can	 exist	without	 a	 valley,	 no	 valley	 can	 exist	without	 a	 peak;
they	 are	 one	phenomenon,	 inseparable.	One	has	 to	 learn	 to	 be	 blissful	 in	 both
ways.	When	you	are	on	the	sunlit	peak	it	is	easy	to	be	blissful.	The	very	altitude,
the	silence,	the	sun,	the	open	sky,	the	freedom	of	that	openness	helps;	and	makes
you	blissful.	You	are	 far	 away	 from	 the	world	 and	 its	 problems	 and	 anxieties.
But	you	cannot	live	on	the	peak;	one	has	to	come	back	to	the	valley.
The	peak	can	only	be	a	holiday.	One	cannot	exist	 there	longer	than	that;	hence
one	has	to	learn	how	to	be	blissful	in	the	valley,	in	the	turmoil	of	the	world,	in
the	darkness,	in	the	dismal	world	of	the	valley,	in	the	struggle,	competition,	in	all
that	 the	 valley	 contains.	One	 has	 to	 learn	 to	 be	 silent,	 blissful,	 even	when	 the
situation	is	just	not	right	for	it,	when	in	fact	the	situation	is	just	against	it.
Unless	you	can	be	blissful	in	a	situation	which	ordinarily	will	create	misery,	you
are	not	a	blissful	person	yet.	Unless	one	can	be	in	heaven	even	in	hell,	one	has
not	arrived	home;	then	much	has	still	to	be	done.
There	 is	 an	 ancient	 parable.	 An	 enlightened	 master	 is	 asked	 at	 the	 gate	 of
heaven,	 "Where	 would	 you	 like	 to	 go?"	 He	 immediately	 says	 "To	 hell."	 The
gatekeeper	is	puzzled,	confused.	He	says	"You	are	the	first	person	in	millions	of
years	who	has	 asked	 to	 go	 to	 hell.	Are	 you	 crazy	 or	 something?	Why	do	 you
want	to	go	to	hell?"
The	master	said,	"Because	I	know	that	I	can	be	in	heaven	anywhere;	heaven	is	in
my	heart.	So	leave	heaven	for	those	who	cannot	be	in	heaven	in	hell;	leave	it	for
the	weaker	ones.	I	am	strong	enough.	I	have	lived	in	the	world,	but	I	have	not
lived	 there,	 I	 was	 always	 in	 heaven.	 So	 send	 me	 anywhere	 and	 I	 will	 be	 in
heaven.	Wherever	I	am,	there	is	heaven."
That	 is	 a	 true	 achievement,	 real,	 authentic;	 otherwise	 you	 can	 live	 cheerfully,
blissfully	only	when	the	situation	permits,	allows,	helps,	nourishes	you.
So	 live	 in	 the	world,	 in	 the	valley,	with	 a	 song	 in	your	heart.	 I	 don't	want	my
sannyasins	 to	 escape	 to	 the	Himalayan	peaks.	Live	 in	 the	valleys	of	 the	world
and	yet	remain	unaffected,	untouched,	uncontaminated	by	all	that	exists	there.	It
is	possible,	and	it	 is	 the	greatest	miracle	when	it	happens,	and	the	greatest	 joy,
because	then	you	have	transcended	all	outer	situations.	And	transcendence	is	the
ultimate	goal	of	sannyas.
Love	is	another	name	for	life,	another	name	for	existence,	another	name	for	god.
Don't	 condemn	 it,	 even	 if	 it	 exists	 on	 the	 lowest	 rung,	 because	 through
condemnation	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 transform	 it.	 Accept	 it	 as	 it	 is.	 Try	 to
understand	 it.	 In	 that	 very	 understanding	 love	 starts	 changing:	 it	 starts	 going
higher	than	lust.
The	 more	 understanding	 grows,	 the	 higher	 love	 starts	 soaring.	 Love	 moves
higher	on	the	wings	of	understanding,	on	the	wings	of	awareness,	meditation.
Love	plus	meditation	 is	equal	 to	 sannyas.	 Just	make	your	 love	more	and	more
meditative,	wherever	it	is,	and	meditation	will	take	it	upwards.	Meditation	alone
is	without	 energy;	 love	 alone	 is	without	 consciousness.	 They	 both	 need	 a	 co-
operation,	a	deep	co-operation.
There	is	an	ancient	parable.	Two	beggars	lived	in	a	forest.	One	had	no	legs	and
the	other	had	no	eyes.
Once	it	happened	that	a	great	fire	broke	out.	Both	would	have	died	if	they	had
tried	to	get	out	separately,	because	the	man	without	the	legs	could	not	move.	He
could	see,	but	just	seeing	was	of	no	use.	He	could	see	from	where	to	escape	but
he	could	not	escape.	And	the	man	without	eyes	was	able	to	escape	but	was	not
able	 to	 see.	They	 joined	 together.	The	blind	man	 took	 the	other	beggar	on	his
shoulders.	Joined	together	they	had	both	eyes	and	legs.
That's	exactly	the	situation	of	man:	without	love	you	don't	have	energy	to	move,
without	meditation	you	don't	have	any	vision,	any	insight.	Love	plus	meditation
and	you	have	both:	you	have	energy	to	soar	and	you	know	where,	how,	when.
Our	bodies	die	but	we	are	neither	born	nor	can	we	die:	we	are	eternal.	To	know
this	is	to	be	free	from	all	fear.	It	has	not	to	be	a	belief.	Millions	of	people	believe
that	they	are	immortal,	but	they	believe	out	of	fear.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
They	are	afraid	of	death.	They	want	to	be	immortal,	hence	they	believe	in	it.	But
they	 don't	 know,	 and	 deep	 down	 there	 is	 always	 doubt	 persisting.	 And	 at	 the
moment	of	death	their	belief	won't	help	them;	the	doubt	will	explode.	They	will
die	in	doubt,	and	to	die	in	doubt	is	to	miss	the	whole	point.	It	is	not	a	question	of
belief,	it	has	to	be	known.
Meditation	is	the	way	to	know	it.	It	opens	the	doors	of	eternity,	of	timelessness.
In	 the	 beginning	 just	 moments	 happen	 when	 time	 disappears;	 then	 more	 and
more,	 then	 more	 and	 more.	 One	 day	 suddenly	 you	 are	 surprised:	 hours	 have
passed	but	it	is	as	if	the	inner	clock	has	stopped,	there	is	no	time	movement	in
you.	 When	 you	 see	 it	 happening,	 that	 you	 can	 transcend	 time,	 you	 have
transcended	death.	It	is	time	that	brings	death,	it	is	time	that	brings	birth.
In	Sanskrit	we	have	one	word	 for	both	 time	and	death.	We	call	both	 time	and
death	kal	--	the	same	word	for	both.	A	great	insight	is	there:	to	go	beyond	time	is
to	go	beyond	death.	And	meditation	slowly	slowly	leads	you	beyond	time.
Let	it	become	your	experience.	I	am	not	here	to	help	people	believe.	There	are
enough	believers	in	the	world:	Christians,	Hindus,	Mohammedans.	I	want	people
who	know,	because	those	will	be	the	harbingers	of	a	new	humanity	--	the	people
who	know.	They	don't	believe,	they	know	god.
Bliss	is	a	phenomenon	which	cannot	be	hidden.	It	is	fire,	it	is	flame.	You	cannot
hide	it;	it	shines	forth	--
it	is	impossible	to	hide	it.
There	are	secret	traditions	which	say	"Hide	it.'	Sufism	particularly	tries	hard	to
hide	 it.	 It	 is	 for	a	particular	reason:	because	 in	Mohammedan	countries	 if	your
bliss	 is	 known	 you	 will	 be	 in	 danger.	 They	 have	 killed	 many	 people	 for	 the
simple	 reason	 that	 they	 were	 so	 joyous	 that	 in	 their	 utter	 joy,	 in	 their	 divine
madness;	they	started	saying	things	which	go	against	the	dead	scriptures,	which
go	against	tradition,	which	go	against	conformity.
For	example,	Al-Hillaj	declared	Ana'l	Haq,	I	am	god.	He	declared	it	in	great	joy,
he	wanted	to	share	it.
His	master	was	 telling	him	 to	keep	his	mouth	 shut,	not	 to	utter	 a	 single	word.
Hillaj	 would	 promise	 him	 but	 moments	 would	 come	 when	 he	 would	 simply
shout	Ana'l	Haq:	I	am	god.	And	not	only	would	he	shout,	his	whole	being	would
shout,	 each	 fibre	 of	 his	 body	would	 shout!	He	was	 so	 full	 of	 light....	 He	was
killed,	 murdered,	 because	 miserable	 people	 cannot	 tolerate	 such	 a	 blissful
person.	It	hurts	to	see	somebody	so	blissful,	it	creates	jealousy.	It	wounds	your
ego.	 p	 So	 Sufis	 have	 tried	 to	 hide	 it.	 But	 it	 is	 impossible,	 it	 is	 a	 luminous
phenomenon.
Misery	is	dark,	bliss	is	bright.	Misery	is	a	light	unmanifest,	a	candle	unlit;	bliss
is	a	candle	lit.	How	can	you	hide	it?	--	it	is	not	possible.	Of	course	we	have	not
yet	been	able	 to	 create	 a	 society	which	will	 love	Al-Hillaj,	 Jesus,	Buddha;	we
have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 create	 a	 society	 which	 will	 appreciate	 really	 blissful
people.	But	 even	 if	 you	 lose	 your	 life	 in	 letting	 your	whole	 being	 declare	 the
ultimate	truth,	the	ultimate	joy	of	existence,	it	is	worth	it.
Man	looks	small	but	he	is	not.	He	is	like	a	small	seed	which	can	grow	into	a	big
tree.	 And	 a	 single	 seed	 can	 fill	 the	 whole	 earth	 with	 greenery;	 a	 single	 seed
contains	so	much,	it	almost	contains	the	infinity.	So	is	man	a	seed	of	love...	but
the	seed	can	become	a	vast	continent.	And	unless	it	does	one	is	never	contented.
Unless	one	becomes	just	love,	pure	love,	with	no	desire	to	gain	anything	out	of	it
but	just	the	joy	of	sharing,	one	is	not	fulfilled.	It	is	only	by	becoming	total	love,
absolute	love,	that	life	comes	to	its	ultimate	crescendo,	its	ultimate	peak.	In	fact
that	peak	is	called	god,	paradise,	nirvana.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	grow	towards	more	and	more	love.	No	other
prayer	 is	 needed,	 no	 other	 scripture	 is	 needed,	 no	 other	 discipline	 is	 needed.
Love	 is	 more	 than	 any	 scripture,	 more	 than	 any	 discipline.	 It	 brings	 its	 own
order:	it	turns	your	chaos	into	a	cosmos.
Trust	in	love	because	love	is	the	very	foundation	of	all	 transformation.	Love	is
the	innermost	core	of	alchemy.
Paritosh	means	total	contentment,	absolute	contentment	--	and	that's	what	brings
god	into	your	life.
People	 live	 in	 discontentment	 --	 and	 to	 live	 in	 discontentment	 is	 to	 live	 in
complaints,	grumbling,	always	asking	for	more	and	more.	To	live	in	discontent
means	to	live	in	desire,	and	desires	are	unquenchable.	One	becomes	just	a	long
long	tragedy,	a	long	series	of	failures,	frustrations,	a	desert	where	nothing	grows,
nothing	flowers.	Man	can	live	either	in	desire	or	in	no-desire.
Sannyas	means	 starting,	 a	 life	 of	 no-desire.	 Sannyas	means	Whatsoever	 is,	 is
more	 than	 enough,	whatsoever	 is,	 one	 is	 thankful	 for	 it;	 one	 does	 not	 ask	 for
more.	On	the	contrary,	one	is	really	grateful,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
because	so	much	has	already	been	given.	And	one	is	not	worthy	of	it.	When	you
see	what	has	been	given	to	you	already,	you	will	be	surprised:	you	don't	deserve
it.	We	 don't	 deserve	 life,	 we	 don't	 deserve	 love,	 we	 don't	 deserve	 joy,	 and	 so
much	has	been	given,	unasked.
Feel	 grateful	 for	 it.	 That	 is	 the	 way	 of	 contentment.	 Contentment	 is	 always
thankful	towards	existence	and	in	that	thankfulness	much	more	goes	on	and	on
coming	to	you.	It	is	a	paradox	of	life	that	you	desire	and	nothing	happens	except
frustration;	you	don't	desire	and	everything	happens,	you	become	entitled	to	all
kinds	of	miracles.
So	 this	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 work	 on	 yourself.	 Remember	 it:	 this	 single	 word
"contentment"	contains	the	whole	of	religion.
Pragyano	 means	 wisdom;	 not	 knowledge	 but	 knowing,	 not	 knowledge	 but
experience,	 something	 not	 based	 on	 other	 authorities	 but	 rooted	 in	 your	 own
vision.
Knowledge	is	cheap:	you	can	collect	as	much	as	you	want.	All	that	you	need	is	a
good	biocomputer,	a	good	memory...	which	is	not	very	difficult.	Memory	can	be
trained,	can	be	made	more	skillful.	But	memory	is	not	going	to	transform	you.	It
has	its	use	in	the	world,	in	day-to-day	affairs,	in	scientific	work,	but	it	has	no	use
as	far	as	your	subjectivity	is	concerned.
The	inner	journey	needs	to	be	without	any	burden	of	knowledge.	One	has	to	go
inwards	more	like	a	child,	innocent.	The	less	you	know,	the	better.	If	you	don't
know	anything,	that's	the	best.	That's	what	Socrates	says:	I	know	only	one	thing,
that	I	know	nothing.	That	is	the	turning	point,	that	is	the	moment	when	one	turns
in.	That	is	the	moment	when	one	becomes	wise.	And	that	is	 the	moment	when
one	 starts	 experiencing	 life.	 Otherwise	 words,	 theories,	 philosophies	 go	 on
interpreting	life	for	you,	they	don't	allow	you	direct,	immediate	contact	with	life.
They	are	not	bridges,	they	are	walls.
Innocence	is	 the	bridge	and	when	innocence	blooms	it	 is	wisdom.	Then	a	man
again	becomes	a	child	and	then	the	circle	is	complete,	 the	circle	is	perfect.	We
are	born	as	a	child	and	we	die	as	a	child.	This	is	the	perfection	of	life.	If	we	die
knowledgeable,	we	miss	the	point,	the	circle	was	incomplete.	We	will	have	to	be
born	again	to	complete	it.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#35
Chapter	title:	None
24	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912245
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT35
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	 so-called	 religious	 people	 have	 been	 very	 inimical	 towards	 the	 lower
phenomena	of	life	energies.
And	being	 inimical	 to	your	own	 lower	self	 is	destructive	because	you	will	not
find	the	staircase,	the	ladder,	to	go	to	the	higher.	And	if	you	are	inimical	to	the
lower,	the	lower	becomes	inimical	to	you,	and	unnecessary	conflict,	struggle	is	a
wastage	of	energy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Befriend	the	lower.	Take	all	the	help	that	the	lower	is	capable	of	giving.	Use	it	--
it	is	a	great	gift	of	god
--	 but	 remember	 that	 one	 has	 to	 go	 beyond	 it.	 Sex	 has	 to	 be	 transformed	 into
prayer.
This	whole	process	I	call	sannyas:	from	sex	to	superconsciousness.	This	whole
journey	I	call	sannyas.
God	 is	 always	available	 for	help	but	we	never	 ask.	 Jesus	 says:	Knock	and	 the
doors	shall	be	opened	unto	you,	ask	and	it	shall	be	given.	But	we	never	ask,	we
never	knock	on	the	doors,	and	we	go	on	missing	immense	powers	which	can	be
ours	just	for	the	asking.
God	is	always	standing	close	by,	just	like	our	shadow,	but	we	go	on	searching	for
money,	 power,	 prestige,	 and	we	 never	 look	 to	 the	 subtle	 presence	 of	 life	 that
surrounds	us.	We	never	look	within	where	it	burns	like	a	flame,	we	never	look
into	others'	eyes;	we	avoid	it.
There	is	a	subtle	contract	amongst	human	beings	all	over	the	world	to	never	look
into	each	other's	eyes	for	more	than	three	seconds.	It	is	strange	that	this	is	so'	all
over	 the	 world,	 in	 all	 the	 cultures,	 to	 look	 more	 than	 that	 is	 thought	 to	 be
uncivilised,	rude,	unless	you	are	very	intimate,	unless	you	are	in	love.	But	even
when	people	are	in	love	they	do	not	look	into	each	other's	eyes	as	windows	for
the	divine;	they	are	looking	into	each	other's	eyes	just	for	bodily,	sexual	energies.
Eyes	express	everything:	your	body,	your	physiology,	and	your	psychology,	and
also	 your	 spirituality.	 Eyes	 are	 windows:	 you	 can	 look	 through	 them	 to	 the
deepest	core.
Look	into	a	flower	and	you	will	find	god.	Look	deeply	anywhere	and	you	will
find	 god.	 God	 simply	 means	 the	 depth	 of	 things.	 And	 whenever	 you	 are	 in
contact	with	the	depth	of	things	immense	powers	become	available	to	you.	You
are	not	poor,	nobody	is;	everybody	is	as	rich	as	one	can	ever	imagine	oneself	to
be,	in	fact,	more	than	you	can	ever	imagine.	The	whole	kingdom	of	god	is	ours
just	for	the	asking,	why	don't	people	ask?	--	the	ego	prevents	them.
The	 ego	 says	 'Don't	 ask	 --	 conquer.	And	you	 cannot	 conquer	 god,	 you	 cannot
conquer	the	whole.	How	can	the	part	conquer	the	whole?	--	it	is	absurd.	We	can
only	surrender	to	the	whole.
But	in	that	very	surrender	is	victory.
Rejoice	because	god	has	heard.
In	fact	you	start	seeking	god	only	when	god	has	already	started	seeking	you.	You
move	towards	god	only	when	god	has	stirred	in	the	deepest	core	of	your	being.
We	are	so	unaware	that's	why	we	think	that	it	is	our	desire	to	seek	the	truth,	to
know	 the	 truth.	We	are	 so	 small	 that	we	can't	have	 that	great	 a	desire.	We	are
small,	our	desires	are	bound	to	be	small.	Our	egos	are	tiny	and	their	desires	are
trivia.
To	desire	god,	to	long	for	god	is	sannyas.	It	is	going	into	an	unknown	territory	to
search	 for	 truth,	 to	 search	 for	 meaning	 in	 life.	 It	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 god	 has
already	heard,	if	god	has	already	called	you.	And	one	can	succeed	only	if	he	is
interested,	otherwise	 it	 is	 impossible.	One	cannot	 succeed	alone,	god's	hand	 is
needed.
This	 is	my	observation:	people	start	 seeking	god	only	when	god	starts	 seeking
them,	although	they	think	that	they	are	seeking.	Only	finally,	at	the	highest	stage
of	meditation,	do	 they	become	aware	of	 the	phenomenon	 that	 their	whole	 idea
has	been	foolish.	It	was	god	seeking	them,	hence	they	started	seeking	god.	But
god	is	always	the	one	who	takes	the	initiative.
Bliss	is	never	old,	it	is	always	young,	because	bliss	is	never	in	the	past	and	never
in	the	future;	it	is	always	in	the	present.	Bliss	simply	means	to	be	in	the	present,
to	 be	 totally	 herenow.	 Then	 one's	 heart	 starts	 dancing	 and	 singing	 and	 great
celebration	 arises	 in	 one's	 being:	 each	 cell	 dancing,	 each	 fibre	 of	 one's	 being
singing	hallelujah!
But	because	it	is	always	of	the	present,	it	is	always	young:	as	fresh	as	dewdrops
in	the	early	morning	sun,	as	fresh	as	a	newly	opening	rose	flower.	It	never	grows
old	and	one	never	grows	tired	of	it,	one	is	never	bored	by	it.
Bertrand	Russell	says	somewhere	that	he	does	not	want	to	go	to	paradise,	for	the
simple	reason	that	he	will	get	bored	with	bliss,	because	there	will	be	only	bliss
and	bliss	and	bliss	and	nothing	else	--	no	misery,	no	tension,	no	anxiety.	He	will
be	dead-bored.	He	does	not	understand	what	bliss	is;	he	is	simply	playing	with
the	word.
Bliss	 is	 that	with	which	 you	 can	 never	 be	 bored,	 because	 it	 is	 never	 old,	 it	 is
always	new,	it	is	never	repetitive.	It	is	so	fresh	every	moment,	how	can	you	be
bored?	Hence	all	the	religions	of	the	world	say	that	the	angels	go	on	singing	on
their	harps,	all	that	they	do	is	sing,	for	the	simple	reason	that	singing	represents
joy:	 they	 rejoice!	 That	 state	 is	 not	 somewhere	 above	 in	 the	 sky,	 that	 state	 is
within	you.	Whenever	you	are	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
contact	with	the	present	you	are	in	paradise.	Now	is	another	name	for	paradise.
Existence	is	always	new;	it	is	only	mind	that	grows	old	and	becomes	rotten.	It	is
only	mind	 that	 accumulates	memories,	 and	because	of	memories	 it	 has	 a	past.
Existence	has	no	memories,	 is	 accumulates	nothing.	 It	 always	 remains	 a	 clean
slate,	a	tabula	rasa;	nothing	is	written	on	it.	And	that's	the	way	for	us	to	be	also.
That	is	called	the	state	of	no-mind.
Mind	is	old,	no-mind	is	new.	Mind	is	thought,	no-mind	is	meditation.	Meditation
simply	 means	 effacing	 all	 the	 memories,	 not	 getting	 involved	 with	 the	 past,
becoming	detached	from	the	past,	so	much	so	that	you	don't	think	of	it	as	your
past.	One	slips	out	of	it	like	a	snake	slips	out	of	its	old	skin.
That	is	the	whole	art	of	sannyas:	to	slip	out	of	the	past	and	to	avoid	entering	the
future.	 Then	 you	 are	 just	 herenow.	 And	 that	 absolute	 newness	 brings	 great
ecstasy.
Bliss	 is	 possible	 only	 to	 those	 who	 can	 trust,	 who	 can	 drop	 doubt.	 And
remember:	 trust	 does	 not	 mean	 believing	 in	 a	 certain	 dogma,	 ideology,
philosophy;	trust	means	trusting	life,	existence,	not	believing	in	the	Bible	and	the
Koran	and	the	Gita	but	believing	in	this	whole	cosmos.
We	are	part	of	it,	just	waves	in	this	great	ocean	of	life.	Trusting	means	that	the
wave	has	no	doubts	about	the	ocean.	It	knows	that	it	belongs	to	the	ocean.	It	is
born	 out	 of	 the	 ocean	 and	 soon	 it	will	 disappear	 in	 the	 ocean	 again.	Both	 are
good:	for	the	moment	dancing	in	the	sun,	and	then,	resting	in	deep	peace.	Then
life	is	not	yours,	nor	is	death	yours.	Life	is	not	the	beginning	and	death	is	not	the
end.	You	were	before	you	were	born,	of	course	not	as	a	wave,	but	as	part	of	the
ocean.	And	you	will	be	after	death,	not	as	a	wave,	but	as	part	of	the	ocean.	And
even	when	you	are	as	a	wave	you	are	nothing	but	a	part	of	the	ocean.	To	know
this	is	 trust.	And	it	 is	 trust	 that	brings	bliss.	It	 is	 trust	 that	becomes	a	light	and
dispels	all	darkness.
Trust	is	religion,	not	belief;	belief	is	always	in	concepts.	Trust	is	not	even	faith,
faith	is	 in	persons:	one	has	faith	in	Jesus,	one	has	faith	in	Buddha.	Trust	 is	 the
highest	thing.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	concepts:	Christian,	Buddhist,	Hindu.	It
has	nothing	to	do	with	Christ,	Buddha,	Krishna.	Trust	simply	means	that	one	is
at	home	with	 existence,	one	has	no	antagonism,	one	 is	 in	 tune	with	 existence.
And	to	be	in	tune	with	existence	is	bliss.
Bliss	can	happen	only	if	we	fulfil	one	condition	--	that	of	being	a	peaceful	heart.
And	it	is	not	difficult	to	fulfil.	The	heart	is	really	peaceful	but	we	are	not	there;
we	 live	 in	 the	 head,	which	 is	 never	 peaceful.	And	we	 try	 the	 impossible	 --	 to
make	the	head	peaceful,	which	cannot	be	done	in	the	very	nature	of	things.	The
head	 is	not	meant	 for	 that.	The	head	 is	always	bound	 to	 remain	with	 thoughts,
desires,	 imagination,	 memory;	 the	 constant	 traffic	 of	 all	 these	 things	 will	 be
there.	That's	its	natural	function,	nothing	is	wrong	with	it.	And	it	is	always	rush
hour,	twenty-four	hours	a	day;	day	in,	day	out,	the	crowd	of	desires	is	passing.
If	you	try	to	make	it	silent	you	will	get	into	more	trouble	you	will	become	very
frustrated.	That's	what	happens	to	people	who	don't	know	what	right	meditation
is.	Then	they	start	 learning	some	tricks	to	hypnotise	their	heads.	And	there	are
tricks	available:	repeat	a	certain	mantra,	chant	a	certain	name,	constantly	repeat
certain	words.	Any	words	will	do;	there	are	no	sacred	words,	all	words	are	the
same.
The	great	English	poet	Tennyson	has	reported	 that	 in	his	 life	he	used	 to	repeat
his	own	name,
"Tennyson,	 Tennyson,	 Tennyson..."	 and	 great	 peace	 would	 descend	 on	 him.
Whenever	 he	 is	 in	 any	 anxiety	 he	would	 repeat	 the	 name,	 his	 own	 --	 not	 any
mantra	 given	 by	Maharishi	Mahesh	 Yogi,	 just	 his	 own	 name,	 not	 any	 funny-
sounding	Sanskrit	mantra	--	and	that	would	do	the	trick!
It	is	not	meditation.	Constant	repetition	of	a	name	simply	creates	a	state	of	deep
sleep	in	the	head:	you	fall	asleep.	It	is	good,	nothing	is	wrong	in	Good	sleep	--
but	 it	 is	 not	 meditation	 and	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 transform	 you.	 The	 real
transformation	happens	when	your	energy	moves	from	the	head	to	the	heart.
The	heart	is	always	peaceful.	It	is	like	the	ocean:	on	the	surface	all	is	turmoil	--
waves,	great	waves	arising	--	but	 in	 the	depth	 there	 is	not	a	single	wave;	all	 is
utterly	silent.	The	head	is	our	circumference	and	the	heart	is	our	centre.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	move	towards	the	heart.	Hence	so	much
emphasis	on	singing,	music,	dance,	love;	these	are	the	ways	in	which	you	can	be
persuaded	back	to	the	heart.	Once	you	are	there,	once	you	have	tasted	the	peace
of	the	heart	you	will	be	surprised:	the	head	is	left	far	behind,	it	is	none	of	your
concern.	It	is	as	if	it	no	longer	belongs	to	you,	it	may	be	somebody	else's	head.	It
is	so	far	away,	so	distant	that	you	don't	even	hear	the	noise.	The	heart	is	so	deep
that	the	head	becomes	infinitely	distant.
Those	are	the	moments	when	you	feel	for	the	first	time	what	bliss	is;	otherwise	it
is	only	a	word.
Very	rarely	have	people	felt	the	real	taste	of	bliss.	People	use	the	word	and	they
think	they	understand	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
too.	 They	 don't	 understand,	 they	 can't	 understand;	 it	 needs	 some	 existential
experience	 to	 understand,	 because	 bliss	 is	 synonymous	 with	 god.	 Bliss	 is	 the
ultimate	meaning	of	life.
To	feel	that	one	is	a	nobody	is	of	tremendous	significance,	because	that	cuts	the
very	root	of	the	ego.
The	ego	lives	through	the	idea	of	superiority.	And	sometimes	the	ego	stands	on
its	head	too,	it	does	a	sirshasan,	a	headstand,	then	it	lives	through	inferiority.	But
a	person,	one	who	knows	that	he	is	nobody,	is	neither	superior	nor	inferior,	he	is
simply	 not.	 And	 in	 those	moments	 of	 non-being,	 bliss	 descends.	Without	 ego
you	cannot	be	miserable.	Nobody	has	succeeded	up	to	now,	and	I	don't	think	that
anybody	can	ever	succeed.	Without	the	ego	it	is	impossible	to	be	miserable,	just
as	with	the	ego	it	is	impossible	to	be	blissful.
When	there	is	no	ego	only	bliss	is	left.
And	the	Greek	meaning	of	Paul	is	also	of	great	significance:	rest.	When	there	is
no	ego	 there	 is	 rest.	 It	 is	ego	 that	keeps	you	restless,	keeps	you	occupied:	"Do
this,	 do	 that,	 be	 this,	 be	 that"	 --	 It	 goes	 on	 giving	 you	 new	 projects.	 It	 never
leaves	you	alone,	it	goads	you.	You	have	to	become	somebody,	you	have	to	be
the	president	of	 the	country	or	 the	prime	minister,	you	have	to	be	famous,	you
have	to	earn	so	much	money....
And	it	goes	on	goading	till	it	either	drives	you	mad	or	drives	you	to	the	point	of
suicide	--	or	drives	you	to	a	man	like	me	for	sannyas!
Dropping	 it,	 great	 rest	 happens.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 try	 any	 relaxation
method,	one	is	simply	relaxed,	 there	is	nothing	to	be	tense	about.	That	natural,
spontaneous	 relaxation	 brings	 bliss	 as	 a	 flood;	 one	 is	 overwhelmed.	And	bliss
never	comes	 in	small	measures.	When	 it	comes,	 it	comes	 like	a	 flood;	when	 it
comes,	it	drowns	you	totally.
Veet	means	 surpassing,	 going	 beyond,	maxine	means	 the	 greatest.	 It	 is	 an	 old
title,	Maximus;	a	Latin	title	of	honour:	the	greatest,	or	full	of	honour.
Go	 beyond	 it.	 The	 very	 idea	 is	 dangerous,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 dropped,	 because	 the
moment	you	think	of	yourself	as	great	you	start	thinking	of	others	as	inferior;	it
is	based	in	comparison.	And	to	compare	yourself	with	anybody	is	harmful	--	for
the	other	and	for	you	too	--	because	everybody	is	unique.	Nobody	is	great	and
nobody	 is	 not	 great,	 nobody	 is	 big	 and	 nobody	 is	 small.	 All	 are	 unique,
incomparably	unique.
This	 is	 the	 religious	understanding.	When	one	becomes	awakened,	 this	 is	how
one	looks	at	people.	They	are	not	alike,	at	the	innermost	core	they	are	the	same,
but	on	the	circumference	they	are	unique	personalities.	A	rose	is	a	rose,	a	lotus	is
a	lotus:	neither	is	the	lotus	great	nor	is	the	rose	great.	Both	have	blossomed,	both
have	expressed	god	in	their	own	ways.
So	from	this	moment	drop	that	whole	idea.	Our	society	lives	with	that	idea:	we
teach	children	to	be	great,	to	be	famous,	to	be	somebody	big,	and	we	also	give
them	names	just	to	implant	this	idea	in	their	minds.	But	this	idea	can	be	carried
only	by	stupid	people:	people	like	Muhammad	Ali	--	the	Greatest.	Only	that	type
of	person,	with	no	intelligence	at	all	can	carry	this	idea.	If	you	have	intelligence,
how	can	you	be	a	Muhammad	Ali	would	be	impossible.	If	you	have	intelligence
you	 would	 be	 a	 Buddha.	 And	 intelligence	 says:	 Don't	 compare.	 See	 that	 this
whole	idea	disappears	from	your	being.
Look	at	people	with	great	 love,	not	with	comparison.	You	are	neither	 superior
nor	are	you	inferior,	they	are	neither	superior,	nor	are	they	inferior.	Everybody	is
suffering	from	either	a	superiority	complex	or	an	inferiority	complex.	And	both
complexes	are	created	by	a	wrong	upbringing,	by	giving	the	child	the	idea	of	ego
--	that	you	have	to	be	somebody	special.	You	have	not	to	be	somebody	special,
you	 are	 already	 special,	 as	 everybody	 else	 is.	 God	 never	 creates	 anybody
ordinary,	 he	 creates	 everybody	 extraordinary.	 But	 remember	 everybody	 is	 the
greatest.	Then	 there	 is	 no	problem.	Then	even	 the	grass	 leaf	 is	 as	great	 as	 the
greatest	star.
That	understanding	will	become	a	great	insight	into	the	truth	of	life,	of	being,	of
existence,	 and	will	 be	 of	 tremendous	 help.	 It	 will	 cleanse	 the	 heart	 of	 all	 the
rubbish	 that	 ego	 collects.	 And	 once	 that	 rubbish	 is	 gone,	 you	 are	 ready	 to
become	a	host	to	the	ultimate	guest	--	god!
The	greatest	worship	 is	 to	be	creative.	God	is	creativity.	When	we	are	creative
we	participate	in	god's	being,	when	we	are	creative	we	are	closest	to	god.	When
we	are	 totally	 immersed	in	creativity	we	are	no	more	there,	only	god	is.	When
god	 pulsates	 through	 us	 then	we	 become	 simply	mediums,	 vehicles,	 passages.
Then	we	are	 like	a	bamboo	flute,	hollow;	and	he	sings	his	song.	 It	 is	his	 song
and	we	are	grateful	that	he	has	chosen	us	to	be	his	vehicles.
Remember	it:	the	greatest	meditation,	the	greatest	prayer,	the	greatest	worship	in
life	is	to	be	creative.
Be	more	 and	more	 creative.	 Creation	 for	 creation's	 sake	 --	 that	 should	 be	 the
motto	of	all	the	sannyasins.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archano	 means	 prayer,	 worship	 --	 prayer	 not	 as	 a	 ritual,	 but	 prayer	 as	 the
spontaneous	pouring	out	of	your	heart	in	gratitude.
People	 go	 to	 the	 church	 or	 to	 the	 temple	 to	 pray;	 they	 repeat	 certain	 phrases
which	have	been	 taught	 to	 them,	but	 it	 is	not	of	 their	heart.	Those	phrases	are
only	on	their	lips,	it	is	lip-service.	They	are	like	gramophone	records,	repeating
whatsoever	the	society	has	conditioned	them	for.	That	is	not	true	prayer.
True	prayer	 is	spontaneous,	sudden,	 informal.	Sitting	in	the	garden,	suddenly	a
deep	desire	arises	to	bow	down	to	the	earth,	for	no	reason	at	all.	Don't	resist	it,
don't	think	that	people	will	think	that	it	is	insane,	foolish,	berserk.	Let	them	think
whatever	 they	want	 to	 think	 about	 it;	 that	 is	 their	 problem.	Bow	 down	 to	 the
earth.	Or	 suddenly	 a	desire	 arises	 to	have	 a	 little	dialogue	with	 the	 tree	or	 the
rose	bush.	Don't	be	disturbed	about	what	others	will	think.	Say	hello	to	the	rose,
talk	to	the	rose	or	to	the	stars.
This	 is	 true	prayer,	because	God	 is	everywhere:	 in	 the	stars,	 in	 the	rose,	 in	 the
earth.	And	God	comes	 in	sudden	moments.	He	may	decide	not	 to	come	 to	 the
church	every	Sunday.	I	think	every	Sunday	he	will	avoid	it,	it	is	so	crowded.	He
can	go	on	other	days	when	it	is	really	beautiful	because	it	is	quiet	and	silent	and
there	is	nobody	there.
Learn	how	to	be	prayerful	without	any	ritual:	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan.
Let	 your	 prayer	 grow	 out	 of	 you.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 yours,	 authentically	 yours.	 Say
things	that	you	want	to	say	to	God	or	don't	say	anything	if	you	want	to	just	be	in
silent	communion.	There	is	no	need	to	speak;	it	is	not	necessary	that	something
be	said.	It	is	far	better	to	listen	to	him,	to	what	he	has	to	say	to	you.
Virago	 means	 absolute	 non-attachment,	 absolute	 non-possessiveness,	 absolute
non-identification.
Don't	 be	 identified	 with	 the	 body,	 don't	 be	 identified	 with	 your	 mind,	 your
country,	your	race,	your	religion.	Simply	don't	be	identified	with	anything.	Don't
say	"I	am	this"	or	"I	am	that."	Remember,	neither	this	nor	that.	That	is	one	of	the
secret	teachings	of	the	mystics:	neti-neti,	neither	this	nor	that.	Avoid	this,	avoid
that	too.	And	if	you	can	avoid	both	polarities	--	neither	day	nor	night,	neither	life
nor	death,	neither	body	nor	mind	--	slowly	slowly	a	third	energy	arises	in	you,	a
third	 force	 arises	 in	 you.	 That	 is	 consciousness.	 That's	 your	 reality.	 That	 is
freedom:	 freedom	 from	 fear,	 freedom	 from	 anxiety,	 freedom	 from	 misery,
freedom	from	the	whole	world,	freedom	from	the	wheel	of	life	and	death.	Then
you	are	simply	a	witness,	watching,	neither	getting	identified	with	this	nor	with
that,	just	a	spectator,	a	mirror	reflecting	but	not	getting	caught	by	any	reflection.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#36
Chapter	title:	None
25	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912255
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT36
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
True	bliss	 always	brings	peace.	 If	 it	 does	not	 bring	peace	 then	 something	was
false	in	it,	then	it	was	pseudo;	then	it	was	not	bliss.	It	may	have	been	pleasure,	it
may	 have	 been	 happiness,	 it	 may	 even	 have	 been	 joy,	 but	 it	 was	 not	 bliss,
because	pleasure,	happiness,	joy	--	they	never	bring	peace;	on	the	contrary,	they
disturb.	 They	 are	 states	 of	 excitement.	When	 you	 feel	 pleasure	 you	 are	 really
excited,	you	are	feverish.	It	is	passion.	You	are	not	calm	and	quiet	and	cool,	you
are	hot.	Hence	pleasure	tires.	Sooner	or	later	one	gets	fed	up	with	it.
Real	 bliss	 is	 judged	 only	 by	 the	 flower	 of	 peace.	 It	 brings	 peace,	 it	 deepens
peace,	 it	 takes	 all	 fever	 away.	 It	 makes	 you	 utterly	 at	 home	 in	 existence,	 so
utterly	at	home	that	you	almost	disappear,	you	don't	exist...	because	the	very	idea
of	I	is	a	disturbance.	It	is	not	a	peaceful	state.	When	the	lake	is	totally	peaceful
there	 are	 no	waves,	 no	 thoughts,	 no	 desires;	 one	 is	 suddenly	 in	 harmony	with
tao,	with	dhamma,	with	the	universal	law	of	existence.
So	 remember	 it:	 attain	 to	 a	 peace	 which	 brings	 bliss,	 attain	 to	 a	 bliss	 which
brings	peace.	 If	one	of	 them	is	missing	 then	 the	other	 is	pseudo;	only	 together
are	they	true.	That's	the	criterion.
Love	brings	peace	naturally,	spontaneously,	without	any	effort.	Hate	brings	war
naturally,	automatically,	without	any	effort.	We	want	a	peaceful	world	and	we	try
in	 many	 ways	 to	 create	 the	 climate	 of	 peace	 without	 recognizing	 the
fundamental,	 that	unless	we	teach	people	how	to	love	there	is	no	possibility	of
peace.	More	and	more	love	energies	have	to	be	released,	then	only	will	peace	be
the	outcome.
The	 world	 has	 lived	 in	 war:	 in	 three	 thousand	 years	 we	 have	 fought	 five
thousand	wars.	This	is	something	unbelievable.	It	is	as	if	men	are	only	meant	to
fight	and	kill	each	other,	as	if	our	whole	existence	is	insane	from	the	very	roots.
War	seems	to	be	the	natural	thing,	peace	seems	to	be	unnatural	because	peace	is
so	rare.
War	 is	 always	 going	 on:	 sometimes	 in	 the	 name	of	 religion,	 sometimes	 in	 the
name	of	political	ideology,	sometimes	something	else.	We	find	excuses	and	we
go	on	fighting.	Any	excuse	will	do	--	the	real	thing	is	to	fight.
We	 are	 boiling	within.	We	 don't	 know	what	 to	 do	with	 our	 energies,	 and	 our
societies	 have	 been	 teaching	 us	 to	 be	 repressive	 so	 we	 go	 on	 repressing	 the
energies.	 Those	 energies	 become	 too	much,	 they	want	 to	 explode.	 So	 either	 a
person	goes	individually	insane	or	the	whole	society	goes	insane.	War	is	a	social
insanity.	And	 now	we	 have	world	wars:	 after	 each	 ten	 years	 the	whole	world
goes	mad	for	a	few	years.	Then	some	relaxation,	some	rest,	some	possibility	of
peace	 for	 a	 few	 years...	 That	 peace	 is	 also	 not	 much	 of	 a	 peace.	 It	 is	 only	 a
tiredness,	exhaustion	because	of	the	war,	and	again	we	start	preparing	for	war.
So	our	peace	is	nothing	but	a	cold	war.
Real	peace	is	possible	only	if	we	start	working	from	the	very	beginning	of	man's
life.	 No	 repression	 should	 be	 the	 rule.	 Energies	 have	 to	 be	 transformed	 into
loving	energies	--	and	that	can	be	done	very	easily,	it	is	not	difficult	at	all.
Man	 has	 inexhaustible	 capacities	 for	 love;	 he	 has	 just	 not	 been	 given
opportunities.	My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 create	 an	 opportunity	 for	 the	 sannyasins	 so
that	 their	 love	 energies	 can	 start	 becoming	 alive.	Once	 your	 love	 energies	 are
moving,	are	dynamic,	all	that	is	negative	--	hate,	anger	--	disappears,	because	it
is	the	same	energies	in	a	perverted	form.
Love	 brings	 peace,	 and	 if	we	want	 a	 peaceful	world	we	will	 have	 to	 create	 a
great	movement	for	love.
My	sannyas	is	a	great	movement	for	love.	It	has	nothing	much	to	do	with	god,
nothing	much	to	do	with	paradise,	because	one	thing	I	am	absolutely	certain	of	is
that	love	will	bring	everything;.	It	will	bring	peace,	it	will	bring	a	better	human
being,	a	new	kind	of	human	being,	it	will	bring	a	new	spirituality,	a	new	kind	of
religiousness,	it	will	bring	a	new	vision	of	god.	It	will	bring	a	new	paradise	on
earth,	herenow.	And	whatsoever	we	can	do	herenow,	we	can	do	even	after	death,
because	it	is	the	same	life	that	continues.
Veet	means	going	beyond.	Gunther	means	courageous	in	war,	brave	in	war.
There	 are	 two	 types	 of	 people	 in	 the	 world,	 people	 can	 be	 divided	 into	 two
categories.	One	is	the	soldier	type,	the	second	is	the	sannyasin	type.
Gunther	 means	 the	 soldier	 type,	 the	 fighter,	 the	 warrior:	 aggressive,	 violent.
Those	are	qualities	in	the	world	of	the	soldier,	but	those	are	disqualifications	in
the	 world	 of	 the	 sannyasin.	 Here	 we	 have	 to	 learn	 not	 to	 conquer	 but	 to
surrender,	not	to	fight	but	to	disappear	into	the	whole,	because	all	fight	is	out	of
the	ego,	and	the	ego	has	to	be	dropped.	Then	only	does	one	become	a	sannyasin.
Veet	 Gunther	 will	 mean:	 so	 beyond	 all	 qualities	 of	 the	 soldier.	 That	 going
beyond	is	entering	into	the	world	of	the	sannyasin.	From	now	onwards	be	more
receptive,	more	loving,	more	feminine	less	German!
I	 have	 heard	 a	 story.	 A	German	 used	 to	work	 in	 a	 factory	which	made	 small
carriages	for	children.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Again	and	again	his	wife	asked	him	to	steal	a	carriage	for	their	child.	He	said	"It
is	difficult	to	steal	the	whole	carriage,	but	I	will	bring	it	part	by	part."
So	 every	 day	 he	 would	 bring	 another	 part;	 by	 the	 end	 of	 the	 month	 he	 had
brought	all	the	parts	necessary.
One	Sunday	he	said,	"Now	I	will	assemble	them."	He	worked	continuously	from
morning	 to	 evening,	 trying	 this	 way	 and	 that,	 fixing	 things	 this	 way	 and	 that
way.	His	wife	was	puzzled.	She	said,	"How	long	will	it	take?"	The	husband	said,
"I	 am	puzzled	 too,	 because	 all	 the	ways	 I	 put	 it	 together,	 it	 turns	out	 a	 gun!	 I
have	tried	all	possible	trays;	it	always	comes	out	a	gun!"
That	has	become	a	characteristic	of	 the	German	mind:	 turn	 it	any	way	and	out
comes	a	gun!
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	that	you	will	have	to	drop	that	whole	approach.	Adolf
Hitler	and	Gautam	Buddha	are	polar	opposites.	And	Buddhahood	is	not	possible
through	fighting	but	only	through	a	deep	let-go.	If	you	can	learn	the	state	of	let-
go	great	blessing	will	start	showering	on	you.
And	it	is	not	only	a	question	of	one	individual	becoming	a	sannyasin;	our	effort
is	 to	create	a	tidal	wave	of	sannyas	all	over	the	world,	because	that	 is	 the	only
possibility	 of	 going	 beyond	war,	 the	 only	 possibility	 of	 going	 beyond	 nations,
races,	 churches,	 the	only	possibility	of	making	 this	earth	a	paradise.	 a	Buddha
says:	 This	 very	 body	 the	 Buddha,	 this	 very	 earth	 the	 lotus	 paradise.	 That's
exactly	our	motto.
Attachment	is	the	root	cause	of	all	misery.	Possessiveness	is	nourishment	for	the
ego.
The	way	of	possessing	things	is	the	way	of	the	world.	To	be	a	sannyasin	means
being	in	the	world	with	the	attitude	of	non-possessiveness.	Enjoy	everything	--
there	is	no	need	to	possess.	You	don't	possess	the	sunset,	still	you	enjoy	it.	You
don't	possess	all	 the	stars,	 still	you	enjoy	 them.	There	 is	no	need	 to	possess	 in
order	 to	 enjoy.	 In	 fact	 the	more	 you	 possess,	 the	 less	 you	 enjoy,	 because	 you
become	more	and	more	worried	about	your	possessions,	their	security,	safety.	In
fact	your	possessions	start	possessing	you.	You	become	just	a	servant,	you	are	no
more	a	master.
To	be	a	sannyasin	 is	a	declaration	 that	 'From	now	onwards	I	am	going	 to	be	a
master,	 not	 a	 servant.'	 And	 this	 is	 the	 secret	 of	 mastery:	 be	 unattached	 to
everything.	And	I	am	not	saying	to	renounce,	I	am	saying	to	be	in	the	world,	to
live	in	the	world,	and	to	live	totally	--	but	with	no	possessiveness.	When	things
are	 there,	good;	when	 they	are	not	 there,	 that	 too	 is	perfectly	good.	When	you
have	 a	 beautiful	 palace	 enjoy	 it;	 when	 it	 disappears	 a	 dream	 is	 over.	 Then
whatsoever	is	available,	enjoy	that.
A	sannyasin	should	be	able	to	enjoy	every	possibility:	he	will	enjoy	the	day,	he
will	 enjoy	 the	 night,	 he	 will	 enjoy	 life,	 he	 will	 enjoy	 death,	 he	 will	 enjoy
friendship	and	he	will	enjoy	aloneness.
Ian	has	both	possibilities:	he	can	be	a	rock	or	he	can	be	a	flower.	If	he	remains	in
the	head	he	remains	a	rock.	If	he	moves	towards	the	heart	he	becomes	a	flower.
And	we	are	taught	only	the	ways	of	the	head,	not	the	ways	of	the	heart,	because
the	world	does	not	need	the	ways	of	the	heart;	in	fact	it	is	afraid	of	the	heart.
It	 teaches	you	mathematics,	 logic,	 economics.	 It	 teaches	you	 to	be	calculative,
clever,	diplomatic,	because	those	are	the	things	which	are	going	to	pay,	those	are
the	qualities	that	you	will	need	in	the	competition	of	life.
It	 does	not	 teach	you	poetry,	 it	 does	not	 teach	you	 love,	 it	 does	not	 teach	you
music,	because	those	things	are	not	going	to	pay,	and	the	people	who	try	to	live
music	and	poetry	and	love	prove	to	be	rebellious.
The	politicians	and	the	priests	have	known	for	a	long	time	that	the	people	who
live	in	the	heart	are	dangerous	people	because	they	will	not	obey	authority	and
they	will	not	follow	the	tradition	and	they	will	not	listen	to	the	scriptures,	 they
will	not	bor	down	unless	they	feel	to.	They	cannot	be	ordered	and	manipulated,
they	cannot	be	reduced	to	slaves.	They	live	spontaneously,	moment	to	moment,
and	 they	 always	 want	 to	 do	 their	 thing.	 But	 the	 society	 is	 not	 interested	 in
individuals;	 it	 is	 interested	 in	 the	mass,	 the	 crowd.	 Hence	 the	 society	 tries	 to
avoid	the	heart.	It	diverts	your	energies	towards	the	head,	and	the	head	is	a	rock;
nothing	grows	there.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	becoming	committed	to	a	new	vision.	Now	the
whole	 work	 will	 be	 to	 bring	 your	 energies	 back	 to	 the	 heart.	 Then	 you	 will
transcend	the	rocklike	qualities,	and	the	same	energy	that	becomes	a	rock	in	the
head	becomes	a	flower	in	the	heart.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 a	 flower,	 because	 only	 a	 flower	 can	 be	 accepted	 as	 an
offering	to	god.	Only	a	flower	will	be	able	to	reach	the	feet	of	the	divine.
Whatsoever	you	can	gain	from	the	scriptures	will	be	knowledge.	Hence	one	has
to	 stop	 accumulating	 unnecessary	 knowledge,	 information;	 one	 has	 to	 dive
inwards	to	find	that	source	of	light	within	oneself.	It	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
already	there,	we	just	have	to	move	towards	that	point.
Sannyas	 has	 to	 become	 the	 turning	 point,	 the	 critical	 moment,	 the	 radical
moment.	Energy	is	no	longer	to	be	wasted	in	the	outside;	more	and	more	of	it	is
to	 go	 inwards,	 to	 the	 source.	And	 there	 one	 comes	 across	 oneself,	 one	 comes
across	the	meaning	of	life,	one	comes	across	God.
Personality	 is	a	social	phenomenon.	 It	 is	given	 to	you	by	others,	 it	 is	not	your
true	self.	You	don't	bring	it	with	you	into	the	world	and	you	will	not	be	able	to
take	 it	with	you	when	you	go	 from	 the	world.	But	 there	 is	 something	more	 to
your	 being	 than	 the	 personality,	 you	 are	 not	 a	 mere	 personality.	 There	 is
something	essential	which	is	your	real	being,	which	comes	before	your	birth	and
will	 continue	after	your	death.	That	 is	 the	 inner	one,	 the	 real	one	 --	 call	 it	 the
self.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 search	 for	 the	 self.	 And	 in	 searching	 for	 the	 self	 one	 has	 to
become	disidentified	with	 the	personality.	 It	 is	 painful	 to	 become	disidentified
with	the	personality,	but	it	is	worth	it.	Once	you	have	become	disidentified	with
it,	great	blessings	shower	on	you.	Then	eternal	bliss	is	yours.
Enlightenment	is	like	the	full	moon	in	the	dark	night	of	the	soul.	The	full	moon
has	 a	 few	 qualities	 which	 are	 symbolically	 meaningful	 in	 understanding
enlightenment.	 It	 is	 light	 but	 cool.	 The	 sun	 is	 also	 light,	 but	 it	 is	 hot.
Enlightenment	is	a	cool	light.
The	moon	is	not	only	cool,	it	has	a	certain	subtle,	hidden	impact,	a	subtle	aura	of
energy	around	 it.	The	oceans	are	 affected	by	 it	 and	man	 is	 also	affected	by	 it.
More	men	go	crazy	on	 the	full-moon	night	 than	on	any	other	night;	more	men
commit	suicide	on	the	full	--	moon	night	than	on	any	other	night.	More	poetry	is
born	on	the	full-moon	night	than	on	any	other	night.	More	love	happens	on	the
full-moon	 night	 than	 on	 any	 other	 night,	 and	 more	 people	 have	 become
enlightened	on	the	full-moon	night	than	on	any	other	night.
Buddha	was	 born	 on	 the	 full-moon	 night;	 he	 became	 enlightened	 on	 the	 full-
moon	night	and	also	died	on	the	full-moon	night.	The	full	moon	has	some	inner
bridge	with	human	heart.	It	stirs	your	heart,	not	your	reason.	Reason	is	more	in
tune	with	the	sun,	intuition	is	more	in	tune	with	the	moon.	And	enlightenment	is
more	 a	 feminine	 phenomenon	 than	 a	 masculine	 phenomenon.	 It	 is	 more	 a
receptivity,	 it	 is	 like	 a	 womb.	 The	 enlightened	 person	 becomes	 a	 womb	 and
receives	god	in	his	being,	becomes	pregnant	with	god.	The	moon	is	feminine.
Remember:	you	have	to	become	a	full	moon.	The	name	will	remind	you	again
and	again.
These	 names	 are	 given	 for	 a	 certain	 purpose.	 The	meaning	 that	 I	 give	 to	 the
name	is	a	message	for	you.
It	will	take	your	whole	life	to	decode	it,	it	will	take	your	whole	life	to	live	it,	but
if	you	can	manage	to	live	it	the	kingdom	of	god	is	yours!
Sahajo	 means	 spontaneity	 --	 and	 that	 is	 my	 basic	 message:	 Be	 spontaneous.
Don't	live	out	of	the	past,	live	moment	to	moment;	don't	react;	respond.	Reaction
comes	 from	 the	 past	 --	 past	 experiences,	 knowledge,	 and	 you	 act	 out	 of	 that
knowledge.	It	never	fits	with	the	moment.	Either	you	are	lagging	behind	or	you
are	 far	 ahead,	 but	 you	 are	 never	 in	 tune	 with	 the	 moment,	 because	 no	 two
moments	are	the	same.	Whatsoever	you	have	experienced	in	the	past	will	never
be	relevant	again.
It	may	appear	many	times	that	'This	is	relevant',	but	it	can't	be.	No	two	moments
are	 similar,	 each	 moment	 has	 its	 own	 uniqueness.	 And	 that's	 the	 difference
between	reaction	and	response.	To	accept	the	challenge	of	the	uniqueness	of	the
moment	and	to	respond	out	of	your	present	consciousness,	not	out	of	your	past
memories,	 is	 spontaneity.	To	be	 spontaneous	means	 to	 be	 always	 in	 tune	with
time,	 to	 be	 always	 with	 the	 moment.	 There	 is	 no	 gap	 between	 you	 and	 the
moment.	Neither	is	the	past	standing	there	between	you	and	the	moment;	nor	is
the	future	standing	between	you	and	the	moment.	There	is	nobody	between	you
and	the	moment;	the	impact	is	total,	the	contact	is	total.
In	that	immediacy	whatsoever	happens	is	right,	and	brings	bliss,	and	brings	god
closer	and	closer	to	you!
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#37
Chapter	title:	None
26	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912265
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT37
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Each	 child	 is	 a	 new	 hope	 and	 a	 divine	 hope.	 Through	 each	 child	 god	 tries	 to
bring	the	real	man	into	the	world	again.	Millions	of	times	he	fails,	but	he	never
loses	hope.	Only	once	in	a	while	does	he	succeed:	with	a	Jesus,	with	a	Buddha,
with	 a	Zarathustra;	 otherwise	 he	 fails.	But	 his	 faith	 in	man	 is	 tremendous.	He
trusts	that	sooner	or	later	everybody	is	going	to	become	the	real,	that	the	phony
will	disappear	from	the	world.
Life	 is	 more	 like	 magic	 than	 mathematics.	 It	 is	 a	 mystery,	 insoluble,
unfathomable,	inexhaustible.
Science	 tries	 to	 demystify	 it.	 Hence	 as	 science	 has	 become	 more	 and	 more
powerful,	people	have	become	more	and	more	irreligious,	for	the	simple	reason
that	they	have	started	thinking	that	they	already	know	what	it	is	all	about.	And
they	know	not.
Science	 gives	 only	 facts,	 not	 truth;	 it	 only	 talks	 about	 objects.	 But	 the	 real
phenomenon	 is	 your	 interior	 subjectivity,	 your	 consciousness,	 and	 science	 is
absolutely	dumb	about	that.
Not	 to	 accept	 its	defeat,	 it	 goes	on	denying	 it.	But	 it	 cannot	deny	 it.	Even	 the
scientist	knows	perfectly	well	that	he	is,	and	he	is	not	an	object.	In	fact,	without
him	 there	 would	 be	 no	 science.	Without	 the	 observer	 there	would	 be	 nothing
observed;	the	object	can	exist	only	because	there	is	a	subject.
That	 inner	 subjectivity	 is	 a	 magical	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	 unbelievable.	 One	 can
experience	 it	 and	 one	 can	 be	 in	 tremendous	 awe.	 That	 awe	 is	 religion,	 that
wonder	is	religion.
Religion	fills	your	life	with	more	and	more	mystery.	Even	things	that	were	never
mysteries	start	turning	out	to	be	mysteries.	A	rose	flower,	a	pebble	on	the	shore,
a	bird	on	the	wing	--	everything	becomes	mystery.
Science	demystifies,	religion	gives	you	back	the	whole	mystery	of	life.
Sannyas	is	an	entry	into	the	magic	world	of	religion.
Deva	means	divine.	Garimo	means	glory,	splendour.
It	 is	 not	 apparent.	 If	 we	 look	 from	 the	 outside	man	 seems	 to	 be	 just	 another
animal,	maybe	with	a	little	more	evolved	a	mechanism,	but	nothing	else.	There
seems	 to	 be	 no	 gap;	 from	 the	 outside	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 not	 much	 difference
between	the	ape	and	the	man.	If	 there	is	any	difference	it	 is	of	quantity,	not	of
quality.
But	 this	 is	 only	 an	 apparent	 thing,	 this	 is	 just	 because	we	go	on	 seeing	 things
from	the	outside.
If	 we	 really	 want	 to	 know	 man	 in	 his	 absolute	 glory	 we	 have	 to	 look	 from
within.	Man	 can	 only	 be	 known	 from	within	 because	man	has	 a	within.	 That
within	is	called	the	soul.	A	chair	is	a	chair,	it	has	no	within;	hence	it	is	a	thing,	it
has	no	soul.
Man	has	a	soul.	He	is	not	only	the	without.	The	without	is	only	periphery.	The
real	 thing	 is	 within,	 the	 real	 treasure	 is	 within.	 Hence,	 by	 observing	 man's
behaviour	we	cannot	come	to	conclusions	about	man.
And	that's	what	so-called	scientific	psychology	is	doing	all	over	the	world,	from
Pavlov	 to	 Skinner.	 All	 the	 behaviourists	 are	 watching	man's	 behaviour	 --	 and
man	is	not	in	his	behaviour.	Deep	inside	himself	he	is	a	watcher,	a	witness.	He
himself	can	watch	his	own	behaviour,	he	can	see	his	own	thoughts	moving,	he
can	see	his	own	body	acting,	walking.	He	can	see	himself;	that	is	one	of	the	most
important	 things	 to	 remember:	 man	 can	 watch	 himself.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 key
secret.	 The	 moment	 you	 start	 watching	 yourself	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 great
splendour,	 of	 great	 glory.	 Slowly	 slowly	 you	 are	 transformed	 into	 an	 infinite
light,	infinite	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
bliss.
Meditation	 is	 a	 bridge	 from	 the	 periphery	 to	 the	 centre.	 Sannyas	 is	 a
commitment,	 a	 commitment	 to	 discover	 yourself,	 a	 commitment	 to	make	 self-
discovery	the	central	focus	of	your	life.	And	if	you	are	really	decisive,	the	very
decision	starts	the	process	of	transformation.
There	 is	 a	 great	 difference	 between	 longing	 and	desire.	Desire	 is	 of	 the	mind,
longing	is	of	the	heart.
Desire	 is	 greed,	 longing	 is	 not	 greed.	 Desire	 is	 never	 fulfilled,	 it	 cannot	 be
fulfilled;	it	always	goes	on	asking	for	more.	But	longing	can	be	fulfilled.
Everything	else	that	you	want	in	life	is	a	desire.	Only	when	you	start	longing	do
you	start	moving	towards	god.	Only	god	can	be	longed	for,	everything	else	is	a
desire.	God	cannot	be	desired	because	he	can	never	be	made	an	object	of	your
thoughts,	imagination,	ego.
When	all	these	have	disappeared,	when	you	are	no	more	functioning	as	a	head,
when	you	are	overflowing	with	love,	then	suddenly,	as	if	a	lotus	has	opened	in
your	heart,	a	longing	opens	up.	That	longing	is	fragrant,	that	longing	in	itself	is	a
tremendous	 joy.	Only	 that	 longing	 can	 bring	 one	 to	 the	 infinite,	 to	 the	 divine.
Remember	 the	 difference:	 one	 has	 to	 become	 desireless	 in	 order	 to	 become	 a
longing	for	god.
Man	is	born	to	be	a	song,	to	be	a	dance,	to	be	a	celebration.	That	is	his	birthright.
But	 the	 society,	 the	 church,	 the	 state	 all	 start	 manipulating	 our	 natural
spontaneous	being	into	something	artificial;	they	start	perverting	us	for	their	own
ends.	They	don't	want	you	to	be	natural	beings.	Unfortunately	we	have	not	yet
been	 able	 to	 create	 a	 natural	 society,	 a	 society	which	 allows	 everybody	 to	 be
natural	and	spontaneous,	which	not	only	allows,	but	helps,	teaches.
On	 the	 contrary	 every	 society	 hinders	 your	 spontaneity.	 It	 is	 suspicious	 of
spontaneity.	It	does	not	trust	nature,	it	trusts	nurture.	It	does	not	trust	your	heart,
it	trusts	your	head	because	the	heart	is	unpredictable.
The	head	is	predictable	because	the	head	is	just	a	biocomputer.	Just	as	you	feed	a
computer	you	feed	 the	head.	That's	what	our	schools,	colleges	and	universities
are	for:	feeding	the	biocomputers.	They	feed	you,	then	for	the	whole	of	your	life
you	 go	 on	 repeating	 whatsoever	 has	 been	 fed	 in.	 They	 reduce	 you	 to
gramophone	records	and	then	all	your	life	is	nothing	but	'his	master's	voice'!
That's	why	we	go	on	missing	our	natural	 joy,	our	natural	 flowering:	we	go	on
missing	the	song	that	we	have	come	to	sing.	That	is	the	only	thing	that	can	make
you	contented.	Remember	it,	and	slowly	slowly	make	every	effort	to	come	out	of
the	bondage	that	has	been	created	by	others	for	you.	One	has	to	be	very	skillful,
intelligent,	to	come	out	of	the	bondage.	That's	the	whole	work	of	a	sannyasin:	it
is	a	kind	of	undoing.	Whatsoever	the	society	has	done	to	you	has	to	be	undone
so	 that	you	can	be	your	natural	 self	 again,	 as	you	were	before	you	were	born.
Zen	people	call	it	the	original	face	--	and	that	is	your	song,	that	is	your	bliss,	that
is	your	truth!
Everyone	 is	 incomparable,	 everyone	 is	unique.	No	 two	 individuals	 are	alike	 --
that's	 the	 beauty	 of	 this	 existence.	 What	 to	 say	 about	 human	 beings?	 --	 you
cannot	 find	 two	 pebbles	 on	 the	 whole	 face	 of	 the	 earth	 absolutely	 alike;	 you
cannot	 find	 two	 leaves	 on	 the	whole	 of	 the	 earth	 absolutely	 alike.	 God	 never
repeats.
God	 is	 not	 an	 assembly	 line,	 he	 is	 a	 creator;	 and	 a	 creator	 never	 repeats,	 he
always	brings	in	something	new.
Each	moment	is	new,	each	day	is	new,	each	person	is	new.	Hence	to	compare	is
one	of	the	most	stupid	things	one	can	do.	And	we	are	all	taught	to	compare.	We
are	 continuously	 comparing	 ourselves	 either	 as	 being	 superior	 to	 others	 or	 as
being	inferior	to	others.	Because	of	this	nonsense	of	comparison	we	have	created
two	 complexes:	 the	 superiority	 complex	 and	 the	 inferiority	 complex.	 And
everybody	suffers	from	either	the	one	or	the	other.	It	is	very	rare	to	find	a	person
who	is	neither	suffering	from	superiority	complex	nor	from	inferiority	complex,
who	simply	is	whosoever	he	is,	incomparably,	uniquely	himself.
That	has	to	be	the	way	of	the	sannyasin.	Then	great	joy	arises.	Then	great	is	the
benediction	 because	 all	 psychological	 complexes	 start	 disappearing,	 a	 great
clarity	happens,	all	clouds	disperse	and	the	sun	shines	so	brightly.	Life	takes	on	a
totally	 new	 colour,	 a	 new	 shape,	 a	 new	 fragrance.	 It	 starts	 moving	 in	 a	 new
direction.
The	mind	which	 is	 jealous,	envious,	ambitious,	greedy,	violent,	 is	bound	 to	be
bitter	because	these	are	all	poisons.	The	moment	you	drop	all	these	poisons	your
whole	 being	 becomes	 full	 of	 a	 sweetness.	 Then	 love	 is	 there,	 compassion	 is
there,	sharing	is	there,	the	joy	of	life	is	there,	gratitude	is	there,	prayer	is	there;
these	 are	 all	 sweet	 phenomena.	 And	 the	 sweeter	 you	 become,	 the	 closer	 you
come	to	god;	the	more	bitter	you	are,	the	farther	away	you	are.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	 let	 this	 be	 the	 criterion:	 judge	 whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing	 by	 whether	 it	 is
helping	to	make	you	more	bitter	or	helping	to	make	you	more	sweet,	whether	it
will	release	poisons	into	your	being	or	nectar.	All	depends	on	you.
Your	whole	life	is	your	own	creation.	There	is	no	fate	--	nobody	decides	for	you.
It	is	totally	your	responsibility:	you	can	become	a	sweet	flower,	a	lotus,	or	you
can	become	a	bitter,	poisonous	phenomenon.
There	 are	 two	paths	 to	 come	 to	 oneself...	 because	we	have	 gone	 too	 far	 away
from	ourselves.	Of	course	it	is	only	in	a	dream	that	we	have	gone	too	far	away,
so	we	have	to	follow	a	dream	path	to	come	back.
One	path	is	of	meditation	and	the	other	is	of	love.	Remember	both	remedies	are
as	false	as	the	disease,	but	a	false	disease	needs	a	false	medicine.	We	have	gone
far	away	in	dreams,	we	have	to	be	brought	back	home;	of	course	we	will	have	to
follow	a	dream	path.
Meditation	 is	 for	 a	 few	 people	 who	 find	 themselves	 incapable	 of	 conceiving
what	love	is.	And	if	you	cannot	conceive	what	love	is	there	is	no	way	to	explain
it	 to	 you;	 it	 is	 not	 something	 that	 can	 be	 taught.	 And	 there	 are	 people	 who
intuitively	 understand	 what	 love	 is.	 They	 don't	 ask	 what	 it	 is,	 they	 know	 it
already.
The	path	of	love	is	for	the	second	type.	You	belong	to	the	second	type.
Meditation	can	be	taught,	love	cannot	be	taught.	Meditation	is	a	science,	it	is	a
methodology,	but	 love	 is	 just	 a	 feeling,	 and	you	cannot	make	a	 science	out	of
feelings.	At	the	most	it	is	an	art,	or	even	better:	it	is	just	a	knack.
It	is	already	there	--	I	can	see	it.	All	that	is	needed	is	support	the	right	soil,	the
right	atmosphere.	And	that's	what	sannyas	is.	We	support	meditators,	we	support
lovers.	So	whatsoever	is	needed...	If	the	plant	needs	more	manure	or	more	water
we	supply	it.
All	 that	 you	 need	 is	 more	 clarity	 about	 love,	 more	 opportunity	 to	 be	 loving.
Remember	 that	 it	 is	 love	 that	will	 bring	 you	back	home,	 so	 focus	 yourself	 on
love.	Even	meditation	will	only	help	you	 to	become	clear	about	 love.	So	 I	am
not	 saying	 that	 you	 are	 not	 to	meditate;	meditate!	 --	But	meditation	will	 only
give	you	more	insight	into	love.	I	also	tell	meditators	to	love,	because	love	helps
them	to	become	more	deeply	meditative.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#38
Chapter	title:	None
27	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912275
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT38
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Renee	 means	 reborn	 --	 and	 that's	 exactly	 what	 sannyas	 is:	 a	 rebirth,	 a	 new
beginning,	from	ABC.
The	way	 you	 have	 lived	 up	 to	 now	will	 not	 be	 the	 way	 any	more.	 From	 the
outside	everything	will	be	the	same	but	from	the	inside	nothing	will	be	the	same.
Up	 to	 now	 life	 has	 been	 an	 unconscious	 affair,	 now	 it	 has	 to	 be	 conscious.
Awareness	has	to	be	added	to	your	being.	That	is	rebirth,	and	that	is	being	born
into	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
god.
Catherine	means	pure,	clean,	innocent.	Purity	has	nothing	to	do	with	morality,	it
has	something	to	do	with	innocence.	Morality	is	a	calculated	step.	One	tries	to	be
good	so	that	one	can	be	virtuous.	And	why	does	one	want	to	be	virtuous?	--	to
gain	something	in	the	other	world.	It	is	all	arithmetic,	it	is	not	innocence.
Morality	 is	 very	 clever,	 cunning.	 Real	 purity	 knows	 nothing	 of	 moral	 and
immoral,	 it	 is	 a	 transcendence,	 a	 transcendence	 of	 all	 dualities:	 good	 and	bad,
even	god	and	devil.	The	child	is	not	concerned	with	anything.	The	child	simply
lives	spontaneously,	moment	to	moment...
Sannyas	 needs	 tremendous	 courage	 because	 it	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 live	 your	 life
according	to	your	 light	--	not	according	to	the	convention,	not	according	to	the
priest	 and	 the	 politicians,	 not	 according	 to	 the	 past	 tradition,	 the	 church,	 but
according	 to	 your	 own	 light.	 It	 is	 a	 tremendous	 assertion	 of	 one's	 freedom.	 It
needs	courage,	and	not	ordinary	courage.	It	really	needs	the	utmost	in	courage,
fearlessness,	because	all	 those	powers	 that	you	will	be	 rebelling	against	would
like	to	crush	you.	One	has	to	be	very	intelligent	not	to	be	crushed	by	them	and
yet	never	to	compromise.
And	sannyas	is	also	the	beginning	of	a	kingly	life.	Ordinarily	it	has	been	taught
in	the	past	that	the	sannyasin	is	a	beggar.	My	sannyasin	is	not	a	beggar.	Even	if
he	has	 nothing	he	 has	 to	 live	 like	 a	 king.	To	 live	 like	 a	 king	does	 not	 require
many	 possessions;	 it	 requires	 integrity,	 it	 requires	 individuality,	 it	 requires
intelligence,	 it	 requires	 a	 centred,	 rooted	 being.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
possessions,	kingdoms.	A	Buddha	becomes	a	bigger	king	when	he	renounces	his
kingdom.	 Jesus	 never	 had	 a	 kingdom,	 but	 who	 can	 compete	 with	 him	 in	 his
kingliness.	Even	on	the	cross	he	is	a	king:	he	dies	with	such	grace,	such	beauty,
such	prayer.
Only	a	king	can	afford	that	--	He	does	not	die	a	dog's	death.
George	Gurdjieff	used	to	say	to	people,	"Beware,	otherwise	you	will	die	a	dog's
death...	because	out	of	millions	of	people	 it	 is	only	once	in	a	while	 that	a	man
dies,	not	like	a	dog,	but	like	a	king.	Not	even	Alexander	dies	like	a	king;	only	a
Buddha	can,	only	a	Jesus	can	die	like	a	king.
Some	inner	kingdom	is	needed,	some	inner	luminosity	is	needed.	Those	who	are
courageous,	they	can	attain	it.
Tilo:	one	who	trust	in	justice.
People	 are	 so	 selfish	 that	 they	 cannot	 be	 just.	 They	 only	 think	 of	 themselves,
they	never	think	of	others.
Their	whole	 interest	 is	 in	how	to	use	others,	how	to	manipulate	others,	how	to
dominate	others.	They	cannot	be	 just.	Their	 interest	 is	 in	possessing	people.	A
just	person	cannot	possess	 anybody,	not	 even	 the	wife,	 the	husband,	 the	 child.
We	 cannot	 possess,	 because	 to	 possess	 is	 unjust;	 it	 destroys	 the	 other's
individuality,	the	other's	freedom.	And	that	is	the	most	unjust	act	in	the	world:	to
reduce	the	other	to	a	thing.	To	possess	him	means	to	reduce	him	to	a	thing.
Justice	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 you	 start	 feeling	 that	 you	 and	 others	 are	 not
separate.	That	happens	only	through	deep	meditation	--	the	realisation	that	"I	am
one	with	the	whole,"	that	"If	I	am	unjust	to	anybody,	I	am	unjust	to	myself.	If	I
harm	anybody	I	am	harming	myself	and	nobody	else,	sooner	or	later	it	is	going
to	rebound	on	me."	This	is	the	whole	philosophy	of	karma:	whatsoever	you	do	to
others	will	be	done	to	you.
Jesus	is	right	when	he	says:	Do	unto	others	what	you	would	like	to	be	done	to
you.	 That	 should	 be	 the	 foundation	 of	 all	 justice.	 But	 that	 is	 possible	 only
through	meditation;	not	by	believing	in	Jesus	but	by	coming	to	know	this	reality,
we	are	not	separate	beings,	we	are	only	separate	on	the	surface.	The	deeper	we
go,	 less	 and	 less	 is	 the	 separation.	 At	 the	 very	 centre	 your	 being,	 the	 whole
universe	converges.	And	 to	 feel	 it	once	 is	enough;	you	will	never	be	 the	same
again.	Then	your	life	is	that	of	justice,	of	love,	of	compassion.
Man	 tries	 to	 live	 as	 a	 separate	 will,	 separate	 from	 the	 whole.	 That's	 how	 he
creates	aLl	kinds	of	miseries	for	himself:	he	is	trying	to	do	the	impossible.	It	is
like	a	wave	in	the	ocean	trying	to	live	according	to	its	will,	not	according	to	the
whole	 ocean:	 the	 wave	 is	 bound	 to	 go	 crazy.	 That's	 what	 has	 happened	 to
humanity	at	large:	humanity	has	gone	mad	for	the	simple	reason	that	everybody
is	trying	to	live	as	if	 the	separation	from	existence	is	a	 truth.	It	 is	a	 lie.	He	are
one	with	the	whole.	God's	will	is	our	will.
To	 understand	 this	 brings	 a	 tremendous	 relaxation.'	 Then	 one	 is	 at	 peace	with
existence,	in	harmony;	then	there	is	no	problem,	no	conflict.	Then	whatsoever	is
the	will	of	god	is	good,	because	god	cannot	will	evil.	God	is	good,	the	whole	is
good,	and	whatsoever	is	going	to	happen	is	going	to	be	good.	One	can	relax,	one
need	not	be	anxious,	anxiety-ridden;	one	need	no	worry	about	what	is	going	to
happen.
The	moment	this	is	understood	--	that	god's	will	is	working	through	the	whole	--
one	can	forget	all	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
worries.	That's	how	a	sannyasin	lives:	knowing	that	god	cares,	knowing	that	god
loves,	knowing	that	whatsoever	happens	is	good;	it	can't	be	otherwise!
God	is	not	to	be	realised,	not	to	be	achieved,	but	only	remembered,	recognised,
declared.	You	are	 already	 that.	The	Upanishads	 say	TAT	TVAM	ASI	Thou	art
that.	Not	that	you	have	to	become	that,	there	is	no	question	of	becoming:	god	is
your	being.	You	may	know	it,	you	may	not	know	it;	it	makes	no	difference:	you
are	godly.
Meditation	 does	 not	 bring	 you	 closer	 to	 god,	 it	 does	 not	 make	 you	 a	 god,	 it
simply	helps	you	to	discover	who	you	are.	It	simply	removes	a	few	curtains,	it
simply	 removes	 a	 few	 layers	 behind	 which	 your	 reality	 is	 hidden.	 It	 is	 a
discovery,	 not	 an	 achievement.	And	 the	moment	 you	 discover	 it,	 it	 is	 nothing
special,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 only	 that	 you	 are	 godly,	 everybody	 is.	 It	 is	 the	most
ordinary	phenomenon.
To	be	divine	is	natural:	trees	are	divine	and	rocks	are	divine	and	man	is	divine.
But	 the	moment	you	know	who	you	are	you	become	a	Buddha,	you	become	a
Christ,	you	become	a	Krishna.	That	becoming	is	not	really	a	becoming	but	just	a
recognition	of	a	long-forgotten	truth,	a	remembrance	of	a	language	forgotten.
We	 are	 all	manifestations	 of	 god.	The	 forms	 are	 different,	 but	 the	 spirit	 is	 the
same.	There	are	many	things	which	are	different;	they	are	all	accidental.	But	the
essential	is	not	different.	The	incidental	is	different	but	the	intrinsic	is	the	same.
This	 has	 to	 be	 remembered	 again	 and	 again	 so	 that	 it	 becomes	 a	 natural
undercurrent	 of	 your	 consciousness.	 As	 it	 deepens	 in	 your	 heart	 you	 start
manifesting	something	which	you	have	never	known	before:	god	starts	radiating
through	your	being.
He	is	waiting	deep	inside	you	like	a	seed.	Remembrance	becomes	the	soil.	If	you
go	on	remembering	it	the	seed	starts	growing,	and	soon	there	is	great	foliage	and
flowers	and	fruits.	Life	then	knows	what	beauty	is,	what	meaning	is,	what	glory
is.	To	die	without	knowing	it	is	to	have	lived	fruitlessly.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 vow,	 a	 commitment,	 a	 total	 involvement:	 "I	 am	not	 going	 to	 die
without	knowing	the	truth	of	my	being."
We	are	not	what	we	appear	to	be.	Our	reality	is	unmanifest,	it	is	hidden.	It	has	to
be	 searched	 for.	 It	 is	 not	 far	 away,	 it	 is	 deep	 within	 you;	 you	 cannot	 find	 it
anywhere	 else,	 you	need	not	 go	 anywhere	 else.	But	one	has	 to	pull	 oneself	 in
from	many	many	desires	and	dreams.	One	has	to	pull	oneself	inwards.
When	you	are	centred,	at	your	centre	totally	he	revelation,	you	are	not	the	body,
you	are	not	the	mind,	you	are	the	stuff	called	god.	The	whole	existence	is	made
of	the	same	stuff.	To	have	felt	it	once	is	enough;	then	your	past	disappears	as	if	it
has	never	existed,	 just	as	 in	 the	morning	when	you	wake	up	there	are	no	more
dreams.	 You	 know	 that	 they	 have	 not	 been	 there	 at	 all,	 you	 have	 only	 been
imagining	them.	We	have	imagined	so	many	lives	and	so	many	worlds,	but	it	is
all	dreaming.
Becoming	a	sanyasin	means	making	an	effort	to	wake	up.
This	moment	you	are	becoming	new.	Forget	the	past.	Simply	disconnect	yourself
from	your	memories;	don't	look	backwards	any	more.
The	moment	we	stop	looking	backwards,	we	also	stop	looking	forwards.	It	is	the
past	 that	 creates	 the	 future,	 it	 is	 the	 memory	 that	 creates	 imagination.	 When
neither	 is	 there,	 there	 is	 great	 silence.	 That	 silence	 is	 meditation,	 and	 in	 that
silence	 you	 are	 in	 tune	 with	 existence.	 And	 that	 moment	 of	 attunement	 with
existence	is	bliss.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#39
Chapter	title:	None
28	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	7912285
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT39
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Faith	does	not	mean	belief.	Belief	is	not	trust.	Belief	is	a	pseudo	trust,	imposed,
cultivated	out	of	fear.	It	is	not	something	that	has	grown	in	you	but	that	has	been
implanted	 by	 others:	 the	 society,	 the	 church,	 the	 state.	 They	 have	 their	 own
interest	 in	 creating	 belief	 in	 people:	 believers	 are	 obedient,	 believers	 are	 not
rebellious,	 believers	 remain	 stupid;	 they	 never	 grow	 in	 intelligence.	 And	 the
society	does	not	want	people	to	be	intelligent.
It	 can	 tolerate	 the	 intellectuals	but	not	 the	 really	 intelligent.	 It	 can	 tolerate	 the
professors,	 the	 scholars,	 the	 educated	 people,	 the	 knowledgeable	 people.	They
are	 intellectuals,	 not	wise,	not	 intelligent,	 because	 if	 they	were	 intelligent	 they
could	not	co-operate	with	all	 the	kinds	of	stupidities	 that	go	on	in	 the	name	of
tradition,	 culture,	 civilisation,	 religion.	 They	 would	 not	 be	 able	 to	 co-operate
with	all	this	nonsense,	they	would	be	bound	to	rebel.
Hence	 society	 has	 a	 vested	 interest	 in	 belief:	 Create	 belief.	 It	 is	 a	 poisonous
phenomenon.	 It	 destroys	 intelligence;	 it	 destroys	 independence,	 it	 destroys
rebelliousness;	it	creates	yea-sayers.	And	the	yes	of	a	man	who	cannot	say	no	is
always	impotent.	First	a	man	has	to	learn	to	say	no,	then	only	is	his	yes	of	any
meaning.
Faith	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	It	is	not	social,	it	is	individual.	It	is	not
given	by	others.	It	is	out	of	your	own	search	that	slowly	slowly	it	grows	in	you,
that	you	start	 trusting	existence	--	not	out	of	fear,	but	out	of	experience,	out	of
love,	 out	 of	 joy.	 And	 then	 faith	 is	 freedom,	 tremendous	 freedom,	 and	 infinite
ecstasy.
There	is	no	god,	but	there	is	godliness.	God	means	a	person;	godliness	means	a
quality.	Because	for	 thousands	of	years	we	have	conceived	of	god	as	a	person,
we	have	created	unnecessary	trouble	for	ourselves.	In	the	first	place,	our	idea	of
god	 never	 fits	 with	 reality	 --	 because	 there	 is	 no	 person.	 Existence	 is	 not	 a
person,	it	is	energy,	unbounded,	infinite,	beginningless,	endless;	it	has	no	form,
no	shape.	It	is	not	a	person,	so	you	cannot	pray	to	it.
Because	 of	 the	 idea	 of	 god	 as	 a	 person,	 prayer	 became	 very	 important.	 The
moment	 you	 drop	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 person,	 prayer	 disappears;	 instead	 meditation
becomes	significant.	That's	why	in	the	West	meditation	never	became	the	central
core	of	religion.	It	was	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Patanjali	--	these	three	persons	in	the
East,	in	India;	and	Lao	Tzu,	Chuang	Tzu	and	Lieh	Tzu	--	three	persons	in	China.
These	six	persons	arc	the	most	important	people	because	they	changed	the	whole
shape	of	religion	from	the	very	foundation.	Instead	of	prayer,	meditation	became
important.
If	god	is	a	person	you	can	pray	with	folded	hands.	You	can	ask	and	demand	and
you	can	bribe,	you	can	praise	and	you	can	do	all	kinds	of	foolish	things.	If	there
is	no	person	then	you	cannot	address	anybody.
Then	 you	 have	 to	 go	within,	 there	 is	 nobody	without.	 Then	 you	 have	 to	 dive
deeper	into	your	own	being.	It	is	at	the	Very	core	of	your	own	existence	that	you
become	aware	of	a	quality	that	permeates	the	whole:	that	quality	is	godliness.
The	world	is	full	of	godliness	but	there	is	no	god.	Because	of	the	idea	of	a	person
Friedrich	Nietzsche	could	say	that	god	is	dead.	And	a	hundred	years	have	passed
and	nobody	has	been	able	to	refute	him	--
because	there	was	no	god	in	the	first	place.	If	I	meet	Friedrich	Nietzsche	I	will
say	 "What	 nonsense	 arc	 you	 talking	 about?	How	 can	 somebody	 die	 if	 he	 has
never	 been	 there	 in	 the	 first	 place?"	 But	 he	 shocked	 the	 whole	 Western
consciousness.	Nobody	has	been	able	to	answer	him	because	in	fact	he	declared
a	truth:	god	as	a	person	has	collapsed.	Man	has	become	a	little	more	mature	and
the	whole	idea	of	god	as	a	person	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
childish,	immature.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 give	 you	 a	 glimpse	 of	 godliness,	 not	 of	 god;	 to	 create	 a
bridge	between	you	and	godliness,	not	god.	And	godliness	is	everywhere.	We	are
overflooded	with	 it:	 it	 is	 in	 the	flowers,	 in	 the	 trees,	 in	 the	rocks,	 in	people,	 in
you.	Wherever	you	look	it	is	there.	But	the	first	experience	has	to	happen	within;
then	you	will	start	seeing	it	without	too.
God,	or	godliness	is	our	strength:	they	both	mean	the	same	to	me.
Man	alone	 is	 absolutely	powerless.	The	moment	man	becomes	part	of	god,	he
becomes	 powerful.	With	 god	 is	 our	 victory,	 without	 there	 is	 only	 failure	 and
nothing	else.
This	 is	 the	 first	 lesson	 of	 sannyas.	 From	 now	 onwards	 remember	 as	much	 as
possible	that	you	have	to	be	in	tune	with	the	whole.	And	to	be	in	tune	with	the
whole	one	has	to	surrender.	One	cannot	go	on	believing	in	one's	ego;	the	ego	has
to	 be	 dropped.	 The	 ego	 is	 impotent.	 And	 once	 you	 drop	 the	 ego	 you	 are
omnipotent.	 Then	 the	 whole	 energy	 of	 god	 starts	 flowing	 through	 you.	 Ego
blocks	the	energy;	egolessness	becomes	a	medium.
Love	is	the	ruler	of	all.
I	teach	only	two	things,	meditation	and	love.	For	you	the	emphasis	is	going	to	be
on	love;	meditation	will	be	a	support.	For	a	few	others	meditation	is	going	to	be
the	main	key;	then	love	becomes	the	support.
Both	are	needed,	the	question	is	just	of	emphasis.	For	you	the	emphasis	is	going
to	be	on	love:	be	loving	to	the	whole,	let	love	be	your	religion.
Love	is	the	most	shining	star.	No	star	in	the	whole	sky	is	comparable	to	it.	It	is
more	 shining	 than	 the	 sun,	 it	 is	 more	 shining	 than	 the	 many	 great	 suns	 that
surround	our	earth,	that	are	spread	to	infinity.
Love	 is	 the	most	 luminous	phenomenon	but	one	needs	 totally	different	eyes	 to
know	it,	to	see	it,	to	feel	it.	The	ordinary	eyes	cannot	look	into	it.	They	are	meant
to	 look	 only	 into	 matter;	 they	 are	 capable	 of	 seeing	 the	 peripheral,	 the
superficial,	 they	 have	 no	 capacity	 for	 depth.	 And	 love	 is	 something	 which
belongs	to	your	ultimate	depth.	The	more	inwards	you	go,	the	more	loving	you
become.	In	fact	that	is	the	only	criterion	of	whether	a	person	is	going	inwards	or
not.	 If	he	 is	becoming	more	and	more	 loving	 to	others,	 towards	himself	 too,	 if
his	life	is	becoming	a	compassion	then	certainly	he	is	going	deeper,	he	is	coming
closer	to	truth,	he	is	becoming	suffused	with	the	divine	energy	of	existence.
And	at	the	ultimate	peak	or	at	the	ultimate	depth	--	which	are	the	same	--	when
love	explodes,	it	is	like	atomic	explosion:	one	becomes	pure	light,	just	light	from
one	 end	 to	 the	 other	 end.	 That's	 why	 this	 ultimate	 moment	 is	 known	 as
enlightenment.	It	is	a	transmutation,	transfiguration.	A	totally	new	being	is	born
which	does	not	belong	 to	 time,	which	belongs	 to	 eternity.	The	mind	 is	part	of
time,	the	heart	is	not	part	of	time.
And	the	heart	is	the	centre	of	love.
Seek	the	heart,	go	deeper	into	it,	risk	everything	for	it	because	nothing	is	more
precious	than	that.	Even	if	life	is	lost	but	you	have	attained	a	single	moment	of
glorious	love,	life	has	been	a	fulfillment;	you	didn't	live	in	vain,	you	lived,	you
really	 lived	 meaningfully.	 A	 single	 moment	 of	 love	 is	 more	 valuable	 than
thousands	of	lives	which	are	loveless.
To	be	a	servant	of	love	is	really	to	be	a	master	of	love.	One	begins	as	a	servant
but	one	ends	as	a	master.
In	the	world	you	begin	as	a	master	and	you	end	up	as	a	servant.	That	is	the	law
of	the	outside.	In	the	inner	world	there	is	a	totally	different	law:	you	begin	as	a
servant,	then	you	can	end	up	as	a	master.
Buddha	 has	 said:	 In	 the	 outer	world	 everything	 is	 sweet	 in	 the	 beginning	 and
bitter	in	the	end,	and	in	the	inside	everything	is	bitter	in	the	beginning	and	sweet
in	the	end.	And	remember,	only	the	end	is	true;	the	beginning	can	be	deceptive.
Keep	alert	about	it:	always	remember	the	ultimate	outcome.	Otherwise	one	can
go	on	swallowing	sugar-coated	poison	--	that's	what	goes	on	happening.
So	it	is	difficult	to	surrender	the	ego,	to	be	just	a	servant,	to	be	a	slave	of	god,	of
love,	 of	 existence;	 it	 is	 hard	 to	 swallow	 it,	 but	 once	 you	 have	 understood	 the
inner	law	it	is	possible	to	do	it	and	to	do	it	joyfully.
Man	ordinarily	 always	 remains	 in	 struggle,	 always	 fighting	with	 something	 or
other.	And	deep	down	every	fight	is	a	fight	against	god,	because	only	god	exists
and	nobody	else.
Once	 this	 is	 understood,	 that	 only	 god	 exists,	 then	 one	 can	 drop	 all	 fighting;
there	is	no	point	in	struggling.	In	fact	one	starts	praying	to	be	defeated	by	god.
To	be	defeated	by	god	is	the	greatest	victory	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
life,	to	be	overcome	by	him	is	the	most	precious	moment.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	it	is	asking	for	your	own	defeat.	Let	me	repeat:
sannyas	 is	 a	 defeat,	 a	 defeat	 of	 the	 ego.	And	 the	moment	 the	 ego	 is	 there	 no
more,	god	is	realised.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 search	 for	 the	 divine	 principle.	 Call	 it	 god,	 truth,	 freedom,
nirvana	 --	 it	 comes	 to	 the	 same	 thing.	 The	 search	 is	 for	 something	 which	 is
missing	in	life.	We	are	alive	but	unaware	of	what	life	is	all	about.	We	are,	but	are
completely	oblivious	of	the	fact	of	who	we	are.	Existence	is	there	but	awareness
is	 not	 there	 --	 and	 unless	 existence	 becomes	 aware	 of	 itself	 life	 goes	 on
remaining	empty,	unfulfilled.
The	search	is	for	awareness.	Awareness	is	the	divine	principle,	the	principle	that
can	transform	you	from	a	mechanical	existence	into	a	conscious	ecstasy	and	the
search	 is	not	outer	at	all,	 it	 is	 inner.	The	principle	has	 to	be	 found	with	closed
eyes	within	oneself.	It	is	already	there;	we	have	to	dive	into	ourselves.
Meditation	is	 the	art	of	diving,	 into	oneself.	Sannyas	is	 the	courage	to	take	the
plunge.	 One	 is	 going	 into	 the	 unfathomable;	 and	 in	 the	 beginning	 it	 is
frightening,	but	only	in	the	beginning.	As	you	become	more	and	more	skillful	at
diving	deeper	and	deeper,	life	becomes	an	adventure	of	tremendous	beauty	and
benediction.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#40
Chapter	title:	None
29	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912295
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT40
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Mariko	means	the	truth.	That's	our	search,	our	inquiry,	and	that	is	the	search	of
every	being.
Without	 knowing	 the	 truth	 of	 life	 one	 remains	 unfulfilled,	 discontented,
frustrated.	The	moment	you	know	the	truth	all	 is	fulfilled;	suddenly	everything
fits	 together.	You	are	no	more	 the	old	miserable	 self,	great	bliss	 arises	 in	you.
The	encounter	with	truth	releases	bliss	in	your	being.
And	the	only	way	to	know	truth	is	to	be	meditative:	to	be	able	to	sit	absolutely
silently,	 without	 any	 thoughts,	 and	 yet	 remain	 conscious	 and	 not	 fall	 asleep.
That's	 what	 meditation	 is:	 consciousness	 without	 thoughts.	 The	 moment	 the
clouds	of	thoughts	are	gone	and	the	mirror	of	consciousness	is	absolutely	empty,
truth	is	revealed,	truth	is	reflected	in	you.	And	truth	liberates.
Gerard	means	brave	in	the	heart,	and	also	a	loyal	heart.
Both	are	almost	two	sides	of	the	same	coin,	because	only	the	brave	one	can	be
the	loyal	one.	The	coward	is	always	insincere.	The	coward	lives	out	of	fear,	and
fear	 can	 never	 allow	 one	 to	 be	 committed	 to	 anything.	 The	 coward	 remains
driftwood,	at	the	mercy	of	the	winds;	he	has	no	sense	of	direction,	no	integrity.
He	is	 just	a	hodgepodge.	Only	 the	brave	person	can	be	 loyal,	can	be	obedient,
can	be	committed	to	a	cause,	can	get	totally	involved	in	something,	can	risk	his
life.
Sannyas	needs	both	qualities:	a	tremendous	courage	and	a	deep	loyalty	--	loyalty
towards	truth,	loyalty	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
towards	God.
Bliss	 is	 the	 ultimate	 flowering	 of	 consciousness.	 Ordinarily	 consciousness	 is
only	a	seed,	a	potentiality.
It	 has	 to	 be	made	 actual.	 That's	 the	 whole	 work	 of	 sannyas:	 to	 transform	 the
potential	into	the	actual.	And	man	has	tremendous	potentiality.	If	you	look	into
man's	potential	he	is	as	big,	as	huge,	as	enormous	as	god	himself.	He	is	a	seed	of
god.
Els	means	god.	If	man	blooms	in	his	consciousness	he	is	god,	he	is	bliss.	If	man
remains	closed	as	a	seed	he	is	not	even	human,	what	to	say	about	being	god?	--
he	is	just	another	kind	of	animal.	And	he	is	totally	miserable,	because	the	seed	is
closed.	 It	 does	 not	 even	 have	 windows	 to	 communicate	 with	 existence;	 it	 is
encapsulated	in	itself.	It	is	an	egg,	an	ego.
Sannyas	means	 dropping	 the	 ego,	 coming	 out	 of	 the	 egg,	 risking	 all.	 The	 egg
means	to	be	very	protective.	It	seems	as	if	it	is	your	home.	It	is	not.	It	has	to	be
left	 behind,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 broken,	 only	 then	 will	 you	 have	 the	 whole	 sky	 to
yourself,	only	then	will	you	be	able	to	use	your	wings.
Man	 remains	afraid	of	coming	out	of	his	 securities.	That's	 the	only	problem,	 I
say	the	only	problem	for	spiritual	growth:	the	fear	of	coming	out	of	the	so-called
security.	It	is	only	apparently	so:	it	is	not	real	security,	it	is	death.
Real	security	is	in	getting	out	of	the	egg	and	becoming	part	of	the	sky.	Yes,	from
the	 point	 of	 view	 of	 the	 person	who	 is	 still	 living	 in	 an	 enclosed	world,	 it	 is
insecurity	to	be	in	the	open	sky.	But	those	who	have	known	the	open	sky	--	the
Buddhas	--	say	that	insecurity	is	the	only	security,	and	to	risk	life	is	the	only	way
to	know	it.	To	risk	all	is	to	know	all.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 way	 of	 dangerous	 living,	 adventurous	 living;	 unconventional,
untraditional.	A	sannyasin	lives	out	of	his	own	self,	according	to	his	own	small
light.	And	remember,	even	if	you	go	astray	according	to	your	own	small	light,	it
is	going	 to	help	you;	even	going	astray	will	become	growth.	And	 in	 following
and	 imitating	 others,	 even	 if	 you	 always	 remain	 in	 the	 right,	 you	will	 remain
immature,	you	will	never	grow.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	leave	next	week.
--	Come	back	soon	 for	a	 longer	period....	And	now	 think	of	 this	place	as	your
home.	Sooner	or	later	you	have	to	end	up	here.	That	is	both	a	prediction	and	a
promise!
Let	your	 love	be	as	 strong	as	possible.	Put	 everything	 into	 it,	don't	hold	back,
don't	be	miserly	about	it.
People	are	very	miserly	about	love.	They	want	it	but	they	never	give	it	--	and	the
law	of	 love	 is	 that	 the	more	 you	 give,	 the	more	 you	 get,	 the	more	 you	 desire
without	giving,	the	less	will	you	get.	Everybody	wants	and	nobody	gives,	hence
the	whole	of	humanity	lives	in	a	state	of	starvation,	spiritual	starvation.
Love	 is	as	much	a	nourishment	 to	 the	 soul	as	 food	 is	 to	 the	body.	Love	 is	 the
food	for	the	soul.
Give	 totally.	 Enjoy	 giving	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all,	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 sharing	 --
whether	anything	comes	back	in	return	or	not	should	not	be	given	any	thought.
Then	love	becomes	stronger	and	stronger.	And	the	more	strong	your	love	is,	the
more	you	have	a	soul	in	you.	Love	is	the	womb	in	which	the	soul	grows.
Amito	means	the	immeasurable,	the	infinite,	the	eternal.
These	are	the	qualities	of	god,	these	are	the	qualities	of	existence	itself.
But	man	thinks	himself	finite,	measurable.	He	thinks	himself	confined	between
birth	 and	 death	 --	 and	 that	 is	 a	 totally	 wrong	 attitude,	 wrong	 approach.	 One
cannot	 know	 oneself	 if,	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 one	 believes	 a	 wrong
conclusion.
You	have	always	been	here	and	you	will	always	be	here.	Even	before	your	birth
you	 were	 here,	 and	 after	 your	 death	 you	 will	 be	 here.	 Neither	 is	 birth	 your
beginning,	nor	 is	death	your	end.	You	are	 immeasurable,	 infinite,	as	 infinite	as
existence	itself,	neither	less	nor	more.
To	remember	it	is	to	go	beyond	all	fear,	to	recognise	it	is	to	recognise	oneself	as
divine.	And	 the	moment	you	recognise	yourself	as	divine	you	have	recognised
everybody	else	as	divine	also.	The	moment	you	understand	your	true	nature	you
have	understood	the	whole	existence.
Ananto	 means	 the	 infinite.	 Man	 appears	 very	 finite.	 He	 is	 not.	 But	 the
appearance	 is	 very	 deceptive	 and	 we	 go	 on	 believing	 in	 the	 appearance.	 We
never	look	deep	enough	to	go	beyond	the	appearance	and	to	find	the	reality.	The
reality	is	totally	different.
If	you	look	at	man	from	the	outside	he	is	just	a	dewdrop	in	this	infinite	universe,
but	if	you	look	at	man	from	within	then	he	is	as	oceanic	as	one	can	be.	Then	the
dewdrop	is	only	a	fallacy	of	the	senses.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Religion	tries	to	look	at	man	from	the	innermost	core	--	not	as	an	object	but	as	a
subjectivity.	That's	why	religion	can	declare	that	man	is	god.	Psychology	cannot
declare	that.	Psychology	is	still	struggling	with	the	stupid	idea	of	objectivity,	that
man	has	 to	be	observed	as	an	object.	Then	you	will	miss	 the	real	 thing.	As	an
object,	man	is	only	a	body,	at	the	most	a	brain.	You	can	watch	his	behavior	just
as	you	watch	the	behavior	of	rats.	And	they	are	the	same,	as	far	as	behavior	is
concerned	there	is	not	much	difference.	The	difference	is	somewhere	else,	in	the
subjectivity.
Meditation	 is	 the	 one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	 turn	 from	 objectivity	 to
subjectivity.	You	stop	looking	at	man	from	the	outside.	First	you	start	looking	at
yourself	 from	 your	 innermost	 core;	 you	 stand	 there	 and	 you	 look	 at	 yourself
from	there,	and	you	become	as	big	as	the	universe.	In	that	moment	great	freedom
descends.	That	moment	is	the	moment	of	nirvana,	enlightenment.
Nisimo	 means	 unbounded,	 without	 any	 boundaries.	 That's	 our	 reality.	 All
boundaries	are	illusory.
Ordinarily	we	think	that	our	boundary	is	our	body.	The	sun	is	far	away	but	if	the
sun	dies	we	will	die	 immediately.	There	are	millions	of	miles	distance,	but	 the
sun	is	somehow	part	of	our	body.	Otherwise,	why	should	we	die?	The	sun	may
live,	may	die,	it	should	be	irrelevant	to	us.	It	is	not.	We	continuously	breathe	air
in	and	out.	Not	for	a	single	moment	are	we	in	a	state	of	non-communication	with
existence	--	although	we	are	not	continuously	aware	of	it.
Buddha	tried	very	much	to	emphasise	breathing,	for	the	simple	reason	that	if	you
become	aware	of	breathing	you	will	become	aware	of	your	unboundedness.	The
breath	that	is	in	me	was	in	you	just	a	moment	before.	It	was	part	of	you,	now	it	is
part	of	me.	And	soon	 it	will	be	part	of	somebody	else.	We	absorb	oxygen	and
release	 carbon	 dioxide;	 the	 trees	 absorb	 carbon	 dioxide	 and	 release	 oxygen.
Without	trees	we	cannot	exist,	without	us	trees	cannot	exist.	So	we	are	related,
joined.	 Even	 the	 smallest	 blade	 of	 grass	 is	 part	 of	 the	 greatest	 star,	 and	 the
greatest	star	is	part	of	the	smallest	blade	of	grass.	Existence	is	one.
To	 understand	 this	 is	 to	 experience	 god.	 God	 is	 not	 somebody,	 god	 is	 not	 a
person,	but	this	experience	of	oneness,	this	experience	of	unboundedness.
Jesus	 says	 that	 god	 is	 love.	 It	 is	 a	 tremendously	 important	 statement.	Nobody
before	him	has	said	that.
In	fact	before	him	the	Judaic	god	was	a	very	angry	god,	a	very	jealous	god.	In
the	Old	Testament	he	declares,	 I	 am	a	very	 jealous	god.	With	 jealousy	 love	 is
impossible.	 And	 the	 very	 idea	 of	 god	 being	 jealous	 and	 angry	 is	 ugly.	 It	 has
nothing	to	do	with	god	because	it	is	simply	ungodly	to	be	angry,	to	be	jealous.
Jesus	brings	a	great	revelation	to	the	world;	god	is	love.	But	I	want	to	change	it	a
little	bit,	I	want	to	refine	it	a	little	more.	I	don't	say	god	is	love,	I	say	love	is	god.
The	difference	may	not	appear	immediately,	but	the	difference	is	great	and	very
significant.
God	 is	 love,	 that	means	 that	 love	 is	 only	 a	 quality	 of	 god,	 there	 can	 be	 other
qualities	 too.	Love	 is	only	one	of	 the	qualities,	along	with	other	qualities,	 it	 is
only	one	of	the	attributes.	When	I	say,	"Love	is	god,"	I	make	it	whole	and	sole.
Then	love	itself	is	the	totality	of	god.	There	is	nothing	else;	no	other	quality	is
needed.	One	attribute	is	enough,	more	than	enough,	because	it	implies	all	that	is
beautiful,	it	implies	all	that	is	divine,	it	implies	all	the	great	values.
That	is	going	to	be	your	name,	and	you	have	to	remember	it	continuously	so	that
it	does	not	remain	only	a	name	but	really	becomes	your	very	being.
The	sarod	is	a	musical	instrument,	one	of	the	most	beautiful	musical	instruments.
I	conceive	of	man	also	as	a	musical	instrument.	One	has	to	learn	to	play	upon	it.
If	you	don't	learn	how	to	play	upon	it	you	will	create	only	noise,	and	it	will	be	a
disturbance;	rather	than	being	a	blessing	it	will	become	a	curse.	That's	what	goes
on	 happening	 to	millions	 of	 people:	 their	 life	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 tale	 told	 by	 an
idiot,	 full	 of	 fury	 and	 noise,	 signifying	 nothing.	And	 the	 simple	 reason	 is	 that
they	don't	know	how	to	play	upon	their	heart,	upon	their	being.
Just	 as	 one	 learns	 to	 play	 upon	 the	 piano,	 the	 sitar,	 the	 sarod,	 the	 veena,	 the
violin,	one	has	to	learn	to	play	upon	one's	own	being.
Sannyas	has	to	become	the	beginning	of	 that	great	art	of	creating	music	out	of
your	own	being.	That	music	 is	what	 the	mystics	have	called	ecstasy,	samadhi.
That	music	is	what	others	have	called	god,	nirvana.
And	it	is	there,	fast	asleep;	it	has	to	be	provoked,	it	has	to	be	called	forth.	One
has	 to	 be	 an	 artist,	 a	musician.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 creative,	 and	 one	 has	 to	 be	 an
explorer	of	one's	own	inner	being.
Religion	is	not	worship,	it	is	art.	It	is	not	formality,	it	is	not	a	social	institution;	it
is	 a	 transformation	 of	 your	 being.	 It	 is	 creating	 harmony	 in	 your	 soul,	 it	 is
alchemy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Omkar	is	the	sound	that	is	heard	in	one's	own	being	when	all	other	noise	in	the
mind	has	stopped.	When	there	are	no	thoughts	floating	in	the	mind,	when	there
is	nothing	to	disturb	one,	one	starts	hearing	a	deep	humming	sound	in	one's	own
being	--	that	is	called	omkar,	the	sound	of	om.
It	is	not	that	you	make	it;	if	you	make	it	you	will	miss	the	real	thing.	You	are	not
to	make	 it,	 it	 is	 not	 a	mantra	 to	 be	 chanted.	You	 have	 to	 be	 utterly	 silent	 and
receptive.	You	have	to	listen,	you	have	to	be	just	a	listener	--	just	ears	and	ears
and	ears	and	nothing	else.	Then	suddenly	a	great	explosion	happens	inside.	The
mystics	 have	 called	 it	 the	 still,	 small	 voice	within.	 The	Zen	 people	 call	 it	 the
sound	of	one	hand	clapping,	and	in	India	we	have	given	it	the	name,	omkar.
It	comes	closest	to	"om"	--	and	that's	exactly	the	word	which	Mohammedans	use
as	 "amin",	 and	 Christians	 use	 as	 "amen".	 It	 is	 exactly	 the	 same	 but	 it	 can	 be
interpreted	in	different	ways:	om,	amin,	amen.
It	 is	 exactly	 the	 same	 word	 that	 exists	 in	 omnipresent,	 omnipotent	 and
omniscient.
That	om	in	'omniscience'	simply	means:	one	who	has	been	the	soundless	sound.
In	'omnipresent'	it	means	one	who	has	become	part	of	that	universal	sound.	And
in	'omnipotent'	it	means	one	who	has	become	so	attuned	with	the	inner	harmony,
with	 the	 inner	 music	 of	 om,	 that	 he	 now	 has	 available	 all	 the	 powers	 of	 the
world.	The	whole	universe	is	at	his	disposal,	the	kingdom	of	god	is	his.
The	sound	of	om	is	called	omkar.	That	is	going	to	be	your	work	upon	yourself:
become	more	and	more	silent	so	that	one	day	you	can	be	blessed,	so	that	one	day
you	can	hear	it.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#41
Chapter	title:	None
30	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912305
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT41
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Dave	means	beloved	of	god.	Everyone	is,	but	nobody	is	aware	of	it.	The	moment
you	become	aware	of	 the	great	 love	 that	 existence	goes	on	 showering	on	you,
you	are	transformed.	Immediately	you	are	transported	into	another	world.
The	greatest	 need	 is	 to	 be	 needed,	 and	 the	moment	 you	 see	 that	 the	 existence
needs	you,	 that	you	are	not	 futile,	 that	you	are	not	 accidental,	 that	you	have	a
place,	that	you	have	a	significance,	that	in	this	vast	universe	you	have	something
to	contribute,	that	contribution	cannot	be	made	by	anybody	else,	nobody	can	be
a	substitute	for	you,	great	joy	arises.	To	know	it	is	to	be	ecstatic.
Nobody	is	unneeded,	nobody	is	useless,	nobody	is	accidental.	Everybody	has	a
significance	and	everybody	enriches	existence	in	his	own	way.	One	need	not	be
a	great	scientist	or	a	philosopher	or	a	poet.
One	may	be	nobody	in	the	eyes	of	the	world	and	yet	one	is	esteemed	in	the	eyes
of	god.	ere	is	a	Sufi	story.
A	 Sufi	 came	 to	 a	 city,	 and	 in	 the	 house	 where	 he	 was	 staying	 he	 was	 very
disturbed	by	the	neighbour	--
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
deliberately:	 whenever	 he	 was	 praying	 the	 neighbour	 would	 make	 noise	 and
shout	and	talk.
In	his	early	morning	prayer	the	next	day	the	Sufi	asked	god,	"What	is	the	need	of
this	man?	He	 is	a	disturbance	 to	your	beloved	ones	 --	why	don't	you	 take	him
away?"	He	heard	a	great	 laugh	coming	from	the	beyond	and	god	said,	"I	have
had	 that	man	 there	 for	a	certain	purpose,	and	 today	 the	purpose	 is	 fulfilled:	he
disturbed	 you.	 You	 failed	 in	 the	 test.	 He	 has	 succeeded,	 you	 have	 failed.	 His
esteem	has	grown	in	my	eyes:	he	can	disturb	a	great	mystic	such	as	you	and	you
can	 be	 disturbed	 by	 such	 an	 ordinary	man!	 This	was	 the	 purpose	 for	which	 I
have	been	keeping	him	there.	He	has	been	waiting	for	you	for	years.
And	god	said,	"When	I	accept	him,	who	are	you	to	reject	him?	I	have	my	own
mysterious	ways,	I	need	him,	otherwise	he	would	not	be	there."
Every	 thing,	 every	 being	 is	 needed.	 Even	 an	 ordinary	 blade	 of	 grass	 is	 as
valuable	as	the	greatest	star.
Nobody	is	superior	and	nobody	is	inferior;	in	god's	eyes	everybody	is	the	same:
significant.	The	famous	ones,	 the	not-so-famous	ones...	even	 the	sinners	are	as
esteemed	as	the	saints.	Judas	also	has	a	purpose	to	fulfill,	otherwise	Jesus'	story
would	be	incomplete,	the	drama	would	remain	incomplete	without	Judas.
Without	Judas	there	would	have	been	no	Christianity.	Judas	is	as	much	needed	in
the	ultimate	estimation	of	things,	in	the	ultimate	account	of	things	as	Jesus	is.
Remember	 it	 about	 yourself	 and	 about	 everybody	 else.	 Then	 great	 acceptance
arises	naturally.	In	 that	very	acceptance	tensions	disappear;	one	feels	at	rest,	at
home.
Prayer	is	a	state	of	silence.	What	is	known	as	prayer	is	not	prayer.	When	you	are
saying	something	to	god	you	are	not	in	prayer.	You	are	in	your	head	--	how	can
you	be	in	the	prayer?	words,	language	are	always	part	of	the	head,	and	prayer	is
something	 that	 happens	 in	 the	 heart.	 Prayer	 can	 only	 be	 silent,	 utterly	 silent,
wordless.
It	 is	 a	 non-linguistic	 communication	 with	 existence;	 communion	 rather	 than
communication.	 It	 is	 feeling	 one	 with	 the	 whole.	 Hence	 prayer	 cannot	 be
Christian,	cannot	be	Hindu,	cannot	be	Jewish.	Silence	 is	simply	silence	--	how
can	you	call	a	silence	Hindu	or	Mohammedan?	That	is	stupid.	Yes,	words	can	be
Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Christian,	but	prayer	cannot	be.
Learn	 to	 be	 more	 and	 more	 silent,	 and	 in	 that	 silence	 slowly	 slowly	 great
gratitude	 arises.	 That	 gratitude,	 that	 silent	 gratitude,	 that	 silent	 thankfulness	 is
prayer.
Man	has	the	capacity	to	create	power,	great	power,	infinite	power.	Man	is	not	so
small	as	he	appears.
Just	 as	 a	 small	 atom,	 invisible	 to	 the	 eyes,	 can	 create	 immense	 power...	 The
small	 atom	exploding	 can	 release	 so	much	power	 --	what	 to	 say	 about	 human
consciousness?	Human	consciousness	also	explodes.
That's	 how	 somebody	 becomes	 a	 Buddha,	 Jesus,	 Moses:	 their	 consciousness,
their	inner	atom	has	exploded	and	then	they	are	at	the	infinite	source	of	energy,
they	are	that	source.	We	are	all	carrying	the	same	power	--
unfortunately,	unaware	of	it,	oblivious	to	it.
Meditation	 is	 simply	 an	 effort	 to	 make	 you	 aware	 of	 your	 infinity,	 of	 your
unboundedness,	of	your	inexhaustible	sources,	of	the	great	kingdom	of	god	that
is	hidden	within	you.
Man	can	be	just	only	if	he	is	aware,	otherwise	he	cannot	be	just;	his	unawareness
will	 go	 on	 harming	 people.	 Not	 only	 others	 --	 in	 unawareness	 we	 harm	 even
ourselves.	 In	 unawareness	we	 are	 like	 a	 drunkard	who	knows	not	where	 he	 is
going,	 why	 he	 is	 going,	 what	 he	 is	 doing.	 That	 is	 the	 ordinary	 situation	 of
humanity.	Only	one	who	is	aware	can	be	just,	because	one	who	is	aware	cannot
do	any	wrong.	That's	impossible.	Just	as	in	unawareness	you	cannot	do	any	right,
in	awareness	you	cannot	do	anything	wrong;	hence	the	whole	thing	depends	on
awareness.	Awareness	is	the	golden	key	that	unlocks	the	doors	of	the	divine.
Make	every	effort	to	be	aware,	put	your	whole	energy	into	being	aware.	Shatter
old	 habits	which	will	 keep	you	unconscious	 forever.	 If	 you	don't	make	 a	 very
deliberate	effort	then	you	will	go	on	revolving	in	the	same	vicious	circle.	Only
very	few	people	in	the	whole	history	of	humanity	have	been	able	to	jump	out	of
the	vicious	circle.
Sannyas	is	a	commitment	to	yourself:	now	you	will	make	every	effort	to	come
out	of	the	old	ways,	the	old	patterns	of	unconscious	habits.
Roberto	 means	 bright,	 full	 of	 light,	 luminous,	 radiant...	 so	 much	 so	 that
everybody	 becomes	 aware	 of	 the	 presence	 of	 that	 kind	 of	 person.	 Hence	 the
other	meaning	of	the	word	roberto	is	shining	fame.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	 can	 happen	 only	 through	 coming	 out	 of	 your	 sleep.	 Sleep	 is	 a	 state	 of
darkness;	 it	 is	 the	 dark	 night	 of	 the	 soul.	Not	 even	 a	moon	 is	 there,	 not	 even
small	stars,	not	even	a	candle,	it	is	just	pure	darkness.	Hence	we	don't	radiate	any
joy,	any	light,	any	godliness.
People	who	are	asleep	stink	--	stink	of	death,	of	something	rotten,	of	something
unclean.	 Become	 aware	 and	 you	 start	 radiating	 a	 freshness.	 You	 become	 a
flower,	and	great	perfume	arises	out	of	your	being.	That	is	the	fulfilment	of	life,
the	very	purpose,	the	goal.
Sannyas	means	 that	 you	 are	 taking	 a	 vow	 to	 attain	 the	 goal,	 that	 you	will	 not
leave	 any	 stone	 unturned,	 that	 you	will	 not	make	 only	 lukewarm	 efforts	 to	 be
aware,	you	will	risk	all!	Only	when	one	is	risking	one	hundred	per	cent	does	the
transformation	happen.
There	is	a	song	in	every	heart	which	cannot	be	sung,	which	can	s	be	felt,	which
can	be	lived,	but	there	is	no	way	to	express	it.
That	song	is	your	truth.	We	are	born	with	it.	It	is	always	there	as	an	undercurrent,
and	 in	some	rare	moments	we	become	a	 little	bit	aware	of	 its	presence	 too.	 In
deep	love	you	feel	it.	It	is	not	gross,	it	is	a	very	subtle	perfume.	It	is	not	like	a
strong	wind,	but	just	a	very	cool	breeze.	In	moments	when	you	are	overwhelmed
by	beauty:	 a	 beautiful	 sunset	 or	 a	bird	on	 the	wing	or	 (a	bird	 calls	 out)...	 Just
listen	to	the	sound	of	this	bird...	something	deep	inside	you	is	stirred.
You	 feel	 it,	 you	 would	 like	 to	 sing	 it,	 you	 would	 like	 to	 dance	 it,	 but	 it	 is
impossible.	Nobody	has	been	able	to	up	to	now	and	nobody	is	ever	going	to	be
able	 to.	 That's	 its	 beauty:	 it	 is	 absolutely	 private,	 incommunicable.	Yes,	when
two	 persons	 have	 heard	 it	 they	 can	 recognise	 each	 other	 immediately.	 Just
looking	 into	each	other's	eyes	 they	will	 recognise	 it	 immediately;	 there	will	be
no	need	for	any	introduction.
A	Buddha	meets	a	Jesus:	no	introduction	will	be	needed,	they	will	immediately
know	that	the	other	has	also	heard	it.
Meditation	 only	 prepares	 the	 way.	 It	 helps	 you	 to	 be	more	 and	more	 inward,
silent,	 available,	 open,	 and	 then	 one	 day	 suddenly	 it	 is	 there.	 It	 is	 such	 an
overwhelming	experience,	just	one	moment	of	it	is	enough,	one	moment	of	it	is
equal	to	the	whole	of	eternity.
Nadamo	means	the	soundless	sound.	It	is	our	inner	harmony,	our	inner	silence;
but	the	silence	is	not	empty,	it	is	full	of	music.
It	is	not	the	same	kind	of	music	as	we	are	acquainted	with.	The	basic	difference
is	 that	 the	 outside	music	 is	 a	 created	music.	 In	 the	 East	 we	 call	 it	 the	 struck
music,	because	you	have	to	strike	two	things;	a	duality	is	needed.	The	player	on
the	violin	or	 the	player	on	 the	 sitar	 is	 striking	 the	 strings.	Without	 the	 sitar	he
cannot	 create	 it,	without	 him	 the	 sitar	 cannot	 create	 it;	 two	 are	 needed.	 It	 is	 a
kind	of	clash.
But	 the	 inner	music	 is	 unstruck.	 There	 is	 no	 sitar	 nor	 any	 player,	 yet	 a	 great
melody,	a	great	music	is	experienced.	Hence	it	is	called	the	soundless	sound	or
the	 silent	 sound	 --	 a	 paradox	 has	 to	 be	 used.	 Zen	 people	 say	 it	 is	 one	 hand
clapping	that	 is	creating	the	sound.	The	emphasis	 is	on	one	hand:	 the	sound	of
one	hand	clapping.
Once	you	have	heard	it	you	cannot	forget	the	joy	of	it.	Then	whatsoever	you	are
doing,	it	continues	there,	it	always	remains	there.	Once	it	is	known,	recognised,
you	can	remain	occupied	with	a	thousand	and	one	things	of	the	world,	but	it	is
always	there	like	a	subtle	presence.	It	follows	you	like	a	shadow,	and	it	goes	on
refreshing	 you,	 it	 goes	 on	 rejuvenating	 you.	 It	 is	 a	 contact	 with	 god.	 It	 is
becoming	 connected	 with	 the	 whole.	 It	 is	 the	 harmony	 between	 you	 and	 the
whole.
Life	can	be	lived	as	a	song	or	as	a	sadness	--	it	is	our	choice.	Many	people,	the
majority,	choose	sadness	for	the	simple	reason	that	to	be	sad	is	easy.	It	needs	no
art,	no	intelligence,	it	needs	no	work	upon	yourself.
People	are	lazy,	they	don't	want	to	work.	And	to	work	upon	oneself	is	arduous,	it
is	an	uphill	task,	but	great	is	the	benefit.	Great	is	the	joy	of	those	who	start	on	the
path	and	move	towards	the	peak.	Their	life	becomes	a	song.
To	 live	 in	 sadness	 is	 to	 live	 in	 dark	 valleys.	 It	 is	 comfortable,	 convenient,
because	 you	 don't	 have	 to	 go	 up	 the	 hill,	 but	 it	 is	 without	 adventure.	 It	 is
boredom,	it	has	no	thrill	and	no	surprise	--	and	if	it	has	no	thrill	and	no	surprise
you	miss	the	point.
Life	has	to	be	a	constant	wonder,	every	moment	should	bring	new	surprises.	But
that	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 start	 moving	 upwards,	 towards	 the	 sunlit	 peaks.
Beyond	 the	 clouds	 there	 is	 infinite	 sky...	 and	 the	 freedom	of	 it.	 Then	 life	 is	 a
song,	is	a	dance,	is	a	celebration.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	sannyasin	has	to	create	that	song.	Unless	that	song	is	created	a	sannyasin	has
not	lived	rightly;	his	sannyas	was	formal,	he	was	not	committed	to	it.
Be	a	committed	sannyasin	so	that	your	life	can	become	an	explosion	of	beauty,
of	bliss,	of	benediction.
Life	 is	 a	 blessing.	 Even	 if	 it	 is	 sometimes	 disguised	 as	 a	 curse.	 Never	 be
deceived	by	the	appearances,	because	the	darkest	night	is	nothing	but	the	womb
for	the	dawn	and	the	saddest	moment	can	become	a	stepping	stone	towards	joy.
The	 thorns	 on	 the	 rose	 bush	 are	 not	 against	 the	 rose	 flowers;	 they	 are	 guards,
protectors.
Start	looking	at	everything	as	a	blessing.	That	is	your	meditation.
Nothing	is	a	curse,	not	even	death;	death	too	is	in	the	service	of	life.	It	is	not	the
end	of	life;	it	only	changes	the	old	garments,	the	rotten	garments,	and	gives	you
new	garments.	It	only	changes	houses:	when	a	certain	house	becomes	unlivable,
death	comes	and	changes	it,	demolishes	it,	makes	you	free	of	it	so	that	you	can
choose	another	house.	Death	is	the	beginning	of	birth.
Nothing	in	life	is	a	curse	--	one	just	needs	a	deep	insight	to	see	into	things.
Scriptures	in	Silence	and	Sermons	in	Stones
Chapter	#42
Chapter	title:	None
31	December	1979	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7912315
ShortTitle:	SCRIPT42
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Remember	one	thing:	god	is	the	closest	when	you	are	blissful;	when	you	are	in
misery	you	are	 farthest	away	 from	god.	The	dilemma	 is	 that	people	 remember
god	 only	 when	 they	 are	 in	 misery	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 moment	 when	 they	 are
farthest	away.	Even	if	they	shout	their	voice	cannot	reach.	When	you	are	blissful
you	 need	 not	 even	 whisper.	 Without	 saying	 a	 single	 word	 your	 prayer	 is
understood.	Even	your	silence	is	eloquent.
But	this	has	been	the	problem	down	the	ages:	man	remembers	god	only	when	he
is	 miserable,	 which	 is	 the	 wrong	 moment	 to	 remember	 him.	 When	 you
remember	god	in	misery	that	means	you	want	to	use	him	--
and	god	cannot	be	used	as	a	means.	That	is	sacrilege,	that	is	sing	the	very	idea	of
using	g	d	as	a	means.	Even	to	use	another	human	being	as	a	means	is	immoral,
what	 to	 say	 about	 god	 if	 you	 think	 about	 him	 as	 a	means	 to	 some	other	 end?
Hence	man	goes	on	praying	and	his	prayers	remain	unfulfilled.	He	prays	at	the
wrong	moment.
My	 approach	 here	 is	 to	 make	 this	 clear	 to	 you:	 when	 you	 are	 in	 a	 blissful
moment,	when	you	are	feeling	blessed	by	existence,	don't	miss	that	moment;	that
is	 when	 you	 are	 closest	 to	 god.	 Let	 that	 moment	 be	 of	 gratitude,	 prayer,
meditation.	In	that	moment	remember	god,	not	verbally	--	existentially.	Let	your
whole	being	feel	the	vibe,	become	overwhelmed	with	the	beyond.	Don't	lose	that
moment,	it	is	very	precious.
Don't	become	too	engrossed	in	the	beauty	of	the	moment.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	as	if	you	are	standing	near	a	window	with	a	beautiful	golden	frame	and	just
outside	 the	window	 there	 is	 a	beautiful	 sunset.	You	can	become	 too	engrossed
with	 the	 beautiful	 frame	 of	 the	 window	 and	miss	 the	moment.	 Of	 course	 the
frame	 is	 beautiful,	 but	 a	 frame	 is	 a	 frame.	 And	 the	 window	 is	 useless	 if	 it
prevents	 you...	 Its	whole	 use	 consists	 of	making	 the	 beyond	 available	 to	 you.
Bliss	is	only	a	frame:	it	opens	the	beyond.	Don't	become	too	forgetful,	don't	be
lost,	don't	be	overwhelmed	by	the	bliss.
Let	blissful	moments	become	moments	of	prayer	and	god	is	not	far	away.	And
once	known,	he	is	known	forever.	Then	there	is	no	way	to	miss	him,	then	he	is
everywhere.	Then	he	is	within	and	without.
Manfred	means	man	of	peace.	And	that's	exactly	the	definition	of	a	sannyasin:	a
man	of	peace;	a	man	who	has	no	quarrel	of	any	kind	with	existence,	who	is	not
in	any	mood	 to	 fight	with	ANYbody,	who	has	dropped	 fighting,	who	no	more
thinks	of	himself	in	terms	of	the	ego,	who	feels	one	with	the	whole.
Only	 then	 do	 you	 know	 what	 peace	 is	 --	 when	 all	 conflict	 between	 you	 and
existence	disappears,	so	much	so	that	there	is	no	distinction	between	you	and	the
whole...	because	the	distinction	consists	only	of	conflicts.	The	less	you	fight,	the
less	you	feel	that	you	are	separate.	when	the	fight	disappears	completely	there	is
no	distinction,	no	definition;	you	and	the	whole	are	one.
That	 oneness	 is	 peace.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 greatest	 achievement	 in	 life:	 the
fulfillment,	the	flowering,	the	fruition	of	life.
Man	is	a	seed	and	can	become	a	great	tree	with	thousands	of	flowers.	Unless	it
happens	one	goes	on	feeling	discontented.	A	tree	feels	blissful	when	it	blooms.
Exactly	 like	 that,	 when	 a	 man	 comes	 to	 flowering	 there	 is	 deep	 joy	 and
contentment;	one	has	arrived	home.	In	the	East	we	call	that	state	Buddhahood,	in
the	West	the	state	is	called	Christ-consciousness.	It	is	the	same	state.
Keep	it	in	your	mind.	Right	now	it	is	only	a	possibility,	but	it	can	be	transformed
into	reality;	and	it	has	to	be	done.	By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	becoming
committed	 to	 this	 goal.	Now	 all	 your	 life	 energies	 should	 be	 directed	 towards
this	single	point.
Parijat	is	a	beautiful	flower	of	the	East.
Become	a	flower.	The	flower	represents	opening.	The	seed	is	closed,	the	flower
is	open.	The	seed	is	disconnected	from	existence	because	it	is	closed.	The	flower
is	 bridged	 with	 existence	 --	 with	 the	 sun	 rays	 dancing	 on	 it,	 with	 the	 wind
passing	by	it,	with	the	birds	singing	around	it.	 It	 is	radiating	joy,	 it	 is	radiating
life,	beauty,	fragrance.	It	is	sharing	its	being	with	the	whole,	it	is	offering	its	soul
to	the	feet	of	god.	And	that's	what	a	sannyasin	has	to	be:	a	flower,	not	a	seed.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	totally	open	to	existence,	not	closed	like	a	bud,	but	utterly
open,	 vulnerable,	 available.	 In	 that	 availability	 the	 ego	 disappears.	 And	 the
disappearance	of	the	ego	is	the	beginning	of	the	experience	of	g	d.
When	you	are	not,	god	is.	Let	the	ego	die	so	that	god	can	be	born	in	you.
Everybody	is	born	ready	for	god.	If	we	miss,	it	is	totally	our	responsibility.	We
miss	 because	 we	 never	 look	 within.	 We	 miss	 because	 we	 never	 use	 the
opportunity	that	life	gives	to	us.	We	miss	because	we	are	lazy.	We	miss	because
we	are	unconscious,	sleepy.	We	miss	because	we	are	not	at	all	aware	of	the	great
blessing	that	life	is.
In	itself	it	is	nothing,	but	it	can	become	a	stepping	stone	to	god	--	and	that	is	its
preciousness.	 Life	 is	 only	 a	means,	 and	 is	 the	 end.	 If	 you	 become	 lost	 in	 the
means	 you	 have	 lost	 the	 opportunity:	 you	 have	 become	 too	 interested	 in	 the
staircase	and	you	have	 forgotten	 that	 the	staircase	 is	 just	 to	be	used.	You	have
become	too	involved	with	the	bridge	and	you	have	forgotten	that	you	have	to	go
to	the	other	shore.
Sannyas	is	only	a	remembrance;	an	effort	to	remember	what	we	are	missing,	an
effort	to	remember	why	we	are	here,	an	effort	to	remember	what	this	life	is	all
about.	Just	a	little	effort	is	needed	and	the	darkness	starts	dispersing	and	a	small
ray	of	light	arises	from	your	very	centre	and	starts	guiding	you.	That	ray	is	from
god.	It	is	already	there	--	we	just	have	to	search	for	it	a	little	bit,	because	we	have
gathered	too	much	unnecessary	furniture	inside,	and	it	is	lost	in	that	furniture.
Nishanto	means	the	end	of	the	night.	Sannyas	is	nothing	but	a	spiritual	dawn,	the
beginning	of	the	day.
To	live	unconsciously	is	to	live	in	the	night.	The	effort	to	live	consciously	is	the
beginning	of	the	day.
And	when	 you	 succeed	 in	 living	 consciously	 you	 have	 succeeded	 in	 bringing
such	light	to	your	being	that	it	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
God	is	light;	hence	god	can	only	be	found	by	becoming	more	and	more	aware.
Awareness	too	is	light.
Unconsciousness	is	darkness,	it	is	night.
Ordinarily	nine-tenths	of	our	being	is	unconscious,	only	one-tenth	is	conscious.
We	are	at	the	mercy	of	unconscious	forces,	that's	why	our	life	is	a	mess.	We	have
to	become	more	 and	more	 conscious.	When	one's	whole	being	 is	 full	 of	 light,
one	hundred	percent,	 then	only	 is	one	really	born.	Before	 that	one	was	only	 in
the	womb.
Ordinarily	 a	 person	 remains	 in	 the	womb	 for	 his	whole	 life,	 not	 only	 for	 nine
months	but	 for	ninety	years.	To	be	 really	alive	a	second	birth	 is	needed	--	and
that's	the	whole	effort	of	sannyas:	to	give	you	a	second	birth,	to	make	you	twice
born.
To	me	virtue	does	not	mean	morality;	virtue	means	awareness.	The	moral	person
is	only	 formally	virtuous,	 superficially	virtuous.	His	virtue	 is	not	coming	 from
his	 innermost	 being,	 it	 is	 something	 cultivated,	 painted.	 He	 is	 performing	 a
social	 formality.	 Otherwise	 he	 is	 as	 immoral	 as	 any	 immoral	 person,	 or	 even
more	so.
Real	 virtue	 cannot	 be	 cultivated;	 it	 is	 a	 by-product,	 a	 by-product	 of	 becoming
more	aware.	When	you	are	aware	you	cannot	do	wrong.	In	total	awareness	the
wrong	 completely	disappears,	 just	 as	 in	 light	 darkness	disappears.	That	 is	 true
virtue,	and	that	is	the	meaning	of	your	name.	Let	it	also	become	the	meaning	of
your	life.
From	this	moment	remember	it	as	much	as	possible	--	god	loves	you.	There	are	a
thousand	and	one	proofs	of	his	 love.	Once	you	start	becoming	aware,	you	will
find	all	those	proofs.	He	breathes	life	in	you,	he	beats	in	your	heart,	he	circulates
in	your	blood.	He	is	your	body,	your	mind,	your	heart,	your	soul.	He	comes	in	so
many	blessings	every	moment	--	it	is	just	that	we	have	not	taken	note	of	it.	We
have	 taken	 it	 for	 granted.	 That	 is	 the	 original	 sin.	Once	 you	 take	 god	 and	 his
blessings	for	granted	you	start	becoming	irreligious.
Don't	take	anything	for	granted.	It	is	a	gift,	we	have	not	earned	it.	It	is	given	by
the	whole	just	out	of	love,	for	no	other	reason.	We	are	not	worthy	of	it.	Still	god
goes	on	pouring	his	love,	his	blessings;	his	flowers	go	on	showering	on	us	like
rain.
They	are	invisible,	and	one	needs	a	little	more	alertness	to	see	them,	but	they	can
be	seen.	The	day	that	you	have	seen	them,	from	that	day	you	are	not	blind	any
more.
Sumeru	is	the	mythological	mountain	of	paradise.	Just	as	the	Himalayas	are	here
on	the	earth,	Sumeru	is	in	heaven.	It	is	a	metaphor,	a	myth.	The	whole	mountain
is	made	of	solid	gold	and	its	peaks	are	the	highest.
The	sun	is	always	showering	its	light	on	those	peaks,	they	are	always	sunlit.	Just
visualise	golden	Himalayas	with	the	sun	always	showering	its	light.
This	 Sumeru,	 the	 mythological	 Himalayas	 in	 heaven,	 represents	 the	 ultimate
peaL	 of	 human	 consciousness.	Man	 can	 reach	 to	 a	 point	where	 consciousness
becomes	golden,	 is	golden,	and	where	 light	 is	continuously	showering	on	you.
That	 is	 the	ultimate	state	of	samadhi,	 the	ultimate	state	of	ecstasy.	 It	has	 to	be
achieved,	it	is	our	birthright.	We	can	achieve	it,	we	just	have	to	gather	together
all	our	forces	and	we	have	to	become	a	one-pointed	arrow.
Truth	 or	 god	 is	 beyond	 knowledge.	 You	 cannot	 know	 truth	 through	 the
scriptures,	 through	education,	 through	studying,	 through	gathering	 information,
because	whatsoever	 you	 accumulate	 will	 be	 about	 god,	 but	 it	 will	 not	 be	 the
experience	of	god	himself.
They	are	totally	different:	to	know	about	love	is	one	thing	and	to	know	love	is
totally	different.	To	know	about	 light	 is	one	 thing,	 and	 to	know	 light	 is	 totally
different.	Even	a	blind	man	can	know	about	light	but	he	cannot	know	light.	Our
so-called	pundits,	scholars,	knowledgeable	people,	are	just	blind	people:	people
who	know	about	god,	who	know	about	truth,	but	who	know	nothing	in	fact.	All
that	they	have	is	mere	words.
Don't	be	lost	in	the	jungle	of	words.	Remember	continuously	that	the	only	way
to	know	god	or	truth	is	through	experience.	Scriptures	cannot	help,	nobody	else
can	give	you	the	experience;	you	have	to	attain	it	on	your	own.
Buddha	says:	Be	a	light	unto	yourself.	And	that	is	basically	what	meditation	is.
Be	a	light	unto	yourself.	Sit	silently,	more	and	more	silently,	and	listen	to	your
own	being.	Make	the	mind	as	quiet	as	possible,	It	takes	time,	it	can't	be	done	in	a
hurry.	Patience	is	needed,	tremendous	patience	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	needed,	but	one	day	 it	happens.	One	day	 that	moment	arrives	when	mind	 is
absolutely	silent,	 there	 is	no	noise	 inside,	and	for	 the	first	 time	you	experience
something	 that	 transforms	 you,	 that	 radically	 transforms	 you,	 that	 takes	 you
beyond	time	into	eternity,	that	takes	you	beyond	death	into	life	abundant.
Guruprem	means	love	for	the	master.
That	is	going	to	be	your	sadhana,	your	path.	Nothing	else	is	needed.
Surrender	totally	--	with	no	conditions,	with	no	strings	attached	to	the	surrender	-
because	then	it	is	no	longer	surrender.	Be	in	a	mad	love.
All	 love	 is	mad,	 but	 love	 for	 the	master	 is	 the	maddest!	One	 cannot	 give	 any
reason	for	it.	It	is	irrational,	absurd	to	the	very	core,	and	because	of	its	absurdity
it	transforms.	It	takes	you	beyond	the	mind,	beyond	logic,	beyond	calculation.	It
takes	you	into	the	realm	of	the	heart,	and	ultimately	into	the	realm	of	being.
These	are	the	three	layers:	mind,	heart,	being.	Mind	is	logic,	heart	is	love,	being
is	beyond	both.	But	to	go	to	the	being	one	has	to	pass	through	love.	Love	is	the
path	which	reaches	the	goal	of	being.
So	in	your	name	I	have	put	your	whole	sadhana.	It	contains	your	whole	future.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
