SEX	HAS	FOUR	STAGES;
	
Those	stages	have	to	be	understood.	Only	at	the	fourth	stage	does	sex	become
the	Golden	Flower.	Not	to	understand	those	four	stages	is	dangerous,	and	the
whole	tradition	has	been	keeping	you	unaware	of	those	four	stages.
	
The	first	stage	is	autosexual.
When	the	child	is	born	he	is	a	narcissist.	He	loves	his	body	tremendously,	and
it	is	beautiful;	he	knows	only	HIS	body.	Just	sucking	his	own	thumb,	and	he	is	in
such	euphoria.	You	see	the	child	sucking	his	own	thumb	—	what	euphoria	is	on
his	face,	just	playing	with	his	own	body,	trying	to	take	his	toe	into	his	mouth,
making	a	circle	of	the	energy.	When	the	child	takes	his	toe	into	the	mouth	a
circle	is	created	and	the	energy	starts	moving	in	a	circle.	The	light	circulates
naturally	in	the	child	and	he	enjoys,	because	when	the	light	circulates	there	is
great	joy	inside.
	
The	child	plays	with	his	own	sexual	organs	not	knowing	they	are	sexual
organs.	He	has	not	yet	been	conditioned;	he	knows	his	body	as	one	whole.	And
certainly,	the	sexual	organs	are	the	most	sensitive	part	of	his	body.	He	utterly
enjoys	touching	them,	playing	with	them.
	
And	here	is	where	the	society,	the	poisonous	society,	enters	into	the	psyche	of
the	child:	“Don’t	touch!”	‘Don’t’	is	the	first	dirty,	four-letter	word.	And	out	of
this	one	four-letter	word,	then	many	more	come:	can’t,	won’t	—	these	are	all
four-letter	words.	Once	the	child	is	told	“Don’t!”	and	the	angry	parent,	mother	or
father,	and	those	eyes…	And	the	child’s	hand	is	taken	away	from	his	genital
organs,	which	are	naturally	very	enjoyable.	He	really	enjoys	it,	and	he	is	not
being	sexual	or	anything.	It	is	just	the	most	sensitive	part	of	his	body,	the	most
alive	part	of	his	body,	that’s	all.
	
But	our	conditioned	minds….	He	is	touching	a	sexual	organ;	that	is	bad,	we
take	his	hand	away.	We	create	guilt	in	the	child.
	
Now	we	have	started	destroying	his	natural	sexuality.	Now	we	have	started
poisoning	the	original	source	of	his	joy,	of	his	being.	Now	we	are	creating
hypocrisy	in	him;	he	will	become	a	diplomat.	When	the	parents	are	there	he	will
not	play	with	his	sexual	organs.	Now	the	first	lie	has	entered;	he	cannot	be	true.
Now	he	knows	that	if	he	is	true	to	himself,	if	he	respects	himself,	if	he	respects
his	own	joy,	if	he	respects	his	own	instinct,	then	the	parents	are	angry.	And	he	is
helpless	against	them,	he	is	dependent	on	them,	his	survival	is	with	them.	If	they
renounce	him,	he	will	be	dead;	so	the	question	is	of	choosing	whether	you	want
to	live.	The	condition	is	that	if	you	want	to	live	you	have	to	be	against	yourself,
and	the	child	has	to	yield.
	
The	child	is	the	most	exploited	phenomenon	in	the	world.	No	other	class	has
been	so	exploited	as	the	child.	He	cannot	do	anything:	he	cannot	make	unions	to
fight	with	the	parents,	he	cannot	go	to	the	court,	he	cannot	go	to	the	government.
He	has	no	way	to	protect	himself	against	the	parental	attack.
	
And	when	the	parents	stop	him,	they	are	stopping	him	because	of	their	own
conditioning;	their	parents	had	done	the	same	to	them.	They	are	very	much
embarrassed	by	the	child’s	touching	his	own	genital	organs	and	playing	with
them,	and	so	unashamedly.
	
Now	the	child	knows	nothing	of	shame,	he	is	innocent.	The	“don’t”	has
entered;	the	energy	recoils.	The	first	trauma	has	happened.	Now	the	child	will
never	be	able	to	accept	his	sexuality	naturally,	joyously.
Repression	has	happened	and	the	child	is	divided	in	two;	his	body	is	no	more
whole.	Some	part	of	the	body	is	not	acceptable,	some	part	of	the	body	is	ugly,
some	part	of	the	body	is	unworthy	to	be	part	of	his	body;	he	rejects	it.	Deep
down	in	his	psychology	he	starts	castrating	himself,	and	the	energy	recoils.
Energy	will	not	be	flowing	as	naturally	as	it	used	to	flow	before	this	“don’t”
happened.
	
And	the	natural	outcome	of	this	stupidity	that	has	been	perpetually	practiced
on	humanity	is	that	first	the	child	is	no	more	a	natural	being,	hypocrisy	has
entered.	He	has	to	hide	something	from	the	parents	or	he	has	to	feel	guilty.
	
This	is	the	autosexual	state:	many	people	remain	stuck	there.	That’s	why	so
much	masturbation	continues	all	over	the	world.	It	is	a	natural	state.	It	would
have	passed	on	its	own,	it	was	a	growing	phase,	but	the	parents	disturbed	the
energy’s	growing	phase.
	
The	child	becomes	stuck:	he	wants	to	play	with	his	genital	organs	and	he
cannot.	Repressing,	repressing,	one	day	it	is	too	much	and	he	is	possessed	by	the
sexual	energy.	And	once	he	has	started	masturbating,	it	may	become	a	habit,	a
mechanical	habit,	and	then	he	will	never	move	to	the	second	stage.
	
And	the	people	who	are	responsible	are	the	parents,	the	priest,	the	politicians
—	the	whole	social	mind	that	has	existed	up	to	now.
	
Now	this	man	may	remain	stuck	at	this	stage,	which	is	very	childish.
He	will	never	attain	to	full	grown-up	sexuality.	He	will	never	come	to	know
the	blissfulness	that	can	come	only	to	a	grown-up	sexual	being.	And	the	irony	is
that	these	are	the	same	people	who	condemn	masturbation	and	make	much	fuss
about	it.	And	they	make	such	statements	which	are	very	dangerous:	they	have
been	telling	people	that	if	you	masturbate	you	will	go	blind,	if	you	masturbate
you	will	become	a	zombie,	if	you	masturbate	you	will	never	be	intelligent,	you
will	remain	stupid.	Now	all	the	scientific	findings	are	agreed	upon	one	point:
that	masturbation	never	harms	anybody.	But	these	suggestions	harm.	Now	this	is
an	absolute	agreement;	there	are	no	two	opinions	about	it.	All	the	psychological
researches	agree	that	masturbation	never	harms	anybody,	it	is	a	natural	outlet	of
energy.
But	these	ideas	—	that	you	will	go	blind	—	may	make	it	dangerous	to	your
eyes,	because	again	and	again	you	will	think	that	you	will	go	blind,	that	you	will
go	blind,	that	you	will	go	blind….	So	many	people	are	using	glasses,	and	the
reason	may	not	be	in	the	eyes;	the	reason	may	be	just	somewhere	else.	So	many
millions	of	people	are	stupid,	and	the	reason	may	not	be	that	they	are	stupid	—
because	no	child	is	born	stupid,	all	children	are	born	intelligent.	The	reason	may
be	somewhere	else:	in	these	techniques.	You	will	remain	ill,	you	will	lose	self-
confidence.	And	so	many	people	are	afraid,	trembling	continuously,	have	no
trust,	no	self-confidence,	are	continuously	afraid,	because	they	know	what	they
have	been	doing.
	
Now	thousands	of	letters	come	to	me:	“We	are	caught	up	in	this	trap;	how	can
we	come	out	of	it?”
	
And	let	me	repeat:	masturbation	has	never	harmed	anybody.	But	the	moment
when	a	person	masturbates	is	a	very	sensitive	and	delicate	moment;	his	whole
being	is	open	and	flowing.	In	that	moment	if	some	suggestion	is	dropped	in	his
mind	—	and	he	himself	will	drop	the	suggestion,	“Now	what	if	I	go	mad?	if	I	go
blind?	if	I	remain	always	stupid?”	—	these	constant	autohypnotic	suggestions
are	the	cause	of	a	thousand	and	one	illnesses,	of	a	thousand	and	one
psychological	problems,	perversions.
	
Who	is	responsible	for	this?
	
And	people	who	come	to	me	come	with	all	these	perversions.	And	I	try	to
help	them,	and	many	are	helped	and	many	grow	beyond	it.	But	the	society	thinks
I	am	teaching	people	some	perversions.	This	is	just	unbelievable.	I	am	helping
you	to	grow	beyond	your	perversions;	the	society	has	given	you	perversions.
You	live	in	a	perverted	society!
	
If	the	child	is	allowed	the	natural	phase	of	autosexuality,	he	moves	on	his	own
to	the	second	phase,	the	homosexual	—	but	very	few	people	move	to	the	second
phase.	The	majority	remain	with	the	first	phase.
Even	while	making	love	to	a	woman	or	a	man	you	may	not	be	doing	anything
else	but	just	a	mutual	masturbation.	Because	very	few	people	attain	to	orgasmic
states,	very	few	people	come	to	the	glimpses	that	are	bound	to	be	there	if	your
sexuality	is	mature.	Very	few	people	come	to	know	about	God	through	their
lovemaking,	which	is	a	natural	phenomenon.	In	lovemaking,	meditation	happens
naturally.
	
But	it	doesn’t	happen,	and	the	reason	is	that	millions,	the	majority,	are	stuck	at
the	first	stage.	Even	if	they	have	got	married	and	they	have	children,	their
lovemaking	is	not	more	than	mutual	masturbation.
It	is	not	real	lovemaking.
	
Lovemaking	is	an	art,	a	great	art;	it	needs	great	sensitivity,	needs	great
awareness,	meditativeness,	it	needs	maturity.
	
THE	SECOND	PHASE	is	homosexual.
Few	people	move	to	the	second	phase;	it	is	a	natural	phase.	The	child	loves	his
body.	If	the	child	is	a	boy,	he	loves	a	boy’s	body,	his	body.	To	jump	to	a	woman’s
body,	to	a	girl’s	body,	would	be	too	much	of	a	big	gap.	Naturally,	first	he	moves
in	love	with	other	boys;	or	if	the	child	is	a	girl,	the	first	natural	instinct	is	to	love
other	girls	because	they	have	the	same	kind	of	body,	the	same	kind	of	being.	She
can	understand	the	girls	better	than	the	boys;	boys	are	a	world	apart.
	
The	homosexual	phase	is	a	natural	phase.	There	society	helps	people	to
remain	stuck	again,	because	it	creates	barriers	between	man	and	woman,	girls
and	boys.	If	those	barriers	are	not	there,	then	soon	the	homosexual	phase	fades
away;	the	interest	starts	happening	in	the	heterosex,	the	other	sex.	But	for	that,
society	does	not	give	chances	—	a	great	China	Wall	exists	between	the	boy	and
the	girl.	In	the	schools	they	have	to	sit	apart	or	they	have	to	be	educated
separately.	In	the	colleges	they	have	to	live	in	separate	hostels.
Their	meeting,	their	being	together,	is	not	accepted.
	
That	is	one	of	the	problems	that	is	happening	to	me	and	to	my	people	in	this
so-called	educated	city.	If	this	city	is	educated,	then	I	wonder	what	city	can	be
called	uneducated.	The	only	problem	to	the	Poonaites	is	that	my	people	are
moving	together,	man,	woman.	It	should	be	a	natural	phenomenon;	people
should	be	happy	that	men	and	women	are	moving	together,	creating	a	love-vibe
around.	But	they	have	never	moved	together;	they	start	feeling	disturbed.	They
start	feeling	jealous,	they	start	feeling	angry,	because	who	are	these	people	to
enjoy	what	has	not	been	given	to	them?	If	it	has	not	been	their	joy	they	will	not
allow	anybody	else	to	have	it	either.	But	they	will	not	say	it	that	way.	They	will
talk	great	philosophy.	They	will	hide	their	jealousies	behind	great	words	of
morality,	of	religion,	of	culture	—	and	they	don’t	know	anything	of	morality	or
religion	or	culture,	because	all	culture,	all	religion,	all	morality	has	to	be	based
on	love.	If	it	is	not	based	on	love	it	is	not	there	at	all.	It	is	just	a	game,	a	pseudo-
game	that	you	go	on	playing	on	the	surface.	Deep	down	you	remain	just	the
opposite	of	it.
	
Homosexuality	is	perpetuated	by	the	society	and	condemned	by	the	same
society.	These	strategies	have	to	be	understood.	The	same	society	condemns	the
homosexual,	calls	him	perverted,	criminal.	There	are	still	countries	where
homosexuality	is	punished,	you	can	be	sent	to	jail	for	ten	years.	There	have	been
countries	where	a	homosexual	could	have	been	sentenced	to	death!	And	it	is	the
same	society	that	creates	it!
	
You	divide	man	and	woman	apart	so	much,	you	create	watertight
compartments.	And	when	the	man	wants	to	love	he	cannot	find	the	woman,	and
the	woman	wants	to	love	and	she	cannot	find	a	man.	Then,	whatsoever	is
available…	she	starts	falling	in	love	with	a	woman,	he	starts	falling	in	love	with
a	man.	And	it	is	not	satisfying	either,	but	it	is	better	than	nothing.	Nature	has	to
find	its	way.	If	you	don’t	allow	the	natural	course,	it	will	find	some	roundabout
way.
Otherwise	homosexuality	is	a	natural	phase;	it	passes	by	itself.
	
AND	THE	THIRD	phase	is	heterosexual.
When	a	man	is	really	out	of	autosex,	homosex,	then	he	is	capable	and	mature
to	fall	in	love	with	a	woman	—	which	is	a	totally	different	world,	a	different
chemistry,	a	different	psychology,	a	different	spirituality.	Then	he	is	able	to	play
with	this	different	world,	this	different	organism.	They	are	poles	apart,	but	when
they	come	close	—
and	there	are	moments	when	they	are	really	close	and	overlapping	—
first	glimpses,	lightning	glimpses	of	samadhi	are	attained.
	
Because	it	does	not	happen,	many	people	think	that	I	am	just	talking
something	like	poetry.	It	is	not	poetry!	I	am	not	talking	fiction,	I	am	talking
reality.	What	I	am	saying	is	an	existential	phenomenon,	but	the	need	is	that	the
man	and	the	woman	must	be	mature.	They	must	have	gone	beyond	the	first	two
stages;	only	then	can	this	happen.	And	very	rarely,	very	rarely,	are	there	people
who	are	mature	men	and	mature	women.	So	nothing	happens;	they	make	love,
but	that	love	is	only	superficial.	Deep	down	they	are	autosexual,	or,	at	the	most,
homosexual.
	
To	love	a	woman	or	to	love	a	man,	a	new	kind	of	being	is	needed	which	can
accept	the	polar	opposite.	And	only	with	the	polar	opposite	—
just	as	with	negative	and	positive	electricity	meeting,	electricity	is	born,	just
like	that	—	when	life	electricities	meet,	man	and	woman,	yin	and	yang,	Shiva
and	Shakti,	when	that	meeting	happens,	that	merger,	that	oblivion,	that
drunkenness,	they	have	disappeared	as	separate	entities,	separate	egos.	They	are
no	longer	separately	there,	therefore	they	are	throbbing	as	one,	two	bodies	in	one
soul.
That	is	the	first	experience	of	no-mind,	no-ego,	no-time,	and	that	is	the	first
experience	of	samadhi.
	
Once	this	has	been	experienced,	then	a	desire	arises:	how	to	attain	this
samadhi	so	that	it	can	become	a	natural	state	of	affairs	and	you	need	not	depend
on	a	woman,	you	need	not	depend	on	a	man?	—	because	dependence	brings
slavery.	Only	out	of	the	experience	of	heterosexual	orgasm	does	a	person	start
searching	for	ways,	means,	and	methods	—
Yoga,	Tantra,	Tao	—	so	that	he	can	attain	the	same	state	on	his	own	or	on	her
own.
	
And	yes,	it	can	be	attained,	because	deep	inside	each	man	is	a	man	and	a
woman	—	half	comes	from	his	father,	half	comes	from	his	mother	—	and	each
woman	is	half	woman,	half	man.	So	once	you	have	known	it	happening	through
the	outside	woman,	you	will	have	the	first	glimpse	that	it	can	happen	within	too.
The	outer	woman	simply	triggered	it,	the	outer	man	simply	acted	as	a	catalytic
agent;	now	you	start	meditating.
	
THEN	THE	FOURTH	phase,	the	ultimate	phase	comes,	which	is
brahmacharya,	which	is	real	celibacy;	not	the	celibacy	of	the	monks	—	that	is
not	celibacy	at	all	—	but	the	celibacy	of	the	Buddhas.	It	is	brahmacharya.	Sex
has	disappeared;	you	don’t	need	the	outer	woman,	you	don’t	need	the	outer	man.
Now	your	inner	man	and	woman	have	fallen	in	a	togetherness,	and	this
togetherness	is	not	momentary.
This	is	real	marriage;	you	are	welded	together.	Now	to	be	orgasmic	is	your
natural	state.	A	Buddha	lives	in	orgasm	continuously;	he	breathes	in	and	out	in
orgasm.
	
These	are	the	four	stages	of	sex.
(…)
Osho,	The	Secret	of	Secrets,	Volume	2,	Chapter	15
(Available	on	Audio	only)
