1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Talks	given	from	1/1/81	to	31/1/81
Darshan	Diary
31	Chapters
Year	published:
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101015
ShortTitle:	POND01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	 truth	 is	 not	 known	 through	 mind	 and	 its	 turmoil.	 It	 is	 known	 through
absolute	 silence,	 then	 the	 mind	 stops	 all	 its	 functioning,	 then	 the	 mind	 is	 no
more.	 In	 that	 pause,	 in	 that	 silence,	 suddenly	 you	 become	 aware	 for	 the	 first
time,	 of	 that	 which	 is	 --	 call	 it	 truth,	 call	 it	 god,	 liberation,	 nirvana,	moksha,
different	names	for	the	same	phenomenon.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	deep	silence.
Because	of	this	a	great	problem	has	arisen.	The	secret	has	been	known	down	the
ages	that	silence	is	the	most	necessary	requirement;	hence	people	have	escaped
from	the	world	thinking	that	it	is	impossible	to	be	silent	in	the	world.	That	was
an	absolutely	wrong	conclusion,	a	wrong	 logic,	because	silence	has	nothing	 to
do	with	the	outside	world.	It	is	something	inner.	You	can	grow	it	anywhere.	You
can	go	to	the	mountains	but	your	mind	will	be	the	same;	it	will	go	on	playing	the
same	games.	In	fact,	it	will	play	the	same	games	more	in	the	mountains,	because
there	you	will	not	have	anything	else	to	do,	so	the	whole	energy	will	be	available
to	the	mind.
In	 the	 monasteries,	 in	 the	 deserts,	 in	 the	 mountains,	 the	 mind	 becomes	 more
predominant	 than	 in	 the	 marketplace,	 than	 in	 the	 ordinary	 life;	 hence	 my
insistence	 is	 that	 no	 sannyasin	 should	 leave	 the	world.	 It	 is	 the	 right	 place	 to
attain	to	silence.	One	has	to	learn	the	art;	escaping	is	not	going	to	help.
If	you	have	cancer,	escaping	to	the	desert	won't	help.	You	have	to	go	through	the
treatment	 --	 through	 surgery,	medicine	 --	 because	 the	 cancer	will	 go	with	 you
wherever	you	go.	And	the	same	mind	will	follow	you	anywhere.	So	the	question
is	 not	 of	 changing	 places	 on	 the	 outside,	 but	 of	 changing	 the	 inner	 attitude,
approach,	the	inner	gestalt.
Once	 you	 change	 the	 inner	 gestalt,	 the	 outside	 noise	 enhances	 your	 silence,	 it
does	not	disturb	it.	It	is	not	a	distraction	at	all,	it	becomes	a	nourishment.
One	of	 the	 old	Zen	haikus	 is	 'THE	OLD	POND...	 PLOP!'	 --	 vizualise	 it	 --	 an
ancient	pond,	very	old.
You	can	see	by	the	rocks,	by	the	moss	 that	has	gathered	on	the	rocks,	you	can
see	 by	 the	 trees	 that	 are	 standing	 on	 the	 bank.	 Everything	 shows	 its	 very
ancientness.	THE	OLD	POND...	PLOP!,	a	frog	jumps	in,	Plop!'	And	you	can	go
on	 sitting	of	 the	bank	of	 the	pond	but	 the	 sound	of	 the	 frog	 jumping	 in	 is	not
going	to	disturb	you.	In	fact,	 it	will	enhance.	You	will	see	that	from	before	the
frog	 jumped	 in	 to	after	 the	 frog	has	disappeared	 into	 the	pond,	 the	 silence	has
deepened.
And	the	same	can	be	done	with	everything	in	the	world	--	the	traffic	noise,	the
train	 passing	 by	 or	 the	 aeroplane	 in	 the	 clouds,	 the	 thunder,	 the	 lightning	 --
everything	 can	 become	 just	 a	 background.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 alert,	 watchful,
relaxed,	 resting	 in	 your	 being.	 Just	 simply	 being,	 not	 doing	 anything,	 then
nothing	disturbs.	Things	go	on	happening	and	you	remain	untouched	like	a	lotus
leaf	in	the	water.	And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about	living	in	the	world	and	yet
not	being	part	of	the	world,	living	in	the	world	but	not	allowing	the	world	to	live
in	you.
A	sannyasin	has	to	grow	great	love	for	silence.	Unless	you	love	silence	totally,	it
cannot	 happen.	And	 if	 you	 love,	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 happen.	 Love	 functions	 like	 a
magnet.	Once	 there	 is	 great	 love	 for	 silence	 you	 have	 created	 the	magnet	 and
then,	 from	 everywhere,	 from	 all	 the	 directions	 and	 dimensions,	 silence	 starts
pouring	in	you	like	river,	pouring	into	the	ocean.
There	are	people	who	would	like	to	be	silent,	but	just	liking	is	not	enough	--	love
is	needed.	Liking	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
very	 lukewarm,	 it	 is	 so-so.	 Love	 means	 you	 are	 passionately	 involved.	 Love
means	it	is	a	question	of	life	and	death.	Love	means	intensity,	totality.
And	 the	great	gifts	of	 life	are	only	 for	people	who	are	 ready	 to	go	 totally	 into
something,	whether	 it	 is	silence,	 freedom,	 truth	--	 it	does	not	matter	what	 it	 is.
All	the	ultimate	values	require	you	to	be	a	lover.
Sannyas	is	a	love	affair	with	silence.
The	most	unique	experience	of	life	is	that	of	silence;	otherwise	life	is	very	noisy.
Outside	 there	 is	 noise,	 inside	 there	 is	 noise,	 and	 both	 together	 are	 enough	 to
drive	anybody	crazy.	They	have	driven	the	whole	world	crazy.
One	has	to	stop	the	inner	noise	--	the	outer	noise	is	beyond	our	control	and	there
is	no	need	either	to	stop	it.	But	we	can	stop	the	inner	noise.	And	once	the	inner
noise	is	stopped	and	silence	settles	in,	the	outer	noise	is	no	longer	a	problem	at
all;	you	can	enjoy	it,	you	can	live	in	it	without	any	problem.
The	experience	of	 the	 inner	silence	 is	 the	most	unique,	 incomparable.	There	 is
no	 other	 experience	 which	 can	 be	 of	 so	 much	 value,	 because	 out	 of	 this
experience	 all	 experiences	 grow.	 It	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 the	 whole	 temple	 of
religion.
Without	 silence	 there	 is	 no	 truth,	 no	 freedom,	no	God.	With	 silence,	 suddenly
things	which	were	not,	they	are	there,	and	things	which	were	there	are	no	longer
there	--	your	vision	has	changed,	your	perspective	has	changed.
Silence	makes	you	capable	of	knowing	the	invisible,	of	knowing	the	unknowable
--	that's	its	uniqueness.
Bliss	is	a	flower,	a	lotus,	which	grows	in	the	lake	of	silence.	If	one	wants	to	grow
the	 lotuses,	one	needs	 the	 inner	consciousness	 to	become	just	a	 lake	of	silence
without	any	waves,	thoughts,	desires	--	just	a	lake	without	any	ripples	at	all.
And	it	 is	possible!	It	can	easily	happen.	It	can	happen	through	meditation;	and
meditation	means	only	one	thing:	awareness.	Be	aware	of	your	body,	its	actions,
be	aware	of	your	mind,	 its	 thoughts,	be	aware	of	your	heart,	 its	 feelings.	With
this	 three-dimensional	 awareness	 you	 will	 one	 day	 enter	 into	 that	 ultimate
silence	 in	which	 suddenly	 thousands	 of	 lotuses	 bloom.	Life	 becomes	 fragrant,
life	becomes	just	sheer	joy!
Shantirup	means	 silence	 is	 our	 self-nature.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 cultivated	 from
the	outside;	it	is	not	something	that	we	have	to	earn.	It	is	already	the	case.	It	is
just	 inside	 us	waiting	 like	 a	 seed	 for	 the	 right	 climate,	 right	 soil	 and	 the	 right
opportunity	to	sprout,	to	become	alive,	to	be	dynamic.	It	is	in	a	dormant	state,	as
if	asleep;	you	have	simply	to	wake	it	up.	Hence	it	is	not	such	a	difficult	project
as	people	think	it	is.
If	it	was	something	to	be	created	then	it	would	have	been	really	impossible.
We	have	brought	it	within	us	but	we	have	never	opened	our	innermost	core,	we
have	never	made	a	well	deep	enough	into	ourselves	so	that	we	can	see	what	is
there.	 We	 are	 acquainted	 only	 with	 our	 circumference;	 our	 own	 center	 is
unknown	to	us.	This	is	the	misery	of	man.
To	know	your	 center	 is	 to	 know	 silence	 simultaneously	 because	 it	 is	 our	 self-
nature,	it	is	our	very	being.
We	are	made	of	the	stuff	called	silence;	hence	the	longing	for	it.	It	is	a	longing
for	one's	own	being,	it	is	a	longing	for	one's	own	ultimate	truth,	and	that's	why	it
brings	 liberation.	 The	 moment	 you	 know	 your	 nature,	 you	 know	 there	 is	 no
death,	there	is	no	need	for	worry.	There	is	no	need	for	hurry,	the	whole	eternity	is
yours!
And	when	there	is	no	worry,	you	can	dance,	you	can	sing.	And	when	there	is	no
hurry,	you	can	enjoy	the	moment	totally.	There	is	nowhere	else	to	go.
The	Bibles,	 the	Korans,	 the	Vedas,	are	not	real	religion,	because	they	are	mere
words.	Of	course,	Moses	has	religion,	Jesus	has	religion,	the	seers	of	the	Vedas
have	 tasted	 religion,	 because	 they	 were	 silent	 people,	 but	 the	 moment	 you
communicate	your	silence	it	becomes	words	and	it	loves	all	truth.
Silence	is	incommunicable,	it	cannot	be	communicated	through	language	at	all.
Yes,	 there	 is	 a	way	of	 communion.	That's	what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about	getting	 in
tune	with	someone	who	has	already	become	silent	makes	you	silent.	Just	getting
in	harmony	with	a	master,	the	disciple	starts	becoming	the	same.	Just	sitting	by
the	side	of	 the	master,	doing	nothing,	one	starts	 imbibing	 the	spirit.	Nothing	 is
said,	nothing	is	heard,	but	a	flame	is	transferred.
The	Zen	people	 call	 it	 the	 transmission	beyond	 scriptures.	The	 true	 religion	 is
always	 a	 transmission	 beyond	 scriptures,	 beyond	words,	 beyond	 philosophies.
Hence	the	true	religion	can	only	be	experienced	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
with	 an	 enlightened,	 awakened	 master,	 with	 a	 Jesus,	 with	 a	 Buddha,	 with	 a
Zarathustra,	with	a	Lao	Tzu	you	can	experience	 it,	 but	not	 through	 the	words.
Although	 the	words	 belong	 to	 Buddha,	 still,	 the	moment	 something	 is	 said	 --
something	which	cannot	be	said	--	it	becomes	false.
And	this	is	one	of	the	problems	man	has	to	solve	because	we	remain	confined	by
theories,	ideologies,	words	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Mohammedanism,	Buddhism
--	these	are	all	words	now.	Once	when	a	man	like	Buddha	was	alive,	the	silence
was	there.	And	for	the	disciple,	even	those	words	were	significant	because	they
were	not	listening	to	the	words,	they	were	listening	to	the	source	of	the	words.
But	now	the	source	is	no	longer	available,	only	words	are	there.
Words	are	like	pictures.	A	picture	of	a	Buddha	or	a	Jesus	is	not	 the	Buddha	or
Jesus.	You	have	to	come	in	communion	with	an	authentic,	alive	master.
And	the	only	definition	of	the	authentic	and	the	alive	master	is	that	he	is	never
traditional,	 he	 is	 always	 rebellious.	 So	 that	 can	 become	 a	 demarcation	 line;
whenever	you	find	a	traditional	saint	he	is	phony.
Otherwise	he	cannot	be	traditional.	Rebellion	is	the	very	spirit	of	a	true	master	--
utter	rebellion.
And	to	be	a	disciple	of	somebody	who	is	living	silence	is	the	only	way	to	taste
religion,	 to	 have	 the	 first	 glimpse	 of	 religion,	 then	 certainly	 you	 can	 start
searching	for	it	within	yourself.	But	the	first	ray,	the	first	hit,	the	first	shock	that
wakes	you	up	has	to	come	from	the	master,	otherwise	one	can	go	on	sleeping	for
lives	together.
So	wherever	you	can	find	a	living	silence,	drink	of	it.	And	the	only	possibility	to
drink	 of	 it	 is	 to	 put	 your	mind	 aside,	 because	 you	 cannot	 argue	with	 silence.
Either	you	fall	in	a	deep	synchronicity	with	it	or	you	are	not	able	to	understand
it.	 There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 argumentation.	 It	 cannot	 be	 proved,	 it	 cannot	 be
disproved.	Logic	is	absolutely	impotent	about	it.
It	is	a	question	of	love	not	of	logic,	a	question	of	the	heart	not	of	the	head.
Man	lives	in	words,	and	to	live	in	words	is	not	to	live	at	all.	It	is	a	fake	life.	To
live	in	words	is	just	to	live	on	the	surface;	life	has	profound	depths	and	you	have
to	dive	to	know	them.	And	there	is	no	more	end	because	there	is	no	rock-bottom;
it	is	depth	and	depth	and	depth.	And	as	you	dive	deeper	you	become	more	and
more	 silent;	 or,	 vice	 versa,	 the	 more	 silent	 you	 become,	 the	 deeper	 is	 your
penetration	into	life.
The	moment	one	becomes	 absolutely	 silent,	 one	has	 found	 the	home,	now	 the
journey	 is	 complete,	 the	 pilgrimage	 is	 over,	 one	 can	 relax,	 the	 full	 point	 has
come.
But	 attachment	with	words	 is	 so	 deep	because	 for	 thousands	 of	 lives	we	have
lived	with	words	only.
People	don't	 love,	 they	only	know	 the	word	 'love';	people	know	nothing	about
god,	they	only	know	the	word
'god';	they	have	not	tasted	anything	of	truth,	but	the	word	is	there	and	they	go	on
playing	all	kinds	of	games	with	 it.	And	one	can	become	very	efficient	 --	 that's
what	 makes	 a	 person	 a	 scholar,	 a	 theologian,	 a	 philosopher.	 They	 become	 so
skilful	with	words;	and	one	word	leads	to	another	word,	and	so	on	and	so	forth,
ad	 infinitum,	 one	 can	 go	 on	 and	 on.	But	 the	whole	 thing	 is	 rubbish,	 just	 pure
rubbish.	There	 is	 no	 content	 in	 it.	Words	 are	 empty	 shells;	 there	 is	 nothing	 in
them.
The	meaning	is	contained	in	a	wordless	silence.	Hence	three	thousand	years	of
philosophizing	 has	 brought	 man	 to	 a	 state	 where	 everybody	 is	 feeling
meaningless.	 Life	 seems	 meaningless,	 love	 seems	 meaningless,	 everything
seems	 to	 be	 just	 a	 nightmare.	 This	 is	 the	 outcome	 of	 three	 thousand	 years	 of
great	 philosophers	 --	 Plato	 and	 Aristotle	 and	 Kant	 and	 Hegel	 and	 Bertrand
Russell	and	Wittgenstein	--	a	long,	long	history	of	philosophy,	much	ado	about
nothing.
They	have	created	great	dust	and	 they	go	on	creating	dust.	And	 that	dust	does
not	 help	 anybody	 to	 see;	 in	 fact,	 it	 makes	 it	 impossible	 to	 see	 anything.	 The
philosophers	are	throwing	dust	into	people's	eyes,	they	are	making	them	blind.
My	work	here	consists	in	just	the	opposite;	to	take	all	the	dust	from	your	eyes,	to
clean	 your	 eyes	 of	words,	 theories,	 philosophies,	 ideologies,	 religions	 --	 these
are	all	dust,	nothing	else.
Once	 your	 eyes	 are	 clean	 and	 clear,	 virgin,	 uncontaminated	 by	 anything,	 once
you	 can	 see	 the	 immediate	 reality,	 your	 life	 is	 transformed	 into	 bliss,	 into	 a
festival	of	lights,	into	a	continuous	ceremony.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101025
ShortTitle:	POND02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Truth	 is	 not	 something	 that	 one	 can	 think	 about,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 been.	 It	 needs	 a
different	kind	of	seeing	--
hence	the	symbol	of	 the	 third	eye.	Not	 that	 the	 third	eye	exists	physiologically
somewhere	 --	 it	 is	only	a	metaphor.	These	 two	eyes	are	not	enough,	 these	 two
eyes	 can	 see	 only	 the	material,	 the	 visible,	 the	measurable.	A	different	 insight
into	 reality	 is	needed	which	can	see	 the	hidden,,	which	can	see	 the	centre,	not
only	the	circumference.
Hence	 in	 the	 East	 we	 call	 philosophy	 'darshan'.	 Darshan	 means	 exactly	 what
'satyam'	means	the	act	of	seeing.
The	 philosopher	 thinks	 about	 truth,	 the	mystic	 sees	 it.	 And	 one	 can	 think	 for
millions	of	lives;	still,	it	will	go	about	and	about,	round	and	round	--	it	will	never
touch	 the	 centre.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 blind	 man	 thinking	 about	 light	 or	 a	 deaf	 man
thinking	 about	music,	 they	 cannot	 even	 begin	 --	 and	whatsoever	 they	 think	 is
going	 to	 be	basically	 false.	 It	 is	 impossible	 for	 them	 to	 come	 to	 a	 conclusion.
Hence	philosophy	has	not	arrived	at	any	conclusions	at	all,	 it	only	creates	new
problems.	 The	 old	 problems	 remain	 and	 the	 new	 are	 created,	 and	 all	 the	 so-
called	 answers	 that	 philosophy	 gives	 only	 trigger	 many	 more	 questions.	 The
foliage	 of	 philosophy	 has	 become	 very	 thick	 but	 it	 has	 not	 solved	 any	 real
problem.	man	remains	as	ignorant	as	ever.
Sannyas	means	we	will	be	trying	a	different	approach,	not	through	thinking	but
through	seeing.	And	meditation	is	the	art	of	creating	a	new	faculty	of	seeing.	It
helps	you	to	become	more	clear,	more	silent,	more	transparent.	And	the	deeper
your	 transparency,	 your	 clarity,	 the	 deeper	 you	 can	 enter	 into	 reality	 --	 in	 the
same	 proportion.	 If	 you	 can	 touch	 your	 own	 centre,	 you	 become	 immediately
capable	of	touching	the	centre	of	the	whole	universe.	And	that	penetration	brings
immense	freedom,	immense	bliss,	and	abundant	life.
Ruth	also	means	beauty,	a	vision	of	beauty.	The	person	who	is	capable	of	seeing
in	a	different	way	than	the	ordinary	becomes	aware	of	a	tremendous	beauty	that
always	 surrounds	 you;	 but	 your	 eyes	 are	 closed.	 it	 is	 showering	 on	 you,	 each
moment,	 but	 because	we	 are	 not	 vulnerable,	we	 are	 closed,	 hence	we	 become
almost	oblivious	to	the	beauty	of	existence.
Once	you	can	see,	then	the	first	experience	if	of	truth,	and	the	second	experience
is	of	the	good,	and	the	ultimate	experience	is	of	beauty.
We	have	two	trinities	in	the	Eastern	mystic	symbology.	One	is	satyam,	shivam,
sunderam	 --	 truth,	 good,	 beauty,	 the	 other	 is	 satchitananda:	 sat	 --	 truth,	 chit	 --
consciousness,	ananda	--	bliss.	But	both	start	with	the	truth.
Truth	is	the	door	and	then,	on	the	second	step,	you	experience	good,	virtue,	real
authentic	 morality	 on	 the	 one	 hand	 and	 on	 the	 other	 hand	 you	 experience
consciousness-	Consciousness	and	goodness	are	two	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
aspects	of	the	same	coin.	And	as	you	go	deeper	or	higher	--	which	are	the	same	-
-	then	you	come	across,	on	the	one	hand,	beauty,	on	the	other	hand,	bliss.	Beauty
and	bliss	are	again	two	aspects	of	the	same	phenomenon.
So,	 in	all,	 these	 two	 trinities	give	you	 five	 things,	not	 six,	because	 truth	 is	 the
common	ground	for	both.
Once	you	know	the	truth	you	become	capable	of	knowing	four	ultimate	values,
the	good,	and	simultaneously,	consciousness,	awakening,	awareness,	beauty,	and
simultaneously,	bliss,	joy,	celebration.
And	if	these	five	things	can	happen,	then	nothing	more	is	needed,	life	is	fulfilled,
one	has	arrived	at	this	source	and	at	the	goal.
Jesus	says	in	one	of	his	most	pregnant	statements,	Truth	brings	liberation.	But	it
is	 only	 half	 the	 truth	 that	 he	 is	 saying,	 the	 other	 half	 has	 to	 be	 remembered,
because	people	have	forgotten	the	other	half	completely.	Truth	liberates,	but	the
truth	has	to	be	your	own	--	only	then	does	it	liberate.	If	it	is	somebody	else's	then
it	 creates	 new	 bondages.	 The	 truth	 of	 Jesus	 liberates	 Jesus,	 but	 becomes	 a
bondage	 for	 all	Christians.	The	 truth	of	Buddha	brings	 freedom	 to	him,	but	 to
those	 who	 are	 blind	 followers,	 imitators,	 for	 them	 it	 creates	 only	 beautiful
chains.
So	one	has	 to	be	very	alert	not	 to	borrow	truth.	Borrowed	truth	brings	slavery.
Truth	 has	 to	 be	 discovered,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 yours.	Nobody	 else's	will	 go.	Neither
roses	can	give	it	to	you,	nor	Jesus,	nor	Mahavira,	nor	Buddha.
Nobody	 can	give	 it	 to	 you,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 commodity	which	 can	be	 transferred	or
given	 hence	 the	 function	 of	 the	 master	 is	 not	 to	 give	 you	 the	 truth	 but	 only
devices	to	discover	it	within	yourself.
The	 moment	 it	 is	 discovered	 all	 chains	 disappear,	 suddenly	 all	 walls	 have
evaporated,	 there	 is	 no	 prison	 at	 all.	 And	 a	 great	 laughter	 arises	 in	 one's
innermost	core	because	that	moment	one	realises	that	the	prison	was	just	an	idea,
a	dream,	a	nightmare.
Truth	 comes	 like	 light	 and	 all	 nightmares	 and	 all	 dreams	 and	 all	 darknesses
disappear.	And	to	 live	 in	 truth	 is	 the	only	way	to	 live.	All	other	ways	are	only
ways	to	die.
The	 person	who	 is	 not	 living	 his	 truth	 is	 simply	 living	 unnecessarily.	He	 is	 a
burden	to	himself	and	a	burden	to	the	earth,	he	is	a	curse	to	himself	and	a	curse
to	 others.	 The	 person	 who	 finds	 his	 truth	 and	 starts	 living	 it	 is	 a	 blessing	 to
himself	and	a	blessing	to	the	whole	universe.
Man	lives	in	lies	because	he	is	not	conscious,	and	unless	he	becomes	conscious
he	can	only	go	on	changing	his	 lies.	He	can	become	a	Christian	 from	being	a
Hindu	or	can	become	a	Mohammedan	from	being	a	Christian	or	can	become	a
Buddhist	from	being	a	Mohammedan	or	can	become	a	communist	from	being	a
Buddhist,	but	he	is	simply	changing	his	lies.
One	gets	bored	with	the	old	lies,	no	one	wants	to	change	them	and	for	a	few	days
one	feels	excited,	because	one	has	found	new	models	of	lies,	the	latest	models	of
lies.	But	 it	 is	 only	 a	honeymoon,	 soon	one	 finds	 the	 chains	 are	 the	 same.	The
shape	may	be	different,	the	make	may	be	different,	but	the	slavery	is	the	same.
Whether	 you	 are	 in	 a	 church	 or	 in	 a	 temple	 or	 in	 a	 mosque	 --	 it	 makes	 no
difference	at	all.	These	are	different	prisons	and	people	go	on	changing	from	one
prison	to	another.
So	it	is	not	a	question	of	changing	your	beliefs.	It	is	a	question	of	changing	your
consciousness	 --	 that's	what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about.	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 anything	 to
believe,	I	don't	give	you	any	consolation,	I	don't	give	you	any	rationalisation.	I
am	not	at	all	interested	in	replacing	your	old	ideology	with	a	new	one,	because
that	will	be	beautiful	only	for	a	few	days,	beautiful	only	because	it	 is	new,	not
because	it	is	really	beautiful.
Sometimes	 the	new	bondage	can	be	more	dangerous	 than	 the	old,	because	 the
old	bondage	is	bound	to	have	many	loopholes	and	the	new	bondage	is	going	to
be	 more	 technically	 efficient.	 The	 new	 bondage	 is	 bound	 to	 have	 fewer
loopholes.	 From	 an	 old	 Indian	 prison	 you	 can	 escape	 very	 easily,	 but	 from	 a
German	 concentration	 camp	 it	 is	 impossibles	 it	 is	 more	 scientific,	 more
technically	 developed.	 It	 is	 almost	 impossible.	 I	 have	 never	 heard	 of	 anybody
who	has	been	able	to	escape	from	a	Russian	prison.	It	cannot	happen.	Even	the
walls	have	ears!
In	 Russia	 you	 cannot	 talk	 sincerely,	 authentically,	 even	with	 your	 husband	 or
wife	--	you	cannot	open	your	heart.	Nobody	knows	who	is	a	spy.	Your	husband
is	 a	 member	 of	 the	 Communist	 party,	 your	 wife	 a	 member	 of	 the	 women's
section	 of	 the	 Communist	 party.	 Even	 your	 kids	 belong	 to	 the	 children's
Communist	party.	One	cannot	even	talk	truly	before	the	kids,	because	they	will
report,	they	are	being	taught	to	report,	to	spy.
In	Russia	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 any	 revolution.	 Every	 precaution	 has	 been
taken.
So	 sometimes	 the	 new	 ideology	 may	 appear	 good	 in	 the	 beginning	 but	 it	 is
bound	to	prove	far	more	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
dangerous	in	the	end	--	hence	I	am	totally	against	giving	you	any	belief.	On	the
contrary,	I	have	to	take	away	all	beliefs.	I	can	help	you	to	be	more	conscious	--
and	that	is	the	only	true	help,	this	true	love	and	the	true	compassion.
If	you	can	become	more	conscious,	more	aware,	then	truth	is	not	far	away.	It	is
within	 you	 --	 a	 conscious	 person	 is	 bound	 to	 find	 it,	 it	 is	 inevitable.	And	 the
moment	truth	is	found	all	is	found.
A	man	lives	without	knowing	his	truth,	his	meaning,	lives	in	utter	futility,	from
one	failure	to	another	failure.	He	dies	without	ever	really	being	born.	He	dies	in
the	 womb,	 millions	 of	 people	 are	 dying	 in	 the	 womb	 --	 not	 physically	 but
psychologically.
The	 function	 of	 the	master	 is	 to	 give	 you	 a	 new	 birth,	 and	 it	 can	 only	 be	 of
consciousness.	 You	 have	 to	 come	 out	 of	 your	 psychological	 bondage,	 your
mental	 slavery.	 You	 have	 to	 drop	 all	 kinds	 of	 beliefs,	 superstitions,	 theories,
hypotheses,	assumptions,	prejudices,	you	have	to	be	utterly	clean,	empty.	And	in
that	nothingness	you	will	discover	your	spiritual	virginity	--	and	that	is	the	truth.
The	purity	of	it	is	incalculable,	the	innocence	of	it	is	beyond	praise.
And	life	takes	wings	the	moment	one	his	discovered	one's	truth.	Then	the	whole
sky	is	yours	--	even	the	sky	is	not	the	limit.
The	 truth	 is	vast,	 so	vast	 that	 it	 can	contain	 contradictions.	 It	 is	 so	vast	 that	 it
contains	 everything,	 from	 the	 smallest	 blade	 of	 grass	 to	 the	 biggest	 star	 --	 it
contains	all.
And	man	can	enter	into	this	ocean	very	simply,	just	one	small	condition	has	to	be
fulfilled,	one	has	 to	drop	one's	ego,	 the	 idea	 that	 'I'm	separate.'	That's	 the	only
fallacy	 that	 keeps	 people	 away	 from	 God,	 away	 from	 truth,	 away	 from	 love,
away	from	bliss.	That's	the	only	fallacy	that	creates	hell	and	misery.
And	it	is	good	is	one	can	become	aware	from	this	age,	if	one	can	become	aware
from	one's	childhood,	then	much	can	be	saved,	much	unnecessary	trouble	can	be
saved.	One	need	not	go	through	all	kinds	of	stupidities.	One	can	find	a	short-cut.
There	is	no	necessity	that	everybody	should	behave	like	a	fool.
And	 it	 is	 easier	 for	 a	 child	 to	 drop	 the	 ego,	 because	 the	 child	 is	 still	 learning.
Every	child	is	born	without	an	ego,	then	he	has	to	learn	it.	He	force	him	to	learn,
we	tell	him	'You	are	separate,	you	are	special,	you	are	this,	you	are	that,'	and	the
child	 certainly	 starts	 accepting	 the	 beliefs	 of	 the	 parents,	 of	 the	 teachers.	And
they	are	all	saying	 'You	have	to	be	very	special,	extraordinary,	you	have	to	top
the	 class	 in	 the	 school.	 In	 the	 college,	 in	 the	 university;	 you	 have	 to	 become
famous.'	So	the	child	starts	thinking	'I	have	to	be	ambitious,'
and	ambition	breeds	the	ego.	Competition	breeds	the	ego	and	ego	brings	misery.
And	you	can	see	that	everywhere	all	people	are	miserable.
Only	once	in	a	while	they	smile,	and	that	smile	is	also	phony,	just	on	the	lips.	It
is	not	coming	from	their	heart,	it	cannot	come	from	their	heart	--	they	have	lost
track	of	their	heart	long	before.	They	don't	know	where	it	is.	They	smile	just	to
ba	polite,	to	be	formal,	but	there	is	no	joy,	there	is	no	dance	in	their	life.	And	life
can	be	a	great	ecstasy.	It	is	our	birthright	to	be	ecstatic.
Life	 should	burst	 forth	 into	 thousands	of	 flowers,	 roses	 and	 roses.	Life	 should
become	a	beautiful	 song,	 a	 dance.	And	 it	 can	 all	 happen	by	 a	 simple	method:
don't	 think	yourself	separate	 from	the	universe,	know	that	we	are	one	with	 the
whole,	we	come	from	the	whole	and	one	day	we	will	go	back	to	the	whole.
I	call	that	whole	the	ocean	and	we	are	just	small	dewdrops.	If	the	dewdrop	slips
into	the	ocean	it	becomes	the	ocean	--	and	that	is	the	moment	of	bliss,	ecstasy.
Gold	has	been	an	ancient	 symbol	 in	alchemy,	 it	 represents	 the	highest	peak	of
consciousness,	 the	 most	 precious	 in	 man.	 Ordinarily	 man	 lives	 a	 very
meaningless,	valueless	life,	but	 this	whole	meaninglessness	can	be	transformed
into	a	great	golden	aura.	One	just	needs	a	certain	chemical	process,	a	bridge,	to
transform	all	that	is	ordinary,	mundane,	into	something	sacred.
And	meditation	does	exactly	that,	as	you	become	more	and	more	silent,	you	start
seeing	 great	 miracles	 happening	 in	 your	 inner	 being,	 you	 start	 seeing	 stones
turning	 into	 diamonds,	 the	 baser	 metal	 turning	 into	 gold.	 And	 suddenly	 you
know	now	that	you	have	found	the	key	to	the	infinite	treasure	of	your	being.	And
that	treasure	of	your	being	is	what	I	call	the	truth.
To	me	truth	is	not	some	dry	philosophical	concept	it	is	a	lived	experience.	It	is
not	dry	like	a	desert,	it	is	not	empty,	it	is	not	abstract.	It	is	overflowing,	it	is	like
a	garden	full	of	flowers	and	trees	and	greenery	and	springs	and	birds	and	songs
and	sun	and	the	wind	and	the	rain.	It	contains	the	totality	of	existence.
So	by	truth	I	mean	your	true	being,	your	authentic	reality.	It	is	there	but	only	in
the	 seed.	 Meditation	 becomes	 a	 soil	 for	 the	 seed	 and	 then	 the	 seed	 starts
growing.	And	the	seed	sprouting	is	a	great	miracle.
The	seed	looks	so	dead,	so	dry.	If	you	cut	it	there	is	nothing	in	it,	but	out	of	that
nothingness	millions	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
flowers	are	possible.	They	say	that	a	single	seed	can	make	the	whole	earth	green
--	 that	 much	 potential.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 man,	 each	 man	 contains
flowers	 of	 consciousness,	 truth,	 love,	 beauty,	 but	 they	 are	 only	 in	 a	 seed,	We
have	 not	 given	 them	 the	 right	 soil	where	 the	 seed	 can	 die	 and	 the	 imprisoned
splendour	in	the	seed	can	become	revealed.
Truth	 is	 not	 a	 thought,	 it	 is	 an	 experience.	 We	 are	 thirsty	 for	 truth,	 so	 just
information	about	truth	is	not	going	to	quench	the	thirst	--	we	need	real	water,
living	water.	Unless	we	drink,	the	thirst	is	going	to	remain.
we	can	forget	the	thirst	if	we	become	too	occupied	with	theories	about	water,	but
again	and	again	it	will	assert,	again	and	again	it	will	be	there.	Unless	you	drink	it
is	not	going	to	be	quenched.
Truth	is	a	longing,	a	deep	longing	in	the	heart.	One	wants	to	know	the	meaning
of	 life,	 one	 has	 every	 right	 to	 ask	 'Who	 am	 I?	 Why	 am	 I	 here?	 For	 what
purpose?'	 And	 unless	 one	 knows	 it	 one's	 whole	 life	 is	 bound	 to	 remain
accidental,	 just	 like	 driftwood,	 no	 direction,	 no	 sense	 of	 direction,	 no	 destiny,
just	at	the	mercy	of	the	winds	and	the	waves,	driftwood	goes	on	moving	here	and
there,	not	knowing	why,	not	knowing	where,	not	knowing	from	where...	Such	a
life	cannot	be	joyous.
One	needs	a	deep	undercurrent	of	meaningfulness	--	and	that's	what	I	call	truth,
discovering	the	undercurrent	of	meaningfulness,	from	the	grave	to	the	cradle	and
from	the	cradle	to	the	grave.	I	have	been	born	many	times,	we	have	died	many
times,	each	death	brings	a	new	birth,	each	birth	brings	a	new	death.
We	 go	 on	moving	 like	 a	 wheel.	 The	 same	 spokes	 come	 again	 and	 again	 and
again	--	life	followed	by	death,	death	followed	by	life	--	and	everybody	is	utterly
bored.	You	can	see	it	everywhere	all	around	the	earth.
One	 thing	which	 is	common	to	all	human	beings	 is	boredom,	whatsoever	 their
nation,	whatsoever	their	religion,	whatsoever	their	race,	it	makes	no	difference,
they	are	all	bored,	bored	to	death.
And	 it	 is	 natural	 because	 they	have	 lived	 so	many	 lives	 and	gone	 through	 the
same	routine	and	there	seems	to	be	no	end	to	it	--	it	is	the	same	routine	again	and
again	and	again.
Unless	 one	 finds	 an	 undercurrent	 of	meaning,	 boredom	 remains.	 The	moment
you	discover	 the	meaning,	 the	moment	you	Experience	 the	meaning,	 suddenly
spring	comes	to	your	life.	Then	it	is	no	more	repetitive,	it	becomes	very	original.
Then	 each	 moment	 is	 new	 and	 original	 and	 boredom	 disappears.	 The	 same
energy	that	has	entangled	in	boredom	is	released	and	becomes	ecstasy.
But	 truth	 has	 to	 be	 an	 experience,	 not	 a	 belief	 not	 information,	 but	 a
transformation!
Truth	is	a	flowering	of	your	being.	It	is	coming	to	a	blossoming	state,	when	all
the	petals	of	your	 inner	 lotus	open	up.	We	in	 the	East	have	called	 the	ultimate
opening	of	 our	 consciousness	 the	one-thousand	petalled	 lotus	 --	One	 thousand
simply	represents	infinity.
Man	is	an	infinity.	Man	is	not	the	body,	not	the	mind,	these	are	limitations.	Man
is	consciousness	--
which	is	unlimited,	unbounded,	in	fact	there	is	no	possibility	to	define	it,	no	way
to	express	it,	no	word	is	adequate	to	contain	it.
It	 can	 be	 communicated	 only	 in	 silence,	 hence	 the	 discovery	 of	 the	 master-
disciple	 relationship.	 It	 is	something	absolutely	Eastern,	 it	has	not	happened	 in
the	 West.	 The	 West	 still	 thinks	 in	 terms	 of	 a	 teacher-student	 relationship.
Nothing	 parallel	 to	 it	 has	 happened	 in	 the	West.	Many	 times	 it	 has	 been	 tried
because	many	times	people	have	carried	the	message	from	the	East	to	the	West.
Jesus	 carried	 the	 message	 from	 the	 East	 to	 the	 West.	 For	 seventeen	 years
continuously	he	was	 travelling	 in	 the	East.	The	Bible	 contains	 only	 two	 small
references	to	his	life	before	he	left	for	this	pilgrimage.	One	is	when	he	was	born
and	another	that	when	he	was	twelve	years	of	age	he	argued	with	the	rabbis	in
the	temple.
Only	two	references,	one	about	his	birth	and	another	about	his	argument	with	the
rabbis	when	he	was	twelve.	After	that,	for	eighteen	years	continuously,	up	to	the
age	 thirty,	 there	 is	 no	 mention	 at	 what	 happened	 in	 those	 eighteen	 years?
Something	tremendous	must	have	happened,	because	out	of	those	eighteen	years
is	born	the	man	Jesus,	who	has	been	worshipped	by	the	Christians	for	these	two
thousand	 years.	 So	 those	 eighteen	 years	 were	 of	 tremendous	 significance,	 the
most	important	part	of	his	life,	in	those	years	he	was	travelling	all	over	the	East.
There	are	documents	ancient	enough	to	prove	the	fact.	He	learned	the	art,	a	very
subtle	art,	of	a	totally	new	dimension	of	relationship,	and	he	tried	to	create	that
kind	of	phenomenon	in	the	West.	But	he	failed,	because	the	whole	context	was
missing.
The	 same	was	 done	 by	 Pythagoras	 in	Greece,	 but	 he	 failed	 too.	 So	 once	 in	 a
while	the	attempt	has	been	made	but	it	never	succeeded.	But	the	East	has	lived
the	 experience	 for	 thousands	 of	 years,	 and	 has	 grown	 it	 into	 one	 of	 the	most
significant	 phenomena.	 It	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon	 than	 the	 teacher-
student	relationship.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 teacher	 simply	passes	on	 the	 information	 that	 he	has	 collected	 from	other
teachers,	he	simply	hands	over	borrowed	knowledge.	He	knows	nothing	himself,
one	ignorant	person	giving	some	theories	to	another	ignorant	person,	one	blind
man	 giving	 theories	 about	 light	 to	 other	 blind	 men;	 and	 this	 goes	 on	 from
generation	to	generation.
The	 master	 means	 one	 who	 sees,	 one	 who	 has	 experienced,	 one	 who	 has
blossomed.	And	the	disciple	has	just	to	be	with	the	master,	in	deep	love,	in	deep
trust.	The	heart	of	the	disciple	has	only	to	say	yes,	an	unconditional	yes	--	and	in
that	 very	 unconditional	 yesness,	 something	 transpires.	 Nothing	 is	 said	 by	 the
master,	 nothing	 is	 heard	 by	 the	 disciple,	 but	 something	 beyond	 the	 scriptures,
beyond	 the	words,	 reaches	 to	 the	very	heart	of	 the	disciple.	The	silence	of	 the
master	 triggers	 silence	 in	 the	 disciple,	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the	 master	 triggers	 a
process	which	opens	the	lotus	of	the	disciple	too!
The	master	is	a	catalytic	agent.
So	learn	how	to	be	a	disciple,	how	to	sit	silently	in	this	commune,	how	to	drop
your	ego,	and	how	to	be	just	a	deep	and	total	yes.	And	that's	all.	And	then	things
start	happening	of	their	own	accord.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101035
ShortTitle:	POND03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Mind	is	basically	a	discord	and	there	is	no	way	to	create	accord	in	the	mind.	Its
very	 nature	 is	 discord,	 because	 mind	 lives	 in	 duality,	 mind	 lives	 with	 polar
opposites.	 If	 there	 is	 love,	 to	 balance	 it	 there	 is	 also	 hate.	 It	 is	 impossible	 for
mind	just	to	be	loving	without	hating.	It	can	love	only	in	the	same	proportion	as
it	hates.	It	can	be	compassionate	only	in	the	same	proportion	as	it	can	be	angry.
They	go	together,	all	the	opposites.
The	mind	can	experience	beauty	only	because	it	can	experience	ugliness.	If	the
mind	 becomes	 incapable	 of	 experiencing	 hatred,	 ugliness,	 anger,	 it	 will	 also
become	incapable	of	love,	of	beauty,	of	compassion.
So	to	be	in	the	mind	is	to	be	constantly	in	conflict.	but	there	is	a	way	to	get	out
of	 the	mind,	 to	 slip	out	of	 this	 turmoil,	 this	 constant	 tension,	 anxiety,	 anguish.
That's	what	meditation	is	all	about	it	is	transcending	the	mind,	going	beyond	the
mind.	And	the	moment	you	are	beyond	the	mind	there	is	harmony.
Just	as	mind	is	discord,	no-mind	is	harmony.	And	to	be	harmonious	is	blissful.
That	 is	 another	 meaning	 of	 your	 name,	 blissfulness,	 cheerfulness.	 it	 is	 a	 by-
product	of	harmoniousness.
There	 have	 been	 two	 schools	 of	 seekers	 down	 the	 ages.	 The	 first	 school	 tries
somehow	to	manage	mind	in	such	a	way	as	to	discipline	it,	to	cultivate	it,	so	that
a	 certain	 harmony	 arises.	 That	 is	 the	 school	 of	 control,	 self-control,	 self-
discipline.	The	ascetics	down	the	ages	have	been	doing	that	forcing	the	mind	to
be	silent.	They	are	 trying	 to	do	something	which	 is	against	nature,	so	 they	can
only	succeed	momentarily,	again	and	again	the	discord	erupts.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Yes,	for	a	few	intervals	they	can	repress	the	mind,	but	the	volcano	will	erupt.	In
fact,	while	they	are	looking	peaceful,	their	mind	is	gathering	energy	to	explode.
Hence	 the	 ascetic	 lives	 in	 constant	 fear,	 in	 constant	 guilt,	 in	 constant
cautiousness.	But	a	life	of	cautiousness,	of	fear,	of	guilt,	cannot	be	cheerful.
That's	 why	 the	 ascetic	 becomes	 sad	 and	 serious	 and	 takes	 his	 revenge	 on	 the
world,	 all	 that	he	 is	 doing	he	has	 somehow	 to	get	 rewards	 for,	 so	he	becomes
holier-than-thou,	he	becomes	condemnatory	of	all	those	who	are	cheerful,	living
life	easily,	without	anxiety.	He	creates	the	same	fear	in	others,	the	same	guilt,	the
same	 anxiety.	That	 has	 been	 the	 sole	work	 of	 your	 so-called	 saints,	 they	 have
only	created	a	guilt-ridden	humanity.	That	is	their	great	work;	they	have	created
an	insane	humanity.
And	the	ascetic	can	fall	any	moment,	just	a	little	temptation	is	enough,	that's	why
he	is	so	afraid	of	temptation,	of	the	devil.	The	devil	exists	nowhere.	The	ascetic
has	created	the	devil	--	it	is	his	invention.
whatsoever	he	has	repressed	becomes	the	devil.	If	he	has	repressed	sex	then	the
devil	will	tempt	him	towards	sexuality.	If	he	has	repressed	his	desire	to	eat	then
the	devil	will	tempt	him	with	delicious	foods	--
spaghetti	and	all!	(laughter)	Then	the	devil	becomes	Italian!	(more	laughter)	The
devil	depends	on	the	ascetic.	For	example,	 the	Jaina	monks	in	India	have	been
forcing	themselves	to	fast	--	continuous	fasting.	Naturally,	after	a	certain	period
of	 fasting	 you	 lose	 sexual	 energy	 because	 sexual	 energy	 needs	 a	 certain
nourishing	of	 the	body.	After	 three	weeks	of	 fasting	you	become	 impotent.	So
the	Jaina	monk	is	not	tortured	by	the	devil	as	far	as	sex	is	concerned,	but	he	is
tortured	by	all	kinds	of	delicious	dishes,	those	dishes	go	on	floating	all	around	in
the	air.(laughter)	But	the	Christian	monk	eats	well	and	is	even	allowed	to	drink.
in	fact,	the	Christian	Catholic	monasteries	have	been	the	best	producers	of	wine,
down	the	ages	that	has	been	their	business.	Even	today	the	Christian	monasteries
have	the	ancientmost	wines	in	their	cellars,	the	most	precious	wine.	So	he	is	not
tortured	by	these	foods	he	is	tortured	by	the	woman,	because	he	has	renounced
the	woman.
Whatsoever	you	renounce	becomes	your	devil.	You	give	shape	and	form	and	life
to	 the	 devil	 by	 your	 repression,	 it	 is	 your	 unconscious	 which	 comes	 as	 a
projection	and	tempts	you.
A	man	who	is	trying	tc	control	his	desires	is	bound	to	be	trapped	into	a	thousand-
and-one	temptations.
His	life	becomes	unnecessarily	arduous,	a	self-imposed	torture.	So	I	am	against
that	school.	To	me	that	school	is	the	cause	of	all	the	misery	that	exists	today.	We
have	created	enough	technology	and	science	to	remove	misery	as	far	as	the	body
is	 concerned,	 but	 these	 people	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 have	 been	 creating	 a
certain	mind;	 even	 if	 you	 remove	 the	 physical	 causes	 of	misery	 your	mind	 is
there	which	science	cannot	change.
Only	a	totally	new	kind	of	religiousness	is	needed,	to	undo	the	work	of	your	so-
called	saints.	And	that	is	my	work:	undoing	their	work.
The	second	school	is	of	those	people	who	have	not	been	trying	to	control,	non-
ascetics	--	the	mystics.	It	consists	of	a	very	small	minority,	but	they	are	the	real
benefactors	of	humanity.	They	are	life-affirmative.
They	have	not	tried	to	control	the	mind	they	have	discovered	a	totally	different
technique	--	slipping	out	of	the	mind.	They	are	meditators,	they	are	mystics,	not
ascetics,	but	they	have	been	very	few	and	they	have	not	been	able	to	influence
humanity	at	large.	Their	voice	was	drowned	by	the	ascetics.
The	second	school	believes	not	in	controlling	but	in	understanding.	That's	what
meditation	is	all	about:	trying	to	watch	your	mind	so	that	you	can	understand	its
functioning,	its	mechanism,	its	ways,	its	subtle	strategies,	its	devices.
The	more	understanding	you	become,	the	more	aware	you	become,	the	more	you
are	out	of	the	mind.
That	transcendence	happens	through	understanding	nothing	else	is	needed.	One
simply	watches	--
choicelessly	 watching	 one's	 own	 mind,	 not	 trying	 to	 impose	 any	 idea,	 any
discipline	--	 just	watchfulness,	 just	 to	see	what	exactly	is	 the	case,	what	 is	 this
mind	and	what	is	going	on?	Unprejudiced,	detached,	one	simply	observes.	That
observation	is	meditation,	that	awareness	is	meditation.	And	the	miracle	is	 that
whenever	you	watch	something	you	are	separate	from	it	--	immediately,	instantly
you	are	separate.
Whatsoever	you	can	watch,	you	become	separate	from.
So	the	day	you	are	able	to	watch	your	mind	totally	you	are	out	of	it,	without	any
other	effort	you	have	transcended	the	mind.	And	then	there	is	immense	harmony,
great	 silence,	 profound	 peace.	 Not	 only	 are	 you	 harmonious	 within	 yourself,
once	 you	 are	 harmonious	 within	 yourself	 you	 become	 harmonious	 with	 the
whole	universe	too.
And	that	is	bliss,	that	is	ecstasy	--	that's	the	goal	of	sannyas!
Meditation	 gives	 you	 the	 real	 taste	 of	 life.	 Without	 meditation	 life	 is	 only
lukewarm,	it	has	no	intensity.
It	is	not	a	flame,	it	is	just	smoke.	Once	you	enter	into	meditation	life	is	a	flame
without	smoKe.	Such	great	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
intensity	explodes	 in	you	--	as	 if	suddenly	spring	has	come	in	 the	 inner	world,
flowers,	songs,	celebrations,	for	no	reason	at	all.	You	have	found	the	life-giving
source	within	you.
Mind	is	a	parasite,	it	sucks	your	energy,	it	deprives	you	of	your	life.	Of	course	it
does	not	kill	you.	No	parasite	can	afford	to	kill	you,	because	your	death	will	be
the	death	of	the	parasite,	so	every	parasite	only	exploits	you	to	a	certain	extent	--
but	it	 leaves	you	alive.	But	just	to	be	alive	is	not	enough.	Every	parasite	keeps
you	at	the	minimum,	and	life	blossoms	forth	only	at	the	maximum.
And	our	mind	is	not	one	parasite	but	many	parasites.	We	don't	have	one	mind,
we	have	many	minds.	We	are	multi-psychic	--	there	are	many	small	minds.	It	is
like	a	 federation	of	many	small	minds,	or	more	 like	a	Rotary	club,	by	 rotation
everyone	 becomes	 the	 king	 --	 for	 a	moment;	 or	 like	 a	wheel	moving	 --	 every
spoke	comes	to	the	top,	every	spoke	has	its	chance	to	be	on	the	top,	but	then	it
goes	back	and	another	spoke	comes	up.	Exactly	like	that,	every	part	of	the	mind
has	a	moment	when	it	reigns	--	but	it	is	momentary.
That's	why	there	is	so	much	confusion	and	mess	you	decide	one	thing	today	and
tomorrow	 you	 cannot	 do	 it,	 you	 yourself	 cancel	 it,	 because	 now	 it	 is	 another
mind.	The	mind	that	has	decided	is	no	more	there,	it	is	no	more	in	power.	In	the
evening	you	decide	'I	will	get	up	early	in	the	morning,'	and	when	the	time	comes
to	get	up,	you	yourself	decide	not	to	get	up.	And	when	you	get	up	again	as	late
as	usual	or	even	later,	you	feel	great	guilt,	you	start	condemning	yourself.	That	is
a	third	mind.
And	this	is	how	this	sorry-go-round	continues.	(laughter)	The	person	derides	not
to	 smoke;	 but	 he	 is	 not	 aware	 that	 the	mind	 that	 is	 deciding	 it	will	 not	 be	 in
power	long.	Soon	another	mind	will	be	there	which	will	decide	to	smoke	or	do
something	else.
These	many	minds	are	many	parasites	--	 they	go	on	destroying	your	life.	They
leave	 only	 enough	 life	 for	 you	 so	 that	 you	 can	 vegetate,	 drag.	They	 don't	 kill
you,	 certainly,	 because	 it	 is	 against	 their	 vested	 interests,	 but	 they	 don't	 allow
you	to	live	totally	either.
Meditation	means	 finding	 the	 source	of	your	 life	and	disconnecting	 the	 source
from	the	mind.	Then	mind	is	used	by	you,	not	vice	versa.	Right	now	the	mind	is
using	you,	the	mind	is	the	master	and	you	are	the	slave.	This	is	the	sole	cause	of
misery.	When	you	are	 the	master	and	 the	mind	 is	 just	a	mechanism	--	you	can
use	 it	whenever	you	want	 and	 if	you	don't	want	 it	you	don't	use	 it	 --	 then	 life
flares	up	and	the	joy	of	it	is	tremendous.	Then	for	the	first	time	you	know	that	to
know	life	is	to	know	god,	that	to	know	life	is	to	know	eternity.	Then	there	is	no
death.
Death	 is	 only	 because	we	 are	 existing	 at	 the	minimum.	When	we	 exist	 at	 the
maximum,	death	evaporates.	And	to	live	deathlessly	is	to	live	a	divine	life.	Then
naturally	 one	 is	 fearless,	 all	 anguish	 is	 dropped	 away,	 all	 darkness	 disappears.
then	life	is	light.
Your	name	also	means	a	 life-giving	 source.	 It	 is	 a	beautiful	name.	To	me	 it	 is
equivalent	to	god!
Discover	the	life-giving	source	in	you.	The	method	is	meditation.
Meditation	 is	 the	 door	 to	 the	 divine.	 To	 live	 in	 the	 mind	 is	 to	 live	 in	 the
mundane.	Mind	belongs	to	the	marketplace;	in	fact	it	is	prepared	for	the	market-
place	 --	 for	competition,	 for	ego	 trips,	 for	politics,	 for	money,	power,	prestige.
From	the	kindergarten,	school	to	the	university	we	create	the	mind	so	that	a	man
can	succeed	in	the	world.
Mind	is	basically	mundane	--	that's	its	purpose.	It	has	no	divine	quality	in	it.	And
there	are	 fools	who	go	on	 reading	 the	scriptures	and	 they	 think	 they	are	doing
some	divine	work.	You	read	the	scripture	through	the	mind,	you	understand	the
scripture	 through	 the	mind.	And	 there	are	 fools	who	go	on	praying	 to	god	and
whatsoever	they	are	praying	for	is	nothing	but	the	desires	of	their	mind.	They	are
asking	for	some	desires	to	be	fulfilled.
Neither	the	scriptures	nor	the	prayers	are	divine.	The	only	divine	phenomenon	is
when	you	fall	into	utter	silence,	when	the	mind	stops	functioning,	when	the	mind
ceases	and	you	are	no	 longer	with	any	 thought,	 any	memory,	 any	 fantasy,	 any
desire.	When	there	is	not	even	a	ripple	of	any	kind	in	you	--	when	you	are	simply
a	 no-mind	 --	 you	 experience	 for	 the	 first	 time	 what	 god	 is,	 you	 experience
godliness.	That	is	the	world	of	the	sacred.
So	move	from	the	mind	to	meditation.	There	is	no	other	proof	for	god,	the	only
proof	is	your	own	experience.	There	is	no	argument	which	can	prove	or	disprove
god,	but	one	can	experience.	But	the	experience	remains	individual.	Those	who
have	known,	they	have	known,	and	others	only	go	on	believing.
Beliefs	 belong	 to	 the	mind,	 experience	 belongs	 to	meditation	 --	 and	 these	 are
worlds	apart.
The	sannyasin	should	remember	again	and	again	that	he	has	to	pull	himself	out
of	his	mental	traps,	he	has	to	bring	all	his	energies	out	of	the	mind,	he	has	to	stop
cooperating	with	the	mind	and	enter	into	silence,	thoughtlessness.	And	then	the
kingdom	of	god	is	yours!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	mind	 functions	 as	 a	wall	 it	 separates	 you	 from	 the	whole,	 it	 is	 a	 divorce
from	the	whole.	And	of	course,	the	whole	is	not	at	a	loss,	we	are	at	a	loss.	We
could	have	been	oceanic	and	we	remain	just	small	drops	of	water.	We	could	have
been	 as	 vast	 as	 the	 universe	 and	 we	 become	 confined	 to	 a	 small	 body-mind
structure,	it	is	imprisonment.
Mind	 basically	 is	 ego.	 To	 get	 out	 of	 the	 mind	means	 to	 get	 in	 tune	 with	 the
whole.	Attunement	or	at-onement	--	that's	yoga.	It	is	a	marriage	with	the	whole,
melting	and	merging,	disappearing	as	a	separate	entity	and	becoming	one	with
the	whole.
The	mind	 is	 a	wall,	meditation	 is	 a	 bridge.	 The	mind	 disconnects,	meditation
reconnects.	And	once	you	are	one	with	the	whole	that	means	you	are	one	with
the	 trees	 and	 the	 mountains	 and	 the	 rivers	 and	 the	 stars	 and	 the	 sun	 and	 the
moon.	Then	 this	 infinity	 is	 yours	 and	 all	 its	 joys	 are	 yours.	 Life	 starts	 having
freedom	 for	 the	 first	 time	 because	 all	 limitations	 disappear	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the
ultimate	desire	of	the	human	heart.
We	 are	 searching	 continuously	 for	 the	 union,	 knowingly	 or	 unknowingly.	We
want	to	merge	with	the	whole,	because	only	with	the	whole	does	life	come	to	its
ultimate	peak.	Ecstasy	attains	its	Everest.
A	 man	 without	 meditation	 is	 a	 beggar.	 He	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 a	 beggar	 --	 it	 is
inevitable	 --	because	a	man	without	meditation	means	a	man	who	 is	 identified
with	the	mind,	and	mind	is	asking	continuously	for	more	and	more	and	more,	it
is	never	contented.
Discontent	is	its	very	nature,	so	whatsoever	you	give,	it	sill	ask	for	more.	It	does
not	matter	what	you	give,	its	demand	remains	the	same.	It	is	like	the	horizon:	the
distance	between	you	and	the	horizon	always	remains	the	same.	It	looks	so	close
by	--	 just	a	few	miles	ahead	--	and	you	think,	 if	you	run	fast	within	hours	you
will	reach,	but	you	can	never	reach.
As	you	are	running	towards	the	horizon,	the	horizon	is	running	away	from	you,
because	it	goes	not	really	exist,	it	is	illusory,	it	is	a	hallucination.	So	the	distance
between	you	and	the	horizon	is	constant	--	it	cannot	be	more,	it	cannot	be	less.	It
will	 remain	 the	 same.	The	 same	 is	 true	 about	mind	 and	 its	 desire	 the	distance
remains	the	same.
If	 you	 have	 ten	 thousand	 rupees	 it	 asks	 for	 one	 hundred	 thousand	 rupees,	 ten
times	more,	if	you	have	one	hundred	thousand	it	asks	again	ten	times	more.	And
it	goes	on	and	on,	so	wherever	you	are,	you	are	in	misery,	whatsoever	you	have
only	 creates	misery.	The	poor	 are	miserable,	 the	 rich	 are	miserable	 in	 fact	 the
rich	are	more	miserable	than	the	poor,	because	the	poor	can	hope,	the	rich	cannot
even	hope.	The	poor	man	can	think	that	tomorrow	things	will	be	better,	but	the
rich	man	knows	perfectly	well	by	his	experience	that	tomorrow	comes	but	things
are	never	better.
So	many	times	he	has	been	able	to	attain	whatsoever	the	mind	wanted,	and	again
mind	started	wanting	more.	Hence	a	very	strange	thing	happens,	the	poor	seem
more	contented	than	the	rich,	for	 the	rich	become	really	very	hopeless.	Once	a
society	 is	 affluent	 it	 starts	 feeling	 utterly	 hopeless,	 desperate,	 because
whatsoever	the	mind	had	always	wanted	is	there,	but	there	is	no	joy.	Mind	is	a
beggar,	if	one	wants	to	be	an	emperor	he	has	to	get	out	of	the	mind.
Meditation	allows	you	to	be	the	emperor,	because	suddenly	that	desire	for	more
is	 no	 more	 suddenly	 there	 is	 immense	 contentment	 --	 wherever	 you	 are,
whatsoever	you	are.	There	is	no	hankering	for	tomorrow	at	all.	This	moment	is
so	 fulfilling,	 this	 now,	 this	 here,	 is	 so	 immensely	 rich	 --	 who	 wants	 to	 be
anywhere	 else?	 It	 is	 so	 overwhelming	 that	 one	 disappears	 in	 the	 now	 and	 the
here,	and	that	brings	your	real	nature	to	the	surface	for	the	first	time.	Otherwise
the	mind	is	hovering	around	your	circumference	and	never	allows	your	centre	to
say	anything.	Once	the	mind	is	put	aside	then	your	being,	which	is	hidden	at	the
centre	like	a	seed,	starts	sprouting	its	branches,	its	flowers,	start	reaching	to	the
circumference,	your	joy	starts	overflowing.	Life	becomes	a	festival	of	lights.
Mind	 is	prose,	meditation	 is	poetry.	Mind	 is	businesslike,	calculative,	cunning.
Meditation	brings	a	totally	different	dimension	of	innocence,	of	a	heart	singing,
dancing,	 rejoicing.	 Mind	 is	 interested	 in	 money,	 power,	 prestige,	 meditation
opens	a	door	to	a	totally	different	style	of	life	--	 the	life	of	the	flowers	and	the
stars	and	the	birds	and	the	rivers	and	the	mountains.
It	 is	a	 total	 transformation	to	move	from	mind	to	meditation.	There	is	no	other
transformation	bigger	than	that.	There	has	never	been	and	there	will	never	be.	To
move	from	mind	to	meditation	is	to	have	travelled	the	greatest	distance	possible.
These	two	points	are	the	farthest	points	in	existence,	but	they	both	exist	within
you.
One	 can	 slip	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the	 heart	 very	 easily	 and	 from	 the	 heart	 to	 the
being	even	more	easily.	The	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
heart	is	only	a	caravanserai	--	just	an	overnight	stay,	a	motel!	(laughter)	But	it	is
a	necessary	state.	It	gives	you	rest	from	the	tiredness	of	the	mind,	it	rejuvenates
you,	it	gives	you	great	encouragement	to	go	deeper,	to	go	further.	It	opens	to	you
a	new	vista,	a	new	vision	of	the	being.	From	the	mind	you	cannot	see	anything
of	 the	being,	 from	the	mind	you	can	at	 the	most	hear	a	 few	whispers	 from	the
heart.	That	too	only	if	you	are	very	alert,	quiet;	then	the	still	small	voice	can	be
heard	 --	 those	 little	knocks	 from	 the	heart.	The	heart	does	not	 speak	 loudly,	 it
only	 whispers.	 It	 is	 a	 love-language,	 you	 cannot	 shout	 it.	 It	 cannot	 be	 like	 a
political	slogan!	it	can	only	be	a	whisper.
So	if	one	is	very	alert,	sensitive,	then	one	can	hear	the	whisper	of	the	heart.	It	is
constantly	calling	you,	but	it	is	like	the	distant	call	of	the	cuckoo:	unless	you	are
very	very	ready	and	listening	for	it,	 the	traffic	noise,	 the	trains,	 the	aeroplanes,
the	people,	will	not	allow	you	to	hear	it.	Once	you	are	groping	for	it	 there	is	a
possibility	that	you	will	be	able	to	put	aside	all	the	noise	and	you	will	be	able	to
hear	 the	 distant	 call	 of	 the	 cuckoo.	 That's	 exactly	 the	 heart's	 whisper,	 a	 very
distant	call,	but	very	silent.
Once	it	 is	heard	you	cannot	forget	 it.	 It	becomes	a	magnetic	pull	 --	 that's	what
leads	you	into	meditation.
First	meditation	becomes	a	 feeling,	a	movement	 from	thinking	 to	 feeling.	First
meditation	becomes	a	love	affair.	And	when	you	have	reached	to	the	heart	then
you	will	be	able	to	see	a	totally	different	world,	another	peak	with	virgin	snows.
But	it	becomes	possible	to	see	it	only	when	you	have	reached	to	the	heart;	then
you	can	see	the	world	of	being.
Meditation	begins	in	the	turmoil	of	the	mind,	reaches	to	a	certain	maturity	in	the
hear	world	of	feeling,	and	reaches	to	its	ultimate	flowering	in	the	world	of	being.
And	these	are	the	three	things	to	remember	first,	the	prose	of	the	mind,	second,
the	poetry	of	the	heart,	and	third,	just	the	silent	music,	the	soundless	sound,	what
Zen	people	call	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101045
ShortTitle:	POND04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	 has	 to	 transcend	 two	 things,	 the	 first	 is	 knowledge	 and	 the	 second	 is
ignorance;	but	knowledge	comes	first	because	it	 is	knowledge	that	goes	hiding
ignorance.	It	 is	a	cover-up.	Unless	you	renounce	knowledge,	you	will	never	be
able	to	know	your	ignorance.	Knowledge	is	a	deception.	It	keeps	one	deluded.
One	 goes	 on	 thinking	 'as	 if'	 one	 knows,	 but	 that	 'as	 if'	 is	 too	 big;	 one	 knows
nothing.	Knowledgeability	is	not	wisdom,	it	is	all	borrowed.	And	whatsoever	is
borrowed	is	ugly,	 it	 is	a	burden.	It	keeps	you	tethered	to	the	earth,	 it	cuts	your
wings,	it	does	not	allow	you	to	fly	into	the	unknown.
The	unknown	is	like	the	sky	and	the	known	is	like	the	earth.	knowledge	has	to
be	transcended;	and	that	is	not	only	the	first	thing	to	be	transcended,	that	is	also
the	more	difficult	thing.	To	renounce	ignorance	is	very	easy	because	knowledge
fulfils	 the	 ego,	 hence	 the	 difficulty.	 It	 is	 a	 nourishment	 for	 the	 ego,	 the	 ego
cannot	 exist	 without	 it.	 So	 the	 ego	 will	 find	 every	 rationalisation	 to	 cling	 to
knowledge.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Once	knowledge	 is	dropped,	once	you	become	as	 ignorant	as	a	child,	 then	 the
second	step	is	very	simple.	In	fact	you	have	not	 to	do	it,	 it	happens	of	 its	own
accord.	The	man	who	has	the	guts	to	renounce	knowledge	has	earned,	deserves,
the	help	of	the	whole.	He	has	proved	himself	worthy	of	the	grace	of	the	divine.
The	 moment	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 accept	 your	 ignorance,	 ignorance	 starts
disappearing.	Socrates	says	'I	know	only	one	thing	--	that	I	know	nothing';	he	has
renounced	knowledge.	Now	whatsoever	man	can	do	he	has	done.	He	has	done
the	most	impossible	task.
Now	the	second	thing	happens	as	a	gift	because	ignorance	does	not	feed	the	ego,
so	there	is	no	clinging	to	it,	no	attachment	to	it	--	who	wants	to	be	ignorant?	It
starts	 slipping,	 like	a	dead	 leaf	 it	 starts	 falling	 from	 the	 tree,	 the	 tree	need	not
renounce	 it.	 It	 is	 dead	 leaf;	 just	 a	 small	 breeze	or	 a	 rain	 shower,	 anything	 can
become	the	excuse	for	it	to	fall.	And	the	moment	ignorance	also	disappears	then
innocence	is	discovered	--
that	is	the	state	of	the	sage.
Sannyas	is	the	beginning,	the	beginning	of	the	pilgrimage	that	ends	in	sagehood.
I	don't	 call	 the	ultimate	 state	 the	 state	of	a	 saint	 --	 that	word	has	become	ugly
because	of	associations.	The	word	'sage'	is	still	virgin,	it	has	not	been	polluted	by
the	so-called	religions.
So	these	things	have	to	be	remembered:	renounce	knowledge	--	that	you	have	to
do	 --	 and	 then	 the	 second	 thing	 comes	 as	 a	 by-product,	 renunciation	 of
ignorance.	 And	 the	 third	 thing	 is	 discovered	 when	 knowledge	 and	 ignorance
both	are	gone.	You	are	gone,	the	ego	is	gone.	In	that	moment	of	egoless	silence
one	discovers	the	primal	innocence,	the	innocence	of	existence	itself.	That's	the
goal	of	sannyas!
Truth	 cannot	 be	 reflected	 upon.	 One	 cannot	 think	 it.	 One	 can	 think	 about	 it,
about	and	about.	The	word
'about'	means	around.	All	thinking	goes	in	circles,	it	never	reaches	to	the	centre.
All	 thinking	 is	 superficial,	 it	 never	 touches	 the	 real,	 the	 essential.	 That's	 why
philosophy	 is	 a	 failure,	 it	 has	 not	 contributed	 anything	 to	 humanity.	 It	 is	 the
greatest	 exercise	 in	 utter	 futility.	 For	 thousands	 of	 years	 thousands	 of	 talented
people	have	wasted	their	energies	and	lives	in	reflecting;	and	they	have	reflected
about	everything	possible,	out	they	have	not	come	to	any	conclusion.
Philosophy,	 by	 its	 nature,	 remains	 inconclusive,	 because	 every	 conclusion
creates	more	problems,	new	problems.	It	solves	nothing,	it	brings	more	and	more
problems	in.	Hence	I	am	against	philosophy.	My	approach	is	anti-philosophical,
it	is	existential.
Thinking	has	to	be	dropped	if	one	wants	to	know	the	truth.	Thinking	is	a	barrier,
not	a	bridge.	So	slowly	slowly	go	on	dropping	the	old	habit	of	thinking.	There
will	come	small	gaps,	intervals,	when	you	are	utterly	in	silence	and	there	is	no
thought.	In	those	moments	windows	start	opening	into	the	unknown.	And	a	few
glimpses	 are	 enough;	 they	 become	 the	 proof	 that	 if	 just	 a	 moment's
thoughtlessness	can	give	you	such	immense	insight	into	existence,	then	what	is
not	possible	if	you	can	put	all	thinking	aside	and	look	directly,	immediately.
Then	 one	 goes	 like	 an	 arrow,	 straight	 to	 the	 very	 centre	 of	 existence.	 And
knowing	it	liberates.
Science	is	concerned	with	the	objective	world,	with	that	which	is	outside	you,	it
is	not	concerned	with	yourself	at	all.	It	is	not	concerned	with	your	interiority.	It
is	leaving	aside	the	most	significant	phenomenon
--	it	is	ignoring	you.	It	is	concerned	with	everything	else.	It	is	really	very	strange
that	 the	 scientist	goes	on	working	on	everything	possible	but	he	never	bothers
about	 'Who	 am	 I?	What	 is	 this	 consciousness	 within	me?'	 Science	 leaves	 the
scientist	absolutely	ignored.	The	scientist	remains	utterly	ignorant	about	himself;
so	whatsoever	he	knows	 is	not	of	much	value,	because	at	 the	very	core	of	his
being	there	is	darkness.
Sannyas	is	concerned	with	the	inner,	the	discovery	of	your	own	centre.	It	is	the
greatest	 adventure	 there	 is;	 but	 one	 has	 to	 drop	 the	whole	 scientific	 approach.
One	has	to	forget	about	the	outside	world,	at	least	for	a	few	moments	every	day,
so	that	one	can	become	more	and	more	attuned	with	one's	own	being.
As	you	become	more	and	more	centred	you	become	luminous.	Your	inner	world
becomes	lighted	up.
And	then	whatsoever	you	do	in	the	outside	world	has	significance,	because	it	is
coming	from	a	source	of	light	and	not	from	a	source	of	darkness.	Science	can	be
a	 great	 blessing	 to	 humanity,	 but	 it	 has	 not	 been	 so	 up	 to	 now,	 for	 the	 simple
reason	 that	 science	 is	a	very	 lopsided	approach.	 It	has	become	 the	concern	 for
the	unessential,	forgetting	the	essential.
I	am	not	against	science,	but	the	priority	has	to	be	given	to	the	inner.	The	inner
comes	 first	 --	 only	 then	 the	 outer	 --	 because	 the	 roots	 of	 life	 are	 in	 the	 inside
world,	on	 the	outside	 there	are	only	 leaves	and	branches,	 foliage.	 If	you	forget
the	roots	the	tree	will	die,	if	you	go	on	feeding	and	nourishing	the	roots,	then	the
tree	will	have	thousands	of	flowers.
Science	can	become	a	blessing	if	it	is	in	the	hands	of	the	mystics.	But	one	of	the
misfortunes	of	human	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
history	 up	 to	 now	 is	 that	 the	 mystics	 don't	 care	 at	 all	 about	 science,	 and	 the
scientists	don't	care	about	the	world	of	the	mystic.	And	because	of	the	division
the	whole	 of	 humanity	 is	 suffering.	 I	 want	 to	 destroy	 that	 division,	 I	 want	 to
bring	things	into	a	deep	harmony	--	but	one	has	to	begin	from	the	inner.
So	 for	 the	 time	being	 forget	 all	 about	 science,	 the	outside	world,	 the	world	of
objects,	 and	 become	 absolutely	 concerned,	 totally	 absorbed	 with	 your
consciousness.	Once	the	inner	is	realised	then	do	whatsoever	you	feel	like	doing,
then	do	whatsoever	 is	 spontaneous	 to	you	--	and	 there	will	be	virtue	and	 there
will	be	service	and	there	will	be	love	and	there	will	be	compassion,	but	they	will
be	natural	phenomena,	not	cultivated.
When	virtue	comes	spontaneously	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.
One	 of	 the	 greatest	 fallacies	 that	 happens	 to	 almost	 every	 human	 being	 is	 the
misunderstanding	between	love	and	attachment.	People	think	attachment	is	love;
it	is	not.	It	is	just	the	opposite	of	love;	it	kills	love,	it	strangles	love.	When	your
being	 is	 full	of	attachment	 then	 love	cannot	grow;	 that	 is	not	 the	 right	climate
and	soil	for	love	to	grow.	Love	cannot	blossom.
Even	 if	 something	 like	 love	exists	 it	will	die.	One	has	 to	 learn	 lovingness	and
unlearn	 the	 subtle	 ways	 of	 attachment.	 One	 should	 not	 cling,	 one	 should	 not
possess	 the	 other,	 because	 the	moment	 you	 possess	 the	 other	 you	 destroy	 his
freedom,	and	he	will	never	be	able	to	forgive	you	for	that.	He	will	take	revenge.
And	 if	 you	 possess	 the	 other	 then	 he	 will	 try	 to	 possess	 you.	 Possessiveness
breeds	 possessiveness	 in	 the	 other;	 it	 becomes	 a	 challenge	 and	 a	 fight	 --	who
possesses	who?.	And	in	 this	war	of	possessiveness,	 love	dies	because	love	is	a
very	delicate	flower.	There	is	nothing	more	delicate	than	love.
And	once	your	love	dies	your	life	dies.	Then	one	can	go	on	vegetating	as	long	as
possible,	but	there	will	be	no	splendour,	no	song,	no	fragrance.	I	am	for	love	and
against	 attachments	 --	hence	 I	don't	 teach	 that	one	 should	 leave	 the	world	and
escape	to	the	mountains	or	the	monasteries.	The	people	who	have	escaped	to	the
mountains	 and	 the	monasteries	 are	 the	 people	 who	 are	 incapable	 of	 drooping
attachments	so	they	escape	from	the	very	situation	where	attachment	is	bound	to
happen.	They	know	it	--	so	they	throw	the	baby	with	the	bathwater.	Just	to	avoid
attachment	they	become	anti-love,	but	this	is	sheer	stupidity.
Without	 love	 there	 is	 no	 prayer,	 no	 god,	 without	 love	 there	 is	 no	 poetry,	 no
music,	no	celebration.	And	there	have	been	up	to	know	only	two	kinds	of	people
the	majority,	the	people	who	are	known	as	the	worldly	people	--	they	kill	love	by
attachment,	 and	 the	 so-called	other-worldly,	 the	monks	and	 the	nuns	of	 all	 the
religions	 --	 they	 escape	 from	 love	 because	 they	 are	 afraid	 of	 attachment,	 they
also	kill	love,	by	escaping.
One	 kills	 by	 escaping,	 but	 both	 become	 loveless.	 That's	 why	 the	 whole	 of
humanity	is	loveless.
And	a	life	without	love	is	a	body	without	breathing	it	is	a	corpse.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 learn	 the	 very	 subtle	 art	 of	 distinguishing	 between
attachment	 and	 love;	 and	 all	 attachment	 has	 to	 be	 dropped.	 One	 has	 to	 be
courageous	 enough	 to	 drop	 all	 attachment,	 all	 clinging,	 all	 jealousy,	 all
possessiveness	 --	 they	 all	 belong	 together,	 different	 faces	 of	 the	 same
phenomenon.	And	when	 all	 that	 is	 dropped,	 love	 arises	 in	 its	 purity.	And	 that
ascending	 love	 takes	 you	 with	 it	 to	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 existence,	 to	 self-
realisation,	to	the	experience	of	the	infinite,	to	the	realisation	of	the	eternal.
The	body	 is	 beautiful,	 the	 body	 is	 a	 temple;	 but	 it	 is	 beautiful	 only	when	you
know	 that	 you	 are	not	 it.	 If	 you	become	 identified	with	 it,	 it	 becomes	ugly;	 it
becomes	an	imprisonment	rather	than	a	temple.
If	you	know	that	 'I	am	not	 the	body	but	only	a	guest	and	the	body	is	 the	host,'
then	the	body	is	a	temple;	and	a	temple	has	a	beauty,	a	serenity,	a	sacredness.	If
you	forget	this	you	start	thinking	'I	am	the	body,'	as	millions	of	people	think	--
ninety-nine	point	nine	percent	of	all	people	think	that	they	are	body.	Even	the	so-
called	 spiritualists	 who	 talk	 about	 spirit	 and	 god,	 etcetera	 --	 if	 you	 look	 deep
down	in	them	you	will	find	they	are	identified	with	their	body.	And	all	that	they
go	on	saying	is	mere	jargon,	it	has	no	content	in	it,	empty	words.	But	words	have
their	own	fascination,	words	have	their	own	hypnotic	power.
There	are	words	which	can	become	obsessions,	which	can	dominate	your	whole
life.	But	reality	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
People	 live	 identified	 with	 the	 body;	 that's	 how	 the	 body	 becomes	 an
imprisonment.	 Rather	 than	 helping	 you	 to	 grow	 towards	 the	 infinite,	 your
identification	with	the	body	makes	you	very	finite,	very	small.	And	that	is	one	of
the	 fundamental	 causes	 of	 misery;	 the	 body	 will	 get	 old,	 then	 you	 will	 feel
afraid,	scared	--
you	are	getting	old;	the	body	will	be	ill	and	then	you	will	be	in	tremendous	fear	-
-	and	sooner	or	later	the	body	is	going	to	die.	You	may	not	think	about	it,	but	it	is
there.	You	see	people	dying	--	you	cannot	deny	it;	you	may	overlook	it	but	you
cannot	deny	it.	You	may	no	look	at	it,	you	may	bypass	it,	but	still	it	is	there	and
deep	down	you	know	that	you	have	to	die.	That	creates	a	trembling,	that	creates
a	sadness	inside	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
soon	 this	 life	 will	 be	 taken	 away	 from	 you	 --	 and	 nothing	 is	 fulfilled	 yet,	 no
flower	has	bloomed	yet.
Identification	with	the	body	becomes	identification	with	death,	old	age,	sickness.
The	moment	you	are	not	identified	with	the	body,	when	you	know	'I	am	separate,
I	 am	 consciousness,'	 you	 are	 immediately	 freed	 from	 illness,	 old	 age,	 death.
They	will	happen	to	the	body	but	you	are	just	a	witness	to	it	all,	just	an	onlooker;
it	has	nothing	to	do	with	you.
And	the	experience	that	whatsoever	happens	in	the	body	has	nothing	to	do	with
you	 is	 such	 a	 freedom,	 is	 such	 a	 relief,	 that	 suddenly	 you	 become	weightless.
That	weightlessness	is	one	of	the	significant	by-products	of	meditation.
Meditation	 simply	means	 the	 art	 of	witnessing.	 Start	 by	witnessing	 your	 body
and	then	your	mind	--	and	get	out	of	both!	In	fact	by	meditating	you	will	be	out
of	both.	And	the	day	one	knows	'I	am	not	the	body,	not	the	mind,'	one	has	come
home.	Then	one	knows	who	one	is.
The	 English	 words	 'mind'	 and	 'man',	 both	 come	 from	 the	 same	 Sanskrit	 root,
manu.
Mind	 is	 our	 past.	 It	 has	 no	 concern	 with	 the	 present	 or	 with	 the	 future,	 it	 is
simply	a	record	of	all	that	has	happened	in	the	past.	And	remember	that	to	live
through	 the	mind	 is	a	wrong	way	 to	 live,	because	 life	goes	on	changing	every
moment.	To	live	through	the	mind	means	to	live	through	the	past,	to	live	through
the	dead,	 to	 live	 through	 that	which	 is	no	more.	 It	will	distort	your	vision	and
you	will	never	be	adequate	to	the	situation	you	are	in,	you	will	always	fall	short
of	the	challenge,	your	response	will	never	be	right.
Mind	 is	 the	 cause	of	 all	 our	 failures,	because	mind	goes	on	giving	you	 ready-
made	answers.	Those	answers	may	have	been	right	in	some	other	situation	in	the
past	 but	 they	 are	no	 longer	 right	 because	 life	 has	 changed	 --	 life	 is	 a	 constant
change.	Only	one	 thing	 is	permanent	and	 that	 is	change.	Otherwise	everything
changes.
Heraclitus	says	'You	cannot	step	in	the	same	river	twice';	and	I	say	to	you,	you
cannot	step	in	the	same	river	even	once,	because	the	river	is	constantly	changing.
When	your	foot	touches	its	surface	it	is	one	river,	it	takes	time	for	your	foot	to	go
a	little	deeper	--	it	is	another	river.	By	the	time	you	reach	to	the	bottom,	of	the
river	 it	 is	 still	 some	 other	 water,	 it	 is	 no	 more	 the	 same	 water	 that	 you	 had
touched	on	the	surface.	So	even	to	step	once	in	the	same	river	is	impossible.
We	have	 to	 learn	not	 to	 function	 through	 the	mind.	Mind	 is	good	as	 a	 record,
good	 as	 a	 computer	 which	 contains	 all	 your	 past	 experiences,	 it	 is	 factually
helpful	 if	 you	 want	 to	 remember	 somebody's	 name	 --	 unless	 the	 person	 has
become	a	sannyasin!	(laughter)	Then	nobody	knows!	(more	laughter)	The	mind
is	good	for	factual	information;	somebody's	phone	number,	somebody's	address,
somebody's	name,	geography,	history
--	that	kind	of	nonsense!	But	as	far	as	reality	is	concerned	mind	has	nothing	to
say	to	you	--	so	put	it	aside	and	look	directly!	Contact	life	immediately	without
any	mediator.	Only	 then	will	you	be	able	 to	respond	adequately,	correctly;	and
each	response	will	bring	joy,	and	each	response	will	bring	immense	fulfilment.
That's	 what	 mediation	 is:	 putting	 the	 mind	 aside	 and	 responding	 to	 reality
freshly,	not	with	ready-made	answers.
Once	you	are	free	from	ready-made	answers	you	are	again	a	child,	innocent,	full
of	wonder,	full	of	awe;	and	the	whole	existence	starts	becoming	more	and	more
mysterious.	 The	 mind	 tries	 to	 demystify	 existence	 and	 meditation	 makes	 you
aware	of	its	eternal	mystery.	That's	what	is	meant	by	the	word	'god':	god	simply
means	that	existence	is	mysterious,	unfathomably	mysterious;	there	is	no	way	to
demystify	it.	The	more	we	know,	the	more	it	becomes	mysterious	the	more	we
know,	 the	 more	 we	 know	 that	 we	 are	 ignorant.	 And	 ultimately	 one	 stops	 the
whole	effort	to	know,	seeing	its	absurdity	one	drops	it,	and	only	then	one	starts
living.
Knowing	is	of	the	head,	living	is	of	your	total	being	and	it	is	living	that	will	give
you	the	taste	of	existence,	it	 is	 living;	that	will	bring	freedom,	love,	truth,	god.
Everything	that	is	valuable	comes	through	living	--	not	by	thinking,	not	by	mind,
not	by	ready-made	answers	given	to	you	by	others.	These	answers	gather	around
you	like	dust	gathering	on	a	mirror	and	the	mirror	becomes	less	and	less	a	mirror
the	more	dust	gathers.	One	day	comes	when	it	is	all	dust	and	there	is	no	mirror
left.
My	work	here	consists	in	helping	you	to	cleanse	your	mirror.	Mind	is	only	dust
and	meditation	is	the	mirror.
Religion	is	not	religiousness.	By	religion	I	mean	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Islam,
Buddhism,	the	organised	dogma,	cult,	creed,	a	certain	doctrine	which	pretends	to
explain	 everything.	 Religiousness	 is	 not	 a	 dogma,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 doctrine.
Religiousness	 is	 your	 flowering.	 It	 has	nothing	 to	do	with	 Jesus	or	Buddha	or
Krishna;	it	has	something	to	do	with	you,	with	your	reality.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	 be	 religious	 the	 first	 thing	 necessary	 is	 to	 forget	 about	 the	 religions.	 It	 is
religions	 which	 are	 preventing	 humanity	 from	 becoming	 religious,	 before	 a
person	 can	 become	 religious,	 Christianity,	 Hinduism,	 Jainism,	 or
Mohammedanism	 is	 imposed	 on	 him.	 The	 child	 is	 covered	 with	 all	 kinds	 of
conditionings,	 he	 is	programmed.	By	 the	 time	he	become	young,	 independent,
able	to	think,	his	whole	being	will	be	so	conditioned,	his	unconscious	will	be	so
full	of	cliches,	 that	he	will	not	be	able	to	find	a	way	on	his	own.	Somehow	he
will	remain	burdened	with	the	conditionings.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 one	 takes	 a	 tremendous	 step	 of	 de-conditioning
oneself.	 A	 sannyasin	 is	 no	 more	 a	 Christian,	 no	 more	 a	 Hindu,	 no	 more	 a
Mohammedan;	a	sannyasin	is	religious,	but	has	no	affiliation	with	any	religion.
His	effort	is	to	discover	truth	on	his	own.	And	that's	the	only	way	truth	can	ever
be	discovered.	It	cannot	be	given	to	you	by	anybody	else.	No	church	can	give	it,
no	priest	can	give	it.
The	master	never	gives	you	the	truth,	he	only	gives	you	methods	to	discover	the
truth	within	yourself.
And	 the	 moment	 truth	 is	 discovered	 you	 become	 a	 lotus	 flower,	 your	 life
becomes	fragrant	with	bliss,	with	beauty,	with	grace.	And	that	life	is	religious	--
but	then	there	is	no	adjective	at	all.	If	somebody	asks	 'To	what	religion...?'	you
cannot	answer.
We	 are	 not	 separate	 from	 existence,	 but	we	 all	 live	with	 the	 idea	 that	we	 are
separate.	The	idea	of	separation	is	the	ego.	The	idea	--	just	the	idea	--	creates	the
whole	 hell,	 because	 then	we	 become	 afraid	 for	 our	 own	 survival,	 we	 become
afraid	for	the	future,	we	become	afraid	that	one	day	we	will	have	to	die	--	and	it
is	all	concerned	with	 the	 idea	of	 the	ego.	We	don't	understand	 that	we	are	one
with	 the	 whole,	 that	 there	 has	 been	 no	 birth	 and	 no	 death,	 because	 we	 have
always	been	here,	part	of	the	whole.	It	is	just	like	a	wave	which	rises	in	the	sea:
it	was	there	in	the	sea	even	before	it	rose	--	and	when	it	has	gone	back	to	the	sea
to	 rest,	 it	 is	 still	 there.	 Birth	 and	 death	 both	 are	 false;	 the	 wave	 remains,
sometimes	latent,	resting,	sometimes	manifest,	but	it	is	there,	it	is	always	there.
It	is	part	of	the	ocean.
We	are	also	part	of	this	existence,	we	are	waves	of	this	ocean.	And	once	this	is
understood	 all	 anxiety	 disappears,	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	worry	 about.	We	will	be
here,	we	have	always	been	here.	This	is	our	home	--
we	are	part	of	it.	There	is	no	way	for	us	to	be	anywhere	else	or	not	to	be	--	there
is	no	way	at	all.
And	because	it	 is	only	an	idea	it	can	be	easily	dropped,	 there	 is	not	much	of	a
problem	 in	 it.	But	 sometimes	 just	 an	 idea	can	create	 so	much	 trouble	 that	one
cannot	believe	that	only	an	idea	--	which	has	no	correspondence	in	reality	--	can
create	so	much	trouble.
I	used	to	live	in	a	house	for	a	few	years	and	I	never	wanted	--	there	were	many
children	 in	 the	 family	 in	 that	 house	 --	 that	 the	 children	 should	 come	 into	my
room	and	do	their	things,	so	I	created	an	idea	that	in	that	room	there	was	a	ghost.
(laughter)	And	I	started	talking	about	the	ghost,	of	course,	the	children	became
afraid...	 about	 the	 stories.	 But	 I	 was	 surprised	 when	 even	 grownups	 started
thinking	that	there	was	a	ghost,	and	even	they	wouldn't	come	into	the	room.	One
day	even	the	owner	of	the	house	wanted	something	and	had	to	pass	through	that
room;	he	asked	me	to	come	along	with	him.	I	said	 'why?'	He	said	 'I	cannot	go
alone.
How	do	you	manage',	he	said,	'to	live	in	that	room?	One	night	you	had	gone	out
and	I	passed	from	the	room	and	I	saw	the	ghost!'	(much	laughter)	when	I	left	the
house	the	family	sold	it;	they	immediately	left	the	house.
I	wrote	a	letter	to	them.	I	asked	'What	is	the	matter?'	They	said	'We	cannot	live
there.	 It	was	 just	because	of	you	 that	we	managed;	we	knew	 that	 if	you	could
live	 in	 the	 room	 with	 the	 ghost	 then	 you	 have	 enough	 power!	 But	 we	 are
ordinary	people	and	you	are	gone	--	now	the	ghost	can	do	anything.	He	may	start
roaming	in	the	house...'	(laughter)
After	two	or	three	years	I	went	again	to	see	the	place	--	the	house	was	empty.	I
enquired	 'What	 happened?'	 The	 person	 who	 had	 purchased	 it	 came	 to	 know
about	the	ghost!	And	when	his	wife	saw	the	ghost	he	sold	the	house!	Since	then
the	house	is	empty;	now	it	is	known	as	the	"ghost	bungalow".	Nobody	is	ready
to	purchase	it,	nobody	is	ready	--	a	beautiful	house!	And	I	had	just	invented	the
ghost	 for	 the	 small	 children.	 I	 tried	 to	 persuade	 those	 people	 that	 there	 is	 no
ghost,	nothing	at	all;	it	was	just	an	invention	to	prevent	the	children	from	coming
into	 my	 room,	 disturbing	 my	 things,	 putting	 my	 things	 here	 and	 there,	 and	 I
didn't	want	any	noise	in	the	room	--	that	was	just	an	invention.	They	said	'Don't
you	try	to	convince	us	--
we	have	seen	with	our	own	eyes!'
The	ego	is	just	a	ghost.	Even	if	you	have	seen	it	with	your	own	eyes	it	is	just	a
ghost.	Once	you	understand,	it	disappears.	And	that	very	moment	life	is	a	dance,
a	celebration,	a	festival.
Mind	is	doubt,	the	heart	is	trust.	The	mind	cannot	trust,	the	heart	cannot	doubt;
so	 the	 whole	 thing	 is	 how	 to	 move	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the	 heart.	 There	 is	 no
question	of	creating	belief	because	belief	is	not	trust,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
belief	is	again	part	of	the	mind	--	as	much	as	doubt	is	part	of	the	mind.	Belief	is
just	a	trick	to	cover	up	doubt,	but	doubt	is	there,	hidden	behind	belief.	You	can
just	scratch	a	little	bit	and	you	will	find	doubt	coming	out	of	belief.
Belief	is	absolutely	useless.	It	has	not	helped	anybody	ever.	So	I	am	not	telling
you	to	believe;	I	am	telling	you	to	shift	your	centre	of	energy	from	the	head	to
the	heart.	Then,	just	as	in	the	head	doubt	is	natural,	in	the	heart	trust	is	natural,
because	 th	heart	 is	 full	of	 love	and	 the	head	 is	 full	of	 logic.	To	be	 in	 the	heart
suddenly	a	new	door	opens	--	the	door	of	trust.	And	it	goes	on	opening,	it	goes
on	becoming	wider	and	wider	and	wider.	It	becomes	so	wide	that	it	can	contain
the	whole	sky.	Even	the	sky	seems	to	be	smaller	than	the	trusting	heart.
And	the	process	is	simple:	just	become	aware	of	your	thought	processes;	watch
your	desires,	your	thoughts,	your	memories,	your	fantasies,	and	just	by	watching
you	will	come	to	feel	a	new	sense,	a	new	sensibility	that	as	you	watch	you	are
moving	 towards	 the	 heart	 --	 you	 are	 becoming	 more	 and	 more	 feeling-full.
Thinking	is	left	far	away	and	feeling	has	taken	its	place.
The	moment	thinking	is	replaced	by	feeling,	doubt	is	replaced	by	trust.	And	trust
does	not	mean	trusting	in	god	or	trusting	in	somebody;	it	is	simply	a	quality.	The
doubtful	 person	 doubts	 everything,	 everybody.	 He	 simply	 doubts	 --	 that's	 his
quality.	 and	 the	person	of	 trust,	 trusts	 --	 simply	 trusts.	There	 is	no	question	of
any	 object	 --	 not	 in	 the	 Bible,	 not	 in	 the	Koran,	 not	 in	 the	Gita	 --	 he	 simply
trusts...	the	trees,	the	mountains,	the	rivers,	the	stars,	the	people,	the	animals.	He
becomes	incapable	of	untrusting.	He	will	trust	even	the	person	who	betrays	him.
Jesus	 trusted	 to	 the	 last	moment	 the	 disciple	who	betrayed	him,	 Judas.	 In	 fact
because	of	 his	 trust,	 Judas	 committed	 suicide	 the	next	 day.	He	 could	not	 exist
any	longer;	he	became	so	burdened	with	'What	have	I	done?	and	to	whom?	To	a
man	 who	 trusted	 me,	 knowing	 perfectly	 well	 that	 I	 am	 going	 to	 betray	 him,
knowing	 exactly	 that	 this	 is	 the	 last	 night	 and	 I	 am	going	 to	 betray	 --	 still	 he
kissed	me	with	deep	love,	he	washed	my	feet	--	and	there	was	no	complaint,	not
even	 a	 question	 asked	 "Why	 have	 you	 done	 this?"'	 The	 crucifixion	 of	 Jesus
became	too	heavy	on	poor	Judas;	certainly	he	is	a	poor	man,	a	man	full	of	doubts
and	logic	and	scepticism.
But	 he	 had	 to	 commit	 suicide,	 he	 could	 not	 live	 any	 longer.	 Life	would	 have
been	far	more	difficult	 than	death.	The	story	of	Judas	is	 the	story	of	doubt	and
the	story	of	Jesus	is	the	story	of	trust.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101055
ShortTitle:	POND05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Compassion	 is	 possible	 without	 becoming	 conscious	 but	 then	 it	 is	 pseudo,
cultivated,	just	on	the	outside.
It	does	not	arise	from	the	innermost	core	of	your	being;	it	is	only	a	formal	thing.
And	that's	what	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
so-called	religions	have	been	doing	teaching	people	to	be	compassionate,	 to	be
of	service	to	others,	to	have	to	be	dutiful,	to	be	loving,	out	all	these	qualities	are
by-products,	so	when	you	try	them	directly	they	remain	phony.
The	 real	 thing	 is	 consciousness.	 The	 more	 conscious	 you	 become,
simultaneously,	compassion	starts	growing.	You	need	not	think	about	it	at	all;	it
comes	 of	 its	 own	 accord	 --	 and	 that	 is	 true	 religion.	 This	 is	 the	 distinction
between	 the	 true	 and	 the	 false:	 the	 false	 is	 cultivated,	 the	 true	 is	 spontaneous,
natural.	 The	 false	 is	 imposed	 from	 the	 outside,	 the	 true	 wells	 up	 from	 your
within.	And	whenever	something	comes	from	your	very	being	it	has	tremendous
beauty.
That	is	another	meaning	of	your	name,	beauty.	And	a	really	religious	person	will
be	beautiful.	His	whole	life	will	be	nothing	but	sheer	grace;	his	actions	will	show
his	being,	his	gestures	will	 indicate	 something	 invisible	 in	him,	his	words	will
contain	 his	 silence	 and	 his	 silence	 will	 be	 his	 message.	 So	 whether	 he	 is
speaking	or	not	speaking,	whether	he	is	doing	something	or	not	doing,	in	every
possible	way	grace	will	surround	him.	And	he	is	not	 trying	to	maintain	 it,	 it	 is
not	out	of	effort	--	he	has	not	to	think	at	all.	It	following	him	as	a	shadow	follows
one.	he	is	not	even	half-conscious	about	it;	hence	he	never	becomes	holier-than-
thou.	 We	 never	 pretends	 that	 he	 is	 doing	 something	 great	 --	 serving	 people,
humanity.
Whatsoever	he	is	doing	is	his	joy	to	do.	Nobody	is	obliged,	nobody	is	made	to
feel	owed	to	him;	in	fact	he	is	thankful	to	the	whole	existence	that	it	has	given
him	the	opportunity	to	live	a	beautiful	life,	blissful	life,	a	conscious	life.
Initiation	 into	 sannyas	 is	 initiation	 into	 consciousness.	 Become	 more	 aware,
alert,	 watchful.	 That	 single	 word	 'consciousness'	 contains	 the	 very	 soul	 of
religion.
Consciousness	is	the	only	hope	in	life,	the	unconscious	person	lives	hopelessly.
His	life	has	no	wonder,	no	surprise,	no	ecstasy.	It	is	dull,	it	is	dead.	He	somehow
drags	himself.	When	one	can	become	a	dance	just	to	go	on	dragging	yourself	is
stupid.	The	same	energy	that	becomes	a	burden	can	also	create	wings,	the	same
energy	that	creates	misery	can	open	the	doors	of	paradise.	All	that	is	needed	is
the	key	 --	and	consciousness	 is	 that	key.	 It	 is	a	master	key,	 it	 can	open	all	 the
locks	and	all	the	doors	and	all	the	mysteries.
So	my	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	my	people	become	more	and	more	conscious.
I	don't	give	you	any	commandments,	 I	don't	give	you	any	morality,	 I	give	you
only	a	simple	alchemical	secret,	be	more	conscious	--	and	that's	enough,	because
a	 conscious	 person	 cannot	 do	 anything	 wrong.	 And	 the	 unconscious	 person
cannot	do	anything	right;	the	unconscious	person	may	intend	to	do	right	but	he
will	 do	wrong.	And	 the	 conscious	 person	 has	 no	 intention	 left.	 The	more	 you
become	 conscious,	 all	 intentions	 and	 all	 desires	 are	 consumed	 by	 the	 fire	 of
consciousness.	The	 conscious	person	 simply	 lives	without	 any	motive.	And	 to
live	without	any	motive	is	to	live	an	authentic	life.	When	there	is	no	motive,	no
expectation,	 one	 cannot	 be	 frustrated,	 obviously;	 every	 frustration	 needs	 as	 a
prerequisite,	 expectation.	 The	 conscious	 person	 expects	 nothing,	 hence	 you
cannot	frustrate	him.	The	conscious	person	never	tries	to	succeed,	hence	he	can
never	be	a	failure.	The	conscious	person	lives	each	moment	for	the	sheer	joy	of
living	--	there	is	no	motive,	no	desire,	no	ambition.	And	that	is	the	true	definition
of	a	sannyasin	living	consciously	is	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
Misery	is	rooted	in	our	robot-like	behavior;	it	arises	out	of	our	unconsciousness.
You	 become	 angry	 because	 you	 are	 unconscious;	 if	 you	 are	 conscious,	 to	 be
angry	is	so	stupid	--	it	is	impossible	to	get	into	it.
One	can	get	into	it	only	unconsciously;	hence	even	unconscious	people	later	on
repent.	When	they	start	getting	a	little	bit	alert	to	what	they	have	done,	how	they
have	behaved,	how	ugly	it	was,	 then	they	start	saying	"I	am	sorry	--	I	did	it	 in
spite	of	myself!"	But	how	can	you	do	it	in	spite	of	yourself?	Then	who	does	it?
But	there	is	a	certain	significance	in	that	expression;	it	shows	that	when	you	are
unconscious	you	are	not	yourself.	Then	you	are	at	the	mercy	of	anything	that	is
happening	outside	--	it	can	drive	you	into	any	direction.	You	become	driftwood.
The	moment	you	are	conscious,	only	then	you	are;	and	then	you	cannot	be	angry,
cannot	 be	 jealous,	 cannot	 be	 dominating,	 cannot	 be	 egoistic.	 All	 these	 things
simply	disappear.
And	 these	 are	 the	 causes	 of	 our	misery.	Once	 they	 are	 gone	 life	 is	 bliss.	One
should	not	settle	for	less	than	that.
One	should	keep	oneself	alert,	so	much	so	that	one	day	your	life	becomes	just	a
blissfulness.	And	 it	 is	 possible,	 it	 is	 our	 potential,	 it	 is	 our	 birthright.	And	 the
whole	of	life	is	a	challenge	to	get	that	which	is	our	birthright.
There	 are	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 fallacies	 prevalent	 all	 around	 the	 world	 about
meditation.	Meditation	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
very	 simple:	 it	 is	 nothing	 but	 consciousness;	 it	 is	 not	 chanting.	 Chanting	 can
create	a	hypnosis.	 It	 is	not	using	a	mantra	or	a	 rosary	 --	 that	 too	 is	a	hypnotic
method;	it	can	give	you	a	certain	kind	of	rest.	Nothing	is	wrong	about	that	rest;	if
one	 is	 just	 trying	 to	 relax	 it	 is	 perfectly	 good	 --	 any	 hypnotic	method	 can	 be
helpful.
But	if	one	wants	to	know	the	truth	then	it	is	not	enough.
Meditation	 simply	 means	 transforming	 your	 unconsciousness	 into
consciousness.	Normally	only	one-tenth	of	our	mind	is	conscious,	nine-tenth	is
unconscious.	Just	a	 little	part	of	our	mind,	a	 thin	 layer	has	 light;	otherwise	 the
whole	house	is	in	darkness.
And	 sannyas	 is	 a	 challenge	 to	 grow	 that	 small	 light	 so	 much	 that	 the	 whole
house	is	flooded	with	light,	so	that	not	even	a	nook	or	corner	is	left	in	darkness.
And	then	the	whole	house	is	full	of	light,	then	life	is	a	miracle;	it	has	the	quality
of	magic.	Then	it	is	no	more	ordinary	--	everything	becomes	extraordinary.	The
mundane	is	transformed	into	the	sacred	and	the	small	things	of	life	start	having
such	tremendous	significance	 that	one	would	not	have	ever	 imagined:	ordinary
stones	look	as	beautiful	as	diamonds,	the	whole	existence	becomes	illuminated.
The	moment	you	are	illuminated	the	whole	existence	is	illuminated.
If	you	are	dark	then	the	whole	existence	is	dark.	It	all	depends	on	you.	You	will
find	only	yourself	reflected	in	thousands	of	ways	in	existence;	in	people's	eyes,
in	the	stars,	in	the	rivers,	in	the	mountains,	in	the	trees,	in	the	flowers,	you	will
find	yourself	 reflected.	 If	 you	 are	 full	 of	 darkness	 then	you	will	 not	 find	 light
anywhere.
Buddha	is	right	when	he	says,	"Be	a	light	unto	yourself."	That's	what	I	mean	by
becoming	conscious:	becoming	a	light	unto	yourself.	And	no	special	method	is
needed.	Just	watch.	Watch	the	actions	of	your	body:	while	walking,	watch;	while
eating,	 watch.	Watch	 the	 thought	 processes	 of	 the	 mind	 --	 thinking,	 desiring,
dreaming	--	watch.	Watch	the	subtle	emotions	--	feelings,	moods,	thoughts	--	just
watch.	These	is	no	need	to	choose	that	this	is	good	and	that	is	bad.	The	moment
you	start	choosing	you	lose	watchfulness;	you	are	no	more	a	sannyasin,	you	have
become	a	puritan,	a	moralist.
There	is	no	question	of	good	and	bad.	Whatsoever	is	the	case,	simply	watch	it,
without	any	judgement.
And	then	slowly	slowly,	from	the	body	to	the	mind,	from	the	mind	to	the	heart...
and	then	the	ultimate	jump	happens	one	day:	suddenly	you	become	watchful	of
watchfulness	itself	--	and	that	is	the	moment	when	the	house	is	full	of	light;	one
has	come	home.
Unconsciousness	 creates	 all	 kinds	 of	 ugliness	 in	 life;	 so	 whenever	 you	 find
anything	 ugly	 in	 you,	 just	 look	 for	 the	 cause;	 somewhere	 in	 the	 roots	will	 be
unconsciousness.	 If	 there	 is	 ambition	 the	 person	 becomes	 ugly.	 Politicians	 are
bound	to	be	ugly,	so	much	ambition,	so	much	desire	to	dominate	others,	by	any
means
--	because	time	is	short	and	competition	is	great.	There	are	so	many	people	who
are	 trying	 to	 be	 the	 president,	 to	 be	 the	 prime	 minister	 in	 such	 a	 great
competitive	world,	with	such	a	short	 life,	how	can	one	bother	about	 the	means
and	 the	 end?	Then	 any	means	 have	 to	 be	 used	 to	 fulfil	 your	 desire.	Then	 one
forgets	all	sense,	all	reason,	all	aesthetic	sensibility.
If	one	has	to	murder	people,	one	murders.	Joseph	Stalin	killed	at	least	ten	million
people,	 and	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	Mao	Tse	Tung,	 and	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about
Adolf	 Hitler.	 The	 whole	 history	 of	 humanity	 is	 full	 of	 these	 monsters	 --	 but
everybody	is	a	politician	more	or	less.	You	may	not	kill	thousands	of	people	or
millions	of	people	but	 in	your	own	small	way	you	will	kill	 a	 few	people,	you
will	kill	your	husband,	your	wife,	your	children	--	whomsoever	you	can	get	hold
of.	You	may	not	really	murder	but	you	may	kill	their	spirit.	The	ambitious	person
is	poisonous,	whatsoever	he	touches	becomes	a	poison.
But	 ambition	 exists	 because	 we	 are	 unconscious,	 otherwise	 who	 bothers	 to
dominate	anybody?	It	is	enough	to	be	a	master	of	oneself.	And	one	becomes	an
emperor,	far	greater	than	any	Alexander	the	Great,	because	by	knowing	oneself
one	comes	to	know	the	inner	kingdom	of	god	--	which	is	eternal	and	infinite.
All	that	is	thought	to	be	valuable	in	the	world	suddenly	becomes	useless.	When
you	 know	 your	 inner	 world	 everything	 pales,	 everything	 starts	 losing	 all
significance.	Once	you	have	 real	gold	you	will	know	that	up	 to	now	you	have
been	 carrying	 an	 unnecessary	 load,	 it	 was	 not	 real	 gold,	 it	 was	 false.	 It	 only
looked	like	gold,	it	glittered	like	gold,	but	all	that	glitters	is	not	gold.
But	 one	 has	 to	 first	 know	 the	 real,	 then	 only	 can	 one	 judge	 what	 is	 unreal,
otherwise	there	is	no	criterion.
Anger,	hatred	--	all	are	ugly.	And	if	so	many	uglinesses	are	there	in	your	mind,
so	many	 snakes	 and	 scorpions	 and	dogs	barking	 inside,	 and	wolves	 and	 foxes
(laughter)...	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 become	a	human	being	with	 all	 these	 creatures
inside.
Consciousness	helps	you	 in	a	very	simple	but	very	efficient	way.	The	moment
you	start	becoming	ambitious,	if	you	are	conscious,	suddenly	you	start	laughing
at	the	whole	idea	of	ambition;	it	looks	ridiculous,	it	drops	like	a	dead	leaf.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	you	are	getting	into	anger	and	you	become	conscious,	anger	evaporates,	 just
like	dewdrops	in	the	early	sun,	leaving	no	trace	behind.
Once	you	have	learned	that	to	be	conscious	is	the	real	miracle	of	life	--	because
it	drops	all	that	is	non	--
essential,	 all	 that	 is	ugly	 --	 then	what	 is	 left	 is	beautiful.	Beauty	has	not	 to	be
cultivated,	the	ugly	only	has	to	cease	and	the	beauty	rises.
Beauty	is	natural,	ugliness	is	unnatural.	Beauty	is	your	self-nature	and	ugliness	is
something	foreign.
That's	 why	 nobody	 wants	 to	 be	 ugly	 --	 but	 because	 of	 unconsciousness
everybody	has	to	be	ugly.
Everybody	wants	to	be	beautiful,	but	not	knowing	how	to	be	beautiful,	people	go
on	painting	their	faces,	trimming	their	hair,	trying	this	kind	of	dress	or	that	kind
of	dress,	dieting	and	all	kinds	of	things,	just	to	be	beautiful.	But	they	don't	know
that	this	is	not	going	to	help	much.
Beauty	is	something	inner.	Hence	it	is	there,	discovered,	it	starts	radiating	from
your	body,	from	your	mind,	from	everything	that	you	consist	of.	Once	your	inner
beauty	is	there	everything	is	beautified.
The	 real	 virtue	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 so-called	 morality.	 There	 is	 one	 very
profound	and	pregnant	statement	of	Socrates:	he	says	'Knowledge	is	virtue.'	By
knowledge	he	means	wisdom,	knowing,	because	his	whole	emphasis	was	'Know
thyself.'	That's	what	I	mean	by	being	conscious,	because	it	is	only	consciousness
that	makes	you	capable	of	knowing	yourself.	And	the	moment	you	have	known
yourself	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 harmful	 to	 anybody.	 It	 is	 simply	 impossible.
You	cannot	be	destructive.
It	is	like	a	man	who	has	eyes,	how	can	you	think	that	he	will	try	to	pass	through
the	wall?	He	as	eyes	so	he	knows	where	the	door	is	--	he	will	pass	through	the
door.	But	the	blind	man	can	try.	He	will	knock	all	around,	and	he	can	even	try	to
get	out	through	the	wall	or	from	the	window.	He	does	not	know	where	the	door
is.	He	will	ask	others	where	the	door	is.	But	each	moment	you	are	in	a	different
house	--	as	 far	as	 life	 is	concerned	--	and	each	moment	 the	house	 is	changing.
Sometimes	the	door	is	on	the	right	and	sometimes	it	is	on	the	left,	and	sometimes
it	is	at	the	back	and	sometimes	in	the	front	--	no	directions	from	others	can	be	of
much	help,	because	the	door	goes	on	changing.
You	need	your	own	eyes.	Then	there	is	no	need	to	ask,	then	there	is	no	need	to
think	 about	 the	 door	whenever	 you	want	 to	 get	 out,	 you	 simply	 look	 and	 you
know	where	the	door	is.	That's	what	consciousness	gives	you:	an	insight,	a	new
vision,	a	way	of	seeing,	a	new	eye	--	in	the	east	we	call	it	the	third	eye.	That	is
only	a	metaphor	but	there	are	a	few	fools	who	try	to	dissect	a	dead	body	to	find
out	where	the	third	eye	is.
These	 fools	 can	 be	 great	 experts,	 scientists,	 but	 that	 does	 not	 make	 any
difference.	They	have	not	understood	the	metaphor,	they	have	not	understood	the
poetry	of	the	word.	It	is	only	an	expression.	The	third	eye	does	not	exist	in	the
physical	body,	it	is	only	a	way	of	saying	that	you	have	found	how	to	see	directly
into	reality,	you	have	become	conscious.	And	out	of	that	consciousness	is	virtue.
And	remember:	if	virtue	is	imposed	from	the	outside	then	it	is	a	regimentation.
When	it	comes	from	the	within	it	has	an	individuality.	It	is	not	like	ready-made
clothes,	it	is	made	for	you,	it	is	made	by	your	consciousness.	Its	harmony	is	total
with	your	being.
Now	Moses	wrote	the	Ten	Commandments	three	thousand	years	ago,	and	there
are	fools	who	are	still	following	them.	They	were	perfectly	good	for	Moses	but
they	are	not	good	for	anybody	else.	They	come	out	of	his	consciousness.	That's
the	parable,	 that	 they	came	out	of	 an	encounter	with	god,	 that's	 an	old	way	of
saying	that	one	has	become	so	conscious	that	one	knows	what	truth	is,	what	god
is.	His	experience	of	the	ultimate	truth	gave	birth	to	those	Ten	Commandments;
they	were	only	applicable	to	him	--	and	to	nobody	else,
In	India,	Hindus	have	followed	the	rules	and	the	discipline	of	Manu,	who	is	even
farther	 beck	 than	 Moses	 --	 five	 thousand	 years	 old.	 They	 may	 have	 been
perfectly	good	for	Manu	but	they	are	not	at	all	adequate	for	anybody	else.	And
this	 is	 my	 insistence,	 that	 each	 person	 has	 to	 find	 his	 own	 religion,	 his	 own
morality,	his	own	virtue.	Then	your	virtue	has	your	 signature.	Then	 it	 is	alive,
breathing,	and	 then	you	are	doing	 it	not	 for	any	other	 reason,	but	 just	because
that's	the	right	thing	to	do.	Your	very	heart	wants	to	do	it.
Then	 you	 are	 not	 asking	 for	 any	 rewards	 in	 heaven,	 you	 are	 not	 greedy	 for
anything	 and	 you	 are	 not	 afraid	 of	 hell,	 of	 any	 punishment.	 You	 are	 doing
exactly	 what	 your	 insight	 is	 tell	 in;	 you	 to	 do	 --	 whatsoever	 the	 result,
whatsoever	the	ultimate	consequence.	Nobody	of	deep	consciousness	ever	cares
about	the	consequences.	He	acts	immediately,	responds	to	reality	directly	--	and
that's	 all.	And	 he	 enjoys	 the	moment	when	 he	 acts	with	 reality,	with	 his	 total
being.	He	enjoys	that	harmony,	that	meeting,	that	merger,	that	union.
Consciousness	 changes	 everything	 from	 prose	 to	 poetry,	 from	mathematics	 to
music,	from	logic	to	love.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	a	radical	transformation	--	and	only	after	this	transformation	does	one	start
enjoying	 the	 adventure	 of	 life.	 Then	 each	 moment	 is	 ecstatic,	 exquisite.	 Its
beauty	 is	 immense,	 unfathomable,	 immeasurable,	 inestimable.	 One	 can
experience	it	but	one	cannot	express	it.	No	expression	is	possible,	no	definition
is	possible.	It	is	so	vast	and	our	words	are	so	small;	our	words	are	like	dewdrops
and	the	experience	of	consciousness	is	oceanic.	You	cannot	force	the	ocean	into
a	dewdrop.
The	experience	of	consciousness	is	absolutely	wordless.	It	happens	only	in	utter
silence.	The	silence	 is	so	profound	that	even	you	are	not	 there.	It	 is	 just	space.
Everything	is	gone	--	your	mind	is	gone,	your	ego	is	gone,	there	is	space	full	of
light.	This	experience	has	been	described	as	god	or	as	nirvana	or	as	truth.
And	if	one	wants	to	catch	some	glimpse	of	it,	then	prose	is	the	most	inadequate
thing;	maybe	poetry	can	reflect	it	a	little	bit	--	just	a	little	bit.	Something	of	it	can
be	communicated	through	poetry,	something	of	it	one	can	sing.	One	may	not	be
able	to	say	but	one	can	sing	it.	It	will	not	be	in	the	words,	it	will	oe	in	the	very
background	of	the	song;	not	in	the	song	itself,	but	in	the	gaps,	in	the	pauses,	in
the	intervals.
The	poetry	is	not	in	the	words,	it	is	always	between	the	words	and	between	the
lines.	 It	 is	 something	 surrounding	 the	word	 like	 an	 invisible	 aura,	but	 it	 is	not
exactly	 in	 the	word.	Or	 it	 can	be	 experienced	 a	 little	 bit	 in	music,	 even	better
than	in	poetry,	because	music	is	the	highest	form	of	poetry.	Words	are	gone:	only
wounds	are	there	and	the	harmony	of	the	sounds.
It	 is	 not	 sounds	 that	make	 the	music	 but	 the	 harmony	 of	 the	 sounds.	And	 the
consciousness	 that	 I	 am	 talking	 about	 creates	 a	 harmony	 in	 your	 inner	 world
among	 all	 your	 fragments,	 it	 joins	 them,	 it	 integrates	 them	 into	 one	 reality.
Ordinarily	 we	 are	 thousands	 of	 thing,	 not	 one.	 we	 are	 many,	 a	 multitude,	 a
crowd.	 But	 when	 one	 becomes	 conscious,	 slowly	 slowly	 the	 crowd	 loses	 its
many-ness	 and	 becomes	 one,	 it	 becomes	 an	 integration,	 a	 crystallization	 and
then	there	is	great	harmony.
First	 one	 has	 to	 become	 harmonious	 within	 oneself	 and	 then	 one	 can	 be
harmonious	with	the	universe,	with	the	stars	and	the	moon	and	the	sun	and	the
trees	 and	 the	 birds	 --	 this	whole	 vast	 infinite	 universe,	 one	 can	merge	 into	 it.
There	are	two	mergers,	one	within	yourself	--	the	first	unity,	and	the	second,	with
the	whole	--	 the	second	unity.	And	within	these	two	steps	the	whole	journey	is
complete.
First	 become	one	with	 yourself,	 then	become	one	with	 the	whole	 --	 and	 that's
what	I	call	holiness.	To	me	that's	the	goal	of	sannyas,	become	conscious	so	your
life	becomes	nothing	but	poetry,	music,	harmony,	unity,	oneness.	And	unless	 it
happens	one	has	lived	in	utter	futility,	in	vain.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101065
ShortTitle:	POND06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Life	 is	 a	 curse	 if	 you	 are	 not	 aware.	 Then	 it	 is	 nothing	 but	misery.	 It	 is	 only
thorns,	not	a	single	rose.
From	the	cradle	to	the	grave	there	are	hopes	and	man	goes	on	living	because	of
those	hopes,	but	they	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
never	fulfilled.
In	the	end	there	is	only	despair,	hopelessness,	anguish.	That's	our	whole	anguish.
But	 this	 tragedy	happens	only	because	we	are	not	 aware.	Awareness	 functions
like	 magic:	 it	 transforms	 everything	 into	 its	 opposite.	 Anger	 becomes
compassion,	greed	becomes	sharing,	hate	becomes	love,	the	very	darkness	of	life
becomes	 light.	And	 then	suddenly	one	discovers	 that	 the	 thorns	were	not	 there
outside;	they	were	our	projection	of	an	unconscious	state.
Once	you	are	conscious,	there	are	only	roses	and	roses.	The	person	who	coined
the	proverb	that	life	is	not	a	bed	of	roses	must	have	been	unconscious,	unaware,
because	 all	 the	 awakened	 ones	 say	 just	 the	 opposite:	 Life	 is	 a	 bed	 of	 roses.
Hence	 all	 that	 a	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 do	 is	 to	 shift	 a	 gear	 inside	 himself	 from
unconscious	to	consciusness.
And	the	process	is	very	simple.	It	cannot	be	simpler	than	it	is.	In	fact	because	it
is	so	simple,	people	go	on	missing	it.	If	it	was	a	little	complicated,	difficult,	there
would	be	a	challenge	for	 the	ego;	but	 there	 is	no	challenge	for	 the	ego.	Ego	is
always	interested	in	something	difficult.	The	more	difficult	it	is,	the	better.	The
ego	 is	 interested	 in	 going	 to	 the	 moon,	 to	Mars;	 it	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 going
within	oneself.
The	process	can	be	reduced	into	a	simple	formula:	whatsoever	you	do,	do	it	but
remain	alert.	Walking,	watch	your	walking;	eating,	watch	you.	eating	just	don't
go	 on	 stuffing	 youself	 mechanically.	 The	 mind	 is	 somewhere	 else,	 you	 are
thinking	a	thousand-and-one	things	and	the	hands	go	on	stuffing	and	the	mouth
goes	on	chewing.	That	is	a	mechanical	process.	You	are	not	aware	of	what	you
are	doing.
If	 you	 are	 totally	 in	 the	moment	 --	 only	 then	 can	you	be	 aware.	So	 forget	 the
whole	world	while	you	are	eating.	Eating,	just	eat;	walking,	just	walk;	listening,
just	listen;	talking,	just	talk	and	remain	totally	in	it,	alert,	aware	of	each	gesture,
each	nuance.	And	slowly	you	will	get	the	knack	of	it,	the	hang	of	it.
It	is	not	a	science,	it	is	not	even	an	art.	It	is	only	a	knack,	like	swimming	--	you
have	just	to	start	throwing	your	hands.	First	start	in	shallow	water	so	there	is	no
fear,	then	go	deeper.	First	begin	with	the	body	--	that	is	the	shallowest	part	of	our
being.	 Then	 go	 into	 the	 mind.	 Then	 watch	 your	 thoughts,	 desires,	 memories.
Then	go	still	deeper,	dive	still	deeper	--	watch	your	emotions,	your	moods.	And
then	the	fundamental	and	the	ultimate	plunge,	 the	fourth,	where	your	centre	 is.
Then	become	aware	of	your	awareness	itself.
The	moment	one	is	aware	of	awareness	itself	the	circle	is	complete	.	And	that	is
the	moment	we	in	the	East	have	called	enlightenment.
Man	 is	 not	 imprisoned	 by	 outside	 forces.	 He	 is	 imprisoned	 by	 his	 own
unconscious,	by	his	own	instincts,	by	his	own	biological	past.	So	one	can	try	to
be	 politically	 free	 --	 that	 is	 not	 difficult	 --	 but	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 bring	 real
freedom.
So	almost	every	counrty	is	politicallty	free	but	the	people	are	in	the	same	misery.
One	 can	 try	 to	 be	 economically	 free.	 The	 moment	 you	 become	 rich	 you	 are
economically	 free.	You	 can	 purchase	 anything	 you	want,	 you	 can	 have	 all	 the
things	of	the	world.	There	is	no	limitation.	You	can	have	the	best	house,	the	best
of	everything;	still,	something	will	be	missing.	You	will	not	feel	contented.	You
will	not	really	feel	free
.	On	the	other	hand,	you	will	feel	hampered	by	all	your	possessions.
The	richer	a	person	gets,	the	more	and	more	he	is	imprisoned	in	his	richness.	He
cannot	even	sleep	well.
He	cannot	live	in	a	relaxed	way,	although	he	always	wished	that	when	the	money
would	be	 there	he	would	 live	 in	a	 relaxed	way.	Then	 life	would	be	 just	a	 long
holiday.	He	now	has	a	house	in	the	mountains,	a	house	on	the	beach,	a	beautiful
yacht	in	the	sea,	an	aeroplane	and	everything,	but	he	has	no	will	to	relax.	In	fact
in	 earning	 all	 this	money	 he	 has	 learned	 one	 thing:	 how	 to	 remain	 constantly
tense.	He	has	been	always	on	his	tiptoes.	Now	it	is	too	late	to	relax.
Relaxation	 needs	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 skill	 --	 the	 rich	 person	 misses	 it.
Hence	 the	rich	person	only	appears	 rich.	Really	he	 is	as	poor	as	anybody	else,
maybe	 far	poorer	 than	 the	poor	ones.	Apparently	he	has	 all	 but	 inside	 there	 is
only	 nothingness,	 and	 the	 freedom	 that	 he	 was	 thinking	 would	 come	 through
econonic	prosperity	has	not	arrived.
Money	can	be	earned,	 freedom	cannot	be	earned.	Freedom	has	 to	grow	within
you.	It	grows	simultaneously	as	a	by-product	of	awarness.	The	more	aware	you
are,	the	freer.	The	moment	your	awareness	is	at	the	peak,	your	freedom	is	also	at
the	peak.	So	only	a	Buddha,	a	Christ,	a	Zarathustra	--	these	few	people	--	have
lived	and	known	freedom.
And	that	is	the	goal	of	sannays:	absolute	freedom.	The	method	is	awareness.
God	 is	 non-existencial	 but	 godliness	 exists.	God	 as	 a	 person	 is	 just	 a	 childish
desire	for	a	father	figure.	It	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	not	accidental	that	god	is	called	the	father.	The	word	is	very	indicative.	We	are
brought	 up	 in	 such	 way	 that	 we	 elarn	 only	 one	 thing:	 how	 to	 remain	 always
dependent	on	somebdoy.	The	child	depends	on	the	father,	ont	he	mother.	As	he
grows	up	he	becomes	 independent	--	at	 least	outwardly	--	but	 inside	 the	desire
for	a	father	or	a	mother	continues.
Hence	 in	 matriarchal	 societies	 where	 the	 woman,	 the	 mother,	 was	 dominant,
there	was	the	idea	of	a	mother-god.	The	goddess-mother	is	far	older	than	god	the
father,	because	the	matriarchal	system	is	older	than	the	patriarchal	system.
In	 the	 beginning;	 the	 woman	 ruled.	 The	 mother	 was	 more	 powerful	 than	 the
father.	There	are	even	a	few	small	aboriginal	tribes	in	the	world	--	in	India	there
are	a	few	tribes	 living	in	 the	deep	jungles	--	who	still	worship	god	the	mother.
They	have	no	 idea	of	god	as	a	 father,	because	 the	woman	 is	still	predominant.
And	a	strange	thing...
I	lived	in	a	tribe	for	a	few	days	just	to	study	the	difference,	and	it	was	shocking
that	 there	 the	men	are	weak	and	 the	women	are	strong.	So	 the	whole	 idea	 that
man	is	basically	strong	just	an	invention.	It	all	depends	on	the	social	structure	.
In	 those	 tribes	where	 the	mother	 is	still	 in	power,	 the	woman	does	all	 the	hard
work	and	the	man	is	given	soft	work.	In	fact	his	whole	purpose	is	 to	serve	the
woman.	He	is	used	as	a	sexual	object.	He	is	fed	and	taken	care	of	and	protected,
but	his	whole	purpose	is	to	serve	as	a	sexual	object	--	just	the	opposite	of	what	is
happening	all	over	the	world.
In	the	rest	of	the	world	whene	the	man	has	become	all	powerful,	he	seems	to	'be
stronger,	more	muscular	and	can	do	hard	things;	woman	is	the	fair	sex,	has	to	be
given	softer	jobs	and	is	being	used	as	a	sexual	object.	She	has	to	be	taken	care	of
so	she	remains	beautiful	and	young;	but	the	whole	purpose	is	to	serve	the	man.
Man	is	more	or	less	a	creation	of	his	own	ideas.	When	I	saw	those	tribes	I	was
puzzled	because	the	women	are	 taller	and	the	men	are	smaller.	Even	in	height,
they	are	not	 taller	 than	 the	woman;	 so	 it	 is	not	 a	biological	phenomenon.	And
just	 as	 is	 our	 societies	 female	 prostitution	 exists,	 in	 those	 societies	 male
prostitution	exists.	Male	prostitutes	are	in	much	demand.	And	they	charge	much
more	(laughter).	A	woman	can	serve	a	few	people	every	night,	a	man	can	serve
only	one	woman	--	of	course	he	has	to	charge	more!
(more	laughter)	And	is	those	societies	men	are	raped.	Just	three	or	four	women
will	get	hold	of	a	man	and	rape	him.	He	is	just	helpless!
The	idea	of	god	the	father	is	a	male	chauvinist	idea.	In	fact	there	is	no	god	like
he	or	she,	but	there	is	an	experience	which	can	be	called	godliness.	But	it	is	more
like	a	frangrance,	you	cannot	catch	hold	of	it.	It	is	not	material,	it	is	absolutely
immatieral.	You	can	experience	it	but	you	cannot	encounter	him.	There	is	no	he,
there	is	no	she,	so	there	is	no	question	of	encountering.
You	cannot	pray	because	there	is	nobody	to	hear	your	prayers.	You	are	just	being
stupid	when	you	kneel	on	your	knees	and	raise	your	hands	towards	the	sky.	You
are	just	being	foolish.	It	is	idiotic.	what	you	are	going	is	just	a	sign	of	a	retarded
mind!	(laughter)
Meditation	is	okay	but	prayer	is	not.	Meditation	simply	means	you	are	becoming
silent,	you	are	putting	the	mind	aside.
That's	 what	 I	 call	 awareness:	 becoming	 silent,	 putting	 the	 mind	 aside,	 just
becoming	more	and	more	aware.	And	when	awareness	explodes	in	you	it	islike
an	atomic	explosion.	All	of	your	ego	and	the	ideas	that	the	ego	has	accumulated
are	simply	onsumed	by	the	fire	of	awareness.	Nothing	is	left,	or	only	nothing	is
left,	but	such	a	great	nothing,	such	pure	innocence,	such	space,	that	in	that	space
one	becomes	aware	for	the	first	time	of	something	transcendental.	Youc	an	call	it
xyz;	that	is	far	better	than	calling	god,	because	you	cannot	pray	to	'x'.	That	will
look	stupid.	Just	think	of	puttting	a	big	'x'	before	yourself	and	praying...	You	will
look	all	around,	is	anybody	looking	or	not?
But	 you	 can	 make	 a	 statue	 of	 god	 and	 then	 that's	 perfectly	 okay	 --	 but	 it	 is
nothing	more	than	xyz!
When	you	are	silent,	aware,	you	experience	godliness;	a	fragrance	comes	like	a
breeze,	overwhelms	you,	 transforms	you,	gives	you	a	new	being,	a	new	feel,	a
new	juice,	a	new	zest,	a	new	dance.	And	life	for	 the	first	 time	becomes	a	 true,
authentic,	ecstasy.
I	also	 use	 the	word	 prayer	 but	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 sense	 than	 the	Christians,
Hindus	and	Mohammedans	have	used	 it	down	the	ages.	When	 this	ecstasy	has
been	 experienced,	 when	 you	 are	 aware	 of	 godliness	 surrounding	 the	 whole
world,	then	a	thankfulness	arises	in	your	heart.	That	thankfulness	is	prayer,	that
gratitude	is	prayer.	Nothing	his	to	be	said	and	there	is	nobody	to	say	it,	but	you
simply	feel	grateful,	grateful	to	all	that	is!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 state	 of	 unconsciousness	 is	 like	 the	 roots	 of	 a	 tree.	 The	 roots	 of	 the	 tree
remain	 underground,	 you	 don't	 see	 them.	 That's	 how	 our	 unconscious	 is,
underground;	we	don't	see	it,	but	it	affects	everything.	It	affects	the	branches,	the
leaves,	 the	 flowers.	Our	 roots	are	hidden	but	 they	are	very	 important;	 they	are
the	most	 important	 part	 of	 a	 tree.	And	unless	 one	 understands	 one's	 roots	 one
cannot	have	a	real	exerience	of	one's	total	being.
The	branches	of	the	tree	are	like	our	so-called	consciousness:	it	is	a	very	fragile,
very	thin	layer,	and	can	be	destroyed	casily	by	any	accident;	just	a	small	accident
and	 it	 collapses.	 Somebody	 insults	 you	 and	 you	 are	 no	 more	 conscious;
somebody	 says	 something,	 and	 you	 forget	 all	 about	 your	 meditation,	 your
awareness.	You	are	mad!	You	can	do	anything;	in	that	state	of	madness.
Anger	is	a	temporary	madness.	Madness	is	nothing	but	anger	which	has	become
a	permanent	state.	One	can	murder.
Many	murderers	 have	 said	 in	 the	 courts	 that	 they	 did	 not	 do	 it.	 It	 used	 to	 be
thought	that	they	were	all	lying,	but	by	and	by	psychologists	became	aware	that
a	 few	 of	 them	 were	 certainly	 lying	 but	 a	 few	 of	 them	 were	 not	 lying	 at	 all.
Although	they	have	committed	the	murder	they	don't	remember	it.	They	were	so
possessed	by	something	from	the	unconscious	that	they	were	not	themselves	at
all,	so	they	don't	remember.
It	 is	 like	when	 somebody	who	 is	 absolutely	 drunk	 says	 something	 to	 you	 and
tomorrow	does	not	remember	it.	He	did	say	it,	you	may	have	a	tape	recording	of
it,	 but	 he	 is	 also	 right	when	 he	 says	 that	 he	 has	 not	 said	 it;	 he	 has	 not	 said	 it
consciously.	And	we	are	doing	many	of	our	acts	unconsciously.
So	just	a	thin	layer	of	consciousness	surrounds	our	unconscious	.	It	is	enough	for
our	 day-to-day,	 routine	 work:	 going	 to	 the	 office,	 working	 on	 a	 typewriter,
driving,	a	car,	talking	to	your	husband	or	wife	--	the	same	cliches	that	you	have
said	so	many	times.	And	you	will	be	repeating	them	without	any	consciousness.
But	 this	 is	 what	 we	 think;	 is	 consciousness;	 it	 is	 so-so,	 just	 lukewarm,	 not
enough	for	any	great	flight	to	the	unknown,	to	the	ultimate.
One	has	to	use	this	small	fragment	of	awareness	as	a	seed	and	one	has	to	start
growing	it,	nourishing	it,	helping	it	in	every	way,	co-operating	with	it.	And	this
in	 the	world	 of	 a	 sannyasin:	 co-operate	more	 and	more	with	 the	 small	 part	 of
your	being	which	is	conscious	and	co-operate	less	and	less	with	the	bigger	part
of	 your	 being	 which	 is	 unconscious.	 Always	 choose	 the	 conscious,	 avoid	 the
unconscious.	Whichever	makes	you	unconscious	is	wrong	and	whichever	helps
you	to	become	concious	is	right.	That's	my	definition	of	right	and	wrong,	that's
my	whole	morality.	And	slowly	slowly	 if	you	co-operate	with	 the	conscious	 it
grows	and	as	you	stop	co-operating	with	the	unconscious	it	becomes	shrunken.
A	moment	 comes	when	 slowly	 slowly	 the	 territory	 of	 the	 conscious	 becomes
bigger	 and	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 and	 the	 unconscious	 goes	 on	 shrinking,
disappearing.	 Finally	 the	 whole	 unconscious	 territory	 is	 claimed	 by	 the
consciousness.	That	is	the	moment	you	start	growing	flowers;	for	the	first	time
your	tree	has	flowers.
When	 almost	 ninety-nine	 per	 cent	 of	 your	 unconscious	 territory	 has	 become
conscious	 you	 start	 growing	 flowers.	 And	 when	 one	 hundred	 per	 cent	 of	 the
territory	 is	 reclaimed,	 when	 nothing	 of	 the	 unconscious	 remaing	 in	 you,	 your
flowers	 release	 their	 fragrance.	 In	 the	 East	 we	 have	 called	 that	 fragrance
Buddhahood,	awakenedness.	In	the	West	the	same	phenomenon	has	been	called
Christ-consciousness.	It	is	the	same.	Only	the	words	differ.
And	 unless	 one	 has	 become	 a	 pure	 fragrance,	 one's	 life	 has	 gone	 as	 a	 sheer
wastage.	Only	with	 this	 release	of	your	 innermost	 splendour	do	you	enter	 into
the	kingdom,	the	kingdom	of	the	infinite	and	the	eternal.	Then	there	is	no	death,
no	birth.	Then	you	are	here	and	now	 forever.	The	body	will	disappear	but	not
you,	 the	mind	will	disappear	but	not	you.	And	 to	know	 that	which	abides	and
abides	forever	is	to	know	the	truth.
Awareness	gives	your	life	a	new	sense,	a	new	insight,	a	new	joy,	a	new	ecstasy,
unexperienced	before,	undreamt	before.	Life	starts	becoming	more	like	a	song.	It
starts	 having	 more	 and	 more	 music	 in	 it,	 it	 starts	 becoming	 harmonious;	 all
discord	disappears.	For	 the	first	 time	you	experience	utter	silence,	so	profound
that	 it	 is	 absolutely	 unfathomable,	 immeasurable.	 One	 can	 dive	 into	 it	 and
disappear,	but	that	disappearance	is	not	death.
That	disappearance	is,	in	fact,	birth,	resurrection.	you	had	lived	before	almost	as
if	in	a	dream;	now	you	really	 live.	And	that	dream	was	not	sweet	at	all.	It	was
more	like	a	nightmare;	you	suffered	all	kinds	of	tortures	in	that	dream.	But	when
one	is	dreaming,	everything	in	the	dream	lookk	absolutely	real.	It	is	only	when
you	are	awake	that	you	can	see	that	 it	was	a	dream	and	nothing	else.	But	only
when	you	are	awake,	not	before	that.
Hence	 the	 awakened	 ones	 have	 said	 again	 and	 again	 that	 the	 whole	 world	 is
maya,	an	illusion,	a	dream,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
made	of	 the	 same	stuff	as	dreams	are	made	of.	But	 the	awakened	ones	cannot
give	any	proof	 for	 it.	How	can	you	prove	 to	 the	person	who	 is	 fast	asleep	and
still	dreaming	that	what	you	are	dreaming	is	a	dream.	There	is	no	way.
The	only	possible	way	is	to	shake	him,	to	wake	him;	once	he	is	awake	there	is	no
need	 to	 prove.	 First	 you	 cannot	 prove	when	 there	 is	 need,	 and	when	 you	 can
prove	there	is	no	need	at	all.
To	be	with	a	master	simply	means	to	live	with	someone	who	is	awake,	who	is	no
more	 asleep,	whose	 dreams	 are	 finished,	whose	 nightmares	 are	 over.	And	 just
being	in	tune	with	the	master	slowly	slowly	wakes	you	up.	The	very	energy	of
the	master	starts	penetrating	your	being.	Slowly	slowly	it	seeps	into	your	heart,
slowly	slowly	it	gives	you	a	new	heart,	a	new	beat.	And	you	cannot	remain	long
with	 a	 master	 without	 becoming	 awake,	 because	 he	 is	 continuously	 shouting,
calling	you	forth	to	wake	up,	calling	you	forth	to	come	out	of	your	grave.
And	 if	 you	 can	 open	 your	 eyes	 even	 once,	 suddenly	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you
experience	the	music,	the	song,	the	dance;	and	it	goes	on	increasing,	it	goes	on
moving	towards	a	crescendo,	towards	a	height	which	is	absolutely	unimaginable
to	the	ordinary	mind.	It	is	beyond	the	mind,	far	beyond;	hence	the	mind	cannot
say	anything	about	it.	It	is	indescribable,	indefinable.	the	mind	simply	falls	short
with	all	 its	 logic,	 language,	words,	with	all	 its	efficiency	as	 far	as	 the	world	 is
concerned.
In	 the	 encounter	 with	 the	 beyond,	 the	 mind	 feels	 for	 the	 first	 time	 utterly
impotent.	The	impotency	of	the	mind	releases	a	new	energy	in	you.	That	energy
I	call	 the	song,	 the	dance,	 the	ecstasy.	This	 is	what	Jesus	calls	 the	kingdom	of
god.	 His	 expression	 is	 a	 little	 bit	 old-fashioned	 but	 what	 he	 is	 indicating	 is
exactly	 what	 I	 am	 indicating.	 It	 is	 a	 kingdom.	 You	 become	 an	 emperor	 only
when	your	heart	is	full	of	songs,	ready	to	burst	forth,	when	the	energy	is	so	much
that	you	would	like	to	dance	and	share	it.
Life	can	be	a	bliss	--	it	depends	all	upon	you.	And	just	a	little	effort,	very	little
effort,	just	a	little	tossing	and	turning	and	one	can	wake	up!
It	does	not	take	much	and	we	come	very	close	to	the	point	from	where	waking
can	happen	but	we	become	afraid	 and	we	escape	back	 into	our	dreams.	Many
people	come	here	and	escape.
Just	 this	 morning	 I	 received	 a	 letter	 from	 the	 father	 of	 one	 of	 my	 sanyasins.
Krishnadeva	is	one	of	my	sannyasins;	his	father	has	come	to	visit.	He	writes	in	a
letter	 'I	want	to	escape	as	quickly	as	possible	because	I	am	becoming	aware	of
the	fact	that	if	I	remain	here	a	little	bit	longer	I	will	be	trapped!	(laughter)	I	am
feeling	so	joyous	for	the	first	time	and	the	people	are	so	beautiful	and	the	whole
space...	 I	had	heard	about	you,	 that	you	hypnotise	people;	now	I	know!	 (more
laughter)	Before	it	happens	I	want	to	leave	this	place!
Now	he	is	very	close.	He	can	escape.	And	the	fear	is	natural	and	human.
So	remember,	when	you	become	a	sannyasin	you	are	taking;	a	plunge	into	a	very
dangerous	ocean!
Take	the	plunge	with	 the	absolute	decisiveness	of	never	 turning	back,	of	never
looking	back.	Look	ahead	to	the	further	shore,	because	it	is	only	on	the	further
shore	of	awakening,	that	you	will	find	all	that	you	have	been	seeking;	for	many
many	lives.	And	it	is	only	alittle	bit	of	courage	that	is	needed.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101075
ShortTitle:	POND07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Misery	disconnects	one	from	existence.	It	creates	a	wall	around	you.	One	starts
living	in	a	capsule,	encapsulated,	one	shrinks	within	one's	own	self	and	creates	a
hard	shell	around,	just	to	protect,	just	not	to	show	one's	wounds.	It	is	humiliating
to	be	exposed,	 to	show	that	you	are	miserable,	hence	people	hide	their	 tears	 in
smiles,	 they	 wear	masks.	 That's	 what	 our	 personality	 is:	 an	 effort	 to	 hide	 the
reality.	It	is	not	our	individuality,	it	is	just	a	facade	painted	beautifully.	So	at	least
we	 can	 deceive	 the	 world	 but	 we	 cannot	 deceive	 ourselves.	 We	 know	 those
wounds	 --	 they	 hurt.	 We	 know	 they	 are	 there	 continuously,	 but	 we	 keep
ourselves	 occupied	 with	 a	 thousand	 end	 one	 things	 so	 that	 we	 can	 keep	 our
misery	hidden.
It	is	because	of	misery	that	for	thousands	of	years	man	has	been	addicted	to	all
kinds	 of	 drugs,	 simply	 to	 forget,	 simply	 to	 become	 utterly	 oblivious.	When	 it
becomes	too	much	then	the	only	way	is	to	fall	into	unconsciousness.
Alcohol	has	become	the	way	for	millions	of	people	around	the	world.	Bliss	does
exactly	the	opposite.
The	same	energy	is	used,	the	same	bricks	are	used,	but	one	does	not	make	a	wall
around	oneself.	One	makes	a	bridge.	And	the	more	bridges	you	create,	the	more
alive	you	are.	When	you	are	totally	bridged	with	existence	life	becomes	a	sheer
ecstasy.
And	that	is	another	meaning	of	your	name;	it	is	the	name	of	the	Celtic	goddess
of	wisdom	and	song.
When	one	 is	bridged	with	existence	one	knows	 for	 the	 first	 time	what	 it	 is	 all
about,	 the	meaning,	 the	 significance.	And	once	 that	meaning	 explodes	 in	 you,
you	are	so	full	of	songs,	dances,	creativity,	 that	one	cannot	 imagine	it	unless	it
happens.	There	is	no	way	to	dream	about	it.
It	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 communicate	 to	 somebody	 what	 it	 is,	 because	 it	 is	 an
experience.	The	master	helps	 the	disciple	 to	 experience	 it,	 not	 to	believe	 in	 it.
That's	my	work	here:	to	help	you	become	bridged	with	all	the	planes	of	existence
and	 all	 the	 dimensions	 of	 existence,	 to	 all	 its	 depth	 and	 height.	 My	 whole
approach	is	life-affirmative,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	become	bridged.	If
you	deny	something	you	close	yourself	towards	it;	hence	I	don't	deny	anything	at
all.	All	is	beautiful,	all	is	divine	and	all	is	perfect	as	it	is.
Rejoice	in	it!
A	life	without	love	is	a	life	full	of	darkness	no	moon,	not	even	a	star,	not	even	a
candle.	It	is	the	dark	night	of	the	soul	and	we	are	born	into	this	dark	night	of	the
soul.	Unless	we	make	some	effort	to	come	out	of	it,	we	are	going	to	live	in	it	and
die	in	it	without	knowing	the	light,	without	ever	encountering	the	day.
The	 word	 'day'	 is	 very	 significant.	 It	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 sanskrit	 root	 as
'divine'.	 Both	 mean	 light.	 And	 the	 only	 light	 is	 love.	 The	 moment	 you	 are
overflowing	with	love	darkness	disappears.	Love	becomes	a	flame.	It	consumes
all	that	is	ugly,	all	that	is	meaningless,	all	that	is	rubbish	--	and	it	leaves	only	the
pure	gold.
When	love	comes	to	its	climax	it	is	a	full	moon.	It	is	not	accidental	that	the	full
moon	 has	 always	 represented	 --	 in	 all	 the	 cultures,	 all	 the	 societies,	 in	 all	 the
ages	 --	 the	 night	 of	 love.	 In	 fact,	 we	 call	 the	 lover	mad	 and	we	 also	 call	 the
madman	 lunatic,	 moon-struck.	 Lunatic	 cones	 from	 lunar.	 Both	 are	mad!	 Both
have	been	struck	by	the	moon.
The	 latest	 research	 says	 that	many	more	people	 fall	 in	 love	when	 the	moon	 is
coming	closer	to	its	peak;	and	very	few	people	have	become	enlightened	on	any
other	night,	except	the	full-moon	night.
Buddha	was	born	on	the	full-moon	light,	became	enlightened	on	the	full-moon
night,	 died	 on	 the	 full-moon	 night,	 the	 same	 full	 moon,	 the	 same	month.	 He
represents	really	all	the	Buddhas	of	all	the	ages,	past,	present	and	future	too.
The	 full	moon	 has	 always	 attracted	 the	 poets,	 the	 painters,	 the	 lovers.	 People
who	 have	 some	 aesthetic	 sense,	 sensitivity,	 have	 always	 felt	 a	 magnetic	 pull
towards	 the	 moon.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 the	 ocean	 that	 becomes	 affected	 on	 the	 full
moon.	Inside	us	also	there	is	some	ocean	that	becomes	affected	and	great	waves
start	rising.	The	full	moon	has	become	representative	of	the	absolute	expression
of	love	and	light.
This	has	to	be	your	path.	This	small	word	'love'	contains	all	that	is	worth	having.
It	contains	all	the	scriptures	--	it	is	a	code-word,	condensed.	One	has	to	decode	it
in	one's	life.
Love	as	much	as	you	can	and	the	more	you	love,	the	more	you	will	be	centred,
rooted,	grounded,	crystallised,	integrated.	Love	for	no	other	reason,	for	no	other
motive,	except	for	sharing	your	life	and	joy,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
except	 for	 sharing	 your	 song	 and	 dance.	 There	 should	 be	 no	 desire	 for	 any
reward,	because	only	then	the	reward	comes.	If	there	is	a	desire	the	very	desire
prevents	it.	Love	is	immensely	rewarded,	it	is	inevitable.
Hence	we	need	not	think	about	it,	we	need	not	bother	about	it.
And	 once	 you	 start	 loving	 people,	 trees,	 rivers,	 stars,	mountains,	 for	 no	 other
reason,	 but	 just	 because	 you	 are	 here	 and	 the	 tree	 is	 here	 --	 then	 why	 not
commune,	 why	miss	 this	 opportunity	 of	 relating,	 why	 remain	 dull	 and	 dead?
Why	 not	 become	 alive	 and	 dance	 with	 the	 tree	 and	 sing	 with	 the	 tree	 and
blossom	with	the	tree?
Yes,	you	will	look	a	little	mad	to	people	but	it	is	worth	it.	Let	the	whole	world
think	you	mad.	The	world	is	living	in	such	an	insane	way	that	to	be	called	insane
by	the	world	is	a	certificate	that	you	are	sane.
It	 is	 really	 a	 great	 compliment!	 The	 world	 has	 called	 Buddha	 insane,	 Jesus
insane,	Lao	Tzu	insane,	because	the	world	consists	of	insane	people.
One	of	my	friends	became	mad	and	he	was	imprisoned	in	a	madhouse.	He	was
mad,	so	one	day	he	drank	something	that	was	kept	there	to	clean	the	bathrooms,
not	 knowing	what	 it	 was.	 It	 created	 such	 vomiting,	 diarrhoea,	 that	 for	 fifteen
days	he	suffered	from	diarrhoea	and	vomiting	and	could	not	eat	anything.	That
long	 fast	 and	 the	 diarrhoea	 and	 the	 vomiting	 cleansed	 his	 whole	 being.	 He
cooled	down,	his	madness	disappeared.
And	for	the	first	time	he	became	aware	that	he	was	in	a	madhouse,	because	there
were	at	least	nine	hundred	mad	people	all	around	and	he	had	been	with	them	for
six	 months.	 Not	 even	 for	 a	 single	 moment	 had	 he	 thought	 that	 anything	 was
wrong.	 Everything	 was	 perfectly	 good.	 Somebody	 was	 pulling	 his	 leg	 and
somebody	was	 cutting	 his	 hair	 and	 it	 was	 perfectly	 right,	 there	was	 no	 harm.
Somebody	was	massaging	him,	somebody	was	sitting	on	his	shoulders...	It	was
perfectly	okay.	He	was	himself	mad.	But	now	what	to	do?
He	told	the	doctor,	'Now	it	is	impossible	for	me	to	be	here.	I	am	absolutely	sane
and	 that	 is	 becoming	 difficult.	 Either	make	me	 insane	 again	 so	 I	 can	 be	with
these	people,	because	 I	have	 to	be	here	 for	 three	months	more'	 --	he	had	been
sentenced	for	nine	months'	imprisonment	in	a	madhouse.	But	the	doctor	laughed,
the	gaoler	laughed,	and	they	said,	'Every	madman	says	this	--	that	he	is	not	mad.'
He	 tried	 hard	 but	 he	 had	 to	 live	 there	 those	 three	 months.	 He	 told	 me,	 'Six
months	were	really	beautiful	because	I	was	in	tune	with	the	whole	madness	that
was	 all	 around.	Once	 I	 became	 sane	 then	 things	were	 very	 difficult;	 for	 those
three	months	it	was	such	a	nightmare.	Those	three	months	felt	as	if	I	had	been
living	there	for	thousands	of	years.	Neither	sleep	nor	anything	else	was	possible.'
His	 becoming	 sane	 created	 the	 whole	 trouble.	 Jesus	 is	 crucified	 because	 he
becomes	sane.	That	is	his	fault,	the	only	crime.
If	you	start	loving	you	will	be	thought	mad,	but	don't	be	worried	about	that.	To
be	my	sannyasin	is	to	risk	prestige,	respectability,	sanity	--	the	so-called	sanity	--
is	to	risk	all	that	is	important	in	the	eyes	of	people.	But	life	begins	only	then.
So	 let	 the	world	 think	you	mad,	 but	 start	 in	 every	possible	way	 connecting	 in
every	 direction,	 in	 every	 dimension,	with	 love.	And	 you	will	 start	 feeling	 the
magic	of	it.	Soon	you	will	be	overwhelmed	by	it.
To	be	totally	love	is	to	know	what	god	is,	because	there	is	no	other	god	except
love.	 To	 be	 just	 love	 is	 to	 be	 enlightened.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 enlightenment,
because	to	be	pure	love	is	to	become	afire.	The	intensity	of	life	is	such	then	that
even	a	single	moment	of	 that	 love	 is	more	significant	 than	 living	 thousands	of
years	of	drudgery	and	drag.
Make	it	a	point	that	except	love	there	is	no	religion.	Love	is	my	poetry,	love	is
my	philosophy,	love	is	my	religion,	love	is	my	message.
Meditation	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 find	 the	 beloved.	 Everybody	 is	 searching	 and
seeking	 for	 the	 beloved,	 but	 the	 search	 if	 unconscious	 and	 the	 unconscious
search	cannot	lead	you	anywhere.	One	can	go	on	stumbling,	groping	in	the	dark,
but	it	cannot	take	you	anywhere.
The	 search	 has	 to	 become	 conscious.	 That's	 what	 meditation	 is:	 awareness,
alertness,	becoming	aware	of	your	body	--	its	actions,	your	mind	--	its	thoughts;
your	heart	--	its	feelings.	These	three	you	have	to	do,	and	the	fourth	comes	as	a
gift	from	the	ultimate.	And	the	fourth	can	only	be	called	the	fourth.
In	the	East	we	have	called	it	'turiya'.	It	means	simply,	the	fourth,	just	a	number.
We	have	not	given	it	a	name	for	a	specific	reason,	because	any	name	will	give	it
a	limitation	--	and	it	is	unlimited.	So	we	have	called	it	the	fourth.	It	is	like	calling
it	xyz,	not	giving	it	any	word	because	every	word	brings	its	limitation.
The	 fourth	means	awareness	of	awareness	 itself.	You	start	 from	the	grossest	 --
the	body	and	its	actions
--	 and	 then	 you	 start	 moving	 to	 the	 subtler	 planes.	 The	 mind	 is	 the	 second
station,	 deeper	 than	 the	 body,	 then	 feeling	 --	 it	 is	 deeper	 than	 thinking,	 than
mind.	And	after	these	three	you	cannot	do	anything.	After	the	third	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
all	effort	ceases,	because	effort	can	either	be	of	the	body	or	of	the	mind	or	of	the
heart.	Now	all	three	have	been	transcended	so	no	effort	is	possible.	In	fact	even
the	ego	is	no	more	there.	There	is	nobody	to	make	the	effort.	Neither	doing	nor
the	 doer	 is	 possible.	 Both	 have	 disappeared.	 Now	 there	 is	 absolute	 silence,	 a
state	of	utter	stillness.	But	that	is	the	right	space,	the	space	in	which	the	beyond
descends	 and	 awareness	 becomes	 aware	 of	 itself.	 And	 to	 become	 aware	 of
awareness	itself	is	the	ultimate	experience.	There	is	nothing	beyond	it.	It	brings
freedom,	it	brings	compassion,	it	brings	prayer,	it	brings	love,	it	brings	truth.	All
these	have	been	expressed	in	a	single	word,	and	that	word	is	'god'.
God	 is	 only	 a	 combination	 of	 all	 the	 great	 values.	God	 is	 not	 a	 person,	 but	 a
word	to	indicate	all	the	ultimate	values.	Becoming	aware	of	awareness	itself,	life
is	 fulfilled,	 one	 has	 arrived.	 That's	 the	 home	 for	 which	 we	 all	 are	 seeking,
searching,	but	our	search	is	unconscious.	Hence	we	search	but	we	fall.	Make	the
search	conscious	and	success	is	sure.
The	Vedas	represent	the	ancientmost	scriptures	of	the	world.	In	fact	the	Bible	is
also	 a	Veda	and	 the	Koran	 is	 also	 a	Veda,	because	 the	word	 'veda'	means	 that
which	contains	knowledge.	So	the	Vedas	have	been	growing,	there	are	not	only
four.	There	 are	 three	 hundred	 religions	 on	 the	 earth	 and	 every	 religion	 has	 its
own	Vedas.	But	knowledge	is	not	wisdom,	and	to	know	the	scriptures	can	make
one	a	scholar,	but	not	enlightened.
One	can	accumulate	as	much	information	as	possible	--	and	we	have	a	memory
system	which	can	accumulate	incalculable	knowledge.
The	 scientists	 say	 that	 a	 single	 memory	 system,	 a	 single	 human	 mind,	 can
contain	 all	 the	 libraries	of	 the	world.	That	much	capacity	 is	 there.	But	 even	 if
one	contains	all	the	libraries	of	the	world	one	will	not	be	a	Buddha.	One	will	still
remain	the	same	fool!	--	the	same	donkey	loaded	with	all	the	scriptures.	It	won't
transform	his	being.	 If	one	wants	 to	 transform	the	being	one	has	 to	go	beyond
the	 word,	 one	 has	 to	 go	 beyond	 all	 theories,	 ideologies,	 doctrines,	 scriptures.
That	is	the	meaning	of	Vedant:	the	end	of	the	Veda.
Be	 finished	with	 information,	put	 a	 full	 stop	 to	 information,	 because	 that	 only
makes	a	man	a	parrot.	We	call	 those	parrots	pundits.	But	 it	does	not	make	one
contented,	blissful,	 loving,	knowing.	Put	an	end	to	all	 information.	That	means
put	 an	 end	 to	 the	 mind.	 And	 putting	 an	 end	 to	 the	 mind	 is	 the	 beginning	 of
meditation.	 The	 cessation	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 the	 birth	 of	 meditation.	 And	 once
meditation	 iq	 born	 then	 miracles	 start	 happening,	 then	 life	 starts	 taking	 such
quantum	leaps,	unbelievable.	One	starts	becoming	aware	of	so	many	mysteries
which	are	all	around,	which	are	so	abundantly	here.	But	we	are	closed	because
of	 our	 knowledge.	 Our	 eyes	 are	 closed.	We	 are	 blind	 because	 of	 knowledge.
Knowledge	is	making	us	blind.
One	 has	 to	 become	 innocent	 like	 a	 child,	 and	 the	moment	 one	 is	 innocent	 --
clean,	completely	clean	like	a	mirror	--	then	one	reflects	the	truth.	And	to	know
the	truth	is	to	become	it.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101085
ShortTitle:	POND08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Pleasure	 is	 from	 the	 outside	 and	 bliss	 is	 from	 the	 inside.	 Pleasure	 depends	 on
others.	 Bliss	 is	 independent.	 Pleasure	 inevitably	 brings	 bondage.	 Bondage	 is
sbsolutely	 part	 of	 pleasure,	 because	 the	 source	 of	 pleasure	 becomes	 more
important	than	you	are,	and	the	fear	arises	that	today	it	is	available,	but	what	is
going	to	happen	tomorrow?	So	make	sure	that	it	remains	yours	tomorrow	too	--
but	then	you	have	to	bargain,	you	have	to	lose	something,	you	have	to	pay	for	it.
And	then	too	it	is	never	absolutely	certain	--
hence	 fear,	 anxiety.	 And	 when	 there	 is	 fear	 and	 anxiety	 and	 bondage,	 what
pleasure	can	you	have?
It	 is	 all	 destroyed.	So	 it	 remains	only	 a	hope,	 just	 a	 carrot	hanging	 in	 front	of
you.	 As	 you	move	 the	 carrot	 goes	 on	moving.	 You	 never	 achieve	 it,	 it	 never
becomes	a	reality.	It	is	always	a	dream.	But	it	keeps	you	occupied,	keeps	you	so
much	occupied	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave	that	you	don't	have	any	time	left	for
the	real	search.	You	fail	again	and	again,	but	the	hope	goes	on	living.	After	each
failure	it	resurrects,	it	is	again	there.
Hope	never	dies.	Even	when	we	say	'I	am	hopeless,'	it	is	not	really	true,	because
if	one	is	really	hopeless,	if	the	hope	has	completely	disappeared,	then	you	cannot
even	 feel	 hopelessness.	 The	 feeling	 of	 hopelessness	 is	 possible	 only	 with	 the
background	of	hope:	you	are	still	hoping	but	becoming	desperate,	seeing	all	the
failures.	You	 are	 becoming	 less	 and	 less	 certain,	 less	 and	 less	 do	 you	 see	 the
possibility	of	its	ever	becoming	a	reality,	but	somewhere,	in	some	corner	of	your
unconscious,	 the	 seed	of	hope	 still	 lives.	 It	will	 sprout	 again.	That's	what	 they
mean	by	the	proverb	that	time	heals;	what	it	heals	nobody	asks.	It	simply	heals
the	 wounds	 that	 have	 been	 left	 by	 past	 hopes,	 it	 heals	 them	 so	 you	 can	 start
hoping	again,	but	it	is	the	same	game.	It	is	moving	in	a	circle.
The	 pleasure-seeker	 goes	 on	 seeking	 but	 he	 never	 arrives.	 To	 understand	 the
utter	 futility	 of	 pleasure,	 the	 impossibility	 of	 its	 ever	 happening,	 becomes	 a
revolution	 in	your	 life.	Then	you	move	towards	 the	 inner	from	the	outer.	Then
you	move	from	dependence	to	independence.	Then	you	start	searching	into	your
own	nature,	into	your	own	interiority.
And	 one	 is	 simply	 in	 for	 a	 great	 surprise:	 the	moment	 one	 turns	 in,	 the	 very
turning	in	--	a	one	hundred	eighty	degree	turn	it	has	to	be	--	and	one	is	dazzled,
puzzled,	 that	 this	 is	what	one	has	been	 seeking	maybe	 for	millions	of	 lives.	 It
was	within	oneself	and	we	have	been	seeking	it	everywhere	else.	If	we	could	not
find	it,	there	is	no	wonder	in	it,	because	it	was	within	us.	The	search	was	without
and	the	real	source	was	within.
Just	a	glimpse	of	it	brings	freedom,	brings	a	new	breeze.	For	the	first	time	you
feel	 alive,	 free,	 joyous,	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all,	 simply	 joyous,	 because	 now	 the
understanding	 dawns	 that	 joy	 is	 our	 self-nature.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 your
name:	 turn	 from	pleasure	 to	 bliss,	 turn	 from	 the	 objective	 reality	 to	 your	 own
subjectivity	--	and	the	kingdom	of	god	is	not	far	away!
Love	 is	 the	 bridge	 which	 takes	 you	 beyond	 your	 self.	 Love	 is	 the	 fire	 that
consumes	all	your	boundaries,	makes	you	unbounded,	 infinite,	eternal.	Love	 is
the	 alchemy	 that	 transforms	 the	 baser	 metal	 into	 gold,	 the	 mundane	 into	 the
sacred,	the	ordinary	to	the	extraordinary.
We	are	born	with	a	great	potential,	but	it	is	only	a	potential.	We	can	die	without
realising	 it,	 we	 can	 miss	 the	 target	 --	 if	 we	 don't	 move	 consciously,	 with
awareness.	If	we	just	remain	driftwood	at	the	mercy	of	the	wind,	and	the	waves,
if	we	remain	accidental,	then	there	is	every	possibility	we	will	miss.	And	that's
why	you	see	so	many	people	in	such	misery,	the	misery	has	no	outer	cause,	it	is
rooted	in	their	missing	the	target.
They	are	all	feeling	something	is	being	missed.	They	are	not	even	aware	what	it
is	 exactly,	 but	 one	 thing	 is	 certain	 everybody	 who	 is	 miserable	 feels	 that
something	of	which	we	have	been	carrying	the	seeds	has	not	grown.	Something
has	not	blossomed.
The	seed	is	bound	to	be	miserable;	only	a	flower	can	dance	in	the	wind,	in	the
rain,	 in	 the	 sun.	 Only	 a	 flower	 can	 sing	 its	 song	 --	 the	 song	 of	 bliss.	 Only	 a
flower	 knows	 fulfilment,	 contentment.	 Only	 a	 flower	 feels	 at	 ease	 with
existence.	 The	 seed	 cannot	 feel	 at	 ease,	 it	 is	 closed,	 it	 has	 no	 connection.	 It
knows	nothing	of	the	moon	and	the	sun	and	the	stars,	it	has	not	even	heard	about
them.	It	knows	nothing	of	the	flowers	and	the	colours	and	the	rainbows	and	the
songs	of	the	birds	and	the	humming	mantras	of	the	bees	--	it	knows	nothing	of	it,
but	somewhere	hidden	in	it	there	is	a	longing	to	know	it	all.
A	very	deep	longing	to	open	up	to	reality	--	 that's	w	what	religion	is	all	about.
Religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	churches	and	temples	and	mosques,	nothing	to
do	 with	 Vedas	 and	 the	 Bible	 and	 the	 Koran,	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 all	 kinds	 of
games	 that	 go	 on	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religion.	 They	 are	 all	 political	 games.
Christianity,	Hinduism,	Islam,	Buddhism,	Jainism,	these	are	all	political	parties
hiding	 behind	 religious	 labels.	 At	 least	 a	 political	 party	 is	 sincere	 enough
because	it	says	it	is	a	political	party,	all	these	religious	organisations	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
basically	political	but	they	play	the	game	behind	the	name	of	religion	--	they	are
far	more	cunning.
The	priest	 is	more	 cunning	 than	 the	 politician.	The	 priest	 plays	 the	 game	 in	 a
more	 subtle	 way.	 True	 religion	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 all	 these	 games,	 true
religion	 is	 simple,	 it	 is	 just	 the	 longing	 of	 the	 heart	 to	 blossom.	 It	 needs	 no
rituals.	it	certainly	needs	a	certain	intelligence	--	that's	all	that	is	needs.	The	only
quality	 that	 is	 required	 is	 intelligence,	and	 that	 is	 the	only	quality	 that	 is	being
destroyed	by	the	priests;	they	don't	like	intelligent	people,	they	like	unintelligent
people	--	only	lukewarmly	intelligent	--	so	that	they	can	become	good	servants,
obedient	slaves.	That	much	intelligence	is	okay,	very	minimal.
They	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 great	 intelligence	 because	 great	 intelligence	 means
rebellion.	Great	intelligence	means	a	person	has	started	thinking	on	his	own.	He
cannot	be	dictated	to,	he	cannot	be	ordered.
He	 will	 follow	 only	 according	 to	 his	 light,	 he	 will	 say	 yes	 only	 because	 his
intelligence	says	yes,	otherwise	he	will	say	no.
And	 the	 people	who	 are	 powerful	 don't	want	 anybody	 to	 be	 rebellious,	 hence
they	have	all	crippled	humanity's	intelligence.	These	are	the	real	criminals.	One
day	history	will	 take	account	of	 them	and	 they	will	be	counted	as	 the	greatest
criminals.	The	people	who	murder	and	cheat	and	steal	are	nothing	compared	to
these	 people.	These	 people	 don't	murder,	 don't	 cheat,	 don't	 rob	 anybody,	 don't
rape	anybody,	but	they	are	doing	such	harm	as	no	rape	can	do,	no	murder	can	do,
they	are	destroying	the	very	possibility	of	human	beings	flowering.
Intelligence	is	the	only	quality	required.	And	that's	what	my	work	here	consists
of:	to	help	you	to	become	more	and	more	intelligent,	to	help	you	to	sharpen	your
sword	of	intelligence,	to	live	at	the	maximum	of	intelligence.	Meditation	is	only
an	 art	 to	 help	 you	 towards	 intelligence.	 It	 is	 a	 ladder	 towards	 intelligence.	 It
helps	you	to	get	rid	of	all	the	nonsense	that	others	have	imposed	on	you.	It	is	that
nonsense	which	is	not	allowing	you	to	be	intelligent.'
Once	all	 those	 superstitions	are	dropped,	 all	 that	holy	cow	dung	 is	 thrown	out
and	you	are	emptied	of	all	rubbish,	rotten	ideas	of	the	past	--	once	you	are	empty,
clean,	you	can	begin	 to	be	 intelligent,	 you	will	 have	 to	 be	 intelligent,	 because
you	will	be	thrown	upon	your	own	source,	you	will	have	to	respond	to	life	and
its	situations	not	according	to	ready-made	answers.	They	have	all	been	taken	out.
You	will	have	to	find	your	own	answers.
And	 remember,	 even	 if	 your	 own	 answer	 is	 wrong	 it	 is	 far	 better,	 anybody's
answer	which	 is	 right.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 right	 and	wrong,	 the	 question	 is
whether	 it	 is	yours.	A	parrot	 can	 repeat	 a	 right	 answer	but	 that	does	not	mean
that	the	parrot	is	intelligent.	It	is	better	to	commit	mistakes	but	be	on	one's	own,
because	 one	 learns	 through	 mistakes.	 There	 is	 nothing	 wrong	 in	 committing
errors.	One	should	learn.	Commit	as	many	errors	as	possible	--	and	don't	commit
the	same	error	again!	That	is	learning,	that	sharpens	your	intelligence.
Become	 silent,	 become	 aware,	 meditative,	 and	 your	 intelligence	 will	 start
growing	--	and	the	seed	will	burst	forth	one	day.	That	day	is	the	greatest	day	of
rejoicing,	when	your	flowers	come,	when	the	spring	comes	to	your	inner	world,
when	you	become	a	garden.
The	moment	you	become	a	garden	you	have	become	a	paradise.	That's	exactly,
literally,	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 word	 'paradise'.	 It	 comes	 from	 the	 Persian	 word
'firdaus'.	Firdaus	means	a	walled	garden.
The	moment	you	blossom,	paradise	has	 come	 to	you.	 it	 is	 not	 true	 to	 say	 that
people	go	to	paradise	--
that	 is	 not	 right.	 Paradise	 comes	 to	 people	when	 they	 are	 ready.	 Paradise	 can
come	right	now,	this	very	moment...	whosoever	is	ready,	whosoever	deserves	it.
Remember	a	fundamental	law	of	life,	that	you	get	only	that	which	you	deserve.
If	you	are	living	in	hell	that's	what	you	deserve.	If	you	want	to	live	in	paradise
then	 deserve	 it:	 then	 create	 intelligence,	 courage,	 and	 work	 upon	 yourself	 to
undo	 all	 that	 others	 have	 done,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 be	 free	 from	 all	 bondage	 and
slavery,	so	that	you	can	have	the	innocence	of	a	child	and	the	wisdom	of	a	sage.
Meditation	does	both	things.	On	the	one	hand	it	gives	you	the	innocence	of	the
child	and	on	the	other	hand	it	gives	you	the	wisdom	of	the	sage	.	And	the	circle
is	complete:	when	you	are	a	child	and	also	a	 sage	 the	circle	 is	complete,	your
journey	is	fulfilled,	you	have	arrived	home.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101095
ShortTitle:	POND09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	body	has	a	limitation,	it	 is	confined	between	birth	and	death,	and	so	is	the
mind.	Mind	is	not	separate	from	the	body.	It	is	its	inner	aspect,	the	inside	of	the
body	is	mind,	the	outside	of	the	mind	is	body.
All	the	languages	have	to	be	changed	sooner	or	later	as	far	as	the	words	 'body'
and	'mind'	are	concerned.
Languages	give	 the	false	 idea	 that	 these	 two	are	separate	entities.	 It	 is	not	 like
body	and	mind.	The	truth	 is	bodymind.	It	 is	one	word,	 it	 is	one	reality.	Just	as
every	 coin	 has	 two	 aspects	 and	 every	wall	 has	 two	 sides,	 so	 is	 the	 case	with
bodymind.	The	body	is	limited,	the	mind	is	limited,	hence	the	fear	of	death.
The	body	cannot	be	afraid	because	it	is	unconscious,	but	the	mind	can	be	afraid.
The	mind	is	constantly	 trembling.	The	fear	 is	 there	 that	sooner	or	 later	 the	full
stop	is	going	to	come.	And	more	than	the	full	stop,	the	problem	is	that	we	have
not	achieved	anything	yet	and	life	is	going	down	the	drain,	every	moment	death
is	coming	closer	and	life	is	slipping	out	of	our	hands.	Hence	the	fear,	the	anxiety,
the	anguish.
But	beyond	 the	bodymind	complex,	 fortunately,	 there	 is	 something	more	 in	us
too	--	and	that	is	consciousness.	The	consciousness	is	unlimited,	it	is	oceanic,	it
is	vast.	The	body	mind	 is	 just	 like	a	dewdrop	and	 the	consciousness	 is	 like	an
infinite	ocean.	The	bodymind	begins	at	the	time	of	birth	and	ends	st	the	time	of
death,	but	the	consciousness	has	no	beginning,	no	end.
To	know	this	consciousness	is	to	be	free	from	all	fear,	anxiety,	anguish.	To	know
this	 consciousness	 is	 to	 become	 deathless,	 eternal,	 timeless.	 To	 know	 this
consciousness	is	the	very	search	of	sannyas.
Sannyas	is	an	enquiry	into	consciousness,	but	to	know	it	one	has	to	drop	the	idea
of	being	a	bodymind.
One	has	 to	 slowly	disidentify	oneself	 from	 the	bodymind	 that	 surrounds	us.	 It
can	be	done.	It	has	been	done.
And	everybody	is	capable	of	doing	it.	It	is	not	impossible	--	difficult,	certainly,
but	 not	 impossible.	 And	 it	 is	 good	 that	 it	 is	 difficult	 because	 that	 gives	 us	 a
challenge.
Sannyas	is	an	adventure,	an	adventure	into	the	unknown	realm	of	our	own	being,
into	our	own	transcendence.
Sannyas	is	a	surrender	of	the	ego	--	and	the	ego	can	surrender	only	if	love	arises.
It	 is	 the	 miracle	 of	 love	 that	 makes	 it	 possible	 far	 us	 to	 surrender	 the	 ego.
Without	 love	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 surrendering	 the	 ego	 because	 without
love,	ego	is	the	only	reality	that	we	know	of.	It	is	the	only	thing	which	supports
us,	it	is	the	only	thing	we	can	cling	to.	It	may	be	just	a	straw	in	the	ocean,	it	may
not	be	capable	of	saving	us,	but	something	is	better	than	nothing	--	even	a	straw
can	 keep	 us	 hoping.	 Although	 it	 is	 hoping	 against	 hope,	 a	 person	 who	 is
drowning	in	the	ocean,	if	he	clings	to	the	straw,	has	to	be	forgiven.	What	else	can
he	do?
There	is	nothing	else	to	cling	to.
The	shore	is	far	away,	beyond	his	vision.	He	cannot	see	where	it	 is,	whether	 it
exists	or	not.	And	thE
ocean	is	drowning	him,	then	anything	to	cling	to	gives	him	a	little	consolation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	only	by	the	birth	of	love	that	one	can	drop	the	straw.	The	birth	of	love	is	just
as	 if	 suddenly	 a	 boat	 has	 arrived.	 Now	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 say	 to	 the	 person
'Throw	 that	 straw';	 he	will	 throw	 it	 himself.	 In	 fact	 he	will	 not	 even	 give	 it	 a
second	look.	The	moment	the	boat	arrives	he	forgets	all	about	the	straw.
The	 same	 happens	 with	 love:	 love	 is	 a	 boat	 which	 can	 take	 us	 to	 the	 further
shore.	 Once	 you	 start	 feeling	 love	 then	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 surrender	 the	 ego.
People	ask	me	again	and	again	how	to	surrender	the	ego.	It	is	not	a	question	of
how	at	all.	Those	who	 love	never	ask,	 those	who	ask	cannot	drop	 it.	The	very
asking	shows	that	they	have	never	tasted	of	love.
Sannyas	is	a	love	affair.	And	just	a	ray	of	love	is	enough.	More	than	that	is	not
needed.	One	can	catch	hold	of	that	ray	and	can	reach	to	the	very	source	of	light.
Love	is	like	a	ray	and	when	we	reach	to	the	source	you	can	call	it	god,	godliness,
nirvana,	liberation,	truth,	or	whatsoever	one	chooses	to	call	it.
Lao	Tzu	says	'I	call	it	tao	because	it	has	no	name.'	Tao	is	just	like	xyz;	it	means
nothing.	In	India	we	have	called	it	aum.	Aum	also	is	like	tao,	it	means	nothing,	it
is	 not	 a	word	 at	 all.	 Hence	 aum	 cannot	 be	written	 alphabetically.	 It	 is	 only	 a
pictorial	 phenomenon.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 symbol	 in	 India	 which	 is	 written
pictorially.	Lao	Tzu	had	noa	difficulty	in	writing	tao,	because	the	whole	Chinese
language	is	written	pictorially,	there	is	no	alphabet	at	all.	Even	other	words	are
written	pictorially.
For	example,	'fight'	or	'war',	'quarrel'	--	a	picture	is	made.	A	simple	picture,	very
simple,	because	it	has	to	be	written,	just	one	line	giving	you	the	idea	of	a	pillar
and	a	small	roof	--	two	lines	--	giving	you	the	idea	of	a	roof,	and	sitting	under
the	roof	are	one	man	and	two	women	--	that	is	war!	(laughter)	quarrel,	conflict,
argument	--	it	contains	the	whole	range	of	everything.	even	the	word	'war'	has	to
be	written	 in	 the	 same	way	because	 that	 is	 the	only	symbol	 --	 it	 is	 just	a	 little
bigger	phenomenon,	that's	all.
Chinese	 is	 a	 beautiful	 language	 because	 it	 is	 non-alphabetical.	 And	 tao	 was
written	just	as	a	picture.	but	in	India	we	had	to	invent	aum,	a	special	symbol	so
that	 it	 can	be	demarcated	 from	 language;	 it	 is	 not	 part	 of	 language,	 it	 is	 not	 a
word.	So	one	 can	 call	 it	 tao	 --	 tao	means	nothing;	 one	 can	 call	 it	 aum	 --	 aum
means	nothing;	one	can	call	 it	 any	name,	one	can	 invent	one's	own	name	 --	 it
will	do	--	because	it	is	a	nameless	reality.
Love	is	the	beginning;	god,	tao,	aum,	is	the	end.	Love	is	the	boat	god,	aum,	tao,
is	the	further	shore.	So	when	love	arises...	and	it	is	bound	to	arise	if	you	are	near
a	master.	Unless	you	protect	yourself,	defend	yourself,	unless	you	escape	from
the	situation	--	that's	another	matter	--	It	is	bound	to	arise.
It	happens	exactly	like	in	the	morning	when	the	sun	risen	the	birds	start	singing,
the	flowers	start	opening.	In	the	presence	of	the	master	love	naturally	arises,	the
heart	 starts	 opening	 like	 a	 flower,	 the	 heart	 starts	 singing	 like	 a	 bird	 --	 the
morning	has	come!
And	once	a	little	taste	of	love	is	there	the	ego	can	easily	be	disposed	of.	And	the
disposal	 of	 the	 ego	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 journey,	 of	 the	 real	 journey	 life	 is
meant	to	be.
The	 state	 of	 blissfulness	 is	 the	 true	 god.	 All	 other	 gods	 are	 false,	 invented	 --
invented	as	consolations,	invented	as	father-figures,	invented	as	wish-fulfilment,
but	they	have	no	reality.	The	gods	of	the	Christians	and	the	gods	of	the	Hindus
and	 the	gods	of	 the	mohammedans	are	 just	 fiction	 --	 religious	 fiction,	 spiritual
fiction.	 Just	 as	 there	 is	 science	 fiction,	 there	 is	 spiritual	 fiction,	 and	 of	 course
spiritual	fiction	can	be	more	fictitious	because	a	science	fiction	writer	has	at	least
to	be	a	little	bit	scientific.	At	least	he	has	to	pretend.
But	once	you	move	into	the	world	of	so-called	spirituality,	esotericism,	then	the
whole	imagination	can	play	all	its	games.	You	can	invent	anything	and	nobody
can	argue	with	you	because	nothing	 can	be	proved,	nothing	 can	be	disproved.
That's	why	there	are	so	many	religions	in	the	world	and	so	many	gods.
The	Hindus	alone	have	three	hundred	thirty	million	gods!	(laughter)	What	to	say
about	 others?	 As	 many	 gods	 as	 there	 are	 Hindus;	 each	 Hindu	 has	 a	 god	 to
himself.	That's	a	good	idea!	(much	laughter)	Have	your	own	private	god.	Why
use	a	public	vehicle	when	you	can	have	your	own	car?	But	this	is	all	stupidity.
The	true	god	is	only	one	and	that	true	god	has	no	personality	at	all,	no	face,	no
body,	no	 form,	no	definition.	 It	 is	 the	 state	of	blissfulness,	 it	 is	 an	 experience.
That's	 why	 as	 far	 as	 bliss	 is	 concerned	 there	 is	 no	 quarrel.	 Hindus,
Mohammedans,	Christians,	Buddhists,	Jainas	--	all	agree	that	when	you	achieve
god	you	achieve	the	ultimate	bliss.	In	fact	people	are	trying	to	know	god	just	in
order	 to	achieve	bliss.	Even	 the	atheists	 are	not	 against	 the	 idea	of	bliss.	Who
can	be	against	the	idea	of	bliss?	--	it	is	everybody's	longing.
And	 that's	 why	 I	 say	 this	 is	 the	 only	 natural,	 spontaneous	 vision	 of	 god.
Everybody	 is	 searching	 for	 bliss.	 So	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 worship.	 You	 don't
worship	 love;	 you	 love.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	worship	 love.	You	 don't	worship
freedom,	you	live	it.
Bliss	 also	 has	 to	 be	 experienced,	 not	 worshipped.	 All	 the	 temples	 and	 the
mosques	and	the	churches	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
just	out	of	date,	primitive,	relics	of	the	past.	We	can	save	a	few	just	as	antique
pieces,	for	the	museums	--
otherwise	they	are	not	needed	at	all,	they	are	unnecessarily	occupying	space.	The
same	space	can	be	used	for	more	purposively,	far	more	creatively.	The	churches
and	the	temples	can	become	places	to	dance	and	sing,	to	play	music	--	and	that
will	be	far	more	religious.	Because	people	dancing,	singing,	playing	music,	will
be	more	blissful	than	the	phony,	so-called	religious	people	who	gather	there.
If	you	want	to	see	the	real	phonies,	just	sit	outside	a	church	on	Sunday,	and	you
will	 see	 all	 the	 Sunday-religious	 people.	 They	 are	 only	 religious	 on	 Sunday
morning.	For	six	days	they	do	everything	that	is	against	their	religion	and	on	the
seventh	day	they	ask	forgiveness,	so	that	they	can	do	the	same	things	again	the
next	 week,	 because	 Monday	 is	 coming	 and	 they	 have	 to	 start	 their	 business
again.	You	 can	 see	 the	phoniness...	 and	 they	 look	very	 religious,	 very	 serious,
sombre,	holy.
I	 have	 watched	 churches,	 temples,	 mosques,	 you	 meet	 the	 same	 people
somewhere	else	and	you	will	see	such	a	change	in	their	faces.	They	start	wearing
a	certain	mask	when	they	enter	into	a	temple	or	a	church.
My	whole	 idea	 of	 religiousness	 is	 of	 experiencing,	A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 live	 in
such	a	way	 that	his	whole	 life	becomes	a	 song;	not	only	his	 life,	but	 even	his
death	becomes	the	very	crescendo	of	his	dance,	his	song,	his	celebration.	It	is	a
question	of	 learning	 the	art	of	how	to	 live,	and	how	to	die.	And	 this	has	 to	be
done	 every	 moment,	 every	 moment	 you	 have	 to	 die	 as	 far	 as	 the	 past	 is
concerned	and	you	have	to	be	reborn	as	far	as	 the	present	 is	concerned.	Die	to
the	 past	 every	 moment	 so	 that	 in	 the	 present	 you	 are	 fresh,	 young,	 alive,
vibrating,	clean,	clear,	virgin.
And	never	allow	 the	past	 to	accumulate	 its	dust	upon	you	 --	keep	your	mirror
clean.	 And	 slowly	 slowly	 blissfulness	 deepens.	 As	 bliss	 deepens	 in	 you	 god
deepens	in	you.	The	moment	you	explode	in	absolute	bliss	you	have	attained	the
ultimate.
The	only	problem	in	life	is	love.	Either	people	are	missing	love	--	then	their	life
is	empty,	then	their	life	has	no	meaning,	no	significance,	no	joy	--	or	people	are
full	 of	 love	 but	 their	 love	 is	 contaminated	 by	 attachment.	Again	 they	 become
miserable;t	again,	anguish	arises,	because	 that	attachment,	 that	clinging	creates
possessiveness,	 jealousy,	 poisons	 love	 completely.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 garden	which	 is
full	 of	 weeds	 and	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 grow	 roses	 in	 it.	 If	 your	 mind	 is	 full	 of
jealousy,	possessiveness,	domination,	ego	trips	and	all	those	numbers,	then	you
cannot	grow	roses	of	love.	The	whole	soil	is	being	exploited	by	the	weeds	--	and
weeds	 are	 cunning	 people,	 very	 cunning	 people!(laughter)	 You	 need	 not	 sow
them,	they	come	on	their	own,	uninvited.	You	need	not	water	them,	they	survive
on	their	own,	they	find	ways	and	means	to	survive.	Even	if	you	uproot	them	they
will	appear	again.	They	are	very	clever	as	far	as	survival	is	concerned.
I	don't	believe	in	Charles	Darwin's	idea	of	survival	of	the	fittest,	because	the	rose
cannot	survive	and	the	weeds	survive.	That	means	the	weeds	are	the	fittest!	The
rose	 cannot	 survive	on	 its	own,	you	have	 to	help	 it,	 you	have	 to	water	 it,	 you
have	 to	 give	 it	 fertilisers,	manure,	 you	 have	 to	 protect	 it.	 Too	much	 rain	may
disturb	 it,	 too	much	 rain	may	kill	 it.	 It	 is	 against	many	 odds	 that	 you	 have	 to
protect	it.
And	love	is	a	rose	flower,	far	more	delicate	than	any	rose	can	ever	be.	It	is	the
subtlest	flowering	of	consciousness.	It	is	the	flower	of	your	innermost	being.	It	is
the	opening	of	your	heart.	Just	as	petals	open,	your	heart	opens	in	love.	But	there
are	dancers	for	it,	and	those	dangers	all	come	from	attachment.
Attachment	is	the	root	of	all	the	dangers	for	love.
One	has	to	destroy	attachment	mercilessly.
So	 these	 are	 the	 two	 situations	people	 are	 in:	 either	 they	 are	 loveless,	 living	 a
loveless	life,	because	they	don't	want	to	get	into	the	troubled	waters	of	jealousy
and	possessiveness,	so	they	remain	aloof,	isolated.
These	people	become	monks	and	nuns,	afraid	of	 relationship,	 they	move	away
from	the	world.	They	start	living	in	closed	quarters.	Not	only	is	their	monastery
closed	 to	 the	 world,	 they	 themselves	 become	 completely	 closed	 to	 existence.
They	are	not	available	to	the	wind,	to	the	rain,	to	the	sun,	to	people,	to	animals	--
they	 are	 not	 available	 to	 anything.	 They	 are	 very	 much	 preoccupied	 with
themselves,	they	are	completely	closed,	windowless,	afraid	that	something	may
come	in	and	they	may	get	disturbed,	distracted.
There	are	monasteries	where	for	a	thousand	years	not	even	a	single	woman	has
entered.	 Not	 even	 a	 six-month-old	 baby	 girl	 is	 allowed	 in	 the	 monastery	 of
Athos.	For	one	thousand	years	no	woman	has	entered.	And	the	monk	who	enters
the	monastery	enters	 forever,	he	does	not	come	out.	And	 there	have	been	such
monasteries	in	Tibet,	in	the	Himalayas,	everywhere.	So	much	fear	of	the	world	is
nothing	but	fear	of	love!
And	 the	 reason	 is	 not	 that	 love	 is	 dangerous;	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 they	 are	 not
capable	of	destroying	 the	weeds;	hence	 they	become	afraid	of	 the	very	 idea	of
the	garden.	They	start	escaping	from	the	garden.	These	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are	one	kind	of	people.	Then	there	is	the	other	kind,	the	whole	world	consists	of
the	other	kind,	the	worldly	people.	They	love	but	their	love	does	not	bring	any
bliss,	 it	brings	only	misery,	conflict.	It	makes	their	life	a	constant	nightmare.	It
drives	them	crazy,	insane.
My	effort	here	is	to	bring	about	a	totally	new	kind	of	person.	That's	my	vision	of
a	new	man,	that	he	should	be	able	to	love.	He	should	not	go	to	a	monastery.	He
should	 live	 in	 the	 marketplace	 and	 yet	 he	 should	 be	 able	 to	 drop	 all
possessiveness,	all	attachment,	all	clinging,	all	jealousy.
It	can	be	done	because	I	have	done	it,	so	you	can	do	it!	(laughter)	I	never	say	a
single	thing	which	is	not	my	own	experience.	I	speak	on	my	own	authority.
There	is	a	Sufi	story	of	an	old	master,	a	woman	came	to	him	dragging	her	small
child	and	said	to	the	master,	'I	am	tired	of	this	boy.	He	eats	so	many	sweets	that	I
am	afraid	he	will	become	ill,	his	 teeth	will	become	rotten.	And	he	suffers	very
much	--	stomach	ache,	this	and	that	--	but	he	eats	only	sweets	and	nothing	else.
So	you	do	something.	I	know	if	you	say	he	will	listen	to	you.'
The	master	looked	at	 the	boy	and	said	to	the	woman,	 'You	come	after	a	week.'
The	 woman	 was	 very	 much	 puzzled	 because	 many	 times	 she	 had	 visited	 the
master	 and	 asked	 him	 very	 difficult	 questions	 about	 life	 and	 death	 and
incarnation	 and	 god	 and	 heaven	 and	 hell	 and	 he	 has	 already	 ready	 to	 answer
instantly.
Now	just	a	small	thing,	he	has	to	say	something	to	this	boy,	and	he	needs	seven
days!
But	 then	 she	 thought,	 'These	 Sufi	 masters	 are	 little	 crazy.	 There	 may	 be
something	in	it,	so	one	week	I	have	to	wait.'
She	came	after	one	week,	and	the	master	said,	'Sorry.	You	come	after	two	weeks.
I	am	not	yet	ready.'
Even	the	boy	was	puzzled.
After	two	weeks	they	came	back	and	the	master	looked	at	the	boy	and	said,	'You
can	do	 it.'	The	boy	 said,	 'But	why	did	you	 take	 three	weeks	 to	 say	 this	much,
"You	can	do	it,"	The	master	said,	'because	I	love	sweets	myself.	So	first	I	had	to
try,	whether	I	could	do	it	or	not,	otherwise	how	can	I	tell	you?	That	would	have
been	 false.	And	 it	 is	hard,	 I	know,	 it	 is	difficult.	 I	was	 thinking	 that	one	week
would	be	enough	but	 it	was	not.	 I	 could	not	drop	 sweets,	 I	 love	 them!	 It	 took
three	weeks	for	me	and	I	am	an	old	man,	so	I	can	understand	your	trouble	but	if	I
can	do	it,	you	can	also	do	it	--	maybe	it	will	be	a	little	more	difficult.'
But	the	boy	became	immensely	interested	in	the	master,	here	is	a	man	who	could
have	simply	said...
nobody	knew	that	he	loved	sweets,	even	the	woman	was	surprised.	But	she	said
'You	could	have	told	him	--
there	was	no	need	for	you	to	prove	it.'	He	said,	'I	cannot	say	anything	that	I	have
not	experienced	myself.
This	is	my	way,	my	whole	life.	I	have	never	uttered	a	single	thing	which	I	have
not	 experienced,	 because	 when	 you	 utter	 something	 which	 you	 have	 not
experienced	 it	 loses	 something	 it	 has	 no	 truth	 in	 it.	 It	may	be	 put	 in	 beautiful
words	but	it	is	only	words.	It	may	have	a	beautiful	container	but	it	has	no	content
at	all.	And	it	is	said	that	the	boy	was	able	to	drop	sweets	that	very	day.	He	felt,
'If	this	old	man	took	so	much	trouble	just	to	say	to	me,	"Yes,	you	can	do	it,"'	And
the	next	day	the	boy	came	and	said,	'You	are	right	--	I	can	do	it!"
And	 the	master	 said,	 'When	 one	 says	 by	 one's	 own	 experience	 it	 goes	 deep.	 I
knew	it.	I	had	looked	into	your	eyes	and	I	had	felt	that	you	would	be	able	to	do
it.	And	 I	 am	an	old	man	 --	 I	 am	weak	 --	 it	 took	 three	weeks	 for	me.	You	 are
young,	you	can	do	it	in	one	day!'
This	is	my	way	also.
Love	can	be	absolutely	 free	 from	attachment.	And	 the	moment	 it	 is	absolutely
free	from	attachment,	it	is	the	greatest	thing	in	life	--	because	it	brings	all	kinds
of	truths	in	its	wake.	It	brings	freedom,	it	brings	bliss,	 it	brings	great	poetry	to
your	heart,	great	music	to	your	being.	It	simply	makes	you	available	to	all	that	is
beautiful,	true	and	great,	all	that	liberates.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8101105
ShortTitle:	POND10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
A	life	becomes	really	alive	only	when	love	blossoms,	otherwise	it	is	a	tree	with
no	flowers,	it	is	a	bird	who	is	dumb,	cannot	sing,	or	a	bird	without	wings.	A	life
without	love	is	crippled	inwardly,	paralysed,	from	the	outside	everything	will	be
as	 it	 should	 be	 but	 from	 the	 inside	 something	 is	 missing	 --	 something	 which
makes	everything	valuable,	something	without	which	it	is	all	dark.
Love	 is	 the	 lamp	of	 the	 interior	world,	 the	 light	of	 the	within.	But	 love	brings
many	 problems,	 sometimes	 so	 big	 that	 it	 seems	 safer	 to	 avoid	 it.	 It	 brings
anxiety,	conflict,	fear,	bondage.	It	is	absolutely	needed.	The	person	who	avoids	it
is	 committing	 suicide,	 but	 the	 people	who	 live	 calculatedly,	whose	 lifestyle	 is
rooted	in	arithmetic,	whose	vision	is	not	more	than	the	material,	the	worldly,	the
outside,	 whose	 vision	 consists	 only	 of	 the	 miserable,	 the	 logical	 --	 they	 are
bound	 to	decide	against	 love.	They	will	call	 love	madness	 ...	And	 they	are	not
absolutely	wrong	either.
They	 are	 right	 because	 love	 brings	 so	 many	 problems	 that	 life	 becomes	 a
turmoil,	 an	 insanity.	 One	 loses	 all	 balance	 and	 then	 to	 get	 out	 of	 it	 is	 very
difficult	 --	 one	 thing	 leads	 to	 another,	 one	 problem	 to	 many	 other	 problems.
Hence	the	cautious	person	decides	against	love,	but	then	he	has	decided	against
life	itself.	Then	he	is	living	meaninglessly.	Then	he	simply	vegetates	and	calls	it
life.	He	drags	and	he	feels	continuously	that	there	is	no	dance,	no	significance,
but	he	consoles	himself	'It	is	so	because	life	itself	is	meaningless	--
what	can	I	do?'
That's	 what	 Jean-Paul	 Sartre	 and	 other	 existentialists	 say:	 life	 itself	 is
meaningless,	it	is	not	our	fault!
Life	is	absurd,	it	is	not	our	fault.	But	they	are	utterly	wrong!	Life	is	not	absurd,
life	 is	 not	 meaningless,	 but	 meaning	 comes	 through	 love.	 Life	 is	 only	 an
opportunity	to	grow	into	love.	Love	brings	problems	--	hence	all	the	religions	of
the	world	have	decided	against	love.	These	religions	have	been	invented	by	very
Jewish	people	--	calculating,	businesslike.
As	far	as	I	can	see	all	the	religions	have	been	founded	by	Jews!	(laughter)	They
may	be	known	or	hidden	--	that's	another	thing	--	but	it	is	a	Jewish	conspiracy,
because	 they	 all	 live	 with	 such	 calculation.	 The	 monastery	 is	 nothing	 but	 an
escape	from	love.
Love	can	become	without	any	problems	if	one	more	element	is	added	to	it	--	that
is	awareness.
Unconscious	love	creates	problems.	In	fact	 it	 is	not	love	that	creates	problems,
that	 is	 a	 misunderstanding.	 It	 is	 the	 unconsciousness	 in	 it	 which	 creates
problems.
Rightly	analysed	one	can	see	clearly	from	where	the	problems	come.	They	don't
come	from	love	itself,	they	come	from	unconciousness.	It's	unconsciousness	that
creates	 jealousy,	 that	 creates	 possessiveness,	 that	 creates	 domination,	 that	 fear,
that	 creates	 anxiety	 about	 the	 future,	 that	 creates	 suspicion,	 doubt.	 It	 is
unconsciousness	that	brings	anger,	hatred,	conflict	--	it	is	not	love	at	all.	But	we
are	such	a	mixture	that	unless	you	are	very	aware	you	will	not	be	able	to	separate
them.
The	moment	you	become	alert	they	can	be	separated.	And	once	you	are	able	to
separate	what	 love	 is	 and	what	 unconsciousness	 is,	 once	you	 are	 conscious	of
your	unconsciousness	it	starts	disappearing,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	make
it	 evaporate.	 To	 be	 conscious	 of	 unconsciousness	 simply	 means	 that
consciousness	 cannot	 allow	 unconsciousness	 to	 exist	 any	 more.	 It	 is	 like
bringing	 light	 into	 a	 dark	 room;	 the	 moment	 the	 light	 is	 inside	 the	 room	 the
darkness	disappears.	Yes,	when	you	are	bringing	the	lamp	and	the	room	is	still
far	away	you	can	see	that	it	is	dark.	The	closer	you	come	the	more	you	can	see
that	it	is	dark.
but	the	moment	you	enter	into	the	room	the	darkness	disappears.
In	a	Sufi	parable,	a	mystic	asked	one	of	his	disciples,	 'Go	out	and	see	whether
the	sun	has	risen	yet	or	not!'	It	is	very	early,	the	last	phase	of	the	night,	and	the
disciple	says,	'There	is	no	need	to	go.	I	can	see	from	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	windows	it	is	very	dark	and	the	sun	has	not	risen	yet.'	But	the	master	says,
'Then	you	 take	a	 lamp	with	you	and	go	and	 look	 for	 the	 sun	 --	whether	 it	has
arisen	yet	or	not.	If	it	is	dark	then	take	a	lamp.'
The	 disciple	 feels	 very	 puzzled.	 The	 master	 looks	 crazy,	 but	 he	 is	 giving	 an
indication	to	the	disciple.	He	is	not	talking	about	the	outside	world,	he	is	talking
about	 the	inside	world.	He	is	saying,	 'If	 it	 is	dark	then	take	the	lamp	and	look,
whether	it	is	really	dark	or	not.	And	the	moment	you	take	the	lamp	it	is	no	more
dark.'
The	 same	 happens	 when	 you	 become	 aware.	 The	 first	 thing	 is	 that
unconsciousness	and	 love	are	separated.When	all	 the	misery	 that	has	 remained
associated	with	love	is	no	more	associated	with	love.	Love	becomes	purified,	a
fragrance,	 and	 the	unconscious	 starts	disappearing	because	you	 start	becoming
more	and	more	conscious	of	it.
This	 is	 the	whole	process	of	sannyas.	Only	 two	things	 to	be	remembered,	 love
and	awareness.	Love	plus	awareness	is	equal	to	sannyas.
Religions	in	the	past	have	lived	in	a	very	uncreative	style.	The	very	orientation
of	the	religions	has	been	uncreative,	escapist,	life-negative.	That's	why	so	many
centuries	have	passed	and	man	is	still	irreligious	(laughter).	There	are	two	kinds
of	 irreligious	 people,	 those	who	 are	 honestly	 irreligious	 and	 say	 so,	 and	 those
who	are	not	honest	enough	and	go	on	pretending	that	they	are	religious	but	are
not.
It	 is	very	 rare	 to	come	across	a	person	who	 is	 religious.	 In	 the	 temples,	 in	 the
mosques,	 in	 the	 churches,	 in	 the	 synagogues,	 you	 will	 find	 phony	 people,
pretending	to	be	religious	--	they	are	not.	But	it	is	not	their	fault.	They	have	been
conditioned	in	a	wrong	way,	and	each	generation	goes	on	conditioning	the	new
generation.	 That	 becomes	 almost	 a	 heritage.	 All	 the	 diseases	 of	 the	 older
generation	become	part	of	the	mind	of	the	new	generation.	This	heritage	has	to
be	disowned	--	only	then	one	becomes	a	sannyasin.
One	 has	 to	 disown	 the	 whole	 past.	 One	 has	 to	 learn	 a	 totally	 new	 style	 of
religiousness.	 To	 me	 life-affirmation,	 blissfulness,	 creativity	 --	 these	 are	 very
fundamental,	 the	 very	 roots	 of	 an	 authentic	 religious	 consciousness.	And	 then
life	certainly	becomes	a	song,	a	celebration.
The	old	saints	lock	so	sad	and	so	serious,	so	dull,	so	dead,	that	I	would	like	my
people	 to	get	 rid	of	all	 those	saints.	 It	 is	better	 to	be	with	a	sinner	who	knows
how	to	laugh	than	to	be	with	a	saint	who	has	forgotten	how	to	laugh.
It	 is	 better	 to	 be	 an	 ordinary	 person	 but	 capable	 of	 singing	 and	 dancing	 and
loving	and	sharing,	than	to	become	closed	into	a	very	subtle	ego	of	holier-than-
thou.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	blissful	and	they	have	to	create	their	life	in	such	a	way
that	slowly	slowly	it	starts	having	the	flavour	of	music,	the	rhythm	of	a	song,	the
harmony	of	a	dance.	And	it	is	possible	It	is	our	birthright.	We	have	been	denied
and	we	 have	 been	 taught	wrong	 things	which	 are	 functioning	 like	 hindrances.
They	can	be	immediately	removed	--	one	need	not	wait	for	tomorrow.	It	is	only	a
question	of	clarity.
Once	you	are	clear	about	what	 the	 impediment	 is,	you	either	 remove	 it	or	you
by-pass	it	or	you	step	over	it.	You	need	not	be	hindered	by	it	because	it	is	dead
and	you	are	alive	and	life	can	always	find	ways	and	means.	And	that's	what	we
are	doing	here,	trying	to	find	out	as	many	ways,	as	many	means	as	possible,	so
that	all	kinds	of	obstacles	can	be	either	removed	or	by-passed	or	stepped	over.
But	once	the	decision	settles	in	the	heart	that	 'I	have	to	make	my	life	a	song,	a
celebration,	 a	 festival	 of	 lights,'	 then	 nothing	 can	 prevent	 you,	 then	 nothing	 is
impossible.
The	 ultimate	 truth	 cannot	 he	 conquered.	 we	 are	 too	 small	 and	 it	 is	 too	 vast.
moreover	we	are	 just	part	of	 it	and	 the	part	cannot	conquer	 the	whole.	But	we
can	invite.	Even	the	poorest	person	can	invite	the	richest	man.	Even	a	beggar	can
invite	 the	 emperor.	 And	 if	 there	 is	 a	 sincerity,	 intensity	 and	 passion	 in	 the
invitation,	it	has	never	been	rejected.
It	happened	on	the	last	day	of	Gautam	Buddha's	life	on	earth,	a	very	poor	man
invited	him	 to	 take	his	meal	at	his	home.	This	was	 the	 routine	way	 --	Buddha
will	open	his	doors	early	in	the	morning	and	whosoever	will	invite	him	first,	he
will	accept	his	invitation	for	that	day.	He	will	go	to	his	house.	He	used	to	take
only	one	meal	each	day.	It	was	almost	impossible	for	a	poor	person	to	invite	him,
it	was	just	accidental.
The	king	was	coming	to	invite	him	out	just	on	the	way	some	accident	happened
and	the	chariot	in	which	he	was	coming,	broke,	so	he	was	delayed.	He	reached
there	 just	 one	minute	 late.	 But	 by	 that	 time	Buddha	 had	 already	 accepted	 the
invitation	of	the	poor	man.
The	king	said,	'I	know	this	man.	He	has	been	trying	his	whole	life	to	invite	you.
Whenever	you	come	to	this	town'...	and	Buddha	loved	a	few	places	very	much,
Vaishali,	one	of	the	cities,	was	one	of	the	most	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
loved	by	him.	In	his	whole	forty-two	years	as	a	master	he	visited	Vaishali	at	least
forty	 tines,	 almost	 every	year.	And	he	 remained	 in	Vaishali	 for	 at	 least	 twelve
rainy	seasons,	for	the	whole	rainy	season,	because	in	the	rainy	season	he	used	to
stop	his	 journey	 --	 it	was	 too	difficult	 to	walk.	So	 for	 three	or	 four	months	he
would	remain	in	one	place;	for	eight	months	he	would	move	around.
The	 king	 said,	 'I	 know	 this	 man,	 I	 have	 seen	 him	many	 times.	 He	 is	 always
trying	and	he	has	nothing	to	offer!	Please	reject	this	idea	of	going	to	his	house.'
But	Buddha	said,	'That	is	impossible.	I	cannot	reject	the	invitation.	I	have	to	go.'
And	he	went.	And	that,	very	going,	became	fatal	 to	his	body,	because	in	Bihar
where	 Buddha	 moved...	 the	 name	 'bihar'	 comes	 from	 Buddha's	 movements.
Bihar	means	'the	place	where	a	Buddha	moved'.	This	is	the	boundary	where	for
forty	two	years	he	continuously	moved.	That	boundary	makes	the	whole	state	of
Bihar.
Buddha	went.	 The	 poor	men	 in	 Bihar	 collect	mushrooms,	 dry	 them	 and	 keep
them	for	the	rainy	season.
They	use	them	as	vegetables.	Sometimes	mushrooms	are	poisonous.	And	he	had
prepared	 mushrooms	 for	 Buddha	 --	 he	 had	 nothing,	 else,	 just	 rice	 and
mushrooms.
Buddha	looked	at	what	he	offered	him,	but	saying	no	to	the	poor	man	would	be
hurting	him,	so	he	ate	 those	mushrooms.	They	were	very	bitter,	but	 to	say	that
will	 hurt	 the	 poor	 man,	 so	 he	 ate	 the	 whole	 thing	 without	 saying	 anything,
thanked	the	poor	man,	and	came	back.	He	died	of	food	poisoning.
And	when	he	was	asked	at	the	last	moment,	'Why	did	you	accept?	You	knew,	the
king,	had	warned	you,	other	disciples	were	warning	you	 that	he	 is	 so	poor,	he
will	not	be	able	to	offer	you	the	right	food,	and	you	are	old,	eighty-two	years	old
--	you	need	the	right	nourishment	--	but	you	didn't	listen.'
Buddha	said,	'It	was	impossible.	Whenever	truth	is	invited	he	has	to	accept.	And
he	invited	me	with	such	passion	and	love	as	nobody	has	ever	invited	me	--	it	was
worth	risking	my	life!'
This	story	is	beautiful.	It	is	true	about	the	ultimate	truth	also:	all	that	is	needed
on	our	part	is	a	total	invitation,	not	holding	back	even	a	small	part	of	our	being.
If	we	are	totally	available,	open,	ready	to	receive	the	host,	the	host	comes.	It	has
never	been	otherwise.
This	is	the	law	of	existence:	truth	cannot	be	conquered	but	can	be	invited.	One
has	to	be	just	a	host	for	the	ultimate	guest.	And	that's	what	I	call	meditation;	it
simply	 makes	 you	 empty	 of	 all	 rubbish,	 it	 empties	 you	 completely	 so	 you
become	 spacious,	 receptive,	 sensitive,	 vulnerable,	 available.	 And	 all	 those
qualities	 make	 you	 passionately	 inviting	 --	 an	 invitation	 for	 the	 unknown,	 an
invitation	for	the	unnameable,	an	invitation	for	that	which	will	make	your	life	a
fulfilment,	without	which	life	is	just	an	exercise	in	utter	futility.	But	one	cannot
do	anything	more	than	that;	just	an	invitation	and	waiting.
This	is	what	I	call	prayer:	invitation	and	waiting	in	deep	trust	that	it	is	going	to
happen.	And	 it	happens,	 it	has	always	happened!	Ais	dhammo	sanantano,	 says
the	Buddha	--	this	is	the	ultimate	law	of	existence.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101115
ShortTitle:	POND11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Power	is	dangerous	without	meditation.	Any	kind	of	power	is	bound	to	become
destructive	if	there	is	no	meditation	involved	in	it.
Lord	 Acton's	 famous	 statement	 is	 basically	 true,	 that	 power	 corrupts	 and
absolute	 power	 corrupts	 absolutely,	 because	 power	means	 energy,	 but	 what	 is
one	going	to	do	with	energy	if	one	has	not	the	understanding	to	use	it	rightly,	if
one	has	not	 the	perspective	to	see	clearly	where	to	go,	what	 to	do,	what	not	 to
do?	 Then	 power	 gives	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 intoxication.	 The	 unconscious	 person
becomes	even	more	unconscious,	the	mad	person	becomes	even	more	mad.
For	 example,	Adolf	Hitler	would	 have	 been	mad	 even	without	 power,	 but	 the
world	would	not	 have	 suffered	 so	much.	Once	he	became	powerful	 then	what
happened	was	inevitable.	A	madman	in	power	is	bound	to	be	a	calamity.	And	we
all	have	immense	power,	it	is	good	that	we	are	not	aware	of	it,	it	is	good	that	it	is
only	potential.
Latest	 researchers	 into	 psychiatry	 have	 come	 to	 a	 very	 significant	 conclusions
that	many	people	who	are	 insane	are	 really	 insane	because	 they	have	so	much
power	that	it	is	beyond	their	control.	They	cannot	cope	with	it.	Basically	they	are
not	bad	people,	not	evil,	but	 their	power	 is	 like	a	sword,	a	naked	sword	 in	 the
hands	of	a	child.	What	 is	 the	child	going	 to	do	with	 the	sword?	Either	he	will
harm	somebody	or	he	will	harm	himself	hence	power	either	becomes	murderous
or	 suicidal.	 These	 are	 the	 only	 two	 possibilities	without	 meditation.	 But	 once
meditation	becomes	 the	 foundation	 then	power	 is	 creative,	 then	 it	 brings	great
poetry	and	great	music	and	great	dance	in	your	life.	And	not	only	in	your	life,	it
starts	overflowing	you,	it	start	reaching	others.
When	the	poetry	is	born	in	you,	you	have	to	share	it.	When	the	flower	opens,	the
fragrance	is	bound	to	be	released.
Humanity	 is	 suffering	 from	 too	much	power.	Technology,	 science	 --	 they	have
given	immense	power	to	man,	and	man	is	insane.	Man	has	no	meditativeness,	no
silence,	 no	peace	within	himself.	He	knows	nothing	of	 awareness	 --	 hence	we
are	standing	on	the	verge.	Any	moment	the	world	can	plunge	into	a	suicidal	act,
global	suicide	is	possible.
In	the	past,	wars	were	never	so	dangerous.	They	were	local.	Now	it	is	going	to
be	a	total	war.	It	can	consume	not	only	humanity	all	the	animals,	trees,	all	life	on
this	earth	can	evaporate	within	hours	or	even	within	minutes.
For	 the	 first	 time	humanity	 is	 in	 immense	need	of	meditation,	 to	balance	what
technology	has	given.
Never	before	was	humanity	in	such	a	need	of	sannyasins.	They	have	to	balance
the	soldiers.	Unless	we	can	keep	soldiers	and	sannyasins	balanced,	 technocrats
and	meditators	balanced,	there	is	no	future,	there	is	no	hope.
Initiation	 into	 sannyas	 is	 not	 only	 your	 individual	 affair.	 It	 has	 far-reaching
consequences.	 It	 will	 release,	 certainly,	 your	 energy,	 it	 will	 transform	 your
personality,	but	it	will	be	a	blessing	to	the	world	too.
And	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 I	 insist	 upon	 is	 meditation.	 I	 don't	 give	 any	 other
discipline	because	no	other	discipline	is	needed.	Once	you	know	how	to	be	silent
and	aware,	everything	else	follows	of	its	own	accord.
Love	 comes,	 compassion	 comes,	 service	 comes,	 prayer	 comes.	 You	 need	 not
seek	for	them,	truth	comes,	freedom	comes,	godliness	comes,	but	they	come	of
their	own	accord.	And	remember,	when	these	things	come	of	their	own	accord	--
without	any	effort	on	your	part	--	they	have	a	tremendous	beauty.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Six	months	or	longer.
--	That's	good.	You	will	be	here	longer	--	you	are	finished!	(laughter)	Good!
Man	can	make	efforts	for	pleasure	but	not	for	bliss.	Pleasure	will	not	come	on	its
own.	You	 have	 to	make	 efforts	 for	 it,	 because	 pleasure	 belongs	 to	 the	 outside
world.	The	pleasure	that	comes	through	having	money,	the	pleasure	that	comes
through	food,	through	sex,	through	political	power,	respectability	--	these	things
never	 come	 as	 gifts.	 One	 has	 to	 work	 hard,	 struggle	 for	 them,	 one	 has	 to	 be
aggressive	and	violent.
If	one	simply	sits	silently	and	waits	for	a	miracle	to	happen	those	miracles	never
happen,	they	have	never	happened.	You	have	to	run	and	you	have	to	run	faster
than	others	because	it	is	a	competitive	game.
You	are	not	alone;	millions	of	people	are	running	for	the	same	goals.
Pleasure	 is	of	 the	outside	 --	competitive;	hence	one	has	 to	make	a	 tremendous
effort	to	gain	it.	And	then	too	what	is	gained	is	not	of	much	use.	Once	you	have
the	money	 that	 you	were	 hoping	would	 give	 you	 all	 that	 you	 need,	 once	 you
have	it,	all	hopes	evaporate,	one	is	simply	disillusioned.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	pleasure	exists	only	in	the	hope.	When	the	hope	is	fulfilled	there	is	only	pain
and	nothing	else.	So	much	effort	is	needed	to	attain	to	pleasure	--	and	what	one
really	attains	is	pain.	Just	on	the	way	while	you	are	journeying	you	can	dream	all
kinds	of	fantasies,	you	can	imagine,	project;	but	by	the	time	you.	have	reached,	it
always	proves	a	mirage.
Bliss	 is	 of	 the	 inner,	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 pleasure.	 There	 is	 no	 competition
because	there	you	are	alone,	nobody	else	is	there	in	your	being.	Nobody	can	ever
be	 there	 except	 you.	 It	 is	 absolute	privacy,	 so	no	 competition,	 no	 struggle...	 If
you	 just	 turn	 in	and	 sit	 silently	 inside,	bliss	 starts	happening.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	your
self-nature;	 that's	why	 it	 is	 said	 bliss	 is	 a	 gift:	 it	 comes	 from	 the	 beyond,	 not
because	of	your	efforts	but	because	of	your	effortlessness.	You	are	simply	sitting
doing	nothing	and	it	starts	showering.
And	once	you	have	known	the	secret	then	any	moment	you	can	close	your	eyes
and	it	is	there.	It	is	a	divine	gift.	You	need	not	deserve	it,	you	need	not	be	worthy
of	it,	you	need	not	fight	for	it.	In	fact	all	these	things	are	hindrances.	You	have	to
be	just	open,	empty,	so	that	when	it	descends	in	you	there	is	space	for	it.
Bliss	 comes	 ns	 a	 guest.	 All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 a	 spaciousness	 so	 that	 you	 can
function	 as	 a	 host.	 And	 this	 is	 the	 paradox	 of	 life;	 much	 has	 to	 be	 done	 for
pleasure	 and	 nothing	 is	 attained	 I	 nothing	 has	 to	 be	 done	 for	 bliss	 and	 all	 is
attained!
Knowledge	 is	 not	knowing.	Knowledgeability	 is	 just	 the	opposite	of	knowing.
Knowledgeability	hides	your	 ignorance.	 It	does	not	destroy	 it,	 it	only	covers	 it
up.	The	wound	remains,	but	covered	and	 the	wound	goes	on	growing	and	you
have	 to	 go	 on	 uncovering	 it.	 So	 the	 knowledgeable	 person	 has	 to	 go	 on
accumulating	 more	 and	 more	 knowledge,	 more	 and	 more	 degrees,	 more	 and
more	qualifications,	to	cover	it	up.	But	whatsoever	you	do	it	is	there.
Knowledge	 cannot	 destroy	 it.	 Knowing	 dispels	 it	 exactly	 as	 light	 dispels
darkness.	Knowing	is	wisdom.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	scriptures,	nothing	to	do	with	information.	It	is	an	inner
transformation.	One	has	 to	become	as	 innocent	as	a	child.	One	has	 to	drop	all
knowledge	to	become	wise.	Hide	the	ignorance	and	you	become	knowledgeable.
Become	 innocent,	 accept	 your	 ignorance,	 be	 aware	 of	 it	 and	 it	 starts
disappearing.
Not	 that	 you	will	 have	 all	 the	 answers	 to	 all	 the	 questions.	You	will	 not	 have
even	a	single	answer	for	a	single	question,	but	in	that	innocence	you	will	be	able
to	 respond	 spontaneously	 to	 reality.	 Your	 response	 will	 be	 always	 total,	 your
action	will	be	total.
And	the	total	action	is	 the	right	action	and	the	total	action	is	virtue.	And	a	life
which	 functions	 through	 innocence	 becomes	 sheer	 blissfulness.	 It	 has	 all	 the
perfume	 of	 all	 the	 flowers,	 the	 freedom	 and	 the	 vastness	 of	 the	 sky,	 and	 the
beauty	 of	 the	 stars.	 It	 is	 not	 confined	within	 your	 body	 or	 within	 your	mind.
Knowledge	is	confined	within	mind	but	wisdom	is	vaster	than	you,	bigger	than
you.
Knowledge	is	something	in	you,	the	moment	wisdom	is	there,	you	are	within	it	--
just	a	small	dewdrop	in	the	vast	ocean.	It	frees	you	--	from	misery,	from	anxiety,
from	death.	Not	only	 from	these	 things	 it	even	you	from	yourself.	One	simply
disappears.	And	that	disappearance	we	have	called	nirvana,	that	disappearance	is
real	 liberation.	 That's	 our	 deepest	 longing	 of	 the	 heart,	 that's	 what	 we	 are
searching	for,	and	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
Sannyas	is	only	a	jump	into	nirvana.
The	Zen	haiku	says	The	old	pond,	the	frog	jumps	in	--	plop!
And	then	there	is	all	silence.	Plop,	and	all	silence.	Soon	the	ripples	on	the	lake
also	disappear,	as	if	nothing	has	happened,	as	if	you	have	never	been	there.
Nirvana	is	disappearing	into	the	total,	and	that	is	possible	only	out	of	innocence.
So	 to	me	 innocence	 is	 knowing	wisdom,	 and	 innocence	 has	 to	 be	 discovered.
And	it	is	not	very	far;	it	is	just	at	the	very	core	of	your	being.	Layer	upon	layers
of	knowledge...	we	are	just	like	an	onion.	One	has	to	peel	it.	And	the	more	you
peel	it...	the	fresher	layers	are	there,	and	when	all	the	layers	are	peeled,	nothing
remains.	 That	 nothing	 is	 nirvana,	 that	 nothing	 that	 was	 there	 before	 the	 frog
jumped	 in	 and	 that	will	 be	 there	 after	 the	 frog	has	 jumped	 in	 --	 just	 a	 plop,	 a
momentary	sound	--	and	all	silence,	a	little	sound	and	all	silence.
That	 little	sound	I	call	meditation	--	and	 then	 there	 is	all	silence.	So	do	a	 little
'hoo,	hoo,	hoo'	--	that	is	plop!	(laughter)	And	then	all	is	calm,	gone	forever,	and
only	then	you	are	at	home.	When	you	are	not,	you	--
for	the	first	time.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	don't	know.	I	leave	it	for	the	future.
--	(a	broad	grin)	That's	very	good!
There	are	two	ways	to	know:	one	is	logic,	another	is	love.	Logic	is	of	the	head,
love	is	of	the	heart.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Logic	 is	 capable	 of	 knowing	 the	 external	 reality,	 but	 about	 the	 internal	 it	 is
absolutely	 incapable.	 It	 knows	 nothing	 of	 the	 inner,	 and	 because	 it	 knows
nothing	of	the	inner	it	denies	that	the	inner	exists	at	all.	Rather	than	accepting	its
limitation,	it	denies	the	very	existence	of	the	inner,	of	consciousness,	of	soul,	of
the	beyond.
Logic	 is	materialistic,	 because	 it	 believes	only	 in	 the	measurable.	The	English
word	'matter'	is	significant.	It	comes	from	'measure';	that	which	can	be	measured
is	matter.	It	is	the	same	word	as	'meter'	--
'measure',	 'matter'.	 It	 comes	 from	a	Sanskrit	 root	which	means	quantity,	matra.
Quantity	means	that	which	can	be	measured,	but	there	is	something	more	which
is	not	quantity	at	all	 --	 that	can	be	known	only	 through	 love,	only	 through	 the
heart.
One	 has	 to	 shift	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the	 heart.	 That	 shift	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most
significant	things	in	life,	because	once	you	shift	your	focus	from	the	head	to	the
heart,	 your	 whole	 vision	 changes	 --	 and	 with	 it	 the	 whole	 world.	 You	 start
knowing	things	in	a	new	way:	the	same	flowers,	but	they	are	no	longer	the	same.
Through	logic	they	were	only	matter	--	chemical,	mineral,	a	little	bit	of	earth	and
water	and	things	like	that.
You	could	have	taken	the	flower	to	the	lab	and	dissected	it,	put	it	into	different
bottles,	labeled	how	much	potassium	it	contains	and	how	much	iron	it	contains,
but	you	would	not	have	found	beauty.
The	moment	you	look	with	the	eyes	of	love,	the	flower	is	not	just	matter,	it	is	far
more.	It	is	surrounded	by	an	aura	of	beauty.	Suddenly	the	material	part	becomes
the	most	insignificant,	and	the	immaterial	part	becomes	the	most	significant.	You
encounter	 the	 soul	 of	 the	 flower,	 and	 the	 same	 becomes	 your	 approach	 about
everything.
When	you	meet	a	friend	you	don't	meet	just	his	body,	bones,	blood,	veins,	skull	-
-	or	do	you?!	Nobody	ever	meets	a	friend	in	that	way.	When	you	meet	a	friend,
you	meet	something	which	is	not	the	body	--
something	more,	something	plus	--	but	ordinarily	it	remains	in	the	background.
When	 your	 love	 is	 functioning	 it	 becomes	 very	 clear;	 it	 comes	 into	 the
foreground,	 the	 body	 goes	 into	 the	 background.	 The	 body	 becomes	 just	 a
vehicle.	You	see	the	inner	reality	reflected	in	the	mirror	of	love.
And	then	one	 lives	 in	a	different	world.	That	world	can	be	called	 the	world	of
godliness,	of	truth,	of	beauty,	of	bliss.
We	can	give	any	name	 to	 it,	 because	 it	 is	 so	vast	 that	 all	 these	names	are	 just
small	aspects	of	 it.	 It	 is	all-comprehensive,	all-inclusive.	 It	 is	simply	 immense,
beyond	the	comprehension	of	words,	language,	concepts,	but	love	is	capable	of
knowing	it	--	only	love	is	capable	of	knowing	it.
So	 drop	 logic	 and	 enjoy	 love.	Even	 if	 the	world	 thinks	 that	 you	have	 become
mad,	let	them	think!	You	are	not	going	to	lose	anything,	they	are	going	to	lose
everything.
These	are	 the	 three	planes	of	existence	the	material,	 the	psychological,	and	the
spiritual.	To	know	all	three	is	to	know	the	divine.	To	become	confined	to	one	is
to	miss	 the	whole.	And	the	unfortunate	 thing	is	 that	people	are	confined	to	 the
first,	the	lowest,	the	material.	Out	of	a	hundred	persons	maybe	only	one	per	cent
enter	into	the	second,	the	psychological.	And	out	of	those	few	people	who	enter
into	the	psychological,	only	one	per	cent	of	those	enter	the	spiritual.	And	out	of
these	few	people	who	enter	the	spiritual	only	one	per	cent	enters	the	divine.
But	 that	 is	 the	ultimate	goal:	 to	know	life	 in	all	 its	planes	and	to	know	that	all
those	 planes	 ore	 interconnected,	 interdependent.	 All	 those	 planes	 are	 not
antagonistic	 to	 each	 other,	 they	 are	 in	 a	 deep	 synchronicity.	 The	 whole	 is	 an
organic	unity.
This	 experience	 can	 be	 called	 god-realisation	 or	 the	 realisation	 of	 truth.	Once
one	has	 come	 to	 know	 the	whole	 as	 it	 is	without	 excluding	 anything,	 one	 has
fulfilled	his	destiny,	one	has	managed	to	do	that	which	was	the	whole	purpose	of
life	and	all	its	journeys.	Millions	of	lives	we	have	lived,	but	unless	this	is	found
our	living	is	just	moving	in	circles.	We	go	on	moving	it	is	tedious	and	boring,	it
is	a	 long,	 long	 journey.	And	 the	strangest	 thing	 is	 that	we	can	end	 the	 journey
any	 moment...	 just	 a	 little	 understanding	 of	 not	 going	 on	 repeating	 the	 old
pattern,	 but	 of	 taking	 the	 right	 plunge	 towards	 the	 centre.	By	moving	 into	 the
circle	nothing	is	going	to	happen.
There	 is	 a	 small	 spider,	 a	 special	 spider	 found	 in	 African	 jungles,	 which
functions	almost	like	human	beings	--	at	least	in	one	way.	If	you	put	that	spider
into	something	circular	 --	a	plate	 --	 it	will	go	on	moving	round	and	round	and
round	till	it	dies.	All	that	is	needed	for	it	is	to	move	is	somebody	ahead.	If	you
put	only	one	spider	it	won't	move,	because	a	leader	is	needed,	a	guide	is	needed.
If	 you	 put	 a	 few	 spiders	 around	 the	 edges	 of	 the	 plate	 so	 every	 spider	 knows
there	is	somebody	ahead,	and	that	one	also	knows	there	is	somebody	ahead,	then
you	 can	 kill	 them.	You	 need	 not	 do	 anything,	 they	will	 go	 on	moving,	 go	 on
moving,	go	on	moving	and	they	won't	think	that	they	are	moving	in	a	circle	--	till
they	are	so	tired	that	they	start	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
dying.	They	go	on	moving	till	they	die.	Just	two	things	are	needed,	a	circle	and
the	feeling	that	somebody	is	ahead.
When	I	read	about	those	spiders	I	could	see	that	they	are	functioning	almost	like
human	beings.	That's	what	human	beings	need:	a	leader	--	Adolf	Hitler,	Joseph
Stalin,	Mao	Tse	Tung,	any	leader	will	do	--	and	a	circle,	a	circle	of	habits,	just	a
routine	and	they	will	go	on	moving,	go	on	moving.	They	will	die,	they	will	be
born	again	and	they	will	start	moving,	they	will	die	and	they	will	be	born	again
and	they	will	start	moving...
Becoming	a	sannyasin	means	coming	out	of	this	vicious	circle.	That's	why	I	am
so	critical	of	all	your	leaders,	the	so-called	gurus,	guides.	In	fact	I	am	not	against
them.	I	am	simply	trying	to	put	you	out	of	that	vicious	circle	--	and	that	is	one	of
the	most	important	parts	--	following	somebody.
Second,	 I	 am	 very	 much	 against,	 continously	 hammering	 against	 your
conditionings,	 because	 those	 are	 your	 patterns.	 You	 have	 done	 those	 things
thousands	of	times	and	you	will	be	doing	them	again	and	again.
There	is	no	end	to	it,	it	is	ad	infinitum.
So	 these	 two	 things	 have	 to	 be	 destroyed	 --	 that's	 my	 work;	 you	 have	 to	 be
stopped	from	following	others	and	you	have	to	be	stopped	from	following	a	dead
routine,	a	conditioned,	habitual	pattern.	Once	these	two	things	are	fulfilled	there
is	 nothing	 else	 to	 be	 done.	 You	 will	 be	 able	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 centre	 this	 very
moment.	 ,,nd	on	 the	circle,	on	 the	circumference,	 there	 is	birth	and	death,	 and
death	is	followed	by	birth	and	birth	is	followed	by	death	and	it	goes	on.	At	the
centre	there	is	no	death,	no	birth	one	enters	into	eternity.
And	to	know	that	eternity	is	to	know	god.
So	my	sannyasins	are	not	my	followers.	One	thing	has	to	be	very	clear	to	every
sannyasins	 they	 are	 not	 my	 followers.	 I	 am	 not	 their	 leader,	 they	 are	 not	 my
followers.	At	the	most,	just	friends,	fellow	travellers.
Secondly,	I	am	not	giving	you	any	discipline	because	I	don't	want	you	to	make	a
mechanical	 life;	 I	 want	 you	 to	 live	 moment	 to	 moment	 according	 to	 your
awareness.	I	will	give	you	methods	to	be	aware	but	not	a	discipline,	not	ready-
made	 answers.	 I	 will	 give	 you	 a	 mirror	 which	 reflects,	 wherever	 you	 are,
whatsoever	the	situation	is,	so	that	you	can	act	on	your	own.	You	need	not	wait
for	my	guidance.
So	my	work	 is	 a	 little	 strange.	 It	 is	not	 the	 routine,	ordinary	work	of	your	 so-
called	gurus	all	around	the	world.	It	is	just	the	opposite.
I	am	not	a	guru,	 I	am	nobody'	 s	 leader.	 I	hate	 the	very	word	 'leader'.	 I	 am	not
giving	you	any	guidance,	where	to	go,	what	 to	do.	I	am	not	at	all	 interested	in
giving	you	a	certain	character,	a	discipline.	On	the	contrary	I	am	destroying	your
desire	 to	 be	 a	 follower	 and	 your	 desire	 to	 have	 a	 fixed	 pattern	 so	 that
unconsciously	you	can	repeat	it.
Once	 you	 are	 on	 your	 own,	 listening	 to	 your	 own	 heart,	 following	 your	 own
silence,	 that's	 enough.	 Then	 you	 have	 risen	 above	 the	 so-called	 humanity	 --
which	 is	 not	 better	 than	 those	 spiders.	 Then	 really	 you	 become	 human.
Independence,	individuality,	awareness	--	and	you	are	an	individual.	And	every
individual	is	bound	to	reach	the	goal.
Love	is	the	greatest	experience	in	life;	but	one	has	to	be	very	aware	that	it	should
be	true	--	it	should	not	be	false,	pseudo,	pretentious.	And	we	are	brought	up	in
such	 a	 wrong	 way	 that	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 our	 love	 starts	 going	 along
wrong	lines.
The	mother	wants	the	love	of	the	child	just	because	she	is	the	mother	--	as	if	love
is	something	which	can	be	asked	for	and	produced	on	order.	The	mother	wants
the	child	to	love	her;	she	gives	the	reason
"Because	I	am	your	mother,"	as	if	love	is	a	logical	syllogism;	"I	am	your	mother,
you	are	my	child,	therefore,	love	me!"	And	the	child	is	at	a	loss;	but	the	child	is
helpless,	so	he	has	to	pretend.	He	becomes	diplomatic,	he	starts	playing	games.
He	smiles	when	he	sees	the	mother	and	the	father.	Whether	he	feels	like	smiling
or	 not,	 that	 is	 not	 the	 point	 at	 all.	 He	 has	 to	 smile,	 it	 is	 part	 of	 his	 survival;
otherwise	it	will	become	difficult	to	survive	--	these	people	are	powerful	people
and	he	has	to	depend	on	them.	They	can	do	anything.
And	he	is	very	much	afraid,	scared.
So	by	and	by	he	loves	the	brothers	and	the	sisters	and	the	uncles	and	the	aunts,
just	because	it	is	ordered.
You	have	 to	behave,	you	have	 to	do	 it,	 and	he	goes	on	doing.	By	 the	 time	he
becomes	an	adult	he	is	already	accustomed	to	a	false	kind	of	love;	then	he	will
love	his	wife	in	the	same	way	he	used	to	love	his	mother	and	his	father,	and	he
will	love	his	children	in	the	same	way	as	he	used	to	love	his	parents.	And	he	will
demand	from	the	children	the	same	kind	of	love	as	he	was	asked	for.	And	this	is
how	we	go	on	from	one	generation	to	another,	doing	the	same	stupid	thing,	the
same	pretentious	game	of	 love.	 It	 is	phony,	 it	 is	not	 true,	 it	 is	not	authentic;	 it
cannot	be	authentic.	We	have	never	allowed	the	real	love	to	arise.
The	moment	you	become	a	sannyasin	make	it	very	clear	to	yourself	that	you	will
put	aside	all	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
diplomatic	games.	For	a	 few	days	you	will	be	 in	a	very	 transitory	period,	you
will	not	know	what	 to	do,	because	you	have	dropped	 those	old	games	and	 the
new	will	take	a	little	time.	It	has	been	repressed	so	long,	it	has	become	so	afraid
of	 light,	 it	won't	come	easily;	but	 if	all	 the	pressure	 is	 removed	 then	sooner	or
later	the	springs	of	your	own	love	will	start	welling	up.
And	once	you	feel	your	own	fountains	of	love	rising,	your	life	becomes,	for	the
first	 time,	something	authentic,	something	 true.	And	unless	our	 love	 is	 true	we
cannot	find	the	truth.	That	condition	has	to	be	fulfilled.
If	even	our	love	is	not	true	then	what	else	can	ever	be	true?	Love	is	the	closest
thing	to	our	heart;	 it	has	 to	be	 true.	Once	it	 is	 true	 then	everything	else	can	be
true.	But	if	the	closest	thing	is	false,	then	everything	else	is	bound	to	be	false.
So	my	emphasis	is	to	make	the	authentic	love	grow	in	you;	and	all	that	you	need
to	do	is	remove	the	unauthentic.	It	is	a	negative	kind	of	process.	Put	aside	all	that
has	been	taught	to	you,	put	aside	all	the	shoulds	and	should	nots,	all	the	musts,
so	that	the	spontaneous	within	you	can	start	growing.	And	the	first	experience	of
the	spontaneous	arising	 is	 such	an	exhilaration,	 it	 is	 so	exquisite,	 so	ecstatic	 --
one	cannot	imagine	it,	one	cannot	dream	about	it.	It	is	beyond	all	our	dreams,	it
is	far	beyond	the	fantasy.	The	very	capacity	to	imagine	falls	short.	The	truth	is	so
far	 away,	 so	qualitatively	different	 that	 the	mind	 is	 absolutely	 incapable	 --	 but
the	heart	is	capable.
So	one	has	to	behead	oneself	and	one	has	to	become	just	the	heart.	The	moment
your	heartbeat	possesses	you,	overwhelms	you,	you	have	entered	in	the	temple,
the	 temple	 of	 gods.	 It	 is	 neither	 Christian	 nor	 Hindu	 nor	Mohammedan;	 it	 is
simply	the	temple	of	god.
My	sannyasins	don't	belong	to	any	religion,	to	any	cult,	to	any	creed.	They	don't
belong	 to	 any	 kind	 of	 theology,	 scripture,	 philosophy;	 they	 belong	 to	 the
universe,	they	belong	to	the	stars,	to	the	sun,	to	the	moon,	to	the	trees.
They	belong	to	the	whole.	And	to	belong	to	the	whole	is	the	only	way	to	be	holy.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101125
ShortTitle:	POND12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	 miserable	 person	 can	 pretend	 to	 be	 a	 friend	 but	 in	 fact	 he	 cannot	 be.
Friendliness	 is	 a	 luxury.	 It	 is	 overflowing	 energy	 --	 so	much	 energy	 that	 you
cannot	contain	it,	you	have	to	share	 it.	That	sharing	becomes	friendliness.	And
when	you	share	because	of	your	abundance	there	is	no	idea	of	getting,	anything
in	return.
In	fact	you	feel	obliged	to	the	person	who	has	helped	you	to	be	unburdened	of	a
little	of	your	overflowing	energy.
The	miserable	 person	 is	 a	 black	 hole.	 He	 is	 utterly	 empty.	 He	 has	 nothing	 to
give.	He	is	a	beggar.	He	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
hungry	 to	get.	He	pretends	 to	be	 a	 friend	because	 that	 is	 the	only	way	he	 can
exploit,	but	he	functions	like	a	parasite.
The	friendship	that	he	shows	is	only	a	facade	a	strategy.	Once	you	are	caught	in
relationship	with	a	miserable	person	then	you	come	to	know	his	reality;	then	he
is	exposed	in	his	true	colours.	But	then	it	is	too	late.	He	has	entangled	you.	Now
to	leave	him	creates	guilt	in	you	--	that	you	deserted	a	friend,	a	lover.	If	you	don't
leave	him	you	will	become	miserable,	your	 life	will	become	a	curse.	So	 to	be
with	him	is	difficult,	 to	 leave	him	is	difficult.	And	 that's	what	 is	happening	all
over	the	world,	in	all	kinds	of	loving	relationships.
Miserable	 people	 are	 intrinsically	 incapable	 of	 love,	 of	 friendship.	 They	 don't
have	anything	to	give.
Before	you	can	give	you	have	to	have;	hence	I	say	only	a	blissful	person	can	be
a	friend,	can	be	a	 lover,	can	be	a	blessing	 to	others.	The	miserable	person	 is	a
curse,	a	calamity.
So	 my	 whole	 approach	 is	 how	 to	 make	 people	 more	 blissful	 --	 and	 then
everything	is	taken	care	of.
Once	your	bliss	starts	growing,	it	is	bound	to	spread,	bound	to	radiate,	bound	to
reach	others.	And	that	reaching	is	friendship.	And	when	you	give	for	the	sheer
joy	of	giving	there	is	beauty,	there	is	grace,	there	is	something	divine	in	that.	It	is
no	 more	 an	 ordinary	 phenomenon.	 The	 beyond	 has	 penetrated	 into	 it.	 It	 is
pregnant	with	something	transcendental.
(Osho	is	addressing	a	sturdy,	well-built	German.)
There	 is	 a	 great	 difference	 between	 satisfaction	 and	 contentment,	 not	 only	 is
there	a	difference,	in	fact	they	are	opposite	to	each	other.
Satisfaction	is	pseudo.	It	is	just...	(Paritosh,	the	initiate	of	several	seconds,	seems
to	pass	out.	At	any	rate,	he	keels	over	so	that	his	head	is	lying	in	the	lap	of	the
commentator!	Shiva,	Osho's	body-guard,	checks	Paritosh's	pulse	and	whispers	to
Haridas,	his	second	in	command,	 to	fetch	a	doctor	from	the	group	of	watching
sannyasins.	 Osho	 quietly	 murmurs	 'Just	 wait'...	 and	 slowly	 the	 prostrate
sannyasin	 comes	 to.	 'Help	 him',	Osho	 says	 to	Haridas,	 'Be	 there',	 and	Haridas
kneels	by	Paritosh's	side	to	support	him	for	the	remainder	of	the	address.
Paritosh	 listens	 to	 Osho	 with	 his	 eyes	 closed	 and	 his	 fingers	 only	 loosely
clasping	 the	 paper	 bearing	 his	 sannyas	 name.	 Needless	 to	 say,	 all	 eyes,	 with
varying	 degrees	 of	 curiosity,	 are	 fixed	 on	 him.	 Kirti	 has	 left	 behind	 a	 certain
something	in	the	air	--	perhaps	it's	catching!)	Satisfaction	is	pseudo.	It	is	just	an
effort	to	cover	up	your	wounds.	The	wounds	are	not	healed,	they	are	there,	but
only	covered.	And	they	go	on	growing,	they	go	on	becoming	bigger,	they	go	on
collecting	more	pus;	they	can	become	cancerous.
Contentment	 is	 healed	 wounds.	 One	 has	 become	 whole.	 It	 is	 authentic.
Satisfaction	 is	 only	 a	 consolation	 because	 we	 cannot	 create	 bliss	 we	 are
miserable,	so	we	create	many	methods	console	ourselves.
Contentment	is	not	a	consolation,	it	is	bliss	itself.
Once	your	bliss	starts	functioning	contentment	is	follows	it	like	a	shadow.	So	I
don't	teach	contentment,	teach	bliss.	For	centuries	the	other	religions	have	been
teaching	contentment,	but	if	you	try	to	be	contented	it	will	be	only	satisfaction,	a
consolation,	a	false	coin.	That's	why	this	pseudo	humanity	has	come	into	being.
I	start	with	bliss.	The	old	religious	approach	was	to	start	with	contentment,	and
they	used	to	say	--	and	it	has	been	said	in	many	scriptures	of	the	world	--	that	the
contented	person	is	blissful.	I	say	just	the	opposite	is	true,	the	blissful	person	is
contented.	And	one	who	is	not	blissful,	his	contentment	is	bogus.
So	start	by	being	blissful.	And	it	will	not	be	very	difficult	for	you.	It	will	be	very
simple	and	very	easy.
You	are	almost	ready	to	take	the	jump!
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	One	month.
--	Be	here.	Good.	(As	Paritosh	rises	to	leave	Osho	says:)	Haridas,	help	him	so	he
does	not	take	the	jump	too	soon!	(much	laughter)
In	India	we	make	small	earthen	lamps.	The	poor	people	use	those	earthen	lamps,
they	are	the	cheapest.
Man	 is	 an	 earthen	 lamp,	 his	 body	 is	 made	 of	 the	 earth.	 That	 is	 exactly	 the
meaning	of	the	word	'adam';	adam	means	earth	--	more	exactly,	red	earth.	That	is
the	colour	of	the	earth	of	Jerusalem.
The	body	is	made	of	the	earth,	but	inside	this	earthen	lamp	of	the	body	there	is	a
flame	which	is	not	part	of	the	earth	--	that	is	our	consciousness.
If	 one	 remains	 identified	 with	 the	 body	 one	 remains	 miserable;	 if	 one	 starts
becoming	aware	that	'I	am	not	the	body,'	then	bliss	descends.	To	know	that	'I	am
not	the	body'	is	the	beginning	of	bliss.	To	know	that	'I	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
am	 consciousness,'	 is	 to	 know	 that	 'I	 am	 deathless.'	 To	 know	 that	 'I	 am
consciousness'	 is	 to	know	that	 'There	 is	no	way	to	harm	me,	no	way	to	wound
me,	 no	 way	 to	 destroy	 me.'	 Knowing	 oneself	 as	 consciousness	 one	 becomes
eternal,	one	becomes	one	with	the	divine.	And	that	meeting	with	the	divine,	with
the	infinite,	with	the	vast,	with	the	oceanic,	is	what	brings	bliss	in.
And	once	there	is	bliss,	life	has	blossomed.	Then	one	can	live	the	ordinary	life
with	extraordinary	insight.	One	can	live	in	the	body	beautifully.	There	is	no	need
to	torture	the	body;	it	is	a	gift	of	the	whole,	and	one	of	the	miracles	of	existence	-
-	a	 temple,	a	 sacred	phenomenon	 in	 its	own	 right.	And	 it	has	been	hosting	us,
giving	us	all	kinds	of	comforts,	coziness,	giving	us	all	kinds	of	sensibilities,	eyes
to	see	the	beauty,	ears	to	listen	to	the	music	and	to	the	songs	of	the	birds,	hands
to	feel	and	touch	the	texture	of	the	rocks,	the	faces	of	your	beloveds.	The	body
has	given	so	much,	one	feels	grateful	to	it,	but	unidentified.	One	remains	in	it	but
is	no	more	part	of	it.
At	 that	 very	moment	 life	 becomes	 synonymous	 with	 bliss.	 Before	 that	 life	 is
only	misery.	Hence	the	whole	process	of	meditation	can	be	reduced	to	a	simple
formula:	disidentification	with	 the	body.	And	 it	 is	done	by	a	simple	process	of
awareness.	You	 just	watch	 your	 body,	 your	 hunger,	 your	 thirst,	 and	 remember
that	you	are	the	watcher	--	you	are	not	hungry,	you	are	not	thirsty.	And	when	you
have	eaten	and	you	feel	satisfied,	remember,	 it	 is	 the	body	that	 is	satisfied,	not
you.	You	are	just	the	watcher.	The	body	is	young,	watch,	the	body	is	old,	watch.
The	 body	 is	 ill,	 watch,	 the	 body	 is	 healthy,	 watch.	 Just	 go	 on	 watching	 all
nuances	 of	 the	 body	 and	 as	 your	watchfulness	 becomes	more	 and	more	 clear,
more	 and	 more	 unwavering,	 the	 natural	 outcome	 is	 disidentification	 with	 the
body.
And	the	same	has	to	be	done	with	the	mind.	Then	one	gets	free	from	both	--	and
that	 freedom	 makes	 you	 capable	 of	 becoming	 aware	 of	 the	 subtlest	 layer,	 of
feelings	and	moods.	They	belong	to	the	heart.	These	three	are	the	dimensions	of
the	body	the	physical,	the	mental	and	the	emotional.
Going	beyond	 the	 three	one	 reaches	 the	 fourth.	That	 fourth	 is	 awareness.	And
with	 that	 fourth	 comes	 bliss.	 Bliss	 is	 a	 flame,	 a	 light	 --	 a	 light	 that	 never
extinguishes.	Once	you	have	discovered	it,	it	is	forever	yours.	And	it	transforms
all	 your	 actions,	 it	 transforms	 everything.	 It	 gives	 you	 a	 totally	 new	 birth,	 a
resurrection.
That	resurrection	is	sannyas.	So	sannyas	is	both	a	crucifixion	--	dying	to	the	past
--	and	a	resurrection	--
being,	born	anew.
Bliss	 is	 both	 awareness	 and	 also	 intoxication;	 or	we	 can	 say	 it	 is	 intoxication
with	awareness.	It	 is	a	paradox.	On	one	side	of	 the	coin	there	is	awareness,	on
the	other	side	of	 the	coin	there	is	 intoxication.	And	up	to	now	religious	people
have	lived	only	half	of	the	coin,	half	of	the	experience.
For	 example,	 Buddha	 insists	 only	 on	 awareness	 --	 he	 will	 not	 tolerate
intoxication	 while	 Jalaluddin	 Rumi	 is	 utterly	 intoxicated,	 Omar	 Khayyam	 is
utterly	 intoxicated.	 That's	 why	 Omar	 Khayyam	 has	 been	 so	 much
misunderstood;	people	think	that	he	is	talking	only	about	wine	and	women,	and
that	he	is	a	drunkard.
Not	only	a	drunkard,	but	preaching	to	people	to	be	drunkards.
Fitzgerald,	who	translated	Omar	Khayyam	for	the	first	time,	has	done	a	beautiful
job;	 his	 translation	 has	 never	 been	 transcended,	 surpassed.	 Many	 other
translations	 have	 been	 done,	 but	 Fitzgerald's,	 the	 first	 translation,	 remains	 the
best.	Poetically	it	is	really	beautiful,	but	philosophically	he	misunderstood	Omar
Khayyam	totally	--	he	misrepresented	him.
Because	 the	 world	 became	 aware	 through	 Fitzgerald's	 translations,	 Omar
Khayyam	 is	 thought	 only	 to	 be	 a	 poet	 who	 sings	 of	 wine	 and	 women	 and
intoxication.	 Omar	 Khayyam	 is	 a	 mystic	 of	 the	 same	 calibre	 as	 Buddha	 and
Jesus.	These	are	his	symbols;	but	he	does	not	talk	about	awareness.	He	lives	the
other	side	of	the	coin.	He	is	not	talking	about	ordinary	wine,	he	is	talking	about
the	wine	that	happens	when	one	is	really	blissful.
It	is	not	that	one	has	to	drink	it	from	the	outside.	One	drinks	it	within	oneself.	It
is	one's	own	 juice,	one's	 innermost	 juice.	The	women	he	 is	 talking	about	have
nothing	to	do	with	women.	The	Sufis	talk	about	god	as	the	woman,	the	beloved.
He	is	talking	about	god!	And	I	can	see	the	point	and	the	beauty	of	it.
Christians	talk	about	god	as	the	father.	That	looks	a	little	dry.	Even	uncle	would
have	been	nicer!
(laughter)	Father	is	an	institutional	thing,	it	is	not	natural.	As	far	as	language	is
concerned,	 'uncle'	 is	 an	 older	word	 than	 father,	 because	 before	marriage	 came
into	 existence	 and	 private	 property	 came	 into	 existence,	 the	 child	 never	 knew
who	 his	 father	 was.	 The	woman	 herself	 was	 not	 aware	who	 the	 father	 of	 the
child	was.
Marriage	had	not	come	into	existence	yet.	She	was	having	many	lovers.	So	all
those	lovers	were	uncles,	someone	must	be	the	father	but	nobody	knows	--	xyz.
So	all	xyz's	were	uncles.
Uncle	 is	 an	 older	word	 --	 and	 nicer	 too.	But	 the	 Judaic	 religion	 insists	 --	 and
Christianity	was	born	out	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	Judaic	religion	--	that	god	is	the	father.	In	fact	the	Talmud	says,	'Remember
god	 is	 not	 nice,	 he	 is	 not	 your	 uncle.	 'exactly	 the	 word	 'uncle'	 is	 being	 used.
'Remember;	he	is	a	father	and	a	very	terrible	father	--	be	afraid	of	him!'
Sufis	seem	to	be	far	closer	to	truth,	god	is	a	beloved.	And	to	think	of	god	as	a
woman,	to	describe	god	as	a	woman	makes	the	whole	thing	more	beautiful,	more
harmonious,	 softer	 --	 rather	 than	 making	 god	 a	 father,	 a	 very	 terrible	 father,
always	ready	to	be	angry	and	ready	to	throw	you	into	hell.
Omar	Khayyam	is	talking	of	the	other	side	of	the	coin.	Buddha	is	talking	of	one
side.	My	sannyasins	have	to	be	the	whole	--	a	meeting,	a	merging	of	Buddha	and
Omar	Khayyam.
Gautam	Buddha	dancing	with	a	woman!	 (laughter)...	holding	a	bottle	of	wine!
(more	laughter)...	Of	course,	empty,	because	he	has	drunk	it	That's	my	vision	of
a	 real	 sannyasin:	 total	 but	 fully	 aware!	 (laughter)	 That's	 why	 the	 wine	 is	 not
falling!
Awareness	 and	 intoxication	 logically	 look	 like	opposites,	but	 existentially	 they
are	complementaries,	not	opposites	at	all.	And	once	you	start	seeing	opposites	as
complementaries	the	whole	vision	changes.	Then	in	life	there	are	no	paradoxes.
One	 is	 capable	 of	 understanding	 the	 opposites	 as	 helping	 each	 other,	 of	 deep
down	 being	 joined	 together,	 supporting,	 nourishing	 each	 other.	 Then	 summer
and	winter	are	one,	then	man	and	woman	are	one,	then	black	and	white	are	one,
then	life	and	death	are	one.	Then	matter	and	god	are	one.
And	when	this	oneness	is	experienced	there	is	nothing	more	to	experience	--	one
has	come	home!
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Unfortunately,	I'm	here	for	only	one	week	more.
Not	unfortunately	--	one	week	can	do	a	miracle.	It	will	bring	you	back,	so	come
back	again.	Good!
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101135
ShortTitle:	POND13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Love	 has	 a	 very	mysterious	 strength	 in	 its	mysterious	 because	 it	 contains	 the
fragileness	of	a	flower	and	also	the	strength	of	a	rock.	It	is	paradoxical,	but	that's
its	beauty.	Anything	that	is	not	paradoxical	remains	flat	--	consistent,	logical,	but
meaningless.
Meaning	comes	from	the	tension	of	the	polar	opposites.	when	the	contradictories
meet	and	merge	and	become	one,	then	there	is	a	great	explosion;	and	love	is	one
of	the	most	explosive	experiences.
It	 is	 strong,	but	not	 in	 the	sense	 in	which	a	sword	 is	 strong.	 It	 is	not	 strong	 in
destroying,	it	is	strong	just	like	the	brush	of	a	painter.	It	is	strong	in	creating;	and
hence	it	can	contain	the	fragileness	of	a	flower	in	it.	If	 it	 is	just	strong	without
being	fragile	then	it	will	be	dead.	If	it	is	just	fragile	without	being	strong	then	it
cannot	survive,	then	too	it	will	be	dead.
Many	people	are	afraid	of	love	because	they	are	afraid	of	becoming	fragile	and
vulnerable,	but	they	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
don't	 know	 that	 behind	 that	 vulnerability	 there	 is	 a	 strength,	 infinite	 strength.
You	have	to	accept	both	and	you	have	to	live	both.
The	lover	lives	the	life	of	a	madman	simply	because	he	lives	a	life	of	paradox.
Sannyas	is	a	love	affair.
With	me	you	will	have	to	be	strong	in	the	sense	of	being	creative	and	fragile	in
the	sense	of	being	receptive,	welcoming,	open,	available	--	and	at	the	same	time
strong,	so	strong	that	if	the	need	arises	one	can	even	sacrifice	life	for	love,	one
can	gamble	everything.
A	sannyasin	is	basically	a	lover;	a	lover	of	existence,	of	all	its	beauty,	of	all	its
joy,	 of	 all	 its	 truth.	But	 he	 lives	 in	 a	 very	 precarious	 balance,	 like	 a	 tightrope
walker.	He	cannot	move	to	one	extreme,	otherwise	he	will	fall.	Too	strong	and
love	dies,	 too	vulnerable	and	 love	cannot	survive.	Both	have	 to	be	 together.	 In
that	togetherness	the	door	opens	to	the	ultimate	mystery.
Love	 is	 the	 beginning,	 god	 is	 the	 end.	 Between	 love	 and	 god	 is	 the	 whole
journey,	the	journey	of	sannyas.
Love	is	dangerous	but	 life	 itself	 is	dangerous.	Death	is	very	secure,	safe.	Once
one	 is	 in	 the	 grave	 there	 is	 no	 danger;	 no	 disease	 can	 happen,	 no	 old	 age,	 no
death	even	--	one	is	absolutely	secure,	safe.	But	life	is	just	the	polar	opposite	of
the	grave,	it	is	insecurity.	And	love	is	the	very	core	of	life,	the	very	centre	of	it;
hence	 love	 is	 the	most	 dangerous	 experience.	 But	 only	 those	who	 know	 love
know	 life.	There	 is	 no	 other	way,	 there	 is	 no	 shortcut.	The	 danger	 is	 that	 you
have	to	dissolve	your	ego;	your	ego	is	a	kind	of	protection,	a	shelter.	Your	ego
keeps	you	surrounded	by	a	wall.
In	a	way	it	protects,	in	another	way	it	kills.	Prisoners	are	very	safe,	far	more	safe
than	the	people	walking	on	the	road.	Any	accident	can	happen	on	the	road.	Some
mad	driver	may	run	over	you.	Everything	is	possible	on	the	road,	but	in	a	prison
no	accident	happens.	Those	walls,	on	the	one	hand,	destroy	your	freedom;	on	the
other	hand,	they	make	you	safe.	That's	exactly	the	purpose	of	the	ego;	it	protects
you,	but	 in	 the	bargain	you	have	to	 lose	your	freedom.	And	really,	 losing	your
freedom	is	too	much	to	pay	for	protection.	It	is	not	a	good	bargain	at	all	you	are
a	loser.
The	very	safety	of	the	ego	destroys	the	whole	opportunity	for	growth.	A	seed	is
safe.	Once	it	sprouts	then	insecurity	begins.	Then	everything	is	possible	the	cold,
the	heat,	the	rain,	the	snow,	the	wind,	the	sun	--
everything	is	possible.	Nothing	is	possible	for	the	seed.	The	seed	is	surrounded
by	a	thick	layer	that	keeps	it	closed,	windowless.
Millions	 of	 people	 live	 like	 seeds,	 out	 of	 fear.	 Sannyas	 is	 learning	 to	 live
dangerously,	getting	out	of	fear	and	all	that	fear	has	created.	Ego	is	a	creation	of
fear.	It	is	basically	fear-oriented,	a	by-product	of	fear.
The	ego	has	 to	be	dissolved;	 then	 love	starts	growing	 in	you.	And	 love	brings
many	flowers,	many	colours,	many	experiences	which	are	inestimable.	And	the
ultimate	experience	of	love	is	nirvana,	when	the	ego	has	gone	totally	--	not	only
in	parts	--	utterly.	Not	only	have	a	few	windows	opened	and	you	can	see	outside
the	windows	to	the	sky	and	the	stars,	but	the	whole	prison	has	disappeared;	you
are	standing	naked	under	the	sun,	under	the	stars,	in	the	wind,	in	the	rain.	When
there	 is	 no	 shelter	 left,	 no	 protection	 left,	 living	 in	 that	 intensity	 moment	 to
moment	is	nirvana.	And	that	is	the	ultimate	experience	of	love,	for	only	then	do
you	live	at	the	optimum;	because	you	are	not	certain	about	the	next	moment	you
cannot	postpone	living.
You	cannot	say	 'Tomorrow.'	Now	or	never	--	tomorrow	never	comes.	So	if	one
has	to	live	now	then	one	has	to	live	totally,	intensely,	passionately.	That	intensity
of	life	is	 love.	In	the	beginning	we	call	 it	 love;	in	the	end	the	same	experience
blossoms	into	nirvana.	The	ego	is	completely	gone	and	you	are	merged	with	the
whole.
Love	is	not	prose,	it	is	poetry.	And	there	is	a	great	difference	between	prose	and
poetry.	They	are	worlds	apart.
Prose	 is	 logic,	grammar,	 language,	arithmetic.	We	are	brought	up	 to	 live	a	 life
which	 is	 basically	 prose;	 hence	 there	 is	 arithmetic,	 calculation,	 cleverness,
cunningness,	diplomacy,	politics	 --	but	 there	 is	no	 joy.	The	bird	of	 the	heart	 is
ignored,	it	remains	undernourished.	It	has	not	enough	energy	to	sing,	and	even	if
sometimes	it	sings	there	is	nobody	to	listen.	We	are	preoccupied	with	the	head.
That	is	the	prose	style	of	life,	preoccupation	with	the	head.
What	 I	 call	 a	 poetry	 style	 of	 life	 is	 living	 in	 the	 heart.	 Initiation	 into	 sannyas
means	 initiation	 into	 a	 poetic	 life;	 dropping	 from	 the	 prose	 style	 to	 a	 totally
different	gestalt,	the	gestalt	of	poetry,	of	song,	of	music,	of	art,	of	beauty,	of	love.
Certainly	without	 these	 things	 there	 can	 be	 no	 celebration.	 Then	 life	 is	 just	 a
mourning,	a	moaning,	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
grumbling,	a	complaint.	You	can	see	it	on	people's	faces.	It	is	very	rare	to	find	a
face	 on	 which	 the	 complaint	 is	 not	 written	 in	 capital	 letters.	 It	 is	 writ	 large.
Everybody	is	a	walking	poster	with	the	whole	list	of	complaints	--	against	life,
against	existence,	against	everything.
If	you	search	within	a	man	you	will	find	him	just	a	heap	of	noes;	no,	no	no...	You
can	 go	 on	 digging	 and	 you	will	 find	more	 and	more	 noes,	 bigger	 and	 bigger
noes.	It	is	very	rare	to	find	a	yes	somewhere;	and	even	if	you	find	it,	it	will	be
paralysed,	 crippled,	 because	 in	 the	 crowd	 of	 noes...	 noes	 are	 very	 nosey!
(laughter)	 They	 are	 Jewish!	A	 poor	 yes	will	 be	 killed,	will	 be	 in	 a	 stampede!
Even	 if	 it	 survives	 in	 same	 nook	 and	 corner	 somewhere,	 it	will	 be	 dying,	 not
fully	alive.
Life	can	become	a	total	yes,	but	we	have	to	change	the	whole	pattern	--	sannyas
is	the	art	of	making	your	life	a	yes;	transforming	all	your	noes	into	yes.	And	all
your	noes	can	be	melted	and	remoulded	into	yes.	It	is	not	so	difficult	as	people
think.	 Certainly	 it	 is	 not	 impossible.	 It	 has	 happened	 to	 many	 people	 --	 to
Buddha,	 to	 Zarathustra,	 to	 Jesus,	 to	 Pythagoras,	 to	 Dionysius,	 to	 Lao	 Tzu.
Around	 the	 globe	 it	 has	 happened	 to	 many	 people;	 it	 can	 happen	 to	 you.	 It
should	happen	to	everyone.	In	fact	we	are	here	for	it	to	happen.
And	that's	what	I	call	the	shift	from	a	prose	lifestyle	to	a	poetry	lifestyle,	a	shift
from	mathematics	to	music.
And	then	life	is	a	song,	a	tremendous	ecstasy.
I	 don't	 teach	 a	 religion	 of	 sadness.	 I	 am	 against	 all	 those	 sado-masochistic
religions.	I	teach	a	new	kind	of	religiousness	which	is	rooted	in	love,	not	in	fear,
which	is	rooted	in	the	present,	not	in	the	future	which	is	rooted	in	love	and	not	in
logic.
Mysticism	has	experienced	a	totally	different	kind	of	emptiness,	a	very	positive
kind	of	emptiness	--	a	zero	which	is	not	zero,	a	zero	which	is	overflowing	with
the	eternal.
In	a	way	it	is	zero;	it	is	empty	of	the	world	and	all	that	the	world	contains.	It	is
empty	of	desire,	empty	of	thought,	empty	of	memories,	empty	of	imagination;	it
is	 empty	 of	 ego,	 jealousy,	 anger,	 greed.	 It	 is	 empty	 of	 the	 whole	 world	 of
stupidity	that	we	go	on	carrying	along	with	us	but	it	is	not	just	empty,	On	the	one
hand	it	is	empty	of	the	world	but	on	the	other	hand	it	is	full	of	godliness.
In	 fact	 the	 more	 empty	 of	 the	 world	 one	 becomes	 the	 more	 full	 of	 god	 one
becomes.	When	the	whole	world	is	thrown	out	you	are	full	of	god,	overflowing
with	god.
Love	is	the	key.	Love	can	do	both	these	things.	It	can	help	you	to	be	emptied	of
all	 that	 is	 stupid,	 of	 all	 nonsense,	 and	 it	 can	 help	 you	 to	 be	 full	 of	 all	 that	 is
significant,	meaningful.
It	will	help	you	to	be	emptied	of	all	kinds	of	lies	and	it	will	help	you	to	discover
your	 own	 truth.	Hence	 shunyam,	 emptiness,	 nothingness	 or	 zero	 are	 not	 to	 be
taken	in	a	negative	sense.	They	are	absolutely	positive.	In	fact	 there	 is	nothing
more	 positive	 than	 a	 zero.	 It	 has	 space,	 infinite	 space,	 unbounded	 space,	 and
with	that	comes	freedom.	With	that	comes	the	whole	universe	within	you.	You
disappear	as	a	self.	You	become	a	no-self.
And	the	beauty	of	no-self	is	indescribable.	The	beauty	of	disappearing,	as	an	ego
is	 the	greatest	 experience	 that	 can	happen	 to	 any	man.	And	 that	 is	 the	goal	of
sannyas	to	become	just	zeros	--	empty	of	the	world	and	full	of	god.
Man	is	being	taught	many	kinds	of	virtues,	moralities,	but	they	are	not	true,	they
cannot	 be	 true.	 They	 are	 a	 kind	 of	 imposition	 from	 the	 outside.	 Others	 are
conditioning	you.	For	example,	if	you	are	born	in	a	vegetarian	family	they	will
impose	vegetarianism	on	you	and	you	will	be	conditioned;	and	you	may	remain
a	vegetarian	your	whole	life,	thinking	that	you	are	doing	something	virtuous.	It
is	not,	because	you	have	never	chosen	it	out	of	your	own	consciousness.
A	virtue,	to	be	really	a	virtue,	has	to	be	out	of	choice,	a	free	choice	--	that	is	its
first	 requirement.	 If	you	 have	 not	 chosen	 it	 but	 others	 have,	 it	may	be	 a	 good
quality,	 it	may	give	you	 respectability,	but	 it	 cannot	help	you	 to	discover	your
innermost	being;	in	fact	it	will	hinder.
People	 are	 being	 taught	 all	 kinds	 of	 good	 things,	 but	 those	 good	 things,	 to	 be
true,	have	to	be	by-products	of	a	growing	love	and	a	growing	consciousness	in
you.	 You	 cannot	 simply	 acquire	 them	 --	 and	 that's	 what	 is	 being	 done
everywhere	 people	 acquire	 a	 certain	 character.	 If	 it	 is	 acquired,	 cultivated,	 it
remains	 superficial,	 painted,	 it	 is	 not	 your	 true	 face.	Hidden	behind	 it	 you	 are
just	the	opposite.	It	creates	only	hypocrites,	not	virtuous	people.
My	 emphasis	 is	 not	 on	morality	 at	 all	 --	 my	 emphasis	 is	 on	 love.	 If	 you	 are
growing	in	love	then	all	that	is	right	is	bound	to	happen	through	you	of	its	own
accord,	because	love	cannot	do	anything	wrong.
For	 example,	 if	 you	 are	 growing	 in	 love	 you	 will	 become	 a	 vegetarian.	 It	 is
impossible	for	a	lover	to	kill	animals	just	for	the	sake	of	taste.	It	is	so	ridiculous,
so	stupid.	I	don't	call	it	a	sin,	it	is	simply	stupidity;	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
because	when	you	taste	something	it	is	just	a	small	part	of	your	tongue	that	gets
the	taste	of	it,	just	a	few	buds	on	the	tongue.	A	little	surgery	can	be	done	on	your
tongue	 and	 you	will	 not	 taste	 anything.	That	 actually	 happens	when	 you	 have
fever	or	a	cold;	those	buds	become	insensitive,	so	you	cannot	taste	anything.
Just	 for	 a	 few	 tiny	 buds	 on	 your	 tongue	 you	 are	 killing	 live	 animals,	with	 no
sensitivity,	with	no	awareness,	with	no	love.	It	seems	impossible;	how	can	a	man
who	has	known	love	be	capable	of	doing	such	things?	A	man	who	loves	his	wife,
who	loves	his	children	goes	on	eating	meat?	Impossible.
Either	he	does	not	love	his	wife,	does	not	love	his	children	or	he	is	just	living	in
a	 mechanical	 way,	 unconscious,	 not	 knowing	 what	 he	 is	 doing.	 If	 he	 is	 so
violent,	 how	can	he	be	 loving?	Life	 cannot	be	divided	 into	 compartments	 --	 'I
will	be	loving	to	my	children	and	I	will	kill	other	animals'	children.'	It	cannot	be
divided,	it	cannot	be	compartmentalised.
My	experience	is,	 if	you	love	one	person,	in	that	very	love	you	have	loved	the
whole	existence.	Your	whole	perspective	changes.	You	cannot	kill.	And;	then	a
totally	 different	 kind	 of	 virtue	 arises;	 then	 you	 don't	 brag	 about	 your
vegetarianism,	because	there	 is	nothing	to	brag	about,	 it	 is	a	simple	 thing.	You
don't	eat	cow	dung.	(laughter)	But	you	don't	brag	about	it	either,	'Look	--	I	don't
eat	cow	dung!'
But	 there	are	stupid	people...	Mahatma	Gandhi	had	a	disciple,	one	of	his	chief
disciples,	 a	 certain	 professor,	 Bhanshali.	 For	 months	 together	 he	 used	 to	 live
only	on	cow	dung...	and	that	was	thought	to	be	a	great	virtue.	Of	course	it	is	holy
cow	dung;	it	was	no	ordinary	thing.	He	is	living	on	holy	food!	(laughter)	He	was
an	utter	fool!	But	he	was	thought	 to	be	a	saint.	Even	Mahatma	Gandhi	used	to
respect	 him	 because	 even	 he	 himself	 was	 not	 able	 to	 do	 such	 a	 great	 work!
(laughter)	The	disciple	defeated	the	master!
And	he	was	respected	all	over	the	country.	That	was	his	only	quality!	There	was
nothing	else	in	that	man	--
just	pure,	holy	cow	dung!
But	fools	are	fools	and	the	world	abounds	with	fools.
These	 things	are	possible	only	because	we	are	not	 living	 intelligently.	And	we
are	not	loving,	and	we	are	not	sensitive	and	we	are	not	conscious.	So	I	don't	want
any	 discipline	 to	 be	 imposed	 on	 you	 from	 the	 outside	 by	 any	 agency.	 I	 want
something	to	grow	from	your	own	heart,	so	that	slowly	slowly	it	comes	from	the
centre	and	reaches	to	your	very	circumference.	Then	there	is	a	unity,	a	harmony
in	you	no	dichotomy,	 no	hypocrisy.	Then	you	 are	 on	 the	 outside	 exactly	what
you	are	on	the	inside.	Then	your	inside	and	the	outside	are	in	deep	accord.
Begin	with	love	and	all	virtues	will	come	following	it	as	a	shadow	follows	you.
Jesus	says,	 'First	seek	ye	the	kingdom	of	god,	then	all	else	shall	be	added	unto
you.'	 Now	 this	 is	 an	 old	 kind	 of	 expression	 --	 understandably,	 because	 two
thousand	years	have	passed,	the	language	is	very	old;	just	a	little	change	and	the
language	can	become	new.	And	 I	 am	always	making,	 little	 changes,	because	 I
am	not	bound	by	 any	 religion,	 by	 any	 church,	 by	 any	dogma.	 I	 am	absolutely
free!
Even	if	I	meet	Jesus	I	am	going	to	argue	my	case.	And	I	am	absolutely	certain
that	he	will	have	to	agree	with	me.
I	will	say,	 'First	seek	ye	 the	kingdom	of	 love,	 then	all	else	shall	be	added	unto
you,'	because	'god'	has	bow	become	an	out-of-date	word.	And	I	am	not	a	lover	of
junk	(laughter).	I	am	not	a	lover	of	antiques	or	vintage	cars.
My	Mukta	(by	Osho's	side	in	darshan)	is	a	lover	of	vintage	cars.	Just	a	few	days
before	 she	 has	 going	 to	 purchase	 a	 1934	model	 Ford!	 (laughter)	 Now	 I	 said,
Mukta,	are	you	going	mad?!'	 (more	laughter)	And	I	suggested	that	I	know	one
Ford	which	the	person	is	ready	to	give	away	free,	without	any	money,	but	that	is
even	 better	 than	 yours	 --	 a	 1928	model.	 It	 has	 been	 standing	 in	 one	 place	 for
many	years.	It	is	really	antique.
In	fact	in	the	Old	Testament	it	says	'god	drove	Adam	and	Eve	out	of	heaven'	--
he	drove	in	this	Ford!
(much	much	 laughter)	 The	word	 'drove'	 certainly	 shows	 he	must	 have	 used	 a
Ford	car!	'God'	is	also	now	very	old	and	rotten.	We	should	replace	it	with	'love'!
How	 long	will	 you	 be	 here?	 (much	 laughter)	Till	 I	 drive	 you	 out?	 (and	much
more	 laughter)	Mm?	 If	 you	want	 to	be	driven	out,	Mukta	 can	bring	 that	 1928
Ford!	(more	laughter)	And	exactly,	I	can	drive	you	out!
(and	more	and	more)	I	have	not	driven	anybody	till	now	but	if	you	want	me	to...
(	and	more	and	more	and	more	)	Otherwise,	be	here!	Good!
Existence	has	many	dimensions,	it	 is	multi-dimensional;	but	love	is	the	highest
dimension.	There	is	a	hierarchy	of	dimensions.
Sex	is	the	lowest	dimension,	love	is	the	highest	dimension.	It	 is	transformation
of	 biology	 into	 spirituality,	 it	 is	 moving	 from	 the	 body	 to	 the	 soul,	 it	 is
surpassing	matter	and	entering	into	the	immaterial.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	whole	message	is	contained	in	the	word	'love'.	That	single	word	is	my	whole
scripture,	the	book	of	the	books,	the	Bible.
The	word	is	very	small,	but	if	you	start	living	it	you	become	every	day	vast	and
vast,	 till	 all	 boundaries	 disappear	 and	 you	 are	 synonymous	 with	 the	 whole
existence.	That	synonymousness	is	what	I	call	holiness.
To	be	one	with	the	whole	is	to	be	holy.	Less	than	that	won't	do,	less	than	that	is
not	enough.	Less	than	that	and	you	will	always	feel	some	discontent,	something
missing.
It	 is	 better	 to	 remember	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 what	 is	 going	 to	 make	 you
absolutely	 contented	 so	 all	 your	 efforts	 can	 move	 into	 that	 dimension.	 Our
energies	should	not	be	scattered.	They	should	not	be	in	fragments.	They	should
all	pour	into	one	direction,	they	should	all	become	one-pointed	and	they	should
move	like	an	arrow,	straight	towards	the	goal.	Only	then	is	there	the	possibility
of	fulfillment.
Life	can	become	an	immense	ecstasy,	but	it	becomes	an	ecstasy	only	when	your
arrow	 of	 being	 penetrates	 into	 the	 being	 of	 the	 whole	 and	 disappears	 into	 it,
leaving	no	trace	behind.	That	merger,	that	melting,	I	call	love.	The	beginning	is
love	and	the	end	is	love	and	the	middle	too!	(laughter)	The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101145
ShortTitle:	POND14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Meditation	is	a	full	stop	on	the	mind.	Ordinarily	the	mind	goes	on	and	on,	you
don't	know	how	to	put	it	off.	There	is	a	way	to	put	it	off.	That's	what	meditation
is	all	about.	Once	you	have	learned,	it	is	a	very	simple	process,	just	like	putting
the	light	on	and	off.	Then	the	same	mind	which	is	ordinarily	a	torture	becomes
immensely	useful.	Then	you	can	use	it	but	you	are	the	master.
Right	now	the	master	is	absolutely	in	the	hands	of	the	servant.	The	mind	goes	on
manipulating	you;	you	have	no	power	over	 it.	You	cannot	even	 say	 to	 it	 'Shut
up!'	It	does	not	listen	at	all.	One	feels	absolutely	impotent	with	the	mind.
And	all	misery	consists	only	in	this	incapacity,	in	this	impotence.	Slowly	slowly
one	becomes	aware	that	'it	is	beyond	my	capacity,'	one	becomes	compromised	to
the	 situation.	 One	 surrenders	 to	 the	 mind.	 And	 surrendering	 to	 the	 mind	 is
surrendering,	 to	a	machine.	 It	 is	 the	most	humiliating	phenomenon.	One	 is	not
really	a	man	if	he	cannot	put	a	stop	on	his	mind.	And	it	is	not	difficult	either;	one
just	has	to	learn	the	knack	of	it.	The	name	of	that	knack	is	awareness.
One	has	to	become	more	and	more	aware	of	all	the	processes	of	the	mind	--	the
memory,	the	imagination,	the	fantasy,	the	thoughts.	One	has	simply	to	be	aware.
The	traffic	goes	by	and	you	are	silently	watching	it,	without	any	judgement.	In
that	 state	of	non-judgmental	awareness,	one	 learns	 the	knack,	because	one	day
suddenly,	watching	it,	it	stops.	The	more	you	become	watchful,	the	less	the	mind
is	there.
When	 you	 are	 one	 hundred	 percent	 watchful	 the	 mind	 becomes	 absolutely
empty.	And	to	watch	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
emptiness	is	the	beginning	of	ecstasy.	You	are	freed,	you	have	become	a	master
for	the	first	time.
This	is	the	beginning	of	the	kingdom	of	god.
When	 you	 become	 absolutely	 silent	 in	mediation,	 a	 subtle	 humming	 sound	 is
heard	within	one's	own	being.	It	does	not	come	from	the	outside;	it	comes	from
one's	own	innermost	core.
In	the	East	we	have	called	it	'omkar'	the	sound	aum	comes	closest	to	it	--	it	is	just
approximate,	remember,	not	exact.	But	if	you	go	into	an	empty	temple	and	you
just	 chant	 'Aum,	 aum,	 aum...'	 and	 you	 go	 on	 chanting,	 and	 then	 you	 stop
suddenly,	because	 the	 temple	 is	 empty	 it	 goes	on	 resounding.	That	 resounding
comes	very	close	to	the	innermost	sound.	And	once	this	soundless	sound,	as	it	is
called,	this	inner	melody	of	your	being	is	heard,	bliss	explodes,	your	whole	life
becomes	 harmonious.	 Then	 suddenly	 everything	 fits,	 then	 it	 is	 no	 more	 a
problem.	Life	for	the	first	time	is	not	a	problem,	not	a	riddle	to	be	solved	but	a
mystery	to	be	lived.
But	the	sound	is	so	subtle	that	unless	your	mind	is	completely	empty	you	cannot
hear	 it.	 The	mind	makes	 so	much	 noise	 you	 cannot	 hear	 the	 still,	 small	 voice
within	yourself	--	hence	meditation	is	the	door	to	reach	to	the	inner	music.	And
the	 person	 who	 has	 heard	 the	 inner	 music	 becomes	 capable	 of	 hearing	 the
celestial	music	of	the	spheres.	He	has	learned	the	first	lesson;	now	he	can	hear	it
all	around,	in	the	stars,	in	the	trees,	in	the	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees,	in
the	sound	of	the	running	water.
Even	when	there	is	no	sound	it	is	there.	The	Zen	people	call	it	the	sound	of	one
hand	clapping.	It	is	their	way	of	saying	that	it	is	not	an	ordinary	sound	which	is
created	by	clapping	two	hands.	It	is	not	a	clash.	It	is	unstruck.	When	you	play	on
the	sitar	you	have	to	strike,	by	your	strokes	you	create	the	sound.	There	is	a	fight
between	you	and	the	strings.	You	have	to	pull	the	strings	to	a	certain	tension	and
then	relax	them.	This	is	called	the	struck	sound.	But	the	inner	sound	is	unstruck,
'anahat'.	Nobody	 is	 playing	 there	 and	nobody	 is	 there.	 It	 is	 utter	 silence.	Even
you	 are	not	 there,	 at	 least	not	 as	you	know	yourself.	A	very	new	awareness	 is
there	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	you.	It	is	so	new,	it	is	not	a	continuity	with
you;	it	is	discontinuous	with	you,	it	is	beyond	you.	But	that	awareness	is	not	dry,
it	is	full	of	music.
That	music	 has	 to	 be	 heard.	Hearing	 it	 one's	 life	 becomes	 sheer	 beauty,	 bliss,
benediction.
Meditation	 makes	 everything	 sacred.	 Its	 very	 touch	 is	 magical,	 It	 makes
everything	golden.	Without	meditation	our	songs	are	ordinary,	superficial,	 they
don't	have	any	depth.
The	moment	 a	 song	arises	out	of	your	 silence,	when	 the	poetry	 is	born	out	of
silence,	when	the	dance	comes	spontaneously,	for	no	reason	at	all,	and	comes	so
irresistibly	that	one	has	to	dance	--	one	is	possessed	by	it,	one	has	to	sing	--	one
is	possessed	by	it	--	then	it	is	kirtan.	When	you	are	not	the	singer,	but	something
above	you,	beyond	you,	starts	flowing	through	you,	when	you	are	just	a	hollow
bamboo	 and	 suddenly	 the	 bamboo	 is	 transformed	 into	 a	 flute,	 some	 unknown
lips	start	singing	a	song	--	then	it	is	kirtan.
What	is	known	ordinarily	in	the	temples	as	kirtan	is	not	kirtan,	because	there	is
no	meditation	in	the	first	place.	People	are	just	singing	the	same	way	as	they	sing
other	songs.	The	words	may	be	religious,	but	only	the	words	are	religious	--	the
state	of	the	mind	is	the	same.	Whether	you	are	singing	a	song	from	a	film	or	you
are	singing	a	song	from	a	sacred	book	makes	no	difference.
The	real	difference	happens	only	when	your	state	of	consciousness	is	different.
Then	even	the	song	from	an	ordinary	film	becomes	sacred.	Then	whatsoever	you
say	has	a	certain	poetry	in	it.	In	fact	the	man	of	meditation	is	so	transformed	by
his	meditativeness,	that	his	silence	starts	radiating	through	each	of	his	acts.
His	words,	his	acts	--	all	are	full	of	his	silence.	Then	whatsoever	he	is	doing	is
sacred.	He	may	be	doing	an	ordinary	thing	cleaning	the	floor	or	cooking	food	or
taking	 a	 bath	 --	 but	 there	 is	 a	 subtle	 difference,	 a	 tremendous	 difference,	 a
difference	 that	 really	 makes	 a	 difference,	 because	 his	 being	 is	 in	 a	 totally
different	 space.	 It	 is	 coming	 out	 of	 such	 depth,	 of	 such	 innocence,	 of	 such
virginity	that	it	is	bound	to	be	sacred.	But	meditation	comes	first.
That's	 where	 I	 see	 these	 Hare	 Krishna	 people	 doing	 just	 idiotic	 things,	 sheer
stupidity.	You	can	go	on	repeating	'Hare	Krishna,	Hare	Rama'	for	lives	together.
It	 will	 do	 only	 one	 thing;	 repeating	 one	 thing	 again	 and	 again	 destroys
intelligence.	It	is	a	very	useful	method	for	making	people	idiotic	--	hence	in	the
Hare	Krishna	movement	you	will	find	all	categories	of	idiots	together.
In	the	first	place,	they	are	idiots	to	become	interested	in	it;	in	the	second	place,	if
they	are	not	already,	they	will	become	idiots,	because	the	whole	process	is	such.
And	 what	 they	 think	 is	 kirtan	 is	 not	 kirtan	 at	 all,	 because	 there	 is	 no
meditativeness	in	it.	It	is	parrot-like.
You	can	teach	a	parrot	and	he	will	repeat.	You	can	tell	him	to	repeat	sentences
from	 the	 Bible	 and	 he	 will	 repeat.	 In	 the	 same	 way	 that	 the	 pope	 goes	 on
repeating,	the	parrot	will	repeat,	but	the	repetition	of	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
parrot	does	not	make	him	holy.	You	know	perfectly	well	that	it	is	just	a	parrot;
there	is	nothing	in	it.	He	is	repeating	mechanically.
I	also	love	kirtan,	but	it	has	to	come	out	of	your	meditation,	it	has	to	come	of	its
own	accord.	meditation	has	to	function	as	a	foundation.	It	is	not	vice	versa,	that
by	 doing	 kirtan	 or	 sacred	 singing	 meditation	 can	 be	 created	 --	 no.	 But	 by
meditation	everything	becomes	sacred	--	even	singing,	even	walking.
If	 meditativeness	 gives	 a	 new	 touch	 to	 everything	 that	 you	 are	 doing.	 It
transforms	 you	 and	 through	 you	 the	 whole	 world	 around	 you.	 And	 once	 the
foundation	 is	 there,	 the	 temple	 starts	 rising	 by	 itself.	 You	 don't	 need	 to	 put	 it
together.
You	have	just	to	prepare	yourself	so	that	meditation	is	there,	awareness	is	there,
silence	is	there	--	then	everything	else	follows.	Everything	else	is	a	consequence.
Meditation	is	the	key	that	unlocks	all	the	doors.
Gautam	Buddha	has	used	 the	word	 'mahasukh',	 the	great	 bliss,	 to	describe	 the
ultimate	 experience.	What	 we	 know	 in	 our	 life	 is	 the	 small	 bliss,	 momentary
bliss,	only	fragments,	glimpses	from	a	very	far	away	place,	as	if	you	have	seen
the	Himalayas	from	thousands	of	miles	away.	Yes,	on	a	cloudless	day	when	the
sun	 has	 risen,	 you	 can	 see	 the	 glistening,	 virgin	 peaks	 of	 the	Himalayas	 from
thousands	of	miles	away.
Exactly	like	that,	what	we	know	in	life	are	small	glimpses	of	a	far	away	land	and
they	are	bound	to	be	momentary,	because	we	are	not	in	that	space	ourselves.	Just
accidentally	a	window	opens,	accidentally	the	clouds	are	not	there,	accidentally
the	sun	is	there,	accidentally	we	are	looking	in	that	direction...	It	is	all	accidental;
hence	for	a	moment	if	all	the	combinations	are	there	you	feel	just	as	if	a	dewdrop
is	slipping	inside	you.
But	then	there	is	despair.	In	the	wake	of	it	there	is	great	despair	because	soon	it
is	 lost;	 that	combination	 is	not	going	 to	 remain	 forever.	We	are	 surrounded	by
shifting	sands.	Everything	is	changing.	The	window	will	not	remain	in	the	same
place;	it	is	moving.	The	clouds	are	moving,	the	Himalayas	are	moving	--
everything	is	in	movement.	So	it	is	only	a	rare	opportunity	to	find	a	little	bit	of
bliss;	hence	Buddha	calls	it	the	small	bliss,	experienced	by	everybody	once	in	a
while.
In	 fact	 George	 Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say	 --	 and	 when	 a	 man	 like	 Gurdjieff	 says
something	it	is	meaningful.
He	used	to	say	'My	observation	is	that	a	person	has	such	glimpses	not	more	than
seven	times	in	a	life	--	that	is	the	maximum.	Not	necessarily	seven	times	--	that
is	the	maximum.	One	may	have	such	a	glimpse	only	one	time	or	two	times,	or
not	at	all.	It	all	depends	on	thousands	of	things.
Sometimes	looking	at	a	sunset,	sometimes	seeing	a	bird	on	the	wing,	sometimes
a	 distant	 call	 of	 a	 cuckoo,	 sometimes	 is	 beautiful	 face,	 sometimes	 a	 child
laughing	--	and	suddenly	it	is	there;	but	as	suddenly	as	it	comes,	it	goes.	And	in
the	wake	of	it	you	fall	into	a	deeper	darkness	than	you	were	in	before.	This	is	not
worth	having.
But	 it	 also	 has	 a	 significance,	 because	 it	 gives	 you	 the	 taste,	 the	 desire,	 the
longing,	 that	 if	 it	 is	 possible	 once	 then	 maybe	 there	 is	 some	 way	 to	 have	 it
forever.	That's	what	meditation	is;	not	to	depend	on	accidental	combinations	of
thousands	 of	 things	 but	 to	 create	 a	 certain	 space	 within	 you	 which	 makes	 it
absolutely	inevitable	that	bliss	is	yours.	Then	it	is	no	more	a	far	away	land;	it	is
something	within	you.
And	because	it	is	part	of	you,	even	if	you	want	to	lose	it	you	cannot	lose	it.	That
is	called	'mahasukh',	the	great	bliss.	It	comes	only	through	meditation.	There	has
never	been	any	other	way,	 there	is	none	and	there	is	never	going	to	be	another
way.
In	 life	what	we	 know	 as	 peace	 is	 not	 real	 peace;	 at	 the	most,	 it	 is	 absence	 of
turmoil,	 absence	 of	 noise.	 It	 is	 the	 absence	 of	 something,	 not	 the	 presence	 of
something.	 It	 is	 negative.	When	 you	 go	 to	 the	 mountains	 you	 have	 a	 certain
peace.	 It	 is	 the	absence	of	 the	market-place,	nothing	else.	Come	back	and	you
will	 be	 the	 same	 all	 peace	 will	 have	 gone.	 The	 people	 who	 live	 in	 the
monasteries	 thing	 they	 are	 living	 in	 peace;	 they	 are	 just	 befooling	 themselves
and	nobody	else.	They	 should	come	back	 to	 the	marketplace	and	 see;	 all	 their
peace	will	be	gone.
Their	 peace	 is	 very	 arbitrary,	 dependent	 on	 certain	 conditions.	And	 any	 peace
that	is	dependent	on	certain	conditions	is	not	yours.	It	may	be	there,	it	may	not
be	there	--	and	because	it	is	dependent	on	certain	conditions	you	have	to	live	in
those	conditions.	You	become	a	slave	of	those	conditions.	Only	slaves	are	living
in	 the	monasteries.	Many	have	 escaped	 to	 the	Himalayas	 and	 to	 the	 caves	but
they	are	all	slaves,	slaves	in	the	sense	that	now	they	think	they	are	peaceful.
Let	 them	come	back	 into	 the	world,	 let	 them	 live	 in	 the	world,	 let	 them	relate
with	people	and	they	will	know	whether	that	peace	was	true	or	not.	I	don't	trust
that	peace;	I	trust	the	peace	that	is	attained	here	and	now,	not	through	escape,	not
by	 changing	 outer	 conditions	 but	 by	 changing	 your	 inner	 awareness.	 That's
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
what	 I	 call	 meditation:	 changing	 your	 inner	 awareness,	 changing,	 your	 inner
world;	not	changing	the	circumstances	but	changing	your	consciousness.
Once	your	consciousness	is	changed,	once	inner	noise	is	dropped,	then	wherever
you	are	there	is	peace.
Peace	surrounds	you,	it	becomes	almost	tangible.	You	become	luminous	with	it.
It	 can	be	 felt	by	 sensitive	people.	A	sensitive	person	 just	passing	by	your	 side
will	 suddenly	 feel	 the	 breeze,	 will	 suddenly	 become	 aware	 that	 something
special	is	there,	some	grace,	something,	invisible	--	but	still	it	touches	the	heart.
Meditation	brings	true	peace	and	true	peace	is	always	infinite.	And	true	peace	is
always	independent.
True	 peace	 is	 yours,	 authentically	 yours;	 hence	 nobody	 can	 take	 it	 away.	You
cannot	be	distracted	from	it,	you	cannot	be	diverted	anywhere	else.	There	is	no
way.	Even	 If	you	are	 thrown	 in	hell	you	will	 live	 in	peace,	because	you	carry
your	paradise	within	yourself.
That's	the	meaning	of	Jesus	when	he	insists	again	and	again	that	the	kingdom	of
god	is	within	you.
Two	words	have	to	be	very	clearly	understood	one	is	information	and	the	other	is
transformation.
Information	makes	a	man	knowledgeable,	but	deep	down	he	remains	ignorant.	In
fact	 he	 becomes	more	 ignorant	 than	he	was	before,	 because	 at	 least	 before	 he
was	innocent;	ignorant	but	innocent	too.	Now	he	has	lost	his	innocence	also.	He
is	knowledgeable.	It	is	not	a	gain,	it	is	a	very	great	loss.
Ignorance	 is	 beautiful	 if	 it	 contains	 innocence	 in	 it,	 far	 more	 beautiful	 than
knowledge,	because	knowledge	is	ignorance	devoid	of	innocence.	But	there	is	a
third	 state	 also;	 wisdom.	 That	 never	 comes	 through	 information.	 It	 comes
through	transformation.
Information	 means	 collecting	 --	 from	 books,	 from	 people,	 from	 all	 over	 the
world,	facts,	fictions,	hypotheses,	superstitions,	all	kinds	of	rubbish.	But	you	can
arrange	that	rubbish	in	such	a	systematic	way,	in	such	a	logical	way	that	it	seems
very	 significant,	 very	 profound.	 Stupidity	 can	 also	 be	 very	 profound.	 If	 it	 is
scholarly,	it	is	profound.
Stupidity	can	also	be	very	logical.	There	is	no	intrinsic	impossibility	in	being	an
idiot	 and	 a	philosopher;	 one	 can	be	both	 together.	 In	 fact,	 in	 the	Middle	Ages
there	 used	 to	 be	 a	 word,	 'foolosopher'...	 And	 many	 philosophers	 are	 really
'foolosophers'	--	utterly	foolish	but	very	pretentious.	Because	of	their	knowledge
they	an	exhibit	 that	 they	know,	 and	deep	down	 they	also	know	 that	 they	don't
know,	 but	 they	 don'	 t	 want	 to	 accept	 it	 --	 even	 to	 themselves.	 even	 in	 their
privacy	they	don'	t	want	to	accept	it.
Hence	 the	man	who	has	become	very	much	 informed	becomes	very	very	 lost,
very	far	away	from	the	truth.	From	ignorance	there	are	two	ways:	one	is	towards
information,	 which	 will	 destroy	 innocence	 and	 protect	 ignorance;	 another	 is
towards	transformation,	which	will	destroy	ignorance	and	protect	innocence.
And	transformation	comes	through	meditation.
One	 simply	 has	 to	 become	 utterly	 silent,	 watchful,	 choicelessly	 aware;	 then
ignorance	disappears,	just	as	darkness	disappears	when	you	bring	a	candle	into	a
room.	But	the	innocence	remains.	In	fact	it	not	only	remains,	it	is	multiplied.
Information	 makes	 a	 foolosopher	 and	 transformation	 makes	 a	 wise	 man,	 a
Buddha,	a	Socrates,	a	Jesus.
But	the	only	way	to	attain	to	transformation,	innocence,	wisdom,	is	meditation.
My	 whole	 emphasis	 is	 on	 meditation.	 A	 single	 word,	 but	 it	 can	 open	 all	 the
mysteries	of	existence.
Nothing	else	is	needed.	It	is	more	than	enough.
The	only	 thing	we	 can	offer	 to	 existence	 is	 is	 singing	heart,	 a	 dancing,	 being.
What	 people	 are	 offering	 is	 nothing	 but	 misery.	 Existence	 gives	 us	 so	 much,
existence	is	not	miserly	at	all.	It	goes	on	giving	in	abundance	--	to	the	worthy,	to
the	unworthy.	It	makes	no	distinctions.	It	simply	goes	on	giving	to	whosoever	is
ready	to	take	it.	It	knocks	on	every	door,	just	to	give	gifts	to	you.	Light	and	love
and	life,	all	are	gifts;	not	that	we	deserve	them,	not	that	we	have	earned	them	--
we	may	not	be	worthy	at	all	--	but	existence	is	overflowing.	It	has	so	much	that	it
has	to	give.	It	cannot	resist	the	temptation	to	give.	It	gives	out	of	its	abundance.
Something	is	needed	from	our	side	too,	just	as	a	thankfulness,	as	gratitude.	And
what	 can	 we	 give	 to	 existence?	 Just	 a	 few	 songs,	 a	 few	 dances,	 a	 little
celebration,	a	festivity	--	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	make	you	a	little	more	to	make	you	just	a	little	more
rejoicing,	to	make	you	aware	of	all	the	gifts	that	the	whole	has	given	to	you	so
that	gratitude	can	arise	in	you.	And	out	of	that	gratitude	is	the	offering	of	songs.
Then	one	bows	down	to	existence,	just	in	simple	gratefulness,	and	offers	oneself,
whatsoever	one	has	got	--	a	few	flowers	of	one's	being.	These	flowers	are	what	I
mean	by	songs	a	little	bit	of	creativity,	whatsoever	you	can	create.
A	sannyas	has	to	live	in	such	a	way	that	when	he	leaves	the	world,	he	leaves	it	a
little	more	beautiful	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
than	he	had	found	it	--	that's	enough!	You	have	proved	that	you	were	religious!
You	have	proved	that	you	were	not	accidental.	You	have	proved	that	you	have
contributed	 something	 to	 existence,	 that	 you	 have	 not	 been	 futile	 and	 in	 vain,
that	 your	 being	 here	 has	 been	 of	 significance.	 That	 very	 feeling	 that	 'I	 have
contributed	a	little	bit	to	the	beauty	of	the	world,	to	the	grace	of	the	existence,'
that	'I	have	added	a	little	more	light	into	the	dark	night	of	the	soul,'	and	one	feels
fulfilled,	immensely	contented.	Nothing	more	is	needed,	no	other	religion.
Creativity	 is	 religion.	Creativity	 is	prayer.	But	 creativity	 can	come	only	out	of
meditativeness.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101155
ShortTitle:	POND15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Your	name,	Marlene,	has	three	meanings,	and	all	three	meanings	are	significant.
They	precisely	define	the	whole	process	of	sannyas.
The	 first	 meaning	 is	 bitterness,	 the	 second	 meaning	 is	 rebellion,	 the	 third
meaning	is	fragrance.
Man	is	born	as	bitterness,	and	unless	he	goes	through	an	inner	transformation,	a
rebellion,	his	energy	cannot	be	fragrant.	It	will	remain	bitter.	It	cannot	be	sweet.
Nothing	is	wrong	with	bitterness.	It	is	just	unpurified	energy,	raw,	just	like	a	raw
diamond	 taken	 directly	 from	 the	mind;	 it	 needs	much	work;	 only	 then	will	 it
shine	forth	in	its	absolute	beauty.
The	most	precious	diamond	in	the	world	is	the	Kohinoor.	When	it	was	found	in	a
mine	 in	 the	south	of	 India,	at	Golconda,	 it	was	 three	 times	weightier	 than	 it	 is
now.	But	it	is	millions	of	times	more	precious	now	than	it	was	then.	It	has	been
continuously	cut,	given	shape,	polished.	It	remains	only	one-third	of	its	original
weight	but	it	has	gained	a	million	times	in	value.
After	it	was	found	for	the	first	time,	it	remained	lying	in	a	poor	man's	house	for
three	 years.	He	was	 not	 aware	 that	 it	was	 such	 a	 precious	 thing.	His	 children
used	to	play	with	the	stone.	Anybody	could	have	stolen	it.	It	was	just	by	chance
that	a	wandering	sannyasin	stayed	 in	his	hut	one	night	and	 looked	et	 the	stone
that	was	lying	just	in	front	of	the	hut.	He	used	to	be	a	jeweller	before	he	became
a	sannyasin.	He	said	'What	are	you	doing	with	this	stone?	I	have	never	in	my	life
seen	such	a	big	diamond.	It	can	make	you	the	richest	person	in	the	world.'	And	it
proved	to	be	the	greatest;	up	to	now	no	other	diamond	has	been	able	to	surpass
it.
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 human	 energy;	 we	 come	 as	 raw	 diamonds	 from	 the
womb;	that	is	the	meaning	of	bitterness.	With	anger,	with	hatred,	with	jealousy,
with	possessiveness,	with	all	kinds	of	ugly	monsters	we	are	born.	But	all	those
monsters	 can	be	 transformed.	The	devil	within	us	 can	become	 the	divine.	The
words
'devil'	and	'divine'	come	from	the	same	root.	As	far	as	the	root	is	concerned,	they
belong	to	the	same	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sanskrit	 root,	 'div'.	 Devil	 means	 'divine'	 upside-down,	 doing	 a	 sirshasan,	 a
headstand,	that's	all,	that's	the	only	difference.	If	we	can	put	the	devil	on	his	feet
again	he	becomes	divine.
But	 that's	what	 rebellion	 is:	 putting	 things	 in	 their	 right	 perspective,	 arranging
one's	inner	world	in	deep	accord.	And	love	can	do	that	miracle.	The	only	magic
in	existence	is	that	of	love.
If	one	can	love	then	things	start	changing	of	their	own	accord	and	the	bitterness
one	day	becomes	fragrance;	hence	I	say	your	name	defines	the	whole	process	of
sannyas.
Misery	is	always	old,	bliss	is	always	young.	Misery	is	old	because	it	depends	on
the	past.	It	is	nd	bliss	is	always	young	because	it	is	part	of	the	now.	It	is	never
caused	by	the	past.	It	springs	up	here	and	now.	It	cannot	be	old,	it	is	intrinsically
impossible	 for	bliss	 to	be	old.	That's	why	even	an	old	person,	 If	he	 is	blissful,
radiates	youthfulness.	And	the	miserable	person,	even	If	he	is	young	looks	old,
dull,	dead.
To	represent	 this	fact	 in	 the	East	we	have	never	made	any	statue	of	Buddha	or
Mahavira	or	Krishna	in	their	old	age.	No	statue	represents	their	old	age.	Not	that
they	 never	 became	 old	 --	 they	 became	 old,	 they	 died	 too	 --	 but	 their	 statues
represent	only	youthfulness.
It	is	very	symbolic.	It	is	not	historical,	but	it	is	far	more	important	than	ordinary
facts.	It	represents	something	of	the	inner.
It	 is	 saying	 that	 blissfulness	 is	 always	 young.	 The	 body	may	 become	 old,	 the
body	may	die,	but	bliss-fulness	never	dies.	 It	never	becomes	old	 --	how	can	 it
die?	It	is	impossible.	Death	never	happens	to	blissfulness.	In	fact	blissfulness	is
not	 part	 of	 time	 at	 all.	 Anything	 that	 is	 part	 of	 time	 is	 bound	 to	 become	 old
sooner	 or	 later,	 because	 time	 always	 becomes	 past.	 It	 is	 always	 on	 the	 way
towards	the	past.	But	bliss	is	part	of	eternity.	So	is	now	part	of	eternity.
What	 I	 call	 meditation	 is	 nothing	 but	 being	 utterly	 herenow,	 putting	 the	 past
aside,	dropping	all	dreams	of	the	future,	abiding	in	the	moment...	and	suddenly,
the	 spring	 bursts	 forth,	 suddenly	 there	 are	 flowers	 and	 flowers	 in	 your	 being.
Suddenly	life	has	taken	a	quantum	leap,	from	time	to	eternity,	from	the	physical
to	the	metaphysical,	from	the	outer	to	the	inner.	And	the	inner	is	always	young,	it
never	grows	old.	It	is	never	born,	it	never	dies.	It	always	remains	the	same.
And	 that's	 the	 definition	 of	 truth;	 that	 which	 always	 remains	 the	 same.	 And,
accordingly,	the	definition	of	dream	is:	that	which	goes	on	changing.	That's	why
in	the	East	we	call	the	world	just	a	dream,	a	maya,	an	illusion,	because	it	goes	on
changing.
We	 have	 to	 find	 that	 which	 does	 not	 change.	 And	 it	 is	 there,	 within	 our
innermost	core.	We	just	have	to	become	silent	enough,	we	just	have	to	put	a	stop
to	our	mind	and	its	 turmoil.	And	that's	what	past	and	future	are,	mind	 turmoil,
noise	of	the	mind	--	either	memories	or	imagination.	Once	these	two	things	are
not	there	you	enter	into	the	world	of	the	eternal,	into	the	world	of	truth.
Meditation	is	not	of	the	mind,	it	is	of	the	heart.	Mind	knows	nothing	of	love.	It
knows	 only	 logic.	And	 logic	 is	 the	 farthest	 thing	 from	 love;	 they	 never	meet.
Love	cannot	be	logical,	logic	cannot	be	loving.	They	are	like	parallel	line;	which
never	meet.
Meditation	belongs	to	the	heart,	to	the	world	of	love.
Many	people	 start	meditation	but	 they	 start	meditation	as	part	of	 their	mind	 --
soon	 they	will	drop	 it.	 It	 is	not	 their	 love	affair.	And	mind	 is	very	calculating;
one	day	it	will	meditate	and	it	will	look	for	the	profit,	the	result,	the	reward	and
if	 it	 is	 not	 coming	 then	 the	mind	will	 say	 'What	 is	 the	 point	 of	 waiting	 your
time?'
Two	days,	three	days,	one	week,	two	weeks	--	these	are	not	things	which	can	be
grown	so	quickly;	these	are	not	seasonal	flowers.	These	are	cedars	of	Lebanon,
they	take	hundreds	of	years	to	grow.	One	needs	patience,	 infinite	patience,	and
only	 love	 can	 afford	 that.	 Logic	 is	 very	 impatient.	 Logic	 wants	 everything
quickly	because	 time	 is	 running	 fast,	 life	 is	 slipping	out	of	our	hands,	death	 is
knocking	on	the	door	hence	everything	has	to	be	like	instant	coffee.
Meditation	also	has	 to	be	 instant	meditation.	But	meditation	cannot	be	 instant.
Coffee	can	be,	but	meditation	cannot	be.	And	it	is	good	that	it	cannot	be.	If	it	can
be	 instant	 then	 it	will	 be	 sold	 in	 the	marketplace.	Then	 you	 can	 have	 it	 in	 all
colours,	 sizes	 and	 shapes.	 It	 will	 be	 manufactured	 like	 Transcendental
meditation.	 Now	 TM	 is	 a	 trademark.	 Even	 the	 word	 'TM'	 is	 copyrighted,
patented;	nobody	can	use	it.	It	is	like	some	commodity.
Meditation	is	not	a	commodity.
So	this	has	to	be	the	beginning	of	a	sannyasin:	the	shift	from	mind,	calculation,
cunningness,	logic,	impatience,	towards	a	love	affair.	If	sannyas	is	a	love	affair	--
then	 only	 are	 things	 going	 to	 happen.	 Then	 you	 function	 in	 a	 totally	 different
way.	Then	there	is	tremendous	readiness	to	wait.	And	the	miracle	is,	one	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
who	can	wait	forever,	he	may	even	get	it	now.	And	the	person	who	wants	to	get
it	now	may	have	to	wait	forever.	Impatience	is	a	disturbance.	patience	is	a	help,
a	nourishment.
And	love	can	wait,	only	love	can	wait.	Only	love	can	hope,	only	love	can	trust.
Love	 has	 all	 the	 great	 values	 which	 are	 needed	 to	 grow	 meditativeness,
awareness,	silence.
Initiation	into	sannyas	is	initiation	into	the	ultimate	love	affair	of	life.
Meditation	is	a	door	to	immortality.	Without	meditation	we	live	in	the	world	of
death;	with	meditation	we	enter	 into	 the	 real	world	of	 life.	Without	meditation
what	we	call	life	is	nothing	but	sitting	in	a	waiting	room	waiting	for	your	train	to
come,	or	standing	in	a	queue	which	every	moment	becomes	smaller	and	smaller,
as	people	go	on	disappearing	into	death.
A	life	in	which	death	is	the	ultimate	end	is	not	much	of	a	life.	At	the	most	it	can
be	defined	as	slow	death.	For	a	few	people	it	takes	seventy	years	to	die,	for	a	few
people	who	 are	 lazy,	 ninety	 years,	 for	 a	 few	 people	who	 are	 really	 lousy,	 one
hundred	years,	one	hundred	and	 twenty	years.	Some	people	 are	quick	 too,	but
one	thing	is	certain:	from	the	cradle	we	are	moving	every	moment	towards	the
grave.	This	is	not	true	life;	 it	 is	 just	a	belief	that	 it	 is	 life.	It	 is	 just	slow	death,
slow	poisoning.
Each	moment	we	 are	 dying;	 but	 once	 you	 enter	 into	 the	world	 of	meditation,
once	 you	 know	 how	 to	 be	 silent,	 how	 to	 be	 alert	 and	 watchful,	 how	 to	 be
unidentified	with	the	mind,	how	to	be	not	a	mind	--	that's	what	meditation	is	all
about;	a	state	of	no-mind	--	then	suddenly	there	is	no	beginning,	no	end,	no	birth,
no	death.	Then	one	tastes	for	the	first	time	what	life	is.	That	life	is	called	god.
And	unless	one	knows	that	'I	am	immortal,'	that	'I	have	been	here	forever	and	I
am	going	to	be	here	forever,'	one	is	bound	to	remain	in	anxiety	and	anguish	and
misery	and	fear	and	all	kinds	of	nightmares.	But	the	moment	you	know	that	you
are	not	the	body,	not	the	mind,	but	an	eternal	soul.	All	dark	clouds	disappear.	For
the	first	time	existence	becomes	full	of	sun,	full	of	flowers,	full	of	light.
Love	 is	 a	 bird	 on	 the	wing,	 not	 a	 bird	 in	 the	 cage.	 Love	 is	 freedom,	 never	 a
bondage.	 But	 we	 make	 love	 a	 bondage	 --	 that's	 how	 we	 kill	 it.	 We	 put	 the
beautiful	bird	into	a	golden	cage,	but	it	 is	not	the	same	bird.	It	appears	exactly
the	same,	but	it	is	no	more	the	same,	because	the	freedom	is	gone	and	with	the
freedom	the	spirit	 is	gone.	With	freedom	the	whole	sky	was	available;	without
freedom	it	has	lost	all	its	kingdom.	It	is	encaged	into	a	small	space.
Maybe	 just	 out	 of	 old	 habit	 it	 will	 still	 sing	 but	 the	 song	 will	 be	 just	 a
gramophone	 record	 --	 out	 of	 habit,	 not	 out	 of	 spirit.	 There	 is	 nothing	 to	 sing
about	any	more.	The	 same	bird	used	 to	 sing	 in	 the	 trees;	 flying	 into	 the	wind,
going	 beyond	 the	 clouds,	 longing	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 stars.	 Then	 there	was	 song!
Then	 that	 song	was	 spontaneous,	 because	 there	 was	 something	 to	 sing	 about,
something	to	celebrate	about.
One	of	 the	greatest	misfortunes	 that	has	happened	to	humanity	 is	 that	we	have
destroyed	love	by	making	it	a	relationship,	by	making	it	a	marriage,	by	making	it
a	possessiveness,	a	domination.	We	have	killed	the	whole	of	human	freedom	just
because	we	have	killed	love.
My	sannyasins	have	to	release	the	bird	from	the	cage.	They	have	to	live	lovingly,
but	without	 any	 relationship,	without	 any	promises	 for	 the	 future,	without	 any
future	and	without	any	past.	Then	again	you	will	be	able	to	sing,	again	you	will
be	able	to	dance,	again	you	will	be	alive.	And	the	very	intensity	of	that	life,	the
very	crescendo	of	that	song,	is	the	experience	of	god!
When	 love	 is	 dead,	 god	 is	 dead.	 When	 love	 is	 dancing,	 alive,	 throbbing,
pulsating,	then	god	is	alive.	It	all	depends	what	you	do	with	your	love.
God	is	not	a	question	of	going	to	the	church	or	to	the	temple	or	reading	the	Bible
or	 the	Gita	 --	 that's	all	nonsense.	That	 is	only	 for	 the	 stupid.	The	 true	god	has
something	to	do	with	your	love;	your	love	energy	has	to	be	released	in	absolute
freedom	so	the	whole	sky	is	yours.	Then	god	is	born	in	you!
And	 to	 give	 birth	 to	 god	 is	 the	 real	 fulfilment	 of	 life.	There	 is	 nothing	 higher
than	that.	There	cannot	be	anything	higher	than	that.
Your	 name,	 Dinesh,	 means	 the	 sun,	 the	 source	 of	 all	 light,	 the	 source	 of	 all
warmth,	the	source	of	all	 life	One	may	not	immediately	see	the	connection	but
when	you	are	enjoying	a	rose	flower,	you	are	enjoying	a	gift	from	the	sun.	Life	is
not	possible	without	the	sun.	The	trees	will	wither,	the	birds	will	die,	the	people
will	disappear.	If	the	sun	dies	then	within	ten	minutes	all	life	will	be	gone.
It	will	 take	ten	minutes	because	light	takes	ten	minutes	to	reach	to	the	earth	so
we	will	come	to	know	of	the	death	of	the	sun	after	ten	minutes.	But	nothing	can
be	done	about	it.	By	the	time	we	know	we	are	finished.	The	moment	we	know,
all	is	finished.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	sun	is	the	source	of	all	that	exists.	Just	as	there	is	an	outer	sun,	there	is	also
an	inner	sun,	because	the	inner	and	the	outer	are	always	in	balance.	Whatsoever
exists	 on	 the	 outside	 also	 exist	 inside.	 That's	 how	 life	 keeps	 its	 balance.	 To
search	for	the	inner	sun	is	the	whole	purpose	of	religion.
Science	can	be	defined	as	the	search	for	the	outer	source	of	life,	and	religion	as
the	search	for	 the	 inner	source	of	 life.	And	 if	 logic	 is	 the	method	for	 the	outer
science	then	love	is	the	method	for	the	inner	science,	religion.
Use	 love	 to	 search	 for	 your	 innermost	 shrine	 of	 being	 and	 there	will	 find	 not
only	yourself;	you	will	find	the	source	of	all!	At	the	centre	of	our	being	we	are
one,	 we	 are	 not	 separate.	 We	 are	 separate	 only	 on	 the	 circumference.	 In
ignorance	we	are	separate,	in	wisdom	we	are	one.	And	love	is	the	way	towards
that	 wisdom.	 Just	 as	 there	 can	 be	 no	 science	 without	 logic,	 there	 can	 be	 no
religion	without	love.
Sannyas	is	an	effort	to	go	beyond	the	night	of	the	soul.	We	have	not	yet	seen	the
dawn.	 We	 go	 on	 stumbling	 in	 the	 dark.	 And	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 our	 eyes	 are
focussed	 on	 the	 outside.	We	 keep	 our	 own	 being	 at	 the	 back;	 that	 keeps	 our
being	in	a	shadow,	in	darkness.
If	 we	 can	 take	 a	 one-hundred-eighty-degree	 turn,	 then	 suddenly	 there	 will	 be
dawn,	 immediately	our	 inner	being	will	be	full	of	 light.	And	that	experience	is
enlightenment,	 to	 know	 oneself	 as	 full	 of	 light	 is	 to	 know	 all	 that	 is	 worth
knowing.	One	who	has	lived	without	knowing	one's	own	light	has	lived	in	vain.
Initiation	 into	sannyas	 is	a	deep	commitment	 towards	 inner	 journey,	a	decision
for	that	one-hundred-eighty-degree	turn.	And	it	is	only	a	question	of	deciding.	If
one	decides	one	can	do	it.	One	is	capable	of	doing	it.
People	are	not	able	to	do	it	just	because	they	are	indecisive,	hesitant,	ambiguous.
Once	the	decision	is	 there,	absolute	and	total,	 in	a	single	moment	one	can	turn
towards	 the	 inner	 world.	 And	 that	 single	 moment	 is	 far	 more	 important	 than
living	a	 long	 life,	because	 that	single	moment	will	make	you	eternal.	The	 long
life	will	take	you	only	to	death	and	nowhere	else.
The	experience	of	bliss	has	many	things	in	common	with	the	moonlight.	First,	it
is	light;	second,	it	is	very	cool	light.	It	is	not	feverish.	it	is	not	cold	either,	neither
hot	nor	cold,	but	just	exactly	in	the	middle	--
cool.	And	 to	 experience	 the	 cool	 light	 gives	 you	 a	 bath.	 It	 rejuvenates	 you.	 It
makes	you	beautiful,	graceful.
It	happens	in	the	moonlight;	the	whole	existence	seems	to	be	more	beautiful	than
ever.	It	is	the	same	existence,	the	same	world	with	no	difference	at	all.	You	have
seen	it	--	the	same	rocks,	the	same	trees,	the	same	roads,	the	same	houses	--	but
suddenly	 in	 the	moonlight,	 as	 if	 a	miracle	 happens,	 everything	 becomes	more
mysterious,	 becomes	 more	 poetic,	 becomes	 dreamlike,	 takes	 a	 flavour	 of
sweetness,	a	fragrance.
The	 same	 happens	 in	 blissfulness	 you	 are	 showered	 with	 a	 cool	 light	 and	 it
cleanses	your	very	being,	gives	you	a	new	freshness,	a	beauty,	a	grace.	A	miracle
surrounds	 you.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 feel	 you	 are	made	 of	 the	 same	 stuff	 as
dreams	are	made	of,	for	the	first	time	the	prose	style	of	life	disappears	and	you
attain	to	a	poetic	style;	the	mathematics	evaporates	and	music	enters	in.
Moonlight	 gives	 you	 an	 ecstasy	but	 the	 ecstasy	has	 no	 excitement	 in	 it	 --	 and
that's	its	beauty,	its	indefinable	quality,	because	whenever	we	thing	of	ecstasy	we
think	of	excitement.	And	the	true	ecstasy	is	without	any	excitement	at	all.	It	is	a
new	dimension,	so	new	that	it	is	absolutely	indefinable	in	the	old	words	and	in
the	 old	 ways	 of	 expression.	 That's	 why	 the	 mystics	 have	 always	 felt	 that	 it
cannot	be	said.
It	can	be	shown,	but	it	cannot	be	said.	The	master	can	share	it	 in	deep	silence,
heart-to-heart,	but	he	cannot	say	it.
Man	can	live	either	in	darkness	or	in	light.	Both	alternatives	are	open.
Each	moment	we	are	at	a	cross	road;	we	can	choose	to	live	ac	enlightened	beings
but	millions	of	people	choose	to	live	an	unenlightened	life.
It	seems	very	strange	--	why?	Why	do	they	choose	the	life	of	darkness	when	the
life	of	 light	 is	available?	It	certainly	 is	one	of	 the	most	significant	questions	--
why	people	choose	misery	when	they	can	be	blissful?
There	are	very	subtle	reasons.	One	is	that	misery	fulfills	many	things	which	bliss
cannot.	 Misery	 gives	 you	 nourishment	 for	 the	 ego	 and	 bliss	 kills	 the	 ego
completely.	 And	we	 are	 brought	 up	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 ego	 seems	 to	 be	 very
significant.	 Even	 the	 so-called	 psychologists	 go	 on	 saying	 that	 every	 person
needs	a	very	strong	ego,	otherwise	he	will	not	be	able	to	survive	in	the	struggle
of	life.
Life	is	not	taken	as	a	celebration.	It	is	taken	as	a	struggle,	a	war.	And	of	course,
if	it	is	a	war,	then	you	have	to	be	very	egoistic	to	fight	it.	You	cannot	be	relaxed.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Without	ego	there	is	relaxation.	Bliss	brings	relaxation,	such	total	relaxation,	that
you	are	no	more	there.
The	relaxation	is	so	absolute	that	the	ego	is	not	possible.	Ego	needs	tensions	as
support.	 Misery	 gives	 you	 enough	 tension;	 it	 supports	 the	 ego.	 The	 more
miserable	you	are,	the	more	the	ego	is	nourished,	fed,	becomes	stronger.	And	out
of	 the	 ego	 all	 our	 projects	 arise.	 Only	 an	 egoistical	 person	 can	 seek	 power,
prestige,	respectability,	money,	and	all	that	nonsense,	only	an	egoistical	person.
And	 this	whole	society,	 for	millions	of	years,	has	been	 teaching	every	child	 to
have	more	power,	more	money,	more	than	others.	You	have	to	defeat	everybody,
you	have	to	be	competitive.	And	all	these	are	the	subtle	reasons	why	we	choose
misery.	Only	a	miserable	person	can	be	a	politician,	only	a	miserable	person	can
go	after	money.
The	really	blissful	person	does	not	bother	about	non-essential	things.	His	life	is
so	 inwardly	 rich	 that	 he	 does	 not	 care	 to	 become	 a	 prime	minister	 or	 to	 ba	 a
president.	 Why	 should	 he	 take	 all	 this	 anxiety	 and	 worry	 and	 all	 kinds	 of
nightmares?	There	is	no	reason!
Alexander	the	Great	had	asked	Diogenes,	a	great	mystic,	 'I	would	like	to	be	as
blissful	as	you	are.'
Diogenes	 used	 to	 live	 naked	 by	 the	 side	 of	 a	 river.	 He	 was	 taking	 his	 usual
morning	 sunbath,	 lying	 down	 on	 the	 sand	 in	 the	 warm	 sun.	When	Alexander
came	 Diogenes	 did	 not	 even	 congratulate	 him.	 He	 remained	 lying	 there.	 He
didn't	take	any	note	of	him.	Alexander	stood	there	and	said	'You	are	the	first	man
I	feel	jealous	of.	It	seems	you	have	more	than	I	have	got.	You	look	so	blissful.	If
I	am	to	be	born	again	I	will	ask	god	to	make	me	a	Diogenes.'
Diogenes	 laughed	 and	 said	 'You	 are	 a	 fool!	Why	 wait	 for	 another	 life?	Who
knows?	If	you	really	want	to	be	a	Diogenes	you	can	be	 this	very	moment;	 this
riverbank	is	so	big	--	throw	off	your	clothes,	lie	down,	relax,	take	a	sunbath,	just
as	 I	am	doing	--	who	 is	preventing	you?	At	 least	 I	am	not	preventing	you	and
there	is	nobody	else	here	If	you	want	to	be	as	blissful	as	I	am,	who	is	preventing
you?	Why	should	you	postpone	it	for	the	next	life?	And	if	you	cannot	do	it	now,
are	you	certain	you	will	be	able	to	do	it	in	the	next	life?	And	if	you	can	do	it	in
the	next	life,	then	why	not	now?	There	is	no	problem	in	it.'
Alexander	was	very	well-versed	as	 for	as	philosophy	and	 logic	are	concerned.
He	 was	 a	 disciple	 of	 Aristotle,	 the	 father	 of	 western	 logic.	 Aristotle	 was	 his
personal	 tutor.	 But	 for	 the	 first	 time	 he	 saw	 that	 his	 whole	 logic	 was	 useless
before	this	man;	'What	he	is	saying	is	right!'
He	said	'I	can	understand	--	what	you	are	saying	is	right,	I	cannot	argue	--	but	the
time	has	not	come	for	me.	Right	now	I	am	going	to	conquer	the	whole	world.'
Diogenes	said	'Okay,	then	what	you	will	do,'	Alexander	said	'Then	I	will	relax.'
Diogenes	 said	 'This	 is	 just	 absurd;	 I	 am	 relaxing	now	 without	 conquering	 the
world.	 Is	 that	 a	 requirement	 for	 relaxation,	 that	 first	 you	 have	 to	 conquer	 the
world?	If	I	can	relax	without	conquering	the	world,	why	is	it	you	cannot?'
Alexander	stood	there	almost	dumb,	then	bowed	down	and	said	'I	am	sorry.	I	can
understand	your	point,	but	I	cannot	do	it	now.'
What	was	the	problem?	Why	couldn't	he	do	it	that	moment?	That	is	the	problem
for	everybody	too,	our	projects,	our	ego	projects.	'I	have	to	conquer	the	world,	I
have	to	become	this,	I	have	to	become	that,	I	have	to	possess	this,	only	then	will
I	 be	 happy.'	 We	 make	 so	 many	 conditions	 to	 be	 blissful,	 that's	 why	 we	 are
miserable;	otherwise	 there	 is	no	need	 to	make	any	conditions.	One	can	simply
choose	to	be	blissful,	to	be	full	of	light,	to	be	full	of	joy,	to	be	full	of	songs.	One
can	become	a	festival	of	lights.
And	it	is	a	sheer	question	of	decision.	I	emphasise	the	point	again	and	again	to
my	 sannyasins	 that	 each	 moment	 you	 are	 given	 two	 opportunities	 --	 to	 be
blissful	 or	 to	 be	 miserable.	 If	 you	 choose	 to	 be	 miserable,	 don't	 complain!
(laughter)	 You	 have	 chosen	 it.	 The	 next	 moment,	 don't	 choose	 it!	 If	 you	 are
really	 fed	up	with	 it,	 then	 the	next	moment	 choose	 to	be	blissful	 --	 that	 is	my
message	for	you!	(laughter)	From	this	very	moment	(laughter)...	start	choosing
to	be	blissful.	Right?	Good,	Yama!
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8101165
ShortTitle:	POND16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	moon	represents	 the	cool,	 the	silent	phase	of	 light.	The	sun	 represents	 the
hot,	 the	 turmoil,	 the	 conflict.	 The	 sun	 is	 excitement	 and	 the	moon	 is	 silence.
Born	of	moonlight	means	coming	out	of	deep	silence.
Bliss	is	a	child	of	silence,	of	coolness,	of	unexcitement,	of	 tranquillity.	Bliss	is
not	something	that	one	has	to	seek	anywhere.	All	that	is	needed	to	find	it,	is	to
become	absolutely	calm	and	quiet.	When	there	 is	no	 turmoil	within	you,	when
the	sun	phase	has	ceased	to	function,	the	moon	comes	to	light	of	its	own	accord.
The	moon	is	always	there,	even	in	the	day.	Just	because	of	the	sunlight	and	the
excitement,	 you	 cannot	 see	 it.	 Once	 the	 sun	 sets,	 the	 moon	 starts	 appearing.
When	the	sun	is	completely	gone	below	the	horizon,	the	moon	is	there	in	all	its
beauty.
Exactly	 the	same	is	 the	case	with	bliss,	 it	 is	already	 there	at	 the	very	center	of
our	 being;	 we	 just	 have	 to	 become	 silent,	 then	 out	 of	 that	 silent	 state	 of
consciousness	 bliss	 arises,	 just	 like	 a	 moon	 arising.	 And	 the	 beauty	 of	 it	 is
tremendous.	There	is	ecstasy	but	no	excitement.
There	is	great	joy	but	it	is	not	hot	--	it	is	cool.
It	is	not	a	distraction.
It	makes	you	even	more	centered,	more	grounded.
It	brings,	for	the	first	time,	immense	contentment,	fulfillment.
One	feels	one	has	arrived.
The	state	of	blissfulness	is	as	free	as	the	eagle.	It	can	rise	beyond	the	clouds.	It
knows	no	limitation.	The	whole	sky	belongs	to	it.
Bliss	is	not	only	free;	in	fact,	it	is	freedom	itself.	It	is	a	bird	on	the	wing	all	the
dimensions	 are	 open	 to	 it.	 Love	 and	 beauty	 and	 sensitivity	 and	 creativity	 --
everything	suddenly	becomes	possible	 for	 the	blissful	person.	There	 is	no	wall
any	more	that	prevents.	All	walls	become	bridges.
Secondly,	 bliss	 is	 also	 wild	 because	 it	 is	 spontaneous.	 It	 is	 not	 part	 of	 the
cultivated,	civilised	mind;	it	is	part	of	our	intrinsic	nature,	which	is	still	beyond
all	cultivation.	 fortunately,	 it	 is	good	 that	 it	cannot	be	cultivated,	otherwise	we
would	have	made	it	phony.	It	is	beyond	our	reach.	We	cannot	do	anything	with
it.
It	remains	as	it	is,	it	remains	true	to	its	nature.
The	eagle	of	the	wood	represents	both;	it	represents	the	freedom	of	a	bird	--	it	is
not	 a	 bird	 in	 the	 cage	 but	 a	 bird	 in	 the	 wood	 --	 and	 it	 also	 represents	 the
wildness,	the	naturalness,	the	spontaneity	of	the	woods.
Bliss	is	both:	open,	free	--	to	the	whole	existence	--	and	natural,	spontaneous.
Misery	is	our	effort.	Misery	is	created	by	us.	It	is	our	invention	and	we	are	doing
great	work	to	create	it.
Day	 in,	 day	 out,	 year	 in,	 year	 out	 --	 we	 are	 doing	 so	 much	 work	 to	 keep
ourselves	miserable	that	the	moment	you	understand	the	fact	that	misery	is	your
own	 creation,	 it	 simply	 disappears	 because	 you	 stop	 creating	 it.	 It	 is	 just	 like
bicycling:	you	go	on	peddling	the	moment	you	stop	peddling	the	bicycle	has	to
stop.	Maybe	it	will	go	a	few	feet	or	if	it	is	downhill,	maybe	a	few	furlongs,	just
because	of	the	past	momentum,	but	sooner	or	later	it	will	stop.
That's	actually	 the	case	with	misery.	Misery	is	a	bicycle;	you	have	to	peddle	 it
continuously,	you	cannot	stop	peddling	it	otherwise	you	will	fall.	Bicycle	means
two	wheels	 only,	 so	 it	 is	 against	 gravitation.	 You	 have	 to	 go	 on	 peddling	 for
gravitation	 to	 remain	 ineffective.	By	 the	 time	 gravitation	 can	make	 it	 fall	 you
have	moved.	It	is	just	escaping	from	gravitation;	that's	why	you	need	peddling.	If
you	stop	in	one	place,	just	a	little	time	is	needed	for	gravitation	to	work	and	you
will	fall.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Bliss	 is	 not	 unnatural.	 It	 needs	 no	 peddling.	 It	 simply	 is	 there.	Once	 you	 stop
creating	misery	you	find	it.
It	is	wild.	It	is	of	the	woods,	of	the	mountains.	It	is	nature!
So	all	 that	one	has	 to	do	 is	 to	understand	 'What	am	I	doing	with	myself?'	The
very	 understanding	 brings	 a	 transformation.	 You	 stop	 creating	 misery	 and
instantly	bliss	starts	showering	on	you.	And	then	one	laughs	at	how	long	one	has
been	miserable,	and	for	no	reason	at	all.	Nobody	else	was	responsible	for	it.	It	is
just	 our	 ignorance	 of	 what	 we	 are	 doing	 that	 creates	 hell.	 Ignorance	 is	 hell,
unawareness	is	hell.	Awareness	is	paradise.
Religions	in	the	past	have	been	very	serious.	That	seriousness	is	a	disease.	It	is
like	a	cancer	of	the	soul;	hence	in	religious	people's	lives	all	songs	disappeared,
all	 joy	 disappeared,	 all	 fun	 disappeared.	 They	 became	 dull	 and	 dead.	 They
became	a	heavy	weight	on	humanity.	They	crushed	humanity	under	their	weight.
They	 thought	 they	 were	 becoming	 holy;	 they	 were	 simply	 becoming	 phony.
They	thought	they	were	becoming	simple,	humble;	they	were	simply	becoming
very	 subtle	 egoists.	 Holier-than-thou	 was	 their	 whole	 philosophy.	 They
condemned	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity.	 They	 created	 sadness	 for	 themselves	 and
greed	for	others.
It	has	been	an	ugly	past.
Getting	initiated	into	my	vision	of	sannyas,	into	my	vision	of	religion,	is	a	change
of	gestalt,	a	total	change	of	perspective.	Instead	of	seriousness	I	teach	laughter,
humour,	cheerfulness,	Instead	of	sadness	I	teach	songs,	dances,	love.
Religion	needs	to	become	more	earthly.	It	has	to	be	a	tree	rooted	in	the	earth	and
rising	high	into	heaven.	The	flowers	will	come	into	the	sky	but	the	roots	will	o
deep	 into	 the	earth.	And	there	has	 to	be	a	balance	between	the	 two;	 the	higher
the	tree	goes	the	deeper	the	roots	have	to	go.
The	really	religious	person	is	very	earthly;	he	has	to	be,	otherwise	he	won't	have
any	 roots.	 Hence	 I	 teach	 rootedness	 in	 the	 earth.	 I	 teach	 the	 earth,	 because	 I
know	that	only	if	our	roots	grow	into	the	earth	will	we	be	able	to	rise	beyond	the
clouds.	The	 flowers	will	 come	but	 they	will	 come	only	 by	 getting	 deeper	 and
deeper	roots.
So	to	me	the	mundane	and	the	sacred	are	not	different	they	are	two	sides	of	the
same	coin.	Hence	singing	and	dancing	and	love	and	creativity	and	cheerfulness
and	laughter	are	not	against	the	sacred.	They	are	part,	an	intrinsic	part	of	it,	and
not	a	small	part	--	exactly	the	half	of	it,	and	the	first	half.	And	if	the	first	half	is
there	the	second	half	follows	automatically	--	They	cannot	be	separated	--	but	in
the	 past	 the	 second	 half	 became	more	 important;	 not	 only	more	 important,	 it
became	empty	of	the	first	half.	That's	how	religion	died.	That's	how	god	died	on
the	earth;	god	became	a	tree	without	roots.
God	can	live	again	but	the	only	way	for	god	to	live	again	is	to	have	roots	into	the
earth	--	and	that's	what	I	mean	by	cheerfulness,	song,	celebration.
Bliss	is	a	light	--	light	of	the	inner	world.	Without	bliss	the	inner	world	remains
dark.	As	you	start	becoming	blissful	the	night	starts	disappearing,	the	dawn	has
arrived.	The	only	way	to	become	enlightened	is	to	be	blissful,	totally	blissful.	No
prayer	is	needed,	no	religious	ritual	is	needed.	One	has	just	to	be	blissful	in	one's
ordinary	 life	 and	 the	 beyond	 suddenly	 opens	 one	 day.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be
aggressive	about	it.
One	has	just	to	be	receptive.
And	one	has	to	learn	only	one	thing:	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	do	it	blissfully.
Make	it	a	point	so	that	bliss	remains	an	undercurrent	in	all	your	activities.	If	that
much	is	remembered	then	your	life	will	be	transformed.	No	power	can	prevent
it,	no	hindrance	then	is	big	enough	to	prevent	your	transformation.
Just	walking,	remember	to	be	blissful.	Sitting,	eating,	cooking,	taking	a	bath,	just
remain	 blissful	 --	 a	 subtle	 cheerfulness	 inside,	 a	 giggling	 in	 the	 heart.	 And
sometimes	you	can	giggle	loudly	too	(laughter)...
there	is	no	problem!	At	the	most	people	will	think	you	a	little	crazy.	But	there	is
no	problem	my	people	are	cuckoos!	(laughter)
And	 then	 if	 it	 just	 becomes	 a	 twenty-four-hour	 undercurrent...	 and	 it	 does
become	that;	 if	you	can	remember	while	you	are	awake,	one	day	you	will	find
that	even	in	your	sleep	it	continues.	In	the	morning	you	can	find	it	still	there	and
you	 can	 remember	 that	 it	 has	 been	 there	 the	 whole	 night.	When	 the	 circle	 is
complete,	 that	 very	moment	 great	 night	 is	 born	within	 oneself.	And	 that	 light
becomes	the	door	to	the	divine,	to	the	eternal.
The	 ordinary	 understanding	 about	 bliss	 is	 that	 it	 is	 great	 excitement.	 That	 is
totally	wrong.	Pleasure	has	excitement	in	it,	bliss	has	no	excitement	at	all.	It	 is
utterly	peaceful.	That's	the	difference	between	pleasure	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
and	bliss.	Pleasure	is	an	excitement	because	it	is	momentary	bliss	cannot	be	an
excitement	because	it	is	eternal.	How	can	you	remain	excited	forever?
Even	the	momentary	pleasure	tires,	exhausts.	It	tastes	sweet,	one	wants	it,	but	at
the	same	time	one	feels
--	and	the	more	alert	you	are,	the	sooner	you	feel	--	that	it	is	exhausting,	tiring,	it
is	a	kind	of	exertion.
Because	 excitement	means	 tension.	Your	 heart	 is	 beating	 faster,	 your	 blood	 is
circulating	faster,	your	mind	is	rushing	faster,	everything	is	speedy	--	how	long
can	you	be	in	that	speed?	Soon	you	will	feel	utterly	tired,	deadly	tired.
That's	why	all	so-called	love	affairs	fail;	after	the	honeymoon	is	over	both	are	so
tired	of	each	other	that	really	everything	is	over	with	the	honeymoon.	But	now
they	cannot	say	it.	They	have	promised	so	many	things	to	each	other	--	it	looks
so	inhuman	and	insulting	and	humiliating	to	swallow	again	whatsoever	you	have
thrown	out.	so	one	has	to	go	on	pretending,	but	now	it	is	tiring.
You	can	see	husbands	and	wives	moving	 together	both	 look	utterly	 tired,	as	 if
they	are	just	coming	out	of	hell.	If	you	see	a	man	with	a	woman	being	joyful	and
cheerful,	 one	 thing	 is	 certain	 that	 the	 woman	 is	 not	 his	 wife!	 (laughter)	 It	 is
really	impossible,	even	for	actors	it	is	impossible	to	be	cheerful	with	their	own
lives	 or	 husbands.	And	 if	 you	 are	 so	 cheerful	with	 your	 own	wife,	 even	 your
wife	will	become	suspicious	'Why?
What	 is	 the	 matter	 with	 you?	 There	 must	 be	 some	 other	 woman	 --	 your
cheerfulness	is	enough	proof!'
You	have	to	be	sad,	serious,	sombre.	The	deader	you	are,	the	more	your	marriage
goes	smoothly.	The	more	alive	you	are,	the	more	it	 is	on	the	rocks.	Even	these
momentary	pleasures	which	are	excitement	are	tiring.	Hence	bliss	cannot	be	an
excitement;	it	is	a	state	of	total	peacefulness.	It	has	all	that	one	longs	for,	except
excitement.
It	is	cool	and	silent,	and	a	tremendous	harmony	prevails	inside,	no	tension	at	all.
In	 fact	 it	 is	 so	peaceful	 that	 slowly	slowly	one	 tends	 to	 forget	 it.	Only	when	a
person	becomes	for	the	first	time	enlightened	does	he	know,	because	now	he	can
see	the	difference,	 that	he	has	come	from	darkness	into	light.	The	change	is	so
vast,	so	immense,	so	tremendous,	the	contrast	is	so	big	--	he	knows	it.	But	as	he
settles	 into	 his	 new	 dimension,	 by	 and	 by	 he	 starts	 forgetting	 all	 about
enlightenment,	all	about	bliss,	because	even	to	know	it	is	a	tension.
It	 becomes	 so	 natural,	 like	 breathing.	 You	 remember	 breathing	 only	 when
something	 is	wrong,	 otherwise	 you	 don't	 remember	 it.	And	with	 bliss	 there	 is
never	anything	wrong.	It	is	getting	in	tune	with	the	ultimate;	never	does	anything
go	wrong.	Hence	it	is	so	silent	that	one	cannot	even	remember	it.
One	 of	 the	 greatest	masters	 of	 the	world	was	Bodhidharma,	who	 founded	 the
school	of	zen.	He	went	to	China,	travelled	from	India	to	China.	The	emperor	of
China,	Wu,	came	to	the	boundary	of	his	country	to	receive	this	great	master.	He
had	 been	 waiting	 for	 him	 for	 years,	 because	 it	 took	 years	 'Bodhidharma	 is
coming,	 Bodhidharma	 is	 coming,'	 and	 he	 had	 to	 cross	 the	 whole	 Himalayan
range.
It	 took	 years	 and	 that	 old	 emperor	 was	 waiting	 and	 waiting.	 And	 when
Bodhidharma	 came	 he	 was	 really	 in	 a	 great	 rejoicing.	 The	 whole	 country
rejoiced.	He	had	come	with	his	whole	court;	there	was	much	festivity	and	much
celebration.
But	Bodhidharma	shocked	him	very	much.	Wu	asked	him	'I	have	done	so	much
for	 religion,	 I	 have	 made	 so	 many	 temples,	 so	 many	 monasteries.	 I	 feed
thousands	 of	 sannyasins.	 What	 will	 be	 my	 merit	 in	 the	 other	 world?'
Bodhidharma	said	'Nothing,	no	merit	at	all.	In	fact	you	will	fall	into	the	seventh
hell.'
It	 was	 such	 a	 shock.	 The	 Emperor	 said	 'But	 everybody	 up	 to	 now	 has	 been
saying	 that	 all	 that	 I	 am	 doing	 is	 of	 such	 great	 virtue	 that	 I	 will	 reach	 to	 the
seventh	heaven	and	you	are	saying	to	me	'You	will	fall	into	the	seventh	hell?"	Is
there	not	anything	like	virtue?'
Bodhidharma	said	'There	is	no	virtue,	no	sin.'	The	emperor	became	a	little	angry,
but	he	was	a	polite	man,	cultured,	polished,	he	didn't	show	his	anger,	but	it	was
there.	 He	 asked	 Bodhidharma	 'Can	 I	 ask	 you,	 sir,	 one	 thing	 --	 who	 are	 you?'
Bodhidharma	said	'I	don't	know.'
Now	this	answer,	'I	don't	know,'	is	one	of	the	greatest	answers	even	given	to	the
question	'Who	are	you?'
And	only	a	man	like	Bodhidharma	can	say	'I	don't	know.'	It	is	not	ignorance.	It	is
the	ultimate	wisdom.	But	he	has	known	himself	 for	so	many	years	 that	he	has
forgotten	who	he	is.	All	that	has	become	so	natural.	He	does	not	remember.	He
said	'I	am	telling	you	the	truth	I	have	no	idea.	It	has	been	so	long,	so	much	water
has	gone	down	the	Ganges	since	I	became	aware	of	who	I	am.	Now	everything
has	settled.	There	is	only	nothingness,	silence,	peace,	and	I	don't	know	anything
about	myself	or	about	you	or	about	anything.'
Yes,	ultimate	innocence	will	look	like	ignorance.	When	bliss	is	absolute	you	tend
to	forget	all	about	it.
If	somebody	asks	me	'Are	you	blissful?'	I	can	only	say	'I	don't	know.	It	has	been
so	 long	 that	 I	 have	 forgotten	 what	 misery	 actually	 means.	 The	 contrast	 is
missing,	 the	 background	 is	 no	 more	 there.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 you	 have	 written	 on	 a
blackboard	with	white	chalk	and	the	blackboard	has	disappeared;	now	how	can
you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
read?	 Only	 those	 words	 written	 in	 white	 chalk	 are	 somewhere	 there;	 but	 the
blackboard	has	disappeared,	there	is	no	contrast.'
That's	the	ultimate	state	when	you	don't	even	know	that	you	are	blissful.	What	to
say	about	misery?	--	in	a	way	even	bliss	is	no	more	there.	But	that's	what	we	are
searching	and	seeking	and	longing	for.	That's	our	deepest	longing	of	the	heart	to
come	 to	 such	 a	 state	 where	 no	 tension	 exists,	 no	 anxiety,	 no	 anguish,	 where
nothing	exists,	or	only	nothing	exists.
The	 state	 of	 blissfulness	 is	 also	 the	 state	 of	 meditativeness;	 they	 are
synonymous.	 To	 be	 blissful	 is	 to	 be	meditative,	 and	 vice	 versa.	One	 can	 start
from	either	end.	either	one	can	be	meditative	--	then	bliss	comes	in
--	or	one	can	be	blissful	and	meditation	comes	in.	To	start	from	meditation	is	a
little	arduous,	but	to	start	from	blissfulness	is	very	simple.	And	when	the	simple
is	available,	why	go	through	the	arduous?
So	 let	 bliss	 be	 the	 beginning.	 Just	 relax	 and	 be	 cheerful,	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all.
Don't	 ask	 why.	 If	 you	 ask	 why,	 you	 will	 always	 remain	 miserable,	 because
misery	has	a	why	 to	 it	 and	bliss	has	no	why	 to	 it.	 If	you	ask	me	why	you	are
miserable,	 it	 can	 be	 answered;	 but	 if	 you	 ask	 why	 you	 are	 happy,	 blissful,	 it
cannot	be	answered,	because	blissfulness	is	a	natural	phenomenon.	It	simply	is
the	case,	just	like	health.
If	 you	 go	 to	 the	 physician	 and	 ask	 'Why	 am	 I	 healthy?'	 he	 will	 shrug	 his
shoulders.	 But	 if	 you	 ask	 'Why	 am	 I	 unhealthy?'	 he	 can	 find	 out	 the	 cause.
Healthy	has	no	cause.	disease	has	cause.	Life	has	no	cause.
Death	has	cause.
Remember	that.	The	negative	always	has	a	cause	to	it,	but	the	really	existential
has	no	cause	to	it;	it	simply	is	there.	So	start	being	blissful	without	asking.	Your
mind	will	ask	'Why	are	you	feeling	so	cheerful?'
Tell	 the	mind	 'Shut	 up!	 (laughter)	 I	 am	 just	 cheerful	 and	why	 should	 I	 bother
about	these	whys?'
One	 can	 be	 cheerful	 only	 if	 one	 can	 drop	 searching	 for	 the	 reasons,	 for	 the
motives.	Be	cheerful	for	cheerfulness'	sake,	for	no	other	reason,	as	if	it	is	an	end
unto	itself.	Everything	else	is	a	means	to	something	else,	but	blissfulness	is	not	a
means;	it	is	an	end.	So	use	every	opportunity	as	an	excuse	to	be	blissful.
In	the	beginning	you	need	a	few	excuses.	By	and	by	you	learn	the	art,	 then	no
excuse	is	needed.	You	can	just	sit	in	your	room	and	enjoy!	(laughter)	And	there
is	nothing	to	enjoy!	People	always	think	that	enjoying	means	something	has	to
be	 there	 to	 be	 enjoyed	 --	 the	 television,	 the	 radio,	 a	man,	 a	woman,	 at	 least	 a
bottle	of	beer	 --	 something	has	 to	be	 there.	When	somebody	 is	 just	 sitting	and
enjoying	 they	 will	 think	 'This	 is	 strange.'	 (laughter)	 And	 if	 somebody	 invites
you,	'Come	to	my	home	and	we	will	enjoy,'	(laughter)	and	both	sit	and	enjoy	--
that's	 really	my	 idea	 of	 enjoyment!	 invite	 people,	 friends	 to	 enjoy...	They	will
come	only	once!	(much	laughter)	Once	they	come	and	they	see	what	enjoyment
is,	once	they	have	understood,	they	will	not	come	again.	But	then	you	can	enjoy
alone!	(more	laughter)	There	is	no	need	for	anybody.	Or	you	can	always	invite
new	people;	but	enjoy	for	no	reason	at	all.	Try	it,	give	it	a	try!
Pleasure	is	like	a	bud	--	closed.	Happiness	is	like	a	flower	--	open.	And	bliss	is
like	fragrance	--
freedom.
There	 is	 not	 much	 difference	 between	 a	 bud	 and	 a	 flower.	 Yes,	 there	 is	 a
difference	 --	 the	 bud	 is	 closed	 and	 the	 flower	 is	 open	 --	 but	 no	 qualitative
difference,	 just	 a	 quantitative	 difference,	 a	 different	 arrangement	 of	 the	 petals,
that's	 all.	But	with	 the	 fragrance	 there	 is	 a	quantum	 leap.	 It	 is	 totally	different
from	the	flower.
The	 flower	 is	 visible,	 the	Fragrance	 is	 not	 visible.	You	 can	hold	 the	 flower	 in
your	hand,	you	cannot	catch	hold	of	the	fragrance.	That's	exactly	the	case	with
bliss	you	cannot	possess	 it.	You	can	experience	 it,	you	can	dance	with	 it,	 sing
with	it,	but	you	cannot	possess	it.
Pleasure	 can	 be	 possessed,	 purchased.	 That's	 why	 ugly	 institutions	 like
prostitution	exist;	pleasure	can	be	purchased,	it	is	very	physical,	gross.
Happiness	is	just	in	between.	It	is	more	difficult	to	purchase	happiness	but	one
can	 manage.	 If	 one	 is	 intelligent	 enough	 one	 can	 manage	 even	 happiness	 --
through	 art,	 through	music,	 through	poetry.	But	 bliss	 is	 absolutely	 beyond	our
reach.	It	is	bigger	than	us.	Our	reason,	our	intelligence,	our	powers	all	fall	short.
We	can	only	be	on	 the	 receiving	 end.	We	are	 just	 a	 host	 --	 if	 it	 comes,	 like	 a
breeze	it	comes,	then	we	can	accept	it	as	a	guest,	but	we	cannot	force	it	to	come,
either	 directly	 or	 indirectly.	But	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 remembered:	 the	moment
you	are	really	ready	to	be	a	host,	the	guest	comes,	the	fragrance	comes,	the	bliss
comes.
It	comes	and	then	never	goes.	It	comes	forever!	But	it	is	not	a	property.	It	is	not
material.	It	is	absolutely	immaterial,	invisible,	like	a	fragrance.
First	one	has	to	become	open	like	a	flower	and	then	one	has	to	wait.	Whenever
the	moment	is	ripe,	the	fragrance,	the	hidden	splendour,	will	be	released.	That's
what	we	are	here	for;	the	very	meaning	of	life	is	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
release	the	imprisoned	splendour.
We	are	living	a	life	divided,	separated,	from	the	whole.	We	have	created	a	small
wall	around	ourselves	out	of	fear,	to	protect,	but	that	very	wall	has	become	our
imprisonment.	The	name	of	the	wall	is	the	ego	and	unless	we	demolish	the	wall,
destroy	the	ego,	we	will	remain	separate	from	the	whole	--	and	that	is	the	basic
cause	 of	misery.	Because	 to	 remain	 separate	 from	 the	whole	means	 to	 remain
undernourished.	It	means	to	remain	continuously	afraid	of	death,	of	all	kinds	of
accidents.	 Once	 you	 are	 one	 with	 the	 whole	 all	 fear	 disappears	 because	 then
there	is	no	death.	The	whole	is	eternal.
And	the	part	cannot	have	any	meaning.	Meaning	always	means	 in	reference	 to
the	whole.	For	example,	you	can	take	a	part	from	a	machine.	That	part	in	itself	is
meaningless.	 Put	 it	 back	 into	 the	machine	 and	 it	 has	 tremendous	meaning.	 Its
meaning	 is	 only	 in	 a	 certain	 context,	 in	 a	 certain	 unity,	 in	 a	 certain	 organic
harmony.	The	egoistical	person	 feels	 life	 as	meaningless	 and	he	himself	 is	 the
cause	of	 it.	Withdraw	the	ego	and	see;	 from	all	directions	meaning	rushes	 into
your	 being.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 feel	 life	 and	 its	 significance.	 And	 the
significance	 is	 enormous,	 infinite,	 and	 then	 only	 one	 can	 dance,	 rejoice.	 Then
only	 one	 knows	 that	 we	 are	 not	 orphans;	 we	 belong	 to	 the	 universe	 and	 the
universe	belongs	to	us.
That	 feeling	 is	 'yoga'	 --	 that	 feeling	 of	 belonging,	 that	 feeling	 that	 we	 are	 an
intrinsic	 part	 of	 the	whole,	 that	 we	 are	 needed	 by	 the	whole,	 that	 we	 are	 not
useless	and	accidental.
Once	that	feeling	overwhelms	you	your	whole	life	is	transformed.
It	becomes	a	rejoicing.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101175
ShortTitle:	POND17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Meditation	basically	is	nothing	but	a	state	of	total	awareness.	Our	mind	is	only
partially	 aware;	 only	 one	 tenth	 of	 our	 totality	 is	 conscious,	 nine-tenths	 is	 in	 a
deep	dark	night.	All	our	problems	arise	out	of	that	darkness,	that	blindness.	And
it	is	nine	times	more	than	our	awareness.	The	so-called	religions,	moralities,	go
on	trying	to	cultivate	that	fragment	of	consciousness.
You	can	teach,	you	can	programme	that	small	fragment	of	consciousness	but	it
will	remain	superficial.
In	times	of	stress	it	won't	help.	One	will	remain	very	polite	and	humble,	but	only
when	everything	is	going	good.	When	things	start	going	wrong	then	suddenly	all
the	repressed	anger,	violence,	overwhelms	one.
Then	 the	 cultivated	morality,	 the	 facade	of	 character	 is	of	no	use	 at	 all.	That's
why	people	do	things	which	you	never	thought	they	could	do.	A	very	good	man,
a	nice	man,	in	every	w!ay	respected,	can	commit	murder.	He	himself	will	not	be
able	to	believe	how	he	could	do	it;	hence	the	phrase	 'in	spite	of	myself.'	It	 is	a
retrospective	 thinking	 later	 on	 when	 he	 comes	 back	 to	 his	 superficial
consciousness	he	can	see	that	he	has	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
done	it	in	spite	of	himself,	because	he	is	identified	only	with	the	conscious	part.
He	has	rejected	the	unconscious	and	that	is	nine	times	more.
That	 is	 our	 true	 reality,	 it	 cannot	 be	 rejected;	 and	by	 cultivating	 the	 conscious
part	 it	 remains	 unaffected,	 it	 remains	 the	 same.	 Hence	 my	 approach	 is	 not
through	character	but	through	meditation.
The	most	fundamental	thing	is	to	make	our	consciousness	bigger,	to	change	the
unconscious	 into	 consciousness	 --	 that	 is	 true	 religion.	 That's	 what	 the	 whole
purpose	of	alchemy	was:	the	transformation	of	darkness	into	light,	of	the	baser
metal	 into	 gold.	 The	 gold	 represents	 light.	 And	 it	 is	 possible	 if	 you	 start
becoming	aware	of	what	you	are	doing,	of	what	you	are	thinking,	of	what	you
are	feeling	--	just	an	undercurrent	of	awareness	of	all	these	three	dimensions	--
then	slowly	slowly	awareness	deepens.	More	and	more	parts	of	the	unconscious
are	claimed	by	consciousness.
And	 once	 you	 have	 learned	 the	 knack	 of	 changing	 the	 unconscious	 into
consciousness,	then	it	is	only	a	question	of	time,	effort,	patience.	Then	the	day	is
not	 far	 away	 when	 the	 whole	 of	 unconsciousness	 disappears	 and	 your	 inner
world	 is	 full	 of	 light.	 Then	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 is	 moral,	 whatsoever	 happens
through	you	is	virtue	--	and	that	virtue	is	not	cultivated	at	all.	It	is	spontaneous.
And	when	it	is	spontaneous	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.	When	it	is	cultivated	it	is
pseudo,	phony.	It	creates	only	hypocrites,	and	that's	why	the	whole	world	is	full
of	hypocrites.
It	is	not	their	fault;	it	is	ten	thousand	years	of	stupidity	perpetuated	in	the	name
of	 religion.	 Religion	 should	 be	 simply	 an	 alchemical	 process	 of	 transforming
unconsciousness	into	consciousness.
A	man	without	meditation	is	windowless,	utterly	closed	to	existence.	No	sun,	no
wind,	no	rain,	reaches	him.	He	lives	almost	in	a	grave.	He	is	not	alive.
You	are	alive	only	in	the	proportion	to	which	you	are	vulnerable,	open.	The	more
alive	you	are,	 the	more	windows	you	have,	 the	more	doors	you	have;	and	you
are	 totally	alive	when	you	are	 just	under	 the	sun,	under	 the	sky,	utterly	naked,
with	 nothing	 to	 keep	 you	 isolated,	 to	 keep	 you	 encapsulated.	 And	 that's	 the
function	 of	meditation	 to	 create	 windows	 in	 you.	 In	 the	 beginning,	 windows,
then	doors;	then	by	and	by	all	the	walls	disappear.	One	day	you	find	yourself	for
the	first	time	merging,	melting,	into	the	whole.
That's	 the	ultimate	experience	of	bliss.	But	the	beginning	is	 in	creating	a	small
window;	then	go	on	making	it	bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger,	so	one	day	there	is
only	window	left.	All	the	doors,	all	the	walls,	everything	has	disappeared.	When
there	 is	 nothing	 to	 disconnect	 you	 from	 existence,	 nothing	 to	 debar	 you,	 you
experience	godliness.
Meditation	 gives	 you	 unbounded	 space.	 It	 makes	 you	 as	 vast	 as	 the	 ocean.
Without	it	one	is	only	a	dewdrop,	confined	into	a	very	small	space,	imprisoned.
And	 that's	our	misery,	 that	wherever	we	 try	 to	move	 there	 is	 a	 limitation.	The
body	limits	us,	the	mind	limits	us,	even	the	heart	limits	us.
One	has	to	go	beyond	the	body,	beyond	the	mind,	beyond	the	heart.	Only	then,
these	three	concentric	circles	transcended,	you	become	as	vast	as	existence	itself.
You	are	no	more	in	that	vastness.	You	cannot	be	the	way	you	have	always	been;
there	is	no	ego.
The	 ego	 can	 exist	 only	 in	 the	 dewdrop.	 The	 ocean	 means	 egolessness.	 The
moment	 you	 are	 infinite,	 you	 taste	 the	 truth	 for	 the	 first	 time;	 otherwise
whatsoever	we	go	on	thinking	about	truth	is	not	truth.	Thinking	about	truth	can
never	be	truth.	Truth	is	a	taste	on	the	tongue.	The	person	who	has	never	tasted
sweetness	may	 go	 on	 thinking	 about	 it	 for	millions	 of	 years;	 still,	 he	will	 not
know	what	it	is.
The	blind	man	can	think	know	light	but	all	his	thinking	is	futile.	He	may	write	a
thesis,	a	great	thesis,	on	light,	he	may	be	awarded	a	Ph.D.	or	a	D.	Lit.,	but	still
because	 he	 is	 blind	 he	 knows	 nothing	 of	 light.	 All	 his	 knowledge	 is	 mere
knowledge,	not	knowing.
Truth	has	 to	be	known.	No	 information	can	be	of	any	help.	 it	 is	 an	existential
experience	and	the	only	way	to	know	it	is	to	become	it	--	to	digest	it	and	to	be
digested	by	it.	Only	in	that	union	where	I	and	thou	disappear,	where	all	dualities
melt	and	become	one,	one	knows.	That	state	I	call	oceanic.	That	 is	 the	goal	of
sannyas.
One	has	 to	come	out	of	 the	confinement	of	 a	dewdrop	and	become	 the	ocean.
One	 has	 to	 allow	 one's	 dewdrop	 to	 slip	 into	 the	 ocean	 and	 disappear	 into	 the
ocean.	To	be	one	with	the	whole	is	the	only	way	to	be	holy.
Meditation	is	the	essence	of	all	true	religion.	Everything	other	than	meditation	is
nothing	but	 ritual.	 It	 is	good	for	deceiving	people,	 it	 is	good	for	exploiting	 the
fools,	it	is	very	good	for	the	priests;	the	popes,	the	imams,	but	it	is	not	religion.
And	a	very	strange	thing	is	that	all	the	vested	interests	are	against	meditation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
They	are	all	for	going	to	the	church,	to	the	temple,	to	the	mosque.	They	are	all	in
support	of	reading	the	Bible	every	day,	or	the	GITA,	reciting	it	again	and	again
and	again	but	 they	are	not	 in	 favour	of	meditation,	because	 they	have	become
aware	again	and	again	down	the	ages	that	the	meditative	person	becomes	a	rebel.
The	meditative	 person	 becomes	 so	 intelligent	 that	 he	 cannot	 be	 exploited	 and
oppressed.	 The	 meditative	 person	 becomes	 so	 full	 of	 life	 that	 he	 cannot	 be
repressed,	 crippled,	 paralysed.	 He	 becomes	 so	 full	 of	 bliss	 and	 joy	 that	 you
cannot	make	him	afraid	and	you	cannot	make	him	greedy	either;	so	your	hell	and
heaven	 both	 become	 superstitions	 for	 the	 meditative	 person,	 because	 hell	 is
nothing	but	exploitation	of	fear	and	heaven	is	exploitation	of	greed	--	two	sides
of	the	same	coin.	Because	people	are	 living	in	fear	and	in	greed,	the	priest	has
invented	hell	and	heaven;	otherwise	there	is	no	hell,	no	heaven.
There	is	life	eternal.	And	if	you	are	silent,	meditative,	this	very	moment	you	are
in	paradise.	And	 if	 you	have	 song	 astray	 from	your	own	centre,	 if	 you	 are	no
more	 centred	 in	 your	 being,	 you	 are	 in	 hell.	 Hell	 simply	 means	 living	 a	 life
unconsciously	and	heaven	means	living	a	life	consciously.
All	 the	 religions	 are	 afraid	 of	 meditation	 because	 it	 gives	 you	 the	 taste	 of
paradise	herenow	and	they	all	depend	on	a	paradise	after	death;	so	you	and	your
life	can	be	postponed.	Heaven	will	be	after	death	and	right	now	you	have	to	live
a	 meaningless	 life.	 So	 they	 go	 on	 giving	 you	 hope	 and	 hope	 is	 nothing	 but
opium.
Meditation	 means	 becoming	 so	 aware,	 so	 intensely	 aware,	 now,	 this	 very
moment,	that	all	these	stupidities	are	seen	as	stupidities,	and	the	moment	you	see
something	as	false	you	are	free	of	it.	Not	only	that,	there	is	even	more	danger	for
the	vested	interests,	for	the	establishment;	the	person	who	has	come	to	know	the
false	 as	 the	 false	 and	 the	 true	 as	 the	 true	 does	 not	 remain	 hidden.	 He	 cannot
remain	hidden.	He	has	to	share	his	experience.	He	has	to	spread	his	fire.
And	that	fire	can	burn	all	the	temples	and	all	the	churches	and	all	the	mosques.
The	 meditative	 person	 will	 not	 be	 Christian,	 will	 not	 be	 Hindu,	 will	 not	 be
Buddhist,	 will	 not	 be	 Mohammedan.	 He	 will	 simply	 be	 human.	 Hence	 the
Christians	will	be	against	him,	the	Hindus	will	be	against	him,	all	the	organised
religions	will	be	against	him.	He	will	not	be	a	Christian	of	course;	he	will	be	a
Christ.	 He	 will	 not	 be	 a	 Buddhist	 but	 he	 will	 be	 a	 Buddha	 --	 and	 that	 is
dangerous.
The	Buddhists	don't	want	another	Buddha	to	be	here,	because	the	latest	Buddha
is	bound	to	change	the	 twenty	--	 five-centuries-old	scriptures	of	 the	Buddhists,
because	he	will	speak	 the	 idiom	of	 the	day,	he	will	speak	 in	 the	context	of	 the
contemporary	humanity.
Christians	will	not	like	Christ	to	be	here	again.	He	will	destroy	all	their	business;
hence	nobody	is	in	favour	of	meditation	--	and	meditation	is	the	essential	core	of
religion.	 In	 other	 words	 all	 religions	 are	 against	 religion,	 against	 the	 true
religion,	against	 the	essential	religiousness.	And	my	effort	here	 is	 to	make	you
aware	that	rituals	are	not	religion,	that	scriptures	are	not	religion,	that	belonging
to	a	certain	sect	is	not	religion.	Religiousness	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon:
it	is	the	experience	of	your	own	being.
Knowing	it,	all	is	known.
Mind	 separates,	 meditation	 unites.	 Mind	 functions	 as	 a	 wall,	 meditation
functions	as	a	bridge.
Meditation	 simply	means	a	 state	of	no-mind;	 slipping	out	of	 the	mind	and	 the
games	of	the	mind	is	the	whole	art	of	meditation.	And	it	is	not	a	difficult	thing	--
we	have	just	never	tried	it,	that's	why	it	appears	difficult.	We	have	always	lived
in	the	mind	so	we	don't	know	that	there	is	a	way	to	live	beyond	the	mind	too.
Once	you	have	taken	even	a	single	step	out	of	 the	mind	you	will	be	surprised;
you	were	living	unnecessarily	in	a	prison.	There	was	nobody	guarding	the	door,
you	were	not	chained,	you	were	just	not	aware	that	there	is	a	beyond	too.	And
the	way	 out	 of	 the	mind	 is	 to	 become	 aware	 of	 the	mind	 and	 its	mechanism,
memory,	 imagination,	 thoughts,	 desires,	 fantasies	 --	 the	 traffic	 is	 there,
continuously	going	on.
You	 have	 just	 to	 stand	 by	 the	 side	 and	watch	whatsoever	 is	 passing,	 with	 no
judgement,	 with	 no	 evaluation;	 just	 a	 silent	 mirror	 reflecting	 whatsoever	 is
passing	by.	Not	even	making	any	comments	that	this	is	good,	this	is	bad,	that	this
is	not	so	good,	that	this	should	not	be	or	should	be	--	without	any	commentary,
just	watching.
In	 the	 beginning	 it	 seems	 difficult	 because	 our	 habit	 is	 of	 continuously
commenting,	 but	 just	 a	 little	 patience,	 sitting	 silently,	 doing	 nothing,	 just
watching;	 it	comes.	And	when	 it	comes	 it	opens	a	 totally	new	dimension.	You
can	see	the	whole	mind	passing	by	and	than	you	know	that	you	are	not	the	mind,
because	 the	 one	 who	 is	 seeing	 the	mind	 passing	 by	 cannot	 be	 the	mind.	 The
observer	 cannot	 be	 the	 observed	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	moment	 you	 are	 out	 of	 the
mind.	 That	 is	 the	 moment	 a	 tremendous	 freedom	 comes.	 One	 is	 no	 more
confined	to	anything.	The	imprisoned	splendour	is	released;	and	life	begins	only
then.	Before	that	we	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are	just	living	a	so-called	life,	lukewarm,	with	no	intensity,	with	no	passion,	with
no	totality.
Man	 lives	mechanically,	 just	 like	 a	 sleep-walker,	 a	 somnambulist;	 he	 goes	 on
doing	things	but	almost	like	a	robot.	If	you	start	watching	your	acts	you	will	be
surprised	 that	 you	 go	 on	making	 the	 same	mistakes	 every	 day.	And	 you	 have
decided	many	times	not	to	do	them	again,	but	those	decisions	are	meaningless.
When	the	situation	arises	aGain,	you	react	 immediately	 in	 the	old	pattern.	You
don't	know	how	to	respond.
These	two	words	are	significant.	'Reaction'	means	mechanical,	unconscious	and
'response'	means	non-mechanical,	conscious.	'Response'	means	acting	according
to	the	situation	and	'reaction'	means	acting	according	to	the	old	pattern.	reaction
means	 following	 ready-made	 answers,	 following	 a	 built-in	 programme,	 being
dictated	and	dominated	by	the	past	--	that	is	reaction.	And	living	in	the	moment,
in	the	moment,	with	no	interference	from	the	past,	is	response.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	responsible	in	this	sense,	not	in	a	moralistic	sense,	not	in
the	sense	of	being	dutiful,	but	in	the	sense	of	being	conscious.	To	be	conscious
means	acting	out	of	 the	 light	of	 awareness;	otherwise	people	are	 acting	out	of
darkness	--	stumbling,	groping.	Yes,	once	in	a	while	just	accidentally	they	can	do
something	right,	but	that	is	accidental.	It	has	no	value	at	all.
Ninety-nine	per	cent	they	will	do	wrong.	One	percent,	accidentally,	they	will	do
right;	but	accidental	right	has	no	value.	It	is	not	virtue.
One	has	to	be	full	of	light.	And	when	there	is	light	you	know	where	the	door	is,
you	need	not	stumble.
You	know	where	the	furniture	is,	you	need	not	stumble.	You	know	exactly	what
is	what	and	you	act	according	to	that	understanding.
Meditation	creates	 light	within	you.	Without	meditation	one	 is	 living	 in	a	dark
night	of	the	soul.	And	the	strange	thing	is	that	we	have	all	the	things	necessary	to
create	light.
In	a	Sufi	story,	a	man	is	hungry.	He	has	flour,	he	has	water,	he	has	butter,	he	has
fuel,	he	has	 fire,	he	has	everything	--	he	can	make	bread.	But	he	 is	 just	sitting
there	hungry,	because	he	cannot	eat	 the	fuel,	he	cannot	eat	 the	flour,	he	cannot
eat	all	these	things	which	only	need	to	be	put	in	a	certain	combination.
Once	they	are	put	in	a	certain	combination	they	will	become	eatable.
We	are	born	with	everything;	that	is	needed	to	create	light,	but	you	have	to	use	a
little	intelligence	to	put	everything	in	its	right	place.	And	that's	what	meditation
is:	putting	things	in	their	right	place.	And	once	they	are	in	the	right	place	a	great
harmony	arises.	Once	life	becomes	such	a	deep	accord,	so	full	of	music,	so	full
of	joy,	so	full	of	light,	out	of	that	joy,	that	music,	that	light,	whatsoever	you	do	is
right.
So	I	don't	teach	you	to	do	right.	I	only	teach	you	to	create	the	light...	then	right
follows!	(laughter)	It	is	inevitable.
There	is	a	vast	difference	between	satisfaction	and	contentment.
Satisfaction	 is	something	 invented.	 In	 the	old	fable	of	Aesop,	 the	fox	says	 that
the	grapes	are	sour,	because	he	can't	 reach	 those	grapes	--	 that	 is	 finding	some
consolation.
When	 people	 cannot	 reach	 they	 have	 to	 create	 a	 certain	 consolation	 around
themselves.	 That	 consolation	 is	 satisfaction,	 that	 consolation	 functions	 like
buffers.
Between	two	compartments	in	a	train	there	are	buffers	so	that	if	some	accident
happens	 the	compartments	don't	crash	 into	each	other.	Those	buffers	are	shock
absorbers.
Or	 just	 like	 in	 a	 car,	 there	 are	 springs	 so	 that	 you	 don't	 feel	 the	 bumps	 --
particularly	on	an	Indian	road	--
those	springs	help;	they	absorb	the	shocks.	A	little	bit	of	it	reaches	to	you	end	if
you	are	also	using	an	Indian	car,	then	much	of	it	reaches	to	you!	Indian	cars	are
made	especially	for	Indian	roads;	they	fit	together.
But	with	good	buffers,	imported	buffers,	you	can	avoid	many	bumps	on	the	road.
Exactly	the	same	is	the	case	with	our	inner	world:	there	are	so	many	shocks	in
life.
You	want	money	and	you	cannot	get	it,	and	you	want	power	and	you	cannot	get
it	 --	 because	 there	 is	 always	 a	 power	 shortage,	 (laughter)...	 gas	 shortage...
everything	is	in	shortage.	There	are	many	more	consumers	and	everything	is	in
shortage.	And	how	many	people	can	be	prime	ministers	and	presidents?
Now	this	country	has	seven	hundred	million	people	and	only	one	person	can	be
the	 president.	 So	 seven	 hundred	 million	 people	 minus	 one	 are	 going	 to	 be
shocked!	 (laughter)	 They	 have	 to	 find	 some	 consolation,	 they	 have	 to	 create
some	 satisfaction.	 They	 can	 say,	 'Who	 cares?	 I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 power
politics.	I	don't	want	to	become	a	politician.	All	these	dirty	politicians...	I	am	a
simple	man,	a	humble	man,	and	I	am	perfectly	satisfied	with	my	life.	These	are
creating	buffers.
This	helps	you	to	carry	on	the	routine	life	but	this	is	not	contentment;	there	is	no
joy	 in	 it,	 because	 deep	 down	 you	 know	 that	 it	 is	 only	 a	 deception.	 You	 can
deceive	others	but	how	can	you	deceive	yourself?	You	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
can	go	on	hypnotizing	yourself	just	as	Christian	Scientists	do:	they	are	ill,	they
know	 they	 are	 ill,	 but	 they	 go	 on	 saying	 I	 am	 not	 ill,	 illness	 is	 all	 false,	 that
illness	 is	only	of	 the	mind.	They	can	go	on	repeating	morning	evening,	day	 in
day	out,	but	in	fact	the	very	fact	that	they	are	repeating	again	and	again	'I	am	not
sick,'	is	enough	proof	that	they	know	they	are	sick.
In	one	 story	a	young	man	met	a	Christian	Scientist	 and	 the	Christian	Scientist
asked,	'I	have	not	seen	your	father	for	many	days.	Where	is	he?'	And	the	young
man	said,	 'He	is	very	sick.'	And	the	Christian	Scientist	said,	 'He	is	not	sick.	He
only	thinks	he	is	sick.'
After	one	month	he	again	met	the	young	man	and	said,	'What	about	your	father?
And	 the	 young	 man	 said,	 'Nothing	 much,	 now	 he	 thinks	 he	 is	 dead!'	 (much
laughter)	This	 type	 of	 tomfoolery,	 this	 kind	 of	 idiotic	 ideology	 has	 dominated
humanity	 for	 centuries.	 People	 go	 on	 trying	 to	 befool	 themselves.	 Now	 he	 is
befooling	himself	that	he	is	dead...!
People	don't	want	to	accept	facts.	They	create	fictions	around	themselves.	Even
if	a	person	dies,	people	don't	say	directly	that	he	is	dead;	they	say	'he	has	gone	to
the	 heavenly	 abode',	 or	 that	 'he	 has	 become	 god's	 beloved'...	 So	what	was	 he
before	 that?	 People	 want	 to	 avoid	 facts,	 and	 they	 create	 smoke	 around
themselves.	That	is	not	contentment.
Contentment	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	It	happens	only	to	the	meditator,
only	 the	 meditator	 becomes	 so	 blissful,	 so	 peaceful,	 because	 he	 has	 arrived!
There	is	nowhere	to	go.	He	has	found	his	home!
He	has	experienced	the	ultimate	significance	of	there	is	nothing,	more	than	that.
He	has	touched	the	optimum,	and	out	of	that	bliss	is	contentment.
So	 contentment	 is	 not	 something	 one	 can	 cultivate;	 it	 is	 a	 by-product	 of
meditation.	And	one	should	not	cultivate	satisfaction,	because	that	will	keep	you
away	 from	 contentment.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 destroy	 all	 satisfaction	 and	 all
consolations;	it	is	better	to	realise	facts	as	they	ares	illness	is	illness	and	death	is
death.
And	if	you	cannot	reach	the	grapes,	better	to	say	 'I	cannot	reach,'	because	then
some	way	can	be	found	to	reach.	Don't	go	on	deceiving	others	and	yourself	that
they	are	sour.
So	I	am	all	for	reality.	My	approach	is	pragmatic.
I	am	a	realist,	not	an	idealist.	I	don't	believe	in	all	that	hocus-pocus.	And	to	be
my	 sannyasin	means	 to	 be	 utterly	 realistic,	 pragmatic,	 grounded	 in	 the	 Earth.
And	because	one	is	grounded	one	starts	growing	like	a	tree	into	the	sky	towards
the	stars,	and	then	there	is	immense	contentment.
Meditation	is	a	process	of	rebirth.	The	first	birth	is	only	physiological,	biological
material.	Don't	think	that	that's	all	there	is	to	life.	Coming	out	of	the	womb	of	the
mother	is	only	an	opportunity	for	a	second	birth,	for	the	real	birth.	The	day	you
come	out	of	the	womb	of	your	psychology,	you	are	really	born.
In	India	we	have	called	the	people	who	have	known	the	truth,	twice	born,	dwija.
And	unless	one	becomes	twice	born,	one	lives	in	vain.
Life	 has	 to	 be	 used	 as	 a	 jumping	 board	 for	 the	 beyond.	 It	 is	 an	 immense
opportunity,	but	very	few	people	have	used	it	up	to	now.	Once	in	a	while	a	Jesus,
a	Buddha,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Bahauddin	--
only	once	 in	 a	while	 a	 few	people	have	used	 this	 life	 for	 reaching	 to	 a	higher
plane,	to	another	life.
All	that	is	needed	is	that	you	have	to	die	to	your	past;	only	then	you	can	be	born
anew.	The	child	has	to	leave	the	womb,	and	he	is	going	on	an	unknown	journey,
uncharted.	He	knows	nothing	about	what	is	going	to	happen.	He	has	no	idea,	no
map,	 no	 guide.	And	 for	 nine	months	 he	 has	 lived	very	 comfortably,	 in	 a	 cosy
world,	 almost	 asleep,	 and	 his	 every	 need	 was	 fulfilled	 --	 no	 worry,	 no
responsibility,	no	struggle,	no	anxiety,	no	anguish,	no	questions,	no	problems.	He
had	lived	the	most	comfortable	and	luxurious	life	that	he	will	ever	live.	And	it	is
going	to	be	finished.	But	the	child	comes	out	of	the	mother's	womb	because	the
womb,	howsoever	comfortable	it	is,	is	dark,	meaningless.	It	is	not	life.	There	is
no	adventure.
And	without	adventure.	There	is	no	possibility	of	life.
The	child	enters	into	the	world	of	adventures,	but	that	is	nothing	compared	to	the
second	birth.
If	you	die	to	your	mind...	mind	means	the	past,	all	that	you	have	accumulated	in
the	past.	Mind	is	nothing	but	a	memory	system.	If	you	die	to	the	past	then	you
enter	 really	 into	 the	 greatest	 adventure	 there	 is:	 you	 are	 reborn.	 That's	 true
resurrection,	and	 it	happens	 through	meditation.	Both	 things	happens:	dying	 to
the	 past	 happens	 and	 birth	 to	 the	 present.	 And	 the	 present	 continues	 into	 the
future.	It	contains	the	whole	future.
The	 past	 is	 a	 barrier.	Unless	 one	 is	 courageous	 enough	 to	 die	 to	 the	 past	 one
cannot	 be	 rewarded	 by	 true	 life.	 And	 this	 death	 has	 to	 happen	 each	moment,
because	each	moment	we	are	creating	the	past.	It	is	not	that	once	you	have	died
to	the	past	the	whole	thing	is	finished.	After	twenty-four	hours	again	twenty-four
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
hours	 of	 the	 past	 will	 be	 with	 you.	 You	 have	 to	 die	 each	 moment	 --	 why
accumulate	 it?	Each	moment,	 be	 finished	with	 it,	 so	you	 are	 always	 fresh	 and
new	and	in	tune	with	existence.	You	are	never	lagging	behind.
And	when	one	is	not	lagging	behind	there	is	great	celebration.	You	are	in	a	dance
with	 existence,	 utterly	 attuned,	 a	 kind	 of	 at-onement.	 And	 that	 makes	 life	 a
festival,	a	love,	a	laughter,	a	song,	a	celebration!
My	sannyas	 is	not	 for	 the	 sad	and	 the	dead.	 It	 is	 for	 those	who	 love	 life,	who
love	laughter,	who	love.	It	is	for	those	who	want	to	be	fresh,	young,	alive	to	the
maximum.
It	 is	for	 those	who	are	ready	to	risk	and	to	go	on	a	pilgrimage	to	the	unknown
and	to	the	unknowable.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101185
ShortTitle:	POND18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Love	can	have	 three	possibilities:	 the	first	 is	animal,	 the	second	 is	human,	and
the	third	is	divine.
Ordinarily	people	know	only	the	first.	It	is	biological	attraction.	It	is	something
hormonal,	chemical,	unconscious.	You	are	not	 the	master	of	 it.	You	are	simply
driven	by	 instinctive	energies.	Those	 instincts	 are	part	of	 the	body,	not	part	of
you.
Nature	has	 its	own	ways	 to	propagate	 the	species.	 It	 forces	every	 individual	 to
reproduce.	That's	the	only	way,	otherwise	everybody	will	disappear;	hence	it	has
made	it	almost	compulsory.	It	is	so	compulsive	that	even	if	one	decides	not	to	go
into	it,	one	is	driven,	in	spite	of	oneself.	And	religions	have	been	fighting	against
this	 energy	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 Their	 fight	 has	 not	 helped.	 In	 fact	 it	 has
distorted	the	natural	energies,	it	has	created	a	very	perverted	humanity.
The	way	to	get	beyond	them	is	not	through	fighting,	but	through	understanding,
through	 awareness,	 through	 meditation.	 Fighting	 means	 repression	 and
whatsoever	 is	 repressed	will	come	up	again	and	again.	 It	 is	not	going	 to	 leave
you.	In	fact	the	more	you	repress	it,	the	more	it	strives	to	take	possession	of	you.
And	the	effort	to	fight	and	repress	creates	a	dichotomy	in	you.	You	become	dual,
divided,	schizophrenic.	It	is	because	of	the	so-called	religions	that	the	whole	of
humanity	is	living	a	split	life.
Fighting	 with	 oneself	 is	 an	 insane	 way	 of	 living.	 Your	 energies	 are	 simply
dissipated.	 They	 are	 not	 used	 creatively.	 It	 is	 like	making	 both	 of	 your	 hands
fight	with	 each	 other;	what	 can	 be	 the	 outcome?	Do	 you	 think	 either	 of	 your
hands	 is	going	 to	win?	Both	belong	 to	you.	You	can	pretend	 that	 the	 right	has
won,	but	any	moment	you	can	also	pretend	that	the	left	has	won.	It	is	up	to	you.
It	 is	 just	 your	 decision.	 It	 is	 not	 going	 to	 give	 you	 any	 victory.	 It	 is	 bound	 to
result	in	ultimate	failure	and	frustration.
Love	 has	 to	 be	 taken	 out	 of	 the	 bondage	 of	 biology,	 but	 fighting	 itself,	 is
biological,	 struggle	 is	 biological,	 and	 you	 cannot	 transcend	 biology	 through
biology.	It	is	like	wiping	mud	with	more	mud.	It	is	sheer	stupidity.
You	have	 to	bring	some	new	element	 into	 the	world	of	biology,	and	 that	 I	call
meditation,	a	ray	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
meditation,	a	ray	of	watchfulness.	That	does	not	belong	to	biology	at	all,	because
animals	 are	 not	 aware,	 trees	 are	 not	 aware.	They	 live	 in	 one-hundred-per	 cent
unconsciousness.
The	 moment	 you	 start	 becoming	 conscious	 of	 all	 your	 biological	 forces,
something	new	has	already	happened,	something	non-biological	has	penetrated,
and	that	is	going	to	become	the	source	of	transformation.
Make	your	lust	an	object	of	observation;	 then	it	changes	into	human	love.	You
have	gone	beyond	the	animal.	The	human	is	born.	Out	of	one	hundred	so-called
human	beings	there	is	only	rarely	one	human	being	ninety-nine	per	cent	are	only
apparently	human,	but	not	really.	They	look	like	human	beings,	they	behave	like
animals.	Their	love	is	animal,	their	hate	is	animal,	their	violence	is	animal	their
anger	is	animal,	their	jealousy	is	animal,	 their	possessiveness	is	animal	--	all	 is
animal.
It	is	one	of	the	great	transformations	to	become	human.	One	is	not	born	human;
one	is	born	an	animal,	but	with	the	potential	of	being	human.	And	that	potential
starts	 functioning	 only	 when	 you	 bring	 awareness	 in.	 Immediately	 awareness
functions	like	a	catalytic	agent.	Suddenly	you	are	beyond	your	biology.
If	 you	 can	 watch,	 you	 are	 no	 more	 it	 --	 the	 watcher	 is	 never	 the	 watched	 --
already	you	have	surpassed,	 transcended,	you	are	something	above,	you	are	an
onlooker,	a	seer.
Human	love	is	non-possessive,	non-jealous,	non	--	biological.	It	has	nothing	to
do	with	reproduction.	It	is	a	play,	a	sharing,	a	fun,	a	way	of	communicating.	But
still	 there	 is	 one	 thing	 in	 it	 which	 has	 to	 be	 dropped	 the	 boundaries.	 Even	 in
human	 love	 the	 lovers	 are	 not	 one	 --	 they	 are	 separate.	 Everything	 of	 the
biological	has	disappeared	except	one	thing	which	is	not	biological	and	therefore
cannot	disappear	with	the	biology	--
that	is	the	ego.
Animals	are	not	egoistic,	neither	are	trees	egoistic.	They	don't	have	the	feeling	of
I.	It	is	a	human	phenomenon.	The	more	you	become	aware	of	your	humanity,	the
more	the	ego	is	strengthened;	hence	the	people	of	great	sensitivity	will	always	be
more	egoistic.	The	poets,	the	painters,	the	dancers	--	they	will	be	more	egoistic
than	other	people,	for	the	simple	reason	that	ego	is	a	human	phenomenon.	Now
their	whole	energy	is	released	from	biology	and	it	is	exploited	by	the	ego.
It	 is	 better	 than	biology,	but	 it	 cannot	be	 the	ultimate	goal,	 because	 if	 you	are
surrounded	 by	 a	 boundary	 you	 are	 limited	 and	 every	 limitation	 brings	misery.
One	 needs	 to	 be	 unlimited,	 unbounded	 only	 then	 the	 imprisoned	 splendour	 is
released.	Then	you	are	as	vast	as	the	universe.	And	this	can	happen	through	love
very	easily.
Now	the	second	step	 is	 to	bring	your	awareness	 to	 the	ego;	 the	same	way	you
brought	your	awareness	to	your	unconscious	instincts	and	became	free	of	them,
bring	your	awareness	to	the	ego.	Now	it	has	to	be	more	subtle,	because	the	ego	is
more	 invisible,	more	cunning,	more	clever.	 If	you	watch	 it	at	one	point,	 it	will
appear	at	another	point.	If	you	are	sitting	at	the	front	door	it	will	come	from	the
back	door.	 If	you	are	watching	both	doors	 it	will	 come	 from	 the	window	or	 it
may	 just	 remove	a	 tile	 from	 the	 roof	and	 jump	from	 there!	 (laughter)	 Just	 like
Santa	Claus	 (laughter)	 coming	 from	 the	chimney.	 It	will	 find	ways	and	means
how	to	come	back	again	and	again.
One	 has	 to	 be	 totally	 aware,	 not	 concentrated,	 not	 excluding	 anything.
Awareness	has	to	be	inclusive.
The	first	awareness	was	a	kind	of	concentration:	you	had	to	be	focussed	on	your
biology	because	it	is	a	determinate	phenomenon,	it	is	there	like	an	object	and	it
cannot	trick	you,	because	it	is	just	part	of	chemistry.	If	you	watch	it	in	a	focussed
way	 it	will	 remain	 there.	Not	 so	with	 the	 ego:	 the	 ego	 is	 very	 elusive.	 If	 you
watch	it	here	it	will	disappear	from	there	and	you	will	feel	very	good	and	in	that
feeling	itself	it	has	come	back.	You	start	patting	your	own	back,	you	say	'Now	it
is	no	more.	I	have	become	egoless,'	and	it	has	come.	It	has	already	grabbed	your
neck.
So	one	 has	 to	 be	 inclusive	 of	 all	 dimensions.	One	 has	 to	 be	 just	 aware,	 open,
watchful,	 simply	watchful,	 not	 in	 a	 concentrated	way	but	 in	 a	 relaxed	way,	 so
nothing	 remains	 hidden.	 Everything	 is	 in	 a	 way	 within	 the	 range	 of	 your
awareness.	Then	 the	 ego	 is	 transcended.	And	 that	 very	moment	 divine	 love	 is
born.	And	divine	love	is	the	ultimate	experience.
You	can	call	it	god,	you	can	call	it	nirvana,	you	can	call	it	enlightenment	--	these
are	just	words	to	indicate	something	which	is	wordless;	but	'love'	seems	to	be	the
most	beautiful	word.	It	has	some	poetry	in	it,	some	dance	in	it,	some	ecstasy	in
it.
Man	living	as	an	ego	lives	like	an	island,	separate	from	the	whole;	and	that	is	his
anxiety,	 anguish,	 because	 he	 feels	 always	 lonely,	 feels	 always	 afraid,	 always
worried	 about	 death	 and	 what	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 tomorrow,	 worried	 about
safety,	security,	worried	about	a	thousand	and	one	things.	But	the	basic	problem
is	created	by	ourselves.	The	moment	we	 think	ourselves	separate	we	create	all
these	problems.	The	separation	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	a	falsity.	Living	as	an	ego	is	living	in	a	dream-world,	it	is	not	true.
We	 cannot	 be	 separate	 from	 the	 whole.	 Our	 life	 is	 part	 of	 the	 whole.	 Each
moment	we	breathe	the	whole	in	and	breathe	the	whole	out.	The	whole	circulates
in	our	blood.	We	are	as	rooted	in	the	whole	as	trees	are	rooted	in	the	earth.	Of
course	our	roots	are	 invisible,	but	 just	don't	breathe	for	a	few	minutes	and	you
are	 gone.	 That	 means	 that	 breathing	 was	 something	 like	 a	 root	 which	 was
connecting	you	with	the	whole	continuously.
We	are	one	with	the	whole.	To	know	it	is	to	be	blissful.	To	experience	it	is	to	go
beyond	all	anguish.	But	it	has	to	be	experienced,	not	believed.	Belief	won't	help.
If	you	are	thirsty	you	can	believe	that	you	are	drinking	water,	but	if	you	are	not
really	drinking	water	the	thirst	is	going	to	grow	more	and	more.	It	will	spread	all
over	your	body.	It	will	kill	you.	Belief	is	not	going	to	help	and	all	the	religions
have	been	teaching	people	to	believe.
The	 real	 thing	 is	 to	 experience;	 hence	 my	 emphasis	 is	 on	 experience,	 not	 on
belief.	 Don't	 believe	 what	 I	 say.	 Try	 to	 experience	 it.	 And	 unless	 you	 have
experienced,	 resist	 the	 temptation	 to	 believe;	 the	 temptation	 is	 always	 there
because	 belief	 is	 cheap.	 The	 mind	 says	 'What	 is	 the	 point	 of	 investigating,
enquiring,	 exploring?	Why	bother?	 Just	 believe!	Buddha	 knows,	 Jesus	 knows,
Lao	Tzu	knows,	Zarathustra	knows,	so	what	is	the	point?	If	they	are	all	saying
that	it	is	so,	it	must	be	so.'	But	if	Zarathustra	drinks,	his	thirst	is	quenched,	not
yours.	If	Zarathustra	knows,	he	knows,	not	you.
My	sannyasins	are	not	to	be	believers	but	experimenters.	A	tremendous	scientific
enquiry	into	the	ultimate	reality	--	 that's	what	initiation	into	sannyas	is.	It	 is	an
adventure.	 Belief	 is	 death,	 it	 is	 a	 full	 point;	 you	 simply	 take	 it	 for	 granted.
Somebody	says,	Somebody	authoritative	--	the	Bible,	the	Koran,	the	Gita	--
and	you	 simply	believe	 the	authority.	To	believe	 in	any	authority	 is	 to	destroy
your	own	intelligence.	All	authorities	are	destructive	of	intelligence.
I	 am	 not	 an	 authority	 in	 that	 sense.	 Whatsoever	 I	 am	 saying	 I	 am	 saying
according	to	my	experience	--
that	way	I	am	authoritative,	but	that	authority	does	not	mean	that	anybody	has	to
believe	 in	 it.	 That	 simply	 means:	 take	 it	 as	 a	 hypothesis	 and	 then	 enquire
whether	it	is	true	or	not.
Being	here	with	me	simply	means	exploring.	And	if	you	start	exploring	you	will
find.	There	is	no	need	to	believe,	because	it	 is	so.	 'Es	dhammo	sanantano'	says
the	Buddha	--	this	is	the	truth,	the	ultimate	truth.	so	if	it	is	the	ultimate	truth	there
is	no	need	to	believe;	you	can	experience	it.
Belief	 is	 insisted	 upon	 only	 by	 people	 who	 themselves	 don't	 believe,	 who
themselves	don't	know.	They	are	afraid	of	enquiry,	they	are	afraid	of	doubt,	they
are	afraid	of	questions.	They	repress	all	questioning.
They	condemn	all	doubt.	I	respect.
So	I	have	to	be	just	a	hypothesis	for	you.	I	will	give	you	hypotheses;	then	you
have	to	go	into	enquiry.
And	I	know	that	you	will	find	the	truth,	because	I	have	found	the	truth	through
the	same	enquiry;	so	there	is	no	reason	why	you	are	not	going	to	find	it.	I	trust
everybody's	intelligence	and	everybody's	intrinsic	potential.
And	the	day	you	discover	that	you	are	one	with	the	whole,	you	have	come	home.
For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 feel	 blessed,	 so	much	 so	 that	 you	 can	 bless	 the	 whole
universe.
Ritam	means	the	law,	the	ultimate	law.
One	can	live	in	two	ways:	either	according	to	the	universal	law	of	life	or	against
it.	 That	 much	 freedom	 is	 a	 prerogative	 of	 human	 beings.	 Going	 astray	 is
available	only	to	human	beings.	No	dog	can	go	astray.
Have	you	 ever	 seen	 a	 dog	who	 is	 a	 sinner	 or	 a	 dog	who	 is	 a	 saint;	 (laughter)
Dogs	are	just	dogs,	neither	sinners	nor	saints.	Have	you	see	a	dog	who	is	less	of
a	dog	or	a	dog	who	is	more	of	a	dog?	They	are	 just	doggie,	all	 the	same	way!
(much	laughter)	But	as	far	as	man	is	concerned,	you	can	say	that	this	man	is	not
man	 enough	 --	 a	 little	 less	 than	 he	 should	 be	 or	 a	 little	 more	 than	 one	 had
expected.	 You	 see	 lesser	men,	 you	 see	 greater	men,	 you	 see	 sinners,	 you	 see
saints.	What	is	the	distinction?	What	is	the	criterion?	What	makes	a	sinner	and
what	makes	a	real	saint?
And	when	I	use	the	word	'saint'	I	am	not	using	it	in	the	Christian	way,	because
the	 Christian	 way	 is	 the	 most	 stupid	 way	 of	 defining	 sainthood.	 The	 church
declares	 that	 somebody	 is	a	saint,	 it	certifies.	The	Christian	word	 'saint'	comes
from	sanctum,	sanctified	by	the	church,	certified	by	the	church.	The	sanction	has
been	 given	 by	 the	 pope	 that	 this	man	 is	 a	 saint.	 So	 sometimes	 they	withdraw
their	sanctions.	Even	after	hundreds	of	years	--	a	man	may	have	been;	for	three
hundred	years	and	for	three	hundred	years	he	has	been	a	saint,	worshipped,	and
then	 they	withdraw	sainthood.	They	find	something.	They	reopen	 the	case	and
they	withdraw	it.	And	sometimes	a	man	was	burned	three	hun-dred	years	before
as	a	sinner	and	aFter	three	hundred	years	or	four	hundred	years,	they	decide	that
it	was	wrong.	The	burning	was	done	by	one	pope,	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
then	--	the	same	church	and	the	same	authority	--	another	pope	declares	him	to
be	a	saint,	and	he	becomes	a	saint.	This	is	the	most	stupid	way.
The	 true	meaning	 of	 the	word	 'saint'	 comes	 from	 the	 Sanskrit	word	 'sant',	 not
from	the	English	word
'sanctum'.	 The	 Sanskrit	 word	 'sant'	 means	 one	who	 has	 known	 the	 truth.	 'Sat'
means	 truth,	 and	 'sant'	 means	 one	 who	 has	 realised	 it.	 From	 'sant'	 comes	 the
English	 word	 'saint'.	 It	 is	 exactly	 the	 same	 word,	 with	 just	 a	 little	 change	 in
pronunciation:	one	who	has	known	the	truth,	one	who	has	lived	according	to	the
truth,	one	who	has	followed	the	law	of	existence,	one	who	has	not	gone	astray.
But	man	 is	 free	 to	choose.	One	can	choose	 to	go	astray	 ...	and	 the	ego	always
wants	to	do	that,	because	the	ego	feels	good	only	when	you	go	astray.	Then	you
are	 on	 your	 own.	When	 you	 are	 following	 the	 universal	 law	you	 are	 no	more
there;	the	law	is	there.	When	the	dewdrop	drops	into	the	ocean,	where	is	it?
In	a	way	it	is	no	more,	in	a	way	it	has	become	the	ocean.	But	in	every	way	the
old	ego	is	no	more	in	existence,	the	old	boundary	is	no	more	in	existence.
Initiation	 into	 sannyas	 means	 consciously,	 deliberately	 deciding	 to	 follow	 the
law	of	existence.	And	how	should	one	know	what	the	law	of	existence	is?	--	it	is
not	 written	 in	 the	 books.	 But	 there	 is	 a	 natural	 criterion	 given	 to	 everybody;
whatsoever	makes	you	blissful	 is	an	indication	that	you	are	close	to	the	law	of
existence,	whatsoever	makes	you	miserable	 is	an	 indication	 that	you	are	going
away	from	the	law	of	existence.	When	you	are	totally	blissful	you	are	one	with
the	law	and	when	you	are	totally	miserable	you	are	against	the	law.
Bliss	 is	 the	 criterion.	 And	 this	 small	 criterion	 is	 enough.	 One	 should	 go	 on
judging;	 whatsoever	 makes	 you	 blissful	 is	 the	 right	 thing	 to	 do,	 to	 be,	 and
whatsoever	makes	you	miserable	is	the	wrong	thing	--	it	has	not	to	be	done.
I	don't	give	you	any	commandments	--	do	this	or	don't	do	this.	I	simply	tell	you
about	the	criterion	so	you	can	judge	for	yourself.
If	jealousy	makes	you	blissful	(laughter)	then	follow	it	 totally!	Then	that	is	the
divine	 law!	 But	 I	 have	 never	 heard	 of	 anybody	 becoming	 blissful	 through
jealousy,	 or	 through	 anger,	 or	 through	 violence,	 or	 through	 possessiveness,	 or
through	 greed.	 These	 things	 have	 been	making	 people	 live	 in	 hell	 --	 but	 they
cling	to	them.	And	by	their	clinging	they	make	the	hell	bigger.
The	moment	you	feel	misery	entering	in	you,	be	alert!	you	have	taken	the	wrong
step,	you	have	fallen	out	of	life's	law,	you	are	no	more	in	tune	with	it.
Ritam	also	means	rhythm.	You	have	fallen	out	of	rhythm,	you	have	fallen	out	of
harmony.	This	 is	 how	 I	 define	 heaven	 and	hell;	 hell	 is	 totally	 out	 of	 harmony
with	existence	and	heaven	is	totally	in	harmony	with	existence.	And	everybody
has	enough	intelligence	to	know	whether	he	is	miserable	or	blissful.
Go	on	choosing	the	blissful,	go	on	dropping	the	miserable,	and	you	will	be	on
the	right	track	towards	the	ultimate.	Then	one	can	be	absolutely	certain	that	he
has	found	true	religion.
Ego	is	 the	only	undivine	thing.	Ego	is	 the	only	evil	 in	 the	world.	And	it	 is	not
really	an	entity;	it	is	just	our	fantasy,	it	is	just	imagination.	It	does	not	exist,	it	is
only	a	nightmare;	but	we	go	on	nourishing	it	and	watering	it	and	then	it	goes	on
growing	more	and	more	thorns.	No	flower	ever	comes	through	it.	Ego	has	never
brought	 a	 single	 flower	 into	 the	 world.	 It	 only	 brings	 thorns.	 The	 more	 you
nourish	 it,	 the	 bigger	 the	 thorns.	They	hurt	 you,	 they	hurt	 others.	Their	whole
function	is	to	hurt.	It	is	not	only	that	they	hurt	others.
Before	they	can	hurt	others	they	hurt	you	because	they	grow	within	you.
First	 they	penetrate	your	 being,	 they	 create	wounds	 in	 you,	 and	 then	you	 start
creating	wounds	in	others	out	of	revenge.
The	 miserable	 person	 creates	 misery	 all	 around.	 He	 wants	 everybody	 to	 be
miserable.	That's	the	only	thing	that	gives	him	a	little	bit	of	happiness.	If	he	can
see	everybody	miserable,	more	miserable	than	he	is	then	certainly,	according	to
the	law	of	relativity,	according	to	Albert	Einstein,	he	feels	good	and	happy	and
blissful.
The	ego	never	wants	anybody	to	be	blissful	because	that	hurts	very	much.	The
miserable	person	creates	misery,	the	blissful	person	create;	bliss.	we	create	only
ourselves,	because	we	can	share	only	ourselves.	for	a	sannyasin,	the	only	thing
to	be	dropped,	the	only	thing	to	be	renounced,	is	the	eJo.	And	it	is	nothing;	just	a
soap	bubble,	a	little	hot	air.	A	pinprick	is	enough,	and	it	is	finished.	One	just	has
to	decide	to	get	rid	of	it.
And	 if	 you	 can	 see	 what	 it	 has	 done	 to	 you	 and	 to	 others,	 you	 are	 bound	 to
decide	 to	get	 rid	of	 it,	because	 it	has	never	given	anybody	any	bliss,	 it	 is	pure
poison.	And	when	 there	 is	 no	 ego	 inside	 you	 a	 tremendous	 emptiness,	 a	 great
emptiness	 comes	 in,	 spaciousness,	 nothingness.	 There	 is	 nobody	 inside,	 just	 a
pure	 awareness,	which	 is	 not	 somebody,	which	has	no	 I	 as	 a	 centre	 to	 it.	 It	 is
meeting	and	merging	with	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
whole.	That's	the	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas;	to	merge	with	the	whole,	to	become
one	with	the	whole.
There	are	two	kings	of	purity,	two	kinds	of	virtue,	two	kinds	of	morality.	One	is
the	 cultivated	 kind,	 from	 the	 outside	 --	 you	 have	 to	 practise	 it.	 It	 is	 a
conditioning.	Deep	 down	 you	 remain	 the	 same	 but	 you	 cover	 yourself	with	 a
beautiful	 facade.	 It	 is	 a	 superficial	 thing	 that	 can	be	 scratched	very	 easily	 and
your	reality	will	come	rushing	towards	the	surface.
You	were	smiling	and	you	were	all	grace	and	somebody	insults	you;	suddenly	all
grace	is	gone	and	all	smiling	is	gone	and	the	animal	inside	you	takes	possession.
And	 you	 start	 doing	 things	which	 you	would	 not	 have	 ever	 thought	 you	were
capable	of.	And	later	on	you	will	repent	and	you	will	say	'How	did	it	happen?	--
I	don't	know.'
This	 cultivated	 kind	 of	 virtue,	 purity,	 morality	 has	 created	 a	 division	 in	 man,
between	 the	circumference	and	 the	centre;	and	 this	division	 is	one	of	 the	most
dangerous	situations,	because	no	man	can	be	at	ease.
It	creates	tensions.	You	cannot	be	yourself	because	you	are	two	--	how	can	you
be	 yourself?	 If	 you	 decide	 to	 follow	 the	 circumference,	 the	 centre	 becomes
neglected,	 ignored,	 rejected;	and	 it	 takes	 revenge.	 If	you	 follow	 the	centre,	 the
circumference	 is	 angry,	 as	 if	 you	have	been	programmed	by	 two	diametrically
opposite	programmes.
One	you	have	brought	from	nature	and	one	has	been	put	on	you	by	the	society,
so	you	are	always	in	a	state	of	conflict	and	inner	turmoil.	This	is	hell.
The	 second	 kind	 of	 purity,	 virtue	 and	 morality	 is	 not	 the	 cultivated	 one.	 I
emphasise	the	second	kind.	It	comes	through	meditation,	not	through	cultivation.
You	 simply	 have	 to	 become	 aware	 of	 your	 innermost	 core,	 you	 have	 to	 relax
towards	your	centre.	You	have	to	settle	at	the	centre	and	bring	awareness	there.
You	 have	 to	 be	 fully	 alert	 at	 the	 centre,	 and	 that	 very	 alertness	 at	 the	 centre
transforms	the	centre.	Awareness	is	the	greatest	transforming	agent	in	the	world;
nothing	has	ever	surpassed	it.
It	is	just	like	light;	you	bring	the	light	in	the	room	and	all	the	darkness	is	gone.
When	you	become	aware	at	the	centre	your	whole	being	is	full	of	light,	and	out
of	that	light	your	circumference	acts.	Then	there	is	a	unity,	no	conflict;	and	that
unity	is	true	sanity,	true	health,	true	wholeness.	And	that	wholeness	brings	great
ecstasy,	great	benediction.
So	 never	 follow	 the	 circumference	 because	 the	 centre	 is	 very	 powerful.	 You
cannot	 drag	 the	 centre	 behind	 the	 circumference,	 but	 if	 your	 centre	 is
transformed	the	circumference	follows	it	naturally,	like	a	shadow.	Then	there	is
no	problem	at	all.
All	 the	 religions	have	been	 teaching	 the	 first	kind	of	morality	 --	 that's	where	 I
differ.	 I	 teach	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 virtue	 which	 arises	 as	 a	 natural
consequence	of	centering,	grounding,	awareness.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Ten	days	more.
--	Then	come	back	again.	Ten	days	are	good	for	ten	commandments,	but	not	for
my	kind	of...	(The	rest	of	the	sentence	is	lost	in	laughter.)	Good!
Devagyan	means	divine	knowing.
Animals	 don't	 know.	 Man	 knows	 but	 his	 knowing	 is	 only	 information,
accumulation	of	facts,	accumulation	of	theories,	ideologies,	philosophies	--	it	is
all	 borrowed.	 And	 the	 borrowed	 always	 becomes	 a	 burden.	 It	 never	 brings
freedom.
By	'divine	knowing'	I	mean	you	have	to	know	your	own.	You	are	not	to	become
knowledgeable.
Knowledgeability	is	a	hindrance	for	known;	because	it	gives	you	a	false	sense	of
knowing.	It	is	a	false	coin.
And	one	can	believe	in	it;	then	one	never	enquires	about	the	real	coin.
Scholars	are	farther	away	from	truth	than	anybody	else.	Even	sinners	are	not	so
far	 away.	 I	 have	 seen	 both	 great	 sinners	 and	 great	 scholars.	 The	 sinners	 are
almost	 always	more	 innocent	 than	 the	 scholars.	They	 are	 simple	 people.	They
are	not	very	far	away	from	the	world	of	truth.	But	the	scholar	is	very	far	away.
He	is	too	much	in	his	head.	He	thinks	he	knows	and	he	knows	nothing.
Sannyas	 begins	 in	 dropping	 the	 idea	 of	 knowledge.	 Sannyas	 begins	 in
remembering	what	Socrates	says:
'I	know	only	one	thing,	that	I	know	nothing'	--	that	is	the	beginning	of	sannyas.
Because	 when	 you	 know	 nothing	 then	 immediately	 a	 tremendous	 desire	 and
longing	arise	in	you	to	know.	And	if	you	have	dropped	all	borrowed	knowledge,
then	the	only	dimension	left	open	is	to	enter	into	your	own	inner	world,	into	your
own	interiority,	into	your	own	consciousness.
And	as	you	go	deeper	in	it,	your	knowing	becomes	more	and	more	clear.	When
you	have	reached	to	the	very	core	of	your	being,	suddenly	light	explodes.	Hence
the	word	'enlightenment';	enlightenment	is	true	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
knowing,	is	divine	knowing.	It	liberates!
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101195
ShortTitle:	POND19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
A	life	without	love	is	life	in	name	only,	in	form	only;	the	content	is	missing.	The
container	is	there	but	utterly	empty;	and	that	emptiness	creates	darkness	in	life.	It
is	absence	of	love	that	makes	life	a	dark	night.
Then	one	can	make	a	thousand	and	one	efforts	to	have	some	meaning,	but	one	is
trying	to	do	the	impossible.
Whatsoever	one	does	is	going	to	fail.	It	is	doomed	from	the	very	beginning.	And
one	cannot	 fight	with	darkness	either,	because	darkness	has	no	existence	of	 its
own.	If	you	fight	you	will	be	defeated.	If	you	don't	fight	you	are	in	darkness.
The	way	out	of	darkness	is	not	through	fighting,	but	through	bringing	light.	The
moment	you	bring	light	in,	darkness	is	sound	no	more.	Exactly	the	same	happens
with	 loves	 love	 is	 the	 light	 of	 the	 inner	world	 --	 it	makes	 your	 life	 luminous,
resplendent,	 shining.	And	 suddenly	 the	 emptiness	 is	 there	no	more.	There	 is	 a
kind	of	fullness,	overfullness.	One	is	so	full	of	energy,	of	delight,	of	dance,	that
one	 can	 share	 it.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 hoard	 it.	 It	 is	 overflowing.	 Even	 if	 one
wants	to	be	miserly	about	it,	one	cannot	be.	It	has	to	be	shared	because	it	grows
as	you	share.	If	you	try	to	hoard	it	you	cripple	it,	you	destroy	it.
Love	 is	 going	 to	 be	 god	 for	 the	 future	 humanity.	 The	 word	 'god'	 is	 going	 to
disappear.	It	has	already	disappeared	from	the	really	intelligent	people's	lives.	It
is	 only	 the	 ignorant,	 retarded,	non-contemporaries,	who	are	 lagging	 far	behind
the	 times,	 who	 go	 on	 talking,	 about	 god;	 otherwise	 now	 it	 is	 absolutely
irrelevant.
Jesus	 says	 god	 is	 love.	 Now	 that	 has	 to	 be	 changed,	 I	 say	 love	 is	 god.	 The
emphasis	has	to	be	on	love.	In	Jesus'	time	the	emphasis	was	on	god,	and	it	is	a
great	difference	--	a	difference	that	makes	a	difference	--
because	once	love	becomes	the	central	focus	of	life,	there	cannot	be	Christianity,
Hinduism,	Mohammedanism.	All	these	stupidities	will	disappear.	They	can	exist
only	as	shadows	of	the	idea	of	god.
Love	is	an	experience.	You	cannot	make	a	statue	out	of	it.	Love	has	to	be	lived.
You	cannot	worship	it.
Love	 is	 the	 act	 of	 loving.	 You	 cannot	 philosophise	 about	 it.	 Only	 fools	 will
philosophise	about	it.	It	is	a	reality	to	be	tasted,	to	be	drunk.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 understand	 that	 by	 becoming	 sannyasins	 they	 are
dropping	 the	 past	 and	 entering	 into	 the	 real	 contemporariness.	 And	 the
contemporariness	contains	the	whole	future.
Just	the	opposite	has	been	the	way	in	the	past:	the	present	has	always	contained
the	past.	And	when	I	talk	about	the	present,	my	present	contains	not	the	past	but
the	future.	It	is	a	radical	change,	it	is	a	revolution.	And	the	present	moment	can
contain	the	future	only	if	it	is	empty	of	the	past.
God	belongs	to	the	past.	Love	belongs	to	the	future.	And	we	are	passing	through
a	transitory	phase	--	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	 very	 significant.	 We	 are	 fortunate	 to	 live	 in	 this	 moment,	 at	 this	 phase	 of
history.	 We	 are	 on	 the	 crossroads.	 Just	 the	 understanding	 that	 we	 are	 on	 the
crossroads,	 that	every	act	of	ours	 is	going	to	be	decisive	for	 the	whole	coming
future,	makes	one	feel	significant.	A	great	joy	arises	out	of	that	understanding.
So	my	religion	is	not	of	the	past	but	of	the	future.	And	the	future	has	not	to	be
contemplated.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 found	 through	 the	 present,	 through	 living	 now	 anc
here.	And	there	is	no	better	way	to	be	herenow	than	love.
Only	for	those	few	moments	when	you	are	in	love	are	you	in	the	present.	That's
the	beauty	of	love,	that's	its	meditativeness,	its	ecstasy.
Life	 can	 either	 be	 a	 drag	 or	 a	 dance	 (laughter)	 ...	 and	 it	 all	 depends	 on	 you!
People	 have	 chosen	 a	 non-dancing	 style	 of	 life.	 They	 have	 chosen	 a	 non-
sensitive	way	of	life.	Their	approach	is	anti-poetic,	anti-aesthetic;	and	the	reason
is	that	they	are	brought	up	to	learn	cleverness,	which	is	simply	a	beautiful	name
for	cunningness.	it	is	not	intelligence.	It	is	just	pseudo	intelligence.
We	 are	 brought	 up	 to	 be	 calculating	 arithmetic	 is	 our	whole	 life,	 business	 our
very	approach.
In	 a	 small	 school	 the	 teacher	 asked	 the	 children	 'Who	 is	 the	 greatest	 man	 of
human	 history?'	 An	 American	 child	 said	 'Abraham	 Lincoln,'	 an	 Indian	 said
'Mahatma	Gandhi,'	 a	Mohammedan	 said	 'Hazrat	Mohammed.'	 But	 the	 teacher
was	not	satisfied.	Then	a	little	Jewish	boy	said	'Jesus	Christ.'	And	she	said
'You	are	right,	but	you	are	a	Jew,	so	why	do	you	say	Jesus	Christ?'
He	 said	 'In	 the	 deepest	 core	 of	my	 being	 I	 know	 it	 is	Moses,	 but	 business	 is
business!'	 (laughter)	 But	 this	 is	 how	 we	 are	 all	 brought	 up.	 And	 when	 life
becomes	business	it	cannot	be	a	dance,	it	cannot	be	a	flowering.	You	can	go	on
counting	currency	notes	but	that	is	not	going	to	give	you	any	experience	of	the
beauty	that	surrounds	us,	of	the	truth	of	which	we	are	an	intrinsic	part.	Currency
notes	 cannot	give	you	any	 idea	of	 the	ultimate	 joy,	 and	 the	ultimate	 joy	 is	 the
very	 stuff	 existence	 is	made	 of.	 To	 live	 life	with	 intensity,	with	 passion,	with
poetry,	we	have	to	learn	a	totally	different	approach.	We	have	to	become	a	little
less	mathematical	and	a	 little	more	musical,	a	 little	 less	calculating	and	a	 little
more	risking,	a	little	more	concerned	about	adventure,	and	a	little	less	concerned
about	safety,	security	--	then	life	becomes	a	dance.
And	then	only	is	there	a	possibility	of	love.	Love	and	dance	are	two	sides	of	the
same	coin.	If	you	love,	your	life	is	a	dance.	If	your	life	 is	a	dance,	 there	is	 the
fragrance	of	love.	They	are	inseparable.
Love	 is	beautiful	only	when	 there	 is	no	attachment	 in	 it,	 but	unfortunately	we
have	been	told	for	thousands	of	years	that	love	means	attachment.	That	is	one	of
the	greatest	calamities	that	has	happened	to	humanity.
Love	 does	 not	 mean	 attachment.	 It	 means	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 attachment,
because	attachment	creates	very	unloving	space.	Attachment	means	you	will	be
possessive	 and	 from	 the	 other	 side	 you	 will	 be	 possessed.	 And	 to	 possess
somebody	is	ugly.	To	possess	means	tc	reduce	the	other	person	into	a	thing,	into
a	commodity.	You	can	possess	a	car,	you	can	possess	a	house,	you	can	possess	a
painting	but	you	cannot	possess	a	woman	or	a	man.	You	cannot	possess	a	child.
That	 is	utterly	destructive,	 inhuman.	A	child	 is	not	 furniture,	a	woman	is	not	a
thing,	a	man	is	not	a	commodity.	These	are	not	economic	objects.	They	are	not
objects	at	all.	They	are	subjects,	subjectivities.
The	moment	you	possess	somebody	you	are	exploiting	and	love	cannot	exploit.
You	are	oppressing	--
and	 love	 cannot	 be	 oppressive.	 The	 moment	 you	 possess	 somebody	 you	 are
dominating	 --	 and	 love	 cannot	 dominate.	You	 are	 playing	 an	 ego	 number	 and
love	is	not	an	ego	trip.	It	is	egolessness.
And	 the	 moment	 you	 possess	 you	 are	 continuously	 afraid,	 anxious,	 worried,
shaky,	 trembling	 deep	 down.	 There	 is	 always	 fear.	 It	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 there,
because	 to	 possess	 somebody	means	 you	 are	 creating	 a	 bondage	 for	 the	 other
person,	and	nobody	likes	bondage;	everybody	resists	it.	Everybody	wants	to	get
out	of	 the	prison;	hence	 the	fear.	The	more	you	possess,	 the	more	you	become
afraid	that	the	other	will	try	to	escape.	And	this	is	a	vicious	circle:	when	you	feel
that	 the	 other	 is	 trying	 to	 escape,	 you	 create	 more	 possessiveness,	 you	 make
more	 arrangements	 so	 the	 other	 cannot	 escape.	 The	 more	 arrangements	 you
make,	the	more	you	create	the	possibility	for	the	other	to	escape.	Hence	the	so-
called	lovers	are	continuously	fighting	--	the	man	in	his	own	way,	the	woman	in
her	own	way	--	but	they	are	fighting.	The	woman	has	subtle	ways	of	fighting,	the
man	has	gross	ways	of	fighting.	The	man	may	beat	the	woman	and	the	woman
will	continuously	nag	the	man,	but	both	are	doing	the	same	to	each	other:	they
are	behaving	like	enemies,	they	are	not	friendly.
It	 is	 very	 rare	 to	 come	 across	 lovers	who	 are	 friendly,	 because	 possessiveness
does	not	allow	friendship	to	grow.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Nobody	wants	 basically	 to	 be	 dependent,	 unfree;	 hence	 anything	 that	 destroys
freedom	will	be	resisted.
And	remember,	love	and	freedom	are	synonymous,	so	a	love	that	is	not	capable
of	giving	freedom	is	not	love	at	all.	It	may	be	anything	else	--	lust,	ego,	greed,
animality	 --	 anything,	 but	 not	 love.	 This	 is	 the	 very	 criterion:	 that	 love	 gives
freedom.	The	more	you	love,	the	more	freedom	you	give.
And	when	 love	 and	 freedom	 go	 together,	 hand	 in	 hand,	 they	 create	 the	most
beautiful	space	possible.
And	it	is	only	in	that	space	that	one	comes	to	know	the	ultimate.	That	space	is
the	temple	of	the	ultimate.
That	space	is	the	most	precious	phenomenon	in	existence.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101205
ShortTitle:	POND20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	is	born	with	the	absolute	potential	to	be	blissful	but	the	society	in	which	he
is	born	is	miserable.
The	 parents,	 the	 family,	 the	 teachers,	 the	 priests,	 the	 politicians,	 the	 whole
structure	around	 the	child	 is	 living	 in	misery,	and	 it	needs	 tremendous	courage
not	to	follow	the	crowd,	otherwise	you	will	also	be	miserable.	It	needs	not	only
courage	but	a	tremendous	trust	in	one's	own	being.
The	 person	who	 follows	 others	 has	 no	 trust	 in	 himself;	 that's	why	 he	 follows
others.	The	man	who	has	trust	in	himself	learns	from	others	but	does	not	follow.
He	follows	his	own	insight.	Whatsoever	the	risk	he	never	compromises.
Courage	 is	 needed	 to	 be	oneself	 and	 immense	 loyalty	 is	 needed	 towards	one's
being.	Initiation	into	sannyas	is	not	initiation	into	a	certain	kind	of	following:	I
am	 against	 all	 following.	 Initiation	 into	 sannyas	 is	 just	 to	 prepare	 you	 to	 be
yourself,	to	prepare	you	to	be	courageous,	to	revolt	against	all	misery	and	all	the
programmes	which	make	people	miserable.
Sannyas	means	individuality.	You	have	to	imbibe	my	spirit,	partake	of	my	being
but	not	to	be	a	follower,	not	to	be	an	imitator.	That's	what	all	the	religions	have
done	 up	 to	 nows	 they	 create	 imitators,	 pseudo,	 phony,	 hypocrites.	 My	 whole
effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	be	courageous,	trusting	in	your	own	being,	trusting
your	own	voice.	I	don't	teach	you	loyalty	to	me;	I	teach	you	loyalty	towards	your
own	potential.
The	 real	master	 always	 throws	 the	 disciple	 towards	 his	 own	 inner	 depths.	He
does	not	allow	the	disciple	to	cling	to	him.	The	disciple	would	like	to	cling	the
disciple	 would	 like	 to	 be	 dependent,	 the	 disciple	 would	 like	 to	 be	 directed,
guided,	given	a	programme,	but	the	true	master	has	to	fight	the	disciple.	He	has
to	 do	 something	 which	 the	 disciple	 is	 not	 inclined	 to	 do.	 And	 that's	 the
distinction	between	a	true	master	and	a	false	master:	the	false	master	fulfils	your
expectations,	he	never	disappoints	you;	the	true	master	disappoints	you	at	each
and	 every	 step,	 he	 never	 fulfils	 your	 expectations.	 He	 really	 frustrates	 you,
because	that	is	the	only	way	to	undo	what	the	society	has	done	to	you,	that	is	the
only	way	to	bring	you	to	total	freedom.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sannyas	is	a	way	towards	absolute	freedom.
Atta	is	a	dangerous	name	--	at	least	in	German!	It	means	the	father.
The	 father	 is	 an	 invented	 institution,	 it	 is	 not	 natural.	 There	was	 a	 time	when
there	was	 no	 institution	 like	 the	 father	 and	 there	will	 come	 a	 time	 --	 and	 it	 is
coming	very	fast	(laughter)	--	when	the	father	is	going	to	disappear.	The	father
came	 into	existence	with	private	property,	 it	 symbolises	private	property.	Once
private	property	disappears,	once	property	becomes	communal,	 the	father	 is	no
more	needed.	Once	the	family	is	replaced	by	the	commune,	the	father	becomes
irrelevant.
Uncles	will	be	there	but	not	fathers.	And	the	word	'uncle'	is	sweet	and	beautiful.
With	 the	 disappearance	 of	 the	 father,	 the	 idea	 of	 god	 the	 father	 will	 also
disappear.	Just	think	of	god	the	uncle,	and	it	changes	the	whole	colour	(laughter),
the	whole	flavour.	If	god	is	the	uncle	there	cannot	be	any	hell,	and	if	god	is	the
father	there	cannot	be	any	heaven.	The	father	represents	the	authoritative.
Veet	means	transcendence.	Go	beyond	the	idea	of	the	father,	of	private	property,
of	 invented	 institutions,	of	 authorities.	 In	Pali,	 the	 language	 that	Buddha	used,
the	same	word	has	a	far	more	significant	meaning.	There	is	just	a	little	different
pronunciation;	not	'ah-ta',	but	'uh-tah'.	The	spelling	is	the	same.
Atta	means	the	ego,	and	in	a	way,	the	father	represents	the	ego.	Go	beyond	the
ego	and	the	egoistic	approach	of	the	father.	The	father	dominates	the	family	--	he
is	the	head,	the	chief,	he	dictates,	he	possesses	the	woman,	the	children,	he	is	the
ruler.	In	fact	the	father	represents,	in	a	very	gross	way,	the	whole	phenomenon	of
the	ego.
One	has	to	go	beyond	the	ego	too.	The	father	is	a	gross	manifestation,	but	deep
down	is	the	ego.	It	is	perfectly	beautiful	to	be	a	lover	but	ugly	to	be	a	husband,
beautiful	 to	 be	 a	 beloved,	 a	 friend,	 but	 ugly	 to	 be	 a	 wife.	 These	 beautiful
experiences	should	not	be	made	into	legal	relationships.	Law	is	very	destructive.
Love	can	never	be	reduced	to	law,	and	the	moment	it	is	reduced	to	law	it	is	no
more	 love.	 It	 is	 perfectly	 beautiful	 to	 be	 a	 vehicle	 for	 children	 to	 come	 into
existence;	and	the	father	and	the	mother	are	nothing	but	vehicles.
The	children	are	not	their	possessions;	they	are	not	produced	by	them,	they	are
not	manufactured	by	them	--
they	are	just	vehicles.
The	children	come	through	them	--	that	is	true	but	they	are	not	created	by	them.
They	come	from	some	unknown	source,	 from	the	same	unknown	source,	 from
the	same	unknown	source	from	where	we	come,	from	where	everything	comes	--
the	flowers	and	the	stars	and	the	birds.
The	idea	of	the	father	creates	possessiveness.	Once	the	idea	of	father	disappears,
you	will	be	friendly	to	your	children.	You	will	be	immensely	respectful	to	them
because	 they	 are	 closer	 to	 the	 source	 than	you	 are,	 they	 come	 freshly	 from	 it.
They	are	as	fresh	as	dewdrops	in	the	early	morning;,	they	are	still	carrying	some
fragrance	 of	 the	 unknown	 source:	 they	 should	 be	 respected,	 loved,	 but	 not
possessed.
And	 this	 is	my	approach;	hence	 I	 am	against	 the	 family	and	 for	 the	commune
and	communal	 living.	The	family	 is	an	ugly	unit	and	it	 is	 the	basic	brick	upon
which	all	other	ugly	institutions	have	arisen	--	the	church,	the	state,	the	nation.	I
want	 to	 hit	 hard	 at	 the	 very	 root.	 I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 pruning	 leaves	 and
branches.	I	want	to	hit	at	the	very	root,	and	the	family	is	the	root.	If	the	family
can	 be	 destroyed	 then	 the	 state,	 the	 church,	 the	 nation,	 will	 automatically
disappear	 from	 the	 earth.	 And	 that	 will	 be	 the	 greatest	 day	 in	 the	 history	 of
humanity;	for	the	first	time	the	whole	earth	will	be	one.
Transcendence	 precisely	 defines	meditation.	One	 has	 to	 transcend	 three	 things
and	then	the	fourth	is	achieved.	The	fourth	is	our	true	nature.	Gurdjieff	used	to
call	his	way	the	fourth	way	and	in	the	East	we	have	called	the	ultimate	state	of
being,	turiya,	the	fourth.
We	have	to	transcend	the	body	--	that	is	our	outermost	circumference.	We	have
to	become	aware	that	we	are	in	the	body,	but	we	are	not	it.	The	body	is	beautiful,
one	has	to	take	care	of	it,	one	has	to	be	very	loving	to	the	body.	It	is	serving	you
beautifully.	One	has	not	to	be	antagonistic	to	it.
The	 religions	 have	 been	 teaching	 people	 to	 be	 antagonistic	 to	 their	 body,	 to
torture	it	--	they	call	it	asceticism.	That	is	sheer	stupidity!	And	they	think	that	by
torturing	the	body	they	will	be	able	to	transcend	it.	They	are	utterly	wrong.
The	 only	 way	 to	 transcend	 is	 awareness,	 not	 torture.	 There	 is	 no	 question	 of
torturing.	You	don't	torture	your	house;	you	know	that	you	are	not	it,	it	is	your
house.	 Just	 awareness	 is	 needed.	There	 is	 no	need	 to	 go	on	 a	 fast,	 there	 is	 no
need	to	stand	on	your	head,	there	is	no	need	to	contort	your	body	in	a	thousand
and	one	postures.	 Just	watching;	becoming	aware,	 is	 enough.	And	 the	 same	 is
the	key	for	the	other	two	transcendences.
The	 second	 is,	 you	 have	 to	 transcend	 the	mind	 --	 that	 is	 a	 second	 concentric
circle,	closer	to	your	being	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
than	the	body.	The	body	is	the	gross,	the	mind	is	the	subtle,	and	then	there	is	a
third,	the	subtlest:	your	heart
--	the	world	of	your	feelings,	emotions,	moods.	But	the	key	is	the	same.
Start	with	the	body	because	the	body	is	the	most	easily	observable	thing.	It	is	an
object.	 Thoughts	 ere	 also	 objects	 but	 they	 are	more	 invisible.	 Once	 you	 have
become	aware	of	 the	body	you	will	 be	 able	 to	watch	your	 thoughts	 too.	Once
you	have	become	aware	of	your	thoughts	you	will	be	able	to	watch	your	moods
too	but	 they	are	the	subtlest;	so	only	at	 the	third	state	 that	awareness	has	to	be
tried.	Once	one	becomes	aware	of	all	these	three	concentric	circles	around	your
centre	the	fourth	happening	of	its	own	accord.	Suddenly	you	know	who	you	are	-
-	not	verbally;	you	don't	get	an	answer,	you	cannot	tell	anybody	--	but	you	know.
You	know	in	the	same	way	you	know	when	you	have	a	headache.	You	know	in
the	 same	way	 as	 you	 know	when	 you	 are	 hungry	 or	 thirsty.	You	 know	 in	 the
same	way	you	know	that	you	have	fallen	in	love.
You	cannot	prove	it,	there	is	no	way	to	prove	it,	but	you	know.	And	that	knowing
is	self-evident;	you	cannot	suspect	it,	it	is	indubitable.	When	one	has	come	to	the
fourth,	one	has	transcended	the	world.
I	don't	teach	renunciation	of	the	world.	I	teach	transcendence	of	the	world	--	and
this	is	the	way.
Pleasure	is	very	limited.	Bliss	is	unlimited,	and	between	the	two	is	what	we	call
happiness.	It	is	exactly	in	the	middle;	a	part	of	it	seems	to	be	infinite	and	a	part
of	it	seems	to	be	very	finite.	Hence	in	happiness	there	is	a	dichotomy,	a	conflict,
a	tension.
Pleasure	 has	 no	 tension.	 In	 fact	 pleasure	 helps	 you	 to	 become	 relaxed.	 For
example;	sex	is	pleasure.
Now	the	medical	sciences	agree	that	sex	helps	people	to	relieve	tension	in	many
ways.	 It	 helps	 people	 to	 protect	 their	 hearts	 from	heart	 failure.	At	 least,	 not	 a
single	man	has	ever	died	from	heart	failure	while	making	love.	In	every	kind	of
activity	 people	 have	 suffered	 from	heart	 failure,	 but	 not	while	making	 love.	 It
should	 be	 otherwise,	 because	 the	 heart	 is	 beating	 faster	 and	 your	 blood	 is
pulsating	faster	and	you	are	getting	crazy!	(laughter)	But	the	heart	does	not	fail.
In	fact	it	is	a	good	exercise	for	the	heart.
Now	 heart	 experts	 suggest	 to	 people	 that	 it	 is	 a	 good	 exercise	 for	 the	 heart.
Pleasure	 relieves	you	of	 tension;	 that's	why	 tense	people	 tend	 to	eat	more	 --	 it
relaxes	tension.	When	their	bellies	are	full	their	heads	become	empty	(laughter),
because	the	whole	energy	goes	into	digestion.	So	there	is	no	more	energy	left	to
think	or	worry.	That's	why	after	eating	people	start	feeling	sleepy.
Pleasure	 is	animal,	but	happiness	 is	human.	And	with	happiness	 there	comes	a
dichotomy,	a	tension.
The	happy	person	is	always	worried	about	how	long	it	is	going	to	last.	He	is	also
worried	that	if	it	is	repeated	too	often	it	will	become	boring.	He	is	also	worried
that	if	he	does	not	repeat	it	he	way	lose	track	of	it	(laughter).	His	problems	are
millions!	(laughter)	That's	why	you	will	find	poor	people	more	satisfied;	they	are
living	 at	 the	 lowest,	 very	 close	 to	 the	 animals.	 The	 richer	 one	 gets,	 the	more
problems	 arise.	 The	 affluent	 society	 has	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 psychological
problems,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 happiness	brings	 a	duality.	A	part	 of	 it	 is
momentary	and	a	part	of	it	is	very	eternal,	and	they	don	't	get	together.	They	are
moving;	in	different	directions.
The	animal	lives	with	pleasure,	human	beings	live	in	a	divided	insane	world	of
happiness,	and	only	Buddhas	have	lived	in	the	world	of	bliss.	Bliss	is	eternal.	It
is	again,	in	a	way,	the	same	as	pleasure,	but	only	in	one	way	is	it	the	same:	there
is	no	dichotomy,	no	fear,	no	anxiety.	But	in	another	way	it	is	absolutely	different.
Pleasure	is	unconscious	and	bliss	is	absolutely	conscious.	Pleasure	is	momentary
--	 you	 can	 enjoy	 food	 today	 but	 tomorrow	 again	 you	will	 be	 hungry.	 So	 it	 is
repetitive,	circular;	you	go	on	in	circles,	a	mechanical	routine.
Bliss	is	every	moment	new,	every	moment	fresh,	every	moment	young.	It	never
grows	old,	never	grows	stale,	never	becomes	stagnant.	And	it	is	infinite.
Once	 you	 have	 entered	 into	 the	 world	 of	 bliss	 you	 have	 entered	 into	 the
unbounded,	uncharted.
Suddenly	 there	are	no	walls	anywhere.	For	 the	first	 time	you	are	no	more	 in	a
prison.	And	the	taste	of	freedom	is	what	ecstasy	is	all	about	--	just	like	the	bird
on	the	wing.
A	 sannyasins	 is	 a	 bird	 on	 the	 wing;	 in	 the	 sky	 of	 bliss	 which	 knows	 no
boundaries.	You	can	go	on	and	on	and	you	will	never	come	to	the	end	of	it.
Buddha	has	said	'Misery	has	no	beginning	but	an	end	and	bliss	has	a	beginning
but	 no	 end.'	 And	 he	 is	 absolutely	 right.	 You	 don't	 know	 how	 you	 became
miserable	or	when	you	became	miserable.	You	have	always	been	miserable.	You
can	go	on	remembering	and	you	will	find	you	have	always	been	miserable.	It	has
no	beginning,	but	it	has	an	end.	You	can	put	a	full	point	to	it.
Bliss	begins	where	misery	ends,	but	then	there	is	no	end	to	it.	You	cannot	put	a
full	point	 to	 it.	 It	 is	a	 river	 that	 is	always	moving	 towards	 the	ocean	but	never
reaches	the	ocean;	and	that's	its	beauty	--	the	ecstasy,	the	excitement,	the	joy,	the
adventure,	of	always	reaching.	And	the	ocean	is	just	ahead	of	you.	By	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	very	effort	to	reach	to	the	ocean	you	start	becoming	an	ocean,	but	you	never
reach	it.
You	 go	 on	 growing,	 you	 go	 on	 evolving,	 but	 there	 comes	 no	 full	 point.	 This
eternal	pilgrimage	is	the	essential	core	of	religion.
Character	 can	 be	 cultivated	 from	 the	 outside	 --	 then	 it	 is	 pseudo	 and	 phony.
That's	what	our	so-called	morality	does.	That's	the	way	of	the	puritan:	it	creates
hypocrisy	 in	 people,	 it	 only	 paints	 their	 faces,	 it	 does	 not	 change	 their	 being.
Behind	 the	beautiful	 facade	 they	 remain	 the	same	people.	They	nay	be	able	 to
deceive	 others	 but	 they	 cannot	 deceive	 existence.	Before	 existence	 one	 has	 to
stand	 naked.	 Not	 only	 do	 the	 clothes	 fall	 away	 but	 your	 whole	 cultivated
character	also	falls.
Hence	it	is	a	sheer	wastage	of	energy,	time,	opportunity.	The	other	way,	the	true
way	 to	 create	 an	 authentic	 character	 is	 through	meditation.	You	don't	 cultivate
any	quality,	any	virtue.	You	simply	become	silent,	aware.	You	start	divine	deeper
and	deeper	into	your	being.
The	moment	 you	 come	 to	 your	 very	 centre	 an	 explosion	 happens,	 and	 in	 that
explosion	the	old	character	is	finished.	A	totally	new	style	of	life	arises,	and	that
is	 real	 virtue.	 Then	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 is	 right.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of
following	 any	 commandment;	 your	 very	 being	 is	 aware	 of	 its	 responsibility.
Then	 it	 is	 no	more	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	 it	 is	 not	derived	 from	 the
Old	Testament	or	the	Vedas	or	the	Koran.	You	live	according	to	your	own	light.
And	when	a	person	starts	living	according	to	his	own	light	there	is	great	joy.	And
each	act	becomes	such	a	 fulfilment,	and	each	act	brings	so	much	contentment,
because	never	does	anything	go	wrong,	never	does	one	feel	guilty	or	repentant,
never	does	one	feel	'I	should	have	done	otherwise.'	Even	a	so-called	great	saint
like	Saint	Augustine	says	in	his	CONFESSIONS,	 'I	always	do	what	should	not
be	done,	and	I	never	do	what	should	be	done	--	god	forgive	me!'	(laughter)	But
that's	the	whole	story	of	all	your	saints.
A	man	 like	Buddha	 cannot	 say	 that.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 at	 all	 of	 shoulds	 and
should	nots;	you	simply	do	out	of	your	total	awareness	whatsoever	is	the	need	of
the	moment.	You	respond	accordingly,	and	your	action	is	total.	It	is	not	a	choice
of	 'Whether	 I	 should	 do	 this	 or	 that.'	 You	 have	 clarity,	 light,	 eyes;	 hence
whatsoever	you	do	is	total.
And	 every	 total	 act	 brings	 freedom,	 joy,	 benediction.	 Then	 character	 is	 not
something,	that	you	have	cultivated;	it	is	a	consequence.
True	character	is	a	by-product	of	meditation	and	false	character	is	manufactured
by	cultivation.	Beware	of	 the	 false,	because	 it	 is	 cheap,	 and	 the	mind	 tends	 to
buy	 the	 cheap.	Beware	 of	 the	 false	 because	 it	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 shortcut,	 and	 the
mind	is	always	ready	to	follows	the	shortcut.	It	is	very	lazy.
Mind	 lives	 in	 time,	mind	 is	 time.	 It	 consists	 of	 past	 and	 future.	 Remember,	 I
divide	 time	 into	 only	 two	 tenses,	 past	 and	 future.	 Present	 is	 not	 part	 of	 time,
present	 is	 part	 of	 eternity.	Present	 is	 that	moment	where	 eternity	 crosses	 time.
Time	 is	 horizontal,	 eternity	 is	 vertical;	 where	 the	 vertical	 line	 crosses	 the
horizontal	line,	that	point	--	it	is	just	a	point	--	is	the	present.	And	the	whole	art
of	meditation	is	to	live	in	the	present,	to	be	herenow,	dropping	the	past,	dropping
the	future.
Once	you	are	capable	of	dropping	all	the	past	and	all	the	future,	all	that	is	left	is
the	 present	moment,	 the	 now.	And	 that	 is	 the	 time,	 the	moment,	 the	 space	 in
which	 the	 revolution	happens.	Suddenly	your	horizontal	 line	becomes	vertical,
you	enter	into	eternity,	into	timelessness.	That	is	the	world	of	truth,	the	world	of
the	real.	Time	is	the	world	of	dreams,	fantasies,	and	nobody	can	be	blissful	in	the
world	of	time.	It	is	nightmarish.
Once	you	enter	into	eternity,	all	turmoil	ceases,	immense	peace	descends	on	you;
and	 then	 you	 can	 go	 on	 living	 in	 the	 world	 of	 time	 but	 you	 carry	 that	 peace
within	 you,	 untouched	 by	 time	 and	 its	 noise.	 Time	 is	mind,	meditation	 is	 no-
mind.	And	this	is	a	whole	change	of	world:	from	mind	to	no-mind,	from	time	to
eternity.
It	 is	 possible;	 everybody	 is	 born	 with	 the	 capacity,	 one	 just	 has	 to	 know	 the
knack	of	it.	And	the	knack	is	simple:	try	to	be	herenow,	don't	go	on	enjoying	the
past	and	its	memories.	All	those	so-called	nostalgias	--
don't	waste	yourself	in	them;	and	don't	go	into	the	future	trips	of	becoming	this,
of	having	that.
The	past	is	no	more	and	the	future	is	not	yet,	and	between	the	two	is	that	which
always	is.	To	enter	that
'isness'	 is	 to	 enter	 into	 godliness,	 into	 bliss,	 into	 truth,	 into	 immortality.	 Then
there	 is	no	death.	In	Sanskrit	we	have	only	one	word	for	 time	and	death	--	 the
same	word,	kal	 --	because	death	happens	 in	 time,	 it	never	happens	 in	eternity.
Eternity	is	deathless.
Mind	 is	one-dimensional;	 it	moves	from	the	past	 to	 the	future.	 It	 is	 linear,	one
line.	Meditation	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
multi-dimensional.	It	opens	as	many	doors	as	you	can	imagine.	It	opens	the	door
of	love,	it	opens	the	door	of	truth,	it	opens	the	door	of	freedom,	it	opens	the	door
of	awareness,	it	opens	the	door	of	bliss,	and	so	on	and	so	forth.	It	simply	goes	on
opening	doors	 upon	doors.	Reality	 is	multi-dimensional	 and	meditation	makes
you	one	with	reality.
Time	is	only	a	small	part,	a	fragment	of	reality.	But	we	are	all	living	in	that	small
fragment;	hence	we	all	feel	suffocated,	cramped,	overcrowded.	It	is	not	just	the
crowd	 around	 you	 that	 makes	 you	 feel	 like	 that,	 it	 is	 far	 deeper.	 Mind	 is
overcrowded	because	it	is	a	single	line	and	on	that	single	line	so	many	trains	are
running.	And	naturally,	so	many	accidents	are	happening.	Thoughts	are	running,
millions	 of	 thoughts,	 desires	 are	 running,	 imagination,	 memories,	 dreams,
fantasies,	what	not.	Just	a	single	track	and	so	many	trains	are	running.
Every	moment	there	is	an	accident,	something	clashes	with	something	else.	You
are	continuously	being	thrown	from	one	accident	to	another	accident.
No	wonder	people	look	so	miserable,	so	drained,	so	utterly	exhausted.	But	once
you	have	learned	how	to	be	silent,	how	to	slip	out	of	the	mind,	then	thousands	of
doors	 open	 and	 suddenly	 your	 world	 becomes	 so	 vast	 that	 you	 don't	 feel
crowded	 at	 all.	There	 is	 so	much	 space	 to	 create,	 to	 enjoy,	 to	 dance,	 so	much
space	 that	 you	 can	 expand	 to	 infinity.	 That	 expansion	 of	 consciousness	 is	 the
ultimate	goal	of	sannyas.
Meditation	has	not	to	be	taken	seriously.	That's	how	people	take	it;	and	to	take	it
seriously	is	to	miss	it	totally.	It	is	a	song,	a	dance,	a	celebration	--	enjoy	it,	love
it,	but	don't	take	it	seriously,	don't	be	sombre	about	it.	Be	sincere,	but	not	serious.
For	thousands	of	years	the	saint	has	looked	so	serious,	so	deadly	serious,	that	he
has	 created	 a	 certain	 idea	 that	 religion	means	 seriousness,	 that	 religion	means
dropping	all	playfulness,	dropping	all	cheerfulness,	that	one	has	to	become	really
gravelike.	Exactly	that	is	the	word	we	use	for	the	serious	person:	very	grave.
He	has	become	a	grave,	he	is	no	more	alive.	He	is	living	only	in	a	very	minimal
way,	just	existing,	or	vegetating,	not	living.
My	 approach	 to	 religion	 is	 absolutely	 non-serious,	 playful.	 So	 let	 your
meditation	be	a	song,	let	your	sannyas	be	a	song.	Let	it	be	a	love,	a	laughter.	As	I
see	 it,	 a	 sense	 of	 humour	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 essential	 qualities	 for	 a	 religious
person.	 If	 it	 is	 not	 there	 then	 the	 person	may	 be	ANything	 else	 but	 he	 is	 not
religious.	Something	of	humour	must	be	there,	a	capacity	to	laugh	at	so	many	of
the	ridiculous	things	life	abounds	with.	Everybody	is	slipping	on	a	banana	peel
(much	 laughter).	 People	 arc	 carrying	 their	 own	 banana	 peels	 (laughter),
spreading	them	on	the	roads,	slipping	on	them	--	how	can	one	be	serious?
(laughter)
People	 are	doing	all	 kinds	of	 absurdities.	 If	you	 just	watch	people	 it	 is	 such	a
comedy!	 (more	 laughter)	That	 has	 to	 be	 the	message	 for	 you!	 (more	 laughter)
Love,	laugh,	and	live!
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101215
ShortTitle:	POND21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
We	are	living	in	the	world	of	death	but	we	don't	belong	to	it.	We	are	strangers	to
the	world	of	death,	time,	change.	At	the	very	core	of	our	being	we	are	connected
to	a	totally	different	dimension.	We	are	a	penetration	of	the	beyond.	We	exist	in
this	world	but	our	roots	are	in	some	other	world.
The	Indian	mystic	scriptures,	the	Upanishads,	have	a	beautiful	simile	for	it.	They
say	man	is	like	a	tree	upside-down:	the	roots	are	in	the	sky	and	the	branches	and
the	flowers	have	reached	to	the	earth	--	just	the	reverse	of	an	ordinary	tree.	It	is	a
beautiful	symbol,	very	significant.	It	says	that	we	are	rooted	in	the	beyond,	only
our	branches	have	reached	into	this	world.	We	are	nourished	by	the	beyond,	we
are	constantly	fed	by	the	beyond.
To	 experience	 it	 is	 to	 be	 free	 from	 all	misery,	 anxiety,	 anguish,	 because	when
there	is	no	death,	how	can	there	be	anxiety?	And	when	there	is	death,	how	can
we	avoid	anxiety?	If	we	are	going	to	die	then	whatsoever	we	are	doing	is	really
meaningless.	 It	 has	 no	 significance	 at	 all.	Whether	we	 are	 sinners	 or	 saints,	 it
does	 not	 matter.	 Whether	 we	 serve	 or	 kill,	 whether	 we	 love	 or	 hate	 --	 if
everything	is	going	to	end	in	death,	if	everything	is	to	be	erased	by	death,	then
our	writings	on	the	sands	of	time	are	absolutely	childish,	playthings.
It	is	impossible	to	live	in	this	meaningless,	accidental	dimension	without	anxiety.
Something	 inside	 will	 go	 on	 being	 worried,	 will	 go	 on	 being	 concerned	 with
what	it	is	all	about.	But	once	we	know	that	our	beings	are	immortal	beings,	that
nothing	disappears	in	death	--	only	dreams	disappear,	the	reality	remains	as	it	has
always	 been	 --	 then	 certainly	 a	 great	 rootedness,	 centering,	 happens	 naturally,
spontaneously.	 One	 starts	 feeling	 meaning,	 relevance.	 In	 the	 context	 of	 the
eternal,	for	the	first	tire	we	feel	blissful;	otherwise	life	is	only	a	nightmare	and	it
is	better	if	it	ends	sooner,	because	it	is	pointless	prolonging	it.
Meditation	is	the	way,	the	means,	the	door,	the	bridge,	which	makes	us	aware	of
our	eternity.	Then	we	can	look	at	our	illness,	sickness,	death	as	just	peripheral.
We	 can	 watch	 them	 ill	 a	 detached	 way,	 we	 can	 be	 just	 a	 witness,	 utterly
indifferent	--	and	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	meditation,	the	experience	of
eternity,	and	the	detached	witnessing	of	all	that	goes	on	happening	around	us.
One	 moves	 through	 it	 unconcerned,	 untouched	 by	 it	 all.	 One	 remains	 virgin,
pure,	innocent.
The	ultimate	truth	has	been	called	by	many	names,	but	the	most	significant	is	the
beloved,	 because	 love's	 our	 deepest	 longing.	 It	 cannot	 be	 fulfilled	 by	 god	 the
father.
God	the	father	seems	to	be	to	institutional,	so	dull	--	who	wants	to	live	with	god
the	father?	(laughter)	Everybody	feels	embarrassed	with	fathers	and	mothers	and
parents.	 At	 the	 most	 one	 can	 tolerate	 them	 a	 few	 days;	 even	 that	 is	 a	 great
burden.	And	to	live	with	god	the	father	for	eternity	(laughter)	--	it	is	better	to	live
in	 hell.	 One	 can	 be	 more	 friendly	 with	 the	 devil!	 And	 also	 there	 is	 much
entertainment	 in	hell!	(laughter)	In	heaven	there	are	 just	phony	saints,	dull	and
dead,	sitting,	counting	on	their	rosaries	--	and	for	eternity,	remember!	There	is	no
end	to	it.	The	boredom	must	be	immense.
'God	the	father'	is	not	the	right	name	for	the	ultimate;	neither	is	'god	the	mother'.
There	are	many	ancient	religions,	far	more	ancient	 than	those	which	believe	in
god	the	father;	they	believe	in	god	the	mother.	It	s	a	little	bit	better	than	god	the
father	but	not	much,	because	the	mother's	love	for	her	children	is	natural;	but	the
children's	love	for	the	mother	is	cultivated.	It	is	more	or	less	a	duty:	one	has	to
do	it,	one	is	expected	to	do	it,	and	one	tries	to	do	it	 the	best	one	can.	But	love
always	 flows	 like	 a	 river:	 from	 the	 mountains	 towards	 the	 valleys,	 from	 the
valleys	towards	the	plains,	from	the	plains	towards	the	ocean;	exactly	like	that,
from	the	mother	to	the	child	and	from	the	child	it	will	go	again	to	her	child.	 It
goes	on	downwards.
The	 upward	 phenomenon	 is	 artificial.	 The	 word	 that	 comes	 very	 close	 to
describing	the	ultimate	is	 'the	beloved',	because	it	 is	our	deepest	 longing	in	the
heart.	It	can	be	fulfilled	only	by	the	ultimate	love	affair,	with	existence.	In	fact	it
is	better	not	to	use	the	word	'god'.	'Existence'	is	enough,	and	one	has	to	know	the
art	 of	how	 to	be	 loving	 towards	 all	 that	 existence	 is,	 from	 the	 stars	 to	 a	 small
blade	of	grass.	It	is	the	same	one	organic	unity.
Meditation	makes	 this	 impossible	 possible.	Meditation	 as	 far	 as	 I	 know	 is	 the
only	 magical	 phenomenon	 in	 the	 world,	 the	 only	 miracle.	 Once	 you	 become
silent,	once	your	mind	stops	 its	much	ado	about	nothing,	once	 it	cools	down	a
little	 bit,	 once	 there	 is	 a	 gap	 and	 a	 window	 opens,	 suddenly	 you	 can	 see	 the
beloved	all	throughout	space:	in	the	trees,	in	the	mountains,	in	the	birds,	in	the
stars;	all	are	manifestations	of	the	same	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
energy.	And	the	lover	and	the	beloved	are	not	two	either.	When	you	know	that
all	is	one	suddenly	you	realise	'I	am	also	part	of	it!'	Then	comes	the	meeting	of
oneself	with	 the	whole,	 the	 union,	 or	maybe	 better	 to	 call	 it	 reunion,	 because
once	we	must	have	been	one	with	it.	Somehow	we	must	have	fallen	asleep	and
forgotten,	somehow	we	must	have	got	lost	into	dreams.
It	is	a	reunion,	a	recognition,	a	realisation.	It	is	nothing	new.	It	is	our	ancientmost
heritage.
Meditation	helps	you	to	learn	a	forgotten	language.	My	name	for	that	language	is
love.	Meditation	makes	 you	more	 and	more	 loving.	 Finally	 it	 transforms	 your
whole	 energy	 into	 love	 energy.	 That	 very	 moment,	 instantly,	 the	 beloved	 is
found.	When	you	are	really	a	lover,	totally	a	lover,	the	beloved	is	found.
And	remember,	 the	beloved	 is	not	a	person,	 it	 is	 this	whole	vast	universe;	and
love	has	to	be	multi-dimension,	it	has	to	be	as	big	as	the	universe	itself	--	and	it
can	be.	It	is	the	only	quality	in	our	being	which	can	be	so	expansive.	Everything
else	 is	small.	Our	mind	is	small,	our	cunningness,	calculation,	cleverness	--	all
arc	very	small,	good	for	the	marketplace.	Our	head	is	very	small,	but	our	heart
can	be	as	vast	as	the	whole.
P.D.	Ouspensky,	in	one	of	his	most	important	treatises,	TERTIUM	ORGANUM,
says	'There	are	two	kinds	of	mathematics	--	the	lower	mathematics	in	which	the
part	 can	 never	 be	 equal	 to	 the	 whole...'	 We	 are	 aware	 of	 that	 kind	 of
mathematics,	we	have	all	been	taught.	And	it	is	logical	how	can	the	part	be	equal
to	the	whole?	Ouspensky	says	'But	there	is	a	higher	kind	of	mathematics'	--	and
he	was	 a	mathematician	 and	 a	mystic	 both,	which	 is	 a	 rare	 combination,	 very
rare.
'In	the	higher	mathematics,'	he	says	'the	part	is	equal	to	the	whole	and	sometimes
even	bigger	than	the	whole.'	Now	that	is	absolutely	illogical	but	it	is	true!	Truth
need	 not	 be	 according	 to	 our	 logic;	 logic	 is	 our	 invention.	 Truth	 is	 not	 our
invention	and	truth	has	no	obligation	to	fulfil	our	expectations.
We	 have	 to	 adjust	 to	 truth,	 truth	 has	 not	 to	 adjust	 to	 us.	 This	 is	 my	 own
experience	too,	 that	 there	are	possibilities	where	the	part	 is	equal	 to	the	whole,
and	 sometimes	 even	 bigger	 than	 the	 whole.	 And	 that	 possibility	 opens	 in	 the
heart,	and	the	name	of	that	possibility	is	love.	It	is	only	love	which	can	take	you
to	 the	 higher	 mathematics.	 Logic	 keeps	 you	 in	 the	 world	 of	 the	 lower
mathematics	and	love	takes	you	to	the	beyond.
Love	can	be	as	big	as	the	whole	universe	and	it	can	even	be	bigger	than	it.	Love
is	our	only	treasure,	the	real	kingdom	of	our	being.	So	my	emphasis	is	that	the
universe	should	be	thought	of	in	terms	of	the	beloved,	so	that	you	can	become	a
lover.	 The	 whole	 emphasis	 really	 is	 so	 that	 you	 can	 become	 a	 lover.	 If	 the
universe	is	hypothetically	accepted	as	the	beloved,	then	the	possibility	opens,	the
enquiry	is	possible:	you	can	become	a	lover.
If	 the	universe	 is	 thought	of	as	god	 the	 father	 then	you	can	only	be	a	 retarded
child,	a	dependent	child,	 fixated	on	 the	 father	 figure.	 If	god	 is	 thought	 to	be	a
mother,	 then	 you	 can	 cling	 to	 the	 skirt	 and	 call	 yourself	 Catholic,	 Hindu,
Mohammedan,	but	all	that	you	have	got	is	just	a	skirt.
A	naked	woman	in	a	supermarket	asked	the	manager,	 'Have	you	seen	five	kids
holding	onto	a	skirt?'
(laughter)	But	that	is	the	situation:	Christians,	Hindus,	Mohammedans	--	they	are
all	snatching	as	much	of	the	skirt	as	possible.	Nobody	is	worried	whether	god	is
naked...	who	cares	about	god?	Everybody	wants	 to	have	as	much	of	a	hold	on
the	skirt	as	possible.
Think	of	the	universe	as	the	beloved	--	that's	what	the	Sufis	have	done.	And	the
Sufis	 have	 given	 the	 most	 beautiful	 vision	 of	 reality.	 Love	 creates	 a	 miracle
world;	 but	 love	 can	 grow	 in	 you	 only	 if	 you	 start	 thinking	 in	 terms	 of	 the
beloved.
The	 idea	 of	 the	 beloved	 surrounding	 you	 function	 like	 a	 right	 climate,	 a	 right
season,	 for	 flowering.	 It	 is	 like	 the	 spring	 and	 your	 heart	 opens	 up:	 suddenly
there	are	flowers,	suddenly	there	is	fragrance.
We	 are	 aware	 of	 a	 reality	 which	 is	 constantly	 changing.	 Hidden	 behind	 this
reality	 there	 is	 also	 another	 reality	 which	 is	 absolutely	 unchanging.	 This
changing	world	is	possible	only	because	of	that	unchanging	centre,	otherwise	it
would	fall	apart.	It	is	the	unchanging	centre	that	holds	it	together.
It	is	just	like	a	wheel	of	a	bullock	cart	--	that's	how	the	Upanishads	describe	it:
when	 the	wheel	moves	 it	moves	 only	 because	 at	 the	 very	 centre	 of	 the	wheel
there	 is	 the	axle	 that	does	not	move;	on	that	unmoving	axle	 the	wheel	goes	on
moving.	That's	the	centre	of	the	cyclone.
We	 are	 acquainted	 only	 with	 the	 cyclone.	 Meditation	 makes	 us	 aware	 of	 the
centre.	It	changes	our	whole	gestalt:	it	takes	us	from	time	to	eternity,	from	death
to	real	life,	from	the	fluxlike	dream	world	to	that	which	is	eternal,	forever.	And
this	can	happen	very	easily	through	meditation,	because	each	man	is	a	miniature
universe.	His	body	is	changing	--	it	is	part	of	the	wheel;	his	mind	is	changing	--
it	is	a	wheel	within	a	wheel;	his	heart,	moods,	emotions,	are	changing	--	that	is	a
wheel	within	a	wheel	within	a	wheel.	These	are	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
three	concentric	wheels	and	hidden	behind	these	three	wheels	is	our	centre,	our
awareness,	consciousness,	our	witnessing,	which	is	absolutely	unchanging.
Meditation	gives	you	the	perspective	in	which	you	can	see	'I	am	not	the	body;	I
am	not	 the	mind,	I	am	not	 the	heart	either;'	 then	only	one	thing	remains:	 'I	am
consciousness'	--	and	that	cannot	be	denied,	that	is	impossible	to	deny.
One	cannot	say	 'I	am	not	consciousness,'	because	if	you	are	not	consciousness,
how	 can	 you	 ay	 even	 this,	 that	 'I	 am	 not	 consciousness'?	 Even	 to	 deny	 it,
consciousness	will	be	needed,	so	even	the	denial	will	be	just	one	more	proof.	It
is	indubitable.
Descartes	says	'Only	one	thing	is	indubitable	and	that	is	"I	am";	everything	else
can	 be	 doubted,	 but	 "I	 am",	 this	 cannot	 be	 doubted.'	 And	 this,	 because	 it	 is
indubitable,	can	become	the	foundation	of	our	whole	new	life.
This	 foundation	has	 to	be	 found.	 It	 is	 there,	waiting	 for	us.	 It	has	always	been
there,	we	have	just	been	roaming	around	and	around	in	circles.	A	few	people	are
attached	to	the	body.	They	are	the	farthest,	they	are	living	only	like	animals.	A
few	people	are	attached	to	the	mind.	They	are	a	little	closer,	but	still	far	away;
they	 are	 living	 like	 human	 beings	 --	 thinkers,	 philosophers,	 poets	 --	 but	 their
world	 consists	 only	 of	 thoughts	 and	 thoughts	 are	 just	 soap-bubbles,	 the	 same
stuff	as	dreams	are	made	of.	And	a	very	few	have	reached	to	the	heart,	very	few.
It	is	a	rare	phenomenon	to	find	a	person	who	lives	in	the	heart,	because	it	is	so
mad	 to	 live	 in	 the	 heart	 --	 it	 looks	 so	 crazy,	 it	 is	 so	 illogical	 that	 it	 becomes
almost	impossible	to	deal	with	the	people	who	are	living	either	in	the	body	or	in
the	mind.	The	man	who	lives	in	the	heart	becomes	immediately	disconnected.
There	are	many	people	who	are	thought	to	be	mad	simply	because	they	are	heart
people	and	they	cannot	communicate	with	the	world	which	has	been	created	by
the	head.	Their	only	problem	is	that	they	are	in	a	far	better	space	than	the	rest	of
the	world.	It	is	like	a	man	who	has	eyes	living	with	people	who	don't	have	eyes:
he	will	 be	 in	 constant	 difficulty.	 Nobody	will	 listen	 to	 him,	 nobody	will	 ever
understand	him;	he	 is	 inevitably	going	 to	be	misunderstood,	on	each	point,	on
each	account.
Hence	very	few	people	dare	to	live	in	the	heart:	they	are	the	mystics,	they	have
come	 very	 close	 --	 but	 still,	 to	 be	 close	 means	 a	 little	 far	 away.	 One	 more
quantum	leap	is	needed,	one	more	jump,	and	then	you	reach	to	the	indescribable.
In	the	East	we	have	called	it	the	fourth,	turiya	--	simply	the	fourth.	We	have	not
given	it	any	name	because	no	name	can	be	given	to	it.	It	is	neither	the	body	nor
the	mind	nor	the	heart,	and	our	whole	language	consists	of	words	which	belong
either	to	the	body	or	to	the	mind	or	to	the	heart.	No	Word	exists	for	the	fourth;
hence	a	number	has	been	used	the	fourth.
And	it	is	the	fourth	which	is	the	unmoving	centre	of	the	moving	world.	Once	you
are	settled	there,	a	great	contentment	showers	on	you,	you	have	found	the	home.
That's	the	search	of	sannyas.
We	are	living	separated	from	existence	--	not	really	separated,	because	if	we	are
really	 separated	we	will	 be	 dead,	 but	 as	 far	 as	 our	mind	 is	 concerned	we	 are
living	with	this	notion,	this	idea	that	we	are	separate.
This	is	only	an	idea,	but	even	the	idea	can	create	great	problems.
For	example,	if	you	see	a	rope	in	the	dark	and	you	think	that	it	is	a	snake.	There
is	no	snake	at	all,	just	a	rope,	but	if	you	think	it	is	a	snake	and	you	start	running
away,	you	may	stumble	on	a	rock,	you	may	fall,	you	may	break	a	few	bones,	you
may	have	a	heart	attack,	you	say	go	crazy	--	anything	is	possible.	And	there	was
no	snake	at	all;	it	was	just	an	idea,	but	the	idea	started	functioning	on	you.
Buddha	 defines	 reality	 as	 that	which	works.	His	 definition	 has	 a	 significance,
very	 pragmatic.	 So	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 whether	 the	 sake	 exists	 or	 not;	 the
question	is	whether	it	works	or	not.	If	 it	works	it	 is	AS	 if	 it	exists.	It	 is	almost
there	for	the	person	who	is	deluded.
It	 is	 the	same	situation:	we	are	 living	as	egos,	separated	from	existence.	Those
egos	are	just	an	idea,	like	the	snake	which	is	not	there	at	all,	but	because	of	those
ego,	 we	 create	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 problems,	 conflicts,	 so	 many	miseries,	 so
many	anxieties	--	 they	all	arise	out	of	a	false	notion.	And	the	greatest	problem
that	it	creates	is	that	it	gives	you	an	illusory	separation	from	existence,	and	living
in	separation	from	the	whole	is	misery.	It	is	like	a	fish	trying	to	live	outside	the
ocean:	it	will	be	miserable,	because	the	ocean	is	its	life.	The	ego	is	the	root	cause
of	all	our	miseries.	Once	we	drop	the	ego	the	union	happens.	And	in	fact	when
the	union	happens	are	come	to	know	that	what	we	have	dropped,	we	never	had
in	the	first	place.	One	laughs	at	the	whole	ridiculousness	of	it!
Meditation	makes	you	aware	enough	to	drop	the	ego.	Meditation	brings	a	light
so	 that	you	can	see	 that	 the	snake	does	not	exist	and	 there	 is	only	an	old	 rope
lying	on	the	road.	And	all	the	problems	that	were	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
created	by	the	illusory	snake	disappear	--	with	the	snake	they	are	gone.
In	the	same	way	meditation	creates	a	light,	a	vision,	a	clarity,	an	insight	--	and
that	helps	you	to	get	rid	of	the	ego.	That	is	one	side	of	the	story,	getting	rid	of	the
ego.	The	other	side	is	union	with	the	whole.	If	ego	is	misery	then	union	is	bliss!
I	don't	believe	in	a	God,	because	I	have	searched	everywhere,	in	and	out.	I	have
not	 found	God,	 but	 I	 have	 found	 something	 far	more	 important:	 I	 have	 found
godliness!
When	I	say	I	have	not	found	God,	I	mean	there	is	no	God	as	a	person.	The	whole
idea	of	a	person	is	our	invention.	It	is	anthropocentric.	Man	has	created	the	idea
of	God	in	his	own	image.	The	Bible	says	God	created	man	in	his	own	image	--
that	is	not	true.	Man	has	created	God	in	his	own	image	--	that	is	far	more	true.
If	 donkeys	 become	 theologians,	 and	 I	 think	 they	 are!	 They	 look	 very	 serious,
always	brooding,	contemplating.	Watch	a	donkey	and	you	are	watching	a	saint!
So	 deadly	 serious,	 I	 don't	 think	 you	 have	 ever	 seen	 a	 donkey	 laughing.	 They
don't	 laugh,	 they	 don't	 even	 smile.	 If	 donkeys	 are	 theologians	 then	 their	 God
must	 be	 a	 donkey	 --	 of	 course,	 a	 very	 big	 donkey!	They	 cannot	 conceive	 that
God	is	a	man.	That	will	be	the	last	thing	a	donkey	will	conceive,	that	God	is	a
man.	What	has	man	done	to	the	donkeys?	He	tortured	them	in	every	way.
If	 trees	 could	 think,	 they	 would	 think	 of	 God	 as	 a	 tree.	 This	 is	 how	 mind
functions:	we	go	on	creating	our	own	image	and	that	fulfills	a	certain	ego.	When
we	think	of	God	as	a	human	being	--	as	father,	as	mother	--	our	ego	is	satisfied
that	God	is	just	like	us.
God	 does	 not	 exist	 as	 a	 person	 at	 all.	 There	 is	 certainly	 something	more	 than
matter,	 but	 that	 is	 not	 a	 personality;	 it	 is	 a	 presence.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of
Bhagvato.	Bhagvato	means	a	godly	presence,	just	like	a	fragrance	surrounding	a
flower	or	a	light	surrounding	a	flame,	exactly	like	that.
You	cannot	catch	hold	of	 the	 fragrance.	You	can	enjoy	 it,	you	can	 take	a	deep
breath,	 it	 can	 fill	 your	 very	heart,	 but	 you	 cannot	 catch	hold	 of	 it,	 you	 cannot
have	 it	 in	 your	 fist,	 you	 cannot	 possess	 it.	 Exactly	 the	 same	 way	 there	 is
godliness.	And	those	who	experience	godliness	become	it!
My	experience	of	God	is	more	like	love	or	freedom	or	awareness.	These	are	all
qualities.
Freedom	 is	 not	 a	 person,	 love	 is	 not	 a	 person,	 compassion	 is	 not	 a	 person,
awareness	is	not	a	person,	and	God	is	the	sum	total	of	all	these	qualities.
Meditation	makes	you	aware	that	the	whole	of	existence	is	full	of	godliness,	that
from	the	smallest	pebble	to	the	biggest	star	it	is	all	one.	But	it	is	a	presence:	you
can	feel	it,	you	can	drink	it;	it	can	give	you	a	new	pulsation,	a	new	life,	a	new
light,	a	new	heartbeat.	It	can	become	a	song	in	you,	a	dance	in	you,	but	it	is	not	a
person.
The	idea	of	God	as	a	person	is	the	invention	of	the	cunning	priests.	And	to	go	on
emphasizing	God	as	a	person,	they	emphasize	prayer	and	all	kinds	of	rituals.	All
those	rituals	are	just	methods	to	go	on	emphasizing	the	idea	of	God	as	a	person.
When	you	pray,	certainly,	you	cannot	pray	to	freedom	--	or	can	you?	You	cannot
pray	to	love	--	or	can	you?	It	will	look	absurd.	Prayer	is	addressed	to	a	person,
not	 to	 a	 quality.	 But	 meditation	 is	 not	 addressed	 to	 anybody	 at	 all,	 it	 is	 just
becoming	silent	for	no	reason	at	all.	To	be	silent	is	enough,	a	reason	unto	itself.
It	is	so	beautiful,	it	is	so	ecstatic,	it	is	so	wonderful,	that	it	is	enough	to	be	silent.
There	is	no	need	to	be	rewarded	for	it.
It	is	such	a	great	reward	that	no	other	reward	is	needed,	nothing	else	is	needed.
And	in	that	silence,	suddenly,	the	feeling	of	God	as	a	presence	arises.	Then	you
need	 not	 go	 to	 a	 temple	 because	 those	 temples,	 those	 churches	 are	 all	 created
around	the	idea	of	God	as	a	person.
So	whenever	you	want	to	go	to	God	--	in	my	word,	to	godliness	--	you	have	to
go	inward.	You	have	to	just	become	silent,	peaceful,	aware,	loving,	and	you	are
there.	It	is	not	that	you	encounter	God,	it	is	that	you	experience	a	peak	of	joy	in
your	being.	And	that	very	peak	is	godliness.
I	 teach	 godliness,	 not	God;	 hence	 I	 teach	 a	 kind	 of	mysticism,	 not	 religion.	 I
teach	a	certain	divine	poetry	and	dance	and	celebration,	but	not	theology.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101225
ShortTitle:	POND22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Misery	is	a	state	of	unconsciousness.	We	are	miserable	because	we	are	not	aware
of	what	we	are	doing,	of	what	we	are	thinking,	of	what	we	are	feeling.	So	we	are
continuously	contradicting	ourselves	each	moment.	Action	goes	in	one	direction,
thinking	goes	in	another,	feeling	is	somewhere	else.	We	go	on	falling	apart,	we
become	more	and	more	fragmented;	that's	what	misery	is	--	we	lose	integration,
we	lose	unity.	We	become	absolutely	centreless,	just	a	periphery.	And	naturally	a
life	which	 is	 not	 harmonious	 is	 going	 to	 be	miserable,	 tragic,	 a	 burden	 to	 be
carried	 somehow,	 a	 suffering.	 At	 the	 most	 one	 can	 make	 this	 suffering	 less
painful.	And	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	kinds	of	pain	killers	available.
It	is	not	only	drugs	and	alcohol:	the	so-called	religion	has	also	functioned	as	an
opium.	It	drugs	people.
And	naturally	all	the	religions	are	against	drugs,	because	they	themselves	deal	in
the	 same	market;	 they	 are	 against	 the	 competitors.	 If	 people	 take	 opium	 they
may	not	be	religious,	there	may	be	no	need	for	them	to	be	religious.	They	have
found	 their	 opium,	 why	 should	 they	 bother	 about	 religion?	 And	 opium	 is
cheaper,	there	is	less	involvement.	If	people	are	taking	marijuana,	LSD	and	more
refined	drugs,	naturally,	they	are	not	going	to	be	religious,	because	religion	is	a
very	primitive	drug.	Hence	all	the	religions	are	against	drugs.
The	reason	is	not	that	they	are	really	against	the	drug.	The	reason	is,	 the	drugs
are	competitors,	and	of	course,	if	people	can	be	debarred	from	using	drugs,	they
are	bound	to	fall	into	the	traps	of	the	priests,	because	then	that	is	the	only	way
left.	That	is	a	way	of	monopolising,	so	only	 their	opium	remains	in	the	market
and	everything	else	becomes	illegal.
People	are	living	in	suffering.	There	are	only	two	ways	out	of	it:	either	they	can
become	meditators	--
alert,	aware,	conscious...	that's	an	arduous	thing.	It	needs	guts.	The	cheaper	way
is	to	find	something	can	make	you	even	more	unconscious	than	you	are	so	you
cannot	feel	the	misery.	Find	something	that	makes	you	utterly	insensitive,	some
intoxicant,	some	pain-killer	that	makes	you	so	unconscious	that	you	can	escape
into	 that	 unconsciousness	 and	 forget	 all	 about	 your	 anxiety,	 anguish,
meaninglessness.
The	second	way	is	not	the	true	way.	The	second	way	only	makes	your	suffering
a	little	more	comfortable,	a	little	more	tolerable,	a	little	more	convenient,	but	it
does	not	help,	it	does	not	transform	you.
The	only	transformation	happens	through	meditation,	because	meditation	is	the
only	method	that	makes	you	aware.	To	me	meditation	is	 the	only	true	religion.
All	else	is	hocus-pocus.	And	there	are	different	brands	of	opium	--	Christianity,
Hinduism,	Mohammedanism,	 Jainism,	 Buddhism	 --	 but	 they	 are	 just	 different
brands.
The	container	is	different	but	the	content	is	the	same:	they	all	help	you	in	some
way	to	adjust	to	your	suffering.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 take	 you	 beyond	 suffering;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 adjust	 to
suffering.	There	is	a	possibility	to	be	totally	free	of	suffering;	but	then	the	path	is
a	little	arduous,	then	the	path	is	a	challenge.
You	have	to	become	aware	of	your	body	and	what	you	are	doing	with	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
One	 day	Buddha	was	 giving	 his	morning	 discourse	 and	 the	 king	 had	 come	 to
listen	 to	 him.	He	was	 sitting	 just	 in	 front	 of	Buddha	 and	he	was	 continuously
moving	his	big	toe.	Buddha	stopped	talking	and	looked	at	the	king's	toe.	When
Buddha	looked	at	his	toe,	obviously,	the	king	stopped	moving	it.	Buddha	started
talking	and	again	and	again	(laughter)	he	started	moving	his	 toe.	Then	Buddha
asked	 him	 'Why	 are	 you	 doing	 that?'	 The	 king	 said	 'Only	 when	 you	 stopped
speaking	 and	 looked	 at	 my	 toe	 did	 I	 become	 aware	 of	 what	 I	 was	 doing,
otherwise	I	was	not	at	all	conscious.'	Buddha	said	'This	is	your	toe	and	you	are
not	 conscious...	 Then	 you	 can	 even	 murder	 a	 person!	 And	 you	 may	 not	 be
conscious.'	 And	 exactly	 int	 hat	 way	 people	 have	 been	 murdered	 and	 the
murderer	has	not	been	conscious.
Many	 times	 in	 the	 courts	 murderers	 have	 absolutely	 denied	 that	 they	 have
murdered.	First	it	used	to	be	thought	that	they	were	just	deceiving,	but	the	latest
findings	are	that	they	are	not	deceiving;	they	did	it	in	a	very	unconscious	state.
They	 were	 so	 enraged,	 they	 were	 so	 angry	 at	 that	 moment	 that	 they	 were
possessed	by	their	rage.	And	when	you	are	enraged,	your	body	secretes	certain
intoxicating	poisons,	your	blood	becomes	intoxicated.
To	be	in	a	rage	is	to	be	in	a	temporary	madness.	And	the	person	will	completely
forget	about	it,	because	he	was	not	aware	at	all.	And	that's	how	people	are	falling
in	love,	killing	each	other,	committing	suicide,	doing	all	kinds	of	things.
The	first	step	in	awareness	 is	 to	be	very	watchful	of	your	body.	Slowly	slowly
one	 becomes	 alert	 about	 each	 gesture,	 each	 movement.	 And	 as	 you	 become
aware,	a	miracle	starts	happening:	many	things	that	you	used	to	do	before	simply
disappear,	your	body	becomes	more	relaxed,	your	body	becomes	more	attuned,	a
deep	peace	starts	prevailing	even	in	your	body,	a	subtle	music	pulsates	in	your
body.
Then	start	becoming	aware	of	your	thoughts;	 the	same	has	to	be	done	with	the
thoughts.	They	are	more	subtle	than	the	body	and	of	course,	more	dangerous	too.
And	when	you	become	 aware	 of	 your	 thoughts,	 you	will	 be	 surprised	 at	what
goes	on	 inside	you.	 If	you	write	down	whatsoever	 is	going	on	at	any	moment,
you	 are	 in	 for	 a	 great	 surprise.	You	will	 not	 believe	 'This	 is	what	 is	 going	 on
inside	me.'	 Just	 for	 ten	minutes	go	on	writing.	Close	 the	doors,	 lock	 the	doors
and	the	windows	so	nobody	can	come	in,	so	you	can	be	totally	honest,	and	keep
a	fire	so	you	can	throw	it	in	the	fire!	(laughter),	so	nobody	will	know	except	you.
And	then	be	truly	honest,	so	on	writing	whatsoever	is	going	on	inside	the	mind.
Don't	interpret	it,	don't	change	it,	don't	edit	it.	Just	put	it	on	the	paper	as	naked	as
it	is,	exactly	as	it	is.
And	after	ten	minutes	you	read	it	--	you	will	see	a	mad	mind	inside!	We	are	not
aware	 that	 this	whole	madness	goes	on	 running	 like	an	undercurrent.	 It	affects
everything	that	is	significant	in	your	life.	It	affects	whatsoever	you	are	doing;	it
affects	whatsoever	you	are	not	doing,	it	affects	everything.	And	the	sum	total	of
it	is	going	to	be	your	life!	So	this	madman	has	to	be	changed.	And	the	miracle	of
awareness	is	that	you	need	not	do	anything	except	to	become	aware.
The	 very	 phenomenon	 of	 watching	 it,	 changes	 it.	 Slowly	 slowly	 the	madman
disappears,	 slowly	 slowly	 the	 thoughts	 start	 falling	 into	 a	 certain	pattern:	 their
chaos	is	no	more,	they	become	more	of	a	cosmos;	and	then	again,	a	deeper	peace
prevails.	And	when	your	body	and	your	mind	are	at	peace	you	will	see	that	they
are	 attuned	 to	 each	 other	 too,	 there	 is	 a	 bridge.	 Now	 they	 are	 not	 running	 in
different	 directions,	 they	 are	 not	 riding	 on	 different	 horses.	 For	 the	 first	 time
there	is	accord	and	that	accord	helps	immensely	to	work	on	the	third	step	--	that
is,	becoming	aware	of	your	feelings,	emotions,	moods.	That	is	the	subtlest	layer
and	the	most	difficult,	but	if	you	can	be	aware	of	the	thoughts	then	it	is	just	one
step	more.	A	little	more	intense	awareness	is	reeded	as	you	start	reflecting	your
moods,	your	emotions,	your	feelings.
Once	 you	 are	 aware	 of	 all	 these	 three,	 they	 all	 become	 joined	 into	 one
phenomenon.	And	when	all	 these	three	are	one,	functioning	together,	perfectly,
humming;	together,	you	can	feel	 the	music	of	all	 three	--	 they	have	become	an
orchestra.	Then	the	fourth	happens,	which	you	cannot	do	--	it	happens	of	its	own
accord.	It	is	a	gift	from	the	whole.	It	is	a	reward,	for	those	who	have	done	these
three.
And	 the	 fourth	 is	 the	 ultimate	 awareness	 that	 makes	 one	 awakened.	 One
becomes	 aware	 of	 one's	 awareness	 --	 that	 is	 the	 fourth.	 That	 makes	 one	 a
Buddha,	 the	 awakened.	And	 only	 in	 that	 awakening	 one	 comes	 to	 know	what
bliss	is.	The	body	knows	pleasure,	 the	mind	knows	happiness,	 the	heart	knows
joy,	the	fourth	knows	bliss.	Bliss	is	the	goal	of	sannyas	and	awareness	is	the	path
towards	it.
Man	lives	as	if	he	is	separate	from	existence;	but	it	is	only	an	'as	if'.	One	cannot
really	be	separate	--	that	is	impossible;	but	one	can	believe	that	one	is	separate.
That	is	possible.	One	can	have	this	notion	of	separation.	That	freedom	is	given	to
man,	that	is	man's	prerogative,	his	privilege.	No	animal	has	that	privilege;	hence
animals	 have	 a	 certain	 beauty	 and	 a	 certain	 blissfulness,	 a	 certain	 innocence
which	man	has	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
lost.	In	fact	that	is	the	meaning	of	the	biblical	story	that	man	has	been	turned	out
of	the	Garden	of	Eden.
Animals	are	still	there,	trees	are	still	there;	only	man	has	been	turned	out.	Man
has	chosen	to	get	out.
Freedom	is	a	very	risky	phenomenon.	Freedom	does	not	mean	that	you	are	free
only	 to	do	 right	 --	 that	will	 not	 be	 freedom.	Freedom	certainly	means	you	 are
also	free	to	do	wrong	only	then	there	is	freedom.
Henry	Ford	had	made	his	first	cars	--	they	were	all	black	and	when	he	showed
them	to	people,	the	prospective	customers,	in	his	show	room,	he	used	to	say	'You
are	free	to	choose	any	colour	provided	it	is	black.'	But	what	kind	of	freedom	is
this	'provided	it	is	black'?	and	there	were	only	black	cars!
Animals	are	doing	right	not	because	they	have	chosen	to	do	it;	it	is	programmed,
it	 is	built-in.	They	are	doing	simply	whatsoever	is	 the	programme	inside.	They
are	following	it,	they	don't	have	any	choice.
Man	has	a	speciality,	a	privilege.	It	is	his	glory	that	he	is	free	to	choose.	He	can
decide	about	his	own	destiny.	All	other	animals	have	a	fixed	destiny.	They	have
a	fate.	Only	man	is	fateless.	Only	man	is	born	as	a	blank	sheet	of	paper,	a	tabula
rasa;	 he	 has	 to	 write	 on	 it,	 it	 is	 unprogrammed.	 That's	 a	 beautiful	 gift	 from
existence!	But	it	is	dangerous	also...
And	there	is	every	possibility	that	man	will	choose	the	wrong	thing,	because	it	is
always	 the	wrong	 thing	 that	 gives	you	 the	 feeling	of	 freedom.	The	 right	 thing
does	 not	 give	 you	 the	 feeling	 of	 freedom.	 It	 is	 always	 the	 no	 that	 gives	 you
feeling	 of	 freedom.	 It	 is	 never	 the	 yes.	 For	 that	 you	 need	 a	 greater	 maturity.
When	yes	can	give	you	the	feeling	of	freedom,	when	doing	right	can	give	you
the	 sense	 of	 freedom	 --	 for	 that	 a	 greater	maturity,	 a	 greater	 understanding,	 a
greater	awareness	is	needed.
Psychologists	 say	 that	 the	 child	 has	 to	 say	 not	 to	 his	 parents	 just	 to	 feel	 free,
otherwise	he	will	not	feel	free.	The	mother	says	'Don't	go	out';	then	he	has	to	go.
If	he	simply	follows	his	mother's	orders	then	he	feels	like	a	slave.
A	little	boy	comes	back	from	the	river.	He	has	been	fishing.	The	mother	aks	--
she	was	angry	--	 'Johnny,	if	you	wanted	to	go	fishing,	why	didn't	you	ask	me?'
And	the	little	boy	says	'Because	I	wanted	to	go!'	Ask	and	it	is	always	no.
The	mother	also	enjoys	saying	no	because	that	gives	her	power,	that	'no'	makes
her	 feel	 powerful.	The	 child	 also	wants	 to	 say	 no	because	 that	 also	 gives	 him
power,	freedom.	Adam	and	Eve	had	to	eat	from	the	Tree	of	Knowledge,	it	was
absolutely	inevitable,	because	they	had	been	prevented.	Now	there	was	only	one
possibility	to	feel	free:	to	eat	the	fruit	of	the	Tree	of	Knowledge,	otherwise	there
was	no	sense	of	freedom.
So	 remember,	 each	 child	 has	 to	 go	 wrong.	 It	 is	 almost	 natural.	 So	 I	 am	 not
against	it,	one	just	has	to	be	alert	that	there	is	a	time	to	go	wrong	and	there	is	a
time	to	go	right.	 It	 is	good	for	small	children,	 immature	children,	 to	say	no,	 to
disobey,	to	go	against	everything	that	is	told	to	them;	but	there	comes	a	moment
when	you	are	mature	enough	that	you	should	learn	a	higher	quality	of	freedom
that	comes	by	saying	yes,	by	surrendering.
The	 fundamental	 no	 that	man	 says	 to	 existence	 is:	 'I	 am	 separate.'	 That	 is	 the
foundation	of	the	ego,	it	creates	the	ego	--	'I	am	separate.'	This	is	good	as	far	as	it
goes.	 Each	 person	 needs	 a	 certain	 ego;	 only	 then	 is	 surrender	 possible	 --
otherwise	what	will	you	surrender?	First	you	have	to	have	it	to	surrender	it.
So	each	child	has	to	learn	the	way	of	the	ego,	he	has	to	be	separate;	but	if	one
lives	his	whole	life	in	this	separation,	then	one	is	miserable.	Sannyas	means	that
you	 are	 now	 moving	 away	 from	 saying	 no,	 towards	 yes,	 because	 it	 is	 only
through	yes	that	the	union	will	happen.	No	separates,	yes	unites.
Saying	yes	to	existence	becomes	the	bridge.	That's	what	trust	is.	And	trust	brings
relaxation,	a	subtle	calmness.	You	are	no	more	fighting	against	the	river,	you	are
no	more	pushing	the	river.	You	start	floating	with	it,	flowing	with	it.	You	are	not
even	swimming,	you	are	not	going	upcurrent;	you	are	just	going	with	the	current
wherever	 it	 is	 going	 --	 joyously,	 dancingly,	 singing,	 going	 towards	 the	 ocean.
That	brings	unions.
Sooner	or	later	the	river	reaches	and	disappears	into	the	ocean.
Sannyas	is	the	beginning	of	surrender,	of	saying	yes;	and	then	one	day,	the	river
of	sannyas	takes	you	to	the	ocean,	to	the	ultimate,	to	the	whole.	and	only	when
the	 part	 has	 again	 become	 one	with	 the	whole,	 consciously,	 there	 arises	 great
bliss.	A	thousand	and	one	blessings	start	showering	on	you.
Religion	has	lived	without	laughter	--	that	has	been	one	of	the	greatest	calamities
--	and	I	am	trying	to	introduce	laughter	into	religion!	Religious	people	tend	to	be
serious,	 sad,	 sombre,	 long	 faced.	 That	 has	 been	 thought	 for	 centuries	 to	 be
something	 holy:	 the	 saint	 has	 to	 be	 sad,	 serious,	 the	 saint	 is	 not	 supposed	 to
laugh.	Laughter	seems	to	be	mundane,	something	ordinary.	It	is	not	so.
Laughter	is	the	most	extraordinary	phenomenon.	Laughter	is	the	most	religious
experience.	 And	 only	 man	 is	 capable	 of	 laughter.	 Donkeys	 and	 buffalos	 and
crocodiles	(laughter),	they	are	all	saints	--	they	don't	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
laugh	 at	 all!	And	our	 so-called	 saints	 have	 fallen;	 they	have	not	 risen	 towards
higher	peaks.	They	have	become	donkeys,	buffalos,	crocodiles...
Religion	 is	dead	without	 laughter.	 It	 becomes	alive	only	when	one	can	have	a
total	 laugh,	 a	passionate,	 intense	 laughter,	 so	 that	 it	 dances	 in	 all	 your	 cells,	 it
vibrates	in	your	whole	being,	it	becomes	something	bigger	than	you,	so	that	you
are	just	a	small	thing	in	it,	it	surrounds	you	like	an	aura	and	you	disappear	into	it.
And	 that's	 exactly	 what	 happens	 in	 laughter:	 your	 ego	 disappears.	 It	 may	 not
disappear	in	your	prayer	--
your	prayer	may	even	strengthen	it.	The	prayerful	becomes	holier-than-thou.	It
will	not	go	away	because	of	your	austerities	and	asceticism	--	 it	becomes	even
more	solid	and	concrete.	But	when	you	have	a	really	good	laugh	the	ego	is	no
more	there.	For	a	moment	a	window	opens,	for	a	moment	 the	ego	is	not	 there.
And	when	the	ego	is	not	there,	you	are.	When	the	ego	is	there,	you	are	not.
Ego	is	a	phony	phenomenon.	It	is	a	poor	substitute	for	your	real,	authentic	being.
Because	we	don't	know	our	real	being	we	have	substituted	for	it	with	the	ego.
Laughter	is	symbolic.	I	use	it	as	a	symbol,	a	symbol	that	represents	egolessness.
And	laughter	is	also	playful.	It	brings	you	back	to	your	lost	childhood.	Children
laugh	 truly.	 Their	 laughter	 has	 no	 politics	 in	 it;	 but	 soon	 we	 start	 learning
political	ways	in	everything.	Even	in	laughter	we	become	political.
I	have	heard	about	a	very	rich	man	who	used	to	tell	the	same	jokes,	almost	the
same	 jokes,	 every	 day	 to	 his	manager	 and	 secretaries	 and	 typists,	 and	 they	 all
used	to	laugh	as	if	they	had	never	heard	those	jokes.
But	one	day	one	typist	didn't	laugh.	The	boss	was	offended;	he	said	'What	is	the
matter	with	you?	You	have	always	been	laughing	so	loudly	--	why	are	you	not
laughing	today?'	She	said	'Tomorrow	I	am	leaving	(laughter)	so	I	need	not	laugh.
These	people	still	have	to	be	here.'
Even	laughter	becomes	political,	economical,	a	subtle	strategy;	 then	 it	 loses	 its
beauty,	its	spirituality.
Laughter	becomes	ugly	when	you	laugh	only	at	others.	When	you	start	laughing
at	yourself	too,	then	it	starts	having	a	new	dimension.	Then	the	whole	of	life	is
taken	non-seriously	--	sincerely	but	non-seriously.
One	 respects	 life	 but	 one	 knows	 that	 it	 is	 full	 of	 cheer,	 full	 of	 joy,	 full	 of
playfulness.
We	 have	 called	 it	 in	 the	 East,	 leela;	 leela	means	 playfulness.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the
greatest	contributions	to	the	world.	Ordinarily	all	the	religions	have	said	that	god
created	the	world,	and	when	they	say	it	they	say	it	very	seriously,	'God	is	doing
something	very	great';	but	only	 the	eastern	mystics	had	 the	courage	 to	say	 that
god	was	just	playful	--	it	is	not	a	serious	creation	--	just	his	playfulness,	the	way
you	sometimes,	sitting	in	the	sand	by	the	bank	of	a	river,	start	playing,	making
houses	of	the	sand.	You	know	that	it	is	just	play.	Or	making	boats	of	paper	and
letting	them	go	with	the	river...	you	know	that	it	is	play.
According	to	the	eastern	mystics,	god	created	the	world	just	as	playfulness.	That
is	why	the	eastern	attitude	and	approach	towards	god	is	totally	different.	In	the
western	idea	of	god,	particularly	the	Judaic,	Christian	and	Mohammedan	idea	--
these	are	the	three	religions	which	are	born	out	of	India	--	god	is	very	serious,	so
serious	that	after	six	days	of	work	he	became	tired	(laughter);	hence	Sunday,	the
holiday.
Just	the	other	day	I	was,	reading:	a	man	asked	a	friend	'When	were	you	born?	On
what	day?	'	And	the	man	said	'On	Sunday.'	The	man	was	a	little	puzzled	and	said
'On	Sunday?	But	 that	 is	a	holiday.	On	a	holiday	nothing;	should	happen.	Even
god	rested	on	that	day!'
It	must	have	been	a	serious	affair	for	six	days;	and	what	happened	to	god	since
then?	 --	 nothing	 has	 been	 heard.	 As	 far	 as	 we	 know,	 after	 Sunday	 comes
Monday,	but	for	god	Monday	never	came.	He	became	so	deadly	tired	that	after
he	created	the	woman,	he	stopped	creating	everything!	He	had	done	his	last!
But	 the	 eastern	god	 is	more	 a	 creativity	 than	a	 creator.	 It	 is	 still	 going	on,	 the
creativity;	 he	 is	 still	 painting	 the	 flowers	 and	 the	 peacock's	 feathers	 and	 the
people.	He	is	still	at	risk,	and	there	is	no	holiday,	because	every	day	is	a	holiday
if	it	is	playful.	If	it	is	not	work	then	every	day	is	a	holiday.
But	the	western	idea	of	god	is	that	of	a	workaholic:	six	days	of	strenuous	world
and	then	on	the	seventh	day	rest.	We	have	taken	life	as	a	beautiful	play.	And	the
moment	you	start	taking	life	as	a	play,	you	start	becoming;	cheerful	for	no	reason
at	 all.	 Then	 everything	 brings	 cheer	 to	 you:	 the	 stars	 and	 the	 trees	 and	 the
mountains	and	 the	people	and	 the	animals...	 It	 is	such	a	beautiful	existence,	so
mysterious,	so	paradoxical	that	one	can	do	only	one	thing:	one	can	have	a	hearty
laugh	at	the	whole	thing.	It	is	so	ridiculous	too,	so	absurd.
Mystery	can	always	be	 thought	of	only	as	absurdity,	because	you	cannot	make
any	sense	out	of	 it.	 In	a	way	 it	 is	nonsense.	What	 sense	 is	 there	 in	 flowers,	 in
creating	so	many	trees	and	so	many	animals?	What	sense	is	there	in	creating	the
existence	itself?'	In	fact	there	is	no	sense	or	logic,	there	is	mystery,	tremendous
mystery.
It	is	creation	for	creation's	sake;	and	once	you	start	approaching	life	in	this	way,
all	seriousness	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
disappears.	 And	 my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 laughing	 ones.	 They	 have	 to	 be
known	in	the	world	as	the	laughing	ones!
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101235
ShortTitle:	POND23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Your	name,	Daeniela	literally	means	god	is	my	judge.	It	is	a	declaration	of	trust
in	 the	 ultimate,	 it	 is	 a	 declaration	 that	 'I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 compromise	 for
anything	less	 than	the	ultimate	--	not	with	 the	society,	not	with	 the	church,	not
with	 the	state,	not	with	 the	mob	psychology;	even	 though	 it	means	death,	 then
too,	 only	 the	ultimate	 is	 going	 to	be	my	context,	my	 source,	my	guide.	 It	 is	 a
declaration	of	individuality.
The	 society	 tries	 to	 destroy	 individuality.	 Instead	 it	 jives	 you	 a	 phony	 thing,
personality.	Personality	is	political.	It	is	a	strategy	created	by	the	establishment
to	manipulate	the	individual,	to	keep	him	within	bounds,	to	keep	him	as	a	slave.
Ordinary	slavery	has	disappeared	 from	 the	world	but	 in	 its	place	a	very	subtle
slavery	has	come	into	existence,	psychological	slavery.	To	be	a	Christian	means
to	 be	 psychologically	 a	 slave.	 It	means	 the	 pope	 is	 the	 judge,	 the	 pope	 is	 the
mediator	between	you	and	the	ultimate.	You	don't	have	a	direct	connection	with
the	ultimate;	the	pope	has	to	interpret,	it	is	in	his	hands	what	he	makes	things	out
to	be.	You	have	 to	 follow	him;	 and	he	 is	 as	blind	 as	you	are,	 and	 the	blind	 is
leading	the	blind.
To	 be	 a	Mohammedan	 means	 to	 accept	 the	 Koran	 as	 the	 sacred	 scripture,	 to
follow	 it	without	any	 thinking,	without	any	contemplation.	You	will	be	 simply
obedient	to	it	--	that's	the	kind	of	subtle	slavery.
And	who	is	going	to	interpret	the	Koran?	You	are	not	allowed	to	interpret	it.	The
scholars	 will	 do	 it,	 the	 priests	 will	 do	 it,	 and	 the	 priests	 are	 prepared	 and
ordained	 by	 other	 priests,	 hence	 it	 is	 the	 past	 that	 dictates	 the	 present.	This	 is
slavery.
To	 be	 a	 Hindu	 is	 to	 be	 a	 slave,	 and	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 other	 religious
ideologies	 and	also	about	political	 ideologies.	To	be	a	 communist	 is	 the	 same,
just	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 a	 change;	 instead	 of	 the	 Koran,	 the	 Bible,	 the	 Gita	 --	 Das
Kapital;	instead	of	Mohammed,	Moses,	Mahavira,	Marx;	and	then	a	long	line	of
interpreters	and	you	are	just	to	be	obedient...
This	is	 the	ugly	situation	 in	which	humanity	 is	 living.	Man	has	 to	come	out	of
this	 slavery	 too.	 He	 has	 to	 declare	 that	 'Any	 relationship	 with	 the	 ultimate	 is
direct,	immediate.	I	don't	need	any	mediator,	I	don't	need	any	go-between,	I	don't
need	 any	 pope,	 any	 ayatollah,	 any	 imam,	 any	 shankaracharya.	 I	 belong	 to	 the
universe	 as	much	as	 anybody	else,	 so	why	 should	 I	 not	 approach	 the	universe
myself?	Why	 should	 I	 be	 dominated,	manipulated?	Why	 should	 I	 allow	 this?
This	is	humiliating,	this	is	disrespectful	towards	one's	own	being.
That's	 the	meaning	 of	Daeniela,	 god	 is	my	 judge	 --	 nobody	 else,	 nothing	 less
than	that,	and	god	simply	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
means	the	ultimate,	the	absolute,	the	whole.	And	the	moment	this	commitment	is
made,	 there	 is	 great	 rejoicing	 in	 the	 heart	 because	 freedom	 is	 achieved,	 and
freedom	is	the	deepest	desire	of	the	human	heart.
Slavery	is	ugly,	freedom	is	beautiful.	Slavery	is	misery,	freedom	is	bliss.
My	sannyasins	are	not	my	followers.	I	am	not	a	mediator	between	you,	and	the
ultimate.	My	function	is	to	help	you	to	be	directly	connected	to	the	universe	--
just	to	give	you	a	deep	understanding	of	your	own	being	and	how	to	relax	with
the	whole.
Sannyas	is	relaxation	into	the	whole,	disappearing	into	the	whole,	surrendering
towards	 the	 whole.	 The	 true	 master	 never	 stands	 between	 anybody	 and	 the
ultimate.	It	 is	only	the	pseudo	teacher	who	tries	 to	pretend	to	be	the	vehicle	of
god,	to	be	the	messenger	of	god,	to	be	the	prophet	of	god,	to	be	the	son	of	goo,
this	 and	 that,	 and	 tries	 to	 dominate	 people	 psychologically,	 spiritually.	 It	 is
exploitation.
My	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 part	 of	 any	 religion.	 I	 impart	 to	 you	 a	 kind	 of
religiousness,	but	not	any	ideology.
I	don't	give	you	any	knowledge,	any	doctrine,	any	philosophy.	I	simply	help	you
to	become	silent,	so	silent	that	you	can	hear	the	still,	small	voice	within	--	and
that	 is	 the	 voice	 of	 god.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 started	 hearing	 your	 own	 inner
voice,	you	are	on	the	right	 track.	Then	my	function	is	fulfilled.	Then	I	can	say
goodbye	to	you.
The	greatest	pleasure	of	 the	real	master	 is	 to	make	 the	disciple	a	master	of	his
own	being.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	said	something	immensely	beautiful.	He	was	a	madman,
but	sometimes	mad	people	have	insights	into	reality	far	deeper	than	the	so-called
sane.	The	so-called	sane	live	very	superficially.	They	live	a	life	of	respectability.
They	become	Rotarians,	Lions,	mayors,	presidents,	prime	ministers,	they	do	all
kinds	of	stupid	things;	just	to	remain	respectable,	they	are	ready	to	compromise
for	 anything	 if	 it	 gives	 respect.	 They	 follow	 the	 dictates	 of	 stupid	 priests,
because	 that	 is	 the	 only	way	 to	 pretend	 to	 be	moral,	 holy:	 they	 go	 to	 church
every	 Sunday	 and	 really	 religiously,	 without	 any	 fall.	 However,	 their	 church-
going	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 religion.	 Again	 that	 too	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 club	 --	 a
religious	club	--
another	 kind	 of	 Rotary	 club,	 no	 difference	 in	 it,	 a	 formality,	 but	 it	 gives
respectability.
The	so-called	sane	are	after	money,	power,	prestige.
People	like	Nietzsche	are	mad,	but	because	they	are	mad,	because	they	have	not
compromised,	 they	 can	 have	 a	 few	 glimpses	 of	 the	 ultimate	 --	 only	 glimpses,
because	they	are	not	Buddhas.
Buddha	 is	 also	mad,	but	with	 a	method.	Nietzsche	 is	 simply	mad	without	 any
method	--	that's	the	difference.	If	he	had	known	about	meditation	then	he	would
have	been	a	Buddha,	an	awakened	one.
Madness	plus	meditation	 is	equal	 to	buddhahood.	But	 if	meditation	 is	missing,
even	then	one	has	the	capacity	to	see	a	little	bit,	from	here	and	there,	about	truth.
Nietzsche	says	 'The	darkest	day	in	humanity's	life	will	be	the	day	when	people
will	 stop	 surpassing	 themselves.'	 --	 and	 this	 he	 wrote	 when	 he	 was	 mad,
imprisoned	in	a	madhouse,	just	one	year	before	he	died.
Let	me	 repeat	 --	 his	 statement	 is	 significant	The	gloomiest,	 the	darkest	 day	 in
humanity's	life	will	be	when	man	will	stop	surpassing	himself.
Man	is	the	only	animal	who	can	surpass	himself.	No	other	animal	can	do	it,	no
tree	can	do	it.	Nobody	except	man	is	capable	of	it.	A	rose	is	going	to	remain	a
rose	--	it	cannot	surpass	itself.	A	lion	is	going	to	remain	a	lion	--	there	is	no	way
to	 surpass.	 But	man	 has	 the	 capacity	 to	 go	 beyond	 himself.	 That's	 his	 special
privilege,	 that's	 his	 dignity,	 his	 grandeur.	 And	 by	 surpassing	 himself	 man
becomes	divine.
Man	is	a	transitory	stage.	Below	man	is	the	world	of	animals,	above	man	is	the
world	of	gods.	And	by	gods	I	don't	mean	any	metaphysical	gods;	I	mean	people
who	have	become	awakened,	 the	Buddhas.	They	are	 the	only	gods,	 those	who
have	attained	to	that	ultimate	transcendence	beyond	which	there	is	nothing	else,
who	 have	 come	 to	 the	 very	 end	 of	 the	 journey.	 Below	 man	 are	 animals,
absolutely	unconscious	above	man	are	Buddhas,	absolutely	conscious;	and	man
is	just	in	between,	a	ladder,	a	bridge.
Again,	 Friedrich	Nietzsche	 says	 that	 'Man	 is	 a	 bridge	 between	 two	 eternities.'
Unconsciousness	 is	eternal,	vast,	 immense,	consciousness	 is	also	eternal	--	and
man	 is	 a	 bridge.	And	 one	 should	 not	make	A	 house	 on	 the	 bridge.	 It	 is	 not	 a
place	to	make	a	house;	it	is	only	a	place	to	be	surpassed.	One	has	to	go	beyond
it.	Hence	only	those	few	people	who	are	constantly	making	efforts	to	transcend
themselves	are	truly	alive.	The	others	are	dead.
A	 sannyasins	 has	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 surpassing,	 transcending,	 going	 beyond.	 I
call	that	art,	meditation.	It	helps	you	to	go	beyond	your	body,	beyond	your	mind,
beyond	your	heart,	and	beyond	these	three	is	the	world	of	the	gods,	the	world	of
the	 awakened	 ones,	 the	 enlightened	 ones,	 where	 dewdrops	 disappear	 into	 the
vast	ocean	of	reality,	when	all	small	egos	disappear	and	one	is	part	of	the	whole.
And	to	be	part	of	the	whole	is	the	only	way	to	be	holy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
24	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101245
ShortTitle:	POND24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Truth	cannot	be	found	through	analysis.	Facts	can	be	found	--	that's	the	way	to
find	facts,	but	not	the	truth.	Truth	is	indivisible,	hence	there	is	no	way	to	dissect
it.	For	example,	you	can	dissect	a	flower	and	you	can	find	through	analysis	all
the	material	constituents	of	it	--	how	much	earth	it	contains	and	how	much	water
and	how	many	other	chemicals	--	but	you	cannot	find	the	beauty.	The	beauty	will
disappear	 in	 analysis.	 The	moment	 you	 dissect	 the	 flower	 you	 have	 killed	 its
beauty.	The	 beauty	 belongs	 to	 the	whole,	 the	 beauty	 is	 organic.	The	 beauty	 is
spiritual	--	it	is	the	spirit	of	the	flower.	It	is	not	its	body,	it	is	its	soul.
By	dissection,	by	analysis,	you	are	simply	working	on	 the	corpse.	 It	 is	a	post-
mortem,	the	soul	has	left	it;	hence	science	only	comes	to	know	about	facts.	It	is
limited	because	of	its	very	methodology.	Its	method	is	analysis.	And	because	it
cannot	 find	 through	 analysis	 anything	 like	 soul,	 consciousness,	 beauty,	 truth,
godliness,	freedom,	it	tends	to	deny	them.	Directly	or	indirectly	its	emphasis	is,
that	which	cannot	be	found	through	scientific	methods	is	not	existential,	is	only
in	the	imagination	of	man.	That	is	absolutely	wrong.
The	real	existence	consists	of	beauty,	of	love,	of	freedom,	of	truth,	of	godliness,
of	eternity.	It	is	not	part	of	time	or	space,	It	is	not	material,	it	is	immaterial.	It	is
not	 visible,	 it	 is	 invisible.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 divisible	 either;	 hence	 a	 totally	 new
approach	is	needed.	That	approach	is	sannyas.
Sannyas	is	the	very	essence	of	religiousness.	One	has	to	go	beyond	analysis	and
then	see.	One	has	to	learn	a	totally	new	way	of	seeing,	of	being,	of	relating.	You
can	relate	to	the	flower	as	a	scientist,	you	can	relate	to	the	flower	as	a	poet,	you
can	relate	to	the	flower	as	a	mystic.	The	scientist	will	find	only	the	material	part
of	 it.	The	poet	 is	exactly	 in	between	the	scientist	and	the	mystic:	something	of
the	 material	 and	 something	 of	 the	 spiritual	 will	 be	 there;	 hence	 poetry	 is	 a
midway	station	between	science	and	religion.
And	obviously,	because	it	consists	of	two	diametrically	opposite	polarities,	there
is	a	certain	paradox	is	it.	The	poet	cannot	be	consistent	--	that	is	impossible.	If	he
wants	to	be	consistent	then	he	either	has	to	all	back	to	the	plane	of	science,	the
lowest	 plane,	 or	 he	 has	 to	 rise	 above	 to	 the	 highest	 plane,	 the	 plane	 of	 the
Buddhas.	Then	he	can	be	consistent.
As	a	poet	it	is	his	destiny	to	be	inconsistent.
Walt	 Whitman	 says	 'Yes,	 I	 am	 inconsistent.	 I	 am	 vast	 enough	 to	 contain
inconsistencies.'	 The	 poet	 has	 to	 be	 vast	 enough,	 because	 he	 is	 like	 a	 ladder
between	two	different	planes,	two	different	languages,	two	different	visions.	The
poet	is	a	little	bit	crazy.	It	is	bound	to	be	so.
It	 is	said	about	a	great	poet,	Coleridge,	 that	one	professor	of	 literature	came	to
him	and	asked	the	meaning	of	one	of	his	poems;	a	certain	particular	section	of
the	poem	was	very	elusive.	And	the	professor	said	'I	always	find	difficulty	with
this	part	when	I	am	teaching	it	to	the	students.	And	this	part	is	such	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
somebody	is	bound	to	ask	questions,	and	I	cannot	answer	them.	So	I	thought	it
wise	to	come	to	you;	you	are	the	only	person	who	can	explain	it	to	me.'
Coleridge	 looked	at	 the	poem	and	said	 'There	were	 two	persons	who	knew	the
meaning:	 one	 is	 god,	 I	 am	 the	other.	You'd	better	 consult	 god,	 because	 I	 have
completely	forgotten	the	meaning.	I	don't	know	myself.
When	I	am	in	a	poetic	flight	I	know	what	it	means,	but	when	I	come	back	down
to	 the	earth	 I	 lose	 the	meaning	myself.	So	 if	you	 find	 the	meaning	some	 time,
please	be	kind	enough	to	tell	it	to	me	too,	because	I	also	feel	puzzled.	I	cannot
change	it	because	it	is	so	beautiful,	but	I	cannot	make	any	sense	out	of	it	either.'
This	is	always	true	about	great	poets:	in	their	poetic	flight	they	touch	the	other
extreme.	 When	 they	 start	 expressing	 themselves	 they	 have	 to	 use	 language,
logic,	and	what	they	have	touched	is	silence.	And	the	silence	has	to	be	expressed
in	 words...	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 very	 difficult,	 troublesome,	 in	 fact,	 almost
impossible.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 third	 plane,	 the	 plane	 of	 awakened	 consciousness.	 It	 is	 beyond
analysis,	it	is	beyond	poetry	too.	It	is	utter	silence.	Nothing	can	be	said	about	it,
nothing	has	ever	been	said	about	it.	Nothing	will	ever	be	said	about	it.
Yes,	 you	 can	 feel	 it	when	you	 are	 attuned	with	 someone	who	has	 reached	 the
point	 of	 no	 return,	 one	 who	 has	 gone	 beyond,	 entered	 into	 the	 very	 truth	 of
existence	 itself.	He	cannot	 say	anything;	 about	 it	 but	he	can	 show.	His	 fingers
can	point	 towards	 the	moon,	his	presence	can	be	a	 triggering	point,	a	catalytic
agent	--
and	that's	what	the	master	and	the	disciple	relationship	is	all	about.
The	disciple	is	simply	saying	'I	am	ready	to	come	close	to	you	--	let	me	come	in!'
And	 the	master	 is	 available,	 always	 available	 to	 anybody	 who	 knocks	 on	 his
door.	And	once	the	disciple	starts	coming	closer	and	closer	and	closer,	a	moment
comes	when	 the	presence	of	 the	master	 triggers	 something	 in	 the	disciple	 that
takes	 him	 beyond	 all	 logic,	 all	 mind,	 all	 philosophy.	 He	 becomes	 part	 of	 a
profound	silence	--	very	alive	is	that	silence.	It	brings	thousands	of	songs	to	your
being,	it	comes	like	a	spring	and	you	are	all	flowers,	but	that	happens	like	magic.
The	relationship	between	a	master	and	a	disciple	is	a	magical	relationship.	It	is	a
miracle	--	a	miracle	which	happens	through	two	things:	the	utter	egolessness	of
the	master	and	the	absolute	surrender	of	the	disciple.
The	master	is	egoless;	 if	 the	disciple	also	surrenders,	he	becomes	egoless.	And
only	 two	 egoless	 beings	 can	merge	 into	 each	 other,	 can	 lose	 their	 boundaries.
Then	one	knows	 the	 taste	of	 the	wine;	 and	 the	wine	 is	 such	 that	 it	 brings	 two
things	into	your	being:	awareness	and	drunkenness	together.	One	becomes	drunk
with	 the	 divine	 and	 at	 the	 same	 time,	 simultaneously,	 one	 becomes	 absolutely
aware.
But	one	has	to	pass	first	beyond	the	scientific	attitude,	approach	--	because	we
are	trained	for	that	--	and	second,	beyond	the	poetic	imagination.
Science	is	thinking,	poetry	is	imagination	and	truth	is	beyond	both.	It	is	neither
thinking	nor	imagination.	It	is	realisation.
Veet	Shastro	means	beyond	scriptures	--	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
Words	are	inadequate.	It	 is	a	direct	communion,	not	communication.	There	are
three	ways	 to	 relate.	One	 is	 head-to-head	which	 is	what	people	use	ordinarily.
The	other	 is	rarely	used	--	heart-to-heart	 --	only	once	in	a	while	at	 the	peak	of
their	 love	people	use	 it	 but	 very	hesitantly,	 very	 cautiously,	 because	 it	 looks	 a
little	 bit	 insane.	They	have	 lived	 their	 lives	 according	 to	 the	head;	 the	head	 is
mathematical,	 calculating,	 rational,	 and	 the	heart	 is	 irrational.	So	 it	 looks	 as	 if
you	are	going	a	little	astray.	One	feels	a	little	embarrassed.
All	 lovers	 feel	 embarrassed,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 themselves	 feel
"What	are	they	doing?	What	is	happening	to	them?"	Hence	the	phrase	'falling	in
love'	exists	in	all	the	languages	of	the	world.	It	is	significant	--	why	is	it	called
'falling',	why	not	'rising'	in	love?	Because	the	head	is	the	top	and	when	you	fall
in	 love	you	 are	 getting	down	 towards	 the	heart,	 and	 the	head	 is	 very	 egoistic.
The	head	lives	with	the	idea	that	whatsoever	fits	with	it	is	right.	Whatsoever	falls
below	it	is	wrong;	hence	lovers	are	thought	to	be	crazy,	mad,	because	they	start	a
different	kind	of	relating.	It	 is	more	poetic,	more	aesthetic,	 less	prose-like,	 less
logical;	of	course,	more	beautiful,	but	beauty	has	no	value	in	the	marketplace.
In	 the	day-to-day	world	of	business,	beauty	 is	not	a	commodity.	Maybe	 in	 the
off-hours,	when	you	have	nothing	 to	do,	you	can	 take	an	 interest	 in	poetry,	 in
painting,	in	beauty,	as	a	hobby,	but	it	cannot	be	made	your	life,	it	cannot	be	your
life-style.	 That's	 what	 the	 head	 is	 continuously	 telling	 everybody.	 From	 the
school	 to	 the	 university	we	 are	 preparing	 everybody	 to	 live	 only	 in	 the	 head;
twenty-five	years	preparation
--	that	is	one-third	of	one's	life	and	the	most	important	one	third.	Naturally,	the
heart	 remains	 ungrown,	 undernourished,	 neglected,	 ignored	 --	 and	 that	 is	 only
the	second	layer.	There	is	still	a	deeper	part	of	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
existence,	the	deepest:	the	being.
Something	 has	 to	 take	 a	 quantum	 leap	 from	 the	 head,	 and	 from	 the	 heart	 too,
towards	 the	being.	 It	has	 to	be	a	quantum	 leap,	 just	a	 jump	 into	 the	unknown.
Only	when	 you	 are	 in	 the	world	 of	 being	 does	 real	 relating	 happen.	 If	 in	 the
words	of	the	head,	in	that	terminology,	communication	happens,	then	at	the	heart
level	communion	happens,	and	at	the	being	level	union	happens	--	not	unity	but
union,	a	merger,	a	dissolution.
A	disciple	has	to	be	ready	for	that;	a	deep	union	with	the	master.
The	master	 is	 only	 a	 preparation	ground.	Once	you	have	 learned	 the	 secret	 of
union,	of	merging,	of	melting,	 then	you	can	melt	with	the	whole	universe.	The
master	is	only	a	window.	Then	you	can	jump	out	of	the	window,	then	you	can	fly
into	the	sky	towards	the	stars.
The	scriptures	contain	words.	No	scripture	contains	the	truth.	By	its	very	nature
truth	cannot	be	contained	in	words.	So	it	may	be	the	Bible	or	the	Koran	or	the
Gita	--	it	does	not	matter;	no	scripture	contains	truth.
Truth	has	to	be	discovered	by	everyone	on	his	own.	One	cannot	borrow	it.	One
can	become	 learned	 through	 the	 scriptures,	very	 learned,	 scholarly,	but	 all	 that
learning	 and	 scholarship	 is	 just	 pure	 rubbish,	 unadulterated	 rubbish.	 It	 simply
helps	 you	 to	 become	 unaware	 of	 your	 ignorance.	 It	 becomes	 a	 cover-up.	 All
knowledgeability	is	a	cover-up.	But	it	does	not	make	you	wise,	it	does	not	give
you	 eyes.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 blind	 man	 learning	 about	 light	 --	 and	 he	 can	 know
everything	that	is	written	about	light,	he	can	learn	the	Braille	script	and	he	can
go	on	reading	and	reading	and	reading,	and	he	can	accumulate	much	information
--	but	that	will	not	give	him	any	experience	of	light.	The	only	thing	that	matters
is	experience.
Hence	one	has	to	drop	clinging	to	the	scriptures.
I	 am	 against	 all	 scriptures;	 against,	 because	 they	 are	 the	 cause	 of	 keeping
humanity	 in	 ignorance.	 My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 become	 as
unknowledgeable	as	possible,	so	that	a	few	windows	and	doors	can	open	up.
Ignorance	 is	 far	 more	 beautiful	 than	 knowledgeability	 because	 ignorance	 is
innocent,	 and	 knowledge	 is	 very	 cunning.	And	 from	 ignorance	 one	 can	move
towards	wisdom,	but	from	knowledge	there	is	no	way.	The	person	who	is	lost	in
knowledge	 is	 lost	 in	 an	 endless	 jungle	 --	 of	 words,	 theories,	 ideologies,
theologies,	philosophies	--	it	is	endless.	Hence	the	first	thing	required	in	sannyas
is	 :	put	aside	all	your	knowledge,	burn	all	your	scriptures;	be	 totally	 free	 from
the	past	and	from	whatsoever	has	been	told	to	you;	from	all	your	conditionings
of	being	a	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	communist,	atheist.
Just	today	I	was	reading	a	letter	of	a	great	atheist.	In	the	Indian	constitution	there
is	no	provision	for	the	atheists,	so	when	the	election	comes	and	the	voter	lists	are
prepared,	 every	 voter	 has	 to	 fill	 in	 a	 certain	 form	 in	which	 he	 has	 to	 show	 to
what	religion	he	belongs.	Now	if	he	is	an	atheist	he	is	in	a	difficulty.	If	he	does
not	 fill	 in	 the	 form,	even	 if	one	 item	 is	 left	out,	 the	 form	 is	 invalid.	He	has	 to
show	whether	 he	 is	 a	Hindu	or	 a	Mohammedan	or	 a	Christian	or	 a	 Jaina	or	 a
Buddhist;	he	has	to	show	his	religion.	If	he	does	not	belong	to	any	religion,	if	he
is	an	atheist,	 then	there	is	 trouble,	 then	he	cannot	be	a	voter.	So	this	rationalist
thinker	 has	 written	 a	 letter	 to	 the	 government	 saying,	 "There	 should	 be	 a
provision	in	the	coming	elections,	there	should	be	a	place	for	atheists	also."
When	I	was	reading	his	letter	I	could	see	that	he	has	no	idea	that	there	are	people
who	may	not	 be	 even	 atheists	 --	 for	 example,	 a	man	 like	me	who	 is	 neither	 a
Mohammedan	nor	a	Hindu	nor	a	Christian,	neither	theist	nor	atheist.	What	about
me?	There	should	also	be	a	provision	for	somebody	like	me	who	can	simply	say
all	this	nonsense	is	nonsense,	that	it	is	all	irrelevant,	that	"I	don't	belong	to	any
ism,	not	even	atheism";	that	too	is	a	religion;	the	religion	of	godlessness.
There	 are	 religions	 which	 believe	 in	 god	 and	 there	 are	 religions	 which	 don't
believe	in	god,	so	it	is	nothing	special.	It	belongs	to	the	same	category	--	whether
you	 believe	 or	 you	 don't	 believe	 --	 but	 I	 consider	 the	whole	matter	 pointless;
there	is	no	question	of	belief	or	non-belief.	I	neither	believe	nor	don't	believe;	I
just	don't	think	it	worth	any	consideration.
And	 that	 should	 be	 the	 approach	 of	 a	 real	 sannyasin.	 The	 question	 is	 of
experiencing,	and	when	you	experience	then	you	cannot	say	what	it	is.	You	can
sing,	you	can	dance,	you	can	laugh,	but	you	cannot	say	what	it	is.	You	can	show
it	in	many	ways	but	you	cannot	say	it.
Ludwig	Wittgenstein,	 one	of	 the	great	 logical	 thinkers	 of	 the	West,	 one	of	 the
most	 significant	 philosophers	 of	 this	 age,	 says,	 "If	 nothing	 can	 be	 said	 about
something,	then	nothing	should	be	said."	I	agree,	if	nothing	should	be	said	--	but
this	is	only	a	half-statement.
I	 would	 like	 to	 add	 something	 to	 it,	 if	 nothing	 can	 be	 said	 about	 something,
nothing	should	be	said,	but	you	can	show	something	about	it;	there	is	no	need	to
say.
The	real	master	shows	it	by	his	very	gestures,	the	way	he	looks	in	your	eyes,	the
way	he	sits,	the	way	he	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
walks,	the	way	he	is;	his	very	presence	is	the	message.
Marshall	McLuhan	has	just	died,	a	few	days	ago.	He	used	to	say	"The	medium	is
the	message."	I	can	change	it	a	little	bit;	the	messenger	is	the	message.
When	 Hazrat	 Mohammed	 died,	 his	 wife	 Ayasha	 was	 asked,	 "Can	 you	 say
something	about	his	character,	how	he	was?"	And	what	Ayasha	said	was	really
of	great	significance;	she	said,	"His	character	was	just	like	the	Koran."	Only	this
much	she	said:	"His	character	was	just	like	the	Koran.	The	Koran	is	his	message
and	 that	was	his	character	 too;	 the	way	he	walked,	 the	way	he	sat,	 the	way	he
ate,	the	way	he	slept,	was	just	like	the	Koran	--	the	same	song,	the	same	flavor,
the	same	fragrance,	the	same	music,	the	same	dance,	the	same	beauty."
The	master	shows	it,	he	cannot	say	it.	That's	why	only	a	few	people	are	capable
of	partaking	of	 the	master's	 being.	Those	who	come	as	observers	 are	going	 to
miss	the	point,	 those	who	come	as	critics	are	certainly	going	to	miss	the	point.
Those	who	 come	 in	 deep	 trust	 and	 surrender	 --	 only	 they	will	 be	 the	 blessed
ones,	because	only	they	will	be	able	to	understand.
Sannyas	makes	you	a	blessed	one.	It	gives	you	the	opportunity	to	live	side-by-
side	with	a	Buddha,	with	a	Christ,	with	a	Lao	Tzu,	with	a	Zarathustra!	It	is	the
greatest	 opportunity,	 the	 greatest	 blessing	 that	 can	 ever	 happen	 to	 any	 man.
There	is	nothing	greater	than	that.	This	is	the	greatest	gift	of	existence.
Respect	it	and	rejoice	in	it!
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
25	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101255
ShortTitle:	POND25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Pleasure	 is	 dependent	 on	 others,	 bliss	 is	 independent.	 Pleasure	 comes	 through
relationship,	 bliss	 arises	 in	 your	 absolute	 aloneness;	 hence	 pleasure	 always
brings	misery	 in	 its	wake,	because	when	something	is	dependent	on	somebody
else	there	is	bound	to	be	many	problems.
First,	the	fear:	what	is	available	today,	will	it	be	available	tomorrow	too	or	not?
And	fear	destroys	all	 joy;	 it	 is	poison	to	 joy,	 it	creates	anxiety,	anguish,	worry.
Out	of	this	fear	one	tends	to	possess	the	other,	so	that	the	future	becomes	secure,
insured.	But	the	moment	you	possess	the	other	you	have	reduced	the	other	into	a
commodity.	And	 joy	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 the	 other	 remains	 as	 individual,	 not	 a
thing.
So	one	is	in	a	dilemma.	If	you	allow	the	other	freedom,	then	there	is	fear.	If	you
don't	allow	the	freedom,	then	you	cut	the	very	roots	of	your	joy.	And	when	you
try	 to	 possess	 the	 other,	 the	 other	 is	 going	 to	 resist,	 because	 freedom	 is	 the
greatest	longing	in	every	heart.	Nobody	wants	to	be	enslaved.
The	resistance	can	be	either	feminine	or	it	can	be	very	male.	Feminine	resistance
is	subtle,	indirect;	male	resistance	is	aggressive.	So	the	other	can	be	resistant	in	a
subtle,	feminine	way;	hence	all	 the	women	go	on	nagging	their	lovers	in	every
possible	way	--	 that	 is	 their	way	of	 resistance.	Or,	 it	can	be	aggression	--	both
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are	 ugly.	 The	 male	 is	 aggressive;	 hence	 he	 has	 reduced	 women	 to	 a	 kind	 of
property.
All	these	problems	are	bound	to	arise,	and	when	you	try	to	possess	the	other,	the
other	is	bound	to	react	in	the	same	way,	tit	for	tat;	the	other	will	try	to	possess
you.	And	 then	 there	will	 be	 a	 struggle	over	who	 is	going	 to	dominate,	who	 is
superior,	who	is	more	powerful,	who	is	on	top.
Pleasure	 brings	many	miseries.	 They	 follow	 it	 like	 shadows.	Bliss	 is	 a	 totally
different	dimension.	It	is	your	natural	flowering.	It	is	just	being	con-tented	with
yourself.	It	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	stop	loving,	but	your	quality	of	love
will	be	totally	different.
When	you	are	 seeking	pleasure	 love	 is	only	a	means;	 the	 real	desire	 is	 to	 find
pleasure.	 Hence	 when	 you	 have	 found	 the	 pleasure	 your	 love	 disappears,
because	love	was	only	a	means	to	a	certain	end.	When	you	are	hungry	you	eat;
of	 course,	 when	 you	 are	 not	 hungry	 you	 are	 no	 more	 interested	 in	 the	 food.
Hence	all	 lovers	go	 through	 these	phases:	when	 they	are	 in	need	 they	are	very
loving,	 when	 the	 need	 is	 no	 more	 there	 they	 are	 very	 unloving,	 they	 take
revenge,	they	become	almost	enemies.
The	blissful	person	also	loves	but	his	love	is	not	a	means	to	any	end.	It	is	an	end
unto	itself,	it	is	a	sharing.	He	does	not	want	to	get	anything	out	of	it.	He	has	so
such	bliss,	so	much	fragrance	in	his	being,	he	wants	to	share	it.	He	is	almost	like
a	raincloud,	so	full	of	rainwater	that	it	wants	to	shower.
Monika	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	names	possible.	It	defines	exactly	the	state
of	the	awakened	person:	he	lives	alone;	out	of	his	aloneness	he	shares,	but	he	is
alone.	He	may	love	thousands	of	people,	he	may	love	the	whole	universe,	but	it
arises	 out	 of	 his	 deep	 aloneness.	And	 remember,	 because	 his	 aloneness	 brings
flowering,	bliss,	 freedom,	 truth,	 it	 is	not	 loneliness	at	 all.	His	aloneness	 is	 just
the	opposite	of	loneliness.
Loneliness	is	a	state	of	despair;	aloneness	is	a	state	of	total	bliss.
One	 can	 cultivate	 character,	 but	 then	 there	 is	 no	 dignity	 in	 it;	 it	 is	 arbitrary,
artificial,	imposed.	It	in	fact	creates	a	schizophrenic	state	in	the	person.	It	makes
one	split.	One	is	something	inside	and	just	the	opposite	on	the	outside.	It	gives
you	only	a	beautiful	facade,	a	mask,	and	a	mask	cannot	have	any	dignity	--	it	is
dead.
It	 can	 give	 you	 respectability,	 it	 can	 give	 you	much	honour,	 because	 as	 far	 as
your	 behaviour	 is	 concerned	 the	 society	 is	 in	 control.	And	 the	 society	 always
respects	 the	 people	who	 allow	 themselves	 to	 be	 controlled	 and	 enslaved.	 The
society	 never	 respects	 the	 rebellious	 person;	 it	 respects	 the	 popes	 and	 it	 kills
Jesus.
It	 is	 a	 very	 strange	world.	 Christ	 is	 crucified	 and	 popes	 are	 enthroned	 --	 and
popes	are	nothing!	They	are	just	parrots.	It	kills	the	real	and	honours	the	phony.
Society	wants	slaves,	the	state	wants	slaves,	the	church	wants	slaves;	hence	they
all	try	to	cultivate	a	certain	conscience	in	you.	Conscience	is	a	trick.
Now	scientists	have	been	working	on	putting	electrodes	in	the	human	brain	and
these	electrodes	can	be	manipulated	by	remote	control.	And	the	person	who	has
the	electrode	fixed	in	his	brain	will	not	be	aware	of	it	at	all,	because	the	inside	of
the	skull	is	absolutely	insensitive.	Even	if	you	put	a	small	rock	there	you	will	not
feel	it.	So	just	a	small	computerised	mechanism,	not	bigger	than	a	button,	can	be
put	into	the	head	very	easily,	and	the	remote-controller	can	make	you	do	things
which	 you	 will	 think	 you	 are	 doing	 out	 of	 your	 own	 choice	 and	 you	 will	 be
simply	behaving	according	to	some	far-away	source.
Delgado	has	 invented	many	 things	on	 these	 lines,	and	 it	 is	possible	 that	 in	 the
future	humanity	will	have	 to	 face	 this	danger.	This	 is	 far	more	dangerous	 than
atomic	bombs	or	hydrogen	bombs;	they	can	kill	your	body,	but	these	electrodes
can	kill	your	very	spirit.	In	a	dictatorial	country	every	child,	when	he	is	born	in
the	hospital,	can	be	fixed	immediately	with	an	electrode	--	 the	first	 thing	to	be
done	--	and	then	for	his	whole	life	he	can	be	controlled,	and	he	will	never	know.
When	he	 says	yes	he	will	 think	he	 is	 saying	yes,	but	 it	 is	 the	electrode	 that	 is
making	him	say	yes.
Now	 this	 is	 a	 more	 developed	 form	 of	 the	 old	 conscience.	 Conscience	 is	 a
bullock	cart	method;	it	takes	a	long	time.	The	family,	the	society,	the	school,	the
college,	 the	 university	 --	 almost	 twenty-five	 years	 it	 takes,	 one-third	 of	 a	 life-
time,	 to	 create	 a	 certain	 conscience:	 do	 this,	 don't	 do	 that.	 The	 old	method	 is
simply	nothing	but	hypnosis.	Go	on	repeating	to	the	small	child	'This	is	right	and
that	 is	 wrong.'	 This	 creates	 a	 subtle	 conditioning	 in	 his	 mind	 and	 then	 that
conditioning	 will	 control	 his	 whole	 life.	 This	 conditioning	 cannot	 have	 any
dignity.	It	will	give	you	a	certain	character,	but	it	will	not	give	you	dignity;	you
will	not	be	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha	or	a	Lao	Tzu	or	a	Zarathustra.
For	dignity	of	character,	consciousness	is	needed,	not	conscience	and	that's	 the
function	of	meditation.
Meditation	does	not	give	you	any	character	directly.	It	does	not	say	what	to	do
and	what	not	to	do.	It	never	gives	you	any	commandments.	It	simply	gives	you	a
technique	for	becoming	more	aware,	for	being	more	alert,	watchful,	witnessing.
Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 awareness.	 And	 once	 you	 are	 aware,	 out	 of	 your
awareness	your	actions	will	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
arise	--	not	out	of	conscience.	Conscience	is	cultivated	by	others,	by	the	vested
interests,	by	the	establishment.	Consciousness	is	yours.	It	is	individual,	it	is	not
collective.	Conscience	is	part	of	 the	mob	psychology.	Consciousness	gives	you
dignity	because	 it	 gives	you	 individuality.	 It	 gives	you	 rebellion,	 it	makes	you
capable	 of	 saying	 yes	 or	 no	 of	 your	 own	 accord.	 There	 is	 no	 foreign	 agency
manipulating	you	in	the	name	of	religion,	morality,	etcetera.
My	effort	here	is	just	to	help	you	to	be	more	aware	so	whatsoever	you	do	comes
out	of	that	awareness.
That	awareness	has	no	ready-made	answers;	it	is	just	like	a	mirror:	it	reflects	the
situation,	the	challenge	of	the	situation,	and	you	act	immediately,	spontaneously.
You	don't	 look	for	an	answer	 in	 the	memory,	 in	 the	scriptures,	 in	your	parent's
ideas,	 in	 all	 that	 has	 been	 taught	 to	 you.	 You	 simply	 encounter	 the	 situation
immediately;	 in	 your	 own	 light.	 Your	 action	 then	 has	 dignity,	 beauty,	 grace,
because	 it	 is	 coming	 out	 of	 freedom.	 Freedom	 makes	 everything	 graceful.
Freedom	is	the	greatest	value	in	life.
And	 then	 certainly,	whatsoever	 you	 do	 --	 your	 character,	 your	 behaviour	 --	 is
yours,	authentically	yours.
It	has	your	signature	on	it.	Then	you	are	not	a	carbon	copy,	you	are	original.	The
Zen	people	call	it	finding	the	original	face.
For	that,	one	has	to	drop	all	the	masks,	one	has	to	risk	many	things,	particularly
respectability.	That	is	a	bribe	by	the	society.	It	will	give	you	a	Nobel	prize	and	it
will	give	you	many	honours;	it	will	do	everything	to	make	you	feel	great,	if	you
can	 fulfil	 one	 condition:	 if	 you	 are	 obedient,	 obedient	 like	 a	 robot,	 then	 all
respect	is	for	you.	Then	the	society	will	make	you	a	great	hero,	but	there	will	be
no	grace,	no	beauty,	no	freedom,	no	truth,	no	being;	you	have	committed	a	real
suicide.
Meditation	opens	the	doors	of	your	inner	treasures,	what	Jesus	calls	the	kingdom
of	god.	Meditation	is	only	a	key,	and	keys	are	always	small	things,	but	they	can
unlock	immense	treasures.	Everybody	is	born	as	a	prince	or	a	princess,	but	gets
lost	in	the	blind	crowd	of	beggars.
A	person	who	is	always	asking	for	more	I	call	a	beggar.	He	may	be	a	rich	beggar
or	 a	 poor	 beggar	 --	 that	 does	 not	matter	 --	 but	 the	 quality	 that	 determines	 his
beggarhood	is	that	he	is	always	asking	for	more.
Whatsoever	he	has	 is	never	enough.	And	it	 is	never	going	to	be	enough.	He	is
always	 desiring,	 and	 because	 of	 that	 desiring	 he	 is	 always	 in	 deep
discontentment.	And	desires	have	a	certain	nature;	 they	are	 like	 the	horizon:	 it
looks	as	if	it's	just	there,	a	few	miles	ahead,	just	a	few	minutes'	drive,	but	by	the
time	you	reach	there	it	has	gone	ahead	of	you.	The	distance	between	you	and	the
horizon	will	always	remain	the	same,	because	the	horizon	does	not	exist	in	fact;
it	 is	 all	 illusion,	 an	 optical	 illusion.	Because	 the	 earth	 is	 round,	 the	 illusion	 is
possible.	 It	 seems	 somewhere	 the	 sky	 is	 meeting	 the	 earth.	 It	 does	 not	 exist;
hence	you	can	go	on	and	on	and	on,	but	the	distance	between	you,	wherever	you
are,	and	the	horizon,	will	be	the	same.
The	same	is	true	about	our	desires:	the	beggar	is	in	discontent	as	much	as	the	so-
called	rich	person,	because	the	distance	is	the	safe.	It	 is	the	distance	that	hurts.
The	beggar	also	knows	that	 if	only	he	can	reach	there	all	will	be	fulfilled;	and
the	rich	person,	even	a	man	like	Alexander	the	Great,	has	the	same	horizon,	the
same	distance.	He	dies	in	immense	poverty,	just	like	everybody	else.
Meditation	is	a	turning	in;	not	running	after	the	horizon	which	goes	on	receding.
Understanding	 the	 futility	 of	 desire	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 meditation;	 seeing	 its
absolute	 absurdity,	 ridiculousness,	 its	 impossibility,	 one	 turns	 in.	 When	 one
searches	 inwards	 because	 the	 outer	 search	 seems	 to	 be	 pointless.	 And	 the
moment	 you	 search	 inwards	 a	 miracle	 happens	 --	 it	 is	 exactly	 a	 miracle	 --
because	whatsoever	you	have	been	searching	for	always	and	always,	maybe	for
many	many	lives,	is	suddenly	there.	It	was	always	within	the	seeker	himself;	the
sought	 is	 in	 the	 seeker.	 And	 we	 have	 been	 running	 everywhere,	 except
withinwards.
Meditation	makes	you	aware	of	 the	 immense	blissfulness	 that	 is	 just	your	very
nature.	And	 to	know	 it	 is	 to	become	an	emperor,	 an	 empress;	 to	know	 it	 is	 to
become	rich	for	the	first	time,	and	it	is	a	richness	that	cannot	be	taken	away	from
you.	Even	death	cannot	take	it	away	from	you,	because	in	death	only	the	outer
shell	dies	your	innermost	being	remains	as	it	is,	it	is	eternal.
To	 know	 the	 eternal,	 to	 be	 the	 eternal,	 is	 the	 whole	 enquiry	 of	 sannyas.	 My
sannyasins	have	to	find	that	they	are	princes,	emperors,	not	beggars.	I	am	not	for
beggars.	 In	 the	past,	monks	and	nuns	have	 lived	 like	beggars.	They	have	been
taught	to	live	a	life	of	renunciation;	I	teach	living	a	life	of	rejoicing.
And	one	who	knows	his	inner	world,	how	can	he	avoid	rejoicing?	His	whole	life
will	be	just	a	celebration.
The	only	 thing	needed	 to	 find	bliss	 is	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 courage	 --	 just	 a	 little	 bit.
Society	makes	us	cowards.
It	makes	us	afraid.	In	a	thousand	and	one	ways	it	makes	us	fear-oriented:	fear	of
others,	fear	of	death,	fear	of	disease,	fear	of	failure,	fear	of	poverty,	fear	of	old
age.	And	even	death	does	not	satisfy	the	society,	so	they	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
create	the	fear	of	hell	after	your	death.
This	fear-orientation	is	bound	to	create	a	life	of	misery.	My	sannyasins	have	to
learn	to	drop	this	whole	orientation.	It	is	not	a	question	of	dropping	one	fear:	if
you	drop	one,	nothing	will	happen	because	there	are	a	thousand	other	fears.	It	is
not	at	all	meaningful	to	go	on	pruning	the	leaves;	it	is	better	to	cut	the	very	root.
Hence	my	insistence	is	on	love,	because	love	is	the	polar	opposite	of	fear.	Life
should	 be	 love-oriented,	 not	 fear-oriented.	 All	 the	 religions	 in	 the	 past	 have
made	it	a	point	to	use	fear-orientation,	because	that	is	an	easy	way	to	manipulate,
dominate,	 subjugate	 people	 --	 but	 that	 has	 made	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity
miserable.
This	is	the	work	of	your	saints	and	so-called	mahatmas.
In	my	 vision	 they	 are	 the	 greatest	 criminals	 in	 the	 world,	 because	 they	 have
crippled	 the	very	possibility	of	man	becoming	blissful,	 they	have	poisoned	 the
very	being.	But	if	one	has	a	little	bit	of	courage	one	can	pull	oneself	out	of	this
orientation.	 It	 is	 just	 imposed	on	us,	 it	never	becomes	part	of	us.	 It	 is	 just	 like
clothes:	you	can	throw	them	off.	Just	a	little	courage	to	be	naked	is	needed,	that's
all.	One	can	throw	off	the	clothes	--	they	are	dirty	and	they	are	suffocating	and
they	are	borrowed	and	so	many	people	have	used	them	before.
A	love-orientation	makes	all	the	difference.	If	one	moves	from	fear	to	love	one
move,	from	misery	to	bliss.	Bliss	arises	when	you	start	looking	at	life	in	a	deep
loving	way.	The	stars,	the	trees,	the	animals,	the	people,	the	very	earth	--	all	this
is	so	beautiful,	in	fact	there	cannot	be	any	more	beautiful	world	than	it	is.
There	cannot	be	any	more	perfect	world	than	it	is.
One	 needs	 only	 to	 grow	 a	 little	more	 sensitivity,	 a	 little	more	 of	 an	 aesthetic
approach,	a	little	more	poetic	vision.	It	all	depends	on	how	you	look	at	life.
When	a	painter	comes	into	the	garden	he	sees	many	shades	of	green.	When	an
ordinary	person	 comes	 into	 the	 garden	he	 simply	 sees	 green	 trees.	He	has	 not
that	subtle	demarcation,	that	sensibility,	that	awareness	that	can	see	that	there	is
not	 only	 one	 kind	 of	 green	 tree;	 each	 tree	 has	 a	 different	 green.	 The	 painter
knows	there	are	many	more	colours	than	ordinary	people	are	aware	of,	but	they
are	 not	 aware	 at	 all,	 they	 are	 really	 colour-blind.	 George	 Bernard	 Shaw	 was
colour-blind	 and	 up	 to	 the	 age	 of	 sixty	 he	 was	 not	 aware	 --	 and	 such	 an
intelligent	man...	If	this	can	happen	to	a	man	like	George	Bernard	Shaw	what	to
say	about	ordinary	people?
On	 his	 sixtieth	 birthday	 somebody	 sent	 him	 a	 beautiful	 suit	 as	 a	 present.	 The
person	just	forgot	to	send	a	tie	with	the	suit.	Bernard	Shaw	loved	the	suit	and	he
went	to	the	market	to	find	a	tie	of	the	same	colour.	His	secretary	followed	him;
she	was	surprised	because	the	suit	was	green,	and	Bernard	Shaw	was	choosing	a
yellow	 tie	 --	 'That	 will	 be	 just	 monstrous!'	 (laughter)	 She	 could	 not	 control
herself.	She	said	'I	should	not	interfere,	that	is	not	my	business,	but	I	have	to	tell
you	that	this	won't	look	good	at	all.	This	is	yellow	and	the	suit	is	green.	'	He	said
'Is	there	any	difference	between	this	tie	and	the	suit?'	That	was	the	first	time	he
became	aware	that	he	could	not	see	yellow.
For	him	there	was	no	difference	between	yellow	and	green.	He	could	only	see
green,	he	was	blind	to	yellow.	But	he	lived	sixty	years	without	knowing	it;	and
millions	of	people	are	living	in	the	world	who	don't	know	the	beauty	of	colours,
who	 don't	 know	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 birds	 and	 their	 songs,	 who	 don't	 know	 the
beauty	of	the	stars.	They	never	look	above	in	the	sky.	They	go	on	crawling	in	the
mud.	They	don't	have	any	time	to	see	a	beautiful	sunset.	Even	if	they	see	it	they
only	pretend	to	see;	they	are	not	really	there,	not	in	that	moment	--	their	mind	is
far	away,	somewhere	else,	always	somewhere	else.	They	may	even	see	and	say
'This	is	beautiful,'	but	they	are	simply	repeating	a	cliche.	They	are	not	aware	of
what	they	are	saying.	They	are	saying	something,	that	is	expected	of	them.	They
are	simply	fulfilling,	the	expectation,	but	they	are	not	really	aware	of	the	beauty.
They	don't	mean	it	when	they	say	it	is	beautiful:	they	are	repeating	parrotlike.
Otherwise,	 this	 existence	 is	 so	 beautiful	 that	 if	 you	 cannot	 love	 it,	 it	 is	 really
unfortunate.	My	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	love	existence,	without	any
fear,	without	 any	greed,	 because	greed	 is	 nothing	but	 fear	 in	 disguise,	 another
phase	of	fear.	If	you	can	love	the	existence,	to	me	that	is	religiousness.	And	out
of	 that	 love	arises	bliss!.	Then	life	has	a	 totally	different	flavour	to	it.	You	can
call	that	flavour	godliness,	a	new	fragrance,	you	can	call	it	Buddhahood,	Christ-
consciousness,	 but	 just	 to	 call	 it	 a	 totally	 new	 fragrance	 is	 enough,	more	 than
enough.	Then	your	life	is	surrounded	by	a	new	poetry,	a	new	dance,	a	new	song.
I	 am	 not	 concerned	 with	 hell	 and	 heaven	 and	 all	 that	 nonsense.	 I	 am	 not
concerned	with	mythologies	 and	 theologies;	my	whole	 concern	 is	how	 to	help
you	to	understand	beauty,	love,	bliss.	And	I	repeat:	just	a	little	bit	of	courage	is
needed	--	nothing	much!
The	only	way	to	find	bliss	is	 to	surrender	to	existence	--	not	to	Buddha,	not	to
Christ,	not	 to	Krishna,	not	 to	me,	but	 to	 the	whole!	The	master	has	 to	be	used
only	as	a	window,	so	that	you	can	see	the	sky	beyond,	so	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
that	you	can	see	the	further	shore	--	that's	all.	Once	you	have	seen	it	you	need	not
cling	to	the	frame	of	the	window.
Surrendering	 tc	 a	 master	 is	 really	 surrendering	 to	 the	 whole.	 That	 is	 just	 the
beginning,	because	at	first	the	whole	will	be	too	much.	You	may	become	afraid.
There	 is	 a	 beautiful	 story	 in	 Srimad	 Bhagavad	 Gita:	 Krishna	 is	 explaining	 to
Arjuna	 to	 surrender	 to	 the	whole	 --	 don't	 bring	 your	will	 in.'	 But	Arjuna	 is	 a
sophisticated	 prince,	well-educated,	 as	 educated	 as	Krishna	 himself,	 far	 richer
than	Krishna,	belongs	 to	a	 far	more	 renowned	 family	 than	Krishna.	Krishna	 is
just	 functioning	as	a	charioteer	 to	Arjuna	 in	 the	war.	They	are	old	friends,	and
relatives	also:	Krishna's	sister	is	married	to	Arjuna.
So	Arjuna	goes	on	arguing.	Finally	when	he	cannot	argue	any	more	he	says	one
thing.	He	says	'If	you	talk	so	much	about	the	whole	can	you	show	me	a	vision	of
the	whole?"
And	 the	 story	 is	 beautiful	 --	 I	 don't	 think	 it	 is	 factual,	 it	 cannot	 be,	 but	 it	 is
significant:	Krishna	 becomes	 a	window	 and	Arjuna	 can	 see	 the	 vast	 universe,
stars	appearing	and	disappearing,	the	whole	eternity.	It	is	so	vast	that	he	becomes
frightened.	Its	very	vastness	 is	 frightening,	 is	scary.	He	trembles,	perspires	and
starts	shouting,	 'Close	this	window!	I	am	absolutely	convinced	of	what	you	are
saying	but	don't	show	me	this	vastness	--	this	is	too	much.	I	cannot	look	at	it	any
more.'
And	 Krishna	 closes	 the	 window,	 he	 becomes	 again	 the	 same	 friend;	 he	 had
disappeared	and	Arjuna	had	had	a	glimpse	of	the	eternal	process	of	existence.
The	parable	is	beautiful	because	that's	exactly	what	happens	between	a	disciple
and	 a	 master	 --	 but	 not	 literally;	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 metaphor,	 metaphorically	 it
really	happens.
It	is	difficult	to	surrender	to	the	whole.	The	master	is	only	an	excuse,	but	once
you	 surrender	 to	 the	 master	 you	 have	 surrendered	 to	 the	 whole,	 and	 slowly
slowly	 you	 will	 learn	 how	 to	 move	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 eternity	 and	 infinity
without	any	fear.	In	fact	when	one	is	surrendered,	ego	disappears,	and	with	the
ego	all	fear	disappears.
Sannyas	means	surrender	--	in	the	beginning	to	the	master	and	then	through	the
master	to	the	whole.	But	one	has	to	remember:	one	has	to	reach	the	whole.	The
river	has	to	reach	the	ocean.	Only	when	the	river	disappears	into	the	ocean,	loses
its	identity,	has	it	come	home.
The	goal	of	every	human	being,	in	fact	of	all	the	beings,	is	to	attain	to	the	state
of	bliss.	Even	trees	are	trying	in	their	own	unconscious	way	to	reach	the	state	of
bliss;	 animals,	 birds,	 in	 a	 haphazard	 way,	 zig-zag,	 because	 there	 is	 no
consciousness.
Man	 is	 privileged:	 he	 can	 become	 conscious	 of	 his	 longing.	 To	 become
conscious	of	your	longing	for	bliss	is	sannyas.	Millions	of	human	beings	also	go
on	searching	for	bliss,	but	in	unconscious	way.	You	cannot	find	it	in	unconscious
ways;	consciousness	is	an	absolute	necessity,	a	prerequisite.	Only	when	you	are
conscious	will	you	be	able	to	attain	to	bliss;	hence	consciousness	is	the	law,	the
ultimate	law.	To	me	consciousness	is	godliness.
The	 moment	 you	 become	 absolutely	 conscious,	 all	 your	 unconsciousness
disappears,	as	 if	 suddenly	you	have	brought	 light	 into	 the	house	of	your	being
and	that	very	moment	you	know	that	the	world	does	not	consist	only	of	matter	--
matter	 is	 only	 a	 form	of	 sleeping	 awareness	 --	 that	matter	 itself	 is	 immaterial,
that	the	world	consists	of	consciousness.	And	when	you	have	known	it,	realised
it	--	not	intellectually	but	existentially	--	you	can	call	it	the	realisation	of	god	or
truth	or	nirvana...	they	are	only	different	expressions	for	the	same	thing,	but	the
taste	is	one	and	that	is	of	bliss,	absolute	bliss,	unwavering	bliss.	Once	attained	it
is	attained	forever.
Intellect	 is	 a	 pseudo	 coin,	 easily	 attainable,	 but	 not	 really	 of	 any	 worth.	 Our
schools,	 colleges,	 universities	 all	 impart	 intellect.	 And	 the	 more	 a	 person
becomes	 intellectual,	 scholarly,	 learned,	 informed,	 the	 more	 his	 intelligence
becomes	covered	with	 rubbish;	otherwise	 every	 child	 is	born	with	 tremendous
intelligence.	We	destroy	his	intelligence;	we	are	afraid	of	his	intelligence,	so	we
start	 crippling,	 paralysing	 his	 intelligence.	 And	 we	 start	 burdening	 his
intelligence,	 putting	 on	 such	 a	 load	 of	 unnecessary	 knowledgeability	 --
geography,	 history,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 nonsense	 --	 that	 he	 becomes	 so	 full	 of
rubbish	and	loses	contact	with	his	own	intelligence,	he	loses	the	way	to	his	own
being.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 find	 the	 diamond	 that	 you	 have	 lost	 in	 the
rubbish	of	intellect.	One	has	to	learn	how	to	throw	all	intellectual	jargon	out	of
one's	being,	how	to	empty	oneself	of	all	knowledge.	The	moment	you	are	ready
to	 empty	 yourself	 of	 all	 knowledge	 you	 attain	 your	 natural	 intelligence	 --	 and
that	becomes	a	second	birth.	One	becomes	a	'dwija',	twice	born	--	and	that	is	the
real	beginning	of	life.	Sannyas	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
has	to	be	a	second	birth.
Jesus	 says	 'Unless	you	are	born	again	you	 shall	 not	 enter	 into	my	kingdom	of
god.'	He	is	absolutely	right:	one	has	to	move	from	intellect	to	intelligence,	from
knowledge	 to	 wisdom,	 from	 information	 to	 transformation.	 And	 this	 can	 be
easily	done	by	meditation,	very	easily.	One	 just	has	 to	become	more	and	more
silent.	 So	whenever	 you	 have	 time,	 just	 sit	 silently,	 doing	 nothing.	 Just	watch
your	mind,	all	its	gimmicks,	games;	enjoy	all	its	trips	and	numbers,	but	remain
aloof,	 cool,	 detached,	 just	 a	 watcher.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 screen,	 like	 a	 TV	 screen,	 on
which	things	are	moving;	you	are	just	an	observer,	unidentified	with	it.	This	is
the	whole	secret	of	meditation:	becoming	unidentified.	Dropping	the	idea	that	'I
am	the	mind'	is	meditation.
When	you	know	'I	am	the	witness	and	the	mind	is	there,	just	an	object,	and	I	am
subjectivity,	mind	 is	a	content	and	I	am	consciousness,'	 that	 'I	am	the	seer	and
the	mind	is	the	seen'	--	this	is	the	whole	process	of	meditation.	And	this	brings
the	transformation,	this	brings	you	to	the	world	of	the	immortals.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
26	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101265
ShortTitle:	POND26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	only	 courage	 that	 is	worth	 calling	 courage	 is	 to	get	 out	 of	 the	 fold	of	 the
mob	psychology.	We	are	born	in	a	crowd;	it	cannot	be	avoided,	it	is	natural.	We
grow	up	 in	a	crowd,	with	 the	whole	past	of	 the	crowd,	and	 the	crowd	goes	on
loading	every	child	with	all	 its	superstitions,	stupidities.	The	crowd	consists	of
blind	 people,	 because	 the	 buddhas	 are	 very	 few	 and	 far	 between.	 The	 crowd
functions	 according	 to	 the	 tradition,	 because	 it	 has	 no	 insight	 of	 its	 own	 --	 it
cannot	have.
To	 grow	 one's	 own	 insight,	 one	 needs	 to	 be	 deeply	meditative,	 very	 alert	 and
aware.	The	crowd	lives	a	kind	of	sleepy,	unconscious	life;	it	makes	no	effort	at
awareness,	 it	 lives	 in	a	routine	way	--	mechanical,	 robotlike.	But	unfortunately
every	 child	 has	 to	 be	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 a	 certain	 crowd,	 and	 the	 crowd
contaminates	the	mind	of	the	child,	it	poisons	his	consciousness.	By	the	time	the
child	is	old	enough,	strong	enough,	to	stand	on	his	own	feet,	 it	 is	 too	late.	The
poison	has	gone	too	deep.	The	crowd	has	become	part	of	his	inner	world;	it	has
penetrated	as	far	as	possible	into	his	psyche.	Hence	I	say	the	greatest	courage	in
life	is	to	throw	the	crowd	out	of	your	being.
If	one	 lives	according	 to	 the	crowd	one	 is	bound	 to	 remain	miserable,	because
the	 crowd	 is	miserable.	 Its	whole	 ideology	 is	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 its	misery.	 Its
past-orientation	 keeps	 it	 miserable.	 It	 has	 no	 passion,	 intensity,	 to	 live	 in	 the
present.	 It	 lives	 in	 the	 nostalgia	 of	 the	 past	 which	 is	 no	 more.	 That	 is	 sheer
foolishness,	a	waste	of	 time.	And	 the	crowd	 thinks	of	a	 future	according	 to	 its
past,	a	future	which	is	never	going	to	be.	Both	are	non-existential,	the	past	is	no
more,	 the	 future	 not	 yet,	 and	 between	 these	 two	 non-existences	 the	 crowd	 is
crushed.	It	remains	empty,	unfulfilled,	hence	the	misery.
A	sannyasin	has	to	come	out	of	the	mob	psychology	and	its	grip.	It	makes	you
not	a	man.	It	deprives	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you	 of	 your	 humanity,	 it	 reduces	 you	 into	 a	 number	 --	Hindu,	Mohammedan,
Christian,	 Buddhist	 --	 which	 are	 all	 replaceable.	 No	 individual	 is	 ever
replaceable,	but	a	Hindu	can	be	replaced	by	another	Hindu,	a	Christian	can	be
replaced	by	another	Christian.	That's	why	all	 these	 religions	are	 interested	 that
people	should	go	on	procreating	as	many	children	as	possible.	No	religion	is	in
favor	of	preventing	the	growing	population	of	the	world.	The	reason	is	simple,
the	people	who	are	Christians	today	will	soon	be	dead;	if	they	stop	reproducing
children	 or	 they	 limit	 themselves,	 then	 who	 is	 going	 to	 replace	 them?
Replacements	are	needed.
Now	 there	are	 six	hundred	and	 fifty	million	Catholics	 in	 the	world;	 if	 they	all
used	 contraceptives,	 birth	 control	 methods,	 abortion,	 then	 soon	 the	 Catholics
would	start	disappearing	--	and	numbers	have	power.	It	is	a	political	game,	they
are	interested	in	numbers.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 Mother	 Teresa	 said	 that	 every	 year	 one	 hundred	 and	 fifty
million	are	killed	through	abortion,	and	she	is	ready	to	provide	a	home	for	one
hundred	and	fifty	million	people	--	there	is	no	need	for	abortion.	Naturally,	such
a	good	opportunity,	such	a	good	business,	one	hundred	and	fifty	million	people
every	year	becoming	Catholics	--	 immense	 joy!	Even	if	 the	whole	earth	has	 to
die	for	it,	even	if	the	whole	humanity	has	to	die	for	it,	that's	okay.
And	who	is	responsible	for	all	 these	abortions?	These	same	people.	They	don't
allow	contraceptives	--
otherwise	there	would	be	no	abortions.	Then	they	condemn	abortions.	First	they
don't	 allow	 contraceptives;	 then	 they	 condemn	 abortions	 as	 murder,	 violence;
and	then	they	create	orphans	and	orphanages.	Just	see	the	whole	trick,	the	whole
business,	the	whole	conspiracy	--	and	then	those	orphans	have	to	be	served.
Just	contraceptives	alone	could	do	all	 the	work.	There	 is	no	need	to	do	all	 this
nonsense.	But	then	the	number	of	Catholics	will	be	reduced.	Hindus	are	against
contraception,	Mohammedans	are	also	against	it.
The	Mohammedans	are	far	more	advanced	than	the	Catholics	because	they	allow
four	wives	to	every	man.
Now	this	is	very	simple	arithmetic.
One	man	can	make	four	or	forty	women	pregnant.	The	vice	versa	is	not	true:	if
one	woman	is	married	to	four	men	you	will	not	get	four	children,	you	will	get
only	one	child;	if	four	women	are	married	to	one	man	you	will	get	four	children
--	simple	business!
Mohammed	himself	had	nine	wives,	and	of	course,	when	 the	prophet	has	nine
wives	 the	 disciples	 have	 to	 be	 allowed	 at	 least	 four	 --	 that	 becomes	 their
birthright.	 And	Mohammedans	 are	 not	 willing	 to	 stop	 this	 ugly	 institution	 of
marrying	 four	wives.	Those	wives	 are	used	 like	 slaves,	 like	 factories	 to	 create
children.
But	Mohammedans	go	on	increasing	their	number.
The	 crowd	 is	 interested	 in	numbers,	 it	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 individuals	 at	 all.	 It
destroys	the	individual,	reduces	him	into	a	commodity.	A	sannyasin	has	to	assert
his	individuality,	he	has	to	pull	himself	out	from	all	kinds	of	crowds.	He	has	to
assert	 that	he	 is	 independent	of	all	mob	psychology,	 ideology,	religion,	church,
state,	nation.
Sannyas	is	a	rebellion,	and	it	needs	courage;	but	the	outcome	is	immense.	Once
you	assert	your	individuality,	once	you	are	on	your	own,	there	is	an	explosion	of
bliss.	Bliss	 is	earned	only	by	 those	who	are	courageous;	cowards	are	bound	 to
live	in	misery.
Man	 has	 to	 regain	 his	 childhood;	 only	 then	 can	 he	 be	 blissful.	 He	 has	 to
deprogramme	 himself.	 Every	 society	 programmes	 you	 according	 to	 its	 own
attitude	towards	life,	according	to	its	own	structure.	It	does	not	care	a	bit	about
you.	 It	 has	 already	made	 a	 certain	 dress:	you	 have	 to	 fit	with	 the	dress.	 If	 the
dress	is	too	short,	then	your	hands,	your	head,	your	feet	have	to	be	chopped.	If
the	dress	is	too	long	then	you	have	to	be	stretched	by	Rolfers!	(laughter)	But	the
dress	cannot	be	changed.	And	one	never	knows	for	whom	the	dress	was	made;	it
was	certainly	made	for	you.	Maybe	it	was	perfectly	okay	for	Jesus	Christ...
It	was	not	meant	for	you,	but	the	Christians	will	try	to	cut	you,	to	stretch	you	--
somehow	they	will	manage	to	make	you	fit	according	to	the	ready-made	dress.
The	dress	is	sacred,	you	cannot	cut	it,	you	cannot	touch	it.
This	 is	what	has	been	done	up	 to	now.	The	pattern	 is	already	 there	before	you
come	into	the	world	and	you	come	not	like	anybody	else;	you	come	as	a	unique
individuals	so	how	can	you	really	fit?	With	all	their	effort,	still,	the	dress	never
fits	perfectly.	Sometimes	it	is	too	loose,	sometimes	it	is	too	tight.	If	it	is	tight	it
makes	 you	 miserable,	 it	 makes	 you	 uptight,	 it	 makes	 you	 an	 Englishman
(laughter).	 If	 it	 is	 too	 loose,	 it	 makes	 you	 lousy,	 it	 makes	 you	 an	 Indian!
(laughter)	And	you	always	look	silly!	It	is	always	somebody	else's	dress	that	you
are	wearing,	you	always	become	a	laughing	stock.
People	are	parading	as	buffoons,	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	are	trying	to	fit
with	 a	 certain	 pattern	 which	 was	 not	 basically	 planned	 for	 then,	 for	 their
uniqueness.	And	if	they	don't	fit,	naturally	it	creates	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
guilt:	 'Something	is	wrong	with	me.'	Everybody	is	saying	that	you	have	to	it	--
'These	are	 the	shoulds	and	 these	are	 the	should	nots'	 --	and	when	you	don't	 fit
you	 feel	 guilty	 you	 are	 simple	 you	 feel	 guilty	 and	 then	 you	 have	 to	 go	 and
confess	all	your	sins	to	the	Catholic	priest.
Just	 the	other	day	 I	was	 reading	about	a	nun	 in	Africa,	 a	mother	 superior.	For
forty	years	she	has	been	Catholic	nun;	now	she	 is	sixty-five.	For	a	 few	days	a
Man	was	coming	continuously	to	confess	his	sins;	she	must	have	enjoyed	those
sins	 so	much	 that	 they	 both	 eloped,	 got	married!	 The	man	 is	 seventy	 and	 the
mother	superior	is	sixty-five!	(laughter)
If	 you	 are	 simple	 you	 will	 feel	 guilty;	 if	 you	 are	 cunning	 you	 will	 become
mother	superiors	and	fathers	and	ministers	and	priests.	If	you	are	cunning,	if	you
can	pretend,	if	you	can	be	a	great	hypocrite,	then	you	will	be	very	successful,	but
at	a	great	cost.	You	will	have	to	repress	your	nature,	your	spontaneity.
Now	what	must	this	woman	have	been	doing	for	forty	years?	Falling	in	love	at
the	 age	of	 sixty-five	 looks	 a	 little	 bit	 odd!	 (laughter)	For	 forty	years	 she	must
have	 been	 repressing	 and	 repressing,	 and	 all	 those	 confessions	 that	 she	 was
listening	to,	she	must	have	been	enjoying.
This	 is	 going	 on	 all	 over	 the	 world:	 either	 your	 conditionings	 make	 you	 feel
guilty	or	they	make	you	hypocrites.	The	cunning	ones	become	hypocrites.	They
reach	to	the	very	heights	of	respectability;	they	become	popes	and	ayatollas	and
imams	 and	 shankaracharyas.	Or	 if	 you	 are	 a	 little	 less	 cunning,	 then	 you	 feel
great	guilt,	 always	burdened	 that	you	are	not	doing	 that	which	should	be	done
and	 you	 are	 doing	 that	which	 should	 not	 be	 done.	You	 are	 always	 torn	 apart,
your	life	become	miserable.
Both	alternatives	are	wrong.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 drop	 the	 whole	 nonsense	 of	 wearing	 somebody	 else's
dresses,	somebody	else's	programmes.	You	have	 to	find	your	own	life	and	you
have	to	live	according	to	your	own	light.	For	that	you	have	to	clean	your	slate.
That's	what	I	mean	by	innocence,	childhood	you	have	to	become	a	child	again	so
that	you	can	erase	all	the	writing	that	has	been	done	on	you	by	others;	so	you	can
undo	whatsoever	they	have	done	to	you.
If	 a	 man	 can	 undo	 whatsoever	 the	 society	 has	 done	 to	 him,	 he	 is	 capable	 of
becoming	awakened,	he	is	capable	of	attaining	to	great	ecstasies.	His	life	will	be
a	 sheer	 joy!	 Otherwise	 you	 will	 either	 be	 guilty	 and	 burdened	 and	 afraid,
knowing	perfectly	well	 that	 you	will	 fall	 into	hell,	 or	 you	will	 be	 a	hypocrite,
continuously	doing	something	that	you	don't	want	to	do.	You	will	have	a	double
personality,	 one	 at	 the	 front	 door,	 another	 at	 the	 back	 door;	 and	 you	 will	 be
continuously	 trying	 to	 hide	 things,	 you	will	 become	very	 secretive.	All	 that	 is
ugly,	all	that	is	inhuman.
How	can	one	live	joyously	if	one	is	divided,	split?	The	phony	person	cannot	live
joyously.	He	 is	 not	 cheating	 anybody	else,	 he	 is	 simply	 cheating	himself.	And
the	guilty	person,	of	course,	cannot	live	joyously;	there	is	no	possibility.	If	he	is
making	love	to	a	woman	he	feels	guilty,	continuously	thinking	that	on	Sunday	he
has	to	go	and	confess.	The	mother	superior	is	there.	He	is	half-heartedly	making
love;	 hence	 he	 cannot	 go	 deeply	 into	 it,	 and	 unless	 you	 go	 deeply	 into	 it	 you
cannot	go	beyond	it.	So	he	remains	always	discontented.
And	 when	 he	 is	 confessing	 his	 guilt	 he	 knows	 perfectly	 well	 that	 all	 this	 is
nonsense	--	he	will	be	doing	 the	same	again.	He	knows	this	perfectly	well.	He
has	confessed	every	Sunday	and	he	goes	on	making	the	same	mistakes	again	and
again;	so	it	is	going	to	happen.
This	type	of	life	is	not	life;	it	is	rather,	a	caricature,	a	cartoon.	It	has	no	beauty.
Become	a	child	again,	be	innocent,	and	start	from	ABC,	start	from	scratch.	I	am
not	 going	 to	 give	 you	 any	 programme.	 My	 work	 is	 negative:	 I	 only
deprogramme	people,	then	I	leave	them.	Then	whatsoever	they	want	to	do	they
can	do.	It	is	their	life	--	my	work	is	finished.	Once	I	have	deprogrammed	you	my
work	is	finished.	Once	I	have	cleaned	your	slate	I	hand	it	over	to	you.	Now	you
can	do	whatsoever	you	want:	you	can	write	a	poem	or	a	love	letter	or	blah,	blah,
blah,	 whatsoever	 you	 want	 (laughter)	 --	 it	 is	 up	 to	 you.	 You	 can	 do	 some
doodling	(laughter)	or	whatsoever	you	want	--	this	is	your	life	--	but	whatsoever
you	do	there	will	be	joy	in	it!
A	person	will	be	joyous	even	if	he	has	chosen	to	go	to	hell;	and	a	person	cannot
be	joyous	if	he	is	forced	to	live	in	heaven,	because	freedom	is	the	very	soul	of
bliss,	the	very	centre	of	bliss.	So	once	you	are	deprogrammed	you	are	free	to	act
according	to	your	own	spontaneity.	I	don't	give	you	any	ready-made	answers.	I
simply	hammer	so	that	all	your	answers	are	destroyed,	demolished,	so	that	you
have	 again	 a	 plain	 ground:	 the	 old	 building	has	 disappeared	 and	you	 can	 start
making	whatsoever	you	want	 to	make.	You	can	make	a	palace	or	a	hut	--	or	 if
you	want	to	live	under	the	sky,	perfectly	beautiful!
A	nan	has	a	birthright	to	be	himself.	Sannyas	means	getting	courage	enough	to
live	 out	 of	 freedom,	 and	 then	 bliss	 follows	 like	 a	 shadow.	 It	 is	 the	 shadow	of
freedom.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 lotus	 is	 a	very	 significant	 symbol	 in	 eastern	mysticism.	The	 lotus	 lives	 in
water,	it	grows	in	water,	but	its	petals	are	so	velvety	that	the	water	cannot	touch
them.	 If	you	go	 in	 the	early	morning	 to	a	 lotus	pond	you	will	 see	on	 the	 lotus
leaves,	on	the	lotus	petals,	dewdrops	shining	like	pearls	in	the	early	morning	sun
--
it	 is	 a	 beauty	 to	 see	 dewdrops	 on	 lotus	 leaves	 or	 lotus	 petals.	 But	 the	 most
miraculous	 thing	 is	 that	 they	 are	on	 the	 leaves,	 on	 the	petals,	 but	 they	 are	not
touching	them.	They	don't	make	them	wet.	Just	a	slight	breeze	and	the	dewdrops
slip	into	the	lake;	and	they	don't	leave	even	a	trace	behind	because	the	leaf	or	the
petals	remain	totally	untouched,	absolutely	untouched,	as	if	there	have	been	no
dew-drops	on	them.	And	this	is	the	symbol	of	a	sannyasin.
The	 lotus	 has	 become	 the	 very	 metaphor	 for	 sannyas,	 live	 in	 the	 world	 but
remain	untouched	by	it.	I	don't	teach	escape,	I	don't	teach	renunciation.	I	am	all
for	life,	I	am	totally	for	life,	because	to	me	life	is	god	and	there	is	no	other	god
than	 life.	 All	 the	 ideas	 of	 god	 other	 than	 life	 are	 simply	 fabrications	 Or	 the
cunning	minds,	ways	to	exploit	simple-minded	human	beings.
Life	is	the	only	god,	so	I	cannot	teach	escape	from	life.	One	has	to	live	in	it	and
one	has	to	live	intensely,	passionately,	not	half-heartedly,	not	in	a	lukewarm	way.
One	 has	 to	 burn	 one's	 life	 torch	 from	 both	 ends	 together;	 then	 even	 a	 single
moment	is	more	valuable	than	the	whole	of	eternity.	A	single	moment	of	intense,
ecstatic	 living,	 is	 far	deeper,	 far	higher,	 than	 living	 for	one	hundred	years,	 but
living	 just	 so-so,	 half-heartedly,	 fragmentarily,	 unconsciously,	 somehow
dragging	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave,	sad,	sombre,	serious,	with	no	dance,	with
no	celebration,	with	no	light	 in	 the	eyes,	with	no	song	in	the	heart.	That	 is	not
life;	that	is	simply	vegetating.
Millions	 of	 people	 are	 simply	 living	 like	 cabbages	 (laughter).	 A	 few	 live	 like
cauliflowers	 (laughter):	 my	 definition	 of	 a	 cauliflower	 is	 a	 cabbage	 with	 a
college	 education	 --	 with	 a	 Ph.D	 or	 a	 D.Lit.	 The	 same	 cabbage	 having	 a
certificate	from	a	university	becomes	a	cauliflower.
But	 whether	 one	 lives	 like	 a	 cabbage	 or	 a	 cauliflower	 makes	 no	 difference.
Rarely,	 a	 very	 few	 people	 have	 lived	 really,	 authentically,	 totally	 --	 and	 that's
what	 I	 teach:	 live	moment-to-moment,	but	 live	without	holding	anything	back.
And	live	like	a	lotus	flower,	untouched.	Take	life	as	a	beautiful	game	and	learn
the	art	of	sportsmanship	--	that's	what	sannyas	is:	do	whatsoever	you	want	to	do
but	 be	 a	 sportsman.	 Whether	 you	 win	 or	 not	 does	 not	 matter,	 whether	 you
succeed	or	fail	is	irrelevant.	All	that	matters	is	that	you	played	well,	that	you	did
your	best,	that	you	enjoyed	while	you	did	it.	To	me	that	is	the	real	thing.	Failure
or	success	makes	no	difference.
In	my	 childhood	 I	 used	 to	 go	 to	 see	many	wrestling	 competitions.	My	village
was	 famous	 for	wrestling;	 there	were	many	good	wrestlers	and	people	used	 to
come	from	far	away	to	fight	with	the	wrestlers	there.
[***some	lines	are	missing	here***]
Its	whole	 ideology	 is	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 its	misery.	 Its	 past-orientation	 keeps	 it
miserable.	 It	 has	 no	 passion,	 intensity,	 to	 live	 in	 the	 present.	 It	 lives	 in	 the
nostalgia	of	the	past	which	is	no	more.	That	is	sheer	foolishness,	a	waste	of	time.
And	 the	crowd	thinks	of	a	 future	according	 to	 its	past,	a	 future	which	 is	never
going	to	be.	Both	are	non-existential:	the	past	is	no	more,	the	future	not	yet,	and
between	 these	 two	 non-existences	 the	 crowd	 is	 crushed.	 It	 remains	 empty,
unfulfilled;	hence	the	misery.
A	sannyasin	has	to	come	out	of	the	mob	psychology	and	its	grip.	It	makes	you	a
sheep	not	a	man.	It	deprives	you	of	your	humanity,	it	reduces	you	into	a	number
--	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Christian,	Buddhist	--
which	are	all	replaceable.	No	individual	is	ever	replaceable,	but	a	Hindu	can	be
replaced	 by	 another	 Hindu,	 a	 Christian	 can	 be	 replaced	 by	 another	 Christian.
That's	why	all	these	religions	are	interested	that	people	should	go	on	procreating
as	many	children	as	possible.	No	religion	is	in	favour	of	preventing	the	growing
population	 of	 the	world.	 The	 reason	 is	 simple:	 the	 people	 who	 are	 Christians
today	 will	 soon	 be	 dead;	 if	 they	 stop	 reproducing	 children	 or	 they	 limit
themselves,	then	who	is	going	to	replace	them?	Replacements	are	needed.
Now	 there	are	 six	hundred	and	 fifty	million	Catholics	 in	 the	world;	 if	 they	all
used	 contraceptives,	 birth	 control	 methods,	 abortion,	 then	 soon	 the	 Catholics
would	start	disappearing	--	and	numbers	have	power.	It	is	a	political	game:	they
are	interested	in	numbers.
Just	the	other	day	Mother	Teresa	said	that	every
[***some	lines	are	missing	here***]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Now	 she	 remembers	 that	 preventing	 him	 from	only	one	 darshan...	 and	 he	 felt
such	a	 shock,	 a	 trembling,	 that	 recapitulating	 the	whole	 scene	 she	understands
the	 meaning	 of	 it;	 that	 for	 him,	 it	 was	 as	 if	 that	 was	 the	 last	 --	 who	 knows
whether	tomorrow	one	will	be	here	or	not?
This	is	the	way	one	has	to	live:	each	moment	has	to	be	the	last	moment,	so	why
life-half-heartedly?	You	may	not	be	able	to	live	another	moment,	so	put	all	that
you	 have	 got,	 risk	 all	 that	 you	 have	 got	 in	 that	 moment	 because	 who	 knows
about	the	other	moment?
This	is	the	way	to	live!	And	when	you	don't	care	about	the	result	you	become	a
lotus.
I	have	chosen	the	colour	for	my	sannyasins:	 this	is	 the	colour	of	the	lotus,	and
the	lotus	has	to	be	remembered	a	again	and	again	so	that	you	can	go	on	getting
deeper	 and	 deeper	 into	 the	 now	 and	 here	 --	 but,	 unattached,	 unclinging,
untouched.	No	future,	so	that	you	can	be	totally,	and	no	past	so	that	you	remain
untouched.
Once	that	happens	life	is	bliss!	Unbounded	bliss,	infinite	bliss,	eternal	bliss.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
27	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101275
ShortTitle:	POND27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
White	Cloud	is	a	beautiful	name.	It	symbolizes	my	whole	philosophy.
The	white	cloud	represents	many	things.	Basically,	the	color	white	is	not	a	color.
In	 one	 sense,	 it	 is	 a	 transcendence	 of	 all	 colors;	 and	 in	 another	 sense,	 very
paradoxically,	it	is	the	synthesis	of	all	the	colors.	All	of	the	seven	colors	are	part
of	whiteness.	When	they	meet	and	merge	in	a	certain	proportion	white	is	born.
White	has	 the	whole	 rainbow	 in	 it.	The	 rainbow	 is	created	when	 raindrops	are
hanging	 in	 the	 air	 in	 the	 rainy	 season	 and	 the	 sun	 suddenly	 comes	 out	 from
behind	the	clouds.	The	rays	are	white,	and	when	they	pass	through	the	hanging,
small	drops	of	water	--	so	small	that	they	cannot	fall	and	remain	hanging	in	the
air	--
those	drops	 function	 like	 a	prism	and	 they	analyze	 the	white	 into	 all	 its	 seven
constituents;	hence	the	rainbow.
The	rainbow	needs	two	things	to	exist:	the	white	sunrays	and	the	hanging	drops
of	 water.	 And	 you	 can	 see	 it	 only	 at	 a	 certain	 angle.	 If	 you	 go	 close	 to	 the
rainbow	it	will	disappear.	If	you	want	to	catch	hold	of	it	you	will	never	be	able
to;	your	hands	will	just	become	a	little	wet,	that's	all.	There	will	not	be	any	color
left.
White	is	a	combination	of	all	the	colors,	but	the	combination	creates	something
unique	and	new,	a	higher	synthesis	That's	also	why	I	call	white	a	transcendence;
it	 is	 not	 any	 of	 the	 colors,	 it	 is	 not	 just	 a	 combination	 either.	 If	 it	was	 only	 a
combination	 then	all	 the	 seven	colors	would	continue	 to	exist	 --	 it	would	be	a
mixture,	 eclectic.	But	 it	 is	 a	 true	 synthesis;	 all	 the	 seven	 colors	 disappear	 and
suddenly	a	totally	new	phenomenon	arises,	colorlessness.
There	 are	 two	 colorlessnesses	 in	 existence:	 one	 is	 white,	 another	 is	 black.	 In
black	there	are	no	colors	at	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
all,	 in	 white	 there	 are	 all	 the	 colors.	 That's	 the	 difference	 between	 black	 and
white:	 black	 is	 empty	 and	 white	 is	 full.	 Black	 is	 negative,	 white	 is	 positive.
Black	 represents	 death	 and	white	 represents	 life.	Hence,	 scientists	 call	 certain
spots	in	space,	black	holes.
There	 are	 certain	 spaces	which	 suck	 things	 in;	 if	 something	moves	 into	 those
spaces,	it	disappears.	It	simply	disappears	from	existence,	it	 is	annihilated,	it	 is
no	 more.	 When	 the	 black	 holes	 were	 discovered	 it	 was	 really	 a	 frightening
phenomenon,	 because	 even	 the	 earth	 can	 pass	 through	 a	 black	 hole	 at	 any
moment.
It	 is	 continuously	 revolving	 around	 the	 sun,	 and	 the	 sun	 is	 revolving	 around
some	other	sun	which	is	not	yet	known.	And	who	knows	at	what	point	the	earth
or	 the	sun	may	pass	 through	a	black	hole?	 If	 it	passes	 through	a	black	hole,	 it
disappears,	it	goes	into	non-existence	--	immediately,	instantly.
But	later	on	they	discovered	that	the	white	hole	also	exists;	in	fact	the	black	hole
and	the	white	hole	are	two	aspects	of	one	hole.	So	you	enter	into	the	black	hole
and	you	disappear,	and	you	come	out	from	the	white	hole	and	you	appear	again,
renewed,	 reborn,	 resurrected.	 If	 the	white	hole	can	be	called	 resurrection,	 then
the	black	hole	can	be	called	crucifixion.
The	world	has	come	into	existence	many	times	and	gone	out	of	existence	many
times.	 This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 ancientmost	 discoveries	 of	 the	 eastern	 mystics.	 The
western	religions	only	think	of	creation;	they	have	never	thought	of	dissolution.
But	 the	 eastern	 mystics	 have	 always	 thought	 of	 both	 together,	 because	 one
cannot	exist	without	the	other.	If	there	is	a	certain	process	of	creation,	then	there
must	 be	 a	 certain	 process	 of	 de-creation.	 Only	 then	 can	 life	 go	 on	 renewing
itself.
Many	cosmoses	have	come	into	being	and	gone	out	of	being.	Black	represents
death,	 annihilation,	 rejection,	 emptiness.	 White	 represents	 just	 the	 opposite,
fullness,	perfection,	totality,	creation,	life;	it	is	a	tremendously	significant	color.
It	is	not	a	coincidence	that	all	over	the	world,	all	the	races,	in	all	times	and	ages,
have	 colored	 the	 devil	 as	 black,	 and	 death	 also	 as	 black	 --	 even	 the	 blackest
people	on	the	earth	have	done	so.
It	is	strange,	because	the	white	man	has	done	so	much	harm	to	black	people	that
it	would	have	been	quite	logical	for	them	to	depict	the	devil	as	a	white	man.	But
even	the	negroes	depict	the	devil	as	black	--	of	course	blacker	than	themselves,
but	still	black!	It	is	because	blackness	simply	means	all	colors	are	absent;	light	is
absent,	 hence	 colors	must	 be	 absent.	 Light	 contains	 colors,	 both	 are	 in	 a	way
similar.
Black	 is	 below	 the	 colors,	white	 is	 above	 the	 colors.	 In	 one	way	 they	 are	 the
same,	and	in	another	way	they	are	totally	different	--	diametrically	opposite.
White	represents	transcendence,	organic	unity	--	more	than	just	a	mathematical
addition,	 one	 color	 added	 to	 another	 and	 another,	 then	 seven	 colors	 added	 to
each	other;	that	will	still	be	seven	colors	a	kind	of	unity,	but	not	union.
Union	means	all	the	seven	lose	their	individuality;	and	because	of	that	surrender,
a	 totally	new	organic	being	 is	born	which	 is	not	 just	 the	 result	of	 addition	but
something	plus,	something	more	than	the	sum	total	of	 the	parts.	That	 is	what	I
mean	by	transcendence.
So	it	is	a	beautiful	word.
And	cloud	is	also	very	symbolic;	it	represents	freedom.	A	cloud	has	no	roots.	It
is	absolutely	free.	It	is	not	tethered	anywhere,	it	has	no	home;	hence	in	the	East
we	have	always	thought	of	the	sannyasin	as	a	cloud,	because	he	makes	the	whole
universe	his	home.	He	does	not	belong	to	any	particular	race,	 religion,	dogma,
doctrine,	country,	church,	state.	He	drops	all	these	limitations.	He	becomes,	in	a
sense,	just	like	a	cloud	--	floating,	without	being	hindered	by	any	boundaries.
A	Chinese	cloud	can	come	 into	 India	without	 any	passport,	no	visa	 is	needed.
Clouds	don't	believe	in	such	stupid	things.	They	don't	bother	about	governments,
geography,	and	the	map:	"We	should	not	enter	this	territory	--	this	is	India,	this	is
Pakistan,	 this	 is	 Germany,	 this	 is	 Italy	 --	 and	 you	 have	 to	 keep	 to	 your	 own
country."	 They	 go	 on	 floating	 all	 over	 the	 universe.	 That	 freedom,	 that
unboundedness	has	to	be	one	of	the	basic	experiences	of	a	sannyasin	--	he	has	to
become	a	cloud.
The	cloud	is	also	free	in	another	sense,	in	a	far	deeper	sense	--	it	has	no	destiny,
hence	 it	 does	 not	 care	 anything	 about	 the	 future.	 There	 is	 no	 tomorrow,	 this
moment	 is	 enough.	 It	 does	 not	 live	 for	 any	 results,	 it	 is	 not	 end-oriented.	 It
enjoys	 the	 moment	 --	 the	 sun,	 the	 wind	 --	 it	 dances	 in	 the	 wind,	 in	 the	 sun,
without	any	 idea	of	what	 is	going	 to	happen	next.	There	 is	nothing	 like	 'next';
this	moment	is	all.
So	it	never	moves	towards	a	particular	destination;	hence	it	cannot	be	frustrated.
If	 the	 wind	 is	 taking	 it	 towards	 the	 south	 it	 goes	 to	 the	 south,	 if	 the	 wind
suddenly	 changes	 its	 mind	 --	 and	 winds	 are	 crazy,	 irrational;	 if	 suddenly	 the
mood	changes	and	 the	wind	starts	moving	 towards	 the	east,	 the	cloud	will	not
resist.	 It	will	not	say,	"What	 is	 the	matter	with	you?	We	were	going	south	and
now	 suddenly	 you	 turned	 towards	 the	 east	 --	what	 has	 happened?	And	 I	 have
been	desiring	so	much	to	go	to	the	south	and	I	had	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
planned	so	many	things,	and	I	wanted	to	visit	so	many	places...	Now	this	sudden
change	is	like	a	shock,	and	I	don't	want	to	go	to	the	east."
No,	there	is	no	resistance	from	the	cloud.	As	the	wind	changes,	the	cloud	simply
starts	moving	towards	the	east	or	the	west	or	the	north	--	wherever	the	wind	is
going.	Or	 if	 it	 is	not	going	anywhere,	 the	cloud	simply	remains	wherever	 it	 is,
with	no	desires	of	its	own.	That	is	its	total	surrender	to	existence.
Jesus	 says,	 "Let	 thy	 kingdom	 come,	 let	 thy	 will	 be	 done."	 That's	 exactly	 the
innermost	 core	 of	 the	 symbol	 of	 a	 cloud.	 And	when	 the	 cloud	 is	 white,	 both
these	symbols,	with	all	their	multi-dimensional	meanings,	come	together.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	a	white	cloud	--	creative	but	free,	 loving	but	untethered,
containing	all	but	not	confined	by	anything,	always	 remaining	a	 little	above,	a
little	beyond.
Life	 is	 noble	 only	when	 it	 functions	 according	 to	 the	 law	 of	 love.	 It	 is	 noble
when	it	functions	lovelessly.
And	millions	 of	 people	 --	 the	 vast	majority,	 almost	 ninety-nine	 point	 nine	 per
cent	--	live	in	deep	ignobility.
They	think	they	know	what	 love	is,	and	that	 is	 their	first	barrier	 to	attaining	to
love.
Love	is	such	a	great	mystery	that	even	those	who	have	loved	tremendously	don't
know	exactly	what	it	is.	It	has	never	been	defined	and	it	will	never	be	defined.
By	its	very	nature	it	remains	indefinable.	You	cannot	put	it	into	words.	words	are
too	small	and	love	is	so	vast.	Words	cannot	even	contain	a	far	away	distant	echo
of	 love;	 but	millions	 of	 people	 live	with	 this	 stupid	 idea	 that	 they	 know	what
love	 is,	 and	 this	 idea	 that	 'I	 already	 know	 what	 love	 is'	 prevents	 them	 from
enquiring	into	the	phenomenon	of	love.
This	is	a	strange	kind	of	disease,	it	is	infectious.	It	is	given	by	the	parents,	by	the
teachers,	 by	 the	 society,	 to	 every	 child.	 People	 start	 telling	 him	 'Love	 your
mother,	 love	your	 father,	 love	your	brother,	 love	your	 sister,'	 and	nobody	ever
helps	him	to	understand	what	love	is,	nobody	ever	makes	it	clear	to	him	in	what
direction	he	has	to	search	for	love.	They	just	go	on	preaching	to	him:	'Love	thy
neighbour	as	thyself.'
And	he	does	not	know	what	love	is	in	the	first	place,	so	he	starts	looking	around
and	starts	imitating.	He	sees	that	the	mother	says	she	loves	the	father,	the	father
says	he	loved	the	mother,	so	he	learn	that	this	is	what	love	is	all	about.	And	what
he	sees	is	ugly.	He	sees	that	they	are	continuously	quarrelling.	And	children	ere
very	alert,	very	intelligent.	Their	way	of	understanding	things	is	not	like	adults,
because	they	have	no	prejudices	at	all.	They	can	see	immediately,	directly.	Their
penetration	 is	 really	 keen.	 They	 have	 no	 clouds	 in	 their	 eyes,	 no	 cobwebs,
nothing	hinders	them	from	seeing	clearly	what	'love'	is.	Whatsoever	they	find	in
their	 home,	 in	 their	 family,	 they	 think	 is	 love,	 and	 they	 will	 repeat	 the
programme	in	their	own	life.
They	will	do	 the	same	 to	 their	wife	as	 their	 father	was	doing;	 they	will	do	 the
same	to	their	husband	as	their	mother	was	doing.
Every	child	 is	going	 to	 repeat	a	certain	conditioning	which	he	caught	when	he
was	very	small.	And	he	will	also	think	that	he	is	loving	that	he	knows	what	love
is	--	and	this	is	not	love	at	all.	It	is	something	else	parading	as	love,	something
not	only	different	but	antagonistic	to	love.
The	first	 thing	my	sannyasins	have	 to	understand	 is	 that	 they	don't	know	what
love	is.	From	there	the	enquiry	begins.	Then	you	can	put	aside	all	your	ideas	and
prejudices	that	you	have	gathered	from	others.
They	had	gathered	them	from	others	in	their	own	time	and	so	on,	and	so	forth.
I	don't	know	whether	or	not	even	god	loved	Adam	and	Eve.	The	way	he	behaved
with	 them	 does	 not	 show	 love.	 Just	 for	 given	 in	 to	 an	 innocent	 temptation	 --
which	 is	 very	 human	 --	 he	 threw	 them	 out	 of	 heaven.	 The	 punishment	 is	 too
much.	 The	 crime	 was	 nothing;	 and	 if	 it	 was	 a	 crime,	 the	 person	 who	 was
responsible	was	god	himself.
One	 can	 expect	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 psychological	 understanding	 from	 god.	 If	 you
prevent	children	 from	something	you	can	expect	 that	 they	will	do	 it.	The	very
prevention	is	a	 temptation;	so	 it	 is	not	 the	serpent	who	tempted	them,	 it	 is	god
himself...	saying	to	Adam	and	Eve	 'Don't	eat	from	these	two	trees	--	one	is	the
Tree	of	Knowledge,	another	is	the	Tree	of	life.'	Now	both	trees	are	so	significant.
Each	child	is	born	with	an	intrinsic	capacity,	a	longing	to	know.	Now	to	prevent,
to	say	'You	are	not	to	eat	from	the	tree	of	knowledge,'	is	really	nasty!	(laughter)
The	longing	to	know	is	so	human,	it	is	so	basic	to	human	nature,	that	only	idiots
don't	have	it,	imbeciles	don't	have	it.	And	Adam	and	Eve	proved	that	they	were
not	 idiots,	 they	were	not	 imbeciles.	They	 took	 the	 challenge,	 they	 risked	 even
paradise.
And	 humanity	 should	 feel	 grateful	 for	 that;	 otherwise	 we	 would	 still	 be	 in
paradise,	 like	cows	and	buffaloes	(laughter),	grazing	around,	avoiding	 the	Tree
of	 Knowledge	 and	 the	 Tree	 of	 life.	 And	 once	 they	 ate	 from	 the	 Tree	 of
Knowledge,	he	threw	them	out	for	the	simple	reason	that	now	they	would	try	to
eat	from	the	second	tree.	Now	that	seems	to	be	a	really	jealous	god,	because	the
second	tree	was	the	Tree	of	life
--	if	you	eat	the	fruit	of	it,	you	will	become	immortal.	That	is	the	second	deepest
longing	in	man.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
These	are	the	two	fundamental	desires:	to	know	what	it	is	all	about	and	to	attain
a	state	which	is	beyond	death.	And	I	cannot	see	that	there	is	any	sin	in	it.	Why	is
man	not	entitled	to	know	why	he	exists,	what	for?
It	is	his	birthright!	He	has	to	know	the	meaning	of	his	existence.	And	he	has	to
know	 whether	 life	 exists	 beyond	 death	 or	 not,	 because	 that	 will	 be	 very
determinative,	it	will	give	a	whole	different	texture	to	his	life.
If	 life	ends	with	death	 then	all	his	values	will	be	of	one	kind.	 If	 life	continues
even	beyond	death	then	he	will	have	a	different	world	of	values	then	he	has	to
think	of	immortality,	of	eternity,	and	he	has	to	live	accordingly.
If	 life	 ends	 in	 death,	 then	 what	 is	 the	 point	 of	 bothering	 about	 religion,
philosophy,	virtue,	meditation,	good	and	bad?	What	is	the	point	of	it	all?	If	it	is
just	going	to	end	in	death	totally,	then	the	whole	of	life	loses	meaning.	Then	it	is
a	tale	told	by	an	idiot,	full	of	fury	and	noise,	signifying	nothing.	From	the	cradle
to	the	grave	it	is	just	an	accidental	process	--	one	sequence	is	being	followed	by
another	 --	 but	 there	 is	 no	 intrinsic	 meaning,	 no	 significance.	 Hence	 man	 is
entitled	to	know	whether	he	exists	beyond	death	or	not.
These	are	the	two	basic	queries,	these	are	the	two	fundamental	religious	quests,
these	 are	 the	 two	 wings	 of	 the	 enquirer:	 to	 know	 the	 meaning	 and	 to	 know
whether	 that	meaning	has	some	eternity	 to	 it	or	 is	 just	 temporary,	whether	 it	 is
only	in	time	or	also	beyond	time?	Everything	else	depends	on	these	questions	--
and	god	prohibited	Adam	and	Eve	from	eating	the	fruit	of	those	two	trees.
And	the	serpent	seems	to	be	one	of	the	benefactors	of	humanity.	What	he	said	to
Eve...	And	certainly	he	persuaded	Eve	first,	because	it	is	difficult	to	persuade	a
male	chauvinist!	He	is	egoistic,	aggressive,	he	will	argue,	and	this	and	that.	The
woman	is	more	receptive,	hence	all	advertisements	are	addressed	to	the	woman.
Now	they	say	that	if	you	want	to	sell	something,	don't	write	the	letter	directly	to
the	woman,	write	the	letter	to	the	husband,	address	it	 to	the	husband,	but	write
on	 top	of	 it	with	 red	 ink	 'Personal'!	Then	 the	woman	 is	 bound	 to	 read	 it.	And
once	the	woman	reads	the	advertisement	the	work	is	done.	And	the	serpent	was
the	 first	 advertising	 expert!	 (laughter)	He	 did	 perfectly	well,	 he	 persuaded	 the
woman.	She	was	more	receptive,	she	could	understand.	And	the	reason	that	he
gave	was	that	god	is	jealous;	he	knows	he	is	immortal	and	he	does	not	want	you
to	know	or	to	become	immortal,	because	if	you	know	and	become	immortal	you
will	become	gods,	and	he	is	afraid	of	you	becoming	gods.	He	wants	to	keep	you
in	submission,	and	only	if	you	are	ignorant	will	you	remain	servants.	Only	if	you
don't	know	that	you	are	 just	 like	gods	will	you	function	as	subordinates.	Once
you	know	you	are	gods,	then	you	will	hove	a	totally	different	religion.	Then	that
religion	 will	 not	 be	 like	 Christianity	 or	 mohammedanism	 or	 Buddhism	 or
Hinduism.	It	will	be	more	like	an	assertion	of	Al	Hillaj	Mansoor:	'Ana'l	Haq	--	I
am	god.'	Or	like	Gautam	Buddha	asserting	that	there	is	no	god	except	you.	Then
there	is	nothing	to	worship.	All	that	you	have	to	know	is	your	own	being,	and	by
knowing	it	you	will	know	all.
The	Upanishadic	Rishis	say	 'Aham	Brahmasmi	--	I	am	god.'	This	 looks	almost
sacrilegious	 to	 the	Christians,	 to	 the	Mohammedans,	 even	 to	 the	Hindus!	 The
declaration	'I	am	god'	looks	very	egoistic,	but	it	is	the	truth;	but	one	can	know	it
only	when	the	ego	is	dropped.	one	cannot	know	it	before.
Since	those	days	every	parent	has	been	trying	to	control	the	child,	condition	the
child,	make	 him	 obedient,	 give	 him	 prejudices,	 ideas	 --	what	 is	 right,	what	 is
wrong	--	in	every	possible	way	programme	him.	This	programming	has	to	be	put
aside	by	a	sannyasin	so	that	he	can	again	become	as	pure	as	Adam	and	Eve.
That's	my	idea	of	creating	a	new	commune	consisting	only	of	sannyasins.	It	will
be	the	first	experiment	of	creating	the	Garden	of	Eden	again,	where	everybody
lives	 innocently	 and	 everybody	 is	 allowed	 to	 eat	 from	 the	Tree	 of	Knowledge
and	the	Tree	of	life,	to	one's	fill,	as	much	as	one	wants,	as	much	as	one	desires,
where	 no	 prohibition,	 no	 commandment,	 no	 restriction,	 no	 slavery	 exists.	 A
commune	 where	 freedom	 is	 the	 only	 law.	 And	 only	 in	 that	 freedom	 can	 one
know	what	 love	 is.	When	you	 are	 totally	 free,	 love	arises	 in	your	being,	of	 its
own	accord.	It	is	not	something	to	be	learned	from	the	outside.	In	freedom	you
open	 up	 like	 a	 flower	 --	 a	 rose,	 a	 lotus	 --	 and	 then	 there	 is	 fragrance.	 That
fragrance	is	love.
It	is	indefinable,	nobody	can	say	exactly	what	it	is.	To	believe	in	it	is	not	right.
The	only	way	to	believe	in	it	is	to	know	it	--	and	that's	my	whole	effort	here;	the
moment	you	know	your	own	love	energy,	flowing,	surrounding	you	like	an	aura
of	light,	a	certain	flavour,	then	there	is	nobleness.
Nobleness	has	nothing	to	do	with	birth.	It	certainly	has	something	to	do	with	a
new	birth,	 and	 sannyas	 is	 that	 new	birth	 --	 being	born	 anew	 into	 the	world	of
freedom,	 love,	 bliss,	 awareness.	 And	 then	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 is	 noble,
whatsoever	you	are	is	noble.	Your	very	existence	becomes	nobleness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
28	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101285
ShortTitle:	POND28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	can	 function	 in	 two	ways	 --	 either	 ss	 a	 head	 or	 as	 a	 heart.	And	both	 are
polar	 opposites	 to	 each	 other;	 their	 languages	 are	 different,	 their	 rhythm	 is
different,	their	dimension	is	different,	their	whole	world	is	different.
Head	consists	of	logic,	calculation,	cleverness,	cunningness;	it	is	a	prose	style	of
life,	mundane	 and	 superficial,	 but	 efficient,	 very	useful	 to	 the	 society,	 because
man	 functions	 through	 the	 head	 almost	 like	 a	 machine	 --	 and	 that's	 what	 the
society	needs.	The	society	is	not	in	need	of	men,	it	needs	machines.	That's	why	it
goes	 on	 replacing	man	by	more	 and	more	machines.	 Sooner	 or	 later	man	will
become	absolutely	 irrelevant.	He	 is	 already	on	 the	way	out,	 because	machines
can	do	the	same	work	more	efficiently,	more	correctly.	They	are	more	reliable	--
they	 don't	 go	 on	 strike,	 they	 don't	 create	 any	 labour	 trouble,	 they	 are	 never
rebellious,	 disobedient,	 they	 don't	 know	 how	 to	 say	 no.	 Hence	 the	 society
teaches	every	person	to	become	a	head	--	that	is	a	subtle	politics.
All	 the	 schools,	 colleges	 and	 universities	 exist	 only	 to	 perpetuate	 that	 subtle
politics.	In	the	name	of	education	what	is	really	done	is	to	reduce	human	being
to	 mechanical	 devices.	 And	 of	 course	 those	 who	 are	 successful	 in	 that	 are
rewarded,	are	respected,	become	rich,	become	famous.
The	heart	 is	neglected,	 ignored,	because	 it	 seems	of	no	use	 to	 the	society.	The
heart	consists	of	love	instead	of	logic.	The	heart	is	intelligence	and	intelligence
is	never	cunning.	It	need	not	be.
Cunningness	is	a	poor	substitute	for	intelligence.	Call	it	cleverness,	but	it	is	the
same	thing,	only	with	a	better	label.
The	heart	 consists	of	 such	a	great	 intelligence	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 it	 to	be
cunning;	hence	 it	becomes	 innocent.	 Intelligence	 is	 always	 innocent.	 It	 is	only
the	 stupid	person	who	 is	 cunning	and	clever.	 Intelligence	 is	 childlike,	with	 the
same	purity,	with	the	same	wonder,	with	the	same	awe.
The	 heart	 consists	 of	 a	 poetic	 lifestyle.	 It	 has	 depth,	 infinite	 depth.	 It	 is	 not
superficial.	 Because	 it	 has	 depth,	 because	 it	 has	 a	 certain	 interiority	 to	 it,	 it
becomes	unapproachable	for	the	society.	Only	the	person	is	capable	of	reaching
his	heart,	nobody	else	can	do	it;	hence	it	gives	you	an	individuality.
The	 head	 gives	 you	 only	 a	 personality,	 and	 persona	means	 a	mask.	 The	 heart
gives	you	your	original	 face,	and	 the	whole	status	quo	 is	afraid	of	 the	original
face	because	the	person	who	has	the	original	face	is	bound	to	be	rebellious.	He
cannot	 bow	 down	 to	 stupidities,	 superstitions,	 exploitation,	 oppression.	 He
cannot	humiliate	himselF.	He	would	rather	die	than	live	with	compromise.
Hence	society	has	made	a	certain	strategy	to	lead	the	child's	energy	towards	the
head,	bypassing	the	heart.	And	a	man	without	heart	cannot	be	noble.	If	you	don't
have	something	for	which	you	can	die	you	cannot	be	noble.	You	don't	have	any
spine	--	how	can	you	be	noble?	You	don't	have	any	commitment	to	existence	--
how	can	you	be	noble?	You	don't	have	any	involvement	with	life	--	how	can	you
be	noble?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Nobility	needs	that	a	person	should	be	so	totally	independent,	uncompromisingly
independent,	 that	 whatsoever	 the	 consequence,	 come	 hail	 or	 hell,	 he	 is
determined	to	remain	himself.	Very	few	people	have	shown	that	much	courage	--
a	 Jesus,	 a	Buddha,	 a	 Socrates	 --	 very	 few	 people,	 but	 they	 are	 the	 salt	 of	 the
earth.	 If	 there	 is	 some	 nobility	 in	 existence	 it	 is	 because	 of	 these	 few	 people.
They	have	contributed	colour,	beauty,	benediction.
The	heart	 is	basically	poetic,	hence	 it	 is	unpredictable,	and	society	depends	on
predictability.	 society	 does	 not	 trust	 the	 poets,	 the	musicians,	 the	 dancers,	 and
never	the	mystics,	because	they	are	really	far	gone!
(laughter)	The	poet	is	still	hanging	around	the	boundary;	sometimes	he	is	prose,
sometimes	he	is	poetry,	sometimes	calculation,	sometimes	intelligence.	He	is	just
living	 in	 a	 boundary	 world.	 He	 goes	 to	 both	 worlds,	 he	 is	 a	 visitor	 in	 both
worlds;	he	moves	between	the	heart	and	the	head.	But	the	mystic	has	completely
dropped	the	head,	he	has	chopped	it	off.	He	lives	only	through	the	heart.	He	is
pure	poetry,	pure	song,	pure	dance,	for	no	other	reason	than	the	sheer	joy	of	it!
And	to	me,	that	is	the	very	essence	of	religiousness.	Only	that	state	is	capable	of
knowing	the	truth.	And	the	moment	you	know	the	truth	you	become	the	truth	--
that's	what	nobility	is:	Mind	is	encapsulated,	closed.	It	is	not	vulnerable,	it	is	not
open.	 The	 brain	 is	 enclosed	 in	 a	 hard	 shell	 not	 only	 physiologically,	 but	 also
metaphysically.
Mind	has	no	windows,	It	is	windowless,	hence	the	mind	is	bound	to	be	a	fanatic.
It	may	be	a	Hindu	mind	or	a	Mohammedan	mind	or	a	Christian	mind	--	it	makes
no	difference	mind	is	going	to	be	fanatic.	It	is	not	available	to	see,	to	experience.
It	lives	according	to	its	prejudices,	it	is	already	contaminated,	conditioned.
Mind	is	nothing	but	all	your	conditionings	together	it	is	whatsoever	the	society
has	given	 to	you	--	 the	parents,	 the	 teachers,	 the	priests,	 the	politicians,	all	 the
do-gooders,	 all	 the	 so-called	 well-wishers.	 And	 I	 am	 not	 suspecting	 their
intentions	--	their	intentions	may	be	good,	perhaps	they	are	good	--	but	the	result
is	ugly,	because	those	intentions	are	unconscious.	Those	people	don't	know	what
they	are	doing.
The	 last	 prayer	 of	 Jesus	 to	 god	was:	 'Forgive	 these	 people	 because	 they	 don't
know	what	they	are	doing.'
And	 this	 is	 true	 not	 only	 when	 you	 are	 crucified;	 this	 is	 true	 when	 you	 are
brought	up	tool	when	you	are	educated,	 then	too.	When	everybody	is	 trying	to
help	you	to	have	a	certain	shape,	a	certain	character,	a	certain	morality,	 in	fact
they	 are	 crucifying	 you.	 The	 cross	 is	 invisible;	 they	 are	 cutting	 your	 nature,
chopping	your	spontaneity,	making	you	fit	to	some	ancient	prejudice	which	may
be	absolutely	irrelevant	 today.	It	may	not	have	been	relevant	ever,	 it	may	have
been	 just	 an	 invention	 of	 the	 cunning	 and	 the	 clever,	 it	 may	 be	 a	 conspiracy
between	the	priest	and	the	politician	to	dominate	the	world,	to	subjugate	people,
to	 enslave	humanity;	 but	mind	 lives	 in	 this	 enclosed	world,	 unavailable	 to	 the
sun,	to	the	rain,	to	the	wind,	unavailable	to	anything	new.
Mind	 is	 old	 and	 reality	 is	 new	 every	 moment	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 communion
between	reality	and	mind.
To	 be	 in	 the	mind	 is	 to	 be	 ignorant,	 to	 cling	 to	 the	mind	 is	 to	 cling	 to	 one's
ignorance.	Meditation	means	coming	out	of	 the	mind,	getting	out	of	 the	mind,
making	 a	 few	windows	 and	 doors	 into	 the	mind,	 becoming	 less	 fanatic,	more
available	to	reality,	more	open	to	the	new,	less	attached	to	the	old	and	the	dead.
That's	 what	meditation	 is.	 It	 is	 a	 revolution,	 from	mind	 to	 no-mind,	 a	 radical
transformation,	a	quantum	leap.
The	 moment	 you	 become	 open,	 available,	 unprejudiced,	 the	 moment	 you	 are
ready	 to	 so	 with	 the	 truth	 wherever	 it	 leads,	 the	 moment	 you	 are	 ready	 to
sacrifice	 all	 your	 knowledge,	 superstitions,	 theologies,	 religions,	 political
ideologies,	just	to	go	with	the	truth,	you	start	growing	a	new	quality	in	you.	That
quality	is	meditativeness,	and	that	quality	is	so	blissful	that	once	you	have	tasted
it	you	will	not	like	to	go	back	to	the	mind,	because	mind	is	an	imprisonment	and
meditation	is	freedom.	And	only	in	freedom	do	you	open	up	like	a	lotus	flower.
With	the	mind	you	remain	in	darkness,	just	like	a	seed,	carrying	great	potential
but	never	giving	it	a	chance	to	become	actual.	Meditation	creates	the	situation,
the	climate,	the	soil,	for	all	your	seeds	to	row,	to	sprout,	for	all	your	buds	to	open
and	become	 flowers.	Meditation	 is	 a	 spring	and	 suddenly	 thousands	of	 lotuses
start	blooming	in	your	being.
To	me	that	experience	is	godliness	or	nirvana.	I	don't	believe	in	a	personal	god,	I
cannot	believe	in	a	personal	god,	because	I	have	searched	and	I	have	found	only
godliness	but	no	god.	I	have	found	love	but	no	lover.	I	have	found	only	qualities.
Metaphorically	 it	 is	 okay	 to	 call	 it	 god,	 but	 I	 have	 found	 freedom,	 love,
godliness,	silence,	awareness,	beauty,	truth.	All	these	are	qualities	of	one	organic
unity,	different	 aspects	of	 the	 same	phenomenon,	but	 the	phenomenon	 is	more
like	a	verb	than	like	a	noun.	It	is	more	like	energy	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
exploding	 than	 like	 a	 person	 confined	 and	 limited;	 hence	 I	 don't	 teach	 prayer
because	prayer	believes	in	a	personal	god.	It	is	addressed	to	a	personal	god,	it	is
ar	I-Thou	relationship.	The	Thou	is	absolutely	needed.
I	teach	meditation	because	meditation	is	not	a	relationship	at	all,	it	has	nothing	to
do	with	 I	or	Thou,	 if	 the	Thou	 is	needed,	 then	you	will	 never	be	able	 to	drop
your	I	either,	because	prayer	needs	both!	There	must	be	one	who	is	addressed,
otherwise	it	looks	insane.	And	if	you	have	to	address	a	god,	you	have	to	be	there
to	 address.	 So	 I	 and	 Thou	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 coin,	 they	 are	 joined
together	 intrinsically.	 You	 cannot	 drop	 one	 without	 dropping	 the	 other;	 either
you	have	to	keep	both	or	you	have	to	drop	both.
Meditation	drops	both.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	Thou,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with
I;	 it	 is	moving	 into	 the	very	depth	of	 your	 being,	where	only	 silence	prevails.
And	that	silence	is	so	absolute	that	there	cannot	be	any	disturbance	of	the	ego.
Ego	is	noisy,	ego	is	part	of	the	mind.	It	cannot	be	part	of	meditation.	hence	I	say
emphatically	that	all	the	prayers	of	all	the	religions	are	head-oriented.	They	may
talk	about	the	heart	but	that	is	mere	talk.	Prayer	basically	is	a	head	phenomenon,
it	is	an	address	from	the	I	to	some	unknown,	invented	Thou.
Martin	Buber	has	written	a	book	on	prayer	and	he	calls	it	I	AND	THOU,	and	he
thinks	that	that	is	the	ultimate	in	religion.	I	feel	sorry	for	the	old	man	--	he	was	a
good	man	but	he	remained	in	the	old	Judaic,	childish	idea	of	I-Thou.	He	thinks
that	is	prayer,	he	thinks	that	is	the	ultimate	in	religion.
It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 religion.	 It	 is	 not	 even	 the	 beginning	 --	what	 to	 say
about	 the	 ultimate?	 The	 ultimate	 of	 religion	 is	 total	 silence	 --	 no	 prayer,	 no
verbal	communication,	nothing	has	to	be	said;	there	is	nothing	to	say	and	there	is
nobody	to	say	it	either	--	and	in	that	silence	something	opens	of	its	own	accord.
We	in	the	East	have	called	it	the	lotus,	because	that	is	the	most	beautiful	flower
in	the	East.	We	have	actually	called	it	the	one-thousand-petalled-lotus,	sahasrar.
There	is	no	lotus	with	one	thousand	petals,	 it	 is	 just	a	metaphor.	One	thousand
simply	represents	infinity,	a	lotus	with	infinite	petals,	which	go	on	opening,	on
and	on	and	on,	and	there	is	no	end	to	it.
There	is	a	world	outside,	a	big,	vast,	enormous	world,	but	there	is	also	a	world
inside,	 bigger	 than	 the	 outside	world.	 If	 the	 outside	world	 is	 infinite	 then	 the
inside	world	is	far	more	infinite	(laughter).	Mahavira	has	the	right	word	for	it;	he
calls	 it	 'infinitely	 infinite',	 not	 only	 one-dimensionally	 infinite	 but	 multi-
dimensionally	infinite.	'Anantanant'	--	that	is	his	word.
A	 line	 can	be	 infinite	 if	 it	 goes	on	 and	on	 and	on,	never	 ending;	but	 from	 the
same	 point	 you	 can	 drag	 many	 lines	 and	 all	 those	 lines	 can	 go	 on	 and	 on
infinitely.	That's	how	the	inner	world	is:	infinitely	infinite.
The	kingdom	of	the	outside	world	is	temporal.	One	can	even	become	Alexander
the	great,	but	compared	to	the	inner	kingdom	even	Alexander	the	Great	is	just	a
beggar	and	nothing	else.	And	it	happened	many	times	in	Alexander's	life	--	the
first	 time	 when	 he	 met	 Diogenes	 in	 Greece,	 he	 felt	 suddenly	 that	 he	 was	 a
beggar.	The	comparison	was	so	clear,	unmistakably	clear.	Diogenes	was	a	naked
mystic,	 he	 had	 nothing.	 He	 had	 fewer	 possessions	 than	 even	 Gautam	 the
Buddha.	 Gautam	 the	 buddha	 had	 at	 least	 three	 robes	 and	 one	 begging	 bowl.
Diogenes	 lived	 naked,	 without	 a	 begging	 bowl,	 absolutely	 possessionless,	 but
Alexander	 felt	 poor.	 The	 radiance,	 the	 richness,	 the	 blissfulness,	 the	 ecstasy
surrounding	 Diogenes	 was	 so	 much,	 so	 tangible	 --	 you	 could	 have	 almost
touched	it.	The	fragrance	of	 the	man	was	such	that	Alexander	remembers	 later
on	'That	was	the	first	time	I	felt	belittled	--	and	that	too	before	a	poor	man,	the
poorest	 that	I	have	seen,	but	before	 that	poorest	man	I	was	poor,	he	was	not.	 I
felt	jealous.'
He	even	said	to	Diogenes	'If	god	gives	me	another	chance	to	be	born	again	I	will
ask	him	'Make	me	Diogenes	rather	than	Alexander	the	Great."'
The	presence	of	Diogenes	must	have	penetrated	very	deep,	for	Alexander	was	a
very	 egoistic	 man.	 How	 can	 you	 account	 for	 his	 whole	 life	 if	 he	 was	 not
egoistic?	His	only	desire	was	to	conquer	the	whole	world.
Diogenes	 asked	 him	 'What	 is	 the	 purpose?	 I	 wonder	 sometimes,	 why	 do	 you
want	to	conquer	the	whole	world?	And	even	if	you	have	conquered	it,	accepted
that	you	have	conquered	it,	then	what?'	Alexander	said
'Then	 I	 will	 rest.'	 And	 he	 laughed,	 Diogenes	 laughed.	 He	 said	 'This	 is	 sheer
stupidity.	You	can	 see	 that	 I	 am	 resting	without	 conquering	 the	world,	 so	why
can't	you	do	 it	 right	now?'	And	he	was	 resting,	he	was	 taking	a	 sunbath	when
Alexander	went	 to	 see	him,	 just	 lying	naked	under	 the	 sun,	 in	 the	 sand	by	 the
side	of	a	river,	listening	to	the	music	of	the	river.	He	said	'I	am	resting,	relaxing,
and	who	 is	preventing	you?	And	 I	don't	 see	 the	point	 --	how	 it	 is	 related	with
conquering	 the	world.	 I	have	not	conquered,	and	 if	 I	can	 rest	 --	and	you	are	a
man	of	 logic,	 I	know	 that	you	are	a	disciple	of	Aristotle,	 the	 father	of	 logic	 --
then	you	can	understand	 that	 there	 is	no	cause	and	effect	 relationship	between
conquering	 the	 world	 and	 relaxing.'	 And	 of	 course,	 Alexander	 could	 see	 the
point.
He	 felt	 ashamed,	 looked	 down,	 could	 not	 answer	 --	 he	 could	 see,	 it	 was
absolutely	logical,	if	a	man	can	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
relax	without	conquering	then	why	is	it	you	cannot	relax?	It	is	not	connected	at
all.	He	 said	 'I	 can	 understand.	Can	 I	 help	 you	 in	 some	way,	 I	 feel	 so	 obliged.
Your	presence	has	given	me	so	much	I	would	like	to	do	something	for	you,	and	I
can	do	anything,	you	just	ask;	nothing	is	impossible	for	me.'
Diogenes	said	'But	I	don't	have	any	desires	so	what	can	I	ask	for?	But	if	you	are
really	 feeling	 to	 do	 something	 then	 just	 stand	 a	 little	 aside	 because	 you	 are
blocking	the	sun	(laughter),	and	I	will	be	immensely	thankful	to	you!'	That's	all
he	 asked.	 It	 haunted	Alexander	 his	whole	 life:	 'That	man,	what	 did	 he	 have?'
And	then	when	he	came	to	India	he	met	again	two	persons	of	the	same	calibre,
of	the	same	depth.
One	man	 he	met	was	 a	Brahmin,	 a	 great	mystic,	 and	 he	wanted	 the	Brahmin
mystic	 to	 give	 him	 the	 ancientmost	 scriptures	 of	 the	 world,	 the	 Vedas.	 The
Brahmin	 said	 'You	 come	 in	 the	 morning,	 and	 in	 the	 morning,	 early	 in	 the
morning	as	the	sun	rises	I	will	give	them	to	you.'	And	the	story	is	that	the	whole
night	he	went	on	reciting	the	Vedas	before	his	two	young	sons.	There	was	a	fire,
he	would	recite	a	page	and	 throw	the	page	 into	 the	fire.	By	 the	morning	when
Alexander	returned,	the	last	page	was	being	read	and	thrown.
He	 saw	 the	 last	 page	 being	 thrown	 and	 consumed	 by	 the	 fire,	 and	 the	 old
Brahmin	said	'You	can	take	these	two	sons	of	mine,	they	remember	everything!
Those	books	I	could	not	give	to	you.	That	was	not	possible	because	the	person
who	had	given	them	to	me	has	made	me	promise	that	they	be	given	only	to	the
initiates.
These	 two	 boys	 are	 initiates	 and	 they	 remember	 everything,	 so	 you	 are	 not
missing	anything.	Whatsoever	you	want	they	will	reply.	The	whole	night	I	have
been	working	for	you	--	you	can	keep	these	boys.'
Alexander	could	not	believe,	such	memory!	He	asked	other	Brahmins	'Is	it	true?'
And	the	other	Brahmins	came	and	examined	those	two	boys	--	and	Vedas	are	big
scriptures,	 thousands	 of	 sutras	 --	 and	 they	 had	 to	 agree	 that	 those	 two	 boys
remembered	every	single	word.	 'How	is	 it	possible?'	he	asked	the	old	man.	He
said	'There	is	no	difficulty	because	these	two	boys	know	what	meditation	is.	It	is
not	a	memory	of	the	mind	--	that	has	limitations.	It	is	a	totally	different	kind	of
memory	that	comes	not	through	intellect	but	through	intelligence,	that	comes	not
through	 cramming,	 repeating	 something,	 but	 that	 comes	 only	 through
understanding.	These	are	great	meditators.	I	have	prepared	them	for	meditation.
They	 listened	 in	 silence,	 in	 absolute	 silence	 --	 there	was	no	disturbance.	They
listened	 to	 it	 from	 their	 very	 interiority.	 There	was	 not	 a	 single	 thought	when
they	 were	 listening	 to	 me,	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 distraction.	 They	 can	 repeat,
whatsoever	you	want	they	will	answer.'
That	was	his	second	experience	that	there	is	a	way	of	understanding	which	is	not
of	the	mind,	which	is	not	to	be	taught.	There	is	a	way	of	life	which	can	only	be
caught	 and	not	 taught.	They	were	 so	 silent	 that	 they	 simply	drank	whatsoever
was	told	--	that	is	the	way	of	a	disciple,	that	is	the	way	of	a	sannyasin,	he	simply
drinks.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 argumentation,	 deciding	 whether	 it	 is	 right	 or
wrong,	it	is	not	a	question	of	pros	and	cons.
He	was	amazed,	could	not	believe.
And	 the	 third	 person	 he	 came	 across	 he	 remembers	 was	 Dandamis,	 another
naked	man	who	reminded	him	again	of	Diogenes.	He	wanted	this	Dandanis	to	go
with	him.	Dandamis	laughed.	He	said	 'You	cannot	order	a	sannyasin.	I	am	like
the	wind,	wherever	it	blows,	it	blows.	You	cannot	order	me	to	go	here	or	to	go
there.	I	follow	my	own	insight.	Nobody	can	force	me	to	do	a	single	act.'
Alexander	was	angry.	He	took	out	his	sword	and	he	said	'If	you	say	no	I	will	cut
off	your	head.'
Dandamis	 laughed,	 the	 same	 laughter.	 Again	 he	 remembered	 Diogenes	 --	 the
same	laughter	coming	from	the	same	depth.	And	Dandamis	said	'You	can	cut	off
my	head	 --	 that's	perfectly	okay,	 I	have	no	objection	about	 it	 --	but	 let	me	 tell
you,	when	the	head	is	cut	and	falls	down,	you	will	see	it	falling	down	and	I	will
also	see	it	falling	down.	You	will	be	seeing	it	from	the	outside,	I	will	be	seeing	it
from	the	inside,	and	I	tell	you,	to	see	it	happen	from	the	inside	is	a	real	miracle.
What	you	will	be	seeing	is	nothing.'
Now	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 kill	 such	 a	 man.	 Again	 Alexander	 remembers	 in	 his
memoirs	 'I	 came	 across	 a	man	who	was	 ready	 to	 die	 laughing!	He	must	 have
gained	something	which	is	far	more	valuable	than	life	itself.
He	must	have	known	something	which	 is	 immortal,	he	must	have	entered	 into
eternity,	otherwise	how	can	he	say	'I	will	see	it	falling,	my	own	head,	and	I	will
enjoy	it!'
So	there	is	a	world	outside	--	the	extrovert	lives	in	it;	it	is	the	world	of	time	and
death,	change,	flux.	But	there	is	another	world	too	--	the	mystic	lives	in	it	--	the
world	of	your	own	interiority,	of	your	own	subjectivity.	That	is	meditation.
Mind	 lives	 outside	 meditation	 is	 of	 the	 inner,	 and	 it	 opens	 the	 door	 or	 the
kingdom,	within.	And	for	the	first	time	one	really	becomes	rich;	a	richness	that
cannot	be	taken	away,	a	richness	that	cannot	be	stolen,	a	richness	that	cannot	be
burned,	 a	 richness	 for	which	 you	 don't	 need	 any	 insurance	 --	 it	 is	 insured	 by
existence	itself	--	a	richness	which	belongs	to	the	eternal,	the	immovable	and	the
deathless.	That	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sannyas	 is	 a	 deep	 search	 to	 really	 become	 emperors	 of	 the	 inner	 world.	 And
everyone	 is	 capable	 of	 it.	 If	 we	 miss,	 then	 it	 is	 our	 own	 stupidity,	 our	 own
irresponsibility,	our	own	negligence.	Nobody	else	is	responsible	for	it.	It	 is	our
choice!
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	choosing	a	new	adventure,	the	real	adventure
of	life.
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	None
30	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101305
ShortTitle:	POND30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	 can	 live	 on	 two	 planes:	 either	 in	 time	 or	 in	 eternity.	 Time	 is	 constantly
changing	it	is	movement,	it	is	flux.	Heraclitus	is	right	about	time	when	he	says
you	cannot	step	in	the	same	river	twice.	No	moment	in	time	cones	back	--	it	is
gone	 and	 gone	 forever.	 Everything	 that	 lives	 in	 time	 is	 temporary,	 everything
that	is	born	in	time	is	bound	to	die.	Our	body	belongs	to	time;	one	day	it	was	not
there,	one	day	again	it	will	not	be	there.	Our	mind	also	belongs	to	time.
Mind	is	created	by	experiences,	knowledge	and	all	 that	is	given	by	the	society,
the	older	generation	--
the	parents,	the	teachers,	the	priests.	Mind	is	also	going	to	die.	We	come	into	the
world	without	mind,	we	come	only	as	a	clean	slate,	a	tabula	rasa,	with	no	writing
on	 it,	 then	 time	 does	 the	 writing.	 As	 the	 child	 grows	 the	 writing	 goes	 on
becoming	bigger	and	bigger.
The	grown-up	person	loses	all	inner	space,	he	is	full	af	junk	from	the	past.	The
older	 a	 man	 is,	 the	 less	 innocent	 he	 is,	 because	 innocence	 needs	 clarity,
spaciousness.	And	 the	 old	man	 is	 so	 burdened	with	memories	 that	 there	 is	 no
space	inside	his	being,	it	is	full	of	furnitures	thoughts,	desires,	dreams	fulfilled,
unfulfilled,	frustrations,	expectations	--	 the	whole	 life	 that	he	has	 lived	and	the
whole	life	that	he	has	missed	living	--	all	that	is	there.	He	is	crowded.
And	the	moment	he	dies	he	will	have	to	leave	his	bodymind	here;	he	will	not	be
able	to	take	it	with	him.
Our	whole	education	goes	down	the	drain.
If	 we	 remain	 identified	 with	 the	 bodymind	 complex	 then	 we	 live	 in	 the
dimension	of	 time.	If	we	become	disidentified	from	the	body	and	the	mind	we
enter	into	a	totally	different	world,	the	world	of	eternity.	That	is	our	real	nature.
We	are	in	time	but	we	don't	belong	to	it.	We	are	like	a	ray	of	light	penetrating	a
dark	 tunnel.	 It	 comes	 from	 the	outside,	 it	 comes	 from	somewhere	else,	 from	o
source	of	light.	It	passes	through	the	dark	tunnel	but	it	is	not	part	of	it.	It	is	alien,
it	is	an	outsider.
The	 body	 belongs	 to	 the	 world,	 the	 mind	 belongs	 to	 the	 world,	 but	we	 don't
belong	to	the	world.
Experiencing	this	is	meditation.	Getting	disidentified	from	all	that	is	part	of	time
is	meditation.
George	 Gurdjieff,	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 masters	 of	 this	 age,	 used	 to	 define
meditation	 simply	 in	 this	way:	 identification	 is	 a	 state	 of	 no	meditation,	 non-
identification	 is	 a	 state	 of	meditation.	And	 the	moment	 you	 are	 not	 identified
with	 the	body	and	 the	mind	and	you	can	watch	 them	as	entities	 separate	 from
you,	suddenly,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
instantly,	you	are	 transported,	 time	disappears	death	disappears	with	 it,	 change
disappears	with	it.	Then	you	are	in	the	world	of	that	which	always	is,	that	which
knows	no	past,	no	future,	that	which	only	knows	the	present,	now.	The	taste	of
now	is	the	taste	of	nectar.
Time	consists	of	past	and	future.	Now	is	penetration	of	a	ray	from	the	beyond,
hence	the	whole	art	of	sannyas	is	to	live	more	and	more	in	the	here,	in	the	now,
in	the	present,	in	the	immediate.	This	moment	is	all,	end	if	one	can	be	absolutely
absorbed	in	this	moment,	caring	nothing	about	that	which	is	gone,	thinking	not
at	 all	 about	 that	 which	 is	 going	 to	 come,	 one	 realises	 the	 beauty	 of
transcendence.	 I	 call	 it	 the	 experience	 of	 immortality,	 deathlessness.	 This	 has
been	the	search	for	centuries	of	all	the	alchemy	schools	of	the	world.
Science	 functions	 in	 time.	 It	 thinks	 in	 time	 and	 space,	 its	 whole	 world	 is
confined	in	spacio-time.	It	knows	nothing	of	the	beyond,	and	the	beyond	is	our
true	being.	The	very	beyondness	is	our	freedom	--
freedom,	 from	 all	 bondage,	 from	 all	 limitations,	 from	 all	 misery.	 And	 the
freedom	 is	 not	 only	 negative	 --	 it	 is	 not	 only	 freedom	 from	bondage,	 it	 is	 not
only	freedom	from	misery.	It	is	freedom	for	bliss,	it	is	freedom	for	the	whole	sky
and	 the	 stars.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 removal	 of	 something:	 at	 the	 same	 time	 it	 is	 a
realisation	of	our	true	potential	hence	it	is	ecstasy.
To	 live	 without	 knowing	 it	 is	 to	 live	 in	 vain.	 And	 once	 you	 know	 it	 then
whatsoever	you	do	has	a	grace.
Then	each	action	that	comes	out	of	your	being	has	a	beauty,	a	creativity	about	it.
Then	your	whole	life	has	a	quality	of	dance,	song,	music,	celebration	--	the	very
colour	of	spring.	Hence	I	have	chosen	orange	and	all	 the	shades	of	 red	for	my
sannyasins;	in	the	East	that	is	the	colour	of	spring,	because	then	all	the	flowers
open	up.	They	belong	more	or	less	to	the	spectrum	of	different	shades	of	red.
Life	without	 flowering	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 slow	 death.	 It	 is	 not	worth	 anything.	 It	 is
meaningless,	it	is	absurd,	sannyas	gives	you	significance,	an	understanding	into
the	 deepest	 mystery	 of	 existence.	 The	 name	 of	 the	 door	 that	 leads	 to	 this
experience	is	meditation.
So	your	name	consists	of	two	words.	The	first	is	the	door,	meditation,	dhyan,	and
the	 second	 is	 when	 you	 have	 entered	 the	 door,	 when	 you	 have	 entered	 the
innermost	shrine	--	that	is	smrit,	that	is	nectar,	that	is	deathlessness,	eternity.
Meditation	bring	many	flowers	to	your	life.	It	is	multi-dimensional.
Mind	 is	 one-dimensional.	 It	 is	 linear,	 like	 a	 straight	 line,	 horizontal.	 It	moves
from	A	to	B,	from	B	to	C,	from	C	to	D;	it	runs	like	a	railway	train,	on	tracks.	Its
approach	is	mechanical,	conditioned.	It	has	no	freedom.	It	is	confined	to	a	single
line.	And	millions	 of	 people	 are	 living	 like	 that.	 In	 fact	 all	 the	 societies	 up	 to
now	have	lived	like	that.
You	 must	 have	 seen	 ants	 moving	 in	 a	 line	 --	 that's	 how	 human	 beings	 have
behaved.	And	 ants	 and	 human	 beings	 have	many	 things	 in	 common.	Ants	 are
one	 of	 the	 most	 primitive	 societies,	 perhaps	 far	 more	 ancient	 than	 human
societies,	and	they	are	very	highly	developed.	There	is	a	certain	hierarchy,	there
is	 a	 definite	 demarcation	of	 classes.	There	 are	 labourers	 --	 hands	 and	heads	 --
and	 they	all	 follow	the	 line	very	obediently,	very	religiously.	You	will	not	 find
even	 a	 single	 ant	 moving	 astray,	 rebels	 don't	 exist.	 That's	 how	 human	 beings
have	also	done	in	the	past;	they	have	lived	in	the	crowd,	according	to	the	crowd,
losing	their	individuality.	And	the	society	wants	you	never	to	be	rebellious;	that
is	 against	 its	 investments,	 it	 is	 against	 the	 establishment,	 it	 is	 against	 all	 the
vested	interests,	it	is	against	the	status	quo.
Hence	society	emphasises	the	mind	because	mind	is	a	crowd	phenomenon,	it	is
part	of	mob	psychology.
Society	 manufactures	 the	 mind.	 From	 the	 kindergarten	 to	 the	 university	 it	 is
nothing	but	a	process	of	manufacturing	 the	minds.	What	 is	 called	education	 is
not	education	at	all;	 it	 is	a	very	destructive	process.	It	 is	an	effort	 to	make	you
part	of	a	crowd,	to	cut	you	to	size,	to	fix	you	into	a	certain	pattern	and	structure
so	 that	 you	 can	become	 efficient,	 a	 cog	 in	 the	wheel.	 It	 does	 not	want	 you	 to
have	any	individuality.	And	that	is	the	miracle	of	meditation;	it	takes	you	out	of
the	mind	and	imparts	individuality	to	you	for	the	first	time.
Meditation	means	putting	 the	mind	aside.	By	putting	 the	mind	aside	you	have
undone	all	that	the	society	has	done	to	you,	you	are	free	from	the	society.	Free
from	the	mind	means	free	from	the	society.	The	society	may	be	Christian,	Hindu,
Mohammedan,	 Indian,	 German,	 Chinese	 --	 it	 makes	 no	 difference.	 It	 may	 be
capitalist,	 communist,	 socialist,	 fascist	 --	 it	 is	 all	 the	 same	 game	 in	 different
names.	Maybe	 there	are	 little	differences	here	and	 there	but	 they	don't	make	a
difference	that	really	makes	a	difference.	Those	are	just	superficial	differences.
Otherwise	every	society	insists	that	you	be	in	the	mind,	that	you	be	the	mind	and
never	slip	out	of	it,	because	slipping	out	of	it	makes	you	a	rebel.	You	start	seeing
on	your	own,	you	start	becoming	independent,	you	start	enjoying	the	freshness
of	freedom.	You	are	no	more	part	of	the	prison.
And	once	you	have	tasted	freedom,	you	can	never	be	a	part	of	 the	prison.	You
would	rather	die	than	compromise.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	is	real	rebellion,	but	it	is	individual	rebellion.	It	is	not	political,	it	is
not	social,	it	is	spiritual.
And	rebellion	can	only	be	spiritual.	All	political	revolutions	have	failed,	without
exception,	because	 the	people	who	possess	power	after	 the	revolution	have	 the
same	 kind	 of	mind.	 They	 start	 creating	 again	 the	 same	mob	 psychology,	 they
start	manipulating	people,	fixing	them	in	a	line,	forcing	them	to	follow	the	line.
The	flags	change,	the	slogans	change,	but	the	basic	poisoning	remains	the	same
hence	I	say	that	only	spiritual	revolution	is	real.	All	other	revolutions	are	pseudo.
And	 spiritual	 revolution	 begins	 with	 meditation.	 Meditation	 is	 like	 a	 snake
slipping	not	of	the	old	skin.
Our	mind	is	an	old	skin,	rotten.	Because	it	is	given	by	others	it	is	ugly,	because	it
has	been	forced	upon	us	it	is	against	us,	it	is	against	our	nature.	It	is	the	enemy	of
our	well-being.	Living	in	it	 is	cowardly.	Getting	out	of	 it	 is	being	again	full	of
adventure	and	thrill.	Then	life	goes	on	opening	new	visions,	new	pastures,	new
peaks	to	be	attained,	new	targets	to	be	fulfilled,	again	life	becomes	a	tremendous
aspiration.	And	I	call	it	aspiration	knowingly,	not	inspiration,	because	inspiration
comes	from	others	--	 leaders	inspire	you,	priests	inspire	you.	Aspiration	comes
from	your	own	being,	and	only	that	which	comes	from	your	own	being	can	have
any	authentic	value.
Getting	 out	 of	 the	mind	 is	 getting	 into	 life,	 into	 the	 very	 stream	 of	 life.	 It	 is
becoming	 alive.	And	 the	person	who	 is	 alive	becomes	 a	 beloved	of	 existence.
The	whole	Existence	 loves	 that	person.	Human	beings	may	hate	him,	but	 they
don't	 constitute	 the	whole	 of	 existence;	 they	 are	 such	 a	 small	 speck	of	 dust	 --
there	is	no	need	to	worry	about	that.	Stars	will	love	you,	trees	love	you,	animals
will	love	you,	mountains	and	rivers
--	the	whole	existence!
Compared	to	the	whole	existence	and	its	love,	the	stupid	respectability	given	by
human	beings	is	of	no	worth	at	all.	Hence	it	is	better	to	be	crucified	like	a	Jesus.
The	 human	 beings	 are	 crucifying	 him,	 but	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 showering
love!	And	that	is	the	meaning	of	your	name:	become	a	meditator	so	that	you	can
become	 a	 beloved	 of	 existence	 itself.	 I	 cannot	 say	 that	 you	 will	 become	 a
beloved	of	human	beings	too.
Of	 course	 a	 few	 human	 beings,	 those	who	 are	 as	 rebellious	 as	 you	 are...	 But
ninety-nine	per	cent,	the	people	who	have	lived	like	sheep	are	bound	to	hate	you.
They	hate	you	because	 it	 is	 a	deep-felt	 insult	 to	 them,	 it	 is	humiliating.	When
they	see	a	rebel	 like	Socrates,	Buddha,	Lao	TZu,	 they	feel	humiliated,	because
they	can	see	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 in	comparison	 to	 these	people,	what	 they	could
have	been	but	are	not,	and	they	don't	have	guts	enough	to	risk	and	to	grow.	So
the	best	way	is	to	kill	Socrates,	to	remove	Jesus,	to	murder	Mansoor,	so	that	no
comparison	is	left	and	they	can	again	feel	at	ease	--	at	ease	in	their	prison,	at	ease
with	their	chains,	at	ease	with	all	their	superstitions	and	stupidities.
My	 sannyasin	 have	 to	 be	 aware,	 that	 whenever	 there	 is	 a	 choice	 between	 the
whole	existence	and	a	 few	human	beings...	 and	 there	are	 really	 fewer	 than	we
think.	Our	perspective	is	not	clear,	that's	why	they	seem	to	be	so	many.	Because
we	only	think	of	this	earth	there	seem	to	be	so	many	human	beings;	but	scientists
say	that	there	are	at	least	fifty	thousand	planets	--	that	is	the	least,	the	minimum,
according	 to	 scientific	 calculations	 --	 fifty	 thousand	 planets	 which	 must	 have
grown	people	at	least	to	the	level	of	human	beings.
There	may	be	more	because	we	have	not	been	able	to	explore	the	whole	--	and	I
don't	think	that	we	are	ever	going	to	be	able	to	explore	the	whole.	The	more	we
will	explore,	the	more	there	will	be	to	be	explored.
If	you	 think	of	 the	whole	existence,	 then	human	beings	simply	disappear;	 they
don't	count!	Then	things	seem	to	be	very	small.
One	scientific	association	publishes	a	magazine,	once	in	a	while,	 to	 inform	the
whole	world	about	atomic	danger.	Once	its	first	issue	it	has	kept	the	same	cover;
from	1960	up	to	now	--	twenty-one	years	--
the	 cover	 has	 not	 changed.	 Only	 one	 thing	 changes	 on	 it,	 just	 one	 thing:	 the
cover	carries	a	picture	of	a	clock.	They	divide	the	whole	history	of	humanity	into
one	 hour.	 Compared	 to	 eternity	 it	 is	 not	 more	 than	 that,	 perhaps	 less	 but	 not
more.	Tentatively	they	divide	it	into	one	hour.
In	1960	when	they	published	their	first	issue	they	declared	that	the	atomic	war,
the	Third	World	War	was	only	seven	minutes	away.	So	the	clock	was	showing
just	 seven	 minutes	 more	 before	 twenty-four	 hours	 would	 be	 complete	 and
humanity	would	be	finished.	Then	when	Kennedy	and	Khrushchev	were	almost
ready	to	crash	on	the	question	of	Cuba	they	published	the	magazine	and	showed
that	now	only	four	minutes	were	left,	and	this	year	with	Ronald	Reagan	coming
into	power	they	have	published	showing	that	only	two	minutes	are	left.
Two	minutes	seem	to	be	so	small,	but	in	fact	they	are	not	that	small.	If	the	whole
of	 human	 history	 is	 only	 twenty-four	 hours	 then	 two	 minutes	 are	 big.	 But
compared	 to	 eternity,	 even	 twenty-four	 hours	 are	 nothing.	 There	 have	 been
millions	of	years	when	man	was	not	on	the	earth	--	he	has	just	appeared	and	can
disappear	any	moment.	So	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried	about	human	beings	--
about	 their	 insults	 and	 about	 their	 disrespect	 and	 about	 their	 condemnation	 --
there	is	no	need	to	worry	at	all.	My	sannyasins	have	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	be	very	aware	from	the	very	beginning	 that	 it	 is	a	choice	between	existence
and	a	tiny,	stupid	part,	which	is	dominated	by	past	absurdities.
Once	 you	 decide	 'I	 am	 ready	 to	 risk	 everything,	 to	 gain	 a	 harmony	 with
existence,	to	be	in	a	deep	love	affair	with	existence,'	you	are	a	sannyasin.	To	me
sannyas	 means	 a	 love	 affair	 with	 the	 whole	 --	 and	 of	 course,	 love	 demands
much!	It	demands	commitment,	intensity,	passionate	fervour.
Love	is	so	valuable	that	one	can	always	sacrifice	oneself	for	it.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	I	will	be	here	four	weeks.
--	Then	come	back	again,	because	that	is	not	even	seconds!	(laughter)	Good!
The	Old	Pond	...	Plop
Chapter	#31
Chapter	title:	None
31	January	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8101315
ShortTitle:	POND31
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Monika)	 This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	 Anand	 Yogo.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Yogo
means	ultimate	union.
The	misery	of	man	 is	 in	his	separation	 from	his	own	source.	Man	has	become
like	 a	 tree	 which	 is	 uprooted	 from	 the	 earth.	 Naturally,	 the	 tree	 cannot	 be
blissful;	the	tree	cannot	remain	alive	for	long	either.
The	 tree	 has	 lost	 its	 connection	 with	 the	 whole,	 it	 is	 existing	 in	 separation,
alienation.	And	man	is	also	a	tree;	his	roots	are	invisible	but	they	are	there.	One
is	 continuously	 breathing	 in	 and	out	 --	 our	 breath	 is	 our	 root.	And	we	 are	 not
only	breathing	through	the	nose;	we	are	breathing	through	every	pore	of	the	skin.
Through	millions	of	pores	in	the	skin	we	are	continuously	breathing	in	and	out.
One	experiment	has	 shown	 that	 if	 the	nose	 is	 left	open	and	 the	whole	body	 is
deeply	 painted	 so	 that	 all	 the	 pores	 become	 closed,	 a	 person	 cannot	 exist	 for
more	than	three	hours,	even	though	he	is	breathing	through	the	nose.	Breathing
through	 the	 nose	 may	 be	 our	 main	 root,	 but	 there	 are	 millions	 of	 roots
surrounding	us,	invisible.
We	 are	 in	 existence	 as	 a	 part	 of	 the	 whole.	 The	 moment	 that	 is	 realised,	 the
moment	one	becomes	aware	of	this	unity,	great	bliss	arises,	for	no	reason	at	all.
Suddenly	one	has	found	one's	home.	One	is	no	more	a	homeless	wanderer,	one
has	arrived!
Ordinarily	everybody	is	searching,	seeking,	desiring;	people	are	seeking	money,
power,	 prestige,	 love,	 and	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things,	 but	 deep	 down	 if	 you
analyse	all	their	desires	you	will	find	one	single	desire:	they	want	to	be	reunited
with	 existence.	Howsoever	 camouflaged	 the	 desire	 is,	 a	 penetrating	 awareness
can	find	it.	Through	power	man	thinks	that	he	will	be	able	to	reconnect,	he	will
be	 capable;	 powerless	 what	 can	 he	 do?	With	money	 he	 thinks	maybe	 he	 can
purchase	bliss.	In	love	also	the	deepest	desire	is	to	find	a	certain	union	with	the
other.	Perhaps	 the	other	can	become	a	window	to	 the	whole.	That's	why	every
love	 affair	 fails	 sooner	 or	 later.	 If	 one	 is	 intelligent	 enough,	 sooner.	 If	 one	 is
stupid	then	it	depends	on	how	stupid	one	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is.	Then	it	takes	a	longer	time.	The	really	idiotic	people	can	love	permanently!
But	 love	fails	 for	 the	simple	reason	 that	what	we	are	expecting	out	of	 it	 is	not
possible	through	it.	It	is	not	love's	fault!	It	is	our	expectation	that	gets	frustrated.
Love	is	perfectly	beautiful.	If	we	stop	expecting	something	which	is	beyond	love
then	there	is	no	failure;	then	love	is	a	beautiful	phenomenon,	a	great	sharing,	a
friendship.	But	unconsciously	we	are	searching.
The	man	 is	searching	 through	 the	woman,	 the	woman	 is	searching	 through	 the
man,	for	a	door,	a	window	into	the	whole.	And	because	it	is	not	found...	Where
can	you	find	a	woman	who	can	become	a	window	to	the	ultimate?	Yes,	once	in	a
while	 such	women	have	 existed	 --	 a	Meera,	 a	Sahajo	 --	 rare	women,	 but	 they
will	not	fall	in	love	with	any	man!	(laughter)	They	have	no	need	to.
There	have	been	men	who	are	windows	 to	 the	 infinite	 --	 a	Buddha,	 a	 Jesus,	 a
Zarathustra	--	but	they	will	not	fall	in	love	with	any	woman.	They	can	shower	all
their	 bliss	 and	 joy	 but	 you	 cannot	 reduce	 them	 into	 ordinary	 lovers;	 that	 is
impossible.
So	the	person,	man	or	woman,	who	can	be	found	will	not	be	a	window,	and	the
person	who	is	a	window	is	not	available.	The	person	who	is	available	is	going	to
be	a	wall!	(laughter)	And	sooner	or	later	you	will	find	that	you	are	hitting	your
head	against	it,	(laughter)	One	can	make	it	a	little	comfortable,	one	can	pad	the
wall,	one	can	put	pillows	 (laughter)	against	 the	wall.	That's	what	all	 lovers	all
over	the	world	are	doing:	padding;	putting	pillows	making	it	somehow	a	little	bit
convenient,	comfortable	so	it	does	not	hurt	so	much.
The	reason	for	this	is	that	our	deep	desire	is	to	find	some	way	to	get	out	of	our
imprisoned	state,	to	get	out	of	this	situation	in	which	we	are	caught,	to	get	rooted
again	so	that	we	can	blossom,	flower,	grow.
Because	it	is	frustrated,	because	it	is	not	fulfilled	by	the	so-called	love,	millions
of	 people	 have	 gone	 against	 love.	 They	 have	 renounced	 love,	 renounced	 life,
escaped	 to	 the	monasteries,	 escaped	 to	 the	mountains,	 to	 the	 deserts;	 but	 that
does	not	help	either.	Only	understanding	helps.	And	the	most	important	thing	for
a	 sannyasin	 to	 understand	 is	 that	 we	 have	 to	 drop	 all	 our	 barriers	 against	 the
whole.	And	the	basic	barrier	is	the	ego;	when	we	think	in	terms	of	I,	naturally	he
became	divided,	 separate.	Then	 existence	 is	 there	 as	 an	 object	 and	we	 are	 the
subject,	we	are	separate.	If	we	lose	our	ego,	if	we	allow	it	to	melt	and	merge	into
the	 whole	 just	 like	 a	 dewdrop	 slipping	 into	 the	 ocean,	 losing	 its	 boundaries,
suddenly	life	starts	moving	in	a	new	dimension	--	it	is	total,	it	is	whole,	it	is	holy.
And	then	there	is	bliss.	Bliss	is	a	by-product	of	becoming	united	with	the	whole.
Misery	is	separation,	bliss	is	union.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Two	days.
--	Then	come	back	again...
--	I	will
--	...	for	a	longer	period	--	really	long!	(laughter)
(To	Dod)	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Omkar.	Anand	means	bliss.	Omkar
is	untranslatable	(laughter)	...	but,	a	few	indications	can	be	given	so	that	you	can
feel	 the	 meaning	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 word,	 it	 is	 a	 symbol	 --	 that's	 why	 it	 is
untranslatable.	It	simply	symbolises	the	ultimate	harmony	of	existence.
Existence	 is	 an	 unbelievable,	 incredible	 orchestra.	 Everything	 is	 moving	 in
tremendous	rhythm.	Except	for	man,	everything	is	part	of	the	cosmos,	part	of	a
great	festival	that	goes	on	and	on.	It	is	an	eternal	festival	with	no	beginning,	no
end.
Man	goes	astray.	That	 too	 is	natural,	because	man	 is	 the	only	being	which	has
the	freedom	to	choose,	and	the	freedom	to	choose	implies	 that	you	can	choose
going	against	the	whole.	You	can	choose	to	be	with	the	whole,	you	can	choose
not	to	be	with	the	whole.	You	can	choose	to	go	against	the	current,	you	can	push
the	river,	you	can	fight	 the	river,	or	you	can	choose	 to	 relax	and	 let	go	and	be
with	the	river,	with	no	fight,	in	deep	surrender,	moving	with	it	wherever	it	goes.
It	 is	man's	 prerogative	 that	 he	 has	 the	 choice,	 but	 out	 of	 one	 hundred	 people,
ninety-nine	misuse	the	freedom.	They	use	it	in	a	negative	way.	There	is	a	reason
why	 this	happens:	only	when	you	use	your	 freedom	 in	a	negative	way	do	you
feel	that	you	have	it.	When	you	say	no	you	feel	you	are	free;	when	you	say	yes
you	don't	feel	 that	you	are	free;	hence	it	 is	part	of	 life's	growth	that	everybody
has	 to	 say	no,	has	 to	 fight,	 has	 to	go	astray.	But	 this	 should	not	become	one's
whole	lifestyle	--	then	it	is	stupid!
Once	you	have	learned	that	you	are	free	--	and	saying	no	is	a	good	way	to	learn
that	you	are	free	--	you	have	to	use	that	freedom	to	say	yes.	That	yes	is	sannyas;
and	the	moment	you	say	yes	to	the	whole	you	become	part	of	the	orchestra.	You
are	 no	 longer	 existing	 separately,	 on	 your	 own.	You	 are	 in	 accord;	 and	 then	 a
certain	music	is	felt,	a	humming	sound	--	that	music	is	omkar.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Omkar	represents	the	ultimate	experience	of	universal	music,	of	celestial	music.
The	 symbol	 is	 really	 significant.	 In	 fact	 no	 symbol	 has	 come	 so	 close	 to	 the
truth.	Even	tao,	which	is	one	of	the	most	significant	symbols,	has	not	the	beauty
of	om.	Omkar	comes	out	of	the	sound	om.
If	you	go	into	an	empty	temple	or	if	you	go	into	the	mountains	where	a	few	echo
points	 exist,	 where	 valleys	 and	 mountains	 echo	 your	 sound,	 then	 just	 start
humming	 the	 sound	om,	 loudly	 --	 om,	om,	om	 --	 for	 a	 few	minutes,	 and	 then
suddenly	 stop	 and	 listen.	 The	 valleys,	 the	 mountains,	 are	 echoing,	 your	 own
sound	is	coming	back	and	showering	on	you	like	flowers.	That	echoing	sound	of
om	is	omkar;	something	very	approximate	to	it	happens	in	deep	surrender.
Your	whole	being	 starts	dancing	 in	a	 rhythm,	your	whole	being,	 each	cell	 and
fibre,	is	humming.	There	is	an	indescribable	joy,	a	bliss	which	is	like	a	fragrance
surrounding	you,	like	an	aura	surrounding	you.	And	at	the	deepest	core	of	your
being	there	is	pure	music.	The	Zen	people	call	it	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.
So	 there	 are	 two	ways	 of	 life:	 a	 life	 rooted	 in	 saying	 no	 and	 a	 life	 rooted	 in
saying	yes.	But	 I	don't	 think	 they	are	opposites.	One	has	 to	 learn	 to	 say	no	 in
order	to	say	yes	one	day.	If	you	don't	learn	to	say	no	your	yes	will	be	impotent.	If
you	say	yes	directly	without	ever	going	astray	your	yes	will	not	have	anything	in
it;	it	will	be	contentless.	Or	if	you	go	on	saying	no	your	whole	life	then	too	you
will	have	missed	the	point.
No	and	yes	have	to	be	used	as	stepping	stones.	No	has	to	be	the	first	stone	and
yes	the	second;	and	with	those	two	steps	the	whole	journey	is	complete.
This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Purnesh.	Anand	means	bliss.	Purnesh	means
perfect.
Pleasure	 is	 always	 imperfect.	 Something	 is	 always	 missing	 in	 it;	 that	 is
inevitable	 for	 many	 reasons.	 One	 reason	 is	 that	 pleasure	 is	 very	 momentary,
fleeting;	 you	have	not	 even	 tasted	 it	 and	 it	 is	 gone	 -	 how	can	 it	 be	perfect?	 It
always	leaves	you	in	a	deeper	misery	than	you	were	in	before.	The	darkness	now
feels	deeper,	darker,	because	for	a	moment	there	was	a	flash	of	 light.	Before	it
was	there	you	were	accustomed	to	your	darkness.	There	was	no	comparison	-	all
that	you	knew	was	darkness.	But	now	you	know	something	 totally	different	 is
possible;	hence	the	misery.	Each	pleasure	is	followed	by	deep	misery,	despair.
And	 then	 a	 great	 hankering	 arises	 to	 find	 the	 same	 pleasure	 again	 and	 again.
Then	a	second	problem	arises:	Whenever	you	experience	something	for	the	first
time	it	has	a	totally	different	flavor;	when	you	repeat	it	the	second	time	it	is	no
longer	 the	same	 thing	 -	 the	novelty	 is	gone,	 the	newness	 is	missing.	 It	 looks	a
little	stale.	The	surprise	is	no	more	there,	the	wonder	is	no	more	there,	and	when
you	 repeat	 something	again	 and	again	 it	 becomes	mechanical,	 flat.	That's	why
husbands	and	wives	look	so	flat,	just	like	flat	tires!
Both	 resting	 by	 the	 side	 of	 a	muddy	 Indian	 road,	 nowhere	 to	 go,	 telling	 each
other	"I	love	you,"	and	knowing	perfectly	well	that	whatever	they	are	saying	is
nonsense.	But	what	 else	 to	 do?	 -	 one	 has	 to	 say	 something.	And	 this	 happens
with	every	pleasure:	every	pleasure	turns	into	pain	because	of	repetition.
You	may	 like	a	certain	 food	very	much	 today,	but	 tomorrow	 it	will	not	be	 the
same,	and	the	day	after	tomorrow	you	will	start	getting	fed	up	with	it.
The	word	'fed	up'	is	really	good:	on	the	first	day	you	were	nourished	and	by	the
third	day	you	are	fed	up.
Within	only	three	days	such	a	revolution!
Every	pleasure	leaves	behind	its	darkness;	and	then	you	hanker	for	it,	but	when
you	 find	 it	 again	 it	 is	 never	 the	 same.	But	 there	 is	 nothing	 else	 so	 you	 go	 on
repeating	it,	the	same	vicious	circle;	every	time	you	find	it	with	great	hope,	and
every	time	you	are	standing	there	looking	silly.	Hence	you	feel	empty,	all	hopes
gone,	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 the	 pleasure	 turns	 into	 pain.	 This	 is	 the	 nature	 of
pleasure.	I	am	not	blaming	it,	I	am	simply	describing	it.	I	am	not	a	condemnor	at
all.	If	somebody	enjoys	it,	perfectly	good,	but	nobody	really	can	enjoy	it.
Bliss	is	always	perfect,	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	comes	but	never	goes.	There
is	a	beginning	to	it	but	there	is	no	end	to	it.
Secondly,	it	 is	always	fresh,	because	it	 is	part	of	eternity,	not	part	of	time.	It	 is
non-temporal.	Thirdly,	it	does	not	depend	on	others;	it	arises	in	your	own	being,
it	 is	 your	 own	 flowering,	 and	 because	 it	 goes	 on	 growing,	 it	 goes	 on	 and	 on
flowing,	you	are	never	tired	of	it.	There	is	always	a	surprise	waiting	for	you.
Each	moment	you	are	in	for	a	great	surprise.	The	wonder	goes	on	deepening,	the
mystery	becomes	more	mysterious.
Pleasure	can	be	explained	and	can	be	explained	away	too.	For	example,	sexual
pleasure	can	be	explained	by	chemistry,	hormones,	biology,	physiology;	and	now
brain	 experts	 say	 that	 it	 is	 a	 very	 simple	 phenomenon:	 a	 certain	 center	 in	 the
brain	 just	 has	 to	 be	 triggered	 and	 you	will	 get	what	 you	 call	 sexual	 pleasure,
orgasmic	pleasure.	And	there	is	no	need	for	any	sexual	activity	for	it;	just	a	small
electrode	can	be	inserted	into	the	head	and	you	can	keep	a	small	remote	control
device	in	your	pocket	with	an	electronic	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
battery	and	that	will	do.	You	just	push	the	button	and	the	electrode	starts	playing
with	 your	 sex	 center	 in	 the	 brain	 and	 you	 go	 berserk!	 You	 will	 have	 great
orgasmic	spasm,	far	greater	then	you	can	ever	have	through	sex,	because	sex	is	a
very	primitive	method,	far	more	ancient	than	the	bullock	cart!	It	is	nothing	new,
even	animals	know	it.	And	it	 is	a	very	long	route.	It	has	 to	pass	 through	many
hurdles	 by	 the	 time	 it	 reaches	 to	 the	 brain.	 Sometimes	 it	 never	 reaches	 to	 the
brain	-	then	it	is	just	local,	a	futile	effort.
For	thousands	of	years	women	have	never	thought	of	orgasmic	pleasure	because
they	were	not	having	it.
In	 fact	 the	 woman	who	 used	 to	 have	 it	 was	 afraid	 to	 tell	 because	 that	 was	 a
certain	 sign	 that	 something	 was	 wrong	 with	 her.	 Ninety-six	 per	 cent	 of	 all
women	 throughout	 human	 history	 have	 not	 had	 any	 orgasm.	 Even	 today,	 in
countries	 like	 India,	 it	 is	very	 rare	 to	 find	a	woman	who	has	ever	experienced
orgasm.	 The	 chemistry	 and	 physiology	 of	 men	 and	 women	 are	 different;	 the
woman	 takes	 a	 little	 longer	 to	 achieve	 orgasm	 and	 the	man	 is	 in	 a	 hurry.	The
woman	 is	 eastern	 and	 the	man	 is	western.	He	goes	 at	 such	 a	 speed,	 he	has	 so
many	other	things	to	do...	he	is	just	on	the	run!	It	is	a	hit-and-run	affair!	And	the
woman	takes	a	little	longer,	because	her	sexuality	is	spread	all	over	the	body,	it
is	not	local.
Unless	her	whole	body	becomes	involved,	excited,	she	will	not	be	able	to	trigger
her	brain	center.	Man's	 sex	 is	 local.	These	 things	can	be	explained	very	easily
and	better	methods	can	be	found.
Now	thousands	of	women	in	the	West	are	using	electric	devices	for	stimulation.
It	 is	 ugly	 in	 a	 way	 it	 shows	 how	 humanity	 is	 falling	 into	 fragments.	 Man	 is
losing	 integrity.	And	 once	 a	woman	 has	 used	 some	 electronic	 device	 or	 some
electronic	 vibrator	 to	 have	 sexual	 orgasm,	 then	 no	 man	 can	 ever	 satisfy	 her,
because	no	man	is	an	electric	vibrator!	And	men	are	not	far	behind....
I	was	thinking	that	reports	are	always	coming	about	women,	again	and	again	-
but	what	 about	men?	And	 just	 the	other	day,	 a	 report	 came	 from	England	 that
many	 cases	 have	 turned	 up	 in	 the	 hospitals,	 of	men	who	 have	 been	 trying	 to
sexually	 stimulate	 themselves	 with	 vacuum	 cleaners.	 It	 looks	 stupid,	 but	 then
they	end	up	in	the	hospital	because	their	skin	was	caught	in	that	vacuum	cleaner
and	 they	could	not	get	out	of	 it!	But	once	a	man	knows	how	 to	use	a	vacuum
cleaner	then	the	days	of	Sophia	Loren	are	over...	then	who	cares	about	her?
Pleasure	can	be	easily	obtained.	 It	has	 its	sources	 in	 the	body,	but	bliss	has	no
source	in	the	body,	not	even	in	the	mind.	It	is	a	spiritual	phenomenon.	It	happens
in	 your	 deep	meditation	 when	 you	 are	 no	more	 the	 body,	 no	more	 the	mind,
when	you	are	just	a	pure	awareness,	just	a	deep	silence,	a	pool	of	silence.	In	that
cool	 silence	 some	 lotuses	 bloom,	 and	 they	 are	 eternal	 lotuses.	They	 cannot	 be
explained	away	by	anything	and	they	cannot	be	replaced	by	anything.
But	 only	 very	 few	 people	 have	 known	 bliss.	My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to
know	it	on	such	a	wide	scale	that	millions	of	people	around	the	earth	will	taste
something	of	it,	because	that	will	be	the	only	possibility	for	humanity	to	survive
-	as	humanity	-	otherwise	mans	whole	life	is	going	to	be	dominated	by	machines.
People	will	be	marrying	machines,	people	will	be	carrying	machines,	people	will
be	 living	 with	 machines	 -	 and	 machines	 are	 efficient,	 replaceable,	 with	 no
problem	of	divorce,	no	problems	of	relationship
-	but	what	kind	of	humanity	will	 that	be?	It	will	really	be	an	insane	world;	but
we	are	exactly	on	the	verge	of	it.
Unless	 some	 deeper	 sources	 of	 bliss	 are	 released,	man	 is	 bound	 to	 go	 insane
because	 all	 pleasures	 fail	 sooner	 or	 later,	 and	 all	 pleasures	 become	 frustrating
and	all	pleasures	turn	into	their	very	opposite,	pain.	If	pleasure	is	the	only	thing
in	life	then	suicide	is	going	to	be	the	dominating	philosophy,	because	when	all
pleasures	have	failed	and	you	have	seen	all	pleasures	turning	into	pain,	what	else
is	 there	 to	 live	 for?	Hence	 humanity	 is	 living	 under	 a	 dark	 cloud	 of	 a	 global
suicide.	Man	can	decide	to	commit	suicide.	It	has	always	been	individuals	who
have	committed	suicide,	but	man	as	a	species	can	decide	to	commit	suicide.
The	only	way	to	save	humanity	is	to	release	some	new	dimensions	of	bliss	-	and
they	 are	 available,	 they	 have	 always	 been	 available	 although	 they	 have	 never
been	made	available	to	the	larger	part	of	humanity.
They	were	never	able	to	understand,	never	ready	to	listen	-	even	today	they	are
not	ready.	But	I	think	that	this	is	the	time	to	take	the	risk,.whether	people	listen
or	not,	whether	they	understand	or	not.	Even	if	a	small	portion	of	humanity	can
be	 transformed	 into	 a	 state	 of	 bliss	 that	 will	 be	 enough	 to	 create	 a	 small
possibility	for	a	future	human	being,	a	new	human	being.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Anand	 Shivano.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Shivano	 means
goddess	of	good.
The	experience	of	bliss	is	the	source	of	all	that	is	good	in	life,	not	vice	versa	as
has	been	 taught	 for	 centuries	 to	 all	 human	beings.	The	priests	have	 said	 again
and	again	to	the	people,	"If	you	are	good,	if	you	are	moral,	virtuous,	you	will	be
rewarded	with	bliss."	That	is	simply	not	right.	It	is	putting	things	upside-down.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	real	thing	is	totally	different:	if	you	are	blissful	then	whatsoever	you	do	will
be	right,	good,	moral,	virtuous,	because	a	blissful	person	cannot	harm	anybody	-
it	is	impossible.	A	blissful	person	can	only	give	to	people	what	he	has	got.	One
can	always	give	only	that	which	one	has	got.	The	miserable	person	cannot	give
bliss	to	others.	In	the	first	place,	he	himself	has	not	got	it.	He	may	intend	to	do
good,	but	whatsoever	he	will	do	will	be	wrong.
Even	Adolf	Hitler's	intentions	were	not	bad.	They	thought	they	were	trying	to	do
good	for	the	people.
Adolf	Hitler	killed	millions	of	Jews,	with	good	intentions,	because	his	idea	was
that	the	Jews	are	the	real	problem;	if	they	are	removed	from	the	earth	there	will
be	no	misery	on	the	earth.	His	logic	was	wrong	but	his	intention	was	not	wrong.
And	 he	 used	 to	 think	 that	 the	 German	 Aryans,	 the	 Nordics,	 were	 the	 purest
people	on	the	earth,	were	made	by	god	to	rule	over	the	world;	so	everybody	else
has	 to	 be	 subjugated,	 enslaved.	 The	 logic	 seems	 to	 be	 perfect:	 of	 course,	 the
higher	 should	 rule	 the	 lower.	And	 he	was	 trying	 hard	 to	 bring	 the	 higher	 into
power.
His	intention	was	not	bad.	He	may	be	mad,	he	was	mad,	and	he	was	miserable;
deeply	miserable,	but	whatsoever	he	was	doing	was	of	great	service	to	humanity
-	according	to	himself.
He	 was	 wrong	 -	 that	 is	 another	 thing.	 And	 all	 the	 people	 who	 have	 done
thousands	of	wrongs	in	the	past	have	done	them	with	good	intentions.	Christians
have	 killed	 Mohammedans,	 Mohammedans	 have	 killed	 Christians,
Mohammedans	have	killed	Hindus,	Hindus	have	killed	Mohammedans,	Hindus
have	killed	Buddhists,	and	this	has	gone	on	and	on.	The	whole	earth	has	been	a
continuous	war,	murdering	each	other	-
and	 using	 beautiful	 names:	Holy	War,	 Crusade,	 Jehad	 -	 in	 order	 to	 bring	 god
onto	the	earth	-	"Of	course	the	evil	people	have	to	be	destroyed,	removed."
That	whole	nonsense	happened	because	of	one	thing:	we	told	people	to	do	right
without	 first	 being	 blissful.	 According	 to	 me	 blissfulness	 should	 be	 the	 first
thing;	then	no	wrong	can	ever	happen.
A	 blissful	 person	 becomes	 absolutely	 incapable	 of	 doing	 wrong.	 He	 cannot
harm,	he	cannot	hurt;	he	 is	always	a	soothing	 influence,	his	very	presence	 is	a
nourishment.	Whatsoever	he	does	comes	out	of	his	bliss,	it	carries	something	of
his	fragrance.
My	sannyasins	have	to	behave	according	to	this	new	order	of	things:	bliss	has	to
be	 their	 first	 goal,	 and	 then	 virtue	 follows	 like	 a	 shadow.	Hence	 I	 don't	 teach
morality,	I	only	teach	meditation,	because	meditation	helps	you	to	discover	your
blissfulness.
Jesus	says,	 "First	ye	seek	 the	kingdom	of	god	and	all	else	shall	be	added	unto
you."	 The	 word	 'god'	 is	 a	 little	 old	 fashioned,	 but	 it	 is	 natural;	 Jesus	 was
speaking	two	thousand	years	before	me.	I	will	say,	"First	ye	seek	the	kingdom	of
bliss	then	all	else	shall	be	added	unto	you."	Just	a	slight	change;	replace	the	word
'god'
with	'bliss',	and	then	it	becomes	the	latest	sermon	on	the	mount!	Then	it	becomes
the	 latest	 message	 from	 god	 himself.	 Even	 god	 himself	 won't	 like	 to	 use	 the
word	god'	any	more	because	the	priests	have	exploited	it	so	much.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
