

THE GATELESS GATE
(Collection of Thirty Immortal Letters)
Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh
Compilation
and Editing:
Swami Yoga Chinmaya
A Life Awakening Movement Publication, Bombay.
Publisher:
lshwarlal N. Shah,
Secretary, Jeevan Jagruti Kendra
(LIFE AWAKENING MOVEMENT)
31, Israil Mohalla,
Bhagwan Bhuvan,
Masjid Bunder Road,
B O M B A Y - 9
53, Empire Building,
146, Dr. D. N. Road,
B O M B A Y - I
Copyright
JEEVAN JAGRUTI KENDRA Bombay - India.
First Edition:
5000, May 1971.
Price Rs. 2-00
Sh. 6-00
$ 1-00
Francs 3
Printed by:
Jayesh Sangani,
Empire Printery,
189, L. J. Road,
Bombay-16. DD.
THE GATELESS GATE
A collection of 30 immortal letters
written by Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh to
different seekers all over the world
1/ Just Be Aware And Await
Dear Bhakti,
Love.
I am thrilled with great expectations about you.
Oh! Much is to happen within you and without also.
You are on the verge of the explosion.
So, be alone.
Not lonely, but Alone.
And live with that Aloneness.
Rather BE that Aloneness.
That is the only meditation to you Now.
Loneliness is negative.
To be lonely is to be aware of the absence of others.
But to be alone is the most positive state of the mind.
It is to be aware of the PRESENCE of Oneself.
Be aware of the presence that is YOU.
Just be aware.
And Await.
Await the happening.
Near - very near is the Moment.
And remember that I am always with you.
I have been always with you.
Even when you did not know me.
And always feel my blessings.
17-8-1970
(To Ma Yoga Bhakti, C/o. Shree Tanya Smith,
Pantherkill Road, Phoenicia, New York, U.S.A.)
2/ Let Meditation Be Thy Very Existence
Dear Saraswati,
Love.
I hope you will be in deep meditation.
Breathe in it, sleep in it, live in it.
Let meditation be thy very existence.
Only then is the HAPPENING.
Don't do it, but BE IT.
And, my blessings are always with you.
If you need any help from me, just ask when you are
thoughtless.
And, it will be GIVEN to you.
25-10-1970
(To Dr. Miss Colette Guinebert, alias Ma Saraswati, 87,
Avenue due Maine XIVe Paris, 75, France).
3/ Let The Meditation Ripen You
Dear Henrotte,
Love.
Come here.
Whenever it is possible.
You will always be welcomed.
And, stay with me for a little longer.
And, let me help.
It will be difficult for you, because, you will have to
LET GO yourself completely.
But it is not impossible.
And with you especially.
Because, I have seen in you the great potential that is
awaiting its opportunity.
With you much impossible is possible.
The seed is there which is longing to explode.
Its very longing is the source of your search.
Its longing is the Tension that you are today.
And its longing will be the Freedom that you will be
tomorrow.
The essence is there and the existence will follow it, if
you so wish,
Please, follow its call to the conclusion.
Go on doing meditation.
Do not seek results.
They will come by themselves, when the time is ripe.
And The Time Is Ripe.
But still you are not.
Let meditation ripen you.
25-10-1970
(To Dr. Jean Georges Henrotte, 65, Rue De Lt, Federation,
Paris-15, France).
4/ Say Wholeheartedly: ̀Thy Wil be Done’
Dear Bhakti,
Love.
Your letter.
I know your inner condition more than you know
yourself.
Because, NOW, your inner is not my outer.
Things that are happening to you unconsciously AND
even against your conscious will are GOOD.
WELCOME them and be grateful.
Because, nothing divine can happen with you and your
will.
Rather, your will is the only barrier in the way.
Say wholeheartedly: "Thy will be done".
And feel it.
And live it.
Come HOME soon.
I am waiting for you.
And much more is waiting to happen to you; also I know
you are sceptical.
That is not bad.
But a good beginning to begin with.
Wherever, there is mind, there is skepticism
Mind is scepticism.
And therefore conflict.
That is the way of the mind.
And its Nature.
Please do not fight with it.
And neither be identified with it.
These are the obvious alternatives.
But both false.
And aspects of the same coin.
You will have to walk in-between.
Come, and be with me and you will understand.
P.S. You know better than me,
Whether I am coming to the U.S.A. or not
Because, I will not come, unless you call me there.
This much is decided now - the remaining
will be decided when you meet me.
(To, Ma Yoga Bhakti, Sivananda Ashram, New York,
U.S.A.).
27-10-1970
5/ The Call from Beyond Has Come
Dear Ananda Prema,
Love and blessings.
Received your letter. I was waiting for it daily, since you
left.
I know that you have gone far away from here; but I also
know that NOW you cannot go away from ME.
And, that nearness is all that counts.
You have come near to me in a non-spatial and non-
temporal sense.
The meeting has taken place in the NO-WHERE.
Or, in the EVERY-WHERE.
Because, they both mean the same thing.
And, the real MEETING takes place only in this way.
All else is illusion.
Remember me whenever you need and you will find me
then and there.
Ask, anything - and WAIT and you will be answered.
The barriers have fallen down from your mind.
And, you have entered the meditative state.
Now the DOORS of the divine are open.
DO NOT HESITATE AND TAKE THE PLUNGE.
You are completely ready - just only be courageous to
enter the uncharted and the unknown.
The CALL from BEYOND has come - now accept the
challenge and be FULFILLED.
Now, close your eyes and feel me and see me and let my
blessings be showered on you.
Send Bhakti soon and convey my love to her.
27-11-1970
(To Ma Ananda Prema, Sivananda Ashram, 205, East,
77th Street, 10-A, New York, N.Y. 10021, U.S.A.).
6/ Freedom From Becoming
My Beloved One,
Love.
Freedom from becoming means freedom for BEING.
Becoming is desiring.
BEING is That-Which-Is.
Becoming is longing for the future.
BEING is to be in the present.
Becoming is mental.
BEING is existential.
That is why - becoming must cease for the BEING to
reveal itself.
Becoming is just like the smoke around the flame.
Or, just like the outer covering around the seed.
So, please let the smoke go for the flame to explode in its
complete glory and splendour.
And, let the seed die to its outer shell so that it may be
what it is in its inner most depth.
7-1-1971
(To Shree Dharmendra Tukaram Dhokhe, Clerk, Police
Wireless Training Centre, Pashan Road, Poona-8, India)
7/ In This Way, The Ocean Drops into the Drop
Beloved Bhakti,
Love.
Be in the crowd as if you are alone.
And vice versa.
Receive a guest with the same attitude you have when
alone. And, when alone, maintain the same attitude you
have in receiving guests.
In this way, the drop drops in the Ocean.
Upon retiring, sleep as if you have entered your last sleep.
And, upon awakening be reborn again.
In this way, the ocean drops into the drop.
15-1-1971
(To Ma Yoga Bhakti, New York, U.S.A.)
8/ Be Open, And Let Things Happen
Beloved Bhakti,
Love. When you are with me be completely at ease and
relaxed; that is, be totally yourself.
If you feel like crying then cry.
If you feel like weeping then weep.
But just be uninterruptedly aware.
Do not think about what you are doing - just be the doing
and when your senses are shaken like leaves in the wind -
then enter this shaking.
Because, only in such situations the being is revealed.
If a mood against someone or for someone arises do not
place it on the person in question but remain centered in
yourself and you will know a transcendence which is not
of this world at all.
16-1-1971
(To, Ma Yoga Bhakti, New York, U.S.A.)
9/ Carefulness for Spiritual Crisis
Dear Atmananda,
Love. Bhakti needs only time to absorb the shock she has
come across her deep meditations.
Remember: only TIME and nothing else.
The shock is nothing new.
It happens whenever the deeper layers of the unconscious
are encountered.
Before any mutation this is absolutely necessary.
Be grateful to the Divine because this is a good omen.
Bhakti needed it badly; and when she is out of it, she will
be a new person totally.
Soon she will be twice-born.
Presently she is passing through a great spiritual crisis -
so you be with her but just as if you are not.
Be present but with absolute absence.
This is the only way you can be helpful to her.
Let her be alone as much as possible.
Do not talk with her except it is needed absolutely.
And, then too, be telegraphic.
But if she herself wants to talk, let her talk as much as she
likes - and you yourself be just a passive listener.
Let her do whatsoever she wants to do or not to do.
And soon everything will be O.K.
Do not worry at all.
I will be there besides you always - and if you can see
you will be able to see me also.
Of course, Bhakti will feel my Presence and will become
aware of me these days so many times.
Convey my blessings to Bhakti.
27-1-1971
(To Ma Atmananda (Mrs. Wellington, now Ma Dhyan
Siddhi) 1016, Old Post Road, Mamarneck, New York,
10543, U.S.A.)
10/ Ecstasy and Bliss of Living
Moment to Moment
Dear Saraswati,
Love. I live not by planning and I also feel that that is the
only way to be alive at all.
In fact, I live a wild life - absolutely unplanned - not
knowing anything about the future, not even about the next
moment.
Today is enough for me - really more than enough!
The moment that is present is the only living moment - the
past is dead in the sense that it is no more and the future is
also dead in the sense that it is not yet born.
And, so to be concerned with the past is to be dead and to
be concerned with the future is also to be dead.
The only way to be alive is to be here and now - in the
moment and totally in it.
Living moment to moment I have found that Ecstasy and
bliss which is not of this world at all.
The single moment lived totally transcends time itself.
It becomes the gap between two moments of time.
And, if one can be in this gap then one is beyond death.
Because, time is death; and timelessness is life.
Life is not something fixed and finished - Life is living
that is - a process - just river like - flowing always into the
unknown - from the shores of the known to the shores of
the unknown.
27-1-1971
(To, Docteur C. Guinebert, 87, Avenue Du Maine, XIV
Medicis 26-94 Paris, France)
11/ Spiritual Sleep and Constant Awareness
Dear Ananda Prema,
Love. Do not forget the search for the Divine for even a
single moment.
Because, the time is always short and the task is great.
And, besides, the mind is wavering.
In fact, the mind is the wavering.
Remember this - and remain aware of this fact as much as
you can.
Because, the moment one is aware the wavering stops.
And in the intervals are the glimpses - glimpses of oneself
- glimpses of no-mind.
One has to transcend the wavering of the mind absolutely
before one comes to the doors of the Beloved.
NO-MINDNESS is the Door.
And the door is not far off.
But the seeker is asleep.
MIND is the SLEEP.
That is why you will have to be attentive and alert of
everything that passes before your consciousness - even
be attentive of the in-attentive moments.
Through constant awareness the spiritual sleep will be
broken and you will be transformed.
This is your potentiality - this is every ones
potentiality.
And, for you the time is RIPE.
But the seed can remain a seed and die.
The opportunity can be lost.
You are free to be that which you are meant to be - or to
be that which you are not meant to be.
Man is free to be or not to be.
This is the glory and this is the burden.
Freedom means responsibility.
So be careful.
If you can be that which is your potentiality - if you can
flower to your fullness - then there is bliss - then there is
ECSTASY; otherwise ashes are in hands and anguish in
the heart.
And, ultimately everything depends on you.
Heaven or Hell - and you and only you will be responsible
for it.
So be careful.
My blessings are always with you.
(To, Ma Ananda Prema, Sivananda Ashram, 205, East
77th St. 10-A New York, 10021, U.S.A.)
28-1-1971
12/ Meditation Is Encountering
Yourself In Total Nakedness
Beloved Bhakti,
Love. Everything has happened, as it should happen.
And I was surprised not because you ran away from here,
but because I never thought that you could be so
predictable!
It is not from here that you have escaped; it is only a vain
effort to escape from yourself.
Which is impossible.
How can one escape from oneself?
But, in meditation a moment comes necessarily when the
mind tries the impossible - for the mind this is the last
defensive act.
Meditation is ultimately suicidal to the mind.
And, of course, the mind must be given a chance!
And, you have given it!
Meditation is encountering yourself - directly and in your
total nakedness.
This creates fear and the futile effort to escape.
The effort is futile because whatsoever is known once - it
is known for ever and you cannot be the old ignorant
again.
There is no way to go back.
And there is no bridge.
This escape too will make you more mature; and you will
come back strengthened through it and because of it.
NOW - RELAX there under the sky and besides the sea -
and I will be there.
Whenever you are relaxed you will feel my presence.
And, when you feel like coming - come back.
And soon you will feel.
I will be waiting here for you as ever.
COME and recontinue the arduous journey towards your
self.
Convey my love and blessings to Anand Prema.
(To, Ma Yoga Bhakti, C/o. Mrs. Wellington, 1015, Old
Post Road, Mamarneck, New York, 10543, U.S.A.)
25- 2-1971
13/ Divineness and Beauty of Being No-Body
Dear Krishna Christ.
Love. Oh! Don’t take life so seriously!
Because seriousness is a great dis-ease.
And not only a disease but a suicide also.
Be playful - totally.
Because that is the only way to be living.
Life is a play - a leela.
And to know it so is religion.
And to live it so is sannyas - renunciation.
If you can act and live as if acting and living in a dream
and still be a witness to it then you will be in the cosmic
flow - the TAO.
And to be in the cosmic flow is to be free - free from
oneself - the EGO.
The EGO is the seriousness - the disease.
And the TAO - the egoless existence is the bliss - the
ecstasy.
That is why I have given you a name - so absurd!
But I have given it to you knowingly.
I have given it to you so that you may never be identified
with it.
The name is so absurd that you will have to remain
nameless and no-body behind it.
And the name is such that not only others but you yourself
will be able to laugh at it.
SWAMI KRISHNA CHRIST!
Oh! What a name?
But perfectly suitable in a dream-drama.
Is it not so?
So feel at ease with it - and laugh with it and sing and
dance with it and be SWAMI KRISHNA CHRIST with all
the letters in capital!
And - always remember that you are no-body.
And always be aware that you are neither a Swami - nor a
Krishna - nor a Christ.
This is what is meant by a Swami!
And, Krishna himself is not a Krishna and Christ himself
is not a Christ - because they are nameless - absolutely
nameless.
They are no-bodies - and that is what makes them divine.
The moment one is identified with any name, one is lost to
one's divinity.
Either one can be a name or a reality.
And no one can be both simultaneously.
Be a name really - and your reality is lost.
Be a reality really - and your name is just a dream - maya.
And, what non-sense to be a Swami!
But once one is at ease with the non-sense one transcends
it.
Please! Don't try to be sensible otherwise you will never
be with any sense at all!
Because only stupidity tries to be sensible!
The existence is absurd.
And meaningless.
And irrational.
And that is why it is so beautiful.
And to be in it is such a blessing!
14- 4-1971
(To, Swami Krishna Christ, alias Mr. Walter Pfuetze, 5, Vassar
Lake Drive, Poughkeepsie, New York, Zip 12601, U.S.A.)
14/ Dance In Ecstasy to Welcome
the Divine Happening
Beloved Tao,
Love. I know what is happening to you.
The nothingness is descending.
The emptiness is increasing.
Welcome it - and rejoice in its coming.
Dance in ecstasy - because there is no other way to
welcome it.
And the more you dance, the more you will die.
And when you are dead completely you will be reborn.
And that moment is near - very near - just by the corner.
You have passed through the entrance-explosion and now
be ready for the ultimate.
Look at yourself once more as the river looks at itself
before falling into the ocean - because after falling into the
ocean there will be no one to look - and no one to be
looked at!
16-4-1971
(To, Ma Yoga Tao, alias Mary Elizabeth Ann Small, Box-
93, Knotts Island, North Carolina, U.S.A.)
15/ Surrender Happens
Beloved Tao,
Love. Don't think about Surrender at all - because
that-which-thinks about it is the only barrier.
And therefore no one can surrender; it is not a doing at all.
It happens - you cannot go to it - it comes to you.
And, any effort on your part will hinder its coming.
Be open and effortless - relaxed and passive.
And it will come - it always comes.
I am a witness to it.
16-4-1971
(To, Ma Yoga Tao, North Carolina, U.S.A.)
16/ Life Is Playful and Festive
Beloved Mukta,
Love. To me meditation means: be playful and transcend
all seriousness.
See: life is not serious.
Look around: `existence is not serious.'
Only disease is serious.
And of course, DEATH.
And the exploiters of death: The Priests!
Life is playful and festive and, therefore, purposeless.
It is not going anywhere - because there is nowhere to go.
It is always Here and Here.
It is always Now and Now.
It is just abundant energy overflowing from here to here
and from now to now.
And, once you know it and be it - you are in that ecstasy
which is the purpose of purposelessness!
Don't be a MIND and you will know it and be it.
Meditation is no-mindness.
Mind is thinking and thinking is going astray from the
BEING.
Mind is forgetfulness of that-which-is.
Meditation is coming back HOME.
So, Mukta, come back home.
And, I create situations so that you may remember the
forgotten.
And, I will go on creating situations unless you are back.
(To, Ma Yoga Mukta, alias Mrs. Catherine Venizelos, Seville
Ave, Rye, New York, U.S.A.)
16-4-1971
17/ Ego - the Creator of all the Agonies
Beloved Bhakti,
Love. Be ordinary - so ordinary that virtually you come to
be no-body.
And, there is the opening.
And, there is the explosion.
And, only when you are not - you are the extra-ordinary!
But do not think about it.
And, do not crave for it.
And, if the craving comes - be aware and LAUGH.
It will be stopped in awareness and the created energy will
be used by the laughter.
And, after the laugh you will feel a deep relaxation.
And, then begin to dance or sing.
And the negative state of the mind will be transformed
into the positive.
The craving to be someone - somebody is absolutely
negative; because the ego is the negation of BEING.
The ego is the principle of negation.
And, if the negative is negated then you are positive.
The ego is the source of all inferiority.
But the trick is subtle.
Because the ego promises superiority and only in the end
results in inferiority.
Decode this secret and understand it very clearly
One who thinks in terms of superiority will remain
always inferior - because they are two aspects of the same
coin.
Oh! Sow the seeds of superiority and you will reap the
crop of inferiority.
Begin with the longing of superiority and you will end
with nothing but inferiority and all the hell that is
involved in it.
Begin with humbleness - with humility and you are
nearer to the Divine.
In fact, you are Divine but the ego will not allow you any
gap to look into your own divinity.
On the contrary, it will go on creating new imaginary
heavens only to make way for new hells.
Enter heaven and you are entering hell!
Beware of this and beware of your so-called self - the
creator of all the agonies that exist on earth.
And be a NO-SELF and you will be THAT - you are
already and have been always THAT which is bliss
eternal.
And freedom.
And the cosmic BEING - The `Brahm'
"Tatvamasi" - That art Thou, my Love.
(To, Ma Yoga Bhakti, New York, U.S.A.)
16-4-1971
18/ Transcendence of Death
Beloved Kusum,
Love. Moment to moment life passes into death.
Because it is death.
Covered, it appears as life.
Uncovered, it is death.
Remember this fact always.
This is silent meditation.
And, when this remembering penetrates even in your
dreams you will have a new door opened unto you.
Through it in fact, you will be altogether new.
And ultimately reborn. .
Remembering death gives a new dimension to
consciousness.
Because to remember death is not natural
On the contrary nature has arranged so that one should
not be aware of it.
Because the moment one transcends death one transcends
nature also.
And, one cannot transcend death unless one is totally
aware of the fact.
So be totally aware of death.
And it is happening each moment within and without.
It is present everywhere.
And because it is so obvious one becomes absent to it.
Remember and deepen the consciousness.
Because as the awareness of death goes deeper one
becomes capable of feeling that which is deathless.
Really, death is the door - the opening to the deathless.
But be conscious of it.
Be conscious and transcend.
Be conscious and know that which is before birth and after
death.
And, you are that.
17-4-1971
(To, Mrs. Kusum, C/o. Shree Kapil Mohan Chandhok,
Quality Ice Cream Co., 90, Industrial Area-A,
LUDHIANA, Punjab, India.)
19/ Jump into the Unknown
Beloved Bhakti,
Love. The gates of the temple are wide open - and it is
only after thousands of years that such opportunity comes
to this earth.
And, know well that they will not remain open for ever.
And, the opportunity can be lost very easily.
And, you are still wavering.
And, you are still hesitating - to enter or not to enter - to be
or not to be.
I know that the challenge is great.
But I know also that your being is completely ready to
take the jump.
Hence, my insistent call for you to come and enter.
And, this is not for the first time that I have called you -
nor the first life.
I know you, Bhakti, since so many births.
And, soon you will also remember many things.
But not before the jump.
And only your superficial persona is resisting - not you.
And it is expected to resist always because the moment
one takes the plunge into the unknown it has to die
naturally.
So, please, do not identify yourself with it.
Be a witness to it.
And you will be in the jump.
Oh! It is time enough to die to the old ego and be reborn to
the supreme self.
17-4-1971
(To, Ma Yoga Bhakti, New York, U.S.A.)
20/ The way to Ecstasy on and Divine Intoxication
Beloved Bhakti,
Love. Begin the following meditation from tomorrow.
And, know that this is an ORDER!
Now, you are so mine that I cannot do anything else but
order!
Pre-requirements:
(1) Do it cheerfully. (2) Do it relaxedly. (3) And be
playful. (4) Do it in the morning after taking the bath.
Meditation steps:
1. First Step:
Breathe deeply and rhythmically.
Not fast, but slowly.
For 10 minutes.
2. Second Step:
Dance rhythmically and slowly.
Be ecstatic.
As if flowing in it.
For 10 minutes.
3. Third Step:
Use the mahamantra: Hoo–Hoo-Hoo: for 10
minutes.
Continue dancing and moving.
Do not be serious.
Do not be tense.
Fourth Step:
Close the eyes and be silent.
Do not move or dance now.
Stand, sit or lie down - as you feel to do.
But just be as if dead.
Feel sinking in.
Surrender and be in the hands of the WHOLE.
For 10 minutes.
Post requirements:
1. Live the whole day in ecstasy - in intoxication of
the Divine. Flowing and flowering in it.
And, whenever depressed - say inwardly: Hoo-
Hoo-Hoo and laugh outwardly.
Laugh without any reason.
And, accept the madness.
2. Before sleep: Chant the mahamantra: Hoo-Hoo-
Hoo. For 10 minutes. Then laugh at yourself.
3. In the morning as you feel awake chant again the
mahamantra: Hoo-Hoo-Hoo. For 10 minutes.
And, then begin the day with a hearty laugh.
4. And, remember always that I am with you.
(To, Ma Yoga Bhakti, New York, U.S.A.)
18-4-1971
21/ Opening of the Locked Doors of the Past Lives
Beloved Mukta,
Love. Yes - you were related to Yoga Vivek in one of
your past lives.
Now, many things will be remembered by you soon.
Because the key is in your hands.
But do not think about them at all.
Otherwise your imagination will get mixed up with the
memories and then it will be very difficult to know what is
real and what is not.
So be always aware from now that you are not to think
about past lives.
Let the memories come up by themselves.
No conscious effort on your part is needed.
On the contrary it will be a great hindrance.
Let the unconscious do the work.
You be just a witness.
And as the meditation will go deeper many locked doors
will be opened to you.
But always remember to wait for the mysteries to reveal
themselves. The seed is broken - and much is to follow.
You only wait and be a witness.
(To, Ma Yoga Mukta, New York, U.S.A.)
19-4-1971
22/ I Am the Gate - the Emptiness
Beloved Bhakti,
Love. Your letter.
You write me that without me you cannot pass through the
gate and with me you will not pass through the gate.
Oh! I know that.
But you need not do either.
You need not pass through the gate with me or not with
me.
Because, I AM THE GATE.
Bhakti, I am NO-ONE - so how can you be with me or not
with me?
And, ONE who is NO-ONE only can be the gate.
The Gate means the emptiness.
Because the Gate is nothing but the space to pass through.
Pass through me - not with me - and know.
I appear to be some-one only from without.
But deeper you penetrate me the less you will find me.
And, in the end: NO-ONE.
(To, Ma Yoga Bhakti, New York, U.S.A.)
19-4-71
23/ Go on Discarding - Until the Nothingness
Dear Krishna Karuna,
Love. Go on discarding - Not this, Not this (Neti-Neti).
And, ultimately when nothing remains to be discarded -
then is the explosion.
Do not cling to anything - to any thought.
Go on and on until the NOTHINGNESS.
I have heard about a little boy Toyo and his meditations.
He was only twelve years old.
But he wanted to be given something to ponder - to
meditate.
So one evening he went to Mokurai, the Zen master -
struck the gong softly to announce his presence and sat
before the master in respectful silence.
Finally, the master said: "Toyo, show me the sound of
two hands."
Toyo clapped his hands.
"Good," said the master.
"Now show me the sound of one hand clapping."
Toyo was silent. Finally he bowed and left to meditate on
the problem.
The next night he returned and struck the gong with one
palm.
"That is not right," said the master.
The next night Toyo returned and played Geisha music
with one hand.
"That is not right," said the master.
And again and again Toyo returned with some answer,
but the master also said again and again: "That is not
right".
For the nights Toyo tried new sounds.
But each and every answer was rejected.
The question itself was absurd so no answer could be
right.
And when on the eleventh night Toyo came and before
he spoke anything, the master said: "That is still not
right!"
And then he stopped coming to the master.
For a year he thought of every possible sound, and
discarded them all - and when there was left nothing to
be discarded any more - he exploded into enlightenment.
And when he was no more, he returned to the master.
And, without striking the gong he sat down and bowed.
And, he was not saying anything.
And, there was silence.
Then the master said: "So you have heard the sound
without sound!"
(To Ma Krishna Karuna, Bombay, India.)
19-4 -1971
24/ Be Free of the Mind - Prison
Dear Michael,
Love. Do not continue circling in the old rut.
And, the way out is just by the hand.
The mind is the past - the dead past.
One has to break it somewhere and jump out of it.
The mind is the prison - the slavery.
Be free of it.
And, the moment is ripe.
Of course I know that you are still not clearly aware of it.
But you are not unaware also.
Gather courage and jump into the unknown.
And, only one step is enough.
Because, the next follows it automatically.
But do not go on thinking and thinking and thinking.
Thinking promises to lead you somewhere.
But the promise remains always a promise.
Because thinking is just impotent - as far as life is
concerned.
So, please, be existential.
Do not hesitate. And you have nothing to lose - because
you have nothing!
Realize this and be NOTHING - NO-ONE
26-4-1971
(To, Mr. Michael Graham, London, England.)
25/ I Knock Your Door
Beloved Dhyana Siddhi,
Love. Do you hear me?
Do you see me?
I stand at the door and knock.
And, I knock because of a promise made in another life
and another age.
(To: Ma Dhyana Siddhi, (Mrs. Eunice Wellington).
Larchmont, New York, U.S.A.)
14-5-1971
26/ Transcendence of Death Through Acceptance
Beloved Dhyana Siddhi,
Love. Fear cripples consciousness.
And, fear is the source of unconsciousness.
That is why without transcending fear, no one can attain to
full consciousness.
But what is fear?
Fear is awareness of death without knowing what death is!
Fear exists in the gap between you and your death.
And if there is no gap, no space, then there is no fear.
Do not think death as something outside you.
Because it is not.
And do not think death as something in the future.
Because it is not.
Death is within you.
Because death is the other side of life.
Life cannot exist without death.
They both belong to the same energy as positive and
negative poles.
So do not identify yourself with life, because you are both.
The identification with life creates the gap.
And, death has nothing to do with future it is always here
and now.
Every moment it is.
And, when one ceases to regard it as something outside
oneself and, so to speak, draws it into his consciousness
and assimilates the idea of it, one is completely changed.
He is in all truth, born again.
And, then, there is no fear.
Because then there is no gap.
15-5-1971
(To: Ma Dhyana Siddhi, New York, U.S.A)
27/ Kneeling Down of the Ego
Beloved Dhyana Siddhi,
Love. We kneel down to ourselves.
Because, we kneel down to the gods we make out of our
experience or out of our desires and dreams, or out of our
so called logic and foolish arguments.
This is neither humility, nor prayer.
Rather, on the contrary this is the most egoistic attitude
possible.
The true religious mind is one which just kneels down,
not to anyone, not to any IMAGE in particular.
This kneeling down is nothing but a flowering of one's
own total nothingness.
Then this kneeling down becomes an inner way of life.
And, unless prayer is such, prayer is not.
One cannot pray, one can only be prayerful.
(To: Ma Dhyana Siddhi, New York, U.S.A.)
15-5-1971
28/ Meditation of Conscious Dreaming
Beloved dhyana siddhi,
Love. Use dreaming consciously as meditation.
And, know well that conscious dreaming opens new
doors of perception.
Lie down, relax and dream.
But do not fall asleep.
Remain conscious in the background.
Wait and watch.
Dream anything that happens to your mind.
Do not plan beforehand.
Dream anything because in dream the whole world is
yours.
Dream your existence as you please.
Dream and be content.
Content with your dreams, because they are yours and
remember that nothing can be yours like your dreams,
because you yourself are a dream-entity!
And also because your wishes come to be true in your
dreams and only in your dreams!
But do not fall into identification.
Be a witness.
Remain aware.
And, then, suddenly there will be no dreaming.
And, only you.
And, Illumination.
(To: Ma Dhyana Siddhi, New York, U.S.A.)
16-5-1971
29/ Authentic Being - Through Meditation
Beloved Dhyana Siddhi,
Love. It is tragic but true that few people ever possess
their souls.
They possess everything except themselves.
And, then, naturally they just become a thing among their
other things.
And the possessor becomes the possessed.
"Nothing is more rare in any man," says Emerson, "than
an act of his own".
But this is just what can be expected.
Because, no one is ones own.
No one is oneself.
Most people are other people.
They are not living - but only acting roles given to them
by others.
Their thoughts are someone else's opinions. And, their
faces are just masks.
They are faceless.
They have no authentic being at all.
There lives: a mimicry.
And, their passions: a quotation.
Break this vicious circle otherwise you will never BE.
Break this through meditation.
And, it cannot be broken by anything else.
Because through mind it cannot be broken.
And except meditation, all else is mind.
Mind is the prison.
Meditation: The Door.
And the only door.
(To: Ma Dhyana Siddhi, New York, U.S.A.)
19- 4 -1971
30/ The Gateless Gate
My beloved,
Love. That which is never lost cannot be found.
And to search for it is absurd.
But, the moment this absurdity is understood, all seeking
stops by itself.
And that which is never lost is found!
That is why I say: seek and you will not find.
Because, the very seeking is the barrier.
The search itself is the hindrance.
Because it creates the seeker, the Ego, the illusion that I
am.
And, I am not.
Do not seek and you will find it - the I-am-not-ness.
This nothingness is the gate.
The gateless Gate.
Riko, once, asked Nansen to explain to him the old
problem of the goose in the bottle.
"If a man puts a goosling into the bottle", he said, "and
feeds the goosling through the bottleneck until it grows
and grows and becomes a goose, and then there just is no
more room inside the bottle, how can the man get it out
without killing the goose, or breaking the bottle?"
"RICO!" shouted Nansen, and gave a great clap with his
hands.
"Yes, Master", said Rico with a start.
"SEE!” said Nansen "the goose is out!"
(To, Shree Inderraj Anand, 10/E, Ben Niwas, Warden
Road, Bombay-26)
25-4-1971
