
The	Diamond	Sutra
Talks	 on	 Vajrachchedika	 Prajnaparamita	 Sutra	 of	 Gautama	 the	 Buddha	 Talks
given	from	21/12/77	am	to	31/12/77	am
English	Discourse	series
11	Chapters
Year	published:	1979
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	That	Realm	of	Nirvana
21	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712210
ShortTitle:
DIAMON01
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
80
mins
VAJRA	CHEHEDIKA
PRAJNAPARAMITA
SUTRA
OF
GAUTAMA
THE
BUDDHA
THUS	HAVE	I	HEARD	AT	ONE	TIME.
THE	LORD	DWELT	AT	SRAVASTI.
EARLY	IN	THE	MORNING	THE	LORD	DRESSED,
PUT	ON	HIS	CLOAK,	TOOK	HIS	BOWL,
AND	ENTERED	THE	GREAT	CITY	OF	SRAVASTI
TO	COLLECT	ALMS.
WHEN	HE	HAD	EATEN	AND	RETURNED
FROM	HIS	ROUND,	THE	LORD	PUT	AWAY
HIS	BOWL	AND	CLOAK,	WASHED	HIS	FEET,
AND	SAT	DOWN	ON	THE	SEAT	ARRANGED	FOR	HIM,
CROSSING	HIS	LEGS,	HOLDING	HIS	BODY	UPRIGHT,	AND
MINDFULLY	FIXING	HIS	ATTENTION	IN	FRONT	OF	HIM.
THEN	MANY	MONKS	APPROACHED	TO	WHERE
THE	LORD	WAS,	SALUTED	HIS	FEET	WITH
THEIR	HEADS,	THRICE	WALKED	ROUND	HIM
TO	THE	RIGHT,	AND	SAT	DOWN	ON	ONE	SIDE.
AT	THAT	TIME	THE	VENERABLE	SUBHUTI
CAME	TO	THAT	ASSEMBLY,	AND	SAT	DOWN.
THEN	HE	ROSE	FROM	HIS	SEAT,
PUT	HIS	UPPER	ROBE	OVER	ONE	SHOULDER,
PLACED	HIS	RIGHT	KNEE	ON	THE	GROUND,
BENT	FORTH	HIS	FOLDED	HANDS	TOWARDS
THE	LORD,	AND	SAID	TO	THE	LORD:
'IT	IS	WONDERFUL,	O	LORD,
IT	IS	EXCEEDINGLY	WONDERFUL,	O	WELL-GONE,
HOW	MUCH	THE	BODHISATTVAS,
THE	GREAT	BEINGS,	HAVE	BEEN	HELPED
WITH	THE	GREATEST	HELP	BY	THE	TATHAGATA.
HOW	THEN,	O	LORD,	SHOULD	ONE	WHO	HAS
SET	OUT	IN	THE	BODHISATTVA-VEHICLE,
STAND,	HOW	PROGRESS,
HOW	CONTROL	THE	THOUGHTS?'
AFTER	THESE	WORDS	THE	LORD	SAID	TO	SUBHUTI:
'THEREFORE,	SUBHUTI,	LISTEN	WELL,
AND	ATTENTIVELY!'
SOMEONE	WHO	HAS	SET	OUT	IN	THE	VEHICLE
OF	A	BODHISATTVA	SHOULD	PRODUCE
A	THOUGHT	IN	THIS	MANNER:
'AS	MANY	BEINGS	AS	THERE	ARE
IN	THE	UNIVERSE	OF	BEINGS,
COMPREHENDED	UNDER	THE	TERM	"BEINGS",
ALL	THESE	I	MUST	LEAD	TO	NIRVANA,
INTO	THAT	REALM	OF	NIRVANA
WHICH	LEAVES	NOTHING	BEHIND.
AND	YET,	ALTHOUGH	INNUMERABLE	BEINGS
HAVE	THUS	BEEN	LED	TO	NIRVANA,
NO	BEING	AT	ALL	HAS	BEEN	LED	TO	NIRVANA.'
AND	WHY?
IF	IN	A	BODHISATTVA	THE	NOTION
OF	A	"BEING"	SHOULD	TAKE	PLACE,
HE	COULD	NOT	BE	CALLED	A	BODHI-BEING.
AND	WHY?
HE	IS	NOT	TO	BE	CALLED	A	BODHI-BEING
IN	WHOM	THE	NOTION	OF	A	SELF
OR	OF	A	BEING	SHOULD	TAKE	PLACE,
OR	THE	NOTION	OF	A	LIVING	SOUL
OR	OF	A	PERSON.'
I	 love	Gautama	 the	Buddha	 because	 he	 represents	 to	me	 the	 essential	 core	 of
religion.	He	is	not	the	founder	of	Buddhism	--	Buddhism	is	a	byproduct	--	but	he
is	 the	 beginner	 of	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 religion	 in	 the	 world.	 He's	 the
founder	of	a	religionless	religion.
He	 has	 propounded	 not	 religion	 but	 religiousness.	 And	 this	 is	 a	 great	 radical
change	in	the	history	of	human	consciousness.
Before	Buddha	there	were	religions	but	never	a	pure	religiousness.	Man	was	not
yet	mature.	With	Buddha,	humanity	enters	into	a	mature	age.	All	human	beings
have	 not	 yet	 entered	 into	 that,	 that's	 true,	 but	 Buddha	 has	 heralded	 the	 path;
Buddha	 has	 opened	 the	 gateless	 gate.	 It	 takes	 time	 for	 human	 beings	 to
understand	such	a	deep	message.
Buddha's	message	 is	 the	deepest	ever.	Nobody	has	done	 the	work	 that	Buddha
has	done,	the	way	he	has	done.	Nobody	else	represents	pure	fragrance.
Other	 founders	 of	 religions,	 other	 enlightened	people,	 have	 compromised	with
their	audience.	Buddha	 remains	uncompromised,	hence	his	purity.	He	does	not
care	what	 you	 can	understand,	 he	 cares	 only	what	 the	 truth	 is.	And	he	 says	 it
without	 being	 worried	 whether	 you	 understand	 it	 or	 not.	 In	 a	 way	 this	 looks
hard;	in	another	way	this	is	great	compassion.
Truth	 has	 to	 be	 said	 as	 it	 is.	 The	moment	 you	 compromise,	 the	moment	 you
bring	 truth	 to	 the	 ordinary	 level	 of	 human	 consciousness,	 it	 loses	 its	 soul,	 it
becomes	superficial,	it	becomes	a	dead	thing.	You	cannot	bring	truth	to	the	level
of	 human	 beings;	 human	 beings	 have	 to	 be	 led	 to	 the	 level	 of	 truth.	 That	 is
Buddha's	great	work.
Twenty-five	 centuries	 ago,	 just	 some	day	 early	 in	 the	morning	 --	 just	 like	 this
day	 --	 this	 sutra	 was	 born.	 Twelve	 hundred	 and	 fifty	 monks	 were	 present.	 It
happened	 in	 the	 city	 of	 Sravasti.	 It	 was	 a	 great	 city	 of	 those	 days.	 The	word
Sravasti	means	the	city	of	glory.	It	was	one	of	the	glorious	cities	of	ancient	India;
it	had	nine	hundred	thousand	families	in	it.
Now	 that	 city	 has	 completely	 disappeared.	A	 very	 very	 small	 village	 exists	 --
you	will	 not	 find	 even	 its	 name	 on	 any	map;	 even	 the	 name	 has	 disappeared.
Now	 it	 is	 called	Sahet-Mahet.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	believe	 that	 such	a	great	city
existed	 there.	This	 is	 the	way	of	 life	 --	 things	go	on	changing.	Cities	 turn	 into
cemeteries,	cemeteries	turn	into	cities...	life	is	a	flux.
Buddha	must	have	loved	this	city	of	Sravasti,	because	out	of	forty-five	years	of
his	 ministry	 he	 stayed	 in	 Sravasti	 twenty-five	 years.	 He	 must	 have	 loved	 the
people.	 The	 people	 must	 have	 been	 of	 a	 very	 evolved	 consciousness.	 All	 the
great	sutras	of	Buddha,	almost	all,	were	born	in	Sravasti.
This	sutra	--	The	Diamond	Sutra	--	was	also	born	in	Sravasti.	The	Sanskrit	name
of	 this	 sutra	 is	 Vajrachchedika	 Prajnaparamita	 Sutra.	 It	 means	 perfection	 of
wisdom	which	cuts	like	a	thunderbolt.	If	you	allow,	Buddha	can	cut	you	like	a
thunderbolt.	He	can	behead	you.	He	can	kill	you	and	help	you	to	be	reborn.
A	buddha	has	to	be	both	--	a	murderer	and	a	mother.	On	the	one	hand	he	has	to
kill,	 on	 the	 other	 hand	 he	 has	 to	 give	 new	 being	 to	 you.	 The	 new	 being	 is
possible	only	when	the	old	has	been	destroyed.	Only	on	the	ashes	of	the	old	the
new	is	born.	Man	is	a	phoenix.
The	mythological	bird	phoenix	is	not	just	a	mythology,	it	is	a	metaphor.	It	stands
for	man.	That	phoenix	exists	nowhere	except	in	man.	Man	is	the	being	who	has
to	die	to	be	reborn.
That's	what	Jesus	said	to	Nicodemus.	Nicodemus	was	a	professor,	a	learned	man,
a	 rabbi,	 a	member	 of	 the	 board	 that	 controlled	 the	 great	 temple	 of	 Jerusalem.
One	dark	night	he	came	 to	 see	 Jesus.	He	could	not	gather	courage	 to	come	 to
him	 in	 the	 day	 time;	 he	 was	 afraid	 what	 people	 would	 say.	 He	 was	 so
respectable,	 so	 much	 respected.	 Going	 to	 a	 vagabond	 teacher?...	 going	 to
somebody	who	is	hated	by	all	the	rabbis	and	all	the	learned	people?...	going	to
somebody	 who	 moves	 with	 thieves	 and	 drunkards	 and	 prostitutes?	 But
something	 in	him	was	very	desirous	 to	see	 this	man.	maybe	he	had	seen	Jesus
walking,	 coming	 to	 the	 temple.	 He	 must	 have	 felt	 something	 deep	 in	 his
unconscious	for	this	man.
He	could	not	hold	himself	back.
One	night	when	everybody	had	left,	when	even	the	disciples	had	gone	to	sleep,
he	reached	Jesus	and	he	asked,	"What	should	I	do	so	that	I	can	also	enter	into	the
kingdom	of	God?"
And	 Jesus	 said,	 "Unless	you	die	nothing	 is	possible.	 If	 you	die,	only	 then	can
you	enter	 into	 the	kingdom	of	God.	You	will	have	to	die	as	you	are,	only	 then
can	you	be	born	as	really	your	inner	being	is."
The	 ego	 has	 to	 die	 for	 the	 essential	 being	 to	 surface.	 That	 is	 the	meaning	 of
Vajrachchedika	 Prajnaparamita.	 It	 cuts	 like	 a	 thunderbolt.	 In	 one	 stroke	 it	 can
destroy	you.	It	is	one	of	the	greatest	sermons	of	Buddha.	Get	in	tune	with	it.
Before	we	enter	into	the	sutra,	a	few	things	to	be	understood	that	will	help	you	to
understand	it.	Gautama	the	Buddha	has	started	a	spirituality	that	is	nonrepressive
and	 nonideological.	 That	 is	 a	 very	 rare	 phenomenon.	 The	 ordinary	 kind	 of
spirituality,	 the	 garden	 variety,	 is	 very	 repressive.	 It	 depends	 on	 repression.	 It
does	 not	 transform	 man,	 it	 only	 cripples	 man.	 It	 does	 not	 liberate	 man,	 it
enslaves	man.	It	is	oppressive,	it	is	ugly.
Listen	 to	 these	words	 of	 Thomas	 a	Kempis,	 author	 of	 Imitation	 of	Christ.	He
writes:	"The	more	violence	you	do	to	yourself,	the	greater	will	be	your	growth	in
grace.	There	is	no	other	way	save	of	daily	mortification.	To	despise	oneself	is	the
best	and	the	most	perfect	counsel."	There	are	thousands	of	saints	down	the	ages
who	will	agree	with	Thomas	a	Kempis.	And	Thomas	a	Kempis	is	pathological.
Or	the	French	priest	Bossuet	says:	"Cursed	be	the	earth!	Cursed	be	the	earth!	A
thousand	times	cursed	be	the	earth."	Why?	Why	should	the	earth	be	cursed?	Life
has	to	be	cursed.
These	 people	 have	 been	 thinking	 as	 if	God	 is	 against	 life,	 as	 if	 life	 is	 against
God.	Life	IS
God,	there	is	no	antagonism,	there	is	no	separation	even.	They	are	not	different
things,	they	are	two	names	for	one	reality.
Remember	this:	Buddha	is	nonrepressive.	And	if	you	find	Buddhist	monks	to	be
repressive,	 remember,	 they	 have	 not	 understood	 Buddha	 at	 all.	 They	 have
brought	their	own	pathology	into	his	teachings.	And	Buddha	is	non-ideological.
He	gives	no	ideology,	because	all	ideologies	are	of	the	mind.	And	if	ideologies
are	of	the	mind,	they	cannot	take	you	beyond	the	mind.	No	ideology	can	become
a	bridge	to	reach	beyond	the	mind.	All	ideologies	have	to	be	dropped,	only	then
the	mind	will	be	dropped.
Buddha	 believes	 in	 no	 ideals	 either	 --	 because	 all	 ideals	 create	 tension	 and
conflict	 in	man.	They	divide,	 they	 create	 anguish.	You	 are	 one	 thing	 and	 they
want	you	to	be	something	else.	Between	these	two	you	are	stretched,	torn	apart.
Ideals	create	misery.
Ideals	create	schizophrenia.	The	more	ideals	there	are,	 the	more	people	will	be
schizophrenic,	they	will	be	split.	Only	a	nonideological	consciousness	can	avoid
being	split.	And	if	you	are	split	how	can	you	be	happy?	how	can	you	be	silent?
how	can	you	know	anything	of	peace,	of	stillness?
The	ideological	person	is	continuously	fighting	with	himself.	Each	moment	there
is	conflict.	He	lives	in	conflict,	he	lives	in	confusion,	because	he	cannot	decide
who	really	he	is	--	the	ideal	or	the	reality.	He	cannot	trust	himself,	he	becomes
afraid	of	himself,	he	loses	confidence.	And	once	a	man	loses	confidence	he	loses
all	glory.	Then	he	is	ready	to	become	a	slave	to	anybody	--	to	any	priest,	to	any
politician.	Then	he	is	just	ready,	waiting	to	fall	in	some	trap.
Why	do	people	become	followers?	Why	are	people	trapped?	Why	do	people	fall
for	a	Joseph	Stalin	or	an	Adolf	Hitler	or	a	Mao	Zedong?	Why	in	the	first	place?
They	 have	 become	 so	 shaky,	 the	 ideological	 confusion	 has	 shaken	 them	 from
their	very	 roots.	Now	 they	cannot	 stand	on	 their	 own,	 they	want	 somebody	 to
lean	on.	They	cannot	move	on	 their	own,	 they	don't	know	who	 they	are.	They
need	somebody	to	tell	them	that	they	are	this	or	that.	They	need	an	identity	to	be
given	to	them.	They	have	forgotten	their	self	and	their	nature.
Adolf	Hitlers	 and	 Joseph	 Stalins	 and	Mao	Zedongs	will	 be	 coming	 again	 and
again	until	and	unless	man	drops	all	 ideologies.	And	remember,	when	I	say	all
ideologies,	I	mean	ALL	ideologies.	I	don't	make	any	distinction	between	noble
ideologies	and	not	so	noble.
All	 ideologies	are	dangerous.	 In	 fact	 the	noble	 ideologies	are	more	dangerous,
because	 they	 have	 a	 more	 seductive	 power,	 they	 are	 more	 persuasive.	 But
ideology	as	such	 is	a	disease,	exactly	a	dis-ease,	because	you	become	two:	 the
ideal	and	vou.	And	the	you	that	you	are	is	condemned,,,	and	the	you	that	you	are
not	is	praised.	Now	you	are	getting	into	trouble.	Now	sooner	or	later	you	will	be
neurotic,	psychotic	or	something.
Buddha	 has	 given	 a	 nonrepressive	way	 of	 life,	 and	 nonideological	 too.	 That's
why	he	does	not	talk	about	God,	he	does	not	talk	about	heaven,	he	does	not	talk
about	any	future.
He	does	not	give	you	anything	to	hold	onto,	he	takes	everything	away	from	you.
He	 takes	 even	 your	 self.	He	 goes	 on	 taking	 things	 away,	 and	 finally	 he	 takes
even	the	idea	of	self,	I,	ego.	He	leaves	only	pure	emptiness	behind.	And	this	is
very	difficult.
This	 is	 very	 difficult	 because	 we	 have	 completely	 forgotten	 how	 to	 give.	We
only	know	how	 to	 take.	We	go	on	 taking	 everything.	 I	TAKE	 the	 exam	and	 I
TAKE	the	wife	and	even	I	TAKE	the	afternoon	nap	--	a	thing	which	cannot	be
taken,	you	have	to	surrender	to	it.	Sleep	comes	only	when	you	surrender.	Even	a
wife,	 a	 husband,	 you	 go	 on	 taking.	 You	 are	 not	 respectful.	 The	wife	 is	 not	 a
property.	You	can	take	a	house	--	how	can	you	take	a	wife	or	a	husband?	But	our
language	shows	our	mind.	We	don't	know	how	to	give	-	how	to	give	in,	how	to
let	go,	how	to	let	things	happen.
Buddha	takes	all	ideals	away,	the	whole	future	away,	and	finally	he	takes	the	last
thing	that	is	very	very	difficult	for	us	to	give	--	he	takes	your	very	self,	leaves	a
pure,	innocent,	virgin	emptiness	behind.	That	virgin	emptiness	he	calls	nirvana.
Nirvana	is	not	a	goal,	it	is	just	your	emptiness.	When	you	have	dropped	all	that
you	have	accumulated,	when	you	don't	hoard	anymore,	when	you	are	no	longer	a
miser	 and	 a	 clinger,	 then	 suddenly	 that	 emptiness	 erupts.	 It	 has	 always	 been
there.
Hakuin	 is	 right:	 "From	 the	 very	 beginning,	 all	 beings	 are	 buddhas."	 That
emptiness	is	there.	You	have	accumulated	junk	so	that	emptiness	is	not	visible.	It
is	 just	 like	 in	 your	 house	 you	 can	 go	 on	 accumulating	 things;	 then	 you	 stop
seeing	any	space,	then	there	is	no	more	space.	A	day	comes	when	even	to	move
in	 the	 house	 becomes	 difficult;	 to	 live	 becomes	 difficult	 because	 there	 is	 no
space.	But	space	has	not	gone	anywhere.	Think	of	it,	meditate	over	it.	The	space
has	not	gone	anywhere;	you	have	accumulated	 too	much	 furniture	and	 the	TV
and	 the	 radio	and	 the	 radiogram	and	 the	piano	and	everything	 --	but	 the	space
has	 not	 gone	 anywhere.	 Remove	 the	 furniture	 and	 the	 space	 is	 there;	 it	 has
always	been	there.	It	was	hidden	by	the	furniture	but	it	was	not	destroyed.	It	has
not	 left	 the	 room,	 not	 for	 a	 single	moment.	 So	 is	 your	 inner	 emptiness,	 your
nirvana,	your	nothingness.
Buddha	 does	 not	 give	 you	 nirvana	 as	 an	 ideal.	 Buddha	 liberates	 instead	 of
coercing.
Buddha	teaches	you	how	to	live	--	not	for	any	goal,	not	to	achieve	anything,	but
to	be	blissful	herenow	--	how	to	live	in	awareness.	Not	that	awareness	is	going	to
give	 you	 something	 --	 awareness	 is	 not	 a	means	 to	 anything;	 it	 is	 the	 end	 in
itself,	the	means	and	the	end	both.	Its	value	is	intrinsic.
Buddha	does	not	teach	you	otherworldliness.	This	has	to	be	understood.	People
are	worldly;	the	priests	go	on	teaching	the	other	world.	The	other	world	is	also
not	very	otherworldly,	it	cannot	be,	because	it	is	just	an	improved	model	of	the
same	world.	From	where	 can	you	 create	 the	other	world?	You	know	only	 this
world.	 You	 can	 improve,	 you	 can	 decorate	 the	 other	 world	 better,	 you	 can
remove	a	few	things	that	are	ugly	here	and	you	can	replace	a	few	things	which
you	think	will	be	beautiful,	but	it	is	going	to	be	a	creation	out	of	the	experience
of	 this	 world.	 So	 your	 other	 world	 is	 not	 very	 different,	 cannot	 be.	 It	 is	 a
continuity.	It	comes	out	of	your	mind;	it	is	a	game	of	imagination.
You	will	have	beautiful	women	there	--	of	course	more	beautiful	than	you	have
here.	You	will	have	the	same	kinds	of	pleasures	there	--	maybe	more	permanent,
stable,	but	 they	will	be	the	same	kinds	of	pleasures.	You	will	have	better	food,
more	tasty	--	but	you	will	have	food.	You	will	have	houses,	maybe	made	of	gold
--	but	they	will	be	houses.	You	will	repeat	the	whole	thing	again.
Just	go	into	the	scriptures	and	see	how	they	depict	the	heaven	and	you	will	find
the	same	world	improved	upon.	A	few	touches	here	and	a	few	touches	there,	but
it	is	not	in	any	way	otherworldly.	That's	why	I	say	the	otherworldliness	of	other
religions	is	not	very	otherworldly;	it	is	this	world	projected	into	the	future.	It	is
born	out	of	 the	experience	of	 this	world.	There	will	not	be	misery	and	poverty
and	illness	and	paralysis	and	blindness	and	deafness.	Things	that	you	don't	like
here	will	not	be	there,	and	things	that	you	like	will	be	there	and	in	abundance,
but	it	is	not	going	to	be	anything	new.
Mind	 cannot	 conceive	 of	 anything	 new.	 Mind	 is	 incapable	 of	 conceiving	 the
new.	Mind	lives	in	the	old,	mind	IS	the	old.	The	new	never	happens	through	the
mind.	The	new	happens	only	when	mind	 is	not	 functioning,	when	mind	 is	not
controlling	you,	when	mind	has	been	put	aside.	The	new	happens	only	when	the
mind	is	not	interfering.
But	all	your	scriptures	talk	about	the	heaven	--	and	the	heaven	or	the	paradise	or
FIRDAUS	or	SWARGA,	 is	nothing	but	 the	same	story.	 It	may	be	printed	on	a
better	 art	paper,	with	better	 ink,	 in	a	more	 improved	press,	with	more	colorful
illustrations,	but	the	story	is	the	same;	it	cannot	be	otherwise.
Buddha	does	not	talk	of	otherworldliness	or	the	other	world.	He	simply	teaches
you	how	to	be	here	 in	 this	world;	how	to	be	here	alert,	conscious,	mindful,	 so
that	nothing	impinges	upon	your	emptiness;	so	that	your	inner	emptiness	is	not
contaminated,	 poisoned;	 so	 that	 you	 can	 live	 here	 and	 yet	 remain
uncontaminated,	unpolluted;	so	that	you	can	be	in	the	world	and	the	world	will
not	be	in	you.
The	 otherworldly	 spirituality	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 oppressive,	 destructive,	 sado-
masochistic	--
in	 short,	 pathological.	 Buddha's	 spirituality	 has	 a	 different	 flavor	 to	 it	 --	 the
flavor	of	no	 ideal,	 the	 flavor	of	no	 future,	 the	 flavor	of	no	other	world.	 It	 is	 a
flower	here	and	now.	It	asks	for	nothing.	All	is	already	given.	It	simply	becomes
more	alert	so	you	can	see	more,	you	can	hear	more,	you	can	be	more.
Remember,	 you	 are	 only	 in	 the	 same	 proportion	 as	 you	 are	 conscious.	 If	 you
want	 to	 be	 more,	 be	 more	 conscious.	 Consciousness	 imparts	 being.
Unconsciousness	takes	being	away.	When	you	are	drunk	you	lose	being.	When
you	are	fast	asleep	you	lose	being.
Have	you	not	watched	it?	When	you	are	alert	you	have	a	different	quality	--	you
are	centered,	rooted.	When	you	are	alert	you	feel	the	solidity	of	your	being,	it	is
almost	tangible.	When	you	are	unconscious,	just	dragging	by,	sleepy,	your	sense
of	being	is	less.
It	is	always	in	the	same	proportion	as	the	consciousness	is.
So	Buddha's	whole	message	is	to	be	conscious.	And	for	no	other	reason,	just	for
the	 sake	 of	 being	 conscious	 --	 because	 consciousness	 imparts	 being,
consciousness	creates	you.
And	a	you	so	different	 from	you	 that	you	are,	 that	you	cannot	 imagine.	A	you
where	'I'
has	 disappeared,	 where	 no	 idea	 of	 self	 exists,	 nothing	 defines	 you...	 a	 pure
emptiness,	an	infinity,	unbounded	emptiness.
This	Buddha	calls	the	state	of	meditation	--	SAMMASAMADHI,	right	state	of
meditation,	when	you	are	all	alone.	But	 remember,	aloneness	 is	not	 loneliness.
Have	you	ever	 thought	about	 this	beautiful	word,	alone?	It	means	all	one.	 It	 is
made	of	two	words	--
all	and	one.	In	aloneness	you	become	one	with	the	all.
Aloneness	has	nothing	of	loneliness	in	it.	You	are	not	lonely	when	you	are	alone.
You	are	alone	but	not	lonely	--	because	you	are	one	with	the	all;	how	can	you	be
lonely?	You	don't	miss	others,	 true.	Not	 that	you	have	forgotten	 them,	not	 that
you	don't	need	them,	not	that	you	don't	care	about	them,	no.	You	don't	remember
others	because	you	are	one	with	them.	All	the	distinction	between	one	and	all	is
lost.	One	has	become	the	all	and	all	has	become	one.	This	English	word	alone	is
immensely	beautiful.
Buddha	says	sammasamadhi	is	aloneness.	The	right	meditation	is	to	be	so	utterly
alone	that	you	are	one	with	all.	Let	me	explain	it	to	you.	If	you	are	empty	your
boundaries	disappear	because	emptiness	can	have	no	boundaries.	Emptiness	can
only	be	infinite.
Emptiness	cannot	have	any	weight,	emptiness	cannot	have	any	color,	emptiness
cannot	have	any	name,	emptiness	cannot	have	any	form.	When	you	are	empty,
how	will	you	divide	yourself	from	others?	--	because	you	don't	have	any	color,
you	 don't	 have	 any	 name,	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 form,	 you	 don't	 have	 any
boundaries.	How	are	you	going	to	make	any	distinctions?	When	you	are	empty
you	are	one	with	all.	You	have	melted	into	existence,	existence	has	merged	with
you.	You	are	no	more	an	island,	you	have	become	the	vast	continent	of	being.
Buddha's	whole	message	is	condensed	in	this	one	word	--	sammasamadhi,	right
meditation.	 What	 is	 right	 meditation	 and	 what	 is	 wrong	 meditation?	 If	 the
meditator	exists	then	it	is	wrong	meditation.	If	the	meditator	is	lost	in	meditation
then	 it	 is	 right	 meditation.	 Right	 meditation	 brings	 you	 to	 emptiness	 and
aloneness.
This	 sutra...	 this	whole	 sutra	 is	 concerned	with	 how	 to	 become	 utterly	 empty.
This	is	his	basic	gift	to	the	world.
THUS	HAVE	I	HEARD	AT	ONE	TIME.
These	 sutras	 have	 been	 remembered	 by	 Buddha's	 great	 disciple	 Ananda.	 And
one	thing	to	be	remembered:	all	sutras	start:	THUS	HAVE	I	HEARD....
When	 Buddha	 died	 all	 the	 disciples	 gathered	 together	 to	 collect	 whatsoever
Buddha	 had	 said	 in	 those	 forty-five	 years.	Ananda	was	 the	 only	 one	who	had
lived	 continuously	 for	 those	 forty-five	 years	 with	 Buddha.	 He	 was	 the	 most
authentic	 to	be	 relied	upon.	Others	had	heard,	but	 they	had	heard	 from	others.
Sometimes	they	were	with	Buddha	and	sometimes	they	were	not	with	Buddha.
Only	Ananda	had	lived	like	a	shadow.
So	Ananda	relates,	but	the	beauty	is	that	he	never	says	that	"Buddha	said	this";
he	 simply	 says,	 "Thus	have	 I	heard".	The	difference	 is	great.	He	does	not	 say,
"Buddha	 has	 said	 this,"	 because	 he	 says,	 "How	 am	 I	 to	 say	what	Buddha	 has
said?	All	that	I	can	say	is	this	-
-	 that	 this	 is	 what	 I	 have	 heard.	What	 Buddha	 said,	 only	 he	 knows.	What	 he
meant,	 only	 he	 knows.	 All	 that	 I	 can	 remember	 is	 what	 I	 have	 heard.	 My
capacities	are	limited.	He	may	have	meant	something	else.	I	may	have	forgotten
a	few	words,	I	may	have	put	a	few	words	of	my	own."
This	 is	 a	 great	 sincerity.	He	 could	have	 claimed,	 "This	 is	what	Buddha	 said.	 I
was	present,	I	am	an	eyewitness."	And	he	WAS	an	eyewitness;	nobody	can	deny
that.	But	look	at	the	humbleness	of	the	man:	he	says	"Thus	have	I	heard.	Buddha
was	saying,	I	was	hearing	--	I	can	only	relate	what	I	have	heard.	It	may	be	right,
it	may	not	be	 right.	 I	may	have	 interfered,	 I	may	have	 interpreted,	 I	may	have
forgotten	a	few	things,	something	of	my	own	mind	may	have	got	into	it	--	that	all
is	possible.	I	am	not	an	enlightened	man."
Ananda	was	 not	 yet	 enlightened,	 so	 he	 says,	 "This	 is	 all	 that	 I	 can	 say,	 I	 can
vouch	for."
THUS	HAVE	I	HEARD	AT	ONE	TIME.
THE	LORD	DWELT	AT	SRAVASTI.
EARLY	IN	THE	MORNING	THE	LORD	DRESSED,
PUT	ON	HIS	CLOAK,	TOOK	HIS	BOWL,
AND	ENTERED	THE	GREAT	CITY	OF	SRAVASTI
TO	COLLECT	ALMS.
WHEN	HE	HAD	EATEN	AND	RETURNED
FROM	HIS	ROUND,	THE	LORD	PUT	AWAY
HIS	BOWL	AND	CLOAK,	WASHED	HIS	FEET,
AND	SAT	DOWN	ON	THE	SEAT	ARRANGED	FOR	HIM,
CROSSING	HIS	LEGS,
HOLDING	HIS	BODY	UPRIGHT,	AND	MINDFULLY
FIXING	HIS	ATTENTION	IN	FRONT	OF	HIM.
This	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 at.	 When	 Ananda	 says,	 he	 goes	 into	 very	 small
details.	One	never	knows	--	when	you	are	reporting	about	a	buddha,	you	have	to
be	very	careful,	mm?
Even	this	much	he	reports	again	and	again	--	such	small	things.
EARLY	IN	THE	MORNING	THE	LORD	DRESSED,
PUT	ON	HIS	CLOAK,	TOOK	HIS	BOWL,
AND	ENTERED	THE	GREAT	CITY	OF	SRAVASTI
TO	COLLECT	ALMS.
Ananda	is	following	him	like	a	shadow,	a	silent	shadow	just	watching	him.	Just
to	watch	him	was	a	benediction.	And	he	watches	everything.
WHEN	HE	HAD	EATEN	AND	RETURNED
FROM	HIS	ROUND,	THE	LORD	PUT	AWAY
HIS	BOWL	AND	CLOAK,	WASHED	HIS	FEET,
AND	SAT	DOWN	ON	THE	SEAT	ARRANGED	FOR	HIM.
When	for	the	first	time	Buddhist	sutras	were	translated	into	Western	languages,
the	translators	were	a	little	bit	puzzled	--	why	this	continuous	repetition?	It	goes
on	and	on	 like	 that;	again	 it	will	be,	again	 this	 repetition.	Why	are	 these	small
things	related?	They	could	not	understand	it.	They	thought	that	this	is	repetitive,
that	this	is	a	very	unnecessary	repetition;	it	is	not	needed	at	all.	What	is	the	point
of	it	all?	But	they	missed.	What	Ananda	is	saying	is	that	Buddha	pays	attention
to	small	things	as	much	as	to	big	things.
For	a	buddha	there	is	nothing	small	and	nothing	big	--	one	thing.
When	he	takes	his	bowl	he	is	as	respectful	to	the	bowl	as	he	would	be	respectful
to	any	God.	When	he	puts	his	cloak	or	puts	his	dress	on	he	is	so	mindful;	he's
absolutely	 alert,	 he	 is	 not	 mechanical.	 When	 you	 put	 your	 dress	 on	 you	 are
mechanical.	You	know	mechanically	 how	 to	 put	 it	 on,	 so	what	 is	 the	 point	 of
paying	 attention	 to	 it?	Your	mind	 goes	 on	moving	 into	 a	 thousand	 directions.
And	you	take	a	shower	--	but	you	are	very	disrespectful	to	the	shower.	You	have
not	been	there,	you	have	been	somewhere	else.
You	eat,	but	you	are	disrespectful	to	the	food.	You	are	not	there,	you	simply	go
on	 swallowing	 the	 food	 inside	 you.	 You	 go	 on	 doing	 your	 things	 habitually,
mechanically.
When	Buddha	does	a	thing	he	is	utterly	there,	he	is	nowhere	else.
WHEN	HE	HAD	EATEN	AND	RETURNED
FROM	HIS	ROUND,	THE	LORD	PUT	AWAY
HIS	BOWL	AND	CLOAK,	WASHED	HIS	FEET,
AND	SAT	DOWN	ON	THE	SEAT	ARRANGED	FOR	HIM,
CROSSING	HIS	LEGS,
HOLDING	HIS	BODY	UPRIGHT,	AND	MINDFULLY
FIXING	HIS	ATTENTION	IN	FRONT	OF	HIM....
These	 minor	 details	 are	 worth	 relating,	 because	 they	 bring	 the	 quality	 of
buddhahood.
Each	moment	he	lives	in	awareness.	What	he	is	doing	is	irrelevant;	each	moment
he	pours	his	attention	into	whatsoever	he	is	doing.	When	he	makes	a	gesture	he
is	totally	the	gesture.	When	he	smiles	he	is	totally	the	smile.	When	he	talks	he	is
totally	his	words.
And	when	he	is	silent	he	is	totally	silent.
To	watch	a	buddha	is	a	blessing	in	itself	--	how	he	walks,	how	he	sits,	how	he
makes	 gestures,	 how	 he	 looks	 at	 you.	 Each	 moment	 is	 a	 radiant	 moment	 of
awareness.	That's	why	Ananda	reports.	There	must	have	been	great	silence	when
Buddha	came,	arranged	his	dress,	washed	his	 feet,	 sat	on	 the	seat	arranged	for
him,	sat	upright,	then	focussed	his	whole	attention	in	front	of	him.	What	is	this
'fixing	your	attention	in	front	of	yourself'?
That	 is	a	 special	Buddhist	method	called	ANAPANSATIYOGA	--	mindfulness
of	breath	coming	in	and	breath	going	out.	That	is	the	meaning	of	focussing	your
attention	in	front.
When	Buddha	is	doing	something,	for	example	dressing,	then	he	is	attentive	of
that	act.
When	he	 is	walking	he	 is	attentive	of	walking.	When	he	 is	not	doing	anything
then	he	is	attentive	of	breath	coming	in	and	breath	going	out.	But	he	is	attentive;
even	while	he	is	asleep	he	is	attentive.
Ananda	asked	Buddha	once....	For	 ten	years	he	 lived	with	Buddha	and	he	was
surprised	that	he	remained	in	the	same	posture	the	whole	night.	Wherever	he	put
his	 hand,	 he	 kept	 it	 there	 the	whole	 night.	He	must	 have	 looked	many	 times,
must	 have	 sneaked	 in	 in	 the	 night.	 It	 was	 worth	 it,	 mm?	 --	 how	 the	 Buddha
sleeps?	And	he	was	surprised	and	puzzled	 that	he	kept	 the	same	posture	 --	 the
same	posture	the	whole	night.	He	could	not	hold	his	curiosity.	One	day	he	said,
"It	is	not	right	for	me	to	get	up	in	the	night	and	look	at	you,	I	should	not	do	such
a	thing,	but	I	am	curious	about	you	and	I	am	puzzled	--	you	remain	in	the	same
posture?	Do	you	sleep	or	do	you	continue	your	awareness?"
And	Buddha	said,	"Sleep	happens	in	the	body,	I	remain	alert.	Now	the	sleep	is
coming,	now	it	has	come,	now	it	has	settled,	now	the	body	is	relaxed,	the	limbs
are	relaxed	--	but	I	keep	my	awareness	bright."
Meditation	is	a	twenty-four	hour	thing.	It	is	not	that	you	do	it	once	a	day	and	you
are	finished	with	it.	It	has	to	become	your	flavor,	it	has	to	become	your	climate.
It	should	surround	you	wherever	you	are,	whatsoever	you	are	doing.
...	AND	MINDFULLY	FIXING	HIS	ATTENTION
IN	FRONT	OF	HIM,	HE	SAT.
THEN	MANY	MONKS	APPROACHED
TO	WHERE	THE	LORD	WAS,
SALUTED	HIS	FEET	WITH	THEIR	HEADS,
THRICE	WALKED	ROUND	HIM	TO	THE	RIGHT
AND	SAT	DOWN	ON	ONE	SIDE.
To	ask	a	question	to	a	Buddha	needs	a	certain	attitude,	only	then	will	you	receive
the	 answer.	 Not	 that	 Buddha	 will	 not	 give	 the	 answer.	 You	 can	 ask	 very
disrespectfully	--
Buddha	will	give	the	answer,	but	you	will	not	receive	it.	So	it	is	not	a	question
that	only	when	you	are	respectful	will	Buddha	give	the	answer.	Buddha	will	give
the	answer	anyway,	but	 if	you	are	not	very	 respectful,	very	humble,	 receptive,
feminine,	 you	will	miss	 it.	How	you	 ask	 the	question	determines	whether	 you
will	be	able	to	receive	the	answer	or	not.
How	you	ask,	in	what	mood....	Are	you	receptive?	Are	you	just	curious?	Are	you
asking	 the	 question	 out	 of	 your	 accumulated	 knowledge	 or	 is	 your	 question
innocent?	Are	you	asking	just	 to	 test	whether	 this	man	knows	or	not?	Are	you
asking	 from	 a	 state	 of	 knowledge	 or	 from	 a	 state	 of	 not	 knowing?	 Are	 you
humble,	surrendered?	Are	you	ready	to	receive	the	gift	if	it	is	given	to	you?	will
you	be	open,	will	you	welcome	it?	will	you	take	it	to	your	heart?	Will	you	allow
it	to	become	a	seed	in	your	heart?	To	ask	a	question	to	a	Buddha	is	not	to	ask	a
question	to	a	professor.	It	needs	a	certain	quality	in	you;	 then	only	will	you	be
benefited	by	it.
THEN	MANY	MONKS	APPROACHED
TO	WHERE	THE	LORD	WAS,
SALUTED	HIS	FEET	WITH	THEIR	HEADS,
THRICE	WALKED	ROUND	HIM	TO	THE	RIGHT
AND	SAT	DOWN	ON	ONE	SIDE.
Walking	thrice	is	symbolic	of	the	three	bodies.	The	first	round	is	for	the	physical
body,	 the	body	 that	we	can	 see,	which	 is	 available	 to	 the	 senses.	The	physical
body	of	 the	Buddha	is	also	beautiful;	 it	 is	 the	shrine	where	God	abides.	So	the
first	round	is	a	salutation	for	the	first	body,	the	physical	body.	The	second	round
is	 for	 the	 bliss	 body,	 the	 second	 body.	And	 the	 third	 round	 is	 for	 the	Buddha
body,	the	truth	body.
These	 three	 rounds	are	symbolic	of	something	else	 too.	 In	Buddhism	there	are
three	 shelters,	 three	 refuges:	 "I	 take	 refuge	 in	 the	Buddha,	 I	 take	 refuge	 in	 the
sangha,	I	take	refuge	in	the	Dhamma."	These	three	rounds	are	symbolic	of	them
too.
When	a	person	comes	to	Buddha	to	ask	anything,	he	has	to	take	refuge.	He	has
to	have	this	state	of	mind	--	that	"I	am	falling	in	tune	with	Buddha,"	that	"I	am
ready	to	vibrate	in	the	same	wavelength."	"I	take	refuge	in	the	Buddha.	You	are
my	shelter,	I	come	to	you	as	a	disciple,	I	come	to	you	knowing	that	I	don't	know,
I	come	to	you	in	innocence,	I	bow	down	to	you,	I	recognize	that	you	know	and	I
don't	know	--	 so	 I	am	ready	 to	 receive	whatsoever	you	 think	 I	am	ready	 to	be
given."
"I	take	refuge	in	the	sangha,	in	the	commune."...	Because	one	Buddha	is	only	a
representative	 of	 all	 the	Buddhas	 of	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future.	One	Buddha	 is	 a
door	to	all	the	Buddhas.	You	can	call	the	Buddhas	the	Christs	or	the	Krishnas;	it
doesn't	 make	 any	 difference.	 These	 are	 different	 names	 given	 by	 different
traditions.
So	 the	 first	 refuge	 is	 in	 this	 Buddha	who	 is	 just	 in	 front	 of	 you.	 The	 second
refuge	 is	 in	all	 the	Buddhas,	 the	sangha,	 the	commune	of	 the	Buddhas	 --	past,
present,	future.	And	the	third	refuge	is	in	the	Dhamma	--	that	essential	being	that
makes	a	man	a	Buddha.	That	art	of	awakening	is	Dhamma,	the	religion.
AT	THAT	TIME	THE	VENERABLE	SUBHUTI
CAME	TO	THAT	ASSEMBLY	AND	SAT	DOWN.
One	of	the	great	disciples	of	Buddha	is	Subhuti.	THEN	HE	ROSE	FROM	HIS
SEAT,	says	Ananda	--	and	again	he	repeats	the	whole	thing.	Because	Subhuti	is
also	 no	 ordinary	 man.	 He	 is	 almost	 a	 Buddha,	 just	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 it.	 Any
moment	he	is	going	to	become	a	Buddha.	So	Ananda	repeats	again:
THEN	HE	ROSE	FROM	HIS	SEAT,
PUT	HIS	UPPER	ROBE	OVER	ONE	SHOULDER,
PLACED	HIS	RIGHT	KNEE	ON	THE	GROUND,
BENT	FORTH	HIS	FOLDED	HANDS	TOWARDS
THE	LORD,	AND	SAID	TO	THE	LORD:
'IT	IS	WONDERFUL,	O	LORD,
IT	IS	EXCEEDINGLY	WONDERFUL,	O	WELL-GONE,
HOW	MUCH	THE	BODHISATTVAS,
THE	GREAT	BEINGS,	HAVE	BEEN	HELPED
WITH	THE	GREATEST	HELP	BY	THE	TATHAGATA.
HOW	THEN,	O	LORD,	SHOULD	ONE	WHO	HAS
SET	OUT	IN	THE	BODHISATTVA-VEHICLE,
STAND,	HOW	PROGRESS,
HOW	CONTROL	THE	THOUGHTS?'
Subhuti	is	almost	close	to	buddhahood.	He	is	a	bodhisattva.	Bodhisattva	means
one	who	is	ready	to	become	a	Buddha,	who	has	come	almost	close	to	it;	one	step
more	 and	he	will	 become	a	Buddha.	Bodhisattva	means	bodhi-essence,	 bodhi-
being:	 ready	 ninety-nine	 degrees	 --	 and	 on	 the	 hundredth	 degree	 he	 will
evaporate.	But	a	bodhisattva	is	one	who	tries	to	remain	a	little	longer	at	ninety-
nine	degrees	so	that	he	can	help	people	out	of	his	compassion,	because	once	he
has	jumped	the	hundred	degrees,	he	has	gone	beyond....
GATE	 GATE	 PARAGATE	 PARASAMGATE	 BODHISWAHA.	 Then	 he	 has
gone	and	gone	beyond	and	beyond.	Then	it	will	be	very	difficult	to	make	contact
with	the	people	who	live	on	this	shore.
The	greatest	help	is	possible	from	those	who	are	at	the	ninety-nine	degree	point.
Why?	--
because	 they	are	 still	not	enlightened.	They	know	 the	ways	of	 the	people	who
are	 unenlightened.	 They	 know	 the	 language	 of	 the	 people	 who	 are
unenlightened.	 They	 are	 yet	 with	 them,	 and	 yet	 in	 another	 sense	 ninety-nine
percent	they	have	gone	beyond.	That	one	percent	keeps	them	linked,	bridged.
So	a	bodhisattva	 is	one	who	is	close	 to	buddhahood	but	 is	 trying	 to	remain	on
this	shore	a	little	longer	so	that	he	can	help	people.	He	has	arrived;	he	would	like
to	share	his	arrival.
He	has	known;	he	would	like	to	share	what	he	has	known.	Others	are	stumbling
in	darkness;	he	would	like	to	share	his	light	with	them,	his	love	with	them.
Subhuti	is	a	bodhisattva.	Ananda	reports	about	him	also	in	the	same	way	as	he
reports	about	Buddha.
THEN	 HE	 ROSE	 FROM	HIS	 SEAT....	 Just	 imagine,	 visualize,	 a	 bodhisattva
arising.	He	 is	utter	awareness.	He	 is	not	 just	 rising	 like	a	robot.	Each	breath	 is
known,	fully	known.
Nothing	 passes	 unknown.	 He	 is	 watchful.	 What	 the	 Catholic	 tradition	 calls
recollectedness,	that	is	what	Buddhists	call	SAMMASATI	--	right	mindfulness.
Mindfulness	 or	 recollection,	 to	 be	 recollected,,	 to	 live	 recollectedly:
SAMMASATI	--	not	to	do	a	single	act	unconciously.
HE	ROSE	FROM	HIS	SEAT,
PUT	HIS	UPPER	ROBE	OVER	ONE	SHOULDER,
PLACED	HIS	RIGHT	KNEE	ON	THE	GROUND,
BENT	FORTH	HIS	FOLDED	HAND	TOWARDS
THE	LORD	AND	SAID	TO	THE	LORD...
And	 remember,	 even	 a	 bodhisattva,	 who	 has	 come	 very	 close	 to	 becoming	 a
Buddha,	bows	down	to	the	Buddha	in	utter	gratitude.
'IT	IS	WONDERFUL,	O	LORD,
IT	IS	EXCEEDINGLY	WONDERFUL,
O	WELL-GONE....'
Well-gone	means	one	who	has	gone	to	the	other	shore.	Subhuti	is	on	this	shore,
Buddha	is	on	that	shore.	Subhuti	has	come	to	that	understanding:	he	can	see	the
other	shore,	he	can	see	Buddha	on	the	other	shore.	'O	Well-gone...'
This	 word	 'well-gone'	 has	 many	 meanings.	 One:	 one	 who	 has	 reached	 to	 the
other	shore.
Another	one	who	has	reached	to	the	ultimate	of	meditation.	Buddha	has	said	that
there	 are	 eight	 steps	 towards	ultimate	meditation.	One	who	has	 reached	 to	 the
eighth	is	called
'well-gone'.	 But	 it	 is	 the	 same.	 One	 who	 has	 reached	 samadhi,	 the	 ultimate
samadhi,	he	has	gone	to	the	other	shore.	he	is	no	more	--	that	is	what	is	meant	by
'well-gone'.	Gone,	utterly	gone.	He	is	no	more,	he	is	just	an	emptiness.	The	self
has	disappeared,	evaporated.
'O	WELL-GONE,
IT	IS	WONDERFUL,
IT	IS	EXCEEDINGLY	WONDERFUL,
HOW	MUCH	THE	BODHISATTVAS,
THE	GREAT	BEINGS,
HAVE	BEEN	HELPED	WITH	THE	GREATEST	HELP
BY	THE	TATHAGATA.
TATHAGATA	is	the	Buddhist	word	which	means	well-gone.	Subhuti	says,	"How
much	help	has	been	given,	how	wonderful	it	is	--	it	is	exceedingly	wonderful,	it
is	unbelievable	how	much	you	have	given	to	us.	And	you	go	on	giving,	and	we
don't	even	deserve	it."
'...	WONDERFUL,	O	LORD,
IT	IS	EXCEEDINGLY	WONDERFUL,	O	WELL-GONE,
HOW	MUCH	THE	BODHISATTVAS,	THE	GREAT	BEINGS,
HAVE	BEEN	HELPED	BY	THE	TATHAGATA.
HOW	THEN,	O	LORD,	SHOULD	ONE
WHO	HAS	SET	OUT	IN	THE	BODHISATTVA-VEHICLE...
One	who	has	decided	to	remain	on	this	shore	a	little	longer	to	help	people.
...	HOW	SHOULD	HE	STAND,	HOW	PROGRESS,
HOW	CONTROL	THE	THOUGHTS?'
What	is	he	asking?	He	is	asking	a	question	which	may	not	be	relevant	to	many
of	you,	because	it	becomes	relevant	only	when	you	have	become	a	bodhisattva.
But	some	day,	some	day	or	other,	you	will	be	becoming	bodhisattvas.	Some	day
or	other	the	question	will	be	relevant.	It	is	better	to	think	about	it,	it	is	better	to
meditate	over	it.
He	says,	"Those	who	have	decided	to	be	bodhisattvas,	how	should	they	stand?"
He	is	saying,	"The	attraction	of	the	other	shore	is	so	much,	the	pull	of	the	other
shore	is	so	much	--	how	should	they	stand	on	this	shore?	We	would	like	to	help
people,	but	how?
The	pull	is	such,	the	magnetic	pull	is	such	--	the	other	shore	is	calling.	So	teach
us	how	we	can	stand	here,	how	we	can	become	again	rooted	on	this	shore.	We
have	 become	 uprooted;	 in	 this	 world	 we	 don't	 have	 any	 roots.	 Ninety-nine
percent	of	the	roots	are	gone."
Just	think	of	a	tree	--	ninety-nine	percent	of	the	roots	are	gone;	only	one	percent
of	the	roots	are	there.	The	tree	is	asking,	"How	should	I	stand	now?	I	am	going
to	fall,	and	I	understand	that	if	I	can	stay	a	little	longer	I	will	be	of	immense	help
to	people,	and	they	need	it.	I	was	in	need	--	you	helped	me.	Now,	others	are	in
need	 --	 I	 should	help."	That	 is	 the	only	way	a	disciple	can	pay	his	debt	 to	 the
master.	There	is	no	other	way.	The	master	has	helped	you;	the	master	needs	no
help	--	how	to	pay	the	debt?	what	to	do?	The	only	thing	to	do	is	help	somebody
who	is	still	stumbling,	groping	in	the	dark.	Do	whatsoever	the	master	has	done
for	you	to	others,	and	you	have	paid	your	debt.
He	asked	"How	to	stand?"	--	it	is	difficult,	it	is	almost	impossible	--	and	"How	to
progress,	how	to	start	helping	people?"	--	because	that	too	is	difficult.	Now	we
understand	their	miseries	are	all	false.	Now	we	understand	that	they	are	suffering
just	nightmares;	their	miseries	are	not	true.	Now	we	know	they	are	afraid	only	of
a	rope,	thinking	that	it	is	a	snake.	Now	it	is	very	difficult	to	help	these	people.	It
is	ridiculous.
And	we	 know	 that	 they	 need	 help,	 because	we	 know	 our	 own	 past.	We	were
trembling,	 crying,	 screaming.	We	know	how	much	we	have	 suffered,	 although
now	we	 know	 that	 all	 suffering	was	 just	 like	 a	 dream,	 it	 was	 illusory;	 it	 was
maya."
Just	think,	if	you	know	that	the	other	person	is	just	talking	nonsense,	that	he	has
no	wounds....	Once	a	man	was	brought	to	me.	He	had	got	the	idea	somehow	that
two	flies	had	entered	into	his	stomach	--	because	he	sleeps	with	an	open	mouth.
And	 the	 flies	kept	on	 revolving	 in	his	stomach.	Naturally,	 if	 they	have	entered
they	will	revolve.	He	was	continuously	worried	and	he	was	not	even	able	to	sit
in	one	posture.	He	would	move	 to	 this	 side	 and	 that	 and	he	would	 say,	 "They
have	 gone	 to	 this	 side,	 and	 now	 they	 have	 gone	 to	 that	 side."	He	was	 almost
mad.
Now,	he	had	been	 to	all	 the	doctors	and	nobody	was	of	any	help,	and	 they	all
laughed;	they	said,	"You	are	just	imagining."	But	just	to	say	to	a	person	that	he	is
imagining	 his	misery	 is	 not	 of	much	 help,	 because	 he	 is	 suffering.	 It	may	 be
imaginary	 to	 you,	 but	 to	 him	 it	 makes	 no	 difference	 whether	 the	 suffering	 is
imaginary	 or	 real;	 he	 is	 suffering	 all	 the	 same.	 What	 you	 call	 it	 makes	 no
difference.
I	touched	his	stomach	and	then	said,	"Yes,	they	are	there."	He	was	very	happy.
He	touched	my	feet,	he	said,	"You	are	the	only	man.	I	have	been	to	many	doctors
and	physicians	--	ayurveydic	and	allopathic	and	homeopathic	--	and	they	are	all
fools!	And	they	go	on	insisting	on	one	thing.	I	tell	them,	If	you	don't	have	any
medicine	 simply	 say	 that	you	don't	have	any	medicine,	but	why	do	you	go	on
saying	that	I	am	imagining?
Now	here	you	are.	Can't	you	see?"
I	said,	"I	can	see	perfectly	--	they	are	there.	I	deal	in	such	problems."	I	said,	"You
have	come	to	the	right	person.	This	is	my	whole	work	--	I	deal	in	such	problems
which	don't	exist	really.	I	am	an	expert	in	dealing	with	problems	which	are	not."
I	said,	"You	just	lie	down	and	close	your	eyes.	I	will	have	to	blindfold	you,	and	I
will	 take	 them	 out.	 And	 you	 open	 your	 mouth	 and	 I	 will	 call	 them.	 A	 great
mantra	is	needed."
He	was	very	happy.	He	said,	"This	is	how	it	should	be	done."	I	blindfolded	him,
told	him	to	open	his	mouth,	and	he	was	lying	there,	very	happy,	waiting	for	the
flies	to	come	out.
And	 I	 rushed	 into	 the	 house	 to	 find	 two	 flies.	 It	 was	 difficult	 because	 I	 have
never	caught	 flies	before,	but	somehow	I	managed	 it,	and	when	he	opened	his
eyes	and	saw	those	two	flies	in	the	bottle	he	said,	"Now	give	this	bottle	to	me.	I
will	go	to	those	fools."	And	he	was	perfectly	okay.	But	it	is	very	difficult	to	help
such	people,	very	difficult,	because	you	know	that	their	difficulty	is	all	false.
Subhuti	 is	 asking,	 "Lord,	 first	 tell	 us	how	 to	 stand	here,	because	our	 roots	 are
gone,	we	don't	belong	to	this	world	any	more.	Our	attachments	are	gone	--	they
are	the	roots.	And	how	to	progress,	to	work?	--	because	we	now	know	that	this	is
all	 just	 nonsense;	 people	 are	 imagining	 all	 their	miseries.	And	 how	 to	 control
thoughts?"
What	does	he	mean?	Because	a	bodhisattva	has	no	thoughts	ordinarily	--	not	the
thoughts	that	you	have.	Now	there	is	only	one	thought,	and	that	thought	is	of	the
other	shore...	and	the	other	shore	continuously	pulls.	The	door	is	open,	you	can
enter	into	utter	bliss,	and	you	are	holding	yourself	at	the	door	--	and	the	door	is
open.
First	 you	were	 searching	 for	many	 lives	 for	where	 the	 door	 is;	 then	 you	were
knocking	 and	 knocking	 for	many	 lives	 --	 now	 the	 door	 is	 open.	And	Buddha
says,	 "You	wait,	you	 remain	outside	 the	door.	There	are	many	who	have	 to	be
helped."	Naturally	 a	 great	 desire	 to	 enter,	 a	 great	 passion	 to	 enter	 through	 the
door	will	arise.	That's	what	he	is	asking.
AFTER	THESE	WORDS
THE	LORD	SAID	TO	SUBHUTI:'THEREFORE,	SUBHUTI,	LISTEN	WELL
AND	ATTENTIVELY.	SOMEONE	WHO	HAS	SET	OUT
IN	THE	VEHICLE	OF	A	BODHISATTVA
SHOULD	PRODUCE	A	THOUGHT	IN	THIS	MANNER;'
It	 does	 not	 look	 very	 good	 in	 the	 English	 translation.	 The	 Sanskrit	 word	 is
CHITTOPAD.
One	should	create	such	a	mind,	such	a	decision;	one	should	create	such	a	great
decision,	determination	--	CHITTOPAD	--	in	this	manner:
'"AS	MANY	BEINGS	AS	THERE	ARE
IN	THE	UNIVERSE	OF	BEINGS,
COMPREHENDED	UNDER	THE	TERM	'BEINGS',
ALL	THESE	I	MUST	LEAD	TO	NIRVANA..."'
"Not	 one	 or	 two,	 Subhuti,	 not	 one	 or	 two,	 but	 all	 the	 beings	 --	men,	women,
animals,	birds,	trees,	rocks.	All	the	beings	in	the	world.	One	should	create	such	a
determination	that	'I	will	lead	all	of	them	into	Nirvana.'"
'...	INTO	THAT	REALM	OF	NIRVANA
WHICH	LEAVES	NOTHING	BEHIND.
AND	YET,	ALTHOUGH	INNUMERABLE	BEINGS
HAVE	THUS	BEEN	LED	TO	NIRVANA;
NO	BEING	AT	ALL	HAS	BEEN	LED	TO	NIRVANA.'
That	too	you	have	to	remember,	you	should	not	forget;	otherwise,	leading	others,
you	will	fall	into	ignorance	again.
All	the	beings	have	to	be	led	to	the	other	shore,	and	still	you	have	to	remember
that	 their	miseries	 are	 false,	 so	your	 remedies	 are	 also	 false.	And	you	have	 to
remember	that	they	have	no	selves;	neither	do	you	have	any	self.	So	don't	forget;
don't	think	that	you	are	helping	people,	that	you	are	a	great	helper,	this	and	that,
otherwise	you	will	fall	again.
Again	you	will	grow	roots	on	this	shore.
So	 two	 things	have	 to	be	 remembered.	You	have	 to	 remain	on	 this	 shore	with
great	determination,	otherwise	you	will	be	pulled	by	the	other;	and	yet	you	are
not	to	grow	roots,	again	otherwise	you	will	not	be	of	any	help.	You	will	destroy
yourself,	you	will	fall	into	the	dream	again.
'AND	WHY?
IF	IN	A	BODHISATTVA
THE	NOTION	OF	A	"BEING"	SHOULD	TAKE	PLACE,
HE	COULD	NOT	BE	CALLED	A	"BODHI-BEING".
AND	WHY?
HE	IS	NOT	TO	BE	CALLED	A	"BODHI-BEING"
IN	WHOM	THE	NOTION	OF	A	SELF
OR	OF	A	BEING	SHOULD	TAKE	PLACE,
OR	THE	NOTION	OF	A	LIVING	SOUL
OR	OF	A	PERSON.'
"So	you	have	to	remember,	Subhuti,	 two	things.	One,	 that	you	have	to	 lead	all
the	beings	to	the	other	shore,	and	still	you	have	to	remember	that	nobody	has	a
being	--	neither	you	nor	they.	All	egos	are	false	and	illusory.
"Go	on	remembering	this	and	go	on	with	great	determination.	Help	people	to	the
other	shore.	They	are	already	there;	you	just	have	to	make	them	alert	and	aware.
But	don't	get	lost,	don't	become	a	saviour	--	these	two	things."
And	again	and	again	Buddha	will	repeat	in	this	sutra	THE	VEHICLE	OF	THE
BODHISATTVA.	I	would	like	you	all	to	become	bodhisattvas.
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Love	Released
22	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712220
ShortTitle:
DIAMON02
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
66
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
OSHO,
IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 THAT	 THE	 NO-MIND	 EVOLVES	 QUITE	 NATURALLY
OUT	OF
THE	 MIND	 WITHOUT	 STRUGGLE	 AND	 ANGUISH,	 WITHOUT
EXPLODING,	HAMMERING,	CUTTING	AND	SUCH	WILD	ACTS?	IS	THE
VERY	 IDEA	OF	NO-MIND,	WHICH	 SEEMS	TO	BE	 IN	 THE	MIND	AND
YET	TRANSCENDING	THE
MIND,	 A	 SEEDLIKE	 FORM	 OF	 THE	 NO-MIND?	 IS	 IT	 HELPFUL	 TO
MEDITATE
ALONG	 THESE	 LINES	 OF	 MIND-TRANSCENDING	 CONCEPTS	 LIKE
ETERNITY,	NIRVANA,	DEATH?	MY	MIND	SEEMS	TO	EXPLODE	WHEN	I
DO.	IT	FEELS
LIKE	 I	 AM	 PUSHING	 OVER	 MY	 LIMIT	 AND	 I	 GET	 AFRAID	 OF
BECOMING
SCHIZOPHRENIC.
The	no-mind	cannot	arise	out	of	the	mind.	It	is	not	a	growth	of	the	mind,	it	is	not
in	continuity	with	the	mind;	it	is	discontinuous.	It	is	as	discontinuous	as	disease
is	with	health.	The	health	does	not	arise	out	of	 the	disease,	 it	arises	out	of	 the
removal	of	the	disease.	Disease	was	encroaching	the	space	and	was	not	allowing
the	health	to	bloom.
The	 disease	 has	 to	 be	 removed.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 rock	 blocking	 the	 path	 of	 a	 small
spring.	You	remove	the	rock	and	the	spring	starts	flowing.	It	does	not	arise	out	of
the	rock.	The	rock	was	blocking	it,	the	rock	was	a	block.	So	is	the	mind.	Mind	is
the	block	for	the	no-mind.
No-mind	simply	means	that	which	is	not	mind	at	all.	How	can	it	arise	out	of	the
mind?	If	it	arises	out	of	the	mind,	it	may	be	super-mind,	but	it	can't	be	no-mind.
That's	where	 I	differ	 from	Shree	Aurobindo.	He	 talks	about	 the	super-mind.	A
super-mind	 is	 the	 same	mind	more	 decorated,	more	 cultivated,	more	 cultured,
more	sophisticated,	more	strong,	more	integrated	--	but	all	the	time	the	same	old
mind.
Buddha	says	not	super-mind	but	no-mind;	not	super-soul	but	no	soul;	not	super-
individuality,	super-self,	but	no-self,	ANATTA.	That	is	where	Buddha	is	unique
and	his	understanding	the	deepest.	A	super-mind	is	a	growth,	a	no-mind	is	a	leap,
a	 jump.	The	no-mind	has	nothing	 to	do	with	 the	mind	at	all.	They	never	meet
even,	 they	never	encounter	each	other.	When	the	mind	is	 there,	 the	no-mind	 is
not	there.	When	the	no-mind	is	there,	the	mind	is	not	there.	They	don't	even	say
hello	to	each	other	--	they	can't.
The	presence	of	the	one	is	necessarily	the	absence	of	the	other.	So	remember	it.
That's	 why	 I	 say	 Shree	 Aurobindo	 never	 became	 enlightened.	 He	 remained
polishing	 the	mind.	He	was	 a	 great	mind,	 but	 to	 be	 a	 great	mind	 is	 not	 to	 be
enlightened.	So	is	Bertrand	Russell	a	great	mind.	But	to	be	a	great	mind	is	not	to
be	 enlightened.	 So	 is	 Friedrich	Nietzsche	 a	 great	mind	 --	 and	Aurobindo	 and
Nietzsche	have	many	similarities.
Nietzsche	 talks	 about	 the	 superman	 and	 Aurobindo	 also	 talks	 about	 the
superman.	But	 the	superman	will	be	a	projected	man.	A	superman	will	be	 this
man;	all	the	weaknesses	destroyed,	all	the	strengths	strengthened	--	but	this	man.
Bigger	than	this	man,	stronger	than	this	man,	higher	than	this	man,	but	still	on
the	same	wavelength,	the	same	ladder.
There	is	no	radical	change,	there	has	never	been	a	discontinuity.
No-mind	means	discontinuity	with	all	that	you	are.	YOU	have	to	die	for	no-mind
to	be.
So	 the	 first	 thing.	 You	 ask,	 "Is	 it	 possible	 that	 the	 no-mind	 evolves	 quite
naturally	out	of	the	mind?"	No.	It	is	not	an	evolution,	it	is	a	revolution.	The	mind
is	dropped	and	suddenly	you	find	 the	no-mind	 is	 there,	has	always	been	 there.
The	mind	was	clouding,	making	you	confused,	was	not	allowing	you	to	see	that
which	is.	So	it	is	not	an	evolution.
And	you	ask,	"Is	it	possible	without	struggle	and	anguish?"	It	has	nothing	to	do
with	struggle	and	anguish.	No-mind	has	nothing	to	do	with	struggle	and	anguish.
It	 does	 not	 come	 out	 of	 struggle	 and	 anguish.	 Anything	 that	 comes	 out	 of
struggle	and	anguish	will	carry	the	wounds.	Even	if	those	wounds	are	healed,	the
scars	will	be	carried.	It	will	be	again	a	continuity.
The	struggle	and	anguish	is	not	for	the	no-mind;	the	struggle	and	anguish	arises
because	 the	mind	 struggles	 to	 keep	 itself	 in	 power.	 The	 fight	 is	 given	 by	 the
mind.	 The	 mind	 does	 not	 want	 to	 go,	 the	 mind	 wants	 to	 stay.	 The	 mind	 has
become	so	powerful;	it	possesses	you.	It	says,	"No,	I	am	not	going	to	get	out.	I
am	going	to	stay	here."	The	whole	struggle	and	anguish	is	because	of	the	mind.
The	 no-mind	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 it.	And	 you	will	 have	 to	 go	 through	 this
anguish	and	struggle.	 If	you	don't	go	 through	 the	anguish	and	 the	struggle,	 the
mind	is	not	going	to	leave	you.
And	 again	 let	me	 repeat,	 the	 no-mind	 is	 not	 born	 out	 of	 your	 struggle;	 out	 of
your	 struggle	only	 comes	 the	mind.	The	no-mind	 comes	without	 any	 struggle.
The	rock	gives	you	the	struggle.	It	does	not	want	to	move.	It	has	remained	in	that
spot	for	centuries,	for	millennia	--	who	are	you	to	remove	it?	"And	about	what
spring	are	you	talking?	There	is	none.	I	have	been	here	for	centuries	and	I	know
--	there	is	none.	Forget	all	about	it!"	But	you	want	to	remove	the	rock.	The	rock
is	heavy,	the	rock	is	rooted	in	the	earth.	It	has	remained	there	for	so	long.	It	has
attachments;	it	does	not	want	to	go.	And	it	knows	nothing	of	the	spring.	But	you
will	have	 to	 remove	 this	 rock.	Unless	 this	 rock	 is	 removed,	 the	spring	will	not
flow.
You	ask:	"without	exploding,	hammering,	cutting	and	such	wild	acts?"	The	no-
mind	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	acts.	But	the	mind	will	not	go.	You	will	have
to	hammer	and	cut	and	you	will	have	to	do	a	thousand	and	one	things.
"Is	the	very	idea	of	no-mind,	which	seems	to	be	in	the	mind	and	yet	transcending
the	mind,	a	seed-like	form	of	the	no-mind?"
No	--	there	is	no	seed	in	the	mind	of	the	no-mind.	The	mind	cannot	contain	even
the	seed	of	no-mind.	The	mind	has	no	space	to	contain	it.	No-mind	is	vast,	like
the	 sky.	 How	 can	 it	 be	 contained	 in	 a	 tiny	 thing,	 the	mind?	And	 the	mind	 is
already	 too	 full	 --	 full	 of	 thoughts,	 desires,	 fantasies,	 imaginations,	memories.
There	is	no	space.
In	 the	 first	place	 it	 is	very	 tiny	 --	 it	cannot	contain	 the	no-mind.	 In	 the	second
place	 it	 is	 so	 full,	 overcrowded,	 so	 noisy.	 The	 no-mind	 is	 silent,	 the	 mind	 is
noisy.	The	mind	cannot	contain	it;	the	mind	has	to	cease.	In	that	cessation	is	the
beginning	of	a	new	life,	a	new	being,	a	new	world.
Is	 it	 helpful,	 you	 ask,	 to	 meditate	 along	 these	 lines	 of	 mind-transcending
concepts	like	eternity,	nirvana,	death?
Those	 so-called	 mind-transcending	 concepts	 are	 still	 concepts	 and	 are	 of	 the
mind.	 When	 you	 are	 thinking	 of	 eternity,	 what	 will	 you	 do?	 You	 will	 think.
When	you	are	thinking	of	nirvana,	what	is	going	to	happen?	Your	mind	will	spin
and	weave,	and	your	mind	will	give	you	beautiful	ideas	about	nirvana	--	but	that
will	be	all	mind	work.	What	can	you	think	about	death?	What	will	you	think	if
you	think	about	death?	You	don't	know.	How	can	you	think	anything	about	that
which	you	don't	know?
Mind	 is	 perfectly	 capable	 in	 repeating	 the	 known;	 with	 the	 unknown	 it	 is
impotent.	You	 don't	 know	 eternity,	 all	 that	 you	 know	 is	 time.	Even	when	 you
think	of	eternity	it	is	nothing	but	lengthened	time,	stretched	time	--	but	it	is	time.
What	do	you	know	about	nirvana?	--	all	that	you	have	heard	about	it,	read	about
it.	 That	 is	 not	 nirvana.	 The	 word	 nirvana	 is	 not	 nirvana,	 and	 the	 concept	 of
nirvana	is	not	nirvana.	The	word	God	is	not	God,	and	all	the	pictures	and	all	the
statues	that	have	been	made	of	God	have	nothing	to	do	with	him	--	because	he
has	no	name	and	no	form.
And	what	are	you	going	to	think	about	death?	How	can	you	think	about	death?
You	have	heard	a	few	things,	you	have	seen	a	few	people	dying,	but	you	have
never	seen	death.
When	you	see	a	man	dying	what	do	you	see?	He	breathes	no	more;	that's	all	that
you	see.
His	body	has	become	cold;	that's	all	that	you	see.	What	more?	Is	this	death?	--
the	body	becoming	cold,	breathing	stopping?	is	this	all?	What	has	happened	to
the	innermost	core	of	the	person?	You	cannot	know	without	dying.	You	cannot
know	without	experiencing.
The	only	way	to	know	the	unknown	is	to	experience	it.
So	 these	concepts	won't	help.	They	may	 rather,	on	 the	contrary,	 strengthen	 the
mind,	 because	 the	 mind	 will	 say,	 "Look,	 I	 can	 even	 supply	 you	 mind-
transcending	concepts.
See	 what	 I	 am	 doing	 for	 you.	 Keep	 me	 with	 you	 always.	 I	 will	 help	 you	 to
become	enlightened.	Without	me	you	will	be	nowhere.	Without	me	how	will	you
think	about	death	 and	nirvana	and	eternity?	 I	 am	absolutely	 essential.	Without
me	you	will	not	be	anything	at	all."
No,	these	meditations	won't	help.	You	have	to	see	it	--	that	the	mind	is	not	going
to	help	at	all.	When	you	see	the	point	that	mind	is	not	going	to	help	at	all,	in	that
very	helplessness,	in	that	very	state,	there	is	silence;	all	stops.	If	the	mind	cannot
do	anything,	 then	nothing	is	 left	 to	do.	Suddenly	all	 thinking	is	paralyzed;	 it	 is
pointless.	 In	 that	 paralysis	 you	will	 have	 the	 first	 glimpse	 of	 no-mind...	 just	 a
small	window	will	open.	In	that	stopping	of	the	mind	you	will	have	a	taste	of	no-
mind.	And	then	things	will	start	moving.	Then	it	will	be	easier	for	you	to	get	lost
into	the	boundariless-ness.
You	 cannot	 meditate,	 you	 have	 to	 go	 into	 it.	 Meditating	 upon	 it	 is	 a	 pseudo
activity;	 it	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 avoiding,	 escaping.	You	 are	 afraid	 of	 death,	 you	 think
about	death.	You	are	afraid	of	nirvana,	you	think	about	nirvana.	Thinking	gives
you	the	feeling	that	you	are	capable	even	of	thinking	about	death	and	nirvana.
My	mind	seems	to	explode	when	I	do.
Mind	is	very	cunning.	It	must	be	deceiving	you	--	because	mind	cannot	explode
while	you	are	thinking.	About	what	you	are	thinking	does	not	matter;	while	you
are	 thinking,	mind	 cannot	 explode.	Mind	will	 be	 enjoying	 it,	 and	 in	 that	 very
enjoyment	you	are	thinking	you	are	exploding.
It	 feels	 like	 I	 am	 pushing	 over	 my	 limit	 and	 I	 get	 afraid	 of	 becoming
schizophrenic.
Dinesh,	 you	 need	 not	 be	 afraid	 of	 ever	 becoming	 schizophrenic,	 because	 you
already	are	-
-	 everybody	 is.	Mind	 is	 schizophrenic,	 because	mind	 knows	 nothing	 of	 unity.
Mind	is	always	split.	Mind	always	has	alternatives.	To	be	or	not	to	be,	to	do	this
or	to	do	that.
Mind	is	always	indecisive.	Even	if	you	choose	something	it	is	only	a	part	of	the
mind	that	chooses	it,	the	other	part	remains	against	it.
The	mind	is	never	total,	so	mind	is	schizophrenic.	You	need	not	be	afraid	of	that.
To	be	in	the	mind	is	to	be	schizophrenic.	Only	Buddhas	are	beyond	it.	The	whole
humanity	is	schizophrenic,	more	or	less.	When	you	go	beyond	a	point	then	you
have	to	seek	and	search	for	the	psychiatrist,	but	the	difference	is	only	of	degrees;
the	 difference	 is	 only	 of	 quantity	 not	 quality.	 Even	 between	 you	 and	 your
psychoanalyst	there	is	only	a	difference	of	degrees.
Remember,	mind	will	not	help.	Mind	cannot	help,	mind	can	only	hinder.	Seeing
this,	no-mind	arrives.	It	is	not	that	you	bring	it;	it	arrives	on	its	own	accord.
The	second	question:
Question	2
IN	 YESTERDAY'S	 SUTRA,	 BUDDHA	 SAYS	 'SOMEONE	WHO	 HAS	 SET
OUT	IN
THE	VEHICLE	OF	A	 BODHISATTVA	 SHOULD	DECIDE	 THAT	 "I	MUST
LEAD
ALL	 THE	 BEINGS	 TO	 NIRVANA,	 INTO	 THAT	 REALM	 OF	 NIRVANA
WHICH
LEAVES	 NOTHING	 BEHIND."'	 OSHO,	 WHAT	 IS	 THIS	 REALM	 OF
NIRVANA	WHICH	LEAVES	NOTHING	BEHIND?
Buddha	 has	 talked	 about	 two	 kinds	 of	 nirvana.	 One	 he	 calls	 nirvana	 with
substratum.	The	tree	has	disappeared,	the	tree	of	desires.	The	foliage,	the	leaves,
the	flowers,	the	fruits	--
everything	has	disappeared.	But	the	roots	are	still	there	underground,	hidden	in
the	 dark	 soil.	 From	 the	 outside	 the	 tree	 has	 been	 removed,	 but	 the	 tree	 is	 still
capable	of	renewing	itself	again.	The	substratum	is	still	 there,	 the	seed	has	not
been	burnt	yet.	This	he	calls
'nirvana	with	substratum.
This	is	exactly	the	same	that	Patanjali	calls	SABEEJ	SAMADHI	--	samadhi	with
seed.	It	is	very	difficult	from	the	outside.	The	tree	has	been	completely	removed,
but	underneath	the	soil	the	roots	are	still	alive,	waiting	for	the	right	moment	to
sprout	 again.	Rains	will	 come	and	 they	will	 sprout.	They	 are	waiting	 for	 their
season,	for	the	moment	again	to	assert.
This	 is	 the	 state	 when	 many	 times	 you	 have	 come	 to	 the	 point	 where	 mind
disappears,	 no-mind	 is	 felt,	 but	 again	mind	 comes	 back,	 again	 it	 sprouts.	You
reach	to	a	peak.	That	moment	of	that	peak	experience,	you	think	all	is	finished,
now	you	will	never	be	falling	back	to	the	valley	of	darkness.	You	think	that	you
will	never	go	back	into	those	ugly	and	miserable	days,	that	the	dark	night	of	the
soul	is	over,	that	the	morning	has	arrived,	that	the	sun	has	arisen.
But	again	one	day	you	suddenly	find	you	are	slipping	back	into	the	darkness	--
again	 the	 valley,	 again	 light	 is	 no	 more,	 again	 that	 peak	 experience	 is	 just	 a
memory.	 And	 one	 starts	 becoming	 doubtful	 whether	 it	 has	 happened	 or	 not.
"Have	 I	been	 just	 imagining?	Or	maybe	 I	was	 just	dreaming."	 ...	Because	 if	 it
had	happened	then	where	has	it	gone?
Where	is	that	sunlit	peak?	Where	are	those	moments	of	ecstasy?	And	misery	is
back	and	anger	is	back	and	agony	is	back	--	you	have	fallen	into	hell	again.	This
happens	many	times.
This	Buddha	calls	nirvana	with	substratum;	sabeej	samadhi	in	Patanjali's	words.
Manifestation	of	the	world	is	gone	but	the	unmanifested	seed	remains.
The	second	nirvana	Buddha	calls	 the	nirvana	without	substratum.	In	Patanjali's
words	 NIRBEEJ	 SAMADHI	 --	 seedless	 samadhi.	 Not	 only	 the	 tree	 has	 been
destroyed,	 but	 the	 seed	 also	 burned.	 A	 burned	 seed	 cannot	 sprout	 again,	 all
substratum	is	gone.	Then	you	remain	on	the	peak	forever,	then	there	is	no	falling
back.
That's	 what	 Buddha	 says	 in	 yesterday's	 sutra:	 'SOMEONE	 WHO	 HAS	 SET
OUT	IN
THE	VEHICLE	OF	A	 BODHISATTVA	 SHOULD	DECIDE	 THAT	 "I	MUST
LEAD
ALL	 THE	 BEINGS	 INTO	 NIRVANA,	 INTO	 THAT	 REALM	OF	 NIRVANA
WHICH
LEAVES	 NOTHING	 BEHIND..."'	 which	 leaves	 no	 substratum,	 no	 roots,	 no
seeds	behind.
The	third	question:
Question	3
OSHO,
WHAT	 IS	 THE	 ZEN	 APPROACH	 TOWARDS	 SEX?	 THE	 ZEN	 PEOPLE
SEEM	TO
HAVE	A	NEUTER	GENDER,	OR	ASEXUAL	AURA	ABOUT	THEM.
Zen	has	no	attitudes	about	sex,	and	that	is	the	beauty	of	Zen.	To	have	an	attitude
means	you	are	still	obsessed	this	way	or	that.	Somebody	is	against	sex	--	he	has
an	attitude;	and	somebody	is	for	sex	--	he	has	an	attitude.	And	for	and	against	go
together	 like	 two	 wheels	 of	 a	 bullock	 cart.	 They	 are	 not	 enemies,	 they	 are
friends,	partners	in	the	same	business.
Zen	 has	 no	 attitude	 about	 sex.	Why	 should	 one	 have	 any	 attitude	 about	 sex?
That's	the	beauty	of	it	--	Zen	is	utterly	natural.	Do	you	have	any	attitudes	about
drinking	water?	Do	you	have	any	attitudes	about	taking	food?	Do	you	have	any
attitudes	about	going	to	sleep	in	the	night?	No	attitudes.
I	know	there	are	mad	people	who	have	attitudes	about	these	things	too:	that	one
should	not	sleep	more	 than	five	hours.	Sleep	 is	a	kind	of	sin,	something	 like	a
necessary	evil,	so	one	should	not	sleep	more	than	five	hours;	or	in	India	there	are
people	who	think	only	three	hours.	And	I	have	come	across	one	person	who	has
not	slept	for	ten	years.	And	he	is	worshipped	for	this	only;	he	has	nothing	else,
no	 other	 creative	 talents.	 It	 is	 his	 only	 talent.	Maybe	 he	 is	 just	 an	 insomniac.
Maybe	even	this	is	not	a	talent,	maybe	he	cannot	sleep.
He	 has	 gone	 so	 neurotic	 that	 he	 cannot	 relax,	 and	 he	 looks	 mad.	 One	 will
become	mad	if	for	ten	years	one	has	not	slept.	And	people	come,	crowds	come,
to	worship	him.	He	has	attained	something	great.	What	has	he	attained?	What	is
the	attainment	there?	He	is	just	an	abnormal	person,	ill.	To	sleep	is	natural.	And
he	is	bound	to	be	very	tense	--	he	is	tense.	He	must	be	boiling	within.	Just	think,
for	ten	years	not	sleeping!	But	now	it	has	become	a	great	investment,	now	it	is
paying.	 His	 madness	 has	 become	 an	 invest-ment,	 now	 thousands	 of	 people
worship	him	--	only	for	this?
Down	 the	ages	 this	has	been	one	of	 the	greatest	calamities	 --	 that	people	have
been	 worshipping	 uncreative	 things,	 and	 sometimes	 pathological	 things.	 Then
you	have	an	attitude	about	 sleep.	There	are	people	who	have	an	attitude	about
food.	To	eat	 this	or	 to	 eat	 that;	 to	 eat	only	 so	much,	not	more	 than	 that.	They
don't	listen	to	the	body,	to	whether	the	body	is	hungry	or	not.	They	have	a	certain
idea	and	they	impose	the	idea	on	nature.
Zen	 has	 no	 attitudes	 about	 sex.	 Zen	 is	 very	 simple,	 Zen	 is	 innocent.	 Zen	 is
childlike.	It	says	there	is	no	need	to	have	any	attitudes.	Why?	Do	you	have	any
attitude	about	sneezing?	--	to	sneeze	or	not,	whether	it	is	sin	or	virtue.	You	don't
have	any	attitude.	But	I	have	come	across	one	man	who	is	against	sneezing,	and
whenever	 he	 sneezes	 he	 immediately	 repeats	 a	 mantra	 to	 protect	 himself.	 He
belongs	 to	a	small	 foolish	sect.	That	sect	 thinks	 that	when	you	sneeze	 the	soul
goes	out.	In	the	sneeze	the	soul	goes	out,	and	if	you	don't	remember	God	it	may
not	come	back.	So	you	have	to	remember,	you	have	to	immediately	remember	so
that	the	soul	is	given	back.	If	you	die	while	sneezing	you	will	go	into	hell.
You	can	have	attitudes	about	anything.	Once	you	have	attitudes,	your	innocence
is	destroyed	and	those	attitudes	start	controlling	you.	Zen	is	neither	for	anything
nor	against	anything.	Zen	says	whatsoever	is	ordinary	is	good.	To	be	ordinary,	to
be	 a	 no	 one,	 to	 be	 a	 nothingness,	 to	 be	 without	 any	 ideology,	 to	 be	 without
character,	to	be	characterless....
When	you	have	 a	 character	you	have	 some	kind	of	neurosis.	Character	means
something	 has	 become	 fixed	 in	 you.	 Character	 means	 your	 past.	 Character
means	conditioning,	cultivation.	When	you	have	a	character	you	are	imprisoned
in	it,	you	are	no	more	free.
When	you	have	a	character	you	have	an	armor	around	yourself.	You	are	no	more
a	free	person.	You	are	carrying	your	prison	around	yourself;	 it	 is	a	very	subtle
prison.	A	real	man	will	be	characterless.
What	do	I	mean	when	I	say	he	will	be	characterless?	He	will	be	free	of	the	past.
He	will	 act	 in	 the	moment	 according	 to	 the	moment.	He	will	 be	 spontaneous;
only	he	can	be	spontaneous.	He	will	not	look	back	into	the	memories	for	what	to
do.	A	situation	has	arisen	and	you	are	looking	in	the	memory	--	then	you	have	a
character.	Then	you	are	asking	your	past,	"What	should	I	do?"	When	you	don't
have	any	character	you	simply	 look	into	 the	situation	and	 the	situation	decides
what	 has	 to	 be	 done.	 Then	 it	 is	 spontaneous	 and	 there	 is	 response	 and	 not
reaction.
Zen	has	no	belief-system	about	anything,	and	that	 includes	sex	too	--	Zen	says
nothing	 about	 it.	And	 that	 should	 be	 the	 ultimate	 thing.	Tantra	 has	 an	 attitude
about	sex.	The	reason?	--	it	tries	to	redress	what	the	society	has	done.	Tantra	is
medical.	The	society	has	 repressed	sex;	Tantra	comes	as	a	 remedy	 to	help	you
redress	balance.	You	have	leaned	too	much	to	 the	 left;	Tantra	comes	and	helps
you	to	lean	to	the	right.	And	to	redress	the	balance	sometimes	you	have	to	lean
too	much	to	the	right,	only	then	the	balance	is	gained.	Have	you	not	seen	a	rope
walker,	a	tightrope	walker?	He	carries	a	staff	in	his	hand	to	keep	balance.	If	he
feels	he	is	leaning	too	much	to	the	left,	he	immediately	starts	leaning	to	the	right.
Then	 again	 he	 feels	 that	 now	 he	 has	 leaned	 too	 much	 to	 the	 right,	 he	 starts
leaning	towards	the	left.	This	is	how	he	keeps	in	the	middle.	Tantra	is	a	remedy.
The	 society	 has	 created	 a	 repressive	 mind,	 a	 life-negative	 mind,	 an	 anti-joy
mind.	The	society	is	very	much	against	sex.	Why	is	the	society	so	much	against
sex?	--	because	if	you	allow	people	sexual	pleasure,	you	cannot	transform	them
into	slaves.	It	is	impossible
--	a	joyous	person	cannot	be	made	a	slave.	That	is	the	trick.	Only	sad	people	can
be	 turned	 into	 slaves.	 A	 joyous	 person	 is	 a	 free	 person;	 he	 has	 a	 kind	 of
independence	to	him.
You	 cannot	 recruit	 joyous	 people	 for	war.	 Impossible.	Why	 should	 they	 go	 to
war?	But	 if	a	person	has	repressed	his	sexuality	he	is	ready	to	go	to	war,	he	is
eager	 to	go	 to	war,	because	he	has	not	been	able	 to	enjoy	 life.	He	has	become
incapable	of	enjoying,	hence	has	become	incapable	of	creativity.	Now	he	can	do
only	 one	 thing	 --	 he	 can	 destroy.	 All	 his	 energies	 have	 become	 poison	 and
destructive.	He	is	ready	to	go	to	war	--	not	only	ready,	he	is	hankering	for	it.	He
wants	to	kill,	he	wants	to	destroy.
In	 fact,	 while	 destroying	 human	 beings	 he	 will	 have	 a	 vicarious	 joy	 of
penetrating.	 That	 penetrating	 could	 have	 been	 in	 love	 and	 would	 have	 been
beautiful.	 When	 you	 penetrate	 a	 woman's	 body	 in	 love,	 it	 is	 one	 thing.	 It	 is
spiritual.	But	when	things	go	wrong	and	you	penetrate	somebody's	body	with	a
sword,	 with	 a	 spear,	 it	 is	 ugly,	 it	 is	 violent,	 it	 is	 destructive.	 But	 you	 are
searching	for	a	substitute	for	penetration.
If	society	is	allowed	total	freedom	about	joy,	nobody	will	be	destructive.	People
who	 can	 love	 beautifully	 are	 never	 destructive.	 And	 people	 who	 can	 love
beautifully	and	have	the	joy	of	life	will	not	be	competitive	either.	These	are	the
problems.
That's	why	primitive	people	are	not	so	competitive.	They	are	enjoying	their	life.
Who	bothers	to	have	a	bigger	house?	Who	bothers	to	have	a	bigger	balance	in
the	bank?	For	what?	You	are	happy	with	your	woman	and	with	your	man	and
you	are	having	a	dance	of	life.	Who	wants	to	sit	in	the	marketplace	for	hours	and
hours	and	hours,	day	 in,	day	out,	year	 in,	year	out,	hoping	 that	 in	 the	end	you
will	have	a	big	bank	balance	and	then	you	will	retire	and	enjoy?	That	day	never
comes.	It	can't	come,	because	the	whole	life	you	remain	an	ascetic.
Remember,	 the	 business	 people	 are	 ascetic	 people.	 They	 have	 devoted
everything	 to	money.	Now	a	man	who	knows	love	and	has	known	the	 thrill	of
love	and	the	ecstasy	of	it	will	not	be	competitive.	He	will	be	happy	if	he	can	get
his	daily	bread.	That	is	the	meaning	of	Jesus'	prayer:	"Give	us	our	daily	bread."
That	 is	 more	 than	 enough.	 Now	 Jesus	 looks	 foolish.	 He	 should	 have	 asked,
"Give	us	a	bigger	bank	balance."	He	asks	only	for	the	daily	bread?	A	joyous	man
never	asks	for	more	than	that.	The	joy	is	so	fulfilling.
It	 is	only	unfulfilled	beings	who	are	competitive,	because	they	think	life	 is	not
here,	 it	 is	 there.	"I	have	 to	reach	 to	Delhi	and	become	the	president,"	or	 to	 the
White	House	and	become	this	or	that.	"I	have	to	go	there,	joy	is	there"	--	because
they	know	here	there	is	no	joy.	So	they	are	always	on	the	go,	go,	go,	go.	They
are	always	on	the	go,	and	they	never	reach.	And	the	man	who	knows	the	joy,	is
here.	Why	should	he	be	going	to	Delhi?
For	what?	He	 is	 utterly	 happy	 herenow.	His	 needs	 are	 very	 small.	 He	 has	 no
desires.	He	 has	 needs	 certainly,	 but	 no	 desires.	Needs	 can	 be	 fulfilled,	 desires
never.	Needs	are	natural,	desires	are	perverted.
Now	 this	 whole	 society	 depends	 on	 one	 thing	 and	 that	 is	 sex	 repression.
Otherwise	 the	 economy	will	 be	 destroyed,	 sabotaged.	War	 will	 disappear	 and
with	it	the	whole	war	machinery,	and	the	politics	will	become	meaningless	and
the	politician	will	no	longer	be	important.	Money	will	not	have	value	if	people
are	allowed	to	 love.	Because	they	are	not	allowed	to	 love,	money	becomes	the
substitute,	money	becomes	their	love.	So	there	is	a	subtle	strategy.	Sex	has	to	be
repressed,	otherwise	this	whole	structure	of	the	society	will	fall	immediately.
Only	love	released	into	the	world	will	bring	revolution.	communism	has	failed,
fascism	 has	 failed,	 capitalism	 has	 failed.	 All	 'isms'	 have	 failed	 because	 deep
down	 they	 are	 all	 sex	 repressive.	 On	 that	 point	 there	 is	 no	 difference	 --	 no
difference	 between	Washington	 aud	Moscow,	Beijing	 and	Delhi	 --	 there	 is	 no
difference	at	all.	They	all	agree	upon	one	thing	-
-	that	sex	has	to	be	controlled,	that	people	are	not	to	be	allowed	to	have	innocent
joy	in	sex.
To	redress	 the	balance	comes	Tantra;	Tantra	 is	a	 remedy.	So	 it	emphasizes	sex
too	much.
The	 so-called	 religions	 say	 sex	 is	 sin	 and	 Tantra	 says	 sex	 is	 the	 only	 sacred
phenomenon.
Tantra	 is	 a	 remedy.	Zen	 is	 not	 a	 remedy.	Zen	 is	 the	 state	when	 the	 illness	has
disappeared;	and	of	course,	with	the	illness,	the	remedy	too.	Once	you	are	cured
of	your	 illness	you	don't	go	on	carrying	 the	prescription	and	 the	bottle	and	 the
medicine	with	you.
You	throw	it.	It	goes	to	the	dustbin.
Ordinary	society	is	against	sex;	Tantra	comes	to	help	humanity,	to	give	sex	back
to	humanity.	And	when	the	sex	has	been	given	back,	then	arises	Zen.	Zen	has	no
attitude.
Zen	is	pure	health.
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
OSHO,
IS	EVERYTHING	IN	THE	WORLD	OKAY?	AND	WHAT	HAS	THAT	TO	DO
WITH
LOVE?	WHEN	YOU	SAY	THE	WORLD	 IS	OKAY	 IT	SOUNDS	OKAY	TO
ME.	IF
ANYBODY	ELSE	SAYS	SO,	OR	IF	I	SAY	SO,	IT	SOUNDS	WRONG.
It	 depends	 on	 who	 is	 saying	 it.	 When	 I	 say	 the	 world	 is	 okay,	 I	 am	 not
propounding	a	theory,	I	am	sharing	a	vision.	In	fact,	the	word	theory	comes	from
a	Greek	root	THEORIA,	and	theoria	means	vision.	When	I	am	saying	anything
to	you,	it	is	not	mind	stuff;	I	am	sharing	my	experience.	In	those	moments,	if	you
are	available	to	me	and	open	to	me,	you	will	also	have	the	vision;	a	little	bit	of
my	vision	will	spill	into	your	being.	For	the	moment	the	doors	will	open	and	you
will	say,	"Yes,	this	is	so."
When	somebody	else	is	saying	it,	and	if	it	is	not	his	vision....	Even	when	you	say
to	somebody	and	it	is	no	more	your	vision	--	it	was	just	a	borrowed	eyesight	--	it
will	not	sound	right.	If	a	man	like	Buddha	even	tells	a	lie,	it	will	sound	like	truth.
And	if	you	tell	even	a	truth,	it	will	sound	like	a	lie.
It	 depends	more	 from	where	 it	 comes,	 the	 source;	 not	what	 you	 say,	 but	who
says.	You	can	go	on	repeating	Christ's	words	and	nobody	is	going	to	crucify	you.
Why?	Why	don't	 they	crucify	you?	You	can	declaim	the	whole	Sermon	on	 the
Mount	and	you	can	go	on	standing.	And	that's	what	people	are	doing	all	over	the
world	--	Christian	priests,	and	missionaries	and	Witnesses	of	Jehovah,	mm?	All
kinds	of	people	are	doing	that	--
carrying	 the	New	Testament,	quoting	 the	New	Testament,	 repeating	 the	words,
and	 nobody	 crucifies	 them.	Why?	When	 Jesus	 said	 these	 things	what	was	 the
matter?	The	words	had	fire	then.	Jesus	was	sharing	his	vision.	When	you	repeat,
there	is	no	vision	in	it;	it	is	a	mere	word.	It	has	no	passion,	no	intensity,	no	truth.
Truth	comes	only	through	experience.
You	ask:	"IS	EVERYTHING	IN	THE	WORLD	OKAY?"	When	I	say	the	world
is	 okay,	what	 do	 I	 really	mean?	 I	mean	 this	 is	 the	 only	world	 and	 there	 is	 no
other	world.	You	don't	have	any	way	to	compare.	Okay	or	not	okay	is	irrelevant.
This	is	the	only	world	there	is;	there	is	no	other.	You	cannot	compare	whether	it
is	better	or	not	better.
Comparison	 is	 not	 possible.	 Comparison	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 there	 are	 two
worlds,	but	there	are	not.
So	when	I	say,	"All	is	okay,"	I	mean	there	is	no	point	in	comparing.	But	why	do
people	say	that	this	is	not	the	right	world?	They	have	created	an	utopia	in	their
mind	and	they	compare	with	the	utopia.	They	have	an	idea	of	how	things	should
be	and	then	nothing	seems	to	be	right,	because	things	are	not	like	their	utopian
idea.	If	you	think	man	should	have	four	eyes....	And	that	looks	very	logical;	two
for	the	back.	Two	eyes	don't	look	right
--	what	about	 the	back?	What	if	somebody	comes	from	the	back	and	hits	you?
God	has	missed	there...	 two	eyes	 in	 the	back.	Then	things	are	not	okay	--	man
has	only	two	eyes;	man	should	have	four.	Then	suddenly	man	is	not	okay.	And
man	is	the	same;	you	have	just	created	an	idea,	and	that	idea	condemns.
Man	should	live	more	than	seventy	years.	Why?	Once	you	say	that	man	should
live	seven	hundred	years	then	seventy	years	look	very	poor.	But	why?	What	will
you	be	doing	here	 for	 seven	hundred	years?	Don't	you	 think	seventy	years	are
enough	 to	 do	 harm?	 to	 destroy?	You	 need	 seven	 hundred	 years?	 Just	 think	 of
Adolf	Hitler	living	seven	hundred	years.
Once	you	have	an	idea,	a	goal,	then	things	become	different.	I	have	no	idea;	I	am
absolutely	non-utopian,	 I	am	absolutely	realistic.	 I	carry	no	 ideals	 in	my	mind.
Then	this	is	the	only	world;	roses	are	red	and	trees	are	green	and	people	are	this
way	--	the	way	they	are	--	and	it	is	absolutely	beautiful.
"IS	 EVERYTHING	 IN	THE	WORLD	OKAY?	AND	WHAT	HAS	THAT	TO
DO	WITH
LOVE?"
That	has	much	to	do	with	love.	If	the	world	is	okay,	only	then	you	can	love.	If
the	 world	 is	 not	 okay,	 you	 become	 a	 politician,	 you	 become	 political.	 The
politician	 depends	 on	 the	 idea	 that	 the	 world	 is	 not	 okay:	 he	 has	 to	 bring	 a
revolution,	he	has	to	change	things,	he	has	to	put	things	right,	he	has	to	improve
upon	God.	That	 is	 the	politician's	mind.	And	the	politician	has	no	 love,	he	has
only	condemnation,	because	he	has	judged.
The	 religious	mind	has	no	 judgment.	 Jesus	says,	"Judge	ye	not."	The	 religious
mind	has	no	judgment,	has	no	condemnation,	hence	he	can	love.	And	remember,
in	your	life	also,	you	can	love	only	when	you	don't	judge.	If	you	have	too	many
ideas	to	judge	with,	you	will	never	love.	You	will	go	on	imposing	your	ideas	on
whomsoever	becomes	a	victim	of	your	so-called	love.	You	will	go	on	imposing
your	ideas	on	him.	Even	if	a	child	is	born	to	you,	immediately	you	will	jump	on
him	and	start	manipulating,	managing,	improving.
And	you	will	destroy	the	being.	That's	how	everybody	has	been	destroyed	by	the
parents	and	by	the	society.
If	you	love	a	woman,	you	immediately	start	improving	how	she	should	be.	And
the	woman,	of	course,	is	a	great	improver.	If	you	become	a	victim	of	a	woman's
love,	 then	you	are	no	more.	Then	 she	will	 improve	you	 so	much	 that	 she	will
make	 something	 else	 out	 of	 you.	 After	 a	 few	 years	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to
recognize	who	you	are.	She	will	cut	and	prune	and	do	things	and	paint:	"Behave
this	way"	and	"Speak	this	way"	and	"Talk	this	way."
A	young	woman	fell	in	love	with	a	man.	The	woman	was	a	Catholic	and	the	man
was	 a	 Jew.	The	woman's	 family	was	 very	worried,	 and	 they	 said,	 "We	 cannot
allow	vou."	The	family	was	very	rich,	and	they	said,	"If	you	marry	this	man	then
you	will	not	inherit	anything."	And	she	was	the	only	child,	so	all	the	money	was
hers.
Now	this	was	too	much,	so	she	asked,	"What	should	I	do?"
So	they	said,	"First	convert	him,	let	him	become	a	Catholic	--	then....
"So	she	tried,	and	she	was	very	happy,	because	the	Jew	was	more	interested	in
the	money	than	in	the	woman,	so	he	was	very	willing.	A	Jew	is	a	Jew,	he	was
very	willing.	He	started	reading	The	Bible	and	started	going	to	the	church,	and
he	was	over-enthusiastic.
The	 woman	 was	 very	 happy	 --	 things	 were	 going	 perfectly	 well	 --	 and	 after
every	month	she	would	report	to	her	parents	that	things	are	going	perfectly	well.
Then	one	day	she	came	home	and	was	crying	and	weeping	and	the	father	asked,
"What	is	the	matter?	What	happened?'
She	had	gone	to	ask	the	man	to	get	married,	she	was	thinking	that	he	was	ready.
And	 she	 said	 to	 her	 father,	 "Yes,	 he	 is	 ready,	 but	 I	 have	 done	 too	 much
reformation,	I	have	reformed	him	too	much."
The	father	was	confused.	He	said,	"I	don't	understand.	What	do	you	mean?	Too
much?"
She	said,	"Yes,	now	he	wants	to	become	a	Catholic	monk.	I	have	overdone."
What	you	call	 love	 is	more	or	 less	 reforming	 the	other.	And	you	go	on	saying
that	you	want	to	reform	the	other	because	you	love.	This	is	absolutely	untrue.	If
you	love	you	never	reform	anybody.	Love	accepts.	Love	respects	the	other	as	he
is.
If	 the	world	 is	 okay	 as	 it	 is,	 only	 then	 can	 you	 love	 it.	 The	 revolutionary,	 the
politician	cannot	love	it;	only	the	religious	consciousness	can	love	it.	And	when
you	 love	 you	 come	 to	 know	 that	 it	 is	 even	more	 okay	 than	 you	 had	 thought
before.	 Then	 you	 love	more,	 and	 then	 you	 come	 to	 find	 that	 it	 is	 immensely
beautiful,	not	just	okay.	Then	more	love...	and	by	and	by	you	find	that	the	world
disappears	--	it	is	God	himself.
The	fifth	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	5
THE	FIRST	TIME	I	SAW	A	DEAD	HUMAN	BEING	WAS	WHEN	I	SAW	MY
DEAD
GRANDMOTHER.	 SHE	 LAY	 THERE	 AND	 LOOKED	 SO	 WHITE	 AND
PEACEFUL,	 SO	 SILENT	 AND	 HAPPY,	 OPEN	 AND	 CLOSED	 AT	 THE
SAME	TIME.	I	WAS
JEALOUS,	BUT	AT	THE	SAME	TIME	AFRAID.	 I	THOUGHT	SHE	MUST
BE	SO
LONELY.	I	COULD	NOT	REACH	HER	ANY	MORE.
WHEN	 I	 SAW	YOU,	 DEAR	OSHO,	 ON	 YOUR	 BIRTHDAY	DARSHAN,	 I
HAD
EXACTLY	 THE	 SAME	 FEELINGS.	 DID	 YOU	 NOT	 FEEL	 VERY	 VERY
LONELY
BETWEEN	 ALL	 THE	 NOISES,	 SHATTERINGS,	 MOVINGS?	 YOU	WERE
SO	FAR
AND	IN	HOLY	SILENCE	--	AS	NEVER	BEFORE	FOR	ME.
ARE	YOU	DEAD	AND	ALIVE	AT	THE	SAME	TIME?
The	question	is	from	Ma	Prem	Aranyo.
Death	is	beautiful,	as	beautiful	as	 life	--	 if	you	just	know	how	to	communicate
with	death.
It	is	beautiful	because	it	is	relaxation.	It	is	beautiful	because	the	person	has	fallen
back	 into	 the	source	of	existence	 --	 to	 relax,	 to	 rest,	 to	be	 ready	 to	come	back
again.
A	wave	rises	in	the	ocean,	then	falls	back	into	the	ocean,	then	rises	again.	It	will
have	 another	 day,	 it	 will	 be	 born	 again	 in	 some	 other	 form.	And	 then	 it	 falls
again	and	disappears.
Death	 is	 just	disappearing	 into	 the	source.	Death	 is	going	 to	 the	unmanifested.
Death	is	falling	asleep	into	God.	You	will	bloom	again.	You	will	again	see	the
sun	and	the	moon,	and	again	and	again	till	you	become	a	Buddha	--	till	you	are
capable	 of	 dying	 consciously,	 till	 you	 are	 capable	 of	 relaxing	 consciously,
knowingly,	into	God.	Then	there	is	no	coming	back.	That	is	utter	death,	 that	is
ultimate	 death.	 The	 ordinary	 death	 is	 a	 temporary	 death;	 you	 will	 be	 coming
back	again.	When	a	Buddha	dies,	he	dies	forever.
His	death	has	the	quality	of	eternity.	But	even	the	temporary	death	is	beautiful.
And	you	are	right,	Aranyo,	I	am	dead	and	alive	at	the	same	time.	As	a	person,	I
am	dead.
As	somebody,	I	am	dead.	As	nobody,	I	am	alive.
You	say:	"THE	FIRST	TIME	I	SAW	A	DEAD	HUMAN	BEING	WAS	WHEN	I
SAW
MY	DEAD	GRANDMOTHER.	SHE	LAY	THERE	AND	LOOKED	SO	WHITE
AND
PEACEFUL,	SO	SILENT,	SO	HAPPY,	OPEN	AND	CLOSED	AT	THE	SAME
TIME.	I	WAS	JEALOUS	BUT	AT	THE	SAME	TIME	AFRAID."
Remember,	that	may	be	your	relationship	with	me	too,	jealous	and	at	the	same
time	 afraid	 too.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 put	 your	 fear	 aside,	 because	 the	 fear	 can
prevent	you	--	can	prevent	you	from	enjoying	this	opportunity	that	is	available	to
you.	 It	 is	very	difficult	 to	 find	a	nobody;	you	have	found	one.	And	unless	you
also	become	a	nobody,	go	on	remembering	you	are	missing	the	opportunity.	Die
as	I	have	died,	and	then	you	will	be	alive	as	I	am	alive.
There	is	a	life	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	person.	There	is	a	life	which	has
nothing	to	do	with	any	self.	There	is	a	life	of	emptiness,	 innocent	and	virgin.	I
make	it	available	to	you.	Put	your	fears	aside,	come	closer	to	me.	Let	me	become
your	death	and	your	resurrection.
A	 Zen	 master,	 Bunon	 has	 said,	 "While	 living,	 be	 a	 dead	 man,	 be	 thoroughly
dead,	and	behave	as	you	like	and	all	is	well."
The	last	question:
Question	6
IS	KNOWLEDGE	ALWAYS	DANGEROUS?
Not	always.	And	knowledge	is	not	dangerous,	knowledgeability	is	dangerous.	To
know	about	facts	is	perfectly	good,	but	to	forget	the	mystery	of	life	is	dangerous.
So	knowledge	is	not	always	dangerous;	sometimes	it	can	be	of	great	help	too.
A	little	anecdote:
Irish	Paddy's	wife	Maureen	had	been	rushed	to	the	hospital	that	morning.	Nine
months	 pregnant	 and	 now	 in	 labor,	 she	 gives	 birth	 to	 two	 beautiful	 twin
daughters.
Irish	Paddy,	after	a	day's	work	laboring	with	rubble	on	the	building	site,	marched
up	 to	 the	 hospital	 in	 the	 cool	 of	 an	 autumn	 evening	 to	 visit	 his	 wife	 in	 the
maternity	ward.
"Oh,	hello,	little	sweet	darling,"	he	cooed	to	his	Maureen,	as	he	approached	the
bed	 with	 a	 glint	 of	 curiosity	 in	 his	 right	 eye,	 as	 he	 observed	 two	 tiny	 babies
arriving	by	the	bed,	hand	in	hand	with	a	nurse.
"I	have	had	twins,	me	luv,"	said	Maureen.	And	for	 ten	long	minutes	Paddy	sat
bemused	by	that	bed,	not	knowing	how	to	work	it	out.
The	ward	bell	rang,	Paddy	kissed	his	wife	and	left.	"By	Christ!"	he	muttered,	as
he	walked	the	long	corridor,	"If	I	find	the	other	bugger	I	will	kill	him."
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	The	Wheel	of	Dhamma
23	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712230
ShortTitle:
DIAMON03
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
67
mins
VAJRACHCHEDIKA
PRAJNAPARAMITA
SUTRA
OF
GAUTAMA	THE	BUDDHA
'BECAUSE	A	BODHISATTVA
WHO	GIVES	A	GIFT
SHOULD	NOT	BE	SUPPORTED	BY	A	THING,
NOR	SHOULD	HE	BE	SUPPORTED	ANYWHERE.'
'THE	GREAT	BEING	SHOULD	GIVE	GIFTS
IN	SUCH	A	WAY
THAT	HE	IS	NOT	SUPPORTED	BY	THE	NOTION	OF	A	SIGN.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	THE	HEAP	OF	MERIT	OF	THAT	BODHI-BEING,
WHO	UNSUPPORTED	GIVES	A	GIFT,
IS	NOT	EASY	TO	MEASURE.'
THE	LORD	CONTINUED:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,	CAN	THE	TATHAGATA
BE	SEEN	BY	THE	POSSESSION	OF	HIS	MARKS?'
SUBHUTI	REPLIED:
'NO	INDEED,	O	LORD.	AND	WHY?
WHAT	HAS	BEEN	TAUGHT	BY	THE	TATHAGATA
AS	THE	POSSESSION	OF	MARKS,
THAT	IS	TRULY	A	NO-POSSESSION	OF	NO-MARKS.'
THE	LORD	SAID:
WHEREVER	THERE	IS	POSSESSION	OF	MARKS,
THERE	IS	FRAUD;
WHEREVER	THERE	IS	NO-POSSESSION	OF	NO-MARKS,
THERE	IS	NO	FRAUD.
HENCE	THE	TATHAGATA	IS	TO	BE	SEEN
FROM	NO-MARKS	AS	MARKS.'
SUBHUTI	ASKED:
'WILL	THERE	BE	ANY	BEINGS	IN	THE	FUTURE	PERIOD,	IN	THE	LAST
TIME,	IN	THE	LAST	EPOCH,	IN	THE	LAST	FIVE	HUNDRED	YEARS,	AT
THE	TIME	OF
THE	 COLLAPSE	 OF	 THE	 GOOD	 DOCTRINE	 WHO,	 WHEN	 THESE
WORDS	OF
THE	SUTRA	ARE	BEING	TAUGHT,	WILL	UNDERSTAND	THEIR	TRUTH?'
THE	LORD	REPLIED:
'DO	NOT	SPEAK	THUS,	SUBHUTI!
YES,	 EVEN	 THEN	 THERE	 WILL	 BE	 BEINGS	 WHO,	 WHEN	 THESE
WORDS	OF
THE	SUTRA	ARE	BEING	TAUGHT,	WILL	UNDERSTAND	THEIR	TRUTH.
FOR
EVEN	AT	THAT	TIME,	SUBHUTI,	THERE	WILL	BE	BODHISATTVAS.
AND	THESE	BODHISATTVAS,	SUBHUTI,	WILL	NOT	BE	SUCH	AS	HAVE
HONORED	 ONLY	 ONE	 SINGLE	 BUDDHA,	 NOR	 SUCH	 AS	 HAVE
PLANTED
THEIR	ROOTS	OF	MERIT	UNDER	ONE	SINGLE	BUDDHA	ONLY.
ON	THE	CONTRARY,	SUBHUTI,	THOSE	BODHISATTVAS	WHO,	WHEN
THESE
WORDS	OF	THE	SUTRA	ARE	BEING	TAUGHT,	WILL	FIND	EVEN	ONE
SINGLE
THOUGHT	OF	SERENE	FAITH,	BE	SUCH	AS	HAVE	HONORED	MANY
HUNDREDS	OF	THOUSANDS	OF	BUDDHAS,	SUCH	AS	HAVE	PLANTED
THEIR
ROOTS	 OF	 MERIT	 UNDER	 MANY	 HUNDREDS	 OF	 THOUSANDS	 OF
BUDDHAS.
KNOWN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	TO	THE	TATHAGATA	THROUGH	HIS
BUDDHA-COGNITION.
SEEN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	BY	THE	TATHAGATA	WITH	HIS	BUDDHA-
EYE.
FULLY-KNOWN	 THEY	 ARE,	 SUBHUTI,	 TO	 THE	 TATHAGATA.	 AND
THEY	 ALL,	 SUBHUTI	 WILL	 BEGET	 AND	 ACQUIRE	 AN
IMMEASURABLE	AND
INCALCULABLE	HEAP	OF	MERIT.'
THEREFORE,	 SUBHUTI,	 LISTEN	 WELL	 AND	 ATTENTIVELY,	 says
Gautama	the	Buddha.
These	are	strange	words	--	strange,	because	Buddha	is	addressing	a	bodhisattva.
They	would	not	have	been	strange	if	they	were	addressed	to	an	ordinary	human
being.	One	can	understand	that	the	ordinary	human	being	needs	to	listen	well.	To
listen	 is	 so	 difficult.	 To	 listen	 means	 to	 be	 herenow.	 To	 listen	 means	 to	 be
without	any	thought.	To	listen	means	to	be	alert	and	aware.	If	 these	conditions
are	fulfilled,	only	then	you	listen.
The	 mind	 goes	 on	 like	 a	 maniac	 inside,	 a	 raving	 maniac.	 The	 mind	 goes	 on
spinning	a	thousand	and	one	thoughts,	and	the	mind	goes	on	moving	all	over	the
world	 --	 in	 the	 past,	 in	 the	 future.	 How	 can	 you	 listen?	 And	whatsoever	 you
listen	 to,	 it	will	 not	 be	 right	 listening	 at	 all.	You	will	 listen	 to	 something	 else
which	 has	 not	 been	 said	 at	 all,	 you	 will	 go	 on	 missing	 that	 which	 is	 said	 --
because	you	will	not	be	in	tune.	You	will	listen	to	the	words	of	course,	because
you	are	not	deaf,	but	just	that	much	is	not	listening.
That's	why	Jesus	goes	on	saying	to	his	disciples:	"If	you	have	ears,	listen.	If	you
have	eyes,	see."	Those	disciples	were	neither	blind	nor	deaf.	They	had	eyes	as
healthy	as	you	have,	ears	as	good	as	you	have.	But	Jesus'	words	are	not	strange;
they	are	relevant.	He	is	talking	to	ordinary	people;	he	has	to	bring	their	attention,
he	has	to	shout.	But	Buddha's	words	are	strange	--	he	is	addressing	a	bodhisattva,
a	great	being,	a	bodhi-being;	one	who	is	just	on	the	verge	of	becoming	a	Buddha.
What	does	it	mean	exactly	when	he	says:	"THEREFORE,	SUBHUTI,	LISTEN
WELL
AND	ATTENTIVELY?"
To	listen	well	ordinarily	means	to	listen	in	a	receptive	mood,	in	deep	receptivity.
When	you	listen,	if	you	are	arguing,	if	you	are	judging,	if	you	are	saying,	"Yes,
this	 is	 right	 because	 it	 fits	 with	 my	 ideology	 and	 this	 is	 not	 right	 because	 it
doesn't	appeal	to	me	logically.	This	is	right,	this	is	not	right.	This	I	can	believe,
this	I	cannot	believe...."	If	you	are	continuously	sorting	out	things	inside,	you	are
listening	but	you	are	not	listening	well.
And	you	are	listening	with	your	past	mind	interfering.	Who	is	this	judging?	It	is
not	you,	it	is	your	past.	You	have	read	a	few	things,	you	have	heard	a	few	things,
you	 have	 been	 conditioned	 for	 a	 few	 things.	 It	 is	 the	 past	 continuously
interfering.	The	past	wants	 to	perpetuate	 itself.	 It	 does	not	 allow	anything	 that
can	disrupt	it.	It	does	not	allow	anything	new;	it	allows	only	the	old	that	fits	with
it.	That's	what	you	go	on	doing	when	you	judge,	when	you	criticize,	when	you
discuss	inside	and	debate.
To	 listen	 rightly	means	 to	 listen	 obediently.	 This	word	 obedience	 is	 beautiful.
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 the	 original	 root	 from	 which	 the	 word
obedience	 comes	 is	 OBEDIRE	 --	 it	 means	 'a	 thorough	 listening'.	 Why	 does
obedience	mean	 thorough	 listening?	Are	 they	 the	same	 thing?	Yes,	 they	are.	 If
you	listen	totally,	thoroughly,	you	will	obey.	If	truth	is	there,	you	will	obey.	You
will	not	need	any	decision	on	your	part.
Truth	is	self-evident.	Once	heard,	it	automatically	follows	that	you	will	follow	it.
Once	heard,	you	will	become	obedient	to	it.	Hence	this	word	obedience	comes
from	obedire	--
listening	thoroughly.
Or	as	the	Jewish	tradition	says,	'to	bare	your	ear'.	If	you	have	really	opened	your
ear	 and	 there	 is	 no	 interference	 and	 no	 disturbance	 inside,	 and	 no	 distraction
from	anywhere,	you	have	not	only	opened	your	ear,	you	have	opened	your	heart.
And	if	the	seed	falls	into	the	heart,	sooner	or	later	it	will	become	a	tree,	sooner
or	later	it	 is	going	to	bloom.	It	may	take	a	little	time	for	it	 to	become	a	tree.	It
will	have	to	wait	for	the	right	season,	for	the	spring	to	come,	but	it	will	become	a
tree.	You	will	obey	it	if	you	have	heard	the	truth.
That's	why	the	mind	does	not	allow	you	to	hear	it,	because	the	mind	is	aware	of
the	fact	that	once	truth	is	heard	then	there	is	no	way	to	escape.	So	if	you	want	to
escape,	it	is	better	not	to	hear.	Once	heard,	you	are	caught	into	it;	then	there	is	no
escape.	 How	 can	 you	 escape	 when	 you	 know	 what	 truth	 is?	 Then	 the	 very
phenomenon	that	you	know	what	truth	is,	creates	a	discipline	in	you.	You	start
following	it.	And	it	is	not	something	that	you	enforce	upon	yourself;	it	comes	on
its	own	accord.
The	earlocks	have	to	be	removed.	What	are	the	earlocks?	The	fear	of	truth	is	the
basic	 lock.	 You	 are	 afraid	 of	 the	 truth	 --	 notwithstanding	 what	 you	 say,
notwithstanding	 that	you	again	and	again	say,	 "I	want	 to	know	 the	 truth."	You
are	afraid	of	truth	because	you	have	lived	in	lies.	And	you	have	lived	in	lies	so
long	that	all	those	lies	are	afraid,	trembling	--	if	truth	comes	they	will	all	have	to
leave	you.	They	have	become	owners	of	you.	Just	as	darkness	is	afraid	of	light,
so	lies	are	afraid	of	truth.	The	moment	you	come	closer	to	truth,	 the	mind	will
become	very	much	disturbed.	It	will	create	much	stir,	it	will	raise	much	dust,	it
will	create	a	cloud	around	you	so	that	you	cannot	hear	what	truth	is.
The	earlocks	have	to	be	removed.	The	basic	lock	is	fear.	You	are	locked	in	fear.
Buddha	 has	 said	 that	 unless	 you	 are	 fearless	 you	will	 not	 attain	 to	 truth.	And
look	 at	 your	 religions,	 at	what	 you	have	done.	Your	 so-called	 religions	 are	 all
based	in	fear.	And	through	fear	there	is	no	way	to	truth;	only	fearlessness	knows
what	truth	is.
When	you	bow	down	in	a	church	or	in	a	mosque	or	in	a	temple,	to	a	statue,	to	a
scripture,	to	tradition,	from	where	is	your	bowing	coming?	Just	watch	inside	--
and	you	will	find	fear	and	fear	and	fear.	Out	of	fear	there	is	no	faith,	but	the	so-
called	faith	is	all	based	on	fear.	That's	why	it	is	very	rare	in	the	world	to	come
across	 a	 man	 who	 has	 faith,	 because	 faith	 happens	 only	 when	 fear	 has
disappeared.	Faith	appears	only	on	the	death	of	fear.
Faith	means	 trust.	 How	 can	 a	 fearful	man	 trust?	He	 is	 always	 thinking,	 he	 is
always	cunning,	he	is	always	protecting,	defending.	How	can	he	trust?	To	trust,
you	need	courage.	To	trust,	you	need	to	be	brave.	To	trust,	you	need	to	be	able	to
risk.	To	trust,	you	need	to	move	into	danger.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 was	 looking	 at	 a	 Chinese	 ideogram	 for	 crisis	 and	 I	 was
intrigued	by	it,	because	the	Chinese	ideogram	for	crisis	consists	of	two	symbols:
one	 means	 danger,	 another	 means	 opportunity.	 Yes,	 that	 moment	 is	 a	 critical
moment	when	you	are	facing	danger	and	opportunity	both.	If	you	don't	go	into
danger	you	will	miss	the	opportunity.	If	you	want	the	opportunity	you	will	have
to	 go	 into	 danger.	 Those	 who	 know	 how	 to	 live	 dangerously,	 only	 they	 are
religious.	Fear	 is	 the	basic	earlock.	Then	 there	are	others,	but	 they	arise	out	of
the	 fear	 --	 the	 judging,	 the	argumentation,	 clinging	with	 the	past,	not	 allowing
the	new	any	entry	in	your	being.
In	many	many	 forms,	 in	many	many	 languages,	 the	word	 for	 obedience	 is	 an
intensive	 form	 of	 the	 word	 listening.	 HORCHEN,	 GEHORCHEN,	 obedire,
etcetera	 --	 all	 these	 words	 simply	 say	 passionate,	 intense,	 total	 listening.	 One
thing	 more.	 You	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 the	 word	 absurd	 is	 the	 exact
opposite	of	obedience.	ABSURDUS
means	absolutely	deaf.	So	if	you	say	something	is	absurd,	you	are	simply	saying,
"I	am	absolutely	deaf	to	what	this	is	going	to	tell	me."	Replace	an	absurd	attitude
with	an	obedient	attitude	and	then	you	will	be	baring	your	ear,	then	you	will	be
utterly	open.
But	it	is	good	to	say	to	an	ordinary	human	being,	"listen	attentively."	Why	does
Buddha	 say	 this	 to	 Subhuti?	 There	 is	 something	 very	 significant	 to	 be
understood.	A	word	has	no	meaning	in	itself;	the	meaning	is	created	only	when
the	word	is	addressed.	To	whom	it	is	addressed	will	determine	the	meaning.	So
you	 cannot	 find	 the	 meaning	 in	 any	 dictionary,	 because	 dictionaries	 are	 not
written	for	bodhisattvas;	they	are	written	for	ordinary	human	beings.
So	what	does	this	mean	--	 'LISTEN	WELL	AND	ATTENTIVELY?'	It	means	a
few	things	which	have	to	be	understood.	One:	when	a	man	like	Subhuti	is	there,
there	is	no	question	of	earlocks,	not	at	all.	There	is	no	question	of	his	openness
to	Buddha,	there	is	no	doubt	about	it,	he	is	open.	There	is	no	doubt	that	he	is	no
longer	arguing	with	Buddha;	he	is	totally	with	him,	flowing	with	him.	But	when
a	 person	 has	 attained	 to	 bodhisattvahood,	 when	 one	 has	 come	 very	 close	 to
buddhahood,	there	arise	a	few	new	problems.
Each	new	stage	of	consciousness	has	its	own	problems.	This	is	the	problem	with
a	 bodhisattva:	 he	 is	 open,	 he	 is	 receptive,	 he	 is	 ready,	 but	 he	 has	 become
uprooted	from	the	body.	His	heart	is	open,	his	being	is	open,	but	he	is	no	more
rooted	 in	 the	 body.	 He	 has	 become	 detached	 from	 the	 body,	 the	 body	 is	 just
hanging	around.	He	does	not	live	in	the	body,	he	is	almost	unidentified	with	the
body	--	that	is	the	problem.
When	someone	says	to	you,	"Listen	well,"	he	means	that	your	body	is	listening
but	you	are	not	 listening.	When	Buddha	says	 it	 to	Subhuti	he	means,	"You	are
listening,	but	your	body	is	not	listening."	It	is	just	the	opposite.	When	you	listen,
your	body	is	here,	you	are	not	here.	The	words	reach	to	the	ear,	they	make	sound
and	noise	there,	and	from	the	other	ear	they	go	out.	They	never	cross	your	being;
your	being	does	not	touch	them.	With	a	man	like	Subhuti	just	the	opposite	is	the
case.	His	being	is	there	but	his	body	is	not	there.
He	has	lost	track	of	the	body.	He	forgets,	he	tends	to	forget	the	body.	There	are
moments	when	he	will	not	think	of	the	body	at	all.	He	will	be	there	but	the	body
will	not	be	there.
He	has	come	to	bodilessness.
Now,	listening	is	possible	only	when	body	and	soul	both	are	together.	In	you	the
body	is	present,	the	soul	is	absent.	In	Subhuti	the	soul	is	present	but	the	body	is
absent.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 Buddha	 when	 he	 says,	 "Subhuti,	 listen	 well."
Bring	your	body	here.	Let	your	body	function.	Get	into	the	body,	be	rooted	in	the
body,	because	the	body	is	the	vehicle,	the	body	is	the	instrument,	the	medium.
And	Buddha	says,	"...	and	attentively."	 Is	Subhuti	 lacking	 in	attention?	That	 is
not	possible	otherwise	he	would	not	be	a	bodhi-being.	A	bodhi-being	is	one	who
has	attained	to	attention,	who	is	aware,	who	is	alert,	who	is	conscious,	who	is	no
more	 a	 robot.	 Then	 why	 does	 Buddha	 say.	 "Be	 attentive,	 listen	 attentively"?
Again	a	different	meaning	has	to	be	understood.
A	man	 like	Subhuti	 tends	 to	 go	 inwards.	 If	 he	 is	 not	making	 an	 effort	 he	will
drown	into	his	being,	he	will	be	lost	there.	He	can	be	outside	only	if	he	makes	an
effort.	Just	the	opposite	is	with	you.	With	a	very	great	effort	you	can	rarely	move
into	your	inner	being.
For	a	single	moment	thoughts	stop	and	you	are	lost	into	the	inner	splendor.	But	it
rarely	 happens,	 and	 after	 long	 arduous	 efforts,	meditation,	 yoga,	 this	 and	 that,
and	then	only	for	a	few	moments	you	have	that	beauty,	that	benediction.	The	sky
opens,	the	clouds	disappear	and	there	is	light,	and	there	is	life	and	there	is	utter
joy.	But	 only	 for	 rare	moments...	 again	 and	 again	 it	 is	 lost.	 If	 you	make	great
effort	to	be	attentive,	you	attain	the	inner	experience.
With	Subhuti,	just	the	opposite	is	the	case:	he	is	lost	inside	himself,	he	is	utterly
drowned	by	his	inner	joy.	Unless	he	makes	an	effort	he	will	not	be	able	to	listen
to	 what	 Buddha	 is	 saying.	 He	 is	 perfectly	 capable	 of	 listening	 to	 Buddha's
silence.	 If	 Buddha	 is	 silent	 there	 is	 communion,	 but	 if	 Buddha	 is	 saying
something	then	he	has	to	make	effort,	he	has	to	pull	himself	together,	he	has	to
come	out,	he	has	to	come	in	the	body,	he	has	to	be	very	attentive.	He	is	drunk
with	the	inner	wine.
Hence	 Buddha	 says	 these	 strange	 words:	 "LISTEN	 WELL,	 AND
ATTENTIVELY."	And	this	is	for	the	first	time	that	I	am	explaining	to	you	these
words.	For	twenty-five	centuries	nobody	has	commented	on	these	words.	They
have	 been	 taken	 ordinarily,	 as	 if	 Buddha	 is	 saying	 to	 anybody,	 "Listen	 well,
attentively."	Buddha	is	not	talking	to	an	ordinary	human	being.
For	 twenty-five	 centuries	 nobody	 has	 commented	 rightly.	 People	 have	 been
thinking	they	understand	 the	meaning	of	 the	words.	The	meaning	of	 the	words
changes;	 it	 depends	 by	 whom	 they	 are	 used,	 for	 whom	 they	 are	 used.	 The
meaning	of	the	words	depends	on	the	context	and	the	circumstance.	The	words
don't	have	any	meaning	in	themselves.	The	words	are	meaningless.	The	meaning
arises	only	in	a	particular	situation.
Now	this	situation	is	very	rare.	Buddha	has	used	these	words	thousands	of	times;
every	day	he	had	 to	use	 these	words	 to	people	 --	"Listen	well,	attentively."	So
those	 who	 have	 commented	 on	 The	 Diamond	 Sutra	 have	 missed.	 I	 think	 the
commentators	 were	 not	 knowers.	 They	 knew	 the	 language	 but	 they	 were
completely	 unaware	 of	 this	 strange	 situation.	 Buddha	 has	 not	 addressed	 some
ordinary	 human	 being;	 Buddha	 has	 addressed	 somebody	who	 is	 very	 close	 to
buddhahood,	who	is	just	on	the	boundary	of	it,	entering	into	buddhahood.
And	he	starts	the	statement	with	therefore:	"THEREFORE,	SUBHUTI,	LISTEN
WELL
AND	ATTENTIVELY."	Now	 this	 'therefore'	 is	 also	 very	 illogical.	 therefore	 is
only	logical	when	it	comes	as	a	part,	as	a	concluding	part,	of	a	logical	syllogism:
All	men	die.
Socrates	is	a	man,	therefore	Socrates	is	mortal.	Then	'therefore'	is	perfectly	right.
It	 is	 part	 of	 a	 syllogism,	 a	 conclusion.	But	 here	 there	 is	 no	 logic,	 nothing	 has
preceded	it,	there	has	been	no	premise.	And	Buddha	starts	with	the	conclusion	--
THEREFORE?
That	too	has	a	strangeness	about	it.	And	that	is	Buddha's	way.	That	is	how	in	The
Heart	 Sutra	 he	 addressed	 Sariputra	 --	 "Therefore,	 Sariputra....".	 Now	 he	 says,
"Therefore,	 Subhuti...."	 Subhuti	 has	 not	 said	 anything	 for	 which	 'therefore'	 is
needed,	 Buddha	 has	 not	 said	 anything	 for	 which	 'therefore'	 is	 needed,	 but
something	is	present	in	Subhuti's	being.
'Therefore'	is	related	to	that	presence;	nothing	has	been	uttered.
A	master	 responds	 to	what	 is	 present	 in	 you.	A	master	 responds	more	 to	 your
silence	 than	 to	 your	words.	A	master	 is	more	 interested	 in	 your	 quest	 than	 in
your	questions.	A	master	is	more	interested	in	your	needs	than	in	your	questions.
This	'therefore'	indicates	a	subtle	need	in	the	innermost	being	of	Subhuti.	Maybe
Subhuti	 himself	 is	 not	 aware	 of	 it,	 maybe	 Subhuti	 will	 take	 a	 little	 time	 to
become	aware	of	it.
The	master	has	to	go	on	looking	into	the	disciple's	being,	and	the	master	has	to
respond	to	the	inner	need	--	expressed,	unexpressed,	that	is	not	the	point.	Maybe
left	 alone	 the	disciple	will	 take	months	 to	 find	out	 the	need;	or	 even	years,	or
even	 lives.	 But	 the	 master	 looks	 not	 only	 into	 your	 past,	 not	 only	 into	 your
present,	but	 into	your	future	 too.	What	 is	going	to	be	your	need	tomorrow	and
the	day	after	tomorrow,	this	life	and	the	next	life	--
the	 master	 provides	 for	 the	 whole	 journey.	 This	 'therefore'	 is	 related	 to	 some
need	in	Subhuti's	inner	being.
Now	the	sutras:
'BECAUSE	A	BODHISATTVA
WHO	GIVES	A	GIFT
SHOULD	NOT	BE	SUPPORTED	BY	A	THING,
NOR	SHOULD	HE	BE	SUPPORTED	ANYWHERE.'
This	 is	 the	 need	 for	 which	 Buddha	 has	 used	 "THEREFORE,	 SUBHUTI,
LISTEN	WELL
AND	ATTENTIVELY."	Deep	 down	 Subhuti	must	 be	 having	 this	 idea,	 a	 very
subtle	idea
--	"If	I	give	to	people	what	I	have	attained,	great	will	be	my	merit."
This	may	not	be	inwards,	this	may	not	have	yet	become	a	thought;	it	may	be	just
a	feel,	a	ripple,	deep	inside.	"If	I	give	the	Dhamma	as	a	gift	to	people..."	and	that
is	 the	 greatest	 gift,	 Buddha	 had	 said.	 The	 greatest	 gift	 is	 to	 give	 people	 your
enlightenment,	to	share	it.
It	has	to	be	the	greatest.	Somebody	shares	his	money,	it	is	nothing.	Even	if	he	is
not	going	to	share,	the	money	will	be	left	here	when	he	dies.	Somebody	shares
something	 else.	 But	 to	 share	 enlightenment	 is	 to	 share	 eternity,	 to	 share
enlightenment	 is	 to	 share	God,	 to	 share	enlightenment	 is	 to	 share	 the	ultimate.
Buddha	has	called	it	the	greatest	gift.
Now	he	is	saying	to	Subhuti	to	share	whatsoever	you	have	attained.	And	create	a
decision,	chittopad,	create	a	great	decision	in	your	being	that	you	will	not	leave
this	shore	unless	you	have	liberated	all	the	human	beings.	Make	a	great	decisive
act	in	your	being	before	you	start	disappearing.	Before	your	boat	starts	moving
to	the	other	shore,	create	a	great	desire	to	help	people.	That	desire	to	help	people
will	 function	 as	 a	 chain	with	 this	 shore.	Before	 it	 is	 too	 late,	 create	 chittopad.
Bring	your	whole	energy	into	it	--	that	"I	will	not	leave	this	shore	whatsoever	the
temptation	of	the	other	shore."
And	 there	 is	 great	 temptation.	 When	 all	 has	 changed	 and	 you	 have	 become
capable	 of	 moving	 to	 the	 other	 shore	 for	 which	 you	 have	 been	 longing	 and
longing	 for	millions	 of	 lives,	 the	 temptation	 is	 great	 not	 to	 be	 here	 at	 all.	 For
what?	You	have	 suffered	enough,	and	now	you	have	 the	passport	 to	enter	 into
nirvana.	And	Buddha	says,	"Deny	the	passport,	throw	it	away,	and	make	a	great
decision	that	you	will	not	leave	this	shore	until	and	unless	you	have	liberated	all
the	human	beings."
Listening	 to	 this,	 a	 subtle	 desire	must	 have	 arisen	 into	 Subhuti's	 heart,	 at	 the
deepest	substratum	of	his	being,	that	"that	will	be	a	great	thing.	How	much	merit
I	will	get	out	of	it,	how	much	PUNYA,	how	much	virtue."	That	must	have	been	a
small	ripple.	It	is	even	difficult	for	Subhuti	to	read	it,	to	read	what	it	is.	It	must
have	flashed,	an	intuitive	flash,	just	for	a	second	or	a	split	second,	but	it	has	been
reflected	in	Buddha's	mirror.
A	master	is	a	mirror.	Whatsoever	is	in	you	is	reflected	in	him.	Sometimes	he	will
not	answer	the	question	that	you	have	asked	because	your	question	may	be	just	a
curiosity	and	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	inner	being,	or	your	question	may	be
just	an	exhibition	of	your	knowledge.	Or	your	question	may	be	just	to	prove	to
others,	 "Look	 what	 a	 great	 seeker	 I	 am.	 I	 ask	 such	 beautiful	 questions."	 The
question	may	not	be	existential,	it	may	be	just	intellectual.	Then	the	master	is	not
going	to	answer	lt.
And	sometimes	the	master	will	answer	a	question	that	you	have	not	asked;	not
only	not	asked,	but	that	you	have	never	known	existed	in	you.	But	it	will	relate
to	your	innermost	need	and	requirement.
Buddha	says:
'BECAUSE	A	BODHISATTVA
WHO	GIVES	A	GIFT
SHOULD	NOT	BE	SUPPORTED	BY	A	THING,
NOR	SHOULD	HE	BE	SUPPORTED	ANYWHERE.'
The	support	means	motive.	The	support	means	that	"I	will	be	getting	something
out	of	it."	Then	you	have	missed	the	whole	point.	Then	it	is	a	bargain,	then	it	is
no	more	a	gift.
And	nirvana	can	only	be	 a	gift,	 it	 cannot	be	 a	bargain.	 It	 is	 not	business.	You
have	to	give	it	for	the	sheer	joy	of	giving	it.	You	should	not	carry	any	motive	to
gain	anything	out	of	it.	If	you	are	carrying	any	motive	to	gain	anything	out	of	it
you	 cannot	 help	 anybody;	 in	 fact	 you	 yourself	 still	 need	 help.	 You	 are	 not
liberated	 yet,	 you	 don't	 have	 the	 passport	 for	 the	 other	 shore	 yet.	 You	 can
misguide	but	you	cannot	guide.
The	 real	 gift	 is	 an	 overflowing.	 You	 are	 so	 full	 of	 your	 enlightenment	 that	 it
simply	goes	on	overflowing.	It	is	anybody's	to	take.	And	you	feel	obliged	when
somebody	takes	it	from	you	because	he	unburdens	you.	When	a	cloud	comes	and
showers	on	the	earth,	it	feels	thankful	to	the	earth,	because	the	earth	has	received
and	the	cloud	is	unburdened.
Yes,	exactly	like	that.
When	enlightenment	is	arising,	it	goes	on	welling	up.	You	can	go	on	sharing	as
much	as	you	want,	and	it	goes	on	again	and	again	coming	up,	again	overflows,
again	overflows.
There	is	no	end	to	it.	You	have	come	to	the	eternal	source.	Now	you	should	not
be	a	miser	and	you	should	not	be	motivated	and	you	should	not	have	any	idea	to
get	anything	in	return.
'BECAUSE	A	BODHISATTVA
WHO	GIVES	A	GIFT
SHOULD	NOT	BE	SUPPORTED	BY	A	THING,
NOR	SHOULD	HE	BE	SUPPORTED	ANYWHERE.
THE	GREAT	BEING	SHOULD	GIVE	GIFTS
IN	SUCH	A	WAY
THAT	HE	IS	NOT	SUPPORTED	BY	THE	NOTION	OF	A	SIGN.'
He	will	not	think,	"This	is	a	gift,"	and	he	will	not	think	that	"I	am	the	giver	and
you	are	the	recipient."	No,	all	these	ideas	and	notions	should	be	dropped.	There
is	no	giver,	no	gift,	no	recipient;	it	is	all	oneness.	The	one	you	are	helping	is	also
you.	The	one	you	are	giving	to	is	another	form	of	you...	as	if	you	are	giving	from
the	left	hand	to	the	right	hand.	There	is	no	need	to	feel	great	about	it.	There	is	no
giver,	there	is	no	receiver	and	there	is	no	gift.
'THE	GREAT	BEING	SHOULD	GIVE	GIFTS
IN	SUCH	A	WAY
THAT	HE	IS	NOT	SUPPORTED	BY	THE	NOTION	OF	A	SIGN.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	THE	HEAP	OF	MERIT	OF	THAT	BODHI-BEING,
WHO	UNSUPPORTED	GIVES	A	GIFT,
IS	NOT	EASY	TO	MEASURE.'
Now	 this	 is	 a	problem	you	will	have	 to	 face	again	and	again.	The	problem	 is,
your	merit	is	great	if	you	don't	think	about	it.	If	you	think	about	it,	it	disappears.
If	you	desire	it	you	will	never	get	it.	If	you	don't	desire	it,	it	goes	on	showering
on	you.
On	 the	 lower	plane,	Jesus'	 statement	 is	 right.	That	statement	has	been	given	 to
ordinary	people:	"Ask	and	it	shall	be	given.	Seek	and	ye	shall	find.	Knock	and
the	door	shall	be	opened	unto	you.	"But	Buddha	is	speaking	to	Subhuti,	and	he	is
exactly	saying,	"Ask	and	it	shall	not	be	given.	Seek	and	you	will	not	find.	Knock
and	the	doors	will	turn	into	a	China	wall;	they	will	never	open."	And	remember,
the	 difference	 comes	 from	 the	 audience.	 Jesus	 is	 talking	 to	 common	 people,
Buddha	is	talking	to	a	very	uncommon	person.
THE	LORD	CONTINUED:'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,	CAN	THE
TATHAGATA
BE	SEEN	BY	THE	POSSESSION	OF	HIS	MARKS?'
SUBHUTI	REPLIED:'NO	INDEED,	O	LORD.	AND	WHY?
WHAT	HAS	BEEN	TAUGHT	BY	THE	TATHAGATA
AS	THE	POSSESSION	OF	MARKS,
THAT	IS	TRULY	A	NO-POSSESSION	OF	NO-MARKS.'
THE	LORD	SAID:
WHEREVER	THERE	IS	POSSESSION	OF	MARKS,
THERE	IS	FRAUD;
WHEREVER	THERE	IS	NO-POSSESSION	OF	NO-MARKS,
THERE	IS	NO	FRAUD.
HENCE	THE	TATHAGATA	IS	TO	BE	SEEN
FROM	NO-MARKS	AS	MARKS.'
These	will	 look	like	puzzles.	They	are	not.	They	appear	to	be	puzzles	but	 they
are	not.
But	 on	 those	 heights	 from	 where	 Buddha	 is	 speaking	 everything	 becomes
contradictory;	 contradiction	 becomes	 the	 only	 expression.	 One	 has	 to	 be
paradoxical	on	those	plenitudes	of	being.	Logic	loses	all	meaning.	If	one	insists
on	 being	 logical	 then	 one	 cannot	 move	 on	 those	 plenitudes	 and	 one	 cannot
express	that	truth.	That	truth	is	bound	to	be	contradictory.
Buddha	asks,	"Subhuti,	is	a	tathagata	to	be	seen	by	the	possession	of	his	marks?"
Buddhist	scriptures	say	that	a	Buddha	has	thirty-two	marks	of	being	a	superman.
Those	thirty-two	marks,	are	they	to	be	the	deciding	factor?
For	 ordinary	 human	beings	 it	 is	 okay,	 because	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 other	 eyes;
you	can	see	only	the	outward	sign.	You	live	by	signs,	marks.	But	for	a	man	like
Subhuti,	who	can	 see	 inward,	who	can	 see	 in	 the	Buddha,	 those	marks	 should
not	be	any	more	relevant.	And	moreover,	to	possess	anything	is	not	the	quality	of
a	Buddha	--	not	even	those	thirty-two	marks.	They	are	irrelevant.	A	Buddha	has
to	be	utterly	ordinary,	because	he	possesses	nothing.	That	is	his	real	mark,	not	to
possess	 anything.	 Not	 to	 possess	 even	 buddhahood,	 that	 is	 the	 real	 mark	 of
buddhahood.	This	is	how	things	become	contradictory.
A	 real	 Buddha	 is	 one	 who	 does	 not	 claim	 even	 to	 be	 a	 Buddha,	 because	 all
claims	are	fraudulent.	To	claim	is	to	be	a	fraud.	A	Buddha	claims	nothing,	he	has
no	claim.	He	desires	nothing.	He	is	not	in	any	way	interested	in	exhibiting.	He	is
not	interested	in	convincing	anybody	about	who	he	is.	He	is	utterly	there	--	you
can	partake	of	him,	you	can	join	him	in	his	dance,	you	can	share	his	celebration	-
-	but	he	is	not	there	to	prove	anything.	To	prove	anything	only	proves	that	you
have	not	attained	yet.	He	is	not	defensive.
And	 those	 outer	 marks	 can	 be	 created	 by	 people	 who	 may	 not	 be	 Buddhas.
Anything	can	be	created.	For	example,	Buddha's	breathing	is	utterly	silent,	as	if
he	does	not	breathe	at	all.	But	that	can	be	done	by	any	yogi	who	is	not	a	Buddha.
You	 can	 practice	 breathing,	 you	 can	 practice	 exercises,	 and	 you	 can	 bring	 the
breathing	to	almost	a	halting	point.	You	can	defeat	Buddha.
His	breathing	is	slow	because	he	has	slowed	down,	not	because	he	has	practised
any	breathing	exercises.	His	breathing	is	slow	because	he	is	not	going	anywhere,
because	 all	 desires	 have	 disappeared;	 that's	 why	 his	 breathing	 is	 slow,	 almost
invisible.	The	reason	is	not	that	he	is	a	great	yogi,	no.	The	reason	is	that	desires
dropped,	 there	 is	 no	 hurry.	 He	 is	 just	 on	 a	 morning	 walk.	 He	 is	 not	 going
anywhere.	He	has	no	future,	no	worry.
Have	 you	watched?	When	you	 are	worried	 your	 breathing	 becomes	 disturbed.
When	you	are	angry	your	breathing	becomes	violent.	When	you	make	love	and
passion	arises,	your	breathing	becomes	very	very	disturbed,	feverish.	A	Buddha's
passion	has	 become	compassion,	 his	 desires	 have	dropped,	 disappeared...	 as	 if
ripe	 leaves	 have	 fallen	 from	 the	 tree.	 And	 his	 breathing	 has	 slowed	 down,
slowed	down,	slowed	down.
But	if	this	is	the	sign,	then	any	pretender	can	show	the	sign.	Buddha	sits	utterly
silently,	his	posture	is	unmoving,	he	remains	in	one	posture.	But	this	can	be	done
by	 anybody,	 just	 a	 little	 practice	 is	 needed,	 but	 by	 that	 practice	 you	 will	 not
become	a	Buddha.
So	Buddha	says...
'WHEREVER	THERE	IS	POSSESSION	OF	MARKS,
THERE	IS	FRAUD....'
If	 somebody	 claims	 'I	 possess	 these	marks	 of	Buddha.	Look,	 I	 am	a	Buddha!'
then	there	is	fraud,	because	the	very	claim	is	a	proof	of	fraud.
'WHEREVER	THERE	IS	NO	POSSESSION	OF	NO-MARKS
THERE	IS	NO	FRAUD.
HENCE	THE	TATHAGATA	IS	TO	BE	SEEN
FROM	NO-MARKS	AS	MARKS.'
Why	does	Buddha	 suddenly	 ask	 this	 question	 of	Subhuti?	A	desire	must	 have
arisen	in	Subhuti...	mm?	--	these	are	the	things	to	be	understood.	A	desire	must
have	arisen	in	Subhuti.	He	is	just	on	the	verge	of	becoming	a	Buddha.	A	desire
must	 have	 arisen:	 "Soon	 I	 will	 possess	 thirty-two	 marks.	 Soon	 I	 will	 be	 a
Buddha,	I	will	be	proclaimed	a	Buddha.	I	will	have	thirty-two	marks."
This	 may	 have	 been	 just	 an	 unconscious	 desire,	 but	 a	 ripple....	 Seeing	 the
Buddha	 and	 his	 thirty-two	 marks,	 his	 grace,	 his	 beauty,	 who	 will	 not	 start
desiring?	 And	 Subhuti	 is	 capable	 now,	 just	 on	 the	 threshold	 of	 buddhahood.
While	Buddha	is	talking	about	giving	as	if	you	are	not	giving,	while	Buddha	is
saying	 that	 if	 you	 can	 give	without	 the	 notion	 of	 a	 giver	 and	 the	 gift	 and	 the
receiver,	 great	will	 be	 your	merit...	 listening	 to	 this	 he	must	 have	 longed.	The
longing	may	have	been	a	subtle	seed,	but	he	must	have	longed.	"Then	with	that
great	merit	 I	will	 become	 a	Buddha.	 I	will	 have	 thirty-two	marks	 --	 the	 same
fragrance	 that	 surrounds	 the	 Buddha,	 the	 same	 grace,	 the	 same	 splendor,	 the
same	benediction!	Aha!"	He	must	have	somewhere	created	the	desire.
Seeing	that	desire,	Buddha	says,	"What	do	you	think,	Subhuti,	can	the	tathagata
be	 seen	 by	 the	 possession	 of	 his	marks?"	Unless	 you	 see	 this	 undercurrent	 in
Subhuti's	 consciousness	 or	 unconsciousness,	 you	 will	 not	 understand	 The
Diamond	Sutra.
SUBHUTI	 ASKED:'WILL	 THERE	 BE	 ANY	 BEINGS	 IN	 THE	 FUTURE
PERIOD,	IN	THE	LAST	TIME,
IN	THE	LAST	EPOCH,
IN	THE	LAST	FIVE	HUNDRED	YEARS,
AT	THE	TIME	OF	THE	COLLAPSE	OF	THE	GOOD	DOCTRINE
WHO,	WHEN	THESE	WORDS	OF	THE	SUTRA
ARE	BEING	TAUGHT,
WILL	UNDERSTAND	THEIR	TRUTH?'
Now	you	will	be	surprised:	this	is	the	time	Subhuti	is	talking	about,	and	you	are
the	 people.	 Twenty-five	 hundred	 years	 have	 passed.	 Subhuti	 has	 asked	 about
you.
Buddha	has	said	that	whenever	a	religion	is	born,	whenever	a	Buddha	turns	the
wheel	 of	Dhamma,	 naturally,	 slowly	 slowly	 the	wheel	 starts	 stopping.	 It	 loses
momentum.	mm?
You	turn	a	wheel,	it	will	start	moving.	Then	by	and	by,	by	and	by,	a	moment	will
come	when	it	will	stop.
When	 a	 Buddha	 moves	 the	 wheel	 of	 Dhamma,	 it	 takes	 two	 thousand	 five
hundred	years	for	it	to	stop	completely.	After	each	five	hundred	years	it	goes	on
losing	momentum.	So	 those	 are	 the	 five	 ages	of	 the	Dhamma.	After	 each	 five
hundred	years,	the	Dhamma	will	be	less	and	less,	decreased	and	decreased	and
decreased,	and	after	twenty-five	centuries	the	wheel	will	stop	again.	It	will	need
another	Buddha	to	turn	it	for	the	coming	twenty-five	centuries.
This	is	a	rare	phenomenon.	It	is	really	intriguing	that	Subhuti	asked	Buddha:
'WILL	THERE	BE	ANY	BEINGS	IN	THE	FUTURE	PERIOD,
IN	THE	LAST	TIME,
IN	THE	LAST	EPOCH,
IN	THE	LAST	FIVE	HUNDRED	YEARS,
AT	THE	TIME	OF	THE	COLLAPSE	OF	THE	GOOD	DOCTRINE
WHO,	WHEN	THESE	WORDS	OF	THE	SUTRA
ARE	BEING	TAUGHT,
WILL	UNDERSTAND	THEIR	TRUTH?'
THE	LORD	REPLIED:	'DO	NOT	SPEAK	THUS,	SUBHUTI!
YES,	EVEN	THEN	THERE	WILL	BE	BEINGS	WHO,
WHEN	THESE	WORDS	OF	THE	SUTRA	ARE	BEING	TAUGHT,
WILL	UNDERSTAND	THEIR	TRUTH.
FOR	EVEN	AT	THAT	TIME,	SUBHUTI,
THERE	WILL	BE	BODHISATTVAS.
AND	THESE	BODHISATTVAS,	SUBHUTI,
WILL	NOT	BE	SUCH	AS	HAVE	HONORED
ONLY	ONE	SINGLE	BUDDHA,
NOR	SUCH	AS	HAVE	PLANTED	THEIR	ROOTS	OF	MERIT
UNDER	ONE	SINGLE	BUDDHA	ONLY.
ON	THE	CONTRARY,	SUBHUTI,	THOSE	BODHISATTVAS	WHO,
WHEN	THESE	WORDS	OF	THE	SUTRA	ARE	BEING	TAUGHT,
WILL	FIND	EVEN	ONE	SINGLE	THOUGHT	OF	SERENE	FAITH,
BE	SUCH	AS	HAVE	HONORED
MANY	HUNDREDS	OF	THOUSANDS	OF	BUDDHAS,
SUCH	AS	HAVE	PLANTED	THEIR	ROOTS	OF	MERIT
UNDER	MANY	HUNDREDS	OF	THOUSANDS	OF	BUDDHAS.
KNOWN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	TO	THE	TATHAGATA
THROUGH	HIS	BUDDHA-COGNITION.
SEEN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	BY	THE	TATHAGATA
WITH	HIS	BUDDHA-EYE.
FULLY-KNOWN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	TO	THE	TATHAGATA.
AND	THEY	ALL,	SUBHUTI
WILL	BEGET	AND	ACQUIRE
AN	IMMEASURABLE	AND	INCALCULABLE	HEAP	OF	MERIT.'
Buddha	 is	 talking	 about	 you.	 The	 Sutra	 is	 being	 read	 to	 you.	 Twenty-five
centuries	have	passed.	Subhuti	has	asked	about	you.
The	other	day	I	had	told	you	that	many	of	you	will	become	bodhisattvas,	many
of	you	are	on	the	way.	It	is	strange	that	Subhuti	should	ask	such	a	question.	And
more	strange	is	that	Buddha	says	"Those	people	after	twenty-five	centuries	will
not	be	less	fortunate	than	you	but	will	be	more	fortunate."
Why?	 I	 have	 been	 telling	 you	many	 times	 that	 you	 are	 ancient	 ones,	 that	 you
have	 walked	 on	 this	 earth	 many	 many	 times,	 that	 you	 are	 not	 listening	 to
Dhamma	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 that	 you	have	 come	 across	many	Buddhas	 in	 your
past	 lives	 --	 sometimes	 maybe	 a	 Krishna	 and	 sometimes	 maybe	 a	 Christ	 and
sometimes	 maybe	 a	 Mahavira	 and	 sometimes	 maybe	 a	 Mohammed,	 but	 you
have	come	across	many	many	Buddhas,	many	enlightened	people.
You	are	fortunate	to	know	so	many	Buddhas,	and	if	you	become	a	little	alert,	all
the	seeds	that	have	been	sown	in	you	by	the	past	Buddhas	will	start	blooming,
will	sprout.
You	will	start	flowering.
Buddha	says:
KNOWN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	TO	THE	TATHAGATA
THROUGH	HIS	BUDDHA-COGNITION.
SEEN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	BY	THE	TATHAGATA
WITH	HIS	BUDDHA-EYE.
FULLY-KNOWN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	TO	THE	TATHAGATA.
It	is	very	mysterious,	but	it	is	possible.	A	Buddha	can	have	a	vision	of	the	future.
He	can	see	through	the	fog	of	the	future.	His	clarity	is	such,	his	vision	is	such,	he
can	throw	a	ray	of	 light	 into	the	unknown	future.	He	can	see.	It	will	 look	very
mysterious	 that	 Buddha	 sees	 you	 listening	 to	 The	Diamond	 Sutra.	 From	 your
standpoint	 it	 seems	almost	unbelievable,	because	you	don't	 know	even	how	 to
see	in	the	present.	How	can	you	believe	that	anybody	can	see	in	the	future?
You	know	only	one	capacity:	that	is	the	capacity	to	look	into	the	past.	You	can
only	 look	 backwards.	 You	 are	 past-oriented.	 And	whatsoever	 you	 think	 about
your	 future	 is	not	 a	vision	of	 the	 future,	 it	 is	 just	 a	projection	of	 the	modified
past.	It	is	not	future	at	all.	It	is	your	yesterday	trying	to	be	repeated	as	tomorrow.
Something	 you	 have	 tasted	 yesterday	 and	 it	was	 sweet	 and	 you	want	 it	 again
tomorrow:	 this	 is	 your	 future.	You	have	 been	 in	 love	with	 somebody	 and	 you
want	to	make	love	again	in	the	future:	this	is	your	future.	It	is	a	repetition	of	the
past.	It	is	not	future	at	all.
You	don't	know	what	future	is	at	all.	You	can't	know	what	future	is	because	you
can't	even	know	what	the	present	is.	And	the	present	is	available	and	you	are	so
blind	that	you	cannot	even	see	into	that	which	is	already	here.
But	then,	eyes	open,	you	can	see	even	into	that	which	is	not	present,	that	which
is	going	to	happen.	You	can	have	glimpses	of	that.	The	way	to	see	the	future	is
first	 to	 see	 the	 present.	 One	 who	 can	 be	 absolutely	 in	 the	 present	 becomes
capable	of	looking	into	the	future.
This	is	ecstatic	to	even	think	that	Gautama	the	Buddha	had	seen	you	listening	to
The	Diamond	Sutra.	 In	The	Diamond	Sutra	you	are	 talked	about.	That's	why	I
have	chosen	it.
When	 I	 came	 across	 these	words	 I	 thought,	 "This	 is	 the	 thing	 for	my	 people.
They	must	know	that	even	they	have	been	looked	into	by	Gautama	the	Buddha;
that	 something	 about	 them	 has	 been	 said	 twenty-five	 centuries	 ago;	 that	 they
have	been	predicted.'
The	wheel	 that	Buddha	moved	has	stopped.	The	wheel	has	to	be	moved	again.
And	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be	my	and	your	 life-work	 --	 that	wheel	 has	 to	 be	moved
again.	Once	it	starts	revolving	it	will	have	again	twenty-five	centuries'	life.	Once
it	starts	moving	it	goes	on	moving	for	twenty-five	centuries	at	least.
And	 it	 has	 to	 be	 done	 again	 and	 again	 and	 again	 because	 everything	 loses
momentum,	everything	functions	under	the	laws	of	nature	--	entropy.	You	throw
a	stone,	you	throw	with	great	energy,	but	it	goes	a	few	hundred	feet	and	it	falls
down.	Exactly	like	that	Dhamma	has	to	be	made	again	and	again	alive.	Then	it
breathes	 for	 twenty-five	centuries	and	 then	dies.	Everything	 that	 is	born	has	 to
die.
But	Buddha	says,	"Subhuti,	do	not	speak	thus."	Subhuti	must	be	thinking,	"Only
we	are	fortunate.	We	have	listened	to	Buddha,	lived	with	Buddha,	walked	with
Buddha.	We	are	fortunate,	we	are	blessed	people.	What	will	happen	after	twenty
five	centuries	when	the	wheel	of	Dhamma	has	completely	stopped	moving?"	He
is	thinking	about	you	unfortunate	people.
Buddha	says,	"Do	not	speak	thus,	Subhuti.	Don't	start	thinking	that	only	you	are
fortunate."	 That	 is	 a	 very	 subtle	 ego:	 "We	 are	 fortunate,	 nobody	 else	 is	 so
fortunate."
Buddha	immediately	puts	his	hand	on	Subhuti's	mouth:
'DO	NOT	SPEAK	THUS,	SUBHUTI!
YES,	EVEN	THEN	THERE	WILL	BE	BEINGS	WHO,
WHEN	THESE	WORDS	OF	THE	SUTRA	ARE	BEING	TAUGHT,
WILL	UNDERSTAND	THEIR	TRUTH.'
And	 I	 know,	 here	 are	 people	 who	 understand	 the	 truth.	 Slowly	 slowly	 the
morning	is	happening,	the	dark	night	is	disappearing.	Slowly	slowly	the	seed	is
gaining	ground,	entering	in	your	heart.
'FOR	EVEN	AT	THAT	TIME,	SUBHUTI,
THERE	WILL	BE	BODHISATTVAS,'
There	are	many	here	who	are	going	 to	become	bodhisattvas.	 Just	 a	 little	work
more,	 just	a	 little	play	more,	 just	a	 little	more	effort	 into	meditativeness,	 just	a
little	more	pouring	of	the	energy,	 just	a	 little	more	concentration	of	the	energy,
avoiding	of	distractions,	and	it	is	going	to	happen.	And	it	is	going	to	happen	to
many.	And	you	are	the	fortunate	ones,	Buddha	says.
'AND	THESE	BODHISATTVAS,	SUBHUTI,
WILL	NOT	BE	SUCH	AS	HAVE	HONORED
ONLY	ONE	SINGLE	BUDDHA,
NOR	SUCH	AS	HAVE	PLANTED	THEIR	ROOTS	OF	MERIT
UNDER	ONE	SINGLE	BUDDHA	ONLY.
ON	THE	CONTRARY,	SUBHUTI,	THOSE	BODHISATTVAS	WHO,
WHEN	THESE	WORDS	OF	THE	SUTRA	ARE	BEING	TAUGHT,
WILL	FIND	EVEN	ONE	SINGLE	THOUGHT	OF	SERENE	FAITH...'
If	 you	 can	 even	 understand	 a	 single	 word	 of	 The	 Diamond	 Sutra,	 if	 you	 can
understand	 a	 simple	 look	 of	my	 eyes	 into	 your	 eyes,	 if	 you	 can	 understand	 a
simple	gesture	of	my	inner	dance....
Buddha	says:
'...	WILL	 FIND	 EVEN	ONE	 SINGLE	 THOUGHT	OF	 SERENE	 FAITH,	 BE
SUCH	AS	HAVE	HONORED
MANY	HUNDREDS	OF	THOUSANDS	OF	BUDDHAS,
SUCH	AS	HAVE	PLANTED	THEIR	ROOTS	OF	MERIT
UNDER	MANY	HUNDREDS	OF	THOUSANDS	OF	BUDDHAS.
KNOWN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	TO	THE	TATHAGATA
THROUGH	HIS	BUDDHA-COGNITION.
SEEN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	BY	THE	TATHAGATA
WITH	HIS	BUDDHA-EYE.
FULLY-KNOWN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	TO	THE	TATHAGATA.
AND	THEY	ALL,	SUBHUTI,
WILL	BEGET	AND	ACQUIRE
AN	IMMEASURABLE	AND	INCALCULABLE	HEAP	OF	MERIT.'
And	you	are	 the	people	Buddha	 is	 talking	about.	And	you	are	 the	people	 I	am
depending	on.	The	wheel	of	Dhamma	has	stopped.	It	has	to	be	turned	again.
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	From	the	Beyond
24	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712240
ShortTitle:
DIAMON04
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
58
mins
The	first	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	1
WHAT	 HAS	 GONE	 WRONG?	 WHY	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 PEOPLE	 MEET
EVERYTHING
NEW	RELUCTANTLY,	AND	WITH	FEAR,	RATHER	THAN	WITH	EAGER
JOY?
The	new	does	not	arise	out	of	you,	 it	comes	 from	the	beyond.	 It	 is	not	part	of
you.	Your	whole	past	is	at	stake.	The	new	is	discontinuous	with	you,	hence	the
fear.	You	have	lived	in	one	way,	you	have	thought	in	one	way,	you	have	made	a
comfortable	 life	 out	 of	 your	 beliefs.	Then	 something	new	knocks	on	 the	door.
Now	your	whole	past	pattern	 is	going	 to	be	disturbed.	 If	you	allow	the	new	to
enter	you	will	never	be	the	same	again,	the	new	will	transform	you.
It	is	risky.	One	never	knows	where	you	will	end	with	the	new.	The	old	is	known,
familiar;	you	have	lived	with	it	for	long,	you	are	acquainted	with	it.	The	new	is
unfamiliar.	It	may	be	the	friend,	it	may	be	the	enemy,	who	knows.	And	there	is
no	way	to	know.	The	only	way	to	know	is	to	allow	it;	hence	the	apprehension,
the	fear.
And	you	cannot	remain	rejecting	it	either,	because	the	old	has	not	given	you	yet
what	 you	 seek.	 The	 old	 has	 been	 promising,	 but	 the	 promises	 have	 not	 been
fulfilled.	 The	 old	 is	 familiar	 but	 miserable.	 The	 new	 is	 maybe	 going	 to	 be
uncomfortable	 but	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 --	 it	 may	 bring	 bliss	 to	 you.	 So	 you
cannot	reject	 it	either	and	you	cannot	accept	 it;	hence	you	waver,	you	 tremble,
great	anguish	arises	in	your	being.	It	is	natural,	nothing	has	gone	wrong.	This	is
how	it	has	always	been,	this	is	how	it	will	always	be.
Try	to	understand	the	appearance	of	 the	new.	Everybody	in	 the	world	wants	 to
become	 new,	 because	 nobody	 is	 satisfied	 with	 the	 old.	 Nobody	 can	 ever	 be
satisfied	with	the	old	because	whatsoever	it	is,	you	have	known	it.	Once	known
it	 has	 become	 repetitive;	 once	 known	 it	 has	 become	boring,	monotonous.	You
want	 to	get	rid	of	 it.	You	want	 to	explore,	you	want	 to	adventure.	You	want	 to
become	new,	 and	yet	when	 the	 new	knocks	 on	 the	 door	 you	 shrink	 back,	 you
withdraw,	you	hide	in	the	old.	This	is	the	dilemma.
How	do	we	become	new?	 --	 and	everybody	wants	 to	become	new.	Courage	 is
needed,	 and	 not	 ordinary	 courage;	 extraordinary	 courage	 is	 needed.	 And	 the
world	 is	 full	 of	 cowards,	 hence	 people	 have	 stopped	 growing.	 How	 can	 you
grow	if	you	are	a	coward?
With	each	new	opportunity	you	shrink	back,	you	close	your	eyes.	How	can	you
grow?
How	can	you	be?	You	only	pretend	to	be.
And	because	you	cannot	grow	you	have	to	find	substitute	growths.	You	cannot
grow	but	your	bank	balance	can	grow,	that's	a	substitute.	It	needs	no	courage,	it
is	perfectly	adjusted	with	your	cowardliness.	Your	bank	balance	goes	on	growing
and	you	start	thinking	that	you	are	growing.	You	become	more	respectable.	Your
name	and	fame	go	on	growing	and	you	think	you	are	growing?	You	are	simply
deceiving	yourself.	Your	name	is	not	you,	neither	is	your	fame	you.	Your	bank
balance	 is	 not	 your	 being.	 But	 if	 you	 think	 of	 the	 being	 you	 start	 shaking,
because	if	you	want	to	grow	there	then	you	have	to	drop	all	cowardice.
How	do	we	become	new?	We	do	not	become	new	of	ourselves.	Newness	comes
from	the	beyond,	say	from	God.	Newness	comes	from	existence.	Mind	is	always
old.	Mind	is	never	new,	it	is	the	accumulation	of	the	past.	Newness	comes	from
the	beyond;	it	is	a	gift	from	God.	It	is	from	the	beyond	and	it	is	of	the	beyond.
The	 unknown	 and	 the	 unknowable,	 the	 beyond,	 has	 ingress	 into	 you.	 It	 has
ingress	 into	 you	 because	 you	 are	 never	 sealed	 and	 set	 apart;	 you	 are	 not	 an
island.	You	may	have	forgotten	the	beyond	but	the	beyond	has	not	forgotten	you.
The	child	may	have	forgotten	the	mother,	the	mother	has	not	forgotten	the	child.
The	part	may	have	started	 thinking,	"I	am	separate,"	but	 the	whole	knows	 that
you	are	not	separate.	The	whole	has	ingress	in	you.	It	is	still	in	contact	with	you.
That's	why	 the	 new	 goes	 on	 coming	 although	 you	 don't	welcome	 it.	 It	 comes
every	morning,	it	comes	every	evening.	It	comes	in	a	thousand	and	one	ways.	If
you	have	eyes	to	see,	you	will	see	it	continuously	coming	to	you.
God	 goes	 on	 showering	 on	 you,	 but	 you	 are	 enclosed	 in	 your	 past.	 You	 are
almost	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 grave.	 You	 have	 become	 insensitive.	 Because	 of	 your
cowardliness	you	have	lost	your	sensitivity.	To	be	sensitive	means	the	new	will
be	felt	--	and	the	thrill	of	the	new,	and	the	passion	for	the	new	and	the	adventure
will	arise	and	you	will	start	moving	into	the	unknown,	not	knowing	where	you
are	going.
Mind	thinks	it	is	mad.	Mind	thinks	it	is	not	rational	to	leave	the	old.	But	God	is
always	the	new.	That's	why	we	cannot	use	past	tense	or	future	tense	for	God.	We
cannot	say
"God	was,"	we	cannot	say	"God	will	be."	We	can	only	use	the	present:	"God	is."
It	is	always	fresh,	virgin.	And	it	has	ingress	in	you.
Remember,	 anything	 new	 coming	 in	 your	 life	 is	 a	message	 from	God.	 If	 you
accept	it	you	are	religious.	If	you	reject	it	you	are	irreligious.	Man	needs	just	to
relax	a	little	more	to	accept	the	new;	to	open	up	a	little	more	to	let	the	new	in.
Give	way	to	God	entering	you.
That	is	the	whole	meaning	of	prayer	or	meditation	--	you	open	up,	you	say	yes,
you	say
"Come	in."	You	say,	"I	have	been	waiting	and	waiting	and	I	am	thankful	that	you
have	come."	Always	receive	the	new	with	great	joy.	Even	if	sometimes	the	new
leads	you	into	inconvenience,	still	it	is	worth	it.	Even	if	sometimes	the	new	leads
you	into	some	ditch,	still	 it	 is	worth	it,	because	only	through	errors	one	learns,
and	only	 through	difficulties	one	grows.	The	new	will	bring	difficulties.	That's
why	you	choose	the	old	--	it	does	not	bring	any	difficulties.	It	is	a	consolation,	it
is	a	shelter.
And	only	 the	new,	accepted	deeply	and	 totally,	can	 transform	you.	You	cannot
bring	the	new	in	your	life;	the	new	comes.	You	can	either	accept	it	or	reject	it.	If
you	reject	it	you	remain	a	stone,	closed	and	dead.	If	you	receive	it	you	become	a
flower,	you	start	opening...	and	in	that	opening	is	celebration.
Only	 the	 entry	 of	 the	 new	 can	 transform	 you,	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way	 of
transformation.	But	 remember,	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	you	 and	your	 efforts.
But	to	do	nothing	is	not	 to	cease	to	act;	 it	 is	 to	act	without	will	or	direction	or
impulse	 from	your	past.	The	 search	 for	 the	new	cannot	be	an	ordinary	 search,
because	it	is	for	the	new.	How	can	you	search	for	it?	You	don't	know	it,	you	have
never	met	it.	The	search	for	the	new	is	going	to	be	just	an	open	exploration.	One
knows	 not.	 One	 has	 to	 start	 in	 a	 state	 of	 not-knowing,	 and	 one	 has	 to	 move
innocently	 like	 a	 child,	 thrilled	 with	 the	 possibilities	 --	 and	 infinite	 are	 the
possibilities.
You	cannot	do	anything	to	create	the	new,	because	whatsoever	you	do	will	be	of
the	old,	will	be	from	the	past.	But	that	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	cease	to
act.	It	is	to	act	without	will	or	direction	or	impulse	from	your	past.	Act	without
any	will	or	direction	or	impulse	from	the	past	--	and	that	is	to	act	meditatively.
Act	spontaneously.	Let	the	moment	be	decisive.
You	don't	impose	your	decision,	because	the	decision	will	be	from	the	past	and	it
will	destroy	 the	new.	You	 just	act	 in	 the	moment	 like	a	child.	Utterly	abandon
yourself	to	the	moment	--	and	you	will	find	every	day	new	openings,	new	light,
new	insight.	And	those	new	insights	will	go	on	changing	you.	One	day,	suddenly
you	will	see	you	are	each	moment	new.	The	old	no	more	lingers,	the	old	no	more
hangs	around	you	like	a	cloud.
You	are	like	a	dewdrop,	fresh	and	young.
Remember,	 a	Buddha	 lives	moment	 to	moment.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 a	wave	 rises	 in	 the
ocean,	 a	majestic	wave.	With	great	 joy	 and	dance	 it	 comes	up,	with	hope	 and
dreams	 to	 touch	 the	 stars.	 Then	 the	 play	 for	 the	 moment,	 and	 then	 the	 wave
disappears.	It	will	come	again,	it	will	have	another	day.	It	will	again	dance	and
again	it	will	be	gone.	So	is	God	--	comes,	disappears,	comes	again,	disappears.
So	 is	 a	 Buddha-consciousness.	 Each	moment	 it	 comes,	 acts,	 responds,	 and	 is
gone.	Again	it	comes	and	is	gone.	It	is	atomic.
Between	 two	moments	 there	 is	 a	 gap;	 in	 that	 gap	Buddha	 disappears.	 I	 say	 a
word	to	you,	then	I	disappear.	Then	I	say	another	word	and	I	am	there,	and	then	I
disappear	again.	I	respond	to	you	and	then	I	am	no	more.	The	response	is	again
there	and	I	am	no	more.
Those	 intervals,	 those	 emptinesses	 keep	 one	 utterly	 fresh,	 because	 only	 death
can	keep	you	absolutely	alive.
You	 die	 once,	 after	 seventy	 years.	 Naturally	 you	 accumulate	 seventy	 years'
garbage.	A	Buddha	dies	every	moment	--	no	garbage	is	accumulated,	nothing	is
accumulated,	nothing	 is	 ever	possessed.	That's	why	Buddha	 said	 the	other	day
that	to	possess	marks	is	to	be	a	fraud,	because	possession	is	of	the	past.	Not	to
possess	marks	is	to	be	a	Buddha.
Just	 think	of	 it	 --	 each	moment	 arising,	 just	 like	a	breath.	You	breathe	 in,	you
breathe	out.
You	breathe	 in	again,	you	breathe	out	again.	Each	breath	coming	in	 is	 life	and
each	breath	going	out	is	death.	You	are	born	with	each	incoming	breath,	you	die
with	each	outgoing	breath.	Let	each	moment	be	a	birth	and	a	death.	Then	you
will	be	new.
But	 this	 new	has	nothing	 to	do	with	your	past,	 your	will,	 your	direction,	 your
impulse.	It	is	to	act	spontaneously.	It	is	not	reaction	but	response.	All	that	is	done
out	of	the	past	is	old,	so	that	one	can	of	oneself	do	nothing	new.	To	see	this	is	to
be	done	with	the	old	and	with	the	past	and	with	yourself.	That	is	all	we	can	do.
But	it	is	everything,	it	is	all.	Upon	the	ending	of	the	old,	the	new	may	follow,	it
may	not.	It	does	not	matter.	The	very	wish	for	the	new	is	an	old	wish.	Then	one
is	utterly	open.	Even	to	ask	for	the	new	is	an	old	wish.
A	Buddha	is	not	even	asking	for	the	new.	There	is	no	desire	for	anything,	that	"It
should	 be	 like	 this."	 If	 there	 is	 desire	 you	 will	 manage	 it	 like	 that,	 you	 will
impose	 yourself	 upon	 it.	 See	 life	 desirelessly.	 See	 life	without	 any	 conditions.
See	life	as	it	is	--	YATHA	BHUTAM	--	And	you	will	be	continuously	renewed,
rejuvenated.
That	is	the	real	meaning	of	resurrection.	If	you	understand	this	you	will	be	free
from	memory,	psychological	memory	that	is.	Memory	is	a	dead	thing.	Memory
is	 not	 truth	 and	 cannot	 ever	 be,	 because	 truth	 is	 always	 alive,	 truth	 is	 life;
memory	is	persistence	of	that	which	is	no	more.	It	is	living	in	a	ghost	world,	but
it	 contains	 us,	 it	 is	 our	 prison.	 In	 fact,	 it	 is	 us.	Memory	 creates	 the	 knot,	 the
complex	 called	 'I',	 the	 ego.	 And	 naturally	 this	 false	 entity	 called	 'I'	 is
continuously	afraid	of	death.	That's	why	you	are	afraid	of	the	new.
This	 'I'	 is	 afraid,	 not	 really	 you.	 The	 being	 has	 no	 fear,	 but	 the	 ego	 has	 fear,
because	the	ego	is	very	very	afraid	of	dying.	It	is	artificial,	it	is	arbitrary,	it	is	put
together.	 It	can	fall	apart	any	moment.	And	when	 the	new	enters,	 there	 is	 fear.
The	ego	is	afraid,	it	may	fall	apart.	Somehow	it	has	been	managing	to	keep	itself
together,	to	keep	itself	in	one	piece,	and	now	something	new	comes	--	it	will	be	a
shattering	thing.	That's	why	you	don't	accept	the	new	with	joy.	The	ego	cannot
accept	its	own	death	with	joy	--	how	can	it	accept	its	own	death	with	joy?
Unless	 you	 have	 understood	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the	 ego,	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to
receive	 the	 new.	 Once	 you	 have	 seen	 that	 the	 ego	 is	 your	 past	 memory	 and
nothing	 else,	 that	 you	 are	 not	 your	 memory,	 that	 memory	 is	 just	 like	 a
biocomputer,	 that	 it	 is	a	machine,	a	mechanism,	utilitarian,	but	you	are	beyond
it....	You	are	consciousness,	not	memory.
Memory	is	a	content	in	consciousness,	you	are	consciousness	itself.
For	example,	you	see	somebody	walking	on	the	road.	You	remember	the	face	but
you	can't	remember	the	name.	If	you	are	the	memory	you	should	remember	the
name	 too.	But	you	 say,	 "I	 recognize	 the	 face	but	 I	 don't	 remember	 the	name."
Then	you	start	looking	in	your	memory,	you	go	inside	your	memory,	you	look	to
this	side,	to	that	side,	and	suddenly	the	name	bubbles	up	and	you	say,	"Yes,	this
is	his	name."	Memory	 is	your	 record.	You	are	 the	one	who	 is	 looking	 into	 the
record,	you	are	not	the	memory	itself.
And	 it	 happens	many	 times	 that	 if	 you	 become	 too	 tense	 about	 remembering
something	it	becomes	difficult	to	remember	it,	because	the	very	tension,	the	very
strain	upon	your	being	does	not	allow	the	memory	to	release	its	information	to
you.	You	 try	and	 try	 to	 remember	 somebody's	name	and	 it	doesn't	 come,	even
though	you	say	it	is	just	on	the	tip	of	the	tongue.	You	know	that	you	know,	but
still	the	name	is	not	coming.
Now	this	is	strange.	If	you	are	memory,	then	who	is	preventing	you	and	how	is	it
not	coming?	And	who	is	this	who	says,	"I	know,	but	still	it	is	not	coming"?	And
then	you	try	hard	and	the	harder	you	try	the	more	difficult	it	becomes.	Then,	fed
up	 with	 the	 whole	 thing,	 you	 go	 into	 the	 garden	 for	 a	 walk,	 and	 suddenly,
looking	at	the	rosebush,	it	is	there,	it	has	surfaced.
Your	 memory	 is	 not	 you.	 You	 are	 consciousness,	 memory	 is	 content.	 But
memory	is	the	whole	life-energy	of	the	ego.	Memory	is	of	course	old,	and	it	is
afraid	of	the	new.	The	new	may	be	disturbing,	the	new	may	be	such	that	it	may
not	be	digestible.	The	new	may	bring	some	trouble.	You	will	have	to	shift	and
reshift	yourself.	You	will	have	to	readjust	yourself.	That	seems	arduous.
To	 be	 new	 one	 needs	 to	 become	 disidentified	 with	 the	 ego.	 Once	 you	 are
disidentified	 with	 the	 ego	 you	 don't	 care	 whether	 it	 dies	 or	 lives.	 In	 fact	 you
know	that	whether	it	lives	or	dies	it	is	already	dead.	It	is	a	mechanism.	Use	it	but
don't	be	used	by	it.	The	ego	is	continuously	afraid	of	death	because	it	is	arbitrary.
Hence	 the	 fear.	 It	 does	 not	 arise	 out	 of	 being,	 it	 cannot	 arise	 out	 of	 being,
because	being	is	life.	How	can	life	be	afraid	of	death?
Life	knows	nothing	of	death.
It	arises	out	of	 the	arbitrary,	 the	artificial,	 the	somehow	put	 together,	 the	 false,
the	pseudo.	And	yet	 it	 is	 just	such	 letting-go,	 just	 that	death	 that	makes	a	man
alive.	To	die	in	the	ego	is	to	be	born	into	being,	into	God.
The	 new	 is	 a	 messenger	 from	 God,	 the	 new	 is	 a	 message	 from	 God.	 It	 is	 a
gospel.	Listen	to	the	new,	go	with	the	new.	I	know	you	are	afraid.	In	spite	of	the
fear,	go	with	the	new,	and	your	life	will	become	richer	and	richer	and	you	will	be
able	one	day	to	release	the	imprisoned	splendor.
The	second	question:
Question	2
WHAT	DO	YOU	MEAN,	OSHO,	BY	SAYING	THAT	LIFE	IS	PERFECT?
I	mean	exactly	that.	Life	is	perfect.	But	I	understand	why	the	question	has	arisen.
The	question	has	arisen	because	you	have	some	ideas	about	perfection,	and	life
does	not	fit	with	your	ideas	hence	you	call	it	imperfect.
When	I	call	life	perfect,	I	don't	mean	that	it	fits	with	my	idea	of	perfection	--	I
have	none.
When	I	call	life	perfect,	I	simply	mean	there	is	nothing	else	to	compare	it	with,
there	is	no	ideal.	This	is	all	there	is;	it	has	to	be	perfect.
Your	perfection	is	always	comparison,	my	perfection	is	 just	a	simple	statement
of	fact;	it	is	not	a	comparison.	You	compare,	you	say,	"Yes,	this	is	perfect,	that	is
not	perfect,"	and	you	have	a	criterion	of	what	is	perfect.
I	have	heard	about	a	Sufi	master	who	was	talking	to	a	few	people	in	the	coffee
house	 and	 he	 said	 an	 old	 Sufi	 saying,"Life	 is	 perfect,	 everything	 is	 perfect,
everybody	is	perfect."
A	hunchback	was	listening,	he	stood	up	and	he	said,	"Look	at	me!	I	am	the	proof
that	life	is	not	perfect.	Look	at	me!	Is	this	not	enough	to	disprove	your	idea	that
life	is	perfect?
Look	at	me	--	how	ugly	I	am,	and	in	how	much	difficulty.	I	am	a	hunchback."
The	Sufi	looked	and	said,	"But	you	are	the	most	perfect	hunchback	that	I	have
ever	seen."
The	most	perfect	hunchback....
Once	 you	 start	 seeing	 life	 as	 it	 is	 and	 you	 have	 no	 idea	 how	 it	 should	 be,
everything	is	perfect.	Even	imperfection	is	perfect.	What	I	mean	when	I	say	life
is	perfect	 is	a	simple	 thing:	 I	mean	don't	bring	your	 ideals	 to	 it;	otherwise	you
make	life	imperfect,	because	once	you	bring	the	ideal	then	you	are	creating	the
imperfection.
If	you	say	man	has	to	be	seven	feet	tall	and	he	is	not,	there	is	difficulty.	Or	if	you
have	 the	 idea	 that	man	has	 to	be	only	four	feet	 tall	and	he	 is	not,	 then	 there	 is
difficulty.	Life	simply	is.	Somebody	is	seven	feet	tall	and	somebody	is	four	feet
tall.	 One	 tree	 grows	 to	 the	 clouds,	 another	 remains	 small.	 But	 all	 is	 perfectly
well,	 all	 is	 as	 it	 should	 be,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 'should'	 in	my	mind.	 I	 simply
listen	and	see	life	as	it	is.	I	have	no	idea	how	it	should	be.	That's	why	I	say	it	is
as	it	should	be,	there	is	no	other	life.
The	 message	 is	 drop	 comparing,	 drop	 judging;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 remain
miserable,	 and	 just	 because	 of	 your	 judgments	 and	 comparisons.	 Look	 at	 life
without	 being	 a	 judge.	Who	 are	 you	 to	 judge?	What	 do	 you	know	about	 life?
What	do	you	know	even	about	yourself?
Who	are	you	to	judge?	Judgment	comes	from	the	idea	that	you	know,	judgment
is	knowledgeability.
Look	at	life	with	a	state	of	not-knowing,	through	a	state	of	not-knowing,	look	at
life	 through	wonder	--	and	suddenly	all	 is	perfect.	Yes,	sometimes	 it	 is	cloudy,
but	 it	 is	perfect.	And	sometimes	it	 is	sunny	and	it	 is	perfect.	And	sometimes	it
rains	and	sometimes	it	doesn't	rain,	but	it	is	perfect.	As	it	is,	it	is	a	blessing.	To
be	in	tune	with	this	blessing	is	to	be	prayerful.
The	third	question:
Question	3
YOU	 SOMETIMES	 SAY	 ABOUT	 PEOPLE	 THAT	 THEY	 HAVE	 MISSED
AGAIN	OR
LIVED	 IN	VAIN.	THAT	SOUNDS	LIKE	THERE	 IS	A	GOAL	OR	A	POINT
WHICH
CAN	EITHER	BE	MISSED	OR	ATTAINED,	AND	THEN	AGAIN	YOU	SAY
THERE
;IS	NO	GOAL,	EVERYTHING	JUST	IS,	SO	HOW	CAN	I	POSSIBLY	MISS?
Dinesh,	you	missed	again!	The	moment	you	ask	how,	you	miss.	There	is	a	point,
not	to	be	realized	but	only	to	be	recognized.	And	there	is	no	'how'	to	it	because	it
is	already	 there;	you	have	 just	 to	 look,	you	have	 just	 to	be	 in	a	silent	space	so
that	you	can	look.
You	have	 to	be	 just	 in	 a	moment	when	you	are	not	doing	anything,	not	going
anywhere,	 not	 trying	 to	 improve	 upon	 things	 --	 relaxed.	 In	 that	 pause,	 in	 that
relaxation,	 it	 is	 there.	 It	 is	 a	 recognition;	 not	 a	 realization	 but	 a	 recognition,
because	deep	down	you	are	already	that	and	you	have	always	been	that.
Ask	 how	 and	 you	 miss	 again	 because	 how	 means	 something	 has	 to	 be	 done
about	 it.	No	method	 is	needed,	no	path	 is	needed,	no	 technique	 is	needed.	All
techniques	and	all	paths	and	all	methods	have	to	be	dropped.	You	have	to	be	in	a
state	of	utter	silence	so	that	you	can	hear	the	still	small	voice	within	you.	It	has
been	there	all	along,	but	you	are	so	noisy	with	your	desires	that	you	cannot	listen
to	your	own	music.
Don't	 ask	 how,	 and	 drop	 all	 the	 methods	 that	 you	 have	 accumulated	 through
asking	how.
Just	fall	into	a	silent	space.	It	is	a	knack,	not	a	technique.	Looking	at	the	morning
sun	rising,	just	sit	silently	and	look;	what	is	there	to	be	done?	The	moon	is	there
in	the	sky,	just	lie	down	on	the	grass	and	be	there	with	the	moon,	and	the	white
clouds	floating...	 just	be	with	 them.	And	 the	birds	are	singing	and	 the	children
playing,	and	you	don't	do	anything.
Be	passive.	In	your	passivity,	God	comes.	Be	feminine.	In	your	femininity,	God
comes.
Have	 you	 not	 watched	 it?	 Buddha	 looks	 very	 feminine,	 Krishna	 looks	 very
feminine.
Why?	--	because	it	is	simply	a	metaphor.	They	have	been	depicted	as	feminine,
graceful,	to	show	that	that	is	their	inner	quality	--	receptivity	.
When	 you	 are	 doing	 something	 you	 are	 being	 aggressive.	When	 you	 are	 not
doing	anything	you	are	non-aggressive.	And	God	cannot	be	conquered;	you	can
only	allow	him	to	conquer	you.
The	fourth	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	4
WHAT	IS	RESPECT	TO	A	MASTER?	HOW	DO	WE	RESPECT	YOU?	ARE
RITUALS	NEEDED	IN	HONOR	OF	YOU?	CAN	WE	JOKE	WITH	YOU?
IN	 SUFI	 DANCING	 WE	 WERE	 TOLD	 TO	 THINK	 OF	 SOMETHING	 TO
MAKE	US
GIGGLE.	 I	 THOUGHT	OF	 YOU	 SLIPPING,	 JUST	 LIKE	 SLIPPING	ON	A
BANANA	PEEL.	IS	IT	DISRESPECT	OR	IS	IT	JUST	OKAY?
With	me	it	 is	perfect.	But	you	have	been	disrespectful	 to	the	banana	peel.	And
remember,	bananas	are	not	Buddhas	--	they	will	never	forgive	you.
The	fifth	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	5
CAN	MEDITATION	BE	PASSIONATE?
Yes,	 that	 is	 the	 only	way	 for	meditation	 to	 exist.	 Passion	 is	 energy,	 passion	 is
fire,	passion	is	life.	If	you	are	doing	meditation	just	so-so,	without	any	passion,
without	intensity,	without	fire,	nothing	will	happen.	If	you	are	praying	just	as	a
formality	and	it	 is	not	love	that	has	arisen	in	your	heart,	 it	 is	meaningless,	 it	 is
absurd.
If	you	are	praying	to	God	without	passion	there	will	be	no	connection	between
you	and	God.	Only	passion	can	become	 the	bridge,	 the	 thirst,	 the	hunger.	The
more	thirsty	you	are,	the	more	is	the	possibility.	If	you	are	utterly	thirsty,	if	you
have	become	just	a	thirst,	your	whole	being	is	consumed	by	your	passion,	then
only	 something	happens	 --	 in	 that	 intensity,	 in	 that	moment	of	hundred-degree
passion.
Don't	be	lukewarm.	People	live	a	lukewarm	life.	They	are	neither	this	nor	that,
hence	they	remain	mediocre.	If	you	want	to	get	beyond	mediocrity,	create	a	life
of	great	passion.	Whatsoever	you	do,	do	 it	passionately.	 If	you	sing,	 then	 sing
passionately.	 If	 you	 love,	 then	 love	 passionately.	 If	 you	 paint,	 then	 paint
passionately.	 If	 you	 talk,	 then	 talk	 passionately.	 If	 you	 listen,	 then	 listen
passionately.	If	you	meditate,	then	meditate	passionately.
And	 from	 everywhere	 you	 will	 start	 having	 contact	 with	 God	 --	 wherever
passion	 is.	 If	 you	 are	 painting	with	 utter	 passion,	 your	 painting	 is	meditation.
There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any	 other	 meditation.	 If	 you	 are	 dancing	 with	 absolute
passion	 so	 that	 the	 dancer	 disappears	 and	 only	 the	 dance	 remains,	 it	 is
meditation,	 no	 other	 need,	 nowhere	 to	 go,	 no	 yoga	 postures.	 This	 is	 the	 yoga
postures:	the	dancer	has	disappeared	and	the	dance	is	there.	It	is	pure	energy	--
energy	vibrating.
In	that	state	you	contact.	Why	in	that	state	do	you	contact?	--	because	when	the
passion	 is	great,	 the	ego	dies.	The	ego	can	exist	only	 in	mediocre	minds;	only
mediocre	people	are	egoistic.	The	 really	great	are	not	egoistic,	 they	cannot	be.
But	 their	 life	 has	 a	 totally	 different	 direction,	 a	 different	 dimension	 --	 the
dimension	of	passion.
Have	 you	 observed	 these	 two	 words	 --	 passion	 and	 compassion?	 Passion
becomes	 transformed	 into	 compassion.	 There	 is	 a	 quantum	 leap	 from	 passion
into	compassion	--
but	the	quantum	leap	happens	only	when	you	are	boiling	at	one	hundred	degrees.
Then	the	water	becomes	vapor.	It	 is	 the	same	energy	that	exists	as	passion	and
one	day	becomes	 compassion.	Compassion	 is	 not	 antagonistic	 to	 passion;	 it	 is
passion	come	of	age,	it	is	passion	bloomed.	It	is	the	spring	season	for	passion.
I	am	all	for	passion.	Do	whatsoever	you	do	but	be	lost	into	it,	abandon	yourself
into	it,	dissolve	yourself	into	it.	And	dissolution	becomes	salvation.
The	sixth	question:
Question	6
OSHO,
THIS	MORNING,	 SITTING	BY	YOUR	STAGE	AFTER	LECTURE,	 I	 FELT
AS	 IF	 I	 WAS	 SITTING	 AT	 YOUR	 FEET	 AND	 YOU	WERE	 SHARING	 A
BEAUTIFUL
STORY	 OF	 WATERFALLS	 AND	 TREES	 AND	 HAPPINESS.	 YOU	 WERE
SMILING
AND	 THERE	WAS	 SO	MUCH	 JOY	AND	YET	WHEN	YOU	 LEFT	ONLY
MINUTES
EARLIER	 THERE	WAS	 A	 STUNNED	 FEELING	 OF	 HAVING	 BEEN	 HIT
OVER
THE	HEAD	WITH	A	VERY	BIG	STICK,	HARD.
OSHO,	 WHAT	 ARE	 YOU	 DOING	 TO	 US?	 ARE	 YOU	 TELLING	 US
BEAUTIFUL
STORIES	OR	HITTING	US	OVER	THE	HEAD	OR	WHAT?
Samata,	 those	stories	are	 just	a	preparation	for	 the	hit.	 I	am	doing	both.	First	 I
have	to	tell	stories	to	you	--	beautiful	stories	of	trees	and	mountains	and	clouds,
beautiful	 stories	 about	 the	 other	 shore,	 beautiful	 stories	 of	 buddhahood	 and
bodhisattvahood.	And	when	I	see	that	now	you	are	lost	in	the	stories	and	I	can
hit	and	you	will	not	be	angry,	then	I	hit.
The	stories	only	just	prepare	the	ground,	but	the	basic	work	is	a	hammer	on	your
head.	I	have	to	destroy	you.
Naturally	 the	work	 is	 such	 that	 first	 I	have	 to	persuade.	First	 I	have	 to	 seduce
you	to	come	closer	and	closer	and	closer;	only	then	the	hammer	can	descend	on
you.	Otherwise	you	will	 escape.	Those	 stories	 don't	 allow	you	 to	 escape,	 they
keep	you	close	 to	me.	Those	beautiful	 stories	 function	 like	a	glue	between	me
and	you,	 and	when	 I	 see	 the	 right	 time	has	 come	 I	hit	 --	 and	when	 I	hit,	 I	 hit
passionately.
The	seventh	question:
Question	7
OSHO,
YOU	 WOULD	 LIKE	 US	 ALL	 TO	 BECOME	 BODHISATTVAS.	 THAT
MEANS	ONE
HAS	 TO	 MAKE	 THAT	 FIRM	 DECISION	 TO	 HELP	 OTHERS	 TO	 THE
OTHER
SHORE.	HOWEVER,	I	DO	NOT	FEEL	ABLE	TO	MAKE	THAT	DECISION.
SOMETIMES	I	FEEL	LOVE	TOWARDS	OTHERS,	SOMETIMES	I	AM	JUST
BUSY
WITH	MYSELF.
SO	SHOULD	 I	WAIT	OR	 IS	THE	DECISION	NOT	SUCH	A	THING	AS	A
STATEMENT	 BUT	 RATHER	 LIKE	 A	 FRUIT	 THAT	 RIPENS	 BY	 ITSELF.
AND
WHY	THEN	IS	BUDDHA	A	BUDDHA	AND	NOT	A	BODHISATTVA?
First,	these	three	things	have	to	be	understood.	One,	the	ordinary	state	of	human
mind	--
when	 you	 cling	 to	 the	 world,	 to	 this	 shore,	 and	 the	 other	 shore	 seems	 to	 be
fictitious.	You	cannot	trust	the	other	shore.	You	cling	so	much	to	this	shore	that
the	only	problem	is	how	to	help	you	to	uncling	from	it.
Right	 now,	 Sandeha,	 this	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help	 if	 you	 start	 thinking	 of	 being	 a
bodhisattva.
This	is	not	going	to	help,	this	will	be	dangerous.	This	will	only	be	a	strategy	to
cling	to	this	shore.	You	are	not	yet	freed	of	this	shore.	This	will	be	a	new	way	to
cling	to	the	world	again.	And	this	is	very	tricky	--	now	it	will	be	in	the	name	of
religion,	compassion,	love	for	people,	service.	Now	it	will	have	great	ideology	in
it	--	"I	am	here	to	help	people,	that's	why	I	am	not	going	to	the	other	shore."	And
you	don't	want	to	go	to	the	other	shore,	and	you	don't	know	that	the	other	shore
exists,	 and	you	don't	 even	believe	 that	 the	other	 shore	 is.	Now	you	are	 falling
into	a	very	subtle	trap.
This	 is	 the	first	stage	of	 the	ordinary	mind:	 it	clings	with	the	world,	 it	goes	on
finding	more	and	more	new	reasons	to	cling.	It	is	very	difficult	to	uncling.	The
second	 stage	 is	 of	 a	 bodhisattva,	 one	 who	 has	 come	 to	 that	 unclinging	 state
where	he	 is	 ready	 to	 fly	 to	 the	other	 shore,	 he	has	no	 longer	 any	 roots	 in	 this
world.	 In	 the	 first	 stage	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	uncling,	 in	 the	 second	 stage	 it	 is	 very
difficult	to	cling.
The	Diamond	Sutra	is	for	the	second	stage	people,	not	for	the	first	stage	people.
First	you	have	to	uncling,	first	you	have	to	destroy	all	your	roots	in	this	world.
When	you	have	destroyed	all	your	roots,	then	only	can	you	be	of	help	to	others,
otherwise	you	cannot	be	of	any	help.	You	don't	have	anything	to	share.	You	can
go	on	believing	"I	love	people"
but	you	don't	have	love	yet.	Still	you	desire	people	to	love	you.	You	are	still	a
beggar,	you	are	not	yet	 in	 that	position	 to	share	your	 love	 for	no	 reason	at	all,
just	for	the	sheer	joy	of	sharing.
First	reach	to	the	second	stage.	First	 let	yourself	be	utterly	egoless.	Destroy	all
your	 roots	 in	 this	 world,	 don't	 be	 possessive.	 Only	 then	 will	 what	 Buddha	 is
saying	be	relevant	to	you.	Then	the	problem	will	arise.	First	the	problem	is	how
to	uncling,	then	the	problem	arises	how	to	cling	a	little	more.
Buddha	says	when	you	have	no	roots	then	you	are	needed	here.	Then	you	have
something	 to	 share.	 Then	 you	 have	 diamonds	 to	 share.	 Then	 before	 leaving,
share,	and	 remain	here	as	 long	as	you	can.	This	 is	 the	 second	stage.	The	 third
stage	is	of	a	Buddha	who	has	reached	to	the	other	shore.
Now	you	ask:	"And	why	then	is	a	Buddha	a	Buddha	and	not	a	bodhisattva?"	The
third	stage	is	more	difficult.	To	be	on	the	other	shore	and	yet	be	on	this	shore	is
the	most	difficult	thing.	To	be	on	the	other	shore	and	still	go	on	helping	people	is
the	most	difficult	thing.	So	these	are	the	three	difficulties.	First,	to	uncling	from
this	shore.	Second,	when	the	unclinging	has	happened,	to	remain	on	this	shore.
And	 third,	when	 you	 cannot	 remain	 on	 this	 shore...	 because	 a	moment	 comes
when	it	becomes	impossible.
Every	bodhisattva	has	to	become	a	Buddha.	You	cannot	cling	to	this	shore,	that
is	illegal.
A	point	comes	when	you	have	to	leave.	A	little	is	possible;	at	the	most	one	life,
not	more	than	that.	Then	you	will	have	to	leave.	One	life	you	can	cling,	because
all	the	roots	are	destroyed	but	you	have	the	body,	so	you	can	remain	in	the	body.
One	life	you	can	cling	at	the	most,	then	you	have	to	leave.
Then	comes	 the	 third	stage	--	 the	Buddha.	Buddha	 is	one	who	has	 left	and	yet
goes	on	helping	people.	But	remember,	if	you	have	been	a	bodhisattva,	only	then
will	you	be	able	in	the	third	stage	to	help	people,	otherwise	not.
There	are	 two	words	 to	be	understood.	One	 is	ARHAT,	another	 is	bodhisattva.
Arhat	 is	 one...	 it	 is	 the	 same	 state	 --	 the	 world	 is	 destroyed,	 he	 has	 no	more
attachment,	the	ego	is	gone	--	but	immediately	he	moves	to	the	other	shore.	He	is
called	arhat.	He	does	not	bother	about	others,	he	simply	goes	to	the	other	shore
when	he	is	ready.
The	arhat	will	not	be	able	to	help	from	the	other	shore	because	he	will	not	know
how	to	help,	he	has	never	been	trained	for	help.	A	bodhisattva	is	also	in	the	same
state	as	an	arhat.	He	has	known,	he	has	seen,	he	has	become	truth,	but	he	stays
on	 this	 shore	 a	 little	 longer	 and	goes	on	helping	people	 in	whatsoever	way	he
can.	He	learns	the	way	to	help.
If	you	have	been	a	bodhisattva	and	then	you	go	to	the	other	shore,	on	the	other
shore	the	arhat	will	also	become	a	Buddha	and	the	bodhisattva	will	also	become
a	Buddha	--	the	other	shore	is	the	shore	of	Buddhahood	--	but	the	one	who	has
been	a	bodhisattva	on	this	shore	will	be	able	to	help	from	the	other	shore	too.	He
will	find	ways	and	means.	And	the	Buddha	goes	on	helping	down	the	centuries.
Even	now,	if	you	are	open	to	Buddha,	the	help	will	be	coming	to	you.	Even	now,
if	you	are	passionately	in	love	with	Buddha,	the	help	will	be	coming	to	you.	He
is	still	shouting	from	the	other	shore,	but	the	shout	from	the	other	shore	is	very
far	away.	You	will	have	to	listen	very	attentively,	more	attentively	than	you	are
listening	to	me,	because	the	voice	will	be	coming	from	the	other	shore.
Sooner	or	later	I	will	be	gone.	If	you	learn	how	to	listen	to	me	attentively,	many
of	you	will	be	able	to	listen	to	me	from	the	other	shore	too.
Buddhahood	 is	 the	 ultimate	 state	 of	 consciousness,	 but	 if	 you	 pass	 through
bodhisattvahood	you	will	remain	available	to	the	world.	You	will	be	a	window	to
God	forever.	If	you	don't	pass	through	bodhisattvahood,	you	will	disappear	into
the	infinite,	but	nobody	will	be	helped	by	you.
The	last	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	8
WHENEVER	 YOU	 TALK	 ABOUT	 REALIZING	 ONE'S	 BUDDHAHOOD,
YOU	SAY
IT	IS	SUDDEN,	LIKE	LIGHTNING,	NOT	A	PROCESS,	BUT	WHAT	I	CAN
SEE
HAPPENING	IN	ME	IS	A	VERY	SLOW	PROCESS	OF	BECOMING	MORE
CONTENTED,	LESS	IN	THE	GRIP	OF	THE	EGO.
CAN	YOU	CLARIFY	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	THAT	PROCESS	AND
THE
'SUDDEN	FLASH'	THAT	HAPPENED	TO	YOU?	IS	THERE	ANY	DANGER
IN
BECOMING	TOO	CONTENTED	WITH	THE	SLOW	PROCESS?
No,	Deepta,	there	is	no	danger.	The	enlightenment	is	always	like	lightning.	It	is
in	a	flash,	it	is	a	sudden	explosion.	It	cannot	come	gradually	because	it	cannot	be
divided;	you	cannot	have	it	in	bits.
Then	what	is	happening	to	Deepta?	She	feels	she	is	becoming	slowly	contented.
This	 is	 not	 enlightenment,	 this	 is	 the	 ground	 in	which	 enlightenment	 happens.
The	ground	can	be	prepared	gradually,	in	fact	has	to	be	prepared	gradually.	You
cannot	prepare	the	ground	like	lightning,	in	a	flash.	Sometimes	it	takes	lives	to
prepare	the	ground.
The	 preparation	 for	 buddhahood	 is	 gradual,	 but	 the	 actual	 happening	 of
buddhahood	is	a	sudden	explosion	in	you.	So	don't	be	afraid,	this	is	good.	You
are	moving	on	the	right	track.	Become	more	and	more	contented.
The	day	you	are	utterly	contented,	the	flash.
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	The	Taste	of	Enlightenment
25	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712250
ShortTitle:
DIAMON05
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
78
mins
VAJRACHCHEDIKA
PRAJNAPARAMITA
SUTRA
OF
GAUTAMA
THE
BUDDHA
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE,	SUBHUTI,	IN	THESE	BODHISATTVAS
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SELF	TAKES	PLACE,
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	BEING,
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SOUL,
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	PERSON.
NOR	DO	THESE	BODHISATTVAS	HAVE
A	PERCEPTION	OF	A	DHAMMA
A	PERCEPTION	OF	A	NO-DHAMMA	OR
NO	PERCEPTION	OR
NON-PERCEPTION	TAKES	PLACE	IN	THEM.
AND	WHY?
IF,	SUBHUTI,	THESE	BODHISATTVAS,
SHOULD	HAVE	A	PERCEPTION	OF	EITHER	A	DHAMMA,
OR	A	NO-DHAMMA,
THEY	WOULD	THEREBY	SEIZE	ON	A	SELF,
ON	A	BEING,	ON	A	SOUL,	ON	A	PERSON.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	A	BODHISATTVA	SHOULD	NOT	SEIZE
ON	EITHER	A	DHAMMA	OR	A	NO-DHAMMA.
THEREFORE	THIS	SAYING	HAS	BEEN	TAUGHT	BY	THE	TATHAGATA
WITH	A	HIDDEN	MEANING:
"BY	THOSE	WHO	KNOW	THE	DISCOURSE	ON	DHAMMA
AS	LIKE	UNTO	A	RAFT,
DHAMMAS	SHOULD	BE	FORSAKEN,
STILL	MORE	SO,	NO-DHAMMAS."'
THE	LORD	ASKED:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
IS	THERE	ANY	DHAMMA	WHICH
THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	FULLY	KNOWN	AS
"THE	 UTMOST,	 RIGHT	 AND	 PERFECT	 ENLIGHTENMENT",	 OR	 IS
THERE	ANY	DHAMMA	WHICH
THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	DEMONSTRATED?'
SUBHUTI	REPLIED:	'NO,	NOT	AS	I	UNDERSTAND
WHAT	THE	LORD	HAS	SAID.
AND	WHY?
THIS	DHAMMA	WHICH	THE	TATHAGATA
HAS	FULLY	KNOWN	OR	DEMONSTRATED	--
IT	CANNOT	BE	GRASPED,
IT	CANNOT	BE	TALKED	ABOUT,
IT	IS	NEITHER	A	DHAMMA	NOR	A	NO-DHAMMA.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	AN	ABSOLUTE
EXALTS	THE	HOLY	PERSONS.
The	Taste	of	Enlightenment
To	recapitulate:
In	the	last	sutra	Subhuti	asked
'WILL	THERE	BE	ANY	BEINGS	IN	THE	LAST	EPOCH,
AT	THE	TIME	OF	THE	COLLAPSE	OF	THE	GOOD	DOCTRINE,
WHO	WILL	BE	ABLE	TO	UNDERSTAND	THE	DHAMMA?'
BUDDHA	SAID:	'DO	NOT	SPEAK	THUS,	SUBHUTI!
YES,	EVEN	THEN	THERE	WILL	BE	BEINGS	WHO
WILL	UNDERSTAND	THE	TRUTH.
EVEN	ONE	SINGLE	THOUGHT	OF	SERENE	FAITH
IS	ENOUGH	TO	TRANSFORM	A	MAN.
KNOWN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	TO	THE	TATHAGATA
THROUGH	HIS	BUDDHA-COGNITION.
SEEN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	BY	THE	TATHAGATA
WITH	HIS	BUDDHA-EYE.
FULLY-KNOWN,	SUBHUTI,	THEY	ARE	TO	THE	TATHAGATA.'
A	 few	 things	 to	be	understood;	 then	 it	will	 be	 easy	 to	 enter	 into	 today's	 sutra.
First,	the	good	doctrine,	the	Dhamma.	Buddha	calls	a	doctrine	good	if	it	is	not	a
doctrine.	If	 it	 is	a	doctrine	it	 is	not	a	good	doctrine.	Buddha	calls	a	philosophy
good	philosophy	if	it	is	not	a	philosophy.	If	it	is	a	philosophy	then	it	is	not	good
philosophy.
A	doctrine	is	a	set,	fixed	phenomenon.	The	universe	is	in	flux;	no	doctrine	can
contain	it.
No	 doctrine	 can	 be	 just	 to	 it,	 no	 doctrine	 can	 do	 justice	 to	 existence.	 All
doctrines	fall	short.
So	Buddha	says,	'My	doctrine	is	not	a	doctrine	but	just	a	vision.	I	have	not	given
you	any	set	rules,	I	have	not	given	you	a	system.'	He	says,	'I	have	only	given	you
an	approach	towards	reality.	I	have	only	given	you	the	keys	to	open	the	door.	I
have	not	said	anything	about	what	you	will	see	when	you	open	the	door.	Nothing
can	be	said	about	it.'
Just	think	of	a	man	who	has	lived	always	in	a	dark	cave,	who	knows	nothing	of
light,	 who	 knows	 nothing	 of	 color,	 who	 has	 never	 seen	 the	 sun	 or	 the	moon.
How	can	you	tell	him	about	the	rainbows?	How	can	you	talk	to	him	about	stars?
How	can	you	describe	roses	to	him?	It	is	impossible.	And	whatsoever	you	say	to
him,	if	he	understands	it,	it	will	be	wrong.	He	will	create	a	doctrine	and	that	will
be	wrong.
So	Buddha	says,	'I	have	not	given	any	doctrine	to	you.	I	have	given	you	only	the
key	to	open	the	door	so	that	you	can	come	out	of	the	dark	cave	of	your	being	and
you	 can	 see	 yourself	 what	 is	 the	 case	 --	 YATHA	 BHUTAM,	 that	 which	 is.'
Nothing	has	been	said	about	 it;	 that's	why	it	 is	not	a	doctrine.	Buddha	 is	not	a
philosopher.	He	is	a	physician.
That's	exactly	what	he	has	said	--	that	'I	am	a	physician,	not	a	philosopher'.
A	philosopher	is	one	who	goes	on	talking	about	color	and	light	to	a	blind	man,
and	goes	on	confusing	him	and	confounding	him.	The	blind	man	is	incapable	of
understanding	anything	about	light.	Buddha	says,	'I	am	not	going	to	philosophize
about	light	I	will	simply	give	you	a	medicine,	I	will	try	to	cure	your	eyes.	Then
you	can	see	for	yourself.'
This	is	called	the	good	doctrine,	this	is	called	Dhamma.	This	is	a	totally	different
vision.
The	 second	 thing	 to	 understand:	 Buddha	 says	 to	 Subhuti,	 Do	 not	 speak	 thus.'
Why?
Because	 this	 idea	has	been	persistently	arising	 in	people	 --	even	 in	people	 like
Subhuti,	of	the	highest	spiritual	qualities	--	that	they	are	special,	that	their	time	is
special,	 that	 their	 age	 is	 special,	 that	 never	 again	will	 people	 be	 able	 to	 touch
such	heights.	This	is	an	egoistic,	a	subtle	egoistic	attitude.	It	shows	much	about
Subhuti	He	is	still	carrying	a	subtle	ego.
Down	the	ages	almost	all	people	have	suffered	from	this	disease,	they	think	that
their	time	is	something	special.	No	time	is	special.	God	is	available	in	all	times.
In	India	Hindus	say	that	now	nobody	can	become	enlightened	because	it	is	Kali
Yuga,	it	is	the	last,	the	dirtiest	age.	Nobody	can	become	enlightened	Jainas	say
that	nobody	can	become	enlightened	because	it	is	Pancham	Kal,	the	fifth	epoch.
Even	 Buddhists,	 perfectly	 aware	 of	 'The	 Diamond	 Sutra',	 go	 on	 saying	 that
nobody	 can	 become	 enlightened	 in	 this	 age,	 and	 even	 they	 try	 to	 interpret
Buddha's	words	in	such	a	way	that	it	starts	appearing	as	if	nobody	can	become
enlightened.
Just	 the	other	night	 I	was	 reading	a	commentary	on	 'The	Diamond	Sutra'.	The
commentary	says	'Yes,	Buddha	says	that	people	will	be	there	who	will	be	able	to
understand	a	little	bit	of	the	truth,	and	great	will	be	their	merit	--	but	merit	is	not
enlightenment.	Merit	is	just	the	ground.'
So	 the	 interpreter,	 the	 commentator	 says,	 'In	 this	 age	 nobody	 can	 become
enlightened;	at	the	most	you	can	attain	to	some	merit.	You	have	to	wait	for	the
right	age	to	become	enlightened.	Your	merit	will	be	of	great	help,	it	will	put	the
foundation,	but	you	cannot	make	the	shrine	right	now.	This	is	how	people	go	on.
What	Buddha	is	saying	is	simply	this	fact.	That	all	time	is	similar	for	the	seeker,
and	so	 it	 is	 for	 the	non-seeker.	 In	Buddha's	 time	 there	were	millions	of	people
who	never	became	enlightened.	It	is	not	like	spring	--	that	when	spring	comes	all
the	 trees	bloom.	 If	 that	 is	 the	case	 then	all	 the	people	 in	Buddha's	 time	would
have	become	enlightened.	Only	 a	 few	people	became	enlightened.	So	 it	 is	 not
like	spring,	 it	 is	not	a	question	of	climate,	 it	 is	not	a	particular	auspicious	time
that	makes	people	enlightened.
Those	who	seek	and	search,	they	attain.	Those	who	don't	seek	and	search,	they
will	not	attain;	even	if	 the	time	is	auspicious,	 it	doesn't	matter.	And	the	time	is
the	same,	the	time	is	neither	good	nor	bad.	Time	is	neither	for	enlightenment	nor
against	enlightenment.
Whatsoever	you	want	your	life	to	become,	time	gives	you	the	opportunity.
Time	 is	 impartial.	 It	 does	 not	 impose	 anything	 on	 you,	 it	 simply	 gives	 you
freedom.	You	can	become	enlightened,	as	enlightened	as	you	desire,	or	you	can
remain	as	unenlightened	as	you	decide.	Existence	cooperates	with	you	But	this
idea	 arises	 again	 and	 again.	 I	 have	 come	 across	many	 scriptures	 of	 the	world,
people	think	'What	will	happen	to	others	in	the	future?'
This	idea	persists	even	in	ordinary	human	beings.	You	can	see	any	old	man	and
he	 talks	about	his	 time.	Those	beautiful	days,	 those	golden	days	which	he	had
lived	were	something	special,	now	there	is	nothing	in	the	world.	And	remember,
when	 you	 become	 old	 you	 will	 tell	 to	 your	 children	 the	 same	 long	 tales,	 tall
tales,	and	you	will	again	say,
'Those	were	the	days.'
I	have	heard	about	a	man	who	went	to	Paris	when	he	was	eighty	with	his	wife,
who	was	almost	 seventy-eight.	They	 looked	around,	 the	old	man	 said,	 'Things
have	 changed,	 Paris	 is	 no	more	Paris.	 I	 had	 come	 fifty	 years	 ago	when	 I	was
thirty	--	that	was	the	real	Paris.'
The	woman	laughed,	and	as	women	are	more	earthly,	more	pragmatic,	she	said,
'My	understanding	is	different.	I	think	you	are	no	more	you,	that's	all	Paris	is	the
same.	Just	 look	at	 the	young	people	--	 they	are	enjoying,	as	much	as	you	must
have	enjoyed	when	you	were	young.'
Now	for	a	man	who	is	eighty,	Paris	means	nothing,	Paris	is	its	night-life.	For	a
man	who	is	eighty,	it	is	irrelevant.	He	is	no	more	so	foolish	to	enjoy	it.	He	is	no
more	that	young	to	be	so	foolish.	Dreams	have	disappeared.	And	I	think	the	wife
is	right	--	'You	are	not	you,	Paris	is	the	same.'
It	happens	to	you	too.	You	start	thinking	that	those	days	of	your	childhood	were
beautiful.	Now	things	are	not	so	good.	You	feel	sorry	for	the	kids	who	are	living
now.
You	don't	know	--	they	will	feel	sorry	for	other	kids	again.	This	has	always	been
so.	And	every	man	thinks	his	time	has	some	special	quality,	it	is	revolutionary.
And	I	have	heard,	these	were	the	first	words	uttered	by	Adam	when	Adam	and
Eve	were	thrown	out	of	the	garden	of	Eden.	He	told	Eve,	'Look,	we	are	living	in
we	are	passing	through	great	revolutionary	times.'	Naturally,	being	thrown	out	of
the	garden	of	Eden	must	have	been	a	great	crisis,	nobody	has	been	through	such
a	crisis	again.
Buddha	says,	'Do	not	speak	thus,	Subhuti.'	Why?	Because	all	time	has	the	same
quality.
Space	and	time	are	not	corrupted	by	you,	they	cannot	be	corrupted.	You	cannot
even	catch	hold	of	time,	how	can	you	corrupt	it?	They	are	not	polluted.	You	can
pollute	the	air	and	the	sea,	but	you	cannot	pollute	time,	or	can	you?
How	can	you	pollute	 time?	You	cannot	even	catch	hold	of	 it.	By	 the	 time	you
catch	hold	of	 it,	 it	 is	gone.	By	 the	 time	you	become	aware	of	 the	moment,	 the
moment	 is	no	more	 It	has	 already	become	past,	 it	 has	 already	become	history.
You	cannot	pollute	time.	Time	is	one	of	the	most	pure	things,	it	is	always	pure.
That's	why	Buddha	says,	'Do	not	speak	thus,	Subhuti.	Yes,	even	then	there	will
be	beings	who	will	understand	truth,'	because	truth	is	not	a	quality	that	happens
sometimes	and	does	not	happen	sometimes.	Truth	is	always	there.	That	is	what	is
called	truth	--	that	which	is	always	there.
Truth	has	nothing	to	do	with	time,	it	is	eternal.	You	can	attain	to	truth	in	the	day,
you	can	attain	to	truth	in	the	night,	you	can	attain	to	truth	in	the	marketplace,	you
can	 attain	 to	 truth	 in	 the	Himalayas,	 you	 can	 attain	 to	 truth	 being	 a	man	 or	 a
woman,	a	child,	a	young	man,	an	old	man.	You	can	attain	to	truth	any	moment,
any	place,	because	truth	is	always	available,	you	just	have	to	become	available
to	it.
And	 Buddha	 says,	 'Even	 one	 single	 thought	 of	 serene	 faith	 is	 enough	 to
transform	a	man.
ONE	 SINGLE	THOUGHT	OF	 SERENE	FAITH....	What	 is	 faith	 in	 Buddha's
sense	of	the	word?	Ordinarily	faith	is	fear,	faith	is	nothing	but	fear.	If	you	go	to
the	churches	and	to	the	temples	and	the	gurudwaras,	you	will	find	fearful	people,
frightened	people	--
frightened	of	life	and	frightened	of	death	and	just	seeking	some	shelter	in	some
god;	feeling	helpless,	finding	some	security	somewhere;	or	missing	their	father
and	their	mother	and	projecting	some	father	and	mother	there	in	heaven.
They	 are	 not	mature,	 they	 cannot	 live	without	 their	mums	 and	 dads.	 The	 dad
may	be	dead,	the	mum	may	not	be	any	more	alive,	but	they	are	children.	They
need	 some	 apron	 to	 cling	 to,	 they	 need	 somebody.	 They	 cannot	 live	 on	 their
own,	they	cannot	trust	themselves.
When	you	are	afraid	and	because	of	your	fear	you	become	religious,	this	religion
is	bogus.	This	religion	is	a	kind	of	monkey	religion,	ape	religion,	imitative.	Out
of	fear	arises	imitation.	What	does	Buddha	mean	when	he	uses	the	word	'faith'?
His	word	is	SHADDHA.	The	Sanskrit	form	of	SHADDHA	is	SHRADDHA;	it
does	not	 really	mean	 faith,	 it	means	confidence,	 faith	 in	oneself.	 It	 is	 a	 totally
different	religion.	Buddha	calls	it	right	religion	and	the	other	religion	he	calls	the
wrong	religion.
If	 you	 approach	 reality	 out	 of	 fear	 and	 trembling,	 you	 are	 approaching	 in	 a
wrong	 way,	 and	 when	 you	 are	 approaching	 in	 a	 wrong	 way,	 whatsoever	 you
come	to	see	and	feel	will	be	wrong.	Your	eyes	are	wrong,	your	heart	is	wrong.
Truth	cannot	be	known	out	of	fear,	truth	can	only	be	known	out	of	fearlessness.
SHADDHA	 is	 needed,	 a	 confidence	 in	 oneself	 is	 needed,	 a	 trust	 in	 one's	 own
being	is	needed.
One	should	approach	reality	out	fo	trust	not	out	of	fear.	The	essence	of	faith	or
trust	is	letting-go.	The	fearful	man	can	never	let	go.	He	is	always	on	the	defence,
he	is	always	protecting	himself,	he	is	always	fighting,	he	is	always	antagonistic.
Even	his	prayer,	his	meditation,	is	nothing	but	a	strategy	to	protect	himself.
The	man	of	faith	knows	how	to	let	go,	the	man	of	faith	knows	how	to	surrender,
the	man	of	faith	knows	how	to	flow	with	 the	river	and	not	 to	push	it.	He	goes
with	the	stream	wherever	it	takes	him.	He	has	that	courage	and	confidence	that
he	can	go	with	the	stream.
This	is	my	experience	and	observation	too.	Whenever	a	fearful	person	comes	to
me	he	is	incapable	of	surrender,	although	he	thinks	he	is	so	strong	that	he	cannot
surrender.
Nobody	 likes	 to	 feel	 that	 he	 is	weak,	 particularly	 the	weaklings	 never	 like	 it.
They	 don't	 want	 to	 come	 to	 the	 realization	 that	 they	 are	 weak,	 that	 they	 are
cowardly.	They	think	they	are	very	strong	--	they	can't	surrender.
My	own	observation	is	the	stronger	the	person,	the	easier	is	the	surrender.	Only
the	 strong	 man	 can	 surrender,	 because	 he	 trusts	 himself,	 he	 is	 confident	 of
himself,	he	knows	that	he	can	let	go.	He	is	unafraid.	He	is	ready	to	explore	the
unknown,	he	is	ready	to	go	into	the	uncharted.	he	is	thrilled	by	the	journey	of	the
unknown.	He	wants	to	taste	it,	whatsoever	the	cost	and	whatsoever	the	risk.	He
wants	to	live	in	danger.
A	man	 of	 faith	 always	 lives	 in	 danger.	 Danger	 is	 his	 shelter,	 insecurity	 is	 his
security,	and	a	tremendous	enquiring	quest	is	his	only	love.	He	wants	to	explore,
he	wants	to	go	to	the	very	end	of	existence,	or	to	the	very	depth	of	existence,	or
to	the	very	height	of	existence.
He	wants	to	know	what	it	is	--	"What	is	it	that	surrounds	me?	What	is	it	that	I	go
on	calling	'I'?	Who	am	I?"
A	 strong	man	 is	 ready	 to	 surrender.	He	 knows	 that	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 fear.	 'I
belong	 to	 existence,	 I	 am	 not	 a	 stranger	 here.	 Existence	 has	 mothered	 me,
existence	can't	be	inimical	to	me.	Existence	has	brought	me	here,	I	am	a	product
of	existence	Existence	has	some	destiny	to	fulfill	through	me.'
The	 strong	man	 always	 feels	THAT	destiny	 there,	 'I	 am	here	 to	 do	 something
that	is	needed	by	the	existence	and	nobody	else	can	do	it	except	me,	otherwise
why	should	I	be	created?'	So	he	is	always	ready	to	go	into	the	dark,	to	search,	to
seek.	This	Buddha	calls	shaddha,	faith.	It	is	better	to	translate	it	as	trust.
EVEN	 ONE	 SINGLE	 THOUGHT	 OF	 SERENE	 FAITH.	 And	 then	 he	 adds
another	condition	to	it	--	SERENE	faith.	You	can	have	a	kind	of	trust.	It	may	not
be	 serene,	 it	may	 be	 full	 of	 turmoil.	 That	won't	 help,	 that	won't	 take	 you	 far.
Faith	has	to	be	serene.
Faith	has	to	come	out	of	stillness,	not	out	of	the	noise	of	the	mind.	Faith	has	not
to	be	a	belief.	Belief	is	always	noisy.
You	choose	one	belief	against	others.	Naturally	 there	 is	conflict,	 it	 is	a	choice.
There	 are	 thousands	 of	 beliefs	 around	 you	 hankering	 for	 your	 attention:	 the
Christian,	the	Hindu,	the	Mohammedan,	the	Buddhist,	the	Jaina	--	thousands	of
beliefs.	 There	 are	 three	 hundred	 religions	 on	 the	 earth	 and	 each	 religion	 has
many	sects.	Now	they	are	all	competing	for	you,	they	want	to	possess	you,	and
naturally	your	mind	becomes	very	very	shaken	and	wavering.	What	 to	choose,
what	not	to	choose,	with	whom	to	go?
And	even	if	you	choose	out	of	this	noise	and	turmoil,	a	part	of	your	mind	always
goes	on	saying,	'You	are	not	doing	right.'	And	that	part	will	take	revenge.	Sooner
or	 later	 that	 part	 will	 assert	 and	will	 disrupt	 your	 being	 and	 you	will	 be	 torn
apart.
Buddha	says	a	serene	faith	is	needed.	What	is	serene	faith?	A	faith	that	does	not
arise	out	of	choice	but	out	of	understanding.	Just	the	other	day	I	received	a	letter
from	Chintana.
She	has	been	a	Christian	nun	and	she	is	very	much	torn	apart.	She	cannot	decide
whether	to	be	with	me	or	to	go	back	to	her	nunnery.	Now	whatsoever	she	will	do
will	be	out	of	chaos.	If	she	decides	to	be	with	me,	a	part	of	her	mind	will	go	on
fighting	with	her.	If	she	decides	to	go	to	the	nunnery,	a	part	of	her	mind	will	go
on	desiring	to	be	here.
Whatsoever	 she	 chooses	 will	 be	 wrong.	 The	 choice	 itself	 will	 come	 out	 of
turmoil,	anxiety.	It	will	be	a	kind	of	repression	If	she	chooses	the	nunnery,	she
will	be	repressing	the	love	for	me.	If	she	chooses	me,	she	will	be	repressing	the
desire	for	the	nunnery	--	the	seclusion,	the	isolation,	the	protection,	the	comfort,
the	convenience	of	the	nunnery.
Now	what	will	Buddha	suggest	to	Chintana?	Buddha	will	suggest	meditate,	don't
choose.
There	is	no	hurry.	Be	choiceless.	Meditate,	pray,	become	more	and	more	silent.
One	 moment	 will	 come	 when	 out	 of	 serenity,	 the	 choice.	 Not	 that	 you	 are
choosing	against	any	of	your	parts,;	just	out	of	the	serenity	it	blooms	like	a	lotus.
It	is	a	total	blooming,	your	whole	being	is	with	it.	It	is	not	a	choice	against	any
other	alternative.	It	is	just	your	very	fragrance.	Then	you	are	not	torn	apart.	This
Buddha	calls	 serene	 faith	And	he	 says	even	a	 single	 thought	of	 serene	 faith	 is
enough	to	transform	a	man.
This	is	my	suggestion	to	Chintana	too.	Today	she	may	be	even	more	worried;	it
is	the	twenty-fifth	of	December	--	torn	apart	she	will	be.	But	I	will	not	suggest	to
her	to	choose	me	or	to	choose	the	monastery.	Don't	choose.	Wait,	have	patience.
Let	God	choose	 for	you.	You	meditate.	How	can	you	choose?	You	are	not	yet
wise	enough	to	choose.	Pray,	and	wait.
And	don't	play	 tricks	 --	because	you	can	play	 tricks	with	your	own	mind.	You
can	have	your	idea	--	you	have	really	chosen	--	and	then	you	can	wait,	and	then
from	 the	back	door	you	can	 force	your	choice	and	you	can	believe	 that	 this	 is
from	 God.	 No,	 when	 I	 am	 saying	 don't	 choose,	 don't	 choose.	 Forget	 about
choosing.	How	can	you	choose?
Meditate,	become	serene,	still,	silent.	One	day	when	there	will	be	no	thought	in
the	mind	suddenly	you	will	feel	something	has	been	decided	and	you	are	not	the
one	who	has	decided	it,	it	is	God's	decision.	Then	whatsoever	it	is,	it	is	good.
KNOWN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	TO	THE	TATHAGATA
THROUGH	HIS	BUDDHA-COGNITION.
SEEN	THEY	ARE,	SUBHUTI,	BY	THE	TATHAGATA
WITH	HIS	BUDDHA-EYE.
FULLY-KNOWN,	SUBHUTI,	THEY	ARE	TO	THE	TATHAGATA.'
Now	these	two	things	have	to	be	understood.	One	is	the	word	TATHAGATA.	It
is	a	very	strange	word	and	has	two	meanings,	absolutely	opposed	to	each	other,
two	meanings	diametrically	opposed	to	each	other.	It	is	a	strange	word.	The	first
meaning	is	tath-agata,	that	means	thus	came.	The	second	meaning	is	tatha-gata,
it	means	thus	gone.	One	meaning	is	thus	came,	another	meaning	is	thus	gone.
A	few	people	have	chosen	the	first	meaning	--	thus	came.	Then	it	means	a	man
who	has	not	come	on	his	own,	who	has	no	motive	for	coming	here.	Mm?	That	is
what	 Christians	 like	 about	 Christ	 --	 he's	 sent	 by	 God.	 He	 has	 no	 motive,	 no
desire	to	be	fulfilled	here.	He	has	come	as	a	messenger.
That	 is	what	Mohammedans	 like	about	Mohammed.	They	call	him	Paigamber,
the	messenger.	He	has	not	come	for	any	of	his	own	desires	to	be	fulfilled	here.
He	is	utterly	contented,	he	has	no	cause	to	be	here.	Others	are	here	with	a	cause,
they	have	not	just	come.	They	have	come	because	of	their	desire.	They	wanted
to	come,	that's	why	they	have	come.
Buddha	has	come,	not	that	he	wanted	to	come,	he	is	sent	by	existence	itself.	It	is
existence	 that	has	 taken	 form	 in	him.	 It	 is	uncaused,	unmotivated,	no	personal
desire.
That	is	the	first	meaning	of	Tathagata	--	thus	came.
The	 second	meaning	 a	 few	 people	 have	 chosen	 --	 thus	 gone.	 That	means	 one
who	has	already	gone	from	here.	If	you	go	deep	into	Buddha	you	will	not	find
anybody	 there,	 he	 has	 left	 the	 abode.	He	no	more	 exists	 in	 the	 body,	 he	 is	 no
more	present	in	the	body.	He	has	become	empty.	He	is	well-gone,	perfectly	gone
to	the	other	shore.	His	real	existence	is	on	the	other	shore,	on	this	shore	only	a
shadow	is	moving.
But	my	own	choice	is	both	together.	I	would	like	to	interpret	the	word	'Tathagata'
as	'thus	came,	thus	gone'...	like	wind.	The	wind	comes	for	no	reason	of	its	own,
for	no	motivation	of	its	own.	It	is	utterly	surrendered	in	existence.	Wherever	the
existence	sends	it,	it	comes.	Wherever	there	is	need,	it	comes.	It	has	no	goals	of
its	own.	It	does	not	say,	'I	will	go	only	to	the	North.	I'm	not	going	to	the	South,	I
am	fed	up	with	the	South.'	Or,	'I	am	going	only	to	the	East,	I	am	a	very	religious
wind.'	Or,	'I	am	only	going	to	the	West,	I	want	to	enjoy	life.'	No,	the	wind	says
nothing.	Wherever	there	is	the	need,	the	wind	goes.
'Thus	came,	thus	gone.'
And	when	it	goes	from	that	place,	it	doesn't	cling	there.	A	wind	comes	and	goes.
It	does	not	say,	'Now	I	have	arrived.	and	I	have	taken	so	much	trouble	to	come,	I
will	not	go.
Now	I	will	 remain	here.	After	such	a	 long	 journey,	crossing	so	many	seas	and
mountains,	I	have	come	here.	Now	I	will	not	go,	I	will	stay	here.	Otherwise	what
is	the	purpose	of	my	coming	here?'	No,	the	wind	comes	and	the	wind	goes.
Buddha	 is	 like	 that	wind.	Thus	came,	 thus	gone.	No	clinging.	His	coming	and
going	is	mysterious.	His	coming	and	going	is	unpredictable,	it	is	unexplainable,
because	 only	 motives	 can	 be	 explained	 and	 causes	 can	 be	 explained.	 In	 that
ultimate	 state	 of	 enlightenment,	 in	 that	 purity,	 on	 that	 planitude,	 things	 are
mysterious,	things	simply	happen.	One	never	knows	why,	there	is	no	need	to	ask
'why'.	Everything	is	beautiful	and	a	benediction.
Coming	is	benediction,	going	is	benediction.	To	be	in	the	body	is	benediction,	to
go	out	of	 the	body	is	benediction.	To	have	a	being	is	benediction,	 to	disappear
into	non-being	is	benediction.	All	is	benediction.
The	taste	of	enlightenment	is	of	benediction.	Whatsoever	happens,	it	makes	no
difference,	 it	 doesn't	matter.	 There	 is	 no	 choice,	 no	motive,	 no	 desire.	 Things
happen	on	their	own,	they	are	very	mysterious.	That's	why	a	Buddha	cannot	be
explained.	A	Buddha	can	be	experienced,	hence	the	need	of	disciplehood
Sometimes	 people	 come	 and	 ask	 me,	 'What	 is	 the	 need	 of	 becoming	 a
sannyasin?'	The	need	is	that	without	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	will	not	be	able
to	have	the	taste	of	me	The	need	is	that	without	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	will
never	 come	 close	 to	me,	 you	will	 never	 have	 that	 orgasmic	 experience	 that	 is
possible	by	feeling	deep	empathy	with	me.
Sannyas	 is	 empathy	 --	 to	 be	 totally	 with	 me,	 utterly	 with	 me,	 to	 drop	 all
defences,	 to	 come	 so	 close	 that	 my	 nothingness	 starts	 overflowing	 in	 you,	 to
come	so	close	that	there	are	no	more	boundaries,	that	we	start	overlapping.	For
that	experience,	sannyas	is	needed	And	a	Buddha	can	be	known	only	that	way,
there	is	no	other	way.
And	 the	 other	 thing	 to	 be	 understood	 is,	 he	 says,	 'I	 have	 seen	 through	 the
Buddha-eye,	I	have	known	through	Buddha-cognition.'	What	is	this	Buddha-eye
and	the	Buddha-cognition?	What	 in	Yoga	is	known	as	 the	 third	eye,	or	Hindus
know	as	SHIVA-NETRA,	the	eye	of	Shiva,	 is	known	in	Buddhist	scriptures	as
the	Buddha-eye.
You	 have	 two	 eyes,	 they	 are	 symbolic	 of	 duality,	 you	 are	 divided.	When	 you
attain	to	one	single	sight,	when	a	third	vision	arises	in	you	which	is	not	divisible,
then	you	start	seeing	the	unity	of	existence.	It	is	as	if	you	break	a	mirror	and	then
all	 those	 fragments	 reflect	 so	many	 faces	of	you.	You	have	only	one	 face,	but
those	 fragments	 of	 the	mirror	 reflect	 a	 thousand	 faces.	 If	 you	 put	 that	 mirror
again	together,	again	one	face	arises.
Reality	is	one	but	we	have	two	eyes,	hence	everywhere	reality	becomes	divided
For	example,	one	thing	you	call	love,	another	thing	you	call	hate.	In	fact	they	are
one	thing	Love	and	hate	are	not	the	right	things	to	describe	them.	The	energy	is
the	same	--	it	is	love-hate.	The	'and'	has	to	be	dropped.	In	fact	you	cannot	even
put	 a	 hyphen	 between	 the	 two,	 lovehate	 is	 one	 word.	 Daynight	 is	 one	 word,
lifedeath	 is	 one	 word,	 miserybliss	 is	 one	 word,	 painpleasure	 is	 one	 word,
mattermind	is	one	word.	But	because	we	have	two	eyes,	everything	is	divided	in
two	and	then	we	go	on	arguing	for	centuries.
Now	for	five	thousand	years	man	has	been	arguing	whether	man	is	body	or	soul.
There	are	not	two	things.	The	body	is	nothing	but	the	outermost	form	of	the	soul,
and	 the	 soul	 is	 nothing	but	 the	 innermost	 core	 of	 the	 body.	They	 are	 not	 two.
And	God	and	the	world	are	not	two	either.	The	creator	and	the	creation	are	one.
This	is	called	the	Buddha-eye	--	to	come	to	a	point	where	your	two	eyes	merge
and	melt	and	become	one.	Jesus	says,	'If	your	eyes	be	like	one,	then	your	whole
being	will	be	full	of	light.'	That's	what	enlightenment	is.
A	few	words	of	Jesus	are	beautiful,	'When	you	make	the	two	one,	and	when	you
make	 the	 inner	 as	 the	 outer,	 and	 the	 outer	 as	 the	 inner,	 and	 the	 above	 as	 the
below,	and	when	you	make	the	male	and	the	female	into	a	single	one,	so	that	the
male	will	 not	 be	male	 and	 the	 female	 not	 be	 female,	 then	 shall	 you	 enter	 the
Kingdom.'
Or	 again,	 'It	 is	 impossible	 for	 a	man	 to	mount	 two	 horses	 and	 to	 stretch	 two
bows;	and	it	is	impossible	for	a	servant	to	serve	two	masters,	otherwise	he	will
honor	the	one	and	offend	the	other.'	'But	if	your	eyes	be	like	one	then	your	whole
being	will	be	full	of	light.'
In	Buddhist	tradition	that	oneness	of	vision,	that	unfragmented	vision,	that	total
vision,	that	whole	vision,	is	called	Buddha-eye.	And	whatsoever	is	seen	through
Buddha-eye	is	Buddha-cognition.	And	when	you	have	the	Buddha-eye	and	you
look	at	 life	with	 that	one	vision,	 it	unites	everything,	 and	 then	you	are	able	 to
know	 fully,	 not	 before	 that.	 Before	 that,	 your	 knowledge	 is	 always	 partial,
fragmentary,	lopsided.
Now	the	sutra.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE,	SUBHUTI,	IN	THESE	BODHISATTVAS
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SELF	TAKES	PLACE,
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	BEING,
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SOUL,
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	PERSON.
NOR	DO	THESE	BODHISATTVAS	HAVE
A	PERCEPTION	OF	A	DHAMMA
OR	A	PERCEPTION	OF	A	NO-DHAMMA.
NO	PERCEPTION	OR	NON-PERCEPTION
TAKES	PLACE	IN	THEM.
These	eight	 things	are	known	as	the	eight	barriers	 to	wisdom.	They	have	to	be
understood.	First,	this	is	the	definition	of	a	Bodhisattva.	Who	is	a	Bodhisattva?
One	 who	 has	 crossed	 these	 eight	 barriers	 of	 wrong	 attitudes,	 of	 wrong
approaches	towards	life.
The	 first,	NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SELF	TAKES	PLACE.	These	 four	words
have	 to	 be	 understood	 --	 they	 are	 almost	 synonymous,	 but	 only	 almost,	 self,
being,	 soul,	 person.	 In	 the	 dictionaries	 they	 are	 almost	 the	 same,	 but	 Buddha
gives	different	colors	to	them,	and	they	have	different	colors,	slight	differences.
First,	 the	 self	 means	 the	 ego	 --	 'my',	 'mine',	 'I'	 --	 as	 distinct	 from	 the	 five
elements	 that	 constitute	 me.	 Man	 is	 constituted	 of	 five	 elements,	 just	 a
combination	of	these	five.	You	take	the	five	apart	and	man	disappears.	Buddha
says	there	is	nothing	else	than	the	five.	It	is	like	a	chariot.	You	take	parts	of	the
chariot	apart,	you	take	the	wheels,	you	take	the	horses,	you	take	everything	else,
and	 if	 in	 the	 end	 you	 want	 to	 know	 where	 the	 chariot	 is,	 the	 chariot	 has
disappeared,	because	the	chariot	was	just	a	combination	of	those	parts.
This	is	one	of	the	greatest	insights	of	Buddha,	no	other	religion	has	gone	to	that
height.
All	other	religions	have	stopped	with	some	idea	of	self,	with	some	idea	of	ego.
Howsoever	 refined,	howsoever	holy,	howsoever	virtuous,	but	 some	 idea	of	 the
ego	has	remained.	You	call	it	self,	you	call	it	soul,	you	call	it	ATMA;	what	you
call	it	doesn't	matter.	Buddha	is	very	very	clear	about	it	--	that	your	deepest	core
consists	of	nothingness.	There	is	no	ego.
The	word	 'I'	 is	 only	 utilitarian,	 it	 corresponds	 to	 no	 reality.	 It	 is	 needed	 even
Buddha	 uses	 it.	 It	 is	 good	 as	 a	 means	 to	 communicate,	 it	 designates,	 but	 it
corresponds	to	no	reality.
So	the	first,	self,	means	 'I	am	separate	from	the	constituents'.	Buddha	says	you
are	not	there,	only	the	constituents	are	there.	You	are	utter	emptiness.	The	second
is	being	--
being	means	 individuality,	 the	 idea	 of	 being	 identical	with	 oneself	 at	 different
times.	You	say	that	'I	was	once	a	child,	now	I	am	a	young	man,	and	soon	I	will
become	an	old	man'.
You	 have	 some	 idea	 as	 if	 you	 persist.	 One	 time	 you	 were	 a	 child,	 then	 you
became	young
--	but	you	are	the	same.	And	then	you	will	become	old	and	you	will	be	the	same
Buddha	says	each	moment	you	are	changing.
He	is	perfectly	in	agreement	with	Heraclitus.	You	cannot	step	twice	in	the	same
river.
The	 river	 goes	 on	 flowing.	 When	 you	 were	 a	 child	 you	 were	 a	 different
individual,	now	you	are	a	different	individual.	When	you	will	be	old	you	will	be
a	different	 individual	again.	 In	 fact	every	day	you	are	different,	every	moment
you	are	different.
Why	does	this	idea	persist	that	'I	am	the	same'?	This	persists	because	the	change
is	so	subtle	and	your	vision	is	not	so	subtle.	It	is	as	if	you	light	a	candle	in	the
evening,	it	burns	the	whole	night,	and	in	the	morning	you	blow	it	and	you	say,	'It
is	 the	 same	 flame	 that	 I	 am	 blowing	 out.'	 It	 is	 not.	 The	 flame	 has	 been
continuously	 changing,	 disappearing,	 new	 flame	 arising	 each	 moment.	 But
between	 two	flames,	one	disappearing,	another	arising,	 the	gap	 is	so	subtle,	so
small,	 that	 you	 cannot	 see	 it.	 That's	 why	 this	 idea	 of	 individuality,	 of	 being,
persists.
Buddha	 says	 life	 is	 a	process,	 life	 is	not	 like	a	 thing.	 It	 is	 a	 continuous	move.
Life	 is	a	river.	Buddha	says	if	we	want	 to	be	true	to	reality	we	should	drop	all
nouns	from	the	language,	only	verbs	are	true.	River	is	not	true,	rivering	is	true.
Tree	is	not	true,	treeing	is	true.	Love	is	not	true,	loving	is	true.	Life	consists	of
verbs,	not	of	nouns.
And	the	third	thing	is	 the	soul,	 the	idea	of	a	supra-force	abiding	in	the	body,	a
unifying	and	vivifying	force	separate	from	everything	else.	That	 too	--	Buddha
says	there	is	no	supra-force.	There	is	nothing	inside	abiding	in	you.	It	is	not	that
you	are	 the	house	 and	 there	 is	 a	host	 inside,	 a	 resident	 inside.	All	 that	 resides
inside	is	pure	nothingness.
And	the	fourth	is	the	idea	of	person,	the	being.	The	belief	in	a	permanent	entity
who	would	migrate	from	rebirth	to	rebirth.	That	Buddha	calls	person	--	that	you
will	 die	 and	 your	 person	 will	 immediately	 be	 born	 into	 some	 other	 womb.
Continuity	is	there	but	there	is	no	person.	Continuity	is	there	but	there	is	no	self.
Continuity	is	 there	but	 there	is	no	individuality.	Continuity	is	 there	but	 there	is
no	soul.
This	vision	of	Buddha	is	so	utterly	unique	that	even	this	country,	such	a	religious
country,	 India,	 could	 not	 swallow	 it.	 It	 was	 felt	 as	 if	 Buddha	 had	 decided	 to
destroy	the	whole	foundation	of	religion.	He	was	giving	a	totally	new	vision,	far
higher	 than	 the	 ordinary	 concepts	 of	 souls,	 self,	 etcetera.	 Because	 in	 those
concepts	your	ego	goes	on	hiding	in	new	ways.	They	are	nothing	but	ways	of	the
ego	to	exist	and	to	continue	existing.
Buddha	says:
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE,	SUBHUTI,	IN	THESE	BODHISATTVAS
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SELF	TAKES	PLACE.
When	a	person	turns	inwards,	when	your	consciousness	turns	inwards	and	looks
into	your	own	being,	nothing	is	found:
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SELF	TAKES	PLACE,
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	BEING	TAKES	PLACE,
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SOUL	TAKES	PLACE,
NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	PERSON	TAKES	PLACE.
These	four	things	are	immediately	dissolved.
NOR	DO	THESE	BODHISATTVAS	HAVE
A	PERCEPTION	OF	A	DHAMMA.
Dhamma	means	the	positive	element	in	life	and	no-Dhamma	means	the	negative
element	in	life.	The	positive	and	negative	--	Buddha	says	even	these	are	not	true,
they	disappear.
A	perception	of	a	Dhamma	does	not	take	place.	You	don't	come	upon	a	positive
reality	 inside,	 neither	 do	you	 come	upon	 a	 negative	 reality	 inside.	You	 simply
come	upon	a	total	nothingness.
And	 remember,	 that	 nothingness	 should	 not	 be	 thought	 synonymous	 with	 no
reality,	with	negativity.	Nothingness	simply	means	no	positive,	no	negative.	Both
have	disappeared,	that	duality	is	no	more	there.	This	is	utter	silence.	Not	finding
anything,	 not	 even	 finding	yourself,	 you	 are	 freed.	Not	 that	 you	 are	 freed,	 but
you	are	freed	from	yourself.
When	 others	 speak	 of	 freedom	 they	 always	mean	 that	 you	will	 be	 there,	 free.
When	Buddha	 talks	 about	 freedom	he	 says	 you	will	 be	 freed,	 you	will	 not	 be
there.	How	can	you	be	in	freedom?	If	you	are	there	in	freedom	there	will	remain
a	kind	of	imprisonment.
You	 are	 the	 imprisonment.	 You	 can't	 be	 free.	When	 you	 are	 not,	 freedom	 is.
When	you	are,	freedom	is	not.
And	seventh,	NO	PERCEPTION.	When	there	is	nothing	to	see,	how	can	you	see
it	is	a	perception?	No	self,	no	positivity,	no	negativity	--	there	is	nothing	to	see.
When	there	is	nothing	to	see,	you	cannot	see	that	a	perception	has	taken	place.	A
perception	 needs	 something	 to	 perceive.	 So,	 the	 seventh	 thing,	 no	 perception
exists.	But	then	you	can	say,
'Then	does	non-perception	exist?'
Buddha	 says	 when	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 see	 and	 nothing	 to	 see,	 how	 can	 non-
perception	exist	either?	He	is	destroying	all	 the	roots	for	the	ego,	all	 the	subtle
ways	of	the	ego.
These	 are	 the	 eight	 barriers.	 When	 all	 these	 have	 disappeared,	 a	 person	 is	 a
Bodhisattva.
And	then	the	problem	arises,	 'How	to	remain	on	this	shore?'	Only	then....	Then
you	have	something	 to	share	--	your	nothingness.	Then	you	have	something	 to
share	your	paradise.
Then	 you	 have	 something	 to	 share	 --	 your	 utter	 existence.	 But	 now	 how	 to
remain	on	this	shore?	How	to	linger	here	a	little	while	more?
And	Buddha	says:
AND	WHY?
IF	SUBHUTI,	THESE	BODHISATTVAS
SHOULD	HAVE	A	PERCEPTION
OF	EITHER	A	DHAMMA	OR	A	NO-DHAMMA,
THEY	WOULD	THEREBY	SEIZE	ON	A	SELF,
ON	A	BEING,
ON	A	SOUL,
ON	A	PERSON.
If	 you	 see	 something	 inside,	 remember,	 you	 are	 still	 outside.	 If	 you	 see
something,	even	Krishna	playing	on	his	flute,	or	Jesus	crucified	and	fresh	blood
flowing	from	his	hands,	or	Buddha	sitting	silently	under	his	Bodhi-tree,	 if	you
come	across	anything	inside,	remember,	you	are	still	outside.	That's	why	Buddha
says,	'If	you	meet	me	on	the	way,	kill	me	immediately.'
One	has	to	come	to	a	point	where	there	is	nothing	to	see.	When	there	is	nothing
to	see,	the	seer	also	disappears;	that	is	the	point	to	remember.	It	is	very	difficult
to	understand.
The	 seer	 exists	 only	 with	 the	 seen.	 That's	 why	 Krishnamurti	 goes	 on	 saying
again	and	again	'the	observer	is	the	observed'.	When	there	is	nothing	to	see,	how
can	 you	 be	 as	 a	 seer	 there?	 When	 content	 disappears,	 the	 container	 also
disappears.	They	exist	together,	they	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.
Buddha	 says	 there	 is	 no	 such	 thing	 as	 spiritual	 experience,	 all	 experiences	 are
non-spiritual.	Mm?	Somebody	comes	and	says,	'My	kundalini	is	rising.'	A	Gopi
Krishna	in	Kashmir	says	his	kundalini	is	rising.	It	is	not	spiritual,	no	kundalini	is
spiritual.	It	is	a	physical	phenomenon,	a	worldly	phenomenon,	and	can	give	you
pleasure,	 just	 as	 sex	 can	 give	 you	 pleasure.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 energy	 moving
upwards.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 spirituality,	 not	 at	 least	with	what	Buddha
means	by	spirituality.
And	Gopi	Krishna	says	that	he	has	attained	because	his	kundalini	has	risen.	He
feels	 tingling	 energy	moving	 in	his	 spine.	But	 a	 spine	 is	 a	 spine.	And	now	he
thinks	that	the	kundalini	has	arisen,	it	has	reached	to	SAHASRAR,	the	seventh
chakra,	 and	 he	 has	 become	 creative.	 So	 he	 has	 started	 writing	 poetry.	 Those
poems	 are	 just	 rubbish.	 If	 they	 prove	 anything,	 they	 simply	 disprove	 all
kundalini.	 I	 have	 never	 come	 across	 such	 rubbish	 poetry	 --	 just	 like	 school
children.	Even	sometimes	they	write	more	beautiful	things.
You	can	find	only	one	comparison,	and	that	is	Shree	Chinmoy.	He	writes	poetry.
In	one	night	he	will	write	one	 thousand	poems.	Even	 to	call	 them	poems	is	an
exaggeration	 They	 are	 not	 even	 prose,	 they	 don't	 have	 anything	 of	 poetry	 in
them.
But	 these	 people	 think	 they	 have	 attained	 to	 spiritual	 creativity,	 because
kundalini	 has	 arisen.	 Somebody	 has	 seen	 light	 in	 the	 head	 and	 he	 thinks	 now
enlightenment	has	happened	--	'Because	I	have	seen	light.	When	I	close	my	eyes
there	is	great	light.'	And	I	am	not	saying	that	light	cannot	be	seen	and	I	am	not
saying	kundalini	 does	 not	 arise.	 It	 arises	 so	 easily,	 you	 can	 see	 here,	 so	many
sannyasins	are	in	that	state	that	Gopi	Krishna	thinks	is	kundalini.	It	is	nothing	to
brag	about.
Any	experience	is	bound	to	be	outside,	because	you	are	the	experiencer	and	the
experience	 is	 there,	 facing	 you.	 When	 all	 experiences	 disappear,	 there	 is
spirituality.	But	then	a	phenomenon	happens,	when	all	experiences	disappear,	the
experiencer	 also	 disappears.	 In	 the	wake	 of	 it,	 it	 disappears,	 because	 it	 cannot
exist,	 it	 cannot	 subsist	without	 experiences.	 It	 feeds	on	 experiences.	When	 the
experience	and	experiencer	are	both	gone	you	are	a	Bodhisattva.
'AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	A	BODHISATTVA	SHOULD	NOT	SEIZE
ON	EITHER	A	DHAMMA	OR	A	NO-DHAMMA.
THEREFORE	THIS	SAYING	HAS	BEEN	TAUGHT	BY	THE	TATHAGATA
WITH	A	HIDDEN	MEANING:
"BY	THOSE	WHO	KNOW	THE	DISCOURSE	ON	DHAMMA
AS	LIKE	UNTO	A	RAFT.
DHAMMAS	SHOULD	BE	FORSAKEN,
STILL	MORE	SO,	NO-DHAMMAS."'
Buddha	 says	 everything	 has	 to	 be	 forsaken	 --	 Dhammas,	 no-Dhammas,
experiences,	great	experiences,	spiritual	experiences,	and	finally	the	experiencer
too.	Everything	has	 to	be	forsaken.	When	nothing	remains,	not	even	a	 trace	of
anything,	not	even	the	idea	that	now	there	is	nothing....
Even	if	this	idea	remains	--	that	now	there	is	nothing	--	everything	is	there.	This
idea	is	enough	to	contain	the	whole	world.	If	you	say,	'Now	nothing	is	there,'	you
have	missed	the	point.	You	cannot	even	say	that	--	that	nothing	is	there.	Who	is
there	to	say?	Who	is	there	to	observe?	There	is	utter	silence,	absolute	silence.
So	 Buddha	 says	 that	 the	 Dhamma,	 the	 religion,	 is	 like	 a	 raft.	 These	 are	 his
famous	words.
Buddha	 says	 in	 'Majjhima	Nikaya':	 'Using	 the	 figure	 of	 a	 raft,	 brethren,	will	 I
teach	you	the	norm	as	something	to	leave	behind,	not	to	take	with	you.	If	one	has
crossed	with	the	help	of	a	raft	a	great	stretch	of	water,	on	this	side	full	of	doubts
and	fears,	on	the	further	side	safe	and	free	from	fears,	one	would	then	not	take	it
on	one's	shoulders	and	carry	it	with	one,	but	though	it	was	of	great	use	to	him,	he
would	 leave	 it	behind	and	have	 finished	with	 it.	Thus,	brethren,	understanding
the	 figure	 of	 the	 raft,	 we	 must	 leave	 righteous	 ways	 behind,	 not	 to	 speak	 of
unrighteous	ways.'
All	methods	--	Yoga,	Tantra	--	all	techniques,	all	meditations	and	all	prayers,	are
strategies	to	reach	to	the	other	shore.	Once	you	have	reached,	they	have	to	be	left
behind.
Feel	thankful,	but	don't	start	carrying	them	on	your	shoulders,	otherwise	you	will
be	a	fool.
Or	 Buddha	 says	 again:	 'The	 example	 of	 the	 raft	 shows	 Dhammas	 should	 be
treated	as	provisional,	 as	means	 to	an	end.	The	 same	holds	good	of	 emptiness
too,	the	negation	of	Dhammas.	This	corollary	has	elsewhere	been	illustrated	by
the	simile	of	medicine	which	can	heal	any	illness.	Once	a	cure	has	been	effected
it	must	be	abandoned	together	with	the	illness	because	its	further	use	would	only
make	one	ill	again.'
Buddha	says:	'Just	so,	when	this	medicine	called	emptiness	has	brought	about	a
cure	 of	 the	 disease	 of	 the	 belief	 in	 existence.	 Attachment	 to	 emptiness	 is	 a
disease	 as	 much	 as	 attachment	 to	 existence.	 Those	 who	 continue	 to	 use	 this
medicine	 of	 emptiness	 after	 they	have	gained	possession	of	 health,	 only	make
themselves	ill	again.'
Remember,	first	one	has	to	drop	everything	and	become	empty,	and	then	one	has
to	 drop	 that	 emptiness	 too.	That	 emptiness	 is	 just	 a	medicine.	Buddha	 is	 right
when	 he	 says,	 'I	 am	 a	 physician,	 not	 a	 philosopher'.	 He	 does	 not	 give	 you	 a
doctrine	to	cling	to.	And	whatsoever	he	gives	to	you	is	provisional,	arbitrary,	and
one	day	it	has	to	be	dropped	and	forgotten.
When	all	disappears	--	the	world	and	God,	matter	and	mind,	body	and	soul,	you
and	I	--
when	all	disappears	and	finally	the	idea	that	all	has	disappeared	also	disappears,
you	have	arrived,	you	have	become	a	Bodhisattva.	Then	is	the	problem	how	to
linger	on	this	shore,	how	to	be	here	even	a	single	moment?
You	 will	 have	 to	 create	 a	 CHITTOPAD,	 a	 great	 decision	 'There	 are	 others
stumbling	 in	 darkness.	 I	 have	 attained	 I	 have	 to	 share	 it,'	 Out	 of	 that
CHITTOPAD,	 out	 of	 the	 creation	 of	 a	 new	mind...	 because	 the	 old	mind	 has
gone	And	with	the	old	mind	gone,	you	cannot	stay	here.	You	will	have	to	create
a	new	mind.
Two	words	to	be	understood,	one	is	passion,	another	is	compassion.	They	both
have	passion	in	them.	Passion	is	the	old	mind,	the	desiring	mind,	the	mind	full	of
desire.	When	 all	 desires	 have	 disappeared	 and	 the	 old	mind	 is	 gone,	 you	will
have	to	immediately	create	compassion	so	that	through	compassion	you	can	be
here.	For	a	little	while	you	can	help	a	few	people	to	raise	their	eyes	to	the	other
shore.	For	a	little	while	you	can	direct	a	few	people,	you	can	indicate	the	way.
THE	LORD	ASKED:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI?
IS	THERE	ANY	DHAMMA
WHICH	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	FULLY	KNOWN	AS
"THE	UTMOST	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT	ENLIGHTENMENT"'?
That	is	one	of	the	methods	of	Buddha	--	he	asks	his	disciples	sometimes,	'What
do	you	think,	Subhuti?	Do	you	think	that	I	have	attained	the	truth,	the	Dhamma,
or	have	I	preached	truth	to	people?	What	do	you	think	about	it?'
'IS	THERE	ANY	DHAMMA
WHICH	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	FULLY	KNOWN	AS
"THE	 ULTIMATE	 RIGHT	 AND	 PERFECT	 ENLIGHTENMENT",	 OR	 IS
THERE	ANY	DHAMMA
WHICH	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	DEMONSTRATED?'
SUBHUTI	REPLIED:	'NO.'
It	was	very	easy	to	fall	in	the	trap	of	the	Buddha,	the	question	was	difficult.	The
question	was	 such	 that	 one	would	 tend	 to	 say	 yes.	 'Yes,	Buddha	 has	 attained,
otherwise	who	has	attained?'	But	the	very	idea	of	attainment	will	be	unspiritual.
And	Buddha	is	saying	there	is	nothing	to	attain	and	nobody	to	attain.
And	 it	would	 have	 been	 very	 very	 simple	 for	 Subhuti	 to	 say,	 'Yes,	 Lord.	You
have	preached	as	nobody	has	preached,	you	have	demonstrated	as	nobody	has
demonstrated.'
But	 if	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 attain,	what	 can	 there	 be	 to	 demonstrate?	 If	 there	 is
nothing	to	attain	and	nobody	to	attain,	who	can	demonstrate	it	and	what	is	there
to	demonstrate?
But	Subhuti	was	not	deceived	by	Buddha's	question.
SUBHUTI	 REPLIED:	 'NO,	 NOT	 AS	 I	 UNDERSTAND	WHAT	 THE	 LORD
HAS
SAID.
AND	WHY?
THIS	DHAMMA	WHICH	THE	TATHAGATA
HAS	FULLY	KNOWN	OR	DEMONSTRATED,
IT	CANNOT	BE	GRASPED,
IT	CANNOT	BE	TALKED	ABOUT,
IT	IS	NEITHER	A	DHAMMA	NOR	A	NO-DHAMMA.'
So	first	he	says,	'No,	you	have	not	attained	anything,	because	there	is	nothing	to
attain	if	I	understand	you	rightly.	And	how	can	you	demonstrate	that	something
which	is	beyond	something	is	beyond	nothing	too?	How	can	you	demonstrate	it?
There	is	no	way	to	grasp	it	and	no	way	to	say	it,	because	it	is	neither	positive	nor
negative.'	 Language	 is	 capable	 only	 of	 catching	 hold	 of	 the	 positive	 and
negative,	that	which	transcends	both	is	not	graspable.
And	again,	the	final	thing	he	says	is:
'AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	AN	ABSOLUTE	EXALTS	THE	HOLY	PERSONS.'
The	 absolute	means	 the	 beyond,	 the	 transcendental,	 that	which	 is	 beyond	hate
and	 love,	 that	 which	 is	 beyond	 life	 and	 death,	 that	 which	 is	 beyond	 day	 and
night,	 that	 which	 is	 beyond	 man	 and	 woman,	 that	 which	 is	 beyond	 hell	 and
heaven,	 that	 which	 is	 beyond	 all	 dualities,	 that	 is	 the	 absolute	 --	 and	 the
ABSOLUTE	EXALTS	THE	HOLY	PERSONS.
An	absolute,	that	absolute,	that	transcendental,	is	exalting	you.
The	 Sanskrit	 word	 for	 it	 is	 very	 rich.	 It	 is	 PRABHAVEETA.	 It	 means	 many
things,	 it	 contains	 a	 wealth	 of	 meanings.	 It	 means	 'exalted	 by',	 'glorified	 by',
'draw	their	strength	from',	'owe	their	light	to'.	The	moon	reflects	the	light	of	the
sun	--	it	is	PRABHAVEETA,	it	is	just	a	mirror.
So	is	a	Buddha.	A	Buddha	is	an	empty	mirror.	He	simply	reflects	existence	as	it
is	--
YATHA	BHUTAM.	He	does	not	say	anything.	A	mirror	says	nothing,	a	mirror
has	nothing	to	say,	it	simply	reflects.	It	does	not	do	anything	to	that	which	is,	it
simply	reflects	as	it	is	--	YATHA	BHUTAM.
In	Buddha,	existence	is	reflected.	The	Absolute	exalts,	the	Absolute	is	reflected.
Buddha	is	not	doing	anything.
A	 real	 master	 is	 just	 a	 mirror,	 he	 simply	 reflects	 that	 which	 is.	 He	 has	 no
philosophy	to	preach,	no	doctrine	to	propound.	Existence	is	his	philosophy,	life
is	his	doctrine.	He	has	nothing	to	grind,	he	has	no	motive	anywhere.	He	himself
is	not,	that's	how	he	has	become	a	mirror.
A	Bodhisattva	is	on	the	point	of	becoming	a	mirror.	If	he	creates	a	new	mind,	a
new	 route,	 CHITTOPAD,	 of	 compassion,	 he	 will	 linger	 on	 this	 shore	 a	 little
while.	 It	 is	 very	 miraculous,	 because	 he	 no	 more	 belongs	 to	 this	 world.	 The
world	exists	in	him	no	more,	still	it	happens,	this	miracle	happens.
The	being	of	a	Buddha	here	on	this	shore	even	for	a	few	days	or	a	few	years	is	a
miracle,	the	greatest	miracle.	A	man	came	to	Buddha	once	and	he	asked,	 'Why
don't	you	show	a	few	'miracles?'	And	Buddha	said,	'I	am	the	miracle.'
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Bodhisattvahood
26	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712260
ShortTitle:
DIAMON06
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
81
mins
The	first	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	1
WHAT	IS	ALL	THIS	STUFF	ABOUT	BODHISATTVAS?	I	DON'T	BELIEVE
A	WORD	OF	IT.	THERE	IS	NO	SUCH	THING.
Yes,	 Somendra,	 it	 is	 all	 nonsense.	 But	 you	 will	 have	 to	 understand	 the	 word
nonsense.	 It	 is	 beyond	 sense.	You	need	not	believe	 it,	 you	 cannot	believe	 it	 --
you	 can	 only	 experience	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 nonsense	 experience.	 But	 it	 is	 true,	 it	 is
absolutely	 true.	It	happens.	Till	 it	happens	 there	 is	no	way	to	believe	 in	 it,	and
there	 is	 no	 need	 either.	 Buddha	 is	 never	 in	 favor	 of	 any	 kind	 of	 belief.
Whatsoever	he	says,	it	is	experience,	it	is	existential.	It	is	something	beyond	the
mind.
Ordinarily	we	use	the	word	nonsense	for	that	which	is	below	mind.	But	there	is
something	beyond	mind	too	--	that	too	is	nonsense.	The	mind	cannot	make	any
sense	out	of	it.	Unless	your	mind	disappears	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	what	this
bodhi-being	is.	It	is	not	a	thing,	true.	It	is	an	experiencing.
You	 know	 desire,	 you	 know	 passion,	 you	 know	 sex,	 you	 know	 love.	 Try	 to
explain	 it	 to	a	child	 in	whom	 the	sexual	desire	has	not	yet	 taken	 form,	and	he
will	say	it	is	all	nonsense.
Just	try	to	explain	it	to	a	four-year-old	child	--	that	you	have	fallen	in	love	--	and
he	will	look	at	you	with	unbelieving	eyes.	What	are	you	talking	about?	What	is
this	stuff	'love'?
And	all	your	romance	and	all	your	poetry	and	all	that	is	throbbing	in	your	heart
is	impossible	to	relate	to	a	child.	He	has	not	tasted	of	that	experience	yet,	he	is
unaware	 of	 it.	 The	 desire	 has	 not	 arisen	 in	 him.	 Buddha	 calls	 that	 desire
WASANA.	That	wasana	has	not	arisen	 in	him.	And	unless	 it	arises	 there	 is	no
way	to	communicate	anything	about	it.
The	same	wasana,	the	same	energy	that	is	involved	in	desire,	in	sex,	in	love,	one
day	is	freed	of	desire.	One	day	desire	drops.	Just	as	one	day	it	arises,	one	day	it
drops	too.
Anything	 that	 is	 born	will	 die,	 anything	 that	 begins	will	 end.	And	 if	 life	 goes
very	very	naturally	and	spontaneously	then	there	is	a	certain	stage	which	can	be
demarked.
Sex	 arises	 at	 the	 age	 of	 fourteen	 --	 sexual	maturity	 --	 and	 the	 child	 is	 thrilled
with	something	unknown	and	new.	The	child	has	got	the	wind	of	desire,	a	great
passion	and	fire	is	arising	in	him.	Now	never	again	will	he	be	that	innocence	that
was	 there	 before	 this	 desire.	He	will	 never	 look	 at	 things	with	 that	 innocence
again.
If	 life	moves	 spontaneously,	 naturally,	 then	 exactly	 fourteen	 years	 before	 your
death	the	desire	will	disappear;	exactly	fourteen	years	before	your	death	sex	will
become	 irrelevant.	 Suddenly	 again	 you	will	 find	 that	 dream	 is	 no	more	 there,
that	passion	has	subsided,	that	storm	has	disappeared,	and	there	is	silence,	utter
silence.	But	your	energy	was	involved	in	the	desire,	the	desire	has	disappeared,
where	will	the	energy	go?
You	are	still	creating	energy	by	food,	by	breathing,	by	exercise,	by	living.	You
go	 on	 transforming	 divine	 energy	 into	 human	 energy.	Where	 will	 this	 energy
gO?	 The	 old	 path	 is	 no	 more	 available;	 it	 cannot	 move	 into	 the	 direction	 of
sexuality.	Where	will	it	move?
Buddha	has	another	word	for	it.	He	calls	it	KARUNA,	compassion.
Passion	is	no	more	significant.	Energy	is	available,	great	energy	is	available.	It
needs	somewhere	to	move,	because	energy	cannot	be	static,	its	very	nature	is	to
be	dynamic.	It	starts	overflowing	from	you	in	compassion.	That	is	the	state	of	a
bodhisattva.	When	 sex	 disappears,	 desire	 disappears,	 future	 disappears.	When
you	are	suddenly	herenow	and	you	have	that	great	energy	in	you	and	you	cannot
contain	it,	it	starts	flowing,	it	starts	overflowing	your	cup.	It	is	compassion.
This	 is	 the	 state	 of	 a	 bodhisattva.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 thing.	 And	 it	 does	 not	 happen
ordinarily	 because	 people	 have	 become	 unnatural.	 That's	 why	 in	 all	 the
languages	of	the	world,	when	an	old	man	is	interested	in	sex	it	is	thought	to	be
something	dirty	--	the	dirty	old	man.	Why	dirty?	The	young	man	is	not	thought
to	be	dirty,	but	why	the	old?
The	phrase	has	come	down	 the	ages	 from	 the	ancient	past	when	 it	used	not	 to
happen.	 It	 was	 an	 ill	 state	 of	 affairs.	 It	 was	 not	 normal,	 it	 was	 abnormal	 --
something	 had	 gone	 wrong.	 Otherwise,	 before	 your	 death	 the	 desire	 has	 to
disappear.	 Otherwise,	 what	 have	 you	 been	 doing	 in	 life	 if	 you	 have	 not	 even
come	to	that	point	where	desire	disappears?
You	have	missed	the	opportunity	of	life.
And	remember,	I	am	not	against	desire.	I	am	all	for	it.	When	it	is	time,	go	into	it.
And	go	into	it	so	totally	that	when	the	time	comes	to	get	out	of	it,	you	can	get
out	of	it	totally	too.
Only	one	who	goes	totally	in	it	will	be	capable	of	coming	totally	out	of	it.	One
who	goes	 lukewarm,	 halfheartedly,	 partially,	 in	 a	 repressed	way,	will	 never	 be
able	to	get	out	of	the	entanglement,	will	never	be	able	to	see	the	stupidity	of	it,
will	never	be	able	to	see	the	illusoriness	of	it.
So	 I	 am	not	 against	 desire.	 I	 am	all	 for	 passion:	 go	 into	 it,	 and	go	 totally	 and
wholeheartedly.	While	 it	 is	 time,	 see	whatsoever	 is	 possible	 to	 see.	 That	 very
seeing	will	make	you	free	of	it,	and	one	day	the	fruit	is	ripe	to	fall	down.	When
the	ripe	fruit	falls	down,	the	tree	is	unburdened.	In	that	unburdening,	what	will
you	do?	The	energy	will	still	be	there	--	more	so,	because	before	it	was	involved
in	 so	many	 things;	 now	 it	 is	 not	 involved	 at	 all.	 Relaxed,	 you	will	 become	 a
reservoir	of	energy.	This	energy	will	start	overflowing	you,	for	no	reason	at	all.
A	bodhisattva	is	one	who	has	so	much	that	he	needs	to	give	it,	who	has	so	much
that	when	you	accept	his	love,	his	being,	his	enlightenment,	you	oblige	him.	He
is	 like	 a	 flower	 full	 of	 fragrance...	 and	 the	 fragrance	wants	 to	 be	 freed	 to	 the
winds.	Or	he	 is	 like	a	cloud	 full	of	 rainwater...	 and	 is	 searching	a	 thirsty	earth
which	can	welcome	it,	which	can	absorb	it.	So	is	a	bodhisattva...	a	cloud	full	of
rainwater,	 moving	 hither	 and	 thither	 in	 search	 of	 a	 thirsty	 soul,	 in	 search	 of
somebody	 who	 will	 wel-come.	 The	 bodhisattva	 is	 obliged	 to	 you	 when	 you
accept	his	gift.
Bodhisattvahood	is	a	state	of	consciousness.	It	is	nonsense,	true.	It	is	not	a	thing,
true,	 Somendra	 --	 but	 it	 happens.	 It	 is	 very	 illogical.	 It	 is	 illogical,	 it	 looks
absurd,	because	it	does	not	relate	to	your	experience	yet.	But	soon	many	of	you
are	 going	 to	 enter	 into	 that	 realm.	 I	 see	 many	 of	 you	 just	 standing	 on	 the
threshold.	You	cannot	see.	I	can	see	that	you	are	on	the	threshold,	getting	ready
to	 take	 the	 ultimate	 jump.	 When	 it	 has	 happened	 then	 you	 will	 know	 what
Buddha	is	talking	about.
The	Diamond	 Sutra	 is	 not	 preached	 to	 the	 layman,	 it	 is	 preached	 only	 to	 the
sannyasins,	only	to	those	who	are	coming	to	bodhisattvahood	or	those	who	have
come.	 In	 fact	 it	 has	 to	 be	 preached	 before	 one	 is	 coming	 to	 bodhisattvahood,
because	 in	 that	moment	of	bodhisattvahood,	 if	 you	don't	 know	anything	about
what	to	do,	if	you	are	not	aware	that	there	is	a	way	to	unburden	--	that	you	can
release	your	blissfulness,	that	there	is	no	need	to	contain	it	--	if	you	don't	know
anything	 about	 it,	 it	 will	 be	 difficult	 for	 you,	 very	 difficult.	 Your	 very
blissfulness	will	become	a	pain	 in	 the	chest,	will	become	an	ache	 in	 the	heart.
Rather	than	becoming	a	dance	and	a	song	it	will	become	painful.
Do	you	know,	when	bliss	becomes	very	intense	it	becomes	painful.	When	light
is	too	intense	it	is	too	dazzling,	and	you	almost	go	blind.	When	love	is	too	much
you	 cannot	 bear	 it.	When	 joy	 is	 too	much,	 your	 heart	 can	 stop;	 it	 can	 be	 too
painful.	And	you	don't	know	anything.	When	bodhisattvahood	happens,	the	joy
is	such,	the	magnitude	of	it,	the	blissfulness	is	such,	the	intensity	of	it,	that	you
can	die	just	out	of	it	or	you	can	go	mad.
Buddhism	 is	 the	only	 tradition	 in	 the	world	where	bodhisattvas	 have	not	 been
known	 to	 go	mad.	Why?	 In	 Sufism	 they	 go	mad,	 in	 Hinduism	 they	 go	mad,
many	of	them	go	mad.
Sufis	have	a	special	name	for	them	--	MASTAS.	But	there	is	nothing	like	that	in
Buddha's	 tradition.	 Why?	 Buddha	 is	 so	 aware	 of	 all	 the	 possibilities	 and	 is
preparing	 the	 path	 so	 scientifically	 that	 he	 goes	 on	 giving	 you	 indications,
directions,	suggestions,	for	those	moments	which	are	going	to	happen.
Down	the	ages,	 in	 these	twenty-five	centuries,	never	a	Buddhist	saint	has	been
known	to	go	mad,	it	is	rare.	In	Sufism	many	go	mad,	in	Hinduism	many	go	mad.
The	reason	is	that	Sufis	and	Hindus	have	nothing	compared	to	bodhisattvahood;
no	instruction	is	given.
And	in	the	West	the	problem	is	even	more	complicated.	Christianity	has	no	idea
about	it.
So	in	Christianity	it	has	happened	that	ordinary	people	who	were	not	in	any	way
saints,	 have	 been	worshipped	 as	 saints.	 and	 those	who	were	 saints	 have	 been
declared	mad,	or	possessed	by	the	devil.
In	many	Western	asylums	there	are	people	who	are	not	really	mad	but	because	of
bodhisattvahood	 they	 have	 gone	 mad.	 They	 don't	 need	 psychiatric	 treatment,
they	 don't	 need	 electric	 shocks,	 they	 don't	 need	 tranquilizers.	 They	 don't	 need
unnecessary	 torture,	 they	 don't	 need	 psychoanalysis.	 All	 that	 they	 need	 is	 a
compassionate	 Buddha	 around	 them.	 The	 presence	 of	 a	 Buddha	 --	 all	 that	 is
needed	 is	 that.	 Just	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 Buddha	 will	 bring	 them	 back,	 will
become	 a	 great	 pull,	 a	 magnetic	 force,	 and	 will	 bring	 them	 back	 to	 their
consciousness.	 But	 they	 are	 being	 tortured,	 they	 are	 being	 put	 through
unnecessary	things,	because	once	you	think	they	are	mad	you	start	treating	them
as	mad.
Buddhism	is	one	of	the	most	scientific	religions	of	the	world.	It	has	all	the	maps
that	 are	 needed	 for	 the	 growth	 of	 consciousness.	And	 bodhisattvahood	 is	 very
essential.	 Before	 one	 becomes	 a	 Buddha	 one	 is	 bound	 to	 pass	 through
bodhisattvahood.	But,	Somendra,	it	is	nonsense,	that	is	true.
The	second	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	2
WHERE	DOES	CARE	FOR	OTHERS	BECOME	INTERFERENCE?
The	 moment	 ideology	 enters,	 care	 becomes	 interference,	 love	 turns	 bitter,
becomes	 almost	 a	 kind	 of	 hatred,	 and	 your	 protection	 becomes	 a	 prison.	 The
ideology	makes	the	difference.
For	example,	if	you	are	a	mother,	take	care	of	the	child.	He	needs	you,	he	cannot
survive	without	 you.	You	 are	 a	must.	He	needs	 food,	 he	 needs	 love,	 he	 needs
care	 --	 but	 he	 does	 not	 need	your	 ideology.	He	does	 not	 need	your	 ideals.	He
does	not	need	your	Christianity,	your	Hinduism,	your	Islam,	your	Buddhism.	He
does	not	need	your	scriptures,	he	does	not	need	your	beliefs.	He	does	not	need
your	 ideals	of	how	he	should	be.	Only	avoid	 ideology,	 ideals,	goals,	ends,	and
then	care	is	beautiful,	then	care	is	innocent.	Otherwise	care	is	cunning.
When	there	is	no	ideology	in	your	caring	--	you	don't	want	to	make	your	child	a
Christian,	you	don't	want	to	make	your	child	this	or	that,	communist	or	fascist,
you	don't	want	your	child	to	become	a	businessman	or	a	doctor	or	an	engineer....
You	 don't	 have	 any	 ideas	 for	 your	 child.	You	 say,	 "I	will	 love,	 and	when	 you
grow	up,	YOU	choose	--
and	be	whatsoever	is	natural	for	you	to	be.	My	blessings...	whatsoever	you	are,
my	blessings.
"And	whatsoever	you	will	be,	from	my	side	you	are	accepted	and	welcome.	Not
that	only	when	you	become	the	president	of	 the	country	will	 I	 love	you	and	 if
you	become	just	a	carpenter	then	there	will	be	no	love,	then	I	will	feel	ashamed
of	you.	Not	that	only	when	you	bring	a	gold	medal	from	the	university	will	there
be	a	welcome	and	if	you	come	a	failure	I	will	be	ashamed	of	you.	Not	that	only
when	 you	 are	 good,	 virtuous,	 moral,	 this	 and	 that,	 will	 you	 be	 my	 child	 and
otherwise	I	am	not	related	to	you,	you	are	not	related	to	me."
The	moment	 you	bring	 any	 idea,	 you	bring	poison	 in	 the	 relationship.	Care	 is
beautiful,	 but	 when	 care	 has	 some	 idea,	 then	 it	 is	 cunningness,	 then	 it	 is	 a
bargain,	then	it	has	conditions.	And	all	our	love	is	cunning,	hence	this	misery	in
the	world,	 this	hell.	Not	that	care	is	not	 there	--	care	is	 there,	but	 it	 is	with	too
much	 cunningness.	 The	mother	 cares,	 the	 father	 cares,	 the	 husband	 cares,	 the
wife	 cares,	 the	 brother,	 the	 sister	 --	 everybody	 is	 caring.	 I'm	 not	 saying	 that
nobody	is	caring	--	people	are	caring	too	much,	but	still	the	world	is	hell.
Something	 is	 wrong,	 something	 is	 fundamentally	 wrong.	 What	 is	 that
fundamental	 wrong?	Where	 do	 things	 go	 wrong?	 Caring	 has	 conditions	 in	 it:
"Do	this!	Be	that!"	Have	you	ever	loved	anybody	with	no	conditions?	Have	you
ever	loved	anybody	as	he	or	she	is?	You	don't	want	to	improve,	you	don't	want	to
change;	your	acceptance	is	total,	utter.
Then	 you	 know	what	 care	 is.	 You	will	 be	 fulfilled	 through	 that	 care,	 and	 the
other	will	be	helped	immensely.
And	remember,	if	your	care	has	no	business	in	it,	no	ambitions	in	it,	the	person
you	cared	about	will	love	you	forever.	But	if	your	care	has	some	ideas	in	it,	then
the	person	you	cared	about	will	never	be	able	to	forgive	you.	That's	why	children
are	incapable	of	forgiving	their	parents.
You	go	and	ask	the	psychiatrists,	the	psychoanalysts	--	all	the	cases	that	come	to
them	are	the	cases	of	children	whose	parents	cared	too	much.	But	their	care	was
businesslike;	it	was	cold,	it	was	calculated.	They	wanted	some	of	their	ambitions
to	be	fulfilled	through	the	child.	Love	has	to	be	a	free	gift.	The	moment	there	is	a
price	tag	on	it,	it	is	no	more	love.
The	third	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	3
WHY	DON'T	YOU	ALLOW	NONVEGETARIAN	FOOD	IN	THE	ASHRAM?
The	 question	 is	 from	 Swami	 Yoga	 Chinmaya.	 There	 must	 be	 some	 idea	 in
Chinmaya's	 mind	 to	 eat	 meat.	 There	 must	 be	 some	 deep	 hidden	 violence.
Otherwise	the	question	is	coming	from	a	vegetarian	and	there	are	thousands	of
nonvegetarians	 here.	 This	 looks	 very	 absurd,	 but	 this	 is	 how	 things	 are.	 The
vegetarian	is	not	a	true	vegetarian;	he	is	just	a	repressed	one.	Desire	arises.
But	why	I	don't	allow	nonvegetarian	food	in	the	ashram	has	nothing	to	do	with
religion,	 it	 is	 just	 pure	 aesthetics.	 I	 am	 not	 one	 who	 thinks	 that	 if	 you	 take
nonvegetarian	food	you	will	not	become	enlightened.	Jesus	became	enlightened,
Mohammed	became	enlightened,	Ramakrishna	became	enlightened	--	 there	has
been	no	problem	about	it.	You	can	take	nonvegetarian	food	and	you	can	become
enlightened,	so	there	is	no	religious	problem	about	it.
To	me	the	problem	is	that	of	aesthetics.	Because	Jesus	continued	to	eat	meat,	I
have	 a	 feeling	 that	 he	 did	 not	 have	 a	 great	 aesthetic	 sense.	Not	 that	 he	 is	 not
religious	 --	 he	 is	 perfectly	 religious,	 as	 religious	 as	Buddha,	 but	 something	 is
missing	in	him.	Ramakrishna	continued	to	eat	fish;	just	nonaesthetic,	it	 looks	a
little	ugly.
Enlightenment	is	not	at	stake,	but	your	poetry	is	at	stake,	your	sense	of	beauty	is
at	stake.
Your	humanity	is	at	stake,	not	your	super-humanity.	That's	why	it	is	not	allowed
in	my	ashram	--	and	it	will	not	be	allowed.	It	is	a	question	of	beauty.
If	you	understand	this	many	things	will	be	clear	to	you.	Alcohol	can	be	allowed
in	 this	 ashram	 but	 not	 meat,	 because	 alcohol	 is	 vegetarian	 --	 fruit	 juice....
fermented,	but	 it	 is	fruit	 juice.	And	sometimes	to	be	a	 little	drunk	gives	rise	to
great	poetry.	That	 is	possible,	 that	has	 to	be	allowed.	 In	 the	new	commune	we
are	going	to	have	a	bar	--	Omar	Khayyam.	Omar	Khayyam	is	a	Sufi	saint,	one	of
the	enlightened	Sufis.
But	meat	cannot	be	allowed,	that	is	just	ugly.	Just	to	think	that	you	are	killing	an
animal	 to	eat,	 just	 the	very	 idea,	 is	unaesthetic.	 I	am	not	against	 it	because	 the
animal	is	killed...
because	 that	which	 is	 essential	 in	 the	animal	will	 live,	 it	 cannot	be	killed,	 and
that	which	is	nonessential,	whether	you	kill	it	or	not,	is	going	to	die.	So	that	is
irrelevant,	that	is	not	a	point	for	me	to	consider.
The	question	is	not	that	you	have	killed	the	animal	and	killing	is	not	good,	no.
The	 question	 is	 that	 you	 have	 killed	 the	 animal	 --	 you.	 Just	 to	 eat?	 While
beautiful	vegetarian	food	is	available?	If	vegetarian	food	is	not	available,	 that's
one	thing.	But	the	food	IS
available.	Then	why?	Then	why	destroy	a	body?	And	if	you	can	kill	an	animal,
then	 why	 not	 be	 a	 cannibal?	 What	 is	 wrong	 with	 killing	 a	 man?	 The	 meat
derived	from	a	human	body	will	be	more	in	tune	with	you.	Why	not	start	eating
human	beings?	That	too	is	a	question	of	aesthetics.
And	 the	 animals	 are	 brothers	 and	 sisters,	 because	 man	 has	 come	 from	 them.
They	are	our	family.	To	kill	a	man	is	only	to	kill	an	evolved	animal,	or	to	kill	an
animal	is	just	to	kill	somebody	who	is	not	yet	evolved	but	is	on	the	way.	It	is	the
same.	Whether	you	kill	the	child	when	he	is	in	the	first	grade	or	whether	you	kill
the	young	man	when	he	has	come	to	his	last	grade	in	the	university,	it	does	not
make	 much	 difference.	 The	 animals	 are	 moving	 towards	 human	 beings,	 and
human	beings	had	once	been	animals.	It	is	only	a	question	of	aesthetics.	Why	not
kill	your	wife	and	eat	her?	She	is	so	beautiful	and	so	sweet....
A	friend	came	to	a	cannibal	and	the	food	was	prepared	and	the	friend	had	never
tasted	anything	like	it.	He	had	never	even	dreamed	that	food	could	be	so	tasty,	so
delicious.
When	 he	was	 leaving	 he	 said	 to	 the	 cannibal,	 "I	 loved	 the	 food.	 I	 have	 never
loved	food	so	much.	When	I	come	next,	prepare	the	same	dishes."
And	the	cannibal	said,	"That	is	difficult,	because	I	only	had	one	mother."
Why	can't	you	eat	your	mother?	Why	can't	you	eat	your	husband	or	your	child?	-
-	so	delicious.	The	question	is	not	religious,	I	would	like	to	remind	you	again,	it
is	a	question	of	aesthetics.	An	aesthetic	man	will	see	that	life	remains	beautiful	it
does	not	become	ugly	and	nightmarish.
But	the	question	has	arisen	in	Chinmaya's	mind,	that	shows	something.	In	India
people	who	are	vegetarian	are	not	 really	vegetarian;	 it	 is	 just	because	 they	are
born	 in	 a	 vegetarian	 family,	 so	 from	 the	very	beginning	 the	vegetarianism	has
been	 imposed	on	 them.	And	naturally	 they	 are	 curious,	 naturally	 they	want	 to
taste	 other	 things	 also,	 and	 naturally	 the	 idea	 arises,	 "The	 whole	 world	 is
nonvegetarian;	people	must	be	enjoying."
The	vegetarian	feels	that	somehow	he	is	missing	much.	That's	why	the	question
has	arisen.
It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	meditation.	You	 can	 eat	meat	 and	you	 can	meditate.
You	can	eat	meat	and	you	can	love.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	love	either.	But	you
will	be	showing	one	thing	about	yourself	--	that	you	are	very	crude,	that	you	are
very	primitive,	uncultured,	uncivilized;	that	you	don't	have	any	sense	of	how	life
should	 be.	 It	 was	 out	 of	 an	 aesthetic	 sense	 that	 vegetarianism	 was	 born.	 It
became	 entangled	 in	 religion	 and	 got	 lost.	 It	 has	 been	 taken	 out	 from	 the
religious	context.
People	come	to	see	me	and	they	ask,	a	Jaina	asked	me,	"How	can	you	say	that
Jesus	 was	 enlightened?	 --	 because	 he	 was	 a	 meat-eater...."	 His	 question	 is
relevant	 because	 he	 thinks	 that	meat-eaters	 cannot	 become	 enlightened.	Meat-
eaters	 can	 become	 enlightened,	 just	 as	 people	 who	 are	 not	 poets	 can	 become
enlightened.	That	 is	 not	 a	 barrier.	 People	who	don't	 have	 any	 sense	 of	 beauty,
who	will	not	see	any	beauty	 in	a	 rose,	can	become	enlightened...	who	will	not
see	any	beauty	 in	 the	moon,	 can	become	enlightened...	who	will	not	have	any
taste	 for	 Beethoven's	 music,	 can	 become	 enlightened.	 But	 Jesus	 shows
something	 crude.	Maybe	 it	 was	 not	 possible,	maybe	 he	 lived	 amongst	 people
who	were	all	meat-eaters.	It	would	have	been	difficult	for	him	to	be	a	vegetarian.
It	would	have	been	almost	 impossible	 for	him.	But	 still,	 that	 trouble	has	 to	be
taken.
But	 remember	 that	 here	 my	 whole	 approach	 is	 an	 integrated	 approach.
Meditation	is	needed,	so	is	poetry,	so	is	aesthetics,	so	is	religion,	so	is	music,	so
is	art.	Man	should	evolve	in	many	dimensions	in	an	integrated	way.	Then	comes
the	 ultimate	 flowering	 when	 all	 your	 petals	 have	 opened.	 And	 you	 will	 have
greater	joy	and	greater	benediction	in	life.
Saint	Francis	 is	 far	more	aesthetic	 than	Jesus.	Naturally	 there	are	stories	about
Saint	Francis	that	birds	would	come	and	sit	on	his	shoulders,	 that	fishes	would
jump	 out	 of	 the	 river	 to	 see	 him.	 He	 had	 a	 kind	 of	 affinity	 with	 the	 animal
kingdom.	He	would	 talk	 to	 trees	and	would	say	 'sister'	 and	with	birds	 'brother'
and	with	the	sun	and	the	moon.	That	would	not	happen	to	Jesus,	that	would	not
happen	to	Mohammed.	That	cannot	happen.
And	still	 I	say	 they	are	enlightened	people,	but	 their	enlightenment	misses	one
thing	--
aesthetic	 sensibility.	 Why	 miss	 it?	 Why	 not	 have	 the	 whole	 of	 it.	 Why	 not
become	enlightened	in	all	the	possible	ways?	in	your	totality?
The	fourth	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	4
WHAT	IS	IT	TO	BE	SURRENDERED	TO	YOU?
Savita,	 that	 which	 you	 don't	 have	 and	 you	 think	 that	 you	 have,	 has	 to	 be
surrendered	to	me.	You	don't	really	have	the	ego,	the	I,	the	self.	You	don't	have	it
really.	You	are	living	in	a	kind	of	illusion	that	you	are	separate	from	existence.
That	separation	is	not	there.
You	cannot	 live	 for	 a	 single	 split	moment	as	 separate.	You	cannot	 live	 like	an
island.	You	are	part	of	the	whole.	The	whole	goes	on	participating	in	your	being,
the	whole	goes	on	showering	you	with	its	energy,	but	you	have	the	idea	that	"I
am	separate."
That	 'I'	has	 to	be	surrendered	 to	me.	And	you	don't	have	 it,	 so	you	will	not	be
really	surrendering	something	to	me,	just	an	illusion.	Let	me	repeat:	that	which
you	don't	have,	I	want	to	take	it	away	from	you.	And	that	which	you	have,	I	want
to	give	it	back	to	you.
Your	reality	I	want	 to	give	back	to	you;	you	have	forgotten	about	 it.	And	your
unreality	I	want	to	take	away	from	you.
Remember,	when	you	 surrender	your	 ego	you	don't	 lose	 anything,	 you	gain	 --
you	gain	reality.	It	is	as	if	you	were	sleeping	and	you	were	dreaming	and	then	I
come	 and	wake	 you	 up.	Your	 dream	 is	 lost.	But	 have	 you	 lost	 anything?	The
dream	was	not	there	in	the	first	place,	it	was	not	a	reality.	It	was	a	dream,	only	a
dream,	and	now	you	open	your	eyes	and	it	is	morning	and	the	sun	is	rising	and
the	birds	are	singing	and	the	trees	are	happy	with	the	new	day.
I	give	you	that	which	is	and	I	take	away	that	which	is	not.	I	wake	you	up.	You
don't	 lose	 anything.	 And	 remember,	 I	 don't	 gain	 anything	 because	 of	 your
surrender.	So	don't	be	miserly.	Don't	think	that	I	will	be	gaining	anything	out	of
your	surrender	--	I	don't	gain	anything.	When	I	wake	you	up,	your	dream	is	lost
but	I	don't	get	your	dream.	Otherwise	I	would	never	have	said	to	surrender	your
egos	to	me;	otherwise	I	will	be	almost	crushed,	killed.
A	very	boring	man	came	to	see	his	friend.	The	friend	was	very	afraid	because	of
his	past	experiences	with	this	man.	He	bored	him	and	bored	him	and	talked	and
talked,	hours	and	hours,	and	then	when	he	was	leaving	he	said,	"This	is	strange.
When	I	came	I	had	a	headache,	now	it	has	gone."
And	the	sufferer,	 the	victim,	said,	"Don't	be	worried	about	 that	 --	 I	have	got	 it
now.	It	has	not	gone	anywhere."
When	you	surrender	the	ego,	I	don't	get	it.	When	you	surrender	your	headache,	I
don't	get	anything	out	of	it.	So	don't	be	miserly.	Don't	think	that	I	must	be	piling
up	 great	 treasures	 because	 so	many	people	 are	 surrendering	 to	me.	 I	 don't	 get
anything.	 What	 you	 surrender	 is	 nothing.	 But	 you	 gain	 much	 out	 of	 the
surrender.	You	get	reality,	you	get	your	authenticity	back.
The	fifth	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	5
AS	 I	 LISTEN	 TO	 YOU	 TALK	 ABOUT	 BUDDHA	 AND	 SARIPUTRA
SUBHUTI,	 ANANDA,	 MAHAKASHYAPA,	 I	 FEEL	 MORE	 AND	 MORE
THAT	YOU	WERE
ACTUALLY	 THERE	 WHEN	 BUDDHA	 LIVED	 AND	 THAT	 YOU
UNDERSTAND
AND	REVERE	HIM	NOT	ONLY	BECAUSE	YOU	SHARE	THE	SAME
CONSCIOUSNESS,	BUT	BECAUSE	YOU	EXPERIENCED	HIM	DIRECTLY
WHEN
HE	WAS	IN	THE	BODY.	IS	THIS	SO?
Pramod,	 yes.	 But	 don't	 tell	 it	 to	 anybody.	 Keep	 it	 a	 secret.	 And	 never	 ask
anything	about	it	again.
The	sixth	question:
Question	6
WHAT	DO	YOU	 THINK	OSHO?	 HAVE	 I	 THE	 SLIGHTEST	 IDEA	WHAT
YOU	ARE
TALKING	ABOUT	OR	WOULD	THE	SLIGHTEST	IDEA	BE	THE	WRONG
THING
TO	HAVE?
Yes,	Subhuti.
The	seventh	question:
Question	7
OSHO,
BUDDHA	SAYS	THAT	ALL	WE	ARE	IS	A	RESULT	OF	WHAT	WE	HAVE
THOUGHT.	 IT	 IS	 FOUNDED	ON	OUR	THOUGHTS,	 IT	 IS	MADE	UP	OF
OUR
THOUGHTS.	IF	A	MAN	SPEAKS	OR	ACTS	WITH	A	PURE	THOUGHT
HAPPINESS	FOLLOWS	HIM	LIKE	A	SHADOW.
HOW	DOES	THIS	RELATE	TO	NO-MIND	FOR	WE	CAN	THINK	PURELY
AND
CONTROL	OUR	 THOUGHTS,	WE	 CAN	OBTAIN	 HAPPINESS,	 YET	 NO-
MIND
SEEMS	 TO	 APPEAR	 TO	 BE	 CONTRADICTORY	 TO	 CONTROLLING
THOUGHT?
The	first	thing.	There	are	three	minds	possible.	One:	the	evil	mind,	which	lives
in	a	destructive	way,	which	thinks	of	destroying,	which	enjoys	creating	suffering
for	people.
To	such	a	mind	Buddha	says	misery	will	 follow	 like	a	shadow.	 If	you	want	 to
create	misery	for	others	you	will	be	creating	misery	for	yourself	finally.	If	you
are	 against	 existence,	 existence	 will	 be	 against	 you	 --	 because	 existence	 is	 a
mirror,	it	echoes	you.
If	you	abuse,	abuses	will	come	and	fall	on	you.	If	you	sing	a	beautiful	song,	the
song	will	come	back	and	shower	upon	you.	Whatsoever	you	give	comes	back	to
you	a	 thousandfold.	Whatsoever	you	sow	you	will	 reap	a	 thousandfold.	So	 the
evil	mind	is	followed	by	misery,	the	evil	mind	is	followed	by	hell.	The	evil	mind
is	one	who	enjoys	 torturing,	destroying,	murdering.	Tamurlane,	Genghis	Khan,
Adolf	Hitler,	Joseph	Stalin	-
-	these	are	the	evil	minds.
Then	there	is	the	holy	mind	--	against	the	evil	mind,	just	diametrically	opposite
to	 it.	 It	 is	 creative,	 it	 enjoys	 seeing	 people	 happy.	 It	 helps,	 serves,	 is	 a	 great
bestower	of	happiness	on	others.	It	loves	to	see	people	happy.	Happiness	follows
like	a	shadow	to	this	mind	--
the	holy	mind.
But	there	is	one	thing	more	that	you	are	not	aware	of.	If	happiness	is	there,	then
just	beyond	 it	 somewhere	unhappiness	will	be	present.	 If	unhappiness	 is	 there,
then	 somewhere	on	 the	boundary	happiness	will	 be	present.	They	go	 together.
The	evil	mind	is	followed	by	misery,	by	hell,	but	somewhere	hell	is	followed	by
heaven.	The	holy	mind	is	 followed	by	happiness,	but	happiness	 is	 followed	by
unhappiness,	because	they	cannot	be	separate.	They	are	not	two	phenomena.
How	can	you	be	happy	 if	you	cannot	be	unhappy?	 If	you	have	 forgotten	what
unhappiness	 is	 you	will	 have	 forgotten	happiness	 too.	 If	 you	don't	 know	what
disease	 is,	 illness	 is,	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 feel	 your	 health,	wellbeing.	 It	 is
impossible.	To	keep	alert	that	you	are	healthy,	sometimes	illness	is	a	must.
You	cannot	write	with	a	white	chalk	on	a	white	wall.	Not	that	you	cannot	write	--
you	CAN	write,	but	nobody	will	be	able	to	read	it,	not	even	you.	To	write	with	a
white	chalk	you	need	a	blackboard.	The	blackboard	functions	as	the	background.
The	white	chalk	becomes	the	figure.	So	is	life.	Your	happiness	is	like	the	white
chalk:	 it	 needs	 a	 black	 background.	 The	 holy	 man	 lives	 in	 happiness	 but	 his
happiness	 is	 a	 figure	 and	 unhappiness	 is	 there	 like	 a	 background.	 Without
unhappiness	 there	 he	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 know	 what	 happiness	 is;	 without
contrast	there	is	no	way	to	know.
So	ultimately	the	holy	mind	and	the	evil	mind	are	not	two	minds,	they	are	two
aspects	of	 the	same	coin.	The	saint	and	the	sinner	exist	 together.	The	saint	can
turn	into	a	sinner	any	moment	and	the	sinner	can	turn	into	a	saint	any	moment.
They	are	not	 far	away,	 they	are	not	distant	neighbors.	They	 live	very	close	by,
they	are	very	intimate.	Their	boundaries	meet	and	merge.
The	 third	 mind	 is	 no-mind	 --	 neither	 saint	 nor	 sinner,	 neither	 happiness	 nor
unhappiness.
The	duality	 is	dropped.	Then	 there	 is	 silence,	 serenity.	Then	 there	 is	peace,	all
turmoil	is	gone.
Remember,	even	happiness	is	a	turmoil,	even	happiness	is	a	kind	of	fever.	You
like	it,	that	is	one	thing,	but	it	is	fever,	it	is	feverish.	Have	you	not	watched	it?
When	you	are	happy,	you	start	getting	tired	of	it.	Once	in	a	while	it	is	okay,	but
you	cannot	remain	happy	for	long.	Sooner	or	later	you	become	fed	up	with	it.	It
is	tiring.
If	you	are	too	happy	you	will	not	be	able	to	sleep	in	the	night.	In	the	same	way,	if
you	are	too	unhappy	you	will	not	be	able	to	sleep	in	the	night,	you	will	not	be
able	to	relax.
Happiness	 becomes	 a	 tension.	Both	 are	 tiring.	When	 happiness	 tires	 you,	 you
move	 towards	 unhappiness.	 When	 unhappiness	 tires	 you,	 you	 start	 moving
towards	 happiness,	 and	 that's	 how	 the	 pendulum	 of	 life	 goes	 on	 swinging,
swaying,	from	one	extreme	to	another.	No-mind	is	a	totally	different	thing.	It	has
nothing	to	do	with	mind,	happy	or	unhappy,	holy	or	unholy.
Do	you	remember?	When	Bodhidharma	went	to	China,	the	Emperor	Wu	asked
him	 a	 few	 questions.	 One	 of	 the	 questions	 was,	 'I	 have	 created	 many
monasteries,	made	many	Buddha	 temples.	 I	 have	 opened	my	 treasures	 for	 the
spread	of	Buddha's	message.	Don't	you	think	it	is	holy?'
And	 Bodhidharma	 laughed	 and	 he	 said,	 'What	 is	 holy	 in	 it?	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of
business.	You	are	planning	for	the	other	world,	you	are	hoping	for	heaven.	There
is	nothing	holy	in	it,	it	is	as	unholy	as	anything	else.
What	 does	Bodhidharma	mean?	He	 is	 saying	 that	 your	 so-called	holy	 acts	 are
bound	 to	 be	 followed	by	unholy	 things,	 because	 deep	down	 the	 very	desire	 is
unholy.
The	Emperor	was	embarrassed,	shocked,	angry,	and	he	said,	'Then	what	do	you
think	--	is	not	Buddha	a	holy	person?'
And	Bodhidharma	laughed	and	he	said,	 'He	is	neither	holy	nor	a	person.	He	is
utter	 emptiness.	How	 can	 holiness	 exist	 there?	 It	will	 be	 a	 kind	 of	 dirt.	He	 is
utterly	silent,	he	is	emptiness.'
The	state	of	no-mind	is	neither	holy	nor	unholy.	Buddha	is	neither	a	saint	nor	a
sinner.	He	has	transcended	duality.	Buddha	is	a	transcendence.
So	please	remember,	from	an	evil	mind	you	can	become	a	holy	mind	but	there	is
not	 a	 real	 transformation.	 It	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 degrees,	 you	 have	 not	 gone
beyond	mind	yet.
Only	no-mind	can	liberate	you.
So	 don't	 try	 to	 become	 a	 holy	 person.	 Holy	 persons	 are	 unholy.	 Don't	 try	 to
become	saints	because	all	that	effort	is	nothing	but	an	ego	trip	--	mind	playing	a
new	game,	and	a	very	subtle	game.	Just	drop	that	whole	nonsense	of	being	holy
or	unholy.	Saint	and	sinner,	say	goodbye	to	both.	Dark	and	light,	say	goodbye	to
both.	Heaven	and	hell,	say	goodbye	to	both.
And	then	arises	a	totally	new	world	which	you	have	not	even	dreamed	of.	Then
there	is	utter	serenity,	then	there	is	peace,	then	there	is	no	turmoil,	then	not	even
a	ripple	arises.
In	 that	 state	 is	 Buddha-hood.	 There	 is	 no	 pain,	 no	 pleasure	 then,	 because
pleasure	is	not	different	from	pain	and	pain	is	not	different	from	pleasure.
Then	 what	 is	 there?	 Buddha	 is	 silent	 about	 it,	 nothing	 can	 be	 said	 about	 it,
because	whatsoever	can	be	said	will	become	part	of	duality.	If	you	say	it	is	bliss
then	you	will	think	it	is	not	misery.	If	you	say	it	is	light	then	you	will	think	it	is
not	dark.	If	you	say	it	is	summer	then	you	will	think	it	is	hot	winter.	If	you	say	it
is	 a	 kind	 of	 flower	 then	 you	 will	 think	 it	 is	 not	 a	 thorn.	 But	 you	 will	 start
thinking	in	duality.
Buddha	 keeps	 absolutely	 silent	 about	 it.	 The	 reason	 is	 that	 it	 can	 only	 be
expressed	in	silence.	It	is	silence.	How	can	you	express	silence	through	sound?
The	seventh	question:
Question	8
A	 FEW	 YEARS	 AGO	 THROUGH	 YOGA	 AND	 MEDITATION	 I
EXPERIENCED
SOME	PEAKS	OF	PRAYER.	MY	WHOLE	BEING	FELT	THE	BLISS	OF	IT	--
ALL
WAS	 DIVINE	 LOVE,	 AND	 THANKFULNESS.	 FOR	 SOME	 REASON	 I
CAME	OUT
OF	 IT	 AND	 NOW	 I	 FIND	 MYSELF	 BACK	 IN	 THE	 DARK	 VALLEY.
SOMEWHERE
THINGS	 WENT	 WRONG.	 IT	 FEELS	 GUILTY	 AND	 SO	 ARDUOUS	 TO
STAND	UP
AGAIN.	PLEASE	COMMENT.
If	 your	 silence	 and	 your	 bliss	 is	 caused	 by	 anything,	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 disappear.
That	 which	 is	 caused	 cannot	 be	 eternal.	 You	 managed	 it	 through	 Yoga	 and
meditation,	but	it	was	not	a	natural	happening.	It	was	artificial,	it	was	arbitrary.	It
was	as	 arbitrary	as	you	can	manage	 through	chemical	drugs,	but	 the	drug	will
wear	off.
You	have	taken	a	certain	quantity	of	LSD	and	you	will	fed	blissed-out,	and	all	is
blissful	 and	 all	 is	 joy	 and	 life	 has	 immense	 beauty	 and	 splendor	 and	 trees	 are
more	 green	 and	 roses	 are	 more	 red	 and	 every	 face	 looks	 radiant.	 Life	 is
luminous,	psychedelic.	But	the	LSD	is	going	to	wear	off.	The	next	morning	you
will	 look	 and	 the	 trees	 are	 dusty	 again;	 that	 greenness	 is	 not	 there,	 that
luminosity	 is	 not	 there.	 They	 are	 not	 illumined	 from	 within.	 You	 will	 see
people's	faces	--	those	dull,	boring	faces	again.	All	is	dusty,	all	is	ordinary.
The	same	can	happen	 through	Yoga,	 the	same	can	happen	 through	 fasting,	 the
same	 can	 happen	 through	 any	 technique	 whatsoever.	 Techniques	 are	 good	 to
give	you	a	glimpse,	but	they	can	only	give	you	a	glimpse;	it	cannot	become	your
state	of	affairs,	it	cannot	become	your	consciousness.
So	 there	 is	not	a	problem	 in	 it,	 it	 is	 simple.	 It	was	going	 to	be	 lost,	nothing	 is
wrong	with	you.	The	only	wrong	thing	is	your	attitude.	You	were	think-ing	that
through	 yoga	 and	 meditation	 you	 would	 be	 able	 to	 create	 something	 eternal.
That	is	not	possible.	The	eternal	cannot	be	created.	Anything	that	is	created	will
fall	one	day	or	other,	sooner	or	later.
The	eternal	comes	to	you	uncreated.	The	eternal	happens,	is	not	done.	When	you
have	 gone	 beyond	 techniques	 and	 methods,	 when	 you	 have	 dropped	 all
techniques	and	all	methods,	when	you	have	come	to	see	one	thing	--	that	just	to
be	 is	 enough,	 nothing	 else	 is	 needed,	 that	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 make	 any
arrangement,	that	all	beings	are	Buddhas	from	the	very	beginning....	When	you
have	 understood	 this	 --	 that	 you	 are	 not	 to	 grow	 into	 something,	 that	 you	 are
already	there,	it	is	already	the	case	--	then	you	relax.
And	the	relaxation	should	not	be	a	method.	You	should	not	relax	through	a	Yoga
posture.
This	very	understanding	 is	 relaxing,	 this	very	understanding	 is	 relaxation.	You
relax,	effort	disappears.	You	 live	your	ordinary	 life	 --	you	chop	wood	and	you
carry	water	from	the	well	and	you	cook	food	and	you	eat	and	you	sleep	and	you
love	 and	 you	 live	 ordinarily	 with	 no	 hankering	 and	 no	 desire	 for	 anything
extraordinary.
And	then	one	day	it	is	there,	not	of	your	making.	One	day	it	is	suddenly	there.
One	day	you	open	your	eyes	and	it	is	there	--	and	then	it	never	leaves.	But	it	has
to	come	on	its	own.	Otherwise,	managed	by	you,	it	will	come	and	leave;	it	will
be	only	a	glimpse.
You	 ask:	 "A	 few	 years	 ago	 through	 yoga	 and	meditation	 I	 experienced	 some
peaks	of	prayer."	They	were	created	peaks,	they	were	dreams	and	imaginations
that	you	managed	 to	have.	"My	whole	being	felt	 the	bliss	of	 it."	But	you	were
there.	You	felt	the	bliss	of	it	but	you	were	there.	You	had	not	disappeared.	"All
was	divine."	This	is	an	interpretation.
The	mind	was	functioning,	the	mind	was	saying,	"All	is	divine".	You	must	have
heard,	you	must	have	read.	Your	mind	was	interpreting	--	all	is	divine	love	and
thankfulness.
These	were	ideas	floating	in	the	mind.
But	you	were	 there,	 the	memory	was	 there,	 the	past	was	 there.	Otherwise	who
would	say
'All	is	divine'?	If	all	is	really	divine	then	what	is	the	point	of	saying	all	is	divine?
If	all	is	divine	all	is	divine,	there	is	no	need	to	say	even.	Saying	simply	says	that
you	 know	 that	 all	 is	 not	 divine.	 Saying	 simply	 says	 that	 you	 are	 posing,
imposing.
Yes,	there	must	have	been	a	kind	of	happiness	created	by	meditation	and	yoga,
there	must	 have	 been	 a	 kind	 of	 joy,	 and	 on	 that	 joy	 you	 imposed	 your	whole
philosophy	--	that	this	is	what	God	is,	that	this	is	divineness,	that	this	is	love	and
thankfulness.	And	for	a	few	days	you	enjoyed	your	dream	--	it	was	a	dream.
"For	some	reason	I	came	out	of	it."	Not	for	some	reason,	it	is	very	simple.	You
had	to	come	out	of	it,	you	could	not	have	lived	in	a	dream	forever	--	nobody	can
live	 in	 a	 dream	 forever.	A	 dream	 is	 never	 forever,	 otherwise	what	will	 be	 the
distinction	between	reality	and	dream?	A	dream	is	only	for	the	moment.	Sooner
or	 later	 you	wake	 up,	 you	 open	 your	 eyes	 and	 the	 dream	 is	 not	 there	 and	 the
ordinary	life	is	there.
"I	came	out	of	it	and	now	I	find	myself	back	in	the	dark	valley."	You	were	there
at	those	sunlit	peaks	and	you	are	there	in	the	dark	valleys.	One	thing	is	similar	:
you.	Dark	valleys	or	sunlit	peaks,	it	does	not	matter;	all	that	matters	is	you	--	the
ego	 is	 there.	The	ego	 is	 in	 the	dark	valley,	 the	ego	 is	 at	 the	peak,	 and	 the	ego
goes	on	creating	dreams.
Let	 me	 tell	 you	 one	 thing	 :	 even	 the	 dark	 valley	 is	 your	 dream	 and	 your
imposition,	your	idea.	There	are	no	dark	valleys.	If	all	is	divine,	how	can	there
be	dark	valleys?	And	if	there	are	dark	valleys,	how	can	all	be	divine?	There	are
neither	dark	valleys	nor	 sunlit	peaks;	 it	 is	 just	 the	game	of	 the	ego.	 It	goes	on
moving	in	polarities,	from	one	point	to	another.	When	you	see	it	--	that	the	sweet
dream	is	a	dream,	so	is	the	nightmare,	both	are	dreams	--	wake	up	and	drop	both
the	dreams.	Then	for	the	first	time	you	have	contact	with	reality.
But	remember,	in	that	moment	when	reality	is	there,	you	are	not.	That	is	the	only
criterion	 to	 understand,	 no	 other	 criterion	 exists.	 The	 only	 criterion	 is,	 if	 the
experience	is	of	reality	you	will	not	be	found	there,	you	cannot	be	found	there.
You	will	be	utterly	absent.	Bliss	will	be	 there	but	you	will	not	be	 there.	There
will	be	nobody	to	say	"I	am	feeling	bliss."	God	will	be	there	but	you	will	not	be
there.	There	will	be	nobody	to	say
"All	is	divine."	Let	that	be	remembered.
And	 this	 can	 happen	 only,	 this	 cannot	 be	 done.	 You	 cannot	 produce	 it.	 A
produced	 thing	 is	 artificial,	 it	 goes	 only	 so	 far,	 then	 it	 disappears.	A	produced
thing	is	cheap.	Just	think	what	you	are	doing.	When	you	do	yoga,	what	are	you
doing?	Standing	on	your	head	--
how	can	standing	on	your	head	make	you	enlightened?	How?	Just	standing	on
your	head?
So	cheap?
Standing	on	your	head	may	give	a	shock	to	your	head,	maybe	a	kind	of	shock
treatment.
Too	much	 blood	 rushing	 to	 the	 head	may	 give	 you	 a	 moment	 of	 stoppage	 --
thinking	stops.	Too	much	blood	has	rushed	so	suddenly,	mm?	--	because	you	are
standing	 on	 the	 head	 so	 the	 gravitation	 is	 pulling	 all	 your	 blood	 towards	 the
head.	And	the	head	cannot	manage	it,	it	is	a	kind	of	flood.	So	for	a	moment	there
is	 a	 stopping	 of	 thinking.	 In	 that	 stopping	 you	 will	 feel,	 "I	 am	 joyous,	 I	 am
blissful,	all	 is	divine."	But	how	long	can	you	stand	on	your	head?	And	even	if
you	learn	to	stand	a	long	time,	the	mind	will	also	learn	how	to	go	on	continuing
thinking	with	that	flood	of	blood.	There	is	no	problem,	mind	will	also	learn	by
and	by.	Then	you	can	stand	on	your	head	and	you	can	go	on	thinking.
When	I	was	a	child	I	used	to	stand	on	my	head	very	very	long.	It	became	such	a
habit	that	one	day	I	fell	asleep.	That	is	almost	impossible.	When	I	told	one	old
man,	who	was	a	kind	of	yogi	in	my	village,	he	said,	"This	is	impossible,	this	has
not	even	happened	to	me.
To	 fall	 asleep	 standing	on	your	head..."	Because	 for	 sleep	 to	happen,	 the	head
needs	less	blood	flow	than	ordinarily.	That's	why	we	use	pillows	in	the	night	to
put	the	head	a	little	higher	so	blood	does	not	go	too	much	in	the	head;	otherwise
the	head	continues	functioning.	The	more	intellectual	a	person	is,	the	bigger	the
pillow	he	will	need	--	two,	three,	four	pillows.	Otherwise	just	a	little	blood	and
the	thought	process	starts.	So	the	food	supply	has	to	be	completely	cut.
The	old	man	said,	"This	 is	 impossible."	But	 it	happened	 to	me.	Not	only	did	I
fall	asleep	but	I	fell	from	my	SHIRSHASANA.	It	had	become	so	habitual.	Not
only	 thoughts,	but	 sleep	and	dream	are	possible.	So	 if	you	stand	on	your	head
too	long	you	will	be	accustomed	to	it	and	the	joy	that	has	happened	for	the	first
time	will	never	happen	again.
And	what	do	you	do	when	you	meditate?	How	can	you	manage	enlightenment
through	meditation	and	yoga	and	fasting	and	dieting?	No,	the	thing	is	far	beyond
--	beyond	the	stars.	All	these	small	things	are	very	earthly.	Yes,	they	can	purify
you,	cleanse	you,	but	they	cannot	give	you	enlightenment.	They	can	give	you	a
few	moments	of	joy,	but	that	joy	is	not	to	be	interpreted	as	bliss,	because	you	are
there.	 They	 can	 sometimes	 fill	 you	 with	 great	 light,	 but	 that	 light	 is	 not	 the
eternal	light.	For	the	eternal	you	can	only	be	feminine,	you	cannot	be	a	doer.	You
have	 to	 be	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 inactivity,	 passivity.	 You	 have	 to	 wait	 patiently.	 Be
ordinary	and	wait
And	I	am	not	saying	don't	do	yoga	exercises;	they	ARE	good	for	the	body.	And	I
am	not	saying	don't	do	meditations;	 they	are	perfectly	good	and	cleansing.	But
don't	 think	 that	by	yoga	and	meditation	you	will	produce	God.	God	cannot	be
produced.	But	you	will	be	cleansed,	and	there	will	be	more	possibility	for	God	to
happen.
But	God	happens	only	when	you	are	unawares.	When	you	are	not	even	looking
for	him,	when	you	are	simply	sitting,	not	doing	anything	and	there	is	no	desire	--
not	 even	 a	 small	 fragment	 of	 desire	 in	 the	 mind	 to	 be	 anything	 else,	 to	 be
somebody	else,	 to	become	enlightened	 and	 all	 that	 --	when	you	 are	 just	 there,
sitting	and	doing	nothing,	suddenly	it	happens.	It	is	always	sudden.	It	descends
on	you.	But	then	you	are	no	more,	enlightenment	is	and	you	are	not.	God	is	and
you	are	not.
The	last	question:
Question	9
OSHO,
FOR	 TWO	MONTHS	 I	 LIVED	 IN	 THE	 COMMUNE	AA	 AND	 FOR	 TWO
YEARS	IN
SOME	 COMMUNES	 IN	 FRANCE.	 THEY	 HAVE	 ALL	 FAILED	 --	 HATE
BECOMING
STRONGER	THAN	LOVE.
I	 FELT	 THAT	 I	 COULD	 BE	 MORE	 TOTALLY	 MYSELF	 LIVING	 IN	 A
GROUP
WITH	 COLLECTIVE	 DECISIONS	 AND	 PROPERTY	 AND	 FREE
SEXUALITY.
WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK	OF	THE	WAY	OF	LIVING	IN	COMMUNES?
The	 problem	 is	 not	 where	 you	 live,	 the	 problem	 is	 you.	 You	 can	 go	 to	 a
commune	and	you	will	carry	all	your	problems	with	you.	And	others	who	have
come	 to	 live	 in	 the	 commune	 have	 also	 come	 just	 like	 you,	 with	 all	 their
problems.	Sooner	or	later	those	problems	will	surface.	These	outer	things	cannot
help.	They	are	distractions.
The	 real	 change	 has	 to	 happen	 in	 you,	 commune	 or	 no	 commune.	 The	 real
change	has	to	happen	in	the	deepest	core	of	your	being.	If	it	happens	there	only
then	will	life	be	different,	otherwise	it	will	not	be	different.
You	 say:	 "They	 have	 all	 failed."	 They	 have	 failed	 because	 you	 are	 the	 same.
They	have	not	failed	really.	Their	failure	only	proves	that	you	are	frustrated,	they
have	 not	 fulfilled	 your	 expectations.	 And	 what	 were	 your	 expectations?	 You
were	thinking	that	just	living	in	a	commune	would	do.	And	your	problems	would
be	solved.
Neither	 can	 a	 commune	 help,	 nor	 can	 going	 to	 the	Himalayas	 and	 living	 in	 a
cave	help.
Life	has	to	be	tackled	very	realistically.	You	have	to	see	into	your	problems,	you
have	to	go	to	their	very	roots,	you	have	to	burn	the	very	seed	of	those	problems,
and	only	then	--
then	it	can	happen	anywhere.
You	 were	 searching	 for	 a	 heaven,	 mm?	 That's	 what	 people	 have	 been	 doing
down	 the	 ages.	 They	 don't	 change	 themselves,	 they	 hanker	 for	 a	 heaven,	 but
wherever	they	go	they	will	create	hell.	They	ARE	hell	--	it	is	not	a	question	of
finding	heaven	somewhere.
Unless	you	have	it	already	in	you,	you	will	not	find	it	anywhere.
Anubodhi	has	sent	me	a	beautiful	parable:
Once	I	knew	a	man	who	had	won	an	all-expenses-paid	trip	to	both	heaven	and
hell.	He	was	 asked	where	he	would	 like	 to	go	 first.	 "I	would	 like	 to	visit	 hell
first,"	he	replied,	and	so	it	was	arranged.
Upon	 arriving	 in	 hell	 a	 great	 sight	met	 his	 eyes.	 He	 found	 himself	 in	 a	 large
banquet	hall	in	which	long	tables	were	laden	with	every	imaginable	kind	of	food.
The	 people	 sat	 along	 the	 tables,	 forks	 poised	 above	 the	 food,	 which	 steamed
deliciously	 and	 filled	 the	 air	 with	 the	 most	 tempting	 smells,	 but	 no	 one	 was
eating.
The	man	was	puzzled,	but	when	he	looked	closer	he	noticed	that	the	people	were
all	suffering	from	a	strange	paralysis	of	the	elbow.	Try	as	they	might,	they	just
could	not	get	the	food	to	their	mouths.
"So	 this	 is	 hell,"	 the	man	 thought.	 "To	 live	 in	 a	 bounteous	 universe,	 abundant
with	all	that	one	could	need	or	desire,	but	to	starve	in	the	midst	of	plenty,	unable
to	feed	oneself."
Turning	away,	the	man	asked	to	be	transported	to	heaven.	In	heaven	he	saw	the
same	 large	banquet	hall,	 filled	with	 the	 same	 long	 tables,	 laden	with	 the	 same
delectable	food.
Looking	 closer	 he	 noticed	 that	 the	 people	 were	 all	 suffering	 from	 the	 same
paralysis	of	the	elbow.	"This	is	heaven,"	he	cried,	almost	aloud.	But	upon	even
closer	inspection	he	noticed	one	difference.	He	saw	that	between	heaven	and	hell
there	was	one	small	difference	which	made	all	the	difference.	What	he	saw	was
that	in	heaven	they	were	feeding	each	other.
They	 were	 paralyzed	 just	 the	 same,	 but	 they	 were	 feeding	 each	 other.	 It	 was
impossible	to	bring	the	food	to	their	own	mouths	but	it	was	possible	to	feed	the
other,	and	the	other	was	feeding	them.
This	is	the	only	difference,	but	the	difference	is	inside	--	compassion	has	arisen.
Unless	 you	 are	 a	 bodhisattva,	 wherever	 you	 are	 you	 will	 be	 in	 hell.	 When
passion	is	transformed	into	compassion....
Then,	wherever	you	are,	you	are	in	heaven.	That	is	the	only	paradise	there	is.
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	A	Dweller	in	Peace
27	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712270
ShortTitle:
DIAMON07
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
75
mins
VAJRACHCHEDIKA
PRAJNAPARAMITA
SUTRA
OF
GAUTAMA
THE
BUDDHA
THE	LORD	THEN	SAID:
'YES,	SUBHUTI,	FOR	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	TAUGHT
THAT	THE	DHAMMAS	SPECIAL	TO	THE	BUDDHAS
ARE	JUST	NOT	A	BUDDHA'S	SPECIAL	DHAMMAS.
THAT	IS	WHY	THEY	ARE	CALLED
"THE	DHAMMAS	SPECIAL	TO	THE	BUDDHAS".'
THE	LORD	ASKED:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
DOES	IT	OCCUR	TO	THE	STREAMWINNER,
"BY	ME	HAS	THE	FRUIT	OF	A	STREAMWINNER
BEEN	ATTAINED"?
SUBHUTI	REPLIED:	'NO	INDEED,	O	LORD.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE,	O	LORD,	HE	HAS	NOT	WON	ANY	DHAMMA.
THEREFORE	IS	HE	CALLED	A	STREAMWINNER.
NO	SIGHT-OBJECT	HAS	BEEN	WON,
NO	SOUNDS,	SMELLS,	TASTES,	TOUCHABLES,
OR	OBJECTS	OF	MIND.
THAT	IS	WHY	HE	IS	CALLED	A	"STREAMWINNER".
IF,	O	LORD,	IT	WOULD	OCCUR	TO	A	STREAMWINNER,
"BY	ME	HAS	A	STREAMWINNER'S	FRUIT	BEEN	ATTAINED,"
THEN	THAT	WOULD	BE	IN	HIM	A	SEIZING	ON	A	SELF,
SEIZING	ON	A	BEING,
SEIZING	ON	A	SOUL,
SEIZING	ON	A	PERSON.'
THE	LORD	ASKED:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
DOES	IT	THEN	OCCUR	TO	THE	ARHAT,
"BY	ME	HAS	ARHATSHIP	BEEN	ATTAINED"?'
SUBHUTI:	'NO	INDEED,	O	LORD.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	NO	DHAMMA	IS	CALLED	"ARHAT".
THAT	IS	WHY	HE	IS	CALLED	AN	ARHAT.
AND	WHY?
I	AM,	O	LORD,	THE	ONE	WHOM	THE	TATHAGATA
HAS	POINTED	OUT	AS	THE	FOREMOST	OF	THOSE
WHO	DWELL	IN	PEACE.
I	AM	O	LORD,	AN	ARHAT	FREE	FROM	GREED.
AND	YET,	O	LORD,	IT	DOES	NOT	OCCUR	TO	ME,
"AN	ARHAT	AM	I	AND	FREE	FROM	GREED."
IF,	O	LORD,	IT	COULD	OCCUR	TO	ME
THAT	I	HAVE	ATTAINED	ARHATSHIP,
THEN	THE	TATHAGATA	WOULD	NOT	HAVE	DECLARED	OF	ME
THAT	"SUBHUTI,	THIS	SON	OF	GOOD	FAMILY,
WHO	IS	THE	FOREMOST	OF	THOSE
WHO	DWELL	IN	PEACE,
DOES	NOT	DWELL	ANYWHERE;
THAT	IS	WHY	HE	IS	CALLED
A	DWELLER	IN	PEACE,	A	DWELLER	IN	PEACE".'
A	Dweller	in	Peace
The	Diamond	Sutra	will	appear	to	most	of	you	as	absurd,	as	mad.	It	is	irrational
but	 not	 anti-rational.	 It	 is	 something	 beyond	 the	 reason,	 that's	 why	 it	 is	 so
difficult	to	express	it	in	words.
Once	a	whisky-drinking,	chainsmoking	and	popcorn-munching	American	priest
was	 staying	 with	 me.	 Roaming	 in	 my	 library,	 accidentally	 he	 found	 The
Diamond	Sutra.	For	just	ten	to	fifteen	minutes	he	looked	into	it	here	and	there,
then	he	came	to	me	and	said,
"This	man	Buddha	must	have	been	mad.	And	not	only	was	he	mad,	he	had	mad
followers	too.'
I	can	understand	his	statement.	Buddha	will	look	mad	to	you	too,	because	he	is
trying	to	say	that	which	cannot	be	said.	He	is	trying	to	catch	hold	of	something
which	is	essentially	elusive.	Hence	all	these	strange	sayings	--	they	ARE	strange.
They	are	strange	because	the	way	they	are	put,	the	way	they	are	expressed,	is	not
logical.	It	does	not	make	any	sense,	not	at	least	on	the	surface.
And	if	you	have	not	felt	something	of	the	beyond,	it	is	very	difficult	for	you	to
understand	what	Buddha	is	trying	to	do.	We	can	understand	only	that	which	we
have	experienced,	if	not	in	toto	then	at	least	in	part.	Otherwise	our	understanding
remains	rooted	in	our	experience.
It	happened:
Charlie	had	been	to	school	that	morning	for	the	first	time.	When	he	came	home
his	mother	said,	"Well,	Charlie,	how	do	you	like	school?"
"I	like	it	well	enough,	but	I	have	not	got	my	present	yet."
"Your	present?"	queried	the	mother.	"What	do	you	mean?"
"Teacher	said,	when	she	saw	me,	'You	may	sit	here	for	the	present,	little	man.'	I
sat	there	all	morning	and	didn't	get	a	thing!"
Now,	a	 small	child's	understanding	 is	a	 small	child's	understanding.	And	 that's
how	 you	 are	 --	 small	 children	 as	 far	 as	 Buddha	 is	 concerned,	 as	 far	 as	 his
statements	are	concerned.
His	 statements	 are	 of	 the	 ultimate	 experience.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 be	 very	 very
patient,	only	then	something	will	start	dawning	in	your	consciousness.	They	are
of	utter	significance.
Even	if	a	single	statement	is	understood,	that	will	prove	radical,	that	will	change
you	from	your	very	roots.
A	father	took	his	young	son	to	an	opera	for	the	first	time.	The	conductor	started
waving	 the	baton	and	 the	soprano	began	her	aria.	The	boy	watched	everything
intently	and	finally	asked,	"Why	is	he	hitting	her	with	his	stick?"
"He	is	not	hitting	her	with	the	stick,"	the	father	explained.
"Then	why	is	she	screaming?"
In	your	mind	many	times	these	ideas	will	come:	What	is	Buddha	saying?	It	looks
so	utterly	mad,	it	doesn't	make	sense.	It	is	beyond	sense.	You	will	have	to	gather
yourself	together	to	climb	to	something	higher	than	you.	You	will	have	to	stretch
your	hands	towards	the	beyond.	Even	if	you	can	touch	just	a	fragment	of	these
sayings,	your	life	will	not	be	the	same	again.
But	 it	 is	 difficult.	We	 live	 rooted	 in	 the	 earth.	We	 are	 like	 trees	 rooted	 in	 the
earth.
Buddha	is	a	bird	on	his	wings	in	the	sky.	Now	these	trees	rooted	in	the	earth	are
trying	to	understand	the	message	of	 the	bird	who	has	no	roots	 in	 the	earth	any
more,	who	is	flying	in	the	sky,	who	knows	the	vastness,	the	infinity	of	the	sky.
He	 has	 a	 different	 understanding,	 a	 different	 vision.	 And	 the	 distance	 is
immense.
Only	 very	 few	 can	 have	 a	 few	 glimpses	 of	 what	 Buddha	 is	 trying	 to	 do.
Something	of	absolute	value	is	being	conveyed	to	you.	If	you	cannot	understand
then	remember	that	you	cannot	understand.	Don't	say,	like	that	whisky-drinking,
chainsmoking,	 popcorn-munching	 priest,	 that	 Buddha	 is	 mad.	 Don't	 say	 that,
beware	of	that.	It	is	easier	to	say	that	Buddha	is	mad.	Then	you	are	freed	of	the
responsibility	 of	 understanding;	 then	 you	 can	 close	 The	 Diamond	 Sutra	 and
forget	all	about	it.
If	you	say,	"It	is	beyond	me,"	then	there	is	challenge.	When	you	say,	"Maybe	I
am	 very	 childish,	 juvenile.	 I	 cannot	 understand,	 I	 have	 to	 grow	 into	 my
understanding.	How	can	Buddha	be	mad?"	then	there	is	a	challenge	and	you	start
growing.
Always	 remember	 that:	 never	 decide	 about	 the	 other.	 Even	 if	Buddha	 is	mad,
take	 it	 as	 a	 challenge.	You	will	 not	 lose	 anything.	 If	 he	 is	mad,	 then	 too	 you
would	have	gone	beyond	your	boundaries	just	in	the	effort	to	understand	him.	If
he	 is	 not	 mad	 then	 you	 have	 met	 with	 something	 precious,	 then	 you	 have
stumbled	upon	a	great	treasure.
The	sutras:
THE	LORD	THEN	SAID:
'YES,	SUBHUTI,	FOR	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	TAUGHT
THAT	THE	DHAMMAS	SPECIAL	TO	THE	BUDDHAS
ARE	JUST	NOT	A	BUDDHA'S	SPECIAL	DHAMMAS.
THAT	IS	WHY	THEY	ARE	CALLED
"THE	DHAMMAS	SPECIAL	TO	THE	BUDDHAS".'
Now	look	at	the	absurdity	--	but	it	is	significant,	it	is	very	meaningful.	What	are
the	 Dhammas	 of	 the	 Buddhas,	 the	 special	 characteristics	 of	 a	 Buddha?	 His
special	characteristic	is	that	he	has	no	characteristics,	that	he	is	utterly	ordinary,
that	if	you	come	across	him	you	will	not	recognize	him.
He	is	not	a	performer,	he	is	not	a	politician,	he	is	not	an	actor.	He	has	no	ego	to
perform.
He	is	not	there	to	convince	anybody	about	his	importance.	He	is	utterly	absent.
That	is	his	presence.	That's	why	these	absurd	statements.
His	characteristic	is	that	he	lives	as	if	he	is	dead;	that	he	walks	and	yet	nobody
walks	in	him,	that	he	talks	yet	nobody	talks	in	him...	there	is	utter	silence,	never
broken.
Zen	monks	say	Buddha	never	uttered	a	single	word,	and	Buddha	spoke	for	forty-
five	years	continuously.	If	anybody	can	surpass	him,	that	is	me,	nobody	else	can
surpass	him.
And	I	say	 to	you	I	have	also	not	uttered	a	single	word.	Zen	people	are	right.	 I
agree	with	them	with	my	own	experience.	I	go	on	saying	things	to	you	and	yet
deep	 inside	 there	 is	 absolute	 silence,	 not	 disturbed	 by	what	 I	 say.	When	 I	 am
speaking,	the	silence	is	there,	not	even	a	ripple	arises	in	it.
I	 am	here,	 in	 a	way	utterly	present,	 in	 another	way	absolutely	 absent,	 because
there	 is	nothing	arising	 in	me	which	says	 'I'.	Not	 that	 I	don't	use	 the	word;	 the
word	has	 to	be	used,	 it	 is	utilitarian	 --	but	 it	 connotes	 to	no	 reality.	 It	 is	 just	a
utility,	a	convenience,	a	strategy	of	language;	it	corresponds	to	no	reality.
When	I	say	'I',	I	am	simply	using	a	word	to	indicate	towards	me,	but	if	you	look
into	me	you	will	not	find	any	'I'	there.	I	have	not	found.	I	have	been	looking	and
looking	and	looking.	The	more	I	have	looked	in,	the	more	the	'I'	has	evaporated.
The	'I'	exists	only	when	you	don't	look	inwards.	It	can	exist	only	when	you	don't
look.	The	moment	you	look,	the	'I'	disappears.
It	 is	 just	 like	when	 you	 bring	 light	 in	 a	 dark	 room,	 darkness	 disappears.	Your
look	inwards	is	a	light,	a	flame.	You	cannot	find	any	darkness	there	--	and	your
'I'	is	nothing	but	condensed	darkness.
The	basic	characteristic	of	a	Buddha,	the	Buddha	Dhamma,	his	unique	quality,	is
that	 he	 is	 not,	 that	 he	has	no	 attributes,	 that	 he	 is	 indefinable,	 that	whatsoever
definition	you	put	upon	him	will	 be	unjust	because	 it	will	 demark	him,	 it	will
limit	him,	and	he	is	not	limited.	He	is	pure	void.	He	is	a	nobody.
Buddha	is	so	ordinary	that	if	you	come	across	him	you	will	not	recognize	him.
You	can	recognize	a	king,	you	know	the	language	how	to	recognize	a	king,	and
the	king	knows	what	language	you	recognize.	He	prepares	for	it,	he	rehearses	for
it.	He	 is	 bent	 upon	proving	 to	you	 that	 he	 is	 special.	Buddha	has	nothing	 like
that.	 He	 is	 not	 trying	 to	 prove	 anything	 to	 anybody.	 He	 is	 not	 trying	 to	 be
recognized	by	 you.	He	has	 no	 need	 to	 be	 recognized.	He	has	 come	home.	He
does	not	need	your	attention.
Remember,	attention	 is	a	psychological	need.	 It	has	 to	be	understood.	Why	do
people	 need	 so	 much	 attention?	Why	 in	 the	 first	 place	 does	 everybody	 want
people	 to	 pay	 attention	 to	 them?	 Why	 does	 everybody	 want	 to	 be	 special?
Something	is	missing	inside.
You	 don't	 know	who	 you	 are.	You	 know	yourself	 only	 by	 others'	 recognition.
You	don't	have	any	direct	approach	into	your	being,	you	go	via	others.
If	somebody	says	you	are	good,	you	feel	you	are	good.	If	somebody	says	you	are
not	good,	you	feel	very	very	depressed	--	so	you	are	not	good.	If	somebody	says
you	are	beautiful	you	are	happy.	If	somebody	says	you	are	ugly	you	are	unhappy.
You	don't	know	who	you	are.	You	simply	live	on	opinions	of	others,	you	go	on
collecting	opinions.
You	don't	have	any	recognition	--	direct,	immediate	--	of	your	being.	That's	why
you	gather	a	borrowed	being.	Hence	the	need	for	attention.
And	 when	 people	 are	 attentive	 to	 you,	 you	 feel	 as	 if	 you	 are	 being	 loved,
because	 in	 love	we	pay	attention	 to	each	other.	When	 two	persons	are	 in	deep
love	they	forget	the	whole	world.	They	become	engaged	into	each	other's	being
absolutely.	 They	 look	 into	 each	 other's	 eyes.	 For	 those	 moments	 all	 else
disappears,	exists	not.	In	those	pure	moments	they	are	not	here.	They	live	on	a
plenitude	 somewhere	 high	 in	 the	 sky,	 or	 in	 heaven,	 and	 they	 are	 absolutely
pouring	their	attention	into	each	other.
Love	 is	 attentive	 --	 and	 everybody	 has	 missed	 love.	 Very	 rare	 people	 have
attained	 to	 love,	 because	 love	 is	 God.	 Millions	 live	 without	 love	 because
millions	live	without	God.
Love	has	been	missed.	How	to	substitute	that	gap?	The	easier	substitute	is	to	get
people's	attention.	That	will	befool	you,	deceive	you	that	they	love	you.
That's	what	happens	to	a	political	leader:	he	becomes	the	prime	minister	of	the
country	or	a	president	of	the	country	and	of	course	the	whole	country	has	to	pay
attention	 to	 him.	 He	 feels	 good.	 It	 is	 a	 vicarious	 way	 of	 feeling	 loved,	 and
nobody	loves	him.	Once	he	is	out	of	the	post,	nobody	is	going	to	care	where	he
is.
Who	 cares	 about	Richard	Nixon,	whether	 he	 is	 alive	 or	 dead	 --	who	 bothers?
You	will	know	about	him	only	when	he	dies.	Then	newspapers	will	have	to	say
something	about	him.	Then	 suddenly	you	will	 know,	 "So	he	was	 alive?"	Who
cares	about	a	politician	who	is	not	in	power?	But	when	he	is	in	power	people	pay
attention.	They	pay	attention	 to	power,	but	 the	politician	 thinks	 the	attention	 is
being	paid	to	him.
And	the	politician	is	one	who	is	searching	for	love	and	has	not	been	able	to	love
and	has	not	been	able	to	be	loved.	The	search	is	for	love;	it	has	taken	a	very	very
subtle	change	and	 turn.	Now	it	has	become	a	search	for	attention.	He	wants	 to
see	his	picture	every	day	in	the	newspaper.	If	one	day	his	picture	is	not	there	in
the	newspaper	he	feels	neglected.
He	 is	 fulfilling	 his	 love-desire,	 but	 it	 cannot	 be	 fulfilled	 that	 way.	 Love,
whenever	 it	 happens,	brings	attention	with	 it	 like	a	 shadow,	but	 attention	does
not	bring	love.
Attention	 can	 come	 in	 a	 thousand	 ways.	 You	 can	 create	 some	 mischief	 and
people	will	pay	attention	 to	you.	The	need	of	 the	politician	and	 the	criminal	 is
the	same.
The	 criminal	 also	wants	 the	 same	 thing	 --	 attention.	He	murders	 and	 then	 his
picture	is	in	the	newspapers,	his	name	is	on	the	radio,	he	is	on	the	TV.	He	feels
good.	Now	everybody	knows	who	he	is,	now	everybody	is	thinking	about	him	--
that	he	has	become	a	name	in	the	world.	The	famous	and	the	notorious	both	seek
the	same	thing.
Buddha	is	absolute	love.	He	has	loved	existence,	existence	has	loved	him.	That's
what	samadhi	is,	when	you	are	in	an	orgasmic	relationship	with	the	total.	He	has
known	 the	 total	orgasm	--	 the	orgasm	which	 is	not	of	 the	body	and	not	of	 the
mind	either,	but	of	totality,	not	partial.	He	has	come	to	know	that	ecstasy.	Now
there	is	no	need	to	ask	for	any	attention	from	anybody.
He	will	pass	you	on	the	road	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	recognize	him	because
you	recognize	only	politicians,	criminals	and	people	like	that.	You	can	recognize
a	madman	 on	 the	 road	 because	 he	will	 be	 creating	mischief,	 but	 you	will	 not
recognize	a	Buddha.
Buddha	will	pass	so	silently,	without	a	whisper.
That	 is	 his	 chief	 characteristic,	 to	 be	 as	 if	 he	 is	 not.	 But	 if	 that	 is	 the	 chief
characteristic	--
to	be	as	if	one	is	not	--	then	he	has	no	characteristics.
That's	what	Buddha	means	when	he	says:
'YES,	SUBHUTI,	FOR	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	TAUGHT
THAT	THE	DHAMMAS	SPECIAL	TO	THE	BUDDHAS
ARE	JUST	NOT	A	BUDDHA'S	SPECIAL	DHAMMAS.
THAT	IS	WHY	THEY	ARE	CALLED
"THE	DHAMMAS	SPECIAL	TO	THE	BUDDHAS".'
The	extraordinariness	of	a	Buddha	 is	his	utter	ordinariness.	His	ordinariness	 is
his	 extraordinariness.	 To	 be	 ordinary	 is	 the	 most	 extraordinary	 thing	 in	 the
world.
Just	 the	other	night	 I	came	across	a	very	beautiful	 story	about	Saint	Francis,	a
Buddha.
Saint	 Francis	 of	 Assisi	 lay	 on	 his	 deathbed.	 He	 was	 singing,	 and	 singing	 so
loudly	 that	 the	whole	 neighborhood	was	 aware.	 Brother	 Elias,	 a	 pompous	 but
prominent	member	of	the	Franciscan	order,	came	close	to	Saint	Francis	and	said,
'Father,	there	are	people	standing	in	the	street	outside	your	window.'	Many	had
come.	Fearing	that	the	last	moment	of	Francis'	life	had	come,	many	who	loved
him	had	gathered	together	around	the	house.
Said	 this	 brother	Elias,	 "I	 am	 afraid	 nothing	we	might	 do	 could	 prevent	 them
from	 hearing	 you	 singing.	 The	 lack	 of	 restraint	 at	 so	 grave	 an	 hour	 might
embarrass	the	order,	Father.	It	might	lower	the	esteem	in	which	you	yourself	are
so	justly	held.	Perhaps	in	your	extremity	you	have	lost	sight	of	your	obligation	to
the	many	who	have	come	to	regard	you	as	a	saint.	Would	it	not	be	more	edifying
for	them	if	you	would,	er,	die	with	more	Christian	dignity?"
"Please	excuse	me,	Brother,"	Saint	Francis	said,	"but	 I	 feel	so	much	joy	 in	my
heart	that	I	really	can't	help	myself.	I	must	sing!"
And	he	died	singing.	In	the	whole	Christian	history,	he's	 the	only	one	who	has
died	 singing.	 Many	 Zen	 people	 have	 died	 singing,	 but	 they	 don't	 belong	 to
Christianity.	He	is	the	only	Zen	master	amongst	Christian	saints.	He	didn't	care	a
bit	about	Christian	dignity.
Now	 what	 happened?	 This	 brother	 Elias	 wants	 to	 prove	 to	 people	 that	 Saint
Francis	is	a	saint.	Now	he	is	afraid	that	people	will	not	think	that	he	is	a	saint;
they	 may	 think	 he	 is	 mad	 or	 something.	 A	 saint	 has	 to	 be	 sad	 by	 the	 very
definition.	Christians	believe	only	in	sad	saints.	They	cannot	believe	that	Jesus
ever	laughed.	That	is	below	Christian	dignity.
Laughter?	 --	 so	 human,	 so	 ordinary?	 They	 know	 only	 one	 thing,	 to	 put	 Jesus
there	high	above	humanity	 --	but	 then	all	 that	 is	human	has	 to	be	 taken	out	of
him.	Then	he	becomes	just	a	dead,	bloodless	thing.
This	brother	Elias	is	worried.	This	is	the	last	moment,	Francis	is	dying,	and	he
will	leave	a	bad	name	behind	him.	People	will	think	either	he	was	not	a	saint	or
he	was	mad.	He	is	worried	because	he	wants	to	prove.	In	fact	he	is	not	worried
about	Saint	Francis,	he	is	worried	about	himself	and	the	order:	"It	will	be	very
embarrassing	for	us	 later	on.	How	are	we	going	 to	answer	 these	people?	What
happened	 in	 the	 last	moments?"	He	 is	worried	 about	 himself.	 If	 the	master	 is
mad	then	what	about	the	disciple?	He	is	a	disciple.
But	 see	 two	 different	 planes,	 two	 different	 dimensions	 together.	 Elias	 is
concerned	with	public	opinion.	He	wants	to	prove	his	master	to	be	the	greatest
master,	to	be	the	greatest	of	saints,	and	he	knows	only	one	way	to	prove	it	--	that
he	should	be	serious,	that	he	should	take	life	seriously,	that	he	should	not	laugh
and	should	not	sing,	should	not	dance.
They	are	too	human,	they	are	too	ordinary.	Ordinary	mortals	can	be	forgiven,	but
not	a	man	of	the	stature	of	Saint	Francis.
But	Saint	Francis	has	a	different	vision	 --	he	 is	 just	ordinary.	He	says,	 "Please
excuse	me,	Brother,	but	 I	 feel	 so	much	 joy	 in	my	heart	 that	 I	 really	can't	help
myself.	I	must	sing!"	In	fact,	it	is	not	that	Francis	is	singing,	Francis	has	become
the	song.	That's	why	he	cannot	help,	he	cannot	control.	There	is	nobody	left	to
control	it.
If	 the	 song	 is	 happening	 it	 is	 happening.	 It	 is	 not	 within	 control,	 it	 can't	 be,
because	the	controller	has	disappeared.	The	self,	 the	ego,	no	more	exists.	Saint
Francis	does	not	exist	as	an	individual.	There	is	absolute	silence	inside.	Out	of
that	silence	this	song	is	born.
What	can	Francis	do?	That's	why	he	says,	"I	can't	help	it.	I	must	sing!"
And	 he	 died	 singing.	 And	 there	 can	 be	 no	 other	 better	 death.	 If	 you	 can	 die
singing,	 that	 proves	 that	 you	 lived	 singing,	 that	 your	 life	was	 a	 joy	 and	 death
became	the	crescendo	of	it,	the	culmination.
Saint	Francis	is	a	Buddha.	The	characteristic	of	a	Buddha	is	that	he	is	ordinary,
that	 he	 has	 no	 ideas	 about	 himself	 of	 how	 he	 should	 be,	 that	 he	 simply	 is
spontaneous,	 that	 whatsoever	 happens,	 happens.	 He	 lives	 on	 the	 spur	 of	 the
moment,	that	is	his	authenticity.
You	 can	 call	 it	 his	 characteristic,	 but	 what	 kind	 of	 characteristic	 is	 this?	 It	 is
simply	 that	 he	 has	 no	 character,	 he	 has	 no	 strait-jacket	 of	 a	 character	 around
himself,	he	has	no	armor,	he	does	not	live	from	the	past,	that	he	does	not	know
what	Christian	dignity	is.	He	lives	in	the	moment	like	a	child.
'YES,	SUBHUTI,	FOR	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	TAUGHT
THAT	THE	DHAMMAS	SPECIAL	TO	THE	BUDDHAS
ARE	JUST	NOT	A	BUDDHA'S	SPECIAL	DHAMMAS.
THAT	IS	WHY	THEY	ARE	CALLED
"THE	DHAMMAS	SPECIAL	TO	THE	BUDDHAS".'
Ordinariness	is	his	extraordinariness,	nobodiness	is	his	somebodiness,	absence	is
his	presence,	death	is	his	life.
THE	LORD	ASKED:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
DOES	IT	OCCUR	TO	THE	STREAMWINNER,
"BY	ME	HAS	THE	FRUIT	OF	A	STREAMWINNER
BEEN	ATTAINED"?
SUBHUTI	REPLIED:	'NO	INDEED,	O	LORD.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE,	O	LORD,	HE	HAS	NOT	WON	ANY	DHAMMA.
THEREFORE	IS	HE	CALLED	A	STREAMWINNER.
NO	SIGHT-OBJECT	HAS	BEEN	WON,
NO	SOUNDS,	SMELLS,	TASTES,	TOUCHABLES,
OR	OBJECTS	OF	MIND.
THAT	IS	WHY	HE	IS	CALLED	A	STREAMWINNER.
IF,	O	LORD,	IT	WOULD	OCCUR	TO	A	STREAMWINNER,
"BY	ME	HAS	A	STREAMWINNER'S	FRUIT	BEEN	ATTAINED,"
THEN	THAT	WOULD	BE	IN	HIM	A	SEIZING	ON	A	SELF,
SEIZING	ON	A	BEING,
SEIZING	ON	A	SOUL,
SEIZING	ON	A	PERSON.'
Buddha	 had	 talked	 about	 four	 stages	 of	 the	 seeker.	 The	 first	 he	 calls	 the
streamwinner.
Streamwinner	 means	 one	 who	 has	 entered	 into	 the	 buddhafield,	 one	 who	 has
become	an	initiate,	one	who	has	become	a	sannyasin.
Why	 is	 he	 called	 the	 streamwinner?	 --	 because	 he	 is	 no	more	 standing	 on	 the
shore,	he	is	no	more	static,	he	has	started	moving	with	the	stream	of	life.	He	is
no	more	fighting	with	the	river.	That	ego	that	used	to	fight	with	the	river	and	that
ego	that	used	to	go	upstream	is	no	longer	there.
Now	again	you	will	feel	it	is	absurd.	The	stream	has	won,	that's	why	he	is	called
a	streamwinner.	He	has	dropped	all	conflict.	He	has	surrendered,	 that's	why	he
has	become	victorious,	that's	why	he	is	called	a	streamwinner.	Strange	words.
First	he	was	 trying	to	win	the	stream.	That's	what	all	are	doing	in	 the	world	--
trying	 to	 have	 a	 life	 according	 to	 their	 own	desires	 and	plans	 and	projections,
trying	 to	 impose	 a	 pattern	 of	 their	 own	making,	 of	 their	 own	 dreams,	 of	 their
own	desires,	upon	life	Everybody	is	trying	to	go	upstream,	everybody	is	trying
to	fight	with	 life,	with	nature,	with	God.	The	ordinary	human	life	 is	 the	 life	of
conflict.
But	with	whom	are	you	fighting?	You	are	fighting	with	your	own	source.	With
whom	are	you	fighting?	With	yourself.	And	 the	fight	 is	going	 to	 lead	you	 into
deeper	 and	 deeper	 frustrations	 because	 you	 cannot	win,	 that	 is	 not	 the	way	 to
win.	You	will	be	defeated,	because	you	are	only	a	small	part	and	the	existence	is
vast,	is	enormous.	You	cannot	win	against	it.	You	can	win	only	with	it.
You	cannot	win	against	 it,	you	can	win	only	through	it.	 If	 it	supports	you,	you
can	 win.	 If	 it	 doesn't	 support	 you,	 you	 can	 go	 on	 believing	 but	 you	 will	 be
defeated.	 It	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 time.	 Sooner	 or	 later	 you	 will	 be	 tired,
frustrated,	exhausted	by	the	fight,	and	then	you	will	drop	--	but	then	you	drop	in
defeat.	And	then	in	that	defeat	there	is	no	joy.
How	can	there	be	joy	in	defeat?	The	people	of	understanding	know	that	before
defeat	comes,	if	you	can	surrender	there	will	be	joy.
Surrender	and	defeat	are	so	different	and	so	alike.	The	defeated	also	seems	to	be
surrendered,	and	the	surrendered	seems	to	be	defeated	but	that	is	just	apparent,
only	on	 the	 surface.	Deep	down	 they	are	worlds	apart.	The	defeated	 is	 feeling
angry,	 in	 rage,	 in	 frustration,	 he	 is	 in	 hell.	 The	 surrendered,	 the	 one	who	 has
surrendered,	has	no	misery.	He	is	elated,	he	 is	ecstatic.	He	has	understood	 that
the	 whole	 fight	 was	 meaningless,	 that	 the	 whole	 fight	 was	 destined	 to	 fail,
doomed	to	fail.
It	 is	as	if	my	left	hand	starts	fighting	with	my	right	hand.	It	 is	as	if	my	fingers
start	 fighting	with	my	body.	How	can	 they	win?	It	 is	 foredoomed.	The	man	of
understanding	surrenders.	He	says,	 "Let	God	be.	Let	 thy	will	be	done.	Let	 thy
kingdom	come."	He	says,
"I	am	no	more.	Flow	through	me.	Let	me	be	just	a	hollow	bamboo,	a	reed	flute.
Sing	 through	me	 if	you	wish	so.	 If	you	don't	wish	so,	 let	 silence	pass	 through
me."	He	becomes	just	a	passage.	He	starts	moving	with	the	stream.	He	says,	"Let
life's	stream	take	possession	of	me.	I	will	not	fight.	I	will	not	even	swim.	I	will
float,	I	will	go	with	the	wind."
To	 enter	 into	 such	 an	 understanding	 with	 life	 is	 called	 'becoming	 a
Streamwinner'.	But	 it	 is	a	strange	word.	surrender	 is	called	winning	--	because
fighting	leads	to	failure	and	defeat.	Surrender	leads	to	conquest,	to	victory.
This	 life	 is	paradoxical.	What	can	Buddha	do?	Life	 is	paradoxical.	Those	who
have	 surrendered	 prove	 themselves	 to	 be	 the	 winners	 and	 those	 who	 go	 on
fighting,	one	day	find	they	have	lost	all	their	energy	in	fight	and	there	is	no	sign
of	any	victory	anywhere.
Remember,	Alexander	 has	 failed,	 not	 Francis.	Napoleon	 has	 failed,	 not	 Jesus.
Genghis	Khan	and	Tamurlane	have	failed,	not	Buddha.	The	real	history	should
not	be	bothered	with	failures	--	Genghis	Khan,	Tamurlane,	Alexander.	The	real
history	should	think	more	of	Buddha,	Jesus,	Francis	--	the	real	people	who	have
won.	But	their	winning	came	out	of	their	surrender.
Just	think	of	it,	just	think	of	the	beauty	and	benediction	of	it,	when	you	are	not
fighting,	 when	 you	 are	 just	 going	 down	 the	 river	 with	 it.	 It	 takes	 you	 to	 the
ocean,	 it	 is	 going	 to	 the	ocean.	You	are	unnecessarily	making	much	 fuss.	 It	 is
going	 already.	 You	 simply	 go	with	 it	 and	 you	will	 reach	 to	 the	 ocean,	 to	 the
ultimate,	 to	the	infinite.	This	utter	surrender	to	existence	Buddha	calls	 the	fruit
of	the	streamwinner.
The	 second	 stage	 is	 called	 once-returner	 and	 the	 third,	 never-returner	 and	 the
fourth,	 arhat.	 The	 streamwinner	 forsakes	 three	 fetters.	 The	 first	 is	 ego,
individuality,	the	idea	of	a	separate	self.	Naturally	that	is	the	whole	root	cause	of
fighting.
Second,	 living	by	mere	rule	and	ritual.	There	are	so	many	religious	people	but
they	 live	only	by	 rule	 and	 ritual.	They	know	nothing	of	 religion.	Ritual	 is	 not
religion,	rule	is	not	religion.	Religion	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	life	--	a	life	of
awareness,	life	of	love,	life	of	compassion.	But	if	you	look	around	the	world	you
will	see	millions	of	people	going	to	the	churches,	temples,	mosques,	gurudwaras,
praying,	doing	this	and	that,	and	it	is	all	ritual,	and	religion	is	nonexistential.
I	have	heard	an	ancient	Indian	story:
A	 man	 was	 doing	 the	 traditional	 SHRADDH	 ceremony	 to	 honor	 his	 just-
departed	father.
Shraddh	 is	 a	 ceremony	 that	 when	 somebody's	 father	 dies	 you	 pray	 for	 his
journey,	you	pray	for	him.
During	 the	ceremony	the	family	dog	wandered	 into	 the	prayer	room.	Afraid	of
defiling	the	occasion	the	man	hastily	got	up	and	tied	his	dog	to	a	post	outside	on
the	verandah.
Years	later,	when	he	died,	his	son	performed	the	shraddh	ceremony	in	his	turn.
Anxious	 to	 follow	 it	 in	 every	 detail	 he	 had	 to	 catch	 hold	 of	 a	 dog	 from	 the
neighborhood,	 because	 he	 remembered	 that	 it	 must	 be	 very	 important.	 "My
father	had	got	up	in	the	middle	of	his	prayers	to	do	it,	and	when	he	had	tied	the
dog	 to	 the	post	 then	he	was	 so	happy	and	he	went	again	and	prayed."	And	he
was	not	going	to	miss	anything,	the	ceremony	had	to	be	perfect.
By	 this	 time	 it	 happened	 that	 the	 family	 had	 no	 dog	 so	 he	 had	 to	 run	 in	 the
neighborhood	 to	 find	a	 stray	dog.	He	caught	hold	of	one,	 tied	 it	 carefully	 to	a
post	on	the	verandah,	then	finished	the	ceremony	with	a	satisfied	conscience.	In
that	family,	down	the	centuries,	the	rule	is	still	followed.	In	fact,	the	sacred	dog
ritual	has	become	the	most	important	item	in	the	ceremony.
That's	 how	 things	 move.	 People	 live	 in	 unconsciousness.	 Your	 fathers	 were
doing	something,	 their	 fathers	and	 their	 fathers	were	doing	something.	 It	 takes
on	 an	 aura	of	 sacredness.	You	 just	 go	on	 repeating	 it,	 you	don't	 care	what	 the
meaning	of	it	is.
Jesus	 called	 God	 'my	 Father	 --	 Abba.'	 You	 go	 on	 calling	 him	 father	 but	 it	 is
meaningless.
You	don't	have	that	heart,	the	ritual	is	just	superficial.	You	don't	have	that	heart
that	can	call	God	Abba.	The	word	abba	is	not	meaningful,	but	the	feeling	in	the
heart.	If	that	feeling	is	there,	there	is	no	need	even	to	say	that	word,	feeling	will
do.	But	if	the	feeling	is	not	there	then	it	is	a	dead	ritual.
I	have	heard:
After	the	four-year-old	girl	was	tucked	in	bed,	she	folded	her	hands	and	started
praying.
By	mistake	 she	 started	 saying	her	 table-prayers.	Realizing	what	 she	had	done,
she	 looked	 upward	 with	 a	 big	 smile	 and	 said,	 "Erase	 that,	 Jesus."	 Then	 she
proceeded	with	her	bedtime	prayer.
Rituals	 are	 like	 that.	 They	 don't	 grow	 in	 you,	 they	 are	 just	 imposed	 from	 the
outside.	You	go	on	repeating,	they	become	mechanical.
Buddha	says	that	a	few	things	have	to	be	dropped	by	the	streamwinner.	One	is
ego,	 the	 second	 is	 living	 by	 mere	 rule	 and	 ritual,	 and	 the	 third	 is	 doubt,
perplexity.
A	doubting	mind	 cannot	 relax.	A	doubting	mind	 cannot	 surrender.	A	doubting
mind	 can	 never	 be	 total;	 a	 part	 goes	 on	 fighting,	 a	 part	 goes	 on	 saying	 no.	A
doubting	 mind	 cannot	 say	 an	 absolute	 yes,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 fundamental	 of
becoming	a	streamwinner	--	to	say	yes	to	life,	to	say	yes	unconditionally,	to	say
yes	simply,	with	your	whole	being.	That	is	prayer	enough.	If	you	can	simply	sit
silently	and	can	say	yes	to	existence,	enough	--
nothing	more	is	needed,	no	ritual.
These	three	things	have	to	be	dropped	by	a	streamwinner.	Then	the	second	stage
is	 called	 once-returner.	Once-returner	means	 one	who	will	 die	 and	 come	 once
more.	He	 has	 to	 forsake	 greed,	 sensuality	 and	 ill-will.	 But	 he	will	 come	 once
more.
The	third	stage	is	called	never-returner,	one	who	will	not	come	again.	He	has	to
forsake	 lust	 for	 life,	 lust	 for	 the	 other	 life,	 lust	 to	 be.	And	 the	 fourth	 stage	 is
called	the	state	of	arhat,	one	who	is	absent,	nobody,	nothingness.	He	has	become
a	Buddha.
Buddha	asked	Subhuti	about	these	four.	He	asks:
'DOES	IT	OCCUR	TO	THE	STREAMWINNER
"BY	ME	HAS	THE	FRUIT	OF	A	STREAMWINNER
BEEN	ATTAINED"?'
A	simple	question,	but	very	significant.
SUBHUTI	REPLIED:	'NO	INDEED	O	LORD.	AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	O	LORD,	HE	HAS	NOT	WON	ANY	DHAMMA.'
If	 you	 say,	 "I	 have	 surrendered,"	 then	 you	have	 not	 surrendered,	 because	 how
can	YOU
surrender?	 You	 have	 to	 BE	 surrendered.	 The	 'I'	 has	 to	 be	 surrendered.	 You
cannot	say,	"I	have	surrendered."	If	 it	 is	something	of	your	doing	then	it	 is	not
surrender.
People	come	 to	me	and	 they	ask,	 "How	can	we	surrender	 to	you?"	And	 I	 say,
"You	cannot.	You	are	 the	barrier	 in	surrender.	You	 just	get	out	of	 the	way	and
there	is	surrender."
Surrender	 is	not	 something	 that	has	 to	be	done	or	 that	 can	be	done,	 it	 is	not	a
doing.
Surrender	is	an	understanding.	 'I'	 is	always	in	a	fighting	mood.	 'I'	can	never	be
without	 fight,	 it	 exists	 through	 fight,	 it	 survives	 through	 fight,	 it	 depends	 on
fight.	Either	you	will	be	fighting	with	others,	or	if	you	change	that	you	will	start
fighting	with	yourself.	That's	what	your	monks	go	on	doing	in	the	monasteries.
They	don't	fight	in	the	world,	they	don't	fight	with	anybody,	they	have	renounced
the	world;	now	they	start	fighting	with	themselves.
The	body	says,	"I	am	hungry,"	and	they	say,	"No."	Now	this	is	fight.	Now	ego
has	arisen	in	a	new	way.	The	ego	says,	"Look,	I	control	my	body	so	beautifully.	I
am	the	master	and	the	body	is	the	slave."	Your	eyes	are	tired	and	they	say,	"We
want	to	go	to	sleep,"	and	you	say,	"No.	I	have	decided	to	stay	awake	the	whole
night.	This	 is	my	meditation.	 I	 am	on	 a	particular	meditation,	 I	 cannot	 sleep."
And	you	feel	good.	Now	you	are	fighting.
Your	body	wants	a	little	comfort	and	you	sleep	on	the	stones,	your	body	wants	a
little	shelter	and	you	stand	in	the	hot	sun,	your	body	wants	a	few	clothes	and	you
stand	 naked	 in	 the	 cold.	 These	 are	ways	 of	 fighting.	Now	 you	 don't	 have	 the
world	to	fight	with	so	you	have	divided	yourself	in	two.
The	ego	lives	through	friction,	any	kind	of	friction	will	do.	The	husband	fights
with	the	wife,	 the	wife	fights	with	the	husband.	These	are	nothing	but	ways	of
feeding	the	ego.
The	more	you	fight,	the	more	the	ego	becomes	strong	and	the	greatest	strength
the	ego	gets	is	from	fighting	with	yourself,	because	that	is	the	hardest	fight.
To	 kill	 somebody	 else	 is	 one	 thing;	 to	 kill	 yourself	 slowly,	 continuously,	 for
many	years,	 is	a	difficult	 job,	 it	 is	a	slow	suicide,	and	the	ego	feels	very	good.
That's	why	the	so-called	religious	monks	have	great	egos;	you	will	not	find	such
great	 egos	 in	 the	 ordinary	 people	 in	 the	marketplace.	 If	 you	want	 really	 great
egos,	if	you	want	to	see	how	they	are,	go	to	the	Himalayas	and	in	the	caves	you
will	find	them.
The	man	who	 has	 surrendered	 cannot	 claim	 that	 "I	 have	 surrendered,"	 he	 can
only	say	surrender	has	happened.
'NO,	INDEED,	O	LORD.	AND	WHY?
BECAUSE,	O	LORD,	HE	HAS	NOT	WON	ANY	DHAMMA.
THEREFORE	HE	IS	CALLED	A	STREAMWINNER.'
Because	you	have	dropped	 the	 'I',	 that's	why	you	are	called	a	surrenderer.	You
cannot	claim	that	"I	have	surrendered."	If	you	claim	you	have	missed	the	whole
point.
'NO	SIGHT-OBJECT	HAS	BEEN	WON,	NO	SOUNDS,
SMELLS,	TASTES,	TOUCHABLES,	OR	OBJECTS	OF	MIND.
THAT	IS	WHY	HE	IS	CALLED	A	STREAMWINNER.'
He	has	not	won	anything	like	an	object.	In	fact,	rather	than	winning	anything	he
has	dropped	the	very	idea	of	winning.	That's	why	he	is	called	a	streamwinner.	He
has	dropped	the	whole	fight,	 the	whole	war,	 that	he	was	doing	for	many	many
lives.	He	has	dropped	the	whole	project,	he	is	no	longer	interested	in	it.
He	 cannot	 show	 you	 anything	 and	 say,	 "I	 have	 won	 this.	 See!	 This	 is	 my
victory."	He	 cannot	 show	 you	 his	 kingdom	 that	 he	 has	won.	He	 has	 not	won
anything	visible.	In	fact,	rather	than	winning	anything	visible	he	has	dropped	his
ego.	 But	 in	 that	 losing	 of	 the	 ego	 is	 great	 victory.	 But	 that	 victory	 is	 such	 it
cannot	be	claimed.
'IF	O	LORD,
IT	WOULD	OCCUR	TO	A	STREAMWINNER,
"BY	ME	HAS	A	STREAMWINNER'S	FRUIT
BEEN	ATTAINED,"
THEN	THAT	WOULD	BE	IN	HIM
A	SEIZING	ON	A	SELF
SEIZING	ON	A	BEING,
SEIZING	ON	A	SOUL,
SEIZING	ON	A	PERSON.
The	 moment	 you	 think,	 "I	 have	 won,	 I	 have	 surrendered,"	 again	 you	 have
created	a	new
'I',	again	a	self	has	arisen,	again	you	have	started	seeing	in	the	ways	of	the	ego.
Again	you	have	perceived	the	self.
The	English	word	perception	is	beautiful.	It	comes	from	PER-CAP	and	CAPIO,
meaning	to	take	hold	of,	to	seize,	to	grasp,	to	capture.	The	moment	you	perceive
that	you	are	there	in	any	way,	you	have	captured	again	the	ego	and	the	ego	has
captured	you.	Again	you	are	back	into	the	old	rut.	The	whole	point	is	lost,	you
are	no	more	a	streamwinner.
This	way	Buddha	asks	about	once-returner	and	never-returner,	but	because	it	is
the	 same	 I	 have	 dropped	 it,	 I	 have	 not	 taken	 it	 into	 the	 sutra.	 Finally:	 THE
LORD	ASKED:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
DOES	IT	THEN	OCCUR	TO	THE	ARHAT,
"BY	ME	HAS	ARHATSHIP	BEEN	ATTAINED"?'
SUBHUTI:	'NO	INDEED,	O	LORD.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	NO	DHAMMA	IS	CALLED	"ARHAT".
THAT	IS	WHY	HE	IS	CALLED	AN	ARHAT.
AND	WHY?
I	AM,	O	LORD,	THE	ONE	WHOM	THE	TATHAGATA
HAS	POINTED	OUT	AS	THE	FOREMOST	OF	THOSE
WHO	DWELL	IN	PEACE.
I	AM	O	LORD,	AN	ARHAT	FREE	FROM	GREED.
AND	YET,	O	LORD,	IT	DOES	NOT	OCCUR	TO	ME,
"AN	ARHAT	AM	I	AND	FREE	FROM	GREED".
IF,	O	LORD,	IT	COULD	OCCUR	TO	ME
THAT	I	HAVE	ATTAINED	ARHATSHIP,
THEN	THE	TATHAGATA	WOULD	NOT	HAVE	DECLARED	OF	ME
THAT	"SUBHUTI,	THIS	SON	OF	GOOD	FAMILY,
WHO	IS	THE	FOREMOST	OF	THOSE
WHO	DWELL	IN	PEACE,
DOES	NOT	DWELL	ANYWHERE;
THAT	IS	WHY	HE	IS	CALLED
A	DWELLER	IN	PEACE,	A	DWELLER	IN	PEACE".'
Simple	once	you	get	 the	 idea.	The	 idea	 is	 that	when	you	start	moving	 into	 the
world	of	truth,	you	cannot	be	a	claimer.	Your	claim	will	be	a	disclaim.
Once	a	man	came	to	Buddha	and	asked,	"Have	you	attained?"	and	Buddha	said,
"I	cannot	claim	because	I	have	attained."
Just	see	the	beauty	of	it.	He	says,	"I	cannot	claim	BECAUSE	I	HAVE	attained.	If
I	claim,	that	will	be	a	sure	sign	that	I	have	not	attained."	But	see	the	difficulty
too.	If	Buddha	says,	"I	have	not	attained,"	then	he	is	saying	a	lie.	If	he	says,	"I
have	attained,"	that	is	not	possible	because	there	is	no	'I'	in	that	attainment.	That
attainment	 is	 such	 that	 it	 happens	 only	 when	 the	 'I'	 has	 gone.	 You	 see	 the
difficulty,	how	language	becomes	impotent.
BUDDHA	ASKED:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
DOES	IT	THEN	OCCUR	TO	THE	ARHAT,
"BY	ME	HAS	ARHATSHIP	BEEN	ATTAINED"?'
Now	arhatship	is	not	a	state.	It	is	not	something	like	an	object.	You	cannot	catch
hold	of	it,	you	cannot	possess	it,	you	cannot	hoard	it.	It	is	a	freedom,	not	a	thing
to	be	possessed.
It	is	a	freedom.	You	simply	go	on	dropping	your	chains.	One	day	all	chains	have
disappeared	--	even	the	last	chain	of	the	idea	of	'I'	has	disappeared.	Then	there	is
nobody	present.	That	consciousness	is	called	arhat.
Buddha	asks,	"Does	it	occur	to	the	arhat	'I	have	attained	arhatship'?"
'THAT	IS	WHY	HE	IS	CALLED	ARHAT.
AND	WHY?	I	AM,	O	LORD,
THE	ONE	WHOM	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	POINTED	OUT
AS	THE	FOREMOST	OF	THOSE
WHO	DWELL	IN	PEACE.'
Now	Subhuti	 takes	himself	 as	an	example.	He	says	"You	have	declared	of	me
that	I	have	attained.	You	have	declared	of	me	that	I	have	become	an	arhat.	You
have	declared	that	I	dwell	in	peace."	This	is	a	special	way	of	Buddha	of	saying
that	there	is	nobody	inside	--
dwelling	in	peace.
Dwelling	in	peace	means	there	is	nobody,	because	if	there	is	somebody,	peace	is
not	 possible.	 If	 there	 is	 somebody	 some	 turmoil	 will	 continue.	 The	 house	 is
silent	only	when	there	is	nobody	in	the	house.	Even	if	somebody	is	there	a	little
bit,	turmoil	will	continue.
Even	 if	 one	 person	 is	 there	 he	 will	 put	 things	 from	 here	 to	 there,	 he	 will	 do
something.
Even	 if	 he	 is	 fast	 asleep	 he	will	 snore.	 Something	 is	 bound	 to	 happen.	When
there	is	nobody	at	all	then	there	is	peace.
Buddha	calls	the	state	of	arhathood	when	there	is	absolute	peace,	so	much	that
there	 is	 not	 anybody	 to	 be	 found	 there.	 When	 Buddha	 used	 to	 say,	 "Now
Subhuti,	you	dwell	in	peace,"	he	is	saying,	"Now	Subhuti,	you	are	no	more."	It	is
the	same.
Subhuti	 says,	 "You	 have	 declared	 that	 Subhuti	 dwells	 in	 peace,	 you	 have
declared	that	Subhuti	has	become	an	arhat,	and	you	must	be	true,	Lord.	How	can
you	be	untrue?	But	I	cannot	say,	it	does	not	occur	to	me,	'An	arhat	am	I	and	free
from	greed.'	If	it	occurs	to	me,	then	you	are	wrong.
"If	it	occurs	to	me	that	I	am	an	arhat,	then	ego	has	arisen,	then	a	self	is	seized,
then	again	I	am	caught	in	the	old	trap.	If	it	arises	in	me	that	I	dwell	in	peace	then
the	peace	is	 lost	because	 the	 'I'	has	come	back,	 the	dweller	 is	back."	Then	you
cannot	dwell	in	peace,	then	something	is	bound	to	happen	--	some	misery,	some
dream,	some	desire,	and	the	world,	the	whole	world	starts.
The	ego	is	the	seed	of	the	world.	The	small	seed	contains	the	whole	world.	Just
feel	"I	am"	and	the	whole	world	comes	following	immediately.
SUBHUTI	SAYS:	'IT	DOES	NOT	OCCUR	TO	ME,
"AN	ARHAT	AM	I	AND	FREE	FROM	GREED."
IF,	O	LORD,	IT	COULD	OCCUR	TO	ME
THAT	I	HAVE	ATTAINED	ARHATSHIP,
THEN	THE	TATHAGATA	WOULD	NOT	HAVE	DECLARED	OF	ME
THAT	"SUBHUTI,	THIS	SON	OF	GOOD	FAMILY,
WHO	IS	THE	FOREMOST	OF	THOSE
WHO	DWELL	IN	PEACE,
DOES	NOT	DWELL	ANYWHERE;
THAT	IS	WHY	HE	IS	CALLED
A	DWELLER	IN	PEACE,	A	DWELLER	IN	PEACE".'
When	 one	 has	 disappeared,	 when	 the	 dweller	 is	 no	 more,	 then	 the	 peace	 is
attained.
Nothingness	 is	 the	 taste	 of	 Buddha's	message.	 One	 has	 to	 come	 to	 that	 point
when	one	 is	not,	when	only	absence	prevails,	but	 then	nobody	can	claim,	 then
nobody	can	come	and	say	and	brag	about	it.
To	 understand	 Buddha	 you	 will	 need	 a	 few	 glimpses	 of	 nonbeing.	 Just
linguistically	you	can	understand	what	he	 is	 saying,	but	 that	won't	help	much,
that	won't	take	you	far	into	it	You	will	have	to	have	a	few	glimpses	of	it	--	and
they	are	possible.
Sometimes	just	sitting	silently,	doing	nothing,	keep	quiet;	not	even	a	mantra	to
disturb	you,	not	even	the	name	of	God,	not	even	a	special	yoga	posture	to	sit	in,
not	even	to	contemplate,	not	even	to	meditate	--	just	sitting	silently	in	your	room
or	by	the	side	of	a	tree	or	by	the	side	of	the	river,	lying	in	the	grass,	looking	at
the	stars	or	with	closed	eyes.
Just	being	there,	just	a	pool	of	energy	going	nowhere	--	and	glimpses	will	start
coming	to	you.	For	a	moment	you	will	feel	you	are	and	you	are	not.
You	are,	utterly	you	are,	and	still	you	are	not.	You	are	not	and	for	the	first	time
you	are.
Then	you	will	see	why	Buddha	is	so	paradoxical.	You	are	only	when	you	are	not.
When	 all	 is	 absent	 there	 is	 great	 presence.	 When	 the	 ego	 has	 completely
disappeared,	you	are	 the	whole,	you	are	 the	all.	You	disappear	as	 the	drop	and
you	become	 the	ocean.	On	one	side	you	have	disappeared	and	on	another	side
you	have	appeared	and	for	the	first	time.
Enlightenment	 is	 a	 death	 and	 a	 resurrection.	 And	 they	 both	 happen	 together,
simultaneously.	 Here	 happens	 death	 and	 immediately	 it	 is	 followed	 by
resurrection.	But	you	will	have	to	taste,	you	will	have	to	savor	it.	These	words
are	 not	 mere	 words,	 these	 are	 not	 just	 doctrines	 and	 philosophies;	 they	 are
existential	experiences.
I	understand	your	difficulty.	Many	questions	have	come	to	me	that	"When	you
talk	 on	Sufis	 our	 hearts	 dance,	 but	 this	Diamond	Sutra	 and	 our	 hearts	 are	 not
dancing."	This	is	higher,	this	is	more	rarified.
Sufis	you	can	understand,	 they	are	close	 to	you.	They	talk	about	 love.	At	 least
you	have	heard	about	the	word	love,	you	have	some	ideas	what	love	is.	You	may
not	understand	the	Sufis'	love,	what	they	mean,	but	at	least	you	know	something
about	love,	you	know	at	least	what	you	mean,	and	when	hearing	about	love	your
heart	starts	melting.	But	these	words	of	Buddha	are	far	superior.
But	it	is	not	so	with	everybody.	A	few	questions	have	come	to	me	that	they	are
thrilled.	It	depends.	You	can	ask	Prasad,	his	heart	is	dancing	so	much	with	The
Diamond	Sutra	that	he	is	almost	having	a	heart	attack.	Or	you	can	ask	Pradeepa.
Remember	one	thing:	here	I	am	speaking	for	so	many	people.	They	are	different,
their	approaches	are	different.	Sometimes	it	will	fit	with	you,	sometimes	it	may
not	fit	with	you.	When	it	doesn't	fit	you	have	to	keep	patience,	because	when	it
fits	with	you	 it	will	not	 fit	with	somebody	else.	He	has	 to	keep	patience.	 I	am
speaking	for	many	people	--
and	 not	 only	 am	 I	 speaking	with	 you	 and	 for	 you,	 I	 am	 speaking	 for	millions
who	are	not	here,	to	whom	these	words	will	reach.
Sometimes	 if	 you	 feel	 the	 thing	 is	 too	 difficult	 for	 you	 or	 unapproachable	 for
you,	be	patient.	Listen.	Maybe	your	heart	 is	not	dancing,	maybe	 it	 is	higher	or
deeper	than	the	heart.	There	are	things	of	the	head,	there	are	things	of	the	heart,
and	there	are	things	which	are	beyond.	This	is	of	the	beyond.	And	the	beyond	is
very	 difficult.	 You	 know	 something	 of	 the	 head,	 you	 know	 something	 of	 the
heart	but	you	know	nothing	of	the	beyond.
But	 these	words	are	rare.	This	Diamond	Sutra	 is	a	diamond,	 the	most	valuable
diamond	that	exists	in	the	world	literature.	Nobody	has	spoken	like	that,	nobody
has	 taken	 such	 flights.	But	 if	 you	 feel	 that	 you	 cannot	 fly	 so	high,	 don't	 close
yourself.	Make	efforts.
Even	if	you	can	go	a	little	further	than	you	can	go	right	now,	even	if	you	can	take
a	few	steps	towards	the	unknown,	that	will	be	enriching	to	you.
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Already	Home
28	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712280
ShortTitle:
DIAMON08
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
82
mins
The	first	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	1
WHY	HAVE	ALL	THE	GREAT	MASTERS	COME	FROM	THE	EAST?
Because	 humanity	 has	 yet	 not	 been	 total.	 The	 East	 is	 introvert,	 the	 West	 is
extrovert.	Man	 is	 split,	mind	 is	 schizophrenic.	That's	why	all	 the	great	masters
have	come	from	the	East	and	all	 the	great	scientists	have	come	from	the	West.
The	West	 has	 developed	 science	 and	 has	 completely	 forgotten	 about	 the	 inner
soul;	 is	 concerned	 with	 matter,	 but	 has	 become	 oblivious	 of	 the	 inner
subjectivity.	The	whole	focus	is	on	the	object.	Hence	all	the	great	scientists	are
born	in	the	West.
The	East	has	become	too	much	concerned	with	the	inner	soul	and	has	forgotten
objectivity,	matter,	the	world.	Great	religious	masters	developed	out	of	this,	but
this	is	not	a	good	situation,	this	should	not	be	so.	Man	should	become	one.	Man
should	not	be	allowed	to	be	lopsided	anymore.	Man	should	be	a	fluidity,	neither
extrovert	nor	introvert.
Man	 should	 be	 capable	 of	 being	 both	 together.	 The	 inner	 and	 the	 outer,	 if
balanced,	give	the	greatest	ecstatic	experience.
The	person	who	is	neither	 leaning	 towards	 the	 inner	 too	much	nor	 towards	 the
outer	too	much	is	the	person	of	equilibrium.	He	will	be	a	scientist	and	a	mystic
together.	That	 is	 something	 that	will	happen,	 that	 is	 something	 that	 is	going	 to
happen.	We	are	preparing	the	field	for	it.	I	would	like	to	see	a	man	who	is	neither
Eastern	 nor	Western,	 because	 to	 be	 Eastern	 as	 against	Western	 is	 ugly.	 To	 be
Western	as	against	Eastern	is	again	ugly.
The	whole	earth	belongs	to	us	and	we	belong	to	the	whole	earth.	A	man	should
be	 just	 man,	 a	 man	 should	 be	 just	 human	 --	 total,	 whole.	 And	 out	 of	 that
wholeness	will	arise	a	new	kind	of	health.
The	East	has	suffered,	the	West	has	suffered.	The	East	has	suffered;	you	can	see
it	 all	 around	 --	 the	poverty,	 the	 starvation.	The	West	has	 suffered,	you	can	 see
inside	 the	 Western	 mind	 --	 tension,	 anxiety,	 anguish.	 The	 West	 is	 very	 poor
inwardly,	the	East	is	very	poor	outwardly.	Poverty	is	bad.	Whether	it	is	inner	or
outer	makes	no	difference,	poverty	should	not	be	allowed.	Man	should	be	rich,
inner,	outer,	both.	Man	should	have	all-dimensional	richness.
Just	think	of	a	man	who	is	an	Albert	Einstein	and	a	Gautam	Buddha	both.	Just
meditate	on	that	possibility	--	that	IS	possible.	In	fact	if	Albert	Einstein	had	lived
a	little	longer,	he	would	have	turned	into	a	mystic.	He	had	started	thinking	about
the	 inner,	he	was	becoming	 interested	 in	 the	 inner	mystery.	How	long	can	you
remain	 interested	 in	 the	 outer	mystery?	 If	 you	 are	 really	 interested	 in	mystery
then	sooner	or	later	you	will	stumble	upon	the	inner	too.
My	concept	is	of	a	world	which	is	neither	Eastern	nor	Western,	neither	inner	nor
outer,	neither	extrovert	nor	introvert	--	which	is	balanced,	which	is	whole.
But	this	has	not	been	the	case	in	the	past.	That's	why	your	question	is	relevant.
You	ask:
"Why	have	all	the	great	masters	come	from	the	East?"	Because	the	East	has	been
obsessed	with	the	inner	as	against	the	outer.	Naturally,	when	down	the	centuries
you	have	been	obsessed	with	the	inner,	you	will	create	a	Buddha,	a	Nagarjuna,	a
Shankara,	a	Kabir.
It	is	natural.
If	you	are	obsessed	with	the	outer	as	against	the	inner,	you	will	create	an	Albert
Einstein,	 an	 Eddington,	 an	 Edison,	 that's	 natural.	 But	 this	 is	 not	 good	 for	 the
totality	of	human	beings.	Something	is	missing.	The	man	who	has	inner	growth
and	 has	 not	 grown	 outwardly	 remains	 juvenile	 in	 the	 outside,	 remains	 stupid
outside.	And	the	same	is	the	case	with	the	man	who	has	grown	much,	who	has
become	mature,	very	mature,	as	far	as	mathematics	goes	and	physics	goes	and
chemistry	goes,	but	who	 inside	has	not	been	even	born	yet,	who	 is	 still	 in	 the
womb.
This	is	my	message	to	you:	drop	these	hemispheres	--	East	and	West	--	and	drop
these	 hemispheres	 of	 inner	 and	 outer.	 Become	 fluid.	 Let	 movement,	 flow,	 be
your	very	life.
Remain	available	to	the	outer	and	to	the	inner	both.
That's	why	I	teach	love	and	meditation.	Love	is	the	passage	to	go	out,	meditation
is	 the	passage	 to	go	 in.	And	a	man	who	 is	 in	 love	AND	meditative	 is	beyond
schizophrenia,	is	beyond	all	kinds	of	split.	He	has	become	one,	he	is	integrated.
In	fact,	he	has	soul.
The	second	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	2
DON'T	 YOU	 GET	 BORED,	 BORED	 AND	 FED	 UP,	 DAY	 AFTER	 DAY
ANSWERING
THE	SAME	QUESTIONS,	WHILE	WE	SIT	THERE	WITH	EARS	BLOCKED,
EYES
TIGHT,	 MOUTH	 SEALED,	 NEVER	 EVER	 GETTING	 THE	 MESSAGE	 --
THAT
THERE	 ARE	 NO	 ANSWERS?	 YOU	 CONTINUALLY	 ASTOUND	 ME	 IN
YOUR
DEWDROP	FRESHNESS	IN	THE	EARLY	MORNING	LIGHT,	AND	STILL	I
AM
BLIND,	 DEAF	 AND	 LAME,	 CUT	 OFF	 FROM	 SHARING	 IN	 YOUR
RADIANCE
EXCEPT	FOR	BRIEF	MOMENTS.
The	first	thing:	I	am	not,	so	I	cannot	be	bored	and	fed	up.	First	you	have	to	be	to
be	bored.	The	more	you	are	the	more	you	will	feel	bored.	The	less	you	are	the
less	bored.
That's	why	children	are	 less	bored	 than	old	people.	Have	you	not	observed	 it?
Children	are	almost	not	bored.	They	go	on	playing	with	the	same	toys,	they	go
on	running	after	 the	same	butterflies,	 they	go	on	collecting	 the	same	seashells.
They	are	not	bored.
Have	you	ever	told	a	story	to	a	child?	After	listening	to	it	he	says,	"Tell	it	again...
and	 again."	And	whenever	you	will	meet	him	again	he	will	 say,	 "Tell	me	 that
story.	 I	 loved	 it."	Why	is	a	child	not	bored?	--	because	he	 is	not.	Or	he	 is	 in	a
very	 rudimentary	way;	 the	 ego	has	 not	 evolved	yet.	The	 ego	 is	 the	 factor	 that
creates	boredom.
Animals	are	not	bored,	trees	are	not	bored,	and	what	novelty	is	there	in	the	life
of	animals	and	 trees?	The	 rosebush	goes	on	producing	 the	 same	 roses	year	 in,
year	out,	and	the	bird	goes	on	singing	the	same	song	every	morning	and	every
evening.	 The	 cuckoo	 knows	 not	 many	 notes,	 just	 a	 single	 note.	 It	 goes	 on
repeating	it;	it	is	monotonous.	But	not	a	single	animal	is	bored,	not	a	single	tree
is	bored.	Nature	knows	nothing	of	boredom.	Why?	--
because	nature	has	no	ego	yet.
A	Buddha	is	not	bored,	a	Jesus	is	not	bored,	because	they	have	dropped	the	ego
again.
Nature	 has	 not	 evolved	 it	 yet,	 Buddha	 has	 dropped	 it.	 Buddha	 and	 nature	 are
almost	 the	 same.	 I	 say	 almost	 because	 there	 is	 only	 one	 difference	 --	 of	 great
significance,	but	only	one	difference.	The	difference	is	that	of	awareness.	Nature
is	without	ego	but	unaware,	Buddha	is	without	ego	but	aware.
Once	you	know	you	are	not	there,	who	is	going	to	be	bored?	who	is	going	to	be
fed	up?
That's	why	I	can	come	every	morning	and	go	on	answering	your	questions.	I	am
not	 bored.	 I	 cannot	 be	 bored.	 For	 almost	 twenty-five	 years	 I	 have	 not	 tasted
boredom.	I	have	started	forgetting	the	very	taste	of	it,	how	it	feels.
The	second	thing:	the	questions	are	not	the	same.	They	cannot	be	--	they	come
from	different	people,	how	can	they	be	the	same	questions?	Yes,	sometimes	the
words	may	be	the	same,	but	the	questions	are	not	the	same.	Two	persons	are	so
different	 from	 each	 other	 --	 how	 can	 they	 ask	 the	 same	 question?	Even	 if	 the
words	are	 the	 same,	even	 if	 the	construction	of	 the	question	 is	 the	 same,	yet	 I
would	like	you	to	be	reminded	--	they	can't	be	the	same.
Now	 this	 question	 is	 asked	 by	Anand	Shaila;	 nobody	 else	 can	 ask	 it.	Nobody
else	upon	this	big	earth	can	ask	it.	To	ask	this	question	a	Shaila	will	be	needed.
And	Shaila	is	only	one;	there	are	not	many	Shailas.
So	remember,	each	 individual	has	such	uniqueness.	To	call	 those	questions	 the
same	is	disrespectful.	I	respect	your	questions.	They	are	not	the	same.	They	have
nuances	of	their	own,	colors	of	their	own,	but	you	need	very	penetrating	eyes	to
see	the	difference,	otherwise	you	may	not	be	able	to	see.
When	you	look	around	and	you	see	all	the	trees	are	green,	do	you	think	it	is	the
same	green?	Then	you	don't	 know	how	 to	 look	 at	 color.	Then	bring	 a	painter,
then	 ask	 the	 painter	 and	 he	will	 say,	 "They	 are	 all	 different	 greens.	 There	 are
thousands	of	types	of	greens	--	different	shades,	different	nuances.	No	two	trees
are	 the	 same	green."	 Just	 look	around	and	you	will	 see	 --	yes,	 each	green	 is	 a
different	green.
So	are	questions.	And	even	if	the	same	person	asks	the	question	again	and	again,
then	 too	 it	cannot	be	 the	same,	because	you	go	on	changing.	Nothing	 is	static.
You	cannot	step	in	the	same	river	 twice,	and	you	cannot	meet	 the	same	person
again.	Shaila	cannot	ask	this	question	tomorrow,	because	there	will	be	no	more
the	same	person	tomorrow.	The	Ganges	will	have	flowed,	much	water	will	have
gone	 down.	 This	 moment	 it	 is	 relevant,	 tomorrow	 it	 may	 not	 be	 relevant,
something	else	may	surface	in	the	consciousness.
No	two	persons	can	ask	the	same	question,	and	not	even	the	same	person	can	ask
the	same	question	again,	because	the	person	goes	on	changing.	A	person	is	like	a
flame,	constantly	changing.	But	again	you	have	to	look	very	deep.	I	have	never
come	across	the	same	questions.	I	am	always	thrilled	by	your	questions.	I	always
wonder	how	you	manage	to	ask.
"Don't	 you	 get	 bored,	 bored	 and	 fed	 up,	 day	 after	 day	 answering	 the	 same
questions	while	we	sit	here	with	ears	blocked,	eyes	 tight,	mouths	sealed,	never
ever	getting	the	message	that	there	are	no	answers?"
Just	 because	 you	 sit	 there	 "ears	 blocked,	 eyes	 tight,	mouth	 sealed,	 never	 ever
getting	the	message,"	it	becomes	a	challenge	to	me.	It	is	a	great	adventure.	You
persist,	I	also	persist.
The	question	is:	Who	is	going	to	win?	Whether	you	will	remain	always	closed	or
some	day	you	will	 take	pity	on	me	and	you	will	 listen...	 open	your	 ears,	 your
heart,	a	little	bit?
It	is	a	struggle.	It	is	wrestling	that	goes	on	between	the	master	and	the	disciple	--
a	constant	fight.
And	 the	disciple	 cannot	win.	 It	 has	never	been	heard	 that	 he	 can	win.	He	 can
postpone,	 he	 can	 delay,	 but	 he	 cannot	win.	And	 the	more	 you	 delay	 the	more
your	defeat	becomes	certain.	I	am	encroaching	on	your	being	in	different	ways.
You	 just	 go	 on	 sitting	 there	with	 your	 closed	 ears	 and	 closed	 eyes	 and	 closed
heart	--	you	just	remain	there,	that's	all.
You	just	be	here.	Sooner	or	later,	one	day,	you	will	have	heard	the	message.
How	 long	 can	 you	go	 on	 remaining	 closed?	They	 say	 if	 a	man	persists	 in	 his
folly	 he	 becomes	wise.	You	 persist.	 Some	 day,	 in	 spite	 of	 you,	 you	will	 have
heard.	That's	why	I	go	on	speaking	every	morning,	every	evening,	year	in,	year
out.
And	you	say,	 "...	never	ever	getting	 the	message	 --	 that	 there	are	no	answers."
You	will	get	that	message	only	when	there	are	no	questions	in	your	mind,	never
before	that.	How	can	you	get	the	message	that	there	are	no	answers	if	you	have
questions	 yet?	 The	 very	 question	 presupposes	 an	 answer.	 The	 question	 is	 the
search	 for	 the	 answer.	 The	 question	 has	 taken	 it	 for	 granted	 that	 the	 answer
exists,	otherwise	how	will	 the	question	exist?	The	question	cannot	 exist	on	 its
own,	it	depends	on	the	answer	or	at	least	on	the	possibility	of	the	answer.
The	day	you	realize	that	there	are	no	longer	any	questions	in	you,	only	that	day
will	the	message	be	heard	that	there	are	no	answers.	And	that	day	you	will	see
that	neither	you	have	asked	nor	 I	have	answered.	There	has	been	utter	silence.
All	that	questioning	and	answering	has	been	like	a	dream.
But	because	you	question,	I	have	to	answer.	That	is	the	only	way	to	help	you	to
get	 rid	 of	 your	 questions.	 Remember,	 my	 answers	 are	 not	 answers	 but	 only
devices.	My	answers	are	not	answering	your	questions,	because	I	know	perfectly
well	that	there	are	no	questions.	All	questions	are	false.	You	have	dreamed	about
them.	But	when	you	ask,	I	respect	you.	I	answer.	My	answer	is	just	a	respect	to
you,	and	my	answer	is	a	device.	It	will	help	you	to	see	that	the	question	by	and
by	disappears.
One	day	suddenly	you	will	be	awake	with	no	questions.	That	day	you	will	see
that	I	have	not	answered	a	single	thing.	Nothing	can	be	answered	because	there
is	not	a	single	question	in	existence.	Existence	exists	without	any	questions.	It	is
a	mystery	--	not	a	problem	to	be	solved	but	a	mystery	to	be	loved,	a	mystery	to
be	lived.
And	Shaila	says:	"You	continually	astound	me	in	Your	dewdrop	freshness	in	the
early	morning	light	and	still	I	am	blind,	dead,	lame,	cut	off	from	sharing	in	Your
radiance	except	for	brief	moments."
Those	brief	moments	will	do.	Those	brief	moments	are	the	hope.	In	those	brief
moments	 I	 will	 enter	 in	 you.	 Those	 brief	 moments	 will	 become	 bigger	 and
bigger	slowly.	One	day	you	will	 find	 those	brief	moments	have	won	over	you.
Even	if	for	a	single	moment	there	is	a	contact	between	me	and	you,	it	is	enough,
it	is	more	than	enough.	Even	that	small	insight	will	become	a	fire	in	you.	That
small	spark	is	going	to	burn	your	whole	mind	utterly,	to	the	very	roots,	root	and
all.
The	third	question:
Question	3
OSHO,
I	DON'T	ENJOY	THESE	BUDDHA	SUTRAS.	THEY	ARE	DRY,	DIFFICULT
AND
COMPLICATED.	IS	NOT	TRUTH	SIMPLE?
Truth	is	simple	and	truth	is	difficult.	In	fact	it	is	difficult	because	it	is	simple.	It
is	 so	 simple	and	your	minds	are	 so	complicated	 that	you	cannot	understand	 it,
you	go	on	missing	 it.	 It	 is	 so	 simple	 that	 it	gives	no	challenge	 to	you.	 It	 is	 so
simple	 that	 you	 pass	 by	 the	 side	 of	 it	 remaining	 completely	 unaware	 that	 you
have	passed	truth.
Truth	 is	 simple	 because	 truth	 is	 obvious.	But	 simple	 does	 not	mean	 easy.	The
simplicity	is	very	complex.	If	you	enter	in	it	you	will	be	lost,	you	may	never	be
able	to	get	out	of	it.
That	simplicity	has	depth	in	it,	it	is	not	shallow.	And	to	attain	to	that	simplicity
you	will	have	to	lose	many	things	--	and	to	lose	those	things	is	difficult.
For	example,	why	do	these	Buddha	sutras	look	difficult	to	you?	--	because	they
are	 illogical.	 If	 you	 can	 lose	 your	 logic,	 they	will	 be	 simple.	 The	 difficulty	 is
coming	from	your	mind,	not	from	Buddha's	sutras.	He	is	a	very	simple	man.	He
is	simply	stating	a	fact.
But	 the	 problem	 arises	 from	 you,	 because	 you	 cannot	 accept	 that	 simple	 fact.
You	have	your	ideas.	Those	ideas	interfere.
You	say,	"How	can	this	be?	If	this	man	is	right	then	my	whole	logic	is	wrong."
And	that	you	cannot	accept	--	your	whole	education,	training,	has	been	of	logic.
And	 he	 goes	 on	 stating	 illogical	 things.	He	 is	 helpless.	At	 that	 height,	 at	 that
plenitude	logic	does	not	exist.	What	can	he	do?	At	that	plenitude	everything	is
paradoxical.	 At	 that	 plenitude,	 opposites	 meet,	 contradictories	 become
complementaries.	What	can	he	do?	He	has	to	assert	them.	The	problem	is	arising
from	 you	 --	 because	 you	want	 those	 truths	 to	 be	 translated	 according	 to	 your
logic.
Suppose	a	boy	in	a	high	school	physics	class	were	to	object,	"I	don't	approve	of
Albert	Einstein's	formula."
"No?"	says	the	teacher.	"Why	not?"
"Well,	 firstly	 it	 is	boring,	 and	whenever	you	explain	 it	 I	 inevitably	 fall	 asleep.
Secondly,	 it	 is	 unbalanced.	Look	 at	 it!	E	=	mc2.	He	 has	 put	 one	 figure	 all	 by
itself	on	one	side	of	the	equation,	and	three	others	all	together	on	the	other	side.
It	is	unartistic.	Why	didn't	he	move	one	of	those	figures	to	the	left	side	to	make
the	formula	more	symmetrical?	That's	why	I	hate	it."
Now	 he	 is	 raising	 beautiful	 questions.	 It	 is	 not	 symmetrical,	 "What	 kind	 of
equation	 is	 this?	 Both	 sides	 are	 not	 equal.	 It	 is	 unartistic	 Just	 by	 putting	 one
figure	on	the	other	side,	things	would	have	been	far	better,	more	symmetrical."
The	boy	is	completely	unaware	of	what	he	is	talking	about,	but	whatsoever	he	is
saying	looks	logical.	But	the	Einsteinian	formula	is	not	there	to	entertain	you.	It
is	to	express	reality.	If	you	are	bored	with	it,	that	simply	shows	that	you	are	very
dull	witted,	 that	 you	 cannot	 understand	 that	 penetrating	 insight.	 It	 is	 said	 that
only	twelve	persons	used	to	understand	Einstein's	theory	of	relativity.	All	around
the	earth,	only	twelve?
The	truth	is	simple,	but	when	you	go	into	its	details,	when	you	start	penetrating
into	its	reality,	it	becomes	difficult.	For	example,	Saint	Augustine	is	reported	to
have	said,
"Everybody	knows	what	time	is.	I	know	what	time	is,	but	when	somebody	asks
me	'What	is	time?	Try	to	explain	it	to	me,'	then	I	am	at	a	loss."
You	know	what	time	is,	you	live	according	to	time.	Six	o'clock	in	the	morning
you	get	up,	eleven	o'clock	in	the	night	you	go	to	bed,	one	o'clock	you	take	your
lunch.	You	go	to	the	office,	you	come	home.	You	use	time,	you	know	what	time
is,	but	can	you	explain	it?
The	moment	you	try	to	explain,	it	becomes	elusive.	You	have	never	seen	it,	you
have	never	seen	it	in	your	hand.	You	cannot	grasp	it.	What	is	it?
Augustine	is	right	--	that	the	problem	arises	when	you	try	to	explain	it.	Light	is
so	simple,	it	is	all	around,	dancing	on	the	trees,	the	whole	sky	is	full	of	light.	Try
to	explain	it	to	a	blind	man	and	he	will	be	bored	and	he	will	say,	"Stop	all	this
nonsense."	First,	you	will	find	it	very	difficult	to	put	it	into	words.
Or,	 drop	 the	 question	 of	 light.	 It	 is	 a	 scientific	 question,	 you	 may	 not	 be
interested	in	it.
You	 have	 loved,	 you	 know	what	 love	 is.	You	must	 have	 loved	 --	 at	 least	 you
must	have	loved	your	mother,	your	father,	your	sister,	some	woman,	your	wife,
your	husband,	your	children.	Can	you	explain	what	 love	 is?	Then	you	become
dumb.	 Then	 suddenly	 you	 lose	 all	 intelligence	 --	 as	 if	 somebody	 has	 simply
struck	you	dead.	You	become	paralyzed.
What	is	love?	Can	you	define	it?
Love	is	everybody's	experience,	more	or	less,	but	nobody	can	define	it.	Nirvana
is	not	everybody's	experience	--	once	in	a	while	nirvana	happens	--	and	Buddha
is	trying	to	explain	to	you	what	nirvana	is.
Truth	is	simple,	but	the	moment	you	try	to	explain	it,	it	becomes	difficult.
But	 remember,	 you	 are	 not	 here	 only	 to	 be	 entertained.	And	 I	 am	 not	 against
entertainment	 either	 --	 it	 is	 good	 in	 its	 own	 time.	 But	 something	 more	 than
entertainment	 is	 needed,	 only	 that	 will	 become	 your	 enlightenment.
Entertainment	is	a	very	lower	need.
Enlightenment	is	the	highest	need.	If	you	simply	go	on	from	one	entertainment
to	 another	 you	 will	 remain	 shallow,	 you	 will	 never	 grow,	 you	 will	 remain
immature.	You	have	 to	sometimes	go	 into	 the	depths	of	 life	and	 love	and	 light
and	God.	Sometimes	you	have	to	fly	into	eternity	to	have	a	taste	of	it.	Only	that
will	make	you	mature.
I	understand	your	difficulties.	You	say:	"I	don't	enjoy	these	Buddha	sutras."	Then
learn	 how	 to	 enjoy.	 Then	 learn	 how	 to	 enjoy	 higher	 things.	 There	 are	 higher
things.	If	you	want	 to	enjoy	classical	Indian	music	you	will	have	to	learn.	You
cannot	 just	 go	 and	 enjoy	 it,	 it	 needs	 a	 certain	 preparation	 in	 you,	 it	 needs	 a
certain	 receptivity	 in	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 vulgar.	 It	 needs	 a	 certain	 understanding	 in
you...	a	deep	understanding	of	sounds	and	silence	--
because	music	 consists	 of	 sound	 and	 silence.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 sound,	 it	 contains
silence	in	it.
The	music	becomes	higher	and	deeper	when	it	contains	more	silence	in	it.	When
it	provokes	your	 silence,	when	 it	penetrates	your	heart	and	 releases	your	 inner
silence,	when	listening	to	it	your	mind	disappears,	your	thoughts	stop....	But	then
you	will	have	to	learn,	you	will	have	to	go	through	a	certain	discipline,	you	will
have	to	become	more	meditative.	One	day	you	will	be	able	to	enjoy	it.	But	if	you
want	to	enjoy	it	right	now	and	you	are	not	ready	for	it,	don't	blame	it.
Don't	say	that	Buddha's	sutras	are	boring,	just	say	that	you	are	not	capable	yet	of
understanding	that	plenitude,	that	you	are	not	capable	of	looking	to	that	height,
that	you	are	not	capable	enough	to	climb	the	Everest	of	consciousness.	Buddha
is	talking	from	the	highest	peak.	You	will	have	to	move	from	your	dark	hole	a
little	bit.	You	will	have	 to	climb	 the	mountains,	only	 then	you	will	understand
those	sunlit	sutras.
It	is	a	difficulty	because	for	that	understanding	we	are	not	prepared	at	all,	hence
sometimes	you	may	feel	bored.	But	fight	with	boredom,	destroy	your	boredom,
pull	yourself	out	of	it.	You	have	to	go	with	the	Buddha,	you	have	to	see	what	he
has	seen.
Seeing	it,	you	will	be	fulfilled.
The	fourth	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	4
IS	 THE	 ONLY	 THING	 THAT	 KEEPS	 US	 FROM	 COMING	 HOME	 THE
DOUBT
THAT	WE	ARE	NOT	ALREADY	HOME,	WHICH	IS	REINFORCED	BY
EVERYONE	AROUND	US?
Yes,	Shobha.	The	doubt	is	 the	only	thing	that	prevents	--	 the	doubt	that	we	are
not	as	we	should	be,	the	doubt	that	God	cannot	be	within	us.	How	can	God	be
within	us?	--	because	you	have	been	taught	God	is	there	in	the	seventh	heaven
sitting	 on	 his	 golden	 throne,	 surrounded	 by	 his	 angels	 playing	 on	 their	 harps,
singing	hallelujah.
He	is	not	here,	he	is	far	away.	He	is	big,	he	is	huge,	he	is	eternal,	he	is	this	and
he	is	that.
How	can	he	be	in	your	heart?	Such	a	tiny	heart	you	have.	And	how	can	he	be	in
your	heart?	--	you	are	so	ugly	and	you	are	so	horrible	and	you	condemn	yourself
in	a	thousand	and	one	ways	continuously.	How	can	he	be	there?	If	God	is	there
in	you,	then	where	will	the	devil	live?	The	doubt....
And	when	somebody	says	that	God	is	within	you,	you	cannot	accept	it.	You	have
heard	 it	 many	 times,	 Jesus	 saying	 to	 people,	 "The	 kingdom	 of	 God	 is	 within
you."	But	even	Christians	don't	 listen,	even	the	followers.	Even	Jesus'	 intimate
followers,	 immediate	 followers,	go	on	asking	about	God	who	 is	 in	heaven	and
Jesus	goes	on	saying,	"He	is	within	you,"	and	they	go	on	talking	about	the	God
who	is	in	heaven,	and	they	go	on	saying,	"When	we	all	will	die,	how	will	we	live
in	paradise?	Who	will	be	at	 the	 right	hand	of	God?	What	will	be	our	position
there?	 Who	 will	 be	 who?	 What	 will	 be	 the	 hierarchy?"	 And	 Jesus	 goes	 on
saying,	"He	 is	within	you,"	but	nobody	believes	 it,	because	you	have	not	been
taught	to	trust	yourself.
From	your	very	birth	you	have	been	distracted	from	your	being.	Everybody	has
condemned	 you	 --	 your	 parents,	 your	 teachers,	 your	 priests,	 your	 politicians.
Everybody	has	condemned	you.	Everybody	has	said,	"You!	You	are	not	right	as
you	are.	You	have	to	become	right.	You	have	to	attain	to	some	perfection."
Goals	have	been	given	to	you,	and	because	of	those	goals	and	those	perfectionist
ideals	 you	 remain	 condemned	 and	 crushed.	How	can	you	 receive	 the	message
that	God	is	within	you,	that	you	are	already	home,	that	you	have	never	left	it	in
the	 first	place,	 that	all	 is	okay	as	 it	 is?	 Just	 relax	and	 it	 is	yours.	Not	 that	you
have	to	search	and	seek,	but	just	relax	into	it	and	it	is	yours.
Doubt	arises:	"God	within	me?	And	my	father	was	saying,	 'You	are	the	ugliest
kid	 in	 the	 town.'	And	my	mother	was	 saying,	 'Why	didn't	 you	 die?	You	 are	 a
condemnation	to	the	family,	you	are	a	blame	to	the	family.	We	are	sorry	that	we
have	given	birth	to	you.'"	And	your	teacher	was	saying	that	you	are	a	fool,	that
you	are	stupid,	that	you	are	idiotic.	And	the	priest	was	saying	that	you	are	bound
for	hell,	that	you	are	a	sinner.
Just	the	other	night	I	was	reading	about	an	Indian	mystic	who	was	invited	into	a
Christian	 church.	 After	 the	 talk	 the	 Christian	 priest	 shouted	 loudly	 to	 the
congregation:	 "All	 you	 sinners!	 Now	 kneel	 down	 and	 pray!	 Kneel	 down	 in
prayer!"
They	all	knelt	down	except	 the	mystic,	 the	Hindu	mystic.	The	priest	 looked	at
him,	he	said,	"Aren't	you	going	to	participate	with	us	in	prayer?"
He	said,	"I	was	going	to	participate,	but	I	am	not	a	sinner.	And	I	don't	see	that
anybody	else	here	is	a	sinner.	I	was	going	to	participate	 in	the	prayer,	but	now
you	have	made	it	impossible	for	me.	I	cannot	kneel	down.	I	am	not	a	sinner.	God
is	within	me.	I	cannot	be	that	disrespectful	to	God.	I	can	pray	only	because	God
is	within	me.	And	I	am	not	praying	for	anything	--	my	prayer	is	my	thankfulness,
my	gratitude	for	all	that	he	has	already	given	to	me.	My	thankfulness	is	that	he
has	chosen	me	as	his	abode,	that	he	has	honored	me,	that	I	am	part	of	him,	that
he	belongs	 to	me.	 I	 am	 ready	 to	pray,	 I	 am	 ready	 to	kneel	down,	but	not	 as	 a
sinner,	because	that	is	not	true."
You	have	been	taught	that	you	are	sinners,	that	unless	Jesus	saves	you,	you	are
bound	to	go	to	hell.	You	have	been	condemned	so	much	that	when	this	Eastern
message	bursts	forth	 in	your	being	you	start	doubting:	"This	 is	not	possible.	I?
And	 I	 have	 never	 left	 home?	Maybe	 it	 is	 true	 about	Buddha,	maybe	 it	 is	 true
about	Jesus,	but	I?	--	I	am	a	sinner."
Nobody	is	a	sinner.	Even	while	you	are	in	the	darkest	hole	of	your	life	you	are
still	divine.	You	cannot	 lose	your	divinity,	 there	 is	no	way	to	 lose	 it.	 It	 is	your
very	being.	It	is	the	stuff	you	are	made	of.
Shobha	has	asked:	"Is	the	only	thing	that	keeps	us	from	coming	home	the	doubt
that	we	are	not	already	home,	which	is	reinforced	by	everyone	around	us?"
Yes,	it	is	reinforced	by	everyone	around	you.	That's	why	I	say	love	is	only	when
somebody	accepts	you	as	divine.	He	reinforces	 the	 truth	 that	you	are	divine.	If
anybody	reinforces	the	untruth	that	you	are	not	divine,	it	is	not	love.	She	may	be
your	mother,	 he	may	 be	 your	 father,	 it	 doesn't	matter.	 If	 anybody	 gives	 you	 a
self-condemnatory	 idea,	 he	 is	 poisoning	you.	 If	 anybody	 says	 that	 you	 are	not
accepted	as	you	are,	that	God	will	love	you	only	if	you	fulfill	certain	conditions,
then	he	is	destroying	you,	he	is	your	enemy	--
beware	of	him.
The	fifth	question:
Question	5
OSHO,
THE	OTHER	DAY	I	CAME	THROUGH	THE	GATES	WITH	AN	INDIAN
SANNYASIN	AND	HE	WAS	TURNED	AWAY	BY	THE	GUARD	WITH	NO
REASON	GIVEN.	WHEN	I	SPOKE	TO	LAXMI	ABOUT	IT,	SHE	MORE	OR
LESS
TOLD	ME	TO	MIND	MY	OWN	BUSINESS.	WHENEVER	 I	 SEE	 PEOPLE
BEING
UNJUSTLY	TREATED,	MY	IMMEDIATE	REACTION	IS	TO	GO	TO	THEIR
ASSISTANCE.	IS	IT	REALLY	NONE	OF	MY	BUSINESS	WHAT	HAPPENS
TO
OTHER	PEOPLE?
The	question	is	from	Ma	Deva	Tulika.
This	is	significant	for	everybody	present	here,	and	everybody	who	is	going	to	be
in	 any	 way	 related	 to	 me.	 Whatsoever	 happens	 in	 this	 commune	 happens
according	to	me.	I	know	who	was	turned	from	the	gate.	And	the	man	who	has
been	turned	away	knows	why	he	has	been	turned	from	the	gate.	And	it	is	none	of
your	business	to	come	into	it.
This	you	have	 to	understand	absolutely,	 that	whatsoever	happens	here...	 I	may
not	 come	 out	 of	 my	 room,	 I	 never	 come	 out	 except	 in	 the	 morning	 and	 the
evening,	 and	 I	 never	 go	 around	 the	 ashram	 --	 but	whatsoever	 happens	 here	 is
perfectly	known	to	me,	is	happening	according	to	me.	Please	don't	interfere.
There	are	a	 few	other	people	also	 like	Tulika	who	are	continuously	 interfering
with	the	work.	You	are	nobody	to	judge	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.	If	you
know	it	already	you	are	not	needed	here,	you	have	become	enlightened	--	you	go
home.
This	is	none	of	your	business	to	decide	what	is	 just	and	what	is	unjust.	This	is
not	an	ordinary	place	 so	ordinary	 things	won't	 apply	here.	Some	extraordinary
experiment	is	on.
I	know	what	is	somebody's	need.	If	I	feel	that	somebody	has	to	be	rejected	from
the	gate,	he	has	to	be	rejected.	If	I	feel	 that	no	reason	has	to	be	given,	 then	no
reason	has	to	be	given.	That's	my	device	for	his	life	and	for	his	work.
Now	you	should	not	come	into	it.	If	you	start	coming	into	it	you	will	only	lose
your	opportunity	for	growth.	Guards	have	their	duties,	they	know	what	they	are
doing.	And	 I	 am	 in	 contact	with	 them,	with	what	 they	 are	 doing.	You	 simply
bypass.
It	is	not	an	ordinary	place.	Everything	is	looked	after,	and	if	somebody	needs	a
hit	 on	 the	 head,	 he	 is	 given.	You	 should	 not	 prevent	 it,	 otherwise	 you	will	 be
coming	 into	 his	 growth	 too,	 you	 will	 hinder	 him,	 and	 you	 will	 be	 hindering
yourself.	And	you	can	get	unnecessarily	excited	about	it.
There	are	a	 few	people	 --	Padma	Sambhava	 is	one.	They	go	on	writing	 to	me
that	this	has	happened	and	somebody	has	done	this	and	this	should	not	be.	Here
you	are	nobody	to	decide	what	should	be	and	what	should	not	be.	The	moment
you	become	part	of	my	commune	you	leave	everything	 to	me;	otherwise	work
will	be	impossible.
Now	I	know	the	man	who	has	been	rejected	and	I	know	why	he	is	rejected	--	and
he	also	knows	why	he	has	been	rejected.	There	is	no	reason	to	give	any	reason.
If	reasons	have	to	be	given	for	each	and	every	thing,	then	my	whole	work	will	be
simply	to	go	on	supplying	reasons.	There	are	thousands	of	people	coming,	and
everybody	has	to	be	given	reasons	and	explanations	about	everything?	Laxmi	is
right.
And	 always	 remember	 that	 Laxmi	 never	 does	 anything	 on	 her	 own.	 She	 is	 a
perfect	 vehicle.	 That's	why	 she	 has	 been	 chosen	 for	 that	work.	Now	 I	 cannot
choose	Tulika	for	work,	because	she	has	her	own	idea	what	is	right	and	what	is
wrong.	Laxmi	has	no	idea.
She	simply	listens	and	does.	Whatsoever	is	said,	she	does.
And	you	have	to	learn	these	ways,	because	soon	we	will	be	becoming	a	bigger
commune	and	thousands	of	people	will	be	coming,	and	these	things	have	to	be
settled.	You	should	not	bring	them	again	and	again.	Again	and	again	you	go	on
writing	questions:
"Somebody	has	done	this...."	That	is	for	me	to	look	to,	and	if	I	think	that	it	is	not
right	it	will	be	prevented.	You	need	not	bring	it	to	my	notice	even.	You	waste	my
time.
And	you	get	 so	excited....	There	 are	 some	 foolish	people	who	have	 renounced
their	sannyas	because	 they	saw	something	unjust	was	being	done.	Now	they're
just	 losing	their	opportunity.	It	was	not	 their	business.	You	have	come	here	for
your	own	growth.	This	 acceptance	has	 to	be	 total,	 only	 then	work	 is	 possible,
only	then	I	can	help	you.	Please	don't	give	suggestions	to	me.	The	moment	you
give	me	a	suggestion,	you	are	disconnected	from	me.
This	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be	 a	 democracy.	You	 are	 not	 to	 be	 asked	what	 should	 be
done	and	what	 should	not	be	done.	This	 should	be	 remembered	 from	 the	very
beginning	--	 that	 this	 is	not	going	to	be	a	democracy.	Your	votes	will	never	be
taken.	You	become	part	 of	 it	with	 that	knowledge,	 that	whatsoever	 I	 decide	 is
absolute.	If	you	don't	choose	that	way	you	are	perfectly	happy	to	leave.
People	are	prevented	from	entering	but	nobody	is	prevented	from	leaving.	You
can	leave.
Have	you	seen	anybody	being	prevented	from	leaving?	Leaving	is	perfectly	free
--	you	are	free,	that	is	your	decision.	If	you	want	to	be	here	you	have	to	be	totally
here.	If	you	feel	that	this	is	not	the	place	for	you,	that	your	ideas	are	not	being
fulfilled,	that	it	is	not	according	to	you,	you	are	free	to	leave.
This	place	will	never	be	according	to	you.	This	place	is	to	change	you,	it	is	not
to	be	according	to	you.	This	place	is	going	to	be	a	transformation	for	you.	And
these	are	the	beginnings.	Who	are	you	to	know	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong?
And	who	are	you	to	ask	for	the	reason?	How	do	you	come	in?
The	Indian	who	has	been	prevented,	if	he	feels	like	asking	he	will	come	and	ask.
He	has	not	asked	because	he	knows,	he	has	been	told	why	he	is	being	prevented.
He	 has	 been	 a	 nuisance	 around	 here.	 But	 these	 things	 are	 not	 to	 be	 inquired
about	by	everybody.	And	this	 is	not	good,	 that	everybody	should	be	told	about
this	nuisance.	This	is	disrespectful	to	him.	He	has	been	told,	and	he	understands
because	he	knows	what	he	has	been	doing.
Now	YOU	suddenly	 jump	in.	You	think	you	are	doing	some	great	work,	some
great	 service.	You	 think	you	are	 saving	some	person	 from	some	 injustice.	You
don't	 know	 the	whole	 story.	And	you	need	not	 know	 the	whole	 story,	 because
who	is	sitting	there	to	tell	you	all	the	stories	about	everybody?	You	decide	only
about	your	own	self.
This	is	a	place	where	many	things	will	never	be	according	to	you.	You	have	to
fall	in	tune	with	things.	If	you	think	that	that	is	not	possible	for	you,	you	are	free
to	leave.
And	 let	 this	 be	 the	 last	 question.	 Many	 questions	 have	 been	 coming	 to	 me.
Somebody	participates	in	a	group	and	writes,	"Why	is	there	so	much	violence	in
the	 encounter	 group?"	And	 that	 comes	 from	a	 groupleader,	 a	woman	who	has
been	a	groupleader.	She	participated	for	one	or	two	days	in	the	Encounter	group
and	dropped	out.
And	she	had	asked	for	it.	I	was	not	going	to	give	her	the	encounter	group,	I	was
giving	her	some	other	groups,	but	she	asked,	"I	want	to	do	the	encounter."	So	I
said	 "Okay."	 But	 when	 I	 say,	 "Okay,"	 you	 should	 understand	 what	 I	 mean.	 I
mean	that	then	it	is	for	you	to	decide.
She	thinks	she	knows	because	she	is	a	groupleader.	She	has	been	leading	groups
so	she	 thinks	she	knows.	And	I	knew	that	very	moment	 that	 she	would	not	be
able	 to	go	 through	 it,	because	 the	encounter	group	 that	 is	going	on	here	 is	 the
best	 in	 the	 world	 at	 this	 moment.	 Nowhere	 else	 is	 such	 absolute	 freedom
allowed.
In	 the	 West	 the	 encounter	 group	 has	 limitations,	 because	 the	 encounter
groupleader	has	limitations.	He	can	go	only	so	far.	When	he	sees	that	things	are
becoming	difficult,	 that	now	he	may	not	be	able	 to	control,	 that	 things	may	go
too	far,	 that	he	may	not	be	able	to	bring	them	back,	then	he	prevents.	Here	we
don't	believe	in	any	boundaries.
I	send	people	to	the	encounter	group	only	when	I	see	that	now	they	understand
that	 they	have	 to	go	beyond	all	boundaries	 --	boundaries	of	sex,	boundaries	of
violence,	anger,	rage.	They	have	to	break	all	boundaries.	That	is	breakthrough	--
when	all	those	boundaries	break	down.
Now	the	woman	became	very	much	afraid,	now	she	is	against	 the	group.	Now
she	is	asking	me,	"Why	do	you	allow	such	violence?"	That	is	not	your	business.
If	you	are	not	capable	of	going	into	 it,	you	are	not	required	 to	go	into	 it,	mm?
You	can	do	some	non-violent	group	--	Zazen,	Vipassana.	We	have	all	kinds	of
toys	around	here.	Mm?	you	can	choose.
But	don't	go	on	writing	to	me.	Whatsoever	happens	here	is	happening	with	my
knowledge.	Not	a	single	thing	happens	here	which	is	not	known	to	me,	so	you
need	not	inform	me	about	things,	I	know	them	already.	It	is	a	sheer	wastage	of
time.
And	 the	 moment	 you	 surrender	 and	 become	 an	 initiate,	 a	 sannyasin,	 that
surrender	has	to	be	total.	Just	live	a	few	months	in	that	total	surrender	and	you
will	see	--	it	is	alchemical,	it	transforms	you.
New	people	come	and	they	think,	"What	is	the	matter?	The	old	sannyasins	don't
interfere.
Somebody	is	prevented	by	the	guard	and	the	old	sannyasins	simply	go	by.	What
has	happened	to	these	people?	Do	they	understand	or	not	that	this	is	not	right?
Have	they	become	apathetic,	indifferent?"
No,	they	have	learned,	and	they	have	learned	just	like	you.	Slowly	slowly	they
have	learned	that	whatsoever	happens	is	happening	according	to	a	plan,	a	device.
There	 is	 some	 hidden	 pattern	 in	 it.	 And	 nobody	 except	 me	 knows	 what	 that
hidden	pattern	 is.	So	you	cannot	go	 to	Laxmi,	 she	does	not	know.	She	 simply
asks	me	what	 is	 to	be	done	 and	 she	does	 it.	You	cannot	 ask	Sant	on	 the	gate,
"What	are	you	doing?"	He	simply	does	what	he	is	told	to	do.
If	you	are	to	be	a	part	of	this	commune	you	have	to	understand	this.	You	have	to
relax,	 you	 have	 to	 stop	 judging.	 Soon,	 after	 a	 few	 months	 of	 relaxation	 and
acceptance,	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 understand.	 That's	 what	 has	 happened	 to	 the
older	sannyasins	--	now	they	understand.
The	sixth	question:
Question	6
OSHO,
I	HAVE	ALWAYS	FELT	THE	NEED	FOR	LITTLE	REWARDS	AT	THE	END
OF
THE	DAY	 --	A	FEW	BEERS,	CIGARETTES	OR	DRUGS.	NOW	NONE	OF
THESE
THINGS	 BRING	 ANY	 SATISFACTION,	 YET	 THE	 DESIRE	 FOR
SOMETHING,	SOME	FORM	OF	GRATIFICATION,	CONTINUES.	WHAT	IS
THIS	LONGING	AND
WHAT	WILL	SATISFY	IT?
Nothing	will	satisfy	it.	There	is	a	subtle	mechanism	of	desire	to	be	understood.
Desire	functions	in	this	way,	desire	places	a	condition	on	your	happiness.	"I	will
be	happy	if	I	can	get	this	car,	this	woman,	this	house."	Fulfillment	of	the	desire
removes	that	condition	on	your	happiness.	In	your	relief	you	feel	good.	Actually
all	you	have	done	is	remove	a	quite	unnecessary	obstruction	to	your	happiness,
but	 it	 is	 not	 long	 before	 you	 find	 yourself	 thinking,	 "If	 I	 can	 create	 that
obstruction	again,	 then	 remove	 it	all	over	again,	 the	 relief	 I	 felt	 in	 removing	 it
the	last	time	will	feel	as	good	as	it	did	then."	And	so	it	is	that	desires,	even	when
we	fulfill	them,	lead	again	and	again	to	the	creation	of	new	desires.
Do	you	follow	it?	First	you	make	a	condition.	You	say,	"Unless	I	get	this	woman
I	am	not	going	 to	be	happy.	 I	 can	be	happy	only	with	 this	woman."	Now	you
start	 striving	 to	get	 this	woman.	The	more	difficult	 it	 is	 the	more	you	become
enthusiastic,	feverish.
The	more	difficult	it	is	the	more	you	are	challenged.	The	more	difficult	it	is	the
more	you	put	all	your	being	at	 stake;	you	are	 ready	 to	gamble.	And	of	course
more	hope	arises	and	more	desire	 to	possess	 the	woman.	 It	 is	 so	hard,	 it	 is	 so
difficult.	It	must	be	something	great,	that's	why	it	is	so	hard,	that's	why	it	is	so
difficult.	You	chase	and	chase	and	chase	and	one	day	you	get	the	woman.
The	day	you	get	the	woman	the	condition	is	removed:	"If	I	get	the	woman	then	I
will	be	happy."	You	had	put	 that	 condition	 in	 the	 first	place.	Now	you	get	 the
woman,	 you	 feel	 relief.	 Now	 there	 is	 no	more	 chasing,	 you	 have	 arrived,	 the
result	is	in	your	hands,	you	feel	good	--	good	because	of	the	relief.
One	 day	 I	 saw	Mulla	Nasruddin	walking,	 swearing	 and	 in	 great	 pain.	 I	 asked
him,	"What	is	the	matter?	Is	your	stomach	aching	or	do	you	have	a	headache	or
something?	What	is	the	matter?	You	look	in	such	agony."
He	said,	"Nothing.	The	shoes	that	I	am	wearing	are	too	small."
"But	then	why	are	you	wearing	them?"
He	said,	"This	is	the	only	relief	that	I	get	at	the	end	of	the	day	--	when	I	take	my
shoes	 off.	God,	 it	 is	 such...	 then	 I	 enjoy.	But	 this	 is	 the	 only	 joy	 I	 have,	 so	 I
cannot	drop	these	shoes.	They	are	one	size	too	small.	It	is	really	hell,	but	in	the
evening	it	gives	heaven.
When	 I	 go	 home	 and	 I	 take	my	 shoes	 off	 and	 I	 fall	 on	my	 sofa,	 I	 say	 I	 have
arrived.	It's	so	beautiful!"
That's	what	you	are	doing.	You	create	pain,	you	create	anguish,	chasing,	fever,
and	then	one	day	you	come	home	and	take	the	shoes	off	and	you	say,	"Great,	this
is	great.	So	I	have	arrived!"	But	how	long	can	it	last?	The	relief	lasts	only	a	few
moments.	Then	again	you	are	hankering.
Now	 this	 woman	 is	 useless	 because	 you	 have	 got	 her.	 You	 cannot	 make	 a
condition	again.	You	can	never	say	again,	"If	I	get	this	woman	I	will	be	happy,"
because	 she	 is	 already	 with	 you.	 Now	 you	 start	 looking	 around	 at	 somebody
else's	woman,	"If	I	get	that	woman..."	Now	you	know	one	trick	--	that	first	you
have	to	put	a	condition	on	your	happiness,	then	you	have	to	follow	the	condition
desperately,	then	one	day	relief	comes.
Now	this	is	futile.	A	man	of	understanding	will	see	that	there	is	no	need	to	put
any	condition,	you	can	be	unconditionally	happy.	Why	go	on	walking	 in	small
shoes	 and	 suffer	 just	 to	 get	 relief	 in	 the	 end?	Why	 not	 have	 the	 relief	 all	 the
time?	 But	 then	 you	 will	 not	 feel	 it,	 that	 is	 the	 problem.	 To	 feel	 it	 you	 need
contrast.	You	will	be	happy	but	you	will	not	feel	it.
And	that	is	the	definition	of	a	really	happy	man:	a	really	happy	man	is	one	who
does	not	know	anything	about	happiness,	who	has	never	heard	about	it,	who	is
so	 happy,	 so	 unconditionally	 happy,	 that	 how	 can	 he	 know	 that	 he	 is	 happy?
Only	unhappy	people	say,
"I	am	happy,	things	are	going	great."	These	are	unhappy	people.	A	happy	person
knows	nothing	about	happiness.	 It	 is	 simply	 there,	 it	 is	 always	 there.	 It	 is	 like
breathing.
You	don't	feel	very	happy	about	breathing	--	then	just	do	one	thing,	close	your
nose.	 Do	 some	 yoga	 exercises	 and	 repress	 your	 breath	 inside	 and	 go	 on
repressing	 and	 go	 on	 repressing.	 Now	 the	 agony	 arises.	 And	 you	 go	 on
repressing.	Be	a	real	yoga	disciple	--	go	on	repressing.	And	then	it	bursts	forth
and	there	is	such	great	joy.	This	is	foolish	--	but	this	is	what	everybody	is	doing.
That's	why	you	wait	for	the	result	in	the	evening.
Happiness	 is	herenow,	 it	needs	no	condition.	Happiness	 is	natural.	 Just	 see	 the
point	of	it.
Don't	make	 conditions	 on	 your	 happiness.	Remain	 happy	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all.
There	is	no	reason	to	find	some	cause	to	be	happy.	Just	be	happy.
Trees	are	happy	and	they	will	not	get	any	beer	in	the	evening	and	any	cigarettes,
and	they	are	perfectly	happy.	Look!	...	And	the	wind	blowing	is	happy,	and	the
sun	is	happy,	and	the	sands	are	happy	and	the	seas	are	happy,	and	everything	is
happy	except	man	--
because	nobody	is	making	any	conditions.	Just	be	happy.
If	you	cannot	be	happy,	then	don't	make	such	impossible	conditions	--	that	it	is
difficult.
Then	Mulla	is	right	--	such	a	small	thing.	I	understand.	He	is	far	more	intelligent
than	you	understand	him	to	be.	Such	a	simple	device	--	wearing	one	size	smaller
shoes	--	such	a	small	device,	nobody	can	prevent	you	from	it,	and	by	the	evening
time	you	are	happy.
Just	small	devices,	create	small	devices,	and	be	as	happy	as	you	want.
But	you	say,	"I	will	be	happy	only	when	this	great	house	is	mine."	Now	you	are
making	a	big	condition.	It	may	take	years,	and	you	will	be	tired	and	exhausted,
and	 by	 the	 time	 you	 reach	 to	 the	 palace	 of	 your	 desires	 you	may	 be	 close	 to
death.	 That's	 what	 happens.	 And	 you	 wasted	 your	 whole	 life	 and	 your	 great
house	will	become	your	grave.	You	say,
"Unless	I	have	a	million	dollars,	I	am	not	going	to	be	happy."	And	then	you	have
to	 work	 and	 waste	 your	 whole	 life.	 Mulla	 Nasruddin	 is	 far	 more	 intelligent:
make	small	conditions	and	have	as	much	happiness	as	you	want.
If	you	understand	then	there	is	no	need	to	put	any	conditions.	Just	see	the	point
of	it	--
that	conditions	don't	create	happiness,	they	only	give	relief.	But	the	relief	cannot
be	permanent,	no	relief	can	ever	be	permanent.	It	lasts	only	for	a	few	moments.
Have	you	not	watched	it	again	and	again?	You	wanted	to	purchase	a	car;	the	car
is	in	your	porch	and	you	are	standing	there,	very	very	happy.	How	long	does	it
last?	Tomorrow	it	is	this	old	car,	one	day	old.	Two	days	after	it	is	two	days	old,
and	 all	 the	 neighborhood	 has	 seen	 it	 and	 they	 all	 have	 appreciated	 it,	 and
finished!	Now	nobody	 talks	 about	 it.	That's	why	car	 companies	have	 to	go	on
putting	out	new	models	every	year,	so	that	you	can	have	new	conditions.
People	go	on	hankering	after	things	just	to	get	relief,	and	relief	is	available.
Have	you	heard	the	story?	A	beggar	was	sitting	under	a	tree	and	a	rich	man's	car
broke.
The	driver	was	fixing	it	and	the	rich	man	came	out	and	the	beggar	was	having	a
good	rest	under	the	tree.	It	was	breezy	and	sunny	and	beautiful,	and	the	rich	man
also	 came	 and	 he	 sat	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 beggar	 and	 he	 said,	 "Why	 don't	 you
work?"
The	beggar	asked,	"For	what?"
And	the	rich	man	said,	"If	you	work,	you	can	earn	money."
The	beggar	asked,	"For	what?"
The	rich	man	felt	a	little	annoyed	and	he	said,	"When	you	have	money	you	can
have	a	big	balance	in	the	bank."
But	the	beggar	again	asked,	"For	what?"
The	rich	man	was	even	more	annoyed.	He	said,	"For	what?	Then	you	can	retire
in	your	old	age	and	rest."
"But,"	the	beggar	said,	"I	am	resting	now!	Why	wait	for	old	age?	And	do	all	this
nonsense?	 --	 earn	money	 and	make	 a	 bank	 balance	 and	 then	 finally	 rest.	And
can't	you	see?	--	I	am	resting	now!	Why	wait?"
Why	wait	for	the	evening?	And	why	wait	for	the	beer?	Why	not	drink	water	and
enjoy	it	while	you	are	drinking	it?,
You	 have	 heard	 Jesus'	 story	 that	 he	 turned	 water	 into	 wine?	 Christians	 have
missed	it.
They	think	he	really	turned	it	into	wine.	That	is	not	true.	He	must	have	taught	the
secret	that	I	am	teaching	you	to	his	disciples.	He	must	have	told	them,	"Drink	it
so	joyously	that	water	becomes	wine."
You	can	drink	water	so	 joyously	 that	 it	almost	 intoxicates	you.	Try!	Just	water
can	 intoxicate	 you.	 It	 depends	 on	 you.	 It	 does	 not	 depend	 on	 the	 beer	 or	 the
wine.	And	 if	you	don't	understand	 it,	 ask	some	hypnotist,	 ask	our	Santosh.	He
knows.	Even	 if	water	 is	given	 to	somebody	who	has	been	hypnotized	and	 told
under	hypnosis	that	this	is	wine,	he	will	become	intoxicated	--	with	water.
Now	 doctors	 know	 about	 placeboes,	 and	 sometimes	 the	 results	 are	 very
puzzling.	 In	 one	hospital	 they	were	doing	 some	 experiments.	To	one	group	of
twenty	 patients	 with	 the	 same	 disease	 medicine	 was	 given	 and	 to	 the	 other
twenty	with	 the	same	disease	 just	water	was	given	--	 just	 to	see	whether	water
can	work.	Neither	the	doctors	nor	the	patients	know	which	is	water	and	which	is
medicine,	 because	 if	 the	 doctor	 knows	 then	 even	 his	 behavior	 will	 change.
Giving	water	he	will	not	give	it	that	seriously	and	that	will	make	some	suspicion
arise	in	the	patient.	So	neither	the	doctor	nor	the	patient	--	nobody	knows.
The	knowledge	is	kept	in	a	vault,	locked.
And	the	miracle	is	that	the	same	number	of	patients	are	helped	by	water	as	are
helped	by	medicine.	Out	of	twenty,	seventeen	persons	are	healthy	by	the	second
week,	from	both	the	groups.	And	the	more	miraculous	thing	is,	those	who	were
kept	on	water	 remained	healthy	 longer	 than	 those	who	were	kept	on	medicine.
The	people	who	were	kept	on	 real	medicine	 started	coming	back	 soon,	 after	 a
few	weeks.
What	 happened?	Why	 did	 water	 help	 so	 much?	 The	 idea	 that	 it	 is	 medicine
helps,	 not	 the	 medicine.	 And	 because	 water	 is	 pure	 water,	 it	 cannot	 harm.
Medicine	will	harm.	That's	why	 the	people	who	had	been	given	 real	medicine
started	coming	back.	They	started	creating	some	new	desire,	some	new	disease,
some	new	problems...	because	no	medicine	can	go	without	affecting	your	system
in	some	way	or	other.	It	will	have	its	reactions.
Water	cannot	have	any	reaction.	This	is	pure	hypnosis.
You	can	drink	water	with	such	zest,	with	such	prayer,	that	it	becomes	wine.	You
see	 the	 Zen	 people	 drinking	 tea	 with	 such	 ceremony	 and	 ritual,	 with	 such
awareness.	 Then	 even	 tea	 becomes	 something	 phenomenal.	 Ordinary	 tea	 is
transformed.	 Ordinary	 acts	 can	 be	 transformed	 --	 a	 morning	 walk	 can	 be
intoxicating.	And	 if	 a	morning	walk	 cannot	 be	 intoxicating	 then	 something	 is
wrong	with	you.	Just	watching	a	roseflower	can	be	intoxicating.	And	if	it	cannot
intoxicate	 you,	 then	 nothing	 can	 intoxicate	 you.	 Just	 looking	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 a
child	can	be	intoxicating.
Learn	how	 to	 live	 the	moment	 joyously.	Don't	 look	 for	 results,	 there	are	none.
Life	is	not	going	anywhere,	it	has	no	ends.	Life	is	not	a	means	to	any	end,	life	is
just	herenow.	Live	 it.	Live	 it	 totally,	 live	 it	 consciously,	 live	 it	 joyously	 --	 and
you	will	be	fulfilled.
Fulfillment	 should	 not	 be	 postponed,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 never	 be	 fulfilled.
Fulfillment	has	to	be	now	--	now	or	never.
The	last	question:
Question	7
PEOPLE	THINK	I	AM	MEAN,	BUT	I	FEEL	I	AM	ONLY	MISERLY.	WHAT
DO
YOU	SAY,	OSHO?
I	will	tell	you	one	anecdote.
A	young	man	was	overjoyed	one	morning	to	learn	that	he	had	won	fifty	thousand
pounds	on	the	football	pools.	He	lived	with	his	mother	and	father,	both	elderly
and	 not	 too	 well	 off,	 and	 when	 he	 told	 them	 about	 his	 win	 they	 too	 were
overjoyed.
"Naturally,"	he	said,	"I	want	you	to	share	in	my	good	fortune,	so	I	am	going	to
make	you	a	present	of	ten	pounds	each."
There	was	 silence	 for	 a	moment	 and	 then	 the	 old	man	 spoke.	 "Well,	 son,"	 he
said,	"we	have	done	a	lot	for	you,	mother	and	I,	and	you	have	never	gone	short
of	anything	over	the	years,	but	now	that	you	are	able	to	stand	on	your	own	two
feet,	 I	 think	you	should	know	that,	well,	your	mother	and	I	were	never	 legally
married."
"What!"	exclaimed	the	young	man.	"Do	you	mean	to	say	that	I	am	a...?"
"Yes,	you	are,"	said	the	old	man.	"And	a	ruddy	mean	one	at	that!"
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	Pure	Land	Paradise
29	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712290
ShortTitle:
DIAMON09
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
65
mins
VAJRACHCHEDIKA
PRAJNAPARAMITA
SUTRA
OF
GAUTAMA
THE
BUDDHA
THE	LORD	ASKED:
WHAT	 DO	 YOU	 THINK,	 SUBHUTI,	 IS	 THERE	 ANY	DHAMMA	WHICH
THE
TATHAGATA	HAS	LEARNED	FROM	DIPANKARA?'	SUBHUTI	REPLIED:
'NOT
SO,	O	LORD,	THERE	IS	NOT.'
THE	LORD	SAID:
IF	ANY	BODHISATTVA	WOULD	SAY,	"I	WILL	CREATE	HARMONIOUS
BUDDHAFIELDS,"	HE	WOULD	SPEAK	FALSELY.	AND	WHY?	THE
HARMONIES	 OF	 BUDDHAFIELDS,	 SUBHUTI,	 AS	 NO-HARMONIES
HAVE	THEY
BEEN	TAUGHT	BY	THE	TATHAGATA.	THEREFORE	HE	SPOKE	OF
"HARMONIOUS	BUDDHAFIELDS."'
THE	LORD	SAID:
'AND	AGAIN,	SUBHUTI,	SUPPOSE	A	WOMAN	OR	A	MAN	WERE	TO
RENOUNCE	 ALL	 THEIR	 BELONGINGS	 AS	 MANY	 TIMES	 AS	 THERE
ARE
GRAINS	 OF	 SAND	 IN	 THE	 RIVER	 GANGES;	 AND	 SUPPOSE	 THAT
SOMEONE
ELSE,	AFTER	TAKING	FROM	THIS	DISCOURSE	ON	DHAMMA	BUT	ONE
STANZA	 OF	 FOUR	 LINES,	 WOULD	 DEMONSTRATE	 IT	 TO	 OTHERS.
THEN	THIS
LATTER	 ON	 THE	 STRENGTH	 OF	 THAT	 WOULD	 BEGET	 A	 GREATER
HEAP	OF
MERIT,	IMMEASURABLE	AND	INCALCULABLE.'
THEREUPON	 THE	 IMPACT	 OF	 DHAMMA	 MOVED	 THE	 VENERABLE
SUBHUTI	TO	TEARS.	HAVING	SHED	TEARS,	HE	THUS	SPOKE	TO	THE
LORD:	'IT	IS
WONDERFUL,	O	LORD,	 IT	 IS	 EXCEEDINGLY	WONDERFUL,	O	WELL-
GONE,	HOW	WELL	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	TAUGHT	THIS	DISCOURSE
ON	DHAMMA.
THROUGH	 IT	 COGNITION	 HAS	 BEEN	 PRODUCED	 IN	ME,	 AND	 IT	 IS
INDEED
NO	PERCEPTION.	AND	WHY?	BECAUSE	THE	BUDDHAS,	THE	LORDS,
HAVE
LEFT	ALL	PERCEPTIONS	BEHIND.'
THE	LORD	SAID:
'SO	 IT	 IS	 SUBHUTI.	 MOST	 WONDERFULLY	 BLEST	 WILL	 BE	 THOSE
BEINGS
WHO,	ON	HEARING	THIS	SUTRA,	WILL	NOT	TREMBLE,	NOR	BE
FRIGHTENED,	 OR	 TERRIFIED.'	 'MOREOVER,	 SUBHUTI,	 THE
TATHAGATA'S
PERFECTION	OF	PATIENCE	IS	REALLY	NO	PERFECTION.	AND	WHY?
BECAUSE,	SUBHUTI,	WHEN	THE	KING	OF	KALINGA	CUT	MY	FLESH
FROM
EVERY	LIMB,	AT	THAT	TIME	I	HAD	NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SELF,	OF	A
BEING,	OF	A	SOUL,	OR	A	PERSON.	AND	WHY?	IF,	SUBHUTI,	AT	THAT
TIME	I	HAD
HAD	 A	 PERCEPTION	 OF	 SELF,	 I	 WOULD	 ALSO	 HAVE	 HAD	 A
PERCEPTION	OF
ILL-WILL	AT	 THAT	 TIME.'	 'AND	 FURTHER,	 SUBHUTI,	 IT	 IS	 FOR	 THE
WEAL	OF
ALL	 BEINGS	 THAT	 A	 BODHISATTVA	 SHOULD	 GIVE	 GIFTS	 IN	 THIS
MANNER.
AND	WHY?	THIS	PERCEPTION	OF	A	BEING,	SUBHUTI,	THAT	IS	JUST	A
NON-PERCEPTION.	THOSE	ALL-BEINGS	OF	WHOM	THE	TATHAGATA
HAS
SPOKEN,	THEY	ARE	INDEED	NO-BEINGS.	AND	WHY?	BECAUSE	THE
TATHAGATA	SPEAKS	IN	ACCORDANCE	WITH	REALITY,	SPEAKS	THE
TRUTH,	SPEAKS	OF	WHAT	IS,	NOT	OTHERWISE.	A	TATHAGATA	DOES
NOT
SPEAK	FALSELY.'
TATHAGATA,	SUBHUTI,	IS	SYNONYMOUS	WITH	TRUE	SUCHNESS.'
THE	LORD	ASKED:
WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI?
IS	THERE	ANY	DHAMMA
WHICH	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	LEARNED	FROM	DIPANKARA?'
SUBHUTI	REPLIED:	'NOT	SO,	O	LORD,	THERE	IS	NOT.'
Dipankara	is	an	ancient	Buddha.	Gautama	Buddha,	in	his	past	life	when	he	was
not	enlightened,	had	gone	to	Dipankara.	He	wanted	to	be	accepted	as	a	disciple,
but	 Dipankara	 laughed	 and	 he	 said,	 "There	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	 learned."	 Truth
cannot	be	learned.
Yes,	something	has	to	be	understood,	but	nothing	has	to	be	learned.	Truth	has	to
be	recognized.	It	is	already	there	in	your	being,	it	has	to	be	uncovered.	But	there
is	nothing	to	learn.
Truth	is	not	new,	truth	is	your	very	being.	You	have	to	become	aware.	Not	that
you	have	to	become	more	knowledgeable,	 in	fact	 the	more	knowledgeable	you
are	the	less	aware	you	will	be.	The	more	you	think	you	know	the	more	you	will
be	covered	with	ignorance.
Knowledge	is	ignorance.	The	knowledgeable	person	is	covered	with	dark	clouds
of	memory,	information,	scripture,	philosophy.
Dipankara	said	 to	Gautama,	"You	need	not	 think	 in	 terms	of	 learning.	Truth	 is
already	 in	you.	Truth	cannot	be	 transferred."	Not	only	 this,	but	when	Gautama
touched	the	feet	of	Dipankara,	Dipankara	bowed	down	and	touched	the	feet	of
Gautama.	 Gautama	 was	 not	 enlightened	 in	 those	 days.	 He	 was	 very	 puzzled,
embarrassed	too.
There	 was	 a	 great	 assembly	 of	 monks;	 nobody	 could	 understand	 what	 was
happening,	what	was	going	on.	Dipankara	had	never	done	that	to	anybody	else.
And	Gautama	said,
"What	 have	 you	 done?	 Why	 have	 you	 touched	 my	 feet?	 I	 am	 a	 sinner,	 an
ignorant	person.
To	touch	your	feet	is	right,	but	you	touching	my	feet	is	absurd.	Have	you	gone
mad?"
And	 Dipankara	 laughed	 again	 and	 he	 said,	 "No,	 Gautama.	 You	 are	 puzzled
because	you	don't	know	your	future.	I	am	not	mad.	I	can	see	it	happening	--	you
will	 be	 a	Buddha	 soon.	 Just	 to	 honor	 that	 fact	 I	 have	 touched	 your	 feet.	And
moreover,	for	one	who	is	enlightened	all	are	enlightened.	It	is	only	a	question	of
time.	It	doesn't	matter	much.	I	have	become	enlightened	today,	you	will	become
enlightened	 tomorrow,	 somebody	 else	 will	 become	 enlightened	 the	 day	 after
tomorrow	--	it	doesn't	matter.	Enlightenment	is	going	to	happen	to	everybody,	to
every	being.	You	can	go	on	delaying	it,	that	is	up	to	you.	The	moment	you	stop
delaying,	the	moment	you	stop	postponing,	it	is	there.	It	has	always	been	waiting
for	you	to	recognize	it."
It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 stories	 --	 that	 Dipankara	 touched	 the	 feet	 of
Gautama.	 And	 Gautama	 was	 an	 unknown	 man.	 After	 centuries,	 nearly	 three
thousand	years	afterwards,	Gautama	became	enlightened.	The	first	thing	that	he
did	 was	 he	 bowed	 down	 to	 Dipankara.	 Then	 there	 was	 no	 Dipankara,	 but	 he
bowed	down	and	he	laughed	and	he	said,	"Now	I	understand	why	you	touched
my	feet.	Now	I	can	touch	everybody's	feet.
Now	I	know	that	the	whole	existence	is	going	to	be	enlightened."
Enlightenment	is	a	natural	happening.	If	we	don't	hinder	it,	it	is	bound	to	happen.
It	is	not	that	you	have	to	achieve	it,	all	that	you	have	to	do	is	not	to	hinder	it.	You
hinder	it	in	a	thousand	and	one	ways.	You	don't	allow	it	to	happen.	When	it	starts
to	happen	you	become	frightened.	When	it	takes	possession	of	you,	you	cannot
give	that	much	possession	--	you	shrink	back,	you	withdraw.	You	come	back	in
your	tiny	cell	of	the	ego.
There	you	feel	protected,	defended,	secure.
Enlightenment	is	the	open	sky	of	insecurity.	It	is	vastness,	it	is	uncharted	ocean.
The	journey	is	from	one	unknown	to	another	unknown.	There	is	nothing	that	can
be	known.
Knowledge,	the	very	idea	of	knowledge,	is	part	of	human	stupidity.	Life	is	such
a	mystery	it	cannot	be	known.	And	if	it	cannot	be	known	how	can	it	be	taught?
And	if	it	cannot	be	taught,	what	is	the	point	of	being	a	master	and	a	disciple?
Just	a	few	days	ago	there	was	a	question:	"Why	have	you	declared	yourself	to	be
the	Blessed	One?'	 It	 is	a	drama.	 I	have	decided	 to	play	 the	part	of	 the	Blessed
One	and	you	have	decided	to	play	the	part	of	disciples	--	but	it	is	a	drama.	The
day	you	will	become	aware	you	will	know,	 there	 is	no	master	and	no	disciple.
The	day	you	will	understand,	you	will	know	that	it	was	a	dream	--	but	a	dream
which	can	help	you	to	come	out	of	all	your	other	dreams,	a	thorn	which	can	help
to	pull	out	your	thorns	from	your	flesh,	it	can	be	instrumental	--	but	a	thorn	all
the	 same.	 A	 poison	 which	 can	 help	 you	 to	 drop	 your	 other	 poisons	 --	 but	 a
poison	all	the	same.	Use	it	as	a	raft.	That's	why	I	say	it	is	a	drama.
Your	being	a	disciple	and	my	being	a	master	is	a	drama.	Play	it	as	beautifully	as
possible.
To	you	it	 is	a	reality,	I	know.	To	me	it	 is	a	drama.	From	your	side	it	 is	a	great
reality,	from	my	side	it	is	a	game.	One	day	you	will	also	understand	that	it	is	a
game.	That	day	will	be	the	day	of	your	enlightenment.
Dipankara	was	simply	saying	to	Gautama,	when	he	touched	his	feet,	that	this	is
just	a	game.	You	touch	my	feet	or	I	touch	your	feet	--	it	makes	no	difference.	We
are	all	 enlightened,	we	are	all	gods.	Not	 that	 I	 am	god	and	you	are	not	god	 --
ALL	is	divine.
Trees	are	gods,	so	are	animals,	so	is	everything,	even	rocks!
God	is	fast	asleep	in	the	rocks.	He	has	become	a	little	alert	in	the	trees,	a	little
more	alert	 in	 the	animals,	 a	 little	more	alert	 in	you.	 In	a	Buddha	he	has	come
perfectly	to	absolute	alertness.	But	the	difference	is	not	of	quality,	the	difference
is	only	of	quantity.	And	if	you	are	this	much	aware,	you	can	become	that	much
aware	too.
Buddha	says:
THE	LORD	ASKED:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	 SUBHUTI,	 IS	 THERE	ANY	DHAMMA	WHICH
THE
TATHAGATA	HAS	LEARNED	FROM	DIPANKARA?'?
He	 is	 asking,	 "Have	 I	 learned	 anything	 from	Dipankara?"	 There	 is	 nothing	 to
learn.	Truth	is	a	given	fact.	Whatsoever	you	learn	will	be	lies.	Truth	need	not	be
learned.	Truth	has	not	to	be	invented	but	only	discovered,	or	more	right	will	be
to	say	it	has	only	to	be	rediscovered.
And	the	word	learning	is	dangerous.	Learning	is	accumulating	information.	The
more	 you	 accumulate	 information	 the	 deeper	 your	 reality	 goes	 into	 the
unconscious.	You	become	burdened,	you	become	too	top-heavy.	Your	head	starts
clamoring	with	knowledge,	 becomes	very	noisy,	 and	 then	you	 cannot	 hear	 the
still	small	voice	of	your	heart.	That	silence	is	lost	in	the	noise	of	knowledge.
That's	why	even	sinners	achieve	but	scholars	miss	--	because	the	sinner	can	be
humble	but	the	scholar	cannot	be	humble.	The	sinner	can	cry	and	weep,	but	the
scholar	knows.
He	is	adamant	in	his	knowledge,	he	is	egoistic	in	his	knowledge.	He	is	hard,	he
cannot	melt.	He	is	not	open,	he	is	closed.	All	his	windows	and	doors	are	blocked
by	his	knowledge,	his	scriptures	that	he	has	accumulated.
To	come	to	truth	means	unlearning	rather	than	learning.	You	have	to	unlearn	that
which	 you	 have	 known.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 becoming	 but	 an	 unbecoming,	 it	 is	 not	 a
learning	but	an	unlearning.	To	unlearn	is	the	way.	If	you	can	unbecome	then	you
will	be	capable	of	becoming.	If	you	are	capable	of	unlearning,	if	you	can	drop	all
knowledge	 utterly,	 unconditionally,	 without	 any	 clinging,	 you	 will	 become
innocent	--	and	that	innocence	brings	you	home.
SUBHUTI	REPLIED:	'NOT	SO,	O	LORD,	THERE	IS	NOT.'
Between	a	master	and	a	teacher	what	is	transferred?	Not	truth,	not	knowledge	--
then	what	 is	 transferred?	 In	 fact,	 nothing	 is	 transferred.	 In	 the	 presence	of	 the
master	 something	 arises	 in	 the	 deepest	 core	 of	 the	 disciple,	 not	 that	 it	 is
transferred.	Nothing	travels	from	the	master	to	the	disciple,	nothing	at	all,	but	the
presence	of	the	master,	the	very	presence	of	the	master,	and	something	that	was
deep	inside	starts	surfacing.	The	presence	of	the	master	calls	forth	the	being	of
the	disciple	--	not	that	something	is	given	or	transferred.	Just	the	very	presence
of	the	master	becomes	a	catalytic	presence	and	the	disciple	starts	changing.
Of	 course,	 a	 disciple	 will	 think	 that	 something	 is	 being	 done	 by	 the	 master.
Nothing	is	being	done.	No	real	master	ever	does	anything.	All	his	doing	consists
of	is	being	present	to	you,	is	being	available	to	you.	All	his	work	consists	of	one
simple	thing	--	that	he	should	be	there,	just	like	the	sun.
The	sun	 rises	 in	 the	morning	and	buds	open	and	become	flowers.	Not	 that	 the
sun	gives	them	something,	not	that	the	sun	comes	and	opens	the	buds	--	nothing
is	done	by	the	sun,	just	the	presence	of	the	light	and	the	bud	starts	opening.	The
opening	comes	from	the	bud	itself...	and	the	flowering	and	the	fragrance	--	it	all
comes	from	the	bud	itself.	The	sun	has	not	added	anything	to	it,	but	the	presence
has	 been	 catalytic.	Without	 the	 sun	 being	 present	 there	 the	 bud	would	 find	 it
almost	impossible	to	open.	It	would	not	know	that	opening	is	possible.	It	would
never	become	alert	of	its	possibilities	and	potential.
A	master	simply	makes	you	aware	of	your	potential.	If	he	has	achieved,	you	can
achieve.
He	is	just	like	you	--	the	blood	and	the	bones	and	the	body.	He	is	just	like	you.	If
something	 is	 possible	 in	 his	 being,	 if	 his	 bud	 can	 become	 a	 flower,	 then	why
can't	 you	 become?	 This	 very	 idea	 sinks	 deep	 into	 the	 heart,	 stirs	 your	 whole
being,	and	energies	start	surfacing,	your	bud	starts	opening.
This	is	called	SATSANGA	in	the	East	--	to	be	in	the	presence	of	the	master.	And
the	real	disciple	is	one	who	has	come	to	know	how	to	be	present	to	the	master.
The	master	is	present,	but	how	to	be	present	to	the	master?
Have	you	seen	the	sunflower?	That	is	the	symbol	for	the	disciple.	Wherever	the
sun	moves,	the	sunflower	moves	that	way.	It	is	always	present	to	the	sun.	In	the
morning	it	is	facing	East,	in	the	evening	it	is	facing	West.	It	has	moved	with	the
sun.	Wherever	the	sun	is,	the	sunflower	moves.	The	sunflower	is	the	symbol,	the
metaphor	for	the	disciple.
Buddha	 is	 asking,	 "Do	 you	 think,	 Subhuti,	 I	 have	 learned	 anything	 from
Dipankara?"
Subhuti	says,	"Not	so,	O	Lord"	--	because	there	is	nothing	to	learn.	Does	it	mean
Buddha	is	ungrateful	to	Dipankara?	No,	not	at	all.	When	he	became	enlightened,
the	first	gratitude	was	towards	Dipankara	who	had	disappeared	into	the	infinite
long	long	ago,	not	even	a	trace	was	left	behind.	He	exists	only	in	the	memory	of
Buddha,	nowhere	else.
About	Dipankara	there	exists	no	scripture.	Maybe	in	those	days	scriptures	were
not	written.	There	exists	no	other	reference	about	him.	Buddha	is	the	only	sole
reference.
Three	thousand	years	have	passed,	nobody	knows	anything	about	Dipankara,	but
when	Buddha	became	enlightened,	the	first	gratitude,	the	first	thankfulness,	was
towards	Dipankara.
Why?	--	because	it	was	in	his	presence	that	the	longing	became	a	passion	--	to
become	 a	 Buddha.	 It	 was	 in	 his	 presence	 that	 the	 great	 desire	 to	 become	 a
Buddha	arose.	It	was	in	his	presence	that	the	bud	of	Gautama	started	dreaming
of	 becoming	 a	 flower.	 It	was	 in	 his	 presence	 that	 the	 dream	 unfolded.	 It	 took
three	 thousand	 years	 to	 drop	 the	 hindrances,	 the	 obstacles,	 but	what	 are	 three
thousand	years	in	the	eternity	of	time?	Nothing...	just	a	few	moments.
Why	 is	 Buddha	 asking	 Subhuti?	 So	 that	 Subhuti	 can	 understand	 that	 there	 is
nothing	 to	 be	 learned	 from	Buddha.	Buddha	 himself	 has	 not	 learned	 anything
from	Dipankara,	so
"There	is	nothing,	Subhuti,	to	learn	from	me.	Be	with	me,	don't	think	in	terms	of
learning.
The	moment	you	think	in	terms	of	learning	you	are	not	with	me."
Here	 also	 there	 are	 two	 types	 of	 people	 --	 the	 disciples	 and	 the	 students.	 The
students	 are	 those	who	 are	 in	 search	 of	 learning	 something.	 They	 are	 here	 to
gather	 something	 so	 that	 they	 can	 brag	 and	 say	 that	 they	 know	 this	 and	 they
know	that.	They	are	just	collecting	colored	stones	while	diamonds	are	available.
The	 disciple	 is	 one	 who	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 knowledge,	 who	 is	 interested	 in
being,	who	is	interested	just	to	be	here	with	me,	for	no	other	reason,	for	no	other
motive.	 His	 heart	 has	 been	 touched,	 his	 dream	 has	 started	 unfolding,	 a	 great
intense	desire	is	arising	in	him.
Just	 the	other	night	Saroj	was	here	 and	 she	was	 saying	 that	 she	becomes	very
afraid	of	death.	I	asked	her,	"Why?	Why	do	you	become	so	much	afraid?"	And
her	answer	was	beautiful.	She	said,	"Not	because	of	death,	Osho,	but	because	I
have	 not	 yet	 known	 anything,	 not	 yet	 realized	 anything.	 I	 have	 not	 yet	 felt
anything.	I	am	afraid	that	I	might	die	without	knowing	the	truth,	that	is	my	fear."
A	disciple	is	one	who	has	become	immensely	interested	in	being	--	in	truth	itself,
not	knowing	about	it.	She	is	not	afraid	of	death,	she	is	afraid	death	may	come	in
and	may	 disturb	 the	 intimacy	 that	 is	 arising	 between	me	 and	 her.	 Death	may
come	 and	 may	 disrupt	 the	 presence	 that	 she	 is	 drinking,	 the	 presence	 that	 is
going	into	her	being	and	changing	a	thousand	and	one	things	in	her	soul	--	that	is
the	fear.
A	disciple	is	one	who	does	not	bother	about	knowing	but	is	interested	in	being.
Not	that	he	wants	to	know	something	about	God,	but	that	he	wants	to	taste	God,
to	drink	out	of	that	reservoir	called	God,	to	become	part	of	that	oceanic	energy.
Remember,	if	you	are	a	student	here	you	are	not	very	wise.	To	be	a	student	here
is	to	be	unintelligent.	This	is	not	a	school.	Life	is	available	here	--	but	you	have
to	be	a	disciple.
To	 be	 a	 disciple	 means	 to	 be	 courageous	 enough	 to	 come	 close	 to	 a	 master,
whatsoever	the	cost.	The	disciple	means	the	one	who	can	take	the	risk	of	being
close	to	a	master.	It	is	a	risk	--	a	risk	because	you	will	die.	The	bud	will	die,	only
then	the	flower	can	come.	The	seed	will	die,	only	 then	the	 tree	can	come.	You
will	have	to	die,	only	then	God	can	bloom	in	you.
THE	LORD	SAID:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	 SUBHUTI,	 IS	 THERE	ANY	DHAMMA	WHICH
THE
TATHAGATA	HAS	LEARNED	FROM	DIPANKARA?'
A	great	 seeker	has	written,	 "I	went	 to	 the	wise	 for	 answers.	There	were	many
wise	men,	each	one	with	his	answer.	It	was	by	that	that	I	came	in	time	to	see	that
they	betrayed	themselves.	But	there	were	also	a	few	I	happened	upon	who	were
otherwise,	 one	 or	 two,	 who	 sat	 with	 a	 serene	 vitality,	 who	 smiled	 at	 my
questions,	and	in	face	of	my	insistence	for	answers,	generously	gave	me	further
questions.
"There	were	moments	with	 them	 that	 I	 forgot	 all	 about	wisdom	and	 smiled	as
carelessly	as	fools	and	children	only	can.	I	got	no	answers	from	the	truly	wise.	It
was	 lack	 of	 wisdom	 that	 had	 sent	 me	 to	 the	 wise.	 How	 then	 could	 I	 have
understood	anything	wise,	even	if	it	was	sayable,	even	if	it	was	said?	The	truly
wise	were	too	true	to	give	wise	answers."
The	truly	wise	gives	you	his	being,	gives	himself.	The	truly	wise	simply	makes
himself	available	to	you,	and	if	you	are	courageous	you	can	drink	and	eat	out	of
his	being.	That's	what	Jesus	means	when	he	says	to	his	disciples:	"Eat	me!	Drink
me!"	The	master	has	to	be	eaten.	The	master	has	to	be	absorbed,	digested,	only
then	 will	 you	 stumble	 upon	 your	 own	 truth.	 There	 is	 nothing	 to	 learn	 --	 no
Dhamma	to	learn,	no	doctrine	to	learn,	no	philosophy	to	learn.
THE	LORD	SAID:
'IF	ANY	BODHISATTVA	WOULD	SAY,
"I	WILL	CREATE	HARMONIOUS	BUDDHAFIELDS,"
HE	WOULD	SPEAK	FALSELY.
AND	WHY?
THE	HARMONIES	OF	BUDDHAFIELDS,	SUBHUTI,
AS	NO-HARMONIES	HAVE	THEY	BEEN	TAUGHT	BY	THE	TATHAGATA.
THEREFORE	HE	SPOKE	OF	"HARMONIOUS	BUDDHAFIELDS".'
The	word	buddhafield	is	of	tremendous	importance.	You	have	to	understand	it,
because	that	is	what	I	am	doing	here	--	creating	a	buddhafield.	It	is	just	to	create
a	 buddhafield	 that	 we	 are	 moving	 away	 from	 the	 world,	 far	 away,	 so	 that	 a
totally	different	kind	of	energy	can	be	made	available	to	you.
Buddhafield	means	a	situation	where	your	sleeping	Buddha	can	be	awakened.
Buddhafield	 means	 an	 energy	 field	 where	 you	 can	 start	 growing,	 maturing,
where	your	sleep	call	be	broken,	where	you	can	be	shocked	to	awareness	--	an
electric	field	where	you	will	not	be	able	to	fall	asleep,	where	you	will	have	to	be
awake,	because	shocks	will	be	coming	all	the	time.
A	buddhafield	is	an	energy	field	in	which	a	Buddha	matures	beings,	a	pure	land,
an	unworldly	world,	a	paradise	on	earth,	which	offers	ideal	conditions	for	rapid
spiritual	growth.	A	buddhafield	is	a	matrix.
The	word	MATRIX	comes	from	Latin;	it	means	the	womb.	From	that	word	we
get	the	words	matter,	mother,	etcetera.	The	womb	offers	three	things	to	a	newly
forming	 life:	 a	 source	 of	 possibility,	 a	 source	 of	 energy	 to	 explore	 that
possibility,	and	a	safe	place	within	which	that	exploration	can	take	place.
That's	 what	 we	 are	 going	 to	 do.	 The	 new	 commune	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a	 great
experiment	 in	 buddhahood.	 Energies	 have	 to	 be	 made	 available	 to	 you,
possibilities	have	to	be	made	clear	to	you.	You	have	to	be	made	aware	of	your
potential,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 be	 given	 a	 safe	 place	 from	where	 you	 can	work:	 a
place	where	you	are	not	distracted	by	 the	world,	a	place	where	you	can	go	on
without	any	disturbance	from	the	crowd,	a	place	where	ordinary	things,	taboos,
inhibitions,	are	put	aside,	where	only	one	thing	is	significant	--
how	 to	become	a	Buddha;	where	 everything	else	 simply	disappears	 from	your
mind	--
money	and	power	and	prestige;	where	all	 else	becomes	 insignificant,	when	all
else	becomes	exactly	what	it	is	--	a	shadow	world	--	and	you	are	no	longer	lost	in
the	apparent.
MAYA	 is	 to	 be	 caught	 up	 in	 the	 apparent.	 That	 is	 the	 greatest	 illusion	 in	 the
world.	 The	 apparent	 holds	 such	 sway	 on	 our	minds.	A	 buddhafield	 is	 a	 place
where	you	are	taken	away	from	the	apparent.
In	 the	 silence	 of	 a	 commune,	 in	 the	 uninhibited,	 untabooed	 atmosphere	 of	 a
commune,	the	master	and	the	disciple	can	enact	the	drama	totally.	The	ultimate
is	 when	 the	 master	 can	 touch	 the	 feet	 of	 the	 disciple,	 when	 the	 master	 and
disciples	are	lost	into	one	reality.
THE	LORD	SAID:
'IF	ANY	BODHISATTVA	WOULD	SAY,
"I	WILL	CREATE	HARMONIOUS	BUDDHAFIELDS,"
HE	WOULD	SPEAK	FALSELY.
AND	WHY?
THE	HARMONIES	OF	BUDDHAFIELDS,	SUBHUTI,
AS	NO-HARMONIES	HAVE	THEY	BEEN	TAUGHT
BY	THE	TATHAGATA.
THEREFORE	HE	SPOKE	OF	"HARMONIOUS	BUDDHAFIELDS".'
Now	 understand:	 if	 somebody	 says,	 "I	 will	 create	 the	 buddafield,"	 and	 the
emphasis	is	on
'I',	then	the	statement	is	false,	because	a	person	who	has	the	'I'	still	alive	cannot
create	 a	 buddhafield.	 Only	 a	 person	 who	 has	 no	 'I'	 within	 him	 can	 create	 a
buddhafield.	In	fact	then	to	say	he	creates	is	not	right;	language	is	inadequate.
The	 Sanskrit	 word	 for	 creation	 is	 far	 better.	 The	 Sanskrit	 word	 is
NIRPADAYATI.	 It	means	many	 things.	 It	 can	mean	 to	 create,	 it	 can	mean	 to
accomplish,	 it	can	mean	to	ripen,	 it	can	mean	to	mature	 it	can	simply	mean	to
trigger	into	existence.	That's	exactly	the	meaning.
A	Buddha	does	not	create,	he	triggers.	Even	to	say	he	triggers	is	not	good;	in	his
presence	things	happen,	in	his	presence	things	are	triggered,	processes	start.	Just
his	 presence	 is	 a	 fire,	 a	 spark,	 and	 things	 start	moving	 and	 one	 thing	 leads	 to
another,	and	a	great	chain	is	created.
That's	how	we	have	been	going	on.	I	simply	sit	in	my	room	doing	nothing,	and
seekers	 from	 all	 over	 the	 world	 have	 started	 pouring	 in.	 I	 don't	 even	 write	 a
letter...	 just	 the	presence.	One	comes,	 another	 comes,	 and	 the	chain	 is	 created.
Now	 the	 time	 has	 come	 when	 a	 buddhafield	 is	 needed,	 a	 matrix	 is	 needed,
because	you	don't	know	 --	 thousands	more	are	on	 the	way.	They	have	already
moved,	they	are	already	thinking	of	coming.
And	the	more	people	are	there,	the	bigger	the	buddhafield	will	be	there,	and	the
more	powerful	it	will	be.	The	possibility	is	that	we	can	create	one	of	the	greatest
and	 the	most	 powerful	 buddhafields	 ever	 created	 in	 the	world,	 because	 never
before	was	there	such	search,	because	never	before	was	man	in	such	a	crisis.
We	are	on	the	threshold	of	something	new	that	is	going	to	happen	to	humanity.
Either	humanity	will	die	and	disappear,	or	we	will	take	a	jump,	a	leap,	and	a	new
being	will	be	formed.	We	are	exactly	at	the	same	point	as	millions	of	years	ago
when	monkeys	came	down	from	the	trees	and	humanity	started	and	a	new	being
was	 born.	 Again	 the	 moment	 is	 coming	 very	 close.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 dangerous
moment,	because	there	is	every	possibility....
It	was	possible	that	the	monkey	may	not	have	survived	on	the	earth,	he	may	have
died	on	 the	 earth,	 but	 a	 few	monkeys	 took	 the	 risk.	And	 they	must	have	been
thought	of	as	fools	by	other	monkeys,	mm?	who	had	always	lived	on	the	trees
and	were	perfectly	happy.
They	must	have	thought,	"These	people	are	going	mad,	crazy.	Why	in	 the	first
place	 are	 you	 going	 to	 live	 on	 the	 earth?	Why	 create	 unnecessary	 trouble	 for
yourselves?	Our	fathers	and	their	fathers	and	their	fathers	have	all	 lived	on	the
trees."
Again	the	same	situation	is	going	to	happen.	Man	has	lived	a	long	time	the	way
he	has	lived.	By	the	end	of	this	century	a	critical	quantum	leap	is	possible.	Either
man	will	die	in	a	third	world	war	or	man	will	take	the	jump	and	will	become	a
new	man.	Before	that	happens,	a	great	buddhafield	is	needed	--	a	field	where	we
can	create	the	future.
But	a	bodhisattva	cannot	say,	"I	will	create	the	harmonious	buddhafields."	If	the
emphasis	is	on	'I'	then	the	person	is	not	yet	a	Bodhisattva.	Even	Buddhas	use	the
word	'I'
but	 they	 insistently	 emphasize	 that	 it	 corresponds	 to	no	 reality,	 that	 it	 is	 just	 a
language	use,	that	it	is	utilitarian.
And	Buddha	says,	"Those	harmonious	buddhafields	are	not	even	harmonious."
Why?	--
because	 harmony	means	 conflict	 is	 still	 alive.	Harmony	means	 the	 conflicting
parts	are	there	but	they	are	no	longer	conflicting.	Buddha	says	the	real	harmony
is	when	the	conflicting	parts	have	dissolved	into	one	unity.	But	then	you	cannot
call	 it	 harmony,	 because	 harmony	 needs	many,	 harmony	means	 that	 there	 are
many	fragments	in	a	harmonious	whole.	Buddha	says	the	real	harmony	is	when
those	many	are	no	longer	there;	they	have	become	one.
So	a	harmony,	a	real	harmony,	cannot	even	be	called	harmony.	The	real	harmony
is	simple	unity.	There	is	no	conflict	and	no	friction,	because	all	the	fragmentary
parts	have	disappeared,	dissolved.
'AND	WHY?
THE	HARMONIES	OF	BUDDHAFIELDS,	SUBHUTI,
AS	NO-HARMONIES	HAVE	THEY	BEEN	TAUGHT
BY	THE	TATHAGATA.
THEREFORE	HE	SPOKE	OF	"HARMONIOUS	BUDDHAFIELDS".'
Remember	again	and	again;	 it	 is	 a	question	of	 the	 inadequate	 language.	That's
why	Buddha	goes	on	insisting	again	and	again	to	remind	you	so	that	you	don't
become	a	victim	of	inadequate	language	expressions.
THE	LORD	SAID:
'AND	AGAIN,	SUBHUTI,	SUPPOSE	A	WOMAN	OR	A	MAN
WERE	TO	RENOUNCE	ALL	THEIR	BELONGINGS
AS	MANY	TIMES	AS	THERE	ARE	GRAINS	OF	SAND
IN	THE	RIVER	GANGES;
AND	SUPPOSE	THAT	SOMEONE	ELSE,
AFTER	TAKING	FROM	THIS	DISCOURSE	ON	DHAMMA
BUT	ONE	STANZA	OF	FOUR	LINES,
WOULD	DEMONSTRATE	IT	TO	OTHERS.
THEN	THIS	MATTER	ON	THE	STRENGTH	OF	THAT
WOULD	BEGET	A	GREATER	HEAP	OF	MERIT,
IMMEASURABLE	AND	INCALCULABLE.'
It	is	said	that	Hui	Neng,	one	of	the	greatest	Zen	masters,	the	sixth	patriarch	in	the
Zen	tradition,	became	enlightened	by	hearing	four	lines	of	The	Diamond	Sutra.
And	 he	 was	 just	 passing	 by	 in	 a	 marketplace.	 He	 had	 gone	 to	 purchase
something,	 he	 was	 not	 even	 thinking	 of	 enlightenment,	 and	 somebody	 by	 the
side	 of	 the	 road	was	 reading	The	Diamond	Sutra.	That	man	 had	 been	 reading
The	Diamond	Sutra	for	his	whole	life	--	he	must	have	been	a	kind	of	scholar,	or	a
parrot	 --	and	 it	was	his	usual	 thing,	his	 ritual,	 to	 read	 the	sutra	every	morning,
every	evening.
It	was	evening	and	the	market	was	just	closing	and	people	were	going	home	and
Hui	Neng	was	passing.	He	heard	just	four	lines.	He	was	struck	dumb.	He	stood
there,	 it	 is	 said,	 for	 the	whole	 night.	 The	Diamond	 Sutra	 finished,	 the	market
closed,	the	man	who	was	chanting	it	went,	and	Hui	Neng	was	standing	there	and
standing	there	and	standing	there.	By	the	morning	he	was	a	totally	different	man.
He	never	went	home,	he	went	 to	 the	mountains.	The	world	became	 irrelevant.
Just	hearing?	Yes,	 it	 is	possible	 if	you	know	how	to	hear.	This	Hui	Neng	must
have	been	of	a	very	very	innocent	mind.	He	was	a	wonderful	man.
Buddha	says	that	even	if	somebody	demonstrates	one	stanza	of	four	lines	from
The	 Diamond	 Sutra,	 his	 merit	 is	 more,	 his	 merit	 is	 immeasurable	 and
incalculable,	more	 than	 the	merit	of	a	man	or	a	woman	who	were	 to	 renounce
their	belongings	as	many	times	as	there	are	grains	of	sand	in	the	river	Ganges.
Renunciation	does	not	help,	 understanding	helps.	Renouncing	 the	world	 is	 not
going	 to	 take	you	anywhere,	 you	have	 to	understand.	Renunciation	 is	 a	 stupid
effort.	Only	stupid	people	renounce,	the	wise	tries	to	understand	what	the	case	is.
The	wise	is	never	an	escapist.	Only	the	stupid	people	are	escapists,	because	they
cannot	face	 life,	 they	cannot	encounter	 life,	and	 they	cannot	 take	 its	challenge.
They	don't	have	the	guts.
They	move	to	the	Himalayas,	they	escape	to	Tibetan	monasteries	or	somewhere
else.
They	run	away	from	the	world.	These	are	the	cowards.	And	religion	is	possible
only	if	you	have	courage	--	immense	courage	is	needed.
Buddha	 says	 these	 sutras	 are	 so	valuable	 that	 if	 you	can	 listen	 totally,	with	 an
open	 heart,	 if	 you	 are	 vulnerable	 to	 them,	 they	 can	 transform	 your	 life.	 Even
sometimes	a	single	word	can	be	such	a	transforming	force.
I	have	heard	about	a	man,	he	must	have	been	like	Hui	Neng.	He	was	very	old,
sixty-five	or	seventy.	He	had	gone	for	a	morning	walk,	and	some	woman	must
have	been	waking	her	son,	or	somebody	else,	inside	a	hut.	The	old	man	was	on
the	road	and	the	woman	was	saying,	"It	is	time	to	get	up.	It	is	morning!	It	is	no
longer	night!"
The	old	man	heard	these	words.	Mm?	--	It	was	not	even	The	Diamond	Sutra,	it
was	just	a	woman	telling	somebody,	"Get	up!	It	is	enough!	You	have	slept	long.
It	is	no	longer	night.	The	sun	has	risen,	it	is	morning,"	and	the	old	man	heard.	He
must	have	been	in	some	receptive	state	of	mind	--	 the	early	morning,	 the	birds
singing	 and	 the	 sun	 and	 the	 cool	 breeze	 --	 and	 those	 words	 struck	 hard,	 like
arrows	in	the	heart:	"It	is	morning	and	you	have	slept	too	long	and	it	is	no	longer
night."	He	never	went	home.
He	 went	 outside	 the	 town,	 sat	 in	 a	 temple	 meditating.	 People	 came	 to	 know
about	 him,	 and	 the	 family	 came	 rushing	 and	 they	 said,	 "What	 are	 you	 doing
here?"
He	said,	"It	 is	morning.	 It	 is	no	 longer	night,	and	I	have	already	slept	enough.
Enough	 is	 enough!	 Excuse	me.	 Leave	me	 alone.	 I	 have	 to	wake	 up.	Death	 is
coming	--	I	have	to	wake	up."
And	whenever	he	would	pass	the	door	of	that	woman	--	he	had	never	seen	that
woman	--
he	would	go	and	bow	down	at	 the	door.	That	was	his	 temple	and	 that	woman
was	his	master.	He	had	never	seen	the	woman,	and	the	woman	was	an	ordinary
woman.
Sometimes	 a	 few	words,	 even	uttered	by	ordinary	people,	 can	 fall	 in	 the	 right
soil	of	the	heart	and	can	bring	great	transformation.	What	to	say	about	words	of
a	Buddha?...
THEREUPON	THE	IMPACT	OF	DHAMMA
MOVED	THE	VENERABLE	SUBHUTI	TO	TEARS.
HAVING	 SHED	 TEARS,	 HE	 THUS	 SPOKE	 TO	 THE	 LORD:	 'IT	 IS
WONDERFUL,	O
LORD,
IT	IS	EXCEEDINGLY	WONDERFUL,	O	WELL-GONE,
HOW	WELL	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	TAUGHT
THIS	DISCOURSE	ON	DHAMMA.
THROUGH	IT	COGNITION	HAS	BEEN	PRODUCED	IN	ME,
AND	IT	IS	INDEED	NO	PERCEPTION.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	THE	BUDDHAS,	THE	LORDS,
HAVE	LEFT	ALL	PERCEPTIONS	BEHIND.'
It	is	very	rare	that	a	man	of	the	qualities	of	Subhuti	will	cry	and	weep	and	tears
will	come	to	him.	But	when	such	compassion,	when	such	love	from	Buddha	is
showering	on	him,	when	such	diamond	words	are	falling	on	him	like	rain...	he
was	overwhelmed.
THEREUPON	THE	IMPACT	OF	DHAMMA
MOVED	THE	VENERABLE	SUBHUTI	TO	TEARS.
Remember,	there	is	no	deeper	way	to	relate	your	gratitude	than	tears,	there	is	no
higher	way	to	pray	than	tears.	Just	a	few	days	ago	Geet	Govind	had	come	from
Esalen.	He	could	not	say	a	single	word	to	me	--	tears	and	tears.	And	he	started
feeling	a	little	embarrassed.
He	wanted	to	say	something,	but	nothing	was	coming.
Those	tears	were	beautiful.	And	since	then	he	has	been	crying	here.	For	all	these
two	or	 three	weeks	 that	he	has	been	here	he	has	been	crying,	and	he	has	been
writing	to	me:
"Osho,	what	to	do?	How	to	stop	these	tears?	They	go	on	and	on."	The	impact....
He	has	made	contact	with	me,	hence	the	tears.	He	has	seen	me,	hence	the	tears.
His	eyes	are	showing	gratitude,	hence	the	tears.	The	eyes	are	fulfilled,	hence	the
tears.
Never	be	afraid	of	tears.	The	so-called	civilization	has	made	you	very	afraid	of
tears.	 It	 has	 created	 a	 kind	of	 guilt	 in	 you.	When	 tears	 come	you	 start	 feeling
embarrassed.	You	start	feeling,	"What	will	others	think?	And	I	am	a	man	and	I
am	crying!	It	looks	so	feminine	and	childish.	It	should	not	be	so."	You	stop	those
tears	--	and	you	kill	something	which	was	growing	in	you.
Tears	are	far	more	beautiful	than	anything	that	you	have	with	you,	because	tears
come	from	the	overflow	of	your	being.	And	tears	are	not	necessarily	of	sadness;
sometimes	 they	 come	 out	 of	 great	 joy	 and	 sometimes	 they	 come	 out	 of	 great
peace	 and	 sometimes	 they	 come	 out	 of	 ecstasy	 and	 love.	 in	 fact	 they	 have
nothing	to	do	with	sadness	or	happiness.	Anything	that	stirs	your	heart	too	much,
anything	that	takes	possession	of	you,	anything	that	is	too	much,	that	you	cannot
contain	and	it	starts	overflowing	--	that	brings	tears.
Accept	 them	 with	 great	 joy,	 relish	 them,	 nourish	 them,	 welcome	 them,	 and
through	tears	you	will	know	how	to	pray.	Through	tears	you	will	know	how	to
see.	Tear-filled	eyes	are	capable	of	seeing	 truth.	Tear-filled	eyes	are	capable	of
seeing	the	beauty	of	life	and	the	benediction	of	it.
THEREUPON	THE	IMPACT	OF	DHAMMA
MOVED	THE	VENERABLE	SUBHUTI	TO	TEARS.
HAVING	 SHED	 TEARS,	 HE	 THUS	 SPOKE	 TO	 THE	 LORD:	 'IT	 IS
WONDERFUL,	O
LORD,
IT	IS	EXCEEDINGLY	WONDERFUL,	O	WELL-GONE,
HOW	WELL	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	TAUGHT
THIS	DISCOURSE	ON	DHAMMA.
THROUGH	IT	COGNITION	HAS	BEEN	PRODUCED	IN	ME....'
He	says,	"Your	presence,	your	compassionate	words,	your	love,	your	grace,	has
produced	cognition	in	me.	It	has	given	me	an	insight,	a	vision,	of	what	is	truth,
AND	IT	IS
INDEED	NO	PERCEPTION."	Still	Subhuti	says,	"But	let	me	remind	you,	it	 is
no	perception	because	there	is	nobody	to	perceive	it.	It	is	pure	cognition."
Knowing	has	arisen	but	there	is	nobody	who	knows	and	there	is	nothing	that	is
known,	only	knowing	has	arisen.	It	is	pure	knowing.	The	division	is	not	there	of
the	knower	and	the	known	and	the	knowing.	It	is	just	knowing.
'AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	THE	BUDDHAS,	THE	LORDS,
HAVE	LEFT	ALL	PERCEPTIONS	BEHIND.'
"And	now	I	know	why	it	is	said	that	the	Buddhas	have	left	all	perception	behind,
because	perception	needs	the	perceiver	and	the	perceived,	observation	needs	the
observer	and	the	observed.	All	these	dualities	have	been	dropped.	There	is	only
oneness."
It	 is	 very	 difficult	 --	 to	 say	 it.	Michael	Adam's	words	will	 be	 helpful:	 "It	 has
taken	 all	 these	words	 to	 tell,	 but	what	 is	 there	 to	 tell?	Here	 and	 now,	what	 is
there?	A	wind	in	the	trees;	it	blows	and	they	bend.	I	have	spoken	in	many	words.
It	 is	cause	for	smiling	now,	for	 truth	 is	only	a	word.	Life	 is	a	word,	death	 is	a
word,	happiness	is	a	word,	God	is	a	word.	The	wind	and	the	tree,	the	robin	and
the	seal,	the	child	and	the	sun	are	real.	The	rest	is	only	words.
"Words	 about	 the	 sun	 lack	 even	 the	 reality	 of	 shadows	 and	 are	 colder	 by	 far.
What	the	sun	is	the	clamoring	mind	and	the	seeking	heart	cannot	know,	for	the
sun	 is	 of	 another	 kind,	makes	 no	 sound	 and	 does	 not	 strive.	But	 this	 still	 and
silent	earth	would	seem	to	understand,	all	without	effort	the	earth	would	seem	to
know	 what	 the	 sun	 is.	 Beneath	 this	 semblance	 of	 death,	 under	 the	 shroud	 of
snow,	in	the	very	midst	of	the	winter,	the	open	quiet	earth	well	knows	what	the
sun	is."
The	disciple	has	to	become	like	thirsty	earth	--	the	thirsty	earth	knows	what	the
cloud	is.
The	 disciple	 has	 to	 become	 like	 open,	 vulnerable	 earth.	 The	 vulnerable	 earth
knows	what	the	sun	is.	It	cannot	say	it,	it	cannot	express	it,	but	it	knows.
That's	what	Subhuti	means	when	he	says,	"Cognition	has	arisen	in	me.	I	cannot
say,	I	am	not	there	to	capture	it,	I	am	not	there	to	seize	it,	I	am	just	an	emptiness
--	but	perception	has	arisen,	cognition	has	arisen,	darshan	has	arisen.	I	have	seen,
and	there	is	no	seer."
THE	LORD	SAID:
'SO	IT	IS,	SUBHUTI.
MOST	WONDERFULLY	BLEST	WILL	BE	THOSE	BEINGS	WHO,
ON	HEARING	THIS	SUTRA,
WILL	NOT	TREMBLE,	NOR	BE	FRIGHTENED,	OR	TERRIFIED.'
These	 sutras	 are	 deathlike,	 they	 are	 crucifixion	 --	 you	 will	 have	 to	 die.	 Only
through	 death	 will	 you	 know	 what	 life	 is.	 Resurrection	 is	 possible	 but	 only
through	crucifixion.
That's	why	Buddha	said	these	sutras	are	dangerous	and
'MOST	WONDERFUL	BLEST	WILL	BE	THOSE	BEINGS	WHO,
ON	HEARING	THIS	SUTRA,
WILL	NOT	TREMBLE,	NOR	BE	FRIGHTENED,	OR	TERRIFIED.'
MOREOVER,	SUBHUTI,
THE	TATHAGATA'S	PERFECTION	OF	PATIENCE
IS	REALLY	NO	PERFECTION.
AND	WHY?	BECAUSE,	SUBHUTI,
WHEN	THE	KING	OF	KALINGA	CUT	MY	FLESH	FROM	EVERY	LIMB,
AT	THAT	TIME	I	HAD	NO	PERCEPTION	OF	A	SELF,
OF	A	BEING,	OF	A	SOUL,
OR	A	PERSON.
AND	WHY?	IF,	SUBHUTI,
AT	THAT	TIME	I	HAD	HAD	A	PERCEPTION	OF	SELF,
I	WOULD	ALSO	HAVE	HAD	A	PERCEPTION
OF	ILL-WILL	AT	THAT	TIME.'
He	reminds	Subhuti	of	his	old	experience	of	a	past	life,	when	the	king	of	Kalinga
had	 cut	 his	 limbs.	He	 says,	 "At	 that	 time	when	my	 limbs	were	 cut,	my	hands
were	cut,	my	legs	were	cut,	and	my	tongue	and	my	eyes	were	taken	away,	I	was
watching	and	I	could	not	see	any	 'I'	arising	in	me.	There	was	nobody	who	was
seeing	it,	there	was	nobody	who	was	hurt	by	it."
"If	any	perception	of	'I'	had	arisen	at	that	time,	then	it	would	have	been	followed
by	ill-will.	Then	I	would	have	been	angry	with	the	king	who	was	killing	me	and
destroying	me,	but	I	was	not	angry.	There	was	no	anger."
The	 ego	 brings	 anger.	 Anger	 is	 the	 shadow	 of	 the	 ego.	 The	 ego	 brings
aggression,	 violence.	 Once	 the	 ego	 disappears	 all	 violence	 disappears.	 A	man
becomes	love	only	when	the	ego	has	completely	disappeared.
'AND	FURTHER,	SUBHUTI,
IT	IS	FOR	THE	WEAL	OF	ALL	BEINGS
THAT	A	BODHISATTVA	SHOULD	GIVE	GIFTS	IN	THIS	MANNER.
AND	WHY?
THIS	PERCEPTION	OF	A	BEING,	SUBHUTI,
THAT	IS	JUST	A	NON-PERCEPTION.
THOSE	ALL-BEINGS	OF	WHOM	THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	SPOKEN,
THEY	ARE	INDEED	NO-BEINGS.
AND	WHY?
BECAUSE	 THE	 TATHAGATA	 SPEAKS	 IN	 ACCORDANCE	 WITH
REALITY,	 SPEAKS	 THE	 TRUTH,	 SPEAKS	 OF	 WHAT	 IS,	 NOT
OTHERWISE.	 A	 TATHAGATA	 DOES	 NOT	 SPEAK	 FALSELY.'
'TATHAGATA,	SUBHUTI,	IS	SYNONYMOUS
WITH	TRUE	SUCHNESS.'
Buddha	says,	"I	have	said	only	 that	which	 is	 --	YATHA	BHUTAM.	I	have	not
said	 anything	 else.	 That's	 why	my	 statements	 are	 so	 paradoxical,	 so	 illogical,
because	truth	is	illogical.	To	understand	truth,	you	will	have	to	drop	logic."
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Utter	Emptiness
30	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712300
ShortTitle:
DIAMON10
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
83
mins
The	first	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	1
EVEN	 IN	 MY	 RELATIONSHIP	 WITH	 YOU,	 WORDS	 BECOME	 LESS
IMPORTANT
ALL	 THE	 TIME.	 WHY	 SHOULD	 A	 BUDDHA	 AND	 A	 BODHISATTVA
NEED	TO
TALK	AT	ALL?
What	 are	 you	 talking	 about,	 about	what	 talk?	 It	 never	 happened.	Nobody	 has
said	anything	and	nobody	has	heard	anything.	The	Diamond	Sutra	has	no	sutras
in	 it,	 Mahasattva,	 that's	 why	 it	 is	 called	 The	 Diamond	 Sutra.	 It	 is	 an	 utter
emptiness.	If	you	get	caught	in	the	words	you	will	miss	the	message.
The	 Diamond	 Sutra	 is	 absolutely	 empty,	 there	 is	 no	 message	 in	 it.	 There	 is
nothing	to	read	and	nothing	to	hear.	It	is	utter	silence.	If	you	read	something	in
The	Diamond	Sutra	 you	have	missed	 it.	 If	 you	 find	 some	doctrine	 in	 it,	 some
philosophy	in	it,	then	you	must	be	imagining,	it	must	be	your	dream.	Buddha	has
not	talked	anything,	neither	has	Subhuti	heard	anything.
In	 that	 non-talking	 and	 non-hearing,	 something	 has	 happened	 --	 something
which	is	beyond	words.	Ananda	has	tried	to	capture	that	for	you	in	words,	but	it
was	not	delivered	in	words.	It	was	a	communion	between	two	emptinesses.
You	just	go	to	the	sea	and	you	see	the	morning,	and	the	fresh	air	and	the	sunrays
and	the	waves,	and	you	come	home	and	you	relate	to	somebody	what	you	have
seen.	Then	you	relate	only	words.	The	word	sea	is	not	the	sea	and	the	word	sun
is	not	 the	sun	and	the	word	freshness	is	not	freshness.	How	do	you	commune?
You	have	come	back	from	the	beach	and	your	beloved	asks,	"What	happened?"
You	bring	all	that	has	happened	into	words,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	it	cannot
be	brought	into	words,	it	cannot	be	reduced	into	words.	Words	are	so	pale.
Something	 has	 certainly	 happened	 between	 Buddha	 and	 Subhuti,	 something
which	 is	 transcendental.	 Maybe	 they	 had	 just	 looked	 into	 each	 other's	 eyes.
Something	was	triggered	in	the	consciousness	of	Subhuti	by	Buddha's	presence.
Ananda	is	trying	to	report	it	for	you.	You	are	blind.	You	cannot	see	light,	you	can
only	hear	the	word	light.
So	remember:	The	Diamond	Sutra	is	not	a	sutra	at	all,	that's	why	it	is	called	The
Diamond	Sutra,	the	most	precious,	because	it	contains	no	philosophy,	no	system,
no	theory.	It	contains	no	words,	it	is	an	empty	book.
If	 you	 can	 forget	 the	words	 and	 you	 can	 go	 deeper	 into	 the	 gaps	 between	 the
words,	 if	 you	 can	 forget	 the	 lines	 and	 can	go	deeper	 between	 the	 lines,	 in	 the
intervals,	in	the	pauses,	then	you	will	find	what	has	happened.	It	is	not	a	verbal
communication.
I	am	also	talking	to	you,	but	still	 I	would	like	to	remind	you	to	remember	that
my	message	is	not	in	my	words.	You	will	have	to	step	upon	the	words	to	get	it.
Use	the	words	as	a	staircase,	as	stepping	stones.	Remember,	stepping	stones	can
become	hindrances	if	you	don't	know	how	to	step	over	them.
You	have	to	listen	in	silence	to	silence.
Mahasattva,	 Buddha	 has	 not	 said	 a	 single	 word,	 neither	 has	 Subhuti	 heard	 a
single	word.
It	is	the	compassion	of	Ananda	to	make	a	few	maps	for	you.	Those	maps	are	not
the	 countries.	 If	 you	 have	 a	map	 of	 India,	 that	map	 is	 not	 India,	 it	 cannot	 be.
How	can	it	be?
But	it	can	be	of	some	limited	help	to	you;	it	can	lead	you	to	the	real	India.	It	is
like	 the	 arrow	 on	 the	 milestone	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 road,	 it	 points	 towards
something.
This	 whole	 Diamond	 Sutra	 points	 towards	 silence.	 Hence	 so	 many
contradictions	in	it,	because	only	through	contradictions	can	silence	be	created.
Each	word	has	to	be	contradicted	by	its	opposite	immediately	it	is	uttered	so	that
they	destroy	each	other	and	in	the	wake,	silence	is	felt.
The	second	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	2
THE	 DEEPER	 INTO	 MYSELF,	 THE	 MORE	 ALONE	 I	 FEEL.	 THERE	 IS
ONLY
NOTHINGNESS.	AND	SOMETIMES,	LOOKING	INTO	YOUR	EYES,	I	GET
THE
SAME	FEELING	OF	A	VAST	EMPTINESS.
IF	IT	IS	NATURAL	--	 IF	BEING	ALONE	IS	BASIC,	THE	VERY	ESSENCE
OF	MY
BEING	--	THEN	HOW	COULD	THE	ILLUSIVE	IDEA	OF	BECOMING	ONE,
OF
FALLING	IN	LOVE	WITH	SOMEBODY	ETERNALLY,	COME	INTO	BEING
IN
THE	FIRST	PLACE?	AND	WHY	IS	IT	SO	PAINFUL	TO	BECOME	AWARE
THAT
IT	IS	AN	ILLUSION?	PLEASE	CLEAR	MY	DOUBTS.
You	are	the	doubter	and	you	are	the	doubt.	There	is	no	other	doubt.	First,	when
you	say,
"The	deeper	 I	 fall	 into	myself,	 the	more	 alone	 I	 feel,"	 if	 you	have	 really	been
falling	deeper	you	will	feel	aloneness	but	you	will	not	feel	"I	am	alone,"	because
then	there	are	two	things,	I	and	aloneness.	Then	you	are	not	alone.	Then	there	is
the	 experiencer	 and	 the	 experienced,	 the	observer	 and	 the	observed.	Then	you
are	not	alone;	the	other	is	there	--
the	experience	is	the	other.
When	you	 really	 fall	 deep	 into	yourself,	 you	will	 not	 find	yourself;	 that	 is	 the
whole	thing	to	understand.	It	is	only	on	the	surface	that	the	waves	exist.	If	you
go	deeper	into	the	ocean	you	will	not	find	waves,	or	can	you?	How	can	you	find
waves	 in	 the	depth?	They	exist	only	on	 the	surface,	 they	can	exist	only	on	 the
surface.	They	need	winds	to	exist.
The	'I'	can	exist	only	on	the	surface	because	it	needs	thou,	the	wind	of	the	thou
to	exist.
When	you	go	deeper	 into	yourself	 the	winds	are	no	 longer	 there,	 thous	are	no
longer	 there.	 How	 can	 there	 be	 'I'?	 I	 and	 thou	 exist	 in	 a	 pair,	 they	 are	 never
divorced.	 Yes,	 you	 will	 find	 aloneness,	 but	 not	 I-ness.	 And	 aloneness	 is
beautiful.	Let	me	remind	you	again,	the	word	alone	means	all	one.	That's	how	it
is	constructed	--	all	one.	On	the	surface	you	are	separate	from	all.	In	fact	on	the
surface	you	are	lonely	because	you	are	separate	from	the	all.	In	the	depth,	when
you	have	disappeared,	there	is	no	distinction	between	you	and	all.	All	is	one,	you
are	no	longer,	aloneness	is.
You	 say,	 "The	 deeper	 I	 fall	 into	 myself	 the	 more	 alone	 I	 feel."	 You	 must	 be
imagining	that	you	are	falling	deeper	into	yourself.	The	mind	can	go	on	playing
games.	 It	 can	 play	 the	 game	 of	 being	 alone,	 it	 can	 play	 the	 game	 of	 being	 in
prayer,	 it	 can	play	 the	game	of	being	 in	meditation,	but	 if	 'I'	 remains	 then	you
can	 be	 certain	 it	 is	 a	 game,	 nothing	 real	 has	 happened.	 That's	 why	 again	 the
desire	for	the	other	will	arise.
The	'I'	cannot	exist	alone.	It	needs	the	other	to	support	it,	to	feed	it,	to	nourish	it.
It	will	 bring	 you	 back	 to	 the	 other.	 That's	why	when	 you	 are	 lonely	 you	 start
thinking	of	your	beloved,	of	your	friend,	of	your	mother,	father,	this	and	that,	a
thousand	and	one	things.
You	 create	 imaginary	 'thous'.	 If	 a	man	 is	 put	 in	 isolation	 for	more	 than	 three
weeks	he	starts	talking	to	himself.	He	creates	the	whole	dialogue.	He	himself	is
divided	 in	 two	 --	 I	 and	 thou.	He	 becomes	 two	 so	 the	 game	 call	 be	 played.	 'I'
cannot	exist	separate	from
'thou'.
"The	deeper	I	fall	into	myself,	the	more	alone	I	feel."
No,	 you	 must	 be	 feeling	 lonely.	 Never	 use	 these	 two	 words	 as	 synonymous.
Loneliness	 is	negative,	aloneness	 is	positive.	Loneliness	simply	means	you	are
missing	 the	other.	The	other	 is	absent,	 there	 is	a	gap	 in	you.	Aloneness	means
you	are	present,	there	is	no	gap	in	you.	You	are	full	of	presence,	you	are	utterly
there.	Loneliness	 is	 the	absence	of	 the	other,	aloneness	 is	 the	presence	of	your
eternal	being.
You	say	"there	is	only	nothingness."	No,	if	there	is	only	nothingness	then	there	is
no	problem.	If	there	is	only	nothingness	and	nobody	to	know	it,	nobody	to	feel
it,	 then	 there	 is	 no	problem.	Then	 from	where	 comes	 the	doubt?	How	can	 the
doubter	 arise?	 No,	 you	 are	 there.	 That	 nothingness	 is	 bogus	 because	 you	 are
there.	How	can	it	be	nothingness?	It	is	just	your	idea.
This	used	to	happen	in	my	family	when	I	was	a	child.	I	was	so	lazy	--	I	am	still	-
-	I	was	so	lazy,	utterly	lazy,	that	my	family	lost	all	hope	with	me.	By	and	by	they
started	 forgetting	about	me,	because	 I	would	never	do	anything.	 I	would	 sit	 in
the	corner	and	 just	sit,	either	with	closed	eyes	or	with	open	eyes,	but	 I	was	so
absent	to	them	that	by	and	by	they	became	oblivious	to	me.
Sometimes	 it	 would	 happen	 that	 my	 mother	 would	 need	 something	 from	 the
market,	vegetables	or	something,	and	I	would	be	sitting	in	front	of	her	and	she
would	say,
"Nobody	 seems	 to	 be	 present	 here."	 She	 was	 just	 sitting	 in	 front	 of	 me	 and
talking	to	me,
"Nobody	seems	to	be	here.	I	want	somebody	to	go	and	fetch	vegetables	from	the
market."
And	I	was	sitting	in	front	of	her	and	she	said,	"Nobody	is	here."
I	was	counted	as	nobody.	Even	if	a	stray	dog	would	enter	in	the	house	I	would
allow	 it.	 I	was	 sitting	at	 the	gate	 and	 the	dog	would	enter	 and	 I	would	watch.
And	my	mother	would	come	rushing	out	and	she	would	say,	"nobody	is	here	to
prevent	this	dog"	--	and	I	was	sitting	there!
By	and	by	they	had	accepted	that	I	was	as	if	not.	But	that	does	not	make	much
difference;	I	was	there.	I	had	seen	the	dog	coming,	I	was	hearing	their	words.	I
knew	I	could	manage	to	go	to	the	market-place	and	fetch	vegetables	for	her.	And
I	would	laugh	at	the	whole	idea	--	that	she	went	on	saying	that	nobody	was	there.
That's	what	is	happening	to	you.	You	are	there,	and	you	say	nothingness	is.	You
are	 oblivious	 of	 yourself,	 you	 don't	 take	 note	 of	 yourself,	 otherwise	 you	 are
there.	 If	 you	 are	 not	 there,	 who	 is	 saying	 that	 nothingness	 is?	 Then	 there	 is
nothingness	when	you	are	not	there,	then	there	is	pure	nothingness.	In	that	purity
is	 nirvana,	 enlightenment.	 That	 is	 the	 most	 valuable	 place	 to	 be,	 the	 most
spacious	 place	 to	 be.	 It	 is	 the	 space	 everybody	 is	 searching	 for,	 because	 it	 is
unlimited,	infinite.	And	its	purity	is	absolute.	It	is	not	polluted	by	anything;	even
you	are	not	there.	There	is	light	and	there	is	consciousness,	but	there	is	no	'I'.	'I'
is	 like	 ice,	 frozen	 consciousness.	 Consciousness	 is	 like	 melted	 ice,	 liquid,	 or,
even	better,	even	the	water	has	evaporated,	has	become	invisible.
And	you	say:	"And	why	is	it	so	painful	to	become	aware	that	it	is	an	illusion?"	--
the	other.	 It	 is	painful	because	 the	 I	 starts	dying.	To	recognize	 the	other	as	 the
illusion,	 to	 recognize	 love	 as	 illusion,	 is	 very	 hard,	 because	 then	 the	 I	 starts
dying.	If	you	drop	the	you,	the	I	cannot	exist.	And	you	don't	know	the	beauty	of
dropping	the	I.
And	you	ask:	"If	 it	 is	natural	--	 if	being	alone	is	basic,	 the	very	essence	of	my
being	--
then	 how	 could	 the	 illusive	 idea	 of	 becoming	 one,	 of	 falling	 in	 love	 with
somebody	eternally,	come	into	being	in	the	first	place?"
It	came	only	because	of	that	--	because	aloneness	is	basic,	essential.	The	Hindu
scriptures	say	that	God	was	alone.	Just	think,	just	visualize	God	alone	and	alone
and	alone	for	eternity.	He	became	fed	up	with	his	aloneness,	it	was	monotonous.
He	wanted	 to	have	a	 little	play.	He	created	 the	other	 and	 started	playing	hide-
and-seek.
When	 you	 are	 tired	 of	 the	 play,	 when	 you	 become	 fed	 up	with	 the	 play,	 you
become	a	Buddha	again.	You	again	drop	your	toys.	They	are	created	by	you,	the
value	 is	 imagined	 by	 you;	 you	 have	 put	 the	 value	 on	 them.	 The	moment	 you
withdraw	your	value	they	disappear,	you	are	again	alone.
The	Hindu	concept	is	tremendously	valuable,	significant.	It	says	God	was	alone,
it	became	monotonous,	and	he	created	the	world,	 the	other,	 just	 to	have	a	little
chitchat	with	the	other,	to	have	a	little	dialogue.	Then	again	and	again	one	comes
and	feels	tired	and	bored	with	the	other,	disappears	into	oneself,	again	reaches	to
one's	nothingness	and	becomes	a	god.
You	are	all	gods	who	are	deceiving	themselves.	It	 is	your	choice.	The	day	you
choose	 not	 to	 be	 this	 way	 you	 will	 be	 free.	 It	 is	 your	 dream.	 Because	 of
aloneness,	because	aloneness	is	the	essential	quality	of	your	being,	the	other	has
been	created.
You	just	try	it,	go	for	a	few	weeks	to	the	mountains	and	sit	alone	and	you	will
feel	very	good.	Everybody	is	 tired	of	relationship	and	fed	up	and	bored.	Go	to
the	mountains	 and	 sit	 silently	 and	you	will	 feel	 so	beautiful,	 but	 after	 three	or
four	days,	five	days,	seven	days,	three	weeks,	you	will	start	thinking	of	the	other.
Your	woman	again	starts	being	attractive	to	you.	You	forget	all	the	nastiness	and
all	 the	nagging.	You	 forget	all	 that	 she	has	been	doing	 to	you,	you	completely
forget	all.	She	is	again	beautiful,	she	is	again	lovely,	she	is	again	fantastic,	mm?	-
-	you	put	value	again.
Then	you	have	to	come	down	from	the	mountains	to	the	plains,	and	for	two	or
three	days	with	the	woman	things	are	going	beautifully	--	a	new	honeymoon	and
after	 two	 or	 three	 days	 things	 become	 difficult	 again,	 and	 again	 you	 start
thinking	how	to	meditate,	how	to	be	silent.	This	 is	how	you	go	on.	Just	watch
your	consciousness	and	its	fluctuations	and	through	it	you	will	know	the	whole
process	of	existence,	because	you	are	a	miniature	existence.
The	pendulum	of	consciousness	goes	on	swinging	between	meditation	and	love,
between	aloneness	and	togetherness.	And	because	all	the	religions	of	the	world
up	to	now	have	been	either	of	love	or	of	meditation,	they	were	fragmentary,	they
were	not	total.	I	am	giving	you	the	total	religion.	I	am	not	choosing.
For	 example,	 Buddha	 had	 chosen	 meditation.	 He	 gives	 you	 the	 love	 for
meditation,	no	other	love.	He	teaches	you	only	to	be	alone,	absolutely	alone	and
nothing	else.	It	is	good,	it	is	tremendously	good	for	people	who	are	tired	and	fed
up	with	the	world.
He	was	tired	and	fed	up	with	the	world.	He	was	a	king,	he	was	not	a	beggar.	He
was	 tired	 of	 women.	 His	 father	 had	 brought	 all	 the	 beautiful	 girls	 from	 the
kingdom	 for	 him.	He	had	one	of	 the	most	 beautiful	 harems.	 If	 you	get	 all	 the
beautiful	women	of	the	world	in	your	house,	how	long	will	you	be	able	to	live
there?	Just	think	of	it:	one	is	more	than	enough.	Now	all	the	beautiful	women	of
the	kingdom	were	 there.	 It	must	 have	been	maddening.	 If	 he	 escaped,	 it	 is	 no
wonder.	 All	 the	 pleasures	 were	 arranged	 for	 him,	 every	 kind	 of	 pleasure	 was
arranged	for	him.	If	he	became	fed	up,	 it	 is	no	wonder.	He	moved	to	the	other
pole.	The	other	was	too	much.	He	escaped	into	the	jungle,	he	became	alone.
There	 are	 religions	 which	 are	 religions	 of	 meditation	 --	 Buddhism,	 Jainism.
There	are	religions	which	are	religions	of	love	--	Christianity,	Mohammedanism.
And	this	has	to	be	understood.	Jesus	is	a	poor	man,	so	is	Mohammed.	This	can't
be	accidental.	Mahavira	is	a	king,	so	is	Buddha.	The	two	kings	have	given	to	the
world	 the	 religion	 of	 meditation,	 and	 the	 two	 poor	 people	 of	 the	 world	 have
given	the	religion	of	love.
The	poor	cannot	be	fed	up	with	the	other.	The	poor	has	not	had	that	much	of	the
other.
The	poor	hankers	for	the	other.	The	other	may	be	the	woman	or	money	or	power
or	prestige	or	God;	it	makes	no	difference	--	the	other	is	needed.
Christianity	and	Islam	are	both	religions	of	prayer,	love	--	love	for	God,	prayer
for	God.
In	Buddhism,	 in	 Jainism,	 there	 is	 no	 place	 for	God	 at	 all	 because	 there	 is	 no
place	for	the	other.	Aloneness	is	enough.	In	Jainism	and	in	Buddhism	there	is	no
existence	of	anything	like	prayer,	the	word	has	not	been	heard;	they	know	only
of	 meditation.	 Christianity	 knows	 nothing	 of	 meditation.	 These	 are	 not
accidental	things,	they	show	something	about	the	founders.
I	 am	 giving	 you	 a	 total	 religion,	 a	 religion	which	 allows	 both.	When	 you	 are
feeling	tired	with	the	other,	move	into	meditation,	swing	into	meditation.	When
you	 are	 feeling	 tired	 of	 aloneness,	 swing	 into	 love.	 Both	 are	 good.	 Both	 are
contradictory,	 but	 through	 contradiction	 great	 joy	 arises.	 If	 you	 have	 only	 one
you	will	not	have	that	kind	of	richness.	The	one	can	give	you	silence	or	can	give
you	 great	 joy,	 but	 both	 can	 give	 you	 something	 infinitely	 precious,
incomparable.	Both	together,	 they	can	give	you	a	silent	ecstasy,	a	peaceful	 joy.
At	the	innermost	core	you	remain	utterly	silent,	and	on	the	periphery,	the	dance.
And	 when	 silence	 dances	 or	 silence	 sings,	 that	 is	 the	 richest,	 the	 peakest	 of
peaks.	Hence	my	insistence	for	both.
George	Bernard	Shaw	once	at	a	party	was	sitting	alone	at	the	edge	of	the	room.
His	 hostess	 came	 over	 to	 him	 and	 inquired	 solicitously,	 "Aren't	 you	 enjoying
yourself?"
Shaw	replied,	"That's	all	I	am	enjoying."
He	has	hit	upon	a	great	truth,	a	great	insight	is	there:	one's	self	is	all	anyone	can
enjoy.
Life	starts	taking	the	quality	of	silence.	But	if	you	can	enjoy	only	yourself	and
never	the	other	then	you	will	miss	the	other	dimension.	One	should	be	capable	of
enjoying	oneself	 and	 the	other	 too.	That's	what	 I	 call	 the	whole	man,	 the	holy
man.
The	third	question:
Question	3
OSHO,
WHEN	 I	 HEAR	YOUR	DISCOURSES	AND	AT	OTHER	 TIMES,	 I	 KNOW
THAT	I	KNOW	ALL	THAT	IS	NEEDED	TO	BE	ENLIGHTENED.	AT	THOSE
TIMES	 AM	 I	 ENLIGHTENED?	 PLEASE	 COMMENT	 ON	 HOW	 THIS
OBVIOUSLY
SUPERFICIAL	 'KNOWING'	 CAN	 PENETRATE	 AND	 BECOME
BEINGNESS.	IT
SEEMS	THAT	THIS	KNOWING	 IS	ROBBING	ME	OF	 INNOCENCE	AND
MORE
COMPLETE	 EXPERIENTIAL	 REALIZATION,	 THAT	 KNOWLEDGE	 HAS
FAR
OUTSPACED	 THE	 GROWTH	 OF	 MY	 BEING,	 AND	 YET,	 KNOWING
THERE	IS	NO
SUCH	 THING	 AS	 MY	 BEING,	 I	 DON'T	 FEEL	 WHOLLY	 MOTIVATED
TOWARDS
GROWING	ONE.
The	first	thing,	you	say:	"When	I	hear	your	discourses	and	at	other	times	I	know
that	I	know	all	that	is	needed	to	be	enlightened."
Nothing	is	needed	to	be	enlightened,	so	how	can	you	know	all	that	is	needed	to
be	 enlightened?	 Nothing	 is	 needed	 to	 be	 enlightened.	 Enlightenment	 is	 your
natural	state;	it	is	not	something	that	has	to	he	produced,	manufactured,	created.
If	 you	 are	manufacturing	 something	 new,	 then	many	 things	will	 be	 needed.	 If
you	are	not	manufacturing	anything	new,	what	is	needed?	You	are	enlightened.
How	can	anything	be	needed?	Nothing	is	needed.
So	 your	 idea	 that	 you	 think	 "I	 know	 that	 I	 know	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 to	 be
enlightened"	 is	 barring	 your	 way.	 Nothing	 is	 needed	 to	 be	 enlightened	 and
nothing	is	needed	to	be	known	to	be	enlightened.	Enlightenment	is	already	there,
is	already	 the	case.	 It	 is	not	a	 realization,	 it	 is	only	a	recognition.	 It	 is	not	 that
you	have	to	make	efforts	to	bring	it;	all	that	you	need	is	not	to	make	any	effort.
Drop	 all	 efforts	 --	 and	 suddenly	 it	 is	 there.	You	 cannot	 see	 it	 because	 you	 are
continuously	making	efforts	to	see	it.	Your	very	effort	to	see	it	is	functioning	as	a
barrier.
And	 you	 say:	 "At	 those	 times	 am	 I	 enlightened?"	You	 are	 enlightened	 all	 the
time,	not	when	you	hear	me,	not	when	you	read	something	from	The	Diamond
Sutra	--	not	only	in	those	moments.	You	are	all	 the	time	enlightened.	From	the
very	 beginning	 to	 the	 very	 end,	 you	 remain	 enlightened.	 You	 can	 go	 on
deceiving	yourself	that	you	are	not	enlightened	as	long	as	you	want,	but	all	the
same	you	are	enlightened.
It	is	like	a	man	who	is	pretending	to	be	a	woman	in	a	drama.	He	is	all	the	time	a
man.	He	can	go	on	pretending,	sometimes	even	he	may	forget.	 If	he	 is	a	good
actor,	a	really	good	actor,	he	may	get	into	the	idea	and	forget	about	it.	For	a	few
moments	he	may	think	that	he	is	a	woman,	but	again	and	again	he	will	know	that
he	is	a	man.
It	is	a	miracle	that	you	forget	that	you	are	enlightened,	that	you	go	on	forgetting
it,	but	you	ARE	enlightened.	Remember,	 enlightenment	 is	not	a	quality	 that	 is
going	 to	 happen	 to	 you	 in	 some	 future.	 You	 have	 brought	 it	 from	 the	 very
beginning.	 It	 is	 in	your	breathing,	 it	 is	 in	your	heartbeat.	 It	 is	 the	stuff	you	are
made	of.
"At	 those	 times	 am	 I	 enlightened?"	 No,	 if	 you	 think	 that	 sometimes	 you	 are
enlightened	and	sometimes	not,	then	you	are	not	enlightened.	The	day	you	know,
the	moment	 you	 know	 you	 are	 always	 enlightened,	 then	 you	 are	 enlightened.
Once	 you	 have	 felt	 enlightenment,	 it	 is	 always	 there	 surrounding	 you	 like	 an
aroma.
Still	you	can	go	on	playing	a	thousand	and	one	games.	I	am	playing,	Buddha	is
playing,	but	that	doesn't	make	any	difference.	Then	it	is	with	full	awareness	that
the	game	is	played.	It	does	not	entangle,	it	does	not	imprison.
Once	you	play	a	game	knowing	that	it	is	a	game,	then	there	is	no	problem.	Then
you	can	be	in	the	world,	then	you	can	be	whatsoever	you	enjoy	to	be,	but	deep
down	you	know	you	are	not	that.	Deep	down	you	remain	far	away.	You	become
a	lotus	flower	--	in	the	water	and	yet	the	water	touches	you	not.
"At	 those	 times	 am	 I	 enlightened?"	 you	 ask.	 "Please	 comment	 on	 how	 this
obviously	superficial	knowing	can	penetrate	and	become	beingness."
Superficial	 knowing	 can	 never	 become	 beingness.	 Even	 deep	 and	 profound
knowing	 can	 never	 become	 beingness.	 Knowledge	 itself	 is	 the	 obstacle.
Knowing	can	never	become	being	--	superficial	or	profound.	Don't	make	 these
distinctions.	These	are	tricks	of	the	mind	again.	It	is	the	knowledgeable	mind.
The	 knowledgeable	 mind	 can	 say	 to	 you,	 "It	 is	 right,	 superficial	 knowledge
cannot	 give	 you	 enlightenment,	 but	what	 about	 profound	 knowledge?"	This	 is
again	a	trick	played	upon	you.	Profound?	Then	certainly	you	are	caught	again	in
the	same	net.	Profound	or	not	profound,	knowledge	as	such	 is	 superficial.	The
profoundest	 knowledge	 is	 superficial,	 to	 know	 is	 superficial.	To	be	 is	 to	 be	 in
that	profoundness	you	are	talking	about.
You	will	have	to	be	aware.	Mind	is	very	cunning.	It	can	accept	many	things	and
again	bring	them	back	from	the	back	door.	It	can	say,	"Right,	 I	perfectly	agree
with	you.	How	can	superficial	knowledge	give	you	enlightenment?	That	 is	not
possible.	I	will	show	you	the	way	how	to	get	profound	knowledge."
What	will	you	do	to	get	profound	knowledge?	It	will	be	superficial	knowledge
again	 because	 knowledge	 is	 superficial.	 At	 the	 most	 you	 will	 have	 more
superficial	knowledge,	the	quantity	will	grow,	and	through	the	quantity	you	will
have	the	illusion	that	you	are	becoming	profound.
You	may	 go	 into	 deeper	 details,	 but	 details	 don't	 lead	 you	 to	 depth.	 You	 can
know	 one	 thing	 about	 one	 thing	 or	 a	 thousand	 things	 about	 that	 one	 thing;	 it
makes	no	difference	--
knowledge	is	about	and	about.	It	never	hits	the	point,	it	never	reaches	the	target.
The	 target	 is	 reached	 only	 by	 being,	 and	 to	 be,	 knowledge	 has	 to	 be	 dropped
absolutely,	totally,	with	no	conditions,	with	no	choice	that	"This	is	good,	keep	it,
and	that	is	bad,	drop	it.	This	is	profound,	keep	it,	and	that	is	not	profound,	drop
it."	If	you	keep	anything	of	knowledge,	you	will	remain	unenlightened.	And	the
wonder	 of	 wonders	 is	 that	 you	 are	 enlightened	 and	 you	 go	 on	 remaining
unenlightened.
The	 question	 is	 from	Chipper	Roth.	He	must	 be	 a	 newcomer	 to	 this	 place,	 he
must	be	an	outsider.	Be	here.	We	will	take	away	your	knowledge	slowly	slowly.
My	 whole	 work	 consists	 of	 making	 people	 ignorant.	 Ignorance	 has	 depth,
ignorance	has	innocence,	ignorance	is	profound	--	not	knowing	has	no	limits	to
it.	Knowing	is	always	limited.	How	can	it	be	profound?	Howsoever	great	your
knowledge,	 it	 will	 have	 a	 limit,	 a	 boundary	 to	 it.	 Only	 ignorance	 has	 no
boundary.
They	say	that	science	is	an	effort	to	know	more	about	less	and	less.	If	you	go	on
and	on	with	this	approach	--	to	know	more	and	more	about	less	and	less	--	what
will	be	the	end?
The	 end	 will	 be	 that	 you	 know	 all	 about	 nothing.	 That	 will	 be	 the	 logical
conclusion.
I	would	like	to	say	that	religion	is	just	the	opposite	approach:	to	know	less	and
less	about	more	and	more.	And	what	will	be	the	ultimate	result?	One	day...	you
go	on	knowing	less	and	less	about	more	and	more;	one	day	you	know	nothing
about	all.	And	that	is	the	experience	--	to	know	nothing	about	all.	That's	what	I
call	ignorance.
Roth,	please	be	here	a	little	longer,	hang	around.
The	fourth	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	4
I	 AM	 ENJOYING	 THE	 PLAY	 VERY	 MUCH	 THESE	 DAYS.	 A	 VERY
MASTERFUL
PERFORMANCE	THIS	MORNING.	EVERY	MORNING	I	WAIT	EAGERLY
WONDERING	WHAT	THE	CURTAIN'S	RISE	WILL	BRING.	I	OVERFLOW
WITH
YOU	 BUT	 IT	 BRINGS	 LAUGHTER,	 NOT	 TEARS.	 WHERE	 ARE	 THE
TEARS?
Sucheta,	they	are	in	your	laughter.
Laughter	 and	 tears	 are	 not	 different.	 There	 are	 two	 types	 of	 people,	 the	 tear
people	 and	 the	 laughter	 people.	 There	 are	 always	 two	 kinds	 everywhere,	 the
whole	 existence	 is	 divided	 into	 duality	 --	 man	 and	 woman,	 yin	 and	 yang,
positive/negative,	 day/night,	 life/death.	 So	 there	 is	 this	 division,	 the	 laughter
people	and	the	tear	people.
The	tear	people	are	introverts,	they	are	easily	ingoing.	And	when	you	go	in,	the
deeper	you	go	in	the	more	and	more	your	eyes	will	be	filled	with	tears.	Sucheta
is	an	extrovert,	she	is	a	laughing	Buddha.	Geet	Govind	is	a	tearful	Buddha.	She
is	an	extrovert,	outgoing,	a	real	American.	So	when	something	overwhelms	her
she	will	laugh.
And	 remember	 always,	 never	 imitate	 anybody.	 If	Geet	Govind	 tries	 to	 imitate
Sucheta	he	will	be	in	difficulty.	His	 laughter	will	be	very	poor	and	it	will	 look
phony.	 If	Sucheta	 tries	 to	 imitate	Geet	Govind	 it	will	be	very	difficult	 to	bring
tears,	and	even	if	she	can	manage	with	some	artificial	aid	they	will	not	be	true,
they	will	be	false.
Extroverts	 should	 follow	 their	 way.	 In	 their	 life,	 laughter	 will	 be	 their
overflowing	 energy.	 Love	 will	 be	 easier	 for	 them,	 meditation	 will	 be	 a	 little
difficult.	 For	 the	 introverts,	 meditation	 will	 be	 easier,	 love	 will	 be	 a	 little
difficult;	tears	will	be	easier,	laughter	will	be	a	little	difficult.
Never	imitate	anybody,	just	go	on	your	own	way,	and	by	and	by	you	will	see	a
transformation	coming	when	you	have	touched	the	extreme.	For	example,	if	you
go	on	laughing...	for	example,	if	Sucheta	goes	on	laughing	to	the	utter	extreme,
tears	will	come.
There	will	come	a	moment	in	laughter	when	the	laughter	will	start	disappearing
and	 tears	will	 come.	 If	Geet	Govind	 goes	 on	 crying	 and	 crying	 and	 crying	 in
tears	 and	 tears	 and	 tears	 to	 the	 very	 end,	 suddenly	 he	 will	 find	 a	 change
happening:	laughter	will	arise.	The	revolution	is	only	from	the	extreme.
Once	I	was	talking	to	a	council	of	Buddhists.	Now	to	say	to	Buddhists	that	the
revolution	 is	 from	 the	 extreme,	 or	 that	 truth	 is	 only	 at	 the	 extreme,	 is	 very
difficult	because	they	believe	in	the	middle	way,	the	golden	mean.	Buddha's	path
is	known	as	MAJJHIMA	NIKAYA,	the	middle	way.
I	forgot	that	they	were	Buddhists.	I	talked	about	the	extreme	and	I	told	them	that
the	 revolution	 happens	 only	 from	 the	 extreme,	 from	 the	 utter	 extreme.	Unless
you	reach	to	the	utter	extreme	there	is	no	truth.	Truth	is	at	 the	extreme,	this	or
that	--	but	at	the	extreme.	Either	love	at	the	extreme	or	meditation	at	the	extreme.
They	were	patient	--	Buddhists	are	patient;	they	are	not	like	Mohammedans,	they
will	not	start	 fighting	--	but	still,	patience	has	a	boundary.	One	Buddhist	could
not	tolerate,	it	although	Buddha	has	said	to	tolerate.	He	stood	up.	He	said,	"This
is	too	much.	Have	you	forgotten	completely	that	Buddha's	path	is	known	as	the
middle	path?"
Then	I	remembered	and	I	said,	"True,	I	know,	but	unless	you	are	at	the	extreme
middle	there	is	no	truth."	I	was	talking	about	 the	extreme,	 it	had	nothing	to	do
with	the	middle.
"If	 you	 are	 at	 the	 extreme	middle,	 exactly	 the	middle,	 then	 again	 truth.	 Truth
happens	only	with	the	extreme."
From	 the	 extreme	 the	 pendulum	 swings	 towards	 the	 other	 polarity.	 So,	 good
Sucheta.
Laugh,	 laugh	 to	 the	 extreme.	 One	 day	 you	 will	 see	 your	 laughter	 is	 bringing
beautiful	tears.
The	sixth	question:
Question	5
OSHO,
CANNOT	ONE	DECLARE	THAT	ONE	HAS	EXPERIENCED	GOD?
If	you	have	experienced,	your	very	existence	will	be	 the	declaration,	you	need
not	declare.	At	 least	you	need	not	ask.	If	 the	declaration	comes	it	comes,	what
can	you	do?
One	who	has	experienced	God	will	not	decide	anything,	not	even	this	--	whether
he	has	to	declare	or	not.	One	who	has	experienced	God	has	dropped	the	mind.
Now	 whatsoever	 happens	 he	 will	 be	 into	 it,	 he	 will	 be	 totally	 into	 it.	 If
declaration	comes	it	comes.
It	 came	 to	 Mansoor.	 He	 declared,	 "ANA'L-HAQ,	 I	 am	 God."	 His	 master,
Junnaid,	 told	him,	 "Mansoor,	 this	 is	not	 right.	You	will	get	 into	 trouble.	 I	 also
know	but	I	have	never	declared	because	you	know	these	Mohammedans	who	are
all	around	--	they	will	kill	you."
But	Mansoor	said,	"What	can	I	do?	When	he	declares	what	can	I	do?	Suddenly
he	catches	hold	of	me	and	declares."
Junnaid	was	so	afraid	that	he	expelled	Mansoor	from	his	school.	He	said,	"You
go	away,	go	somewhere	else.	You	will	get	into	trouble,	and	you	will	also	get	me
into	trouble."
But	Mansoor	said,	"What	can	I	do?	If	he	wants	to	get	into	trouble	himself,	what
can	I	do?"	And	he	got	into	trouble.	But	it	was	true	that	he	could	not	do	anything.
He	declared	at	the	last	moment	also	from	the	cross:	"ANA'L-HAQ,	I	am	God"	--
and	laughed.
Somebody	asked	from	the	crowd,	"If	you	can	still	deny,	if	you	can	still	say	that
you	were	wrong	 in	 declaring	 yourself	God,	 there	 is	 still	 hope	 that	 you	 can	 be
forgiven."
He	laughed	and	he	said,	"But	what	can	I	do?	He	declares."
And	you	are	asking	me:	"Cannot	one	declare	that	one	has	experienced	God?"	If
God	declares,	good.	 If	God	 is	not	declaring,	you	please	keep	quiet,	 leave	 it	 to
him.
J.	Donald	Walters	writes:
A	few	years	ago	I	met	a	man	who	was	holding	forth,	somewhat	drunkenly,	and
with	massive	 self-importance,	 on	 his	 version	 of	 how	 the	 universe	 ought	 to	 be
run.	I	forget	how	it	came	about,	but	I	happened	to	mention	that	I	thought	I	had
met	 perhaps	 six	 people	 in	my	 life	who	 knew	God.	My	 companion	 held	 out	 a
huge,	hairy	paw.	"Shake!"	he	cried	hoarsely.	"Ya	just	met	the	seventh."
Donald	Walters	writes	 that	he	could	not	believe	 that	 this	man	had	experienced
God,	because	he	thinks	how,	if	you	have	experienced	God,	will	you	declare	so
blatantly,
"Shake!	Ya	just	met	the	seventh."
But	 that	 it	 not	 my	 opinion.	 It	 is	 possible.	 Because	 sometimes	 God	 is	 hoarse,
sometimes	very	polite	and	sometimes	very	hoarse.	God	comes	in	all	shapes	and
sizes.	Sometimes	his	hands	are	very	very	smooth	and	sometimes	very	hairy.	He
comes	in	all	the	ways.	His	ways	are	mysterious.
So	if	he	wants	to	declare	through	you,	go	to	the	housetops	and	let	him	declare.
But	if	he	does	not	want	to	declare	and	you	declare	on	your	own,	you	will	get	into
trouble.	 If	he	wants	 to	get	 into	 trouble	 that	 is	his	business,	but	don't	decide	on
your	own	otherwise	it	will	be	just	an	ego	trip.
Reading	 this	 story	 of	Donald	Walters,	 I	 felt	 very	much	 for	 the	man	who	 said,
"Shake!	Ya	just	met	the	seventh."
Walters	 writes	 condemningly.	 He	 thinks	 this	 is	 not	 the	 way.	Who	will	 decide
what	is	the	way?	No	one	should	decide.	Who	am	I	to	tell	you	that	you	should	not
declare?	If	he	wants	to	declare,	who	am	I	to	tell	you?	Let	his	will	be	done.
But	remember	always,	 it	should	not	be	your	decision.	If	you	decide	to	declare,
that	 simply	means	you	have	not	known.	Then	 the	mind	 is	playing	 the	greatest
megalomaniac	trick.	Then	the	mind	is	going	mad.
The	seventh	question:
Question	6
OSHO,
A	DEAR	FRIEND	OF	MINE	SENT	A	LETTER	TO	YOU	FROM	THE	WEST
ASKING
FOR	 A	 SANNYAS	 NAME	 AND	 THEN	 CAME	 HERE	 BEFORE	 SHE
RECEIVED	AN
ANSWER	AND	TOOK	SANNYAS	HERE.	THE	NAME	SHE	WAS	GIVEN	BY
LETTER	WAS	A	TOTALLY	DIFFERENT	KIND	OF	NAME	FROM	THE	ONE
YOU
GAVE	HER	HERE.	 I	WAS	VERY	DISTURBED	WHEN	 I	 HEARD	ABOUT
THIS
BECAUSE	 I	 HAVE	ALWAYS	 THOUGHT	OF	MY	NAME	AS	MY	 PATH.	 I
HAVE
USED	 IT	 TO	 DIRECT	 ME	 WHEN	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 CONFUSED.	 WHAT
REALLY	IS
THE	SIGNIFICANCE	OF	THE	NAME	YOU	GIVE	TO	US.
Veera,	 all	 holy	 cow	 dung.	 Don't	 be	 deceived	 by	 the	 names.	 You	 are	 always
hankering	 to	 catch	hold	of	 something,	 to	make	 something	big	out	of	nothings.
The	names	I	give	you	are	just	like	lovers'	sweet	nothings.	Don't	make	much	fuss
about	them.
In	 fact,	 once	 I	 have	 given	 you	 the	 name,	 never	 come	 and	 ask	 me	 about	 its
meaning	again	because	 I	 forget.	 It	 is	 in	 that	moment	 that	 I	 create	 the	meaning
around	 it.	 Then	 how	 am	 I	 supposed	 to	 remember?	 I	 must	 have	 given	 thirty
thousand	names	or	more.
A	name	is	just	a	name.	You	are	nameless.	No	name	confines	you,	no	name	can
confine	you.	They	are	just	labels	to	be	used	--	utilitarian,	nothing	spiritual	in	it.
But	because	I	pay	so	much	attention	to	your	name	and	I	explain	it	 to	you,	you
get	 hooked	 with	 it.	 That	 is	 just	 my	 way	 of	 showering	 my	 attention	 on	 you,
nothing	else;	just	my	way	of	showing	my	love	to	you,	nothing	else.
BELOVED	OSHO,
Question	7
WHY	 DO	 I	 ALWAYS	 FALL	 ASLEEP	 IN	 DISCOURSE?	 SOMETIMES	 I
CAN'T	HELP
COMPARING	 MYSELF	 TO	 THOSE	 PEOPLE	 WHO	 SIT	 ABSOLUTELY
STILL,	JUST	IMBIBING	YOU,	AND	THAT	MAKES	ME	FEEL	LIKE	I	HAVE
SO	FAR	TO
GO,	ESPECIALLY	EVERY	TIME	WHEN	PEOPLE	COME	UP	TO	ME	AFTER
THE
LECTURE	AND	SAY,	"WASN'T	IT	AMAZING	TODAY?"
MAYBE	MORE	WOULD	 COME	 THROUGH	 TO	ME	 IF	 I	 JUST	 ACCEPT
THAT
DISCOURSE	IS	A	GOOD	PLACE	FOR	ME	TO	SLEEP.
It	 is	 the	perfect	place.	Don't	be	worried	about	 those	people	who	come	and	 tell
you,	 they	must	be	 joking.	You	sleep	well.	They	must	be	 trying	 to	disturb	you,
they	must	be	trying	to	create	some	jealousy	in	you.	They	must	be	really	jealous
of	you	 --	 that	you	are	sleeping	so	well	and	snoring,	and	 those	poor	people	are
just	sitting.	They	want	to	disturb	you.
Don't	be	worried.	Go	on	sleeping.	You	have	to	go	far,	but	in	sleep,	nowhere	else.
The	game	was	drifting	off	into	total	boredom	when	a	man	in	the	crowd	suddenly
burst	 into	 a	 round	 of	 applause.	 The	man	 next	 to	 him	 said,	 "Why	 did	 you	 do
that?"
"Sorry,"	he	replied.	"I	was	trying	to	keep	myself	awake."
You	don't	 know	how	much	difficulty	people	 are	having	 in	keeping	 themselves
awake.
You	 just	go	 into	your	 sleep,	 relax	 into	 it.	 If	 you	can	accept	 it	 totally,	 that	will
become	a	great	experience.
The	mind	always	creates	conflict.	If	you	don't	sleep,	the	mind	says,	"I	am	feeling
like	it	would	be	good	if	I	could	sleep."	If	you	sleep,	 the	mind	says,	"You	have
missed	 something,	 you	 should	 not	 do	 this."	 The	mind	 always	 creates	 conflict,
friction.	 It	 is	 never	 happy	 with	 anything.	 Drop	 that	 mind.	 If	 sleep	 comes
naturally,	 then	 allow	 it.	 In	 that	 very	 acceptance	 and	 the	 disappearance	 of	 the
mind,	you	will	be	hearing	The	Diamond	Sutra.
Patanjali	 says	 sleep	 is	 just	 next	 to	 samadhi.	 A	 good	 sleep,	 a	 deep	 sleep,	 and
samadhi,	 are	different	only	 in	one	 sense:	 samadhi	has	 awareness,	 sleep	has	no
awareness.	But	awareness	can	happen	in	sleep.	Don't	make	trouble	for	yourself,
don't	divide	yourself.
If	 sleep	 is	 not	 coming,	 perfectly	 good,	 keep	 awake,	 but	 then	 it	will	 not	 be	 an
effort.	If	sleep	is	coming	then	fall	asleep,	then	don't	try	to	keep	yourself	awake.
And	I	am	not	saying	that	if	sleep	is	not	coming	you	have	to	try	to	go	to	sleep.
Accept	whatsoever	is	the	case.	Accept	reality	as	it	happens	in	a	certain	moment.
Be	totally	in	the	moment.
That's	 my	 whole	 message,	 to	 be	 utterly	 with	 the	 moment.	 This	 is	 desire:	 "I
should	not	be	asleep."	Why?	This	is	not	spiritual	--	to	sit	in	a	discourse	and	fall
asleep.	Why?	Sleep	is	a	perfectly	spiritual	activity,	a	great	spiritual	activity.	It	is
as	good	as	 sitting	 there	 and	 thinking,	 dreaming	 is	 as	good.	Dreaming	 is	 just	 a
primitive	form	of	thinking,	more	colorful.	Others	are	thinking,	you	are	dreaming.
What	is	the	difference?	Dream	well,	sleep	well,	relax.
One	day,	out	of	this	relaxation	you	will	start	becoming	aware	and	alert,	but	that
alertness	will	have	a	different	quality	 to	 it.	 It	will	not	be	 forced,	 it	will	not	be
manipulated	 by	 you,	 it	 will	 come.	 One	 day	 suddenly	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the
discourse	 you	 will	 open	 your	 eyes,	 fresh,	 young,	 from	 the	 deep	 sleep,	 and
something,	just	a	word,	may	go	into	your	being	and	will	transform	you.
The	whole	Diamond	Sutra	was	not	needed	when	Hui	Neng	heard	 four	 lines	 --
that	was	enough.	Sometimes	a	single	word	from	a	Buddha	is	enough.	It	just	goes
like	an	arrow	and	pierces	your	heart	and	you	are	no	longer	the	same.
So	don't	be	worried.	Relax	well.	And	if	you	have	relaxed	well	and	you	open	your
eyes,	some	time	it	is	possible	--	there	may	happen	the	meeting	between	you	and
me.	 And	 you	 will	 be	 so	 fresh	 from	 sleep,	 unthinking,	 not	 knowing	 who	 you
are....
Don't	you	know?	Sometimes	it	happens	in	the	morning	when	you	wake,	it	takes
a	 few	seconds	 for	you	 to	 recognize	who	you	are,	 the	mind	 takes	 time	 to	come
back.	Sometimes	you	cannot	even	recognize	where	you	are.	Suddenly	awakened
in	 the	middle	of	 the	night,	 everybody	will	wonder	who	he	 is,	where	he	 is.	He
will	take	a	little	time	to	gather	himself	together.
So	 it	 is	 possible,	 sleeping,	 one	 day	 in	 the	 middle	 you	 hear	 my	 shouting.
Suddenly	 you	 wake	 up	 and	 you	 don't	 know	 where	 you	 are.	 That	 is	 the	 right
moment	I	can	enter	in	you.
So	don't	be	worried.	Whatsoever	happens	is	good.	All	is	accepted	here.	I	accept
you	as	you	are.	I	have	no	'shoulds'	for	you.
The	last	question:
Question	8
OSHO,
WHY	CAN'T	PEOPLE	UNDERSTAND	EACH	OTHER'S	RELIGIONS?
WHY	IS	THERE	ALWAYS	SO	MUCH	CONFLICT?
The	ego.	 It	has	nothing	 to	do	with	religions,	 just	 the	ego.	Whatsoever	 is	yours
has	to	be	the	best	in	the	world.	Whatsoever	is	others'	cannot	be	the	best,	cannot
be	allowed	to	be	the	best	in	the	world.
Your	 wife	 is	 the	 most	 beautiful	 woman,	 your	 husband	 is	 the	 most	 beautiful
person.	You	are	the	greatest	man	in	the	world.	You	may	not	say	so,	but	you	say	it
in	a	thousand	and	one	ways.	And	whatsoever	belongs	to	you	has	to	be	the	best.
People	are	just	like	small	children.	Small	children	go	on	fighting,	"My	daddy	can
lick	your	daddy	any	time."
A	small	boy	was	telling	another	boy,	"My	mother	is	a	great	orator.	She	can	speak
on	any	subject	for	hours."
The	other	said,	"That's	nothing.	My	mother	is	such	a	great	orator	she	can	speak
without	any	subject	for	hours.	Nobody	knows	what	she	is	speaking."
People	go	on	bragging	about	their	things,	about	everything,	about	religion	too.
Mulla	Nasruddin's	 son	asked	him,	 "Pop,	 if	 a	Mohammedan	 leaves	his	 religion
and	becomes	a	Hindu	or	a	Christian,	what	would	you	call	him?"
The	Mulla	became	very	angry	and	he	said,	"He	is	a	traitor!	He	should	be	shot.
This	 is	 the	 greatest	 sin	 in	 the	world	 --	 to	 change	your	 religion,	 to	 betray	 your
religion.	He	is	NAMAK	HARAM	--	he	has	betrayed	his	salt."
Then	 the	 boy	 asked,	 "Then	 Pop,	 if	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a	 Christian	 becomes	 a
Mohammedan?"
Mulla	was	all	smiles,	Jimmy	Carter	smiles.	He	said,	"That	is	great.	That	man	is
wise.
That	man	 should	 be	welcomed	 and	 respected	 and	 honored.	He	 knows	what	 is
truth	and	he	is	courageous.	He	is	a	convert,	my	son!"
Now	the	thing	has	changed.	If	a	Mohammedan	becomes	a	Hindu	or	a	Christian
he	is	a	traitor;	if	a	Hindu	or	a	Christian	becomes	a	Mohammedan	he	is	a	convert
and	 he	 is	 a	 great	 man	 and	 he	 should	 be	 honored	 and	 respected.	 He	 is	 wise
because	he	has	recognized	what	is	the	real	religion.
That's	how	our	egos	function.	That's	why	religions,	rather	than	bringing	peace	to
the	world,	 have	been	 the	 cause	 of	 bloody	wars.	Many	more	 people	 have	been
killed	in	the	name	of	religion	than	in	any	other	name.	Not	even	politicians	have
been	 able	 to	 surpass	 the	 so-called	 religious	 people	 in	 murder.	 The	 greatest
murderers	have	been	the	churches	and	the	mosques	and	the	temples.
In	the	future	this	ugliness	has	to	be	dropped;	it	should	be	immediately	dropped.
A	 religion	 is	 a	personal	 choice.	 If	 somebody	does	not	 like	 the	 roseflower,	you
don't	kill	him	and	you	don't	say	that	he	is	ugly,	you	don't	say	that	he	is	wrong.
You	say	 that	 that	 is	his	 liking.	He	does	not	 like	 the	roseflower,	 it	 is	 finished.	 I
like	the	roseflower.	But	it	is	a	question	of	liking.	There	is	no	question	of	truth	in
it,	there	is	no	question	of	arguing	about	it	and	there	is	no	reason	to	prove	why	I
don't	like	the	rose.	If	I	don't	like,	I	don't	like.	If	you	like,	you	like.	There	is	no
conflict.	Religion	should	be	like	that.
Somebody	likes	Jesus	--	perfectly	beautiful.	Somebody	likes	Buddha,	somebody
likes	Krishna	--	likings.	A	religion	should	not	have	anything	to	do	with	birth.	It
should	 be	 a	 pure	 liking.	 Then	 there	will	 be	 no	 conflict,	 then	 there	will	 be	 no
unnecessary	 arguing	 which	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 down	 the	 centuries.	 Rather	 than
praying,	people	have	been	arguing.
The	whole	energy	that	they	have	put	to	argument,	if	it	would	have	been	put	into
prayer	 they	 would	 have	 known	 what	 God	 is.	 But	 they	 go	 on	 arguing,	 great
debates	 continue,	 and	 nothing	 is	 ever	 proved	 because	 nothing	 can	 ever	 be
proved.
If	you	like	Jesus,	it	is	just	like	when	you	fall	in	love	with	a	woman.	You	cannot
prove	anything.	Why?	...	And	whatsoever	you	prove	will	look	foolish	to	others.
If	you	say	to	others,	"Look	at	her	nose	--	how	long,	how	beautiful,"	people	will
say	 "That	 looks	 ugly,	 it	 is	 out	 of	 shape,	 it	 is	 too	 big,	 the	 face	 is	 not	 in
proportion."	If	you	say,	"Look	at	the	eyes	--
so	big,	so	beautiful,"	 then	somebody	will	say,	"They	look	frightening.	 I	cannot
stay	with	that	woman	in	the	night.	Those	two	big	eyes...	I	am	scared.	And	they
are	too	big	and	not	symmetrical!"
There	is	no	way	to	prove	your	liking.	Somebody	likes	Jesus	and	somebody	likes
Buddha.
This	is	falling	in	love	--	you	need	not	prove	it.	And	if	you	prove	it	you	will	look
a	fool	to	others.	That's	how	it	 looks.	Hindus	think	people	who	are	in	love	with
Jesus	are	foolish:	What	is	there	in	this	man?	You	ask	the	Hindus?	--	they	have	a
beautiful	theory	of	karma.
They	say	you	suffer	only	 if	you	have	done	wrong	in	your	past	 lives.	Why	was
Jesus	 crucified?	He	must	have	done	great	 sins;	 otherwise	why?	Krishna	 is	 not
crucified,	Rama	is	not	crucified	--	why	is	Jesus	crucified?	He	must	have	been	a
sinner.
Now	 the	 whole	 perspective	 changes.	 Now	 you	 ask	 a	 Christian	 about	 Krishna
playing	upon	the	flute.	It	looks	so	beautiful	and	Jesus	on	the	cross	looks	so	sad,
and	he	will	say,
"What	 are	 you	 talking	 about?	 This	world	 is	 in	 such	misery,	 this	man	Krishna
must	have	been	of	a	very	stony	heart.	He	is	playing	on	the	flute	and	people	are
dying	and	people	 are	 in	misery	and	 there	 is	death	and	disease	and	 this	man	 is
playing	on	the	flute.	He	must	have	a	very	very	rocklike	heart.	He	has	no	heart.	If
he	had	any	heart	he	would	have	sacrificed	himself	for	the	downtrodden,	for	the
oppressed,	for	those	who	are	in	misery.
Look	at	Jesus	--	he	is	the	savior.	He	died	for	us	so	that	we	can	be	redeemed.	This
Krishna	looks	shallow."
But	 ask	 the	 Hindu	 who	 follows	 Krishna.	 He	 will	 say,	 "What	 are	 you	 talking
about?	 There	 is	 no	misery.	All	misery	 is	 illusion.	And	 if	 people	 are	 suffering
they	 are	 suffering	 for	 their	 sins.	Nobody	 else	 can	 redeem	 them.	And	 the	 only
redeemer	that	can	be	of	any	help	is	one	who	brings	joy	into	the	world.	Only	joy
is	the	healing	force.	How	can	you	redeem?"
Hindus	say	if	somebody	is	crying	and	you	sit	by	the	side	and	you	also	cry,	can
you	redeem	him?	Crying	is	doubled.	Somebody	is	 ill	and	you	fall	 in	sympathy
and	 lie	 down	 by	 their	 side	 --	 how	 are	 you	 helping?	 To	 help	 you	 have	 to	 be
healthy.	You	need	not	fall	ill.	Krishna	is	healthy,	Krishna	is	joy.	The	world	is	so
in	misery,	that's	why	he	brings	his	flute.	Crosses	everybody	is	carrying	already	--
what	is	there	in	carrying	a	cross?
Everybody	 is	 carrying	a	 cross.	A	 flute	 is	needed.	Now	 these	 are	 the	ways	and
everybody	can	go	on	arguing	for	and	against.
To	me,	religion	is	a	love	affair.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	intellect,	it	has	nothing
to	do	with	reason.	It	is	falling	in	love.	With	whomsoever	you	have	fallen	in	love,
that	is	your	way.	Go	through	it	--	that	is	your	door.
Love	 is	 the	 door,	 it	 is	 irrelevant	 with	 whom	 you	 have	 fallen	 in	 love.	 Love
redeems,	neither	Jesus,	nor	Krishna.	Love	redeems.	Fall	in	love.	Love	is	the	only
redeeming	force.
Love	is	the	savior.	But	your	egos....
Meditate	over	this	beautiful	story:
Patrick	the	First,	the	Irish	pope,	was	sitting	in	his	office	in	the	Vatican	one	day,
reading	 the	 CATHOLIC	 HERALD,	 when	 a	 small	 article	 in	 the	 Irish	 section
entitled	"Record	Births"	caught	his	attention.
"Holy	Mary	Michael!"	said	the	pope	to	his	secretary,	Cardinal	Fitz-Michael.	"Do
you	see	this,	bejaisus!"
"And	what	is	that,	Monseigneur,"	said	Michael,	jumping	up	from	his	paperwork.
"It	says	the	wife	of	Paddy	O'Flynne	from	Dublin	has	just	presented	him	with	his
fifty-sixth	child,"	said	the	pope.
"The	saints	be	praised,	sir,"	said	Michael.	"Some	miracle	indeed,	is	it	not?"
"The	Lord's	work,	to	be	sure,"	cried	the	pope,	"and	should	be	commemorated	in
some	way	 for	 the	unity	of	 the	Catholic	church,	world	 faith	 in	general,	 and	 the
Emerald	Isle	in	particular."
"Indeed	sir,	what	exactly	do	you	have	in	mind?"
"No	mind,	Michael,"	replied	the	pope	excitedly,	"Action!	Go	this	very	moment
to	 the	 workshop,	 have	 a	 golden	madonna	 stuck	 up,	 top	 priority	 job,	 then	 run
around	to	the	travel	agents	and	book	me	a	first	class	return	flight	 to	Dublin	on
Aer	Lingus.	I	myself	personally	will	take	the	madonna	as	a	little	gift	and	present
it	to	the	O'Flynnes.	I	could	do	with	a	little	holiday	in	the	old	country."
The	next	morning	sharp,	Pope	Pat,	clutching	the	madonna,	the	HERALD,	and	a
bottle	of	Irish	whiskey	for	the	flight,	boarded	the	plane	for	Dublin.	On	arrival	he
went	 straight	 to	O'Flynne's	home	whereupon	he	was	 taken	 to	 the	 local	pub	by
one	of	the	family	to	where	the	main	celebrations	were	taking	place.
"Someone	to	see	you,	Dad,"	yelled	the	kid	to	the	roomful	of	drinkers.
"Tell	him	to	grab	a	Guinness	and	come	over!"	a	voice	replied.
The	pope	grabbed	a	Guinness	and	pushed	his	way,	madonna	first,	into	the	center
of	the	high-spirited	group	of	inebriates.	Some	hours	and	many	Guinnesses	later,
the	 pope	 finally	 staggered	 up	 to	 Paddy	 and,	 thrusting	 the	 madonna	 at	 him
slurred,	"I	would	like	to	offer	my	sincere	congratulations	to	you."
"And	who	 do	 I	 have	 the	 honor	 of	 addressing,	 sir?'	 said	 Paddy,	 beholding	 the
drunken	cleric,	Guinness	in	one	hand,	madonna	in	the	other.
"Well,	you	don't	know	me	personally,	Paddy,	but	in	fact	I	am	the	pope."
"The	 pope!"	 exclaimed	 Paddy.	 "And	 you	 are	 in	 a	 dangerous	 place	 to	 be	 sure.
Will	you	have	another	little	Guinness?"
"I	will	 indeed,"	 said	 the	pope,	 "if	you	will	 just	promise	me	one	 thing	before	 I
do."
"For	a	drinking	man,"	said	Paddy,	"it	will	be	hard	to	refuse."
"I	would	like	you	to	accept	this	madonna	as	a	little	gift	from	us	all	at	the	Vatican
and	take	it	and	put	it	on	the	altar	of	your	local	Catholic	church."
"Ah	 now,	 sir,"	 said	 Paddy.	 "I	will	 take	 the	madonna,	 sir,	 to	 be	 sure,	 and	 very
grateful	I	am,	but	put	it	on	the	altar	of	me	local	catholic	church	I	cannot	do."
"And	why	ever	not,"	said	the	pope	in	amazement,	"as	a	gift	to	Mother	Mary?"
"Well,	the	truth	is,	sir,"	said	Paddy,	"I	am	not	a	Catholic,	I	am	a	Protestant."
"What!"	 screamed	 the	 pope.	 "You	 mean	 to	 say	 I	 have	 come	 all	 this	 way	 to
present	me	golden	madonna	to	a	fucking	sex	maniac!"
Enough	for	today.
The	Diamond	Sutra
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	The	Fully	Enlightened	One
31	December	1977	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7712310
ShortTitle:
DIAMON11
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
82
mins
VAJRACHCHEDIKA
PRAJNAPARAMITA
SUTRA
OF
GAUTAMA
THE
BUDDHA
THE	LORD	ASKED:
'WHAT	 DO	 YOU	 THINK,	 SUBHUTI,	 DOES	 IT	 OCCUR	 TO	 THE
TATHAGATA,	"BY
ME	HAS	DHAMMA	BEEN	DEMONSTRATED"?	WHOSOEVER,	SUBHUTI,
WOULD	SAY,	"THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	DEMONSTRATED	DHAMMA,"	HE
WOULD	SPEAK	FALSELY,	HE	WOULD	MISREPRESENT	ME	BY	SEIZING
ON
WHAT	IS	NOT	THERE.	AND	WHY?
'BECAUSE	 NOT	 EVEN	 THE	 LEAST	 DHAMMA	 IS	 THERE	 FOUND	 OR
GOT	AT.
THEREFORE	IS	IT	CALLED	UTMOST,	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT
ENLIGHTENMENT.	 FURTHERMORE,	 SUBHUTI,	 SELF-IDENTICAL	 IS
THAT
DHAMMA,	AND	NOTHING	IS	THEREIN	AT	VARIANCE.	THEREFORE	IS
IT
CALLED	UTMOST,	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT	ENLIGHTENMENT.	SELF-
IDENTICAL	THROUGH	THE	ABSENCE	OF	A	SELF,	A	BEING,	A	SOUL,
OR	A	PERSON,	THE	UTMOST,	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT	ENLIGHTENMENT
IS	FULLY
KNOWN	AS	THE	TOTALITY	OF	ALL	THE	WHOLESOME	DHAMMAS.'
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,	DOES	IT	OCCUR	TO	A	TATHAGATA,
"BY
ME	HAVE	BEINGS	BEEN	SET	FREE"?	NOT	THUS	SHOULD	YOU	SEE	IT,
SUBHUTI!	 AND	 WHY?	 THERE	 IS	 NOT	 ANY	 BEING	 WHOM	 THE
TATHAGATA	HAS	SET	FREE.'
FURTHER	THE	LORD	TAUGHT	ON	THAT	OCCASION	THE	FOLLOWING
STANZAS:	'THOSE	WHO	BY	MY	FORM	DID	SEE	ME,
AND	THOSE	WHO	FOLLOWED	ME	BY	VOICE
WRONG	THE	EFFORTS	THEY	ENGAGED	IN,
ME	 THOSE	 PEOPLE	WILL	NOT	 SEE.'	 'FROM	THE	DHAMMA	 SHOULD
ONE	SEE
THE	 BUDDHAS,	 FROM	 THE	 DHAMMA-BODIES	 COMES	 THEIR
GUIDANCE.
YET	 DHAMMA'S	 TRUE	 NATURE	 CANNOT	 BE	 DISCERNED,	 AND	 NO
ONE	CAN
BE	CONSCIOUS	OF	IT	AS	AN	OBJECT.'
'WHOSOEVER	 SAYS	 THAT	 THE	 TATHAGATA	 GOES	 OR	 COMES,
STANDS,	SITS
OR	LIES	DOWN,	HE	DOES	NOT	UNDERSTAND	THE	MEANING	OF	MY
TEACHING.	 AND	 WHY?	 "TATHAGATA"	 IS	 CALLED	 ONE	 WHO	 HAS
NOT	GONE
ANYWHERE,	 NOR	 COME	 FROM	 ANYWHERE.	 THEREFORE	 IS	 HE
CALLED	THE
TATHAGATA,	THE	ARHAT,	THE	FULLY	ENLIGHTENED	ONE.
To	recapitulate:
THE	LORD	SAID:
'THE	TATHAGATA	SPEAKS	IN	ACCORDANCE	WITH	REALITY,
SPEAKS	THE	TRUTH,
SPEAKS	OF	WHAT	IS,
NOT	OTHERWISE.
TATHAGATA,	SUBHUTI,
IS	SYNONYMOUS	WITH	TRUE	SUCHNESS.'
The	 word	 suchness	 is	 of	 immense	 importance	 in	 Buddha's	 approach	 towards
reality.	 The	 word	 suchness	 is	 as	 important	 in	 Buddhism	 as	 God	 is	 in	 other
religions.
The	Buddhist	word	for	suchness	is	TATHATA.	It	means,	"Seeing	things	are	such,
don't	 take	any	attitude,	don't	make	any	opinion,	don't	 judge	or	 condemn."	The
Buddhist	meditation	consists	of	suchness.	The	method	is	very	practical	and	very
deep-going.
Buddha	 has	 said	 to	 his	 disciples,	 "Just	 watch	 things	 as	 they	 are,	 without
interfering."	 For	 example,	 you	 have	 a	 headache.	 The	 moment	 you	 note	 it,
immediately	 the	 opinion	 enters	 that	 "this	 is	 not	 good.	 Why	 should	 I	 have	 a
headache?	What	should	I	do	not	to	have	it?"
You	are	immediately	worried,	you	have	taken	an	opinion,	you	are	against	it,	you
have	 started	 repressing	 it.	Either	you	have	 to	 repress	 it	 chemically,	 through	an
aspro	or	novalgin,	or	you	have	to	repress	it	in	the	consciousness	--	you	don't	look
at	 it,	 you	 put	 it	 aside.	 You	 get	 involved	 in	 something	 else,	 you	 want	 to	 be
distracted	 in	 something	 else	 so	 you	 can	 forget	 it.	 But	 in	 both	ways	 you	 have
missed	suchness.
What	will	Buddha	suggest?	Buddha	says	take	note	twice,	"Headache,	headache."
Don't	 feel	 inimical	 towards	 it,	 neither	 friendly	 nor	 antagonistic.	 Just	 take	 a
simple	 note,	 as	 if	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 you:	 "Headache,	 headache."	 And
remain	undisturbed,	undistracted,	uninfluenced	by	it,	without	any	opinion.
See	the	point.	 Immediately,	ninety	percent	of	 the	headache	is	gone...	because	a
headache	 is	 not	 a	 real	 headache,	 ninety	 percent	 arises	 out	 of	 the	 antagonistic
opinion.	Immediately	you	will	see	that	the	greater	part	of	it	is	no	longer	there.
And	another	thing	will	be	noted:	sooner	or	later	you	will	see	that	the	headache	is
disappearing	 in	 something	 else	 --	 maybe	 you	 are	 now	 feeling	 anger.	 What
happened?	 If	 you	 repress	 the	 headache	 you	will	 never	 come	 to	 know	what	 its
real	message	was.	The	headache	was	there	just	as	an	indicator	that	you	are	full	of
anger	in	this	moment	and	the	anger	is	creating	a	tension	in	the	head,	hence	the
headache.
But	 you	watched,	 you	 simply	 took	 note	 of	 it	 --	 "Headache,	 headache"	 --	 you
remained	impartial,	objective.	Then	the	headache	disappears.	And	the	headache
gives	you	the	message	that	"I	am	not	a	headache,	I	am	anger."
Now	 Buddha	 says	 take	 note	 again,	 "Anger,	 anger."	 Now	 don't	 become	 angry
with	anger,	otherwise	again	you	are	 trapped	and	you	have	missed	 suchness.	 If
you	say,	"Anger,	anger,"	ninety	percent	of	 the	anger	will	be	gone	 immediately.
This	is	a	very	practical	method.	And	the	ten	percent	that	will	be	left	will	release
its	message.	You	may	come	to	see	that	it	is	not	anger,	it	is	ego.	Take	note	again:
"Ego,	ego."	And	so	on	and	so	forth.
One	 thing	 is	 connected	with	 another,	 and	 the	 deeper	 you	move	 the	 closer	 you
come	to	the	original	cause.	And	once	you	have	come	to	the	original	cause,	 the
chain	is	broken	--	there	is	no	beyond	it.
A	moment	will	come	when	you	will	 take	note	of	the	last	link	in	the	chain,	and
then	 nothingness.	 Then	 you	 are	 released	 from	 the	whole	 chain,	 and	 there	will
arise	great	purity,	great	silence.	That	silence	is	called	suchness.
This	has	to	be	practiced	continuously.	Sometimes	it	may	happen	that	you	forget,
and	you	have	made	an	opinion	unconsciously,	mechanically.	Then	Buddha	says
remember	again,
"Opinion,	opinion."	Now	don't	get	distracted	by	 this	 --	 that	you	have	made	an
opinion.
Don't	 get	 depressed	 that	 you	 have	missed.	 Just	 take	 note,	 "Opinion,	 opinion,"
and	suddenly	you	will	see	--	ninety	percent	of	 the	opinion	 is	gone,	 ten	percent
remains,	and	that	releases	its	message	to	you.	What	is	its	message?	The	message
is	 that	 there	 is	 some	 inhibition,	 some	 taboo;	 out	 of	 that	 taboo	 the	 opinion	 has
arisen.
A	sex	desire	comes	in	the	mind	and	immediately	you	say,	"This	is	bad."	This	is
opinion.
Why	is	it	bad?	--	Because	you	have	been	taught	it	is	bad,	it	is	a	taboo.	Take	note,
"Taboo,	taboo,"	and	go	on.
Sometimes	it	will	also	happen	that	you	have	judged	--	not	only	judged,	you	have
made	 an	 opinion;	 not	 only	made	 an	 opinion,	 you	 have	 become	 depressed	 that
you	have	missed.
Then	take	note	again,	"Depression,	depression,"	and	go	on.
Whenever	you	become	conscious,	 at	whatsoever	point,	 from	 there	 take	note	 --
just	 a	 simple	 note	 --	 and	 leave	 the	 whole	 thing.	 And	 soon	 you	 will	 see	 the
entangled	mind	 is	 no	 longer	 as	 entangled	 as	 it	 has	 always	 been.	 Things	 start
disappearing,	and	there	will	be	moments	of	suchness,	tathata,	when	you	will	be
simply	there	and	the	existence	is	there	and	there	is	no	opinion	between	you	and
existence.	All	is	undisturbed	by	thought,	unpolluted	by	thought.	Existence	is,	but
mind	has	disappeared.	That	state	of	no-mind	is	called	suchness.
Buddha	 says	 A	 TATHAGATA	 IS	 SYNONYMOUS	 WITH	 SUCHNESS.
Synonymous	--
not	that	he	has	the	quality	of	suchness,	he	is	suchness.
And	 Buddha	 says	 A	 TATHAGATA	 SPEAKS	 IN	 ACCORDANCE	 WITH
REALITY.	 He	 cannot	 do	 otherwise.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 he	 chooses	 to	 speak	 in
accordance	 with	 reality	 --	 there	 is	 no	 choice.	 Whatsoever	 is	 real	 is	 spoken
through	him.	It	is	not	that	he	chooses,	"This	is	real	and	I	should	speak	this,	and
that	is	unreal	and	I	will	not	speak	that."	If	that	choice	has	arisen,	you	are	not	a
Buddha	yet.
A	Tathagata	speaks	out	of	choicelessness.	So	it	is	not	that	the	Tathagata	speaks
truth.	 In	 fact	 it	 should	 be	 said	 in	 this	 way,	 that	 whatsoever	 is	 spoken	 by	 a
Tathagata	is	truth.	HE
SPEAKS	IN	ACCORDANCE	WITH	REALITY.	In	fact,	reality	speaks	through
him.	He	is	just	a	medium,	a	hollow	bamboo.	The	reality	sings	its	song	through
him,	 he	 has	 no	 song	 of	 his	 own.	 All	 his	 opinions	 have	 disappeared	 and	 he
himself	has	disappeared.	He	is	pure	space.	Truth	can	pass	through	him	into	the
world,	truth	can	descend	through	him	into	the	world.
HE	SPEAKS	THE	TRUTH,	HE	SPEAKS	OF	WHAT	IS.
YATHA	BHUTAM.
Whatsoever	is	the	case,	he	speaks.	He	has	no	mind	about	it,	he	never	interferes.
He	does	not	drop	a	 thing,	he	does	not	add	a	 thing.	He	 is	a	mirror:	whatsoever
comes	in	front	of	the	mirror	the	mirror	reflects.	This	reflectiveness	is	suchness.
'A	TATHAGATA,	SUBHUTI,
IS	SYNONYMOUS	WITH	TRUE	SUCHNESS.'
And	why	does	he	say	TRUE	suchness?	Is	there	some	untrue	suchness	too?	Yes.
You	 can	 practice.	 You	 can	 practice,	 you	 can	 cultivate	 a	 certain	 quality	 called
suchness,	but	that	will	not	be	true.	The	true	suchness	has	not	to	be	cultivated,	it
comes.
For	example,	what	do	I	mean	when	I	say	you	can	cultivate?	You	can	decide,	"I
will	only	speak	the	truth,	whatsoever	the	consequence.	Even	if	I	have	to	lose	my
life	 I	 will	 speak	 the	 truth."	 And	 you	 speak	 the	 truth	 --	 but	 this	 is	 not	 true
suchness,	it	is	your	decision.	The	untruth	arises	in	you.	You	go	on	pushing	down
the	untruth.	You	say,	"I	have	decided	that	even	if	my	life	is	at	stake	I	am	going	to
be	true."
It	is	effort.	Truth	has	become	your	prestige.	Deep	down	you	are	longing	to	be	a
martyr.
Deep	down	you	want	 to	 let	 the	whole	world	know	that	you	are	a	 truthful	man,
that	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 sacrifice	 your	 life	 also	 for	 it;	 you	 are	 a	 great	 man,	 a
mahatma.	And	you	sacrifice	your	life,	but	it	is	not	true	suchness.
True	suchness	knows	nothing	of	choice.	You	are	simply	an	instrument	of	reality.
You	 don't	 come	 in,	 you	 don't	 stand	 in	 between,	 you	 simply	 have	 withdrawn
yourself.	The	mirror	docs	not	decide,	"This	man	is	standing	in	front	of	me.	I	am
going	to	show	him	his	real	face,	whatsoever	the	consequence.	Even	if	he	throws
a	 stone	at	me	 --	because	he	 is	 so	ugly,	he	may	get	 angry	 --	but	 I	 am	going	 to
show	him	his	real	face."
If	a	mirror	thinks	that	way	then	the	mirror	is	no	longer	a	mirror	--	mind	has	come
in.	It	is	not	mirroring,	it	is	his	decision.	The	purity	is	lost.	But	a	mirror	is	simply
there,	it	has	no	mind.	So	is	a	Buddha.	That's	why	Buddha	uses	the	word	TRUE
suchness.
This	 Buddhist	 meditation	 of	 taking	 note	 --	 try	 it,	 play	 with	 it.	 I	 cannot	 say
practice	it,	I	can	only	say	play	with	it.	Sitting,	walking,	sometimes	remember	it	-
-	just	play	with	it.
And	you	will	be	surprised	that	Buddha	has	given	to	the	world	one	of	the	greatest
techniques	to	penetrate	into	your	innermost	core.
Psychoanalysis	does	not	go	that	deep.	It	also	depends	on	something	like	this	--
free	 association	 of	 thoughts	 --	 but	 it	 remains	 superficial,	 because	 the	 other's
presence	is	a	hindrance.	The	psychoanalyst	 is	sitting	there;	even	if	he	is	sitting
behind	a	screen,	but	you	know	he	is	there.	That	very	knowledge	that	somebody
is	there	hinders.	You	cannot	be	a	real	mirror,	because	the	presence	of	the	other
cannot	allow	you	to	open	totally.	You	can	open	totally	only	to	your	own	self.
Buddha's	method	is	far	more	deep-going	because	it	is	not	to	be	told	to	anybody
else.	You	 have	 just	 to	 take	 note	 inside.	 It	 is	 subjective	 and	 yet	 objective.	 The
phenomenon	 has	 to	 happen	 in	 your	 subjectivity,	 but	 you	 have	 to	 remain
objective.
Just	take	note,	and	go	on	taking	note	as	if	it	is	none	of	your	business,	as	if	it	is
not	happening	to	you,	as	if	you	have	been	appointed	to	do	some	job:	"Stand	on
this	corner	of	 the	road	and	just	 take	note	of	whosoever	passes	by.	A	woman,	a
woman.	 A	 dog,	 a	 dog.	 A	 car,	 a	 car."	 You	 have	 nothing	 to	 do,	 you	 are	 not
involved.	You	are	absolutely	aloof,	distant.
It	 can	 take	you	 from	one	 thing	 to	 another.	And	one	moment	 comes	when	you
have	reached	to	the	very	cause	of	a	certain	chain.	And	there	are	many	chains	in
your	being,	thousands	of	threads	have	got	intertwined	into	each	other.	You	have
become	a	mess.	You	will	have	to	follow	each	thread,	slowly	slowly,	and	you	will
have	 to	 come	 to	 the	 end	 of	 each	 thread.	 Once	 the	 end	 is	 reached,	 that	 chain
disappears	from	your	being.	You	are	less	burdened.
Slowly	slowly,	one	day	it	happens	--	all	threads	have	disappeared,	because	you
have	looked	into	all	causes	that	were	causing	them.	They	were	effects.	One	day,
when	all	causes	have	been	looked	into,	you	have	observed	everything	--	all	the
games	 of	 the	 mind	 that	 it	 goes	 on	 playing	 with	 you,	 all	 the	 tricks	 and
cunningnesses	 of	 it,	 all	 the	 deceptions	 and	 mischiefs	 --	 the	 whole	 mind
disappears,	as	if	it	has	never	been	there.
There	is	a	famous	sutra	which	Buddha	has	said	about	the	mind,	about	life,	about
existence.	The	 sutra	 is	one	of	 the	most	golden	ones.	He	 says:	Think	about	 the
mind
As	stars,	a	fault	of	vision,	as	a	lamp,
A	mock	show,	dewdrops,	or	a	bubble,
A	dream,	a	lightning	flash,	or	a	cloud,
So	should	one	view	what	is	conditioned.
Mind	is	a	conditioned	phenomenon.	It	is	the	effect	of	some	causes.	You	cannot
destroy	the	effects	directly,	you	will	have	to	go	to	the	causes.	You	cannot	destroy
a	tree	just	by	cutting	its	branches	and	leaves	and	foliage;	you	will	have	to	go	to
the	roots	--	and	roots	are	hidden	underneath.
So	 are	 the	 roots	 in	 you.	 These	 things	 have	 to	 be	 understood.	 Buddha	 says,
"Think	 of	 your	 mind	 as	 stars."	Why?	 Stars	 exist	 only	 in	 darkness.	When	 the
morning	comes	and	the	sun	rises	they	disappear.
So	 is	 your	 mind;	 it	 exists	 only	 in	 unconsciousness.	 When	 the	 sun	 of
consciousness	rises	it	disappears	--	just	like	stars.	Don't	fight	with	the	stars.	You
will	not	be	able	to	destroy	them,	they	are	millions.	Just	become	more	aware	and
they	will	disappear	on	their	own	accord.
A	FAULT	OF	VISION.	Your	eye	is	ill,	it	has	some	fault.
Then	you	see	things	which	are	not	there.	For	example,	you	may	be	seeing	double
or	you	may	be	seeing	patterns,	because	your	eye	is	not	as	 it	should	be.	If	your
liver	is	not	good	your	eyes	will	start	seeing	things	which	are	not	there;	a	weak
liver,	and	eyes	will	 see	patterns	 in	 the	air,	bubbles,	designs,	patterns.	They	are
not	really	there,	they	are	caused	by	your	eye	itself.	You	cannot	fight	with	them,
you	cannot	destroy	them,	because	they	don't	exist.	All	that	is	needed	is	that	you
will	have	to	go	to	a	physician.	Your	eye	needs	treatment,	your	eye	needs	to	be
cured.
Buddha	used	to	say,	"I	am	not	a	philosopher,	I	am	a	physician.	I	don't	give	you	a
doctrine,	I	doctor	you.	I	don't	give	you	a	theory,	I	simply	give	you	a	medicine.	I
don't	talk	about	what	light	is,	I	only	help	you	open	your	eyes	so	you	yourself	can
see	it."
The	blind	man	cannot	be	helped	by	definitions	of	light	and	color	and	rainbows.
The	 only	 help	 possible	 is	 that	 his	 eyes	 have	 to	 be	 brought	 back.	 You	 cannot
explain	to	a	deaf	person	what	music	is.	Only	when	he	can	hear	will	he	know.	The
experience	is	the	only	explanation.
Third,	Buddha	says	think	of	the	mind	as	a	lamp.	Why	as	a	lamp?	The	lamp	burns
only	while	the	oil	in	it	lasts.	Once	the	oil	is	finished	the	flame	disappears.	So	is
the	mind	--	and	the	oil	is	the	desire.	If	there	are	desires	in	the	mind,	the	mind	will
remain	 alive.	 Don't	 fight	 with	 the	 flame,	 just	 don't	 go	 on	 pouring	 fuel	 on	 it.
Desire	is	the	fuel.
Desire	means	 that	which	 is,	 you	 are	 not	 satisfied	with	 it,	 you	want	 something
else.	You	 are	not	 living	 in	 suchness	 --	 that's	what	 desire	means.	Desire	means
you	want	things	to	be	other	than	they	are.	You	don't	want	them	the	way	they	are.
You	have	your	own	ideas,	you	have	your	private	dreams	to	impose	upon	reality.
You	are	not	contented	with	reality	as	such,	you	want	 to	change	 it	according	 to
your	heart's	desire.	Then	mind	will	remain.
Mind	exists	because	you	are	not	contented	with	reality.
So	many	people	 come	 to	me	 and	 they	 ask,	 "How	 to	 stop	 the	 thoughts?"	They
want	 to	 stop	 the	 thoughts	 directly.	 They	 cannot	 be	 stopped.	 Thoughts	 exist
because	desires	exist.
Unless	 you	 understand	 desire	 and	 drop	 desire,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 drop
thoughts	--
because	thoughts	are	by-products.
First	the	desire	comes	in.	You	see	a	beautiful	car	passing	by	and	a	desire	arises.
Buddha	 will	 say,	 "Say,	 'Car,	 car.'	 Finished.	 If	 a	 desire	 has	 arisen	 in	 you,	 say
again,	'Desire,	desire,'
and	be	finished".	But	you	have	seen	a	beautiful	car,	and	a	dream,	a	desire,	takes
possession	of	you.
Now	 so	many	 thoughts	will	 arise	 --	 "How	 can	 I	manage	 to	 purchase	 this	 car.
Should	 I	 sell	my	house?	Should	 I	go	 to	 the	bank?	Should	 I	 earn	more	money,
legal/illegal?	What	should	I	do?	This	car	has	to	be	possessed."	Now	how	can	you
stop	thoughts?
A	politician	used	 to	come	to	me	and	he	wanted	 to	stop	 thoughts,	he	wanted	 to
meditate.	I	said,	"First	you	drop	your	politics,	otherwise	how	can	you	stop?	You
are	so	ambitious."
First	 he	was	 an	M.L.A.	He	was	 very	 ambitious,	 he	 became	 a	 deputy	minister.
But	he	was	again	ambitious,	he	became	a	minister.	Now	he	was	trying	to	become
the	chief	minister	of	a	state.	And	he	said,	"But	I	have	come	only	for	this,	that	if
you	 can	 help	me	 to	 relax,	 to	meditate,	 I	 will	 be	more	 capable	 of	 fighting,	 of
giving	a	good	fight	to	my	competitors.
And	you	are	saying	drop	politics?	That	I	cannot	do."
But	 if	you	don't	drop	desire,	how	can	you	stop	 thinking?	Thinking	comes	as	a
help.	You	want	 to	be	 the	chief	minister,	 the	mind	starts	 spinning	and	weaving.
The	mind	says,
"Now	I	have	to	look	into	things,	into	how	it	should	be	managed."	Now	there	are
a	thousand	and	one	problems	to	be	solved,	only	then	can	your	desire	be	fulfilled.
Thinking	is	a	device	of	desire	to	fulfill	itself.	You	cannot	stop	thinking	directly.
Buddha	 says	 desire	 is	 like	 oil	 in	 a	 lamp.	 If	 the	 oil	 is	 no	more,	 the	 flame	will
disappear	on	its	own.	Think	of	mind	as	a	lamp,	think	of	mind	as	a	mock	show,	a
magic	 show.	 Nothing	 is	 substantial	 there,	 it	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 hypnotic	 state.	 The
hypnotist	 has	 hypnotized	 you	 and	 he	 says,	 "Look	 --	 the	 animal,	 the	 camel	 is
coming."	And	there	arises	a	form	of	a	camel	in	your	mind,	and	you	start	looking
at	the	camel	and	the	camel	is	there	--	for	you.
Everybody	is	laughing,	because	nobody	is	seeing	the	camel	but	you	are	seeing	it.
Your	mind	is	a	magic-box,	that's	what	Buddha	has	said	again	and	again.	It	goes
on	creating	phantoms,	 imaginations,	which	have	no	substance	 in	 them	--	but	 if
you	want	to	believe	in	them,	they	will	become	real.	Your	mind	is	a	great	mock
show.	In	fact	the	English	word	magic	comes	from	the	Indian	word	MAYA.	Maya
means	illusion.
Illusions	can	be	created,	and	you	all	create	illusions.	You	see	a	woman,	but	you
never	see	YATHA	BHUTAM	--	as	she	is.	That's	why	there	is	so	much	frustration
afterwards.	 You	 start	 seeing	 things	 which	 are	 not	 there,	 which	 are	 only
projections	of	your	mind.
You	project	beauty,	you	project	a	thousand	and	one	things	on	the	poor	woman.
When	 you	 come	 closer,	 when	 you	 are	 able	 to	 live	 with	 the	 woman,	 those
phantoms	 will	 start	 wearing	 out.	 Those	 imaginations	 cannot	 persist	 against
reality	for	long,	the	woman's	reality	will	assert.	And	then	you	will	feel	cheated
and	you	will	think	she	has	cheated	you.
She	has	not	done	a	thing.	She	herself	is	feeling	cheated	by	you,	because	she	has
also	projected	something	on	you.	She	was	thinking	you	are	a	hero,	an	Alexander
or	something,	a	great	man,	and	now	you	are	just	a	mouse	and	nothing	else.	And
she	was	 thinking	you	are	a	mountain	--	you	are	not	even	a	molehill!	She	feels
cheated.	You	both	feel	cheated,	you	both	feel	frustrated.
I	have	heard:
A	woman	walked	 into	 the	Missing	Persons	Bureau.	 "My	husband	 disappeared
last	night,"
she	reported.
"We'll	 do	 our	 best	 to	 find	 him,"	 the	 officers	 assured	 her.	 "Kindly	 give	 us	 a
description	of	the	man."
"Well,"	 she	waited	 a	 little	 and	 then	 said,	 "he's	 about	 five	 feet	 tall,	wears	 thick
glasses,	 has	 a	 bald	 head,	 drinks	 a	 lot,	 has	 a	 red	 nose,	 has	 a	 high	 squeaky
voice...."	And	 then	 she	 stopped	and	 thought	 for	 a	moment,	 and	 said,	 "Oh,	 just
forget	the	whole	thing!"
If	you	see	the	reality,	that	is	how	it	is.	You	will	say,	"Oh,	forget	the	whole	thing."
But	you	don't	see.	You	go	on	projecting.
One	day	Mulla	Nasruddin	said	to	me,	"My	uncle	lived	in	Italy	for	years.	He	died
from	wine,	women	and	song."
I	 said	 to	 him,	 "Nasruddin,	 I	 had	 never	 thought	 that	 your	 uncle	 was	 so	 Omar
Khayyamic.
Tell	me	something	more	about	your	uncle.	I	am	interested."
Mulla	Nasruddin	said,	"Actually	it	is	not	as	romantic	as	it	sounds.	And	I	will	not
hide	the	real	thing	from	you.	I	will	tell	you	the	truth,	Osho.	He	was	singing	this
rude	song	under	a	married	bird's	window	and	her	husband	came	out	and	brained
him	with	a	chianti	bottle.
He	died	of	wine,	women	and	song."
That's	how	we	go	on	and	on.
Reality	 is	 never	 frustrating,	 reality	 is	 always	 fulfilling.	 Frustrations	 come
because	we	impose	our	illusions	on	reality.
Buddha	says	it	is	a	mock	show.	Be	aware	--	your	mind	is	a	magician.	It	shows
you	things	which	are	not	there,	which	have	never	been	there.	It	deludes	you,	it
creates	an	unreal	world	around	you,	and	then	you	live	in	that	unreal	world.
This	world	of	trees	and	birds	and	animals	and	mountains	is	not	unreal!	But	the
world	that	your	MIND	creates	is	unreal.
When	you	hear	people	like	Buddha	talking	about	the	unreality	of	the	world,	don't
misunderstand	them.	They	don't	mean	that	the	trees	are	unreal,	they	don't	mean
that	 the	people	are	unreal.	They	mean	 that	whatsoever	you	have	been	 thinking
about	reality	is	unreal	--	your	mind	is	unreal.	Once	mind	is	dropped,	all	is	real.
Then	you	live	in	suchness,	then	you	become	tathata,	then	you	are	suchness.
The	professor	was	telling	his	8	a.m.	class,	"I	have	found	that	the	best	way	to	start
the	day	is	to	exercise	for	five	minutes,	take	a	deep	breath	of	air	and	then	finish
with	a	cold	shower.	Then	I	feel	rosy	all	over."
A	sleepy	voice	from	the	back	of	the	room	responded,	"Tell	us	more	about	Rosy!"
The	mind	 is	 ready	 to	 jump	upon	anything,	 to	project.	Be	very	careful	with	 the
mind.
That's	what	meditation	 is	 all	 about	 --	 being	careful,	 being	not	deceived	by	 the
mind.
The	 fifth	 thing:	 think	 of	 the	 mind	 as	 dew	 drops.	 Very	 fragile....	 Just	 for	 the
moment	the	dewdrops	exist.	Comes	the	morning	sun	and	they	evaporate.	Comes
a	 little	breeze	and	 they	slip	and	are	gone.	So	 is	 the	mind.	 It	knows	nothing	of
reality,	 knows	 nothing	 of	 eternity.	 It	 is	 a	 time-phenomenon.	 Think	 of	 it	 as
dewdrops.	But	you	think	of	it	as	pearls,	diamonds	--	as	if	it	is	going	to	stay.
And	 you	 need	 not	 believe	 in	Buddha,	 you	 just	watch	 your	mind.	 It	 is	 not	 the
same	even	for	two	consecutive	moments.	It	goes	on	changing,	it	 is	a	flux.	One
moment	it	is	this,	another	moment	it	is	that.	One	moment	you	are	in	deep	love,
another	 moment	 you	 are	 in	 deep	 hate.	 One	 moment	 you	 are	 so	 happy,	 and
another	moment	you	are	so	unhappy.	Just	watch	your	mind!
If	you	cling	with	this	mind	you	will	always	remain	in	a	turmoil,	because	you	will
never	be	able	 to	remain	 in	silence	--	something	or	other	will	go	on	happening.
And	 you	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 have	 any	 taste	 of	 eternity	 and	 only	 that	 taste
fulfills.	Time	is	constant	change.
And	sixth:	 think	of	your	mind	as	a	bubble.	Like	bubbles,	all	mind	experiences
burst	sooner	or	later	and	then	nothingness	is	left	in	the	hands.	Go	after	the	mind	-
-	it	is	a	bubble.	And	sometimes	the	bubble	looks	very	beautiful.	In	the	sunrays	it
may	look	like	a	rainbow,	it	may	have	all	the	colors	of	the	rainbow,	and	it	looks
really	 enchanting,	 majestic.	 But	 go	 rushing	 for	 it,	 catch	 hold	 of	 it,	 and	 the
moment	you	catch	hold	of	it,	it	is	no	longer	there.
And	that's	what	happens	every	day	in	your	life.	You	go	on	rushing	after	this	and
that,	and	the	moment	you	catch	hold	of	something	it	is	no	longer	the	same.	Then
all	beauty	is	gone
--	that	beauty	was	only	in	your	imagination.	Then	all	joy	is	gone	--	that	joy	was
only	in	your	hope.	Then	all	those	ecstasies	that	you	were	thinking	were	going	to
happen,	do	not	happen	--	they	were	only	in	your	imagination,	they	were	only	in
the	waiting.
Reality	is	totally	different	than	these	bubbles	of	your	imagination	--	and	they	all
burst.
Failure	 frustrates,	 so	 does	 success.	 Success	 also	 frustrates,	 ask	 the	 successful
people.
Poverty	 is	 frustrating,	 so	 is	 richness,	 ask	 the	 rich	 people.	 Everything,	 good	 or
bad,	is	frustrating	because	all	are	mind-bubbles.
But	we	go	on	chasing	 the	bubbles	 --	not	only	chasing,	we	want	 to	make	 them
bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger.	There	is	a	great	mania	in	the	world	to	make	every
experience	bigger.
There	is	a	story	to	the	effect	that	a	group	of	students	from	different	nations	were
asked	to	write	individual	essays	on	the	elephant.	A	German	student	wrote	on	the
uses	of	the	elephant	in	warfare.	An	English	student,	on	the	elephant's	aristocratic
character.	A	French	student,	on	lovemaking	among	the	elephants.	An	Indian,	on
the	 elephant's	 philosophical	 attitude.	 And	 an	 American	 chose	 for	 his	 subject,
how	to	make	bigger	and	better	elephants.
The	mind	is	continuously	thinking.	The	mind	is	American,	how	to	make	things
bigger	--
a	 bigger	 house,	 a	 bigger	 car,	 everything	 has	 to	 be	 bigger.	 And	 naturally,	 the
bigger	 the	bubble	becomes	 the	closer	 it	 comes	 to	bursting.	Small	bubbles	may
float	a	little	longer	on	the	surface	of	the	water;	bigger	bubbles	cannot	even	float
that	 much.	 Hence	 the	 American	 frustration.	 Nobody	 is	 as	 frustrated	 as	 the
American.
The	 American	 mind	 has	 succeeded	 in	 making	 the	 bubble	 very	 big;	 now	 it	 is
bursting	from	everywhere.	Now	there	seems	to	be	no	possibility	to	protect	it,	to
save	it;	it	is	exploding.
And	nobody	is	at	fault,	because	nobody	thinks,	"It	is	our	deepest	desire	and	we
have	succeeded	in	it."	Nothing	fails	like	success.
Seventh:	Buddha	says	think	of	the	mind	as	a	dream.	It	is	imagination,	subjective,
one's	 own	 creation.	 You	 are	 the	 director,	 you	 are	 the	 actor	 and	 you	 are	 the
audience.	All	that	goes	on	in	your	mind	is	a	private	imagination.	The	world	has
nothing	to	do	with	it.	The	existence	has	no	obligation	to	fulfill	it.
A	 doctor	 had	 just	 finished	 giving	 a	 patient,	 who	 was	 quite	 a	 bit	 more	 than
middle-aged,	a	thorough	physical	examination.	"I	can't	find	a	thing	wrong	with
you,	sir,"	the	doctor	said.
"But	I	recommend	you	give	up	about	half	of	your	love	life."
The	 old	man	 stared	 at	 the	 doctor	 for	 a	moment	 and	 then	 said,	 "Which	 half	 --
thinking	about	it	or	talking	about	it?"
Mind	 is	 insubstantial	 --	 thinking	 or	 talking.	 It	 knows	 nothing	 of	 the	 real.	 The
more	mind	you	have	the	less	reality	you	will	have;	 the	less	mind	you	have	the
more	 reality.	 The	 no-mind	 knows	what	 reality	 is,	 tathata.	 Then	 you	 become	 a
tathagata	--	one	who	has	known	suchness.
Or	think	of	the	mind	as	a	lightning	flash,	says	Buddha.	Don't	cling	to	it,	because
the	moment	you	cling	to	it	you	will	create	suffering	for	yourself.	The	lightning	is
only	for	the	moment	there,	and	it	 is	gone.	Everything	comes	and	goes,	nothing
remains,	and	we	go	on	clinging.	And	by	clinging	we	go	on	creating	misery.
Watch	your	mind,	how	ready	it	is	to	cling	to	anything,	how	afraid	the	mind	is	of
the	 future,	 of	 change.	 It	wants	 to	make	 everything	 stable,	 it	wants	 to	 cling	 to
everything	that	happens.	You	are	happy,	you	want	this	happiness	to	remain.	You
will	cling	with	it.	And	the	moment	you	cling	you	have	crushed	it	already,	it	is	no
more	there.
You	have	met	a	man,	a	woman,	you	are	in	love,	and	you	cling	and	you	want	this
love	to	stay	forever.	In	that	very	moment	--	when	you	desire	that	the	love	should
stay	forever	--	it	has	disappeared.	It	is	no	longer	there.	All	mind	experiences	are
like	lightning,	they	come	and	they	go.
Buddha	 says:	 "You	 simply	 watch."	 There	 is	 not	 time	 enough	 to	 cling!	 You
simply	watch,	take	note:	"Headache,	headache."	"Love,	love."	"Beauty,	beauty."
Just	take	note.	That	is	enough.	It	is	such	a	small	moment	that	nothing	more	can
be	done.	Take	note	and	become	aware.
Awareness	can	become	your	eternity	--	nothing	else.
And	 the	 last	 thing,	 the	 ninth:	 Buddha	 says	 think	 about	 mind	 experiences	 as
clouds,	 changing	 forms,	 fluxes.	You	 look	at	 the	 cloud;	 sometimes	 the	 cloud	 is
like	an	elephant,	and	 immediately	 it	 starts	changing	and	becomes	a	camel	or	a
horse,	and	so	many	things.
It	goes	on	changing.	 It	 is	never	 static,	 so	many	 forms	arise	and	disappear.	But
you	are	not	worried.	What	does	it	matter	to	you	whether	the	cloud	looks	like	an
elephant	or	it	looks	like	a	camel?	It	does	not	matter,	it	is	just	a	cloud.
So	is	the	mind	a	cloud	around	your	consciousness.	Your	consciousness	is	the	sky
and	the	mind	is	the	cloud.	Sometimes	it	is	an	anger	cloud,	sometimes	it	is	a	love
cloud,	sometimes	it	 is	a	greed	cloud	--	but	 these	are	forms	of	 the	same	energy.
Don't	choose,	don't	become	attached.	If	you	become	attached	with	the	elephant
in	 the	cloud	you	will	be	miserable.	Next	 time	you	will	 see	 that	 the	elephant	 is
gone	and	you	will	cry	and	you	will	weep.	But	who	is	responsible?	Is	the	cloud
responsible?	The	 cloud	 is	 simply	 following	 its	 nature.	You	 just	 remember	 --	 a
cloud	is	there	to	change,	so	is	the	mind.
Watch	from	your	inner	sky	and	let	the	clouds	float.	Become	just	a	watcher.	And
remember,	clouds	will	come	and	go,	you	can	remain	indifferent.
Buddha	has	given	indifference	very	great	value.	He	calls	it	UPEKSHA.	Remain
indifferent,	it	doesn't	matter.
Two	astronauts,	a	man	and	a	woman,	were	visiting	the	planet	Mars,	where	they
found	the	Martians	very	hospitable	and	eager	to	show	them	around.	After	a	few
days	 the	astronauts	decided	 to	pose	a	pressing	question	 to	 their	hosts,	"How	is
life	reproduced	on	Mars?"
The	Martian	 leader	 proceeded	 to	 take	 the	 astronauts	 to	 a	 laboratory	where	 he
showed	them	how	it	was	done.	First	he	measured	some	white	liquid	into	a	tube,
and	then	carefully	sprinkled	a	brown	powder	on	top,	stirred	the	mixture	and	set	it
aside.	In	nine	months,	the	astronauts	were	told,	this	mixture	would	develop	into
a	new	Martian.
Then	 it	was	 the	 turn	of	 the	Martians	 to	ask	how	 life	was	 reproduced	on	earth.
The	 astronauts,	 a	 bit	 embarrassed,	 eventually	 gathered	 courage	 to	 give	 a
demonstration,	and	began	to	make	love.	They	were	interrupted,	however,	by	the
hysterical	laughter	of	the	Martians.
"What	is	so	funny?"	the	astronauts	asked.	"That,"	replied	the	Martian	leader,	"is
how	we	make	Nescafe."
All	 forms.	 One	 need	 not	 be	 worried	 about	 these	 forms.	 Just	 watch.	 Think	 of
mind	As	stars,	a	fault	of	vision,	as	a	lamp,
A	mock	show,	dewdrops,	or	a	bubble,
A	dream,	a	lightning	flash,	or	cloud,
So	should	one	view	what	is	conditioned.
And	then	the	conditioning	disappears	and	you	come	to	the	unconditioned.	That
unconditioned	is	suchness,	truth,	reality.	YATHA	BHUTAM.
Now	the	sutras.
THE	LORD	ASKED:
"WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
DOES	IT	OCCUR	TO	THE	TATHAGATA,
"BY	ME	HAS	DHAMMA	BEEN	DEMONSTRATED"?
WHOSOEVER,	SUBHUTI,	WOULD	SAY,
"THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	DEMONSTRATED	DHAMMA",
HE	WOULD	SPEAK	FALSELY,
HE	WOULD	MISREPRESENT	ME
BY	SEIZING	ON	WHAT	IS	NOT	THERE.
AND	WHY?	'BECAUSE	NOT	EVEN	THE	LEAST	DHAMMA
IS	THERE	FOUND	OR	GOT	AT.
THEREFORE	IS	IT	CALLED
UTMOST,	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT	ENLIGHTENMENT.
FURTHERMORE,	SUBHUTI,
SELF-IDENTICAL	IS	THAT	DHAMMA,
AND	NOTHING	IS	THEREIN	AT	VARIANCE.
THEREFORE	IS	IT	CALLED
"UTMOST,	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT	ENLIGHTENMENT".
SELF-IDENTICAL	THROUGH	THE	ABSENCE	OF	A	SELF,
A	BEING,
A	SOUL,
OR	A	PERSON,
THE	UTMOST,	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT	ENLIGHTENMENT
IS	FULLY	KNOWN	AS	THE	TOTALITY
OF	ALL	THE	WHOLESOME	DHAMMAS.
Buddha	says:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
DOES	IT	OCCUR	TO	THE	TATHAGATA,
"BY	ME	HAS	DHAMMA	BEEN	DEMONSTRATED"?'
It	 cannot	 occur	 to	 a	 tathagata,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 more	 a	 person	 inside.
Personality	 is	 a	 form	of	 the	mind,	 the	 idea	of	 'I'	 is	 a	 form	 in	 the	 clouds.	To	 a
tathagata,	clouds	have	disappeared,	 there	 is	only	pure	 sky	 indefinable,	 infinite.
There	arises	no	idea	of	'I'.
So	a	tathagata	cannot	say,	"I	have	demonstrated	the	Dhamma."	In	the	first	place,
he	 is	 not.	 In	 the	 second	 place,	 because	 he	 has	 disappeared,	 now	 he	 knows
nobody	is.
For	example,	you	all	 fall	 asleep	 tonight	and	you	all	 start	dreaming.	Somebody
starts	saying	something	and	somebody	starts	groaning	and	somebody	is	shouting
and	a	man	who	is	awake,	what	will	he	think?	He	will	laugh	at	you	--	because	he
knows	dreams	are	just	dreams,	they	are	not	realities.
One	is	groaning,	one	is	crying,	one	is	shouting,	or	one	is	very	ecstatic	and	one	is
laughing
--	and	he	knows	all	is	false.	Neither	is	there	any	cause	to	laugh,	nor	is	there	any
cause	to	weep.	All	is	false.	People	are	asleep.	He	will	not	go	to	the	person	who	is
crying	 and	 console	 him,	 "Don't	 cry,"	 and	 he	 will	 not	 feel	 happy	 because
somebody	is	laughing.	He	knows	that	they	are	dreaming.
That	is	the	situation	of	a	tathagata,	of	a	Buddha.	One	who	has	known	his	inner
sky	now	knows	that	everybody	is	that	sky,	but	everybody	is	clouded.	And	those
clouds	 are	 false,	 imaginary.	 And	 if	 those	 clouds	 are	 false	 and	 imaginary	 then
there	are	no	beings.	To	whom	can	the	tathagata	demonstrate	the	Dhamma?	There
is	nobody,	there	is	pure	sky.
The	 moment	 you	 disappear,	 all	 beings	 disappear.	 Then	 there	 are	 no	 longer
separate	beings,	 it	 is	 all	one.	There	 is	nobody	 like	a	master	 and	nobody	 like	a
disciple.
That's	why	I	said	to	you	the	other	day	that	this	is	a	game,	a	great	drama	that	we
are	 enacting	here.	 It	 is	 the	 ancient	 drama,	 enacted	many	 times	 --	 enacted	with
Buddha	and	his	disciples,	Christ	and	his	disciples,	Krishna	and	his	disciples.	The
same	drama	is	being	enacted.	From	your	side	it	is	a	very	real	thing,	from	my	side
it	is	just	a	drama.	From	your	side	it	is	a	serious	thing	to	be	a	disciple,	from	my
side	 it	 is	 neither	 serious	 nor	 nonserious,	 it	 is	 simply	 a	 cloud.	 And	my	whole
effort	here	will	be	 to	help	you	 to	 see	 that	 it	 is	 just	 a	 cloud,	 a	 formation	 in	 the
clouds.
And	the	day	you	become	awakened	you	will	laugh,	because	there	is	nothing	to
be	achieved	--	nothing	to	 lose,	nothing	to	achieve.	All	 is	as	 it	has	always	been
since	the	very	beginning,	to	the	very	end,	it	remains	the	same.	Do	you	think	the
sky	 changes	 when	 clouds	 gather	 in	 the	 rainy	 season?	 Do	 you	 think	 the	 sky
changes	when	it	is	summer	and	the	clouds	disappear?	Do	you	think	there	is	any
change	in	the	sky?	The	sky	remains	the	same,	clouds	come	and	go.
So	is	SAMSARA	--	so	is	the	world,	the	mind.
Buddha	says:
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
DOES	IT	OCCUR	TO	THE	TATHAGATA,
"BY	ME	HAS	DHAMMA	BEEN	DEMONSTRATED"?
WHOSOEVER,	SUBHUTI,	WOULD	SAY,
"THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	DEMONSTRATED	DHAMMA",
HE	WOULD	SPEAK	FALSELY,	HE	WOULD	MISREPRESENT	ME
BY	SEIZING	ON	WHAT	IS	NOT	THERE.'
There	is	neither	I	nor	you,	there	is	neither	the	master	nor	the	disciple.	And	there
is	 nothing	 to	 demonstrate,	 all	 is	 as	 it	 is.	 There	 is	 nothing	 to	 teach,	 there	 is
nothing	to	learn.
'BECAUSE	NOT	EVEN	THE	LEAST	DHAMMA
IS	THERE	FOUND	OR	GOT	AT.
THEREFORE	IS	IT	CALLED
UTMOST,	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT	ENLIGHTENMENT.'
Buddha	 says:	 That's	 why	 we	 call	 it	 perfect	 enlightenment.	 There	 are	 other
religions	in	the	world	whose	idea	of	enlightenment	cannot	be	called	perfect.	For
example,	 the	 Christian	 idea	 of	 trinity	 --	 God,	 the	 Son	 and	 the	Holy	Ghost.	 It
means	 that	 at	 the	 very	 ultimate	 end	 also	 there	 remain	 three	 distinctions,
divisions.	 That	 means	 some	 cloud	 has	 been	 retained,	 some	 form	 has	 been
retained,	some	formality	has	been	retained.	The	world	continues	a	little	bit	still,
mind	has	not	been	dropped	utterly.
The	Hindu	idea	is	a	little	better.	Only	two	remain:	the	God	and	the	soul.	Better
than	 three,	but	 still	 the	 two,	 the	duality.	All	duality	 is	of	mind.	 It	 is	mind	 that
separates	 things,	 it	 is	 mind	 that	 defines.	 So	 this	 too	 cannot	 be	 perfect
enlightenment.
In	the	Jaina	concept	only	one	remains,	the	soul.	This	is	far	better	--	better	than
Christianity,	better	than	Hinduism.	only	one	remains,	the	soul.	But	Buddha	says
that	too	is	not	perfect	enlightenment,	because	to	think	of	one,	it	will	be	necessary
to	think	of	two	and	three	and	four	and	five.	Just	to	say	'one'	is	enough	to	bring	in
the	whole	train.	The	one	cannot	be	defined	without	bringing	the	two	in.
What	will	you	mean	by	'one'?	You	will	have	to	say	not	two.	So	the	one	will	need
the	other	at	 least	 for	 its	definition.	The	other	will	 remain	somewhere	hidden	 it
has	not	disappeared	completely.	If	I	am	there,	 then	you	will	be	there.	It	cannot
disappear	completely.	The	'I'	will	need	the	'you';	just	for	its	own	sheer	existence
the	'you'	will	be	needed.	'I'	exists	only	in	the	pair	with	'thou'.	They	are	together:;
I-thou	is	one	reality.
So	Buddha	says	 'I'	has	also	to	disappear.	Then	the	whole	trinity	is	gone.	In	the
ultimate	 experience	 there	 are	 neither	 three	 nor	 two	 nor	 one.	 It	 is	 pure	 sky	 --
nothingness,	 no	 being,	 no	 entity.	 It	 is	 zero,	 SHUNYATA.	 That's	 why	 Buddha
says	this	is
'...	UTMOST,	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT	ENLIGHTENMENT.
FURTHERMORE,	SUBHUTI,
SELF-IDENTICAL	IS	THAT	DHAMMA,
AND	NOTHING	IS	THEREIN	AT	VARIANCE.
THEREFORE	IS	IT	CALLED
UTMOST,	RIGHT	AND	PERFECT	ENLIGHTENMENT.
SELF-IDENTICAL	THROUGH	THE	ABSENCE	OF	A	SELF,
A	BEING,
A	SOUL,
OR	A	PERSON....'
All	 forms	 have	 disappeared.	 That's	 why	 the	 sky	 remains	 identical	 with	 itself.
There	are	no	 longer	any	forms	arising,	disappearing,	no	 longer	any	change,	no
movement.	All	dreams	have	disappeared.
It	 is	morning	and	 the	 sun	has	 risen	and	one	 is	 awake.	There	 is	 awareness,	but
there	 is	nobody	who	can	say,	"I	am	aware."	There	 is	 teaching,	but	nobody	can
say,	"I	am	the	teacher."	There	is	a	path,	but	almost	pathless.	Methods	--	but	they
cannot	be	called	methods.	The	master	and	the	disciple	--	but	only	from	the	side
of	the	disciple;	from	the	side	of	the	master	all	has	disappeared.
'WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK,	SUBHUTI,
DOES	IT	OCCUR	TO	A	TATHAGATA,
"BY	ME	HAVE	BEINGS	BEEN	SET	FREE"?
NOT	THUS	SHOULD	YOU	SEE	IT,	SUBHUTI!
AND	WHY?
THERE	IS	NOT	ANY	BEING	WHOM
THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	SET	FREE.'
How	can	that	idea	arise	in	a	tathagata	--	that	"I	have	set	many	beings	free"?	In
the	 first	place,	nobody	 is	unfree.	So	 if	you	ask,	 "Is	Buddha	a	savior?"	Buddha
will	say,	"No,	I	am	not	a	savior	--	because	nobody	needs	to	be	saved.	There	is
nobody	 to	 be	 saved."	And	 freedom	 is	 everybody's	 nature.	 Freedom	 is	 there,	 it
need	not	be	brought.	One	has	 to	 just	become	alert	of	what	 is	already	 there.	So
Buddha	says:
'THERE	IS	NOT	ANY	BEING	WHOM
THE	TATHAGATA	HAS	SET	FREE.'
FURTHER	THE	LORD	TAUGHT	ON	THAT	OCCASION
THE	FOLLOWING	STANZAS:
'THOSE	WHO	BY	MY	FORM	DID	SEE	ME,
AND	THOSE	WHO	FOLLOWED	ME	BY	VOICE
WRONG	THE	EFFORTS	THEY	ENGAGED	IN,
ME	THOSE	PEOPLE	WILL	NOT	SEE.'
If	you	see	Buddha	as	the	form,	as	the	body,	then	you	miss.	If	you	only	hear	the
word	of	the	Buddha	and	don't	hear	his	silence,	you	miss.	If	you	see	only	his	face
and	you	don't	see	his	inner	sky,	you	miss.
Buddha	speaks	only	to	utter	silence.	Buddha	is	there	in	the	form	only	to	express
the	formless.	Remember	this	stanza.	I	can	also	say	to	you	the	same:
'THOSE	WHO	BY	MY	FORM	DID	SEE	ME,
AND	THOSE	WHO	FOLLOWED	ME	BY	VOICE
WRONG	THE	EFFORTS	THEY	ENGAGED	IN,
ME	THOSE	PEOPLE	WILL	NOT	SEE.'
'FROM	THE	DHAMMA	SHOULD	ONE	SEE	THE	BUDDHAS....'
From	the	standpoint	of	the	sky,	not	from	the	standpoint	of	the	cloud.
'FROM	THE	DHAMMA	SHOULD	ONE	SEE	THE	BUDDHAS,
FROM	THE	DHAMMA-BODIES	COMES	THEIR	GUIDANCE,
YET	DHAMMA'S	TRUE	NATURE	CANNOT	BE	DISCERNED,
AND	NO	ONE	CAN	BE	CONSCIOUS	OF	IT	AS	AN	OBJECT.'
This	 is	 saying	 in	words	 that	which	cannot	be	said	 --	AVACHYA,	unspeakable.
Buddha	is	saying:	From	where	comes	the	Buddha's	guidance?	Not	from	himself
but	 from	 the	 eternal,	 from	 the	 sky.	Buddha	 is	 just	 a	passage,	 the	 eternal	 floats
through	him.
Don't	be	too	much	obsessed	by	the	words	that	he	uses,	listen	to	his	silence.	Don't
be	 too	much	 concerned	 by	 the	 body	 he	 lives	 in,	 don't	 be	 concerned	 with	 the
house	in	which	he	resides.	Think	of	 the	inner	presence,	 think	of	his	being.	See
deep.
And	how	to	see	deep	in	a	Buddha?	The	only	way	to	see	deep	in	a	Buddha	is	not
with	open	eyes	but	with	closed	eyes.	To	see	deep	into	yourself	is	the	only	way	to
see	deep	into	a	Buddha.	If	you	become	acquainted	with	your	own	inner	sky,	you
will	 be	 acquainted	with	 the	 Buddha's	 --	 all	 the	 Buddhas	 of	 all	 the	 ages,	 past,
present	and	future	too.	Descend	into	your	own	being.
'WHOSOEVER	SAYS
THAT	THE	TATHAGATA	GOES	OR	COMES,
STANDS,	SITS	OR	LIES	DOWN,
HE	DOES	NOT	UNDERSTAND	THE	MEANING
OF	MY	TEACHING.
AND	WHY?
"TATHAGATA"	IS	CALLED
ONE	WHO	HAS	NOT	GONE	ANYWHERE,
NOR	COME	FROM	ANYWHERE.
THEREFORE	IS	HE	CALLED	THE	TATHAGATA,
THE	ARHAT,	THE	FULLY	ENLIGHTENED	ONE.'
When	clouds	come,	do	you	think	the	sky	has	gone	somewhere?	When	the	clouds
go,	 do	 you	 think	 the	 sky	 has	 come	 back?	 The	 sky	 remains.	 Your	 innermost
nature	remains.
Once	you	were	a	rock.	That	was	a	cloud	that	had	taken	the	form	of	a	rock;	you
lived	in	the	mineral	world.	Then	you	became	a	tree,	you	changed	your	form;	you
became	 a	 rosebush	 or	 a	 pine	 or	 a	 cedar	 of	 Lebanon.	 But	 the	 inner	 nature
remained	 the	 same.	 Now	 the	 form	 of	 the	 cloud	 changed,	 you	 lived	 in	 the
vegetable	 kingdom.	 Then	 you	 became	 an	 animal	 --	 maybe	 a	 lion,	 a	 tiger,	 a
crocodile,	a	deer,	a	dog.	Only	 the	form	changed,	but	 the	 inner	sky	remains	 the
same.	Then	you	became	a	man	or	a	woman	--	again	the	form	is	changing.	You
can	become	an	angel	in	the	heaven	--	only	the	form	will	change.
You	can	go	on	moving	 from	one	 form	 to	another,	you	can	go	on	dying	 in	one
form	and	being	born	into	another	form.	This	is	called	samsara:	getting	caught	in
one	form,	then	getting	caught	in	another,	moving	from	one	form	to	another	form,
from	one	prison	to	another	prison.
What	is	buddhahood?	Becoming	aware	of	the	inner	sky	that	was	in	the	rock,	in
the	animals,	in	the	trees,	in	man	and	in	woman.	Once	you	become	aware	of	that
inner	sky,	you	are	released	from	all	forms.	That	is	freedom.	Not	that	you	become
free,	because	in	that	freedom	you	don't	exist,	you	can't	exist.
"You	become	free"	simply	means	you	become	free	from	yourself.	All	selves	are
forms.
The	rock	has	a	self,	a	soul.	The	tree	has	a	self,	the	animal	has	a	self.	The	Buddha
has	no	self	--	he	is	utter	freedom.	That's	why	Buddha	says:
'WHOSOEVER	SAYS
THAT	THE	TATHAGATA	GOES	OR	COMES....
Certainly	 he	 goes	 and	 comes	 --	 this	Diamond	 Sutra	 started	with	 that.	 See	 the
beauty	of	it:	The	Diamond	Sutra	started	with	it	--	that	Buddha	goes	to	beg,	then
he	comes	back,	puts	down	his	bowl,	cleanses	his	feet,	sits,	looks	in	front	of	him,
and	Subhuti	asks.
The	sutra	started	with	the	form	and	the	sutra	is	ending	on	the	formless.
That	is	the	beginning.	You	cannot	listen	to	my	silence	first;	first	you	will	have	to
listen	to	my	words.	You	cannot	see	my	inner	sky	directly,	first	you	will	have	to
see	this	cloud	that	surrounds	me.	Only	then,	slowly	slowly,	will	you	start	falling
in	tune	with	the	innermost.
First,	naturally,	you	come	to	the	outer.	First	you	see	the	house	and	then	you	will
see	the	dweller.
It	is	natural,	nothing	is	wrong	in	it,	but	don't	cling	to	the	house.	Move	from	the
house,	from	the	dwelling	to	the	dweller.	This	is	the	beauty	of	this	sutra	--	it	starts
with	Buddha's	body	--	how	he	walks,	how	he	sits,	how	he	looks,	what	he	does.
And	now	it	ends	on	this	strange	sentence:
'WHOSOEVER	SAYS
THAT	THE	TATHAGATA	GOES	OR	COMES,
STANDS,	SITS	OR	LIES	DOWN,
HE	DOES	NOT	UNDERSTAND	THE	MEANING
OF	MY	TEACHING.
AND	WHY?
"TATHAGATA"	IS	CALLED
ONE	WHO	HAS	NOT	GONE	ANYWHERE,
NOR	COME	FROM	ANYWHERE.
THEREFORE	IS	HE	CALLED	THE	TATHAGAT,
THE	ARHAT,	THE	FULLY	ENLIGHTENED	ONE.'
Who	 is	called	 the	 fully	Enlightened	One?	One	who	has	come	 to	know	the	sky
that	never	moves,	one	who	has	come	to	know	the	eternal	which	is	beyond	time,
one	who	has	come	to	know	truth.
Truth	 is	 always	 the	 same	 --	 dreams	 change,	 truth	 is	 always	 the	 same.	 Be
acquainted	 with	 Buddha's	 words	 but	 don't	 remain	 there.	 That	 is	 just	 an
introduction	--	move	from	there.
What	I	say	 to	you,	 listen	 to	 it	but	don't	become	obsessed	with	 it	 --	move	from
there.	By	and	by,	fall	in	tune	with	my	silence.	By	and	by,	forget	me	--	forget	the
cloud,	 and	 enter	 the	 sky.	 Then	 you	 are	 really	 in	 tune.	 Then	 you	 have	 started
moving	into	truth	itself.
Words	 are	 about	 truth,	 they	 are	 not	 truth	 themselves.	 The	word	God	 is	 just	 a
word,	it	is	not	God.	The	word	love	is	just	a	word,	it	is	not	love.	Use	the	word,
then	throw	it	away.	It	is	the	container,	not	the	content.
With	the	master,	don't	become	too	much	attached	with	his	body.	That	attachment
will	 become	 a	 barrier.	Love	 the	master,	 but	 go	 deeper.	 Slowly	 slowly,	 step	 by
step,	 penetrate	 his	 innermost	 core.	 And	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 --	 because	 the
innermost	is	the	same.	In	the	innermost,	the	disciple	and	the	master	meet.	In	the
innermost	there	is	no	distinction.
Kabir	has	said	a	very	strange	sentence:	"The	moment	has	come	when	the	master
touches	the	feet	of	the	disciple."	Then	there	is	no	distinction.	Who	is	the	master
and	who	is	the	disciple	--	there	is	no	distinction.
When	Rinzai	was	with	his	master	--	the	master	was	a	very	very	hard	master,	as
Zen	masters	are	--	Rinzai	was	beaten	so	many	times,	was	thrown,	and	the	master
would	jump	on	him	and	beat	him.	Then	one	day	Rinzai	was	going	on	a	journey,
a	 pilgrimage,	 and	 the	master	 called	 him	 and	 started	 beating	 him.	 Rinzai	 said,
"But	I	have	not	even	said	a	single	word!	And	I	have	not	done	anything."
The	master	said,	"l	know,	but	you	are	going	on	this	pilgrimage	and	my	feeling	is
that	 when	 you	 come	 back	 you	will	 be	 enlightened	 and	 I	 will	 never	 have	 any
chance	to	beat	you	again.	That's	why	--	this	is	the	last	chance."
And	when	Rinzai	came	back,	yes,	it	had	happened.	The	master	bowed	his	head
and	said,
"Now	you	can	beat	me."	Not	 that	Rinzai	has	beaten	 the	master,	but	 the	master
says,	"Now	you	can	beat	me.	Now	you	enjoy	--	I	have	enjoyed	beating	you	so
much.	You	have	arrived	home."
At	the	innermost	core	there	is	no	distinction.
Buddha	 is	 saying	 don't	 be	 too	 much	 concerned	 with	 the	 words.	 Use	 them	 as
steps,	stepping-stones.	Don't	be	too	much	concerned	with	Buddha's	movements,
bodily	 movements.	 People	 are	 there,	 imitative	 people,	 who	 will	 start	 walking
like	the	Buddha,	who	will	start	talking	like	the	Buddha,	who	will	start	using	the
same	words,	 the	same	gestures.	Buddha	 is	saying	 those	are	not	 the	real	 things.
The	real	thing	is	beyond	forms.	It	cannot	be	imitated.
Don't	 imitate	 the	 master.	 Only	 then	 one	 day	 will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 become	 the
master.	Love,	listen,	but	always	remember	that	you	have	to	go	far	in.	You	have
to	transcend	all	clouds.
Enough	for	today.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	That	Realm	of	Nirvana
Chapter	title:	Love	Released
Chapter	title:	The	Wheel	of	Dhamma
Chapter	title:	From	the	Beyond
Chapter	title:	The	Taste	of	Enlightenment
Chapter	title:	Bodhisattvahood
Chapter	title:	A	Dweller	in	Peace
Chapter	title:	Already	Home
Chapter	title:	Pure	Land	Paradise
Chapter	title:	Utter	Emptiness
Chapter	title:	The	Fully	Enlightened	One
