
The	Golden	Future
Talks	given	from	19/04/87	pm	to	31/05/87	pm
English	Discourse	series
40	Chapters
Year	published:	1988
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	The	language	of	the	golden	future
19	April	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704195
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN01
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
91
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	 WHILE	 AGO	 YOU	 SAID	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 SILENCE	 WHICH
STARTLED
ME.	 IN	 MY	 SLEEPINESS,	 I'D	 SIMPLY	 THOUGHT	 OF	 IT	 AS	 JUST	 AN
ABSENCE	--
AN	ABSENCE	OF	NOISES.	BUT	YOU	WERE	SAYING	IT	HAD	POSITIVE
QUALITIES,	 A	 POSITIVE	 SOUND.	 AND	 IN	 MY	 MEDITATIONS,	 I'VE
NOTICED
THE	 DISTINCTION	 BETWEEN	 A	 SILENCE	 IN	 MY	 BODY	 AND	 A
SILENCE	IN
MY	MIND.	I	CAN	HAVE	THE	FIRST,	WITHOUT	THE	SECOND.	BELOVED
MASTER,	PLEASE	TALK	TO	ME	ABOUT	SILENCE.
Anand	 Somen,	 silence	 usually	 is	 understood	 to	 be	 something	 negative,
something	 empty,	 an	 absence	 of	 sound,	 of	 noises.	 This	 misunderstanding	 is
prevalent	because	very	few	people	have	ever	experienced	silence.	All	 that	 they
have	experienced	in	the	name	of	silence	is	noiselessness.	But	silence	is	a	totally
different	phenomenon.	It	is	utterly	positive.	It	is	existential,	it	is	not	empty.	It	is
overflowing	with	a	music	that	you	have	never	heard	before,	with	a	fragrance	that
is	unfamiliar	to	you,	with	a	light	that	can	only	be	seen	by	the	inner	eyes.	It	is	not
something	 fictitious;	 it	 is	 a	 reality,	 and	 a	 reality	 which	 is	 already	 present	 in
everyone	 --	 just	we	never	 look	 in.	All	our	 senses	are	extrovert.	Our	eyes	open
outside,	our	ears	open	outside,	our	hands	move	outside,	our	legs...	all	our	senses
are	meant	to	explore	the	outside	world.
But	 there	 is	a	sixth	sense	also,	which	 is	asleep	because	we	have	never	used	 it.
And	no	society,	no	culture,	no	educational	system	helps	people	to	make	the	sixth
sense	active.
That	sixth	sense,	in	the	East,	is	called	"the	third	eye."	It	looks	inwards.	And	just
as	there	is	a	way	of	looking	in,	so	there	is	a	way	of	hearing	in,	so	there	is	a	way
of	smelling	in.
Just	 as	 there	 are	 five	 senses	 moving	 outward,	 there	 are	 five	 counter-senses
moving	inward.	In	all,	man	has	ten	senses,	but	the	first	sense	that	starts	the	inner
journey	is	the	third	eye,	and	then	other	senses	start	opening	up.
Your	inner	world	has	its	own	taste,	has	its	own	fragrance,	has	its	own	light.	And
it	 is	utterly	 silent,	 immensely	silent,	 eternally	 silent.	There	has	never	been	any
noise,	and	there	will	never	be	any	noise.	No	word	can	reach	there,	but	you	can
reach.	The	mind	cannot	reach	there,	but	you	can	reach	because	you	are	not	the
mind.	 The	 function	 of	 the	mind	 is	 again	 to	 be	 a	 bridge	 between	 you	 and	 the
objective	world,	and	the	function	of	the	heart	is	to	be	a	bridge	between	you	and
yourself.
The	silence	that	I	have	been	talking	about	is	the	silence	of	the	heart.	It	is	a	song
in	itself,	without	words	and	without	sounds.	It	is	only	out	of	this	silence	that	the
flowers	 of	 love	 grow.	 It	 is	 this	 silence	 that	 becomes	 the	 garden	 of	 Eden.
Meditation,	and	only	meditation,	is	the	key	to	open	the	doors	of	your	own	being.
You	are	 asking,	 "A	while	 ago	you	 said	 something	about	 silence	which	 startled
me	in	my	sleepiness.	I	had	simply	thought	of	it	as	just	an	absence	--	an	absence
of	noises.	But	you	were	saying	it	had	positive	qualities,	a	positive	sound.	And	in
my	meditations,	I	have	noticed	a	distinction	between	a	silence	in	my	body	and	a
silence	in	my	mind."
Your	 experiences	 are	 true.	 The	 body	 knows	 its	 own	 silence	 --	 that	 is	 its	 own
well-being,	 its	 own	 overflowing	 health,	 its	 own	 joy.	 The	mind	 also	 knows	 its
silence,	when	 all	 thoughts	 disappear	 and	 the	 sky	 is	without	 any	 clouds,	 just	 a
pure	space.	But	the	silence	I	am	talking	about	is	far	deeper.
I	am	talking	about	the	silence	of	your	being.
These	silences	that	you	are	talking	about	can	be	disturbed.	Sickness	can	disturb
the	 silence	 of	 your	 body,	 and	 death	 is	 certainly	 going	 to	 disturb	 it.	 A	 single
thought	can	disturb	the	silence	of	your	mind,	the	way	a	small	pebble	thrown	into
the	silent	lake	is	enough	to	create	thousands	of	ripples,	and	the	lake	is	no	longer
silent.	The	silence	of	the	body	and	the	mind	are	very	fragile	and	very	superficial,
but	in	themselves	they	are	good.
To	experience	them	is	helpful,	because	it	indicates	that	there	may	be	even	deeper
silences	of	the	heart.
And	the	day	you	experience	the	silence	of	the	heart,	it	will	be	again	an	arrow	of
longing,	moving	you	even	deeper.
Your	very	center	of	being	is	the	center	of	a	cyclone.	Whatever	happens	around	it
does	not	 affect	 it;	 it	 is	 eternal	 silence.	Days	come	and	go,	years	come	and	go,
ages	 come	 and	 pass,	 lives	 come	 and	 go,	 but	 the	 eternal	 silence	 of	 your	 being
remains	 exactly	 the	 same	 --	 the	 same	 soundless	music,	 the	 same	 fragrance	 of
godliness,	 the	 same	 transcendence	 from	 all	 that	 is	 mortal,	 from	 all	 that	 is
momentary.
It	is	not	your	silence.
You	are	it.
It	 is	 not	 something	 in	 your	 possession;	 you	 are	 possessed	 by	 it,	 and	 that's	 the
greatness	 of	 it.	 Even	 you	 are	 not	 there,	 because	 even	 your	 presence	will	 be	 a
disturbance.
The	silence	is	so	profound	that	there	is	nobody,	not	even	you.	And	this	silence
brings	 truth,	 and	 love,	 and	 thousands	 of	 other	 blessings	 to	 you.	 This	 is	 the
search,	 this	 is	 the	 longing	 of	 all	 the	 hearts,	 of	 all	 those	 who	 have	 a	 little
intelligence.
But	 remember,	 don't	 get	 lost	 in	 the	 silence	 of	 the	 body,	 or	 the	 silence	 of	 the
mind,	or	even	the	silence	of	 the	heart.	Beyond	these	three	is	 the	fourth.	We,	 in
the	 East,	 have	 called	 it	 simply	 "the	 fourth,"	 turiya.	We	 have	 not	 given	 it	 any
name.	Instead	of	a	name	we	have	given	it	a	number,	because	it	comes	after	three
silences	--	of	the	body,	of	the	mind,	of	the	heart	--	and	beyond	it,	there	is	nothing
else	to	be	found.
So,	don't	misunderstand.	Most	of	the	people...	for	example,	there	are	people	who
are	practicing	yoga	exercises.	Yoga	exercises	give	a	silence	of	the	body,	and	they
are	 stuck	 there.	 Their	 whole	 life,	 they	 practice,	 but	 they	 know	 only	 the	most
superficial	silence.
Then	 there	 are	 people	 who	 are	 doing	 concentrations	 like	 transcendental
meditation,	of	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi.	It	can	give	you	a	silence	which	will	be
only	 of	 the	 mind.	 Just	 by	 repeating	 a	 name	 or	 a	 mantra...	 the	 very	 repetition
creates	in	its	wake,	a	silence	in	the	mind.	But	it	 is	not	meditation,	and	it	 is	not
transcendental.
And	there	are	Sufis	who	know	the	third,	which	is	 the	deepest	of	 the	three.	But
still	it	is	not	the	goal,	the	target;	your	arrow	is	still	falling	short.	It	is	very	deep
because	Sufis	know	the	heart	more	 than	anybody	else.	For	centuries	 they	have
been	working	 on	 the	 heart,	 just	 as	 yogis	 have	 been	working	 on	 the	 body,	 and
people	of	concentration	and	contemplation	have	been	working	on	the	mind.
The	 Sufis	 know	 the	 immense	 beauty	 of	 love.	 They	 radiate	 love,	 but	 still	 the
home	has	not	been	reached.	You	have	to	remember	the	fourth.	Unless	you	reach
the	fourth,	continue	the	journey.
People	misunderstand	very	easily.	 Just	 a	 little	bit	of	 experience	and	 they	 think
they	have	arrived.	And	mind	is	very	clever	to	rationalize.
There	 is	a	Sufi	story	about	Mulla	Nasruddin.	The	Mulla	hears	a	commotion	 in
the	street	outside	his	house	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	His	wife	tells	him	to	go
down,	 and	 after	many	 arguments	 he	 puts	 a	 blanket	 on	 his	 shoulders	 and	 goes
down	to	the	street.	There	were	many	people	in	the	street	and	a	lot	of	noise,	and
in	the	crowd	somebody	steals	his	blanket.
The	Mulla	goes	home	naked,	and	his	wife	asks	him,	"What	was	that	all	about?"
The	 Mulla	 says,	 "It	 seems	 to	 be	 about	 my	 blanket,	 because	 as	 they	 got	 the
blanket	they	all	disappeared.	They	were	just	waiting	for	the	blanket.	And	I	was
telling	yoùDon't	 force	me	 to	go	 there.'	Now	I	have	 lost	my	blanket	and	I	have
come	naked.	It	was	none	of	our	business."
He	has	found	a	rationalization,	and	it	looks	logical,	that	as	they	got	his	blanket
they	 all	 disappeared.	 And	 the	 poor	 Mulla	 thinking	 that	 perhaps	 that	 was	 the
whole	problem....
"Their	argument	and	 their	noise	 just	 in	 front	of	my	house	 in	 the	middle	of	 the
night,	and	my	foolish	wife	persuaded	me	finally	to	lose	my	blanket!"
Mind	is	continuously	rationalizing,	and	sometimes	it	may	appear	that	what	it	is
saying	is	right,	because	it	gives	arguments	for	it.	But	one	has	to	beware	of	one's
own	mind,	 because	 in	 this	 world	 nobody	 can	 cheat	 you	more	 than	 your	 own
mind.	 Your	 greatest	 enemy	 is	 within	 you,	 just	 as	 your	 greatest	 friend	 is	 also
within	you.
The	greatest	enemy	is	just	your	first	encounter,	and	your	greatest	friend	is	going
to	be	your	last	encounter	--	so	don't	be	prevented	by	any	experience	of	the	body
or	 the	mind	 or	 the	 heart.	 Remember	 always	 one	 of	 the	 famous	 statements	 of
Gautam	Buddha.	He	used	to	conclude	his	sermons	every	day	with	the	same	two
words,	charaiveti,	charaiveti."	Those	two	simple	words	--	just	one	word	repeated
twice	--	means	"Don't	stop;	go	on,	go	on."
Never	 stop	 until	 the	 road	 ends,	 until	 there	 is	 nowhere	 else	 to	 go	 --	 charaiveti,
charaiveti.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	IT	REALLY	WORTH	PUTTING	ANY	ENERGY	INTO	IMPROVING	MY
PERSONALITY?
Anand	Tarika,	have	you	ever	heard	me?	I	have	been	constantly	telling	you	that
the	personality	has	to	be	dropped	so	that	your	individuality	can	be	discovered.	I
have	been	insisting	that	the	personality	is	not	you;	it	is	a	mask	people	have	put
over	you.	It	is	not	your	authentic	reality,	it	is	not	your	original	face.	And	you	are
asking	 me,	 "Is	 it	 really	 worth	 putting	 any	 energy	 into	 improving	 my
personality?"
Put	 your	 energy	 into	 destroying	 your	 personality.	 Put	 your	 energy	 into
discovering	your	individuality.	And	make	the	distinction	very	clear:	individuality
is	 that	 which	 you	 have	 brought	 from	 your	 very	 birth.	 Individuality	 is	 your
essential	being,	and	personality	is	what	the	society	has	made	of	you,	what	they
wanted	to	make	of	you.
No	 society	 up	 to	 now	 has	 been	 able	 to	 give	 freedom	 to	 their	 children	 to	 be
themselves.	It	seems	risky.	They	may	prove	rebellious.	They	may	not	follow	the
religion	of	 their	 forefathers;	 they	may	not	 think	 the	great	 politicians	 are	 really
great;	they	may	not	trust	in	your	moral	values.	They	will	find	their	own	morality,
and	 they	will	 find	 their	 own	 lifestyle.	 They	will	 not	 be	 replicas,	 they	will	 not
repeat	the	past;	they	will	be	beings	of	the	future.
This	 has	 created	 fear	 that	 they	 may	 go	 astray.	 Before	 they	 go	 astray,	 every
society	 tries	 to	give	 them	a	certain	direction	how	to	 live,	a	certain	 ideology	of
what	is	good	and	what	is	evil,	a	certain	religion,	a	certain	holy	scripture.	These
are	 ways	 to	 create	 the	 personality,	 and	 the	 personality	 functions	 like	 an
imprisonment.	 You	 are	 asking	 me,	 Tarika,	 that	 you	 want	 to	 improve	 this
personality.	Are	you	your	own	enemy?
But	 this	 is	 not	 only	 you.	 Millions	 of	 people	 in	 the	 world	 know	 only	 their
personality;	 they	don't	know	that	 there	 is	anything	more	than	personality.	They
have	completely	forgotten	themselves,	and	they	have	forgotten	even	the	way	to
reach	themselves.	They	have	all	become	actors,	hypocrites.	They	have	become
puppets	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 priests,	 of	 the	 politicians,	 of	 the	 parents;	 they	 are
doing	things	which	they	never	want	 to	do	and	they	are	not	doing	things	which
they	are	hankering	to	do.
Their	life	is	split	in	such	a	diametrically	opposite	way	that	they	can	never	be	at
peace.
Their	nature	will	assert	itself	again	and	again,	will	not	leave	them	at	peace.	And
their	 so-called	 personality	 will	 go	 on	 repressing	 it,	 forcing	 it	 deeper	 into	 the
unconscious.	This	conflict	divides	you	and	your	energy	--	and	a	house	divided
cannot	stand	long.	This	is	the	whole	misery	of	human	beings	--	why	there	is	not
much	dance,	much	song,	much	joyfulness.
People	are	so	much	engaged	in	warfare	with	themselves.	They	don't	have	energy,
and	they	don't	have	time	to	do	anything	else	except	fight	with	themselves.	Their
sensuality	they	have	to	fight,	their	sexuality	they	have	to	fight,	their	individuality
they	have	to	fight,	their	originality	they	have	to	fight.	And	they	have	to	fight	for
something	which	they	don't	want	to	be,	which	is	not	part	of	their	nature,	which	is
not	 their	 destiny.	 So	 they	 can	 pretend	 to	 be	 false	 for	 a	 time	 --	 again	 the	 real
asserts.
Their	whole	 life	goes	on,	up	and	down,	and	 they	cannot	 figure	out	who	 really
they	 are:	 the	 repressor	 or	 the	 repressed?	 the	 oppressor	 or	 the	 oppressed?	And
whatever	they	do,	they	cannot	destroy	their	nature.	They	can	certainly	poison	it;
they	can	certainly	destroy	its	joy,	they	can	destroy	its	dance,	they	can	destroy	its
love.	 They	 can	 make	 their	 life	 a	 mess,	 but	 they	 cannot	 destroy	 their	 nature
completely.	 And	 they	 cannot	 throw	 away	 their	 personality,	 because	 their
personality	 carries	 their	 forefathers,	 their	 parents,	 their	 teachers,	 their	 priests,
their	whole	past.	It	is	their	heritage;	they	cling	to	it.
My	whole	teaching	is,	don't	cling	to	personality.	It	 is	not	yours,	and	it	 is	never
going	 to	 be	 yours.	 Allow	 your	 nature	 full	 freedom.	 And	 respect	 yourself,	 be
proud	 of	 being	 yourself,	 whatever	 you	 are.	 Have	 some	 dignity!	 Don't	 be
destroyed	by	the	dead.
People	who	have	been	dead	for	thousands	of	years	are	sitting	on	your	head.	They
are	your	personality	 --	and	you	want	 to	 improve	on	 them?	So	call	 a	 few	more
dead!	 Graves	 have	 to	 be	 searched	 for...	 bring	 out	 more	 skeletons,	 surround
yourself	with	all	kinds	of	 skeletons.	You	will	be	 respected	by	 the	 society.	You
will	be	honored,	rewarded;	you	will	have	great	prestige,	you	will	be	thought	to
be	a	saint.	But	living	with	the	dead,	surrounded	by	the	dead,	you	will	not	be	able
to	laugh	--	it	will	be	so	out	of	place	--	you	will	not	be	able	to	dance,	you	will	not
be	able	to	sing,	you	will	not	be	able	to	love.
Personality	 is	 a	 dead	 thing.	Drop	 it!	 --	 in	 a	 single	 blow,	 not	 in	 fragments,	 not
slowly,	today	a	little	bit	and	then	tomorrow	a	little	bit,	because	life	is	short	and
tomorrow	is	not	certain.
The	false	is	false.	Discard	it	totally!
Every	 real	human	being	has	 to	be	a	 rebel...	 rebel	against	whom?	--	against	his
own	personality.
The	 Japanese-American	 was	 a	 long-time	 customer	 at	 this	 Greek	 restaurant,
because	 he	 had	 discovered	 that	 they	 made	 specially	 tasty	 fried	 rice.	 Each
evening	he	would	come	in	the	restaurant,	and	he	would	order	"flied	lice."	This
always	 caused	 the	 Greek	 restaurant	 owner	 to	 nearly	 roll	 on	 the	 floor	 with
laughter.	Sometimes	he	would	have	two	or	three	friends	stand	nearby	just	to	hear
the	Japanese	customer	order	his	"flied	lice."
Eventually	the	customer's	pride	was	so	hurt	that	he	took	a	special	diction	lesson
just	 to	 be	 able	 to	 say	 "fried	 rice"	 correctly.	 The	 next	 time	 he	 went	 to	 the
restaurant	he	said	very	plainly,	"Fried	rice,	please."
Unable	 to	 believe	 his	 ears,	 the	 Greek	 restaurant	 owner	 said,	 "Sir,	 would	 you
repeat	that?"
The	Japanese-American	replied,	"You	heard	what	I	said,	you	flucking	Gleek!"
How	long	can	you	go	on	pretending?	The	reality	is	going	to	come	up	some	day
or	other,	and	it	is	better	that	it	comes	sooner.
There	 is	 no	 need,	 Tarika,	 to	 improve	 your	 diction!	 Just	 drop	 that	 whole
personality	thing.
Just	 be	 yourself.	 Howsoever	 raw	 and	 howsoever	 wild	 it	 appears	 to	 be	 in	 the
beginning,	soon	it	starts	having	its	own	grace,	its	own	beauty.
And	the	personality...	you	can	go	on	polishing	it,	but	it	 is	just	polishing	a	dead
thing	which	 is	going	 to	destroy	not	only	your	 time,	your	energy,	your	 life,	but
also	the	people	who	are	around	you.
We	are	all	affecting	each	other.	When	everybody	 is	doing	something,	you	also
start	doing	it.	Life	is	very	contagious;	everybody	is	improving	his	personality	--
that's	why	the	idea	has	arisen	in	your	mind.
But	my	people	are	not	doing	that.	My	people	are	not	a	herd,	not	a	mob.	They	are
respectful	 of	 themselves,	 and	 they	 are	 respectful	 of	 others.	 They	 are	 proud	 of
their	freedom	and	they	want	everybody	else	to	be	free,	because	their	freedom	has
given	them	so	much	love	and	so	much	grace.	They	would	like	everybody	else	in
the	world	to	be	free,	loving	and	graceful.
This	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 are	 original	 --	 not	 something	 put	 together,	 not
something	false,	but	something	that	grows	within	you,	which	has	roots	 in	your
being,	which	 brings	 flowers	 in	 its	 time.	And	 to	 have	 one's	 own	 flowers	 is	 the
only	destiny,	is	the	only	significant	way	of	life.
But	 the	 personality	 has	 no	 roots;	 it	 is	 plastic,	 it	 is	 phony.	 Dropping	 it	 is	 not
difficult;	it	needs	just	a	little	courage.	And	my	feeling	of	thousands	of	people	is
that	 everybody	 has	 that	much	 courage,	 just	 people	 are	 not	 using	 it.	Once	 you
start	 using	 your	 courage,	 sources	 which	 are	 dormant	 become	 active,	 and	 you
become	capable	of	having	more	courage,	of	more	rebelliousness.
You	become	a	revolution	in	yourself.
A	man	who	is	a	revolution	unto	himself	is	a	joy	to	see,	because	he	has	fulfilled
his	destiny.	He	has	transcended	the	ordinary	mob,	the	sleeping	crowd.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 THESE	DAYS	 I	 FEEL	A	 LITTLE	 PLANT	GROWING	 INSIDE	OF	ME,
WHICH	IS
STILL	VERY	DELICATE	AND	FRAGILE.	I	FEEL	LIKE	I	HAVE	TO	TAKE
IMMENSE	CARE	OF	THIS	LITTLE	FLOWER	JUST	STARTING	TO	OPEN,
NOT	TO
WATER	 IT	 TOO	 MUCH,	 NOR	 TOO	 LITTLE,	 NOR	 TO	 EXPOSE	 IT	 TOO
MUCH	TO
THE	WIND.	 MY	 BELOVED	 OSHO,	 PLEASE	 TELL	 ME	 HOW	 TO	 TAKE
CARE	OF
THIS	 LITTLE	 PLANT,	 SINCE	 IN	 THIS	MOMENT	 IT	WOULD	 STILL	 BE
VERY
EASY	FOR	ME	TO	DESTROY	IT.
Deva	Premal,	 it	 is	good	news	 that	you	are	 feeling	a	 little	plant	growing	 inside
you.
Naturally	 it	will	be,	 in	 the	beginning,	very	delicate	and	very	 fragile.	And	your
feeling	 is	 right,	 that	 you	 "have	 to	 take	 immense	 care	 of	 this	 little	 flower	 just
starting	to	open,	not	to	water	it	too	much,	nor	too	little,	nor	to	expose	it	too	much
to	the	wind."
All	that	is	needed	are	three	things.
When	your	consciousness	starts	growing,	you	need	more	meditation.	And	there
is	no	limit	to	meditation,	so	you	need	not	be	worried	that	meditation	can	be	too
much	 and	 can	 kill	 the	 flower.	Meditation	 is	 always	 too	 little,	 because	 there	 is
always	too	much	ahead	of	you,	and	meditation	will	make	the	fragile	and	delicate
flower	more	and	more	strong.
You	need	a	silent	being.
Caring	too	much	can	be	dangerous,	it	can	become	an	anxiety.	Being	worried	too
much	that	you	should	water	less	or	you	should	water	more,	that	you	may	expose
it	to	the	winds,	to	the	sun,	to	the	rain	too	much	or	too	little...	caring	can	become
a	tremendous	turmoil	in	your	being,	and	your	very	caring	can	destroy	the	flower.
Instead	of	caring,	you	need	a	more	silent,	more	conscious,	more	peaceful	being,
which	will	give	a	strength	to	something	new	that	is	growing	in	you.
Secondly,	care	is	not	enough;	love	is	needed.	Care	is	more	a	technical	word;	love
is	totally	different.	Care	needs	a	certain	education.	Care	is	just	like	a	nurse	who
knows	what	has	to	be	done,	what	is	right	to	be	done	--	but	there	is	no	love	in	her
heart,	she	functions	technically.
Love	is	more	like	a	mother,	who	may	not	know	the	art	of	nursing,	but	she	need
not	know.
Love	is	enough	unto	itself.	Love	is	a	mysterious	phenomenon;	it	knows	what	is
needed.	It	simply	knows	without	any	education.
So	what	you	need	is	meditation,	love,	and	the	third	thing	--	which	you	may	not
have	thought	of	at	all	--	a	joyous	life,	because	all	that	is	great	in	you	only	grows
when	 joy	 is	 showering	 on	 it.	 It	 grows	 only	 when	 you	 are	 in	 a	 space	 of
blissfulness,	when	there	is	laughter,	there	is	song	and	there	is	dance.
And	I	know	perfectly	your	fear.	You	say,	"Please	tell	me	how	to	take	care	of	this
little	plant."	I	will	not	say	how	to	take	care,	because	I	don't	want	you	to	become
a	 nurse.	 I	want	 you	 to	 become	 a	mother.	 I	want	 you	 to	 be	 love,	 not	 technical
knowledge,	because	these	flowers	don't	need	technical	knowledge.
You	 are	 afraid,	 "since	 in	 this	 moment,	 it	 would	 still	 be	 very	 easy	 for	 me	 to
destroy	it."
That	 danger	 is	 very	 real.	 When	 something	 inside	 you	 grows	 it	 brings	 new
responsibilities,	 because	 now	 you	 need	more	meditation,	 you	 need	more	 love,
you	need	more	joy.
This	flower	inside	you	can	become	a	burden	to	you	if	you	don't	understand	the
language	of	meditation,	the	language	of	love,	the	language	of	blissfulness.	You
can	destroy	 the	 flower	by	your	own	hands,	 just	 to	get	 rid	of	 the	 responsibility.
But	this	flower	is	not	only	responsibility:	it	is	also	your	growth,	your	maturity.
This	flower	is	not	something	separate	from	you.
It	is	your	own	being.
To	destroy	it	means	to	commit	suicide.
But	your	question	is	more	concerned	about	the	technicalities	of	care,	and	I	would
like	you	to	change	the	focus.
Inner	 growth	 does	 not	 need	 any	 technical	 knowledge,	 any	 technical	 expertise.
All	that	it	needs	is	very	simple	and	very	joyful,	and	it	is	not	a	burden.	Meditation
will	make	you	lighter,	less	loaded	with	all	kinds	of	rubbish.	Love	will	also	give
you	 new	 skies,	 new	 freedoms.	 Blissfulness	 will	 give	 you	wings	 to	move	 into
those	new	skies	and	new	spaces.
But	 the	question	carries	 the	 implication	that	for	centuries	 in	 the	West	 the	mind
has	become	technically	oriented.	 It	has	created	great	 technology,	great	science,
but	 it	has	destroyed	man	completely.	The	house	 is	 full	of	all	kinds	of	gadgets,
just	the	master	of	the	house	has	disappeared,	is	lost	in	the	gadgets.
The	East	has	never	been	technically	oriented;	 it	 is	more	concerned	with	values
than	with	techniques.	For	example,	in	the	East	if	somebody	is	sick,	then	the	wife
will	not	be	ready	for	her	husband	or	her	lover	to	be	taken	care	of	by	a	nurse.	It
simply	will	not	come	 to	her	mind.	This	 is	 the	 time	when	she	 is	needed,	and	 if
love	cannot	heal,	then	no	other	technique	is	going	to	heal.	It	is	not	a	question	of
expertise.
In	the	West	the	same	situation	will	have	a	totally	different	response.	The	wife	or
the	husband	would	like	to	call	a	nurse	to	take	care.	And	he	seems,	or	she	seems,
to	 be	more	 logical	 because	 the	 nurse	 is	 trained	 in	 taking	 care;	 She	 knows	 the
know-how.
But	in	the	East	it	is	almost	inconceivable	that	love	can	be	replaced	by	expertise
of	any	kind.	Expertise	can	be	called	in	only	when	there	is	no	love,	when	the	wife
feels	it	is	a	burden	and	it	is	a	good	chance	to	get	rid	of	this	fellow...	call	a	nurse.
And	she	has	good	reason;	every	logic	is	in	her	support.	The	doctor	will	support
her,	that	this	is	a	very	loving	decision.	But	the	reality	is	just	the	opposite;	it	is	not
a	loving	decision.
So	don't	ask	me	about	how	to	take	care.	Ask	me	how	to	be	more	meditative,	how
to	be	more	loving,	how	to	be	more	joyful,	because	that	which	is	growing	within
you	needs	nourishment	--	and	your	meditation	will	give	it	nourishment,	your	joy
will	give	it	warmth,	your	love	will	give	it	dignity.
A	man,	narrowly	reared	by	a	widowed	mother,	got	married.	He	telephoned	back
to	 his	 mother	 from	 the	 honeymoon	 hotel	 to	 say	 that	 he	 knew	 there	 was
something	he	had	to	do	in	bed,	but	he	did	not	know	what	it	was.
"Why,"	said	his	mother,	"you	put	your...	eh,	 that	 is,	you	put	 the	hardest	part	of
yourself	in	the	place	where	your	wife	wee-wees."
At	midnight	the	hotel	rang	the	fire	brigade	for	help.	"We	have	got	a	young	man
with	his	head	jammed	in	a	chamber	pot."
Avoid	technical	knowledge!
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	COME	I	HAVE	ALWAYS	FELT,	EVER	SINCE	CHILDHOOD,	THAT	I
AM
MORE	THAN	TWO	PEOPLE?	COULD	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	PLEASE?
Prem	Prabhati,	everybody	is	born	as	one	single	individual,	but	by	the	time	he	is
mature	enough	 to	participate	 in	 life	he	has	become	a	crowd.	 It	 is	not	anything
special	 that	 you	 are	 feeling;	 it	 is	 almost	 the	 case	 with	 everybody.	 The	 only
difference	 is	 that	you	are	becoming	aware	of	 it,	which	 is	good.	People	are	not
aware	of	it.
If	you	just	sit	silently	and	listen	to	your	mind,	you	will	find	so	many	voices.	You
will	be	surprised,	you	can	recognize	those	voices	very	well.	Some	voice	is	from
your	grandfather,	some	voice	is	from	your	grandmother,	some	voice	is	from	your
father,	some	voice	is	from	your	mother,	some	voice	is	from	the	priest,	from	the
teacher,	 from	 the	 neighbors,	 from	 your	 friends,	 from	 your	 enemies.	 All	 these
voices	are	jumbled	up	in	a	crowd	within	you,	and	if	you	want	to	find	your	own
voice,	it	is	almost	impossible;	the	crowd	is	too	thick.
In	fact,	you	have	forgotten	your	own	voice	 long	before.	You	were	never	given
freedom	enough	to	voice	your	opinions.	You	were	always	taught	obedience.	You
were	 taught	 to	 say	yes	 to	everything	 that	your	elders	were	 saying	 to	you.	You
were	 taught	 that	you	have	 to	follow	whatever	your	 teachers	or	your	priests	are
doing.	Nobody	ever	told	you	to	search	for	your	own	voice	--	"Have	you	got	any
voice	of	your	own	or	not?"
So	your	voice	has	remained	very	subdued	and	other	voices	are	very	loud,	very
commanding,	because	they	were	orders	and	you	had	followed	them	--	in	spite	of
yourself.
You	had	no	intention	to	follow,	you	could	see	that	this	is	not	right.	But	one	has	to
be	obedient	to	be	respected,	to	be	acceptable,	to	be	loved.
Naturally	only	one	voice	 is	missing	in	you,	only	one	person	is	missing	in	you,
and	that	is	you;	otherwise	there	is	a	whole	crowd.	And	that	crowd	is	constantly
driving	you	mad,	because	one	voice	says,	"Do	this,"	another	voice	says,	"Never
do	that!	Don't	listen	to	that	voice!"	And	you	are	torn	apart.
This	whole	crowd	has	to	be	withdrawn.	This	whole	crowd	has	to	be	told,	"Now
please	 leave	me	alone!"	The	people	who	have	gone	 to	 the	mountains	or	 to	 the
secluded	forests	were	really	not	going	away	from	the	society;	they	were	trying	to
find	a	place	where	they	can	disperse	their	crowd	inside.	And	those	people	who
have	made	a	place	within	you	are	obviously	reluctant	to	leave.
But	if	you	want	to	become	an	individual	in	your	own	right,	if	you	want	to	get	rid
of	 this	 continuous	 conflict	 and	 this	 mess	 within	 you,	 then	 you	 have	 to	 say
goodbye	to	them	--
even	when	they	belong	to	your	respected	father,	your	mother,	your	grandfather.
It	does	not	matter	to	whom	they	belong.	One	thing	is	certain:	they	are	not	your
voices.	They	are	the	voices	of	people	who	have	lived	in	their	time,	and	they	had
no	 idea	what	 the	 future	was	going	 to	be.	They	have	 loaded	 their	children	with
their	own	experience;	their	experience	is	not	going	to	match	with	the	unknown
future.
They	 are	 thinking	 they	 are	 helping	 their	 children	 to	 be	 knowledgeable,	 to	 be
wise,	so	their	life	can	be	easier	and	more	comfortable,	but	they	are	doing	just	the
wrong	 thing.	With	all	 the	good	 intentions	 in	 the	world,	 they	are	destroying	 the
child's	spontaneity,	his	own	consciousness,	his	own	ability	to	stand	on	his	feet,
and	to	respond	to	the	new	future	which	their	old	ancestors	had	no	idea	of.
He	is	going	to	face	new	storms,	he	is	going	to	face	new	situations,	and	he	needs
a	totally	new	consciousness	to	respond.	Only	then	is	his	response	is	going	to	be
fruitful;	only	then	can	he	can	have	a	victorious	life,	a	life	that	is	not	just	a	long,
long	 drawn-out	 despair,	 but	 a	 dance	 from	moment	 to	moment,	which	 goes	 on
becoming	more	and	more	deep	to	the	last	breath.	He	enters	into	death	dancing,
and	joyously.
Prabhati,	it	is	good	that	you	are	becoming	aware	that	it	seems	you	are	more	than
one	person.	Everybody	 is!	And	by	becoming	aware,	 it	 is	possible	 to	get	 rid	of
this	crowd.
Be	silent,	and	find	your	own	self.
Unless	you	find	your	own	self,	it	is	very	difficult	to	disperse	the	crowd,	because
all	those	in	the	crowd	are	pretending,	"I	am	your	self."	And	you	have	no	way	to
agree,	or	disagree.
So	don't	create	any	fight	with	the	crowd.	Let	them	fight	amongst	themselves	--
they	are	quite	efficient	 in	fighting	amongst	 themselves.	You,	meanwhile,	 try	 to
find	yourself.	And	once	you	know	who	you	are,	you	can	just	order	them	to	get
out	of	the	house	--	it	is	actually	that	simple!	But	first	you	have	to	find	yourself.
Once	you	are	there,	the	master	is	there,	the	owner	of	the	house	is	there.	And	all
these	 people,	 who	 have	 been	 pretending	 to	 be	 masters	 themselves,	 start
dispersing.	A	man	who	is	not	a	crowd	is	truly	the	"superman"	of	which	we	have
been	talking	as	Zarathustra's	great	hope.
The	man	who	 is	 himself,	 unburdened	of	 the	past,	 discontinuous	with	 the	past,
original,	strong	as	a	 lion	and	innocent	as	a	child...	he	can	reach	to	the	stars,	or
even	beyond	the	stars;	his	future	is	golden.
Up	 to	now	people	have	always	been	 talking	about	 the	golden	past.	My	people
have	to	learn	the	language	of	the	golden	future.
There	 is	no	need	 for	you	 to	change	 the	whole	world;	 just	 change	yourself	and
you	have	started	changing	the	whole	world,	because	you	are	part	of	the	world.	If
even	 a	 single	 human	 being	 changes,	 his	 change	will	 radiate	 in	 thousands	 and
thousands	of	 others.	He	will	 become	a	 triggering	point	 for	 a	 revolution	which
can	give	birth	to	the	superman.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Peaks	beyond	peaks	unending
20	April	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704200
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN02
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
93
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 YOU	 SAID	 THAT	 IF	 WE	 DON'T	 ACHIEVE	 TOTAL
CONSCIOUSNESS	IN
THIS	LIFE,	WE	WILL	HAVE	TO	START	FROM	THE	VERY	BEGINNING
AGAIN,	AND	GO	THROUGH	THE	WHOLE	EVOLUTION	OF	MANKIND
ONE	MORE
TIME,	 I	 WAS	 VERY	 TOUCHED.	 IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 THAT	 WE	 WILL
TOTALLY
LOSE	 THESE	 FEW	 GLIMPSES	 OF	 LIGHT,	 BEAUTY,	 AND
CONSCIOUSNESS
THAT	WE'VE	GOT	THROUGH	BEING	SANNYASINS?
Antar	Ashiko,	 it	 is	 a	very	 complicated	question.	Whatever	you	achieve	 in	 this
life	will	remain	with	you,	but	it	has	to	be	an	achievement	not	just	a	glimpse.	And
there	is	a	great	difference	between	an	achievement	and	a	glimpse.	You	can	see
the	Himalayan	 peaks	 from	 thousands	 of	miles	 away	 --	 it	 is	 a	 glimpse;	 but	 to
reach	those	peaks	will	be	an	achievement.
A	 glimpse	 helps	 you	 to	 move	 onward,	 towards	 achievement;	 but	 unless
something	becomes	a	crystallized	experience	in	your	life,	it	is	going	to	be	lost	--
you	will	have	to	start	from	the	very	beginning.
There	 will	 be	 a	 little	 difference,	 and	 that	 will	 be	 that	 in	 your	 unconscious	 a
shadow	of	your	past	life,	a	faraway	echo	--	as	if	you	have	seen	something	--	will
remain.	And	when	you	again	get	the	glimpse	you	may	feel	that	this	is	not	new,	I
have	 known	 it	 before.	 But	 otherwise,	 only	 crystallized	 achievements	 go	 with
you,	consciously,	into	the	other	life...
knowingly,	 not	 just	 a	 dark	 shadow,	 a	 faraway	 echo	 in	 the	 unconscious,	 but
consciously	 knowing	 that	 these	Himalayan	 peaks	 exist,	 and	 you	 have	 been	 on
those	peaks.	There	will	be	no	doubt	about	it,	no	wavering	about	it,	no	question
about	it.
You	 are	 asking,	 "Is	 it	 possible	 that	we	will	 totally	 lose	 these	 few	 glimpses	 of
light,	 beauty,	 and	 consciousness	 that	 we	 have	 got	 through	 being	 sannyasins?"
Such	glimpses	you	have	got	 in	many	lives	before	too,	and	you	have	lost	 them.
They	never	became	part	of	your	being;	they	remained	only	beautiful	memories.
But	the	memories	are	not	achievements.	It	is	as	if	you	have	seen	something	in	a
dream	--	perhaps	it	may	be	true,	perhaps	it	may	not	be	true.
So	if	you	feel	 that	 there	is	something	happening	now,	make	every	effort	 that	 it
does	not	remain	only	a	glimpse	but	becomes	an	actual	experience,	becomes	part
of	your	being.
Only	then	can	it	go	with	you	into	another	life.
It	is	possible	to	take	all	your	experiences	with	you	into	another	life,	and	never	to
begin	 from	scratch	but	always	 to	begin	where	you	had	 left	off	 in	 the	past	 life.
But	be	clear	that	just	a	glimpse	is	very	fragile,	just	a	glimpse	is	very	superficial.
Howsoever	 touching	 it	 may	 be	 in	 the	moment,	 even	 tomorrow	 you	may	 start
doubting	whether	 it	 really	happened	or	you	 imagined	 it.	And	 the	 life	after	 this
life	is	a	faraway	journey.
Glimpses	 are	 simply	 incentives	 to	 move	 towards	 crystallization.	 Make	 it	 an
experience	so	deep	that	it	becomes	part	of	you,	and	there	is	no	way	to	forget	it	or
to	lose	it.	Don't	remain	satisfied	with	glimpses.	Enjoy	them,	but	use	them	only	as
an	indicator	towards	greater	things	to	happen.
To	see	something	from	far	away	is	one	thing,	and	to	become	that	thing	is	totally
another.
A	glimpse	of	love	is	just	like	a	breeze	that	passes	within	seconds;	a	glimpse	of
silence	is	just	like	the	fragrance	of	a	rose	flower	that	you	felt	for	a	moment,	and
now	you	don't	know	where	it	has	gone.
When	 I	 say,	 "Crystallize	 your	 experience,"	 I	 mean	 it	 is	 not	 enough	 to	 have
beautiful	 glimpses.	 It	 is	 good,	 but	 not	 good	 enough.	 You	 should	 become	 the
fragrance	of	the	rose	itself;	the	glimpse	was	only	an	arrow	pointing	towards	the
possibility	 --	 it	 did	 its	work,	 but	 you	 remain	 there.	 In	 the	 past	 life	 also,	many
times	you	have	come	across	many	beautiful	experiences	and	right	now	you	don't
know	even	that	there	have	been	past	lives.
Only	once	 in	a	while	you	 see	 somebody,	 and	you	have	a	very	 strange	 feeling,
almost	weird,	as	if	you	have	seen	this	man	before	--	and	certainly	not	in	this	life.
You	come	to	a	place,	and	suddenly	you	are	startled,	as	if	you	had	come	to	this
place	before	too	--
although	certainly	not	in	this	life.	Everything	seems	to	be	known,	but	has	been
dormant	in	your	unconscious.
Life	has	a	mechanism	that	whenever	a	person	dies,	unless	he	is	enlightened,	he
becomes	 almost	 unconscious;	 he	 goes	 into	 a	 coma	 before	 death,	 actual	 death,
happens.	So	he	knows	nothing	about	the	death,	and	he	remains	in	a	state	of	coma
till	he	is	born	again.	All	those	nine	months	in	the	mother's	womb	are	a	state	of
coma;	the	child	is	fast	asleep	twenty-four	hours	a	day	for	nine	months.
It	 rarely	 happens	 that	 somebody	 dies	 consciously.	 It	 happens	 only	 to	 great
meditators,	who	know	well	 the	 path	 death	will	 be	 coming	 on	 because	 in	 their
meditations	they	have	traveled	on	the	path	again	and	again	--	it	is	the	same	path.
As	 they	 go	 deep	 in	 their	meditation	 the	 body	 is	 left	 far	 away,	mind	 is	 left	 far
away,	 the	 heart	 is	 left	 far	 away;	 only	 a	 beautiful	 silence	 --	 fully	 alert	 and
conscious	--	remains.
The	same	happens	when	you	die.	If	you	have	been	meditating,	then	death	is	not
a	new	experience.	You	will	be	surprised	that	in	your	meditation	you	have	been
dying	 every	 day,	 and	 you	 have	 been	 coming	 back	 to	 life	 every	 day.	 Such	 a
person	dies	 very	 consciously,	 so	he	knows	what	 death	 is	 --	 and	 such	 a	 person
remains	conscious	in	the	mother's	womb.	He	is	also	born	consciously.	From	his
very	first	moment	on	the	earth,	he	knows	all	 that	has	passed	before	 in	 the	past
life,	and	he	remembers	it.
I	have	come	across	many	children....	And	this	happens	most	particularly	in	India,
because	outside	India	--	where	Christianity	is	prominent	or	Judaism	is	prominent
or	Mohammedanism	is	prominent	--	they	have	conditioned	the	mind	that	there	is
only	one	life.	They	don't	know	anything	about	meditation.	They	have	substituted
meditation	with	prayer,	and	prayer	is	praising	a	fictitious	god;	it	is	very	childish.
Meditation	needs	no	god	--	you	are	enough.	You	are	a	reality,	and	you	explore
your	reality	to	the	deepest	core.
In	 India	 all	 the	 religions	 are	 agreed	 on	 one	 point;	 they	 differ	 in	 their
philosophies,	 they	 differ	 on	 every	 other	 thing,	 but	 on	 one	 thing	 they	 are	 all
agreed	--	that	life	is	a	continuity;	death	comes	millions	of	times.	Death	is	only	a
change	of	the	body,	a	change	of	the	house,	and	this	process	goes	on	--	unless	you
become	 totally	 enlightened.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 enter	 another	 womb,
because	life	was	just	a	school,	a	training;	you	have	completed	it.
Your	enlightenment	 is	 the	culmination	of	your	education	about	existence.	Now
you	 need	 not	 enter	 into	 another	 body.	 You	 can	 enter	 into	 the	 womb	 of	 the
universe	itself	--	you	are	prepared	for	it.
So	 whenever	 you	 are	 having	 glimpses,	 don't	 be	 satisfied	 with	 them.	 Your
glimpses	should	create	great	discontent	in	you,	not	content.	They	should	create	a
longing	that	what	is	seen	far	away	you	would	like	to	come	closer,	and	closer,	and
closer.	You	don't	want	just	to	see	it,	even	from	c	closeness;	you	want	to	become
it.
You	 can	 become	 love,	 you	 can	 become	 silence,	 you	 can	 become	 joy,	 you	 can
become	all	these	experiences:	beauty,	light,	consciousness.	These	are	not	things
that	you	cannot	become;	 they	are	your	potentials.	So	 take	every	glimpse	 to	 its
ultimate	end.	That's	what	I	call	crystallization.
Once	it	is	crystallized,	once	you	have	known	yourself	to	be	love,	yourself	to	be
light,	 yourself	 to	 be	 consciousness,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 problem	 of	 forgetting	 it.
Then	 these	 experiences	will	 go	with	 you.	And	 in	 your	 future	 life	 you	will	 be
growing	 further	 ahead,	 from	consciousness	 to	 superconsciousness;	 you	will	 be
going	beyond	these	experiences.
But	if	you	remain	satisfied	with	your	glimpses,	there	is	every	danger	they	will	be
erased.
Death	is	such	a	shock	and	such	a	surgery	and	such	a	long	coma	that	when	you
wake	up,	you	will	have	forgotten	all	those	glimpses.
"Someone	stole	my	bike,"	complained	a	priest	to	his	minister	friend.
"Bring	up	the	Ten	Commandments	in	your	sermon	tomorrow,	and	as	soon	as	you
mention,	`Thou	shalt	not	steal,'	look	around	in	your	congregation;	you	will	find
the	 guilty	 party.	 Invite	 him	 to	 come	 forward.	 Tell	 him	 that	 this	 is	 the	way	 to
confess,	 and	 this	 is	 the	way	 to	 get	 the	 forgiveness	 of	God,"	 the	minister	 said
confidently.
The	 next	 day	 the	 priest	 visited	 the	 minister	 and	 happily	 reported	 that	 he	 had
found	 his	 bike.	 "Yes",	 he	 went	 on,	 "when	 I	 came	 tòThou	 shalt	 not	 commit
adultery'	I	remembered	where	I	had	left	it."
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	IT	POSSIBLE	THAT	I	ALWAYS	TRANSFORM	MY	FEELINGS	AND
EXPERIENCES	 INTO	 WORDS	 AND	 IMAGES	 ONLY	 TO	 GET	 RID	 OF
THEM?	IS	IT
POSSIBLE	THAT	I	COME	TO	YOUR	FEET	WITH	TREMENDOUS	THIRST,
AND
WHEN	I	AM	FILLED	WITH	ENERGY,	I	AM	OVERWHELMED	WITH	THIS
ABSOLUTE	 NEED	 OF	 SHARING	 --	 ONLY	 TO	 GET	 RID	 OF	 IT?	 IS	 IT
POSSIBLE
THAT	THIS	URGE	FOR	SHARING	IS	ONLY	MY	ILLUSION,	OR	JUST	MY
WAY
TO	 ESCAPE?	 SOMEBODY	 TOLD	 ME	 THAT	 I	 SHOULD	 BE	 MORE
GENEROUS
WITH	MYSELF.	WHAT	CAN	I	DO	IF	I	KNOW	NOT	ANY	OTHER	WAY	TO
BE
GENEROUS	WITH	MYSELF	THAN	SHARING?	 IS	 IT	TIME	FOR	ME	TO
LEARN
ANOTHER	WAY?	PLEASE	HELP	ME	WITH	YOUR	GUIDANCE.
Sarjano,	what	 you	 are	 experiencing	 and	what	 you	 are	 doing	 is	 perfectly	 right.
Sharing	 your	 experiences,	 your	 energy,	 your	 love,	 your	 blissfulness,	 is	 not	 an
escape	 from	 them,	 neither	 is	 it	 a	way	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 them.	On	 the	 contrary,	 the
more	you	share,	the	more	you	will	have.
It	 is	not	 the	ordinary	economics.	 In	 the	ordinary	economics	you	share	and	you
lose;	 in	 the	 spiritual	 economics	 you	 share	 and	 you	 get	 more.	 In	 ordinary
economics	you	have	to	be	a	miser,	then	only	you	can	become	rich...	accumulate,
never	 share.	 In	 the	 spiritual	 economics,	 if	 you	 are	 a	miser	whatever	 you	 have
will	be	lost.	It	can	live	only	if	you	share;	it	is	a	living	experience.	By	sharing	it
continues	a	dynamic	movement.
I	have	heard	about	a	young	man	who	had	just	received	a	great	lottery	prize,	and
he	was	 immensely	pleased.	He	 stopped	his	 car	because	a	beggar	was	 standing
there.	He	used	 to	 stand	 there	every	day,	but	he	had	never	 stopped	his	 car.	But
today	 was	 different.	 He	 gave	 him	 a	 note	 of	 one	 hundred	 rupees.	 The	 beggar
laughed.
The	man	said,	"I	don't	understand.	Why	are	you	laughing?"
He	said,	"It	reminds	me...	once	I	used	to	have	my	own	car	and	I	used	to	be	just
as	generous	as	you	are.	I	am	laughing	because	soon	you	will	be	standing	by	my
side.	Don't	be	so	generous!	Learn	something	from	my	experience."
In	 the	ordinary	economics,	 the	moment	you	give	something,	 that	much	 is	 less.
But	have	you	felt	that	by	giving	love	you	have	less	love?	Or	by	sharing	your	joy,
have	you	felt	that	your	joy	is	a	little	bit	less?
If	 you	have	watched,	 you	will	 be	 surprised:	 by	 sharing,	 your	 joy	 is	 a	 little	 bit
more;	 by	 loving,	 your	 sources	 of	 love	 are	 flowing	more	 --	 you	 are	 juicier.	By
dancing...	 just	 to	 share	 yourself	 with	 your	 friends	 you	 will	 not	 find	 yourself
losing	something,	but	gaining	something.
Sarjano,	 don't	 listen	 to	 other	 people.	 They	 know	 only	 about	 the	 ordinary
economics.	They	don't	know	anything	about	a	higher	economics,	where	giving	is
sharing	and	where	not	giving	is	very	destructive.
The	more	you	give,	the	more	you	will	have,	the	less	you	give,	the	less	you	will
have.	And	if	you	don't	give	at	all,	you	will	not	have	anything	at	all.
But	 the	 people	who	 are	 suggesting	 to	 you	 that	 this	 is	 not	 right	 are	 creating	 a
problem	 in	 your	 mind	 about	 whether	 you	 are	 doing	 right	 or	 wrong.	 You	 are
doing	absolutely	right.
Do	 it	with	more	 totality,	without	 any	hesitation,	 and	without	 holding	 anything
back.	 Don't	 listen	 to	 others.	 Listen	 to	 your	 own	 experience;	 watch	 your	 own
experience	--	when	you	give,	do	you	lose	something	or	do	you	gain	something?
That	 should	be	 the	decisive	 thing,	not	people's	 advice.	The	advice	of	others	 is
dangerous....
When	the	Eisenbergs	moved	to	Rome,	little	Hymie	came	home	from	his	school
in	tears.
He	 explained	 to	 his	 mother	 that	 the	 nuns	 were	 always	 asking	 these	 Catholic
questions	and	how	was	he,	a	nice	Jewish	boy,	supposed	to	know	the	answers?
Mrs.	Eisenberg's	heart	swelled	with	maternal	sympathy.	"Hymie,"	she	said,	"I'm
going	 to	 embroider	 the	 answers	 on	 the	 inside	 of	 your	 shirt,	 and	 you	 just	 look
down	and	read	them	the	next	time	those	nuns	pick	on	you."
"Thanks	Mum,"	said	Hymie,	and	he	didn't	bat	an	eye	when	Sister	Michele	asked
him	who	was	the	world's	most	famous	virgin.	"Mary,"	he	answered.
"Very	good,"	said	the	nun.	"And	who	was	her	husband?"
"Joseph,"	answered	the	boy.
"I	see	you	have	been	studying.	Now,	can	you	tell	me	the	name	of	their	son?"
"Sure,"	said	Hymie,	"Calvin	Klein."
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
TO	 ME,	 YOUR	 FANTASTIC	 VARIATION	 OF	 DYNAMIC	 MEDITATION
YOU	DO
WITH	US	 AT	 THE	 END	OF	 EVERY	 EVENING	DISCOURSE	 IS	 ONE	OF
THE
MOST	 ENERGY-LADEN	 EXPERIENCES	 I'VE	 EVER	 HAD.	 ALL	 YOUR
LOVERS
ARE	RADIATING,	EVERYTHING	IS	VIBRATING.	I	FEEL	WE	ARE
BROADCASTING	 ENERGY	 WAVES	 LIKE	 A	 HUGE	 RADIO	 ANTENNA.
THE
GLOW	MUST	 EVEN	BE	VISIBLE	 FROM	OUTER	 SPACE.	 OSHO,	 IF	WE
DON'T
WAKE	 UP	 THIS	 TIME,	 THEN	 WHAT?	 OR	 ARE	 YOU	 KEEPING	 EVEN
LOUDER
ALARMS	UP	YOUR	SLEEVE?
Premda,	it	is	almost	impossible	for	you	not	to	wake	up	this	time.	I	am	going	to
do	everything	 to	wake	you	up.	 I	have	 ice	cold	water	prepared;	 I	 am	preparing
people	to	pull	you	out	of	your	bed	and	give	you	a	good	beating.
But	anyway,	you	have	to	wake	up,	because	for	me	this	is	the	last	time.	I	will	not
be	here	again,	so	I	have	to	do	everything	that	I	can	do.	And	if	you	miss	it	will	be
really	unfortunate,	because	one	never	knows	when	you	will	come	across	a	man
who	 loves	you	 so	much	 that	 he	 can	be	 so	hard	 and	 so	 cruel	 as	 to	 hit	 on	your
head,	not	bothering	what	happens	to	your	skull	--	but	somehow	you	should	get
up	and	open	your	eyes.
The	masters	in	the	past	have	done	strange	things	to	wake	up	their	disciples.	One
Zen	master,	Fui	Hai,	had	a	big	monastery.	It	had	two	wings,	right	and	left,	and	in
the	middle	 was	 his	 cottage.	 He	 had	 a	 beautiful	 cat,	 and	 all	 the	monks	 of	 the
monastery	loved	it.
There	 were	 almost	 one	 thousand	 monks,	 five	 hundred	 on	 one	 side	 and	 five
hundred	 on	 the	 other	 side.	 And	 they	 all	 used	 to	 fight,	 particularly	 when	 the
master	was	not	at	home.
The	problem	was	the	cat	--	who	should	have	it?
The	right	wingers	said,	"It	belongs	to	us,	we	are	older	than	you."	It	was	true;	the
right	 wing	 was	 made	 first	 and	 the	 left	 wing	 was	 added	 later	 on.	 But	 the	 left
wingers	said,	"It	is	true	that	your	wing	was	made	first,	but	then	there	was	no	cat.
The	cat	came	when	the	left	wing	was	being	made.	We	own	it."
It	was	a	constant	fight,	and	the	cat	was	being	taken	from	this	wing	to	that	wing,
and	the	master	got	fed	up	with	this	whole	thing	--	every	day	complaints.
One	day	he	gathered	all	 the	monks,	except	one	monk	who	was	not	present;	he
had	gone	to	the	city	to	purchase	a	few	things	for	the	monastery.
The	master	said,	"Today	I	am	going	to	decide	this	constant	quarrel	amongst	the
two	wings."	He	took	a	knife	and	said,	"Either	you	say	that	this	cat	belongs	to	one
wing,	then	it's	life	can	be	saved;	otherwise	I'm	going	to	cut	it	in	two	and	give	to
both	wings	half	of	the	cat.	There	seems	to	be	no	other	way;	it	has	to	be	divided."
They	all	loved	the	cat,	they	all	wanted	it	to	be	in	their	wing...	they	were	all	silent.
The	master	said,	"If	somebody	can	do	something	which	shows	his	understanding
and	his	deep	meditation,	to	whichever	wing	he	belongs,	he	will	be	the	owner	of
the	cat	and	that	wing	will	have	the	cat.	Come	out!	You	can	save	the	life	of	the
cat;	otherwise	the	cat	is	finished."
But	people	knew	 that	you	cannot	deceive	 the	master.	He	had	 such	a	 clarity	of
vision	 that	 you	 cannot	 pretend	 that	 you	 are	 great	meditators;	 so	 nobody	 came
out.	He	cut	the	cat	in	two	and	gave	half	of	the	cat	to	each	wing.	Everybody	was
sad	--	because	what	can	you	do	with	half	the	cat?	And	the	master	was	also	sad
that	out	of	one	thousand	monks	not	a	single	man	could	do	something	to	save	the
cat.
At	that	very	time,	when	he	was	sitting	sadly	and	the	whole	monastery	was	sad,
the	man	who	had	not	been	in	the	monastery	came	back	from	the	city.	He	heard
the	whole	story	of	what	had	happened.	There	was	blood,	 the	cat	had	died,	and
both	the	wings	had	half	of	the	cat.
They	said,	"We	had	never	expected	that	our	master	will	be	so	cruel,	so	hard;	he
is	 such	a	 loving	and	compassionate	person.	But	we	cannot	blame	him;	he	had
given	us	chances."
But	the	man	came	in	front	of	the	master	and	gave	him	a	good	slap	on	the	face.
The	master	 laughed	 and	 said,	 "If	 you	had	been	here,	 the	 poor	 cat	would	 have
been	saved.
You	 show	 your	meditativeness.	Without	 your	meditations	 you	 cannot	 hit	 your
master;	 to	 hit	 your	master	 you	 have	 to	 know	 that	 the	 body	 is	 not	 you,	 so	 the
master's	body	is	also	not	the	master.	You	are	not	hitting	the	master	but	just	 the
body,	and	that's	what	I	have	done.	I	have	cut	only	the	body,	not	the	cat.	The	cat	is
still	alive,	must	be	born	somewhere	else.	But	you	have	come	a	little	late."
There	is	another	story	about	Lin	Chi,	a	Japanese	Zen	master.	He	had	a	disciple	to
whom	 he	 had	 given	 the	 traditional	 Zen	 koan	 to	 meditate	 --	 "Meditate	 on	 the
sound	of	one	hand	clapping."	Now	this	is	absurd.	One	hand	cannot	clap,	and	one
hand	 cannot	make	 any	 sound.	Without	 clapping	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 any
sound.	 "Meditate	 on	 it	 and	 when	 you	 have	 found	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand
clapping,	come	and	report."
The	young	monk	went	out	into	the	garden,	sat	under	a	tree,	tried	in	many	ways
to	 think	what	 could	 be	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand	 clapping.	 Suddenly,	 he	 heard	 a
cuckoo	in	the	bamboo	grove	and	he	said,	"This	must	be	it!"	He	rushed	and	told
the	master,	"I	have	found	it.	It	is	the	cuckoo	in	the	bamboo	grove."
The	master	hit	him	hard	on	the	face	and	said,	"Don't	be	foolish;	next	time	be	a
little	more	intelligent.	Go	and	meditate	again!"
Every	day	he	would	come,	and	by	and	by	it	became	such	a	situation;	sometimes
he	would	come...	the	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees	creates	a	certain	sound,
perhaps	 that	 is	 the....	 Or	 sometimes	 the	 water	 running	 down	 creating	 sounds,
perhaps	that	 is	 it....	Or	sometimes	the	lightning	in	the	clouds.	Slowly,	slowly	it
became	a	routine	thing.	The	master	would	not	even	ask;	as	he	entered	he	would
slap	him,	and	tell	him,	"Go	back	and	meditate."
But	the	monk	said,	"I	have	not	even	told	you...."
The	master	said,	"I	know	what	it	will	be.	You	just	go.	Meditate	more!"
He	said	 to	many	other	monks,	"This	seems	to	be	 too	much.	First	he	used	 to	at
least	hear	my	answer;	now	he	assumes	that	the	answer	is	going	to	be	wrong!"
But	one	day	he	did	not	come.	Two	days	passed,	and	seven	days	passed....	The
master	went	 to	 the	 tree	where	 he	 used	 to	 sit	 and	meditate,	 and	 the	monk	was
sitting	there,	utterly	silent.
His	master	 shook	him	 and	 told	 him,	 "So	 at	 last	 you	have	 heard	 it.	This	 is	 the
sound	of	one	hand	clapping,	this	silence....	But	why	did	you	not	come	to	report?"
He	said,	"I	forgot	everything;	the	silence	was	so	sweet,	so	blissful.	I	am	grateful
to	you	that	you	never	listened	to	my	answers,	and	you	went	on	giving	me	hard
hits.	Your	compassion	is	beyond	the	grasp	of	ordinary	people."
So	Premda,	don't	be	bothered	and	don't	be	concerned	about	others.	You	have	to
wake	up.
And	 waking	 up	 is	 such	 a	 simple	 thing	 --	 just	 the	 way	 you	 wake	 up	 in	 the
morning.	Have	you	ever	observed...	do	you	do	some	gymnastics,	some	exercises,
some	chanting?	You	simply	wake	up!	The	night	is	over	and	you	open	your	eyes
and	jump	out	of	the	bed.
Spiritual	awakening	is	not	different	from	that.	Once	you	understand	that	you	are
spiritually	 asleep....	 and	 that	 is	 the	 problem.	 People	 don't	 think	 they	 are
spiritually	asleep,	that's	why	they	go	on	sleeping.	Once	you	understand	you	are
spiritually	asleep,	then	waking	is	a	very	simple	matter.
The	 hardest	 thing	 is	 to	 accept	 that	 deep	 in	 your	 being	 there	 is	 a	 sleep,	 an
unconsciousness.
Whatever	meditations	are	being	done	here	are	just	to	shake	you,	to	bring	you	to	a
point	where	the	sleeping	consciousness	cannot	sleep	anymore;	it	has	to	wake	up.
It	is	only	a	question	of	simple	understanding:	You	can	wake	up	right	now!	This
silence	is	enough.
Brigitte	 lay	 in	 bed	 on	 the	 first	 night	 of	 their	 honeymoon	 while	 Pat	 sat	 fully
clothed	on	an	armchair	in	the	bedroom.	"Why	don't	you	come	to	bed?"	Brigitte
asked	him.
"My	mother	told	me	that	this	would	be	the	most	exciting	night	of	my	life,"	said
Pat,	"and	I	don't	want	to	miss	any	of	it	by	going	to	sleep!"
It	is	very	easy	to	misunderstand.
It	is	also	very	easy	to	understand.
It	all	depends	on	you.
Are	you	ready	to	wake	up?	Then	nothing	can	prevent	you,	and	no	technique	is
needed.
But	if	you	are	not	ready	to	wake	up,	then	no	technique	can	help	you.	You	have	to
see	your	 life	 as	 the	 life	of	 a	 somnambulist	who	 is	 sleep-walking,	doing	 things
asleep...
fighting,	 saying	 the	 same	 things	 which	 he	 has	 said	 before	 and	 have	 always
brought	anger,	irritation,	in	other	people.
It	is	a	question	of	watching	your	life.	Is	it	a	life	of	a	man	who	is	awake?	Can	a
man	who	is	awake	behave	the	way	the	world	is	behaving?
You	have	been	angry,	you	have	been	sorry	for	it	 thousands	of	times,	and	it	has
still	not	become	clear	to	you	that	again	you	will	be	angry	and	again	you	will	be
sorry.	What	you	are	doing,	 it	cannot	be	said	 that	you	are	doing	 it	 fully	awake.
Your	 whole	 life	 is	 more	 like	 a	 robot;	 you	 are	 just	 going	 through	 mechanical
actions.	 You	 suffer,	 and	 you	 decide	 to	 change,	 but	 when	 the	 time	 to	 change
comes,	you	forget	it	completely.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 Christian	 monk	 who	 used	 to	 give	 sermons	 in	 different
places,	and	his	basic	sermon	was	based	on	Jesus'	teaching	of	the	Sermon	on	the
Mount.	He	would	say	again	and	again	that	if	somebody	slaps	you	on	one	cheek,
give	him	the	other	cheek	too.
One	man	 had	 been	 listening	 to	 this	 so	many	 times,	 he	 got	 bored.	One	 day	 he
stood	 up	 when	 the	 monk	 was	 saying	 this,	 and	 went	 ahead	 and	 slapped	 him.
There	was	great	anger	in	the	Christian	monk's	eyes,	but	seeing	the	crowd	--	and
remembering	what	 he	 has	 been	 telling	 them	 for	 so	many	 years	 --	 he	 gave	 the
other	cheek,	hoping	that	this	idiot	will	not	hit	it.	But	that	man	was	also	a	unique
individual	--	he	hit	even	harder!
And	that	very	moment,	chaos	broke;	the	Christian	monk	jumped	on	the	man	and
started	 hitting	 him.	 The	 man	 said,	 "What	 are	 you	 doing?	 It	 is	 against	 your
preachings!	I	have	been	listening	to	your	sermons."
The	monk	said,	"Forget	all	my	sermons.	Jesus	only	said	`Give	the	other	cheek.'
There	is	no	third	cheek.	Now	I	am	free,	and	I	will	show	you...."
But	the	man	said,	"Giving	the	other	cheek	means	you	should	not	be	revengeful."
The	monk	said,	"Forget	all	that	nonsense!	Giving	the	other	cheek	simply	means
giving	 the	 other	 cheek,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 third	 cheek.	 You	 have	 made	 me
completely	free,	and	now	I	will	teach	you	the	real	lesson!"
And	he	has	been	teaching	his	whole	life...	but	perhaps	that	was	also	talking	in	his
sleep,	never	penetrating	to	the	meaning	of	the	words	he	is	saying	and	what	he	is
doing.
Gurdjieff	 remembers	 his	 father.	His	 father	 died	when	Gurdjieff	was	 only	 nine
years	old,	and	must	have	been	a	very	unique	man.	He	called	Gurdjieff	close	to
him	and	told	him,
"I'm	dying,	and	I	don't	have	anything	as	a	heritage	for	you.	I'm	leaving	you	poor
and	orphaned.	Just	one	advice	I	want	to	give	to	you	--	that	is	the	advice	given	to
me	by	my	father.	I	have	found	that	that	advice	has	proved	to	me	the	richest	thing
that	any	father	can	give	to	his	son.	You	are	so	young;	perhaps	you	may	not	be
able	 to	understand	 it.	 Just	 remember	 it;	 soon	you	will	 be	 able	 to	understand	 it
also,	 and	whether	 you	 understand	 it	 or	 not,	 start	 behaving	 accordingly.	 Listen
very	closely	and	then	repeat	to	me	what	I'm	saying."
It	was	simple	advice.	The	advice	was	that	"If	somebody	insults	you,	humiliates
you,	hurts	you,	you	are	not	to	react	immediately.	You	have	to	say	to	that	person,
"You	will	have	to	wait	 twenty-four	hours,	and	then	I	will	come	to	answer	you.
This	is	something	sacred	to	me;	I	have	given	a	promise	to	my	dying	father.	So
wait	twenty-four	hours	and	then	go	to	the	person.	In	those	twenty-four	hours	you
will	 see	 that	 he	 was	 right,	 or	 you	 may	 see	 that	 he	 was	 not	 right,	 but	 it	 is
absolutely	stupid	to	get	into	a	quarrel.	Those	twenty-four	hours	will	have	given
you	 a	 chance	 to	 be	 more	 alert.	 People	 react	 immediately	 --	 there	 is	 not	 time
enough	 to	be	aware.	They	 react	 just	 like	machines.	So	 if	you	 find	 that	he	was
right,	go	and	thank	him.	If	you	find	he	was	wrong,	there	is	no	need	to	go;	or	if
you	want	to	go,	you	can	go	and	say	`You	seem	to	be	in	a	misunderstanding.'"
And	Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say,	 later	 in	 his	 life,	 "That	 simple	 advice	 of	my	 dying
father	has	transformed	my	whole	life	because	it	gave	me	a	certain	awareness,	a
certain	awakening.	I	could	not	do	anything	immediately,	instantly.	I	had	to	wait
for	twenty-four	hours.	And	you	cannot	remain	angry	for	twenty-four	hours."
A	man	who	is	awake	behaves	in	a	totally	different	way	from	the	whole	humanity,
which	is	fast	asleep.
One	 of	my	 friends,	 he	was	 a	 colleague	 in	 the	 same	 university	where	 I	 was	 a
teacher,	said	to	me	"I	have	been	trying	to	drop	my	smoking,	for	almost	 twenty
years."
I	said,	"That	is	too	long	a	time	to	drop	a	cigarette;	just	give	me	a	cigarette	and	I
can	drop	it	right	now."
He	said,	"Don't	make	a	laughing	stock	of	me.	I	have	worked	hard	to	drop	it,	and
sometimes	 for	 a	 few	hours,	 or	 sometimes	 even	 for	 few	 days,	 I	manage	 not	 to
smoke.	But	finally	I	have	to	give	way.	And	now	I	have	even	dropped	fighting;	it
is	meaningless	--
twenty	years	fighting."
I	said,	"You	don't	understand	simple	laws	of	life.	You	are	a	man	fast	asleep,	and
in	 sleep	 you	 cannot	make	 any	 decisions,	 any	 commitments.	My	 suggestion	 is
that	you	do	one	thing:	you	smoke	more	consciously."
He	said,	"What	--	smoke?	I	want	to	drop	it."
I	said,	"Just	 listen	to	what	I	am	saying,	you	smoke	more	consciously.	Take	the
packet	from	your	pocket	very	slowly	and	consciously.	Pull	the	cigarette	out	very
slowly	 --	 there	 is	 no	hurry.	Look	 at	 the	 cigarette	 from	all	 sides,	 put	 it	 in	 your
mouth,	wait.	There	is	no	hurry.	Go	very	slow-motion,	just	as	if	a	film	is	going	in
slow	motion.
He	said,	"What	is	that	going	to	do?"
I	said,	"That	we	will	se	later	on...	then	take	your	lighter,	look	at	it."
He	said,	"You	are	making	me	a	fool	--	what	is	that	going	to	do?"
I	said,	"You	just....	Twenty	years	you	have	done	it	your	way;	twenty	days	you	do
it	my	way.	Look	at	the	lighter,	then	light	the	cigarette,	then	smoke	as	slowly	as
possible.	And	be	watchful	 that	 the	smoke	 is	going	 in,	 then	 the	smoke	 is	going
out.	That	 is	 the	oldest	meditation,	 vipassana.	Gautam	Buddha	may	never	 have
thought	that	it	will	be	used	with	a	cigarette	and	a	cigarette	lighter	--	but	I	have	to
manage	for	him.
He	would	not	do	Vipassana,	but	this....	He	said,	"Okay,	I	will	try	it,	twenty	days
it	is	not	much."
But	 the	 second	day	he	came	 to	me	and	said,	 "This	 is	 strange.	Doing	 things	 so
slowly	makes	me	 so	alert;	 smoking,	 and	watching	 the	 smoke	going	 in	and	 the
smoke	 going	 out	makes	me	 so	 silent	 that	 already,	 in	 two	 days,	 I	 am	 smoking
almost	fifty	percent	less.
I	said,	"Just	wait	twenty	days."
He	said,	"I	don't	think	it	will	last	twenty	days;	at	the	most	five	days	and	it	will	be
finished."
I	said,	"Don't	be	 in	a	hurry	 to	 finish	 it,	because	 if	anything	remains	clinging	 it
will	 enforce	 you	 again.	 So	 go	 very	 slowly;	 there	 is	 no	 hurry,	 and	 there	 is	 no
harm.	 It	 does	 not	 matter	 --	 at	 the	 most	 you	 may	 die	 two	 years	 earlier.	 But
anyway,	what	were	you	going	to	do	in	those	two	years	--	just	smoke...	more!	So
there	 is	 no	 harm	 anyway;	 the	 world	 is	 too	 populated,	 and	 if	 people	 go	 on
disappearing	 a	 little	 earlier,	 making	 space	 for	 other	 people,	 it	 is	 very
compassionate	of	them."
He	said,"You	are	a	strange	fellow."	And	after	the	fourth	day	he	told	me,	"Now,
as	my	hand	moves	towards	the	pocket,	suddenly	a	stop	comes	--	from	where,	I
don't	know.	I	have	not	been	smoking	for	one	whole	day	because	each	time	I	try
to	take	a	cigarette,	I	cannot	take	the	packet	out.	What	is	the	secret	of	it?"
I	 said,	 "There	 is	 no	 secret;	 you	 have	 just	 learned	 to	 smoke	 consciously,	 with
awareness.
And	nobody	can	smoke	with	awareness,	because	smoking	is	not	a	sin	--	smoking
is	simply	a	stupidity.	If	you	are	alert	and	awake,	you	cannot	be	so	stupid.	There
is	 fresh	air	available;	you	can	go	and	have	good	breathing,	deep	breaths,	 fresh
air,	perfumed	with	 flowers.	You	must	be	an	 idiot	 if	you	have	 to	pay	money	 to
make	your	breathing	dirty,	dirty	with	nicotine,	harming	your	lungs,	harming	your
life;	and	there	is	no	point	in	it."
Premda,	people	are	really	fast	asleep;	it	is	a	wonder	they	don't	snore	with	open
eyes.
King	Arthur,	going	on	a	two-year	dragon	hunting	expedition,	ordered	Merlin	the
Wise	to	make	a	chastity	belt	for	Guinevere	to	wear	whilst	he	was	away.	Merlin
came	up	with	a	very	unorthodox	design	--	one	that	had	a	large	gaping	aperture	in
the	area	that	would	normally	be	most	strongly	fortified.
"That's	absurd,"	said	Arthur.	"This	belt	is	not	functional."
"Yes,	it	is,"	said	Merlin.	Picking	up	a	spare	magic	wand,	he	passed	it	through	the
opening
--	instantly	a	guillotine-like	blade	came	down	and	chopped	the	wand	in	two.
"Ingenious!"	cried	Arthur.
After	outfitting	Guinevere	with	the	belt,	he	rode	off	to	slay	dragons,	his	mind	at
peace.
Two	years	later,	when	Arthur	came	back,	his	first	official	act	was	to	assemble	all
of	 the	Knights	of	 the	Round	Table	 and	 send	 them	 to	 the	 court	 physician	 for	 a
special	inspection.
His	frown	grew	severe	as	he	learned	that	every	member	of	the	Round	Table	was
nicked,	cut,	or	scratched	--	all	but	one.	Sir	Lancelot	was	impeccable.
Arthur	called	for	him	immediately,	and	smiled	at	his	best	knight.	"Sir	Lancelot,"
he	declared,	"you	are	the	only	one	of	my	knights	who	did	not	assail	the	chastity
of	my	 lady	while	 I	was	off	slaying	dragons.	You	have	upheld	 the	honor	of	 the
Round	 Table	 and	 I	 am	 proud	 of	 you.	 You	 shall	 be	 rewarded.	 You	 may	 have
anything	in	the	kingdom	you	desire,	you	have	but	to	name	it.	State	your	wish	Sir
Lancelot."
But	Sir	Lancelot	was	speechless....
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	Untry	and	untry	again
23	April	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704235
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN03
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
104
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
MANY	YEARS	AGO,	IT	SEEMS,	I	USED	TO	BE	ABLE	TO	MEDITATE	--	I
THINK.
A	BEAUTIFUL,	SILENT,	TRANSPARENT	STATE	WOULD	ARRIVE	FROM
SOMEWHERE;	I	PRESUMED	THIS	WAS	MEDITATION.	NOW,	NOTHING
COMES
EXCEPT	A	RACING	MIND.	WHAT	HAPPENED?
Prema	 Veena,	 it	 always	 almost	 happens	 this	 way.	 The	 days	 when	 you	 were
feeling	 a	 kind	 of	 meditation	 happening	 to	 you	 were	 the	 days	 you	 were	 not
looking	for	it	--	it	was	happening	to	you.	Now	you	are	trying	to	make	it	happen,
and	 that	makes	all	 the	difference.	All	 the	 things	 that	are	 really	valuable	 in	 life
only	 happen;	 you	 cannot	 make	 them	 happen,	 you	 cannot	 do	 them.	 It	 may	 be
meditation,	it	may	be	love,	it	may	be	blissfulness,	it	may	be	silence.
Anything	that	goes	beyond	your	mind	is	beyond	your	capacity	to	do	it;	you	can
only	do	things	which	come	in	the	territory	of	the	mind.
The	mind	is	the	doer,	but	your	being	is	not	a	doer.	Your	being	is	just	an	opening,
and	a	deep	acceptance	of	whatever	happens,	with	no	complaint,	with	no	grudge	-
-	just	a	pure	gratefulness.	And	that,	too,	is	not	done	by	you;	that	is	also	part	of
the	 happening.	We	have	 to	make	 this	 distinction	very	 clear;	 almost	 everybody
gets	confused.	Something	happens	to	you	--	 it	 is	so	beautiful,	so	blissful	--	 the
mind	 starts	 immediately	 desiring	 that	 it	 should	 happen	 more,	 that	 it	 should
happen	 more	 often,	 that	 it	 should	 go	 deeper.	 The	 moment	 mind	 comes	 in,	 it
disturbs	everything.	Mind	is	the	devil,	the	destroyer.
So	 one	 has	 to	 be	 very	 aware	 that	 mind	 should	 not	 be	 allowed	 to	 interfere	 in
things	of	the	beyond.	Mind	is	perfectly	good	as	a	mechanic,	a	technician.	Give
your	mind	what	it	can	do,	but	don't	let	it	interfere	in	things	which	are	beyond	its
capacity.	But	one	of	the	problems	is	that	mind	is	nothing	but	desiring	--	desiring
for	 more.	 As	 far	 as	 the	 world	 of	 doing	 is	 concerned,	 you	 can	 have	 a	 bigger
house,	you	can	have	a	better	house,	you	can	have	better	furniture	--	you	can	do
everything	better;	it	is	within	the	capacity	of	the	mind.
But	 beyond	 the	 mind...	 mind	 can	 only	 desire,	 and	 each	 desire	 is	 going	 to	 be
frustrated.
Instead	of	bringing	more	meditation,	it	will	bring	you	more	frustration.	Instead
of	bringing	you	more	love,	it	will	bring	to	you	more	anger.	Instead	of	silence	and
peace,	 it	 will	 bring	 more	 traffic	 of	 thoughts	 --	 and	 that	 happens	 to	 almost
everybody.	So	it	is	something	natural	that	one	has	to	grow	out	of.
You	 are	 saying,	 "Many	 years	 ago,	 it	 seems,	 I	 used	 to	 be	 able	 to	 meditate.	 A
beautiful,	silent,	transparent	state	would	arrive	from	somewhere;	I	presumed	this
was	meditation."
Neither	were	you	expecting	it,	nor	were	you	desiring	it;	it	was	just	a	guest,	like	a
breeze	 that	 comes	 to	 you.	 But	 you	 cannot	 keep	 it,	 and	 you	 cannot	 order	 it	 to
come.	It	comes	when	it	comes.	And	once	you	understand	this,	you	stop	trying.
You	have	heard	 the	 expression,"Try	 and	 try	 again.	 I	would	 like	 to	 say	 to	you:
Untry	and	untry	again.	Whenever	the	idea	of	trying	arises,	immediately	drop	it.
It	is	going	to	lead	you	into	failure,	into	frustration,	and	if	you	can	drop	it...	and
everybody	can	drop	it,	because	it	never	brings	anything.	What	is	the	problem	in
dropping	 the	 failure,	 frustration,	despair	and	hopelessness?	 Just	drop	 them	and
forget	all	about	meditation.
One	day,	suddenly,	you	will	find	a	window	opens,	and	a	fresh	breeze	with	new
rays	has	filled	your	heart.	Again,	don't	commit	the	same	mistake!	Be	thankful	for
what	is	happening,	but	don't	ask	for	more	--	and	more	will	be	coming.	Don't	ask,
"Come	again"	--
your	asking	will	become	the	barrier.
It	 will	 come	 again,	 it	 will	 come	 more	 often.	 Slowly,	 slowly	 it	 becomes	 your
heartbeat;	waking,	sleeping,	 it	 is	always	 there,	 it	never	goes.	But	 it	 is	not	your
doing.	You	cannot	brag	that	"I	have	done	it."	You	can	only	say,	"I	have	allowed
the	 unknown	 to	 do	 it	 to	 me."	 It	 is	 always	 from	 the	 unknown	 that	 great
experiences	enter	into	our	small	hearts,	and	when	we	are	trying	hard	to	get	them,
we	become	so	tense	that	the	very	tension	prevents	them.
When	you	are	not	trying,	and	you	are	relaxed	--	you	are	not	even	bothered	about
meditation	 and	 things	 like	 that	 --	 you	 suddenly	 find	 the	 footsteps	 of	 the
unknown,	 something	 from	nowhere,	 approaching	you.	Look	at	 it	with	wonder,
not	with	desire.	Look	at	it	with	gratitude,	but	not	with	greed.
You	are	 saying,	 "Now,	nothing	comes	except	a	 racing	mind.	What	happened?"
You	became	aware	of	the	unknown.	A	little	taste	of	meditation,	and	you	became
greedy,	desirous.	Your	desire,	your	greed	spoilt	the	whole	game.	Still,	everything
can	be	put	right.	You	see	the	mind	continuously	racing;	let	it	race	--	you	simply
watch,	just	be	a	bystander,	an	observer.
Just	watching	the	mind	is	one	of	the	greatest	secrets	of	life,	because	it	does	not
show	that	it	works	--	but	it	works!	Just	as	you	watch,	indifferent,	uninterested,	as
if	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	you,	those	thoughts	start	getting	thinner;	there	is	less
traffic	on	the	track	of	the	mind.
Slowly,	slowly	there	are	small	gaps,	and	in	those	gaps	you	will	have	a	glimpse	of
what	you	used	to	have.	But	don't	jump	upon	it,	don't	be	greedy.	Enjoy	it,	it	will
also	pass;	don't	try	to	cling	to	it.	Thoughts	will	start	coming	again;	again	a	gap
will	come,	a	bigger	gap.
Slowly,	slowly	bigger	gaps	will	be	happening	when	the	mind	will	be	empty.
In	that	empty	mind	the	beyond	can	enter	into	you,	but	the	basic	condition	is	that
you	should	not	cling	to	it.	If	it	comes	--	good;	if	it	does	not	--	good.	Perhaps	you
are	 not	 ripe,	 perhaps	 it	 is	 not	 the	 time	 --	 still,	 be	 grateful.	 One	 has	 to	 learn
watchfulness	 and	gratefulness.	Even	when	nothing	 is	 happening	 that	 you	deep
down	want	 to	happen,	still	be	grateful.	Perhaps	 it	 is	not	 the	right	 time	for	you,
perhaps	it	will	not	help	your	growth.
I	have	often	told	you	the	story	of	a	Sufi	mystic,	Junnaid.	He	was	the	master	of	Al
Hillaj	Mansoor	and	because	of	Mansoor	he	became	very	famous.	Mansoor	was
killed	by	the	orthodox,	traditionalist	fanatics,	and	because	of	Mansoor,	Junnaid's
name	also	became	famous	--	Mansoor	was	Junnaid's	disciple.
Junnaid	used	to	go	for	a	pilgrimage	every	year	to	the	Mohammedan	holy	place,
Kaaba.	 It	was	not	very	far	 from	his	place,	and	Mohammedans	are	expected	by
their	 tradition	 at	 least	 once	 in	 a	 life	 to	 go	 to	 Kaaba;	 otherwise	 they	 are	 not
complete	Mohammedans.	But	Kaaba	was	so	close	to	his	place	that	every	year	he
used	to	go	with	his	disciples.	He	was	the	revolutionary	kind	of	saint.	In	fact,	any
kind	other	than	the	revolutionary	are	not	saints	--	just	facades,	actors,	pretenders,
and	hypocrites.
The	people	in	the	villages	where	Junnaid	had	to	pass	were	very	angry	with	him.
A	few	villages	were	so	angry	 that	 they	would	not	give	him	anything	 to	eat,	or
even	water	to	drink	and	would	not	allow	him	to	stay	in	the	village.
It	was	Junnaid's	usual	prayer	--	Mohammedans	pray	five	times	a	day	--	and	after
each	prayer	he	would	raise	his	hands	to	God	and	he	would	say,	"I	am	so	grateful
to	You.	How	 should	 I	 express	my	gratefulness?	You	 take	 care	 of	me	 in	 every
possible	way;	Your	compassion	is	infinite,	your	love	knows	no	bounds."
The	disciples	were	 tired	because	 five	 times	every	day,	 and	 in	 situations	where
they	could	see	there	is	no	care	taken	by	God	--	they	have	not	received	food,	they
have	not	received	water,	 they	have	not	received	shelter	from	the	hot	sun	in	the
desert....	Once	it	happened	that	for	three	days	continually	they	were	thrown	out,
stoned,	given	no	food,	no	water,	no	shelter;	but	Junnaid	continued	his	prayer	the
same	way.
On	the	third	day,	the	disciples	freaked	out.	They	said,	"Enough	is	enough.	Why
are	you	saying,	`You	are	compassionate',	`Your	love	is	great',	`You	take	care	of
us	in	every	possible	detail?'	For	three	days	we	have	not	eaten	a	single	thing,	we
are	thirsty,	we	have	not	slept	under	shelter,	we	have	been	sleeping	in	the	desert,
shivering	in	the	cold	night.
For	what	are	you	being	grateful?"
The	answer	 that	 Junnaid	gave	 to	his	disciples	 is	worthy	of	being	 remembered.
He	said,
"For	these	three	days,	do	you	think	I	cannot	see	that	food	has	not	been	given	to
us,	that	we	have	been	thrown	out,	that	we	have	been	stoned,	that	we	are	thirsty,
that	for	three	days	we	had	to	remain	in	the	open	desert...?	Don't	you	see	that	I	am
also	aware	of	it?	But	this	does	not	mean	that	he	is	not	taking	care	of	us.	Perhaps
this	is	the	way	he	is	taking	care	of	us;	perhaps	this	is	what	we	need	at	this	time.
"It	is	very	easy,	when	life	is	going	comfortably,	to	thank	God.	That	thankfulness
means	nothing.	These	three	days	I	have	been	watching.	slowly,	slowly,	all	of	you
have	stopped	thanking	Him	after	the	prayer;	you	failed	the	test.	It	was	a	beautiful
test.	Even	if	death	comes	to	me,	I	will	die	with	gratefulness.	He	gave	me	life;	He
took	 it	away.	 It	was	His,	 it	 is	His,	 it	will	be	His.	Who	am	I	 to	 interfere	 in	His
affairs?"
So	 there	will	 be	 times	when	 you	will	 not	 find	 any	moment	 of	 peace,	 silence,
meditation,	love,	blissfulness.	But	do	not	lose	hope.	Perhaps	those	moments	are
needed	to	crystallize	you,	to	make	you	strong.	Be	grateful	not	only	when	things
are	going	good,	but	be	grateful	when	everything	is	going	wrong.	A	man	who	can
be	 grateful	 when	 everything	 is	 going	 wrong	 is	 really	 grateful;	 he	 knows	 the
beauty	 of	 gratefulness.	 For	 him,	 things	 can	 go	 wrong	 forever,	 but	 his
gratefulness	is	such	a	transforming	force,	it	is	going	to	change	everything.
So	don't	be	worried	about	the	racing	mind;	let	it	race.	Allow	it	to	race	as	fully	as
possible;	don't	prevent	it,	don't	try	to	stop	it	--	you	just	be	a	watcher.	You	get	out
of	the	mind	and	let	the	mind	race,	and	soon,	without	fail,	as	a	natural	law,	gaps
will	 start	happening.	And	when	gaps	happen,	don't	get	 too	happy	 that,	 "I	have
got	 it."	Remain	 relaxed.	Enjoy	 those	gaps	 also,	 but	without	greed	 and	without
desire,	because	they	will	disappear;	and	they	will	disappear	soon	if	you	become
greedy.	If	you	are	ungreedy,	undesirous,	they	may	stay	longer.
This	is	the	whole	training	of	meditation.	Soon,	the	day	comes	when	the	mind	is
completely	 silent,	 filled	 with	 great	 joy,	 silence.	 But	 remember,	 it	 is	 not	 your
doing.	If	even	for	a	single	moment	you	think	it	is	your	doing,	it	may	disappear.
Always	remember	that	you	are	the	doing	of	existence.	All	that	is	great	is	going
to	happen	to	you	not	by	your	effort,	but	by	your	relaxed	openness,	availability.
Just	keep	your	doors	open.
The	guest	will	come	--	it	has	never	been	otherwise
The	guest	always	comes.
Pat's	son	became	an	actor,	and	one	evening	rushed	home	to	his	father	in	a	state
of	great	excitement,	"Guess	what	Dad,"	he	announced,	"I	have	 just	been	given
my	first	part.	I	play	a	man	who	has	been	married	for	twenty-five	years."
"Keep	it	up	my	son,"	said	Pat,	"someday	you	may	get	a	speaking	part,	too."
In	the	case	of	Veena,	 it	 is	 just	 the	opposite.	Right	now	you	are	in	 the	speaking
part;	just	keep	on,	someday	you	will	certainly	get	the	silent	part	too.	But	there	is
nothing	 to	 be	worried	 about.	 Life	 has	 to	 be	 taken	 very	 playfully,	with	 a	 great
sense	 of	 humor.	 In	 good	 times	 and	 bad	 times,	when	 things	 are	 happening	 and
when	 things	 are	 not	 happening,	when	 the	 spring	 comes	 and	when,	 sometimes,
the	spring	does	not	come	to	you....
Remember,	we	are	not	the	doers	as	far	as	things	beyond	mind	are	concerned;	we
are	only	receivers.	And	to	become	a	receiver,	you	have	just	to	become	a	watcher
of	your	mind	because	 through	watching	 those	gaps	appear.	 In	 those	gaps	your
door	is	open.	And	through	that	door	stars	can	enter	into	you,	flowers	can	enter
into	you.	Even	when	stars	and	flowers	enter	into	you,	don't	be	greedy,	don't	try
to	keep	them	in.	They	come	out	of	freedom	and	you	should	remember,	they	will
remain	 with	 you	 only	 in	 freedom.	 If	 you	 destroy	 their	 freedom,	 they	 are
destroyed	too.	Their	freedom	is	their	very	spirit.
It	is	my	continual	experience	of	thousands	of	people	that	when	they	come	for	the
first	time	to	meditate,	meditation	happens	so	easily	because	they	don't	have	any
idea	what	 it	 is.	Once	it	has	happened,	 then	the	real	problem	arises	--	 then	they
want	 it,	 they	 know	 what	 it	 is,	 they	 desire	 it.	 They	 are	 greedy	 for	 it;	 it	 is
happening	 to	 others	 and	 it	 is	 not	 happening	 to	 them.	 Then	 jealousy,	 envy,	 all
kinds	of	wrong	things	surround	them.
Always	 remain	 innocent	 as	 far	 as	 things	 beyond	mind	 are	 concerned.	Always
remain	amateur,	never	become	an	expert.	That	is	the	worst	thing	that	can	happen
to	anybody.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	 FEW	DAYS	AGO,	 I	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT	THE	VOICE	 SPEAKING
INSIDE
OF	US	IS	ALWAYS	THE	MIND,	SO	I	WONDER	WHO	IN	ME	IS	HEARING
THIS
VOICE.	WHEN	I	TRY	TO	FIND	THE	ANSWER,	I	ONLY	FIND	SILENCE.
Chidvilas,	the	moment	you	look	into	your	self	you	only	find	silence.	But	are	you
not	aware	that	you	are	also	there?	Who	finds	the	silence?	Silence	itself	can	not
find	itself;	there	is	somebody	as	a	witness	who	is	finding	the	silence.	Just	your
focus	 is	 wrong;	 you	 are	 still	 focusing	 on	 the	 object.	 It	 is	 just	 an	 old	 habit,
perhaps	cultivated	for	many,	many	lives,	 that	you	always	focus	yourself	on	the
object,	and	you	always	forget	yourself.
An	ancient	Eastern	story	is	that	ten	blind	men	crossed	a	stream.	The	current	was
very	 strong,	 so	 they	 took	 hold	 of	 each	 other's	 hands	 because	 they	were	 afraid
somebody	may	be	taken	away	by	the	current.	They	reached	the	other	shore,	and
somebody	 amongst	 them	 suggested,	 "It	 is	 better	we	 should	 count	 because	 the
current	and	the	stream	were	really	dangerous.	Somebody	may	have	slipped,	and
we	may	not	even	be	aware."
So	 they	 started	 counting.	 It	 was	 a	 great	 shock,	 and	 they	 were	 all	 crying	 and
weeping;	everybody	tried,	but	the	count	was	always	nine	--	because	nobody	was
counting	himself.
Naturally,	he	would	start	counting,	"One,	two,	three,	four,	five,	six,	seven,	eight,
nine....
My	God,	one	has	gone!"	So	they	all	were	crying.
A	woodcutter	was	watching	all	 this	drama	and	he	said...	he	had	never	seen	ten
blind	men	 together,	 in	 the	 first	 place.	Second,	what	 a	 stupid	 idea	 these	people
had.	What	was	the	need	to	cross	the	stream	when	it	was	so	strong	and	flooded?
And,	above	all,	now	they	were	counting,	and	crying	and	weeping	for	someone	--
they	 did	 not	 know	 who,	 but	 certainly	 someone	 had	 been	 taken	 away	 by	 the
current.	Watching	 them	 counting,	 he	was	 simply	 amazed	 how	was	 it	 possible
that	they	were	ten	persons,	but	the	count	always	came	to	nine?
Some	help	was	needed,	so	he	came	down	from	his	tree	and	he	said,	"What	is	the
matter?"
They	all	said,	"We	have	 lost	one	of	our	 friends.	We	were	 ten,	and	now	we	are
only	nine."
The	man	said,	"I	can	find	your	tenth	man.	You	are	right,	you	used	to	be	ten,	but
there	is	a	condition."
They	said,	"We	will	accept	any	condition,	but	our	friend...."
He	said,	"It	is	not	a	very	big	condition,	it	is	a	simple	condition.	I	will	hit	on	the
first	man's	head;	he	has	to	say	"one."	Then	I	will	hit	on	the	second	person's	head
two	times;	he	has	to	say	"two."	Then	I	will	hit	on	the	third	person's	three	times;
he	 has	 to	 say	 "three."	 As	 many	 times	 as	 I	 hit,	 the	 person	 has	 to	 speak	 the
number."
They	said,	"If	this	is	the	way	to	find	the	lost	friend,	we	are	ready."
So	he	enjoyed	hitting	very	much,	and	he	hit	 them	in	turn.	When	he	had	hit	 the
tenth	man	ten	times	he	said	"ten."	All	the	nine	said,	"You	idiot,	where	have	you
been?
Unnecessarily	 we	 have	 all	 been	 beaten!	 Where	 you	 have	 been	 hiding	 up	 to
now?"
He	said,	"I	was	standing	here,	I	was	myself	counting,	and	it	always	came	to	nine.
This	man	seems	to	be	a	miracle	man;	he	managed	to	find	the	tenth	man."
The	story	is	significant	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	has	become	our	habit	not	to
count	ourselves.	So	when	you	are	watching	your	 thoughts,	 inside,	 you	 are	not
aware	 that	 there	 is	a	watcher	 too.	When	you	are	watching	silence,	you	are	not
aware	that	you	cannot	watch	silence	if	you	are	not	there.
Chidvilas,	 you	 are	 asking,	 "A	 few	 days	 ago	 I	 heard	 you	 say	 that	 the	 voice
speaking	inside	of	us	is	always	the	mind,	so	I	wonder	who	in	me	is	hearing	this
voice?"	Certainly	I	am	not	hearing	it,	and	as	far	as	I	know	nobody	else	is	hearing
it.	You	must	be	 the	guy	who	 is	hearing	 this	voice.Everybody	else	has	his	own
problem!
"When	 I	 try	 to	 find	 the	 answer	 I	 only	 find	 silence."	But	 then	 too	 the	question
arises:	Who	finds	the	silence?	It	is	the	same	guy	who	was	hearing	the	voice.	His
name	is	Chidvilas.
You	have	to	become	more	subjective,	more	alert	to	yourself;	we	are	always	alert
to	everything	around	us.
Pat	 followed	 his	 friend	 Mike's	 example	 and	 left	 Ireland	 to	 work	 in	 England.
Though	they	had	since	lost	contact,	Mike	had	mentioned	how	easy	it	was	to	get	a
job	at	Whipsnade	Open	Zoo,	so	Pat	applied.	Unfortunately	they	had	no	keeper's
jobs	available;	there	was	not	even	the	position	of	a	sweeper	vacant.
"But	I	 tell	you	what,	Pat,"	 the	manager	said,	"the	gorilla	died	a	couple	of	days
ago,	and	what	is	a	zoo	without	a	gorilla?	But	we	have	kept	his	pelt	entire;	now	if
you	crawl	into	that	skin	and	take	over	his	enclosure,	we	will	feed	and	house	you,
and	pay	you	handsomely	as	well."
Pat	had	a	look	over	the	lovely	field	that	was	the	gorilla	enclosure;	he	surveyed
the	comfortable	gorilla	house,	and	tested	the	bed	provided.	He	agreed	to	take	the
job.	Very	soon	Pat	had	become	a	great	favorite	with	visitors	to	the	zoo.	Being	a
bit	 of	 an	 extrovert,	 he	 would	 always	 put	 on	 a	 good	 act	 --	 tumbling,	 chest-
thumping,	and	growling.	But	 the	climax	of	his	performance	was	most	popular.
Whenever	there	was	a	good	crowd,	Pat	would	scale	a	large	oak	tree	at	the	side	of
his	enclosure	where	 it	 adjoined	 the	 lion's	pen	and	pelt	 the	 lioness	with	acorns.
The	big-maned	lion,	in	particular,	would	roar	with	rage	and	stamp	about,	and	the
crowd	would	roar	with	delight.
One	public	 holiday	 a	 particularly	 large	 crowd	had	gathered,	 and	Pat	was	 aloft
and	 reaching	 the	 peak	 of	 his	 performance.	 He	 had	 just	 finished	 off	 the	 acorn
pelting	with	a	bit	of	chest-thumping	when	the	branch	he	was	balanced	on	broke;
he	fell	to	the	ground	at	the	lion's	feet.	Pat	jumped	up,	shouting	for	help,	and	was
about	to	scarper	when	the	lioness	whispered,	"Hold	your	tongue	Pat,	sure	do	you
want	to	lose	us	the	best	jobs	we	have	every	had?"
Here,	 everybody	 has	 different	 skins	 only;	 inside	 is	 the	 same	 consciousness.
Whether	 you	 are	 hearing	 a	 voice,	 or	 you	 are	 hearing	 silence,	 remember	more
about	yourself	--	who	is	the	watcher?	who	is	the	witness?
In	every	experience,	when	you	are	angry,	when	you	are	in	love,	when	you	are	in
greed,	when	you	are	in	despair,	it	is	the	same	key:	just	watch	--	are	you	really	in
danger,	or	are	you	only	a	witness.	Here	we	are,	just	sitting.	Deep	down,	who	are
you?	Always	a	witness.
Whatever	 happens	 on	 the	 outside	 --	 you	may	 be	 young,	 you	may	 be	 old,	 you
may	be	alive,	you	may	be	dead	--	whatever	happens	on	the	outside,	inside	is	the
same	witness.
This	witness	is	our	truth.	This	witness	is	our	ultimate	reality,	our	eternal	reality.
So	 all	 your	work	 is	 concerned	with	 shifting	 your	 focus	 from	 the	 object	 to	 the
subject.
Don't	be	bothered	about	anger,	or	silence,	or	love.	Be	concerned	about	whom	all
this	is	happening	to,	and	remain	centered	there.	This	centering	will	bring	you	the
greatest	experience	of	your	life.	It	will	make	you	a	superman.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
ELEVEN	YEARS	AGO,	WHEN	I	FIRST	SAT	IN	FRONT	OF	YOU,	I	WAS	SO
OVERWHELMED	BY	YOUR	ENERGY,	BY	YOUR	LOVE,	BY	YOU,	THAT	I
COULD	DO	NOTHING	BUT	CRY	AND	BOW	DOWN	TO	YOUR	FEET	IN
SILENT
EXPRESSION;	AND	YET	 I	FELT	VERY	MUCH	UNDERSTOOD	BY	YOU.
AT
THAT	TIME	YOU	TOLD	ME	TO	KEEP	MY	ENERGY	INSIDE	AND	BRING
IT	TO
MY	HARA.	SINCE	THEN	THIS	SUGGESTION	STAYS	WITH	ME,	AND	MY
BELLY	HAS	BECOME	MY	BEST	FRIEND,	AND	THE	PLACE	BELOW	MY
NAVEL
A	 MIRROR	 OF	 MY	 FEELINGS.	 IN	 ALL	 THIS	 TIME	 TEARS	 AND
LAUGHTER	OF
JOY	AND	GRATITUDE	FOR	BEING	ABLE	TO	SPEND	THIS	LIFE	WITH
YOU
HAVE	KEPT	 BACK	MOST	 OF	MY	WORDS.	MY	 BELOVED	MASTER,	 I
FEEL
THAT	 BEHIND	 THIS	 SMALL	 SUGGESTION	 OF	 YOURS	 LIES	 MORE
THAN	I	CAN
IMAGINE.	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	MORE	ABOUT	THE
HARA,	AND	GUIDE	ME	FURTHER?
Deva	 Radhika,	 hara	 is	 the	 center	 from	where	 a	 life	 leaves	 the	 body.	 It	 is	 the
center	 of	 death.	 The	 word	 "hara"	 is	 Japanese;	 that's	 why	 in	 Japan,	 suicide	 is
called	 hara-kiri.	 The	 center	 is	 just	 two	 inches	 below	 the	 navel.	 It	 is	 very
important,	and	almost	everybody	in	the	world	has	felt	it.	But	only	in	Japan	have
they	gone	deeper	into	its	implications.
Even	the	people	in	India,	who	had	worked	tremendously	hard	on	centers,	had	not
considered	the	hara.	The	reason	for	their	missing	it	was	because	they	had	never
considered	death	to	be	of	any	significance.	Your	soul	never	dies,	so	why	bother
about	a	center	that	functions	only	as	a	door	for	energies	to	get	out,	and	to	enter
into	another	body?	They	worked	 from	sex,	which	 is	 the	 life	center.	They	have
worked	 on	 seven	 centers,	 but	 the	 hara	 is	 not	 even	 mentioned	 in	 any	 Indian
scriptures.
The	people	who	worked	hardest	on	the	centers	for	thousands	of	years	have	not
mentioned	the	hara,	and	this	cannot	be	 just	a	coincidence.	The	reason	was	that
they	never	 took	death	 seriously.	These	 seven	centers	 are	 life	 centers,	 and	each
center	is	of	a	higher	life.	The	seventh	is	the	highest	center	of	life,	when	you	are
almost	a	god.
The	hara	is	very	close	to	the	sex	center.	If	you	don't	rise	towards	higher	centers,
towards	 the	 seventh	 center	which	 is	 in	 your	 head,	 and	 if	 you	 remain	 for	 your
whole	life	at	the	sex	center,	then	just	by	the	side	of	the	sex	center	is	the	hara,	and
when	 then	 life	will	 end,	 the	 hara	will	 be	 the	 center	 from	where	 your	 life	will
move	out	of	the	body.
Why	 have	 I	 told	Radhika	 this?	 She	was	 very	 energetic,	 but	 not	 aware	 of	 any
higher	centers;	her	whole	energy	was	at	the	sex	center,	and	she	was	overflowing.
Energy	overflowing	at	the	sex	center	is	dangerous,	because	it	can	start	releasing
from	the	hara.
And	 if	 it	 starts	 releasing	 from	 the	hara,	 then	 to	 take	 it	upwards	becomes	more
difficult.	So	 I	had	 told	her	 to	keep	her	 energy	 in,	 and	not	 to	be	 so	expressive:
Hold	it	in!	I	simply	wanted	the	hara	center,	which	was	opening	and	which	could
have	been	very	dangerous,	to	be	completely	closed.
She	followed	it,	and	she	has	become	a	totally	different	person.	Now	when	I	see
her,	I	cannot	believe	the	expressiveness	that	I	had	seen	at	first.	Now	she	is	more
centered,	and	her	energy	is	moving	in	the	right	direction	of	the	higher	centers.	It
is	 almost	 at	 the	 fourth	 center,	which	 is	 the	 center	 of	 love	 and	which	 is	 a	 very
balancing	center.	There	are	three	centers	below	it,	and	three	centers	above	it.
Once	a	person	is	at	the	center	of	love,	there	is	very	rarely	a	possibility	for	him	to
fall	back	down,	because	he	has	tasted	something	of	the	heights.	Now	valleys	will
be	very	dark,	ugly;	he	has	seen	sunlit	peaks,	not	very	high,	but	still	high;	now	his
whole	desire	will	be....
And	that	is	the	trouble	with	all	lovers:	they	want	more	love,	because	they	don't
understand	that	the	real	desire	is	not	for	more	love,	but	for	something	more	than
love.
Their	language	ends	with	love;	they	don't	know	any	way	that	is	higher	than	love,
and	 love	does	not	 satisfy.	On	 the	contrary,	 the	more	you	 love	 the	more	 thirsty
you	become.
At	 the	 fourth	 center	 of	 love,	 one	 feels	 a	 tremendous	 satisfaction	 only	 when
energy	starts	moving	to	the	fifth	center.	The	fifth	center	is	in	your	throat,	and	the
sixth	center	is	your	third	eye.	The	seventh	center,	the	sahastrara,	is	on	the	top	of
your	head.	All	these	centers	have	different	expressions	and	different	experiences.
When	love	moves	to	the	fifth	center	then	whatever	talents	you	have,	any	creative
dimension,	is	possible	for	you.	This	is	the	center	of	creativity.	It	is	not	only	for
songs,	not	only	for	music;	it	is	for	all	creativity.
Hindu	mythology	has	 a	beautiful	 story.	 It	 is	 a	myth,	but	 the	 story	 is	beautiful,
and	particularly	for	explaining	to	you	the	fifth	center.	Indian	mythology	says	that
there	 is	 a	 constant	 struggle	 between	 evil	 forces	 and	 good	 forces.	 They	 both
discovered	that	if	they	made	a	certain	search	in	the	ocean	they	could	find	nectar,
and	that	whoever	drank	it	would	become	immortal.	So	they	all	tried	to	find	it.
But	as	 life	balances	everywhere,	 there	 too....	Before	they	found	the	nectar	 they
found	poison	which	was	hiding	 the	nectar	underneath	 it.	Nobody	was	 ready	 to
test	 it;	even	 the	very	sight	of	 it	created	sickness.	One	of	 them	thought	 that	 the
first	hippie	of	the	world,	perhaps	might	be	willing	--	he	was	the	god	Shiva.	So
they	asked	Shiva,	"You	test	it."	He	said,	"Okay."
He	not	only	tested	it,	he	drank	it	all,	and	it	was	pure	poison.	He	kept	it	just	in	his
neck,	 at	 the	 fifth	 center.	 The	 fifth	 center	 is	 the	 creative	 center.	 It	 became
completely	poisoned,	and	Shiva	became	the	god	of	destruction.	So	Hindus	have
three	gods:	Brahma	who	creates	the	world,	Vishnu	who	sustains	the	world,	and
Shiva	who	destroys	the	world.	His	destructiveness	came	from	his	creative	center
being	 poisoned.	 And	 the	 poison	 was	 so	 great	 that	 it	 cannot	 be	 a	 small
destruction;	he	can	only	destroy	the	whole	of	existence.
When	Vishnu	is	tired	of	maintaining	it,	Shiva	destroys	it.	By	that	time	Brahma
has	 forgotten	 --	 millions	 of	 years	 have	 passed	 since	 he	 created	 the	 world;	 he
again	starts	creating
it	--	just	an	old	routine!	Brahma	is	the	creator	god,	but	in	the	whole	of	India	there
is	 only	one	 temple	devoted	 to	Brahma,	because	who	cares	 about	 him?	He	has
done	his	work;	it	is	futile	to	say	anything	to	him.	Vishnu	has	millions	of	temples,
because	 he	 is	 the	 sustainer	 god.	 Krishna	 and	 Rama	 are	 all	 incarnations	 of
Vishnu.
But	 nobody	 can	 compete	 with	 Shiva.	 Shiva	 has	 more	 shrines	 to	 him	 than
anybody	else.
He	 is	 a	 hippie,	 so	 he	 does	 not	 need	 very	 great	 temples	 or	 anything	 --	 just
anywhere,	under	any	tree.	Just	put	a	round	stone,	oval	shape,	and	he	does	not	ask
much	--	a	few	leaves,	not	even	flowers.	A	few	leaves	you	can	drop	there,	a	few
drops	 of	 water	 on	 his	 head,	 just	 to	 keep	 him	 cool...	 so	 people	 have	 created
devices;	 they	 just	 hang	 a	 small	 pot	 on	 top	of	his	 head	with	 a	 small	 drip,	 drip,
drip.	It	keeps	him	cool,	so	he	does	not	get	annoyed	with	anybody	and	destroy	the
world.
Everybody	 is	 afraid	 of	 him,	 so	 naturally	 he	 has	many	more	worshipers,	many
more	 temples,	 and	many	more	 shrines.	 In	 every	 small	 village	 you	will	 find	 at
least	a	dozen	Shiva	shrines,	because	they	cost	nothing;	any	poor	man	can	afford
it.	And	 he	 has	 to	 be	 concerned	 about	 it	 because	 Shiva	 can	 destroy.	Keep	 him
satisfied!	And	he	does	not	ask	much;	just	keep	his	head	cool.	Flowers	are	costly,
but	any	two	leaves	and	his	worship	is	finished.
Shiva	 became	 the	 destroyer	 of	 the	 world	 because	 his	 fifth	 center	 had
accumulated	the	whole	poison	of	existence	in	 it.	 It	 is	our	creative	center,	 that's
why	 lovers	 have	 a	 certain	 tendency	 to	 creativity.	When	 you	 fall	 in	 love,	 you
suddenly	feel	like	creating	something	-
-	 it	 is	 very	 close.	 If	 you	 are	 guided	 rightly,	 your	 love	 can	 become	 your	 great
creative	act.
It	can	make	you	a	poet,	it	can	make	you	a	painter,	it	can	make	you	a	dancer,	it
can	make	you	reach	to	the	stars	in	any	dimension.
The	sixth	center	which	we	call	the	third	eye	is	between	the	two	eyes.	This	gives
you	 a	 clarity,	 a	 vision	of	 all	 your	past	 lives,	 and	of	 all	 the	 future	possibilities.
Once	 your	 energy	 has	 reached	 your	 third	 eye,	 then	 you	 are	 so	 close	 to
enlightenment	 that	something	of	enlightenment	starts	showing.	 It	 radiates	 from
the	man	of	the	third	eye,	and	he	starts	feeling	a	pull	towards	the	seventh	center.
Because	of	these	seven	centers,	India	never	bothered	about	hara.	Hara	is	not	in
the	line;	it	is	just	by	the	side	of	the	sex	center.	The	sex	center	is	the	life	center,
and	hara	is	the	death	center.	Too	much	excitement,	too	much	uncenteredness,	too
much	throwing	your	energy	all	over	the	place	is	dangerous,	because	it	takes	your
energy	towards	the	hara.	And	once	the	route	is	created,	it	becomes	more	difficult
to	move	it	upwards.	Hara	is	equally	parallel	to	the	sex	center,	so	the	energy	can
move	very	easily.
It	was	a	great	discovery	by	the	Japanese:	 they	found	that	 there	was	no	need	to
cut	your	head	off,	or	 shoot	your	brains	out	 to	kill	 --	 they	are	all	unnecessarily
painful;	just	a	small	knife	forced	exactly	at	the	hara	center,	and	without	any	pain,
life	 disappears.	 Just	make	 the	 center	 open	 and	 life	 disappears,	 as	 if	 the	 flower
opens	and	the	fragrance	disappears.
The	hara	should	be	kept	closed.	That's	why,	Radhika,	I	had	told	you	to	be	more
centered,	 to	keep	your	feelings	inside,	and	to	bring	it	 to	your	hara.	"Since	then
this	suggestion	stays	with	me,	and	my	belly	has	become	my	best	friend,	and	the
place	below	my	navel	a	mirror	of	my	feelings."
If	 you	 can	 keep	 your	 hara	 consciously	 controlling	 your	 energies,	 it	 does	 not
allow	 them	 to	 go	 out.	 You	 start	 feeling	 a	 tremendous	 gravity,	 a	 stability,	 a
centeredness,	which	is	a	basic	necessity	for	the	energy	to	move	upwards.
You	are	asking,	"I	feel	that	behind	this	small	suggestion	of	yours	lies	more	than	I
can	imagine."	Certainly,	there	is	much	more....
A	Pole	 is	walking	down	the	street,	and	passes	a	hardware	store	advertising	 the
sale	of	a	chain	saw	that	is	capable	of	cutting	seven	hundred	trees	in	seven	hours.
The	Pole	thinks	that	it	is	a	great	deal	and	decides	to	buy	one.
The	next	day	he	comes	back	with	the	saw,	and	complains	to	the	salesman,	"The
thing	did	not	come	close	to	chopping	down	the	seven	hundred	trees	that	the	ad
said	it	would."
"Well,"	said	 the	salesman,	"let	us	 test	 it	out	back."	Finding	a	 log,	 the	salesman
pulls	the	starter	cord,	and	the	saw	makes	a	great	roaring	sound.
"What	is	that	noise?"	asked	the	Pole.
So	he	must	have	been	cutting	by	hand	and	it	was	an	electric	saw!
Radhika,	 your	 hara	 center	 has	 so	 much	 energy	 that,	 if	 it	 is	 rightly	 directed,
enlightenment	is	not	a	faraway	place.
So	 these	 two	are	my	 suggestions:	 keep	yourself	 as	much	centered	 as	possible.
Don't	get	moved	by	 small	 things	 --	 somebody	 is	 angry,	 somebody	 insults	you,
and	 you	 think	 about	 it	 for	 hours.	 Your	 whole	 night	 is	 disturbed	 because
somebody	said	something....	If	the	hara	can	hold	more	energy,	then	naturally	that
much	more	energy	starts	rising	upwards.
There	 is	 only	 a	 certain	 capacity	 in	 the	 hara,	 and	 every	 energy	 that	 moves
upwards	moves	through	the	hara;	but	the	hara	should	just	be	closed.
So	 one	 thing	 is	 that	 the	 hara	 should	 be	 closed.	 The	 second	 thing	 is	 that	 you
should	always	work	for	higher	centers.	For	example,	if	you	feel	angry	too	often
you	 should	 meditate	 more	 on	 anger,	 so	 that	 anger	 disappears	 and	 its	 energy
becomes	compassion.	 If	you	are	a	man	who	hates	everything,	 then	you	should
concentrate	on	hate;	meditate	on	hate,	and	the	same	energy	becomes	love.
Go	on	moving	upwards,	think	always	of	higher	ladders,	so	that	you	can	reach	to
the	highest	point	of	your	being.	And	 there	should	be	no	 leakage	from	the	hara
center.
India	has	been	 too	concerned	about	sex	 for	 the	same	reason:	sex	can	also	 take
your	 energy	 outside.	 It	 takes...	 but	 at	 least	 sex	 is	 the	 center	 of	 life.	 Even	 if	 it
takes	energy	out,	it	will	bring	energy	somewhere	else,	life	will	go	on	flowing.
But	 hara	 is	 a	 death	 center.	 Energy	 should	 not	 be	 allowed	 through	 the	 hara.	A
person	 whose	 energy	 starts	 through	 hara	 you	 can	 very	 easily	 detect.	 For
example,	there	are	people	with	whom	you	will	feel	suffocated,	with	whom	you
will	 feel	 as	 if	 they	 are	 sucking	 your	 energy.	You	will	 find	 that,	 after	 they	 are
gone,	you	feel	at	ease	and	relaxed,	although	they	were	not	doing	anything	wrong
to	you.
You	will	 find	 just	 the	opposite	kind	of	people	also,	whose	meeting	you	makes
you	 joyful,	 healthier.	 If	 you	 were	 sad,	 your	 sadness	 disappears;	 if	 you	 were
angry,	your	anger	disappears.	These	are	 the	people	whose	energy	 is	moving	 to
higher	 centers.	 Their	 energy	 affects	 your	 energy.	We	 are	 affecting	 each	 other
continually.	And	the	man	who	is	conscious,	chooses	friends	and	company	which
raises	his	energy	higher.
One	point	is	very	clear.	There	are	people	who	suck	you,	avoid	them!	It	is	better
to	 be	 clear	 about	 it,	 say	goodbye	 to	 them.	There	 is	 no	need	 to	 suffer,	 because
they	are	dangerous;	they	can	open	your	hara	too.	Their	hara	is	open,	that's	why
they	create	such	a	sucking	feeling	in	you.
Psychology	 has	 not	 taken	 note	 of	 it	 yet,	 but	 it	 is	 of	 great	 importance	 that
psychologically	sick	people	should	not	be	put	together.	And	that	is	what	is	being
done	all	over	the	world.
Psychologically	sick	people	are	put	into	psychiatric	institutes	together.	They	are
already	psychologically	sick,	and	you	are	putting	them	in	a	company	which	will
drag	their	energy	even	lower.
Even	the	doctors	who	work	with	psychologically	sick	people	have	given	enough
indication	of	it.	More	psychoanalysts	commit	suicide	than	any	other	profession,
more	 psychoanalysts	 go	 mad	 than	 any	 other	 profession.	 And	 every
psychoanalyst	once	in	a	while	needs	to	be	treated	by	some	other	psychoanalyst.
What	happens	to	these	poor	people?	Surrounded	by	psychologically	sick	people,
they	 are	 continually	 sucked,	 and	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 idea	 how	 to	 close	 their
haras.
There	 are	methods,	 techniques	 to	 close	 the	 hara,	 just	 as	 there	 are	methods	 for
meditation,	to	move	the	energy	upwards.	The	best	and	simplest	method	is:	try	to
remain	as	centered	in	your	life	as	possible.	People	cannot	even	sit	silently,	they
will	be	changing	 their	position.	They	cannot	 lie	down	silently,	 the	whole	night
they	will	be	turning	and	tossing.
This	is	just	unrest,	a	deep	restlessness	in	their	souls.
One	 should	 learn	 restfulness.	And	 in	 these	 small	 things,	 the	hara	 stays	 closed.
Particularly	 psychologists	 should	be	 trained.	Also,	 psychologically	 sick	people
should	not	be	put	together.
In	 the	East,	particularly	 in	 Japan	 in	Zen	monasteries,	where	 they	have	become
aware	 of	 the	 hara	 center,	 there	 are	 no	 psychologists	 as	 such.	 But	 in	 Zen
monasteries	there	are	small	cottages,	far	away	from	the	main	campus	where	Zen
people	 live,	 but	 in	 the	 same	 forest	 or	 in	 the	 same	 mountain	 area.	 And	 if
somebody	who	 is	psychologically	 sick	 is	brought	 to	 them,	he	 is	given	a	 cabin
there	and	he	is	told	to	relax,	rest,	enjoy,	move	around	in	the	forest	--	but	not	to
talk.	Anyway	there	is	nobody	to	talk	to!	Only	once	a	day	a	man	comes	to	give
food;	he	is	not	allowed	to	talk	to	that	man	either,	and	even	if	he	talks,	the	man
will	not	answer.	So	his	whole	energy	is	completely	controlled.	He	cannot	even
talk;	he	cannot	meet	anybody.
You	will	be	 surprised	 to	know	 that	what	psychoanalysis	 cannot	do	 in	years,	 is
done	 in	 three	 weeks.	 In	 three	 weeks	 time	 the	 person	 is	 as	 healthy	 as	 normal
people	 are.	 And	 nothing	 has	 been	 done	 --	 no	 technique,	 nothing.	 He	 has	 just
been	 left	alone	so	he	cannot	 talk.	He	has	been	 left	alone	so	he	can	rest	and	be
himself.	He	is	not	expected	to	fulfil	somebody	else's	expectations.
Radhika,	 you	 have	 done	 well.	 Just	 continue	 whatever	 you	 are	 doing,
accumulating	your	energy	in	yourself.	The	accumulation	of	energy	automatically
makes	it	go	higher.	And	as	it	reaches	higher	you	will	feel	more	peaceful,	more
loving,	more	joyful,	more	sharing,	more	compassionate,	more	creative.
The	day	is	not	faraway	when	you	will	feel	full	of	light,	and	the	feeling	of	coming
back	home.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Patience	is	the	way	of	existence
24	April	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704240
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN04
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
74
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	KEEP	GOING	WHERE	YOU	ARE	AND	CAN'T	MOVE	AWAY.	STILL,
SOMETHING	 IS	 MISSING.	 AT	 THE	 JUNCTION	 OF	 TWO	 PATHS,	 THE
INNER
ONE	 AND	 THE	 OUTER	 ONE,	 WITH	 TEARS	 IN	 HIS	 EYES,	 THE
STUBBORN
DONKEY	 IS	 STARVING.	THE	OUTER	PATH	DOES	NOT	ATTRACT	HIM
MUCH
ANYMORE,	AND	WHEN	 IT	DOES	 THE	HOPE	 IS	QUICKLY	 SMASHED.
SEEING
YOUR	 FINGER	 POINTING	 TO	 THE	 MOON,	 STILL	 HE	 IS	 NOT	 GOING
VERY
MUCH	ON	THE	INNER	PATH.	I	DO	NOT	KNOW	QUITE	HOW	TO	SPEAK
TO
HIM.	DISGUSTED	WITH	TUNAFISH	SANDWICHES,	HE	BECAME
ACCUSTOMED	TO	STARVATION.	IS	THIS	JUST	FEAR,	LAZINESS,
IMPATIENCE?	DOES	HE	 JUST	NEED	A	 JUICY	JOKE?	BELOVED	OSHO,
GIVE
HIM	A	LITTLE	PUSH.
Uttama,	it	is	one	of	the	significant	things	to	understand	that	unless	you	attain	the
ultimate,	the	feeling	of	something	missing	is	going	to	remain	with	you.	And	this
feeling	is	not	against	you;	this	feeling	is	a	kind	of	reminding	you	that	you	have
not	reached	yet,	that	you	have	to	go	on	and	on.
Don't	take	the	feeling	of	missing	as	negative;	it	is	healthy	and	positive.	It	shows
that	 you	 are	 aware	 of	where	 you	 are	 and	 you	 are	 also	 sensitive	 to	where	 you
should	be,	and	between	the	two,	the	gap	is	the	feeling	of	missing.
I	would	like	to	read	your	question:	"I	keep	going	where	you	are	and	can't	move
away."
I	have	been	aware	of	it.	For	the	whole	year	I	have	been	moving	from	one	place
to	another	place	and	you	have	remained	constantly	moving	with	me.	It	is	not	just
attachment	with	me	--	it	is	something	more.	It	is	not	a	question	of	being	with	me:
it	is	a	question	of	being	in	the	same	state	of	being	as	I	am.
You	 don't	 want	 to	 miss	 any	 opportunity,	 any	 single	 moment.	 And	 one	 never
knows	--
your	time	may	come	and	you	may	be	far	away	from	me.
Still	something	is	missing.	It	will	go	on	missing	for	a	little	time	more.	You	are
growing,	but	to	reach	to	the	flowers,	to	reach	to	the	fruits,	it	takes	a	long	time	to
grow.	And	spiritual	growth	is	not	like	seasonal	flowers;	they	come	within	weeks
and	they	are	gone.
The	 spiritual	 growth	 is	 of	 the	 eternal:	 once	 it	 comes,	 it	 remains	 --	 remains
forever.
Naturally,	compared	to	eternity	our	time	scale	is	very	small.	A	few	days	pass	or,
a	few	months	or	a	few	years;	we	start	feeling,	is	there	something	wrong?	Am	I
doing	right?
And	these	are	natural	feelings.	But	I	have	been	watching	you.	Nothing	is	wrong,
everything	 is	 as	 it	 should	be.	You	are	 silently	growing.	All	 growth	 is	 silent,	 it
makes	no	noise.	And	suddenly	one	day...	the	flowers	appear.
Just	by	the	side	of	Chuang	Tzu	hall	there	were	no	flowers	three	days	ago.	Then
one	day	the	storm	came	and	the	rains	came,	and	in	the	morning	suddenly	there
were	 beautiful	 sunflowers	 --	 just	 in	 one	 night.	 I	 had	 seen	 the	 place;	 in	 the
evening	there	were	no	flowers,	in	the	morning	there	were	flowers.
It	takes	time	for	the	growth,	but	when	the	right	moment	comes	it	is	an	explosion.
Suddenly,	all	over,	is	the	spring.	And	it	is	good	that	until	it	happens	you	go	on
feeling	that	something	is	missing.	You	should	not	forget	for	a	single	moment	that
something	is	missing.	That	will	be	dangerous.
Millions	of	people	have	forgotten	it	completely.	They	are	absolutely	content	and
feeling	 that	 all	 that	 they	 need	 they	 have	 --	 nothing	 is	 missing.	 They	 are	 the
poorest	people	in	the	world.	They	don't	have	a	longing	for	higher	reaches,	they
don't	want	to	climb	mountains,	they	don't	want	to	go	to	the	stars	--	in	their	dark
caves	they	are	perfectly	comfortable.
One	should	have	compassion	for	them.	Their	contentment	is	their	spiritual	death.
You	need	a	spiritual	discontentment	which	constantly	moves	you,	like	an	arrow,
towards	faraway	goals.
"At	the	junction	of	two	paths,	the	inner	one	and	the	outer	one,	with	tears	in	his
eyes,	the	stubborn	donkey	is	starving.	The	outer	path	does	not	attract	him	much
anymore,	 and	 when	 it	 does	 the	 hope	 is	 quickly	 smashed.	 Seeing	 your	 finger
pointing	to	the	moon,	still	he	is	not	going	very	much	on	the	inner	path."
The	inner	growth	is	very	still	and	very	silent.
You	cannot	hear	your	own	footsteps.
You	 only	 become	 aware	 when	 you	 reach	 a	 certain	 stage.	 And	 it	 is	 a	 surprise
because	 all	 the	 time	 you	 were	 thinking	 nothing	 is	 happening...	 suddenly,	 the
flowers	have	come.	This	is	what	I	mean	by	patience.
To	 grow	 cedars	 of	 Lebanon	 one	 needs	 great	 patience.	 They	 are	 not	 seasonal
flowers	and	you	cannot	see	the	growth.	It	is	happening	every	moment,	all	these
trees	are	growing	every	moment.	But	existence	functions	very	silently.
You	are	growing,	and	even	you	cannot	be	aware	of	 it	unless	something	 totally
new	happens	and	makes	you	aware	that	you	have	reached	some	space	that	was
unknown	to	you.	And	that	can	happen	any	moment.
On	your	part	great	patience	is	needed,	and	a	trust	that	the	whole	existence	is	in
support	 of	 all	 those	 who	 are	 trying	 to	 grow	 spiritually.	 It	 is	 not	 you	who	 are
trying	to	grow	spiritually;	it	is	existence	who,	through	you,	is	trying	to	reach	to
its	utmost	heights.
"I	do	not	quite	know	how	to	speak	to	him.	Disgusted	with	tunafish	sandwiches,
he	became	accustomed	to	starvation.	Is	this	just	fear,	laziness,	impatience?	Does
he	just	need	a	juicy	joke?"
It	 is	a	combination	of	many	 things.	Fear	 is	always	 there,	and	will	 remain	until
you	 come	 to	 know	 that	 there	 is	 no	 death.	 Fear	 is	 the	 shadow	 of	 death.	When
death	disappears	the	shadow	disappears.
There	 is	 impatience,	 but	 you	 have	 to	 use	 your	 impatience	 not	 against	 your
growth,	but	 in	 favor	of	 it.	Be	 impatiently	very	patient.	Your	 impatience	should
only	show	your	longing.
It	should	not	be	against	your	patience;	it	should	be	simply	a	tremendous	desire	of
your	being	 to	 crystallize,	 to	 reach	 somewhere	where	 life	becomes	meaningful,
blissful,	where	fear	disappears,	death	disappears,	where	one	becomes	acquainted
with	one's	own	immortality.
And	it	is	not	laziness.	It	appears	so,	because	you	don't	see	every	day	new	spaces;
it	almost	seems	as	if	you	are	standing,	not	moving.	In	the	inner	journey	this	has
been	 felt	 by	many	many	 people,	 by	 almost	 everybody.	 And	 the	 reason	 is	 the
nature	of	movement.
You	are	sitting	in	a	train	and	the	train	is	moving;	how	do	you	know	that	the	train
is	moving?	Because	 you	 cannot	 see	 the	wheels;	 the	 only	 idea	 that	 the	 train	 is
moving	 is	 given	 to	 you	 by	 the	 trees	 and	 the	 houses	 and	 the	 stations	 that	 are
passing	by	on	both	sides.
They	are	going	in	the	opposite	direction;	the	faster	they	are	going,	the	faster	you
feel	your	train	is	moving.
Just	 for	 a	moment	 imagine	 that	your	 train	 is	moving	 in	 a	place	where	 there	 is
nothing	on	either	side,	you	cannot	see	anything	that	is	moving	backwards.	Will
you	feel	that	your	train	is	moving?	For	example	if	the	train	is	moving	in	the	sky	-
-	no	trees,	no	houses,	no	stations	--	you	will	not	be	able	to	feel	the	movement	of
the	train.	This	is	the	reason	why	we	cannot	feel	the	movement	of	the	earth.	It	is
moving	faster	than	any	train,	but	there	is	nothing	against	which	you	can	feel	its
movement.
In	 the	 inner	 journey	 this	 is	 the	problem.	You	are	alone.	There	are	no	 trees,	no
stations,	 no	 houses;	 it	 is	 just	 like	 the	 sky.	 How	 can	 you	 feel	 if	 there	 is	 any
movement	happening	or	not?	One	becomes	aware	of	 the	movement	only	when
one	comes	to	certain	definite	spaces	which	are	different	from	those	with	which
he	 is	 acquainted.	Then	 suddenly	one	 realizes	 that	 one	has	moved	very	 fast.	 In
fact,	even	if	in	many	lives	you	can	achieve	enlightenment,	it	 is	too	early.	But	I
am	 saying	you	 can	 achieve	 it	 now;	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 that	 you	don't	 look	 at
things	negatively.
Our	mind	is	a	very	negative	phenomenon.	Relaxation	it	will	call	laziness,	deep
longing	it	will	call	 impatience.	Always	remember	mind	is	negative.	It	does	not
know	how	to	say	yes.	And	that	is	the	meaning	of	trust:	saying	yes.
You	 are	 in	 a	 perfectly	 good	 situation,	 Uttama.	 Say	 yes	 to	 it,	 and	 say	 yes	 as
deeply	 and	 as	 totally	 as	 possible.	 And	 any	 negative	 thing	 that	 mind	 brings,
change	it	into	the	positive.	It	says	it	is	laziness.	Tell	it,	it	is	not;	it	is	relaxation,	it
is	restfulness.	It	says	it	is	impatience.
Tell	it,	it	is	not;	it	is	a	great	longing,	a	great	passion	to	realize	oneself,	to	realize
one's	treasures	--	not	to	die	without	realizing	oneself.
And	you	are	asking,	"Does	he	just	need	a	juicy	joke?"
That	I	can	do!	Whenever	it	needs	any	juicy	joke,	you	bring	your	donkey	to	me.
Patrick's	wife	 lived	way	 out	 in	 the	 country	 and	was	 taken	 ill	 one	 day,	 shortly
before	her	child	was	due.	It	was	quite	dark	when	the	doctor	arrived	and	he	asked,
"Where	is	the	little	lady?"
Patrick:	 "She	 is	 over	 there	 in	 the	 barn	 where	 she	 collapsed."	 With	 Patrick
holding	the	lamp	the	doctor	set	about	his	job.
"Patrick,	you	are	the	proud	father	of	a	little	boy."
Patrick	said,	"Doctor,	we	will	have	a	drink."
"Just	a	minute,	hold	the	light	a	little	closer.	You	are	the	father	of	two!"
"We	will	open	a	bottle,"	said	Patrick.
"Wait!"	 said	 the	 doctor.	 "Hold	 the	 light	 a	 little	 closer.	 You	 are	 the	 father	 of
three."
"And	sure	it	is	going	to	be	a	celebration	and	all,"	said	Patrick.
"Just	a	minute,"	said	the	doctor,	"hold	the	light	a	little	closer."
"I	don't	want	to	be	difficult,	doctor,"	said	Patrick,	"but	do	you	think	this	bloody
light	is	attracting	them?"
Children	go	on	coming	as	the	light	is	coming	closer....
Uttama,	 remain	 joyous,	 wait	 with	 great	 love.	 Everything	 takes	 its	 own	 time,
impatience	makes	no	 sense.	Patience	 is	 the	way	of	 existence.	Remain	 relaxed,
because	 the	 more	 excited	 you	 become	 the	 farther	 away	 is	 the	 goal.	 The
experience	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 only	when	 you	 are	 utterly	 silent,	 just	 a	 pool	 of
silence...	your	whole	energy	so	relaxed,	as	if	it	is	absent.
When	 you	 have	 become	 just	 a	 zero	 you	 become	 a	 womb.	 And	 out	 of	 this
nothingness	is	born	your	original,	your	authentic	reality.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	FEEL	THAT	I	DON'T	LOVE	YOU	ENOUGH,	DON'T	APPRECIATE	YOU
ENOUGH,	 AM	 NOT	 OPEN	 ENOUGH.	 I	 FEEL	 LIKE	 I	 AM	 TRUNDLING
ALONG	IN
A	CREAKY	OLD	BULLOCK	CART,	WHILE	YOU	ARE	FLYING	BY	IN	ALL
YOUR
BEAUTY	AND	GRACE	AND	VASTNESS.	BELOVED	OSHO,	I	AM
EXASPERATED	BY	MY	 STATE	OF	 RETARDATION.	WHY	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 I
DON'T
RESPOND?
Prem	Veena,	it	is	something	intrinsic	to	love	that	it	always	feels	it	is	not	enough.
Only	a	small	love	feels	enough.	The	greater	the	love,	the	more	you	are	aware	of
the	feeling	that
"I	don't	love	enough."	That	is	one	of	the	signs	of	a	great	love.
If	somebody	comes	and	says	to	me,	"I	love	you	very	much	--	I	love	you	totally,"
then	his	 love	 is	certainly	going	 to	be	very	small.	Otherwise	 to	 love	 totally	 is	a
tremendous	phenomenon;	it	will	change	you	entirely.
So	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried	that	your	love	is	not	enough.	You	want	to	love
more,	 and	 if	 your	 love	 is	 great	 it	 will	 never	 be	 enough;	 it	 will	 always	 be
something	less	than	you	wanted	it	to	be.
And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 appreciation.	 You	 say,	 "I	 don't	 appreciate	 you
enough,	am	not	open	enough."	Just	a	little	appreciation	and	just	a	little	opening
is	enough	for	my	purposes.	I	can	sneak	in	from	any	small	opening!	One	thing	is
certain	--	you	are	not	a	China	wall.
I	 can	 understand.	 You	 have	 been	 long	 enough	 with	 me	 and	 it	 is	 natural	 to
expect....	But	you	don't	know	how	much	you	have	changed.	I	remember	exactly,
photographically,	the	day	you	came	to	me.	You	had	not	come	for	yourself,	you
had	come	for	a	totally	different	reason.	You	had	brought	a	young	man;	you	had
come	for	him.
He	was	a	complete	crackpot;	he	wanted	 to	 live	only	on	water.	And	because	 in
one	of	my	lectures	I	had	mentioned	that	I	know	a	man	who	has	lived	for	many
years	only	on	water,	you	brought	that	young	man	--	because	he	was	moving	from
place	to	place,	enquiring	for	somebody	who	can	teach	him	the	art	of	how	to	live
on	water.
You	had	 not	 said	 a	 single	word	 about	 yourself.	You	were	 only	 concerned	 that
somehow	 either	 he	 drops	 this	 idea	 or	 he	 finds	 some	 way	 --	 it	 had	 become	 a
torture.	There	 are	ways	 people	 can	 live...	 but	 they	 need	 years	 of	 training,	 and
they	 lead	nowhere.	What	 is	 the	point?	Even	 if	you	can	 live	only	on	water	 that
does	not	make	you	spiritual;	that	does	not	bring	liberation	to	your	being.	And	it
takes	fifteen	to	 twenty	years'	 long	training	to	come	to	 the	point	where	you	can
drop	all	food,	and	just	air	and	water	are	enough	for	you.
So	I	told	the	man,	"It	is	possible	and	I	can	give	you	the	address.	But	if	you	want
my	advice	I	would	say	don't	go	there	because	that	man	is	cracked.	You	are	only
half	cracked	right	now;	there	is	still	time	to	come	back.	What	are	you	going	to
gain?	Why	are	you	obsessed	with	the	idea?"	The	obsession	was	that	if	you	live
only	on	pure	water	and	air,	you	become	physically	immortal.
I	said,	"That	is	nonsense!	Many	people	have	lived	on	water	and	air	and	none	of
them	 are	 alive;	 not	 a	 single	 one	 has	 become	 immortal.	 If	 you	 really	 want	 to
become	 immortal,	 I	 can	 show	 you	 the	 way;	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
becoming	immortal,	it	is	a	question	of	discovering.	You	are	immortal	already	--
you	are	just	not	aware.	Awareness	has	to	be	brought..."	and	just	as	I	was	talking
to	 the	 man	 about	 awareness	 and	 meditation	 --	 he	 was	 not	 interested;	 he
disappeared,	he	never	came	again.
But	 Veena	 was	 caught.	 That	 was	 accidental!	 Since	 then	 she	 has	 been	 doing
meditation,	 sometimes	 successfully,	 and	 whenever	 you	 succeed	 in	 meditation
there	are	moments	of	failure;	there	are	days	and	there	are	nights.
Naturally,	 after	 so	 many	 years,	 fifteen	 or	 sixteen	 years,	 she	 feels	 like	 "I'm
trundling	along	in	a	creaky	old	bullock	cart,	while	you	are	flying	by	in	all	your
beauty	and	grace	and	vastness."
You	 should	 be	 happy,	 at	 least	 you	 have	 a	 creaky	 old	 bullock	 cart!	 There	 are
millions	who	don't	have	even	that.	And	if	 it	 is	 too	creaky	just	ask	some	Italian
sannyasin	 to	 make	 it	 a	 little	 greasy.	 Sarjano	 can	 do	 it.	 And	 to	make	 a	 flying
bullock	cart	will	be	a	great	 joy	and	a	miracle	 --	 just	 take	a	 little	care	with	 the
bullock	cart.	Anyway	it	is	moving.	Or	perhaps	you	would	like	it	to	go	on	being
creaky	 because	 that	 gives	 you	 the	 idea	 that	 you	 are	 moving.	 But	 there	 is	 no
hurry.	You	need	not	fly.	Sometimes	it	is	dangerous.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 received	 a	 letter	 from	Canada.	A	 young	woman	wants	 to
come	 here,	 but	 the	 problem	 is	 she	 is	 very	 much	 afraid	 of	 flying.	 Now	 from
Canada	to	here,	coming	in	a	creaky	old	cart	will	really	take	so	long.	So	she	has
asked	me,	"First	help	me	to	get	rid	of	this	paranoia.	I	cannot	enter	an	airplane."
I	have	all	kinds	of	crackpots	all	over	the	world!	But	they	are	very	nice	people.
Just	 a	day	before	another	woman	 from	Germany	asked	 --	her	problem	 is	 even
more	difficult	--	her	problem	is	that	she	is	afraid	to	leave	her	house.	"Help	me,	I
want	to	come	to	Poona!"
Now	this	woman	who	is	afraid	of	flying	can	have	other	means	suggested	to	her:
trains,	cars,	buses,	a	horse;	but	the	woman	who	is	afraid	to	leave	the	house....	But
I	have	to	suggest	something	to	them	--	and	just	because	the	suggestion	is	coming
from	me,	 it	works.	 It	has	nothing	 in	 it;	 I	 just	have	 to	 invent	 suggestions:	 "Just
keep	 an	 onion	 in	 your	 mouth,	 and	 leave	 the	 house	 and	 no	 danger	 will	 ever
happen	 to	you!	And	when	 I	 am	suggesting	 there	must	be	 some	great	 secret	 in
onions...	 soon	 the	 woman	will	 be	 here,	 because	 these	 fears	 are	 all	 just	 mind-
made,	mind-manufactured.
There	is	no	fear	in	flying,	there	is	no	fear	of	coming	out	of	the	house;	millions	of
people	are	coming	out	of	the	house	every	day,	and	thousands	are	flying.	And	the
rate	 of	 accidents	 is	 not	 much	 more	 than	 the	 rate	 of	 death	 which	 naturally
happens,	so	whether	you	are	sleeping	on	your	bed	or	flying	in	an	airplane	does
not	make	any	difference.	The	rate	of	death	is	the	same.
In	fact,	on	the	bed	it	is	more,	because	99%	of	people	die	on	the	bed.	If	somebody
wants	to	be	really	afraid	of	any	place,	it	is	your	bed.	Avoid	it!	Keep	it	for	show
but	never	sleep	on	it!	In	the	night	close	the	doors	and	sleep	on	the	floor,	because
I	have	never	heard	of	anybody	dying	on	the	floor.	And	there	are	people	who	are
trying....
My	 legal	 secretary	Anando	 sleeps	 in	 her	 bath,	 just	 to	 avoid	 death!	 --	 because
nobody	has	ever	died	in	the	bath.	She	keeps	her	bed	ready;	that	is	just	for	show.
Whenever	I	ask	Shunyo	to	find	her	I	have	to	 tell	her,	"Look	in	her	bathroom."
And	she	is	sleeping	with	her	blanket	and	with	her	clothes	in	the	bathtub.	A	great
device	to	avoid	death!
Veena,	don't	be	exasperated	by	your	state.	You	are	growing.	Everybody	has	his
own	 pace	 of	 growth.	 Some	 people	 grow	 fast,	 some	 people	 grow	 slowly	 --
whatever	 is	 natural	 to	 them	 --	 and	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 superiority	 or
inferiority.	But	 if	you	ask	me	 I	will	 say	you	are	going	perfectly	 right.	You	are
responding	to	me	as	deeply	as	your	nature	allows	in	this	moment.
Forcing	 anything	 is	 going	 against	 nature.	 Accepting,	 relaxing,	 contented,
allowing	 the	 flow	 of	 nature	 to	 take	 you,	 is	 what	 Lao	 Tzu	 used	 to	 call	 `the
watercourse	way.'
Sometimes	 the	 river	 flows	 fast.	 Sometimes	 it	 flows	very	 slowly.	Sometimes	 it
falls	with	 great	 speed	 in	waterfalls	 from	 the	mountains	 to	 the	 plains.	 But	 one
thing	is	certain:	whether	slow,	fast	or	very	fast,	every	river	reaches	to	the	ocean.
And	 it	 does	 not	 matter	 that	 somebody	 reaches	 a	 little	 earlier	 and	 somebody
reaches	a	little	later.	What	matters	is	that	one	reaches.
Just	 think	of	the	moment	--	your	joy,	your	peace,	your	centeredness.	The	more
you	 enjoy	 them,	 the	 more	 they	 grow,	 and	 faster.	 But	 don't	 think	 in	 terms	 of
becoming	rich	very	fast.
Even	 if	 the	 richness	 is	 of	 the	 inner	world,	 to	 become	 rich	 fast	 one	 has	 to	 use
wrong	means
--	 and	 in	 the	 inner	 world	 you	 cannot	 use	 wrong	 means.	 That	 will	 not	 be
profitable;	 that	will	be	a	loss.	In	the	outside	world,	 if	you	want	to	become	rich
faster	then	you	have	to	use	wrong	means.
But	to	be	with	me,	at	least	one	thing	has	always	to	be	remembered:	we	are	not
looking	for	any	profit,	we	are	not	looking	for	any	reward.	Our	reward	is	in	this
moment.	Our	profit	is	our	joy	in	this	moment.
Farelli	came	from	Italy,	opened	a	restaurant	and	became	very	successful.	He	still
practiced	 the	simplest	 form	of	bookkeeping.	He	kept	 the	accounts	payable	 in	a
cigar	 box,	 accounts	 due	 on	 a	 spindle,	 and	 cash	 in	 the	 register.	 One	 day	 his
youngest	son,	who	had	just	graduated	as	an	economics	major,	said	to	him,	"Pa,	I
don't	 see	 how	 you	 run	 your	 business	 this	 way.	 How	 do	 you	 know	what	 your
profits	are?"
"Well,	sonny	boy,"	replied	Farelli,	"when	I	got	off-a	the	boat	I	no	have	nothing
but-a	the	pants	I	was-a	wearing.	Just-a	the	pants.	Today	your	brother	is	a	doctor,
your	sister	is-a	the	teacher	and	you	just-a	graduate."
"I	know,	papa,	but...."
"Your	mama	 and	me	have	 a	 nice-a	 car,	 a	 nice-a	 house,	 a	 good-a	 business	 and
everything	is-a	paid	for.	So	you	add	all-a	that	together,	you	subtract-a	the	pants
and	that's-a	the	profit."
Why	 get	 into	 so	 much	 unnecessary	 detail?	 That	 poor	 Italian	 was	 doing	 very
well!	Now	 to	 count	 all	 these	 things	 and	 then	 to	 subtract	 the	 pants-a...	 and	 the
remaining	is	all	the	profit.
On	 the	 path	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 keep	 any	 accounts.	 Each	moment	 live	 totally,
joyously,	and	move	on.	Don't	carry	even	 the	memory	of	 that	moment:	 that	 too
becomes	 a	 burden,	 that	 too	 prevents	 you	 from	 responding	 to	 reality
spontaneously.	 If	 you	want	 to	 be	 spontaneous	 and	 responsive	 then	 you	need	 a
very	clean,	mirror-like	mind.	No	dust	should	gather	on	it.
And	Veena,	 as	 far	 as	 I	 see	 you	 are	 doing	 perfectly	well.	But	 these	 are	 human
desires	that	again	and	again	arise	in	people	--	perhaps	things	can	be	done	better;
perhaps	rather	than	going	by	a	bullock	cart	I	can	go	by	an	airplane.	These	ideas
simply	create	anxiety	in	you	and	disturb	your	natural	growth.
Live	each	moment	and	don't	 let	 it	gather	 in	your	memory.	Keep	your	memory
clean.
And	 everything	 that	 you	 have	 never	 imagined,	 never	 dreamt	 of,	 is	 going	 to
happen	to	you.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Just	a	little	knack	of	losing	yourself
24	April	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704245
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN05
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
89
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
NIETZSCHE	 WROTE:	 "HE	 WHO	 FIGHTS	 WITH	 MONSTERS	 SHOULD
LOOK	TO
IT	THAT	HE	HIMSELF	DOES	NOT	BECOME	A	MONSTER,	AND	WHEN
YOU
GAZE	LONG	 INTO	AN	ABYSS	THE	ABYSS	ALSO	GAZES	 INTO	YOU."
THE
LAST	PHRASE	SEEMS	SUCH	A	BEAUTIFUL	DESCRIPTION	OF	THE	ART
OF
MEDITATION.	WOULD	YOU	COMMENT?
Maneesha,	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 is	 a	 strange	 philosopher,	 poet	 and	mystic.	 His
strangeness	is	that	his	philosophy	is	not	the	ordinary	rational	approach	to	life;	his
strangeness	 is	 also	 that	 he	writes	 poetry	 in	 prose.	He	 is	 also	 a	 strange	mystic,
because	 he	 has	 never	 traveled	 the	 ordinary	 paths	 of	mysticism.	 It	 seems	 as	 if
mysticism	happened	to	him.
Perhaps	 being	 a	 philosopher	 and	 a	 poet	 together,	 he	 became	 available	 to	 the
experiences	 of	 the	mystic	 also.	 The	 philosopher	 is	 pure	 logic,	 and	 the	 poet	 is
pure	 irrationality.	 The	 mystic	 is	 beyond	 both.	 He	 cannot	 be	 categorized	 as
rational,	and	he	cannot	be	categorized	as	irrational.	He	is	both,	and	he	is	neither.
It	 very	 rarely	 happens	 that	 a	 philosopher	 is	 a	 poet	 also,	 because	 they	 are
diametrically	opposite	dimensions.	They	create	a	tremendous	inner	tension	in	the
person.	And	Nietzsche	 lived	 that	 tension	 to	 its	very	extreme.	 It	 finally	 led	him
into	madness,	because	on	the	one	hand	he	is	one	of	the	most	intelligent	products
of	Western	philosophy,	without	parallel,	and	on	the	other	hand	so	full	of	poetic
vision	that	certainly	his	heart	and	his	head	would	have	been	constantly	fighting.
The	poet	and	the	philosopher	cannot	be	good	bedfellows.	It	is	easy	to	be	a	poet,
it	is	easy	to	be	a	philosopher,	but	it	is	a	tremendous	strain	to	be	both.
Nietzsche	is	not	in	any	way	mediocre	--	his	philosopher	is	as	great	a	genius	as
his	poet.
And	the	problem	becomes	more	complicated	because	of	this	tension	between	the
heart	and	the	mind.	He	starts	becoming	available	to	something	more	--	more	than
philosophy,	more	than	poetry.	That's	what	I	am	calling	mysticism.
His	 statement	 is	 of	 tremendous	 importance:	 "He	 who	 fights	 with	 monsters
should	look	to	it	that	he	himself	does	not	become	a	monster."
I	have	always	been	 telling	you	 that	you	can	choose	a	 friend	without	being	 too
cautious,	but	you	cannot	afford	an	enemy	without	being	very	alert	--	because	the
friend	is	not	going	to	change	you,	but	 the	enemy	is	going	to	change	you.	With
the	friend	there	is	no	fight,	with	the	friend	there	is	no	quarrel;	the	friend	accepts
you	as	you	are,	you	accept	the	friend	as	he	is.	But	with	the	enemy	the	situation	is
totally	different.	You	are	trying	to	destroy	the	enemy	and	the	enemy	is	trying	to
destroy	 you.	 And	 naturally	 you	 will	 affect	 each	 other,	 you	 will	 start	 taking
methods,	means,	techniques	from	each	other.
After	a	while	it	becomes	almost	impossible	to	find	who	is	who.	They	both	have
to	behave	in	the	same	way,	they	both	have	to	use	the	same	language,	they	both
have	 to	be	on	 the	same	 level.	You	cannot	 remain	on	your	heights	and	 fight	an
enemy	who	lives	in	the	dark	valleys	down	below;	you	will	have	to	come	down.
You	will	have	 to	be	as	mean,	as	cunning	as	your	enemy	is	 --	perhaps	you	will
have	to	be	more,	if	you	want	to	win.
Nietzsche	is	right.	"He	who	fights	with	monsters	should	look	to	it	that	he	himself
does	not	become	a	monster.	And	when	you	gaze	 long	 into	an	abyss,	 the	abyss
also	gazes	into	you."
The	second	part	of	the	statement	is	actually	the	very	essence	of	meditation:	it	is
gazing	 into	emptiness,	nothingness,	 into	an	abyss.	And	when	you	gaze	 into	an
abyss	it	is	not	one-sided;	the	abyss	is	also	gazing	into	your	eyes.
When	I	am	looking	at	you,	it	is	not	only	that	I	am	looking	at	you;	you	are	also
looking	at	me.	The	abyss	has	 its	own	ways	of	gazing	into	you.	The	empty	sky
also	 gazes	 into	 you,	 the	 faraway	 star	 also	 looks	 into	 you.	And	 if	 the	 abyss	 is
allowed	to	gaze	into	you,	soon	you	will	find	a	great	harmony	between	yourself
and	the	silence	of	the	abyss,	you	will	also	become	part	of	the	abyss.	The	abyss
will	be	outside	you	and	also	inside	you.
What	he	is	saying	is	immensely	beautiful	and	truthful.	The	meditator	has	to	learn
to	gaze	into	things	which	he	wants	to	become	himself.	Look	into	the	silent	sky,
unclouded.	Look	long	enough,	and	you	will	come	to	a	point	when	small	clouds
of	 thoughts	within	 you	 disappear,	 and	 the	 two	 skies	 become	 one.	 There	 is	 no
outer,	there	is	no	inner:	there	is	simply	one	expanse.
For	 thousands	 of	 years	 meditators	 have	 been	 gazing	 at	 the	 early	 sun	 in	 the
morning,	because	later	it	becomes	too	difficult	to	gaze	into	it.	But	the	early	sun,
just	rising	above	the	horizon,	can	be	looked	into	without	any	danger	to	the	eyes.
And	if	you	allow,	then	the	light	and	the	color	that	is	spread	all	over	the	horizon
starts	spreading	within	you	--	you	become	part	of	the	horizon.	You	are	no	longer
just	a	gazer;	you	have	become	part	of	the	scenery.
An	 ancient	 parable	 in	 China	 is	 that	 an	 emperor	 who	 was	 very	 interested	 in
paintings,	and	had	a	great	collection	of	paintings,	announced	a	great	prize	for	the
best	 painting.	 All	 the	 great	 painters	 of	 the	 country	 arrived	 in	 the	 capital	 and
started	working.
One	painter	said,	"It	will	take	at	least	three	years	for	me."
The	emperor	said,	"But	I'm	too	old."
The	painter	 said,	 "You	need	not	 be	worried.	You	 can	give	me	 the	 award	 right
now.	If	you	are	not	certain	of	your	life,	I	am	certain	about	my	painting.	But	I'm
not	asking	either.	I	am	just	saying	that	I	am	going	to	do	a	job	that	has	never	been
done.	I	want	to	show	you	what	a	painting	should	really	be;	so	forget	about	your
death	and	forget	about	the	award.	You	allow	me	three	years	and	a	separate	place
in	the	palace.	Nobody	can	come	while	I'm	working;	for	three	years	I	have	to	be
left	alone."
Each	day	was	such	an	excitement	for	the	emperor.	The	man	was	a	well-known
painter,	 and	not	only	a	painter	 --	he	was	a	Zen	master	 too.	Finally	 those	 three
years	passed,	and	 the	painter	 invited	 the	emperor...	he	 took	him	 into	 the	 room.
On	 the	 whole	 wall	 he	 had	 painted	 a	 beautiful	 forest	 with	 mountains,	 with
waterfalls,	and	a	small	footpath	going	round	about	and	then	getting	lost	into	the
trees	behind	the	mountains.
The	 painting	 was	 so	 alive,	 so	 three-dimensional,	 that	 the	 emperor	 forgot
completely	 that	 it	 was	 a	 painting	 and	 asked	 the	 painter,	 "Where	 does	 this
footpath	lead	to?"
The	 painter	 said,	 "I	 have	 never	 gone	 on	 it,	 but	we	 can	 go	 and	 have	 a	 look	 at
where	it	goes."
The	story	is	that	the	painter	and	the	emperor	both	walked	on	the	path,	entered	the
forest,	and	have	not	returned	since	then.	The	painting	is	still	preserved;	it	shows
the	 footprints	 of	 two	 persons	 on	 the	 footpath.	 It	 seems	 to	 be	 absolutely
unbelievable,	but	the	meaning	is	of	tremendous	importance.
The	painter	is	saying	that	unless	you	can	be	lost	in	a	painting,	it	is	not	a	painting.
Unless	you	can	become	part	of	the	scene,	something	is	dividing	you;	you	are	not
allowing	yourself,	totally,	to	be	one	with	it,	whether	it	is	a	sunrise	or	a	sunset....
A	meditator	has	to	learn	in	different	ways,	from	different	sides	of	life,	to	be	lost.
Those	are	the	moments	when	you	are	no	more,	but	just	a	pure	silence,	an	abyss,
a	sky,	a	silent	lake	without	any	ripples	on	it.	You	have	become	one	with	it.	And
all	that	is	needed	is	--
don't	 be	 just	 a	 passer-by,	 don't	 be	 a	 tourist,	 don't	 be	 in	 a	 hurry.	 Sit	 down	 and
relax.	Gaze	 into	 the	 silence,	 into	 the	 depth,	 and	 allow	 that	 depth	 to	 enter	 into
your	eyes,	so	that	it	can	reach	to	your	very	being.
A	moment	comes	when	the	gazer	and	 the	gazed	become	one,	 the	observer	and
the	observed	become	one.	That	is	the	moment	of	meditation	--	and	there	are	no
more	 golden	 experiences	 in	 existence.	 These	 golden	moments	 can	 be	 yours...
just	 a	 little	 art,	 or	 rather	 a	 little	 knack,	 of	 losing	yourself	 into	 something	vast,
something	so	big	that	you	cannot	contain	it.	But	it	can	contain	you!	And	you	can
experience	it	only	if	you	allow	it	to	contain	you.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	is	right;	he	must	have	said	what	he	had	experienced	himself.
It	was	unfortunate	that	he	was	born	in	the	West.	In	the	East	he	would	have	been
in	 the	 same	 category	 as	Gautam	Buddha	or	Mahavira	 or	Bodhidharma	or	Lao
Tzu.	In	the	West	he	had	to	be	forced	into	a	madhouse.
He	himself	could	not	 figure	 it	out.	 It	was	 too	much:	on	 the	one	hand	his	great
philosophical	 rationality,	 on	 the	 other	 hand	 his	 insights	 into	 poetry,	 and	 those
sudden	glimpses	of	mystic	experiences...	it	was	too	much.	He	could	not	manage
and	 started	 falling	 apart.	 They	 were	 all	 so	 different	 from	 each	 other,	 so
diametrically	opposite...	 he	 tried	hard	 somehow	 to	keep	 them	 together,	 but	 the
very	effort	of	trying	to	keep	them	together	became	a	nervous	breakdown.
The	 same	 experience	 in	 the	 East	 would	 have	 been	 a	 totally	 different
phenomenon.	 Instead	 of	 being	 a	 nervous	 breakdown,	 it	 would	 have	 been	 a
breakthrough.	 The	 East	 has	 been	 working	 for	 thousands	 of	 years;	 its	 whole
genius	has	been	devoted	to	only	one	thing,	and	that	is	meditation.	It	has	looked
into	all	possible	nooks	and	corners	of	meditation,	and	it	has	become	capable	to
allow	poetry,	to	allow	philosophy,	without	any	problem,	without	any	opposition
and	 tension.	 On	 the	 contrary	 they	 all	 become,	 under	 meditation,	 a	 kind	 of
orchestra	--	different	musical	instruments,	but	playing	the	same	tune.
There	 have	 been	many	misfortunes	 in	 the	world,	 but	 I	 feel	 the	most	 sorry	 for
Friedrich	Nietzsche	because	I	can	see	what	great	potential	he	had.	But	being	in	a
wrong	 atmosphere,	 having	 no	 precedent	 and	 having	 no	way	 to	work	 it	 out	 by
himself,	alone....	It	was	certainly	too	much	for	an	individual,	for	any	individual,
to	work	it	out	alone.
Thousands	of	people	have	worked	from	different	corners,	and	now,	in	the	East,
we	have	a	whole	atmosphere	in	which	any	kind	of	genius	can	be	absorbed.	And
meditation	will	not	be	disturbed	by	genius;	meditation	will	be	enhanced,	and	his
own	particular	dimension	--
poetry,	literature,	science	--	will	also	be	enhanced.
Nietzsche	was	 just	 in	 a	wrong	 place,	 surrounded	 by	wrong	 people	who	 could
only	think	of	him	as	mad.And	to	them,	he	appeared	mad.
Two	kids	were	playing	on	the	sea	beach.	One	of	them	asked	the	other,	"What	do
you	want	to	be	when	you	grow	up?"
He	said,	 "When	I	grow	up	 I	want	 to	be	a	great	prophet.	 I'm	going	 to	speak	of
profound	truths."
The	first	boy	said,	"But	they	say	nobody	listens	to	the	prophets,	so	why	become
a	prophet?"
"Ah,"	he	said,	"us	prophets	are	very	obstinate."
This	very	obstinacy	became	a	problem,	because	 the	whole	 society	was	against
him,	a	single	man	single-handedly	fighting	for	truths	which	people	cannot	even
understand,	but	are	absolutely	ready	to	misunderstand.	If	a	man	is	sincere	and	if
he	cannot	understand	a	thing	he	should	say,	"I	do	not	understand	it."	But	people
are	 not	 so	 sincere.	When	 they	 don't	 understand	 a	 thing	 they	 immediately	 start
misunderstanding	it.	Misunderstanding	is	their	way	of	hiding	their	ignorance.
The	people	who	have	come	to	know	some	truth	are	certainly	obstinate.	You	can
crucify	 them,	 but	 you	 cannot	 change	 their	 minds.	 You	 can	 throw	 them	 into
madhouses,	but	 they	will	go	on	 repeating	 their	 insights.	Their	 insights	become
more	valuable	than	their	lives	themselves.
The	 East,	 at	 least	 in	 the	 past,	 has	 been	 the	 best	 soil	 for	 prophets,	 for
philosophers,	for	poets,	for	mystics.	It	is	no	longer	the	case,	but	still	something
of	the	past	goes	on	echoing	in	the	atmosphere.	The	West	has	corrupted	the	East
too.	 The	West	 knows	 the	 tradition	 of	 Socrates	 being	 poisoned,	 it	 knows	 Jesus
Christ's	 crucifixion;	 the	 East	was	 absolutely	 innocent.	 It	 was	 an	 accepted	 fact
that	everybody	had	 the	 right	 to	 say	his	 truth.	 If	you	don't	 agree	with	him,	 that
does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	kill	him.	Don't	agree	--	that	is	your	right;	at	least
we	can	agree	 to	disagree	with	each	other,	but	 there	 is	no	need	 to	bring	swords
when	you	don't	have	arguments.	Swords	cannot	become	arguments.
But	the	atmosphere	has	been	changing	for	almost	two	thousand	years,	since	this
country	became	 invaded	again	and	again	by	barbarous,	uncivilized,	uncultured
people	who	 had	 no	 idea	what	 philosophy	was.	 And	 finally,	 for	 three	 hundred
years	 the	West	has	 tried	 in	every	possible	way	 to	corrupt	 the	mind	of	 the	East
through	its	educational	system	--
through	schools,	through	colleges,	through	universities.
Now	even	in	the	East	crucifixion	is	possible.	Just	the	other	day	one	of	the	great
Hindu	religious	leaders,	equivalent	to	the	pope	of	the	Catholics,	Shankaracharya
Svarupananda,	was	here	for	a	few	days.	I	told	Neelam,	when	she	informed	me	of
this,	that	he	would	say	something	against	me	certainly.	But	he	spoke	against	me
only	on	the	last	day,	before	leaving,	so	when	the	information	came	to	me,	he	had
already	gone.
What	he	had	 spoken	 against	me	 is	 so	poor	 that	 one	 feels	 great	 pity.	What	 has
happened	 to	 the	great	 philosophical	 traditions	of	 the	East?	 --	 and	 these	people
represent	 those	 traditions.	He	 said	 about	me:	 "He	 is	 the	most	 dangerous	man,
unparallelled	 in	 the	history	of	mankind."	He	has	not	given	any	reason	why.	To
me	this	is	a	compliment.	But	at	least	I	have	the	right	to	ask	what	is	the	reason	for
giving	me	such	a	great	compliment	--
"unparallelled	in	the	whole	history	of	mankind."	And	what	danger	am	I?
This	 was	 not	 the	 way	 of	 the	 East.	 When	 I	 was	 listening	 to	 his	 statement	 I
remembered	 about	 the	 original	 shankaracharya,	 Adi	 Shankaracharya.	 He	 is	 a
predecessor	of	nearly	fourteen	hundred	years	ago.	He	died	a	young	man,	he	died
when	he	was	 thirty-three.	He	created	a	new	 tradition	of	 sannyasins,	he	created
four	 temples	 in	all	 the	 four	directions,	 and	he	appointed	 four	 shankaracharyas,
one	 for	 each	 direction.	 I	 remembered	 about	 him	 that	 he	 traveled	 all	 over	 the
country	 defeating	 great,	 well-known	 philosophers	 --	 that	 was	 in	 a	 totally
different	atmosphere.
One	great	philosopher	was	Mandan	Mishra;	he	had	a	great	following.	Still	in	his
memory	a	town	exists.	I	have	been	there	many	times.	It	is	on	a	beautiful	bank	of
the	Narmada,	one	of	the	most	beautiful	rivers.	That	is	the	place	where	the	river
descends	 from	 the	mountains,	 so	 it	 has	 tremendous	 beauty.	 The	 city	 is	 called
Mandala,	in	memory	of	Mandan	Mishra.
Shankara	must	have	been	at	the	age	of	thirty	when	he	reached	Mandala.	Just	on
the	outskirts	of	the	town,	by	a	well,	a	few	women	were	drawing	water.	He	asked
them,	"I	want	to	know	where	the	great	philosopher	Mandan	Mishra	lives."
Those	 women	 started	 giggling	 and	 they	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 worried,	 you	 just	 go
inside.	You	will	find	it."
Shankara	said,	"How	will	I	find	it?"
They	said,	"You	will	find	it,	because	even	the	parrots	around	his	house	--	he	has
a	big	garden	and	there	are	so	many	parrots	in	the	garden	--	they	repeat	poetries
from	 the	 UPANISHADS,	 from	 the	 VEDAS.	 If	 you	 hear	 parrots	 repeating,
singing	beautiful	poetries	from	the	Upanishads,	you	can	be	certain	that	this	is	the
house	of	Mandan	Mishra."
He	 could	 not	 believe	 it,	 but	when	 he	went	 and	 he	 saw,	 he	 had	 to	 believe.	He
asked	Mandan	Mishra	--	he	was	old,	nearabout	seventy	--	"I	have	come	a	very
long	way	from	South	India	to	have	a	discussion	with	you,	with	a	condition:	If	I
am	defeated,	I	will	become	your	disciple,	and	if	you	are	defeated,	you	will	have
to	become	my	disciple.
Naturally,	 when	 I	 become	 your	 disciple	 all	 my	 disciples	 will	 become	 your
disciples	 and	 the	 same	 will	 be	 true	 if	 you	 become	 my	 disciple	 --	 all	 your
disciples	will	become	my	disciples."
Old	Mandan	Mishra	looked	at	the	young	man	and	he	said,	"You	are	too	young
and	I	feel	a	little	hesitant	whether	to	accept	this	challenge	or	not.	But	if	you	are
insistent,	then	there	is	no	way;	I	have	to	accept	it.	But	it	does	not	look	right	that	a
seventy	year	old	man	who	has	 fought	 thousands	of	debates	 should	be	 fighting
with	a	young	man	of	thirty.	But	to	balance,	I	would	suggest	one	thing"	--	and	this
was	the	atmosphere	that	has	a	tremendous	value	--	"to	substitute,	I	will	give	you
the	chance	to	choose	the	judge	who	will	decide.	So	you	find	a	judge.	You	are	too
young,	and	I	feel	that	if	you	are	defeated	at	least	you	should	have	the	satisfaction
that	the	judge	was	your	choice."
Now	where	 to	 find	 a	 judge?	 The	 young	man	 had	 heard	 much	 about	Mandan
Mishra's	wife.	Her	name	was	Bharti.	She	was	also	old,	sixty-five.	He	said,	"I	will
choose	your	wife	to	be	the	judge."
This	is	the	atmosphere,	so	human,	so	loving.	First	Mandan	Mishra	gave	him	the
chance	 to	 choose,	 and	 then	 Shankara	 chose	Maridan	Mishra's	 own	wife!	And
Bharti	said,	"But	this	is	not	right,	I'm	his	wife,	and	if	you	are	defeated	you	may
think	it	is	because	I	may	have	been	prejudiced,	favorable	towards	my	husband."
Shankara	said,	"There	is	no	question	of	any	suspicion.	I	have	heard	much	about
your	sincerity.	 If	 I'm	defeated,	 I'm	defeated.	And	I	know	perfectly	well	 if	your
husband	is	defeated,	you	will	be	the	last	person	to	hide	the	fact."
Six	months	it	took	for	the	discussion.	On	each	single	point	that	man	has	thought
about	they	quarreled,	argued,	quoted,	interpreted,	and	after	six	months	the	wife
said,	"Shankara	is	declared	victorious.	Mandan	Mishra	is	defeated."
Thousands	 of	 people	 were	 listening	 for	 these	 six	 months.	 It	 was	 a	 great
experience	to	listen	to	these	two	so	refined	logicians,	and	this	was	a	tremendous
experience,	 that	 the	wife	 declared	Shankara	 to	 be	 the	winner.	There	was	great
silence	 a	 for	 few	moments,	 and	 then	Bharti	 said,	 "But	 remember	 that	 you	 are
only	 half	 a	 winner,	 because	 according	 to	 the	 scriptures	 the	 wife	 and	 husband
makes	one	whole.	I'm	half	of	Mandan	Mishra.	You	have	defeated	one	half;	now
you	will	have	to	discuss	with	me."
Shankara	was	at	a	loss.	For	six	months	he	had	tried	so	hard;	many	times	he	had
been	thinking	of	giving	up	--	the	old	man	was	really	very	sharp	even	in	his	old
age.	Nobody	has	been	able	 to	stand	against	Shankara	 for	six	months,	and	now
the	wife	says	his	victory	is	only	half.	Bharti	said,	"But	I	will	also	give	you	the
chance	to	choose	your	judge."
He	said,	"Where	am	I	going	to	find	a	better	judge	than	Mandan	Mishra?	You	are
such	simple	and	fair	and	sincere	people.	But	Bharti	was	very	clever,	more	clever
than	 Shankara	 had	 imagined,	 because	 she	 started	 asking	 questions	 about	 the
science	of	sex.
Shankara	 said,	 "Forgive	me,	 I	 am	 a	 celibate	 and	 I	 don't	 know	 anything	 about
sex."
Bharti	said,	"Then	you	will	have	to	accept	your	defeat,	or	if	you	want	some	time
to	study	and	experience,	I'm	willing	to	give	you	some	time."
He	 was	 caught	 in	 such	 a	 strange	 situation;	 he	 asked	 for	 six	 months	 and	 six
months	were	given.	"You	can	go	and	learn	as	much	as	you	can	because	this	will
be	the	subject	to	begin	with,	then	later	on,	other	subjects.	It	is	not	easy,"	Bharti
said,	"to	beat	Mandan	Mishra.
But	that	half	was	easier!	I	am	a	much	harder	woman.	If	I	can	declare	the	defeat
of	my	husband,	you	can	understand	that	I	am	a	hard	woman.	It	is	not	going	to	be
easy.	If	you	feel	afraid	don't	come	back;	otherwise	we	will	wait	for	six	months."
This	 atmosphere	 continued	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 There	 was	 no	 question	 of
being	angry,	 there	was	no	question	of	being	abusive,	 there	was	no	question	of
trying	to	prove	that	you	are	right	by	your	physical	strength	or	by	your	arms	or	by
your	armies.	These	were	thought	to	be	barbarous	methods;	these	were	not	for	the
cultured	people.
Nietzsche	was	in	a	very	wrong	place	in	a	wrong	time;	he	was	not	understood	by
his	 contemporaries.	 Now,	 slowly,	 interest	 in	 him	 is	 arising;	 more	 and	 more
people	 are	 becoming	 interested	 in	 him.	 Perhaps	 it	would	 have	 been	 better	 for
him	 to	delay	his	 coming	 a	 little.	But	 it	 is	 not	 in	our	 hands	when	 to	 come	and
when	 to	 go.	And	 people	 of	 his	 genius	 always	 come	 before	 their	 time.	But	 he
should	have	his	respected	place	in	the	category	of	the	Buddhas.	That	day	is	not
far	away.
When	 all	 other	 so-called	 great	 philosophers	 of	 the	 West	 will	 be	 forgotten,
Friedrich	Nietzsche	will	still	be	remembered,	because	he	has	depths	which	have
still	 to	be	explored,	he	has	 insights	which	have	been	only	 ignored;	he	has	 just
been	put	aside	as	a	madman.
Even	if	he	is	a	madman,	that	does	not	matter.	What	he	is	saying	is	so	truthful	that
if	to	get	those	truths	one	has	to	become	mad,	it	is	a	perfectly	good	bargain.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
RECENTLY	 YOU	 SPOKE	 ABOUT	 THE	 WILL	 TO	 POWER.	 YOU
EXPLAINED	THE
IMPORTANCE	OF	HAVING	THIS	WILL,	THIS	LONGING,	TO	BECOME	A
MASTER	 OVER	 ONE'S	 SELF.	 YOU	 ALSO	 OFTEN	 DECLARE	 THAT
EVERY
DESIRE	IS	THE	BASIC	REASON	FOR	MAN'S	FRUSTRATION.	CAN	YOU
PLEASE
EXPLAIN	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	WILL	AND	DESIRE?
Gyan	 Saahaba,	 the	 difference	 between	 will	 and	 desire	 is	 great,	 although	 they
appear	almost	similar.
Desire	 is	 always	 for	 things.	 More	 money,	 more	 prestige,	 more	 respectability,
more	 knowledge,	 more	 virtue,	 a	 better	 place	 in	 the	 afterlife	 --	 these	 are	 all
desires.	Desires	can	be	millions,	because	there	are	millions	of	things	in	the	world
which	can	become	objects	of	desire.	A	desire	always	needs	an	object.
Will	 is	not	objective;	 it	does	not	want	something	else	to	be	added	to	it.	Will	 is
simply	 your	 very	 life	 force,	 which	 wants	 to	 assert	 itself	 in	 its	 totality,	 in	 its
wholeness,	to	bring	all	the	flowers	that	are	hidden	in	you,	to	be	yourself.
The	will	knows	only	one	thing	and	that	is	you	and	your	golden	future.	You,	right
now,	are	only	seeds.	But	you	can	become	great	trees,	reaching	to	the	stars.
Vincent	van	Gogh,	one	of	the	most	significant	Dutch	painters,	was	also	thought
of	 just	 like	Nietzsche	--	a	madman.	He	also	had	 to	 live	 in	a	madhouse,	and	he
was	 not	 a	 harmful	man;	 his	 paintings	were	 just	 not	 according	 to	 the	 ideas	 of
people.	 Strange...	 in	 this	 world	 you	 are	 not	 even	 free	 to	 paint	 something
according	to	your	own	idea,	which	is	not	harming	anybody.
He	had	painted	his	trees	so	tall	that	stars	were	left	far	behind	--	they	go	above	the
stars.
Naturally	people	used	to	ask	him,	"This	is	sheer	madness.	Where	have	you	seen
these	trees	going	beyond	the	stars?"
And	what	was	always	his	answer	is	immensely	significant.	He	used	to	say,	"To
me,	trees	represent	the	will	of	the	earth.	The	earth	is	trying	to	reach	beyond	the
stars,	 and	 you	 will	 see	 one	 day	 that	 the	 earth	 has	 succeeded.	 It	 is	 just	 the
beginning,	that's	why	you	don't	see	the	trees	that	high.	But	I	can	see	far	away	in
the	future."
But	we	cannot	even	forgive	poets,	we	cannot	forgive	even	visionaries	for	 their
harmless	 visions.	 But	 what	 a	 beautiful	 idea	 --	 that	 the	 earth	 wants	 to	 reach
beyond	the	stars.	That	defines	will.
Desire	is	always	for	possessions.
Will	is	always	for	consciousness.
Will	is	a	lifeforce;	a	flame	of	your	very	being.	It	does	not	want	anything	else	--	it
simply	wants	 itself	 to	be	actualized	 in	 its	 totality.	 It	does	not	want	 to	 remain	a
seed,	 it	 does	 not	want	 just	 to	 remain	 a	 dream;	 it	wants	 to	 become	 a	 reality,	 it
wants	to	become	an	actual	phenomenon.
Gyan	 Saahaba,	 I	 can	 understand	 your	 problem.	 It	 may	 have	 arisen	 in	 many
people's	minds,	because	I	have	always	spoken	against	desire,	and	while	speaking
on	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche's	 ZARATHUSTRA	 I	 supported	 totally	 his	 idea	 of	 the
will.
When	on	a	rosebush	flowers	blossom,	it	is	the	will.	They	were	hidden	inside	the
bush	and	they	were	trying	to	come	into	manifestation	--	just	as	a	Gautam	Buddha
is	hidden	in	you,	or	a	Zarathustra	is	hidden	in	you	and	is	trying	to	come	out.	You
are	a	seed.	Once	this	idea	settles	in	you,	you	will	find	inside	the	seed	a	serpent
starts	uncoiling	itself	--	 that	 is	 the	will.	Nietzsche	has	called	 it	will	 to	power.	I
myself	 would	 like	 to	 call	 it	 will	 to	 realization,	 will	 to	 actualization,	 will	 to
become	absolutely	yourself.
Desire	is	a	very	dangerous	thing,	because	you	can	get	lost	in	desire	and	millions
are	lost.
The	 jungle	of	desires	 is	very	 thick,	 and	 there	 is	no	end;	one	after	 another	you
will	find	desires	and	desires	and	desires.	And	no	desire	is	fulfilling.	Every	desire
only	gives	you	a	new	frustration,	every	desire	gives	you	a	new	desire.	But	this
whole	 process	 of	 desiring	 takes	 your	 energy	 away	 from	 becoming	 a	 will	 to
realization,	 a	 will	 to	 bring	 your	 potential	 into	 flowering,	 into	 its	 ultimate
expression.
Desire	is	going	astray	from	will.
My	effort	here	is	to	pull	you	back	from	your	desires	to	one	single-pointed	will	--
the	will	that	wants	to	know	yourself,	the	will	that	wants	to	be	yourself,	the	will
that	wants	whatever	is	hidden	in	you	to	become	manifest.
Mendel	saves	up	for	years	to	buy	a	really	fine	tailor-made	suit,	his	very	first,	but
after	he	has	been	out	 in	 it	 for	 an	hour	or	 so	he	notices	 there	are	 things	wrong
with	it.	He	goes	back	to	the	tailor.
"The	arms	are	too	long,"	says	Mendel.
"No	problem.	Just	hold	your	arms	out	further	and	bend	at	the	elbows."
"But	the	trouser	legs	are	too	long."
"Right,	no	problem.	Walk	with	your	knees	bent."
"The	collar	is	too	high;	it	is	halfway	up	the	back	of	my	head."
"Okay.	Just	poke	your	head	out	further."
So	 Mendel	 goes	 out	 into	 the	 world	 with	 his	 first	 tailor-made	 suit.	 As	 he	 is
passing	a	couple	in	the	street	the	woman	says,	"Look	at	that	poor	man,	he	must
have	had	polio."
The	man	says,	"But	what	a	fine	suit	he	is	wearing!"
Your	desires	may	give	you	a	fine	suit,	but	they	will	also	make	you	suffer	from
polio;	 everything	will	 be	wrong.	Your	desires	will	 not	 allow	you	 to	be	 simply
yourself,	to	be	exactly	your	destiny.
Will	is	a	longing	to	achieve	one's	destiny.
Okay	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#6
Chapter	 title:	 Loneliness	 is	 aloneness
misunderstood
25	April	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704250
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN06
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
79
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	SAID	THE	OTHER	DAY	THAT	WE	ARE	BORN	ALONE,	WE	LIVE
ALONE
AND	WE	DIE	ALONE.	YET	 IT	SEEMS	AS	 IF	FROM	THE	DAY	WE	ARE
BORN,	WHATEVER	WE	ARE	DOING,	WHOEVER	WE	ARE,	WE	SEEK	TO
RELATE	TO
OTHERS;	 IN	 ADDITION,	 WE	 ARE	 USUALLY	 ATTRACTED	 TO	 BEING
INTIMATE
WITH	 ONE	 PERSON	 IN	 PARTICULAR.	 WOULD	 YOU	 PLEASE
COMMENT?
Dhyan	Amiyo,	the	question	that	you	have	asked	is	the	question	of	every	human
being.
We	 are	 born	 alone,	 we	 live	 alone,	 and	 we	 die	 alone.	 Aloneness	 is	 our	 very
nature,	but	we	are	not	aware	of	 it.	Because	we	are	not	aware	of	 it,	we	 remain
strangers	 to	 ourselves,	 and	 instead	 of	 seeing	 our	 aloneness	 as	 a	 tremendous
beauty	 and	 bliss,	 silence	 and	 peace,	 at-easeness	 with	 existence,	 we
misunderstand	it	as	loneliness.
Loneliness	 is	 a	 misunderstood	 aloneness.	 Once	 you	 misunderstand	 your
aloneness	as	loneliness,	the	whole	context	changes.	Aloneness	has	a	beauty	and
grandeur,	a	positivity;	loneliness	is	poor,	negative,	dark,	dismal.
Everybody	 is	 running	 away	 from	 loneliness.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 wound;	 it	 hurts.	 To
escape	from	it,	the	only	way	is	to	be	in	a	crowd,	to	become	part	of	a	society,	to
have	friends,	to	create	a	family,	to	have	husbands	and	wives,	to	have	children.	In
this	crowd,	the	basic	effort	is	that	you	will	be	able	to	forget	your	loneliness.
But	nobody	has	ever	succeeded	in	forgetting	it.	That	which	is	natural	to	you,	you
can	try	to	ignore	--	but	you	cannot	forget	it;	it	will	assert	again	and	again.	And
the	problem	becomes	more	complex	because	you	have	never	seen	it	as	it	is;	you
have	taken	it	for	granted	that	you	are	born	lonely.
The	 dictionary	 meaning	 is	 the	 same;	 that	 shows	 the	 mind	 of	 the	 people	 who
create	 dictionaries.	 They	 don't	 understand	 at	 all	 the	 vast	 difference	 between
loneliness	and	aloneness.	Loneliness	is	a	gap.	Something	is	missing,	something
is	needed	to	fill	it,	and	nothing	can	ever	fill	it	because	it	is	a	misunderstanding	in
the	first	place.	As	you	grow	older,	the	gap	also	grows	bigger.	People	are	so	afraid
to	 be	 by	 themselves	 that	 they	do	 any	kind	of	 stupid	 thing.	 I	 have	 seen	people
playing	cards	alone;	 the	other	party	 is	not	 there.	They	have	 invented	games	 in
which	the	same	person	plays	cards	from	both	sides.
Somehow	one	wants	to	remain	engaged.	That	engagement	may	be	with	people,
may	be	with	work....	There	are	workaholics;	 they	are	afraid	when	the	weekend
comes	close	--
what	 are	 they	 going	 to	 do?	 And	 if	 they	 don't	 do	 anything,	 they	 are	 left	 to
themselves,	and	that	is	the	most	painful	experience.
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 it	 is	 on	 the	 weekends	 that	 most	 of	 the
accidents	in	the	world	happen.	People	are	rushing	in	their	cars	to	resort	places,	to
sea	 beaches,	 to	 hill	 stations,	 bumper	 to	 bumper.	 It	 may	 take	 eight	 hours,	 ten
hours	to	reach,	and	there	is	nothing	for	them	to	do	because	the	whole	crowd	has
come	 with	 them.	 Now	 their	 house,	 their	 neighborhood,	 their	 city	 is	 more
peaceful	than	this	sea	resort.	Everybody	has	come.
But	some	engagement....
People	 are	playing	 cards,	 chess;	 people	 are	watching	 television	 for	 hours.	The
average	American	watches	television	five	hours	a	day;	people	are	listening	to	the
radio...	just	to	avoid	themselves.	For	all	these	activities,	the	only	reason	is	--	not
to	be	 left	alone;	 it	 is	very	fearful.	And	this	 idea	 is	 taken	from	others.	Who	has
told	you	that	to	be	alone	is	a	fearful	state?
Those	who	have	known	aloneness	say	something	absolutely	different.	They	say
there	is	nothing	more	beautiful,	more	peaceful,	more	joyful	than	being	alone.
But	 you	 listen	 to	 the	 crowd.	 The	 people	who	 live	 in	misunderstanding	 are	 in
such	 a	 majority,	 that	 who	 bothers	 about	 a	 Zarathustra,	 or	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha?
These	 single	 individuals	 can	be	wrong,	 can	be	hallucinating,	 can	be	deceiving
themselves	 or	 deceiving	 you,	 but	 millions	 of	 people	 cannot	 be	 wrong.	 And
millions	of	people	agree	that	to	be	left	to	oneself	is	the	worst	experience	in	life;
it	is	hell.
But	any	relationship	that	is	created	because	of	the	fear,	because	of	the	inner	hell
of	being	left	alone,	cannot	be	satisfying.	Its	very	root	is	poisoned.	You	don't	love
your	woman,	you	are	 simply	using	her	not	 to	be	 lonely;	neither	does	 she	 love
you.	She	is	also	in	the	same	paranoia;	she	is	using	you	not	to	be	left	alone.
Naturally,	in	the	name	of	love	anything	may	happen	--	except	love.	Fights	may
happen,	arguments	may	happen,	but	even	they	are	preferred	to	being	lonely:	at
least	somebody	is	there	and	you	are	engaged,	you	can	forget	your	loneliness.	But
love	is	not	possible,	because	there	is	no	basic	foundation	for	love.
Love	never	grows	out	of	fear.
You	are	asking,	"You	said	the	other	day	that	we	are	born	alone,	we	live	alone	and
we	die	alone.	Yet	it	seems	as	if	from	the	day	we	are	born,	whatever	we	are	doing,
whoever	we	are,	we	seek	to	relate	to	others."
This	seeking	to	relate	to	others	is	nothing	but	escapism.	Even	the	smallest	baby
tries	to	find	something	to	do;	if	nothing	else,	then	he	will	suck	his	own	big	toes
on	his	feet.	It	is	an	absolutely	futile	activity,	nothing	can	come	out	of	it,	but	it	is
engagement.	He	is	doing	something.	You	will	see	in	the	stations,	in	the	airports,
small	boys	and	girls	carrying	their	teddy	bears;	they	cannot	sleep	without	them.
Darkness	makes	their	loneliness	even	more	dangerous.	The	teddy	bear	is	a	great
protection;	somebody	is	with	them.
And	your	God	is	nothing	but	a	teddy	bear	for	grown-ups.
You	 cannot	 live	 as	 you	 are.	Your	 relationships	 are	 not	 relationships.	 They	 are
ugly.	 You	 are	 using	 the	 other	 person,	 and	 you	 know	 perfectly	 well	 the	 other
person	is	using	you.
And	to	use	anybody	is	to	reduce	him	into	a	thing,	into	a	commodity.	You	don't
have	any	respect	for	the	person.
"In	 addition,"	 you	 are	 asking,	 "we	 are	 usually	 attracted	 to	 being	 intimate	with
one	person	in	particular."
It	has	a	psychological	reason.	You	are	brought	up	by	a	mother,	by	a	father;	if	you
are	a	boy,	you	start	loving	your	mother	and	you	start	being	jealous	of	your	father
because	he	is	a	competitor;	if	you	are	a	girl,	you	start	loving	your	father	and	you
hate	your	mother	because	she	is	a	competitor.	These	are	now	established	facts,
not	hypotheses,	and	the	result	of	it	turns	your	whole	life	into	a	misery.	The	boy
carries	 the	 image	 of	 his	 mother	 as	 the	 model	 of	 a	 woman.	 He	 becomes
conditioned	continuously;	he	knows	only	one	woman	so	closely,	 so	 intimately.
Her	face,	her	hair,	her	warmth	--	everything	becomes	an	imprint.	That's	exactly
the	scientific	word	used:	it	becomes	an	imprint	in	his	psychology.
And	the	same	happens	to	the	girl	about	the	father.
When	you	grow	up,	you	fall	 in	 love	with	some	woman	or	with	some	man	and
you	think,
"Perhaps	we	are	made	for	each	other."	Nobody	is	made	for	anyone.	But	why	do
you	feel	attracted	towards	one	certain	person?	It	is	because	of	your	imprint.	He
must	resemble	your	father	in	some	way;	she	must	resemble	your	mother	in	some
way.
Of	course	no	other	woman	can	be	exactly	a	replica	of	your	mother,	and	anyway
you	are	not	 in	search	of	a	mother,	you	are	 in	search	of	a	wife.	But	 the	 imprint
inside	you	decides	who	 is	 the	 right	woman	 for	you.	The	moment	you	 see	 that
woman,	there	is	no	question	of	reasoning.	You	immediately	feel	attraction;	your
imprint	immediately	starts	functioning	-
-	this	is	the	woman	for	you,	or	this	is	the	man	for	you.
It	is	good	as	far	as	meeting	once	in	a	while	on	the	sea	beach,	in	the	movie	hall,	in
the	garden	is	concerned,	because	you	don't	come	to	know	each	other	totally.	But
you	are	both	hankering	to	live	together;	you	want	to	be	married,	and	that	is	one
of	the	most	dangerous	steps	that	lovers	can	take.
The	moment	 you	 are	married,	 you	 start	 becoming	 aware	 of	 the	 totality	 of	 the
other	person,	and	you	are	surprised	on	every	single	aspect	 --	"Something	went
wrong;	this	is	not	the	woman,	this	is	not	the	man"	--	because	they	don't	fit	with
the	ideal	that	you	are	carrying	within	you.	And	the	trouble	is	multiplied	because
the	woman	 is	 carrying	 an	 ideal	 of	 her	 father	 --	 you	 don't	 fit	 with	 it.	 You	 are
carrying	 the	 ideal	 of	 your	 mother	 --	 she	 does	 not	 fit	 with	 it.	 That's	 why	 all
marriages	are	failures.
Only	 very	 rare	marriages	 are	 not	 failures	 --	 and	 I	 hope	God	 should	 save	 you
from	 those	marriages	which	 are	 not	 failures,	 because	 they	 are	 psychologically
sick.	There	are	people	who	are	sadists,	who	enjoy	torturing	others,	and	there	are
people	who	 are	masochists,	who	 enjoy	 torturing	 themselves.	 If	 a	 husband	 and
wife	belong	to	these	two	categories,	that	marriage	will	be	a	successful	marriage.
One	 is	 a	masochist	 and	one	 is	 a	 sadist	 --	 it	 is	 a	perfect	marriage,	because	one
enjoys	being	tortured	and	one	enjoys	torturing.
But	ordinarily	it	is	very	difficult	to	find	out	in	the	first	place	whether	you	are	a
masochist	or	a	sadist,	and	then	to	look	for	your	other	polarity....	If	you	are	wise
enough	you	should	go	to	the	psychologist	and	enquire	who	you	are,	a	masochist
or	a	sadist?	and	ask	if	he	can	give	you	some	references	which	can	fit	with	you.
Sometimes,	 just	 by	 accident,	 it	 happens	 that	 a	 sadist	 and	 masochist	 become
married.	 They	 are	 the	 happiest	 people	 in	 the	 world;	 they	 are	 fulfilling	 each
other's	needs.	But	what	kind	of	need	 is	 this?	--	 they	are	both	psychopaths,	and
they	are	living	a	life	of	torture.	But	otherwise,	every	marriage	is	going	to	fail,	for
one	simple	reason:	the	imprint	is	the	problem.
Even	in	marriage,	the	basic	reason	for	which	you	wanted	to	have	the	relationship
is	not	fulfilled.	You	are	more	alone	when	you	are	with	your	wife	than	when	you
are	alone.	To	leave	husband	and	wife	in	a	room	by	themselves	is	to	make	them
both	utterly	miserable.
One	of	my	 friends	was	 retiring;	he	was	a	big	 industrialist,	 and	he	was	 retiring
because	of	my	advice.	I	said,	"You	have	so	much	and	you	don't	have	a	son;	you
have	 two	 daughters	 and	 they	 are	 married	 in	 rich	 families.	 Now	 why
unnecessarily	bother	about	all	kinds	of	worries	 --	of	business,	and	 income	 tax,
and	this	and	that?	You	can	close	everything;	you	have	enough.	Even	if	you	live
one	thousand	years,	it	will	do."
He	said,	"That's	true.	The	real	problem	is	not	the	business,	the	real	problem	is	I
will	 be	 left	 alone	with	my	wife.	 I	 can	 retire	 right	 now	 if	 you	promise	me	one
thing,	that	you	will	live	with	us.
I	said,	"This	is	strange.	Are	you	retiring	or	am	I	retiring?"
He	 said,	 "That	 is	 the	 condition.	 Do	 you	 think	 I	 am	 interested	 in	 all	 these
troubles?	It	is	just	to	escape	from	my	wife."
The	wife	was	a	great	social	worker.	She	used	to	run	an	orphanage,	a	house	for
widows,	and	a	hospital	particularly	for	people	who	are	beggars	and	cannot	pay
for	their	treatment.
I	also	asked	her	in	the	evening,	"Do	you	really	enjoy	all	this,	from	the	morning
till	the	evening?"
She	said,	"Enjoy?	It	is	a	kind	of	austerity,	a	self-imposed	torture."
I	 said,	 "Why	 should	 you	 impose	 this	 torture	 on	 yourself?"	 She	 said,	 "Just	 to
avoid	your	friend.	If	we	are	left	alone,	that	is	the	worst	experience	in	life."
And	this	is	a	love	marriage,	not	an	arranged	marriage.	They	married	each	other
against	 the	whole	family,	 the	whole	society,	because	they	belonged	to	different
religions,	 different	 castes;	 but	 their	 imprints	 gave	 them	 signals	 that	 this	 is	 the
right	woman,	 this	 is	 the	 right	man.	And	all	 this	happens	unconsciously.	That's
why	you	cannot	answer	why	you	have	fallen	 in	 love	with	a	certain	woman,	or
with	a	certain	man.	 It	 is	not	a	conscious	decision.	 It	has	been	decided	by	your
unconscious	imprint.
Amiyo,	 this	 whole	 effort	 --	 whether	 of	 relationships	 or	 remaining	 busy	 in	 a
thousand	 and	one	 things	 --	 is	 just	 to	 escape	 from	 the	 idea	 that	 you	 are	 lonely.
And	I	want	it	to	be	emphatically	clear	to	you	that	this	is	where	the	meditator	and
the	ordinary	man	part.
The	ordinary	man	goes	on	trying	to	forget	his	loneliness,	and	the	meditator	starts
getting	more	and	more	acquainted	with	his	aloneness.	He	has	left	the	world;	he
has	gone	to	the	caves,	to	the	mountains,	to	the	forest,	just	for	the	sake	of	being
alone.	He	wants	 to	 know	who	 he	 is.	 In	 the	 crowd,	 it	 is	 difficult;	 there	 are	 so
many	disturbances.	And	those	who	have	known	their	aloneness	have	known	the
greatest	 blissfulness	 possible	 to	 human	 beings	 --	 because	 your	 very	 being	 is
blissful.
After	being	 in	 tune	with	your	aloneness,	you	can	 relate;	 then	your	 relationship
will	bring	great	joys	to	you,	because	it	is	not	out	of	fear.	Finding	your	aloneness
you	can	create,	you	can	be	involved	in	as	many	things	as	you	want,	because	this
involvement	will	 not	 anymore	be	 running	 away	 from	yourself.	Now	 it	will	 be
your	expression;	now	it	will	be	the	manifestation	of	all	that	is	your	potential.
Only	 such	 a	man	 --	whether	 he	 lives	 alone	 or	 lives	 in	 the	 society,	whether	 he
marries	 or	 lives	 unmarried	makes	 no	difference	 --	 is	 always	 blissful,	 peaceful,
silent.	His	life	is	a	dance,	is	a	song,	is	a	flowering,	is	a	fragrance.	Whatever	he
does,	he	brings	his	fragrance	to	it.
But	the	first	basic	thing	is	to	know	your	aloneness	absolutely.
This	escape	from	yourself	you	have	learned	from	the	crowd.	Because	everybody
is	 escaping,	 you	 start	 escaping.	 Every	 child	 is	 born	 in	 a	 crowd	 and	 starts
imitating	people;	what	others	are	doing,	he	starts	doing.	He	falls	 into	 the	same
miserable	situations	as	others	are	in,	and	he	starts	thinking	that	this	is	what	life	is
all	about.	And	he	has	missed	life	completely.
So	 I	 remind	 you,	 don't	 misunderstand	 aloneness	 as	 loneliness.	 Loneliness	 is
certainly	sick;	aloneness	is	perfect	health.
Ginsberg	visits	Doctor	Goldberg.	"Ja,	you	are	sick."
"Not	good	enough.	I	want	another	opinion."
"Okay,"	said	Doctor	Goldberg,	"you	are	ugly	too."
We	are	all	committing	the	same	kinds	of	misunderstandings	continually.
I	would	 like	my	people	 to	know	that	your	 first	and	most	primary	step	 towards
finding	the	meaning	and	significance	of	life	is	to	enter	into	your	aloneness.	It	is
your	 temple;	 it	 is	 where	 your	 God	 lives,	 and	 you	 cannot	 find	 this	 temple
anywhere	else.	You	can	go	on	to	the	moon,	to	Mars....
Once	you	have	entered	your	 innermost	core	of	being,	you	cannot	believe	your
own	eyes:	you	were	carrying	 so	much	 joy,	 so	many	blessings,	 so	much	 love...
and	you	were	escaping	from	your	own	treasures.
Knowing	 these	 treasures	 and	 their	 inexhaustibility,	 you	 can	 move	 now	 into
relationships,	into	creativity.	You	will	help	people	by	sharing	your	love,	not	by
using	them.	You	will	give	dignity	 to	people	by	your	 love;	you	will	not	destroy
their	respect.	And	you	will,	without	any	effort,	become	a	source	for	them	to	find
their	own	treasures	too.	Whatever	you	make,	whatever	you	do,	you	will	spread
your	silence,	your	peace,	your	blessings	into	everything	possible.
But	 this	 basic	 thing	 is	 not	 taught	 by	 any	 family,	 by	 any	 society,	 by	 any
university.	People	go	on	living	in	misery,	and	it	is	taken	for	granted.	Everybody
is	 miserable,	 so	 it	 is	 nothing	 much	 if	 you	 are	 miserable;	 you	 cannot	 be	 an
exception.
But	I	say	unto	you:	You	can	be	an	exception.	You	just	have	not	made	the	right
effort.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	DAY,	YOU	TALKED	ABOUT	THE	THIRD	EYE	AS	A	DOOR
FOR
CONNECTING	WITH	YOU	AND	EXISTENCE.	WHENEVER	I	FEEL	OPEN,
FLOWING,	 CONNECTING	 WITH	 YOU,	 OTHER	 PEOPLE,	 NATURE	 OR
MYSELF,	 I	 MOSTLY	 FEEL	 IT	 IN	 MY	 HEART	 AS	 SILENCE	 AND
EXPANDING
SPACIOUSNESS,	 AND	 SOMETIMES	 AS	 RADIATING	 LIGHT.	 BELOVED
OSHO,	 IS	 THIS	 THE	 SAME	 KIND	 OF	 EXPERIENCE	 YOU	 WERE
TALKING	ABOUT,	OR
IS	 THERE	 A	 DIFFERENCE	 BETWEEN	 CONNECTING	 THROUGH	 THE
THIRD
EYE	OR	THE	HEART;	OR	ARE	THERE	DIFFERENT	STAGES?
Vedant	Amod,	what	you	are	experiencing	 is	 in	 itself	valuable,	but	 it	 is	not	 the
experience	of	the	third	eye.	The	third	eye	is	a	little	higher	than	your	experience.
The	way	the	mystics	in	the	East	have	categorized	the	evolution	of	consciousness
is	in	seven	centers.	Your	experiences	belong	to	the	fourth	center,	the	heart.	It	is
one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 centers,	 because	 it	 is	 exactly	 in	 the	 middle.	 Three
centers	 are	 below	 it	 and	 three	 centers	 are	 above	 it.	 That's	why	 love	 is	 such	 a
balancing	experience.
Your	description	is,	"Whenever	I	feel	open,	flowing,	connecting	with	you,	other
people,	nature	or	myself,	 I	mostly	 feel	 it	 in	my	heart	as	silence	and	expanding
spaciousness,	 and	 sometimes	 as	 radiating	 light.	 Is	 this	 the	 same	 kind	 of
experience	you	were	talking	about?"
I	 was	 talking	 about	 the	 third	 eye,	 which	 is	 above	 the	 heart.	 There	 are	 three
centers	above	the	heart.	One	is	in	your	throat,	which	is	the	center	of	creativity;
one	 is	 between	 your	 two	 eyebrows,	 exactly	 in	 the	middle,	which	 is	 called	 the
third	eye.	Just	as	you	have	two	eyes	to	know	the	outside	world...	the	third	eye	is
only	a	metaphor,	but	the	experience	is	knowing	oneself,	seeing	oneself.
The	 last	 center	 is	 sahastrara,	 the	 seventh;	 that	 is	 at	 the	 top	 of	 your	 head.	 As
consciousness	 goes	 on	 moving	 upwards,	 first	 you	 know	 yourself,	 and	 in	 the
second	step	you	know	the	whole	universe;	you	know	the	whole	and	yourself	as
part	of	it.
In	 the	 old	 language,	 the	 seventh	 is	 "knowing	 God,"	 the	 sixth	 is	 "knowing
yourself,"	 the	 fifth	 is	 "being	creative,"	and	 the	 fourth	 is	 "being	 loving,	 sharing
and	knowing	others."
With	the	fourth,	your	journey	becomes	certain;	it	can	be	guaranteed	that	you	will
reach	the	seventh.	Before	the	fourth,	there	is	a	possibility	you	may	go	astray.
The	 first	 center	 is	 the	 sex	 center,	 which	 is	 for	 reproduction	 --	 so	 that	 life
continues.	Just	above	it...	the	sex	energy	can	be	moved	upwards,	and	it	is	a	great
experience;	for	the	first	time	you	find	yourself	self-sufficient.
Sex	always	needs	the	other.	The	second	center	is	the	center	of	contentment,	self-
sufficiency:	you	are	enough	unto	yourself.	At	the	third	center	you	start	exploring
--	 who	 are	 you?	 who	 is	 this	 self-sufficient	 being?	 These	 centers	 are	 all
significant....
The	moment	you	find	who	you	are,	the	fourth	center	opens	and	you	find	you	are
love.
Before	the	fourth	the	journey	has	started,	but	there	is	a	possibility	you	may	not
be	 able	 to	 complete	 it.	You	 can	 go	 astray.	 For	 example,	 finding	 yourself	 self-
sufficient,	 contented,	 you	 can	 remain	 there;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 do	 anything
anymore.	You	may	not	even	ask	the	question,	"Who	am	I?"	The	sufficiency	is	so
much	that	all	questions	disappear.
A	master	is	needed	in	these	moments,	so	that	you	don't	settle	somewhere	in	the
middle	without	reaching	the	goal.	And	there	are	beautiful	spots	to	settle...	feeling
contented,	what	is	 the	need	to	go	on?	But	the	master	goes	on	nagging	you	and
wants	you	to	know	who	you	are;	you	may	be	contented,	but	at	least	know	who
you	are.	The	moment	you	know	who	you	are,	 a	new	door	opens,	because	you
become	aware	of	life,	of	love,	of	joy.	You	can	stay	there;	it	is	so	much,	there	is
no	need	to	move	any	more.	But	the	master	goads	you	on,	"Move	to	the	fourth!
Unless	 you	 find	 the	 purest	 energy	 of	 love,	 you	will	 not	 know	 the	 splendor	 of
existence."
After	 the	 fourth,	 you	 cannot	 go	 astray.	Once	 you	 have	 known	 the	 splendor	 of
existence,	creativity	arises	on	its	own.	You	have	known	beauty;	you	would	like
to	create	it	also.
You	want	to	be	a	creator.	A	tremendous	longing	for	creativity	arises.	Whenever
you	 feel	 love,	you	always	 feel	creativity	 just	as	a	 shadow	coming	with	 it.	The
man	 of	 creativity	 cannot	 simply	 go	 on	 looking	 outside.	 There	 is	much	 beauty
outside...	 but	he	becomes	aware	 that	 just	 as	 there	 is	 an	 infinite	 sky	outside,	 to
balance	it	there	must	be	the	same	infinity	inside.
If	a	master	is	available,	it	 is	good;	if	he	is	not	available,	these	experiences	will
lead	you	onwards.
Once	your	third	eye	is	opened,	and	you	see	yourself,	the	whole	expanse	of	your
consciousness,	 you	 have	 come	 very	 close	 to	 the	 temple	 of	 God;	 you	 are	 just
standing	on	the	steps.	You	can	see	the	door	and	you	cannot	resist	the	temptation
to	 go	 inside	 the	 temple	 and	 see	 what	 is	 there.	 There	 you	 find	 universal
consciousness,	there	you	find	enlightenment,	there	you	find	ultimate	liberation.
There	you	find	your	eternity.
So	these	are	the	seven	centers	--	just	arbitrarily	created	divisions,	so	the	seeker
can	move	 from	 one	 to	 another	 in	 a	 systematic	 way;	 otherwise,	 there	 is	 every
possibility,	 if	you	are	working	by	yourself,	 to	get	muddled.	Particularly	before
the	fourth	center	there	are	dangers,	and	even	after	the	fourth	center....
There	have	been	many	poets	who	have	lived	at	the	fifth	center	of	creativity	and
never	 gone	 ahead	 --	many	 painters,	many	 dancers,	many	 singers	 who	 created
great	 art,	 but	never	moved	 to	 the	 third	 eye.	And	 there	have	been	mystics	who
have	 remained	 with	 the	 third	 eye,	 knowing	 their	 own	 inner	 beauty;	 it	 is	 so
fulfilling	that	they	thought	they	had	arrived.	Somebody	is	needed	to	tell	you	that
there	is	still	something	more	ahead;	otherwise,	in	your	ignorance,	what	you	will
do	is	almost	unpredictable.
Mike	 had	 decided	 to	 join	 the	 police	 force	 and	 went	 along	 for	 the	 entrance
examination.
The	examining	sergeant,	realizing	that	 the	prospective	recruit	was	an	Irishman,
decided	to	ask	him	a	simple	question.	"Who	killed	Jesus	Christ?"	he	asked.
Mike	looked	worried	and	said	nothing,	so	the	sergeant	told	him	not	to	worry	and
that	he	could	have	some	time	to	think	about	it.	Mike	was	on	his	way	home	when
he	met	Paddy.
"Well,"	said	Paddy,	"are	you	a	policeman	yet?"
"Not	only	that,"	says	Mike,	"but	I	am	on	my	first	case."
Man	 is	 such	 that	 he	 needs	 someone	 who	 has	 known	 the	 path	 and	 knows	 the
pitfalls,	 knows	 the	 beautiful	 spots	 where	 one	 can	 remain	 stuck,	 and	 has
compassion	enough	to	go	on	pushing	you	--	even	against	you	--	until	you	have
reached	to	the	final	stage	of	your	potentiality.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Love:	the	purest	power
25	April	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704255
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN07
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
63
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOU	SPOKE	ABOUT	NIETZSCHE'S	CONCEPT	OF	WILL,	IT	WAS
SO
MUCH	 THE	 OPPOSITE	 POLE	 TO	 THE	 CONCEPT	 OF	WILL	 THAT	 THE
NAZIS
DEVELOPED	 FROM	 THE	 SAME	 SOURCE,	 AND	 THAT	 IS	 STILL	 SO
PREVELANT
IN	THE	WEST.	COULD	YOU	SPEAK	ABOUT	THE	DIFFERENCE?
Prem	Pankaja,	it	is	the	destiny	of	the	genius	to	be	misunderstood.	If	a	genius	is
not	 misunderstood,	 he	 is	 not	 a	 genius	 at	 all.	 If	 the	 common	 masses	 can
understand,	that	means	the	person	is	speaking	at	the	same	level	where	ordinary
intelligence	is.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	is	misunderstood,	and	out	of	this	misunderstanding	there	has
been	tremendous	disaster.	But	perhaps	it	was	unavoidable.	To	understand	a	man
like	Nietzsche	you	have	to	have	at	 least	 the	same	standard	of	consciousness,	 if
not	higher.
Adolf	Hitler	 is	so	retarded	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 think	 that	he	can	understand
the	meaning	of	Nietzsche;	but	he	became	the	prophet	of	Nietzsche's	philosophy.
And	 according	 to	 his	 retarded	mind	 he	 interpreted	 --	 not	 only	 interpreted,	 but
acted	 according	 to	 those	 interpretations	 --	 and	 the	 second	 world	 war	 was	 the
result.
When	Nietzsche	is	talking	about	"will	to	power,"	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	will	to
dominate.	But	that	is	the	meaning	the	Nazis	had	given	to	it.
"The	will	to	power"	is	diametrically	opposite	to	the	will	to	dominate.	The	will	to
dominate	 comes	 out	 of	 an	 inferiority	 complex.	One	wants	 to	 dominate	 others,
just	to	prove	to	himself	that	he	is	not	inferior	--	he	is	superior.	But	he	needs	to
prove	 it.	Without	 any	 proof	 he	 knows	 he	 is	 inferior;	 he	 has	 to	 cover	 it	 up	 by
many,	many	proofs.
The	really	superior	man	needs	no	proof,	he	simply	is	superior.	Does	a	roseflower
argue	 about	 its	 beauty?	 Does	 the	 full	 moon	 bother	 about	 proving	 its
gloriousness?	The	superior	man	simply	knows	it,	there	is	no	need	for	any	proof;
hence	he	has	no	will	to	dominate.
He	 certainly	 has	 a	 "will	 to	 power,"	 but	 then	 you	 have	 to	 make	 a	 very	 fine
distinction.	His	will	to	power	means:	he	wants	to	grow	to	his	fullest	expression.
It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 anybody	 else,	 its	 whole	 concern	 is	 the	 individual
himself.	 He	 wants	 to	 blossom,	 to	 bring	 all	 the	 flowers	 that	 are	 hidden	 in	 his
potential,	 to	rise	as	high	as	possible	in	the	sky.	It	 is	not	even	comparative,	it	 is
not	trying	to	rise	higher	than	others
--	it	is	simply	trying	to	rise	to	its	fullest	potential.
"Will	to	power"	is	absolutely	individual.	It	wants	to	dance	to	the	highest	in	the
sky,	 it	 wants	 to	 have	 a	 dialogue	 with	 the	 stars,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 concerned	 with
proving	anybody	inferior.	It	is	not	competitive,	it	is	not	comparative.
Adolf	Hitler	and	his	followers,	the	Nazis	have	done	so	much	harm	to	the	world
because	 they	 prevented	 the	world	 from	understanding	Friedrich	Nietzsche	 and
his	true	meaning.
And	it	was	not	only	one	thing;	about	every	other	concept	too,	they	have	the	same
kind	of	misunderstanding.
It	is	such	a	sad	fate,	one	which	has	never	befallen	any	great	mystic	or	any	great
poet	before	Nietzsche.	The	crucifixion	of	Jesus	or	poisoning	of	Socrates	are	not
as	 bad	 a	 fate,	 as	 that	 which	 has	 befallen	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 --	 to	 be
misunderstood	on	such	a	grand	scale	that	Adolf	Hitler	managed	to	kill	more	than
eight	million	people	 in	 the	name	of	Friedrich	Nietzsche	 and	his	 philosophy.	 It
will	take	a	little	time....	When	Adolf	Hitler	and	the	Nazis	and	the	second	world
war	are	forgotten,	Nietzsche	will	come	back	to	his	true	light.	He	is	coming	back.
Just	the	other	day,	sannyasins	from	Japan	informed	me	that	my	books	are	selling
in	their	language	at	the	highest	rate	and	next	to	them	are	Friedrich	Nietzsche's	--
his	books	are	also	selling.	And	just	a	few	days	earlier	the	same	information	came
from	Korea.	Perhaps	people	may	be	finding	something	similar	in	them.
But	Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	to	be	interpreted	again,	so	that	all	the	nonsense	that
has	been	put,	by	 the	Nazis,	over	his	beautiful	philosophy	can	be	 thrown	away.
He	has	to	be	purified,	he	needs	a	baptism.
Little	Sammy	tells	his	grandfather	about	the	great	scientist,	Albert	Einstein,	and
his	theory	of	relativity.
"Ah	yes,"	says	the	grandfather,	"and	what	does	the	theory	have	to	say?"
"Our	teacher	says	that	only	a	few	people	in	the	whole	world	can	understand	it,"
the	boy	explains,	"but	then	she	told	us	what	it	means.	Relativity	is	like	this:	if	a
man	sits	for	an	hour	with	a	pretty	girl,	it	feels	like	a	minute;	but	if	he	sits	on	a
hot	stove	for	a	minute,	it	feels	like	an	hour	--	and	that's	the	theory	of	relativity."
Grandpa	 is	 silent	 and	 slowly	 shakes	 his	 head,	 "Sammy,"	 he	 says	 softly,	 "from
this	your	Einstein	makes	a	living?"
People	understand	according	to	their	own	level	of	consciousness.
It	was	 just	 a	 coincidence	 that	Nietzsche	 fell	 into	 the	hands	of	 the	Nazis.	They
needed	 a	 philosophy	 for	 war,	 and	 Nietzsche	 appreciates	 the	 beauty	 of	 the
warrior.	They	wanted	some	idea	for	which	to	fight,	and	Nietzsche	gave	them	a
good	excuse	--	for	the	superman.
Of	 course,	 they	 immediately	 got	 hold	 of	 the	 idea	 of	 superman.	 The	 Nordic
German	Aryans	were	going	 to	be	Nietzsche's	 new	 race	of	man,	 the	 superman.
They	wanted	to	dominate	the	world,	and	Nietzsche	was	very	helpful,	because	he
was	saying	that	man's	deepest	 longing	is	"will	 to	power."	They	changed	it	 into
will	to	dominate.
Now	they	had	the	whole	philosophy:	the	Nordic	German	Aryans	are	the	superior
race	because	they	are	going	to	give	birth	to	the	superman.	They	have	the	will	to
power	 and	 they	 will	 dominate	 the	 whole	 world.	 That	 is	 their	 destiny	 --	 to
dominate	 the	 inferior	 human	 beings.	 Obviously,	 the	 arithmetic	 is	 simple:	 the
superior	should	dominate	the	inferior.
These	beautiful	concepts...	Nietzsche	could	not	ever	have	imagined	they,	would
become	so	dangerous	and	such	a	nightmare	to	the	whole	of	humanity.	But	you
cannot	avoid	being	misunderstood,	you	cannot	do	anything	about	it.
A	drunk	who	 smelt	of	whiskey,	 cigars,	 and	a	 cheap	perfume,	 staggered	up	 the
steps	 into	 the	bus,	 reeled	down	 the	aisle,	 then	plopped	himself	down	on	a	seat
next	to	a	Catholic	priest.
The	drunk	took	a	long	look	at	his	offended	seat	partner	and	said,	"Hey	father,	I
have	got	a	question	for	you.	What	causes	arthritis?"
The	priest's	reply	was	cold	and	curt,	"Amoral	living,"	he	said,	"too	much	liquor,
smoking	and	consorting	with	loose	women."
"Well,	I'll	be	damned!"	said	the	drunk.
They	rode	in	silence	for	a	moment.	The	priest	began	to	feel	guilty,	 that	he	had
reacted	 so	 strongly	 to	 a	man	who	obviously	 needed	Christian	 compassion.	He
turned	 to	 the	drunk	and	said,	"I	am	sorry,	my	son.	 I	did	not	mean	 to	be	harsh.
How	long	have	you	suffered	from	this	terrible	affliction	of	arthritis?"
"My	affliction?"	the	drunk	said,	"I	don't	have	arthritis.	I	was	just	reading	in	the
paper	that	the	pope	had	it."
Now,	what	can	you	do?	Once	you	have	said	something,	then	it	all	depends	on	the
other	person,	what	he	is	going	to	make	of	it.
But	Nietzsche	 is	 so	 immensely	 important	 that	 he	 has	 to	 be	 cleaned	 of	 all	 the
garbage	that	the	Nazis	have	put	on	his	ideas.	And	the	strangest	thing	is	that	not
only	the	Nazis	but	other	philosophers	around	the	world	have	also	misunderstood
him.	Perhaps	he	was	such	a	great	genius	that	your	so-called	great	men	also	were
not	able	to	understand	him.
He	was	bringing	so	many	new	insights	into	the	world	of	thinking,	that	even	just
a	single	insight	would	have	made	him	one	of	the	great	philosophers	of	the	world
--	 and	he	has	dozens	of	 insights	which	are	absolutely	original,	which	man	has
never	 thought	about.	 If	 rightly	understood,	Nietzsche	certainly	could	create	 the
atmosphere	and	the	right	soil	for	the	superman	to	be	born.	He	can	help	humanity
to	be	transformed.
I	 have	 tremendous	 respect	 for	 the	 man,	 and	 also	 a	 great	 sadness	 that	 he	 was
misunderstood	 --	 not	 only	 misunderstood,	 but	 forced	 into	 a	 madhouse.	 The
doctors	 declared	 that	 he	 was	 mad.	 His	 insights	 were	 so	 far	 away	 from	 the
ordinary	mind	that	the	ordinary	mind	felt	very	happy	in	declaring	him	mad:	"If
he	is	not	mad,	then	we	are	too	ordinary."	He	has	to	be	mad,	he	has	to	be	forced
into	a	madhouse.
My	own	feeling	is,	he	was	never	mad.	He	was	just	too	much	ahead	of	his	time,
and	 he	was	 too	 sincere	 and	 too	 truthful.	He	 said	 exactly	what	 he	 experienced
without	 bothering	 about	 politicians,	 priests	 and	 other	 pygmies.	 But	 these
pygmies	are	so	many	and	this	man	was	so	alone,	that	they	would	not	hear	that	he
was	not	mad.	And	the	proof	that	he	was	not	mad	is	his	last	book,	which	he	wrote
in	the	madhouse.
But	 I	 am	 the	 first	man	who	 is	 saying	 that	 he	was	 not	mad.	 It	 seems	 that	 this
whole	world	is	so	cunning,	so	politically	minded,	that	people	say	only	things	that
bring	reputation	to	them,	which	bring	applause	from	the	crowd.	Even	your	great
thinkers	are	not	very	great.
The	book	that	he	wrote	in	the	madhouse	is	his	greatest	work,	and	is	an	absolute
proof	 because	 a	mad	man	 could	 not	write	 it.	His	 last	 book	 is	THE	WILL	TO
POWER.	He	did	not	 see	 it	 printed,	because	who	 is	going	 to	print	 a	madman's
book?	 He	 knocked	 on	 many	 publishers'	 doors,	 but	 was	 refused	 --	 and	 now
everybody	agrees	that	that	is	his	greatest	work.	After	his	death,	his	sister	sold	the
house	and	other	things	to	publish	the	book,	because	that	was	his	last	desire,	but
he	did	not	see	it	in	print.
Was	he	mad?	or	are	we	 living	 in	a	mad	world?	If	a	madman	can	write	a	book
like,	THE
WILL	 TO	 POWER,	 then	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 mad	 than	 to	 be	 sane	 like	 Ronald
Reagan,	 who	 is	 piling	 up	 nuclear	 weapons	 --	 there	 are	 thousands	 of	 people
employed	 in	 creating	 nuclear	 weapons	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day.	 You	 call	 this
man	sane,	and	you	call	Friedrich	Nietzsche	mad?
An	 old	 Indian	 was	 sitting	 in	 a	 bar,	 when	 a	 long-haired,	 bearded,	 dirty	 hippy
stormed	 into	 the	 bar	 and	 ordered	 a	 drink.	 The	 hippy's	 raunchy	 insults	 drove
everyone	else	out	of	the	bar,	but	the	old	Indian	sat	calmly	watching.	Finally	the
old	hippy	turned	to	him	and	said,
"Hey,	 red	 man,	 why	 the	 hell	 are	 you	 staring	 at	 me?	 Are	 you	 crazy,	 or
something?"
"No,"	the	Indian	replied,	"twenty	years	ago	I	was	arrested	for	making	love	to	a
buffalo.	I	thought	you	might	be	my	son."
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOU	TALKED	ABOUT	THE	SUPERMAN,	YOU	SAID	THAT	THE
CAMEL
HAS	TO	BECOME	A	LION.	 I	FEEL	VERY	ATTRACTED	TO	THAT	LION,
BUT	I	AM	STILL	AFRAID	TO	GET	IN	CONTACT	WITH	IT.	 I	HAVE	THE
FEELING	THE
LION	IN	ME	HAS	SOMETHING	TO	DO	WITH	MY	POWER.	HOW	CAN	I
USE	MY
POWER	WITHOUT	 LOSING	MY	 LOVE?	 HOW	CAN	 I	 USE	MY	 POWER
AND
STILL	STAY	WITH	AN	OPEN	HEART?	TO	ME,	LOVE	AND	POWER	SEEM
TO	BE
CONTRADICTORY.	 IS	 THIS	 SO?	 CAN	 YOU	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT
THIS,	PLEASE?
Dhyan	Agni,	the	question	that	you	are	asking	is	exactly	the	same	as	the	question
that	Pankaja	asked.	You	also	have	the	same	misunderstanding,	although	it	is	not
related	to	Friedrich	Nietzsche.
You	 are	 basically	 asking,	 "How	 can	 I	 use	my	 power	without	 losing	my	 love?
How	 can	 I	 use	my	 power	 and	 still	 stay	with	 an	 open	 heart?	 To	me,	 love	 and
power	seem	to	be	contradictory."
That's	your	misunderstanding.
Love	and	power	are	not	contradictory.
Love	is	the	greatest	power	in	the	world.
But	 you	 have	 to	 understand	 again:	 by	 power	 I	 don't	mean	 power	 over	 others.
Power	over	others	is	not	love;	power	over	others	is	pure	hate,	it	 is	poison,	it	 is
destructive.
But	 to	me,	 and	 to	 anyone	who	 knows,	 love	 itself	 is	 power	 --	 and	 the	 greatest
power,	because	there	is	nothing	more	creative	than	love.	There	is	nothing	more
fulfilling	than	love,	there	is	nothing	more	nourishing	than	love.	When	you	are	in
love,	 all	 fears	 disappear,	 and	 when	 you	 become	 love	 yourself,	 even	 death
becomes	irrelevant.
Jesus	is	not	very	far	away	from	the	truth	when	he	says,	"God	is	love."	Certainly
God	is	power,	the	greatest	power.	I	want	to	improve	upon	Jesus:	I	don't	say	God
is	love,	I	say	love	is	God.	To	me	God	is	only	a	symbol	and	love	is	a	reality.
God	is	only	a	myth	--	love	is	the	experience	of	millions	of	people.
God	is	only	a	word,	but	love	can	become	a	dance	in	your	heart.
Your	misunderstanding	is	that	you	think	power	means	power	over	others.	And	it
is	 not	 only	 your	misunderstanding,	Dhyan	Agni,	 it	 is	 the	misunderstanding	 of
millions	of	people.	And	because	of	this	misunderstanding	they	destroy	the	whole
beauty	of	love.
Instead	of	creating	a	paradise	out	of	it,	they	create	a	hell	for	each	other,	because
everybody	is	trying	to	dominate	everybody	else	in	the	name	of	love	--	but	deep
down	is	the	desire	to	dominate.
Love	in	itself	is	unconditional.	It	knows	only	giving,	sharing;	it	does	not	know
any	desire	for	getting	something	in	return.	It	does	not	ask	for	any	response.	Its
joy	and	its	reward	is	in	sharing.	And	its	power	is	in	its	sharing.	It	is	so	powerful
that	 it	 can	 go	 on	 sharing	 with	 millions	 of	 people,	 and	 still	 the	 heart	 remains
overflowing	with	love	--	it	is	inexhaustible.
That	is	its	power.
You	are	asking,	"How	can	I	use	my	power	without	losing	my	love?"	If	you	want
to	dominate,	 then	certainly	you	will	have	to	lose	your	love.	But	 if	you	want	 to
love,	you	can	love	as	powerfully	as	you	want.
There	 is	 no	 contradiction	 between	 power	 and	 love.	 If	 there	 is	 a	 contradiction
between	 power	 and	 love,	 then	 love	 will	 become	 powerless,	 it	 will	 become
impotent,	uncreative,	weak;	power	will	become	dangerous,	destructive	--	it	will
start	to	enjoy	torturing	people.
Love	and	power	separate	are	the	misery	of	the	world.	Love	and	power	together,
as	 one	 energy,	 can	 become	 a	 great	 transformation.	 Life	 can	 become	 a
blissfulness.	And	it	is	only	a	question	of	dropping	a	misunderstanding.
It	 is	 just	 as	 if	 you	 were	 thinking	 two	 plus	 two	 is	 equal	 to	 five,	 and	 then
somebody	points	out	to	you	that	you	are	calculating	wrongly:	two	plus	two	is	not
five,	two	plus	two	is	four.
Do	 you	 think	many	 austerities	will	 be	 needed	 to	 change	 your	misconception?
Will	you	have	to	stand	on	your	head	for	hours	to	change	your	idea	that	two	and
two	are	four,	or	five?	Or	you	will	have	to	go	on	a	fast	unto	death	to	change	your
misconception?	 Or	 you	 will	 have	 to	 renounce	 the	 world	 and	 all	 its	 pleasures
because	 your	 calculation	 is	 wrong	 and	 you	 have	 to	 purify	 your	 soul	 first;
otherwise	how	can	you	calculate	rightly?
These	 are	 simple	 calculations,	 and	 a	 man	 of	 understanding	 can	 change	 them
within	a	second.	It	is	just	a	question	of	seeing	where	you	have	gone	astray.	Bring
yourself	back.
"I	had	the	strangest	dream	last	night,"	a	man	was	telling	his	psychiatrist.	"I	saw
my	mother,	but	when	she	 turned	around	 to	 look	at	me,	 I	noticed	she	had	your
face.	As	you	 can	 imagine,	 I	 found	 this	 very	disturbing;	 and	 in	 fact	 I	woke	up
immediately	and	could	not	get	back	to	sleep.	I	just	lay	there	in	bed	waiting	for
the	morning	to	come	and	then	I	got	up,	drank	a	coke	and	came	right	over	here
for	my	appointment.	 I	 thought	you	 could	help	me	explain	 the	meaning	of	 this
strange	dream."
The	psychiatrist	was	silent	for	a	few	moments	before	responding,	"A	coke?	You
call	that	breakfast?"
The	poor	 fellow	has	come	 to	understand	 the	dream,	why	his	mother's	 face	has
turned	into	his	psychiatrist's	face;	but	that	is	not	the	problem	to	the	psychiatrist.
To	him	the	problem	is:	"A	coke?	You	call	that	breakfast?"
But	 just	watch	 people	 talking,	 and	 you	will	 be	 amazed	 --	 everywhere	 there	 is
misunderstanding.	 You	 are	 saying	 something,	 something	 else	 is	 understood;
somebody	else	is	saying	something,	you	understand	something	else.
The	world	would	be	a	more	silent	and	peaceful	place	if	people	were	saying	only
five	percent	of	what	they	are	saying	now	--	although	that	five	percent	will	cover
absolutely	 everything	 that	 is	 essential.	 And	 I	 am	 not	 taking	 a	 very	 minimum
point,	that	is	the	maximum.	You	can	try	it:	speak	only	the	essential,	as	if	you	are
giving	a	telegram,	so	you	have	to	go	on	choosing	just	ten	words.	And	have	you
watched?	 Your	 telegram	 means	 more	 than	 your	 long	 letter,	 condensed.	 Be
telegraphic	and	you	will	be	 surprised	 that	 in	 the	whole	day	 there	are	very	 few
times	when	you	have	to	speak.
One	retired	mathematician	used	to	live	in	my	neighborhood	in	a	city.	His	whole
life	he	had	been	a	teacher,	and	it	was	very	difficult	for	him	to	suffer	retirement.
His	wife	had	not	been	on	talking	terms	with	him	for	years;	"Because"	she	said,
"He	 is	such	a	bore!	 It	 is	better	not	 to	 talk	with	him.	He	 immediately	goes	 into
mathematics."
No	 other	 neighbor	 was	welcoming	 to	 him;	 one	 of	my	 neighbors	 was	worried
about	me	because	he	used	to	come	to	me	for	hours.	He	was	worried	that	that	old
fellow	must	be	torturing	me.	He	came	to	give	me	a	suggestion.
He	said,	"I	give	you	a	suggestion	how	to	get	rid	of	this	old	man.	Whenever	you
see	him	coming,	just	 take	your	umbrella,	stand	on	the	door	as	if	you	are	going
somewhere,	and	he	will	ask,	'Where	are	you	going?'	and	you	can	say	that	you	are
going	somewhere."
I	said,	"You	don't	know	that	man!	If	I	say	I	am	going	somewhere,	he	will	say,	Ì'm
coming	along,'	and	that	will	be	more	torturous.	It	is	better	here.	And	it	is	not	a
torture,	I	enjoy	it,	because	I	have	nothing	to	say,	I	simply	sit	silently.	He	alone
does	everything.	He	talks	and	he	goes	on	and	on,	and	finally	he	thanks	me	and
says,	`You	are	such	a	good	conversationalist.'	and	I	say,	Ì	am	nothing	compared
to	you,	but	I	am	learning	just	a	little	bit	from	you.'"
People	 don't	 want	 you	 to	 speak,	 they	 want	 you	 to	 listen.	 And	 if	 you	 learn	 a
simple	art	of	listening	to	people,	so	much	misunderstanding	in	the	world	will	be
avoided.
The	very	elderly	couple	were	 listening	 to	a	 religious	 revival	on	 the	 radio.	The
preacher	 ended	his	 stirring	 speech	by	 saying,	 "God	wants	 to	heal	you	all.	 Just
stand	up,	put	one	hand	on	the	radio,	then	place	the	other	on	the	part	of	the	body
that	is	sick."
The	old	woman	tottered	to	her	feet,	put	one	hand	on	the	radio	and	the	other	on
her	 arthritic	 leg.	The	 old	man	put	 one	 hand	 on	 the	 radio	 and	 one	 hand	 on	 his
genitals.
The	old	woman	snapped	at	him,	"Fred!	This	preacher	said	God	would	heal	 the
sick,	not	raise	the	dead!"
But	you	cannot	avoid	being	misunderstood.
I	don't	know	who	has	given	you	the	idea	that	love	and	power	are	contradictory.
Change	it,	because	changing	it	will	change	you	and	your	whole	life.
Love	is	power,	the	purest	power	and	the	greatest	power:	Love	is	God.	Nothing
can	 be	 higher	 than	 that.	 But	 this	 power	 is	 not	 a	 desire	 to	 enslave	 others,	 this
power	is	not	a	destructive	force.
This	power	is	the	very	source	of	creation.
This	power	is	creativity.
And	 this	power	will	 transform	you	 totally	 into	a	new	being.	 It	has	no	concern
with	 anybody.	 Its	 whole	 concern	 is	 to	 bring	 your	 seeds	 to	 their	 ultimate
flowering.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	You	have	forgotten	the	way	home
26	April	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704260
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN08
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
97
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	MY	MEDITATIONS,	AS	I	TRY	TO	LOOK	MORE	AND	MORE	INSIDE,	I
OFTEN
FEEL	 THAT	 THERE	 IS	 NOBODY.	 IT	 IS	 LIKE	 FALLING	 INTO	 AN
ENDLESS
BLACK	GAP.	AND	I	FEEL	A	LOT	OF	TENSION,	AND	WANTING	TO	RUN
AWAY.
IF	THERE	IS	NO	ME	INSIDE,	THEN	WHOM	SHOULD	I	LOVE?	PLEASE
HELP	ME
FIND	 THAT	 LOVE	 FOR	 MYSELF,	 AND	 THAT	 TOTALITY	 THAT	 YOU
HAVE
TALKED	ABOUT	SO	MANY	TIMES.
Shivam	 Annette,	 the	 question	 you	 have	 asked	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important
questions	as	far	as	the	people	who	are	meditating	are	concerned.	Before	I	go	into
your	question,	a	few	necessary	distinctions	have	to	be	understood.
When	I	say,	"Go	inwards,"	that	does	not	mean	that	you	will	find	someone	there
waiting	for	you.	On	the	contrary,	the	more	you	go	inwards,	the	less	and	less	you
are	an	ego.	You	are,	but	the	feeling	of	I-ness	starts	disappearing	--	for	the	simple
reason	that	the	I	can	exist	only	in	reference	to	Thou.	If	the	Thou	is	not	present,
the	I	starts	melting.
Outside	you	are	confronted	with	many	Thous,	they	keep	your	I	alive.	But	inside,
there	is	no	Thou;	hence,	there	can	be	no	I.	That	does	not	mean	that	you	are	not.
It	simply	means	you	are	in	your	purity	--	not	in	reference	to	somebody	else,	but
just	 yourself,	 without	 any	 reference,	 in	 your	 absolute	 aloneness.	 Because	 our
whole	life	we	live	as	an	ego,	as	an	I,	this	disappearance	of	the	I	naturally	creates
fear	and	an	effort	to	run	away.	Although	it	is	natural,	it	is	not	right.
You	have	 to	go	 through	 this	 fear,	 darkness,	 anxiety,	 tension,	 because	your	 I	 is
dying.	Up	to	now,	you	have	remained	identified	with	the	I,	so	it	seems	as	if	you
are	 dying.	 But	 just	 look	 at	 a	 single	 point:	 you	 are	 watching	 fear,	 you	 are
watching	 the	 disappearance	 of	 I,	 you	 are	 watching	 tension,	 you	 are	 watching
blackness,	darkness,	you	are	watching	a	feeling	of	nobodiness.	This	watcher	 is
you.
Going	 inwards	 is	 to	 find	 the	 witness	 in	 its	 absolute	 purity,	 unpolluted	 by
anything	--	just	a	pure	mirror,	not	reflecting	anything.	If	mirrors	were	thinkers	--
fortunately	they	are	not	--
and	if	they	were	brought	up	always	with	somebody	looking	in	them,	that	would
have	given	them	an	idea	of	who	they	are.	And	for	many	years,	always	reflecting
somebody,	 they	would	have	created	a	 certain	 image	of	 themselves	 --	 that	 they
are	the	reflectors.
Just	 visualize	 that	 one	 day	 suddenly	 nobody	 reflects	 in	 the	mirror.	The	mirror
will	 feel	 fear.	 The	mirror	will	 feel	 as	 if	 he	 is	 falling	 into	 a	 deep	 abyss,	 dark,
dismal,	into	nonexistence	--	who	is	he?	His	identity	is	lost	just	because	nobody	is
looking	in	the	mirror.
The	mirror	has	not	changed,	in	fact	the	mirror	is	pure.	But	with	this	purity	he	has
never	been	acquainted;	nobody	has	introduced	him	to	this	purity.
Meditation	takes	you	to	your	purity.
Your	purity	is	witnessing,	watching,	awareness.
You	 have	 not	 asked,	 "Who	 is	 the	 watcher?"	 You	 are	 asking,	 "I	 find	 there	 is
nobody."
Who	 finds	 it?	 --	 that's	 you!	 You	 will	 find	 nothingness,	 you	 will	 find	 nothing
reflected	in	you;	you	will	 find	emptiness.	You	have	to	change	your	focus	from
the	object	 to	your	subjectivity.	One	 thing	 is	certain:	 the	witness	 is	present,	and
the	 inward	 journey	 is	 to	 find	 the	witness	 --	 is	 to	 find	 the	 pure	mirror	 of	 your
being.
You	say,	"In	my	meditations,	as	I	try	to	look	more	and	more	inside,	I	often	feel
that	there	is	nobody."	But	you	are	not	conscious	at	all	 that	you	are	finding	that
there	 is	 nobody.	But	you	are!	Do	you	 think	you	are	going	 to	meet	yourself	 as
somebody?	Do	you	think	you	are	going	to	meet	somebody	who	will	say,	"Hello,
Shivam	Annette,	how	do	you	do?"	That	will	 really	 freak	you	out	 --	 "My	God,
I'm	not	one,	I'm	two!"
This	feeling	that	there	is	nobody	is	absolutely	right.	You	are	on	the	right	track.
Just	go	on	being	alert	that	you	are	still	 there,	watching.	All	these	are	objects	--
the	nobody,	the	darkness,	the	fear,	the	tension....	"It	is	like	falling	into	an	endless
black	gap.	And	I	feel	a	lot	of	tension	and	wanting	to	run	away."
Watch	all	these	things.	They	are	just	your	old	habits.	You	have	never	been	into
your	own	depths;	hence	the	fear	of	the	unacquainted,	of	the	unknown.	You	have
always	 been	 going	 around	 and	 around	 --	 but	 outside	 --	 and	 you	 have	 even
forgotten	 the	 path	 to	 your	 inner	 home.	 In	 the	 beginning	 it	 will	 look	 like	 an
endless	 black	 gap.	 Allow	 it.	 Blackness	 has	 a	 beauty	 of	 its	 own.	 Blackness	 is
deep,	is	silent	--	enjoy	it!	There	is	no	need	to	run	away	from	it.
"If	there	is	no	me	inside,	then	whom	should	I	love?"
There	 is	 certainly	 no	me	 inside	 anyone.	 But	 there	 is	 something	 else	 far	more
important:	 there	 is	 something	which	can	only	be	called	your	am-ness,	your	 is-
ness	--	just	your	pure	existence.
You	call	it	me,	because	outside	you	need	to	refer	to	yourself.
Have	you	watched	small	babies?	In	the	beginning	they	often	refer	to	themselves
by	their	name,	"Johnny	is	hungry."	They	are	far	more	accurate.	But	in	a	society
they	will	be	thought	to	be	insane.	"Johnny	is	hungry?"	Why	don't	you	say,	"I'm
hungry"	"Johnny"
gives	the	idea	that	somebody	else	is	hungry.	Johnny	is	your	name	to	be	used	by
others.
You	cannot	use	it	when	you	are	referring	to	yourself.	Then	you	have	to	refer	to
yourself	as	Ì',	`me',	but	not	your	name."
It	happened	in	Thomas	Alva	Edison's	life...	he	was	one	of	the	greatest	scientists.
As	far	as	numbers	of	inventions	are	concerned	he	is	unparallelled	--	he	invented
one	thousand	things.	It	is	almost	impossible	to	find	a	thing	which	is	not	invented
by	Thomas	Alva	Edison.	He	was	so	much	respected	that	nobody	mentioned	his
name,	just	out	of	respect.
His	colleagues	called	him	Professor,	his	students	called	him	Sir,	and	obviously
he	didn't	use	his	own	name.
Then	came	 the	first	world	war,	and	for	 the	first	 time	rationing	was	 introduced,
and	he	went	 to	 the	 rationing	 shop.	There	was	a	queue;	he	was	 standing	 in	 the
queue	and	when	the	man	in	front	of	him	had	left,	the	clerk	shouted	loudly,	"Who
is	 Thomas	 Alva	 Edison?"	 And	 Thomas	 Alva	 Edison	 looked	 here	 and	 there,
where	is	Thomas	Alva	Edison?	The	clerk	was	also	a	little	puzzled,	because	this
man	ought	to	be	Thomas	Alva	Edison;	it	was	his	number.	And	the	whole	queue
was	also	puzzled.	They	were	looking	at	each	other,	what	is	the	matter?
Finally	 one	 man	 from	 the	 back	 of	 the	 queue	 said	 to	 him,	 "Sir,	 as	 far	 as	 I
remember,	I	have	seen	you.	You	are	Thomas	Alva	Edison."
And	Edison	said,	"If	you	say	so,	perhaps	I	am."
The	clerk	said,	"Are	you	insane	or	what?"
He	said,	 "Not	 insane,	but	 I	have	not	heard	 this	name	 for	almost	 thirty	years.	 I
have	forgotten	it.	Nobody	calls	me	by	the	name.	My	father	died	when	I	was	very
young,	my	mother	died.	Now	it	 is	a	far,	faraway	memory.	I	can	remember	that
something	 like	Thomas	Alva	Edison	used	 to	 be	my	name,	 but	 for	 thirty	 years
nobody	 has	mentioned	 it.	 It	 is	 good	 that	 that	man	 recognized	me;	 otherwise	 I
don't	think	that	on	my	own	I	would	have	been	able	to	recognize	it	myself."
It	is	a	rare	case,	but	thirty	years	is	a	long	time,	particularly	for	a	man	like	Edison
whose	life	is	so	full	of	creativity.	His	thirty	years	are	almost	three	hundred	years
in	your	life.
It	 is	 simply	 a	 social	 invention	 that	 you	 refer	 to	 others	 by	 their	 name,	 and	you
refer	to	yourself	by	I,	me.	But	inside	there	is	no	other,	and	with	the	other	gone,
the	me,	the	I,	is	gone.
But	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 worry.	 You	 will	 not	 find	 your	 I,	 but	 you	 will	 find
something	greater:	you	will	find	your	is-ness,	your	existence,	your	being.
When	 I	 say	 "Love	 yourself,"	 this	 is	 for	 those	 who	 have	 never	 gone	 inside,
because	 they	 can	 always...	 they	 are	 bound	 to	 understand	 only	 a	 language	 of
duality.	Love	yourself	--
that	means	you	are	dividing	yourself	into	two,	the	lover	and	the	loved.	You	may
not	have	 thought	about	 it,	but	 if	you	go	 inside	you	will	not	 love	yourself,	you
will	be	love.
You	will	be	simply	the	energy	called	love.
You	will	be	loving;	you	will	radiate	love.	Love	will	be	your	fragrance.
Goldstein,	who	looked	Jewish,	was	walking	down	a	street	 in	Berlin	just	before
the	war,	when	he	accidentally	collided	with	a	stout	Nazi	officer.
"Schwein,"	bellowed	the	Nazi.
"Goldstein,"	replied	the	Jew	with	a	courteous	bow.
Sometimes	you	may	need	your	name	also;	life	gives	strange	situations.	Goldstein
did	well.	Rather	than	being	offended,	he	introduced	himself,	just	as	the	Nazi	had
introduced	himself.	But	all	these	names	can	be	used	only	on	the	outside.
Inside	you	are	nameless,	you	are	egoless.	Inside	you	are	just	a	pure	existence	--
and	out	of	that	pure	existence	arises	the	aroma	of	love.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
BEING	 WITH	 YOU,	 SEEING	 YOUR	 BEAUTY,	 HEARING	 YOUR	 COZY
VOICE,	FEELING	YOUR	PRESENCE	 --	THIS	ALL	UNCOVERED	AGAIN
THE	DEEP
LONGING	 IN	 ME	 FOR	 THAT	 WHICH	 ZARATHUSTRA	 CALLED	 `THE
GREAT
NOONTIDE'.	 IS	 THAT	 ENOUGH?	 DOES	 THAT	 LEAD	 ME	 TO	 THE
ULTIMATE?
Shantu	Abhinava,	this	is	not	enough.	This	will	not	bring	you	to	what	Zarathustra
calls,
"the	great	noontide",	but	it	is	a	good	beginning.
You	are	saying,	"Being	with	You,	seeing	Your	beauty,	hearing	Your	cozy	voice,
feeling	Your	presence	--	this	all	uncovered	again	the	deep	longing	in	me	for	that
which	Zarathustra	called	`the	great	noontide'.	Is	that	enough?	Does	that	lead	me
to	the	ultimate?"
It	is	not	enough,	and	it	will	not	lead	you	on	its	own	to	the	ultimate.	You	will	have
to	 understand	 something	 deeper	 on	 each	 point	 that	 you	mention.	 "Being	with
You"	is	not	enough;	you	have	to	be	with	yourself.	Being	with	me	may	give	you	a
taste,	but	 that	 is	not	going	 to	be	enough	nourishment.	You	have	 to	 learn,	 from
that	--	being	with	yourself.
"Seeing	Your	beauty"...	 these	 are	good	 indications,	 but	when	are	you	going	 to
see	 your	 beauty?	 I	 can	 only	 be	 an	 arrow.	 But	 the	 arrow	 is	 always	 pointing
towards	your	center.
The	arrow	may	be	beautiful,	you	may	appreciate	it,	that	was	not	the	purpose	of
the	arrow.
The	purpose	of	the	arrow	was	for	you	to	move	to	where	it	was	pointing.
You	have	to	see	your	beauty.
You	have	not	only	 to	hear	my	voice;	you	have	 to	hear	 the	still,	 small	voice	of
your	own	being.
It	is	a	good	beginning	to	experience	my	presence,	but	one	should	not	stop	at	it.
You	have	to	experience	your	presence.	That	will	bring	in	you	what	Zarathustra
calls	`the	great	noontide'.
The	master	is	just	a	milestone,	on	every	milestone	there	is	an	arrow	showing	you
--	 move	 on,	 you	 are	 coming	 closer	 to	 the	 goal.	 And	 when	 you	 come	 to	 the
milestone	where	 there	 is	no	arrow	but	 zero,	you	have	come	home.	That	 is	 the
great	noontide.
This	is	not	going	to	happen	just	by	itself;	you	will	have	to	move	a	little,	make	a
little	effort.	And	the	effort	has	to	be	very	relaxed	--	that	is	the	secret.	We	know
efforts,	but	they	become	tensions,	anxieties,	worries.
You	have	to	learn	a	different	kind	of	effort	--	what	Lao	Tzu	calls	effortless	effort
--
utterly	 relaxed,	 because	 you	 are	 not	 going	 anywhere.	You	 are	 simply	 relaxing
within	 yourself.	 You	 are	 not	 going	 to	 find	 some	 goal,	 some	 achievement	 far
away	which	creates	worries	--	whether	you	are	on	the	right	path	or	on	the	wrong
path,	 whether	 you	 are	 moving	 in	 the	 right	 direction,	 whether	 the	 goal	 really
exists	or	it	is	just	a	fiction	that	you	have	heard	from	others.	With	me	one	thing	is
clear	--	that	you	are	not	a	fiction.
God	may	be	a	fiction	and	paradise	may	be	a	fiction.
You	are	a	reality.
Relaxing	 within	 yourself	 simply	 means	 not	 going	 outwards,	 withdrawing	 all
your	 energy	which	 generally	 goes	 on	moving	 outwards.	Don't	 go	 anywhere	 --
just	be	now	and	here.
There	is	no	question	of	tension,	there	is	no	question	of	any	worry.
Silently	you	will	slip	into	your	own	being	and	you	will	feel	a	great	presence	and
you	will	hear	a	soundless	sound	--	what	 the	Zen	people	call	"the	sound	of	one
hand	clapping."
You	 will	 see	 the	 most	 beautiful	 space	 which	 you	 cannot	 imagine,	 which	 you
cannot	even	dream	of.	And	it	is	so	close	by	--	just	at	the	very	center	of	you.
The	journey	is	small,	but	it	has	to	be	done,	and	done	in	such	a	strange	way	that
there	 is	 no	 doer	 --	 almost	 the	way	 you	 fall	 asleep.	You	 cannot	 be	 a	 doer,	 you
cannot	make	any	effort	to	bring	sleep	--	that	will	be	a	disturbance.	This	entering
into	your	own	being	and	presence	is	almost	like	allowing	it	to	happen.
That	is	the	great	effort	which	is	effortless,	which	will	bring	the	noontide	and	the
ultimate	 experience.	 In	 a	 single	 word:	 meditation	 is	 equivalent	 to	 total
relaxation.	Just	doing	nothing,	sitting	silently,	and	the	grass	grows	by	itself.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
ONE	LINE	FROM	DOSTOEVSKY'S	WORK	HAS	IMPRESSED	ME	MUCH
IN	MY
CHILDHOOD.	 HE	 SAYS,	 "IN	 SUFFERING	 LOOK	 FOR	 HAPPINESS."	 I
USED	TO
THINK	THAT	NOTHING	OF	VALUE	COULD	BE	ATTAINED	WITHOUT
SACRIFICE	AND	HARD	WORK.	AFTER	MEETING	YOU	AND	DRINKING
YOUR
MESSAGE	 OF	 LOVE,	 LIFE,	 ENJOYMENT	 AND	 CELEBRATION,	 I
REALIZE	THAT
MY	 PREVIOUS	 IDEA	 WAS	 QUITE	 MASOCHISTIC	 AND	 SUICIDAL.	 I
LOVE
DOSTOEVSKY	 AND	 ALL	 HIS	 WORKS	 HAVE	 BEEN	 OF	 IMMENSE
VALUE	TO
ME.	BUT	NOW	I	FEEL	THERE	IS	A	DEPTH	OF	SADNESS	IN	HIM,	WHICH
HE
SEEMS	TO	STOP	--	AS	IF	SOMETHING	OF	THE	OPPOSITE	IS	MISSING.
COULD
YOU	PLEASE	SHED	SOME	LIGHT	ON	THIS?
Jivan	Mada,	Fyodor	Dostoevsky	is	a	very	special	case	--	he	was	a	genius.	If	one
has	to	decide	on	ten	great	novels	in	all	the	languages	of	the	world,	he	will	have
to	choose	at	least	three	novels	of	Dostoevsky	in	the	ten.
His	insight	into	human	beings	and	their	problems	is	greater	than	your	so-called
psychoanalysts,	 and	 there	 are	moments	 where	 he	 reaches	 the	 heights	 of	 great
mystics.	But	he	is	a	sick	soul;	he	himself	is	a	psychological	case.
He	needs	all	 the	compassion,	because	he	 lived	 in	 suffering,	utter	 suffering.	He
never	knew	a	moment	of	joy;	he	was	pure	anguish,	angst.	But	still	he	managed
to	write	novels	which	perhaps	are	the	best	 in	the	whole	literature	of	 the	world.
BROTHERS
KARAMAZOV	is	 so	great	 in	 its	 insights	 that	no	BIBLE	or	KORAN	or	GITA
can	be	a	competitor	to	it.
And	this	is	the	strange	fact	about	him:	that	he	was	writing	such	great	insights	as
if	he	was	possessed,	but	he	himself	was	living	in	hell.	He	created	it	himself.	He
never	loved	anybody,	he	was	never	loved	by	anybody.	He	never	knew	that	there
is	 something	 like	 laughter;	 he	was	 sickly	 serious.	 I	 don't	 see	 that	 he	 ever	 felt
even	a	single	moment	of	blissfulness.	There	is	nobody	else	in	the	whole	history
of	 man	 who	 was	 so	 sick,	 and	 yet	 had	 such	 clarity	 about	 things.	 He	 was	 a
madman	with	a	method.
You	 are	 saying,	 "One	 line	 from	 Dostoevsky	 has	 impressed	 me	 much	 in	 my
childhood.	He	says,	Ìn	suffering	look	for	happiness.'"
That	statement	will	appeal	to	many	people	because	many	are	suffering,	and	one
can	tolerate	suffering	only	if	one	goes	on	looking	for	happiness;	if	not	today	then
tomorrow,	 or	 the	 day	 after	 tomorrow.	 Suffering	 can	 be	 tolerated	 only	 through
hope.	Then	one	can	suffer	his	whole	life,	just	looking	for	happiness.
Your	 being	 impressed	 by	 the	 statement	 is	 dangerous.	One	 should	 not	 look	 for
happiness;	one	should	look	for	the	causes	of	suffering,	because	that	is	the	way	to
come	 out	 of	 suffering.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 are	 out	 of	 suffering	 there	 is
happiness.	Happiness	 is	not	something	 that	you	have	 to	wait	 for.	You	can	wait
for	infinity	and	happiness	will	not	come	to	you,	unless	you	destroy	the	causes	of
suffering.
I	will	not	agree	with	the	statement.	I	will	say,	"In	suffering	look	for	the	causes	of
suffering."	Don't	waste	your	 time	about	happiness;	 it	 is	none	of	your	business.
You	 are	 suffering;	 suffering	 is	 your	 state.	 Look	what	 is	 causing	 it	 --	 jealousy,
anger,	inferiority	complex	--	what	is	causing	it?
And	the	miracle	is:	if	you	can	go	into	your	suffering	as	a	meditation,	watching,
to	the	deepest	roots	of	it,	just	through	watching,	it	disappears.	You	don't	have	to
do	anything	more	than	watching.	If	you	have	found	the	authentic	cause	by	your
watching,	 the	suffering	will	disappear;	and	 if	 it	 is	not	disappearing,	 that	means
you	are	not	watching	deep	enough.
So	 it	 is	 a	 very	 simple	 process	 and	 with	 a	 criterion:	 if	 your	 watching	 is	 deep
enough...	just	the	way	you	pull	out	a	plant	to	look	at	its	roots,	it	dies,	because	the
roots	outside	the	earth	cannot	survive.	In	the	light	is	their	death.
Suffering	can	exist	only	if	its	roots	remain	in	the	unconscious	of	your	being.	If
you	go	deep	down	searching	and	looking	for	the	roots,	the	moment	you	become
conscious	of	 the	 roots	of	 suffering,	 suffering	disappears.	The	disappearance	of
suffering	is	what	you	call	happiness.
Happiness	has	not	to	be	found	somewhere	else;	it	was	always	with	you,	but	the
cloud	of	suffering	was	covering	it.	Happiness	is	our	nature.
To	 say	 it	 in	 other	 words:	 for	 suffering	 you	 have	 to	 make	 much	 effort,	 for
happiness	you	don't	have	to	make	any	effort.	Just	stop	making	the	effort	to	create
suffering.
"I	used	to	think	that	nothing	of	value	could	be	attained	without	sacrifice	and	hard
work."
That	 is	 the	 disease	Christianity	 has	 been	 spreading	 all	 over	 the	world.	 In	 fact,
everything	of	authentic	value	is	achieved	by	relaxation,	by	silence,	by	joy.	The
idea	of	sacrifice	and	hard	work	will	create	more	suffering	for	you.	But	once	the
idea	 gets	 settled	 in	 your	mind,	 your	mind	will	 go	 on	 telling	 you	 that	 you	 are
suffering	 because	 you	 are	 not	working	 hard	 enough,	 that	 your	 sacrifice	 is	 not
total.
Hard	 work	 is	 needed	 to	 create	 things.	 Sacrifice	 is	 needed	 when	 you	 have
something	of	value,	 truth,	 love,	enlightenment.	And	when	there	 is	an	attack	by
the	mob	on	your	experience,	one	is	ready	to	sacrifice,	but	not	to	compromise.
Sacrifice	is	not	in	finding	the	truth;	sacrifice	is	when	you	have	found	it	--	 then
you	will	be	in	trouble.	Sacrifice	is	not	in	finding	love,	but	when	you	have	found
it	 you	 will	 be	 in	 trouble.	 Then	 either	 compromise	 or	 sacrifice.	 The	 cowards
compromise.	The	people	who	have	guts	sacrifice	--	but	sacrifice	is	not	a	means
to	attain	anything.
"After	 meeting	 you	 and	 drinking	 your	 message	 of	 love,	 life,	 enjoyment	 and
celebration,	I	realized	that	my	previous	idea	was	quite	masochistic	and	suicidal."
It	 is	good	 that	you	understood	something	very	significant.	All	your	saints	who
have	 been	 sacrificing	 and	 working	 hard	 and	 torturing	 themselves,	 are	 just
masochistic	and	suicidal.
And	 because	 they	 are	 worshipped,	 they	 go	 on	 continuing	 more	 and	 more
masochistic	torture	to	themselves.
And	the	people	who	are	worshipping	them	also	have	the	same	desire,	but	not	the
courage;	they	also	want	to	be	saints,	perhaps	in	a	future	life.	At	least	in	this	life
they	can	worship	the	saints.
The	whole	 past	 of	 humanity	 has	 been	dominated	by	masochistic,	 sadistic,	 and
suicidal	people.	That's	why	there	is	so	much	misery.	To	be	blissful	in	this	world
looks	as	if	you	are	committing	a	crime;	to	dance	with	joy	amongst	so	many	dead
people	all	around...	you	cannot	be	forgiven.
I	have	always	thought	that	Christianity	became	the	greatest	religion	of	the	world
because	Jesus	was	on	 the	cross.	Just	 think,	 if	he	was	with	his	girlfriend	on	 the
beach	 there	 would	 not	 have	 been	 any	 Christianity,	 although	 he	 would	 have
enjoyed....
And	 why	 did	 it	 become	 the	 greatest	 religion?	 Almost	 half	 of	 humanity	 is
Christian.
Because	he	represents	your	deepest	desire.	You	also	want	to	be	crucified,	and	in
different	ways	you	are	crucifying	yourself;	in	the	name	of	duty,	in	the	name	of
nations,	in	the	name	of	the	religion....
Jesus	says,	"Everybody	has	 to	carry	his	cross	on	his	shoulders."	But	why?	 this
will	look	very	awkward	--	wherever	you	go	you	will	be	carrying	your	cross.	But
nobody	has	objected	to	it.	Nobody	has	said,	"Why?"	And	if	I	say	that	everybody
has	to	carry	his	guitar	they	all	condemn	me!	The	whole	world	is	against	a	single
man	who	is	not	saying	anything	sick.
This	 is	 a	 sick	 idea,	 carrying	 your	 cross.	Can't	 you	 carry	 anything	 else?	 Just	 a
flowerpot?
If	you	are	determined	to	carry...	then	there	are	more	beautiful	things	in	the	world.
A	cross	is	not	something...	just	a	bamboo	flute	will	do,	light	in	weight.	And	you
can	do	something	with	it.	You	can	play	on	it	--	a	beautiful	tune,	a	song;	you	can
dance.	What	are	you	going	to	do	with	the	cross?	--	except	crucify	yourself.	So
why	 carry	 it.	Why	 not	 crucify	 it	 here	 and	 now?	 Unnecessarily	 carrying	 such
weight....
Jesus	was	 only	 thirty-three	 years	 of	 age,	 and	 he	 fell	 three	 times	while	 he	was
carrying	 the	 cross	 --	 the	 cross	was	 so	 heavy.	And	 naturally,	 if	 it	 becomes	 the
fashion	 that	 everybody	has	 to	 carry	his	 cross,	 you	will	 see	 that	 people	will	 be
carrying	heavier	and	heavier	crosses,	heavier	than	everybody	else!	You	will	feel
embarrassed	 if	 you	 are	 carrying	 a	 small	 cross	 --	 are	 you	 childish	 or	what?	A
heavy	cross	 is	needed	so	 that	you	 fall	on	 the	 road	many	 times	and	have	many
fractures....
But	Christianity	is	masochistic.	It	does	not	know	anything	about	enjoying	life.	It
knows	only	about	sacrificing	life	--	sacrificing	for	some	stupid	fiction.	It	knows
nothing	of	singing	and	dancing	and	celebration.
You	say,	"I	 love	Dostoevsky	and	all	his	works	have	been	of	 immense	value	 to
me.	But	now	I	feel	there	is	a	depth	of	sadness	in	him,	which	he	seems	to	stop	--
as	if	something	of	the	opposite	is	missing."
There	is	not	only	sadness	in	him,	there	is	absolutely	suicidal	instinct;	he	is	tired
and	bored	with	life	itself.	In	his	best	book,	BROTHERS	KARAMAZOV,	one	of
the	 characters,	 Ivan	 Karamazov,	 makes	 a	 very	 significant	 statement.	 Perhaps
Dostoevsky	himself	is	speaking	through	him.
Ivan	Karamazov	says,	"If	there	is	a	God	and	I	meet	him,	I	am	going	to	return	his
ticket	and	ask	him,	`Why	did	you	send	me	life	without	asking	me?	What	right	do
you	have?	I	want	to	return	the	ticket	to	you.'"	This	is	a	suicidal	instinct.
He	lived	very	miserably	and	has	always	written	that	existence	has	no	meaning,
that	it	has	no	significance,	that	it	is	accidental,	that	there	is	nothing	to	find	--	no
truth,	 no	 love,	 no	 joy.	 All	 his	 conclusions	 are	 wrong.	 But	 the	 man	 was
tremendously	capable,	a	great	genius.	Even	if	he	writes	things	which	are	wrong,
he	 writes	 with	 such	 art	 and	 such	 beauty	 that	 millions	 of	 people	 have	 been
influenced	by	him	--	just	like	you,	Jivan	Mada.
The	danger	is:	the	words	can	be	beautiful	and	the	message	can	be	poison,	pure
poison.
His	insights	are	deep	--	but	they	are	always	deep	--	to	find	more	suffering	in	life,
more	misery	 in	 life.	He	 is	 determined	 in	 all	 his	works	 to	 prove	 that	 life	 is	 an
exercise	 of	 utter	 futility.	 He	 influenced	 the	 contemporary	 philosophical
movement	of	existentialism	--	he	became	a	pioneer.
I	also	love	him,	but	I	also	feel	sad	and	sorry	for	him.	He	was	a	man	who	could
have	 danced,	 who	 could	 have	 loved,	 who	 could	 have	 lived	 with	 tremendous
totality	and	 intensity.	But	he	served	death	rather	 than	 life.	Read	him	--	 there	 is
nothing	better	to	read	-
-	 but	 remember	 you	 are	 reading	 a	 psychopath,	 a	 man	 who	 is	 deeply	 sick,
incurably	sick.
His	whole	work	is	just	a	dark	night	which	knows	no	dawn.
Okay	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	I	want	you	to	become	the	dance
26	April	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704265
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN09
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
93
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
NIETZSCHE'S	MAXIM:	"ONE	IS	PUNISHED	MOST	FOR	ONE'S	VIRTUES"
I	SEE
THE	TRUTH	OF	MOST	CLEARLY	IN	YOU.	BUT	EVEN	A	MAN	WHO	IS
VIRTUOUS	 BY	 SOCIETY'S	 STANDARDS	 IS	 SUBTLY	 PUNISHED	 TOO,
ISN'T	HE?
--	PUNISHED	BY	JEALOUSY	AND	CRITICISM.	IT	IS	AS	IF	ONE	IS	ONLY
MEANT	 TO	 STRIVE	 TOWARDS;	 TO	 ATTAIN	 IS	 AN	 ALTOGETHER
DIFFERENT
MATTER.	IS	THIS	SO?
Maneesha,	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche's	 maxim:	 "One	 is	 punished	 most	 for	 one's
virtues"	has	a	very	deep	and	different	meaning	from	what	you	have	seen	in	it.
The	man	of	virtue	is	not	in	any	way	a	hypocrite;	he	is	sincere,	truthful.	Society
consists	 of	 hypocrites;	 they	want	 virtue	 also	 to	 be	 a	 hypocrisy,	 and	 they	 have
created	false	virtues	which	have	no	relation	at	all	to	any	authentic	virtuousness.
The	people	who	conform	to	the	society's	idea	of	virtues	are	never	punished;	they
are	 rewarded,	 they	 are	 respected.	 They	 are	 not	 stoned	 to	 death,	 they	 are	 not
crucified.	They	 are	 crowned	 as	 saints,	 as	 sages,	 as	wise	 people;	 every	kind	of
honor	is	given	to	them.	But	the	basic	condition	is	that	they	should	conform	to	the
idea	 of	 the	 society.	 They	 should	 not	 bother	whether	 it	 is	 really	 virtuous;	 they
should	not	even	inquire.
Absolute	surrender	is	needed	by	the	society,	a	total	enslavement.	Only	then	the
society	 gives	 respectability	 --	 only	 to	 the	 slaves,	 only	 to	 those	 who	 have
committed	 spiritual	 suicide.	 They	 are	 not	 really	 virtuous	 people.	 Just	 look
around	in	different	societies	so	that	you	can	have	a	sense	of	how	real	virtue	and
the	so-called	virtue	of	the	societies	are	diametrically	opposite.
In	India	you	will	find	Hindu	monks	all	getting	fat	and	ugly	because	it	is	thought
by	 the	Hindus	 that	 to	 eat	milk	products	 is	 a	 virtue,	 because	 the	 cow	 is	 a	 holy
animal.	So	the	Hindu	monk	goes	on	eating	milk	products,	goes	on	gathering	fat	-
-	bigger	the	belly,	bigger	the	saint.	If	you	want	to	measure	the	height	of	the	saint
you	have	to	measure	his	belly.
The	 Jaina	monks	 eat	 only	 one	 time	 a	 day	 --	 and	 that	 too,	 standing.	 To	make
everything	as	uncomfortable	as	possible	is	a	virtue.	Now	I	cannot	conceive	what
sin	there	is	in	sitting	comfortably	and	eating.	And	because	they	have	to	eat	only
one	time	a	day,	they	eat	as	much	as	possible	--	to	compensate,	because	then	they
have	 to	 wait	 twenty-four	 hours	 again.	 So	 their	 bodies	 become	 thin	 and	 their
bellies	become	big	--	but	it	is	respected.
One	of	the	sects	of	the	Jainas	believes	that	a	saint	is	perfect	only	when	he	starts
living	naked.	But	what	is	the	virtue	in	being	naked?	All	the	animals	are	naked.
First	 these	monks	 torture	 their	bodies	 in	 every	way.	They	cannot	use	 anything
except	their	own	hands;	for	eating	they	will	have	to	make	a	cup	of	their	hands,
they	cannot	use	a	plate.
That	 is	 thought	 to	 be	 renunciation,	 great	 renouncing	of	 the	world	 and	worldly
things.
Then	it	goes	 to	 the	extreme	of	stupidity.	They	cannot	use	razor	blades,	so	 they
have	 to	 pull	 out	 their	 hairs	 with	 their	 own	 hands.	 It	 is	 such	 an	 ugly	 scene.
Thousands	 of	 people,	 men,	 women,	 children,	 gather	 to	 see	 --	 this	 is	 a	 very
special	occasion,	a	very	holy	occasion	--	when	a	Jaina	monk	pulls	out	his	hairs,
beard,	 mustache.	 Tears	 are	 coming	 from	 his	 eyes.	 He	 is	 standing	 naked,
surrounded	 by	 people;	 his	 whole	 body	 is	 a	 skeleton	 except	 the	 belly,	 and	 all
these	 people	 are	 looking	 at	 the	 scene	with	 such	 respect.	 They	will	 take	 those
hairs	and	make	lockets	of	them	--	they	are	holy	hairs.	They	will	kiss	the	ground
on	which	the	saint	was	standing	--	it	is	holy	ground.
But	I	don't	see	that	there	is	any	virtue	in	it.	Certainly	the	man	who	is	doing	this
act,	performing	this	stupidity,	is	a	masochist	--	and	the	people	who	have	gathered
there	 to	 see	 him	 do	 it	 are	 certainly	 sadists.	 They	 love	 to	 see	 people	 being
tortured,	 and	when	 somebody	 is	 torturing	 himself,	 that	 is	 a	 delicacy.	Both	 are
sick.	But	the	masochist	becomes	a	great	saint	and	the	sadists	become	followers.
Authentic	virtue	is	a	totally	different	 thing.	It	needs	a	deep	exploration	of	your
own	 being,	 living	 according	 to	 your	 own	 insight,	 even	 if	 it	 goes	 --	 and	most
often	it	will	--
against	the	social	norms,	the	ideals,	and	the	conditioning.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	is	saying,	"One	is	punished	most	for	one's	virtues."	But	the
virtues	 have	 to	 be	 your	 own,	 they	 have	 to	 be	 your	 own	 discoveries.	And	 you
have	to	be	courageous	and	rebellious	enough	to	live	them,	whatever	the	cost.
Socrates	 was	 asked	 by	 the	 judges,	 "We	 can	 forgive	 you	 if	 you	 stop	 speaking
completely.
What	you	think	is	truth	is	not	accepted	by	the	people	amongst	whom	you	have	to
live.
They	 are	 offended	 by	 your	 truth.	 If	 you	 promise	 --	 and	we	 can	 trust	 you,	we
know	you	are	a	man	of	your	word	--	if	you	promise	not	to	speak	again,	to	just	be
silent,	you	can	save	your	life."
The	answer	that	Socrates	gave	is	to	be	remembered	forever	by	all	those	who,	in
some	way,	 are	 interested	 in	 truth.	He	 said,	 "I'm	 living	only	 to	 speak	 the	 truth.
Life	was	given	to	me	by	existence	to	experience	truth,	and	now	I'm	repaying	life
by	 spreading	 the	 truth	 to	 those	who	 are	groping	 in	 the	dark.	 If	 I	 cannot	 speak
then	I	don't	see	any	point	--	why	should	I	live?	My	life	and	my	message	of	truth
are	synonymous.	Please	don't	try	to	seduce	me.	If	I	am	alive	I	will	speak."
The	 judges	 were	 at	 a	 loss.	 One	 of	 the	 judges	 said,	 "You	 are	 too	 stubborn,
Socrates."
Socrates	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 I	 who	 is	 stubborn;	 it	 is	 truth,	 it	 is	 virtue	 which	 is
stubborn.	Truth	knows	no	compromise.	It	is	better	to	die	than	to	be	condemned
forever	because	I	compromised	for	a	small	life.	I'm	already	old;	death	will	come
anyway.	And	 it	 is	 far	more	 beautiful	 to	 accept	 death,	 because	 then	 death	 also
becomes	meaningful.	I'm	accepting	it	on	the	grounds	that	even	death	cannot	stop
me	from	speaking."
Society	 has	 virtues.	 There	 are	 hundreds	 of	 societies	 in	 the	world,	 so	 naturally
there	 are	 hundreds	 of	 different	 kinds	 of	 virtues.	 Something	 is	 virtuous	 in	 one
society	and	the	same	thing	is	unvirtuous	in	another	society.
For	 example,	 the	 whole	 world	 economy	 depends	 on	 the	 system	 of	 charging
interest.	A	society	becomes	richer	if	the	money	moves	faster	and	does	not	remain
stuck	in	one	hand,	but	the	money	can	move	faster	only	if	there	is	some	incentive.
Why	should	I	give	my	money	to	somebody	else	unless	I	can	earn	something	out
of	it?	Interest	is	nothing	but	a	strategy	to	make	the	money	move	from	one	hand
to	 another	 hand.	 And	 the	 faster	 the	 money	 moves,	 the	 richer	 the	 society
becomes.
Mohammedans	are	poor	because	interest	is	condemned	by	their	religion	as	a	sin.
To	take	interest	or	to	give	interest	is	a	great	sin.	Now	Mohammedans	can	never
be	rich;	or	if	they	become	rich,	they	have	to	be	condemned	by	the	society.	They
cannot	 take	 loans	 from	 the	 banks	 because	 interest	 will	 have	 to	 be	 paid.
Mohammedanism	 is	 the	 world's	 second	 largest	 religion	 after	 Christianity,	 and
they	have	remained	poor	for	a	single	reason:	that	interest	is	thought	to	be	a	sin.
No	 other	 society	 thinks	 interest	 is	 a	 sin.	 What	 is	 the	 sin	 in	 it?	 You	 take
somebody's	money,	you	have	 to	pay	something;	otherwise	why	should	he	give
his	money	to	you?
Interest	 is	 just	a	kind	of	rent.	But	 the	Mohammedan	considers	 interest	 to	be	so
unvirtuous	that	anybody	who	commits	the	sin	loses	all	respect	in	the	society.	The
same	person	will	gain	respect	in	any	other	society	because	he	will	become	richer
--	and	richness	is	respected.
The	vegetarians	are	not	willing	to	see	a	simple	fact,	that	not	a	single	vegetarian
has	received,	up	to	now,	a	Nobel	prize.	Forty	percent	of	Nobel	prizes	go	to	the
Jews,	which	is	simply	out	of	proportion	to	their	numbers;	sixty	percent	go	to	the
rest	of	the	world	and	forty	percent	to	the	Jews	alone.	And	why	have	vegetarians
not	been	able	to	find	a	single	Nobel	prize?	The	reason	is	in	their	food,	because	it
lacks	a	few	vitamins	which	are	absolutely	necessary	for	intelligence	to	grow.	It	is
virtuous,	 in	 a	 vegetarian	 society,	 not	 to	 eat	 meat	 --	 but	 you	 are	 losing	 your
intelligence.
Substitutes	could	have	been	found	and	 I	have	been	 for	 thirty	years	continually
telling	 vegetarians,	 "You	 should	 start	 eating	 unfertilized	 eggs.	 They	 are
absolutely	vegetable	because	 there	 is	no	 life	 in	 them.	And	 they	contain	all	 the
vitamins	that	intelligence	absolutely	needs;	otherwise	you	will	remain	retarded."
Vegetarians	 stopped	 asking	me	 to	 speak	 at	 their	 conferences;	 they	became	my
enemies,	and	I	was	simply	suggesting	to	them	something	that	is	purely	scientific
and	in	their	favor.
But	they	would	rather	listen	to	their	tradition;	they	will	not	see	the	facts.
The	virtues	that	society's	concepts	create	are	just	manufactured	by	man's	mind.	If
you	agree	with	them	you	will	be	rewarded	greatly.	But	what	Nietzsche	is	saying
is	not	 about	 those	virtues	which	are	acceptable	 to	 any	 society,	but	 about	 those
virtues	which	 an	 individual	 finds	 in	 the	 clarity	 of	 his	 own	 intelligence,	 in	 the
silences	of	his	own	heart,	in	the	understanding	of	his	own	being	--	and	follows
them.	He	will	 be	 crucified,	 he	will	 be	 stoned	 to	 death,	 because	 he	will	 not	 be
acceptable	to	the	crowd.
You	are	saying,	"Nietzsche's	maxim:	Òne	is	punished	most	for	one's	virtues'	I	see
the	 truth	 of	most	 clearly	 in	You.	But	 even	 a	man	who	 is	 virtuous	 by	 society's
standards	is	subtly	punished	too,	isn't	he?	--	punished	by	jealousy	and	criticism."
No,	 Maneesha,	 he	 is	 not	 punished	 by	 jealousy	 or	 criticism.	 He	 is	 certainly
punished	by	his	own	virtue	--	that	is	another	thing	--	because	he	will	have	to	do
something	stupid,	he	will	have	to	torture	himself,	he	will	have	to	go	against	his
own	 intelligence.	 Only	 then	 can	 he	 fulfill	 the	 demands	 of	 the	 society	 that	 he
should	be	virtuous.
But	these	saints	and	virtuous	people	are	not	punished	by	jealousy	and	criticism.
Criticism	 is	 for	 those	who	are	not	 following	 the	virtuous;	 jealousy	 is	 for	 those
who	 are	 enjoying	 life	 and	 are	 not	 being	 ascetics.	 The	 virtuous	 people	 are
punished,	they	are	punished	by	their	own	virtue,	but	their	egos	are	so	immensely
satisfied	that	they	are	ready	to	do	anything	--
they	can	even	commit	suicide.
Jainism	 is	 the	 only	 religion	 in	 the	 world	 where	 even	 suicide	 is	 considered	 a
virtue.	Of	course	it	has	to	be	done	in	a	certain	methodological	way:	one	has	to
fast	unto	death.	 It	 is	 a	very	 torturous,	 long	awaiting,	because	 a	healthy	person
can	live	without	food	for	ninety	days.	And	those	ninety	days,	continuous	hunger
and	waiting	for	death...	and	people	around	him	are	singing	religious	songs	and
worshiping	him.	His	pictures	are	printed	in	the	newspapers	with	great	respect,	as
though	he	is	doing	something	very	spiritual;	he	is	leaving	the	condemned	body.
And	even	today,	people	do	it.
So	 they	 are	 punished,	 but	 by	 their	 own	 virtue,	 not	 by	 others.	 Do	 you	 think
anybody	will	 feel	 jealous	 that	 somebody	 is	 committing	 suicide?	Do	you	 think
somebody	will	criticize	him?	His	worshipers	will	kill	whoever	criticizes	him.
"It	is	as	if	one	is	only	meant	to	strive	towards;	to	attain	is	an	altogether	different
matter."
That's	 true.	 Society	 talks	 about,	 scriptures	 talk	 about,	 great	 virtues	 of	 truth,	 of
love,	of	silence,	of	peace,	of	brotherhood.	But	they	are	only	to	be	talked	about;
you	are	not	supposed	to	practice	them.	Yes,	in	the	name	of	love	you	can	kill	as
many	people	 as	you	want.	Millions	of	people	have	been	killed	 in	 the	name	of
Christian	love;	millions	of	others	have	been	killed	in	the	name	of	peace,	by	the
Mohammedans.
These	beautiful	words	are	just	decorative.	They	give	you	a	good	feeling	that	you
have	such	a	beautiful	philosophy	to	live	by,	such	beautiful,	distant	stars	to	reach
--	 but	 don't	 try	 to	 reach	 to	 those	 stars,	 because	 a	 man	 of	 truth	 will	 not	 be
acceptable	in	society!
The	society	lives	by	lies,	so	many	lies	that	the	man	of	truth	is	going	to	expose	it	-
-	he	is	a	danger.	The	man	of	love	cannot	be	acceptable	because	the	society	lives
by	 hate:	 one	 nation	 hates	 another,	 one	 religion	 hates	 another,	 one	 color	 hates
another.	There	are	so	many	groups,	sects,	cults	and	they	are	all	hating	each	other
and	are	 ready	 to	destroy	each	other.	 Just	 talk	about	 love,	write	about	 love,	but
don't	 practice	 --	 because	 a	 man	 of	 love	 is	 dangerous.	 That	 means	 he	 will	 be
against	you	whenever	he	sees	any	hatred,	any	anger.
For	 a	 man	 of	 love,	 nationality	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 beautiful	 name	 for	 hatred.
Religious	organizations	are	nothing	but	sophisticated	ways	of	hating	others	who
don't	belong	to	your	organization,	to	your	herd,	to	your	crowd.
Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 is	 right;	 his	 whole	 life's	 experience	 is	 condensed	 in	 that
small	statement.	He	suffered	for	his	virtues.
The	 Italian	 priest	 was	 preaching	 about	 sex	 and	 morality	 to	 his	 congregation.
"Sex	is-a	dirty",	he	shouted.	"I	wanna	see	only	good-a	girls	today.	I	wanna	every
virgin	in-a	church	to-a	stand	up."
Not	 a	 soul	 moved.	 Then	 after	 a	 long	 pause	 a	 sexy	 looking	 blond	 holding	 an
infant	 in	her	arms	got	 to	her	feet.	"Virgins	is-a	what	I	want,"	said	the	outraged
priest.
"Hey	father,"	she	asked,	"you	expect	a	two	month	old	baby	to	stand	by	herself?"
I	was	in	Greece	and	one	of	my	sannyasins,	Amrito,	who	was	my	hostess,	told	me
that	 virginity	 is	 the	 most	 important	 quality	 preached	 by	 the	 Greek	 Orthodox
church.	I	said,
"But	are	there	virgins	in	Greece?"
She	said,	"That	is	a	different	matter.	I	have	not	come	across	any	virgins."
As	a	doctrine	it	 is	beautiful,	but	 in	reality	virginity	should	not	be	a	virtue;	 it	 is
going	against	nature.	In	fact,	a	man	who	has	any	intelligence	should	not	marry	a
girl	who	is	a	virgin;	you	should	expect	some	experience.
When	you	employ	a	 servant	you	ask,	 "What	 are	your	qualifications?	Bring	all
your	 certificates."	 You	 are	 going	 to	marry	 a	 woman	 for	 your	 whole	 life;	 you
should	 at	 least	 think	 that	 if	 she	has	 remained	a	virgin	 that	means	no	man	was
attracted	 to	 her	 up	 to	 now,	 so	why	 are	 you	 being	 stupid?	First	 ask	 how	many
people	 she	 has	 been	 in	 love	 with.	 The	 more	 experienced	 she	 is	 the	 better
companion	 she	 will	 prove	 to	 be,	 because	 experience	 is	 always	 valuable.
Experience	is	a	virtue	in	every	field!
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHILST	 YOU	 WERE	 SPEAKING	 ON	 KAHLIL	 GIBRAN	 AND
ZARATHUSTRA,	 YOUR	 WORDS	 SEEMED	 TO	 PENETRATE	 WITHOUT
MY	INTERPRETATION
DIRECTLY	TO	THE	CENTER	OF	MY	BEING.	I	EXPERIENCED	AN
ATTUNEMENT,	 A	 COMMUNION	 HAPPENING	 AS	 NECTAR	 THAT	WAS
FILLING
MY	 BEING.	 SOMETIMES,	 WITHOUT	 SOBBING,	 TEARS	 SIMPLY
POURED	FROM
MY	 EYES,	 AND	 AFTER	 ALMOST	 EVERY	 DISCOURSE	 I	 FELT	 FOR	 A
LONG
WHILE	IN	TOUCH	WITH	SOMETHING	FAR	BEYOND	WHAT	I	KNOW	OF
AS
MYSELF.	WITH	QUESTIONS	AND	ANSWERS	THIS	DOES	NOT	HAPPEN.
I	STILL
FEEL	THAT	SPECIAL	WHATEVER-IT-IS	 THAT	COMES	WHEN	SITTING
WITH
YOU,	 BUT	 NOT	 WITH	 THE	 DEPTH	 OF	 INTENSITY	 I	 HAVE	 JUST
DESCRIBED.
WHAT	IS	THE	DIFFERENCE?
Prabodh	Nityo,	 the	question	you	have	asked	raises	many	other	questions	 too.	 I
would	like	to	cover	all	the	implications	in	short,	because	it	is	important	not	only
to	you	but	for	everyone	else	here.
The	first	thing:	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	the	question-answer	sessions	are	more
significant	because	they	relate	to	you,	they	relate	to	your	growth.	Certainly	you
are	groping	 in	darkness,	 trying	 to	 find	a	way.	You	cannot	 ask	questions	of	 the
heights	of	Zarathustra,	of	Kahlil	Gibran	--	and	I	have	to	answer	your	reality.
Listening	 to	 Zarathustra	 and	Kahlil	Gibran	 is	 a	 good	 and	 great	 entertainment:
you	may	sob	and	you	may	have	tears	and	you	may	feel	great,	but	it	is	all	hot	air!
You	remain	the	same	--	nothing	changes	in	you.	I	speak	sometimes	on	Buddha,
on	 Chuang	 Tzu,	 on	 Zarathustra,	 just	 to	 give	 you	 an	 insight	 into	 the	 heights
people	have	reached,	just	to	make	you	aware	of	those	distant	stars.	They	are	not
so	 distant	 as	 they	 look	 --	 people	 like	 us	 have	 reached	 there.	 It	 is	within	 your
grasp.
That	 is	 the	 reason	 why,	 on	 Zarathustra	 and	 Buddha	 and	 Bodhidharma	 and	 a
thousand	others,	I	have	spoken:	to	create	a	longing	in	you.	But	just	the	longing	is
not	enough.	Then	I	have	to	give	you	the	path;	 then	I	have	to	sort	out	 the	mess
that	 you	 are,	 and	put	 your	 fragments,	which	 are	 spread	 all	 over	 the	 space...	 to
find	out	where	your	legs	are	and	where	your	head	is	and	put	them	all	together,
and	somehow	push	you	on	the	path.
The	 question-answer	 sessions	 are	 concerned	 with	 you,	 your	 growth,	 your
progress	--	the	place	where	you	are.	And	the	discourses	on	Zarathustra	or	Kahlil
Gibran	are	concerned	with	the	places	where	you	should	be	--	but	you	are	not	yet
there.
So	I	disagree	with	you.	I	can	understand	that	you	enjoy	the	dream	that	is	created
when	 one	 is	 hearing	 about	 Buddha....	 You	 have	 nothing	 to	 do;	 you	 are	 just
listening	to	great	poetry,	listening	to	a	great	song,	listening	to	great	music,	seeing
a	great	dance.	But	you	are	not	singing,	you	are	not	becoming	the	poetry,	you	are
not	 becoming	 the	 dance.	And	 I	want	 you	 to	 become	 the	 dance;	 I	want	 you	 to
reach	to	the	greatest	heights	that	anybody	has	ever	reached.
So	I	have	to	keep	a	balance,	talking	about	the	dreamlands	and	then	talking	about
the	dark	caves	where	you	are	hiding,	very	reluctant	to	come	out	in	the	light.	You
want	to	hear	about	light	and	you	enjoy,	but	you	remain	hiding	in	your	dark	cave.
You	want	 to	 hear	 about	 strange	 lands,	 beautiful	 stories	 and	 parables,	 but	 it	 is
mere	entertainment.
You	should	be	more	concerned	when	I	am	answering	the	questions,	because	they
can	change	your	reality.	I	have	to	do	both	jobs:	create	the	longing,	give	a	glimpse
of	 the	goal,	and	 then	clean	 the	path	and	grease	your	parts	 --	because	you	have
never	moved	in	many	many	lives,	you	are	sitting	in	a	junkyard	--	to	put	you	back
on	the	wheels	and	rolling.
The	 second	 job	 is	 difficult,	 and	 not	 very	 juicy	 either.	 But	 it	 is	 absolutely
necessary.
Secondly,	 I	 have	 to	 remind	 you	 of	 one	 thing.	 When	 I	 was	 speaking	 on
Zarathustra...	it	is	a	very	complicated	affair,	because	I	was	not	speaking	directly
on	Zarathustra;	I	was	speaking	on	a	Zarathustra	who	is	an	invention	of	Friedrich
Nietzsche.	All	the	great	insights	are	given	by	Nietzsche	to	Zarathustra.
Zarathustra...	many	times	his	original	books	have	been	brought	to	me,	and	they
are	so	ordinary	that	I	have	never	spoken	on	them.	Nietzsche	has	used	Zarathustra
only	as	a	symbolic	figure,	just	as	Kahlil	Gibran	was	using	Almustafa,	which	was
a	completely	fictitious	name.	Nietzsche	has	used	a	historical	name,	but	in	a	very
fictitious	way.	He	is	putting	his	insights	into	the	mouth	of	Zarathustra.
So	first	you	should	remember	it	is	Nietzsche's	Zarathustra;	it	has	nothing	much
to	do	with	 the	original	Zarathustra.	And	secondly,	when	I	am	speaking	on	 it,	 I
don't	care	what	Nietzsche	means,	and	I	don't	even	have	any	way	to	know	what
he	 means;	 the	 way	 he	 used	 Zarathustra,	 I	 am	 using	 him!	 So	 it	 is	 a	 very
complicated	story.	It	is	my	Nietzsche,	and	via	Nietzsche	it	is	my	Zarathustra.	So
whatever	heights	you	are	flying	in	have	nothing	to	do	with	Zarathustra.
I	have	been	speaking	on	hundreds	of	mystics,	but	it	is	always	that	I	am	speaking.
And	 I	know	perfectly	well	 that	 if	by	chance,	 somewhere,	 I	meet	 these	people,
they	are	going	to	be	very	angry.	They	are	going	to	be	really	enraged	and	say,	"I
never	meant	that."	But	my	problem	is,	"How	can	I	know	what	you	had	meant?"	I
can	only	mean	what	I	mean.	So	whether	it	is	Zarathustra	or	Buddha	or	Jesus	or
Chuang	Tzu,	once	 they	pass	 through	me	they	have	my	signature	on	 them.	You
are	always	listening	to	me.
When	 I	 am	answering	your	questions	 I	 am	more	concerned	with	your	growth,
with	your	 actual	 problems;	 they	 are	more	 earthly.	So	don't	 be	 deceived;	many
people	have	been	deceived.	I	have	been	reminding	you,	but	people's	memories
are	not	great.
I	 was	 speaking	 on	 Gautam	 Buddha	 in	 Varanasi	 and	 one	 Buddhist,	 a	 very
renowned	 scholar	 in	 Buddhism,	 said	 to	 me,	 "I	 have	 been	 reading	 the	 same
scriptures.	But	you	have	revealed	such	great	depths	and	heights	that	I	was	never
aware	of;	you	have	confirmed	my	faith	in	Gautam	Buddha."
I	said,	"If	you	don't	get	angry	with	me...	you	should	confirm	your	faith	in	me."
He	said,	"What?"
I	 said,	 "Yes,	 because	 whatever	 you	 were	 reading	 was	 perhaps	 exactly	 what
Buddha	 meant,	 and	 the	 depths	 and	 heights	 I	 am	 talking	 about	 are	 my
experiences."
But	what	to	do?	There	are	idiots	all	over	the	world.	If	you	want	Buddhist	idiots
to	listen	to	you,	you	just	have	to	say	the	name	"Buddha"	and	that's	enough;	then
you	can	say	anything	you	want.	If	you	want	Hindus	to	listen	to	you,	you	have	to
talk	about	Krishna.
I	am	always	talking	about	myself;	I	cannot	talk	about	anybody	else	--	how	can	I?
Five	 thousand	years	ago,	what	was	Krishna	 thinking,	what	was	 in	his	mind?...
but	when	they	listen	to	me	they	think,	"My	God,	we	were	not	aware	that	Krishna
had	 such	depths,	 such	heights."	Krishna	had	nothing.	Those	 heights	 and	 those
depths	are	my	experiences	that	I	am	hanging	on	anybody;	these	people	function
like	hooks,	I	simply	hang	my	idea	on	them.
And	even	great	scholars...	this	man	was	Bhikshu	Jagdish	Kashyap;	he	was	dean
of	 the	 faculty	of	Buddhism	 in	 the	University	of	Varanasi,	 a	 very	 learned	man.
But	 when	 I	 said	 this	 to	 him,	 he	 became	 a	 permanent	 enemy.	 I	 said,	 "What
happened	to	the	heights	and	to	the	depths?"
People	are	much	more	concerned	with	names.	 If	 I	say	 to	you	that	"Zarathustra
said	this,"
you	listen	with	great	attention.	The	very	name	Zarathustra	 looks	so	ancient,	so
prophetic,	that	he	must	have	said	something...	and	trust	me,	I	know	him,	he	is	a
poor	guy.	But	don't	tell	this	to	anybody!	This	is	just	a	private	conversation	with
you.
Michelangelo	was	painting	the	ceiling	of	the	Sistine	Chapel.	He	was	getting	tired
of	lying	on	his	back,	so	he	rolled	over	and	saw	an	old	woman	praying,	down	in
the	 chapel.	 He	 leaned	 over	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 scaffold	 and	 shouted,	 "I'm	 Jesus
Christ!	I'm	Jesus	Christ!
Listen	to	me	and	I	will	perform	miracles!"
The	 Italian	 lady	 looked	up	 and	 clasping	her	 rosary	 answered	back,	 "Shut	up-a
your	mouth.	I'm	talking	to	your	mother!"
Michelangelo	must	have	been	thinking	that	he	was	joking	with	the	old	woman,
but	he	was	at	a	loss	when	he	heard	this.	Of	course,	a	mother	is	a	mother,	and	you
should	 not	 interfere	 between	 two	 old	 women	 talking...	 just	 go	 on	 and	 play
outside!
So	 don't	 be	 disturbed.	 If	 you	 want	 I	 can	 go	 on	 talking	 about	 any	 historical,
mythological,	fictitious	figure;	I	can	create	my	own	fictions.	Do	you	think	all	the
stories	that	I	have	told	you	have	happened?	They	should	have	happened!	--	they
are	so	significant.	But	if	I	tell	you	that	I	am	just	making	up	this	story,	you	will
not	be	very	interested;	you	will	not	be	flying	high.
Once	in	a	while	I	want	you	to	fly	high,	but	it	is	just	an	imaginary	flight.	Really,	I
want	you	to	be	one	day	actually	on	those	heights	but	for	that,	practical	work	is
needed,	pragmatic	work	is	needed.
Just	for	you	to	fly	a	little	high....
Goldstein,	a	string	merchant	from	New	York,	was	trying	desperately	to	sell	some
of	 his	 goods	 in	 Alabama,	 but	 wherever	 he	 went	 he	 kept	 encountering	 anti-
semitism.	In	one	department	store	the	manager	taunted	him,	"Alright,	Goldstein.
I	will	buy	some	of	your	string	--	as	much	as	reaches	from	the	top	of	your	nose	to
the	tip	of	your	Jewish	prick."
Two	weeks	later,	the	manager	was	startled	to	receive	a	shipment	containing	eight
hundred	cartons	of	grade-A	string.	Attached	was	a	note:	"Many	thanks	for	your
generous	 order.	 Invoice	 to	 follow.	 Signed:	 Jacob	 Goldstein,	 residing	 in	 New
York,	circumcised	in	Kiev."
Okay	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Life	is	not	short	life	is	eternal
27	April	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8704270
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN10
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
94
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	ONCE	TOLD	ME	TO	OPEN	ALL	MY	WINDOWS	SO	I	COULD	HAVE
THE
SUNRISE	 IN	 THE	 EAST,	AND	THE	 SUNSET	 IN	 THE	WEST.	 I	 FEEL	 SO
MANY
POSSIBILITIES	INSIDE	ME	THAT	I	OFTEN	DON'T	TAKE	ENOUGH	TIME
TO
EXPLORE	 THEM	 IN	 DEPTH;	 RATHER,	 I	 FEEL	 THAT	 BY	 SIMPLY
TOUCHING	ON
THEM	I	KNOW	THEM	ALREADY	SO	WELL	THAT	I	FEEL	THE	URGE	TO
MOVE
ONTO	THE	NEXT	ONE.	IT	SEEMS	LIFE	IS	TOO	SHORT,	AND	SO	MUCH
STILL
NEEDS	 TO	 BE	 DISCOVERED	 AND	 DEVELOPED.	 AM	 I	 SUPERFICIAL
AND	TOO
MUCH	 IN	 A	 HURRY?	 THE	 ONLY	 CONTINUITY	 IN	 MY	 LIFE	 IS	 YOU,
AND	 I	 FEEL	 I	 WILL	 NEVER	 BE	 ABLE	 TO	 TOUCH	 YOUR	 DEPTH.
PLEASE,	BELOVED
MASTER,	GIVE	SOME	GUIDANCE	TO	ME.
Indradhanu,	everybody	has	to	go	according	to	his	own	heart	feeling;	if	you	feel
at	ease	to	move	from	one	thing	to	another,	it	is	perfectly	right	for	you.	The	whole
question	is	that	whatever	you	do	should	be	a	deep	pleasure,	without	any	tension.
If	 you	 force	 yourself	 to	 explore	 any	 possibility	 more	 deeply,	 you	 may	 create
tension	 in	 yourself.	 If	 it	 feels	 enough,	 that	 touching	 a	 certain	 possibility	 has
given	you	enough	juice	to	move	on,	then	move	on.	Perhaps	that	is	natural;	to	you
that	is	your	natural	pace.
One	should	never	go	against	one's	nature.	That	is	the	only	sin,	according	to	me,
to	go	against	one's	nature;	and	the	only	virtue	is	to	go	with	your	nature	in	total
harmony.	And	never	compare	yourself	with	others;	everybody	 is	different,	 and
everybody's	 liking	 is	 different.	 Once	 you	 start	 comparing,	 thinking	 that,
"Somebody	is	going	deeper	into	things,	moving	more	slowly,	and	I	am	moving
faster,"	then	tension	will	arise	in	you:
"Perhaps	I	am	hurrying	too	much."	All	these	tensions	arise	out	of	comparison.
Remember	one	thing:	You	have	to	be	in	tune	with	your	own	nature,	not	in	tune
with	 anybody	 else.	So	 always	 feel	within	yourself.	 If	 it	 is	 pleasant,	 do	 it.	 If	 it
feels	tense,	forced,	then	it	is	not	for	you.	Don't	do	it.
Always	go	with	the	river	of	life.	Never	try	to	go	against	the	current,	and	never
try	 to	 go	 faster	 than	 the	 river.	 Just	 move	 in	 absolute	 relaxation,	 so	 that	 each
moment	you	are	at	home,	at	ease,	at	peace	with	existence.
The	second	thing	you	have	to	remember	is	that	life	is	not	short;	life	is	eternal,	so
there	is	no	question	of	any	hurry.	By	hurrying	you	can	only	miss.	In	existence	do
you	see	any	hurry?	Seasons	come	in	their	time,	flowers	come	in	their	time,	trees
are	 not	 running	 to	 grow	 fast	 because	 life	 is	 short.	 It	 seems	 as	 if	 the	 whole
existence	is	aware	of	the	eternity	of	life.
We	have	been	here	always,	and	we	will	be	here	always	 --	of	course	not	 in	 the
same	 forms,	 and	 not	 in	 the	 same	 bodies.	 Life	 goes	 on	 evolving,	 reaching	 to
higher	 stages.	But	 there	 is	 no	 end	 anywhere,	 and	 there	 has	 been	no	beginning
anywhere	either.	You	exist	between	a	beginningless	life	and	an	endless	life.	You
are	always	in	the	middle	of	two	eternities	on	both	sides.
Your	 conditioning	 has	 given	 you	 the	 idea	 of	 one	 life.	 The	 Christian	 idea,	 the
Jewish	 idea,	 the	 Mohammedan	 idea	 --	 which	 are	 all	 rooted	 in	 the	 Jewish
conception	 that	 there	 is	 only	 one	 life	 --	 has	 given	 the	 West	 a	 tremendous
madness	 for	 speed.	Everything	has	 to	be	done	 in	such	a	hurry	 that	you	cannot
enjoy	 doing	 it,	 and	 you	 cannot	 do	 it	 in	 its	 entire	 perfection.	 You	 somehow
manage	to	do	it	and	rush	to	another	thing.
The	Western	man	has	been	living	under	a	very	wrong	conception:	It	has	created
so	much	tension	in	people's	minds	that	they	can	never	be	at	ease	anywhere;	they
are	always	on	the	go,	and	they	are	always	worried	that	one	never	knows	when
the	end	is	coming.	Before	the	end	they	want	to	do	everything.	But	the	result	is
just	 the	 opposite;	 they	 cannot	 even	 manage	 to	 do	 a	 few	 things	 gracefully,
beautifully,	perfectly.
Their	 life	 is	 so	 much	 overshadowed	 by	 death	 that	 they	 cannot	 live	 joyously.
Everything	 that	brings	 joy	seems	 to	be	a	wastage	of	 time.	They	cannot	 just	 sit
silently	for	an	hour,	because	their	mind	is	saying	to	them,	"Why	are	you	wasting
the	hour?	You	could	have	done	this,	you	could	have	done	that."
It	is	because	of	this	conception	of	one	life	that	the	idea	of	meditation	never	arose
in	the	West.	Meditation	needs	a	very	relaxed	mind,	with	no	hurry,	with	no	worry,
with	nowhere	to	go...	just	enjoying	moment	to	moment,	whatever	comes.
In	the	East,	meditation	was	bound	to	be	discovered,	just	because	of	the	idea	of
life's	eternity	--	you	can	relax.	You	can	relax	without	any	fear,	you	can	enjoy	and
play	your	flute,	you	can	dance	and	sing	your	song,	you	can	enjoy	the	sunrise	and
the	 sunset.	You	 can	 enjoy	 your	whole	 life.	Not	 only	 that,	 you	 can	 enjoy	 even
dying,	because	death	too	is	a	great	experience,	perhaps	the	greatest	experience	in
life.	It	is	a	crescendo.
In	the	Western	concept,	death	is	the	end	of	life.	In	the	Eastern	concept,	death	is
only	a	beautiful	incident	in	the	long	procession	of	life;	there	will	be	many,	many
deaths.	Each	death	is	a	climax	of	your	life,	before	another	life	begins	--	another
form,	another	label,	another	consciousness.	You	are	not	ending,	you	are	simply
changing	the	house.
I	 am	 reminded	of	Mulla	Nasruddin.	A	 thief	 entered	 into	his	house;	Mulla	was
sleeping,	not	really,	 just	with	closed	eyes,	 in	between	opening	them	and	seeing
what	 the	 thief	 is	doing.	But	he	did	not	believe	 in	 interfering	 in	people's	work.
The	 thief	was	 not	 interfering	with	 his	 sleep,	why	 should	 he	 interfere	with	 his
profession?	Let	him	do	it.
The	thief	was	a	little	concerned	that	this	man	seemed	to	be	strange.	As	he	was
carrying	everything	out	of	 the	house,	sometimes	something	fell	from	his	hands
and	there	was	noise,	but	Mulla	remained	completely	asleep.	A	suspicion	arose	in
the	thief's	mind	that	this	type	of	sleep	is	possible	only	if	a	man	is	awake:	"What	a
strange	man	that	he	does	not	say	anything;	I'm	just	emptying	his	whole	house!."
All	 the	 furniture	went	out,	 all	 the	pillows	went	out,	 everything	 that	was	 in	 the
house	went	out.
And	when	 the	 thief	was	collecting	everything,	binding	 them	to	carry	home,	he
suddenly	 felt,	 "Somebody	 is	 following	me."	He	 looked	 back,	 it	was	 the	 same
man	who	was	asleep.
He	said,	"Why	are	you	following	me?"
Mulla	 said,	 "No,	 I'm	not	 following	you;	we	are	changing	 the	house.	You	have
taken	 everything.	 Now	 what	 am	 I	 going	 to	 do	 in	 this	 house?	 So	 I	 am	 also
coming."
This	at-easeness	 is	 the	Eastern	way;	even	with	death	 the	East	has	followed	the
idea...	just	changing	the	house.
The	thief	was	worried;	he	said,	"Forgive	me,	take	your	things."
Mulla	said,	"No,	there	is	no	need.	I	was	thinking	myself	to	change	the	house;	it
is	almost	 in	 ruins.	You	can't	have	a	worse	house	 than	 this,	and	anyway	I	am	a
very	lazy	man.	I	need	somebody	to	 take	care	of	me,	and	when	you	have	taken
everything,	why	leave	me	alone?"
The	thief	became	afraid	that...	he	had	been	stealing	his	whole	life.	He	had	never
come	across	such	a	man.	He	said,	"You	can	take	your	things."
Mulla	said,	"No,	there	is	not	going	to	be	any	change.	You	will	have	to	carry	the
things,	 otherwise	 I	 am	 going	 to	 the	 police	 station.	 I	 am	 behaving	 like	 a
gentleman,	 I	 am	 not	 calling	 you	 a	 thief,	 but	 just	 a	man	who	 is	 helping	me	 to
change	the	house."
There	 is	no	hurry,	 so	your	 idea	of	 a	 short	 life	 is	 a	dangerous	 idea.	That's	why
even	though	the	East	is	very	poor,	 there	is	no	despair,	 there	is	no	anguish.	The
West	 is	 rich,	but	 the	 richness	has	not	brought	anything	 to	 its	 spirituality,	or	 its
growth;	on	the	contrary,	the	West	is	very	tense.	It	should	be	more	relaxed,	it	has
all	the	comforts	of	life.
But	the	basic	problem	is	that	deep	down	the	West	knows	that	life	is	such	a	short
thing;	we	are	standing	 in	a	queue,	and	every	moment	we	are	coming	closer	 to
death.	Since	we	were	born,	we	started	the	journey	towards	the	graveyard.	Every
moment	life	is	being	cut	--
becoming	shorter	and	shorter.	This	creates	a	tension,	an	anguish,	an	anxiety.	All
the	 comforts,	 all	 the	 luxuries,	 all	 the	 riches	 become	meaningless,	 because	 you
cannot	take	them	away	with	you.	You	will	have	to	go	into	death	alone.
The	 East	 is	 relaxed.	 First,	 it	 does	 not	 give	 death	 any	 importance;	 it	 is	 just	 a
change	 of	 form.	 Second,	 because	 it	 is	 so	 relaxed,	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 your
inner	riches,	which	will	be	going	with	you	--	even	beyond	life.	Death	cannot	take
them	away.
Death	can	 take	everything	 that	 is	outside	you	and,	 if	you	have	not	grown	your
inner	 being,	 naturally	 there	 will	 be	 fear	 that	 you	 cannot	 save	 anything	 from
death;	 it	will	 take	everything	 that	you	have.	But	 if	you	have	grown	your	 inner
being,	 if	 you	 have	 found	 peace,	 blissfulness,	 silence,	 joy,	 which	 are	 not
dependent	on	anything	outside,	if	you	have	found	your	garden	of	being	and	seen
the	 flowers	of	your	own	consciousness,	 the	question	of	 fearing	death	does	not
arise	at	all.
Indradhanu,	again	I	say	to	you,	remember	only	one	thing:	You	are	an	immortal
being.
Right	now,	it	is	not	your	experience;	right	now,	if	you	love	me,	if	you	have	any
trust	in	me,	you	can	accept	it	as	a	hypothesis	--	not	as	a	belief,	but	a	hypothesis
to	experiment	with.
I	 never	 want	 anybody	 to	 accept	 anything	 from	me	 as	 a	 belief,	 but	 only	 as	 a
hypothesis.
Because	 I	 know	 the	 truth	 of	 it,	 I	 need	 not	 enforce	 belief	 and	 faith	 on	 you.
Knowing	 the	 truth	 I	 can	 say	 to	 you,	 "It	 is	 just	 for	 experiment,	 a	 temporary
hypothesis,"	 because	 I	 am	 absolutely	 certain	 that	 if	 your	 experiment,	 your
hypothesis	will	change	into	your	own	knowing	--	not	in	a	belief,	not	in	a	faith,
but	in	a	certainty.	And	only	certainties	can	save	you.	Beliefs	are	boats	made	of
paper.
One	should	not	think	that	one	can	cross	the	ocean	of	existence	on	a	boat	made	of
paper.
You	need	a	certainty...	not	a	belief,	but	a	 truth	 that	 is	experienced	by	yourself.
Not	somebody	else's	truth,	but	your	own.	Then	it	is	a	joy	to	go	into	the	unknown,
uncharted	ocean;	it	is	a	tremendous	excitement	and	ecstasy.
But	always	keep	in	tune	with	your	own	nature.
Some	 trees	 grow	 slowly,	 some	 trees	 grow	 fast;	 there	 is	 nothing	 special	 in
growing	fast	or	in	growing	slowly.	One	thing	is	similar	to	both	trees	--	they	are
both	 following	 their	 natures.	 It	 is	 only	 man	 who	 looks	 all	 around,	 starts
comparing,	and	gets	into	unnecessary	anxieties.
Whenever	you	feel	a	problem,	look	within	your	heart.	If	you	are	at	ease,	you	are
on	 the	 right	path.	Your	heart	 is	 the	criterion.	 If	 it	 is	disturbed,	 that	means	you
have	to	change	the	path;	something	has	gone	wrong,	you	have	gone	astray.
The	heart	is	your	guide.	When	it	is	completely	in	harmony	with	nature,	there	is	a
beautiful	dance	and	a	music	 in	your	heart.	When	you	go	away	from	nature	 the
music	becomes	just	noise,	the	dance	becomes	disturbed.	These	are	the	signs	and
the	 language	 of	 the	 heart	 to	 make	 you	 aware	 whether	 you	 are	 going	 right	 or
wrong.
You	don't	need	any	guidance	from	anybody.	Your	guide	is	within	yourself.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YES,	 YOU	 HAVE	 DISTURBED	 MY	 SLUMBER;	 NOW,	 WAKING	 TO	 A
MORNING
SUN,	BIRDS	SING	AND	LEAVES	DANCE	 IN	THE	BREEZE.	SITTING	 IN
YOUR
GARDEN	 IS	 SO	 SWEET.	 SITTING	WITH	 YOU,	 THERE	 IS	 MORE	 AND
MORE	JOY
EACH	DAY.	IS	THIS	JUICE	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE	INCREASING	SO	MUCH
THESE	DAYS,	OR	AM	I	JUST	NOW	NOTICING	WHAT'S	BEEN	HERE	ALL
ALONG?
Nityanando,	what	you	are	experiencing	now	has	always	been	here,	but	you	were
not	here.
For	the	first	time	you	are	also	here	--	that's	why	you	are	noticing.
You	may	have	come	here	many	times,	but	it	was	only	a	coming	of	your	physical
body.
Your	mind	was	wandering	somewhere	else,	your	being	was	not	here.	Now	you
have	known	the	knack	to	be	here	and	now,	and	the	juice	that	you	are	feeling	will
go	 on	 growing,	 because	 your	 presence	 will	 go	 on	 becoming	 more	 and	 more
crystallized.
The	juice	has	always	been	here,	the	flowers	have	always	been	blossoming	here,
the	cool	breeze	was	always	blowing	here,	 the	 trees	and	 the	sun	 rays...	but	you
were	blind.
For	the	first	time	you	have	opened	your	eyes,	for	the	first	time	your	senses	have
become	 alive.	 The	 more	 alive	 they	 become,	 the	 more	 profound	 are	 the
experiences	waiting	for	you.	It	all	depends	on	your	sensitivity,	your	awareness,
your	being	silently	just	here	and	now.
It	is	possible	that	there	may	be	somebody	else	who	is	not	feeling	any	juice,	who
is	not	feeling	anything	at	all,	and	he	will	go	with	the	idea	that	there	is	nothing.
This	 is	 how	 your	mind	 befools	 you;	 it	 never	 allows	 you	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 your
blindness,	your	unawareness,	your	unattentiveness.	On	the	contrary,	if	somebody
says	 to	 such	 a	 person,	 "You	 have	missed	 something,"	 he	will	 retort,	 "You	 are
hypnotized!	 I	 am	 a	 rational	man;	 you	 have	 allowed	 yourself	 to	 be	 hypnotized
and	you	have	forgotten	all	rationality."
People	protect	 their	blindness,	protect	 their	unconsciousness,	 they	protect	 their
misery;	anything	that	is	theirs	--	it	may	be	hell	--	they	will	protect	it.
But	to	be	really	with	me,	you	have	to	put	all	your	defenses	away,	you	have	to	be
vulnerable	 --	because	we	are	not	here	 to	 fight	with	each	other.	We	are	here	 to
have	 a	 deep	 rapport,	 a	 deep	 accord,	 a	 harmony	 in	 which	 all	 differences
dissolve...	and	there	are	not	so	many	people,	but	a	single	silence,	a	single	peace
that	passeth	understanding.
Those	who	cannot	put	 their	defenses	away	need	all	 the	compassion.	They	may
think	that	they	are	rational	beings,	but	they	are	really	unconscious	beings.	Eyes
don't	need	reason,	because	eyes	can	see	light	without	any	reason;	only	blind	men
think	about	light,	reason	about	light	--	for	or	against,	believe	in	light,	disbelieve
in	 light	 --	 but	 the	 man	 who	 has	 eyes	 neither	 believes	 nor	 disbelieves,	 he	 is
neither	for	nor	against.	He	simply	knows:	light	is	there.	It	has	to	be	enjoyed,	not
argued	about.
Nityanando,	you	are	in	a	state	in	which	I	want	everybody	to	be.	But	people	are
so	strange!	I	have	heard...	a	great	astronomer	was	concluding	his	lecture	at	 the
synagogue:
"...	 And	 some	 of	 my	 colleagues	 believe	 that	 our	 own	 sun	 will	 probably	 die
within	four	or	five	billion	years."
"How	many	years	did	you	say?"	asked	Mrs.	Siegel,	from	the	back	of	the	room.
"Four	or	five	billion,"	replied	the	scientist.
"Phew,"	said	Mrs.	Siegel.	"I	thought	you	said	million."
People	 are	 very	 strange...	 as	 if	 she	 has	 understood!	 It	 does	 not	 matter	 in
existence	 --	 four	 billion	 or	 four	 million	 --	 but	 perhaps	 million	 is	 the	 biggest
number	she	knows.	If	it	is	four	billion,	no	problem.
If	you	are	listening	with	your	mind	there	will	come	many	such	moments;	if	you
are	not	listening	with	the	mind	but	with	the	heart,	there	will	not	come	any	such
moment.	And	listening	with	the	heart	is	the	only	true	listening.
Ronald	Reagan	came	home	and	found	his	wife	Nancy	in	bed	with	his	very	best
friend,	Edwin	Meese.
"Hey,	what	do	you	think	you	are	doing?"
"See,"	 Nancy	 said	 to	 Meese,	 "I	 told	 you	 he	 was	 stupid.	 Now	 he	 can	 see
everything	and	he	is	asking,	`What	is	going	on?'"
Your	experiences	are	fresh.	This	is	the	beauty	of	the	inner	experiences,	that	they
always	remain	fresh.	You	cannot	make	them	mechanical.	Tomorrow	and	the	day
after	 tomorrow,	 whenever	 you	 will	 be	 here...	 the	 same	 perfume,	 the	 same
presence,	 the	 same	 juice	 --	 but	with	 a	new	 taste,	with	 a	deeper	understanding,
with	a	greater	sensitivity.
In	 the	 spiritual	 life	 nothing	 becomes	 old,	 it	 always	 remains	 fresh.	 And	 its
freshness	keeps	you,	even	to	the	last	breath	of	your	life,	young.
The	mystic	always	dies	young.	His	age	may	be	a	hundred	years	or	a	hundred	and
twenty	years,	 it	 does	not	matter.	He	always	dies	young	because	his	 sources	of
life	 are	 continuously	 being	 refreshed;	 a	 fresh	 breeze	 is	 passing	 through	 him,
fresh	rays	of	the	sun	are	passing	through	him,	fresh	moonlight	and	fresh	stars	are
always	arising	in	him.
Nityanando,	you	are	blessed.	Don't	lose	track.	You	have	come	to	the	right	point.
Become	more	and	more	centered	on	that	point.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 MANAGED	 TO	 TIE	 UP	 MY	 CAMEL.	 THE	 LION	 ROARS	 IN
DISTANT,	UNKNOWN	JUNGLES,	THE	CHILD	IS	NOT	YET	CONCEIVED,
AND	THE
STUBBORN	MULE	GOES	NOWHERE.	CAN	YOU	COMMENT?
Devaprem,	Zarathustra	has	no	idea	about	a	stubborn	mule;	you	seem	to	belong	to
a	totally	different	category.	You	are	neither	a	camel,	nor	a	lion,	nor	a	child	--	you
are	a	mule.	And	with	the	mule	there	are	many	difficulties.
Have	you	ever	thought	that	the	mule	cannot	conceive	a	child?	Mules	don't	give
birth	to	children;	they	are	cross-breeds	between	donkeys	and	horses.	They	have
all	 that	 is	 the	worst	 in	donkeys	and	all	 that	 is	worst	 in	horses.	But	one	thing	is
good	about	them:	they	don't	leave	a	new	generation,	they	simply	die.
I	would	like	you	to	consider	again.	Look	into	a	mirror...	because	Zarathustra	has
absolutely	categorized,	and	there	is	no	place	for	the	mule.	You	will	find	a	camel
in	the	mirror.
And	you	say,	"I	have	managed	to	tie	up	my	camel."	If	you	have	managed	to	tie
up	your	camel,	then	the	only	criterion	to	prove	it	will	be	the	lion's	roar.	But	you
are	 saying,	 "The	 lion	 roars	 in	 distant	 unknown	 jungles."	 The	 camel	 has	 to
become	the	lion...	the	camel	has	the	capacity	to	become	the	lion.
These	 are	metaphors	 that	 Zarathustra	 has	 used.	 The	moment	 the	 camel	 rebels
against	 slavery,	 he	 becomes	 a	 lion,	 and	 suddenly	 there	 is	 the	 roar!	One	of	 the
most	beautiful	experiences	is	to	hear	the	lion	roar.	And	the	process	is	such	that	if
the	mule	 becomes	 the	 lion...	 the	 lion	 is	 only	 a	 passage,	 a	 bridge.	The	 child	 is
always	 there.	 It	 is	not	a	question	of	conceiving	a	child;	everybody	is	pregnant,
born	pregnant	with	the	child,	just	the	right	opportunity....
In	the	camel	the	right	opportunity	is	not	there;	in	the	lion	is	the	right	opportunity
for	the	child	to	be	born.	But	rather	than	going	the	simple	way,	you	are	stuck	with
some	 mule,	 a	 stubborn	 mule.	 Do	 you	 know	 any	 other	 kind?	 All	 mules	 are
stubborn,	that	is	their	great	quality.
But	 recognize	exactly	where	you	are.	No	man	 is	a	mule,	because	man	 is	not	a
crossbreed.	You	have	to	begin	with	the	camel.	And	you	are	not	supposed	to	hear
the	 lion	 roar	 faraway,	 "in	 distant	 unknown	 jungles."	 That	 lion's	 roar	 will	 not
help.	The	roar	has	 to	come	from	your	deepest	heart.	And	in	 that	very	roar	you
will	become,	for	the	first	time,	aware	that	the	child	is	coming.
The	child	is	our	destiny.
One	has	to	become,	finally,	as	innocent	as	a	child,	full	of	wonder	and	surprise,
full	of	trust	and	love,	absolutely	in	tune	with	existence.	That's	what	is	meant	by
the	 child.	These	 are	metaphors.	But	 I	 can	 understand	what	 you	mean	 by,	 "the
stubborn	mule	goes	nowhere."
The	pope	stood	before	a	hushed	crowd	of	attentive	Italian	villagers.	"My	flock,
you	musta	not	use-a	the	pill,"	he	warned.
Just	then	a	beautiful	young	Signorina	stepped	forward	and	said,	"Look	--	you	no
play-a	the	game,	you	no	make-a	the	rules!"
A	simple	thing:	You	don't	play	the	game	--	you	don't	have	the	right	to	make	the
rules.
This	is	the	quality	of	the	mule;	he	does	not	like	to	move	even	an	inch,	wherever
he	is.	In	that	sense	our	minds	can	be	compared	to	mules.
You	can	watch	your	mind;	 it	 does	not	want	 to	change	anything.	Every	change
means	difficulty,	readjustment,	rearrangement	--	but	no	change	signifies	death.	I
would	 like	 you	 to	 remember	 that	 the	 mind	 is	 a	 dead	 machine,	 it	 is	 simply	 a
biocomputer.	 It	 resists	 all	 change,	 it	 is	 against	 evolution,	 and	 all	 the	 evolution
that	 has	 happened	 in	 the	 world	 has	 happened	 through	 the	 people	 who	 were
courageous	enough	to	put	the	mind	aside.
Putting	the	mind	aside	is	what	I	mean	by	meditation.	Mind	is	a	mule;	meditation
is	an	eagle,	flying	to	the	farthest	horizon	across	the	sun,	always	ready	to	go	into
the	unknown.
Devaprem,	if	the	mule	goes	nowhere,	get	down	from	the	mule.	What	is	the	need
to	go	on	sitting	on	the	mule	and	looking	stupid?	Get	down	from	the	mule!	It	is
better	 to	walk	on	your	own	feet	 --	at	 least	you	can	move,	you	can	evolve	 to	a
better	state	of	consciousness.
The	whole	religion	can	be	condensed	in	one	single	word,	and	that	is	meditation.
And	meditation	is	a	simple	way	to	get	down	from	the	mule,	to	get	down	from	the
mind.	Let	 the	mind	 remain	where	 it	 is;	you	 start	moving	without	 it.	And	once
you	 are	 not	 thinking	 through	 the	 mind,	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 understand
Zarathustra's	categories.	You	will	find	yourself	first	a	slave	in	thousands	of	ways
--	a	slave	of	your	tradition,	a	slave	of	your	education,	a	slave	of	your	religion,	a
slave	of	all	kinds	of	superstitions.	You	will	find	so	many	slaveries.	Just	a	 little
courage,	and	let	the	camel	revolt	against	any	enslavement.
All	 the	great	 teachers	of	 the	world	have	been	 insisting	 for	a	 revolution	against
the	slavery	that	keeps	your	spirit	in	a	status	quo.	And	once	the	slavery	is	thrown
away,	 the	 camel	 goes	 through	 the	 metamorphosis,	 becomes	 a	 lion.	 He	 had
always	been	a	lion;	he	became	a	camel	because	of	the	slavery.
And	the	moment	he	becomes	a	lion	--	courageous	and	brave,	ready	to	go	into	the
unknown,	 ready	 to	 be	 alone	 --	 the	 child	 is	 not	 faraway.	 The	 second
metamorphosis	will	happen;	you	will	find	the	lion	turning	into	a	child.	And	the
child	is	the	ultimate	state	of	liberation.
The	 innocence	 of	 the	 child	 is	 his	 wisdom;	 the	 simplicity	 of	 the	 child	 is	 his
egolessness.
The	 freshness	of	 the	child	 is	 the	 freshness	of	your	consciousness,	which	never
becomes	old,	which	always	remains	young.	It	has	passed	through	thousands	of
bodies:	 they	became	young,	 they	became	old,	 they	died.	But	 the	consciousness
continues,	a	young	river,	fresh,	dancing	towards	the	ocean.	The	wondering	eyes
of	the	child	is	the	opening	of	your	being	to	all	the	great	mysteries	of	existence.
The	scientist	also	tries	to	discover	the	mysteries	and	their	secrets,	but	his	method
is	violent;	it	is	more	a	rape	than	a	love.	He	dissects,	he	attacks.	The	behavior	of
the	scientist	with	nature	is	not	human;	it	is	very	inhuman.
The	child	and	 the	sage	also	come	 to	know	 the	mysteries	of	existence,	but	 in	a
way	that	can	be	called	only	playfulness,	that	can	be	called	only	loving	radiation.
And	 existence	 itself	 is	 eager	 to	 open	 its	 heart	 to	 the	 loving	 child,	 to	 open	 its
secrets	to	the	wondering	eyes	of	the	child.
Lao	Tzu	says,	"The	moment	you	drop	knowledge,	you	become	wise."
The	moment	you	stop	inquiring	into	the	mysteries	of	existence,	existence	itself
opens	up	all	its	doors,	invites	you.	And	to	enter	the	mysteries	of	existence	as	a
guest	is	dignified.
To	 attack	 nature,	 to	 force	 nature	 is	 barbarous.	 Science	 is	 still	 barbarous,	 and
science	 will	 remain	 barbarous	 unless	 it	 learns	 to	 be	 meditative	 too.	 Only
meditation	can	change	the	barbariousness	of	science	and	can	make	it	an	innocent
love	affair	with	existence.
That	will	be	a	golden	future:	when	science	becomes	a	love	affair	with	existence	-
-	not	a	struggle,	not	a	conflict,	but	a	deep	harmony,	a	friendship.
Up	to	now,	even	the	greatest	thinkers	like	Bertrand	Russell	talk	in	terms	which
are	barbarous.	He	has	written	a	famous	book;	the	title	is	THE	CONQUEST	OF
NATURE.
The	very	idea	of	conquering	nature	is	ugly.	We	are	part	of	nature;	how	can	the
part	conquer	 the	whole?	Can	you	conceive	 that	my	 left	hand	can	conquer	me?
And	we	are	such	a	small	part	of	existence	that	the	very	idea	of	conquering	it	is
quixotic.
But	 a	 different	 science	 is	 certainly	 needed;	 this	 science	 has	 failed.	 The	 old
religion	has	failed.	It	has	not	delivered	salvation	to	humanity,	it	has	not	brought
what	it	has	promised
--	blissfulness,	benediction,	godliness.	All	its	promises	have	proved	lies.
And	now	I	want	to	say,	science	has	also	failed.	In	conquering	nature,	it	has	only
created	 destructive	 weapons,	 atomic	 energy,	 nuclear	 missiles.	 Rather	 than
conquering	nature,	it	has	succeeded	in	preparing	a	graveyard	of	the	whole	planet.
Science	has	failed.	It	has	not	been	able	to	serve	life	for	the	simple	reason	that	the
very	idea	of	conquering	is	barbarous	and	violent.
We	 have	 to	 find	 a	 new	 religiousness	 and	 a	 new	 scientific	 approach,	 and	 they
cannot	be	two	different	things.	They	can	be	two	sides	of	one	coin:	Applied	to	the
inner	consciousness,	it	becomes	religiousness;	applied	to	the	objective	world,	it
becomes	science.
But	 the	 basic	 reality	 is	 innocent,	wondering,	 and	 loving	 eyes...	 a	 friendship,	 a
harmony,	a	love	affair.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	The	sacred	makes	you	speechless
17	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705170
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN11
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
84
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT	GAUTAM	BUDDHA'S	WORK	CAME	TO
AN
END	WHEN	HE	BECAME	ENLIGHTENED,	AND	YOU	STARTED	YOUR
WORK
AFTER	 YOUR	 ENLIGHTENMENT.	 COULD	 YOU	 SAY	 SOMETHING
ABOUT
THIS?
Prem	Pankaja,	one	of	the	most	important	things	to	be	remembered	by	all	is	the
way	 you	 have	 started	 your	 question.	 The	 question	 is,	 "I	 have	 heard	You	 say."
Usually,	people	drop	the	first	part.	They	simply	say,	"You	have	said	this."	And
there	is	such	a	great	difference	between	the	two,	such	an	immense	difference	that
it	is	unbridgeable,	and	needs	a	great	understanding.
Whatever	 you	 hear	 is	 not	 necessarily	 the	 thing	 said;	 what	 is	 said	 is	 not
necessarily	 what	 you	 hear.	 The	 obvious	 reason	 is	 that	 I	 am	 speaking	 from	 a
different	space	of	being,	and	you	are	hearing	from	a	totally	different	space.	In	the
transmission,	many	things	change.
It	is	always	a	sign	of	understanding	to	remember	that	whatever	I	have	said	may
be	 totally	 different	 than	what	 you	 have	 heard.	 Your	 question	 should	 be	 about
what	 you	 have	 heard,	 because	 how	 can	 you	 ask	 a	 question	 about	 something
which	you	have	not	heard?
Gautam	Buddha,	in	his	whole	life,	never	allowed	people	to	write	down	what	he
was	 saying.	 His	 reason	 was	 that	 if	 you	 are	 writing	 it	 down,	 your	 attention
becomes	divided.
You	are	no	longer	total.	You	have	to	hear	and	you	have	to	write,	and	what	he	is
saying	is	so	subtle	that	unless	you	are	total,	you	are	going	to	miss	it.	So	rather
than	writing	it	down,	try	with	your	totality	and	intensity	to	approach	your	heart,
to	let	it	sink	within	you.
He	spoke	for	forty-two	years	continuously.	After	his	death,	the	first	question	was
to	write	down	whatever	the	disciples	remembered;	otherwise	it	would	have	been
lost	to	humanity.
They	did	a	great	service,	and	also	a	great	disservice.	They	wrote	down...	but	they
came	 to	 see	 a	 strange	 phenomenon	 --	 that	 everybody	 had	 heard	 something
different.	Their	memory,	their	remembrance,	was	not	the	same.
Thirty-two	 schools	 sprang	 up,	 proclaiming,	 "This	 is	 what	 Buddha	 has	 said."
Only	one	man	--	a	man	to	be	remembered	forever,	his	closest	disciple,	Ananda	--
who	was	not	even	enlightened	before	Buddha	died....	Just	out	of	his	humbleness,
knowing,	 "I	 was	 unenlightened,	 how	 can	 I	 hear	 exactly	 what	 comes	 from	 an
enlightened	consciousness?	I	am	going	to	interpret	it,	I	am	going	to	mix	it	with
my	own	thoughts,	I	am	going	to	give	it	my	own	color,	my	own	nuance.	It	cannot
carry	within	me	the	same	meaning	it	has	brought,	because	I	don't	have	yet	those
eyes	that	can	see	and	those	ears	that	can	hear."
Out	 of	 this	 humbleness,	 the	 memories	 that	 he	 remembered	 and	 wrote	 down
became	 the	 basic	 scriptures	 of	 Buddhism.	 They	 all	 start	 with	 "I	 have	 heard
Gautam	Buddha	say."
And	 all	 the	 thirty-two	 philosophical	 schools	 --	 they	 were	 great	 scholars,	 far
greater	 than	 Maitreya,	 than	 Ananda,	 far	 more	 capable	 to	 interpret,	 to	 bring
meanings	 to	 things,	 to	make	 systems	 out	 of	words	 --	 those	 thirty-two	 schools
slowly,	slowly	became	rejected.
And	the	reason	for	their	rejection	was	that	they	had	missed	a	single	beginning:	"I
have	heard...."	They	were	saying,	"Gautam	Buddha	said"	--	the	emphasis	was	on
Gautam	Buddha.
Ananda's	 version	 is	 the	 universally	 accepted	 version.	 Strange...	 there	 were
enlightened	people,	but	 they	 remained	silent	because	what	 they	had	heard	was
not	 possible	 to	 be	 expressed.	 And	 there	 were	 unenlightened	 philosophical
geniuses	who	were	very	articulate,	and	they	wrote	great	treatises	--	but	they	were
not	accepted.	And	the	man	who	was	not	enlightened,	not	a	great	philosopher,	but
just	a	humble	caretaker	of	Gautam	Buddha,	his	words	have	been	accepted.	The
reason	 is	 these	 beginnings	 --	 "I	 have	 heard...."	 I	 don't	 know	 whether	 he	 was
saying	it	or	not.	I	cannot	impose	myself	on	him.
All	 that	 I	 can	 say	 is	what	 echoed	 in	me;	 I	 can	 talk	 about	my	mind	 --	 not	 the
mindless	silence	of	Gautam	Buddha."
Buddhist	scriptures,	in	this	way,	are	the	only	scriptures	in	the	world	which	have
this	quality	of	the	great	difference	between	the	master	and	the	disciple,	between
one	who	has	arrived	and	one	who	is	trying	to	arrive.
You	 are	 asking,	 Pankaja,	 "I	 have	 heard	 You	 say	 that	 Gautam	 Buddha's	 work
came	to	an	end	when	he	became	enlightened,	and	You	started	Your	work	after
Your	enlightenment."
It	 is	one	of	 those	strange	 incidents	of	history,	where	 the	obvious	 is	completely
ignored.	 I	 have	 talked,	 discussed,	 with	 a	 few	 very	 great	 scholarly	 Buddhist
monks.	One	was	Bhikshu	Sangharakshita.	He	was	an	Englishman,	but	while	he
was	young,	searching,	he	found	that	Christianity	had	nothing	to	give	and	became
a	Buddhist.	When	 I	met	 him,	 he	 had	 become	very	 old.	He	 used	 to	 live	 in	 the
Himalayas,	 in	Kalimpong.	He	has	written	great	books	on	Buddhism	with	 such
love	and	such	insight	that	one	feels	full	of	awe.
I	have	been	discussing	many	times	with	Bhikshu	Ananda	Kausalyayan,	who	is
the	most	prominent	Buddhist	 scripture	scholar	and	who	has	written	much	with
depth	and	profundity.	And	the	third	man	was	Doctor	Bhikshu	Jagdish	Kashayap.
He	was	the	head	of	the	great	Institute	of	Buddhist	Studies.
None	of	these	three	people	have	noticed	the	difference	--	that	Ananda's	version	is
humble	and	truer	because	he	is	saying	what	is	reflected	in	his	being,	and	he	can
authoritatively	 say	 only	 that.	 When	 I	 pointed	 it	 out	 to	 them,	 they	 were	 all
surprised	 --	 "We	have	been	studying	our	whole	 life,	but	we	never	 thought	 that
this	 has	 any	 significance.	 We	 always	 thought	 that	 it	 is	 just	 the	 way	 Ananda
writes."
And	when	I	said	to	them,	"No	Buddhist,	except	a	few	Zen	masters,	are	going	to
agree	with	me...."	The	whole	 of	Asia	 is	Buddhist.	 In	 different	 countries	 it	 has
taken	different	 shapes,	 different	 rituals.	But	 one	 thing	 is	 similar	 everywhere	 --
that	 Buddha	 worked	 for	 six	 years,	 hard	 enough	 to	 attain	 enlightenment.	 He
attained	enlightenment	after	six	years	of	hard	work	--	this	is	just	accepted.
But	 when	 I	 came	 to	 see	 the	 life	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 I	 was	 simply	 amazed,
because	in	a	way	it	can	be	said	that	he	attained	his	enlightenment	after	six	years
of	hard	work,	but	that	is	not	the	whole	truth.	It	is	not	even	a	small	fragment	of
the	truth.	The	truth	is,	he	attained	enlightenment	only	when	he	dropped	all	desire
for	it,	all	work	for	it,	all	hope	for	it.
This	 gap	 between	 the	 hard	 work	 and	 relaxing	 and	 dropping	 the	 idea	 that
anything	like	truth	exists....	He	had	done	everything	that	was	told	to	him,	and	yet
no	 silence	 had	 descended	 on	 him.	 He	 had	 not	 been	 able	 to	 enter	 into	 his
innermost	being.	He	had	knocked	on	all	the	doors,	but	no	door	was	opened.	His
work	was	so	total	and	intense	that	he	could	not	conceive	that	there	was	anything
more	to	be	done.
I	have	been	 to	 the	 small	 river	Niranjana,	by	 the	 side	of	which	he	had	become
enlightened	 one	 full-moon	 night.	 That	 day,	 the	 most	 important	 experience
happened	--	which	is	not	even	talked	about	by	the	Buddhists,	by	the	followers.	It
does	not	look	important,	they	are	not	to	be	blamed.	He	had	tortured	his	body,	he
had	been	fasting	for	months,	and	he	had	become	so	weak...	and	Niranjana	 is	a
very	 small	 river.	He	 had	 got	 into	 the	 river	 for	 his	morning	 bath,	 but	 even	 the
smallest	river	and	its	current	was	too	much;	he	started	going	down	with	the	river.
He	could	not	manage	to	get	out	of	it.	He	hung	to	the	root	of	a	tree.
That	moment	 was	momentous.	 Hanging	 to	 the	 root	 of	 the	 tree	 in	 the	 river,	 a
thought	 arose	 in	 him,	 "What	 kind	 of	 stupid	 life	 have	 I	 been	 living?	 All	 this
asceticism,	 all	 this	 arduous	 effort,	 has	 led	 me	 nowhere	 to	 truth,	 but	 only	 to
weakness.	It	has	not	given	me	an	abundance	of	life;	it	has	brought	me	closer	to
death.	How	is	 this	kind	of	discipline,	which	 is	being	 taught	by	all	 the	schools,
going	to	help	me	cross	the	ocean	of	life	and	reach	the	further	shore?"
A	 question	 mark	 about	 his	 whole	 lifestyle,	 and	 in	 a	 clear	 moment,	 in	 a
transparent	moment	on	that	morning	--	the	sun	was	rising	--	something	changed
in	his	whole	being.
He	had	 renounced	his	kingdom;	 in	 that	moment	he	 renounced	his	 renunciation
too.	He	had	renounced	this	world;	in	that	moment	he	renounced	that	world	too.
He	had	renounced	ambition,	power,	prestige	--	and	now	he	saw	that	in	a	subtle
way	even	the	effort	 to	achieve	enlightenment	 is	nothing	but	ambition,	 that	 it	 is
also	a	desire.	A	desire	for	a	more	eternal	 life,	desire	for	 truth,	but	anyway	it	 is
also	a	desire.
As	he	struggled	to	get	out	of	 the	river,	 that	desire	was	also	dropped.	He	rested
under	 a	 bodhi	 tree.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 in	 his	whole	 life	 he	was	 utterly	 relaxed.
There	was	nowhere	to	go,	nothing	to	find,	no	effort	to	be	made.	And	amazingly,
the	silence	that	he	was	seeking	started	descending	on	him	like	rain.
By	the	evening	he	was	a	totally	changed
man	--	calm	and	cool,	at	home,	at	ease.	The	center	that	he	was	searching	for	--	he
laughed	about	it,	because	the	seeker	himself	was	the	sought.	He	had	been	doing
something	 absurd.	 The	 center	 of	 his	 being	 was	 not	 something	 separate	 from
himself.	Unless	all	desires	disappear,	all	ambitions	disappear	--	unless	you	have
nothing	to	do,	nothing	left	to	be	done;	you	are	just	sitting,	peacefully....
He	found	the	center.
He	was	the	center.
There	was	no	object	anywhere	else.
One	of	the	most	important	Danish	philosophers,	Soren	Kierkegaard,	has	said	that
"Subjectivity	is	all."	You	can	call	it	religion,	you	can	call	it	truth,	you	can	call	it
nirvana.
But	your	own	subjectivity,	your	own	being....
And	by	the	evening,	a	beautiful	incident	happened.	It	was	a	full-moon	night	--	it
has	just	passed	here,	one	or	two	days	ago;	it	was	the	same	full-moon	night	--	a
woman	 in	 the	 nearby	 village....	 In	 India	 people	 worship	 trees,	 they	 worship
animals,	they	worship	stones,	they	worship	mountains,	they	worship	the	sun,	the
moon.	On	the	surface	it	 looks	very	childish,	but	deep	down	the	question	is	not
what	you	worship;	the	question	is	that	you	worship.	Whether	it	is	the	sun	or	the
moon	or	a	tree	or	a	river,	these	are	only	excuses;	the	real	thing	is	worship.	That
woman	was	a	worshiper	of	the	tree	under	which	Gautam	Buddha	was	sitting.
The	moon	 had	 risen...	 this	 is	 the	 strongest	moon	 in	 the	 whole	 year,	 the	most
beautiful.
And	Gautam	Buddha	was	looking	almost	like	a	god	under	the	tree	in	the	silence
of	the	forest,	by	the	side	of	the	river	--	particularly	to	that	woman.	She	had	asked
the	 tree	 something	 and	her	desire	 had	been	 fulfilled,	 and	 so	 she	had	promised
that	 she	 would	 come	with	 delicious	 food	 to	 offer	 to	 the	 god	 of	 the	 tree.	 She
thought	perhaps	the	god	of	the	tree	had	come	out	of	the	tree	and	was	sitting	and
waiting.
And	Buddha	was	hungry;	he	had	not	eaten	for	many	days,	so	when	she	offered	--
her	name	was	Sujata	--	he	accepted.	He	slept	for	the	first	time	in	these	six	years
of	torturous	search,	without	any	tension,	without	any	dreams.	Just	a	silence	was
the	 only	 experience	 that	 was	 becoming	 deeper	 and	 deeper;	 his	 sleep	 was
becoming	 samadhi.	 When	 there	 are	 no	 thoughts,	 no	 desires,	 and	 the	 mind	 is
quiet,	sleep	becomes	samadhi;	it	becomes	enlightenment.
And	in	the	morning,	when	he	opened	his	eyes...	just	visualize...	nowhere	to	go,
nothing	to	achieve.	And	as	he	saw	the	last	star	disappearing	in	the	sky,	he	saw
himself	 also	 disappearing	 in	 the	 sky.	 This	 he	 called	 nirvana,	 disappearing.	He
became	absent,	just	a	pure	silence,	a	nothing...	a	joyful	silence,	a	silence	that	has
a	song	in	it,	a	silence	which	is	an	invisible	dance.
This	 was	 the	 day	 of	 his	 enlightenment.	 Buddhist	 scholars	 for	 twenty-five
centuries	have	thought	 that	he	achieved	this	state	because	of	 those	six	years	of
arduous	 effort.	 I	 differ	 from	 them	 absolutely.	And	 they	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to
prove	to	me...	and	they	think	that	I	am	crazy	because	they	think	that	 if	 it	were
true,	 then	in	twenty-five	centuries	people	would	have	seen	it.	But	I	say	that	he
attained	enlightenment	because	he	dropped	the	desire	to	attain	it.
Pankaja,	 I	 said	 Gautam	 Buddha's	 work	 came	 to	 an	 end	 when	 he	 became
enlightened.	He	worked	too	hard.	I	have	never	worked	for	enlightenment;	I	have
never	 followed	 any	 discipline,	 any	 scripture,	 any	 religion,	 any	 ascetic	 path.
Where	Buddha	 reached	 after	 six	 years	 of	 arduous	 effort,	 I	 found	myself	 there
from	the	very	beginning	--	sitting	under	a	tree,	relaxed.	People	used	to	think	--
my	teachers,	my	friends	--	that	I	must	be	mad.	Even	sometimes	I	used	to	think,
"Perhaps	 they	 are	 right,	 because	 everybody	 has	 ambition;	 I	 don't	 have	 any.
Everybody	wants	to	become	this	and	that,	and	I	want	simply	to	sit	silently	and
not	to	do	anything,	and	just	be	myself."
Enlightenment	 to	 Buddha	 was	 the	 culmination	 of	 his	 whole	 work.	 My	 work
started	after	my	enlightenment.	 I	 have	never	 searched	 for	 it.	 It	 is	one	of	 those
mysteries	which	have	no	explanation.	 It	knocked	on	my	door,	 and	 I	 said	 to	 it,
"Come	in,	it	is	open."	I	have	not	even	taken	the	trouble	to	open	the	door.	I	have
left	it	open	always.
The	day	I	became	enlightened,	 then	my	work	began.	My	work	is	you;	Gautam
Buddha's	work	was	himself.
I	have	lived	for	you.
I	have	no	other	reason	to	be	alive,	because	all	that	life	could	give	to	me,	it	has
given	to	me	without	asking.	It	has	been	very	generous	to	me.	But	after	my	own
enlightenment,	I	felt	the	first	urge	in	my	being	--	that	this	is	so	simple,	so	natural,
that	 it	 should	 happen	 to	 everybody.	 And	 unless	 it	 happens	 to	 everybody,	 the
world	 is	 going	 to	 remain	 in	 misery	 and	 in	 suffering.	 Gautam	 Buddha	 was
enlightening	himself;	 I	 have	been	 enlightening	others.	 So	where	 his	work	was
completed,	my	work	starts.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHENEVER	 I	 TRY	 TO	 WRITE	 WHAT	 I	 WOULD	 LIKE	 TO	 TELL	 YOU
BEFORE
GOING	 BACK	 TO	 THE	 WEST,	 I	 FIND	 MYSELF	 AS	 SPEECHLESS	 AS
LANCELOT.
IT	IS	MORE	THAN	GRATITUDE,	MORE	THAN	LOVE,	MORE	THAN	YOU
AND
ME.	AND	YET,	SOME	LONGING	TO	CONVEY	THIS	FEELING	IS	THERE,
STRONG,	 AND	 DOESN'T	 GO;THERE	 IS	 A	 QUIET	 SADNESS	 AND	 A
BURNING
FIRE.	 BELOVED	 MASTER,	 HOW	 CAN	 I	 EXPRESS	 THE	 IMMENSITY
THAT	HAS
FILLED	 ME	 SO	 MANY	 TIMES	 WHEN	 SITTING	 IN	 YOUR	 PRESENCE
AND
LIVING	IN	YOUR	BUDDHAFIELD?
Satyam	Svarup,	the	moment	it	happens	it	is	always	more	than	love,	it	is	always
more	than	joy,	it	is	always	more	than	gratitude,	because	life	is	more	than	you	and
more	 than	me.	 It	 is	 so	multi-dimensional,	 it	 is	 so	 vast....	 Only	 if	 you	 are	 not
aware	of	it,	are	you	capable	to	express	your	feelings.	But	the	moment	awareness
enters	 in	 your	 life,	 explanations	 start	 disappearing,	 expressions	 become
impossible,	because	whatever	you	can	say	falls	very	short.
There	have	been	many	people	on	the	earth	who	have	achieved	the	ultimate,	but
we	 don't	 even	 know	 their	 names	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	 moment	 they
achieved,	 they	became	dumb	 --	 the	 silence	was	 so	deep,	 they	could	not	 find	a
way	to	convey	what	had	happened	to	them.
There	are	many	mystics	in	the	world,	but	very	few	masters.	Every	mystic	is	not	a
master.
It	is	a	rare	combination	of	articulateness,	of	using	words	in	such	a	way	that	they
carry	wordlessness	 in	 them,	 to	say	things	 in	such	a	way	as	 if	nothing	has	been
said,	 to	 be	 in	 such	 a	way	 as	 if	 you	 are	 not.	And	 the	more	you	 are	 absent,	 the
more	you	are	a	pure	presence.
You	are	asking	me,	"Whenever	I	try	to	write	what	I	would	like	to	tell	You	before
going	back	to	the	West,	I	find	myself	as	speechless	as	Lancelot."
You	are	fortunate.	It	is	part	of	blissfulness	to	be	so	silent;	you	know	something
has	 to	 be	 said,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 say	 it.	 You	 know	 there	 is	 a	 great
blissfulness	overflowing	you,	a	gratitude	in	your	heart,	and	it	does	not	look	right
not	to	express	them.	But	all	words	are	so	earthly,	and	all	these	experiences	are	so
unearthly,	that	there	is	no	way	of	translating	them.	Even	the	great	masters	who
tried	to	convey	something	of	the	inexpressible	had	to	find	strange	ways.
Just	the	other	day,	I	received	the	news	of	a	man	in	the	part	of	Kashmir	occupied
by	 Pakistan.	 He	 is	 one	 hundred	 and	 twenty-five	 years	 old,	 and	 he	 has	 joked
about	death	three	times.	This	was	the	third	time.
He	dies;	doctors	declare	 that	he	 is	dead	and	 there	 is	great	mourning	 --	 friends
and	relatives,	and	preparations	--	and	at	the	final	moment	when	they	are	taking
him	to	the	graveyard,	he	opens	his	eyes	and	he	starts	laughing!	The	first	time	he
did	it	people	thought,	"It	may	have	been	just	a	coma,	and	we	were	misled."	The
second	time	they	were	more	alert	not	to	be	deceived	by	the	old	fellow;	in	every
way	they	made	certain	that	he	was	dead.	But	still,	 the	same	thing	happened:	at
the	last	moment,	just	when	they	were	putting	him	into	the	grave,	he	said,	"Wait!"
He	said,	"Can't	you	see	the	joke?"
And	he	has	performed	it	now	again	at	the	age	of	one	hundred	and	twenty-five.
This	 is	his	way,	a	strange	way	of	saying	to	you	that	 life	 is	eternal	and	death	is
just	a	joke.	He	is	saying	it	by	his	own	life.	And	this	time	he	has	said,	"Now	I	am
very	old,	and	I	cannot	go	on	doing	this	strategy	for	long,	so	perhaps	this	is	the
last	time.	Remember	--	the	fourth	time	I	may	be	really	dead."
But	they	said,	"We	can't	believe	you.	Every	time	you	say,	`Next	time	I	may	be
really	dead.'"
He	 is	 showing	 the	 eternity	 of	 life	 and	 consciousness.	He	 is	 a	master.	Without
words,	he	is	saying	what	the	UPANISHADS	have	said:	Amritasya	putra	--	"You
are	 sons	 and	 daughters	 of	 eternity."	 But	 his	 way	 of	 saying	 it	 is	 far	 more
significant,	because	words	can	be	used	in	a	very	poetic	way	and	still	 they	may
not	be	true,	they	may	not	be	the	experience	of	the	poet.	But	this	man	knows	how
to	go	deep	--	so	deep	into	himself	that	there	is	no	medical	way	to	find	out	that	he
is	still	alive.
Speechlessness	 is	 bound	 to	 happen	with	 anything	 that	 you	 can	 experience	 but
you	cannot	bring	to	words.	You	see	a	beautiful	sunset	--	what	can	you	say?	You
see	a	bird	on	the	wing	in	the	sky	--	so	beautiful,	just	the	expression	of	freedom	--
but	what	can	you	say?
And	whatever	you	say	will	always	fall	short	of	the	target.
Only	mundane	things	can	be	said.
The	sacred	makes	you	speechless.
Because	"it	is	more	than	gratitude...."	You	say	"gratitude"	and	you	certainly	feel
you	have	not	said	it;	the	word	is	so	small	and	the	experience	is	so	big	--	and	yet
there	is	a	great	longing	to	convey	the	feeling.
These	are	the	mysteries	of	life:	when	you	cannot	say,	the	urge	becomes	more	and
more	powerful	to	say	it.	The	musician	says	in	his	own	way,	the	poet	says	in	his
own	way,	 the	 painter	 says	 in	 his	 own	way,	 but	 nobody	 succeeds	 --	 something
remains	beyond	all	expression.
That	 something	 beyond	 expression	 is	 God,	 is	 truth,	 is	 enlightenment,	 is
liberation.	 But	 these	words	 also	 don't	 say	 it;	 they	 only	 indicate	 --	 just	 fingers
pointing	to	the	moon.
You	are	right,	"There	is	a	quiet	sadness	and	a	burning	fire...	how	can	I	express
the	 immensity	 that	has	 filled	me	so	many	 times	when	sitting	 in	Your	presence
and	living	in	Your	buddhafield?"
You	will	have	to	go	through	an	alchemical	change.	That	sadness	is	beautiful;	it	is
not	misery,	it	is	just	the	sadness	of	experiencing	the	beyond	and	the	inability	to
express	it.
And	 the	burning	desire	 to	express	 it	 turns	 into	creativity	 --	you	can	paint,	you
can	sing,	you	can	dance;	you	can	 find	your	own	way	somehow	to	 indicate	 the
beyond,	and	the	burning	fire	will	not	be	a	torture	to	you.	It	will	become	a	great
joy	of	creativity.
So	don't	make	it	sadness,	and	don't	make	it	a	suffering.	Feel	blessed!	Change	it
into	a	great	laughter.	It	is	only	a	question	of	getting	out	of	the	bed	from	the	right
side.
The	Mother	Superior	of	the	convent	awoke	in	a	happy	mood,	dressed	and	set	off
to	visit	her	flock.	"Good	morning,	Sister	Augusta.	God	bless	you.	Are	you	happy
at	your	work?"
"Yes,	Reverend	Mother,	but	I	am	sorry	to	see	you	got	out	of	bed	on	the	wrong
side	this	morning."
The	Mother	Superior	ignored	the	remark,	and	passed	on	to	another	nun.	"Good
morning,	Sister	Georgina.	You	look	pleased	with	yourself."
"I	am,	Reverend	Mother,	but	 it	 is	a	pity	you	got	out	of	bed	on	 the	wrong	side
today."
The	Mother	Superior,	greatly	puzzled,	moved	on	 to	 a	young	novice,	 "Tell	me,
little	sister,	do	you	also	feel	I	got	out	of	bed	on	the	wrong	side?"
"I	am	afraid	so."
"But	why?	Am	I	not	as	happy	as	a	songbird?	and	pleasant	to	you	all?"
"Yes,	Mother,	but	you	are	wearing	Father	Vincenzo's	slippers."
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	That	beyondness	is	you
17	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705175
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN12
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
84
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THESE	 DAYS,	 LOOKING	 INSIDE,	 I	 DO	 NOT	 FIND	 A	 PERSONALITY
WITH
CERTAIN	 CHARACTERISTICS,	 BUT	 RATHER	 AN	 EVER-CHANGING
FLUX,	 TOTALLY	 UNPREDICTABLE.	 IT	 MAKES	 LIFE	 IN	 THIS	 BODY
FEEL	VERY
FRAGILE,	 VULNERABLE	 AND	 MOMENTARY	 --	 A	 FEELING	 WHICH
EXTENDS
ITSELF	TO	EVERYTHING	AROUND	ME,	SHAKING	ME	TO	THE	ROOTS.
Deva	Surabhi,	man	is	not	one,	man	is	many:	man	is	a	multitude,	a	crowd.	The
feeling	of	being	a	personality	is	a	mirage.	It	arises	because	you	never	go	in,	and
you	never	face	the	crowd.	Perhaps	to	avoid	the	crowd,	you	never	go	in.
You	are	living	outside	your	own	home	and	the	home	is	being	occupied	by	your
neighbors,	many	 of	 whom	 are	 dead.	 And	when	 I	 say	many,	 I	mean	many!	 --
centuries,	queues	of	old	and	dead	people	are	living	within	you;	hence,	when	for
the	first	time	one	enters	on	the	path	of	meditation,	the	first	encounter	shakes	one
to	 the	 very	 roots.	 One	 sees	 many	 faces	 and	 many	 people	 --	 except	 one	 face,
except	the	one	individual	that	he	is.
Most	people,	out	of	fear,	simply	run	out	again	and	get	engaged	in	things	so	that
they	can	forget	what	is	happening	within	themselves.	To	find	oneself	alone	needs
such	 courage	 because	 the	moment	 you	 find	 yourself	 alone	 you	 have	 to	 face	 a
multitude,	a	crowd.	Each	in	the	crowd	pretends	to	be	your	real	self,	and	there	is
no	way	for	you	to	find	out	who	is	your	real	 individual.	Millions	of	people	live
their	 lives	without	meditation	for	 the	simple	reason	 that	 they	cannot	cope	with
this	encounter.
The	method	is	very	easy.	Bodhidharma	used	to	say	to	his	disciples,	"When	you
enter	 into	 yourself	 you	 will	 find	 many	 pretenders	 who	 look	 almost	 like	 you.
Some	of	them	are	even	better	than	you,	because	they	have	been	practicing	your
act,	your	part,	for	years	--	or	perhaps	for	lives.	You	have	to	behave	the	way	the
elephant	 behaves	 when	 a	 crowd	 of	 dogs	 starts	 barking:	 the	 elephant	 goes	 on
without	even	bothering,	as	if	there	is	nobody...
You	have	to	be	an	elephant	and	treat	the	crowd	within	you	as	if	they	are	barking
dogs."
In	India	it	is	now	becoming	a	rare	scene,	but	in	my	childhood	it	was	an	everyday
scene	because	all	the	Maharajas,	and	there	were	many,	and	all	the	great	religious
leaders,	and	they	were	many,	all	had	many	elephants.	In	fact,	a	religious	leader's
religiousness	was	measured	by	how	many	elephants	he	had,	because	to	keep	an
elephant	is	not	easy;	it	is	very	costly.
It	 was	 an	 everyday	 scene	 --	 the	 elephants	 passing	 on	 the	 road	 and	 the	 dogs
barking.	A	strange	 feeling	arises	when	you	 see	a	dog	bark	at	 the	elephant;	 the
elephant	pays	not	even	the	smallest	attention	--	as	if	there	is	nobody,	nothing	is
happening.	 And	 if	 you	 look	 at	 the	 face	 of	 the	 dog,	 you	 can	 understand	 the
meaning	of	the	word	`despair'..."This	fellow	is	strange:	we	are	barking,	so	many
dogs,	and	he	is	going	his	way	as	if	nothing	is	happening."
Soon	those	dogs	start	disappearing	--	"What	is	the	point?	The	elephant	seems	to
be	 an	 idiot,	 or	 maybe	 he	 is	 deaf,	 but	 not	 our	 equal.	 Perhaps	 he	 does	 not
understand	our	language,	but	whatever	the	reason,	the	task	is	hopeless."
Bodhidharma	is	right;	the	meditator	has	to	behave	like	an	elephant.	And	he	will
be	 surprised:	 all	 those	who	 are	 surrounding	 his	 inside	 --	many	 facades,	many
voices	 --	 start	 becoming	 distant.	 Soon	 a	moment	 comes	when	 they	 are	 so	 far
away	 that	 it	 seems	you	 have	 only	 seen	 them,	 heard	 them,	 in	 a	 dream.	And	 as
they	 go,	 receding...	 a	 great	 silence,	 a	 tremendous	 tranquillity	 settles	 in	 your
being.
Surabhi,	your	question	is,	"These	days,	looking	inside,	I	do	not	find	a	personality
with	 certain	 characteristics,	 but	 rather	 an	 ever-changing	 flux,	 totally
unpredictable.	 It	 makes	 life	 in	 this	 body	 feel	 very	 fragile,	 vulnerable	 and
momentary	 --	 a	 feeling	which	 extends	 itself	 to	 everything	 around	me,	 shaking
me	to	the	roots."
It	appears	as	if	it	is	a	curse	--	it	is	not.
The	 roots	 that	can	be	shaken	are	not	your	 roots,	and	 that	which	 is	 fragile,	 that
which	is	momentary,	does	not	belong	to	you.	Only	one	thing	belongs	to	you	in
this	whole	 experience:	 that	 is	 the	watcher,	 the	witness.	Who	 is	witnessing	 the
fragileness,	 the	 ever-changing	 flux	 of	 personalities?	 Who	 is	 watching	 the
shaking	of	the	roots?	Certainly	he	is	beyond	all	of	it.
That	beyondness	is	yours.
That	beyondness	is	you.
That	is	your	individuality,	that	is	your	being.
Settle	in	that	witnessing,	and	all	that	you	are	feeling	disturbed	by	will	disappear.
It	 is	 just	 the	 first	 encounter	of	 entering	 into	oneself.	Don't	 go	back;	go	deeper
into	it.
Ginsberg	 sits	down	 in	 a	Moscow	cafe	 and	orders	 a	glass	of	 tea	 and	a	 copy	of
pravda.
"I	will	bring	 the	 tea,"	 the	waiter	 tells	him,	"but	 I	can't	bring	a	copy	of	pravda.
The	Soviet	regime	has	been	overthrown	and	pravda	is	not	published	anymore."
"Alright,"	says	Ginsberg,	"just	bring	the	tea."
The	next	day,	Ginsberg	comes	to	 the	same	cafe	and	asks	for	 tea	and	a	copy	of
pravda.
The	waiter	gives	him	the	same	answer.
On	the	third	day,	Ginsberg	orders	the	same	and	this	time	the	waiter	says	to	him,
"Look,	sir,	you	seem	to	be	an	intelligent	man.	For	the	past	three	days	you	have
ordered	 a	 copy	 of	 pravda	 and	 three	 times	 now	 I	 have	 had	 to	 tell	 you	 that	 the
Soviet	regime	has	been	overthrown	and	Pravda	is	not	published	anymore."
"I	know,	I	know,"	says	Ginsberg,	"but	I	just	like	to	hear	you	say	it!"
It	is	good	news,	Surabhi,	that	you	don't	exist	as	a	personality.	You	should	rejoice
--
rejoice	in	the	fact	that	you	are	only	the	witness,	the	watcher,	because	that	is	the
only	 thing	which	 is	 eternal	 and	 immortal.	 It	 is	 the	only	 thing	which	cannot	be
transcended	by	any	more	beautiful	 experience,	 any	deeper	ecstasy,	 any	greater
enlightenment.
Just	 let	 this	 personality,	 this	 fragileness,	 this	 momentariness,	 this	 fear,	 this
trembling	of	the	roots,	not	be	identified	with	yourself.	Remain	aloof,	a	watcher
on	the	hills,	and	soon	the	whole	scene	changes.
The	pope	lay	dying.	His	doctor	called	the	cardinals	together	and	announced,	"We
can	only	save	his	life	with	a	heart	transplant."
"We	 must	 tell	 the	 people,"	 said	 one	 of	 the	 cardinals,	 "perhaps	 a	 donor	 will
volunteer	to	give	his	heart	for	the	pontiff."
An	announcement	was	made	and	thousands	gathered	beneath	the	pope's	balcony
shouting,	"Take-a	my	heart,	take-a	my	heart!"
The	cardinals	now	had	to	decide	on	the	person	who	would	donate	his	heart	to	the
holy	 father.	 "We	 will	 drop	 a	 feather	 from	 his	 holiness'	 head,"	 said	 the	 head
cardinal.
"Whosoever	it	lands	upon	will	be	the	lucky	person."
As	the	feather	floated	down	from	the	balcony,	from	the	multitudes	below	came,
"Take-a	my	heart	--	phew!	Take-a	my	heart	--	phew!"
It	 is	one	 thing	 to	say,	"Take-a	my	heart,"	but	when	 it	comes	so	close,	"Phew!"
Everybody	wants	to	know	his	inner	reality,	but	you	will	have	to	lose	something;
you	will	have	to	pay	for	it.
There	 is	 nothing	 in	 existence	 available	without	payment.	 If	 you	want	 to	know
yourself,	 you	will	 have	 to	drop	 all	 false	 identities.	They	are	your	 investments,
they	are	your	power,	they	are	your	prestige,	they	are	your	religion,	they	are	your
qualifications.	It	is	difficult	to	drop	them;	it	feels	like	death.
Certainly	meditation	is	a	death,	a	death	of	all	that	is	false	in	you.	And	only	then,
that	which	 is	not	 false	 is	experienced.	That	experience	 is	 resurrection	 --	a	new
life,	the	birth	of	a	new	man.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	MOST	AWARE	OF	A	BIG	FEAR	OR	GUILT	IN	ME	WHEN	I	SIT	WITH
YOU,	AND	I	AM	LONGING	SO	MUCH	TO	BE	TOTALLY	OPEN	TO	YOU.
RECENTLY	I	COULD	FEEL	THE	SERPENT	ROLLED	UP	IN	THE	BOTTOM
OF	 ME,	 SLEEPING,	 AND	 THE	 DOOR,	 THE	 THIRD	 CHAKRA	 STILL
CLOSED.	MY	HEART	WANTS	TO
FLY	WITH	YOU.	IS	THERE	ANYTHING	I	CAN	DO?
Sambodhi	Amrita,	what	is	fear?	There	are	fears	and	fears;	I	am	not	talking	about
them.	I	am	talking	about	the	most	fundamental	fear	--	all	other	fears	are	faraway
echoes	of	the	basic	fear	--	and	that	fear	is	of	death.	Life	is	surrounded	by	death.
You	see	every	day	somebody	dying	--	something	dying;	something	that	was	alive
a	moment	before	is	dead.
Each	death	reminds	you	of	your	own	death.
It	is	impossible	to	forget	your	own	death;	every	moment	there	is	a	reminder.	So
the	first	thing	to	be	understood	is	that	the	only	possibility	of	getting	rid	of	fear	is
to	get	rid	of	death.	And	you	can	get	rid	of	death,	because	death	is	only	an	idea,
not	a	reality.
You	have	only	seen	other	people	dying;	have	you	ever	seen	yourself	dying?	And
when	you	see	somebody	else	dying,	you	are	an	outsider,	not	a	participant	in	the
experience.	The	experience	is	happening	inside	the	person.	All	that	you	know	is
that	he	is	no	longer	breathing,	that	his	body	has	become	cold,	that	his	heart	is	no
longer	beating.	But	do	you	think	all	 these	 things	put	 together	are	equivalent	 to
life?	Is	 life	only	breathing?	Is	 life	only	the	heartbeat,	 the	blood	circulating	and
keeping	 the	 body	 warm?	 If	 this	 is	 life,	 it	 is	 not	 worth	 the	 game.	 If	 only	 my
breathing	is	my	life,	what	is	the	point	of	going	on	breathing?
Life	must	be	something	more.	To	be	of	any	value	 life	must	have	something	of
eternity	in	it;	it	must	be	something	beyond	death.	And	you	can	know	it,	because
it	exists	within	you.
Life	exists	within	you	--	death	is	only	an	experience	of	others,	outside	observers.
It	is	simply	like	love.	Can	you	understand	love	by	seeing	a	person	being	loving
to	 someone?	What	will	 you	 see?	They	 are	 hugging	 each	other,	 but	 is	 hugging
love?	You	may	see	they	are	holding	hands	together,	but	 is	holding	hands	love?
From	 the	 outside,	 what	 else	 can	 you	 discover	 about	 love?	 Anything	 that	 you
discover	will	 be	 absolutely	 futile.	 These	 are	 expressions	 of	 love,	 but	 not	 love
itself.	Love	is	something	one	knows	only	when	one	is	in	it.
One	 of	 the	 greatest	 poet's	 of	 India,	 Rabindranath	 Tagore,	 was	 very	 much
embarrassed	by	an	old	man	who	was	his	grandfather's	friend.	The	old	man	often
used	 to	come	because	he	 lived	 in	 the	neighborhood,	and	he	would	never	 leave
the	house	without	creating	trouble	for	Rabindranath.	He	would	certainly	knock
on	his	doors,	and	ask,	"How	is	your	poetry	going?	Do	you	really	know	God?	Do
you	really	know	love?	Tell	me,	do	you	know	all	these	things	that	you	talk	about
in	your	poetry?	Or	are	you	just	articulate	with	words?
Any	idiot	can	talk	about	love,	about	God,	about	the	soul,	but	I	don't	see	in	your
eyes	that	you	have	experienced	anything."
And	 Rabindranath	 could	 not	 answer	 him.	 In	 fact	 he	 was	 right.	 The	 old	 man
would	meet	him	in	the	marketplace	and	hold	him	and	ask	him,	"What	about	your
God,	have	you	found	him?	Or	are	you	still	writing	poetry	about	him?	Remember,
talking	about	God,	is	not	knowing	God."
He	was	 a	 very	 embarrassing	 person.	 In	 poets'	 gatherings,	where	Rabindranath
was	very	much	 respected	 --	 he	was	 a	Nobel	 prize	winner	 --	 that	 old	man	was
bound	 to	 reach.	 On	 the	 stage,	 before	 all	 the	 poets	 and	 worshipers	 of
Rabindranath,	he	would	hold	him	by	his	collar	and	would	say,	"Still	 it	has	not
happened.	Why	are	you	deceiving	these	idiots?
They	are	smaller	 idiots,	you	are	a	bigger	 idiot;	 they	are	not	known	outside	 the
land,	you	are	known	all	over	the	world	--	but	that	does	not	mean	that	you	know
God."
Rabindranath	has	written	in	his	diary:	"I	was	so	much	harassed	by	him,	and	he
had	 such	 penetrating	 eyes	 that	 it	was	 impossible	 to	 tell	 a	 lie	 to	 him.	His	 very
presence	was	 such	 that	 either	 you	 had	 to	 say	 the	 truth,	 or	 you	 had	 to	 remain
silent."
But	 one	 day	 it	 happened...	Rabindranath	 had	 gone	 for	 a	morning	walk.	 In	 the
night	 it	 had	 rained;	 it	 was	 very	 early	morning	 and	 the	 sun	 was	 rising.	 In	 the
ocean	it	was	all	gold,	and	by	the	side	of	the	streets	water	had	gathered	in	small
pools.	In	those	small	pools	also	the	sun	was	rising	with	the	same	glory,	with	the
same	 color,	 with	 the	 same	 joy....	 And	 just	 this	 experience	 --	 that	 in	 existence
there	 is	nothing	superior	and	nothing	inferior,	 that	all	 is	one	whole	--	suddenly
triggered	something	in	him.	For	the	first	time	in	his	life	he	went	to	the	old	man's
house,	knocked	on	the	door,	looked	into	the	eyes	of	the	old	man	and	said,
"Now,	what	do	you	say?"
He	said,	"Now	there	is	nothing	to	say.	It	has	happened.	I	bless	you."
The	experience	of	your	immortality,	of	your	eternity,	of	your	wholeness,	of	your
oneness	 with	 existence	 is	 always	 possible.	 It	 only	 needs	 some	 triggering
experience.
The	whole	function	of	the	master	is	to	create	a	situation	in	which	the	experience
can	 be	 triggered;	 and	 suddenly	 the	 cloud	 of	 death	 disappears	 and	 there	 is	 all
sunshine	--
tremendous	life,	abundant	life,	life	full	of	song	and	full	of	dance.
So	 the	 first	 thing,	Amrita,	 is	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 death.	All	 fears	will	 disappear.	You
don't	have	to	work	on	each	single	fear;	otherwise	it	will	take	lives	and	still	you
will	not	be	able	to	get	rid	of	them.
You	say,	"I	am	most	aware	of	a	big	fear...."
Everybody	 is	 more	 or	 less	 aware	 of	 the	 big	 fear,	 but	 the	 fear	 is	 absolutely
rootless,	baseless.	And	you	say	"...	or	guilt	in	me,	when	I	sit	with	You."
The	 fear	 is	natural,	because	death	 is	known	by	everybody	around.	Guilt	 is	not
natural;	it	is	created	by	religions.	They	have	made	every	man	guilty	--	guilty	of	a
thousand	 and	 one	 things,	 so	 burdened	 with	 guilt	 that	 they	 cannot	 sing,	 they
cannot	dance,	they	cannot	enjoy	anything.	The	guilt	poisons	everything.
Sitting	with	me	it	becomes	more	clear	to	you,	because	I	am	a	stranger	amongst
you;	I	don't	have	any	guilt.	Guilt	is	an	absolutely	non-existential	thing.	It	is	the
conditioning	of	religions.
Sitting	with	me,	everything	inside	you	starts	becoming	clear	by	contrast:	Here	is
a	man	who	has	no	guilt,	a	man	who	has	no	fear,	a	man	who	is	absolutely	alone	in
this	whole	world	 --	 a	 single	man	 against	 the	whole	world.	All	 your	 guilt	 that
ordinarily	 remains	 unconscious,	 because	 you	 are	 living	with	 the	 same	 kind	 of
people,	with	the	same	kind	of	conditioning....
Being	with	me	is	being	with	a	mirror.
And	to	see	yourself	and	the	mess	that	you	are	carrying	within	you,	 is	certainly
saddening.
But	 it	 is	also	 important,	because	 if	you	become	aware	of	 it,	 it	can	be	dropped.
Guilt	is	an	idea	accepted	by	you.	You	can	reject	it,	and	it	can	be	rejected	because
it	 is	 not	 part	 of	 existence.	 It	 is	 part	 of	 some	 stupid	 theology,	 of	 some	 old
primitive	religion.
You	are	saying,	"and	I	am	longing	so	much	to	be	totally	open	to	You."	And	you
become	afraid	because	the	closer	you	become,	 the	more	open	you	become,	 the
more	 you	 feel	 yourself	 full	 of	 guilt,	 sadness,	misery,	 condemnation.	You	 have
been	humiliated	so	much.
All	 the	 religions	 have	 conspired	 against	 innocent	 human	beings	 to	make	 them
guilty,	 because	 without	 making	 them	 guilty	 they	 cannot	 be	 made	 into	 slaves.
And	slaves	are	needed.	For	a	few	people's	lust	for	power,	millions	of	people	are
needed	to	be	enslaved.
For	a	few	people	to	become	Alexander	the	Great,	millions	have	to	be	reduced	to
a	subhuman	status.
But	all	these	are	simply	conditionings	in	the	mind,	which	you	can	erase	as	easily
as	writing	 in	 the	sands	on	a	beach.	Just	don't	be	afraid,	because	 those	writings
you	have	accepted	as	holy,	you	have	accepted	as	coming	from	very	respectable
sources,	 from	 great	 founders	 of	 religions.	 It	 does	 not	 matter.	 Only	 one	 thing
matters:	that	your	mind	should	be	completely	cleaned,	utterly	empty	and	silent.
There	is	no	need	of	Moses	or	Jesus	or	Buddha	to	reside	inside	you.	You	need	a
totally	silent,	clean	space.	And	only	that	space	can	bring	you	not	only	to	me,	but
to	yourself,	to	existence	itself.
"Recently	I	could	feel	 the	serpent	rolled	up	 in	 the	bottom	of	me,	sleeping,	and
the	door,	 the	third	chakra,	still	closed.	My	heart	wants	to	fly	with	you.	Is	there
anything	I	can	do?"
There	are	things	which	have	to	be	done,	and	there	are	things	which	have	not	to
be	done.
Things	 that	 can	 be	 done	 are	 ordinary,	 mundane,	 mediocre,	 of	 the	 objective
world.	Things	which	happen,	and	cannot	be	done,	belong	 to	a	 superior,	higher
order	of	existence.
If	you	are	feeling	that	you	would	like	your	love	to	grow,	to	blossom,	then	wait
with	deep	longing	--	as	a	seed.	The	longing	has	to	be	the	seed.	And	the	waiting,
the	patient	waiting	for	the	time	when	the	spring	comes	and	seeds	start	changing
from	dormant	beings	into	alive,	active	blossomings....
The	longing	is	there.
Just	waiting	is	needed.
And	the	waiting	should	not	be	impatient,	because	impatient	waiting	means	you
don't	 trust	 existence.	 And	 your	 impatience	 cannot	 bring	 the	 spring	 a	 single
moment	 earlier.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 your	 impatience	may	 block	 the	 door	 for	 the
spring	to	come	to	you.
Just	remain	available,	with	a	deep	longing,	just	like	a	thirst	in	every	cell	of	your
body,	a	passion.
And	spring	has	always	come.
Your	spring	will	also	come.
You	need	not	do	anything	else.
Just	long	as	lovingly,	as	intensely,	and	wait	as	patiently,	as	possible.
The	 religions	 of	 the	world	 have	 given	 so	many	 diseases	 to	man	 that	 they	 are
uncountable.
One	of	the	diseases	is	that	they	have	made	every	man	ambitious	for	reward	--	if
not	in	this	world	then	in	the	other	world.	They	have	made	man	so	greedy,	and	at
the	same	time	they	are	all	talking	against	greed.	But	their	whole	religion	is	based
on	greed.
Don't	let	your	longing	be	a	greed.
Your	longing	should	be	a	love	affair.
Your	 longing	 should	 not	 be	 a	 sad	 state	 but	 a	 joyful	 state,	 just	 as	 a	 pregnant
mother.	 Your	 longing	makes	 you	 pregnant.	 You	 can	 feel	 the	 child	 inside	 you
which	is	growing	every	day,	and	each	moment	becomes	a	reward	--	not	that	your
reward	will	be	delivered	in	heaven.
Religions	have	done	 such	harm	 that	 they	cannot	be	 forgiven.	They	have	 taken
away	all	dignity	of	man	--	his	joy	of	longing,	of	love,	his	pleasure	in	waiting,	his
trust	that	the	spring	will	come.	They	have	taken	everything	away	from	you.	You
will	 be	 rewarded	only	 if	 you	do	 certain	 rituals	which	have	no	 relationship,	 no
relevance.	Now,	going	around	a	statue	seven	times	--	what	relevance	can	there	be
that	you	have	earned	virtue?
There	are	people	who	are	continuously	counting	beads.	I	have	seen	people	who
are	tending	their	shop	and	their	hand	is	holding	the	beads	so	others	should	not
see.	It	looks	strange	that	you	are	haggling	about	the	price	of	a	certain	thing	with
a	customer	and	at	the	same	time	moving	the	beads,	so	they	keep	their	hands	and
their	beads	in	a	bag	so	you	cannot	see.	But	anybody	can	see	--	why	should	one
have	one's	hand	in	a	bag?
So	the	religion	is	going	on	inside	the	bag;	outside	they	are	haggling	for	the	price
and	everything,	and	trying	to	cheat	and	exploit	--	lying.	And	inside,	how	many
times	 they	have	moved	 the	beads	 --	means	 they	have	earned	 that	much	virtue.
Virtue	is	the	coin	in	heaven	--	how	much	virtue	have	you	in	your	bank	account?
In	Tibet	they	have	done	even	better	than	counting	beads.	They	have	made	small
prayer	wheels;	each	spoke	represents	one	bead.	So	they	go	on	doing	all	kinds	of
work,	their	prayer	wheel	by	their	side,	and	just	once	in	a	while	they	move	it.	And
it	goes	on	moving;	when	it	slows	down,	they	again	give	a	push....
When	I	first	came	to	know	a	lama	with	his	prayer	wheel	I	said,	"You	are	stupid.
Just	plug	it	into	the	electricity.	It	will	go	on	eternally,	irrespective	of	whether	you
are	alive	or	dead!"
But	the	lama	could	not	understand	that	I	was	making	a	laughingstock	of	him.	He
said,
"Your	 idea	 is	 great,	 because	 then	 we	 are	 completely	 free;	 otherwise	 this	 is	 a
hindrance	 and	 everything	 --	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 wholeheartedly."	 Even
making	 love,	 they	 are	 moving	 their	 prayer	 wheel	 --	 both	 the	 wife	 and	 the
husband,	they	both	have	their	prayer	wheels.	Now,	it	is	very	difficult:	in	the	first
place,	the	exercise	of	love	is	difficult	--	such	primitive	gymnastics	--	and	on	top
of	it	you	have	to	go	on	moving	those	prayer	wheels.
A	 simple	 and	 innocent	 religion	would	 have	 changed	 the	whole	 earth.	 But	 the
cunning	priests	would	not	allow	a	pure	and	innocent	and	childlike	religion,	with
wondering	eyes,	with	joy,	not	bothering	about	stupid	ideas	about	heaven	and	hell
but	living	each	moment	with	great	love.
And	waiting	for	more	--	not	desiring,	but	by	waiting,	deserving,	creating	more
and	more	space,	silence,	so	that	the	spring	comes.	And	not	only	a	few	flowers,
but	so	many	flowers....
One	of	 the	Sufi	mystics	has	a	 small	poem	about	 it:	 "I	had	waited	 long	 for	 the
spring	--	 it	came.	And	it	came	so	abundantly,	with	so	many	flowers,	 that	 there
was	not	a	place	left	where	I	could	make	a	nest	for	myself."
Life	 gives	 abundantly;	 you	 just	 have	 to	 be	 a	 recipient.	But	 never	wait	 for	 any
reward.
Three	 men	 die	 on	 the	 same	 day	 and	 go	 to	 heaven.	 One	 by	 one	 they	 are
interviewed	 by	 Saint	 Peter,	 who	 asked	 the	 first	 man	 how	many	 times	 he	 had
made	love:	"Never!	I	am	a	virgin,"	is	the	first	guy's	answer.	Saint	Peter	gives	him
a	Mercedes	Benz	 to	get	 around	 in,	 and	poses	 the	 same	question	 to	 the	 second
man.	"Only	once,"	he	says,	"on	my	wedding	night."
Giving	him	the	keys	to	a	Toyota,	Saint	Peter	turns	and	asks	the	third	man	how
often	he	has	made	love	in	his	life.	"I	have	gotten	laid	so	many	times	I	have	lost
count,"	the	fellow	confesses.	And	Saint	Peter	gives	him	a	bicycle.
Not	too	much	later,	the	first	man	is	driving	around	in	his	Mercedes	Benz	when
he	 sees	 something	 so	 extraordinary	 that	 he	 turns	 his	 head	 to	 look.	He	 crashes
headlong	 into	 a	 tree,	 and	 when	 he	 comes	 to,	 in	 Heaven	 Hospital,	 the	 angel
doctors	and	police	are	standing	by	his	bedside,	waiting	to	find	out	what	caused
the	accident.
"It	was	shocking,	simply	shocking!"	whispers	 the	poor	man,	"I	saw	Pope	John
Paul	on	roller	skates."
All	your	old	 religions	are	based	on	 reward	and	punishment,	on	more	and	 less.
Even	on	the	last	night	when	Jesus	is	departing	from	his	disciples	they	ask	only
one	question	--
"Certainly	 in	 heaven	 you	will	 be	 standing	 at	 the	 right	 hand	 of	God,	 but	what
about	us?
Who	will	be	standing	next	to	you?	And	what	are	going	to	be	our	positions?"	It	is
shocking	 to	 think	 that	 the	 man	 they	 had	 loved,	 lived	 with,	 is	 going	 to	 be
crucified	tomorrow	--	it	is	almost	certain	--	but	their	whole	concern	is	about	their
position.	This	is	the	corruption	that	religions	have	put	into	man's	mind.
I	want	 you	 to	 be	 absolutely	 innocent	 of	 all	 religious	 corruption	 and	 pollution.
Have	a	silent,	loving	mind,	waiting	for	more	to	happen.	Life	is	so	much	that	we
go	on	exploring	it	--	but	we	cannot	exhaust	it.	The	mystery	is	timeless.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	Nothing	goes	right	without	meditation
18	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705180
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN13
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
104
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	FEEL	A	STRONG	CONNECTION	BETWEEN	DEATH	AND	MEDITATION,
A	 FASCINATION	 AND	 A	 FEAR.	 WHEN	 I	 SIT	 WITH	 YOU,	 IT	 IS
SOMEHOW	SAFE
TO	CLOSE	MY	EYES	AND	MEDITATE;	WHEN	I	AM	ALONE,	IT	IS
FRIGHTENING.	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Dhyan	 Sagar,	 there	 is	 not	 only	 a	 strong	 connection	 between	 meditation	 and
death,	but	they	are	almost	the	same	thing	--	just	two	ways	of	looking	at	the	same
experience.
Death	separates	you	from	your	body,	from	your	mind,	from	all	 that	 is	not	you.
But	 it	 separates	 you	 against	 your	will.	You	 are	 resisting,	 you	don't	want	 to	 be
separated;	you	are	not	willing,	you	are	not	in	a	state	of	let-go.
Meditation	also	separates	all	 that	 is	not	you	from	your	being	and	reality	 --	but
the	resistance	is	not	there;	that	is	the	only	difference.	Instead	of	resistance,	there
is	a	tremendous	willingness,	a	longing,	a	passionate	welcome.	You	want	it;	you
desire	it	from	the	very	depth	of	your	heart.
The	experience	is	the	same	--	the	separation	between	the	false	and	the	real	--	but
because	 of	 your	 resistance	 in	 death,	 you	 become	 unconscious,	 you	 fall	 into	 a
coma.	You	cling	too	much	in	death;	you	don't	allow	it	to	happen,	you	close	all
the	doors,	all	the	windows.
Your	lust	for	life	is	at	the	optimum.	The	very	idea	of	dying	frightens	you	from
the	very	roots.
But	 death	 is	 a	 natural	 phenomenon	 and	 absolutely	 necessary	 too	 --	 it	 has	 to
happen.	 If	 the	 leaves	 don't	 become	 yellow	 and	 don't	 fall,	 the	 new	 leaves,	 the
fresh	and	young	will	not	come.	If	one	goes	on	living	in	the	old	body,	he	will	not
be	moving	into	a	better	house,	fresher,	newer,	with	more	possibilities	of	a	new
beginning.	Perhaps	he	may	not	 take	 the	same	route	as	he	has	 taken	 in	his	past
life,	getting	in	a	desert.	He	may	move	into	a	new	sky	of	consciousness.
Each	death	is	an	end	and	a	beginning.
Don't	pay	too	much	attention	to	the	end.	It	is	an	end	to	an	old,	rotten,	miserable
life	style,	and	it	is	a	great	opportunity	to	begin	a	new	life,	not	to	commit	the	old
mistakes.	It	is	a	beginning	of	an	adventure.	But	because	you	cling	to	life	and	you
don't	want	to	leave	it	--
and	it	has	to	happen	by	the	very	nature	of	things	--	you	fall	unconscious.
Almost	everyone,	except	 those	few	people	who	have	become	enlightened,	dies
unconsciously;	 hence	 they	 don't	 know	what	 death	 is,	 they	 don't	 know	 its	 new
beginning,	the	new	dawn.
Meditation	is	your	own	exploration.
You	are	searching	to	know	exactly	what	constitutes	you:	what	is	false	in	you	and
what	is	real	in	you.	It	is	a	tremendous	journey	from	the	false	to	the	real,	from	the
mortal	to	the	immortal,	from	darkness	to	light.	But	when	you	come	to	the	point
of	 seeing	 the	 separation	 from	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 body,	 and	 yourself	 just	 as	 a
witness,	the	experience	of	death	is	the	same.	You	are	not	dying...	a	man	who	has
meditated	will	die	joyfully	because	he	knows	there	is	no	death;	the	death	was	in
his	clinging	with	life.
You	say,	Sagar,	I	FEEL	A	STRONG	CONNECTION	BETWEEN	DEATH	AND
MEDITATION.	There	is.	In	the	ancient	scriptures	of	this	land,	even	the	master	is
defined	 as	 death	 because	 his	 whole	 function,	 his	 whole	 work	 is	 to	 teach	 you
meditation.	 In	 other	words,	 he	 is	 teaching	 you	 to	 die	without	 dying	 --	 to	 pass
through	the	experience	of	death,	surprised	that	you	are	still	alive;	death	was	like
a	cloud	that	has	passed;	it	has	not	even	scratched	you.	Hence	the	fascination,	and
the	fear.	The	fascination	is	to	know	the	mysterious	experience	everybody	has	to
pass	through,	has	passed	through	many	times,	but	became	unconscious.	And	the
fear	--	that	perhaps	death	is	only	the	end	and	not	another	beginning.
It	happened,	just	in	the	beginning	of	this	century,	that	the	King	of	Varanasi	was
to	be	operated	on;	the	operation	was	major.	But	the	King	was	very	stubborn	and
he	wouldn't	take	any	kind	of	anesthesia.	He	said,	"You	can	do	the	operation,	but
I	want	to	see	it	happen;	I	don't	want	to	be	unconscious."
The	 doctors	 were	 puzzled.	 It	 was	 against	 medical	 practice...	 such	 a	 major
operation	was	going	 to	be	 too	painful;	 the	man	might	die	because	of	 the	pain.
Surgery	needs	you	to	be	unconscious.
Perhaps	 the	 science	 of	 surgery	 has	 learned	 the	 art	 of	 anesthesia	 from	 the
experience	of	death,	because	death	is	the	greatest	surgery.	It	separates	you	from
your	body,	 from	your	heart,	 and	you	have	 remained	 identified	with	all	 this	 for
seventy	 years,	 eighty	 years.	 They	 have	 become	 almost	 your	 real	 self.	 The
separation	is	going	to	be	very	painful,	and	there	is	a	limit	to	pain.
Have	 you	 ever	 noticed?	 --	 there	 is	 no	 unbearable	 pain.	 The	words"unbearable
pain"	 exist	 only	 in	 language	 --	 all	 pain	 is	 bearable.	 The	 moment	 it	 becomes
unbearable,	you	fall	unconscious.	Your	unconsciousness	is	a	way	to	bear	it.
If	he	had	been	an	ordinary	man,	the	doctors	would	not	have	listened	to	him	--	but
he	was	a	king,	and	a	very	well-known	king,	known	all	over	the	country	as	a	great
wise	man.	He	 persuaded	 the	 surgeons,	 "Don't	 be	worried,	 nothing	 is	 going	 to
happen	to	me.	Just	give	me	five	minutes	before	you	start	your	operation	so	that	I
can	arrange	myself	into	a	meditative	state.	Once	I'm	in	meditation,	I	am	already
far	away	from	the	body.	Then	you	can	cut	my	whole	body	into	pieces	--	I	will	be
only	a	witness,	and	a	faraway	witness,	as	if	it	is	happening	to	somebody	else."
The	moment	was	very	critical;	 the	operation	had	 to	be	done	 immediately.	 If	 it
was	 not	 done	 immediately,	 it	 might	 cause	 death.	 There	 were	 only	 two
alternatives:	either	to	operate	and	allow	the	patient	to	remain	conscious,	or	not	to
operate,	but	follow	the	old	routine	of	science.	But	in	that	case,	death	was	certain.
In	the	first	case,	there	was	a	chance	that	perhaps	this	man	could	manage,	and	he
was	so	insistent...	finding	no	way	to	persuade	him,	they	had	to	operate.
That	was	 the	 first	 operation	 done	without	 anesthesia,	 in	 a	 state	 of	meditation.
The	 king	 simply	 closed	 his	 eyes,	 became	 silent.	 Even	 the	 surgeons	 felt
something	changing	around	the	king	--	 the	vibe,	 the	presence;	his	 face	became
relaxed	 like	 a	 small	 baby,	 just	 born,	 and	 after	 five	 minutes	 they	 started	 the
operation.	The	operation	took	two	hours,	and	they	were	trembling	with	fear;	in
fact,	 they	were	not	 sure	 that	 the	king	would	survive	 --	 the	 shock	might	be	 too
much.	But	when	the	operation	was	over,	 the	king	asked	them,	"Can	I	open	my
eyes	now?"
It	was	discussed	 in	 the	medical	 field	all	over	 the	world	as	a	very	strange	case.
The	 surgeons	 asked	 him	what	 he	 did.	He	 said,	 "I	 have	 not	 done	 anything.	 To
meditate	is	my	very	life.	Moment	to	moment	I	am	living	in	silence.	I	asked	for
those	five	minutes	because	you	were	going	to	do	such	a	dangerous	operation	that
I	 had	 to	 become	 absolutely	 settled	 in	my	 being,	 with	 no	wavering.	 Then	 you
could	do	anything...	because	you	were	not	doing	it	to	me.	I	am	consciousness	--
and	you	cannot	operate	on	consciousness,	you	can	operate	only	on	the	body."
You	say,"	WHEN	I	SIT	WITH	YOU,	IT	IS	SOMEHOW	SAFE."	There	is	really
no	 difference	 whether	 you	 sit	 with	 me	 or	 you	 sit	 alone	 --	 it	 is	 just	 a	 mind
security,	the	idea	that	the	master	is	present	so	there	is	no	harm	to	take	the	jump.
If	something	goes	wrong,	somebody	is	there	to	take	care	of	it.
In	meditation,	nothing	goes	wrong	--	ever.
Without	meditation,	everything	is	going	wrong.
Nothing	goes	right	without	meditation;	your	whole	life	is	going	wrong.	You	live
only	in	hope,	but	your	hopes	are	never	fulfilled.	Your	life	is	a	long,	long	tragedy.
And	the	reason	is	your	unawareness,	your	unmeditativeness.
Meditation	 looks	 like	 death,	 and	 the	 experience	 is	 exactly	 the	 same.	 But	 the
attitude	and	the	approach	is	different,	and	the	difference	is	so	vast	that	it	can	be
said	that	meditation	is	life	and	death	is	just	a	dream.
But	this	is	the	function	of	a	mystery	school,	where	many	people	are	meditating,
where	a	master	 is	present.	You	 feel	 safe,	you	are	not	alone.	 If	 something	goes
wrong,	help	will	be	available	immediately.	But	nothing	goes	wrong.
So	 meditate	 while	 you	 are	 sitting	 with	 me,	 and	 meditate	 in	 your	 aloneness.
Meditation	is	the	only	thing	with	an	absolute	guarantee	that	nothing	goes	wrong
with	it.	It	only	reveals	your	existence	to	yourself	--	how	can	anything	go	wrong?
And	you	are	not	doing	anything;	you	are	really	stopping	doing	everything.	You
are	 stopping	 thinking,	 feeling,	 doing	 --	 a	 full	 stop	 to	 all	 your	 actions.	 Only
consciousness	remains,	because	that	is	not	your	action,	it	is	you.
Once	you	have	tasted	your	being,	all	fear	disappears,	and	life	becomes	a	totally
new	dimension	--	no	longer	mundane,	no	longer	ordinary.	For	the	first	time	you
see	the	sacredness	and	the	divineness	not	only	of	yourself,	but	of	all	that	exists.
Everything	becomes	mysterious,	and	 to	 live	 in	 this	mystery	 is	 the	only	way	 to
live	blissfully;	to	live	in	this	mystery	is	to	live	under	blessings	showering	on	you
like	 rain.	 Each	 moment	 brings	 more	 and	 more,	 deeper	 and	 more	 profound
blessings	to	you.	Not	that	you	deserve	them,	but	because	life	gives	them	out	of
its	abundance	--	it	is	burdened,	it	shares	with	whomsoever	is	receptive	to	it.
But	don't	get	 the	 idea	 that	meditation	 is	death-like,	because	death	has	no	good
associations	in	your	mind.	That	will	prevent	you	experiencing	consciousness	--
"It	is	death-like."	In	fact,	it	is	a	real	death.	The	ordinary	death	is	not	a	real	death,
because	 you	 will	 be	 again	 joined	 with	 another	 structure,	 another	 body.	 The
meditator	dies	in	a	great	way;	he	never	again	becomes	imprisoned	in	a	body.
An	Italian	missed	a	day	at	work	and	the	foreman	wanted	an	explanation.
"Where	have	you	been?"	he	asked.
"It	was-a	my	wife.	She	give-a	birth	to	a	wheelbarrow."
"If	you	can't	do	any	better	than	that,"	said	the	foreman,	"I'm	gonna	have	to	fire
you."
"I	think-a	I	got	it	wrong,"	said	the	Italian.	"My	wife,	she's	in-a	bed	having	a	push
chair."
"That's	it,	wise	guy,"	shouted	the	foreman,	"You	are	fired!"
The	 Italian	 went	 home	 and	 asked	 his	 wife,	 "Hey,	 what	 was	 wrong	 with	 you
yesterday?"
"I	told-a	you,	I	had-a	miscarriage."
"I	knew	it	was-a	something	with-a	wheels-a	on	it."
There	 are	 misunderstandings	 piled	 upon	 misunderstandings	 in	 you.	 Some
misunderstandings	 can	 be	 tremendously	 harmful.	 Getting	 the	 association	 of
meditation	 and	death	 identified	 in	 your	mind	 is	 one	of	 the	 greatest	 harms	 that
you	can	do	to	yourself.
Although	 you	 are	 not	wrong,	 your	 associations	with	 the	meaning	 of	 death	 are
such	that	they	will	prevent	you	from	getting	into	meditation.
That	is	one	of	the	reasons	I	want	to	make	death	more	and	more	associated	with
celebration	rather	than	with	mourning,	more	and	more	associated	with	a	change,
a	 new	 beginning,	 rather	 than	 just	 a	 full	 stop,	 an	 end.	 I	 want	 to	 change	 the
association.	That	will	clear	the	way	for	meditativeness.
And	 if	 you	 are	 feeling,	 here	with	me,	 silent	 and	meditative	 --	 still	 alive,	more
alive	than	ever	--	then	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid.	Try	it	in	different	situations,
and	 you	will	 always	 find	 it	 a	 source	 of	 great	 healing,	 a	 source	 of	 great	well-
being,	 a	 source	 of	 great	 wisdom...	 a	 source	 of	 great	 insight	 into	 life	 and	 its
mysteries.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 SOMEONE	 LIKE	 NIETZSCHE	 OR	 GERTRUDE	 STEIN	 DIES	 --	 A
GENIUS
WHO	 WOULD	 PROBABLY	 HAVE	 BECOME	 ENLIGHTENED	 IF	 THEY
HAD	MET
A	MASTER	--	WHAT	SORT	OF	CONSCIOUSNESS	DO	THEY	CARRY	INTO
THE
NEXT	 LIFE,	 AND	 WHAT	 WAS	 IT	 THAT	 IN	 THEIR	 PREVIOUS	 LIVES
ALLOWED
THEM	TO	EXPERIENCE	SUCH	A	HUGE	POTENTIAL,	SUCH	A	GREAT
FLOWERING,	 AND	 SUCH	 A	 GREAT	 KNACK?	 WAS	 IT	 THE	 IDEA	 OF
WANTING
TO	GO	THEIR	OWN	WAY	WITHOUT	A	MASTER?
Pankaja,	there	are	many	things	in	your	question.	First,	you	ask,	"When	someone
like	 Nietzsche	 or	 Gertrude	 Stein	 dies	 --	 a	 genius	 who	 would	 probably	 have
become	enlightened	 if	 they	had	met	a	master	 --	what	 sort	of	consciousness	do
they	carry	into	the	next	life?
The	 first	 thing	 to	 be	 understood	 is	 that	 consciousness	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with
genius.
Everybody	 can	 be	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha.	 Everybody	 cannot	 be	 a	 Michelangelo,
everybody	cannot	be	a	Friedrich	Nietzsche.
But	 everybody	 can	 be	 a	 Zarathustra,	 because	 the	 spiritual	 realization	 is
everybody's	 birthright.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 talent	 like	 painting,	 or	 music,	 or	 poetry,	 or
dancing;	it	is	not	a	genius	either.	A	genius	has	tremendous	intelligence,	but	it	is
still	of	the	mind.
Enlightenment	is	not	of	the	mind,	it	is	not	intellect;	it	is	intelligence	of	a	totally
different	order.	So,	the	first	thing	to	remember	is	that	it	is	not	only	people,	like
Friedrich	Nietzsche	who	have	missed	the	journey	towards	their	own	selves;	they
were	great	intellectuals,	geniuses	unparalleled	--	but	all	that	belongs	to	the	mind.
And	 to	 be	 a	Gautam	Buddha,	 a	Lao	Tzu,	 or	 a	Zarathustra	 is	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the
mind,	to	be	in	a	state	of	mindlessness.	It	does	not	matter	whether	you	had	a	big
mind	or	a	small	mind,	a	mediocre	mind,	or	a	genius;	the	point	is	that	you	should
be	out	of	the	mind.	The	moment	you	are	out	of	the	mind,	you	are	in	yourself.
So	the	strange	thing	is	that	the	more	a	person	is	intellectual,	the	farther	he	goes
away	from	himself.	His	 intellect	 takes	him	to	faraway	stars.	He	is	a	genius,	he
may	 create	 great	 poetry,	 he	may	 create	 great	 sculpture.	 But	 as	 far	 as	 you	 are
concerned,	you	are	not	to	be	created,	you	are	already	there.
The	genius	creates,	the	meditator	discovers.
So,	don't	make	a	category	of	Nietzsche	and	Stein	and	Schweitzer	separate	from
others.	In	the	world	of	mind,	they	are	far	richer	than	you,	but	in	the	world	of	no-
mind,	they	are	as	poor	as	you	are.	And	that	is	the	space	which	matters.
Secondly,	you	ask,	"What	sort	of	consciousness	do	they	carry	into	the	next	life?"
They	don't	have	any	consciousness	to	carry	into	another	life.	They	have	a	certain
genius,	 a	 certain	 talent,	 a	 certain	 intelligence;	 they	will	 carry	 that	 intelligence
into	another	life,	but	they	don't	have	consciousness.
Consciousness	 is	 an	 altogether	 different	 matter.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
creativity,	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 inventiveness,	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
science	or	art;	it	has	something	to	do	with	tremendous	silence,	peace,	a	centering
--	they	don't	have	it.	So	the	question	of	carrying	a	certain	consciousness	into	the
next	life	does	not	arise;	they	don't	have	it	in	the	first	place.	What	they	have,	they
will	 carry	 into	 the	 next	 life.	 They	 will	 become	 greater	 geniuses,	 they	 will
become	better	singers,	 they	will	become	more	 talented	 in	 their	 field,	but	 it	has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 meditation	 or	 consciousness.	 They	 will	 remain	 as
unconscious	as	you	are,	as	anybody	else	is.
It	is	as	if	you	all	fall	asleep	here;	you	will	be	dreaming.	Somebody	may	have	a
very	 beautiful	 dream,	 very	 nice,	 very	 juicy,	 and	 somebody	 may	 have	 a
nightmare.	But	both	are	dreams.	And	when	 they	wake	up,	 they	will	know	 that
the	beautiful	dream	and	the	nightmare	are	not	different	--	they	are	both	dreams.
They	are	non-existential,	mind	projections.
When	an	ordinary	man	meditates,	he	comes	to	the	same	space	of	blissfulness	as
Nietzsche	or	Albert	Einstein	or	Bertrand	Russell.	That	space	of	blissfulness	will
not	 be	 different,	 will	 not	 be	 richer	 for	 Bertrand	Russell	 because	 he	 is	 a	 great
intellectual.	Those	values	don't	matter	outside	of	the	mind;	outside	of	the	mind,
they	are	irrelevant.
This	is	great	and	good	news	because	it	means	a	woodcutter	or	a	fisherman	can
become	 Gautam	 Buddha.	 An	 uneducated	 Jesus,	 an	 uneducated	 Kabir,	 who
doesn't	 show	 any	 indication	 of	 genius,	 can	 still	 become	 enlightened,	 because
enlightenment	 is	 not	 a	 talent,	 it	 is	 discovering	 your	 being.	 And	 the	 being	 of
everyone	is	absolutely	equal.	That	is	the	only	place	where	communism	exists	--
not	in	the	Soviet	Union,	not	in	China.
The	only	place	where	communism	exists	is	when	somebody	becomes	a	Gautam
Buddha,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Lao	Tzu.	Suddenly	all	distinctions,	talents	of	the	mind,
disappear.	 There	 is	 only	 pure	 sky	where	 you	 cannot	make	 any	 distinctions	 of
higher	and	lower.
And	you	are	asking,	 "What	was	 it	 that	 in	 their	previous	 lives	allowed	 them	 to
experience	such	a	huge	potential?"
You	are	growing	every	moment	in	whatever	you	are	doing.	A	warrior	will	attain
a	certain	quality	of	warriorness,	a	sharpness	of	the	sword,	and	he	will	carry	that
quality	 into	 the	 next	 life.	 A	 mathematician	 will	 carry	 his	 mathematical
intelligence	to	higher	peaks	in	another	life.	That's	why	people	are	so	different,	so
unequal,	because	 in	 their	past	 lives	everybody	has	been	doing	different	 things,
accumulating	different	experiences,	molding	the	mind	in	a	certain	way.	Nothing
is	lost,	whatever	you	are	doing	will	be	with	you	like	your	shadow.	It	will	follow
you,	and	it	will	become	bigger	and	bigger.
If	Nietzsche	is	a	great	philosopher,	he	must	have	been	philosophizing	in	his	past
lives	--
perhaps	 many,	 many	 lives	 --	 because	 such	 a	 genius	 needs	 a	 long,	 long
philosophical	past.
But	the	same	is	true	about	everybody.	Everybody	has	a	certain	talent,	developed
or	undeveloped;	it	depends	on	your	decision,	on	your	commitment.	Once	you	are
committed,	 you	 have	 accepted	 a	 responsibility	 to	 grow	 in	 a	 certain	 direction.
Even	 whole	 races	 of	 people	 have	 developed	 in	 different	 directions,	 not	 only
individuals.
For	example,	the	Sikhs	in	India	are	not	different	from	Hindus.	They	are	only	five
hundred	 years	 old,	 following	 an	 enlightened	 man,	 Nanak.	 They	 became	 a
different	sect	--	but	they	are	Hindus.	And	for	these	five	hundred	years,	a	strange
phenomenon	has	happened,	which	has	not	happened	anywhere	else	in	the	world.
You	cannot	 find	 in	 a	 Jewish	 family	 that	 one	person	 is	 a	Christian;	 you	 cannot
find	in	a	Mohammedan	family	that	one	person	is	a	Hindu.	But	for	five	hundred
years	it	has	been	a	convention	that	in	Punjab,	where	Sikhs	dominate,	the	eldest
son	 of	 the	 family	 should	 become	 a	 Sikh.	 He	 still	 remains	 in	 the	 family.	 His
whole	 family	 is	Hindu	 --	 his	 father	 is	Hindu,	 his	wife	may	 be	Hindu;	 he	 is	 a
Sikh.
And	 the	 strangeness	 is	 that	 just	 by	 being	 Sikhs,	 the	 whole	 character	 of	 those
Hindus	has	changed.	Hindus	have	become	cowards	in	the	name	of	nonviolence;
they	are	boiling	with	aggression	within	but,	nonviolence	is	the	ideal.	Sikhs	don't
believe	 in	 nonviolence;	 neither	 do	 they	 believe	 in	 violence	 --	 they	 believe	 in
spontaneity.
A	 certain	 situation	 may	 need	 violence	 and	 a	 certain	 situation	 may	 need
nonviolence;	you	cannot	make	 it	 a	principle	of	 life.	You	have	 to	 remain	open,
available,	and	responsive	to	the	moment.	And	there	is	no	difference	of	blood	--
the	differences	are	such	that	one	can	only	laugh	at	them	--	but	they	have	created
a	totally	new	race.
Any	Hindu	can	become	a	Sikh,	any	Mohammedan	can	become	a	Sikh,	because
the	change	is	very	simple.	You	have	to	have	long	hair,	you	cannot	cut	your	beard
or	mustache;	 you	have	 to	 use	 a	 turban,	 and	you	have	 to	 keep	 a	 comb	 in	 your
turban;	you	have	to	wear	a	steel	ring,	a	bracelet,	just	to	show	that	you	are	a	Sikh,
and	you	have	to	carry	a	sword.	You	always	have	to	wear	underwear.
How	these	things	have	changed	people	is	a	miracle,	because	the	Sikh	is	totally
different	 from	Hindus	 in	his	behavior.	He	 is	a	warrior;	he's	not	cowardly.	He's
more	sincere,	more	simple,	more	of	the	heart.
It	 happened...	 I	was	 going	 to	Manali,	 the	mountainous	 part,	 and	 it	 had	 rained,
and	the	driver	of	my	limousine	was	a	Sikh.	He	started	becoming	afraid.	The	road
was	very	small,	 the	limousine	was	very	big.	The	road	was	slippery;	 there	were
water	pools	collected	on	the	road.	At	a	certain	point	it	looked	very	dangerous.	A
great	river	was	flowing	by,	thousands	of	feet	down	--	and	just	a	small	road.	He
stopped	the	car,	went	out,	and	sat	there.	And	he	said,	"I	cannot	move	anymore,	it
is	simply	going	into	death."
I	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	you	just	sit;	I	will	drive."
He	said,	"That	is	even	more	dangerous!	I	cannot	give	you	the	key."
I	 said,	 "This	 is	 very	 strange,	 because	we	have	been	 traveling	 the	whole	 night,
twelve	hours;	now	we	are	in	the	middle."
I	tried	to	explain	to	him,	"Even	going	back,	you	will	have	to	travel	twelve	miles,
twelve	hours	again	on	the	same	dangerous	road.	Whether	you	go	backwards	or
you	go	forwards,	it	is	the	same."
He	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 the	 same,	 because	 the	 road	 that	 we	 have	 passed,	 we	 have
survived	--	I	can	manage.	But	ahead	it	seems	to	be	simply	committing	suicide	--
I	cannot	go."
At	 that	 very	 moment,	 the	 inspector	 general	 of	 Punjab,	 who	 was	 coming	 to
participate	 in	 the	 camp,	 came	 in	 his	 jeep.	 Seeing	 me	 standing	 there,	 and	 the
limousine	and	driver	sitting	there,	he	said,	"What	is	the	matter?"
I	said,	"It	is	good	you	have	come	at	the	right	moment;	this	driver	is	not	ready	to
move	ahead."
The	inspector	general	of	Punjab	was	also	a	Sikh.	He	came	close	to	the	driver	and
told	him,	"You	are	a	Sikh.	Have	you	forgotten	this?	Just	get	into	the	car."
And	strangely	enough,	he	immediately	got	into	the	car.	We	moved.	I	asked	him,
"What	happened?	I	have	been	arguing	with	you...."
He	said,	"It	is	not	a	question	of	argument.	I	am	a	Sikh!	I	am	supposed	not	to	be
afraid,	and	I	had	forgotten	it."
Just	 a	 slight	 idea	 can	 change	 not	 only	 the	 individual,	 it	 can	 change	 the	whole
race.
We	have	seen	how	Adolf	Hitler	created	in	Germany	a	race	of	warriors	as	nobody
has	 done	 ever	 before,	 just	 by	 giving	 them	 the	 idea	 that	 "you	 are	 the	 purest
Aryans,	that	you	are	born	to	rule	all	over	the	world.	"And	once	the	idea	got	into
their	 minds,	 he	 almost	 conquered	 the	 world.	 For	 five	 years,	 he	 went	 on
conquering.	 People	 became	 so	 afraid	 that	 a	 few	 countries	 simply	 gave	way	 to
him	without	 fighting.	What	was	 the	point	of	 fighting	with	 those	people?	They
were	superhuman.	These	ideas	also	are	carried	from	one	life	to	another.
In	India	there	are	sudras,	untouchables.	For	five	thousand	years	they	have	been
condemned,	oppressed,	as	nobody	else	in	the	whole	world.	I	used	to	go	to	their
functions	and	they	would	not	let	me	sit	with	them.	I	would	tell	them,	"You	are	as
human	as	anybody	else,	 and	 in	 fact	you	are	doing	a	 service	which	 is	 far	more
valuable	 than	any	prime	minister	or	any	president	of	any	country.	The	country
would	 be	 more	 peaceful	 without	 these	 presidents	 and	 prime	 ministers,	 but
without	you,	the	country	cannot	live.
You	are	keeping	the	country	clean,	you	are	doing	the	dirtiest	jobs;	you	should	be
respected	for	it."
They	would	listen	to	me,	but	I	could	see	that	they	were	not	ready	to	accept	the
idea	that	they	are	equal	to	other	human	beings.	For	five	thousand	years	they	have
not	revolted	against	such	oppression,	such	humiliation	--	just	they	go	on	carrying
it	from	one	life	into	another	life;	it	becomes	more	and	more	ingrained.
Pankaja,	you	are	asking,	"Was	it	the	idea	of	wanting	to	go	their	own	way	without
a	master?"	No,	they	had	no	idea	of	the	great	experience	that	happens	between	a
master	and	a	disciple.	They	have	never	consciously	decided	to	go	on	their	own
way.
In	fact	in	the	West,	masters	have	not	existed.	There	have	been	saviors.	They	are
not	masters;	they	don't	help	you	to	become	enlightened,	they	help	you	to	remain
unenlightened.	 Just	 believe	 in	 them	and	 they	will	 save	 you,	 you	 are	 not	 to	 do
anything.
The	West	has	known	prophets,	messengers	of	God,	but	the	West	has	not	known
masters.
It	has	known	mystics,	but	 the	mystics	have	 remained	silent	 in	 the	West	 seeing
that	they	will	not	be	understood.
It	is	the	atmosphere	of	thousands	of	years	in	the	East	that	has	made	a	few	people
take	courage,	and	say	things	which	cannot	be	said.	It	was	the	long	heritage	that
allowed	 a	 few	mystics	 to	 become	masters.	The	West	 has	missed	 completely	 a
whole	dimension	of	life.
The	East	has	also	missed	many	things	--	it	has	missed	the	scientific	mind,	it	has
missed	the	technological	progress.	It	has	remained	poor,	it	has	been	invaded	very
easily	by	anybody,	because	its	whole	soul	was	devoted	towards	only	one	thing	--
everything	 else	 was	 irrelevant:	 Who	 rules	 the	 country	 does	 not	 matter,	 what
matters	is	whether	you	are	enlightened	or	not.	Whether	you	are	rich	or	poor	does
not	matter,	what	matters	is	whether	you	know	yourself	or	not	--	a	single-pointed
devotion.	And	because	of	this,	the	East	has	a	climate	of	its	own.
As	you	enter	into	the	Eastern	climate,	you	suddenly	feel	a	difference.	The	West
is	more	logical;	the	East	is	more	loving.	The	West	is	more	of	the	mind;	the	East
is	more	of	mindlessness,	of	meditation.
No,	Pankaja,	 they	have	not	missed	a	master;	 the	very	 idea	was	non-existent	 to
them.	Even	today,	millions	of	Western	people	are	unaware	of	the	fact	of	masters,
disciples,	meditations.	 It	 is	 only	 the	 younger	 generation	 --	 and	 that	 too	 a	 very
small	portion	of	it	--
which	has	entered	into	the	Eastern	dimension,	and	has	been	shocked	that	the	real
richness	is	not	of	the	outside	world,	the	real	richness	is	of	the	inside.
Ginsberg	is	dying.	"Call	the	priest,"	he	says	to	his	wife,	"and	tell	him	I	want	to
be	converted	into	the	catholic	religion."
"But	Max,	you	are	an	orthodox	Jew	all	your	 life.	What	are	you	 talking	about?
You	want	to	be	converted?"
Ginsberg	says,	"Better	one	of	them	should	die	than	one	of	us."
People	have	lived	as	Jews,	as	Christians,	as	Mohammedans,	but	people	have	not
lived	as	simply	religious.
In	 the	East	 also	 only,	 a	 very	 few	 people	 have	 lived	 in	 pure	 religiousness.	But
only	 those	very	 few	people	have	 filled	 the	whole	of	 the	East	with	 a	 fragrance
which	seems	to	be	eternal.
God	asked	Moses	to	choose	whatever	promised	land	he	wished.	After	weighing
several	factors,	Moses	settled	on	California.	But	Moses,	according	to	legend,	had
a	speech	impediment	and	he	begin	to	answer,	"C...	C...."
Whereupon	God	said,	"Canaan,	that	wasteland?	Well,	okay	Mo.	If	you	want	it,
you	got	it."
Poor	Moses,	because	of	a	speech	impediment	got	Canaan,	which	is	now	Israel	--
its	old	name	is	Canaan.
But	from	the	very	beginning	in	the	Western	mind,	the	desire	was	for	California.
He	could	have	asked	for	Kashmir	where	finally	he	came	and	died;	he	could	have
asked	for	the	land	of	Gautam	Buddha.
But	 the	 East	 has	 appealed	 only	 to	 those	 who	 are	 called	 by	 psychologists
"introverts";	 and	 the	West	 has	 appeal	 for	 those	 who	 are	 known	 as	 extroverts.
Going	Eastward	means	going	inward;	going	Westward	means	going	outward.
For	 thousands	of	 years,	 authentic	 seekers	 have	been	 coming	 to	 the	East.	They
have	found	a	certain	magnetic	pull;	where	so	many	people	have	meditated,	they
have	created	a	tremendous	energy	pool.	Being	in	that	atmosphere,	things	become
simpler,	because	the	whole	atmosphere	is	supportive,	is	a	nourishment.
I	 have	 been	 around	 the	 world,	 and	 I	 have	 seen	 how	 the	 West	 is	 absolutely
unaware	 of	 the	 Eastern	 grace.	 How	 is	 it	 that	 the	Western	 man	 is	 unaware	 of
himself?	He's	 thinking	of	 the	 farthest	 star,	but	not	about	himself.	The	East	has
remained	committed	to	a	single	goal	--
to	 be	 oneself,	 and	 to	 know	 oneself.	 Unless	 you	 know	 yourself,	 and	 you	 are
yourself,	your	life	has	gone	to	waste;	it	has	not	blossomed,	it	has	not	flowered.
You	have	not	fulfilled	your	destiny.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	The	love	that	never	ends
18	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705185
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN14
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
65
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
ONCE,	 IN	 KATHMANDU,	 I	 ASKED	 YOU	 ABOUT	 THE	 NEED	 OF	 THE
DISCIPLE
FOR	 A	 MASTER.	 THEN	 I	 ASKED	 YOU	 IF	 THE	 MASTER	 NEEDS	 THE
DISCIPLE,	 AND	 YOU	 SHOWERED	 ON	 ME	 SOME	 WORDS	 THAT	 I
RECEIVED	 IN	TEARS,	LIKE	PETALS	OF	AN	UNKNOWABLE	FLOWER.
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	BE	SO
KIND	 AND	 SPEAK	 TO	 US	 ABOUT	 THE	 NEED	 OF	 THE	MASTER	 FOR
THE
DISCIPLES.	 AREN'T	 YOU	 THE	 FORMLESS	 FORM,	 WITH	 WHOM
EXISTENCE	IS
FULFILLING	OUR	LONGING?	AREN'T	WE,	IN	SOME	WAY,	YOUR	FOOD,
YOUR
NOURISHMENT?
Sarjano,	 I	 do	 not	 remember	 what	 I	 said	 in	 response	 to	 your	 question	 in
Kathmandu.	I	never	remember	anything	I	have	said.	That	keeps	me	responsible.
I	cannot	repeat,	because	I	do	not	remember.	I	can	only	respond	to	the	question,
and	to	the	questioner	in	this	very	moment.
Between	 Kathmandu	 and	 this	 moment,	 neither	 you	 have	 remained	 you,	 nor	 I
have	 remained	 I.	 And	 so	 much	 water	 has	 gone	 down	 the	 Ganges,	 that	 any
repetition	is	always	out	of	date.	Any	repetition	is	dead,	is	not	alive.
That's	how	the	whole	of	humanity	 is	only	pretending	to	 live,	but	deep	down	is
dead,	 because	 it	 has	 forgotten	 the	 language	 of	 response.	 It	 knows	 only	 the
language	of	reaction.
It	 reacts	 according	 to	 the	 memory.	 It	 does	 not	 respond	 according	 to	 the
awareness	of	the	moment,	of	the	need	here	and	now.	It	is	full	of	the	past.
There	 is	no	present	 in	millions	of	people	around	 the	world.	Millions	of	people
live	without	knowing	the	taste	of	the	present.	And	when	you	are	full	of	the	past
you	are	a	graveyard.	Howsoever	beautiful	the	past	may	be,	it	 is	still	dead.	And
beauty	 is	 meaningless	 if	 it	 cannot	 dance,	 if	 it	 cannot	 sing,	 if	 it	 cannot	 even
breathe.
I	 am	 here,	 you	 are	 here,	 why	 bring	 Kathmandu	 in?	 I	 don't	 know	 what
Kathmandu	 means	 in	 Nepalese,	 but	 in	 Hindustani	 we	 have	 a	 phrase	 which
immediately	 reminds	one	of	Kathmandu.	The	phrase	 is	kath	ke	ullu.	 It	means,
"You	are	an	owl.	And	that	 too	not	real,	but	made	of	wood."	I	don't	know	what
Kathmandu	means;	Kath	certainly	means	wood....
Why	bring	Kathmandu	in?	You	really	want	 to	 listen	to	 the	same	answer	again,
but	 it	 is	 impossible	 Sarjano.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 forgive	 me,	 because	 I	 don't
remember	a	single	word.	Kathmandu	is	almost	as	far	away	as	the	farthest	star,	as
if	it	happened	in	some	other	life.
While	we	are	alive,	why	waste	your	time?	You	can	ask	a	new	question	and	you
can	receive	a	new	response.	The	new	will	be	fresher,	and	the	new	will	be	better.
The	new	will	be	more	mature.
But	people	have	lived	to	live	in	the	past.	It	has	become	almost	a	second	nature	to
them.	It	is	very	difficult	to	drag	them	out	of	their	graves	and	tell	them,	"You	are
not	dead	yet.
Start	breathing,	you	are	still	alive."
An	 elderly	 Jewish	 man	 walks	 into	 a	 jewelry	 store	 to	 buy	 his	 wife	 a	 present.
"How	much	is	this?"	he	asks	the	assistant,	pointing	to	a	silver	crucifix.
"That	is	six	hundred	dollars,	sir,"	replies	the	assistant.
"Nice,"	says	the	man,	"and	how	much	without	the	acrobat	on	it?"
People	 cannot	 forgive	 the	 past,	 people	 cannot	 forget	 the	 past.	 Two	 thousand
years	 have	 passed,	 but	 Jesus	 is	 not	 yet	 acceptable	 to	 the	 Jewish	mind.	 Not	 a
single	 Jew	 in	 two	 thousand	 years	 has	 repented	 that	 crucifying	 Jesus	 was	 a
criminal	act,	and	 that	he	 finds	himself	also	part	of	 the	conspiracy.	You	will	be
surprised	to	know	that	not	a	single	Jewish	scripture	even	mentions	the	name	of
Jesus.	It	is	so	unworthy.	Such	is	our	approach	to	life....
I	will	take	your	question	as	fresh,	because	we	are	not	in	Kathmandu.	And	I	will
answer	you	in	this	moment,	responding	to	your	question	and	to	you.	I	am	not	in
the	habit	of	quoting	myself.
You	are	asking,	what	 is	 the	need	of	 the	disciple	for	a	master,	and	vice	versa	--
what	 is	 the	need	of	a	master	 for	a	disciple?	Condensed	 to	 its	essentialness,	 the
question	is,	"Does	love	exist	in	the	lover	or	in	the	beloved?	Or	does	love	exist	in
the	harmony	of	both?"
Only	in	those	rare	moments,	when	there	is	no	"I"	and	no	"thou,"	love	blossoms.
It	 does	 not	 exist	 in	 the	 lover,	 it	 does	 not	 exist	 in	 the	 beloved,	 it	 exists	 in	 the
disappearance	of	their	separation.
That's	why	all	 lovers	are	disappointed,	because	 they	cannot	 remain	organically
one	for	more	than	a	few	seconds.	Just	a	small	thing	and	the	separation	returns;	it
was	just	waiting.
If	 in	 twenty-four	hours	you	can	 find	 twenty-four	 seconds	of	organic	unity	 and
harmony,	you	should	think	yourself	immensely	blessed,	tremendously	rich.
The	same	is	the	situation	between	the	disciple	and	the	master.	Something	higher
than	love,	something	deeper	than	love	and	togetherness	exists	in	those	moments
of	 silence,	 those	moments	 of	 communion,	when	 the	 disciple	 forgets	 that	 he	 is
separate	from	the	master,	when	the	disciple	melts	and	merges	into	the	master.
The	master	 is	 already	merged	 into	 existence.	Merging	 into	 the	master	 you	 are
really	merging	with	existence	itself.	The	master	functions	only	as	a	door,	and	a
door	is	an	emptiness;	you	pass	through	it.
The	master	is	the	door	to	the	beyond.
And	the	beyond	exists	in	the	organic	unity,	in	the	communion,	in	the	merger,	in
the	melting	of	the	master	and	the	disciple.	It	is	the	highest	form	of	love.	It	is	the
greatest	prayer,	the	deepest	gratitude,	and	the	most	ecstatic	experience	available
to	human	consciousness.
The	 master	 is	 missing	 something	 when	 he	 is	 alone;	 he	 is	 like	 an	 ocean	 into
which	no	rivers	melt.	A	disciple	is	certainly	just	a	nobody	without	a	master.	With
a	master,	he	becomes	 the	whole	existence.	Both	are	 fulfilled	 in	a	 togetherness.
And	because	 this	 togetherness	 is	 not	 of	 the	 body,	 not	 of	 the	mind,	 but	 of	 that
which	is	beyond	the	mind	in	you,	it	is	possible	to	attain	and	never	lose	it.
Love	is	always	up	and	down,	one	moment	joyful,	another	moment	sad.	But	the
love	that	we	are	talking	about	--	love	between	two	spirits,	between	two	beings	--
only	begins,	it	never	ends.
The	masters	ordinarily	will	not	accept	what	I	am	saying,	but	if	they	don't	accept
it	they	are	insincere.	And	if	they	are	insincere,	what	kind	of	masters	are	they?
The	masters	 have	 been	 pretending	 that	 they	 don't	 need	 anything	 --	 they	 don't
need	you,	 they	don't	need	your	eyes,	 they	don't	need	your	heartbeat,	 they	don't
need	 your	 love,	 they	 don't	 need	 your	merger	 and	meeting.	 That	 is	 an	 egoistic
attitude.	And	anybody	who	pretends	that	he	needs	nothing	is	only	a	teacher,	not	a
master.	He	himself	needs	 to	be	a	disciple.	He	has	heard	many	beautiful	 truths,
but	he	has	not	known	anything	on	his	own.
A	true	master,	out	of	his	sincerity,	out	of	his	humbleness,	will	accept	the	simple
fact	that	he	is	not	beyond	any	need.	Of	course,	his	needs	are	of	a	very	spiritual
kind.
He	 cannot	 live	 unless	 he	 can	 share.	 Even	 to	 exist	 is	 impossible	 for	 him	 --	 he
loses	all	meaning	--	unless	he	can	wake	up	people	who	are	fast	asleep,	unless	he
can	make	people	who	are	miserable	become	transformed	into	dancing	roses.	In
their	fulfillment	he	becomes	again	and	again	enlightened.
His	 enlightenment	 is	 not	 an	 incident:	 the	 authentic	 master	 is	 becoming
continuously	 enlightened	 each	 moment.	 His	 enlightenment	 is	 a	 progress,	 an
eternal	 progress;	 otherwise,	 the	 world	 would	 have	 been	 far	 more	 poor.	 It	 is
already	poor.
If	Gautam	Buddha	needed	nothing,	 then	for	forty-two	years	walking	the	whole
land,	talking	to	people,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	they	cannot	understand,	is	an
arduous	task.
Why	is	he	doing	it?	He	is	helpless,	he	has	to	do	it.	It	comes	as	an	intrinsic	part	of
his	own	enlightenment.
Before,	it	was	a	longing	to	become	enlightened.	Now	it	is	a	longing	to	make	the
whole	world	enlightened.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	LOVE	THE	WAY	YOU	SPEAK	SO	INTIMATELY	TO	SANNYASINS	WHO
HAVE
BEEN	WITH	YOU	FOR	A	LONG	TIME,	REMEMBERING	VEENA	WITH
PHOTOGRAPHIC	CLARITY	AND	WHETHER	SOMEONE	ELSE'S	HANDS
WERE
COLD	OR	WARM,	AND	WHERE	HE	USED	TO	STAND	TO	GREET	YOU.
THE
INTIMACY	OF	YOU	ACKNOWLEDGING	US	IS	SUCH	AN	INCREDIBLY
BEAUTIFUL	GIFT	IT	MAKES	ME	WEEP.	COULD	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING
ABOUT	ACKNOWLEDGEMENT?
Prem	Pankaja,	one	of	the	most	important	secrets	of	life	is	that	the	something	can
be	of	 immense	spiritual	value,	and	the	same	thing	can	be	a	great	hindrance	for
your	growth.
Such	is	acknowledgement.	It	can	arise	out	of	your	ego	--	to	be	acknowledged	--
then	it	is	dangerous.	Then	it	is	going	to	strengthen	that	which	is	false	in	you	and
block	the	doors	for	the	real	to	open	up.
But	if	it	arises	out	of	a	simple,	innocent	heart	--	not	as	a	nourishment	to	the	ego
but	 just	 as	 a	 blissful	 recognition	 that	 you	 are	 also	 there,	 that	 you	 are	 also	 in
existence,	that	you	are	accepted	as	you	are,	that	you	are	respected	as	you	are	--
then	 acknowledgement	 can	 become	 a	 tremendous	 experience	 and
transformation.
It	all	depends	on	you,	what	you	make	of	it.
There	are	people	whom	I	feel	afraid	to	recognize	--	not	that	it	is	going	to	do	any
harm	to	me,	but	because	it	is	going	to	do	harm	to	them.	I	can	see	in	their	eyes,	in
their	 faces,	 a	 deep	 desire,	 a	 greed	 to	 be	 recognized.	 I	 ignore	 it.	 But	 there	 are
people	who	are	simply	here	--	just	enjoying.	It	is	more	than	enough	that	they	are
breathing	 the	 same	 air,	 that	 they	 are	 sitting	 under	 the	 same	 roof,	 that	 they	 are
surrounded	by	the	same	trees.
I	am	reminded	of	a	strange	story	about	Ananda,	one	of	Gautam	Buddha's	most
intimate	disciples.
And	he	was	not	only	a	disciple,	he	was	also	his	elder	cousin-brother.	Just	the	fact
that	 he	 was	 more	 deeply	 related	 with	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 the	 fact	 that	 blood	 is
thicker	than	water,	the	fact	that,	"Not	only	I	am	related,	he	is	younger	in	age	to
me,"	became	a	hindrance.
Forty-two	years	he	 remained	with	Buddha,	but	could	not	attain	enlightenment.
And	many,	many	others	came	and	became	enlightened.	It	was	the	day	when	he
was	 taking	 initiation	 that	 he	 had	 asked	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 "I	 have	 come	 to	 be
initiated.	 After	 initiation	 I	 will	 be	 your	 disciple.	 Right	 now	 I	 am	 your	 elder
brother."	 And	 in	 India,	 even	 cousin-brothers,	 if	 they	 are	 elder,	 have	 to	 be
respected	just	like	your	real	brothers.
Ananda	said,	"I	want	you	to	remember	three	conditions,	and	give	me	a	promise
that	you	will	not	go	against	your	word,	because	after	initiation	your	order	will	be
my	life,	your	word	will	be	my	law	--	then	I	cannot	say	anything.	So	just	before
initiation	 I	want	 three	promises.	As	your	elder	brother	you	have	 to	 respect	my
desires."
Sariputra,	one	of	Gautam	Buddha's	earliest	disciple's,	said	to	Ananda,	"Don't	be
stupid,	these	promises	will	become	hindrances	for	your	growth.	These	conditions
will	 prohibit	 all	 for	which	 you	 are	 taking	 the	 initiation.	You	 are	 saying,	 Ì	 am
going	to	become	your	disciple,'	but	deep	down	you	will	never	be	a	disciple.	You
will	always	know	that	you	are	the	elder	brother,	and	those	three	conditions	will
always	make	you	certain	about	it."
Initiation	has	to	be	taken	unconditionally,	but	Ananda	was	not	going	to	listen	to
an	 ordinary	 sannyasin.	 Sariputra	 was	 one	 of	 the	 wisest	 disciples	 of	 Gautam
Buddha,	but	in	the	eyes	of	Ananda	he	was	nobody.	Ananda	was	a	king,	had	his
own	kingdom;	Sariputra	was	 just	a	commoner.	Ananda	said	 to	him,	"You	keep
quiet.	It	is	a	question	between	two	brothers,	you	need	not	interfere."
After	 forty-two	 years	Ananda	wept	when	Gautam	Buddha	was	 dying.	And	 he
said,	 "I	did	not	 listen	 to	Sariputra.	 I	was	 ignorant,	 I	 insisted.	Those	conditions
were	nothing	but	an	enhancement	of	my	ego."
The	 first	 condition	was,	 "I	will	 always	 remain	with	 you.	You	 cannot	 send	me
anywhere	else	to	spread	the	word."	Second,	"I	can	ask	any	question.	You	cannot
say	 to	me,	 `Wait,	 and	when	 the	 time	 is	 right	you	will	 receive	 the	answer.'	No,
you	will	have	to	give	me	the	answer	immediately."	And	third,	"If	I	bring	a	friend
--	even	if	it	is	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	and	I	wake	you	up	--	you	will	have	to
receive	him	and	answer	his	questions."
Gautam	Buddha	 laughed.	There	are	very	 few	occasions	when	he	 laughed	 --	 in
his	 whole	 life	 maybe	 three	 or	 four	 occasions.	 He	 laughed,	 laughed	 at	 the
stupidity	 of	 human	 ignorance.	What	 he	was	 asking	was	 just	meaningless,	 and
what	he	was	losing	he	was	not	aware	of.
Buddha	said,	"You	are	my	elder	brother.	I	have	to	obey	you,	respect	you.	Your
conditions	are	accepted.	You	will	never	find	a	fault.	I	give	my	promise	--	but	I
am	 giving	 it	 with	 a	 very	 heavy	 heart,	 because	 you	 don't	 know	 what	 you	 are
missing.	You	are	thinking	you	are	becoming	special,	and	this	is	the	place	where
you	have	to	become	humble."
But	 a	 blind	man	 is	 a	 blind	man.	He	 took	 initiation	only	 after	 those	 conditions
were	accepted.	And	he	wept	tears	of	blood,	because	he	remained	always	with	a
subtle	ego:	"I	have	a	certain	speciality	amongst	ten	thousand	disciples.
Nobody	has	any	promise	from	Gautam	Buddha	except	me."
But	 the	people	who	had	no	promise,	 their	 promises	were	 fulfilled.	Those	who
had	come	without	asking	anything	and	surrendered	themselves,	they	attained.	He
remained	 lagging	 behind.	 He	 could	 not	 believe	 it:	 "What	 is	 the	 matter?	 Very
junior	 people	 have	 attained	 to	 liberation,	 and	 I	 am	 one	 of	 the	 most	 senior
persons.	And	I	am	the	closest."
But	closest	only	physically.	He	slept	in	the	same	room	in	which	Gautam	Buddha
slept.
He	 moved	 just	 behind	 him	 like	 a	 shadow,	 and	 he	 felt	 greatly	 proud	 of	 his
specialness.	He	was	acknowledged	by	Gautam	Buddha	and	by	everybody	else;
but	his	acknowledgement	became	his	fault,	his	failure.
Pankaja,	never	desire	acknowledgement.	Enjoy	when	it	comes,	relish	it,	dance...
but	when	it	comes	on	its	own,	not	asked	for.	The	master	always	recognizes	--	but
only	those	who	will	be	helped	by	it.	And	he	ignores	those	who	will	be	helped	by
his	ignoring	them.
Perhaps	 they	 will	 come	 to	 an	 understanding	 of	 why	 they	 are	 being	 ignored:
because	they	want	to	be	special,	because	they	want	to	be	acknowledged.
Drop	that!	If	you	cannot	drop,	even	with	a	master,	then	what	kind	of	discipleship
is	it?
What	kind	of	initiation	have	you	taken?	Now	leave	it	to	him.	If	he	feels	that	you
need	being	ignored,	he	will	ignore	you	--	and	you	have	to	be	thankful	for	it.	And
if	he	feels	you	need	acknowledgement	he	will	acknowledge	you,	and	you	have	to
be	thankful	for	that	too.	But	it	should	not	be	a	demand	on	your	part.
The	moment	you	demand	you	miss	 the	intimacy,	 the	deep	spiritual	connection.
You	fall	 far	away,	because	 the	desire	 is	not	of	your	being,	 it	 is	of	your	ego,	of
your	personality	--
which	is	not	you,	which	is	your	enemy.	This	enemy	has	to	be	crucified.
Without	ego,	without	any	sense	of	"I",	you	will	know	the	innocence	of	a	child.
Then	the	whole	starry	sky	and	its	freedom	is	yours.
A	smart	New	York	career	girl	married	Stefano,	a	handsome	young	Italian	farmer.
She	was	not	 too	happy	with	 his	 social	manners,	 and	 started	 trying	 to	 improve
him	immediately.	Throughout	the	wedding	reception	she	continuously	corrected
his	mistakes,	telling	him	what	to	say,	which	knife	to	use	at	the	table,	and	how	to
pass	the	butter.
Finally,	the	celebrations	were	over,	and	they	were	in	bed	at	last.	Stefano	fidgeted
between	the	sheets,	unsure	of	himself,	but	finally	he	turned	towards	his	new	wife
and	stuttered,
"Could	you	pass	the	pussy	please?"
It	is	better	to	recognize	whatever	you	are:	ignorant,	uneducated,	knowledgeable,
moralistic,	puritan,	egoist	--	it	is	better	to	recognize	whatever	you	are.
There	is	no	need	to	hide	yourself	from	the	master.
The	function	of	the	master	is	not	to	improve	upon	you,	but	to	transform	you	--
and	these	are	two	different	processes.
To	reform	you	means	to	decorate	you,	to	polish	you;	to	transform	means	to	help
you	die	as	an	ego	and	be	born	as	an	 innocent	child,	who	knows	no	 idea	of	"I-
ness".
Only	the	childlike	consciousness	is	capable	of	understanding	all	that	is	beautiful
in	life,	all	that	is	great	in	existence.	And	the	whole	existence	is	full	of	greatness,
full	of	glories.
This	is	the	only	existence	there	is;	its	beauty,	its	truth,	is	the	only	beauty	and	the
only	truth.	But	they	are	available	only	to	the	innocent	people.
Blessed	are	the	innocent,	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	God.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	Most	people	return	unopened
19	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705190
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN15
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
79
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT	 FEELS	 SO	 HOPELESS.	 I	 FEEL	 ASHAMED	 TO	 HAVE	 BEEN	 A
SANNYASIN
FOR	TEN	YEARS	AND	STILL	BE	 IN	THIS	STATE.	 I	HESITATE	TO	ASK
FOR
YOUR	HELP,	BECAUSE	EVEN	YOUR	WORDS	BECOME	MECHANICAL
IN	ME
AFTER	A	FEW	REPETITIONS.	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
Prem	Indivar,	it	is	not	yet	hopeless	enough.	Just	make	it	a	little	more	hopeless.
There	comes	a	point	in	hopelessness	where	you	stop	hoping.
Hopelessness	is	still	deep	down	nothing	but	hope.	Let	the	hope	fail	completely
and	 totally,	 and	 a	dramatic	 experience	 arises	out	 of	 that	 space	when	you	don't
have	any	hope	-
-	because	hope	is	another	name	of	desire,	another	name	of	expectation,	another
name	 of	 ambition.	 And	 before	 you	 can	 realize	 yourself,	 all	 desires,	 all
expectations,	 all	 ambitions	 must	 have	 failed	 you,	 must	 have	 left	 you	 alone.
Hoping	nothing,	desiring	nothing,	expecting	nothing	--	where	will	you	be?	There
is	no	way	to	go	out.
Hope	is	a	way	of	going	out,	desire	is	a	way	of	going	away,	ambition	is	a	way	to
avoid	 going	 in.	On	 the	 path,	 to	 be	 utterly	 hopeless,	 so	 hopeless	 that	 you	 stop
hoping...	suddenly	you	are	in	--	without	taking	a	single	step.
Hope	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 opium;	 it	 keeps	 you	 intoxicated.	 To	 tolerate	 the	 miserable
present,	your	eyes	remain	fixed	on	a	faraway	star:	your	hope.	Millions	of	people
live	without	 finding	 themselves	 --	 not	 because	 of	 any	 sin	 that	Adam	 and	Eve
committed,	 or	 that	 they	 committed	 in	 some	 of	 their	 past	 lives.	 The	 sin	 is	 that
people	go	on	looking	in	the	future	and	the	present	goes	on	passing	by.	And	the
present	 is	 the	only	reality;	 the	future	 is	a	dream,	and	howsoever	sweet,	dreams
never	come	true.
Self-realization	is	not	a	dream.	It	is	a	realization	in	the	present	moment	of	your
own	 being.	 So	 don't	 be	 worried;	 you	 are	 on	 the	 right	 path,	 Prem	 Indivar	 --
becoming	hopeless.
Go	 on	 more	 and	 more,	 exhaust	 hopelessness.	 Come	 to	 the	 optimum
hopelessness.	Then	hope	disappears	automatically.
And	when	there	is	no	hope,	you	are.
When	there	is	no	hope,	the	present	is.
An	old	spinster	died,	and	her	 two	old	 friends	went	 to	a	stone	mason	 to	have	a
gravestone	made.	 "And	what	message	 would	 you	 like	 to	 have	 on	 the	 stone?"
asked	the	mason.
"Well,"	 said	 one	 of	 the	 old	maids,	 "It's	 quite	 simple	 really.	We	would	 likèShe
came	a	virgin,	she	lived	a	virgin,	and	she	died	a	virgin.'"
The	mason	 replied,	 "You	 know,	 you	 ladies	 could	 save	 a	 lot	 of	money	 by	 just
saying,
`Returned	unopened.'"
Most	 of	 the	 people	 return	 unopened,	 and	 nobody	 is	 responsible	 except
themselves.
You	 are	 asking,	 "It	 feels	 so	 hopeless...."	Not	 yet;	 otherwise	 even	 this	 question
would	not	have	arisen.	There	is	still	hope.	You	say,	"I	feel	ashamed	to	have	been
a	sannyasin	for	ten	years,	and	still	be	in	this	state."	That	is	your	ego	feeling	hurt;
otherwise	you	would	feel	humble,	not	ashamed.	What	is	there	to	be	ashamed	of?
Life	is	not	a	small	thing.	It	is	so	vast,	and	we	are	so	small.	The	ocean	is	so	big,
and	we	have	to	swim	in	it	just	with	our	own	small	hands.	Only	those	people	who
never	start	swimming	and	go	on	standing	on	the	bank	looking	at	others,	should
feel	ashamed.	One	who	has	started	swimming...	ten	years	is	nothing	much,	even
ten	lives	are	short.
One	should	be	so	patient.	It	is	your	impatience	that	is	feeling	ashamed;	it	is	your
ego	 that	 is	 feeling	 ashamed.	 You	 should	 feel	 humble	 --	 humble	 before	 the
vastness	 of	 existence,	 humble	 before	 the	 mysteries	 of	 life...	 just	 humble,	 a
nobody.	 And	 in	 that	 humbleness,	 the	 ocean	 becomes	 small	 and	 your	 hands
become	bigger.
You	say,	"I	hesitate	to	ask	for	your	help...."
You	go	on	saying	things	which	you	don't	mean.	If	you	really	hesitate,	then	why
are	you	asking?	In	fact,	hesitation	is	your	question.	You	should	ask	a	little	more
so	 that	 you	 can	 open	 up,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 become	more	 exposed.	Don't	 go	 on
hiding	yourself.	What	 is	 the	hesitation	 in	asking?	And	you	go	on	 rationalizing
everything	within	yourself;	you	have	rationalized	your	hesitation.
Everybody	 hesitates	 to	 ask,	 and	 the	 reason	 and	 the	 rationalization	 are	 two
different	 things.	The	 reason	 for	 feeling	 hesitation	 is	 that	 one	 does	 not	want	 to
show	one's	ignorance,	and	every	question	shows	your	ignorance.	One	hopes	that
some	 other	 stupid	 person	 is	 going	 to	 ask	 the	 question,	 just	wait...	 because	 the
human	reality	is	one,	and	human	problems	are	one,	and	the	search	for	oneself	is
one.	So	some	day	somebody	is	going	to	ask	the	question	that	you	cannot	gather
courage	to	ask	yourself.
But	I	want	you	to	remember	that	even	in	asking	there	is	something	valuable.	In
asking,	you	are	exposing	your	ignorance;	in	asking,	you	are	accepting	that	you
don't	know;	in	asking,	you	are	dropping	your	so-called	knowledgeability.
To	ask	a	question	is	more	important	than	the	question	itself.	The	question	may	be
anything	--	XYZ	--	but	the	very	asking	is	significant.	It	brings	you	closer	to	me,
and	 it	brings	you	closer	 to	all	other	 sannyasins,	 the	 fellow	 travelers.	You	don't
remain	 closed,	 afraid	 that	 somebody	may	 know	 that	 you	 know	 not.	 Exposing
yourself	--	that	you	are	ignorant	--	all	fear	disappears.	You	become	more	human,
and	you	become	more	intimate	with	everyone	who	is	a	fellow	traveler,	because
the	same	is	his	situation.	That	is	the	reason	why	one	hesitates.
But	rationalizations	are	a	totally	different	thing.	You	rationalize	that,	"I	hesitate
to	ask	for	your	help	because	even	your	words	become	mechanical	in	me	after	a
few	repetitions."
What	 is	 the	need	of	repeating	 them?	One	repeats	a	 thing	because	one	wants	 to
make	it	mechanical.	 In	your	mind,	 there	 is	a	 robot	part;	 if	you	repeat	a	certain
thing,	the	robot	part	takes	it	over.	Then	you	don't	have	to	think	about	it;	the	robot
part	goes	on	doing	 it.	You	are	unburdened	of	 thinking,	you	are	unburdened	of
responsibility.	And	the	robot	part	is	very	efficient;	it	is	mechanical.	It	has	its	use,
and	it	has	its	misuse.
When	you	are	working	in	the	ordinary	world,	the	day	to	day	world,	if	you	have
to	remember	every	day	where	your	house	is,	who	your	wife	is...	if	you	have	to
search	every	day	in	the	crowd	looking	into	every	face	--	who	is	your	wife?	--	it
will	become	a	little	difficult.	The	robot	part	takes	over.	It	knows	the	way	home;
you	need	not	 think	on	every	 turn	whether	 to	go	 right	or	 to	go	 left.	You	go	on
listening	 to	 the	 radio,	 and	 your	 hands	 will	 go	 on	 turning	 the	 steering	 wheel
exactly	to	your	own	porch.
If	 one	 has	 to	 think	 about	 everything,	 life	 will	 become	 too	 clumsy.	 Once	 in	 a
while,	it	happens	with	a	few	people,	who	don't	have	a	very	strong	robot	part	--
and	 these	 are	 the	 people	 who	 are	 very	 intelligent	 --	 that	 their	 whole	 energy
moves	into	intelligence,	and	their	robot	part	is	left	starving.
Thomas	Alva	Edison	 is	one	of	 the	cases	 to	be	considered.	He	was	 leaving	and
going	 to	an	 institute	 to	deliver	a	 lecture	on	some	new	scientific	project	he	was
working	on.	Saying	goodbye	to	his	wife,	he	kissed	her	and	waved	to	his	maid.
His	chauffeur	could	not	believe	his	eyes	--	because	he	had	kissed	the	maid,	and
he	was	waving	 to	 the	wife.	His	 robot	part	was	very,	very	small;	his	whole	 life
energy	was	devoted	to	scientific	investigations	where	a	robot	part	is	not	needed.
One	day,	he	was	 sitting	 and	working	on	 some	calculations,	 and	his	wife	 came
with	 the	breakfast.	Seeing	him	so	much	 involved,	 she	 left	 the	breakfast	by	his
side,	thinking	that	when	he	sees	it,	he	will	understand	why	she	has	not	disturbed
him.	Meanwhile,	one	of	his	friends	came.	Seeing	him	so	much	absorbed,	he	also
felt	not	to	disturb	him.	Having	nothing	else	to	do,	he	ate	the	breakfast,	and	left
the	 empty	 dishes	 by	 his	 side.	When	 Edison	 looked	 up	 and	 saw	 his	 friend,	 he
looked	at	 the	empty	plate	and	said,	"You	came	a	 little	 late.	 I	have	finished	my
breakfast.	We	could	have	shared	it."
The	friend	said,	"Don't	be	worried."
You	say	that	everything	becomes	mechanical	in	you	after	a	few	repetitions.	But
why	repeat?	The	repetition	is	a	method	to	make	a	thing	mechanical.	Always	do
something	fresh,	something	new,	if	you	do	not	want	to	get	caught	in	repetitions.
But	in	ordinary	life,	repetitions	are	perfectly	good.
As	you	enter	into	the	world	of	higher	consciousness,	repetitions	are	dangerous.
There	you	need	 always	 a	 fresh	mind,	 an	 innocent	mind,	which	knows	nothing
and	responds	to	a	situation	not	out	of	 the	mechanical,	robot	part	of	your	mind,
but	from	the	very	living	source	of	your	life.
Here	we	are	not	concerned	about	the	mundane	world.	Our	concern	is	to	raise	the
consciousness.
Don't	repeat,	don't	imitate.	Remember	one	thing:	you	have	to	respond	always	in
a	 fresh	way.	The	 situation	may	be	old,	but	you	are	not	 to	be	old.	You	have	 to
remain	young	and	fresh.	Just	try	new	responses.	They	will	not	be	as	efficient	as
mechanical	 responses,	 but	 efficiency	 is	 not	 a	 great	 value	 in	 spiritual	 life...
freshness	is.
A	rabbi	and	a	minister	were	sitting	together	on	a	plane.	The	stewardess	came	up
to	them	and	asked,	"Would	you	care	for	a	cocktail?"
"Sure,"	said	the	rabbi.	"Please	bring	a	Manhattan."
"Fine,	sir,"	said	the	stewardess.	"And	you	Reverend?"
"Young	lady,"	he	said,	"before	I	touch	strong	drink,	I	would	just	as	soon	commit
adultery."
"I've	missed,"	said	the	rabbi."	"As	long	as	there	is	a	choice,	I	will	have	what	he's
having."
People	are	imitative	and	imitation	is	bound	to	be	unintelligent.	They	want	to	do
exactly	 the	 things	 which	 others	 are	 doing.	 That	 destroys	 their	 freshness.	 Do
things	in	your	own	style;	live	your	life	according	to	your	own	light.	And	even	if
the	same	situation	arises,	be	alert	to	find	a	new	response.
It	 is	only	a	question	of	 a	 little	 alertness,	 and	once	you	have	 started	enjoying...
and	 it	 is	 really	 a	 great	 joy	 to	 respond	 to	 old	 situations	 always	 in	 a	 new	way,
because	 that	 newness	 keeps	 you	 young,	 keeps	 you	 conscious,	 keeps	 you	 non-
mechanical,	keeps	you	alive.
Don't	be	repetitive.	But	when	I	am	saying	don't	be	repetitive,	I	don't	mean	in	the
ordinary	 life,	 in	 the	marketplace;	 there,	 repetition	 is	 the	 rule.	But	 in	 the	 inner
world,	the	freshness	of	your	response	is	the	law.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 NOTICED	 THAT	 WHEN	 YOU	 LEAVE	 THE	 DISCOURSE	 AND
PASS
THROUGH	THE	DOOR,	YOU	OFTEN	LOOK	TO	YOUR	LEFT.	ARE	YOU
SIMPLY
SAYING	"HELLO"	TO	THE	GHOST?
I	have	to.	That	room,	Anando's	room,	has	so	many	ghosts.	I	had	not	told	Anando
when	she	came	into	the	room	for	the	first	 time	--	but	how	long	can	you	hide	a
fact?	The	ghosts	 started	declaring	 themselves.	 In	 the	middle	of	 the	night,	 they
would	wake	her.	They	would	knock	--	she	would	jump	out	of	her	bed.	And	she
was	afraid	to	tell	anybody	what	was	the	matter.	Finally	she	gathered	courage	and
asked	me,	"What	is	the	matter?
Suddenly,	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	somebody	knocks,	and	if	I	don't	jump	up,
he	tries	to	pull	my	leg."
I	said,	"Nothing	to	be	worried	about.	It	is	a	very	nice	assembly	of	ghosts."	I	keep
them	in	Anando's	room	just	so	they	can	also	listen	to	the	discourse	--	in	fact,	it	is
their	room.
They	are	not	ghosts,	they	are	the	hosts	--	Anando	is	the	guest.	But	she	was	very
much	afraid	I	said,	"You	don't	be	afraid.	Start	introducing	yourself	to	them."
She	said,	"But	what	will	others	think?"
I	said,	"Nobody	is	there	in	the	middle	of	the	night."
She	said,	"That's	right."	So	she	introduced	herself:	"I'm	a	nice	Australian	girl	and
I	 don't	want	 any	 trouble."	And	 now	 she	 has	 even	 started	making	 a	 bed	 in	 the
bathroom,	in	the	bathtub,	with	cozy	blankets	and	many	clothes	for	the	ghosts,	so
they	can	rest	there.
I	have	to	pass	that	room	just	because	of	those	fellows.	Just	a	"hello"	is	needed.
And	now	it	has	become	known	to	a	few	people.	Milarepa	is	asking,	"Why,	when
you	enter	 the	 room,	do	you	 look	 to	 the	 left	 and	say,	 `Hello'?"	Mukta	has	even
approached	Anando	to	say,	"I	enjoy	the	company	of	ghosts.	I	would	like	to	invite
them	for	tea	--	just	to	be	friendly	with	them."
But	Anando	 is	 very	much	 afraid.	 She	 has	 to	 talk	 to	 them	 every	 night.	 I	 have
asked	her	whether	they	answer.	She	said,	"They	never	answer."
I	said,	"They	will	not	answer	because	they	don't	exist.	You	have	to	create	them;
it	is	a	very	creative	dimension."
Nirupa	became	interested,	because	everybody	wants	to	know	mysterious	things.
She	 stayed	with	Anando,	 and	 she	 also	 heard	 the	 knocks.	 She	 said,	 "My	God,
they	 are!"	 But	 in	 fact,	 all	 those	 knocks	 are	 made	 by	 Milarepa.	 It	 is	 by
arrangement	with	me,	just	to	keep	a	place	in	the	commune	for	nice	ghosts.
You	can	create	ghosts	very	easily.	Anything	else	is	very	difficult	because	it	needs
some	 material.	 Ghosts	 are	 absolutely	 immaterial.	 It	 just	 needs	 a	 good
imagination,	and	Anando	has	a	good	 imagination.	And	 it	 is	a	good	exercise	 to
talk	to	the	ghosts,	because	you	can	be	more	truthful	than	you	can	be	with	human
beings	--	it	is	a	good	meditation.	You	can	tell	them	secrets	which	you	cannot	tell
to	 anybody	 else,	 because	 they	 are	 not	 going	 to	 spread	 rumors.	 You	 can	 trust
them;	they	are	your	own	creation.
Slowly,	slowly,	Anando	will	make	it	a	meditation	--	 it	 is	becoming	one	by	and
by.	I	am	giving	her	as	much	encouragement	as	possible.	There	is	nothing	to	be
afraid	of,	because	ghosts	don't	exist	anywhere	--	Anando's	room	included.	But	to
have	a	good	company	of	ghosts,	and	to	talk	with	them,	can	be	transformed	into	a
meditation,	as	if	you	are	talking	to	your	own	different	selves.
Every	man	has	many	selves.	He	can	make	each	self	a	ghost,	and	then	it	is	easy	to
talk	to	them.	And	just	one	step	more	--	talk	from	your	side	and	answer	from	his
side.	Between	this	conversation,	between	you	and	the	non-existential	ghost,	you
will	 find	 treasures	 hidden	within	 yourself,	 secrets	 and	mysteries	 of	which	 you
were	not	aware	before.
So	Anando's	room	is	a	special	room.	When	you	walk	through	it,	never	forget	to
say	hello	to	the	ghosts.
Goldstein	applies	for	membership	in	the	Communist	Party,	and	he	is	requested	to
answer	a	few	questions.
"Who	was	Karl	Marx?"
"I	don't	know,"	replies	Goldstein.
"Lenin?"
"Sorry,	I	don't	know	him	either."
"What	about	Leonid	Brezhnev?"
"Never	heard	of	him."
"Are	 you	 playing	 games	 with	 me?"	 asked	 the	 official.	 "Not	 at	 all,"	 says
Goldstein.	"Do	you	know	Herschel	Salzberg?"
"No,"	says	the	official.
"What	about	Yankl	Horovitch?"
"Never	heard	of	him."
"Sammy	Davidovitch?"
"No."
"Well,"	says	Goldstein,	"I	guess	that's	the	way	it	goes.	You	have	got	your	friends,
I	have	got	mine."
People	think	Anando	lives	alone	--	she	has	such	a	beautiful	congregation!	Right
now	 I	 am	 telling	 her	 to	 have	 some	 conversations,	 and	 soon	 you	 will	 see	 her
addressing	the	congregation.	There	will	be	nobody,	but	she	will	enjoy	her	own
revelations.	And	one	thing	is	good	about	ghosts:	you	can	say	anything	to	them,
in	any	language;	right	or	wrong,	it	does	not	matter.
Ghosts	 are	 almost	 like	 God.	 People	 are	 praying	 all	 over	 the	 world	 every
morning,	 every	 evening,	 to	 a	 god.	And	 it	 is	 not	 that	 their	 prayer	 is	 absolutely
useless	--	although	there	 is	no	God.	If	 they	are	praying	with	 tears	 in	 their	eyes
and	 love	 in	 their	 hearts,	 and	 a	 feeling	 of	 gratitude	 surrounding	 them,	whether
God	exists	or	not	is	not	the	point.	The	prayer	changes	the	person.	It	gives	him	a
new	experience.	God	was	just	an	excuse.
So	are	the	ghosts	of	Anando's	room	an	excuse	for	her	to	stand	up	and	address	the
congregation.	I	think	tonight	she's	going	to	do	it,	and	enjoy	it,	and	tell	those	poor
fellows...	because	they	are	so	old.	Somebody	may	have	died	thousands	of	years
before.
Just	 visualize	 a	 few	 skeletons	 sitting	 around	 you	 --	 it	 is	 an	 exercise	 in
visualization	--	and	then	start	addressing	them,	"Brothers	and	sisters...."	And	you
will	not	be	surprised	that	they	applaud,	they	laugh,	at	exactly	the	right	moments.
Milarepa	 has	 another	 question.	 He	 is	 afraid	 that	 Anando's	 ghosts	 are	 just
underneath	his	room,	and	someday	they	may	start	moving	around	the	house.	You
need	not	be	afraid,	Milarepa,	because	I	have	asked	a	few	ghosts...	they	are	afraid
of	 you!	 So	 you	 remain	 courageous.	 Even	 if	 you	 feel	 some	 ghost	 has	 entered,
behave	as	if	nobody	has	entered.
Go	 on	 playing	 on	 your	 guitar	 a	 little	 louder.	Ghosts	 don't	 particularly	 like	 the
contemporary	music	because	they	are	not	contemporary	--	they	are	very	classical
people.
Two	Italians	were	watching	a	jet	fly	overhead.
"Hey,	that's-a	the	pope	up-a	there,"	declared	one.
"How	you	know-a	that?"	asked	the	other.
"That's-a	easy"	replies	the	first.	"The	airplane-a,	said	TWA	on	it.	That	means	Top
Wop	Aboard."
Milarepa,	 you	 can	 write	 on	 your	 door	 TWA:	 Top	Wap	Aboard.	 And	 don't	 be
afraid	of	the	ghosts.	I	am	always	here.	If	some	ghost	plays	tricks	on	you,	you	can
just	inform	me,	because	I	have	such	an	intimacy	with	everything	in	life	--	ghosts
and	 gods,	 trees	 and	 rivers,	mountains	 and	 clouds	 --	 that	 I	will	 prevent	 them...
Don't	Disturb	the	Musician!
You	are	allowed	to	be	present	in	the	court	of	Anando.	She	is	my	legal	secretary,
and	if	you	want	 to	 learn	about	 law,	she	can	teach	you	things.	I	don't	 think	that
any	ghost	is	interested	in	things	like	law	--	so	technical.	But	they	are	interested
in	Anando.	She	is	very	juicy!
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	I	SAW	YOU	THE	OTHER	MORNING,	YOU	SEEMED	SO	TOTALLY
FRESH,	SO	NEW,	SO	RADIANT	--	DEEPER,	AND	HIGHER,	AND	VASTER
THAN
EVER	BEFORE.	WHAT	HAS	HAPPENED	 TO	YOU	 IN	 THESE	DAYS	OF
SILENCE?
Anand	Suresh,	 there	are	many	things	 that	have	not	been	told	by	the	mystics	 to
people,	 just	 so	 that	 they	don't	 freak	out.	One	of	 the	 things	 is	 the	moment	 you
become	aware,	conscious,	 reaches	which	were	unknown	to	you	before	become
available.	 Your	 contact	 with	 the	 body	 becomes	 loose,	 particularly	 after
enlightenment.
The	general	understanding	is	that	you	will	be	more	healthy.	You	are	in	an	inner
sense	 more	 healthy,	 but	 as	 far	 as	 your	 body	 is	 concerned,	 you	 become	 more
fragile.	 So	whenever	 I	 have	 a	 great	 opportunity	 of	 being	 sick,	 I	 use	 it	 --	 just
resting	under	my	blankets,	being	utterly	silent.	I	love	to	be	sick,	to	tell	you	the
truth,	because	 then	 I	 can	 sleep	 twenty	hours,	 at	 least.	 It	 is	 sleep	 to	 the	outside
people;	but	to	me	it	is	a	deep	meditation.
So,	 because	 both	 my	 arms	 and	 their	 joints	 are	 in	 bad	 shape,	 I	 cannot	 even
participate	in	your	rejoicing	and	in	your	music.	I	have	been	resting	completely.
And	whatever	I	do,	I	do	totally.	That	may	have	given	you	the	idea	that	I	looked
"totally	fresh,	new,	radiant	--
deeper	and	higher	and	vaster	than	ever	before."
I	am	always	the	same.	But	as	you	become	more	and	more	centered	inward,	even
to	look	outside	is	a	strain	on	the	eyes,	even	to	speak	a	word	is	a	strain	because
effort	has	to	be	made.	Otherwise	the	silence	cannot	be	translated	in	any	way	and
conveyed	to	you.
So	whenever	 I	get	 some	chance....	For	example,	when	 I	was	 in	American	 jails
for	twelve	days,	all	I	did	was	sleep	for	twenty	hours,	waking	up	twice	to	take	a
bath	and	to	eat	something,	and	then	go	to	sleep	again.	When	I	came	out	of	the
jail,	 the	 jailer	 said,	"You	are	my	first	experience	of	someone...	 from	when	you
entered,	 till	now	when	you	are	coming	out,	 I	can	compare:	You	are	 looking	so
radiant,	so	fresh."
I	said	to	him,	"Jail	life	suits	me!"
He	said,	"What?"
I	said,	"Yes,	because	there	is	no	disturbance."
Each	of	your	presidents,	your	prime	ministers,	your	senate	members	should	be
given	a	chance	every	year,	at	least	for	twelve	days,	to	be	in	jail.	They	will	all	feel
nourished.
They	just	have	to	know	the	art:	take	it	easily.	Easy	is	right.
An	American	 from	 Texas	 is	 visiting	 France,	 and	 feeling	 thirsty,	 he	 stops	 at	 a
house	along	the	road.	"Can	you	give	me	a	drink	of	water?"	asked	the	Texan.
"Of	course,"	says	the	Frenchman.
"What	do	you	do?"	asks	the	Texan.
"I	raise	a	few	chickens,"	says	the	Frenchman.
"Really,"	says	the	Texan.	"I'm	also	a	farmer.	How	much	land	do	you	have?"
"Well,"	says	the	Frenchman.	"Out	front	it	is	fifty	meters,	as	you	can	see,	and	in
the	back	we	have	close	 to	a	hundred	meters	of	property.	And	what	about	your
place?"
"Well,"	says	 the	Texan	proudly.	"On	my	ranch,	I	have	breakfast,	and	I	get	 into
the	 car,	 and	 I	 drive	 and	 drive,	 and	 I	 don't	 reach	 the	 end	 of	 the	 ranch	 until
dinnertime."
"Really,"	replied	the	Frenchman.	"I	once	had	a	car	like	that."
It	all	depends	how	you	take	it.
Margaret	 Thatcher,	 Francois	 Mitterand,	 and	 Ronald	 Reagan	 were	 lunching
together.
Naturally,	they	talked	about	their	respective	heartaches.
Margaret	Thatcher	said,	"I	have	thirteen	undercover	agents	and	one	of	them	is	a
double	agent,	but	I	don't	know	which."
Mitterand	spoke	up,	"I	have	thirteen	mistresses	and	one	of	them	is	cheating	on
me,	but	I	don't	know	which."
Reagan	said,	"I	have	thirteen	cabinet	ministers,	and	one	of	them	is	intelligent	--
but	I	don't	which."
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	Life	is	an	eternal	incarnation
19	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705195
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN16
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
106
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SOMETIMES	IN	DISCOURSE,	I	SUDDENLY	COME	TO	CONSCIOUSNESS
AND
REALIZE	 THAT	 I	 DON'T	 KNOW	 WHERE	 I'VE	 BEEN,	 AND	 YET	 THE
DISCOURSE
IS	 COMING	TO	A	CLOSE.	 YOUR	WORDS	WERE	COMING	 THROUGH,
BUT	I'M
NOT	SURE	 IF	 I	WAS	AWAKE.	 IF	 I'M	NOT	CONSCIOUS,	AM	 I	ASLEEP?
ARE
THESE	THE	ONLY	TWO	POSSIBILITIES?	IS	THERE	SOME	STAGE	IN-
BETWEEN?	HOW	TO	TELL	THE	DIFFERENCE?
Mary	Catherine,	 the	 question	you	have	 asked	 is	 the	 question	 everybody	needs
the	answer	for.	Man	is	asleep,	but	it	is	no	ordinary	sleep;	he	is	asleep	with	open
eyes.	His	sleep	is	spiritual,	not	physical.
Just	 as	 in	 physical	 sleep	 your	 consciousness	 is	 filled	with	 dreams,	 in	 spiritual
sleep	your	consciousness	 is	filled	with	thoughts,	desires,	feelings	--	a	 thousand
and	one	things.
It	 is	 not	 that	 you	 are	 unconscious	 in	 the	 sense	 of	 being	 in	 a	 coma;	 you	 are
unconscious	in	the	sense	that	your	consciousness	is	covered	with	too	much	dust.
It	 is	exactly	 like	a	mirror:	 if	covered	with	many	 layers	of	dust,	 it	will	 lose	 the
quality	 of	 reflecting,	will	 lose	 the	 quality	 of	 being	 a	mirror.	 But	 the	mirror	 is
there;	all	that	is	needed	is	to	remove	the	dust.	Your	consciousness	is	there	--	even
while	 you	 are	 physically	 asleep	 your	 consciousness	 is	 there,	 but	 now	 more
covered	than	when	you	are	awake.
You	 are	 asking,	 "If	 I'm	 not	 conscious,	 am	 I	 asleep?	 Are	 these	 the	 only	 two
possibilities?
Is	there	some	stage	in	between?	How	to	tell	the	difference?"
You	 are	 not	 unconscious	 in	 the	 sense	 a	 person	 falls	 into	 a	 coma;	 you	 are	 not
conscious	 in	 the	 sense	 a	Gautam	Buddha	 is	 conscious.	You	 are	 in	between.	A
thick	layer	of	thoughts	does	not	allow	you	to	be	in	the	present.	That's	why,	while
you	are	listening	to	me,	you	are	listening	and	yet	the	listening	is	very	superficial
--	because	deep	down	there	are	so	many	thoughts	going	on.	You	are	listening	but
it	is	not	reaching	you,	and	as	I	stop	speaking,	suddenly	you	realize	that	you	have
been	 listening,	 certainly,	 but	 you	 have	 not	 understood	 it.	 It	 has	 not	 penetrated
you;	 it	 has	 not	 become	 part	 of	 your	 being.	 Something	 has	 prevented	 it,	 like	 a
China	Wall.	Those	thoughts	are	transparent,	but	they	are	thicker	than	any	China
Wall	can	be.
You	are	neither	asleep	nor	awake,	you	are	in	between	--	awake	as	far	as	your	day
to	 day	 mechanical	 activities	 are	 concerned,	 and	 asleep	 as	 far	 as	 a	 clear
consciousness	 is	 concerned.	 A	 pure	 consciousness,	 a	 deep	 innocence	 like	 an
unclouded	sky,	is	absent.
The	pope	was	sitting	with	his	cardinals	signing	papers	and	proclamations.	The
phone	rang	and	his	secretary	answered.	"Your	holiness,"	she	said.	"It	is	about	the
abortion	bill.
A	reporter	wants	to	talk	to	you."
"Don't	bother	me,"	the	pope	interrupted.
"But	he	wants	to	know	what	you	are	going	to	do	about	the	bill."
"Just	pay	it,"	the	pope	replied.	"Pay	it	quick!"
In	what	position	will	you	put	the	pope?	Asleep	or	awake?	He	is	in	between;	he
has	 heard	 the	 word	 bill,	 but	 he	 has	 interpreted	 it	 in	 his	 own	 way.	 He	 has
forgotten	completely	that	the	bill	is	about	abortion,	and	certainly	he	has	not	been
aborted,	and	he	has	not	to	pay	any	bill.
But	this	 is	 the	situation	of	us	all.	We	hear	what	we	want	to	hear;	we	hear	only
that	which	adjusts	with	our	preconceived	notions,	prejudices.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know...	the	scientific	research	is	almost	unbelievable:	it
says	ninety-eight	percent	of	what	you	hear	is	prevented	from	reaching	to	you	--
ninety-eight	 percent!	Only	 two	 percent	 reaches	 you.	 It	 has	 to	 pass	 through	 so
many	 thoughts,	 conceptions,	 beliefs,	 conditionings,	 and	 they	 go	 on	 cutting	 it
according	 to	 themselves.	 By	 the	 time	 it	 reaches	 you,	 it	 is	 something	 totally
different	than	was	said,	than	was	heard.	It	is	a	long	process	of	screening,	and	we
are	all	screening.	If	something	falls	in	tune	with	our	mind	--	that	means	with	our
past	 --	we	hear	 it.	But	 if	 it	goes	against	 it,	we	certainly	hear	 the	sound	but	we
miss	the	meaning.
To	listen	is	a	great	art.
People	only	hear;	very	few	people	are	able	to	listen.
One	man	had	reached	Gautam	Buddha.	He	was	a	well-known	philosopher	of	the
day	 and	 he	 had	 defeated	many	 philosophers	 in	 discussions	 about	 the	 ultimate,
the	truth,	God.	He	had	come	to	defeat	Gautam	Buddha	too	--	that	would	be	the
crowning	victory.	He	had	brought	with	him	five	hundred	chosen	disciples	to	see
Gautam	Buddha	defeated.
But	 Gautam	 Buddha	 asked	 a	 very	 strange	 question.	 He	 asked,	 "Do	 you
understand	the	meaning	and	the	difference	between	hearing	and	listening?"
The	man	was	at	a	loss.	He	had	come	to	discuss	great	things,	and	this	was	a	small
matter.
And	there	was	no	difference...	as	far	as	 language	 is	concerned,	dictionaries	are
concerned,	hearing	is	listening.	The	man	said,	"There	is	no	difference	at	all,	and
I	had	hoped	you	would	not	ask	such	an	ordinary	question."
Gautam	Buddha	 said,	 "There	 is	 a	 great	 difference.	And	unless	you	understand
the	difference,	there	is	no	possibility	of	any	dialogue.	I	will	say	something;	you
will	hear	something	else.	So	if	you	really	want	to	have	a	dialogue	with	me,	sit	by
my	 side	 for	 two	 years.	 Don't	 speak	 a	 single	 word,	 just	 listen.	 Whatever	 I'm
telling	others,	be	unconcerned;	I'm	not	telling	you.	So	you	need	not	be	worried
about	whether	it	is	true	or	untrue,	whether	you	have	to	accept	it	or	not.	You	are
just	a	witness;	your	opinion	is	not	required.
"After	two	years,	you	can	have	the	dialogue,	the	discussion	you	have	come	for.
And	I	would	 love	 to	be	defeated,	so	 this	 is	not	 to	postpone	defeat;	 it	 is	 just	 to
make	the	dialogue	possible."
At	 that	 very	 moment,	 Mahakashyap	 --	 a	 great	 disciple	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha;
perhaps	 the	 greatest	 --	 laughed.	He	was	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree	 far	 away,	 and	 the
philosopher	thought,
"That	man	seems	to	be	mad.	Why	is	he	laughing?"
Buddha	said,	"Mahakashyap,	this	is	not	mannerly;	even	for	an	enlightened	man
this	is	not	right."
Mahakashyap	said,	"I	don't	care	about	right	and	wrong;	I'm	just	feeling	sorry	for
the	poor	philosopher."
And	 he	 turned	 to	 the	 philosopher	 and	 said	 to	 him,	 "If	 you	 want	 to	 have	 a
discussion,	have	 it	 right	now;	after	 two	years,	 there	will	be	 just	silence	and	no
dialogue.	 This	man	 is	 not	 trustworthy.	 He	 deceived	me;	 I	 also	 came	with	 the
same	idea	as	you,	to	defeat	him,	and	he	cheated	me.	He	said,	`Sit	down	for	two
years	by	my	side,	and	listen.	Learn	first	the	art	of	listening.	And	because	you	are
not	concerned	at	all,	your	mind	need	not	function.'
"And	two	years	 is	a	 long	 time;	 the	mind	starts	 forgetting	how	to	 think,	how	to
function.
The	 very	 presence	 of	Gautam	Buddha	 is	 so	 peaceful,	 so	 silent,	 that	 one	 starts
rejoicing	in	the	silence.	And	to	listen	to	his	words...	which	are	not	addressed	to
you,	 so	 you	 are	 not	 worried	 whether	 they	 agree	 with	 your	 prejudices,	 your
philosophy,	your	religion	--	with	you	--	or	not.	You	are	indifferent.	You	listen	to
him	as	if	you	are	listening	to	the	birds	singing	in	the	morning	when	the	sun	rises.
"And	 two	 years...	 the	 mind	 disappears.	 And	 although	 those	 words	 are	 not
addressed	 to	you,	 they	start	 reaching	 to	your	heart.	Because	 the	mind	 is	 silent,
the	passage	is	open	--
the	door	is	open,	the	heart	welcomes	them.	So	if	you	want	to	ask	anything,	if	you
want	 to	 challenge	 this	 man,	 challenge	 now.	 I	 don't	 want	 to	 see	 another	 man
cheated	again."
Gautam	Buddha	said,	"It	 is	up	to	you;	 if	you	want	 to	defeat	me	now,	I	declare
my	defeat.
There	is	no	need	to	talk.	Why	waste	time?	You	are	victorious.	But	if	you	really
want	 to	have	 a	dialogue	with	me,	 then	 I'm	not	 asking	much,	 just	 two	years	 to
learn	the	art	of	listening."
The	man	remained	for	two	years,	and	even	forgot	completely	that	after	two	years
he	had	to	challenge	Gautam	Buddha	for	a	debate.	He	forgot	the	whole	calendar.
Days	passed,	months	passed,	seasons	came	and	went	away,	and	after	two	years
he	 was	 enjoying	 the	 silence	 so	much	 that	 he	 had	 no	 idea	 that	 two	 years	 had
passed.
It	 has	 to	 be	 remembered	 that	 time	 is	 a	 very	 elastic	 thing.	 When	 you	 are	 in
suffering,	time	becomes	longer;	suddenly	all	the	watches	and	clocks	of	the	world
start	moving	slowly	--
a	great	conspiracy	against	a	poor	man	who	is	in	suffering.	Time	moves	so	slowly
that	sometimes	one	feels	as	if	it	has	stopped.
You	are	sitting	by	the	side	of	someone	you	love	who	is	dying,	in	the	middle	of
the	night;	it	seems	time	has	stopped,	that	this	night	is	not	going	to	end,	that	your
idea	 that	 all	nights	end	was	a	 fallacy...	 this	night	 is	not	going	 to	have	a	dawn,
because	time	is	not	moving.
And	when	you	are	joyful	--	when	you	meet	a	friend	after	many	years,	when	you
meet	a	beloved,	a	 lover	for	whom	you	have	waited	 long	--	suddenly,	again	 the
conspiracy.	 All	 the	 clocks,	 all	 the	 watches,	 start	 moving	 faster;	 hours	 go	 like
minutes,	 days	 go	 like	 hours,	 months	 go	 like	 weeks.	 Time	 is	 elastic:	 time	 is
relative	to	your	inner	condition.
The	man	 had	 enjoyed	 those	 two	 years	 of	 silence	 so	 deeply	 that	 he	 could	 not
conceive	that	two	years	had	passed.	Suddenly,	Buddha	himself	asked	him,	"Have
you	forgotten	completely?	Two	years	have	passed;	this	is	the	day	you	had	come
two	years	ago.	Now	if	you	want	to	challenge	me	to	a	debate,	I'm	ready."
The	man	fell	to	the	feet	of	Gautam	Buddha.
And	Mahakashyap	laughed	again,	and	said,	"I	had	told	you,	but	nobody	listens
to	me.	 I	 have	 been	 sitting	 under	 this	 tree	 for	 almost	 twenty	 years,	 preventing
people	from	falling	into	the	trap	of	this	man;	but	nobody	listens	to	me.	They	fall
into	the	trap,	and	each	person	gives	me	two	occasions	to	laugh."
The	 man	 went,	 after	 touching	 Gautam	 Buddha's	 feet,	 to	 touch	 the	 feet	 of
Mahakashyap	 too,	 saying,	 "I	 am	grateful	 to	you.	 I	have	 learned	 the	distinction
between	 hearing	 and	 listening.	 Hearing	 had	 made	 me	 a	 great	 knowledgeable
man,	 and	 listening	 has	 made	 me	 innocent,	 silent	 --	 a	 peace	 that	 passeth
understanding.	 I	 don't	 have	 any	questions,	 and	 I	don't	 have	 any	answers;	 I	 am
utterly	silent.	All	questions	have	disappeared,	all	answers	have	disappeared.	Can
I	also	sit	by	your	side	under	the	tree?"	he	asked	Mahakashyap.
Mahakashyap	said,	"No,	I	don't	accept	disciples;	that	is	the	business	of	Gautam
Buddha	--
you	 just	 go	 there.	 Don't	 crowd	 around	 my	 tree,	 because	 even	 here	 there	 is
nothing	to	listen	to,	only	once	in	a	while	a	laughter	when	somebody	comes	and	I
see	that	he's	falling	into	the	trap.	You	have	fallen	into	the	trap;	now	be	initiated,
become	a	sannyasin."
Not	only	did	the	man	become	a	sannyasin,	his	five	hundred	followers	who	were
also	sitting	and	listening	for	two	years,	had	also	become	silent.
Mary	Catherine,	you	are	well-educated;	perhaps	too	much	--	well-read;	perhaps
too	much.	Your	mind	is	so	full	of	thoughts.	Those	thoughts	are	creating	a	state
which	is	neither	consciousness	nor	unconsciousness.	Everything	seems	to	be	so
full	of	noise	in	you	that	if	I	shout,	perhaps	my	words	may	reach	you	--	but	what
about	my	whispers?	And	 truth	cannot	be	shouted,	 it	can	only	be	whispered.	 In
fact,	it	can	be	said	only	in	silence;	even	whispering	is	too	much	verbiage.
Put	your	educated	mind	aside.	Here	you	have	to	be	innocent,	like	small	children
playing	on	the	beach	making	castles	of	sand,	running	after	butterflies,	collecting
seashells,	looking	at	everything	with	so	much	wonder	that	each	and	every	thing
in	existence	becomes	a	mystery.
Listening	to	me	is	only	a	beginning;	then	you	have	to	listen	to	the	trees,	to	the
mountains,	to	the	moon,	to	the	faraway	stars	--	they	all	have	messages	for	you.
To	the	sunrises,	to	the	sunsets...	they	all	have	been	waiting	for	so	long.	Once	you
start	 listening,	 the	whole	existence	starts	 speaking	 to	you.	Right	now	you	only
speak	to	yourself,	and	nobody	listens.
Three	Soviet	citizens	--	a	Pole,	a	Czech,	and	a	Jew	--	were	accused	of	spying	and
sentenced	to	death.	Each	was	granted	a	last	wish.
"I	want	my	ashes	scattered	over	the	grave	of	Karl	Marx,"	said	the	Pole.
"I	want	my	ashes	scattered	over	the	grave	of	Lenin,"	said	the	Czech.
"And	 I,"	 said	 the	 Jew,	 "want	 my	 ashes	 scattered	 over	 the	 grave	 of	 Comrade
Gorbachev."
"But	that	is	impossible!"	he	was	told.	"Gorbachev	is	not	dead	yet."
"Fine,"	said	the	Jew,	"I	can	wait."
You	should	not	wait.
Start	 from	 this	moment	 to	 listen,	 to	 be	 silent,	 because	 the	next	moment	 is	 not
certain.
Gorbachev	may	die,	may	not	die.	Tomorrow	it	may	not	be	so	easy	as	it	is	today,
because	in	twenty-four	hours	you	will	have	gathered	more	garbage	in	your	head;
so	 the	sooner	 the	better,	because	you	cannot	sit	silently.	 If	you	don't	start	now,
you	will	be	doing	something	or	other....
Don't	 postpone	 it.	 Every	 postponement	 is	 suicidal	 --	 particularly	 of	 those
experiences	which	belong	to	the	beyond.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	WESTERN	SOCIETY,	AT	LEAST,	YOUTH	IS	CONSIDERED	TO	BE
EVERYTHING,	AND	TO	A	CERTAIN	EXTENT,	 IT	SEEMS	THIS	 IS	AS	IT
SHOULD
BE	 IF	WE	 ARE	 TO	 CONTINUE	 GROWING	 IN	 EVERY	 DIMENSION	 OF
LIFE.	BUT
THE	NATURAL	COROLLARY	OF	THAT	IS	THAT	AS	ONE	MOVES	AWAY
FROM
YOUTH,	 BIRTHDAYS	 ARE	 NO	 LONGER	 A	 CAUSE	 FOR
CONGRATULATIONS,	 BUT	 ARE	 AN	 EMBARRASSING	 AND
UNAVOIDABLE	FACT	OF	LIFE.	IT
BECOMES	 IMPOLITE	 TO	ASK	 SOMEONE	THEIR	AGE;	GRAY	HAIR	 IS
DYED,	 TEETH	 CAPPED	 OR	 REPLACED	 ENTIRELY,	 DEMORALIZED
BREASTS	AND
FACES	HAVE	TO	BE	LIFTED,	TUMMIES	MADE	TAUT,	AND	VARICOSE
VEINS
SUPPORTED	--	BUT	UNDER	COVER.	YOU	CERTAINLY	DON'T	TAKE	IT
AS	A	COMPLIMENT	IF	SOMEONE	TELLS	YOU	THAT	YOU	LOOK	YOUR
AGE.	BUT
MY	EXPERIENCE	IS	THAT	AS	I	BECOME	OLDER,	EACH	YEAR	IS	ONLY
BETTER	AND	BETTER;	YET	NOBODY	TOLD	ME	THIS	WOULD	BE	SO,
AND
YOU	 NEVER	 HEAR	 PEOPLE	 SINGING	 THE	 PRAISES	 OF	 GROWING
OLDER.
WOULD	 YOU,	 FOR	 THE	 BENEFIT	 OF	 YOUR	 MIDDLE-AGED
SANNYASINS,	SPEAK	ON	THE	JOYS	OF	GROWING	OLDER?
Maneesha,	the	question	you	have	asked	implies	many	things.	First,	the	Western
mind	is	conditioned	by	the	idea	that	you	have	only	one	life	--	seventy	years,	and
youth	will	never	come	again.	In	the	West,	the	spring	comes	only	once;	naturally,
there	 is	a	deep	desire	 to	cling	as	 long	as	possible,	 to	pretend	 in	every	possible
way	that	you	are	still	young.
In	 the	 East,	 the	 older	 person	 was	 always	 valued,	 respected.	 He	 was	 more
experienced,	he	had	seen	many,	many	seasons	coming	and	going;	he	had	 lived
through	 all	 kinds	 of	 experiences,	 good	 and	 bad.	He	 had	 become	 seasoned;	 he
was	no	more	immature.	He	had	a	certain	integrity	that	comes	only	with	age.	He
was	not	childish,	carrying	his	teddy	bears;	he	was	not	young,	still	fooling	around
thinking	that	this	was	love.
He	had	passed	through	all	these	experiences,	had	seen	that	beauty	fades;	he	has
seen	 that	 everything	 comes	 to	 an	 end,	 that	 everything	 is	 moving	 towards	 the
grave.	From	the	very	moment	he	left	the	cradle,	there	was	only	one	way	--	and	it
is	from	cradle	to	the	grave.
You	 cannot	 go	 anywhere	 else;	 you	 cannot	 go	 astray	 even	 if	 you	 try.	You	will
reach	to	the	grave	whatever	you	do.
The	old	man	was	respected,	loved;	he	had	attained	a	certain	purity	of	the	heart
because	 he	 had	 lived	 through	 desires,	 and	 seen	 that	 every	 desire	 leads	 to
frustration.	 Those	 desires	 are	 past	 memories.	 He	 had	 lived	 in	 all	 kinds	 of
relationships,	and	had	seen	that	every	kind	of	relationship	turns	into	hell.	He	had
passed	through	all	the	dark	nights	of	the	soul.	He	had	attained	a	certain	aloofness
--	the	purity	of	an	observer.	He	was	no	longer	interested	in	participating	in	any
football	game.	Just	living	his	life,	he	had	come	to	a	transcendence;	hence,	he	was
respected,	his	wisdom	was	respected.
But	 in	 the	East,	 the	 idea	has	been	 that	 life	 is	not	 just	 a	 small	piece	of	 seventy
years	 in	 which	 youth	 comes	 only	 once.	 The	 idea	 has	 been	 that	 just	 as	 in
existence	everything	moves	eternally	--	the	summer	comes,	the	rains	come,	the
winter	comes,	and	the	summer	again;	everything	moves	like	a	wheel	--	life	is	not
an	exception.
Death	is	the	end	of	one	wheel	and	the	beginning	of	another.	Again	you	will	be	a
child,	 and	 again	you	will	 be	young,	 and	 again	you	will	 be	old.	 It	 has	 been	 so
since	the	beginning,	and	it	is	going	to	be	so	to	the	very	end	--	until	you	become
so	enlightened	 that	you	can	 jump	out	of	 the	vicious	circle	and	can	enter	 into	a
totally	 different	 law.	 From	 individuality,	 you	 can	 jump	 into	 the	 universal.	 So
there	was	no	hurry,	and	there	was	no	clinging.
The	 West	 is	 based	 on	 the	 Judaic	 tradition	 which	 believes	 only	 in	 one	 life.
Christianity	 is	only	a	branch	of	 the	Jews.	Jesus	was	a	Jew,	born	a	Jew,	 lived	a
Jew,	 died	 a	 Jew;	 he	 never	 knew	 that	 he	 was	 a	 Christian.	 If	 you	 meet	 him
somewhere	and	greet	him	with,	`Hello,	Jesus	Christ',	he	will	not	recognize	who
you	are	addressing	because	he	never	knew	that	his	name	is	Jesus	and	he	never
knew	 that	 he	 is	 Christ.	 His	 name	was	 Joshua,	 a	Hebrew	 name,	 and	 he	was	 a
messiah	of	God,	not	a	Christ.	Jesus	Christ	is	a	translation	in	Greek	from	Hebrew.
Mohammedanism	is	also	a	by-product	of	the	same	tradition	--	the	Jews.
These	three	religions	believe	in	one	life.	To	believe	in	one	life	is	very	dangerous
because	 it	 does	 not	 give	 you	 chances	 to	make	mistakes,	 it	 does	 not	 give	 you
chances	to	have	enough	experience	of	anything;	you	are	always	in	a	hurry.
The	whole	Western	mind	has	become	the	mind	of	a	tourist	who	is	carrying	two,
three	 cameras,	 and	 rushing	 to	 photograph	 everything	 because	 he	 only	 has	 a
three-week	visa.
And	 in	 three	 weeks,	 he	 has	 to	 cover	 the	 whole	 country	 --	 all	 the	 great
monuments.	There	 is	no	 time	for	him	to	see	 them	directly;	he	will	see	 them	at
home,	at	ease,	in	his	album.
Whenever	I	remember	the	tourists,	I	see	the	old	women	rushing	from	one	place
to	another
--	from	Ajanta	to	Ellora,	from	Taj	Mahal	to	Kashmir	--	in	a	hurry,	because	life	is
short.
It	is	only	the	Western	mind	which	has	created	the	proverb	that	time	is	money.	In
the	East,	things	go	slowly;	there	is	no	hurry	--	one	has	the	whole	of	eternity.	We
have	been	here	and	we	will	be	here	again,	so	what	is	the	hurry?	Enjoy	everything
with	intensity	and	totality.
So,	one	 thing:	because	of	 the	 idea	of	one	single	 life,	 the	West	has	become	 too
concerned	about	being	young,	and	 then	everything	 is	done	 to	 remain	young	as
long	 as	 possible,	 to	 prolong	 the	 process.	 That	 creates	 hypocrisy,	 and	 that
destroys	 an	 authentic	 growth.	 It	 does	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 become	 really	wise	 in
your	 old	 age,	 because	 you	 hate	 old	 age;	 old	 age	 reminds	 you	 only	 of	 death,
nothing	else.	Old	age	means	the	full	stop	is	not	far	away;	you	have	come	to	the
terminus	--	just	one	whistle	more,	and	the	train	will	stop.
I	had	an	agreement	with	my	grandfather.	He	loved	his	feet	to	be	massaged,	and	I
had	 told	him,	"Remember,	when	 I	 say	 `comma,'	 that	means	be	alert;	 the	semi-
colon	is	coming	close.	When	I	say	`semi-colon,'	get	ready	because	the	full	stop	is
coming	close.	And	once	I	say	`full	stop,'	I	mean	it."	So	he	was	so	much	afraid	of
"comma"	that	when	I	would	say,
"Comma,"	 he	would	 say,	 "It	 is	 okay,	 but	 let	 the	 semi-colon	 be	 a	 little	 longer.
Don't	make	it	short	and	quick!"
Old	 age	 simply	 reminds	 you,	 in	 the	West,	 that	 a	 full	 stop	 is	 coming	 close	 --
prolong	 the	 semi-colon.	 And	 who	 are	 you	 trying	 to	 deceive?	 If	 you	 have
recognized	 that	 youth	 is	 no	 longer	 there,	 you	 can	 go	 on	 deceiving	 the	 whole
world.	But	you	are	not	young,	you	are	simply	being	ridiculous.
I	have	heard...	two	so-called	young	people	got	married	--	so-called	because	both
were	pretending	to	be	young;	youth	had	gone	down	the	drain	a	long,	long	time
ago.	They	went	 for	a	honeymoon	with	suitcases,	with	 the	 tags,	 "Just	married."
But	both	were	afraid.
There	was	no	joy	on	their	faces,	only	the	fear	of	exposure.
Immediately	 they	 entered	 the	 hotel	 room,	 and	 closed	 the	 doors;	 the	 man
immediately	got	into	bed,	under	the	blanket,	and	told	the	wife,	"Put	the	light	off
while	you	are	in	the	bathroom.	I	will	wait	in	darkness;	I	like	darkness."
The	wife	said,	"Why	do	you	like	darkness?	I	cannot,	because	you	are	a	stranger
to	me.
We	just	met	on	the	beach;	I	don't	know	who	you	are,	you	don't	know	who	I	am.	I
want	to	keep	the	light	on	the	whole	night."
The	man	said,	"I	will	not	be	able	to	sleep."
The	woman	said,	"But	at	 least	until	I	come	out	of	the	bathroom,	keep	the	light
on."
And	 that	 struggle	 is	 always	 the	 beginning	 of	 every	 honeymoon,	 the	 fight....
Because	 the	woman	 started	 insisting,	 "Why	 you	 are	 so	 stubborn	 that	 the	 light
should	be	put	out?"
The	man	said,	"You	are	going	to	know	anyway,	so	what	is	the	point	of	fighting?"
He	threw	the	blanket	away	and	showed	that	one	of	his	legs	was	false.
He	said,	"I	did	not	want	you	to	know	it."
The	woman	said,	"But	it	is	good."
She	threw	off	her	wig,	took	out	her	teeth,	and	told	the	man,	"My	breasts	are	also
false.	So	now	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid	of	the	light."
He	said,	"Now	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid	of	anything.	Now	just	come	on,	have
a	headache,	and	go	to	sleep;	the	honeymoon	is	over."
People	 are	 trying	 to	 remain	 young,	 but	 they	 don't	 know	 that	 the	 very	 fear	 of
losing	youth	does	not	allow	you	to	live	it	in	its	totality.
And	secondly,	the	fear	of	losing	youth	does	not	allow	you	to	accept	old	age	with
grace.
You	miss	both	youth	--	 its	 joy,	 its	 intensity	--	and	you	also	miss	the	grace,	and
the	wisdom,	and	the	peace	that	old	age	brings.	But	the	whole	thing	is	based	on	a
false	conception	of	life.
Unless	the	West	changes	the	idea	that	there	is	only	one	life,	this	hypocrisy,	this
clinging,	and	this	fear	cannot	be	changed.
In	 fact,	one	 life	 is	not	all;	you	have	 lived	many	 times,	and	you	will	 live	many
times	more.
Hence,	 live	 each	moment	 as	 totally	 as	 possible;	 there	 is	 no	 hurry	 to	 jump	 to
another	moment.	Time	is	not	money,	time	is	inexhaustible;	it	is	available	to	the
poor	as	much	as	to	the	rich.	The	rich	are	not	richer	as	far	as	time	is	concerned,
and	the	poor	are	not	poorer.
Life	is	an	eternal	incarnation.
What	 appears	 on	 the	 surface	 is	 very	 deep-rooted	 in	 the	 religions	 of	 the	West.
They	are	very	miserly	in	giving	you	only	seventy	years.	If	you	try	to	work	it	out,
almost	one	third	of	your	life	will	be	lost	in	sleep,	one	third	of	your	life	will	have
to	be	wasted	 in	earning	food,	clothes,	housing.	Whatever	 little	 is	 left	has	 to	be
given	to	education,	football	matches,	movies,	stupid	quarrels,	fights.	If	you	can
save,	in	seventy	years'	time,	seven	minutes	for	yourself,	I	will	count	you	a	wise
man.
But	it	is	difficult	to	save	even	seven	minutes	in	your	whole	life;	so	how	can	you
find	yourself?	How	can	you	know	the	mystery	of	your	being,	of	your	life?	How
can	you	understand	that	death	is	not	an	end?
Because	you	have	missed	experiencing	life	itself,	you	are	going	to	miss	the	great
experience	of	death,	too;	otherwise,	there	is	nothing	to	be	afraid	of	in	death.	It	is
a	beautiful	sleep,	a	dreamless	sleep,	a	sleep	that	is	needed	for	you	to	move	into
another	body,	 silently	and	peacefully.	 It	 is	 a	 surgical	phenomenon;	 it	 is	 almost
like	anesthesia.
Death	is	a	friend,	not	a	foe.
Once	you	understand	death	as	a	friend,	and	start	living	life	without	any	fear	that
it	is	only	a	very	small	time	span	of	seventy	years	--	if	your	perspective	opens	to
the	eternity	of	your	life	--	then	everything	will	slow	down;	then	there	is	no	need
to	be	speedy.
In	everything,	people	are	simply	rushing.	I	have	seen	people	taking	their	office
bag,	 pushing	 things	 into	 it,	 kissing	 their	 wife,	 not	 seeing	whether	 she	 is	 their
wife	or	somebody	else;	and	saying	goodbye	to	their	children.	This	is	not	the	way
of	living!	And	where	are	you	reaching	with	this	speed?
I	have	heard	about	a	young	couple	who	had	purchased	a	new	car,	and	they	were
going	full	speed.
The	 wife	 was	 telling	 the	 husband	 again	 and	 again,	 "Where	 are	 we	 going?"
Because	women	are	still	old-minded,	"Where	are	we	going?"
And	the	man	said,	"Stop	bothering	me,	just	enjoy	the	speed	we	are	going	with.
The	real	question	is	not	where	we	are	going;	the	real	question	is	with	what	great
speed	we	are	going?"
Speed	has	become	more	 important	 than	 the	destination,	and	speed	has	become
more	 important	 because	 life	 is	 so	 short.	 You	 have	 to	 do	 so	 many	 things	 that
unless	you	do	everything	with	speed,	you	cannot	manage.	You	cannot	sit	silently
even	 for	a	 few	minutes	 --	 it	 seems	a	wastage.	 In	 those	 few	minutes	you	could
have	earned	a	few	bucks.
Just	wasting	time	closing	your	eyes,	and	what	is	there	inside	you?	If	you	really
want	 to	 know,	 you	 can	 go	 to	 any	 hospital	 and	 see	 a	 skeleton.	 That	 is	what	 is
inside	 you.	 Why	 are	 you	 unnecessarily	 getting	 into	 trouble	 by	 looking	 in?
Looking	in,	you	will	find	a	skeleton.
And	once	you	have	seen	your	skeleton,	life	will	become	more	difficult;	kissing
your	 wife,	 you	 know	 perfectly	 well	 what	 is	 happening	 --	 two	 skeletons.
Somebody	just	needs	to	invent	x-ray	glasses,	so	people	can	put	on	x-ray	glasses
and	see	all	around	skeletons	laughing.	Most	probably,	he	will	not	be	alive	to	take
his	 glasses	 off;	 so	 many	 skeletons	 laughing	 is	 enough	 to	 stop	 anybody's
heartbeat....	"My	God,	this	is	the	reality!	And	this	is	what	all	these	mystics	have
been	telling	people,	`Look	inwards'	--	avoid	them!"
The	West	has	no	tradition	of	mysticism.	It	is	extrovert:	look	outward,	there	is	so
much	 to	 see.	But	 they	are	not	 aware	 that	 inside	 there	 is	not	only	 the	 skeleton;
there	 is	 something	 more	 within	 the	 skeleton.	 That	 is	 your	 consciousness.	 By
closing	your	eyes	you	will	not	come	across	 the	skeleton;	you	will	come	across
your	very	life	source.
The	West	needs	a	deep	acquaintance	with	its	own	life	source,	then	there	will	be
no	hurry.
One	will	enjoy	when	life	brings	youth,	one	will	enjoy	when	life	brings	old	age
and	one	will	enjoy	when	life	brings	death.	You	simply	know	one	thing	--	how	to
enjoy	everything	that	you	come	across,	how	to	transform	it	into	a	celebration.
I	call	the	authentic	religion	the	art	of	transforming	everything	into	a	celebration,
into	a	song,	into	a	dance.
An	old	man	walked	into	a	health	clinic	and	told	the	doctor,	"You	have	got	to	do
something	 to	 lower	my	 sex	drive."	The	doctor	 took	one	 look	at	 the	 feeble	old
man	and	said,	"Now,	now	sir,	I	have	got	the	feeling	that	your	sex	drive	is	all	in
your	head."
"That's	what	I	mean	sonny,"	the	old	man	said.	"I	have	got	to	lower	it	a	little."
Even	the	old	man	is	wanting	to	be	a	playboy.	It	shows	one	thing	with	certainty	--
that	he	has	not	lived	his	youth	with	totality.	He	has	missed	his	youth,	and	he	is
still	thinking	about	it.	Now	he	cannot	do	anything	about	it,	but	his	whole	mind	is
continuously	thinking	about	the	days	he	had	in	youth	which	have	not	been	lived;
at	that	time	he	was	in	a	hurry.
If	 he	 had	 lived	 his	 youth,	 he	 would	 be	 free	 in	 his	 old	 age	 of	 all	 repressions,
sexuality;	 there	 would	 be	 no	 need	 for	 him	 to	 drop	 his	 sexual	 instinct.	 It
disappears,	it	evaporates	in	living.	One	just	has	to	live	uninhibited,	without	any
interference	from	your	religions,	from	your	priests	and	it	disappears;	otherwise,
when	you	are	young	you	are	in	church,	and	when	you	are	old,	you	are	reading
the	playboy	by	hiding	it	in	your	HOLY	BIBLE.
Every	 HOLY	 BIBLE	 is	 used	 only	 for	 one	 purpose,	 hiding	 magazines	 like
playboy,	so	you	are	not	caught	by	children	--	it	is	embarrassing.
I	have	heard	of	three	men,	old	men.	One	is	seventy,	the	other	is	eighty	and	the
third	is	ninety.	They	are	all	old	friends,	retired,	who	used	to	go	for	a	walk	and	sit
on	a	bench	in	the	park,	and	have	all	kinds	of	gossips.
One	day	the	youngest	of	the	three,	the	seventy	year	old	man,	looked	a	little	sad.
The	second	one,	the	eighty	year	old,	asked,	"What	is	the	matter?	You	are	looking
very	sad."
He	said,	 "I	 am	 feeling	very	guilty.	 It	will	help	me	 to	unburden	myself	 if	 I	 tell
you.	It	is	an	incident.	A	beautiful	lady	was	taking	a	bath.	She	was	a	guest	in	our
house,	 and	 I	was	 looking	 through	 the	 keyhole	 and	my	mother	 caught	 hold	 of
me."
Both	the	old	friends	laughed;	they	said,	"You	are	an	idiot.	Everybody	does	such
things	in	childhood."
He	said,	"It	is	not	a	question	of	childhood;	it	happened	today."
The	 second	man	 said,	 "Then	 it	 is	 really	 serious.	But	 I	will	 tell	 you	 something
which	has	been	happening	to	me	for	three	days,	and	I	am	keeping	it	like	a	stone,
a	rock	on	my	heart.
Continuously	for	three	days	my	wife	has	refused	to	love	me."
The	first	man	said,	"That	is	really	very	bad."
But	 the	 third,	 the	oldest	 laughed	and	he	said,	"First	you	ask	him	what	does	he
mean	by	love?"
So	he	asked,	and	the	second	old	man	said,	"Nothing	much.	Don't	make	me	feel
more	embarrassed.	It	is	a	simple	process.	I	hold	my	wife's	hand	and	press	it	three
times,	then	she	goes	to	sleep	and	I	go	to	sleep.	But	for	three	days,	whenever	I	try
to	 hold	 her	 hand,	 she	 says,	 `Not	 today,	 not	 today!	 Feel	 ashamed;	 you	 are	 old
enough	--	not	today!'	so	for	three	days	I	have	not	loved.
The	third	old	man	said,	"This	is	nothing.	What	has	been	happening	to	me	I	must
confess,	because	you	are	young	and	it	will	help	you	in	your	future.	Last	night,	as
the	 night	 was	 passing	 and	 the	 morning	 was	 coming	 closer,	 I	 started	 to	 make
preparations	to	make	love	to	my	wife	and	she	said	to	me,	`What	are	you	trying	to
do	you	idiot?'	I	said,	`What	am	I	trying	to	do?	I	am	simply	trying	to	make	love	to
you,'	and	she	said,	`This	is	the	third	time	in	the	night;	neither	you	sleep	nor	you
allow	me	to	sleep.	Love,	love,	love.'	So	I	think	it	seems	I	am	losing	my	memory.
Your	problems	are	nothing;	I	have	lost	my	memory."
If	you	listen	to	old	people,	you	will	be	surprised;	they	are	talking	only	of	things
which	 they	should	have	 lived,	but	 the	 time	has	passed	when	 it	was	possible	 to
live	 them.	At	 that	 time	 they	were	 reading	 the	Holy	Bible	 and	 listening	 to	 the
priest.
Those	priests	and	those	holy	scriptures	have	corrupted	people,	because	they	have
given	them	ideas	against	nature	and	they	cannot	allow	them	to	live	naturally.
If	 we	 need	 a	 new	 humanity,	 we	 will	 have	 to	 erase	 the	 whole	 past	 and	 start
everything	 anew.	 And	 the	 first	 basic	 principle	 will	 be:	 allow	 everybody,	 help
everybody,	teach	everybody	to	live	according	to	his	nature,	not	according	to	any
ideals,	and	live	totally	and	intensely	without	any	fear.	Then	children	will	enjoy
their	childhood,	the	young	people	will	enjoy	their	youth	and	the	old	people	will
have	the	grace	that	comes	naturally,	out	of	a	whole	life	lived	naturally.
Unless	your	old	age	is	graceful	and	wise	and	full	of	light	and	joy,	contentment,
fulfillment,	 a	blissfulness...	 in	your	very	presence,	 unless	 flowers	blossom	and
there	is	a	fragrance	of	eternity,	then	it	is	certain	that	you	have	lived.	If	it	is	not
happening	 that	way,	 that	means	 somewhere	 you	 have	 gone	 astray,	 somewhere
you	 have	 listened	 to	 the	 priests,	 who	 are	 the	 corrupters,	 the	 criminals,
somewhere	 you	 have	 gone	 against	 nature;	 and	 nature	 takes	 revenge.	 And	 its
revenge	is	to	destroy	your	old	age	and	make	it	ugly	--	ugly	to	others	and	ugly	in
your	own	eyes.	Otherwise	old	age	has	a	beauty	which	even	youth	cannot	have.
Youth	 has	 a	maturity,	 but	 it	 is	 unwise.	 It	 has	 too	much	 foolishness	 in	 it;	 it	 is
amateurish.
Old	age	has	given	the	last	touches	to	the	paintings	of	his	own	life.	And	when	one
has	given	the	last	touches,	one	is	ready	to	die	joyously,	dancingly.	One	is	ready
to	welcome	death.
Okay,	Maneesha
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	Gorbachev:	a	new	beginning
20	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705200
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN17
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
88
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
AFTER	 SIX	 YEARS	 OF	 SANNYAS	 AND	 A	 LONG,	 HARD	 STRUGGLE
WITH
AUTHORITIES	AND	 LEGAL	HINDRANCES,	 I	 RECENTLY	 SUCCEEDED
IN
LEAVING	 MY	 HOME	 COUNTRY	 --	 THE	 SOVIET	 UNION.	 SITTING	 IN
DARSHAN
JUST	A	FEW	METERS	FROM	YOU,	AND	SEEING	YOU,	AND	HEARING
YOU
TALK	FOR	THE	FIRST	TIME	IN	MY	LIFE,	I	REMEMBERED	ALL	MY
SANNYASIN	FRIENDS	WHO	ARE	NOT	ABLE	TO	TRAVEL	TO	YOU,	AND
MY
JOY	 WAS	 MIXED	 WITH	 DEEP	 SADNESS.	 DO	 YOU	 SEE	 THE	 SOVIET
UNION
UNDER	GORBACHEV	BECOMING	A	MORE	OPEN	SOCIETY,	 SO	THAT
YOUR
MESSAGE	OF	LOVE	AND	MEDITATION	WILL	SPREAD	MORE	EASILY
THERE?
Amrit	Chinmayo,	I	can	understand	your	sadness	for	 those	friends	in	 the	Soviet
Union	who	cannot	reach	me.	But	the	night	in	Soviet	Union	seems	to	be	coming
to	an	end.	The	man,	Gorbachev,	is,	perhaps	for	the	first	time	in	the	whole	history
of	the	Russian	Revolution,	a	man	who	has	an	insight	 into	human	values	and	is
trying	his	best	to	make	the	Soviet	Union	a	really	communist	democracy,	an	open
society.
The	dictatorship	of	the	proletariat	is	not	a	permanent	part	of	Karl	Marx'	utopia.	It
is	only	 for	 the	 interim	period,	while	 the	society	 is	becoming	established	 in	 the
new	form	and	the	old	form	is	disappearing.	Once	the	old	form	is	gone,	once	the
capitalist	 mind	 is	 no	 longer	 there,	 the	 necessity	 for	 dictatorship	 and	 a	 closed
society	 automatically	 has	 to	 disappear.	 It	 is	 a	 long	 time	 since	 the	 revolution
happened	and	enough	time	to	allow	the	dictatorship.
Gorbachev	is	a	new	beginning.	Perhaps	he	is	not	only	bringing	an	open	society
in	the	Soviet	Union;	he	will	also	be	helping	the	outside	world	to	become	really
open.	It	has	only	been	a	hypothesis	up	to	now;	it	is	not	a	reality.
If	half	the	world	is	closed,	the	other	half	cannot	remain	open.	It	is	as	if	half	of
you	 is	 dead,	 and	 the	 other	 half	 is	 expected	 to	 go	 on	 living.	Life	 is	 an	 organic
unity	on	many	 layers,	 in	many	dimensions.	This	beautiful	planet	of	ours	has	a
totality.	The	division	between	the	Soviet	and	the	American	blocks	is	ugly.	And
more	particularly,	 any	division	between	human	beings	 --	 either	 in	 the	name	of
religion	or	in	the	name	of	nationalities	--
is	primitive	and	barbarous.
Man	is	one.	His	problem	is	one,	his	misery	is	one	--	his	ecstasy	is	also	going	to
be	one.
In	the	whole	field	of	politics,	Gorbachev	seems	to	be	a	category	in	himself.	He
cannot	be	categorized	with	other	politicians.	 It	 is	going	 to	be	very	difficult	 for
him	 to	 make	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 an	 open	 society.	 But	 the	 man	 seems	 to	 be
courageous	and	intelligent,	and	it	is	a	challenge	to	him	to	make	his	people	live	in
freedom	--	freedom	of	thought,	freedom	of	movement,	freedom	of	expression.
I	 have	 been	 watching	 his	 steps.	 He	 is	 going	 slowly,	 but	 going	 steadily.	 The
change	 has	 to	 come	 very	 slowly,	 because	 the	 whole	 bureaucracy	 has	 enjoyed
dictatorial	 powers	 for	more	 than	 half	 a	 century;	 and	 the	Communist	 party	 has
enjoyed	more	power	than	any	party	in	the	whole	history	of	man.	To	relax	the	lust
for	power	is	one	of	the	most	difficult	things	in	the	world.
But	 life	 is	 full	 of	 mysteries.	 In	 the	 first	 place,	 Karl	 Marx,	 the	 founder	 of
communism,	had	not	even	dreamt	that	communism	would	happen	in	the	Soviet
Union.	If	he	is	awakened	from	his	grave	and	told	about	the	Russian	Revolution
he	 will	 be	 shocked	 because	 it	 is	 against	 all	 his	 calculations,	 against	 all	 his
arguments.	 That's	 what	 I	 mean	 when	 I	 say	 life	 is	 full	 of	 mysteries.	 It	 never
follows	the	logical,	the	mathematical	way;	it	goes	zig-zag,	like	a	river	moving	in
the	mountains	towards	the	ocean.	Life	does	not	run	like	railway	trains	on	settled
rails	--	it	is	not	predictable.
According	 to	 Karl	 Marx,	 communism	 was	 going	 to	 happen	 in	 America,	 and
logically	he	was	right.	Where	one	part	of	humanity	has	become	immensely	rich
and	 another	 part	 has	 become	 immensely	 poor,	where	 the	 division	between	 the
poor	and	 the	 rich	 is	 so	big	 that	 it	becomes,	 at	 a	point,	 intolerable,	 it	 has	 to	be
changed,	the	society	has	to	go	through	a	revolution.	America	should	have	been
the	first	to	go	through	the	revolution.	But	that	is	what	logic	predicts.	Life	has	its
own	 ways.	 It	 happened	 in	 a	 very	 backward	 country	 which	 was	 not	 even
capitalist.
According	 to	 Karl	 Marx,	 communism	 can	 happen	 only	 when	 there	 is	 a	 very
developed	 form	 of	 capitalism	 and	 a	 class	 struggle.	 Russia	 was	 still	 a	 pre-
capitalist	 country,	 still	 living	 under	 feudalism,	 under	 the	 czars.	 There	 was	 no
capitalist	class,	and	there	was	no	proletariat.	Karl	Marx	could	not	have	logically
conceived	that	Russia	would	be	the	first	communist	country,	the	first	to	have	the
great	 revolution.	But	 it	happened	 like	 that:	Russia	was	 the	 first	and	China	was
the	next	--	and	Marx	could	not	have	thought	either	of	Russia	or	of	China.
Perhaps	it	is	going	to	be	again	a	mysterious	phenomenon.	People	think	America
is	a	democracy	--	which	is	utterly	false.	And	people	think	that	in	America	there
is	freedom	of	expression,	freedom	of	individuality,	that	what	the	constitution	of
America	says	is	not	only	written	in	the	constitution	but	is	lived	by	the	country,
and	 that	 the	 government	 exists	 for	 the	 people,	 by	 the	 people,	 of	 the	 people.
Nothing	can	be	farther	away	from	truth.
America	 is	 the	 most	 hypocritical	 society	 today	 in	 the	 world,	 and	 the	 most
dangerous	to	the	human	future.
Gorbachev's	coming	into	power	is	a	great	hope,	because	the	man	does	not	seem
to	be	a	politician.	He	is	a	man	in	politics,	but	he	is	not	a	politician.	His	vision	is
for	a	better	humanity	--	it	 is	not	confined	to	the	Soviet	Union	alone.	And	he	is
slowly	relaxing	the	dictatorial	bureaucracy	that	has	grown	up	like	a	monster	in
the	past	sixty	years.
He	is	taking	one	of	the	most	risky	steps.	If	he	succeeds...	and	I	hope	that	he	will
succeed	 For	 sixty	 years	 half	 of	 humanity	 has	 lived	 under	 such	 tremendous
slavery	that	it	can	be	expected	that	a	second	revolution	will	come.	And	a	second
revolution	will	be	bigger	than	the	first,	greater	than	the	first.	The	first	revolution
in	the	Soviet	Union	destroyed	feudalism;	the	second	revolution	will	destroy	the
dictatorship	and	the	slavery	of	millions	of	people.
Gorbachev	to	me	is	almost	a	reincarnation	of	Lenin.	In	the	world	of	politics,	he
is	the	only	man	I	have	any	respect	for.
Amrit	Chinmayo,	 it	will	not	be	a	 long	time	until	 the	Soviet	Union	becomes	an
open	society,	and	it	will	be	possible	for	my	sannyasins	to	come	to	me.	It	will	be
possible	for	them	to	be	sannyasins	openly.
I	have	dedicated	my	book	on	human	rights	to	Gorbachev	and	Sakharov	--	I	have
never	dedicated	any	of	my	books	to	anybody	before	--	because	I	can	see	a	ray	of
light	 in	 this	 man,	 and	 a	 courage	 to	 create	 a	 second	 revolution	 which	 will	 be
bigger	than	the	first.	The	sannyasins	in	the	Soviet	Union	should	help	this	second
revolution	to	the	utmost	of	their	capacity.	Gorbachev	needs	every	support	of	all
those	 who	 believe	 in	 freedom,	 who	 believe	 in	 individuality,	 and	 who	 respect
differences	 in	 people;	who	 are	 not	 of	 a	 fascist	mind	 to	 impose	 themselves	 on
others,	but	of	a	democratic	spirit	to	help	everybody	to	be	himself.
Gorbachev	 has	 a	 task	 which	 not	 only	 can	 make	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 an	 open
society,	but	will	prove	that	all	condemnation	by	the	American	politicians	of	the
Soviet	Union	is	utterly	false	and	baseless.	The	Soviet	Union	becoming	an	open
society	will	 take	away	all	 the	power	that	America	has	accumulated	by	creating
fear	 in	 the	world	 against	 it.	 If	 that	 fear	disappears,	 the	power	of	America	will
disappear	with	 it.	America	does	not	want	 the	Soviet	Union	 to	become	an	open
society.
Now	 it	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 by	 every	 Soviet	 citizen,	 and	 every	 level	 of
humanity,	 that	 it	 is	 absolutely	 urgent	 that	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 becomes	 open,
available,	so	that	all	condemnations	fall	on	their	own,	and	America	is	proved	to
be	 cheating	 the	 whole	 humanity.	 This	 will	 be	 the	 real	 victory	 of	 the	 Soviet
Union.
The	question	of	a	nuclear	victory	is	simply	not	possible.	And	Gorbachev	is	the
first	man	who	has	seen	the	fact	that	with	the	invention	of	nuclear	weapons,	the
third	world	war	has	become	an	impossibility	--	because	nobody	can	win,	nobody
can	 be	 victorious.	 If	 a	 third	world	war	 happens,	 everybody	will	 be	 destroyed.
There	will	not	be	somebody	left	even	 to	write	 the	history	of	what	happened	 in
the	third	world	war.
It	 is	 again	 those	 mysterious	 things	 I	 talk	 about....	 Gautam	 Buddha	 could	 not
prevent	people	from	fighting;	Jesus	could	not	prevent	people	from	fighting;	Leo
Tolstoy,	Prince	Kropotkin,	and	all	 the	people	who	have	been	against	war,	have
not	been	able	to	prevent	people	from	going	to	wars.	What	has	prevented	them	is
the	invention	of	nuclear	powers.
Now	war	 is	 simply	 impossible	 --	 unless	 humanity	 decides	 to	 commit	 suicide.
And	humanity	 is	not	 in	a	position	 to	decide	for	suicide.	There	 is	a	 tremendous
longing	in	every	heart	 to	live,	and	to	live	joyously.	A	third	world	war	is	out	of
the	question.
Gorbachev's	greatness	is	in	his	insight	that	now	America	has	to	be	defeated	in	a
different	way.
The	Soviet	Union	becoming	really	democratic	--	a	freedom-loving	society	--	will
be	the	defeat	of	America.	It	just	has	to	penetrate	into	all	people	who	have	power
in	the	Soviet	Union	that	history	has	brought	them	to	a	point	where	they	can	win
over	America	without	 any	war.	 Just	 by	 bringing	 freedom	 to	 their	 own	 people
they	will	 take	 the	mask	 off	America	 --	 its	 so-called,	 pseudo,	 democracy.	And
Gorbachev	is	trying	slowly	to	bring	the	people....
For	 this	 new	kind	 of	war,	who	 is	more	 free?	Who	 is	more	 independent?	Who
respects	 the	 individual?	Who	respects	 individuals'	differences,	 their	 freedom	of
expression,	 their	 freedom	 of	 creativity?	Now	 this	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 real	war!
And	the	Soviet	Union	can	be	victorious	without	fighting.	Fighting	is	no	longer
possible.
For	 the	 first	 time	 a	 totally	 new	 kind	 of	 war	 has	 come	 into	 existence,	 and
Gorbachev	 must	 be	 given	 the	 credit	 of	 seeing	 it.	 And	 he	 is	 not	 missing	 the
opportunity	--	every	moment	he	is	moving	towards	an	open	society.
Amrit	Chinmayo,	give	the	message	to	my	sannyasins	in	the	Soviet	Union:	"Your
day	has	come."	Just	as	the	first	revolution	had	come	unexpectedly	to	the	Soviet
Union,	even	more	unexpectedly	the	second	revolution	is	coming	--	it	has	already
begun.	They	should	rejoice	and	make	every	effort	to	help	Gorbachev	in	making
the	Soviet	Union	the	land	of	freedom,	love,	friendship,	respect	to	human	life.	It
is	going	to	happen	--	you	can	take	it	from	me,	almost	as	a	prediction.
Just	 a	 few	 days	 ago,	 I	 was	 seeing	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 books	 to	 be
published	in	this	century,	MILLENNIUM.	It	is	a	deep	research	into	Nostradamus
and	his	predictions.
Eighty	 thousand	 copies	were	 published	 --	which	 is	 very	 rare	 --	 and	 they	were
sold	within	weeks.	Now	a	second	publication,	a	second	edition,	is	happening	in
America,	another	is	happening	in	England,	and	the	book	is	being	translated	into
many	other	languages	--
Dutch,	German....
Nostradamus	was	a	great	mystic	with	an	insight	into	the	future.	And	you	will	be
surprised	to	know	that	in	his	predictions,	I	am	included.	Describing	the	teacher
of	the	last	days	of	the	twentieth	century,	he	gives	eight	indications.	Krishnamurti
fulfills	 five,	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi	fulfills	 three,	Da	Free	John	fulfills	 four	--
and	I	was	amazed	that	I	fulfill	all	eight.
In	this	book	MILLENNIUM,	they	have	made	a	chart	of	the	teacher	about	whom
Nostradamus	 is	predicting	 --	 that	his	people	will	wear	 red	clothes,	 that	he	will
come	from	the	East,	that	he	will	be	arrested,	that	his	commune	will	be	destroyed,
that	 flying	 birds	 will	 be	 his	 symbol,	 that	 his	 name	 will	 mean	 moon....	 Three
hundred	years	ago	that	man	was	seeing	something	that	fits	perfectly	with	me	--
my	 name	 means	 "the	 moon."	 And	 in	 their	 chart	 they	 have	 declared	 me	 the
teacher	of	the	last	part	of	the	twentieth	century.
I	can	see	as	clearly	as	Nostradamus:
I	predict	that	Gorbachev	is	going	to	succeed	in	bringing	the	second	and	greater
revolution	 to	Russia,	 and	 his	 revolution	 in	 the	Soviet	Union	 is	 going	 to	 affect
everything	in	the	whole	world.
I	would	like	my	sannyasins	to	meet	him	--	they	have	to	meet	him	to	present	my
book	 that	 I	 have	 dedicated	 to	 him.	 Invite	 him	 to	 come	 to	 my	 people	 here
whenever	 he	 needs	 a	 little	 encouragement	 and	 hope,	 whenever	 he	 needs	 a
spiritual	 support,	 a	 nourishment.	 And	 tell	 him	 that	 his	 meetings	 with	 Ronald
Reagan	are	not	going	to	fulfill	anything,	but	if	he	dances	with	my	sannyasins	he
will	 gather	 a	 new	 spirit,	 a	 new	 joy	 to	 accept	 the	 great	 challenge	 that	 is	 his
destiny.
And	it	will	not	be	long	before	sannyasins	from	the	Soviet	Union	will	be	allowed
to	come	here,	and	my	sannyasins	from	other	countries	will	be	entering	into	the
Soviet	Union.
I	 have	 gone	 around	 the	 world	 --	 except	 to	 the	 Soviet	 Union.	 It	 will	 be	 an
immense	 help	 for	Gorbachev	 to	make	 the	 Soviet	Union	 an	 open	 society	 if	 he
invites	me	and	my	people....	Nobody	else	can	destroy	the	people	who	are	full	of
lust	 for	 power,	 and	 nobody	 else	 can	 revive	 the	 spirit	 of	 the	 people	which	 has
been	repressed	for	sixty	years.
If	my	people	just	go	and	sing	and	dance	and	move	around	in	the	Soviet	Union,
they	will	create	an	atmosphere	in	which	Gorbachev	can	work	more	easily	for	the
second	 great	 revolution.	 This	 is	 my	 message	 for	 my	 sannyasins,	 and	 for
Gorbachev,	and	for	Sakharov.
So	when	you	go	back,	meet	Sakharov	and	tell	him	from	me	that	he	should	make
arrangements	for	my	sannyasins	in	the	Soviet	Union	to	meet	with	Gorbachev.	He
is	the	right	person,	in	the	right	place,	in	the	right	moment.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	AMAZED.	IT	IS	INDIA,	IT	IS	A	HUNDRED	AND	FIVE	DEGREES	IN
THE
SHADE,	AND	YOU	REMAIN	SO	COOL,	SO	CALM,	SO	QUIET.	WHAT	IS
IT?	DO
YOU	HAVE	SOMETHING	UP	YOUR	SLEEVE,	OR	MAYBE	UNDER	YOUR
HAT?
Satyadharma....
A	new	flood	is	foretold,	and	nothing	can	be	done	to	prevent	it.	In	three	days	the
waters	will	wipe	out	 the	world.	The	 leader	of	Buddhism	appears	on	 television
and	 pleads	with	 everybody	 to	 become	 a	Buddhist.	That	way	 they	will	 at	 least
find	salvation	in	paradise.
The	pope	goes	 on	 television	with	 a	 similar	message:	 "It	 is	 still	 not	 too	 late	 to
accept	Jesus,"	he	says.
Bhagwan	Shree	Rajneesh	takes	a	different	approach:	"Look	guys,	we	have	three
days	to	learn	how	to	live	under	water."
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	MY	SIXTY-THREE	YEARS	OF	LIFE	YOU	ARE	THE	FIRST	LOVE
RELATIONSHIP	 WHICH	 HAS	 MADE	 ME	 INDEPENDENT.	 HOW	 HAS
THIS
HAPPENED?
Paritosh	Lore,	 love	brings	 freedom.	And	a	 love	 that	does	not	bring	 freedom	 is
not	love.
Love	 is	 not	 domination.	How	can	 you	dominate	 someone	 you	 love?	How	can
you	make	him	dependent,	and	still	be	loving?	But	that's	what	goes	on	happening
in	the	world	in	the	name	of	love	--	something	else	--	a	lust	to	power,	to	dominate
the	other.	Naturally	 independence	cannot	be	allowed.	Every	effort	 is	made	 that
the	other	should	be	a	carbon	copy	of	you.	You	are	afraid	of	the	freedom	of	the
other,	because	freedom	is	not	controllable,	and	freedom	is	not	predictable.	So	all
so-called	love	tries	in	every	way	to	destroy	freedom	--	and	the	moment	freedom
is	destroyed,	love	dies.
Love	is	very	fragile,	just	like	a	rose	flower.	You	have	to	allow	it	to	dance	in	the
rain,	in	the	wind,	in	the	sun.
Love	 is	 like	a	bird	on	 the	wing,	having	 the	whole	sky	as	 its	 freedom.	You	can
catch	hold	of	the	bird,	you	can	put	it	in	a	beautiful	golden	cage,	and	it	seems	it	is
the	same	bird	that	was	flying	in	freedom	and	had	the	whole	sky	to	itself.	It	only
appears	to	be	the	same	bird.
It	 is	not	--	you	have	killed	 it.	You	have	cut	 its	wings,	you	have	taken	away	its
sky.	And	the	birds	don't	bother	about	your	gold.	However	precious	may	be	your
cage,	it	is	imprisonment.
And	 that's	 what	 we	 are	 doing	with	 our	 love:	 we	 create	 golden	 cages.	We	 are
afraid	because	the	sky	is	vast.	The	fear	is	that	the	bird	may	not	return.	To	keep	it
under	your	control	it	has	to	be	imprisoned.	That's	how	love	becomes	marriage.
Love	is	a	bird	on	the	wing:	marriage	is	a	bird	in	a	golden	cage.	And	certainly	the
bird	can	never	forgive	you.	You	have	destroyed	all	 its	beauty,	all	 its	 joy,	all	 its
freedom.	You	have	destroyed	its	spirit	--	 it	 is	 just	a	dead	replica.	But	you	have
made	one	 thing	certain,	 that	 it	cannot	escape	you,	 that	 it	will	be	always	yours,
that	tomorrow	also	it	will	be	yours,	and	the	day	after	tomorrow....
Lovers	 are	 always	 afraid.	 The	 fear	 is	 because	 love	 comes	 like	 a	 breeze.	 You
cannot	 produce	 it,	 it	 is	 not	 something	 to	 be	 manufactured	 --	 it	 comes.	 But
anything	 that	 comes	 on	 its	 own,	 can	 go	 also	 on	 its	 own,	 that	 is	 a	 natural
corollary.
Love	comes,	and	flowers	blossom	in	you,	songs	arise	in	your	heart,	a	desire	to
dance...
but	with	a	hidden	fear.	What	will	happen	if	this	breeze	that	has	come	to	you,	cool
and	fragrant,	leaves	you	tomorrow?...	because	you	are	not	the	limit	of	existence.
And	the	breeze	is	only	a	guest	--	it	will	be	with	you	as	long	as	it	feels	to	be,	and
it	will	go	any	moment.
This	creates	fear	in	people,	and	they	become	possessive.	They	start	closing	their
doors	and	windows	to	keep	the	breeze	in.	But	when	your	doors	and	windows	are
closed,	it	is	not	the	same	breeze.	The	coolness	is	lost,	the	fragrance	is	lost	--	soon
it	 is	 disgusting.	 It	 needs	 freedom,	 and	you	have	 taken	 away	 the	 freedom;	 it	 is
only	a	corpse.
In	 the	 name	 of	 love	 people	 are	 carrying	 each	 others'	 corpses,	which	 they	 call
marriage.
And	to	carry	corpses	you	have	to	go	to	a	government	registrar's	office	to	make	it
a	legal	bond.	Love	cannot	allow	marriage.	In	an	authentic	world	marriage	will	be
impossible.
One	should	 love,	and	 love	 intensely	and	 love	 totally,	and	not	be	worried	about
tomorrow.
If	existence	has	been	so	blissful	today,	trust	that	existence	will	be	more	beautiful
and	more	blissful	 tomorrow.	As	your	 trust	grows,	existence	becomes	more	and
more	generous	towards	you.	More	love	will	shower	on	you.	More	flowers	of	joy
and	ecstasy	will	rain	over	you.
Paritosh	Lore,	 in	 your	 sixty-three	 years`	 life	whatever	 you	 have	 known	 in	 the
name	 of	 love	 was	 not	 love.	 It	 may	 have	 been	 infatuation,	 it	 may	 have	 been
biological	 attraction,	 it	 may	 have	 been	 a	 conspiracy	 of	 hormones	 against	 two
individuals	--	but	not	love.	You	have	known	love	for	the	first	time...	because	this
is	 the	 only	 criterion:	 your	 freedom	grows	 deeper,	 your	 independence	 becomes
more	solid	and	integrated	and	crystallized.
This	is	the	only	criterion	that	love	has	visited	you,	that	love	has	been	a	guest	in
your	heart.
And	who	cares	about	 tomorrow?	The	people	who	care	about	 tomorrow	are	 the
people	who	don't	have	today,	who	are	miserable	right	now	and	try	to	hide	it,	try
to	ignore	it	in	the	hope,	in	the	desire,	in	the	dream	for	tomorrow.	But	tomorrow
never	comes,	 this	 is	one	of	 the	difficulties.	 It	 is	always	 today	 that	comes.	And
you	 become	 accustomed	 to	 being	 miserable	 today,	 and	 hoping,	 desiring,
dreaming	for	tomorrow.	You	have	missed	life.
People	have	become	so	accustomed	to	tomorrows	that	they	are	not	only	thinking
of	tomorrows	in	this	life,	they	are	thinking	of	life	after	death.
People	 used	 to	 ask	me,	 "What	 will	 happen	 after	 life?	What	 will	 happen	 after
death?"	And	 I	 used	 to	 say	 to	 them,	 "Whatever	 is	 happening	 before	 death,	 the
same	will	 continue.	Are	you	blissful	 today?	 --	 because	 tomorrow	will	 be	born
out	of	today.	Today	is	pregnant	with	your	whole	future."
Love	intensely,	joyously,	totally,	and	you	will	never	think	of	creating	a	bondage,
a	contract.	You	will	never	think	of	making	the	person	dependent.	You	will	never
be	so	cruel	--	if	you	love	--	as	to	destroy	the	freedom	of	the	other.	You	will	help,
you	will	make	his	sky	bigger.
There	 is	 only	 one	 criterion	 of	 love:	 It	 gives	 freedom,	 and	 it	 gives
unconditionally.
You	have	experienced	love	for	the	first	time,	but	it	is	not	too	late	--	although	you
are	sixty-three	years	old.	Love	transforms	old	age	into	youth.	If	you	can	go	on
loving	 to	 the	very	 last	breath,	you	will	 remain	young.	Love	knows	no	old	age.
Love	knows	no	death.	If	you	can	go	on	loving,	your	love	will	continue	beyond
death	too.	Love	is	the	most	precious	experience	in	life.
People	unnecessarily	waste	their	time	in	empty	words	like	"God."	I	was	looking
at	the	famous	book,	WAITING	FOR	GODOT.	In	fact	he	wants	to	say	"God,"	but
has	not	 the	courage	 --	 it	will	offend	many	people	 --	 so	he	has	created	a	word,
"Godot,"	which	will	remind	you,	you	will	understand.	But	I	thought	perhaps	in
some	language	"Godot"
means"	God,"	and	that	language	can	only	be	the	German.
One	of	my	old	sannyasins,	Haridas,	who	is	on	the	way	--	soon	he	will	be	here	--	I
asked	him,	"What	is	the	German	word	for	God?"
He	said,	"For	God?	The	German	word	is	Gott!"
I	said,	"That	is	even	more	dangerous	than	Godot	--	Gott!"
Nobody	has	got	it.	But	people	are	wasting	their	time....
Be	more	realistic,	be	more	pragmatic.	Don't	betray	the	earth...	and	then	you	will
see	 there	 is	 nothing	 more	 important	 than	 love,	 and	 love	 grows	 only	 in	 the
atmosphere	of	freedom.
That	makes	your	complete	religion.
Love,	 growing	 in	 freedom,	 is	 all	 that	 religion	 should	mean.	 There	 is	 no	 other
religion	than	love	and	freedom	--	and	they	are	one	phenomenon.
Freedom	is	empty	without	love	--	dry,	desert-like.
Love	is	dead	without	freedom	--	a	corpse.
Together	 they	are	all.	Together	 they	are	more	 than	you	can	 imagine	 life	 to	be.
You	have	Gott	it!...	I	love	the	word.	It	seems	to	be	the	best	--	"God"	is	far	away,
"Godot"	is	fictitious,	but	"Gott"	is	more	earthly.
But	 it	 is	 possible	 only	 where	 love	 blossoms	 in	 the	 sky	 of	 freedom.	 And
whenever	it	happens,	at	whatever	age	it	happens,	it	brings	youth	to	you,	it	brings
spring	to	you.
Millions	 of	 people	 are	 unfortunate	 --	 they	 live	 and	 die	without	 knowing	what
love	 is,	 and	 without	 knowing	 the	 joy	 of	 giving	 freedom.	 And	 unless	 you	 are
capable	of	giving	freedom,	you	are	not	worthy	of	getting	it	either.
Paritosh	Lore,	what	has	happened	to	you	is	a	great	blessing.	You	should	pray	that
it	happens	to	all.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	Existence	is	taking	care
20	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705205
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN18
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
72
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
PLEASE	WOULD	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THE	RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN	LET-GO	AND	WITNESSING?
Prem	 Vijen,	 let-go	 is	 the	 atmosphere	 in	 which	 witnessing	 flowers.	 They	 are
almost	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 experience	 --	 they	 are	 not	 different.	One	 cannot
allow	let-go	without	witnessing,	neither	can	one	be	a	witness	without	being	in	a
let-go.
Let-go	simply	means	total	relaxation:	no	tension,	no	thought,	no	desire	--	mind
not	moving,	not	going	anywhere,	just	not	functioning.	Mind	in	silence	allows	the
greatest	experience	of	life,	the	arising	of	a	new	phenomenon	--	witnessing.
We	are	all	living	and	we	are	all	a	little	bit	conscious	too;	otherwise	life	would	be
impossible.	 But	 our	 consciousness	 is	 very	 superficial,	 just	 skin-deep	 --	 or
perhaps	not	even	that	deep.
Witnessing	is	as	deep	as	you	are,	as	existence	is.	It	is	the	deepest	point	of	life	in
existence	 where	 one	 simply	 watches	 what	 remains	 to	 watch:	 a	 tremendous
silence,	a	great	joy,	a	beautiful	existence	surrounding	you,	and	a	deep	ecstasy	--	a
song	without	words	and	a	dance	without	movement.	Witnessing	is	 the	ultimate
experience	of	religion.	Only	those	who	arrive	at	it	have	really	lived;	others	have
been	only	vegetating.
Nancy	and	Ronald	Reagan	went	out	 to	eat	 in	a	high	class	 restaurant,	and	after
seating	 them	at	 the	best	 table,	 the	waiter	gave	 them	the	menus.	He	returned	 to
take	 their	orders,	and	Nancy	gave	hers	 first.	 "For	 the	aperitif	 I	will	have	a	dry
martini,	and	 for	 the	appetizer	 I	will	 take	 the	Hawaiian	 lobster	salad,"	she	said.
"Then	for	the	fish	course	I	will	have	rainbow	trout,	and	for	the	entree	I	will	take
the	steak."
"And	what	about	the	vegetable?"	asked	the	waiter.	And	with	only	a	few	seconds
hesitation,	she	replied,	"Oh,	he	will	have	the	same."
But	it	is	true	about	most	of	the	people	in	the	world	--	they	are	vegetables.	They
have	not	known	anything	that	can	make	them	claim	to	be	more	than	vegetables.
The	whole	 effort	 of	 raising	your	 consciousness	 is	 to	make	you	 transcend	your
vegetable	existence.	Let-go	is	to	create	the	right	soil,	and	witnessing,	watching,
being	alert	are	the	seeds.	You	have	only	to	be	the	right	soil	for	the	right	seed,	and
the	lotuses	are	bound	to	grow	in	your	being.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	DOES	THE	PHRASE	"EXISTENCE	TAKES	CARE"	MEAN?
Nirada,	 we	 are	 part	 of	 existence,	 we	 are	 not	 separate.	 Even	 if	 we	want	 to	 be
separate,	we	cannot	be.	Our	life	is	part	of	being	together	with	existence.	And	the
more	you	are	together	with	existence,	the	more	alive	you	are.	That's	why	I	insist
continually	to	live	totally,	to	live	intensely,	because	the	deeper	your	living	is,	the
more	you	are	in	contact	with	existence.	You	are	born	of	it;	every	moment	you	are
renewed,	 rejuvenated,	 resurrected	 by	 each	 of	 your	 breaths,	 by	 each	 of	 your
heartbeats	--	existence	is	taking	care	of	you.
But	we	are	not	aware	of	our	own	being,	we	are	not	aware	of	our	own	breathing.
Gautam	 the	Buddha	 gave	 to	 the	world	 a	 tremendously	 simple,	 but	 immensely
valuable,	meditation
--	 vipassana.	 The	 word	 vipassana	 simply	 means	 watching	 your	 breath	 --	 the
coming	of	the	breath	in,	and	the	going	of	the	breath	out.
People	 used	 to	 ask	 Buddha,"	 What	 will	 happen	 by	 this?"	 He	 was	 not	 a
theoretician.	He	would	say	to	them,	"Just	do	it	and	see.	Experiment	and	report	to
me	what	happens.	Don't	ask	me."
Just	as	you	start	watching	your	breathing,	you	start	seeing	a	great	phenomenon	--
that	 through	 your	 breath,	 you	 are	 continuously	 connected	 with	 existence,
uninterruptedly	--
there	is	no	holiday.	Whether	you	are	awake	or	asleep,	existence	goes	on	pouring
life	into	you,	and	taking	out	all	that	is	dead.
Carbon	dioxide	is	dead,	and	if	it	accumulates	in	you,	you	will	be	dead.	Oxygen
is	 life,	and	you	need	continuously	that	 the	carbon	dioxide	be	replaced	by	fresh
oxygen.	 Who	 is	 taking	 care?	 Certainly	 you	 are	 not	 taking	 care!	 If	 you	 were
taking	care,	you	would	have	been	dead	long	ago;you	would	not	have	been	here
to	 ask	 the	 question.	 You	 would	 have	 forgotten	 sometimes	 to	 breathe,	 or
sometimes	the	heart	would	forget	to	beat,	sometimes	the	blood	would	forget	to
circulate	 inside	you	--	anything	could	go	wrong.	There	are	a	 thousand	and	one
things	 in	 you	 which	 could	 go	 wrong.	 But	 they	 are	 all	 functioning	 in	 deep
harmony.	Is	this	harmony	dependent	on	you?
So	when	I	say,	"existence	takes	care,"	I	am	not	talking	philosophy.	Philosophy	is
mostly	 nonsense.	 I	 am	 simply	 talking	 an	 actual	 fact.	 And	 if	 you	 become
consciously	 aware	 of	 it,	 this	 creates	 a	 great	 trust	 in	 you.	 My	 saying	 to
you,"existence	takes	care,"	is	to	trigger	a	consciousness	that	can	bring	the	beauty
of	trusting	in	existence.
I	don't	ask	you	to	believe	in	a	hypothetical	God,	and	I	don't	ask	you	to	have	faith
in	a	messiah,	in	a	savior;	these	are	all	childish	desires	to	have	some	father	figure
who	takes	care	of	you.	But	they	are	all	hypothetical.
There	has	not	been	any	savior	in	the	world.
Existence	is	enough	unto	itself.
I	 want	 you	 to	 inquire	 into	 your	 relationship	 with	 existence,	 and	 out	 of	 that
inquiry,	arises	trust	--	not	belief,	not	faith.	Trust	has	a	beauty	because	it	is	your
experience.	Trust	will	 help	 you	 to	 relax	 because	 the	whole	 existence	 is	 taking
care	--	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried	and	to	be	concerned.	There	is	no	need	to
have	any	anxiety,	no	need	of	any	anguish,	no	need	of	what	the	existentialists	call
angst.
Trust	helps	you	to	relax,	it	helps	you	to	let	go,	and	the	let-go	prepares	the	ground
for	witnessing	to	come	in.	They	are	related	phenomena.
Three	gray-haired	mothers,	Mrs.	Fletcher,	Mrs.	Cornfield,	and	Mrs.	Baum,	were
sitting	in	a	Catskill	hotel	bragging	about	their	children.
"My	son	is	a	doctor,"	said	Mrs.	Fletcher,	"and	he's	an	internist,	a	surgeon	and	a
specialist.
He	makes	 so	much	money,	he	owns	an	apartment	building	on	Park	Avenue	 in
New	York."
"That's	 nice,"	 said	Mrs.	 Cornfield.	 "My	 son	 is	 a	 lawyer.	He	 handles	 divorces,
accidents,	 tax	 cases,	 insurance.	 He	 is	 so	 successful,	 he	 owns	 two	 apartment
buildings	on	Fifth	Avenue."
"Ladies,"	 announced	 Mrs.	 Baum,	 "you	 should	 both	 be	 proud	 to	 have	 such
successful	sons.	My	boy,	I	have	to	tell	you	the	truth,	is	a	homosexual."
"That's	a	shame,"	said	Mrs.	Cornfield.	"And	what	does	he	do	for	a	living?"
"Nothing,"	said	Mrs.	Baum.	"He	has	two	friends:	one	is	a	doctor	who	owns	an
apartment	 building	 on	 Park	Avenue,	 and	 the	 other	 is	 a	 lawyer	who	 owns	 two
apartment	buildings."
Existence	takes	care.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	CAN	A	BLIND	AND	IGNORANT	PERSON	BE	HELPED	BY	A	BLIND
AND
IGNORANT	THERAPIST	AND	HIS	BLIND	ADVICE?	IS	 IT	ALL	JUST	TO
MAKE
SOME	FIRECRACKERS	EXPLODE	IN	THE	DARK	TUNNEL,	TO	HAVE	A
PARTY
AND	EXCITEMENT	TOGETHER,	TO	MAKE	THE	JOURNEY	A	BIT	"PIFF-
PAFF-PUFF"?	 CAN	 REAL	 HELP	 AND	 GUIDANCE	 NOT	 JUST	 COME
FROM	A	MASTER
LIKE	YOU?	IF	YOU	LIKE,	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Prem	Ruchi,	your	question	is,"	How	can	a	blind	and	ignorant	person	be	helped
by	a	blind	and	ignorant	therapist	and	his	blind	advice?"	Do	you	mean	to	say	that
you	cannot	be	helped	by	a	doctor	if	you	have	a	cancer	and	he	has	not?	Are	you
going	to	look	for	a	doctor	who	has	a	cancer?	--	only	he	can	help	you?
In	life,	you	are	being	helped	by	many	people	who	don't	have	the	experience	but
who	have	the	expertise.	The	difference	is	great	between	experience	and	expertise
--	but	the	expert	can	also	help.
A	man	 was	 purchasing	 eggs,	 and	 he	 said	 to	 the	 shopkeeper,	 "These	 eggs	 are
rotten."
The	shopkeeper	was	very	much	shocked	and	angry,	and	he	said,	"Are	you	a	hen?
Have	you	ever	laid	an	egg?	What	do	you	know	about	eggs?	Neither	are	you	an
egg,	nor	are	you	a	hen."
The	man	remained	silent	 for	a	moment;	he	had	never	 thought	of	 this.	He	said,
"That	means	 to	know	 that	an	egg	 is	 rotten,	 I	have	 to	be	a	hen	 --	 then	 life	will
become	impossible.	I	will	have	to	be	so	many	things	because	life	needs	so	many
things."
So	the	first	thing	to	remember	is	that	a	therapist	is	as	blind	and	ignorant	as	you
are	 --	 and	perhaps	 that	 is	 a	qualification,	because	he	knows	what	blindness	 is,
what	ignorance	is.	He	is	as	miserable	as	you	are,	he	knows	the	taste	of	misery.
The	only	difference	between	you	and	him	is	that	he	is	also	an	expert	of	a	certain
art:	therapy.
His	knowledge	about	therapy	may	not	have	made	him	able	to	help	himself,	but
his	knowledge	about	therapy	may	be	of	some	help	to	you.	At	least	he	has	some
expertise	that	you	don't	have.	At	least	he	can	analyze	your	problem.	He	may	not
be	able	to	give	a	solution,	but	there	are	problems	in	life	which	need	only	analysis
--	they	don't	need	any	other	solution.	Once	you	know	why	they	are	there,	once
you	know	their	analytical	basis,	they	disappear.
Do	you	think	Sigmund	Freud	is	psychologically	different	from	you?	But	he	has
given	the	whole	science	of	psychoanalysis	which	has	helped	many	people,	if	not
to	become	enlightened,	at	least	to	become	aware	that	they	are	blind,	that	they	are
groping	in	darkness,	that	they	need	a	master.	This	is	not	something	small.
You	 are	 asking,"	 Is	 it	 all	 just	 to	 make	 some	 firecrackers	 explode	 in	 the	 dark
tunnel,	to	have	a	party	and	excitement	together,	to	make	the	journey	a	bit	`piff-
paff-puff'?"
Even	 if	 this	much	 can	be	done	by	 the	 therapist,	 it	 is	 a	 great	 service	 to	have	 a
beautiful	 party	 --	 in	 the	 Italian	 sense	 --	 in	 the	 dark	 tunnel,	 to	 explode	 a	 few
firecrackers,	and	to	make	the	journey	a	little	joyous.	You	will	not	be	going	far,
and	you	will	not	be	going	out	of	 the	 tunnel	because	you	cannot	have	 the	 right
direction	 --	you	may	be	going	deeper	 into	 the	 tunnel.	But	 the	 therapist	at	 least
puts	you	on	the	move.	He	greases	your	wheels.
Out	of	this	movement,	something	is	going	to	happen.	He	creates	in	you	at	least	a
longing.
He	may	not	be	able	to	deliver	the	goods,	but	he	creates	a	desire,	a	dream.	And
that	 is	 not	 a	 small	 thing,	 because	 there	 are	millions	 of	 people	who	 don't	 have
dreams,	who	are	so	utterly	content	with	their	miserable	lives	that	they	don't	think
anything	else	is	possible	--
this	is	all	there	is.
The	therapist	at	least	creates	in	you	a	new	longing	that	there	is	something	more;
and	 you	 should	 be	 grateful	 to	 him.	 He	 may	 be	 searching	 himself	 --	 he	 is
searching	--	and	he	has	made	you	also	infectious	with	the	search.
You	 want	 real	 help	 and	 guidance,	 not	 just	 a	 longing,	 a	 desire.	 You	 want	 the
flowers	but	you	don't	want	 the	seeds.	The	 therapist	at	 least	can	sow	 the	seeds,
can	prepare	the	ground.
I	have	been	using	therapists	to	move	you	from	your	stagnant,	dormant	state	into
a	pilgrimage	for	the	unknown.	Once	that	desire	is	awake,	then	a	master	can	be	of
help.	The	therapists	can	do	the	spade	work.
It	 is	 true	 that	 the	 real	help	and	guidance	can	come	only	 from	a	master.	But	do
you	need	 real	help?	Do	you	need	 real	guidance?	Do	you	deserve	 it?	Even	 if	 a
great	master	 knocks	 on	 your	 doors,	 are	 you	 going	 to	 welcome	 him?	Are	 you
prepared	for	that?
To	 receive	 a	master,	 even	 to	 acknowledge	 a	master,	 needs	 a	 long	 preparation.
The	 therapist	 can	 do	 that	 preparation,	 so	 that	 when	 you	 come	 across	 a	 real
master...	the	therapist	has	given	you	the	thirst;	now	the	real	master	can	quench	it.
Without	the	thirst,	even	the	greatest	master	is	of	no	help.
I	understand	that	the	blind	cannot	lead	the	blind,	the	ignorant	cannot	help	you	to
move	 towards	 light,	 towards	 knowing,	 towards	 realization;	 but	 they	 can	 do
something	else	which	can	be	used	as	a	device.	Therapy	has	never	been	used	by
any	master	in	the	world	as	a	device,	but	I	find	it	to	be	immensely	helpful:	it	helps
those	who	participate	 in	 therapies	 to	become	 thirsty	 for	 the	 real.	The	 therapist
cannot	deliver	the	real,	but	he	has	made	you	thirsty	for	the	real.	You	should	be
grateful	for	that	--	it	is	not	a	small	service	that	he	has	done	for	you.
And	 the	 therapy	 is	 a	 double-edged	 sword.	 On	 the	 one	 hand	 it	 helps	 the
participant,	and	on	the	other	hand	it	helps	the	therapist.	The	therapist	is	also	in
the	same	boat.	He	is	also	groping,	he	is	also	uncertain;	he	is	also	not	in	a	state	to
say	with	a	guarantee,	"There	is	something	like	truth,	or	something	like	bliss,	or
something	 like	 ecstasy."	But	 seeing	 so	many	 people	 becoming	 thirsty,	 he	 also
becomes	more	thirsty	than	he	was	ever	before.	If	so	many	people	can	easily	be
made	aware	of	a	tremendous	challenge	for	a	pilgrimage	towards	the	unknown...
he	 himself	 also	 becomes	 a	 pilgrim.	 If	 he	 does	 not	 become	 a	 pilgrim,	 he	 has
helped	you	but	he	has	not	been	able	to	help	himself.
He	can	become	a	false	teacher	--	that	is	the	danger	of	being	a	therapist.	You	can
start	 thinking	 that	 you	 are	 a	 great	 teacher	 because	 you	 are	 making	 so	 many
people	 thirsty	 for	 truth.	 And	 perhaps	 you	 may	 start	 delivering	 false	 goods	 to
them	 too,	 because	 they	don't	 know	what	 is	 false	 and	what	 is	 real;	 they	 cannot
make	any	distinction.
There	 are	 many	 false	 therapists;	 they	 become	 false	 the	 moment	 they	 start
becoming	masters.	They	are	not	masters.	They	are	as	much	a	seeker	as	others;
perhaps	 more	 articulate,	 more	 knowledgeable.	 If	 they	 remain	 therapists	 --
knowing	perfectly	well	that	they	know	nothing	much,	only	a	certain	expertise	--
they	can	help	you,	and	they	can	help	themselves,	 too;	otherwise....	Kabir	has	a
statement:	"The	blind	people	lead	the	blind,	and	they	all	fall	into	a	well."	There
is	nowhere	else	to	go	--	they	will	find	a	well	somewhere	to	fall	in.
An	Israeli	visiting	Paris	goes	to	a	brothel	and	insists	on	the	services	of	a	certain
Michelle.
He	 is	 told	 that	Michelle	 is	unavailable,	 but	when	he	offers	 a	 thousand	dollars,
she	is	brought	to	him	and	they	spend	the	night	together.
The	next	night,	 the	Israeli	returns	and	repeats	his	generous	offer,	and	again	the
third	night.	Finally,	on	the	third	night,	Michelle	asks	why	she	has	been	singled
out	for	this	flattering	attention.
"Well,"	says	the	man,	"You	see,	I	am	from	Israel."
"Why,	so	am	I,"	says	Michelle.
"Yes,	I	know,"	the	Israeli	replies.	"It	turns	out	that	your	grandmother	lives	in	the
same	building	as	my	parents,	and	when	she	heard	I	was	going	to	Paris,	she	asked
me	to	give	you	the	three	thousand	dollars	you	had	asked	for."
A	Jew	is	a	Jew!	--	he	cannot	do	anything	else;	a	blind	man	is	a	blind	man.
The	 therapist	 has	 to	 be	 very	 humble	 and	 very	 alert,	 and	 he	 has	 to	 make	 the
people	who	come	to	him	aware	--	"I	am	as	far	away	from	truth	as	you	are,	but	I
have	a	certain	expertise	which	I	can	deliver	to	you.	Perhaps	that	may	help	you	to
find	the	way.	I	am	not	the	way	but	perhaps	I	can	give	you	a	candle	which	may
help	you."
It	is	not	much,	just	a	candle,	but	in	a	dark	night	of	the	soul	even	a	candle	is	much
--	a	treasure;	it	can	help	you	to	find	the	way.
The	 therapist	has	 to	become	a	bridge	between	 the	seeker	and	 the	master;	he	 is
not	to	become	the	master	himself.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	THE	VIDEO	THE	OTHER	NIGHT,	FOR	THE	SECOND	TIME	I	HEARD
YOU
SAYING	 THAT	 NO	MASTER	 HAS	 BEEN	 BETRAYED	 BY	 A	WOMAN.	 I
DON'T
UNDERSTAND	THAT.	WHAT	ABOUT	SHEELA	AND	HER	GANG?	DIDN'T
THEY
BETRAY	YOU?	SO	FAR	AS	I'M	CONCERNED,	IN	THE	MOMENT,	I	CAN'T
IMAGINE	 BETRAYING	 YOU,	 BUT	 I	 CAN'T	 SAY	 FOR	 SURE	 THAT	 I
WOULD
NEVER	DO	 IT.	 I	DON'T	KNOW	WHAT	 I	WOULD	DO	 IF	 I	WAS	 IN	THE
POSITION
OF	 SHEELA.	 SAYING	 ALL	 THIS,	 MY	 HEART	 HURTS,	 BUT	 MY	 MIND
KEEPS	ON
GOING	AND	DOESN'T	UNDERSTAND.	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Prem	 Samyo,	 a	 master	 can	 be	 betrayed	 if	 he	 requires	 your	 faith.	 You	 cannot
betray	 me,	 because	 I	 don't	 require	 your	 faith.	 You	 can	 be	 with	 me;	 you	 can
choose	to	go	away.	Being	with	me	is	your	free	choice.	Going	away	is	also	your
freedom.
Nobody	can	betray	me.
I	don't	give	you	the	chance	to	betray.
I	have	removed	the	very	basis,	the	very	possibility.
Thousands	of	people	have	been	with	me,	 and	walked	with	me	as	 long	as	 they
could	manage.	And	when	it	was	impossible	for	them	--	and	I	am	an	impossible
man,	so	it	is	not	their	fault	--	then	they	took	off	on	a	road	separate	from	me.	But	I
don't	have	any	complaint,	because	 I	was	never	expecting	 them	 to	hang	around
me	forever	and	forever.	In	fact,	I	have	to	work	on	so	many	people	that	I	want	a
few	 old	 people	 to	 take	 their	 own	 way,	 to	 create	 space	 for	 new	 people.	 My
caravan	is	big	enough.
The	old	masters	were	betrayed,	but	 the	fault	was	 theirs	because	 they	asked	for
your	total	surrender.	I	don't	ask	anything	from	you.	It	is	your	choice	to	walk	with
me	as	 long	as	you	wish,	and	 it	 is	your	choice	 to	say	goodbye	at	any	 time	you
want.
I	am	a	bit	of	a	strange	master	--	a	master	who	cannot	be	betrayed	--	because	I	am
a	master	who	does	not	ask	you	for	any	surrender,	any	commitment;	who	does	not
ask	anything	from	you,	but	who	gives	you	as	much	as	he	can	and	is	grateful	that
you	receive	his	love,	is	grateful	that	you	receive	his	silence.
And	it	is	absolutely	your	individual	decision	to	remain	my	fellow	traveler	or	to
move	in	some	other	direction.	And	who	knows,	perhaps	you	may	come	back	to
the	 caravan	 again,	 or	 you	 may	 meet	 me	 somewhere	 ahead	 on	 some	 other
crossroad;	you	will	be	welcome	there.
I	accept	you	when	you	are	with	me,	I	accept	you	when	you	leave	me;	I	accept
you	if	you	never	come	back	to	me,	I	accept	you	if	you	want	to	come	back	to	me.
From	my	 side,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 any	 commitment;	 hence,	 Prem	 Samyo,
when	I	said,	"No	master	has	been	betrayed	by	a	woman,"	you	have	not	to	include
me	in	it.	I	am	talking	about	the	old	masters;	they	all	wanted	absolute	faith,	total
surrender.	They	wanted	you	to	be	almost	 in	a	spiritual	slavery,	and	I	 think	 this
very	situation	created	in	a	few	people's	minds	a	desire	to	be	free	of	them.
You	 cannot	 desire	 to	 be	 free	 of	 me;	 you	 are	 free.	 You	 cannot	 contemplate
betraying	me	because	that	will	be	absurd.	I	have	never	asked	your	faith,	so	you
cannot	 take	 it	 away.	 I	 have	 not	 taken	 anything	 from	 you,	 so	 you	 cannot
disappoint	me.
My	statement	was	about	the	past	masters.
I	don't	belong	in	their	category.
I	am	the	beginning	of	a	new	line,	of	a	new	category,	where	a	master	is	a	friend,
where	a	master	gives	you	freedom,	where	a	master	wants	you	to	be	on	your	own
--	the	sooner	the	better.	I	would	love	that	day,	when	all	of	you	have	betrayed	me
and	I	can	sit	silently,	enjoying	myself!	I	am	enjoying	myself	right	now	too,	but
to	 enjoy	 in	 a	 crowd	 is	 one	 thing	 and	 to	 enjoy	 yourself	 in	 your	 bathroom	 is
another.
So,	if	you	are	not	sure...	you	don't	want	to	betray	me,	but	you	are	not	sure.	Who
knows?	-
-	tomorrow,	you	may	want	to.	So	I	want	you	to	remember:	even	if	you	want	to
betray	me,	you	cannot.	I	have	made	it	impossible.
I	am	just	a	friend.	We	have	met	on	the	road;	we	are	strangers.	You	liked	me	to
walk	with	you,	I	liked	you	to	walk	with	me,	we	enjoyed	being	together.	But	any
moment	you	want	 to	 say,	 "Now	 it	 is	 time	 to	depart,"	 I	will	help	you	 to	depart
without	tears,	joyously,	because	you	are	going	to	be	independent	--	yourself.
You	 are	 not	 capable	 of	 hurting	me.	All	 those	 old	masters	were	 hurt,	 but	 they
created	 the	situation	 themselves.	 I	don't	expect	anything	from	you,	so	how	can
you	disappoint	me?
Whatever	you	do,	I	can	bless	it	without	knowing	what	it	is.
"Mr.	Baumgarten,"	said	the	doctor,	"even	though	you	are	a	very	sick	man,	I	think
I	will	be	able	to	pull	you	through."
"Doctor,	 if	you	do	 that,	when	I	get	well	 I	will	donate	five	 thousand	dollars	for
your	new	hospital."
Months	later,	the	M.D.	met	his	former	patient.	"How	do	you	feel?"	he	asked.
"Wonderful,	doctor,	fine,	never	been	better."
"I	have	been	meaning	to	speak	to	you,"	said	the	doctor.	"What	about	the	money
for	the	new	hospital?"
"What	are	you	talking	about?"	said	Baumgarten.
"You	said	that	if	you	got	well,	you	would	contribute	five	thousand	dollars	to	the
new	hospital."
"I	said	that?"	asked	the	patient.	"That	just	shows	how	sick	I	was."
To	 expect	 anything	 from	you	 is	 just	 not	 right;	 you	 are	 in	 such	misery.	Out	 of
your	misery	you	may	surrender,	out	of	your	misery	you	may	have	faith,	out	of
your	misery	you	may	believe	 --	 in	any	nonsense.	 I	 cannot	exploit	your	misery
which	has	been	exploited	all	through	the	past.
I	would	like	to	help	you	to	come	out	of	your	misery,	and	that	will	be	my	reward	-
-	if	I	can	see	you	smiling	and	singing	and	dancing,	it	is	more	than	enough.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	The	sunlit	peaks	of	sacredness
21	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705210
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN19
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
93
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	JUST	FINISHED	READING	THE	BOOK	ABOUT	JESUS	AND	HIS
JOURNEY	TO	KASHMIR	AFTER	THE	CRUCIFIXION,	AND	NOW	I	HAVE
A	PHOTOGRAPHIC	PICTURE	IN	MY	MIND	OF	THE	MAN	AND	HIS
UNQUENCHABLE	 THIRST	 FOR	 TRUTH.	 HEARING	 STORIES	 ABOUT
YOU,	OR
THE	BUDDHA	BEFORE	ENLIGHTENMENT,	THERE	WAS	THE	SAME
UNQUENCHABLE	THIRST.	BUT	HERE	I	AM	WITH	YOU	FEELING	LIKE
A	DRY
LEAF,	 BLOWING	 IN	 THE	 WIND	 --	 SEARCHING	 FOR	 TRUTH,	 BUT
BEING
DISTRACTED	BY	EVERY	GUST	OF	WIND	THAT	TAKES	ME	WHEREVER
IT
WISHES	 TO.	 WILL	 BEING	 IN	 YOUR	 PRESENCE	 MORE	 AND	 MORE
HELP	ME
TO	INTENSIFY	MY	SEARCH,	AND	ENABLE	ME	TO	USE	THESE	GUSTS
OF
WIND	TO	TAKE	ME	FURTHER	ON	THE	PATH	TOWARDS	TRUTH?
Vimal,	there	is	a	saying	of	Jesus:	"Ask	and	it	shall	be	given	to	you,	seek	and	ye
shall	 find,	 knock	 and	 the	 door	 shall	 be	 opened	 unto	 you."	These	 are	 beautiful
words,	but	only	on	a	very	superficial	plane.	They	have	poetry	in	them,	and	they
have	a	certain	truth	also;	but	unfortunately	I	have	to	disagree	with	them.
If	 I	were	 to	write	 them	 again,	 I	would	 say,	 "Ask	 not,	 and	 it	 shall	 be	 given	 to
you,"
because	asking	is	desiring,	asking	is	demanding,	asking	is	impatience.	Asking	is
not	trust,	is	not	love.	Love	never	asks,	but	it	is	given	all.	It	never	asks,	but	it	is
always	understood.
"Seek	 not;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 miss	 it,"	 because	 every	 search	 leads	 you	 away
from	yourself;	every	path	leads	you	away	from	yourself.	"Seek	ye	not;	 just	be,
and	you	have	found	it,"	because	it	is	something	within	you.	It	is	not	something
far	away,	it	has	not	to	be	found;	it	is	the	finder	himself.	It	has	not	to	be	sought,	it
is	the	seeker	himself.	The	moment	you	are	silent,	neither	asking	nor	seeking,	you
have	it,	you	are	it.
"Knock	not,	because	every	knock	makes	you	a	beggar,"	because	all	knocking	is
on	the	doors	of	others.	And	it	is	not	a	question	of	finding	it	in	somebody	else's
house;	it	is	there	within	you.	There	are	no	doors	for	you	to	knock	on.	You	have
just	to	be	utterly	centered,	and	the	doors	are	always	open.	This	is	what	Lao	Tzu
would	 say,	 and	 this	 is	what	Chuang	Tzu	would	 say.	 I	 know	 if	 Jesus	 had	been
born	 in	 the	 East,	 he	 would	 have	 said	 the	 same	 thing.	 It	 is	 the	 Western
atmosphere,	where	all	search	is	for	the	object	and	nobody	cares	about	the	seeker.
There	are	great	scientists	of	tremendous	intelligence	who	discover	many	things
in	their	lives,	but	go	on	missing	themselves.	The	reason	is	that	they	are	always
searching	for	something;	but	one's	own	being	is	already	there	--	you	have	just	to
be	in	a	relaxed	state	of	consciousness,	in	a	let-go.
I	 am	 reminded	 of	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 women	 who	 has	 walked	 on	 the
earth,	Rabiya	al-Adabiya.	She	is	truly	a	rebel,	and	without	being	a	rebel	nobody
can	be	religious.
Rebellion	is	 the	very	foundation	of	being	religious.	The	orthodox	can	never	be
religious,	the	traditional	can	never	be	religious.
She	was	going	to	the	market,	just	to	fetch	some	vegetables,	and	she	saw	a	great
Sufi,	 well	 known	 all	 over	 the	 country,	 Junnaid.	 He	 was	 sitting	 outside	 the
mosque	praying	loudly	and	looking	at	the	sky,	crying,	"When	are	you	going	to
hear	me?	Why	don't	you	open	 the	doors?	 I	have	been	waiting	so	 long,	do	you
hear	me	or	not?	I'm	tired	of	knocking	on	your	doors."
Rabiya	 stood	 behind	 him,	 heard	 all	 this	 and	 hit	 his	 head.	 He	 looked	 back	 --
because	it	is	very	sacrilegious	to	disturb	someone	who	is	in	prayer	--	and	there
stood	 that	 strange	 woman,	 Rabiya.	 And	 she	 said,	 "Junnaid,	 are	 you	 going	 to
mature	 or	 not?	 Are	 you	 absolutely	 blind?	 --	 because	 the	 doors	 are	 open.	 The
doors	are	always	open,	twenty-four	hours,	day	and	night.	What	kind	of	nonsense
is	 this,	 that	 you	 go	 on	 asking	 God	 Òpen	 the	 doors'?	 Even	 God	 cannot	 do
anything	--	how	can	he	open	doors	which	are	always	open?
Just	 look	 silently;	 the	 doors	 are	 not	 outside.	 Close	 your	 eyes	 and	 see.	 And
remember,	 the	next	 time	 I	 hear	 you	 say	 all	 this	 nonsense	 I'm	going	 to	hit	 you
really	hard!	By	your	prayer	you	are	avoiding	yourself."
It	 was	 a	 sudden	 enlightening	 experience.	 Junnaid	 closed	 his	 eyes,	 looked
within...	 the	doors	are	open.	What	you	are	seeking	is	hidden	within	you,	and	if
you	go	on	seeking	it	you	will	go	on	missing	it.
Vimal,	don't	make	the	search	for	truth	a	serious	phenomenon.	Take	it	easy,	and
remember
"easy	 is	 right."	 If	 strong	 winds	 take	 you	 hither	 and	 thither,	 don't	 resist;	 they
appear	 strong	because	of	your	 resistance.	Relax,	 go	with	 them.	Go	with	 them,
with	totality.
Lao	Tzu	became	enlightened	sitting	under	a	tree,	seeing	an	old	dead	leaf	falling
from	the	tree,	slowly.	Winds	were	taking	it	this	way	and	that	way,	and	it	had	no
resistance.	It	was	totally	willing	to	go	anywhere	--	because	the	truth	that	you	are
seeking	is	everywhere.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	relaxed	consciousness	to	see	it.
Those	winds	are	not	against	you,	they	are	not	distracting	you.	Your	resistance	is
the	problem.	You	have	made	your	search	very	serious.	Be	a	little	more	playful.
Dance	with	the	wind;	allow	the	wind	to	take	you	to	the	north,	to	the	south,	to	the
east,	to	the	west,	without	any	resistance.
In	 your	 resistance	 exists	 your	 ego.	 "What	 is	 ego?"	 people	 ask.	 It	 is	 your
resistance	 to	 existence.	 "And	what	 is	 egolessness?"	 It	 is	 your	 relaxed	 state	 of
being,	 a	 let-go.	 Wherever	 the	 winds	 take	 you,	 go	 with	 totality	 --	 willingly,
joyously,	dancing,	singing.
It	is	not	that	you	will	find	the	truth	where	the	winds	are	taking	you.	You	will	find
the	 truth	 in	your	non-resistance;	you	will	 find	 the	 truth	 in	your	 let-go,	 in	your
playfulness,	in	your	non-seriousness,	in	your	laughter.
Sick	 people	 have	 dominated	 humanity	 for	 too	 long	 --	 psychologically	 sick,
spiritually	sick	--	and	they	have	made	everybody	serious.	My	whole	approach	is
that	of	playfulness,	non-seriousness,	taking	it	easy.
Relaxation	is	prayer.
Non-resistance	is	egolessness.
And	in	egolessness	all	is	found.
The	serious	are	tense,	the	serious	are	worried.	The	serious	are	always	concerned
whether	they	are	on	the	right	path...	and	there	are	no	milestones.
All	paths	are	imaginary.
Existence	 is	 just	 like	 the	 sky,	 there	 are	 no	 paths.	 The	 birds	 fly,	 but	 they	 don't
leave	 any	 footprints;	 the	 sky	 remains	 pathless.	 So	 is	 your	 consciousness	 a	 far
more	clean	and	far	more	clear	space,	where	there	are	no	footprints,	no	paths.
You	cannot	go	astray.	To	go	astray	you	need	a	path.	And	finding	the	truth	is	not
the	 goal,	 finding	 the	 truth	 cannot	 be	 made	 an	 ambition.	 Finding	 the	 truth	 is
finding	 yourself.	 And	 you	 can	 find	 yourself	 only	 in	 a	 relaxed	 state.	Who	 can
distract	you	from	yourself?	The	wind	may	take	you	to	the	north,	or	to	the	south,
but	it	cannot	distract	you	from	yourself;	wherever	you	are	you	are.
If	you	start	being	playful	in	life	you	have	learned	the	greatest	prayer;	you	have
learned	the	pathless	path.
Most	 major	 cities	 have	 a	 dial-a-prayer	 number	 for	 anyone	 requiring	 religious
reassurance	 in	 the	 form	 of	 a	 brief,	 pre-recorded	 sermon.	Now	 there	 is	 talk	 of
establishing	a	similar	number	for	atheists:	when	you	dial	it,	no	one	answers.
And	I	think	that	will	be	far	closer	to	reality	than	a	pre-recorded	sermon.	If	you
can	 listen	 to	 the	 silence	 --	 no	 one	 is	 answering,	 you	 are	 left	 alone	 --	 it	 can
become	a	meditation.
There	is	no	goal.	You	are	not	to	go	somewhere,	and	there	is	not	some	object	to
be	found.
You	have	just	to	relax	into	such	a	deep	state	that	you	can	settle	within	yourself.
In	that	very	settling	you	have	come	home.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	DAY,	OUT	OF	THE	SILENCE	OF	YOUR	NAMASTE	CAME
THE
UNEXPECTED	GIFT	OF	YOUR	DANCE.	MY	HEART	BURST	OPEN,	AND
SUDDENLY	I	WAS	LIKE	A	CHILD,	 INNOCENT	AND	UTTERLY	IN	AWE
OF	THE
MYSTERY	 OF	 YOUR	 PRESENCE.	 WOULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 SAY
SOMETHING
ABOUT	HOW	 IT	 IS	 THAT	 THE	 SLIGHTEST	GESTURE	MADE	BY	YOU
AFFECTS
US	SO	DEEPLY?
Puja	 Melissa,	 love	 is	 the	 greatest	 alchemy	 in	 the	 world.	 It	 transforms	 small
things	 into	 great,	 into	 precious	 experiences.	 Just	 a	 bird	 singing,	 received	 in
silence	and	love,	is	more	valuable	than	God	speaking	to	Moses,	because	that	is	a
fiction	--	and	not	a	very	nice	one,	either.
When	Moses	reached	the	mountain	on	Sinai	to	meet	God,	he	saw	a	miracle;	he
saw	a	green	bush,	lush	green,	and	yet	surrounded	by	flames.	As	he	came	closer,
a	voice	from	the	bush	shouted	at	him,	"Moses,	take	your	shoes	off!	You	are	on
holy	ground"	 --	not	a	very	nice	beginning	 to	a	conversation.	Moses	must	have
been	a	very	obedient	person;	otherwise	he	would	have	asked,	"Can	you	tell	me
where	is	the	land	which	is	not	holy?
Should	I	carry	my	shoes	on	my	head?"
The	whole	existence	is	holy.
But	the	poor	fellow	was	so	amazed	by	a	voice	without	any	person	around,	and
the	bush	on	fire,	and	yet	green,	lush	green....
God	gave	him	 ten	commandments,	 ten	pieces	of	 stone,	 and	on	each	piece	one
commandment	 was	 written:	 "Thou	 shall	 not	 commit	 adultery"...	 not	 a	 great
meeting	--	in	a	way	insulting	and	humiliating.	And	poor	Moses	carried	all	those
ten	stones;	they	must	have	been	heavy.
But,	in	the	whole	thing,	the	only	significant	part	is	the	green	bush	in	the	flames
of	 fire.	As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	 take	 only	 that	 part	 to	 be	 important	 in	 the
whole	encounter.	Jews	have	not	bothered	much	about	the	bush	and	the	fire;	they
are	much	more	concerned	with	the	ten	commandments	and	God's	declaration	of
the	Holy	Land.
If	you	enter	into	yourself	you	will	find	this	very	experience:	flames	of	life	and
the	green	bush	with	flowers	of	ecstasy,	of	blissfulness,	existing	together.	Those
flames	represent	the	revolution,	and	that	green	bush	represents	the	coolness	and
the	calmness....
You	 may	 have	 come	 across	 calm	 and	 cool	 people,	 but	 they	 are	 not
revolutionaries;	 they	are	dull,	unintelligent,	 almost	 idiots.	You	may	have	come
across	 revolutionaries	who	 are	 fiery,	 but	 they	 don't	 have	 the	 calmness	 and	 the
quietness	and	the	peace	which	can	make	their	revolution	meaningful.	Otherwise,
the	same	fire	that	cooks	your	food	can	burn	your	house	too.
To	me,	the	meeting	of	Moses	with	God	is	simply	a	myth.	Real	religion,	authentic
religion,	is	concerned	with	your	love,	with	your	trust,	with	your	joy.	And	when
you	 see	 through	 the	 eyes	 of	 love,	 a	 small	 flower	 becomes	 so	mysterious,	 the
faraway	song	of	a	cuckoo	becomes	far	more	holy	than	any	scripture.
You	love	me;	that's	why	my	smallest	gesture	makes	an	immense	impact	on	you.
It	is	not	the	gesture,	it	is	your	love.	There	may	be	somebody	else	sitting	by	your
side	 to	whom	 the	 gesture	means	 nothing,	 just	 a	movement	 of	 the	 hand.	 If	 his
heart	is	not	full	of	love,	then	just	the	movement	of	the	hand	is	meaningless;	if	his
heart	 is	 full	 of	 love,	 the	hand,	 its	grace,	 can	be	 indicative	of	greater	mysteries
and	secrets	of	life.
This	is	one	of	the	mysteries	of	life,	that	life	is	how	you	see	it.	It	depends	on	your
eyes.	If	you	have	the	eyes	of	a	poet	the	same	trees	are	greener,	livelier;	they	have
a	message,	they	whisper	things	into	the	ears	of	the	poet.	But	if	you	are	not	a	poet
you	pass	by	the	same	trees	without	even	noticing	them.	All	depends	on	you.
Your	whole	life	experience	goes	on	growing	with	your	growing	consciousness.
As	 your	 consciousness	 becomes	more	 and	more	 juicy,	 life	 becomes	more	 and
more	divine.
Because	you	love	me,	my	words	have	a	meaning	to	you	which	they	will	not	have
without	your	 loving	heart.	Your	 love	contributes	ninety	percent,	at	 least,	 to	 the
meaning	of	my	words	or	my	gestures.
The	day	you	are	capable	of	contributing	one	hundred	percent,	 then	my	gesture
becomes	 your	 gesture,	 then	 my	 word	 becomes	 your	 word,	 then	 my	 heartbeat
becomes	 your	 heartbeat.	 That	 state	 I	 call	 the	 state	 of	 the	 devotee:	 a	merger,	 a
melting	of	two	souls	into	one.
But,	unfortunately,	in	the	name	of	love	such	pseudo	things	exist	in	the	world	that
they	 have	 contaminated	 the	 greatest	 word	 we	 have.	 People	 "love"	 their	 cars,
people	"love"
their	 houses.	 They	 don't	 understand	 that	 love	 is	 a	 sacred	 experience,	 it	 is	 not
mundane.
The	moment	 you	 pull	 it	 down	 to	 the	world	 of	mundane	 reality	 you	 are	 being
terribly	destructive.	You	have	 to	 raise	 the	mundane	reality	 to	 the	 level	of	 love,
the	sunlit	peaks	of	sacredness.
But	people	are	doing	just	the	opposite	--	and	suffering	unnecessarily.	Life	is	not
meant	to	be	a	suffering;	it	is	meant	to	be	a	blissfulness.	But	one	has	to	learn	the
art.
Brickman	and	Horowitz	were	relaxing	on	the	beach	in	Puerto	Rico.	"You	know,"
said	 Brickman,	 "this	 Racquel	Welch	 --	 what	 does	 everyone	 see	 in	 her?	 Take
away	her	hair,	her	lips,	her	eyes	and	her	figure,	and	what	have	you	got?"
Horowitz	said,	"My	wife."
These	 are	 our	 love	 relationships.	 Rather	 than	 adding	 to	 things,	 beautifying
existence,	we	are	living	in	such	negativity	that	we	take	away.	Take	away	the	lips
of	a	beautiful	woman,	take	away	her	hair,	take	away	her	eyes,	and	what	is	left?
And	of	course,	if	this	is	your	approach	to	looking	at	things,	your	life	is	going	to
be	a	hell	--	worse	than	hell.
Love	 contributes	 tremendously,	 beautifies	 things.	 Where	 it	 was	 prose,	 love
makes	 it	 a	 poetry;	 where	 it	 was	 just	 an	 ordinary	 flower,	 love	 makes	 it
extraordinary.	Love	has	the	magic	of	transforming	the	whole	world	around	you
into	a	sacred	existence.
I	call	the	man	materialistic	who	does	not	know	the	art	of	love;	I	don't	call	a	man
materialistic	who	does	not	believe	in	God.	And	I	don't	call	a	man	religious	who
believes	in	God.	I	call	a	man	religious	who	goes	on	growing	in	his	love,	in	his
trust,	and	goes	on	spreading	his	ecstasy	all	around	existence.
People	 are	 so	 stupid	 that	 they	 are	 trying	 to	 demystify	 everything.	 The	 whole
effort	of	science	is	to	demystify	existence,	to	know	everything.	So,	of	course,	the
way	to	know	Racquel	Welch	is	to	dissect	her	on	the	table	of	the	scientist.	Take
her	hair	apart,	her	eyes	apart...	and	then	see	what	is	left.	There	is	no	beauty,	there
is	no	soul,	there	is	no	life;	science	has	demystified	a	beautiful	woman.
Religion	 mystifies	 existence.	 It	 makes	 the	 meaningless	 songs	 of	 birds	 as
meaningful	as	great	poetry,	as	great	music.	It	makes	ordinary	trees	as	significant
as	great	paintings.
It	 is	up	 to	you	where	you	want	 to	 live,	 in	hell	or	 in	heaven,	because	wherever
you	want	 to	 live	you	will	have	 to	create	 it.	 It	 is	not	something	ready-made,	so
that	you	purchase	a	ticket	and	catch	a	train.	It	is	something	to	be	created.
Love	can	create	paradise	herenow.
My	whole	teaching	is	love	more,	to	the	point	when	you	yourself	become	just	a
source	of	love,	and	nothing	else.
"Hey	man,"	one	hippie	said	to	another,	"turn	on	the	radio."
"Okay,"	 the	 second	 hippie	 answered.	And	 then	 leaning	 over	 very	 close	 to	 the
radio	he	whispered,	"I	love	you."	He	is	turning	on	the	radio.
We	 have	 destroyed	 beautiful	words	 so	 ignorantly,	 and	 by	 destroying	 them	we
have	destroyed	ourselves	--	because	what	are	we	except	our	attitudes?
Melissa,	 you	 could	 see	 in	 my	 movements	 a	 beauty,	 a	 grace,	 a	 significance
because	your	heart	is	full	of	love.	I	want	to	remind	you	that	the	beauty	is	not	in
the	gestures,	the	beauty	is	in	the	eyes	that	see	it.	I	want	you	to	be	responsible	for
the	hell	or	heaven	in	which	you	live.	And	once	you	understand	the	responsibility,
I	don't	think	anybody	is	going	to	live	in	hell.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	 CAN	 I	 TELL	 THE	 DIFFERENCE	 BETWEEN	 ONE	 PART	 OF	 THE
MIND
OBSERVING	 ANOTHER	 PART	 OF	 THE	 MIND,	 AND	 THE	 WATCHER?
CAN	THE
WATCHER	WATCH	ITSELF?	ONE	TIME	I	THOUGHT	I	HAD	GOT	IT	AND
THEN
THAT	SAME	DAY	I	HEARD	YOU	SAY	IN	A	DISCOURSE,	"IF	YOU	THINK
YOU'VE	GOT	THE	WATCHER,	YOU'VE	MISSED."	SINCE	THEN	I	TRY
WATCHING	 FEELINGS	 IN	 THE	 BODY,	 THOUGHTS,	 AND	 EMOTIONS.
MOSTLY,	 I'M	 JUST	 CAUGHT	 IN	 THEM.	 BUT,	 ONCE	 IN	 A	 WHILE,
RARELY,	I	FEEL
TREMENDOUSLY	RELAXED	AND	NOTHING	STAYS	--	IT	JUST	KEEPS
MOVING.	IS	THERE	ANYTHING	TO	DO?
Deva	Waduda,	one	has	 to	 start	watching	 the	body	 --	walking,	 sitting,	going	 to
bed,	eating.
One	should	start	 from	the	most	solid,	because	 it	 is	easier,	and	 then	one	should
move	to	subtler	experiences.	One	should	start	watching	thoughts,	and	when	one
becomes	an	expert	in	watching	thoughts,	then	one	should	start	watching	feelings.
After	you	feel	that	you	can	watch	your	feelings,	then	you	should	start	watching
your	moods,	which	are	even	more	subtle	than	your	feelings,	and	more	vague.
The	miracle	of	watching	 is	 that	as	you	are	watching	 the	body,	your	watcher	 is
becoming	stronger;	as	you	are	watching	the	thoughts,	your	watcher	is	becoming
stronger;	as	you	are	watching	 the	feelings,	 the	watcher	 is	becoming	even	more
strong.	When	you	are	watching	your	moods	the	watcher	is	so	strong	that	it	can
remain	itself	--	watching	itself	--
just	 as	 a	 candle	 in	 the	 dark	 night	 not	 only	 lights	 everything	 around	 it,	 it	 also
lights	itself.
To	 find	 the	 watcher	 in	 its	 purity	 is	 the	 greatest	 achievement	 in	 spirituality,
because	 the	 watcher	 in	 you	 is	 your	 very	 soul;	 the	 watcher	 in	 you	 is	 your
immortality.	But	never	for	a	single	moment	think,	"I	have	got	it,"	because	that	is
the	moment	when	you	miss.
Watching	is	an	eternal	process;	you	always	go	on	becoming	deeper	and	deeper,
but	you	never	 come	 to	 the	 end	where	you	can	 say	 "I	 have	got	 it."	 In	 fact,	 the
deeper	you	go,	the	more	you	become	aware	that	you	have	entered	into	a	process
which	is	eternal--	without	any	beginning	and	without	any	end.
But	 people	 are	 watching	 only	 others;	 they	 never	 bother	 to	 watch	 themselves.
Everybody	is
watching	 --	 that	 is	 the	 most	 superficial	 watching	 --	 what	 the	 other	 person	 is
doing,	what	the	other	person	is	wearing,	how	he	looks....	Everybody	is	watching;
watching	 is	not	 something	new	 to	be	 introduced	 in	your	 life.	 It	has	only	 to	be
deepened,	 taken	 away	 from	 others,	 and	 arrowed	 towards	 your	 own	 inner
feelings,	thoughts,	moods	--	and	finally,	the	watcher	itself.
A	 Jew	 is	 sitting	 in	 a	 train	 opposite	 a	 priest.	 "Tell	me,	 your	worship,"	 the	 Jew
asks,	"why	do	you	wear	your	collar	back	to	front?"
"Because	I	am	a	father,"	answers	the	priest.
"I	am	also	a	father,	and	I	don't	wear	my	collar	like	that,"	says	the	Jew.	"Oh,"	says
the	priest,	"but	I	am	a	father	to	thousands."
"Then	 maybe,"	 replies	 the	 Jew,	 "it	 is	 your	 trousers	 you	 should	 wear	 back	 to
front."
People	are	very	watchful	about	everybody	else.
Two	Polacks	went	out	for	a	walk;	suddenly	 it	began	 to	rain.	"Quick,"	said	one
man,
"open	your	umbrella."
"It	won't	help,"	said	his	friend,	"my	umbrella	is	full	of	holes."
"Then	why	did	you	bring	it	in	the	first	place?"
"I	did	not	think	it	would	rain."
You	can	laugh	very	easily	about	the	ridiculous	acts	of	other	people,	but	have	you
ever	 laughed	 about	 yourself?	Have	 you	 ever	 caught	 yourself	 doing	 something
ridiculous?	No,	you	keep	yourself	completely	unwatched;	your	whole	watching
is	about	others,	and	that	is	not	of	any	help.
Use	this	energy	of	watchfulness	for	a	transformation	of	your	being.	It	can	bring
you	so	much	bliss	and	so	much	benediction	that	you	cannot	even	dream	about	it.
A	simple	process,	but	once	you	start	using	it	on	yourself	it	becomes	a	meditation.
One	can	make	meditations	out	of	anything.
Anything	 that	 leads	 you	 to	 yourself	 is	 meditation.	 And	 it	 is	 immensely
significant	to	find	your	own	meditation,	because	in	the	very	finding	you	will	find
great	 joy.	And	because	 it	 is	your	own	finding	--	not	some	ritual	 imposed	upon
you	--	you	will	love	to	go	deeper	into	it.	The	deeper	you	go	into	it,	the	happier
you	 will	 feel	 --	 peaceful,	 more	 silent,	 more	 together,	 more	 dignified,	 more
graceful.
You	all	know	watching,	so	there	is	no	question	of	learning	it.	It	is	just	a	question
of	changing	the	object	of	watching.	Bring	them	closer.
Watch	 your	 body,	 and	 you	 will	 be	 surprised.	 I	 can	 move	 my	 hand	 without
watching,	 and	 I	 can	 move	 my	 hand	 with	 watching.	 You	 will	 not	 see	 the
difference,	but	I	can	feel	the	difference.	When	I	move	it	with	watchfulness,	there
is	a	grace	and	beauty	in	it,	a	peacefulness,	and	a	silence.	You	can	walk,	watching
each	 step;	 it	 will	 give	 you	 all	 the	 benefit	 that	 walking	 can	 give	 you	 as	 an
exercise,	plus	it	will	give	you	the	benefit	of	a	great	simple	meditation.
The	 temple	 in	Bodhgaya	where	Gautam	Buddha	became	enlightened	has	been
made	in	memory	of	two	things...	one	is	a	Bodhi	tree	under	which	he	used	to	sit.
Just	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 tree	 there	 are	 small	 stones	 for	 a	 slow	 walk.	 He	 was
meditating,	sitting,	and	when	he	would	feel	that	sitting	had	been	too	much	--	a
little	exercise	was	needed	for	 the	body	--	he	would	walk	on	 those	stones.	That
was	his	walking	meditation.
When	I	was	in	Bodhgaya,	having	a	meditation	camp	there,	I	went	to	the	temple.
I	saw	Buddhist	lamas	from	Tibet,	from	Japan,	from	China.	They	were	all	paying
their	 respect	 to	 the	 tree,	and	I	saw	not	a	single	one	paying	his	 respect	 to	 those
stones	on	which	Buddha	had	walked	miles	and	miles.	 I	 told	 them,	"This	 is	not
right.	You	 should	not	 forget	 those	 stones.	They	have	been	 touched	by	Gautam
Buddha's	 feet	 millions	 of	 times.	 But	 I	 know	 why	 you	 are	 not	 paying	 any
attention	 to	 them,	 because	 you	 have	 forgotten	 completely	 that	 Buddha	 was
emphasizing	 that	 you	 should	 watch	 every	 act	 of	 your	 body:	 walking,	 sitting,
lying	down."
You	 should	 not	 let	 a	 single	 moment	 go	 by	 unconsciously.	 Watchfulness	 will
sharpen	 your	 consciousness.	 This	 is	 the	 essential	 religion	 --	 all	 else	 is	 simply
talk.	But	Waduda,	 you	 ask	me,	 "Is	 there	 something	more?"	No,	 if	 you	 can	 do
only	watchfulness,	nothing	else	is	needed.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	religion	as	simple	as	possible.	All	 the	religions	have
done	just	the	opposite:	they	have	made	things	very	complex	--	so	complex	that
people	have	never	tried	them.	For	example,	in	the	Buddhist	scriptures	there	are
thirty-three	 thousand	 principles	 to	 be	 followed	 by	 a	 Buddhist	 monk;	 even	 to
remember	 them	 is	 impossible.	 Just	 the	 very	 number	 thirty-three	 thousand	 is
enough	 to	 freak	you	out:	 "I	 am	 finished!	My	whole	 life	will	 be	 disturbed	 and
destroyed."
I	teach	you:	just	find	a	single	principle	that	suits	you,	that	feels	in	tune	with	you,
and	that	is	enough.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	The	second	russian	revolution
21	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705215
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN20
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
82
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	FEW	MONTHS	BEFORE	HIS	DEATH	EDGAR	CAYCE,	IN	ONE	OF	HIS
TRANCE
"SLEEP	TALKS"	SAID,	"THROUGH	RUSSIA	COMES	THE	HOPE	OF	THE
WORLD.	 NOT	 IN	 RESPECT	 TO	 WHAT	 IS	 SOMETIMES	 TERMED
COMMUNISM
OR	BOLSHEVISM,	NO;	BUT	FREEDOM,	FREEDOM!	THAT	EACH	MAN
WILL
LIVE	 FOR	 HIS	 FELLOW	 MAN.	 THE	 PRINCIPLE	 HAS	 BEEN	 BORN
THERE.	IT
WILL	 TAKE	 YEARS	 FOR	 IT	 TO	 BE	 CRYSTALLIZED.	 YET	 OUT	 OF
RUSSIA	 COMES	 AGAIN	 THE	 HOPE	 OF	 THE	 WORLD."	 COULD	 YOU
PLEASE
COMMENT?
Jivan	Mada,	Edgar	Cayce	was	one	of	the	strangest	human	beings,	a	category	in
himself....
There	 have	 been	 utterly	 conscious	 people	 having	 clear	 visions	 of	 the	world	 --
like	Nostradamus;	but	Cayce	was	not	anything	special	when	he	was	conscious.
Only	when	he	was	 in	 a	 sort	 of	 unconsciousness,	 a	 trance-like	 sleep,	would	 he
start	saying	things	of	tremendous	importance,	many	of	which	have	come	true.
Many	of	 these	are	bound	 to	happen,	 sooner	or	 later,	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 that
whatever	he	has	seen	in	his	trance	state	is	absolutely	transparent,	clear,	without
ifs	 and	 buts	 --	 it	 is	 absolute.	And	 because	 it	was	 not	 coming	 in	 his	 conscious
state,	his	ego	was	not	involved.
It	was	coming	out	of	his	 innocence;	and	anything	 that	comes	out	of	 innocence
has	a	validity,	has	an	authority	of	its	own.
There	are	 thousands	and	thousands	of	pages	of	notes	collected	by	his	disciples
from	 when	 he	 was	 speaking	 in	 his	 trances;	 almost	 a	 whole	 library	 exists
containing	his	predictions.
When	he	used	 to	come	to	consciousness,	out	of	 the	 trance,	he	himself	was	not
aware	what	he	had	said	--	as	if	it	was	not	said	by	him	but	by	an	unknown	source,
by	an	unknown	energy,	as	if	existence	itself	had	spoken	itself	 through	him.	He
had	been	only	a	vehicle,	and	a	very	correct	vehicle,	because	his	ego	was	not	in
the	way,	his	mind	was	not	in	the	way.	He	was	simply	transmitting	whatever	was
coming	from	the	very	roots	of	life.	There	have	not	been	many	people	like	him.
There	 have	 been	 a	 few	 people,	 but	 none	 has	 the	 height	 and	 the	 depth,	 and
immensity	of	Edgar	Cayce.
In	 one	 of	 his	 trance-sleeps	 he	 said,	 "Through	 Russia	 comes	 the	 hope	 of	 the
world."	Once	it	had	already	come:	the	Russian	Revolution	in	1917	was	the	end
of	an	old	world	and	the	beginning	of	a	new.	It	proclaimed	many	truths	about	man
--	that	property	should	not	be	individual,	 that	property	is	of	 the	commune.	The
founders	of	the	revolution,	particularly	Lenin,	wanted	marriage	to	be	dissolved;
because	marriage	came	into	existence	with	private	property,	it	should	go	out	of
existence	when	private	property	is	being	dissolved.
It	is	a	historical	fact	that	because	of	private	property,	man	became	interested	in
marriage,	in	monogamy;	otherwise,	by	nature,	he	is	polygamous.	But	to	protect
his	property,	so	that	even	after	his	death	it	should	remain	in	the	hands	of	his	own
sons,	 man	 decided	 in	 favor	 of	 monogamy	 --	 which	 was	 not	 natural	 to	 him.
Hence,	 on	 the	 one	 hand	marriage	 came	 into	 existence,	 and	 on	 the	 other	 hand,
prostitution.	They	both	are	by-products	of	private	property.
Property	 should	 belong	 to	 all	 --	 just	 as	 the	 air	 belongs	 to	 all,	 and	 the	 water
belongs	 to	 all,	 and	 the	 sun	 belongs	 to	 all.	 Private	 property	 creates	 immense
problems.	On	one	hand,	people	go	on	becoming	richer;	on	the	other	hand,	people
go	on	becoming	poorer.	And	the	poor	man	is	the	producer:	he	toils	in	the	field,
he	works	in	the	orchards	--	and	he	remains	hungry.	He	weaves	the	clothes	--	and
he	remains	naked.	He	makes	the	beautiful	mansions	and	palaces	--	and	he	has	no
house,	not	even	a	hut	to	hide	his	head	in.
This	 exploitation	was	 condemned	 by	 the	Russian	Revolution,	 and	 against	 this
exploitation	 a	 new	 age	 of	 a	 classless	 society	 was	 declared,	 where	 everybody
would	 have	 the	 equal	 opportunity	 to	 grow.	 A	 great	 hope	 had	 arisen	 with	 the
Russian	Revolution,	but	it	died.	The	revolution	fell	into	wrong	hands.	Instead	of
bringing	 a	 new	 age	 and	 a	 new	 humanity,	 it	 repeated	 the	 old	 game	 under	 new
names.	The	only	change	was	of	labels:	where	in	the	past	there	were	the	rich	and
the	poor,	now	there	were	the	bureaucrats	and	the	people.	But	the	distinction	was
the	same,	and	the	exploitation	was	the	same.
For	 sixty	 years	Russia	 has	 lived	 in	 a	 new	kind	 of	 slavery.	Nobody	 else	 in	 the
world	 has	 known	 that	 kind	 of	 slavery.	 The	 whole	 country	 has	 become	 a
concentration	camp.
Beautiful	words	sometimes	prove	very	dangerous:	instead	of	bringing	equality	to
man	it	has	taken	away	all	freedom,	even	the	freedom	of	expression.	It	has	made
the	whole	society	a	society	of	slaves.
For	a	moment	in	1917	a	great	hope	arose	around	the	world,	particularly	in	those
who	were	intelligent	enough	to	see	the	immense	possibility	that	was	opening	up
--	but	the	bud	never	became	a	flower.	But	you	cannot	keep	millions	of	people	in
a	concentration	camp	forever.	There	is	a	 limit	 to	tolerance	--	and	that	 limit	has
come.	There	is	great	restlessness	for	a	new	revolution	in	the	Russian	youth.	And
Gorbachev	simply	represents	 the	tremendous	longing	for	freedom,	for	equality,
for	 the	 dignity	 of	 being	 human	 beings,	 for	 self-respect.	 He	 has	 given	 another
chance	to	the	intelligent	people	of	the	world,	for	a	new	hope	again.
Where	Lenin	left	off,	Gorbachev	has	to	begin.
The	sixty	years	in	between	have	been	a	long	nightmare	--	but	that	which	is	gone
is	gone,	that	which	is	past,	 is	past.	And	the	Soviet	youth,	with	the	courage	and
insight	 of	 Gorbachev,	 is	 looking,	 not	 backwards	 to	 the	 sixty	 ugly	 years	 of
inhumane	dictatorship,	but	 to	a	new	future	of	an	open	society,	 in	 the	authentic
sense.
Perhaps	 Edgar	 Cayce	 is	 going	 to	 be	 true	 again	 in	 his	 prediction:	 THROUGH
RUSSIA	 COMES	 THE	 HOPE	 OF	 THE	 WORLD.	 NOT	 IN	 RESPECT	 TO
WHAT	IS
SOMETIMES	 TERMED	 COMMUNISM	 OR	 BOLSHEVISM,	 NO;	 BUT
FREEDOM,	FREEDOM!	THAT	EACH	MAN	WILL	LIVE	FOR	HIS	FELLOW
MAN.	THE
PRINCIPLE	HAS	BEEN	BORN	THERE,	IT	WILL	TAKE	YEARS	FOR	IT	TO
BE
CRYSTALLIZED.	Those	years	have	passed.	The	principle	is	now	crystallized.
YET	OUT	OF	RUSSIA	COMES	AGAIN	THE	HOPE	OF	THE	WORLD	--	the
second	great	revolution.	Russia	seems	to	be	a	land	of	destiny	--	not	only	for	its
own	people,	but	for	the	whole	world.	It	was	the	first	to	revolt	against	capitalism;
it	 is	 going	 to	 be	 again	 the	 first	 to	 revolt	 against	 dictatorial	 communism.	 The
future	 is	of	 a	democratic	 communism,	 a	 communism	 rooted	 in	 the	 freedom	of
man.
Equality	is	valuable,	but	it	 is	not	more	valuable	than	freedom.	Freedom	cannot
be	sacrificed	for	it.	Freedom	cannot	be	sacrificed	for	anything	else.	It	is	the	most
precious	 treasure	 of	 your	 being.	 There	 are	 all	 signs	 that	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 is
going	 to	 fulfill	 the	 great	 hope,	 the	 great	 dream.	Millions	 of	 people	 have	 been
hoping	for	it,	dreaming	for	it	--
it	 has	 been	 the	 utopia	 for	 centuries.	 Gorbachev	 is	 in	 a	 position	 to	 make	 it	 a
reality.	A	tremendously	great	responsibility	has	fallen	on	his	shoulders.	And	as	I
can	 see,	 he	 seems	 to	 be	 strong	 enough,	 intelligent	 enough	 to	 fulfill	 the
expectations.
Only	 one	 thing	 I	 would	 like	 my	 Russian	 sannyasins	 to	 convey	 to	 Gorbachev
from	me:	if	the	dimension	of	meditation	also	opens	for	him,	he	cannot	allow	the
opportunity	to	be	distorted.
Joseph	Stalin	destroyed	the	whole	revolution	for	a	single	reason,	and	the	reason
was	materialism.	He	believed	that	man	is	nothing	but	matter.	According	to	Karl
Marx,	 consciousness	 is	 only	 a	 by-product	 of	 matter,	 and	 as	 you	 die	 matter
disperses;	 nothing	 is	 left	 as	 consciousness	 --	 there	 is	 no	 soul.	 Because	 of	 this
wrong	idea	he	could	manage	to	kill	at	least	one	million	Russians	in	the	name	of
revolution	without	 any	 trouble;	 otherwise	 even	 to	 kill	 one	man	would	 destroy
your	whole	life's	sleep.	It	would	haunt	you	--	you	would	never	be	able	to	forgive
yourself.	But	to	kill	one	million	people	without	any	concern	was	possible	under
the	umbrella	of	materialism.
I	would	like	Gorbachev	not	only	to	introduce	freedom	to	the	Soviet	Union	and
its	people,	but	also	some	spiritual	dimension	so	that	it	is	clear	that	they	are	not
just	matter.	Matter	cannot	have	any	dignity	--	matter	can	be	used,	but	cannot	be
respected.	 Matter	 can	 be	 destroyed,	 but	 you	 need	 not	 feel	 that	 you	 have
committed	a	crime,	or	a	sin.
Unless	the	Soviet	Union	and	its	people	not	only	desire	freedom,	but	also	desire	a
search	for	the	soul...	because	what	will	you	do	with	freedom?	Freedom	for	what?
There	are	two	kinds	of	freedom:	freedom	from	and	freedom	for.	Freedom	from	is
not	much	of	a	freedom.	The	real	freedom	is	the	second	freedom	--	freedom	for
spiritual	growth,	freedom	for	inner	search,	freedom	for	knowing	the	secrets	and
the	mysteries	of	life.
If	Gorbachev	can	introduce	the	Soviet	Union	to	Gautam	Buddha,	to	Mahavira,	to
Zarathustra,	 to	Lao	Tzu...	why	be	so	confined	to	Karl	Marx?	Why	be	so	poor?
Why	not	make	the	whole	sky	yours?	--	all	the	stars	and	the	whole	beauty	of	the
night,	 yours.	Why	 remain	 confined?	 If	 he	 can	 open	 the	 doors	 for	 the	 spiritual
search,	then,	certainly,	he	can	fulfill	the	prophecy	of	Edgar	Cayce	that	Russia	is
the	hope	for	all	of	mankind.
And	 I	 think	him	a	man	 intelligent	 enough	 to	understand	 that	materialism	 is	 as
confining	 as	 Christianity,	 as	 confining	 as	 Hinduism.	 I	 am	making	 my	 people
available	to	all	dimensions	because	the	whole	past	is	your	heritage.	Why	remain
so	 poor,	 clinging	 to	 one	 small	 tradition?	Why	 not	 allow	 the	 whole	 sky	 to	 be
yours?	Why	not	open	your	wings?
Communism	 missed	 the	 first	 revolution	 because	 it	 was	 not	 revolutionary
enough.	 It	 was	 a	 reaction	 against	 Christianity;	 and	 whenever	 you	 react	 to
something,	you	start	behaving	in	 the	same	way.	In	America	they	are	becoming
more	and	more	a	closed	society	because	of	fundamentalist	Christianity.	You	will
be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 in	America	 thousands	 of	 books	 have	 been	 removed
from	 the	 libraries	 --	 in	 this	 twentieth	 century,	 just	 now	 in	 this	 year	 --	 because
they	do	not	conform	with	the	fundamentalist	Christian	attitudes,	with	the	fanatic
and	fascist	Christian	mind.
Even	 in	 American	 education	 Charles	 Darwin's	 theory	 of	 evolution	 cannot	 be
taught;	 it	has	been	prohibited,	because	 it	goes	against	Christianity.	Christianity
believes	in	creation.
Perhaps	 you	 have	 never	 thought	 that	 the	 idea	 of	 creation	 and	 the	 idea	 of
evolution	 are	 diametrically	 opposite.	 God	 created	 the	 world;	 now	 there	 is	 no
question	of	any	evolution.
You	cannot	improve	upon	God.
Charles	Darwin	and	his	 theory	of	evolution	 is	 against	Christianity.	 In	no	other
country	is	it	banned.	But	some	American	states	have	banned	it;	now	it	is	a	crime
to	 teach	 it.	 And	 all	 books	 --	 and	 there	 are	 thousands	 of	 books	written	 on	 the
theory	 of	 evolution	 --	 have	 been	 removed	 from	 the	 libraries	 of	 colleges,
universities	and	national	libraries.
A	strange	polarity.	The	Soviet	Union	has	been	up	 to	now	a	closed	society,	and
America	 at	 least	 pretended	 to	 be	 an	 open	 society.	 Now	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 is
making	every	effort	to	become	an	open	society,	and	America	is	becoming	more
and	more	closed.
I	would	like	to	add	a	few	words	to	Edgar	Cayce's	prediction:	If	the	Soviet	Union
is	the	hope	for	mankind,	then	the	United	States	of	America	is	the	greatest	danger
for	mankind.
It	 is	 preparing	 for	 human	 death.	 And	 if	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 becomes	 not	 only
politically	open	but	also	philosophically	open	--	not	confined	to	the	out-of-date
ideas	 of	 Karl	Marx,	 but	 open	 to	 all	 kinds	 of	 theories,	 philosophies,	 religions;
experiences	 of	 Zen,	 and	 Sufism,	 and	 Hassidism,	 of	 Tao	 and	 Yoga	 --	 it	 can
certainly	prove	the	savior	of	humanity.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 OFTEN	 HEARD	 YOU	 SPEAK	 OF	 ALONENESS	 AND
LONELINESS	AS
BEING	OPPOSED;	OF	ALONENESS	BEING	A	STATE	IN	WHICH	ONE	IS
SO	FULL
--	 FULFILLED;	 OF	 LONELINESS	 BEING	 A	 STATE	 IN	 WHICH	 ONE	 IS
MISSING
THE	OTHER,	FEELING	VERY	EMPTY.	READING	RYOKAN'S	POETRY,	 I
FEEL
SOME	LONELINESS,	YET	THE	MAN	IS	KNOWN	AS	AN	ENLIGHTENED
ZEN
MONK.
"STANDING	ALONE	BENEATH	THE	SOLITARY	PINE,
QUICKLY	THE	TIME	PASSES.
OVERHEAD	THE	ENDLESS	SKY.
WHO	CAN	I	CALL	TO	JOIN	ME	ON	THE	PATH?"
IN	 THE	 HANKERING	 FOR	 A	 TRUE	 COMPANION,	 IN	 THE	 NEED	 TO
SHARE
THAT	 RICHNESS,	 I	 WONDER	 IF	 IN	 THE	 HEART	 OF	 ALONENESS,
THERE	IS	A	KIND	OF	LONELINESS.	PLEASE	EXPLAIN	IF	ALONENESS
AND	LONELINESS
ARE	INTERRELATED.
Kavisho,	loneliness	is	loneliness,	and	aloneness	is	aloneness	--	and	the	two	never
meet	 anywhere.	 They	 cannot	 by	 their	 very	 nature.	 Aloneness	 is	 so	 full,	 so
abundantly	full	of	yourself	there	is	no	space	for	anybody	else.	And	loneliness	is
so	 empty,	 so	 dark,	 so	 miserable	 that	 it	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 constant	 hunger	 for
someone	to	fill	it...	if	not	to	fill	it,	at	least	to	help	you	to	forget	it.
You	are	quoting	from	Ryokan's	poetry.	I	don't	 think	Ryokan	is	yet	enlightened.
He	 was	 certainly	 a	 Zen	 monk,	 and	 a	 great	 poet,	 but	 he	 fell	 short	 of	 being	 a
mystic.	 He	 reached	 very	 close,	 but	 even	 to	 reach	 very	 close	 is	 not	 to	 be
enlightened.
I	have	also	loved	Ryokan's	poetry.	But	beware	of	poets,	because	they	appear	so
close	to	the	mystics.	Sometimes	their	words	are	more	juicy	than	the	words	of	the
mystics,	because	the	poet	is	the	artist	of	words;	the	mystic	is	an	expert	of	silence.
Ryokan	was	a	Zen	monk;	hence	 something	of	 the	mystic	echoes	 in	his	poetry.
But	 that	 is	because	he	 lived	 in	an	atmosphere	 in	communion	with	 the	mystics.
But	he	himself	was	not	a	mystic.
These	 are	 his	 lines,	 and	 you	 can	 see	 immediately	 what	 I	 mean:	 STANDING
ALONE	BENEATH	A	SOLITARY	PINE,
QUICKLY	THE	TIME	PASSES.
OVERHEAD	THE	ENDLESS	SKY.
WHO	CAN	I	CALL	TO	JOIN	ME	ON	THE	PATH?
He	is	still	in	need	of	a	companion,	and	he	is	still	searching.	He	is	still	talking	of
"the	path,"	and	the	enlightened	man	knows	there	is	no	path.	All	paths	are	wrong,
without	 exception,	 because	 every	 path	 leads	 you	 away	 from	 yourself.	 And	 to
come	to	yourself	you	don't	need	any	path:	you	have	to	be	just	awake	and	you	are
there.
It	is	almost	like	you	are	asleep	in	your	room	and	dreaming	that	you	are	far	away
in	London,	in	New	York,	in	San	Francisco.	Do	you	think	that	if	suddenly	you	are
awakened	you	will	find	yourself	in	San	Francisco?	You	were	there,	but	that	was
only	a	dream.
Awake,	 suddenly	 you	 find	 you	 are	 in	 your	miserable	 room,	 and	 you	 have	 not
even	gone	out	of	the	door.	You	may	be	angry	with	the	person	who	has	awakened
you,	 but	 he	 has	 brought	 you	 back	 to	 the	 reality.	 And	 there	 was	 no	 need	 of
booking	a	ticket,	because	you	had	never	gone	out;	you	were	only	dreaming.
You	are	only	dreaming	what	you	are.	If	you	wake	up,	suddenly	you	will	find	all
that	you	used	to	think	your	personality,	your	body,	your	mind,	your	knowledge,
your	feelings,	your	love	--	they	were	all	dreams.	You	are	only	a	witness.	But	you
cannot	dream	about	the	witness;	that	is	an	impossibility.
The	witness	remains	a	witness,	never	becomes	a	dream.	Your	aloneness	is	your
witness,	is	your	being.	And	it	is	so	full,	there	is	no	need	of	any	companion.	And
what	is	the	need	of	a	path?	Where	are	you	going?	You	have	arrived.
Ryokan	was	a	beautiful	poet,	and	perhaps	a	very	disciplined	monk,	but	he	was
not	a	mystic	and	certainly	not	an	enlightened	man.
Kavisho,	let	this	be	an	opportunity	to	remind	you	again:	beware	of	poets.	They
are	like	false	coins,	although	they	look	exactly	like	authentic	coins.	But	the	false
is	false,	and	there	is	no	way	to	make	it	real.	Ryokan	has	still	to	wake	up	and	see
there	is	no	solitary	pine	tree	standing	alone,	there	is	no	need	of	a	companion,	and
there	is	no	path.
One	is,	and	has	always	been,	at	home.
To	realize	this	at-homeness	is	aloneness.
Going	around	in	your	dreams	you	will	always	find	yourself	lonely.	Loneliness	is
a	misunderstanding.	Aloneness	is	an	awakening.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	NIGHT	I	HEARD	YOU	SPEAK	OF	BETRAYAL,	AND	HOW	IT
IS
IMPOSSIBLE	 TO	 DISAPPOINT	 YOU.	 MY	 EYES	 FILLED	WITH	 TEARS.
YOUR
EYES	WERE	SO	LUMINOUS,	SHINING	WITH	ENOUGH	LOVE	TO	FILL
THIS
UNIVERSE.	 I	 REALIZED	 THAT	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 TRYING	 NOT	 TO
DISAPPOINT
THE	 PEOPLE	 I	 LOVE	 ALL	 MY	 LIFE,	 AND	 MY	 TEARS	 WERE	 OF
GRATITUDE
FOR	 YOUR	 LOVE,	 A	 LOVE	 THAT	 CANNOT	 BE	 TOUCHED	 OR
TARNISHED
WHATEVER	HAPPENS.	YOUR	LOOK	HAD	A	BURNING	INTENSITY,	YET
A	 WHOLLY	 IMPERSONAL	 QUALITY	 TOO.	 WHAT	 KIND	 OF	 LOVE	 IS
THIS?
Devageet....
Two	 little	 children	were	 playing	with	 their	 dog	 by	 the	 sea	when	 the	 dog	was
carried	out	 to	 sea	by	a	big	wave.	A	passing	 rabbi	dived	 in,	 saved	 the	dog	and
revived	it	by	artificial	respiration.
The	children	asked,	"Hey,	rabbi,	are	you	a	vet?"
"Am	I	wet?"	replied	the	rabbi.	"I	am	absolutely	soaked!"
I	am	talking	about	a	love	in	which	you	are	not	only	wet,	but	absolutely	soaked.
And	there	 is	no	need	 to	make	any	effort	 for	 it.	Just	being	here,	slowly,	slowly,
you	will	find	your	hardness	melting.	It	cannot	resist	the	temptation,	because	love
is	such	a	joy,	such	a	bliss,	that	once	you	have	seen	a	man	of	love	you	can	never
be	the	same	again.
Seeing	 the	man	of	 love,	 you	have	 seen	your	own	 future.	And	 things	will	 start
happening.
The	hardness	which	prevents	you	from	being	loving,	melts;	the	heart	which	you
have	completely	forgotten	is	suddenly	remembered.	The	mind	which	has	become
your	 permanent	 residence	 is	 no	more	 your	 residence,	 but	 only	 a	 workshop	 --
useful	 as	 far	 as	 work	 is	 concerned	 and	 utterly	 harmful	 as	 far	 as	 love	 is
concerned.	Your	heart	becomes	your	home,	and	your	life	starts	radiating	without
any	effort	on	your	part.
Love	is	a	contagious	disease	which	has	no	cure.	The	world	is	loveless	so	much
because	very	few	people	are	there	to	spread	the	disease.
I	have	heard	 that	 the	doctor	of	Mulla	Nasruddin	knocked	on	his	door.	He	was
very	angry,	and	he	said,	"I	have	waited	for	one	month,	and	you	have	not	paid	me
and	I	cured	your	child	of	smallpox!"
Nasruddin	said,	"Listen.	I	have	been	patient	enough;	otherwise,	the	reality	is	that
you	owe	much	money	to	me."
The	doctor	said,	"What?	I	owe	money	to	you?"
Nasruddin	said,	"Yes.	Who	do	you	think	spread	the	disease	to	the	whole	school?
My	child!	And	from	all	that	you	have	earned	during	this	whole	month,	I	have	a
percentage.	I	was	being	a	gentleman	and	not	asking	for	it,	but	you	are	being	such
a	nasty	fellow,	so	miserly,	and	you	have	some	nerve,	too."
Love	 has	 disappeared	 from	 the	world	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 there	 are	 not
enough	lovesick	people	to	spread	it,	not	enough	love-soaked	people	to	spread	it.
It	is	something	which	is	not	taught,	which	is	caught.
Devageet,	just	don't	be	worried	about	it.	Being	here	you	are	going	to	be	soaked.
My	whole	presence,	my	silence,	my	words	are	nothing	but	to	push	you	into	the
ocean	so	that	you	can	be	soaked.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 LOVE	 TO	 WATCH	 YOU	 RETREAT	 SO	 GRACEFULLY	 BACKWARDS
OUT	OF
THE	 HALL	 UNTIL	 YOU	 ARE	 SAFELY	 INSIDE.	 I	WONDER	 HOW	YOU
AVOID
THE	DOOR	AND	THE	WALL.	BUT	TELL	ME,	BELOVED	ONE,	ARE	YOU
AFRAID	TO	TURN	YOUR	BACK	ON	US?
Prem	Sucheta,	I	will	have	to	tell	you	a	story.	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	invited	to	a
conference	where	many	wise	people	were	gathered.	He	had	his	own	disciples.
He	collected	all	the	disciples	and	rode	on	his	donkey.
But	 the	disciples	 said,	 "What	are	you	doing?"	 --	because	he	was	 riding	on	 the
donkey	 in	 the	 wrong	 way,	 not	 facing	 where	 the	 donkey	 was	 going.	 He	 was
facing	the	disciples	who	were	following	him.
They	said,	"Mulla,	we	know	that	to	go	with	you	anywhere	is	to	get	into	trouble.
Now	the	whole	city	will	laugh	and	we	will	feel	embarrassed	because	we	are	your
disciples."
He	said,	"Don't	be	worried	about	the	city.	I	will	see	to	those	idiots."
"But,"	they	said,	"at	least	to	us	you	should	explain	the	great	principle."
He	said,	"The	great	principle	is	simple.	If	I	ride	on	the	donkey	in	the	usual	way,
my	back	will	be	 towards	you.	That	 is	 insulting	you.	 I	cannot	do	 that.	 I	 respect
you	as	much	as	you	respect	me.	If	I	tell	you	to	walk	ahead	of	me,	then	your	back
will	be	towards	me.	That	will	be	even	worse	--	the	disciples	insulting	the	master.
"I	could	not	 sleep	 the	whole	night	until	 I	discovered	 this	great	principle:	 I	can
ride	on	my	donkey	facing	you;	neither	 I	am	being	disrespectful	 to	you	nor	are
you	 being	 disrespectful	 to	 me.	 And	 as	 far	 as	 the	 donkey	 is	 concerned,	 he	 is
accustomed	to	me;	he	knows	that	I	am	a	little	crazy.	He	will	giggle	a	little.	As	far
as	the	city	people	are	concerned,	let	them	laugh.	You	need	not	feel	embarrassed	-
-	you	are	disciples	of	a	great	master."
They	said,	"The	principle	seems	to	be	great,	but	still	we	are	feeling	very	much
afraid."
And	it	happened	just	the	way	the	disciples	were	thinking.	People	came	out	of	the
shops,	crowds	gathered.	People	started	asking,	"What	is	the	matter?"
The	 disciples	 said,	 "It	 is	 a	 very	 complicated	 thing.	 Its	 name	 is	 the	 Great
Principle.	If	you	want	to	understand	you	will	have	to	come	to	the	school	where
our	great	master	teaches	us."
They	 said,	 "It	 is	 a	 strange	 principle:	 sitting	 the	wrong	way	 on	 a	 poor	 donkey.
But,	if	he	says	it	is	a	great	principle,	it	must	be"	--	because	they	have	known	him,
and	every	time	he	has	proven	himself	right.	He	has	his	own	way.	They	said,	"We
are	going	to	come	tomorrow	to	the	school	to	understand	the	Great	Principle."
And	when	 the	Great	 Principle	was	 explained	 to	 them,	 they	 all	 looked	 at	 each
other.	Of	course,	 it	was	right,	because	Mulla	Nasruddin	said	 to	 them:	Unless	a
master	respects	his	disciples,	he	should	not	expect	any	respect	from	them.
Prem	Sucheta,	it	is	the	Great	Principle.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	Sunrise	in	the	soviet	union	sunset	in	america	22	May	1987	am	in
Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705220
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN21
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
81
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	CAN	THE	WORLD	EVER	BECOME	A	PARADISE	WHEN	ALL
ENLIGHTENED	PEOPLE	ALWAYS	CHOOSE	NOT	TO	BE	BORN	AGAIN?
Anand	Anahad,	one	of	the	most	fundamental	things	about	the	enlightened	person
is	 that	 he	 attains	 to	 enlightenment	 by	 dropping	 all	 choices;	 he	 attains	 it	 in	 a
choiceless	 awareness.	 After	 enlightenment	 there	 is	 no	 way	 for	 him	 to	 choose
anything.
It	is	not	that	he	chooses	not	to	be	born;	it	is	simply	the	law	of	existence	that	once
you	 are	 enlightened	 you	 do	 not	 need	 the	 body	 and	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 whole
imprisonment	which	we	call	life.	It	is	not	that	the	enlightened	person	goes	into
nonexistence;	he	becomes	part	of	existence	itself	--	just	like	a	fragrance,	spread
all	 over.	 In	 this	 way	 he	 helps	 the	 world	 to	 become	 a	 paradise.	 The	 more
enlightened	 people	 disappear	 in	 the	world	 as	 fragrance,	 the	more	 light	 it	 will
become...	blissful,	ecstatic.
And	 the	 question	 of	making	 life	 a	 paradise	 is	 for	 you,	 not	 for	 the	 enlightened
person.	For	him	it	is	already	a	paradise.	Even	in	this	whole	misery,	and	anguish,
he	 remains	above	and	beyond.	He	showers	his	 love	and	compassion,	but	he	 is
not	touched	by	the	anguish	and	anxiety,	the	misery	and	the	hell	that	people	are
living	 in.	His	 heart	 is	 full	 of	 compassion	 for	 them,	 and	 he	 does	 everything	 to
help	them	to	come	out	of	their	darkness.
Paradise	 is	 not	 a	 location;	 it	 is	 not	 part	 of	 geography.	 Paradise	 is	 a	 certain
attitude	 towards	 existence;	 it	 is	 a	way	 of	 life.	 The	 same	 energy	 that	 becomes
misery	 becomes	 bliss;	 the	 same	 energy	 that	 creates	 jealousy	 and	 anger	 is
transformed	 into	 love,	 into	peace,	 into	 silence.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	of	 only	 the
enlightened	person	changing	the	world	into	a	paradise;	everybody	has	to	change
it	by	changing	himself.
All	those	people	who	have	been	dreaming	of	a	better	world	can	be	divided	into
two	categories.	The	major	part	of	the	dreamers	who	want	the	world	to	become	a
paradise	 think	 in	 terms	 of	 changing	 the	 world	 --	 its	 social	 structure,	 its
economics,	its	politics.
These	people	have	been	working	for	thousands	of	years.
Their	 intentions	are	 immensely	beautiful,	but	 they	are	 ignorant	about	 the	basic
fact	 that	 except	 for	 the	 individual,	 there	 is	 no	 world.	 You	 cannot	 change	 the
world	because	the	world	is	only	a	word,	it	is	not	a	reality.	If	you	go	in	search	to
meet	the	world	you	will	always	meet	the	individual.	The	individual	is	the	reality.
It	is	not	just	a	word;	it	is	existential.
The	small	part,	 the	minor	part	of	dreamers	who	want	to	bring	a	utopia	into	the
world	have	a	totally	different	approach.	Their	approach	is	to	teach	you	how	to	be
silent,	 how	 to	be	peaceful,	 how	 to	beautify	 existence	 around	you,	how	 to	 take
everything	and	change	it...	to	create	a	harmony,	an	accord.
The	same	orchestra,	the	same	instruments,	can	be	played	by	monkeys	too	--	and
they	will	 really	enjoy.	But	music	will	not	be	born;	what	will	be	born	will	be	a
maddening	noise!
Even	to	people	who	do	not	know	the	art	of	music,	who	have	not	learnt,	who	have
not	 gone	 into	 the	 discipline,	 all	 those	 instruments	 are	 useless.	An	 orchestra	 in
which	 thirty	or	more	 instruments	are	being	played	by	 those	who	know	how	 to
play	 them	 does	 not	 create	 noise;	 on	 the	 contrary	 it	 creates	 music	 --	 which	 is
closest	to	silence.The	higher	the	music	is,	the	closer	it	is	to	silence.	Listening	to
great	music,	you	will	fall	into	silence.
In	the	East	music	has	been	always	used	as	a	support	for	meditation.	It	is	difficult
to	 fight	 with	 the	 mind,	 its	 constant	 rush	 of	 thoughts,	 but	 being	 absorbed	 in
beautiful	music	all	 those	 thoughts	disappear.	Music	 is	sound,	but	sound	can	be
used	in	such	a	way	that	it	creates	silence;	that	is	the	whole	art.
Life	 has	 many	 components.	 They	 can	 all	 live	 together	 like	 a	 crowd	 --	 noisy,
conflicting	with	each	other,	fighting	to	dominate	--	 that's	how	we	create	a	hell.
Hell	 is	 your	 inability	 to	 bring	 the	 crowd	 within	 you	 to	 a	 peaceful,	 loving
existence.	 It	 is	 the	 inability	 to	 create	 an	orchestra	out	 of	your	being.	The	man
who	can	create	an	orchestra	out	of	his	being	--
whose	mind,	heart,	being,	are	all	in	tune	--	has	created	paradise	for	himself,	and
an	energy	field	around	himself,	which	will	affect	others	also.
It	is	everybody's	task;	in	fact	it	is	the	only	task,	the	only	challenge	life	gives	to
you	--
whether	you	turn	it	into	a	hell	or	into	a	heaven.	The	man	who	turns	his	life	into	a
heaven	is	the	greatest	artist	in	the	world.	Musicians	and	painters	and	dancers	and
poets	 --	 all	 are	 left	 far	 behind.	 I	 call	 this	 man	 the	 mystic.	 He	 is	 the	 highest
category.
It	is	up	to	you	to	see	that	your	components	are	not	at	war,	that	you	are	at	peace
with	yourself.	One	great	Sufi	mystic,	Bayazid	was	dying.	His	old	grandmother
was	always	worried	about	the	life	of	Bayazid,	because	he	was	not	a	traditional,
orthodox,	 religious	 person;	 he	 never	went	 to	 the	mosque,	 he	 never	 prayed	 the
way	 a	Mohammedan	 should	 pray,	 five	 times	 a	 day	 --	 he	 laughed	 at	 the	 very
existence	 of	 God.	 As	 he	 was	 dying,	 his	 grandmother	 came	 close	 to	 him	 and
whispered,	"Bayazid,	there	is	still	time;	make	peace	with	God."
And	Bayazid	died	with	a	great	laughter,	saying,	"I	don't	need	to,	because	I	have
made	peace	with	myself."
Those	who	 are	 not	 at	 peace	with	 themselves	 are	 trying	 in	 every	way	 to	make
peace	with	God,	to	make	peace	in	the	world,	to	make	peace	among	the	warring
nations.	 But	 the	 man	 who	 has	 found	 peace	 within	 himself,	 radiates	 it.	 He
becomes	the	source,	triggering	the	same	kind	of	music,	the	same	harmony,	and
the	same	beauty	in	others	who	come	close	to	him.
The	enlightened	man,	while	he	is	alive,	works	through	his	presence,	through	his
love,	 through	 his	 silence.	 And	 when	 dead,	 he	 does	 not	 disappear;	 he	 simply
becomes	spread	all	over	existence.
Ramakrishna	was	dying	and	his	last	instructions	to	his	wife	were....	In	India,	the
moment	 the	 husband	 dies	 the	 wife	 goes	 through	 a	 trauma.	 She	 cannot	 wear
colored	clothes,	she	has	to	shave	her	head	--	she	cannot	have	hair;	she	cannot	use
any	ornaments,	not	even	the	cheapest	glass	bangles	--	she	has	to	break	them.
But	 before	 dying	 Ramakrishna,	 called	 Sharda,	 his	 wife,	 and	 told	 her,
"Remember,	you	are	never	going	to	become	a	widow.	I	am	dying,	but	I	will	be
here.	I	will	not	be	confined	in	the	body,	but	you	have	not	loved	only	my	body;
you	have	loved	me,	my	consciousness.
So	 don't	 become	 a	 widow.	 Use	 beautiful	 clothes;	 just	 for	 my	 joy,	 use	 all	 the
beautiful	 ornaments	 that	 I	 have	 given	 to	 you.	 And	 remember"	 --	 he	 loved
delicious	food	too	much	-
-	he	said,	"Remember,	don't	forget	to	create	beautiful	dishes	for	me.	I	will	not	be
able	to	eat	them,	but	even	the	aroma	of	your	beautiful	food	will	be	a	nourishment
to	me.	And	don't	forget	to	prepare	my	bed	rightly,	particularly	the	mosquito	net."
His	disciples	were	feeling	very	embarrassed,	"What	 is	he	saying?	Has	he	gone
insane?	A	dying	enlightened	person	is	worried	about	the	mosquito	net...."
Sharda	followed	his	instructions	for	almost	thirty	years	that	she	lived	after	him.
She	would	prepare	his	food	the	same	way	she	used	to	prepare	it	while	he	was	in
the	 body.	 She	 would	 take	 it	 to	 his	 room	 --	 and	 nobody	 was	 there	 --	 and	 she
would	say,	"Paramahansdev,	your	food	is	ready."	She	would	sit	like	the	way	she
used	to	sit,	with	her	fan	in	her	hand.
There	was	nobody.	The	disciples	tried	to	convince	her	--	"This	is	absolutely	mad;
you	go	on	fanning	and	there	is	nobody...."
She	said,	"There	may	not	be	for	you;	there	is	for	me."	She	would	prepare	the	bed
the	way	he	liked,	with	many	covers.	She	would	take	care	about	the	mosquito	net,
that	not	a	single	mosquito	entered	inside.
Very	 few	people	have	understood	Sharda,	but	 she	 really	 loved	Ramakrishna	 --
not	 the	body	 in	which	he	was,	but	him,	his	being.	Now	 the	body	 is	no	 longer
there,	but	the	being	is	spread	all	over	existence;	he	is	more	than	he	was	before.
Before	he	was	 imprisoned	 in	 the	body;	now	he	 is	unembodied.	Now	he	 is	 just
freedom.
The	 enlightened	 man	 helps	 people	 while	 he	 is	 alive,	 and	 he	 goes	 on	 helping
people	while	he	is	not	in	the	body.	But	if	you	cannot	understand	an	enlightened
man	while	he	is	in	the	body,	it	is	very	difficult	for	you	to	understand	when	he	is
not	in	the	body.
Once	you	have	fallen	in	love	with	a	master,	slowly,	slowly	he	is	no	more	a	body
to	you.
He	becomes	only	a	pure	consciousness.
When	 Gautam	 Buddha	 died	 ten	 thousand	 sannyasins	 were	 present.	 Except
twenty,	 almost	 everybody	 was	 crying.	 But	 what	 was	 the	 matter	 with	 those
twenty?	Were	 they	not	 devoted	 to	Gautam	Buddha?	One	of	 them,	Manjushree
was	asked,	"What	is	the	matter	with	you	all?	--	because	you	have	been	closest	to
him."
He	 said,	 "That	 is	 the	 matter.	We	 have	 known	 him	 not	 as	 the	 body;	 we	 have
known	him	as	an	immortal	consciousness.	We	are	rejoicing.	Up	to	now	he	was
confined	 in	 a	 small	 space;	 now	 the	 whole	 sky	 is	 his.	 We	 can	 touch	 him
anywhere,	we	can	talk	to	him	anywhere.	We	know	he	will	be	available	--	that's
why	we	are	not	crying,	not	weeping.
You	are	crying	and	weeping	because	you	have	never	gone	beyond	the	body.	The
body	was	beautiful,	but	it	is	nothing	compared	to	the	beauty	of	consciousness."
Anand	 Anahad,	 the	 enlightened	 man	 naturally	 goes	 on	 creating	 a	 paradise
wherever	he	is
--	 in	the	body	or	not	in	the	body.	But	he	cannot	create	a	paradise	without	your
agreeing	 to	 it.	 Finally,	 you	 are	 the	 decisive	 factor.	 He	 can	 make	 all	 the
arrangements,	and	you	can	refuse	them;	you	can	go	on	living	in	your	hell.	The
first	 thing	 is	 that	you	are	 living	 in	hell.	So	many	 times	people	have	asked	me,
"Does	hell	exist?"	And	I	have	said	to	them,
"You	amaze	me.	You	live	in	it,	and	you	ask	me,	`Does	hell	exist?'	What	is	your
life?	It	is	not	a	joy,	it	is	not	a	dance	--	you	are	living	a	nightmare."
To	live	unconsciously	is	to	be	in	hell,	and	to	live	consciously	is	to	be	in	heaven.
To	 be	 fully	 enlightened...	 it	 is	 not	 that	 you	 enter	 paradise;	 paradise	 opens	 its
petals,	just	like	a	lotus,	in	you.	It	is	your	innermost	potential.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
SEEING	 SUCH	 UNBELIEVABLE	 CHANGES	 IN	 RUSSIA	 THESE	 PAST
TWO
YEARS,	 DUE	 TO	 GORBACHEV'S	 LEADERSHIP,	 DO	 YOU	 HAVE	 A
SPECIAL
MESSAGE	 FOR	 HIM?	 WOULD	 YOU	 AT	 ALL	 CONSIDER	 GOING	 TO
RUSSIA	IF
HE	 WOULD	 HAVE	 THE	 COURAGE	 TO	 WELCOME	 YOU	 AND	 YOUR
PEOPLE?
DO	YOU	THINK	THAT	ONE	DAY	RUSSIA	COULD	BE	THE	COUNTRY	OF
THE
FUTURE	OF	HUMANITY?
Jivan	Mada,	yes,	 it	appears	as	 if	unbelievable	changes	have	been	happening	 in
Russia	 in	 the	 past	 two	 years.	But	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	was	waiting	 for
those	changes;	they	are	not	unbelievable.	Sixty	years	of	oppression,	exploitation
and	mass	scale	butchery	were	preparing	the	ground.	No	night	is	without	a	dawn.
Sixty	years	was	more	than	enough;	it	was	absolutely	certain	that	it	would	come
to	an	end.
Gorbachev	 is	 the	 first	 ray	 heralding	 that	 the	 morning	 has	 come.	 Many	 more
changes	 will	 be	 happening	 in	 the	 future.	 Their	 speed	 is	 going	 to	 accelerate,
because	for	sixty	years	the	people	have	not	tasted	freedom,	have	not	tasted	trust,
love;	 they	have	known	only	a	 fascist	 regime,	which	was	 ready	 to	kill	anybody
for	any	small	excuse.	They	have	lived	under	the	shadow	of	death.
I	welcome	 the	 dawn;	 the	 birds	 have	 started	 singing,	 and	 the	 flowers	 have	 not
forgotten	--
even	in	sixty	years	--	that	when	the	sun	rises	they	have	to	open	and	release	their
fragrance.
You	are	asking	me,	do	I	have	a	special	message	for	this	great	man,	Gorbachev,
who	is	bringing	a	second	revolution	in	the	Soviet	Union?	Yes,	I	have	a	message
for	him.	And	my	message	is	not	special,	but	 the	same	as	 it	 is	for	every	human
being,	wherever	he	exists.	But	the	situation	is	certainly	special.	You	will	have	to
go	a	little	bit	back	in	the	history....
Communism	 is	 a	 reaction	 against	 Christianity.	 Christianity	 has	 done	 so	much
harm	 that	 the	 intelligentsia	 --	 particularly	 people	 like	 Karl	 Marx,	 who	 were
geniuses	 --	 became	 so	 frustrated	 with	 Christianity	 that	 they	 created	 an
alternative:	 a	 materialist	 philosophy	 with	 no	 God,	 with	 no	 soul,	 with	 no
consciousness.
It	 is	 understandable	 --	 but	 not	 forgivable	 --	 because	 Karl	 Marx	 was	 not
acquainted	 with	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 nor	 was	 he	 acquainted	 with	 the	 Eastern
flowers	of	Zen,	of	Tao,	of	Yoga.
Without	 knowing	 anything	 about	 authentic	 religion	 --	 he	 thought	 that
Christianity	was	equivalent	to	religion	--	he	created	a	religionless	society.	This	is
moving	from	one	extreme	to	another	extreme.
It	 has	 been	 always	 my	 understanding	 that	 amongst	 all	 the	 crimes	 that
Christianity	has	committed,	communism	is	also	one	of	them	--	not	directly,	but
indirectly.	It	is	because	of	Christianity	--	its	stupid	superstitions,	its	exploitation
of	the	people,	its	protection	of	the	richest	and	its	consolations	for	the	poor	--	that
Karl	Marx	had	to	say	that	religion	is	nothing	but	opium	for	 the	people.	This	 is
perfectly	 true	 for	 organized	 religions,	 but	 this	 is	 not	 true	 about	 men	 like
Zarathustra,	or	Bodhidharma,	or	Basho.	They	are	the	pinnacles	of	consciousness.
Gorbachev's	greatest	 contribution	will	be	 to	 introduce	 the	people	of	 the	Soviet
Union	 to	 the	 immense	 varieties	 of	 religious	 experiences,	 and	 not	 to	 remain
confined	to	Christianity.	Christianity	has	nothing	of	religion	in	it.	The	West	has
not	produced	any	religions;	its	whole	consciousness	is	extrovert.
My	 message	 to	 Gorbachev	 is:	 Introduce	 meditations	 in	 the	 schools,	 in	 the
colleges,	in	the	universities;	open	the	doors	for	Zen,	for	Tao,	for	Hassidism,	and
let	 people	 see	 that	 the	 essential	 religion	 is	 not	 a	 bondage,	 but	 the	 ultimate
freedom.	All	other	freedoms	are	small
--	 political,	 economical,	 social.	The	 only	 freedom	 that	 cannot	 be	 destroyed	 by
anybody,	and	cannot	be	taken	away	by	anybody,	is	of	the	spirit.	He	is	trying	to
introduce	political	freedom,	freedom	of	expression.	These	are	good,	but	they	are
not	enough;	they	are	all	superficial.
The	 Soviet	 Union	 is	 in	 a	 very	 special	 state.	 For	 sixty	 years	 they	 have	 been
denied....
There	is	a	deep	longing	for	truth,	for	freedom,	for	love	--	it	is	almost	like	a	land
that	 has	 been	 lying	 unused	 for	 sixty	 years,	 waiting	 for	 its	 spring,	 waiting	 for
someone	to	sow	seeds.	It	has	gathered	so	much	potential	and	power	that	if	you
sow	the	seeds	this	land	can	produce	the	most	beautiful	flowers,	the	richest	crops.
Gorbachev	himself	has	 to	be	 introduced	to	 the	art	of	meditation,	and	he	has	 to
open	the	doors	and	the	windows	to	all	the	dimensions	that	have	been	closed	for
sixty	 years,	 so	 people	 can	 choose	 the	 method	 to	 find	 themselves.	 A	 spiritual
realization	has	to	be	made	available	to	the	people	of	the	Soviet	land.	That	will	be
the	greatest	contribution	Gorbachev	can	make.
You	 are	 asking,	 "If	 he	 had	 enough	 courage	 to	welcome	you,	 and	your	 people,
would	you	consider	going	there?"
Absolutely,	unconditionally!	I	would	love	to	go	there,	to	take	my	people....	And
if	he	has	courage	enough	I	would	like	to	create	a	commune	in	the	Soviet	Union
to	show	America,
"The	 day	 you	 destroyed	 the	 commune	 there,	 you	 have	 yourself	 committed
suicide."
And	you	can	see,	Ronald	Reagan	has	not	the	same	prestige	as	he	had	when	the
commune	was	 there;	 he	 cannot	 hope	 to	 become	 the	 president	 again.	Governor
Atiyeh	of	Oregon	was	very	powerful	just	because	of	the	commune	--	because	he
was	opposing	it,	and	people	were	supporting	him.	He	could	not	gather	courage
even	to	run	for	the	second	time.
He	 is	 no	 longer	 the	 governor;	 if	 we	 had	 been	 there,	 he	 would	 have	 been	 the
governor	still.
The	politicians	who	had	become	immensely	important	have	lost	all	their	power.
Their	power	was	because	of	us.	 If	 they	had	 real	 intelligence,	 they	would	have
continued	to	be	against	us	superficially,	and	behind	the	curtain	they	would	have
been	helping	us	to	be	as	strong	as	possible	--	because	we	were	the	source	of	their
power.	The	more	powerful	we	would	have	been,	the	more	powerful	they	would
have	been.	But	Oregonians	are	simply	the	most	stupid	people	in	the	world.	They
destroyed	their	very	source	of	power;	now	nobody	takes	any	note	of	them.
They	were	trying	to	collect	signatures	to	change	the	rule	that	you	can	be	a	voter
in	Oregon	 if	you	have	 stayed	 there	 for	 twenty	days	before	 the	voting	but	 they
needed	the	signatures	of	seventy-five	percent	of	the	population.	Their	campaign
was	going	great	when	we	were	 there;	 it	was	because	of	us	 they	were	afraid	of
those	twenty	days.	I	have	been	informed	by	my	attorneys	that,	"The	moment	you
left,	your	sannyasins	left,	their	campaign	completely	failed."	They	had	gathered
almost	forty	percent	of	 the	signatures,	but	now	nobody	is	 interested	 in	 it	 --	 for
what?
It	 would	 be	 a	 good	 answer	 to	 America	 if	 Russia	 could	 help	 us	 to	 create	 a
commune	 in	 their	 land.	 And	 in	 fact,	 the	 whole	 philosophy	 of	 a	 commune	 is
highest	 and	most	 significant	 in	 the	 philosophy	 of	 communism	 itself;	 the	 very
word	communism	comes	from	the	word	commune.
And	 our	 commune	 can	 become	 a	 model	 for	 the	 whole	 Soviet	 Union.	 If
Gorbachev	has	guts	enough,	I	will	do	everything	to	create	a	commune	on	Soviet
land	that	will	be	the	sunrise	in	the	Soviet	Union,	and	the	sunset	in	America.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
QUESTIONS	 ARISE	 AND	 SOLVE	 THEMSELVES	 AFTER	 I	 MEDITATE;
THEN
ALMOST	 THE	 SAME	 QUESTIONS	 ARE	 ASKED	 IN	 THE	 FOLLOWING
DAYS.
ONCE	I	HEARD	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	THE	THEORY	OF	RELATIVITY	AND
ITS
DISCOVERY:	 IF	 EINSTEIN	 HADN'T	MANAGED	 TO	 DO	 IT,	 IT	WOULD
HAVE
BEEN	 DISCOVERED	 BY	 ANOTHER	 SCIENTIST,	 BECAUSE	 THE	 TIME
WAS
READY	FOR	IT.	THOUGHT,	AS	FAR	AS	I	CAN	UNDERSTAND	IT,	SEEMS
TO
BELONG	TO	THE	SAME	LAW	OF	EXISTENCE	 --	ESPECIALLY	 IN	THIS
STRONG
ENERGY	CIRCLE	AROUND	YOU.	WILL	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	THIS
PHENOMENON?
Prem	Adina,	no	man	 is	 an	 island.	We	are	all	 connected	 in	a	 thousand-and-one
ways.
That's	what	I	was	saying	about	Albert	Einstein's	Theory	of	Relativity.
Somebody	had	asked	him,	"If	you	had	not	discovered	it,	do	you	think	somebody
else	would	 have	 been	 able	 to	 discover	 it,	 ever?"	And	 he	was	 surprised	 by	 the
answer.	Albert	Einstein	said,	"It	would	have	taken	not	more	than	three	weeks	for
somebody	else	to	discover	it."
As	 it	 happens,	 in	 fact,	 it	 was	 discovered	 by	 another	 scientist	 before	 Albert
Einstein;	he	was	just	a	lazy	man	and	did	not	publish	his	article,	and	once	Albert
Einstein	had	published	his	article,	there	was	no	point.
Our	beings	 are	 connected.	Of	 course,	 everybody	 cannot	 discover	 a	 theory	 like
relativity;	 it	 needs	 a	 very	 refined	 intelligence.	But	 there	were	 at	 least	 a	 dozen
people	in	the	world	who	were	of	the	same	caliber,	and	who	were	looking	in	the
same	direction.	It	was	only	a	question	of	time	--	of	who	is	fast	enough	to	reach
the	conclusion.
Here	you	will	feel	it	every	day.	A	question	arises	in	you.	You	can	ask	it,	or	just
wait	 a	 little	 --	 somebody	 is	 going	 to	 ask	 it!	 Here	 you	 are,	 all	 for	 the	 same
purpose,	the	same	search;	you	are	all	looking	in	the	same	direction,	accepting	the
same	challenge.	It	is	very	natural	that	the	same	questions	will	arise	in	you.
There	 are	 people	who	 have	 never	 asked	 a	 single	 question	 because	 they	 know
now	 so	 certainly,	 "What	 is	 the	 point?	 Somebody	 is	 going	 to	 ask	 it."	And	 it	 is
always	better	when	somebody	else	asks	 it,	and	you	are	 just	 listening	relaxedly.
The	person	who	has	asked	 is	 tense,	because	 it	 is	his	question.	 I	am	not	a	very
predictable	man,	 and	 I	 answer	 the	 questioner	more	 than	 the	 question;	 so	 he	 is
very	alert,	very	tense,	a	little	bit	afraid.
Everybody	 else	 can	 enjoy	 relaxedly	 --	 that	 poor	 fellow	 has	 finally	 asked	 the
question.
And	 I	 have	 seen	 that	 the	 people	 who	 are	 listening	 to	 the	 answers	 of	 other
people's	questions	understand	more	clearly,	because	they	are	more	relaxed.	They
are	 almost	 like	 observers.	They	 are	more	 open.	 I	 am	not	 going	 to	 hit	 on	 their
head,	of	that	they	must...
they	are	certain;	so	they	can	enjoy	the	answer.	And	it	is	their	question	too.
And	particularly	because	we	are	concerned	in	a	single-pointed	purpose	--	how	to
know	yourself	and	how	to	be	yourself	--	questions	will	be	coming,	and	they	will
be	applicable	almost	to	everybody.	It	just	depends	on	your	attitude.	You	should
not	 forget	 to	 listen	 to	 the	 answer	 thinking	 that	 because	 it	 is	 somebody	 else's
question	it	is	none	of	your	concern,	and	you	can	enjoy	having	your	own	yakkety-
yak	 that	 goes	 on	 inside	 you.	 Then	 you	 will	 miss.	 And	 you	 will	 miss	 a	 great
opportunity.	It	is	unintelligent.
The	intelligent	person	will	listen	very	carefully	to	any	question,	because	it	may
not	be	significant	for	him	today	--	but	perhaps	tomorrow....	Perhaps	he	has	not
come	 to	 that	 space,	but	he	will	 come;	 it	 is	better	 to	be	 ready	 for	 it.	All	 that	 is
needed	is	a	little	intelligence.
Although	he	was	approaching	eighty,	the	old	colonel	refused	to	accept	his	loss	of
sexual	desire	and	stamina,	so	he	consulted	a	doctor.	The	doctor	was	amused,	and
asked,	"Why	should	you	be	so	concerned?	It	is	only	to	be	expected	at	your	time
of	life."
"But	 a	 friend	 of	mine	who	 is	 eighty-five	 says	 he	 still	makes	 love	 to	 his	wife
every	night,"
replied	the	colonel.
The	doctor	smiled,	"Why	can't	you	say	the	same	thing?	It	is	only	a	question	of
saying."
Just	a	little	intelligence....
A	young	boy	came	before	the	court,	charged	with	stealing	a	girl's	bicycle.
"I	did	not	steal	it,	sir,"	he	told	the	magistrate,	"she	gave	it	to	me.	She	was	riding
me	 home	 on	 the	 handlebars,	 and	 she	 stopped	 in	 the	 woods;	 she	 took	 off	 her
bluejeans	and	her	panties	and	said	I	could	have	anything	she	had.	Well	sir,	 the
panties	 were	 girls'	 things	 and	 the	 bluejeans	would	 not	 fit	me	 --	 so	 I	 took	 the
bicycle."
Just	be	a	little	intelligent.	Don't	take	the	bicycle!
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	The	time	for	families	is	over
22	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705225
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN22
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
87
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	YOUR	IDEA	OF	A	MODEL	COMMUNE?
Maneesha,	mankind	is	at	a	crossroads.	It	cannot	live	the	way	it	has	lived	up	to
now.	 That	 has	 become	 simply	 impossible.	 It	 has	 been	 dreaming	 for	 a	 better
future	as	far	back	as	you	can	conceive,	but	life	has	been	deteriorating	rather	than
becoming	 better.	 It	 has	 come	 to	 a	 point	where	we	 are	 facing	 either	 suicide,	 a
global	suicide,	or	a	total	transformation	of	human	consciousness	and	its	style	of
life.
My	idea	of	a	model	commune	implies	the	whole	life	of	man	from	all	the	possible
aspects.
First,	the	family	cannot	remain	the	basic	unit	of	the	society.	It	is	the	root	cause	of
millions	of	diseases;	 it	 is	 the	basic	brick	of	which	nations	 are	made,	 races	 are
made,	 religious	 organizations	 are	 made.	 The	 family	 has	 destroyed	 the
blissfulness	of	men	and	women	of	the	whole	of	mankind.	Its	basic	structure	is	of
possessiveness	 --	 the	 husband	 possesses	 the	 wife	 and	 they	 both	 possess	 the
children	--	and	the	moment	you	possess	a	human	being,	you	have	taken	away	his
dignity,	his	freedom,	his	very	humanity.	You	have	taken	away	all	that	is	beautiful
and	you	have	given	him	only	handcuffs,	perhaps	made	of	gold...	beautiful	cages
in	 place	 of	 his	 wings.	 Those	 golden	 cages	 cannot	 give	 him	 the	 sky	 and	 the
freedom	of	the	sky.
So	the	first	thing	is:	a	model	commune	will	not	have	families.	The	implication	is
clear	that	it	will	not	have	marriages.
Love,	for	the	first	time,	should	be	given	the	respect	that	is	its	due	for	centuries.
Love	should	be	 the	only	 law	between	 two	human	beings	 if	 they	decide	 to	 live
together;	only	joy	should	be	their	binding	force.	The	moment	love	disappears....
And	 remember,	 like	 everything	 real,	 love	 also	 changes.	 Only	 unreal	 things,
plastic	things,	remain	permanent.
Marriage	is	permanent,	but	it	gains	permanence	by	killing	love.
It	is	on	the	grave	of	love	that	marriage	makes	its	house.	Naturally,	it	brings	only
agony,	anguish,	suffering,	slavery	--	and	a	total	destruction	of	man's	spirituality.
A	model	 commune	will	 be	 a	 communion,	 a	 gathering	 of	 free	 spirits.	Children
should	 belong	 to	 the	 commune,	 not	 to	 the	 parents.	 Parents	 have	 done	 enough
harm.	They	cannot	be	allowed	anymore	to	corrupt	their	children,	although	their
intentions	are	all	good.	But	what	to	do	with	their	good	intentions?	The	results	are
all	ugly.
Parents	 teach	their	children	to	be	competitive,	and	competition	brings	jealousy.
They	 teach	 their	 children	 to	 become	 somebody	 in	 the	world,	 to	 leave	 a	 name
behind	themselves.	That	makes	life	a	struggle,	not	a	rejoicing	but	a	continuous
fight	 --	 so	 destructive	 that	 it	 takes	 away	 all	 your	 joy,	 all	 your	 juice,	 all	 your
flowers.	 It	 leaves	 behind	 only	 skeletons	 fighting	 for	 power,	 for	 money	 ,	 for
position.	Life	becomes	a	warfield.
The	whole	blame	goes	to	the	parents.	They	have	lived	as	ambitious	beings;	they
have	 destroyed	 themselves.	 Now	 they	 go	 on	 giving	 their	 heritage	 to	 their
children	 --	 their	 unfulfilled	 desires,	 their	 incomplete	 ambitions.	 In	 this	 way
diseases	pass	on	from	one	generation	to	another.
A	commune	is	a	declaration	of	a	non-ambitious	 life	with	equal	opportunity	for
all.	But	remember	my	differences	with	Karl	Marx.	I	am	not	in	favor	of	imposing
equality	 on	 people,	 because	 that	 is	 a	 psychologically	 impossible	 task,	 and
whenever	 you	 do	 something	 against	 nature,	 it	 becomes	 destructive	 and
poisonous.
No	 two	 men	 are	 equal.	 But	 I	 can	 be	 misunderstood	 very	 easily,	 so	 try	 to
understand	my	standpoint	very	clearly:	I	am	not	in	favor	of	equality,	but	I	am	not
in	 favor	 of	 inequality	 either!	 I	 am	 in	 favor	 of	 creating	 equal	 opportunities	 for
everybody	to	be	himself.	In	other	words,	in	my	vision,	each	individual	is	unique.
The	question	of	equality	or	inequality	does	not	arise,	because	two	individuals	are
not	the	same.	They	cannot	be	compared.
A	real	commune,	a	real	communism,	will	create
equal	opportunities	for	growth,	but	accept	the	uniqueness	of	each	individual.
There	should	be	no	private	property.	Everything	should	belong	to	the	commune.
There	should	be	absolute	freedom	of	expression	in	words	or	in	creativity.
Each	 individual	 should	 be	 respected	 as	 he	 is,	 not	 according	 to	 any	 ideal.	 His
basic	needs	should	be	fulfilled	by	the	commune,	and	as	the	commune	becomes
richer,	every	individual	should	be	provided	with	more	comfort,	with	more	luxury
--	because	I	am	not	against	luxury	or	comfort.	I	am	not	a	sadist,	and	I	don't	want
people	 to	be	 tortured	 in	 any	beautiful	name.	 In	 the	name	of	 religion,	or	 in	 the
name	of	socialism,	nobody	should	be	sacrificed.	No	kind	of	self	 torture	should
be	supported.
Man	is	here	to	rejoice,	to	live	a	life	as	beautifully,	as	peacefully,	as	comfortably
as	possible.
I	am	all	for	richness,	but	the	richness	will	be	of	the	commune.	As	the	commune
becomes	richer,	every	individual	will	become	richer.	I	am	against	poverty;	I	am
not	 a	worshiper	 of	 poverty.	 I	 don't	 see	 anything	 spiritual	 in	 being	poor	 --	 it	 is
sheer	 stupidity.	 Neither	 poverty	 is	 spiritual,	 nor	 is	 sickness	 spiritual,	 nor	 is
hunger	 spiritual.	 A	 commune	 should	 live	 in	 a	 way	 that	 it	 becomes	more	 and
more	 rich,	 that	 it	 does	 not	 produce	 too	 many	 children,	 that	 it	 does	 not
overproduce	 people.	 Overproduction	 is	 bound	 to	 create	 beggars,	 is	 bound	 to
create	orphans,	and	once	there	are	orphans	there	are	Mother	Teresas.
I	don't	want	any	Mother	Teresa	in	the	world.	Neither	do	I	believe	in	the	virtue	of
serving	the	poor,	because	I	don't	want	anybody	to	be	poor	in	the	world.	And	it	is
in	our	hands:	we	have	all	 the	scientific	 techniques	 to	produce	according	 to	our
needs	--	or	not	to	produce.
To	 produce	 the	 best	 possible	 children...	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 produce	 blind,
crippled,	 retarded...	 that	 should	 be	 a	 thing	 of	 the	 past!	 Now	 science	 places	 it
absolutely	in	our	hands	to	choose	how	our	children	should	be.	We	just	have	to
drop	our	old	conception.
Our	old	conception	was:	my	child	should	be	of	my	blood.	It	is	sheer	nonsense.
What	is	the	difference	between	my	blood	and	your	blood?	The	new	intelligence
should	 choose	 the	 right	 seed	 for	 the	 child	 --	 from	whom	 it	 comes,	 it	 does	 not
matter.
In	a	commune	there	should	be	banks	for	semen	in	the	hospitals,	just	as	there	are
banks	for	blood.	A	couple	can	go	and	ask	the	doctor	what	kind	of	child	is	needed
--	a	mathematician?	a	Mohammed	Ali	the	Great?	a	Jesus	Christ?	--	because	now
it	 is	 possible	 to	 read	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 every	 child	 even	 before	 he	 is
conceived.	Every	living	cell	that	is	going	to	become	the	life	of	a	new	child	has
the	whole	program.	How	long	he	will	 live,	whether	he	will	be	healthy	or	sick,
intelligent	or	unintelligent,	a	musician,	a	dancer,	a	scientist...	you	can	choose!
We	 just	have	 to	drop	 the	old,	 stupid	 ideas.	As	 far	as	 lovemaking	 is	concerned,
you	 can	make	 love	 to	 the	woman	 you	 like.	But	 as	 far	 as	 producing	 a	 child	 is
concerned,	your	woman	can	provide	 the	womb	and	you	can	 find	 the	best	 seed
from	 the	hospital.	And	 it	will	 be	 anonymous,	 so	you	need	not	be	worried	 that
someone	in	the	street	will	say,
"Hello,	you	are	the	father	of	my	child."	Nobody	can	say	that;	nobody	will	ever
know.
Finally,	 the	 children	 should	 belong	 to	 the	 commune	 as	 a	 whole.	 Father	 and
mother	 should	 recede,	 in	 their	 place,	 should	 be	 "uncles"	 and	 "aunts".	 There
should	be	so	many	uncles	and	so	many	aunts...	perhaps	the	mother	should	be	the
chief	aunt	and	the	father	should	be	the	chief	uncle,	but	not	more	than	that.
Everybody	should	be	allowed	to	be	himself.	Right	now	everybody	is	forced	to	be
according	to	the	ideas	of	others.	That	causes	misery	and	great	anguish,	and	takes
all	 joy	 and	gladness	 from	 life.	Everybody	 should	be	himself	 and	 contribute	 to
life	 according	 to	 his	way	 --	 by	 creating	music,	 or	 by	 creating	paintings,	 or	 by
writing	poetry,	or	by	producing	better	fruits,	better	crops,	making	better	roads.
Everyone	 should	 be	 allowed	 to	 have	 his	 own	 potential	 fulfilled.	 A	 model
commune	will	give	dignity	 to	every	 individual.	 I	was	saying	 this	morning	 that
Gorbachev	can	invite	us	to	have	a	model	commune	in	the	Soviet	Union.
This	is	as	far	as	human	growth	is	concerned.	One	thing	for	the	inner	growth	is
that	 everybody,	 irrespective	 of	 whether	 he	 is	 a	 man	 or	 a	 woman,	 should	 be
allowed	to	choose	a	method	of	meditation	suitable	to	him,	so	that	he	can	not	only
experience	the	joys	of	life,	but	he	can	also	experience	the	joys	of	his	spirit.
Communism	is	missing	only	one	thing:	a	spirituality.	A	model	commune	should
be	a	spiritual	gathering	of	seekers,	of	lovers,	of	friends,	of	creative	people	in	all
dimensions	of	life.	They	can	produce	paradise	here	on	the	earth.
The	 time	 for	 families	 is	 over,	 and	 the	 time	 for	 cities	 is	 over,	 and	 the	 time	 for
nations	is	over.	The	world	should	be	one,	consisting	of	small	communes.	Then
there	is	no	need	for	armies	because	there	is	nobody	with	whom	you	are	to	fight.
There	 is	no	need	of	arms,	particularly	atomic	and	nuclear,	because	you	are	not
interested	in	committing	a	global	suicide.
The	whole	energy	that	is	being	poured	into	creating	more	and	more	destructive
weapons	can	be	changed	into	creativity,	and	the	whole	earth	can	live	as	richly,	as
luxuriously,	as	no	emperor	has	ever	lived!	And	if	we	do	not	choose	this,	then	we
don't	have	any	intelligence	at	all.	Even	a	little	intelligence	is	enough	to	show	that
a	 total	 transformation	 of	 the	 society,	 of	 the	 old	 dead	 and	 rotten	 society,	 has
become	an	 absolute	necessity	 for	 survival;	 otherwise,	 if	we	continue	 to	be	 the
way	we	are,	we	can	count	the	years	on	our	ten	fingers.
The	end	 is	not	very	 far	away,	but	 the	end	can	become	a	great	beginning	 if	we
understand.
We	can	avoid	it!
It	is	in	our	own	hands,	because	the	end	is	not	coming	by	any	natural	calamity,	it
is	being	caused	by	our	stupidity!
A	model	 commune	will	 create	 as	much	 intelligence	as	possible	 and	will	 allow
people	 to	 grow	 intelligently,	 search	 and	 seek	 their	 truth.	 That	 is	 how	 one
becomes	more	 intelligent,	 by	 searching	 and	 seeking.	 Intelligence	 is	 sharpened
like	a	sword.
Man	 has	 lived	 in	 unintelligence	 because	 all	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 world	 have
emphasized	only	one	 thing:	belief	 --	 and	belief	 is	 poison	 to	 intelligence.	They
have	emphasized	only	one	thing:	faith	--	and	faith	is	against	all	growth.
The	new	man	I	conceive,	will	not	have	any	belief	system	and	will	not	have	any
faith.	 He	 will	 be	 a	 seeker,	 a	 searcher,	 an	 enquirer.	 His	 life	 will	 be	 a	 life	 of
tremendous	discovery	--
discoveries	in	the	outside	world	and	discoveries	in	the	inside	too.
I	 want	 every	 human	 being	 to	 be	 a	 discoverer:	 a	 Galileo,	 a	 Copernicus,	 a
Columbus,	in	the	outside	world	and	a	Gautam	Buddha,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Chuang-
Tzu	in	the	inside	world.
My	whole	effort	 is	concentrated	on	one	 thing:	 to	create	 the	new	man	as	Zorba
the	Buddha.
In	 a	 model	 commune	 everybody	 will	 have	 the	 qualities	 of	 the	 Zorba	 and	 the
qualities	of	the	Buddha;	tremendously	interested	in	the	outside	world,	and	in	the
same	way,	in	love	with	the	inner	search.	The	day	you	are	both	together	you	have
become	the	new	man,	and	the	new	man	is	going	to	be	the	savior	of	humanity.
If	the	new	man	is	not	born	there	is	no	hope	for	humanity.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 FEEL	 LIKE	 A	 GUEST	 ON	 EARTH,	 AS	 IF	 I	 DON'T	 REALLY	 BELONG
HERE	AT
ALL.	 IN	YOUR	BEAUTIFUL	GATHERING,	 I	 FEEL	THAT	 I	AM	ALSO	A
GUEST,	 STAYING	 HERE	 ONLY	 BY	 YOUR	 GRACE	 OR	 BY	 GOOD
FORTUNE.	I	HAVE
NOTHING	REALLY	TO	GIVE,	EXCEPT	MYSELF.	IS	THIS	ENOUGH?
Vimal,	 this	 is	more	 than	 enough.	The	 readiness	 to	 give	 oneself	 is	 the	 greatest
adventure	of	life.	And	it	is	not	only	you	who	does	not	have	anything	else	to	give,
we	all	come	naked	in	the	world.	We	don't	bring	anything	into	the	world.	All	that
we	 really	 have	 is	 our	 own	 self	 --	 everything	 else	 belongs	 to	 the	world,	 is	 not
ours.	To	give	money	or	to	give	anything	else	is	really	to	avoid	giving	yourself.
The	 people	 who	 give	 money	 to	 the	 poor,	 make	 hospitals	 and	 schools	 and
universities	--
and	brag	about	it	--	are	unaware	of	the	fact	that	all	their	giving	is	just	a	facade.
They	 are	 hiding	 their	 nudity.	 They	 are	 hiding	 the	 fact	 that	 they	 are	 not
courageous	 enough	 to	 give	 themselves	 --	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	 thing	worth
giving;	that	is	the	only	thing	that	belongs	to	you.	All	so-called	givers	are	giving
things	that	don't	belong	to	them.	It	is	almost	like	somebody	giving	you	the	full
moon,	somebody	giving	you	the	sunrise	saying,
"You	can	have	it,	it	is	yours."
I	 have	 heard	 about	 two	drunks.	They	were	 lying	 down	under	 a	 tree	 on	 a	 full-
moon	night.
Gazing	at	the	moon,	very	poetically,	in	a	very	romantic	mood,	one	drunk	said	to
the	other,	"I	would	like	to	purchase	this	moon."
The	other	said,	"That	is	impossible.	Forget	it!	Completely	forget	it!"
The	first	man	said,	"But	why	are	you	getting	so	angry?"
The	second	man	said,	"Why	shouldn't	I	get	angry?	--	I	don't	want	to	sell	it!"
Unless	you	give	yourself,	you	don't	give!	You	simply	hide	behind	your	so-called
givings,	your	poverty	and	your	impotence.
Vimal,	 there	 is	 nothing	 wrong.	 The	 very	 realization	 that	 you	 can	 give	 only
yourself	is	a	great	realization,	tremendously	beautiful	and	intrinsically	spiritual.
You	are	saying,	"I	feel	like	a	guest	on	the	earth."	Do	you	think	anybody	else	can
feel	to	be	a	host	on	the	earth?	Everybody	is	a	guest	except	Anando's	ghosts.	Only
they	 are	 the	 hosts;	 otherwise	 everybody	 is	 a	 guest.	 But	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be
worried	about	it.	Be	grateful	to	existence	that	it	has	invited	you	to	be	a	guest.
You	 say,	 "As	 if	 I	 don't	 really	 belong	 here	 at	 all."	 Nobody	 belongs	 here.
Everybody	 comes	 one	 day,	 and	 everybody	 one	 day	 goes	 away.	 This	 is	 a	 big
caravanserai.	 Just	one	night's	 stay	and	 in	 the	morning	 the	 journey	starts	 again.
Who	is	going	to	stay	here?	Millions	of	people	have	been	here	before	you	--	not
even	 their	 names	 can	 be	 remembered,	 they	were	 all	 guests	 --	 and	millions	 of
people	will	be	here	after	we	are	gone.
Just	don't	use	this	planet	like	a	waiting	room	in	a	railway	station,	particularly	an
Indian	 railway	station.	 I	have	been	 traveling	 for	years,	 staying	 in	 thousands	of
waiting	 rooms	 and	 seeing	 the	 strange	 scene.	 People	 are	 throwing	 their	 banana
peels	on	the	floor,	spitting	their	"pan"	leaves	on	the	floor,	even	if	I	have	asked
them,	 "What	 are	 you	doing!"	They	 answer	me	 saying,	 "This	 is	 only	 a	waiting
room.	It	is	not	anybody's	home.	And	who	cares?	Just	ten	minutes	more	and	my
train	is	coming!"	It	is	true	your	train	is	coming,	but	your	train	will	be	bringing	a
few	passengers	who	will	be	staying	in	this	waiting	room	with	your	banana	peels!
You	are	a	guest.	Leave	this	earth	a	little	more	beautiful,	a	little	more	human,	a
little	more	lovable,	a	little	more	fragrant,	for	those	unknown	guests	who	will	be
following	you.
An	ancient	Sufi	 story:	The	king	of	Bhagdad	used	 to	go	around	 the	city	on	his
beautiful	horse,	just	to	see	how	things	were	going	--	of	course	in	disguise,	not	as
the	king	 --	 so	 that	he	could	 see	 reality	as	 it	 is.	 If	he	went	as	 the	king,	 then	he
could	see	everything	that	was	beautiful	and	he	would	not	be	shown	the	real	face
--	he	would	have	to	see	only	the	mask.
Everyday	 he	 saw	 a	 man,	 a	 very	 old	 man,	 must	 be	 past	 one	 hundred	 years,
working	 in	 the	garden,	putting	 in	small	plants,	but	 those	small	plants	were	not
seasonal	flowers.	If	they	were	seasonal	flowers	there	would	be	no	question	at	all.
Those	were	the	plants	of	the	cedars	of	Lebanon,	which	grow	one	hundred	feet,
two	hundred	feet	high,	just	almost	touching	the	stars	and	they	take	hundreds	of
years	to	grow	to	that	height.	They	live	one	thousand	years,	two	thousand	years,
three	thousand	years	and	they	are	some	of	the	most	beautiful	trees.
The	king	was	puzzled	because	 this	old	man,	who	is	one	hundred	years,	cannot
even	 hope	 to	 see	 the	 next	 spring.	His	 hands	 are	 shaking;	 he	 is	 so	 fragile,	 any
moment	death	may	take	him	away.	And	why	is	he	planting	these	cedars?	He	will
never	 be	 able	 to	 see	 them	grow,	 to	 see	 them	 come	of	 age,	 to	 see	 their	 beauty
when	they	start	touching	the	stars.
Finally	 it	was	 impossible	 for	 the	 king	 to	 resist	 the	 temptation.	He	 stopped	 his
horse	one	day	and	went	to	the	old	man	and	said,	"I	should	not	interfere	in	your
work,	but	I	cannot	resist	the	temptation."
The	 old	 man	 said,	 "There	 is	 nothing	 to	 worry	 about,	 my	 son.	 You	 can	 ask
anything	you	want."
The	king	said,	"My	question	is,	you	will	never	be	able	to	see	these	trees	come	of
age;	you	will	be	gone	long	before	that...."
The	old	man	said,	"That's	true."
The	king	said,	"You	know	that's	true	and	still	you	go	on	doing	it?"
The	old	man	said,	"If	my	forefathers	had	not	planted	the	seeds	--	just	see	on	the
other	 side	of	my	garden	 those	 tall	Lebanon	cedars	 --	 I	would	have	never	 seen
them.	If	my	forefathers	were	so	generous	about	the	children	with	whom	they	are
not	yet	acquainted,	who	will	be	coming,	who	will	be	the	visitor,	who	will	be	the
guest....	 Still	 they	 worked	 hard	 and	 they	 created	 those	 monumental	 trees.
Looking	at	those	trees	I	gather	courage	and	work	hard,	because	certainly	I	will
not	 be	 able	 to	 see	 the	 beautiful	 growth	 but	 somebody	 will.	 My	 children's
children,	or	perhaps	even	their	children,	will	be	able	to	see	when	they	come	to
their	full	glory.	It	is	enough	that	I	am	not	betraying	my	forefathers.	If	they	could
trust	in	the	future,	in	the	unknown	guest,	I	can	also	trust."
We	are	 all	 guests,	 but	don't	 use	 this	beautiful	planet	 as	 a	 railway-station	guest
house.	It	is	not	a	waiting	room.	It	is	our	home	for	the	time	being	and	it	will	still
be	the	home	for	somebody	else.	Don't	be	so	miserly	as	to	say,	"I	will	be	gone	--
after	 ten	minutes	my	train	 is	coming,	so	who	cares	 if	 I	 leave	 the	waiting	room
dirty?"
Nobody	 belongs	 here,	 Vimal.	 But	 for	 the	 moment	 we	 are	 here,	 and	 for	 the
moment	we	have	to	be	here	totally,	intensely,	and	we	have	to	make	this	moment
as	beautiful	as	possible.	We	have	to	live	our	life	like	a	dance,	so	when	we	leave,
anybody	who	comes	after	us	will	find	that	the	people	who	have	been	here	were
not	 ordinary	 people;	 they	 have	 left	 flowers	 and	 fragrance;	 they	 have	 left	 the
echoes	 of	 their	 songs	 and	 their	 dances;	 they	 have	 left	 their	 footprints	 in	 pure,
twenty-four	carat	gold.
It	is	not	unfortunate	that	we	are	guests.	It	is	a	great	opportunity:	the	planet,	the
existence,	 has	 been	 so	 generous,	 so	 kind,	 so	 loving,	 so	 accepting,	 that	 it	 has
welcomed	you	to	be	here.
Leave	your	mark.	You	may	be	gone,	but	your	laughter	can	remain.	You	may	be
gone,	 but	 your	 dance	 can	 remain	 behind.	You	may	 be	 gone,	 but	 the	way	 you
lived	 will	 go	 on	 creating	 its	 own	 vibrations;	 the	 people	 of	 the	 future	 will	 be
reminded,	with	gratitude,	that	they	are	inheritors	of	a	great	planet	and	of	a	great
race	of	human	beings.
At	the	funeral	of	one	of	the	richest	men	in	town,	a	stranger	was	observed	crying
louder	than	any	of	the	other	mourners.	One	of	the	townspeople	approached	him:
"Are	you	a	relative	of	the	deceased,	the	richest	man	of	our	town?"
"No."
"Then	why	are	you	crying,	and	crying	so	loudly?"
"That's	why!"
Vimal,	it	is	perfectly	good	just	as	you	are.	In	this	gathering	nobody	is	a	host	--	all
are	 guests	 pretending	 to	 be	 hosts	 to	 each	 other.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 pretension.
Nobody	is	a	host;	everybody	is	a	guest,	but	how	can	there	be	a	guest	if	there	is
no	 one	 to	 host	 him?	 This	 is	 the	 strange	 fact	 about	 this	 gathering;	 the	 whole
gathering	is	the	host,	but	as	far	as	each	individual	is	concerned,	he	is	just	a	guest.
So	you	are	both	--	a	guest	as	an	individual	and	a	host	as	a	part	of	the	gathering.
An	American	makes	a	bet	with	a	Britisher	that	whichever	of	them	tells	the	most
unbelievable	story,	wins.
"You	start	then,"	says	the	Britisher.
"Well,"	says	the	American,	"one	day	an	American	gentleman...."
"Enough!	You	win!"	says	the	Britisher.
An	"American	gentleman"	--	you	have	told	the	strangest	story.
You	don't	have	anything	to	give	except	yourself.	It	is	more	than	enough.	Nothing
else	 is	asked.	Even	 this	 is	not	asked	of	you.	 It	 is	out	of	your	own	 love.	 If	you
give	yourself	to	the	commune,	the	very	giving	will	be	a	great	reward.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WITH	 YOU,	 I	 AM	 OFTEN	 REMINDED	 OF	 THE	 FIRST	 GERMAN
CHANCELLOR
AFTER	THE	WAR,	ADENAUER.	WHEN	NAILED	BY	HIS	OPPONENTS	ON
DIFFERENT	 STATEMENTS	 HE	 HAD	 GIVEN	 ABOUT	 A	 SUBJECT,	 HE
SMILED
AND	SAID,	 "LISTEN,	 THERE	 IS	MORE	THAN	ONE	TRUTH.	 I	MYSELF
KNOW	AT
LEAST	FOUR:	THE	SIMPLE,	THE	PURE,	THE	PLAIN,	AND	THE	WHOLE
TRUTH."	I	WONDER	HOW	MANY	YOU	KNOW?
Anand	Sadhu,	the	German	Chancellor	Adenauer,	was	absolutely	wrong.	There	is
only	one	truth.	What	he	has	counted	as	four,	are	four	aspects	of	it.	He	says	there
are	 four	 truths:	 the	 simple,	 the	 pure,	 the	 plain,	 and	 the	 whole	 truth.	 The	 first
thing	to	remember	is	that	the	truth	is	always	whole,	just	as	the	circle	is	always
whole.	You	cannot	have	a	half-circle.	The	moment	it	is	half,	it	is	only	an	arce,	it
is	 not	 a	 circle.	 The	 very	word	 circle	means	 the	whole.	 If	 you	 say	 it	 is	 only	 a
relative	 truth,	 then	 it	 is	 not	 truth	 because	 it	 is	 dependent,	 and	 truth	 is	 never
dependent	on	anything.
The	loving	couple	wanted	to	marry	immediately,	but	the	girl's	strong-willed	and
domineering	mother	adamantly	opposed	the	union.
"I	can't	help	it,"	said	the	distraught	girl	to	her	boyfriend.	"Mother	thinks	you	are
effeminate."
Reflecting	 for	 a	moment,	 he	 replied,	 "You	know,	 compared	with	 her,	maybe	 I
am."
This	is	relative	truth,	but	a	relative	truth	is	not	the	truth.	Only	the	absolute	and
the	 whole	 is	 the	 truth	 --	 and	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 plain.	 Only	 lies	 are	 very
complicated.	They	have	to	be;	otherwise	everybody	will	be	able	to	find	that	you
are	lying.
You	have	to	lie	in	such	a	complicated	way,	using	legal	jargon,	logic,	philosophy,
law,	science,	and	hiding	the	lies	behind	so	many	words.	You	cannot	have	a	plain
lie	because	it	will	be	caught	immediately.
Only	truth	is	plain.	And	the	truth	is	always	pure.	Can	you	conceive	a	truth	which
is	impure?	All	lies	are	impure.	There	is	no	pure	lie	and	there	is	no	impure	truth.
And	the	truth	is	always	simple,	it	is	the	very	spirit	of	simplicity.
So	I	repeat	that	Adenauer	was	absolutely	wrong.	There	is	only	one	truth.	There
are	millions	of	lies,	but	truth	cannot	be	more	than	one.	It	is	impossible	even	to
conceive	that	there	are	two	truths.	Four	is	out	of	the	question.
There	was	a	man	who	had	an	extremely	large	penis	and	a	very	bad	stutter.	Every
time	 he	 met	 a	 woman	 he	 stuttered	 so	 badly	 that	 he	 finally	 went	 to	 visit	 a
physician.	 After	 an	 examination	 the	 doctor	 says,	 "Well,	 I	 can	 see	 what	 your
problem	is:	 the	weight	of	your	penis	is	so	great	 that	 it	 is	pulling	on	your	vocal
cords	 and	 causing	 you	 to	 stutter.	 I'm	 afraid	 I	must	 remove	 ten	 inches	 to	 cure
you."
The	 poor	 man	 was	 so	 desperate	 that	 he	 agreed	 to	 undergo	 the	 surgery
immediately.	 The	 operation	 was	 a	 total	 success	 and	 he	 began	 to	 meet	 every
woman,	 who	 all	 found	 him	 very	 charming.	 However,	 once	 in	 bed,	 they	 were
very	disappointed	with	his	diminished	apparatus.
Finally	 he	 goes	 back	 to	 the	 doctor	 and	 says,	 "Look	Doc,	 you	were	 absolutely
right.	You	have	cured	my	stuttering,	but	I	need	to	have	some	of	my	penis	back."
After	 a	 moment	 of	 silence	 the	 doctor	 says,	 "Er...,	 er...,	 sorry,	 but	 that	 is
impossible,	impossible!"
There	 are	 some	 things	 which	 are	 impossible.	 Now	 his	 vocal	 cords	 are	 being
pulled	down!
There	is	only	one	truth.
The	German	chancellor	was	a	politician	and	he	lied	even	about	truth.	I	wonder...
the	people	he	lied	to	must	have	been	Germans;	otherwise	somebody	must	have
raised	the	question:	"What	nonsense	are	you	talking?"
Pure	truth,	plain	truth,	simple	truth,	whole	truth...	there	is	only	one	truth.	Lies	are
many.
That's	why	those	who	know	the	truth	find	it	very	difficult	to	express	it,	because	it
is	so	simple,	so	pure,	so	plain,	so	obvious;	they	have	to	create	great	devices	just
so	that	they	can	convey	the	simple	truth.
If	 the	 simple	 truth	 is	 conveyed	 directly,	 nobody	 is	 going	 to	 listen;	 nobody	 is
going	to	understand	it,	either.	Just	as	two	plus	two	are	only	four,	neither	five,	nor
six.	So	is	the	truth.	Simple,	pure,	plain,	whole	--	these	are	all	aspects.	They	don't
make	four	truths;	they	simply	describe	the	same	truth	from	four	different	angles.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	The	five	dimensions	of	education
23	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705230
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN23
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
82
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	 WOULD	 BE	 THE	 FORM	 OF	 EDUCATION	 IN	 THE	 NEW
COMMUNE?
Maneesha,	 the	 education	 that	 has	 prevailed	 in	 the	 past	 is	 very	 insufficient,
incomplete,	superficial.	It	only	creates	people	who	can	earn	their	livelihood	but
it	 does	 not	 give	 any	 insight	 into	 living	 itself.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 incomplete,	 it	 is
harmful	too	--	because	it	is	based	on	competition.
Any	 type	 of	 competition	 is	 violent	 deep	 down,	 and	 creates	 people	 who	 are
unloving.
Their	whole	 effort	 is	 to	 be	 the	 achievers	 --	 of	 name,	 of	 fame,	 of	 all	 kinds	 of
ambitions.
Obviously	they	have	to	struggle	and	be	in	conflict	for	them.	That	destroys	their
joys	and	 that	destroys	 their	 friendliness.	 It	 seems	everybody	 is	 fighting	against
the	whole	world.
Education	 up	 to	 now	 has	 been	 goal-oriented:	 what	 you	 are	 learning	 is	 not
important;	 what	 is	 important	 is	 the	 examination	 that	 will	 come	 a	 year	 or	 two
years	 later.	 It	makes	the	future	 important	--	more	important	 than	the	present.	 It
sacrifices	the	present	for	the	future.
And	that	becomes	your	very	style	of	life;	you	are	always	sacrificing	the	moment
for	something	which	is	not	present.	It	creates	a	tremendous	emptiness	in	life.
The	 commune	 of	 my	 vision	 will	 have	 a	 five-dimensional	 education.	 Before	 I
enter	 into	 those	 five	 dimensions,	 a	 few	 things	 have	 to	 be	 noted.	 One:	 there
should	not	be	any	kind	of	examination	as	part	of	education,	but	every	day,	every
hour	observation	by	the	teachers;	their	remarks	throughout	the	year	will	decide
whether	 you	 move	 further	 or	 you	 remain	 a	 little	 longer	 in	 the	 same	 class.
Nobody	fails,	nobody	passes	--	it	is	just	that	a	few	people	are	speedy	and	a	few
people	are	a	little	bit	lazy	--	because	the	idea	of	failure	creates	a	deep	wound	of
inferiority,	 and	 the	 idea	 of	 being	 successful	 also	 creates	 a	 different	 kind	 of
disease,	that	of	superiority.
Nobody	is	inferior,	and	nobody	is	superior.
One	is	just	oneself,	incomparable.
So,	 examinations	 will	 not	 have	 any	 place.	 That	 will	 change	 the	 whole
perspective	from	the	future	to	the	present.	What	you	are	doing	right	this	moment
will	 be	 decisive,	 not	 five	 questions	 at	 the	 end	 of	 two	 years.	 Of	 thousands	 of
things	you	will	pass	through	during	these	two	years,	each	will	be	decisive;	so	the
education	will	not	be	goal-oriented.
The	 teacher	has	been	of	 immense	 importance	 in	 the	past,	 because	he	knew	he
had	 passed	 all	 the	 examinations,	 he	 had	 accumulated	 knowledge.	 But	 the
situation	has	changed	--
and	this	is	one	of	the	problems,	that	situations	change	but	our	responses	remain
the	old	ones.	Now	the	knowledge	explosion	is	so	vast,	so	tremendous,	so	speedy,
that	you	cannot	write	a	big	book	on	any	scientific	subject	because	by	 the	 time
your	 book	 is	 complete,	 it	will	 be	 out	 of	 date;	 new	 facts,	 new	 discoveries	will
have	made	it	irrelevant.	So	now	science	has	to	depend	on	articles,	on	periodicals,
not	on	books.
The	 teacher	 was	 educated	 thirty	 years	 earlier.	 In	 thirty	 years	 everything	 has
changed,	and	he	goes	on	repeating	what	he	was	taught.	He	is	out	of	date,	and	he
is	making	 his	 students	 out	 of	 date.	 So	 in	my	 vision	 the	 teacher	 has	 no	 place.
Instead	of	teachers	there	will	be	guides,	and	the	difference	has	to	be	understood:
the	guide	will	tell	you	where,	in	the	library,	to	find	the	latest	information	on	the
subject.
And	 teaching	 should	 not	 be	 done	 in	 the	 old-fashioned	way,	 because	 television
can	 do	 it	 in	 a	 far	 better	 way,	 can	 bring	 the	 latest	 information	 without	 any
problems.	The	 teacher	has	 to	appeal	 to	your	ears;	 television	appeals	directly	 to
your	eyes;	and	the	impact	is	far	greater,	because	the	eyes	absorb	eighty	percent
of	your	life	situations	--	they	are	the	most	alive	part.
If	 you	 can	 see	 something	 there	 is	 no	need	 to	memorize	 it;	 but	 if	 you	 listen	 to
something	 you	 have	 to	memorize	 it.	Almost	 ninety-eight	 percent	 of	 education
can	be	delivered	through	television,	and	the	questions	that	students	will	ask	can
be	answered	by	computers.	The	teacher	should	be	only	a	guide	to	show	you	the
right	channel,	to	show	you	how	to	use	the	computer,	how	to	find	the	latest	book.
His	function	will	be	totally	different.	He	is	not	imparting	knowledge	to	you,	he	is
making	you	aware	of	the	contemporary	knowledge,	of	the	latest	knowledge.	He
is	only	a	guide.
With	 these	considerations,	 I	divide	education	 into	 five	dimensions.	The	 first	 is
informative,	like	history,	geography,	and	many	other	subjects	which	can	be	dealt
with	by	 television	and	computer	 together.	The	 second	part	 should	be	 sciences.
They	 can	 be	 imparted	 by	 television	 and	 computer	 too,	 but	 they	 are	 more
complicated,	and	the	human	guide	will	be	more	necessary.
In	 the	 first	 dimension	 also	 come	 languages.	Every	 person	 in	 the	world	 should
know	at	least	two	languages;	one	is	his	mother	tongue,	and	the	other	is	English
as	 an	 international	 vehicle	 for	 communication.	 They	 can	 also	 be	 taught	 more
accurately	 by	 television	 --	 the	 accent,	 the	 grammar,	 everything	 can	 be	 taught
more	correctly	than	by	human	beings.
We	 can	 create	 in	 the	world	 an	 atmosphere	 of	 brotherhood:	 language	 connects
people	 and	 language	 disconnects	 too.	 There	 is	 right	 now	 no	 international
language.	This	is	due	to	our	prejudices.	English	is	perfectly	capable,	because	it	is
known	by	more	people	around	the	world	on	a	wider	scale	--	although	it	is	not	the
first	 language.	 The	 first	 is	 Spanish,	 as	 far	 as	 population	 is	 concerned.	 But	 its
population	 is	 concentrated,	 it	 is	 not	 spread	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 The	 second	 is
Chinese;	 that	 is	even	more	concentrated,	only	 in	China.	As	 far	as	numbers	go,
these	languages	are	spoken	by	more	people,	but	the	question	is	not	of	numbers,
the	question	is	of	spread.
English	 is	 the	 most	 widespread	 language,	 and	 people	 should	 drop	 their
prejudices	 --	 they	 should	 look	 at	 the	 reality.	 There	 have	 been	many	 efforts	 to
create	 languages	 to	 avoid	 the	 prejudices	 --	 the	 Spanish	 people	 can	 say	 their
language	 should	 be	 the	 international	 language	 because	 it	 is	 spoken	 by	 more
people	 than	almost	 any	other	 language....	To	avoid	 these	prejudices,	 languages
like	 Esperanto	 have	 been	 created.	 But	 no	 created	 language	 has	 been	 able	 to
function.	 There	 are	 a	 few	 things	 which	 grow,	 which	 cannot	 be	 created;	 a
language	is	a	growth	of	thousands	of	years.	Esperanto	looks	so	artificial	that	all
those	efforts	have	failed.
But	it	is	absolutely	necessary	to	create	two	languages	--	first,	the	mother	tongue,
because	 there	 are	 feelings	 and	 nuances	which	 you	 can	 say	 only	 in	 the	mother
tongue.	One	of	my	professors,	S.	K.	Saxena,	 a	world	 traveler	who	has	 been	 a
professor	of	philosophy	in	many	countries,	used	to	say	that	in	a	foreign	language
you	can	do	everything,	but	when	it	comes	to	a	fight	or	to	love,	you	feel	that	you
are	not	being	true	and	sincere	to	your	feelings.	So	for	your	feelings	and	for	your
sincerity,	your	mother	tongue...	which	you	imbibe	with	the	milk	of	the	mother,
which	becomes	part	of	your	blood	and	bones	and	marrow.	But	that	is	not	enough
--	that	creates	small	groups	of	people	and	makes	others	strangers.
One	international	language	is	absolutely	necessary	as	a	basis	for	one	world,	for
one	humanity.	So	two	languages	should	be	absolutely	necessary	for	everybody.
That	will	come	in	the	first	dimension.
The	second	is	the	enquiry	of	scientific	subjects,	which	is	tremendously	important
because	 it	 is	 half	 of	 reality,	 the	 outside	 reality.	 And	 the	 third	 will	 be	 what	 is
missing	 in	 present-day	 education,	 the	 art	 of	 living.	 People	 have	 taken	 it	 for
granted	 that	 they	 know	what	 love	 is.	 They	 don't	 know...	 and	 by	 the	 time	 they
know,	it	is	too	late.	Every	child	should	be	helped	to	transform	his	anger,	hatred,
jealousy,	into	love.
An	important	part	of	the	third	dimension	should	also	be	a	sense	of	humor.	Our
so-called	education	makes	people	sad	and	serious.	And	if	one	third	of	your	life	is
wasted	in	a	university	in	being	sad	and	serious,	it	becomes	ingrained;	you	forget
the	language	of	laughter	--	and	the	man	who	forgets	the	language	of	laughter	has
forgotten	much	of	life.
So	love,	laughter,	and	an	acquaintance	with	life	and	its	wonders,	its	mysteries...
these	birds	singing	in	the	trees	should	not	go	unheard.	The	trees	and	the	flowers
and	 the	 stars	 should	 have	 a	 connection	 with	 your	 heart.	 The	 sunrise	 and	 the
sunset	will	not	be	just	outside	things	--	 they	should	be	something	inner,	 too.	A
reverence	for	life	should	be	the	foundation	of	the	third	dimension.
People	are	so	irreverent	to	life.
They	still	go	on	killing	animals	to	eat	--	they	call	it	game;	and	if	the	animal	eats
them	--
then	they	call	it	calamity.	Strange...	in	a	game	both	parties	should	be	given	equal
opportunity.	 The	 animals	 are	without	weapons	 and	 you	 have	machine	 guns	 or
arrows....
You	may	not	have	thought	about	why	arrows	and	machine	guns	were	invented:
so	 that	 you	 can	 kill	 the	 animal	 from	 a	 faraway	 distance;	 to	 come	 close	 is
dangerous.	What	kind	of	game	is	this?	And	the	poor	animal,	defenseless	against
your	bullets....
It	is	not	a	question	of	killing	the	animals;	it	is	a	question	of	being	irreverent	to
life,	because	all	 that	you	need	can	be	provided	either	by	synthetic	foods,	or	by
other	 scientific	methods.	All	 your	 needs	 can	 be	 fulfilled;	 no	 animal	 has	 to	 be
killed.	 And	 a	 person	 who	 kills	 animals,	 deep	 down	 can	 kill	 human	 beings
without	 any	 difficulty	 --	 because	 what	 is	 the	 difference?	 And	 there	 are
cannibals....
Just	a	few	days	ago	in	Palestine,	the	people	demanded	that	the	government	allow
them	to	eat	human	flesh,	because	there	was	not	enough	food	--	so	why	waste	a
dead	body?
Whether	it	has	died	naturally	or	has	been	destroyed	by	the	terrorists	or	has	been
in	an	accident,	it	is	good	food!	And	the	surprising	thing	is	that	the	government	of
Palestine	 has	 agreed	 --	 they	 had	 to.	 Food	 is	 short,	 and	 people	 cannot	 be	 left
hungry.	Today	they	will	be	eating	the	naturally	dead	or	the	accidentally	dead,	or
those	killed	by	 terrorists;	 but	 this	 is	 not	 going	on	 forever.	Soon	 they	will	 start
finding	ways	to	kill	people	--	to	steal	children,	because	their	flesh	is	thought	to
be	the	most	delicious.
A	great	reverence	for	 life	should	be	taught,	because	life	 is	God	and	there	is	no
other	 God	 than	 life	 itself,	 and	 joy,	 laughter,	 a	 sense	 of	 humor	 --	 in	 short	 a
dancing	spirit.
The	 fourth	 dimension	 should	 be	 of	 art	 and	 creativity:	 painting,	 music,
craftsmanship,	 pottery,	 masonry	 --	 anything	 that	 is	 creative.	 All	 areas	 of
creativity	 should	 be	 allowed;	 the	 students	 can	 choose.	There	 should	 be	 only	 a
few	 things	 compulsory	 --	 for	 example	 an	 international	 language	 should	 be
compulsory;	a	certain	capacity	to	earn	your	livelihood	should	be	compulsory;	a
certain	 creative	 art	 should	 be	 compulsory.	 You	 can	 choose	 through	 the	whole
rainbow	of	 creative	 arts,	 because	 unless	 a	man	 learns	 how	 to	 create,	 he	 never
becomes	a	part	of	existence,	which	is	constantly	creative.	By	being	creative	one
becomes	divine;	creativity	is	the	only	prayer.
And	the	fifth	dimension	should	be	the	art	of	dying.	In	this	fifth	dimension	will	be
all	 the	 meditations,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 know	 there	 is	 no	 death,	 so	 that	 you	 can
become	aware	of	an	eternal	life	inside	you.	This	should	be	absolutely	essential,
because	everybody	has	to	die;	nobody	can	avoid	it.	And	under	the	big	umbrella
of	meditation,	you	can	be	introduced	to	Zen,	to	Tao,	to	Yoga,	to	Hassidism,	to	all
kinds	and	all	possibilities	 that	have	existed,	but	which	education	has	not	 taken
any	 care	 of.	 In	 this	 fifth	 dimension,	 you	 should	 also	 be	 made	 aware	 of	 the
martial	arts	like	aikido,	jujitsu,	judo	--	the	art	of	self-defense	without	weapons	--
and	not	only	self-defense,	but	simultaneously	a	meditation	too.
The	 new	 commune	 will	 have	 a	 full	 education,	 a	 whole	 education.	 All	 that	 is
essential	should	be	compulsory,	and	all	 that	 is	nonessential	should	be	optional.
One	can	choose	from	the	options,	which	will	be	many.	And	once	the	basics	are
fulfilled,	then	you	have	to	learn	something	you	enjoy;	music,	dance,	painting	--
you	have	to	know	something	to	go	inwards,	to	know	yourself.	And	all	this	can
be	done	very	easily	without	any	difficulty.
I	 have	been	 a	professor	myself	 and	 I	 resigned	 from	 the	university	with	 a	note
saying:	 This	 is	 not	 education,	 this	 is	 sheer	 stupidity;	 you	 are	 not	 teaching
anything	significant.
But	 this	 insignificant	 education	 prevails	 all	 over	 the	 world	 --	 it	 makes	 no
difference,	 in	 the	Soviet	Union	or	 in	America.	Nobody	has	 looked	 for	 a	more
whole,	a	total	education.
In	this	sense	almost	everybody	is	uneducated;	even	those	who	have	great	degrees
are	uneducated	in	the	vaster	areas	of	life.	A	few	are	more	uneducated,	a	few	are
less	--	but	everybody	is	uneducated.	But	to	find	an	educated	man	is	impossible,
because	education	as	a	whole	does	not	exist	anywhere.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
SO	NOW	THIS:	 I'M	A	FAIRLY	GOOD-LOOKING	GUY	WITH	A	PRETTY
GOOD
TAN,	AND	I'M	WITH	A	BEAUTIFUL	GIRLFRIEND,	AND	I'M	PRETTY
INTELLIGENT.	I	MEDITATE	ONCE	IN	A	WHILE	AND	I	CAN	PLAY	SOME
CHORDS	ON	THE	GUITAR;	AND	I	KNOW	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN
A	PRE-FRONTAL	LOBOTOMY	AND	A	FREE	BOTTLE	IN	FRONT	OF	ME;
SO	WHILE
EVERYONE	ELSE	IS	TRYING	TO	FIND	OUT	WHY	THEY	CAN'T	BE
THEMSELVES,	I'D	LIKE	TO	KNOW	WHY	I	CAN'T	BE	MILAREPA?
Satyadharma,	 you	 are	 perfectly	 good	 as	 you	 are.	You	need	not	 be	 a	Milarepa.
These	 are	 the	 ideas	 which	 education	 and	 a	 competitive	 society	 have	 given	 to
you.	You	want	to	be	somebody	else.
You	say,	"I	am	a	fairly	good-looking	guy."	Who	told	you	that?	It	must	have	been
your	girlfriend	 --	but	every	girlfriend	says	 that	 to	every	boyfriend.	You	should
not	get	too	impressed	by	such	things.
You	say	"with	a	pretty	good	 tan."	Particularly	here	 in	 India,	a	 tan	 is	not	pretty
good	--	I	hate	it!	--	it's	just	beautiful-looking	people	burning	their	skin	under	the
sun.	A	tan	is	a	stupid	Western	idea.	If	you	want	to	rest,	rest	 in	the	shade;	don't
have	any	inferiority	complex	about	your	whiteness.	The	blacks	have	created	the
idea	that	"black	is	beautiful."
What	about	white?	Not	a	single	white	man	says	"white	is	beautiful."
And	 you	 say,	 "And	 I	 am	with	 a	 beautiful	 girlfriend."	And	 naturally	 you	 think
these	 things	mean	 you	 can	 be	 declared	 another	Milarepa.	 But	 then	 everybody
else...?	 Then	 we	 will	 have	 to	 name	 people	 "Milarepa	 number	 1,"	 "Milarepa
number	2."	And	you	say,	"I	meditate	once	in	a	while,	and	I	can	play	some	chords
on	the	guitar,	and	I	know	the	difference	between	a	pre-frontal	 lobotomy,	and	a
free	bottle	in	front	of	me;	so	while	everyone	else	is	trying	to	find	out	why	they
can't	be	themselves,	I	would	like	to	know	why	I	can't	be	Milarepa."	You	can	be,
but	you	will	be	only	number	two,	and	that	hurts.
You	 can	 be	 only	 a	 carbon	 copy,	 and	 you	 don't	 know	 the	 difficulties	 of	 poor
Milarepa;	you	are	not	aware	of	his	problems.
I	have	heard	from	reliable	sources...	Milarepa	came	home	exhausted	and	terribly
upset.	"I	was	late	for	work	today,"	he	told	his	wife.
"I	know,"	she	replied.
"I	quarreled	with	the	boss."
"I	know."
"He	fired	me,"	he	said	glumly.
"I	know,"	she	answered.
"How	the	hell	do	you	know?"
"He	told	me."
"Ah,	screw	him!"	Milarepa	said	angrily.
"I	did,"	replied	the	wife.
Hearing	this,	Milarepa	took	his	guitar	and	came	here.
You	are	perfectly	good	as	you	are	--	Milarepa	has	his	own	problems.	You	have	a
girlfriend,	he	has	so	many	--	and	gets	hit	from	everywhere.	When	one	girlfriend
throws	 him	 out,	 he	 reaches	 another.	 Finally	 he	 has	 a	 permanent	 girlfriend,
Shunyo.	 When	 all	 the	 girlfriends	 are	 angry	 at	 him,	 then	 he	 reaches	 Shunyo.
Shunyo	is	his	last	resort.
I	 think	 you	 should	 drop	 this	 idea.	You	 just	 be	 yourself.	Milarepa	 is	 quite	 in	 a
mess!
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
PAUL	 GAUGIN,	 THE	 FAMOUS	 FRENCH	 PAINTER,	 DROPPED	 OUT	 OF
SOCIETY
AND	 LIVED	 THE	 REMAINDER	 OF	 HIS	 LIFE	 ON	 AN	 ISLAND	 IN	 THE
SOUTH
PACIFIC.	SHORTLY	BEFORE	HIS	DEATH,	HE	FINISHED	HIS	LAST
MASTERPIECE,	 ENTITLED	 "WHO	 ARE	 WE?	 WHERE	 DO	 WE	 COME
FROM?
WHERE	ARE	WE	GOING?"	ABOUT	THIS	HE	WRITES,	"I	HAVE	PUT	ALL
MY
ENERGIES	 INTO	 THIS	 WORK	 BEFORE	 DYING	 --	 A	 PASSION	 SO
PAINFUL,	A	VISION	SO	CLEAR."	THE	OTHER	MORNING	YOU	SPOKE
TO	US	ABOUT	BEING
CREATIVE,	AND	BEING	JOYFUL	WITH	IT,	NOT	SAD.	OSHO,	IS	THERE
ANY
MORE	 YOU	 CAN	 SAY	 ABOUT	 THE	 ROLE	 OF	 CREATIVITY	 IN	 YOUR
VISION?
Milarepa,	Paul	Gaugin	had	to	suffer	just	the	way	every	creator	suffers.	Creativity
is	 almost	 like	pregnancy.	The	mother	goes	 for	nine	months	 into	deep	 troubled
waters,	and	even	after	the	birth	of	the	child	she	is	not	free	of	responsibility.	All
creativity	 is	 a	 deep	 suffering,	 unless	 your	 creativity	 does	 not	 come	 out	 of	 the
mind,	but	out	of	meditation.
When	 it	 comes	 out	 of	 meditation,	 creativity	 is	 sharing	 the	 joy,	 sharing	 the
blissfulness	that	you	have.
Mind	has	no	joy	--	it	is	really	a	wound,	very	painful.
Paul	Gaugin	had	no	 idea	of	 any	meditation,	but	he	had	a	 tremendous	passion,
almost	a	madness	to	create.	And	just	to	create,	he	dropped	out	of	society,	forgot
all	about	his	wife	and	children	and	responsibilities.	He	was	possessed	by	the	idea
of	creating.	The	possession	was	so	total	that	he	could	not	allow	any	distraction.
But	when	you	are	possessed	by	something,	you	are	working	almost	as	a	slave,
and	slavery	cannot	bring	blissfulness.
All	the	creators	in	the	West	have	passed	through	long	years	of	suffering.	Many
of	 them	 have	 been	 forced	 to	 live	 in	 madhouses,	 and	 many	 of	 them	 have
committed	suicide.	The	suffering	became	too	much,	unbearable;	they	had	to	end
their	own	life.	But	still	the	Western	creator,	either	of	meditation	or	of	music,	of
painting	or	of	dance,	has	not	become	aware	of	why	he	has	to	suffer.
In	the	East,	the	situation	is	totally	different	--	not	a	single	creator	has	suffered.	In
fact	 only	 the	 creators	 have	 enjoyed	 life	 to	 its	 fullest.	Not	 a	 single	 creator	 has
been	 put	 into	 a	 madhouse,	 not	 a	 single	 creator	 has	 committed	 suicide;	 but
creators	 have	moved	 deeper	 into	meditation,	 and	many	 of	 them	 have	 become
mystics.	From	painting,	 from	music,	 from	dance,	 they	have	moved	deeper	 into
their	own	being.
Western	 society	 lives	 under	 an	 affliction	 --	 their	 ignorance	 about	 meditation;
hence,	whatever	they	do	is	out	of	the	mind.
And	mind	is	not	the	source	of	joy.
It	can	only	create	agony,	but	never	ecstasy.
Mind	is	your	hell.
So	 learn	 to	 be	 more	 meditative,	 and	 let	 your	 creativity	 be	 secondary	 to	 your
meditativeness.	Then	 you	will	 have	 a	 totally	 different	 state	 of	 being	 --	 that	 of
ecstasy;	and	out	of	ecstasy,	whatever	is	created	has	also	some	flavor	of	it.
In	 the	West,	 perhaps	 Gurdjieff	 is	 the	 only	man	 who	 has	 divided	 art	 into	 two
sections:	the	objective	art	and	the	subjective	art.	Subjective	art	is	from	the	mind,
and	is	out	of	anguish.
Objective	 art	 --	 the	Taj	Mahal,	 the	 caves	 of	Ellora	 and	Ajanta,	 the	 temples	 of
Khajuraho	-
-	has	come	from	meditative	people.	Out	of	 their	 love,	out	of	 their	silence,	 they
wanted	to	share;	it	is	their	contribution	to	the	world.
The	Western	artist	has	lived	under	a	very	heavy	burden.	It	is	time	that	he	should
be	made	 aware	 that	 there	 is	 something	more	 beyond	mind.	 First	 reach	 to	 that
beyond,	and	then	you	can	create	stars;	and	they	will	not	only	be	a	great	 joy	to
you,	they	will	also	be	a	great	joy	for	those	who	see	them.
Just	on	a	full-moon	night,	sit	by	the	side	of	the	Taj	Mahal	--	don't	do	anything,
just	look	at	it	--	and	you	will	find	suddenly	a	silence	descending	on	you,	a	peace
filling	your	heart.
The	mind	is	stopping	its	constant	chattering.
An	objective	piece	of	art	like	the	Taj	Mahal	is	not	just	to	be	seen,	but	to	be	lived
--	 and	 then	 you	 will	 be	 in	 a	 certain	 way	 connected	 with	 the	 creators	 of	 that
beautiful	 architecture.	 It	was	 created	by	Sufi	masters.	 Its	very	 shape	 somehow
creates	within	you	a	new	blissful	space.	But	the	Western	tourist	comes	with	the
camera,	 takes	 a	 few	 shots	 from	 here	 and	 there	 and	 runs	 away	 to	 some	 other
place.	He	does	not	know	how	to	appreciate	an	objective	art.	One	has	to	meditate
on	it	--	it	may	be	that	thousands	of	years	have	passed	between	the	creator	of	that
piece	 and	 you.	 Suddenly	 that	 distance	 disappears;	 you	 become	 part	 of	 that
creative	joy,	of	that	creative	dance.
Milarepa,	 creativity	 is	 secondary,	 meditation	 is	 basic	 and	 fundamental;
everything	 should	 come	 out	 of	 your	 meditation.	 Then	 it	 will	 give	 you	 a
beatitude,	your	being	a	new	song,	and	it	will	help	others	to	experience	something
of	it.	It	will	depend	on	their	meditativeness.
I	would	like	to	make	one	very	strange	statement:	that	a	great	meditator	will	find
more	 joy,	 more	 peace,	 more	 blissfulness,	 than	 even	 the	 creator	 himself.	 If	 a
Gautam	Buddha	sits	by	the	side	of	the	Taj	Mahal,	then	what	those	Sufi	Masters
had	 experienced	 by	 creating	 it	 will	 be	 left	 far	 behind.	 Gautam	 Buddha	 will
experience	something	far	deeper,	far	more	truthful,	far	more	beautiful.
Whether	you	create,	or	you	observe	an	objective	piece	of	creativity,	meditation
should	be	the	key.	Without	it,	mind	can	only	spread	on	the	canvas	its	nightmares.
Most	of	the	paintings	of	the	great	painters	like	Paul	Gaugin	or	Picasso	are	almost
like	vomit.	They	could	not	contain	their	agony	and	suffering	--	it	was	so	much
they	threw	it	on	the	canvas	to	get	relief.	The	real	objective	art	is	not	a	relief;	it	is
not	 a	 sickness	 that	you	want	 to	get	 rid	of.	 It	 is	 a	blissfulness	 that	you	want	 to
share.	And	by	sharing,	it	grows;	you	have	more	of	it,	the	more	it	is	shared.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	Love	will	be	his	law
23	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705235
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN24
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
75
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	WILL	BE	THE	LEGAL	SYSTEM	USED	IN	THE	NEW	COMMUNE
UNTIL
ALL	 OF	 ITS	 MEMBERS	 ARE	 TOTALLY	 CONSCIOUS?	 WILL	 THERE
NEED	TO
BE	A	SYSTEM	OF	PUNISHMENT	AND	REWARD?
Maneesha,	 all	 legal	 systems	 are	 nothing	 but	 the	 revenge	 of	 society	 --	 revenge
against	 those	who	don't	 fit	 in	with	 the	system.	According	to	me,	 law	is	not	for
protection	of	the	just,	it	is	for	protection	of	the	crowd	mind;	whether	it	is	just	or
unjust	does	not	matter.
Law	 is	 against	 the	 individual	 and	 for	 the	 crowd.	 It	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 reduce	 the
individual	and	his	freedom,	and	his	possibility	of	being	himself.
The	 latest	 scientific	 researches	 are	very	 revealing.	The	people	who	are	 termed
criminals	 are	 not	 responsible	 for	 their	 crimes;	 their	 crimes	 are	 genetic,	 they
inherit	them.	Just	as	a	blind	man	is	not	responsible	for	his	blindness,	a	murderer
is	 not	 responsible	 for	 his	 murderousness.	 Both	 inherit	 the	 tendency	 --	 one	 of
blindness,	 another	 of	 committing	 murder.	 Now	 it	 is	 almost	 an	 established
scientific	fact	that	punishing	anybody	for	any	crime	is	simply	idiotic.	It	is	almost
like	punishing	somebody	because	he	has	tuberculosis
--	sending	him	to	jail	because	he	is	suffering	from	cancer.	All	criminals	are	sick,
psychologically	and	spiritually	both.
In	my	vision	of	a	commune,	the	courts	will	not	consist	of	law	experts,	they	will
consist	 of	 people	who	 understand	 genetics	 and	 how	 crimes	 are	 inherited	 from
generation	to	generation.	They	have	to	decide	not	for	any	punishment,	because
every	punishment	is	wrong	--	not	only	wrong,	every	punishment	is	criminal.	The
man	who	has	committed	anything	wrong	has	 to	be	sent	 to	 the	right	 institution;
maybe	 a	 hospital,	 to	 be	 operated	 on,	 or	 a	 psychiatric	 institution,	 or	 a
psychoanalytic	 school.	 He	 needs	 our	 sympathy,	 our	 love,	 our	 help.	 Instead	 of
giving	 him	 our	 sympathy	 and	 love,	 for	 centuries	 we	 have	 been	 giving	 him
punishment.	Man	has	committed	so	much	cruelty	behind	such	beautiful	names	as
order,	law,	justice.
The	new	man	will	not	have	any	jails	and	will	not	have	any	judges	and	will	not
have	any	legal	experts.	These	are	absolutely	unnecessary,	cancerous	growths	on
the	 body	 of	 society.	 There	 will	 certainly	 have	 to	 be	 sympathetic	 scientists;
meditative,	 compassionate	 beings,	 to	work	 out	why	 it	 happened	 that	 a	 certain
man	committed	rape:	is	he	really	responsible?	According	to	me,	on	no	account	is
he	 responsible.	 Either	 he	 has	 committed	 rape	 because	 of	 the	 priests	 and	 the
religions	 teaching	 celibacy,	 repression	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 --	 this	 is	 the
outcome	 of	 a	 repressive	 morality	 --	 or	 biologically	 he	 has	 hormones	 which
compel	him	to	commit	rape.
Although	you	are	living	in	a	modern	society,	most	of	you	are	not	contemporaries
because	you	are	not	aware	of	the	reality	that	science	goes	on	discovering.	Your
educational	 system	 prevents	 you	 from	 knowing	 it,	 your	 religions	 prevent	 you
from	knowing	it,	your	governments	prevent	you	from	knowing	it.
A	man	 is	 attracted	 to	 a	woman	and	 thinks	 that	 he	 is	 in	 love.	The	woman	also
thinks	 she	 is	 in	 love.	 But	 the	 scientific	 truth	 is	 that	 they	 both	 have	 certain
biological	 factors,	 certain	 hormones	 that	 attract	 each	 other.	 That's	 why	 it	 is
possible	to	change	the	sex	of	one	person	from	man	to	woman	or	from	woman	to
man	 just	by	changing	 the	hormonal	system.	A	good	 injection	of	hormones	and
you	are	full	of	love.
The	man	who	is	committing	rape	perhaps	has	more	hormones	than	those	moral
people	who	manage	 to	 live	with	one	woman	 for	 their	whole	 life,	 thinking	 that
they	are	moral.
The	 real	 fact	 is	 that	 their	 hormones	 are	 very	 weak;	 it	 is	 enough	 for	 their
hormones	to	be	satisfied	with	one	woman.	A	man	with	more	hormones	will	need
more	women;	so	will	be	the	case	with	a	woman.	It	is	not	a	question	of	morality,
it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 biology.	A	man	who	 commits	 rape	 needs	 all	 our	 sympathy,
needs	a	certain	operation	in	which	his	extra	hormones	are	removed,	and	he	will
cool	down,	calm	down	--	he	will	become	a	Gautam	Buddha.
To	 punish	 him	 is	 simply	 an	 exercise	 in	 stupidity.	 By	 punishing,	 you	 cannot
change	his	hormones.	Throwing	him	in	jail,	you	will	create	a	homosexual,	some
kind	of	pervert.	In	American	jails	they	have	done	a	survey:	thirty	percent	of	the
inmates	are	homosexuals.
That	 is	 according	 to	 their	 confession;	 we	 don't	 know	 how	 many	 have	 not
confessed.
Thirty	percent	is	not	a	small	number.	In	monasteries	the	number	is	bigger	--	fifty
percent,	 sixty	 percent.	 But	 the	 responsibility	 lies	 with	 our	 idiotic	 clinging	 to
religions	 which	 are	 out	 of	 date,	 which	 are	 not	 supported	 and	 nourished	 by
scientific	research.
The	 new	 commune	 of	 man	 will	 be	 based	 on	 science,	 not	 on	 superstition.	 If
somebody	does	 something	which	 is	harmful	 to	 the	commune	as	 such,	 then	his
body	has	 to	 be	 looked	 into;	 he	needs	 some	physiological	 change	or	 biological
change.	 His	 mind	 has	 to	 be	 looked	 into	 --	 perhaps	 he	 needs	 some
psychoanalysis.	The	deepest	possibility	is	that	neither	the	body	nor	the	mind	are
of	 much	 help;	 that	 means	 he	 needs	 a	 deep	 spiritual	 regeneration,	 a	 deep
meditative	cleansing.
Instead	of	courts,	we	should	have	meditative	centers	of	different	kinds,	so	every
unique	 individual	 can	 find	 his	 own	 way.	 And	 we	 will	 have	 --	 instead	 of	 law
experts,	who	are	simply	irrelevant:	they	are	parasites	sucking	our	blood.We	need
scientific	people	of	different	persuasions	 in	 the	courts,	because	somebody	may
have	a	chemical	defect,	somebody	may	have	a	biological	defect,	somebody	may
have	 a	 physiological	 defect.	 We	 need	 all	 these	 kinds	 of	 experts,	 of	 all
persuasions	 and	 schools	 of	 psychology,	 all	 types	 of	 meditators,	 and	 we	 can
transform	the	poor	people	who	have	been	victims	of	unknown	forces...	and	have
been	punished	by	us.	They	have	suffered	in	a	double	sense.
First,	 they	 are	 suffering	 from	an	unknown	biological	 force.	Secondly,	 they	 are
suffering	at	the	hands	of	your	judges,	who	are	nothing	but	butchers,	henchmen;
your	 advocates,	 all	 kinds	 of	 your	 law	 experts,	 your	 jailers	 --	 it	 is	 simply	 so
insane	 that	 future	 human	beings	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 believe	 it.	 It	 is	 almost	 the
same	with	the	past.
Just	the	other	day	there	was	a	report	from	South	India	that	a	woman	was	thought
to	be	having	intercourse	with	the	devil.	Now	the	devil	has	been	almost	dead	for
many	centuries;	suddenly	he	became	alive	in	that	small	village.	And	the	villagers
took	the	woman	to	the	priest	who	declared	that	she	should	be	hung	upside	down
from	 a	 tree	 and	 beaten:	 the	 devil	 is	 still	 inside	 her.	 Somebody	 informed	 the
police	of	the	nearby	town.
The	 police	 arrived,	 but	 the	 villagers	 were	 reluctant....	 Two	 hundred	 villagers
were	 standing,	 stopping	 the	 police,	 saying,	 "You	 cannot	 interfere	 with	 our
religious	 conceptions."	 And	 they	 were	 beating	 the	 woman	 --	 they	 killed	 her!
Until	 she	was	dead,	 they	were	not	satisfied.	They	could	not	 find	 the	devil,	but
they	killed	the	woman.
This	used	to	be	the	common	practice	all	over	the	world.	Mad	people	were	beaten
to	cure	their	madness;	people	who	were	schizophrenic,	who	were	thought	to	be
possessed	by	ghosts,	were	beaten	almost	 to	death	--	 this	was	 thought	 to	be	 the
treatment.	Millions	of	people	have	died	because	of	your	great	treatments.
Now	we	can	 simply	 say	 that	 those	people	were	barbarous,	 ignorant,	primitive.
The	 same	 will	 be	 said	 about	 us.	 I	 am	 already	 saying	 it:	 that	 your	 courts	 are
barbarous,	your	laws	are	barbarous.	The	very	idea	of	punishment	is	unscientific.
There	 is	 nobody	 in	 the	world	who	 is	 a	 criminal;	 everybody	 is	 sick,	 and	needs
sympathy	and	a	scientific	cure,	and	half	of	your	crimes	will	disappear.	First,	with
the	disappearance	of	private	property....	Private	property	creates	thieves,	dacoits,
pickpockets,	politicians,	priests.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	just	a	few	days	ago	a	cartoonist	was	put	into
jail	 in	 the	 contemporary,	 educated	 city	 of	 Madras,	 because	 he	 has	 printed	 a
cartoon	in	a	magazine	with	the	caption	that	the	man	who	looks	like	a	pickpocket
is	a	cabinet	minister;	and	the	man	who	looks	like	a	dacoit,	is	the	prime	minister.
There	were	two	men	in	the	cartoon.
Immediately,	he	was	caught	by	the	police	--	and	this	 is	called	democracy!	One
cannot	even	joke,	one	cannot	even	laugh.	He	has	not	named	anybody	--	but	all
your	 politicians	 are	 pickpockets,	 are	 dacoits.	 They	 also	 need	 psychiatric
treatment,	 they	also	need	sympathetic	psychiatric	nursing	homes.	They	have	 to
be	cured	of	their	politics.
Politics	is	a	disease.
Man	has	suffered	from	many	diseases	and	he	has	not	even	been	aware	that	they
are	diseases.	He	has	been	punishing	small	criminals	and	he	has	been	worshiping
great	 criminals.	Who	 is	Alexander	 the	Great?	 --	 a	great	 criminal;	he	murdered
people	on	a	mass	scale.	Adolf	Hitler	alone	killed	millions	of	people,	but	he	will
be	remembered	in	history	as	a	great	leader	of	man.
I	received	a	letter	from	the	president	of	the	Neo-Nazi	party	saying	that	I	should
stop	 speaking	 against	 Adolf	 Hitler	 because,	 "It	 hurts	 our	 religious	 feeling."	 I
said,	"My	God!"
I	had	been	receiving	letters	from	Hindus,	from	Mohammedans,	from	Christians,
from	Buddhists,	from	Jainas.	I	have	been	facing	hundreds	of	cases	in	courts	on
the	same	grounds,	that	I	have	hurt	somebody's	religious	feeling	--	but	I	had	never
even	 dreamt	 that	 to	 speak	 against	 Adolf	 Hitler	 was	 going	 to	 hurt	 someone's
religious	feelings.
And	the	president	of	Neo-Nazi	party	had	said,	"Adolf	Hitler,	to	us,	is	not	just	a
great	political	 leader,	he	is	also	the	reincarnation	of	the	ancient,	Old	Testament
prophet	Elijah.
Now	he	will	 be	 remembered	 in	 history	 as	 the	 great	 incarnation	of	 the	 prophet
Elijah	who	 killed	 forty-five	million	 people.	 Certainly	 it	 must	 have	 been	 done
according	to	the	will	of	God.	Who	are	the	people	you	read	about	in	history?
Napoleon	Bonaparte,	 Ivan	 the	Terrible,	Nadir	Shah,	Genghis	Khan,	Tamerlane
are	all	mass	scale	criminals.	But	their	crimes	are	so	big,	perhaps,	that	you	cannot
conceive....
They	have	killed	millions	of	people,	burned	millions	of	people	alive,	but	they	are
not	thought	of	as	criminals.
And	a	small	pickpocket,	who	takes	away	a	two	rupee	note	from	your	pocket	will
be	punished	by	the	court.	And	perhaps	the	two	rupee	note	that	you	were	carrying
was	 not	 authentic	 at	 all.	 But	 his	 mother	 is	 dying,	 and	 he	 has	 no	 money	 for
medicine,	and	I	cannot	say	that	he	is	a	criminal;	he	is	simply	a	kind-hearted	man
who	loves	his	mother.
Once	private	property	disappears....	And	in	a	commune	there	 is	going	to	be	no
private	property,	everything	belongs	to	all;	naturally,	stealing	will	disappear.	You
don't	steal	water	and	accumulate	it,	you	don't	steal	air.	A	commune	has	to	create
everything	 in	 such	 abundance	 that	 even	 the	 retarded	 person	 cannot	 think	 of
accumulating	 it.	What	 is	 the	point?	 It	 is	always	available,	 fresh.	Money	has	 to
disappear	from	society.	A	commune	does	not	need	money.	Your	needs	should	be
fulfilled	 by	 the	 commune.	 All	 have	 to	 produce,	 and	 all	 have	 to	 make	 the
commune	richer,	affluent,	accepting	the	fact	that	a	few	people	will	be	lazy.	But
there	is	no	harm	in	it.
In	every	family,	you	will	find	somebody	lazy.	Somebody	is	a	poet,	somebody	is
a	 painter,	 somebody	 simply	 goes	 on	 playing	 on	 his	 flute	 --	 but	 you	 love	 the
person.	A	certain	percentage	of	lazy	people	will	be	respectfully	allowed.	In	fact	a
commune	 that	 does	 not	 have	 lazy	 people	 will	 be	 a	 little	 less	 rich	 than	 other
communes	which	have	a	few	lazy	people	who	do	nothing	but	meditate,	who	do
nothing	but	go	on	playing	on	their	guitar	while	others	are	toiling	in	the	fields.	A
little	more	human	outlook	is	needed;	these	people	are	not	useless.	They	may	not
seem	to	be	productive	of	commodities,	but	 they	are	producing	a	certain	joyful,
cheerful	atmosphere.	Their	contribution	is	meaningful	and	significant.
With	 the	 disappearance	 of	money	 as	 a	means	 of	 exchange,	 many	 crimes	 will
disappear.
As	religions	disappear,	with	their	repressive	superstitions	and	moralities,	crimes
like	 rape,	 perversions	 like	 homosexuality,	 diseases	 like	 AIDS	 will	 become
unheard	of.	And	when	from	the	very	beginning	every	child	is	brought	up	with	a
reverence	for	life	--	reverence	for	the	trees	because	they	are	alive,	reverence	for
animals,	 reverence	 for	 birds	 --	 do	 you	 think	 such	 a	 child	 one	 day	 can	 be	 a
murderer?	It	will	be	almost	inconceivable.
And	 if	 life	 is	 joyous,	 full	 of	 songs	 and	 dances,	 do	 you	 think	 somebody	 will
desire	to	commit	suicide?	Ninety	percent	of	crimes	will	disappear	automatically;
only	 ten	 percent	 of	 crimes	 may	 remain,	 which	 are	 genetic,	 which	 need
hospitalization	--	but	not	jails,	prisons,	not	people	to	be	sentenced	to	death.	This
is	all	so	ugly,	so	inhuman,	so	insane.
The	new	commune,	the	new	man,	can	live	without	any	law,	without	any	order.
Love	will	be	his	law,	understanding	will	be	his	order.	Science	will	be,	in	every
difficult	situation,	his	last	resort.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	NOT	A	 POEM	OF	MY	OWN	TO	WRITE	 TO	YOU,	 SO	 I	WRITE
OTHERS.	 I	 HAVE	NOT	A	 SONG	OF	MY	OWN	TO	 SING	TO	YOU,	 SO	 I
SING	 OTHERS.	 I	 HAVE	 NOTHING	 TO	 GIVE	 TO	 YOU	 BUT	 MY	 OLD
DESIRES,	 FEARS,	 FAILURES,	 JEALOUSIES.	MY	HEART	ACHES,	 FOR	 I
WANT	TO	BE	ABLE	TO	GIVE	YOU
SOMETHING	 OF	ME,	 BUT	 THAT	 I	 AM	 STILL	 TRYING	 TO	 FIND.	 THE
HEART
ONLY	KNOWS,	MY	BELOVED.	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Kendra,	if	you	do	not	have	a	poem	of	your	own,	there	is	no	need	to	write	others.
Send	me	blank	sheets	of	paper.	They	will	 show	much	more	of	your	heart	 than
words	which	are	borrowed.
The	 only	 book	 in	 the	 world	 that	 I	 can	 call	 holy	 is	 a	 book	 Sufis	 have	 been
carrying	for	almost	twelve	centuries.	The	first	man	who	had	it	used	to	read	it	by
locking	 his	 doors,	 closing	 his	 windows;	 his	 disciples	 were	 always	 puzzled,
intrigued.	They	tried	in	every	possible	way	--	even	sometimes	they	went	up	on
the	roof,	removed	a	tile	--	just	to	see	what	is	written	in	that	book,	because	that
old	master	 never	 used	 to	 open	 that	 book	 before	 anybody.	 He	 used	 to	 keep	 it
covered	 in	 beautiful	 cloth,	 hiding	 it	 under	 his	 pillow,	 so	 even	 while	 he	 was
asleep	nobody	could	manage	to	get	to	the	book.
It	created	more	and	more	 temptation.	And	the	day	he	died,	people	were	not	so
concerned	with	his	death;	 they	were	more	concerned	 to	 take	out	 the	book	first
and	see	what	was	there	--	"As	far	as	he	is	concerned,	he	is	dead;	he	can	wait	a
little	for	the	last	funeral	rites,	but	let	us	see	what	is	in	that	book."	And	they	were
shocked	and	surprised,	the	book	was	empty.	Between	those	two	covers	there	was
not	a	single	word,	just	empty	pages.
They	went	 through	all	 the	pages,	 there	were	almost	 three	hundred	pages.	They
thought	there	must	be	something	--	that	man	was	very	clever	and	cunning,	so	he
must	be	hiding	it	somewhere.	But	there	was	nothing	in	the	book.
And	the	old	man	was	really	very	clever,	he	had	not	died.	He	just	opened	his	one
eye,	and	said,	"Are	you	satisfied?	I	am	going	to	die,	don't	be	worried.	I	was	just
waiting	to	see	the	reaction."
He	laughed	and	he	died.	But	he	had	told	to	his	chief	disciple	just	the	day	before,
"You	will	be	the	possessor	of	the	book,	because	it	is	the	holiest	of	the	holies.	It	is
just	 the	 silence	 and	 wordless	 interiority	 of	 your	 being.	 For	 twelve	 centuries
continuously,	the	book	has	passed	from	hand	to	hand,	from	master	to	disciple."
One	 of	 the	 Sufis	 who	 is	 very	 well-known	 in	 the	 West,	 Idries	 Shah,	 tried	 to
publish	the	book,	but	no	publisher	was	ready.	Every	publisher	 looked	here	and
there	and	they	said,
"But	there	is	nothing	to	publish."
Just	to	satisfy	them,	he	has	written	a	few	lines	as	an	introduction	to	the	book;	the
history	 of	 the	 book	 for	 twelve	 centuries...	 the	 beginning,	 how	 it	 has	 been
transferred	from	hand	to	hand,	how	it	has	been	worshiped,	and	how	it	has	been
read	 for	 twelve	 centuries	 by	 great	masters.	 Finally	 it	 has	 been	 published	 by	 a
daring	publisher,	thinking	that	people	may	at	least	use	it	as	a	notebook.
The	 Western	 mind	 cannot	 understand	 a	 few	 things,	 a	 few	 things	 which	 are
absolutely	Eastern.	Those	who	understand	have	been	angry	at	Idries	Shah,	 that
he	 compromised.	 I	 myself	 am	 angry	 at	 the	 man.	 There	 was	 no	 need	 to
compromise,	the	book	could	have	remained	unpublished.	But	just	 to	publish	it,
he	wrote	a	few	pages	of	introduction,	and	destroyed	the	beauty	of	it,	the	whole
sanctity	of	it.
Kendra,	 if	 you	 cannot	 sing	your	 own	 song,	 be	 silent.	Your	 silence	 is	 far	more
valuable	than	the	greatest	song	which	you	have	borrowed	from	somebody	else.	It
will	not	be	alive,	it	will	not	have	a	heartbeat.	It	will	not	be	breathing.
Your	silence	will	be	breathing.
Your	silence	will	have	a	heartbeat	to	it.
Your	silence	will	be	alive.
And	don't	offer	me	dead	things.	You	say,	"I	have	nothing	to	give	to	you	but	my
old	desires,	fears,	failures."	But	you	don't	give	them	either.	People	just	talk.	They
talk;	they	want	to	give	their	fears,	their	failures,	their	jealousies,	their	desires,	but
nothing	 reaches	 to	me.	 I	 go	 on	waiting	 and	waiting,	 and	 they	 go	 on	 enjoying
their	 jealousies,	and	their	desires.	If	you	don't	want	 to	give,	don't	say	it.	 If	you
want	to	give,	then	give.	And	you	are	not	giving	any	treasures.	You	are	giving	all
kinds	of	poisons.
But	 just	 the	 idea	 that	 you	want	 to	 give	 is	 in	 itself	 beautiful.	And	 I	 don't	 care
whether	you	give	poisons	or	 treasures,	but	give.	 Just	don't	go	on	 talking	about
giving.
You	say,	"My	heart	aches,	for	I	want	to	be	able	to	give	you	something	of	me."
Kendra,	 you	must	 be	 very	miserly...	 something	 of	 you?	 not	 even	 the	 totality?
What	will	you	give	to	me?	just	a	hand,	which	will	become	a	burden	to	me?
There	 is	 only	 one	 giving,	 it	 is	 never	 partial.	And	 you	 cannot	 give	 yourself	 in
installments,	 something	 today	 and	 something	 tomorrow...	 slowly,	 slowly
gathering	courage,	cutting	yourself	into	slices.	You	are	not	a	loaf	of	a	bread;	you
are	a	living	being.	Either	you	give	yourself	in	totality,	or	you	don't	give.
This	is	not	the	case	only	with	you,	Kendra,	it	is	the	case	with	many	people.	They
go	on	talking	beautifully,	"My	heart	aches".	I	suspect.
If	you	have	a	headache,	I	can	believe	it.	But	the	heartache	is	a	very	deep,	a	very
profound	feeling.	People	know	heart	failures,	people	don't	know	heartache.	You
can	find	so	many	medicines	for	headache,	but	have	you	heard	of	any	medicine
for	heartache?	It	is	just	poetry,	borrowed.
"My	heart	aches,	for	I	want	to	be	able	to	give	you	something."
First	 you	 want	 to	 be	 able....	 Can't	 you	 give	 yourself	 as	 you	 are	 right	 now	 --
because	I	don't	expect	from	you	something	very	refined,	cultured,	a	diamond	cut
with	great	art	and	polished.	No,	I	love	you	as	you	are	raw,	wild,	but	simple	and
just	yourself.	Don't	wait	for	becoming	able;	you	will	never	become	able.
But	 this	 too	 has	 been	 your	 conditioning	 by	 the	 society,	 that	 you	 can	 offer
yourself	 only	 when	 you	 are	 qualified.	 But	 in	 this	 temple	 of	 love,	 no
qualifications	are	needed.	 Just	 the	 longing	 to	give	 is	enough	qualification.	 Just
give	 yourself,	 and	 forget	 all	 about	 it.	 Don't	 remember	 that	 you	 have	 given
yourself,	and	don't	remind	me	again	and	again,	"Listen,	I	have	given	myself	 to
you."
Give	yourself	and	forget	the	whole	matter.	Giving	should	be	simple	--	so	simple
that	no	record	should	be	kept	of	it,	because	you	are	not	a	kind	of	income	that	a
record	has	to	be	kept.	Then	income	tax	officers	will	come,	and	I	will	have	to	be
income	 taxed,	 because	 so	 many	 people	 are	 coming	 to	 me	 and	 offering
themselves	 to	me	 --	 their	 jealousies,	 their	 desires,	 their	 angers	 and	 their	 fears.
And	my	income	is	so	much,	that	I	must	be	taxed....
You	simply	give!	I	have	never	paid	any	tax,	and	I	am	not	going	to	pay	any	tax,
ever.
When	I	was	a	professor	in	the	university,	and	my	income	came	to	the	point	that
beyond	it,	 it	would	become	taxable,	I	informed	the	university,	"Now	my	salary
has	come	to	the	full	point."
They	said,	"What	do	you	mean?	Within	the	next	month,	you	are	going	to	have	an
increment."
I	 said,	 "Forget	 all	 about	 it,	 I	 will	 not	 take	 any	 increment	 because	 with	 that
increment	comes	taxation.	And	I	hate	only	one	thing	in	life,	that	is	income	tax."
And	I	never	allowed	them.	They	were	very	much	surprised;	the	vice-chancellor
tried	 to	 persuade	 me,	 even	 the	 clerks,	 the	 cashiers,	 said,	 "Look,	 this	 is	 very
crazy;	what	will	people	think	if	they	hear	about	it?	The	income	tax	is	going	to	be
very	little,	and	if	you	stop	taking	increments	then	your	salary	will	remain	stuck
always	 at	 this	point.	And	you	are	 so	young	you	can	 reach	 to	 the	 salary	of	 the
vice-chancellor	without	any	trouble	just	by	your	seniority."
I	 said,	 "I	 am	 not	 going	 anywhere.	 Just	 keep	 it	 at	 this	 point,	 because	 above	 it
comes	income	tax."
Since	then,	my	income	is	of	a	totally	different	kind	--	fears,	anxieties,	tensions,
anguish;	these	are	not	taxable.	Why	should	you	be	worried	first	to	become	able
to	give?	Whatever	you	are,	as	you	are...	I	don't	put	any	conditions	on	anybody.
My	 love	 is	 unconditional,	 and	 my	 acceptance	 is	 without	 asking	 you	 to	 be
anything	 other	 than	 you	 are.	 In	 this	 relaxed	 attitude,	 the	meeting	 and	merging
between	the	master	and	the	disciple	happens;	there	is	no	other	way.
The	rabbi	was	distressed	at	the	lack	of	generosity	amongst	his	congregation,	and
he	prayed	that	the	rich	should	give	more	charity	to	the	poor.
"And	has	your	prayer	been	answered?"	asked	his	wife.
"Half	of	it	was,"	replied	the	rabbi.	"The	poor	are	willing	to	accept."
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	am	willing	to	accept.	Now	it	is	a	question	of	you	--
are	you	willing	to	give,	or	are	you	first	waiting	to	become	able	to	give?	If	I	am
ready	to	accept	right	now,	why	waste	time,	and	why	wait	for	tomorrow?
Giving	yourself	will	be	such	a	relaxation,	such	a	transformation,	such	a	joy,	that
you	cannot	conceive	it;	you	can	only	experience	if	you	go	through	the	gesture	of
giving.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	You	need	a	divine	discontent
24	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705240
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN25
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
87
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
TO	ME,	THE	CONCEPT	OF	LOYALTY	HAS	OVERTONES	OF	DUTY	AND
HONOR	AND	BELIEF	--	ALL	OF	WHICH	REPRESENT	STATIC,
UNQUESTIONING	ATTITUDES	THAT	ARE	ROOTED	IN	OUTMODED
SENTIMENTALITY.	I	LOVE	AND	TRUST	YOU	AS	MY	MASTER,	AND	I
CANNOT	 IMAGINE	 THE	 REST	 OF	 MY	 LIFE	 HAVING	 ANY
SIGNIFICANCE
EXCEPT	 THAT	 IT	 BE	 IN	 THE	 SERVICE	 OF	 THAT	 LOVE	 AND	 TRUST.
BUT	THAT
IS	NOT	MY	BEING	loyal:	IT'S	SOMETHING	I	CONSCIOUSLY	AFFIRM	IN
MY
LIFE,	 MOMENT	 TO	 MOMENT.	 WOULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 TALK	 ON
LOYALTY?
Maneesha,	 one	 very	 fundamental	 thing	 has	 always	 to	 be	 remembered:	man	 is
very	 clever	 in	 creating	 pseudo-values.	 The	 real	 values	 demand	 your	 totality,
demand	your	whole	being;	the	pseudo-values	are	very	cheap.	They	look	like	the
real,	but	they	don't	demand	you	in	your	totality	--	just	a	superficial	formality.
For	example,	in	place	of	love,	trust,	we	have	created	a	false	value:	loyalty	--	the
loyal	person	 is	only	superficially	concerned	with	 love.	He	goes	 through	all	 the
gestures	of	love,	but	he	means	nothing	by	them;	his	heart	stays	out	of	his	formal
gestures.
A	slave	is	loyal,	but	do	you	think	anybody	who	is	a	slave,	who	has	been	reduced
in	his	humanity,	whose	whole	pride	and	dignity	has	been	taken	away,	can	love
the	 person	 who	 has	 harmed	 him	 so	 deeply?	 He	 hates	 him,	 and	 if	 the	 chance
arises,	he	can	kill	him.	But	on	the	surface,	he	will	remain	loyal	--	he	has	to.	It	is
not	out	of	his	joy,	it	is	out	of	fear;	it	is	not	out	of	love,	it	is	out	of	a	conditioned
mind	which	says	that	you	have	to	be	loyal	to	your	master.	It	is	the	loyalty	of	the
dog	to	his	master.
Love	needs	a	more	total	response;	it	comes	not	out	of	duty,	but	out	of	your	own
heartbeats,	out	of	your	own	experience	of	joy,	out	of	the	desire	to	share	it.
Loyalty	 is	 something	 ugly,	 but	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 it	 has	 been	 a	 very
respectable	 value	 because	 society	 has	 enslaved	 people	 in	 different	 ways.	 The
wife	 is	 supposed	 to	 be	 loyal	 to	 the	 husband,	 to	 the	 point	 that,	 in	 this	 country,
millions	of	women	have	died	with	their	husband's	death,	jumping	in	the	funeral
pyre	 alive,	 and	 burning	 themselves	 to	 death.	 It	 was	 so	 respectable	 that	 any
woman	who	could	not	do	it	had	to	live	a	very	condemned	life.
She	 became	 almost	 an	 outcast;	 she	 was	 treated	 only	 as	 a	 servant	 in	 her	 own
family.	 It	was	concluded	 that	because	 she	could	not	die	with	her	husband,	 she
was	not	loyal	to	him.
In	fact,	just	think	of	it	the	other	way	around:	not	a	single	man	has	jumped	into
the	funeral	pyre	of	his	wife.	Nobody	has	raised	the	question,	"Does	it	mean	that
no	 husband	 has	 ever	 been	 loyal	 to	 his	 wife?"	 But	 it	 is	 a	 society	 of	 double
standards:	one	standard	is	for	the	master,	the	owner,	the	possessor,	and	the	other
standard	is	for	the	slave.
Love	is	a	dangerous	experience,	because	you	are	possessed	by	something	which
is	bigger	 than	you,	and	it	 is	not	controllable	--	you	cannot	produce	it	on	order.
Once	it	is	gone,	there	is	no	way	to	bring	it	back;	all	that	you	can	do	is	to	pretend,
be	a	hypocrite.
Loyalty	is	a	totally	different	matter;	it	 is	manufactured	by	your	own	mind,	it	 is
not	something	beyond	you.	It	is	a	training	in	a	particular	culture	--	just	like	any
other	training.
You	 start	 acting;	 and	 by	 and	 by,	 you	 start	 believing	 your	 own	 acting.	 Loyalty
demands	that	you	should	be	always,	in	life	or	in	death,	devoted	to	the	person	--
whether	 your	 heart	 is	 willing	 for	 it	 or	 not.	 It	 is	 a	 psychological	 way	 of
enslavement.
Love	brings	freedom.
Loyalty	brings	slavery.
On	the	surface,	they	both	look	alike;	deep	down,	they	are	just	the	very	opposite	-
-
diametrically	opposite.	Loyalty	is	acting,	you	have	been	educated	for	it.	Love	is
wild,	 its	 whole	 beauty	 is	 in	 its	 wildness.	 It	 comes	 like	 a	 breeze	 with	 great
fragrance,	 fills	 your	 heart,	 and	 suddenly	 where	 there	 was	 a	 desert	 there	 is	 a
garden	full	of	flowers.	But	you	don't	know	from	where	it	comes,	and	you	don't
know	that	there	is	no	way	to	bring	it;	it	comes	on	its	own	and	remains	as	long	as
existence	 wills	 it.	 And	 just	 as	 it	 had	 come	 one	 day	 as	 a	 stranger,	 as	 a	 guest,
suddenly	one	day	it	is	gone.	There	is	no	way	to	cling	to	it,	no	way	to	hold	it.
Society	 cannot	 depend	 on	 such	 unpredictable,	 unreliable	 experiences.	 It	wants
guarantees,	securities;	hence,	it	has	removed	love	from	life	completely	--	it	has
placed	marriage	in	its	place.	Marriage	knows	loyalty,	loyalty	to	the	husband,	and
because	it	is	formal,	it	is	within	your	hands...	but	it	is	nothing	compared	to	love,
it	is	not	even	a	dew	drop	of	the	ocean	that	love	is.
But	 society	 is	 very	 happy	with	 it	 because	 it	 is	 reliable.	The	husband	 can	 trust
you,	 can	 trust	 that	 tomorrow	also	 you	will	 be	 as	 loyal	 as	 you	 are	 today.	Love
cannot	be	trusted.
And	the	strangest	phenomenon	is	that	love	is	the	greatest	trust	--	but	it	cannot	be
trusted.
In	the	moment,	it	is	total;	but	the	next	moment	remains	open.	It	may	grow	within
you,	it	may	evaporate	from	you.	The	husband	wants	a	wife	who	is	a	slave	for	her
whole	 life.	He	cannot	depend	on	 love;	he	has	 to	create	something	 looking	 like
love,	but	manufactured	by	man's	mind.
It	is	not	only	in	the	relationship	of	love,	but	in	other	fields	of	life,	also.	Loyalty
has	been	given	great	 respect	because	 it	destroys	 intelligence:	 the	soldier	has	 to
be	loyal	 to	 the	nation....	The	man	who	dropped	atom	bombs	on	Hiroshima	and
Nagasaki	--	you	cannot	call	him	responsible	for	 it,	he	was	simply	fulfilling	his
duty.	He	was	ordered,	and	he	was	loyal	to	his	superiors;	that	is	the	whole	training
of	armies.
For	years	they	train	you,	so	that	you	become	almost	incapable	of	revolt.	Even	if
you	see	that	what	is	being	asked	from	you	is	absolutely	wrong,	still	your	training
has	gone	so	deep	to	say,	"Yes,	sir,"	that	you	will	do	it.	I	cannot	conceive	that	the
man	who	 dropped	 the	 bombs	 on	Hiroshima	 and	Nagasaki	was	 a	machine.	He
also	had	a	heart	just	like	you,	he	also	had	his	wife	and	children,	his	old	mother
and	father...	he	was	as	much	a	human	being	as	you	are	--	with	a	difference.	He
was	trained	to	follow	orders	without	questioning,	and	when	the	order	was	given,
he	simply	followed	it.
I	have	thought	again	and	again	about	his	mind.	Is	it	conceivable	that	he	did	not
think	 that	 this	bomb	 is	going	 to	destroy	almost	 two	hundred	 thousand	people?
Can't	he	say,	"No"?
Is	it	not	better	to	be	shot	by	the	general	for	not	following	the	order,	than	to	kill
two	hundred	thousand	people?	Perhaps	the	idea	never	occured	to	him.
The	army	works	in	such	a	way	as	to	create	loyalty	--	it	starts	with	small	things.
One	wonders	why	every	soldier	for	years	has	to	go	for	parades	and	follow	stupid
orders	 --	 left	 turn,	 right	 turn,	 go	 backwards,	 go	 forwards	 --	 for	 hours,	 for	 no
purpose	 at	 all.	 There	 is	 a	 hidden	 purpose	 in	 it.	 His	 intelligence	 is	 being
destroyed.	He	is	being	turned	into	an	automaton,	into	a	robot.	So	when	the	order
comes,	"Left	turn,"	the	mind	does	not	ask,
"Why?"	If	somebody	else	says	to	you,	"Left	turn,"	you	are	going	to	ask,	"What
nonsense	is	this?	Why	should	I	left	turn?	I'm	going	right!"	But	the	soldier	is	not
supposed	 to	 doubt,	 to	 enquire;	 he	 has	 simply	 to	 follow.	 This	 is	 his	 basic
conditioning	for	loyalty.
It	 is	good	 for	 the	kings	and	 for	 the	generals	 that	armies	should	be	 loyal	 to	 the
point	that	they	function	like	machines,	not	like	men.	It	is	comfortable	for	parents
that	 their	 children	 are	 loyal,	 because	 a	 child	who	 is	 a	 rebel	 is	 a	 problem.	The
parents	may	be	wrong,	and	the	child	may	be	right,	but	he	has	to	be	obedient	to
the	parents	 --	 that	 is	 part	 of	 the	 training	of	 the	old	man	 that	 has	 existed	up	 to
now.
I	teach	you	the	new	man	in	whom	loyalty	has	no	place,	but	instead	intelligence,
enquiry,	a	capacity	 to	say	"No."	To	me,	unless	you	are	capable	of	saying	"No"
your	 "Yes;"	 is	 meaningless	 --	 your	 "Yes"	 is	 just	 recorded	 on	 a	 gramophone
record.	You	cannot	do	anything;	you	have	to	say,	"Yes"	the	"No"	simply	does	not
arise	in	you.
Life	and	civilization	would	have	been	totally	different	if	we	had	trained	people
to	 have	 more	 intelligence.	 So	 many	 wars	 would	 not	 have	 happened	 because
people	would	 have	 asked,	 "What	 is	 the	 reason?	Why	 should	we	 kill	 people	 --
people	who	are	innocent?"	But	they	are	loyal	to	one	country	and	you	are	loyal	to
another	country,	and	both	the	countries'
politicians	are	fighting	and	sacrificing	their	people.	If	the	politicians	love	to	fight
so	much	they	can	have	a	wrestling	match,	and	people	can	enjoy	it	just	like	any
football	match.
But	the	kings	and	the	politicians,	the	presidents	and	the	prime	ministers	don't	go
to	war.
The	simple	people,	who	have	nothing	to	do	with	killing	others,	go	to	war	to	kill
and	to	be	killed.	They	are	rewarded	for	their	loyalty;	they	are	given	the	Victoria
Cross	or	other	kinds	of	awards	--	for	being	inhuman,	for	being	unintelligent,	for
being	mechanical.
Maneesha,	you	asked	me,	"To	me,	the	concept	of	loyalty	has	overtones	of	duty,
and	honor,	and	belief."
It	has	not	only	overtones.	It	is	nothing	but	the	combination	of	all	these	diseases	-
-	belief,	duty,	respectability.	They	all	are	nourishment	for	your	ego.	They	are	all
against	your	spiritual	growth,	but	they	are	in	favor	of	the	vested	interests.
The	priests	don't	want	you	to	ask	any	question	about	their	belief	system	because
they	know	that	they	have	no	answers	to	give.	All	belief	systems	are	so	false	that
if	questioned	they	will	fall	down.	Unquestioned,	they	create	great	religions	with
millions	of	people	in	their	folds.
Now	the	Catholic	pope	has	fifty	million	people	under	him,	and	out	of	these	fifty
million	people,	not	a	single	one	enquires,	"How	can	a	virgin	girl	give	birth	to	a
child?"	That	would	be	sacrilegious!	Out	of	fifty	million	people,	not	a	single	one
asks,	 "What	 is	 the	 evidence	 that	 Jesus	 is	 the	 only	 begotten	 son	 of	 God?"	 --
anybody	can	claim	 it.	 "What	 is	 the	 evidence	 that	 Jesus	has	 saved	people	 from
misery?"	--	he	could	not	save	himself.	But	questions	like	this	are	embarrassing,
and	 they	 are	 simply	 not	 raised.	 Even	 God	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 hypothesis	 which
religious	people	have	been	 trying	 to	prove	 for	 thousands	of	years,	 all	kinds	of
proofs	 --	 but	 all	 bogus,	 with	 no	 substance,	 no	 support	 from	 existence.	 But
nobody	asks	the	question.
From	the	very	first	day	of	life,	people	are	being	trained	to	be	loyal	to	the	belief
system	in	which	they	were	born.	It	is	convenient	for	the	priests	to	exploit	you,	it
is	convenient	for	the	politicians	to	exploit	you,	it	is	convenient	for	husbands	to
exploit	wives,	for	parents	to	exploit	children,	for	teachers	to	exploit	students.	For
every	vested	 interest,	 loyalty	 is	simply	a	necessity.	But	 it	 reduces	 the	whole	of
humanity	into	retardedness.
It	does	not	allow	questioning,	it	does	not	allow	doubt,	it	does	not	allow	people	to
be	 intelligent.	 And	 a	man	 who	 is	 not	 capable	 of	 doubting,	 of	 questioning,	 of
saying,	"No,"
when	 he	 feels	 that	 the	 thing	 is	 wrong,	 has	 fallen	 below	 humanity	 --	 he	 has
become	a	subhuman	animal.
"...	 all	 of	 which	 represent	 static,	 unquestioning	 attitudes	 that	 are	 rooted	 in
outmoded	sentimentality.
"I	 love	 and	 trust	You	 as	my	Master,	 and	 I	 cannot	 imagine	 the	 rest	 of	my	 life
having	any	significance	except	that	it	be	in	the	service	of	that	love	and	trust."
If	love	is	asked,	then	it	becomes	loyalty.	If	love	is	given	without	being	asked,	if
it	is	your	free	gift.	Then	it	raises	your	consciousness.
If	 trust	 is	 asked	you	 are	being	 enslaved	but	 if	 a	 trust	 arises	 in	you,	 something
superhuman	is	growing	within	your	heart.
The	difference	 is	very	small,	but	of	 tremendous	 importance.	Asked	or	ordered,
love	 and	 trust	 both	 become	 false.	 When	 they	 arise	 on	 their	 own,	 they	 have
immense	intrinsic	value.	They	do	not	make	you	a	slave,	they	make	you	a	master
of	yourself,	because	it	is	your	love,	it	is	your	trust.	You	are	following	your	own
heart.	You	are	not	following	somebody	else,	you	are	not	being	forced	to	follow.
Out	of	your	freedom	is	your	love,	out	of	your	dignity	is	your	trust,	and	they	are
both	going	to	make	you	richer	human	beings.
That	is	my	idea	of	the	new	man.	He	will	love,	but	he	will	not	allow	love	to	be
ordered.
He	 will	 trust,	 but	 he	 will	 trust	 according	 to	 himself	 --	 not	 according	 to	 any
scriptures,	not	according	to	any	social	structure,	not	according	to	any	priest,	not
according	to	any	politician.
To	live	your	life	according	to	your	own	heart,	following	its	beat,	going	into	the
unknown	just	 like	an	eagle	 flying	across	 the	sun	 in	utter	 freedom,	knowing	no
limits...	 it	 is	 not	 ordered.	 It	 is	 its	 own	 joy.	 It	 is	 the	 exercise	 of	 one's	 own
spirituality.
"But	that	is	not	my	being	loyal."
Certainly.	I	would	not	like	anybody	to	be	loyal	to	me,	because	I	cannot	destroy
you,	and	I	cannot	take	away	your	dignity.	I	am	here	to	crown	you	with	dignity,	to
help	you	achieve	your	potential	to	its	fullest,	to	make	you	a	master	of	your	own
destiny.	I	cannot	ask	loyalty	from	you,	I	cannot	ask	anything	--	neither	love,	nor
trust,	nor	 loyalty.	But	 if	 love	arises	 in	you,	 trust	grows	 in	you,	 that	 is	a	 totally
different	phenomenon.	The	whole	credit	goes	to	you;	it	has	nothing....	As	far	as	I
am	 concerned	 you	 cannot	 disappoint	me,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 I	 am	 not
asking	any	loyalty.	If	you	fail	in	your	love,	if	you	fail	in	your	trust,	you	are	not
disappointing	me,	you	are	disappointing	yourself;	you	are	not	betraying	me,	you
are	betraying	your	own	higher	values.
This	is	a	totally	different	approach,	but	this	is	the	way	of	the	new	man.	And	the
new	man	is	the	only	hope	for	the	future.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
LATELY	 I	 FEEL	 MY	 LIFE	 HAS	 COME	 TO	 A	 PEAK.	 LIVING	 IN	 YOUR
PRESENCE
IS	 SUCH	 A	 PRECIOUS	 AND	 DELICIOUS	 GIFT.	 EVERY	 MOMENT	 IS
BECOMING
SO	 JOYFUL	 AND	 CONTENTED,	 BUT	 THEN	 OFTEN	 THE	 FEAR	 OF
DEATH
COMES	 UP	 INTENSE	 AND	 STRONG	 AND	 THE	 FEAR	 OF	 HAVING	 TO
LEAVE
ALL	 THIS	 BEAUTY,	 THIS	 FRIENDSHIP,	 AND	 LOVE.	 YOU	 KEEP	 ON
TELLING
US	LATELY	THAT	WE	DON'T	HAVE	MUCH	TIME	LEFT	BEFORE	THIS
WORLD
FINISHES.	 HOW	 IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 TO	 RELAX	 IN	 THIS	 CERTAINTY	 OF
DEATH?
Sadhan,	 first	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 relax	only	when	death	 is	 a	 certainty.	Relaxing	 is
difficult	when	things	are	uncertain.	If	you	know	that	you	are	going	to	die	today,
all	fear	of	death	will	disappear.	What	is	the	point	of	wasting	time?	You	have	one
day	to	live:	live	as	intensely	as	possible,	live	as	totally	as	possible.
It	actually	happened	 in	a	man's	 life....	His	doctor	 told	him,	"You	have	only	six
months	more	 to	 live,	not	a	 single	day	more,	 so	 if	you	want	 to	 finish	anything,
finish	it.	If	you	have	wanted	to	do	anything,	do	it."
The	man	was	very	rich,	and	he	always	had	an	idea	to	go	around	the	world	to	visit
all	 the	 beautiful	 places,	 but	 there	 were	 so	 many	 problems	 that	 he	 was
continuously	 postponing	 it.	 Now	 there	 was	 no	 time	 to	 postpone.	 He	 ordered
beautiful	clothes	to	be	made	for	him....
People	 had	 never	 known	 him	 so	 extravagant:	 he	was	 eating	 the	 best	 food,	 he
purchased	the	best	house	in	the	town,	he	closed	all	his	businesses.	What	was	the
need	to	keep	them?
For	six	months	he	had	more	than	enough	--	he	could	live	like	a	king.
He	 went	 around	 the	 world,	 visiting	 all	 the	 beautiful	 places,	 all	 the	 beautiful
people	of	 the	world.	 In	 fact,	he	simply	 forgot	 to	die.	By	 the	 time	he	was	back
home,	six	months	had	passed	a	long	time	before.	He	went	to	the	doctor	to	thank
him.
The	 doctor	 said,	 "Are	 you	 still	 alive?	 How	 did	 you	 manage	 --	 because	 the
disease	was	such	that	you	were	going	to	die	within	six	months."
The	man	 said,	 "Once	 it	 became	 certain	 that	 I	was	 going	 to	 die,	 death	was	 no
longer	a	problem	but	a	certainty.	I	had	six	months	to	live,	so	I	wanted	to	live	as
multidimensionally	 as	 possible.	 And	 by	 living	 so	 totally	 and	 so	 intensely,
perhaps	I	forgot	to	die	at	the	right	time."
The	doctor	 checked	him	 --	his	disease	had	disappeared.	These	 six	months	had
been	of	such	relaxed,	deep,	joyful	enjoyment	that	the	disease	had	to	disappear!
So	 the	 first	 thing,	 Sadhan:	The	 certainty	 of	 death	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 fortunate
things.	And	death	has	never	been	so	certain	--	so	certain	for	the	whole	humanity.
In	fact,	people	should	stop	creating	war	materials.	Instead	of	fighting	with	their
neighbors,	they	should	start	singing	and	dancing	with	them.	The	time	is	so	short,
you	cannot	afford	to	fight.
People	should	forget	all	their	differences	of	religion,	and	Communism,	Socialism
and	Fascism.	All	these	differences	are	good	when	you	have	enough	time	--	but
time	 is	 very	 short.	 You	 cannot	 afford	 all	 these	 differences	 of	 being	 Christian,
Hindu,	Mohammedan.
Just	 the	 shortage	 of	 time	 and	 the	 certainty	 of	 a	 global	 death	 can	 bring	 a
transformation.
Perhaps	you	may	find	yourself	in	the	same	position	as	this	man,	that	the	world
stops	 being	 divided	 into	 nations,	 being	 divided	 into	 religions,	 continuously
fighting	and	we	start,	for	the	first	time,	enjoying	this	beautiful	planet	together.
Death	may	not	come.	death	cannot	come	to	people	who	live	very	intensely	and
very	totally.	And	even	if	it	comes,	those	people	who	have	lived	totally,	welcome
it	 because	 it	 is	 a	 great	 relief.	They	 are	 tired	of	 living,	 they	 lived	 so	 totally,	 so
intensely,	so	death	comes	like	a	friend.	Just	as	night	comes	after	the	whole	day's
hard	work	as	 a	great	 relaxation,	 as	 a	beautiful	 sleep,	 so	does	death.	Death	has
nothing	ugly	about	it;	you	cannot	find	anything	cleaner.
You	are	asking,	"Lately	I	feel	my	life	has	come	to	a	peak."
Remember,	there	are	peaks	beyond	peaks	--	just	look	ahead.	Don't	get	satisfied
with	 what	 you	 have	 achieved.	 You	 need	 a	 divine	 discontentment.	 Every
achievement	 should	 become	 a	 deep	 longing	 for	 something	more,	 and	 greater.
And	there	are	peaks	beyond	peaks,	unending,	skies	beyond	skies.	It	 is	 just	 that
you	need	strong	wings.
It	is	good	that	you	are	feeling	you	have	come	to	the	highest	peak,	but	don't	make
it	the	end	of	your	journey.	Make	it	the	beginning	of	a	new	journey.	Every	peak
has	to	be	made	the	beginning	of	a	new	journey	--	a	search	for	a	higher	peak.
"Living	in	Your	presence	is	such	a	precious	and	delicious	gift.	Every	moment	is
becoming	so	joyful	and	contented,	but	then	often	the	fear	of	death	comes	up."
That	 means	 your	 joy,	 your	 blissfulness,	 your	 contentedness	 is	 not	 total	 --	 it
leaves	 spaces,	 loopholes,	 from	which	 the	 fear	 of	 death	 comes	 in.	 The	 fear	 of
death	simply	shows....
Dance	a	little	faster,	live	a	little	faster.
I	have	never	forgotten...	in	Ahmedabad	I	used	to	stay	at	Jayantibhai's	house.	We
had	to	cross	a	bridge,	and	as	the	bridge	came	near	he	would	start	driving	faster,
because	there	was	a	big	board	by	the	side	of	the	bridge	advertising	Gold	Spot.	It
said,	"Live	a	little	hot,	sip	a	Gold	Spot."
I	 asked	 Jayantibhai,	 "What	 is	 the	 matter?	 Suddenly,	 on	 this	 bridge,	 you	 start
going	fast."
He	said,	"Looking	at	that	board,	`Live	a	little	hot,'	I	start	going	fast!"
If	the	fear	of	death	comes	in,	that	means	there	are	a	few	loopholes	which	are	not
filled	with	living.	So	those	fears	of	death	are	very	indicative	and	helpful	--	show
you	that	your	dance	has	 to	go	a	 little	 faster,	 that	you	have	 to	burn	 the	 torch	of
your	life	from	both	ends	together.
Dance	so	fast	that	the	dancer	disappears,	and	only	the	dance	remains.
Then	it	is	not	possible	for	any	fear	of	death	to	visit	you.
"And	the	fear	of	having	to	leave	all	this	beauty,	this	friendship,	and	love."
If	you	are	totally	herenow,	who	cares	about	tomorrow?	Tomorrow	will	take	care
of	itself.
Jesus	is	right	when	he	prays	to	God,	"Lord,	give	me	my	daily	bread."	He	is	not
even	asking	for	tomorrow,	just	today	is	enough	unto	itself.	And	you	have	to	learn
that	each	moment	has	a	completion.
The	 fear	 of	 having	 to	 leave	 it	 all	 comes	 only	 because	 you	 are	 not	 completely
living	in	the	moment;	otherwise	there	is	no	time,	and	there	is	no	mind,	and	there
is	no	space.
For	 more	 than	 three	 decades	 I	 have	 never	 thought	 about	 tomorrow.	 And	 you
cannot	find	a	more	simple	life	than	mine.	For	my	whole	life	I	have	been	sleeping
in	the	afternoon,	and	it	happens	often	that	Nirvano	has	to	remind	me	when	she
wakes	me	up	 in	 the	afternoon,	because	 if	nobody	wakes	me	I	am	not	going	 to
wake	up	by	myself	--	why	bother?	She	has	to	remind	me,	"This	is	afternoon,	not
morning,"	because	I	often	forget.
It	happens	once	in	a	while	that	she	forgets	to	remind	me...	I	have	gone	into	the
bathroom	and	started	taking	my	shower,	getting	ready	for	the	morning	talk	and
only	when	the	cold	water	shook	me	a	little	I	remembered,	"My	God!	What	am	I
doing?"
But	anyway,	I	enjoyed	the	shower!
Sadhan,	you	are	also	saying,	 "You	keep	on	 telling	us	 lately	 that	we	don't	have
much	 time	 left	 before	 this	 world	 finishes.	 How	 is	 it	 possible	 to	 relax	 in	 this
certainty	of	death?"
In	 fact,	my	continuous	emphasis	 that	 there	 is	 a	possibility	of	 this	whole	world
being	destroyed	is	to	help	you	to	live	intensely	right	now	because	there	may	not
be	any	tomorrow.
You	are	in	a	very	special	position	in	the	history	of	mankind.	People	have	always
had	time	to	postpone	--	you	don't	have.	Your	situation	is	unique.	Use	it	--	not	for
worrying,	because	that	is	not	going	to	stop	the	world	from	ending.	Use	whatever
time	 is	 left	 to	 live	 so	 deeply	 that	 ten	 years	 become	 almost	 equivalent	 to	 one
hundred	years.
Once	a	merchant	was	asked,	"How	old	are	you?"
And	he	said,	"Three	hundred	and	sixty	years	old."
The	man	 could	 not	 believe	 it.	 He	 said,	 "Please,	 repeat	 it.	 Perhaps	 I	 have	 not
heard	rightly."
The	merchant	shouted	and	said,	"Three	hundred	and	sixty	years	old."
The	man	 said,	 "Forgive	me,	 but	 I	 cannot	 believe	 it.	You	don't	 look	more	 than
sixty!"
The	merchant	said,	"You	are	also	right.	As	far	as	the	calendar	is	concerned,	I	am
sixty.
But	as	far	as	my	life	is	concerned	I	have	lived	six	times	more	than	anybody	else.
In	sixty	years	I	have	managed	to	live	three	hundred	and	sixty	years."
It	depends	on	intensity.
There	 are	 two	 ways	 of	 living.	 One	 is	 the	 way	 of	 the	 buffalo	 --	 it	 lives
horizontally,	in	a	single	line.	The	other	way	is	of	a	buddha.	He	lives	vertically,	in
height	and	in	depth.	Then	each	moment	can	become	an	eternity.	And	unless	you
learn	 the	 art	 of	 transforming	each	moment	 into	 an	 eternity,	 you	have	not	been
with	me	--	you	missed	me.
The	 world	 may	 end,	 may	 not	 end,	 that	 is	 not	 my	 concern.	 But	 I	 will	 go	 on
insisting	that	 it	 is	going	to	end	for	a	simple	reason:	to	wake	you	up.	And	don't
waste	your	time	in	trivia,	but	live,	sing,	dance,	love	as	totally	and	overflowingly
as	you	are	capable	of;	and	no	 fears	will	 interfere,	and	you	will	not	be	worried
what	will	happen	 tomorrow.	Today	 is	enough	unto	 itself.	Lived,	 it	 is	 so	 full;	 it
leaves	no	space	to	think	about	anything	else.	Unlived,	worries	come,	fears	come.
It	is	not	only	me	who	is	emphasizing	the	fact	that	the	world	is	coming	to	an	end.
It	is	just	a	coincidence	that	alongside	my	insistence	on	it,	the	world	situation	is
very	supportive	of	what	I	am	saying.	But	Jesus	Christ,	two	thousand	years	ago,
was	 saying	 the	 same	 thing,	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 twenty-five	 centuries	 ago,	 was
saying	the	same	thing.
It	is	an	old	device	to	wake	you	up.	Unless	you	know	that	your	house	is	on	fire,
you	are	not	going	to	run	out	of	it.	And	Jesus	and	Gautam	Buddha	were	using	it
as	a	device,	without	any	corresponding	reality.
I	am	also	using	it	as	a	device,	but	it	is	not	only	a	device.	For	the	first	time,	the
world	 is	 really	 in	 a	 position	 to	 commit	 a	 global	 suicide.	 If	 Gautam	 Buddha
managed	to	make	two	dozen	people	enlightened,	then	it	should	be	very	easy	for
me	 to	make	 at	 least	 two	hundred	people	 enlightened	 --	 very	 easy,	 because	 his
device	was	only	fictitious.
My	device	 is	 not	 fictitious,	 it	 is	 a	 reality.	 The	 reality	 is	 supporting	my	 device
with	totality.
Sadhan	you	just	live,	love,	and	make	each	moment	a	deep	ecstasy.	All	fears	may
disappear.	And	if	the	whole	humanity	listens	to	me,	perhaps	the	world	may	not
end,	perhaps	we	may	continue.	The	old	man	may	die	and	a	totally	new	man	with
fresh	values	may	arise	to	replace	him.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	Freedom	is	all	I	want
24	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705245
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN26
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
92
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	MORNING	I	CAME	ACROSS	THIS	PASSAGE	FROM
RABINDRANATH	 TAGORE'S	 GITANJALI	 WHICH	 TOUCHED
SOMETHING
DEEP	INSIDE	ME.	"OBSTINATE	ARE	THE	TRAMMELS,	BUT	MY	HEART
ACHES
WHEN	 I	 TRY	 TO	 BREAK	 THEM.	 FREEDOM	 IS	 ALL	 I	WANT,	 BUT	 TO
HOPE	FOR
IT	I	FEEL	ASHAMED.	I	AM	CERTAIN	THAT	PRICELESS	WEALTH	IS	IN
THEE,	AND	THAT	THOU	ART	MY	BEST	FRIEND.	BUT	I	HAVE	NOT	THE
HEART	TO
SWEEP	AWAY	THE	TINSEL	THAT	FILLS	MY	ROOM.	THE	SHROUD	THAT
COVERS	ME	IS	A	SHROUD	OF	DUST	AND	DEATH.	I	HATE	IT,	YET	HUG
IT	IN
LOVE.	 MY	 DEBTS	 ARE	 LARGE,	 MY	 FAILURES	 GREAT,	 MY	 SHAME
SECRET
AND	HEAVY.	YET	WHEN	I	COME	TO	ASK	FOR	MY	GOOD,	I	QUAKE	IN
FEAR
LEST	MY	PRAYER	BE	GRANTED."	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
Prem	Kendra,	Rabindranath	Tagore	 is	 the	very	heart	 of	 this	 country.	He	 is	 the
most	contemporary	man,	and	yet	 the	most	ancient	 too.	His	words	are	a	bridge
between	the	modern	mind	and	the	ancientmost	sages	of	the	world.	In	particular,
GITANJALI	 is	 his	 greatest	 contribution	 to	 human	 evolution,	 to	 human
consciousness.	It	is	one	of	the	rarest	books	that	has	appeared	in	this	century.	Its
rarity	 is	 that	 it	 belongs	 to	 the	 days	 of	 the	 UPANISHADS	 --	 nearabout	 five
thousand	years	before	GITANJALI	came	into	existence.
It	 is	 a	miracle	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 Rabindranath	 is	 not	 a	 religious	 person	 in	 the
ordinary	 sense.	 He	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 progressive	 thinkers	 --	 untraditional,
unorthodox	--	but	his	greatness	consists	in	his	childlike	innocence.	And	because
of	 that	 innocence,	 perhaps	he	was	 able	 to	become	 the	vehicle	of	 the	universal
spirit,	in	the	same	way	as	the	UPANISHADS	of	old	are.
He	is	a	poet	of	the	highest	category,	and	also	a	mystic.	Such	a	combination	has
happened	only	once	or	twice	before	--	in	Kahlil	Gibran,	in	Friedrich	Nietzsche,
and	 in	 Rabindranath	 Tagore.	With	 these	 three	 persons,	 the	 whole	 category	 is
finished.	In	the	long	history	of	man,	it	is	extraordinary....	There	have	been	great
poets	and	there	have	been	great	mystics.
There	have	been	great	poets	with	a	little	mysticism	in	them,	and	there	have	been
great	mystics	who	have	expressed	themselves	in	poetry	--	but	their	poetry	is	not
great.
Rabindranath	is	in	a	strange	situation.
I	have	heard	about	 a	man	who	 loved	 two	beautiful	women	and	was	always	 in
trouble,	because	even	one	woman	is	trouble	enough.	Both	of	the	women	wanted
to	 know	whom	 he	 loved	 the	most.	 They	 took	 him	 for	 a	 ride	 on	 the	 lake	 in	 a
motorboat,	and	just	in	the	middle	of	the	lake	they	stopped	the	boat	and	they	told
the	man:	 "It	 has	 to	 be	 decided,	 because	 it	 is	 heavy	 on	 our	 hearts....	 Once	we
know	we	will	 become	 slowly,	 slowly	 tolerant	 about	 it;	we	may	 accept	 it.	 But
remaining	in	the	dark	and	always	thinking	about	it	has	become	a	wound."
The	man	said,	"What	is	the	matter?	Ask	directly."
Both	the	women	said	together:	"Our	question	is,	`Whom	do	you	love	the	most?'"
The	man	fell	into	deep	silence	--	it	was	such	a	strange	situation	in	the	middle	of
the	lake	-
-	but	he	must	have	been	a	man	of	great	humor.	He	said,	"I	love	each	of	you	more
than	the	other."	And	both	women	were	satisfied.	That's	what	they	wanted.
It	is	difficult	to	say	about	Rabindranath	whether	he	is	a	greater	poet	or	a	greater
mystic.
He	is	both	--	greater	than	each	--	and	to	be	in	the	twentieth	century....
Rabindranath	was	not	a	man	confined	to	this	country.	He	was	a	world	traveler,
educated	 in	 the	 West,	 and	 he	 was	 continually	 moving	 around	 the	 world	 in
different	countries	--	he	loved	to	be	a	wanderer.	He	was	a	citizen	of	the	universe,
yet	 his	 roots	were	 deep	 in	 this	 country.	 He	may	 have	 flown	 far	 away	 like	 an
eagle	across	the	sun,	but	he	kept	on	coming	back	to	his	small	nest.	And	he	never
lost	track	of	the	spiritual	heritage,	no	matter	how	covered	with	dust	it	may	have
become.	He	was	capable	of	cleaning	it	and	making	it	a	mirror	in	which	you	can
see	yourself.
His	poems	in	GITANJALI	are	offerings	of	songs	to	God.	That	is	the	meaning	of
GITANJALI:	offerings	of	songs.	He	used	to	say,	"I	have	nothing	else	to	offer.	I
am	just	as	poor	as	a	bird,	or	as	rich	as	a	bird.	I	can	sing	a	song	every	morning
fresh	and	new,	in	gratefulness.	That	is	my	prayer."
He	never	went	 to	any	 temple,	he	never	prayed	 in	 the	 traditional	 ritual	way.	He
was	born	a	Hindu,	but	it	would	not	be	right	to	confine	him	to	a	certain	section	of
humanity,	 he	 was	 so	 universal.	 He	 was	 told	many	 times,	 "Your	 words	 are	 so
fragrant	with	religion,	so	radiant	with	spirituality,	so	alive	with	the	unknown	that
even	 those	who	do	not	believe	 in	 anything	more	 than	matter	 become	affected,
are	touched.	But	you	never	go	to	the	temple,	you	never	read	the	scriptures."
His	answer	is	immensely	important	for	you.	He	said,	"I	never	read	the	scriptures;
in	fact	I	avoid	them,	because	I	have	my	own	experience	of	the	divine,	and	I	don't
want	others'
words	to	be	mixed	with	my	original,	authentic,	individual	experience.	I	want	to
offer	God	 exactly	what	 is	my	 heartbeat.	 Others	may	 have	 known	 --	 certainly,
others	have	known	--
but	 their	knowledge	cannot	be	my	knowledge.	Only	my	experience	can	satisfy
me,	 can	 fulfill	my	 search,	 can	give	me	 trust	 in	 existence.	 I	 don't	want	 to	 be	 a
believer."
These	are	the	words	to	be	remembered:	"I	don't	want	to	be	a	believer;	I	want	to
be	a	knower.	I	don't	want	to	be	knowledgeable;	I	want	to	be	innocent	enough	so
that	 existence	 reveals	 its	 mysteries	 to	 me.	 I	 don't	 want	 to	 be	 worshiped	 as	 a
saint."	And	 the	 fact	 is,	 that	 in	 this	whole	century,	 there	was	nobody	else	more
saintly	than	Rabindranath	Tagore	--
but	he	refused	to	be	recognized	as	a	saint.
He	said,	"I	have	only	one	desire	--	to	be	remembered	as	a	singer	of	songs,	as	a
dancer,	as	a	poet	who	has	offered	all	his	potential,	all	his	flowers	of	being,	to	the
unknown	divineness	of	existence.	 I	don't	want	 to	be	worshiped;	 I	consider	 it	a
humiliation...	 ugly,	 inhuman,	 and	 removed	 from	 the	 world	 completely.	 Every
man	contains	God;	every	cloud,	every	tree,	every	ocean	is	full	of	godliness,	so
who	is	to	worship	whom?"
It	 reminds	 me	 of	 another	 great	 mystic,	 Nanak,	 on	 whose	 songs	 Sikhism	 is
founded.	He	was	not	the	founder	of	it	--	it	was	not	a	deliberate	act	on	his	part.	He
simply	 went	 on	 singing	 his	 songs	 with	 his	 one	 disciple,	 Mardana,	 who	 was
playing	the	sitar	as	he	was	singing.
Nanak	 is	 the	 only	mystic	 of	 this	 country	 who	 went	 all	 over	 the	 country,	 and
beyond	the	boundaries	of	the	country,	too.	He	reached	Kaaba,	the	holy	place	of
the	Mohammedans.
It	was	evening	and	he	was	tired	and	his	disciple,	Mardana,	made	a	bed	for	him.
But	the	priests	of	Kaaba	were	very	angry.	They	had	heard	about	Nanak	because
he	 had	 been	 singing	 in	 the	 nearby	 villages,	 and	 thousands	 of	 people	 were
influenced	by	his	songs.
They	were	waiting	for	him	to	come	one	day.	But	they	had	never	thought	that	he
would	do	something	so	sacrilegious:	he	was	sleeping,	keeping	his	feet	 towards
the	holy	stone	of	Kaaba.	The	priests	came....
The	 story	 goes	 this	way:	 They	 said	 to	Nanak,	 "We	 have	 heard	 that	 you	 are	 a
spiritual	man,	but	what	kind	of	spiritual	man	are	you?	You	can't	even	recognize	a
small	 thing:	 that	 your	 feet	 should	 not	 be	 towards	 the	 holy	 Kaaba."	 Nanak
laughed.	The	story	is	beautiful;	whether	it	is	true,	whether	it	is	historical	or	not,
it	does	not	matter	 --	 it	 is	significant,	 immensely	meaningful.	Nanak	said,	"You
turn	my	feet	towards	any	place	which	is	not	holy.	I	am	in	a	difficulty,	I	have	to
put	my	feet	somewhere.	Kaaba	is	holy,	but	the	remaining	universe	is	not	unholy.
You	turn	my	feet."
The	 priest	 turned	 his	 feet,	 and	 wherever	 they	 turned	 his	 feet,	 they	 found	 the
Kaaba	 also	 moved	 in	 that	 direction.	 That	 may	 be	 fiction,	 but	 a	 fiction	 worth
loving,	significant;	it	may	not	be	a	fact,	but	it	is	a	truth.	The	stone	of	Kaaba	may
not	 have	 moved,	 but	 the	 priests	 must	 have	 recognized	 that	 they	 were	 being
stupid.	The	whole	existence	is	holy...
what	is	the	point?	They	moved	in	a	circle	and	finally	they	gave	an	apology	and
kept	Nanak's	feet	towards	Kaaba.
Rabindranath	never	went	to	any	temple,	never	worshiped	any	God,	was	never,	in
a	traditional	way,	a	saint,	but	to	me	he	is	one	of	the	greatest	saints	the	world	has
known.
His	saintliness	is	expressed	in	each	of	his	words.
Prem	Kendra,	 the	 lines	 that	 you	 have	 quoted	 are	 very	 pregnant:	OBSTINATE
ARE	THE
TRAMMELS,	BUT	MY	HEART	ACHES	WHEN	I	TRY	TO	BREAK	THEM.
FREEDOM	IS	ALL	I	WANT,	BUT	TO	HOPE	FOR	IT	I	FEEL	ASHAMED.
He	 is	 saying	 something	 not	 only	 about	 himself,	 but	 about	 all	 human
consciousness.	Such	people	don't	speak	about	themselves;	they	speak	about	the
very	heart	of	all	mankind.
OBSTINATE	ARE	THE	TRAMMELS....	The	hindrances	 are	 great,	 the	 chains
that	 prevent	my	 freedom	 --	 I	 have	 become	 too	 attached	 to	 them.	They	 are	 no
more	 chains	 to	me;	 they	have	become	my	ornaments.	They	 are	made	of	 gold,
they	 are	 very	 precious.	 But	 my	 heart	 aches,	 because	 on	 the	 one	 hand	 I	 want
freedom,	and	on	the	other	hand	I	cannot	break	the	chains	that	prevent	me	from
being	free.	Those	chains,	those	attachments,	those	relationships	have	become	my
life.	 I	 cannot	 conceive	 of	 myself	 without	 my	 beloved,	 without	 my	 friends.	 I
cannot	conceive	of	myself	absolutely	alone,	in	deep	silence.	My	songs	have	also
become	my	fetters,	so	MY	HEART	ACHES	WHEN	I	TRY	TO	BREAK
THEM.	FREEDOM	IS	ALL	I	WANT.
This	 is	 the	 situation	of	 every	human	being.	 It	 is	 difficult	 to	 find	 a	man	whose
heart	does	not	want	to	fly	like	a	bird	in	the	sky,	who	would	not	like	to	reach	to
the	 faraway	stars,	but	who	also	knows	his	deep	attachment	with	 the	earth.	His
roots	are	deep	in	 the	earth.	His	split	 is	 that	he	 is	attached	to	his	 imprisonment,
and	his	deepest	longing	is	for	freedom.	He	is	divided	against	himself.
This	is	the	greatest	anguish,	anxiety.	You	cannot	leave	the	world	that	chains	you;
you	cannot	leave	those	who	have	become	your	hindrances	in	life,	because	they
are	also	your	attachments,	your	joys.	They	are	also	in	some	way	a	nourishment
for	 your	 pride.	You	 can	 neither	 leave	 them,	 nor	 can	 you	 forget	 that	 you	 don't
belong	to	this	world,	 that	your	home	must	be	somewhere	else,	because	in	your
dreams	you	are	always	flying,	flying	to	faraway	places.
FREEDOM	 IS	ALL	 I	WANT,	BUT	TO	HOPE	FOR	 IT,	 I	 FEEL	ASHAMED.
Why	 should	 one	 feel	 ashamed	 to	 hope	 for	 freedom?	 --	 because	 nobody	 is
preventing	you.	You	can	be	free	this	very	moment.	But	those	attachments...	they
have	gone	very	deep	in	you;	they	have	become	almost	your	very	existence.	They
may	be	bringing	misery	to	you,	but	they	also	bring	moments	of	happiness.	They
may	be	creating	chains	for	your	feet,	but	they	also	give	you	moments	of	dance.
It	is	a	very	strange	situation	every	intelligent	man	has	to	face:	he	is	rooted	in	the
earth	and	he	wants	wings	 to	fly	 in	 the	sky.	He	cannot	be	uprooted	because	 the
earth	 is	 his	 nourishment,	 his	 food.	 And	 he	 cannot	 stop	 dreaming	 of	 wings,
because	that	is	his	spirit,	that	is	his	very	soul,	that	is	what	makes	him	a	human
being.
No	animal	feels	the	anguish;	all	animals	are	utterly	satisfied	as	they	are.	Man	is
the	only	animal	who	is	intrinsically	discontented;	hence,	the	feeling	of	shame	--
because	he	knows,	"I	can	be	free."
I	have	always	loved	an	ancient	story:	A	man,	a	great	man,	a	fighter	for	freedom
was	traveling	into	the	mountains.	He	stayed	in	a	caravanserai	for	 the	night.	He
was	 amazed	 that	 in	 the	 caravanserai	 there	 was	 a	 beautiful	 parrot	 in	 a	 golden
cage,	continually	 repeating,	"Freedom!	Freedom!"	And	 the	serai	was	 in	such	a
place	that	when	the	parrot	repeats	the	word	"Freedom!"	it	goes	on	echoing	in	the
valley,	in	the	mountains.
The	man	 thought:	 I	 have	 seen	many	parrots,	 and	 I	 have	 thought	 they	must	 be
desiring	to	be	free	from	those	cages...	but	I	have	never	seen	such	a	parrot	whose
whole	day,	from	the	morning	to	the	evening	when	he	goes	to	sleep,	 is	spent	 in
asking	 for	 freedom.	He	had	 an	 idea.	 In	 the	middle	 of	 the	 night	 he	 got	 up	 and
opened	the	door	of	the	cage.	The	owner	was	fast	asleep	and	he	said	to	the	parrot,
he	whispered,	"Now	get	out."
But	he	was	very	surprised	that	the	parrot	was	clinging	to	the	bars	of	the	cage.	He
told	him	again	and	again:	"Have	you	forgotten	about	freedom?	Just	get	out!	The
door	 is	open	and	the	owner	 is	fast	asleep;	nobody	will	ever	know.	You	just	fly
into	the	sky;	the	whole	sky	is	yours."
But	 the	parrot	was	clinging	so	deeply,	so	hard,	 that	 the	man	said,	"What	 is	 the
matter?
Are	you	mad?"	He	tried	to	take	the	parrot	out	with	his	own	hands,	but	the	parrot
started	hitting	him,	and	at	the	same	time	started	shouting,	"Freedom!	Freedom!"
The	valleys	in	the	night	echoed	and	re-echoed...	but	the	man	was	also	stubborn,
he	was	a	freedom	fighter.	He	pulled	the	parrot	out,	and	threw	him	into	the	sky;
and	he	was	very	satisfied,	although	his	hand	was	hurt.	The	parrot	had	attacked
him	as	forcefully	as	he	could,	but	the	man	was	immensely	satisfied	that	he	had
made	a	soul	free.	He	went	to	sleep.
In	the	morning,	as	the	man	was	becoming	awake,	he	heard	the	parrot	shouting,
"Freedom!	Freedom!"	He	thought	perhaps	the	parrot	must	be	sitting	on	a	tree,	or
on	a	 rock.	But	when	he	came	out,	 the	parrot	was	sitting	 in	 the	cage.	The	door
was	open.
I	have	loved	the	story,	because	it	 is	very	true.	You	may	like	to	be	free,	but	 the
cage	has	certain	securities,	safeties.	In	the	cage	the	parrot	has	no	need	to	worry
about	food,	has	no	need	to	worry	about	enemies,	has	no	need	to	worry	about	a
thing	 in	 the	world.	 It	 is	cozy,	 it	 is	golden.	No	other	parrot	has	such	a	valuable
cage.
Your	power,	your	riches,	your	prestige	--	all	are	your	cages.	Your	soul	wants	to
be	free,	but	freedom	is	dangerous.
Freedom	has	no	insurance.
Freedom	has	no	security,	no	safety.
Freedom	 means	 walking	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 a	 razor	 --	 every	 moment	 in	 danger,
fighting	your	way.	Every	moment	is	a	challenge	from	the	unknown.	Sometimes
it	is	too	hot,	and	sometimes	it	is	too	cold	--	and	nobody	is	there	to	take	care	of
you.
In	the	cage,	the	owner	was	responsible.	He	used	to	cover	the	cage,	when	it	was
cold,	with	a	blanket;	he	used	to	put	an	electric	fan	close	by	when	it	was	too	hot.
Freedom	 means	 tremendous	 responsibility;	 you	 are	 on	 your	 own	 and	 alone.
Rabindranath	is	right:	FREEDOM	IS	ALL	I	WANT,	BUT	TO	HOPE	FOR	IT,	I
FEEL	ASHAMED,	--
because	it	is	not	a	question	of	hope;	it	is	a	question	of	taking	a	risk.
I	 AM	 CERTAIN	 THAT	 PRICELESS	 WEALTH	 IS	 IN	 THEE,	 AND	 THAT
THOU	ART
MY	BEST	FRIEND.	BUT	I	HAVE	NOT	THE	HEART	TO	SWEEP	AWAY	THE
TINSEL	THAT	FILLS	MY	ROOM.
I	AM	CERTAIN	THAT	PRICELESS	WEALTH	IS	IN	THEE....	In	the	world	of
freedom,	 in	 the	 experience	of	 freedom,	 I	 am	certain	 there	 is	priceless	wealth."
But	this	certainty	is	also	a	projection	of	your	desire,	of	your	longing.	How	can
you	be	certain?	You	would	like	to	be	certain.	You	know	that	longing	for	freedom
is	 there.	 It	 cannot	 be	 for	 a	 futile	 freedom;	 it	 must	 be	 for	 something	 rich,
something	priceless.	You	are	creating	a	certainty	 to	gather	courage	so	 that	you
can	take	the	jump	into	the	unknown.
...	 AND	 THAT	 THOU	 ART	MY	 BEST	 FRIEND.	 But	 these	 are	 all	 beautiful
dreams,	 these	 are	 hopes;	 the	 certainty	 is	 your	 own	 cage,	 its	 security.	 BUT	 I
HAVE	NOT	THE
HEART	 TO	 SWEEP	 AWAY	 THE	 TINSEL	 THAT	 FILLS	 MY	 ROOM.	 THE
SHROUD
THAT	 COVERS	 ME	 IS	 A	 SHROUD	 OF	 DUST	 AND	 DEATH.	 These	 are
beautiful	ideas	in	the	mind.
I	HATE	IT,	YET	HUG	IT	 IN	LOVE.	You	know	your	body	 is	going	 to	die.	 In
fact,	 your	 body	 is	 made	 of	 dead	 material;	 it	 is	 already	 dead.	 It	 seems	 alive
because	something	alive	is	inside	it.	It	radiates	warmth	and	aliveness,	because	of
a	 guest	 inside	 you.	 The	moment	 that	 guest	 has	 flown	 away,	 the	 reality	 of	 the
body	will	be	revealed	to	you.
Rabindranath	 says,	 THE	 SHROUD	 THAT	COVERS	ME	 IS	 A	 SHROUD	OF
DUST
AND	DEATH.	Our	bodies	are	made	of	dust	and	death.	I	HATE	IT,	AND	YET
HUG	IT
IN	LOVE.	But	when	you	fall	in	love	with	a	woman,	then	two	skeletons	hug	each
other;	both	know	that	the	skin	is	only	a	covering	of	a	skeleton.	If	you	could	see
each	other	 in	 real	nudity	 --	not	only	without	clothes,	but	without	 the	skin,	 too,
because	 that	 is	 the	real	clothing	--	 then	you	would	be	shocked,	and	you	would
escape	as	 fast	as	possible	 from	the	beloved	with	whom	you	were	promising	 to
live	forever	and	forever.	You	would	not	even	look	back;	you	would	not	even	like
to	be	reminded	of	the	phenomenon.
It	happened	in	the	court	of	one	Mohammedan	emperor	of	India,	Shahjehan.	He
was	in	love	with	a	woman,	but	the	woman	was	not	willing	to	marry	him.
He	was	a	gentleman;	otherwise	he	could	have	 forced	her.	He	 tried	 to	persuade
her,	but	she	was	in	love	with	a	bodyguard	of	Shahjehan.	And	when	he	found	out
about	it,	he	was	really	enraged.	They	were	both	immediately	caught	and	brought
to	the	court.
Shahjehan	was	going	to	cut	off	the	heads	of	both,	then	and	there.	But	his	prime
minister,	who	was	a	very	old	man	--	he	had	been	his	father's	prime	minister	and
Sahjehan	 respected	 him	 just	 like	 his	 father	 --	 said,	 "Don't	 do	 that.	 Be	 a	 little
wiser;	that	is	not	enough	punishment.	I	will	give	them	the	right	punishment."	He
ordered	that	both	should	be	tied	together	naked,	in	a	hug,	and	then	chained	to	a
pillar	 in	 the	court.	The	other	members	of	 the	court	could	not	believe	 it	 --	what
kind	of	punishment	is	this?	This	seems	to	be	a	reward;	that's	what	they	always
wanted,	to	hug	each	other.	But	they	were	wrong.
That	old	man	really	had	a	great	psychological	insight.	Those	two	lovers	also	felt,
what	kind	of	punishment	is	this?	--	this	is	a	reward.	They	hugged	each	other	with
great	love.
They	were	 tied	by	a	rope,	so	 they	could	not	escape	from	each	other;	 then	 they
were	 tied	 to	 a	 pillar.	 How	 long	 can	 you	 hug	 somebody?	 Five	minutes,	 seven
minutes,	half	an	hour...?	After	twenty-four	hours	they	hated	each	other...	because
they	 pissed	 on	 each	 other	 --	 they	 had	 to,	 there	was	 no	 other	way.	 They	were
perspiring,	 their	body	 smells	 filled	 the	place,	 and	 there	was	no	way	 to	escape.
After	twenty-four	hours	the	old	man	said,	"Now	give	then	their	clothes	and	make
them	free."
And	as	they	got	their	clothes,	they	rushed	in	opposite	directions,	never	to	meet
each	other	again;	they	had	met	enough!	Twenty-four	hours...	it	is	good	for	half	a
minute	to	hug	somebody,	or	maybe	one	minute,	but	more	than	that	and	you	will
start	feeling	restless.
My	grandfather	used	to	love	me	very	much.	But	in	the	evening	I	started	to	avoid
him,	because	he	would	pull	me	 to	his	bed,	cover	me	with	 the	blanket,	hug	me
inside	 the	 blanket...	 and	 he	was	 very	 old,	 so	 sleeping	was	 not	 the	 question.	 I
would	wait	until	he	started	snoring	so	that	I	could	slip	out,	but	his	sleep	was	very
shallow	--	in	old	age	it	becomes	very	shallow	--	and	he	would	say,	"What?	Are
you	going	out?"
I	would	 say,	 "I	have	 to	 live	my	whole	 life;	you	have	 lived	enough.	 In	 the	day
your	love	is	good,	but	this	night	affair	does	not	suit	me	at	all."
He	was	a	 chain	 smoker,	 so	his	breath	was	 so	 smelly	of	 tobacco	and	he	would
cough	the	whole	night,	and	he	would	go	on	pulling	me	closer	to	him.
I	said,	"This	is	not	love	--	you	will	kill	me!"
But	he	made	me	learn	one	lesson:	never	allow	anybody	in	your	bed.	I	don't	allow
anybody	even	in	my	room.	My	room	is	locked	from	outside;	even	if	I	want	to	get
out,	I	cannot	get	out.	I	remember	him	and	just	cover	myself	and	go	to	sleep.
THE	SHROUD	THAT	COVERS	ME,	IS	A	SHROUD	OF	DUST	AND	DEATH.
I	HATE	IT,	YET	HUG	IT	IN	LOVE.
Such	 is	 the	 schizophrenia	 of	 man,	 the	 split	 personality	 of	 man.	 His	 house	 is
divided	against	itself;	hence,	he	cannot	find	peace.
MY	DEBTS	ARE	 LARGE,	MY	 FAILURES	GREAT,	MY	 SHAME	 SECRET
AND
HEAVY.	YET	WHEN	I	COME	TO	ASK	FOR	MY	GOOD,	I	QUAKE	IN	FEAR
LEST
MY	PRAYER	BE	GRANTED.	These	 lines	can	be	understood	only	 if	 I	 remind
you	of	another	poem	of	Rabindranath	in	the	same	book,	GITANJALI.
In	that	other	poem,	he	says,	"I	have	been	seeking	and	searching	God	for	as	long
as	I	can	remember,	for	many	many	lives,	from	the	very	beginning	of	existence.
Once	in	a	while	I	have	seen	him	by	the	side	of	a	faraway	star,	and	I	have	rejoiced
and	danced	 that	 the	distance,	although	great,	 is	not	 impossible	 to	 reach.	And	 I
have	traveled	and	reached	to	the	star;	but	by	the	time	I	reached	the	star,	God	has
moved	to	another	star.	And	it	has	been	going	on	for	centuries.
"The	challenge	is	so	great,	that	I	go	on	hoping	against	hope...	I	have	to	find	him,
I	am	so	absorbed	in	the	search.	The	very	search	is	so	intriguing,	so	mysterious,
so	enchanting	that	God	has	become	almost	an	excuse	--	the	search	has	become
itself	the	goal.
"And	to	my	surprise,	one	day	I	reached	a	house	 in	a	faraway	star	with	a	small
board	in	front	of	it,	saying	`This	is	the	house	of	God.'	My	joy	knew	no	bounds	--
so	finally	I	have	arrived!	I	rushed	up	the	steps,	many	steps,	that	led	to	the	door	of
the	 house.	But	 as	 I	was	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer	 to	 the	 door,	 a	 fear	 suddenly
appeared	in	my	heart.	As	I	was	going	to	knock,	I	became	paralyzed	with	a	fear
that	I	had	never	known,	never	thought	of,	never	dreamt	of.	The	fear	was:	if	this
house	is	certainly	the	house	of	God,	then	what	will	I	do	after	I	have	found	him?
"Now	 searching	 for	God	has	 become	my	very	 life;	 to	 have	 found	him	will	 be
equivalent	 to	committing	suicide.	And	what	am	I	going	 to	do	with	him?	 I	had
never	 thought	of	all	 these	 things	before.	 I	 should	have	 thought	before	 I	 started
the	search:	what	am	I	going	to	do	with	God?
"I	took	my	shoes	in	my	hands,	and	silently	and	very	slowly	stepped	back,	afraid
that	God	may	hear	 the	 noise	 and	may	open	 the	 door	 and	 say,	 `Where	 are	 you
going?	 I	 am	here,	 come	 in!'	And	 as	 I	 reached	 the	 steps,	 I	 ran	 away	 as	 I	 have
never	 run	before;	and	since	 then	 I	have	been	again	searching	 for	God,	 looking
for	him	in	every	direction	--	and	avoiding	that	house	where	he	really	lives.
"Now	I	know	that	that	house	has	to	be	avoided.	And	I	continue	the	search,	enjoy
the	very	journey,	the	pilgrimage."
The	 insight	 in	 the	story	 is	so	 tremendous.	There	are	seekers	of	 truth	who	have
never	 thought,	what	will	 I	do	with	 truth?	You	cannot	eat	 it,	you	cannot	 sell	 it;
you	cannot	become	a	president	because	you	have	the	truth.	At	the	most,	if	you
have	the	truth,	people	will	crucify	you.
He	is	right	when	he	says,	My	debts	are	large,	my	failures	great,	my	shame	secret
and	heavy.	Yet	when	I	come	to	ask	for	my	good,	I	quake	in	fear	lest	my	prayer
be	granted	--
because	these	things	are	good	to	talk	about:	God,	truth,	good,	beauty.	It	is	good
to	 write	 treatises	 on	 them,	 have	 universities	 confer	 Ph.D.'s,	 let	 the	 Nobel
awarding	committee	give	you	a	Nobel	prize.	These	things	are	good	for	talking,
for	 writing,	 but	 if	 you	 really	 get	 to	 experience	 them,	 you	 will	 be	 in	 trouble.
That's	what	he	is	saying:	I	am	afraid	that	my	prayer	may	be	granted.
It	is	good	that	God	is	deaf.	He	does	not	hear	prayers;	otherwise	you	all	will	be	in
trouble.
Your	prayer	will	create	your	trouble,	because	in	prayers	you	will	be	so	romantic,
asking	great	things	which	you	cannot	live	by,	which	will	become	very	heavy,	and
will	 interfere	 in	your	 so-called	 life	 --	which	 is	going	on	 smoothly,	 although	 in
misery.
Truth	becomes	a	cross;	life	becomes	heavy.	Truth	becomes	poison	to	a	Socrates.
Truth	becomes	death	 to	Al-Hillaj	Mansoor.	Truth	becomes	crucifixion	 to	Jesus
Christ.	And	you	pray,	"God,	give	me	truth.	Give	me	qualities	which	are	divine,
godly."	But	God	is	deaf	on	purpose	--	so	that	your	prayers	cannot	be	heard	and
you	can	enjoy	both,	your	miserable	life	and	your	beautiful	prayers.	The	prayers
will	not	be	heard	--	you	can	remain	jealous,	angry,	full	of	hate,	full	of	egoism,
and	go	on	praying	to	God,	"Make	me	humble;	and	becausèblessed	are	the	meek,'
make	me	meek."	--	but	on	purpose.
It	is	not	written	in	any	scripture,	but	I	tell	you	on	my	personal	authority	that	after
creating	the	world	in	six	days,	the	last	thing	God	did	was	destroy	his	ears.	Since
then,	 we	 has	 never	 heard	 anything;	 and	 since	 then,	 neither	 have	 we	 heard
anything	about	him.
So	it	is	perfectly	good:	in	the	morning	you	go	to	the	temple	or	the	church	or	the
mosque,	have	a	beautiful	prayer,	ask	great	things	--	knowing	perfectly	well	that
he	is	deaf	--	and	go	on	being	your	ugly,	miserable	self.	Then	tomorrow	morning
again	have	a	good	prayer....	This	is	such	a	good	settlement,	a	good	arrangement.
Rabindranath	in	his	poem	is	indicating	a	tremendous	truth:	Do	you	really	want
God?	Do	you	really	want	truth?	Do	you	really	want	silence?	If	you	ask,	and	you
are	honest,	you	will	feel	ashamed.	You	will	have	to	accept	that	you	don't	really
want....	You	are	only	pretending	to	meditate	--	because	you	know	you	have	been
meditating	 for	 many	 years,	 and	 nothing	 happens.	 There	 is	 no	 fear;	 you	 can
meditate,	nothing	happens.
Once	 something	 starts	 happening,	 then	 there	 is	 trouble.	 once	 something	 starts
growing	in	your	life	that	is	not	growing	in	the	hearts	of	the	crowd	that	surrounds
you,	 you	 will	 be	 a	 stranger,	 you	 will	 be	 an	 outsider.	 And	 the	 crowd	 never
forgives	strangers,	the	crowd	never	forgives	outsiders;	it	destroys	them.	It	has	to
destroy	them	just	for	its	own	peace	of	mind.
A	man	like	Jesus	Christ	is	a	continual	nuisance,	because	he	reminds	you	that	you
can	also	be	of	the	same	beauty,	of	the	same	grace,	of	the	same	truth,	and	it	hurts.
He	makes	you	feel	inferior,	and	nobody	wants	to	feel	inferior.
And	there	are	only	two	ways	not	to	feel	inferior:	one	is	to	become	superior;	that
is	a	hard	way,	and	a	long	way	--	dangerous,	because	you	will	have	to	walk	alone.
The	simple	way	is,	destroy	that	superior	man.	Then	the	whole	crowd	is	of	equal
people.	Nobody	is	superior,	nobody	is	inferior.	All	are	cunning,	all	are	cheats,	all
are	criminals	in	their	own	way.	All	are	jealous,	all	are	ambitious.	They	are	all	in
the	same	boat,	and	 they	understand	each	other's	 language.	And	nobody	creates
any	fuss	about	truth,	about	God,	about	meditation.
People	 are	 happy	 without	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 without	 a	 Socrates,	 without	 a
Zarathustra,	because	these	people	are	like	high	peaks	of	mountains	and	you	look
so	tiny,	so	pygmy	--
it	hurts.	They	say	that	camels	never	go	near	the	mountains.	They	have	chosen	to
live	in	the	desert,	because	in	the	desert	they	are	the	walking	mountains,	but	near
the	mountains,	they	will	look	like	ants	--	and	that	hurts.
The	easiest	way	is	to	forget	all	about	mountains,	to	say,	"These	mountains	are	all
mythological,	 fictitious;	 the	 reality	 is	 the	desert."	So	you	enjoy	 the	desert,	you
enjoy	your	ego	--	and	you	also	enjoy	the	prayer,	"God,	please	free	me	of	the	ego,
make	me	humble,"
knowing	perfectly	well	 that	 he	does	not	 hear,	 that	 no	prayer	 is	 answered.	You
can	pray	 for	 anything	without	 fear	 because	you	will	 remain	 the	 same	and	you
will	also	have	the	satisfaction	of	praying	for	great	things.
That's	 why	 people,	 without	 becoming	 religious,	 become	 Christians,	 become
Hindus,	become	Mohammedans.	They	are	not	 religious	people	at	all;	 these	are
strategies	 to	avoid	being	religious.	A	religious	person	 is	simply	religious;	he	 is
neither	 Hindu,	 nor	 Mohammedan,	 nor	 Christian,	 nor	 Buddhist	 --	 there	 is	 no
need.	He	is	truthful,	he	is	sincere,	he	is	compassionate,	he	is	loving,	he	is	human
--	so	human	that	he	almost	represents	the	divine	in	the	world.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	I	can	see	a	shoe	in	your	heart
25	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705250
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN27
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
83
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
MORE	AND	MORE	EASILY	DO	I	FEEL	FILLED	WITH	YOU	DURING
DISCOURSE,	AND	THOUGHTS	TEND	NOT	TO	INTRUDE	AS	MUCH	AS
THEY
USED	 TO.	 STILL,	 THE	 FACT	 REMAINS	 THAT	 I	 DON'T	 CARRY	 THE
SERENITY
AND	 BLISS	 THAT	 I	 FEEL	 IN	 YOUR	 PRESENCE	 INTO	 MY	 DAILY
ACTIVITIES.
AND	UNTIL	THERE	IS	NO	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	HOW	I	FEEL	NEAR
YOU
AND	AWAY,	I	HAVEN'T	GOT	IT,	HAVE	I?	IT	FEELS	AS	IF	ALL	OTHER
QUESTIONS	 ARE	 SIMPLY	 A	 DISTRACTION	 TO	 AVOID	 THIS
HOMEWORK.	IS
THIS	SO?
Maneesha,	the	difference	that	you	feel	in	my	presence	from	when	you	are	doing
something	alone	is	going	to	remain	to	the	very	last	moment.	The	explosion	will
come,	but	there	is	no	way	to	say	when.	The	time	will	come	certainly	when	there
will	be	no	difference:	either	you	are	in	my	presence	or	you	are	alone	--	it	will	be
the	 same.	 It	 becomes	 the	 same	 only	 when,	 in	 your	 aloneness	 also,	 you	 start
feeling	my	presence.
When	you	are	doing	other	things,	they	are	not	distractions;	you	are	doing	them
for	me.
Love	 is	 full	 of	 mysteries,	 but	 even	 this	 much	 is	 more	 than	 one	 can	 expect
because	it	is	a	right	becoming	--	you	have	started	feeling	me.	Now	that	feeling
will	continue	to	grow	on	its	own;	you	have	to	be	just	nourishing	it.	Don't	make	it
a	problem.	Rather	accept	it	as	a	necessity	of	growth.
The	first	flowers	of	the	spring	have	come.	All	the	flowers	will	be	coming	soon.
And	 one	 should	 not	 expect,	 one	 should	 rather	 learn	 to	 enjoy	 that	 which	 is
happening.	 That	 allows	more	 happenings,	makes	 you	 available,	 and	 open	 and
vulnerable	for	greater	possibilities.
The	 real	 problem	 is	when	nothing	 is	 happening.	You	can	 feel	 no	difference	 at
two	points:	if	in	my	presence,	you	don't	feel	anything	different	in	your	being	--	it
feels	 just	 the	 same	 as	 you	 are	 when	 you	 are	 alone,	 or	 with	 others,	 or	 doing
something	else	--	this	is	the	lowest	point.	There	is	no	difference.	On	the	highest
point,	also,	there	will	be	no	difference.	It	is	a	question	of	how	much	deeper	your
melting	and	your	merging	becomes.
It	 does	 not	 depend	 on	 you.	 There	 is	 nothing	 like	 homework	 --	 you	 cannot	 do
anything...
you	can	only	wait,	you	can	only	hope,	you	can	only	trust.	And	existence	brings
everything	to	your	door.
Eighty-year-old	Goldstein	marries	a	very	beautiful	and	attractive	twenty-year-old
girl.	All	his	friends	and	business	partners,	lustlessly	married	since	ages,	declare
him	foolish.	"How	can	you	in	your	old	age	expect	her	to	be	faithful	to	you?"	they
ask.
Shrewd	 old	 Goldstein	 smiles	 and	 says,	 "Why	 shouldn't	 I	 expect	 it?	 I	 don't
understand	your	concern	since	it	has	been	my	basic	principle	all	my	life,	that	it	is
better	 to	have	only	 a	 twenty-five	percent	 share	 in	 an	 excellent	business	 than	a
hundred	percent	share	in	a	lousy	one."
Even	 a	 twenty-five	 percent	 share	 in	 a	 good	 business	 is	 great.	 Don't	 ask	 for	 a
hundred	 percent	 in	 a	 lousy	 one.	 That	 twenty-five	 percent	 is	 happening.	 The
seventy-five	percent	will	also	follow,	but	it	is	a	question	of	happening	--	it	is	not
part	of	doing.	And	it	is	good	that	there	are	things	men	cannot	do,	but	can	only	be
a	 recipient	of.	Only	 those	 things	are	valuable	which	you	cannot	do,	but	which
happen.	They	don't	 have	 a	 price,	 but	 they	have	 value.	Things	 that	 you	 can	 do
have	a	price,	but	they	don't	have	any	value.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT'S	HILARIOUS!	 I	 KEEP	DRINKING	AND	DRINKING,	AND	YOU	ARE
THE	ONE
WHO	IS	DRUNK.	COULD	YOU	PLEASE	PASS	THE	BOTTLE	--	NO,	THE
WHOLE
OCEAN	--	ONCE	MORE?
Okay.	Satyadharma...	 an	American,	 an	Englishman,	and	a	Frenchman	are	on	a
boat.	After	a	while,	the	boat	begins	to	sink.	The	Englishman,	being	a	gentleman,
says,	"Women	and	children	first."
The	American	says,	"Fuck	them!"
The	Frenchman	says,	"Do	we	have	time?"
You	are	drunk;	but	no	drunk	accepts	that	he's	drunk,	he	goes	on	asking	for	more
bottles.
In	 a	 pub	 one	 night,	 a	 drunk	 was	 creating	 too	much	 nuisance.	 He	 was	 utterly
drunk,	and	still	was	asking:	"More	bottles."
The	owner	of	the	pub	said,	"Absolutely	no!"	and	called	his	servants	to	throw	the
man	 out	 of	 the	 door.	 He	 said,	 "It	 is	 more	 than	 you	 can	 absorb.	 Come	 again
tomorrow,	but	tonight	just	go	home	and	rest."
The	drunk	was	feeling	very	thirsty	--	that	is	one	of	the	problems	in	drinking:	the
more	you	drink,	 the	more	 thirsty	you	feel.	He	went	staggering	a	few	steps	and
came	back	in	from	the	back	door	and	asked	for	a	few	bottles.
The	owner	said	to	the	servants,	"Throw	him	back	out	again."
He	said,	"It	is	strange...	do	you	own	all	the	pubs	in	the	city?"
Satyadharma,	 you	 are	 saying,	 "It	 is	 hilarious...."	 It	 is!	 "I	 keep	 drinking	 and
drinking,	and...	you	are	the	one	who	is	drunk."	If	I	was	not	drunk,	from	where
would	you	go	on	drinking	and	drinking?
Here	you	are	 sitting	with	 all	 kinds	of	drunkards.	Even	 if	you	come	 sober,	 just
sitting	 with	 these	 people,	 soon	 you	 will	 start	 feeling	 something	 hilarious	 is
happening.	 Even	 the	 air	 is	 very	 heavy;	 just	 breathing	with	 all	 these	 people	 is
enough	for	amateurs	to	get	drunk.	And	don't	ask	for	the	bottle;	the	whole	ocean
will	be	delivered	to	you	--	just	become	capable	of	absorbing	it.
Our	 capacity	 in	 every	 dimension	 is	 very	 limited.	 And	 as	 far	 as	 drinking	 is
concerned	--
particularly	drinking	joy,	ecstasy,	blissfulness	--	our	capacity	is	very	limited.	We
soon	come	 to	a	point	beyond	which	we	cannot	move.	The	 fear	of	being	 lost...
one	has	to	learn	to	drop	the	fear,	and	to	learn	the	art	of	being	lost.
When	 Bodhidharma	 reached	 China,	 Emperor	 Wu	 had	 come	 to	 the	 border	 to
receive	him	because	his	name	and	his	 fragrance	had	reached	far	ahead	of	him.
Bodhidharma,	in	the	tradition	of	Gautam	Buddha,	is	one	of	the	rarest	flowers...
even	 Gautam	 Buddha	 may	 sometimes	 feel	 jealous	 of	 him,	 although
Bodhidharma	is	his	disciple.
Bodhidharma	 came	 with	 one	 shoe	 on	 his	 foot	 and	 another	 shoe	 on	 his	 head.
Emperor	Wu	could	not	trust	his	eyes,	and	could	not	trust...	he	has	heard	so	much
about	 the	man,	and	he	seems	 to	be	absolutely	mad.	But	he	was	a	man	of	very
great	culture,	etiquette;	he	was	an	emperor.	He	tried	to	avoid	seeing	that	shoe	on
the	head.	It	was	not	right	to	enquire	about	it,	but	the	temptation	was	becoming
greater	 and	 greater...	 what	 is	 the	matter?	 He	 talked	 about	 God,	 and	 he	 talked
about	truth,	but	all	the	time	inside	he	was	thinking	about	the	shoe.
Finally	Bodhidharma	said,	"Don't	ask	unnecessary	questions;	ask	the	necessary
question.
I	 can	 see	a	 shoe	 in	your	heart.	You	cannot	hide	 from	me.	My	eyes	are	 almost
capable	of	penetrating	into	the	thickest	skull:	`Why	are	you	keeping	that	shoe	on
your	head'?"
The	emperor	was	amazed:	This	is	too	much.	This	man	seems	to	be	either	drunk
or	mad,	but	certainly	he	has	a	method	in	his	madness.	He	is	carrying	the	shoe	on
his	head....	But	he	is	not	wrong	--	I	am	suppressing	the	shoe	in	my	heart,	in	my
mind;	my	whole	being	wants	 to	ask	only	one	question:	"Why	are	you	carrying
this	shoe?"	And	when	he	is	insisting,	"Ask	the	real	question,"	it	is	better	to	ask	it;
otherwise,	I	will	not	be	able	to	sleep.
He	said,	"Forgive	me,	it	is	very	embarrassing."
Bodhidharma	said,	"Nothing	is	embarrassing.	You	simply	ask."
The	emperor	 said,	 "I	 am	 trying	 to	 avoid	 that	question,	 and	 just	 to	 avoid	 it	 I'm
asking	all	other	questions	--	I	don't	mean	anything.	But	you	seem	to	be	a	strange
fellow;	you	have	caught	me	red-handed.	I	have	not	asked,	but	you	have	heard	the
question:	"Why	are	you	carrying	the	shoe	on	your	head?"
Bodhidharma	 said,	 "Now	we	 can	 talk.	Now	you	 are	 being	 simple,	 innocent	 --
now	you	are	not	repressing.	I	am	carrying	this	shoe	on	my	head	so	that	you	can
ask	a	real	question.
Now	there	 is	no	need...."	He	removed	the	shoe,	put	 it	on	his	foot,	and	he	said,
"Now	you	have	to	understand:	start	from	the	very	beginning;	don't	start	asking
questions	about	God.
You	seem	to	be	a	born	shoemaker."
The	emperor	was	very	angry	and	shocked.	Obviously	this	man	was	making	fun
of	him,	but	he	still	tried	to	hide	his	embarrassment.	His	whole	court	was	present,
and	 they	 were	 all	 trying	 to	 hide	 their	 laughter.	 He	 asked,	 "Who	 are	 you?"	 --
because	that	is	one	of	the	most	significant	and	most	ancient,	spiritual	questions.
Bodhidharma	said,	"As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	don't	know.	Do	you	know	who
you	are?"
The	emperor	said,	"This	is	something	I	have	come	to	enquire	from	you	because	I
don't	know."
Bodhidharma	said,	"You	are	ignorant;	I	also	don't	know,	but	I	am	innocent.	Just
now,	go	back.	Sleep	will	not	be	possible	because	you	will	have	to	figure	out	why
you	are	ignorant	and	I	am	innocent	--	and	for	the	same	reason."
The	emperor	returned	home	very	puzzled.	The	man	had	a	charisma:	he	could	not
forget	his	eyes,	he	could	not	forget	his	presence.	He	could	not	sleep	the	whole
night;	he	could	not	make	the	distinction	how	one	person	saying,	"I	don't	know"
is	ignorant	and	another	person	saying,	"I	don't	know"	is	innocent.
He	 came	 back	 again.	 Bodhidharma	 said,	 "You	 are	 knowledgeable;	 you	 have
never	 recognized	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 don't	 know	 yourself	 --	 you	 have	 always
believed	that	you	know.	At	least,	you	have	pretended	to	the	world	that	you	know.
It	is	out	of	ignorance.
"I	have	searched	deeply	into	myself.	I	don't	know	because	there	is	nobody	to	be
known.	 I	 have	 found	 the	 house	 empty	 --	 a	 pure	 nothingness,	 a	 sky	 without
clouds.	There	is	no	knower,	there	is	nothing	to	be	known.
"You	are	saying	it	out	of	ignorance,	because	you	still	think	you	are,	but	you	don't
know	who	you	are.	I	am	saying	it	out	of	innocence,	because	I	know	there	is	no
one	to	be	known,	to	be	a	knower.	It	is	just	pure	silence."
The	 bottle	will	 be	 delivered	 to	 you	 --	 just	 get	 ripe	 for	 it.	 Right	 now,	 you	 are
asking	out	of	ignorance.	The	day	you	will	ask	out	of	innocence,	the	bottle...?	no,
the	whole	ocean	will	be	delivered	to	you	--	it	belongs	to	you.	It	is	already	within
you.	Your	 insight	 just	has	 to	grow	more,	your	awareness	has	 to	be	more	clear,
your	 silence	 has	 to	 be	more	 deep,	more	 profound.	And	 all	 these	 qualities	 are
almost	ready	to	explode	within	you	--	it	is	just	that	you	don't	allow	them,	you	are
preventing	them.
Nobody	wants	to	be	just	a	nobody,	nobody	wants	to	be	a	pure	nothingness.	The
moment	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 disappear,	 a	 new	 presence	 arises	 in	 you	 which	 has
nothing	to	do	with	"I"
and	 "me,"	 which	 is	 part	 of	 the	 whole	 existence.	 And	 then	 only	 the	 thirst	 is
quenched.
My	work	 is	 to	make	you	more	and	more	 thirsty	 --	 so	 thirsty	 that	one	day,	you
take	 a	 jump	 into	 your	 own	 nothingness,	 and	 disappear.	Your	 disappearance	 is
your	enlightenment.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
UNABLE	 TO	 WRITE	 YOU	 A	 MEANINGFUL	 QUESTION,	 I	 AM
OVERJOYED
SEEING	PEOPLE	LOVING	YOU.	BELOVED	MASTER,	PLEASE	HELP	ME
TO
KEEP	MOVING	ON.
Nirupa,	the	feeling	that	you	are	unable	to	write	a	meaningful	question	gives	you
what	 I	was	 calling	 innocence;	 otherwise,	 people	 think	 their	 questions	 are	 very
meaningful.	Out	of	ignorance,	you	cannot	ask	a	meaningful	question.	It	is	one	of
the	mysteries	of	 life:	 the	day	you	can	ask	a	meaningful	question,	you	will	 find
the	 meaningful	 answer	 within	 yourself.	 A	 meaningful	 question	 carries	 as	 a
shadow	the	meaningful	answer.
But	to	be	aware	that	you	cannot	ask	a	meaningful	question	is	an	achievement	on
the	way	of	innocence.	There	is	no	need	for	any	question,	and	there	is	no	need	for
any	answer.
Questions	 and	 answers	 are	 just	 the	 stuff	 your	 mind	 is	 made	 of.	 When	 you
become	 disinterested	 in	 questions	 and	 answers,	 you	 start	 stepping	 out	 of	 the
mind;	and	out	of	the	mind	is	your	glorious	being,	is	your	authentic	self.
It	 is	 beautiful	 that	 you	 say,	 "I	 am	 overjoyed	 seeing	 people	 loving	 you."
Ordinarily	mind	does	not	function	that	way.	Only	if	you	have	slipped	a	little	bit
out	of	the	mind	is	it	possible	to	be	overjoyed	seeing	people	loving	me.	Mind	is
always	 jealous,	 it	cannot	be	overjoyed.	 It	will	 feel	hurt	 that	"others	are	 loving,
are	ahead	of	me,	and	I	am	lagging	behind."	And	it	will	create	a	thousand	and	one
rationalizations	that	"their	love	is	fake	--
they	are	all	pretending.	My	love	is	true	and	authentic	--	these	are	all	hypocrites."
The	 function	of	 the	mind	 is	 to	make	you	competitive,	 to	make	you	 jealous,	 to
make	you	believe	yourself	superior	to	others.	Once	you	are	just	a	little	bit	out	of
the	mind,	things	start	changing.	If	somebody	is	joyful,	you	don't	feel	jealous;	you
feel	 grateful	 that	 you	 saw	 a	 joyful	man.	 Somebody	 is	 loving	 --	 you	 don't	 feel
jealous;	you	feel	again	grateful	that	you	have	been	able	to	see	somebody	loving
somebody	else,	and	jealousy	has	not	arisen	in	you.
You	say,	"I	am	overjoyed	seeing	people	loving	you."	This	is	a	good	indication,
Nirupa.
You	have	been	long	enough	with	me,	and	it	is	time	for	you	to	go	out	of	the	mind.
All	those	who	are	with	me,	their	only	work	is	to	go	out	of	the	mind,	to	transcend
mind,	to	function	as	a	no-mind,	to	function	as	a	heart,	and	finally,	to	function	as
a	being.
You	are	asking,	"Please	help	me	to	keep	moving	on."	My	blessings	are	with	you,
my	love	is	with	you;	you	don't	need	anything	more.	That	will	go	on	helping	you
move	onwards	--
just	 don't	 become	 too	 greedy.	 Great	 things	 come	 very	 slowly.	 Don't	 ask	 for
seasonal	flowers;	they	come	quickly,	but	they	also	disappear	quickly.
Little	Moishe	goes	skating	on	the	lake	while	his	mother	stands	by	watching	over
him.
Suddenly,	through	a	crack	in	the	thin	ice,	little	Moishe	vanishes.
"Oy	 vey!"	 shrieks	 his	 mother.	 "My	 Moishe,	 in	 front	 of	 my	 very	 eyes!"
Eventually	a	policeman	comes,	strips	naked,	and	dives	into	the	icy	water.	Again
and	 again,	 blue	 from	 cold,	 he	 dives	 in	 and	 eventually	 finds	 Moishe.	 The
policeman	manages	to	revive	him,	wraps	him	in	his	own	clothes,	and	rushes	him
to	the	hospital	where	little	Moishe	eventually	recovers.
Moishe's	mother	goes	up	to	the	policeman	afterwards	and	says,	"So,	where	is	his
hat?	He	had	a	hat!"
This	is	particularly	a	Jewish	mind,	but	all	minds	are	Jews.	She	is	worried	about	a
hat.	 She	 is	 not	 even	 thankful	 to	 the	 policeman	 that	 he	 risked	his	 own	 life	 and
saved	her	boy.	Her	concern	is,	"Where	is	the	hat?"
Never	 be	 greedy	 and	 never	 be	 concerned	 with	 trivia,	 and	 your	 movement
towards	greater	silences	of	the	heart	will	become	easier	every	day.	Be	loving,	be
joyous,	and	be	always	thankful	for	whatever	is	happening	to	you.	Don't	ask	for
the	hat.
Be	thankful	for	what	has	been	given	to	you	--	and	life	is	giving	you	so	much	that
your	 thankfulness	 is	 always	 going	 to	 fall	 short.	 But	 the	 thankful	 heart	 grows
easily;	 with	 gratitude,	 you	 are	 nourished.	 You	 become	 stronger	 in	 moving
towards	the	unknown.
Except	gratitude,	there	is	no	other	prayer.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
THIS	 QUESTION	 HAS	 COME	 UP	 MANY	 TIMES	 FOR	 ME,	 BUT	 YOU
HAVE	JUST
PROVOKED	 IT	 INTO	 THE	 OPEN.	 ISN'T	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 THE	 LAST
RESORT?
Prem	Shunyo,	enlightenment	is	certainly	the	last	resort,	but	not	for	Milarepa.	For
Milarepa,	 you	 are	 the	 last	 resort.	 In	 other	 words,	 for	 Milarepa,	 you	 are	 the
enlightenment.
So	don't	be	worried,	let	him	fool	around,	but	he	cannot	escape	you.	You	are	his
last	resort,	his	enlightenment.
They	say	that	behind	every	great	man	there	is	a	woman.	They	have	forgotten	to
know	that	sometimes	in	front	of	every	great	man	there	is	a	woman.	In	your	case,
you	are	not	behind	Milarepa,	you	are	in	front	of	Milarepa.	Searching	you,	he	will
grow,	because	you	will	be	growing	towards	enlightenment.	And	he	will	stagger,
somehow	carrying	his	guitar,	behind	you	--	it	will	be	a	unique	enlightenment.
Two	 persons	 have	 never	 become	 enlightened	 together	 --	 but	 in	 your	 case,	 it
seems	it	is	going	to	happen,	an	exception.	And	when	you	both	are	enlightened,
he	will	 play	 on	 the	 guitar....	No	 enlightened	master	 up	 to	 now	has	 carried	 the
guitar	 to	 those	 heights.	And	 his	 enlightenment	 is	 sure	 --	 just	 you	 go	 on	 being
ahead	 of	 him.	 Don't	 follow	 him;	 otherwise,	 you	 both	 will	 lose	 the	 path.	 You
search	enlightenment,	and	let	Milarepa	search	you.
A	story	for	you	to	tell	Milarepa....	A	proud	father	gave	his	son	twenty	bucks	and
sent	 him	 off	 to	 the	 local	 whorehouse.	 On	 his	 way,	 the	 boy	 passed	 by	 his
grandmother's	house,	and	she	called	him	in.	He	explained	where	he	was	going,
and	she	insisted	that	he	keep	the	twenty	dollars	and	do	it	with	her.
The	boy	returned	home	with	a	big	smile.	"How	was	it?"	asked	the	father.
"Great!	and	I	saved	the	twenty	bucks,"	responded	the	boy.
"How	is	that?"	his	father	asked.
"I	did	it	with	grandma,"	the	boy	explained.
His	father	screamed,	"You	mean	you	made	love	to	my	mother?"
"Hey,	why	not?"	said	the	boy.	"You	have	been	making	love	to	mine!"
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	NIGHT,	AS	YOUR	LEG	GAVE	WAY	AND	YOU	BEGAN	TO
FALL,	 SOMETHING	 LIKE	 LIGHTNING	 HAPPENED.	 IN	 A	 MOMENT,	 I
KNEW	MY
DEEPEST	FEARS,	MY	DEEPEST	TEARS,	AND	TOTAL	TRUST.	EVEN	TO
TALK
ABOUT	THIS	AS	AN	EXPERIENCE	IS	IMPOSSIBLE.	IT	WAS	NOT	AN
EXPERIENCE	AS	 I	 HAVE	KNOWN	 EXPERIENCE	 TO	 BE.	 I	 CAN	ONLY
STUMBLE
ABOUT	WITH	THE	WORDS.	IT	WAS	AS	IF	THERE	ARE	HEARTS	WITHIN
HEART.	MY	HEART	FELT	AN	INSTANT	BEAT	OF	DEEP	SADNESS,	FAR
BEYOND	ANY	SADNESS	I	HAVE	EVEN	KNOWN.	AND,	AS	IF	HOLDING
THIS
HEART	WITHIN	ITSELF,	A	BIGGER	HEART	EXISTED	IN	EXACTLY	THE
SAME
MOMENT,	 COMPLETELY	 STILL,	 KNOWING,	 WATCHING.	 THIS	 WAS
TRUST.
THE	 WORDS	 FALL	 SO	 SHORT.	 OSHO,	 WILL	 YOU	 PLEASE	 SAY
SOMETHING
ABOUT	THIS	MOMENT?
Satyadharma,	 the	 question	 you	 are	 asking	may	 be	 in	 the	 heart	 of	many	 other
sannyasins.
You	are	asking,	 "The	other	night	 as	your	 leg	gave	way	and	You	began	 to	 fall,
something	like	lightning	happened.	In	a	moment,	I	knew	my	deepest	fears,	my
deepest	tears,	and	total	trust."
One	may	recognize	or	not...	deep	down	those	who	have	loved	me	are	carrying	a
certain	fear	that	one	day	I	will	not	be	in	the	body	--	that	is	their	deepest	fear,	and
their	deepest	tears,	because	they	cannot	conceive	themselves	without	me,	I	have
become	almost	a	part	of	their	being.	It	is	no	longer	a	relationship,	it	is	a	merging
and	a	melting.	Without	me,	they	will	find	a	vast	gap	in	their	being	which	cannot
be	fulfilled.	With	my	disappearing	from	the	body,	 they	will	 find	a	part	of	 their
life	has	also	disappeared	 --	and	perhaps,	 that	was	 the	part	which	was	 the	most
significant,	the	most	meaningful.
The	day	my	leg	gave	way	and	I	began	to	fall,	all	these	fears	and	tears	suddenly
came	 to	 the	 surface.	 It	 has	 been	 tremendously	 good	of	my	 leg	 to	 give	 you	 an
opportunity	to	see	deeper	within	yourself	that	I	am	not	going	to	be	here	forever.
So	you	are	not	to	postpone	a	single	moment;	you	have	to	be	ready	before	I	leave
the	body.	Only	then	will	you	not	miss	me;	in	your	own	realization,	you	will	have
found	me	again	--	more	close,	more	fresh.
It	is	true:	even	to	talk	about	this	as	an	experience	is	impossible,	because	it	was
exactly	 like	 lightning	 --	 not	 like	 a	 slow	 experience	 --	 so	 quick,	 so	 sudden,	 so
unexpected.
After	all,	my	leg	is	a	master's	leg.	When	it	is	going	to	do	something,	it	is	going
to	do	something	really	deep.	It	provoked	in	you	many	feelings,	and	the	greatest
of	them	was	of	trust.
While	 I	 am	 alive,	 in	 the	 body,	 you	 can	 take	 me	 for	 granted,	 that	 tomorrow
morning	I	will	be	coming	back	to	talk	to	you.	But	in	that	moment,	you	knew	it	is
possible	 that	 any	moment	 you	may	have	 to	 lose	me.	And	before	 that	moment
comes,	 unless	 you	 have	 attained	 yourself,	 you	 will	 be	 in	 utter	 misery	 and
darkness.
Suddenly,	you	could	not	take	me	for	granted.	I	have	been	insisting,	"Don't	take
me	for	granted.	Today	I	am	here;	tomorrow	I	may	not	be."	It	is	easier	to	attain	to
the	truth	while	I	am	holding	your	hand	in	my	hand;	it	will	be	more	difficult	when
you	are	left	alone.
And	one	never	knows	how	long	it	will	take	for	you	to	find	another	man	who	can
love	you	unconditionally,	who	can	trust	you	as	you	are.	It	can	take	lives	to	find
such	a	person	again.	You	will	meet	many,	but	they	will	all	require	that	you	have
to	be	a	certain	way	to	be	acceptable	to	them.	Gautam	Buddha,	or	Zarathustra,	or
Jesus	Christ,	 they	 all	 require	 you	 to	 be	 a	 certain	way,	 then	 you	 deserve	 to	 be
accepted.
I	am	breaking	a	new	path:	I	accept	you	as	you	are.
The	 difference	 is	 they	want	 you	 to	 change	 before	 they	 accept	 you;	 I	 trust	my
acceptance.
I	 know	 that	 my	 acceptance	 is	 going	 to	 change	 you.	 They	 expect	 you	 to	 be
deserving,	to	be	worthy;	only	then	they	can	shower	their	love	on	you.
My	attitude	is	totally	different	from	them,	from	anybody	who	has	ever	lived	on
the	earth.
I	 will	 shower	 my	 love	 on	 you	 because	 I	 trust	 in	 my	 love	 and	 its	 alchemical
qualities.	My	love	is	going	to	transform	you,	to	make	you	deserving.	It	may	take
lives	and	lives	to	find	another	man.	And	if	you	cannot	become	enlightened	with
me,	it	will	be	very,	very	difficult	with	that	old	type	of	disciplehood,	and	the	old
type	of	masters.
The	world	 is	 not	 a	 paradise	 yet	 because	 nobody	 has	 accepted	 you.	 First	 they
wanted	 you	 to	 change	 according	 to	 their	 ideals	 and	 only	 then	 you	 would	 be
accepted.	It	used	to	take	five	years,	seven	years,	or	even	ten	years	to	become	an
initiate	 with	 Gautam	 Buddha.	 Ten	 years	 you	 would	 remain	 a	 novice...	 just
preparing,	and	hoping	that	you	will	be	accepted.
Thousands	tried,	and	only	very	few	of	them	were	accepted.
You	 are	 not	 new	 on	 the	 earth;	 perhaps	 many	 of	 you	 have	 lived	 with	 other
masters,	but	they	made	the	whole	thing	so	difficult.	Even	the	initiation	requires
qualities	 to	be	developed	 in	you	 --	you	have	 to	be	acceptable	and	presentable.
Millions	have	 longed	 for	a	better	 consciousness,	but	nobody	was	 there	 to	help
them	--	they	were	not	worthy	to	receive	help.
Your	deepest	fear	is	not	an	experience	that	can	be	easily	expressed.	It	has	shaken
your	whole	being.	It	has	made	you	aware	that	you	have	to	put	your	totality	into
transforming	 your	 consciousness	while	 I	 am	 here	 in	 the	 body;	 otherwise,	 you
had	every	opportunity	to	find	the	deathless,	and	you	missed	it.	You	will	never	be
able	to	forgive	yourself.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	We	have	to	create	a	golden	future
25	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705255
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN28
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
87
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
TOWARDS	 THE	 END	 OF	 THE	 FIRST	MILLENNIUM,	 HUMANITY	WAS
AFRAID
THAT	GOD	WOULD	PUT	AN	END	TO	THE	WORLD,	BECAUSE	OF	WHAT
HE
SAID	 IN	 THE	 APOCALYPSE	 OF	 ST.	 JOHN.	 NOWADAYS,	 AS	 WE	 ARE
COMING
CLOSE	 TO	 THE	 END	 OF	 THE	 SECOND	 MILLENNIA,	 MAN	 IS
BECOMING	MORE
AND	MORE	AFRAID	THAT	PERHAPS	HE	HIMSELF	 IS	GOING	TO	PUT
AN	END
TO	THE	WORLD.	HAS	ANYTHING	CHANGED	AT	ALL	IN	HUMAN
CONSCIOUSNESS	DURING	THE	LAST	ONE	THOUSAND	YEARS?	WHAT
DOES
MAN	NEED	TO	UNDERSTAND	NOW	THAT	HE	KNOWS	THAT	HE	AND
ONLY
HE	WILL	BE	RESPONSIBLE	AND	NOT	SOME	FICTITIOUS	GOD?
Chidananda,	 there	has	been	a	great	change	 in	human	consciousness	during	 the
past	one	thousand	years.	But	the	change	is	such	that	you	can	see	it	only	when	a
real	situation	arises,	and	man	responds	in	a	totally	different	way	than	he	has	ever
responded	before.	For	example,	there	has	never	been	so	much	awareness	about
peace,	and	there	has	never	been	so	much	antagonism	towards	war.
In	fact,	war	was	always	respected	in	the	past,	and	peace	was	never	thought	of	as
anything	 more	 than	 a	 gap	 between	 two	 wars	 --	 nothing	 positive,	 just	 a
preparation	for	a	new	war.
You	need	some	time.	A	war	destroys	so	much	that	you	cannot	immediately	start
another	war;	hence	a	 time	of	peace	 is	needed.	This	 is	not	authentic	peace,	 it	 is
simply	cold	war.
The	 war	 and	 all	 its	 components	 continue	 underground,	 preparing	 for	 a	 more
dangerous	and	a	more	destructive	war	in	the	future.
The	whole	past	has	been	 respectful	of	 the	warrior.	 It	 is	only	 just	now	 in	 these
few	 past	 years	 that	 war	 has	 become	 a	 dirty	 four-letter	 word,	 and	 peace	 has
become	for	the	first	time	a	desire	and	a	longing	of	the	very	heart	of	humanity.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	war	has	become	almost	impossible.
The	 impossibility	 of	 war	 is	 based	 on	 two	 fundamentals.	 One	 is	 a	 human
consciousness	 about	 the	 futility	of	war.	Nobody	can	claim	 that	 it	 is	 something
beautiful,	 something	 honorable,	 something	 which	 gives	 dignity	 to	 humanity.
Slowly,	slowly	it	has	penetrated	into	human	consciousness	that	war	takes	away
all	 dignity.	 It	 makes	man	 fall	 below	 animals,	 because	 even	 animals	 don't	 kill
their	own	species;	lions	don't	kill	other	lions,	deer	don't	kill	other	deer.	It	is	only
man	who	kills	other	human	beings.	It	is	a	disqualification,	not	a	great	quality	to
be	honored.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 is	 that	 war	 has	 fallen	 into	 disrespect,	 into	 utter	 futility,
stupidity;	it	has	lost	all	its	past	glory	and	significance.
Secondly,	 the	 war	 materials	 --	 atomic	 energy	 and	 nuclear	 weapons	 --	 have
reached	to	such	a	point	that	they	have	made	war	impossible.	Unless	the	whole	of
humanity	 suddenly	 goes	mad,	war	 is	 impossible,	 because	 the	 only	 purpose	 of
war	was	to	defeat	the	enemy,	the	only	purpose	was	to	be	victorious.	Victory	was
the	end.	But	now,	with	nuclear	weapons,	there	is	no	defeat,	no	victory;	no	one	is
defeated,	no	one	becomes	victorious,	all	are	dead.	The	whole	life	on	the	planet
simply	disappears.
What	Gautam	Buddha,	Mahavira,	 Jesus,	 Zarathustra	 and	 the	 great	 teachers	 of
humanity	have	not	been	able	to	convince	man	about,	has	been	done	by	nuclear
weapons.	Now	war	means	only	one	thing:	a	global	suicide.	And	no	man	is	ready
to	commit	suicide.	In	fact,	the	closer	comes	the	possibility	of	a	third	world	war,
the	deeper	becomes	the	urge	to	live
--	 and	 to	 live	 more	 consciously,	 and	 to	 live	 more	 lovingly,	 and	 to	 live	 more
intensely.	A	longing	for	life	itself	has	never	been	so	intense	and	so	profound	as	it
is	today.
I	predict	the	impossibility	of	any	war	in	the	future.	And	this	is	going	to	change	a
thousand	and	one	 things	 in	 life,	because	 if	war	becomes	 impossible,	 sooner	or
later	the	piling	up	of	nuclear	weapons	will	become	an	exercise	in	stupidity.
In	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 under	 the	 leadership	 of	 Gorbachev,	 they	 have	 stopped
creating	 nuclear	 weapons	 one-sidedly.	 They	 have	 tried	 hard	 to	 negotiate	 with
America	that	they	should	both	stop	together.	They	said,	"We	go	on	creating	out
of	the	fear	that	you	are	creating;	you	go	on	creating	out	of	the	fear	that	we	are
creating	--	we	can	stop	together."
But	Ronald	Reagan	is	Adolf	Hitler	number	one	--	a	very	fascist	mind.
Gorbachev	has	taken	a	step	so	revolutionary	and	so	intelligent	and	so	courageous
and	so	risky	that	one	cannot	conceive	of	him	just	as	a	politician.	He	is	a	man	of
deep	understanding.	He	stopped	creating	more	nuclear	weapons	almost	one	year
ago,	and	he	has	been	cutting	the	budget	every	moment,	because	he	can	see	the
possibility	of	what	 I	am	saying:	 that	 there	 is	not	going	 to	be	any	war,	because
you	 cannot	 convince	 five	 billion	 people	 to	 die	 for	 no	 purpose.	Gorbachev	 has
made	history	by	taking	the	step	single-handedly,	but	America	is	still	piling	up....
The	American	masses	 should	 rise	 up	 in	 a	 rebellious	 uproar	 against	 their	 own
government,	because	now	even	Ronald	Reagan	cannot	say,	"We	have	 to	create
because	the	Soviet	Union	is	creating."	The	Soviet	Union	has	opened	its	doors	to
world	 scientists	 to	 come	 and	 examine	 their	 plants	 and	 be	 satisfied,	 because
Ronald	 Reagan	 was	 lying	 continuously	 saying	 "Gorbachev	 has	 not	 stopped
creating	nuclear	weapons;	he	is	simply	deceiving	us."
Now	the	whole	world	is	convinced	that	the	Soviet	Union	is	no	longer	interested
in	destroying	human	life.
All	 the	 intelligent	 people	 of	 the	 world	 should	 protest	 against	 this	 American
fascist	attitude,	and	force	America	to	stop	bringing	death	to	this	beautiful	planet.
And	I	think,	as	the	century	comes	to	its	end,	there	is	bound	to	be	a	great	protest
from	all	over	the	world.
America	has	to	be	put	right	--	it	is	already	late!
I	am	reminded	of	George	Gurdjieff.	He	used	to	say	laughingly	that	America	has
not	 been	 discovered	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 and	 that	 is	 true.	 It	 is	 a	 lie	 that	 is	 being
taught	 in	 the	 schools	 and	 colleges	 and	 the	 universities	 that	 America	 was
discovered	 by	Columbus.	 In	Turkey	 there	 is	 a	 seven	 hundred	 year	 old	map	 in
which	 America	 is	 completely	 drawn,	 both	 the	 Americas,	 North	 America	 and
South	 America,	 an	 exact	 map	 of	 the	 whole	 world.	 When	 that	 map	 was
discovered	it	was	so	shocking	that	not	only	was	America	known,	it	was	so	well
known	that	maps	of	it	existed.	Then	what	had	happened?
In	Indian	mythology,	one	of	 the	great	warriors	of	Mahabharat,	 the	great	Indian
war	of	five	thousand	years	before,	had	married	a	woman	from	Mexico.	The	word
in	 Sanskrit	 literature	 for	 Mexico	 is	 Makshika.	 Mexico	 is	 a	 distortion	 of	 a
Sanskrit	word	Makshika,	 because	 the	 description	 is	 exactly	 of	Mexico;	 and	 in
Mexico,	Hindu	temples	have	been	found,	and	Hindu	gods	and	their	statues	have
been	found.	The	Mexican	temple	is	a	replica	of	the	Hindu	temple.
George	 Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say	 that	 America	 has	 been	 discovered	 many	 many
times,	but	it	becomes	such	a	nuisance	that	we	have	to	hush	it	up	and	forget	all
about	it	--	then	somebody	else	discovers	it	again!
If	Ronald	Reagan	and	his	fascist	colleagues	are	not	going	to	listen	to	the	protest
of	 the	whole	 intelligent	world,	 then	 the	 only	way	will	 be	 an	 absolute	 boycott;
forgive	the	fools	-
-	and	forget	them,	so	they	can	be	discovered	again	by	some	Columbus.
The	 steps	 that	 Gorbachev	 is	 taking	 are	 immensely	 valuable,	 and	 are	 very
convincing	to	the	whole	world	that	his	intentions	are	for	a	beautiful	co-existence.
There	is	no	need	of	any	war.	You	can	have	your	democracy,	you	can	have	your
communism,	you	can	have	your	own	ideology	--	what	is	the	problem?	There	is
no	need	to	impose	your	ideology	on	somebody	else.	At	least	man's	spirit	should
be	 left	 in	 freedom	 to	choose	 its	own	 ideology	 --	 religious,	political,	 social.	No
government	has	 the	right	over	 the	rights	of	 the	 individual;	all	governments	are
only	 servants.	 But	 strangely,	 because	 of	 the	 power	 in	 their	 hands,	 servants
become	 masters;	 they	 start	 behaving	 as	 if	 the	 masters	 are	 servants.	 But	 this
cannot	go	forever.
Yes,	all	the	predictions	of	the	ancient	seers,	like	Nostradamus,	that	the	world	is
going	to	end	by	the	end	of	this	century,	are	true	in	a	very	different	sense	than	has
been	understood.
The	old	world	 is	going	 to	end,	and	a	new	world	 is	going	 to	begin.	That	 is	my
interpretation	of	Nostradamus.
The	old	man	has	to	disappear	to	give	place	to	a	new	man	with	fresh	values,	with
one	 earth	 undivided	 into	 nations,	 with	 one	 humanity	 undivided	 by	 religions,
because	 religions	 don't	 need	 to	 be	 organized.	 Religion	 is	 a	 love	 affair,	 a	 love
affair	with	existence.	There	is	no	question	of	any	organization	like	Christianity,
or	Hinduism,	or	Mohammedanism.
Religion	is	as	much	purely	individual	as	love,	because	religion	is	nothing	but	the
purest	 and	 the	 highest	 quality	 of	 love.	You	don't	 organize	 love!	You	don't	 say
that	this	is	Christian	love,	this	is	Hindu	love,	this	is	Mohammedan	love.	Love	is
simply	 love,	 meditation	 is	 simply	 meditation,	 peace	 is	 simply	 peace,
enlightenment	is	simply	enlightenment.	It	cannot	have	any	adjective	with	it.
Changes	 have	 been	 happening.	 They	 will	 come	 to	 a	 peak	 by	 the	 end	 of	 this
century	 when	 the	 moment	 of	 ultimate	 decision	 will	 have	 to	 be	 faced	 by
humanity,	either	 to	 transform	yourself	 totally;	drop	all	 that	 is	old....	Don't	 look
backwards;	start	creating	new	values,	look	forward	--	because	the	past	is	the	past
and	to	visit	the	graveyard	too	much	is	dangerous.	The	graveyard	is	a	place	one
should	visit	only	once,	and	that	too	is	a	one-way	affair...	you	simply	go	there	and
never	come	back.
It	is	the	future	that	should	be	your	concern.	It	is	the	future	and	the	faraway	stars
that	will	become	your	challenges.	You	have	heard	always	about	the	golden	past.
We	have	to	forget	all	about	it;	we	have	to	create	a	golden	future.
The	decisive	moment	 is	 coming	 close-by;	 either	we	have	 to	 decide	 to	 commit
suicide....	If	we	cling	with	the	past,	 then	that	is	 the	only	possibility.	If	we	drop
the	past	and	the	dead	and	start	afresh	from	ABC,	from	the	very	scratch,	writing
the	 destiny	 of	 man,	 the	 days	 of	 the	 last	 part	 of	 this	 century	 will	 be	 of	 a
tremendous	revolution.	The	revolution	is	going	to	be	so	great	that	Nostradamus
can	be	said	to	be	right,	that	the	world	will	end	--	the	world	as	we	have	known	it	-
-	and	a	world	that	we	have	never	even	dreamt	of	has	to	begin.
Chidananda,	you	are	right	that	we	cannot	throw	away	the	responsibility	on	some
fictitious	God,	that	he	will	end	the	world.	We	are	perfectly	aware	that	if	a	third
world	war	 happens,	we	will	 be	 the	 only	 responsible	 people	 to	 have	 destroyed
ourselves.	I	think	changes	happen	only	in	such	dangerous	and	critical	moments.
If	life	goes	on	smoothly	and	comfortably	great	changes	don't	happen,	but	if	life
comes	to	a	place	where	you	have	to	choose	between	death	or	a	new	style	of	life,
I	am	absolutely	certain	you	will	choose	the	new	style	of	life	rather	than	the	old
well-acquainted	death.
Yes	 Chidananda,	 there	 is	 no	 god,	 and	 man	 is	 going	 to	 be	 responsible	 for
whatever	he	chooses.	And	I	 trust	 in	 the	deepest	 longing	of	everybody:	 it	 is	 for
life,	it	is	for	love,	it	is	for	joy,	it	is	for	song,	it	is	for	flowers,	it	is	for	dances.	It	is
for	love.
Man	cannot	choose	a	global	death.
It	is	an	impossibility.
Yes,	the	old	world	will	come	to	an	end;	Nostradamus	is	not	going	to	be	wrong.
But	his	 interpreters	are	all	wrong.	My	interpretation	 is:	The	death	of	 the	old	 is
the	birth	of	the	new.
A	man	down	on	his	luck	goes	home	to	his	wife	and	tells	her,	"Look	dear,	we	are
running	out	of	money	and	we	are	gonna	have	to	cut	down	on	all	 the	luxuries."
He	then	adds	scornfully,	"If	you	would	just	learn	to	cook	we	could	fire	the	chef."
"In	that	case,"	replies	the	woman,"if	you	would	learn	to	make	love	we	could	fire
the	chauffeur."
In	critical	moments	one	has	to	be	truthful,	and	if	things	are	going	to	change,	then
you	have	 to	change	also.	Your	ways	of	 love	have	 to	change.	You	have	 to	drop
old	 kinds	 of	 jealousies,	 competitions;	 you	 have	 to	 drop	 old	 values	 of	 honor,
respectability,	 royal	 blood...	 all	 nonsense.	 You	 have	 to	 learn	 that	 the	 whole
humanity	is	one	brotherhood.	The	black	and	the	white	and	the	in-between,	all	are
the	same.
I	 am	 reminded...	 Rabindranath	was	 in	Geneva.	 He	 had	 just	 been	 awarded	 the
Nobel	prize,	and	he	was	being	received	by	the	government	of	Switzerland	in	a
vast	welcome	party.
Everybody	 was	 white.	 Somebody	 asked,	 Rabindranath,	 "What	 is	 your
explanation?	Why	has	God	created	such	discriminations	--	because	you	insist	on
one	brotherhood	of	the	whole	humanity."
Rabindranath	 said,	 "God	 first	 created	 a	 man	 out	 of	 mud	 and	 baked	 him,	 but
being	inexperienced,	baked	him	too	much.	He's	the	negro.	He	created	a	second
man.	Being	afraid	that	he	may	again	make	another	negro,	he	pulled	him	out	quite
early,	unbaked...
he's	the	white	man."
That's	why	in	the	white	man	the	desire	for	having	a	tan	continues...	a	little	more
baking.
And	 baking	 powders	 are	 available,	 baking	 lotions	 are	 available;	 put	 on	 those
lotions	and	powders	and	lie	down	naked	under	the	hot	burning	sun.	This	desire	is
because	they	were	pulled	out	of	the	bakery	a	little	too	soon.	God	said,	"My	God,
I	have	committed	another	mistake."
That's	why	the	Indian	is	in-between.	That	is	the	third	person	he	baked,	just	right,
neither	 a	 little	 more,	 nor	 a	 little	 less.	 But	 more	 than	 that,	 there	 is	 not	 any
difference...	just	a	little	more	sun,	a	little	less	sun.
There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any	 color	 discrimination.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 have
boundaries	of	nations,	because	the	earth	has	no	boundaries.	There	is	no	need	to
have	 flocks	 of	 people	 gathered	 separately	 --	 the	Catholics,	 the	Protestants,	 the
Hindus,	the	Mohammedans;	each	one	should	be	free	to	have	his	own	immediate
and	personal	contact	with	existence,	his	own	prayer.
The	new	man	is	on	the	horizon.
All	the	preparations	to	destroy	the	world	will	only	destroy	the	old	man	and	the
old	world.
They	will	create	the	basic	necessity	for	the	birth	of	a	new	man.	I	can	see	him	on
the	 horizon	 already.	 He	 has	 arrived;	 it	 will	 just	 take	 some	 time	 for	 people	 to
recognize	him.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 SOMEONE	 ASKED	 ME	 WHERE	 I	 CAME	 FROM
BEFORE
COMING	TO	POONA	AND	I	COULDN'T	REMEMBER.	HE	STARTED
MENTIONING	MAJOR	EUROPEAN	CITIES	WHILE	I	GOT	MORE
EMBARRASSED.	I	SAID,	"JUST	WAIT,	IT	WILL	COME,"	AND	SUDDENLY
REMEMBERED	SYDNEY,	AUSTRALIA.	OSHO,	SINCE	I'VE	BEEN	WITH
YOU
THIS	 TIME	 I'M	 LOSING	 MY	 MEMORY.	 WHAT'S	 HAPPENING?	 I	 ASK
THIS
QUESTION	 IN	 THE	 HOPE	 THAT	 THIS	 SHOWS	 SOMETHING	 TO	 DO
WITH
MEDITATION.
Michael,	you	are	really	becoming	intelligent.	It	is	not	expected	from	people	who
come	 from	 Sydney,	 Australia.	 This	 has	 never	 happened	 before!	 Losing	 your
memory	is	of	great	significance.	It	means	the	energy	is	shifting	from	memory	to
intelligence.
Memory	 is	 mechanical;	 intelligence	 is	 non-mechanical.	 That's	 why	 computers
can	have	memory;	they	don't	have	intelligence.	If	you	ask	them	a	question	about
which	they	have	not	been	told	before,	you	have	to	feed	the	information	first,	then
you	can	ask	the	question,	and	without	fail	the	answer	will	come.	Intelligence	is	a
totally	different	matter.
Your	meditation	is	certainly	going	deeper.	Leaving	aside	Sydney,	Australia,	and
all	the	memories	concerned	with	Sydney,	Australia,	leaving	aside	the	past	--	you
are	entering	into	a	new	space.
Only	 once	 in	 a	while	 a	 computer	 has	 been	 intelligent	 --	 only	 in	 jokes,	 not	 in
reality.
A	man	was	 asking	 a	 computer,	 "Tell	me	 about	my	 father.	What	 do	 you	 know
about	my	 father?	 I	 want	 all	 the	 information."	 The	 information	 came	 --	 "Your
father	has	gone	fishing	just	three	hours	ago	in	the	ocean."	The	man	laughed	and
he	said,	"You're	stupid!
My	father	 is	dead	and	he	has	been	dead	for	 three	years;	he	cannot	go	fishing."
The	 computer	 laughed	 and	 said,	 "That	was	 not	 your	 father,	 that	was	 only	 the
husband	of	your	mother.	Your	father	has	gone	fishing;	you	just	go	to	the	beach
and	you	will	find	him	there."
I	 used	 to	 think	 that	 only	 in	 jokes	 computers	 can	 be	 intelligent,	 but	 just	 today
Anando	 brought	 me	 the	 news	 that	 in	 Japan	 there	 are	 one	 hundred	 thousand
robots	 --	 just	 men,	 mechanical	 men	 --	 working	 in	 factories,	 and	 not	 a	 small
number,	 but	 working	 in	 thousands....	 And	 the	 government	 has	 just	 released
information	that	a	strange	thing	is	happening	which	is	creating	tremendous	fear.
These	 robots	 have	 suddenly	 started	 killing	men.	The	 robot	 is	 just	working,	 he
sees	some	man	passing	by,	jumps,	catches	hold	of	him,	and	with	his	steel	hands
gives	him	a	good	hug	and	finishes	him.
Ten	people	have	been	killed	just	in	a	few	days.	And	if	the	government	says	ten,
you	can	multiply	by	ten;	at	least	one	hundred	must	have	died.	Then	governments
accept,	 reluctantly,	a	 small	percentage.	But	 the	 fear	has	become	great,	because
one	hundred	thousand	robots	--	if	they	simply	come	out	of	the	factories	into	the
streets	and	start	making	hugging	gestures	to	men	and	women....	These	ten	deaths
happened	 in	a	strange	situation,	because	 those	robots	work	 through	computers,
they	 receive	 orders	 from	 the	 computer.	 They	 are	 machines,	 but	 somehow	 it
seems	something	strange	and	mysterious	is	starting	to	happen.
The	government	has	assured	people,	"Don't	be	worried	about	ghosts	etcetera"	--
because	that	is	the	first	thing	that	comes	to	mind,	that	Anando's	ghosts,	finding	a
perfect	body....
They	have	perfect	human	bodies,	just	they	are	made	of	steel;	they	can	be	good
abodes	 for	 ghosts!	Poor	 ghosts	 have	 to	 live	on	 trees,	 in	 rain,	 in	 cold;	 this	 is	 a
great	opportunity!	But	once	a	ghost	enters	 in,	 then	there	is	danger.	It	may	start
doing	things	which	the	computer	is	not	ordering,	which	it	is	not	supposed	to	do.
You	are	not	a	robot.	When	you	become	silent,	you	start	seeing	your	memories	far
away,	as	distant	echoes.	 It	 is	a	very	common	experience	 that	 intelligent	people
have	not	very	good	memories,	and	vice	versa;	 the	people	who	have	very	good
memories	have	never	been	found	 to	be	very	 intelligent.	Sometimes	 idiots	have
great	memories;	 because	 their	whole	 energy	 is	 involved	 in	 their	memory,	 they
don't	have	any	intelligence.
Intelligence	is	the	power	to	face	a	new	situation	about	which	you	know	nothing.
Memory	 is	a	 reaction.	You	know	the	answer,	 the	question	 is	asked,	you	repeat
the	 answer.	But	 if	 any	 new	question	 is	 asked	 the	memory	 is	 impotent.	A	 new
question,	 a	 new	 situation,	 does	 not	 need	 your	 memory;	 it	 needs	 intelligence,
because	a	new	answer	is	needed,	a	new	response	is	needed.
Linelli	said	to	his	daughter,	"I	no	like-a	that	Irish	boy	taking-a	you	out.	He's	a-
rough	and	common	and	besides	he's-a	big-a	dumbbell."
"No	papa,"	replied	the	girl.	"Tim	is	the	most	clever	fella	I	know.	Why	you	say-a
that?	 We	 have	 only	 been	 dating	 for	 nine	 weeks,"	 the	 daughter	 replied,	 "and
already	he	has	cured	me	of	that	little	illness	I	used	to	get	every	month."
Michael,	don't	try	to	cling	to	memory.	Here	nobody	is	bothered	about	where	you
come	from;	in	fact	nobody	knows.	Everybody	comes	from	nowhere	and	goes	on
disappearing	 into	 nowhere	 again.	 Sydney	 or	 Calcutta	 or	 Bombay	 or	 San
Francisco	or	Rome	or	London	are	all	 stations	between	 two	nowheres.	And	 the
trains	are	becoming	faster;	they	don't	stop	on	every	station!	There	is	no	need	to
be	worried.	 If	 you	 forget	 everything	 that	 you	know,	 you	will	 not	 be	 a	 loser	 --
because	what	 do	 you	know?	 It	 is	 not	 valuable	 at	 all.	 In	 fact	 it	will	 be	 a	 great
richness	 if	you	can	forget	all	 that	you	know,	and	suddenly	enter	 into	a	state	of
not-knowing,	fresh	and	young	and	innocent	--	childlike.	That's	what	meditation
is,	and	that's	what	brings	tremendous	intelligence	to	you:	to	face	every	moment
with	a	totally	new	response	not	borrowed	from	the	past.
The	 most	 important	 thing...	 if	 you	 want	 to	 remember,	 if	 you	 are	 addicted	 to
remembering	and	if	you	find	it	difficult,	then	don't	be	bothered	about	where	you
come	 from;	 then	be	bothered	 about	where	you	 are	 going	 to.	That	 is	 better.	At
least	that	will	keep	you	open,	searching,	hoping.	Why	cling	to	graves,	and	why
be	a	digger	of	graves?	Your	memory-system	is	nothing	but	a	graveyard.	Try	to
live	without	memory,	and	see	how	life	becomes	suddenly	fresh.	Every	face	looks
so	new...	you	can	even	fall	in	love	with	your	own	wife.
Be	happy!	And	next	time	when	somebody	asks	you	from	where	you	are	coming,
just	ask	him:	"From	where	does	everybody	else	come?"	--	nobody	knows.	And
nobody	knows	where	we	are	going.
Still,	the	going	is	good,	we	are	enjoying.	Who	cares	about	the	beginning	and	the
end?
The	real	thing	is	in-between	--	the	pilgrimage.
I	 want	 to	 make	 your	 pilgrimage	 a	 bliss,	 a	 benediction,	 without	 any	 goal	 and
without	any	source.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THESE	 LAST	 FEW	 DAYS	 I	 OFTEN	 FIND	 MYSELF	 BEING	 IN	 VERY
DRAMATIC
AND	MISERABLE	MOODS.	I	SEE	MYSELF	WALKING	AROUND	WITH	A
LONG,	LONG	FACE	AND	WITH	THOUGHTS	LIKE,	 "I	AM	A	FAILURE."
THEN
SUDDENLY	 SOMETHING	 --	 ANYTHING	 --	 HAPPENS,	 AND	 I	 JUST
STAND
THERE,	 WATCHING	 AND	 FEELING	 AN	 OVERWHELMING	 GIGGLING
INSIDE
ME,	WHICH	INCREASES	TO	A	BIG	SMILE	AND	SOMETIMES	EVEN	TO
AN
EXPLOSION	 OF	 LAUGHTER	 AND	 THE	 FEELING	 OF	 BEING
ABSOLUTELY
HAPPY.	IT	IS	ALWAYS	SO	STRONG	THAT	I	CAN'T	EVEN	HOLD	ON	TO
MY
DRAMATIC	 MOOD	 ANYMORE!	 YESTERDAY,	 IN	 ONE	 OF	 THESE
SITUATIONS,	WITH	THE	GIGGLING	FROM	SOMEWHERE	DEEP	INSIDE
ME	CAME	THE
WORDS:	"LAUGH	YOUR	WAY	TO	GOD."	IT	FELT	LIKE	A	RECIPE	FOR
GROWTH.	 OSHO,	 DOES	 THIS	 GIGGLING	 HAVE	 ANYTHING	 TO	 DO
WITH	THE
WATCHER	 INSIDE	 ME?	 WOULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 SPEAK	 ON	 THE
RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN	EASY-GOING	LAUGHTER	AND	THE	WATCHER?
Lokita,	 there	 is	 certainly	 a	 relationship	 between	 the	 watcher	 and	 the	 laughter
arising	 in	 you,	 because	 the	 watcher	 can	 see	 not	 only	 the	 stupidities	 of	 other
people,	but	the	stupidities	of	your	own.
The	watcher	 could	 see	 your	 dramatic	mood.	Before	 the	watcher	 came	 in,	 you
were	 identified	 with	 the	 dramatic	 mood;	 you	 had	 forgotten	 that	 it	 is	 just	 a
dramatic	mood.
Just	watch	people.	Everybody	is	carrying	a	face	which	is	a	role,	repeating	some
dialogue	inside,	preparing	himself	--	what	he	is	going	to	say	to	the	wife,	because
he	is	late....	And	he	knows	perfectly	well	that	not	even	once	in	his	whole	life	has
he	been	able	to	deceive	her,	but	still	he	goes	on	doing	the	same	stupidity.
If	 the	watcher	 comes	 in,	 if	 suddenly	 you	 remember	 to	witness,	 you	will	 start
giggling	at	yourself	that	you	are	such	a	fool.	You	go	on	falling	in	the	same	ditch
every	day,	deciding	every	day	never	to	fall	again	in	the	same	ditch.	But	when	the
ditch	comes	close	by,	the	attraction,	the	fascination,	of	falling	in	the	ditch	is	so
much	that	you	forget	all	your	decisions.	You	console	yourself,	"Just	once	more.
From	 tomorrow,	 I'm	 going	 to	 keep	 my	 word,	 given	 to	 myself."	 But	 this	 has
happened	so	many	times.	And	you	will	do	it	your	whole	life,	unless	you	allow
the	watcher	to	see	the	ridiculous	acts	that	you	are	doing.
And	there	is	certainly	a	deep	relationship.	As	you	watch	you	will	start	giggling
about	why	you	unnecessarily	have	a	serious	face.	In	fact,	nobody	is	even	looking
at	you;	you	can	relax.	And	even	if	they	are	looking	at	you,	a	serious	face	is	not	a
beauty.	A	joyous	face,	a	face	full	of	smile,	radiant	with	some	deep	blissfulness,
may	be	worth	having.	If	you	are	being	an	actor,	then	choose	at	least	some	good
act,	some	good	part!
Everybody	has	 chosen	 such	ugly	 parts;	 their	 faces	 are	 dull	 and	 sad,	 their	 vibe
that	of	a	corpse.	Still	they	want	everybody	to	love	them,	respect	them.	And	even
dogs	don't	bark,	even	they	tolerate;	they	just	don't	look,	just	"Let	him	go."	Dogs
also	 get	 tired,	 barking	 unnecessarily	 the	 whole	 day.	 They	 have	 their	 own
fundamental	 ideology;	 they	 bark	 at	 people	 who	 wear	 uniforms	 --	 policemen,
postmen,	 sannyasins.	They	 are	 absolutely	 against	 uniforms.	They	 are	 certainly
very	 rebellious	 people.	 They	 don't	 want	 any	 organizations	 in	 the	 world;
everybody	should	be	an	individual.	"What	is	this	nonsense!"
The	whole	army,	the	whole	brigade	is	going,	and	all	the	people	are	in	the	same
dress	--
dogs	cannot	resist	the	temptation	to	protest.
You	pass	by;	even	the	dog	does	not	protest.	But	 if	you	watch,	you	will	giggle!
You	will	giggle	at	yourself,	"Why	you	are	carrying	such	a	face?"	and	you	will
giggle	at	the	dog,
"Why	are	you	ignoring	me?	You	are	also	trying	to	be	very	serious."	And	you	will
be	surprised,	if	you	are	really	watching,	that	the	dog	is	also	giggling	at	you.
Lokita,	 if	you	don't	believe	me,	you	can	 try	with	Niskriya;	he's	 such	a	 serious
man.	Just	look	at	him	with	a	giggling	face,	and	he	is	bound	to	giggle.	Although	it
is	 against	 his	 German	 background	 --	 he's	 a	 serious	 photographer,	 totally
dedicated	 to	his	art;	he	does	not	 look	here	and	 there	 --	but	even	he	will	 laugh.
And	you	will	help	him	in	being	watchful	 too,	because	while	you	are	 laughing,
watchfulness	is	easiest.
Perhaps	you	have	not	noted	 that	 fact.	Next	 time	you	have	a	full-hearted	 laugh,
try	 to	 see	a	very	 fundamental	 fact:	watching	 is	easiest	while	you	are	 laughing,
because	laughing	is	not	a	serious	act,	and	laughing	is	natural.	Laughing	creates
in	you	 an	 atmosphere	of	 silence.	 If	 your	 laughter	 is	 really	 total,	mind	 stops	 --
"Let	 this	 fool	 first	 laugh."	 Those	 are	 the	moments	when	 you	 can	 bring	 in	 the
watcher	very	easily.
You	heard	these	words	"Laugh	your	way	to	God."	Just	remember	that	you	don't
laugh	your	way	to	a	serious	God,	that's	all.	Laugh	your	way	to	a	laughing	God	--
which	is	a	very	rare	phenomenon.	You	will	find	on	the	way	many	gods	who	are
absolutely	serious,	who	have	forgotten	laughter.
Just	for	your	giggling...	and	remember	to	watch	while	you	are	giggling:	The	first
grade	class	gathered	around	the	teacher	for	a	game	of	"Guess	the	Animal."	The
first	 picture	 the	 teacher	 held	 up	 was	 a	 cat.	 "Okay,	 boys	 and	 girls,"	 she	 said
brightly,	"can	anyone	tell	me	what	this	is?"
"I	know!	I	know!	It	is	a	cat."	Yelled	a	little	boy.
"Very	good,	Eddy.	Now	who	knows	what	this	animal	is	called?"
"That's	a	dog,"	piped	up	the	same	little	boy.
"Right	again.	And	what	about	this	animal?"	she	asked	holding	up	a	picture	of	a
deer.
Silence	 fell	over	 the	class.	After	a	minute	or	 two	 the	 teacher	 said,	 "I	will	give
you	 a	 hint,	 children,	 listen.	 It	 is	 something	 that	 your	mother	 calls	 your	 father
around	the	house."
"I	know!	I	know!"	screamed	Eddy,	"It	is	a	horny	bastard!"
A	sailor	 from	 the	Greek	navy	was	 stranded	on	a	desert	 island	and	managed	 to
survive	 by	making	 friends	with	 the	 local	 natives	 --	 such	 good	 friends,	 in	 fact,
that	 one	 day	 the	 chief	 offered	 him	 his	 daughter	 for	 an	 evening	 entertainment.
Late	that	night,	while	they	made	love,	the	chief's	daughter	kept	shouting,	"Oga,
boga!	 Oga,	 boga!"	 The	 arrogant	 sailor	 assumed	 this	must	 be	 how	 the	 natives
express	their	appreciation	when	something	is	fantastic.
A	 few	 days	 later	 the	 chief	 invites	 the	 sailor	 for	 a	 game	 of	 golf.	 On	 his	 first
stroke,	the	chief	hit	a	hole	in	one.	Eager	to	try	out	his	new	vocabulary,	the	Greek
enthusiastically	shouted	"Oga	boga!	Oga	boga!"
The	chief	turned	around	with	a	puzzled	look	on	his	face	and	asked,	"What	you
mean,
`Wrong	hole?'"
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	When	the	archer	is	perfect
26	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705260
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN29
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
80
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOU	LEAVE	THE	HALL	EVERY	DAY,	LOOKING	AT	ALL	OF	US,	I
FEEL
SO	 BATHED	 AND	 SOAKED	 IN	 YOUR	 LOVE	 AND	 RADIANCE.	WHEN
YOU
WERE	DANCING	WITH	US,	 I	 EXPERIENCED	THE	MOST	BEAUTIFUL,
JOYFUL,	 AND	 ECSTATIC	 MOMENTS	 WITH	 YOU.	 I	 COULD	 NOT
IMAGINE	THERE
COULD	EVER	BE	MORE.	BUT	NOW,	WHEN	YOU	GENTLY	WALK	OUT,
FACING	US,	THE	FEELING	INSIDE	OF	ME	IS	SO	VAST,	SO	MUCH	MORE
THAN
ANYTHING	 BEFORE,	 THAT	 I	 FEEL	 TOTALLY	 OVERWHELMED	 BY
PRECIOUS
LOVINGNESS.	COULD	YOU	EXPLAIN	WHAT	IS	HAPPENING?
Prem	Turiya,	there	is	a	music	which	has	no	sounds,	and	there	is	a	dance	which
has	no	movement.	They	are	the	highest	expressions	of	grace.
While	dancing,	singing,	rejoicing,	you	were	feeling	ecstatic,	and	you	could	not
have	believed	that	anything	more	is	possible.	Now,	you	are	experiencing	still	the
same	dance,	just	the	movements	have	been	taken	out,	the	same	music,	only	the
sounds	have	been	dropped.	It	is	a	purification	of	the	ecstasy.	That's	why	you	feel
something	higher	is	being	experienced.
I	have	always	loved	a	Chinese	story	about	an	archer	who	was	the	greatest	archer
in	the	whole	land.	He	went	to	the	emperor	saying	that	the	whole	country	should
be	made	 aware	 that	 if	 anybody	 wants	 to	 contest	 with	 him,	 he's	 available.	 "If
nobody	 turns	 up,	 then	 you	 have	 to	 declare	me	 the	 champion	 of	 archery."	 The
emperor	knew	the	man,	and	he	knew	his	art,	his	archery,	and	he	knew	there	was
nobody	else	who	could	even	come	close	 to	him.	His	art	was	perfect;	he	never
missed	 a	 target.	 So	 the	 emperor	 was	 willing	 to	 declare	 him	 the	 champion	 of
archery	in	the	whole	land	of	China.
Just	 at	 that	 moment,	 his	 old	 prime	 minister	 prevented	 him	 saying,	 "Wait	 a
minute,	because	I	know	a	man	who	lives	far	away	in	the	mountains.	Unless	this
archer	goes	to	that	old	man,	and	that	old	man	certifies	that	he	should	be	declared
the	champion,	you	should	wait.	You	should	not	be	 in	a	hurry,	because	 that	old
man	 is	 not	 only	 the	 champion	 of	 this	 land,	 he	 is	 the	 champion	 of	 the	 whole
world,	 although	 he's	 a	 non-competitive	 man,	 non-ambitious,	 and	 people	 don't
know	about	him.	Send	 this	 archer	 first	 to	get	 a	 certificate	 from	 that	old	man."
And	he	gave	the	directions	where	the	old	man	would	be	found.
The	archer	could	not	believe	 that	 anyone	could	be	better;	he	was	one	hundred
percent	successful	in	hitting	the	bulls	eye	exactly	in	the	middle,	he	never	missed
the	 target.	 It	was	 inconceivable	 for	him	 that	anybody	could	be	a	better	archer!
But	there	was	no	way....	The	emperor	told	him	to	go	to	the	mountains,	and	bring
a	certificate.
It	 was	 a	 difficult	 journey.	 The	 old	 man	 lived	 on	 a	 very	 high	 peak	 of	 the
mountain,	alone.
He	was	really	very	old,	almost	ancient,	and	he	had	no	bow,	no	arrows.	He	was
just	sitting	under	a	tree.	The	archer	asked,	"Are	you	the	man	who	is	the	greatest
archer	in	the	world?"
The	old	man	said,	"Perhaps,	because	on	this	mountain	nobody	else	lives.	But	I
can't	 be	 certain	 because	 I	 have	 never	 been	 competitive.	 As	 far	 as	 archery	 is
concerned,	 for	 twenty	 years	 I	 have	 not	 touched	 the	 bow,	 have	 not	 seen	 the
arrows.	In	fact,	I	have	lost	track	where	they	are.	But	what	is	the	problem?	Why
have	you	traveled	so	far?"
The	 young	 man	 said,	 "I	 knew	 it	 before	 that	 this	 would	 be	 an	 unnecessary
journey!	A	man	who	 has	 not	 touched	 the	 bow	 for	 twenty	 years,	 and	who	 has
even	forgotten	where	his	bow	and	his	arrows	are...."
Still,	because	of	the	emperor's	requirement,	he	said	to	the	old	man,	"I	want	to	be
declared	the	champion	of	the	art	in	the	whole	country,	and	the	emperor	has	sent
me	to	get	your	certificate."
The	 old	man	 said,	 "That	 is	 not	 difficult.	 But	 seeing	 a	 bow	with	 you,	 and	 the
arrows,	makes	me	suspicious	that	you	are	an	amateur	because	the	old	saying	is:
`When	the	musician	becomes	perfect,	he	throws	away	his	musical	 instruments;
when	the	archer	becomes	really	an	archer,	perfect	in	his	art,	he	breaks	down	his
bow,	 and	 throws	 the	 arrows.'	 They	 are	 good	 to	 begin	 with,	 but	 one	 has	 to
transcend	technique	at	a	certain	moment.	You	will	have	to	pass	two	tests:	one	is,
do	you	see	that	protruding	rock	over	the	valley?"
There	was	a	long	rock,	very	low,	protruding	over	a	very	deep	valley,	thousands
of	feet	deep.	The	old	man	said,	"Go	to	that	rock,	to	the	very	end.	The	test	is	to
stand	 at	 the	very	 end,	with	half	 your	 feet	 hanging	over	 the	 rock,	with	 just	 the
front	part,	your	toes,	on	the	rock.	If	you	can	stand	there	without	any	trembling,
you	have	passed	the	first	test."
The	man	said,	"My	God!	But	what	kind	of	archery	is	this?	This	is	sure	death!"
But	the	old	man	said,	"I	will	go	first	to	show	you	the	way	it	has	to	be	done."
He	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 eyes.	 The	 old	 man	 went	 to	 the	 very	 end	 of	 the
protruding	rock;	and	he	stood	there	with	half	the	feet	on	the	rock,	over	the	valley
thousands	of	feet	deep.
And	there	was	not	even	a	small	wavering	or	trembling.	He	called	the	young	man,
"Now,	come	on,	and	stand	by	my	side."
The	young	man	 tried	 just	one	 step	on	 the	 rock.	As	he	 looked	downward,	 such
fear	overwhelmed	him...	he	fell	on	the	ground,	 trembling,	perspiring.	He	could
not	reach	the	end	--	he	was	only	at	the	beginning	of	the	rock.
The	old	man	said,	 "What	 is	 the	matter?	Come	on,	have	courage.	 If	you	are	 so
fearful	and	trembling	inside,	your	archery	cannot	be	of	great	value,	because	it	is
your	 hands	which	will	 take	 the	 bow	 and	 it	 is	 your	 hands	which	will	 take	 the
arrows;	it	is	your	heart	which	has	to	be	used	in	it.	This	fear...	try,	make	an	effort."
He	 started	 crawling	 on	 all	 fours.	 Standing	 and	moving	 on	 that	 rock,	 he	 found
impossible.
Those	thousands	of	feet	were	so	dangerous;	just	a	single	wrong	step	and	you	will
never	 be	 found.	You	will	 be	 broken	 into	 bits	 and	 pieces	 and	 thrown	 over	 the
whole	valley.
But	he	could	reach	by	crawling	only	to	the	middle.	He	said,	"More	than	that,	I
cannot	do."
The	old	man	laughed.	He	came	back,	supported	 the	man	to	stand	up,	and	 took
him	back	to	the	tree.	He	said,	"I	had	said	you	are	just	an	amateur;	otherwise	there
is	 no	 need	 of	 this	 bow	 and	 these	 arrows.	 Now,	 look	 at	 me:	 when	 the	 archer
becomes	perfect	his	eyes	become	arrows,	his	very	being	becomes	the	bow."
He	looked	at	a	flying	flock	of	twelve	cranes,	and	they	all	fell	down	on	the	earth.
He	said,
"If	you	can	make	even	a	single	bird	fall	down	on	the	earth,	just	with	your	eyes,	I
will	certify	you."
The	young	man	said,	"That	is	impossible.	How	can	one	do	it?"
The	old	man	said,	"I	have	just	done	it,	and	not	one,	twelve	cranes	are	just	dead,
lying	before	you."
The	young	man	said,	"You	are	right;	I	am	simply	an	amateur.	I	would	like	to	be
accepted	as	a	disciple;	I	would	like	to	learn	archery."
The	old	man	said,	"That	sounds	right.	Be	here."
After	 ten	 years,	 the	 old	man	 said,	 "Now	you	 can	 go	 back,	 but	 don't	 go	 to	 the
emperor;	go	home.	The	day	you	suddenly	realize,	seeing	your	bow	hanging	on
the	wall,	that	you	cannot	recognize	it,	that	is	the	day	you	can	go	to	the	emperor."
The	emperor	was	becoming	very	old,	and	he	enquired	again	and	again	from	his
prime	minister,	"What	happened	to	that	young	man?"
The	prime	minister	 said,	 "He	has	 reached	 the	 old	man;	 I	 have	been	watching.
He's	 learning,	 he	 has	 reached	 his	 home,	 and	 now	 he's	 waiting	 for	 the	 sign	 to
come."
The	emperor	said,	"I	am	becoming	very	old."
One	day,	a	few	years	after	coming	home,	the	man	looked	at	the	bow	hanging	on
the	wall,	and	enquired	of	his	son,	"What	is	that	object?"
The	son	said,	"Have	you	gone	mad?	It	is	your	bow,	those	are	your	arrows."
He	said,	"Bow?	Arrows?	Am	I	an	archer?"
The	son	said,	"Are	you	laughing	at	me,	or	kidding	me?	or	just	going	senile?"
He	said,	"No,	the	time	has	come.	I	have	to	go	to	the	emperor."
The	son	asked,	"For	what?"
He	said,	"To	be	declared	the	champion	of	archery	in	the	land."
He	 went	 to	 the	 emperor.	 The	 prime	 minister	 said,	 "Have	 you	 brought	 the
certificate?"
He	said,	"I	am	the	certificate."
They	were	sitting	in	 the	garden.	He	looked	at	a	bird	flying	faraway	in	 the	sky,
almost	invisible.	But	as	he	looked	at	the	bird,	the	bird	came	falling	to	the	feet	of
the	emperor.
The	emperor	said,	"Is	this	archery	or	some	kind	of	magic?"
The	man	said,	"I	don't	know,	but	this	is	what	that	old	man	has	taught	me:	that	if
you	are	a	perfect	archer,	you	don't	need	the	bow,	you	don't	need	the	arrows;	your
eyes	are	enough.
If	you	are	a	perfect	musician,	you	don't	need	instruments;	your	silence	is	music
enough."
It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 story,	 very	 ancient,	 almost	 three	 thousand	 years	 old.	 Lao	Tzu
used	to	tell	the	story	to	his	disciples,	and	that	was	twenty-five	centuries	ago.	The
story	must	have	been	far	older.
As	you	become	more	and	more	in	tune	with	me,	just	being	here	with	me,	there	is
music,	there	is	dance.	Your	ears	will	not	hear	it,	and	your	eyes	will	not	see	it,	but
you	will	feel	it;	your	being	will	be	soaked	with	it.
Every	 art	 has	 to	 reach	 to	 a	 point	 where	 technologies	 are	 dropped.	 Every
meditation	has	to	reach	to	the	point	where	methods	are	dropped.	They	are	good
for	 the	 beginners,	 for	 learning	 the	 ABC's,	 but	 when	 you	 have	 reached	 to	 the
point	of	XYZ,	they	are	of	no	use.
Silently,	you	are	filled	with	music.
Without	moving,	you	are	dancing.
Without	 any	 thought,	 any	 feeling	 in	 you,	 there	 is	 just	 pure	 grace,	 gratitude
arising	out	of	you,	just	like	fragrance	arising	out	of	a	lotus	flower.
One	 has	 to	 reach	 to	 this	 point.	Only	 then	 one	 is	 fulfilled.	Only	 then,	 one	 has
attained	his	destiny.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THOSE	 OLD	 MASTERS	 MADE	 DISCIPLESHIP	 LIKE	 SITTING	 IN	 A
DENTIST'S
WAITING	 ROOM,	 FULL	 OF	 ANCIENT	 MAGAZINES	 AND	 WITH	 A
BORED,	OLD
GOLDFISH	SWIMMING	ROUND	AND	ROUND	IN	A	BOWL.	YOU	HAVE
KNOCKED	OUT	 THE	WALLS,	 REMOVED	 THE	 ROOF,	 AND	 DO	 YOUR
SURGERY
OUT	 IN	 THE	 SUNLIGHT	 WHILE	 WE	 ALL	 WATCH,	 LAUGHING	 AND
DANCING,	 BARELY	ABLE	 TO	WAIT	 FOR	OUR	 TURN	 TO	 BE	ON	 THE
TABLE.	THE
MASTERS	WHO	FOLLOW	YOU	ARE	GOING	TO	HAVE	ONE	HELL-OF-A
JOB
BECAUSE	YOU	HAVE	SET	A	WHOLE	NEW	STANDARD	OF	BEHAVIOR;
NOT
ONLY	THAT,	YOU	KEEP	ON	RAISING	IT.	IT	SEEMS	IMPOSSIBLE,	BUT	IT
GOES
ON	GETTING	MORE	AND	MORE.	I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT
ENLIGHTENMENT	IS	THE	SAME	FOR	EVERYONE,	BUT	YOU	SEEM	TO
BE
GETTING	 MORE	 JUICE	 OUT	 OF	 IT	 THAN	 ANYBODY	 I	 HAVE	 EVER
HEARD
ABOUT.	 WILL	 YOU	 SPEAK	 ABOUT	 THE	 MASTERS	 WHO	 WILL
FOLLOW	YOU?
Devageet,	 it	 is	true	I	am	getting	more	juice	out	of	enlightenment	then	anybody
else	who	has	ever	become	enlightened	on	the	earth,	for	the	simple	reason	that	to
them,	enlightenment	was	a	serious	search	for	God,	or	for	self.
To	me,	seriousness	is	sickness.	To	me,	enlightenment	is	not	a	serious	search,	but
a	playful,	joyful	wandering	into	the	unknown.
In	the	past,	all	 the	enlightened	people	were	goal	oriented.	I	am	not.	To	me,	the
pilgrimage	 itself	 is	 the	 goal	 --	 every	moment	 enjoying	 the	 sun,	 the	moon,	 the
trees,	 the	mountains,	 the	 rivers,	 the	 surprising	 turns	 in	 life;	 but	 enjoying	 them
with	intensity	and	totality,	squeezing	all	the	juice	out	of	them.
The	day	you	become	capable	of	 squeezing	all	 the	 juice	out	of	 any	moment	of
life,	so	that	not	even	a	single	drop	of	juice	is	left	behind,	you	are	enlightened.
Enlightenment	is	not	a	goal	somewhere	far	away.
It	is	something	that	you	have	to	live	every	moment.
Unenlightenment	 is	 a	 way	 of	 living	 --	 unconscious,	 groping	 in	 the	 dark.
Enlightenment	is	also	a	way	of	living...	enjoying,	if	it	is	day,	what	the	day	brings
the	flowers,	the	trees,	the	sun	rays	or	if	it	is	night,	the	silence	and	its	music,	the
depth	of	darkness,	the	beauty	and	vastness	of	darkness.	There	is	no	question	of
groping.	When	it	is	night,	you	enjoy	the	night;	you	are	not	even	thinking	of	the
dawn.	When	it	is	day,	you	enjoy	the	day,	not	bothering	even	about	the	full-moon
night.
Living	 each	moment	 as	 if	 this	 is	 the	 first	 and	 the	 last	 moment	 is	 the	 way	 of
enlightenment.
In	the	past,	the	masters	were	very	serious.	They	made	the	life	of	the	seeker	very
arduous,	torturous,	unnecessarily	--	perhaps	those	ages	should	be	called	the	dark
ages	of	the	soul.
We	 have	 reached	 the	 dawn.	 A	 delightful,	 relaxed	 laughter	 is	 possible	 for	 my
people,	which	has	never	been	allowed	in	the	past.	We	have	grown	up;	we	have
come	to	a	certain	maturity.
I	am	the	end	of	an	old	tradition,	and	the	beginning	of	a	new	line,	a	new	category.
You	are	asking	me	to	speak	about	the	masters	who	will	follow	me.	Who	bothers?
I	 am	utterly	concerned	with	 the	present.	Whether	 any	master	 follows	or	not	 is
not	my	concern.
That's	why	I	am	absolutely	without	any	worry,	without	any	tension,	without	any
thought,	and	without	any	dream.
I	am	being	condemned	all	over	the	world.	Everyday,	Neelam	and	Anando	bring
news	clippings	from	all	over	the	world;	people	who	don't	know	anything	about
me	are	unnecessarily	freaking	out.	But	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	nothing	makes
even	a	dent	in	my	consciousness.
Utter	 lies	 are	 being	written	 about	me.	 Just	 the	other	 day	 there	was	news	 from
Madras,	in	a	Tamil	magazine,	that	because	of	my	teachings	hundreds	of	women
are	running	naked	in	California	--	because	I	teach	that	man	is	born	naked	and	it
is	his	birthright	to	be	naked.
And	many	of	these	women	who	are	running	naked	in	California	are	pregnant.	I
really	enjoyed	it!	My	teaching	is	bringing	fruit.
Some	other	day,	in	a	Hebrew	magazine,	there	was	a	very	serious	article	alerting
the	Israelis	that	my	next	target	is	Israel,	that	I	am	going	to	come	to	Israel.	First	I
will	 become	 converted	 into	 a	 Jew,	 and	 then	 I	 will	 declare	 myself	 as	 the
reincarnation	 of	Moses;	 everything	 is	 planned,	 I	 am	 just	 waiting	 for	 the	 right
time.	I	used	to	think	there	is	a	limit	to	lies,	but	I	was	wrong.	There	is	no	limit.
I	am	not	at	all	concerned	about	the	future.	This	moment	is	enough	unto	itself.	I
am	 enjoying	 it,	 you	 are	 enjoying	 it,	 and	 through	 us,	 the	 whole	 existence	 is
feeling	the	ecstasy.
We	have	been	showering	the	existence	with	more	flowers	than	any	communion
that	has	ever	existed	on	the	earth.
One	night,	Hymie	brought	home	a	dozen	roses	for	his	wife.	"How	lovely,	dear,"
she	said.
"What	 is	 the	occasion?"	"I	want	 to	make	 love	 to	you,"	he	said	simply	enough.
"Not	tonight,	dear.	I	have	a	headache,"	she	whined.
The	next	night,	Hymie	came	home	with	a	big	box	of	chocolates,	and	repeated	his
desire	to	make	love.	"Not	tonight,	lovely,	I	am	awfully	tired,"	said	the	wife.
Every	 night	 of	 the	 week,	 Hymie	 brought	 something,	 but	 each	 time	 his	 wife's
answer	was	categorically,	"No!"	Finally,	one	night,	he	came	home	with	six	black
kittens	 with	 little	 red	 balls	 around	 their	 necks,	 and	 handed	 them	 to	 his	 wife.
"How	 adorable,	 Hymie,"	 she	 exclaimed.	 "But	 what	 are	 they	 for?"	 "They,	 my
dear,	are	the	six	pallbearers	for	your	dead	pussy."
Who	 cares	 about	masters	 and	 disciples	 in	 the	 future?	Right	 now,	 a	 joke	 is	 so
enlightening!
You	all	are	going	to	become	enlightened	--	if	you	don't	become	serious.	You	all
are	going	 to	become	great	masters	 if	you	start	collecting	holy	 jokes	--	because
you	will	need	them!
A	 Chinaman	 complains	 to	 his	 doctor	 of	 his	 being	 constipated.	 The	 doctor
prescribes	 a	 strong	 laxative.	However,	 a	 few	days	 later,	 the	Chinaman	 returns.
"Have	you	had	a	movement	yet?"	asks	the	doctor.
"No,	sir,	me	no	move-ee,	me	no	move-ee."
So	the	doctor	doubled	the	dose	of	laxative.
Two	 days	 later,	 the	 Chinaman	 returns	 and	 reports	 no	 progress	 with	 his
movement,	so	the	doctor	triples	the	prescription.
"Come	back	in	three	days,"	says	the	confounded	doctor.
Three	 days	 later,	 the	 doctor	 greets	 the	 Chinaman.	 "Well,	 have	 you	 had	 a
movement	yet?"
"No,	sir,	me	no	move-ee	yet.	We	move-ee	tomorrow,	though.	House	full	of	shit!"
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	MORNING	IN	DISCOURSE,	YOU	SHOWERED	YOUR	LOVE
AND
GRACE	 ON	 US	 SO	 BEAUTIFULLY	 THAT	 I	 COULDN'T	 CONTAIN
MYSELF.	MY
TEARS	WERE	FLOWING,	AND	I	FELT	AS	IF	BEING	LIFTED	UP.	IT	WAS
AS	IF
THERE	WAS	 NO	ME,	 BUT	 SOME	 FEELING	OF	 THE	 BEYOND.	 AFTER
YOUR
TALK,	 I	 WAS	 IMMENSELY	 SAD	WHEN	 I	 SAW	 THAT	 I	 WAS	 COMING
BACK	TO
THE	PERSON	CALLED	ME.	I	EVEN	BECAME	VERY	BITCHY	TOWARDS
MY
LOVER,	 ALTHOUGH	 I	 FELT	 VERY	 RELAXED.	 I	 WONDERED	 THEN
WHETHER
IT	IS	MY	CHOICE	TO	COME	BACK	TO	MY	FORMER	STATE.	OSHO,	IS	IT
MY
DECISION	TO	RETURN	FROM	THAT	SOMETHING	I	CALL	BEYOND?	IS
IT
POSSIBLE	 THAT	 IF	 I	 CHANGED	 MY	 WHOLE	 ATTITUDE	 TOWARDS
NORMAL
DAY-TO-DAY	 LIFE,	 I	 COULD	 REMAIN	 IN	 THAT	 BEAUTIFUL,	 OPEN,
AND
RELAXED	 SPACE?	 COULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 TALK	 ABOUT	 OUR
RESPONSIBILITY
TOWARDS	OURSELVES?
Lokita,	 every	mountain	has	 its	 own	valleys,	 and	 every	great	 experience	of	 the
beyond	will	be	followed	by	a	valley	experience.	You	have	to	learn	to	enjoy	the
valley	experience	too.
Nobody	can	remain	permanently	in	a	certain	stage	of	experience,	and	it	is	good
and	 fortunate	 because	 if	 you	 are	 experiencing	 the	 beyond	 continuously,	 it	will
create	only	boredom	and	nothing	else.	Even	to	be	with	God	twenty-four	hours...
how	long	can	you	tolerate	it?	You	will	need	a	few	holidays	to	be	with	the	devil!
Life	is	a	dialectical	phenomenon.
Life	 is	 always	moving	 from	one	extreme	 to	another	 extreme.	Most	of	us	don't
want	to	be	troubled	by	all	these	changes.	We	want	a	certain	beautiful	state,	and
to	remain	in	it	permanently	forever.	But	then	you	will	be	dead,	and	that	beautiful
space	will	not	stay	beautiful	long	enough;	you	have	to	lose	it	again	and	again	to
keep	it	fresh,	to	keep	it	beautiful.
It	is	perfectly	normal	and	natural	that	one	moment	you	feel	ecstatic,	and	another
moment	 you	 fall	 into	 darkness.	 But	 nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 darkness.	 The	 sunlit
peaks	have	their	own	beauty,	but	the	dark	valleys	have	their	own	peace,	and	their
own	silence,	their	own	depth,	their	own	coolness.
Don't	ask	of	life	to	be	permanent	at	a	single	experience.	Allow	life	to	take	you
into	 all	 its	 dimensions.	 Just	 remember	 one	 thing:	Whatever	 life	 offers	 to	 you,
enjoy	 it.	 That	 is	 the	 golden	 key	 to	 transform	 every	 experience	 into	 a	 spiritual
beatitude...	 not	 permanency	 but	 a	 flux,	 a	 river-like	 flow.	 Sometimes	 it	 is
mountainous,	 and	 sometimes	 it	 is	 the	 plains;	 sometimes	 it	 is	 the	 ocean,
sometimes	it	is	moving	into	the	clouds,	and	sometimes	it	is	again	raining.	Accept
the	whole	circle	of	life.	In	this	acceptability	is	your	authentic	religiousness.
But	I	am	not	saying	that	after	experiencing	something	beyond	yourself,	the	next
thing	is	to	become	bitchy	to	your	poor	lover,	Niskriya.	He's	such	a	nice	fellow,
so	 silent,	 so	centered	 in	himself.	 I	 can	understand	 that	 such	 fellows	can	create
bitchiness	in	women	--
just	their	very	centeredness,	their	very	silence,	irritates	women;	they	want	to	pull
them	down.	But	remember	Niskriya	is	not	the	one	to	be	pulled	down.	You	can	be
bitchy,	but	he	will	just	look	at	you	through	his	glasses	and	go	back	to	his	work,
just	feeling	amazed	--
what	kind	of	woman	is	this?	But,	Niskriya,	all	women	of	this	kind,	their	greatest
problem	is	to	tolerate	a	man	who	is	centered	and	silent	and	doing	his	own	thing.
They	will	poke	their	nose...	Unless	they	interfere	with	you,	unless	they	make	you
irritated,	they	will	not	find	peace	of	heart.
Lokita,	you	are	in	a	difficult	position.	Your	bitchiness	will	not	bring	any	joy	to
you;	it	will	only	bring	frustration.	But	feeling	something	beyond	yourself,	there
is	 no	 need	 to	 take	 revenge	 on	 poor	 Niskriya.	 He's	 the	 only	 marble	 Gautam
Buddha	here.	Even	I	cannot	laugh	because	of	him.	One	just	has	to	be	respectful
when	you	are	sitting	before	a	Gautam	Buddha....
Perhaps	your	problem,	Lokita,	is	that	you	are	the	girlfriend	of	a	Gautam	Buddha.
Nobody	 suffers	 more	 in	 the	 world	 than	 the	 girlfriend	 of	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha,
because	you	can	be	bitchy	but	he	will	simply	be	a	witness.
The	Jewish	mothers	meet	 in	 the	marketplace.	They	are	all	proud	of	 their	 sons,
and	want	to	brag	about	them.
The	 first	 one	 says,	 "Ah,	my	 son	 is	 always	 so	 very	 gentle	 and	 polite	with	my
husband	and	me."
The	second	one	says,	"Ah,	my	dear,	my	son	is	so	very,	very	sweet	with	me.	He
does	 the	 shopping	 for	 me,	 he	 cleans	 my	 house,	 and	 each	 day	 he	 brings	 me
flowers."
The	third	one	says,	"Ah,	my	son	is	much	sweeter	than	that.	Each	time	he	goes	to
see	his	psychoanalyst,	he	only	speaks	of	me."
When	 you	 are	 coming	 down	 from	 an	 experience	 beyond	 yourself,	 you	would
like	poor	Niskriya	 to	 talk	 about	you.	He	cannot	do	 that.	He	 is	 simply	not	 that
kind	of	man.	You	have	gone	beyond	the	"me",	and	you	would	like	somebody	to
remind	you	of	 it.	Don't	 expect	 it	 from	Niskriya.	Even	your	bitchiness	will	 not
help.
After	coming	back	from	the	beyond,	be	silent.	Enjoy	this	coming	back;	there	is
nothing	wrong	in	it.	Don't	feel	guilty,	and	don't	ask	for	any	support.	The	spiritual
path	 is	 absolutely	 alone.	 Boyfriends	 and	 girlfriends	 are	 not	 allowed	 together;
they	have	to	go	separately.
So	 whenever	 you	 touch	 a	 height,	 enjoy	 the	 height;	 whenever	 you	 touch	 the
bottom,	enjoy	the	bottom.	One	thing	should	remain	continuously	flowing	in	you
--	the	enjoyment.
Giggle	within	yourself	when	you	are	beyond	yourself,	and	giggle	within	yourself
when	 you	 are	 within	 yourself	 --	 but	 giggling	 should	 continue.	 Make	 life	 a
laughter	 when	 great	 things	 are	 happening,	 and	 when	 nothing	 is	 happening,
laughter	should	continue.
Laughter	 should	 be	 the	 running	 thread	 of	 the	 garland	 of	 flowers	 of	 all	 your
ecstasies	 and	 experiences	 of	 the	 beyond.	 They	will	 change,	 but	 one	 thread	 of
laughter	can	continue	within	you.
Laughter	is	almost	the	shrine	of	the	witness.
Within	the	laughter,	you	will	always	find	the	watcher.	And	to	become	a	watcher
without	discontinuity,	without	gaps,	is	all	that	is	meant	by	enlightenment.
But	don't	interfere	with	enlightened	people	like	Niskriya.	When	I	first	saw	him
in	 Kathmandu	 I	 immediately	 picked	 him	 up.	 He	 is	 such	 a	 silent	 man,	 never
interfering	with	anybody	--	except	with	my	air	conditioners,	because	they	make
noise,	and	he	is	a	perfect	photographer;	that	noise	disturbs	his	photography.
I	 have	 kept	 watchers	 so	 he	 does	 not	 interfere	 with	 my	 air	 conditioners,	 but
sometimes,	when	there	is	nobody	else	here,	he	puts	them	down	half.	Last	night,
he	 succeeded.	 He	 is	 not	 concerned	 that	 I	 will	 be	 suffering	 with	 hot	 air,	 his
concern	is	his	photography.	But	I	don't	blame	him;	everybody	just	has	to	watch
him,	that	he	never	comes	near	my	air	conditioners!
Lokita,	particularly	 for	you,	 the	 instruction	 is	 that	when	you	want	 to	be	bitchy
with	him,	put	my	air	conditioners	on	full!
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	Life	is	a	deep	interdependence
26	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705265
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN30
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
82
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 SILENCE	 I	 EXPERIENCE	 LATELY	 IN	 YOUR	 PRESENCE	 IS
BECOMING
VASTER	 AND	 DEEPER;	 AND	 WHEN	 YOU	 LEAVE	 CHUANG	 TZU
AUDITORIUM,	 TEARS	ROLL	GENTLY	DOWN	MY	 FACE	AND	 I	WANT
NOTHING	MORE	THAN
TO	 STAY	 THERE.	 SO	 IT	 IS	 DIFFICULT	 TO	 BE	 ACTIVE	 AFTERWARDS
BECAUSE
I	 KNOW	 SLOWLY	 THE	 EXPERIENCE	WILL	 CHANGE,	 AND	 I	WOULD
LIKE	TO
REMAIN	THERE.	BELOVED	MASTER,	IS	LOVE	SO	FRAGILE	THAT	WE
CANNOT	HOLD	IT	EVEN	WITH	TWO	FINGERS?
Prem	Azima,	everything	 that	 is	of	value	 is	 fragile.	Beauty	 is	 fragile,	 silence	 is
fragile,	love	is	fragile.	Look	at	a	roseflower	dancing	in	the	wind,	and	in	the	rain,
and	in	the	sun.	It	seems	it	is	strong	enough	for	the	wild	wind,	strong	enough	for
the	sun,	strong	enough	for	 the	rain.	 It	 is	very	fragile;	by	the	evening,	 its	petals
will	 be	 thrown	 in	 all	 directions.	But	while	 it	was,	 it	was	 tremendous;	while	 it
was,	it	was	more	than	any	rock.	The	rock	will	remain,	the	rock	is	permanent;	the
flower	will	come	and	go.	The	higher	the	value,	the	more	fragile	it	is.
One	 has	 to	 deeply	 understand	 it;	 otherwise	 you	 start	 clinging	 to	 great
experiences,	and	you	destroy	those	experiences	by	your	very	clinging.	They	are
so	 fragile	 that	 your	 clinging	 can	 destroy	 them,	 your	 attachment	 can	 destroy
them;	even	your	desire	to	continue	them	can	be	poison,	destructive,	murderous
to	them.
As	 you	 become	 acquainted	 more	 and	 more	 with	 silence,	 peace,	 blissfulness,
ecstasy,	you	will	have	also	to	learn	the	lesson:	enjoy	them	while	they	are	at	their
fullest,	and	when	they	go,	let	them	go	with	a	joyful	and	grateful	heart.
Yes,	tears	are	allowed,	but	not	tears	of	pain	--	tears	of	prayer,	tears	of	gratitude.
The	more	easily	you	let	them	go,	the	more	those	experiences	come	to	you.	And
once	you	have	understood	the	science	that	your	let-go	is	the	way	to	desire	them,
to	long	for	them	--	not	the	desire,	but	a	desireless	love	--	one	should	feel	blissful
enough,	even	if	a	fragile	experience	visits	you	only	once.	If	you	are	grateful,	it	is
bound	to	come	again	and	again.
Slowly,	slowly,	 it	may	not	go	at	all;	 it	may	become	your	very	heartbeat.	 It	can
your	very	breathing,	but	one	has	to	learn	the	whole	science.
Ordinarily,	what	our	mind	is	going	to	do	is	to	close	the	doors,	close	the	windows,
and	keep	the	fresh	breeze	in,	so	that	it	cannot	escape.	But	just	by	closing	all	the
doors	and	the	windows	you	have	destroyed	the	freshness	of	the	breeze;	soon	it
will	be	stale.	It	will	have	lost	its	dance,	it	will	have	lost	its	aliveness;	you	will	be
sitting	by	the	side	of	a	corpse.
And	people	are	sitting	by	the	side	of	corpses	--	corpses	of	love,	which	they	call
marriages,	corpses	of	prayer,	which	they	call	their	temples,	their	churches,	their
mosques,	and	corpses	of	authentic	and	sincere	experiences,	which	they	call	holy
scriptures.	 People	 are	 surrounded	 by	 corpses.	 And	 if	 you	 keep	 company	with
corpses,	you	cannot	remain	alive	very	long	yourself;	you	will	become	a	corpse
amongst	other	corpses.	It	is	a	very	dangerous	friendship.
Beware	of	it!	Learn	the	simple	fact	 that	 truth,	 love,	beauty,	bliss	--	all	are	very
fragile,	 very	 momentary.	 You	 cannot	 grasp	 them	 in	 your	 fist;	 they	 are	 like
fragrances.	 You	 cannot	 run	 after	 them.	 You	 have	 to	 wait	 and	 trust:	 the	 same
existence	 that	 has	 brought	 an	 experience	 to	 you	 will	 bring	 many	 more.	 It	 is
abundant,	 it	 wants	 to	 share,	 but	 it	 can	 share	 only	 with	 people	 who	 are	 not
hoarders.	 It	 can	 share	 only	 with	 people	 who	 know	 the	 momentariness,	 the
fragileness	--	and	the	beauty	of	fragileness,	and	the	joy	of	momentariness.
Only	dead	things	are	permanent.
All	that	is	alive	is	changing,	moment	to	moment.
All	that	is	alive	is	living	under	the	risk	of	death	at	any	moment.	If	you	want	to	be
secure,	 absolutely	 secure,	 then	 you	 will	 have	 to	 enter	 into	 your	 grave;	 only
graveyards	 are	 absolutely	 secure	 places.	 In	 a	 grave,	 nothing	 else	 happens;
everything	 stops,	 time	 stops,	 nothing	 changes	 anymore.	 Even	 death	 cannot	 do
any	harm	to	you.
But	if	you	want	to	be	alive,	then	more	aliveness...	the	more	you	have	to	be	alert
and	 aware	 of	 the	 fragileness	 of	 all	 the	 qualities	 that	 are	 not	 created	 and
manufactured	by	man,	which	descend	from	the	beyond	--	unpredictable,	out	of
nowhere,	 suddenly	 overwhelming	 you.	 Don't	 think	 about	 whether	 they	 will
remain	 or	 go,	 because	 if	 you	 get	 into	 thinking	 about	 your	 future,	 and	 the
possibility	 of	 the	 experience	 remaining	 permanently	 with	 you,	 you	 may	 miss
everything.	Enjoy	it,	dance	with	it,	let	time	cease.
Put	the	mind	aside.	Then	even	a	single	moment	is	equal	to	eternity.
You	 are	 asking,	 Azima,	 "The	 silence	 I	 experience	 lately	 in	 your	 presence	 is
becoming	vaster	and	deeper;	and	when	you	leave	Chuang	Tzu	auditorium,	tears
roll	 gently	down	my	 face	 and	 I	want	nothing	more	 than	 to	 stay	 there.	So	 it	 is
difficult	 to	 be	 active	 afterwards	 because	 I	 know	 slowly	 the	 experience	 will
change."
It	 will	 change.	 Even	 if	 you	 don't	 do	 anything,	 even	 if	 you	 stay	 here	 it	 will
change.	It	does	not	change	because	you	have	to	go	to	work,	it	changes	because
change	is	the	nature	of	life.	And	it	is	good	that	it	changes.	Otherwise,	tomorrow
you	 will	 not	 have	 again	 the	 tremendous	 experience	 of	 silence.	 You	 will	 be
carrying	the	stale,	old	experience	of	yesterday;	you	won't	have	space	enough	for
the	new	to	enter	in.
Change	is	favorable	 to	 life.	That's	why	even	death,	I	say,	 is	favorable	 to	 life	--
because	it	is	the	greatest	change.	It	brings	you	into	new	spaces,	into	new	forms,
into	 new	 existences;	 it	 keeps	 your	 pilgrimage	 continuously	 new,	 it	 keeps	 your
excitement	 alive.	 Every	 moment	 remains	 always	 a	 challenge	 and	 a	 deep
awaiting,	because	anything	is	possible.	Silence	can	come	to	you,	blissfulness	can
come	to	you,	ecstasy	can	descend	into	your	heart,	truth	can	open	its	doors;	life	is
full	of	mysteries,	uncountable.	So	when	it	happens,	be	thankful
--	and	move	on.
And	slowly,	slowly,	as	you	become	more	acquainted	with	 the	depth	of	silence,
while	 you	 are	 working,	 doing	 something,	 the	 unknown	 guest	 may	 come
suddenly	and	stand	by	your	side.
A	 time	 comes	when	 these	 experiences	 start	 following	 you	 like	 a	 shadow;	 just
close	 by,	 you	 can	 feel	 their	 coolness,	 you	 can	 smell	 their	 fragrance.	 Just
remember	not	 to	grab,	not	 to	possess,	not	 to	make	 the	effort	of	changing	 them
into	 your	 property.	 They	 come	 in	 freedom,	 and	 they	 remain	 in	 freedom.	 You
cannot	enslave	them.
The	desire,	Azima,	 is	not	only	yours;	 it	 is	as	ancient	as	man.	Man	has	 tried	 to
capture	truth	in	words	and	failed,	utterly	failed;	he	has	tried	to	capture	beauty	in
sculpture	 and	 failed;	 he	has	 even	 tried	 to	 capture	God	 into	 temples	 --	 and	has
utterly	failed.	But	such	is	the	blindness,	that	nobody	sees	all	these	failures!	Your
temples,	 your	 churches,	 your	 synagogues	 are	 landmarks	of	 your	 failures.	Your
scriptures	are	the	failures	of	your	forefathers,	of	trying	to	catch	hold	of	truth	in
words.
Words	have	remained,	but	the	truth	has	evaporated.	Now	they	go	on	worshiping
these	scriptures,	these	statues.
All	the	religions	are	nothing	but	failures.	That's	why	they	are	against	a	man	like
Jesus	or	Socrates	or	Mansoor	 --	because	 these	people's	crime	 is	 that	 they	have
tried	to	make	you	aware	that	you	are	blind,	that	what	you	are	worshiping	is	not
truth,	 but	 a	 corpse.	 Perhaps	 once	 there	 was	 truth...	 but	 people	 behave	 like
drunkards.
An	old	English	lady	was	looking	through	her	curtains.	Spying	on	her	neighbors,
she	saw	a	man	coming	out	of	 the	house	opposite.	He	rushed	 to	 the	side	of	 the
road,	jumped	three	feet	into	the	air,	and	fell	flat	on	his	face.	The	old	lady	ran	to
his	side	and	asked,	"Excuse	me,	what	happened?"
"I	was	 late	 for	work,	 and	 I	 came	 rushing	 out,	 and	 jumped	 on	my	 bike.	 But	 I
forgot	--	I	have	not	got	one!"
In	a	hurry,	it	is	possible	to	forget.
I	have	heard	about	a	drunkard	who	was	watching	a	man	doing	pushups	on	 the
beach.	For	a	long	time	the	drunkard	went	around	him,	looked	from	every	side,
and	finally	said,
"Listen,	man,	I	should	not	interfere	in	whatever	you	are	doing,	but	I	cannot	resist
the	 temptation	 any	 more.	 Your	 girl	 is	 no	 longer	 there;	 you	 are	 unnecessarily
doing	exercises.
She	must	have	gone	long	ago,	because	I	have	been	watching	you	for	almost	one
hour;	you	are	perspiring,	huffing	and	puffing,	and	 the	girl	 is	no	 longer	 there,	 I
have	 looked	 from	 every	 nook	 and	 corner.	 Strange	 that	 this	man	 is	 so	 deep	 in
love!"
But	 in	 life,	 that's	 exactly	 what	 we	 are	 doing	 with	 all	 our	 fragile	 experiences.
Somehow	we	have	an	unconscious	desire	for	things	to	be	permanent.	Why	this
desire	is	in	the	unconscious,	is	something	to	be	explored.	Perhaps	it	is	the	fear	of
death.	Most	probably	 it	 is,	because	we	are	ourselves	 fragile.	This	moment	you
are	alive,	next	moment	you	may	be	gone.	Because	of	our	own	 fragileness,	we
desire	to	have	permanency	in	everything	around	us	as	a	security,	as	a	safety.	But
if	we	are	fragile,	how	can	our	experiences	be	anything	else?
An	 Englishman,	 a	 Frenchman,	 and	 a	 Polack	 have	 been	 stranded	 on	 a	 desert
island	for	almost	a	year,	when	they	discover	a	lamp	lying	in	the	sand.	They	rub
it,	and	sure	enough,	a	genie	appears.
"Well,	gentleman,"	 says	 the	genie,	 "traditionally,	 I	give	 the	 finder	one	of	 three
wishes,	but	since	there	are	three	of	you,	I	will	grant	you	one	wish	each."
The	 Englishman	 speaks	 right	 up:	 "I	 know	what	 I	 want.	 I	 wish	 to	 be	 back	 on
Hampstead	High	Street,	having	a	pint	in	my	favorite	club."
Poof!	He	disappears.
The	Frenchman	speaks	up:	"I	wish	to	be	back	in	Paris,	in	a	nice	little	restaurant,
with	a	bottle	of	good	wine,	and	a	gorgeous	woman	by	my	side."
Poof!	He	disappears.
The	Polack	is	thinking	and	thinking,	when	finally	the	genie	asks	him,	"And	what
is	your	wish,	my	friend?"
"Gee,	I	only	want	to	be	the	pope	at	the	Vatican."
Poof!	And	he	disappears.
Many	have	wondered	why	a	Polack	has	become	 the	pope.	Now	 I	open	up	 the
secret.
Poof!	And	the	Polack	becomes	the	pope.
But	 that	 is	how	 things	disappear.	Enjoy	 them	while	 they	are,	and	don't	ask	 for
any	permanence,	because	permanence	is	non-existential;	it	is	only	in	our	desires,
out	of	fear	of	death.	But	in	existence,	everything	is	change.	Existence	believes	in
the	law	of	change.
Every	moment,	everything	is	changing.	Our	language	gives	us	a	very	fallacious
idea,	because	our	language	consists	of	nouns	and	pronouns,	and	existence	knows
only	verbs.
When	you	see	the	river,	the	actual	fact	is	that	there	is	not	a	river;	the	actual	fact
is	that	there	is	a	rivering,	because	the	water	is	continuously	flowing.	A	tree	does
not	exist,	there	is	only	treeing,	because	the	tree	is	continuously	growing.	And	the
same	is	 the	case	with	you.	You	won't	go	back	from	this	place	 the	same	as	you
have	entered	--	so	much	water	will	have	gone	down	the	Ganges.
Gautam	Buddha	was	 the	 first	man	 in	 history	who	 reminded	 his	 disciples	 that
existence	 consists	 only	 of	 verbs,	 not	 of	 nouns,	 not	 of	 pronouns.	 To	 make	 a
language	only	of	verbs,	will	be	very	difficult,	almost	impossible	--	conversation
will	become	so	ridiculous	--	so	we	have	to	continue	to	use	nouns	and	pronouns.
But	remember,	deep	down,	that	there	is	nothing	static.
Don't	be	befooled	by	the	language	you	use.	Look	around,	everything	is	changing
--	 every	moment,	 every	 split	 second.	And	 once	 you	 understand	 change	 as	 the
God	of	existence,	your	whole	life	pattern	--	your	attitudes,	your	approaches,	your
style	 --	will	 change	accordingly.	You	will	 become	more	of	 a	 flow	 than	a	dirty
pond.
You	will	become	more	like	a	river,	a	pilgrimage	into	 the	unknown	towards	 the
ocean,	where	even	you	are	going	to	disappear.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 YOUR	 VISION	 OF	 A	 MODEL	 SOCIETY,	 WOULD	 THERE	 BE	 ONE
LARGE
COMMUNE,	OR	A	SERIES	OF	COMMUNES?	IF	THERE	IS	MORE	THAN
ONE,	WHAT	WOULD	BE	THEIR	RELATIONSHIP	TO	ONE	ANOTHER?	DO
YOU
ENVISAGE	PEOPLE	OF	DIFFERENT	COMMUNES	BEING	ABLE	TO	BE
INTERDEPENDENT,	 SHARING	 IDEAS	 AND	 SKILLS,	 AND	 WITHOUT
ANY	OF
THE	ATTITUDES	THAT	GROW	OUT	OF	POSSESSIVENESS,	LIKE
NATIONALISM	AND	FANATICISM?
Maneesha,	 the	 question	 raises	 a	 very	 important	 thing:	 the	 concept	 of
interdependence.
Man	has	lived	in	dependence,	and	man	has	desired	and	fought	for	independence,
but	nobody	looks	into	the	reality	--	that	dependence	and	independence	both	are
extremes.
Reality	 is	 exactly	 in	 the	 middle;	 it	 is	 interdependence.	 Everything	 is
interdependent.	 The	 smallest	 blade	 of	 grass	 and	 the	 biggest	 star	 both	 are
interdependent.	 This	 is	 the	 whole	 foundation	 of	 ecology.	 Because	 man	 has
behaved	without	understanding	the	reality	of	interdependence.	He	has	destroyed
so	much	of	the	organic	unity	of	life.	He	has	been	cutting	his	own	hands,	his	own
legs,	without	knowing.
Forests	 have	 disappeared,	millions	 of	 trees	 are	 being	 cut	 every	 day.	 Just	 now
scientists	are	giving	warnings	--	but	nobody	is	ready	to	listen	--	that	if	all	trees
disappear	from	the	earth,	man	cannot	live.	We	are	in	a	deep	inter-exchange.	Man
goes	 on	 breathing	 in	 oxygen,	 and	 throwing	 out	 carbon	 dioxide;	 trees	 go	 on
inhaling	carbon	dioxide	and	exhaling	oxygen.	Neither	you	can	exist	without	the
trees,	nor	can	the	trees	exist	without	you.
This	 is	 a	 simple	 example;	 otherwise	 life	 is	 interwoven	 in	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
ways....
Because	many	trees	have	disappeared,	so	much	carbon	dioxide	has	gathered	in
the	 atmosphere,	 that	 it	 has	 raised	 the	 temperature	 on	 the	whole	 earth	 by	 four
degrees.	 To	 you	 it	 may	 seem	 insignificant	 --	 four	 degrees	 --	 but	 it	 is	 not
insignificant.	By	the	end	of	this	century,	this	temperature	will	be	enough	to	melt
so	 much	 ice	 that	 every	 ocean	 will	 rise	 four	 feet	 higher.	 One	 degree	 of
temperature	more	means	the	ocean	rises	one	foot	higher.
So	the	cities	which	are	on	the	coast	of	the	oceans	--	and	all	 the	great	cities	are
there	--	will	be	flooded	with	water.
If	 the	 temperature	 goes	 on	 increasing,	 as	 is	 the	 possibility,	 because	 nobody	 is
listening....
Trees	are	being	cut,	without	any	understanding,	for	useless	things;	for	third	rate
newspapers	 you	 need	 newsprint,	 and	 you	 are	 destroying	 life.	 There	 is	 a
possibility	that	if	the	eternal	ice	of	the	Himalayas	starts	melting,	which	has	never
happened	in	the	whole	past,	then	all	the	oceans	will	rise	twenty	feet	higher,	and
will	drown	almost	the	whole	earth.	They	will	destroy	all	your	cities	--	Bombay
and	 Calcutta,	 New	York,London,	 and	 San	 Francisco.	 Perhaps	 a	 few	 primitive
people	who	live	high	in	the	mountains	may	survive.
Such	is	the	interdependence	that	when	your	first	astronauts	reached	to	the	moon,
we	became	aware	for	the	first	time	that	the	whole	earth	is	surrounded	by	a	thick
sheet	 of	ozone,	which	 is	 a	 form	of	oxygen.	That	 layer	of	 ozone	 surrounds	 the
whole	earth,	like	a	blanket.	It	has	been	because	of	this	ozone	blanket	that	life	has
become	possible	on	this	planet,	because	ozone	does	not	allow	in	the	death	rays
that	 come	 from	 the	 sun.	 It	 allows	 in	 only	 the	 life	 rays	 and	 prevents	 the	 death
rays;	it	returns	them.
But	 in	our	 stupidity	 to	 reach	 to	 the	moon,	we	have	made	holes	 in	 the	blanket.
And	the	efforts	continue.	Now	we	are	trying	to	reach	Mars!	Each	time	a	rocket
goes	beyond	 the	atmosphere	of	 the	earth,	 that	 is	 two	hundred	miles	beyond,	 it
creates	 great	 holes.	 Through	 those	 holes,	 death	 rays	 have	 started	 entering	 in.
Now	scientists	are	saying	that	these	death	rays	will	increase	the	rate	of	cancer	by
almost	thirty	percent;	and	other	diseases	are	not	counted,	small	diseases	are	not
counted.
The	stupid	politicians	are	not	listening.	And	if	you	call	them	stupid,	then	you	are
jailed,	you	are	punished;	false	allegations	are	made	against	you.	But	I	don't	see
what	else	to	call	them.	Stupid	seems	to	be	the	most	gentle	and	the	most	cultured
word	for	them.	They	don't	deserve	it;	they	deserve	something	worse.
Life	is	a	deep	interdependence.
My	vision	of	commune,	Maneesha,	is	that	nations	disappear,	big	cities	disappear,
because	 they	 don't	 allow	 enough	 space	 for	 every	 human	 being	 --	 and	 every
human	 being	 has	 a	 certain	 psychological	 need	 for	 a	 territorial	 imperative,	 just
like	other	animals.	 In	big	cities,	man	 is	continuously	moving	 in	a	crowd.	That
creates	great	anxiety,	tension,	agony,	and	does	not	allow	him	any	time	to	relax,
any	time,	any	place,	to	be	himself	--	to	be	alone,	to	be	with	the	trees,	which	are
life-giving	sources,	to	be	with	the	ocean,	which	is	a	life-giving	source.
My	vision	of	 a	new	world,	 the	world	of	 communes,	means	no	nations,	 no	big
cities,	no	families,	but	millions	of	small	communes	spread	all	over	the	earth	in
thick	forests,	lush	green	forests,	in	mountains,	on	islands.	The	smallest	commune
manageable,	which	we	have	already	 tried,	can	be	of	 five	 thousand	people,	and
the	 biggest	 commune	 can	 be	 of	 fifty	 thousand	 people.	 From	 five	 thousand	 to
fifty	 thousand	 --	more	 than	 that	will	 become	unmanageable;	 then	again	 comes
the	question	of	order	and	law,	and	the	police,	and	the	court,	and	all	old	criminals
have	to	be	brought	back.
Small	 communes...	 five	 thousand	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 perfect	 number,	 because	we
have	 tried	 that.	 Everybody	 knows	 everybody	 else,	 all	 are	 friends.	 There	 is	 no
marriage	 --	 children	 belong	 to	 the	 commune.	 The	 commune	 has	 hospitals,
schools,	 colleges.	 The	 commune	 takes	 care	 of	 the	 children;	 parents	 can	 visit
them.	 It	 is	 simply	 insignificant	whether	 the	parents	 are	 living	 together	 or	 they
have	separated.	For	the	child,	they	both	are	available;	he	can	visit	them,	they	can
visit	him.
All	the	communes	should	be	interdependent,	but	they	will	not	exchange	money.
Money	should	be	dissolved.	It	has	done	tremendous	harm	to	humanity.	Now	it	is
time	to	say	goodbye	to	it!
These	 communes	 should	 exchange	 things.	You	 have	more	milk	 products;	 you
can	 give	 them	 to	 another	 commune,	 because	 you	 need	more	 clothes,	 and	 that
commune	 can	provide	 you	with	more	 clothes	 --	 a	 simple	 barter	 system,	 so	 no
commune	becomes	rich.
Money	is	a	very	strange	thing.	You	can	accumulate	it;	that	is	the	strangest	secret
of	 money.	 You	 cannot	 accumulate	 milk	 products,	 you	 cannot	 accumulate
vegetables.	If	you	have	more	vegetables	you	have	to	share	with	some	commune
which	has	not	enough	vegetables.
But	money	can	be	accumulated.	And	 if	one	commune	becomes	richer	 than	 the
other	 commune,	 then	 comes	 from	 the	 back	 door,	 the	 poverty	 and	 the	 richness
and	the	whole	nightmare	of	capitalism,	and	the	classes	of	the	poor	and	the	rich,
and	 the	 desire	 to	 dominate,	 because	 you	 are	 rich.	 You	 can	 enslave	 other
communes.	Money	is	one	of	the	enemies	of	man.
Communes	 will	 be	 exchanging.	 They	 will	 be	 broadcasting	 on	 their	 radio
stations,	that	such	and	such	a	product	is	available	from	them.	Anybody	who	has
certain	 other	 products	 that	 they	 need	 can	 contact	 them,	 and	 things	 can	 be
exchanged	in	a	friendly	way;	there	is	no	haggling,	there	is	no	exploitation.	But
the	commune	should	not	become	too	big,	because	bigness	is	also	dangerous.
A	 commune's	 criterion	 of	 bigness	 should	 be	 that	 everybody	 knows	 everybody
else;	 that	 should	 be	 the	 limit.	Once	 that	 limit	 is	 crossed,	 the	 commune	 should
divide	itself	into	two.
Just	as	 two	brothers	separate,	when	a	commune	becomes	big	enough	it	divides
itself	 into	 two	 communes,	 two	 sister	 communes.	 And	 there	 will	 be	 a	 deep
interdependence,	sharing	ideas	and	skills,	without	any	of	the	attitudes	that	grow
out	of	possessiveness	--	like	nationalism	and	fanaticism.	There	will	be	nothing	to
be	fanatic	about.	There	will	be	no	reason	for	a	nation.
A	 small	 group	 of	 people	 can	 enjoy	 life	more	 easily,	 because	 to	 have	 so	many
friends,	so	many	acquaintances,	is	a	joy	unto	itself.	Today	in	the	big	cities,	you
live	 in	 the	 same	 house	 and	 you	 don't	 know	 your	 neighbor.	 In	 one	 house	 one
hundred	 thousand	 people	 may	 be	 living.	 A	 one	 hundred	 story	 building	 can
contain	that	many	people	--	almost	a	whole	city.	And	they	are	absolute	strangers
to	each	other,	living	in	a	crowd,	and	yet	being	alone.
My	idea	of	a	commune	is,	living	in	small	groups,	which	gives	you	enough	space,
and	yet	living	in	a	close,	loving,	relationship.	Your	children	are	taken	care	of	by
the	commune,	your	needs	are	taken	care	of	by	the	commune,	your	medical	care
is	 taken	 care	 of	 by	 the	 commune.	The	 commune	becomes	 an	 authentic	 family
without	any	diseases	 that	 families	have	created	 in	 the	past.	 It	 is	a	 loose	family
and	a	constant	movement.
There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 any	marriage,	 and	 no	 question	 of	 any	 divorce.	 If	 two
persons	want	to	be	together,	they	can	be	together,	and	if	one	day	they	don't	want
to	be	 together,	 that	 is	perfectly	good.	 It	was	 their	decision	 to	be	 together;	now
they	can	choose	other	friends.	In	fact,	in	one	life	why	not	live	many	lives?	Why
not	make	it	richer?	Why	should	a	man	cling	to	a	woman,	or	a	woman	cling	to	a
man	unless	they	enjoy	each	other	so	much	that	they	want	to	be	together	for	their
whole	life.	But	looking	at	the	world,	the	situation	is	clear.	People	would	like	to
be	 independent	from	their	 families;	children	want	 to	be	 independent	from	their
families.
Just	the	other	day,	one	small	boy	in	California	did	something	unique	and	special.
He	wanted	to	go	out	and	play.	This	was	nothing	special;	all	children	should	be
allowed	to	go	out	and	play.	But	the	mother	and	father	insisted,	"No,	don't	go	out;
just	play	inside	the	house."	And	the	boy	shot	both	the	mother	and	the	father.	He
played	inside	the	house.
There	is	a	limit...	always	listening	to	"no,	no,	no!"
In	America	the	time	rate	of	husbands	and	wives	changing	is	three	years.	It	is	the
same	rate	 that	people	change	 their	 jobs;	 it	 is	 the	same	 time-rate	people	change
cities.	There	seems	to	be	something	special	about	three	years.	It	seems	it	is	the
limit	one	can	tolerate.
Beyond	 that,	 it	 becomes	 intolerable.	 So	 people	 change	 wives	 and	 husbands,
people	change	cities,	people	change	jobs.
But	in	a	commune,	there	is	no	need	to	make	any	fuss.	You	can	say	goodbye	any
moment,	and	you	can	still	remain	friends,	because	who	knows?	After	two	years,
you	may	 fall	 in	 love	 again	with	 the	 same	man,	with	 the	 same	woman.	 In	 two
years	time	you	may	have	forgotten	all	the	troubles,	and	you	want	to	have	a	taste
again;	 or	 perhaps	 you	 had	 fallen	 into	 the	 hands	 of	 a	 worse	man	 and	 a	worse
woman,	and	you	repent,	and	you	want	to	go	back!	But	it	will	be	a	richer	life;	you
will	 have	 known	 many	 men	 and	 many	 women.	 Each	 man	 has	 his	 own
uniqueness,	and	each	woman	has	her	own	uniqueness.
Communes	can	also	exchange	people,	if	somebody	wants	to	move	into	another
commune,	and	the	other	commune	is	willing	to	accept.	The	other	commune	may
say,	"If	somebody	else	wants	to	go	into	your	commune,	exchange	is	possible	--
because	we	don't	want	to	raise	our	population."	People	can	decide.	You	can	go
and	 advertise	 yourself;	 some	 woman	 may	 like	 you,	 some	 people	 may	 turn
friends.	 Somebody	may	 have	 been	 bored	 in	 that	 commune,	 and	would	 like	 to
change	their	commune....
The	whole	world	should	be	one	humanity,	only	divided	by	small	communes	on	a
practical	 basis:	 No	 fanaticism,	 no	 racism,	 no	 nationalism.	 Then,	 for	 the	 first
time,	we	can	drop	the	idea	of	wars.	We	can	make	life	with	honesty,	worth	living,
worth	 enjoying;	 playful,	 meditative,	 creative,	 and	 give	 every	 man	 and	 every
woman	equal	opportunity	to	grow	and	bring	their	potential	to	flowering.
The	scene	is	the	crucifixion.	Three	huge	crosses	are	outlined	against	the	sky,	as
the	 sun	sets.	A	crowd	of	 jeering	 soldiers	and	citizens	 surround	 the	dying	man,
Jesus.	Raising	his	eyes,	he	looks	to	the	back	of	the	mob	and	sees	Peter	trying	to
hide	himself.
"Peter,	Peter,"	Jesus	cries	in	a	hoarse	voice.	"Come	closer,	come	closer!"
Peter	wraps	his	cloak	around	his	head	and	pretends	not	 to	hear.	 Jesus	with	his
last	strength	calls	out,	"Peter,	please...	come	closer."
Peter,	realizing	that	he	cannot	ignore	his	dying	master,	creeps	to	the	foot	of	the
cross,
"Yes,	Lord,	what	do	you	want	of	me?"
"Peter,	I	can	see	my	house	from	up	here!"
His	house	must	have	been	deep	down	in	the	city	of	Jerusalem;	he	is	dying	on	the
cross,	 hanging	 high	 up,	 and	 he	 wants	 to	 share	 his	 experience.	 I	 have	 always
loved	 the	 story	 that	 even	 at	 the	 time	 of	 death,	 he	 says,	 "From	 here,	 from	 this
height...	I	can	see	my	house	from	up	here."
Jesus	was	crucified	only	once.	 I	have	been	on	 the	cross	almost	my	whole	 life.
Jesus	was	 crucified	 in	 a	 small	 unknown	part	 of	 the	world,	 Judea.	 I	 have	 been
crucified	in	almost	every	country	of	 the	world.	And	my	crime	is	 that	I	can	see
the	new	house	where	man	will	 live	in	the	future:	 the	new	man,	his	new	house,
his	new	commune,	his	new	future.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#31
Chapter	title:	Watchfulness	--	the	essential	religion
27	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705270
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN31
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
70
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 NIGHT	 A	 GIRLFRIEND	 OF	 MINE	 WOLF-WHISTLED	 AT
YOU	IN
DARSHAN.	 SHE	 SAID	 YOU	 SMILED,	 WHEREAS	 NOBODY	 ELSE
AROUND	HER
LOOKED	 LIKE	 THEY	 APPRECIATED	 IT.	 I	 FELT	 SURE	 THAT	 YOU
WOULD
ENJOY	 IT	BECAUSE	YOU'RE	SUCH	A	CRAZY	MASTER.	WOULD	YOU
PLEASE
SPEAK	ABOUT	THIS	CRAZINESS.	I	LOVE	IT	SO	MUCH.	WHAT	IS	THE
DIFFERENCE	 BETWEEN	 ORDINARY	 MADNESS	 AND	 DIVINE
MADNESS?
Anand	Gaya,	 there	 is	 a	 great	 difference	 between	 ordinary	madness	 and	 divine
madness.
Although	it	is	great,	it	is	very	subtle.	There	is	something	similar	and	something
absolutely	 different.	 The	 ordinary	 madness	 means	 you	 have	 fallen	 below	 the
mind	--	but	you	have	fallen	out	of	it.	The	divine	madness	means	you	have	gone
beyond	the	mind	--
but	you	have	gone	out	of	it.
Falling	below	the	mind	and	going	beyond	the	mind	have	one	similarity:	both	are
leaving	 the	mind	 behind;	 hence,	 the	madman	 and	 the	 sage	 in	 some	way	 look
similar,	 but	 their	 difference	 is	 great.	 To	 be	 beyond	 the	 mind	 means	 to	 be	 in
silence,	utter	silence.	To	be	beyond	the	mind	means	you	become	the	master	of
the	mind.	To	fall	below	the	mind	means	you	become	a	slave	of	the	mind.	All	the
whimsical	ideas	of	the	mind	you	have	to	obey;	you	don't	have	any	control	over
your	mind.
The	man	who	has	 transcended	his	mind	 is	 in	absolute	control	of	his	mind.	He
uses	it	when	needed,	and	he	stops	using	it	when	it	is	not	needed;	mind	becomes
an	instrument	in	his	hands.	But	for	the	ordinary	man	the	situation	is	very	sad.	He
becomes	an	instrument	in	the	hands	of	the	mind.
You	 are	 asking,	 "The	 other	 night	 a	 girlfriend	 of	mine	wolf-whistled	 at	 you	 in
darshan."
You	seem	to	be	very	poor.	You	have	only	A	girlfriend?	But	whosoever	is	here,
whether	girl	or	boy,	is	my	friend.	I	have	not	heard	the	wolf-whistle	and	I	would
like	your	girlfriend	to	do	it	again.	I	 love	it,	because	nobody	does	it	 to	me.	She
must	be	mad.
As	far	as	my	smiling	is	concerned,	she	says	that	I	smiled.	Even	if	she	had	tears
in	her	eyes,	I	would	have	smiled	the	same.	Even	if	she	were	dead,	I	would	have
smiled	 the	 same.	 I	 don't	 smile	 at	 you,	 I	 simply	 smile;	 it	 is	 not	 addressed	 to
anyone	in	particular.	But	if	she	feels	good	about	it,	there	is	no	harm!	This	time	I
will	be	careful,	but	she	has	to	do	it	a	little	louder	that	I	can	hear	it	in	the	whole
crowd.	And	whether	it	is	a	wolf-whistle	or	ANYthing,	if	it	is	done	out	of	love,	it
is	respectful.
"....	whereas	 nobody	 else	 around	 her	 looked	 like	 they	 appreciated	 it."	 Perhaps
she	does	not	know	how	to	do	it;	otherwise,	my	people	are	always	appreciating.
Only	 when	 you	 do	 something	 wrong,	 utterly	 wrong....	 She	 has	 to	 do	 some
homework.	She	should	start	doing	it	to	everyone	in	the	ashram,	whomsoever	she
sees,	so	she	will	become	famous	as	the	wolf-whistle	girlfriend	--	girlfriend	of	all.
Why	possess	her?	Such	a	girlfriend	is	wild	and	needs	to	have	total	freedom.
If	this	time	she	does	it	well	I	will	specially	smile	at	her,	and	wave	too,	because	if
a	person	 is	doing	so	much....	Everybody	cannot	wolf-whistle.	Particularly	girls
don't	do	that;	--
boys	 do	 that!	 She	 is	 daring,	 courageous	 --	 and	 I	 love	 daring	 and	 courageous
people.	And	if	I	wave	at	her,	 then	everybody	will	appreciate	her.	But	that	does
not	 mean	 that	 every	 girl	 should	 start	 wolf-whistling	 at	 me.	 Don't	 disturb	 the
peace	and	the	music	and	the	silence	of	the	place.
There	were	two	pregnant	cats	standing	next	to	the	garbage	pile	looking	for	mice.
One	turned	to	the	other	and	said,	"Do	you	know	the	big	ginger	tomcat	with	the
bushy	tail?
Well,	he's	the	one	who	put	me	in	the	family	way.	Who	is	the	father	of	yours?"
The	other	pregnant	cat	replied,	"I	don't	know.	I	had	my	head	in	an	empty	sardine
can	at	the	time."
There	are	people	and	people.	And	you	have	to	learn...	love	all!
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YESTERDAY	I	WAS	WONDERING	WHY	I	STILL	GET	SO	CAUGHT	UP
SOMETIMES	 IN	MY	GERMAN	SERIOUSNESS	AND	WANTING	THINGS
TO	RUN
PERFECTLY.	TODAY	 IT	 IS	ALL	GONE.	YOU	SHOWERED	US	WITH	SO
MUCH
LOVE	 THIS	 MORNING	 THAT	 ALL	 WORRIES	 ARE	 SWEPT	 AWAY.
SOMETHING
OPENED	IN	ME	THAT	MAKES	ME	WANT	TO	DANCE	AND	SING	AND
EMBRACE	 THE	 WHOLE	 WORLD.	 IT	 FEELS	 SO	 GOOD	 TO	 FEEL	 SO
DRUNK
WITH	LOVE	 IN	THE	MIDDLE	OF	THE	DAY,	RATHER	THAN	PULLING
MYSELF
TOGETHER	AFTER	DISCOURSE	AND	GETTING	CARRIED	AWAY	WITH
ORGANIZING	AND	GETTING	THINGS	DONE	MORE	EFFICIENTLY.	BUT
THIS
NEW	STATE	HAS	A	 STRONG	 SIDE	 EFFECT;	 IT	 BRINGS	UP	MY	LAZY
SIDE
AND,	 TOTALLY	UNUSUAL	 FOR	ME	 LATELY,	 I	 FEEL	 SENSUOUS	AND
SEXUAL
FROM	TOP	 TO	 TOE.	 BELOVED	OSHO,	ANY	ADVICE	AS	 TO	HOW	TO
COMBINE
THESE	 TWO	 SIDES?	 OR	 SHOULD	 I	 JUST	 LET	 GO	 AND	 SEE	 WHAT
HAPPENS?
Nandan,	first	your	feeling	sensuous	and	sexual	from	top	to	toe:	a	simple	device
is	to	start	wolf-whistling	as	much...	I	will	really	love	it!	And	all	your	sexuality
and	sensuousness	will	disappear	in	it.
You	say,	"Yesterday	I	was	wondering	why	I	still	get	so	caught	up	sometimes	in
my	German	seriousness	and	wanting	things	to	run	perfectly."
I	need	a	few	Germans;	otherwise	who	will	take	care	of	all	my	lazy	people?	So
don't	 be	 serious	 about	 it;	 it	 is	 absolutely	 needed	 by	 the	 commune.	 And
particularly	 for	 a	 German	 it	 is	 so	 natural	 that	 not	 to	 be	 serious	 will	 be	 an
unnecessary	torture.
You	say,	"Today	it	is	all	gone.	You	showered	us	with	so	much	love	this	morning
that	all	worries	are	swept	away.	Something	opened	in	me	that	makes	me	want	to
dance	and	sing	and	embrace	the	whole	world."
All	worries	may	have	 gone,	 but	 the	 idea	 of	 embracing	 the	whole	world	 is	 the
idea	of	Adolf	Hitler;	he	was	also	trying	to	embrace	the	whole	world.	People	just
did	not	like	it	--
that's	their	problem.	But	he	made	immense	effort,	and	he	had	almost	succeeded.
And	my	showering	of	love...	these	are	just	to	nourish	your	roots,	not	to	destroy
them.	 If	you	have	a	German	heart,	my	 love	will	make	 it	more	German,	and	 if
you	have	an	Italian	lousiness,	my	love	will	make	it	really	lousy.	You	look	at	my
photographer	Niskriya;	 the	more	I	shower	my	love	on	him	the	more	perfect	he
becomes.
You	have	to	become	yourself.
Whatever	is	your	natural	tendency,	your	potential,	my	love	has	to	nourish	it,	not
to	wash	it	away.	Of	course	these	pre-monsoon	showers	are	a	little	hard	and	soak
the	roots,	but	don't	be	worried.	I	take	care	that	nobody	goes	astray	from	himself
or	 herself.	 It	 is	 perfectly	 beautiful	 that	 something	 opened	 in	 you	Nandan,	 that
makes	you	want	to	dance	and	sing.	But	dance	perfectly	and	sing	perfectly!
"It	feels	so	good	to	feel	so	drunk	with	love	in	the	middle	of	the	day,	rather	than
pulling	myself	together	after	discourse	and	getting	carried	away	with	organizing
and	getting	things	done	more	efficiently."
Somehow	you	have	got	 the	wrong	 idea	 that	 I	would	 like	you	not	 to	have	your
German	quality.	It	has	its	own	beauty	--	to	work	efficiently,	to	organize	anything
perfectly.	My	 love	 should	make	you	capable	of	doing	 things	efficiently	with	 a
song	 in	 your	 heart,	 of	 organizing	 things	 perfectly	with	 a	 dance	 in	 your	 being.
They	 should	 not	 be	 antagonistic	 to	 one	 another	 but	 complimentaries,	 helping
each	other.	And	this	is	for	everyone.	You	can	only	be	your	authentic	self.	Once
in	a	while	you	can	be	on	a	holiday	--	that	is	not	a	distraction,	just	the	weekend.
Monday,	you	come	back	to	your	original	self.
You	are	asking,	"Any	advice	as	to	how	to	combine	these	two	sides?	Or	should	I
just	let	go	and	see	what	happens?"
You	just	let	go.	There	is	no	need	of	combining	them.	They	are	complimentaries;
they	will	help	each	other	and	become	an	organic	unity.
If	you	can	watch	silently,	then	all	opposites	can	be	supportive	of	each	other	and
all	contradictions	can	dissolve	into	a	beautiful	orchestra.
Mistress	 Goldblum	 brought	 her	 husband's	 remains	 to	 the	 undertaker	 to	 have
them	cremated.	When	asked	what	kind	of	container	she	wanted	his	ashes	stored
in,	she	said,
"None.	I	want	them	poured	right	into	my	hands."
The	 undertaker	 thought	 this	 rather	 odd,	 but	 did	 as	 the	widow	 requested.	Mrs.
Goldblum	 returned	 home	 and	 went	 straight	 to	 the	 bedroom.	 She	 dimmed	 the
lights,	 put	 romantic	 music	 on	 the	 stereo	 and	 whispered,	 "Hymie,	 here	 is	 that
blow-job	you	always	wanted."
And	she	blew	his	ashes	all	over	the	floor.
Now	if	Jews	disappear	from	the	world,	something	tremendously	beautiful	will	be
gone!
The	world	exactly	needs	the	people	there	are.	There	are	lazy	people	--	they	are
needed.
They	are	part	of	 a	 relaxed,	utterly	contented	 flowering	 that	 is	of	 its	own	kind.
And	 there	 are	 perfectionists.	 They	 are	 needed,	 otherwise	 everything	 will	 be
topsy	 turvy.	 There	 are	 so	 many	 kinds	 of	 people.	 They	 create	 a	 variety,	 and
variety	in	itself	is	tremendously	needed.
You	 should	 not	 ask	 that	 everyone	 becomes	 like	 everybody	 else.	 In	 fact,
everybody	 should	 be	 left	 to	 be	 himself	 or	 herself	 and	 respected	 the	 way	 the
person	is.	Variety	means	many,	many	kinds	of	flowers	in	the	garden.	Just	roses
and	 roses	will	 be	boring.	Amongst	millions	of	other	people,	 everybody	has	 an
uniqueness	and	is	not	boring,	but	helps	the	world	in	its	variety,	makes	the	garden
richer.
Particularly,	my	emphasis	is	that	you	should	always	remember	that	whatever	is
natural	to	you	is	your	destiny.	What	others	are	doing	is	good	for	them.	You	need
not	impose	yourself	on	them,	and	you	need	not	allow	them	to	impose	themselves
on	you.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
PLEASE	HELP	ME!	NOW	MY	BOYFRIEND	HAS	BEEN	IN	GOA	FOR	FIVE
WEEKS	AND	I'VE	HAD	SUCH	A	GOOD	TIME	ENJOYING	THE	FREEDOM
AND
INDEPENDENCE,	 NO	 NEED	 TO	 FACE	 MY	 JEALOUSY	 AND
POSSESSIVENESS,	 JUST	 FLOATING	 THROUGH	 THE	 DAY.	 NOW	 IT
LOOKS	AS	IF	HE	IS	COMING
BACK	 SOON	 AND	 I'M	 GETTING	 NERVOUS	 ALREADY,	 WONDERING
WHAT	HE
IS	DOING,	HOW	IT	IS	GOING	TO	BE,	IF	HE	FOUND	SOMEBODY	ELSE
ETCETERA.	WHAT	IS	THIS	ATTACHMENT	TO	A	PARTICULAR	PERSON
WHICH	 CREATES	 ALL	 THESE	 COMFORTABLE	 AND	 VERY
UNCOMFORTABLE
FEELINGS?	 I'M	 NOT	 REALLY	 A	 MEDITATIVE	 TYPE,	 BUT	 IS	 THERE
ANY
POSSIBILITY	 TO	 GO	 BEYOND	 THIS	 ATTACHMENT	 OF	 THE	 HEART
AND	FEEL
FREE,	 OR	 IS	 THE	 ONLY	 WAY	 TO	 LIVE	 IT,	 GO	 THROUGH	 IT,	 AND
SUFFER	AND
ENJOY	THE	WHOLE	THING?
Latifa,	I	know	your	boyfriend.	He	will	make	anybody	happy	if	he	goes	to	Goa
and	remains	there	for	ever.	But	again,	you	are	a	German;	you	cannot	be	satisfied
with	anything	less	difficult.	He	is	a	challenge.	So	if	you	are	becoming	nervous,	it
is	natural.
And	don't	be	worried	about	his	getting	 involved	with	any	girl,	because	no	girl
will	get	involved	with	him.
I	have	 thought	about	him	and	 I	 think	 that	only	Latifa	can	manage	him.	He's	 a
crackpot	--
but	you	love	him.	You	cannot	love	a	simple	human	being.	You	are	born	for	each
other:	neither	can	you	find	another	boyfriend	nor	can	he	find	another	girlfriend.
So	 don't	 be	 worried	 about	 possessiveness	 or	 anything.	 You	 can	 be	 absolutely
non-possessive	--	still	he	will	be	your	boyfriend.	Where	else	can	he	go?	You	are
in	a	good,	secured,	guaranteed,	insured	condition.
In	the	first	place,	it	is	a	miracle	that	you	have	found	him.	When	I	heard	about	it
for	 the	 first	 time	 I	 said,	 "My	 God!	 Now	 something	 mysterious	 is	 going	 to
happen.	 These	 two	 people	 together	 are	 going	 to	 create	 so	much	 trouble."	 But
still,	he's	attached	to	you,	you	are	attached	to	him.
Mostly	your	love	is	fighting,	and	when	you	are	tired	of	fighting	you	love	also	--
but	that	is	only	when	you	are	both	tired.	He	will	also	be	feeling	nervous,	because
he	has	to	come	back.	I	have	sent	him	only	for	six	weeks.	He	left	immediately	the
very	moment	 he	 received	my	message:	 "Go	 to	Goa."	He	 did	 not	wait	 even	 a
single	day.	He	must	have	enjoyed	 those	 five	weeks	 the	way	you	have	enjoyed
them.	Now	you	are	feeling	nervous,	and	he	will	be	feeling	nervous	because	six
weeks	will	finally	come	to	an	end.
But	deep	down	you	are	also	feeling	happy	that	he	is	coming,	and	the	same	will
be	 his	 situation.	 Let	 him	 come.	 He's	 just	 your	 old	 boyfriend:	 you	 know	 him
every	bit,	he	knows	you	every	bit.	All	the	fights	are	well	known,	all	the	problems
are	well	known.	There	is	no	need	to	feel	nervous	because	there	is	not	going	to	be
anything	new.	It	is	just	the	old	chap,	so	let	him	come	and	start	life	again	in	the
same	old	way.
It	is	something	to	be	understood:	the	girlfriend	you	get	or	the	boyfriend	you	get,
you	deserve.	You	don't	get	any	boyfriend	who	you	don't	deserve	and	you	don't
get	any	girlfriend	who	you	don't	deserve	--	those	kinds	of	relationships	last	for
one	day	or	two	days.	But	your	relationship	has	a	history	and	it	is	going	to	last	to
the	very	end,	so	relax	and	take	it	easily!
You	deserve	him,	he	deserves	you.	And	once	you	see	the	point	that	you	deserve
each	other	there	is	no	question	of	any	grudge,	any	complaining,	any	grumbling.
You	are	strong	enough,	because	that	crackpot	has	not	been	able	to	make	even	a
dent	 in	 you.	 He	 has	 been	 doing	 all	 kinds	 of	 neurotic	 things.	 But	 he	 does	 not
know	 that	 Latifa	 is	 a	 psychotic,	 and	 neurotics	 and	 psychotics	 make	 good
marriages.	They	fit	perfectly.
One	psychoanalyst	was	asked	 --	because	 those	 two	words	 look	so	 similar,	 and
the	 difference	 is	 known	 only	 to	 the	 experts	 --	 the	 psychoanalyst	 was	 asked,
"What	is	the	difference	between	neurosis	and	psychotics?"
"He	said,	"The	neurotic	 thinks	 two	plus	 two	are	five	and,	whatever	you	do,	he
never	changes	his	mind.	He's	determined	and	committed	 to	his	viewpoint.	The
psychotic	 knows	 that	 two	plus	 two	 are	 four	 but	 feels	 very	nervous	 --	why	 are
they	four?"
Perfect	marriages	happen	only	 in	heaven,	but	once	 in	a	while	on	 the	earth	 too.
Latifa	and	her	boyfriend	are	a	perfect	combination.	So	let	the	poor	fellow	come,
start	 hammering	 the	 old	 way....	 You	 are	 accustomed	 and	 well	 trained,	 he	 is
accustomed	 and	 well	 trained.	 One	 feels	 worried	 about	 a	 new	 girlfriend;	 one
never	knows	what	she	is	going	to	do	--	freak	out	in	the	middle	of	the	night?	One
is	 nervous	 about	 the	 new	 boyfriend,	 because	 one	 cannot	 predict	what	 kind	 of
man	he's	going	to	prove	to	be.
You	 are	 certain.	 In	 this	 certainty	 you	 should	 relax	 and	 let	 him	 come.	He	will
bring	his	 own	question.	 I	 have	been	 throwing	out	 his	 questions,	 but	 because	 I
have	answered	yours,	now	I	will	have	to	answer	his	question	about	you.
But	I	don't	see	that	there	is	any	problem.	You	are	both	perfectly	happy	in	your
misery;	 all	 people	 are	 perfectly	 happy	 in	 their	 miserable	 relationships!	 That's
why	after	a	five	weeks'
separation	you	feel	good.	But	a	longer	separation	and	you	will	start	missing	him.
I	have	given	him	an	exact	time	so	that	you	can	enjoy	freedom	and	he	can	enjoy
freedom;	and	in	the	right	time,	when	you	start	missing	each	other,	he's	back.	Just
wait!	And	he's	not	a	dangerous	person;	he	cannot	harm	you.	He's	very	good	at
heart	--	just	a	little	loose	in	his	head.	But	to	have	a	boyfriend	who	is	a	little	loose
in	the	head	is	better	than	to	have	a	boyfriend	who	is	a	little	tight	in	the	head.	I
know	it	is	no	ordinary	relationship:	you	both	are	extraordinary.
What	did	the	tornado	say	to	the	coconut	palm?
"Hang	on	to	your	nuts,	this	is	no	ordinary	blow	job."
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
LOVE	 AND	MEDITATION	 SEEM	 TO	 BE	 OPPOSITE	 POLARITIES.	 CAN
YOU
PLEASE	 TALK	 TO	 US	 ON	 HOW	 TO	 GROW	 IN	 MEDITATION	 AND	 IN
INTIMACY
WITH	THE	BELOVED.
Prem	Azima,	you	neither	know	what	love	is,	nor	do	you	know	what	meditation
is.	Still,	you	are	disturbed	by	the	question.	To	you,	love	and	meditation	seem	to
be	opposite	polarities	--	I	wonder	where	you	got	that	idea?	If	love	and	meditation
are	opposite	polarities,	then	nothing	in	this	world	can	be	close	to	any	other	thing.
But	I	know	all	the	old	religions	have	also	been	under	the	same	fallacy.
The	 meditators	 have	 been	 escaping	 to	 the	 mountains	 to	 avoid	 love,	 and	 the
lovers	never	bothered	about	meditation	because	they	knew	that	if	they	meditated
their	 love	 life	 would	 be	 finished.	 It	 has	 been	 one	 of	 the	 longest	 fallacies
humanity	has	lived	with.	Love	is	a	silence,	a	joy,	a	peace,	a	blissfulness	between
two	persons.	But	because	there	are	two	persons,	sometimes	they	don't	match.
Meditation	 is	 the	 same	experience	of	 silence	 and	peace	 and	bliss	 --	 but	 alone.
But	 if	 two	meditators	are	 in	 love,	 then	 things	come	to	 the	highest	peak.	 If	one
meditator	 can	 reach	 to	 a	 certain	 peak	 in	 his	 blissfulness,	 in	 his	 silence,	 two
meditators	who	love	each	other	can	become	an	immense	support	to	each	other's
flight	 into	 the	 unknown.	 Their	 love	 can	 become	 a	 nourishment	 to	 their
meditation,	and	vice-versa,	 their	meditation	can	become	a	nourishment	 to	 their
love.
This	is	the	point	where	I	differ	from	all	the	religions	of	the	past.	They	have	made
love	and	meditation	polarities,	parallel	lines	which	meet	nowhere.
To	me	a	man	of	meditation	 is	 bound	 to	be	 immensely	 loving.	All	 his	 anger	 is
gone,	all	his	hate	is	gone,	all	his	possessiveness	is	gone.	If	he	cannot	love	then
who	else	can	love?
And	 a	 man	 of	 love	 can	 go	 deepest	 in	 meditation	 because	 love	 is	 our	 highest
quality,	 our	 purest	 self,	 our	 perfect	 song.	 If	 two	 singing	hearts	 cannot	meet	 in
deep	meditation	then	no	other	meeting	is	possible.
In	fact,	the	people	who	have	escaped	to	the	mountains	to	meditate,	think	only	of
women	in	their	meditation.	They	hallucinate.	Their	hallucinations	can	become	so
real	 that	 they	 start	 talking	 to	 those	 women.	 And	 in	 the	 whole	 world,	 people
without	meditation	are	loving	each	other,	but	their	love	does	not	bring	a	paradise
to	their	life;	on	the	contrary,	it	creates	hell.	They	are	known	as	intimate	enemies	-
-	enemies	who	have	decided	to	live	together.
My	own	understanding	is	that	unless	love	and	meditation	are	almost	two	sides	of
the	same	coin,	we	cannot	create	the	new	man,	the	new	humanity,	the	new	world.
Last	night	I	told	you	the	story	of	Jesus	on	the	cross	telling	Peter,	"Peter,	from	my
height	 I	can	see,	 far	away,	my	house."	From	my	height	of	consciousness	 I	can
also	 see	 the	 faraway	house	where	 love	and	meditation	will	dwell	 together.	We
have	to	create	that	house.
Azima,	 don't	 say	 love	 and	 meditation	 are	 opposite	 polarities.	 That	 is	 a	 lie
propagated	by	the	priests	down	the	ages.	It	has	destroyed	lovers	into	miserable
lives	and	meditators	into	juiceless	deserts.	I	want	your	life	to	be	a	garden	full	of
flowers	--	full	of	fruits,	full	of	juice.
There	is	no	question	of	how	to	create	a	loving,	meditative	relationship.	Here,	the
people	who	 have	 gathered	 around	me	 are	 already	 living	 --	 at	 least	making	 an
effort	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 man	 --	 to	 bring	 love	 and
meditation	as	 two	sides	of	 the	same	experience.	Why	should	 love	disturb	your
meditation?
In	fact,	love	should	give	you	the	right	atmosphere,	the	right	soil	to	meditate.	And
meditation	should	give	you	the	right	fragrance	for	love	to	become	a	treasure,	a
glory,	a	benediction.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#32
Chapter	title:	The	new	man:	the	very	salt	of	the	earth
27	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705275
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN32
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
125
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT	 TOUCHES	 SO	 MUCH	 WHEN	 YOU	 TALK	 ABOUT	 THE	 NEW	 MAN.
WHEN
YOU	FIRST	MENTIONED	THIS	CONCEPT	TO	US	MANY	YEARS	AGO,
THE	NEW
MAN	WAS	SIMPLY	THAT	TO	ME:	A	CONCEPT	THAT	WAS	INTRIGUING,
A	FASCINATING	POSSIBILITY.	BUT	LATELY,	I	FEEL	AS	IF	I	KNOW	THIS
NEW
MAN	 --	 THIS	 NEW	RACE	OF	 PEOPLE	 --	 AND	 REALLY	 CARE	ABOUT
HIM.	IT
SOUNDS	AUDACIOUS	TO	REPEAT	THE	WORDS	 I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU
USE:	 "I	 AM	 PREGNANT	 WITH	 THE	 NEW	 MAN."	 BUT	 ACTUALLY,
THAT'S	HOW	I	FEEL;	NOT	ONLY	ABOUT	MYSELF,	BUT	ABOUT	ALL	OF
YOUR	PEOPLE.	WHAT	IS
OUR	RELATIONSHIP	TO	THE	NEW	MAN?
Maneesha,	 the	 new	man	 contains	my	whole	 philosophy	 about	 life	 and	 how	 it
should	be	--
lived	 in	 totality,	 in	 intensity,	 in	 wholeness,	 so	 that	 we	 are	 not	 only	 dragging
ourselves	 from	 the	 cradle	 to	 the	 grave,	 but	 we	 can	 make	 each	 moment	 a
tremendous	rejoicing	--	a	song,	a	dance,	a	celebration.
The	 old	man	 that	 has	 existed	 up	 to	 now	 is	 on	 his	 death	 bed.	He	 has	 suffered
much;	he	needs	all	our	compassion.	He	has	been	conditioned	to	live	in	misery,	in
suffering,	 in	 self-torture.	 He	 was	 given	 promises:	 promissory	 notes	 for	 great
rewards	after	death	--	the	more	he	suffers,	the	more	he	tortures	himself,	the	more
he	is	masochistic,	the	more	he	is	destructive	of	his	own	dignity,	the	more	he	will
be	rewarded.
That	was	a	very	convenient	concept	for	all	the	vested	interests	because	the	man
who	is	ready	to	suffer	can	easily	be	enslaved.	The	man	who	is	ready	to	sacrifice
today	 for	 an	 unknown	 tomorrow	 has	 already	 declared	 his	 inclination	 to	 be
enslaved.	The	future	becomes	his	bondage.	And	for	thousands	of	years,	man	has
lived	only	in	hope,	in	imagination,	in	dreams,	in	utopias,	but	not	in	reality.	And
there	 is	 no	 other	 life	 than	 the	 life	 of	 reality,	 than	 the	 life	 that	 exists	 in	 this
moment.
The	new	man	 is	a	 rebellion,	a	 revolt,	a	 revolution	against	all	 the	conditionings
which	can	enslave	him,	oppress	him,	exploit	him,	just	by	giving	him	hopes	of	a
fictitious	 heaven,	 frightening	 him,	 blackmailing	 him	 about	 another	 fictitious
phenomenon:	hell.	All	the	old	ways	of	life	were	strangely	in	agreement	on	one
point:	that	man	is	a	sacrificial	animal	at	the	feet	of	a	fictitious	God.
There	 were	 times	 when	 men	 were	 actually	 sacrificed	 alive,	 butchered	 before
stone	 statues.	Although	nobody	dares	 to	 do	 such	 a	 thing	now,	 psychologically
the	 situation	 has	 not	 changed.	 Man	 is	 still	 sacrificed	 either	 in	 the	 name	 of
communism,	or	 in	 the	name	of	capitalism,	or	 in	 the	name	of	an	Aryan	race,	 in
the	name	of	Islam,	in	the	name	of	Christianity,	in	the	name	of	Hinduism.	Instead
of	 stone	 gods,	 now	 there	 are	 only	 phony	 words,	 meaningless.	 But	 man	 has
accepted	to	live	like	this	for	the	simple	reason	that	every	child	finds	himself	born
in	 a	 crowd	 which	 is	 already	 conditioned.	 The	 teachers	 are	 conditioned,	 the
parents	 are	 conditioned,	 the	 neighbors	 are	 conditioned;	 and	 the	 small	 child	 is
almost	helpless	--	he	cannot	envisage	any	other	alternative	than	to	be	part	of	the
crowd.
The	old	man	was	a	crowd,	a	cog	in	the	wheel;	the	old	man	had	no	individuality.
The	vested	interests	had	taken	all	care	to	destroy	self-respect,	dignity,	a	joy	and	a
gratefulness	that	you	are	a	human	being,	that	you	are	the	highest	creation	in	the
long,	long	path	of	evolution...	that	you	are	the	crowning	glory.
These	ideas	were	dangerous.	If	a	man	has	some	respect	for	himself,	some	dignity
of	being	human,	you	cannot	reduce	him	to	a	slave;	you	cannot	destroy	his	soul
and	make	him	a	robot.	Up	to	now,	man	has	only	pretended	to	live	--	his	life	has
been	only	hypothetical.
The	new	man	is	a	revolt	against	the	whole	past.
He	is	a	declaration	that	we	are	going	to	create	a	new	way	of	life,	new	values	of
life;	that	we	are	destined	for	new	goals	--	faraway	stars	are	our	targets.	And	we
are	not	going	 to	allow	anybody	 to	 sacrifice	us	 for	 any	beautiful	name.	We	are
going	 to	 live	 our	 lives,	 not	 according	 to	 ideals,	 but	 according	 to	 our	 own
longings,	our	own	passionate	intuitions.
And	we	are	going	to	live	moment	to	moment;	we	are	no	longer	to	be	befooled	by
the	tomorrow,	and	the	promises	for	tomorrow.
The	new	man	contains	 the	whole	future	of	humanity.	The	old	man	is	bound	to
die.	He	has	prepared	his	own	grave	--	he	is	digging	it	every	moment,	deeper	and
deeper.	 What	 do	 you	 think	 Ronald	 Reagan	 is	 doing?	 --	 digging	 a	 grave	 for
humanity	 as	 deep	 as	 possible.	 These	 people	 seem	 to	 be	 afraid	 even	 of	 dead
people	 --	 that	 if	 the	grave	 is	not	deep	enough,	 they	may	come	back;	 they	may
come	back	alive.
Nuclear	 weapons	 and	 all	 destructive	 measures	 are	 a	 preparation	 for	 a	 global
suicide.	The	old	man	has	decided	to	die.	It	is	up	to	the	intelligent	people	in	the
world	to	disconnect	from	the	old	man	before	he	destroys	you	too...	to	disconnect
yourself	from	old	traditions,	old	religions,	old	nations,	old	ideologies.
For	 the	 first	 time,	 the	old	 is	no	 longer	gold.	The	old	 is	 the	 rotten	corpse	of	an
ugly	past.	It	is	a	great	responsibility	for	the	new	generation,	for	the	young	people
to	renounce	the	past.
In	the	past,	religions	used	to	renounce	the	world.	I	teach	you	to	love	the	world	so
that	 it	 can	 be	 saved,	 and	 to	 renounce	 the	 past	 totally	 and	 irrevocably,	 to	 be
discontinuous.
The	 new	 man	 is	 not	 an	 improvement	 upon	 the	 old;	 he	 is	 not	 a	 continuous
phenomenon,	not	a	refinement.	The	new	man	is	 the	declaration	of	 the	death	of
the	old,	and	the	birth	of	an	absolutely	fresh	man	--	unconditioned,	without	any
nation,	without	any	religion,	without	any	discriminations	of	men	and	women,	of
black	and	white,	of	East	and	West,	or	North	and	South.
The	new	man	 is	 a	manifesto	 of	 one	 humanity.	 It	 is	 the	 greatest	 revolution	 the
world	has	ever	seen.
You	have	heard	about	 the	miracle	 that	Moses	parted	 the	sea	 in	 two	parts.	That
miracle	is	nothing.	I	want	to	part	humanity,	the	whole	ocean	of	humanity	divided
in	two	parts:	the	old	and	the	new.
The	new	will	love	this	life,	this	world.	The	new	will	learn	the	art	of	living	and
loving	and	dying.
The	new	will	not	be	concerned	about	heaven	and	hell,	sin	and	virtue.	The	new
man	will	be	concerned	about	how	to	increase	the	joys	of	life,	the	pleasures	of	life
--	more	flowers,	more	beauty,	more	humanity,	more	compassion.	And	we	have
the	capacity	and	 the	potential	 to	make	 this	planet	 a	paradise,	 and	 to	make	 this
moment	the	greatest	ecstasy	of	your	life.
Let	the	old	die.	Let	the	old	be	led	by	people	like	Ronald	Reagan.	Let	the	blind
people	follow	the	blind.
But	 those	 who	 have	 a	 younger	 spirit	 --	 and	 when	 I	 say	 "a	 younger	 spirit,"	 it
includes	even	those	old	people	who	are	not	old	in	spirit;	and	it	does	not	include
even	the	young	people	who	are	old	in	spirit.	The	spiritually	young	are	going	to
be	the	new	man.
The	new	man	is	not	a	hope:	You	are	already	pregnant	with	it.
My	work	 is	 just	 to	make	you	aware	 that	 the	new	man	has	already	arrived.	My
work	is	to	help	you	to	recognize	him	and	to	respect	him.
You	are	asking,	Maneesha:	"What	is	our	relationship	to	the	new	man?"	There	is
no	relationship	between	you	and	the	new	man	because	you	are	the	new	man.	You
just	have	 to	drop	all	 the	dust	 that	has	gathered	down	the	ages	on	 the	mirror	of
your	consciousness.
The	new	man	is	not	someone	coming	from	another	planet.	The	new	man	is	you
in	your	freshness,	 in	your	silences	of	 the	heart,	 in	your	depth	of	meditation,	 in
your	beautiful	spaces	of	love,	in	your	songs	of	joy,	in	your	dances	of	ecstasy,	in
your	love	of	this	earth.
No	religion	 teaches	you	 to	 love	 this	earth	 --	and	 this	earth	 is	your	mother,	and
these	trees	are	your	brothers,	and	these	stars	are	your	friends.
You	are	not	going	to	have	a	relationship	with	the	new	man	because	that	would	be
a	separation;	all	relationships	separate.	You	are	going	to	be	the	new	man.	In	my
vision	you	are	already	on	the	path	of	the	new	man.	You	have	started	the	journey,
although	you	are	not	fully	awake;	but	as	you	will	see	the	old	man	moving	more
and	more	towards	the	graveyard,	it	will	become	easier	for	you	to	renounce	him
and	his	ways	of	life,	his	churches,	his	synagogues,	his	temples,	his	gods,	his	holy
scriptures.
Your	holy	scripture	is	your	whole	life,
and	nobody	else	can	write	 it	 --	you	have	 to	write	 it.	You	come	with	an	empty
book,	and	it	depends	on	you	what	you	make	of	it.	Birth	is	not	life;	it	is	only	an
opportunity	given	to	you	to	create	life...	to	create	a	life	as	beautiful,	as	glorious,
as	loving	as	you	can	imagine,	as	you	can	dream.
The	new	man's	 dreams	 and	his	 reality	will	 be	one	because	his	 dreams	will	 be
rooted	here	in	this	earth.	They	will	bring	flowers	and	fruits.	They	will	not	be	just
dreams	--	they	will	make	the	world	a	dreamland.
Realize	the	responsibility...	man	has	never	faced	a	greater	responsibility	before:	a
responsibility	to	renounce	the	whole	past,	to	erase	it	from	your	being.
Be	Adam	and	Eve	again,	and	let	this	earth	be	the	Garden	of	Eden;	and	this	time
we	will	see	who	the	God	is	who	has	the	guts	to	drive	man	out	of	the	Garden	of
Eden!	It	is	going	to	be	our	garden,	and	if	God	wants	to	be	in	our	garden,	He	will
have	to	knock	on	our	doors.
This	earth	can	be	a	splendor,	a	magic,	a	miracle.	Our	hands	have	that	touch	--	it
is	 just	 that	we	 have	 never	 tried	 it.	Man	 has	 never	 given	 a	 chance	 to	 his	 own
potential	 to	grow,	 to	blossom,	 to	bring	 fulfillment,	 contentment,	 to	 shower	 the
whole	 earth	 with	 flowers,	 to	 fill	 the	 whole	 earth	 with	 fragrance.	 To	 me,	 that
fragrance	is	godliness.
The	new	man	will	not	worship	a	God	as	a	creator	of	the	world;	the	new	man	will
create	God	as	a	fragrance,	as	beauty,	as	love,	as	truth.	Up	to	now	God	has	been
the	creator:	for	the	new	man,	man	will	be	the	creator,	and	God	is	going	to	be	the
created.	We	can	create	godliness	--	it	is	within	our	hands.
That's	why	I	say	the	new	man	is	the	greatest	revolution	that	has	ever	happened	in
the	world.	And	there	is	no	way	to	avoid	it	because	the	old	man	is	determined	to
die,	 determined,	 committed	 to	 commit	 suicide.	 Let	 him	 die	 peacefully.	 Those
who	have	a	rebellious	spirit	should	just	disconnect	themselves,	and	they	will	be
the	 saviors,	 they	will	 create	a	Noah's	 ark,	 they	will	be	 the	beginning	of	a	new
world.	And	because	we	have	known	the	old	world	and	its	miseries;	we	can	avoid
all	 those	miseries;	we	can	avoid	all	 those	 jealousies,	all	 those	angers,	all	 those
wars,	all	those	destructive	tendencies....
We	can	go	through	a	total	transformation:	we	can	create	innocent	people,	loving
people,	people	who	breathe	in	freedom,	people	who	help	each	other	to	be	free.
We	can	create	nourishment	for	everybody	to	be	dignified,	to	be	respected	--	not
according	to	some	ideals	and	values,	but	just	as	he	is.
The	new	man	is	going	to	be	the	very	salt	of	the	earth.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
LAST	 NIGHT,	 AFTER	 YOU	 HAD	 LEFT	 DISCOURSE,	 AND	 I	 WAS
BOWING
DOWN,	A	FEELING	CAME	OVER	ME	SO	STRONGLY	THAT	I	COULDN'T
IMAGINE	 LIVING	 AFTER	 YOU	 DIE.	 I	 FELT	 THAT	 WITHOUT	 YOUR
CONSTANT
SHOWERING,	 I	 WOULD	 BE	 LOST	 IN	 DARKNESS	 FOREVER.	 LATER,
SITTING
IN	MY	ROOM,	I	FELT	A	TREMENDOUS	FEAR	COMING	UP	IN	ME	--	THE
SORT
THAT	 USUALLY	 CATAPULTS	 ME	 INTO	 SOME	 NEUROTIC	 AND
COMPULSIVE
ACTIVITY.	 THIS	 TIME	 THOUGH,	 I	 SAT,	 FELT	 YOU,	 AND	 LET	 THE
FEELING
COME	 UNTIL	 IT	 WAS	 SO	 STRONG	 THAT	 I	 FELT	 ABSOLUTELY
PARALYZED.
SUDDENLY,	 IT	 POPPED;	 AND	 I	 WAS	 SITTING	 THERE	 IN	 A	 KIND	 OF
SILENCE	I	HAVE	NEVER	KNOWN	BEFORE.	TODAY,	I	FEEL	QUIET	AND
UNCOMPLICATED	 --	 MY	 USUAL	 OBSESSIONS	 FAR	 AWAY,	 NOT
ECSTATIC,	 NOT	 DOWN;	 JUST	 VERY	 SIMPLE	 AND	 SOBER.	 BELOVED
MASTER,	WAS	THIS
AN	ENCOUNTER	WITH	DEATH?
Rafia,	there	is	no	way	to	encounter	death,	just	because	death	is	a	fiction.	You	can
think	about	it,	you	can	be	afraid	about	 it;	but	you	cannot	encounter	 it.	Nobody
ever	dies	--
people	are	simply	changing	houses.
What	you	have	experienced	was	first	the	fear	that:	after	I	die,	how	are	you	going
to	live	without	me?	Don't	be	worried	about	it.	First,	if	I	see	that	you	cannot	live
without	me,	I	can	postpone	dying	--	unless	you	come	with	folded	hands,	and	you
say,	"Now,	it	is	too	much	--	I	cannot	tolerate	You	any	more."
Secondly,	 before	meeting	me	you	 have	 lived	without	me.	 If	 I	 die,	 it	will	 be	 a
shock	--	for	a	few	days,	you	will	feel	 in	a	dramatic	mood	of	sadness,	and	then
life	will	take	you	over	again.	Millions	of	people	have	died	--	every	day	people	go
on	dying	--	and	life	continues	with	all	 its	songs,	with	all	 its	discos,	with	all	 its
music.	People	go	on	dying,	but	if	you	think	before...	it	is	the	thinking	that	makes
it	difficult.	Death	 itself	 is	a	wound	 that	 time	heals	very	quickly.	But	 I	will	not
even	leave	that	wound	in	you.	Before	I	die,	I	will	make	you	able	to	see	that	there
is	no	death.
What	is	the	purpose	of	all	your	meditations?	It	is	a	deep	search	to	know	that	life
is	 eternal,	 and	death	as	 such	 is	only	an	observation	of	 the	outsiders.	You	have
always	seen	other	people	die:	have	you	ever	seen	yourself	die?	But	what	do	you
know	when	other	people	die?	Only	one	thing	--	that	they	don't	breathe,	they	don't
talk;	that	their	blood	circulation	stops,	that	their	hearts	have	no	more	beats.
I	was	telling	you	just	a	few	days	ago....	One	man	in	the	part	of	Kashmir	occupied
by	Pakistan,	has	played	a	 joke	on	people	for	 the	 third	 time.	He	is	one	hundred
and	twenty-five	years	old:	he	has	died	three	times.	This	was	the	third	time,	and
because	he	has	done	the	act	two	times	before,	people	were	very,	very	cautious.
Doctors	were	called,	every	examination	was	done,	and	when	everybody	agreed
that	this	time	the	poor	guy	had	really	died	--	it	was	no	longer	a	joke	--	that	man
opened	one	eye,	and	said,	"Who	is	saying	I	am	dead?	At	least,	this	time	I'm	not!"
The	 relatives	 had	 gathered	 from	 faraway	 villages,	 and	 they	 all	 went	 away	 in
sadness:	"It	 seems	he	will	have	a	 few	years	more,	and	he	will	again	 torture	us
into	coming!"	But	 the	old	man	 said,	 "Listen,	 this	 is	my	 last	 act;	next	 time	 I'm
really	going	to	die."
He	has	been	asked	by	doctors	what	his	secret	 is,	and	he	says	his	secret	 is	very
simple:	 going	 deep	 into	 meditation,	 he	 realized	 that	 as	 you	 go	 deeper,	 your
breathing	becomes	slower.	When	you	are	deepest	in	meditation,	your	breathing
stops.	And	it	is	simply	a	knack....	Once	he	learned	that	stopping	the	breathing	is
not	death,	he	allowed	even	 the	heart	 to	 stop	 --	he	 just	 relaxed.	And	 from	deep
down,	he	was	watching	the	whole	show	that	was	going	all	around:	the	doctors,
and	physicians,	and	the	relatives.
There	 was	 one	 man,	 Bhrahma	 Yogi,	 from	 South	 India	 --	 he	 did	 the	 same
experiment	 in	 almost	 every	 university	 of	 the	 world,	 particularly	 the	 medical
colleges.	For	ten	minutes,	it	was	possible	for	him	to	pretend	to	die.	And	he	had
certificates	from	the	greatest	authorities	--	from	Oxford,	from	Cambridge	--	that
he	is	dead;	the	doctors	signed	certificates	for	his	death.	And	after	ten	minutes	he
would	 start	 breathing	 again,	 smiling,	 and	he	would	open	his	 eyes.	 It	was	very
frightening.
He	 had	 collected	 so	 many	 certificates	 --	 death	 certificates	 from	 so	 many
authorities	 --	 that	 he	had	 challenged	 the	whole	medical	 science:	 "Your	 idea	of
death	is	incorrect.	You	simply	think	that	these	symptoms	of	life	are	life;	they	are
only	symptoms	--	very	outward	symptoms.	They	show	only	one	thing:	that	life	is
connected	with	the	body.	When	the	connection	is	no	longer	there,	the	symptoms
disappear.	It	does	not	mean	that	life	disappears."
It	is	almost	like	electricity:	you	can	see	the	electricity,	you	can	put	it	off,	and	all
symptoms	will	disappear;	but	that	does	not	mean	that	electricity	has	died.	Life	is
nothing	but	bio-electricity	--	living	electricity	--	a	higher	form,	a	refined	form	of
the	same	energy	as	electricity.
I	will	not	leave,	Rafia,	unless	you	have	experienced	that	there	is	no	death.	I	will
ask	your	permission	before	I	leave.	You	will	have	to	sign	your	signature	that	you
give	me	leave,	 then	I	can	go	on	a	holiday.	And	once	you	know	that	your	inner
life,	your	real	life,	 is	eternal,	you	will	be	able	to	have	some	contact	with	me	--
although	I	will	not	be	in	the	body.
To	be	in	the	body	is	not	equivalent	to	life.	It	is	a	kind	of	imprisonment.	You	are
imprisoned	in	the	body;	you	can	be	free	of	the	body,	you	can	become	part	of	the
whole.
And	this	time	I	am	going	to	become	part	of	the	whole.	I	am	not	going	to	enter
another	 womb,	 into	 another	 imprisonment.	 I	 have	 done	 my	 jail	 terms	 --
complete!
But	one	thing	important	happened	that	you	have	not	been	very	conscious	about:
the	moment	 you	 allowed	 the	 fear	 --	 the	 darkness	 surrounding	 you	 --	 and	 you
relaxed	 into	 it,	with	no	 resistance,	with	no	 fight,	with	no	desire	 to	 escape	 into
some	 activity,	 slowly,	 slowly,	 the	 fear	 and	 the	 darkness	 and	 the	 death
disappeared.	 You	 became	 profoundly	 silent...	 a	 silence	 that	 you	 have	 never
known	before.
"Today,	I	feel,"	you	are	saying,	"quiet	and	uncomplicated	--	my	usual	obsessions
far	away,	not	ecstatic,	not	down;	just	very	simple	and	sober."	This	is	beautiful	--
this	is	a	great	experience.	You	have	touched	something	deep	in	existence	itself.
Feel	 blissful,	 and	 remember	 the	 experience.	Next	 time,	 anything	 that	 happens,
allow	 it	 to	 happen	 and	 just	 sit	 silently	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 it	 --	 a	 center	 of	 the
cyclone.	Slowly,	slowly,	the	cyclone	will	disappear,	and	only	the	center	will	be
left	behind.	You	will	feel	immensely	centered,	silent,	sober,	innocent,	simple	--
experiences	which	are	tremendously	valuable.
We	miss	these	experiences	because	we	always	escape.	When	you	feel	afraid,	you
get	 involved	 in	 some	 activity;	 you	 go	 to	 meet	 a	 friend,	 you	 start	 fighting	 or
loving	 your	 girl	 friend,	 you	 go	 to	 the	 restaurant.	 If	 nothing	 else,	 you	 start
smoking	 --	 but	you	have	 to	do	 something	 to	 escape	 from	 the	 experience.	This
way,	people	go	on	missing	great	opportunities	of	spiritual	growth.
Whatever	 has	 happened	 this	 time	 should	 be	 remembered,	 and	 if	 another
opportunity	 arises	 --	 and	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 arise	 --	 use	 it	 even	more	deeply,	more
joyously,	 with	 a	 welcome,	 and	 it	 will	 open	 doors	 of	 great	 riches	 and	 great
treasures.
But	you	have	not	understood	the	great	opportunity	because	in	 the	end	you	still
ask:
"Beloved	Master,	was	this	an	encounter	with	death?"
You	have	encountered	silence,	you	have	encountered	a	new	quality	within	you	of
soberness,	quietude	 --	which	 is	unusual	 to	you.	You	were	not	ecstatic,	and	not
down,	very	centered:	neither	at	this	extreme	nor	that	extreme,	but	exactly	in	the
middle.	But	you	have	not	understood.	 It	 is	natural	 --	when	 for	 the	 first	 time	 it
happens,	 it	 is	 expected	 that	 you	 will	 not	 understand	 it.	 But	 I	 want	 you	 to
remember,	it	was	not	an	encounter	with	death;	it	was	an	encounter	with	your	fear
of	death,	with	your	fear	of	being	left	behind,	with	your	fear	of	being	without	a
master.
Ten	 years	 after	 his	 arrival	 in	 America	 from	 Italy,	 Roselli	 had	 saved	 enough
money	from	his	vegetable	business	to	build	a	huge	house.
"I	want-a	 three	 bedroom-as	 upstairs,"	 he	 explained	 to	 the	 builder.	 "Nice	 big-a
staircase	 leading	 up	 to	 bedroom-as,	 and	 right	 over	 here	 next	 to	 a	 staircase,	 I
want-a	hollow	statue."
Months	 later,	 he	 returned	 and	 found	 everything	 to	 his	 satisfaction.	 Then	 he
noticed	a	statue	next	to	the	staircase.
"Hey,	what's-a	matter	with	you?"	shouted	Roselli.	"You	no	understand-a	what	I
tell-a	you?"
"Isn't	that	what	you	ordered?"	asked	the	builder.	"A	hollow	statue?"
"Are	you	stupid,	or	something?"	cried	the	Italian.	"I	want-a	one	of	those	things-a
that	goes-a	ring-a	ring.	You	pick	it	up	and	say-àhallo,	's	tat	you?'"
Just	a	little	misunderstanding...	otherwise,	Rafia,	you	had	a	beautiful	experience.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHENEVER,	 I	 AM	 IN	 LOVE	 WITH	 A	 MAN,	 FOR	 THOSE	 YEARS	 NO
OTHER
MAN	 ATTRACTS	 ME.	 BUT	 FOR	 THE	 MAN,	 IT'S	 NOT	 THE	 SAME.
THOUGH	HE
IS	HAPPY	AND	SATISFIED	WITH	ME,	AND	WANTS	TO	KEEP	THE
RELATIONSHIP	WITH	ME,	HE	HAS	HIS	SHORT	LOVE	AFFAIRS	EVERY
FEW
MONTHS.	 I	 UNDERSTAND	 THE	 DIFFERENT	 NATURE	 OF	 MAN	 AND
WOMAN.	I	ALSO	UNDERSTAND	EVERY	LOVE	RELATIONSHIP	HAS	ITS
PEAKS	AND
VALLEYS.	STILL,	SADNESS	IN	ME	KEEPS	ON	COMING	FOR	A	SHORT
WHILE,	 AND	 LEAVING.	 I	 GIVE	 A	 LONG	 ROPE	 TO	 THE	 MAN.	 MY
FRIENDS	SAY	I	MAKE	MYSELF	SO	AVAILABLE	THAT	I	LET	THE	MAN
TAKE	ME	FOR
GRANTED	AND	I	LOSE	MY	SELF-RESPECT.	OSHO,	 IS	 IT	SO?	 I'M	NOT
CLEAR.	 I	 DON'T	 EXPECT	 ANYTHING	 FROM	 HIM.	 YOU	 KNOW	 ME
BETTER.	WOULD
YOU	PLEASE	LIKE	TO	COMMENT?
Neelam,	 there	 are	 many	 things	 in	 your	 question.	 First,	 you	 have	 a
misunderstanding	 about	man's	 nature.	You	 think,	 as	many	people	 in	 the	world
think,	that	man	is	polygamous,	and	the	woman	is	monogamous...	that	the	woman
wants	 to	 live	 with	 one	man,	 to	 love	 one	man,	 to	 devote	 and	 dedicate	 herself
totally	 to	 one	 man,	 but	 man	 is	 different	 in	 nature	 --	 he	 wants	 to	 love	 other
women	too,	at	least,	once	in	a	while.
The	reality	 is:	both	are	polygamous.	The	woman	has	been	conditioned	by	man
for	 thousands	of	years	 into	 thinking	that	she	is	monogamous.	And	man	is	very
cunning;	he	has	exploited	the	woman	in	many	ways.	One	of	the	ways	is:	he	has
been	telling	her	that	man	is,	by	nature,	polygamous.	All	the	psychologists,	all	the
sociologists	are	agreed	upon	the	fact	that	man	is	polygamous;	and	none	of	them
says	the	same	thing	about	woman.
My	own	understanding	is	that	both	are	polygamous.	If	a	woman	does	not	behave
in	a	polygamous	way,	it	is	nurture,	not	nature.	She	has	been	utterly	conditioned
so	long	that	the	conditioning	has	gone	into	her	very	blood,	into	her	bones,	into
her	very	marrow.	Why	do	I	say	so?	--	because	in	the	whole	of	existence,	all	the
animals	are	polygamous.
It	 would	 be	 really	 surprising	 that	 if	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 polygamous,	 only
woman	 has	 an	 exceptional	 nature.	 In	 existence	 there	 are	 no	 exceptions.	 But
because	a	woman	had	to	depend	financially	on	man,	man	has	cut	the	woman	in
so	many	ways:	 he	 has	 cut	 her	 wings,	 he	 has	 cut	 her	 freedom,	 he	 has	 cut	 her
dependence	 upon	 herself.	 He	 has	 taken	 her	 responsibilities	 on	 his	 shoulders,
showing	great	love,	saying:	you	need	not	be	worried	about	yourself,	I	will	take
care.	 But	 in	 the	 name	 of	 love,	 he	 has	 taken	 the	 freedom	 of	 the	 woman.	 For
centuries	he	has	not	allowed	a	woman	to	be	educated,	to	be	qualified	in	any	way,
in	any	craft,	 in	any	skill	--	she	has	to	be	financially	dependent	on	the	man.	He
has	 taken	 away	 even	her	 freedom	of	movement	 --	 she	 cannot	move	 freely	 the
way	 man	 moves;	 she	 is	 confined	 to	 the	 house.	 The	 house	 is	 almost	 her
imprisonment.
And	 in	 the	past	particularly,	 she	was	continuously	pregnant	because	out	of	 ten
children,	nine	children	used	to	die.	To	have	two,	three	children,	a	woman	had	to
be	 continually	 pregnant	 the	 whole	 time	 she	 was	 capable	 of	 reproducing.	 A
pregnant	woman	becomes	even	more	dependent	financially	--	the	man	becomes
her	 caretaker.	The	man	 is	 knowledgeable,	 the	woman	knows	 nothing.	 She	 has
been	kept	 ignorant	because	knowledge	 is	power	--	 that's	why	woman	has	been
deprived	of	knowledge.
And	 because	 it	 is	 a	man's	world,	 they	 all	 agree	 as	 far	 as	 keeping	 the	woman
enslaved	is	concerned.
But	everything	has	been	done	with	very	articulate	intelligence.	She	has	been	told
that	it	is	her	nature	to	be	monogamous.	Now	there	is	not	a	single	psychoanalyst,
not	a	 single	woman	sociologist	 to	 refute	 this:	 if	man	 is	polygamous,	 then	why
should	woman	be	monogamous?	Man	has	made	 the	way	 for	his	polygamy:	he
has	 created	 prostitutes.	 It	was	 an	 accepted	 fact	 in	 the	 past	 that	 no	wife	would
have	objected	if	her	husband,	once	in	a	while,	visited	a	prostitute.	It	was	thought
that	it	is	just	natural	for	man.
I	say	unto	you	that	both	are	polygamous.	The	whole	existence	is	polygamous.	It
has	to	be
--	 monogamy	 is	 boredom.	 However	 beautiful	 a	 woman	 may	 be,	 however
beautiful	 a	 man	 may	 be,	 you	 become	 tired	 --	 the	 same	 geography,	 the	 same
topography.	 How	 long	 do	 you	 have	 to	 see	 the	 same	 face?	 So	 it	 happens	 that
years	pass,	 and	 the	husband	has	not	 looked	attentively	 at	 his	wife	 for	 a	 single
moment.
My	own	approach	is	natural	and	simple.	I	want	no	marriages	in	the	world	of	the
new	man.	Marriage	is	such	an	ugly	and	rotten	phenomenon	--	so	destructive,	so
inhuman.	On	the	one	hand	it	makes	one	woman	a	slave,	and	on	the	other	hand,	it
creates	 the	 ugliest	 institution	 of	 prostitutes.	The	 prostitutes	 are	 needed	 to	 save
the	marriage;	 otherwise,	 the	man	will	 start	 fooling	 around	with	 other	 people's
wives.	It	is	a	social	device	so	that	he	doesn't	get	entangled	with	another's	wife	--
there	are	beautiful	women	available.
In	 India,	 in	 the	 days	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 it	 was	 the	 tradition	 that	 the	 most
beautiful	woman	in	the	town	was	not	allowed	to	be	married;	she	had	to	become	a
prostitute.	She	was	called	nagabadu:	 the	wife	of	 the	whole	city	 --	because	 she
was	so	beautiful	 that	 to	be	married	 to	one	man	was	going	 to	create	 jealousies,
conflicts,	 problems.	 It	was	 better	 to	 avoid	 all	 those	 conflicts	 amongst	men,	 to
make	her	a	prostitute	--	available	for	all.
In	 India,	 every	 temple	had	devadasis.	Still	 in	South	 India,	 there	 are	devadasis.
Every	family	was	required,	in	the	past,	to	donate	their	most	beautiful	girl	to	the
temple,	to	God.
In	the	name	of	God,	those	beautiful	girls	in	the	temples	became	prostitutes.	First,
they	were	used	by	the	priests;	second,	they	were	used	by	the	rich	customers	--	I
mean	 the	 rich	worshipers.	And	 they	were	 so	many	 that	 they	were	 available	 in
every	price	range;	even	the	poorest	could	afford	one.	Of	course,	it	would	not	be
so	beautiful	a	woman,	but	any	woman	is	better	than	no	woman.
Even	 today,	 just	 a	 few	 days	 ago,	 a	 survey	 was	 made	 in	 Bombay	 of	 all	 the
prostitutes	--
thirty	 percent	 of	 them	have	 come	 from	South	 India,	 from	 temples	where	 their
parents	 have	 dedicated	 them	 to	 God.	 For	 the	 parents,	 there	 was	 an	 incentive:
dedicating	her	 to	God	was	easier	 than	 to	get	a	girl	married.	 It	 is	so	difficult	 in
India...	you	have	to	give	so	much	money,	that	not	all	parents	can	afford	it	--	just
one	daughter,	and	they	will	have	to	sell	their	land,	their	house,	they	will	become
beggars.	So	 it	was	very	easy,	and	comfortable,	convenient,	and	virtuous,	 too	--
respectable,	honorable	--	the	society	honored	it.
They	 offered	 those	 girls;	 they	 still	 offer	 those	 girls	 to	 the	 temples,	 and	 the
temples	 are	 selling	 those	 girls	 to	 all	 great	 cities	 because	 now	 rich	worshipers
don't	 come	 to	 the	 temples.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 have	 those	 girls	 sold	 to	 agents	 in
Bombay,	 in	Calcutta,	 in	New	Delhi	because	politicians	will	 need	 them,	priests
will	need	them,	rich	people	will	need	them.	People	who	are	living	far	away	from
their	 homes,	working	 in	 cities	 --	 their	 families	 are	 in	 the	 villages	 --	will	 need
them.
Thirty	percent	of	the	prostitutes	in	Bombay	have	come	from	temples	where	they
were	dedicated	to	God.	Every	temple	in	the	past	was	nothing	but	a	sacred	facade
to	 hide	 prostitutes	 under	 the	 name	 of	 devadasis.	 The	word	means:	 servants	 of
God.
Man	has	arranged	for	himself,	but	he	has	prohibited	the	woman....	First,	his	ego
is	hurt	if	his	woman	falls	in	love	with	somebody	else.	That	means	he	is	rejected,
that	means	he	is	not	man	enough,	that	means	something	is	missing	in	him.
And	more	than	that,	there	is	another	problem:	private	property.	He	has	to	keep	a
perfect	 guard	 on	 his	 woman	 because	 he	 wants	 his	 own	 blood	 to	 inherit	 his
property.	And	if	the	women	are	free	to	have	love	affairs,	then	it	is	very	difficult	-
-	almost	 impossible	 --	 to	be	certain	 that	your	son	 is	 really	your	son.	 It	may	be
somebody	 else's	 son,	 and	 he	 will	 inherit	 your	 property.	 To	 protect	 private
property,	the	woman	has	to	be	conditioned	that	she	is	monogamous.	But	it	is	not
true,	it	is	not	natural.
Whether	 one	 is	man	 or	woman,	 everybody	 needs	 a	 change,	 at	 least	 once	 in	 a
while	--	for	the	weekend.	Five	days	you	can	both	be	monogamous;	for	two	days,
on	the	weekend,	you	can	both	be	polygamous.	And	what	is	the	worry	about	the
property	 --	 who	 owns	 it	 when	 you	 are	 dead	 --	 whether	 it	 is	 your	 blood	 or
somebody	else's	blood?	It	seems	 to	be	an	unnecessary	worry	--	somebody	will
inherit	it.
And	if	you	become	interested	in	other	women,	you	should	understand	that	your
woman	 is	 also	 human,	 has	 the	 same	heart,	 the	 same	 consciousness	 --	 she	 also
likes	sometimes	to	meet	a	new	man.	She	also	gets	tired	and	bored.
In	the	new	world,	to	which	I	have	dedicated	my	whole	life,	there	should	be	no
marriage	--
only	lovers.	And	as	long	as	they	are	pleased	to	be	together,	they	can	be	together;
and	the	moment	they	feel	that	they	have	been	together	too	long,	a	little	change
will	be	good.
There	is	no	question	of	sadness,	no	question	of	anger	--	just	a	deep	acceptance	of
nature.
And	if	you	have	loved	a	man	or	a	woman,	you	will	love	to	give	the	other	person
as	much	freedom	as	possible.
If	love	cannot	give	freedom,	then	it	is	not	love.
Neelam,	 you	 say	 that,	 "Sadness	 in	me	 keeps	 on	 coming	 for	 a	 short	while	 and
leaving.	I	give	a	long	rope	to	the	man."	Now,	the	very	idea	is	wrong.	Is	your	man
a	dog	that	you	give	him	a	long	rope?
You	 cannot	 give	 freedom	 --	 freedom	 is	 everybody's	 birthright.	 The	 very	 idea,
"I'm	 giving	 a	 long	 rope"...	 still	 the	 rope	 is	 in	 your	 hand.	You	 are	 the	 giver	 of
freedom.	You	cannot	give	freedom;	you	can	only	accept	the	freedom	of	the	other
person.	You	 cannot	 keep	 one	 end	 of	 the	 rope	 in	 your	 hand,	watching	 the	 dog
pissing	on	this	tree,	pissing	on	that	tree....
You	think	that	is	freedom?	No,	the	very	idea	is	wrong.
The	other	person	has	his	freedom;	you	have	your	freedom.	Neither	he	needs	to
have	one	end	of	the	rope	in	his	hand,	nor	do	you	have	to	have	it;	otherwise,	both
are	 chained.	His	 rope	 is	 going	 to	 be	your	 chains,	 your	 rope	 is	 going	 to	 be	his
chains.	And	 you	 think	 you	 give	 enough	 rope	 --	 you	 think	 you	 are	 being	 very
generous.
Freedom	 is	 not	 something	 that	 has	 to	 be	 given	 to	 another	 person.	 Freedom	 is
something	that	has	to	be	recognized	as	the	property	of	the	other	person.
And	the	freedom	of	the	person	you	love	will	not	hurt	you.	It	hurts	because	you
don't	use	your	own	freedom.	It	 is	not	his	freedom	that	hurts;	what	hurts	 is	 that
you	have	been	 incapacitated	by	centuries	of	wrong	conditioning	 --	you	cannot
use	your	own	freedom.
Man	has	taken	your	whole	freedom.	That	is	the	real	problem.	Your	freedom	has
to	be	returned	to	you,	and	it	will	not	hurt;	in	fact	you	will	enjoy	it.
Freedom	 is	 such	 a	 joyful	 experience.	Your	 lover	 is	 enjoying	 freedom,	 you	 are
enjoying	freedom.	In	freedom,	you	meet;	 in	 freedom,	you	depart.	And	perhaps
life	may	bring	you	together	again.	And	most	probably....	All	the	researches	about
love	 relationships	 indicate	 a	 certain	phenomenon	which	has	not	been	accepted
by	 any	 society	 up	 to	 now.	 And	 even	 today,	 when	 I	 say	 these	 things,	 I'm
condemned	 all	 over	 the	world.	When	 your	man	 becomes	 interested	 in	 another
woman,	 it	 does	 not	mean	 that	 he	 no	 longer	 loves	 you;	 it	 simply	means	 just	 a
change	of	taste.
Once	in	a	while,	you	like	to	go	to	Sarjano's	pizza	place.	That	does	not	mean	that
you	have	renounced	your	old	food,	but	once	in	a	while,	it	 is	perfectly	good.	In
fact,	after	visiting	Sarjano's	place,	you	go	to	the	canteen	more	joyously.	It	takes	a
few	days	for	you	to	forget	 the	experience	--	 then	again,	one	day,	 the	spaghetti.
These	affairs	don't	mean	much.	One	cannot	live	on	spaghetti	alone.
The	psychologists	are	agreed	on	one	point:	couples	who	love	each	other	should
have	 a	 few	 love	 affairs	 once	 in	 a	 while.	 Those	 love	 affairs	 will	 renew	 their
relationship,	will	refresh	it.	You	will	start	seeing	beauty	again	in	your	wife.	You
may	start	fantasies,	dreams	of	having	your	wife	again	--	that	you	misunderstood
her	before;	 this	 time	you	are	not	going	to	misunderstand.	And	the	same	is	 true
about	your	husband.
In	my	idea	of	a	commune,	people	will	be	absolutely	free	to	say	to	their	partner:
"I	would	 like	 two	days	holiday.	And	you	are	also	 free;	you	need	not	 sit	 in	 the
house	 and	 boil."	 If	 you	want	 to	meditate,	 that	 is	 another	 thing;	 otherwise	 you
have	been	 interested	 in	 the	neighbor's	wife	 too	 long....	The	green	grass	on	 the
other	side	of	 the	 fence	 --	you	wanted	 to	chew	it	 for	so	 long;	now	your	wife	 is
giving	you	a	chance!
You	should	say,	"You	are	great!	Just	go	for	a	holiday,	and	enjoy	it.	And	I'm	going
to	the	neighbor's	house	--	the	grass	is	greener	there."	But	in	two	days,	you	will
find	that	the	grass	is	grass,	and	your	own	lawn	was	far	better.
But	an	authentic	experience	is	needed,	and	when	after	two	days,	you	meet	again,
it	will	be	the	beginning	of	a	new	honeymoon.	Why	not	have	honeymoons	every
month?	Why	be	satisfied	with	one	honeymoon	in	one	life?	That	is	strange,	and
absolutely	unnatural.	And	love	is	not	something	bad	or	evil	so	that	you	have	to
prevent	your	wife	 loving	somebody	else.	 It	 is	 just	 fun;	 there	 is	not	much	to	be
bothered	about.	If	she	wants	to	play	tennis	with	somebody,	let	her	play!	I	don't
think	that	making	love	has	more	significance	than	playing	tennis.	In	fact,	tennis
is	far	cleaner.
Neelam,	you	say,	"I	don't	expect	anything	from	him.	You	know	me	better."	I	do
know	you	better!	I	know	everybody	better.	Even	in	your	no-expectations,	there
are	 hidden	 expectations	 --	 unspoken...	 and	 they	 are	 more	 subtle,	 and	 more
binding.	Simply,	one	has	to	accept	a	simple	fact:	your	partner	is	a	stranger	--	it	is
just	 an	 accident	 that	 you	 are	 together	 --	 and	 you	 never	 expect	 anything	 from
outsiders,	from	strangers.
One	of	the	wisest	women	I	have	met	in	my	life	told	me	that	she	makes	love	only
to	strangers.
I	said,	"Why?	It	will	be	really	a	difficult	thing	to	find	a	stranger	to	make	love	to."
She	said,	"No	--	in	trains,	in	airplanes...	I	don't	even	ask	their	name,	and	I	don't
say	anything	about	myself	--	we	remain	strangers,	I	have	made	love	to	them,	and
we	 meet	 the	 next	 day	 in	 the	 marketplace:	 neither	 I	 recognize	 him,	 nor	 he....
There	 is	 no	 need	 --	 we	 enjoyed	 the	 moment	 just	 out	 of	 sheer	 freedom,	 no
bondage,	no	commitment."
She	is	a	married	woman,	married	to	a	very	rich	man	in	the	Philippines,	but	she
rarely	 goes	 to	 the	 Philippines.	 She	 goes	 on	moving	 around	 the	world,	 finding
strangers.	 She	 says,	 "Once	 in	 a	 while,	 I	 go	 to	 the	 Philippines.	 My	 husband
himself	becomes	by	that	time	a	stranger,	and	I	love	him.	But	the	moment	I	feel
that	I	am	falling	into	the	trap	of	relationship,	I	rush	out	--	again,	on	the	road."
I	can	see	something	tremendously	deep	in	her	insight.	Love	as	much	as	you	can.
Never	think	of	the	next	moment;	and	if	your	lover	goes	somewhere	else,	you	are
also	 free.	And	don't	 deceive	yourself:	 can	 any	woman	 say	 that	while	 she	 is	 in
love	with	one	person,	she	does	not	get	attracted	to	other	people?	Maybe	it	 is	a
very	repressed	desire,	maybe	she	never	allows	it	to	surface;	but	it	is	impossible
not	to,	because	there	are	so	many	beautiful	people	around.	You	have	chosen	only
one	stranger	amongst	many	strangers.
Keep	freedom	as	a	higher	value	than	love	itself.	And	if	it	is	possible	--	and	it	is
possible	 because	 it	 is	 natural	 --	 your	 life	 will	 not	 be	 a	 misery,	 it	 will	 be	 a
continuous	excitement,	a	continuous	exploration	of	new	human	beings.	We	are
all	strangers:	nobody	is	a	husband,	nobody	is	a	wife.	Some	idiot	registrar	cannot
--	just	by	putting	his	seal	--	make	you	a	husband	and	wife.	And	once	that	idiot
has	put	the	seal,	if	you	want	to	separate,	you	have	to	go	to	another	idiot	--	bigger
idiots	--	and	wait	for	months	or	years	to	be	separated.
Strange!	--	 it	 is	your	private	affair;	no	business	of	any	registrar,	no	business	of
any	judge.
Why	do	you	go	on	giving	your	freedom	into	the	hands	of	others?
Neelam,	you	say,	"My	friends	say	I	make	myself	so	available	that	I	let	the	man
take	me	for	granted,	and	I	lose	my	self-respect."	Your	friends	don't	understand	a
thing	 --	 and	 they	 are	 not	 your	 friends	 either	 because	 their	 advice	 is	 that	 of
enemies.
One	should	make	oneself	absolutely	available.	Your	friends	are	telling	you	that
when	 your	 man	 wants	 to	 make	 love	 to	 you,	 one	 day	 say	 you	 are	 having	 a
headache;	another	day,	you	are	too	tired;	the	third	day,	you	are	not	in	the	mood...
so	keep	the	man	hanging	around.	Don't	give	that	much	rope	--	just	a	little	rope,
and	 a	 beautiful	 bell	 around	 his	 neck	 with	 your	 name	 written	 on	 it,	 saying,
"Beware,	personal	property."	What	do	you	mean	by
"availability?"	You	should	be	available	to	the	person	you	love,	and	if	once	in	a
while	he	feels	to	change	--	enjoy.	And	let	him	go	joyously.	That	will	bring	self-
respect	to	you,	and	dignity.
A	divorced	woman,	frustrated	with	married	life,	ran	an	ad	in	the	local	newspaper
that	read,	"Looking	for	a	man	who	won't	beat	me,	who	won't	run	around	on	me,
and	who	is	a	fantastic	lover."
After	one	week,	her	doorbell	rings.	She	goes	to	the	door,	opens	it,	and	sees	no
one	there.
She	closes	the	door,	and	is	about	to	walk	away	when	the	bell	rings	again.
Opening	the	door	once	again,	she	sees	no	one	there,	but	happens	to	look	down
and	notices	a	man	with	no	arms	and	no	legs	sitting	on	the	doorstep.
"I'm	here	to	answer	your	ad,"	he	says.
The	woman	does	not	know	quite	what	to	do,	what	to	say.
So	the	man	continues,	"As	you	can	see,	I	can't	beat	you,	and	it	will	be	impossible
for	me	to	run	around	on	you."
"Yes,	I	can	see	that,"	said	the	woman,	"but	the	ad	also	said	I	wanted	àfantastic
lover'."
The	man	smiles	and	says,	"I	rang	the	doorbell,	didn't	I?"
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#33
Chapter	title:	The	natural	man	needs	no	morality
28	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705280
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN33
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
83
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
ALTHOUGH	 I	 AM	 DEEPLY	 SATISFIED	 AND	 NOURISHED	 BY	 MY
EKDAM
PUNJABI	FOOD,	STILL	FROM	TIME	TO	TIME	I	FEEL	A	STRONG	PULL
TOWARDS	 OTHER	 DISHES,	 AND	 ENJOY	 ITALIAN	 PIZZAS,	 FRENCH
WINE,	OR
JAPANESE	SUSHI.	IT'S	NOT	THAT	I	DON'T	WANT	TO	EAT	OUT
OCCASIONALLY,	BUT	I'D	LIKE	TO	FEEL	IT	IS	IN	MY	HANDS	WHETHER
I	DO
OR	NOT,	AND	NOT	BE	A	VICTIM	OF	THIS	HORMONAL	CONSPIRACY.
BELOVED	MASTER,	CAN	YOU	PLEASE	GIVE	ME	A	CLUE	HOW	TO	GO
BEYOND	THESE	BIOLOGICAL	PULLS?
Kamal,	if	one	allows	nature	without	any	inhibitions	to	take	its	own	course,	one
transcends	biology,	body,	mind,	without	any	effort.	But	we	are	full	of	inhibitions.
Even	 the	 so-called	 young	 people,	 who	 think	 that	 they	 have	 disowned
repressions,	are	in	a	very	subtle	way	repressive.	If	you	are	repressive,	then	you
cannot	transcend	biological	pulls	naturally,	without	any	effort.	So,	the	first	thing
to	be	remembered	is	that	nature	is	right.
All	 old	 traditions	 have	 been	 telling	 you	 that	 nature	 is	 not	 right.	 You	 have	 to
divide	nature	 into	 right	and	wrong.	But	nature	 is	 indivisible.	So	while	you	are
dividing	it,	you	are	simply	making	an	impossible	effort.	The	whole	of	nature	has
to	be	accepted	with	great	joy	and	gratitude.	Biology	is	not	your	bondage,	but	a
certain	stage	of	growth.
Life	taken	with	insight	and	understanding	helps	you	to	go	beyond	itself	without
asking	you	for	any	discipline,	any	effort,	any	arduous	conflict.	We	are	children
of	nature.	But	all	the	religions	have	created	one	thing	certainly:	a	divided	mind,	a
schizophrenic	 man	 who	 is	 pulled	 in	 two	 directions.	 They	 have	 all	 given	 you
moralities.
The	 natural	 man	 needs	 no	 morality.	 Easy	 is	 right.	 To	 be	 natural,	 to	 be
spontaneous	is	right...	and	transcendence	comes	on	its	own.	The	people	who	are
split	against	themselves
--	 that	 biology	 is	 something	 to	 be	 transcended,	 that	 body	 is	 something	 to	 be
fought,	that	mind	is	something	to	be	dropped	--	anybody	who	is	entangled	in	all
these	conflicts	will	never	transcend.
One	 should	 go	 more	 easy.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 war	 field.	 Your	 life	 is	 an	 autonomous
growth.	 The	 first	 need	 is	 of	 a	 total	 acceptance	 with	 no	 reluctance,	 no
unwillingness,	no	subtle	condemnation	anywhere	in	your	mind.
You	are	saying,	"Although	I	am	deeply	satisfied	and	nourished	by	my	EKDAM
Punjabi	food...."	His	Punjabi	food	is	Neelam.	You	say	you	are	deeply	satisfied;
you	don't	understand	the	nuances	of	being	deeply	satisfied.	It	becomes	a	kind	of
death.	To	be	 alive	one	needs	 a	 little	 discontent,	 a	 little	 restlessness.	 If	 you	 are
deeply	 satisfied,	 from	 that	 deep	 satisfaction	 arises	 your	 desire	 to	 change	 your
food	once	in	a	while.
Man	is	a	creature	of	evolution	and	growth.	Being	deeply	satisfied	brings	a	full
stop	to	your	life...ekdam.	Ekdam	means:	once	for	all,	once	for	ever.	Neelam	has
an	individuality,	a	grace,	a	 loving	heart,	and	it	 is	very	easy	to	be	satisfied	with
her	 --	 she	 is	 not	 a	 quarreling	 type,	 a	 fighting	 type.	 She	 herself	 is	 at	 ease,	 and
anybody	who	loves	her	will	find	himself	soon	at	ease.	A	harmony	arises	--	but
harmony	on	the	one	hand	is	beautiful,	and	on	the	other	hand	is	boring.
Perhaps	you	have	never	thought	that	satisfaction	is	a	kind	of	death.	It	means	you
are	 ready	 to	 repeat	 the	 same	 every	 day,	 that	 you	 have	 forgotten	 to	 change,	 to
evolve.
"...	 still	 from	 time	 to	 time	 I	 feel	 a	 strong	pull	 towards	other	 dishes,	 and	 enjoy
Italian	 pizzas,	 French	 wine,	 or	 Japanese	 sushi."	 It	 is	 absolutely	 natural.	 The
problem	 is	 arising	because	of	your	conditionings	 that	when	you	are	absolutely
satisfied	 with	 a	 woman,	 why	 should	 you	 ask?	 Why	 should	 the	 desire	 for
somebody	 else	 even	 arise	 in	 you?	 It	 arises	 because	 of	 your	 deep	 satisfaction.
Deep	 satisfaction	 starts	 deadening	 you...	 nothing	 new,	 no	 excitement,	 no
possibility	of	"No,"	always	"Yes."	On	the	one	hand	it	is	very	sweet;	on	the	other,
it	is	too	sweet.
Hence,	the	desire	arises	once	in	a	while	to	have	some	affair	with	another	woman.
It	is	absolutely	natural.	If	Neelam	were	a	fighting	type,	nagging	type,	bitchy,	this
desire	would	not	have	arisen	 so	much,	because	 she	would	never	have	allowed
you	to	be	satisfied.	She	would	have	kept	you	always	unsatisfied;	she	would	have
remained	a	stranger	to	you,	still	to	be	explored.	I	know	her...	she	has	been	open
to	you,	available	to	you,	she	has	not	been	holding	secrets	from	you.	That	is	not
her	fault,	 that	 is	her	beauty.	But	even	the	most	beautiful	roseflowers	have	their
thorns,	even	the	most	satisfying	situations	have	their	problems.
Because	 you	 are	 too	 satisfied,	 you	 start	 asking	 for	 a	 change	 of	 taste:	 Italian
pizzas,	 French	 wine,	 or	 Japanese	 sushi.	 Nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 it.	 At	 least	 my
people,	who	are	 the	herald	of	 the	new	man,	have	 to	understand	 it,	 that	 there	 is
nothing	wrong	in	it.	The	whole	old	conditioning	goes	against	what	I	am	saying
to	you,	but	if	you	are	intelligent,	you	will	see	the	point.
Accept	it,	but	don't	keep	it	a	secret	from	Neelam.	Don't	let	her	down.	Don't	make
her	feel	that	she	is	not	enough	for	you.	Say	to	her,	"You	are	too	satisfying,	and
my	mind	wants	a	little	change	of	atmosphere,	some	excitement	so	that	I	can	feel
that	I	am	still	alive."	And	remember,	whatever	you	take	for	yourself,	you	have	to
give	her	too.	It	has	not	to	be	one-sided,	not	that	you	go	to	Sarjano's	place,	or	find
a	Chinese	restaurant;	you	allow	her	also.
Not	only	allow...	 the	woman	has	been	repressed	by	man	so	much	that	you	will
have	to	pull	her	out	from	her	conditionings.	You	will	have	to	help	her	to	move,
once	 in	 a	 while,	 into	 new	 pastures.	 If	 you	 can	 do	 that,	 you	 will	 not	 only	 be
accepting	your	nature;	you	will	also	be	helping	her	to	find	out	her	nature.
As	a	man,	you	are	also	guilty,	because	it	is	the	man	who	has	forced	the	woman,
made	her	monogamous.	In	fact,	she	needs	to	move	with	other	people	more	than
you.	The	most	astounding	research	about	men	and	women	and	their	sexualities	is
just	 amazing:	Man	 can	 have	 only	 one	 orgasm,	 the	 woman	 can	 have	 multiple
orgasms.	The	 reason	 is	 simple	because	 in	orgasm,	a	man	 loses	energy;	he	will
need	to	recover	for	sometime,	according	to	his	age,	to	have	another	orgasm.
But	the	woman	does	not	lose	any	energy.	On	the	contrary,	her	first	orgasm	gives
her	a	deep	incentive	to	have	more	orgasms,	and	she	is	capable	of	at	least	half	a
dozen	orgasms	in	a	single	night.	Because	of	this	fact,	man	became	so	afraid	that
he	prevented	the	woman	from	knowing	the	fact	that	anything	like	orgasm	exists.
So	 he	 is	 very	 quick	 in	making	 love.	The	woman	will	 take	 a	 little	 longer	 time
because	man's	sexuality	is	local,	genital;	woman's	sexuality	is	spread	all	over	her
body.	If	a	man	wants	her	to	have	an	orgasm,	he	has	to	play	with	her	whole	body,
the	foreplay,	so	her	whole	body	starts	throbbing	with	energy.
But	 once	 she	 has	 had	 one	 orgasm,	 she	 is	 utterly	 dissatisfied	 because	 now	 she
knows	the	taste,	and	she	is	capable,	and	she	knows	that	now	she	can	have	deeper
orgasms.	And	man	is	simply	impotent	after	the	first	orgasm,	at	least	for	twenty-
four	hours.	He	cannot	do	anything	else	 --	he	 just	 turns	over	and	goes	 to	sleep.
The	poor	boy	 is	 finished.	And	every	woman	weeps,	 cries	because	 she	has	not
even	come,	and	her	lover	is	finished.
To	avoid	the	woman	from	having	the	knowledge	of	orgasm	--	for	centuries	the
woman	was	not	allowed	even	to	know	the	beauty	and	the	pleasure	of	orgasm	--
man	also	has	had	to	prevent	himself	from	having	orgasm.	All	 that	he	knows	is
ejaculation;	ejaculation	is	not	orgasm.	Ejaculation	is	simply	throwing	out	energy:
one	 feels	 more	 relaxed,	 the	 tensions	 of	 the	 energy	 are	 gone,	 and	 one	 snores
better.
The	woman	 has	 become	 aware	 of	 orgasm	 only	 in	 this	 century	 and	 the	whole
credit	goes	to	the	movement	of	psychoanalysis.	In	the	East,	ninety-eight	percent
of	women	are	 still	unaware	 that	 there	 is	 anything	 in	making	 love,	because	 she
gets	no	juice,	no	experience.
She	in	fact	hates	the	whole	affair.	Ejaculation	is	not	her	need,	it	 is	man's	need;
but	both	have	remained	deprived	of	sex	and	its	ultimate	orgasmic	experiences.
But	the	trouble	is,	how	to	manage	it?	Anything	looks	very	immoral.	Either	you
have	to	invite	all	your	friends,	so	that	five,	six	friends	make	love,	one	by	one,	to
the	woman.
Then	she	will	be	satisfied,	but	that	looks	very	hurting	to	the	ego.	Or	you	have	to
provide	her	with	an	electric	vibrator.	But	once	she	knows	 the	electric	vibrator,
you	are	useless	because	the	electric	vibrator	gives	her	such	tremendous	orgasmic
experiences	that	you	cannot	give.
It	seems	there	has	been	some	mistake	by	nature	itself:	men	and	women	are	not
equal	 in	 their	 orgasmic	 capacity.	 You	 are	 fully	 satisfied,	 but	 have	 you	 ever
bothered	whether	your	beloved	has	found	even	a	single	orgasm?	Because	she	has
not	found	a	single	orgasm,	she	can	remain	devoted	to	you:	monogamous.	But	if
she	knows	what	orgasmic	experience	is,	she	will	also	want,	once	in	a	while,	to
be	with	another	man.
If	 you	 really	 love	 your	 woman,	 you	 will	 help	 her	 to	 come	 out	 of	 her	 old
conditionings	 which	 are	 far	 deeper,	 because	 man	 himself	 is	 responsible.	Man
himself	does	not	have	those	conditionings;	his	morality	is	very	superficial	and	a
hypocrisy.	 But	 the	 woman's	 morality	 has	 gone	 very	 deep.	 Man	 has	 been
enforcing	 it	 from	 the	 very	 childhood.	 If	 you	 feel	 to	 change	 it,	 it	 is	 your
responsibility;	 and	particularly	Kamal,	 a	man	of	your	understanding	 should	be
able	to	understand	what	I	am	saying.
It	is	your	responsibility	to	bring	Neelam	also	out	into	the	sun,	into	the	rain,	into
the	wind,	so	that	she	can	drop	all	her	conditionings.	You	have	to	help	her;	you
have	to	teach	her	how	to	enjoy	Sarjano's	place,	and	not	go	on	eating	the	Punjabi
food	her	whole	life...	how	to	enjoy	Japanese	food	or	Chinese	food.	If	men	and
women	 really	 love	 each	 other,	 they	 will	 help	 each	 other	 to	 be	 unconditioned
from	the	past.
Man	does	not	 have	many	 conditionings,	 and	 they	 are	 superficial.	He	 can	drop
them	 very	 easily,	 the	 way	 you	 drop	 your	 clothes.	 The	 woman	 has	 been
conditioned	so	much	that	it	is	not	like	dropping	her	clothes,	it	is	like	peeling	her
skin.	It	 is	hard	and	unless	you	really	love	a	woman....	It	will	be	impossible,	on
her	own,	 to	get	 rid	of	all	 those	conditionings,	help	her.	Give	her	also	 the	 taste
that	 in	 the	world	 there	 are	 so	many	other	 foods;	 in	 the	world,	 other	 than	you,
there	are	many	more	beautiful	men.	Your	woman	must	know	all	of	 them.	 It	 is
part	 of	 your	 love	 that	 your	 woman	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 rich	 in	 her
experiences.	And	 the	 richer	 she	 is,	 she	will	not	only	give	you	satisfaction;	 she
will	start	giving	you	excitement	and	ecstasy.
You	say,	"It's	not	that	I	don't	want	to	eat	out	occasionally,	but	I'd	like	to	feel	it	is
in	my	hands	whether	 I	 do	or	 not...."	 It	 is	 in	 your	 hands,	 but	 it	 can	be	 in	 your
hands	only	if	it	is	in	the	hands	of	Neelam	too.	As	far	as	I	am	concerned	and	my
concept	 of	 the	 new	man	 and	 new	woman	 is	 concerned,	 there	 should	 be	 equal
opportunity	for	both.	Not	that	you	are	the	master	and	your	woman	is	your	slave;
that	she	can	remain	satisfied	with	you,	and	you	can	go,	once	in	a	while,	fooling
around	 the	 neighborhood.	 She	 has	 every	 right	 to	 fool	 around	 in	 the	 same
neighborhood!	And	there	 is	no	need	 to	feel	guilty;	you	have	 to	help	her	not	 to
feel	guilty.
It	is	a	very	strange	phenomenon	that	woman's	liberation	will	be	man's	liberation,
too;	 their	 slavery	 is	 together.	Because	you	don't	 allow	your	woman	 to	be	 free,
how	can	she	allow	you	to	be	free?
Freedom	 has	 to	 be,	 from	 both	 sides,	 a	 precious	 value	 --	 loved,	 recognized,
respected.
You	say	"...	and	not	be	a	victim	of	this	hormonal	conspiracy."	If	you	want	to	get
beyond	 the	 hormones	 and	 the	 biology;	 live	 it	 totally,	 exhaust	 it.	 My	 own
understanding	is	that	by	the	age	of	fourteen	your	hormones	start	working,	and	if
you	allow	them	total	freedom	if	you	go	with	them	joyously	by	the	age	forty-two,
they	will	like	to	go	to	rest.	And	this	transcendence	will	be	natural;	it	will	not	be	a
celibacy	 imposed.	 It	will	 be	 a	 sacred	 celibacy	 that	 is	 coming	 to	 you	 from	 the
beyond,	because	you	have	lived	your	life	totally	and	now	nothing	in	the	ordinary
life	interests	you.	Your	interest	is	in	higher	values,	for	a	deeper	search	about	life,
about	truth,	about	creativity.	You	have	passed	a	childish	age.	By	the	age	of	forty-
two,	according	to	me,	a	man	really	becomes	adult,	but	only	if	he	lives	naturally.
If	 he	 lives	 half-heartedly	 then	 it	 will	 take	 a	 longer	 time	 --	 maybe	 forty-nine
years,	maybe	seventy-five.	Maybe	even	when	he	is	dying	he	is	thinking	only	of
sex	and	nothing	else;	he	never	transcends	it.
You	both	are	understanding	people	and	you	both	love	me,	and	you	both	can	see
things	 without	 screens	 on	 your	 eyes,	 clearly.	 Love	 each	 other	 totally,	 and
occasionally	allow	each	other	freedom.	But	it	has	to	be	on	both	sides.	And	it	is
not	 going	 to	 destroy	 your	 love;	 it	 is	 going	 to	 make	 it	 richer,	 deeper,	 more
fulfilling,	 more	 orgasmic.	 And	 those	 few	 occasions	 when	 you	 are	 on	 holiday
from	each	other	will	not	take	you	away	from	each	other;	they	will	go	on	bringing
you	closer	to	each	other.	Don't	have	any	secret	--	be	absolutely	open,	and	allow
the	other	person	also	 to	be	absolutely	open,	and	respect	openness.	Never,	even
by	your	 gestures,	make	 the	 other	 person	 feel	 guilty.	That	 is	 the	 greatest	 crime
humanity	 has	 been	 committing:	making	 people	 guilty.	 If	 the	 other	 feels	 guilty
because	of	very	deep	rooted	conceptions,	help	her	to	be	free	of	the	guilt.
Love	lived	in	an	atmosphere	of	freedom	will	 transcend	you	from	sex	naturally,
easily,	effortlessly.	Love	will	remain,	sex	will	be	gone	and	then	love	has	a	purity
and	a	beauty	and	a	sacredness	of	its	own.
Sitting	on	a	bus	in	New	York,	a	prim	old	lady	was	shocked	to	overhear	an	Italian
say	to	another,	"Emma	come-a	first.	I	come-a	next.	Two	ass-a	come-a	together.	I
come-a	again.
Two	 ass-a	 come-a	 together	 again.	 I	 come-a	 once	more.	 Peepee	 twice.	 Then	 I
come-a	for	the	last	time."
When	 the	 Italian	 was	 finished,	 the	 red	 faced	 old	maid	 turned	 to	 a	 policeman
sitting	nearby,	and	said,	"Are	you	not	going	to	arrest	that	terrible	old	man?"
"What	for?"	asked	the	policeman.	"For	spelling	Mississippi?"
Take	 life	 more	 joyously	 and	 more	 jokingly.	 Let	 your	 whole	 life	 become	 a
beautiful	joke.
There	is	nothing	wrong	in	nature,	and	to	be	natural	is	to	be	religious.
But	 there	 are	 disparities	 between	 man	 and	 woman;	 neither	 biologists,	 nor
psychologists	 have	 been	 able	 to	 figure	 out	 why	 these	 disparities	 exist.	 The
woman	is	far	stronger	as	far	as	orgasmic	experience	is	concerned.	She	needs	to
have	more	lovers	than	man,	and	man	must	have	become	aware	of	the	fact	in	the
very	 beginning	 of	 life.	 To	 prevent	 her,	 he	 has	 completely	 closed	 even	 the
possibility	of	having	one	orgasm.	That's	why	all	women	hate	sex.	I	was	puzzled	-
-	why	 do	women	 hate	 sex?	All	 the	women	 go	 to	 celibate	monks	 and	worship
them;	as	far	as	their	own	husband	is	concerned,	they	know	he	is	a	dirty	old	man.
The	reason	is,	to	them	sex	is	an	experience	--	just	dirtiness.	The	man	is	throwing
his	dirt	onto	the	woman.	The	woman	feels	used,	and	nobody	likes	being	used.
The	new	man	will	make	love	not	a	one	way	affair,	from	man	to	woman;	it	will
be	a	two-way	affair.	Both	will	be	enjoying	it.	And	science	has	to	find	some	way
either	to	make	man	capable	of	having	multiple	orgasms	so	he	can	go	a	long,	long
time	with	the	woman,	giving	her	as	many	orgasms	as	she	requires,	and	make	the
whole	 journey	 beautiful;	 or	 science	 has	 to	 cut	 woman's	 multiple	 orgasmic
capacity	to	a	single	orgasm.	Something	has	to	be	done,	and	it	is	one	of	the	most
important	things	because	it	creates	problems	in	everybody's	life.
You	both	are	intelligent,	and	I	hope	that	you	will	prove	my	hypothesis	that	you
can	love	each	other,	and	yet	once	in	a	while	have	different	affairs	--	joyously,	not
reluctantly.	Not	because	I	am	saying	it,	but	out	of	your	own	understanding.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	DAY	WHEN	YOUR	BODY	FELL	A	LITTLE,	SOME	OF	YOUR
SANNYASINS	RUSHED	TOWARDS	YOU	IN	A	SPLIT	SECOND	TO	HELP.
THERE
WAS	NO	HUSTLE	AND	NO	CONFUSION	AMONGST	THEM,	AND	THEIR
MOVEMENTS	WERE	IN	PERFECT	HARMONY.	AFTER	THE	NECESSARY
ASSISTANCE	WAS	FINISHED,	THEY	SAT	BACK	IN	THEIR	SEATS	AS	IF
NOTHING	HAD	HAPPENED.	THIS	ALL	HAPPENED	WITHIN	A	COUPLE
OF
SECONDS.	 OSHO,	 IS	 THIS	 THE	 REFLECTION	 OF	 THE	 AWARENESS
THAT	YOU
ARE	CONSTANTLY	TALKING	ABOUT?
Satyam	 Niranjan,	 yes.	 It	 is	 something	 of	 alertness,	 something	 of	 silence	 and
peace	 --	a	discipline	 that	arises	out	of	awareness,	not	a	discipline	 that	 is	being
forced	 through	 training.	Only	Sarjano	missed	 out	 because	 he	 did	 not	 have	 the
camera	ready.
After	you	had	gone	back	to	your	seats	and	I	moved,	I	remembered	Sarjano,	and	I
remembered	a	small	story....
An	 American	 couple	 are	 touring	 darkest	 Africa	 on	 safari.	 They	 are	 walking
cautiously	through	the	jungle,	when	suddenly	a	huge	lion	springs	out	in	front	of
them.	 It	 seizes	 the	wife	with	 its	 giant	 jaws	 and	 proceeds	 to	 drag	 her	 into	 the
bush.
"Shoot!"	she	screams.	"Shoot	for	Christ's	sake!"
"I	can't,"	answers	the	husband.	"I	have	run	out	of	film."
Everything	was	right,	only	Sarjano	was	not	ready	with	his	camera.	I	have	heard
he	 is	 angry	with	 his	 camera,	wants	 to	 sell	 it.	Don't	 do	 any	 such	 stupid	 thing!
Even	if	you	have	run	out	of	film	we	can	get	more!
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
NOT	 LONG	 AGO,	 IN	 A	 DISCOURSE,	 I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 THAT	 YOU
HATED
SPAGHETTI.	THEN	RECENTLY,	YOU	SAID	YOU	HATED	SUNTANS.	AND
NOW,	 JUST	 THE	 OTHER	 DAY,	 I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 THAT	 THE	 ONLY
THING	YOU
HATED	WAS	INCOME	TAX.	DOES	THIS	MEAN	THAT	YOU	DON'T	HATE
SPAGHETTI,	 AND	 SUNTANS	 ANYMORE?	 OR	 IS	 THERE	 SOME
MYSTERIOUS
CONNECTION	BETWEEN	THESE	THREE	SEEMINGLY	UNRELATED
PHENOMENA?
I	don't	hate	anything.	But	just	when	I	am	talking	to	you,	there	are	points	which
have	 to	 be	 emphasized.	 And	 when	 I	 say	 I	 hate	 spaghetti,	 I	 am	 simply
emphasizing	something.
Hatred	is	not	part	of	my	being	at	all.	In	fact,	I	have	never	tasted	spaghetti,	and
perhaps	I	will	never	taste	it	because	of	an	accident.
One	Italian	woman,	a	professor	with	a	doctorate	from	the	University	of	Rome,
used	to	be	my	sannyasin.	But	she	had	strange	habits:	one	was	that	I	don't	think
she	had	ever	taken	a	single	shower	in	her	life.	She	used	to	stink.	And	she	went
putting	on	powder,	 layers	of	powder...	 she	was	a	beautiful	woman.	And	 it	was
she	who	made	me	so	much	afraid	of	 spaghetti,	because	she	prepared	spaghetti
one	day	and	brought	it	for	me	to	eat.	The	spaghetti	was	smelling	of	her.
I	told	her,	"Out,	you	just	go	out	of	the	room.	Leave	the	spaghetti,	I	will	eat...	but
I	always	eat	alone.	You	just	go	out."	And	as	she	went	out,	the	first	thing	was:	I
threw	her	spaghetti	down	the	 toilet.	And	the	smell	was	so	dangerous	 that	even
today	 --	 it	 must	 be	 twenty-six,	 twenty-seven	 years	 ago	 --	 but	 suddenly,	 if	 I
remember	 spaghetti,	 I	 remember	 the	woman	 and	 the	 smell.	 And	 then	 it	 is	 no
more	a	memory;	I	have	to	live	it	again.	That's	why	I	say,
"I	hate";	otherwise,	I	have	never	tasted	spaghetti.	It	just	came	in	a	wrong	way	to
me,	through	a	wrong	vehicle.
A	 suntan	 also	 I	 don't	 hate,	 but	 certainly	 I	 don't	 like,	 because	 to	me	 it	 seems	a
modern	way	of	self-torture.	 It	 is	 something	masochistic,	 lying	down	 in	 the	hot
sun.	All	 over	 the	world	millions	 of	women	 are	 suffering,	 and	nobody	protests
that	 --	 "Stop	 this	 nonsense!"	 And	 that	 suntan	 does	 not	 remain	 long.	 You	 are
simply	 sunburned.	 In	 a	 few	 days,	 you	 are	 healed	 and	 you	 are	 back	 to	 your
normal	color.
If	one	really	wants	to	be	a	little	less	white,	a	suntan	is	not	the	way.	You	need	a
certain	pigment	to	be	injected	into	your	body,	and	then	you	will	remain,	for	your
whole	 life,	 the	color	you	wanted.	A	suntan	 to	me	always	 looks	something	 like
religious	self-torture;	the	beaches	are	full...	there	is	no	space	on	the	beaches	on	a
sunny	day.
I	don't	hate	 --	why	should	 I	hate?	 It	has	nothing	 to	do	with	me.	 I	 simply	don't
like...	 I	myself	don't	 like	 to	go	into	 the	sun.	I	 love	 to	see	 the	sun	from	my	air-
conditioned	room.
A	 wealthy	 English	 tourist	 visiting	 America	 was	 curious	 about	 the	 native
American	Indians.	After	touring	one	reservation,	she	asked	her	guide	why	some
men	had	more	feathers	than	others	in	their	headdresses.
"We	only	 have	 one	 feather	 because	we	 only	 have	 one	 squaw,"	 said	 the	 guide.
Thinking	 the	guide	must	be	 joking,	 she	asked	another	man	who	said,	 "Uh!	we
have	four	feathers	because	we	have	four	squaw."
Disturbed	that	any	culture	could	possibly	have	such	a	crude	custom,	she	decided
to	ask	the	tribal	chief	for	further	explanation.	"Why	are	there	so	many	feathers	in
you	headdress,	chief?"	she	asked.
"Me	chief,	so	me	fuck	them	all.	Big,	small,	short,	tall,	make	no	difference."
The	English	lady	was	mortified.	"You	ought	to	be	hung,"	she	snorted.
"You	damned	right,"	said	the	chief.	"Me	hung	like	buffalo."
"Well,"	she	cried.	"You	don't	have	to	be	so	damned	hostile!"
"Hoss-style!	Dog-style!	Any	style!	Me	fuck	them	all!"
Tears	in	her	eyes,	and	red	with	embarrassment,	the	woman	cried,	"Oh	dear,	Oh
dear."	To	which	the	chief	replied,	"No	deer!	Me	no	fuck	deer!	Asshole	too	high.
Fuckers	run	too	fast!"
I	 have	 just	 been	 joking.	 I	 don't	 hate	 anybody...	 neither	 the	 spaghetti,	 nor	 the
suntan,	nor	the	tax	collectors.	But	when	I	am	speaking,	I	never	say	anything	that
I	have	prepared	beforehand	and	whatever	I	say,	 I	want	 to	say	with	my	totality,
with	my	spontaneity.	My	word	"hate"	is	simply	a	total	expression	of	my	dislike.
My	God!	I'm	still	smelling	that	spaghetti!
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#34
Chapter	title:	Out	of	the	mind	--	below	or	beyond
28	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705285
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN34
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
102
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOUR	 OUTSTRETCHED	 HANDS	 EVER-PATIENTLY	WAIT	 BESIDE	 MY
OPEN
CAGE	DOOR,	 BECKONING.	 BUT	 TIME	AND	TIME	AGAIN,	 I	 RETURN
TO	MY
CAGE	 SHOUTING,	 "FREEDOM,	 FREEDOM!"	 HAVING	 A	 TASTE	 HERE
AND
THERE	OF	THE	VASTNESS	OF	THE	UNKNOWN,	WHY	DO	I	RETURN	TO
MY
LESSER	 HOME?	 YOUR	 BECKONING	 EYES,	 YOUR	 INVITING	 HANDS
PULL	SO
STRONGLY	 AT	 MY	 HEART,	 AND	 YET	 I	 RESIST.	 BELOVED	 OSHO,
WHICH	IS	IT
I	AM	MORE	AFRAID	OF	--	LIFE	OR	DEATH?
Prem	Leela,	the	old	man,	the	way	he	has	existed	for	centuries,	is	afraid	of	life,
not	afraid	of	death.	Death	he	worships,	life	he	renounces.
All	 the	religions	 that	have	prevailed	 in	 the	world	have	been	 life-negative;	 they
have	 continuously	 hammered	 the	 thought	 into	 your	 mind	 that	 to	 love	 life	 is
something	wrong;	 to	 love	 life	 is	 for	 sinners,	 to	hate	 life	 is	 for	 saints.	All	 their
disciplines	are	managed	and	planned	in	such	a	way	that	 they	destroy	your	 life;
they	destroy	your	joy	of	life,	they	destroy	your	longing	for	more	and	more	life.
Rather	 than	 helping	 you	 to	 live	 more	 aesthetically,	 more	 artistically,	 more
beautifully,	more	 blissfully,	 they	 condemn	 life	 so	much	 in	 so	many	ways	 that
your	 whole	 longing	 for	 life	 is	 poisoned.	 And	 in	 a	 very	 indirect	 way,	 they	 all
teach	you	to	worship	death.	What	is	renunciation	of	life	if	not	the	worshiping	of
death?	They	are	afraid	of	life	because	life	seems	to	be	against	their	religions.	A
man	 who	 loves	 life	 will	 not	 bother	 at	 all	 about	 temples,	 and	 mosques,	 and
churches;	life	is	enough	unto	itself.
One	who	 has	 known	 life	 in	 its	 depths	 and	 in	 its	 heights	will	 not	 bother	 at	 all
whether	God	exists	or	not	because	he	has	already	known	something	more	real,
something	more	certain	than	any	God	has	ever	been.
All	gods	are	hypothetical.
Only	life	is	the	real	God.
Naturally,	the	priests	are	worried	that	you	should	not	get	too	much	involved	with
the	mysteries	of	life,	because	if	you	are	too	much	involved	with	the	mysteries	of
life...	 who	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a	 Christian,	 or	 a	 Hindu,	 or	 a	 Mohammedan,	 or	 a
Buddhist?	Who	 is	 going	 to	worship	 dead	 gods,	 dead	 saints?	Who	 is	 going	 to
listen	to	the	priests?
One	who	has	heard	the	song	of	life	itself,	one	who	has	lived	intensely	and	totally
the	music	of	 life	 itself,	who	has	danced	 it,	 is	not	going	 to	be	concerned	about
belief	systems	-
-	he	has	no	need.	And	there	are	only	two	ugliest	professions	in	the	world...	one	is
that	of	the	prostitutes	and	the	other	is	that	of	the	priests.
Of	course,	the	profession	of	the	priests	is	far	worse	because	the	prostitutes	only
sell	 their	 bodies,	 they	 don't	 sell	 their	 souls.	 And	 they	 don't	 interfere	 with
anybody	 else's	 freedom,	 they	 don't	 destroy	 your	 joy;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 they	 in
some	way	enhance	it,	intensify	it,	make	it	more	aflame.	It	is	the	priest	who	sells
gods,	 and	 who	 enslaves	 man,	 and	 who	 interferes	 in	 everybody's	 life	 --	 his
freedom,	his	individuality.
He	can	not	 tolerate	seeing	anybody	happy,	because	the	person	who	is	happy	is
not	 going	 to	 be	 his	 customer;	 his	 business	 is	 dependent	 on	 your	 misery.	 The
more	miserable	you	are,	the	more	you	will	seek	the	advice	of	the	priest,	the	more
you	 will	 worship	 statues,	 the	 more	 you	 will	 look	 beyond	 life	 for	 some
consolation.	This	life	is	full	of	suffering.	You	have	to	believe	in	a	life	other	than
this	 life	 just	 to	bear	 it,	 just	 to	 tolerate	 it;	 otherwise,	 it	will	 become	 impossible
even	for	a	single	moment	for	any	intelligent	man.
The	 priests	 have	 left	 only	 one	 thing,	 and	 that	 is	 suicide.	 They	 have	 destroyed
everything	that	life	is	capable	of,	and	they	have	poisoned	your	minds	so	deeply
that	even	 if	you	 try	 to	enjoy	something...	you	want	 to	dance,	but	you	find	 that
some	 invisible	 chains	are	preventing	your	 feet;	you	want	 to	 sing,	but	you	 find
some	invisible	hands	are	choking	your	voice;	you	want	to	love,	but	you	suddenly
hear	 some	 voice	 coming	 from	 within	 your	 own	 mind	 that	 you	 are	 going	 to
commit	a	sin,	it	is	against	God	and	against	all	the	holy	scriptures.
Prem	Leela,	your	question	is	of	tremendous	importance.	You	are	asking,	"Which
is	it	I'm	more	afraid	of:	life	or	death?"
Nobody	is	afraid	of	death.
It	may	 seem	unbelievable,	but	 I	 repeat	 that	nobody	 is	 afraid	of	death,	because
you	 cannot	 be	 afraid	 of	 something	 you	 don't	 know.	 You	 cannot	 be	 afraid	 of
something	with	which	you	are	not	acquainted	--	what	do	you	know	about	death?
How	can	you	be	afraid	of	the	unknown?
It	is	the	known	that	creates	fear.	It	is	the	miserable	life	that	you	have	lived	today,
that	you	are	afraid	you	may	have	to	live	tomorrow	again.	You	know	it;	you	have
been	 living	 it	 year	 after	 year,	 hoping	 that	 some	 miracle	 will	 happen,	 and
tomorrow	with	 the	 rising	 sun	 everything	will	 change.	 But	 the	 sun	 rises	 every
day;	it	has	risen	thousands	of	times,	and	nothing	changes.	On	the	contrary,	 life
goes	 on	 becoming	more	 complicated,	 more	 miserable,	 more	 full	 of	 suffering,
more	full	of	fear.
Yes,	you	are	afraid	of	old	age,	you	are	afraid	of	disease,	but	not	of	death.	You
know	nothing	about	death.	Death,	you	worship.
One	of	my	friends	was	meeting	with	the	home	minister.	He	asked,	"Ramakrishna
Mission	 is	 given	 tax-exempt	 status,	Vivekananda	Mission	 is	 given	 tax-exempt
status;	why	are	you	all	against	a	man	who	has	not	done	any	harm	to	you?"
And	the	home	minister	said	to	him	--	"they	are	friends,	old	colleagues	--	because
Bhagwan	is	still	alive,	he	cannot	be	given	 tax-exempt	status."	My	friend	could
not	believe	 that	 to	get	 tax-exempt	status,	you	have	 to	be	dead!	He	said,	"What
kind	of	logic	is	this?"
And	the	home	minister	explained,	"A	living	man	cannot	be	given	a	tax-exempt
status	because	he	may	change	tomorrow,	he	may	change	his	whole	ideology;	he
may	 become	 a	 communist,	 he	may	 become	 an	 anarchist.	 And	 particularly	 the
man	you	have	come	to	recommend	to	me	is	already	dangerous!
"Once	a	man	dies,	everybody	is	satisfied;	at	least	one	thing	is	certain	--	that	man
cannot	change.	He	cannot	give	another	 interpretation	 to	 life,	he	cannot	declare
that	 there	 is	no	God.	We	can	be	certain	about	his	philosophy,	and	 if	 it	 fits	 into
our	categories,	we	can	give	the	tax-exempt	status,	but	not	to	a	living	man	--	and
especially	to	a	living	man	like	Bhagwan!"
My	friend	was	going	to	see	the	prime	minister,	but	the	home	minister	said,	"It	is
better	you	don't	mention	Bhagwan's	name	to	anybody.	Just	the	name	makes	them
afraid	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 he	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 any	 religion;	 nobody
knows	 what	 exactly	 is	 his	 teaching.	 He	 does	 not	 give	 any	 discipline	 to	 his
people;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 he	 takes	 away	people's	 disciplines	 and	beliefs.	Rather
than	conditioning	them	to	be	obedient	to	the	society	and	the	society's	morality,
he	 corrupts	 them.	 He	 takes	 away	 their	 conditionings	 and	 leaves	 them	 open,
vulnerable,	rebellious."
Have	 you	 ever	 seen	 anybody	 who	 is	 alive	 being	 worshiped	 as	 a	 saint?	 Even
when	Ramakrishna	was	alive,	people	thought,	"He	is	an	idiot,	he	is	a	madman."
When	Ramateertha	was	alive,	the	great	Hindu	scholars	of	Varanasi	declared	that
he	could	not	be	a	saint	because	he	did	not	know	Sanskrit.	His	whole	upbringing
was	in	Persian,	Arabic	and	Urdu,	because	he	was	born	in	Lahore	which	is	now	in
Pakistan.	 But	 once	 dead,	 nobody	 asks	 whether	 Ramateertha	 knew	 Sanskrit	 or
not;	dead,	everything	is	right.	Now	he	is	worshiped	as	a	great	saint.	Ramakrishna
is	no	longer	described	as	a	madman;	he	is	worshiped	as	an	incarnation	of	God	--
by	the	same	people.
To	worship	the	dead	has	been	one	of	the	basic	attitudes	of	the	old	man,	because
the	dead	man	cannot	create	 rebellion,	cannot	provoke	people	 to	 revolt.	A	dead
man	is	very	comfortable,	convenient.	But	one	who	is	alive,	and	not	only	alive,
but	who	believes	life	to	be	the	only	God,	looks	certainly	dangerous.
Just	 a	 few	 days	 ago	 here	 in	 Poona,	 one	 of	 the	 shankaracharyas,	 Swami
Svarupanand,	 told	 a	 conference,	 "Bhagwan	 Shree	 Rajneesh	 is	 the	 most
dangerous	man	mankind	has	 ever	 known."	 I	 don't	 carry	 nuclear	weapons	with
me,	I	don't	have	even	a	knife	to	cut	vegetables,	but	I	am	the	most	dangerous	man
of	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 mankind	 because	 I	 teach	 life	 and	 not	 death,	 love,
rejoicing	and	not	renunciation.
The	old	man	has	lived	so	wrongly,	so	stupidly,	so	insanely	that	the	harm	that	has
been	done	to	us	is	incalculable.
A	 man	 is	 shipwrecked,	 and	 finds	 himself	 in	 an	 uninhabited	 region.	 After
wandering	long	in	the	jungle,	he	comes	at	last	to	a	village	where	he	sees	a	noose
from	which	a	corpse	is	hanging.
"The	Lord	be	praised,"	he	cries.	"Civilization	at	last!"
But	this	is	the	civilization	we	all	have	inherited.
Two	guys	at	a	bar	were	comparing	the	sexual	behavior	of	their	wives.	"Hey,"	one
said,
"Does	your	wife	close	her	eyes	when	you	are	making	love	to	her?"
"Sure,	 she	 does,"	 the	 other	 replied.	 "She	 can't	 stand	 to	 see	me	 having	 a	 good
time."
The	 priests	 are	 just	 like	 these	wives	who	 can't	 stand	 to	 see	 anybody	 having	 a
good	time.
All	your	religions	are	nothing	but	condemnations	of	everything	that	can	give	you
pleasure,	 joy.	 They	 are	 very	 supportive	 of	 everything	 that	 is	 nothing	 but	 self-
torture.
Your	question	is:	"Bhagwan,	your	outstretched	hands	ever-patiently	wait	beside
my	 open	 cage	 door,	 beckoning,	 but	 time	 and	 time	 again,	 I	 return	 to	my	 cage
shouting,	"Freedom,	freedom!"	Having	a	taste	here	and	there	of	the	vastness	of
the	unknown,	why	do	 I	 return	 to	my	 lesser	 home?	Your	beckoning	 eyes,	 your
inviting	hands	pull	so	strongly	at	my	heart;	and	yet	I	resist."
Naturally,	a	great	question	mark	arises	in	your	heart	--	why?	Why	do	you	choose
slavery	when	freedom	is	available?	Why	do	you	choose	the	cage	when	the	doors
are	open,	and	the	whole	sky	is	yours?
The	answer	 is	not	very	 far	 to	 find.	The	cage	has	security.	 It	protects	you	 from
rain,	 from	sun,	 from	strong	wind,	 from	your	enemies.	 It	protects	you	 from	 the
vastness	 in	which	one	can	be	 lost.	 It	gives	you	a	shelter,	 it	 is	your	cozy	home,
and	you	don't	have	any	responsibility	of	worrying	about	your	food,	of	worrying
about	the	rainy	season,	of	worrying	about	whether	tomorrow	you	will	be	able	to
find	nourishment	or	not.
Freedom	brings	tremendous	responsibilities.
Slavery	 is	 a	 bargain:	 you	 give	 your	 freedom	 and	 somebody	 else	 starts	 being
responsible	for	your	life,	for	your	protection,	for	your	food,	for	your	shelter,	for
everything	that	you	need.	All	that	you	lose	is	your	freedom,	all	that	you	lose	are
your	wings,	all	that	you	lose	is	the	starry	sky.	But	that	was	your	soul.
In	a	cage	safe	and	secure,	you	are	dead;	you	have	chosen	a	 life	of	no	 risk,	no
danger.
That's	 why	 you	 go	 on	 returning	 to	 your	 cage,	 although	 your	 deepest	 soul	 is
restless	in	slavery;	it	would	like	to	risk	all	and	to	have	the	freedom	to	go	to	the
very	end	of	the	sky.
It	 longs	 to	 fly	 across	 the	 sun	 to	 faraway	 stars.	 That's	 why	my	 hands	 become
significant	to	you,	my	words	become	a	beckoning.	But	you	decide,	finally,	to	be
a	hypocrite;	that's	what	almost	everybody	in	the	whole	world	has	decided.
You	start	singing	songs	of	freedom	in	the	cage.	Although	the	doors	are	open	and
the	sky	is	available,	you	settle	for	a	life	of	hypocrisy	--	to	have	all	the	coziness
and	the	insurance	and	the	security	of	the	cage,	and	have	all	the	joys	of	freedom
in	your	song,	in	your	poetry,	in	your	painting,	in	your	music.	That's	why	you	go
on	shouting,	"Freedom,	freedom!"	You	are	simply	deceiving	yourself.
The	new	man	will	not	be	a	hypocrite.
The	old	man	was	basically	taught	to	be	a	hypocrite.	The	greater	the	hypocrite	he
was,	the	more	honored,	the	more	rewarded,	the	more	respectable.	He	had	settled
with	society:
"You	respect	me	and	I	will	be	a	slave,	I	will	be	at	your	disposal.	You	just	go	on
giving	Nobel	prizes	to	me."
But	you	are	not	to	be	part	of	that	old	hypocrite	world.	I	want	you	to	come	out	of
all	 security,	 all	 coziness,	 all	 shelter.	 Make	 the	 whole	 sky	 your	 home,	 be	 a
wanderer,	a	pilgrim,	know	all	the	mysteries	and	all	the	secrets	of	life.	And	let	not
your	life	be	a	serious	and	miserable	phenomenon.	Let	it	be	a	joyous	laughter,	a
playfulness.
To	me,	authentic	 religiousness	means	a	childlike	 innocence,	playfulness,	 and	a
wholehearted	capacity	for	laughter.
Then	 each	 moment	 becomes	 so	 precious	 that	 you	 will	 not	 sing	 the	 song	 of
freedom,	you	will	 live	 it.	You	will	 not	 talk	 about	 truth,	 you	will	 know	 it.	You
will	not	worship	God,	you	will	find	him	wherever	life	is	--	all	over	existence.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	CLOSER	 I	GET	TO	YOU,	THE	MADDER	 I	BECOME,	AND	 I	HAVE
NOTICED
THIS	PHENOMENON	IN	OTHER	DISCIPLES.	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Prem	Ramarshi,	the	question	shows	you	are	not	yet	mad	enough	because	those
who	are	mad	never	accept	 that	 they	are	mad.	That	 is	one	of	 the	absolutes:	 the
madman	never	accepts	that	he	is	mad.
You	can	look	in	madhouses,	you	can	ask	as	many	madmen	as	possible,	and	you
will	be	surprised	that	they	are	all	shocked	that	people	think	that	they	are	mad.	No
argument	convinces	them;	on	the	contrary,	they	are	ready	to	give	every	argument
to	prove	that	they	are	not	mad.
It	happened	in	the	second	world	war,	Winston	Churchill	had	gone	for	a	walk	in
the	evening,	tired	of	the	whole	day's	work,	and	the	tremendous	responsibility	and
tension	--
because	 Adolf	 Hitler	 was	 bombing	 exactly	 over	 London.	 He	 forgot	 in	 his
thoughts	that	after	six	o'clock	he	had	to	go	inside	the	house;	an	absolute	curfew
ordered	 that	 after	 six	 o'clock,	 nobody	 should	 come	 out	 of	 the	 house.	 As
Churchill	remembered	it,	he	saw	that	it	was	six-fifteen.	And	it	was	not	in	India
where,	if	you	are	the	prime	minister,	no	law	applies	to	you;	it	was	Britain	where
it	makes	no	difference	whether	you	are	the	prime	minister	or	a	nobody.
He	 rushed	 to	 the	 closest	 house	because	his	own	house	was	 far	 away,	 it	would
take	 fifteen	 minutes...	 the	 streets	 were	 deserted,	 he	 could	 be	 caught,	 and	 that
would	become	a	scandal
--	 that	 even	 the	 prime	 minister	 does	 not	 follow	 the	 rules	 that	 he	 decides	 for
everybody	to	follow.
He	 knocked	 on	 the	 door.	 A	man	 opened	 the	 door,	 and	 he	 introduced	 himself
saying,	"I	am	Winston	Churchill,	prime	minister	of	the	country,	and	by	chance	I
forgot	to	return	home	in	time.	Please	give	me	shelter."
Before	 he	 could	 end	 his	 sentence,	 the	man,	 a	 very	 strong	man,	 pulled	 him	 in.
Churchill	said,	"What	are	you	doing?"	The	man	said,	"Shut	up!	We	already	have
three	more	Winston	Churchills	in	here."
It	was	a	madhouse!
Winston	 Churchill	 said,	 "But	 I	 really	 AM	Winston	 Churchill."	 The	man	 said,
"Forget	 all	 about	 it.	They	all	 say	 the	 same	 thing.	Everybody	 is	 really	Winston
Churchill."
He	 said,	 "Let	me	phone	my	wife,	 or	 to	 the	palace."	The	man	 said,	 "Forget	 all
these	things.
Just	get	into	your	cell	so	I	can	lock	it.	And	don't	make	any	nuisance	in	the	night,
because	 we	 are	 tired	 of	 these	 Winston	 Churchills.	 Those	 three	 are	 also
continually	saying,	"We	want	to	talk	to	Buckingham	Palace;	we	want	to	inform
parliament	what	kind	of	misbehavior	is	being	done	to	the	prime	ministers."
He	thought	for	a	moment,	and	realized	the	situation	--	 that	 there	 is	no	way;	he
will	have	to	wait	till	the	morning,	unless	some	officer	or	doctor,	somebody	more
intelligent	then	this	idiot,	comes	in.
But	it	was	the	same	story.	The	jailer	came,	and	he	was	an	educated	man.	Winston
Churchill	very	politely	said	to	him,	"Listen,	I'm	really	Winston	Churchill.	I'm	not
joking.
And	I	have	too	much	responsibility,	the	country	is	at	war,	I	cannot	remain	here!
I'm	needed	in	my	office;	every	moment	is	decisive.
The	 jailer	 laughed.	 He	 said,	 "Just	 rest.	 Three	 others	 are	 also	 continually
harassing	us	that	they	are	responsible	for	the	whole	country,	that	they	are	to	save
the	whole	world."
Winston	Churchill	 thought	that	now	even	the	last	hope....	The	doctor	came.	He
looked	 at	Winston	 Churchill,	 and	Winston	 Churchill	 said,	 "Do	 you	 recognize
me?	Have	you	seen	my	picture?"
The	doctor	said,	"I	have	seen	your	picture,	and	that's	why	I'm	wondering...	that
you	look	exactly	like	Winston	Churchill."
Churchill	said,	"I	don't	look.	I	am."
The	doctor	 said,	 "Forget	 all	 about	 that!	Don't	 say	 that,	 because	 there	 are	 three
more.	 They	 also	 look...	 and	 if	 you	 tell	 them	 that	 they	 look	 like	 Winston
Churchill,	 they	 become	 very	 angry.	 They	 say,	 `We	 are!	Don't	 insult	 your	 own
prime	minister.'"
His	family	was	in	search	all	over	the	street	where	he	used	to	go	for	a	walk,	and
somebody	said	 that	 they	had	seen	him	knock	at	 the	madhouse	on	 the	corner	 --
that's	 how	 he	was	 found	 and	 released.	 But	 before	 getting	 released	 he	 said,	 "I
would	like	to	ask	a	favor.	I	would	like	to	see	the	other	three.	I	have	become	so
interested	in	them.	Once	in	the	night,	it	came	to	me,	"Perhaps	I'm	just	mad,	and
they	are	right."	But	then	I	dropped	that	idea,"
No,	I'm	certainly	Winston	Churchill;	I'm	the	prime	minister."	But	I	would	love	to
see	them."
So	he	was	taken	to	see	them.	They	all	looked	like	him	--	fat,	with	the	cigar.	And
they	all	 looked	at	him	also,	and	 they	all	 said	 the	same	 thing.	They	said,	 "Boy,
you	 look	almost	 like	Winston	Churchill	 --	 an	exact	 copy	of	me!	How	did	you
manage?"
Because	he	was	not	a	madman,	for	a	moment	the	idea	came	to	him,	"Perhaps	I
am	mad."
But	for	those	three	people	even	that	idea	was	impossible.
You	say,	Ramarshi,	"The	closer	 I	get	 to	you,	 the	madder	 I	become,	and	I	have
noticed	this	phenomenon	in	other	disciples."	You	have	to	come	a	little	bit	closer.
Just	 becoming	 madder	 is	 not	 enough;	 you	 have	 to	 be	 really	 mad!	 And	 the
moment	when	you	are	really	mad,	you	will	not	say	you	are	mad;	your	will	say,	"I
am	 enlightened."	 That	 too	 happens	 here;	 when	 somebody	 really	 gets	 mad	 he
becomes	enlightened.	Unless	you	become	enlightened,	 I	don't	 take	 it	 seriously.
Then	it	is	okay,	it	is	normal.	Here	in	this	commune	of	crazy	people	it	is	a	normal
phenomenon,	and	you	have	observed	rightly.
But	to	be	mad	by	coming	closer	to	me	is	to	attain	to	sanity	in	a	world	which	is
really	insane.	Because	the	world	is	insane,	the	sane	people	will	appear	as	if	they
have	gone	mad.	The	sane	people	are	so	few,	and	they	happen	once	in	thousands
of	 years	 --	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 a	 Zarathustra,	 a	 Lao	 Tzu,	 a	 Socrates,	 a	 Jesus.
Centuries	 pass,	 and	 humanity	 goes	 on	 living	 in	 a	 lukewarm	 madness.	 But
because	everybody	is	in	the	same	boat,	nobody	recognizes	that	anybody	is	doing
something	insane.
Coming	closer	to	me	means	becoming	more	sane.	It	will	appear	like	becoming
madder...
and	even	more	mad.	All	these	words	are	very	irrelevant.	As	far	as	I	see,	there	is	a
certain	similarity	and	a	certain	dissimilarity	between	the	sane	and	the	really	sane,
between	the	ordinary	mad	and	the	madness	that	comes	as	a	divine	gift.
The	 sameness	 is	 that	 both	 go	 out	 of	 the	 mind.	 In	 fact,	 we	 say	 --	 in	 many
languages	 the	 phrase	 exists	 --	 that	 somebody	 has	 gone	 out	 of	 his	 mind	 that
means	he	has	gone	mad.	But	Gautam	Buddha	also	goes	out	of	his	mind.	Just	the
difference	is	that:	you	can	go	out	of	mind	and	fall	below	mind	or	you	can	go	out
of	mind	and	transcend	mind	and	go	beyond.
In	 both	 the	 cases	 you	 will	 be	 out	 of	 the	 mind	 --	 that	 will	 be	 the	 similarity
between	the	ordinary	madman	and	the	enlightened	man.	But	everything	else	will
be	totally	different.
The	man	who	 has	 gone	 beyond	 the	mind	 has	 become	 for	 the	 first	 time	 sane,
intelligent,	wise.	But	 to	 the	 ordinary	 humanity,	 to	 the	 normally	 insane	 people,
both	have	gone	beyond	their	fold,	both	will	appear	as	if	they	are	mad,	and	many
of	their	actions	can	be	interpreted	as	if	they	are	similar.
One	great	Zen	master,	Lin	Chi,	was	staying	in	a	temple	on	a	cold	winter	night.	In
the	 middle	 of	 the	 night,	 the	 priest	 suddenly	 woke	 up	 because	 he	 saw,	 in	 the
middle	of	 the	 temple,	a	great	 fire.	He	 rushed	 there;	Lin	Chi	was	 sitting	by	 the
side	of	the	fire.
Lin	Chi	had	come	that	very	evening	and	he	wanted	to	stay	overnight.	Knowing
him	as	a	great	Zen	master,	the	priest	had	allowed	him;	but	now	he	was	repenting
that	he	had	allowed	this	madman	inside	the	temple	because	he	had	burned	a	big
wooden	 statue	 of	Gautam	Buddha,	 and	 he	was	 enjoying	 in	 the	 cold	 night	 the
heat,	the	warmth.
The	priest	said,	"Are	you	mad	or	something?"	Lin	Chi	said,	"What's	the	matter?
Why	are	you	looking	so	angry?"
He	 said,	 "You	have	burnt	Gautam	Buddha!	 It	was	our	most	precious	 statue;	 it
took	years	to	make	it."
He	 said,	 "I	 have	 burnt	 Gautam	 Buddha?"	 So	 he	 took	 his	 staff	 and	 started
searching	 in	 the	ashes	of	Gautam	Buddha	 for	his	bones,	which	 in	 the	East	 are
called	flowers.
The	priest	said,	"Now	what	are	you	doing?"	Lin	Chi	said,	"I	am	looking	for	the
flowers!
Gautam	Buddha	is	gone,	but	at	least	we	can	save	the	bones."
Even	 the	priest	 had	 to	 forget	 his	 seriousness	 and	 laugh,	 and	he	 said,	 "You	 are
really	mad.
This	is	just	a	wooden	Gautam	Buddha.	There	are	no	bones	in	it."
Lin	Chi	said,	"If	that	is	the	case	then	you	have	still	got	two	more	statues,	and	the
night	 is	 long	and	very	cold.	Bring	one	and	you	can	also	participate	and	enjoy.
And	as	far	as	worship	is	concerned,	one	statue	is	enough;	three	are	not	needed."
But	the	priest,	seeing	the	intentions	of	Lin	Chi,	could	not	allow	him	to	remain	in
the	temple.	In	the	middle	of	 the	night,	a	cold	night,	he	forced	him	to	leave	the
temple.	He	 said,	 "I'm	 afraid	 if	 I	 go	 to	 sleep	 you	will	 destroy	 another	 statue.	 I
have	heard	much	about	you	and	I	have	always	thought	that	you	are	a	little	mad,
but	today	I	know	you	are	completely	gone."
So	he	threw	Lin	Chi	out	of	the	temple.	In	the	morning	he	opened	the	doors	to	see
what	had	happened	to	Lin	Chi.	Just	in	front	of	the	temple	there	was	a	milestone.
Lin	Chi	had	collected	a	few	wild	flowers,	had	put	those	flowers	on	the	milestone
and	he	was	doing	his	morning	worship:	"Buddham	Sharanam	Gachchhami."
The	priest	 said,	 "My	God,	 this	 is	 too	much!	First	 he	 has	 destroyed	 a	 precious
statue	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha	 and	 now	 he	 is	 worshiping	 before	 a	 milestone."	 He
went	and	he	asked	Lin	Chi,	"What	are	you	doing?"
He	said,	"The	real	thing	is	prayer.	Whether	the	stone	is	carved	in	a	certain	form
and	 proportion	 or	 not,	 it	 does	 not	matter.	 It	 is	 only	 an	 excuse.	You	 have	 your
excuses	--	I	have	destroyed	one,	two	are	still	there.	Sometime	I	will	see...	but	for
this	morning	this	milestone	is	as	perfect	to	meditate,	to	pray	with,	as	any	Gautam
Buddha."
To	any	ordinary	normal	human	being,	this	behavior	will	look	insane.	But	do	you
think	 it	 is	 insane	 or	 is	 it	 super-sanity,	 super-sensitivity?	 He	 is	 a	 superman,
because	he	is	saving	the	essential	and	destroying	the	non-essential.
Don't	be	worried	about	becoming	madder	by	coming	closer	to	me	--	rejoice!	The
madder	 you	 become,	 the	more	 blissful	 you	 are.	And	 you	 are	 seeing	 the	 same
phenomenon	happening	in	other	people.	My	very	being	here	is	to	drive	as	many
people	 mad	 as	 possible,	 because	 these	 mad	 people	 are	 the	 potential	 for	 the
future.
The	so-called	sane	have	ruled	the	world	too	long,	and	destroyed	everything	that
was	valuable.	Now	let	this	new	race	of	the	new	man,	who	may	look	mad	to	the
old,	rule	over	the	world.	Let	these	people	spread	more	madness,	more	joy,	more
song,	more	ecstasy	and	more	dance	around	the	earth.	That's	the	only	way	to	save
it	from	destruction.
But	old	habits	die	hard.	So	you	are	becoming	madder,	Ramarshi,	in	installments
--
slowly,	 slowly.	Take	a	 little	 longer	 steps.	Don't	 take	me	 for	granted.	 I	am	here
today,	 tomorrow...?	Only	one	 thing	 is	 needed	 --	 permission	 from	Rafia!	And	 I
can	persuade	him....
Sandra	and	Simon	are	arguing	 furiously	over	 the	breakfast	 table.	 "Oh,	you	are
stupid!"
shouted	Simon	at	his	sister.	"Simon!"	says	the	father,	"that's	quite	enough	of	that.
Now	say	you	are	sorry."
"Alright,"	says	Simon,	"Sandra,	I	am	sorry	you	are	stupid."
Just	small	steps	won't	do;	you	need	quantum	leaps!
Ramarshi,	the	mind	can	try	to	be	sane.	But	it	will	be	very	superficial	sanity,	just
skin-deep,	 or	 perhaps	 not	 even	 that	much;	 a	 little	 scratch	 and	 the	 insane	 will
come	out.	Real	sanity	consists	only	in	going	beyond	the	mind	and	entering	into	a
state	of	meditation.
Thoughts	can	never	become	sane.	Only	a	 thoughtless	silence	brings	you	 to	 the
world	of	sanity.
And	when	silence	deepens	inside	you	and	goes	on	opening	doors	upon	doors	of
your	heart	till	you	have	reached	your	very	being,	don't	stop,	because	the	mind	is
very	old	and	your	meditation	will	be	a	very	new	experience.	The	old	has	weight,
the	old	can	pull	you	back	again	and	again.	The	new	experience	of	meditation	and
intelligence	 has	 to	 be	 given	 time	 to	 grow	 roots,	 has	 to	 be	 given	 time	 to	 start
influencing	your	 actions	 and	your	behavior.	You	 should	not	 leave	 the	effort	 to
create	 your	 meditation,	 your	 silence,	 your	 peace	 and	 its	 depth	 till	 you	 are
absolutely	certain	that	your	mind	is	under	your	control	and	you	are	not	under	the
control	of	the	mind.	That	is	the	criterion	of	a	sane	man:	the	mind	is	his	servant.
For	the	insane	man,	the	mind	is	his	master.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	MORNING	YOU	SAID	THAT	WE	ARE	ALL	GOING	TO	BE
ENLIGHTENED	AND	ALL	MASTERS,	AND	I	FELT	SIMULTANEOUSLY	A
GREAT	 LAUGHTER	 AND	 A	 TREMENDOUS	 RESPONSIBILITY
AWAKENING	IN
ME.	 IS	 THAT	 WHAT	 YOU	 WANT?	 AM	 I	 LISTENING	 CORRECTLY?
AGAIN	 I	 FEEL	 THAT	 I	AM	NOT	RECEPTIVE	ENOUGH.	 PLEASE	HELP
ME.
Sarjano,	 I	 said	 certainly	 that	 you	 are	 all	 going	 to	 become	 enlightened,	 and
masters,	and	you	heard	me	right.	Just	one	thing	more	I	have	to	add	to	it.	I	could
say	it	because	enlightenment	is	your	very	nature.	It	is	because	of	language	that
many	problems	arise;	otherwise	I	would	have	said	you	are	enlightened	and	you
are	masters	--	you	are	just	unaware	of	it.
It	is	as	if	you	have	a	treasure	in	your	house,	but	you	don't	know	where	it	is.	The
house	is	big	--	many	mansions,	many	rooms;	you	know	certainly	the	treasure	is
there,	but	you	are	poor,	you	are	a	beggar,	and	who	is	going	to	believe	you?	Even
you	yourself	 suspect	 a	 thousand-and-one	 times	 that	 perhaps	 it	 is	 all	 a	myth,	 a
dream;	there	is	no	treasure.	But	you	have	not	looked	into	the	house,	you	have	not
searched	in	all	nooks	and	corners;	you	have	not	made	enough	efforts	to	find	it.
I	 have	 found	 my	 treasure!	 That's	 why	 I	 am	 absolutely	 certain	 that	 if	 my
consciousness	can	give	me	so	much	peace	and	so	much	silence,	so	much	joy,	so
much	 blissfulness,	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 why	 your	 consciousness	 cannot	 do	 the
same.	Perhaps	you	have	not	looked	into	the	possibility,	you	have	not	searched	in
your	own	being,	you	have	never	gone	in;	otherwise	you	are	enlightened	this	very
moment.
And	I	could	say	that	not	only	you	all	will	be	enlightened;	you	all	will	be	masters.
All	 enlightened	 people	 have	 not	 been	masters,	 but	 I	 can	 say	with	 tremendous
guarantee	 that	 my	 people,	 once	 they	 become	 enlightened,	 are	 going	 to	 be
masters,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 I	 have	 been	 preparing	 you	 to	 convey	 the
message.	I	am	giving	you	all	the	devices:	how	to	create	bridges	between	you	and
those	who	are	blind;	how	to	find	words	which	can	contain	at	least	a	hint	of	your
experience.	Talking	to	you	twice	every	day	for	almost	thirty-five	years....
The	 danger	 is	 that	 many	 of	 you	 may	 become	 masters	 before	 they	 become
enlightened,	 because	 they	 have	 listened	 to	 so	much;	 just	 a	 little	 articulateness
and	they	can	pretend	to	be	great	masters.	A	few	are	doing	that	already	around	the
world;	they	have	become	mini-gurus.
But	 what	 you	 heard,	 you	 heard	 rightly.	 It	 seems	 difficult,	 it	 seems	 almost
impossible;	 hence	 you	 laughed.	 The	 very	 idea	 of	 Sarjano	 as	 enlightened	 will
create	 laughter	 in	everybody.	Sarjano,	 the	enlightened	master,	 the	piesta	 seller,
the	pornography	photographer.	It	certainly....	I	can	understand	why	you	laughed.
You	know	yourself!
But	simultaneously	you	also	felt	a	tremendous	responsibility	awakening	in	you,
because	 it	 does	 not	matter;	 neither	 piesta,	 nor	 anything	 else	 can	 prevent	 your
enlightenment.	In	fact,	my	people	are	going	to	be	not	just	like	the	stone	statues
of	Gautam	Buddha,	sitting	in	a	lotus	posture	doing	nothing.	How	many	Buddhas
like	 that	 can	 we	 afford	 in	 the	 world?	 We	 will	 need	 a	 shoemaker	 who	 is
enlightened,	a	piesta	maker	enlightened	--	all	kinds	of	people.	Your	actions	don't
define	you;	your	being	remains	undefined	by	your	actions.	Certainly	your	being
defines	your	actions.	When	you	are	enlightened	your	piesta	will	have	a	different
taste.
In	desperation	the	young	bride	finally	took	pen	in	hand	and	wrote	to	the	problem
page	of	a	newspaper:	"I	am	married	to	a	sex	maniac.	My	husband	never	leaves
me	alone.	He	makes	love	to	me	all	night	long,	while	I	am	in	the	shower,	while
cooking	 breakfast,	 even	while	 I'm	 trying	 to	 clean	 the	 house.	 Can	 you	 tell	me
what	to	do?"	signed,	worn	out.
"P.S.	Please	excuse	the	jerky	handwriting."
But	even	these	people	have	to	become	enlightened!
My	 deepest	 longing	 is	 to	 make	 all	 kinds	 of	 people	 enlightened	 and	 to	 make
enlightenment	 a	 very	 ordinary,	 simple	 and	 innocent	 experience	 --	 nothing
special,	 nothing	 holier-than-thou-humble,	 non-pretending,	 not	 claiming
spirituality...	 just	 being	 joyous	 and	 full	 of	 light,	 radiant	 with	 joy,	 overflowing
with	love,	ready	to	share	their	experience	in	whatever	way	they	can.
Sarjano,	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 laugh.	You	are	as	capable	as	any	Gautam	Buddha.
And	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 worried	 about	 responsibility,	 because	 when	 you
become	 enlightened	 you	 also	 become	 capable	 of	 fulfilling	 tremendous
responsibilities	of	which	you	could	have	never	dreamt	before.
[SUDDENLY	 THE	 SOUND	 OF	 FIRE	 CRACKERS	 IS	 HEARD	 IN	 THE
DISTANCE.]
Is	 this	Sarjano	making	all	 these	firecrackers	 from	his	piesta	shop?	--	because	I
think	he	is	there!
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#35
Chapter	title:	Buffaloes	are	never	bored
29	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705290
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN35
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
115
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
PRINCE	CHARLES,	THE	HEIR	TO	THE	ENGLISH	THRONE,	RECENTLY
SPENT
THREE	 DAYS	 ON	 A	 SMALL	 SCOTTISH	 ISLAND	 WITH	 A	 LOCAL
FAMILY,	 HELPING	 ON	 A	 CROFT.	 EARLIER	 THIS	 YEAR,	 HE	 SPENT
SOME	TIME	IN	THE
KALAHARI	DESERT	WITH	LAWRENCE	VAN	DER	POST.	HE	SAID	ON
TELEVISION	THAT	HE	TALKS	TO	HIS	PLANTS	TO	HELP	THEM	GROW.
THE
FUTURE	 KING	 OF	 ENGLAND	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 INTERESTED	 IN
SPIRITUAL
MATTERS.	HAVE	YOU	ANY	COMMENT	TO	MAKE	ON	THIS?
Prem	 Yatro,	 Prince	 Charles	 is	 deeply	 interested	 in	 meditation.	 He	 is	 also
interested	 in	 exploring	 the	 inner	 world.	 But	 in	 the	 West,	 unfortunately,	 such
people	are	thought	to	be	a	little	crazy	--	a	little	loony.
His	 statements	 --	 that	 he	 talks	 to	his	plants	 to	help	 them	grow	 --	have	 created
almost	a	scandal	all	over	England.	They	don't	think	that	their	future	king	should
talk	such	nonsense	--	although	it	is	not	nonsense.	But	from	a	man	from	the	royal
family,	and	particularly	 the	man	who	is	going	 to	be	 the	king,	England	must	be
feeling	very	insecure.
His	going	alone	in	the	desert	or	to	small	villages	to	find	peace	of	mind	is	very
disturbing	 to	 the	 British	 traditional,	 orthodox	 Christian;	 it	 is	 disturbing	 to	 his
family,	to	the	queen	and	to	his	father,	Prince	Philip.
When	he	was	in	India,	he	had	specially	called	Vimalkirti	and	his	wife,	Turiya	--
they	both	were	my	sannyasins.	Vimalkirti	was	one	of	his	cousins.	Vimalkirti	was
the	 great-grandson	 of	 the	 German	 emperor,	 and	 he	 was	 directly	 connected	 to
Prince	Philip;	Prince	Philip	was	his	mother's	brother.
He	talked	for	hours	about	me,	about	meditation,	about	what	 is	happening	here.
Vimalkirti	and	Turiya	both	invited	him	to	come;	he	was	very	interested,	but	very
afraid	of	the	royal	family.	He	was	specially	told	by	Queen	Elizabeth	not	to	go	to
Poona.	He	went	 to	 see	 the	 shankaracharya,	 he	went	 to	 see	Mother	Teresa,	 but
Queen	Elizabeth	was	more	afraid	of	Poona	than	anything.
In	the	East,	kings	were	sent	--	particularly	future	kings	--	to	the	great	seers	and
mystics	to	learn	the	ways	of	inner	life,	because	a	king	is	not	of	any	worth	if	he
has	no	contact	with	himself.	If	he	is	just	an	extrovert,	he	cannot	be	a	blessing	to
his	people.	For	years	in	the	East	the	princes	used	to	sit	at	the	feet	of	the	masters
to	learn	silence,	to	learn	compassion,	to	learn	meditation,	to	become	aware	of	the
mysteries	 of	 existence.	 The	 king	 should	 not	 only	 be	 aware	 of	 the	 mundane
world,	he	should	also	have	his	roots	in	the	sacred	--	only	then	is	he	a	complete
man.	And	only	then	can	he	look	after	his	people	in	all	aspects	of	life.	But	in	the
West,	it	is	totally	a	different	thing.
Prince	 Charles	 is	 being	 thought	 of	 as	 if	 he	 is	 a	 little	 crazy,	 and	 England	 is
worried	because	he	is	going	to	be	the	king.	He	has	already	started	throwing	his
weight;	he	insists	on	his	way	of	life.
It	is	a	well-known	scientific	fact	that	you	can	talk	to	the	trees,	and	you	can	help
them	to	grow	faster,	you	can	help	them	to	bring	bigger	flowers,	juicier	fruits;	you
just	 have	 to	 be	 in	 a	 friendly,	 loving	 relationship	 with	 them.	 They	 are	 very
sensitive	people,	more	sensitive	than	man	himself.
The	latest	research	about	trees	and	their	sensitivity	scientifically	proves	strange
phenomena.	 Scientists	 have	 developed	 some	 instruments,	 something	 like
cardiograms,	which	can	graphically	depict	the	exact	emotions	of	a	tree.
On	a	silent	and	beautiful	morning,	with	the	sun	rising	and	the	birds	singing	the
graph	is	very	harmonious.	Then	suddenly,	the	scientists	bring	a	woodcutter	with
the	intention	to	cut	a	tree.	And	immediately	--	the	man	has	not	started	cutting	it,
he	has	not	expressed	his	thought	even	that	he	is	going	to	cut	it	--	the	graph	starts
wavering,	loses	harmony,	shows	fear,	anxiety,	tension;	the	tree	has	lost	its	joyous
ecstatic	interiority.
It	seems	that	the	tree	is	capable	of	reading	the	mind	of	the	man,	because	he	has
not	said	anything.	And	if	the	same	woodcutter	is	brought	to	the	side	of	the	tree
without	 any	 intention	 to	 cut	 it,	 the	 graph	 goes	 on	 harmoniously,	 there	 is	 no
change.	 The	 tree	 is	 not	worried;	 the	man	 is	 not	 dangerous,	 he	 is	 not	 going	 to
harm	it.
Not	only	that,	but	when	a	woodcutter	comes	with	the	intention	of	cutting	a	tree,
a	certain	tree,	other	trees	surrounding	it	all	start	showing	anxiety,	fear,	anguish;
their	graphs	start	losing	the	harmonious	beauty.	They	are	not	going	to	be	cut,	but
one	of	their	friends,	one	of	their	neighbors,	a	colleague	for	years,	is	going	to	be
unnecessarily	killed.
It	was	in	the	East	with	Mahavira,	that	the	first	insight	came	into	the	world	that
trees	 are	 living	 beings,	 and	 they	 should	 be	 treated	 in	 the	 same	 way.
Vegetarianism	 is	 just	 a	 by-product	 of	 that	 intuition.	 But	 it	 remained	 a
philosophical	hypothesis.
Then	another	 Indian	man,	Sir	 Jagdish	Chandra	Bose,	 scientifically	proved	 that
trees	are	living	beings.	He	was	given	a	Nobel	prize	for	his	great	exploration	and
opened	a	new	door	for	future	explorers.	But	since	then	fifty	years,	or	more	than
fifty	years	have	passed;	nobody	has	gone	beyond	Jagdish	Chandra	Bose.
But	recently,	many	scientists	around	the	world	--	in	the	Soviet	Union,	outside	the
Soviet	Union	--	have	gone	far	beyond	Jagdish	Chandra	Bose	and	his	discoveries.
The	trees	are	not	only	alive;	they	are	also	conscious	in	their	own	way.
Man	should	not	think	that	he	is	the	only	conscious	and	intelligent	animal	in	the
world,	 and	 he	 should	 not	 think	 that	 his	 is	 the	 only	 type	 of	 consciousness	 that
exists.	The	researchers	show	that	animals	have	a	different	kind	of	consciousness
and	a	different	kind	of	sensitivity.
A	few	birds...	particularly	bees	have	been	found	to	have	a	certain	language,	and
trees	have	been	found	immensely	sensitive.	When	the	gardener	comes	to	water
and	to	nourish	them,	the	graph	on	the	cardiogram	attached	to	them	starts	dancing
in	joy,	shows	some	ecstatic	welcome.	Perhaps	soon	we	may	be	able	to	discover
that	they	have	their	own	kind	of	language	that	we	don't	understand.
But	Prince	Charles	talking	to	the	trees	in	England	will	not	be	acceptable.	He	is
being	condemned	as	a	 little	crazy.	Actually,	according	 to	me,	and	according	 to
all	 the	scientific	 research	 too,	what	he	 is	doing	 is	absolutely	sane	--	more	sane
than	your	ordinary	people	are.
I	had	an	old	gardener	who	won	every	year	a	competition	in	the	city	because	he
used	to	bring	roses	so	big	that	people	could	not	believe	it.	He	was	a	poor	man
and	his	secret	was	that	he	treated	trees	not	as	trees,	but	as	his	own	children.	He
would	 talk	 to	 them,	 he	 would	 inform	 them	 before-hand,	 "I	 am	 going	 for	 a
competition;	 don't	 let	 me	 down.	 You	 have	 to	 produce	 the	 biggest	 flower
possible."
For	almost	the	twenty	years	that	he	was	with	me,	he	was	winning	every	year.	But
his	secret	was	not	better	gardening;	his	secret	was	a	deep	respect	for	the	plants,
bestowing	on	them	a	dignity,	communing	with	them	as	if	they	also	were	human
beings.	He	was	offered	many	other	jobs	by	richer	people	because	they	wanted	to
win	the	prizes.
I	 told	him,	"You	can	accept	if	somebody	is	giving	you	more	money	--	don't	be
worried."
He	 said,	 "That	 is	 not	 the	 question.	 The	 question	 is	 that	 everywhere	 I	 will	 be
thought	mad.
It	is	only	you	who	has	never	said	to	me	that	what	I	am	doing	is	nonsense.	You
have	supported	me,	and	in	my	whole	life	you	are	the	only	person	who	has."
When	I	came	to	Poona,	the	gardener	had	become	very	old,	but	he	was	sending
messages	 through	 sannyasins	 that	 he	would	 like	 to	 come	 and	 take	 care	 of	my
garden.	He	was	worried	that	nobody	else	could	take	care	of	my	garden	the	way	it
should	be	taken	care	of.
What	Prince	Charles	is	doing	is	perfectly	right.	He	should	be	supported,	but	he	is
being	condemned	all	over	England.	We	are	so	blind	towards	existence	that	it	is
not	surprising.
Have	you	ever	 said,	 "Hello,"	 to	 a	 tree?	You	yourself	would	 think	 that	you	are
going	out	of	your	mind.	Have	you	ever	touched	a	tree	with	love,	the	same	way
you	would	touch	your	beloved?	Have	you	ever	hugged	a	tree?	You	are	missing	a
whole	world	of	sensitivity	that	surrounds	you,	that	is	available.
Slowly,	 slowly,	 you	 will	 start	 feeling	 that	 when	 you	 say	 hello	 to	 a	 tree...	 of
course,	 it	cannot	 respond	 in	 language,	but	 it	will	 respond	 in	some	way.	 It	may
start	 swaying	even	 though	 there	may	be	no	wind.	When	you	 touch	 it	 lovingly,
just	a	little	acquaintance	is	needed,	and	you	can	feel	that	on	the	other	side	there
is	 not	 something	 insensitive,	 but	 something	 which	 is	 far	 more	 sensitive	 than
people	are.	The	tree	will	be	sending	its	energy,	its	warmth	to	your	hand.
If	you	hug	a	tree,	the	world	is	going	to	think	you	mad.	But	all	the	trees	will	know
that	 there	 is	 still	 hope	 for	man;	 there	 are	 still	 sensitive	people.	And	hugging	a
tree,	you	will	find	more	sensitiveness,	more	lovingness,	than	you	can	find	even
hugging	your	 friend	or	your	beloved,	because	your	 friend,	or	your	beloved	are
full	 of	 tensions,	 anxieties,	 agonies.	 Trees	 are	 absolutely	 innocent;	 their
consciousness	is	as	pure	as	the	purest	sky,	unclouded.	We	are	not	living	in	a	dead
world.
Although	it	has	not	been	discovered	yet	by	science,	it	is	predictable	that	even	in
rocks	you	will	find	a	consciousness	deep	asleep.	Nothing	is	dead	anywhere;	it	is
whole,	 alive,	 sensitive.	 We	 are	 unnecessarily	 confining	 ourselves	 to	 human
beings.	We	should	spread	our	hands	in	all	directions	--	to	the	animals,	the	trees,
the	birds,	the	rocks,	the	oceans....
By	this	expansion	of	your	experiences,	your	own	consciousness	will	be	evolving
more	and	more.	This	universe	is	not	a	graveyard,	it	is	full	of	rejoicings;	you	are
just	 deaf.	 It	 is	 full	 of	 beauties,	 but	 you	 are	 blind.	All	 the	 birds	 are	 living	 in	 a
different	dimension	of	consciousness;	you	can	have	a	communication	with	them.
Man's	future	evolution	is	to	expand	his	own	consciousness	in	all	dimensions,	so
that	he	can	find	the	oceanic	life	and	sensitivity	that	constitutes	the	universe.	To
me,	this	sensitivity	and	consciousness	that	makes	up	the	whole	existence	is	the
only	God,	not	to	be	worshiped,	but	to	be	loved.
Create	 more	 friends,	 and	 as	 your	 friendship	 goes	 deeper	 into	 different
dimensions,	you	will	find	yourself	becoming	richer	and	richer;	your	own	heights
will	start	reaching	Everest,	your	own	depths	will	start	reaching	the	Pacific.
The	new	man,	of	which	I	consistently	dream,	is	going	to	deny	God	and	to	accept
the	 world.	 But	 his	 world	 will	 be	 full	 of	 godliness.	 The	 old	 man	 has	 been	 a
worshiper	of	dead	gods	 in	 the	 temples	and	mosques	and	synagogues.	The	new
man	will	find	his	living	god	in	the	trees,	in	the	birds,	in	the	rivers,	in	the	ocean,
in	 the	 mountains,	 in	 the	 stars.	 He	 will	 transform	 the	 whole	 universe	 into	 his
temple.
Prince	Charles	is	moving	on	absolutely	the	right	lines.	He	needs	encouragement
from	every	nook	and	corner	because	England	will	not	support	him;	it	is	one	of
the	most	 dull	 countries	 in	 the	world,	 the	most	 serious,	 long-faced,	 dead	 in	 the
soul.	 But	 he	 should	 continue	 his	 meditations	 in	 deserts,	 in	 deep	 forests,	 in
mountains.	Let	the	whole	world	call	him	mad,	but	the	new	man	will	accept	him
as	a	pioneer.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	WITH	SARJANO	FOR	A	WHILE.	CAN	I	SURVIVE	THAT?
Prem	 Sandha,	 it	 is	 a	 difficult	 job	 you	 have	 taken	 in	 your	 hands.	 It	 is	 almost
impossible	to	survive	with	Sarjano.	But	it	is	not	a	curse,	it	is	a	blessing.
You	should	not	make	any	effort	to	survive	either	--	merge	with	him.	He	is	mad,
but	with	 a	method;	 he	 is	 full	 of	 energy	 and	 love.	 Just	 don't	 fight	with	 him	 --
become	one	with	him.
The	way	to	survive	with	Sarjano	is	to	become	one	with	him.	But	that	is	the	way
for	everyone	who	wants	to	love.	Love	is	basically	committing	suicide.	Two	egos
have	to	commit	suicide	to	place	them	in	a	position	for	merging	and	melting,	to
create	the	space	in	which	love	can	grow.
Sarjano	is	full	of	energy	--	sometimes	too	much!	But	an	understanding	woman
can	help	him	 to	be	more	 centered	 if	 she	 can	 love	unconditionally	 and	without
asking	 anything.	 If	 she	 can	 enjoy	 his	 abundance	 of	 energy,	 then	 there	 is	 no
problem.	But	 if	you	want	 to	dominate	him,	you	cannot	survive;	 if	you	want	 in
some	way	to	be	bitchy,	you	cannot	survive.
He	is	not	a	man	who	will	accept	any	handcuffs,	any	curtailment	of	his	freedom.
Neither	 do	 you	 have	 to	 curtail	 your	 freedom;	 enjoy	 your	 freedom	and	 let	 him
enjoy	his	freedom.
Two	freedoms	can	exist	 together	beautifully,	but	two	slave-makers	cannot	exist
together;	they	are	after	each	other's	necks.	Unfortunately,	that	is	the	situation	in
the	whole	world:	people	are	killing	each	other	 in	 the	name	of	 love,	destroying
each	other	in	the	name	of	love.
Love	 is	a	creative	act.	 It	enhances	both.	 It	gives	 freedom,	 it	gives	 joy,	 it	gives
courage,	 and	 nourishment,	 but	 that	 seems	 to	 be	 only	 theoretical.	 In	 actuality,
millions	of	people	are	suffering	because	of	love.	It	is	very	rare	to	find	someone
who	 is	 growing	 because	 of	 love,	 who	 is	 becoming	 spiritually	 strong	 and
integrated	because	of	love.
But	at	least	my	people	should	understand	it,	because	I	don't	want	you	to	be	just
like	the	unconscious	crowds	that	fill	the	whole	earth.	I	want	you	to	experiment
with	new	ways	of	 living,	new	styles	of	 living.	And	one	of	 the	most	 important
things	for	new	styles	of	living	is	that	love	should	never	be	used	as	politics,	as	an
effort	to	dominate	the	other.
Love	 should	 make	 you	 humble	 and	 simple,	 innocent,	 available	 and	 open	 --
childlike,	 with	 no	 expectations.	 Then	 you	 can	 survive	 even	 Sarjano,	 or	 even
nuclear	weapons.	He	is	a	nuclear	person!
I	love	people	like	Sarjano;	they	are	so	full	of	energy,	they	don't	know	what	to	do
with	it.
They	 are	 running	 hither	 and	 thither	 for	 no	 purpose,	 just	 to	 exhaust	 their
abundance	of	energy.	A	right	woman	can	help	him	to	be	centered,	can	help	him
to	transform	his	abundance	of	energy	into	something	creative.
A	man	walks	into	a	bar	looking	for	his	friend.	After	finding	him,	he	proceeds	to
tell	the	friend	how	much	he	hates	his	own	wife.
"Why	 don't	 you	 have	 her	 murdered?"	 asked	 the	 friend.	 "I	 know	 a	 guy	 called
Artie	who	will	do	it	for	you	really	cheap."	This	sounds	great	to	the	man.	So	he
goes	off	to	meet	Artie	who	agrees	to	do	the	job	for	a	dollar.
He	 asks	 the	man	where	 his	 wife	 goes	 shopping	 --	 he	 plans	 to	 do	 the	murder
there.	 So	 Artie	 waits	 outside	 the	 supermarket	 until	 he	 sees	 the	 woman	 go	 in.
Then	he	creeps	up	behind	her	and,	in	a	deserted	corner,	strangles	her.
When	 he	 has	 finished,	 he	 notices	 two	 old	 ladies	 staring	 at	 him,	 so	 he	 has	 to
strangle	 them	 too.	 On	 his	 way	 out	 of	 the	 market,	 he	 is	 caught	 by	 the	 store
detective	and	handed	over	to	the	police.
The	 headlines	 in	 the	 newspapers	 read,	 "Artie	 Chokes	 Three	 For	 A	 Dollar	 In
Supermarket."
But	 it	 is	 not	 a	 rare	 case	 that	 husbands	 hate	 their	 wives	 and	 wives	 hate	 their
husbands,	although	they	go	on	saying,	"Darling,	I	love	you."	The	more	they	hate,
the	more	they	repeat,	"I	 love	you."	They	have	to	repeat	 it	 to	create	a	facade	to
hide	their	hate.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 very	 great	 surgeon.	His	 friends	 had	 arranged	 a	 beautiful
party	and	celebration	as	a	golden	jubilee	of	the	surgeon's	married	life.	They	all
were	 drinking	 and	 dancing	 and	 enjoying.	 Suddenly,	 somebody	 looked	 around;
the	surgeon	was	not	there,	so	his	most	intimate	friend	and	advocate	went	out	in
the	garden	to	see	where	he	could	have	gone.	He	was	sitting	under	a	tree	very	sad.
The	 advocate	 said,	 "What	 is	 the	 matter?	 Everybody	 is	 enjoying,	 and	 it	 is	 a
moment	of	celebration,	and	you	are	sitting	here	sad."	The	surgeon	said,	"Don't
come	near	me!	I	may	strangle	you.	You	are	the	person	who	destroyed	my	whole
life."
The	advocate	could	not	believe	this	outburst.	He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?"	The
surgeon	said,	"You	may	have	forgotten,	but	remember:	twenty-five	years	ago,	I
had	come	 to	you	 to	ask	 that	 if	 I	murder	my	wife,	what	will	happen?	And	you
said,	 `Never	do	 it	 because	you	will	 get	 at	 least	 twenty-five	years	 in	 jail.'	 I	 am
feeling	sad	that	if	I	had	not	listened	to	your	advice,	today	I	would	have	been	a
free	man."
In	the	name	of	love,	people	have	been	torturing	each	other	for	centuries...	men	in
their	own	way,	women	in	their	own	way.
Love	has	not	yet	entered	into	the	world.	It	is	still	in	the	poems	of	the	poet,	in	the
songs	of	the	musicians,	but	it	has	not	become	part	of	humanity.	I	hope	that	when
we	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 old	 man	 and	 his	 whole	 so-called	 barbarous	 attitudes	 and
approaches	to	life,	love	will	become	the	very	foundation	of	a	new	humanity.	This
love	will	not	be	a	bondage,	an	imprisonment,	but	a	tremendous	freedom.
Unless	love	becomes	freedom,	you	don't	know	what	it	is.	Freedom	without	love
is	 dry,	 is	 a	 desert.	Love	without	 freedom	 is	 fake,	 just	 a	 hypocrisy;	 it	 does	 not
exist.
Love	and	freedom	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
It	 is	 one	 flower,	 and	 it	 can	 blossom	 only	 when	 both	 are	 allowed	 dignity	 and
respect.
You	can	survive	Sarjano.	He	is	not	a	dangerous	man.	He	has	a	very	loving	heart.
If	you	can	love	him,	you	will	find	hidden	in	him	one	of	the	most	beautiful	hearts.
There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 "surviving"	 him.	 You	 can	 dancingly	 live	 together,
helping	 each	 other	 in	 creativity,	 in	 meditation,	 transforming	 each	 other	 into
higher	peaks	of	consciousness	--
which	are	our	birthright.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
AT	 THE	RISK	OF	 PUTTING	MY	HEAD	 INSIDE	 THE	 LION'S	MOUTH,	 I
HAVE	A	QUESTION.	YOU	SEEM	TO	BE	HAVING	AT	LEAST	FOUR	EGOS
ON	TOAST	FOR
YOUR	BREAKFAST	LATELY	--	AND	HERE	COMES	MINE.	WHEN	I	HEAR
YOU
SPEAK	 OF	 BOREDOM	 I	 LOOK	 INSIDE,	 BUT	 I	 CAN'T	 FIND	 IT
ANYMORE.	I	REMEMBER	HAVING	IT	BEFORE	I	MET	YOU,	BUT	IT	HAS
LONG	GONE.	EVEN
IN	MY	LIFE	WITH	NITYAMO,	"BOREDOM"	IS	THE	LAST	WORD	THAT	I
WOULD	USE.	WE	FIGHT,	WE	LOVE,	WE	JOKE	AND	GIGGLE,	WE	CRY,
WE
DECIDE	TO	PART	AT	LEAST	TWICE	EVERY	MONTH	--	ONCE	DURING
MY
PERIOD,	 AND	 ONCE	 DURING	 HERS.	 SOMETIMES	 WE	 HAVE	 LONG
FACES,	SOMETIMES	WE	BEAM	WITH	BLISS,	BUT	BOREDOM?	NEVER!
I	 WONDER	 IF	 I	 AM	 HIDING	 SOMETHING?	 IN	 FACT,	 I	 AM	 FEELING
GUILTY	THAT	NO
BOREDOM	IS	HAPPENING.	PERHAPS	I	AM	SO	BORING	THAT	I	DON'T
REALIZE	HOW	BORING	I	AM.	MY	LIFE	IS	RICH	AND	JUICY,	MY	HEART
IS
OVERFLOWING.	 I	 LOVE	 HER	 TOPOGRAPHY	 AND	 GEOGRAPHY.	 MY
GOD!
WHY	CAN'T	I	HAVE	A	BORING	LIFE	LIKE	OTHER	PEOPLE?	I	MUST	BE
A	FREAK.
Devageet,	 first	 I	have	 to	 remind	you:	 I	don't	 take	any	breakfast.	Breakfast	 is	a
very	religious	word.	It	means	breaking	the	fast.	I	hate	all	religious	words,	I	hate
fasting.	That's	why	I	had	to	stop	taking	breakfast	too;	so	you	need	not	be	worried
about	that.
You	say,	"I	hear	you	speak	of	boredom,	I	look	inside	but	I	can't	find	it	anymore.	I
remember	having	it	before	I	met	you,	but	it	has	long	gone."
That's	 how	 it	 should	 be;	 otherwise,	 what	 is	 the	 purpose	 of	 being	 with	 me?
Boredom	is	a	virtue	for	saints,	and	 this	 is	a	communion	of	sinners	of	all	kinds
and	varieties.
If	you	want	 to	 see	boredom,	you	will	have	 to	visit	heaven.	There	you	will	 see
ancient	 saints	 covered	with	dust,	 skeletons	playing	on	 their	 harps,	 "Alleluia"...
although	 you	 cannot	 hear	 anything	 because	 when	 you	 for	 centuries	 go	 on
repeating	"Alleluia,"	you	become	bored	with	"Alleluia,"	you	become	bored	with
your	 harp.	 Heaven	 is	 the	 greatest	 accumulation	 of	 all	 kinds	 of	 antique,	 bored
people.	Unless	you	practice	boredom	here	you	cannot	enter	heaven.
Jesus	 has	 forgotten	 the	 real	 beautitude:	 Blessed	 are	 the	 bored	 for	 they	 shall
inherit	 the	Kingdom	of	God.	All	 the	 nice	 people	 you	will	 find	 in	 hell	 --	 juicy
people,	 poets,	 singers,	 dancers,	 actors,	 sculptors,	 mystics.	 Hell	 is	 colorful;
heaven	is	almost	like	a	white-washed	graveyard.
Here	there	is	no	question	of	being	bored.	I	am	making	every	effort	to	destroy	the
very	 roots	 of	 boredom	 in	 you.	 But	 there	 is	 something	 very	 complex	 to	 be
understood:	 boredom	 can	 be	 destroyed	 by	 making	 you	 blissful;	 boredom	 can
also	 be	 destroyed	 by	 making	 you	 utterly	 retarded.	 Retarded	 people	 don't	 feel
boredom.	Certainly,	no	retarded	people	ever	approach	me.	I	am	not	a	magnet	for
them;	my	charisma	is	only	for	the	very	intelligent,	for	the	very	few.
Harry	and	Abe	had	been	friends	almost	all	their	lives.	Now	as	their	time	on	earth
drew	to	a	close,	Abe	asked	Harry,	"Do	you	believe	in	life	after	death?"
"I	don't	know,"	Harry	said,	"but	we	should	make	a	pact:	whoever	goes	first	will
give	the	other	a	sign."	Not	too	long	after,	Abe	died,	and	Harry	waited	for	a	sign.
One	day	the	telephone	rang.
"Hello,	Harry,"	came	the	voice.
"Abe,"	Harry	said.	"Where	are	you?"
"Well,	where	I	am	the	grass	is	green,	the	air	is	sweet	and	pure,	there	are	beautiful
mountains.	I	get	up	in	the	morning,	have	a	little	grass,	make	a	little	love,	take	a
little	nap.
In	the	evening,	I	have	a	little	grass,	make	a	little	love,	and	go	to	sleep."
"You	mean	you	are	in	heaven?"
"Heaven?	What	heaven?	I	am	a	buffalo	in	Montana."
Buffaloes	are	never	bored!	So	there	are	two	kinds	of	people	who	are	never	bored
--	one	is	the	meditator,	and	the	other	is	the	buffalo	type.	You	will	not	find	more
contented,	 more	 satisfied	 saints	 than	 buffaloes.	 They	 go	 on	 eating	 the	 same
grass;	they	don't	even	change	the	variety	of	grass	their	whole	life.	And	you	will
never	see	even	a	sign	of	boredom.	For	boredom,	a	certain	intelligence	is	needed,
and	to	go	beyond	boredom,	tremendous	intelligence	is	needed.
Devageet,	you	are	not	a	freak,	but	the	reason	why	you	are	not	feeling	bored	even
in	your	life	with	Nityamo	is	very	simple.	You	say,	"We	fight,	we	love,	we	joke
and	giggle,	we	cry,	we	decide	to	part	at	least	twice	every	month	--	once	during
my	period,	and	once	during	hers.	Sometimes	we	have	long	faces,	sometimes	we
beam	with	bliss,	but	boredom?	Never!"	You	don't	have	any	 time	 for	boredom.
You	are	so	engaged	in	tremendous	revolutionary	activities.
That	 reminds	 me	 of	 the	 case	 with	 Neelam.	 Her	 boyfriend	 says	 he	 is	 utterly
satisfied	with	 her.	That	 is	 the	 beginning	of	 boredom.	She	 is	 a	 silent,	 peaceful,
non-fighting,	 loving	 woman.	 If	 she	 also	 starts	 throwing	 things,	 every	 night	 a
pillow	fight...	if	she	follows	your	lifestyle	then	her	boyfriend	will	not	be	utterly
satisfied,	 and	 he	will	 not	 have	 any	 time	 to	 feel	 bored	 or	 any	 time	 to	 look	 for
another	woman.	In	fact,	he	will	come	to	the	conclusion	that	one	is	enough;	two
will	be	too	much.	It	is	a	question	of	survival.
You	 are	 not	 hiding	 anything,	 and	 you	 need	 not	 feel	 guilty	 that	 no	 boredom	 is
happening.
You	 have	 got	 the	 right	 woman	 for	 you;	 she	 will	 not	 leave	 you	 alone	 to	 feel
boredom.	And	 it	 is	 not	 true	 that	 you	 are	 so	 boring	 that	 you	 don't	 realize	 how
boring	you	are.	If	you	were	boring,	Nityamo	would	have	escaped.	But	she's	also
not	 feeling	 bored	 --	 that	 shows	 certainly	 that	 you	 both	 are	 engaged	 in	 a	 great
adventure.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 neighborhood	 where	 every	 couple	 was	 fighting	 and
shouting	at	each	other,	but	 they	were	very	much	 intrigued	by	 the	 fact	 that	one
sardarji	 lived	 in	 their	 apartment	 building.	 From	 the	 sardarji's	 flat,	 they	 never
heard	any	shouting,	any	fight;	on	the	contrary,	every	night	 they	heard	laughter.
They	could	not	believe	it	--	what	secret	has	this	sardar	got?	He's	enjoying	life	so
much,	laughter	every	night.
Finally,	the	temptation	was	so	much	that	one	day	they	gathered	when	the	sardarji
was	coming	out	from	his	office.	They	surrounded	him	and	said,	"Now	you	have
to	tell	us	the	secret.	You	know	we	all	fight,	you	know	we	throw	things	and	our
women	break	the	pottery,	but	from	your	flat	always	comes	a	soothing	laughter"
The	sardarji	said,	"It	would	have	been	better	 if	you	had	not	asked,	because	the
reality	is	very	heavy.	The	reality	is	we	have	decided	that	she	can	throw	things	at
me.	If	she	hits,	she	can	laugh,	and	if	I	can	save	myself	and	she	misses	the	target,
then	 I	 laugh.	 So	 fifty-fifty	 it	 goes.	 Sometimes	 she	 hits	 me,	 then	 she	 laughs;
sometimes	she	misses	the	target,	then	I	laugh.	But	as	far	as	you	are	concerned,
you	hear	laughter	every	day."
But	the	same	sardarji	was	found	after	ten	years	standing	in	the	court	asking	for	a
divorce.
The	magistrate	said,	"How	long	have	you	been	married?"	He	said,	"Almost	fifty
years."
The	magistrate	said,	"If	you	have	been	married	for	fifty	years,	what	emergency
has	arisen	so	suddenly	that	you	want	the	divorce?"
He	 said,	 "The	 fact	 is,	 we	 used	 to	 laugh	 fifty-fifty,"	 and	 he	 explained	 their
arrangement.
"But	now	she	laughs	one	hundred	percent,	because	during	the	fifty	years,	she	has
become	such	an	expert	in	hitting	me	that	there	is	no	way	to	escape.	For	years	I
have	not	laughed.
So	now	it	is	too	much...	I	want	the	divorce."
Devageet,	 life	 is	 a	 very	 strange	 thing.	 Because	 you	 are	 continuously	 fighting,
then	making	friends,	 then	making	 love,	 then	deciding	 to	separate,	 then	coming
together	again...	this	whole	panorama,	this	whole	drama,	keeps	you	so	engaged
that	you	don't	feel	bored.	But	if	you	were	totally	satisfied,	if	she	was	a	woman
like	Neelam	--	silent,	available,	not	fighting,	not	creating	any	trouble	for	you,	not
nagging	you	--	you	would	have	become	bored.
Boredom	is	a	 flat	 life,	but	when	 there	are	so	many	ups	and	downs,	 there	 is	no
boredom.
Moreover,	 being	 with	 me,	 I	 am	 taking	 away	 all	 your	 inhibitions,	 all	 your
conditionings,	all	your	saintliness;	I	am	making	you	raw	and	wild.	When	you	are
raw	and	wild,	and	you	don't	live	a	life	of	a	polished	hypocrisy,	boredom	does	not
enter	in.
Primitive	people	don't	know	anything	about	boredom.	It	is	only	the	latest	trends
in	philosophy,	particularly	existentialism,	which	has	made	boredom	 the	central
theme	 of	 thinking.	 Jean-Paul	 Sartre,	 Jaspers,	 Martin	 Heidegger,	 Soren
Kierkegaard,	Martin	Buber	-
-	all	these	people	are	engaged	in	a	great	intellectual	exploration	of	what	boredom
is.
Once	 I	 came	 home	 from	 the	 university	 in	 the	 holidays,	 and	 I	 had	 a	 book	 on
existentialism.	My	 grandfather	 looked	 at	 the	 contents,	 and	 he	 said,	 "My	God!
What	kind	of	philosophy	are	you	learning	in	the	university?	There	is	not	even	a
mention	 of	 God,	 soul,	 heaven,	 hell,	 reincarnation;	 the	 contents	 are	 anguish,
boredom,	 meaninglessness,	 futility,	 suicide.	What	 kind	 of	 philosophy	 are	 you
reading	about	in	the	university?"
I	 said,	 "This	 is	 the	 latest	 philosophy	 because	man	 has	 come	 to	 a	 point	where
everything	has	become	flat.	Nothing	is	wild	anymore,	nothing	is	raw	anymore.
Everything	 has	 become	 cultured;	 everybody	 is	 a	 gentleman,	 every	woman	has
become	a	lady.	It	is	very	difficult	to	find	an	authentic	woman;	they	are	all	ladies.
It	is	difficult	to	find	an	authentic	man;	they	are	all	gentlemen.	These	gentlemen
and	 these	 ladies	are	creating	an	atmosphere	of	meaninglessness,	of	anguish,	of
boredom."
I	am	taking	away	from	you	all	that	can	create	boredom	in	you.	My	whole	effort
is	to	give	you	again	a	natural	life	--	wild,	adventurous,	dangerous;	then	boredom
cannot	exist.
The	new	man	will	live	dangerously.
He	will	live	like	wild	animals,	not	like	tamed	animals	in	a	zoo.	He	will	live	like
trees	 in	a	 forest,	not	as	 trees	 in	a	British	garden.	Even	 the	garden	 in	Britain	 is
boring.
My	people	have	to	learn	to	live	like	a	Zen	garden,	where	nothing	is	symmetrical,
where	 trees	 are	 allowed	 to	 grow	 the	 way	 they	 like.	 The	 gardeners	 are	 not
continually	after	them,	pruning	them,	giving	them	a	shape.
One	beautiful	Zen	story	is	that	a	king	sent	his	prince,	who	was	going	to	be	the
next	 king,	 to	 learn	 gardening	 with	 a	 Zen	 master.	 It	 took	 three	 years,	 and
whatever	the	prince	learned...	 in	the	garden	of	the	palace,	he	had	one	thousand
gardeners;	 he	 told	 them	 how	 to	 do	 all	 that	 he	 had	 learned	 to	 create	 a	 garden.
After	 three	 years	 the	 master	 would	 come,	 and	 if	 he	 was	 satisfied	 the	 prince
would	pass	the	examination;	otherwise,	again	another	three	years.
The	 master	 came.	 It	 was	 a	 beautiful	 garden	 --	 one	 thousand	 gardeners	 were
working	in	it.
But	the	prince	was	becoming	afraid	because	there	was	no	smile	on	the	master's
face,	and	finally	the	master	said,	"Everything	is	right,	but	you	will	have	to	come
back	for	three	more	years."
The	prince	said,	"What	is	wrong?	You	say,	Èverything	is	right,'	then	why	have	I
to	come	back?"
The	master	went	out	of	the	garden,	brought	thousands	of	dead	leaves	which	the
gardeners	had	thrown	out...	the	whole	night	they	had	been	cleaning	the	garden	of
all	 the	 old	 dead	 leaves,	 so	 when	 the	 master	 came	 there	 would	 be	 nothing	 to
object	to.	And	the	master	brought	the	leaves	and	threw	them	on	the	garden	path.
The	wind	started	playing	with	those	dead	leaves,	and	there	was	a	certain	music
of	 the	wind	playing	with	 the	dead	 leaves,	and	 the	dead	 leaves	moving	all	over
the	path.
The	master	 said,	 "Now	everything	 is	 okay.	Without	 the	 leaves	 the	garden	was
looking	 too	man-made;	 now	 it	 looks	 natural.	But	 as	 far	 as	 you	 are	 concerned,
you	will	need	 three	more	years,	because	you	have	not	 learned	 the	basic	 lesson
that	 the	garden	should	not	be	man-made.	Man	should	help	the	trees	to	grow	in
their	own	way,	in	their	own	individuality."
A	Zen	garden	is	a	beauty	which	no	other	garden	in	the	world	can	be	compared
with...
suddenly	a	pond,	suddenly	old	rocks,	trees	growing	in	their	own	way;	it	is	more
a	forest	than	a	garden.	The	forest	has	something	of	godliness,	the	garden	is	too
sophisticated.	You	 cannot	 be	 bored	 in	 a	 Zen	 garden;	 you	 can	 be	 bored	 in	 the
garden	which	Europe	has	invented,	that	is	man-manufactured.
A	man	also	should	be	a	little	raw,	a	little	wild,	ready	to	live	in	insecurity,	ready
to	risk,	ready	to	go	on	the	untrodden	paths,	always	ready	to	take	the	challenge	of
the	dangerous.
Then	life	is	every	moment	an	ecstasy,	and	boredom	disappears.
Devageet,	 you	 are	 not	 a	 freak.	 You	 have	 relaxed	 and	 become	 wild,
unsophisticated,	not	a	hypocrite,	authentic,	sincere.	And	to	be	with	me	is	to	live
in	constant	danger.
Jayesh	 is	 asleep;	 he	 came	 late	 in	 the	 night.	He	 had	 been	 thinking	 for	 years	 to
come	to	me,	to	sit	silently,	to	relax,	and	to	meditate.	And	the	day	he	reached	the
commune	I	was	arrested	--	and	he	was	arrested	with	me.	Since	then,	for	eighteen
months	he	has	not	been	able	 to	sit	silently	for	a	single	moment.	We	have	been
moving	around	the	world,	being	thrown	out	from	one	country	to	another	country,
and	he	says,	"My	God!	Before	I	came	to	you,	I	had	time	at	least	to	sit	silently,
and	 I	had	come	 to	meditate."	He	had	 to	 live	with	me	 in	 the	 jail...	 but	he's	not
bored;	he's	enjoying	the	whole	trip.
A	Pole	was	working	at	a	construction	site	where	the	boss	left	each	day	at	eleven
a.m.	and	was	gone	for	two	hours.	This	became	such	a	regular	occurrence	that	the
rest	of	the	workers	decided	to	spend	those	two	hours	in	the	bar	across	the	street,
but	the	Polack	decided	to	head	home	for	some	extra	nookie	with	his	wife.	When
he	arrived	home,	he	found	his	boss	busy	banging	his	wife	in	the	bedroom.	Well
he	walked	right	out	and	headed	back	to	 the	 job.	The	following	day,	 the	Polack
was	working	his	ass	off	when	everyone	headed	across	to	the	bar.
"Hey,	Ski,	aren't	you	coming?"	asked	one	of	them.
"Hell,	no!"	said	the	Polack.	"I	almost	got	caught	yesterday."
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#36
Chapter	title:	Science	has	to	become	religious
29	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705295
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN36
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
94
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
FROM	MY	EARLY	BOYHOOD	I	WAS	STRONGLY	ATTRACTED	TO
ASTRONOMY	 AND	 NUCLEAR	 SCIENCES;	 IT	 WAS	 A	 SEARCH	 FOR
TRUTH.	AS
A	 RESULT,	 I	 VERY	 SOON	 REJECTED	 THE	 IDEA	 OF	 CHRISTIANITY.
TODAY	I	UNDERSTAND	THAT	THE	DEEPER	SCIENTISTS	GO	INTO	THE
MATTER,	THE
MORE	 THEY	 REALIZE	 THAT	 THEY	 ARE	 THROWN	 BACK	 ON
THEMSELVES,	 ACKNOWLEDGING	 THAT	 IT	 IS	 MAN	 WHO
DETERMINES	THE	COSMOS	TO
APPEAR	ACCORDING	TO	HIS	OWN	CONSCIOUSNESS.	THAT	REMINDS
ME	OF
WHAT	I	UNDERSTAND	YOU	TO	BE	CONSTANTLY	SAYING.	ALTHOUGH
THESE	SCIENTISTS	REALIZE	THAT	THE	EARTH	CLOCK	SHOWS	TWO
MINUTES	 TO	 TWELVE,	 AND	 ALTHOUGH,	 AS	 SCIENTISTS,	 THEY
SHOULD
NOT	HAVE	PREJUDICES,	YOUR	VISION	OF	THE	NEW	MAN	DOES	NOT
SEEM
TO	APPEAL	TO	THEM.	DO	THEY	BELONG	TO	THE	SAME	CATEGORY
AS
POLITICIANS?	 SCIENCE	 IS	 SO	 EXCITINGLY	 INTERESTING,	 BUT	 ON
THE
OTHER	 HAND	 I	 FOUND	 THAT	 IT	 DOES	 NOT	 TRANSFORM	 AT	 ALL.
WHAT	IS	IT
GOOD	FOR?	BELOVED	MASTER,	AM	 I	WASTING	MY	TIME	WITH	 IT?
WHEN	I	SEE	YOU	LAUGHING	I	MELT	WITH	JOY.
Satyam	Bhairava,	the	question	you	have	asked	implies	many	questions.	First,	are
the	 scientists	 also	 of	 the	 same	 category	 as	 politicians?	 In	 a	 way,	 yes.	 The
politician	 is	 one	whose	whole	 desire	 is	 to	 have	 power;	 hence	 anybody	whose
desire	is	to	have	power,	particularly	over	others	--	they	may	be	human	beings	or
material	 objects,	 it	makes	 no	 difference....	 The	 politician	 is	 struggling	 to	 have
power	over	people,	the	scientist	is	struggling	to	have	power	over	matter;	but	the
desire	is	the	same,	and	the	mind	is	the	same.	So,	in	one	way,	they	both	are	in	the
same	boat.	But	there	are	many	other	aspects	in	which	science	is	totally	different
from	politics.
Politics	enslaves	living	people;	hence	it	is	more	violent.	Science	tries	to	conquer
matter;	 hence	 it	 is	 not	 a	 violent	 search.	 But	 science	 has	 grown	 to	 such
complexity	 that	now	it	 is	not	possible	for	 individual	scientists	 to	work	on	their
own;	they	need	immense	support	from	politicians.	Their	research	projects	are	so
expensive	 that	 only	 governments	 of	 very	 rich	 nations	 can	 afford	 them.	 So	 the
scientist	unknowingly	has	fallen	a	victim	to	the	hands	of	the	politicians.
Now	the	scientist	works	as	a	servant	to	nationalism,	to	communism,	to	fascism,
to	 capitalism.	 He	 is	 no	 more	 an	 independent	 seeker;	 he	 is	 part	 of	 a	 certain
political	ideology.
He	 works	 and	 discovers	 but	 he	 has	 no	 control	 over	 his	 own	 discoveries;	 the
control	 is	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 politicians.	 They	 decide	 in	 which	 direction	 he
should	 work;	 otherwise	 they	 will	 not	 financially	 support	 any	 other	 kind	 of
project	--	and	their	only	project	is	war.
So	 thousands	 of	 scientists	 of	 immense	 intelligence,	 talent	 and	 genius	 have
become	just	slaves	of	a	political	mechanism	which	exploits	their	intelligence	in
the	service	of	war	and	death.
Science	can	be	of	great	 importance	 if	 two	 things	are	added	 to	 it:	one	 is	 that	 it
should	not	only	be	an	objective	search,	it	should	also	open	the	subjective	doors
of	consciousness.
The	scientist	should	not	go	on	working	only	on	objects.	He	has	to	work	upon	the
scientist	himself.
Up	 to	now	the	scientist	has	been	denying	his	own	consciousness.	 It	 is	 such	an
absurd	attitude,	so	illogical	and	so	unscientific,	that	it	brings	scientists	closer	to
the	 so-called,	 superstitious	 religions:	 they	 believe	 blindly	 in	 a	God	 they	 know
nothing	about,	and	the	scientist	goes	on	disbelieving	in	himself.
The	 superstition	 is	 enormous,	 unbelievable.	 If	 there	 is	 nobody	 inside	 you,	 if
there	is	no	consciousness	in	you,	then	who	is	going	to	discover	the	mysteries	and
secrets	of	matter,	nature,	and	life?	At	this	point,	science	has	been	behaving	in	an
old	superstitious	way;	it	has	been	imitating	religions.
I	have	been	in	contact	with	many	professors	of	science	and	not	a	single	one	of
them	was	able	to	give	any	argument	in	support	of	this	superstition.	They	simply
go	on	repeating	that	consciousness	is	only	a	by-product	of	matter.	And	whenever
I	have	asked	them,	"On	what	grounds	are	you	saying	it?	Who	is	the	scientist	who
has	proved	it?	Which	are	the	discoveries	which	have	been	made	which	support
the	idea?..."	It	is	just	because	a	man	who	was	not	a	scientist	at	all,	who	was	an
economist,	Karl	Marx,	created	this	idea	that	consciousness	is	only	a	by-product
of	matter.	He	wanted	to	deny	God	and	he	wanted	to	deny	soul;	his	approach	was
philosophical.
Communism	 goes	 on	 believing	 in	 Karl	 Marx.	 It	 can	 be	 understood	 if	 in	 the
Soviet	Union	the	scientist	has	been	repeating	the	same	as	Karl	Marx,	because	to
say	 anything	 against	 Karl	 Marx	 there	 is	 to	 go	 against	 the	 holy	 scripture	 of
communism.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 as	 in	 a	 fanatic	 Christian	 society,	 you	 cannot	 say
anything	against	THE	BIBLE.	You	may	be	right,	that	does	not	matter;	it	is	not	a
question	of	being	right	or	wrong.	THE	HOLY
BIBLE	 cannot	 be	 contradicted;	 that	 is	 unforgivable	 sin.	 But	 the	 same	 is	 the
situation	in	the	Soviet	Union	as	far	as	Karl	Marx	and	his	book	DAS	KAPITAL	is
concerned.
But	in	the	free	world,	where	people	are	pretending	to	have	the	right	of	freedom
of	 expression,	 there	 too	 the	 scientists	 go	 on	 repeating	 this	 superstition	 that
consciousness	 is	 only	 a	 by-product	 of	 matter,	 without	 any	 understanding	 that
Karl	Marx	was	not	a	scientist	and	his	statement	is	not	based	on	any	experiments.
Karl	Marx	was	an	atheist.	Just	as	 there	are	people	who	believe	in	God	without
knowing	 anything	 about	 God,	 there	 are	 people	 who	 do	 not	 believe	 in	 God
without	knowing	anything	about	God.	They	don't	differ	basically;	their	quality	is
the	same.
So	in	one	aspect	the	scientist	behaves	like	a	fanatic	fundamentalist	Christian....
He	goes	on	denying	consciousness.	And	unless	science	opens	up	the	dimension
of	one's	own	interiority,	it	will	not	become	a	total	subject,	a	whole	subject.	It	will
remain	partial;	its	viewpoint	will	remain	only	half	of	the	truth.
And	you	should	remember	that	a	whole	lie	is	better	than	half	a	truth.	The	whole
lie	 will	 be	 detected	 soon;	 the	 half-truth	 is	 very	 dangerous	 because	 it	 has
something	of	truth	in	it.
It	can	keep	people	in	darkness	for	centuries.
And	three	centuries	have	already	passed	for	scientists.	They	have	been	working
but	they	have	not	dared	to	enquire	into	the	innermost	being	of	man	--	that	is	one
thing	 that	 has	 to	 be	 added	 to	 science;	 then	 it	 can	 become	 of	 tremendous
importance.
To	add	subjectivity	to	objective	science	means	adding	the	methods	of	meditation
to	 the	 methods	 of	 concentration.	 The	 methods	 of	 concentration	 take	 you	 out,
they	are	extrovert.
Science	 requires	 a	 mind	 which	 has	 the	 capacity	 to	 concentrate.	 Meditation
requires	 the	capacity	 to	go	beyond	mind,	 to	go	 into	 silence,	 to	be	absolutely	a
pure	nothingness.
Unless	science	accepts	meditation	as	a	valid	method	of	enquiry	it	will	remain	a
halfhearted	 search	 --	 and	because	of	 its	halfheartedness,	 it	 is	dangerous.	 It	 can
easily	serve	the	purposes	of	death	because	it	does	not	believe	in	consciousness,	it
believes	 in	 dead	matter	 --	 so	 it	 does	 not	matter	whether	Nagasaki	 happens	 or
Hiroshima	 happens,	 or	 even	 if	 the	 whole	 globe	 commits	 suicide.	 It	 doesn't
matter,	because	all	is	matter.	There	is	no	consciousness;	nothing	is	lost.
The	 scientist	 will	 revolt	 against	 the	 politicians	 only	 when	 the	 dimension	 of
meditation	 is	 added	 in	his	 research,	 in	his	work.	Secondly,	 the	 scientist	 has	 to
remember	now	that	he	 is	providing	the	politicians	with	self-destructive	nuclear
weapons.	He	is	behaving	against	humanity,	he	is	behaving	against	the	new	man,
the	new	humanity;	he	is	behaving	against	his	own	children.	He	is	sowing	seeds
of	death	for	all.
It	 is	 time	 that	 scientists	 should	 learn	 to	discriminate:	what	 helps	 life	 and	what
destroys	life?	Just	because	of	their	salaries	and	comforts...	they	should	not	go	on
like	slaves	and	robots	working	for	war	and	a	destruction	which	is	unprecedented.
The	scientist	has	to	be	a	revolutionary	too.	He	has	to	be	a	spiritual	seeker	first,
and	second	he	has	 to	be	a	 revolutionary.	And	he	has	 to	 remember	not	 to	serve
death,	whatsoever	the	cost.	He	has	not	to	follow	the	directions	of	politicians.	He
has	to	decide	himself	what	is	helpful	to	the	whole	cosmos,	what	is	helpful	to	the
ecology,	what	is	helpful	to	a	better	life,	to	a	more	beautiful	existence.	And	he	has
to	condemn	the	politicians	if	they	force	him	to	work	in	the	service	of	death.	He
has	to	refuse	totally,	everywhere	--	in	the	Soviet	Union,	in	America,	in	China,	in
every	country	all	over	the	world.
Scientists	need	a	global	association	of	their	own	which	can	decide	what	research
should	be	taken	in	hand	and	what	research	should	be	dropped.
Up	 to	 now	 science	 has	 been	 accidental.	 People	 have	 been	 just	 groping	 in	 the
dark,	 finding	 something,	 becoming	 great	 discoverers.	 Now	 that	 time	 is	 over.
Groping	 in	 the	dark	 they	have	found	atom	bombs,	nuclear	weapons;	 they	have
done	great	service!
Now	 it	 is	 their	 responsibility	 to	 destroy	 all	 the	 nuclear	 weapons,	 all	 atomic
weapons,	even	though	it	goes	against	your	so-called	nationalism,	your	so-called
communism,	your	so-called	democracy.	Nothing	matters,	because	now	even	the
very	 existence	 of	 man	 is	 at	 stake.	 Just	 as	 one	 day	 scientists	 revolted	 against
religion	and	its	dictates,	now	they	have	to	revolt	again	against	the	politicians	and
their	dictates.
The	scientist	has	to	stand	on	his	own	and	be	absolutely	clear	that	he	is	not	being
exploited.	He	is	being	exploited	everywhere.	Just	because	he	is	being	paid	great
salaries,	 given	Nobel	 prizes,	 great	 honor,	 he	 is	 ready	 to	 sacrifice	 the	whole	 of
humanity	--	for	his	Nobel	prizes,	for	all	those	stupid	awards.	Scientists	should	no
longer	behave	like	children.	These	awards	and	these	prizes	and	these	respectable
posts	are	all	toys	to	befool,	and	even	your	great	scientists	are	behaving	like	fools.
I	would	like	my	people	to	create	an	uproar	all	over	the	world	against	scientists
who	are	 serving	governments	and	politicians	 in	creating	war	mechanisms.	The
masses	have	to	be	awakened	against	these	scientists;	they	have	become	now	the
greatest	danger,	and	their	association	with	politicians	has	to	be	broken.
Science	in	itself	can	become	both:	accepting	meditation	it	can	become	religion;
being	rebellious	it	can	create	a	better	life,	more	affluent,	more	abundant.	It	can
be	the	greatest	blessing	to	mankind	--	outwardly	and	inwardly.	But	right	now	it	is
one	of	the	greatest	dangers.
Satyam	Bhairava,	you	are	worried	and	concerned	that	the	scientists	are	not	at	all
aware	of	 the	new	man.	They	cannot	be;	 they	are	 in	 the	service	of	 the	old	man
and	 the	 old	 humanity,	 the	 old	 politicians,	 the	 old	 ideologies.	 In	 fact	 they	 are
preparing	a	funeral	for	the	new	man.	They	should	prepare	a	funeral	for	the	old
man	which	 is	already	dead!	And	we	are	carrying	 its	corpse	--	 it	 stinks,	but	we
have	become	immune,	because	we	have	been	born	in	a	society	which	has	been
carrying	 corpses.	We	 have	 grown	 up	 in	 a	 society,	 in	 educational	 institutions...
everywhere	corpses	are	worshiped.
If	there	is	life	anywhere	on	another	planet	--	and	scientists	suspect	that	there	is
life	 on	 at	 least	 fifty	 thousand	planets	 in	 the	whole	universe,	 and	 there	may	be
planets	where	 science	 has	 grown	 to	 far	 higher	 reaches	 --	 they	may	 be	 able	 to
observe	our	behavior.	And	they	will	be	simply	surprised:	what	are	our	geniuses
doing?	It	would	have	been	better	if	there	were	more	idiots	and	fewer	geniuses	--
at	least	life	would	have	continued.	These	geniuses	are	going	to	destroy	the	whole
of	life.
The	new	man	can	be	accepted	only	if	scientists	understand	that	 the	world	does
not	consist	only	of	dead	objects,	it	also	consists	of	living	beings	--	and	not	only
of	living	beings	but	beings	who	are	conscious	too.	And	there	is	a	possibility	of
growing	this	consciousness	to	great	peaks.
A	Gautam	Buddha	 and	 a	Zarathustra	 are	 like	Everest,	Himalayan	peaks.	They
show,	 they	 indicate	 the	 potential	 of	 every	 human	being;	 just	 a	 little	 effort	 and
you	can	also	reach	their	heights.	You	can	also	reach	the	sunlit	peaks;	you	need
not	live	always	in	the	dark	caves,	in	the	valleys	of	misery.
The	dark	night	need	not	remain	forever.
There	is	a	possibility	to	come	out	of	the	dark	night	into	a	beautiful	morning	with
birds	singing	and	flowers	blossoming.
The	scientists	need	a	great	incentive	for	meditation.	Only	then	will	they	be	able
to	see	that	what	they	have	been	doing	is	against	the	future	of	mankind.	They	are
destroying	 the	 very	 hope...	 while	 with	 the	 same	 intelligence	 they	 could	 have
created	 a	 paradise	 on	 earth	 for	 the	 new	 man,	 for	 their	 children	 and	 their
children's	children	 to	 live	 in	a	better	world,	with	more	health,	with	more	 love,
with	more	consciousness.
Satyam	Bhairava,	you	are	right	that	science	is	"so	excitingly	interesting,"	but	it
can	 be	 even	 more	 interesting.	 It	 has	 to	 become	 religious,	 it	 has	 to	 become
spiritual.	 It	 has	 not	 to	 exhaust	 all	 its	 energies	 on	 the	 outer	 world	 but	 has	 to
penetrate	 into	 the	 treasures	 of	 our	 inner	 being.	And	 you	 are	 also	 right	 that,	 "I
found	that	it	does	not	transform	anything	at	all.	What	is	it	good	for?"
It	 has	 great	 potential,	 but	 that	 potential	 is	 not	 yet	 used.	 Just	 as	 it	 has	 been
successful	 in	 penetrating	 into	 the	 very	 secret	 of	 matter,	 it	 has	 the	 capacity	 to
penetrate	 into	 the	 very	 secret	 of	 consciousness	 too.	 Then	 it	 will	 be	 a	 great
blessing,	a	great	benediction.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned	and	my	vision	for	a	new	humanity	is	concerned,	I	see
science	 as	 having	 two	 dimensions:	 one,	 the	 lower	 dimension,	 working	 on
objects;	 and	 two,	 the	 higher	 dimension,	 working	 on	 consciousness.	 And	 the
lower	dimension	has	to	work	as	a	servant	for	the	higher	dimension.	Then	there	is
no	need	of	any	other	religion;	then	science	fulfills	totally	all	the	needs	of	man.
But	right	now	you	are	right	that	science	transforms	nothing.	It	cannot.	Unless	it
approaches	consciousness	and	works	out	how	to	develop	more	consciousness	in
man	--
how	 to	make	his	unconscious	 conscious,	 how	 to	 transform	his	darkness	 into	 a
noontide	--
it	will	 not	 be	 of	 any	great	 use.	On	 the	 contrary,	 it	 is	 proving	 to	 be	 one	 of	 the
greatest	dangers.
It	 was	 Albert	 Einstein	 who	 wrote	 a	 letter	 before	 the	 second	 world	 war	 to
President	Roosevelt	 of	America	 saying,	 "I	 can	 create	 atomic	 energy	 and	 atom
bombs,	and	if	you	don't	have	atom	bombs	I	can	predict	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 to
win	against	Germany	in	the	war."
Albert	 Einstein	was	 a	German	 Jew.	He	was	working	 in	Germany,	 researching
under	the	German	government,	which	was	under	Adolf	Hitler,	to	create	an	atom
bomb.	Just	 the	very	 idea...	 if	he	was	not	a	Jew,	 the	whole	history	of	 the	world
would	have	been	totally	different.	If	Germany	could	have	produced	atom	bombs,
then	 there	would	 have	 been	 no	 power	 --	 neither	 of	America	 nor	 of	 the	Soviet
Union	 nor	 of	 England	 --	 to	 stand	 in	 front	 of	 Adolf	 Hitler;	 he	 would	 have
conquered	the	whole	world.
But	 because	Albert	Einstein	was	 a	 Jew...	 he	was	 so	 important	 that	 he	was	not
harassed	by	Adolf	Hitler	and	his	people,	but	he	was	seeing	that	millions	of	Jews
were	 disappearing,	 actually	 evaporating	 as	 smoke	 in	 the	 gas	 chambers	 of	 the
Nazi	 government.	 He	 would	 not	 have	 been	 killed	 because	 he	 was	 so	 much
needed	and	 there	was	nobody	else	 to	 replace	him,	but	he	became	afraid	 that	 if
Adolf	 Hitler	 wins,	 then	 all	 over	 the	 world	 there	 will	 not	 be	 a	 single	 Jew	 left
alive.	He	was	 not	 afraid	 about	 his	 own	 life;	 it	was	 safe,	 because	Adolf	Hitler
needed	him.
Albert	Einstein	escaped	from	Germany,	leaving	the	experiment	incomplete.	The
German	 scientists	 did	 everything,	 but	 there	 was	 no	 other	 Albert	 Einstein	 to
complete	the	experiment.	And	Einstein	wrote	a	letter	to	the	enemy	of	Germany,
to	America,	saying	"I	have	escaped	from	Germany	and	I	am	ready	to	make	atom
bombs	for	America.	Without	atom	bombs	you	cannot	defeat	Germany.	And	there
is	also	a	fear	that	somebody	may	be	able	to	complete	the	experiment	that	I	have
left	incomplete,	because	there	were	many	scientists	working	with	me,	under	me."
Roosevelt	immediately	invited	him	and	gave	him	all	the	facilities	possible.
Truman	 was	 president	 at	 the	 time	 when	 the	 atom	 bombs	 were	 produced	 by
Albert	Einstein,	and	Einstein	 told	Truman,	"Now	there	 is	no	need	 to	use	 them,
because	Germany	has	committed	a	historical	mistake."
This	historical	mistake	has	been	committed	many	times.	Anybody	who	wants	to
fight	with	Russia	and	has	committed	this	historical	mistake	is	doomed,	because
for	nine	months	the	whole	country	is	covered	with	snow.	Russia	is	so	vast	--	it
covers	 two	 continents,	 from	one	 corner	 of	Europe	 to	 the	other	 corner	 of	Asia.
And	there	are	only	three	months	when	the	weather	is	clear	enough	to	fight.	And
Russia	has	a	great	enough	army	to	prevent	the	enemy	for	three	months	and	wait
for	the	winter.
Winter	lasts	for	nine	months.	Then	Russia	need	not	fight;	that	winter	finishes	the
enemies	 without	 any	 trouble.	 Nobody	 can	 survive	 the	 Russian	 winter,	 except
Russians	--	it	needs	a	lifelong	training.	Napoleon	got	lost,	in	the	first	world	war
Germany	got	lost,	and	Adolf	Hitler	again	committed	the	same	mistake.
But	this	time	Truman	did	not	even	answer	the	letter	of	Albert	Einstein.	The	first
letter	was	received	with	such	great	joy	and	he	was	invited	with	great	welcome,
was	given	all	the	facilities	that	he	needed,	but	now	the	bombs	were	already	in	the
hands	of	 the	politicians.	Who	cares	about	Albert	Einstein?	And	he	was	 saying
simply,	"Now	there	is	no	need.	Germany	is	finished,	and	within	two	weeks	at	the
most,	Japan	will	be	finished,	because	Japan	cannot	stand	on	its	own.	It	was	the
German	support....	There	is	no	need	to	use	these	bombs."
But	 Truman	 was	 in	 a	 hurry	 to	 use	 the	 atom	 bomb,	 because	 Germany	 has
surrendered	and	if	Japan	also	surrenders	then	there	is	no	opportunity	to	see	what
great	power	America	has	and	no	opportunity	to	show	the	whole	world.
Nagasaki	 and	 Hiroshima	 were	 destroyed	 unnecessarily.	 Japan	 was	 ready	 to
surrender.
Preparations	were	being	done	on	how	the	surrender	should	happen;	negotiations
were	going	on	between	the	generals.	And	Truman	ordered,	"Before	the	surrender
at	 least	 we	 should	 try	 out	 how	much	 power	 we	 have.	 Once	 the	 war	 ends	 we
won't	have	any	opportunity."
Two	hundred	thousand	people	in	two	great	cities	died	within	ten	minutes	--	and
not	 only	 people	 but	 trees,	 animals,	 birds,	 everything	 alive	 suddenly	 became
dead.
Albert	 Einstein	 was	 so	 much	 shocked	 that	 before	 his	 death	 when	 somebody
asked	him,
"If	you	are	born	again,	wouldn't	you	like	to	be	a	physicist	in	your	new	life?"	he
said,
"Never!	If	I	am	born	again,	I	would	rather	be	a	plumber	than	a	physicist.	Enough
is	 enough.	 I	 have	 seen	 how	 I	 worked	 day	 in,	 day	 out	 to	 create	 the	 atomic
weapons.	 They	 were	 for	 an	 emergency,	 but	 once	 they	 were	 created	 I	 had	 no
power	over	them.	I	had	created	them,	but	once	they	were	created,	the	politicians
had	the	keys	in	their	hands.	And	my	letter	was	not	even	answered!	I	am	dying
one	of	the	most	frustrated	men	on	the	earth."
He	was	one	of	 the	most	 successful	men,	 perhaps	 the	greatest	 scientist	 that	we
have	 ever	 known,	 but	 his	 own	 feeling	 was	 far	 more	 true.	 He	 was	 a	 man	 of
conscience;	 he	 died	 almost	 like	 a	 wounded	 lion,	 utterly	 frustrated	 with
politicians	and	their	ugliness,	their	murderous	and	criminal	minds.
Up	to	now,	science	certainly	has	not	brought	much	of	a	transformation	as	far	as
human	 consciousness	 is	 concerned,	 but	 it	 has	 the	 potential	 --	 just	 a	 great
awakening	is	needed.
The	scientist	has	to	realize	his	responsibility.	He	has	almost	become	a	god;	either
he	can	create	or	he	can	destroy.	He	has	to	be	reminded	that	he	is	no	longer	the
old	scientist	of	the	times	of	Galileo,	just	working	in	his	own	house,	with	a	few
tubes	 and	a	 few	bottles,	 just	mixing	chemicals	 and	experimenting.	Those	days
are	 gone.	Now	he	 has	 the	 power	 to	 destroy	 the	whole	 life	 of	 this	 planet	 or	 to
create	a	life	so	beautiful	and	so	blissful	that	man	has	imagined	it	only	in	heaven;
it	can	be	possible	here.	A	few	small	groups	of	scientists	have	started	working	on
those	lines.	Nobody	believes	them.
In	Manali,	 in	one	of	 the	press	 interviews,	 I	was	 talking	about	 the	possibilities,
the	 creative	 and	 absolutely	 new	 possibilities	 of	 doors	 that	 science	 can	 open.
Neelam	was	there,	and	she	reported	to	Nirvano	in	Kathmandu	that	I	was	talking
"off	the	wall."	And	I	can	understand	that	anybody	will	think	what	I	was	saying
was	"off	the	wall."	It	will	appear	like	that.
But	just	the	other	day	Japan	created	an	artificial	island,	because	in	Japan	there	is
so	much	a	shortage	of	land	that	it	is	becoming	impossible	to	expand	industries.
Japan	has	become	the	richest	country	in	the	world.	It	needs	more	and	more	land.
The	old	way	is	to	conquer	some	other	country;	that	is	not	possible	anymore.	The
fear	of	a	third	world	war	hangs	over	everybody.
Japan	 has	 created	 an	 artificial	 island	 which	 will	 be	 used	 for	 industrial
development.	It	will	be	floating	in	the	ocean.	Once	it	becomes	a	success,	many
more	artificial	islands...
and	Japan	will	be	creating	more	earth	than	God	created	in	those	six	days.
There	are	tremendous	possibilities	for	science.	Once	it	no	longer	serves	death,	it
can	 float	 cities	 in	 the	 ocean.	 Japan	 has	 also	 successfully	 tried	 to	 make
underground	cities,	because	why	go	on	with	the	old	conception	that	you	have	to
live	overground?	You	can	 live	underground;	 it	 is	more	peaceful	 there,	and	you
can	get	the	right	kind	of	light,	the	right	kind	of	oxygen,	because	everything	will
be	in	the	hands	of	the	scientist.
I	was	talking	about	such	things	in	that	press	interview,	and	poor	Neelam	thought
that	I	am	talking	"off	the	wall."	Just	as	underground	cities	are	possible,	floating
cities	in	the	ocean	are	possible,	under	the	ocean	cities	are	possible,	flying	cities
are	possible....
Once	 science	 changes	 its	 attitude	 and	 stops	 being	 supportive	 to	 politicians	 for
war,	so	much	energy	will	be	released	that	scientists	can	do	all	these	things	which
may	appear	off	the	wall	to	you,	but	they	don't	appear	off	the	wall	to	me.
To	me,	all	that	seems	to	be	almost	predictable.	It	is	going	to	happen,	because	the
earth	 is	 going	 to	be	overburdened	with	population.	 It	 has	 already	 reached	 five
billion,	and	by	 the	year	 two	thousand	and	ten	 it	will	have	almost	doubled.	Ten
billion	population?	--	this	poor	earth,	which	has	been	exploited	for	centuries,	will
not	 be	 able	 to	 support	 it.	You	will	 have	 to	 create	 artificial	 food,	 perhaps	 new
vegetables,	new	food.
In	the	Soviet	Union	they	already	have	new	fruits	which	God	had	not	created	in
those	 six	 days.	 Just	 as	 animals	 can	 be	 created	 by	 crossbreeding,	 they	 are
crossbreeding	 trees	 and	 creating	 new	 fruits,	 giving	 them	 the	 right	 taste,	 right
juice	 --	 fruits	 which	man	 has	 never	 eaten,	 for	 which	 there	 is	 no	 name	 in	 the
dictionaries.	They	are	being	given	new	names.
And	man	may	have	to	live	more	and	more	on	chemical	food.	Perhaps	it	may	be
more	 healthy,	 because	 right	 now	 ninety-five	 percent	 of	 whatever	 you	 eat	 is
roughage;	it	has	to	be	thrown	out	of	the	body.	Hardly	five	percent	is	used.	This	is
sheer	nonsense!	This	is	burdening	your	digestive	system	unnecessarily.	Why	not
only	 give	 exactly	 that	 five	 percent	 that	 your	 body	 needs?	 If	 your	 digestive
system	is	not	tired,	your	life's	length	will	become	longer.
It	is	the	digestive	system	that	kills	you.	All	the	experiments	about	the	digestive
system	show....	 It	 has	been	 tried	on	many	animals.	Animals	which	were	given
enough	food,	as	much	as	they	wanted,	had	only	half	the	life	span	of	animals	who
were	 given	 half	 the	 food	 they	 asked	 for.	 The	 first	 group	 lived	 ten	 years,	 the
second	group	 lived	 twenty	years,	 because	 the	digestive	 system	 remained	more
fresh,	younger,	untired.
And	if	man's	food	becomes	more	and	more	chemical,	more	and	more	scientific,
it	will	not	be	digested,	 it	can	be	directly	injected.	There	is	no	need	to	tire	your
digestive	 system,	and	 if	your	digestive	 system	remains	 stronger,	younger,	your
life	will	become	longer.
Scientists	 say	man	can	very	easily	 live	 three	hundred	years,	without	becoming
old.
Science	has	great	possibilities,	Satyam	Bhairava,	just	we	have	not	yet	been	able
to	use	those	possibilities.	And	all	the	scientists	are	in	the	service	of	politicians,	of
governments	-
-	that	means	in	the	service	of	death	and	war.	A	great	revolution	is	needed.
Just	as	scientists	revolted	once	against	religion,	fought	against	religion,	now	they
have	 to	 fight	 against	politics,	 against	nationalism.	Their	 responsibility	 is	great.
The	new	man	will	need	them	and	their	revolution.	They	are	the	most	important
people	for	the	survival	of	humanity.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 NEVER	HAVE	 SEX	AND	 I	 DON'T	 FEEL	 LIKE	HAVING	 SEX.	 I	 DON'T
THINK
THAT	 I	AM	BEYOND	SEX,	BUT	 I	LOVE	MEDITATION	AND	DANCING
MUCH
MORE,	ALTHOUGH	IT	IS	DIFFICULT	TO	ACCEPT	THIS.	SEX	IS	NOT
HAPPENING,	AND	I	LIKE	THAT	IT	IS	NOT	HAPPENING.	OSHO,	DOES	IT
MEAN
THAT	 IN	ORDER	 TO	BE	A	 SANNYASIN,	 I	MUST	HAVE	 SEX?	 I	 DON'T
LIKE	IT	IF
IT	IS	NOT	A	NATURAL	HAPPENING,	IF	IT	IS	ONLY	A	SEX	AND	MIND
MEETING,	 AND	 NOT	 MEDITATION.	 I	 ENJOY	 BEING	 ALONE.	 I	 SEE
MYSELF	IN
CONFLICT	A	LOT	WITH	THIS,	BUT	 I	CAN	ALSO	ACCEPT	THE	WAY	 I
AM.
THEN	IT	ALL	DISAPPEARS	FROM	THE	MIND,	AND	MY	HEART	OPENS
AGAIN.
OSHO,	IS	SOMETHING	WRONG	WITH	ME?
Anand	Dolano,	nothing	is	wrong	with	you.	Repression	of	sex	is	evil,	but	if	sex	is
not	a	natural	desire	in	you,	to	force	it	will	be	a	repression.
There	 are	 people	 who	 are	 forcing	 their	 natural	 desire	 for	 sex	 in	 trying	 to	 be
celibate;	 they	 are	 going	 against	 their	 nature.	 And	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 any
inclination	towards	sex,	forcing	it	will	be	going	against	your	nature;	it	will	be	the
same	kind	of	crime.
A	sannyasin	needs	to	be	natural.
You	have	to	listen	to	your	own	body,	your	own	instincts,	your	own	intuition,	and
follow	it.	You	are	not	to	do	anything	against	your	nature.	If	you	like	to	be	alone,
and	 enjoy	meditating...	 that's	 what	 everybody	 else	 is	 trying,	 but	 first	 they	 are
trying	to	get	finished	with	sex	so	that	they	can	enjoy	being	alone.	You	are	in	a
better	position,	you	don't	have	to	pass	through	the	hell.	You	have	already	passed
through	it	somehow;	perhaps	in	your	past	life.	You	are	out	of	the	hell;	now	don't
try	to	get	into	the	dark	tunnel	again.
Even	the	people	to	whom	I	say,	"Don't	repress	sex,"	are	not	being	told	to	remain
always	sexual.	In	fact	repression	of	sex	keeps	you	always	sexual.	Once	you	have
lived	 it	 totally,	 you	 are	 finished	 with	 it.	 And	 the	 sooner	 you	 are	 finished	 the
better,	because	 then	you	can	sit	 silently	without	being	bothered	by	 the	need	of
anybody	else	as	a	companion.	You	are	enough	unto	yourself,	and	that	is	the	most
important	thing	for	a	meditator	--	the	enoughness	of	aloneness.
But	I	can	understand	your	problem.	Here	you	must	be	seeing	everybody	bringing
problems	about	sex,	about	their	fights.	Somebody	is	completely	satisfied;	that	is
his	boredom.	Somebody	 is	not	satisfied,	he	wants	more	satisfaction;	 that	 is	his
problem.
Somebody	 is	 not	 feeling	 boredom;	 that	 is	 his	 problem.	 Listening	 to	 all	 these
problems,	naturally	anybody	will	get	worried:	what	is	my	problem?	If	you	don't
have	any	problem,	it	certainly	means	something	is	wrong	with	you!
Nothing	 is	 wrong	 with	 you.	 Just	 enjoy	 being	 yourself,	 your	 meditation,	 your
silence,	and	 let	 these	people	pass	 through	their	darkness.	One	day	 they	will	all
come	out	of	the	tunnel;	then	you	can	greet	them.	But	just	seeing	that	everybody
is	 in	 the	 tunnel,	 fighting,	 shouting....	 Sitting	 outside	 the	 tunnel	 in	 the	 light,	 in
silence,	don't	be	worried	that
"Something	seems	to	be	wrong	with	me.	Everybody	is	in	the	tunnel;	what	am	I
doing	here?	All	the	meditators	are	in	the	tunnel.	Nobody	is	meditating...	but	they
have	all	come	here	to	meditate;	only	I	am	meditating."
"My	wife	 is	 a	 typical	 Jew,"	 complained	 the	man	 to	 his	 companion.	 "She	 only
makes	love	doggy-style."
"Doggy-style?"	said	his	companion,	"I	don't	believe	it!"
"It	is	true.	I	sit	up	and	beg,	and	she	rolls	over	and	plays	dead."
Let	 them	 play	whatever	 style	 they	want;	 you	 simply	 don't	 get	 distracted	 from
your	meditation.	You	are	perfectly	right.	And	all	these	people	are	trying	to	reach
to	 your	 position.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 descend	 into	 their	 troubles,	 into	 their
problems.
You	 are	 blessed.	 It	 rarely	 happens,	what	 is	 happening	 to	 you.	 It	 happens	 only
because	of	your	past	life;	there	is	no	other	explanation.	In	your	past	life	you	must
have	been	meditating;	you	must	have	been	with	a	master;	you	must	have	come	to
a	 point	where	 sex	 became	meaningless,	where	 the	 need	 of	 the	 other	 dropped,
when	 you	 became	 enough	 unto	 yourself	 and	 your	 loneliness	 changed	 into
aloneness;	hence	in	this	life	you	are	carrying	all	that	you	have	achieved	in	your
past	life.
It	is	because	of	such	experiences	that	all	three	Eastern	religions	accepted	the	idea
of	 reincarnation.	 The	 three	 other	 religions,	 which	were	 born	 outside	 of	 India,
have	 no	 explanation	 for	 such	 an	 experience.	 Christianity,	 Judaism,
Mohammedanism	 --	 all	 three	 religions	 cannot	 explain	 your	 situation.	 But
Hinduism,	 Jainism,	 Buddhism,	 have	 a	 very	 logical	 scientific	 explanation:	 that
you	are	carrying	a	quality	that	you	achieved	in	your	past	life.
Nothing	is	lost.	Once	you	have	achieved	it,	 it	goes	on	with	your	consciousness
into	new	lives,	into	new	bodies.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#37
Chapter	title:	Behind	the	drama	a	witness
30	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705300
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN37
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
94
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 MORNING	 YOU	 WERE	 TALKING	 SO	 BEAUTIFULLY
ABOUT	TWO
MEDITATORS	 BEING	 TOGETHER	 IN	 LOVE.	 FOR	 ME,	 SITTING	 WITH
YOU
EVERY	 DAY	 IS	 SO	 FULFILLING	 THAT	 MY	 DESIRE	 TO	 BE	 WITH
SOMEONE
HAS	 ALMOST	 DISAPPEARED.	 THIS	 IS	 HAPPENING	 TO	 ME	 EVERY
TIME	I	AM
AROUND	YOU.	TODAY	THOUGH,	THE	FEAR	AROSE	THAT	I	AM	TOO
MISERLY	 WITH	 MY	 LOVE	 AND	 THEREFORE	 AVOIDING	 A
RELATIONSHIP.
BELOVED	OSHO,	IS	THIS	POSSIBLE?
Prem	Nishavda,	one	has	to	be	very	much	aware	of	the	mind	creating	problems
which	 do	 not	 exist	 in	 reality.	 Mind	 is	 almost	 a	 problem-creating	 factory;
whatever	 you	 do,	 whatever	 happens	 to	 you,	 mind	 is	 going	 to	 raise	 problems
about	it.	That's	its	old	strategy	to	disturb	you.
If	you	are	 feeling	perfectly	okay,	 then	 listen	 to	 the	heart,	not	 to	 the	mind.	One
has	 to	 learn	 the	knack	of	not	paying	 too	much	attention	 to	 the	mind,	 trying	 in
every	possible	way	to	listen	to	the	heart.
Your	question	is	that	for	you,	sitting	with	me	every	day	is	so	fulfilling	that	your
desire	to	be	with	someone	else	has	almost	disappeared.
It	 is	 how	 it	 should	 be.	 The	 desire	 for	 the	 other	 is	 not	 something	 great.	 It	 is
poverty	of	the	soul.	You	cannot	be	alone;	hence,	the	desire	for	the	other	arises.
Because	you	 cannot	 feel	 peaceful,	 silent,	 centered,	 fulfilled,	 contented,	 just	 by
being	yourself,	the	desire	arises	to	be	with	someone;	perhaps	someone	can	give
you	what	you	are	missing.
Nobody	 can	 give	 you	 what	 you	 are	 missing.	 Most	 probably	 you	 will	 meet
another	beggar,	just	like	you,	who	has	been	in	search	of	someone	who	can	give
him	fulfillment,	contentment,	blissfulness.	And	when	two	beggars	start	begging
from	each	other	it	is	really	a	pitiable	scene,	but	it	is	being	repeated	by	millions	of
people	around	the	earth	every	day.	Because	you	are	brought	up	by	these	beggars,
amongst	 these	 beggars,	 when	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you	 start	 getting	 out	 of	 this
begging,	 the	 mind	 wants	 to	 pull	 you	 back.	 It	 raises	 questions,	 doubts;	 it
persuades	you	with	beautiful	names.
For	example,	now	your	mind	is	saying,	"Today	though,	the	fear	arose	that	I	am
too	miserly	with	my	love	and	therefore	avoiding	a	relationship."	If	you	have	love
enough	 it	 will	 start	 showering	 on	 others	 by	 itself.	 You	 cannot	 contain	 it;	 it
becomes	an	overflowing,	so	there	is	no	need	to	worry	about	it.
Nobody	can	be	miserly	with	love.
Let	me	repeat	 it:	nobody	can	be	miserly	with	 their	 love.	Either	one	has	 love	--
then	 it	 starts	overflowing	 in	 its	own	 time;	you	don't	have	 to	push	 it,	you	don't
have	to	force	it	--
or	one	has	not.	When	one	has	not,	one	can	only	pretend.	Millions	of	people	are
doing	that.	Everybody	is	pretending	to	love	and	they	have	not	known	what	love
is.
Love	can	be	known	only	as	a	fragrance	of	meditation,	not	before	it.	You	have	not
known	 even	 the	 flower.	 You	 are	 not	 acquainted	 with	 the	 fragrance.	 Once	 the
flower	 opens	 up,	 it	 is	 beyond	 the	 capacity	 of	 the	 flower	 to	 be	 miserly	 about
fragrance	--	what	can	it	do?	The	fragrance	will	go	with	the	winds,	it	will	spread
all	over.
The	flower	cannot	be	miserly,	neither	can	love	be,	because	love	also	is	a	flower
that	 grows	 in	 your	 meditation....	 So	 you	 just	 enjoy	 being	 alone;	 this	 is	 your
meditation.	 And	 the	 spring	 will	 come,	 it	 always	 comes.	 Trust	 existence.	 The
flower	will	blossom,	and	love	will	flow	from	you.
Nobody	can	be	miserly	about	love;	that	is	an	impossibility,	for	the	simple	reason
that	love	follows	a	totally	different	economics.	In	the	ordinary	economics,	if	you
go	on	giving	you	go	on	becoming	poorer;	one	has	to	be	a	hoarder	to	remain	rich.
Love	is	not	part	of	these	mundane	economics.	The	more	you	give,	the	more	you
have;	 if	you	don't	give	 it	you	will	not	have	 it.	 In	giving	 it	grows,	 in	sharing	 it
becomes	more	 and	more	 purified,	more	 and	more	 beautiful,	more	 and	more	 a
blessing.
But	mind	will	go	on	creating	a	thousand	and	one	questions.	Don't	listen	to	your
own	mind!	That	is	part	of	the	disciplehood.	When	I	am	here,	listen	to	me.	If	you
are	going	to	listen	to	your	own	mind,	 then	there	is	no	need	for	you	to	be	here.
You	already	have	a	master	within	you	who	will	guide	you	to	hell....
While	on	vacation,	Ronald	Reagan	asks	for	a	girl	for	the	night.	Three	gorgeous
girls	are	sent	up	to	his	room	--	a	blonde,	a	brunette	and	a	redhead.
He	 says	 to	 the	 blonde,	 "I'm	 the	 president	 of	 the	United	 States.	 How	much	 to
spend	a	night	with	you?"
"Four	hundred	dollars,"	she	replies.
"Too	much,"	says	Reagan.
He	 asks	 the	 brunette	 the	 same	 question,	 but	 just	 then	 the	 redhead	 runs	 in	 and
says,	"Mr.
President,	if	you	can	raise	my	skirt	as	high	as	your	taxes	and	screw	me	the	way
you	are	screwing	the	people	of	America,	you	can	have	me	for	nothing."
Prem	Nishavda,	you	are	in	a	very	harmonious	state.	The	mind	will	try	to	disturb
it,	 and	your	harmony	 is	 so	new	and	 the	mind	 so	old	 and	 so	 strong	 that	 if	 you
don't	stop	it	from	disturbing	your	harmony,	 it	 is	going	to	be	disturbed.	All	 that
mind	wants	is	to	disturb	your	meditation	because	they	are	enemies.	Mind	knows
perfectly	well	that	if	meditation	grows,	mind	has	no	place	in	your	life;	it	will	be
reduced	from	being	a	master	to	a	servant.
Just	try	to	feel...	if	you	are	feeling	good,	if	you	are	feeling	at	ease,	at	home,	then
tell	the	mind	to	shut	up!	Take	the	reins	into	your	own	hands.
Becoming	a	meditator	means	an	effort	to	get	out	of	the	slavery	of	the	mind	and
to	become	 the	master,	which	you	would	naturally	have	been	 if	 the	society	had
not	 turned	things	upside	down.	You	were	born	with	your	meditativeness	as	 the
master,	and	 the	mind	 just	as	a	servant,	but	 that	 is	not	convenient	 for	an	 insane
society.	 To	 make	 you	 also	 insane,	 the	 easiest	 way	 is	 to	 make	 the	 master	 the
servant	and	the	servant	the	master;	then	everything	in	you	is	messed	up.
The	new	man	I	have	been	talking	about	will	be	a	master	of	his	own	self.	And	the
strangest	 phenomenon	 is	 that	when	you	 are	 the	master,	 the	mind	 functions	 far
more	 efficiently	 than	 it	 functions	 when	 it	 is	 a	 master,	 because	 naturally	 it	 is
destined	to	be	a	servant.	As	a	servant	it	is	perfect,	but	when	it	pretends	to	be	the
master,	it	cripples	you.	It	does	not	know	how	to	be	the	master	--	that's	one	thing	-
-	and	it	does	not	allow	the	master	hidden	deep	inside	you	to	have	any	say	in	your
life.	This	is	one	of	the	psychological	sicknesses	of	mankind.
The	new	man	will	be	healthy,	and	his	health	will	consist	of	everything	being	in
its	own	place.	Then	only	can	we	create	an	orchestra,	not	a	crowd	of	noises.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOU	 SPOKE	ABOUT	 SHARDA,	 THE	WIFE	OF	RAMAKRISHNA
AND	HER
IMMENSE	LOVE	TOWARDS	HIM,	I	NOTICED	THAT	I	FELT	GUILTY	AND
SAD.
IT	SEEMS	THAT	I	CANNOT	LOVE	A	MAN	AT	ALL.	OUT	IN	THE	WORLD
THE
RELATIONSHIP	WITH	MY	BOYFRIEND	WAS	SO	 JUICY,	AND	SEEMED
TO	BE
THE	 ONLY	 WAY	 TO	 STAY	 ALIVE,	 WHEREAS	 HERE	 THERE	 IS	 A
NEVERENDING	CONFLICT.	THE	CONFLICT	I	FEEL	IS	OF	LONGING	TO
BE	ALONE,	FEELING	TOTALLY	CONTENTED	WITHIN	MYSELF	--	YET	I
DO	NOT	WANT	TO
LOSE	MY	BOYFRIEND,	OUT	OF	THE	FEAR	OF	BEING	LONELY	AND
VULNERABLE.	I	AM	SO	PUZZLED.	PLEASE,	WOULD	YOU	COMMENT?
Shantidevi,	man	is	asleep.	It	has	to	be	repeated	again	and	again,	to	remind	you
that	 you	 are	 still	 in	 the	middle	 --	 neither	 asleep	nor	 awake.	You	 can	go	 either
way:	you	can	take	a	turn	and	pull	the	blanket	over	yourself	and	go	to	sleep,	or
you	can	jump	out	of	the	bed	and	take	a	cold	shower	and	be	alert	and	awake.	But
you	have	to	understand	what	is	meant	by	spiritual	sleep.
You	 say,	 "When	 you	 spoke	 about	 Sharda,	 the	 wife	 of	 Ramakrishna	 and	 her
immense	love	towards	him,	I	noticed	that	I	felt	guilty	and	sad."	Why	should	you
feel	guilty	and	sad?
You	can	have	immense	love,	just	like	Sharda,	but	you	have	to	know	much	more
about	Sharda.
She	 was	 a	 meditator,	 and	 after	 Ramakrishna	 died	 she	 became,	 without	 any
declaration,	 without	 any	 announcement,	 naturally	 the	 head	 of	 the	 order	 that
Ramakrishna	had	created.
The	disciples	of	Ramakrishna	became	disciples	of	Sharda.	She	was	no	ordinary
woman	in	love	with	a	man.	Ramakrishna	was	not	a	man	for	her;	Ramakrishna	to
her	represented	life,	consciousness,	and	its	highest	flight.
Rather	 than	 feeling	 guilty	 and	 sad	 and	wasting	 your	 time	 and	 energy,	 use	 the
same	energy	 for	being	a	meditator,	 so	 love	can	grow	out	of	your	meditation.	 I
teach	you	the	real	love,	not	the	phony	love	that	you	find	all	over	the	world.
Everybody	 is	 saying	 to	 everybody	 else,	 "I	 love	 you,"	 but	 on	 the	 whole	 there
seems	 to	be	no	 love	 in	 the	world.	People	are	simply	 like	parrots,	 repeating	 the
words	"I	love	you."
They	don't	know	even	the	meaning	of	what	they	are	saying.
Do	you	have	the	quality	of	love?	Do	you	have	that	richness?	Do	you	have	that
fulfillment	out	of	which	love	arises?
Love	does	not	arise	in	a	desert.
It	is	a	flower,	it	needs	a	garden.
Have	you	planted	a	garden	in	your	being?
We	are	gathered	here	to	become	gardens.	You	come	here	as	deserts,	but	the	most
unbelievable	phenomenon	is	that	even	a	desert	can	hallucinate	that	it	is	a	garden,
that	it	is	an	oasis.
You	say,	"It	seems	that	I	cannot	love	a	man	at	all."	Who	is	asking	you	to	love	a
man?
You	can	 love	 trees	and	 they	are	far	better	people.	They	don't	 feel	 jealous,	 they
will	not	create	trouble	for	you,	they	will	not	become	an	anxiety.	You	can	love	the
clouds,	you	can	love	the	stars....
Man	is	such	a	tiny	part	in	this	whole	universe.	Why	are	you	after	this	tiny	part?
Leave	 it	 alone,	 let	 the	poor	 fellow	 live!	You	can	 love	 the	whole	universe;	 just
exclude	man	 --	 for	 the	 time	 being,	 at	 least.	When	 you	 become	 so	 capable	 of
loving	that	you	can	love	even	man,	then	it	will	happen	on	its	own	accord.
And	Ramakrishna	was	 no	ordinary	man.	Through	his	 eyes	 the	whole	 universe
looked	into	you;	through	his	hands	the	whole	existence	made	gestures	significant
and	meaningful	to	you;	through	his	words	the	whole	spoke.	He	was	so	simple,	so
egoless,	 just	 a	 hollow	 bamboo	 --	which	 can	 be	made	 into	 a	 flute	without	 any
difficulty.	And	you	can	sing	a	song;	the	song	will	be	yours,	he	will	be	only	the
vehicle....	And	he	allowed	the	whole	universe	to	sing	as	many	songs	as	possible
through	him.
You	can	also	find	a	man...	but	for	that	you	will	need	a	sensitive	heart,	open	and
available,	and	you	will	have	to	drop	all	this	garbage	of	being	guilty	and	sad.
People	think	that	they	already	know	how	to	love.	They	have	taken	it	for	granted
that	they	know	how	to	live.	This	is	one	of	the	greatest	fallacies.	Neither	do	you
know	how	to	love,	nor	do	you	know	how	to	live.	All	that	you	know	is	how	to	go
on	towards	the	graveyard.
From	the	cradle	to	the	graveyard	you	are	a	perfect	pilgrim;	otherwise	you	know
nothing.
You	 will	 have	 to	 learn.	 You	 have	 the	 possibility	 to	 learn,	 but	 the	 possibility
becomes	dormant	because	of	your	idea	that	you	already	know.
You	say,	"Out	in	the	world	the	relationship	with	my	boyfriend	was	so	juicy."	You
cannot	 deceive	 me.	 I	 have	 known	 thousands	 of	 boyfriends	 and	 thousands	 of
girlfriends,	and	how	juicy	their	relationship	is...	unless	you	decide	to	call	poison,
juice	--	then	it	is	a	different	matter.	And	if	it	was	juicy	outside	in	the	world,	what
is	the	trouble?	Here	are	juicier	people!
Outside	 in	 the	 world	 there	 are	 Christians	 and	 there	 are	 Hindus	 and	 there	 are
Mohammedans,	there	are	Jews	and	there	are	Buddhists,	and	they	are	all	against
what	you	call	"being	juicy."	They	want	you	to	be	dry	bones.
But	 illusions	 can	 be	 created	 very	 easily.	 One	 strategy	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 that	 it
always	looks	at	the	past	and	chooses	a	few	beautiful	moments	out	of	thousands
of	ugly	situations,	and	 then	magnifies	 them	and	starts	believing	 in	 them;	 that's
why	 everybody	 thinks	 his	 childhood	was	 great.	Ask	 any	 child,	 and	 he	 is	 in	 a
hurry	to	grow	up,	because	he	can	see	the	grown-up	people	are	living	juicy	lives.
I	used	to	live	by	the	side	of	a	post	office	and	every	morning	very	early,	when	it
was	 almost	 dark,	 I	 used	 to	 go	 for	 a	walk.	One	 day	 I	 saw	 a	 small	 boy	with	 a
mustache	--	I	could	not	believe	it.
I	said,	"This	is	something	impossible!"	The	boy	started	hiding	behind	trees,	but	I
followed	him	and	got	hold	of	him.	He	said,	"Don't	tell	anybody."
I	asked,	"But	why	are	you	having	this	false	mustache.?"
He	said,	"I	would	love	to	grow	up.	I	have	got	a	cigarette	also.	When	I	see	people
with	a	mustache	and	a	beard	and	having	cigarettes,	I	feel	so	sad.	How	long	is	it
going	to	take,	this	miserable	boyhood?	Nobody	takes	any	notice	of	me,	but	if	I
start	doing	anything,	everybody	stops	me	saying,	`you	are	still	a	child;	don't	do
that!'	I	cannot	even	ask	questions	because	I	am	a	child	--	`When	you	will	grow
up	you	will	know.'"
Then	I	realized	that	he	was	the	postmaster's	son.	He	said,	"Don't	tell	my	father;
otherwise	I	am	going	to	be	given	a	good	lesson.	He	beats	me."
I	 have	 known	 thousands	 of	 children	 and	 I	 have	 enquired	 of	 them,	 "Are	 you
feeling	great	that	you	are	a	child?"	They	were	all	feeling	miserable	about	being
still	 a	 child;	 yet	 these	 same	 children	 in	 their	 old	 age	 will	 remember	 their
childhood	as	really	golden.	They	will	make	it	golden.
You	are	saying	that	outside	your	boyfriend	was	so	juicy.	If	he	was	so	juicy,	why
have	you	come	here?	People	start	thinking	of	meditation	if	their	life	is	not	juicy.
If	their	life	is	already	juicy,	who	bothers	about	meditation	and	God	and	truth?
I	don't	think	that	you	have	ever	known	anything	juicy;	it	is	an	ego	fulfillment	to
exaggerate	your	past.	And	if	you	know	how	to	make	a	relationship	juicy....	Here
there	are	many	people	from	the	same	outside	world.	They	have	not	come	from
other	planets;	they	have	also	lived	very	juicy	lives	outside.	But	it	seems	strange:
the	 moment	 they	 come	 here	 all	 their	 juiciness	 disappears;	 because	 here	 my
insistence	is	to	be	sincere	with	yourself	--
don't	deceive.	Outside	they	were	deceiving.
You	are	saying	"...	and	seemed	to	be	the	only	way	to	stay	alive."	Then	have	you
come	here	to	commit	suicide?	If	that	was	the	only	way	to	be	alive	and	you	think
it	was	 so	 juicy,	what	 accident	 happened?	Did	 your	 ship	 get	wrecked,	 and	 you
landed	 in	 this	 desert?	 Just	 stop	 exaggerating	 --	 that	 is	 a	 childish	 approach
towards	life.
Look	 at	 things	 straight,	 as	 they	 are.	 Nobody	 leaves	 juicy	 places.	 One	 gets	 so
caught	because	 juicy	places	are	sticky	 too;	 there	 is	not	much	 juice	but	 there	 is
much	glue.	So	whenever	you	have	a	juicy	relationship,	in	fact	it	is	nothing	but	a
very	glued	relationship.
You	 can	 call	 glue	 "juice,"	 that	 is	 another	 thing.	Only	 the	words	differ,	 but	 the
reality	will	be	the	same.
Meditation	and	the	search	for	truth,	or	the	search	for	oneself,	starts	only	because
you	find	life	is	not	juicy.	It	is	a	vast	desert.	Only	once	in	a	while	do	you	see	an
oasis	 somewhere,	but	by	 the	 time	you	 reach	 there,	 there	 is	no	oasis.	All	oases
prove	 mirages.	 Frustrated,	 you	 start	 searching	 for	 something	 deeper	 than	 life
makes	available	to	you.
You	are	saying,	Shantidevi,	"...	whereas	here	there	is	a	never-ending	conflict."
Conflict	with	whom?	Have	you	forgotten	 to	create	 juice?	Or	have	you	become
aware	it	is	not	juice,	it	is	glue?	The	first	thing	is	to	be	clearly	aware	about	your
situation,	 howsoever	 bad	 it	may	be.	Don't	 exaggerate	 and	 don't	 hide	 it;	 if	 you
hide	yourself	then	it	is	impossible	to	transform	you.	You	will	have	to	put	away
all	your	masks,	because	masks	cannot	grow.	Only	your	original	face	can	grow.
"The	conflict	I	feel	is	one	of	longing	to	be	alone,	feeling	totally	contented	within
myself	-
-	 yet	 I	 do	 not	 want	 to	 lose	my	 boyfriend	 out	 of	 the	 fear	 of	 being	 lonely	 and
vulnerable.	I	am	so	puzzled."
I	can	see	you	are	puzzled,	but	your	puzzle	is	your	own	creation.	First,	you	want
to	be	alone	--	why?	Life	is	so	juicy	with	the	boyfriend,	so	live	it!	Why	do	you
have	a	longing	to	be	alone?	Life	with	the	boyfriend	cannot	be	juicy,	that's	why.
"...	feeling	totally	contented	within	myself"	--	so	you	don't	like	juice.	You	want
to	feel	totally	contented	within	yourself	--	what	about	the	juice	of	the	boyfriend?
Just	be	real,	authentic;	say	that	you	have	been	living	in	a	hell.	But	even	people
who	live	in	hell	pretend	that	they	are	living	in	heaven.
I	have	heard	that	the	people	who	live	in	hell	have	changed	the	board	on	which	it
was	written,	 "This	 is	 hell."	 They	 have	written,	 "This	 is	 heaven."	At	 least	 that
much	gives	great	consolation.	And	the	people	who	are	living	in	heaven,	I	have
heard,	 are	 continually	 asking	 for	 a	 holiday	 from	 this	 continuous	 repetition	 of
hallelujiah,	playing	on	their	harps	before	a	dodo	God.	He	must	be	a	dodo,	always
listening	to	hallelujiah,	for	eternity.
Perhaps	this	hallelujiah	has	killed	him	and	he	is	just	a	corpse	sitting	there.
Your	so-called	saints	want	holidays;	where	will	 they	go	 for	holidays?	There	 is
only	one	place	where	they	can	go,	and	that	is	to	hell	--	and	that's	where	they	go,
because	 there	 they	 find	 restaurants	and	discos	and	 juicy	people!	Hell	 is	 full	of
juice	 --	 people	 are	 almost	 swimming	 in	 it.	You	 just	 have	 to	 be	 clear	why	you
want	to	be	contented.	What	was	wrong	in	your	love	relationship?	Was	there	not
contentment?
And	 then	comes	 the	 fear,	 "Yet	 I	do	not	want	 to	 lose	my	boyfriend."	You	want
your	boyfriend	also	in	your	pocket	while	you	are	meditating,	so	that	he	cannot
escape.	While	 you	 are	 totally	 contented,	 the	 boyfriend	 has	 to	 remain	 in	 your
pocket.	What	kind	of	boyfriend	do	you	have?	Is	it	a	teddy	bear?
Your	whole	puzzle	is	very	simple	to	solve.	The	first	thing:	you	have	to	forget	and
drop	 the	 idea	 that	 you	 know	 what	 love	 is,	 that	 you	 know	 what	 a	 juicy
relationship	 is.	 Be	 alone,	 be	 meditative,	 be	 contented,	 and	 out	 of	 this
contentment	 will	 flow	 the	 juice.	 Then	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 of	 having	 a	 love
which	will	be	a	joy,	a	constant	joy.
Non-meditators	 cannot	 love,	 they	 can	 only	 pretend.	 But	 because	 man	 is	 so
asleep,	he	goes	on	believing	in	his	own	pretensions,	he	goes	on	believing	in	his
own	dreams.
A	racing	car	driver	picked	up	a	girl	after	the	race	and	took	her	home.	Later	that
night,	after	a	passionate	bout	of	lovemaking,	the	man	drifted	off	into	sleep.	He
awoke	suddenly,	with	a	very	angry	woman	astride	him,	smacking	his	face.
"What	is	the	matter?"	he	asked.
"You	were	 talking	 in	 your	 sleep,"	 she	 shouted.	 "You	were	 feeling	my	 tits	 and
saying,
`What	perfect	headlights,'	and	you	felt	my	legs	and	said,	`What	a	smooth	finish.'
"Well	what's	wrong	with	that?"	the	driver	asked.
"Nothing,"	cried	the	woman,	"but	when	you	felt	my	pussy	and	yelled,	`Who	left
the	garage	door	open...?'"
People	are	asleep,	talking	in	their	sleep	--	"I	love	you".	Meditation	is	an	effort	to
be	awake,	to	be	alert,	 to	be	conscious.	Anything	else	should	follow,	but	cannot
precede	 it:	 love	 can	 follow	 it,	 friendship	 can	 follow	 it,	worship	 can	 follow	 it,
prayer	can	follow	it,	gratitude	can	follow	it.	But	everything	has	 to	 follow	only
when	you	have	attained	an	 integrated	consciousness;	otherwise	you	are	having
only	dreams,	nightmares,	and	you	are	believing	in	them	as	if	they	are	real.
Shantidevi,	 as	 you	 are	 already	 here,	 have	 a	 taste	 of	meditation	 and	 aloneness.
Don't	be	afraid	that	you	will	lose	the	boyfriend.	There	are	so	many	boys;	if	you
lose	 one	 you	 get	 one	 dozen	 --	 they	 are	 queuing!	 And	 if	 you	 are	 meditative,
contented,	silent,	you	are	bound	to	find	a	man	of	the	same	qualities,	because	we
can	 relate	 only	 with	 people	 with	 the	 same	 qualities,	 who	 speak	 the	 same
language.	And	a	 love	affair	 after	meditation	can	become	a	 tremendous	help	 to
both,	for	their	spiritual	growth.
Drop	 the	 fear	 about	 losing	 the	 boyfriend.	 These	 boyfriends	 are	 so	 stupid	 that
even	if	you	want	to	lose	them	it	is	very	difficult.	You	can	ask	my	people	here.	It
is	so	difficult	to	lose	a	boyfriend	or	a	girlfriend;	they	cling.	I	have	told	you	the
reason:	what	 they	 think	 is	 juice	 is	not	 juice,	 it	 is	 glue.	And	here	 in	 this	place,
everything	is	German;	if	it	is	Indian	glue	you	can	escape,	but	the	German	glue...
you	are	finished!
There	is	an	ancient	story...	man	asked	God,	"God,	why	did	you	make	women	so
pretty?"
"So	you	will	like	them,"	God	answered.
And	man	 asked	God,	 "Why	 did	 you	make	women	 so	 soft?	 "So	 you	will	 like
them,"	God	answered	again.
"And	why,"	asked	man	again,	"did	you	make	them	so	stupid?"
And	God	answered,	"So	they	will	like	you."
There	is	no	worry	at	all!
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 NIGHT	 WHEN	 YOU	 WERE	 TALKING	 ABOUT	 YOUR
VISION	 OF	 A	 MODERN	 COMMUNE,	 AND	 YOUR	 OFFER	 TO
GORBACHEV	TO	ESTABLISH	A	MODEL	COMMUNE	IN	RUSSIA,	I	WAS
DEEPLY	TOUCHED.	AFTER	YOUR
COMMUNE	DISSOLVED	ONE	AND	A	HALF	YEARS	AGO,	I	WENT	BACK
INTO
THE	WORLD	AND	GOT	QUITE	A	BITTER	TASTE	OF	LIFE	IN	WESTERN
SOCIETY:	 POWER,	 MONEY,	 FRUSTRATION,	 COMPENSATION.	 YOUR
VISION
OF	A	 COMMUNE	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 THE	ANSWER	 FOR	MANKIND	 --	 TO
FIND	 A	 FULFILLING	 WAY	 TO	 LIVE;	 YOUR	 VIEW	 IS	 SO	 VAST,	 SO
CLEAR.	BUT
LOOKING	 AT	 MY	 OWN	 REALITY,	 I	 STILL	 DISCOVER
POSSESSIVENESS,	NARROW-MINDEDNESS,	UNLOVINGNESS,	GREED,
LACK	 OF	 HUMBLENESS,	 DESIRES,	 JEALOUSY.	 I	 FELT	 ASHAMED
LISTENING	TO	YOUR	WORDS
BECAUSE	THE	GAP	BETWEEN	YOUR	VISION	AND	MY	REALITY	IS	SO
HUGE.
BELOVED	 MASTER,	 SOMETIMES	 I	 THINK	 THAT	 YOU	 HAVE	 TOO
POSITIVE	A	PICTURE	OF	US.	OR	ARE	YOU	SIMPLY	SUPPORTING	THE
GOOD	SEED?	DO
YOU	 REALLY	 SEE	 A	 CHANCE	 THAT,	 ONE	 DAY,	 WE	 WILL	 LIVE
ACCORDING
TO	YOUR	VISION?
Deva	Nutan,	your	question	is	significant	because	you	say,	"Looking	at	my	own
reality,	I	still	discover	possessiveness,	narrow-mindedness,	unlovingness,	greed,
lack	of	humbleness,	desires,	jealousy."	Just	one	thing	you	have	forgotten	--	that
none	of	these	things	is	you.
You	are	the	awareness	of	all	these	things:	possessiveness,	jealousy,	greed.	Who
is	 being	 alert?	 Certainly	 jealousy	 cannot	 be	 alert	 about	 itself,	 neither	 can
possessiveness	be	alert	about	itself.
There	is,	behind	this	whole	drama,	a	witness.	That	is	my	hope	and	that	is	your
hope	--
and	it	is	the	hope	for	the	new	man	and	for	the	new	humanity.	If	you	can	be	aware
of	 these	 realities	 it	 is	 not	 a	 difficult	 thing	 to	 drop	 them,	 because	 you	 are	 not
them;	they	are	separate	from	you.	You	have	learned	them	in	a	society	which	is
greedy,	in	which	if	you	are	not	greedy	you	cannot	survive.
In	 a	 commune	where	 there	will	 be	no	possibility	 for	greed	 --	because	with	no
money	to	accumulate,	nobody	poor,	nobody	rich,	you	will	easily	forget	all	about
greed.	Why	are	you	possessive?	--	because	you	are	in	a	society	where	everybody
else	is	possessive.	You	cannot	protect	yourself	if	you	are	not	possessive;	you	will
be	destroyed	by	the	other	possessive	people.
All	 these	 things:	 possessiveness,	 unlovingness,	 greed,	 lack	 of	 humbleness,
desires,	 jealousy	 are	 a	 by-product	 of	 living	 in	 a	 world	 which	 is	 full	 of	 these
things,	which	requires	everybody	to	have	all	these	poisonous	attitudes.
In	a	commune	you	cannot	be	greedy,	because	there	will	be	no	support	for	greed.
There	will	 be	 no	 question	 of	 imitating	 anybody.	 There	will	 be	 no	 question	 of
ambition	 because	 people	 will	 be	 respected	 as	 they	 are.	 There	 will	 be	 no
requirement	that	they	should	be	presidents	and	vice	presidents,	prime	ministers,
and	then	they	should	be	respected;	they	will	be	respected	as	they	are.	Whatever
they	are	doing,	if	it	is	creative	and	is	needed	by	the	society,	they	will	be	honored.
Narrow-mindedness	 is	 created	 by	 your	 religions,	 by	 your	 political	 ideologies.
These	 are	 all	 learned	 things	 nurtured	 in	 you.	 They	 are	 not	 part	 of	 your
consciousness,	they	are	not	part	of	your	being.
So	I	am	not	being	too	optimistic	and	I	am	not	taking	a	too	positive	view	of	you.	I
am	simply	realistic.	I	know	why	you	are	what	you	are	--	because	you	are	living
in	a	wrong	world,	and	to	exist	you	have	to	be	wrong.
If	you	are	allowed	to	live	in	a	sane	commune	where	people	are	naturally	humble
because	humbleness	 is	 respected,	where	 the	egoist	will	be	sent	 to	a	psychiatric
hospital,	where	people	 are	non-possessive	because	 all	 their	 needs	 are	 fulfilled,
and	all	 the	opportunities	 they	need	are	given	to	 them...	why	should	they	worry
about	hoarding	for	tomorrow?
They	 know	 that	 they	 need	 not	 be	 worried;	 they	 are	 not	 alone.	 Five	 thousand
people	are	taking	care	of	them,	and	if	they	can	create	today	a	beautiful	life,	they
will	be	able	to	create	an	even	a	better	life	tomorrow.	The	fear	of	the	future	will
disappear.
Possessiveness	is	out	of	fear	for	the	future,	because	if	you	don't	possess,	what	are
you	going	to	do	tomorrow?	What	are	you	going	to	do	in	your	old	age?
In	a	commune	the	older	people	will	be	loved	and	respected	for	their	experiences.
The	 older	 people	 will	 become	 the	 teachers,	 the	 guides.	 Old	 age	 will	 not	 be
thought	 of	 as	 something	 ugly,	 but	 as	 something	 immensely	 graceful.	 One	 has
gone	beyond	all	childish	and	all	youthful	foolishnesses;	one	has	come	to	be	very
centered	and	silent,	and	a	lifelong	meditation....
Every	 commune	 will	 have	 its	 own	 old	 people	 who	 will	 be	 almost	 Gautam
Buddhas,	 sources	of	wisdom	who	can	 teach	you	 life,	who	can	 teach	you	 love,
who	 can	 teach	 you	 how	 to	 grow	 old	 beautifully	 and	 gracefully,	 and	who	 can
teach	you	how	to	die	--	because	when	they	die	 they	will	die	with	such	a	grace
and	such	joy.	That	will	be	their	last	gift	to	the	commune.
I	am	not	taking	a	positive	side	only.	You	are	corrupted	by	the	society	because	the
society	is	corrupt,	and	it	is	simply	a	survival	measure	to	be	corrupted	in	such	a
society.	All	 that	you	need	 is	a	better	atmosphere	 --	more	 loving,	more	healthy,
more	sane,	more	in	tune	with	nature.	All	these	things,	which	religious	founders
have	been	trying	to	get	people	to	drop,	people	cannot	drop,	because	if	they	drop
them,	the	whole	corrupted	mass	around	them	will	destroy	them.	So	they	listen	to
Gautam	 Buddhas,	 to	 Jesus	 Christs,	 and	 they	 know	 what	 happens	 to	 a	 Jesus
Christ:	 if	 you	 follow	 his	 teachings,	 soon	 you	 will	 be	 on	 the	 cross.	 You	 can
understand	that	his	teachings	are	beautiful,	but	the	society	is	so	ugly,	you	cannot
live	those	beautiful	teachings.
All	 religions	 have	 failed,	 because	 they	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 create	 a	 culture
which	 is	 supportive	 of	 the	 great	 teachings.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 not	 supportive,	 it	 is
against.
The	 commune	 is	 a	 totally	 new	 concept.	 It	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 change	 the	 whole
atmosphere	 in	which	 these	poisonous	mushrooms	grow.	And	once	your	whole
atmosphere	 is	 different,	 you	will	 find	 different	 people	 arising,	 totally	 different
people	arising	--	because	then	love	will	be	needed	to	survive,	meditation	will	be
needed	to	survive,	compassion	will	be	needed	to	survive.
A	commune	is	a	transformation,	a	total	transformation.	The	old	society	was	very
schizophrenic.	On	 the	one	hand	 it	worshiped	people	who	were	 teaching	 things
which	 were	 not	 possible	 for	 ordinary	 human	 beings	 to	 follow	 --	 because	 the
whole	society	was	against	them.	So	man	was	living	in	a	schizophrenia:	he	knew
what	 was	 right	 and	 he	 was	 doing	 what	 was	 wrong,	 so	 he	 was	 feeling
continuously	guilty,	ashamed	of	himself.
I	want	a	totally	new	order	in	which	man's	dignity	is	not	hurt,	and	all	these	things
that	have	been	taught	by	great	teachers	need	not	be	taught	at	all.
We	should	create	real	values.	Rather	than	telling	people	not	to	be	possessive,	we
should	 create	 a	 commune	 where	 possessiveness	 is	 useless.	 Anybody	 who
possesses	will	be	thought	stupid,	idiotic;	he	will	lose	his	respect	and	his	dignity.
And	what	would	he	possess?	Once	money	is	removed,	you	cannot	possess.	You
cannot	possess	milk,	you	cannot	possess	fruits.	If	you	have	too	much	milk	you
will	 have	 to	 share;	 if	 your	 trees	 are	 giving	 too	many	 fruits,	 you	 will	 have	 to
share.	You	will	really	enjoy	children	coming	to	your	garden	and	stealing	fruits.
You	will	give	them	chocolates	also,	as	a	reward	--	"come	again,	because	the	trees
are	 too	heavy	with	fruits."	And	what	are	you	going	to	do	with	so	many	fruits?
You	cannot	sell	them.
What	has	been	taught	by	the	founders	of	religion	was	illogical.	What	I	am	trying
to	 do	 is	 a	 double	 process	 --	 changing	 the	 individual	 through	 meditation,	 and
changing	the	society	through	the	commune.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#38
Chapter	title:	Don't	dig	valleys	--	climb	mountains
30	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705305
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN38
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
98
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THERE	ARISES	GREAT	DARKNESS	 IN	ME	AND	I	WISH	TO	TRADE	 IN
THIS
INTOLERABLE	AGAMA	AND	START	AFRESH	SO	THAT	SOMEHOW	I
WOULDN'T	GROW	WITH	MY	PERSONALITY	SO	INSEPARABLY	GLUED
TO
MYSELF.	I	REMEMBER	THERE	WAS	ONCE	INNOCENCE	AND	I	HAD	A
SENSE
OF	MYSELF.	TRY	AS	I	MIGHT,	I	CAN'T	RECOVER	IT,	CAN'T	SEPARATE
OFF
THE	WITNESS,	CAN'T	TRUST	IN	MY	SEEING.	SO	LONG	AGO	I	TOOK	A
SHORTCUT	 AND	 NOW	 I	 CAN'T	 REMEMBER	 WHERE	 I	 LEFT	 THE
HONESTY
AND	THE	INNOCENCE	AND	THE	LOVE,	FOR	THE	FALSE,	THE	TRYING,
THE
STUPID.	HOW	CAN	I	FIND	MY	WAY	BACK?
Prem	Agama,	your	story	is	everyone's	story.	Everyone	has	gone	astray.	Everyone
has	lost	himself.	Perhaps	it	is	part	of	human	growth	to	be	lost,	to	forget	the	way
back	home,	 to	search	 for	 it,	because	unless	you	go	astray,	 there	 is	no	need	 for
search.	Unless	you	 lose	 the	way,	 there	 is	no	question	of	 finding	 it.	Unless	you
forget	 yourself,	 you	 will	 never	 realize	 yourself;	 hence	 it	 is	 not	 against	 your
spiritual	growth.
It	 is	 part,	 an	 absolutely	 intrinsic	 part,	 that	 you	 should	 be	 lost	 in	 darkness,	 in
agony,	in	suffering.	But	there	is	no	need	to	remain	in	the	dark	night	of	the	soul.
One	need	not	make	a	house	in	suffering	and	misery,	in	ignorance,	in	dishonesty,
in	a	false	and	phony	life.
One	 has	 to	 use	 this	 opportunity.	 Yes,	 I	 call	 it	 a	 golden	 opportunity,	 knowing
perfectly	well	that	it	is	painful.	But	all	birth	is	painful,	and	a	spiritual	birth	more
so.
You	 should	 not	 settle	 in	 suffering,	 in	misery,	 in	 pain.	 You	 should	 continue	 to
search.	The	question	is	not	of	finding	the	right	way.	Every	way	is	right	if	your
search	is	deep,	your	hope	enormous,	your	trust	infinite.	Then	wherever	you	are
and	whatever	 path	 you	 follow,	 you	will	 reach	 the	 ocean	 --	 just	 as	 every	 river
reaches	the	ocean,	passing	through	the	mountains,	 through	the	valleys,	 through
strange	 lands,	 strange	 people,	 without	 any	 guide,	 without	 any	 map,	 without
anybody	to	indicate	the	right	direction.
Every	river,	small	or	big,	reaches	to	the	ocean.	It	seems	a	deep	thirst,	an	intense
longing,	makes	every	way	the	right	way.
All	ways	are	going	towards	the	ocean.
You	just	have	to	be	patient	enough,	trustful	of	existence.
And	your	remembrance	will	be	of	enormous	value:	one	day	you	knew	yourself,
you	were	 not	 yet	 gone	 astray,	 you	 had	 not	moved	 on	 the	 paths	 of	 desire	 and
ambition.	You	were	still	within	yourself,	sincere,	honest	and	innocent.	You	know
that	the	space	you	are	searching	for	again	is	not	imaginary.	You	have	known	it,
you	have	been	it;	it	is	only	a	question	of	how	to	enter	that	space	again.
The	 logical	way	 is	 to	 find	 the	 right	path.	And	 there	 comes	one	of	 the	greatest
problems	 for	 every	 spiritual	 seeker,	 because	 every	 path	 leads	 you	 away	 from
yourself.	Every	path	indicates	towards	some	goal,	somewhere	else.
Hence	the	question	is	not	of	finding	the	right	path;	the	question	is	of	finding	the
right	consciousness,	awareness.	And	strangely,	 immediately	 the	whole	problem
changes.
It	is	a	dream	you	can	go	far	away,	you	can	visit	some	faraway	star.	But	when	you
wake	up	you	will	wake	up	in	your	own	room,	in	your	own	home.	The	question	is
not	to	find	a	right	path	from	the	faraway	star	to	come	back	home.
You	are	already	there,	you	have	just	forgotten	it.
That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 words	 --	 which	 has	 been
contaminated	by	religions.	That	word	is	sin;	its	root	meaning	is	forgetfulness.	If
forgetfulness	is	the	sin,	then	awareness	is	the	only	virtue.
You	are	 asking,	 "There	 arises	 great	 darkness	 in	me	 and	 I	wish	 to	 trade	 in	 this
intolerable	Agama	and	start	afresh,	so	that	somehow	I	would	not	grow	with	my
personality	 so	 inseparably	 glued	 to	 myself.	 I	 remember	 there	 was	 once
innocence	and	 I	had	a	 sense	of	myself.	Try	as	 I	might,	 I	 can't	 recover	 it,	 can't
separate	off	the	witness,	can't	 trust	 in	my	seeing.	So	long	ago	I	 took	a	shortcut
and	now	 I	 can't	 remember	where	 I	 left	 the	honesty	 and	 the	 innocence	 and	 the
love,	for	the	false,	the	trying,	the	stupid.	How	can	I	find	my	way	back?"
Just	by	being	awake!	Shake	yourself,	slap	yourself	--	but	wake	up.	Jump	out	of
the	bed	--
but	wake	up.
Your	 suffering	 is	 a	 dream,	 your	 darkness	 is	 a	 dream,	 your	 going	 astray	 is	 a
dream.	That's	the	meaning	of	the	word	maya.	Man	lives	in	illusion.	The	way	out
of	illusion	does	not	exist,	because	the	way	out	of	illusion	will	be	another	illusion.
You	have	simply	to	wake	up.
There	is	no	way,	no	bridge.
One	state	is	of	unawareness,	another	is	of	awareness.	And	from	unawareness	to
awareness	the	distance	is	nil...	just	a	little	effort,	a	little	jogging.
A	man	walks	into	a	bar	and	orders	a	glass	of	beer,	which	he	swallows	down	in
one	gulp.
Immediately	 he	 orders	 another,	 and	 again	 swallows	 it	 down	 in	 one	 gulp.	 Still
thirsty,	he	orders	a	third	and	a	fourth.	By	this	time	he	needs	the	bathroom.	The
bartender	tells	him,
"down	the	corridor	and	first	on	your	right."	The	man	stumbles	down	the	corridor,
misses	the	turn,	goes	through	another	door	and	falls	straight	into	the	swimming
pool.	 When	 he	 finally	 comes	 to	 the	 surface,	 he	 yells	 out	 to	 the	 surprised
attendant,	"Wait,	for	God's	sake	don't	flush!"
Agama,	you	are	where	you	have	always	been;	you	have	not	moved	even	an	inch
away	from	your	innocence,	or	your	being,	or	your	sincerity.	It	is	not	possible	in
the	very	nature	of	things	to	go	away	from	oneself,	just	as	you	cannot	run	away
from	your	shadow.	The	faster	you	run,	the	shadow	runs	faster;	the	slower	you	go
the	shadow	goes	slower.	But	you	cannot	run	away	from	it.
If	this	is	the	case	with	your	shadow,	what	about	your	innermost	being?	How	can
you	go	 away	 from	 it?	Wherever	 you	 are,	 it	will	 be	 in	 the	 innermost	 shrine	 of
your	consciousness
--	always	intact,	uncorrupted.
So	all	that	is	needed	is	to	sit	silently,	to	close	your	eyes	and	to	look	into	yourself.
You	 will	 find	 again	 the	 same	 space,	 that	 you	 remembered	 with	 such	 great
passion,	 with	 such	 great	 love.	 It	 is	 still	 there.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 the	 case	 with
everybody	else.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	BELIEVE	IT	WAS	SARTRE	WHO	COINED	THE	TERM	"EXISTENTIAL
NAUSEA"	TO	DESCRIBE	SEVERE	ALIENATION.	I	LIKE	TO	THINK	THAT
WHAT
I	 AM	 FEELING	 IS	MORNING	 SICKNESS	 --	 IN	 ANTICIPATION	OF	 THE
BIRTH	OF
MY	 SELF-REALIZED	 BEING.	 IT	 SEEMS	 IRONIC	 TO	 ME	 THAT,
ALTHOUGH	I	HAVE	EXPERIENCED	EXQUISITE	MYSTICAL	INSIGHTS,	I
STILL	FALL	INTO
PITS	 OF	 DEPRESSION	 AND	 ALIENATION	 WHERE	 WORDS	 AND
ACTIONS
SEEM	 ONLY	 TO	 EMPHASIZE	 A	 FUTILITY	 IN	 HUMAN	 ENDEAVORS.
WORSE
STILL	 IS	 A	 DEEP	 SHAME	 THAT	 I	 AM	 FULL	 OF	 DOUBTS	 WHEN	 SO
MANY
LOVELY	 FLOWERS	 HAVE	 BEEN	 PRESENTED	 TO	 ME	 FROM	 THE
HANDS	OF
EXISTENCE.	WORDS	 REALLY	 DON'T	 COMPENSATE	 FOR	 THE	 ALIEN
GAP,	 BUT	 JUST	 HEARING	 THE	 TENDERNESS	 OF	 YOUR	 VOICE
SOOTHES	THE
BLOWN-OUT	CRATERS	ON	 THE	DARK	 SIDE	OF	MY	MOON.	WOULD
YOU
SPEAK	ON	ALIENATION?
The	 philosophy	 of	 existentialism	 has	 given	 a	 few	 new	 words	 tremendous
emphasis.	One	of	those	words	is	alienation	--	to	feel	alien	to	oneself.
Man	has	always	felt	that	he	does	not	know	himself.	It	is	not	something	new;	just
the	 name	 is	 new	 and	 the	 emphasis	 is	 new.	Twenty-five	 centuries	 ago	Socrates
was	 telling	 people,	 "Know	 thyself."	 He	 was	 saying,	 "You	 are	 a	 stranger	 to
yourself.	You	don't	know	your	being;	you	don't	know	all	the	dimensions	of	your
being.	You	don't	know,	why	you	are	here.	You	don't	know	from	where	you	have
come,	 you	 don't	 know	 where	 you	 are	 going.	 And	 most	 important,	 you	 don't
know	whether	you	are	or	not."
It	happened...	George	Bernard	Shaw	was	traveling	from	London	to	a	small	town
in	England.	The	ticket	checker	came	into	his	compartment.	He	looked	in	all	his
pockets,	in	the	suitcases,	but	he	could	not	find	the	ticket.	The	ticket	checker	told
him	many	times,
"Don't	 get	 so	worried.	You	 are	 a	world-famous	 figure,	 I	 know	you.	You	must
have	forgotten	the	ticket	somewhere.	When	I	come	on	the	next	run,	I	can	see	it.
There	is	no	hurry."
He	was	trying	to	console	the	agitated	George	Bernard	Shaw,	but	George	Bernard
Shaw	was	perspiring.	Listening	to	his	words	he	became	very	angry	and	shouted,
"Shut	up!	I	am	not	looking	for	the	ticket	for	you.	Now	the	problem	arises,	where
am	I	going?	Can	you	tell	me?"
The	man	said,	"How	can	I	tell	you?"	George	Bernard	Shaw	said,	"Then	don't	talk
nonsense.	 I	 am	not	worried	 about	you;	 I	 am	worried	 about	where	 I	 am	going.
Now	what	will	happen	to	me?"
Everybody	is	going	somewhere,	certainly.	And	nobody	is	going	to	ask	for	your
ticket,	 but	 still...	 those	 who	 are	 intelligent	 are	 themselves	 bound	 to	 inquire
"Where	are	we	going?"
But	all	these	questions	are	secondary.	The	basic	question	is	"Who	am	I?"
This	 strangeness	 about	 oneself,	 this	 ignorance	 about	 oneself,	 if	 felt	 deeply
creates	in	existentialist	terms	a	nausea.	One	starts	feeling	nauseous.	One	is	here,
one	is	going	somewhere,	one	is	coming	from	somewhere...	there	seems	to	be	no
meaning	in	all	this.
And	 there	 are	 so	 many	 worries,	 so	 much	 suffering,	 so	 much	 anguish	 to	 go
through	for	what?
Existentialism	is	a	negative	philosophy.	But	the	modern	man	needs	it,	 just	as	a
shock.
Existentialist	ideas	cannot	be	fulfilling;	they	cannot	remove	the	nausea,	they	can
only	 deepen	 it.	 They	 cannot	 destroy	 your	 alienation,	 they	 can	 only	 make	 it
sharper.	They	cannot	 take	away	meaninglessness	 from	your	 life,	 they	can	only
write	it	in	bold	letters.
They	can	surround	you	with	a	feeling	of	sickness.	If	death	is	the	end,	then	life	is
nothing	 but	 sickness	 --	 sickness	 unto	 death.	 But	 existentialism	 can	 help
intelligent	people	not	to	be	satisfied	with	nausea,	but	to	inquire.
There	have	been	people	who	have	found	themselves.	Their	serenity	is	a	proof	of
it,	 their	fragrance	is	evidence	of	it,	 their	rejoicing	is	an	argument	which	cannot
be	refuted.	A	Gautam	Buddha,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Chuang	Tzu,	a	Bodhidharma	--
nobody	 can	 deny	 their	 grace.	 Nobody	 can	 deny	 that	 these	 people	 have	 gone
beyond	worries,	beyond	anxiety.
These	people	have	found	something	which	fills	their	life	with	songs	of	joy.	They
have	found	some	treasure	which	is	inexhaustible	and	makes	them	dance	in	utter
gratitude.
Their	 very	 presence	 has	 convinced	millions	 of	 people	 that	 life	 need	 not	 be	 a
sickness	 unto	 death;	 on	 the	 contrary	 life	 can	 become	 such	 a	 dance	 that	 death
becomes	 the	 ultimate	 culmination	 of	 the	 dance.	 Life	 can	 be	 transformed	 so
deeply	 that	 even	death	disappears	 as	 darkness	 and	becomes	 a	 dawn,	 that	 even
death	is	no	more	an	end	but	a	new	beginning.
Existentialism	 has	 paralyzed	 immensely,	 terribly,	 the	 intelligentsia	 of	 the
Western	world.
The	 impact	 of	 the	 existentialists	 has	 been	 great.	 And	 the	 conclusion	 of	 their
philosophy	 is	 nothing	 but	 suicide,	 which	 can	 relieve	 you	 from	 all	 nausea,	 all
alienation,	all	meaninglessness,	all	anguish,	all	suffering.
There	has	never	been	such	a	negative	philosophy	 in	 the	whole	history	of	man.
There	have	been	atheists,	who	denied	God,	but	they	denied	God	to	support	life.
They	denied	God	 so	man	 can	be	 absolutely	 free,	without	 anybody	dominating
him	 and	 dictating	 to	 him	 and	 giving	 him	 commandments.	 Atheists	 were
humanitarians;	 they	raised	man	as	 the	highest	value.	To	the	theists	 they	looked
negative	because	 they	were	negating	God,	but	nobody	has	seen	 that	 they	were
affirming	life.
In	fact,	compared	to	atheists	the	theists	are	negative,	because	they	deny	life,	they
negate	 life,	 they	 teach	 people	 to	 renounce	 life	 for	 a	 fictitious	 god,	 for	 a
hypothetical	god	for	which	they	don't	have	any	proof,	any	argument.	But	theists
have	been	thought	of	as	positive	thinkers,	and	atheists	as	negative	thinkers.	This
evaluation	 is	 totally	wrong,	according	 to	me.	Atheists	are	very	positive;	 theists
are	absolutely	negative.
But	the	existentialists	have	far	transcended	the	theists	and	their	negativity;	they
were	 at	 least	 affirming	 a	 fictitious	 god.	 Atheism	 was	 denying	 only	 a	 fiction.
Existentialists	are	denying	the	fiction	of	god	and	they	are	also	denying	the	reality
of	life;	not	only	denying,	but	giving	it	such	condemnatory	colors	that	it	seems	it
is	a	calamity	to	be	born,	it	is	a	punishment	to	be	born...	that	life	is	not	a	joy,	but
simply	another	name	of	hell.
Existentialism	has	to	be	understood	very	deeply,	because	philosophically	it	may
become	the	cause	of	the	third	world	war.	It	has	destroyed	all	that	was	beautiful	in
life.	It	has	negated	everything	that	was	valuable	--	love,	silence,	meditation,	joy.
It	has	erased	them	all.	Life	is	only	a	sickness,	and	we	are	clinging	to	life	because
we	 are	 afraid	 to	 die.	 It	 is	 not	 that	we	 love	 life;	we	 hate	 it	 --	 but	 at	 least	 it	 is
known.	Who	 knows,	 death	 may	 be	 far	 worse.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 remain	 with	 the
known,	although	it	is	miserable.
They	have	created	the	philosophical	background	for	people	like	Ronald	Reagan
to	destroy	the	whole	humanity.	If	existentialism	is	true,	then	there	is	no	harm	in
destroying	 the	whole	humanity;	 in	 fact	 it	 should	be	 taken	as	a	blessing	 that	all
sickness	disappears,	all	that	is	ugly	disappears.
And	all	is	ugly	according	to	the	existentialists.	There	is	not	even	a	single	thing
which	can	be	appreciated.
Unless	the	West	becomes	aware	of	meditation,	unless	meditation	penetrates	the
Western	 intelligence,	 there	 is	a	danger.	The	politicians	are	creating	weapons	 to
destroy,	and	the	philosophers	are	creating	readiness	to	be	destroyed,	willingness
to	be	destroyed.	It	is	the	greatest	conspiracy	against	life	between	politicians	and
philosophers.
And	 these	 existentialists....	 One	 wonders!	 I	 have	 written	 letters	 to	 Jaspers,	 to
Jean-Paul	Sartre	and	they	didn't	even	have	the	courage	to	answer.	I	asked	them,
"If	 your	 philosophy	 is	 right,	 you	 should	 commit	 suicide.	Why	 are	 you	 living?
For	what?	Waiting	for	death?"
According	 to	 them,	 life	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 waiting	 room	 and	 the	 train	 that	 will
come,	its	name	is	death.
Neither	 Jaspers	nor	 Jean-Paul	Sartre	ever	 replied.	All	 these	philosophers,	 from
Soren	 Kierkegaard	 to	 Marcel,	 were	 living	 perfectly	 happily,	 enjoying	 Nobel
prizes	and	preaching	a	philosophy	which	is	itself	really	sick.
Life	is	not	sick.	It	is	the	wrong	glasses	they	have	on	their	eyes.	Just	today	I	heard
some	news.	A	man	shot	his	wife	 in	New	York.	The	police	came,	and	 the	man
was	absolutely	unafraid.	He	said,	"Yes,	I	have	killed	my	wife."	But	his	son	said,
"Father,	 she's	 not	 my	 mother	 and	 she's	 not	 your	 wife."	 He	 said,	 "My	 God,	 I
forgot	to	put	on	my	glasses!"	He	killed	some	other	woman,	thinking	that	she	was
his	wife.
Existentialism	is	giving	wrong	glasses	to	people.	It	is	the	most	anti-human,	anti-
life	ideology	ever	preached.
Prem	Padmini,	you	need	not	be	caught	 into	 these	sick	 ideologies.	 I	am	here	 to
open	new	windows	for	you,	and	you	can	see	with	your	own	eyes	 the	 immense
beauty	of	life,	 the	great	blissfulness	of	life...	 the	tremendous	silence	which	is	a
song	without	sounds,	and	a	dance	that	goes	on	eternally	in	the	trees,	in	the	rivers,
in	the	mountains,	in	the	stars.
The	whole	 existence	 is	 full	 of	 rejoicing;	you	 just	 need	 to	open	your	windows.
Your	 darkness	 is	 your	 own	 creation,	 your	 alienation	 is	 your	 own	 creation;
otherwise	you	are	not	a	stranger	to	yourself.	You	are	not	a	stranger	to	the	trees,
to	the	rivers,	to	the	mountains.
It	is	our	existence;	we	are	part	of	it.
Our	heartbeat	is	part	of	the	universal	heartbeat.
And	it	is	not	a	dead	universe;	it	is	immensely	intelligent,	conscious,	sensitive.	It
is	divine	in	its	every	dimension.	But	you	have	to	learn	to	participate	in	the	dance.
You	are	sitting	like	a	cripple,	and	because	of	your	crippledness	--	which	is	just
your	 idea;	you	are	not	 crippled,	you	have	 just	been	 told	 that	you	are	 crippled,
you	cannot	dance,	you	will	fall,	so	sit	silently	--	you	are	not	participating	in	the
dance	that	is	going	all	over	the	place.
The	cripple	automatically	becomes	a	critic.	He	starts	hating	that	which	he	cannot
do.	He	starts	calling	the	dancers	stupid,	mad,	insane	--	"What	is	the	point	of	all
this	dance?	what	is	the	meaning	of	all	these	songs	and	music?	It	is	just	noise	and
nothing	else.
So	 as	 not	 to	 see	 one's	 crippledness,	 one	 starts	 condemning	 those	who	 are	 not
influenced	by	crippled	philosophies	and	religions.
Be	a	participant!	In	the	beginning	it	may	be	a	little	difficult,	but	step	by	step	start
moving	a	little.
A	husband	asks	his	wife	which	 she	 likes	most,	Christmas	or	 sex.	 "Christmas,"
she	says.
"Why	is	that?"	asks	her	husband.	"Is	it	more	romantic?"	"No,"	she	answers,	"but
it	happens	more	often."
Now,	 if	 Christmas	 happens	 more	 often,	 then	 life	 will	 look	 like	 a	 nausea,	 a
sickness.
Participate	in	the	small	joys	of	life,	and	it	will	open	its	great	treasures.	It	contains
immense	 riches,	 but	 it	 needs	 you	 to	 explore	 them.	 It	 gives	 you	 challenges,
because	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 parts	 of	 understanding	 that	 what	 you	 find	 with	 great
difficulty	you	enjoy	more.
That	which	is	very	arduous	brings	great	rejoicing;	that	which	is	obvious,	freely
available,	will	not	give	you	joy.
Life	 follows	 that	 principle,	 it	 keeps	 its	 treasures	 hidden.	 But	 it	 goes	 on
challenging	you,	calling	you.	You	have	 to	become	pilgrims,	seekers,	searchers.
And	all	the	doors	are	inside,	so	you	don't	have	to	go	to	the	Himalayas.	You	have
just	 to	 go	 inwards.	 The	 deeper	 you	 go	 in,	 the	more	 you	 know	 that	 life	 is	 not
alien;	it	is	your	very	heart.	You	are	not	separate	from	it.	You	have	always	been
part	of	it,	in	some	form	or	other,	and	you	will	remain	always	part	of	it.
You	belong	to	this	eternal	celebration.
Existentialism	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 dangerous	 approaches	 to	 life	 --	 far	 more
dangerous	 than	 your	 religions,	 because	 your	 religions	 are	 very	 poor	 in
arguments.	Existentialism	is	very	rich	in	arguments,	so	convincing	that	once	you
are	caught	in	its	trap,	you	cannot	escape.
Just	 remember	one	 thing:	not	a	 single	existentialist	philosopher	has	committed
suicide.
That	destroys	their	whole	philosophical	approach.
Only	once	before	in	the	past	in	Greece	there	was	a	great	philosopher,	Zeno.	He
was	not	teaching	so	many	ugly	things,	and	making	man	really	feel	nauseous,	but
he	was	certainly	teaching	that	life	has	no	meaning	and	only	cowards	go	on	living
because	they	don't	have	the	guts	to	commit	suicide.	He	himself	lived	a	long	life
of	ninety	years,	and	thousands	of	people	committed	suicide	under	his	influence.
When	he	was	dying,	one	young	man	asked,	"Just	one	question	more:	how	come
you	 managed	 to	 live	 ninety	 years	 while	 your	 followers,	 particularly	 young
people,	have	committed	suicide	according	to	your	philosophy?"
He	said,	"I	had	to	live	to	teach	the	philosophy.	It	was	such	a	suffering	to	live,	but
I	had	to	suffer	for	the	sake	of	humanity."
Philosophers	 can	 be	 very	 cunning.	Now	 this	 is	 cunningness,	 pure	 and	 simple.
But	at	least	he	accepted	one	thing	--	that	he	lived	to	teach	his	philosophy.	Jaspers
and	Jean-Paul	Sartre	and	Marcel	did	not	even	answer	my	question.	They	could
have	 at	 least	 said,	 "We	 are	 suffering	 greatly,	 but	 because	we	want	 to	 awaken
humanity	to	the	reality,	which	is	nauseous,	we	are	somehow	managing	to	remain
alive."	 Even	 that	 much	 they	 were	 not	 courageous	 enough	 to	 accept.	 And
strangely	enough,	when	Marcel	was	given	a	Nobel	prize,	he	accepted	it.	Life	is	a
nausea.	What	is	a	Nobel	prize?	A	cancer?	Happily,	he	accepted.
These	 are	 just	 intellectuals	 playing	 games	 with	 words,	 mind	 games;	 but	 they
don't	 know	 anything	 of	 meditation.	 If	 they	 had	 known	 just	 a	 little	 bit	 of
meditation	not	only	would	their	life	have	been	richer,	they	would	have	changed
the	whole	West,	particularly	 the	Western	youth,	 into	a	happier,	a	more	 radiant,
alive	generation.
But	 all	 that	 they	 have	 created	 is	 a	 subtle	 willingness	 for	 suicide,	 a	 deep
acceptance	of	Hiroshima	and	Nagasaki.	 If	 life	 is	 such,	 then	 to	destroy	 it	 is	not
evil;	then	Adolf	Hitler	is	a	great	prophet	and	he	helped	six	million	people	to	be
relieved	from	a	life	which	was	nausea.	He	was	the	greatest	servant	of	the	Jews:
without	 him,	 six	 million	 Jews	 would	 still	 be	 suffering	 from	 nausea,	 anguish,
anxiety,	meaninglessness.	Adolf	Hitler	is	a	great	savior.	And	now	he	has	come	in
a	 far	 greater	 form	 as	 Ronald	 Reagan.	 Perhaps	 Ronald	 Reagan	 will	 prove	 the
greatest	savior	of	humanity	by	destroying	all	life.
Existentialism	has	to	be	fought,	it	has	to	be	destroyed	by	the	roots,	because	it	is
in	favor	of	death	and	against	life	--	and	without	knowing	life.	And	to	know	life
there	is	only	one	way,	the	way	of	meditation.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	IS	 IT	THAT	MY	VALLEYS	ARE	DEEPER	THAN	MY	MOUNTAINS
ARE
HIGH?
Ramaprem,	it	is	unfortunate	that	your	valleys	are	deeper	than	your	mountains	are
high,	 but	 the	 responsibility	 is	 yours.	 You	 are	 digging	 your	 valleys	 every	 day
deeper	and	you	have	not	made	any	effort	even	to	climb	the	mountains.	To	make
them	bigger	is	a	totally	different	thing;	you	have	not	even	climbed	them.	You	are
going	deeper	 into	your	valleys,	and	digging	 them	more	and	more.	Most	of	 the
men	in	the	world	are	gravediggers;	they	go	on	digging	their	own	graves.
An	old	man	was	dying,	a	very	rich	old	man.	His	four	sons,	who	were	all	rich	in
their	own	 right,	had	gathered	 to	 say	goodbye	 to	 their	 father.	They	were	 sitting
around	him.	The	youngest	 son	 said	 "We	 should	 arrange	a	Rolls	Royce	 to	 take
him	to	the	graveyard.	That	was	his	lifelong	desire,	to	ride	in	a	Rolls	Royce,	but
he	was	so	miserly,	he	could	not	manage	it.	At	least	we	should	give	him	a	chance.
He	will	be	dead,	but	his	spirit,	his	ghost,	may	enjoy	the	trip.	And	it	is	not	very
costly	because	it	is	one	way."
But	 the	 second	 son,	 elder	 than	 the	 first,	 said;	 "You	 are	 forgetting	 our	 family
heritage.
What	 difference	does	 it	make	 to	 a	 dead	man	whether	 you	 take	him	 in	 a	Rolls
Royce	or	in	a	four	wheel	Ford	truck?	It	makes	no	difference	to	him	but	to	us	it
will	make	a	difference.
At	least	I	am	not	going	to	contribute	if	a	Rolls	Royce	is	brought;	I	will	contribute
at	the	most	for	a	Ford	truck.	A	dead	man	is	a	dead	man.	He	knows	nothing	about
where	he	is	sitting.	It	will	do,	and	we	will	take	him	in	the	nighttime,	so	nobody
knows	and	nobody	sees."
The	third	brother	said,	"You	are	all	being	too	extravagant.	What	is	the	need	of	a
Ford	truck?	Just	a	bullock	cart...	and	one	of	my	servants	has	a	bullock	cart,	so	we
need	 not	 even	 pay	 anything.	A	 dead	 body	will	 enjoy	 the	 bullock	 cart	 and	 the
open	air	more	than	any	Rolls	Royce."
The	eldest	brother	 said,	 "You	all	 seem	 to	have	gone	wrong,	you	have	all	gone
insane;	 it	 is	 sheer	 wastage.	 We	 should	 put	 him,	 in	 the	 deep	 darkness	 in	 the
middle	of	night,	by	the	side	of	the	road	where	people	throw	all	their	garbage,	so
in	the	morning	the	corporation	truck	will	take	him	away.	They	do	the	same	with
all	the	beggars,	and	a	dead	man,	whether	he	was	rich	or	a	beggar	does	not	make
any	 distinction.	 There	 is	 no	 problem;	 a	 dead	 man	 is	 a	 dead	 man,	 it	 is	 just	 a
corpse."
Just	 then	 the	old	man	 tried	 to	 sit	up.	He	was	 still	 alive	and	 listening.	He	 said:
"My	sons,	just	help	me	to	find	my	shoes."	They	said,	"What	are	you	going	to	do
with	your	shoes?
Are	you	going	to	die	with	your	shoes	on?"	He	said,	"I	have	still	a	little	life	left.	I
can	walk	to	the	graveyard.	In	the	night,	who	is	going	to	see?	And	you	are	four;
you	can	dig	the	grave	and	I	will	help	as	much	as	I	can	in	my	old	age.	Then	you
can	take	my	shoes	back,	because	they	are	almost	new.	I	have	used	them	only	for
ten	years;	they	are	good	enough	for	you	and	your	children."
You	ask,	why	your	valleys	are	deeper.	Instead	of	digging	your	valleys,	learn	the
art	 of	 climbing	 the	 mountains.	 Reach	 to	 the	 sunlit	 peaks	 of	 the	 mountains.
Certainly	 valleys	 are	 more	 secure,	 more	 cozy,	 more	 comfortable,	 less	 risky.
Climbing	a	mountain...	if	you	really	want	to	climb	a	high	mountain	like	Everest
it	is	dangerous.	But	the	more	dangerous	it	is,	the	more	alive	it	makes	you.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	used	to	keep	a	small	card	on	his	table.	He	had	written	on	it
himself,
"Live	dangerously!"	Any	visitor	was	bound	to	see	it	and	ask	him	"What	does	it
mean?"
He	 said,	 "That	 is	 my	 whole	 philosophy,	 because	 I	 have	 found	 that	 the	 more
dangerously	you	live,	the	more	deeply	you	live."
As	 you	 live	more	 dangerously,	 you	 really	 live.	 A	 few	moments	 of	 dangerous
living,	as	if	you	are	walking	on	a	razor's	edge,	are	more	precious	than	a	long	life
without	any	danger,	without	any	risk,	comfortable	and	cozy,	everything	insured,
everything	secure.
The	way	of	the	sannyasin	is	really	the	way	to	live	life	dangerously.
A	young	man	asked	his	friend,	"How	come	that	old	maid	keeps	getting	the	best-
looking	boys	for	each	dance	?"	"That	is	easy,"	his	friend	replied.	"When	she	was
young	she	gave	it	away,	later	she	sold	it,	and	now	that	she	is	rich,	she	is	buying	it
back!"
She	really	lived,	in	every	possible	way.	Most	people	are	avoiding	living.
George	was	a	sprightly	eighty-eight	year	old	when	he	married	Ruby,	a	lusciously
ripe	eighteen	year	old.	As	they	prepared	for	bed	on	their	wedding	night	he	asked
her,	"Tell	me,	sweet	child,	did	your	mother	tell	you	the	facts	of	life?"	Blushingly
she	murmured,
"No."
"That's	too	bad,"	George	said,	"because	I'm	afraid	I	have	forgotten	them."
Now	 it	 is	 too	 long...	 eighty-eight	 years	 old,	 but	 still	 trying	 his	 best	 --	 not
accepting	 old	 age,	 not	 being	 worried	 about	 death,	 and	 although	 he	 had	 gone
senile,	still	ready	to	live.
But	most	people,	even	when	they	are	young,	are	living	reluctantly,	resisting	life,
afraid	of	life,	feeling	guilty	to	live	because	that's	what	they	have	been	told,	that's
how	they	have	been	prepared.	Their	whole	conditioning	is	so	life-negative	that
even	if	they	want	to	live,	their	guilt	does	not	allow	them	to	live.
As	far	as	my	people	are	concerned,	my	single-pointed,	unconditional	advice	is	to
live	as	intensely	as	possible,	as	totally	as	possible,	because	that	is	the	only	way
to	know	the	godliness	of	life,	to	know	its	divine	fragrance,	its	divine	taste.	And
the	most	 strange	 fact	 is,	 the	 people	who	 live	 totally,	 fully,	 transcend	 the	 very
desire	to	live	a	mundane	kind	of	life.	They	move	beyond	the	mundane	to	another
dimension,	another	sphere:	the	sacred.
Live	 as	 a	Zorba;	 then	 it	will	 be	possible	 for	you	 to	 live	 as	 a	Gautam	Buddha.
Zorba	has	 to	be	 the	 foundation	of	your	 life,	 and	Gautam	Buddha	your	highest
peak.	Live	without	any	 fear,	because	 there	 is	no	god	you	have	 to	be	afraid	of.
And	there	is	no	heaven	where	your	tortures	will	be	rewarded,	and	there	is	no	hell
where	 your	 joys	 will	 be	 punished.	 This	 moment	 is	 all.	 Always	 remember	 in
whatever	moment	you	are	that	it	is	all.
Ramaprem,	 one	 day	 one	 of	Mulla	 Nasruddin's	 friends	 asked	 him	 if	 he	 could
borrow	 his	 donkey	 to	 carry	 some	 vegetables	 to	 the	market.	 "No,"	 said	Mulla
Nasruddin,	"that's	not	possible,	because	my	donkey	is	not	here,	and	what's	more,
he	is	sick."	At	that	moment,	his	donkey	appeared	from	around	the	corner	calling,
"Heehaw,	heehaw."
"You	 said	 your	 donkey	 is	 not	 here,	 and	 that	 he	 is	 sick,"	 accused	 Mulla
Nasruddin's	friend,
"and	here	he	is	and	yelling	`heehaw,	heehaw,'	as	well	as	can	be."
"Who	do	you	believe,	"asked	Mulla	Nasruddin,	"my	donkey	or	me?"
Ramaprem,	if	you	believe	me,	then	there	is	no	problem;	then	the	sunlit	peaks	are
very	close	by.	But	 if	you	believe	religious	donkeys	of	all	kinds	and	all	sorts	 --
hindu	shankaracharyas	and	Ayatollah	Khomeiniac	and	pope	the	Polack	--	then	I
am	helpless.
Then	you	have	to	go	on	digging	your	valleys	deeper.
Just	 trust	 what	 I	 am	 saying,	 because	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 anything	 based	 on	 any
scripture.	I	am	saying	only	things	based	on	my	own	experience;	hence	what	I	am
saying	 has	 an	 authority	 --	 which	 these	 shankaracharyas	 cannot	 have;	 they	 are
only	representatives,	they	don't	have	their	own	experience...	these	popes	cannot
have;	they	are	only	elected	people.
It	is	a	very	strange	world,	where	religious	leaders	are	also	elected,	elected	by	all
kinds	of	idiots,	elected	by	the	followers.
I	 am	not	 elected	by	 anybody;	 neither	 am	 I	 representing	 anybody.	 I	 am	 simply
telling	you	what	my	experience	 is;	hence	 I	have	an	authority	 that	 these	people
cannot	have.	I	don't	want	you	to	believe	it;	I	want	you	to	trust	it.	And	I	make	the
difference,	because	by	believing	you	will	remain	just	a	follower;	by	trusting	you
will	come	to	the	same	status	and	the	same	space	in	which	I	am	living.
Believing	is	cheap.
To	 trust	 means	 you	 are	 accepting	 a	 challenge	 to	 climb	 the	 sunlit	 peaks	 of
mountains.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#39
Chapter	title:	Growing	up	comes	by	itself
31	May	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705310
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN39
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
78
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 DAY,	 I	 FOUND	 MYSELF	 UPSET,	 IMPATIENT,	 AND
IRRITABLE.
WHEN	WILL	I	GROW	UP?	WHEN	WILL	WE	ALL	COME	TO	THE
RESPONSIBILITY	 OF	 JUST	 BEING	 THE	 YOU	 IN	 US:	 THAT
GRACEFULNESS
THAT	WE	ALL	KNOW	OURSELVES	TO	BE?	I	FEEL	THAT	THE	TIME	IS
RIPE	TO
STOP	WHINING	 ABOUT	MISERY,	 AND	MISUNDERSTANDINGS,	 PAIN,
AND
DISCOMFORTS.	 COULD	 IT	 BE	 THAT	AS	A	DISCIPLE,	 I	 SIMPLY	 TAKE
YOU,	 YOUR	 PRESENCE,	 YOUR	 ANSWERS,	 YOUR	 INSIGHTS,	 AND
YOUR	GRACE
FOR	GRANTED,	AS	A	WAY	TO	AVOID	JUST	STEPPING	INTO	MYSELF,
INTO
THE	DEVOTEE?
Satyadharma,	 it	 is	 natural	 to	 be	 impatient.	 And	 a	 great	 understanding	 and
awareness	is	needed	not	to	be	impatient,	because	impatience	is	not	going	to	help;
on	 the	 contrary,	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 great	 hindrances.	 You	 have	 to	 understand
impatience	 as	 your	 enemy.	 You	 want	 the	 vast	 and	 the	 mysterious	 to	 open	 its
doors,	without	much	effort	on	your	part.	It	is	not	possible.	There	are	a	thousand
and	one	doors,	and	only	one	 is	 right;	you	will	have	 to	knock	on	all	 the	wrong
doors	to	find	the	right	one.	Either	in	scientific	research,	or	in	a	spiritual	seeking,
patience	is	absolutely	necessary.
I	am	reminded	of	Edison	who	invented	 the	first	electric	bulb.	He	worked	on	 it
for	 three	 years.	 All	 his	 colleagues	 and	 his	 disciples	 slowly,	 slowly	 left.	 They
were	 impatient,	 they	 wanted	 it	 to	 happen	 immediately,	 and	 they	 could	 not
believe	the	patience	of	Edison.
Every	day,	Edison	would	come	fresh,	young,	excited,	and	they	would	say	to	him,
"We	 have	 experimented	 in	 so	 many	 ways,	 and	 we	 have	 failed	 in	 every
experiment.	Why	not	change	the	subject?	We	should	work	on	something	else."
Edison	would	say,	"Who	told	you	that	we	have	been	failures?	Each	failure	brings
us	nearer	to	success	because	there	must	be	only	a	limited	number	of	doors.	We
knock	on	one	door,	and	it	is	not	the	right	door	--	but	it	is	not	a	failure.	One	door,
a	wrong	door,	 is	eliminated;	success	 is	closer.	We	knock	on	another	door;	 it	 is
not	the	right	door.	But	we	are	even	closer	to	success	--	two	doors	are	eliminated.
Soon	we	will	be	knocking	on	the	right	door.
But	the	patience	that	he	had	is	part	of	a	very	intelligent	and	very	genuine	seeker.
After	three	years,	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	he	knocked	on	the	right	door.	For
the	first	time,	the	human	eyes....
He	was	 alone,	 all	 his	 colleagues	 had	 left;	 he	was	 tired,	 utterly	 exhausted,	 and
thinking	himself	almost	mad.	He	was	alone	when	he	discovered	the	electric	bulb.
It	had	taken	three	years.	Day	and	night	he	had	been	thinking	only	of	one	thing	--
from	where	to	approach	this?	And	when	the	room	was	lighted	up	with	electricity,
he	was	sitting	there	in	utter	wonder.	He	was	the	first	man	to	see	something	which
had	never	existed	before.	He	could	not	take	his	eyes	off	the	electric	bulb.
It	was	getting	 late,	and	finally	his	wife	shouted	from	the	other	 room,	"Put	 that
stupid	light	off!"	She	was	not	aware	that	it	was	electricity.	She	said	"Come	back,
and	go	to	sleep."
He	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 the	 stupid	 light	 that	 you	 are	 acquainted	with;	 it	 is	what	my
three	years	of	patience	has	created.	You	should	come	here	and	see!"
Because	of	his	patience	--	he	has	a	uniqueness	in	the	whole	history	of	man	--	he
discovered	 one	 thousand	 inventions.	 Anybody	 else	 could	 have	 done	 it,	 but
nobody	had	that	quality	of	patience.	There	were	many	intelligent	researchers,	but
they	 would	 go	 a	 little	 way	 and	 have	 a	 few	 failures...	 and	 start	 moving	 into
another	direction.
Jalaluddin	 Rumi,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 Sufi	 mystics,	 one	 day	 took	 his
disciples	to	a	nearby	farm	where	the	farmers	were	trying	to	dig	a	well.	They	had
made	eight	holes,	and	now	they	were	working	on	the	ninth;	on	each	one	they	had
gone	 only	 so	 far,	 and	 then	 seeing	 that	 there	 was	 no	 water,	 they	 dropped	 that
project	and	started	in	another	place.
They	had	destroyed	the	whole	farm.
Jalaluddin	 Rumi	 had	 taken	 his	 disciples	 for	 a	 specific	 purpose	 --	 to	 see	 how
impatience	is	idiotic.	If	these	people	had	put	all	the	energy	that	they	had	used	in
destroying	 the	whole	 field	with	 several	 holes	 into	 digging	 a	 single	 hole,	 they
would	be	bound	to	find	water.	But	these	are	not	the	kind	of	people	who	are	going
to	find	water.
He	was	telling	his	disciples,	"You	should	not	be	impatient.	Put	your	total	energy,
your	 total	 trust,	 one	 pointedly,	 arrowed	 towards	 one	 goal.	When	 the	master	 is
with	you	--	who	has	traveled	the	path,	up	and	down	many	times,	and	who	knows
that	the	path	is	going	to	lead	you	to	your	cherished	dream	--	don't	feel	dejected,
don't	feel	impatient,	don't	start	new	projects	again	and	again.	That	way	nobody
has	ever	been	able	to	find	anything."
You	say,	"The	other	day	I	found	myself	upset,	impatient,	and	irritable!"
Satyadharma,	you	cannot	suddenly	find	yourself	upset,	 impatient,	and	irritable.
You	must	have	been	always	impatient,	upset,	and	irritable.	Perhaps	the	other	day
you	came	to	a	peak	of	realization;	you	realized	 that	 these	great	qualities	are	 in
you.	 But	 they	must	 have	 always	 been	 there;	 they	 cannot	 come	 suddenly.	You
must	have	become	accustomed	to	them.
"When	will	I	grow	up?"	What	is	the	hurry?	And	what	are	you	doing	by	growing
up?
Even	if	you	grow	up	today,	what	will	you	do?	You	will	get	even	more	upset	and
impatient	 and	 irritable,	 thinking,	 "My	God,	 there	was	a	goal,	now	even	 that	 is
finished.
Now	my	life	is	absolutely	meaningless."
Growing	up	comes	by	itself.	You	have	to	work,	but	not	directly	on	how	to	grow
up	soon;	you	have	to	work	more	on	meditation,	more	on	silence,	more	on	love.
And	the	total	result	is	growth.	The	growth	itself	is	not	something	separate;	it	is
the	whole	synthesis	of	all	great	qualities.	You	have	to	work	on	those	qualities.
In	my	childhood	--	and	perhaps	in	India	in	everybody's	childhood	--	it	must	have
happened...	 I	 used	 to	 plant	 mango	 seeds.	My	 impatience	 was	 so	 much	 that	 I
could	not	even	sleep	the	whole	night	--	I	wanted	to	see	what	had	happened	in	the
night.	In	the	morning,	I	would	dig	them	up	again,	and	see	whether	anything	had
happened	or	not.
Nothing	had	happened!
The	mango	seed,	when	 two	 leaves	start	growing	 in	 it,	 can	be	 taken	out,	and	 it
makes	a	very	good	whistle.	My	interest	was	not	in	the	mangoes,	my	interest	was
in	getting	more	whistles.	But	even	that	needs	patience	--	 just	 those	two	leaves.
But	impatience	was	such	that	it	was	even	impossible	to	get	those	two	leaves	to
grow.	Every	morning	I	would	dig	up	 the	seed	 to	see	what	was	happening,	and
that	would	destroy	the	whole	thing.
Growth	 is	 something	 that	 happens	 by	 the	 side.	 You	 meditate,	 you	 sing,	 you
dance,	you	rejoice,	and	suddenly,	one	day	you	will	find	those	two	leaves	of	the
mango	 are	 growing	 above	 the	 ground	 --	 so	 fresh,	 so	 beautiful.	 Growth	 is	 a
finding	on	the	margin;	you	cannot	make	it	a	goal.	That's	what	is	making	you	so
upset,	impatient,	and	irritable!	You	have	made	growing	up	your	goal.	Now	what
can	you	do?	Get	stretched	on	a	traction	machine?
"When	will	we	all	 come	 to	 the	 responsibility	of	 just	 being	 the	You	 in	us:	 that
gracefulness	that	we	all	know	ourselves	to	be?"	Any	question	about	when	shows
that	you	have	not	understood	my	emphasis	on	the	present	moment;	you	have	not
understood	my	approach	of	here	and	now.	Enjoy	this	moment,	and	forget	the	lot!
And	growth	will	 come	 suddenly	one	day,	not	 as	 a	 reward,	but	 as	 a	 shadow	of
your	living	moment-to-moment,	joyously.
"When"	always	takes	you	into	the	future,	it	always	thinks	of	tomorrows.	And	the
basic	spiritual	insight	of	thousands	of	years	is	that	tomorrow	never	comes.	This
very	moment	will	become	another	moment,	your	today	will	continue	to	remain
today,	 the	 tomorrow	will	 come	 in	 the	 form	of	 today.	But	our	whole	 system	of
thought	is	goal-oriented.	We	are	always	living	in	the	future,	and	nobody	can	live
in	the	future;	or	we	are	living	in	the	past,	and	nobody	can	live	in	the	past	either.
The	only	way	to	live	is	to	enjoy	this	moment,	to	cherish	this	moment,	to	make	it
as	beautiful	as	possible.	And	out	of	this	moment	will	come	the	next	moment,	out
of	 this	moment	will	come	your	whole	 future.	This	moment	contains	 the	whole
eternity	--	past	and	future.
You	are	 saying,	 "I	 feel	 that	 the	 time	 is	 ripe	 to	 stop	whining	about	misery,	 and
misunderstandings,	pain,	and	discomforts.	Could	it	be	that	as	a	disciple,	I	simply
take	 You,	 Your	 presence,	 Your	 answers,	 Your	 insights,	 and	 Your	 grace	 for
granted?"
Do	 you	 really	 feel,	 Satyadharma,	 that	 "the	 time	 is	 ripe	 to	 stop	whining	 about
misery,	 and	 misunderstandings"?	 And	 what	 are	 you	 doing	 in	 your	 question?
What	is	this	about	being
"upset,	impatient,	and	irritable,"	and	"when	will	I	grow	up"?	If	it	is	not	whining
about	misery,	and	pain,	and	discomforts,	then	what	is	it?	You	have	not	felt	that
the	time	is	ripe	-
-	 you	 have	 only	 thought.	 Thinking	 is	 of	 no	 help.	 Thinking	 is	 a	 cheat.	 It	 talks
great	things,	it	gives	you	big	promises,	but	the	goods	are	never	delivered.
Remember	 a	 clear-cut	 distinction	between	 thinking	 and	 feeling:	 those	who	 are
feeling
"the	time	is	ripe"	are	not	whining	about	any	misery.	They	are	enjoying	the	ripe
time,	and	by	enjoying,	they	are	making	it	riper.
Of	 course,	 it	 is	 true	 --	 at	 least	 about	 you	 --	 that	 you	 have	 started	 taking	 my
presence	 for	 granted.	That	 is	 the	 natural	 habit	 of	 the	mind.	 It	 starts	 taking	 for
granted	things	which	it	will	repent	only	when	it	has	lost	them.
There	is	a	beautiful	Sufi	story....	A	very	rich	man,	super-rich,	became	bored	with
life	 because	 he	 had	 known	 all	 the	 pleasures,	 all	 the	 joys	 that	 money	 can
purchase,	 but	 they	 were	 not	 truly	 satisfying.	 He	 was	 still	 thirsty,	 he	 was	 still
hungry	for	something	authentic.
He	was	enquiring	from	sages	and	saints,	and	all	that	they	could	say...	he	had	tried
their	rituals,	worship,	prayer	and	nothing	worked.
One	saint	out	of	desperation...	because	 this	man	was	 torturing	him	continually
again	and	again	about	his	misery	 --	 "Time	 is	passing,	 life	 is	 limited,	and	what
kind	of	saint	are	you?
You	cannot	show	me	the	right	path.	And	I	have	twenty-four	hours	to	devote	to	it;
I	don't	have	to	work	to	earn	money	or	anything,	I	don't	have	children,	and	I	have
earned	so	much	money	that	it	is	enough	for	ten	lives	at	least."	The	saint	sent	him
to	a	Sufi	master	who	was	 thought	 to	be	a	 little	bit	 insane,	 and	 to	whom	many
sages	were	sending	their	disciples	when	they	wanted	to	get	rid	of	them.	But	that
insane	Sufi	master	only	looked	insane;	he	had	a	super-sanity.
The	rich	man	took	a	big	bag,	filled	it	with	diamonds	and	rubies	and	emeralds	and
sapphires;	and	went	to	the	Sufi	who	was	sitting	under	a	tree.	He	told	the	Sufi	his
whole	story...	 that	he	was	very	miserable,	he	had	everything	that	the	world	can
afford.	"I	have	brought,	just	to	give	you	a	proof,	this	whole	bag	worth	millions.
All	I	need	is	peace	of	mind."	The	Sufi	said,	"I	will	give	it	to	you.	Get	ready!"
The	rich	man	thought,	"This	man	seems	to	be	strange.	I	have	been	to	so	many
saints	--
nobody	was	so	quick,	and	nobody	promised	to	give	it	to	me.	They	all	said,	`Go
through	 this	 ritual,	 this	 worship,	 this	 prayer,	 this	 meditation.	 Work	 it	 out
yourself.'	This	is	the	only	man...	perhaps,	they	are	right	that	he	is	insane.	He	is
saying,	 `Get	 ready.	Don't	waste	my	 time!'	 "So	hesitatingly	he	 said,	 "Okay,	 I'm
ready."	But	he	was	very	afraid	 --	 although	he	had	come	 to	get	peace	of	mind.
And	when	the	man	said	he	was	ready,	the	Sufi	master	took	hold	of	his	bag,	and
ran.
It	 was	 a	 small	 village	 with	 small	 streets	 with	 which	 the	 Sufi	 was	 perfectly
acquainted.
And	the	rich	man	had	never	run.	He	ran	behind	the	Sufi	master	shouting,	"I	have
been	cheated!	This	man	is	not	a	sage.	He's	not	insane,	he's	very	cunning."	But	he
could	not	get	hold	of	the	Sufi	because	he	was	going	so	fast	and	taking	so	many
turns	in	the	village.	The	old	man	was	fat	--	huffing,	puffing,	perspiring,	crying	--
and	the	whole	crowd	was	laughing.	He	could	not	understand	why	these	people
were	laughing,	and	nobody	was	helping!	But	the	village	knew	that	that	man	was
not	insane	--	he	was	super-sane.	He	had	his	own	methods.
Finally,	the	rich	man	reached	to	the	same	tree.	The	Sufi	had	reached	far	ahead;
he	was	sitting	with	the	bag	there.	And	the	rich	man	was	shouting,	abusing.
The	 Sufi	 said,	 "Stop	 all	 this	 nonsense!	 Take	 this	 bag."	 The	man	 took	 the	 bag
immediately,	and	the	Sufi	asked,	"How	are	you	feeling?"
He	said,	"I'm	feeling	great	peace."
The	Sufi	 said,	 "That's	what	 I	was	 telling	you.	 If	you	are	 ready,	 I	can	give	you
peace	immediately.	Have	you	got	it?"
He	said,	"I	have	got	it!"
"Never	again	ask	anybody	about	it!"	You	have	started	taking	for	granted	all	your
riches.	 I	 gave	you	a	 chance	 to	 lose	 them,	 and	 suddenly	you	became	what	you
really	are	--	a	beggar.	And	these	very	precious	stones	which	have	lost	their	value
to	you	are	again	precious."	But	it	happens.	The	people	who	live	in	palaces	start
taking	those	palaces	for	granted;	 the	people	who	are	rich	never	think	about	the
miseries	 of	 poverty.	 The	 people	 who	 have	 got	 a	 master	 start	 taking	 him	 for
granted	--	that	there	is	nothing	to	be	done;	you	only	have	to	ask	the	question	and
your	master	is	there	to	answer	it.
But	my	answers	cannot	be	of	any	help.
My	 answers	 are	 only	 a	 provocation	 and	 an	 invitation,	 a	 challenge	 to	 work
through	the	misery	and	the	darkness	towards	the	dawn,	towards	light.
I	can	show	you	the	way,	but	I	cannot	walk	for	you.
And	if	you	start	taking	me	for	granted,	then	don't	be	miserable;	take	your	misery
also	for	granted.	Accept	that	you	are	a	miserable	person,	that	it	is	your	destiny.
You	don't	take	your	misery	for	granted,	but	you	can	take	your	master	for	granted.
You	don't	take	your	problems	for	granted,	but	you	take	my	answers	for	granted.
So	you	have	to	be	clear,	very	clear,	Satyadharma.	In	your	whole	question,	only
your	last	 line	is	 true,	and	authentic:	"As	a	way	to	avoid	stepping	into	myself,	I
have	started	taking	you	for	granted."
It	is	a	very	easy	way	to	ask	a	question,	to	get	an	answer,	and	out	of	the	answer,
make	 a	 few	 more	 questions	 for	 tomorrow...	 and	 you	 remain	 the	 same.	 My
answers	 are	 remedies;	 they	 are	 medicinal.	 You	 have	 not	 just	 to	 create	 more
questions	out	of	them;	you	have	to	make	an	effort	to	live	those	answers.	Out	of
living	those	answers,	your	questions	will	disappear.
And	my	 answers	 are	 simple.	 I	 am	 not	 requiring	 you	 to	 grow	 into	 some	 self-
torturing	 saint;	 I	 am	 not	 asking	 you	 for	 any	 ascetic	 disciplines.	 I	 am	 simply
asking	 you	 to	 relax,	 to	 trust	 existence,	 to	 find	 a	 few	moments	 of	 silence	 and
peace	which	 are	 absolutely	 available	 to	 everybody	 --	whoever	 closes	his	 eyes,
relaxes	his	body,	sits	silently.
The	 silence	 I'm	 talking	 about	 is	 not	 some	 acquirement	 or	 achievement.	 It	 is	 a
discovery.	It	is	already	within	you	--	just	the	mind	has	to	be	quiet	so	that	you	can
hear	the	music	of	silence	that	surrounds	your	whole	being,	so	that	you	can	smell
the	 fragrance	of	your	being	 itself.	And	once	you	have	known	 it,	 then	you	 can
repeat	 it	 as	many	 times	 in	 the	day	as	you	 like,	whenever	you	have	 time.	Even
sitting	in	a	train	or	in	a	bus,	you	can	just	close	your	eyes	and	move	inwards.	It	is
only	a	question	of	taking	the	first	step,	 then	everything	else	becomes	easy.	But
remember	to	be	patient.
A	 Polack	 air	 cadet	 is	 taking	 his	 first	 sky	 diving	 jump.	 "What	 happens	 if	 the
parachute	 does	 not	 open?"	 he	 asked	 his	 instructor.	 "Don't	 worry,"	 replies	 the
instructor.	"There	is	only	one	chance	in	a	thousand	that	it	will	happen,	and	you
have	a	spare	parachute	too."
"But,"	replies	the	anxious	student,	"what	if	that	one	does	not	open	either?"
"There	 is	 only	 one	 chance	 in	 a	 million	 that	 that	 will	 happen,"	 the	 instructor
assures	him	and	adds,	"and	then	the	ambulance	is	 there	on	the	field	 to	pick	up
the	pieces."
The	 nervous	 cadet	 boards	 the	 plane	 which	 takes	 off.	 At	 ten	 thousand	 feet	 he
jumps	 out	 of	 the	 plane,	 and	 pulls	 the	 cord	 of	 his	main	 parachute.	 It	 does	 not
open.
"Shit!"	he	says,	and	then	pulls	the	cord	of	his	reserve	chute	which	also	refuses	to
open.	"I	knew	it,"	he	says	 to	himself.	"And	I	bet	with	my	luck,	 the	ambulance
won't	be	there	to	pick	up	the	pieces	either."
Just	 don't	 be	 so	 miserable!	 Most	 probably,	 the	 first	 parachute	 will	 do.	 If
everything	goes	wrong,	then	even	with	your	luck,	you	will	find	the	ambulance	to
collect	the	pieces.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
MICHAEL	WAS	HELPING	PATRICK	CHECK	TO	SEE	THAT	HIS	CAR
INDICATORS	 WERE	 WORKING.	 HE	 PUT	 HIS	 HEAD	 OUT	 OF	 THE
WINDOW,	 AND	 YELLED,	 "YES,	 PATRICK,	 THEY	 ARE...	 NO,	 THEY'RE
NOT...	YES,	THEY
ARE...	 NO,	 THEY'RE	NOT.	 "	 OSHO,	NO	 I'M	NOT...	 YES	 I	 AM...	 NO	 I'M
NOT...	YES
I	 AM.	 RECENTLY	 I'VE	 NOTICED	 THOSE	 SPACES	 IN	 BETWEEN,	 AND
NOW
THEY	SEEM	TO	BE	COMING	MORE	AND	MORE	IN	EVERY	WAY.
ONE	 ADVERTISEMENT	 FOR	 BEER	 CLAIMS	 TO	 "REACH	 THE	 PARTS
THAT
OTHER	BEERS	CAN'T.	"PARTS	OF	ME	THAT	JUST	A	FEW	WEEKS	AGO	I
DIDN'T	KNOW	EXISTED	ARE	BEGINNING	TO	FEEL	SPACIOUS,	LIGHT,
AND
GRATEFUL.	I	AM	BEGINNING	TO	FEEL	THE	FLOW	AND	THE	PACE	OF
EXISTENCE,	 TO	 RELAX	 INTO	 IT,	 AND	 TO	 TRUST	 IT.	 WILL	 YOU
PLEASE
COMMENT?
Dhyan	Sagar,	the	workings	of	the	mind	are	just	like	that	--	split	between	yes	and
no,	 between	 to	 be	 or	 not	 to	 be.	The	mind	 cannot	 have	 one	 voice;	 it	 is	 always
balanced	by	its
"against"	 voice.	 That	 is	 simply	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 mind:	 it	 is	 split,	 it	 is
schizophrenic.	In	a	more	philosophical	way,	they	call	it	dialectical.
But	my	whole	 teaching	 is	 to	 go	 beyond	 the	mind,	 not	 to	 be	 bothered	with	 it.
Neither	its
"no"	is	of	any	meaning,	nor	even	its	"yes."	The	only	use	of	the	mind	is	to	use	it
as	 a	 stepping-stone,	 to	 go	 beyond	 it.	Don't	 try	 to	 solve	 problems	 of	 the	mind,
they	are	insoluble.	You	will	get	into	a	thick	forest,	and	find	it	almost	impossible
to	find	the	way	back	home.
The	mind	is	a	Polack.
How	do	you	make	a	one	armed	Polack	fall	off	a	flagpole?
Answer:	You	wave	to	him.
Why	did	the	Polish	Government	import	five	hundred	million	tons	of	sand	from
Saudi	Arabia?
Answer:	They	wanted	to	drill	for	their	own	oil.
Did	you	hear	about	the	Polish	lesbian?
Answer:	She	likes	men.
The	mind	is	certainly	part	of	Poland.
One	contemporary	 logician	has	 invented	a	word,	 "po."	And	my	 suspicions	 are
that	 he	 has	 taken	 that	 word	 "po"	 from	 Poland;	 otherwise,	 there	 is	 no	 way	 he
could	manage	this	word
"po."	He	has	invented	it	because	his	philosophy	needed	it.	He	says	that	Aristotle
has	given	us	a	philosophy	of	yes	and	no;	either	something	is	right	or	something
is	wrong,	either	something	is	black	or	white	--	a	very	simple	duality.	Either	you
believe	in	God	or	you	don't.
But	what	about	things	when	the	real	answer	is	neither	yes	nor	no?	For	example,
God.	To	say	"yes"	is	wrong	because	you	have	not	experienced	it;	to	say	"no"	is
wrong	because	you	have	not	explored	it.	So	neither	yes	is	applicable,	nor	no.
According	 to	 this	man's	 logic,	when	 somebody	 asks	 you,	 "What	 about	God?"
you	have	to	say	"po."	Po	is	noncommittal;	it	does	not	mean	yes,	it	does	not	mean
no.	It	simply	means,
"I	 don't	 know."	 But	 rather	 than	 accepting	 the	 ignorance,	 it	 gives	 you	 a	 good
feeling	to	say
"po."	You	put,	in	fact,	the	other	person	in	a	state	of	ignorance	because	he	cannot
understand	--	"What	is	po?"	He	has	never	heard	the	word.
My	suspicion	is	that	he	has	got	this	"po"	from	Poland.	There	is	no	other	way	to
get	it.	But	even	with	"po",	mind	will	not	be	the	solution.	You	can	go	on	repeating
"po"	but	you	will	remain	as	poor,	as	ignorant,	as	miserable	as	before.	This	"po"
is	not	going	to	transform	anything	in	you.
Only	one	thing	can	transform,	and	that	is	going	beyond	the	mind,	going	beyond
thinking,	and	coming	to	a	space	where	the	sky	is	absolutely	without	clouds.	And
then	no	question	arises,	and	no	answer	is	needed.
People	 think	 that	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 Mahavira,	 Zarathustra,	 or	 Lao	 Tzu	 have
found	the	answer.	They	are	wrong.	They	have	lost	both	--	the	question	and	the
answer.	 They	 have	 found	 a	 silence,	 undisturbed	 either	 by	 questions	 or	 by
answers.
When	 I	 said	 this	 to	 Tibetan	 Buddhist	 lamas,	 they	were	 shocked	 because	 they
were	 thinking	Gautam	Buddha	 had	 found	 the	 answer.	 I	 said,	 "If	 you	 find	 the
answer,	 you	 are	 still	 inside	 the	mind,	 you	are	 still	 very	 close	 to	 the	question."
Gautam	Buddha	 has	 gone	 beyond	 the	 question	 and	 the	 answer.	 He	 has	 found
silence	--	indestructible.
Philosophy	 finds	 answers,	 religion	 finds	 a	 state	which	 is	 far	 beyond	 questions
and	answers.	Questions	and	answers	look	childish,	look	like	toys	to	play	with.
Ten	years	ago	an	anthropology	student	spent	some	time	studying	rural	regions	of
Kashmir.	 One	 day	 he	 was	 driving	 down	 the	 road	 when	 he	 saw	 a	 man	 on	 a
donkey,	while	his	wife	walked	ten	yards	behind	him.	"Why	do	you	do	that?"	he
asked.	"It	is	our	age-old	tradition,"	the	man	replied.
Recently,	 the	 student,	 now	 a	 reporter,	 was	 sent	 back	 to	 Kashmir	 by	 his
newspaper.	By	a	 strange	coincidence	he	 found	himself	on	 the	 same	 road,	with
the	 same	man	he	 had	 seen	 ten	 years	 before.	But	 this	 time	 the	man's	wife	was
walking	ten	yards	ahead	of	him.	The	man	on	the	donkey	was	exactly	ten	yards
behind	the	wife.
"What	happened	to	the	traditional	custom?"	asked	the	reporter.	"Has	the	tradition
changed?"
"No,	"	said	the	man.	"The	tradition	has	not	changed,	but	now,	you	see,	there	are
land	mines."
Mind	 is	 very	 cunning.	 It	 will	 use	 traditions,	 it	 will	 use	 religions,	 it	 will	 use
philosophies	--
just	to	survive.	It	will	give	you	all	kinds	of	questions,	and	all	kinds	of	answers	--
just	 to	 survive.	But	any	question	 raised	by	 the	mind	 is	as	 futile	as	any	answer
found	by	the	mind.
Mind	is	an	exercise	in	utter	futility.
Only	very	few	people	in	the	world	have	been	able	to	find	the	truth	that	the	mind
is	our	only	problem.
If	 we	 can	 go	 beyond	 mind	 into	 silence,	 into	 utter	 and	 profound	 silence	 --
undisturbed	by	anything,	not	even	a	ripple	of	thought	--	then	we	have	found	it...
not	 the	 answer,	 but	 something	 existential,	 a	 transformation,	 a	 mutation,	 a
revolution	in	ourselves	which	destroys	all	questions	and	all	answers,	and	leaves
us	in	utter	serenity,	in	a	tremendous	beatitude.
Meditation	is	nothing	but	annihilation	of	the	mind.
Meditation	is	not	the	training	of	the	mind:	Meditation	is	simply	cessation	of	the
mind.
Just	cease	to	be	a	mind,	and	you	will	find	a	pure	being,	unpolluted	and	pure	from
eternity	to	eternity.
Little	 Ernie	 was	 always	 saying	 things	 that	 got	 him	 into	 trouble.	 One	 day	 his
mother	was	having	a	friend	to	lunch	who	was	bringing	her	new	baby	who	had	no
ears.
Ernie's	 mother	 called	 him	 and	 said,	 "Ernie,	 don't	 you	 say	 anything	 about	 the
baby.	In	fact,	don't	even	speak	at	all."
"Okay,"	said	Ernie.
The	friend	arrived	with	her	baby.	Ernie	looked	at	him,	took	his	hand,	and	said,
"What	beautiful	little	hands	he	has."
"Ernie,"	warned	his	mother.
"And	what	beautiful	brown	hair	he	has."
"Yes,"	said	the	proud	friend.
"Has	he	got	good	eyesight?"	asked	Ernie.
"Ernie!"	yells	his	mother.
"Why?"	asked	the	baby's	mother.
"Because,"	says	Ernie,	"he	will	never	be	able	to	wear	glasses."
The	 mind	 is	 so	 cunning;	 it	 goes	 on	 round	 about,	 but	 comes	 finally	 to	 some
trouble,	to	some	problem.	You	can	repress	its	one	question	by	one	answer,	but	it
will	 create	 new	 questions	 which	 will	 be	 nothing	 but	 echoes	 of	 the	 repressed
question.
A	seeker	of	truth	is	a	seeker	of	the	beyond.	The	beyond	is	our	home.
The	 mind	 can	 be	 Christian,	 Hindu,	 Mohammedan;	 the	 beyond	 is	 just	 pure,
without	 any	 objective.	 To	 me,	 the	 future	 man,	 the	 new	 man	 will	 live	 in	 the
beyond.
Living	in	the	beyond	does	not	mean	that	you	cannot	use	your	mind;	in	fact,	on
the	contrary,	only	those	who	live	in	the	beyond	are	capable	of	using	their	mind
as	 an	 instrument.	Mind	 goes	 on	 torturing	 those	who	 have	 not	moved	 into	 the
beyond;	 it	 is	 a	nightmare.	And	 they	 cannot	use	 the	mind	because	 they	 are	not
above	it.
Be	a	witness	to	the	mind.
In	your	witnessing,	the	beyond	will	open	its	doors.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Golden	Future
Chapter	#40
Chapter	title:	Absolutely	without	any	goals
31	May	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8705315
ShortTitle:
GOLDEN40
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
66
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 I	 VISITED	 SARJANO'S	 PIZZA	 PARLOR	 YESTERDAY,	 I	 FOUND
HIM
SOBBING	BY	A	HUGE	VAT	OF	SPAGHETTI.	HE	SAID	THAT,	IN	SPITE	OF
YOUR
ASSURANCES,	 HE	 FEELS	 IT	 IS	 ALL	 HOPELESS.	 HE	 SAID,	 "I	 CAN-A
NEVER
GET-A	 ENLIGHTENED-A.	 I'M-A	 TOO	 MUCH-A	 ATTACHED-A	 TO	 MY
PAST-A.	"
I	TRIED	TO	CHEER	HIM	UP	BY	SAYING	THAT	YOU	WERE	HELPING	US
TO
RETURN	 TO	 THE	 SOURCE,	 AND	 WHERE	 THERE	 IS	 SAUCE	 THERE
MUST	BE
SPAGHETTI.	 BUT	 HE	 WAS	 INCONSOLABLE.	 BELOVED	 MASTER,
PLEASE,	CAN	YOU	HELP?
Maneesha,	 Sarjano	 need	 not	 become	 enlightened	 --	 he	 is	 already.	 Those	 who
have	been	to	his	place	have	tasted	enlightenment	in	his	spaghetti.
It	 is	 true,	he	 is	 too	much	attached	 to	 the	past-a.	 I	would	 like	 to	suggest	 to	him
that	in	our	place	he	should	change	these	names	a	little
bit	--	because	I	am	against	the	past,	I	cannot	allow	any	past-a	here.	So	I	have	to
rename	his	pasta;	it	will	be	called	from	tomorrow:	futura.	And	his	pizza	should
be	 called	 presenta.	 The	 language	 should	 be	meaningful.	 Pizza	 reminds	 one	 of
pee	--	that's	why	I	have	never	been	calling	it	pizza.	I	have	been	always	calling	it
"piesta"	just	to	avoid	that	pee.
And	Sarjano	 need	 not	worry	 about	 enlightenment;	 those	who	 are	with	me	 are
already	enlightened.	They	may	recognize	it,	they	may	not	recognize	it	--	just	out
of	humbleness....
A	very	large	elephant	was	moving	sedately	through	the	African	jungle	when	he
caught	sight	of	a	mouse.	He	stopped	in	astonishment;	he	had	never	seen	a	mouse
before.	"My	God,"	he	said,	"you	are	small!"	"Yes,"	said	the	mouse,	"I	have	been
ill	lately."
Following	an	ancient	custom,	the	rabbi	of	the	local	synagogue	prostrated	himself
before	the	Ark	of	the	Lord,	"Oh	Lord,	forgive	me,	for	I	am	as	nothing."	Then	the
cantor	 followed,	 "Oh	Lord,	 forgive	me,	 for	 I	 am	as	 nothing."	A	 little	 old	man
praying	nearby	in	his	tobacco-stained	shirt	and	old	shoes	called	out,	"Oh	Lord,
forgive	me,	for	I	am	as	nothing."	The	disgusted	rabbi	said	to	the	cantor,	"Look
who	thinks	he	is	nothing!"
In	the	society	where	everything	turns	into	ego,	even	humbleness	--	which	should
be	egolessness	--	becomes	a	subtle	ego	in	itself.	But	my	people	are	not	egoists;
hence	 they	need	not	 be	 humble	 either	 --	 because	 humbleness	 and	 ego	 are	 two
extremes	of	the	same	energy.	My	people	are	simple,	they	are	just	exactly	in	the
middle;	they	follow	the	golden	mean.
Nirvana,	enlightenment,	kaivalyam,	moksha,	all	great	experiences,	are	not	to	be
proclaimed.	People	will	recognize	them	just	by	your	joy,	by	your	playfulness,	by
your	 presence.	And	 Sarjano	 is	 playful,	 joyous	 --	 sometimes	 a	 little	 too	much.
Once	in	a	while	he	goes	to	the	extreme,	but	most	of	the	time	remains	"normally
mad."	I	am	going	to	visit	his	place	one	day.	I	have	heard	too	much	about	it.	He
and	Kuteer	are	both	doing	great	things	there.
Sarjano	 has	made	 a	 great	 futura	 for	me,	 a	 huge	wristwatch	with	 numbers	 and
hands.	He	must	have	devoted	so	much	time	and	so	much	love...	and	it	came	with
the	message:
"Bhagwan,	I	can	only	offer	you	this	kind	of	watch."	You	can	see	his	humbleness,
his	love.	He	is	one	of	my	most	beloved	disciples.
You	 all	 have	 to	 remember	 that	 I	 have	 changed	 the	 names....	We	 are	 thinking
about	the	new	man	and	we	are	thinking	about	the	future	of	humanity	--	and	this
is	 the	 last	 talk	 of	 this	 series.	 It	 is	 perfectly	 the	 right	 and	 ripe	 time	 to	 give
Sarjano's	creativity	new	names:	futura	and	presenta.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU'VE	BEEN	TALKING	ABOUT	LOVE	AND	FREEDOM,	AND	MY
GIRLFRIEND	HAS	GONE	OFF	WITH	ANOTHER	MAN.	 I	 LOOK	 INSIDE
TO	SEE	IF
THERE	 IS	 ANYTHING	 RESEMBLING	 LOVE	 THAT	 WILL	 WILLINGLY
GIVE	THE
OTHER	 FREEDOM,	 AND	 I	 CAN'T	 FIND	 ANYTHING	 EXCEPT	 THIS
BLACK
MISERY,	WHICH	I	AM	SURPRISED	TO	FIND	MYSELF	ENJOYING.	DO	I
HAVE
ANY	OF	THE	NEW	MAN	IN	ME	OR	IS	IT	ALL	OLD?
Vijen,	these	are	the	blessings	I	have	been	talking	about	every	day.	After	all,	your
girlfriend	has	left	you.	It	happens	only	to	very	fortunate	people	and	you	know	it!
You	 say	 you	 are	 enjoying	 it;	 it	 is	 just	 out	 of	 old	 habit	 that	 you	 are	 calling	 it
"black	misery."	You	don't	see	 the	contradiction:	 it	 is	a	pure	white	blessing,	not
black	misery.	It	is	black	misery	to	the	man	with	whom	your	girlfriend	has	gone!
You	should	now	pray	and	meditate	for	that	poor	fellow.	Your	girlfriend	has	done
enough	for	you;	now	she	will	do	the	same	to	the	other	fellow.
You	 say,	 "I	 am	 surprised	 to	 find	myself	 enjoying	 it."	Everybody	will	 enjoy	 it,
because	everybody	 is	 tortured	with	our	 so-called	 relationships.	They	 start	very
beautifully,	 very	 sweet,	 but	 they	 end	 up	 very	 soon	 in	 utter	misery,	 in	 absolute
darkness,	and	there	seems	to	be	no	end	to	the	night.	That's	why	my	vision	of	a
new	man	is	that	he	will	only	relate	with	others,	but	there	will	be	no	relationship
as	such	--	no	binding	for	tomorrow,	no	contract	for	the	future.	Today	is	enough
unto	itself;	enjoy	it.	If	tomorrow	you	find	yourselves	still	together,	it	is	good.	If
you	find	yourselves	separating,	separate	with	gratitude,	because	for	one	day	you
have	 given	 great	 joy	 and	 blissfulness	 to	 each	 other,	 and	 it	 is	 good	 that	 before
things	 become	 bitter	 you	 should	 separate.	 At	 least	 in	 your	 memory	 those
beautiful	moments	will	always	remain	--	fragrant,	fresh,	alive.
Wealthy	Hymie	 and	 Becky	 are	 sitting	 in	 their	 luxurious	New	York	 penthouse
watching	 television	when	 there	 is	 a	 knock	on	 the	door.	Hymie	opens	 it	 and	 is
confronted	 by	 a	 hooded	 six-foot	 burly	 figure.	 "Please,"	 says	Hymie,	 "take	my
money,	anything,	but	don't	hurt	me."	"Sir,"	said	the	hooded	figure,	"I	am	a	rapist,
not	a	thief."	"Thank	God,"	says	Hymie	and	calls	over	his	shoulder,	"Becky,	it	is
for	you."
Three	months	 later,	 same	scene:	same	knock	on	 the	door,	 same	hooded	figure,
but	this	time	Hymie	closes	the	door	on	him	saying,	"I	have	already	given."
Life	could	be	a	 real	excitement,	an	ecstasy,	but	because	of	our	ugly	heritage	 it
turns	out	 to	be	a	hell.	And	 it	 is	not	enough	 that	you	change	 the	woman	or	 the
man.	Within	a	few	days,	the	second	man	or	the	second	woman	will	again	end	up
in	the	same	dark	space.
Perhaps	existence	has	a	different	design	for	man,	and	we	have	not	listened	to	it.
That	different	design	is	that	we	should	remain	strangers,	meeting	and	separating
without	creating	any	kind	of	 imprisonment	 for	each	other,	any	contract	 for	 the
future,	any	promises.	Without	promises	and	without	any	contracts	 --	 if	we	can
live	life	moment	to	moment	and	allow	change,	without	any	reluctance,	without
any	resistance	to	it	happening,	joyously,	life	can	become	a	celebration.
But	 man	 has	 listened	 more	 to	 stupid	 priests,	 ignorant	 philosophers,	 criminal
politicians,	rather	than	listening	to	his	own	heart	and	listening	to	existence	itself
in	deep	silence	and	meditation.	Unless	man	follows	his	nature,	his	existence,	his
own	 heart	 without	 any	 inhibitions,	 life	 is	 going	 to	 remain	 gloomy;	 it	 cannot
release	the	tremendous	blissfulness	it	contains	in	itself.
The	new	man	has	to	prove	that	we	can	live	without	any	religion	and	without	any
morality,	that	we	can	live	without	any	God	and	without	any	priests,	that	we	can
live	simply	according	to	our	own	heart,	wherever	it	leads,	just	like	a	white	cloud
floating	 in	 the	 sky	 with	 no	 direction,	 with	 no	 goal,	 enjoying	 every	 moment
wherever	it	is.
The	 old	 man	 was	 goal-oriented;	 hence	 religions	 became	 relevant,	 moralities
became	 prevalent.	 The	 new	man	 is	 going	 to	 be	 absolutely	 without	 any	 goals,
totally	 in	 tune	with	 the	present	moment,	not	 listening	to	any	dictates	of	God	--
which	are	all	fictitious.
A	little	boy	was	sitting	on	the	curb,	crying,	and	an	old	man	was	passing	by	and
came	 over	 to	 him.	 "What	 is	 the	 matter,	 little	 boy?"	 he	 asked.	 "Why	 are	 you
crying?"	"I	am	crying	because	I	can't	do	what	the	big	boys	do,"	he	said.	The	old
man	sat	down	on	the	curb	and	cried	too.
Moses	came	down	from	the	mountain	where	he	had	been	negotiating	with	God
on	 behalf	 of	 his	 people.	 He	 called	 all	 the	 people	 together	 to	 give	 them	 the
message	from	God.
"Well",	he	said,	"I	have	got	some	good	news	and	some	bad	news.	The	good	news
is,	I	have	got	him	down	to	ten	commandments.	The	bad	news	is,	adultery	is	still
in	there."
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	WAS	TRAVELING	IN	THE	HIMALAYAS	FOR	SEVEN	WEEKS.	THE	DAY
I	WAS
TO	RETURN	TO	POONA,	YOU	ANSWERED	A	QUESTION	I	HAD	SENT	IN
EIGHT
WEEKS	BEFORE,	ABOUT	FEELING	HOPELESS.	WHILE	YOU	WERE
ANSWERING	IT,	I	WAS	RECEIVING	THE	ANSWER	EXPERIENTIALLY,
WAITING	ON	THE	VARANASI	TRAIN	PLATFORM	FOR	TWENTY-EIGHT
HOURS.	EACH	HOUR	IT	WAS	ANNOUNCED	THAT	THE	TRAIN	WOULD
ARRIVE	 IN	 ONE	 HOUR;	 BUT	 EACH	 TIME	 THERE	WAS	 NO	 TRAIN	 --
ONLY
MORE	PEOPLE,	MORE	HEAT,	MORE	NOISE,	MORE	SMELL,	AND	MORE
FLIES.
I	FINALLY	TRULY	GAVE	UP	HOPE,	PUT	MY	STRAW	HAT	DOWN	OVER
MY
EYES,	AND	CRIED.	WHEN	I	LOOKED	UP	AGAIN,	THE	FLIES	LOOKED
PSYCHEDELIC	 WITH	 THE	 SUN	 SHINING	 THROUGH	 THEIR	 WINGS,
THE
SOUND	OF	THE	TRAINS	AND	THE	CHAIWALLAHS	WERE	MUSIC	TO
MY
EARS,	AND	MY	HEART	WAS	FULL	OF	LOVE	FOR	EVERYONE.	OSHO,
YOUR
SENSE	OF	TIMING	IS	UNCANNY.	HOW	DO	YOU	DO	IT?
Prem	Indivar,	it	is	a	secret,	but	one	day	I	can	whisper	it	in	your	ears	--	just	you
have	 to	keep	 the	promise	not	 to	 tell	 it	 to	anyone	else.	You	have	 to	continue	 to
say,	"He	has	not	said	it	to	me	yet."	And	they	will	understand	that	I	have	already
said	it.
A	man	was	standing	exactly	where	you	have	been	on	the	Varanasi	station,	seeing
the	train	off,	and	he	observed	someone	near	him	shouting	at	one	of	the	departing
passengers,
"Goodbye,	 your	 wife	 was	 a	 great	 lay!	 Your	 wife	 was	 a	 great	 lay!"	 He	 was
stunned.
After	the	train	pulled	away,	he	went	over	to	the	man	who	had	done	the	shouting
and	asked,	"Did	I	hear	you	correctly?	Did	you	tell	that	man	his	wife	was	a	great
lay?"	The	other	man	shrugged	his	shoulders.	"It	is	not	really	true,"	he	said,	"but	I
don't	want	to	hurt	his	feelings."
"What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	America	 and	England?"	 asked	 the	 teacher.	 "I
know,"
said	Hymie.	"America	has	Ronald	Reagan,	Johnny	Cash,	Bob	Hope,	and	Stevie
Wonder.
England	has	Margaret	Thatcher,	no	cash,	no	hope	--	and	no	wonder."
So	don't	be	worried	about	what	happened	on	the	Varanasi	station	platform.	This
is	usual	in	this	country.	I	have	been	traveling	for	many	years	around	the	country;
I	must	have	waited	on	every	platform.	A	few	incidents	will	help	you:
One	day,	for	the	first	 time	in	my	life,	I	found	the	train	coming	exactly	in	time.
That	is	absolutely	a	unique	occasion	in	India.	It	simply	does	not	happen.	I	was	so
much	amazed	and	felt	so	grateful	that	I	went	to	the	driver	to	thank	him	and	I	told
him,	 "This	 is	my	 first	 experience	 that	 the	 train	 has	 come	 exactly	 in	 time.	You
must	be	the	best	driver	in	the	country."
He	said,	"Don't	make	me	feel	ashamed."
I	said,	"Why?"
He	said,	"This	is	yesterday's	train.	It	is	exactly	twenty-four	hours	late!"
Just	at	 that	 time,	when	he	told	me	that	 it	 is	 twenty-four	hours	 late,	I	said,	"My
God."	 The	 stationmaster	was	 standing	 by	my	 side.	 I	 asked	 him,	 "If	 trains	 are
going	to	be	late	--	and	I	have	been	traveling	for	twenty	years	--	then	what	is	the
point	of	publishing	timetables?"
He	 said,	 "You	 are	 a	 strange	man.	Without	 timetables	 how	will	we	 know	 how
much	the	train	is	late?"
I	said,	"That's	right;	I	had	not	thought	about	it."
He	said,	"Everything	would	get	mixed	up.	The	timetable	is	published	so	that	you
can	know	how	much	the	train	is	going	to	be	late."
On	another	junction,	just	as	you	are	saying...	the	train	was	announced	again	and
again,
"one	hour	late...	two	hours	late."	I	could	not	believe	it	when	I	heard	that	it	is	one
hour	late;	 then	it	became	two	hours	late,	 then	it	became	four	hours	late.	I	said,
"My	God,	is	it	coming	this	side	or	is	it	going	the	other	way?	If	it	was	one	hour
late,	how	it	can	be	suddenly	four	hours	late	now?"
I	went	to	the	stationmaster	and	I	asked,	"In	which	direction	is	the	train	going?"
He	said,	"Don't	be	angry.	It	is	just	to	protect	our	lives	that	we	cannot	declare	that
it	 is	forty-eight	hours	 late;	people	will	kill	us.	So	we	declare	 in	 installments;	 it
keeps	people	calm	and	quiet	that	"just	one	hour	more...	okay	two	hours	more...
and	by	these	installments	we	manage	forty-eight	hours."
I	said,	"I	can	understand	your	great	compassion;	otherwise	there	would	be	many
heart	attacks,	heart	failures...	if	you	start	declaring	it	exactly	right."	I	have	seen
trains	coming	sixty	hours	 late	and	I	have	been	sitting	on	 the	platform	for	sixty
hours,	but	it	was	always
"two	hours	more...	 two	hours	more."	 It	can	happen	only	 in	 this	country,	which
has	 learned	 to	 live	 patiently	 --	 nobody	 bothers.	 People	 accept	 it	 as	 if	 it	 is
determined	by	fate;	you	cannot	do	anything	about	it.
But	 you	went	 through	 a	 really	 beautiful	 experience	 --	 it	 was	 because	 of	 your
patience.
You	say	the	moment	you	covered	your	face	with	your	straw	hat	and	cried....	 It
must	have	cleaned	your	eyes	and	it	must	have	softened	your	heart,	and	when	you
looked	again,	the	flies	had	a	psychedelic	color	--	their	wings	in	the	sun	rays	were
tremendously	beautiful.
The	noises	on	the	platform	suddenly	became	an	orchestra.	It	was	patience	and	it
was	crying	that	gave	you	a	very	new	experience.
Ordinarily	man	has	been	brought	up	with	the	idea	that	crying	is	only	for	women,
not	for	men,	although	nature	has	made	tear	glands	of	equal	size	behind	the	eyes
of	men	and	women,	both.	It	is	absolutely	certain	that	nature	intends	men	also	to
cry	and	weep	and	have	tears.	You	may	not	have	cried	in	your	whole	life.	Crying
was	 such	 a	 new	 experience	 to	 you,	 so	 relaxing,	 creating	 a	 kind	 of	 let-go,	 that
everything	around	you	which	was	disgusting	just	a	few	moments	before	became
beautiful.
Crying	 is	 certainly	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 things	 for	 everybody	 to	 learn.
There	may	be	millions	of	people	who	have	never	cried.	They	don't	know	the	joy
of	it,	how	it	relaxes,	how	it	cleanses	your	eyes	--	not	only	the	outer	eyes	but	your
inner	vision	--	and	how	it	makes	trees	look	more	green,	the	sound	of	words	more
clear.	 The	 noises	 in	 a	 marketplace	 certainly	 start	 changing	 into	 a	 harmony
because	you	are	in	a	harmony.
You	dropped	the	hope,	you	cried	over	it,	you	became	innocent	like	a	child.	You
should	 learn	 something	 from	 that	 experience.	The	platform	of	Varanasi	 station
turned,	for	you,	into	a	religious	experience.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 WHENEVER	 I	 COME	 TO	 ASK	 A	 QUESTION,
QUESTIONS	OF
GREAT	SIGNIFICANCE,	THAT	I	KNEW	WERE	THERE	BEFORE,	ELUDE
ME.	 I	 WOULD	 LIKE	 TO	 ASK	 ABOUT	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 AND
MEDITATION,	BUT
WHEN	I	GET	DOWN	TO	WRITING	THEM,	THE	QUESTIONS	LOSE	ALL
REALITY	 FOR	 ME.	 THE	 SIGNIFICANCE	 AND	 DEPTH	 OF	 THINGS
ALWAYS
FRIGHTENS	 ME.	 COULD	 IT	 BE	 THAT	 I	 AM	 AVOIDING	 THE	 DEEP
TREASURES
OF	MY	BEING?
Premdipa,	 the	 questions	 about	 enlightenment	 and	 about	meditation	 are	 not	 yet
your	deep	search.	You	are	not	avoiding	anything	through	them.	On	the	contrary,
when	you	try	to	write	the	question	about	enlightenment	or	meditation	it	loses	all
reality	to	you	because	it	has	no	reality	for	you	--	it	is	a	borrowed	question.	You
hear	so	much	about	enlightenment	here,	about	meditation;	naturally	you	become
curious.	But	curiosity	 is	not	 inquiry,	 and	unless	a	 search	becomes	 so	authentic
that	it	becomes	a	question	of	life	and	death,	the	question	cannot	have	reality.	You
can	ask	it,	but	it	will	remain	phony	--	to	you	and	to	me.
I	can	see	 through	your	questions,	because	my	basic	effort	 is	not	 to	answer	 the
question	but	to	answer	the	questioner.	And	in	an	effort	to	answer	the	questioner,
I	 have	 to	 destroy	 the	 question.	 All	 my	 answers	 are	 an	 effort	 to	 destroy	 your
question.
I	am	not	giving	you	the	answer.
I	am	simply	taking	away	the	question,	so	you	can	be	more	empty,	more	silent,	so
that	you	can	find	the	answer	yourself.
My	answer	cannot	be	your	answer.
My	experience	cannot	be	your	experience.
The	teachers	in	the	schools,	in	the	colleges,	in	the	universities,	give	you	answers
relevant	 to	your	questions;	 they	are	not	concerned	with	 the	questioner	at	all.	 It
may	be	anybody,	X,	Y,	Z.	Their	answer	will	remain	the	same	if	the	question	is
the	same.	But	my	answer	will	not	remain	the	same	if	the	questioner	is	different,
because	 no	 two	 persons	 can	 ask	 the	 same	 question.	 Their	 words	 may	 be	 the
same,	 the	 construction	 of	 their	 questions	 may	 be	 the	 same,	 but	 the	 meaning
cannot	 be	 the	 same	 --	 because	 the	 sources	 out	 of	 which	 those	 questions	 are
arising	are	different.
It	is	perfectly	right	to	understand	that	enlightenment	and	meditation	are	still	not
your	authentic	search.	Rather	than	borrowing	those	questions	from	others,	 look
into	yourself.
Find	out	your	own	questions.	They	may	not	be	very	big	and	great;	they	may	be
mundane.
Somebody's	 girlfriend	 escapes,	 somebody's	 boyfriend	 is	 pretending	 that	 he	 is
paralyzed.
They	may	be	stupid,	they	may	be	absurd,	but	they	will	be	real	and	I	would	like
to	answer	them,	because	I	can	destroy	them	and	bring	you	out	of	an	absurdity,	of
some	mundane	situation....
Yes,	 one	day	 it	will	 be	possible	 for	 you	 to	 ask	questions	of	 a	higher	 reality	 --
about	enlightenment,	about	meditation,	about	consciousness,	about	being,	about
the	ultimate	--
but	 they	have	 to	come	from	your	 innermost	core;	otherwise	answering	 them	is
simply	wasting	not	only	your	time,	not	only	my	time,	but	everybody	else's	time
unnecessarily.
It	is	perfectly	right	that	you	should	start	asking	what	is	significant	to	you.	Here,
nobody	 is	 going	 to	 laugh	 at	 your	 question,	 nobody	 is	 going	 to	 ridicule	 you,
nobody	is	going	to	condemn	you,	because	this	is	a	gathering	of	seekers	to	help
each	other	--	fellow	travelers.
If	somebody	falls,	all	the	hands	around	him	should	help	him	to	be	again	on	his
feet.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 laughing;	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 your	 love,	 of	 your
compassion,	of	your	fellowship.
A	Jewish	matron,	showing	off	to	her	friend	at	an	art	gallery,	was	pointing	out	the
paintings,	"That's	a	Rembrandt,"	she	said.
"It	is	a	Velasquez,	Madam,"	corrected	the	guide.
"Then	that	is	a	Goya."
"A	Rubens,	Madam."
"A	Turner."
"No,	Madam,	a	Constable."
"Well,	that	is	definitely	a	Picasso,"	she	said.
"No,	Madam,	it	is	a	mirror."
Your	 questions	 have	 to	 be	 authentically	 yours,	 they	 have	 to	mirror	 you.	Don't
pretend	 that	 you	 know	 about	 Rembrandt,	 Rubens,	Goya...	 just	 a	 cheap	mirror
will	 do;	 just	 look	 at	 your	 own	 face.	 Questions	 should	 come	 from	 your	 own
reality;	 then	 they	 can	 be	 dissolved,	 and	 you	 can	 be	 put	 on	 a	 journey	 of
transformation.
A	 man	 stalking	 through	 the	 jungle,	 hunting	 wild	 animals,	 suddenly	 stumbles
across	a	beautiful	woman	lying	naked	in	the	forest.	She	says	to	him	seductively,
"I	am	game,"	so	he	shoots	her.
People	have	to	behave	according	to	their	own	understanding.	Now	that	idiot	shot
the	beautiful	woman	because	he	understood	only	one	meaning	of	the	word	game;
his	understanding	was	that	of	an	ignorant	hunter.	But	one	cannot	do	otherwise.
You	have	to	act	according	to	your	own	reality.
Even	 your	 questioning	 is	 a	 significant	 act.	Don't	 borrow	your	 questions;	 don't
take	them	from	the	atmosphere.	If	everybody	else	is	interested	in	a	certain	thing,
it	does	not	mean	you	have	 to	be	 interested	also.	This	 is	not	a	crowd.	Here	we
respect	the	individual.
And	that	is	my	message	for	the	new	man:	that	he	will	be	an	individual,	not	a	cog
in	 the	 wheel.	 He	 will	 not	 belong	 to	 any	 crowd	 --	 political,	 religious,	 social,
racial,	national.	He	will	not	belong	to	anyone.
He	 will	 be	 alone,	 standing	 like	 a	 beautiful	 Himalayan	 peak	 in	 his	 own
individuality.	He	can	have	friends,	he	can	have	fellow	travelers,	fellow	seekers,
but	he	cannot	belong	 to	any	 ideology	 --	which	 forces	him	 to	be	blind,	 to	be	a
believer,	which	forces	him	to	toe	the	line	of	a	certain	concept.
He	will	keep	himself	absolutely	free	from	the	crowd;	he	will	not	be	a	sheep,	he
will	be	a	shepherd.	Everyone	will	be	a	shepherd	--	not	only	Jesus	Christ...!
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Peaks	beyond	peaks	unending
Chapter	title:	Untry	and	untry	again
Chapter	title:	Loneliness	is	aloneness	misunderstood
Chapter	title:	Love:	the	purest	power
Chapter	title:	That	beyondness	is	you
Chapter	title:	Most	people	return	unopened
Chapter	title:	Gorbachev:	a	new	beginning
Chapter	title:	Existence	is	taking	care
Chapter	title:	The	second	russian	revolution
Chapter	title:	Buffaloes	are	never	bored
Chapter	title:	Absolutely	without	any	goals
