
OSHO
The	Grass	Grows	By	Itself
Talks	on	Zen
Talks	given	from	21.02.1975	am	to	28.02.1975	am
English	Discourse	series
8	Chapters
Year	published:	1976
___________________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER	1	-	The	Significance	of	Zen
21	February	1975	a.m.	in	Buddha	Hall
___________________________________________________________________________
SOMEBODY	 ASKED	 THE	 MASTER,	 BOKUJU:	 "WE	 HAVE	 TO	 DRESS
AND	EAT
EVERY	DAY	-	HOW	DO	WE	GET	OUT	OF	ALL	THAT?"
BOKUJU	ANSWERED:	"WE	DRESS,	WE	EAT."
THE	QUESTIONER	SAID:"I	DON'T	UNDERSTAND."
BOKUJU	ANSWERED:	 "IF	YOU	DON'T	UNDERSTAND,	 PUT	ON	YOUR
CLOTHES
AND	EAT	YOUR	FOOD."
What	is	Zen?	Zen	is	a	very	extraordinary	growth.	Rarely	does	such	a	possibility
become	an	actuality	because	many	hazards	are	involved.	Many	times	before	the
possibility	 has	 existed	 -	 a	 certain	 spiritual	 happening	 could	 have	 grown	 and
become	like	Zen,	but	it	was	never	realized	to	its	totality.	Only	once	in	the	whole
history	of	human	consciousness	has	a	thing	like	Zen	come	into	being.	It	is	very
rare.
So	first	I	would	like	you	to	understand	what	Zen	is,	because	unless	you	do	that
these	 anecdotes	 won't	 be	 much	 help.	 You	 need	 to	 know	 the	 complete
background.	 In	 that	 background,	 in	 that	 context,	 these	 anecdotes	 become
luminous	 -	 suddenly	 you	 attain	 to	 the	 meaning	 and	 the	 significance	 of	 them,
otherwise	they	are	separate	units.	You	can	enjoy	them;	sometimes	you	can	laugh
at	them;	they	are	very	poetic;	in	themselves	they	are	beautiful,	unique	pieces	of
art,	but	just	by	looking	at	these	anecdotes	you	will	not	be	able	to	penetrate	into
the	significance	of	what	Zen	is.
So	first	 try	 to	follow	me	slowly	 through	the	growth	of	Zen	-	how	it	happened.
Zen	 was	 born	 in	 India,	 grew	 in	 China,	 and	 blossomed	 in	 Japan.	 The	 whole
situation	is	rare.	Why	did	it	happen	that	it	was	born	in	India,	but	could	not	grow
here	and	had	to	seek	a	different	soil?	It	became	a	great	tree	in	China,	but	could
not	blossom	there,	it	had	to	again	seek	a	new	climate,	a	different	climate	-	and	in
Japan	 it	 blossomed	 like	 a	 cherry	 tree,	 in	 thousands	 of	 flowers.	 It	 is	 not
coincidental,	it	is	not	accidental;	it	has	deep	inner	history.	I	would	like	to	reveal
it	to	you.
India	is	an	introvert	country,	Japan	is	extrovert,	and	China	is	just	in	the	middle	of
these	 two	 extremes.	 India	 and	 Japan	 are	 absolute	 opposites.	 So	 how	come	 the
seed	was	born	in	India	and	blossomed	in	Japan?	They	are	opposites;	they	have
no	 similarities;	 they	 are	 contradictory.	 And	 why	 did	 China	 come	 just	 in	 the
middle,	to	give	soil	to	it?
A	 seed	 is	 introversion.	Try	 to	understand	 the	phenomenon	of	 the	 seed,	what	 a
seed	 is.	A	 seed	 is	 outgoing;	 a	 seed	 has	 really	 turned	 upon	 itself.	A	 seed	 is	 an
introvert	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	 centripetal	 -	 the	 energy	 is	moving	 inwards.	 That's
why	it	is	a	seed,	covered	and	closed	from	the	outer	world	completely.	In	fact	a
seed	is	the	loneliest,	most	isolated	thing	in	the	world.	It	has	no	roots	in	the	soil,
no	branches	in	the	sky;	it	has	no	connection	with	the	earth,	no	connection	with
the	 sky.	 In	 fact	 it	 has	 no	 relationships	 around	 it.	A	 seed	 is	 an	 absolute	 island,
isolated,	caved	 in.	 It	does	not	 relate.	 It	has	a	hard	shell	around	 it,	 there	are	no
windows,	no	doors;	it	cannot	go	out	and	nothing	can	come	in.
Seed	is	natural	to	India.	The	genius	of	Indian	can	produce	seeds	of	tremendous
potentiality,	but	cannot	give	them	soil.	India	is	an	introverted	consciousness.
India	says	the	outer	doesn't	exist	and	even	if	it	exists	it	is	of	the	same	stuff	that
dreams	are	made	of.	The	whole	genius	of	India	has	been	trying	to	discover	how
to	escape	from	the	outer,	how	to	move	to	the	inner	cave	of	the	heart,	how	to	be
centred	in	oneself,	and	how	to	come	to	realize	 that	 the	whole	world	 that	exists
outside	consciousness	is	just	a	dream	-	at	the	most	2
beautiful,	at	 the	worst	a	nightmare;	whether	beautiful	or	ugly,	 in	 reality,	 it	 is	a
dream,	and	one	should	not	bother	much	about	it.	One	should	awake,	and	forget
the	whole	dream	of	the	outer	world.
The	whole	effort	of	Buddha,	Mahavir,	Tilopa,	Gorakh,	Kabir,	their	whole	effort
through	the	centuries,	has	been	how	to	escape	from	the	wheel	of	life	and	death:
how	to	enclose	yourself,	how	to	completely	cut	yourself	from	all	relationships,
how	 to	 be	 unrelated,	 detached,	 how	 to	move	 in	 and	 to	 forget	 the	 outer.	That's
why	Zen	was	born	in	India.
Zen	means	DHYAN.	Zen	is	a	Japanese	change	of	the	word	DHYAN.	DHYAN	is
the	whole	effort	of	Indian	consciousness.	DHYAN	means	to	be	so	alone,	so	into
your	own	being,	that	not	even	a	single	thought	exists.	In	fact,	in	English,	there	is
no	direct	translation.
Contemplation	is	not	the	word.	Contemplation	means	thinking,	reflection.	Even
meditation	 is	 not	 the	 word	 because	meditation	 involves	 an	 object	 to	meditate
upon;	 it	 means	 something	 is	 there.	 You	 can	 meditate	 on	 Christ,	 or	 you	 can
meditate	on	the	cross.	But	DHYAN	means	to	be	so	alone	that	there	is	nothing	to
meditate	upon.	No	object,	just	simple	subjectivity	exists	-
consciousness	without	clouds,	a	pure	sky.
When	the	word	reached	China	it	became	CH'AN.	When	CH'AN	reached	Japan,
it	became	Zen.	It	comes	from	the	same	Sanskrit	root,	DHYAN.
India	can	give	birth	 to	DHYAN.	For	millennia	 the	whole	Indian	consciousness
has	been	travelling	on	the	path	of	DHYAN	-	how	to	drop	all	thinking	and	how	to
be	 rooted	 in	 pure	 consciousness.	 With	 Buddha	 the	 seed	 came	 into	 existence.
Many	 times	before	also,	before	Gautam	Buddha,	 the	seed	came	 into	existence,
but	it	couldn't	find	the	right	soil	so	it	disappeared.	And	if	the	seed	is	given	to	the
Indian	 consciousness	 it	 will	 disappear,	 because	 the	 Indian	 consciousness	 will
move	more	and	more	inwards,	and	the	seed	will	become	smaller	and	smaller	and
smaller,	 until	 a	moment	 comes	when	 it	 becomes	 invisible.	A	 centripetal	 force
makes	things	smaller,	smaller,	smaller	-	atomic	-	until	suddenly	they	disappear.
Many	 times	 before	 Gautam	 Buddha	 the	 seed	 was	 born	 -	 and	 to	 become	 a
DHYANI,	 to	 become	 a	 great	meditator.	 In	 fact	 he	 is	 one	 of	 the	 last	 of	 a	 long
series.	He	himself	remembers	twenty-
-four	Jaina
Teerthankaras	and	they	all	were	meditators.	They	did	nothing	else,	 they	simply
meditated,	meditated,	meditated,	and	came	to	a	point	where	only	they	were,	and
everything	else	disappeared,	evaporated.
The	seed	was	born	with	Parasnath,	with	Mahavir,	Neminath,	and	others,	but	then
it	 remained	with	 the	 Indian	 consciousness.	The	 Indian	 consciousness	 can	 give
birth	to	a	seed,	but	cannot	become	the	right	soil	for	it.	It	goes	on	working	in	the
same	direction	and	the	seed	becomes	smaller	and	smaller,	molecular,	atomic	and
disappears.	That's	how	it	happened	with	the	Upanishads;	that's	how	it	happened
with	the	Vedas;	that's	how	it	happened	with	Mahavir	and	all	others.
With	Buddha	it	was	also	going	to	happen.	Bodhidharma	saved	him.	If	the	seed
had	been	 left	with	 the	 Indian	consciousness,	 it	would	have	dissolved.	 It	would
never	have	sprouted,	because	a	different	type	of	soil	is	needed	for	sprouting	-	a
very	balanced	soil.	Introversion	is	a	very	deep	imbalance,	it	is	an	extreme.
Bodhidharma	escaped	with	the	seed	to	China.	He	did	one	of	the	greatest	things
in	the	history	of	consciousness:	he	found	the	right	soil	for	the	seed	that	Buddha
had	given	to	the	world.
Buddha	himself	is	reported	to	have	said:	My	religion	will	not	exist	for	more	than
500
years;	then	it	will	disappear.	He	was	aware	that	it	always	happened	that	way.	The
Indian	 consciousness	 goes	 on	 grinding	 it	 into	 smaller	 and	 smaller	 and	 smaller
pieces;	 then	 a	 moment	 comes	 when	 it	 becomes	 so	 small	 that	 it	 becomes
invisible.	It	is	simply	no	longer	part	of	this	world;	it	disappears	into	the	sky.
3
Bodhidharma's	 experiment	 was	 great.	 He	 looked	 all	 around	 the	 world	 and
observed	deeply	for	a	place	where	this	seed	could	grow.
China	is	a	very	balanced	country,	not	like	India,	not	like	Japan.	The	golden	mean
is	the	path	there.	Confucian	ideology	is	to	remain	always	in	the	middle:	neither
be	introvert,	nor	be	extrovert;	neither	think	too	much	of	this	world,	nor	too	much
of	that	world	-	just	remain	in	the	middle.	China	has	not	given	birth	to	a	religion,
just	morality.	No	religion	has	been	born	there;	the	Chinese	consciousness	cannot
give	 birth	 to	 a	 religion.	 It	 cannot	 create	 a	 seed.	All	 the	 religions	 that	 exist	 in
China	 have	 been	 imported,	 they	 have	 all	 come	 from	 the	 outside;	 Buddhism,
Hinduism,	Mohammedanism,	Christianity	-	they	have	all	come	from	the	outside.
China	is	a	good	soil	but	 it	cannot	originate	any	religion,	because	to	originate	a
religion	one	has	to	move	into	the	inner	world.	To	give	birth	to	a	religion	one	has
to	be	like	a	feminine	body,	a	womb.
The	feminine	consciousness	is	extremely	introvert.	A	woman	lives	in	herself;	she
has	a	very	small	world	around	her,	the	most	minimum	possible.	That	is	why	you
cannot	interest	a	woman	in	things	of	great	vastness.	No.	You	cannot	talk	about
Vietnam	 to	 her,	 she	 doesn't	 bother.	Vietnam	 is	 too	 far	 away,	 too	 outer.	 She	 is
concerned	 with	 her	 family,	 her	 husband,	 the	 child,	 the	 dog,	 the	 furniture,	 the
radio	set,	the	TV.	A	very	small	world	is	around	her,	just	the	minimum.	Because
she	doesn't	have	a	very	big	world	around	it	is	very	difficult	for	man	and	woman
to	 talk	 intelligently	 -	 they	 live	 in	 different	worlds.	A	woman	 is	 beautiful	 only
when	she	keeps	quiet;	the	moment	she	starts	talking	then	stupid	things	come	out
of	her.	She	cannot	 talk	 intelligently.	She	cannot	be	very	philosophic;	no,	 that's
not	possible.	These	things	are	too	far	away,	she	doesn't	bother.	She	lives	in	the
very	 small	 circle	 of	 her	 own	world,	 and	 she	 is	 the	 center.	 And	whatsoever	 is
meaningful	 is	 meaningful	 only	 in	 concern	 to	 herself	 -	 otherwise	 it	 is	 not
meaningful.	She	cannot	 see	why	you	are	bothered	about	Vietnam.	What	 is	 the
matter	with	you?	You	are	not	related	to	the	Vietnamese	at	all.	Whether	there	is	a
war	happening	or	not,	it	is	no	concern	of	yours.	And	the	child	is	ill	and	you	are
bothering	 about	Vietnam!	She	 cannot	 believe	 that	 she	 is	 present	 near	 you	 and
you	are	reading	the	newspaper.
Women	live	in	a	different	world.	A	woman	is	centripetal,	 introvert.	All	women
are	Indian	-
wherever	 they	are	 it	makes	no	difference.	Man	is	centrifugal,	he	goes	out.	The
moment	he	can	find	an	excuse	he	will	escape	from	the	home.	He	comes	to	the
home	only	when	he	cannot	go	anywhere	else;	when	all	the	clubs	and	hotels	are
closed,	then,	what	to	do?	He	comes	back	home.	Nowhere	to	go,	he	comes	home.
A	woman	 is	always	home-centered,	home	based.	She	goes	out	only	when	 it	 is
absolutely	 necessary,	 when	 she	 cannot	 do	 otherwise.	When	 it	 has	 become	 an
absolute	necessity	she	goes	out.	Otherwise	she	is	home	based.
Man	is	a	vagabond,	a	wanderer.	The	whole	of	family	life	is	created	by	women,
not	by	men.
In	 fact,	 civilization	 exists	 because	 of	 woman,	 not	 because	 of	 man.	 If	 he	 is
allowed	 he	 will	 be	 a	 wanderer	 -	 no	 home,	 no	 civilization.	 Man	 is	 outgoing,
woman	 is	 in-going;	 man	 is	 extrovert,	 woman	 is	 introvert.	 Man	 is	 always
interested	 in	 something	 other	 than	 himself,	 that's	 why	 he	 looks	 healthier.
Because	when	you	are	too	concerned	with	yourself,	you	become	ill.	Man	is	more
happy	looking.
You	will	 always	 find	women	 sad	 and	 too	 concerned	with	 themselves.	 A	 little
headache	and	 they	are	very	concerned,	because	 they	 live	 inside	-	 the	headache
becomes	something	big,	out	of	proportion.	But	a	man	can	forget	 the	headache;
he	has	too	many	other	headaches.	He	creates	so	many	headaches	around	himself
that	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 coming	 upon	 his	 own	 headache	 and	 making
something	 out	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 always	 so	 little	 he	 can	 forget	 about	 it.	 A	woman	 is
always	 concerned	 -	 something	 is	 happening	 in	 the	 leg,	 something	 in	 the	hand,
something	 in	 the	back,	 something	 in	 the	 stomach,	 always	 something	 -	because
her	own	4
consciousness	 is	 focused	 inwards.	 A	 man	 is	 less	 pathological,	 more	 healthy,
more	outgoing,	more	concerned	about	what	is	happening	to	others.
That's	why,	 in	all	 religions,	you	will	 find	 that	 if	 there	are	 five	persons	present,
four	will	 be	women,	 and	 one	 a	man.	And	 that	 one	man	may	 have	 only	 come
because	of	some	woman	-	the	wife	was	going	to	the	temple	so	he	had	to	go	with
her.	Or,	she	was	going	to	listen	to	a	talk	on	religion,	so	he	came	with	her.	In	all
churches	this	will	be	the	proportion,	in	all	churches,	temples,	wherever	you	go.
Even	with	Buddha	this	was	the	proportion,	with	Mahavir	this	was	the	proportion.
With	Buddha	there	were	fifty	thousand	SANNYASINS	-	forty	thousand	women
and	ten	thousand	men.	Why?
Physically	 man	 can	 be	 healthier;	 spiritually	 woman	 can	 be	 healthier,	 because
their	concerns	are	different.	When	you	are	concerned	with	others	you	can	forget
your	body,	you	can	be	more	physically	healthy,	but	religiously	you	cannot	grow
so	 easily.	Religious	 growth	 needs	 an	 inner	 concern.	A	woman	 can	 grow	 very,
very	 easily	 into	 religion,	 that	 path	 is	 easy	 for	 her,	 but	 to	 grow	 in	 politics	 is
difficult.	 And	 for	 a	 man	 to	 grow	 in	 religion	 is	 difficult.	 Introversion	 has	 its
benefits;	extroversion	has	its	benefits	-	and	both	have	their	dangers.
India	is	introvert,	a	feminine	country;	it	is	like	a	womb,	very	receptive.	But	if	a
child	 remains	 in	 the	womb	 for	 ever	 and	 for	 ever	 and	 for	 ever,	 the	womb	will
become	the	grave.	The	child	has	to	move	out	from	the	mother's	womb	otherwise
the	mother	will	kill	the	child	inside.
He	has	to	escape,	to	find	the	world	outside,	a	greater	world.	The	womb	may	be
very	 comfortable	 -	 it	 is!	 Scientists	 say	 we	 have	 not	 yet	 been	 able	 to	 create
anything	more	comfortable	than	the	womb.	With	so	much	scientific	progress	we
have	not	made	anything	more	comfortable.	The	womb	is	just	a	heaven.	But	even
the	child	has	to	leave	that	heaven	and	come	outside	the	mother.	Beyond	a	certain
time	the	mother	can	become	very	dangerous.	The	womb	can	kill,	because	it	will
then	become	an	imprisonment	-	good	for	a	time,	when	the	seed	is	growing,	but
then	the	seed	has	to	be	transplanted	to	the	outside	world.
Bodhidharma	 looked	 around,	 watched	 the	whole	world,	 and	 found	 that	 China
had	the	best	soil;	it	was	just	a	middle	ground,	not	extreme.	The	climate	was	not
extreme,	so	the	tree	could	grow	easily.	And	it	had	very	balanced	people.	Balance
is	 the	 right	 soil	 for	 something	 to	 grow:	 too	 cold	 is	 bad,	 too	 hot	 is	 bad.	 In	 a
balanced	climate,	neither	too	cold	nor	too	hot,	the	tree	can	grow.
Bodhidharma	escaped	with	 the	 seed,	escaped	with	all	 that	 India	had	produced.
Nobody	was	aware	of	what	he	was	doing,	but	it	was	a	great	experiment.	And	he
proved	right.	In	China,	the	tree	grew,	grew	to	vast	proportions.
But	although	the	tree	became	vaster	and	vaster,	no	flowers	grew.	Flowers	did	not
come,	because	flowers	need	and	extrovert	country.	Just	as	a	seed	is	introvert,	so
a	 flower	 is	 extrovert.	 The	 seed	 is	 moving	 inwards;	 the	 flower	 is	 moving
outwards.	 The	 seed	 is	 like	male	 consciousness.	 The	 flower	 opens	 to	 the	 outer
world	and	releases	its	fragrance	to	this	outside	world.	Then	the	fragrance	moves
on	 the	 wings	 of	 the	 wind	 to	 the	 farthest	 possible	 corner	 of	 the	 world.	 To	 all
directions,	the	flower	releases	the	energy	contained	in	the	seed.	It	is	a	door.
Flowers	would	like	to	become	butterflies	and	escape	from	the	tree.	In	fact,	that	is
what	they	are	doing,	in	a	very	subtle	way.	They	are	releasing	the	essence	of	the
tree,	the	very	meaning,	the	significance	of	the	tree	to	the	world.	They	are	great
sharers.	 A	 seed	 is	 a	 great	 miser,	 confined	 to	 it	 self,	 and	 a	 flower	 is	 a	 great
spendthrift.
Japan	 was	 needed.	 Japan	 is	 an	 extrovert	 country.	 The	 very	 style	 of	 life	 and
consciousness	 is	 extrovert.	 Look...	 in	 India	 nobody	 bothers	 about	 the	 outside
world	 very	 much:	 about	 clothes,	 houses,	 the	 way	 one	 lives.	 Nobody	 bothers.
That	is	why	India	has	remained	so	poor.
If	 you	 are	 not	worried	 about	 the	 outside	world,	 how	 can	 you	 become	 rich?	 If
there	 is	 no	 concern	 to	 improve	 the	 outside	 world	 you	 will	 remain	 poor.	 And
India	is	always	very	serious,	5
drop-outs	from	existence	itself	-	not	only	from	society,	ultimate	drop-outs	from
existence	itself!	The	existence	is	too	boring.	For	the	Indian	eye	life	is	just	a	grey
colour	 -	 nothing	 interesting	 in	 it,	 everything	 just	 boring,	 a	 burden.	One	has	 to
carry	it	somehow,	because	of	past	karmas.	Even	if	an	Indian	falls	in	love	he	says
it	 is	 because	 of	 past	 karmas,	 one	 has	 to	 pass	 through	 it.	 Even	 love	 is	 like	 a
burden	one	has	to	drag.
India	seems	to	be	leaning	more	towards	death	than	life.	An	introvert	has	to	lean
towards	 death.	 That's	 why	 India	 has	 evolved	 all	 the	 techniques	 how	 to	 die
perfectly,	 of	 how	 to	 die	 so	 perfectly	 that	 you	 are	 not	 born	 again.	Death	 is	 the
goal,	 not	 life.	 Life	 is	 for	 fools,	 death	 is	 for	 those	 who	 are	 wise.	 Howsoever
beautiful	a	Buddha,	a	Mahavir	may	be,	you	will	find	them	closed;	around	them	a
great	 aura	 of	 indifference	 exists.	 Whatsoever	 is	 happening,	 they	 are	 not
concerned	at	all.	Whether	it	happens	this	way	or	that	way	makes	no	difference;
whether	the	world	goes	on	living	or	dies,	it	makes	no	difference...	a	tremendous
indifference.	In	this	indifference	flowering	is	not	possible;	in	this	inner-confined
state,	flowering	is	impossible.
Japan	 is	 totally	 different.	With	 the	 Japanese	 consciousness	 it	 is	 as	 if	 the	 inner
doesn't	 exist,	 only	 the	 outer	 is	 meaningful.	 Look	 at	 Japanese	 dresses.	 All	 the
colours	of	flowers	and	rainbows	-	as	if	the	outer	is	very	meaningful.	Look	at	an
Indian	when	he	is	eating,	and	look	at	 the	Japanese.	Look	at	an	Indian	when	he
takes	his	tea	-	and	the	Japanese.
Japanese	 create	 a	 celebration	 out	 of	 simple	 things.	 Taking	 tea,	 he	 makes	 it	 a
celebration.	 It	 becomes	 an	 art.	The	 outside	 is	 very	 important;	 clothes	 are	 very
important,	 relationships	 are	 very	 important.	 You	 cannot	 find	 more	 out-going
people	in	the	world	than	the	Japanese	-
always	smiling	and	 looking	happy.	For	 the	 Indian	 they	will	 look	shallow;	 they
will	not	 look	serious.	 Indians	are	 the	 introvert	people	and	 the	Japanese	are	 the
extrovert:	they	are	opposites.
Japanese	is	always	moving	in	society.	The	whole	Japanese	culture	is	concerned
with	how	to	create	a	beautiful	society,	how	to	create	beautiful	relationships	-	in
everything,	in	every	minute	thing	-	how	to	give	them	significance.	Their	houses
are	so	beautiful.	Even	a	poor	man's	house	has	a	beauty	of	its	own;	it	is	artistic,	it
has	its	own	uniqueness.
It	may	 not	 be	 very	 rich,	 but	 still	 it	 is	 rich	 in	 a	 certain	 sense	 -	 because	 of	 the
beauty,	 the	 arrangement,	 the	 mind	 that	 has	 been	 brought	 to	 every	 small,	 tiny
detail:	where	 the	window	should	be,	what	 type	of	curtain	should	be	used,	how
the	moon	should	be	invited	from	the	window,	from	where.	Very	small	things,	but
every	detail	is	important.
With	the	Indian	nothing	matters.	If	you	go	to	an	Indian	temple,	it	is	without	any
windows;	there	is	nothing,	no	hygiene,	no	concern	with	air,	ventilation	-	nothing.
Even	temples	are	ugly,	and	anything	goes
dirt	 or	 dust,	 nobody	 bothers.	 Just	 in	 front	 of	 the	 temple	 you	 will	 find	 cows
sitting,	 dogs	 fighting,	 people	 praying.	Nobody	 bothers.	No	 sense	 of	 the	 outer,
they	are	not	at	all	concerned	with	the	outer.
Japan	is	very	concerned	with	the	outer	-	just	at	the	other	extreme.	Japan	was	the
right	country.	And	the	whole	tree	of	Zen	was	transplanted	in	Japan,	and	there	it
blossomed,	in	thousands	of	colours.	It	flowered.
This	is	how	it	has	to	happen	again.	I	am	again	talking	about	Zen.	It	has	to	come
back	 to	 India	 because	 the	 tree	 has	 flowered,	 and	 the	 flowers	 have	 fallen	 and
Japan	cannot	create	the	seed.	Japan	cannot	create	the	seed:	it	is	not	an	introvert
country.	So	everything	has	become	an	outer	ritual	now.	Zen	is	dead	in	Japan.	It
did	flower	in	the	past,	but	now,	if	by	reading	in	books	-	reading	D.	T.	Suzuki	and
others	-	if	you	go	to	Japan	in	search	of	Zen,	you	will	come	back	empty-handed.
Now	 Zen	 is	 here;	 in	 Japan	 it	 has	 disappeared.	 The	 country	 could	 help	 it	 to
flower,	but	now	the	flowers	have	disappeared,	fallen	to	the	earth,	and	nothing	is
there	any	more.	There	are	rituals	-	the	Japanese	are	very	ritualistic	-	rituals	exist.
Everything	 in	Zen	monasteries	 is	 still	 continued	 the	 same	way,	 as	 if	 the	 inner
spirit	 is	 still	 there,	but	 the	 inner	shrine	 is	vacant	and	empty.	The	master	of	 the
house	has	moved.	The	God	is	there	no	more	-
just	 empty	 ritual.	And	 they	 are	 extrovert	 people,	 they	will	 continue	 the	 ritual.
Every	morning	6
they	will	get	up	at	five	-	there	will	be	a	gong	-	they	will	move	to	the	tea-room,
and	they	will	take	their	tea;	they	will	move	to	their	meditation	hall,	and	they	will
sit	with	closed	eyes.
Everything	 will	 be	 followed	 exactly	 as	 if	 the	 spirit	 is	 there,	 but	 it	 has
disappeared.	There	are	monasteries,	 there	are	 thousands	of	monks,	but	 the	 tree
has	flowered	and	seeds	cannot	be	created	there.
Hence	I	am	talking	so	much	about	Zen	here
because,	again,	only	India	can	create	the
seed.	The	whole	world	exists	 in	a	deep	unity,	 in	a	harmony	-	 in	India	 the	seed
can	again	be	given	birth.	But	now	many	things	have	changed	around	the	world.
China	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 possibility,	 because	 it	 has	 itself	 become	 an	 extrovert
country.	 It	 has	 become	 communistic:	 now	 matter	 is	 more	 important	 than	 the
spirit.	And	now	it	is	closed	for	new	waves	of	consciousness.
To	me,	if	any	country	can	in	the	future	become	again	the	soil,	it	is	England.
You	will	be	surprised,	because	you	may	think	it	is	America.	No.	Now	the	most
balanced	 country	 in	 the	 world	 is	 England,	 just	 as	 in	 the	 ancient	 days	 it	 was
China.	The	seed	has	to	be	taken	to	England	and	planted	there;	it	will	not	flower
there,	but	it	will	become	a	big	tree.
English	 consciousness	 -	 conservative,	 always	 following	 the	 middle	 way,	 the
liberal	mind,	never	moving	to	the	extremes,	just	remaining	in	the	middle	-	will
be	helpful.	That	 is	why	 I	am	allowing	more	and	more	English	people	 to	 settle
around	me.	It	is	not	only	for	visa	reasons!
Because	 once	 the	 seed	 is	 ready,	 I	would	 like	 them	 to	 take	 it	 to	England.	And
from	England	 it	 can	 go	 to	America,	 and	 it	will	 have	 flowering	 there,	 because
America	is	the	most	extrovert	country	right	now.
I	tell	you	that	Zen	is	a	rare	phenomenon,	because	only	if	all	these	situations	are
fulfilled	can	such	a	thing	happen.
Now,	 try	 to	 understand	 the	 story.	 These	 small	 anecdotes	 are	 very	meaningful,
because	Zen	people	say	that	that	which	arises	in	the	depth	of	your	being	cannot
be	said,	but	it	can	be	shown.	A	situation	can	be	created	in	which	it	can	be	hinted
at;	words	may	not	be	able	 to	 tell	 anything	about	 it,	 but	 an	alive	anecdote	 can.
That	 is	why	Zen	is	so	anecdotal.	 It	 lives	 in	parables,	 indicates	 in	parables,	and
nobody	 else	 has	 been	 able	 to	 create	 such	 beautiful	 parables.	 There	 are	 Sufi
stories,	 there	 are	 Hassid	 stories,	 and	 there	 are	 many	 others,	 but	 nothing	 to
compare	with	Zen.	Zen	has	simply	got	the	knack	of	hitting	at	the	right	thing	and
indicating	that	which	cannot	be	indicated.	And	in	such	a	simple	way	that	you	can
miss	it:	you	will	have	to	search	for	it,	you	will	have	to	grope	for	it,	because	the
anecdote	in	itself	is	so	simple	that	you	can	miss	it.	It	is	not	very	complex,	in	fact,
the	 mind	 is	 not	 required;	 rather,	 an	 opening	 of	 the	 heart,	 so	 that	 you	 can
understand.
See...	 this	 small	 anecdote	 tells	 the	 whole	 significance	 of	 Zen:	 SOMEBODY
ASKED	THE	MASTER,	BOKUJU:	"WE	HAVE	TO	DRESS	AND	EAT
EVERY	DAY	-	HOW	DO	WE	GET	OUT	OF	ALL	THAT?"
Had	he	 asked	 the	 same	 thing	 to	Buddha,	 the	 answer	would	 not	 have	 been	 the
same.	The	 answer	would	 have	 come	 from	 the	 seed-mind.	Buddha	would	 have
said:	All	is	illusory	-
eating,	dressing,	everything	is	illusory.	Become	more	aware.	See	the	illusoriness
and	dreaminess	of	the	world.	All	is	MAYA.	Become	more	aware	and	don't	try	to
find	how	to	get	out	of	it,	because	how	can	one	get	out	of	a	dream?	One	simply
becomes	aware	and	one	is	out.
Have	you	seen	anybody	ever	getting	out	of	a	dream?	A	dream	is	unreal,	how	can
you	 get	 out	 of	 it?	 The	miracle	 is	 that	 you	 have	 entered	 it	 in	 the	 first	 place	 -
because	it	is	not	there	and	you	entered	it!	And	now	you	are	creating	more	trouble
for	yourself	asking	how	to	get	out	of	it.
The	same	way	as	you	entered	it,	get	out	of	it!	How	did	you	enter	the	dream?	By
believing	that	it	was	real.	That	is	the	way	one	enters	a	dream	-	by	believing	that
it	is	real.	So	simply	drop	the	7
belief	and	see	that	it	is	not	real;	then	you	are	out	of	the	dream	-	by	believing	that
it	is	real.	So	simply	drop	the	belief	and	see	that	it	is	not	real;	then	you	are	out	of
the	dream.	There	are	no	steps	to	get	out,	no	techniques	to	get	out,	no	methods.
Buddha	would	have	 said:	Look...	 your	whole	 life	 is	 a	 dream	 -	 and	you	would
have	been	out	of	it.
If	 the	Chinese	genius	Confucius	had	been	asked	 -	 the	balanced	mind	which	 is
neither	extrovert	nor	introvert	-	he	would	have	said:	There	is	no	need	to	get	out
of	it.	Follow	these	rules	and	you	will	be	able	to	enjoy	it.	Confucius	would	have
given	a	few	rules:	those	rules	have	to	be	followed,	that's	all.	One	need	not	get	out
of	it.	One	simply	has	to	plan	his	life	in	a	right	way.	One	even	has	to	plan	the	life
of	dream	in	a	right	way!	Confucius	says	that	even	if	in	your	dream	you	commit
something	wrong,	you	have	to	ponder	over	it	-	somewhere	in	your	waking	hours
you	 are	 not	 following	 the	 right	 path.	Otherwise	how	can	you	go	wrong	 in	 the
dream?	Settle	something,	balance	something;	 that's	why	he	had	 three	 thousand
three	hundred	rules.
But	in	Japan	there	would	have	been	a	totally	different	answer:	with	Buddha	the
answer	would	 have	 come	 from	 the	 seed,	with	Confucius	 from	 the	 tree	 -	 from
Bokuju	it	comes	from	the	flower.	Of	course	these	are	different	answers	-	rooted
in	 the	 same	 truth,	 but	 not	 using	 the	 same	 symbols,	 they	 cannot.	What	Bokuju
says	is	simply	flower-like;	it	is	the	most	perfect	possibility.
BOKUJU	ANSWERED:	"WE	DRESS,	WE	EAT."
Such	a	 simple	 answer	 -	 and	 there	 is	 every	possibility	 to	miss.	You	may	 think:
What	is	he	saying?	It	looks	like	gibberish,	nonsense.	The	man	asked:	"We	have
to	dress	and	eat	everyday
-	how	do	we	get	out	of	all	that?"	And	Bokuju	answered:	"We	dress,	we	eat."
What	 is	Bokuju	 saying,	what	 is	 he	 indicating?	A	very	 subtle	 indication.	He	 is
saying:	We	 also	 do	 it	 -	we	 eat,	we	 dress	 -	 but	we	 eat	 so	 totally	 that	 the	 eater
doesn't	exist;	only	eating.	We	dress	so	totally	that	the	dresser	doesn't	come	into
being,	but	only	dressing.	We	walk,	but	there	is	no	walker,	just	the	walk.	So	who
is	this	asking	to	get	out	of	it?
Look	at	the	vast	difference.	Buddha	would	have	said	that	all	this	is	a	dream;	your
eating,	 your	 dressing,	 your	 walking	 -	 and	 Bokuju	 says	 that	 you	 are	 a	 dream.
Tremendous	difference.
Bokuju	is	saying:	Do	not	bring	yourself	in,	simply	eat	and	walk	and	sleep.	Who
is	this	asking	to	get	out	of	it?	Drop	this	ego;	it	is	non-existential,	and	when	you
are	not,	how	can	you	come	out	of	it?	Not	that	walking	is	a	dream,	but	the	walker
is	the	dream.	Not	that	eating	is	a	dream,	but	the	eater.
And	 watch	 minutely	 -	 if	 you	 really	 are	 walking,	 is	 there	 any	 walker	 inside?
Walking	happens,	it	is	a	process.	Legs	move,	hands	move,	you	breathe	more,	the
wind	blows	in	your	face,	you	enjoy;	the	faster	you	go,	the	more	vitality	you	feel
-	everything	is	beautiful.	But	is	there	really	a	walker?	Is	there	somebody	sitting
inside,	or	does	 just	 the	process	exist?	If	you	become	aware,	you	will	 find	only
the	process	exists.	The	ego	is	illusory:	it	is	just	a	mind-creation.	You	eat,	and	you
think	there	must	be	somebody	who	eats,	because	logic	says:	How	can	you	walk
without	a	walker	inside?	How	can	you	eat	without	an	eater	being	there?	How	can
you	love	without	a	lover	being	inside?	This	is	what	logic	says.	But	if	you	have
loved,	and	 if	you	have	come	 to	a	moment	where	 love	 really	existed,	you	must
have	known	that	there	was	no	lover	inside	-	only	love,	a	process,	an	energy;	but
nobody	inside.
You	 meditate,	 but	 is	 there	 any	 meditator?	 And	 when	 meditation	 comes	 to	 a
flowering,	and	all	 thoughts	cease,	who	 is	 there	 inside?	 Is	 there	somebody	who
says	that	all	 thoughts	have	ceased?	If	 that	is	 there,	 then	still	 the	meditation	has
not	flowered;	at	least	one	thought	is	still	there.	When	meditation	flowers	there	is
simply	nobody	to	take	note	of	it,	nobody	to	give	it	8
recognition,	nobody	to	say:	Yes,	 it	has	happened.	The	moment	you	say:	Yes,	 it
has	happened	-
it	is	lost	already.
When	 there	 is	 really	meditation,	 a	 silence	 pervades;	without	 any	 bounds	 bliss
throbs;	without	any	boundaries	 there	 is	a	harmony;	but	 there	 is	nobody	to	 take
note.	There	is	nobody	to	say:	Yes,	this	has	happened.	That's	why	the	Upanishads
say	 that	when	a	person	says:	"I	have	realized!"	you	can	know	well	 that	he	has
not.	That's	why	all	the	B
whenever	 somebody	 claims,	 the	very	 claim	 shows	 that	 he	has	 not	 reached	 the
final	peak	because	at	the	final	peak	the	claimer	disappears.	In	fact,	it	has	never
been	there.	Eating	is	not	a	dream	-	the	eater	is	the	dream.
The	whole	emphasis	has	changed	from	the	seed	to	the	flower.
That's	why	many	people	in	the	West	think	that	to	call	Zen	"Zen	Buddhism"	is	not
good,	because	a	vast	difference	is	felt	 in	the	answers.	But	 they	are	wrong.	Zen
Buddhism	 is	 absolute	 pure	 Buddhism,	 even	 purified	 of	 Buddha,	 purified	 of
Buddhist	 concepts.	 It	 is	 the	 most	 essential,	 the	 purest	 DHYAN,	 the	 purest
flowering	of	 consciousness.	Without	 any	center	you	exist.	Without	 there	being
anybody	 you	 exist.	 You	 are	 and	 still	 you	 are	 not.	 That's	 what	 Tilopa	 is
emphasizing:	no-self,	ANATTA,	emptiness,	void.
What	does	Bokuju	say?	He	says:	"We	dress,	we	eat."	His	answer	is	finished.	His
answer	is	complete,	perfect.	He	says	simply:	we	eat,	and	we	dress,	and	we	have
never	found	any	problem,	and	we	have	never	found	anybody	who	can	come	out.
There	is	nobody	inside.
Eating	exists,	dressing	exists;	ego	does	not.
He	 is	 saying:	 Don't	 ask	 a	 foolish	 question.	 The	 questioner	 had	 said:	 "I	 don't
understand."
He	may	have	come	to	find	some	rules	and	disciplines,	how	to	become	a	religious
man,	how	to	drop	these	trivial	things	of	eating	and	dressing,	that	same	routine;
every	 day,	 again	 and	 again,	 one	 goes	 on	 doing	 the	 same	 thing.	He	must	 have
been	fed	up,	bored;	everybody	comes	to	this	point.	If	you	are	a	little	intelligent,
you	will	have	to	come	to	a	point	when	you	will	feel	bored.
Only	idiots	and	sages	are	never	bored,	otherwise	intelligent	people	are	bound	to
get	fed	up.
What	is	going	on?	Every	day	you	go	to	sleep,	just	to	get	up	again	in	the	morning
and	 then	 the	 breakfast	 and	 then	 the	 going	 to	 the	 office	 and	 then	 this	 and	 then
that.	And	you	know	you	are	doing	all	 this	 to	go	 to	sleep	again,	and	you	know
well	 that	 in	 the	 morning	 again	 the	 same	 routine	 will	 start.	 One	 starts	 feeling
robot-like.
And	if	you	become	aware,	as	in	India,	where	people	have	become	aware	in	the
past,	 that	 this	 has	 been	 going	 on	 for	 millions	 of	 lives,	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 feel
completely	bored	to	death.
That's	why	they	say:	How	to	get	out	of	it?	This	wheel	of	life	and	death	goes	on,
grinding	and	grinding	and	grinding,	and,	just	like	a	broken	gramophone	record,
the	same	line	goes	on	repeating.	This	has	happened	to	you	millions	of	times.	You
fell	in	love,	you	got	married,	you	worked	hard,	you	gave	birth	to	children,	you
struggled,	 you	 died.	Again,	 and	 again,	 and	 again,	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 ad	 nauseam.
That's	 why,	 becoming	 aware	 of	 this	 phenomenon	 of	 continuous	 rebirth,	 India
became	bored;	the	whole	consciousness	became	so	fed	up	that	the	whole	effort
became	"how	to	get	out	of	 it?"	That's	what	 that	man	had	come	 to	ask	Bokuju:
Help	me	get	 out	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 too	much	 and	 I	 don't	 know	 from	where	 to	 escape.
Getting	dressed,	and	eating	every	day	-	how	to	get	out	of	this	dead	routine,	this
rut?	Says	Bokuju:	"We	dress,	we	eat."
He	 says	 many	 things.	 He	 says	 that	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 get	 out,	 so,	 if	 there	 is
nobody,	how	can	you	get	bored?	Who	will	get	bored?
I	also	get	up	every	day	in	the	morning,	 take	my	bath,	eat,	dress,	do	everything
that	you	do.
But	I	am	not	bored,	I	can	go	on	doing	it	until	the	very	end	of	eternity.	Why	am	I
not	bored?
Because	I	am	not	there,	so	who	is	going	to	get	bored?	And	if	you	are	not	there,
who	 is	 going	 to	 say	 that	 it	 is	 a	 repetition?	 Every	morning	 is	 new,	 it	 is	 not	 a
repetition	of	 the	past.	Every	breakfast	 is	new.	Every	moment	 is	new	and	 fresh
like	the	dewdrops	on	the	grass	in	the	9
morning.	 It	 is	because	of	your	memory	 -	collecting	 the	past,	 carrying	 the	past,
and	always	 looking	at	 the	 fresh	moment	 through	 the	past,	 the	dusty	past	 -	 that
you	feel	bored.
Bokuju	lives	in	the	moment	and	doesn't	bring	in	other	moments	to	compare	with
it.	There	is	nobody	who	carries	the	past,	and	there	is	nobody	who	thinks	about
the	future.	There	is	only	a	life	process,	a	river	of	consciousness,	which	goes	on
moving	 from	moment	 to	moment,	 always	 from	 the	 known	 into	 the	 unknown,
always	from	the	familiar	into	the	unfamiliar.	So	who	is	there	to	be	worried	about
getting	out	of	it?	There	is	nobody.	Bokuju	says:	We	eat	and	we	dress,	and	it	 is
finished!	We	don't	create	a	problem	out	of	it.
The	problem	arises	because	of	the	psychological	memory.	You	always	bring	it	in
to	compare	and	to	judge	and	to	condemn.	If	I	show	you	a	flower,	you	don't	see	it
directly;	you	say:	Yes,	this	is	a	beautiful	rose.	What	is	the	need	to	call	it	a	rose?
The	moment	you	call	it	a	rose,	all	the	roses	that	you	have	known	in	the	past	have
come	 into	 it.	The	moment	you	call	 it	 a	 rose,	 you	have	 compared	 it	with	other
flowers,	you	have	identified	it,	you	have	categorized	it.
The	moment	 you	 call	 it	 a	 rose,	 and	 the	moment	 you	 call	 it	 beautiful,	 all	 your
concepts	 of	 beauty,	memories	 of	 roses,	 imaginations,	 everything,	 has	 come	 in.
The	rose	is	lost	in	the	crowd.	This	rose	is	lost	in	the	crowd.	This	beautiful	flower
is	 lost	 in	your	memories	and	imaginations	and	concepts.	Then	you	will	get	fed
up	because	it	will	look	like	other	roses.
What	is	the	difference?	If	you	look	directly	at	this	phenomenon,	at	this	rose,	eyes
fresh,	empty	of	the	past,	consciousness	clear,	perception	unclouded,	doors	open,
words	non-existent,	 if	you	can	be	here,	now,	with	 this	flower	for	a	 little	while,
then	you	will	understand	when	Bokuju	says:	We	dress,	we	eat.
He	 is	saying	do	everything	so	 totally	 in	 the	present	 that	you	cannot	 feel	 it	 is	a
repetition.
And	because	you	are	not	there,	who	is	to	carry	the	past,	and	who	is	to	imagine
the	future?
Absent	 you	 exist,	 and	 then	 a	 different	 quality	 of	 presence	 happens	 to	 you	 -
moment	 to	moment	new,	 flowing,	 loose,	natural.	From	one	moment	 to	another
moment	one	simply	slips,	just	as	a	snake	sometimes	slips	out	of	the	old	skin.	The
old	skin	is	left	behind,	he	never	looks	back;	he	doesn't	carry	the	old	skin.	A	man
of	 awareness	 simply	 slips	 from	 one	 moment	 to	 another,	 just	 like	 a	 dewdrop
slipping	from	the	blade	of	grass,	not	carrying	anything.	A	man	of	awareness	has
no	cargo,	he	moves	unburdened.	Then	everything	is	new,	and	then	no	problems
are	created.
What	Bokuju	 is	 saying	 is	 this:	 It	 is	 better	 not	 to	 create	 a	 problem	because	we
have	not	known	anybody	 to	 solve	any	problems,	ever.	Once	created,	problems
cannot	be	solved.	Don't	create	them,	that	is	the	only	way	to	solve	them.	Because
once	created,	in	the	very	creation	you	have	taken	a	false	step.	Now,	whatsoever
you	do,	that	false	step	won't	allow	you	to	solve	it.	If	you	ask	how	to	drop	the	ego
you	have	created	a	problem	which	cannot	be	solved.	Thousands	of	teachers	exist
who	go	on	teaching	you	how	to	solve	it,	how	to	be	humble	and	how	not	to	be	an
egoist.	 Nothing	 happens	 -	 in	 your	 humility	 also,	 you	 remain	 egoists;	 in	 your
egolessness	also,	you	carry	a	subtle	ego.	No.	Those	who	know	will	not	help	you
to	solve	any	problems.
They	will	simply	ask	where	the	ego	is.	They	will	ask	where,	in	fact,	the	problem
is.	 They	will	 help	 you	 to	 understand	 the	 problem,	 not	 to	 solve	 it,	 because	 the
problem	is	false.	The	answer	cannot	be	right	if	the	question	is	wrong.	If	the	very
question	is	rooted	in	something	wrong,	then	all	answers	given	will	be	futile	and
they	will	lead	you	to	more	false	questions.	It	will	become	a	vicious	circle	-	that's
how	 philosophers	 become	mad.	Not	 looking	 at	 the	wrongness	 of	 the	 question
they	create	an	answer;	and	 then	 the	answer	creates	more	questions.	No	answer
solves	anything.
Then	what	 is	 to	be	done?	What	does	Zen	 say?	Zen	 says:	Look	at	 the	problem
itself,	there	the	answer	is	hidden.	Look	at	the	question	deeply,	and	if	the	look	is
perfect,	 the	 question	 disappears.	 No	 question	 is	 ever	 answered,	 it	 simply
disappears;	and,	when	it	disappears,	it	disappears	without	a	trace.
10
He	is	saying:	Where	is	the	problem?	We	also	eat,	we	also	dress,	but	we	simply
eat	and	dress.	Why	create	a	problem?	Bokuju	is	saying:	Accept	life	as	it	is.	Don't
create	problems.
One	has	to	eat	-	eat.	There	is	hunger,	you	have	not	created	it,	it	has	to	be	fulfilled
-	fulfil	it.
But	don't	create	a	problem.
When	people	come	to	me	this	is	the	whole	situation,	every	day.	They	bring	their
problems	but	I	have	not	come	across	a	single	problem,	because	there	are	none.
You	create	 them,	and	 then	you	want	an	answer	 to	 them.	There	are	people	who
will	give	you	answers:	those	are	small	teachings.	And	there	are	people	who	will
give	you	an	insight	into	your	problem:	that	is	the	great	teaching.	Small	teachings
lead	 to	 forced	 disciplines,	 and	 great	 teachings	 allow	you	 to	 become	 loose	 and
natural.
BOKUJU	SAYS:	"WE	DRESS,	WE	EAT."
But	the	man	could	not	understand.	Of	course,	it	is	difficult	to	understand	such	a
simple	thing.	People	can	understand	complex	things	but	they	cannot	understand
simple	things.
Because	a	complex	thing	can	be	divided,	analyzed,	logically	tackled,	but	what	is
to	 be	 done	with	 a	 simple	 thing?	You	 cannot	 analyze	 it,	 you	 cannot	 cut	 it	 into
pieces,	you	cannot	dissect	it
-	there	is	nothing	to	dissect.	It	is	so	simple.	And	because	it	is	so	simple	you	miss
it.	The	man	could	not	understand.	But	still,	I	think,	the	man	was	sincere,	because
he	said:	"I	don't	understand."
There	are	very	complex	people	who	will	nod	their	heads	to	show	that	they	have
understood.	 These	 are	 great	 fools:	 nobody	 can	 help	 them	 because	 they	 go	 on
pretending	that	 they	understand.	They	cannot	say	 that	 they	don't	understand.	 If
they	say	this,	they	will	look	idiotic	to	themselves.	They	pretend.	How	can	they
not	 understand	 such	 a	 simple	 thing?	 They	 go	 on	 showing	 that	 they	 have
understood,	and	now	more	complexities	will	arise.	In	the	first	place	there	is	no
problem,	 and	 in	 the	 second	 place	 they	 have	 understood	 the	 answer!	 Problem
doesn't	exist,	and	now	they	have	gained	knowledge	about	the	problem:	they	say
they	understand!	They	become	more	and	more	puzzled,	just	a	mess	inside.	Such
people	come	to	me	and	I	can	see	inside	them	-	they	are	just	a	mess,	a	hotchpotch.
They	have	not	understood	anything.	They	have	not	even	understood	what	 their
problems	are,	and	they	have	the	answers.
Not	only	that,	they	start	helping	others	to	solve	their	problems.
This	man	must	have	been	sincere.	He	said:	"I	don't	understand."	This	is	a	good
step	 towards	 understanding.	 If	 you	 don't	 understand,	 you	 can	 understand;	 the
possibility	is	open.
You	 are	 humble,	 you	 recognize	 the	 difficulty,	 you	 recognize	 that	 you	 are
ignorant.	 This	 is	 the	 first	 step	 towards	 knowing,	 towards	 understanding:	 to
recognize	that	you	don't	understand.	At	least	he	understood	this	much.	And	this
is	a	great	step.
BOKUJU	ANSWERED:	 "IF	YOU	DON'T	UNDERSTAND,	 PUT	ON	YOUR
CLOTHES
AND	EAT	YOUR	FOOD."
Bokuju	does	not	 look	very	compassionate,	but	he	 is.	He	 is	 saying:	You	cannot
understand,	 because	 the	 mind	 never	 understands.	 The	 mind	 is	 a	 great	 non-
understander;	 the	 mind	 is	 the	 very	 root	 of	 ignorance.	 Why	 can't	 the	 mind
understand?	 Because	 the	 mind	 is	 just	 a	 tiny	 part	 of	 your	 being,	 and	 the	 part
cannot	understand,	only	the	whole	can	understand.	Always	remember	this:	only
your	 total	being	can	understand	something,	no	part	can.	Neither	your	head	nor
your	heart,	nor	your	hands,	nor	your	legs,	can	understand	-	only	your	total	being.
Understanding	 is	of	 the	 total,	misunderstanding	 is	of	 the	part.	The	part	 always
misunderstands,	because	the	part	tries	to	pretend	as	the	whole;	that	is	the	whole
problem.	The	mind	tries	to	say	that	it	is	the	whole	understanding,	but	it	is	just	a
part.
11
When	you	fall	asleep,	where	is	your	mind?	The	body	continues	without	it.	The
body	digests	 food;	 there	 is	no	need	 for	 the	mind.	Your	brain	 can	be	 taken	out
completely	and	your	body	will	continue.	It	will	digest	food,	it	will	grow,	it	will
throw	dead	things	out	of	the	body.
Now	scientists	have	come	to	feel	that	the	mind	is	just	a	luxury.	The	body	has	its
own	wisdom;	it	doesn't	bother	about	the	mind.	Have	you	ever	observed	that	the
mind	 goes	 on	 playing	 at	 being	 the	 great	 knower,	 without	 having	 the	 slightest
feeling	 that	all	 that	 is	 important	 in	 the	body	goes	on	without	 it?	You	eat	 food.
The	body	doesn't	ask	the	mind	how	to	digest	it;	and	it	is	a	very	complex	process.
It	is	not	easy	to	transform	food	into	blood,	but	the	body	transforms	it	and	goes
on	working.	It	is	a	very	complicated	process	because	thousands	of	elements	are
involved.	 In	 right	 proportions,	 the	 body	 releases	 juices,	 which	 are	 needed	 to
digest	the	food.
Then	it	absorbs	that	which	is	needed	for	the	body	and	it	leaves	that	which	is	not
needed,	it	 throws	out	the	excreta.	In	the	body,	every	second,	thousands	of	cells
are	 dying;	 the	 body	goes	 on	 throwing	 them	out	 of	 the	 bloodstream.	There	 are
millions	of	needs	for	hormones,	vitamins,	and	millions	of	 things,	and	 the	body
goes	on	finding	them	from	the	atmosphere.	When	the	body	needs	more	oxygen,
it	 takes	 deep	 breaths.	 When	 the	 body	 doesn't	 need	 it,	 it	 relaxes	 breathing.
Everything	goes	on	-	mind	is	just	a	part	in	this	whole	mechanism,	and	not	very
essential.	Without	the	mind	animals	exist,	 trees	exist,	and	exist	beautifully.	But
the	 mind	 is	 a	 great	 pretender.	 It	 simply	 pretends	 that	 it	 is	 the	 base,	 the
foundation,	 the	 peak,	 the	 climax.	 It	 goes	 on	 pretending.	 You	 just	 watch	 your
mind	and	you	will	see.	With	this	pretender	you	want	to	understand?	This	is	the
only	false	note	within	you.
What	is	Bokuju	saying?	He	says:	"If	you	don't	understand,	put	on	your	clothes
and	eat	your	food."	Don't	bother	about	understanding.	You	just	be	 like	us	-	eat
and	 dress,	 and	 don't	 try	 to	 understand.	 The	 very	 effort,	 the	 very	movement	 to
understand	creates	misunderstanding.
There	 is	no	need.	Simply	 live	and	be.	That's	what	Bokuju	says:	Eat	and	dress,
just	be.	Forget	about	understanding,	what	is	the	need?	If	trees	can	exist	without
understanding,	what	is	the	need	for	you?	If	the	whole	existence	is	there	without
understanding,	 why	 bother?	 Why	 bring	 this	 small	 tiny	 mind	 in	 and	 create
problems?	Relax	and	be!
Bokuju	 is	 saying	 that	 the	understanding	comes	 from	 the	 total.	You	simply	eat,
don't	try	to	understand.	You	simply	move,	walk,	love,	sleep,	eat,	take	your	bath.
Be	total.	Let	things	happen.	Simply	be.	And	don't	try	to	understand,	because	the
very	effort	to	try,	the	very	effort	to	understand,	creates	a	problem.	You	become
divided.	Don't	create	the	problem	-	just	be.
Try	this	sometime.	I	would	like	you	to	try	this:	sometime	go	into	the	mountains
for	three	weeks	and	just	be.	Don't	try	to	understand	anything	-	just	be,	naturally
loose.	When	you	feel	like	sleeping,	go	to	sleep.	When	you	feel	like	eating,	eat.	If
you	don't	feel	like	eating,	don't	eat.	There	is	no	urgency.	Just	leave	everything	to
the	 body,	 to	 the	 total.	Mind	 is	 a	 creator	 of	 problems.	 Sometimes	 it	 says:	 Eat
more,	the	food	is	very	delicious!	And	when	the	body	says:	Enough,	wait,	don't
force	anything	any	more	-	you	don't	listen	to	the	total.	The	total	is	wise.	In	that
total,	your	mind,	your	body,	everything,	is	involved.
Not	that	I	am	saying	cut	the	mind	off	-	that	too	would	be	unnatural,	that	too	is	a
part.	The	mind	must	have	its	own	place,	its	own	proportion,	but	it	should	not	be
allowed	 to	 be	 the	 dictator.	 If	 it	 becomes	 the	 dictator,	 then	 it	 creates	 problems.
And	then	it	seeks	solutions,	and	solutions	create	more	problems,	and	you	go	on
until	you	end	up	in	a	madhouse.
Mind's	 destiny	 is	 the	 madhouse.	 Those	 who	 go	 fast,	 of	 course,	 reach	 earlier;
those	who	 go	 slowly,	 they	 reach	 a	 little	 later	 -	 but	 everybody	 is	 in	 the	 queue.
Mind's	destiny	is	the	madhouse,	because	a	part	trying	to	pretend	to	be	the	whole
is	already	mad,	insane.
And	 all	 religions	 have	 helped	 to	 create	 divisions	 in	 you.	 All	 religions	 have
helped	the	mind	to	become	more	and	more	dictatorial.	They	say:	Kill	the	body.
And	 you	 don't	 understand	what	 you	 are	 doing,	 and	 you	 start	 killing	 the	 body.
Mind	and	body	and	soul	-	 they	all	exist	 together,	 in	a	 togetherness.	They	are	a
togetherness.	Don't	divide;	divisions	are	false,	divisions	are	12
political.	 If	you	divide,	 the	mind	becomes	 the	dictator	because	 the	mind	 is	 the
most	articulate	part	in	the	body.	There	is	nothing	else	in	it.
It	happens	 in	 life	also:	 if	 a	man	 is	more	articulate,	he	will	become	a	 leader	of
men.	If	he	can	talk	well,	if	he	is	an	orator,	if	he	can	manipulate	language,	he	will
become	 the	 leader.	Not	 that	 he	 is	 capable	 of	 being	 a	 leader,	 but	 he	 is	 a	 good
talker,	 he	 impresses	 people's	minds,	 he	 is	 a	 good	 persuader,	 a	 good	 salesman,
articulate.	That's	why	orators	lead	the	world.	Of	course,	they	lead	it	into	a	deeper
and	deeper	mess	because	they	are	not	leaders	of	men.	They	don't	have	any	other
quality	than	talk.	So	your	parliaments	are	nothing	but	talking-houses.	People	go
on	talking,	and	the	one	who	can	manipulate	language	better	becomes	the	head.
That's	why	your	parliament	and	your	madhouses	are	not	very	different	-	they	are
the	same.
The	 quality	 of	 being	 total	 is	 totally	 different.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 being
articulate;	 it	 is	 rather	 a	 question	 of	 giving	 every	 part	 its	 proportion.	 It	 is	 a
harmony.	It	is	giving	your	life	a	harmonious	rhythm	with	everything	existing	in
it.	Then	 the	mind	 is	also	beautiful.	Then	 it	doesn't	 lead	you	 to	 the	madhouses.
Then	the	mind	becomes	the	greater	mind,	the	mind	becomes	the	enlightenment.
But	 your	 whole	 exists	 as	 a	 whole;	 you	 don't	 divide	 yourself;	 your	 wisdom
remains	 undivided.	 That's	 what	 Bokuju	 is	 saying,	 and	 that	 is	 what	 Zen	 is	 all
about.
That's	why	I	say	that	Zen	is	a	rare	phenomenon.	No	other	religion	has	reached	to
such	 a	 great	 flowering.	 Because	 Zen	 has	 come	 to	 understand	 that	 the
understanding	is	of	the	total	-	you	eat,	you	sleep,	you	be	natural	and	you	be	total,
and	don't	 try	 to	divide	yourself,	mind	and	body,	 soul	and	matter.	Don't	divide.
With	 division	 comes	 conflict	 and	 violence,	 with	 division	 come	 millions	 of
problems,	and	there	are	no	solutions.	Rather,	there	is	only	one	solution	and	that
is	to	be	whole	again,	to	leave	everything	to	the	natural	totality.
The	mind	will	 be	 there	but	 its	 function	will	 be	 totally	different.	 I	 also	use	 the
mind.	I	am	talking	to	you,	 the	mind	is	needed.	For	communication	the	mind	is
needed;	in	fact	it	is	a	communication	device.	For	memory	the	mind	is	needed.	It
is	 a	 computer.	But	 to	be,	 your	whole	 is	 needed.	 In	 the	body	 -	 and	when	 I	 say
"body"	I	mean	your	whole:	body,	mind,	soul	-
everything	has	its	own	functioning.	If	I	want	to	catch	something,	I	will	use	my
hand.	If	I	want	to	move,	I	will	use	my	legs.	If	I	want	to	communicate,	I	will	use
my	mind.	That's	all.
Otherwise	I	remain	as	a	whole.	And	when	I	use	my	hands,	my	whole	backs	my
hands.	 They	 are	 not	 used	 against	 the	 whole,	 but	 with	 the	 co-operation	 of	 the
whole.	 When	 I	 use	 my	 legs	 and	 walk,	 they	 are	 used	 by	 the	 whole,	 in	 co-
operation.	 In	 fact,	 they	 are	 functioning,	 walking	 for	 the	 whole,	 not	 for
themselves.	If	I	talk	to	you,	communicate,	I	use	the	mind	for	the	whole.
If	I	have	something	in	my	whole	being	that	I	would	like	to	communicate,	I	use
my	mind,	I	use	my	hands	and	my	gestures,	I	use	my	eyes;	but	they	are	used	by
the	 whole.	 The	 whole	 remains	 the	 supreme.	 The	 whole	 remains	 the	 master.
When	 the	 parts	 become	 the	 master,	 then	 you	 are	 falling	 apart,	 then	 your
togetherness	will	be	lost.
Says	Bokuju:	If	you	don't	understand,	there	is	no	need.	Don't	be	worried	about	it.
You	just	go	and	put	on	your	clothes	and	eat	your	food.	 I	don't	know	what	 that
man	 did,	 but	 to	 you	 I	 also	 say:	 If	 you	 understand	 -	 beautiful.	 If	 you	 don't
understand	 -	 go,	 put	 on	 your	 clothes	 and	 eat	 your	 food.	 Because	 the
understanding	will	come	only	as	a	shadow	of	your	total	being.
Live	life	in	its	totality,	and	don't	be	afraid	of	the	total	life.	Don't	be	a	coward,	and
don't	try	to	escape	to	the	mountains	and	the	monasteries.
I	have	given	you	SANNYAS	to	live	in	the	world	as	totally	as	possible.	Just	by
living	totally	in	the	world	you	will	transcend	it.	Suddenly	you	will	come	to	know
that	 you	 are	 in	 the	world,	 but	 not	 of	 it.	 I	 bring	 you	 a	 totally	 new	 concept	 of
SANNYAS.	The	old	SANNYAS
said:	Escape,	 renounce!	But	 I	 tell	 you	 that	 those	who	escape	are	not	 total,	 not
whole.	I	 tell	you	that	those	who	escape	are	crippled.	It	 is	not	for	you.	You	live
life	in	its	totality;	you	live	it,	as	wholly	as	possible.	And	the	more	whole	you	are,
the	more	holy	you	will	become.	The	quality	13
of	 sacredness	 comes	when	 one	 lives	 courageously	without	 fear,	without	 hope,
without	desire.
One	simply	slips	from	one	moment	to	another,	completely	fresh	and	new.
This	 is	 what	 SANNYAS	 is	 to	 mean	 to	 you.	 SANNYAS	 is	 living	 life	 in	 its
totality,	moment	 to	moment;	 allowing	 it	 to	 happen	without	 any	 conditions	 on
your	 part.	And	 then,	 if	 you	 allow	 this	much,	 life	 allows	 you	 a	 transcendence.
Remaining	 in	 the	valley,	you	become	the	peak,	and	only	 then	 it	 is	beautiful.	 If
you	go	to	the	peak,	the	valley	is	lost	-	and	the	valley	has	its	own	beauties.	If	you
remain	in	the	valley,	the	peak	is	lost	-	and	the	peak	has	its	own	beauties.
And	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 become	 a	 man	 of	 valley	 and	 peak,	 both	 together.
Remaining	 in	 the	 valley,	 be	 a	 peak	 -	 and	 then	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 understand
what	Zen	is.
14
__________________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER	2	-	Master	and	Disciple
22	February	1975	a.m.	in	Buddha	Hall
__________________________________________________________________________
EVERY	 TIME	 LIEH	 TZU	 WAS	 NOT	 BUSY,	 YIN	 SHENG	 TOOK	 THE
OPPORTUNITY
TO	 BEG	 FOR	 SECRETS.	 LIEH	 TZU	 KEPT	 TURNING	 HIM	 AWAY	 AND
WOULD	NOT
TELL	 HIM	 UNTIL	 EVENTUALLY	 HE	 SAID:	 "I	 USED	 TO	 THINK	 YOU
INTELLIGENT	-
ARE	 YOU	 REALLY	 AS	 VULGAR	 AS	 ALL	 THAT?	 HERE,	 I	 WILL	 TELL
YOU	WHAT	I	LEARNT	FROM	MY	OWN	MASTER.
THREE	YEARS	AFTER	 I	 BEGAN	 TO	 SERVE	 THE	MASTER,	MY	MIND
NO	LONGER
DARED	 TO	 THINK	 OF	 RIGHT	 OR	 WRONG,	 AND	 MY	 MOUTH	 NO
LONGER	DARED
TO	SPEAK	OF	BENEFIT	AND	HARM.	IT	WAS	ONLY	THEN	THAT	I	GOT
SO	MUCH
AS	A	GLANCE	FROM	THE	MASTER.
AFTER	FIVE	YEARS	MY	MIND	WAS	AGAIN	THINKING	OF	RIGHT	AND
WRONG,	AND	MY	MOUTH	WAS	AGAIN	SPEAKING	OF	BENEFIT	AND
HARM.	FOR	THE
FIRST	TIME	THE	MASTER'S	FACE	RELAXED	INTO	A	SMILE.
AFTER	 SEVEN	 YEARS	 I	 THOUGHT	 OF	WHATEVER	 CAME	 INTO	MY
MIND
WITHOUT	 ANY	 LONGER	 DISTINGUISHING	 BETWEEN	 RIGHT	 AND
WRONG,	AND	I	SAID
WHATEVER
CAME
INTO
MY
MOUTH
WITHOUT
ANY
LONGER
DISTINGUISHING	 BETWEEN	 BENEFIT	 AND	 HARM.	 AND	 FOR	 THE
FIRST	TIME
THE	MASTER	 PULLED	ME	 OVER	 TO	 SIT	WITH	 HIM	 ON	 THE	 SAME
MAT.
AFTER	 NINE	 YEARS	 I	 THOUGHT	 WITHOUT	 RESTRAINT	 OF
WHATEVER	CAME
INTO	MY	MIND,	AND	SAID	WITHOUT	RESTRAINT	WHATEVER	CAME
INTO	MY
MOUTH	 WITHOUT	 KNOWING	 WHETHER	 THE	 RIGHT	 OR	 WRONG,
BENEFIT	OR
HARM,	 WERE	 MINE	 OR	 ANOTHER'S,	 AND	 WITHOUT	 KNOWING
WHETHER	THAT
MASTER	WAS	MY	TEACHER	OR	NOT.	EVERYTHING	WAS	THE	SAME.
NOW	YOU	COME	TO	BE	MY	DISCIPLE,	AND	BEFORE	EVEN	A	YEAR
HAS	GONE
ROUND	 YOU	 ARE	 INDIGNANT	 AND	 RESENTFUL	 TIME	 AND	 TIME
AGAIN!"
The	 greatest	 art	 in	 the	 world	 is	 to	 be	 a	 disciple.	 It	 cannot	 be	 compared	 to
anything.	 It	 is	 unique	 and	 incomparable.	 Nothing	 like	 it	 exists	 in	 any	 other
relationship,	nothing	like	it	can	exist.
To	be	a	disciple,	to	be	with	a	master,	is	to	move	into	the	unknown.	You	cannot	be
very	aggressive	there.	If	you	are	aggressive,	the	unknown	will	never	be	revealed
to	you.	It	cannot	be	revealed	to	an	aggressive	mind.	The	very	nature	of	it	is	such
that	you	have	to	be	receptive,	not	aggressive.
The	search	for	truth	is	not	an	active	search,	it	is	a	deep	passivity	-	in	your	deep
passivity	you	will	receive.	But	if	you	become	too	active	and	concerned,	you	will
miss.	It	 is	 like	being	a	womb,	it	 is	feminine;	you	receive	the	truth	as	a	woman
receives	a	pregnancy.	Remember	this...	 then	many	things	will	become	easier	to
understand.
To	be	near	 a	master	 is	 to	 be	 just	 a	 passivity,	 absorbing	whatsoever	 the	master
gives	or	whatsoever	the	master	is	-	not	asking.	The	moment	you	start	asking	you
have	 become	 aggressive,	 the	 receptivity	 is	 lost,	 you	 have	 become	 active.	 The
passive,	the	feminine,	is	no	longer	there.	Nobody	has	ever	reached	the	truth	as	a
male	 -	aggressive,	violent.	That's	not	possible.	You	reach	very	silently.	 In	 fact,
you	 wait	 and	 truth	 reaches	 you.	 The	 truth	 seeks	 you,	 like	 water	 seeks	 some
hollow	ground,	moves	downwards,	finds	a	place,	and	becomes	a	lake.
15
An	active	mind	is	too	filled	with	itself;	an	active	mind	thinks	that	it	knows	what
truth	is.
One	has	only	to	ask,	at	least	the	question	is	known;	only	for	the	answer	does	one
have	to	seek	and	search.
But	when	 you	 become	 passive,	 even	 the	 question	 is	 not	 known.	How	 to	 ask?
What	to	ask?
For	what	to	ask?	There	is	no	question,	one	cannot	do	anything	else	but	wait.	This
is	patience	-
and	 this	 is	 infinite	 patience	 -	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 time,	 it	 is	 not	 a
question	of	you	waiting	for	a	few	months,	or	a	few	years.	If	you	have	patience
for	a	few	years,	that	won't	help,	because	a	mind	that	thinks	that	it	has	to	wait	for
three	years	is	not,	in	fact,	waiting.	He	is	looking	actively,	to	when	the	three	years
are	over,	then	he	can	jump,	be	aggressive,	and	ask;	then	he	can	demand	that	the
period	of	waiting	be	over,	that	now	he	is	entitled	to	know.	There	is	nothing	like
that.	Nobody	is	ever	entitled	to	know	the	truth.
Suddenly	the	moment	comes	when	you	are	ready,	and	your	patience	has	become
not	 of	 time,	 but	 of	 eternity;	 you	 are	 not	 waiting	 for	 something,	 but	 simply
waiting,	 because	 the	 waiting	 is	 so	 beautiful;	 the	 waiting	 itself	 is	 such	 a	 deep
meditation,	 the	waiting	 itself	 is	 such	 a	 tremendous	 achievement	 -	who	bothers
about	anything	else?	When	the	waiting	has	become	so	total,	so	intense,	so	whole,
that	 time	 disappears	 and	 the	 waiting	 takes	 the	 quality	 of	 eternity,	 then
immediately	you	are	ready.	You	are	not	entitled,	remember	-	you	cannot	ask.	You
are	 simply	 ready	 and	 you	 are	 not	 even	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 ready.	Because	 the
very	 awareness	will	 be	 a	hindrance	 to	your	 readiness;	 the	very	 awareness	will
show	that	the	ego	is	there,	watching	in	the	corner,	hiding	somewhere.
And	the	ego	is	always	aggressive,	whether	hiding	or	not	hiding,	apparent	or	not
apparent.
Even	hiding	in	the	deepest	corner	of	the	unconscious,	the	ego	is	aggressive.	And
when	I	say	that	to	become	totally	passive	is	the	art	of	being	a	disciple,	I	mean	-
dissolve	the	ego.	Then	there	is	nobody	who	is	asking,	demanding,	then	there	is
simply	nobody	-	you	are	a	vacant	house,	a	deep	emptiness,	simply	waiting.	And
suddenly,	all	that	you	could	have	asked	for	is	given	to	you,	without	you	asking
for	it.
Jesus	says:	Ask,	and	it	shall	be	given	to	you.	But	that	is	not	the	highest	teaching.
Jesus	 could	 not	 give	 the	 highest	 teaching	 to	 the	 people	who	were	 around	 him
because	they	did	not	know	how	to	be	disciples.	In	the	Jewish	tradition	teachers
have	existed,	and	students,	but	a	disciple	and	a	master	are	basically	an	Eastern
phenomenon.	 Teachers	 have	 existed	 -	 who	 have	 taught	 many	 things;	 and
students	have	existed,	sincere	students	-	who	have	learnt	much.
But	Jesus	couldn't	find	disciples	there;	he	couldn't	give	the	highest	teaching.	He
says:	Ask,	and	 it	shall	be	given	 to	you.	Knock	and	doors	shall	be	opened	unto
you.	But	I	tell	you,	if	you	ask,	you	will	miss;	if	you	knock,	you	will	be	rejected.
Because	 the	very	knocking	 is	 aggressive,	 the	very	 asking	 is	 of	 the	 ego.	 In	 the
very	asking	you	are	too	much,	and	the	doors	cannot	be	opened	for	you.
In	the	knocking,	what	are	you	doing?	You	are	being	violent.	No.	At	the	doors	of
the	temples	knocking	is	not	allowed.	You	have	to	come	to	the	doors	so	silently
that	 even	 the	 sound	 of	 your	 feet	 is	 not	 heard.	 You	 come	 as	 a	 nothing,	 as	 if
nobody	has	come.	You	wait	at	 the	door	and	whenever	 the	door	opens	you	will
enter.	You	are	not	in	a	hurry.	You	can	sit	and	relax	at	the	door,	because	the	door
knows	better	than	you	when	to	open	and	the	master	inside	knows	better	than	you
when	it	should	be	given.
Knocking	at	the	door	of	the	temple	is	vulgar;	asking	the	master	is	unmannerly	-
because	he	is	not	going	to	teach	you	anything,	he	is	not	a	teacher.	He	is	going	to
toss	something	to	you	from	his	innermost	being	-	a	treasure	-	and	unless	you	are
ready,	 it	 cannot	 be	 done.	 The	 pearls	 cannot	 be	 thrown	 before	 the	 swine.	 The
master	has	 to	wait	until	 your	 swine	has	disappeared,	until	 you	have	awakened
and	you	have	become	really	human	and	the	animal	is	no	longer	there
-	the	aggressive,	the	vulgar,	the	violent.	The	relationship	between	a	master	and	a
disciple	is	not	of	a	rape:	it	is	of	deepest	love.
16
That	is	the	difference	between	science	and	religion.	Science	is	like	rape;	there	is
aggression	towards	nature	to	know	its	secrets.	Science	is	a	violent	effort	to	force
nature	 to	 reveal	 its	 secrets.	 Religion	 is	 love,	 it	 is	 a	 persuasion,	 it	 is	 a	 silent
waiting.	 It	 is	making	oneself	 ready,	prepared,	 so	 that	whenever	 the	moment	of
your	inner	readiness	comes,	suddenly	there	is	a	tuning,	everything	falls	into	line
and	 nature	 is	 revealed	 to	 you.	And	 this	 revelation	 is	 totally	 different.	 Science
may	force	nature	to	give	a	few	facts	-	but	the	truth?	No.	Science	will	never	be
able	 to	 know	 the	 truth.	 At	 the	 most,	 robbers,	 aggressive,	 violent	 people,	 can
snatch	away	a	few	facts.	That's	all.	And	those	facts	will	be	of	 the	surface.	The
innermost	 center	 will	 remain	 veiled	 for	 them	 because	 to	 reach	 the	 innermost,
violence	is	not	to	be	used	-	cannot	be	used.
The	innermost	center	must	invite	you,	only	then	can	you	enter	there.	Uninvited,
there	is	no	way.	As	a	guest,	invited,	you	enter	into	the	inner	shrine.
The	relationship	between	a	master	and	a	disciple	is	the	highest	possibility	of	love
-	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a	 relationship	 of	 two	 bodies,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 relationship	 of	 any
pleasure,	or	any	gratification,	it	is	not	a	relationship	of	two	minds,	two	friends,	in
subtle,	psychic	harmony.
No.	It	 is	neither	bodily,	nor	sexual;	it	 is	neither	mental	nor	emotional.	It	 is	two
totals,	coming	together	and	merging	into	each	other.
And	how	can	you	be	 a	 total	 if	 you	ask	a	question?	 If	you	are	 aggressive,	you
cannot	be	total.	A	totality	is	always	silent;	there	is	no	conflict	within.	That's	why
you	cannot	be	in	conflict	without.	Totality	is	serene	and	tranquil	and	collected.	It
is	a	deep	togetherness.
Waiting	 near	 a	 master,	 one	 learns	 how	 to	 be	 together,	 with	 no	 movement.	 A
simple	 unmoving	 center	 simply	 waits;	 thirsty	 of	 course,	 hungry	 of	 course,
feeling	 the	 thirst	 in	 every	 fiber	 of	 the	 body,	 in	 every	 cell	 of	 the	 being	 -	 but
waiting,	 because	 the	master	 knows	 better	 when	 the	 right	moment	 comes.	 Not
knocking...	 the	 temptation	will	be	 there,	and,	when	 the	master	 is	available,	 the
temptation	becomes	very,	very	deep	and	intense.	Why	not	ask	him?	He	can	give,
then	why	wait,	why	waste	time?	No,	it	is	not	a	question	of	wasting	time.	Really,
waiting	patiently	is	 the	best	use	of	 time.	All	else	may	be	wasted	but	waiting	is
not,	because	waiting	 is	prayer,	waiting	 is	meditation,	waiting	 is	all.	Everything
happens	through	it.
And	I	call	 it	 the	greatest	art.	Why?	Because	between	a	master	and	disciple	 the
greatest	 mystery	 is	 lived,	 the	 deepest	 is	 lived,	 the	 highest	 flows.	 It	 is	 a
relationship	 between	 the	 known	 and	 the	 unknown,	 between	 the	 finite	 and
infinite,	between	time	and	eternity,	between	the	seed	and	the	flower,	between	the
actual	and	the	potential,	between	past	and	future.	A	disciple	is	only	the	past;	the
master	is	only	the	future.	And	here,	this	moment,	in	their	deep	love	and	waiting,
they	meet.	The	disciple	is	time,	the	master	is	eternity.	The	disciple	is	mind	and
the	master	is	no-mind.	The	disciple	is	all	that	he	knows,	and	a	master	is	all	that
cannot	be	known.
When	 the	 bridge	 happens	 between	 a	master	 and	 a	 disciple,	 it	 is	 a	miracle.	 To
bridge	the	known	with	the	unknown,	and	time	with	eternity,	is	a	miracle.
Doing	is	on	the	part	of	the	master,	because	he	knows	what	to	do.	The	doing	is
not	on	your	part,	should	not	be	on	your	part,	because,	by	your	very	doing,	you
will	 disturb	 the	whole	 thing.	You	 don't	 know	what	 you	 are	 -	 how	 can	 you	 do
anything?	A	disciple	waits,	knowing	well	that	he	cannot	do.	He	does	not	know
the	direction,	he	does	not	know	what	is	good	and	what	is	bad,	he	does	not	know
himself.	How	can	he	do	anything?	The	doing	 is	of	 the	master;	but	when	 I	 say
that	the	doing	is	of	the	master,	don't	misunderstand	me.
A	master	 never	 does	 anything	 -	 if	 the	 disciple	 can	wait,	 the	 very	 being	 of	 the
master	becomes	a	doing.	Just	his	presence	becomes	a	catalytic	agent,	and	many
things	start	happening	on	their	own	accord.
When	 somebody	 asked	 the	 great	 master	 Zenerin:	What	 do	 you	 do	 with	 your
disciples?	He	said:	What	do	I	do?	I	don't	do	anything.	The	questioner	asked:	But
so	many	things	happen	around	you,	you	must	be	doing	something.	Zenerin	said:
Sitting	quietly,	doing	nothing,	spring	comes,	and	the	grass	grows	by	itself.
17
This	 is	 what	 a	master	 is	 doing:	 sitting	 quietly,	 doing	 nothing,	 waiting	 for	 the
right	moment,	the	spring.	Suddenly,	when	the	disciple	and	the	master	meet,	there
will	be	spring	-	the	spring	comes,	and	the	grass	grows	by	itself.	And	this	is	how
it	happens.	A	master	simply	sits,	not	doing	anything	and	a	disciple	waits	for	the
master	to	do	something.	Then	comes	the	spring	and	the	moment	they	meet,	the
grass	grows	by	itself.
In	 fact,	 truth	 is	 a	 happening;	 one	 has	 only	 to	 allow	 it.	 Nothing	 is	 to	 be	 done
directly;	 one	 has	 only	 to	 allow	 it.	 You	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 know	 it,	 unless	 it
happens,	 because	 all	 you	 know	 is	 that	 only	 when	 you	 do	 something	 does
something	 happen.	When	 you	 don't	 do	 anything,	 nothing	 happens.	 So	 you	 are
completely	oblivious	of	a	totally	different	dimension	of	things.
But,	 if	 you	 observe	 your	 own	 life,	 you	 will	 see	 many	 things	 still	 happening
without	your	doing.	What	do	you	do	when	 love	happens?	The	grass	grows	by
itself.	Suddenly	the	spring	is	there	and	something	flowers	within	you,	flowers	for
somebody	-	you	are	in	love.	What	have	you	done?
That's	why	people	are	so	afraid	of	love	-	because	it	is	a	happening,	you	cannot
manipulate	it,	you	cannot	be	in	control.	That's	why	people	say	that	love	is	blind.
In	fact,	just	the	opposite	is	the	case	-	love	is	the	only	clarity	of	vision.	Love	is	the
only	eye,	but	people	say	that	love	is	blind	because	they	cannot	do	anything	about
it.	 It	 takes	 possession	 and	 they	 are	 no	 longer	 in	 control,	 they	 are	 thrown	 off-
center.	They	say	it	is	blind	because	reason	is	not	there	-	it	is	irrational.	It	is	like
madness;	it	is	like	a	high	fever;	it	is	something	that	has	happened	to	you,	like	a
disease.	It	appears	to	be	so,	because	you	are	no	longer	in	control	-	life	has	taken
over.
Truth	is	of	the	quality	of	love.	That's	why	Jesus	goes	on	saying,	"Love	is	God",
or	"God	is	love",	because	the	quality	is	of	the	same	source.	Truth	also	happens
like	love,	you	don't	do	anything	about	it.	You	don't	even	knock	on	the	door.
You	breathe	in,	you	breathe	out;	that	is	what	life	is.	How	do	you	do	it?	Are	you
the	doer?
Then	hold	your	breath	in,	for	a	few	seconds,	and	you	will	come	to	know	that	you
are	not	the	doer.	You	cannot	hold	it	for	long.	Within	seconds	the	breath	will	force
itself	out.	Hold	it	out:	within	seconds	you	will	find	you	cannot	do	anything	-	the
breath	is	forcing	itself	in.	In	fact,	the	grass	grows	by	itself,	just	like	breathing.	It
grows	of	its	own	accord;	you	are	not	the	doer.
But	the	ego	avoids	looking	at	such	facts.	The	ego	looks	only	at	things	which	you
can	do.	It	chooses,	accumulates	things	which	can	be	done,	and	it	avoids,	throws
into	 the	 unconscious,	 those	 things	which	 happen.	 The	 ego	 is	 very	 choosey.	 It
doesn't	look	at	life	in	its	totality.
Truth	is	a	happening,	the	final	happening,	the	ultimate	happening,	in	which	you
dissolve	into	the	whole	and	the	whole	dissolves	into	you.	In	the	words	of	Tilopa,
it	 is	 MAHAMUDRA,	 the	 ultimate	 orgasm	 that	 happens	 between	 one	 unit	 of
consciousness	 and	 total	 consciousness,	 the	 total	 ocean	 of	 consciousness	 -
between	the	drop	and	the	ocean.	It	is	the	total	orgasm,	in	which	both	are	lost	into
each	other	and	the	identities	dissolve.
The	same	happens	between	a	master	and	a	disciple.	The	master	is	of	the	quality
of	the	ocean	and	the	disciple	is	still	a	drop	-	the	finite	meeting	the	infinite.	Much
patience	is	needed,	infinite	patience	is	needed.	Hurry	won't	help.
Now,	try	to	understand	this	beautiful	Zen	parable.	Each	word	has	to	be	allowed
to	reach	your	deepest	core	of	being,	because	this	is	what	you	are	here	for.	If	you
can	understand	this	story,	it	will	be	easier	for	you	to	be	closer	and	closer	to	me.
EVERY	 TIME	 LIEH	 TZU	 WAS	 NOT	 BUSY,	 YIN	 SHENG	 TOOK	 THE
OPPORTUNITY
TO	BEG	FOR	SECRETS.
Lieh	 Tzu	 was	 one	 of	 the	 masters	 of	 the	 school	 of	 Lao	 Tzu,	 one	 of	 the
enlightened	disciples	of	Lao	Tzu.	And	Lieh	Tzu	was	not	an	ordinary	master,	not
concerned	with	your	small	18
problems,	 your	 actions,	 not	 concerned	 with	 small	 teachings.	 Lieh	 Tzu	 was
concerned	only	with	the	ultimate.	He	had	many	disciples.
There	are	 two	types	of	disciples.	One	type	of	disciple	 is	chosen	by	the	master;
another	type	of	disciple	is	one	who	has	chosen	the	master.	Their	qualities	differ.
This	man,	Yin	Sheng,	must	have	been	one	of	the	second	category	-	and	vast	 is
the	difference.	When	a	master	chooses	you,	it	is	totally	different.	Of	course,	you
will	never	be	allowed	to	know	that	the	master	has	chosen	you.	In	fact,	the	master
will	persuade	you	in	such	a	way	that	you	will	feel	that	you	have	chosen	him.	He
has	 to	 be	 very	 subtle	 about	 it,	 because	 if	 he	 allows	 you	 to	 know	 that	 he	 has
chosen	you,	your	ego	can	create	a	disturbance,	because	 the	ego	 likes	 to	be	 the
master;	the	ego	likes	to	be	in	control.	Every	day	I	encounter	the	same	situation:	I
have	 not	 to	 allow	 you	 to	 know	 that	 I	 am	 choosing	 you,	 I	 have	 to	 give	 you
freedom	to	choose	me.
But	the	difference	is	vast,	because	when	a	master	chooses	a	disciple,	he	chooses
with	 perfect	 understanding.	 He	 looks	 through	 you,	 all	 your	 potentialities,
possibilities,	 past	 and	 future	 -	 the	whole	 destiny	 is	 revealed	 to	 him.	But	when
you	choose	a	master,	almost	always	you	will	be	wrong,	because	you	grope	in	the
dark.	Not	knowing	who	you	are,	how	can	you	choose?	Not	knowing	what	truth
is	how	can	you	choose	a	master?	How	can	you	judge?
Whatsoever	 you	 judge	 is	 going	 to	 be	wrong.	 I	 say	 unconditionally:	 it	 is	 not	 a
question	 of	 whether	 something	 can	 be	 wrong	 and	 something	 right.	 No.
Whatsoever	you	choose,	will	be	wrong,	because	you	are	in	darkness,	you	don't
have	the	 inner	 light	by	which	to	 judge.	You	don't	have	any	criterion,	you	don't
have	 any	 touchstone.	You	 cannot	 know	what	 is	 gold	 and	what	 is	 not	 gold.	A
sincere	seeker	simply	allows	the	master	to	be;	a	sincere	seeker	allows	a	master	to
choose	him.	A	foolish	seeker	tries	to	choose	the	master,	and	then,	from	the	very
beginning,	trouble	arises.
Lieh	Tzu	and	his	master,	Lao	Tzu,	had	a	totally	different	quality	of	relationship.
Lao	Tzu	had	chosen	Lieh	Tzu.	This	Yin	Sheng	had	chosen	Lieh	Tzu,	and	when	a
disciple	 chooses	 he	 is	 aggressive	 -	 because	 of	 the	 very	 choice	 the	 aggression
starts.	And	a	master	cannot	 reject	you,	even	 if	you	choose	him,	 just	out	of	his
compassion	he	cannot	reject	you.
EVERY	 TIME	 LIEH	 TZU	 WAS	 NOT	 BUSY,	 YIN	 SHENG	 TOOK	 THE
OPPORTUNITY
TO	BEG	FOR	SECRETS.
That	 begging	 is	 not	 really	 begging;	 it	 is	 just	 a	 way	 to	 snatch.	 In	 fact,	 he	 is
aggressive,	 not	 a	 beggar,	 the	 begging	 is	 just	 diplomatic.	 He	 is	 a	 thief,	 not	 a
beggar.	 Whenever	 he	 found	 any	 opportunity	 and	 Lieh	 Tzu	 was	 not	 busy,	 he
started	begging	for	the	secrets.	Lieh	Tzu	kept	turning	him	away	and	would	not
tell	him	until	eventually	he	said....	Many	times	Lieh	Tzu	avoided,	postponed,	and
said:	Sometime	I	will	tell	you,	some	other	time;	it	is	not	the	right	moment.	You
are	not	 ripe.	But	Yin	Sheng	persisted	until	 eventually	Lieh	Tzu	had	 to	 say	 the
truth.
HE	SAID:	"I	USED	TO	THINK	YOU	INTELLIGENT	-	ARE	YOU	REALLY
AS	VULGAR
AS	ALL	THAT?"
What	is	the	vulgarity?	Secrets	cannot	be	asked	for,	you	have	to	earn	them.	You
have	 to	 become	 capable.	 Secrets	 are	 gifts	 from	 the	 master:	 you	 cannot	 steal
them,	you	cannot	beg	them,	you	cannot	snatch	them,	you	cannot	rob	them	-	there
is	 no	way.	Secrets	 can	only	be	gifts,	 nothing	 else.	So	you	have	 to	be	 capable,
capable	so	that	the	master	can	give	them	to	you	as	gifts.	He	would	like	to	share
them,	but	you	have	to	rise	above	your	ordinary	mind,	because	the	ordinary	mind
will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 share.	 That's	 what	 Jesus	 goes	 on	 saying:	 Pearls	 cannot	 be
thrown	before	the	swine.	Because	the	swine	won't	understand,	the	understanding
is	not	there.
19
You	 can	 understand	 words:	 those	 secrets	 are	 not	 words.	 You	 can	 understand
concepts:	 those	 secrets	 are	 not	 concepts.	 They	 are	 not	 philosophies,	 doctrines.
Those	 secrets	 are	 the	 innermost	 energy	 of	 the	master,	 his	 treasure	 of	 being.	 If
you	rise	higher	and	higher,	 then	only	will	you	be	nearer	and	nearer	 the	master,
and	only	when	the	master	feels	that	you	can	sit	on	the	same	mat	can	the	secrets
be	given	to	you.	Not	before.	Even	if	he	wants	to	give,	he	cannot.	To	whom?
He	 would	 like	 to	 give	 them	 out	 of	 his	 compassion,	 but	 they	 will	 be	 simply
wasted.
It	happened	 in	 the	same	way	 that	a	Sufi	mystic,	Dhun-nun	had	a	disciple.	The
disciple	must	have	been	like	Yin	Sheng,	persistent,	asking	again	and	again.	One
day,	 Dhun-nun	 gave	 him	 a	 stone	 and	 told	 him	 to	 go	 to	 the	 market,	 to	 the
vegetable	 market,	 and	 to	 try	 to	 sell	 it.	 The	 stone	 was	 very	 big,	 it	 looked
beautiful.	 But	 the	master	 said:	 "Don't	 sell	 it,	 just	 try	 to	 sell	 it:	 observe,	 go	 to
many	 people	 and	 just	 report	 to	 me	 how	 much	 we	 can	 get	 for	 it	 from	 the
vegetable	market."	The	man	went.	Many	people	looked	at	it	and	they	thought:	It
can	 be	 a	 good	 show-piece,	 our	 children	 can	 play	with	 it,	 or	 we	 can	 use	 it	 as
measures	for	our	vegetables.	So	they	offered,	but	 just	few	small	coins,	 like	 ten
paisa.	The	man	came	back.	He	said:	"At	the	most,	we	can	only	get	ten	paisa	for	it
-	and	responses	were	different,	from	two	paisa	to	ten."
The	master	said:	"Now	you	go	to	the	gold	market	and	ask	people	there.	But	don't
sell	 it,	 just	 enquire	how	much."	From	 the	gold	market	 the	disciple	 came,	 very
happy,	and	he	said:
"These	people	are	wonderful.	They	are	ready	to	give	a	thousand	rupees	for	this.
Responses	were	different,	from	five	hundred	to	a	thousand	rupees."
The	master	said:	"Now	you	go	to	the	jewellers,	but	don't	sell	it."	He	went	to	the
jewellers.
He	couldn't	believe	it.	They	were	ready	to	offer	fifty	thousand	rupees.	And	when
he	wouldn't	sell,	they	went	on	increasing	the	offers	-	they	reached	one	hundred
thousand	rupees.	But	the	man	said:	I	am	not	going	to	sell	it.	They	said:	"We	offer
two	hundred	thousand	rupees,	three	hundred	thousand	rupees,	or	whatsoever	you
say.	But	sell	it!"	The	man	said:	"I	cannot	sell.	I	am	just	to	enquire."	He	couldn't
believe	 it	 -	 these	people	were	mad.	He	himself	 thought	 that	 the	price	 that	was
offered	in	the	vegetable	market	was	enough.
He	came	back.	The	master	took	the	stone	and	said:	"We	are	not	going	to	sell	it,
but	 now	you	know	 that	 it	 depends	on	you,	 on	 if	 you	have	 the	 touchstone,	 the
understanding.	You	go	on	asking	questions	and	you	live	in	the	vegetable	market.
You	live	in	the	vegetable	market	and	you	have	the	understanding	of	that	market.
Then	 you	 ask	 for	 valuable	 secrets:	 you	 ask	 for	 diamonds.	 First	 become	 a
jeweller,	and	then	come	to	me.	Then	I	will	teach	you."
A	 certain	 quality	 of	 understanding	 is	 needed,	 only	 then	 can	 certain	 truths	 be
given	to	you.
And	secrets?	You	cannot	ask	for	them,	because	in	the	very	asking	you	show	that
you	 come	 from	 the	 vegetable	 market.	 You	 have	 to	 wait;	 you	 have	 to	 wait
infinitely.	 Then	 you	 show	 that	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 sacrifice	 your	 whole	 life	 for
them.	 Then	 you	 show	 how	 much	 you	 value	 the	 secrets	 -	 you	 are	 ready	 to
sacrifice	yourself	completely.	Then	the	master	simply	shares	his	being	with	you.
Nothing	is	to	be	given,	because	these	are	not	things.	Energy	simply	jumps	from
the	 master	 towards	 you	 like	 a	 flame.	 It	 enters	 you	 and	 transfigures	 you
completely.
"I	 USED	 TO	 THINK	 YOU	 INTELLIGENT	 -	 ARE	 YOU	 REALLY	 AS
VULGAR	AS	ALL
THAT?"
This	persistent	asking	shows	a	vulgar	mind.	You	don't	understand	what	you	are
asking.
Juvenile,	 childish,	 you	 seem	 to	 be	 absolutely	 uncultured,	 not	 knowing	 with
whom	you	are,	not	knowing	what	you	are	asking.
And	then	he	told	his	own	story	with	his	own	master.	It	is	a	rare	story.
"HERE,	I	WILL	TELL	YOU	WHAT	I	LEARNT	FROM	MY	OWN	MASTER."
20
His	 own	 master	 was	 Lao	 Tzu,	 the	 source	 of	 the	 Taoist	 tradition,	 one	 of	 the
greatest	beings	who	have	ever	walked	on	the	earth.	Says	Lieh	Tzu:
"THREE	YEARS	AFTER	 I	BEGAN	TO	SERVE	THE	MASTER,	MY	MIND
NO	LONGER
DARED	 TO	 THINK	 OF	 RIGHT	 OR	 WRONG,	 AND	 MY	 MOUTH	 NO
LONGER	DARED
TO	SPEAK	OF	BENEFIT	AND	HARM.	IT	WAS	ONLY	THEN	THAT	I	GOT
SO	MUCH
AS	A	GLANCE	FROM	THE	MASTER."
Three	years	passed.	He	simply	served	the	master.	What	else	can	you	do?	You	can
simply	serve	the	master.	Nothing	else	can	be	done	by	a	disciple.	No	questioning.
No	asking.	No	demanding.	A	disciple	simply	becomes	a	shadow	of	the	master,
serves	 him,	 and	 through	 service,	 through	 his	 love,	 reverence,	 trust,	 a	 change
starts	in	the	mind.
Says	Lieh	Tzu:
"MY	MIND	NO	LONGER	DARED	TO	THINK	OF	RIGHT	AND	WRONG."
It	 became	 almost	 impossible	 to	 think	 about	 what	 is	 right	 and	 what	 is	 wrong.
When	you	 live	near	a	master,	you	need	not	 think.	You	simply	move	with	him.
You	simply	follow	his	movements.	You	leave	everything	to	him.	You	surrender.
Says	Lieh	Tzu:
"MY	 MIND	 NO	 LONGER	 DARED	 TO	 THINK...	 AND	 MY	 MOUTH	 NO
LONGER
DARED	TO	SPEAK	OF	BENEFIT	AND	HARM."
Because	in	living	near	a	master	your	whole	attitude	starts	changing.	For	the	first
time,	 from	 the	window	of	 the	master,	 you	 look	 at	 the	 total:	where	wrong	 and
right	meet	 and	mingle	with	 each	 other,	where	 darkness	 and	 light	 are	 no	more
separate.
Says	Heraclitus:	God	is	night	and	day,	summer	and	winter,	hunger	and	satiety.
Through	 the	master	 first	 glimpses	 start	 coming	 to	 you.	The	master	 becomes	 a
window:	 the	closer	you	come	the	more	your	own	understanding	is	 thrown	into
chaos.	Whatever	 you	 knew	 before	 becomes	 absolutely	 useless,	 futile.	You	 are
shaken.	Your	whole	foundation	is	shaken.
You	are	thrown	off-gear.	You	no	longer	know	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.
You	have	looked	through	the	master	at	the	whole,	and	the	total	comprehends	all.
The	total	comprehends	all	contradictions,	the	total	comprehends	all	paradoxes,	in
the	total	all	opposites	meet	and	become	one.	That's	why	Lieh	Tzu	said	that	he	no
longer	dared	to	think	of	what	was	wrong	and	what	was	right.	All	the	criteria	of
right	and	wrong	dropped.	All	 the	concepts	of	what	 is	benefit	and	what	 is	harm
simply	evaporated.
"IT	WAS	ONLY	THEN	THAT	I	GOT	SO	MUCH	AS	A	GLANCE	FROM	THE
MASTER."
Three	 years	 of	 deep	 trust,	 service,	 and	when	 the	master	 saw	 that	 now	 the	 old
mind	 was	 no	 longer	 functioning	 -	 the	 old	 mind,	 which	 lived	 in	 opposites,	 in
divisions,	good	and	evil,	 ugly	 and	beautiful,	 this	 and	 that	 -	 that	dividing	mind
was	no	more,
"IT	WAS	ONLY	THEN	THAT	I	GOT	SO	MUCH	AS	A	GLANCE	FROM	THE
MASTER."
21
What	does	Lieh	Tzu	mean?	Is	it	that	for	three	years	the	master	never	looked	at
Lieh	Tzu?
That	 is	 impossible.	 Serving	 the	 master	 continuously,	 the	 master	 must	 have
looked	millions	of	times.	Then	what	does	he	mean	by	a	glance?
A	look	and	a	glance	are	totally	different.	A	look	is	a	passive	thing.	When	I	look
at	 you,	my	eyes	 function	 as	 a	window,	you	 are	mirrored,	 it	 is	 not	 a	glance.	A
glance	means	 that	my	 eyes	 don't	 function	 as	windows,	 but	 that	my	 eyes	 start
functioning	as	a	pouring	of	my	energy	into	you.	They	are	not	passive;	they	are
loaded	 with	 the	 master's	 energy.	 When	 the	 look	 is	 loaded	 with	 the	 master's
innermost	energy,	then	it	becomes	a	glance.	It	is	a	very	creative	force.	It	simply
goes	to	your	very	heart,	like	an	arrow,	it	penetrates	to	your	very	deepest	core.	In
a	sense	it	is	like	an	arrow,	because	it	penetrates;	in	another	sense	it	is	like	a	seed
-	 you	 become	 pregnant.	A	 glance	 is	 a	 look	 that	makes	 you	 pregnant	with	 the
energy	of	 the	master.	A	glance	 is	 totally	different	 from	a	 look.	 In	a	glance	 the
master	 travels	 from	 his	 own	 being	 to	 your	 center.	 A	 glance	 is	 a	 bridge.	 The
master	must	have	looked	at	Lieh	Tzu	many	times	in	three	years,	but	it	was	not	a
glance.	 And	 you	 will	 know	 the	 difference	 only	 when	 I	 give	 you	 a	 glance.
Sometimes,	 I	 give	 you	 a	 glance	 -	 but	whenever	 I	 give	 the	 glance	 to	 a	 certain
person,	only	he	knows,	nobody	else	can	know	it.	The	glance	has	 to	be	earned;
you	have	to	be	ready	for	it.	The	look	is	okay,	but	the	glance	has	a	very	intense
energy	in	it.	It	is	a	transfer	of	the	master's	being,	his	first	effort	to	penetrate	you.
"IT	WAS	ONLY	THEN	THAT	I	GOT	SO	MUCH	AS	A	GLANCE	FROM	THE
MASTER."
Remember	 the	difference	between	a	 look	and	a	glance.	A	 look	 is	 just	 a	 look	 -
nothing	more.	A	glance	 is	qualitatively	different	 -	 something	moves.	The	 look
becomes	the	vehicle	-	it	is	no	longer	empty,	something	travels	with	it.
If	you	have	fallen	in	love	with	somebody	you	may	know	what	a	glance	is.	The
same	woman	 had	 looked	 at	 you	many	 times,	 but	 it	was	 an	 ordinary	 look	 -	 as
everybody	else	looks	at	you.	Then	suddenly	one	day,	a	spring	morning,	she	gives
you	a	glance.	It	 is	 totally	different;	 it	 is	an	invitation;	 it	 is	an	offer;	 it	 is	a	call.
Suddenly	something	pierces	your	heart.	Now	the	woman	is	no	longer	the	same.
Something	 has	 happened	 between	 you.	 Something	 only	 you	 two	 will	 know,
something	 absolutely	 private.	 It	 is	 not	 public,	 nobody	 else	 will	 be	 aware	 that
something	has	happened;	that	a	look	has	become	a	glance.
But	this	is	nothing,	a	love	glance	is	nothing	compared	to	when	a	master	looks	at
you,	and	 it	 is	no	 longer	a	 look	but	a	glance.	Because	when	 two	 lovers	 look	at
each	other	with	a	loving	glance,	they	stand	on	the	same	plane.	The	glance	cannot
be	very	loaded;	it	is	just	like	a	river	moving	on	the	same	plane.	When	a	master
looks	at	you,	it	is	like	a	tremendous	waterfall,	because	the	planes	are	different.	It
is	as	if	Niagara	is	falling	into	you.	You	are	completely	washed	away	and	you	will
never	be	the	same	again.	You	cannot	be	the	same	again	-	there	is	no	return.
Once	a	master	has	glanced	at	you,	your	innermost	being	hums	is	a	different	way,
lives	 in	 a	 different	 rhythm.	 In	 fact	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 the	 same:	 the	 old	 has
disappeared	 through	 the	 glance	 and	 a	 new	 being	 has	 come	 into	 being.	 That's
what	Lieh	Tzu	says	-	for	three	years	of	serving	the	master	continuously,	waiting
and	waiting,	not	asking	anything,	one	day,	he	got	a	glance	from	the	master.
"AFTER	 FIVE	 YEARS	 MY	 MIND	 WAS	 AGAIN	 THINKING	 OF	 RIGHT
AND	WRONG,	AND	MY	MOUTH	WAS	AGAIN	SPEAKING	OF	BENEFIT
AND	HARM.	FOR	THE
FIRST	TIME	THE	MASTER'S	FACE	RELAXED	INTO	A	SMILE."
22
Try	to	penetrate	this	story:	this	is	your	story.	It	is	not	something	that	happened	in
the	past,	it	is	something	which	is	going	to	happen	in	the	future.	All	Zen	stories
are	future	stories	about	you.	So	don't	think	it	is	something	that	happened	in	the
past.	Zen	is	never	in	the	past,	it	is	always	in	the	future.	And	you	have	to	bring	it
into	 the	 present.	 What	 happened?	 After	 three	 years	 of	 serving	 the	 master	 he
didn't	 dare	 to	 think	of	what	was	 right	 and	wrong,	 didn't	 dare	 to	 say	what	was
right	 and	 wrong,	 what	 was	 harmful	 and	 what	 was	 beneficial.	 Then	 what
happened	after	the	glance?
"MY	MIND	WAS	AGAIN	THINKING	OF	RIGHT	AND	WRONG,	AND	MY
MOUTH
WAS	AGAIN	SPEAKING	OF	BENEFIT	AND	HARM."
What	 happened?	 First	 you	 think	 something	 is	 right	 and	 something	 is	 wrong,
because	 society	has	conditioned	you	 that	way.	 It	 is	not	your	 thinking,	 it	 is	not
you;	it	is	the	society	in	you.	Society	has	conditioned	your	mind.	It	has	penetrated
within	you	and	controls	you	from	there.
Now	scientists	 say	 that	 sooner	or	 later	we	will	 be	able	 to	 fix	 electrodes	 in	 the
deepest	part	of	the	mind	and,	through	those	electrodes,	a	man	will	be	able	to	be
controlled.	The	government	will	be	able	 to	control	 the	whole	country,	and	you
will	not	know	that	somebody	else	is	controlling	you.	You	will	feel	that	you	are
doing	 these	 things.	 You	 can	 be	 pacified	 immediately:	 a	 knob	 has	 only	 to	 be
pushed.	You	can	be	made	angry:	a	knob	has	only	to	be	pushed.
Delgado	 did	 a	 very	 famous	 experiment.	 He	 fixed	 an	 electrode,	 a	 small,	 tiny
electrode,	in	the	brain	of	a	bull.	Then	he	gave	a	public	demonstration.	He	had	a
small	mechanism	 in	 his	 hand,	 just	 a	 small	 radio	with	 a	 few	 buttons	 on	 it.	He
pushed	one	button	 and	 the	 bull	 rushed	 towards	 him,	 ferocious,	 and	 everybody
became	concerned	that	Delgado	would	be	killed.	Just	in	the	nick	of	time,	exactly
when	 the	 bull	 was	 going	 to	 penetrate	 Delgado,	 he	 pushed	 another	 button.
Suddenly,	 the	 bull	 stopped	 as	 if	 dead,	 like	 a	 statue.	 The	 inside	 electrode	 was
controlled	by	the	wireless	-	 the	bull	would	become	ferocious	just	by	pushing	a
button,	and	it	could	be	stopped	just	by	pushing	a	button.
This	is	a	very,	very	new	finding	but	society	has	been	doing	it	since	pre-historical
days	in	a	different	way,	in	a	subtle	way.	Society	doesn't	fix	an	electrode	in	your
mind	although	 soon	 it	will	 do	 that,	 because	 it	will	 be	 cheaper,	 and	 easier,	 and
then	 there	will	be	no	possibility	 for	human	 freedom.	Delgado	has	done	one	of
the	most	dangerous	things,	more	dangerous	than	atomic	energy,	an	atom	bomb,
or	an	H-bomb	-	because	they	can	kill	your	bodies,	but	Delgado	can	kill	your	very
soul,	the	very	possibility	of	your	freedom.	And	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	that
you	 are	 functioning	because	of	 somebody	else's	 directions,	 you	will	 think	 that
you	are	doing	it.
The	 same	 is	 being	 done	 by	 society	 in	 a	 very	 subtle,	 primitive	 way.	 Society
teaches	you	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.	From	the	very	childhood	it	forces
what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong	onto	your	mind	and	then	continuous	repetition
hypnotizes	you	-	the	continuous	repetition	and	feedback.	Whenever	you	do	right
you	are	appreciated,	and	whenever	you	do	wrong	you	are	condemned.	Whenever
you	do	right,	there	is	a	positive	feedback;	prizes	are	given	to	you,	appreciations.
Whenever	 there	 is	 something	 wrong,	 a	 negative	 feedback	 is	 given;	 you	 are
punished,	condemned.	This	 is	how	society	has	been	 fixing	 the	electrode	 inside
you.	Then	it	controls.	If	your	society	has	conditioned	you	to	be	a	vegetarian,	you
cannot	 eat	meat.	Not	 that	meat	 cannot	 be	 eaten,	 but	 simply	 the	 electrode,	 the
conditioning	controls	and,	seeing	the	meat,	you	will	start	vomiting.	It	is	nothing
that	you	are	doing,	it	is	being	done	by	society,	and	every	society	conditions	in	its
own	way.	That's	why	 it	 is	 very	difficult	 to	 live	 in	 another	 society;	 to	 live	 in	 a
foreign	country	becomes	difficult.	Your	conditionings	are	23
different	and	their	conditionings	are	different	and	all	moralities	are	nothing	but
conditionings.
So	when	a	person	starts	moving	towards	the	ultimate	freedom	and	truth,	first	the
conditioning	of	the	society	falls.
That's	 what	 happened	 to	 Lieh	 Tzu.	 After	 three	 years	 of	 serving	 the	 master,
watching,	living,	being	with	him,	he	came	to	know	that	all	right	and	wrong	are
just	social	conditionings.
They	 fell.	 Then	 arises	 your	 own	 conscience.	 The	 real	 conscience.	 The
conscience	 that	 you	 carry	 right	 now	 is	 false,	 it	 is	 borrowed.	 Then	 arises	 your
own	 conscience:	 then	 you	 have	 your	 own	 vision	 of	what	 is	 right	 and	what	 is
wrong.	That	is	what	happened.
"AFTER	 FIVE	 YEARS	 MY	 MIND	 WAS	 AGAIN	 THINKING	 OF	 RIGHT
AND	WRONG,	AND	MY	MOUTH	WAS	AGAIN	SPEAKING	OF	BENEFIT
AND	HARM.	FOR	THE
FIRST	TIME	THE	MASTER'S	FACE	RELAXED	INTO	A	SMILE."
Not	 that	 the	master	was	 continuously	 sad	 for	 these	 eight	years.	Hard,	 serious?
No!	 A	 master	 like	 Lao	 Tzu	 is	 always	 laughing.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 serious	 man.
Seriousness	is	a	disease.	An	enlightened	man	is	always	playful;	his	whole	life	is
nothing	but	a	play.	How	can	he	be	serious?
What	happened?	For	these	eight	years,	did	Lao	Tzu	never	laugh	nor	smile?	No,
that	is	not	the	point:	he	must	have	laughed	many	times,	and	he	must	have	smiled
many	 times.	But	 for	Lieh	Tzu,	 in	his	 innermost	being,	something	happened	on
that	day:	for	the	first	time	the	master's	face	relaxed	into	a	smile.	A	master	has	to
haunt	 the	disciple	continuously;	he	has	 to	be	very	hard;	out	of	compassion,	he
has	to	work	continuously.	This	is	about	the	inner	face,	not	about	the	outer	face.
For	these	eight	years	Lao	Tzu	must	have	followed	the	innermost	being	of	Lieh
Tzu	with	a	very	hard	face,	very	hard,	for	 the	inner	discipline.	Then	seeing	that
Lieh	Tzu's	own	conscience	had	evolved,	he	must	have	smiled,	for	the	first	time.
That	smile	was	concerned	with	 the	 inner,	not	 the	outer	 face.	For	 the	first	 time,
Lieh	Tzu	felt	many	smiles	from	the	master	falling	on	him	like	showers.	He	could
feel	 that	 the	 master	 had	 relaxed	 about	 him	 -	 no	 longer	 hard,	 no	 longer	 a
taskmaster.	He	had	smiled.
Once	your	own	conscience	has	arisen,	there	is	no	need	for	the	master	to	be	hard
on	you.	He	had	to	be	hard	because	you	had	a	false	conscience	in	the	first	place.
That	had	to	be	destroyed.
Then	 he	 had	 to	 be	 hard	 because	 your	 own	 conscience	 has	 to	 be	 crystallized.
When	it	has	crystallized,	you	have	your	own	center	of	being;	then	the	master	can
smile	 and	 relax.	 Half	 the	 work	 is	 done.	 Now	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any	 outer
discipline	 from	 the	master	 for	 you.	You	 have	 your	 own	 conscience.	Now	 you
have	your	own	inner	light,	which	will	show	you	what	is	wrong	and	what	is	right.
Now	you	can	move	on	your	own.
That	is	the	meaning	of	the	master	smiling	-	it	is	felt.	When	really	you	attain	to
your	 own	 conscience,	 you	 will	 feel	 the	 master's	 smiles	 falling	 within	 you,
showering;	they	will	surround	you	from	every	corner	of	your	being.	That	is	why
the	master	celebrates	the	birth	of	your	inner	conscience.
"AFTER	 SEVEN	YEARS	 I	 THOUGHT	OF	WHATEVER	CAME	 INTO	MY
MIND
WITHOUT	 ANY	 LONGER	 DISTINGUISHING	 BETWEEN	 RIGHT	 AND
WRONG,	AND	I	SAID
WHATEVER
CAME
INTO
MY
MOUTH
WITHOUT
ANY
LONGER
DISTINGUISHING	 BETWEEN	 BENEFIT	 AND	 HARM.	 AND	 FOR	 THE
FIRST	TIME
THE	MASTER	 PULLED	ME	 OVER	 TO	 SIT	WITH	 HIM	 ON	 THE	 SAME
MAT."
Again,	 it	 is	 like	a	 spiral	or	 like	a	mountain	path.	You	come	again	 to	 the	 same
point	at	a	higher	altitude,	again	and	again,	the	inner	spiral.	The	false	conscience
fell,	the	conditioning	of	society	fell	and	your	own	inner	conscience	arose.	Now
that	too	disappears.
24
"AFTER	 SEVEN	YEARS	 I	 THOUGHT	OF	WHATEVER	CAME	 INTO	MY
MIND
WITHOUT	 ANY	 LONGER	 DISTINGUISHING	 BETWEEN	 RIGHT	 AND
WRONG,	AND	I	SAID
WHATEVER
CAME
INTO
MY
MOUTH
WITHOUT
ANY
LONGER
DISTINGUISHING	BETWEEN	BENEFIT	AND	HARM."
This	 is	 total	 relaxation.	 A	 conscience,	 an	 inner	 conscience,	 is	 also	 needed
because	you	are	not	absolutely	natural.	An	outer	conscience	 is	needed	because
you	don't	have	an	inner	conscience.	The	inner	conscience	is	needed	because	you
are	 not	 absolutely	 natural	 yet:	 something	wrong	 can	 happen	 through	 you.	But
when	you	are	absolutely	natural,	what	Tilopa	calls	"loose	and	natural",	then	no
harm	can	happen	through	you.	You	simply	are	no	more;	you	cannot	harm.	Now
there	is	no	need,	so	your	inner	conscience	also	dissolves.	Now	you	become	like	a
small	child,	simple	and	pure,	saying	 things	 that	happen	 to	you,	 thinking	 things
that	happen	to	you.	Thoughts	float	in	your	mind,	but	you	are	not	concerned;	your
mouth	 says	 things,	 you	 are	 not	 concerned.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 small	 child,	 or	 like	 a
madman:	 absolutely	 relaxed,	 as	 if	 there	 is	 nobody	 in	 control.	 And	 when	 the
control	is	completely	lost,	the	ego	disappears	because	the	ego	is	nothing	but	the
controller	 -	 when	 there	 is	 no	 control,	 who	 are	 you?	 You	 are	 just	 like	 a	 river
flowing	towards	the	ocean,	or	like	a	cloud	floating	in	the	sky.	You	are	no	longer
there;	the	human,	the	ego,	has	disappeared.	Now	you	are	simply	natural.
"AFTER	 SEVEN	YEARS	 I	 THOUGHT	OF	WHATEVER	CAME	 INTO	MY
MIND	..."
You	cannot	do	anything,	because	there	is	nobody	to	do.	If	thoughts	come,	they
come.	If	they	don't	come,	okay;	if	they	come,	okay.	The	mouth	says	something	-
there	 is	 nobody	 to	 control	 it,	 so	 it	 says.	 Sometimes	 somebody	 asks	 and	 no
answer	comes;	such	a	man	will	remain	silent.	Sometimes	there	is	nobody	asking
anything	and	this	man	laughs	and	answers,	because	it	comes.	This	man	behaves
like	a	madman!
In	India,	there	is	a	sect,	a	particular	sect,	called	BAUL	-	the	word	BAUL	means
the	mad.
They	live	in	this	third	state	continuously.	They	do	whatsoever	happens:	no	good,
no	bad,	no	choice	on	their	part.	They	move	like	winds,	and	they	are	one	of	the
most	beautiful	phenomena	in	the	world.	They	dance,	they	sing,	even	sometimes
when	there	is	nobody,	on	a	lonely	path,	 they	will	still	be	singing;	like	a	flower
that	has	come	to	bloom	on	a	lonely	path	where	nobody	walks.	But	the	flower	has
the	fragrance	to	spread,	and	it	goes	on	spreading	the	fragrance.
They	live	simply	"loose	and	natural".
"AND	FOR	THE	FIRST	TIME	THE	MASTER	PULLED	ME	OVER	TO	SIT
WITH	HIM
ON	THE	SAME	MAT."
Now	 the	disciple	has	disappeared;	 the	 ego	 is	 no	 longer	 there.	Now	 the	master
and	the	disciple	have	become	one,	now	there	is	no	distinction.	The	master	pulled
Lieh	Tzu	over,	for	the	first	time	pulled	him	over	to	sit	with	him	on	the	same	mat.
Just	symbolic,	but	deep	inside	very,	very	significant.	The	master	has	pulled	him
towards	him	now,	seeing	that	no	barrier	exists,	there	is	no	ego	to	resist.	When	the
disciple	disappears,	the	master	also	disappears.
The	master	was	not	there,	in	fact,	from	the	very	beginning.	It	was	only	because
of	the	ego	of	the	disciple	that	he	was	the	master.	The	disciple	was	ignorant,	that's
why	 he	 was	 the	 master.	 Now	 there	 is	 no	 disciple	 and	 no	 master.	 Both	 have
disappeared.
The	master	has	pulled	him	onto	his	own	mat;	inside,	the	master	has	pulled	him
and	 they	 have	 become	 one.	 This	 is	MAHAMUDRA.	 This	 is	 the	 orgasm	 that
happens	between	a	master	and	a	disciple	when	 they	meet.	A	 faint	glimpse	can
come	to	you	through	sexual	orgasm,	very	25
faint,	 very	 pale.	 But	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 have	 any	 other	 parallel,	 that's	why	 I	 say
through	sexual	orgasm	-	something	of	the	same	happens.	Something.	As	a	drop
can	be	compared	to	the	ocean
-	 just	 like	 that.	 Sexual	 orgasm	 is	 like	 a	 drop,	 and	 when	 a	 spiritual	 orgasm
happens	between	a	master	and	a	disciple	it	is	an	oceanic	feeling.
"AFTER	 NINE	 YEARS	 I	 THOUGHT	 WITHOUT	 RESTRAINT	 OF
WHATEVER	CAME
INTO	MY	MIND,	AND	SAID	WITHOUT	RESTRAINT	WHATEVER	CAME
INTO	MY
MOUTH	 WITHOUT	 KNOWING	 WHETHER	 THE	 RIGHT	 OR	 WRONG,
BENEFIT	OR
HARM	 WERE	 MINE	 OR	 ANOTHER'S,	 AND	 WITHOUT	 KNOWING
WHETHER	THAT
MASTER	WAS	MY	TEACHER	OR	NOT.	EVERYTHING	WAS	THE	SAME."
First	the	good	and	bad	disappeared,	then	benefit	and	harm	disappeared,	and	then
the	idea:	Who	is	who?	You	and	me,	I	and	thou,	they	disappeared.
Martin	 Buber	 has	 written	 a	 beautiful	 book,	 "I	 and	 Thou".	 Jewish	 mysticism
comes	 to	 this	point	 then	 remains	 stuck	 there.	 It	 is	one	of	 the	very	high	points,
where	the	disciple	and	the	master	are	the	seeker	and	the	whole.	They	come	to	a
point	of	direct	dialogue	between	"I"	and
"Thou",	but	they	remain	there.	Eastern	mysticism	takes	the	final	jump	-	"I"	and
"Thou"	also	disappear.	The	dialogue	disappears.	There	is	only	silence.
EVERYTHING	WAS	THE	SAME.
Now	Lieh	Tzu	was	not	even	aware	whether	Lao	Tzu	was	his	master	or	not.	He
was	not	aware	whether	he	was	a	disciple	or	not.
In	such	moments	many	unbelievable	things	have	happened	in	the	history	of	Zen.
The	master	 always	 hits	 the	 disciple	many	 times	 in	many	 years.	 Sometimes	 he
throws	him	out	of	the	door	and	kicks	him!	Zen	masters	are	very	harsh.	And	then
the	disciple	becomes	enlightened,	after	twenty	or	thirty	years	of	hard	work	and
discipline	with	the	Master.	And	he	comes	and	he	slaps	the	master	-	this	has	never
happened	anywhere	before.	And	 the	master	 laughs,	a	belly	 laugh,	and	he	says:
Exactly	right.	You	did	well.
It	happened	once	 that	a	disciple	was	going	on	a	 journey	and	 the	master	called
him	and	hit	him	hard	on	the	head	and	slapped	him.	And	the	disciple	said:	"This
is	too	much.	I	have	not	done	anything.	I	have	not	even	uttered	a	single	word.	I
entered	 your	 room	 and	 you	 started	 hitting	me.	 This	 is	 too	much."	 The	master
said:	"No!	You	are	going	on	a	journey	and	I	can	see	that	the	moment	you	come
back,	you	will	be	enlightened.	And	this	is	my	last	chance	to	hit	you!"
"NOW	YOU	COME	TO	BE	MY	DISCIPLE
said	Lieh	Tzu	to	Yin	Sheng
AND	 BEFORE	 EVEN	 A	 YEAR	 HAS	 GONE	 ROUND	 YOU	 ARE
INDIGNANT	AND
RESENTFUL	TIME	AND	TIME	AGAIN."
It	 took	 twenty-four	 years	 for	 Lieh	 Tzu	 to	 come	 to	 a	 point	 where	 the	 master
pulled	him	onto	his	mat,	and	opened	his	heart	and	the	hidden-most	secret	of	his
being.	And	 this	disciple	had	only	been	here	 for	one	year	 and	he	 felt	 resentful,
aggressive,	angry,	because	Lieh	Tzu	wouldn't	answer	his	questions	and	wouldn't
give	him	the	secrets	he	was	hankering	for.
What	 is	 one	 year	 in	 the	 infinite	 expanse	 of	 eternity?	Nothing.	But	 your	 hurry
makes	it	look	very,	very	long.	Twenty-five	centuries	have	passed	since	Lieh	Tzu
was.	If	he	came	back,	he	26
would	not	be	able	to	believe	that	it	has	become	almost	impossible	for	people	to
wait	for	even	one	year.	I	have	come	across	people	who	say:	We	have	come	only
for	 three	 days.	 I	 have	 come	 across	 people,	 who	meditate	 once,	 and	 then	 they
come	to	me	and	they	say:	Nothing	has	happened	yet.
Man	has	become	more	and	more	stupid,	vulgar.	You	can	get	small	things	easily,
they	 are	 like	 seasonal	 flowers:	 you	 put	 the	 seed	 in	 the	 soil,	 and	 within	 three
weeks	 they	 sprout.	 But,	 by	 the	 season's	 end,	 they	 will	 be	 gone.	 They	 are
momentary.	You	can	have	instant	coffee:	you	cannot	have	instant	meditation.	In
the	mind	of	the	West	particularly,	time	is	too	important,	too	heavy.	The	West	is
time	 obsessed.	 Listening	 to	 these	 Eastern	 tales,	 you	may	 enjoy	 them,	 but	 you
must	be	aware	about	your	own	time	obsession.	In	the	West	everything	is	done	in
such	 a	 hurry	 that	 you	 cannot	 enjoy	 anything.	 You	 move	 from	 one	 place	 to
another,	always	on	the	go,	travelling	fast.	The	faster	you	go	the	less	significance
there	is	in	travelling,	because	you	go	from	one	point	to	another	and	all	that	is	in
between	is	lost.	To	travel	by	a	bullock-cart	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.	To	travel	by	a
jet	plane	is	foolish	because	it	is	not	travel	at	all.	It	may	be	a	business	trip.	That's
okay.	For	business	it's	okay.	You	save	time.	But	for	travelling,	for	travelling	you
have	 to	move	 slowly.	 There	 is	 nothing	 like	wandering	 on	 your	 feet,	 then	 you
enjoy	 each	 moment	 of	 it	 -	 each	 tree	 that	 passes	 by.	 You	 become	 one	 with
millions	of	things,	and	you	are	enriched	through	it.
Because	 of	 time	 obsession,	 speed	 has	 become	 the	 only	 goal.	 You	 don't	 know
where	you	are	going,	but	you	are	very	happy	because	you	are	going	 fast.	The
direction	is	lost	but	speed	is	in	your	hand.
This	mind	will	not	be	able	to	seek	the	ultimate	because	the	ultimate	means	the
eternal.	 It	 is	not	 like	a	seasonal	 flower:	 it	 is	 the	ultimate,	eternal	 tree.	For	 it	 to
become	 a	 soil,	 and	 for	 it	 to	 take	 roots	 in	 you,	 infinite	 patience	 and	waiting	 is
needed.	If	you	can	only	wait,	then	all	else,	I	can	promise,	will	come.	You	simply
wait	with	me,	and	everything	will	follow.	But	don't	be	in	a	hurry	and	don't	ask
for	 secrets	 -	 they	 will	 be	 given	 to	 you	 when	 you	 are	 ready.	 They	 are	 always
given.	In	fact,	to	say	that	they	are	given	is	not	exactly	right.	When	you	are	ready,
you	will	suddenly	find	that	whatsoever	you	were	trying	to	achieve	was	already
within	 you.	 You	 had	 it	 always:	 it	 was	 already	 the	 case.	 The	 master	 is	 just	 a
catalytic	agent;	he	sits	silently,	quietly,	not	doing	anything.	Spring	comes	and	the
grass	grows	by	itself.
27
___________________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER	3	-	Emptiness	and	the	Monk's	Nose
23	February	1975	a.m.	in	Buddha	Hall
___________________________________________________________________________
SEKKYO	 SAID	 TO	 ONE	 OF	 HIS	 MONKS:	 "CAN	 YOU	 GET	 HOLD	 OF
EMPTINESS?"
"I'LL	 TRY",	 SAID	 THE	MONK,	 AND	 HE	 CUPPED	 HIS	 HANDS	 IN	 THE
AIR.
"THAT'S	 NOT	 VERY	 GOOD",	 SAID	 SEKKYO,	 "YOU	 HAVEN'T	 GOT
ANYTHING
THERE".
"WELL,	MASTER",	 SAID	 THE	MONK,	 "PLEASE	 SHOW	ME	A	 BETTER
WAY".
THEREUPON,	 SEKKYO	 SEIZED	 THE	MONK'S	 NOSE	 AND	 GAVE	 IT	 A
GREAT
YANK.
"OUCH!"	YELLED	THE	MONK,	"YOU	HURT	ME!"
"THAT'S	THE	WAY	TO	GET	HOLD	OF	EMPTINESS",	SAID	SEKKYO.
Man	is	too	full	of	himself	and	that	is	his	undoing.	Man	should	be	like	a	hollow
bamboo,	 so	 that	 existence	can	pass	 through	him.	Man	 should	be	 like	a	porous
sponge	-	not	hard	-	so	that	the	doors	and	the	windows	of	his	being	are	open,	and
existence	 can	 pass	 from	 one	 end	 to	 another	 without	 any	 hindrance;	 in	 fact,
finding	no	one	inside.	The	winds	blow	-	they	come	in	from	one	window	and	they
go	 out	 from	 another	window	 of	 his	 being.	 This	 emptiness	 is	 the	 highest	 bliss
possible.	But	you	are	like	a	hard,	unporous	rock,	or	like	a	hard	steel	rod.	Nothing
passes	through	you.	You	resist	everything.	You	don't	allow.	You	go	on	fighting
on	all	sides	and	in	all	directions	as	if	you	are	in	a	great	war	with	existence.
There	is	no	war	going	on,	you	are	simply	befooled	by	yourself.	Nobody	is	there
to	destroy	you.	The	whole	 supports	you;	 the	whole	 is	 the	very	earth	on	which
you	are	standing,	the	very	sky	in	which	you	breathe,	you	live.	In	fact,	you	are	not
-	only	the	whole	is.
When	one	understands	this,	by	and	by	one	drops	the	inner	hardness;	there	is	no
need	for	it.
There	is	no	enmity;	the	whole	is	friendly	towards	you.	The	whole	cherishes	you,
loves	you.
Otherwise,	why	are	you	here?	The	whole	brings	you	forth,	like	a	tree	is	brought
forth	by	the	earth.	The	whole	would	like	to	participate	in	all	your	blessings,	in	all
the	 celebrations	 that	 are	 possible.	 When	 you	 flower,	 the	 whole	 will	 flower
through	you;	when	you	sing,	the	whole	will	sing	through	you;	when	you	dance,
the	whole	will	dance	with	you.	You	are	not	separate.
The	 feeling	 of	 separateness	 creates	 fear,	 and	 fear	 makes	 you	 unporous.	 The
feeling	of	insecurity,	as	if	the	whole	is	going	to	destroy	you,	the	feeling	that	you
are	a	stranger	here,	an	outsider,	and	that	you	have	to	fight	your	way	inch	by	inch
towards	your	destiny,	makes	you	a	hard	steel	rod.	Of	course,	 then	many	things
simply	disappear	 from	your	 life.	You	 live	 in	 anguish,	 you	 live	 in	 anxiety,	 you
live	in	intense	pain,	but	you	live	this	of	your	own	accord.	Be	porous.	Be	floating.
Fight	is	not	needed	at	all.	Rather,	a	merger	is	needed.
These	are	the	two	attitudes	open	to	man:	the	attitude	of	a	warrior	and	the	attitude
of	 a	 lover.	 It	 is	 your	 choice	 -	 you	 can	 choose.	 But	 remember...	 certain
consequences	will	follow.
If	you	choose	the	path	of	the	warrior	and	you	become	a	fighter	with	everything
that	surrounds	you,	you	will	always	be	in	misery.	This	is	creating	a	hell	around
you;	in	the	very	attitude	of	fighting	the	hell	is	created.	Or	you	become	a	lover,	a
participant,	 then	 this	 whole	 is	 your	 home;	 you	 are	 not	 a	 stranger.	 You	 are	 at
home.	There	 is	no	 fight.	You	simply	 flow	with	 the	 river.	Then,	ecstasy	will	be
yours;	then	each	moment	will	become	ecstatic,	a	flowering.
There	is	no	hell	except	you	and	there	is	no	heaven	except	you.	It	is	your	attitude,
how	you	look	at	the	whole.	Religion	is	the	way	of	the	lover:	science	is	the	way
of	the	fighter.
28
Science	is	the	way	of	the	will,	as	if	you	are	here	to	conquer,	to	conquer	nature,	to
conquer	nature's	secrets;	as	if	you	are	here	to	enforce	your	will	and	domination
on	 existence.	 This	 is	 not	 only	 foolish,	 it	 is	 futile	 also.	 Foolish	 because	 it	will
create	a	hell	around	you,	and	 futile	because	 finally	you	will	become	more	and
more	 dead,	 less	 and	 less	 alive;	 you	will	 lose	 all	 possibilities	 of	 being	 blissful.
And,	in	the	end,	you	will	have	to	come	back	from	it,	because	you	can	go	for	a
while	 on	 the	 path	 of	 the	 will,	 but	 only	 frustration	 and	 more	 frustration	 will
happen	through	it.	You	will	be	defeated	more	and	more.	You	will	feel	more	and
more	impotent,	and	more	and	more	enmity	will	be	around	you.	You	will	have	to
come	back	from	it
-	grudgingly,	resistant,	but	you	will	have	to	come	back	from	it.	Finally,	nobody
can	 rest	 with	 a	 fighting	 attitude,	 because	 with	 a	 fighting	 attitude	 no	 rest	 is
possible,	you	cannot	relax.
The	path	 of	 religion	 is	 the	 path	 of	 love.	 From	 the	 very	 beginning	 you	 are	 not
fighting	 anybody.	 The	whole	 exists	 for	 you,	 and	 you	 exist	 for	 the	whole,	 and
there	 is	 an	 inner	 harmony.	Nobody	 is	 here	 to	 conquer	 anybody	 else.	 It	 is	 not
possible.	Because	how	can	one	part	conquer	another	part?	And	how	can	a	part
conquer	the	whole?	These	are	absurd	notions	which	only	create	nightmares	for
you,	nothing	else.	See	the	whole	situation...	you	come	out	of	the	whole	and	you
dissolve	into	it,	and,	in	between,	you	are	every	moment	part	of	it.	You	breathe	it,
you	live	it,	and	it	breathes	through	you,	it	lives	through	you.	Your	life	and	its	life
are	not	two	things	-	you	are	just	like	a	wave	in	the	ocean.
Once	 you	 understand	 this,	meditation	 becomes	 possible.	Once	 you	 understand
this,	you	relax.	You	throw	off	all	the	armour	that	you	have	created	around	you	as
a	security.	You	are	no	longer	afraid.	Fear	disappears	and	love	arises.	In	this	state
of	love,	emptiness	happens.	Or,	if	you	can	allow	emptiness	to	happen,	love	will
flower	 in	 it.	 Love	 is	 a	 flower	 of	 emptiness,	 total	 emptiness	 -	 emptiness	 is	 the
situation.	It	can	work	both	ways.
So	 there	 are	 two	 types	 of	 religion.	 One	 which	 creates	 emptiness	 in	 you	 and
around	you	so	that	a	flowering	becomes	possible;	you	have	created	the	situation,
now	 the	 flower	 bubbles	 up	 automatically.	 Finding	 no	 resistance,	 the	 seed
suddenly	 blooms	 into	 a	 flower.	 There	 is	 a	 jump	 in	 your	 being,	 an	 explosion.
Buddhism	and	Zen	follow	this	path	-	they	create	emptiness	in	and	around	you.
There	is	another	path	also,	a	second	type	of	religion,	which	creates	love	in	you,
which	creates	devotion	in	you.	Meera	and	Chaitanya	love,	and	they	love	the	total
so	deeply	that	they	find	their	beloved	everywhere;	on	every	leaf,	on	every	stone,
is	the	signature	of	the	beloved.
He	is	everywhere.	They	dance	because	there	is	nothing	else	to	do	but	celebrate.
And	everything	is	ready	-	only	the	celebration	has	to	start	on	your	part.	Nothing
else	 is	 lacking.	 A	 BHAKTA,	 a	 lover,	 simply	 celebrates,	 enjoys.	 And	 in	 that
enjoyment	of	love	and	celebration,	the	ego	disappears	and	emptiness	follows.
Either	 you	 create	 emptiness,	 like	 a	Buddha,	Tilopa,	 Sekkyo	 and	others	 or	 you
create	 love,	 like	 Meera,	 Chaitanya,	 Jesus.	 Create	 one	 and	 the	 other	 follows,
because	they	cannot	live	separately,	they	don't	have	any	separate	existence.	Love
is	one	 face	of	emptiness;	emptiness	 is	nothing	but	 love	 in	another	aspect,	 they
come	together.	If	you	bring	one,	you	invite	one,	the	other	follows	automatically
as	 a	 shadow	 of	 it.	 It	 depends	 on	 you.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 follow	 the	 path	 of
meditation,	 become	 empty.	 Don't	 bother	 about	 love	 -	 it	 will	 come	 of	 its	 own
accord.
Or,	if	you	find	it	very	difficult	to	meditate,	then	love,	then	become	a	lover,	and
meditations	This	is	how	it	should	be	because	there	are	two	types	of	human	mind:
the	feminine	and	the	male.	The	feminine	mind	can	love	easily	but	to	be	empty	is
difficult.	And	when	 I	 say	 feminine	mind,	 I	don't	mean	 females,	because	many
females	have	male	minds,	and	many	males	have	feminine	minds.	So	they	are	not
equivalent.	When	 I	 say	 feminine	mind,	 I	 don't	mean	 the	 feminine	 body	 -	 you
may	have	a	 feminine	body	but	not	a	 feminine	mind.	The	 feminine	mind	 is	 the
mind	that	feels	love	easier,	that's	all.	That	is	my	definition	of	the	feminine	mind:
it	is	29
one	who	feels	love	easily,	naturally,	who	can	flow	into	love	without	any	effort.
The	male	mind	is	one	for	whom	love	is	an	effort	-	he	can	love	but	he	will	have	to
do	it.	Love	cannot	be	his	whole	being	-	it	is	just	one	thing	of	many	other	things,
not	 even	 the	 most	 important.	 He	 can	 sacrifice	 his	 love	 for	 science,	 he	 can
sacrifice	his	love	for	the	country,	he	can	sacrifice	his	love	for	any	trivial	affair,
for	business,	for	money,	for	politics.	Love	is	not	such	a	deep	thing	with	him,	a
male	mind.	It	is	not	as	effortless	as	it	is	for	a	feminine	mind.	Meditation	is	easier.
He	can	become	empty	easily.
So	this	is	my	definition:	if	you	find	being	empty	easy,	then	do	that.	If	you	find	it
is	very	difficult,	then	don't	be	unhappy	and	don't	feel	hopeless.	You	will	always
find	love	easier.	I	have	not	come	across	a	man	who	finds	both	difficult.	So,	there
is	hope	for	everybody.	If	meditation	is	difficult,	love	will	be	easier,	it	has	to	be.
If	love	is	easier,	meditation	will	be	difficult.	If	 love	is	difficult,	meditation	will
be	easier.	So	just	feel	yourself.
And	this	is	not	concerned	with	your	body,	not	with	your	physical	structure,	your
hormones.
No.	It	is	a	quality	of	your	inner	being.	Once	you	find	it,	things	become	very,	very
easy,	because	 then	you	won't	 try	on	 the	wrong	path.	You	can	 try	on	 the	wrong
path	for	many	lives	but	you	will	not	attain	anything.	And	if	you	try	on	the	right
path,	even	the	first	step	can	become	the	last,	because	you	simply,	naturally,	flow
into	it.	Nothing	like	effort	exists	-
effortlessly	you	flow.
Zen	is	for	the	male	mind.	Soon	I	will	balance	it	by	talking	about	Sufism,	because
Sufism	is	for	the	feminine	mind.	These	are	the	two	extremes	-	Zen	and	Sufism.
Sufis	 are	 lovers,	 great	 lovers.	 In	 fact,	 in	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 human
consciousness,	more	daring	 lovers	 than	Sufis	have	never	existed,	because	 they
are	 the	 only	 ones	 who	 have	 turned	 God	 into	 their	 beloved.	 The	 God	 is	 the
woman	and	they	are	the	lovers.	Soon	I	will	balance.
Zen	insists	on	emptiness,	that's	why	in	Buddhism	there	is	no	concept	of	God,	it
is	 not	 needed.	 People	 in	 the	 West	 cannot	 understand	 how	 a	 religion	 exists
without	the	concept	of	a	God.	Buddhism	has	no	concept	of	any	God	-	there	is	no
need,	because	Buddhism	insists	on	simply	being	empty,	then	everything	follows.
But	 who	 bothers?	 Once	 you	 are	 empty,	 things	 will	 take	 their	 own	 course.	 A
religion	exists	without	God.	This	 is	simply	a	miracle.	 In	 the	West,	people	who
write	about	 religion	and	 the	philosophy	of	 religion	are	always	 in	 trouble	about
how	 to	 define	 religion.	 They	 can	 define	 Hinduism,	 Mohammedanism,
Christianity,	easily,	but	Buddhism	creates	trouble.	They	can	define	God	as	being
the	 center	 of	 all	 religion,	 but	 then	 Buddhism	 becomes	 a	 problem.	 They	 can
define	 prayer	 as	 the	 essence	 of	 religion,	 but	 again	 Buddhism	 creates	 trouble,
because	there	is	no	God	and	no	prayer,	no	mantra,	nothing.
You	have	only	to	be	empty.	The	concept	of	God	will	not	allow	you	to	be	empty;
prayer	will	 be	 a	disturbance;	 chanting	will	 not	 allow	you	 to	be	 empty.	Simply
being	empty,	everything	happens.	Emptiness	is	the	secret	key	of	Buddhism.	You
are	in	such	a	way	that	you	are	not.
Let	me	explain	a	little	more	about	emptiness	to	you,	then	it	will	be	possible	to	go
into	this	Zen	anecdote.
Physicists	 have	 been	 working	 for	 three	 hundred	 years	 to	 find	 the	 base,	 the
substance	of	matter,	 and	 the	deeper	 they	 reached,	 the	more	 they	were	puzzled.
Because	the	deeper	they	groped,	the	less	and	less	substantial	matter	was;	the	less
and	less	material	matter	was.	And	when	they	really	stumbled	upon	the	source	of
matter,	 they	 simply	 couldn't	 believe	 it,	 because	 it	 was	 against	 all	 their
conceptions.	 It	 was	 not	 matter	 at	 all:	 it	 was	 simply	 energy.	 Energy	 is	 non-
substantial.	It	has	no	weight.	You	cannot	see	it.	You	can	only	see	the	effects	of	it;
you	can	never	see	it	directly.
Eddington,	 in	 1930,	 said	 that	 we	 were	 in	 search	 of	 matter,	 but	 now	 all	 new
insight	into	matter	shows	that	there	is	no	matter,	 it	 looks	more	and	more	like	a
thought	and	 less	and	 less	 like	a	 thing.	Suddenly	 the	 insight	of	Buddha	became
very,	very	 significant	 again,	because	Buddha	did	 the	 same	with	human	matter,
the	human	stuff.	Physicists	were	trying	to	penetrate	30
matter	in	an	objective	way	to	find	out	what	was	there	inside	it,	and	they	found
nothing.	Total	emptiness.	And	the	same	was	discovered	by	Buddha	in	his	inner
journey.	He	was	trying	to	find	out	who	was	there	inside	-	the	substance	of	human
consciousness	 -	 but	 the	more	he	penetrated,	 the	more	he	became	aware	 that	 it
becomes	more	and	more	empty.	And	when	he	suddenly	reached	to	the	very	core,
there	was	nothing.	All	had	disappeared.	The	house	was	empty.	And	around	this
emptiness	 everything	 exists.	 Emptiness	 is	 your	 soul,	 so	Buddha	 had	 to	 coin	 a
new	word	which	had	never	 existed	before.	With	 a	 new	discovery	you	have	 to
change	your	language.	New	words	have	to	be	coined,	because	you	have	revealed
new	truths	and	old	words	cannot	contain	them.	Buddha	has	to	create	a	new	word.
In	 India	 people	 had	 always	 believed	 in	 the	 reality	 of	 the	 soul,	 ATMA,	 but
Buddha	 discovered	 that	 there	 was	 no	 soul,	 no	ATMA.	He	 had	 to	 coin	 a	 new
word	 -	 ANATTA.	 ANATTA	 means	 no-self.	 The	 deepest	 hidden	 in	 you	 is
emptiness	-	a	state	of	no-self.	You	are	not;	you	only	appear	to	be.
Let	me	explain	to	you	in	a	different	way	because	it	 is	one	of	the	most	difficult
things	 to	 understand.	 Even	 if	 you	 understand	 intellectually,	 it	 is	 almost
impossible	to	trust	it.	You	are	not?	Your	being	seems	so	taken	for	granted.	And
you	can	always	ask	foolish	questions.
Buddha	was	asked	again	and	again:	If	you	are	not,	then	who	is	speaking?	If	you
are	not,	then	who	becomes	hungry?	And	who	goes	begging	in	the	town?	If	you
are	not,	then	who	is	standing	before	me?
The	emperor	Wu,	in	China,	asked	Bodhidharma	immediately:	If	you	say	that	you
are	not	and	nothing	is,	and	emptiness	is	the	very	substance	of	your	inner	being,
then	 who	 is	 this	 fellow	 talking	 to	 me,	 standing	 before	 me?	 Bodhidharma
shrugged	his	shoulders	and	said:	I	don't	know.
Nobody	 knows,	 and	 Buddha	 says	 that	 nobody	 can	 know,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a
substance	 that	 you	 can	 encounter	 as	 an	 object;	 it	 is	 no-substance,	 you	 cannot
encounter	 it.	This	Buddha	calls	 realization:	when	you	come	 to	understand	 that
the	 innermost	 emptiness	 cannot	 be	 known,	 it	 is	 unknowable,	 then	 you	 have
become	a	realized	man.
It	 is	difficult,	so	 let	me	again	explain	 it	 to	you.	You	go	 to	a	movie.	Something
beautiful	 is	 happening	 there.	 The	 screen	 is	 empty.	 Then	 the	 projector	 starts
working.	 The	 screen	 disappears	 because	 the	 projected	 pictures	 hide	 it
completely.	And	what	are	 these	projected	pictures?	Nothing	but	a	play	of	 light
and	shade.	You	see	somebody	throwing	a	spear	on	the	screen,	the	spear	moves
fast.	But	what	is	happening	exactly?	The	movement	is	only	an	appearance,	it	is
not	happening.	It	cannot	happen.	In	fact	a	movie	is	not	a	movie	at	all,	because	it
has	no	movement;	all	the	pictures	are	still.	But	an	appearance	is	created	through
a	trick.	The	trick	is	that	many	still	pictures	of	the	spear	in	different	positions	are
flashed	on	the	screen	so	fast	that	you	cannot	see	the	gap	between	two	pictures	-
and	you	have	the	feeling	that	 the	spear	 is	moving.	I	raise	my	hand.	You	take	a
hundred	pictures	of	my	hand	 in	different	positions	and	 then	 flash	 them	so	 fast
that	the	eyes	cannot	catch	the	gap	between	two	pictures.
Then	you	will	 see	 the	hand	being	 raised.	A	hundred	still	pictures,	or	a	million
still	 pictures,	 are	 projected	 and	 the	movement	 is	 created.	And	 if	 the	 film	 is	 a
three	dimensional	film	and	somebody	is	throwing	a	spear,	you	may	be	so	much
taken	 in	 by	 it,	 that	 you	may	 lean	 to	 the	 right	 or	 to	 the	 left	 to	 avoid	 the	 spear.
When	 three	 dimensional	 pictures	 came	 into	 existence	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 they
scared	people.	With	a	horse	running	at	you,	you	become	afraid	because	the	horse
is	soon	going	to	enter	the	hall;	and	you	may	even	lean	to	the	right	or	left,	as	the
case	may	be,	to	avoid	the	clash.	The	movement	is	false;	it	is	not	happening	there,
it	is	just	fast-moving	still	pictures.	And	the	falseness	is	not	apparent	unless	you
see	the	film	moving	very	slowly,	being	projected	very	slowly.
The	same,	 in	a	different	 sense,	 is	happening	 in	 life.	Thoughts	are	projected	by
your	mind	so	fast	that	you	cannot	see	the	gap	between	two	thoughts.	The	screen
is	completely	covered	by	the	thoughts	and	they	move	so	fast	that	you	cannot	see
that	each	thought	is	separate.	That's	31
what	Tilopa	 says:	Thoughts	 are	 like	 clouds,	without	 any	 roots,	with	 no	 home.
And	a	thought	is	not	related	to	another	thought;	a	thought	is	an	individual	unit,
just	 like	dust	particles,	separate.	But	 they	move	so	fast	you	cannot	see	 the	gap
between.	You	feel	they	have	a	unity,	a	certain	association.	That	association	is	a
false	notion,	but	because	of	that	association,	ego	is	created.
Buddha	says:	Fast-moving	thoughts	create	an	illusion,	as	if	there	is	some	center
to	them,	as	if	they	are	related	to	one	thing.	They	are	not	related,	they	are	without
roots	-	like	clouds.
When	you	meditate	you	will	understand	that	each	single	thought	is	an	individual
thought,	not	related	to	another.	Between	the	two	is	the	emptiness	of	your	being.
They	 come	 and	 go,	 but	 they	 come	 and	 go	 so	 fast	 that	 you	 cannot	 see	 the
intervals.	Ego	is	created.
And	 then	you	 start	 feeling	 that	 there	 is	 somebody	as	 a	 center	 in	you	 to	which
everything	 belongs	 -	 thoughts,	 actions.	 But	 Buddha	 says	 that	 there	 is	 nobody
inside	you.	When	you	go	deeper	you	will	understand	 the	 truth	of	 it:	 it	 is	not	a
philosophical	doctrine.
Buddha	 can	 be	 defeated	 very	 easily	 by	 argument;	 he	 was	 thrown	 out	 of	 this
country	because	Indians	are	great	arguers.	They	have	done	nothing	else	for	five
thousand	 years	 but	 argue,	 and	 through	 argument	 Buddha	 can	 be	 defeated
because	 the	 whole	 thing	 seems	 to	 be	 absurd.	 Buddha	 is	 saying	 that	 there	 are
actions,	there	is	no	actor;	there	are	thoughts,	there	is	no	thinker;	there	is	hunger,
there	 is	 satiety;	 there	 is	 illness,	 there	 is	health;	but	 there	 is	no	center	 to	which
they	all	belong.	They	are	just	like	clouds	moving	in	an	empty	sky,	not	related	to
each	 other	 at	 all.	 Through	 experience	 nobody	 can	 defeat	Buddha,	 but	 through
logic	it	is	very	simple.
Soon	Buddha	became	aware	that	through	logic	he	could	be	defeated	very	easily.
So	 what	 to	 do?	 India	 had	 great	 scholars	 in	 those	 days,	 great	 pundits,	 great
logicians,	hair-splitters.	So	Buddha	simply	declared:	I	am	not	a	metaphysician,	I
am	not	a	philosopher,	and	I	have	no	doctrine	to	offer.	These	are	not	conclusions
of	my	intellect.	If	somebody	wants	to	understand	them,	he	will	have	to	come	and
live	with	me,	 and	 do	whatsoever	 I	 say.	 And	 after	 a	 year,	 if	 he	 lives	with	me
silently	in	meditation,	then	I	am	ready	to	argue	with	him,	never	before.
And	 it	 happened	 that	 although	many	 great	 scholars	 came	 to	 him,	 this	was	 his
condition.
Sariputta	came.	He	was	a	very	famous	scholar,	and	he	had	five	hundred	of	his
own	disciples.
They	were	great	scholars	in	their	own	right:	they	knew	all	the	Vedas,	they	knew
all	the	Upanishads,	they	knew	all	the	wisdom	of	the	centuries,	and	they	had	very,
very	 keen	 intellects.	 Sariputta	 came	 and	 Buddha	 said:	 You	 have	 come,	 that's
good.	But	for	one	year	you	have	to	remain	silent,	because	I	have	no	doctrine	to
propose,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 any	 argument.	 I	 have	 something	 in	 my
being	to	share,	but	no	doctrine	to	propose.	So,	if	you	like,	you	can	be	here.
Then	came	Moulunkaputta,	another	great	scholar,	and	Buddha	said	the	same	to
him:	For	one	year	you	sit	silently	by	my	side,	not	raising	a	single	question.	For
one	year	you	have	to	let	your	mind	subside	and	penetrate	into	the	intervals.	After
one	year,	exactly	one	year,	if	you	have	some	questions,	I	will	answer.
Sariputta	was	also	sitting	there.	He	started	laughing.
Moulunkaputta	asked:	"What	is	the	matter?	Why	are	you	laughing?"
Sariputta	said:	"Don't	be	befooled	by	this	man.	If	you	have	to	ask	anything,	ask
immediately,	because	after	one	year	you	will	not	be	able	 to	ask	anything.	This
has	happened	 to	me.	One	year,	meditating	silently,	questions	disappeared.	One
year,	 meditating	 silently,	 the	 argumentative	 mind	 disappeared,	 and	 the	 arguer
disappeared.	One	year,	sitting	by	the	side	of	this	man,	one	becomes	empty;	and
then	he	laughs,	and	then	he	plays	tricks,	and	then	he	says:
'Now	 you	 ask.	Where	 are	 your	 doctrines	 and	 principles	 and	 arguments?'	 And
nothing	 arises	 inside.	 So,	Moulunkaputta,	 if	 you	 have	 to	 ask,	 right	 now	 is	 the
moment	-	otherwise,	never."
32
Buddha	said:	"I	will	fulfil	my	promise.	If	you	remain	one	year	and	if	you	have
any	 questions,	 I	 will	 answer,	 whatsoever	 the	 questions."	 Moulunkaputta
remained.	One	year	passed.	He	forgot	completely	about	the	year	passing	and	that
the	day	had	come	back;	but	Buddha	remembered.	After	one	year,	on	exactly	the
day,	 he	 said	 to	Moulunkaputta:	 "Now	you	 stand,	Moulunkaputta,	 and	 you	 can
ask."
Moulunkaputta	stood	there	silent,	with	closed	eyes,	and	then	he	said:	"There	is
nothing	to	ask,	and	there	is	nobody	to	ask.	I	have	completely	disappeared."
Buddhism	is	an	experience	and	Zen	is	the	purest	of	all	Buddha's	teachings	-	the
very	 essence.	 And	 the	 center	 around	 which	 the	 whole	 experience	 moves	 is
emptiness.
How	to	become	empty?	That	is	what	meditation	is	all	about:	how	to	become	so
silent,	 that	 you	 cannot	 even	 see	 yourself	 -	 because	 that	 too	 is	 a	 disturbance.
Feeling	 that	 "I	 am",	 is	 also	 a	 disturbance	 -	 even	 that	 goes.	One	 is	 completely
effaced,	 utterly	 effaced.	 The	 sheet	 is	 clean,	 it	 becomes	 like	 a	 summer	 sky	 -
clouds	are	no	longer	there,	just	the	depth,	the	infinite	blueness,	ending	nowhere,
beginning	 nowhere.	 This	 is	 what	 Buddha	 calls	 the	 ANATTA,	 the	 innermost
center	of	non-being,	of	no-self.	Buddha	says:	"You	walk,	but	there	is	no	walker;
you	eat,	but	there	is	no	eater;	you	are	born,	but	there	is	nobody	who	is	born.	You
will	be	 ill,	 and	you	will	become	old,	but	 there	 is	nobody	who	becomes	 ill	 and
becomes	old.	And	you	will	die,	but	there	is	nobody	who	dies."	And	this	is	what
eternal	life	is...	not	being	born,	how	can	you	die?
Not	being	there,	how	can	you	be	ill	or	healthy?
These	things	happen,	and	if	you	become	a	deep	witness	to	them,	by	and	by	you
will	know	 that	 they	happen	on	 their	own	accord.	They	are	not	concerned	with
you.	They	are	not	in	any	way	happening	in	relation	to	you.	Unrelated,	homeless,
rootless	-	this	is	the	utter	enlightenment.
Knowing	this,	 that	 things	happen,	 like	dreams,	one	 is	not	bothered	 this	way	or
that,	one	 is	neither	happy	nor	unhappy.	One	simply	 is	not.	Buddha	says:	 "You
can	 never	 be	 happy,	 because,	 in	 the	 very	 insistence	 that	 you	 are,	 unhappiness
hides.	You	can	never	be	liberated,	because	you	are	the	bondage.	Liberation	is	not
of	you,	liberation	is	from	you."	This	is	the	deepest	core	ever	touched,	the	deepest
core.
Mahavir	says:	"You	will	be	enlightened."
Buddha	says:	"You	are	the	hindrance."
Mahavir	says:	"You	will	live	in	MOKSHA,	in	the	ultimate	state	of	consciousness
-
blissful,	eternally	blissful."
Buddha	says:	"Unless	you	die,	you	will	never	attain	to	that	state."
You	 are	 the	 only	 barrier,	 the	 only	 hindrance,	 the	 only	 obstacle.	When	you	 are
not,	that	state	is.	That	state	is	not	yours,	you	cannot	claim	it;	in	fact,	because	you
are,	 you	 don't	 allow	 that	 state	 to	 be.	 It	 is	 already	 here	 within	 you,	 this	 very
moment,	but	you	don't	allow	it	to	function.
You	 try	 to	 control	 it,	 manipulate	 it.	 The	 ego	 is	 the	 great	 manipulator,	 the
controller,	and	the	controller	disappears.	That	is	what	I	am	trying	to	do	with	you
with	these	many	meditations.
The	effort	is	how	to	drop	the	control,	how	to	drop	the	great	manipulator.
You	whirl	 in	 a	 Dervish	 dance.	 In	 the	 beginning	 you	 are	 there.	 Soon	 you	 feel
nausea,	 but	 that	 nausea	 is	 not	 only	 physical,	 it	 is	 deeply	 spiritual.	 You	 start
feeling	 nausea	when	 the	moment	 comes	 for	 control	 to	 be	 dropped.	When	 that
moment	nears,	you	start	feeling	nausea.
The	nausea	is	that	the	control	is	being	lost.	You	feel	dizzy;	you	feel	that	you	may
fall	down.
These	are	not	just	physical	things	-	deep	inside	the	ego	is	feeling	as	if	it	is	being
thrown	off	 the	 track.	The	ego	 is	 feeling	dizzy.	 It	 is	 feeling	 that	 if	 this	whirling
continues	for	even	a	little	longer,	I	will	not	be	able	to	be	there.	You	start	to	feel
like	vomiting.	In	fact,	that	vomit	is	not	only	physical,	just	one	part	is	physical;	a
deeper	part	is	the	vomit	of	the	ego.	If	you	continue	to	feel	disturbed,	there	will
be	a	physical	vomiting,	but	if	you	don't	bother	about	it,	soon	33
physical	vomiting	will	disappear.	And	then	the	real	vomit	will	happen:	one	day,
suddenly,	the	ego	is	vomited.	Suddenly	an	ugly	phenomenon	within	you	escapes;
suddenly	 the	 disease	 from	 you	 is	 thrown	 out;	 suddenly	 you	 are	 ego-free.	 It
happens	 unexpectedly.	 When	 it	 happens	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 you	 cannot	 even
believe	it;	you	cannot	believe	that,	without	the	ego,	you	are.
There	is	nobody	inside,	and	you	are;	and	you	are	so	perfect	and	so	beautiful	and
so	blissful	-
without	anybody	being	there!
The	ego	has	to	be	thrown	off-center,	because	it	has	become	so	deeply	rooted	in
your	mind,	 through	many	 lives.	 It	has	usurped	 the	whole	being;	emptiness	has
been	thrown	into	the	background,	into	the	unconscious,	and	the	ego	has	usurped
the	 throne.	 Now	 the	 ego	 has	 become	 the	 king,	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 manipulating
everything.
This	parable,	 this	small	anecdote,	will	 tell	you	many	things	about	how	the	ego
can	be	thrown	off-center.
SEKKYO	SAID	TO	ONE	OF	HIS	MONKS:	 "CAN	YOU	GRAB	HOLD	OF
EMPTINESS?"
"I'LL	TRY",	SAID	THE	MONK	AND	HE	CUPPED	HIS	HANDS	IN	THE	AIR.
The	 master	 is	 playing	 a	 trick.	 The	 master	 asked:	 "Can	 you	 get	 hold	 of
emptiness?"	The	question	is	tricky,	and	if	the	disciple	was	of	any	understanding,
he	would	not	have	tried.	The	very	effort	to	catch	hold	of	emptiness	is	stupid.	You
can	 catch	hold	 of	 something;	 you	 cannot	 catch	hold	 of	 nothing.	How	can	you
catch	 hold	 of	 nothing?	The	 disciple	 still	 feels	 that	 emptiness	 is	 something;	 he
still	feels	that	emptiness	is	not	empty	-	it	is	a	name,	a	label	of	something	which
can	 be	 caught	 hold	 of.	 If	 he	 had	 a	 little	 understanding,	 even	 a	 little
understanding,	he	would	have	done	something	else	than	catch	hold	of	emptiness.
That	was	the	test.
There	 are	 stories	 where	 a	 master	 asks	 a	 disciple:	 "Can	 you	 get	 hold	 of
emptiness?"	and	the	disciple	seizes	the	master's	nose	and	gives	it	a	great	yank	-
that	 would	 have	 been	 absolutely	 right,	 because	 the	 question	 is	 absurd.
Whatsoever	you	try	it	is	going	to	fail	from	the	very	beginning.	Nothing	will	help.
These	 are	 the	 Zen	 koans.	 A	 Zen	master	 gives	 you	 an	 absurd	 problem,	 which
cannot	be	solved.	There	is	no	answer	to	it.
I	have	heard	about	a	toy-shop	somewhere	in	America.	A	father	was	purchasing	a
toy	puzzle	for	his	child.	He	tried	to	fix	it,	and	he	tried	and	tried	in	many	ways,
but	something	was	always	wrong,	it	wouldn't	work.	So	he	asked	the	manager	of
the	shop:	"If	even	 I	cannot	make	head	or	 tail	out	of	 this,	how	do	you	suppose
that	a	small	child	will	be	able	to?"	The	manager	said:	"Nobody	can	do	it.	This	is
just	to	give	the	child	a	taste	of	modern	life.	It	is	not	meant	to	be,	nobody	can	do
it,	it	cannot	be	fixed.	The	part,	the	different	parts,	are	not	made	to	fix."
This	was	just	to	give	a	taste	of	modern	life:	whatsoever	you	do,	nothing	is	of	any
avail;	 in	 the	 end	you	will	 feel	 frustrated.	Do	 this	 or	 that,	 there	 are	millions	of
alternatives,	 but	 all	 are	 false,	 because	 they	 fail	 from	 the	 very	 beginning.	 The
puzzle	was	not	a	puzzle,	but	an	absurdity.	A	puzzle	is	that	which	can	be	solved
by	 some	 intelligence.	 An	 absurdity	 is	 that	 which	 by	 its	 very	 nature	 is	 not
solvable,	cannot	be	solved.	A	koan	is	an	absurd	puzzle.
The	 master	 says:	 "Can	 you	 get	 hold	 of	 emptiness?"	 Now,	 from	 the	 very
beginning,	any	solution	is	debarred.	In	the	very	wording	of	the	question	he	has
created	 an	 absurdity.	How	 can	 you	 catch	 hold	 of	 nothing?	You	 can	 of	 course,
catch	hold	of	something.	But	nothing?
Emptiness?	All	your	efforts	are	doomed	from	the	very	beginning.	And	this	is	the
whole	 thing:	 the	master	 is	 trying	 to	help	 the	disciple	 to	become	aware,	but	 the
ego	 takes	 the	 problem	 immediately	 and	 starts	 trying	 to	 solve	 it.	 It	 becomes	 a
challenge.
That's	why	so	many	people	try	a	crossword	puzzle,	this	and	that.	Just	looking	at
the	 newspaper	 their	 ego	 is	 challenged;	 they	 have	 to	 solve	 it,	 otherwise	 it	will
haunt	them.	They	34
are	 so	 intelligent,	 how	 can	 this	 puzzle	 exist?	 They	 will	 have	 to	 solve	 it,	 it
becomes	 an	 obsession.	 Millions	 of	 people	 waste	 millions	 of	 hours	 solving
foolish	things.	The	ego	takes	up	the	challenge.
When	the	master	said:	"Can	you	get	hold	of	emptiness?"	he	was	exciting	the	ego
and	ego	is	the	most	stupid	thing	in	human	life.	You	can	excite	it	by	anything	-	by
anything.
At	an	advertisement	in	the	newspaper:	Do	you	have	a	two-car	garage,	or	only	a
one-car	garage?	-	immediately	the	ego	feels	disturbed	because	other	people	have
a	 two-car	garage,	 and	you	have	only	one.	Your	 life	 is	wasted.	You	existed	 for
nothing,	Move	fast,	borrow	money.	Do	something!	Even	if	you	get	ulcers	on	the
way,	it	is	okay.	Cancer	one	can	tolerate,	but	one	cannot	tolerate	a	one-car	garage.
Commit	suicide,	but	you	have	to	have	a	two-car	garage.	Ego	is	the	most	stupid
thing,	and	 the	whole	market	of	salesmen	and	advertisers	depends	on	your	ego.
They	excite	the	ego:	they	exploit	you.	And	it	is	difficult	to	prevent	them	unless
you	drop	the	ego.	They	will	go	on	and	on.	A	big	car	becomes	an	ego	symbol.
I	have	heard	 that	Mulla	Nasruddin	went	 to	America.	 In	his	 town	he	had	never
seen	 a	 bigger	 car	 than	 a	 FIAT.	 When	 he	 saw	 such	 big	 cars	 he	 was	 simply
puzzled:	What	to	call	them?
Because	they	are	not	cars,	and	they	are	not	buses;	and	in	such	a	big	car	only	one
person	sits	or	a	dog.	What	is	the	matter?	He	saw	such	big	houses	-	what	to	call
them?	In	his	town	a	two-storey	house	is	called	an	ATARI,	a	palace.	Then	he	saw
a	 hundred-storied	 house.	 His	 mind	 boggled.	 You	 cannot	 call	 it	 a	 house,	 you
cannot	call	it	a	palace	-	there	simply	exists	no	word	for	it.
And	then	he	saw	Niagara.	He	closed	his	eyes	and	he	said:	"It	seems	I	am	seeing
a	dream."
He	 had	 seen	 small	waterfalls,	 his	 town	 had	 a	waterfall,	 but	 it	 ran	 only	 in	 the
rainy	season.
What	 is	 this?	 And	 he	 became	 so	 puzzled	 that	 it	 was	 even	 impossible	 to
appreciate	such	big,	tremendous	things;	and	he	was	not	able	to	say	anything	to
the	guide.	So	then	he	started	feeling	guilty	-	he	should	say	something.
Then	 they	came	across	 a	 small	 river.	So	Mulla	Nasruddin	 thought:	This	 is	 the
opportunity.
And	he	said:	"It	seems	somebody's	car	radiator	is	leaking."
Things	go	on	becoming	bigger	 and	bigger	 and	bigger	 just	 because	of	 the	 ego.
They	are	not	needed.	There	exists	no	necessity	for	them.	Life	becomes	more	and
more	complex	because	of	 the	stupid	ego.	And	once	 it	 takes	 the	challenge,	 it	 is
always	 ready	 to	 take	 it,	 without	 even	 asking	 if	 this	 is	 possible,	 impossible,
rational,	irrational.
The	master	Sekkyo	said:
"CAN	YOU	GRAB	HOLD	OF	EMPTlNESS?"
"I'LL	TRY",	SAID	THE	MONK.
This	is	the	answer	of	the	ego:	"I	will	 try."	It	 takes	all	sorts	of	challenges	and	a
koan	is	a	great	challenge.	It	is	made	in	such	a	way	that	you	cannot	solve	it.	And
trying	 to	 solve	 it,	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 that	 your	 very	 effort	 to	 solve	 it	 is
idiotic.	 In	 trying	 to	 solve	 it,	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 that	 you	 have	 taken	 the
challenge.	That	was	wrong.	The	one	who	says	within	you:	"I	will	try	and	I	will
do",	is	impotent.
A	koan	 is	given	 to	a	disciple	 to	feel	 the	 impotency	-	which	you	cannot	do	-	 to
feel	 the	 helplessness,	 because	 the	 ego	 can	 disappear	 only	 in	 a	 helpless	 state,
otherwise	not.	The	ego	can	disappear	only	when	 it	 is	 a	 total	 failure;	when	not
even	a	slight	possibility	of	its	success	exists.	Only	then,	otherwise	it	can	go	on
hoping	 that	 it	 will	 do	 something	 else,	 or	 something	 else,	 and	 it	 will	 try	 this
alternative	and	that.	There	must	exist	a	possibility	for	the	emptiness	to	be	caught,
for	you	to	catch	hold	of	it:	I	will	try.	Remember	always	to	watch	before	you	say:
"I	will	try."	Don't	allow	the	ego	to	come	in.	Just	watch.	Be	intelligent,	don't	be
egoistic.
Intelligence	 is	 good.	 Being	 egoistic	 in	 fact	 hinders	 the	 functioning	 of	 your
intelligence.	Such	a	35
simple	thing.	The	disciple	should	have	hit	the	master,	right	then	and	there.	What
type	of	nonsense	are	you	telling	me?
But	people	have	tried	to	solve	all	sorts	of	nonsense,	because	the	ego	says:	There
must	be	some	way.	The	ego	says:	If	the	problem	exists,	the	solution	must	exist.
What	is	the	necessity?
You	can	create	a	problem,	but	there	is	no	necessity	in	nature	for	the	solution	to
exist.
And,	as	I	have	observed,	ninety-nine	per	cent	of	the	problems	of	philosophy	are
foolish.
They	 cannot	 be	 solved,	 but	 great	 minds	 are	 involved	 in	 solving	 them.	 For
example,	simple	problems	like:	"Who	created	the	world?"	are	foolish,	but	great
theologians,	 religious	 people,	 scholars,	 waste	 their	 whole	 life	 on	 them.	 For
thousands	of	years	many	have	been	worried	about	who	created	the	world.	And	it
cannot	be	solved;	it	is	a	koan.	It	is	absurd,	because	the	very	question	is	such,	the
nature	of	it	is	such,	that	whatsoever	you	do,	it	will	again	jump	up	and	stand	on
its	feet,	it	will	not	be	killed.
For	example,	if	you	say:	A	created	the	world,	immediately	the	question	is	there:
Who	created	A?	B	created	A.	Then	the	question	is	there:	Who	created	B?	You	go
on,	and	on,	and	finally,	 just	fed	up	with	 the	whole	 thing,	you	will	have	to	say:
This	Z,	nobody	created	this	Z.
But	why	get	to	Z?	Why	not	say	in	the	first	place	that	nobody	created	this	world?
Why	go	from	A	to	Z?	When	you	have	to	concede	that	nobody	created	God,	then
why	say	that	God	created	the	world?	If	God	can	exist	without	being	created,	then
why	not	this	existence?	There	seems	to	be	no	reason.	But	people	go	on,	and	they
think	that	they	are	doing	very	serious	religious	thinking.	This	is	not	religious	at
all;	in	fact,	no	thinking	is	religious.	Non-thinking	is	religious.
Can	you	get	hold	of	emptiness?	What	nonsense!	Emptiness	is	nothing,	how	can
you	get	hold	of	it?	It	has	no	boundaries,	no	limitations	to	it,	it	is	not	possible,	but
the	ego	says:	I	will	try.
"I'LL	 TRY",	 SAID	 THE	MONK,	 AND	 HE	 CUPPED	 HIS	 HANDS	 IN	 THE
AIR.
Not	only	did	he	say	it,	he	tried	-	he	cupped	his	hands	in	the	air.	You	may	think
that	you	would	have	done	better.	What	would	you	do?	Whatsoever	you	do	will
be	the	same.	Without	knowing	what	you	would	do,	I	say	it	will	be	the	same.	You
jump	this	way	and	that,	and	try	to	catch	hold	-	you	will	simply	look	foolish.
...	AND	HE	CUPPED	HIS	HANDS	IN	THE	AIR.
"THAT'S	 NOT	 VERY	 GOOD",	 SAID	 SEKKYO,	 "YOU	 HAVEN'T	 GOT
ANYTHING
THERE".
There	is	something	to	be	understood	here	-	if	your	hands	are	open,	emptiness	is
there;	 if	 your	 hands	 are	 not	 open,	 and	 you	 have	 made	 a	 fist,	 emptiness	 has
disappeared.	In	a	fist	there	is	no	space;	in	an	open	hand	the	whole	sky	is	there,
but	it	is	in	an	open	hand.	The	meaning	is	very	subtle,	but	very	beautiful	-	if	you
try	 to	catch	hold	of	 it	you	will	miss,	 if	you	don't	 try	 it	 is	already	 there.	 If	you
don't	try,	in	your	open	hand	the	whole	sky	exists;	nothing	less	than	that.
If	 you	 try	 to	 catch	 hold	 of	 the	 sky,	 and	 you	 make	 a	 fist	 out	 of	 your	 hand,
everything	has	disappeared.
What	is	there	in	your	fist?	Maybe	a	little	stale	air	-	and	that	too	shows	that	the
fist	is	not	exactly	complete.	That's	why.	If	the	fist	is	exactly	complete,	the	whole
sky	has	disappeared	from	it.
The	ultimate	is	already	there;	no	effort	is	needed	to	get	it.	In	the	very	effort	you
miss	and	lose	and	go	astray.
One	man	came	to	Lin	Chi,	a	great	Zen	master,	and	said:	"I	am	very	troubled.	I
would	 like	 to	become	a	Buddha	myself.	What	 to	do?"	Lin	Chi	chased	him	out
with	his	staff,	out	of	the	36
temple.	He	hit	him	hard,	the	man	started	running,	and	he	chased	him	out	of	the
temple.
Somebody	who	was	standing	by	said:	"This	 is	 too	hard.	The	poor	man	has	not
asked	anything	wrong.	He	was	simply	asking	a	very	religious	question,	and	he
looked	very	sincere	-	you	should	have	looked	at	his	eyes,	his	face.	He	had	really
travelled	 a	 long	 way	 to	 come	 to	 you,	 and	 he	 was	 asking	 a	 simple	 sincere,
religious	question:	how	to	become	a	Buddha.	And	what	you	did	seems	to	be	too
hard	on	the	poor	man,	and	unjustified."	Lin	Chi	said:	"I	chased	him	out	because
he	was	asking	an	absurd	thing.	He	is	already	a	Buddha.	If	he	tries,	he	will	miss.
And	if	he	can	understand	why	I	hit	him	and	chased	him	out,	then	he	should	leave
all	effort	-
there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	 achieved,	 he	 has	 just	 to	 be	 himself.	 He	 has	 to	 be	 just
whatsoever	he	is."
Be	loose	and	natural,	what	Tilopa	says,	and	then	Buddha	is	already	there	in	the
inner	 shrine.	One	has	not	 to	become	a	Buddha;	one	 is	 always	born	 a	Buddha.
Buddhahood	 is	your	 innermost	essential	nature.	You	need	not	enquire	about	 it:
you	need	not	try	for	it.
The	poor	seeker	went	 to	another	master,	 thinking	 that	 this	Lin	Chi	was	mad:	 I
ask	a	simple	question	and	he	hits	me	hard,	and	then	chases	me	out	of	the	temple.
He	is	completely	insane.
He	went	to	another	master;	a	master	who	was	opposed	to	Lin	Chi.	They	had	their
monasteries	nearby	 in	 the	same	hills.	He	went	 there.	He	felt:	This	man	will	be
right,	because	he	is	opposed	to	Lin	Chi.	And	now	I	know	why	he	is	opposed.
He	went	to	the	master,	the	other	master	and	asked	the	same	question.	The	master
said:
"Have	 you	 ever	 been	 before	 to	 any	 other	master?"	 He	 said:	 "Yes.	 But	 it	 was
wrong	of	me	to	go	there.	I	went	to	see	Lin	Chi.	He	hit	me	hard,	and	chased	me
out	of	the	temple."	Suddenly,	the	master	became	very	ferocious,	as	if	he	would
kill	 him.	 He	 pulled	 his	 sword	 out	 of	 his	 sheath,	 and	 the	 man	 ran	 away.	 The
master	said:	"What	do	you	think?	Do	you	think	I	am	an	ignorant	man?	If	Lin	Chi
can	do	that,	I	will	kill	you	completely."
He	asked	somebody	on	the	way	what	to	do.	The	man	said:	"You	go	back	to	Lin
Chi,	he	is	more	compassionate."	And	he	did.	When	he	went	back	Lin	Chi	asked:
"Why	 have	 you	 come	 back?"	 He	 said:	 "The	 other	 man	 is	 dangerous,	 more
dangerous	 than	 you.	 He	 would	 have	 completely	 killed	me.	 He	 seems	 to	 be	 a
maniac,	 ferocious."	Lin	Chi	said:	"We	help	each	other.	 It	 is	a	conspiracy.	Now
you	be	here	and	never	again	ask	how	to	be	a	Buddha,	because	you	are	already.
One	 has	 just	 to	 live.	 You	 live	 like	 a	 Buddha.	 You	 don't	 bother,	 don't	 try	 to
become	one."	And	he	became	enlightened.
This	 is	 the	greatest	 teaching	possible:	you	live	it	out.	And	this	 is	what	I	would
like	 you	 to	 do	 also.	You	 live	 it	 out	 -	 you	 need	 not	 bother	 to	 become,	 you	 are
already.	 And	 Buddhahood	 is	 a	 being,	 it	 is	 never	 a	 becoming.	 You	 can	 never
become.	How	can	you	become	a	Buddha?
Either	you	are,	or	you	are	not.	How	can	you	become?	How	can	an	ordinary	stone
become	 a	 diamond?	Either	 it	 is	 or	 it	 is	 not;	 becoming	 is	 not	 possible.	 So	 you
decide:	either	you	are,	or	you	are	not.	If	you	are	not,	forget	everything	about	it.	If
you	 are,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 think	 about	 it.	 In	 either	 way	 you	 simply	 be
whatsoever	you	are,	and	in	that	very	being	everything	is	caught	hold	of	-	you	can
catch	hold	of	emptiness	without	any	effort.
"THAT'S	 NOT	 VERY	 GOOD",	 SAID	 SEKKYO,	 "YOU	 HAVEN'T	 GOT
ANYTHING
THERE".
"WELL,	MASTER",	 SAID	 THE	MONK,	 "PLEASE	 SHOW	ME	A	 BETTER
WAY".
There	 are	 no	 ways	 better	 or	 worse.	 The	 way	 doesn't	 exist,	 because	 the	 way
means	that	something	has	to	become.	The	way	means	that	some	distance	has	to
be	 travelled.	 The	 way	 means	 that	 you	 and	 the	 goal	 are	 separate.	 The	 way	 is
possible	 if	 I	 am	 travelling	 to	 come	 to	 you,	 the	 way	 is	 possible	 if	 you	 are
travelling	 to	 come	 to	 me,	 but	 how	 is	 the	 way	 possible	 if	 I	 am	 trying	 to	 be
myself?	There	is	no	distance.
37
If	you	are	trying	to	reach	yourself,	the	way	is	not	possible.	There	is	no	space,	no
distance.
You	 are	 already	yourself,	 the	way	doesn't	 exist.	That	 is	why	Zen	 is	 called	 the
pathless	path,	 the	gateless	gate.	The	gate	 is	not	 there,	and	 this	 is	 the	gate.	The
pathless	path	-	the	path	doesn't	exist,	and	to	understand	this,	is	the	path.	The	Zen
effort	 is	 to	 throw	 you	 onto	 your	 reality	 immediately.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to
postpone.
"WELL,	MASTER",	 SAID	 THE	MONK,	 "PLEASE	 SHOW	ME	A	 BETTER
WAY".
He	 is	 still	 in	 the	 same	 trap.	 The	 ego	 is	 asking:	 then	 something	 else	 may	 be
possible;	maybe	something	can	be	done	and	you	can	catch	hold	emptiness.
THEREUPON,	 SEKKYO	 SEIZED	 THE	MONK'S	 NOSE	 AND	 GAVE	 IT	 A
GREAT
YANK.
Why	are	Zen	masters	so	rude?	And	only	Zen	masters	are	so	rude.	They	have	a
real	compassion,	and	you	can	be	thrown	to	yourself	only	in	such	a	way,	there	is
no	other	way.	You	need	shock	treatment.	Why	shock	treatment?	Because	only	in
a	shock,	for	a	small	portion	of	time,	does	your	thinking	stop,	otherwise	not.	Only
in	 a	 shock	 you	 become	 aware,	 alert,	 your	 sleep	 drops.	 Otherwise	 you	 are	 a
sleepwalker.	Unless	somebody	hits	you	hard,	your	sleep	cannot	be	broken.
THEREUPON,	 SEKKYO	 SEIZED	 THE	MONK'S	 NOSE	 AND	 GAVE	 IT	 A
GREAT
YANK.
"OUCH!"	YELLED	THE	MONK,	"YOU	HURT	ME!"
In	 this	 "Ouch!"	 is	 the	 whole	 mystery.	 Somebody	 yanks	 on	 your	 nose	 -	 what
happens	 inside?	 The	 first	 thing	 is	 that	 it	 was	 never	 expected.	 The	 mind	 was
expecting	some	intellectual	answer.	This	is	rather	total.	He	was	asking	for	some
theory,	 some	 doctrine,	 some	 method,	 technique:	 he	 wanted	 a	 head-to-head
communication.	This	 is	 rather	 total.	The	 total	master	 jumps	on	him,	 just	 like	a
cat	jumps	on	a	mouse.	A	total	thing.	The	whole	cat	jumps,	not	the	head;	and	the
whole	mouse	is	caught,	not	the	head.	This	is	a	total	thing,	unexpected.
And	unexpectedness	is	the	key,	because	if	the	mind	can	expect,	there	will	be	no
shock.	 If	 the	mind	 can	 expect,	 then	 the	mind	 is	 already	dead.	So	 if	 you	go	 to
Sekkyo,	remember	well	-	he	will	not	do	the	same	to	you	again,	because	you	can
expect	it	now.	He	will	do	something	absolutely	unexpected.
Because	 Zen	masters	 hit,	 throw	 people	 out	 of	 the	window,	 jump	 on	 them,	 do
anything,	it	has	sometimes	happened	in	the	history	of	Zen	that	people	will	come
completely	ready.
Dimensions	are	limited.	What	can	you	do?	You	can	hit,	you	can	throw,	you	can
jump	 on	 the	 man.	 Just	 a	 few	 alternatives	 are	 there.	 So	 people	 will	 come
completely	ready.	But	you	cannot	deceive	a	master	-	he	will	not	do	anything;	he
will	simply	sit	silently	-	and	that	will	be	unexpected.
Unexpectedness	 is	 the	key,	because	 in	an	unexpected	moment	 the	mind	cannot
function.
That's	what	 "Ouch!"	means.	 The	mind	 has	 simply	 stopped.	This	 voice	 doesn't
come	 from	 the	mind;	 it	 comes	 from	your	 totality.	 It	 is	 not	manipulated	by	 the
ego,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 time	 for	 the	 ego	 to	 manipulate,	 it	 has	 happened	 so
suddenly,	 the	master	 has	 jumped	 upon	 you	 so	 suddenly,	 there	was	 no	 time	 to
prepare,	 to	 get	 ready,	 to	 do	 something.	 This	 "Ouch!"	 comes	 from	 your	whole
body,	mind,	soul;	from	your	very	depth	of	emptiness	it	comes,	it	has	a	flavor	of
the	total.
38
And	 there	 is	no	manipulator,	nobody	has	done	 it	 -	 it	has	happened.	And	when
something	happens	and	the	doer	is	not,	that	is	how	you	catch	hold	of	emptiness.
This	is	emptiness.	This
"Ouch!"	comes	 from	 the	 inner	 emptiness.	Nobody	 is	 a	doer	of	 it.	The	disciple
has	not	done	it:	it	has	simply	happened.	And	in	that	happening,	in	that	"Ouch!"
mind	is	not	functioning.	It	has	passed	through	the	mind,	but	it	has	not	come	from
the	mind.	And	it	has	passed	through	the	mind	at	such	a	fast	speed,	in	fact,	if	you
are	really	hurt	on	the	nose,	yanked,	the	"Ouch!"	that	happens	breaks	the	sound-
barrier.	You	go	 and	 ask	 the	 physiologists:	 it	moves	 faster	 than	 sound.	 It	 has	 a
total	 energy	 in	 it	 and	 it	 is	 beautiful,	 because	 this	 man	 may	 have	 completely
forgotten	 the	 spontaneousness	 of	 being.	 He	 is	 thrown	 back	 to	 his
spontaneousness.	 He	 is	 thrown	 from	 the	mind	 deeper	 into	 his	 own	 innermost
shrine:	from	there	comes	this	"Ouch!"
Unexpected,	 not	 doing	 it,	 it	 happens.	 It	 happens	 out	 of	 emptiness,	 you	 have
caught	hold.
"OUCH!"	YELLED	THE	MONK,	"YOU	HURT	ME!"
And	immediately	comes	back	the	echo:	"You	hurt	me."	It	lasts	only	for	a	single
moment,	not	even	a	single	moment,	a	minute	part	of	 it,	a	glimpse,	a	 lightning,
and	immediately	the	mind	takes	control	again:	You	hurt	me.
Look	at	these	three	words	-	you,	hurt,	me.	This	is	the	whole	of	life:	you	and	me
and	the	hurt.	 Immediately	 the	whole	mind	is	back,	with	all	 the	basic	elements;
you,	me	and	the	hurt.
"THAT'S	THE	WAY	TO	GET	HOLD	OF	EMPTINESS",	SAID	SEKKYO.
He	has	revealed	it.	He	has	not	explained,	he	has	already	given	it.	He	has	not	only
indicated,	he	has	created	a	situation	in	which	it	happened.	That's	what	a	master	is
for:	 to	create	a	situation	in	which	things	happen	to	you,	 to	create	a	situation	in
which	 you	 can	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 mechanicalness	 of	 the	 mind,	 and	 of	 the
spontaneousness	of	your	inner	no-self.	And	then	you	can	move,	by	and	by,	from
the	mind	to	the	inner	spontaneousness.	You	can	become	loose	and	natural.	You
have	 to	 understand	 that	 everything	 can	 go	 on	 without	 your	 mind	 trying	 to
manipulate	-	everything	in	fact	goes	on	very	beautifully.	The	trouble	starts	when
you	take	hold,	when	you	try	to	manipulate,	when	you	want	the	mind	to	be	in	the
saddle	 -	 then	 the	 trouble	 starts.	Otherwise	 everything	goes	on,	 and	goes	on	 so
beautifully.	There	is	no	need	to	improve	it,	and	you	cannot	improve	it.
The	master	 gave	him	a	glimpse	of	 his	 inner	being,	 because	 the	 "Ouch!"	 came
from	the	very	center.	It	was	not	of	the	body,	not	of	the	mind.	It	was	of	the	total,
and	in	that	moment	he	functioned	as	a	spontaneous	being,	not	as	a	doer.
This	functioning	can	become	your	whole	life	-	that's	what	religion	should	be.	A
religious	 life	 is	 a	 functioning	 of	 the	 spontaneous	 being.	 There	 are	 situations
every	 moment.	 You	 act,	 but	 not	 as	 a	 doer,	 you	 act	 spontaneously.	 Somebody
smiles,	what	do	you	do?	You	can	smile	as	a	doer,	you	can	manipulate;	you	can
smile	because	it	will	be	impolite	if	you	don't	smile;	you	can	smile,	because	in	a
society	 you	 have	 to	 exist	 and	 this	man	 is	 very	 important.	 In	 fact,	 it	 is	 greatly
flattering	that	he	smiled	at	you,	so	you	have	to.	It	may	be	a	bargain,	a	business,	a
trade,	a	social	mannerism,	or	it	may	be	simply	an	unconscious	habit.	Somebody
smiles	 -	 you	 react,	 you	 smile.	 A	 push-button	 smile,	 your	 being	 is	 absolutely
unaffected.	In	fact,	you	are	not	in	your	smile	at	all.	It	is	just	on	the	lips,	a	painted
thing:	 just	 an	 exercise	 of	 the	 lips,	 nothing	 in	 it,	 absolutely	 empty.	 You
manipulate.
It	happened	once	I	stayed	in	a	house	and	the	man	of	the	house	died.	He	had	no
wife,	so	his	sister	came	to	help	arrange	things.	And	I	was	staying	there	and	was
simply	 watching	 what	 was	 happening.	 Whenever	 somebody	 came	 the	 sister
would	look	out	of	the	door	and	immediately	she	would	start	crying	and	weeping
and	saying	things	about	the	dead	man:	that	he	was	so	39
beautiful	 and	 he	 is	 gone	 and	 her	 whole	 life	 will	 be	 now	 sad,	 a	 light	 has
disappeared	 -	 and	 everything!	 And	 she	 would	 do	 it	 so	 mechanically;
immediately	 saying	 something	 if	 somebody	was	 coming.	 She	 in	 fact	 told	me:
You	sit	more	outside	in	the	garden.	If	somebody	comes,	simply	give	me	a	knock.
And	 when	 the	 person	 had	 gone,	 she	 was	 perfectly	 okay.	 Tears	 were	 flowing
down	her	cheeks	when	she	was	crying	and	weeping,	but	as	soon	as	the	man	was
out	of	the	house,	his	back	towards	the	house,	the	tears	would	disappear	and	she
was	 perfectly	 okay,	 talking	 and	 chatting	 and	 doing	 things.	 I	 was	 simply
surprised.	I	asked:	How	do	you	do	it?	You	could	have	been	a	perfect	actress.	You
simply	do	it	so	perfectly	that	even	the	tears	come	down!
Manipulation.	 You	 are	 not	 only	 manipulating	 another's	 body,	 you	 are
manipulating	 your	 own	 body	 -	 and	 this	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 continuously.	 All
spontaneity	is	lost;	you	become	a	robot.
This	is	how	life	becomes	ugly,	crippled;	this	is	how	a	hell	is	created.	Then	your
love	is	false,	your	hate	is	false,	your	smile	is	false,	your	tears	are	false.	And	how
do	you	suppose	 to	 live	 in	such	falsity	and	 think	of	bliss;	 to	 live	 in	such	falsity
and	 think	 of	 truth;	 to	 live	 in	 such	 falsity	 and	 think	 of	 liberation,	MOKSHA?
There	 is	 no	MOKSHA	for	 a	 false	being.	Falsity	 should	drop.	Be	 spontaneous,
there	is	nothing	to	lose	and	everything	to	be	gained.
In	the	beginning	you	may	sometimes	feel	a	little	awkward	because	you	wanted
to	smile,	it	was	needed	as	a	social	mannerism	but	a	spontaneous	smile	was	not
there.	But	 only	 in	 the	 beginning.	Soon	your	 authenticity	will	 be	 felt	 by	others
also,	and	soon	your	authenticity	will	start	paying	you.	It	pays	so	tremendously,
that	when	a	real	smile	comes	to	your	lips,	it	will	be	as	total	as	the	"Ouch!"	-	the
whole	 being	 smiles,	 the	 whole	 being	 becomes	 a	 smile.	 All	 around	 you	 your
smile	spreads	like	ripples	in	consciousness.	Everybody	who	is	near	you	will	feel
a	 purity,	 a	 bath-like	 purity,	 and	 you	will	 feel	 a	 tremendous	 bliss	 happening	 to
you.
A	simple	act	of	authentic	spontaneity,	and	immediately	you	are	transported	from
this	world	to	another	world.
Love	-	or	even	anger...	I	tell	you	that	even	positive	emotions,	false,	are	ugly;	and
even	negative	 emotions,	 authentic,	 are	beautiful.	Even	anger	 is	 beautiful	when
your	whole	being	feels	it,	when	every	fibre	of	you	being	is	vibrant	with	it.	Look
at	a	small	child	angry	-	and	then	you	will	fell	the	beauty	of	it.	His	whole	being	is
in	it.	Radiant.	His	face	red.	Such	a	small	child	looks	so	powerful	that	it	seems	he
could	destroy	the	whole	world!	And	what	happens	to	a	child	once	he	is	angry?
After	a	few	minutes,	a	few	seconds,	everything	is	changed	and	he	is	happy	and
dancing	and	running	around	 the	house	again.	Why	doesn't	 this	happen	 to	you?
You	move	from	one	falsity	to	another.	Really,	anger	is	not	a	lasting	phenomenon,
by	its	very	nature	it	is	a	momentary	thing.	If	the	anger	is	real,	it	lasts	for	a	few
moments;	 and	while	 it	 lasts,	 authentic,	 it	 is	beautiful.	 It	harms	nobody.	A	 real,
spontaneous	thing	cannot	harm	anybody.	Only	falsity	harms.	In	a	man	who	can
be	 angry	 spontaneously,	 the	 tide	 goes	 after	 a	 few	 seconds	 and	 he	 relaxes
perfectly	to	the	very	other	extreme.	He	becomes	infinitely	loving.
On	the	contrary,	it	creates	it	again	and	again,	renews	it.
If	a	wife	and	husband	never	get	angry,	you	can	be	certain	 there	exists	no	 love
between	them.	That's	absolutely	certain.	But	if	sometimes	they	get	angry,	really
angry,	 that	anger	refreshes	everything.	In	fact,	after	 the	anger	is	gone	they	will
again	have	a	new	honeymoon.
Now	everything	is	fresh,	the	storm	has	passed,	it	has	cleaned	everything.	Again
they	are	new.
They	moved	away,	now	they	fall	 in	love	again.	To	fall	 in	love	again	and	again
and	again	is	the	eternity	of	love.	If	there	is	no	anger,	real	anger,	if	you	are	boiling
within	and	just	go	on	with	a	smile	on	the	face	because	you	are	a	husband	and	she
is	a	wife	and	anger	will	create	trouble	-	if	now	you	smile,	that	smile	is	false.	And
the	wife	knows	that	your	smile	is	false;	and	you	also	know	that	her	smile	is	false.
In	the	house	you	live	a	false	life.	And	this	falsity	becomes	so	ingrained	that	you
have	completely	lost	track	of	what	a	real	smile	is,	of	what	a	real	kiss	is,	of	what	a
real	 embrace	 is,	 you	 have	 completely	 lost	 track.	 Then	 you	 go	 through	 the
motions	-
40
you	embrace	your	wife,	you	kiss	her,	and	you	think	of	other	things.	You	move
through	the	motions	but	they	are	gestures,	impotent,	dead.	How	can	your	life	be
a	fulfilment?
And	I	tell	you	that	even	negative	emotions	are	good,	if	real;	and	if	they	are	real,
by	 and	 by,	 their	 very	 reality	 transforms	 them.	 They	 become	 more	 and	 more
positive	and	a	moment	comes	when	all	positivity	and	negativity	disappears.	You
simply	remain	authentic:	you	don't	know	what	is	good	and	what	is	bad;	you	don't
know	what	is	positive	and	what	is	negative.	You	are	simply	authentic.
This	authenticity	will	allow	you	to	have	a	glimpse	of	the	real.	Only	the	real	can
know	the	real,	the	true	can	know	the	truth;	the	authentic	can	know	the	authentic
that	surrounds	you.
That's	the	way	to	get	hold	of	emptiness.
The	master	 created	 a	 situation,	 allowed	 the	 disciple	 to	move	 in	 a	 spontaneous
act,	howsoever	small	 -	 just	"Ouch!"	and	 lightning	happens.	This	can	become	a
satori,	the	first	enlightenment.
So	 remember	 a	 few	 things:	 you	 have	 to	 move	 from	 the	 mechanical	 to	 the
spontaneous;	 from	 the	 mental,	 the	 verbal,	 to	 the	 non-mental,	 the	 non-verbal;
from	the	part	to	the	total;	from	the	false	to	the	real;	and	from	the	ego	to	the	non-
ego	 -	 from	 the	 self	 to	 the	 no-self.	 Already	 the	 no-self	 exists	 by	 the	 side	 of
yourself.	Just	a	change	of	attention,	a	change	of	gear	is	needed.
The	 non-mechanical	 exists	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 mechanical,	 the	 real	 is	 always
waiting	by	the	side	of	the	false	-	just	a	change	of	gestalt,	just	a	look	towards	the
spontaneous	 is	 needed.	 Try	 it	 for	 twenty-four	 hours.	 Whenever	 you	 have	 an
opportunity	 to	 move	 from	 the	 false	 to	 the	 real,	 from	 the	 mechanical	 to	 the
authentic,	 immediately	 change	 the	 gear.	 And	 remain	 floating	 as	 if	 you	 are
emptiness;	don't	try	to	control	yourself	too	much.	Remain	loose	and	natural.
41
___________________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER	4	-	The	Cataract	at	Luliang
24	February	1975	a.m.	in	Buddha	Hall
___________________________________________________________________________
CONFUCIUS	 WAS	 LOOKING	 AT	 THE	 CATARACT	 AT	 LULIANG.	 IT
FALLS	 FROM	 A	 HEIGHT	 OF	 TWO	 HUNDRED	 FEET,	 AND	 ITS	 FOAM
REACHES	FIFTEEN	MILES
AWAY.	NO	SCALY	FINNY	CREATURE	COULD	SURVIVE	THEREIN.
YET	CONFUCIUS	SAW	AN	OLD	MAN	GO	IN.	THINKING	THE	OLD	MAN
WAS
SUFFERING	FROM	SOME	TROUBLE	AND	WAS	THEREFORE	DESIROUS
OF
ENDING	HIS	 LIFE,	 CONFUCIUS	BADE	A	DISCIPLE	RUN	ALONG	THE
BANK	TO
TRY	TO	SAVE	HIM.
THE	OLD	MAN	EMERGED	ABOUT	A	HUNDRED	PACES	OFF,	AND	WITH
FLOWING
HAIR,	HE	WENT	CAROLING	ALONG	THE	BANK.
CONFUCIUS	FOLLOWED	HIM,	AND	WHEN	HE	CAUGHT	UP	WITH	HIM
HE	SAID:	"I	HAD	THOUGHT,	SIR,	YOU	WERE	A	SPIRIT,	BUT	NOW	I	SEE
YOU	ARE	A	MAN.
KINDLY	 TELL	 ME,	 IS	 THERE	 ANY	 WAY	 TO	 DEAL	 THUS	 WITH	 THE
WATER?"
"NO",	REPLIED	THE	MAN,	"I	HAVE	NO	WAY;	PLUNGING	IN	WITH	THE
WHIRL,	 I	 COME	OUT	WITH	 THE	 SWIRL.	 I	 ACCOMMODATE	MYSELF
TO	THE	WATER,	NOT
THE	WATER	 TO	ME.	 AND	 SO	 I	 AM	ABLE	 TO	DEAL	WITH	 IT	 AFTER
THIS
FASHION."
You	have	a	thousand	and	one	problems,	and	you	try	to	solve	them.	But	not	even
a	single	problem	is	solved.	 It	cannot	be	solved,	because	 in	 the	first	place	 there
are	not	a	thousand	and	one	problems,	there	is	only	one;	and	if	you	see	a	thousand
and	one	problems,	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	the	one	that	really	is.	You	go	on
seeing	things	which	are	not,	and,	because	of	that,	you	miss	seeing	that	which	is.
So	the	first	thing	to	be	understood	is	the	basic,	the	only	problem.	It	is	perennial;
it	doesn't	belong	in	particular	to	you,	or	to	me	or	to	somebody	else.	It	belongs	to
man	 as	 such.	 It	 is	 born	 with	 you	 and,	 unfortunately,	 as	 is	 the	 situation	 with
millions	of	people,	the	problem	will	die	with	you.	If	the	problem	can	die	before
you	die	you	have	become	enlightened.	And	the	whole	effort	of	religion	is	to	help
you	to	dissolve	the	problem	before	it	has	killed	you	completely.
There	 is	 a	possibility	of	 a	man	without	 any	problems,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 religious
man.	He	has	no	problems,	because	he	has	solved	the	basic	problem.	He	has	cut
the	root.
That's	why	Tilopa	says:	Cut	the	root	of	the	mind.	Don't	go	on	cutting	the	leaves
and	the	branches.	There	are	millions,	and,	by	cutting	them,	you	will	not	be	able
to	cut	the	root,	and	the	tree	will	go	on	growing.	It	will	become	even	denser	and
thicker	 and	 bigger	 if	 you	 go	 on	 pruning	 the	 leaves.	 Simply	 forget	 about	 the
leaves.	They	are	not	 the	problems.	The	problem	is	somewhere	 in	 the	 root.	Cut
the	root,	and	the	tree	by	and	by	disappears,	withers	away.
So	where	is	the	root	problem	of	the	mind?	It	is	neither	yours,	nor	anybody	else's;
it	belongs	to	man	as	such.	It	comes	into	existence	the	moment	you	are	born,	but
it	can	dissolve	before	you	die.	A	child	is	born...
Follow	me	step	by	step,	 if	you	can	understand	 the	problem	rightly,	 it	 is	solved
immediately,	because	the	problem	carries	its	own	solution	within	it.	The	problem
is	like	a	seed	and	the	solution	is	like	a	flower	that	is	hidden	in	the	seed.	If	you
can	understand	the	seed	correctly,	totally,	the	solution	is	already	there.	To	solve	a
problem	is	in	fact	not	to	solve	it,	but	to	understand	it.	The	solution	is	not	external
to	it,	it	is	intrinsic.	It	is	hidden	in	it.	So	don't	look	for	solutions,	just	look	deeper
into	the	problem.	Find	the	root.	In	fact,	there	is	no	need	even	to	42
cut.	Once	you	have	understood	it,	the	very	understanding	becomes	the	cutting	of
the	root.	So,	follow	me	step	by	step	to	see	how	the	problem	is	born.	And	don't	be
concerned	with	the	solution	-	that's	how	philosophy	arises	in	the	world.	There	is
a	problem;	 the	mind	starts	 to	 find	some	solution.	Philosophy	arises.	There	 is	a
problem,	the	mind	tries	to	understand	it,	religion	is	born.
...	 a	 child	 is	 born	 and	 the	 child	 is	 absolutely	 helpless,	 particularly	 the	 human
child.	 He	 cannot	 survive	 without	 others'	 help.	 So	 this	 is	 the	 first	 thing:	 no
problem	exists	for	animals	and	trees	and	birds.	They	live	a	non-problematic	life.
They	simply	live	without	any	problems,	anxiety,	ulcers,	cancer:	they	simply	live
and	enjoy	and	celebrate	the	moment	while	they	are.
They	have	no	problem	in	their	life	and	they	have	no	problem	in	their	death	-	they
live	a	non-problematic	existence.	Only	a	human	child	is	born	helpless.	All	other
children,	 animals,	 trees,	 birds,	 can	 survive	 without	 the	 parents,	 can	 survive
without	society,	can	survive	without	a	family.	Even	if	sometimes	help	is	needed,
it	 is	very	 little,	a	few	days,	at	 the	most	a	few	months.	But	a	human	child	 is	so
helpless;	for	years	he	has	to	depend,	and	it	is	there	that	the	root	has	to	be	sought.
Why	 does	 helplessness	 create	 the	 human	 problem?	 The	 child	 is	 helpless,	 he
depends	on	others;	but	the	ignorant	mind	of	the	child	interprets	this	dependence
on	others	as	if	he	is	the	center	of	the	whole	world.
The	child	thinks:	Whenever	I	cry,	my	mother	runs	immediately;	whenever	I	am
hungry,	 just	 an	 indication,	 and	 the	 breast	 is	 given.	Whenever	 I	 am	wet,	 just	 a
slight	crying,	weeping,	and	somebody	comes	and	changes	my	clothes.	The	child
lives	 like	 an	 emperor.	 In	 fact	 he	 is	 absolutely	 helpless	 and	dependent,	 and	 the
mother	and	the	father	and	the	family	are	all	helping	him	to	survive.	They	are	not
dependent	on	the	child;	the	child	is	dependent	on	them.
But	the	ignorant	mind	of	the	child	interprets	it	as	if	he	is	the	center	of	the	whole
world,	as	if	the	whole	world	exists	for	him.	And	the	whole	world	is,	of	course,
very	 small	 in	 the	 beginning:	 the	mother,	 on	 the	 fringe	 the	 father	 -	 this	 is	 the
whole	world.	And	they	both	love	the	child.
The	 child	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 egoistic.	 He	 feels	 himself	 to	 be	 the	 very
center	 of	 all	 existence.	The	 ego	 is	 created.	Through	 dependence,	 helplessness,
the	ego	is	created.
In	fact	the	situation	is	just	the	contrary;	there	is	no	reason	to	create	the	ego.	But
the	 child	 is	 absolutely	 ignorant,	 and	 he	 is	 not	 capable	 of	 understanding	 the
complexity	of	the	thing:	he	cannot	feel	he	is	helpless.	He	feels	he	is	the	dictator.
And	then	for	his	whole	life	he	will	try	to	remain	the	dictator.	He	will	become	a
Napoleon,	 an	Alexander,	 an	Adolph	Hitler	 -	 your	 presidents,	 prime	ministers,
dictators,	are	all	childish.	They	are	trying	for	the	same	thing,	they	want	to	be	the
center	of	 the	whole	 existence:	with	 them	 the	world	 should	 live,	with	 them	 the
world	should	die;	the	whole	world	is	their	periphery	and	they	are	the	meaning	of
it,	 the	 very	meaning	 of	 life	 is	 hidden	 in	 them.	 The	 child,	 of	 course,	 naturally
finds	 this	 interpretation	 correct,	 because	when	 the	mother	 looks	 at	 him,	 in	 the
eyes	of	the	mother	he	sees	that	he	is	the	significance	of	her	life.	And	when	the
father	comes	home	he	feels	that	he	is	the	very	meaning	of	the	life	of	the	father.
This	lasts	for	three	or	four	years	-	and	the	four	years	of	the	beginning	of	life	are
the	 most	 important;	 never	 again	 will	 there	 be	 such	 a	 potential	 time	 in	 life.
Psychologists	say	that	after	the	first	four	years	the	child	is	almost	complete.	The
whole	pattern	is	fixed;	throughout	his	whole	life	he	will	repeat	the	same	pattern
in	different	situations.	But	the	pattern	is	there	already,	complete.	By	the	seventh
year	the	child	is	perfect:	now	nothing	else	is	going	to	happen	to	him.	He	has	all
his	attitudes	confirmed,	his	ego	settled.	Now	he	moves	into	the	world,	and	then
everywhere	there	will	be	problems,	millions	of	problems.	And	he	carries	the	root
within	him.
43
Once	out	of	the	circle	of	the	family,	problems	will	arise.	Because	nobody	bothers
as	 your	 mother	 bothered	 about	 you;	 nobody	 is	 concerned	 as	 your	 father	 was
concerned	with	you.
There	 is	 total	 indifference.	 And	 the	 ego	 is	 hurt.	 But	 now	 the	 pattern	 is	 set.
Whether	hurt	or	not	the	child	cannot	change	the	pattern,	it	has	become	the	very
blueprint	of	his	being.	He	will	play	with	other	children	and	try	to	dominate.	He
will	go	to	school	and	try	 to	dominate,	 try	 to	come	first	 in	class,	 to	become	the
most	 important	 man.	 And	 he	 believes	 he	 is	 the	 "superior-most",	 but	 other
children	believe	also	in	the	same	way.	There	is	conflict,	there	are	egos	is	fight,
struggle.
Then	this	becomes	the	whole	story	of	life:	there	are	millions	of	egos	around	you,
just	 like	 yours,	 and	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 control,	 manoeuvre,	 domineer	 -
through	 wealth,	 power,	 politics,	 knowledge,	 strength,	 lies,	 pretensions,
hypocrisies,	 even	 religion,	 morality.	 And	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 dominate,	 to
show	the	whole	world	that	"I	am	the	center".	And	this	is	the	root	of	all	problems.
Because	of	this	concept,	you	are	always	in	conflict	and	struggle,	with	somebody
or	other.
Not	that	others	are	enemies	to	you,	everybody	is	just	like	you,	in	the	same	boat;
the	plight	is	the	same	for	everybody	else.	They	have	been	brought	up	in	the	same
way.
There	exists	a	certain	school	of	psycho-analysts	in	the	West	who	have	proposed
that,	unless	children	are	brought	up	without	 their	 father	and	mother,	 the	world
will	 never	be	 at	 peace.	 I	 don't	 support	 them	 -	because	 then	 they	will	 never	be
brought	up	in	any	way.	They	have	something	of	a	truth	in	their	proposal,	but	it	is
a	 very	 dangerous	 proposal.	 Because	 if	 children	 are	 brought	 up	 in	 nurseries
without	fathers	and	mothers,	without	any	love,	with	total	indifference,	they	may
not	have	the	problem	of	the	ego,	but	they	will	have	some	other	problems,	in	the
same	way	dangerous,	even	more	so.
If	a	child	 is	brought	up	 in	 total	 indifference	he	will	have	no	center	 in	him.	He
will	be	a	hotchpotch	being,	clumsy,	not	knowing	who	he	is.	He	will	not	have	any
identity.	Afraid,	 scared,	 he	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 take	 even	 a	 single	 step	without
fear,	because	nobody	loved	him.
Of	course,	the	ego	will	not	be	there,	but,	without	the	ego,	he	will	have	no	center.
He	will	not	become	a	Buddha;	he	will	be	just	a	dull,	 inferior	being,	stupid	and
always	 feeling	 afraid.	 Love	 is	 needed	 to	make	 you	 feel	 fearless,	 that	 you	 are
accepted,	that	somebody	loves	you,	that	you	are	not	useless,	that	you	cannot	be
discarded	in	the	junkyard.	If	children	are	brought	up	in	such	a	situation,	where
love	is	lacking,	they	will	not	have	egos,	 that's	right.	Their	life	will	not	have	so
much	struggle	and	fight.	But	they	will	not	be	able	to	fight	at	all,	and	they	will	be
always	in	flight,	escaping;	escaping	from	everybody,	hiding	in	caves	in	their	own
being.	They	at	home.	They	will	simply	be	eccentric,	off-center.	That	will	not	be
a	good	situation	either.
So	 I	 don't	 support	 these	 psycho-analysts.	 They	 will	 create	 robots,	 not	 human
beings	-
robots	of	course	have	no	problems.	They	may	create	human	beings	like	animals;
there	will	be	less	anxiety,	less	ulcers,	less	cancer.	But	that	is	not	worth	achieving.
Then	 you	 are	 not	 growing	 to	 a	 higher	 peak	 of	 consciousness,	 you	 are	 falling
downwards.	It	 is	regression.	Of	course,	 if	you	become	an	animal,	 there	will	be
less	 anguish,	 because	 there	will	 be	 less	 consciousness.	 And,	 if	 you	 become	 a
stone,	a	rock,	there	will	be	no	anxiety	at	all	because	there	is	nobody	inside	to	feel
anxious,	to	feel	anguish.	But	this	is	not	worth	achieving.	One	has	to	be	god-like,
not	rock-like.
And	the	meaning	of	the	word	"God"	is	this:	to	have	absolute	consciousness	and
still	have	no	worries,	no	anxieties,	no	problems;	to	enjoy	life	 like	birds,	and	to
have	a	consciousness	that	is	absolutely	perfect;	to	celebrate	life	like	birds,	to	sing
like	birds	-	not	by	regression,	but	by	growing	to	the	optimum	of	consciousness.
The	 child	gathers	 ego	 -	 it	 is	 natural,	 nothing	 can	be	done	 about	 it,	 I	 accept	 it.
Only	later	on	there	is	no	need	to	carry	it.
44
That	 ego	 is	 needed	 in	 the	 beginning	 for	 the	 child	 to	 feel	 that	 he	 is	 accepted,
loved,	 welcomed;	 that	 he	 is	 a	 guest,	 not	 uninvited,	 invited.	 The	 father,	 the
mother,	 the	 family,	 the	 warmth	 around,	 help	 him	 to	 grow	 strong,	 rooted,
grounded.	It	is	needed;	the	ego	gives	him	a	protection.	It	is	good.	It	is	just	like
the	shell	of	a	seed.	But	the	shell	should	not	become	the	ultimate	thing,	otherwise
the	seed	will	die.	The	protection	can	become	too	much,	then	it	becomes	a	prison.
The	protection	must	 remain	a	protection,	 and	when	 the	moment	comes	 for	 the
shell,	 the	hard	shell	of	 the	seed	 to	die	 into	 the	earth,	 it	 should	die	naturally	so
that	the	seed	can	sprout	and	life	can	be	born.
The	ego	is	just	a	protective	shell	-	the	child	needs	it	because	he	is	helpless;	the
child	needs	it	because	he	is	weak;	the	child	needs	it	because	he	is	vulnerable	and
there	are	millions	of	 forces	all	 around.	He	needs	a	protection,	 a	home,	a	base.
The	whole	world	may	be	indifferent,	but	he	can	always	look	towards	the	home,
from	there	he	can	gather	significance.
But	with	 significance	 comes	 the	 ego.	He	becomes	 egoistic.	And	with	 this	 ego
arises	all	the	problems,	the	thousand	and	one	problems.	This	ego	will	not	allow
you	 to	 fall	 in	 love	 and	millions	 of	 problems	 will	 arise	 in	 your	 life.	 This	 ego
would	 like	 everybody	 to	 surrender	 to	 you;	 this	 ego	 will	 not	 allow	 you	 to
surrender	 to	 anybody	 -	 and	 love	happens	only	when	you	 surrender.	When	you
force	somebody	to	surrender,	it	is	hate,	destruction,	it	is	not	love.
And	if	there	is	no	love,	your	life	will	be	without	warmth,	without	any	poetry	in
it.	It	may	be	a	plain	prose,	mathematical,	logical,	rational.	But	how	can	one	live
without	 poetry?	Prose	 is	 okay,	 it	 is	 utilitarian,	 needed,	 but	 it	 can	never	 be	 life
because	it	can	never	be	a	celebration,	 it	can	never	be	festive.	And	when	life	 is
not	 festive,	 it	 is	boredom.	Poetry	 is	needed,	but	 for	poetry	you	need	surrender.
You	need	to	throw	off	this	ego.	If	you	can	do	it,	put	it	aside,	even	for	moments,
your	life	will	have	glimpses	of	the	beautiful,	of	the	Divine.	Without	poetry	you
cannot	really	live,	you	can	only	exist.	Love	is	poetry.
And	 if	 love	 is	 not	 possible,	 how	 can	 you	 pray?	 Then	 prayer	 becomes	 almost
impossible,	 and,	 without	 prayer,	 you	 will	 remain	 just	 a	 body,	 you	 will	 never
become	aware	of	the	innermost	soul.	Only	in	prayer	do	you	reach	to	the	peaks.
Prayer	is	the	highest	peak	of	experience,	but	love	opens	the	door.	Prayer	allows
you	into	the	innermost	mystery	of	life.
When	you	cannot	pray,	then	millions	of	problems	arise.
Carl	Gustav	Jung,	after	a	whole	life	of	studying	thousands	of	people,	thousands
of	cases	of	people	ill,	psychologically	defective,	psychologically	confused,	said
in	 his	 last	 testament:	 I	 have	 never	 come	 across	 a	 psychologically	 ill	 person
whose	real	problem	after	the	fortieth	year	is	not	religion.	After	the	fortieth	year...
it	is	just	like	after	the	fourteenth	year	every	boy	and	girl	will	have	to	tackle	sex	-
and	there	will	be	problems.	And	if	you	tackle	them	wrongly,	then	those	problems
will	continue,	hovering	around	you.
Exactly	as	sex	becomes	mature	at	the	age	of	fourteen,	so	a	new	dimension	opens
at	 the	 age	 of	 forty-two.	 Because	 every	 seven	 years	 there	 are	 biological,
psychological	and	spiritual	changes	in	your	being	-	every	seven	years.	Childhood
is	 finished	by	 the	 seventh	 year,	 by	 the	 fourteenth,	 adolescence	 is	 gone,	 by	 the
twenty-first	there	are	changes	-	every	seventh	year.
There	 is	 a	 rhythm	 in	 life.	 By	 the	 year	 forty-two	 a	 new	 dimension	 arises,	 the
dimension	of	prayer,	the	religious	dimension.	And,	if	you	cannot	tackle	it	rightly,
if	 you	 don't	 know	what	 to	 do,	 you	will	 be	 ill,	 you	will	 lose	 all	 rest,	 you	will
become	restless.
If	you	cannot	love	at	the	age	of	fourteen,	you	will	not	be	able	to	pray	at	the	age
of	forty-two.
You	have	been	missing,	and	 the	whole	growth	 is	a	continuity.	 If	you	miss	one
step,	 it	becomes	discontinuous.	The	child	gathers	ego	-	he	cannot	 love,	and	he
cannot	 be	 at	 ease	 with	 anybody.	 The	 ego	 is	 constantly	 in	 fight.	 You	 may	 be
sitting	silently,	but	the	ego	is	constantly	in	fight,	just	looking,	watching	how	to
dominate,	 how	 to	 become	 dictatorial,	 how	 to	 become	 the	most	 supreme-most
person	in	the	world.
45
This	 creates	 problems	 everywhere.	 In	 friendship,	 sex,	 prayer,	 love,	 society,
everywhere	you	are	in	conflict.	Even	with	the	parents	who	have	given	this	ego	to
you	 there	 is	 conflict.	 It	 is	 rarely	 that	 a	 son	 forgives	 his	 father,	 rarely	 that	 a
woman	forgives	her	mother.	Rarely.
Gurdjieff	had	a	sentence	written	in	his	room	where	he	used	to	see	the	people.	It
is	 simply	 unbelievable	 that	 a	 man	 like	 Gurdjieff	 should	 write	 such	 a	 simple
sentence	on	the	wall.	The	sentence	was	this:	If	you	are	not	yet	at	ease	with	your
father	and	mother,	then	go	away.	I	cannot	help	you.	Why?	Because	the	problem
has	arisen	there	and	it	has	to	be	solved	there.
That's	why	all	the	old	Eastern	traditions	say	love	your	father,	respect	your	father
as	deeply	as	possible,	because	the	ego	arises	there,	that	is	the	soil.	Solve	it	there,
otherwise	it	will	haunt	you	everywhere.
Now	psycho-analysts	have	also	stumbled	upon	the	fact;	all	that	psycho-analysis
does	 is	 it	 brings	 you	 back	 to	 the	 problems	 that	 existed	 between	 you	 and	 your
parents	 and	 tries	 to	 solve	 them	 somehow.	 If	 you	 can	 solve	 your	 conflict	with
your	parents,	many	other	conflicts	will	simply	disappear	because	they	are	based
on	 the	 basic	 conflict.	 For	 example,	 a	 man	 who	 is	 not	 at	 ease	 with	 his	 father
cannot	believe	in	God,	because	God	is	a	father-figure	-	the	father	of	the	whole.	A
man	who	 is	 not	 at	 ease	with	 his	 father	 cannot	 be	 at	 ease	with	 the	 boss	 in	 the
office	-
never,	because	he	is	the	father-figure.	A	man	who	is	not	at	ease	with	his	father
cannot	 be	 at	 ease	with	 his	master	 or	 guru,	 because	 he	 is	 a	 father-figure.	 That
small	 conflict	 with	 your	 parents	 continues	 to	 be	 reflected	 in	 all	 your
relationships.
If	you	are	not	at	 ease	with	your	mother,	you	cannot	be	at	 ease	with	your	wife
because	she	will	be	 the	 representative	woman;	and	you	cannot	be	at	ease	with
women	as	such,	because	your	mother	is	the	first	woman,	she	is	the	first	model	of
a	 woman.	 If	 you	 hate	 your	 mother,	 or,	 if	 you	 have	 a	 certain	 conflict	 in	 your
mind,	if	you	cannot	be	with	your	mother	for	a	long	time,	you	feel	bored	and	you
want	to	escape,	you	will	not	feel	at	ease	with	any	woman	in	the	world.
Because	 wherever	 a	 woman	 is,	 your	 mother	 is,	 and	 a	 subtle	 relationship
continues.
In	 India,	 in	 the	 ancient	 days,	 in	 the	 days	 of	 Upanishads,	 whenever	 a	 newly
married	 couple	 came	 to	 an	 enlightened	man	 the	 enlightened	man	would	 bless
them	 with	 the	 blessing	 that	 they	 would	 become	 father	 and	 mother	 of	 ten
children.	And	to	the	woman	he	would	say:	Let	it	be	remembered	that	unless	your
husband	becomes	your	eleventh	child	the	marriage	is	not	complete.
Why?	 Why	 should	 the	 husband	 become	 the	 eleventh	 child	 -	 otherwise	 the
marriage	is	not	complete?	This	is	the	reason:	if	the	man	has	come	to	terms	with
his	mother,	he	will	 finally	 find	 the	mother	again	 in	his	wife.	A	man	 remains	a
child,	and	a	woman	is	a	born	mother.	So	the	ultimate	flowering	of	a	woman	is	to
become	 a	 mother	 of	 the	 whole.	 That's	 why	 I	 call	 my	 SANNYASINS	 "Ma"	 -
mothers.	And	the	ultimate	peak	of	a	man	is	to	become	child-like,	innocent	again
like	a	child	and	then	the	whole	world	and	existence	become	the	mother.	This	is
the	 intrinsic	 potentiality	 -	 but	 one	 has	 to	 come	 to	 terms	 with	 the	 father	 and
mother.
Ego	 is	born	 there;	 it	has	 to	be	 tackled	 there.	Otherwise	you	will	go	on	cutting
branches	 and	 leaves	 and	 the	 root	 remains	 untouched.	 If	 you	 have	 settled	with
your	father	and	mother,	you	have	become	mature.	Now	there	is	no	ego.	Now	you
understand	that	you	were	helpless,	now	you	understand	that	you	depended,	that
you	were	not	 the	center	of	 the	world.	 In	 fact,	you	were	completely	dependent:
you	could	not	have	survived.	Understanding	this,	the	ego	by	and	by	fades,	and,
once	you	are	not	in	conflict	with	life,	you	become	loose	and	natural,	you	relax.
Then	 you	 float.	 Then	 the	 world	 is	 not	 filled	 with	 enemies,	 it	 is	 a	 family,	 an
organic	unity;	and	the	world	is	not	against	you,	you	can	float	with	it.	That	is	the
meaning	of	this	small	parable.
This	 is	 a	 parable	 used	 by	 Zen	 people	 and	 Taoists,	 and	 I	 must	 tell	 you	 a	 few
things	before	I	enter	into	it.
46
Taoists	 and	Zen	people	have	 always	 joked	 about	Confucius.	This	 is,	 in	 fact,	 a
joke.
Because	Confucius	 to	 them	 is	 the	pinnacle	of	 the	 legal	mind.	Confucius	 is	 the
very	paragon	of	ego	-	subtle,	polished,	cultured.
The	whole	Confucius	philosophy	is	how	to	polish	your	ego	in	such	a	way	that
you	retain	it	without	being	in	conflict	with	others.	That's	what	a	cultured	man	is.
A	cultured	man	is	not	humble,	no	never;	a	cultured	man	is	a	very	subtle	egoist.
He	 is	very	cunning,	 clever.	He	will	 not	bring	his	 ego	 into	 any	 relationship,	he
will	hide	 it,	and	he	will	 try	 to	show	that	he	 is	very	humble.	He	will	 smile	and
bow	down,	and	you	can	see	well	that	this	is	just	diplomatic.	To	live	in	the	world,
Confucius	says,	you	have	to	exist	with	other	egos	and	you	should	be	very,	very
intelligent	about	how	you	behave,	otherwise	unnecessary	troubles	are	created.	So
Confucius	has	three	thousand	three	hundred	rules	for	how	a	man	should	behave.
For	each	step	he	has	rules:	how	one	should	dress...
And	 try	 to	 see	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 Taoist,	 Zen	 and	 Confucian	 minds.
Because	that	is	how,	all	over	the	world,	the	distinction	has	existed:	the	moralist
is	different	from	the	religious	man.	The	difference	is	very	subtle.	A	moralist	tries
to	be	humble;	a	religious	man	is	humble.
A	moralist	poses	humility	all	around	-	it	is	a	pose,	it	is	a	gesture,	cultivated.
A	 religious	 person	 is	 simply	 humble,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 pose.	 Finding	 that	 the	 ego	 is
nonsense,	finding	that	the	ego	has	no	grounds	to	exist,	finding	that	the	ego	is	just
a	childish	dream,	misconceived	in	ignorance,	the	religious	man	simply	becomes
egoless.	Finding	no	ground	for	the	ego,	the	ego	evaporates.	Not	that	he	becomes
humble,	no,	he	simply	becomes	egoless.
How	 can	 he	 become	 humble	 when	 there	 is	 no	 ego?	 Only	 ego	 can	 become
humble,	so	who	will	become	humble?	He	simply	comes	to	know	that	he	is	not,
that	he	is	just	a	part	of	this	vast	organic	universe.	He	is	not	separate,	so	who	is
going	to	be	an	egoist	and	who	is	going	to	be	humble?	He	is	not.	He	simply	finds
there	is	nothing	like	a	center	in	him:	the	center	is	in	the	universe	and	he	is	part	of
it.	Religious	people	have	said	that	if	there	is	a	God,	only	he	can	be	permitted	to
use	the	word	"I".	Nobody	else	should	use	the	word	"I"	because	there	is	only	one
center	 in	 existence.	There	 cannot	 be	millions	of	 centers,	 because	 there	 are	 not
millions	 of	 universes,	 only	 one	 universe.	 So,	 if	 there	 is	 a	 center,	 there	 can	 be
only	 one	 center.	 We	 all	 participate	 in	 it,	 but	 we	 cannot	 claim	 that	 center	 in
ourselves.	That's	why	Zen	says:	Don't	be	humble,	be	a	no-self.
Because	humility	is	a	trick	of	the	ego,	it	is	the	polished	ego,	not	vulgar.
So	 there	are	 two	 types	of	ego.	The	vulgar	ego	you	will	 find	 in	 the	uncultured,
uncivilized,	uneducated	person.	Then	there	 is	a	cultured	ego,	refined,	polished,
perfumed,	 very	 subtle;	 you	 cannot	 detect	 it.	 Always	 posing	 humility,
humbleness,	simplicity	-	these	are	all	postures.
Confucius	is	the	paragon	of	the	civilized	man,	he	believes	in	civilization,	and	he
says	that	rules	have	to	be	followed;	strict	discipline	has	to	be	imposed,	because
life	is	a	struggle.
And	don't	provoke	anybody	unnecessarily.	Conserve	your	 energy,	because	you
will	need	it	in	some	fight.	So	don't	go	on	fighting	with	everybody,	because	that	is
unnecessary.	Conserve	energy.	Then	when	 there	 is	 really	a	need	you	can	 fight,
but	 that	 fight	 should	 be	 very	 cultivated	 and	 cultured.	 How	 to	 sit	 and	 how	 to
stand,	how	to	move,	how	to	behave	-	Confucius	has	rules	for	them,	because	there
are	millions	of	egos	and	you	have	to	find	your	path	through	this	vast	 jungle	of
egos.	And,	if	you	want	to	reach	the	goal,	don't	be	unnecessarily	in	conflict	with
each	 and	 everybody.	 Just	 passing,	 pass	 in	 such	 a	 humble	 way	 that	 nobody
hinders	you.	So	this	humility	is	diplomacy:	it	is	political,	not	religious.
Confucius	is	not	a	religious	man	at	all.	Because	of	Confucius,	China	could	fall	a
victim	 to	 communism,	 because	 Confucius	 has	 remained	 the	 central	 force	 in
China.	Many	people	ask	me	how	it	happened	that	such	a	religious	country	like
China	 could	 fall	 a	 victim	 to	 communism,	 to	 an	 absolutely	 materialistic
philosophy.	It	 is	not	an	accident.	Buddha	entered	China	with	his	 teaching;	Lao
Tzu	lived	there;	Chuang	Tzu	lived	there	-	but	they	could	never	become	the	47
central	 force.	 The	 central	 force	 has	 remained	 Confucius,	 and	 Confucius	 and
Marx	 are	 fellow-travellers	 so	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 It	 is	 difficult	 for	 India	 to
become	communist.	It	was	very,	very	easy	for	China	to	become	communist	-	and
so	 suddenly,	 and	 so	 easily,	because	 the	Confucian	 trend	 is	 absolutely	political,
diplomatic,	material.
Zen	and	Taoists	have	always	 laughed	about	Confucius,	and	 this	 is	one	of	 their
subtle	jokes.
Try	to	understand	it.
CONFUCIUS	 WAS	 LOOKING	 AT	 THE	 CATARACT	 AT	 LULIANG.	 IT
FALLS	 FROM	 A	 HEIGHT	 OF	 TWO	 HUNDRED	 FEET	 AND	 ITS	 FOAM
REACHES	FIFTEEN	MILES
AWAY.	NO	SCALY	FINNY	CREATURE	COULD	SURVIVE	THEREIN.
YET	CONFUCIUS	SAW	AN	OLD	MAN	GO	IN.	THINKING	THE	OLD	MAN
WAS
SUFFERING	FROM	SOME	TROUBLE	AND	WAS	THEREFORE	DESIROUS
OF
ENDING	HIS	 LIFE,	 CONFUCIUS	BADE	A	DISCIPLE	RUN	ALONG	THE
BANK	TO
TRY	SAVE	HIM.
THE	OLD	MAN	EMERGED	ABOUT	A	HUNDRED	PACES	OFF	AND	WITH
FLOWING
HAIR	HE	WENT	CAROLING	ALONG	THE	BANK.
CONFUCIUS	FOLLOWED	HIM	AND	WHEN	HE	CAUGHT	UP	WITH	HIM
HE	SAID:	"I	HAD	THOUGHT,	SIR,	YOU	WERE	A	SPIRIT,	BUT	NOW	I	SEE
YOU	ARE	A	MAN.
KINDLY	 TELL	 ME,	 IS	 THERE	 ANY	 WAY	 TO	 DEAL	 THUS	 WITH	 THE
WATER?"
It	looked	almost	impossible	to	Confucius	that	in	this	big	waterfall,	with	the	river
falling	 from	 the	height	of	 two	hundred	 feet	 and	 creating	 so	much	 foam	 that	 it
spread	over	fifteen	miles;	an	old	man	was	going	to	take	his	bath,	to	bathe	in	the
river.	It	was	impossible!	The	tremendous	energy	of	the	waterfall	would	kill	 the
man;	he	would	not	be	able	to	come	out	again.	He	would	be	forced	into	the	river,
to	the	rocks,	to	the	very	bottom.	At	first	he	thought	that	this	man	must	be	going
to	commit	suicide,	because	you	could	not	come	alive	out	of	this	waterfall.	So	he
told	a	disciple	to	go	by	the	bank	and	try	to	save	him.	But	the	man	jumped,	and
then	 a	 few	 paces	 away	 he	 came	 out	 of	 the	 river,	 perfectly	 alive.	 It	 was
unbelievable!
Why?	For	Confucius	 it	was	unbelievable,	because	he	believed	 in	 fight.	He	did
not	know	how	to	flow	with	nature.	That	 is	 the	joke	in	 it.	He	did	not	know.	He
might	have	known	all	the	rules	and	regulations	and	how	to	swim,	but	he	did	not
know	how	to	flow	with	the	river.	He	did	not	know	surrender,	the	secret	of	it.	So
he	 couldn't	 believe	 his	 eyes.	 He	 thought	 that	 this	 man	 must	 be	 a	 spirit:	 the
physical	 body	 cannot	 survive,	 it	 is	 against	 all	 rules.	He	 ran	 after	 the	man	 and
when	he	got	hold	of	him,	he	asked:
"I	HAD	THOUGHT,	SIR,	YOU	WERE	A	SPIRIT,	BUT	NOW	I	SEE	YOU	ARE
A	MAN.
KINDLY	 TELL	 ME,	 IS	 THERE	 ANY	 WAY	 TO	 DEAL	 THUS	 WITH	 THE
WATER?"
You	have	done	a	miracle:	 it	 is	unbelievable.	Is	there	a	certain	way	to	deal	thus
with	the	water?
Confucius	believes	always	in	ways,	methods,	techniques	-	the	way.	This	is	how
the	ego	believes.
There	are	people	who	come	to	me	and	they	say:	How	to	fall	in	love?	Is	there	a
way?	How	 to	 fall	 in	 love?	They	ask	 for	 a	way,	 a	method,	 a	 certain	 technique.
They	don't	understand	what	they	are	asking.
Falling	in	love	means	that	now	there	is	no	way,	no	technique,	no	method.	That's
why	it	 is	called	"falling	in";	you	are	no	more	the	controller,	you	simply	fall	 in.
That's	why	people	who	are	very	head-oriented	will	say:	Love	 is	blind.	Love	 is
the	only	eye,	the	only	vision,	but	they	will	say	that	love	is	blind,	and	they	will
think	that	this	man	has	gone	mad.	It	looks	mad	to	the	48
reason,	because	the	reason	is	a	great	manipulator.	Anything	in	which	the	control
is	lost	looks	dangerous	to	the	reason.	So	Confucius	asked	for	the	way:	How	do
you	behave	with	the	river?
How	have	you	survived,	sir?	There	must	be	some	technique.
This	is	the	technique-oriented	mind,	the	mind	that	creates	all	technologies	in	the
world.
But	 there	 is	a	world	of	human	heart,	and	 there	 is	a	world	of	human	being	and
consciousness	 where	 no	 technology	 is	 possible.	 All	 technologies	 are	 possible
with	matter;	with	consciousness	no	technologies	are	possible.	In	fact	no	control
is	possible.	The	very	effort	to	control	or	to	make	a	thing	happen,	is	egoistic.
Confucius	doesn't	know	that	there	is	something	like	surrender.
If	you	have	been	a	lover	of	rivers,	and	if	you	have	been	swimming	in	rivers,	you
will	understand	what	 that	old	man	said.	 I	myself	have	 loved	rivers	very	much,
and	to	fall	in	a	whirlpool	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	experiences.
In	 rivers,	particularly	when	 they	are	 flooded,	 in	 the	rains,	many	whirlpools	are
created,	 very	 powerful	 and	 strong.	 The	 water	 moves	 round	 and	 round	 like	 a
screw.	If	you	are	caught	in	it,	you	will	be	forced,	pulled	towards	the	bottom,	and
the	deeper	you	go,	the	stronger	the	whirl	becomes.	The	natural	tendency	of	the
ego	is	to	fight	with	it.	Of	course,	because	it	looks	like	death	and	the	ego	is	very
much	afraid	of	death.	The	ego	tries	to	fight	with	the	whirl,	and	if	you	fight	with
the	whirl	in	a	flooded	river,	or	near	a	waterfall	where	many	whirls	exist,	you	are
lost,	because	the	whirl	is	very	strong,	you	cannot	fight	it.	Violence	won't	do	-	the
more	you	fight	with	it,	the	weaker	you	become	because	the	whirl	goes	on	pulling
you,	and	you	are	fighting.	With	each	effort	to	fight	you	are	losing	energy.	Soon
you	will	be	tired	and	the	whirl	will	suck	you	downwards.
And	 this	 is	 the	 phenomenon	 of	 the	whirl:	 on	 the	 surface	 the	whirl	 is	 big;	 the
deeper	you	go,	the	smaller	and	smaller	the	whirl	becomes	-	stronger,	but	smaller.
And	nearly	at	the	bottom	the	whirl	is	so	small	you	can	simply	get	out	of	it	with
no	fight.	In	fact	the	whirl	itself	throws	you	out,	near	the	bottom.	But	you	have	to
wait	for	the	bottom.	If	you	start	fighting	on	the	surface,	you	are	done,	you	cannot
survive.	I	have	tried	with	many	whirls;	the	experience	is	lovely.
And	it	is	exactly	as	it	happens	in	deep	meditation,	because	there	also	you	fight.
When	your	inner	being	yawns	and	the	abyss	opens,	it	is	just	like	a	whirl:	if	you
start	fighting,	you	will	be	crushed.	You	have	to	allow	it;	you	simply	move	with
it,	 you	 don't	 fight.	 You	 simply	 move	 with	 it;	 wherever	 it	 leads,	 you	 go.	 You
preserve	 your	 energy;	 not	 a	 single	 iota	 of	 energy	 is	 lost,	 because	 you	 are	 not
fighting,	 you	 are	 moving	 with	 the	 whirl.	 You	 are	 enjoying	 the	 whole
phenomenon,	as	if	you	are	on	the	wings	of	the	whirl,	flying.	Within	a	second	you
are	 pulled	 to	 the	 bottom	 because	 it	 is	 such	 a	 tremendous	 force.	 It	 kills	 many
people.	And,	once	near	 the	bottom,	you	can	 simply	 slip	out	 -	 there	 is	 even	no
need	 to	 slip	out	of	 it,	you	will	 slip	out	because	 it	 is	 so	 small	 it	 cannot	contain
you.
The	same	exactly	happens	 in	deep	meditation.	You	feel	 suffocated,	you	feel	 in
the	grip	of	something,	possessed,	being	pulled	to	some	magnetic	force.	You	start
fighting	and	resisting.
If	you	resist,	only	then	will	your	energy	be	sucked.
Jesus	 says	 a	 very	 unbelievable	 thing,	 and	Christians	 have	 been	 at	 a	 loss	 as	 to
how	to	interpret	it	for	these	two	thousand	years	and	they	have	not	been	able	to
interpret	it.	Jesus	says:	Resist	not	evil.	Even	if	it	is	evil,	don't	resist;	because,	if
you	resist,	the	evil	will	win.	You	are	such	a	tiny	energy	-	resist	not.	In	the	very
fight	you	will	be	defeated.	Don't	fight	and	nobody	can	defeat	you.	Even	if	a	very
evil	force,	the	devil	is	there,	if	you	don't	fight,	he	cannot	defeat	you.	If	you	start
fighting,	 you	 are	 already	 defeated.	 Fight,	 and	 the	 failure	 is	 absolutely	 certain;
don't	fight,	and	there	is	no	possibility	of	failing.	Because	how	can	you	fail	if	you
don't	fight?
This	is	the	art	of	judo	and	ju-jitsu:	not	to	fight.	In	Japan,	they	have	developed	a
very	 subtle	 art	 of	 judo.	 The	 man	 who	 is	 trained	 in	 judo	 cannot	 be	 defeated,
because	he	doesn't	fight.	Even	if	49
you	 hit	 him,	 he	 absorbs	 the	 energy	 that	 you	 have	 thrown	 by	 your	 hitting.	He
doesn't	resist;	he	doesn't	fight.	And	within	minutes	even	a	very	strong	person	can
be	defeated	by	a	very	weak	person	if	he	knows	judo.
You	 observe	 it	 many	 times	 happening	 all	 around.	 Every	 day	 you	 see	 small
children	falling
-	the	whole	day.	They	fall,	and	they	get	up,	and	they	forget	about	it.	But	if	you
fall	like	a	small	child,	you	will	always	be	in	the	hospital.	What	happens	when	a
child	falls?	He	simply	falls;	he	doesn't	resist.	He	moves	with	the	pull,	with	the
gravitation.	He	simply	falls	-	like	a	pillow	falling,	no	resistance.	When	you	fall,
you	resist.	You	first	try	not	to	fall.	All	your	fibres,	all	your	bones,	become	tense
and	 strained.	 When	 strained	 bones	 and	 a	 strained	 nervous	 system	 fall
unwillingly,	 fighting,	 then	many	 things	are	broken.	Not	because	of	gravitation,
but	 because	 of	 your	 resistance.	 You	 sometimes	 see	 a	 drunkard	 falling	 on	 the
street,	lying	down	in	the	gutter	-	nothing!	By	the	morning	he	is	absolutely	okay,
he	goes	 to	 the	office	 -	and	every	night	he	 falls.	He	must	know	some	 trick	 that
you	don't	know.	What	does	he	know?	Simply	this:	he	is	so	drunk	that	he	cannot
resist.	He	cannot	resist,	he	simply	falls,	like	a	feather	drops	down,	with	no	inner
resistance	 or	 fight.	 That's	 why	 in	 the	 morning	 he	 is	 absolutely	 okay	 again,
laughing	 and	 going	 to	 the	 office.	 If	 you	 fall	 like	 a	 drunkard,	 you	 will
immediately	have	 to	be	 transported	 to	 the	hospital,	many	fractures	would	have
happened.	Those	fractures	happen	because	of	your	fight.
In	judo	they	train	the	person	not	to	fight.	If	somebody	attacks	you,	you	simply
absorb	 the	attack.	 If	he	hits	you	on	your	head,	you	absorb.	When	somebody	is
hitting	on	your	head,	a	certain	amount	of	energy	has	come	 to	his	hand.	 If	you
fight,	then	two	energies	fight	and	are	destroyed.	If	you	don't	fight,	you	become
receptive.	It	is	a	very	difficult	art.	It	takes	many	years	to	learn	because	the	ego
again	 and	 again	 comes	 in.	 Once	 you	 have	 known	 the	 knack	 of	 it,	 then	 you
simply	 absorb	 the	 energy	 of	 the	 enemy.	 And	 soon,	 just	 by	 throwing	 out	 his
energy,	he	becomes	weak,	and	by	and	by	you	become	stronger.	He	is	defeated	by
his	own	effort	and	you	win	with	no	effort.
This	is	what	the	old	man	said.
"NO,	REPLIED	THE	MAN,	 I	HAVE	NO	WAY;	PLUNGING	 IN	WITH	THE
WHIRL..."
-	with	the	whirl,	not	against	the	whirl	-
"...	PLUNGING	IN	WITH	THE	WHIRL,	I	COME	OUT	WITH	THE	SWIRL."
I	have	no	way.	It	is	all	done	by	the	whirl	and	the	swirl.	I	don't	come	in,	I	move
with	it	-
"PLUNGING	 IN	WITH	THE	WHIRL,	 I	 COME	OUT	WITH	THE	SWIRL.	 I
ACCOMMODATE	MYSELF	TO	THE	WATER,	NOT	THE	WATER	TO	ME."
The	ego	is	trying	to	accommodate	the	whole	world	to	itself.	This	is	the	trouble.
A	man	who	has	no	ego	accommodates	himself	to	the	world.	In	fact,	it	is	not	good
to	say	that	he	accommodates	-	he	simply	finds	that	he	is	accommodated.
The	ego	tries	 to	accommodate	everything	 to	 it;	 this	 is	very	childish,	 just	 like	a
child.	 A	 child	 wants	 everything	 to	 be	 done,	 instantly;	 whatsoever	 he	 desires
should	 be	 done	 immediately.	 If	 he	 desires	 the	 moon,	 the	 moon	 should	 be
produced	immediately,	right	now.
He	cannot	even	wait.	A	child	wants	everything,	everybody,	 to	accommodate	to
him.	A	child	is	a	dictator,	and	whenever	a	child	is	born	into	a	family,	he	changes
the	whole	 atmosphere.	He	makes	 everybody	 a	 servant,	 his	 dictatorship	 has	 no
end	-	and	the	ego	is	born	in	that	childhood.
50
The	 ego	 is	 the	 most	 immature	 phenomenon:	 it	 is	 childish,	 immature,	 not
knowing	what	it	is	doing.
Who	are	you?	Why	should	the	whole	accommodate	to	you?	You	are	just	like	a
wave	on	the	ocean	and	you	are	trying	to	make	the	ocean	accommodate	to	you.
Foolish.	Patently	foolish.	There	is	no	need	for	the	whole	to	accommodate	to	you.
It	cannot	be	possible;	it	is	not	possible.	You	can	go	on	thinking	about	it,	but	you
will	 be	 a	 failure.	 Ego	 is	 always	 a	 failure,	 because	 the	 impossible	 is	 asked.
Napoleons,	Hitlers,	Alexanders	 -	 ask	 them.	 In	 the	 end,	 they	 are	 great	 failures.
Rich	people	-	ask	them,	in	the	end.	They	have	accumulated	much,	but	they	feel	a
deep	failure	inside.	You	can	accumulate	power	in	many	ways,	but	you	will	be	a
failure.
Ego	can	never	be	victorious.
Mulla	Nasrudin	was	telling	stories	to	his	child.	I	was	also	listening,	and	the	child
was	 insisting	on	more,	 so	he	 invented	 a	 story.	He	 said:	 "There	was	one	worm
that	was	an	early-rising	worm.	He	woke	up	in	BRAHAMAMUHURTA,	early	in
the	morning,	 thinking	 that	 religious	 and	moral	 teachers	 have	 always	 said	 that
early	rising	is	beautiful.	But	he	was	caught	by	an	early-rising	bird	who	was	also
a	believer	 in	 religious	precepts:	 that	 to	 rise	early	 is	good."	The	child	was	very
excited	and	he	said:	"What	happened	to	the	other	worm?	You	said	that	one	worm
was	an	early	 riser	 -	 and	 the	other?"	Mulla	 said:	 "Yes,	he	was	a	 late	 riser,	very
lazy.	But	a	child	found	him	asleep	and	killed	him."
The	child	was	a	 little	confused.	He	said:	"But	what	 is	 the	motto	of	 the	story?"
Said	Nasrudin:	"Motto?	You	cannot	win."
Whatsoever	 you	 do,	 early	 riser	 or	 not,	 in	 the	 end	 everybody	 is	 killed.	 This
absolutely	 true	 about	 the	 ego	 -	 you	 cannot	 win.	 Whatsoever	 you	 do,	 be	 it
virtuous	or	good,	if	this	virtue	and	goodness	is	based	on	the	ego,	you	cannot	win,
you	have	the	very	seed	of	defeat	in	you.	You	can	serve	people,	become	a	great
servant	of	 the	 society,	but	 if	 the	ego	 is	 the	base,	you	cannot	win.	You	may	do
millions	 of	 good	 things,	 but	 if	 the	 ego	 is	 there,	 poison	 is	 there.	 It	will	 poison
everything	you	do.	Be	poor,	be	rich;	be	religious,	be	 irreligious;	 theist,	atheist;
moral,	immoral;	criminal,	a	saint	-	it	doesn't	matter.	You	can't	win	if	the	ego	is
there,	 because	 the	 ego	 is	 the	 seed	 of	 failure.	 And	 if	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 there	 you
cannot	be	defeated.	Your	victory	is	absolute.	This	is	the	secret-most	teaching	of
Zen.
Be	 in	 accord	with	 the	whole,	move	with	 the	whole,	with	 the	 river.	Don't	 even
swim.	People	try	to	swim	against	the	current,	and	then	they	are	defeated.	Don't
even	swim.	Can't	you	float?
Can't	you	just	allow	the	river	to	take	you?	Allow	the	river.	You	just	move	with	it
-	relax	with	the	river	of	life	and	let	it	move	you.	It	reaches	the	ocean,	you	need
not	bother.
The	old	man	said:
"I	 ACCOMMODATE	 MYSELF	 TO	 THE	 WATER,	 NOT	 THE	 WATER	 TO
ME."
This	should	be	a	constant	 remembrance;	a	constant	mindfulness	of	 it	will	help
you	 tremendously.	Whenever	you	 feel	 that	you	are	 fighting,	 relax.	Whatsoever
the	case,	you	float,	you	don't	fight,	and	then	the	goal	is	certain.	In	fact,	then	there
is	no	goal	in	the	future;	right	now,	this	very	moment,	you	have	attained	it	-	flow
with	nature,	loose	and	natural,	allow	nature	to	take	its	own	course,	don't	force	it
in	 any	way,	 remain	passive,	 not	 aggressive	 and	violent.	 Just	 like	 a	 small	 child
going	for	a	walk	with	his	father	-	wherever	the	father	goes,	 the	child	is	simply
going	with	him,	happy,	not	knowing	where	he	is	going,	why	he	is	going.	Even	if
the	father	is	going	to	kill	the	child	there	is	no	problem	with	the	child.
There	is	a	Christian	story.	A	man	thought	that	he	had	been	ordered	by	God	to	kill
his	son.
He	was	 to	 take	 the	son	 to	 the	 forest,	 so	 the	son	was	very	excited.	Early	 in	 the
morning	 they	 had	 to	 leave,	 and	 the	 son	 was	 awake	 by	 midnight	 and	 he	 was
saying:	"Father,	when	are	we	going?"
51
The	father	was	troubled,	because	he	was	going	to	kill	 the	son	in	the	forest	and
the	son	was	so	excited,	he	didn't	know	what	was	going	to	happen.	But	the	man
believed	in	the	voice	of	God,	in	his	own	Father	the	man	believed.	And	the	child
believed	in	HIS	father:	there	was	trust.
The	father	took	the	child,	and	the	child	was	very	happy.	He	had	never	been	taken
to	 the	 forest.	Then	 the	 father	 started	 sharpening	 the	 sword	with	which	he	was
going	 to	 kill,	 and	 the	 child	was	very	 excited	 and	was	helping.	The	 father	was
crying	 inside	 because	 he	 knew	 that	 this	 child	 didn't	 know	what	 was	 going	 to
happen.	Then	the	child	asked:	"What	are	you	going	to	do	with	this?"	The	father
said:	 "You	 don't	 know.	 I	 am	 going	 to	 kill."	 And	 the	 child	 laughed,	 he	 was
enjoying,	 and	 he	 said:	 "When?"	 He	 was	 ready.	 This	 is	 what	 "floating-with"
means.
The	 father	 took	 the	 sword	 and	 the	 child	 was	 leaning	 in	 front	 of	 him,	 happy,
smiling;	it	was	a	game.
I	don't	know	whether	the	story	is	true	or	not,	but	it	seems	to	be	true,	should	be
true,	it	carries	a	deep	meaning.
Just	in	the	middle,	a	voice	was	heard:	"Stop!	You	trusted	me	and	that's	enough."
And	the	child	was	saying:	"Why	have	you	stopped?	Do	it!	It	is	a	good	play."	The
child	was	in	a	playful	mood.
When	 you	 trust	 life,	 you	 trust	God,	 because	 life	 is	God	 and	 there	 is	 no	 other
God.	When	you	trust	and	float	with	it,	even	death	is	transformed.	Then	there	is
no	 death.	You	 never	 tried	 to	 exist	 separately	 so	 how	 can	 you	 die?	 The	whole
always	lives:	only	individuals	come	and	go.	Waves	come	and	go:	the	ocean	goes
on	and	on	and	on.	If	you	don't	believe	in	yourself	as	a	separate	wave,	ego,	then
how	 can	 you	 die?	 You	 will	 live	 always	 and	 always	 in	 the	 whole.	 You	 lived
before,	when	you	were	not,	you	are	 living	 right	now,	when	you	 think	you	are,
and	you	will	 live	again,	when	you	will	not	be	 there.	The	dream	of	your	being
separate	is	the	ego,	and	the	ego	creates	conflict.	Through	conflicts	you	dissipate
and	die.	Through	conflicts	you	are	miserable.	Through	conflicts	you	lose	all	that
was	possible	for	you.	Every	moment	the	benediction	is	possible;	every	moment
the	ecstasy	is	possible,	but	you	miss.	You	miss	because	you	are	a	fighter.
The	man	said:
"I	ACCOMMODATE	MYSELF	TO	THE	WATER,	NOT	THE	WATER	TO	ME.
AND	SO	I	AM	ABLE	TO	DEAL	WITH	IT	AFTER	THIS	FASHION."
But	it	is	not	a	method,	it	is	not	a	technique,	not	a	way;	it	is	an	understanding.
And	remember,	finally,	either	ego	can	exist,	or	understanding,	both	cannot	exist
together.
If	 the	 ego	 exists,	 you	 have	 no	 understanding;	 you	 are	 just	 an	 ignorant	 child
believing	that	you	are	the	center	of	the	whole,	and,	finding	that	it	is	not	so,	you
are	 miserable.	 Finding	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the	 center,	 you	 create	 your	 hell.
Understanding	means	understanding	 the	whole	situation.	Simply	 looking	at	 the
whole	 phenomenon	 of	 your	 life,	 inner	 and	 outer,	 ego	 disappears.	 With
understanding	there	exists	no	ego;	understanding	is	the	path,	the	way.
Then	you	are	in	accord,	in	harmony,	in	rhythm,	in	step	with	life.	Then	suddenly
you	come	to	feel	 that	you	plunge	 in	with	 the	whirl	and	you	come	out	with	 the
swirl.	And	this	game	is	eternal	-	plunging	in	with	the	whirl,	coming	out	with	the
swirl	-	this	is	the	eternal	game.
That's	 what	 Hindus	 have	 called	 LEELA,	 the	 great	 cosmic	 play.	 You	 come
sometimes	as	a	wave,	and	then	you	disappear.	Then	again	you	come	as	a	wave,
and	you	disappear.	And	this	goes	on	and	on,	 there	is	no	beginning	to	it	and	no
end	to	it.	The	ego	has	a	beginning,	the	ego	has	an	end,	but	you,	without	the	ego,
are	 beginningless	 and	 endless.	 You	 are	 the	 very	 eternity,	 but	 in	 the	whole,	 in
accord	with	the	whole.	Against	the	whole,	you	are	a	nightmare	to	yourself.
52
So	there	is	either	ego	or	understanding.	The	choice	is	yours.	There	is	no	need	to
be	humble,	just	understanding.	And	it	is	as	if	you	have	lighted	a	candle	in	a	dark
room	-
suddenly	 the	 darkness	 is	 not	 there,	 because	 light	 and	 darkness	 cannot	 exist
together.	So,	ego	and	understanding	cannot	exist	together.
53
___________________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER	5	-	The	"Master	of	Silence"
25	February	1975	a.m.	in	Buddha	Hall
___________________________________________________________________________
THERE	 WAS	 A	 MONK	 WHO	 CALLED	 HIMSELF	 "THE	 MASTER	 OF
SILENCE".
ACTUALLY	 HE	 WAS	 A	 FRAUD	 AND	 HAD	 NO	 GENUINE
UNDERSTANDING.
TO	 SELL	 HIS	 HUMBUG	 ZEN	HE	HAD	 TWO	 ELOQUENT	ATTENDANT
MONKS	TO
ANSWER	 QUESTIONS	 FOR	 HIM	 -	 BUT,	 AS	 IF	 TO	 SHOW	 HIS
INSCRUTABLE	SILENT
ZEN,	HE	HIMSELF	NEVER	UTTERED	A	WORD.
ONE	 DAY,	 DURING	 THE	 ABSENCE	 OF	 HIS	 TWO	 ATTENDANTS,	 A
PILGRIM	CAME
TO	HIM	AND	ASKED:	"MASTER,	WHAT	IS	THE	BUDDHA?"
NOT	 KNOWlNG	 WHAT	 TO	 DO,	 OR	 HOW	 TO	 ANSWER,	 HE	 LOOKED
DESPERATELY
AROUND	IN	ALL	DIRECTIONS	FOR	HIS	MISSING	MOUTHPIECES.
THE	 PILGRIM,	 APPARENTLY	 PLEASED	 AND	 SATISFIED,	 THANKED
THE	MASTER,	AND	SET	OUT	AGAIN	ON	HIS	JOURNEY.
ON	THE	ROAD	THE	PILGRIM	MET	THE	TWO	ATTENDANT	MONKS	ON
THEIR
WAY	HOME.	HE	BEGAN	TELLING	THEM	ENTHUSIASTICALLY	WHAT
AN
ENLIGHTENED	BEING	THIS	MASTER	OF	SILENCE	IS.
HE	 SAID:	 "I	 ASKED	HIM	WHAT	 BUDDHA	 IS	 AND	HE	 IMMEDIATELY
TURNED	HIS
FACE	 TO	 THE	 EAST	 AND	 TO	 THE	 WEST	 IMPLYING	 THAT	 HUMAN
BEINGS	ARE
ALWAYS	LOOKING	FOR	BUDDHA	HERE	AND	THERE,	BUT	ACTUALLY,
BUDDHA	IS	NOT	TO	BE	FOUND	IN	ANY	SUCH	DIRECTIONS.	OH	WHAT
AN	ENLIGHTENED
MASTER	HE	IS,	AND	HOW	PROFOUND	HIS	TEACHINGS!"
WHEN	 THE	 ATTENDANT	 MONKS	 RETURNED,	 THE	 MASTER	 OF
SILENCE
SCOLDED	THEM	THUS:	WHERE	HAVE	YOU	BEEN	ALL	THIS	TIME?	A
WHILE	AGO
I	 WAS	 EMBARRASSED	 TO	 DEATH	 AND	 ALMOST	 RUINED	 BY	 AN
INQUISITIVE
PILGRIM.
Life	is	a	mystery.	The	more	you	understand	it,	the	more	mysterious	it	becomes.
The	more	 you	 know,	 the	 less	 you	 feel	 that	 you	 know.	 The	more	 you	 become
aware	of	the	depth,	the	infinite	depth,	the	more	it	becomes	almost	impossible	to
say	anything	about	it.	Hence	silence.
A	man	 who	 knows	 remains	 in	 such	 awe,	 such	 infinite	 wonderment	 that	 even
breathing	stops.	Standing	before	the	mystery	of	life,	one	is	lost	completely.
But	 there	 are	 problems,	 and	 the	 first	 problem	with	 the	mystery	 of	 life	 is	 that
there	is	always	the	possibility	of	frauds,	people	who	can	deceive	others,	people
who	can	cheat.	In	the	world	of	science	that	is	not	possible.	Science	moves	on	a
plain	 ground	 with	 infinite	 caution	 -	 logical,	 rational.	 If	 you	 utter	 something
nonsensical,	immediately	you	will	be	caught,	because	whatsoever	you	say	can	be
verified.	Science	is	objective,	and	any	assertion,	any	statement,	can	be	verified	in
experiments	in	the	laboratories.
With	religion	everything	is	inner,	subjective,	mysterious,	and	the	path	is	not	on	a
plain.	 It	 is	 a	 hilly	 track.	 There	 are	 many	 ups	 and	 many	 downs,	 and	 the	 path
moves	like	a	spiral.	Again	and	again	you	come	to	the	same	place,	maybe	a	little
higher.	 And	 whatsoever	 you	 say	 cannot	 be	 verified,	 there	 is	 no	 criterion	 of
verification.	Because	it	is	inner,	no	experiment	can	prove	or	disprove	it;	because
it	is	mysterious,	no	logical	argumentation	can	decide	this	way	or	that.
That's	why	science	is	one,	but	there	exist	almost	three	thousand	religions	in	the
world.	 You	 cannot	 prove	 any	 religion	 false.	 Neither	 can	 you	 prove	 any	 other
religion	to	be	true	or	authentic.	That	is	not	possible,	because	no	empirical	test	is
possible.
54
A	Buddha	says	that	there	is	no	self	inside.	How	to	prove	this	or	how	to	disprove
this?	If	somebody	says,	"I	have	seen	God",	and	he	sounds	sincere,	what	to	do?
He	may	be	a	deluded	lunatic,	he	may	have	seen	a	hallucination,	or	he	may	really
have	seen	the	reality	of	existence.
But	how	to	prove	or	disprove?	He	cannot	share	his	experience	with	anybody,	it
is	inner.	It	is	not	like	an	object	you	can	place	in	the	middle	and	everybody	can
watch	 it,	 and	 everybody	 can	 experiment	 and	 dissect	 it.	You	 have	 to	 take	 it	 in
faith.	 He	 may	 sound	 absolutely	 sincere,	 and	 may	 be	 deluded:	 he	 may	 not	 be
cheating	you,	trying	to	cheat	you,	he	may	be	himself	deceived.
He	may	 be	 a	 very	 true	 person	 but	 he	 has	 seen	 a	 dream	 and	 thinks	 it	 is	 real	 -
sometimes	 dreams	 have	 the	 quality	 that	 they	 look	 more	 real	 than	 the	 reality
itself.	Then	dreams	look	like	visions.
He	has	heard	the	voice	of	God	and	he	is	so	filled	with	it,	so	thrilled.	But	what	to
do?	How	to	prove	that	he	has	not	gone	mad,	that	he	has	not	projected	his	own
mind	and	idea?	There	is	no	possibility.
If	there	is	one	genuine	religious	man,	there	are	ninety-nine	others	all	around	him.
A	 few	 of	 them	 are	 deluded:	 poor,	 simple	 fellows,	 good	 at	 heart,	 not	 trying	 to
harm	 anybody,	 but	 still	 they	 harm.	 Then	 there	 are	 a	 few	 cheats,	 robbers,
deceivers:	cunning,	clever	people	who	are	knowingly	doing	harm.	But	the	harm
pays.	 You	 cannot	 find	 a	 better	 business	 in	 the	 world	 than	 religion.	 You	 can
promise,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 deliver	 the	 goods,	 because	 the	 goods	 are
invisible.
I	 have	 heard	 an	 anecdote	 -	 in	 America	 they	 invented	 invisible	 hair-pins	 for
ladies.	One	 lady	was	purchasing	 them	at	a	supermarket	and	 the	salesman	gave
her	 a	packet	of	 invisible	hair-pins.	She	 looked	 in	 the	box	and	 she	couldn't	 see
any.	Of	course,	 they	were	 invisible,	so	how	can	you	see?	And	she	said:	"But	 I
don't	 see	 anything	 in	 it."	 The	man	 said:	 "They	 are	 invisible,	 so	 how	 can	 you
see?"	So	the	lady	asked:	"Really?	Are	they	invisible?"	The	man	said:	"You	are
asking	me?	For	seven	days	we	have	been	out	of	stock,	and	still	we	are	selling
them.	They	are	absolutely	invisible."
When	things	are	invisible,	you	can	go	on	selling,	promising.	There	is	no	need	to
deliver	 the	 goods,	 because	 in	 the	 first	 place	 they	 are	 invisible,	 so	 nobody	 can
ever	detect	 them.	And	you	cannot	 find	a	better	business	 than	 religion,	because
the	goods	are	 invisible.	 I	have	seen	many	people	being	deceived,	many	people
deceiving.	And	the	thing	is	so	subtle	that	nothing	can	be	said	for	or	against.
For	example,	I	know	a	man	who	is	a	simple,	plain,	stupid	man.	But	stupidity	has
its	 own	 qualities.	 Particularly	 in	 religion,	 a	 stupid	 man	 can	 look	 like	 a
PARAMAHANSA.	Because	he	is	stupid,	his	behavior	is	unexpected,	just	like	an
enlightened	man.	The	similarity	is	there.
Because	 he	 is	 stupid,	 he	 cannot	 utter	 a	 single	 rational	 statement	 -	 just	 like	 an
enlightened	man.
He	is	foolish,	he	doesn't	know	what	he	is	saying,	how	he	is	behaving.	Suddenly
he	 can	 do	 anything:	 and	 this	 sudden	 doing	 seems	 to	 be	 as	 if	 he	 belongs	 to
another	world.	He	has	epileptic	fits,	but	people	think	he	is	going	into	samadhi.
He	needs	electric	shock	treatment!
Suddenly	he	will	go	into	a	fit	and	swoon,	and	the	followers	will	beat	their	drums
and	 they	 will	 sing	 to	 the	 glory	 of	 God,	 that	 their	 master	 has	 gone	 into	 great
samadhi,	ecstasy.	And	his	mouth	starts	foaming,	and	his	saliva	flows	out	-	he	is
simply	in	a	fit.	He	has	no	intelligence.
But	 that	 is	 a	quality,	 and	 there	are	deceivers	around	him	who	go	on	 spreading
things	about	the
"baba".
And	 many	 things	 happen	 near	 him:	 that	 is	 the	 miracle.	Many	 things	 happen,
because	many	things	happen	of	 their	own	accord.	The	baba	 is	 in	a	swoon,	and
many	 people	 will	 feel	 their	 kundalini	 rising.	 They	 are	 projecting.	 There	 is	 a
certain	phenomenon:	 if	you	sit	quietly	for	a	 long	period,	 the	body	accumulates
energy,	and	then	the	body	starts	moving,	feeling	restless.
Sudden	jerks	start	coming	-	they	think	this	is	kundalini.	Kundalini	is	rising	and
when	it	rises	in	one	person,	how	can	you	lag	behind?	Then	others	start.	Then	it	is
just	like	if	one	person	goes	to	the	toilet,	then	others	feel	the	urge:	if	one	person
sneezes,	others	have	a	tremendous	55
sneeze	 coming	 to	 them.	 It	 becomes	 infectious.	 But	 with	 so	 many	 things
happening,	the	baba	must	be	in	samadhi.	He	is	simply	in	a	fit.	In	the	East	it	has
been	my	observation	that	only	one	genuine	person	exists,	ninety-nine	are	false	-
either	 themselves	 deceived,	 simple,	 poor	 people;	 or	 deceivers,	 cunning,	 clever
people.
This	can	go	on,	because	the	whole	phenomenon	is	invisible.	What	to	do?	How	to
judge?
How	to	decide?	Religion	is	always	dangerous.	It	is	dangerous	because	the	very
terrain	 is	 mysterious,	 irrational.	 Anything	 goes,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 outer	 way	 to
judge	it.	And	there	are	people	with	their	gullible	minds,	always	ready	to	believe
something,	 because	 they	 need	 some	 foothold.	 Without	 belief	 they	 feel
unanchored,	uprooted;	they	need	somebody	to	believe	in,	they	need	somewhere
to	go	and	feel	anchored	and	rooted.
Belief	is	a	deep	need	in	people.	Why	is	it	a	deep	need?	Because	without	belief
you	 feel	 like	 a	 chaos;	 without	 belief	 you	 don't	 know	 why	 you	 exist;	 without
belief	 you	 cannot	 feel	 any	meaning	 in	 life.	No	 significance	 seems	 to	be	 there.
You	 feel	 like	 an	 accident	with	 no	 reason	 at	 all	 to	 be	 here.	Without	 belief,	 the
question	 arises:	 Why	 are	 you?	 Who	 are	 you?	 From	 where	 are	 you	 coming?
Where	are	you	going?	And	there	is	not	a	single	answer	-	without	belief	there	is
no	answer.	One	feels	simply	without	any	meaning,	an	accident	in	existence,	not
needed	at	all,	not	indispensable.	You	will	die	and	nobody	will	bother;	they	will
all	 continue.	 You	 feel	 something	 is	 lacking,	 a	 contact	 with	 reality,	 a	 certain
belief.	That's	why	religions	exist	-	to	supply	beliefs,	because	people	need	them.
A	person	without	belief	has	to	be	very,	very	courageous.	To	live	without	belief	is
to	live	in	the	unknown,	to	live	without	belief	is	a	great	daring.	Ordinary	people
cannot	afford	that.	With	too	much	daring,	anguish	comes	in,	anxiety	is	created.
And	this	has	to	be	noted:	to	me	a	real	religious	person	is	without	belief.	Trust	he
has,	but	not	belief,	and	there	is	a	vast	difference	between	the	two.
Belief	is	intellectual.	You	need	it,	that's	why	you	have	it.	It	is	there	because	you
cannot	 live	without	belief.	Belief	gives	you	a	support	 to	live	by;	 it	gives	you	a
certain	meaning,	howsoever	false;	it	gives	you	a	certain	blueprint	for	life,	how	to
move,	where	to	move.	You	are	on	the	highway,	not	lost	in	the	forest.	Belief	gives
you	a	commodity,	 there	are	other	believers	 just	 like	you;	you	become	a	part	of
the	 crowd.	 Then	 you	 need	 not	 think	 on	 your	 own,	 then	 you	 are	 no	 longer
responsible	for	your	own	being	and	what	you	are	doing.	Now	you	can	throw	the
responsibility	on	the	crowd.
An	 individual	 Hindu	 is	 never	 as	 bad	 as	 a	 Hindu	 crowd.	 An	 individual
Mohammedan	 is	 never	 as	 bad	 as	 a	 Mohammedan	 crowd.	 What	 happens?
Individuals	are	not	bad,	crowds	are	simply	mad	-	because,	 in	a	crowd,	nobody
feels	responsible.	You	can	commit	murders	in	a	crowd	easily,	because	you	know
the	 crowd	 is	 doing	 it	 and	 you	 are	 just	 a	wave	 in	 it,	 you	 are	 not	 the	 deciding
factor,	so	you	are	not	responsible.	Individual,	alone,	you	feel	a	responsibility.
You	will	feel	guilty	if	you	commit	something.	It	is	my	observation	that	sin	exists
through	 crowds;	 no	 individual	 is	 ever	 a	 sinner.	 And	 individuals,	 even	 if	 they
commit	 something	 wrong,	 can	 be	 taken	 out	 of	 it	 very	 easily;	 but	 crowds	 are
impossible,	because	crowds	have	no	souls,	no	centers.	To	whom	to	appeal?
And	in	all	that	goes	on	in	the	world	-	the	devil,	the	evil	forces	-	the	crowd	is	in
fact	responsible.	Nations	are	the	devil;	religious	communities	are	the	evil	forces.
Belief	makes	you	 a	 part	 of	 a	 bigger	 crowd	 than	you,	 and	 there	 is	 a	 feeling	of
elation	when	you	are	a	part	of	something	bigger,	a	nation	-	India,	or	America,	or
England.	Then	you	are	not	a	tiny	human	being.	A	great	energy	comes	to	you	and
you	feel	elated.	Euphoria	is	felt.	That's	why,	whenever	a	country	is	at	war,	people
feel	very	euphoric,	ecstatic.	Suddenly	their	life	has	a	meaning	-	they	exist	for	the
country,	for	the	religion,	for	the	civilization;	now	they	have	a	certain	goal	to	be
achieved,	and	a	certain	treasure	to	be	protected.	Now	they	are	no	longer	56
ordinary	 people,	 they	 have	 a	 great	 mission.	 Belief	 is	 the	 bridge	 from	 the
individual	to	the	crowd.
Trust	is	totally	different.	Trust	is	not	an	intellectual	concept.	Trust	is	a	quality	of
the	 heart,	 not	 of	 the	 head.	 Belief	 is	 a	 bridge	 between	 the	 individual	 and	 the
crowd,	 and	 trust	 is	 a	 bridge	 between	 the	 individual	 and	 the	 cosmos.	 Trust	 is
always	in	God,	and	when	I	say	"God",	I	don't	mean	any	belief	in	God.	When	I
say	God,	I	simply	mean	the	whole.
Trust	 is	 a	 deep	 understanding	 that	 you	 are	 simply	 a	 part,	 a	 note	 in	 a	 great
symphony,	 just	a	small	wave	in	the	ocean.	Trust	means	you	have	to	follow	the
whole,	flow	with	the	whole,	be	in	accord	with	the	whole.	Trust	means:	I	am	not
here	as	an	enemy,	I	am	not	here	to	fight;	I	am	here	to	enjoy	the	opportunity	that
has	been	given	to	me;	I	am	here	to	be	grateful	and	celebrating.	Trust	is	not	in	a
doctrine:	you	need	not	be	a	Hindu,	you	need	not	be	a	Mohammedan,	you	need
not	be	a	Jain	or	a	Sikh.	Trust	 is	a	commitment	between	 the	 individual	and	 the
whole.	Trust	makes	you	religious	-	not	Hindu,	not	Mohammedan,	not	Christian	-
simply	religious.	Trust	has	no	name.	Belief	makes	you	a	Hindu,	Mohammedan,
Christian.	Belief	has	names,	millions	of	names;	there	are	thousands	of	beliefs	-
you	 can	 choose.	 Trust	 has	 only	 one	 quality:	 the	 quality	 of	 surrender	 into	 the
whole;	the	quality	of	moving	in	accord	with	the	whole;	the	quality	of	not	forcing
the	whole	to	follow	you,	but	simply	allowing	yourself	to	move	with	the	whole.
Trust	 is	 a	 transformation;	 trust	 has	 to	 be	 attained;	 belief	 is	 given	 by	 birth.
Nobody	is	born	in	trust,	everybody	is	born	in	belief:	you	are	born	a	Hindu,	or	a
Jain,	 or	 a	 Buddhist.	 Belief	 is	 given	 by	 society,	 because	 belief	 is	 the	 bridge
between	you	and	society.
If	society	doesn't	give	you	a	belief,	there	is	a	fear	-	you	may	become	rebellious.
In	fact	it	is	certain	that	if	the	belief	is	not	given,	you	will	become	rebellious,	and
society	 doesn't	want	 that,	 can't	 afford	 that.	 Society,	 before	 you	become	 aware,
gives	you	deep	beliefs.	Into	your	blood	it	goes	-	with	the	milk	of	your	mother	the
poison	of	belief	seeps	into	your	being.	By	the	time	you	become	aware	of	what
has	 happened	 you	 find	 you	 are	 already	 a	 Hindu,	 or	 a	 Mohammedan,	 or	 a
Christian.	The	straitjacket	is	already	there:	you	are	imprisoned.
And	it	 is	very	difficult	 to	get	out	of	it	because	it	gets	into	your	unconscious;	 it
becomes	your	very	foundation.	Even	if	you	get	out	of	it,	even	if	you	go	against
it,	 it	will	 remain	 in	 the	 foundation,	because	 to	cleanse	 the	unconscious	 is	very
difficult.	Consciously	you	can't	do	it.
I	have	heard,	 it	happened	 that	Mulla	Nasrudin	became	an	atheist.	And	he	was
dying,	so	the	priest	came.	The	priest	said:	Mulla,	now	this	is	the	last	moment	and
the	last	opportunity.	Still	there	is	time	left,	you	confess	your	sin	and	you	confess
that	you	went	wrong	by	becoming	an	atheist.	Become	a	theist	and	die	believing
in	God.
Mulla	Nasrudin	opened	his	eyes	and	said:	"Thank	God	I	am	not	a	theist."
Even	 if	you	are	not	a	 theist,	you	will	 thank	God.	Deep	down	 it	 remains	 in	 the
unconscious,	 it	 becomes	 a	 foundation.	 Whatsoever	 you	 have	 learned	 in	 your
childhood	 before	 the	 age	 of	 seven	 has	 become	 your	 foundation.	 To	 uproot	 it,
very	great	effort	and	meditation	is	needed.
You	will	have	to	move	back,	only	then	can	it	be	wiped	out.	You	can	create	anti-
beliefs,	they	won't	help,	they	cannot	help.	You	can	become	a	theist.	You	can	be	a
Hindu	in	your	childhood,	then	you	can	be	converted	to	a	Christian,	but	you	will
remain	a	Hindu	-	your	Christianity	will	be	coloured	by	your	Hinduism.	You	may
become	a	communist,	but,	deep	down,	the	unconscious	is	there	and	it	will	colour
your	communism.	A	deep	meditation	is	needed	to	cleanse	the	unconscious.
Trust	is	totally	different.	Trust	is	not	in	words,	in	scriptures.	Trust	is	towards	life
-	 the	very	energy	 that	moves	 the	whole.	You	trust	 it	and	you	float	with	 it.	 If	 it
takes	you	down	in	the	whirl,	you	go	down	in	the	whirl.	If	it	takes	you	out	in	the
swirl,	you	come	out	in	the	swirl.
You	move	with	it,	you	don't	have	your	own	mind	about	it.	If	it	makes	you	sad,
you	become	sad.	 If	 it	makes	you	happy,	you	become	happy.	You	simply	move
with	it,	with	no	mind	of	57
your	own,	and	suddenly,	you	come	to	realize	that	now	you	have	achieved	a	point
where	 bliss	 is	 going	 to	 be	 eternal.	 In	 your	 sadness	 also	 you	 will	 be	 blissful,
because	it	is	none	of	your	business.	The	whole	is	doing	it	that	way	and	you	are
moving	with	it.	Happiness	-	okay.
Sadness	 -	 okay.	 You	 simply	 "okay".	 Everything	 is	 Okayed.	 This	 is	 what	 a
religious	man	is:	he	has	no	mind	of	his	own.	Belief	has	a	very	strong	mind	of	its
own.
It	is	said	about	a	great	saint,	Tulsidas	that	he	was	invited	into	a	Krishna	temple	in
Mathura,	and	he	was	a	believer	 in	Ram.	He	went	 there,	but	he	would	not	bow
down,	because	the	statue	was	of	Krishna	with	a	flute	on	his	lips.	It	is	said	that	he
said	to	Krishna:	"I	can	bow	down	only	to	Ram,	so,	if	you	want	me	to	bow	down,
you	take	the	bow	of	Ram	in	your	hand.	When	I	see	that	you	have	become	Ram,
only	then	will	I	bow	down."
This	is	the	mind	of	belief.	Otherwise,	what	is	the	distinction	between	Ram	and
Krishna?
And	what	is	the	distinction	between	a	flute	and	a	bow?
And	 the	 story	goes	on:	 it	 says	 that	 the	 statue	changed,	 it	 became	 the	 statue	of
Ram,	and	then	Tulsidas	bowed	down	very	happily.
Now	 the	 problem	 is,	what	must	 have	 happened?	My	understanding	 is	 that	 the
statue	must	 have	 remained	 the	 same,	 because	 statues	 don't	 bother.	 They	 don't
bother	 whether	 you	 bow	 down	 or	 not.	 But	 the	 mind	 of	 a	 believer	 can	 create
things.	 Tulsidas	 must	 have	 projected:	 it	 must	 have	 been	 a	 projection;	 it	 must
have	been	a	hallucination.	He	must	have	seen	that's	certain.	He	must	have	seen,
otherwise	he	would	not	have	bowed	down:	that's	certain.	The	possibility	is	that
his	own	mind	created,	 and	when	you	are	 too	 filled	with	belief	you	can	create.
You	can	see	things	which	are	not	there,	and	you	can	miss	things	which	are	there.
A	mind	that	is	filled	with	belief	is	a	mind	which	can	project	anything	according
to	the	belief.
When	you	see	things,	always	remember	this.
People	 come	 to	me....	 If	 somebody	 is	 a	 believer	 in	Krishna	 and	 he	meditates,
immediately	Krishna	starts	coming	 to	him.	Visions.	But	Christ	never	comes	 to
him.	A	Christian	starts	meditation	-	then	Krishna	never	disturbs	his	meditation,
only	Christ	comes.	To	a	Mohammedan,	neither	Krishna	nor	Christ	comes;	and
Mohammed	 cannot	 come	 because	 Mohammedans	 have	 no	 pictures	 of
Mohammed.	They	don't	know	what	he	looked	like,	so	they	cannot	project.
Whatsoever	 you	 believe,	 you	 project.	 Belief	 is	 a	 projection.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a
projector	 in	a	movie	film-house:	you	see	something	on	the	screen	which	is	not
there.	The	projector	 is	hidden	behind,	but	you	never	 look	at	 the	projector,	you
look	at	the	screen.	The	projector	is	at	the	back,	and	the	whole	game	is	going	on
there,	but	you	look	at	the	screen.	The	whole	game	is	going	on	in	your	mind,	and
a	mind	filled	with	belief	always	goes	on	projecting	 things	 in	 the	world,	 it	 sees
things	 which	 are	 not	 there.	 This	 is	 the	 problem.	 The	 mind	 which	 believes	 is
always	 vulnerable	 and	 always	 provides	 an	 opportunity	 to	 be	 exploited	 by	 the
cheaters	-	and	the	cheaters	are	all	around.	The	whole	path	is	filled	with	robbers,
because	no	map	exists.
Moving	into	religion	is	moving	into	the	uncharted,	into	the	unmapped.	Robbers
can	flourish	there	very	easily,	they	can	wait	for	you	-	and	they	are	waiting.	And
sometimes,	 even	 if	 the	 person	 is	 not	 deceiving	 you,	 you	want	 to	 be	 deceived.
Then	you	will	be	deceived.
Nobody	can	deceive	you	if,	deep	down,	you	are	not	ready	to	be	deceived.
Just	a	few	days	before,	a	man	came	to	me	and	he	said:	A	baba	has	deceived	me,
and	 he	 is	 a	 great	 yogi.	 I	 asked	 him:	And	what	 has	 he	 done?	He	 said:	He	 can
make	gold	out	of	any	metal.
He	has	shown	me	and	I	have	seen	it	happening	with	my	own	eyes.	Then	he	said
that	I	should	bring	all	my	gold	and	he	would	make	it	tenfold.	So	I	collected	all
my	ornaments	and	he	has	simply	escaped	with	them.	He	has	deceived	me.
Everybody	will	 think	 that	he	had	deceived	him,	but	 I	 told	 this	man:	 It	 is	your
greed	 that	has	deceived	you.	Don't	 throw	 the	 responsibility	onto	anybody	else.
You	are	simply	foolish.
Greed	is	foolish.	You	wanted	your	ornaments	to	be	made	tenfold.	That	mind	has
deceived	58
you;	the	other	person	has	simply	used	the	opportunity.	He	is	just	a	clever	person,
that's	all.
You	 are	 the	 real	 problem.	 If	 he	 had	 not	 deceived	 you,	 somebody	 else	 would
have.
So	who	deceives	it	not	the	question.	It	has	been	my	observation	that	if	somebody
deceives	 you,	 it	 shows	 a	 certain	 proneness	 in	 you	 to	 be	 deceived.	 And	 if
somebody	can	lie	to	you,	it	means	you	have	a	certain	affinity	with	lies.	A	man	of
truth	cannot	be	deceived.	A	man	who	 lives	 in	 truth	cannot	become	a	victim	of
liars.	 Only	 a	 liar	 can	 be	 deceived	 by	 another	 liar;	 otherwise	 there	 is	 no
possibility.	There	are	millions	of	people	who	are	ready	to	be	deceived,	who	are
simply	waiting	for	someone	to	come	and	deceive	them	-	because	of	their	beliefs,
because	of	their	vicious	desires,	because	of	their	greed.	And	remember	well	that
greed	is	greed,	whether	it	exists	in	the	material	world	or	in	the	spiritual	makes	no
difference.	 The	 quality	 of	 it	 remains	 the	 same.	 You	 would	 like	 somebody	 to
increase	your	gold	tenfold	-	this	is	greed.	Then	somebody	says,	"I	will	make	you
an	enlightened	person",	and	you	fall	in	line	immediately.	That	too	is	greed.
And	I	tell	you:	It	is	possible	to	increase	gold	tenfold	very	easily,	but	it	is	almost
impossible	to	make	any	other	person	enlightened.	Because	that	is	no	game.	The
path	 is	 arduous.	 In	 fact	 nobody	 ever	 makes	 you	 enlightened	 -	 you	 yourself
become	 enlightened;	 the	 other	 may	 be	 a	 catalytic	 agent	 at	 the	 most,	 nothing
more.	But	in	fact	everything	happens	within	you;	the	other's	presence	may	have
helped,	that's	all.	And	if	you	are	really	sincere,	even	that	is	not	needed.	If	you	are
sincere,	 those	who	 can	 help	will	 seek	 you,	 if	 you	 are	 insincere,	 you	will	 seek
those	who	can	harm.	That	is	the	difference.	When	a	disciple	seeks	a	master,	there
is	almost	always	going	to	be	something	wrong.	When	a	master	seeks	a	disciple,
only	then	something	authentic	is	going	to	happen.
How	can	you	seek	a	master?	Whatsoever	you	may	think	will	be	your	mind,	and
you	 are	 completely	 ignorant,	 you	 are	 a	 sleepwalker.	 You	will	 seek	 somebody
according	to	you.	YOU
will	 be	 the	 criterion.	 Then	 you	 will	 go	 and	 seek	 somebody	 who	 is	 doing	 a
miracle.
You	may	go	and	seek	Satya	Sai	Baba,	because	that	will	be	a	deep	fulfilment	of
your	greed.
You	will	 see:	 here	 is	 the	man.	 If	 he	 can	 produce	 things	 out	 of	 air,	 he	 can	 do
anything.	 Now	 your	 greed	 is	 provoked.	 Now	 a	 deep	 affinity	 happens
immediately.	 That's	 why	 you	 will	 see	 thousands	 of	 people	 around	 Satya	 Sai
Baba.	If	a	Buddha	exists,	you	will	not	see	multitudes	there,	because	there	is	no
affinity.	Satya	Sai	Baba	has	an	appeal	deep	inside	you:	your	greed	is	provoked.
Now	you	know	this	 is	 the	right	man.	But	you	are	wrong.	How	can	you	decide
who	is	the	right	man?	You	create	your	deceivers,	you	give	them	the	opportunity.
You	follow	magicians,	not	masters.
If	you	 really	want	 to	seek	a	master,	drop	greed	and	drop	your	beliefs.	Go	 to	a
master	completely	nude	in	the	mind,	with	no	beliefs;	as	if	you	are	a	tree	in	the
fall	with	no	 leaves,	naked,	 standing	against	 the	sky.	You	go	and	seek	a	master
with	a	naked	mind,	with	no	leaves,	with	no	beliefs.	Only	then,	only	then,	I	say,
will	 you	be	 able	 to	 see	without	 projection;	 only	 then	will	 something	penetrate
into	your	life	from	the	above.	Then	nobody	can	deceive	you.
So	 don't	 be	 bothered	 and	 don't	 condemn	 the	 deceivers:	 they	 fulfil	 a	 need.
Because	you	need	them,	they	are	there.	Nothing	exists	without	any	cause.	People
exist	 all	 around	 you,	 because	 you	 need	 them.	 Thieves	 exist,	 robbers	 exist,
exploiters	exist,	deceivers	exist,	because	you	need	them.	You	will	be	nowhere	if
they	 all	 disappear;	 you	will	 be	 simply	 unable	 to	 live	 your	 life	 if	 they	 are	 not
there.
This	story	is	beautiful,	and	has	to	be	understood	deeply.
THERE	 WAS	 A	 MONK	 WHO	 CALLED	 HIMSELF	 "THE	 MASTER	 OF
SILENCE".
ACTUALLY	 HE	 WAS	 A	 FRAUD	 AND	 HAD	 NO	 GENUINE
UNDERSTANDING.
59
You	 can	 pretend,	 and	 in	 religion	 you	 can	 pretend	 more	 than	 anywhere	 else.
Because	 people	 are	 clever	 in	 their	 worldly	 ways	 but	 they	 are	 completely
innocent	 as	 far	 as	 religion	 is	 concerned.	You	may	be	 able	 to	 know	everything
that	 goes	 on	 in	 the	market,	 you	have	 lived	 there,	 you	know	 the	 tricks	 and	 the
ways	and	everything	-	you	have	yourself	been	doing	those	things.	You	are	wise
as	 far	 as	 the	 world	 is	 concerned,	 but	 when	 you	 move	 into	 the	 world	 of	 a
monastery,	from	the	market	 to	the	monastery,	 there	is	a	great	difference.	In	the
monastery	you	are	completely	innocent,	like	a	child.	You	may	be	very	old,	sixty
or	seventy	years	of	age,	but	in	a	monastery,	in	a	temple,	you	are	just	like	a	small
child.	You	have	not	lived	there,	and	the	same	things	exist	there	also.	Again	it	is	a
market.
When	 Jesus	 entered	 the	 temple	 of	 Jerusalem,	 he	 entered	 with	 a	 whip	 and	 he
started	 beating	 people,	 because	many	 shopkeepers	 had	 entered	 the	 temple	 and
many	money-lenders.	He	turned	their	tables	upside	down	and	he	said:	"You	have
made	 my	 God's	 temple	 a	 market.	 You	 traders	 -	 you	 get	 out!"	 This	 is	 really
something	-	one	single	man,	and	the	whole	crowd	of	traders	escaped.
Truth	 has	 a	 strength	 of	 its	 own.	 When	 something	 is	 true,	 you	 immediately
become	weak,	 because	 you	 are	 a	 liar	 and	 you	 immediately	 understand:	 That's
right.	 Those	 shopkeepers	 didn't	 fight;	 those	 money-lenders	 could	 have	 killed
Jesus;	 he	 was	 alone	 and	 they	 were	 many.	 But	 simply	 at	 the	 truth	 of	 it	 they
escaped	 outside.	 And	 only	 when	 they	 reached	 outside	 did	 they	 start	 planning
what	to	do	with	this	man	-	and	it	was	their	planning	that	finally	crucified	Jesus.
In	 the	 monasteries,	 in	 the	 temples,	 in	 the	 ashrams,	 another	 world	 exists.	 You
don't	know	the	laws	of	it,	the	rules	of	the	game.	You	can	be	deceived	there	very,
very	easily.	And	pretenders	abound	because	it	is	so	easy.
This	has	been	my	feeling:	two	types	of	people	move	towards	religion.	One	is	the
man	who	has	lived	in	the	world,	lived	it	through	and	through,	and	has	come	to
understand	that	it	is	futile,	useless,	a	wastage	of	life.	It	is	just	like	a	dream,	and
that	 too	 not	 a	 beautiful	 dream,	 but	 a	 nightmare.	This	 is	 one	 type,	 the	 genuine
type,	 the	 authentic,	 who	 has	 lived	 through	 the	 world	 and	 found	 it	 useless,	 a
desert,	with	no	oasis	in	it,	and	has	turned	away.	His	turning	is	total.	He	will	not
look	back.	There	 is	nothing	 to	 look	back	 to.	Buddha	used	 to	ask	his	disciples:
"Have	you	 really	 turned	 completely	or	would	you	 like	 to	 have	 a	 little	 of	 your
mind	always	looking	back,	a	part	of	you	always	looking	back?"	This	is	the	first
type	 who	 is	 really	 genuine,	 who	 has	 lived	 in	 the	 world	 and	 found	 it	 just	 a
frustration.	That's	why	he	has	moved	towards	religion.
Then	there	is	another	type	which	is	completely	opposite.	The	first	type	is	one	per
cent;	 the	 second	 type	 is	 ninety-nine	 per	 cent.	 These	 people	 are	 very	 much
attracted	towards	religion.
This	 type	 is	 those	 people	 who	 couldn't	 succeed	 in	 the	 world,	 who	 couldn't
succeed	in	their	ambitions,	who	could	not	become	important.	They	would	have
liked	 to	 have	 become	 prime	ministers	 and	 presidents,	 but	 they	 couldn't.	 They
were	 simply	 not	made	 that	 strong	 to	 fight	 there.	 They	 are	 people	who	would
have	 liked	 to	 have	 become	 Rockefellers,	 or	 Fords,	 but	 could	 not	 because	 the
competition	 was	 too	 great	 and	 they	 were	 not	 made	 of	 the	 right	 strong	metal.
They	were	lacking,	because	life	is	a	struggle	and	they	were	simply	inferior.	They
didn't	have	that	much	intelligence,	or	that	kind	of	strength	to	fight	through	and	to
fulfil	their	ambitions.	These	people	also	turn	towards	religion.
These	are	the	great	deceivers.	They	will	become	the	problem	for	religion	and	for
people	who	seek	religion.	They	will	be	deceivers	all	around	the	temple;	they	will
make	the	temple	a	trade-house	because	their	desires	are	still	there	lurking.	They
have	turned	to	religion	as	politicians	-	of	course,	politicians	who	have	failed	in
politics.	You	go	all	over	the	country	-
around	gurus	everywhere	you	will	find	politicians	who	have	failed.	Ex-ministers
will	always	be	found	coming	to	some	guru	-	people	who	wanted	too	much	in	the
world	 and	 couldn't	 get	 it,	 they	 turn	 towards	 religion,	 because	 there	 things	 are
easier.	Competition	is	not	much,	and	you	60
can	pretend,	and	you	can	believe	easily	that	you	are	a	very	superior	being.	And
there	is	no	competition.	You	can	simply	say,	"I	have	become	enlightened",	and
nobody	can	deny	it,	and	nobody	can	disprove	it.	There	simply	exists	no	criterion
to	judge	it,	and	you	can	always	find	foolish	people	to	follow	you.
Even	a	Muktanand	can	get	 followers.	Once	 I	passed	Muktanand's	 ashram,	and
just	 to	 see	 what	 was	 happening	 there,	 I	 went	 in.	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 such	 an
ordinary	 man	 becoming	 a	 great	 religious	 leader	 of	 people.	 No	 potential,	 no
achievement,	 no	 insight	 -	 if	 you	 saw	him	walking	 in	 the	 street	 you	would	not
recognize	that	there	is	something	there.	Just	plain	ordinary	-	and	not	ordinary	in
the	sense	of	Zen	-	just	plain	ordinary.	But	even	he	can	find	followers.
In	the	world,	millions	of	fools	exist;	and	they	are	always	ready	to	believe,	always
ready,	ready	to	fall	into	the	trap	of	anybody.	In	fact,	sometimes	there	is	no	trap	at
all,	but	they	fall,	because	they	would	like	to	believe	that	something	is	happening.
Man	is	so	imaginative,	and,	because	of	his	imagination,	he	starts	believing	that
something	is	happening.	These	people	know	at	least	this	much	about	what	to	do.
Somebody	comes	to	me	and	says:	"I	have	a	certain	pain	in	my	backbone."	Now,
if	I	say	that	this	is	simply	a	pain,	go	to	a	doctor,	he	simply	turns	away	from	me
and	never	comes	back,	because	he	had	not	come	for	 that.	He	had	come	for	an
approval.	If	I	say:	"Yes	your	kundalini	is	rising",	he	will	be	happy.	These	fools
will	always	find	their	Muktanands.
And	not	 very	 ordinary	 people,	 sometimes	 very	 intelligent	 people	 come.	 Just	 a
few	days	before,	a	film	producer	came	to	me	-	a	well-known	name	all	over	India.
His	blood	sugar	has	gone	beyond	all	ordinary	limits;	it	has	reached	five	hundred.
He	should	really	be	dead	by	now.
He	 is	 a	 drunkard,	 and	 a	 great	 food	 eater,	 obsessed	 with	 eating,	 but	 still	 he
continues	and	continues	eating	sweets	and	drinking	alcohol.	Now,	because	of	so
much	 blood	 sugar,	 his	 whole	 body	 is	 trembling.	 It	 has	 to,	 because	 his	 whole
body	is	 ill,	every	fibre	of	 it	 is	 ill,	and	there	is	a	deep	trembling	inside.	He	was
sitting	there	when	I	was	talking	to	others,	and	he	was	trembling.	Then	he	asked
me:	"What	do	you	think?	What	is	it	-	is	it	kundalini	rising?"
Now	 what	 to	 do	 with	 these	 people?	 These	 are	 the	 victims,	 and	 these	 are
participants	in	creating	deceivers;	they	are	also	half	responsible.	And	I	know	this
man	also	belongs	to	Muktanand's	group.
Now	the	problem	arises	for	me	-	what	to	do?	If	I	say:	"Yes.	It	is	Kundalini	rising
and	 this	 is	 your	 last	 life.	 Soon,	within	 days,	 you	will	 be	 enlightened,"	 he	will
bow	down,	touch	my	feet	and	will	go	away	very	happy.	He	will	be	happy,	I	will
be	happy,	and	everything	is	settled.
And	he	will	go	around	talking	about	me,	that	this	is	the	right,	the	greatest	master
that	he	has	come	to	know.	It	is	good	business.	Simple.	But	then	I	am	deceiving
him,	and	not	only	deceiving.	I	am	killing	him,	I	am	a	murderer,	because	I	know
that	he	is	dying	of	diabetes,	and	the	diabetes	has	gone	beyond	all	limits.	If	I	say,
"This	is	kundalini	and	enlightenment	is	coming,	and	this	is	 like	samadhi,	 that's
why	you	are	trembling;	it	is	God	descending	into	you,"
or,	"You	are	rising	towards	the	Divine,"	or	"The	Divine	is	descending	in	you,"	he
will	be	very	happy,	everybody	is	happy,	 there	 is	no	problem.	He	will	work	for
me	and	until	he	dies	he	will	go	on	talking	about	me.
But	 the	moment	 I	 said:	 "This	 is	nothing	 to	do	with	any	enlightenment.	This	 is
simple	 -	 too	much	 sugar	 in	 the	blood.	Your	whole	body	 is	 feverish.	You	don't
waste	 time,	you	go	 to	 the	doctors	and	 listen	 to	 them,"	 immediately	I	could	see
the	change	in	his	face.	It	changed:	"This	man	is	not	a	master	at	all.	How	can	he
be	 a	 master,	 and	 enlightened,	 when	 he	 cannot	 understand	 such	 simple
phenomenon	that	is	happening	in	me?"
It	actually	happened.	A	man,	very	well-known	in	the	West,	Franklin	Jones,	was	a
disciple	 of	 Muktanand	 -	 and	 then	 his	 kundalini	 arose.	 Muktanand	 approved:
"You	 have	 become	 a	 SIDDHA."	 Not	 only	 did	 he	 approve,	 he	 gave	 a	 written
certificate.	I	simply	cannot	believe	61
what	 foolishnesses	 go	 on	 -	 a	 certificate	 that	 you	 have	 become	 a	 SIDDHA,
enlightened!	So	of	course	the	man	became	a	SIDDHA	and	he	changed	his	name.
He	was	Franklin	Jones,	now	he	is	Bubba	Free	John,	and	he	has	many	followers
of	his	own.
Now	 the	 trouble	 came	 in,	 because	 he	 had	 become	 more	 enlightened	 than
Muktanand	ever	 expected,	 and	he	had	become	a	guru	 in	his	own	 right.	No	he
wanted	 -	 he	 came	 again	 just	 a	 few	 months	 ago	 -	 now	 he	 wanted	 another
certificate.	Now	he	wanted	to	show:	"There	is	no	need	for	me	to	belong	to	any
master,	 because	 now	 I	 am	 a	 master	 myself,	 and	 my	 karmas	 with	 you,	 with
Muktanand,	are	fulfilled.	So,	give	me	a	certificate	that	I	am	absolutely	free."
Now	Muktanand	hesitated	-	this	was	going	too	far.	So	he	denied;	he	would	not
give	another	certificate.	But	the	thing	had	already	gone	too	far.	The	man	returned
home,	wrote	a	book,	and	said:	"Of	course	Muktanand	helped	me	a	little	on	my
way,	but	he	is	not	an	enlightened	man	and	I	dissolve	all	my	links	with	him.	He	is
an	ordinary	man."
This	 is	 how	 things	 go.	 He	 was	 an	 enlightened	 man	 because	 he	 gave	 the
certificate;	he	was	the	greatest	master	in	the	world.	Now	he	is	no	longer.	He	is	an
ordinary	man	-	"I	dissolve	all	my	links	with	him."
These	 things	go	on.	Remember	 this,	because	you	can	become	a	part	 in	 such	a
game	yourself.	Never	believe	 in	yourself	 too	much.	Remain	aware.	When	you
come	 to	 me	 I	 will	 say	 exactly	 what	 is	 happening.	Many	 have	 gone	 from	me
because	I	will	not	support	their	egos	and	I	will	not	fulfill	their	wishes,	and	I	will
not	say	what	they	want	me	to	say.	And	once	they	go	away,	they	are	against	me,
they	have	to	be.	These	are	the	traps.	Not	only	do	the	deceivers	create	them,	you
help	to	create	them.	Don't	be	a	participant	in	any	deception,	be	very,	very	alert.
This	monk,	who	was	a	fraud	and	had	no	genuine	understanding,	called	himself
"The	Master	of	Silence".	That's	very	beautiful,	 because	 if	 you	utter	 something
you	can	be	caught.	It	is	simply	beautiful	to	remain	silent;	then	nobody	can	catch
you.	They	say	it	is	good	for	two	kinds	of	persons	to	be	silent:	the	very,	very	wise
have	 to	 be	 silent,	 because	what	 they	 know	 cannot	 be	 said;	 and	 the	 very,	 very
foolish,	because	if	they	are	not	silent,	they	will	be	caught.
So	this	man,	who	was	a	fraud,	used	to	call	himself	"The	Master	of	Silence".	He
would	 not	 utter	 a	 single	 word.	 But	 if	 you	 don't	 utter	 a	 word	 you	 cannot	 sell
anything.	If	a	salesman	is	silent,	how	will	he	sell	things?	So	he	devised	a	plan.
TO	 SELL	HIS	 HUMBUG	 ZEN	HE	 HAD	 TWO	 ELOQUENT	ATTENDANT
MONKS	TO
ANSWER	 QUESTIONS	 FOR	 HIM	 -	 BUT,	 AS	 IF	 TO	 SHOW	 HIS
INSCRUTABLE	SILENT
ZEN,	HE	HIMSELF	NEVER	UTTERED	A	WORD.
ONE	 DAY,	 DURING	 THE	 ABSENCE	 OF	 HIS	 TWO	 ATTENDANTS,	 A
PILGRIM	CAME
TO	HIM	AND	ASKED:	"MASTER,	WHAT	IS	THE	BUDDHA?"
This	is	one	of	the	Zen	questions.	It	means:	what	is	DHARMA,	what	is	religion?
It	means:	what	is	awareness?	It	means:	what	is	an	awakened	being?	It	is	one	of
the	 most	 fundamental	 questions	 in	 Zen	 -	 What	 is	 the	 Buddha?	 What	 is	 that
utterly	enlightened	state	of	being	that	we	call	Buddha?
NOT
KNOWING
WHAT
TO
DO,
OR
HOW
TO
ANSWER,
HE
LOOKED
DESPERATELY	 AROUND	 IN	 ALL	 DIRECTIONS	 FOR	 HIS	 MISSING
MOUTHPIECES.
THE	 PILGRIM,	 APPARENTLY	 PLEASED	 AND	 SATISFIED,	 THANKED
THE	MASTER
AND	SET	OUT	AGAIN	ON	HIS	JOURNEY.
ON	THE	ROAD	THE	PILGRIM	MET	THE	TWO	ATTENDANT	MONKS	ON
THEIR
WAY	HOME.	HE	BEGAN	TELLING	THEM	ENTHUSIASTICALLY	WHAT
AN
ENLIGHTENED	BEING	THIS	MASTER	OF	SILENCE	IS.
62
He	projected,	of	course.	He	must	have	heard	that	those	who	know	remain	silent.
He	must	have	read	it	in	the	scriptures	where	it	is	said	millions	of	times	that	one
who	knows,	never	says;	one	who	says,	has	not	known	yet.
But	these	are	very,	very	paradoxical	things.	Lao	Tzu	says	in	the	very	beginning
of	"Tao	Te	Ching",	that	truth	cannot	be	uttered,	and	that	which	can	be	uttered	is
not	true.	But	Lao	Tzu	uttered	this	-	so	what	to	think	about	it?	Is	it	true,	or	not?	It
is	the	uttered	word,	it	has	been	said.	Now	you	will	be	in	very	deep	trouble,	Lao
Tzu	says	that	truth	cannot	be	said,	but	this	much	he	is	saying.	So	is	this	saying
true	or	not?	If	it	 is	not	true	that	will	mean	that	truth	can	be	uttered;	if	it	 is	true
then	even	this	cannot	be	uttered.
Religion	 is	 full	of	paradoxes	and	 that's	 the	problem.	This	man	must	have	 read
many	Zen	masters	saying	that	truth	cannot	be	said.	This	is	right:	truth	cannot	be
said.	But	this	much	can	be	said,	many	things	can	be	said,	millions	of	things	can
be	said	which	will	be	helpful	to	find	that	which	cannot	be	said.	Many	things	can
be	 indicated,	 and	 that	which	 cannot	 be	 said	 can	 at	 least	 be	 shown.	The	whole
meaning	is	only	this:	that	the	truth	is	greater	than	the	words.	It	is	greater	than	the
silence	also.	Truth	 is	so	vast	 that	 it	cannot	be	forced	 into	 the	capsule	of	words
and	 it	 cannot	 be	 forced	 into	 silence	 either.	 In	 fact,	 silence	 exists	 in	 truth,	 and
words	also	exist	in	truth.	Truth	is	the	very	sky,	the	very	space.
This	master	pulled	a	trick.	Thinking	that	truth	cannot	be	said,	the	best	way	is	to
keep	silent
-	but	then	no	one	will	be	attracted	to	you.	So	he	had	two	attendants	to	talk	about
him	-
mouthpieces.	That	is	a	good	arrangement,	because	if	they	say	something	wrong,
he	is	not	involved,	if	they	say	something	right	-	so	far,	so	good.	But	one	day	he
was	caught.	You	can	deceive	people	for	the	time-being,	but	you	cannot	deceive
people	for	ever.	Some	day,	somewhere,	you	will	be	caught.	You	cannot	make	an
arrangement	of	lies	which	can	go	on	for	ever.	The	truth	will	erupt.	Ninety-nine
per	cent	of	 the	 time	you	may	succeed,	but	one	per	cent	you	will	 fail.	And	that
one	 per	 cent	will	 bring	 the	whole	 success	 to	 failure.	 It	will	 destroy	 the	whole
thing.
One	 day	 a	 pilgrim	 came	 and	 asked:	 "What	 is	 the	 Buddha?"	 The	 master
desperately	 looked	 this	 way	 and	 that	 in	 all	 directions	 for	 his	 missing
mouthpieces.	This	was	the	truth;	he	had	no	answer	to	give.	And	by	looking	in	all
directions,	he	was	looking	for	something	else	-	not	for	truth,	not	for	Buddha,	not
to	indicate	anything	by	a	gesture.	But	the	pilgrim	projected.	By	his	looking	in	all
directions,	the	pilgrim	thought	that	he	was	really	a	Zen	master,	a	great	master.
He	 would	 not	 utter	 words,	 but	 he	 was	 showing	 that	 you	 can	 look	 in	 every
dimension,	 in	 every	 direction,	 and	 you	 will	 not	 find	 Buddha	 there,	 because
Buddha	is	inside.	You	can	seek	and	search	and	you	will	not	find,	because	he	is	in
the	seeker	himself.	This	was	the	projection,	and	this	is	what	you	can	do	easily.
This	 is	 how	people	 are	 deceived	 -	 they	 have	 their	 own	minds	 and	 beliefs	 and
concepts	and	theories,	and	they	project.
Many	times	it	has	happened	to	me.	People	project.	A	man	came.	He	came	with	a
bag.	I	didn't	know	what	he	had	in	the	bag.	He	touched	my	feet	and	the	bag	was
in	his	hand,	so	the	bag	also	touched	my	feet.	I	thought	it	was	just	accidental.	But
the	man	had	a	bottle	with	water	in	it	inside	the	bag,	and	it	was	not	accidental.	He
wanted	my	 feet	 to	 touch	 the	bottle,	 and	 I	was	 completely	unaware	of	what	 he
was	doing.	Then,	after	a	few	days,	he	came	and	he	thanked	me,	and	he	was	very,
very	grateful.	He	 said:	 "You	cured	my	 illness."	 I	 asked:	 "What	 illness?	 I	 don't
know	your	illness."	He	said:	"I	had	a	severe	headache	for	many	years,	a	sort	of
migraine,	 and	 the	water	 I	 brought	 last	 time	 I	 came,	 you	 touched	 it	 with	 your
feet."	I	said:	"I	never	touched	it	with	my	feet."	He	said:	"Whatsoever	is	the	case,
you	 touched	 the	 bottle	 and	 I	 drank	 it	 for	 a	 few	 days	 and	 the	 headache	 is
completely	gone."
Now	what	to	do?	If	I	say	that	this	is	simply	his	own	magic,	he	has	done	it,	it	is
an	auto-hypnosis,	 then	 there	 is	a	possibility	 that	 the	headache	may	come	back;
because	you	cannot	63
believe	 in	 yourself,	 you	 always	 believe	 somebody.	 You	 cannot	 believe	 in
yourself	 -	 but	 if	 you	 cannot	 believe	 in	 yourself,	 how	 can	 you	 believe	 in
anybody?	 But	 this	 goes	 on.	 You	 feel	 impotent	 inside:	 you	 cannot	 believe	 in
yourself.	You	seek	somebody,	and	through	somebody's	belief,	your	own	magic,
your	own	auto-hypnosis	starts	working.	This	man	was	cured.	In	 the	first	place,
his	 headache	 must	 have	 been	 created	 by	 himself	 -	 because	 a	 real	 headache
cannot	be	cured	in	such	a	way,	only	a	false	headache,	a	psychological	one	-	 in
the	first	place	the	headache	was	a	hypnosis;	in	the	second	place,	he	had	cured	it.
But	 this	man	 is	dangerous,	because	 if	 you	can	create	 a	headache	you	can	also
create	cancer.	Projecting	things...
Once	it	happened	that	a	man	stayed	with	me	and	we	were	sleeping	in	the	same
room.	 In	 the	night	 I	must	 have	gone	 to	 the	 toilet	 and	he	must	 have	been	very
sleepy,	half	awake,	half	asleep.	So	he	looked	at	my	bed	and	I	was	not	there.	Then
he	must	have	 fallen	asleep	 for	a	 few	seconds.	When	 I	came	back	and	he	must
have	looked	again	-	I	was	there!	So	he	thought	that	for	those	few	seconds	I	had
disappeared.	He	jumped	out	of	the	bed,	caught	my	legs	and	said:
"Just	 tell	me	-	you	have	done	 the	miracle	-	but	 tell	me	how	you	did	 it?	Now	I
will	never	leave	you.	You	are	the	right	master!"	So	I	told	him:	"It	is	okay.	You
will	not	leave	me;	but	at	least	give	me	a	chance	also	to	say	whether	I	would	like
you	to	be	with	me	always,	or	not	-	because	you	are	simply	a	fool."	But	the	man
said:	"No,	you	don't	try	to	escape.	I	am	not	going	to	leave	you.	I	have	seen	the
miracle:	for	this	I	was	waiting.	I	will	choose	the	master	who	can	disappear.	You
have	done	it.	I	have	seen	it	with	my	own	eyes!"
Mind	 is	 a	very	 subtle	game.	You	can	hear	 things	 I	 am	not	 saying;	you	can	go
through	things	I	am	not	doing;	you	can	deceive	yourself.	So	it	is	not	necessary
that	 somebody	 should	 deceive	 you.	You	 can	 deceive	 yourself.	You	 are	 a	 self-
deceiver.
The	man,	 seeing	 the	 silent	master	 looking	desperately	 all	 around,	 thought	 that
this	 was	 the	 right	 man,	 a	 great	 enlightened	 man,	 indicating	 that	 the	 Buddha
cannot	be	found	anywhere.	So,	satisfied,	well	pleased,	he	thanked	the	master	and
set	out	again	on	his	journey.
ON	 THE	 ROAD	 THE	 PILGRIM	 MET	 THE	 ATTENDANT	 MONKS	 ON
THEIR	WAY
HOME.
HE
BEGAN
TELLING
THEM
ENTHUSIASTICALLY
WHAT
AN
ENLIGHTENED	BEING	THIS	MASTER	OF	SILENCE	IS.
HE	 SAID:	 "I	 ASKED	HIM	WHAT	 BUDDHA	 IS	 AND	HE	 IMMEDIATELY
TURNED	HIS
FACE	 TO	 THE	 EAST	 AND	 TO	 THE	 WEST,	 IMPLYING	 THAT	 HUMAN
BEINGS	ARE
ALWAYS	LOOKING	FOR	BUDDHA	HERE	AND	THERE,	BUT	ACTUALLY,
BUDDHA	 IS	 NOT	 TO	 BE	 FOUND	 IN	 ANY	 SUCH	 DIRECTIONS.	 OH,
WHAT	AN	ENLIGHTENED
MASTER	HE	IS,	AND	HOW	PROFOUND	HIS	TEACHING!"
WHEN	 THE	 ATTENDANT	 MONKS	 RETURNED,	 THE	 MASTER	 OF
SILENCE
SCOLDED	THEM	THUS:	WHERE	HAVE	YOU	BEEN	ALL	THIS	TIME?	A
WHILE	AGO
I	 WAS	 EMBARRASSED	 TO	 DEATH	 AND	 ALMOST	 RUINED	 BY	 AN
INQUISITIVE
PILGRIM.
Remember	this	story	well,	because	it	can	be	your	story	also	on	the	path.	And	this
should	 not	 be	 so	 -	 this	 story	 should	 not	 become	your	 story.	 I	 am	 telling	 these
stories	and	talking	about	them	to	make	you	aware	of	certain	things.	I	love	these
stories,	 because	 they	 indicate	 so	 simply	 and	 so	 directly	 and	 so	 immediately
certain	 phenomena	which	 are	 possible	 for	 every	 pilgrim	 to	meet	 on	 the	 path.
How	to	avoid	them	so	that	you	are	not	deceived?	Nothing	can	be	done	about	the
deceivers.	What	can	you	do?	They	are	 there	and	 the	whole	allows	 them	also	 -
that	 far	 it	 is	 good.	 You	 cannot	 do	 anything	 about	 the	 deceivers,	 so	 don't	 be
worried,	let	them	be	themselves.	But	you	can	do	something	about	yourself,	that
is	the	point.
I	don't	want	you	 to	become	 revolutionaries	 and	go	and	hunt	babas.	No.	Leave
them	 to	 themselves.	 I'm	 telling	 you,	 not	 to	 become	 revolutionaries,	 but	 to
become	more	aware	so	that	64
such	 things	 don't	 happen	 to	 you,	 that's	 all.	 Babas	 will	 continue,	 always	 and
always,	because	fools	are	there,	and	they	need	them;	they	fulfil	a	particular	need.
So	what	 is	 to	be	done?	You	can	do	only	one	 thing.	You	drop	 that	need	within
you.	Don't	 project.	Don't	 allow	 beliefs	 to	 settle	 in	 your	mind.	Clean	 the	mind
every	day,	as	one	cleans	 the	house;	dust	gathers	 the	whole	day,	 in	 the	evening
you	clean	it,	and	again	in	the	morning.	In	the	night	you	have	done	nothing,	but
even	in	 the	night	dust	settles,	so	 in	 the	morning	you	clean	again.	Continuously
clean	 your	mind	 of	 beliefs,	 concepts,	 theories,	 ideas,	 ideologies,	 philosophies,
doctrines,	scriptures.	You	simply	clean	your	mind	of	verbal	chattering	and	you
try	to	look	at	reality	without	any	mind	inside.	Just	look,	a	pure	look,	stare	naked.
Tilopa	says:
"Stare	naked	and	MAHAMUDRA	will	be	yours."	You	will	attain	to	the	highest
enlightenment	possible	 to	human	consciousness.	Stare	naked.	Let	your	eyes	be
clean	of	all	concepts.	Then	the	reality	will	be	revealed	to	you,	because	you	will
not	distort	it	and	you	will	not	project	it	and	you	will	not	put	anything	into	it.
What	 did	 this	 pilgrim	 do?	He	 had	 some	 ideas	 and	 he	 put	 these	 ideas	 into	 the
gesture	of	the	master	who	was	looking	all	around	for	his	mouthpieces.	Into	that
situation	he	put	his	own	ideas.	He	must	have	read	somewhere	 that	 the	Buddha
cannot	be	found	in	any	direction.	That	was	projected.
Don't	 be	 a	 projector,	 don't	 be	 an	 active	 mind.	 Let	 your	 mind	 be	 completely
passive,	receptive.	Don't	bring	anything	from	the	mind	into	the	reality,	otherwise
you	will	distort	it.
Simply	 allow	 the	 reality	 to	 enter	 the	 mind	 and	 you	 be	 a	 passive	 watcher,	 a
passive	witness.
Then,	whatsoever	the	case	is,	you	will	know.	Then	that	which	is	will	be	revealed
to	 you,	 and	 only	 that	 can	 lead	 you	 to	 maturity,	 to	 growth,	 and	 to	 the	 final
flowering.
Drop	the	mind	if	you	want	to	know	the	real.	Put	aside	the	mind	if	you	want	to
penetrate	into	the	truth.	The	truth	is	always	there,	but	your	mind	is	standing	just
in-between.	Put	 aside	 the	mind,	make	a	window	and	 look,	 and	everything,	 the
very	mystery	of	 life,	becomes	unveiled	before	you.	With	 the	mind	nobody	has
ever	been	able	to	know	the	truth.	Without	the	mind	anybody	can	know	the	truth,
because	the	mind	is	the	only	barrier.	The	mind	must	cease	for	the	truth	to	be.
And	 you	 have	 nothing	 else	 but	mind,	 so	 it	 is	 difficult,	 very	 difficult	 to	 put	 it
aside	-
arduous,	but	it	happens	if	you	go	on	trying.	In	the	beginning	only	a	few	seconds
of	glimpses	will	 be	 there.	But	 even	 those	will	 give	you	a	new	dimension.	For
seconds	mind	 stops,	 and	 suddenly,	 as	 if	 there	 is	 lightning,	 the	whole	world	 of
mind	 disappears	 and	 the	 world	 of	 the	 real	 is	 revealed.	 These	 lightnings	 will
happen	to	you,	and	then,	by	and	by,	you	will	get	settled	into	the	state	of	no-mind.
Then	there	is	no	need	for	lightning,	the	sun	has	arisen.	Now	it	is	the	morning,	all
darkness	disappears.
A	 religious	 person	 is	 a	 person	 of	 no	mind,	 no	 belief.	 A	 religious	 person	 is	 a
person	of	trust.
65
___________________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER	6	-	Awakening
26	February	1975	a.m.	in	Buddha	Hall
___________________________________________________________________________
DURING	 THREE	 YEARS	 OF	 SEVERE	 TRAINING	 UNDER	 THE	 GREAT
MASTER
GIZAN,	KOSHU	WAS	UNABLE	TO	GAIN	SATORI.
AT	 THE	 BEGINNING	 OF	 A	 SPECIAL	 SEVEN-DAY	 SESSION	 OF
DISCIPLINE,	HE
THOUGHT	 HIS	 CHANCE	 HAD	 FINALLY	 COME.	 HE	 CLIMBED	 THE
TOWER	OF	THE
TEMPLE	 GATE,	 AND	 GOING	 UP	 TO	 THE	 ARHAT	 IMAGES	 HE	 MADE
THIS	VOW:
"EITHER	 I	 REALIZE	 MY	 DREAMS	 UP	 HERE,	 OR	 THEY'LL	 FIND	 MY
DEAD	BODY
AT	THE	FOOT	OF	THIS	TOWER."
HE	 WENT	 WITHOUT	 FOOD	 OR	 SLEEP,	 GIVING	 HIMSELF	 UP	 TO
CONSTANT
ZAZEN,	OFTEN	CRYING	OUT	THINGS	LIKE:	"WHAT	WAS	MY	KARMA
THAT	IN
SPITE	OF	ALL	THESE	EFFORTS	I	CAN'T	GRASP	THE	WAY?"
AT	 LAST	 HE	 ADMITTED	 FAILURE,	 AND,	 DETERMINED	 TO	 END	 IT
ALL,	HE	WENT
TO	THE	RAILING	AND	SLOWLY	LIFTED	HIS	LEG	OVER	 IT.	AT	THAT
VERY
INSTANT	HE	HAD	AN	AWAKENING.
OVERJOYED,	 HE	 RUSHED	 DOWN	 THE	 STAIRS	 AND	 THROUGH	 THE
RAIN	TO
GIZAN'S	ROOM.
BEFORE	 HE	 HAD	 A	 CHANCE	 TO	 SPEAK,	 THE	 MASTER	 CRIED:
"BRAVO!	-	YOU'VE
FINALLY	HAD	YOUR	DAY."
Man	 is	 the	 only	 animal	 who	 can	 think	 of,	 try	 to,	 or	 actually	 commit	 suicide.
Suicide	is	very	special.	It	is	human.
Animals	live,	they	die,	but	they	cannot	commit	suicide.	They	live,	but	there	are
not	any	problems,	life	doesn't	create	any	"angst",	anguish.	Life	is	not	an	anxiety
for	them	-	they	simply	live	it;	and	then,	as	simply	as	they	live,	they	simply	die.
Animals	don't	have	any	death	consciousness.	 In	 fact,	 they	are	neither	aware	of
life,	nor	of	death,	so	the	question	of	suicide	doesn't	arise.	They	are	not	conscious
at	all;	they	live	in	the	deepest	sleep	of	the	unconscious.
Only	 man	 can	 commit	 suicide.	 That	 means	 that	 only	 man	 can	 do	 something
about	life	or	death;	it	means	that	only	man	can	stand	against	life.	This	possibility
is	 there	 because	 man	 is	 conscious.	 But	 remember,	 the	 problems	 of	 life,	 the
anxiety,	the	tension,	the	anguish,	or	the	final	decision	to	commit	suicide,	do	not
come	out	of	consciousness	-	they	come	out	of	a	fragmentary	consciousness.
This	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 deeply.	A	Buddha	 is	 also	 conscious,	 but	 he	 cannot
commit	suicide,	cannot	even	think	about	it.	Suicide	doesn't	exist	for	a	Buddha,
but	 he	 is	 also	 conscious.	 Why?	 Animals	 are	 unconscious	 totally;	 Buddha	 is
conscious	 totally.	With	 total	 consciousness	 there	 is	 no	 problem,	 or,	 with	 total
unconsciousness	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 In	 fact,	 to	 be	 total	 in	 any	 way	 is	 to	 be
beyond	problems.
A	man	 is	 fragmentarily	 conscious:	 a	 part	 of	 him	 has	 become	 conscious.	 That
creates	 the	 whole	 problem.	 The	 remaining,	 the	 greater	 part,	 remains
unconscious.	Man	has	become	two.
One	part	is	conscious,	the	remaining	whole	is	unconscious.	A	discontinuity	has
happened	in	man.	He	is	not	one	whole.	He	is	not	one	piece.	He	is	double.	The
duality	has	come	in.	He	is	just	like	an	iceberg,	floating	in	the	ocean:	one-tenth	is
out	of	the	water,	nine-tenths	is	hidden	underneath.	The	same	is	the	proportion	of
human	 consciousness	 and	 unconsciousness:	 one-tenth	 of	 consciousness	 has
become	conscious,	nine-tenths	of	consciousness	is	still	in	the	66
unconscious.	 Just	 the	 top	 layer	 is	 conscious,	 and	 the	 whole	 being	 remains
underneath	in	deep	darkness.
Of	 course	 there	 are	 going	 to	 be	problems,	 because	 a	 conflict	 has	 arisen	 in	 the
being.	You	have	become	two;	and	the	conscious	part	is	so	small	that	it	is	almost
impotent.	 It	 can	 talk,	 it	 is	 very	 articulate;	 it	 can	 think;	 but	 when	 the	moment
comes	 to	 do	 something,	 it	 is	 the	 unconscious	 which	 is	 needed	 because	 the
unconscious	has	the	energy	to	do	it.	You	can	decide	that	you	will	not	be	angry
again,	 but	 this	 decision	 comes	 from	 the	 impotent	 part	 of	 the	 mind,	 that	 part
which	is	conscious;	which	can	see	that	anger	is	futile,	harmful,	poisonous;	which
can	see	the	whole	situation,	and	decide.	But	the	decision	has	no	power	behind	it,
because	 all	 power	 belongs	 to	 the	 whole	 which	 is	 still	 unconscious.	 The
conscious	 part	 decides,	 "I	 will	 not	 be	 angry	 again",	 and	 it	 is	 not	 -	 until	 the
situation	arises.	When	the	situation	arises,	the	conscious	is	pushed	aside,	and	the
unconscious	surfaces.	It	is	vital,	it	is	forceful,	it	has	energy,	and	suddenly	you	are
overpowered.	The	conscious	may	try	a	little	while,	but	it	is	useless	-
against	the	tide	it	is	nothing.	When	the	unconscious	becomes	a	tide	and	comes	to
take	over	a	situation,	you	are	possessed,	you	are	no	more	yourself	as	you	know
yourself	to	be,	your	ego	is	thrown	off-gear.
All	 the	 decisions	 taken	 by	 your	 conscious	 are	 simply	 insignificant:	 it	 is	 the
unconscious	 which	 does	 things.	 Again,	 when	 the	 situation	 has	 gone,	 the
unconscious	 recedes	 and	 the	 conscious	 comes	 back	 onto	 the	 throne.	 The
conscious	comes	on	the	throne	only	when	the	unconscious	is	not	there.
It	is	like	a	servant.	When	the	emperor	is	not	there	the	servant	sits	on	the	throne
and	orders.
Of	course,	nobody	is	there	to	listen	to	him,	he	is	alone.	When	the	emperor	comes
the	servant	simply	has	to	leave	the	throne	and	listen	to	the	emperor.	The	bigger
part	of	you	always	remains	the	emperor,	the	lesser	part	remains	like	a	servant.
Then	much	conflict	arises,	because	the	part	that	decides	cannot	act,	and	the	part
that	acts	cannot	decide.	The	part	that	sees	things	can	think	about	them,	but	has
no	energy;	and	the	part	that	cannot	see,	is	completely	blind,	has	all	the	energy.
In	 animals	 there	 are	 not	 two	 parts,	 only	 the	 unconscious	 exists,	 and	 with	 no
thinking,	 it	 acts.	 There	 is	 no	 problem,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 inner	 conflict.	 In	 a
Buddha,	 also,	 the	 same	 happens	 from	 the	 other	 end:	 the	 whole	 has	 become
conscious.	 This	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 enlightenment,	 satori,	 samadhi.	 You	 have
again	become	one	like	an	animal	-	one	piece.	Now,	whatsoever	Buddha	decides,
automatically	it	happens,	because	there	is	nobody	against	it,	nobody	unaware	of
it.	There	 is	no	other	 in	 the	house.	Buddha	 lives	alone	 in	 the	house,	 so	Buddha
need	not	struggle.	He	sees	a	situation,	he	decides	and	acts.	In	fact,	decision	and
action	are	not	two	in	a	Buddha	-	decision	is	the	act.	He	simply	sees	that	anger	is
useless,	 and	 anger	 disappears.	 There	 is	 no	 effort	 to	 impose	 on	 it,	 force	 it.	 A
Buddha	remains	loose	and	natural.
He	can	afford	to.	You	cannot	afford	to	be	loose	and	natural,	because	the	moment
you	 are	 loose	 and	 natural	 the	 unconscious	 comes	 in.	 You	 have	 to	 go	 on
controlling	yourself,	and	the	more	you	control,	the	more	artificial	you	become.
A	civilized	human	being	is	a	plastic	flower.	He	has	no	vitality,	no	energy	-	and
when	there	 is	no	energy,	 there	 is	no	delight.	One	of	 the	greatest	English	poets,
William	 Blake,	 has	 a	 beautiful	 line	 about	 it,	 a	 very	 deep	 insight.	 He	 says:
"Energy	is	delight."	There	is	no	other	delight.	The	very	vitality,	the	very	energy
of	being,	is	delight,	is	bliss.	Only	impotence	is	misery,	weakness	is	misery.	And
duality	creates	impotence.
And	whatsoever	small	energy	is	left	after	you	are	divided	in	two,	that	too	goes	as
wastage	in	the	inner	conflict.	You	are	continuously	fighting	inside,	continuously
suppressing	 something,	 continuously	 trying	 to	 force	 something	 else.	 Anger
comes,	and	you	would	like	to	be	non-angry;	greed	comes,	and	you	would	like	to
be	 greed-less;	 possession	 comes,	 and	 you	 would	 like	 to	 be	 non-possessive;
violence	comes,	and	you	would	like	to	be	non-violent;	there	67
is	cruelty,	and	you	go	on	imposing	compassion;	there	is	much	turmoil,	and	you
would	 like	 to	 be	 serene	 and	 silent;	 something	 goes	 on	 inside,	 and	 you	 go	 on
imposing	something	else	on	it,	continuous	fight	dissipates	the	remaining	energy.
And	this	is	going	to	be	so,	unless	you	become	one	again.
There	are	two	ways	to	become	one:	either	fall	back	to	the	animal,	or	rise	up	to
the	Buddha.
Of	course,	falling	back	is	easier.	Effort	will	not	be	needed,	you	can	simply	slip
back.	It	is	downhill,	no	effort,	and	going	up	is	difficult.	Hence	millions	of	people
choose	 the	downhill	way.	What	 is	 the	downhill	way	as	 far	as	consciousness	 is
concerned?	Drugs,	alcohol,	sex,	are	the	downhill	way.
In	a	deep	sexual	act	you	again	become	an	animal,	you	are	no	more	human.	The
gap	is	bridged.	In	a	deep	sexual	orgasm,	the	duality	disappears;	the	controller	is
no	more	 there.	 In	a	deep	 sexual	 act,	your	whole	 starts	 functioning	as	a	whole.
Mind	is	no	longer	there,	ego	is	no	longer	there,	the	controller	and	the	control	are
no	longer	there,	because	the	sexual	act	is	non-voluntary.	Your	will	is	not	needed,
your	 will	 is	 not	 required.	 You	 are	 no	 more	 a	 will,	 the	 will	 is	 surrendered.
Suddenly	you	are	back	to	the	world,	the	animal	world,	the	natural	world;	again
you	have	entered	into	the	Garden	of	Eden,	again	you	are	Adam	or	Eve	-	no	more
a	civilized	human	being.
That's	why	all	societies	condemn	sex.	They	are	afraid	of	it.	It	is	a	back	door	to
the	Garden	of	Eden.	All	civilizations	are	afraid	of	sex.	The	fear	comes,	because
once	you	know	an	uncontrolled	existence	then	you	would	not	like	control	at	all.
You	can	become	a	rebel,	you	can	throw	all	the	rules	and	regulations	to	the	winds,
you	can	throw	Confucius	to	the	dust.
Again	 you	 can	 become	 an	 animal;	 and	 civilization	 is	 afraid	 of	 it.	 So,	 sex	 is
allowed,	because	 if	 it	 is	not	allowed	then	too	it	will	create	 trouble.	 It	 is	such	a
deep-rooted	 instinct	 in	 the	 very	 biology,	 in	 the	 very	 physiology	 of	 you,	 in	 the
very	deeper	chemistry,	that	if	it	is	not	allowed,	it	will	create	perversion,	you	may
go	mad.	So	society	allows	it	in	mild,	homeopathic	doses.	That	is	the	meaning	of
marriage	-	marriage	is	a	mild,	homeopathic	dose	controlled	in	a	certain	way.
You	 are	 allowed	 a	 little	 window	 out	 of	 society,	 but	 society	 still	 manages	 the
outer	control.
Marriage	 is	 love	 plus	 law	 -	 that	 "plus	 law"	 is	 the	 control	 around	 it.	 If	 love	 is
allowed	 without	 any	 law,	 the	 fear	 is	 that	 man	 will	 fall	 again	 into	 an	 animal
world.
And	the	fear	seems	to	be	true;	the	fear	has	meaning.	Man	can	fall	through	love,
because	man	can	rise	through	love.	Man	can	fall	through	it	because	the	ladder	is
always	 the	 same	 whether	 you	 go	 up	 or	 you	 go	 down.	 Love	 can	 rise	 to	 such
heights	that	Jesus	can	say:	"Love	is	God."	And	love	can	fall	to	such	depths	that
society	 is	 constantly	 on	watch,	 the	police	 are	 always	 around,	 the	magistrate	 is
sitting	there.
Love	is	not	a	freedom.	Why,	in	love,	can	man	fall	so	deep?	Because	in	love	the
control	 is	 lost,	 the	 chasm	 is	 bridged,	 you	 become	 one	 piece	 again	 -	 but	 you
regress	to	the	animal	world.
Love	 can	 also	 lead	 you	 to	 the	 Divine,	 but	 then	 love	 has	 to	 be	 very,	 very
meditative.	Then	love	has	to	be	"love	plus	meditation".	That	is	what	Tantra	is	-
"Love	plus	meditation".	You	move	into	love,	you	allow	your	whole	being	total
freedom,	but	still,	deep	at	the	center,	you	remain	a	witness.	If	the	witness	is	lost,
you	are	going	downhill;	if	the	witness	remains	there,	then	love,	the	same	ladder,
can	lead	you	to	the	very	ultimate	heaven.
Alcohol...	 all	 societies	 have	 been	 against	 it,	 but	 still,	 they	 have	 to	 allow	 it,
because	they	know	that	without	alcohol	there	would	be	much	chaos.	Alcohol	has
to	 be	 allowed	 in	 mild	 doses,	 legal	 doses;	 legally	 it	 has	 to	 be	 allowed.	Why?
Because	 it	 soothes	 people;	 it	 is	 a	 tranquilizer.	 And	 people	 are	 in	 such	 inner
anguish,	they	need	something	to	soothe	them.
Otherwise	 they	 would	 simply	 go	 berserk.	 They	would	 simply	 go	mad.	 So	 no
society	 can	 afford	 freedom	 about	 alcohol,	 but	 no	 society	 can	 prohibit	 it
completely.	That	is	not	possible.
Either	way	it	will	be	difficult	to	manage.	Alcohol	is	a	need.	It	is	a	need	because
the	tension	is	so	great	inside	that	you	would	go	made	because	of	it.
68
And	then	many	types	of	drugs	have	cropped	up	-	and	it	is	not	for	the	first	time,	it
has	been	always	so.	From	the	soma	of	Rig	Veda	to	LSD	25,	it	has	always	been
so.	Again	and	again	drugs	pop	up.	Again	they	have	to	be	pushed	down,	crushed;
and	society	tries	to	forget	them.
But	again	they	come	back.	There	seems	to	be	a	deep	need.	The	need	is:	a	bridge
is	 needed	 between	 the	 conscious	 and	 unconscious.	 Unless	 a	 man	 becomes
sincerely	 meditative,	 drugs	 will	 be	 needed.	 Unless	 you	 go	 upwards,	 you	 will
have	to	fall	downwards.
You	cannot	 remain	 static.	This	 is	one	of	 the	deeper	 laws	of	 existence:	nobody
can	 remain	 static.	Either	 he	has	 to	 go	up,	 or	 he	has	 to	 fall	 down;	 because	 life
knows	no	rest,	it	knows	only	movement.	Either	you	go	forward,	or	you	will	be
thrown	backward,	but	you	cannot	say	that	you	will	stick	to	your	state	-	you	will
not	go	down	and	you	will	not	go	up.
No,	that	is	not	possible.	If	you	are	not	going	up,	you	are	already	falling	down	-
you	 may	 or	 you	 may	 not	 know	 it.	 Only	 a	 meditative	 society	 can	 be	 free	 of
alcohol	and	drugs,	and	other	chemical	ways	to	bridge	the	gap.
You	 can	bridge	 the	gap	 through	being	more	 alert,	 that's	why	 there	 is	 so	much
emphasis	on	being	alert,	 aware,	witnessing,	watchful.	Why?	Because	 the	more
you	become	alert,	the	more	the	unconscious	becomes	conscious.	That	is	the	only
way.	 If	you	 remain	more	alert,	 if	 you	walk	with	 awareness,	 if	 you	 talk,	 listen,
with	awareness,	if	you	eat,	take	your	bath,	with	awareness,	not	like	a	robot,	not
walking	 in	 sleep	 and	 doing	 things,	 or	 doing	 things	 and	 thinking	 about	 other
things	 -	 that	 too	 is	 a	 sort	of	 sleep	 -	no,	 if	 consciously,	mindfully,	you	do	your
thing,	chunks	of	the	unconscious	are	being	transformed	into	consciousness,	and
by	and	by,	more	and	more	of	your	iceberg	comes	out	of	the	water	of	darkness,
out	of	the	ocean.
When	the	whole	of	you	is	out	of	darkness,	 this	 is	samadhi,	 this	enlightenment;
this	 is	 the	 state	 of	 a	 Buddha,	 or	 an	 ARHAT:	 one	 who	 has	 no	 longer	 any
unconsciousness	 in	 him,	 one	 who	 has	 no	 longer	 any	 dark	 corners	 within	 his
being.	 The	 whole	 house	 is	 lighted.	 Now,	 you	 have	 attained	 to	 a	 unity	 -	 on	 a
higher	 plane.	 So	 a	Buddha	 is	 pure	 like	 an	 animal,	 simple	 like	 an	 animal.	 The
animal	 has	 its	 innocence	because	 of	 ignorance,	 and	Buddha	has	 his	 innocence
because	of	his	enlightened	awareness.	The	cause	has	changed.
This	is	the	first	thing,	before	we	enter	this	story.
The	second	thing:	a	man	comes	to	a	point	where	he	starts	feeling	that	suicide	is
the	only	way	to	get	out	of	this	whole	mess.	This	point	comes	in	everybody's	life
-	when	you	are	totally	fed	up	with	the	struggle,	when	you	are	totally	bored	with
the	whole	effort	of	being.
Remember,	just	like	suicide,	boredom	is	also	very	special,	it	is	also	human.	No
animal	is	ever	bored.	Look	at	a	buffalo,	chewing	grass,	the	same	grass	every	day,
sitting	 and	 chewing	 and	 chewing,	 never	 bored.	You	may	 get	 bored	 looking	 at
her:	she	is	not	bored.	No	animal	is	ever	bored,	you	cannot	bore	an	animal.	Too
thick,	 too	 dense	 a	mind	 -	 how	 can	 you	 bore?	 For	 boredom	 a	 very,	 very	 high
sensitivity	 is	 needed,	 the	 higher	 your	 sensitivity,	 the	 higher	 will	 be	 your
boredom,	 the	 more	 will	 be	 your	 boredom.	 Children	 are	 not	 bored;	 they	 still
belong	more	 to	 the	 animal	world	 than	 to	 the	 human,	 they	 are	 human	 animals.
They	still	enjoy	simple	things,	they	are	not	bored.	Every	day	they	can	go	hunting
for	butterflies	and	they	will	never	be	bored	-	and	they	are	ready	to	go	every	day.
Have	you	ever	 talked	 to	children,	 told	 them	a	story,	 the	same	story?	They	will
say:	"Tell	it	again."	And	you	tell	it	again	and	they	will	say:
"Tell	it	again."
You	cannot	bore	children.	You	cannot	bore	animals.	Boredom	is	human,	a	very
great	quality,	in	fact,	because	it	exists	only	on	a	higher	plane	of	consciousness.
When	one	 is	 very	 sensitive	one	 feels	 boredom	 -	 life	 seems	meaningless,	 there
seems	to	be	no	purpose	in	it;	one	feels	as	if	it	is	just	an	accident,	whether	you	are
here	 or	 not	 makes	 no	 difference.	 The	 moment	 comes	 when	 one	 is	 so	 utterly
bored	that	one	starts	thinking	of	committing	suicide.
What	 is	 suicide?	 It	 is	 simply	 dropping	 out.	 It	 is	 just	 saying	 that	 enough	 is
enough.	 I	 don't	want	 to	 play	 the	 game	 again.	 I	want	 to	 drop	 out	 of	 the	whole
game.	Unless	this	point	is	69
reached,	 religion	 is	 not	 possible,	 because	 only	 from	 this	 point	 can	 you	 either
commit	suicide,	or	transform	yourself.	Here	is	the	crossroad.
So	 this	 has	 been	 my	 observation:	 people	 who	 become	 prematurely	 religious
simply	 waste	 their	 time.	 To	 become	 prematurely	 religious	 means	 to	 become
religious	without	being	 really	 fed	up	with	 life,	not	yet	 really	bored.	The	game
still	 has	 some	 attraction.	 It	may	 be	 sex,	 it	may	 be	money,	 it	may	 be	 politics,
power.	But	something	in	life	still	has	an	attraction.	Then	prematurely	you	have
become	religious,	and	this	will	not	help:	you	will	simply	waste	your	time.	One
has	to	be	utterly	bored;	life	has	no	more	attraction;	all	the	dreams	are	shattered;
all	 the	rainbows	have	disappeared;	 there	are	no	more	flowers,	only	thorns;	you
are	saturated	with	it.	Then	there	is	no	effort	on	your	part	to	leave	it	or	renounce	it
-	 remember.	 If	 there	 is	 any	 effort	 to	 renounce	 it,	 it	 means	 there	 was	 a	 little
attraction	left.	Otherwise,	what	is	the	effort?
When	you	are	fed	up	with	a	thing,	do	you	renounce	it?	No,	there	is	no	need	to
renounce.	It	is	already	renounced.
If	you	escape	to	the	forest,	from	whom	are	you	escaping?	From	some	attractions
lingering	 in	 the	world...	otherwise	why?	Where	are	you	escaping	 to,	and	why?
Even	in	escape	you	are	showing	that	you	are	attached	to	something.	Remember
this	-	this	is	the	rule:	from	wherever	you	escape,	there	is	your	attraction.	If	you
escape	 from	 woman,	 woman	 is	 your	 attraction.	 If	 you	 escape	 from	 politics,
politics	is	your	attraction.	And	the	faster	you	run,	the	greater	is	the	attraction.
This	 is	premature,	you	will	be	called	back.	You	may	go	 to	 the	Himalayas,	but
you	 will	 think	 that	 you	 have	 been	 chosen	 a	 president	 of	 a	 country.	 You	 will
dream.	 Sitting	 in	 the	 Himalayas	 in	 this	 lonely	 cave,	 you	 will	 find	 many
APSARAS,	 beautiful	 women,	 coming	 from	 heaven.	 They	 are	 your	 mind's
children.	Nobody	is	sending	beautiful	women	to	you:	it	is	from	woman	that	you
have	escaped.
Premature.	 There	 is	 no	 renunciation	 in	 a	 premature	mind.	Maturity	 is	 needed,
and	maturity	means	you	have	lived	life,	known	it	to	the	very	depth,	and	found	it
lacking.	 There	 is	 nothing	 in	 it,	 the	 journey	 is	 complete;	 you	 can	 live	 in	 the
market,	or	you	can	go	to	the	monastery.	It	doesn't	matter,	it	is	all	the	same.	Life
is	no	longer	an	attraction:	wherever	you	are	it	makes	no	difference.	This	point	is
the	point	of	suicide.	And	this	point	is	the	point	of	SANNYAS.
Suicide	or	SANNYAS:	this	is	the	alternative.	And,	unless	your	SANNYAS	is	an
alternative	to	suicide,	it	is	not	very	significant.
This	is	the	point	where	you	can	feel	the	difference	between	a	religious	mind	and
a	secular	mind.	A	secular	mind	has	no	alternative.	When	he	 is	bored	with	 life,
suicide	is	the	only	way;	there	is	no	alternative	to	it.
An	atheist	-	what	will	he	do	when	he	is	fed	up	with	life?	He	can	commit	suicide.
That's	why	in	the	West	more	suicide	is	committed.	That's	why	more	men	commit
suicide	 than	 women.	 The	 number	 is	 almost	 double	 because	 men	 are	 more
atheistic	than	women,	less	religious	than	women.	In	the	East	less	and	less	suicide
is	committed,	in	the	West	more	and	more.	You	go	westwards,	and	you	move	into
the	hemisphere	of	suicide.
Great	 thinkers,	 philosophers,	 logicians,	 commit	 suicide	 more	 than	 ordinary
people,	because	thinking	implies	doubt,	and	a	man	who	doubts,	in	fact	becomes
a	believer	in	atheism.	You	cannot	remain	in	doubt	because	doubt	is	empty.	You
have	to	cling	to	some	belief	-	either	in	God,	or	no	God;	either	in	the	possibility
of	 a	 future	 life,	 or	 no	 possibility	 of	 a	 future	 life;	 either	 in	 a	 meaning,	 a
transcendental	meaning	 to	higher	planes,	 or	no	higher	planes;	 but	 you	have	 to
decide.	You	cannot	remain	in	doubt.
I	have	never	seen	anybody	who	lives	in	doubt.	He	may	call	himself	a	sceptic:	no,
scepticism	is	his	belief.	He	may	call	himself	an	atheist	-	I	don't	believe	in	God	-
but	he	believes	in	his	non-belief.	And	he	believes	as	arrogantly	as	any	theist;	and
he	 is	 as	 ready	 to	 defend	 his	 belief	 as	 any	 theist	 is	 ready	 to	 argue,	 to	 prove.
Nobody	can	live	in	doubt.
70
So	 there	 are	 two	 types	 of	 minds:	 secular	 and	 religious.	 It	 will	 be	 good	 to
understand	 the	 difference.	 A	 secular	mind	 believes	 in	whatsoever	 is	 apparent,
whatsoever	he	can	see,	touch.
A	religious	mind	believes	not	only	in	the	apparent,	but	in	the	transcendental.	The
religious	mind	is	one	which	says	that	eyes	cannot	exhaust	reality.	Reality	is	more
than	eyes	can	see.
Hands	cannot	clasp	all	that	is:	reality	is	more.	Ears	cannot	hear	all	that	is:	reality
is	more.	A	religious	mind	says	that	whatsoever	you	know	is	only	a	part	-	there	is
a	beyond,	 this	 life	 is	not	all.	There	 is	more	 to	 life,	 there	are	more	openings.	A
secular	mind	is	a	closed	mind;	a	religious	mind	is	an	open	mind	-	always	ready
to	move,	always	ready	to	probe,	always	ready	to	enquire,	always	ready	to	travel
to	the	unknown.	If	you	have	a	secular	mind,	when	you	get	fed	up	with	life,	and
you	have	lived	all	that	life	can	give,	and	you	have	found	it	useless,	futile,	at	the
most	 a	 toy	 to	 be	 engaged	 with,	 occupied	 with	 -	 and	 how	 long	 can	 you	 be
occupied	with	a	 toy?	-	 then	a	moment	comes,	a	moment	of	maturity,	when	the
toy	has	to	be	thrown	away.
Then	 there	 is	 nothing.	 This	 life	was	 all,	 now	 it	 has	 flopped.	You	 can	 commit
suicide.	There	is	nothing	else	for	you.
Only	 at	 the	moment	of	 suicide	does	one	 come	 to	know	 the	beautiful	world	of
religion.	And	what	the	meaning	of	religion	is	is	only	realized	then.	Because	this
life	is	finished,	but	there	is	more	life;	this	world	is	finished,	but	the	universe	is
vast;	 this	dimension	has	 finished,	but	 there	are	millions	of	dimensions	 -	 layers
and	 layers	 and	 layers	 of	 being	 and	 existence.	There	 is	 no	 end	 to	 it.	This	 open
mind	is	the	religious	mind,	and	this	vastness	of	possibilities	is	what	is	meant	by
God.	 God	 is	 the	 infinite	 possibility	 for	 you	 to	 grow.	 When	 one	 direction	 is
finished,	 another	 direction	 opens.	 In	 fact,	 whenever	 a	 door	 is	 closed,	 another
opens	immediately.
At	this	moment	of	suicide	one	stands	at	a	crossroad:	either	destroy	yourself,	or
create	 yourself	 in	 a	 new	 way.	 The	 old	 is	 no	 longer	 of	 any	 meaning.	 Either
destroy	yourself	completely	-	that	is	suicide	-	or	create	yourself	in	a	totally	new
way	so	that	you	enter	a	new	world,	and	a	new	life,	and	a	new	love.
A	secular	mind	is	simply	destructive,	a	religious	mind	is	creative.	The	religious
mind	says	that	when	a	world	has	finished	it	shows	simply	that	the	way	you	lived,
the	very	base	of	your	life,	is	finished	-	nothing	else.	You	can	live	in	another	way;
another	style	of	being	is	possible.
Create	anew.	Up	to	now	you	have	lived	as	a	body,	now	you	can	live	as	a	soul.	Up
to	now	you	have	lived	in	a	material	way,	now	you	can	live	in	a	spiritual	way.	Up
to	 now	 you	 have	 lived	 with	 greed	 and	 anger	 and	 sex,	 jealousy	 and
possessiveness,	now	live	in	a	different	way,	non-possessive,	in	compassion.	Up
to	 now	you	 lived	with	 greed	 as	 your	 base,	 now	 live	 as	 a	 sharing,	 your	whole
being	sharing	with	others.	Up	to	now	you	lived	with	thinking	and	thoughts	and	it
failed,	now	live	as	meditation,	as	ecstasy.	Up	to	now	you	were	moving	outwards
and	outwards	and	outwards.	Now	turn	back.
This	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 conversion:	 turn	 back,	 move	 towards	 the	 source.	 The
outer	has	finished,	the	inner	is	there:	now	move	inwards.	A	new	being	arises.
Hindus	have	called	this	point	the	point	of	being	reborn.	One	birth	is	given	by	the
parents	-
that's	the	birth	in	the	physical	world.	Another	birth	is	given	by	yourself	-	that's
the	birth,	the	real	birth,	of	your	being.	Hindus	call	this	rebirth,	and	for	the	man
who	has	attained	to	it	they	have	a	particular	name	-	they	call	him	DWIJ	-	twice
born.	 Out	 of	 his	 own	 womb	 he	 now	 gives	 a	 new	 birth	 to	 himself.	 A	 new
dimension	 opens:	 the	 dimension	 of	 meaning,	 of	 significance,	 of	 eternal
significance.	But	it	happens	only	when	you	have	come	to	such	a	bored	state	of
being	that	you	would	like	to	commit	suicide.
Now,	we	will	enter	this	beautiful	Zen	story.
DURING	 THREE	 YEARS	 OF	 SEVERE	 TRAINING	 UNDER	 THE	 GREAT
MASTER
GIZAN,	KOSHU	WAS	UNABLE	TO	GAIN	SATORI.
71
Satori	 is	 samadhi,	 the	 first	 samadhi,	 the	 very	 entrance	 into	 samadhi,	 another
world,	totally	unknown	to	you,	totally	unimagined	by	you,	not	even	dreamed	of
by	you.	That	world	exists	just	by	the	side	of	this	world.	In	fact	you	have	not	to
move	even	a	single	step:	just	by	the	side	of	this	world,	just	in	it,	it	exists.	Only
your	viewpoint	has	to	change.	Suddenly	when	you	have	a	new	viewpoint	to	look
at	 the	 same	world,	 another	 is	 revealed.	 The	world	 is	 your	 viewpoint,	 nothing
else.	This	world	is	ugly	because	your	viewpoint	is	wrong.	If	this	world	is	just	an
anguish,	a	hell,	it	is	because	your	viewpoint	is	wrong.	It	is	not	in	fact	the	world
which	is	a	hell:	it	is	you	who	create	hell	around	it,	it	is	your	projection.
The	world	is	neutral;	it	is	like	a	film	screen	-	clean,	white,	plain,	pure.	And	then
it	depends	what	you	project	on	it.	You	can	project	hell,	you	can	project	heaven	-
or	 you	 may	 drop	 all	 projections.	 That	 is	 what	 MOKSHA	 is.	 Not	 projecting
anything	is	the	ultimate	liberation.
DURING	 THREE	 YEARS	 OF	 SEVERE	 TRAINING	 UNDER	 THE	 GREAT
MASTER
GIZAN,	KOSHU	WAS	UNABLE	TO	GAIN	SATORI.
Something	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 here.	 If	 you	 don't	 make	 any	 effort,	 you	 will
never	attain,	but	you	can	make	too	much	effort	also,	and	miss.	Sometimes	you
can	overdo;	and	this	is	a	very,	very	delicate	matter	-	how	to	balance	just	in	the
middle.	 It	 is	 easy	 not	 to	 do	 anything;	 it	 is	 also	 easy	 to	 overdo	 a	 thing.	 The
difficult	thing	is	just	to	be	in	the	middle,	in	the	right	proportion.
For	the	ego,	extremes	are	easy.	Not	to	do	anything	is	very	easy,	then	to	do	it	too
much	is	also	easy.	People	whose	bodies	have	become	too	filled	with	fat	come	to
me	and	ask	me	what	to	do.	Should	they	go	on	a	fast?	And	I	know	that	either	they
can	eat	too	much,	obsessively,	or	they	can	go	on	a	fast.	Both	are	easy.	But	if	you
tell	them	to	just	cut	their	intake	to	half,	it	is	difficult.	They	can	starve	themselves
that	 is	not	very	difficult.	Easy.	They	can	stuff	 themselves	 too	much,	 that	 too	is
easy,	because	in	both	cases	they	are	doing	harm	to	the	body.
The	quality	of	their	murderous	attitude	towards	the	body	remains	the	same.	They
can	overstuff	it:	this	is	a	sort	of	murder,	violence.	Then	they	can	do	another	type
of	violence:	 they	can	go	on	a	fast.	Both	are	extremes	and	both	are	wrong.	The
extreme	is	always	wrong.	To	remain	in	the	middle	is	always	right.
This	Koshu	must	have	overdone	 things.	And	 it	happens	always	 that	when	you
come	to	a	master	you	become	infatuated.	When	you	are	near	a	master	you	are	so
attracted	 by	 his	 being	 that	 you	 would	 like	 to	 take	 a	 jump,	 you	 would	 like	 to
become	like	him,	you	would	like	to	do	anything,	your	activity	becomes	feverish
-	you	are	in	too	much	of	a	hurry.
Koshu	must	have	done	 too	much,	otherwise	with	a	master	 like	Gizan,	you	can
simply	sit	by	his	 side	and	satori	can	happen.	Why	 three	years	of	effort	and	he
was	still	missing?	He	had	overdone	it.
When	you	overdo	a	certain	thing,	anxiety	is	created;	when	you	overdo	a	certain
thing,	inner	turmoil	is	created.	You	are	unbalanced,	you	cannot	be	at	peace,	and
satori	happens	only	when	you	are	at	home.	In	fact,	satori	happens	only	when	you
are	really	relaxed.
Do	only	that	much	which	helps	relaxation,	don't	overdo	it.	And	one	has	to	feel
his	 own	 way,	 because	 no	 fixed	 formula	 can	 be	 given,	 because	 it	 differs	 and
depends.	Each	person	has	to	find	his	own	balance,	and,	by-and-by,	one	becomes
aware	 of	what	 balance	 is.	Balance	 is	 a	 state	 of	mind	where	 you	 are	 silent,	 no
exertion,	this	way	or	that.
When	you	are	lethargic	and	don't	do	much,	then	your	energy	becomes	a	turmoil,
because	 too	much	 energy	 inside	will	 create	 restlessness.	 Children	 are	 restless.
There	is	too	much	energy	coming	into	their	being	and	they	don't	know	what	to
do,	 where	 to	 throw	 it.	 If	 you	 are	 lethargic,	 you	 will	 have	 too	 much	 energy
creating	turmoil;	your	own	energy	will	become	your	enemy.	Or,	if	you	become
too	active,	do	too	much,	if	you	do	a	certain	thing	so	much	that	it	72
drains	 your	 energy	 off,	 and	 you	 feel	 drained,	 tired,	 then	 again	 you	 will	 be
restless,	 because	 you	 need	 a	 certain	 level	 of	 energy	 inside.	 Either	 too	 much
energy	will	create	restlessness,	or,	too	drained	of	energy,	you	will	feel	restless.
With	a	master	 it	almost	always	happens.	He	has	a	magnetic	center	 in	him,	you
become	 infatuated.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 love	 affair	 -	 you	 fall	 in	 love	 and	 then	 a	 fever
arises.	Love	is	a	sort	of	fever.	The	temperature	goes	high.
This	must	have	happened	to	Koshu,	because	after	three	years	nothing	happened.
AT	 THE	 BEGINNING	 OF	 A	 SPECIAL	 SEVEN-DAY	 SESSION	 OF
DISCIPLINE,	HE
THOUGHT	HIS	CHANCE	HAD	FINALLY	COME.
Every	 year,	 or	 every	 six	 months,	 or	 every	 three	 months,	 they	 have	 a	 special
seven-day	discipline	 in	Zen	monasteries	 called	 zazen.	 In	 these	 seven	days	one
has	 to	 do	 nothing	 but	meditate.	The	whole	 energy	 has	 to	 be	 brought	 to	 it,	 for
seven	days	continuously,	only	stopping	for	 food	-	 that	 too,	very	 little	 -	and	for
two	to	three	hours	sleep	in	the	night,	 that's	all.	For	the	remaining	twenty	hours
one	has	to	meditate	and	meditate.	One	has	to	sit	for	even	six	hours	continuously
in	a	meditative	posture,	and	meditate.	And	when	one	feels	completely	 tired,	or
sleepy,	and	one	cannot	sit	any	more,	then	one	has	to	walk	and	meditate.	And	in
the	 whole	 seven-day	 session	 the	master	 is	 around	 you	with	 his	 staff,	 because
when	you	meditate	for	three	to	four	hours,	even	half	an	hour	is	enough	for	one	to
start	 feeling	 sleepy.	 So	 he	 hits	 you	 on	 the	 head	 with	 the	 staff.	Whosoever	 is
feeling	 sleepy	 will	 be	 hit	 immediately	 and	 brought	 back.	 Seven	 days	 of	 very
strenuous	effort....	That	helps	lethargic	people.
But	this	Koshu	must	have	been	totally	the	opposite.	A	session	wouldn't	help	him;
a	special	effort	wouldn't	help	him:	he	had	been	doing	that	already	for	three	years.
In	 fact,	 he	 needed	 a	 different	 type	 of	 special	 meditation	 -	 seven	 days	 of
relaxation.
This	has	not	existed	in	the	Zen	discipline.	It	should,	it	has	to,	because	there	are
two	 types	of	people:	 the	 lethargic	and	 the	overactive.	For	 lethargic	people	 it	 is
good	that	 for	a	few	days	 they	should	 try	 their	utmost;	 for	 lethargic	people	 it	 is
good.	But	 they	are	ninety-nine	percent,	 that	 is	why	for	 the	one	percent	nobody
has	bothered.	For	the	one	percent,	who	have	already	been	doing	too	much,	this
session	will	not	be	of	any	help.
But...
AT	 THE	 BEGINNING	 OF	 A	 SPECIAL	 SEVEN-DAY	 SESSION	 OF
DISCIPLINE,	HE
THOUGHT	HIS	CHANCE	HAD	FINALLY	COME.
Now	he	would	be	doing	 all	 that	 he	 could	do,	 for	 almost	 twenty-four	 hours	 he
would	be	meditating.	Now	the	satori	could	not	escape	his	grasp.
HE	CLIMBED	THE	TOWER	OF	THE	TEMPLE	GATE,	AND	GOING	UP	TO
THE
ARHAT	 IMAGES	 HE	 MADE	 THIS	 VOW:	 "EITHER	 I	 REALIZE	 MY
DREAMS	UP
HERE,	OR	THEY	WILL	FIND	MY	DEAD	BODY	AT	THE	FOOT	OF	THIS
TOWER."
Now	he	wanted	to	bring	his	total	energy	to	it,	and	he	was	sincere,	he	was	serious.
He	 really	wanted	 to	 have	 satori.	 Even	 if	 his	 life	 had	 to	 be	 paid	 for	 it	 he	was
ready.
"EITHER	I	REALIZE	MY	DREAMS	UP	HERE",
he	said	in	the	tower,	before	the	Buddha	image,
73
"OR	 THEY	 WILL	 FIND	 MY	 DEAD	 BODY	 AT	 THE	 FOOT	 OF	 THIS
TOWER".
He	would	commit	suicide.	This	is	a	point,	a	very	rare	point	in	life	-	when	you	are
ready	to	give	so	much,	when	you	are	really	sincere.	Then	suicide,	or	samadhi	-
this	is	the	only	alternative.
HE	WENT	WITHOUT	FOOD	OR	SLEEP,
for	seven	days	he	didn't	take	any	food,	he	didn't	sleep,	GIVING	HIMSELF	UP
TO	CONSTANT	ZAZEN...
Zazen	 is	 just	 sitting	 silently	 in	 a	 Buddha	 posture,	 not	 doing	 anything,	 simply
being	aware;	no	food,	no	sleep,	just	sitting	for	twenty-four	hours.	He's	doing	his
best,	the	last	that	he	can	do,	the	utmost.
...OFTEN	 CRYING	 THINGS	 LIKE:	 "WHAT	WAS	MY	KARMA,	 THAT,	 IN
SPITE	OF
ALL	THESE	EFFORTS,	I	CAN'T	GRASP	THE	WAY?"
The	moment	comes	to	every	seeker,	when	he	feels	that	he	is	doing	all	that	he	can
do,	nothing	more	is	possible.
"WHAT	WAS	MY	 KARMA	 THAT	 IN	 SPITE	 OF	 ALL	 THESE	 EFFORTS	 I
CAN'T	GRASP
THE	WAY?"
But,	in	fact,	he	couldn't	grasp	the	way	BECAUSE	of	these	efforts	-	not	in	spite
of	them,	BECAUSE	of	them.
First,	 lethargy	is	 the	problem,	how	to	bring	you	out	of	your	lethargy.	And	then
secondly,	the	problem	is	how	to	help	you	to	remain	in	the	middle.	Not	to	move
to	 the	 opposite	 end,	 the	 hyperactivity,	 but	 to	 remain	 balanced.	 Koshu	 had
overdone	 it.	 But	 that	 helped	 in	 a	 different	 way	 -	 through	 it	 satori	 was	 never
reached,	through	it	he	couldn't	realize.
AT	 LAST	 HE	 ADMITTED	 FAILURE,	 AND	 DETERMINED	 TO	 END	 IT
ALL...
Now	nothing	was	there,	all	that	he	could	do	he	had	done;	more	he	could	not	do,
more	was	not	there	to	be	done.	So	now	there	was	no	hope;	for	what	to	wait	now?
AT	LAST	HE	ADMITTED	FAILURE...
This	 failure	 is	 not	 ordinary	 failure,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 failure	 amid	many	 failures,	 it	 is
THE	failure.
When	 you	 fail	 in	 one	 thing	 it	 doesn't	 make	 any	 difference,	 because	 there	 are
many	others	you	will	succeed	in.	When	you	fail	in	one	effort,	you	know	that	you
can	 make	 another	 effort.	 But	 this	 is	 THE	 failure,	 because	 he	 had	 done
whatsoever	he	could	do,	more	could	not	be	done.
And	 there	was	nothing	 else:	with	 life	he	was	 already	 finished,	 now	he	had	no
more	 dates	with	 life,	 that	 game	was	 completely	 over.	He	had	done	 everything
that	he	could	think	of	and	do.	He	accepted	the	failure	-	satori	had	not	happened.
...	AND,	DETERMINED	TO	END	IT	ALL...
74
So	 now	 suicide	 was	 the	 only	 possibility.	 Samadhi	 was	 not	 there	 for	 him.	 He
could	only	commit	suicide.
...	HE	WENT	TO	THE	RAILING	AND	SLOWLY	LIFTED	HIS	LEG	OVER	IT.
AT	THAT
VERY	INSTANT	HE	HAD	AN	AWAKENING.
The	satori	happened,	the	vast	sky	of	samadhi	opened	immediately.	This	has	to	be
understood,	because	 it	may	be	 the	 same	 for	you.	This	 is	not	only	one	case,	 in
many	cases	it	has	been	so.	When	you	are	a	failure,	a	 total	failure,	many	things
happen	within	you	-	the	ego	evaporates.	Even	in	zazen,	sitting	silently	for	seven
days,	without	food,	without	sleep,	the	ego	was	there.	In	fact,	who	is	asking	for
samadhi?	Who	 is	 there	who	asks	 that	 samadhi	 should	happen?	This	 is	 the	 last
effort	of	the	ego;	the	ego	wants	to	grasp	it,	and	that	is	the	barrier.
When	he	 accepted	 failure,	 the	 ego	dissolved,	because	 the	 ego	exists	 only	with
success.
Success	is	the	food,	the	very	stuff	that	the	ego	lives	on.	If	you	are	really	a	failure,
a	 complete	 failure,	 how	 can	 the	 ego	 remain	 there?	 The	 ego	 cannot	 exist	 in
ultimate	 failure.	 The	 ego	 disappeared;	 and	 with	 the	 ego,	 lethargy	 and
hyperactivity,	 too	much	 activity,	 both	 disappeared.	Without	 ego	you	 are	 in	 the
balance.	Suddenly,	everything	fits	and	you	are	in	the	balance.	Without	ego	there
is	no	extreme,	it	cannot	exist;	extreme	exists	as	an	ego	effort.
Suddenly	ego	is	not	there	and	you	are	in	the	middle.	And	now,	the	very	effort	of
suicide	is	very,	very	balanced.
AT	 LAST	 HE	 ADMITTED	 FAILURE,	 AND,	 DETERMINED	 TO	 END	 IT
ALL,	HE	WENT
TO	THE	RAILING	AND	SLOWLY	LIFTED	HIS	LEG	OVER	IT.
Why	slowly?	Now,	suicide	was	not	really	something	he	was	going	to	do:	suicide
was	something	that	was	happening	to	him.	Finished	with	the	world,	there	was	no
hurry	also,	because	he	was	not	going	 to	go	anywhere,	he	was	simply	dropping
out	of	existence.	There	was	no	hurry.
Silently,	slowly,	he	came	to	the	railing.	This	is	really	a	beautiful	moment,	very
deep.
Already	 this	 suicide	 is	 different.	You	 can	 commit	 suicide	 in	 very	 great	 hyper-
tension	-	that's	how	people	commit	suicide,	in	hyper-tension.	If	they	are	delayed,
even	for	a	single	moment,	they	will	not	commit	suicide.	It	has	to	be	committed
when	you	are	completely	mad.	 It	has	 to	be	done	when	 really	you	are	 so	 tense
that	you	don't	know	what	you	are	doing.	So,	if	you	can	delay	suicide	even	for	a
single	moment,	it	will	never	happen.
I	had	a	friend.	He	was	in	love	with	a	woman	and	the	woman	rejected	him.	So,	of
course,	 being	 a	 poet,	 he	 thought	 of	 committing	 suicide.	 His	 family	 was	 very
disturbed.	They	all	 tried	 to	convince	him;	but	 the	more	 they	 tried,	 the	more	he
became	 convinced	 that	 he	 was	 going	 to	 commit	 suicide.	 This	 happens.	 Not
knowing	what	to	do,	they	locked	his	door.	He	started	beating	his	head	against	the
door.	They	became	very	much	afraid.	What	to	do?
Suddenly	they	remembered	me	and	called	me.	I	went	there.	He	was	beating	his
head	against	the	door;	he	was	really	in	a	fury	and	completely	determined.	I	went
near	the	door	and	I	said	to	him:	"Why	are	you	making	so	much	show	out	of	it?	If
you	want	 to	commit	suicide,	do	 it.	But	why	so	much	noise?	And	why	are	you
beating	your	head?	Just	by	beating	your	head	on	the	door	you	will	not	die.	So,
listen	 to	me,	 come	with	me.	We	 can	 go	 to	 the	 river;	 there	 is	 a	 beautiful	 point
where	I	have	always	meditated.	If	ever	I	am	to	commit	suicide,	this	is	the	place.
You	come	with	me,	this	is	a	good	chance."
Because	I	was	not	saying	anything	against	suicide,	he	calmed	down.	He	was	not
hitting	 his	 head.	 He	 was	 really	 puzzled,	 because	 you	 never	 expect	 that	 your
friend	will	help	you	to	commit	suicide.	So	I	 told	him:	"You	open	the	door	and
don't	make	a	fool	of	yourself,	and	75
don't	 help	 crowds	 to	 gather	 here.	 Why	 so	 much	 showmanship	 about	 it?	 You
simply	come	with	me	and	drop	yourself	in	the	river.	There	is	a	waterfall	in	the
river	and	you	will	simply	disappear."
So	 he	 opened	 the	 door	 and	 he	 looked	 at	me,	 he	was	 very	 puzzled.	 I	 took	 his
hand,	 brought	 him	 home.	He	 said:	 "When	 are	we	 going?"	But	 he	was	 a	 little
afraid;	 now	 that	 I	was	 ready	 I	was	 dangerous.	 So	 I	 said:	 "This	 is	 a	 full-moon
night	 and	 there	 is	 no	 hurry.	 When	 one	 wants	 to	 die,	 one	 should	 choose	 an
auspicious	moment.	So	we	will	go	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	then	the	full	moon
will	be	just	there	and	I	can	say	good-bye	and	you	can	jump."	He	became	more
and	more	afraid.	I	was	simply	delaying	the	time.
We	went	to	bed	at	ten	o'clock.	I	fixed	the	alarm	for	twelve,	and	I	told	him	that
sometimes	 I	 didn't	 hear	 the	 alarm,	 so	 if	 he	 heard	 it	 first	 he	 should	 wake	me.
Immediately	 the	alarm	started	he	put	 it	 off.	 I	waited	 for	 a	 few	minutes,	 then	 I
said:	 "Why	are	 you	waiting?	Wake	me."	He	became	 suddenly	 angry	 and	 said:
"Are	you	my	friend	or	my	enemy?	It	seems	you	want	to	kill	me."	I	said:	"I'm	not
making	any	 judgment	on	my	own.	 If	you	want	 to	die,	 I	am	a	 friend,	 I	have	 to
cooperate	and	help.	If	you	don't	want	to	die,	that's	your	decision,	so	you	tell	me.
I	am	neutral.	The	car	is	ready,	I	will	drive	you	to	the	spot;	the	night	is	beautiful
and	the	moon	has	come	up.	Now	it	is	up	to	you."	He	said:	"Take	me	to	my	home.
I	am	not	going	to	die.	And	who	are	you	to	force	me	to	die?"
I	 was	 not	 forcing	 anybody	 -	 just	 a	 delayed	 moment	 and	 one	 comes	 to	 one's
senses.	But	this	is	not	that	type	of	suicide.
I	must	 tell	you,	by	 the	way,	 that	 there	 is	only	one	 religion	 in	 the	world	which
allows	suicide	-	Jainism.	It	is	rare;	only	Mahavir	allows	suicide.	He	says	that	if
you	 can	 die	 very	 silently,	 without	 any	 emotionality	 about	 it,	 it	 is	 beautiful,
nothing	is	wrong	with	it.	But	it	has	to	be	done	over	a	very	long	time,	otherwise
you	never	know.	So	you	have	to	stop	taking	food,	that's	all.	It	takes	almost	three
months	for	a	person	to	die	without	food.	For	three	months	the	body	goes	on	and
on,	using	its	reservoirs,	energy,	and	food	and	everything.	One	goes	on	becoming
more	and	skinnier,	 the	flesh	disappears,	 then	only	the	skeleton	remains.	Nearly
three	months	it	takes.
So	Mahavir	 says	 that	 if	 you	 want	 to	 die,	 and	 if	 this	 suicide	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a
religious	dropping	out,	then	don't	do	it	in	a	hurry.	Do	it	simply,	because	you	have
three	months	 to	 think,	and	you	can	go	back,	nobody	 is	 forcing	you.	And	 there
have	been	many	people	who	have	done	it	that	way	in	the	past:	many	people	have
dropped	 out	 of	 existence	 after	 not	 taking	 food	 for	 three	 months	 -	 simply
meditating,	 lying	down.	Then	 that	suicide	 is	more	beautiful	 than	your	ordinary
life	because	 they	are	not	 really	killing	 themselves,	 they	are	moving	 to	 another
realm.
This	Koshu	moved	slowly,	 there	was	no	hurry.	 In	 fact,	when	 life	doesn't	mean
anything	to	you,	death	also	doesn't	mean	anything	to	you.	When	life	is	useless,
death	is	also	useless,	because	death	is	nothing	but	the	culmination	of	life.	Death
means	 so	much	 to	you	because	 life	means	 so	much	 to	you.	 It	 is	 always	 in	 the
same	proportion.	 If	 life	 is	 very,	 very	meaningful	 to	 you,	 you	will	 be	 afraid	 of
death.	When	life	is	meaningless,	of	course	death	is	also	meaningless.	There	is	no
hurry.
He	came	to	the	railing,
HE	WENT	TO	THE	RAILING	AND	SLOWLY	LIFTED	HIS	LEG	OVER	IT.
At	 that	moment...	 Just	 visualize	 the	 picture	 -	 a	 Buddhist	 monk	 standing	 on	 a
tower	slowly	lifting	his	feet,	and	suddenly	there	is	all	that	he	always	wanted	to
be.	The	satori	has	happened,	the	lightning.
76
What	happened	in	that	moment?	Slowly	lifting	the	leg	up	to	commit	suicide,	life
was	 completely	 finished;	 there	was	 no	 greed	 in	 the	mind,	 not	 even	 for	 satori.
There	was	no	ego	 in	 the	mind,	not	 even	 for	 religious	achievement.	The	 future
had	 completely	 dropped,	 because	 it	 exists	 only	 with	 desires.	 Desire	 is	 future,
longing	 is	 future.	Only	one	 longing	had	remained	 there	 inside	him	-	 for	satori.
That	longing	was	creating	future	and	time,	that	longing	was	the	last	barrier.	The
last	barrier	had	dropped.	Now	there	was	no	future,	no	desire.	Only	this	moment
existed.
At	the	moment	when	Koshu	lifted	his	leg	slowly,	all	time	stopped	-	no	past,	no
future:	no	past	because	life	had	been	realized	as	useless;	no	future	because	there
was	no	longing,	even	for	satori.
That	leg	lifted	up,	time	stopped.	That	leg	lifted	up,	mind	stopped	-	because	there
was	nothing	to	achieve,	nothing	to	think.	At	that	moment	he	crossed	out	of	time.
At	that	moment	he	transcended	time.	At	that	moment	his	being	became	vertical,
no	longer	horizontal.	No	more	past,	no	more	future	-	all	the	waste	disappeared.
At	that	moment	of	lifting,	not	only	did	he	lift	his	leg,	his	whole	being	was	lifted
up.	The	vertical	dimension	started.	And	suddenly,	there	was	satori.
Suddenly,
AT	THAT	VERY	INSTANT,	HE	HAD	AN	AWAKENING.
It	always	happens	so:	 it	happened	 in	 the	same	way	 to	Buddha	himself.	He	 left
the	world,	the	palace,	the	beautiful	wife,	the	newly	born	child,	the	whole	empire.
The	world	was	no	longer	meaningful.	Then	for	six	years	he	tried	and	tried	and
tried	his	utmost.	He	went	to	every	teacher,	to	every	master	that	he	came	to	know
about.	And	he	said:	"I	am	ready	to	do	whatsoever,	but	I	want	to	know	what	life
is,	who	I	am."	And	the	masters,	many	masters	in	those	six	years,	told	him	to	do
many	things,	and	he	did	them.	And	he	did	them	so	perfectly	that	no	master	could
tell	 him	 that	 it	 was	 not	 happening	 because	 he	 was	 not	 doing	 well.	 That	 was
impossible	-	even	 the	master	was	not	as	perfect	as	 the	disciple.	So	 the	masters
accepted	their	failure,	and	they	said	that	up	to	this	moment,	to	this	extent,	they
could	help;	beyond	this	they	themselves	didn't	know.	So	he	should	seek	another
master.	Then	all	the	masters	were	finished.
Then	 he	 started	 doing	 things	 on	 his	 own;	 and	 he	 did	 everything	 that	 was
prevalent	 in	 India	 for	centuries.	He	 tried	all	methods	of	hatha	yoga,	 raja	yoga.
He	 did	 everything	 that	 was	 available.	 He	 overdid	 it.	 He	 was	 too	 anxious	 to
achieve.	 He	 was	 too	 serious	 about	 it.	 His	 sincerity	 became	 a	 hyper-tension
inside,	and	he	couldn't	attain.
Then	 one	 day,	 crossing	 the	 Niranjana	 River	 near	 Bodhgaya,	 he	 was	 so	 weak
because	 of	 fasting	 that	 he	 couldn't	 cross	 it.	 It	was	 a	 very	 small	 stream	 but	 he
couldn't	swim	it,	and	he	had	to	hang	onto	a	root	of	a	tree	to	save	his	life.	He	was
so	weak.	In	that	moment	he	thought:
"What	have	 I	 done?	 I	 have	destroyed	my	body	 and	 I	 have	not	 attained	 to	 any
soul;	this	whole	effort	has	been	foolish."
At	that	moment	he	dropped	all	efforts.	The	world	was	already	useless,	now	the
religious	world	of	efforts	was	also	useless.	On	that	day	he	relaxed	under	a	tree,
which	 became	 the	 bodhi	 tree	 under	 which	 he	 attained	 his	 enlightenment.	 He
relaxed.	That	relaxation	was	total.
For	the	first	time,	there	was	nothing	to	achieve:	the	achieving	mind	dropped.	He
had	done	everything	and	nothing	more	could	be	done.	So	what	to	do?	He	simply
slept.
That	 night	 there	 was	 no	 dream,	 because	 when	 there	 is	 no	 desire	 there	 is	 no
dream.	 Dreams	 are	 the	 shadows	 of	 desires.	 Dreams	 are	 desires	 which	 go	 on
haunting	you	even	in	your	sleep.
The	whole	night	passed	as	if	it	was	a	single	moment.
77
And	in	the	morning,	the	early	morning,	when	the	last	star	was	disappearing,	he
opened	his	eyes	and	 looked	at	 the	star.	He	was	 in	 the	same	situation	as	Koshu
was	when	Koshu	 lifted	his	 leg	and	was	going	 to	drop	himself	 from	 the	 tower.
The	disappearing	last	star	-	and	he	opened	his	eyes	with	no	mind	inside,	with	no
desire.	Time	stopped	-	and	suddenly,	it	was	there.	His	longing	was	the	barrier.
So,	 one	 has	 to	 long	 first,	 and	 one	 has	 to	 strive,	 and	 one	 has	 to	 make	 all	 the
efforts,	and	one	has	to	roam,	and	seek	and	enquire,	and	one	has	to	do	whatsoever
one	can	do,	and	then,	one	has	to	drop	all.
You	cannot	drop	it	right	now,	because	you	have	nothing	to	drop.	First	you	have
to	do,	then	you	can	drop.	You	can	go	to	a	tower,	and	you	can	raise	your	leg	very,
very	slowly,	but	nothing	will	happen.	Because	 it	 is	not	a	question	of	 the	outer
posture	-	for	the	inner	you	have	not	yet	done	all	that	has	to	be	done.	You	can	go
to	 a	 bodhi	 tree	 and	 lie	 down,	 completely	 relaxed,	 and	 in	 the	morning,	 exactly
when	the	last	star	is	disappearing,	you	can	open	your	eyes.	Nothing	will	happen.
One	 has	 to	 pass	 through	 arduous	 effort	 to	 come	 to	 a	 total	 relaxation.	 Then
suddenly	it	happens.	In	fact	it	has	been	always	there	around	you;	only	you	were
not	there.	You	were	not	present.	You	were	moving	in	the	mind,	in	the	desires,	in
the	future,	in	the	past,	in	the	memories,	in	the	thoughts.	You	were	too	attached	to
clouds,	that's	why	you	couldn't	see	the	sky.	It	was	always	there.	In	fact	the	clouds
were	roaming	in	the	sky.	Samadhi	is	all	around	you;	samadhi	is	the	ocean.	And
you	are	the	fish	-	but	you	are	not	present.
OVERJOYED,	 HE	 RUSHED	 DOWN	 THE	 STAIRS	 AND	 THROUGH	 THE
RAIN	TO
GIZAN'S	ROOM.
BEFORE	 HE	 HAD	 A	 CHANCE	 TO	 SPEAK,	 THE	 MASTER	 CRIED:
"BRAVO!	-	YOU
HAVE	FINALLY	HAD	YOUR	DAY."
The	very	quality	of	the	person	who	has	attained	to	satori	changes.	He	need	not
say	-	at	least	to	the	master	-	he	need	not	say,	"I	have	achieved".	Because	the	very
vibration,	 the	 very	 being	 of	 one	 who	 has	 achieved,	 is	 totally	 different.	 Even
before	he	could	say	anything,	the	master	said:	"Bravo!	So	you	have	achieved,	so
it	has	happened."	There	was	no	need	to	talk	about	it.
Once	 it	happens,	 those	who	know	will	 see	 it.	Even	 those	who	don't	know	will
start	to	feel	it.
You	 cannot	 come	 to	 a	 man	 of	 realization	 without	 feeling	 something	 of	 the
unknown,	without	listening	to	his	footsteps	in	the	world	of	the	unknown,	in	the
world	of	the	mysterious.
Mystery	surrounds	him.	In	his	very	shadow	a	very	sacred	quality	exists.	 In	his
very	movement	there	is	holiness,	because	he	is	whole.	Satori	makes	you	whole;
samadhi	makes	you	whole.
Now	there	is	no	longer	a	division	between	conscious	and	unconscious.	Suddenly
it	is	bridged.
The	whole	has	become	conscious.
The	quality	 is	 just	 like	 this:	you	see	a	house	 in	 the	night,	with	no	 light	within.
Then	somebody	 lights	a	 lamp	 inside.	The	whole	quality	of	 the	house	changes;
even	 passers-by	 on	 the	 road	will	 suddenly	 see	 that	 the	 light	 is	 burning	 in	 the
house.	The	quality	has	changed.
From	the	windows,	 from	the	doors,	 from	the	cracks,	 the	 light	 is	 shining	 to	 the
outside.	The	house	is	no	longer	dark.
78
___________________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER	7	-	Not	a	Dead	One
27	February	1975	a.m.	in	Buddha	Hall
___________________________________________________________________________
AN	EX-EMPEROR	ASKED	THE	MASTER	GUDO:	"WHAT	HAPPENS	TO	A
MAN	OF
ENLIGHTENMENT	AFTER	DEATH?"
GUDO	REPLIED:	"HOW	SHOULD	I	KNOW?"
THE	EX-EMPEROR	SAID:	"WHY?	BECAUSE	YOU	ARE	A	MASTER."
GUDO	SAID:	"YES,	SIR,	BUT	NOT	A	DEAD	ONE!"
Man	is	ignorant	of	the	real.	And	it	is	difficult	to	know	the	real	because,	to	know
the	real,	first	you	have	to	be	the	real.	Only	the	same	can	know	the	same.
Man	is	false.	As	man	exists,	he	is	a	deep	hypocrite.	He	is	not	real	himself.	His
original	face	is	completely	lost.	He	has	many	faces,	he	uses	many	faces,	but	he
himself	is	not	aware	of	the	original	face:	his	own.
Man	is	an	imitator.	He	goes	on	imitating	others,	and,	by	and	by,	he	completely
forgets	that	he	has	his	own	unique	being.
The	real	can	be	known	only	when	you	are	real.	It	is	a	tremendous	effort;	arduous
is	 the	 path.	 So	 man	 tries	 a	 trick.	 He	 starts	 thinking	 about	 the	 real	 -
philosophizing,	 theorizing,	 creating	 mental	 systems	 about	 the	 real.	 That	 is	 all
that	philosophy	is:	a	trick	of	the	mind	to	deceive	oneself	about	one's	ignorance,
about	one's	not	knowing	the	real.	That's	why	philosophies	abound	and	the	whole
world	lives	in	concepts	and	theories.	Hindus,	Mohammedans,	Christians,	Jainas,
Buddhists	-	there	are	millions	of	concepts.
And	 they	are	cheap,	you	need	not	change	yourself;	you	need	only	an	ordinary
intelligent	mind,	a	mediocre	mind.	No	higher	IQ	is	needed,	so	 there	 is	not	any
difficulty.	 You	 can	 adopt	 concepts	 and	 you	 can	 hide	 your	 ignorance	 from
yourself.	Philosophy	is	just	a	hiding	method:	one	starts	feeling	that	one	knows,
without	 knowing	 at	 all;	 one	 starts	 feeling	 that	 one	 has	 arrived,	 without	 even
having	taken	the	first	step.
Philosophy	 is	 the	 greatest	 disease,	 and	 once	 you	 are	 caught	 in	 it,	 it	 is	 very
difficult	to	come	out	of	it	because	it	is	so	deeply	fulfilling	to	the	ego.	One	feels
hurt	 when	 one	 comes	 to	 know	 one's	 ignorance.	 And	 ignorance	 is	 total	 and
absolute;	you	don't	know	anything	at	all.	You	are	simply	in	dark	ignorance,	and
this	 hurts.	 One	 would	 like	 to	 know	 something,	 at	 least	 something,	 and
philosophy	 gives	 you	 a	 consolation:	 there	 are	 theories,	 and	 if	 you	 have	 an
ordinary	intelligence,	that	will	do	-	you	can	learn	the	theories,	you	can	have	your
own	system,	a	philosophy,	and	then	you	are	at	ease.	Then	not	only	do	you	know,
but	 you	 can	 teach	others,	 you	 can	 advise	 others,	 you	 can	go	on	 showing	your
knowledge	to	others	-	and	everything	is	settled,	ignorance	is	forgotten.
Philosophy	means	a	logical	construction	about	reality:	it	is	about	and	about	and
about,	it	is	never	the	real.	Round	and	round	it	goes,	just	beating	around	the	bush,
but	it	never	hits	the	center	of	the	real.	It	cannot	do	that	which	is	not	possible	for
philosophy.	Why	 is	 it	not	possible?	Because	philosophy	 is	based	on	 logic,	and
reality	is	beyond	logic.
You	have	to	understand	it	a	little	more.
Logic	is	a	search	for	consistency,	and	reality	is	not	consistent.	Or,	it	is	so	deeply
consistent	 that	 even	 the	 opposite	 is	 not	 inconsistent	 with	 it.	 Reality	 is
paradoxical:	 all	 the	opposites	meet	and	mingle	and	merge	 into	 it.	 It	 is	 so	vast.
Logic	is	narrow;	logic	is	like	a	road,	narrow,	goal-oriented.	Reality	is	like	a	vast
space,	no	goal,	not	going	anywhere;	it	is	already	there,	moving	in	all	dimensions
together.	Logic	is	one-dimensional,	reality	is	multidimensional.	Logic	says	79
A	is	A	and	can	never	be	B	-	this	is	the	consistency	of	logic	-	and	in	reality,	A	is
A,	but	always	moves	and	becomes	B	also.
Logic	 says	 life	 is	 life	 and	 can	 never	 be	 death.	How	 can	 life	 be	 death?	But	 in
reality,	life	is	moving	every	moment	into	death.	Life	is	death.
Logic	says	love	is	love	and	can	never	be	hate;	but	love	is	moving	every	moment
into	hate,	and	hate	is	moving	every	moment	into	love.	You	love	the	same	person
and	you	hate	the	same	person	-	the	deeper	the	love,	the	deeper	the	hate.	Hate	and
love	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 coin.	 Can	 you	 hate	 a	 person	without	 loving
him?	How	can	you	hate	 a	 person	without	 loving	 him?	First	 you	have	 to	 love,
only	 then	 can	you	hate.	Hate	needs	 love	 as	 a	 first	 step.	How	can	you	become
inimical	to	a	person	with	whom	you	have	never	been	friendly?
Friends	and	 foes	 are	 separate	only	 in	 logic;	 in	 reality	 they	are	 together.	 If	you
search	your	hate	deeply,	you	will	find	love	hidden.
The	moment	you	are	born,	death	is	also	born	with	you.	Birth	is	the	beginning	of
death,	 and	 death	 is	 the	 culmination	 of	 birth.	 Says	Heraclitus:	 "God	 is	 life	 and
death,	summer	and	winter,	hunger	and	satiety,	good	and	bad."
Always	both.	And	God	is	reality.
If	you	look	at	reality,	you	will	see	all	opposites	meeting.	Reality	is	contradictory;
logic	is	non-contradictory.	Logic	is	clean,	plain,	simple;	reality	is	very	complex.
Reality	is	not	like	a	logical	syllogism	or	a	mathematical	problem	-	it	has	many
dimensions.	And	 it	 is	 interrelated,	all	contradictions	are	 together:	 the	day	 turns
into	 night,	 the	 night	 again	 turns	 into	 day.	 The	 morning	 is	 nothing	 but	 the
indication	that	the	evening	is	coming.	Youth	becomes	old	age.
Beauty	turns	and	becomes	ugly.	Everything	changes,	and	becomes	the	opposite.
This	has	 to	be	understood	deeply,	 because	 this	 is	 the	basic	difference	between
philosophy	 and	 religion.	 Philosophy	 is	 logical;	 religion	 is	 not.	 Philosophy	 is
logical;	religion	is	real.	To	understand	philosophy	is	not	difficult;	to	understand
religion	 is	 almost	 impossible.	 Logic	 speaks	 a	 plain	 language;	 religion	 cannot
speak,	because	religion	has	to	speak	the	language	of	the	reality.
Logic	 is	 a	 fragment	 chosen	 from	 reality	 by	 the	mind,	 it	 is	 not	 total.	 Religion
accepts	the	whole	and	wants	to	know	it	as	it	is.	Logic	is	a	mental	construction.
Philosophy,	 logic,	 science,	 all	 are	 mental	 constructions:	 they	 are	 all	 based	 on
logic.
Religion	is	a	de-structuring	of	the	whole	mind.	Philosophy	is	a	structure	of	the
mind	about	the	reality,	a	creation	of	a	system.	The	mind	remains	there	and	helps
you	to	choose,	to	project,	to	find.	In	religion	you	have	to	de-structure	the	mind.
The	reality	remains	as	it	is,	you	don't	do	anything	to	the	reality	-	you	simply	drop
the	mind,	and	then	you	look.	If	the	mind	is	there,	it	won't	allow	you	to	look	at
the	 whole.	 The	 mind	 is	 obsessed	 with	 consistency,	 it	 cannot	 allow	 the
contradictory.
So,	whenever	you	come	near	a	person	who	is	enlightened,	your	mind	will	be	in
difficulty,	you	will	 feel	many	contradictions	 in	him.	Your	mind	will	 say,	 "This
man	 says	 this,	 and	 then	 he	 contradicts.	And	 sometimes	 he	 says	 this,	 and	 then
again	something	else	-	he	is	inconsistent."	A	religious	man	is,	by	the	very	nature
of	 the	 case,	 contradictory;	 he	 has	 to	 be,	 because	 he	 is	 not	 in	 search	 of
consistency,	 he	 is	 in	 search	 of	 the	 truth.	He	 is	 in	 search	 of	 the	 real,	 and	 he	 is
ready	 to	 drop	 everything	 for	 the	 real,	 whatsoever	 the	 real	 is.	 He	 has	 no	 pre-
formulated	structure	for	the	real	-	he	has	no	idea	how	the	real	should	be.	If	it	is
inconsistent,	it	is	inconsistent.	Okay.	He	has	nothing	to	impose	on	it.	A	religious
mind	simply	allows	the	real	to	reveal	itself.	He	has	no	idea	how	it	should	be.
A	religious	man	is	passive;	a	logical,	philosophical,	scientific	man	is	aggressive.
He	gets	some	idea	and,	through	that	idea,	he	structures	reality.	Around	the	idea
he	tries	to	discover	the	real.	The	idea	won't	allow	you	to	discover	the	real	-	the
very	idea	is	the	hindrance.
80
So	 one	 path	 is	 logic,	 another	 path	 is	 poetry.	 Poetry	 is	 against	 logic.	 Logic	 is
rational,	 poetry	 is	 irrational.	 Logic	 is	 logical,	 poetry	 is	 imagination.	 And	 this
distinction	has	to	be	remembered	because	religion	is	neither	-	neither	logic,	nor
poetry.
Logic	is	of	the	mind	and	imagination	is	also	of	the	mind.	A	poet	imagines	reality.
Of	 course,	 his	 reality	 is	 more	 colourful	 than	 a	 logician's	 reality,	 because	 he
imagines,	and	he	is	not	afraid.	He	is	completely	free	in	his	imagination;	he	has
not	to	follow	any	idea.	He	simply	dreams	about	reality:	but	it	 is	again	"about".
He	dreams	about	reality,	he	makes	a	beautiful	whole	out	of	his	dreaming.	He	is
colourful,	because	deep	down	is	fantasy.	Logic	is	plain,	colourless,	almost	grey;
there	 is	 no	 poetry	 in	 it	 because	 there	 is	 no	 imagination	 in	 it.	 Poetry	 is	 almost
contradictory,	because	it	is	imagination.	It	doesn't	bother.	You	never	ask	the	poet
to	 be	 consistent.	 If	 a	 poet	 writes	 one	 poem	 today,	 another	 tomorrow,	 and
contradicts	himself,	nobody	bothers.	People	say	this	is	poetry.
If	a	painter	paints	a	certain	thing	today	and	just	the	opposite	tomorrow,	you	don't
ask	 for	 any	 consistency,	 you	 don't	 say:	 "What	 are	 you	 doing?	 Yesterday	 you
painted	the	moon	yellow	and	today	you	are	painting	the	moon	red.	What	are	you
doing?	You	are	contradicting."	No!
Nobody	asks	-	it	is	poetry,	painting	is	poetry,	sculpture	is	poetry,	and	you	allow
the	poet	all	freedom.	But	poetry	is	imagination.
Mind	has	two	centers:	one	is	thinking,	another	is	imagination.	But	both	centers
are	 of	 the	mind	 -	 and	 religion	 is	 beyond,	 beyond	both	 centers,	 it	 is	 not	 of	 the
mind	at	all.	It	is	neither	science	nor	poetry	-	or	it	is	both.	That's	why	religion	is	a
deeper	mysticism	than	any	poetry.	It	simply	drops	the	mind,	with	all	its	centers,
and	then	looks.	It	is	just	as	if	you	put	aside	your	glasses,	and	look.	The	mind	can
be	put	aside	because	it	is	a	mechanism;	you	are	not	the	mind.
The	mind	is	just	like	a	window.	You	are	standing	there	and	looking	through	the
window,	 then	 the	frame	of	 the	window	becomes	 the	frame	of	reality.	You	look
from	the	window,	the	moon	has	arisen,	and	the	sky	is	beautiful,	but	your	sky	will
be	framed	by	the	window.	And	if	the	window	has	certain	colours	of	glass,	then
your	sky	will	be	coloured	by	the	window.
Religion	 is	 simply	 coming	out	of	 the	house	 completely;	 looking	at	 reality,	 not
through	any	window,	not	through	any	door,	not	through	any	glasses,	not	through
any	 concepts,	 but	 simply	 looking	 at	 it	 as	 it	 is,	 putting	 aside	 the	 mind.	 It	 is
difficult	because	you	are	 so	 identified	with	 the	mind	 that	you	have	completely
forgotten	that	you	can	put	it	aside.	But	this	is	the	whole	methodology	of	religion:
all	of	yoga,	Tantra,	and	all	the	techniques	of	meditation	are	nothing	but	how	to
put	the	mind	aside,	how	to	break	the	identity	with	the	mind,	and	then	look.	Then
whatsoever	is	reality	is	revealed:	that	which	is	is	revealed.	Remember	this.
Sometimes	religion	will	speak	the	language	of	 logic,	 then	it	becomes	theology.
Sometimes	religion	will	speak	the	language	of	poetry,	then	it	becomes	objective
art,	like	the	Taj	Mahal.	If	you	go	and	watch	the	Taj	Mahal	for	the	first	time,	you
will	understand	what	objective	art	is.
Looking	 at	 a	 piece	 of	 objective	 art,	 like	 the	 Taj	Mahal,	 if	 you	 simply	 sit	 and
watch	and	look,	suddenly	a	silence	surrounds	you,	a	peace	descends	upon	you.
The	 very	 structure	 of	 the	 Taj	 Mahal	 is	 related	 to	 your	 innermost	 being;	 just
looking	at	the	shape	of	it,	something	changes	within	you.
There	are	 two	types	of	art.	One	art	 is	subjective	-	 for	example,	Picasso.	 If	you
look	at	a	Picasso	painting	you	can	understand	what	 type	of	mind	Picasso	must
have	 had,	 because	 he	 pictures,	 paints	 his	 own	 mind,	 and	 he	 must	 have	 been
living	in	nightmares,	because	all	his	painting	is	nightmarish.	You	cannot	look	at
it	 for	 long	without	 feeling	 ill	and	nauseous.	 It	 is	his	 inner	madness	 that	he	has
painted	in	colour,	and	it	is	infectious.	This	is	subjective	art:	whatsoever	you	do,
you	bring	in	your	own	mind.
Objective	 art	 is	 not	 bringing	 your	 own	mind	 in,	 but	 following	 some	 objective
rules	to	change	the	person	who	will	look	at	it,	meditate	on	it.
81
All	of	Eastern	art	has	 tried	 to	be	objective.	The	artist	 is	not	 involved	 in	 it,	 the
painter	is	forgotten,	the	sculptor	is	forgotten,	the	architect	is	forgotten,	they	are
not	involved	in	it.	They	are	simply	following	certain	objective	rules	to	create	a
piece	 of	 art,	 and	 for	 centuries,	 whenever	 somebody	 looks	 at	 it,	 something	 of
meditation	will	happen	in	them.	On	a	full-moon	night,	sitting	near	the	Taj	Mahal,
not	 talking,	 just	meditating	on	 it,	 time	disappears,	 a	no-time	moment	happens.
And	suddenly	the	Taj	Mahal	is	not	there	outside,	something	is	changing	within
you.
Sometimes	 religion	 talks	 in	 terms	of	objective	art,	 to	bring	 the	 reality	 into	 this
world	 of	 the	 mind.	 Sometimes	 it	 talks	 in	 terms	 of	 logic,	 then	 it	 becomes
theology,	 then	 it	 argues.	 But	 these	 are	 both	 compromises	 with	 the	 world,
compromises	with	the	ordinary,	mediocre	mind,	bringing	religion	to	the	ordinary
mind.	When	religion	speaks	in	its	purity	it	is	paradoxical,	like	the	"Tao	te	Ching"
of	 Lao	 Tzu,	 or	 the	 fragments	 of	Heraclitus,	 or	 these	 Zen	 stories.	 In	 its	 purity
religion	transcends	logic,	imagination,	both.	It	is	the	very	beyond.
Now,	a	few	things	about	the	"very	beyond",	then	we	can	enter	into	this	story.
It	is	small,	like	a	seed.	But	if	you	allow	it	the	soil	of	your	heart,	it	can	grow	into
a	vast	tree.
It	is	small,	if	you	look	at	the	form;	but	if	you	look	at	the	formless	hidden	in	it,	it
has	no	limits,	it	is	infinite.
Something	 to	 be	 aware	 about	 the	 very	 beyond	 -	 first,	 the	 very	 beyond,	 the
transcendental,	needs	a	transformation	in	you,	otherwise	you	will	not	be	able	to
understand	 it.	 It	 needs	 a	 clarity	 of	 perception	 in	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
intellect	alone;	even	a	genius	may	not	be	able	 to	understand	 it,	and	sometimes
even	an	ordinary	villager	may	be	able	to	understand	it.
Sometimes	 even	 an	 Einstein	 may	 miss	 it,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
cleverness,	 intelligence	 -	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 clarity,	 not	 cleverness.	 Clarity	 is
different.	Cleverness	 is	 a	way	of	being	cunning	with	 reality;	 it	 is	 cunningness.
Clarity	is	completely	different;	it	is	not	cunningness,	it	is	innocence,	child-like.
You	 don't	 have	 a	 mind,	 the	 window	 is	 completely	 open.	 You	 don't	 have	 any
ideas,	because	a	mind	filled	with	ideas	loses	its	clarity;	it	is	just	like	a	sky	filled
with	clouds.	A	mind	filled	with	thoughts	is	not	transparent,	it	is	a	junkyard.	And
through	 that	 junkyard,	 you	 cannot	 come	 to	 realize	what	 reality	 is.	One	 has	 to
clean	 oneself.	 A	 deep	 cleansing	 is	 needed.	 One	 has	 to	 pass	 through	 many
meditations	so	that,	by	and	by,	your	mind	becomes	clear,	like	a	clear	sky	with	no
clouds.	So	it	is	not	a	question	of	intellectual	understanding,	it	is	a	question	of	a
different	type	of	being,	a	being	who	is	clear,	like	a	clear	sky.
The	 second	 thing	 to	 remember	 is	 that	 a	 religious	mind	never	 goes	 beyond	 the
moment,	 because	 the	 moment	 you	 go	 beyond	 the	 moment	 you	 have	 started
working	through	the	mind.
The	future	is	not	here,	so	how	can	you	look	at	 it?	You	can	only	think	about	it.
You	can	only	think	about	the	future,	you	cannot	see	it.	Only	the	present	moment
can	be	seen,	 it	 is	already	here.	So	 the	religious	mind	 lives	 in	 the	moment;	you
cannot	force	the	religious	mind	to	go	beyond	the	moment,	because	the	moment
the	religious	mind	thinks	about	the	future,	it	is	no	longer	religious.	Immediately
the	quality	of	the	mind	has	changed.	The	religious	mind	exists	here	and	now,	and
that	is	the	only	way	to	exist.	If	you	think	about	the	future,	the	moment	that	is	not
here,	you	are	already	in	the	trap	of	the	mind	and	you	have	allowed	thoughts	to
form.	 In	 the	 present	 there	 is	 no	 thought.	 Have	 you	 ever	 observed	 this?	 Right
now,	 how	 can	 thought	 exist?	 No	 thought	 ever	 exists	 in	 the	 present;	 it	 always
exists	 in	 the	 future	 or	 in	 the	 past.	 Either	 you	 think	 of	 the	 past	 -	 then	 there	 is
imagination;	or	you	think	of	the	future	-	then	there	is	logic.	How	can	you	think
of	 the	 present?	 You	 can	 only	 be.	 And	 the	 moment	 is	 so	 subtle,	 so	 small,	 so
atomic,	that	there	is	no	space	for	any	thought	to	exist	in	it.	Thought	needs	space,
needs	room,	and	in	the	present	there	is	no	room	for	thought.	Only	being	can	be
there.	So	whenever	you	are	in	the	present,	thinking	stops,	or,	if	you	stop	thinking
you	will	be	in	the	present.	A	religious	mind	is	not	concerned	about	the	future,	is
not	concerned	about	what	82
happened	 in	 the	 past.	 It	 lives	 in	 the	 moment	 and	 it	 moves	 from	 moment	 to
moment.	When	 this	moment	 disappears,	 another	moment	 comes:	 the	 religious
man	has	moved	into	it.	He	is	river	like.
The	very,	very	deep	thing	to	be	remembered	is	that	a	religious	mind,	a	religious
man,	a	religious	being,	is	always	a	process,	he	is	always	moving.
Of	course,	the	movement	is	unmotivated.	It	is	moving	not	for	any	goal,	it	simply
moves	-
because	movement	is	the	nature	of	reality.	Movement	is	the	nature	of	reality,	it
moves	with	 reality,	 just	 as	 somebody	 floats	with	 the	 river.	He	moves	with	 the
river	of	 time.	Each	moment	he	 lives,	and	moves.	He	 is	not	doing	anything,	he
simply	lives	the	moment.	When	the	moment	has	gone,	another	comes:	he	lives
that	 moment.	 A	 religious	 man	 has	 a	 beginning,	 but	 no	 end;	 awakening	 has	 a
beginning,	but	no	end	-	it	goes	on	and	on	and	on.
Just	the	opposite	is	the	case	with	ignorance	-	ignorance	has	no	beginning,	but	an
end.	Can	you	say	when	your	 ignorance	started?	It	has	no	beginning.	When	did
Buddha's	ignorance	start?	It	had	no	beginning,	but	it	had	an	end.	It	ended	on	a
certain	full-moon	night,	twenty-five	centuries	ago.	Ignorance	has	an	end,	but	no
beginning;	enlightenment	has	a	beginning,	but	no	end.	And	that's	how	the	circle
becomes	 complete.	When	 an	 ignorant	 man	 becomes	 enlightened,	 the	 circle	 is
complete.
Ignorance	has	no	beginning,	but	has	 the	end;	enlightenment	has	 the	beginning,
but	has	no	end.	Now	the	circle	is	complete.	Now	here	is	the	perfect	being	whose
circle	is	complete.
But	this	perfection	doesn't	mean	any	"staticness",	because	enlightenment	has	no
end;	it	goes	on	and	on	and	on,	for	eternities,	forever.
Now,	try	to	understand	this	beautiful	seed	like	story.
AN	EX-EMPEROR	ASKED	THE	MASTER	GUDO:	"WHAT	HAPPENS	TO	A
MAN	OF
ENLIGHTENMENT	AFTER	DEATH?"
If	 he	 had	 asked	 philosophers	 they	 would	 have	 supplied	 many	 answers.	 The
scriptures	are	full	of	answers.
What	happens	 to	an	enlightened	man	after	death?	Buddha	was	asked	 the	same
question	 again	 and	 again,	 and	 he	 would	 simply	 laugh	 sometimes.	 Once	 it
happened	 that	 it	 was	 evening	 and	 a	 small	 earthen	 lamp	 was	 burning	 near
Buddha.	 Somebody	 asked	 the	 question:	 "What	 happens	 to	 a	 man	 of
enlightenment	 after	 death?"	 Buddha	 put	 the	 flame	 out,	 and	 asked:	 "What
happens	 now	 to	 the	 flame	which	 is	 no	more?	Where	 has	 it	 gone?	Where	 is	 it
now?	Just	a	moment	before	it	was	here,	now	where	has	it	gone?"	The	same	thing
happens	to	the	man	of	enlightenment.
This	is	not	an	answer.	The	man	must	have	gone	unsatisfied,	feeling	that	Buddha
was	avoiding	the	question.
Those	who	have	known	have	 always	 avoided,	but	 those	who	don't	 know,	 they
have	many	answers.	Scholars,	pundits,	you	ask	them	and	they	will	supply	man
answers.	You	can	choose	any	of	your	likings.
GUDO	REPLIED:	"HOW	SHOULD	I	KNOW?"
You	are	asking	something	of	the	future,	and	I	am	here	and	now.	For	me	there	is
no	future.
Only	this	moment	exists,	there	is	no	other	moment.	You	are	talking	about	death,
death	of	 an	enlightened	person,	 somewhere	 in	 the	 future,	or	 somewhere	 in	 the
past.	What	happened	to	Buddha?
That's	why	Gudo	said:
83
"HOW	SHOULD	I	KNOW?"
He	means:	 I	 am	here	and	now;	no	past	 is	meaningful	 for	me,	no	 future.	He	 is
saying:	Look	at	me	right	now.	The	enlightened	being	is	before	you.	He	is	saying:
Look	at	me.	Why	are	you	concerned?
It	happened	once	that	a	man	came	to	meet	Gudo	-	he	was	a	very	famous	master	-
and	 the	 man	 was	 very	 old,	 near	 about	 ninety.	 He	 belonged	 to	 a	 particular
Buddhist	sect.	And	he	said:
"I	have	come	from	very	far,	and	my	life	is	almost	coming	to	an	end,	and	I	have
always	been	waiting	for	a	chance	to	meet	you"	-	because	Gudo	was	known	all
over	the	country	as	the	master	of	the	emperor	-	"before	I	die	I	have	come	to	you
because	 I	 have	 to	 ask	 you	 one	 question.	 For	 almost	 fifty	 years	 I	 have	 been
studying	 the	 scriptures,	 and	 I	 have	 come	 to	 know	 everything.	Only	 one	 thing
disturbs	me.	In	my	scriptures	it	is	written	that	even	trees	and	rocks	will	become
enlightened.	That	I	could	never	understand.	Trees	and	rocks?"	Gudo	said:	"Tell
me	 one	 thing.	 Have	 you	 ever	 thought	 about	 yourself?	 Can	 you	 become
enlightened,	or	not?"
The	man	said:	"It	is	strange,	but	I	must	confess	that	I	never	thought	about	it."
Trees	and	 rocks	and	how	 they	can	become	enlightened	 -	he	had	been	 thinking
about	this	for	fifty	years!	And	he	had	come	from	far	away	to	ask	this	question	of
Gudo,	and	he	had	never	thought	about	himself.
People	talk	about	death,	not	knowing	that	right	now	they	are	alive.	Life	is	here,
first	know	it.	Live	it	totally!	Why	do	you	talk	about	death?
People	talk	about	what	will	happen	after	death.	It	would	be	better	to	think	about
what	is	happening	to	you	right	now,	after	birth.	And	when	death	comes,	we	will
meet	 it.	 First	 meet	 life	 that	 is	 here	 now;	 and	 if	 you	 can	 meet	 life,	 you	 will
become	capable	of	meeting	death	also.
One	who	can	live	rightly	will	die	rightly.	One	who	has	lived	a	total,	rich	life	of
moment-tomoment	 moving,	 living,	 awareness,	 consciousness,	 will	 of	 course,
when	death	comes,	do	the	same	with	death.	He	will	live	it,	because	he	knows	the
quality	of	how	to	live	in	the	present.
When	death	becomes	the	present,	he	will	live	it.	But	people	are	more	concerned
about	death,	less	concerned	about	life.	But	if	you	cannot	know	life,	how	do	you
suppose	that	you	will	be	able	to	know	death?	Death	is	not	separate	from	life;	it	is
the	 very	 culmination	 of	 it.	 If	 you	miss	 life,	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 see	 death.
Death	will	come,	but	you	will	be	unconscious.
That	is	what	is	happening.	People	die	in	a	deep	unconsciousness,	a	coma.	They
live	 their	 whole	 life	 in	 unconsciousness,	 and	 when	 you	 treated	 life	 with
unconsciousness,	 how	 do	 you	 suppose	 that	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 be	 conscious
before	 death?	Death	will	 happen	 in	 a	 single	moment,	 and	 life	 is	 a	 seventy	 or
eighty	 year	 process.	 If	 you	 could	 not	 even	 become	 aware	 in	 eighty	 years,	 if
eighty	years	were	not	enough	for	you	to	become	conscious,	how	will	you	be	able
to	in	one	second?	Only	a	person	who	has	lived	moment	to	moment	will	be	able
to	see	death,	because	when	he	has	 lived	 life	moment	 to	moment,	death	cannot
escape	him.	He	has	the	clarity,	such	intense	clarity,	that	even	in	a	single	moment,
when	death	comes	and	moves,	he	will	be	able	to	see	it.	One,	who	has	been	able
to	see	life,	will	automatically	be	able	to	see	death	-	and	then	one	knows	one	is
neither	life	nor	death.	One	is	just	the	witness.
When	 a	 person	 asks	 what	 happens	 to	 a	 man	 of	 enlightenment	 after	 death	 he
himself	is	not	enlightened.	He	is	asking	from	his	deep	ignorance,	so	it	is	difficult
to	answer.	It	is	just	like	a	blind	man	asking	what	happens	when	the	sun	rises	in
the	morning.	How	to	explain	that	to	him?	How	to	make	the	communication?	It	is
impossible.
It	 once	 happened	 that	 a	 man	 was	 blind,	 not	 only	 blind,	 he	 was	 a	 great
philosopher.	 The	 whole	 village	 was	 disturbed	 by	 him,	 because	 he	 proved
logically	that	there	is	no	light.	He	said:	"I	have	hands.	I	can	touch	and	feel.	So
show	me	 where	 light	 is.	 If	 something	 exists,	 it	 can	 be	 touched;	 if	 something
exists,	 it	 can	be	 tasted;	 if	 something	exists,	and	you	hit	 something	against	 it,	 I
can	hear	the	sound."
84
And	 the	villagers	were	very	disturbed,	because	 they	couldn't	gather	any	proof.
He	had	four	senses	and	he	said:	"I	have	four	senses.	You	bring	light	before	me
and	I	will	see	through	my	four	senses	whether	it	is	there	or	not."	And	they	said:
"Because	you	are	blind,	you	cannot	see."	He	laughed	and	said:	"It	seems	that	you
are	dreaming.	What	are	eyes?	And	how	can	you	prove	that	you	have	eyes	and	I
don't	have?	You	tell	about	your	light,	what	it	is.	Explain	it	to	me."	They	couldn't
do	 that.	 It	was	 impossible.	But	 they	 felt	very	depressed,	because	 this	man	was
blind	and	they	had	eyes,	and	they	knew	what	light	was.	But	how	to	explain	to	a
blind	man?
Then	Buddha	 came	 to	 the	 town.	 They	 all	 took	 this	mad	 philosopher,	 the	mad
blind	man,	 to	Buddha	and	 they	asked	Buddha:	 "You	 try	 to	 explain	 to	him,	we
have	 failed.	 And	 this	man	 is	 something:	 he	 has	 proved	 that	 light	 is	 not	 there
because	 it	 cannot	 be	 touched,	 cannot	 be	 smelled,	 cannot	 be	 tasted,	 cannot	 be
heard.	 So	 how	 can	 it	 exist?	 Now	 you	 have	 come,	 you	 can	 explain	 to	 him."
Buddha	said:	"You	are	fools!	Light	cannot	be	explained	to	a	blind	man.	The	very
effort	is	absurd.	But	I	know	a	man	who	is	a	great	physician.	You	take	this	man	to
him,	and	he	will	treat	his	eyes."
The	man	was	 taken	 to	 the	physician,	 his	 eyes	were	 treated.	He	was	not	 really
blind.	Within	six	months	he	started	seeing.	Then	he	came	to	Buddha,	who	was
now	in	another	town.	He	fell	at	his	feet	and	he	said:	"Yes,	now	I	know.	Light	is.
Now	I	know	why	those	poor	villagers	could	not	prove	it,	and	now	I	also	know
that	you	did	well	to	send	me	to	a	physician.	I	needed	treatment	-	not	philosophy,
not	theories	about	light."
When	 an	 ignorant	 person	 asks,	 "what	 happens	 to	 an	 enlightened	 person	 after
death?",	leave	it.	Even,	"what	happens	to	an	enlightened	man	while	he	is	alive?"
cannot	be	explained.
CANNOT	be	explained.	What	has	happened	 to	me?	How	can	 I	explain	 it?	No
possibility.	 It	 is	 impossible	 -	 unless	 you	 start	 seeing,	 unless	 your	 eyes	 open.
Unless	 you	 are	 changed,	 nothing	 can	 be	 explained.	The	 communication	 is	 not
possible,	because	enlightenment	 is	a	 totally	different	quality	of	being,	and	you
are	completely	blind	to	it.	You	can	believe	that	I	am	enlightened,	but	you	cannot
see	it.	That	belief	will	help,	because	that	belief	will	allow	you	to	remain	open.
That	trust	will	help,	because	you	can	deny,	you	can	say:	"No,	I	cannot	believe.
How	can	I	believe?	How	can	I	 trust	when	I	don't	know?"	That	will	close	you:
then	 there	 is	 no	 possibility.	That's	why	 religion	 insists	 on	 trust,	 SHRADDHA.
The	blind	man	can	only	believe	and	trust	when	people	say	that	light	exists.	And
if	he	trusts,	then	there	is	a	possibility.	If	he	does	not	trust,	then	he	will	not	even
allow	a	treatment.	He	will	say:	"What	are	you	doing?
There	 is	no	 light,	 and	 there	are	no	 such	 things	as	eyes.	 I	don't	believe	you,	 so
please	don't	waste	your	time,	and	don't	waste	my	time."
It	 is	 impossible	 to	 communicate	 from	 one	 plane	 to	 another	 plane;	 it	 won't
function	at	all.
You	have	to	rise	up	to	another	plane	of	being;	only	then,	suddenly,	can	you	see.
And	when	you	see	and	experience,	then	the	trust	is	fulfilled.	But	before	you	see,
one	has	to	have	faith,	to	have	trust,	just	to	allow	the	transformation.
GUDO	REPLIED:	"HOW	SHOULD	I	KNOW?"
Death	has	not	come	yet.	When	it	comes,	it	comes.	Then	I	will	know	and	I	will
inform	you,	but	right	now	I	don't	know.
An	 enlightened	 person	will	 not	 give	 you	 theories.	 He	would	 like	 to	 give	 you
insight,	 not	 theories.	 Insight	 is	 a	 deep	 phenomenon	within	 you;	 theory	 is	 just
borrowed.	He	could	have	replied,	because	there	are	theories	about	what	happens
to	the	enlightened	man.	Some	say	he	reaches	to	a	plane	called	MOKSHA,	where
he	 lives	 for	 ever	 and	 ever.	 Some	 are	more	 colourful,	 they	 say	 he	 goes	 to	 the
kingdom	of	God	and	lives	with	God	for	ever	and	ever,	just	like	Jesus	sitting	by
the	throne	of	God,	on	the	right	hand,	with	angels	dancing	and	singing	and	85
celebrations	 going	 on	 and	 on.	 There	 are	millions	 of	 theories.	 But	 they	 are	 all
created	by	the	theologians	to	console	people.	You	ask	-	so	somebody	has	to	give
you	the	answer.
But	 not	 enlightened	 people:	 they	 have	 remained	 silent	 about	 it.	 They	 are	 not
concerned	at	all.	Jesus	says:	Consider	the	lilies	of	the	field.	They	exist	only	here
and	now.	They	don't	bother	about	the	tomorrow;	the	tomorrow	will	take	care	of
itself.
Somebody	 brought	 the	 New	 Testament	 to	 a	 Zen	 master,	 and	 he	 read	 a	 few
sentences	 from	 it	 -	 particularly	 this	 sentence:	 "Consider	 the	 lilies	 in	 the	 field.
They	toil	not,	they	don't	think	of	the	tomorrow,	and	they	are	so	beautiful	in	the
here	and	now	that	even	Solomon,	the	great	emperor,	in	his	peak	glory,	was	not
arrayed	 in	 such	 beauty."	 When	 he	 read	 this	 the	 Zen	 master	 said:	 "Stop!
Whosoever	said	this	 is	a	Buddha."	He	didn't	know	about	Jesus,	he	didn't	know
about	Christianity.	Christianity	 had	 reached	 Japan	 just	 a	 few	 days	 before.	 The
master	said:
"Stop!	No	need	to	say	anything	more.	Whosoever	said	this	is	a	Buddha."
All	enlightened	persons	have	 insisted	on	remaining	 in	 the	moment.	That's	why
Gudo	said:
"How	should	I	know?"
THE	EX-EMPEROR	SAID:	"WHY?	BECAUSE	YOU	ARE	A	MASTER."
From	 a	 master	 we	 expect	 answers,	 but	 in	 fact,	 a	 master	 never	 gives	 you	 an
answer,	 he	 simply	 destroys	 your	 question.	 There	 is	 a	 vast	 difference	 between
these	 things.	 From	 a	 master	 we	 expect	 answers	 to	 our	 questions,	 but	 if	 the
questions	 are	 foolish,	 the	 answers	 cannot	 be	 better.	 How	 can	 you	 answer	 a
foolish	question	in	a	wise	way?	The	very	question	is	foolish.
Somebody	comes	and	asks:	"What	is	the	taste	of	the	colour	green?"	It	is	absurd,
because	there	is	no	relationship.	But	the	question	looks	perfect,	linguistically	it	is
perfect.	You	can	ask:
"What	is	the	taste	of	the	colour	green?"	There	is	no	error	in	the	language,	in	the
formulation.
The	same	is	the	case,	for	many	reasons,	when	somebody	asks:	"What	happens	to
an	enlightened	person	when	he	is	dead?"	First,	he	is	never	dead.	An	enlightened
person	is	one	who	has	come	to	know	the	eternal	life.	He	is	never	dead.	Second,
an	enlightened	person	is	no	longer	a	person.	His	ego	is	dissolved,	that's	why	he
is	enlightened.	So,	in	the	first	place,	he	is	never	dead;	in	the	second	place,	he	is
already	dead,	because	he	is	no	more.
Buddha	moved	about	for	forty	years	after	his	enlightenment,	but	 in	 those	forty
years,	 while	 he	 was	 wandering	 from	 village	 to	 village,	 talking	 to	 people
continuously,	 giving	 them	whatsoever	 he	 has	 attained,	 it	 is	 said	 that	 he	 never
uttered	a	single	word	and	he	never	took	a	single	step.	What	does	this	mean?	It	is
rightly	said	that	he	never	uttered	a	single	word,	because	he	was	no	more.	How
can	you	utter	a	word	when	you	are	not?	It	was	as	if	existence	itself,	not	Buddha,
uttered	those	words,	because	now	Buddha	was	no	longer	a	person,	just	the	name
remained,	 utilitarian,	 functional.	Otherwise	 there	was	 no	need	 for	 it.	He	never
took	a	single	step,	but	he	was	wandering	and	wandering.	The	whole	province	of
Bihar	is	called
"Bihar"	because	of	his	wanderings.	Bihar	means	the	wandering,	and	because	he
was	wandering	there,	the	whole	province	is	known	as	Bihar.	But	it	is	said	that	he
never	took	a	single	step	-	and	it	is	right,	absolutely	right	-	he	never	took	a	single
step.
I	tell	you:	In	continuously	talk	to	you	but	I	have	not	uttered	a	single	word.	When
the	ego	is	not	there,	who	can	utter?	Then	what	is	happening	when	I	am	talking	to
you?	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 breeze	 passing	 through	 the	 trees;	 it	 is	 just	 like	 a	 spring
moving	towards	the	river,	it	is	just	like	a	flower	opening.	But	I	am	not	there.	And
the	 flower	 cannot	 claim	 that	 it	 opened	 itself.	 The	 breeze	 cannot	 say;	 "I	 pass
through	 these	 trees",	because	 the	breeze	has	no	ego	 to	say	 it.	The	 river	cannot
say,	"I	am	moving	towards	the	ocean".	The	river	moves,	but	there	is	nobody	who
is	moving.	I	talk	to	you,	but	I	have	not	uttered	a	single	word.
But	how	 to	communicate	 these	 things?	An	enlightened	person	 is	already	dead;
the	past	has	disappeared,	the	center	is	no	longer	there.	Now	he	is	nowhere	-	he
exists	everywhere.	Now	he	86
is	one	with	the	whole,	the	wave	has	lost	itself	into	the	ocean.	So,	when	you	see
Buddha	standing	there,	that	body	is	just	a	contact	point,	that's	all.	Nothing	else.	It
is	just	like	an	electricity	plug.	If	you	plug	in	there	the	energy	moves;	otherwise
the	energy	is	everywhere.
So,	when	Buddha	is	standing	there,	he	is	just	a	contact	point	for	the	cosmos.	He
is	no	longer	there;	he	is	just	a	passage,	just	an	anchor	into	this	world.	And	when
the	anchor	is	lost,	that's	when	Buddha's	body	will	drop.
You	ask:	"What	happens?"	When	a	wave	is	no	more,	what	happens?	It	becomes
the	ocean.
When	a	Buddha	is	no	more,	the	body	disappears	like	the	wave	has	disappeared,
Buddha	is	already	dead,	that's	why	he	is	a	Buddha;	and	secondly,	he	can	never
die,	because	once	the	ego	is	lost,	the	eternal	life	is	attained.	Now	Buddha	is	not
anywhere:	he	is	everywhere.	When	you	don't	have	a	center,	the	whole	existence
becomes	your	center.
The	question	is	foolish.	It	looks	logical,	meaningful,	but	it	is	foolish.	That's	why
Gudo	replied:	"HOW	SHOULD	I	KNOW?"	Many	 things	are	 implied.	Gudo	 is
saying:	I	am	not.
Who	should	know?	When	the	wave	disappears	in	the	ocean,	how	should	I	know?
THE	EX-EMPEROR	SAID:	"WHY?	BECAUSE	YOU	ARE	A	MASTER."
We	 expect	 answers	 from	 a	master,	 but	 answers	 are	 given	 by	 teachers,	 not	 by
masters.
Masters	 simply	 destroy	 your	mind;	 even	 if	 it	 appears	 that	 they	 are	 answering
you,	 they	 never	 answer.	They	 are	 elusive.	You	 ask	 something,	 they	 talk	 about
something	 else.	 You	 ask	 about	 A,	 they	 talk	 about	 B.	 But	 they	 are	 very
persuasive,	seductive.	They	talk	about	B	and	they	convince	you	that,	yes,	your
question	is	answered.	But	your	questions	are	foolish,	 they	cannot	be	answered,
they	are	 irrelevant.	So	a	master	never	answers	 the	questions.	He	gives	you	 the
feeling	 that	he	 is	answering	you,	but	he	 is	simply	 trying	 to	pull	 the	earth	 from
beneath	your	feet.	The	whole	effort	 is	for	your	mind	to	fall,	 to	collapse.	If	you
can	be	near	a	master	for	a	little	while,	you	will	collapse.	He	is	a	chaos;	you	will
be	pulled	down	completely.	Neither	 questions	nor	 answers	will	 be	 there.	Only
then,	when	silence	exists	in	you,	has	a	master	succeeded	with	you.
Answers	will	fill	your	mind	again,	so	how	can	a	master	give	you	answers?	They
will	be	theories;	they	won't	allow	you	to	enter	into	reality.	A	master	really	cuts
away	your	questions	until,	by	and	by,	you	stop	asking,	and	when	the	moment	of
no	asking	comes,	only	 then	 is	 the	answer	given.	But	 that	answer	 is	not	verbal;
that	answer	is	from	his	very	being.	Then	the	master	pours	himself	into	you.	He	is
the	vehicle,	and	the	whole	pours	through	him	into	you.
"WHY?	BECAUSE	YOU	ARE	A	MASTER."
We	 think	 that	 a	 master	 must	 be	 very	 knowledgeable,	 that	 he	 must	 know
everything.	In	fact	a	master	knows	nothing:	he	has	attained	to	perfect	ignorance,
because	only	ignorance	can	be	innocent,	knowledge	never.	Knowledge	is	always
cunning,	 it	 can	 never	 be	 innocent.	 Perfect	 ignorance.	 He	 does	 not	 know
anything.	Knowledge	has	dropped.	He	is,	but	he	is	not	a	knower,	and	whatsoever
he	says	is	out	of	his	innocence,	not	out	of	his	knowledge.	He	can	say	millions	of
things,	because	innocence	is	so	potent.	He	can	go	on	and	on	for	years	-	for	forty
years	Buddha	talked.	Now	scholars	say	that	it	seems	impossible	for	one	man	to
talk	for	forty	years	-	and	about	so	many	things.	It	seems	a	difficult	thing	for	them
because	 they	 don't	 know	 that	 innocence	 is	 inexhaustible.	 Knowledge	 will	 be
exhausted.	If	I	know	something,	it	is	limited,	then	I	cannot	go	on	and	on	and	on.
And	I	tell	you	that	if	you	are	ready,	I	can	go	on	and	on	for	eternity,	because	it	is
not	out	of	knowing,	but	out	of	perfect	ignorance.
Perfect	ignorance	is	not	your	ignorance:	your	ignorance	is	not	perfect.	You	know
-	 in	 fact	you	know	 too	much.	You	cannot	 find	an	 ignorant	person	who	doesn't
know.	He	may	know	87
less,	more,	but	he	knows;	he	may	know	wrongly	or	rightly,	but	he	knows.	Even
an	 idiot	 knows,	 and	 insists	 that	 he	 knows	 rightly.	 Only	 an	 enlightened	 man
denies	that	he	knows.	Said	Socrates:	"When	I	was	young,	I	knew	many	things,	in
fact	 I	knew	all.	Then	I	became	a	 little	more	mature	and	I	started	 feeling	 that	 I
didn't	know	much,	in	fact,	very	little.	And	when	I	became	very,	very	old	then	I
understood	the	whole	thing.	Now	I	know	only	one	thing:	that	I	don't	know."
While	he	was	young	he	knew	many	things....	Youth	is	arrogant.	Only	immature
persons	 are	 knowledgeable;	 maturity	 is	 like	 ignorance,	 it	 doesn't	 know.	 Or	 it
knows	only	that	it	doesn't	know.
GUDO	REPLIED:	"HOW	SHOULD	I	KNOW?"
THE	EX-EMPEROR	SAID:	"WHY?	-	BECAUSE	YOU	ARE	A	MASTER."
Answers	 are	 expected.	He	must	 know.	 If	 he	 doesn't	 know,	 then	who	 else	will
know?
And	beautiful	is	Gudo	-	Said	he:
"YES,	SIR,	BUT	NOT	A	DEAD	ONE!"
I	am	a	master,	but	not	a	dead	one.	Wait.	When	I	am	dead,	then	I	will	say	what
happens	when	an	enlightened	person	dies.	I	am	yet	alive	and	you	ask	me	about
death.	It	has	not	happened,	so	how	should	I	know?	When	it	happens,	I	will	report
to	you.
It	never	happens	to	an	enlightened	man.	Gudo	is	really	clever.	It	never	happens
to	an	enlightened	man.	Only	ignorant	people	die.	Only	the	egos	die.	When	there
is	no	center	inside	you,	who	can	die?	How	is	death	possible?	Death	is	possible	to
the	ego,	 to	 the	 self.	How	can	death	happen	 to	 the	no-self?	All	 the	enlightened
people	through	the	ages	have	been	saying	only	one	thing:	Die	to	the	ego	so	that
you	can	attain	to	the	eternal.	Let	the	ego	die,	then	there	will	be	no	death	for	you,
you	become	deathless.
88
___________________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER	8	-	A	Field	Dyed	Deep	Violet
28	February	1975	a.m.	in	Buddha	Hall
___________________________________________________________________________
NINAGAWA-SHINZAEMON,	 A	 LINKED-VERSE	 POET,	 AND	 DEVOTEE
OF	 ZEN,	 DESIRED	 TO	 BECOME	 A	 DISCIPLE	 OF	 THE	 REMARKABLE
MASTER,	IKKYU,	WHO
WAS	ABBOT	OF	THE	DAITOKUJI	IN	MURASAKINO	-	A	VIOLET	FIELD.
HE	CALLED	UPON	 IKKYU,	AND	THE	FOLLOWING	DIALOGUE	TOOK
PLACE	AT
THE	TEMPLE	ENTRANCE.
IKKYU:	"WHO	ARE	YOU?"
NINAGAWA:	"A	DEVOTEE	OF	BUDDHISM."
IKKYU:	"YOU	ARE	FROM?"
NINAGAWA:	"YOUR	REGION."
IKKYU:	"AH.	AND	WHAT'S	HAPPENING	THERE	THESE	DAYS?"
NINAGAWA:	"THE	CROWS	CAW,	THE	SPARROWS	TWITTER."
IKKYU:	"AND	WHERE	DO	YOU	THINK	YOU	ARE	NOW?"
NINAGAWA:	"IN	A	FIELD	DYED	DEEP	VIOLET."
IKKYU:	"WHY?"
NINAGAWA:
"MISCANTHUS,
MORNING
GLORIES,
SAFFLOWERS,
CHRYSANTHEMUMS,	ASTERS."
IKKYU:	"AND	AFTER	THEY'RE	GONE?"
NINAGAWA:	 "IT	 IS	 MIYAGINO	 -	 THE	 FIELD	 OF	 AUTUMN
FLOWERING."
IKKYU:	"WHAT	HAPPENS	IN	THAT	FIELD?"
NINAGAWA:	 "THE	 STREAM	 FLOWS	 THROUGH,	 THE	 WIND	 SWEEPS
OVER."
AMAZED	AT	NINAGAWA'S	ZEN-LIKE	SPEECH,	IKKYU	LED	HIM	TO	HIS
ROOM
AND	SERVED	HIM	TEA.	THEN	HE	SPOKE	THIS	IMPROMPTU	VERSE:	"I
WANT	TO
SERVE	 YOU	 DELICACIES.	 ALAS!	 THE	 ZEN	 SECT	 CAN	 OFFER
NOTHING."
AT	WHICH	THE	VISITOR	REPLIED:	"THE	MIND	WHICH	TREATS	ME	TO
NOTHING
IS	THE	ORIGINAL	VOID	-	A	DELICACY	OF	DELICACIES."
DEEPLY	MOVED,	THE	MASTER	SAID:	"MY	SON,	YOU	HAVE	LEARNED
MUCH."
Poetry	is	closer	than	theology	to	religion,	imagination	nearer	than	reason.	And,
of	course,	religion	transcends	both	-	it	is	neither.
But	 through	 logic,	 to	 drop	 into	 the	 abyss	 of	 religion	 is	 a	 little	 bit	 difficult,
because	logic	has	a	rigidity	about	it.	It	is	not	flexible;	it	is	closed,	not	open;	it	has
no	windows,	no	doors,	to	go	out	of	itself.	It	is	like	a	grave.	One	can	die	within	it,
but	 one	 cannot	 move	 into	 a	 living	 process,	 one	 cannot	 become	 more	 alive
through	it.	Logic	is	a	straitjacket,	a	prison.
Poetry	is	closer	to	religion,	because	it	is	more	flexible,	liquid,	more	flowing.	It	is
not	 religion,	 but	 you	 can	 drop	 out	 of	 it	 more	 easily	 than	 from	 logic.	 It	 has
openings	 -	 doors	 and	 windows	 -	 and	 fresh	 winds	 can	 always	 reach	 into	 the
deepest	core	of	the	heart	of	a	poet.
Poetry	 is	not	 rigid;	you	can	drop	out	of	 it,	 if	you	 like;	 it	will	not	cling	 to	you.
And,	 because	 it	 is	 imaginative,	 it	 can	 stumble,	 even	 unknowingly,	 upon	 the
unknown.	It	goes	on	groping	in	the	dark	-	it	IS	a	groping	in	the	dark	-	and	it	goes
on	 groping,	 it	 goes	 on	 searching.	 It	 is	 always	 ready	 to	 move	 into	 any	 new
dimension.
Logic	 is	 resistant:	 you	 cannot	 find	more	 orthodox	people	 than	 logicians.	They
will	never	listen	to	a	new	dimension	opening;	they	will	not	even	look	at	it.	They
will	simply	say	it	is	not	89
possible.	All	 that	 is	possible,	 they	 think,	 is	already	known;	all	 that	can	happen
has	already	happened.	They	are	always	suspicious	of	the	unknown.
The	heart	of	the	poet	is	always	in	love	with	the	unknown.	He	goes	on	groping	in
the	 dark	 for	 something	 new,	 something	 original,	 something	 un-tasted	 before,
something	 unlived,	 un-experienced.	 A	 poet	 gropes.	 And	 sometimes	 he	 can
stumble	upon	the	unknown;	he	can	fall	into	the	abyss	of	religion.
Poetry	is	metaphoric,	metaphorical,	it	lives	through	metaphors.	The	same	is	the
language	 of	 religion.	 Of	 course,	 when	 a	metaphor	 is	 used	 in	 a	 poetic	 way,	 it
means	one	thing;	and	when	it	is	used	in	a	religious	way,	it	means	something	else.
But	both	use	metaphors.	There	is	a	meeting	ground.	Their	meanings	may	differ,
but	 their	 methods	 are	 of	 the	 same	 family.	 They	 look	 like	 twins.	 Vast	 is	 the
difference	within,	but	 at	 least	 in	 form,	at	 the	 surface,	 they	are	more	alike	 than
logic	 and	 religion.	 Because	 of	 this	 likeness	 religion	 has	 always	 spoken	 in	 the
way	of	the	poet:	Upanishads,	Vedas,	Kabir,	Meera,	Zen	poets....
Zen	poets	have	written	beautiful	haikus,	 so	condensed	 that	a	vast	poetic	world
becomes	 like	a	seed	 in	 the	haiku.	Sometimes	 they	are	very	simple;	you	cannot
even	catch	the	significance	immediately.	But	if	you	ponder	over	them,	meditate
upon	them,	then,	by	and	by;	the	small	haiku	becomes	a	door.	A	few	days	before	I
was	reading	Basho's	famous	haiku.	It	is	very	small,	but	if	you	meditate	upon	it,
suddenly	a	door	opens.	The	haiku	is:
"Old	pond
Frog	jumps	in
Water-sound."
Just	visualize	 it	 -	 an	old	pond,	very	ancient,	 a	 frog	 jumps	 in,	 the	water-sound.
Finished.
Nothing	 more	 to	 say.	 A	 whole	 situation	 condensed.	 If	 you	 meditate	 on	 it,
suddenly	you	will	feel	a	silence	surrounding	you.	Something	will	change	within
you.	It	is	objective	art.
Zen	poets,	Sufi	mystics,	Hindu	saints,	have	all	spoken	in	the	language	of	poetry,
and	 even	 if	 sometimes	 Buddha	 and	 Mahavira	 and	 Jesus	 don't	 speak	 in	 the
language	of	poetry,	the	poetry	is	still	there,	whether	they	speak	in	it	or	not.	If	you
listen	 to	 them,	 you	 will	 feel	 a	 certain	 poetic	 quality	 underneath	 their	 words.
Their	 prose	 is	 only	 on	 the	 surface.	 The	 form	 is	 of	 prose,	 but	 the	 spirit	 is	 of
poetry.	In	fact,	one	who	is	enlightened	cannot	do	otherwise.	If	he	must	speak	in
prose,	he	can;	but	he	cannot	avoid	poetry.	The	poetry	will	be	there	just	beneath
the	 surface	 -	 if	you	have	a	 little	 insight,	you	will	 see	 it;	 it	 is	vibrant	 and	alive
there.	 Religion	 and	 poetry	 have	 the	 same	 language:	 their	 words	 differ,	 but
somewhere	they	have	a	meeting	point.	And	that	meeting	point	is	the	subject	of
this	story.
A	 poet	 comes	 to	 meet	 a	 Zen	 master.	 He	 must	 have	 been	 a	 very	 great	 poet,
because	only	the	highest	and	greatest	poets	can	have	a	meeting	ground	with	the
mystic.	 Each	 and	 every	 poet	 will	 not	 have	 that,	 because	 where	 the	 poetry
becomes	 ultimate,	 there	 is	 the	 first	 step	 of	mysticism.	Where	 the	 poetry	 ends,
culminates,	reaches	its	peak,	its	GOURISHANKAR,	becomes	the	Everest,	there
is	 the	 first	 step	 of	 the	 temple	 of	 the	mystic.	 The	 highest	 poetry	 is	 the	 lowest
mysticism	-	there	is	the	meeting	point.	So	only	very	great	poets	can	attain	to	the
height	where	a	Zen	master	will	have	to	say:
"MY	SON,	YOU	HAVE	LEARNED	MUCH."
Now	we	should	enter	into	this	story.
90
NINAGAWA-SHINZAEMON,	 A	 LINKED-VERSE	 POET,	 AND	 DEVOTEE
OF	 ZEN,	 DESIRED	 TO	 BECOME	 A	 DISCIPLE	 OF	 THE	 REMARKABLE
MASTER,	IKKYU,	WHO
WAS	ABBOT	OF	THE	DAITOKUJI	IN	MURASAKINO	-	A	VIOLET	FIELD.
This	 has	 always	 been	 my	 feeling:	 that	 the	 greatest	 of	 the	 poets	 cannot	 avoid
religion;	they	have	to	come	into	it,	because	poetry	leads	to	a	certain	point,	and
beyond	that	is	religion.	If	you	persist	in	being	a	poet,	you	will	become	religious.
You	can	remain	a	poet	only	if	you	have	not	travelled	the	whole	extent	of	it.	So
only	small	poets	can	remain	poets:	great	poets	are	bound	to	move	into	religion.
You	cannot	escape	it,	because	a	certain	point	comes	where	the	poetry	ends	and
religion	 begins.	 If	 you	 follow	 up	 to	 that	 extent,	 where	 will	 you	 go?	 At	 that
moment	poetry	converts	itself	into	religion.	One	has	to	follow.
The	same	thing	happens	to	a	logician,	to	a	scientist,	but	in	a	different	way.	With
a	 scientist	 also,	 if	 he	 persists,	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 and	 on,	 there	 comes	 a	moment
where	he	feels	there	is	a	cul-de-sac,	the	road	moves	nowhere.	Now	there	comes
an	abyss,	there	are	no	more	roads	ahead.
It	is	different	with	a	poet:	there	is	a	road	ahead,	but	now	it	is	no	longer	of	poetry.
His	 road	automatically	converts	 into	 the	 road	of	 religion.	But	 for	a	 scientist,	 a
logician,	or	a	philosopher,	 it	happens	in	a	different	way.	He	comes	to	a	cul-de-
sac,	the	road	simply	ends.	It	goes	no	further;	there	is	no	road,	just	a	precipice,	an
abyss.
This	 happened	 to	 Albert	 Einstein	 in	 his	 last	 days.	 It	 can	 happen	 only	 to	 the
greatest.	The	lesser	minds	on	the	same	road	never	reach	to	the	cul-de-sac	point.
They	die	somewhere	on	the	road	believing	that	the	road	was	leading	somewhere,
because	there	was	still	road	ahead	of	them.	The	conversion	happens	only	to	the
greatest.	In	the	last	days	of	Albert	Einstein's	life,	he	started	feeling	that	his	whole
life	 had	 been	 a	 wastage.	 Somebody	 asked	 him,	 "If	 you	 are	 born	 again,	 what
would	 you	 like	 to	 be?"	He	 said:	 "Never	 again	 a	 scientist.	 I	would	 rather	 be	 a
plumber,	 but	 never	 again	 a	 scientist.	 Finished!"	 In	 the	 last	 days,	 he	 started
thinking	about	God,	or	 the	ultimate	meaning	of	 life,	 the	mystery	of	mysteries,
and	he	said:	"The	more	I	penetrated	into	the	mystery	of	existence,	the	more	and
more	 I	 felt	 that	 the	mystery	 is	 eternal,	 unending,	 infinite.	The	more	 I	 came	 to
know,	the	less	I	became	certain	about	my	knowledge."
The	mystery	is	vast,	it	cannot	be	exhausted.	This	is	what	a	concept	of	God	is:	the
mysterious,	the	vast,	that	which	cannot	be	exhausted.	You	can	know,	and	know,
and	know,	and	still	it	remains	unknown.	You	move	into	it,	and	go	in,	and	in,	and
in,	 and	 still	 you	 are	moving	on	 the	 periphery.	You	go	on	dropping	 into	 it,	 but
there	is	no	bottom	to	it.	You	can	never	exactly	reach	to	the	center	of	the	mystery.
The	moment	never	comes	when	you	can	say:
"I	have	known	all."	Nobody	has	said	that,	except	fools.	A	wise	man	starts	feeling
more	and	more	ignorant,	only	fools	gather	a	few	things	from	here	and	there,	and
start	thinking	that	they	know.	Only	fools	are	knowers,	claimers	of	knowledge.
Even	 in	 a	 scientific	 search	 the	moment	 comes	 when	 the	 road	 leads	 nowhere.
Then,	suddenly,	there	is	a	jump.	A	poet	can	move	into	religion	without	any	jump,
he	 can	 simply	 slip,	 the	 roads	 are	 linked	 together.	But	 a	 scientist	 has	 to	 take	 a
jump:	 a	 total	 about-turn,	 three	 hundred	 and	 sixty	 degrees.	 He	 has	 to	 go
completely	upside	down,	inside	out,	outside	in.	But	a	poet	can	simply	slip,	like	a
snake	 slipping	 out	 of	 his	 old	 skin.	 That's	 why	 I	 say	 that	 poetry	 is	 closer	 to
religion.
This	man,	Ninagawa,	must	have	been	a	very,	very	great	poet;	hence	he	became
interested	in	Zen,	meditation.
If	poetry	does	not	lead	you	to	meditation,	it	is	not	poetry.	At	the	most,	it	may	be
a	clever	composition	of	words,	but	 there	will	be	no	poetry	 in	 it.	You	may	be	a
good	 linguist,	 a	 good	 composer,	 a	 good	 grammarian,	 one	 who	 knows	 all	 the
rules	about	how	 to	write	poetry,	but	you	are	not	a	poet	 -	because	poetry	 in	 its
deepest	core	is	meditative.
91
A	poet	is	not	a	composer:	a	poet	is	a	visionary.	He	doesn't	compose,	the	poetry
happens	to	him	in	certain	moments	-	 those	moments	are	of	meditation.	In	fact,
when	 the	 poet	 is	 not,	 then	 the	 poetry	 happens.	 When	 the	 poet	 is	 completely
absent,	 suddenly	 he	 is	 filled	with	 something	 unknown,	 unasked	 for;	 suddenly
something	of	the	unknown	has	entered	into	him,	a	fresh	breeze	has	come	into	his
house.	 Now	 he	 has	 to	 translate	 this	 fresh	 breeze	 into	 language	 -	 he	 is	 not	 a
composer,	he	is	a	translator.	A	poet	is	a	translator:	something	happens	inside	his
being	 and	 he	 translates	 it	 into	 language,	 into	words.	 Something	wordless	 stirs
within.	It	is	more	like	a	feeling,	and	less	like	a	thought.	It	is	less	in	the	head,	and
more	in	the	heart.
A	poet	is	very	courageous.	To	live	with	the	heart	takes	the	deepest	courage.	The
word
"courage"	is	very	interesting.	It	comes	from	a	Latin	root	"cor",	which	means	the
heart.	The	word	courage	comes	from	the	root	"cor".	Cor	means	the	heart	-	so	to
be	courageous	means	to	live	with	the	heart.	And	weaklings,	only	weaklings,	live
with	the	head;	afraid,	they	created	a	security	of	logic	around	them;	fearful,	they
close	 every	 window	 and	 door	 with	 theology,	 concepts,	 words,	 theories	 -	 and
inside	them	they	hide.
The	way	of	the	heart	is	the	way	of	courage.	It	is	live	in	insecurity,	it	is	to	live	in
love,	and	trust;	it	is	to	move	in	the	unknown;	it	is	leaving	the	past	and	allowing
the	future	to	be.
Courage	is	to	move	on	dangerous	paths:	life	is	dangerous	and	only	cowards	can
avoid	the	danger.	But	then,	they	are	already	dead.	A	person	who	is	alive,	really
alive,	vitally	alive,	will	always	move	 into	 the	unknown.	There	 is	danger	 there,
but	he	will	take	the	risk.	The	heart	is	always	ready	to	take	the	risk,	the	heart	is	a
gambler,	the	head	is	a	businessman.	The	head	always	calculates	-	it	is	cunning.
The	heart	is	non-calculating.
This	English	word	 "courage"	 is	beautiful,	 very	 interesting.	To	 live	 through	 the
heart	is	the	meaning:	a	poet	lives	through	the	heart.	And,	by	and	by,	in	the	heart
he	 starts	 listening	 to	 the	 sounds	 of	 the	 unknown.	The	 head	 cannot	 listen;	 it	 is
very	far	away	from	the	unknown.	The	head	is	filled	with	the	known.
What	 is	your	mind?	It	 is	all	 that	you	have	known.	 It	 is	 the	past,	 the	dead,	 that
which	has	gone.	Mind	is	nothing	but	the	accumulated	past,	the	memory.	Heart	is
the	 future,	 heart	 is	 always	 the	 hope,	 heart	 is	 always	 somewhere	 in	 the	 future.
Head	thinks	about	the	past;	heart	dreams	about	the	future.
And	I	tell	you	that	the	present	is	nearer	to	the	future	than	to	the	past.	That's	why
I	say	that	the	poet	is	nearer	to	religion.	Philosophy,	logic	metaphysics,	theology,
science,	all	belong	to	the	past,	the	known;	poetry,	music,	dance,	art	-	all	the	arts	-
belong	to	the	future.
Religion	 belongs	 to	 the	 present,	 and	 I	 tell	 you	 that	 the	 future	 is	 nearer	 to	 the
present	than	to	the	past,	because	the	past	is	already	gone.	The	future	is	to	come.
The	 future	 is	 yet	 to	 be.	 The	 future	 has	 yet	 the	 possibility.	 It	 will	 come;	 it	 is
already	 coming.	 Every	 moment	 it	 is	 becoming	 the	 present	 and	 the	 present	 is
becoming	the	past.	The	past	has	no	possibility,	it	has	been	used.
You	have	already	moved	away	from	it	-	 it	 is	exhausted,	 it	 is	a	dead	thing,	 it	 is
like	a	grave.
The	future	is	like	a	seed;	it	is	coming,	ever	coming,	always	reaching	and	meeting
with	the	present.	You	are	always	moving.	The	present	is	nothing	but	a	movement
into	 the	 future;	 it	 is	 already	 the	 step	 that	 you	 have	 taken;	 it	 is	 going	 into	 the
future.	Poetry	is	concerned	with	possibility,	hope,	dreams;	it	is	nearer.
This	man,	Ninagawa,	must	have	been	a	great	poet.	Why	do	I	say	he	must	have
been	a	great	poet?	-	I	have	not	read	his	poetry;	I	don't	know	what	he	wrote.	But	I
say	he	must	have	been	a	great	poet,	because	he	became	interested	in	Zen.	And
not	 only	 that	 -	 he	 DESIRED	 TO	 BECOME	 A	 DISCIPLE	 OF	 THE
REMARKABLE	MASTER,	IKKYU.
To	 be	 interested	 in	 Zen	 is	 not	 enough	 unless	 you	 become	 a	 disciple.	 To	 be
interested	in	religion	is	not	enough	-	it	is	good,	but	it	doesn't	go	very	far.	Interest
remains	a	curiosity;	92
interest	 remains	mental,	 unless	 you	 take	 a	 jump	 into	 commitment,	 unless	 you
become	a	disciple.
To	become	a	disciple	is	a	great	decision.	It	 is	no	ordinary	decision;	it	 is	a	very
difficult,	 almost	 impossible	decision.	 I	 always	 say	 that	 to	become	a	disciple	 is
the	most	 impossible	 revolution.	Because	 how	 can	 one	 trust	 another?	How	can
one	leave	his	life	in	the	hands	of	another?	It	 is	the	most	impossible	revolution,
but	it	happens,	and	when	it	happens,	it	is	beautiful,	there	is	nothing	like	it.	But
only	 those	who	are	very	courageous,	almost	daredevils,	only	 they	can	 take	 the
step.	It	is	not	for	cowards.	It	is	not	for	head-oriented	people.	It	is	for	those	who
live	in	the	heart,	for	those	who	have	courage,	for	those	who	can	risk.	This	is	the
greatest	 gamble	 ever	 because	 you	 risk	 your	 total	 life,	 you	 give	 yourself	 to
somebody.	You	don't	know	who	he	 is,	you	cannot	know.	You	may	 feel	certain
things,	but	you	can	never	be	certain	about	the	master.	Always	a	doubt	remains.
In	 spite	of	 the	doubt,	one	has	 to	 take	 the	 jump.	The	doubt	cannot	be	 satisfied.
No.	You	can	hide	it,	but	you	cannot	convince	 the	doubting	part	-	how	can	you
convince	it?	You	have	to	be	with	the	master,	only	then	will	the	doubt	disappear.
Before	it	is	not	possible.	Only	experience	will	help	it	to	disappear.	So	how	can
you	convince	it?
The	 mind	 always	 hesitates.	 People	 come	 to	 me	 and	 they	 say	 that	 they	 are
hesitating,	 they	are	fifty-fifty,	what	 to	do?	Should	 they	wait?	If	 they	wait,	 they
can	wait	forever,	because	if	they	think	that	they	will	take	the	jump	only	when	the
mind	 is	 a	 hundred	 percent	 certain,	 convinced,	 then	 they	 will	 never	 take	 it.
Because	 the	mind	 can	 never	 be	 a	 hundred	 percent	 for	 something	 -	 that	 is	 the
nature	of	the	mind.	It	is	always	divided,	fragmented;	it	can	never	to	total.	That	is
the	 difference	 between	 heart	 and	mind.	 Heart	 is	 always	 total,	 mind	 is	 always
divided.	Mind	is	the	division	of	your	being:	heart	is	the	undivided	being.
Discipleship	is	of	the	heart.	The	mind	goes	on	rambling	and	talking	and	doubting
and	being	suspicious.	In	spite	of	that,	in	spite	of	the	chattering	mind,	one	takes
the	jump.	I	say	"in	spite	of	that".	That	is	the	only	way	-	you	simply	don't	listen	to
the	mind.	You	simply	move	beneath	the	mind,	reach	the	heart,	and	ask	the	heart.
Discipleship	is	like	love,	it	is	not	like	a	business	partnership.	It	is	not	a	bargain.
You	simply	give,	without	knowing	whether	something	is	going	to	happen	or	not.
Whether	 you	 will	 receive	 anything	 back,	 you	 don't	 know.	 You	 simply	 give.
That's	why	it	is	courage.
He	 was	 not	 only	 interested	 in	 Zen,	 he	 was	 a	 devotee.	 He	 loved	 it.	 Interest,
curiosity,	enquiry,	is	of	the	mind,	devotion	is	of	the	heart.
...DESIRED	TO	BECOME	A	DISCIPLE.
What	 is	 becoming	 a	 disciple?	What	 does	 it	mean?	 It	means:	 I	 have	 tried,	 and
failed;	I	have	searched	and	couldn't	find;	I	have	done	all	 that	I	could	do,	and	I
have	remained	the	same.	No	transformation	has	happened	to	me.	So	I	surrender.
Now,	the	master	will	be	the	deciding	factor,	not	me.	I	will	simply	follow	him	like
a	shadow.	Whatsoever	he	says	I	will	do.	I	will	not	ask	for	proofs.	I	will	not	ask
that	he	should	first	convince	me.	I	will	not	argue,	I	will	simply	follow	-	in	deep
trust.
The	mind	may	still	go	on	about:	 "What	are	you	doing?	This	 is	not	good.	This
will	not	lead	anywhere;	this	is	foolish,	this	is	mad."	The	mind	will	go	on	saying
this,	but,	once	you	have	taken	the	decision	to	be	a	disciple,	you	don't	listen	to	the
mind,	you	listen	to	the	master.	Up	to	now	you	have	listened	to	your	own	mind,
the	ego,	from	now	onwards,	you	will	listen	to	the	master,	now	the	master	will	be
your	mind.	This	is	the	meaning	of	discipleship:	you	will	put	yourself	aside	and
allow	 the	master	 to	 penetrate	 into	 the	 deepest	 core	 of	 your	 being.	You	 are	 no
more.	Now	only	the	master	is.	To	be	a	disciple	means	to	be	a	shadow,	to	put	your
ego	completely	aside.
93
HE	CALLED	UPON	 IKKYU,	AND	THE	FOLLOWING	DIALOGUE	TOOK
PLACE	AT
THE	TEMPLE	ENTRANCE.
Zen	stories	are	very,	very	meaningful:	no	word	is	there	unnecessarily,	not	even	a
single	word.
...THE	 FOLLOWING	 DIALOGUE	 TOOK	 PLACE	 AT	 THE	 TEMPLE
ENTRANCE.
First,	the	word	"dialogue".	Dialogue	is	not	just	talking,	it	is	not	discussing,	it	is
not	arguing,	it	 is	not	a	debate.	A	dialogue	has	a	different	quality.	A	dialogue	is
the	meeting	of	two	beings,	meeting	in	love,	trying	to	understand	each	other.	Not
trying	to	argue,	not	trying	to	discuss	-	just	a	very	sympathetic	attitude.	Dialogue
is	participating	in	the	being	of	the	other:	two	friends	or	two	lovers	talking	with
no	antagonism	inside,	with	no	effort	to	prove	you	right,	and	the	other	wrong.
That	 happens	while	 you	 are	 talking	with	 people	 -	 you	 go	 on	 and	 on	 in	 subtle
ways,	 trying	to	prove	that	you	are	right.	And	the	other	goes	on	trying	to	prove
that	 he	 is	 right.	 Then	 dialogue	 is	 not	 possible.	 Dialogue	 means	 trying	 to
understand	the	other	with	an	open	mind.
Dialogue	 is	 a	 rare	 phenomenon	 and	 it	 is	 beautiful,	 because	 both	 are	 enriched
through	a	dialogue.	 In	 fact,	while	you	 talk,	either	 it	can	be	a	discussion	-	both
opposite	to	each	other,	a	verbal	fight,	trying	to	prove	that	I	am	right	and	you	are
wrong	 -	 or	 a	 dialogue,	which	 is	 different.	Dialogue	 is	 not	 posing	 against	 each
other,	but	 taking	each	other's	hand,	moving	 together	 towards	 the	 truth,	helping
each	other	to	find	the	way.	It	is	togetherness,	it	is	cooperation,	it	is	a	harmonious
effort	to	find	the	truth.	It	is	not	in	any	way	a	fight,	not	at	all.	It	is	a	friendship,
moving	 together	 to	 find	 the	 truth,	helping	each	other	 to	 find	 the	 truth.	Nobody
has	the	truth	already,	but	when	two	persons	start	finding	out,	enquiring	about	the
truth	together,	that	is	dialogue	-	and	both	are	enriched.	And	when	truth	is	found,
it	 is	 neither	 of	 me,	 nor	 of	 you.	 When	 truth	 is	 found,	 it	 is	 greater	 than	 who
participated	in	the	enquiry,	it	is	higher	than	both,	it	surrounds	both	-	and	both	are
enriched.
Dialogue	is	the	beginning	between	a	master	and	a	disciple;	and	it	must	happen	at
the	entrance,	otherwise	going	 into	 the	 temple	 is	not	possible.	Hence	 the	words
"at	the	entrance"	-
it	must	happen	at	 the	gate.	The	first	 thing	 is	 the	dialogue:	 if	 it	doesn't	happen,
then	 there	 is	 no	possibility	 of	 any	disciple	 hood.	Then	 Ikkyu	would	have	 said
good-bye,	 at	 the	 very	 entrance,	 because	 there	 would	 be	 no	 need	 to	 invite	 the
person	 into	 the	 temple,	 there	 would	 be	 no	 meaning	 in	 it.	 So	 sitting	 at	 the
entrance,	just	sitting	on	the	steps,	this	dialogue	happened.
Ikkyu	 tried	 to	 feel	 the	 man.	 He	 had	 to	 feel	 the	 man,	 the	 potentiality,	 the
possibility,	 the	attitude.	How	deep	was	the	enquiry?	How	deep	was	the	urge	to
enquire?	Was	it	just	a	curiosity?	Was	he	just	a	philosopher,	or	really	a	devotee?
Ikkyu	was	just	trying	to	feel	his	being,	and	Ninagawa	allowed	it,	he	participated
in	it.	He	didn't	become	scared,	he	didn't	try	to	defend,	he	didn't	try	to	pretend	to
be	something	which	he	was	not.	He	opened	his	heart	to	this	man	completely.	He
allowed	 this	man	 to	 enter	 in	 him,	 to	 feel,	 because	 that's	 how	 a	master	 has	 to
decide	whether	you	have	come	here	accidentally,	or	you	have	really	come.
The	coming	can	be	accidental	-	somebody	told	you	and	you	were	passing	by	the
road	so	you	said:	"Okay,	there	is	time	enough	to	go	to	the	movie.	Let	us	go	and
see	who	this	master	is."
If	it	is	accidental	then	it	is	better	to	end	the	relationship	at	the	entrance,	because
it	will	lead	nowhere.	If	the	mind	is	argumentative,	if	the	mind	is	too	filled	with
its	own	ideas,	then	you	can	become	a	student,	but	not	a	disciple.	And	a	master	is
not	a	teacher,	he	is	not	in	search	of	94
students,	he	 is	not	running	a	school.	He	is	creating	a	 temple	of	 the	heart,	he	 is
making	a	shrine;	he	is	bringing	a	holy,	sacred	phenomenon	to	the	earth.
Ikkyu	had	to	feel,	and	he	felt	him	very	deeply,	and	the	man	proved	his	mettle,	he
was	authentic.	He	didn't	 react,	he	 responded	 to	 the	master,	and	whatsoever	 the
master	asked,	he	gave	a	total	response	to	it.	Those	responses	are	beautiful,	move
slowly.
HE	CALLED	UPON	 IKKYU,	AND	THE	FOLLOWING	DIALOGUE	TOOK
PLACE	AT
THE	TEMPLE	ENTRANCE.	IKKYU:	"WHO	ARE	YOU?"
That	is	going	to	be	the	whole	search.	"Who	am	I?"	is	all	that	religion	is	about.	If
you	 already	 know	who	 you	 are,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 bother	 or,	 if	 in	 your
ignorance	 you	 have	 become	 identified	 with	 the	 name	 and	 the	 form,	 too
identified,	too	filled	with	your	name	and	form,	then,	too,	you	are	not	yet	mature
enough	for	a	master	like	Ikkyu	to	accept	you.	You	have	to	go	to	a	lesser	master,
in	fact,	to	a	teacher	who	will	teach	you	that	you	are	not	the	name,	and	you	are
not	 the	 form,	 and	 you	 are	 not	 the	 body,	 and	 this	 and	 that,	 and	 create	 a
philosophical	 soil	 into	which	 a	master	 can	 throw	 the	 seed.	You	 need	 to	 go	 to
some	teacher.	So	the	first	thing	Ikkyu	asked	was:	"Who	are	you?"
Ninagawa	said:
"A	DEVOTEE	OF	BUDDHISM."
A	very,	very	humble	attitude	-	non-claiming.	He	didn't	say	his	name,	that	"I	am
Ninagawa	-
you	 don't	 know?	 Have	 you	 not	 heard	 about	 the	 greatest	 poet	 in	 the	 country?
Don't	 you	 read	 newspapers?	 What	 nonsense	 are	 you	 asking:	 Who	 are	 you?
Everybody	knows	in	the	country,	even	the	emperor."
Poets	 are	 very,	 very	 egoistical	 people.	 Poets,	writers,	 novelists	 -	 all	 have	 very
crystallized	egos.	You	cannot	find	more	egoistical	people	than	literary	people.	It
is	very	difficult	 to	have	any	dialogue	with	them.	They	already	know.	They	can
teach	you,	but	they	cannot	be	taught.
Just	because	they	can	compose	a	few	lines,	just	because	they	can	write	an	article,
or	 a	novel,	 or	 a	 story,	 they	 start	 feeling	very	much	 that	 they	are	 somebody.	 In
fact,	a	real	poet	will	have	no	ego	-	if	a	poet	has	a	very	crystallized	ego,	he	is	not
a	poet	at	all.	Because	he	has	learned	nothing	out	of	his	poetry,	he	has	not	even
learned	this	basic	truth:	that	poetry	descends	only	when	you	are	not.	So	he	must
be	 composing,	 he	must	 be	 doing	 something.	 Poetry	 can	 be	 a	 technique,	 so	 he
may	be	a	 technician,	but	he	 is	not	a	poet.	He	may	be	able	 to	arrange	beautiful
words,	in	rhythm,	he	may	follow	all	the	rules,	he	may	be	perfect	-	but	he	is	not	a
poet.	He	may	be	clever,	technically	right,	but	deep	inside,	if	the	ego	is	still	there,
he	does	not	know	what	poetry	is,	because	poetry	happens	only	when	you	are	not.
In	fact,	a	great	poet	will	not	claim	that	he	is	the	creator	of	this	poetry.	How	can
he	claim	it?	He	was	not	when	it	happened.
It	happened	that	when	Coleridge	-	one	of	the	greatest	poets	-	died,	he	left	almost
forty	thousand	pieces	incomplete.	He	would	start	a	poem;	write	three	lines,	and
then	stop.	Years	would	pass,	and	then	suddenly	one	day	he	would	add	two	more
lines,	 then	 stop.	 Forty	 thousand	 incomplete	 poems!	 Just	 before	 he	 died,
somebody	asked:	"What	have	you	been	doing?	These	are	such	beautiful	things,
why	 don't	 you	 complete	 them?"	He	 said:	 "How	 can	 I	 complete	 them?	 I	 never
wrote	 them,	 they	 came.	When	 they	 come,	 they	 come;	 when	 they	 don't	 come,
they	don't	come.	What	can	I	do?	They	cannot	be	pulled;	they	cannot	be	forced	to
come.
I	don't	know	from	where	they	come:	out	of	the	blue	a	line	descends.	Sometimes
the	whole	poem	comes	 in	succession,	sometimes	not,	and	nothing	can	be	done
because	I	don't	know	from	where	they	come.	In	fact,	when	they	come	I	am	not.	I
am	so	dazed,	I	become	just	a	void.
So	how	can	I	complete	them?"
95
That's	why	ancient	poems	exist	without	any	signature.	Nobody	knows	who	wrote
them.
Who	wrote	 the	Upanishads,	 the	 greatest	 of	 poems	 -	who	wrote	 them,	 nobody
knows.	The	authors	never	signed	them;	they	never	signed	them	because	they	felt
so	humble.	They	were	not	the	makers,	not	the	creators.
When	Ninagawa	was	asked,	"who	are	you?"	if	he	had	been	just	like	other	poets,
ordinary	poets	and	writers	and	authors,	too	filled	with	their	own	egos,	he	would
have	said	something	like,	"you	don't	know	that	I	am	a	Nobel	Laureate,	a	Nobel
Prize	winner,	and	that	the	emperor	has	praised	me	and	appointed	me	as	the	royal
poet?"	No,	Ninagawa	said:
"A	DEVOTEE	OF	BUDDHISM."
He	didn't	talk	about	poetry,	he	didn't	talk	about	his	famous	name,	he	didn't	talk
about	himself	at	all.	He	simply	said:
"A	DEVOTEE	OF	BUDDHISM"
-	a	devotee	of	Buddha.	A	devotee	-	that	showed	that	he	was	there	because	of	his
heart,	 because	of	 his	 love.	He	was	 there	 not	 because	of	 his	 reasoning;	 he	was
there	because	of	his	feeling.	Just	a	devotee.
IKKYU:	"YOU	ARE	FROM?"
NINAGAWA:	"YOUR	REGION."
A	beautiful	metaphor.	In	fact	he	was	from	the	region,	from	the	same	part	of	the
country,	 from	where	 Ikkyu	 came.	 But	 he	 was	 not	 talking	 about	 that.	 He	 was
talking	 about	 the	 inner	 region,	 the	 inner	 search:	 "Maybe	 you	 are	 far	 ahead,
maybe	 you	 have	 reached,	 and	 I	 am	 just	 a	 beginner,	 but	 I	 belong	 to	 the	 same
region,	the	search	is	the	same.	I	am	a	fellow	traveller."
Once	your	heart	 is	filled	with	the	urge	to	know	the	truth,	you	become	a	fellow
traveller	of	all	that	makes	no	difference	-	you	have	started	on	the	path.	You	may
be	just	at	the	beginning,	but	now	you	are	a	fellow	traveller.
Says	Ninagawa:
"YOUR	REGION."
I	belong	to	the	same	part	of	the	world	to	which	you	belong.
IKKYU:	"AH.	AND	WHAT'S	HAPPENlNG	THERE	THESE	DAYS?"
He	goes	on	poking	at	him,	provoking	him;	maybe	he	is	just	a	pretender	trying	to
deceive,	 saying	 beautiful	 things	 learned	 somewhere,	 borrowed.	 He	 may	 have
been	 a	 scholar	 of	Zen	 classics	where	 such	 dialogues	 are	 given.	But	 he	 cannot
escape	Ikkyu.	If	he	is	a	pretender,	he	will	fall	somewhere	or	other.
"AH.	AND	WHAT'S	HAPPENING	THERE	THESE	DAYS?"
Ikkyu	brings	him	back	and	back.	He	understands	what	Ninagawa	is	saying,	what
he	means	by	 "your	 region",	 but	 he	doesn't	 allow	 it	 for	 a	moment.	So	he	 says:
"What	 is	 happening	 there	 these	 days?"	 Who	 has	 become	 the	 prime	 minister
there?	Whose	wife	has	moved	with	whom?
96
Some	 rumor,	 some	 gossip;	 what	 is	 happening	 there?	 Some	 events	 must	 have
taken	place	-
somebody	died,	somebody	got	married.	Events	-	what	is	happening	there?
NINAGAWA:	"THE	CROWS	CAW,	THE	SPARROWS	TWITTER."
Prime	ministers,	ministers,	and	their	world,	politics,	the	market,	economics,	are
not	real	history.	They	are	just	accidents;	they	happen	on	the	periphery.	They	are
not	 part	 of	 eternity,	 they	 happen	 in	 time.	What	 is	 eternal	 is	 the	 only	 news	 for
those	who	 know,	 and	what	 is	 accidental	 is	 the	 only	 news	 for	 those	who	 don't
know.
NINAGAWA:	"THE	CROWS	CAW,	THE	SPARROWS	TWITTER."
This	 is	 the	 eternal	 news,	 which	 has	 always	 been	 happening	 and	 is	 happening
still.	Summer	and	winter,	nature	flows,	and	clouds	come	and	go.	This	is	eternity.
In	 the	morning	 the	 sun	 rises,	 and	 in	 the	 evening	 the	 sun	 sets,	 still.	And	 in	 the
night	there	are	stars	in	the	sky	with	their	subtle	music.	This	is	all.	That	is	the	real
news.	 The	 crows	 don't	 bother	 who	 has	 become	 the	 prime	 minister,	 and	 the
sparrows	don't	pay	a	single,	a	single	bit	of	attention	to	the	world	of	events.	Only
man	is	filled	with	this	junk.
Henry	Ford	has	said:	"History	is	bunk."	It	is	rare	for	something	like	this	to	come
from	a	very	rich	man,	but	it	is	true.	What	does	it	matter	whether	Napoleon	wins
or	is	defeated?	Who	rules?	The	eternal	moves,	not	even	aware	that	these	things
are	happening.	What	is	Ninagawa	saying?	He	is	saying	it	is	always	the	same:
THE	CROWS	CAW,	THE	SPARROWS	TWITTER.
"AND	WHERE	DO	YOU	THINK	YOU	ARE	NOW?"
Ikkyu's	hard	-	from	another	dimension	he	attacks.
"AND	WHERE	DO	YOU	THINK	YOU	ARE	NOW?"
NINAGAWA:	"IN	A	FIELD	DYED	DEEP	VIOLET."
The	temple	was	known	as	the	violet	field,	Murasakino.
IKKYU:	"WHY?"
Why	do	you	call	it	that?	You	are	in	a	field	dyed	deep	violet.	Why	do	you	call	it
"DYED	DEEP	VIOLET?"
NINAGAWA:	 "MISCANTHUS,	 MORNING	 GLORIES,	 SAFFLOWERS,
CHRYSANTHEMUMS,	ASTERS."
Flowers	all	over.	Ninagawa	doesn't	 say	 that	 this	was	 the	name	of	 the	 temple	 -
violet	field.
Names	belong	to	the	memory,	to	the	past,	and	the	master	was	asking	about	the
now.	And	now,	all	over,	all	around	are	flowers:
MISCANTHUS,
MORNING
GLORIES,
SAFFLOWERS,
CHRYSANTHEMUMS,
ASTERS.
97
They	were	giving	the	whole	place	a	deep	violet	colour.	When	Ikkyu	asked	about
the	now,	Ninagawa	talked	about	the	now.
Ikkyu	is	really	impossible;	he	won't	relax.	He	asks:
"AND	AFTER	THEY'RE	GONE?"
These	 flowers	 are	 here	 now,	 okay,	 so	 you	 call	 it	 a	 deep	violet	 colour,	 a	 violet
field.	But	soon	these	flowers	will	be	gone,	then	what	will	you	call	it,	after	they
are	gone?
NINAGAWA:	 "IT	 IS	 MIYAGINO	 -	 THE	 FIELD	 OF	 AUTUMN
FLOWERING."
This	is	to	be	understood.	Clouds	come	and	go	-	these	are	two	aspects	of	the	same
coin.
Flowers	 flower,	 then	 disappear	 -	 these	 are	 also	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same
phenomenon.	Absence	and	presence	are	not	opposite:	they	are	two	aspects	of	the
same	thing.	Now	there	are	flowers,	so	it	is	called	the	violet	field,	and	when	the
flowers	 are	 gone	 people	will	 say	 that	 this	 is	 the	 field	 of	 the	 absence	 of	 these
autumn	 flowers.	 It	 will	 still	 be	 the	 violet	 field,	 but	 from	 the	 other	 side,	 the
absence.
It	happened	once	that	a	Zen	master	loved	his	mother	very	much.	In	fact,	before
he	became	a	Zen	disciple,	his	father	died.	He	wanted	to	become	a	Zen	monk,	but
his	mother	said:	"I	am	poor,	and	I	am	alone,	and	your	father	is	dead."	So	he	said:
"Don't	worry.	Even	when	I	become	a	monk,	I	will	be	your	son	and	you	will	be
my	mother.	 I	 am	not	 renouncing,	 you	 are	 not	 losing	 anything."	So	 the	mother
allowed	him	to	become	a	monk.
He	loved	the	mother	very	much.	He	would	go	to	the	market	to	purchase	things
for	her,	and	people	would	laugh.	They	would	say:	"We	have	never	seen	a	monk
purchasing	things."
Buddhist	monks	simply	beg;	and	not	only	would	he	not	be	begging,	he	would	be
purchasing	meat	and	fish,	and	people	would	simply	ridicule	him.	This	was	 too
much.
Of	course	he	was	buying	these	things	for	his	mother,	not	for	himself;	she	liked
them	and	she	was	not	a	nun	or	a	religious	person.	Then	the	mother,	seeing	that
people	 laughed,	 that	 the	 whole	 town	 laughed	 about	 a	 monk	 purchasing	 fish,
became	a	vegetarian.	And	because	people	laughed	about	him	purchasing	things,
she	said:	"Don't	go.	I	will	purchase	them	myself."	He	continued	to	be	a	devoted
son.
Then	one	day	he	went	to	preach	somewhere	and	the	mother	died	when	he	was
not	there.
He	came	just	in	time;	the	dead	body	was	there	and	people	were	getting	ready	to
take	it	to	the	cemetery.
He	 came	near	 the	body	 and	 said:	 "Mother,	 so	you	have	 left?"	And	he	himself
replied:	 "Yes,	 son,	 I	 have	 left	 the	 body."	Then	he	 said:	 "Don't	 be	 too	worried,
because	soon	I	will	also	be	leaving	the	body."	Then	he	replied,	from	the	mother's
side:	"Good,	I	will	wait	for	you."	And	then	he	told	the	people:	"I	have	said	good-
bye	to	my	mother.	The	dialogue	is	over.	The	funeral	is	over.	Now	you	can	take
the	 dead	 body."	 Somebody	 asked:	 "We	 cannot	 follow,	 what	 is	 the	matter?	 To
whom	were	you	talking?"	He	said:	"To	the	absence	of	my	mother,	because	that	is
another	aspect	of	her	being."	They	asked:	"But	why	were	you	answering?"	He
said:
"Because	she	could	not	answer,	so	I	had	to	do	both.	Absence	cannot	answer,	so	I
had	to	answer	from	her	side.	But	she	is	there,	as	she	was	before,	only	now	she	is
in	her	absent	aspect."
So	when	Ikkyu	asked:
"AND	AFTER	THEY	ARE	GONE?"
Ninagawa	said:
98
"IT	IS	MIYAGINO	-	THE	FIELD	OF	AUTUMN	FLOWERING."
It	is	the	same	field,	but	in	an	absent	aspect.	Manifested	or	un-manifested,	being
or	non-being,	 life	or	death,	are	 two	aspects	of	 the	same	phenomenon.	There	 is
nothing	to	choose,	and	those	who	choose	are	stupid,	and	unnecessarily	fall	into
suffering.	Now	amazed,	Ikkyu	asked	the	last	question:
-	when	flowers	are	gone?
NINAGAWA:	 "THE	 STREAM	 FLOWS	 THROUGH,	 THE	 WIND	 SWEEPS
OVER."
AMAZED	AT	NINAGAWA'S	ZEN-LIKE	SPEECH,	IKKYU	LED	HIM	TO	HIS
ROOM
AND	SERVED	HIM	TEA.
Remember,	it	is	Zen-like,	but	it	is	not	exactly	Zen.	He	is	a	poet,	and	a	very	great
poet	 of	 deep	 understanding,	 but	 the	 highest	 of	 poetry	 is	 just	 the	 beginning	 of
Zen,	the	beginning	of	religion.
It	is	Zen-like	stuff.	He	understands	he	has	a	certain	glimpse,	he	is	open,	he	feels,
he	 has	 groped	 in	 the	 dark	 and	 he	 knows	 a	 certain	 quality;	 through	 his	 own
enquiry	he	has	stumbled	upon	it.	But	still	it	is	just	a	glimpse.	Sometimes	it	can
happen	-	a	dark	night,	a	sudden	lightning,	and	you	have	a	glimpse.	Then	again
there	 is	 darkness.	 This	 is	what	 happens	 to	 the	 greatest	 poet:	 he	 is	 just	 on	 the
boundary	line	from	where	he	can	have	glimpses	of	the	beyond.
But	they	are	glimpses.	They	are	Zen-like.
When	 will	 they	 become	 Zen?	 They	 will	 become	 Zen	 only	 when	 they	 are	 no
longer	glimpses,	but	have	become	your	very	being.	Then	you	live	in	them	from
moment	 to	moment,	 they	 don't	 come	 and	 go.	 They	 have	 simply	 become	 your
innermost	being,	the	way	you	are.	It	is	not	like	lightning,	it	is	full	noontide,	it	is
day;	 the	 sun	 is	 high	 in	 the	 sky	 and	 remains	 there;	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of
darkness	coming	again.	It	is	not	a	glimpse,	it	has	become	part	of	you,	you	carry
it	 wherever	 you	 go.	 The	 inner	 light	 is	 burning	 now	 -	 you	 don't	 depend	 on
accidents,	you	have	settled	in	it,	it	has	become	your	home.
Trying	 to	 reach	 reality	 through	 the	 head	 is	 just	 like	 someone	 trying	 to	 see
through	the	ears.
It	is	not	possible.	Ears	can	hear,	but	cannot	see.	Trying	to	reach	reality	through
the	heart	is	like	trying	to	see	with	the	hands.	The	hands	cannot	see,	but	they	can
still	give	a	glimpse	of	what	seeing	can	be.
A	blind	person,	if	he	loves	a	woman,	touches	her	face,	feels	the	curves,	touches
the	 body,	 feels	 the	 roundness,	 the	 warmth	 and	 the	 marble-like	 texture,	 then
through	 the	 hands	 comes	 a	 certain	 glimpse	 of	 seeing.	 Hands	 can	 give	 you	 a
certain	glimpse	of	seeing,	not	exactly	seeing	because	how	can	hands	see?	They
can	only	grope.	But	when	you	 touch	a	 face	with	closed	eyes,	you	can	 feel	 the
curves,	the	nose,	the	eyes,	the	way	the	face	is.
A	 poet	 is	 like	 a	 hand,	 he	 feels	 the	 nature	 of	 reality	 with	 his	 hands.	 Certain
glimpses	come	 to	him,	Zen-like.	And	a	 real	man	of	Zen	 is	 like	eyes,	he	 is	not
groping,	he	has	no	need	to	touch	with	the	hand	-	he	can	see.
AMAZED	AT	NINAGAWA'S	ZEN-LIKE	SPEECH,	IKKYU	LED	HIM	TO	HIS
ROOM
AND	SERVED	HIM	TEA.
These	are	symbols	showing	that	you	are	allowed	-	come	nearer	and	closer.
99
...AND	SERVED	HIM	TEA.
Tea	is	a	Zen	symbol	which	means	awareness,	because	tea	makes	you	more	alert,
more	aware.	Tea	was	invented	by	Buddhists	and	for	centuries	they	have	used	tea
as	a	help	in	meditation.	And	tea	is	helpful.	If	you	take	a	cup	of	tea,	strong,	and
then	sit	in	meditation	for	at	least	one	hour	you	will	not	feel	sleepy,	and	you	can
remain	aware.	Otherwise,	whenever	you	feel	silent,	and	sit	relaxed,	sleep	comes.
To	avoid	sleep,	tea	has	helped.
The	 story	 is	 that	Bodhidharma	was	meditating	on	a	 certain	mountain	 in	China
called	"Ta".
From	that	"Ta"	comes	the	name	"tea".	That	mountain	can	be	pronounced	as	"Ta",
or	"Cha";	that's	why	in	India	tea	is	called	"chai",	or	"cha".
Bodhidharma	 was	 meditating;	 he	 was	 really	 a	 great	 meditator.	 He	 liked	 to
meditate	for	eighteen	hours,	but	it	was	difficult.	He	would	feel	sleepy	again	and
again,	and	his	eyelids	would	drop,	again	and	again.	So	he	cut	off	his	eyelids	and
threw	them	away,	now	there	was	no	possibility	of	closing	the	eyes.	The	story	is
beautiful	-	those	eyelids	became	the	first	seeds	of	tea,	and	a	certain	plant	came
out	of	 them.	Bodhidharma	prepared	 the	first	 tea	 in	 the	world	out	of	 the	plants,
and	he	was	amazed	to	find	that	if	you	took	the	leaves	and	drank	them,	you	could
remain	alert	for	longer	periods.	So	for	centuries	Zen	people	have	been	drinking
tea,	and	tea	has	become	a	very,	very	sacred	thing.
When	a	Zen	master	 serves	 tea,	 it	 is	a	metaphor.	He	 is	 saying:	Be	more	aware.
You	are	on	the	right	path,	he	says	to	Ninagawa,	you	are	on	the	right	path,	but	you
are	walking	a	little	sleepily.	You	have	found	the	direction;	now	move	in	the	same
direction.	Soon	your	Zen-like	being	will	become	Zen,	but	you	will	need	 to	be
more	aware.
AMAZED	AT	NINAGAWA'S	ZEN-LIKE	SPEECH,	IKKYU	LED	HIM	TO	HIS
ROOM
AND	SERVED	HIM	TEA.
He	is	serving	awareness,	a	cup	full	of	awareness.	It	is	a	symbol	to	indicate	that
he	should	become	more	aware,	that's	all	that	he	needs.
THEN	 IKKYU	 SPOKE	 THIS	 IMPROMPTU	VERSE:	 "I	WANT	 TO	 SERVE
YOU
DELICACIES.	ALAS!	THE	ZEN	SECT	CAN	OFFER	NOTHING."
It	has	two	meanings.	The	ordinary	meaning	is	that	in	the	Zen	sect	delicacies	are
not	 allowed.	 Very	 simple	 food	 is	 allowed;	 rice,	 a	 few	 vegetables,	 tea	 -	 no
delicacies.	So	the	first,	the	ordinary	meaning	is:
I	 WANT	 TO	 SERVE	 YOU	 DELICACIES.	 ALAS!	 THE	 ZEN	 SECT	 CAN
OFFER
NOTHING.
This	 is	 the	 last	 effort	 of	 Ikkyu	 to	 penetrate	 him	 to	 the	 deepest	 core,	 to	 see
whether	he	can	understand	the	meaning	or	not.
The	second	meaning	is:
I	 WANT	 TO	 SERVE	 YOU	 DELICACIES	 ALAS!	 THE	 ZEN	 SECT	 CAN
OFFER...	only	NOTHING.
I	can	offer	nothing.	It	can	mean:	I	cannot	offer	anything,	or	 it	can	mean:	I	can
offer	you	only	nothing.	Then	nothing	is	offered.	Awareness	and	nothingness	are
two	aspects	of	the	same	thing.	The	more	you	become	aware,	the	more	you	feel
being	nothing.
100
So	 first	 Ikkyu	 served	 tea	 to	 say:	Become	aware.	Then	he	 says:	Alas!	 I	 cannot
offer	anything
-	except	nothing.
This	is	the	last	net	thrown	by	the	master.	After	he	had	given	the	tea,	if	Ninagawa
had	 been	 a	 pretender,	 he	 would	 have	 relaxed.	 He	would	 have	 thought:	 "I	 am
accepted.	The	master	has	led	me	to	his	tea-room,	offered	me	tea,	served	me	tea.	I
am	relaxed."	After	taking	tea	he	would	have	relaxed,	because	you	cannot	pretend
for	long.	Pretension	is	such	a	strain	that	one	relaxes.	And	when	the	master	has
served	and	given	you	tea,	now	there	is	no	need	to	pretend,	everything	is	finished.
So	it	was	the	last	trap.
Ninagawa	replied:
"THE	MIND	WHICH	TREATS	ME	TO	NOTHING	IS	THE	ORIGINAL	VOID
-	A	DELICACY	OF	DELICACIES."
No.	He	had	a	really	Zen-like	understanding;	he	was	not	a	mere	poet.	Something
of	 the	 real	 poetry	 of	 existence	 had	 happened	 to	 him.	 He	 could	 immediately
understand.	He	could	be	immediate	and	he	could	respond.	He	said:
"THE	MIND	WHICH	TREATS	ME	TO	NOTHING	IS	THE	ORIGINAL	VOID
-	A	DELICACY	OF	DELICACIES."
Nothing	is	the	delicacy	of	delicacies	-	more	than	that	cannot	be	offered.	That	is
the	last	delicacy,	the	last	taste	of	existence	itself.	It	is	as	if	you	have	eaten	God
himself	-	the	delicacy	of	delicacies.
DEEPLY	MOVED,	THE	MASTER	SAID:	"MY	SON,	YOU	HAVE	LEARNED
MUCH."
This	 learning	 is	 not	 knowledge.	Zen	makes	 a	 difference	 between	 learning	 and
knowledge;	let	me	explain	it	to	you.	Knowledge	is	borrowed:	learning	is	yours.
Knowledge	 is	 through	 words,	 language,	 concepts:	 learning	 is	 through
experience.	Knowledge	is	always	finished:	you	know	it,	it	is	complete.	Learning
is	never	complete;	it	is	always	on	the	way.	Learning	is	a	process	-	one	goes	on
and	on	and	on,	to	the	very	last	moment	one	goes	on	learning.
Knowledge	 stops	 somewhere,	 and	 becomes	 the	 ego.	 Learning	 never	 stops,	 it
remains	humbleness.	Knowledge	 is	borrowed:	you	cannot	deceive	a	master	by
your	knowledge,	because	your	words	will	be	just	on	the	surface;	deep	down	your
being	 will	 show.	 Your	 words	 cannot	 hide	 you.	 For	 a	 master	 your	 words	 are
transparent.	Whatsoever	you	show	 that	you	know	he	can	always	see	behind	 to
what	is	really	there.	This	man	would	have	been	caught	by	Ikkyu	if	he	had	been	a
man	of	knowledge.	But	no,	he	was	really	a	man	of	learning:	he	had	learned,	he
was	not	pretending.	Through	many	experiences	of	life,	existence,	he	had	learned
much.
"MY	SON",	SAID	IKKYU,	"YOU	HAVE	LEARNED	MUCH".
And	this	 is	very	much	from	a	Zen	master,	because	they	are	very	miserly	about
saying	such	 things.	When	a	Zen	master	says	such	a	 thing	he	means	 it.	And	he
can	 say	 such	 a	 thing	 only	when	 he	 is	 really	moved,	 when	 he	 really	 feels	 the
authentic.	Only	then,	otherwise	not.
Look	into	 this	story,	and	feel	yourself	parallel	 to	 it.	Have	you	 learned,	or	have
you	only	gathered	knowledge?	Let	it	become	a	very	fundamental	law:	don't	react
through	knowledge,	react	-	that	is,	respond	-	spontaneously.	Only	then	will	you
be	closer	and	closer	to	me,	and	only	then,	one	day,	can	I	lead	you	in	and	serve
you	tea.	Otherwise	you	can	just	be	physically	101
closer	to	me	and	that	won't	help.	I	have	to	serve	awareness	to	you	and	I	have	to
give	you	the	delicacy	of	delicacies	-	nothingness.
___________________________________________________________________________
102
Table	of	Contents
CHAPTER	2	-	Master	and	Disciple
CHAPTER	6	-	Awakening
