1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Talks	given	from	8/11/76	to	3/12/76
Darshan	Diary
24	Chapters
Year	published:	1978
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	The	Opening	of	the	Door...
8	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611085
ShortTitle:	WHIP01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
A	SEEKER	SAID	TO	BUDDHA:
'I	DO	NOT	ASK	FOR	WORDS;	I	DO	NOT	ASK	FOR	SILENCE.'
BUDDHA	JUST	SAT	QUIETLY.
THE	SEEKER	SAID	ADMIRINGLY:
'THE	COMPASSION	OF	THE	WORLD-HONOURED	ONE
HAS	OPENED	THE	CLOUDS	OF	MY	ILLUSION
AND	HAS	ENABLED	ME	TO	ENTER	ON	THE	PATH.'
MAKING	HIS	SALUTATIONS,	HE	DEPARTED.
ANANDA	THEN	ASKED	BUDDHA:
'WHAT	WAS	IT	THIS	STRANGER	REALISED
THAT	HE	SO	PRAISED	YOU?'
THE	WORLD-HONOURED	ONE	REPLIED:
'A	HIGH	CLASS	HORSE	MOVES	EVEN	AT
THE	SHADOW	OF	THE	WHIP.'
Anand	means	bliss	and	pragita	means	a	song;	a	song	of	bliss.	And	I	would	like
you	to	sing,	to	dance.
Create	 a	 life	 around	 celebration	 --	 that	 should	 become	 the	 most	 fundamental
thing;	 everything	 else	 should	 be	 secondary.	 So	 whenever	 anything	 happens,
delight	in	it,	accept	it	as	a	gift	of	God.	It	is	through	singing	and	music	and	dance
that	you	will	grow.
And	there	is	no	need	to	be	trained	in	them.	Singing	needs	no	training.	The	birds
go	on	singing	without	any	training.	They	have	never	entered	any	school,	never
learned	anything	anywhere.	Only	man	has	forgotten	the	natural	way	to	sing	and
to	 dance.	 So	 just	 be	 natural	 about	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 performance	 --	 it	 is	 just	 an
expression	of	your	joy....
[A	sannyasin	asks:	...	things	are	going	great	and	everything	is	okay	--	but...	the
same	old	uglies	keep	coming	up	over	and	over	again:	the	same	impatience,	the
need	to	control,	the	same	carelessness,	the	same	absent-mindedness...	since	this
is	still	happening	after	two	years	of	silence,	maybe	I'm	stuck,	and	that	I	should
break	out	of	silence	and	do	a	few	groups.	So	that's	my	question:	as	 to	whether
I'm	stuck,	and	whether	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
this	sense	of	well-being	I	have	is	just	my	mind	playing	tricks.]
No,	 no,	 nothing.	 It	 is	 really	 happening,	 but	 still	 problems	 can	 continue.	 The
being	 is	so	vast	 that	problems	can	continue	 in	a	corner.	On	 the	whole	you	can
feel	 a	 very	 great	 well-being,	 a	 very	 great	 silence	 and	 happiness,	 and	 still
somewhere,	 in	a	dark	corner	of	 the	heart,	one's	problems	can	continue	and	can
go	on	creating	their	noise.	There	is	nothing	wrong	in	it.	Man	is	vast	!
We	ordinarily	think	that	we	are	confined	to	the	body	--	that	is	not	true.	Man	is	so
vast	 that	 he	 can	 contain	 contradictions.	 So	 nothing	 to	 be	 worried	 about.	 And
sometimes	 it	 happens	 that	 the	 more	 silent	 you	 become,	 the	 more	 aware	 you
become	of	the	contradiction.	If	you	were	not	so	silent	you	might	not	have	been
aware	of	it,	because	the	contrast	would	not	arise.
It	is	as	if	the	whole	room	is	dirty	--	then	you	clean	a	part	of	it.	Because	of	this
clean	part,	now	the	whole	room	looks	very	dirty.	When	this	clean	part	was	not
there	and	the	whole	room	was	dirty,	the	same,	you	were	not	aware	of	it.	It	is	just
as	if	on	a	plain	wall	you	throw	black	ink:	it	becomes	so	clear	and	so	loud.
But	 a	 group	 can	 still	 be	 good.	That	will	 help	 you	 to	 bring	 this	 problem	 to	 its
climax.	If	you	feel	like	doing,	you	can	do	one	group.	Encounter	will	be	perfect.
Do	Encounter,	mm?	and	in	the	group	come	out	of	silence.	After	the	group	you
can	go	into	silence	again	....	Or	we	will	see	first.	First	do	the	group	and	see	how
you	feel,	because	silence	has	not	to	be	there	for	your	whole	life.	If	your	energy
starts	feeling	that	it	would	be	good	to	come	out	and	communicate,	you	can	come
out	 --	nothing	 is	wrong	 in	 it.	And	 the	well-being	will	still	 remain	 there;	 it	will
not	be	lost.	It	has	happened	so	it	is	going	to	remain.	But	up	to	the	group,	remain
in	silence,	then	we	will	decide,	mm?	Good.
[The	Encounter	group	is	present.
To	a	member	of	the	group	Osho	says:]
Something	about	you?	(she	remains	unspeaking)	Come	closer.	If	you	don't	want
to	say,	just	close	your	eyes	and	let	your	energy	say	it.
Good.	The	energy	is	going	very	well.	Just	enjoy	the	energy	that	is	flowing	there.
You	have	touched	a	very	silent	space	--	now	don't	lose	contact	with	it.	It	is	very
difficult	to	come	in	contact	with;	it	is	very	easy	to	lose.
So	don't	be	afraid.	Sometimes	it	is	even	very	scaring	to	be	really	silent.	One	feels
dazed	 --	 that's	 how	 you	 look.	 One	 feels	 as	 if	 there	 is	 no	 spine.	 But	 don't	 be
scared.	Many	beautiful	things	are	going	to	happen.
This	is	just	the	opening	of	the	door.	And	you	can	never	be	the	same	again	--	the
door	has	opened.	So	just	enjoy	it	and	feel	blissful.
And	I	am	here,	so	never	be	afraid	of	anything.	You	can	go	into	any	space,	and
whenever	you	feel	that	it	is	becoming	too	much,	just	take	the	locket	(that	is	part
of	the	mala)	in	your	hand	and	remember	me,	mm?
Good.
[A	sannyasin	 says:	 I	 found	out	 from	 the	Encounter	group	 that	 there's	 this	 split
between	my	head	and	my	feelings.	I've	been	on	a	path	for	many	years	in	which
one	just	tries	to	see	the	divine	in	everybody.	And	what	it's	done	is	screened	out
all	the	negativity	or	whatever	that	I	probably	have,	so	I'm	just	seeing	everything
falsely...	Now	I	distrust	everything.	I	don't	know	if	it's	intellect	or	feeling...	Until
I	got	that	feedback	from	others	I	wasn't	in	that	space	at	all.	But	I	feel	quite	full.]
Mm	mm.	This	too,	is	because	others	say.	My	observation	is	that	this	too	is	only
because	others	have	said	so,	it	is	still	intellectual.	You've	understood	what	others
are	saying,	and	you	have	felt	that	this	may	be	so,	but	this	is	not	your	experience.
For	 ten	days	after	 the	group,	 simply	meditate	and	 forget	all	 about	 it.	After	 ten
days	 come	 back	 and	 tell	me	 how	 you	 feel.	 Forget	what	 others	 say	 --	 because
whatsoever	others	say	can	never	go	deeper	than	your	intellect.	The	feeling	part	is
available	only	to	you.	And	when	somebody	says	something	about	you,	it	is	more
about	him	than	about	you.	It	 is	what	they	feel	--	 that	you	are	hollow;	you	may
not	be.	But	ordinarily	we	live	on	others'	opinions	--	that's	how	our	intellect	lives;
it	is	constantly	in	need	of	feedback.	So	if	others	say	you	are	beautiful,	you	feel
beautiful.	If	others	say	you	are	very	loving,	you	feel	perfectly	good.	If	others	say
that	this	is	all	bullshit,	you	start	feeling	this	is	all	bullshit.	But	still	it	is	not	your
feeling.	And	others	may	not	be	right,	so	don't	judge	too	early.
Let	 the	 group	 be	 finished.	 Work	 two	 days	 more	 as	 hard	 as	 you	 can	 so	 that
whatsoever	you	can	become	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
aware	of,	 become	aware;	 then	 forget	 about	 it.	Have	a	gap.	The	whole	point	 is
that	 you	 should	 come	 to	 see	whether	 it	 is	 so.	 If	 you	 come	 to	 see	 that	 it	 is	 so,
immediately	there	will	be	a	change.	Or	if	you	come	to	see	that	it	is	not	so,	there
is	no	need	for	any	change.	Both	ways	it	will	be	beneficial.
Now	you	will	be	in	trouble.	One	possibility	is	that	the	others	may	be	wrong,	and
now	you	will	 start	 trying	 to	 do	 something	 so	 the	 others	 say	 that	 you	 are	 very
loving	or	this	and	that.	That	may	create	a	real	falsity.	Or	the	others	may	be	right,
but	you	have	not	felt	it	yourself	so	you	will	try	to	do	something.	Then	too,	only
on	the	surface	will	you	decorate	your	being.
The	understanding	has	to	go	so	deep,	to	such	a	deep	layer,	where	nobody	can	say
anything	else	except	yourself	about	how	it	 is.	When	you	have	a	headache,	you
don't	rely	on	others'	feedback.	You	don't	go	on	asking,	 'Have	I	a	headache?	Do
you	feel	that	I	have	a	headache?'	The	whole	world	may	deny	it	but	that	doesn't
matter	--	you	will	still	say	that	it	is	there,	that	it	has	not	gone.	Only	you	can	feel.
There	is	no	way	from	the	outside	to	know	whether	you	have	a	headache	or	not.
And	a	headache	is	not	very	deep.	The	head	itself	is	not	very	deep.	To	go	to	the
heart	 is	very	deep.	No	instruments	exist...	even	the	subtlest	 instruments	are	not
capable	 of	 giving	 any	 indication	 about	 your	 feelings,	 cannot	 make	 any	 graph
about	your	feelings.
Only	 you	 alone	 are	 capable	 of	 being	 there.	 That's	 your	 pure	 space,	 absolutely
yours.	 Nobody	 can	 trespass.	 So	 don't	 be	worried	 about	what	 others	 say.	 Take
note	 of	 it,	 don't	 neglect	 it,	 then	 forget	 about	 it	 for	 ten	 days.	 And	 after	 the
Encounter	group,	every	night	when	you	go	to	sleep,	just	for	three	minutes	relax
on	the	bed,	put	your	hands	on	the	heart	and	just	try	to	feel.	Don't	bring	in	others'
opinions.	Just	try	to	feel	how	things	are,	uncontaminated	by	others'	opinions	and
judgements.	 This	 group	 can	 be	 of	 tremendous	 value	 to	 you.	 But	 it	 can	 be
valuable	only	when	it	helps	you	to	go	to	your	own	inner	centre,	otherwise	you
miss.
[A	group	member	says:	A	lot	is	happening	during	this	group,	but	I	don't	trust	you
and	I	don't	love	you.	I	don't	love	anybody.]
Mm	mm.	Don't	be	worried	about	that.	If	something	is	happening,	that	will	come.
There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 it	 to	 be	 there	 right	 now.	 If	 something	 is	 happening	 it	 is
bound	to	come.	How	long	can	you	remain	without	loving	me?	You	can	try	hard
but	you	will.
You	 are	 doomed!	 You	 are	 going	 to	 fail.	 But	 try,	 mm?	 Remain	 non-trusting,
doubting,	 unloving,	 and	 just	 go	 on	 doing	 camps	 and	 the	 groups,	 and	 one	 day
suddenly	you	will	 find	 that	 it	has	happened.	 It	 is	nothing	 that	you	can	do	 --	 it
happens.	But	if	something	is	happening,	it	is	perfectly	good.
There	is	no	need	to	force	any	belief.	I	am	not	a	believer	in	beliefs,	and	all	belief
systems	are	Poisonous.
With	a	belief	system	all	that	you	can	do	is	believe	in	me.	That	is	not	trust	--	that
is	a	deception.	When	trust	is	missing,	one	can	substitute	a	belief	and	one	can	feel
that	one	trusts,	but	that's	not	trust.	And	in	fact	if	you	substitute	it	with	belief,	the
real	trust	may	not	ever	arise	because	you	can	go	on	playing	with	your	false	coin
and	you	will	stop	searching	for	the	real	coin;	the	pseudo	will	satisfy	you.	That	is
the	 misery	 of	 many	 people:	 they	 are	 in	 such	 a	 hurry	 that	 they	 want	 to	 trust
somebody	--	but	trust	is	not	so	easy.	It	arises	when	it	arises.
There	is	no	way	of	predicting	it.
But	you	can	create	a	belief.	Belief	will	be	home-made,	man-made,	and	that	will
obstruct	the	trust	and	will	not	allow	it	to	come	in.	So	don't	be	worried	about	it.
Be	a	non-believer	and	go	on	doubting	me.	If	there	is	something	in	me,	the	trust	is
bound	to	arise.	If	 there	is	not,	 then	it	 is	good	not	to	trust.	So	it	 is	for	me	to	do
something.	Mm?	 it	 is	not	your	problem,	 it	 is	my	problem.	While	you	are	here
enjoy	 these	moments	 and	 one	 day	 suddenly	 you	will	 find	 I	 am	 there	 in	 your
heart.	That	comes	out	of	the	belief	--	without	even	giving	any	information	that	it
is	coming,	without	notifying	you.
In	 India	 we	 call	 God	 'the	 ultimate	 guest',	 and	 the	 sanskrit	 word	 for	 guest	 is
'atithi'.	That	term	is	very	beautiful:	it	means	one	who	comes	without	giving	any
information,	one	who	comes	without	giving	any	date.
'Tithi'	means	date	and	'atithi'	means	one	who	comes	suddenly	without	giving	any
date	when	he	is	coming.
God	is	an	old	type	of	guest.	New	guests	inform	you	that	they	will	be	coming	and
how	many	days	 they	will	be	staying.	 In	 the	old	days	guests	would	suddenly....
And	in	India	they	still	do	--	suddenly	they	are	there.
God	is	an	'atithi',	a	guest	who	comes	nobody	knows	when.
It	will	come.	You	just	have	to	be	joyful,	silent.	Belief	is	not	a	prerequisite,	and
all	beliefs	divide	people.
That's	the	difference	between	a	Hindu	and	a	Christian	and	a	Mohammedan	their
beliefs.	There	is	nothing;	just	beliefs	divide	people.	Beliefs	create	conflict.	Down
the	 centuries	 there	 have	 been	 wars	 upon	 wars	 because	 of	 foolish	 beliefs.
Somebody	believes	in	God	as	trinity	and	somebody	believes	God	is	not	a	trinity
--	and	there	is	war.	People	argue,	and	when	they	cannot	prove	by	argument,	they
bring	their	swords	and	try	to	prove	by	violence.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	really	 religious	person	 is	without	belief.	Because	how	can	you	believe?	You
have	not	yet	known	me	so	how	can	you	trust?	This	is	a	good	gesture	--	that	you
are	making	an	effort	to	understand.	That's	all	--
enough!	On	your	 part	 you	 are	 doing	well.	 So	 don't	 raise	 this	 problem	 in	 your
mind	again	and	again	--	that	you	don't	trust	and	you	must	trust.	It	is	not	a	must	at
all.
And	don't	feel	jealous	about	others	who	trust.	Of	course	they	will	be	flowering
better	 than	you,	 that's	certain,	but	don't	 feel	 jealous,	because	what	can	you	do?
They	trust	and	you	don't	trust.	It	has	happened	to	them.	They	also	cannot	tell	you
how	and	why	it	has	happened	to	them.	One	day	it	will	happen	to	you	also,	and
you	too	will	not	be	able	to	tell	somebody	how	it	happened.
So	just	remain	happy,	mm?	Believe	in	happiness,	that's	all.	I	will	be	coming	by
the	backdoor	!
[One	 group	 member	 says	 he	 feels	 stuck.	 The	 leader	 comments	 he	 has	 much
resistance	to	being	told	what	to	do.	Osho	tells	him	to	"Either	surrender	or	get	out
of	the	group".	The	participant	replies:	I	want	to	get	out]
Get	out,	mm?	There	is	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	Because	if	you	don't	listen	to
what	is	said	to	you,	and	if	you	don't	do	anything,	there	is	no	point.	Why	waste
your	energy	and	why	waste	their	energy?	Simply	get	out	of	it.	Do	the	camp,	and
after	 the	 camp	 whenever	 you	 feel	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 obey	 certain	 orders,	 join
another	group.
And	 remember	 always	 that	 only	 a	 very	 grown-up	 person	 can	 obey	 --	 childish
people	 cannot	 obey.	 To	 obey	 one	 needs	 to	 be	 very	 very	 disciplined,	 and	 one
needs	to	be	very	understanding.	And	it	is	not	a	slavery	because	it	is	only	a	seven-
day	group.	It	is	just	an	agreement	that	for	seven	days	you	will	listen	to	the	leader.
After	seven	days	he	is	not	going	to	order	you	to	do	something.	After	seven	days
you	 are	 not	 expected	 to	 listen	 to	 him,	 but	 for	 seven	 days	 there	 is	 a	 subtle
agreement	that	he	knows	some	techniques,	he	will	be	helping	you....	And	we	do
it	all	the	time.
You	go	and	sit	in	a	bus,	and	once	you	have	sat	in	the	bus	you	trust	the	driver.	The
driver	 is	 not	 superior	 to	 you	 --	 he	 is	 not	God	 --	 but	 you	 know	 that	 he	 knows
driving,	 so	 you	 read	 your	 newspaper,	 smoke	 a	 cigarette,	 gossip,	 or	 just	 go	 to
sleep.	When	you	go	in	an	aeroplane,	you	trust	the	pilot.	You	may	not	have	even
seen	 his	 face	 and	 you	may	 not	 know	 anything	 about	 him,	 but	 you	 trust.	 You
entrust	him	with	your	life.
If	 every	 passenger	 in	 the	 aeroplane	 starts	 enquiring	 about	 the	 pilot	 and	 his
credentials,	 his	 character	 certificates	 and	 his	 past,	 his	 mind	 and	 his	 body	 and
health	and	everything,	there	would	be	no	flight.	It	would	be	impossible.
So	in	a	group	the	leader	is	just	a	pilot.	It	is	not	an	absolute	surrender	to	him.	It	is
not	 that	 you	 are	 to	 listen	 to	 him	 for	 your	 whole	 life.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 seven-day
arrangement.	 You	 will	 be	 on	 this	 journey	 and	 you	 will	 need	 a	 guide.	 If	 you
cannot,	simply	get	out	of	it.
And	 (to	 the	 group	 leader),	 remember	 it.	Whenever	 you	 feel	 that	 somebody	 is
finding	 it	 difficult	 to	 listen,	 just	 tell	 him	 that	 this	 is	 an	 agreement	 and	 that
nothing	is	wrong	--	he	can	get	out	of	it	if	he	wants.	Because	why	should	he	feel
troubled?	You	will	be	feeling	troubled	and	the	whole	group	will	be	distracted.	If
there	is	somebody	who	is	resisting,	he	creates	a	vibe	of	resistance	to	surrender	in
others	also.
(To	the	participant)	And	there	is	no	condemnation	in	it.	If	you	cannot,	simply	get
out	 of	 it.	 But	 think	 about	 it.	 It	 is	 very	 immature.	 Why	 are	 you	 so	 afraid	 of
obeying?	That	fear	shows	you	are	afraid	that	anybody	can	make	a	slave	of	you.
The	resistance	is	because	of	fear.	A	really	strong	person	is	never	afraid:	just	by
obeying	 he	 is	 not	 becoming	 a	 slave.	 But	 if	 you	 are	 a	 weakling	 and	 afraid
somewhere	that	if	you	listen	to	somebody	who	knows,	he	may	start	dominating
you,	and	each	time	you	have	to	show	that	you	are	strong	--
then	your	strength	is	not	worth	much.
A	really	strong	person	is	one	who	never	has	to	show	it	--	there	is	no	need,	he	is.
And	I	don't	think	that	you	are	a	weak	person;	you	are	a	strong	person.	You	must
be	carrying	a	wrong	notion	about	yourself.
My	suggestion	is	to	try	to	surrender	for	a	few	days.	Do	whatso-ever	is	said	and
see	 how	you	 feel.	That	will	 be	 an	 experience.	You	may	 have	 a	 new	vision	 of
your	old	being	and	you	will	see,	'How	foolish	I	was!
Unnecessarily	afraid!'	But	still,	 if	you	think	that	it	will	be	difficult	for	you,	get
out	of	it,	mm?	Good.
[Another	participant	says:	I'm	too	clever	for	my	own	good.	And	then,	afraid	to
be	soft.]
Both	are	very	dangerous	qualities.	Cleverness	 is	always	a	barrier.	And	it	 is	not
intelligence	--	it	is	a	false	substitute.	An	intelligent	person	is	innocent.	You	can
cheat	 an	 intelligent	 person	 very	 easily,	 but	 you	 cannot	 cheat	 a	 clever	 person
because	the	clever	person	himself	is	a	cheat.	So	never	think	that	cleverness	is	of
any	value;	it	is	based	on	fear.	The	logic	behind	cleverness	is:	if	you	don't	cheat
others,	others	will	cheat	you.	So	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
remain	 clever	 and	 always	 protect	 yourself,	 and	 before	 somebody	 attacks	 you,
attack	 them,	because	attack	 is	 the	best	defence.	This	 is	 the	 logic	of	cleverness:
always	pretend	that	you	know,	even	when	you	don't.
I	had	a	teacher	in	my	university	days.	He	was	a	professor	of	indian	philosophy.	I
became	aware	 that	he	was	not	very	 intelligent	but	 just	 trying	 to	be	clever,	so	I
started	playing	a	game.	 I	would	say	 that	 I	was	reading	XYZ's	such	and	such	a
book	--	what	did	he	think	about	it?	He	would	say,	'It	is	beautiful!'	And	the	book
exists	not	--	neither	the	author	nor	the	title!
One	day	 I	was	 talking	 to	him	and	 the	head	of	 the	department	was	present.	He
became	 a	 little	 suspicious	 and	 he	 called	 me	 later	 on.	 He	 asked,	 'What	 is	 the
matter?	I	have	never	heard	of	these	authors	you	are	talking	about	and	that	fellow
seems	 to	 be	 a	 very	 great	 scholar.	 He	 knows	 everybody	 and	 every	 author	 and
every	book.'
I	told	him,	'They	exist	not,	but	he	is	such	a	great	man	that	he	cannot	say	that	he
has	never	heard	of	them
--	no,	that	is	impossible.	He	cannot	say	that	he	doesn't	know	about	this	book.	By
being	 clever	 he	 is	 simply	 being	 foolish.	 The	 whole	 class	 laughs	 at	 him	 and
everybody	knows	now.	It	has	become	such	a	game	that	every-body	is	bringing
names	and	authors	and	books	now	that	exist	not,	and	he	will	never	say	that	he
has	 not	 read	 them.'	He	was	 trying	 to	 be	 clever	 --	 but	 cleverness	 proves	 to	 be
foolish	finally.
Always	 remember	 that	 intelligence	 is	 very	 innocent,	 and	 cleverness	 is	 not
intelligence.	 Politicians	 are	 clever	 people	 but	 not	 intelligent.	 You	 can	 deceive
intelligent	people	very	easily	because	they	will	always	be	innocent,	they	will	be
true.	But	cleverness	functions	as	a	very	protective	barrier	--	so	drop	cleverness.
And	nobody	can	force	you	to	drop	it.
The	moment	that	you	see	that	it	 is	not	intelligence....	Because	you	are	harming
yourself,	how	can	it	be	intelligence?	And	you	know	it!	You	yourself	feel	that	you
are	too	clever	to	be	good	for	yourself	--	this	cleverness	is	almost	suicidal.	Drop	it
--	 and	drop	 it	without	any	effort.	Simply	drop	 it.	Tomorrow	morning	enter	 the
group	as	innocently	as	a	small	child.	Put	all	rationalisations	and	cleverness	aside.
Cleverness	has	never	helped	anybody	--	it	has	destroyed	many	people's	lives	and
opportunities.
And	 the	 second	 thing:	 if	 you	 are	 not	 clever,	 you	will	 be	 ready	 very	 easily	 to
become	soft.	You	are	soft	--
maybe	that's	why	you	are	trying	to	be	clever.	This	is	my	observation:	the	softer	a
man	is,	the	bigger	and	harder	the	crust	he	creates	around	himself	because	he	is
afraid	of	his	softness.	He	is	afraid	--	he	knows	that	if	the	crust	is	broken	he	will
be	 too	 vulnerable	 in	 this	world.	 This	world	 is	 too	 cunning	 and	 he	will	 be	 too
open,	 he	will	 be	 robbed,	 cheated,	 destroyed.	So	 the	 softer	 a	 person	 inside,	 the
harder	the	shell	he	creates	around	himself.	But	the	harder	the	shell,	the	more	and
more	 you	 live	 in	 a	 grave-like	 situation;	 closed	 in	 yourself.	 And	 all	 that	 is
beautiful	happens	only	when	your	softness	is	available.	Love,	meditation,	God,
beauty,	 truth,	 joy	 --	 they	 all	 happen	 only	 when	 you	 are	 open,	 soft.	 So	 drop
cleverness.
It	will	disappear	--	don't	be	worried.	First	do	the	camp	and	then	after	the	camp,
book	for	something	else.
[Another	 participant	 says:	 I	 always	 thought	 I	was	 strong.	Now	 it	 just	 gets	me
into	trouble.	I	don't	know	what	I	feel....	]
You	don't	feel	that	strong?	That	strength	was	nothing.	That	strength	was	just	the
ego,	and	now	you	are	becoming	really	strong.	But	 this	strength	 is	bound	 to	be
fragile.	 It	 is	 like	a	flower:	strong	enough	to	face	 the	whole	world	and	yet	very
fragile...	can	be	crushed.	It	can	be	crushed	just	by	a	child	who	can	throw	a	rock.
Fragile,	because	by	the	evening	it	will	be	gone.	But	when	it	is	there	it	can	face
wind,	it	can	face	sun	it	can	face	the	whole	world!	This	is	a	totally	different	kind
of	strength.	Lao	Tzu	calls	it	the	strength	of	the	weak,	the	richness	of	the	poor,	the
knowledge	 of	 the	 ignorant,	 the	wisdom	 of	 the	 fool.	 This	 is	 a	 totally	 different
thing.
The	strength	you	used	to	feel	was	nothing	but	ego-strength.	There	was	a	crust	of
strong	ego.	That's	how	 in	 the	West	 all	 strong	people	 feel,	mm?	because	 in	 the
West	there	is	only	one	definition	of	strength,	and	that	is	of	ego	strength.	One	has
to	have	a	very	strong	ego,	a	ripe	ego,	a	crystallised	ego,	to	fight,	to	struggle.	This
is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon	 that	 is	 happening	 --	 it	 is	 the	 strength	 of
surrender.
So	you	will	feel	for	a	few	days.	.	.Teertha	is	right	that	you	are	somewhere	in	the
middle.	You	will	feel	for	a	few	days	as	if	you	are	hanging	in	the	middle,	because
the	past	is	no	more	there.	That's	why	you	are	so	confused	and	you	cannot	even
say	why.	But	soon	it	will	happen.	The	ego	is	disappearing;	don't	try	to	cling	to	it.
Accept	 this	weakness	that	has	arisen.	A	child	is	weak,	a	flower	is	weak.	When
water	falls	from	a	hill,	 it	 is	weak,	and	the	rocks	that	it	falls	on	are	very	strong.
But	 in	 due	 time	 the	 rocks	 will	 be	 gone	 and	 the	 water	 will	 still	 be	 there.	 If
momentarily	you	think	that	the	rock	is	very	strong	and	the	water	is	very	weak...
can	you	find	anything	weaker	than	water?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Lao	Tzu	calls	his	way	the	watercourse	way.	He	says	not	to	be	like	a	rock.	In	the
moment	 you	 will	 look	 very	 strong,	 but	 in	 the	 long	 run	 the	 rock	 is	 bound	 to
disappear	into	sand,	and	the	water	is	going	to	win.
Finally	the	weaker	wins.
Jesus	says,	 'Those	who	are	last	in	the	world	will	be	the	first	 in	my	kingdom	of
God',	 and	 'Blessed	 are	 the	 meek.'	 This	 is	 meekness	 --	 and	 certainly	 when	 it
comes	 one	 feels	 really	 disturbed,	 because	 one	 has	 always	 thought	 that	 one	 is
very	strong	and	now	suddenly	one	feels	so	vulnerable...	so	vulnerable	that	small
things	make	you	cry,	small	things	can	make	you	laugh.	So	vulnerable	--	and	you
were	always	thinking	that	you	were	a	great	citadel,	nothing	could	penetrate	you.
And	now	everything	can	penetrate	you.
When	one	becomes	open,	that's	how	it	happens.	But	it	is	a	blessing.	Be	meek...
be	poor,	mm?	Good.
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	The	Essential	is	One
9	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611095
ShortTitle:	WHIP02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Sannyas	 is	 a	disidentification	with	 the	past...	 a	new	beginning,	 a	new	being,	 a
fresh	breeze,	a	rebirth.	All	that	is	implied	in	giving	you	a	new	name.	One	name
was	given	to	you	by	your	mother	and	father.	Now	I	am	giving	you	another	name.
That	one	name	was	given	 to	you	so	you	could	 function	well	 in	 life.	Without	a
name	it	would	be	very	difficult	to	function.	One	needs	a	label,	one	needs	some
indentification,	 one	 needs	 some	 identity	 card.	 People	 need	 some	 name	 to	 call
you	 by,	 to	 address	 you.	 They	 have	 given	 you	 one	 name	 for	 the	 world.	 I	 am
giving	you	another	name	for	God,	not	for	the	world.
God	will	also	need	a	name	so	that	He	can	call	you,	so	He	can	provoke	you,	so
that	 whenever	 He	 wants	 to	 say	 something	 it	 can	 be	 addressed	 to	 you.	 The
sannyas	name	is	simply	a	new	address	--	a	new	address	fundamentally	meant	for
God,	for	the	whole	existence.	So	this	is	a	turning	point.
You	may	not	be	even	aware	of	what	a	great	jump	you	are	taking.	By	and	by	after
you	have	taken	it,	you	will	become	aware.	There	are	many	things	that	you	know
only	when	 you	 have	 done	 them.	 In	 fact	 there	 is	 no	 other	way	 to	 know	 them.
Many	people	ask	me,	'What	is	sannyas?'	It	is	very	difficult	to	say.	It	is	something
that	has	to	be	experienced.	It	is	something	that	has	to	be	tasted.
So	you	are	moving	in	a	new	territory	from	this	moment	--	with	a	new	name,	with
a	new	dress,	with	a	new	identity.	And	now	you	belong	 to	me	and	you	become
part	 of	 me	 from	 this	 moment.	 It	 is	 a	 great	 responsibility	 too,	 because	 now
whatsoever	you	do	I	will	be	associated	with	it.	Good	or	bad	--	whatsoever	your
action	 --	 now	 my	 name	 will	 be	 associated	 with	 it.	 And	 I	 never	 give	 any
discipline.	I	never	say,	'Do	this,	do	that.'	I	simply	want	you	to	be	aware	that	now
you	have	to	be	responsible.	And	then	move	in	freedom.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	changing	your	very	way	of	life.	Right	now	it
will	be	just	a	small	stream.	Mm?	It	is	just	as	a	great	river	is	born	as	a	very	small
stream	--	not	even	a	stream	but	just	a	fountain.
By	and	by	 it	gathers	more	and	more	water	and	becomes	a	big	river.	Right	 this
moment	it	is	just	drops.	Soon	you	will	become	vast....
[A	sannyasin	says:	I	appreciated	that	you	read	my	poetry.	Is	there	anything	that
you	want	me	to	do?]
Much	has	to	be	done,	and	continue	creating	there	whatsoever	you	feel	like.	One
should	always	cultivate	something	that	is	purely	for	delight.	Your	profession	is	a
need	--	it	has	to	be	done.	That	may	be	a	delight	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
may	 not	 be,	 but	 one	 has	 always	 to	 do	 something	 on	 the	 side	 which	 is	 sheer
delight,	for	no	financial	reasons,	for	no	economics,	for	no	politics.	You	are	just
doing	 it	 for	your	own	delight.	Write	poetry,	paint,	or	whatsoever	you	feel	 like.
And	always	remember	that	this	will	rejuvenate	you.	This	will	become	your	real
recreation.
The	world	'recreation'	is	very	good	--	it	creates	you.	And	unless	it	creates	you,	it
is	not	a	recreation.	All	entertainments	are	not	recreations.	Only	that	in	which	you
are	creatively	involved	is	a	recreation.
If	 you	 are	 just	 sitting	 there	 and	 somebody	 is	 dancing,	 that	 is	 not	 a	 recreation,
maybe	entertainment.	You	remain	passive,	you	are	not	active.	Recreation	has	to
be	very	active	--	you	have	to	be	involved.	Dance,	sing,	or	do	whatsoever	you	feel
like	doing:	gardening,	cooking,	anything.
It	is	not	being	done	for	any	ulterior	motive.	It	is	not	even	done	for	someone	to
appreciate.	If	they	appreciate,	good.	If	they	don't	appreciate,	good,	because	it	is
not	meant	for	that.
There	has	been	an	indian	saint,	a	great	poet,	who	has	written	the	story	of	Ram.	It
is	 a	 great	 epic,	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 in	 the	 world	 --	 'Rama-charit-manas'.
Somebody	asked	Tulsidas,	'Why	have	you	written	it	--
because	 it	must	 have	 taken	 years,	 it	 is	 such	 a	 long	 poem	and	 so	 superb.	Why
have	you	written	it?	Why	have	you	put	so	much	energy	into	it?	Your	whole	life
into	it?'
And	Tulsidas	said,	'Svantah	Sukhaya':	'I	have	been	singing	this	story	of	God	just
for	my	own	delight.	It	is	not	meant	for	any-body.	It	was	my	delight..	.1	enjoyed
it.	The	value	is	intrinsic	--	it	is	an	end	unto	itself.'
That's	what	recreation	is	--	'Svantah	Sukha.'	--	for	one's	own	delight,	and	an	end
unto	itself.
So	whenever	you	are	tired,	whenever	you	are	fed	up	with	the	world	--	and	many
times	 one	 is	 fed	 up	with	 the	world,	 it	 is	 natural.	 The	world	 is	 too	 heavy,	 too
boring,	too	monotonous,	too	repeti-tive,	too	routine	and	trivial.	So	whenever	you
feel	that,	the	best	way	is	to	do	something	creative	and	get	involved	in	it.	You	will
come	out	of	it	recreated,	rejuvenated...	again	throbbing	with	energy.	Even	more
than	 sleep,	 poetry	 can	 be	 recreative	 --	 more	 so	 than	 sleep.	 Just	 five	 minutes
concentrated	creation	of	a	poem	can	be	more	than	eight	hours	sleep,	can	refresh
you	 tremendously,	 because	 when	 you	 are	 totally	 involved	 in	 it,	 God	 starts
functioning	through	you.
All	 creation	 is	 His	 --	 we	 become	 only	 vehicles.	 So	 whenever	 there	 is	 some
creation,	it	is	always	God's.
The	 signature	 is	 His.	 We	 are	 just	 vehicles,	 passages.	 And	 when	 God	 flows
through	 us,	 of	 course	 --	 we	 are	 rejuvenated.	 Just	 His	 passing	 through	 us	 is
enough.	It	is	a	magnetising	force,	again	you	are	recharged.	So	allow	God	to	pass
through	you	in	any	form	whatsoever.
And	you	are	going	to	do	much	for	me	because	you	belong	to	me.	By	becoming	a
sannyasin	 you	 become	 pan	 of	 me.	 Now	 my	 work	 is	 your	 work.	 If	 you	 do
something	 and	 if	 you	 succeed,	 you	 are	 not	 obliging	 anybody.	You	 are	 simply
obliging	yourself	because	it	is	your	work.
[Osho	passed	a	 small	wooden	box	 to	 the	 sannyasin,	one	of	which	He	gives	 to
sannyasins,	as	a	reminder	of	Him.]
Keep	 this	with	you,	and	whenever	you	write	your	poetry	or	you	do	something
creative,	just	keep	it	in	your	lap	and	it	will	remind	you	of	me.	It	can	bring	you
very	close	to	me.
And	every	night	when	you	go	to	sleep,	put	it	under	your	pillow	so	I	can	go	on
haunting	you	(laughter).
And	if	sometimes	I	come	in	the	dark	of	the	night,	don't	get	scared!
[A	 visitor	 from	 Madagascar,	 Africa,	 came	 said,	 through	 a	 translator,	 he	 is	 a
contractor	 and	wants	Osho's	 help	 so	 that	 he	 can	make	 a	 lot	 of	money	 for	 his
family.]
(to	the	translator)	Tomorrow	morning	before	he	leaves	he	should	do	at	least	one
Dynamic	meditation.
Tell	 him	 to	 start	 doing	 it	 every	 day	 and	within	 three	months,	 things	will	 start
happening.
[A	visitor	says:	I'm	a	B'hai.]
Be	a	B'hai.	Nothing	to	be	worried	about...
Nothing	 is	a	problem.	 I	give	sannyas	 to	all	 sorts	of	people	 --	no	problems.	 It's
perfectly	good,	I	will	not	replace	whatsoever	you	are	--	I	will	simply	strengthen
it,	 because	 whatsoever	 I	 am	 doing	 here	 is	 for	 the	 essential	 religion.	 So
whatsoever	is	essential,	I	am	with	it	and	for	it,	and	that	essential	is	in	B'hai	also.
It	 is	 in	Christianity,	 it	 is	 in	Mohammedanism	--	 it	 is	everywhere.	Maybe	much
which	 is	not	essential	has	gathered	around	it	 --	 I	may	hammer	 that	 --	but	 I	am
absolutely	 for	 everything.	The	non-essen-tial	 I	may	be	 against	 sometimes,	 and
sometimes	one	may	think	that	I	go	on	shattering	things,	but	those	are	just	non-
essential	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
growths.
The	 essential	 is	 one	 --	 only	names	differ.	So	B'hai	 is	 perfectly	good.	 If	 this	 is
hindering	you,	you	are	unnecessarily	preventing	yourself	from	some	experience.
And	 a	 B'hai	 should	 not	 be	 such	 a	 coward.	 A	 B'hai	 should	 be	 very	 ready	 to
experiment,	 to	 explore	 new	 spaces.	 Fear	 is	 not	 of	 religion	 --	 fear	 is	 political,
organisational.	 Religion	 is	 just	 fearlessness.	 If	 you	 are	 a	B'hai,	 sannyas	 is	 not
going	to	take	anything	--	it	will	be	a	plus.
Of	course	much	will	change,	because	you	may	be	a	B'hai	and	you	may	not	know
at	all	what	essential	B'haism	is,	because	if	you	have	once	seen	the	essential,	you
will	 laugh	at	 the	 ridiculousness	of	 religious	people	 fighting,	 arguing	with	each
other	and	trying	to	prove	that	they	are	right	and	others	are	wrong.	It	looks	stupid,
because	the	essential	is	one.
[The	visitor	takes	sannyas]
Now	you	really	become	a	B'hai!
And	this	will	be	your	name:	Swami	Satyananda.	Satya	means	truth,	anand	means
bliss;	bliss	that	comes	by	the	experience	of	truth.	And	change	to	orange	!
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	When	the	Dance	Dances	itself...
10	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611105
ShortTitle:	WHIP03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[In	a	previous	darshan	(See	"God	Is	Not	For	Sale",	October	25th,	Osho	had	told
a	sannyasin	to	make	dance	and	music	his	meditation.	Now	the	sannyasin	reports:
Much	has	happened.]
It	has	--	and	much	that	is	going	to	happen	is	on	the	way.	The	more	you	have,	the
more	is	given	to	you.
The	 rich	 become	 richer,	 because	 each	 experience	 creates	 a	 new	 receptivity,	 a
new	trust.	And	with	each	experience	you	are	ready	to	take	a	bigger	jump,	and	so
on	and	so	forth.	So	continue	to	dance.
There	 is	 nothing	 like	 dancing,	 because	 dancing	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 only	 activity
when	the	doer	can	be	easily	lost,	and	the	only	activity	in	which	body,	mind,	soul
--	all	can	participate	 in	a	harmony.	Otherwise	 there	are	activities	 that	 the	body
can	do,	there	are	activities	that	the	mind	can	do	--	the	body	is	not	needed.	There
are	 activities	 that	 can	 be	 done	 by	 the	 soul,	 by	 the	 spirit	 --	 neither	 the	mind	 is
needed	nor	the	body.
Any	activity	that	needs	the	cooperation	of	all	the	three	layers	of	your	being	will
give	you	the	richest	crop,	because	in	that	harmony,	in	that	synchronicity	--	when
all	the	three	layers	meet	together	and	are	not	in	any	conflict,	when	they	are	one
together	 --	 you	 become	 something	 transcendental.	 Then	 you	 are	 none	 of	 the
three	--	you	have	become	the	fourth.	And	the	fourth	is	the	goal.
[Osho	said	 that	 in	 India	 the	fourth	state	 is	known	only	as	 'turiya'	which	means
simply	'the	fourth'.]
Dancing	is	the	only	activity	in	which	all	the	three	can	be	together,	in	which	all
the	 three	 are	 needed.	 And	 all	 the	 three	 are	 needed	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 they
become	one.	So	continue	to	dance.	Much	will	happen	through	dance.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	is	no	need	to	give	any	form	to	it,	because	once	you	start	giving	form	to	it,
the	mind	has	become	predominant.	Let	it	be	spontaneous,	let	it	be	formless.	Let
it	be	such	that	it	surprises	even	you.	So	each	day	simply	stand	and	let	it	come.
Let	it	flood	you!	And	then	start	moving.	Let	each	movement	lead	you	to	another
not	knowing	at	all	where	you	are	going	or	what	 is	going	to	happen	next.	Then
the	dance	dances	itself.	And	when	the	dance	dances	itself	and	there	is	no	dancer,
it	is	tremendously	beautiful.
So	 through	dance	many	 things	will	happen.	And	humanity	has	completely	 lost
track	 of	 dance.	 All	 primitive	 societies	 were	 dancing	 societies.	 Still	 a	 few
primitive	 tribes	 exist	 somewhere;	 they	 are	 still	 dancing	 tribes.	 Their	 whole
religion	consists	of	dance.	They	find	any	excuse	and	they	will	dance.	It	may	be
the	birth	of	a	child	and	the	whole	tribe	dances	to	receive	the	new	guest.	It	may	be
a	marriage	 ceremony,	 it	may	be	 some	other	 festival.	 It	may	be	 that	 somebody
had	died,	so	again	they	dance.	Birth,	death,	marriage	or	anything	important	they
mark	by	their	dance.
Even	when	they	go	to	war,	they	go	dancing.	They	call	it	a	war	dance.	Then	even
wars	take	on	a	new	meaning,	a	new	quality.	Then	it	is	not	the	ugly	war	that	we
have	 invented.	Of	 course	 people	 are	 killed,	 but	 they	 are	 killed	while	 they	 are
dancing.	And	when	a	person	 is	dancing,	death	 is	meaningless.	He	 is	deathless,
because	 if	 he	 is	 killed	 in	 that	 harmony,	 that	 very	 experience	 will	 become	 an
experience	 of	 samadhi.	 The	 primitive	 war	 dance	 has	 not	 yet	 been	 understood
rightly.	We	think	it	is	simply	war	--	it	is	not	really	a	war.	It	is	again	an	excuse	to
dance	 --	 the	 ultimate	 dance,	 the	 last	 dance,	 the	 death	 dance.	 Both	 sides	 come
dancing,	and	dancing	 they	fight,	dancing	 they	die.	But	 if	you	die	 in	dance	you
will	attain	to	a	great	new	life.	You	will	be	born	in	a	totally	different	altitude.	So
let	this	be	your	meditation.
Put	on	any	music	--	sometimes	do	it	even	without	music.	Sometimes	life	has	its
own	music.	This	moment	it	is	raining....	There	is	subtle	music	in	this	rain.	Rain
falling	on	the	leaves	and	one	can	dance	--
enough	music.	One	has	only	 to	be	sensitive.	Or	ocean	waves	shattering	on	 the
beach,	 on	 the	 rocks.	 One	 can	 dance	 --	 enough	 music.	 One	 can	 have	 a	 wild,
orgasmic	dance.	Or	maybe	there	is	no	sound,	only	silence	--
then	too	there	is	music...	one	can	move	with	that	silence.
So	whenever	you	can	find	time	--	but	at	least	once	a	day,	make	it	a	part	of	your
life.	 Just	 as	 you	 eat	 and	 you	 sleep,	 dance	 too.	 And	 I	 will	 remain	 available
wherever	you	are.	Just	don't	be	shy	in	asking	for	my	help.
It	 is	your	 right.	By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	have	all	 the	 right	 to	ask	 for	my
help	 in	 any	moment,	 in	 any	 situation.	That	 is	 the	 privilege	 of	 a	 sannyasin.	 So
don't	be	shy	about	it.
Ask,	and	it	shall	be	given	to	you.
[A	 sannyasin	who	 is	 leaving	 says:	 I'm	 a	 little	 scared	 to	 come	 back.	To	 be	 too
much	involved	here.]
Afraid	of	involvement?	Then	you	will	miss,	because	involvement	is	life,	and	the
deeper	you	become	involved,	the	deeper	you	will	know	the	taste	of	it.	From	the
periphery	nothing	much	is	available.	If	somebody	doesn't	want	to	get	involved,
remains	on	the	periphery,	he	remains	on	the	bank.	He	never	gets	into	the	stream,
afraid	that	the	stream	will	take	him	to	some	unknown	space.	But	then	he	remains
on	 the	 bank	 and	 he	 remains	 thirsty	 and	 he	 remains	 hungry	 and	 he	 remains
frustrated	 --	 because	 enrichment	 is	 through	 involvement.	 One	 grows	 through
commitment.
I'm	not	saying	that	one	should	become	attached	to	one's	involvements	--	no,	not
at	all.	And	that's	the	art:	one	should	get	involved	but	always	remain	capable	of
getting	out	of	it.	Any	moment,	if	the	situation	arises	and	one	has	to	get	out,	one
can.	 Involvement	 should	 not	 be	 an	 attachment,	 so	 beware	 of	 attach-ment,	 but
never	be	afraid	of	 involvement.	They	almost	go	 together	 --	 that's	why	 the	 fear
arises	--	but	they	can	be	put	separately,	and	that	is	the	whole	art	of	life.
If	you	don't	get	involved	you	will	not	enjoy	life;	everywhere	the	problem	is	the
same.	If	you	love	a	woman	you	will	be	afraid	--	you	may	get	 involved.	In	fact
you	 should	 get	 involved,	 otherwise	 how	 can	 you	 love	 a	 woman?	 Then	 only
peripheries	meet	and	the	 inner	consciousness	remains	completely	aloof.	Unless
the	 inner	 consciousnesses	 overlap,	 start	 penetrating	 each	 other,	 you	 will	 not
know	what	love	is,	you	will	not	know	its	depth;	you	will	miss.
On	the	surface	there	are	only	waves.	The	great	calm	is	only	in	the	depth.	It	may
be	love,	 it	may	be	meditation,	 it	may	be	sannyas,	but	 the	problem	is	 the	same.
You	 have	 to	 go	 into	 it	 headlong;	 one	 has	 to	 be	 a	 little	 foolish.	 Wise	 people
always	 remain	 hanging	 on	 the	 bank.	 Their	 wisdom	 eventually	 proves	 to	 be
stupidity.	Fools	jump,	and	finally	their	foolishness	simply	proves	that	they	were
courageous	and	wise	because	they	learned.	They	know	new	places	of	being.
So	 never	 be	 afraid	 of	 involvement.	 Never	 be	 afraid	 of	 commitment.	 Just	 one
thing	has	to	be	remembered
--	never	lose	your	freedom.	That	does	not	mean	that	you	don't	become	intimate
with	somebody.	It	simply	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
means	that	you	become	intimate	but	you	still	remain	free.	In	fact	a	free	person	is
simply	aware	that	he	is	free,	any	moment	anything	can	be	dropped.	If	 the	time
arises	and	the	situation	is	there,	the	challenge	is	there	and	one	simply	feels	stuck
--	one	can	get	out	of	it.	It	is	an	agreement	that	can	be	broken.	It	is	your	choice	to
be	in	it	or	not.	But	from	the	very	beginning	to	stand	out	and	become	a	spectator
you	will	miss	the	whole	of	life.
So	go	deeply	into	involvement	but	always	remain	your	own	master.	There	is	no
need	to	show	your	mastery	every	moment,	you	just	have	to	know	that	it	is	there.
And	if	you	want	to	get	out,	you	can	simply	slip	out;	just	as	a	snake	slips	out	of
the	 old	 skin,	 one	 can	 slip	 out	 of	 any	 situation.	 But	 if	 you	 remain	 afraid	 just
because	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 of	 getting	 involved,	 and	 you	 don't	 grow	 skin
because	 it	may	become	old	 and	 then	you	may	have	 to	get	 out	 of	 it,	 or	 it	may
become	a	confinement,	how	will	you	live?	But	it	happens	to	everybody.
Once	 you	 start	 enjoying	 your	 aloneness	 and	 enjoying	 your	 freedom,	 the	 fear
arises,	 'Now	don't	get	into	anything.	Just	keep	out.'	That's	why	so	many	people
drop	out	of	society.	But	that	is	not	going	to	end	it.	And	the	days	that	are	wasted,
are	wasted	forever	--	you	cannot	reclaim	them.
My	whole	teaching	is	to	get	involved	and	yet	to	remain	unattached.	Walk	in	the
water	but	don't	be	touched	by	the	water.	Remain	like	a	lotus	leaf:	in	the	water	but
yet	untouched.	The	 lotus	 leaf	has	 functioned	as	one	of	 the	greatest	 symbols	 in
the	East	because	it	remains	in	the	water	and	yet	untouched.	That	is	the	ideal	for
the	 sannyasin.	Not	 that	 one	 escapes,	 then	 there	 is	 no	water.	Not	 that	 one	 gets
soaked	with	water,	then	you	are	not	a	lotus	leaf.
Be	 in	 the	 water,	 be	 in	 the	 turmoil	 of	 involvement,	 in	 the	 problems	 that
commitment	 brings,	 that	 intimacy	 brings,	 love	 brings;	 be	 in	 it	 and	 yet	 remain
aloof.	And	by	and	by	one	learns	--	it	is	a	knack.	One	learns	by	doing	it.	Then	a
great	balance	arises.	With	that	balance	all	fear	disappears.
Come	back	and	get	involved,	mm?
[A	visitor	says:	I	don't	know	if	I'm	ready	to	stop	holding	back.]
Nobody	knows.	Holding	back	is	just	a	tendency	of	the	mind,	a	natural	tendency.
In	fact	to	say	that	the	mind	holds	back	is	not	right.	This	holding	back	is	what	the
mind	 is.	 Once	 you	 don't	 hold	 back,	 the	 mind	 disappears.	 And	 with	 the
disappearance	of	the	mind	is	the	appearance	of	your	being,	of	your	true	being.
This	holding	back	simply	says	that	one	goes	on	clinging	to	the	past.	Of	course
there	is	nothing	to	cling	to	because	the	past	has	gone.	If	you	open	your	fist	there
is	nothing	to	hold,	the	past	is	gone.	It	is	just	in	the	memory,	it	is	no	more	part	of
reality.	But	we	go	on	holding	it,	hoping	that	maybe	it	is	somewhere	and	can	be
reclaimed.
And	 holding	 back	 is	 also	 a	 subtle	 fear	 of	 the	 unknown,	 the	 unfamiliar,	 the
strange.	By	and	by	you	will	start	living	a	very	dead	life,	because	the	unknown	is
what	life	is,	and	each	moment	one	has	to	take	the	risk	again	and	again	of	living.
Each	 morning	 one	 has	 to	 take	 a	 risk	 again.	 It	 is	 very	 risky,	 and	 there	 is	 no
security.	One	never	knows	where	one	is	going,	so	that	the	mind	holds	back.	The
mind	 is	a	 safety	measure,	mm?	--	a	key	 to	 the	known,	 to	 the	 familiar.	Make	a
definition	 --	 don't	 go	 beyond	 it.	 Make	 a	 boundary.	 But	 all	 boundaries	 are
imprisonments.	And	then	one	suffers.
Man	is	made	in	such	a	way	that	unless	the	whole	sky	is	his	boundary	he	will	be
miserable.	Less	than	that	won't	do.	One	needs	to	expand,	and	one	has	to	become
the	expansion.	Then	there	is	enthusiasm	and	there	is	zest	and	there	is	juice,	mm?
because	each	moment	is	a	new	victory;	you	expand.	Each	moment	there	is	a	new
challenge.	You	accept	and	you	go	on	the	unknown	journey.	Each	moment	God
knocks	on	your	door	and	calls	you	in	such	a	way	that	He	has	never	called	you;	in
such	a	language	He	has	never	used	before;	onto	such	paths	which	you	have	not
even	dreamed	about,	and	beckons	you	to	come	and	follow	Him	That's	what	I	call
a	religious	life:	to	always	be	ready	to	go	into	the	unknown,	the	unchartered,	with
no	 maps,	 with	 no	 past	 experiences.	 Of	 course	 there	 cannot	 be	 any	 past
experiences	of	it.	Such	a	being	grows	and	such	a	being	has	a	movement.
And	I	can	see	that	you	have	infinite	possibilities....
(to	 a	 sannyasin):	 I	 received	 your	 letter.	 Too	much	 eating	 is	 the	 problem?	 Is	 it
something	new	or	has	it	always	been	there?
[The	sannyasin	replies:	Always.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	can	do	two	things.	There	are	two	types	of	food.	One	is	that	which	you	like,
which	you	have	a	fancy	for,	about	which	you	fantasize.	There	is	nothing	wrong
in	it,	but	you	will	have	to	learn	a	small	trick	for	it.
There	are	foods	which	have	a	tremendous	appeal.	The	appeal	is	not	because	you
see	that	the	food	is	available.	You	go	into	a	hotel,	into	a	restaurant,	and	you	see
certain	foods	--	the	smell	coming	from	the	backroom,	the	colour	and	the	aroma
of	 the	 food.	 You	 were	 not	 thinking	 about	 the	 food	 and	 suddenly	 you	 are
interested	in	it	--	this	is	not	going	to	help.	This	is	not	your	real	desire.	You	can
eat	this	thing	--	it	will	not	satisfy	you.	You	will	eat	and	eat	and	nothing	will	come
out	 of	 it;	 no	 satisfaction	 will	 come	 out	 of	 it.	 And	 satisfaction	 is	 the	 most
important	thing.	It	is	the	dissatisfaction	that	creates	the	obsession.
Simply	meditate	every	day	before	you	take	food.	Close	your	eyes	and	just	feel
what	your	body	needs	--
whatsoever	 it	 is!	You	 have	 not	 seen	 any	 food	 --	 no	 food	 is	 available;	 you	 are
simply	feeling	your	own	being,	what	your	body	needs,	what	you	feel	like,	what
you	hanker	for.
Dr.	Leonard	Pearson	calls	this,	'humming	food'	--	food	that	hums	to	you.	Go	and
eat	as	much	of	it	as	you	want,	but	stick	to	it.	The	other	food	he	calls,	'beckoning
food':	when	it	becomes	available,	you	become	interested	in	it.	Then	it	is	a	mind
thing	and	it	is	not	your	need.	If	you	listen	to	your	humming	food,	you	can	eat	as
much	 as	 you	want	 and	 you	will	 never	 suffer,	 because	 it	will	 satisfy	 you.	 The
body	simply	desires	that	which	it	needs;	it	never	desires	anything	else.	That	will
be	satisfactory,	and	once	there	is	satisfaction,	one	never	eats	more.	The	problem
arises	 only	 if	 you	 are	 eating	 foods	 which	 are	 beckoning	 foods:	 you	 see	 them
available	 and	 you	 become	 interested	 and	 you	 eat.	 They	 cannot	 satisfy	 you
because	there	is	no	need	in	the	body	for	them.	When	they	don't	satisfy	you,	you
feel	unsatisfied.	Feeling	unsatisfied,	you	eat	more,	but	howsoever	much	you	eat,
it	is	not	going	to	satisfy	because	there	is	no	need	in	the	first	place.
The	first	type	of	desire	has	to	be	fulfilled,	then	the	second	will	disappear.	What
people	are	doing	 is	 that	 they	never	 listen	 to	 the	 first,	 so	 the	second	becomes	a
problem.	If	you	listen	to	the	hum-ming	food,	the	beckoning	food	will	disappear.
The	second	 is	a	problem	only	because	you	have	completely	 forgotten	 that	you
have	to	listen	to	your	inner	desire,	and	people	have	been	taught	not	to	listen	to	it.
They	have	been	taught,	'Eat	this	--	don't	eat	that'	--	fixed	rules.	The	body	knows
no	fixed	rules.
They	have	found	that	if	small	children	are	left	alone	with	food,	they	will	eat	only
that	 which	 is	 needed	 for	 their	 body,	 and	 they	 were	 surprised.	 Many
psychological	findings	are	available	now;	they	were	simply	surprised.	If	a	child
is	 suffering	 from	some	disease,	 and	 if	 apple	 is	good	 for	 that	disease,	 the	child
will	choose	the	apple.	All	other	foods	are	available	but	 the	child	will	go	to	the
apple.
That's	 what	 all	 animals	 are	 doing;	 only	 man	 has	 forgotten	 the	 language.	 You
bring	a	buffalo	and	leave	her	in	the	garden.	The	whole	garden	is	there	--	all	the
greenery	 is	 available;	 she	 will	 not	 bother.	 The	 flowers	 and	 the	 trees	 may	 be
beckoning	but	she	won't	bother	with	them.	She	will	go	to	the	grass	that	hums	to
her,	and	she	will	choose	only	certain	grass	that	is	her	need.	You	cannot	deceive	a
buffalo;	you	can	only	deceive	man.
Man	has	fallen	even	below	buffaloes.	You	cannot	befool	a	donkey	--	he	will	eat
his	 food.	 Man	 is	 befooled.	 Everywhere	 through	 advertisements,	 coloured
pictures,	TV,	movies,	you	are	being	attracted	and	distracted	from	your	humming
body.	 Some	 company	 is	 interested	 in	 selling	 something	 to	 you.	 That	 is	 in	 the
favour	of	the	company,	it	is	beneficial	to	the	company,	not	to	you.
Some	 Coca	 Cola	 company	 is	 interested	 in	 selling	 Coca	 Cola	 to	 you.	 It	 has
nothing	 to	 do	with	 your	 body;	 it	 allures	 you.	Wherever	 you	 go,	 there	 is	Coca
Cola;	Coca	Cola	seems	to	be	one	of	the	most	universal	things.
Even	 in	 Soviet	 Russia	 --	 nothing	 else	 american	 is	 allowed,	 but	 Coca	 Cola	 is
there.	From	everywhere	 the	bottle	 is	calling	you,	beckoning,	 'Come	here.'	And
suddenly	you	start	feeling	thirsty.	That	thirst	is	false.	I'm	not	saying	don't	drink
Coca	Cola	--	but	let	it	hum;	make	it	a	point.
It	will	take	a	few	days,	even	a	few	weeks	for	you	to	come	to	feel	what	appeals	to
you.	Eat	as	much	as	you	want	of	what	appeals	to	you.	Don't	bother	about	what
others	say.	If	ice-cream	appeals	to	you,	eat	ice-cream.	Eat	to	your	satisfaction,	to
your	heart's	desire,	and	then	suddenly	you	will	see	that	there	is	satisfaction.	And
when	you	 feel	 satisfied,	 the	desire	 to	 stuff	disappears.	 It	 is	 an	unsatisfied	 state
that	makes	you	stuff	yourself	more	and	more	and	still	 to	no	purpose.	You	 feel
full	and	still	unsatisfied,	so	the	problem	arises.
So	 first	 start	 learning	 something	which	 is	 natural	 and	which	will	 come,	mm?
because	we	have	only	forgotten;	it	 is	there	in	the	body.	When	you	are	going	to
take	your	breakfast,	 close	your	 eyes	 and	 see	what	 you	want;	what	 your	desire
really	 is.	Don't	 think	about	what	 is	available;	simply	 think	what	your	desire	 is,
and	then	go	and	find	that	thing	and	eat	it.	Eat	as	much	as	you	want.	For	a	few
days	just	go	with	it.	By	and	by	you	will	see	that	now	no	food	beckons	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 second	 thing:	 when	 you	 eat,	 chew	 it	 well.	 Don't	 swallow	 it	 in	 a	 hurry,
because	if	it	is	oral,	you	enjoy	it	in	the	mouth,	so	why	not	chew	it	more?	If	you
take	 ten	bites	of	 something	you	can	enjoy	one	bite,	 chew	 it	 ten	 times	more.	 It
will	almost	be	like	taking	ten	bites	if	your	enjoyment	is	only	of	the	taste.
It	happened	once	that	a	man	drank	some	hot	coffee	somewhere	in	Japan	and	he
burned	his	throat	inside.
Some	 complication	 arose	 and	 his	 throat	 was	 completely	 cut	 from	 inside;	 the
passage	had	to	be	closed	otherwise	the	man	was	going	to	die.	The	doctors	fixed	a
pipe	into	his	stomach	so	he	had	to	chew	the	food,	throw	it	into	the	pipe,	and	the
pipe	would	take	it	into	the	stomach.
The	 man	 was	 surprised	 because	 he	 continued	 to	 enjoy	 his	 food	 as	 much	 as
before.	And	even	the	doctors	were	surprised.
They	were	at	first	feeling	very	sympathetic	 towards	him	because	the	poor	man
would	no	 longer	 enjoy	his	 food.	But	 the	man	continued	 to	 enjoy	 it.	 In	 fact	 he
started	to	enjoy	it	more	because	now	he	would	chew	it	and	if	he	did	not	want	to
take	it	into	the	stomach,	he	would	simply	throw	it	out.	Now	he	could	eat	as	much
as	he	wanted.	There	was	no	need	to	take	it	into	the	stomach;	the	mouth	and	the
stomach	were	completely	separate.
So	whenever	you	are	eating,	chew	more,	because	the	enjoyment	is	just	above	the
throat.	Below	the	throat	there	is	no	taste	--	nothing	of	the	sort	--	so	why	be	in	a
hurry?	Just	chew	it	more,	taste	it	more.	And	to	make	this	taste	more	intense,	do
all	 that	 can	 be	 done.	When	you	 are	 eating	 something,	 first	 smell	 it.	Enjoy	 the
smell	of	it	because	half	the	taste	consists	of	smell.
Many	experiments	have	been	done.	 If	your	nose	 is	completely	closed	and	 then
something	is	given	to	you,	you	cannot	taste	it.	Then	you	will	understand	that	the
taste	was	more	smell	than	taste.	If	your	eyes	are	closed,	you	cannot	taste	it	even
that	much,	 because	 the	 colour,	 the	 appeal	 to	 the	 eyes,	 is	 no	more	 there.	 They
have	done	beautiful	experiments:	eyes	closed,	nose	completely	closed,	and	then
they	 give	 you	 something;	 you	 cannot	 even	 tell	what	 it	 is.	They	may	 give	 you
onion	and	you	cannot	say	 that	 it	 is	onion	because	much	depends	on	 the	smell.
That's	why	when	you	have	a	cold	you	cannot	enjoy	food,	because	 the	smell	 is
not	there,	the	taste	is	not	there.	When	people	are	suffering	from	a	cold	they	start
eating	spicy	food	because	only	then	can	they	feel	a	little	tingling.
So	 smell	 the	 food,	 look	 at	 the	 food.	 There	 is	 no	 hurry...	 take	 time.	Make	 it	 a
meditation.	Even	if	people	think	you	have	gone	mad,	don't	be	worried.	Just	look
at	it	from	all	sides.	Touch	it	with	closed	eyes,	touch	it	with	your	cheek.	Feel	it	in
every	way;	smell	it	again	and	again.	Then	take	a	small	bite	and	chew	it,	enjoy	it;
let	it	be	a	meditation.	A	very	small	quantity	of	food	will	be	enough	and	will	give
you	more	satisfaction.
So	these	few	things	do	for	three	weeks	and	then	report	to	me,	mm?	But	try	for
three	weeks.	Good!
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	You	are	Freedom
11	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611115
ShortTitle:	WHIP04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	sannyasin	who	is	leaving	for	the	States:	For	the	last	three	or	four	days	I	feel
very	 lost.	 I	 don't	 know	what	my	 position	 is.	 I	 don't	 know	what	my	 role	 is	 or
anything.]
There	is	no	need	to	know	it	and	nobody	knows	exactly.	And	it	is	better	that	you
don't	know	it.	If	you	know	who	you	are,	if	you	know	what	your	role	is,	you	will
lose	all	feeling.	You	will	be	fixed:	you	will	be	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
thing	 and	 not	 a	 person.	That's	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 thing	 and	 a	 person.	A
rock	is	a	rock.	A	man?	--
nobody	knows	what	a	man	is.	A	man	is	all	possibilities.	A	rock	is	an	actuality	--
there	is	no	possibility.	It	is	simply	a	rock,	absolutely	certain	of	what	it	is.	Its	role
is	predictable:	it	is	a	rock.
Man	is	a	potentiality,	he	can	be	anything	--	he	can	even	be	nothing.	All	doors	are
open,	 and	 each	 moment	 you	 have	 to	 decide	 who	 you	 are.	 Each	 moment	 by
acting,	you	decide	who	you	are	 --	 but	 that	 decision	 is	 only	 for	 the	moment,	 it
cannot	 go	 beyond	 the	moment.	 If	 it	 goes	 beyond	 the	moment,	 you	 destroy	 all
beauty	 in	your	 life	 --	 you	become	a	 thing,	 you	are	no	more	 a	person.	To	be	 a
person	means	 to	be	a	 freedom.	A	thousand	and	one	alternatives	are	 there.	And
you	can	choose	any	--	it	is	your	choice.
There	 is	nobody	who	has	 fixed	your	 role.	When	you	came	 into	 the	world	you
were	 not	 given	 a	 script	 to	 live	 up	 to.	 You	 have	 been	 thrown	 into	 the	 world,
absolutely	free,	to	find	out	who	you	are	--	it	is	not	a	given	thing.	And	by	doing
things,	by	being	a	million	and	one	things,	you	will	feel	by	and	by	who	you	are.
But	when	you	come	to	know	who	you	are,	again	you	will	not	be	a	thing.	Then
too,	you	cannot	define	yourself.
Then	you	know	that	you	are	a	nothing.	You	know	that	you	are	a	freedom.
That's	 what	 is	 meant	 by	 nirvana,	 moksha.	 The	 word	moksha	means	 freedom,
absolute	freedom;	all	possibilities	and	nothing	actual.	Nothing	defines	you.
Definition	is	ugly	because	definition	is	a	prison.	You	can	define	a	tree	because	it
has	a	fixed	role,	and	you	can	define	a	dog	because	it	has	a	fixed	role	--	but	you
cannot	 define	 man.	 Man	 is	 indefinable	 --	 as	 indefinable	 as	 God.	 That's	 the
dignity...	that's	the	grandeur.	But	ordinarily...	I	can	understand	your	problem
--	it	comes	to	everybody.	Everybody	has	to	encounter	it	some	day	or	other.
If	 you	 know	 who	 you	 are	 you	 will	 feel	 at	 ease.	 There	 is	 a	 full	 stop	 and	 the
sentence	 is	 complete;	 you	 can	 relax.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 growth...	 there	 is	 no
journey.	You	can	feel	that	you	have	arrived.	This	search	to	be	certain	of	who	you
are	 is	 a	 search	 for	 security	 --	 a	 search	 to	 be	 dead	 and	 dull.	 To	 be	 constantly
moving	is	difficult	--	certainly	difficult,	arduous	--	because	again	and	again	each
moment	you	are	faced	with	emptiness.	Again	you	have	to	do	something	to	know
who	 you	 are.	 Each	 act	 defines	 you,	 but	 only	 for	 the	moment.	 That's	why	 one
should	never	look	into	the	past	of	any	man.
Somebody	 says,	 'Don't	 go	 with	 that	 man	 because	 he	 is	 a	 thief.'	 What	 is	 he
saying?	He	 is	 saying	 that	 he	 has	 been	 caught	 stealing	 --	 but	 that	 is	 past.	 That
definition	no	more	 applies.	That	 act	 defined	 a	 certain	moment	 in	 the	 past,	 but
now	it	is	no	more	a	definition;	that	man	is	out	of	that	moment.	Don't	call	a	man	a
thief,	because	he	may	have	turned	against	stealing	by	now.	He	may	have	become
a	saint.	Then	you	say	that	somebody	is	a	saint.	Don't	call	a	man	a	saint,	because
what	 do	 you	mean?	You	mean	 some	 acts	 that	 he	 has	 done	 in	 the	 past?	 They
define	his	past	but	they	cannot	define	his	present.	A	saint	can	become	a	sinner.
And	this	is	beautiful!	That	means	that	even	a	saint	is	free.	A	sinner	can	become	a
saint,	a	saint	can	become	a	sinner.	Freedom	remains	untouched	--	no	definition
covers	 it.	 But	 people	 try	 to	 cover	 themselves	 with	 definitions.	 They	 feel
protected	 by	 a	 definition.	 Behind	 a	 definition	 they	 feel	 perfectly	 okay,
complacent,	comfortable.	Life	is	no	more	an	adventure.	They	are	dead	people	--
they	 are	 already	 in	 their	 graves.	 In	 fact	 when	 a	man	 dies,	 only	 then	 can	 you
define	him	--	never	before.
If	 you	 want	 to	 know	 the	 definition,	 go	 to	 the	 graveyard,	 and	 there	 on	 the
tombstones	 you	will	 find	 definitions.	Now	 those	men	who	 are	 in	 their	 graves
cannot	do	anything	to	be	changed;	they	can	be	defined.
They	are	now	almost	like	rocks.	But	you	are	alive	--	and	remain	alive!	Nobody
has	given	you	any	role.	The	whole	idea	that	somebody	has	given	you	a	role,	that
you	have	a	fixed	purpose,	that	you	are	here	to	do	something	in	particular,	is	very
humiliating.	That	means	that	you	are	born	with	a	script	and	you	have	to	follow
that	 script.	 Then	 life	 will	 not	 have	 enthusiasm:	 it	 will	 be	 a	 very	 dull	 and
monotonous	affair.
No,	 this	 is	 good.	This	 is	 the	 right	 space	 I	would	 like	you	 to	be	 in.	This	 is	 the
space	that	I	am	creating	for	you	here.	I	am	trying	to	take	all	the	definitions	away.
You	are	a	Christian,	you	are	a	Hindu,	you	are	a	Jew	--
I	am	trying	to	take	away	all	your	definitions.	You	are	a	man	or	a	woman	--	I	am
trying	 to	even	 take	away	that.	You	are	young	or	old,	educated,	uneducated....	 I
am	 trying	 to	 take	 everything	 away	 from	 you	 so	 that	 you	 remain	 just	 an
openness...	 a	 freedom	 to	 be	 anything	 you	wish	 to	 be	 in	 any	moment.	Nothing
holds	you,	nothing	prevents	you.
This	 is	what	 I	 call	 a	 real	man	 --	who	 has	 nothing	 to	 prevent	 him	 from	 doing
anything,	who	has	 no	 considerations	 and	who	 is	 not	 bothered	 to	 be	 consistent
with	his	past.	Only	a	rock	is	consistent	with	his	past,	a	dog	is	consistent	with	his
past.	 You	 can	 never	 say	 to	 a	 dog	 that	 he	 looks	 inconsistent	 --	 he's	 always
consistent.	His	life	is	a	routine,	a	repetition.
The	bigger	the	man,	the	bigger	are	his	contradictions.	The	greater	the	man,	the
greater	are	his	paradoxes.
Nothing	can	hold	him,	he	goes	on	moving	--	every	time	he	leaves	the	past	and
goes	on	searching	in	new	fields.	He	is	an	explorer.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	forget	about	it!	There	is	no	need	for	you	to	know	who	you	are.	Each	moment
you	will	 know	 a	 fragment.	 In	 some	moment	 you	will	 be	 a	 saint	 and	 in	 some
moment	you	will	 be	a	 sinner.	When	you	are	 sitting	with	your	 lover,	you	are	 a
beloved.	You	 are	 talking	 to	 somebody	who	 is	 just	 an	 acquaintance	 --	 you	 are
different,	you	are	not	the	same	person,	your	very	quality	is	different.	Then	you
go	 to	 the	office	 to	work,	 then	again	you	are	different.	You	are	 sitting	alone	 in
your	 drawing-room	 and	 then	 somebody	 knocks	 on	 the	 door.	 A	 salesman	 just
knocks,	 and	 you	 are	 different;	 you	 change.	 The	 salesman	 enters	 and	 you	 are
different.
Each	moment	brings	a	new	breeze	and	a	new	sun	and	you	go	on	changing.	Such
is	 the	vastness	of	a	human	being.	 It	 is	 tremendous...	 it	has	no	boundaries.	You
cannot	label	it,	and	the	very	effort	to	label	it	is	wrong,	ugly.	So	drop	that	whole
idea.	Learn	something	of	what	I	am	saying.	And	you	don't	have	any	role.
You	will	have	many	roles	but	they	are	your	choice.	You	want	to	play	them	--	you
play;	it	is	your	game.
So	 take	 life	 as	 an	 infinite	 possibility.	 For	man	 nothing	 is	 actual.	Man	 is	 born
completely	open...	just	a	great	emptiness.	You	can	change	him	into	anything.	He
is	 ready	 to	adjust	 to	any	act,	and	all	acts	are	purely	games.	They	are	not	 roles
given	to	you	by	somebody	else	--	it	is	out	of	your	own	choice.
A	man	who	 is	 aware	 becomes	 his	 own	 source	 of	 his	 roles.	He	 is	 no	more	 an
effect	then	--	he	becomes	the	cause.	When	you	are	asking,	 'What	role	have	I	to
play	in	my	life?'	you	are	asking	as	if	the	role	is	to	be	given	by	somebody	else:
you	are	the	effect	and	he	is	the	cause.	Absolutely	wrong...	that	is	not	how	life	is.
you	 are	 the	 cause,	 you	 are	 the	 effect	 --	 you	 are	 absolutely	 responsible.	 You
cannot	 throw	 responsibility	 on	 anybody	 else.	 Of	 course	 if	 you	 are	 not
courageous,	 this	 will	 create	 great	 fear.	 Then	 you	 feel	 a	 nothingness	 and	 you
cannot	 cope	with	 it.	But	 I	 know	 that	 you	have	 courage	 and	 that	 you	 can	 cope
with	it.
So	 even	 if	 there	 is	 fear	 sometimes,	 let	 it	 be,	 but	 never	 forget	 that	 you	 are	 the
cause	 of	 your	 life,	 you	 are	 at	 the	 very	 source	 of	 your	 life,	 and	 that	 you	 can
change	because	nobody	is	forcing	any	structure	on	you.	To	understand	this	much
is	to	understand	what	we	mean	by	liberation,	freedom,	moksha.
Never	 get	 caught	 in	 any	 definition.	 Then	 your	 purity,	 your	 freedom,	 always
remains	uncorrupted.	Have	you	got	a	box	with	you?	(She	shakes	her	head)
(Osho	passes	her	a	box)	Now	at	this	moment	you	are	a	receiver	of	a	box!
Dhyana	 means	 meditation	 and	 ananda	 means	 bliss;	 bliss	 that	 comes	 through
meditation.	This	word	dhyana	 is	one	of	 the	most	 significant	words.	 In	English
you	have	 three	words:	concentration,	contemplation,	meditation.	Concentration
means	putting	your	mind,	focusing	your	mind	on	one	object,	centering	the	mind
on	 one	 object.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 concentration.	 But	 it	 brings	 tension
because	you	have	to	focus	and	narrow	the	mind.	It	is	a	forced	state,	and	I	am	not
in	support	of	it.	That	is	not	real	meditation.
And	 this	 is	 what	 is	 thought	 by	 people	 to	 be	 meditation:	 you	 concentrate	 on
something	 outside	 or	 some	 imagined	 light	 inside	 or	 some	 mantra,	 but	 you
concentrate.	Concentration	is	not	dhyana,	because	dhyana	is	a	very	relaxed	state
and	 concentration	 is	 very	 tense.	Concentration	 is	 very	 forced,	 disciplined,	 and
dhyana	is	very	spontaneous.
The	 second	 word	 is	 contemplation.	 Concentration	 is	 more	 of	 the	 head	 and
contemplation	 is	 more	 of	 the	 heart:	 that	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 'temple'	 in	 it.
Contemplation	means	to	become	a	temple,	'templum'	--	from	that	root	comes	the
word.	So	it	 is	more	prayerful,	more	compassionate	and	one	is	working	through
the	heart.
Better	than	concentration	but	still	not	dhyana,	because	whether	you	concentrate
through	the	mind	or	through	the	heart,	there	is	some	activity	going	on	--	either	of
the	head	or	of	 the	heart.	Meditation	 is	a	state	of	no	activity,	no	ripples	arising.
One	simply	is	--	neither	thinking	nor	feeling,	neither	concentrating	on	anything
nor	thinking	about	anything.	One	is	simply	a	pool	of	energy.
The	 third	 word	 is	 better	 than	 the	 other	 two	 but	 still	 not	 perfect.	 The	 word
meditation	comes	from	the	same	root	as	medicine:	'med'.	It	means	to	care	about.
Medicine	means	to	take	care	of	the	body,	and	the	medical	profession	means	the
profession	that	takes	care	of	the	body.	Meditation	means	to	take	care	of	the	soul.
Just	as	medicine	is	good	for	the	body,	meditation	is	good	for	the	soul.
So	these	are	 the	three	layers:	head	--	concentration;	heart	--	contemplation;	 the
soul,	your	innermost	core
--	that	is	meditation.	Meditation	comes	closest	to	dhyana.	Dhyana	means	just	to
be	doing	nothing,	just	sitting	silently...	just	being.	It	is	the	absolute	relaxed	state
of	consciousness.
And	I	am	giving	you	that	name	because	I	feel	that	your	energy	can	very	easily
relax.	You	can	become	a	great	meditator.	 It	 is	already	there	--	you	just	have	to
work	 and	 help	 it	 a	 little.	 Not	 much	 work	 is	 needed.	 So	 continue	 doing
meditation,	do	a	few	groups,	but	at	least	every	day	for	half	an	hour	just	sit	and
do	nothing.
Just	 enjoy	 sitting.	 Looking	 at	 the	 sky	 or	 looking	 at	 the	 earth,	 or	 not	 looking
anywhere,	just	sit	silently	--
sometimes	with	open	eyes,	sometimes	with	closed	eyes;	just	exactly	as	you	are
sitting	right	now	(The	sannyasin	was	sitting	with	his	legs	folded	under	him,	back
erect).	Mm?	the	heart	goes	on	beating,	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
breathing	goes	on,	but	everything	slows	down	and	one	becomes	quiet;	a	serenity
surrounds	one.
This	is	what	meditation,	what	dhyana	is.	And	become	really	a	the	sannyasin	--	a
blissful	meditator.
[A	sannyasin,	said	he	had	various	aches	and	pains	in	his	body	and	had	them	for
some	time.	He	wondered	if	he	should	do	Postural	Integration.]
It	happens	many	times	that	the	body	and	the	mind	are	not	in	tune.	Then	you	start
feeling	 as	 if	 the	 body	 is	 some	 other	 person.	The	 body	 hangs	 and	 you	 have	 to
carry	 it	and	it	becomes	a	wound.	If	 the	body	and	the	mind	are	coinciding	with
each	other,	fitting	with	each	other,	you	can	forget	the	body;	you	don't	remember
it.
You	 are	 almost	 bodiless.	And	 that's	 the	 definition	 of	 health:	 one	 does	 not	 feel
that	one	is	in	the	body.	Of	course	if	somebody	reminds	you,	you	will	remember
it,	 otherwise	 the	 body	 simply	 does	 not	 exist.	 The	 mechanism	 is	 running	 so
smoothly,	so	hummingly,	that	one	never	feels	any	distance	between	the	body	and
oneself.
And	it	happens	many	times	 that	when	you	start	growing	in	 the	mind	there	 is	a
separation,	 because	 the	 body	was	 adjusted	 to	 the	 old	mind;	 now	 the	mind	has
changed	 --	 the	 body	 remains	 the	 old.	 The	 body	 is	 a	 very	 very	 slow-moving
mechanism,	and	it	has	a	kind	of	intelligence	but	certainly	it	is	not	very	great.	So
if	your	mind	moves	suddenly	into	some	new	space,	the	body	is	completely	at	a
loss;	 it	cannot	follow	so	easily	and	so	suddenly	--	 then	there	 is	a	gap,	and	that
gap	will	create	hurts	and	aches.	That	gap	can	be	filled	by	Postural	Integration	or
Rolfing	or	the	Alexander	technique.
For	a	different	mind	a	different	body	is	needed	immediately.	So	the	body	and	the
mind	have	to	go	together.	One	should	always	take	care	of	it.	If	your	mind	grows
a	little	and	you	feel	that	there	is	a	distance	and	the	body	is	lagging	behind,	bring
the	body	to	 the	state	of	 the	mind,	otherwise	you	will	not	be	able	 to	go	 too	far.
The	distance	will	be	too	much	and	a	conflict	will	come.	One	cannot	go	without
the	body;	the	body	has	to	be	taken	care	of.	And	the	body	is	great	when	it	is	with
you,	it	helps	tremendously.	It	is	a	base,	the	very	ground	of	all	your	growth.
In	 the	 old	 days	 the	 traditional	method	of	working	was	 first	 the	 body,	 then	 the
mind.	That's	what	the	yoga	system	is:	first	work	on	the	body,	first	let	the	body	be
ready	 for	 the	 jump	of	 the	mind,	 and	 then	 let	 the	mind	 jump.	That	was	 the	old
pattern,	but	then	many	problems	came	because	people	got	so	obsessed	with	the
body	that	they	forgot	about	the	jump.	The	body	is	a	vast	thing,	so	they	were	lost
in	postures	and	asanas	and	gymnastics,	and	they	completely	forgot	that	this	was
just	to	be	a	jumping	board.
You	can	find	in	India	great	yogis	as	far	as	their	body	is	concerned,	but	their	mind
is	ordinary	and	very	stupid.	They	have	become	very	capable	with	the	body.	They
can	stop	their	breathing,	they	can	stop	their	heart-beat.	They	can	go	underground
for	months	together	and	remain	alive	without	oxygen.	They	can	drink	poison	and
will	not	be	killed.	These	things	are	good	--	you	can	appreciate	them	and	applaud
them	--	but	ultimately	they	are	meaningless.	What	are	you	going	to	do	with	these
things?	You	become	an	exhibitionist,	you	become	a	circus.
And	these	people	have	completely	forgotten	that	with	such	a	great	base,	now	you
take	 the	 jump.	 They	 don't	 know	 how	 to	 meditate;	 they	 don't	 think	 about
meditation.	And	these	postures	were	invented	to	make	you	so	solid	in	the	body
that	when	you	 take	 the	 jump	of	 the	mind,	 the	 body	 simply	 follows	you	 like	 a
shadow.	The	idea	was	good	but	went	wrong.	Then	by	and	by	people	moved	to
the	other	extreme:	 they	started	working	on	 the	mind	directly	because	 the	body
proved	to	be	a	great	jungle.	This	is	called	Raja	Yoga
--	 the	Yoga	 of	 the	 kings.	 The	mind	 has	 to	 be	 changed,	 but	 then	 this	 problem
arises.
Now	 the	 world	 is	 living	 under	 the	 Raja	 Yoga	 impact.	 So	 all	 these	 group
processes	 around	 the	 world	 are	 all	 Raja	 Yoga	 techniques.	 But	 then	 there	 are
problems	 --	 problems	 like	 this.	Hence	Bio-energetics,	massage,	 deep	massage,
Rolfing,	Postural	Integration,	and	things	like	that	are	being	developed,	because
that	is	a	must	now.	People	will	be	taking	great	trips	into	the	mind	and	the	body
will	 be	 lagging	 behind.	 The	 body	 has	 to	 be	 helped.	 So	 good	 --	 take	 Postural
Integration.
[A	 sannyasin	 says:	 After	 the	 last	 darshan	 with	 the	 Encounter	 group	 I	 started
seeing	colours	coming	from	people.	I	saw	feelings	as	colours	and	it	made	me	a
little	bit	afraid.	Then	I	began	to	fight...	 to	fight	with	the	energy...	It	has	gone.	I
became	more	and	more	dead	inside	and	then	I	became	very	ill	for	four	days.]
No,	 you	 created	 something	 wrong.	 You	 should	 have	 enjoyed	 it.	 You	 are	 not
seeing	colours	now?
[She	answers:	No.	Now	I	feel	very	light	and	very	good.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Good,	but	never	stop	any	processes.	If	something	like	that	begins,	just	enjoy	it.
They	 look	 very	 outlandish	 and	 eccentric	 and	 a	 little	 crazy.	 When	 you	 see
somebody	coming	and	you	see	a	red	light	coming	from	that	person,	you	become
afraid	and	you	 think	 that	maybe	you	have	gone	crazy.	Then	you	 see	a	woman
and	a	green	 light	and	you	start	 feeling	 that	 something	 is	wrong	with	you.	You
have	never	seen	these	lights,	but	in	fact	those	lights	are	there.	You	have	not	seen
them	before	because	your	eyes	were	not	clear.	People	have	their	lights.
The	world	is	really	colourful.	It	is	not	so	black	and	white	as	we	think.	The	black
and	white	colour	is	man-made;	the	black	and	white	world	is	man-made.	We	have
divided	everything	 into	 two	--	black	and	white.	Everything	 is	very	colourful	 --
all	 the	 colours	 of	 the	 spectrum.	And	 it	 is	 not	 that	 a	 person	 is	 always	green	or
always	blue	or	red:	each	moment	the	person	goes	on	changing,	because	when	the
inner	energy	changes,	the	colour	changes.
It	was	 really	 a	 very	meaningful	 experience,	 but	 naturally	 one	 becomes	 afraid.
Next	time	if	something	like	this	happens,	allow	it.	It	will	go	on	its	own,	it	will
disappear.	That's	why	you	became	ill:	something	was	happening	and	you	forced
it	back.	Out	of	fear	you	cramped	your	being	and	you	shrank.	That	very	cramping
brought	 the	 illness	 --	 never	 do	 it	 again.	 If	 it	 is	 too	 frightening	 or	 something,
come	to	me.	For	what	am	I	here?	Just	come	to	me	or	you	can	write	a	letter.	But
never	stop	anything	that	 is	happening.	Let	 it	go	to	its	end	--	 then	it	will	finish.
When	it	does	you	will	feel	very	very	cleansed,	purified.
[A	sannyasin	asks:	I	have	a	problem	because	I	am	very	ungrateful,	and	I	would
like	to	know	how	I	can	enjoy	being	ungrateful...	]
Then	you	must	be	having	some	idea	 that	 it	 is	wrong;	 that	will	not	be	allowing
you	to	enjoy	it.
[She	says:	It	feels	like	it	creates	misery	--	the	ungratefulness.]
Mm,	 it	 does	 --	 that's	 true.	 It	 creates	misery,	 because	when	 you	 are	 ungrateful,
you	 become	 closed	 to	 the	 universe.	 You	 are	 no	more	 open,	 you	 are	 no	more
flowing	because	you	don't	respond.	You	don't	say	'thank	you'.	The	universe	goes
on	 giving	 so	much	 to	 you	 and	 you	 don't	 even	 say	 'thank	 you',	 so	 the	 process
stops	and	you	will	be	miserable.
If	you	want	to	enjoy	ungratefulness,	you	will	have	to	enjoy	misery	too.	It	is	the
same	package;	they	go	together.	If	you	don't	want	to	enjoy	the	misery,	start	being
a	little	more	grateful	and	you	will	never	lose	anything	by	it	--	you	will	get	more.
By	being	grateful	you	will	 get	much	more,	because	when	you	become	able	 to
say	 'thank	you'	to	the	universe,	the	universe	pours	itself	into	you	more	happily.
Then	more	flowers	will	flower	for	you.
So	this	is	for	you	to	decide,	I'm	not	saying	to	drop	it.	I	am	simply	saying	that	if
you	want	 to	 enjoy	 ungratefulness,	 then	 in	 the	 same	 package	misery	 comes	 to
you.	If	you	want	to	enjoy	blissfulness,	you	will	have	to	learn	the	ways	of	being
grateful.	 And	 what	 is	 the	 trouble	 in	 being	 grateful?	 The	 trouble	 is	 the	 ego,
because	to	be	grateful	means	to	be	humble.
So	 whenever	 you	 don't	 feel	 grateful,	 that	 simply	 shows	 that	 you	 are	 very
egoistic.	 You	 take	 things	 that	 the	 universe	 gives	 you	 for	 granted	 and	 you	 say
'That's	already	my	right.	If	you	don't	give,	I	will	complain.	If	you	do	give,	there
is	 no	 "thank	 you"	 coming.'	 But	 then	 you	 will	 be	 miserable.	 Just	 learn	 to	 say
'thank	you'	--
and	it	is	so	easy.
From	tomorrow	morning	just	start	saying	'thank	you'	for	small	things.	Somebody
smiles	 --	 say	 'thank	you'	and	see	how	good	 it	 feels.	Then	 if	you	start	enjoying
and	cherishing	it,	even	when	somebody	insults	you,	say	'thank	you'	and	see	what
happens,	 how	beautiful	 it	 feels.	You	 have	 come	 across	 something	meaningful,
but	you	will	have	to	work	it	out.
From	 tomorrow	 morning	 for	 ten	 days	 just	 try	 to	 be	 grateful	 for	 each	 and
everything,	even	 if	sometimes	 it	 looks	crazy.	 If	 the	sun	 is	coming	and	the	rays
are	beautiful,	just	say,	 'thank	you...	thank	you'.	Have	a	little	talk	to	the	river,	to
the	sky,	to	the	dewdrops	in	the	morning.	For	ten	days	don't	miss	any	opportunity
to	feel	grateful.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Search	for	the	Undefined
12	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611125
ShortTitle:	WHIP05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Shanti	means	silence,	peace,	a	state	of	no	mind,	and	prabhu	means	lord;	lord	of
silence.	And	 that's	 how	 I	 see	 your	 energy	moving	 --	 it	 is	moving	 towards	 the
great	silence.	You	are	holding	it.	 If	you	stop	holding	it	you	will	simply	plunge
into	a	totally	different	dimension.	So	uncontrol	is	going	to	be	your	discipline	--
don't	 control	 it.	 There	 is	 a	 silence	 that	 comes	 only	 when	 you	 are	 absolutely
uncontrolled;	 it	 descends.	 That	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 the	 parable	when	 Jesus	was
baptised	by	 John	 the	Baptist,	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	way	of	 saying	 the	 same	 thing:	 a
dove,	a	white	dove	descended	on	him.	The	dove	is	a	symbol	of	peace.	It	is	just
poetry,	 but	 beautiful	 poetry.	 The	meaning	 is	 that	 it	 descended	 upon	 him	 from
nowhere	and	he	was	completely	transformed,	he	was	no	more	the	old	--	the	new
being	was	born.
So	you	have	to	remember	this	--	that	by	your	control	you	will	be	distracting	your
energy.	 The	mind	 is	 a	 great	 dictator	 --	 it	 tries	 to	 control	 everything.	And	 if	 it
cannot	control	something	it	denies	it;	it	says	it	exists	not.	That's	what	all	atheism
is.	The	mind	denies	 that	God	 can	 exist	 because	 the	mind	 thinks	 --	 and	 rightly
also	--	that	if	God	exists,	the	mind	will	not	be	able	to	control	Him.
So	all	that	is	beyond	control	has	to	be	denied.	Then	a	man	lives	a	very	poor	life,
because	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful,	 good,	 true,	 is	 beyond	 control.	 One	 lives	 a	 very
mundane	 life	 then...	 just	a	mechanical	 routine.	No	flower	ever	 flowers,	and	no
star	 ever	 shines,	 and	 no	 song	 is	 ever	 born,	 because	 they	 all	 come	 from	 the
unknown,	 from	nowhere	 like	a	dove	descending.	One	has	 to	be	 in	a	very	deep
receptive	mood	--	not	in	a	controlled	state.	One	has	to	be	almost	a	woman,	not	a
man.	The	feminine	capacity	has	to	be	developed	so	that	you	can	receive	it.
This	meditation	I	would	like	you	to	do	every	night	before	you	go	to	sleep.	Just
sit	in	the	bed,	put	the	lights	off,	and	be	finished	with	anything	that	you	want	to
do	because	after	it	you	have	simply	to	go	into	sleep.	Then	don't	do	anything,	the
doer	 should	not	 be	 allowed	 after	 the	meditation,	mm?	Simply	 relax	 and	move
into	sleep,	because	sleep	also	comes	--	you	cannot	control	it.	There	is	one	quality
in	sleep	which	is	almost	like	meditation,	silence	--	that	it	comes.	That's	why	in
the	West	many	people	 are	 suffering	 from	 insomnia.	They	are	 trying	 to	 control
even	that;	hence	the	problem.	It	is	nothing	that	you	can	do	anything	about.	You
can	simply	wait,	you	can	simply	be	in	a	relaxed,	receptive	mood.
So	after	this	meditation	you	have	simply	to	relax	and	go	into	sleep	so	that	there
will	 be	 a	 continuity	 and	 the	meditation	will	 go	 on	 flowing	 in	 you.	The	whole
night	 the	 vibration	will	 be	 there.	And	 you	will	 feel	 in	 the	morning	when	 you
open	your	eyes	that	you	have	slept	 in	a	 totally	different	way.	There	has	been	a
qualitative	change	--	it	was	not	just	sleep:	something	else,	deeper	than	sleep,	was
present.	You	have	been	showered	by	something	and	you	don't	know	what	 it	 is
and	how	to	categorise	it.
The	meditation	is	very	simple.	Sit	in	the	bed,	relax	the	body	close	the	eyes,	and
just	 imagine	 that	 you	 are	 lost	 in	 a	mountainous	 region.	 It	 is	 a	 dark	 night,	 no
moon	in	the	sky,	and	it	is	a	very	clouded	sky	--	you	cannot	see	even	a	single	star,
it	 is	absolutely	dark	--	you	cannot	see	even	your	own	hand.	You	are	lost	in	the
mountains	and	it	is	very	difficult	to	grope	your	way.	There	is	every	danger	--	any
moment	 you	 can	 fall	 into	 some	 valley,	 into	 some	 abyss	 and	 you	will	 be	 gone
forever.	 So	 you	 are	 groping	 very	 cautiously.	 You	 are	 fully	 alert	 because	 the
danger	 is	 tremendous,	 and	when	 the	 danger	 is	 tremendous	 one	 has	 to	 be	 very
alert.
So	the	imagination	of	the	dark	night	and	the	mountainous	region	is	just	to	create
a	very	dangerous	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
situation.	And	you	are	very	alert	--	even	if	a	pin	drops	you	will	be	able	to	hear	it.
Then	suddenly	you	come	near	a	precipice.	One	can	feel	that	now	there	is	no	way
ahead,	and	one	never	knows	how	deep	is	the	abyss.
So	you	 take	 a	 rock	 and	 throw	 into	 the	 abyss,	mm?	 Just	 to	 see	how	deep	 it	 is.
Wait	and	listen	for	the	report	of	the	rock	falling	on	other	rocks.	But	you	go	on
listening,	you	go	on	listening,	you	go	on	listening,	and	there	is	no	report	--	as	if	it
is	an	abyss	with	no	bottom.	Just	listening,	listening,	listening,	a	great	fear	arises
in	you,	and	with	that	fear	of	course	your	awareness	becomes	a	flame.	Mm?	but
let	it	be	an	actual	imagination.	Do	you	follow	me?
You	 throw	 the	 rock	 and	 you	 wait	 --	 just	 your	 ear	 close	 by	 and	 you	 go	 on
listening,	listening,	and	you	wait	with	a	beating	heart,	and	no	sound.	It	is	utterly
silent.	 In	 that	sound,	fall	asleep.	 In	 that	soundless	silence:	 fall	asleep.	And	this
you	have	to	practise	every	day,	and	after	three	weeks	you	have	to	tell	me.	Mm?
Good!
[A	sannyasin	asks:	Are	drugs	helpful	 in	meditation?	I	had	the	experience	some
time	ago....	I	took	LSD
and	then	I	was	one	with	everything	I	saw.	It	was	a	very	big	adventure.	And	so	I
tried	 to	 do	 it	 again	 for	 the	 second	 time	 but	 it	was	 not	 the	 same.	Now	when	 I
meditate	I	always	think	about	it	and	I	cannot	come	to	the	same	point.]
I	understand.	It	can	be	helpful,	it	can	be	a	hindrance	too	--	it	depends....	Because
LSD	or	any	other	drug	simply	changes	the	chemistry	of	your	mind	--	it	does	not
change	you.	 It	 simply	helps	you	 to	withdraw	your	control	on	 the	mind.	 In	 that
uncontrolled	 state	 sometimes	 you	 can	 feel	 very	 beautiful	 and	 sometimes	 very
ugly.	Sometimes	 it	 is	 an	opening	 to	God	 and	 sometimes	you'll	 be	meeting	 the
devil.	Sometimes	it	is	heaven	and	sometimes	it	is	hell.	It	depends	on	your	mind
and	if	your	mind	was	in	a	good	space	--	LSD	cannot	create	your	space.
If	you	were	in	a	good	mood	and	your	energy	was	flowing	high	and	you	were	at
ease,	LSD	can	open	the	windows.	Because	you	were	feeling	good	and	high	you
will	feel	tremendously	good	and	high,	a	thousand-fold.	But	if	you	are	feeling	bad
and	 the	energy	 is	not	going	well	and	you	are	angry,	sad,	or	something	--	no	 --
you	will	be	 in	hell;	 a	 thousand-fold	will	be	your	experience	 then	 too.	So	LSD
only	magnifies,	it	is	a	magnifier	--	it	is	not	a	creator.	If	you	feel	some	good	space
through	 it	 sometimes,	 then	 the	 desire	will	 arise	 to	 experience	 that	 space	 again
and	again.	And	it	is	never	going	to	be	the	same:	each	time	it	will	be	something
different	because	each	 time	you	are	different.	 It	 does	not	depend	on	LSD	 --	 it
depends	on	the	taker,	it	depends	on	you.	And	if	you	take	it	too	many	times	your
mind	will	become	dull.	Each	drug	dulls	the	mind.
Meditation	is	hard	work,	and	LSD	seems	to	be	a	very	short-cut.	Immediately	you
take	it,	you	are	there	--
and	 meditation	 will	 take	 years.	 But	 there	 is	 a	 difference	 to	 be	 remembered:
meditation	 really	 changes	 you.	 It	 is	 almost	 as	 if	 you	 are	 ill	 .	 If	 you	 want	 to
become	 healthy	 you	 will	 have	 to	 do	 exercises,	 take	 medicine,	 go	 for	 walks,
swim,	breathe	air,	run;	it	will	take	months	for	you	to	become	really	healthy.	Then
some	hypnotist	says,	'You	lie	down	and	I	will	hypnotise	you	and	within	minutes
you	will	 feel	 happy.'	 He	 can	 suggest	 to	 you,	 and	 in	 a	 deep	 hypnosis	 you	 can
believe	also	that	everything	is	good,	and	you	are	a	great	man	--
Mohammed	Ali	 the	Great;	 you	 are	 a	 very	 big	man	 and	 very	 powerful.	Under
hypnosis	you	can	 feel	 that,	but	out	of	hypnosis	again	you	are	 the	 same	mouse
that	you	were;	you	are	no	more	Mohammed.
These	 are	 deceptions.	 But	 still	 I	 say,	 one	 experience	 can	 be	 good,	 but	 never
become	an	addict.	So	if	you	have	had	a	good	experience	you	are	blessed	--	now
forget	about	it.	You	had	a	glimpse	--	now	try	to	change	your	whole	life	in	such	a
way	that	this	glimpse	becomes	an	ordinary	thing,	that	each	moment	without	any
drug,	you	can	live	and	you	can	live	in	it.	Meditation	is	hard	work,	but	real	work.
LSD	is	a	deception.	It	is	cheating	with	nature.	It	is	forcing	your	body	chemistry
to	have	certain	experiences,	but	it	is	violent	and	ultimately	very	very	frustrating.
So	if	you	had	good	experiences,	 thank	God.	Don	t	bother	about	 it.	Now	work!
Now	you	know	 that	 there	 is	 something	 like	 that	 and	you	can	work	 for	 it.	 In	 a
better	world	some	day	in	the	future,	things	like	LSD	will	be	used	in	this	way:	a
person	who	has	no	 idea	of	 the	unknown,	no	conception	of	 the	beyond,	who	 is
very	earthly,	can	be	helped.	He	can	be	given	LSD	or	something	like	that,	once	--
in	 very	 good	 company,	 with	 beautiful	 music,	 flowers,	 gardens,	 a	 loving
atmosphere	--	so	that	he	can	have	one	glimpse	of	the	unearthly,	that's	all.	Then
he	is	not	to	be	given	any	more.	He	has	to	work	now.
It	is	as	if	from	a	thousand	miles	away	you	have	seen	the	Himalayan	peaks	with
their	 beautiful	 eternal	 snow.	 Just	 one	 day	 suddenly	 in	 the	morning,	 the	 sky	 is
clear	 and	 there	 are	 no	 clouds	 and	 from	 thousands	 of	miles	 away	 you	 can	 see
Everest,	and	it	looks	so	close	that	you	can	touch	it.	It	is	so	present	that	you	forget
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	distance.	But	you	cannot	 touch	 it	 --	 the	distance	 is	 there.	Again	 the	clouds
will	 come	and	 the	 sky	will	be	covered	and	 the	peak	will	be	 lost,	but	now	you
know	that	it	exists.	Now	you	can	trek	to	the	mountains.
To	 reach	 to	 Everest	 is	 very	 difficult.	 One	 needs	 the	 courage	 of	 an	 Edmund
Hillary...	one	needs	to	risk	one's	life.	But	if	it	is	so	beautiful	from	so	far	away	--
what	to	say	when	you	are	close	and	you	are	able	to	touch,	and	you	are	able	to	sit
on	 top	 of	 it?	 LSD	 can	 give	 you	 a	 glimpse.	 In	 the	 East	 it	 has	 been	 used	 for
centuries	that	way.	In	the	Vedas	they	talk	about	Soma.	That	was	a	sort	of	LSD,
but	 it	 was	 used	 only	 by	 masters	 and	 it	 was	 given	 to	 disciples	 only	 in	 rare
situations.	It	was	not	available	 in	 the	marketplace.	In	fact	nobody	has	yet	been
able	 to	 find	 out	 what	 it	 was	 exactly.	 Once	 the	 tradition	 disappeared	 India
completely	 forgot	 the	mushroom	 and	 from	where	 Soma	was	 created.	 It	was	 a
hidden	secret,	an	esoteric	secret.	The	master	would	only	say	to	his	chief	disciple
where	to	find	it,	how	to	find	it,	to	whom	to	give,	and	how	much,	and	only	once.
Just	to	give	you	a	glimpse	of	the	unknown	--	then	there	is	no	need.	Now	you	can
move	and	work	it	out.	In	the	same	way	some	day	it	will	be	used.
Now	both	the	parties	the	party	which	is	in	favour	of	drugs	and	the	party	which	is
against	them	--	are	foolish.	Those	who	are	against	are	absolutely	against;	that	is
foolish.	 We	 know	 in	 the	 East	 that	 drugs	 have	 been	 used,	 and	 used	 very
creatively.	 The	 party	 who	 are	 for	 them,	 the	 people	 like	 Timothy	 Leary	 and
others,	 are	 also	 foolish	 because	 they	 are	 absolutely	 for	 them.	They	 think	LSD
can	become	a	substitute	for	samadhi
--	there	is	no	need	for	any	meditation.	Both	parties	are	just	absurd.	There	seems
to	be	no	reasonableness	about	it.
I	 am	 neither	 on	 this	 side	 nor	 on	 that.	 My	 own	 opinion	 is	 that	 under	 proper
guidance,	 once	 tried	 drugs	 can	 be	 of	 tremendous	 value.	 And	 whenever	 the
political	 climate	 is	 good	 and	 the	 politicians	 have	 a	 little	 more	 intelligence	 to
them,	this	will	become	possible.	But	it	has	to	be	used	only	as	an	opening,	mm?
not	as	a	habit.
So	get	out	of	it.
[A	visitor	says:	I	have	a	fear	of	my	spiritual	energy.	I	don't	know	where	rm	going
with	it...	about	a	year	ago	I	did	a	Vipassana	retreat	for	fourteen	days,	and	I	had	a
lot	of	experiences	on	the	retreat.	I	felt	the	energy	go	clear	through	my	spine	and
out	 the	 top	of	my	head.	After	 that	 I	did	a	 lot	of	 reading	--	Buddhism,	Tibetan,
Krishnamurti	--	and	I	started	feeling	my	head	was	going	to	split	in	half	.	It	just
came	so	strong	through	my	head.	In	the	last	year	I've	been	trying	to	get	back	into
my	body	and	out	of	my	head.]
Mm	mm.	It	almost	always	happens:	when	energy	starts	moving,	fear	arises.	To
move	into	any	meditation	is	playing	with	fire.	And	one	should	not	move	into	it
just	out	of	curiosity	--	it	can	be	dangerous.
If	nothing	happens	there	is	no	problem.	And	to	ninety	percent	of	people	nothing
happens	 so	 the	 problem	does	 not	 arise.	But	 for	 a	 few	people	 something	 starts
happening	 --	 then	 there	 is	 danger	 because	 you	 have	 opened	 the	 door	 of	 some
energy	and	you	don't	know	what	it	 is,	and	you	don't	know	where	to	channel	it,
what	to	make	of	it.	It	can	be	very	disrupting.	And	without	a	master	one	can	go
mad.
Hence	 in	 the	East	we	have	never	 allowed	 anybody	 to	 do	 something	without	 a
master	 there.	 Unless	 somebody	 is	 there	 to	 look	 after	 you	 who	 knows	 the
possibilities,	all	the	alternatives	that	can	happen	to	you,	who	knows	that	madness
is	very	close	--	just	one	step	and	you	can	go	mad....	Because	you	are	moving	on
a	tight	rope.	If	everything	goes	right	there	will	be	a	great	synthesis,	your	whole
being	will	become	one.	For	 the	 first	 time	you	will	know	what	 individuality	 is.
For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 will	 be	 integrated	 and	 a	 tremendous	 benediction	 will
shower	on	you.
But	 if	 everything	 goes	 right	 --	 and	 there	 is	 no	 necessity	 for	 everything	 to	 go
right...	Without	 a	master	 there	 is	more	 possibility	 of	 things	 going	wrong	 than
right	because	you	are	simply	groping	in	the	dark.	And	if	something	goes	wrong,
then	a	split,	schizophrenia,	a	dual	personality	will	arise.	For	the	modern	man	this
danger	 is	 very	 very	 close	 --	 and	 particularly	 in	 California,	 because	 all	 the
teachings	have	become	available.
That	was	not	the	old	way,	not	the	ancient	way	--	to	make	teachings	available	to
people	generally;	there	was	a	sort	of	secrecy.
Teachings	were	only	made	available	to	people	who	were	really	ready	to	go	into
them	and	who	were	not	 just	 curious	people;	who	were	 ready	 to	 risk	 and	were
ready	to	surrender.	That	is	one	of	the	greatest	problems:	it	is	easy	to	read	a	book;
it	 is	 very	difficult	 to	 accept	 a	master,	 because	 reading,	 you	 remain	 the	master.
You	can	play	around	with	things,	this	and	that,	and	you	can	do	things.
Teachings	were	 never	made	 so	 generally	 available	 as	 they	 have	 become	 now.
Mm?	the	whole	Pandora's	box	is	open.	And	not	only	one	teaching	has	become
available	thousands	of	teachings	have	become	available	which	are	diametrically
opposite.	Many	 people	 are	 victims	 now.	 They	 know	 everything	 --	 and	 it	 is	 a
hodge-podge.	Each	system	functions	in	a	different	way	--	functions	on	the	same
energy	but	in	a	different	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
way;	 the	devices	are	different.	And	when	you	know	many	 things	 they	become
confused:	 one	 thing	becomes	 associated	with	 another	 thing,	 so	 one	becomes	 a
mess.	 Then	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 grow.	 There	 is	 more	 possibility	 of	 going
berserk.
There	are	teachings	which	are	for	the	right	side	of	the	mind;	there	are	teachings
which	are	for	the	left	side	of	the	mind.	Now	you	can	read	both,	and	one	day	you
will	feel	suddenly	that	your	head	is	getting	split	in	two.	And	you	are	the	cause	of
it,	because	you	have	been	using	both	minds.	Only	one	has	to	be	used.	It	is	better
not	to	know	about	the	other	and	its	techniques.	Later	on	when	you	have	arrived
home,	you	can	 read	all,	you	can	know	as	much	as	you	want.	Then	 there	 is	no
problem,	 because	 now	 you	 are	 integrated	 and	 nothing	 can	 destroy	 your
integration.
But	if	you	are	not	integrated,	anything	is	dangerous	and	everything	is	dangerous.
Then	it	is	better	to	be	with	a	master	and	to	follow	one	line.	Things	will	be	clear-
cut.	And	if	somebody	is	there	who	knows	what	is	ahead,	he	can	plan.	You	cannot
plan	 because	 you	 don't	 know	what	 is	 ahead.	 So	 better	 choose	 a	master	 rather
than	going	through	books.
Be	with	somebody	and	follow	his	instructions.	A	book	is	a	dead	thing.	It	has	not
been	written	particularly	for	you.	It	may	be	just	a	generalised	teaching,	abstract,
not	addressed	to	anybody	in	particular.
But	if	I	am	talking	to	you,	I	am	talking	to	you;	I	am	not	talking	to	anybody	else.
And	whatsoever	I	am	saying	to	you	is	not	a	general	statement	--	it	is	addressed	to
you...	 it	 is	 meant	 for	 you.	 It	 will	 take	 care	 of	 your	 need,	 of	 your	 possibility,
potentiality,	of	your	past,	of	your	future.	Then	you	are	on	a	safe	path.
So	the	first	thing	for	a	seeker	is	to	find	a	master.	It	is	very	difficult,	because	how
to	decide?	How	to	choose?	The	old	eastern	way	is	just	to	move	from	one	master
to	another.	You	cannot	decide	off-hand	--
there	 is	 no	 way	 and	 there	 is	 no	 criterion;	 you	 have	 just	 to	 move	 and	 feel.
Somewhere,	 with	 somebody,	 suddenly	 you	 feel	 at	 ease.	 A	 sort	 of	 at-onement
happens,	 rhythms	meet;	 there	 is	 something	 that	 strikes	 home.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a
hunch...	something	clicks.	For	a	moment	you	have	a	vision	that	here	is	the	man	-
-	now	this	will	do.	Then	you	have	taken	the	greatest	step	in	your	growth.	To	find
a	master	is	almost	half	of	the	work	done	--	you	have	arrived	fifty	percent	of	the
way.	The	harder	part	is	already	over	--	now	the	journey	can	be	a	dance.	You	will
laugh	and	enjoy	because	now	you	are	in	safe	hands.
So	rather	than	going	through	the	books....	If	one	is	simply	reading	the	books	for
entertainment,	 it	 is	 okay.	 Then	 whether	 you	 read	 tibetan	 or	 zen	 books,	 or
Krishnamurti	 or	 Gurdjieff,	 or	 anybody	 --	 if	 you	 are	 reading	 only	 for
entertainment	then	it	is	as	much	use	as	any	detective	novel.	There	is	no	problem
in	it,	you	can	read.	But	I	don't	see	that	you	are	reading	only	for	entertainment	--
you	have	a	sincere	search.	You	have	a	great	desire,	a	passion,	 to	 find	out	who
you	 are,	 to	 find	 out	 why,	 for	 what	 life	 exists.	 The	 passion	 is	 there,	 then	 it	 is
dangerous	to	go	on	reading,	and	one	tends	to	try.
Vipassana	 is	good,	but	may	not	be	 the	 right	method	 for	you,	and	how	are	you
going	to	decide?
Sometimes	the	method	may	be	right	for	you,	but	the	right	time	has	not	arrived.
After	three	months	of	working	on	other	meditations,	maybe	Vipassana	suits	you,
but	 right	 now	 if	 you	 go	 into	 it,	 it	 may	 not	 suit	 you,	 or	 it	 may	 give	 such	 an
explosion	of	energy	that	you	may	not	be	able	to	control	 it.	You	will	be	thrown
off	 your	 centre	 rather	 than	 getting	 centering	 from	 it.	You	 can	 lose	whatsoever
centering	you	had	before.
Just	a	few	years	before	a	monk	was	brought	to	me	from	Ceylon.	For	three	years
he	had	not	been	able	 to	sleep.	All	 sorts	of	medicines	were	 tried,	 tranquillizers,
and	nothing	would	help.	Somebody	brought	him	to	me,	and	I	told	him,	'Simply
stop	Vipassana	for	fifteen	days	and	then	we	will	see.'
By	the	third	day,	he	was	fast	asleep	and	snoring	--	and	for	three	years	he	had	not
slept!	He	was	surprised.	He	had	never	thought	about	it	--	that	Vipassana	can	be
such	a	disturbance	in	sleep.	He	was	a	very	soft	man.	The	effort	to	be	aware	went
so	deep	into	his	heart,	that	even	in	the	night	he	would	not	be	able	to	sleep	--	that
awareness	 continued.	 It	 would	 keep	 him	 awake	 and	 .alert.	 He	 was	 becoming
mad	!
For	 three	 years	 if	 you	 cannot	 sleep,	 naturally	 you	 will	 become	 .	 mad.	 He
continued	 his	 meditation	 and	 nobody	 told	 him....	 I	 told	 him,	 'First	 do	 some
cathartic	 meditations.	 For	 one	 year	 simply	 follow	 dynamic	 meditations,	 and
forget	about	Vipassana,	and	then	come	back.'
After	 one	 year	 he	 started	 Vipassana	 again,	 but	 now	 it	 was	 not	 disturbing	 his
sleep.	Now	he	had	become	a	little	harder.	Now	he	was	a	little	more	integrated,
and	 he	 could	 take	 in	Vipassana.	 So	 it	 depends	 on	 the	 individual,	 on	 the	 right
timing.	Otherwise	things	can	always	go	wrong.	The	more	possibility	is	that	they
will	go	wrong	than	not.
So	 if	 you	 are	 really	 interested,	 come	 back,	 be	 here	 for	 a	 few	weeks,	meditate
here	and	just	feel	me.
Much	 is	 possible...	 and	 if	 you	 become	 afraid	 you	 will	 be	 stuck.	 The	 fear	 is
natural,	because	you	opened	something	for	which	you	were	not	ready.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[Osho	gives	her	sannyas]
Anand	 means	 bliss	 and	 arupam	 means	 formless;	 formless	 bliss.	 And	 bliss	 is
formless.	Happiness	has	a	form	to	it,	it	is	limited.	Sadness	also	has	a	form	to	it,	it
is	 limited.	 But	 bliss	 has	 no	 form,	 it	 is	 unlimited,	 it	 has	 no	 boundary	 --	 it	 is
unbounded.	Happiness	is	of	the	mind,	sadness	too,	but	bliss	is	not	of	the	mind	--
It	is	of	the	beyond.
So	 the	 deeper	 you	 go,	 the	 more	 you	 come	 to	 the	 formless.	 If	 you	 look	 at
something	 from	 the	 mind,	 it	 has	 a	 form.	 If	 you	 touch	 something	 through	 the
body,	it	has	a	form.	It	is	almost	as	if	you	are	standing	at	a	window	and	looking	at
the	 sky;	 then	 the	 sky	 also	 has	 the	 same	 frame	 as	 the	 window.	 The	 sky	 is
frameless,	but	the	window	is	giving	it	a	frame.
A	few	modern	artists	have	tried	not	to	put	their	paintings	into	frames	--	a	great
experiment,	 because	 to	 put	 a	 painting	 into	 a	 frame	 is	 not	 right.	 Its	 nature	 is
without	any	frame.	It	goes	on	and	on....	So	when	you	put	a	painting	into	a	frame,
you	destroy,	you	falsify.
Truth	 is	without	a	frame	--	so	 is	beauty,	so	 is	bliss.	And	only	 the	formless	can
satisfy	you	because	you	are	the	formless.
That's	 why	 we	 are	 never	 satisfied	 in	 ordinary	 life.	Whatsoever	 we	 get,	 some
dissatisfaction	 somewhere	 continues...	 some	 frustration	 follows	 like	 a	 shadow.
Even	in	the	most	beautiful	moments	of	happiness,	you	will	find	a	certain	shadow
of	 frustration.	Something	 is	missing.	You	may	not	even	be	able	 to	 finger	 it,	 to
pinpoint	it,	but	you	know	that	everything	is	not	all	right	--	something	is	missing.
Even	in	very	beautiful	moments	of	love,	there	is	something	missing.	That's	why
lovers	 go	 on	 fighting	with	 each	 other.	 They	 think	 the	 other	 is	 cheating	 --	 not
giving	as	much	as	he	should.	Nobody	 is	cheating,	but	 through	 the	body	 things
have	a	 limitation	--	 they	are	framed.	Through	the	mind	 they	are	a	 little	bigger,
but	still	they	are	framed.	And	your	innermost	core	is	formless.	The	formless	can
be	 fulfilled	only	by	 the	 formless.	How	can	you	 fulfill	 the	 formless	with	 form?
Forms	are	 too	 small.	The	hunger	 is	 for	 the	 formless,	 and	you	go	on	 feeding	 it
form.	Something	remains	empty.
So	remember	 that	 --	 that	one	has	 to	search	 the	undefined.	And	even	when	you
touch	somebody's	body	in	deep	love	always	remember	that	if	the	touch	ends	on
the	body,	 it	 is	not	going	to	go	very	deep.	So	let	 the	body	be	 the	vehicle	of	 the
formless.	 Then	 the	 body	 too,	 is	 beautiful.	 When	 you	 say	 something,	 always
remember	not	to	say	it	only	from	the	mind	--	let	the	mind	be	in	service	of	the	no-
mind.	When	words	 are	 in	 the	 service	 of	 silence	 they	 are	 golden.	They	 have	 a
tremendous	grandeur...	they	are	throbbing	with	life.	They	simply	become	poetry.
Ordinary	words	coming	with	silence,	become	poetic,	transparent	--	you	can	see
through	them,	and	you	will	find	the	formless	there,	alive,	waiting.
So	always	remember,	do	anything	with	the	body	but	remember	the	bodiless.	Do
something	with	the	mind,	but	remember	the	mindless.	One	should	continuously
remember	the	formless,	the	beyond.	Use	everything	--	I	am	not	against	anything,
but	never	forget	the	formless.	That	is	the	meaning	of	Arupam.
Good!
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Childbirth	can	be	orgasmic
13	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611135
ShortTitle:	WHIP06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[A	sannyasin,	eight	months	pregnant,	asks:	There	is	one	thing	I	wanted	to	ask	--
if	there	is	any	possibility,	is	there	something	that	the	mother	can	do	to	reduce	the
break	of	memory	that	 the	child	has	through	the	birth	and	to	make	it	as	easy	as
possible	for	the	child?]
Certainly	 the	 mother	 can	 do	 much	 --	 but	 you	 can	 do	 only	 by	 non-doing.	 So
simply	relax.
Non-interference	 has	 to	 be	 remembered,	 and	 when	 you	 start	 feeling	 the	 pain
simply	go	with	 the	pain.	When	you	 start	 feeling	 the	movements	 in	 the	womb,
and	 the	 body	 starts	 getting	 ready	 to	 give	 birth,	 and	 there	 is	 a	 rhythmic	 pulse
inside....	That	pulse	people	 think	 is	 painful;	 it	 is	 not	painful	 --	 it	 is	 our	wrong
interpretation	that	makes	it	painful.
So	when	the	pulse	arises,	simply	accept	it,	float	with	it.	It	is	just	like	breathing
in,	breathing	out,	so	--
the	womb	and	the	birth	channel	start	expanding,	shrinking.	That	is	just	a	way	to
make	 a	 passage	 for	 the	 child.	When	you	 feel	 it	 is	 pain,	when	you	decide	 it	 is
pain,	you	start	fighting	with	it	because	it	is	very	difficult	not	to	fight	with	pain.
When	 you	 start	 fighting	 you	 start	 an	 interference	 with	 the	 rhythm.	 That
interference	is	very	destructive	to	the	child.	If	the	mother	simply	helps	the	child,
if	whatsoever	 is	happening	 the	mother	goes	with	 the	body	 --	expands	with	 the
body,	shrinks	with	the	body,	allows	the	pulse	and	simply	enjoys	it	--	it	is	really	a
great	delight.	But	it	depends	how	you	take	it.
For	example,	now	at	 least	 in	 the	West	people	have	more	advanced	 ideas	about
sex.	Otherwise	in	the	past	all	down	the	centuries	the	first	sexual	experience	for
the	 woman	 was	 very	 painful.	 She	 was	 just	 trembling	 because	 from	 the	 very
childhood	it	was	taught	that	it	is	very	ugly,	animalistic,	so	she	was	just	shaking
with	 fear.	 The	 honeymoon	 would	 come	 close	 and	 the	 woman	 would	 be
trembling.	She	has	 to	go	 through	 the	ordeal	 --	 it	was	 an	ordeal,	 and	of	 course
then	it	was	painful.	But	now	in	the	West	at	least,	the	pain	has	disappeared.	It	is	a
beautiful	experience	--	it	is	orgasmic.
It	 is	 exactly	 the	 same	 thing	 with	 childbirth.	 It	 is	 greater	 orgasm	 than	 sexual
orgasm,	because	in	a	sexual	orgasm	your	body	takes	a	rhythm:	expands,	shrinks,
expands,	shrinks,	but	it	 is	nothing	com-pared	to	when	you	are	giving	birth	to	a
child.	To	give	birth	to	a	child	is	a	million-fold	bigger	orgasm.	If	you	take	it	as	an
orgasm	 --	 happy,	 delighted,	 rejoicing	 in	 it,	 that's	 all	 --	 then	 the	 child	 simply
comes	out	of	the	passage,	helped	by	you.	Otherwise	if	the	mother	is	fighting	--
the	child	wants	to	come	out	and	the	mother	is	fighting,	and	she	is	not	allowing
the	 movement	 that	 is	 needed	 for	 it,	 the	 necessary	 movement.	 Sometimes	 the
child	 is	 stuck	 the	 head	 is	 stuck.	 If	 the	 head	 is	 stuck,	 the	 child	will	 suffer	 his
whole	life.	He	will	not	be	as	intelligent	as	he	would	have	been,	because	his	head
is	 very	 soft	 and	 the	 brain	 is	 still	 developing.	 Just	 a	 little	 shock.	 just	 a	 little
closing,	and	the	brain	is	no	more	as	healthy	as	it	could	have	been.
So	help	it,	enjoy	it.	Just	take	it	as	if	you	are	moving	in	a	great	orgasm	--	nothing
else.	No	interference	on	your	part	is	the	greatest	help	for	a	child.	Then	the	child
comes	 easily,	 relaxed,	 in	 a	 let-go.	 And	 then	 your	 child	 will	 not	 need	 Primal
therapy,	 otherwise	 each	 person	 needs	 Primal	 therapy	 because	 everybody	 has
suffered	a	birth	trauma,	and	it	has	been	so	painful	for	the	child.	It	is	just	the	first
experience,	 and	 the	 first	 experience	 is	 so	 ugly,	 suffocating,	 almost	 killing	 the
child:	the	passage	is	narrow	and	the	mother	is	tense	and	the	child	cannot	come
out	of	the	passage.
This	is	his	first	experience.	So	the	first	experience	is	of	hell,	and	then	the	whole
life	becomes	miserable.
Let	the	first	experience	be	of	a	beautiful	flowing,	and	that	will	be	the	foundation
for	the	child.
[The	music	 group	was	 at	 darshan	 tonight.	 They	 played	 and	 people	 present	 at
darshan	danced.]
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	In	Orgasm	You	are	Part	of	God
15	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	7611155
ShortTitle:	WHIP07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	 sannyasin	 asks	 if	 participating	 in	 groups	 together	 with	 her	 husband	would
help	their	relationship.]
Groups	 never	 help	 as	 far	 as	 staying	 together	 is	 concerned.	 If	 you	 want	 to
separate,	 a	 group	 is	 very	 helpful,	 because	 the	 whole	 process	 is	 to	 make	 one
aware	of	certain	things	that	one	does	not	want	to	become	aware	of.	For	example
if	a	marriage	has	failed,	still	the	mind	goes	on	hoping.	The	group	will	make	you
aware	that	it	has	failed,	and	the	hope	is	futile	--	abandon	hope.	The	group	never
gives	you	any	hope	--	it	simply	makes	you	aware	of	the	fact	that	it	didn't	work.	If
it	 didn't	 work	 for	 thirty	 years,	 how	 is	 it	 going	 to	work?	But	 the	 human	mind
clings...	 even	 goes	 on	 clinging	 to	misery	 just	 in	 the	 hope	 that	 something	may
turn	up,	something	may	happen.	That's	how	you	have	remained	your	whole	life,
and	the	more	you	remain	with	a	certain	misery,	the	more	difficult	it	becomes	to
get	out	of	it.
So	a	group	process	won't	help.	If	you	want	to	try	again,	it	is	better	not	to	go	to
the	 group	 --	 it	will	 break	 you	 immediately,	 because	 a	 group	 process	 is	 a	 very
authentic	 process.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 your	 desires,	 with	 your	 wishes,
dreams.	It	has	no	'should'.	It	simply	makes	you	aware	--	of	the	naked	fact	that	if
something	has	not	worked	for	thirty	years,	it	is	not	going	to	work.	The	mind	still
wants	 to	 hope	 --	 that's	 how	 you	 have	 been	 hoping	 for	 thirty	 years.	 You	 have
wasted	thirty	years.	You	could	have	got	out	after	three	years,	then	these	twenty-
seven	years	 you	would	 have	 lived	 totally	 differently...	 you	would	 have	 been	 a
totally	different	person.	But	even	now	the	same	hope....
So	nothing	changes	 --	 this	hope	 is	old,	 it	 is	nothing	new.	 It	 is	not	 for	 the	 first
time	you	are	hoping;	you	have	been	hoping	all	 these	years.	So	the	hope	is	old,
and	with	the	old	hope	you	remain	the	old.	So	don't	go	through	a	group	process	if
you	really	want	to	be	together,	because	the	group	process	has	nothing	to	do	with
your	marriage,	nothing	to	do	with	your	 'shoulds'	 --	how	it	should	be,	 that	once
married	 then	 you	 should	 remain	 married	 to	 the	 person	 forever.	 The	 group
process	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	religion,	any	morality.
It	simply	brings	your	naked	truth	 to	you	and	makes	you	courageous	enough	to
accept	it.	So	if	somebody	is	going	for	a	separation,	I	always	suggest,	'Go	and	do
a	group.'	But	if	you	are	going	to	try	again	with	your	old	hope,	the	group	will	be
the	last	thing	to	be	suggested	by	me,	because	it	is	not	going	to	help.
So	just	go	and	try	again!	If	you	want	to	try,	you	have	to	try.	It	is	your	life,	and	if
you	want	to	try	it	again,	there	is	no	problem	about	it.	Go	and	try	once	more	and
see	what	happens.	 If	 things	work,	good...	because	sometimes	 that	 too	happens.
You	may	get	tired,	and	if	you	really	want	the	marriage	to	work,	mm?	you	may
stop	 creating	 old	 tricks,	 old	 games	 that	 you	were	 playing	 before.	 If	 you	 drop
them,	 if	you	really	want,	authentically	want	 to	make	 it	work,	and	you	drop	all
your	old	patterns,	and	you	become	absolutely	new,	at	least	on	your	side	--	on	the
other's	 side	you	cannot	do	anything,	but	 if	you	change	completely,	 there	 is	 the
fifty	percent	possibility	that	the	other	may	start	changing.
[She	answers:	This	is	my	hope.]
So	 just	go	and	 try.	But	because	of	 this	hope,	 I	 think	you	will	not	be	different.
This	hope	is	old	--	this	hope	is	not	new.	If	you	listen	to	me,	I	will	tell	you,	'Go
without	any	hope,	and	try!'	But	don't	go	with	any	hope	--	 then	at	 least	you	are
doing	 something	new.	 Just	go	without	hope,	because	 for	 thirty	years	you	have
been	hoping,	and	it	has	not	worked	--	so	at	least	drop	hope!
I'm	not	saying	don't	try	--	try,	but	this	time	without	any	hope,	because	when	you
try	with	a	hope,	you	falsify,	you	project,	you	imagine;	you	don't	see	the	fact	of	it.
Hope	 is	 a	 poison,	 a	 drug.	 All	 these	 people	 moving	 on	 the	 streets,	 living	 in
misery,	and	going	back	again	to	their	misery	in	a	vicious	circle	--	why	are	they
doing	all	this?	They	are	drugged	by	hope.	They	are	all	addicts	--	hope	addicts.	In
the	morning	they	think	they	are	finished.	They	are	not	going	back	home.	They
will	kill	 themselves	or	do	something,	but	 they	are	not	coming.	By	 the	evening
again	 the	 hope	 arises.	 They	 think,	 'Maybe	 the	 wife	 has	 changed,	 or	 I	 have
changed,	and	who	knows	about	tomorrow?	Let	us	try	once	more.'	And	this	way
it	goes	on	and	on	and	on....
So	abandon	hope,	and	simply	go	free	cf	hope.	You	will	be	freer,	more	relaxed,
because	there	is	no	need	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	force	it	to	work.	You	know	that	you	are	not	hoping	for	anything	and	so	there
will	be	no	frustration.	If	it	doesn't	work	there	is	no	problem;	no	problem	arises
out	 of	 its	 non-working.	You	 know	beforehand	 that	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	work,	 so
there	is	nothing	to	cry	and	weep	and	create	any	scene	about.
If	you	go	without	hope,	you	are	going	as	a	new	person.	Murti	may	be	surprised
and	that	may	start	a	chain	of	change.	And	tell	him	that	you	have	not	come	with
any	hope	--	you	have	come	fully	aware	that	the	more	likely	possibility	is	that	it
won't	work,	because	 thirty	years'	 experience	 is	 enough.	Maybe	you	are	 such	a
person,	he	is	such	a	person,	that	you	don't	fit.	But	one	last	experiment	and	this
time	without	any	hope,	and	with	no	expectations.	No	effort	to	dominate	him,	no
effort	 to	 change	 him	 --	 that	 you	 have	 done.	 This	 time,	 you	 have	 come	 to
experiment	on	your	own	--	he	will	be	on	the	periphery.
You	are	 trying	on	your	own	If	 it	 is	you	who	are	not	fitting	with	him,	 then	you
will	 do	 your	 best	 to	 fit.	 If	 it	 is	 he	 who	 is	 not	 fitting	 with	 you,	 then	 you	 are
finished,	 then	 you	 are	 helpless.	 But	 there	 is	 no	 frustration	 in	 it	 --	 just	 a	 last
experiment,	a	 last	 try.	But	make	it	very	clear	 that	you	have	not	come	with	any
hope.
If	 you	 are	 hoping	 too	much,	 you	 start	 thinking	 in	 terms	 of	 ideals,	 and	 that	 is
cause	of	much	conflict.	It	is	very	difficult	for	a	woman	to	think	that	her	husband
is	ordinary.	She	thinks	he	is	a	hero,	a	saint	or	something
--	all	rubbish!	And	not	only	does	she	think,	she	tries	to	make	a	saint	out	of	him.
And	then	there	is	difficulty
--	he	is	an	ordinary	human	being.	Just	by	being	your	husband,	he	has	not	decided
to	become	a	martyr	or	a	 saint	or	anything,	mm?	He	 is	 just	an	ordinary	human
being,	with	all	imperfections,	all	limitations,	all	the	flaws	that	human	beings	are
prone	to.
So	if	you	don't	hope,	you	will	not	create	an	idea	that	he	is	a	saint	or	he	has	to	be
a	 saint.	 This	 is	my	 experience	 --	 that	 out	 of	 a	 hundred	 cases,	 it	 is	 seventy	 to
eighty	percent	of	 the	 time	women	are	who	are	 responsible	 for	destroying	 their
marriage,	because	they	are	the	more	dreamy	of	the	partners	in	the	game.
They	dream	too	much,	they	romanticise	too	much.	They	have	great	ideas	of	how
the	husband	should	be,	and	these	ideas	cannot	be	fulfilled.	If	the	husband	tries	to
fulfill	them,	he	will	be	almost	on	the	gallows!	He	will	be	under	such	a	strain	that
he	will	drop	dead	because	it	will	be	moving	out	of	his	normality,	his	naturalness.
So	that	is	impossible.	And	if	he	tries	to	be	natural,	as	he	is,	and	as	he	should	be,
then	the	woman	is	not	satisfied.
Men	 look	 for	 physical	 beauty	 in	 women,	 and	 women	 look	 for	 something
spiritual,	 something	 moral	 in	 men.	 They	 can	 tolerate	 a	 very	 homely	 looking
person	--	that	is	not	difficult;	they	don't	bother	about	physical	beauty	much,	but
something	of	a	psychological	grace,	something	of	spirituality.	That's	why	women
become	easily	attracted	to	spiritual	people	--	very	easily.	They	have	a	knack,	a
feeling,	for	where	spirituality	is.
That's	what	they	have	been	continually	hankering	for.	They	wanted	to	see	all	that
in	their	husband:	maybe	he	is	a	Jesus	or	a	Buddha.	He	is	not!
And	 the	problem	 is,	 if	you	get	Buddha	as	a	husband,	you	will	not	be	 satisfied
then	too,	because	he	will	be	too	much	of	the	other	world;	then	there	is	a	problem.
So	impossible	is	the	hope.	In	the	first	place,	it	is	not	possible	that	you	can	find	a
Buddha	for	a	husband.	 In	 the	second	place,	 if	 it	happens	at	all	you	will	not	be
satisfied,	because	he	will	be	so	other-worldly,	so	cool,	that	he	will	not	have	any
passion.
What	a	woman	is	hankering	for	is	the	impossible:	 the	man	should	be	rooted	in
the	earth,	and	should	be	from	the	beyond...	should	be	like	a	Buddha,	and	yet	a
husband.	This	is	not	possible.	Either	Buddhas	escape,	leave	their	wives	and	go	to
the	Himalayas,	or	even	if	they	remain	in	their	houses	they	become	statues,	they
become	 so	 cool.	 Then	 too	 they	 are	 almost	 dead;	 the	 wife	 is	 a	 widow.	 The
husband	is	alive,	but	the	wife	is	a	widow!	Then	too	it	is	not	satisfying.
So	look	at	 this:	maybe	it	 is	your	hoping	too	much,	desiring	too	much,	 that	has
destroyed	and	corrupted	the	whole	relationship.
And	always	remember	that	at	the	source	of	your	misery	you	must	be	there,	not
the	other	one.	If	Murti	is	suffering,	that	will	be	his	misery	--	it	has	nothing	to	do
with	 you	 --	 but	 if	 you	 are	 suffering,	 it	 is	 your	 responsibility.	 So	 this	 time,	 go
without	 hope.	Go	with	 no	 idea	 of	 changing	Murti	 --	 that	 you	 have	 tried.	This
time	go	and	accept	him	totally	as	he	is	--	howsoever	hard	it	is.	If	you	really	want
it	 to	 work,	 then	 accept	 him	 as	 he	 is,	 and	 tell	 him,	 'I	 have	 come	 without	 any
expectations	 this	 time.	You	be	as	you	are	 --	you	be	natural.	 I	have	dropped	all
idealism.	Just	be	natural.	And	if	something	has	to	be	done,	then	I	have	to	do	it,
because	now	it	is	my	decision	to	try	once	more,	so	it	is	my	responsibility.'	If	you
go	with	this	idea,	there	is	a	possibility	it	may	work.	But	if	you	go	with	hope,	you
go	with	the	old.
I	was	thinking	that	when	you	go	I	was	going	to	say	to	you	to	go	without	hope.
Go	completely	free,	and	then	the	experiment	will	have	beauty	to	it,	and	then	he
will	not	feel	that	you	have	come	back	again,	and	just	the	whole	old	story	starts
again.	He	will	 not	 feel	 that.	 So	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 just	make	 everything
clear.	The	first	moment	you	see	him,	tell	him	everything.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	if	it	doesn't	work,	then	simply	say	good-bye	and	come	back.	Then	forget	all
about	it.	Mm?	start	anew.
But	I	have	a	feeling	it	can	work,	mm?	Let	me	hope,	but	you	go	without	hope!
Mm?	Good!
[A	sannyasin	says:	My	 life	 is	 rather	changed	since	 I've	been	here.	But	 there	 is
something	 going	 wrong,	 because	 I	 feel	 I'm	 not	 at	 all	 interested	 in	 sex	 and
relationship,	and	I	cannot	really	be	transcending	sex	through	meditating	because
I've	 never	 really	 been	 in	 touch	 with	 the	 in-things,	 so	 perhaps	 I'm	 avoiding
something.]
I	have	been	watching	you.	There	are	two	problems	--	in	fact,	just	two	aspects	of
the	one	problem.	One	aspect	is	that	you	are	very	much	afraid	that	maybe	you	are
going	to	lose	your	interest	in	sex	forever;	that	is	one.	That	is	absolutely	unbased.
There	is	no	need	to	be	afraid	of	it.	When	in	the	beginning	one	starts	meditating,
it	happens.	It	is	the	same	energy	that	was	involved	in	sex.	The	same	energy	starts
moving	 towards	meditation.	So	 for	 the	 time	being,	 for	 a	period	of	 at	 least	 six,
twelve	weeks	 at	 the	most,	 one	 feels	 as	 if	 one	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 sex,	 in	 love.
Once	the	meditation	has	settled,	for	the	first	time	you	will	know	that	now	your
sexual	quality	is	totally	different	--	very	deep-going.	It	is	becoming	more	loving,
more	tender,	soft.	It	is	losing	violence	and	neurosis.	It	is	no	more	an	obsession	--
it	is	a	flowering,	very	natural.
For	 the	 first	 time	 you	will	 see	what	 sex	 should	 be.	Ordinarily	 people	 are	 just
obsessed	by	sex.	It	is	not	a	natural	thing.	It	is	almost	like	a	burden...	a	constant
worry	about	it.	It	is	more	like	a	performance;	it	is	more	like	a	duty	that	one	has
to	do.	If	you	do	it,	you	don't	gain	much.	If	you	don't	do	it,	you	feel	you	are	losing
much;	maybe	 you	 are	missing	 something.	 So	 it	 is	 a	 very	 vicious	 circle	 --	 and
that's	what	has	been	up	to	now.
So	before	sex	becomes	normal	and	natural,	there	will	be	a	time	in	which	you	will
lose	 interest	 --	 in	 that	 time	 don't	 be	 afraid.	 You	 are	 not	 going	 to	 become	 a
buddhist	nun	--	don't	be	afraid,	mm?	And	by	chance	you	had	to	listen	to	Buddha
lectures,	mm?	 so	 that	 created	much	 fear	 in	 you	 --	 that	 I	 am	 trying	 to	make	 a
buddhist	nun	of	everybody.	No,	you	are	not	going	to	become	a	nun,	and	I	am	not
in	favour	of	nuns	--	that	is	again	another	neurosis.
A	 few	 are	 neurotically	 in	 favour	 of	 sex;	 a	 few	 are	 neurotically	 against	 it.	 A
natural	person	is	neither	for	nor	against.	It	is	not	a	problem	at	all.	One	is	simply
as	 attuned	 to	 natural	 things	 as	 one	 is	 attuned	 to	 breathing.	 One	 is	 neither	 for
breathing	nor	against	breathing.	One	does	not	even	think	about	it.	Sex	should	be
exactly	that	way.
So	within	a	few	weeks	it	will	settle.	Now	these	few	weeks	will	be	difficult,	and
if	you	don't	put	your	energy	into	meditation	more,	 it	will	 take	a	 longer	 time	to
settle.	If	you	put	your	whole	energy	into	it...	the	body	is	ready	to,	that's	why	the
interest	 in	 sex	has	disappeared.	The	body	 is	 ready	 to	 take	 the	 jump	 --	you	are
apprehensive.	 Relax	 and	 take	 the	 jump.	 Within	 a	 few	 weeks	 meditation	 will
settle	and	there	will	be	no	need	for	this	much	energy	to	be	engaged	there.	Then
your	energy	can	become	available	again	for	sex,	and	it	will	be	on	a	new,	higher
altitude.	It	will	become	more	meditative.
Sex	 and	 meditation	 are	 not	 opposite	 things.	 Sex	 is	 a	 sort	 of	 meditation,	 and
meditation	is	a	sort	of	sexual	experience.	In	fact	this	is	my	statement:	that	people
have	 become	 aware	 about	meditation	 only	 because	 of	 sex.	The	 first	meditator
must	have	come	to	know	about	meditation	through	sex	--	there	is	no	other	way.
Meditation	is	born	out	of	deep	sexual	experience,	because	that	is	a	natural	way
to	 meditate.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 natural	 way	 available	 in	 which	 you	 can	 move
totally,	without	holding	anything.	You	can	simply	go	beyond	the	mind.	Thinking
stops	in	a	deep	sexual	experience	--	and	time	too.	One	is	aware	neither	of	time
nor	of	mind.	One	is	simply	a	presence	--	one	is	not	even	aware	of	the	body.	One
is	--	without	body,	without	mind.
In	 a	 deep	 sexual	 experience,	 one	 forgets	whether	 one	 is	man	 or	woman.	And
when	the	orgasm	really	showers,	you	are	part	of	God.
Sex	 is	a	great	natural	blessing.	And	 through	sex	people	have	experienced	 their
first	glimpses	of	meditation.	Only	then,	by	and	by,	they	developed	the	meditation
techniques.	 And	 once	 a	 person	 becomes	 able	 to	move	 into	 a	 deep	meditative
technique	suddenly	he	knows	 the	experience	 is	 the	same.	Then	 it	 is	 for	you	 to
choose	 --	 both	 are	 available.	 If	 you	 feel	 like	moving	 into	 sex	 and	 relating	 to
somebody	 --	good!	 If	you	don't	 feel	 like	 it,	you	can	have	 the	 same	experience
through	meditation.	Meditation	is	in	fact	an	inner	auto-eroticism.	In	sex	the	other
is	needed,	and	because	of	the	other	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	complexities.
In	meditation	the	other	is	not	needed.	Your	own	inner	woman	and	man	meet	in	a
deep	 communion	 and	 dissolve.	 The	 same	 happens	 inside	 the	 heart,	 in	 your
innermost	core	of	being.	So	right	now	put	all	your	energies	into	meditation.	And
don't	be	afraid!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	day	you	want	your	sex	back,	I	will	just	move	my	hand	and	it	will	be	back.
You	just	tell	me	--	the	day	you	want	it	back,	it	will	be	back;	there	is	no	problem
in	it.	It	is	very	simple.	In	fact,	to	take	somebody	away	from	sex	is	very	difficult.
To	bring	them	back	to	sex	is	very	simple	--	because	it	is	a	fall,	it	is	downhill.	So
it	is	very	simple.	It	is	just	a	push	and	your	car	goes	downhill	without	any	petrol.
So	don't	be	worried.	But	put	more	of	your	energies	into	meditations.	Good.	Very
good!
[A	sannyasin	says:	Last	time	you	told	me	not	to	be	afraid	to	feel	anything.	And	I
felt	the	bottom	of	many	things	and	the	top	of	many	things.	I	felt	fear	all	through
my	body...	And	love.	A	lot	of	fear	and	sadness	--
and	love	too.]
Good.	Everybody	has	great	fear	deep	down.	We	never	go	that	deep	so	we	don't
become	aware	of	it.
When	a	child	is	born,	with	the	birth,	death	is	born.	So	the	first	experience	of	life
is	entangled	with	death.
Once	a	child	is	born	only	one	thing	is	certain	--	that	he	will	die;	nothing	else	is
certain.	 He	 may	 succeed	 in	 the	 world,	 may	 not	 succeed;	 he	 may	 remain	 a
bachelor	or	may	get	married;	he	may	earn	much	money	or	become	a	sannyasin.
Nobody	knows,	nothing	is	certain.	But	one	thing	is	absolutely	certain	--	that	he
will	die...	maybe	after	seventy	years,	sixty	years,	or	 twenty	years	or	a	hundred
years;	that	is	irrelevant,	time	is	not	relevant.	One	thing	is	absolutely	certain:	once
you	are	born,	you	will	die.
So	the	first	circle	around	the	child	is	of	death.	And	it	remains	there	--	the	fear	of
death.	So	you	do	many	things,	mm?	You	get	involved	in	many	things,	occupied
in	many	ways,	 but	 behind	 it	 all	 somewhere,	 death	waits.	 And	when	 you	 start
encountering	your	inner	feelings,	fear	will	arise	again.	Don't	be	escaping	from	it
--	accept	it.	If	it	is	so,	it	is.
If	you	accept	it	and	still	go	on	looking	deeper,	you	will	find	that	behind	fear	is
death,	and	you	will	pass	through	an	experience	of	death.	That's	why	sadness	is
just	lurking	behind	fear.	That	is	the	shadow	of	death.
And	if	you	can	live	with	death	too,	you	will	penetrate	into	a	new	world	that	is	of
life.	So	the	first	centre	is	life,	the	first	circle	around	life	is	death,	and	of	course
with	death	is	sadness,	fear,	and	then	layer	upon	layer	like	an	onion.
If	you	go	on	peeling	an	onion,	the	onion	of	man,	these	things	will	happen.	But
finally	at	the	very	core	of	it	is	life,	so	one	just	has	to	go	on	digging.
One	day	 suddenly,	 all	 layers	 are	broken,	 there	 is	 a	break-through,	 and	you	are
standing	face	to	face	with	life,	with	eternal	life.	Call	it	God,	truth	or	whatever.
So,	good!	Don't	be	disturbed	by	it;	you	are	on	the	right	track.	But	accept	these
things	--	there	is	no	need	to	escape	from	them	or	hide	yourself	somewhere.
[She	answers:	But	I	felt	myself	fighting	so	much...	so	many	no's	inside	me.]
That	may	be	because	of	fear.	Fear	always	says	'no'.	It	is	only	fearlessness	which
says	'yes'.	To	say	yes,	one	needs	to	be	very	brave.	To	say	no	is	nothing,	even	a
coward	 can	 say	 no.	 To	 say	 yes,	 one	 needs	 great	 intelligence;	 to	 say	 no,	 no
intelligence	is	needed.	That	fear	may	be	the	cause	of	all	your	no's.	But	stick	to	it.
Don't	waver	here	and	there,	and	don't	look	sideways	--	go	on	looking	into	it.	It
will	be	painful,	but	if	you	can	prolong	this	process	for	a	few	days	more,	one	day
suddenly	you	will	see	that	fear	has	gone	and	there	is	death,	darkness...	abysmal
dark,	an	infinite	darkness	and	you	are	lost	in	it	as	if	you	are	dying.
When	 death	 is	 there,	 fear	 will	 disappear	 --	 this	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful
things.	When	 a	 person	 is	 really	 facing	 death	 all	 fear	 disappears	 because	 now
there	is	no	point.	Fear	is	always	of	the	future.	If	somebody	comes	with	a	dagger
and	puts	it	on	your	heart,	you	will	not	be	afraid.	In	that	moment	you	will	simply
look	like	a	child,	innocent,	there	will	be	no	fear	at	all.	But	if	somebody	says,	 'I
will	kill	you	tomorrow',	the	whole	night	you	will	be	afraid	because	tomorrow	is
in	the	future.
So	go	on	facing	this	fear,	and	one	day	suddenly	there	will	be	a	great	explosion	of
darkness.	Christian	mystics	have	the	right	name	for	it:	they	call	it	'the	dark	night
of	 the	soul'.	 If	one	can	pass	 through	 the	darkness	of	 the	soul,	 then	 there	 is	 the
mom,	the	dawn,	the	sunrise,	and	one	is	for	the	first	time,	really	alive.
But	one	has	to	pay	for	it	--	and	for	all	these	things	a	price	is	to	be	paid.	It	is	not
cheap	--	it	is	arduous	and	hard.	Just	go	on	with	it.	Mm?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Celebration	--	the	Only	Rule
16	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611165
ShortTitle:	WHIP08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	visitor,	who	is	a	film	star	asks:	If	you	can	help	me	in	any	way...	]
In	every	way	I	am	going	to	help,	mm?	The	first	thing	first:	become	a	sannyasin
(the	visitor	nods	slowly).
That	connects	you	with	me	--	and	before	the	work	can	start	a	deep	connection	is
needed,	a	deep	involvement	with	me	is	needed	because	the	help	is	not	going	to
be	an	outer	help.	I	need	a	passage	into	the	heart.	And	by	becoming	a	sannyasin
you	become	available,	you	become	vulnerable.	Then	it	becomes	very	easy,	you
don't	 create	 obstacles.	 Otherwise	 ordinarily	 the	 human	mind	 goes	 on	 creating
obstacles	in	a	thousand	and	one	ways...	unconsciously	of	course.
A	man	 is	his	own	undoing.	So	 if	you	 really	want	help,	 the	 first	 need	 is	 to	get
involved	with	my	family	--
immediately	many	things	start	happening.	The	first	thing	--	you	become	relaxed
with	me.	Otherwise	whenever	a	new	person	comes	here,	he's	afraid	of	sannyas	--
desirous	and	afraid	too.	There	is	a	part	which	wants	to	move	into	this	new	space
that	 I	 am	making	 available	 here,	 and	 there	 is	 a	 part,	 naturally	 from	 the	 past,
which	is	suspicious	of	everything	--	everything	new	at	least;	that	part	holds	back.
So	if	you	are	here	and	not	a	sannyasin,	to	become	a	sannyasin	or	not	to	become	a
sannyasin	 remains	a	constant	worry	on	 the	head	 --	a	very	subtle	 tension.	Once
you	have	become	a	sannyasin	that	tension	is	gone.
You	can	relax,	and	only	when	you	are	in	a	relaxed	state	can	I	penetrate	you.	By
becoming	 relaxed	 you	 become	 feminine;	 then	 penetration	 is	 possible.	 By
surrendering	 you	 are	 no	 more	 a	 male	 energy	 --	 that's	 why	 surrender	 is	 so
difficult.	The	male	energy	 is	 aggressive...	 it	wants	 to	conquer.	Hence	 the	West
has	 given	 birth	 to	 science	 --	 science	 is	 an	 aggressive	 attack,	 almost	 a	 rape	 on
truth.
In	 the	East	we	have	never	 thought	 in	 terms	of	conquering,	we	have	 thought	 in
terms	of	surrendering.	We	surrender	to	nature,	to	God,	or	whatsoever	one	calls	it,
and	then	nature	starts	revealing	its	mystery.
So	this	sannyas	is	nothing	but	a	first	step	towards	the	ultimate	surrender	which
will	be	coming	by	and	by.	I	am	just	a	door.	By	surrendering	to	me	you	enter	into
the	temple.
And	I	can	help	in	every	way,	but	I	can	help	only	if	you	allow	me	to	help.
There	is	a	very	famous	story	about	a	sufi	mystic,	Bayazid.	When	he	went	to	his
master	he	was	a	young	man,	desirous	of	knowing.	He	went	to	his	master	and	he
asked	the	master,	'Would	you	teach	me,	sir?'
The	master	looked	at	him	and	said,	'Would	you	allow	me	to	teach	you?'
And	that	very	saying	became	a	transformation.
I	am	ready	to	help	but	will	you	allow	me	to	help	you?...	because	nothing	can	be
done	without	your	cooperation.	I	never	interfere	in	anybody's	life	unless	the	life
has	become	part	of	my	life	--	that's	what	the	meaning	of	sannyas	is.	Then	you	are
no	more	 [your	name]:	you	don't	belong	 to	your	past	 --	you	belong	 to	me.	You
can	simply	come	out	of	your	past	as	a	snake	comes	out	of	the	old	skin	--	and	it	is
tremendously	beautiful	to	come	out	of	the	past.	For	a	man	like	you	who	has	lived
a	public	life,	who	has	become	famous	in	a	way,	who	is	well-known,	it	is	a	must
to	get	out	of	it.
This	is	one	of	the	greatest	human	dilemmas	--	that	when	a	person	is	not	known,
not	 famous,	 he	 hankers	 to	 become	 famous	 because	 walking	 on	 the	 road	 as	 a
nonentity	hurts.	Nobody	looks	at	you,	nobody	even	says	'hello',	nobody	pays	any
attention.	Whether	 you	 exist	 or	 not	 does	 not	matter.	 If	 you	 die,	 there	will	 not
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
even	be	a	ripple,	you	will	simply	disappear	as	if	you	had	never	existed	--	it	hurts.
One	 starts	 in	 every	way	 to	make	 one's	mark,	 to	 leave	 one's	 signature,	 so	 that
even	when	death	comes	one	can	live	in	people's	memories.	And	one	wants	that
people	 should	 pay	 attention...	 people	 should	 know	who	you	 are!	 So	 there	 is	 a
great	 urge	 to	 become	 famous.	 Somebody	 becomes	 a	 politician,	 somebody
becomes	an	actor,	 somebody	becomes	an	author,	 a	painter,	 a	poet...	 somebody
becomes	a	saint.
The	day	you	are	famous	--	and	it	 takes	long	effort;	 tired,	exhausted	you	arrive,
you	become	famous	--
suddenly	you	recognise	that	now	it	is	almost	impossible	to	walk	on	the	road,	to
be,	because	no	privacy	is	available.	Wherever	you	go	people	know	who	you	are.
Everybody	is	staring	at	you.	One	becomes	a	public	show.
So	when	one	becomes	 famous,	one	 finds	 that	one	has	 lost	one's	privacy,	one's
own	space.	Then	one	wants	to	be	anonymous,	you	want	to	go	somewhere	where
nobody	knows	you.	So	first	we	create	fame,	when	it	is	there...	and	by	the	time	it
is	 there	 much	 has	 been	 lost;	 much	 energy	 has	 been	 wasted,	 one	 has	 suffered
much:	many	headaches	and	many	ulcers,	and	everything	has	happened.	And	then
by	the	time	one	becomes	famous,	it	is	futile.	First	one	hankers	for	riches	--	when
they	are	there,	one	simply	sees	the	futility	of	it	all.
...	 Sannyas	 is	 just	 a	 leap	 of	 understanding.	 that	 now	 fame	 does	 not	 mean
anything,	richness	does	not	mean	anything;	that	you	would	like	to	live	a	natural,
simple,	 spontaneous	 life.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 to	 escape	 from	 the	 world,	 I'm	 not
saying	drop	out	of	your	work,	but	once	this	ambition	disappears,	you	can	remain
in	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	but	the	quality	will	change.
...	And	that's	what	I	can	see	--	you	need	a	space	to	be	alone,	you	need	a	space,	a
private	 space,	 a	 private	 sky	where	 you	 are	 left	 alone	 and	 you	 can	 be	 silently
growing,	doing	something	or	not	doing	something,	just	enjoying	being.	You	are
tired	of	doing.	Sannyas	will	be	a	great	help:	it	will	make	a	discontinuity.
On	the	surface	it	is	very	difficult	to	say	what	sannyas	is.	It	is	an	experience.	And
there	 are	 two	 ways	 to	 become	 a	 sannyasin:	 one	 is	 --	 you	 think	 about	 it,	 you
decide	about	it.	The	other	and	the	better	is	that	you	simply	go	into	it	in	deep	trust
without	thinking	about	it,	without	making	a	decision	about	it.	When	you	make	a
decision,	sannyas	is	not	so	valuable	because	it	is	the	past	making	decision.	Then
the	break	is	not	so	abrupt.
Mm?	you	will	 think	--	who	is	 this	 thinking?	Your	past	will	 think	and	calculate
and	 watch	 and	 talk	 to	 people	 and	 meet	 people	 and	 see	 whether	 something
happens	 or	 not.	This	whole	 thing	will	 go	 on	 and	 then	 there	 is	 a	 conclusion,	 a
decision	--	you	take	or	you	don't	 take.	But	 this	decision	comes	out	of	 the	past,
and	the	past	remains	continuous,	then	the	quantum	leap	is	missed.
If	you	simply	 take	a	 jump,	not	knowing	where	you	are	going,	not	making	any
effort	 to	know	where	you	are	going	--	 if	you	simply	go	into	this	darkness,	 into
this	vast	darkness	of	existence,	without	any	map,	without	any	plan	--	then	it	has
a	tremendous	beauty.	You	will	have	a	thrill,	an	adventure.
So	it	is	for	you	to	decide	!	Would	you	like	to	decide	or	would	you	simply	like	to
go	into	it?
...	Close	your	eyes	and	feel	me	surrounding	you	from	everywhere	as	if	you	are
just	 in	my	womb,	 relaxed,	 contented	 --	 and	whatsoever	 form	your	 body	 starts
taking,	let	it	take.
This	will	be	your	name...	so	consciously,	deliberately	make	a	break	with	the	old
name.	For	your	business	purposes	you	can	continue	the	old,	but	as	far	as	you	are
concerned	the	old	name	becomes	fictitious,	 the	old	name	becomes	pseudo,	and
this	new	name	becomes	your	reality	--	Swami	Deva	Veeten.
Deva	 means	 divine	 --	 the	 word	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 root	 as	 divine.	 Divine
comes	from	a	sanskrit	root,	deva	--	they	both	mean	light.	From	dev	comes	day
and	divine	both	--	it	means	light.	And	veeten	means	beyond;	the	light	beyond	or
the	God	beyond.	And	the	reality	is	beyond	you.	The	reality	is	beyond	the	body,
beyond	the	mind.	That's	what	one	is	ordinarily	identified	with	--	either	the	body
or	the	mind	--	but	reality	is	beyond	both.	Reality	is	in	the	witnessing	of	both.
If	you	can	observe	the	body,	you	are	more	real	than	you	are	when	you	are	in	the
body.	If	you	are	eating,	you	are	not	as	real	as	if	you	are	watching	yourself	eating.
When	you	are	 thinking,	you	are	not	so	 real:	but	 if	you	can	watch	 the	 thoughts
passing	by	you	become	more	real.
Reality	happens	to	you	only	when	you	are	not	identified	with	the	body	and	mind.
So	 Veeten	 means	 trying	 to	 be	 beyond,	 trying	 to	 be	 constantly	 beyond	 any
identity	that	can	confine	you.	That's	what	Gurdjieff	calls	'self-remembering',	but
self-remembering	is	not	such	a	good	word	because	the	self	in	fact	does	not	exist
when	 there	 is	 remembering.	 So	 the	word	 is	 not	 a	 very	 fortunate	 choice;	 self-
remembering	somehow	makes	it	a	self-centred	thing.	There	is	every	possibility...
and	 I	 have	 come	 across	 many	 Gurdjieff	 people	 who	 have	 mistaken	 self-
remembering	for	self-consciousness.
They	 become	 more	 self-conscious	 --	 that	 creates	 more	 tension.	 Self-
remembering	has	nothing	to	do	with	self-consciousness	because	it	has	nothing	to
do	with	self,	it	is	simple	remembering.	Remembering	is	also	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
not	 a	 very	 good	 choice	 of	 words,	 mm?	 because	 it	 means	 that	 you	 are
remembering	something	from	the	past.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	past	either.	You	have	never	known	it.	It	is	going	to
be	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 rediscovery	 --	 it	 is	 a	 discovery	 !	 So	 it	 is	 a
witnessing,	it	is	pure	consciousness,	it	is	just	seeing	things	as	they	are.
So	 these	 are	 the	 three	 layers	 upon	 one's	 being.	 One	 is	 the	 world	 outside,	 the
outermost	layer:	the	sun,	the	trees,	the	people,	the	society.	It	is	very	easy	to	get
out	of	it,	because	there	is	a	gap	between	you	and	it;	it	is	not	very	difficult.	And
there	is	no	need	to	escape	to	the	Himalayas	or	to	a	cave,	because	wherever	you
go	 the	world	 is	 there	 --	 the	outer	world	 is	 there.	 It	 is	very	simple,	because	 the
distance	is	vast	so	one	is	never	identified	with	the	outer	world.	There	are	a	few
people	very	neurotic,	who	have	become	identified.
Somebody	is	so	much	identified	with	his	car	that	if	a	car	is	dented,	he	is	dented.
Or	with	 the	house	--	 if	 the	house	 is	gone,	he	may	start	 thinking	of	committing
suicide.	 Or	 there	 are	 people	 who	 are	 very	much	 identified	 with	money,	 wife,
children,	but	ordinarily	 that	 is	not	 such	a	big	problem,	because	you	know	 that
you	are	separate.
The	problem	starts	with	 the	body	--	 the	body	 is	very	close.	The	outer	world	 is
like	a	dream	--	you	can	drop	it	and	you	can	become	naked.	The	body	is	like	skin
--	 it	 is	 not	 so	 easy	 to	 peel	 it	 away,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 impossible.	 So	 just	 watching
helps.	 You	 are	 walking	 on	 the	 road	 just	 become	 the	 witness.	 see	 the	 body
walking.
And	don't	make	 it	 a	 tense	 thing:	 strain	 is	 not	 needed.	 If	 it	 becomes	 strenuous,
you	miss	 the	point.	 So	be	perfectly	 at	 ease	 and	 relaxed.	 It	 is	 fun	 --	 it	 is	 not	 a
serious	 thing.	 That	 is	 one	 of	 the	 other	 problems	which	Gurdjieff	 people	 have
imbibed	--	they	become	very	serious,	and	they	don't	take	it	as	fun.	That	creates
anxiety.
Even	 when	 Gurdjieff	 was	 there	 many	 people	 became	 ill,	 many	 people	 died,
many	people	went	mad,	and	the	reason	was	that	it	was	thought	to	be	such	a	great
work	!	The	very	word	'work'	makes	it	very	serious.
What	I	am	doing	here	is	play	--	it	is	not	work.	When	I	am	gone,	my	work	is	to	be
known	as	play,	never	as	work.	So	take	it	non-seriously.	Seriousness	is	a	disease
and	through	seriousness	no	one	has	ever	gone	beyond.	Seriousness	is	so	heavy
that	 it	makes	you	 rooted	 in	 the	gravitation.	One	needs	 to	be	very	playful,	 then
one	can	go	beyond	gravitation	--	one	can	fly!
A	great	 unburdening	 is	 needed,	 so	 just	 be	 playful	 about	 it.	When	 I	 say,	 'when
walking,	watch,'	I	mean	be	playful.	If	sometimes	you	forget,	nothing	is	wrong	in
it.	Watch	that	too	--	you	have	forgotten,	good!	Then	again	you	remember,	good!
Both	are	good.	In	fact	there	is	a	rhythm.	You	cannot	constantly	watch;	it	is	just
like	breathing	in,	breathing	out.
...	And	that	has	been	one	of	the	missing	points	in	Gurdjieff's	system.
People	are	trying	to	be	continuously	watching.	It	is	foolish!
When	you	breathe	out	the	air	goes	out,	when	you	breathe	in	the	air	goes	in,	and
there	is	a	rhythm.	The	eyes	go	on	blinking,	there	is	a	rhythm.	And	everything	is
a	rhythm:	the	day	and	night,	the	summer-winter,	the	whole	of	life	is	rhythmic.	So
watchfulness	 cannot	 be	 a	 continuity.	One	 should	not	 strive	 for	 it.	 It	 is	 foolish,
and	it	can	create	a	neurosis!	It	can	create	cancer,	tuberculosis,	and	it	can	create
many	things,	because	you	strain	too	much.
So	 just	 let	 it	 be	 a	 natural	 rhythm.	 Sometimes	 you	 forget;	 that	 means	 it	 is
exhalation.	 When	 you	 remember	 it	 is	 inhalation.	 And	 then	 it	 becomes	 very
simple...	very	simple,	child-like.	And	when	you	start	enjoying	it,	 forgetfulness,
remembering,	 forgetfulness,	 remembering....	 And	 both	 are	 good,	 because	 the
forgetfulness	gives	you	respite	and	rest	--	that	is	needed,	it	prepares	you	again	to
remember.
So	 walking,	 eating,	 sitting,	 just	 be	 watchful,	 but	 in	 a	 playful	 mood,	 with	 the
body.	And	the	same	has	to	be	done	with	the	mind.	Sometimes	sitting	silently,	just
watch.	And	that	watching	has	not	to	be	with	a	staring	inside	--	with	very	relaxed
eyes.	One	is	simply	sitting,	a	thought	passes	by	--	one	looks	at	it.
[The	new	sannyasin	says:	Yes,	because	when	I	look	at	it,	it	stops.]
No,	you	must	be	straining.	If	you	strain,	then	it	stops.	Let	it	float,	it	has	its	own
right	 to	 be.	 Let	 it	 float	 just	 as	 clouds	 float	 in	 the	 sky.	 Just	 watch.	 So,
watchfulness	 without	 any	 tension	 in	 it.	 That's	 why	 I	 am	 not	 using	 the	 word
attention,	because	it	has	tension	in	it.
Just	an	unfocused	watchfulness.	So	whatsoever	it	is,	one	is	looking	at	it.	There	is
no	desire	to	stop,	because	if	you	are	desiring	to	stop	it	you	cannot	watch	it.	The
very	desire	becomes	again	subtle	identification	--	you	are	afraid	of	the	thought.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 afraid.	 The	 thought	 is	 the	 thought,	 you	 are	 you.	 The
thought	is	not	hindering	you.	The	clouds	are	moving	in	the	sky.	The	thoughts	are
moving	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	 mind.	 The	 thoughts	 are	 as	 far	 away	 from	 you	 as	 clouds,	 and	 they	 have
nothing	to	do	with	you.	In	fact	they	are	not	even	yours	--	they	are	just	passing.
That's	why	one	thought	comes,	another	comes,	and	sometimes	you	will	become
aware	 that	 if	 you	 are	with	 a	 certain	 person	 a	 certain	 type	 of	 thought	 enters	 in
you,	mm?	because	that	person	is	constantly	broadcasting.	So	they	are	not	exactly
yours;	thoughts	are	collective.
The	 society	exists	 in	 an	atmosphere	of	 thoughts	 --	 just	 as	 air	 is	 social.	Mm?	 I
breathe	out,	you	breathe	in.
You	 breathe	 out,	 I	 breathe	 in.	 One	 thought	 passes	 my	 head,	 it	 enters	 in	 your
head,	it	passes	into	somebody	else's	head	and	it	goes	on.
So	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	You	are	not	 to	stop	it.	Simply	watch,	and	in	a
very	relaxed,	calm,	quiet	mood.	And	learn	to	sit	silently.	Whenever	you	can	find
time,	 just	 relax	 in	 the	 chair	 --	 no	 need	 for	 any	 posture.	 The	 only	 thing	 to	 be
remembered	is	that	you	are	at	ease.	Any	posture	that	makes	you	at	ease,	at	home,
is	good.	So	just	relax,	just	close	your	eyes,	and	just	be.
By	and	by	you	will	see	you	are	neither	the	society,	nor	the	body,	nor	the	mind.
And	then	a	new	sensation...	a	new	feeling	of	being	arises,	and	you	know	you	are
this.	 Not	 that	 you	 make	 that	 type	 of	 statement	 inside	 --	 no.	 It	 simply	 arises
existentially:	'Now	this	is	me.'
This	witnessing,	this	consciousness,	is	our	innermost	core.	And	all	the	religions
have	been	working	to	achieve	this	state.	Many	people	try	but	miss,	because	they
try	too	hard.	That	is	the	problem	with	Krishnamurti	--	trying	too	hard...	making	it
such	 a	 problem.	 People	 are	 already	 burdened	 with	 problems,	 and	 you	 bring
another	problem,	and	an	almost	impossible	problem	too.	And	Krishnamurti	goes
on	hammering	on	their	heads,	and	becomes	angry	too...	rages!
But	that	is	not	going	to	help	anybody.	Life	is	playful...	God	is	playful.	And	one
comes	closer	to	God	as	one	becomes	more	playful.
So	mix	with	people	here,	change	to	orange,	forget	your	past	for	the	days	you	are
here.	Dance,	meditate
--	but	everything	has	to	be	done	absolutely	non-seriously.	Sincerely,	yes!	--	but
seriously,	no.
And	 enjoyment,	 delight,	 has	 to	 be	 imbibed.	 Laughter	 has	 to	 be	 learned	 and
enjoyment	 in	 small	 things:	 drinking	 a	 cup	 of	 tea,	 talking	 to	 a	 friend,	 holding
hands	with	a	stranger	or	just	sitting	looking	at	the	sky.	Life	is	marvellous!	And	if
we	miss,	only	we	are	responsible	--	nobody	else.
And	all	that	man	needs	to	be	happy	is	available.	All	that	man	needs	to	be	happy
is	always	available.	You	just	have	to	relax	and	enjoy	it	and	participate	in	it.	So
let	celebration	be	the	only	rule!
And	I	would	like	you	to	do	a	few	groups	here.	A	few	groups	will	be	very	helpful.
...	Rolfing	is	good,	mm?	Do	that,	and	book	for	Encounter...	and	these	days	you
are	 here	 just	 mix	 with	 people	 and	 dance	 and	 enjoy....	 And	 forget	 everything.
Much	is	going	to	happen.	You	just	have	to	allow	--
and	I	have	started	working,	mm?	Good!
[To	another	sannyasin]
Come	 here.	 Mm,	 so	 great	 energy	 is	 happening?	 Very	 good.	 Something	 has
exploded	in	you.
Now,	three	things	have	to	be	remembered.	First,	 in	the	lecture	try	to	control	 it,
remain	centred.	Let	 the	energy	be	 there;	 it	will	 rise	with	a	great	 force	and	you
will	 have	 every	 temptation	 to	 cry	 or	 move,	 sway,	 shake	 --	 every	 temptation,
because	 when	 the	 energy	 is	 there	 the	 temptation	 is	 there.	 But	 at	 least	 in	 the
lecture	 drop	 that	 temptation.	 If	 you	 can	 drop	 that	 temptation	 and	 you	 remain
silent	 and	 sit	 silently	 and	 watch	 it,	 you	 will	 see	 that	 soon,	 if	 you	 don't	 get
tempted	it	will	cool	down,	and	then	there	will	be	a	great	showering	of	bliss	on
you,	because	when	you	shriek	or	you	scream	the	energy	is	lost.
So	there	are	two	different	types	of	screams:	one	I	allow.	one	I	don't	allow.	One
type	 is	 of	 catharsis:	 you	 are	 full	 of	 anger	 and	 a	 scream	 comes	 --	 it	 is	 good,
healthy.	Mm?	you	have	thrown	anger	out,	you	have	thrown	a	toxic	element	from
your	system,	it	is	good.	Hence	in	all	my	meditations,	catharsis	is	a	part.	If	your
body	 wants	 to	 move,	 let	 it	 move	 so	 the	 body	 can	 drop	 all	 wrong	 vibrations
accumulated	in	it.	For	example,	if	you	are	angry	you	want	to	hit	somebody	but
you	cannot.	The	situation	does	not	permit	--	he	is	your	boss	or	something	and	it
will	be	too	costly.	It	is	uneconomical	to	hit	him,	so	you	hold	the	energy	in	your
hand,	 now	 your	 hand	 keeps	 that	 energy.	 In	 the	 body	 there	 is	 no	 way	 for	 the
energy	to	go	back	to	its	original	source.	It	can	come	to	the	hand	but	it	cannot	go
back.	 There	 is	 no	 reverse	 gear	 because	 when	 God	 created	 man,	 He	 had	 not
thought	about	saints	--	that	these	people	will	come	and	teach	people	to	repress	--
so	there	has	been	no	reverse	gear.
You	 know	when	Ford	made	 his	 first	 car	 there	was	 no	 reverse	 gear	 (laughter).
Only	later	on	when	he	found	that	it	was	difficult....	If	you	wanted	to	come	back
you	had	to	go	miles	around	and	then	you	had	to	come	back...	he	thought	about	it.
God	 has	 not.	 yet	 thought	 about	 it!	 (laughter)	 He	 still	 hopes	 that	 some	 day
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
these	saints	will	disappear	and	people	will	be	natural.	So	there	is	only	one	gear.
The	energy	comes	to	the	hand;	if	you	don't	hit,	the	energy	clings	there.
In	Kundalini,	 in	Dynamic,	when	your	hand	shakes,	that	energy	falls	away.	It	 is
good	--	it	gives	you	a	new	quality.	As	dust	drops	your	mirror	becomes	clear.	So
as	far	as	catharsis	is	concerned,	good.	But	then	when	catharsis	has	happened	and
new	energy	arises	and	 it	 is	 there	near	your	navel	and	 it	bursts	 forth	with	great
power,	it	is	not	good	to	express	it,	otherwise	it	will	be	lost.	So	keep	quiet	and	let
it	accumulate	there.
Let	it	become	a	great	reservoir.
Mm.	First	it	will	come	to	your	heart	and	there	will	be	great	temptation	to	cry	and
weep.	Don't	weep,	don't	cry;	you	will	see	that	it	is	coming	to	your	throat.	When
it	 comes	 to	 your	 throat	 there	 will	 be	 a	 great	 temptation	 to	 shout	 and	 say
something.	 Don't	 say	 anything	 and	 you	 will	 see	 that	 it	 has	 gone	 beyond	 the
throat;	it	has	come	to	your	third	eye.
When	it	comes	to	your	third	eye,	your	eyes	will	start	being	pulled	upwards	and
you	will	 feel	 that	 there	 is	 a	 pull.	Up	 to	 this	 point	 you	 can	 help	 the	 energy	 to
come,	beyond	that	it	goes	by	itself.	But	if	you	start	crying,	weeping,	it	will	never
go	above	the	heart.	If	you	shout	it	will	never	go	above	the	throat.	And	it	has	to
reach	 to	 the	 third	 eye	 --	only	 from	 the	 third	 eye	 is	 there	 transformation,	never
before	 it.	 When	 the	 kundalini,	 the	 energy,	 the	 snake	 inside	 you,	 uncoils	 and
reaches	to	the	third	eye,	your	work	is	finished	Now	you	are	available	to	God	--
now	He	will	pull	you.	It	is	almost	as	if	you	go	to	the	roof	and	you	want	to	jump:
you	need	to	take	one	step,	then	the	rest	will	be	done	by	gravitation.	You	don't	do
anything	afterwards	--	you	simply	jump!
Up	to	the	third	eye	you	have	to	come,	and	from	there	you	need	not	work.	Then
the	seventh	centre	starts	pulling	the	energy	automatically.
So	this	energy	is	not	a	cathartic	energy.	The	first	day	you	started	screaming	I	told
you	to	stop,	and	that	was	just	to	see	whether	you	could	stop	it	or	not.
[The	sannyasin	answers:	I	couldn't	hear	you.]
You	could	not,	I	know.	You	could	not	--	that	proved	that	it	was	not	catharsis.	If	it
was	 catharsis	 you	 would	 have	 immediately	 stopped,	 because	 catharsis	 is	 in
control.	You	have	been	doing	 that	 for	 your	whole	 life,	 so	 it	 is	 nothing	new	 to
stop	 it.	One	 is	 angry	 and	 one	 can	 smile;	 you	 have	 learned	 that!	One	wants	 to
shout,	 but	 stops.	 The	 husband	 and	wife	were	 just	 going	 to	 quarrel,	 and	 throw
things	at	each	other,	and	a	guest	knocks	--	mm?	They	are	smiling	and	all	smiles!
(laughter)	So	you	know	it.	But	that	day	you	could	not.
That	proved	that	it	was	nothing	that	you	can	do	anything	about.	You	will	have	to
learn.
So	from	tomorrow	morning,	sit	very	far	away	there	in	the	corner	so	that	nobody
is	 disturbed	 and	 just	 keep	 quiet	 --	 become	 a	 Buddha	 statue	 --	 and	 when	 the
energy	arises	just	keep	quiet.	Within	two	or	three	days	you	will	become	able	--
no	shaking	of	 the	body,	and	no	shouting	 --	and	 then	you	will	be	benefitted,	 so
blessed.	A	great	benediction	will	surround	you.
Continue	in	the	meditations	--	that	is	catharsis.	But	in	lectures	simply	sit	silently,
mm?	And	then	later	on	I	will	tell	you	something	else.	This	is	the	first	thing	to	do.
Two	 things	 I	will	 tell	 you,	 so	when	you	 come	next,	 you	 remind	me	 about	 the
other	two	things.	First	you	do	this,	mm?	And	things	are	going	very	well.
Mm?
[A	sannyasin	says:	I	wrote	that	I	was	really	angry	with	you,	and	that	it	was	about
something	to	do	with	the	Buddha	lectures...	I	felt	you	wanted	so	much	of	me	and
I	couldn't	live	up	to	your	expectations,	and	I	wanted	you	to	leave	me	alone...
Mm!	I	cannot	leave	you	alone!	(laughter.	Osho	chuckles)
[She	 continues:	But	 it	 just	made	me	 feel	 angry...	 you	 have	 sticking	 your	 nose
into	my	affairs.	I	was	so	angry!]
Mm	mm,	 that's	 a	good	sign	 (laughter).	That's	 really	beautiful	 --	because	anger
arises	only	when	something	hits	hard	and	deep.	And	 these	 lectures	on	Buddha
have	hit	many	people,	and	they	have	hit	only	because	they	have	a	truth	in	them.
The	problem	is,	if	you	accept	their	truth	then	what	about	your	illusions	that	you
are	living	in?	So	this	is	the	difficulty:	if	Buddha	is	right,	then	your	whole	life	is
wrong	--	and	that	is	too	much.	And	then	you	say,	'What	right	has	Buddha?'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	he	is	right!	(laughter)	Nothing	can	be	done	about	it!
And	 if	 you	 understand	 him	 rightly,	 he	 is	 not	 saying	 to	 leave	 your	 illusions	 or
anything	 like	 that	 --	no!	No	master	of	 that	quality	ever	 interferes	 in	anybody's
life.	He	 is	 simply	 saying	his	 truth.	 If	you	can	understand,	good.	 If	you	cannot
understand,	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried	about	it.	Continue!	Some	day	you	will
realise	that	yes,	he	is	right,	and	then	you	will	repent.
But	 it	 takes	 time	 --	and	everybody	 is	not	 ripe	at	 that	moment	 to	understand	 it.
There	is	a	difference:	when	the	fruit	is	ripe	it	falls	down	easily.	And	if	he	starts
talking	about	falling	down...	and	fruit	which	is	not	ripe	and	which	still	wants	to
cling	to	the	tree	and	live	his	dreams	out	certainly	feels	angry.
Ouspensky	 has	 dedicated	 his	 book	 'In	 Search	 of	 the	Miraculous'	 to	Gurdjieff,
with	 the	words:	 'To	 the	man	who	disturbed	my	 sleep.'	 It	 is	 a	 disturbance,	 and
when	somebody	is	asleep,	and	really	enjoying	a	good	dream,	a	nice	dream,	and
you	go	and	shake	him....
So	your	anger	is	natural	--	I	am	not	saying	anything	against	it,	but	I	will	go	on
shaking	 you!	 (laughter)	 And	 keep	 coming,	 keep	 being	 angry	 --	 that	 is	 not	 a
problem,	mm?	That	is	not	a	problem.	It	simply	shows	love	and	nothing	else.	If
you	 love	you	become	angry	 too.	And	 it	 is	good	--	 it	gives	spice	(laughter).	So
many	 people	 love	 me,	 and	 if	 they	 don't	 get	 angry,	 it	 becomes	 too	 sweet
(laughter).	Allow	 it,	mm?	So	you	 are	 the	 salty	 type	of	 sannyasin,	mm?	Good,
Shraddha.	Don't	be	worried.	Continue	hating	and	being	angry,	and	you	can	write
as	long	letters	as	you	want	--	because	who	reads?	(much	laughter)	Mm?	Good!
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	Laughter	is	Prayer
17	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611175
ShortTitle:	WHIP09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[Osho	gives	sannyas	to	a	five-year-old	girl	and	she	skips	back	to	her	seat.	Osho
speaks	to	her	parents:]
Anand	means	bliss,	joy,	and	hasya	means	laughter.	Teach	her	to	laugh	more	and
more.	And	when	you	play	with	her,	keep	the	atmosphere	of	laughter	around	her.
If	 you	 can	 avoid	 seriousness,	 you	 will	 be	 fulfilling	 your	 duty.	 Children	 are
crushed	under	seriousness.	Certainly	older	people	are	more	serious	and	children
are	 laughter-like,	 but	 by	 and	 by	 they	 start	 imitating;	 they	 start	 feeling	 as	 if
laughter	 is	 something	 wrong.	 And	 older	 people	 create	 an	 impression	 in	 their
minds	that	to	be	serious,	to	keep	quiet,	to	be	silent,	is	something	good,	virtuous.
That	 is	 wrong,	 because	 once	 the	 child	 loses	 contact	 with	 laughter	 it	 is	 very
difficult	to	gel	back	the	contact.	So	many	therapies	are	needed,	and	even	then	it
is	 difficult	 to	 get	 your	 childhood	 back.	 So	many	 religions	 are	 needed.	 In	 fact
there	is	no	need	for	any	religion	in	the	world.
If	 children	 are	 allowed	 to	 be	 natural,	 laughing,	 allowed	 fun,	 spontaneity,	 no
religion	 is	 needed,	 no	 church	 is	 needed.	 People	 will	 be	 religious	 without	 any
religion,	and	people	will	be	 religious	without	any	church.	They	may	not	know
the	name	of	God,	 they	may	not	go	somewhere	 to	worship,	but	 their	whole	 life
will	be	worship,	because	laughter	is	a	prayer.
The	moment	the	child	loses	fun,	death	has	settled	in,	and	near	the	age	of	three,	a
child	starts	dying.
That's	 why	 even	 in	 old	 age	 people	 remember	 that	 there	 was	 paradise	 in
childhood	--	childhood	was	heaven.
That	 feeling	 that	 something	has	 been	 lost	 continues	 --	 the	 garden	of	Eden	has
been	lost...	Adam	has	been	expelled.
In	fact,	it	is	beautiful	--	the	story	that	he	ate	the	fruit	of	knowledge	is	beautiful	--
he	ate	knowledge.	He	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
must	have	become	serious,	because	the	moment	you	become	knowledgeable	you
lose	laughter,	you	lose	fun.
His	laughter	must	have	stopped.	And	he	was	hiding	from	God.	The	moment	you
stop	 playing,	 you	 start	 hiding	 from	 God.	 He	 was	 expelled	 because	 of	 his
knowledge,	his	seriousness.	He	had	become	a	saint	 --	he	was	no	more	a	child.
That's	why	Jesus	goes	on	insisting	that	unless	you	become	a	child	again,	you	will
not	enter	the	kingdom	of	God.
So	whenever	you	have	a	child,	you	have	a	garden	of	Eden	around	you.	So	don't
force	 him	 to	 become	 serious.	 No	 child	 should	 be	 forced	 to	 become	 serious.
Rather	you	should	lose	seriousness	when	you	are	with	her.	Laugh	and	become	a
child.	If	you	can	help	that	much,	she	will	grow	into	a	beautiful	sannyasin.	Mm?
Good!
[to	a	visitor]:
Close	your	eyes	and	if	something	happens	in	the	body	--	the	body	starts	moving
and	 swaying,	 your	 hands	 start	moving	 in	 a	mudra,	 a	 gesture,	 your	 head	 leans
forward,	backward	--	allow	it,	as	if	you	are	not	there	but	only	energy	is.
Open	your	eyes	and	enter	into	another	world,	mm?	Just	feel	me.
This	will	be	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Aneesha.
I	 am	 giving	 you	 a	 very	 paradoxical	 name,	 but	 life	 is	 paradoxical	 and	 I	 love
paradox.	Only	lies	are	not	paradoxical	--	truth	always	is.	Deva	means	divine,	and
aneesha	means	godlessness;	divine	godlessness.	And	 that	 is	exactly	 the	case	 --
God	is	not	a	person.	In	fact	there	is	no	God	--	there	is	only	divine	energy.	It	is
better	to	call	it	godliness	rather	than	God.	Life	is	divine,	but	there	is	no	God	like
a	father-figure,	 there	 is	nobody	who	is	manipulating,	controlling	--	nobody	has
ever	created	life,	it	is	eternal.	In	this	sense	Christianity,	Judaism,	Islam	are	very
childish	religions.	Their	concept	of	God	is	 the	concept	of	a	child	who	looks	at
the	father	and	cannot	believe	that	the	world	can	be	without	a	father...	who	goes
on	 thinking	 that	 there	 must	 be	 somebody	 just	 like	 his	 father	 who	 protects,
shelters.
But	in	the	East	we	have	developed	great	religions	--	religions	for	the	grown-up
person.	The	Buddha's	 teaching	 is	without	any	God.	 It	 teaches	you	divinity,	but
there	 is	 no	 God	 in	 it.	 H.G.	Wells	 has	 said	 about	 Buddha	 that	 he	 is	 both	 the
godliest	man	and	the	most	godless.	Never	has	anybody	walked	on	this	earth	who
was	more	godly	and	more	godless.
If	Nietzsche	were	born	in	India,	if	he	had	known	anything	about	Buddha,	he	may
not	have	gone	mad.	He	said,	 'God	is	dead.'	But	then	he	could	not	manage	--	he
himself	was	 not	 yet	 so	 grown-up	 as	 to	 be	 able	 to	 accept	 a	world	without	 any
centre,	 to	 conceive	 of	 a	 world	 without	 somebody	 controlling	 it	 --	 he	 was
shattered.	His	own	mind	was	still	 that	of	a	child,	and	he	stumbled	upon	a	very
great	concept	--	that	there	is	no	God.	Now	it	was	impossible	for	him	to	be	quiet,
to	be	silent	--	he	was	split.	A	part	of	him	was	demanding	that	God	is	needed,	and
another	part	was	saying	that	there	is	no	God.
In	 the	 same	 situation,	 if	 he	 were	 in	 India,	 if	 he	 had	 known	 something	 about
Buddha,	he	would	have	become	another	Buddha.	Buddha	never	went	mad	--	he
denied	 God	 absolutely	 but	 there	 was	 no	 problem	 in	 it.	 He	 simply	 became	 so
grown-up	that	the	childhood	concept	was	left	behind	like	toys,	meaningless.
Christianity	in	that	sense	remains	a	beginner's	religion:	if	Christianity	is	the	ABC
of	religion	then	Buddhism	is	the	XYZ;	if	Christianity	is	the	alpha	then	Buddhism
is	the	omega.
And	 this	 name	 is	 a	 buddhist	 name:	 Ma	 Deva	 Aneesha.	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to
become	 more	 and	 more	 divine,	 and	 yet	 godless.	 Then	 divinity	 is	 a	 freedom.
Otherwise	even	God	becomes	a	bondage	and	a	prison.
So	a	christian	monk	or	a	christian	nun	has	no	taste	of	freedom,	of	what	freedom
is.	Their	bowing	down	to	some	God	in	heaven	 is	a	sort	of	mental	slavery.	Not
that	 bowing	 down	 is	 wrong,	 but	 to	 bow	 down	 out	 of	 fear	 or	 out	 of	 greed	 is
juvenile.	To	bow	down	out	of	love	is	another	thing.	But	then	love	is	not	for	some
person	in	particular	--	love	is	for	the	whole	existence.
So	this	is	my	message	for	you:	don't	look	for	God	--	look	for	divinity.	And	you
will	find	it	everywhere	--
in	 the	 trees,	 in	 the	 rivers,	 in	 the	 laughter	of	children,	 in	 the	wrinkles	of	an	old
face,	in	the	birds,	in	the	sky	--
you	will	find	it	everywhere!	If	you	are	looking	for	God	you	will	never	find	it.	In
God	you	can	believe,	but	it	never	becomes	an	experience.	If	you	are	looking	for
godliness,	it	is	everywhere.	Then	wherever	you	touch	there	is	godliness,	because
the	whole	stuff	that	the	universe	is	made	of	is	godliness.
So	don't	 look	 for	 a	God	 in	 an	 anthropomorphic	 sense,	 don't	 think	of	God	 in	 a
human	form	--	just	think	of	godliness.	Mm?	it	is	an	ocean	of	godliness	taking	so
many	forms	and	so	many	waves.	All	ripples	are	His,	but	when	I	say	His	I	don't
mean	a	person.	I	have	to	use	language	so	I	use	it,	but	I	mean	a	no-person,	just	a
quality.	God	 is	more	 like	a	 fragrance	 than	 like	a	 flower...	more	diffused,	more
formless,	more	nebulous.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Prem	means	love,	and	rachana	means	creation.	And	to	me,	only	love	is	creative.
All	else	is	destructive.
Creation	 is	 out	 of	 love,	 and	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 with	 love	 becomes	 creative.
Anything	 that	 is	 touched	 by	 love	 is	 golden.	 Even	 small	 ordinary	 things	 im-
mediately	have	a	different	quality	to	them.	So	a	person	who	lives	a	life	of	love,
lives	a	creative	 life.	 In	 fact	only	he	 lives.	Loving	 is	 living	 --	 and	 to	 live	a	 life
without	love	is	to	drag.
Love	has	been	destroyed	very	badly	by	religions.	They	talk	about	love,	but	they
talk	about	something	abstract	--	that	abstraction	is	not	possible.	Love	is	a	reality,
a	very	concrete	phenomenon.	For	example,	religions	say,	'Love	humanity.'	Now
this	is	foolish!	You	cannot	love	humanity.	Whenever	you	love,	you	love	a	human
being,	 not	 humanity.	Where	will	 you	 find	 humanity	 to	 hug	 and	 to	 kiss	 and	 to
love?	--
impossible!	 But	 abstraction	 looks	 beautiful	 --	 'Love	 humanity.'	 And	 there	 are
many	 people	 who	 are	 incapable	 of	 loving	 human	 beings.	 They	 hide	 behind
humanity	--	they	say	they	love	humanity,	they	love	God.
It	is	very	easy	to	love	God	because	you	are	not	going	to	enounter	Him.	It	is	very
difficult	to	love	a	human	being	because	to	love	a	human	being	is	to	go	through
fire,	 and	 growth	 comes	 out	 of	 fire.	 To	 love	 God	 is	 almost	 impotent,	 it	 is
meaningless.	And	unless	you	have	loved	human	beings,	real	human	beings,	there
is	no	possibility	to	reach	to	higher	altitudes	of	love.	One	needs	a	foundation	in
the	earth.
I	am	very	earthly	 that	way.	 I	know	one	has	 to	go	higher	and	higher,	but	every
height	needs	depth.	A	 tree	goes	high,	but	 then	 simultaneously	 it	 is	going	deep
through	 the	 roots	 --	 it	 is	 almost	 the	 same	proportion.	 If	 the	 tree	goes	 fifty	 feet
high,	 it	goes	fifty	feet	deep	in	the	earth.	It	 is	not	possible	that	a	tree	should	go
only	 two	 feet	 depth,	 and	 fifty	 feet	 high	 --	 it	 will	 fall	 down,	 it	 will	 not	 have
foundations.
So	first	grow	your.	roots	in	the	earth.	Based	on	the	earth	one	can	rise	high	into
heaven.	And	heaven	and	earth	are	not	enemies	 --	but	 religions	have	made	 that
trick.	They	have	managed	to	create	the	idea	that	heaven	and	earth	are	enemies,
and	if	you	want	to	love	heaven,	you	have	to	hate	earth.	This	is	absurd,	and	not
only	absurd	--	it	is	poisonous.	If	you	want	to	love	heaven	you	have	to	love	earth
as	deeply	as	possible,	as	totally	as	possible.	The	more	total	your	love	for	earth,
the	greater	will	be	your	flight	 into	heaven.	Even	a	bird	 that	goes	far	away	into
the	sky	knows	that	there	is	a	nest	waiting	for	him;	by	the	evening	he	will	be	able
to	come	back	and	rest.	He	can	go	so	far	only	because	he	has	a	nest	somewhere
on	the	earth.	One	can	go	as	far	as	one	wants,	but	one	should	have	a	foundation	in
the	earth.
So	love	concrete	human	beings,	concrete	animals,	concrete	 trees,	 love	 the	real,
and	then	your	life	by	and	by	will	become	more	and	more	creative.
[A	sannyasin,	who	has	trained	in	and	practiced	massage,	says:	I'm	very	attracted
to	doing	massage.	I	have	some	resistance	to	it	as	well.	I'd	like	your	guidance	on
that.]
Mm.	That's	very	good.	So	would	you	like	to	start	massage	immediately	or	would
you	first	like	to	do	a	few	groups	and	then	start	massage?
...	I	think	it	will	be	better,	mm?	A	little	work	on	you,	and	then	you	do	massage.
And	massage	 is	 not	 simply	massage.	 You	 are	 sharing	 energy;	 and	 unless	 you
have	energy	flowing	in	you,	soon	you	will	become	tired.	Then	it	is	very	risky.	It
is	not	physical	tiredness	that	comes	--	that	is	not	important;	you	will	sleep,	you
will	eat,	and	it	will	go.	But	massage	is	a	deeper	sharing	of	energy.	When	you	are
massaging	 somebody's	 body,	 not	 only	 are	 your	 bodies	 involved	 --	 your	 subtle
bodies,	two	energy	bodies,	two	bio-plasmas.	The	person	who	is	taking	massage
can	 take	 too	much	 of	 your	 bio-plasma,	 and	 unless	 you	 have	 a	 constant	 inner
supply,	 unless	 you	 are	 joined	 to	 the	 source,	 you	 will	 become	 very	 much
dissipated	by	it.	It	may	not	immediately	affect	you	because	you	are	young.	Even
for	months	and	years	you	may	not	feel	it,	but	one	day	suddenly	you	will	feel	you
have	collapsed.
So	my	understanding	is	that	first	one	should	work	upon	oneself,	and	one	should
become	very	 very	 centred.	When	you	 are	 centred,	 you	 are	 not.	When	you	 are
centred,	the	source	starts	functioning.	Then	you	are	just	a	passage.	The	cosmos
starts	 flowing	through	you	--	 then	 there	 is	no	problem.	You	can	share	as	much
energy	as	you	want,	and	you	will	be	constantly	getting	new	energy,	mm?	Then
you	are	not	 like	a	reservoir	of	water	which	has	no	springs	 to	 it.	You	are	 like	a
well	which	has	many	springs	to	it;	you	go	on	taking	the	water	out	and	new	water
is	flowing	in	--	you	cannot	exhaust	it.	In	fact	you	take	the	old,	rotten,	stale	water
out	and	the	fresh	and	alive	water	comes	in.	So	the	well	is	very	happy	--	you	are
unburdening	it	from	the	past	and	the	old	and	the	stagnant.
So	 if	you	are	 in	a	flow	and	your	energy	 is	 flowering	 then	 there	 is	no	problem.
But	right	now	I	see	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you	will	be	 taking	a	 risk.	So	 first	do	one	or	 two	camps,	do	a	 few	groups,	 and
then	wait	for	me.	But	go	on	reminding	me,	so	that	when	I	feel	that	now	the	right
moment	has	come	and	you	can	move	 into	massage,	you	will	move.	Otherwise
later	you	will	 repent.	When	somebody	is	young	it	 is	not	difficult.	But	 later	on,
when	 one	 is	 going	 downhill	 --	 after	 thirty-five	 years,	 and	 the	 downhill	 slope
comes	--	one	starts	feeling	many	problems.	And	you	may	not	even	connect	them
with	 your	massage	 unless	 you	know.	This	 happens	 to	many	healers:	 they	 heal
people,	 but	 one	 day	 they	 fall	 very	 badly	 ill,	 and	 then	 nobody	 can	 heal	 them
because	their	own	energy	is	almost	spent,	exhausted.
So	massage	and	healing	and	these	phenomena	are	very	subtle.	And	it	is	not	only
a	 question	 of	 knowing	 the	 technique.	The	 bigger	 question	 is	 how	 to	 be	 at	 the
source	--	then	there	is	no	problem.	Then	I	don't	bother	even	about	the	technique
and	 whether	 you	 know	 it	 or	 not.	 Mm?	 you	 can	 simply	 start	 playing	 with
somebody's	body	and	energy	will	 be	 flowing,	 and	 there	will	 be	great	 benefits.
But	 there	 is	 only	 real	 benefit	 when	 the	 person	 who	 is	 massaging	 is	 also
benefitted	through	it	--	then	there	is	a	real	benefit.	Then	the	healer	is	benefitted,
and	the	healee	too	--	both	are	benefitted.	Nobody	is	at	loss.
Do	the	camp,	and	then	I	will	see.	After	each	group	you	will	be	seeing	me,	then	I
will	see	how	things	are	going.	Once	your	energy	is	flowing,	start	massage	in	the
ashram.	Mm?	Good!
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Be	a	Pure	Hedonist
18	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611185
ShortTitle:	WHIP10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[To	a	sannyasin,	newly	arrived:]
Do	a	few	groups	here,	mm?	Join	the	music	group	and	become	part	of	the	family
here.	Music	melts	people	very	easily.	Otherwise	something	remains	frozen	and
one	is	not	even	aware	of	it.	So	the	first	necessity	of	all	growth	is	to	be	relaxed.
Nobody	 can	 grow	 with	 a	 tense	 mind,	 and	 sometimes	 it	 happens	 very
paradoxically	that	even	the	growth	itself	becomes	a	tension	--	one	has	to	grow.
Then	the	very	idea	of	growth	becomes	the	barrier.	So	start	with	music.
And	the	dance	is	unstructured,	it	is	just	natural	--	whatsoever	comes	to	you,	the
way	it	comes	to	you	--	it	is	not	a	performance.	You	are	not	dancing	for	anybody
else,	you	are	simply	dancing	for	yourself	or	for	God
--	which	means	the	same.	When	I	say	'or	for	God',	I	really	mean	it.	And	when	I
say	'it	means	the	same',	that	too	I	really	mean,	because	when	you	dance	naturally
it	 is	 God	 dancing	 --	 you	 disappear.	When	 you	 perform	 you	 come	 in,	 the	 ego
enters	in.	God	is	no	more	there.
Whenever	you	are	not,	God	is.	Your	absence	is	His	presence.
And	 this	 is	 the	 basic	 arithmetic	 for	 any	 possible	 growth	 --	 that	 you	 have	 to
disappear.	So	for	the	first	ten	days	you	dance	and	sing,	and	after	that	you	have	to
do	two	groups.	First	Tathata.	Tathata	means	'suchness'...
whatsoever	is.	The	'should'	creates	all	the	problems.	Once	you	have	an	idea	how
things	should	be	you	are	going	to	be	in	trouble.	Then	you	go	on	proposing	and
God	will	 go	 on	 disposing	 --	 because	 your	 idea	 is	 your	 idea.	 It	 doesn't	 fit	 --	 it
doesn't	 fit	 with	 the	whole.	 The	whole	 is	 vast	 and	 you	 are	 very	 tiny.	 The	 tiny
wants	the	whole	to	take	a	shape	according	to	his	ideas	--	as	if	a	leaf	on	the	tree
wants	 to	 have	 a	 certain	 destiny	which	 is	 not	 possible,	 or	 a	 drop	 in	 the	 ocean
wants	to	have	a	certain	destiny	which	is	not	possible.	The	drop	has	to	be	just	a
part	of	the	ocean	so	that	whatsoever	is	the	ocean's	destiny	is	the	drop's	destiny;
there	is	no	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
'should'	on	the	part	of	the	drop.	When	there	is	no	'should'	there	is	no	boundary.
When	there	is	no	'should'
you	can	simply	relax	and	melt.
So	 this	will	be	your	 first	group,	Tathata.	This	word	 is	very	 significant	 --	 that's
why	I	have	chosen	it.	It	is	the	essential	word	of	Buddha.	He	says	to	live	in	the
suchness	of	things.	And	by	suchness	he	means	that	whatsoever	happens,	happens
such	is	the	case.	Your	wife	leaves	you,	so	Buddha	says	 'Such	is	the	case	--	she
has	left.'	So	accept	it	and	live	it.	If	she	comes	back,	good	--	such	is	the	case.	If
she	never	comes,	that	too	is	good	--	what	can	be	done?
So	to	live	in	suchness	is	one	of	the	most	significant	experiences.	And	if	you	can
learn	it,	it	is	not	only	to	be	used	in	the	group,	it	has	to	become	your	very	life.
I	am	using	these	groups	just	to	give	you	a	glimpse	of	how	things	change.	If	you
just	change	your	attitude	you	see	how	things	suddenly	change,	how	things	have
always	been	beautiful	but	because	of	your	attitude	you	were	unable	to	see	their
beauty,	you	were	missing	them.	Once	you	relax	in	the	idea	of	suchness	there	is
no	anxiety,	there	is	nothing	to	be	done,	you	have	no	task	to	fulfill.	Nothing	is	left
except	delight,	except	celebration.
And	 celebration,	 once	 it	 starts,	 never	 ends.	 It	 goes	 on	 accelerating.	 In	 fact	 the
word	acceleration	comes	from	the	same	root	as	celebration;	both	have	the	same
root.	Once	 you	 start	 celebrating,	 it	 accelerates,	 it	 goes	 on	 and	 on,	 deeper	 and
deeper,	and	higher	and	higher	--	there	is	no	end	to	it.
So	the	first	group,	Tathata,	Ist	to	3rd	December,	and	the	second	group	is	Tao,	6th
to	10th.	That	 is	a	 further	step	of	Tathata.	Tao	means	 the	eternal	 law	--	what	 in
India	 we	 call	 the	 dhamma,	 or	 what	 the	 christian	 theologians	 call	 logos,	 the
eternal	 law,	 the	 law	 of	 all	 things:	 the	 law	 according	 to	which	 trees	 grow	 and
flower,	and	the	law	according	to	which	water	flows	and	moves	to	the	ocean,	and
the	clouds	float,	and	the	sun	rises,	and	the	birds	sing,	and	the	man	falls	in	love
with	a	woman,	and	a	child	 is	born...	 the	 law	of	a	 thousand	and	one	 things;	 the
law	of	the	total.	Once	you	start	feeling	the	taste	of	suchness,	you	are	very	close
to	tao.	Once	you	accept	life	as	it	is,	suddenly	you	fall	in	line	with	tao,	with	the
eternal	law.
And	this	is	what	I	mean	by	a	religious	person:	a	person	who	lives	according	to
nature,	not	according	to	any	philosophy;	who	simply	trusts	nature	and	its	ways.
They	are	mysterious,	unpredictable,	one	never	knows	what	 is	going	to	happen.
..but	 that	 is	 the	 beauty	 of	 it	 --	 that	 one	 is	 constantly	 thrilled,	 surprised.	 Each
moment	brings	a	new,	amazing	experience,	a	new	wonder.	So	first	Tathata,	then
Tao,	 these	 two.	Then	 there	will	be	a	camp,	and	 I	will	 tell	you	what	else	 to	do
then,	mm?	Would	you	like	to	say	something	to	me?
[A	visitor	says:	I've	come	to	see	if	I	can	get	out	of	myself	--	that's	the	easiest	way
I	can	say	it.	I'll	be	here	three	months	or	so	and	I	hope	that	will	happen.]
Mm	mm.	Hope	is	always	dangerous.	You	want	to	get	out	of	yourself,	but	who	is
hoping	 this?	Now	 this	 is	 the	 dilemma.	The	hope	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 source
that	you	want	to	get	out	of.	So	if	your	hope	is	fulfilled	you	will	never	get	out	of
it,	and	if	you	get	out	of	it	you	will	feel	frustrated	because	your	hope	will	not	be
fulfilled	 --	 these	 are	 the	 dilemmas	 that	 we	 create.	 And	 a	 dilemma	 is	 such	 a
problem	that	whatsoever	happens	you	will	be	frustrated,	this	way	or	that.	So	it	is
foreordained.
The	 first	 thing	 I	would	 like	 to	 suggest	 to	 you	 is	 to	 abandon	 hope,	 drop	 hope,
because	 the	 hope	 comes	 from	 you	 --	 it	 comes	 from	 the	 old	 mind.	 It	 is	 a
projection	of	the	old	mind	into	the	future.	You	want	to	drop	the	old	mind	and	the
very	 idea	 is	of	 the	old	mind.	So	you	will	 fall	 into	an	absurdity,	and	 then	 there
will	 be	 no	 way	 out.	 You	 will	 be	 chasing	 your	 own	 tail	 like	 a	 dog.	 The	 dog
sometimes	sits	 in	winter	and	enjoys	 the	sun,	and	 then	goes	on	chasing	 its	own
tail...	 jumps	and	then	feels	very	frustrated,	because	the	tail	also	jumps.	It	 is	his
tail.
So	the	first	thing	is:	be	here	without	any	hope.	Just	be	here,	for	the	first	time	in
your	life,	without	any	projection	about	the	future.	Let	us	see	what	happens.	Why
should	we	project?	Why	should	we,	from	the	very	beginning,	start	managing	the
future?	 Let	 it	 be	 open	 and	 then	 there	 is	 a	 possibility,	 otherwise	 there	 is	 no
possibility.
The	second	thing:	why	do	you	want	to	get	out	of	yourself?
[The	visitor	 answers:	 I	 don't	 feel...	 good.	 I'm	 too	much	 in	 the	mind,	 too	many
thoughts,	projections,	 I	 find	 it	very	hard	 to	be	calm,	quiet,	 relaxed.	Sometimes
that's	all	right,	but	it's	too	much.]
That	 too	 has	 to	 be	 understood,	 because	 through	 this	 idea	 of	 getting	 out	 of
yourself,	you	are	creating	a	dichotomy,	you	are	dividing	yourself	in	two,	you	are
becoming	split.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	as	if	you	want	to	get	rid	of	the	right	hand.	The	left	hand	wants	to	get	rid	of
the	 right	 hand,	 the	 right	 hand	wants	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 left	 hand,	 and	nobody	 is
thinking	of	the	total	body.	The	head	is	as	much	yours	as	your	heart.	And	to	be	in
the	head	is	needed	as	much	as	it	is	needed	to	be	in	the	heart.	To	be	calm	is	good
but	if	you	are	incapable	of	becoming	disturbed,	your	calmness	will	be	dead.	So
these	are	the	actual	facts	to	be	understood:	to	be	silent	is	good	but	sometimes	to
be	disturbed	is	also	good,	otherwise	the	silence	will	be	dead,	there	will	be	no	life
in	it.	Unless	you	can	move	to	the	polar	opposite,	you	cannot	be	alive.	Life	lives
by	polarity,	just	like	a	pendulum	of	an	old	clock	--	moving	left,	right,	left,	right.
And	 because	 of	 the	movement	 into	 polar	 opposites,	 the	 clock	 ticks.	 Hold	 the
pendulum	in	the	middle,	make	it	quiet	--	the	clock	stops.
So	 real	 understanding	 is	 never	 against	 anything.	 Real	 understanding	 is	 an
acceptance.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 getting	 out	 of	 anything	 or	 becoming
something	else,	somebody	else.	Real	understanding	simply	accepts	 the	polarity
that,	yes,	there	are	moments	when	you	are	low,	and	there	are	moments	when	you
are	high.	This	is	how	life	is.	It	moves	between	the	low	and	the	high.	Sometimes
there	 are	 moments	 you	 are	 sad,	 and	 sometimes	 there	 are	 moments,	 beautiful
moments	of	happiness.	This	is	how	life	moves,	between	happiness,	unhappiness.
It	is	a	constant	movement	between	hell	and	heaven.
And	life	is	the	movement	between	the	two.	If	you	are	stuck	in	hell,	you	are	dead.
If	you	are	stuck	in	heaven,	you	are	dead.	To	be	stuck	is	to	be	dead.	To	be	on	the
move,	 to	 be	 always	 moving,	 journeying,	 exploring,	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 being
alive.	Then	suddenly	you	have	a	silence	which	is	not	opposite	to	tensions,	which
is	not	opposite	 to	worries.	There	 is	a	great	silence	which	comprehends	worries
too.	Do	you	 follow	me?	There	 is	a	very	great	 silence	which	 is	not	opposite	 to
worries	--	it	comprehends	worries	too.	And	there	is	a	bliss	which	is	not	against
suffering	 --	 it	 comprehends	 suffering	 too.	 It	 is	 so	 vast,	 it	 can	 contain
contradictions.
My	 whole	 approach	 is	 to	 make	 you	 so	 aware	 of	 the	 reality	 of	 life	 that	 you
become	capable	of	 accepting	 each	and	everything,	whatsoever	 life	brings.	Not
only	accepting	it,	but	welcoming;	not	only	welcoming,	but	feeling	grateful	for	it
--	 even	 if	 sometimes	 it	 brings	 pain.	 And	 pain	 too	 is	 great.	 It	 too	 is	 a	 gift.	 It
sharpens	your	consciousness;	it	is	not	useless.
So	this	split	that	you	are	carrying	within	you	is	your	problem;	not	that	one	part	is
your	problem	and	another	part	is	your	solution	--	no!	This	very	split	--	that	you
say,	 'I	 want	 to	 get	 out	 of	 myself'	 --	 this	 very	 split	 is	 your	 problem.	 And	 my
suggestion	 is:	 relax,	 and	 see	 both	 and	 accept	 both.	 Both	 these,	 both	 are	 your
hands,	your	 two	wings,	 and	with	one	wing	you	will	not	be	able	 to	 fly.	Pain	 is
needed	as	much	as	pleasure,	and	death	 is	needed	as	much	as	 life.	The	devil	 is
another	wing	just	as	God	is.	And	both	help	each	other.
Mm?	 you	 can	 see	 that	 God	 could	 not	 do	 without	 the	 devil	 --	 He	 needed	 a
Beelzebub,	He	could	not	run	this	whole	business	without	him.	It	was	a	must	--
He	depends	on	him.
This	 I	 call	 the	 perfect	 understanding,	 the	 total	 understanding.	 And	 a	 total
understanding	need	not	do	anything,	 it	need	not	go	anywhere,	 it	need	not	drop
anything,	it	need	not	change	anything.	A	total	understanding	can	be	happy	right
this	moment.	It	is	not	an	improvement	--	it	is	a	sudden	illumination.
So	abandon	hope	--	the	first	thing.	And	the	second	thing	--	rather	than	getting	out
of	yourself,	start	loving	yourself	as	you	are.	And	start	loving	all	the	aspects	that
you	are	carrying	within	yourself.	Painful	spaces	too,	are	yours.
It	is	almost	as	when	you	eat	delicious	food.	It	is	so	tasty,	it	is	so	satisfying,	but
next	day	after	twenty-four	hours	you	have	to	throw	it	out	of	your	system	--	it	is
stinking.	 Now	 if	 somebody	 says,	 'I	 want	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 whole	 process	 of
defecation	--	it	is	ugly.'	Just	think	about	what	he	is	saying.	Then	you	will	not	be
able	to	eat,	you	will	have	to	leave	food	completely	--	you	will	start	dying.
It	 is	 the	 same	process.	That	which	 starts	on	your	 tongue	and	after	 twenty-four
hows	you	have	to	throw	it	out	--	it	is	the	same	process.	These	are	not	two	things.
And	 in	 an	 alive	 body,	 both	 processes	will	 be	 there:	 one	will	 eat,	 and	one	will
enjoy	 food,	and	 then	one	will	enjoy	getting	 rid	of	 it	 too.	But	 the	process	 itself
cannot	be	cut	in	two.	And	that	which	you	are	throwing	out	of	the	system	again
becomes	manure,	 again	goes	 to	 the	 trees,	 rises	high	with	 the	 sap	of	a	 tree	and
becomes	an	apple	again;	again	you	ear	it.	This	is	a	circle	--
and	everything	is	a	circle.
So	sometimes	when	you	feel	that	something	is	too	heavy	on	you,	don't	make	any
judgement	in	a	hurried	way	--	it	must	be	part	of	a	big	circle.	Look	at	the	whole
thing,	and	then	you	will	become	more	accepting.
Don't	 look	only	at	 the	part.	Abandon	hope,	simply	be	here	with	no	idea	of	any
improvement.	I	don't	promise	improvement	because	that	is	a	very	small	promise
--	the	idea	of	improvement.	Even	if	you	become	improved,	you	will	remain	the
same	--	a	 little	modified	here	and	 there,	decorated,	white-washed,	but	you	will
remain	the	same.
I	don't	promise	any	improvement,	because	as	I	see	you,	I	see	you	as	perfect.	You
are	as	you	should	be.	I	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
can	 promise	 something	 greater	 --	 and	 that	 is	 a	 sudden	 illumination.	 But	 one
cannot	 work	 for	 it.	 You	 have	 to	 work	 on	 other	 planes.	 It	 sometimes	 happens
whenever	The	right	moment	comes	--	and	nobody	knows	when	it	comes.
So	do	a	few	groups,	meditate,	be	here,	and	drop	this	constant	anxiety	to	improve.
That	will	not	allow	you	to	be	in	such	a	relaxed	state	where	sudden	illumination
is	possible.	And	take	a	jump	into	sannyas!
[the	visitor	nods	and	Osho	gives	him	sannyas]
Ready	for	the	jump?...
Let	this	moment	be	a	dropping	of	your	split	ideas.
This	will	be	your	new	name	--	so	forget	the	old	name,	mm?	Just	by	forgetting	it,
it	will	be	easier	for	you	to	have	a	new	identity,	a	new	vision.
Anand	 means	 bliss	 and	 purnesh	 means	 the	 god	 of	 the	 perfection;	 god	 of
perfection	 and	 bliss.	 I	 am	 giving	 you	 this	 name	 so	 that	 it	 reminds	 you
continuously	that	you	are	perfect	as	you	are.	If	this	seed	settles	in	your	heart	it
will	do	many	things.	To	accept	oneself	as	one	is,	 is	 the	beginning	of	a	 journey
that	never	ends.
The	whole	western	mind	is	a	little	schizophrenic.	Christianity	is	the	cause	of	it	--
too	 much	 condemnation.	 Now	 people	 have	 even	 forgotten	 Christianity.	 Now
Christians	are	no	more	Christians;	it	is	just	a	formality	and	even	that	is	not	true
for	the	new	generation.
Those	ideas	go	on	lingering	in	the	unconscious.	You	may	not	condemn	the	body,
but	 the	 condemnation	 becomes	 focused	 on	 something	 else	 --	 you	 may	 start
condemning	 being	 in	 the	 head,	 but	 condemnation	 continues.	 You	 may	 start
condemning	something	else	but	condemnation	continues.
This	 very	 moment	 you	 are	 whatsoever	 you	 can	 ever	 be.	 This	 very	 moment
everything	 is	 ready	 as	 you	 need	 it	 to	 be	 --	 just	 start	 enjoying	 it.	 So	 drop
programmes	of	improvement	and	start	delighting	in	the	moment.
Forget	Christianity	for	these	three	months.	Be	an	epicurean,	be	a	pure	hedonist.
No	other	religious	person	is	going	to	say	for	you	do	to	that,	but	I	say	to	you	to	be
absolutely	hedonistic.	Enjoy	small	things	of	life	--	they	are	all	gifts	of	God,	and
through	 the	 happiness	 that	 they	 will	 bring,	 you	 will	 become	 more	 and	 more
prayerful.
[An	Indian	sannyasin	who	works	in	the	movie	industry	asks	about	his	problems
in	being	creative,	and	about	expressing	his	anger	and	emotions.]
I	think	you	do	a	few	groups.
Mm.	 Good.	 And	 nothing	 to	 be	 worried	 about.	 These	 things	 come	 when	 you
change	 your	work.	 You	were	 doing	 a	 certain	work	 you	 had	 become	 perfectly
efficient	in	it.	Your	whole	identity	was	with	that	work.
You	were	efficient,	you	were	capable,	you	knew	where	you	were,	what	you	were
doing,	you	had	a	certainty,	a	confidence.	Now	suddenly	at	this	age,	you	change
the	work.	Now	in	the	new	work	you	cannot	be	so	efficient.	In	the	new	work	you
will	 be	 an	 amateur,	 a	 beginner.	Your	 identity	will	 have	 to	 start	 from	 the	 very
beginning	 as	 if	 you	 have	 just	 now	 come	 out	 of	 your	 school	 and	 are	 starting
something	new.
Younger	 people	 than	you	will	 find	 faults	with	 you.	They	will	 say,	 'What	 have
you	done?	This	is	just	ordinary	or	nonsense,	or	change	it,	and	do	this	and	make	it
like	this.'	They	are	more	experienced	in	their	work.	They	may	be	younger	than
you,	they	may	be	just	of	your	age,	they	may	have	great	respect	for	you,	but	as	far
as	 the	 new	work	 is	 concerned	 they	 are	 better	 than	 you.	 And	 new	 bosses,	 the
same	people	who	were	your	friends	will	become	boss-like...	and	it	hurts.	And	it
is	no	easy	thing	to	suddenly	start	a	new	work.
And	 not	 an	 ordinary	 work.	 To	 write	 a	 story	 needs	 a	 long	 training.	 a	 certain
discipline	of	the	mind	--	writing	is	not	so	easy.
Just	now	I	was	telling	Vivek	an	anecdote.
A	man	wanted	 to	 become	 a	writer.	He	had	 some	 fancy	 that	 he	would	 become
famous	as	a	writer,	so	he	went	to	the	novelist	Somerset	Maugham,	and	he	said,	'I
want	to	become	a	great	writer	but	how	do	you	start?
--	that's	the	problem.'	So	Maugham	said,	'It	is	not	difficult.	I	can	tell	you	how	I
start.	 I	simply	sit	on	my	chair,	 face	 the	 typewriter	and	 just	write	 the	first	word
'the',	or	type	the	word	'the',	then	I	wait	for	inspiration	to	come.	It	comes	and	then
off	I	go.	In	fact	beginning	is	not	the	problem.	The	real	pro-blem	is	how	to	end	it.'
So	the	man	said,	'It	is	so	simple.	Nobody	told	me.'	He	went	home,	fixed	his	place
--	he	was	very	happy.
He	 took	out	 the	 type-writer,	 the	paper,	and	wrote	 'the',	and	 then	he	waited	and
waited	and	waited.	The	whole	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
night	was	 passing	 and	 nothing	was	 coming	 --	 no	 inspiration.	 In	 fact,	 his	 head
was	 always	 full	 of	 thoughts	 and	 suddenly	 all	 thoughts	 disappeared.	 He	 was
feeling	empty.	Finally	he	wrote,	'The	hell	with	it.'	(laughter)	So	it	is	not	an	easy
thing.	You	are	avoiding	 --	by	eating,	by	drinking,	by	 fighting,	quarrelling	with
[your	wife	 --	 so	you	can	find	excuses	as	 to	why	you	are	not	doing	your	work.
The	pen	 is	 ready,	 the	pencil	 is	 there,	 the	paper	 there,	but	 they	are	not	going	 to
write	--	you	are	going	to	write!	So	you	can	always	find	excuses	--
because	your	wife	was	not	in	a	good	mood	and	you	were	fighting	so	you	could
not	write,	 and	you	had	drunk	 too	much	so	you	could	not	write,	you	had	eaten
like	a	pig	so	you	could	not	write.	These	are	 just	 tricks	of	 the	mind	so	that	you
car!	find	excuses.	But	this	happens...	this	is	natural.
It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 change	 your	work	 at	 a	 later	 stage;	 it	 becomes	more	 and
more	difficult.	But	 it	 is	courageous!	To	do	it	 is	very	good!	It	 is	difficult,	but	 if
you	can	do	it	you	will	have	a	new	lease	of	life.	Once	you	get	into	the	new	work
you	will	 become	younger	 again	 and	you	will	 again	 be	 enjoying	 life	 afresh.	 In
fact	 a	 courageous	 man	 should	 go	 on	 changing,	 should	 never	 get	 settled	 into
anything,	should	always	remain	a	vagabond.	Then	he	will	remain	very	very	fresh
and	young,	and	always	learning,	learning.
All	 the	 great	 things	 that	 have	 ever	 happened	 in	 the	 world,	 have	 happened
through	 vagabonds	 who	 have	 been	 changing.	 A	 mathematician	 suddenly
becomes	a	poet	--	now	he	is	a	fool	as	far	as	poetry	is	concerned,	but	suddenly	he
becomes	 a	 poet.	 He	 is	 foolhardy	 and	 people	 will	 laugh,	 but	 he	 will	 bring
something	 to	 poetry	 if	 he	 goes	 into	 it	 because	 all	 his	 knowledge	 will	 remain
there	somewhere	in	the	unconscious.	His	poetry	will	have	arithmetic	in	it.	Even
if	it	will	not	be	so	plain	on	the	surface,	it	will	have	a	different	rhythm,	a	different
quality.	If	a	poet	becomes	a	mathematician,	he	will	bring	his	poetry	to	it.	So	it	is
very	good.
This	is	cross-breeding.	And	the	child	that	comes	out	of	cross-breeding	is	always
better	 --	 better	 than	 both	 the	 parents.	 I	 am	 all	 for	 cross-breeding.	 The	 whole
world	should	be	mixing	in	every	way	possible.	A	scientist,	suddenly	at	 the	age
when	he	has	become	famous	and	is	settling,	should	change	immediately	because
now	he	 is	dying.	The	moment	he	has	got	a	nobel	prize	he	should	 immediately
change	from	it,	should	start	painting.	Now	it	is	finished,	now	there	is	no	more	to
it.
It	is	said	about	an	american	president,	Coolidge,	that	when	he	was	asked,	'Why
are	you	not	standing	next	time?'	he	said,	 'There	is	no	more	progress	there	now.
What	 is	 the	 point	 of	 becoming	 a	 president	 again?	 I	 have	 been	 a	 president	 --
finished!	Now	I	would	like	to	become	somebody	else	--	even	a	farmer	is	better,
because	it	is	something	new.	What	is	the	point	of	becoming	the	president	again?'
His	party	bosses	could	not	believe,	because	he	is	a	fool!	Everybody	was	ready	to
give	 him	 another	 chance	 and	 he	was	 not	 ready.	They	 tried	 to	 persuade	 but	 he
wouldn't	listen.	He	would	say,	'What	is	the	point?	I	have	been	a	president	and	I
have	known	it.	Now	the	White	House	is	not	for	me.	There	is	no	goal.
The	end	of	the	ladder	has	come.'
I	believe	 this	man	is	a	beautiful	man.	He	 is	not	a	politician	and	he	 is	not	dead
either,	 he	 is	 very	 alive.	 He	 went	 to	 the	 farm,	 he	 started	 gardening.	 That's
beautiful.	That's	something	that	shows	mettle.
So	I	am	happy	you	changed...	but	problems	will	be	there,	you	will	be	in	trouble
for	 a	 few	 months.	 And	 the	 more	 you	 dissipate	 your	 energy	 in	 fighting	 and
drinking	and	this	and	that,	the	longer	will	be	the	period.
So	 put	 your	 whole	 energy	 to	 the	 work.	 Now	 it	 is	 a	 gamble.	 Put	 your	 whole
energy	into	it,	and	within	six	months	you	will	be	flowing	in	your	new	work	as
you	were	in	your	old	work.	And	once	you	are	flowing,	you	will	bring	something
new	to	it	that	only	you	can	bring	because	of	your	old	experience.
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	Every	Choice	is	a	Limitation
19	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611195
ShortTitle:	WHIP11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[A	 sannyasin	 asks:	 Is	 there	 anything	 you	 could	 say	 about	 what	 sort	 of	 path	 I
should	follow?	I	feel	unsure	of	what	direction	I	should	be	going	in.]
Whenever	 you're	 unsure,	 it	 is	 better	 not	 to	 choose	 but	 rather	 float	 and	 let	 life
decide	 itself,	 because	 whatsoever	 you	 choose	 will	 be	 against	 your	 natural
unsureness.	It	will	be	 trying	to	make	sure	something	which	is	not.	Never	 jump
ahead.	Go	with	life.	If	at	this	moment	your	consciousness	is	unsure,	then	that's
what	 has	 to	 be	 --	 remain	 unsure.	 Nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 being	 unsure.	 It	 is	 a
freedom.
When	 you	 are	 unsure....	 To	 use	 the	 word	 unsure	 makes	 it	 look	 a	 little
problematic;	rather,	use	 the	word	freedom.	When	you	are	unsure	you	are	freer,
more	liquid,	not	solid.	More	is	possible	when	you	are	unsure.
When	 you	 are	 sure,	 you	 have	 chosen	 --	 and	 every	 choice	 is	 a	 limitation.
Whenever	 you	 choose,	 you	 choose	 against	 something.	Whenever	 you	 choose,
you	drop	something.	So	every	choice	is	a	limitation.
If	you	choose	 the	path	of	awareness,	you	drop	 love.	 If	you	choose	 the	path	of
love,	you	drop	awareness.
If	 you	 choose	 to	 be	 a	 Christian,	 you	 cannot	 be	 a	 Hindu	 and	 cannot	 be	 a
Mohammedan.	Whatsoever	you	choose,	in	that	very	moment	your	consciousness
is	narrowed	down.	You	become	 like	a	 tunnel:	only	a	very	small	portion	of	 the
sky	is	available	at	the	far	end	but	the	whole	sky	is	lost.	When	you	are	unsure	the
whole	sky	is	available.
So	don't	 take	unsureness	as	a	problem,	rather	 take	 it	as	a	 flowing,	 liquid,	 fluid
state	of	being.	And	there	is	no	need	to	be	sure.	If	the	sureness	comes	by	itself,
good	--	then	it	is	not	your	choice	and	it	will	not	be	a	limitation.
This	 distinction	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 deeply:	 when	 you	 choose,	 it	 becomes	 a
limitation.	When	life	itself	brings	you	to	a	certain	thing,	it	is	not	a	limitation	on
you	--	not	at	all.	You	can	move	through	a	tunnel	--	you	have	not	chosen	it,	it	is
only	 temporary	 --	 and	 you	 know	 the	 whole	 sky	 is	 available	 once	 you	 have
passed.
That	small	portion	of	the	sky	that	you	can	see	far	away	you	know	belongs	to	the
total	sky	--	it	is	not	the	whole	sky	because	you	have	not	chosen.
So	 if	 love	 happens	 by	 itself,	 awareness	 remains	 part	 of	 love.	 If	 awareness
happens	by	itself,	love	remains	part	of	it.	If	you	choose,	there	is	limitation.	So	let
God	choose.	That	is	the	meaning	of	Jesus'	saying,
'Thy	kingdom	come,	Thy	will	be	done.'	He's	saying	that	he	is	not	choosing	now	-
-	God	should	choose	--
because	whatsoever	he	chooses	 is	bound	to	be	wrong.	It	cannot	be	right	 in	 the
very	 nature	 of	 things.	 Your	 choice	 will	 be	 your	 choice	 --	 hence	 wrong!	 Your
choice	will	be	the	choice	of	the	mind	--	hence	wrong!
Your	 choice	will	 be	 the	 choice	 from	 the	 past	 --	 hence	wrong!	God's	 choice	 is
from	the	future,	not	from	the	past.
When	 you	 start	 feeling	 a	 certain	 sureness	 arising	 --	 good,	 enjoy	 that	 too.	 If	 it
again	melts	and	 things	become	unsure,	enjoy	 that	 too.	Move	with	 life,	with	no
prejudice,	with	no	 idea	of	your	own.	Give	 total	 freedom	 to	 life	 then	 life	gives
total	 freedom	 to	 you	 --	 it	 is	 always	 in	 proportion.	 If	 you	 hanker	 for	 security,
certainty,	 sureness,	 it	 is	coming	out	of	 fear.	And	 fear	kills	 freedom!	Why	does
the	mind	hanker	so	much	 to	be	sure?	 --	because	with	sureness,	certainty,	 there
seems	to	be	security.	One	knows	where	one	is	--	but	does	one	really	know?	And
what	is	the	need	to	know?	How	can	one	ever	know?
The	moment	 you	 say,	 'I	 am	 this,'	 you	 are	 no	more	 this	 --	 it	 is	 already	passed.
Each	identity	that	you	think	has	arisen	is	already	gone,	it	is	already	dead	--	you
have	moved	from	that.	The	moment	you	say,	 'I	 love,'	 it	has	changed.	Now	it	 is
not	the	same	state	and	not	the	same	space.	You	may	be	just	declaring	something
which	does	not	exist	any	more.	It	may	be	just	a	declaration	of	something	dead	--
a	post-mortem	declaration,	a	posthumous	declaration.
The	moment	you	make	anything	 sure,	 you	have	moved	 from	 it	 because	 life	 is
movement,	 a	 continuous	 flux,	 river-like;	 it	 knows	 no	 limitation.	 So	 one	 can
never	be	really	certain.	And	to	live	with	this	uncertainty	is	really	to	live.	To	live
at	all	 is	 to	 live	with	uncertainty,	with	openness	--	vague,	nebulous;	 in	a	certain
way,	in	chaos.	And	it	is	beautiful	to	be	in	a	chaos.
Order	 is	 always	 ugly	 because	 order	 is	 always	 petty.	And	order	 is	 always	 ugly
because	order	is	man-made,	home-made.	God	is	a	chaos:	stars	disappearing,	new
stars	being	born...	old	people	disappearing,	new	babies	being	born.	It	is	a	chaos!
It	 is	very	un-economical.	For	seventy,	eighty	years,	a	person	has	 learned,	been
educated,	experienced	life	and	then	suddenly	God	dismantles	him	and	brings	a
baby	 --	 again	 unsure	 what	 he	 is	 going	 to	 be:	 a	 doctor,	 an	 engineer,	 or	 a
vagabond;	 will	 be	 able	 to	 earn	 his	 bread	 or	 will	 become	 a	 thief;	 will	 be	 a
murderer	or	a	saint	--	nobody	knows.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	 the	 person	who	was	 getting	 settled,	whom	 everybody	 knew,	who	 had	 an
identity	 card,	 is	 taken	 away.	 And	 God	 goes	 on	 sending	 chaotic	 babies	 --
screaming	and	crying	and	knowing	nothing!	They	take	the	place	of	people	who
knew	so	many	things	--	were	wise,	learned,	respected.	He	goes	on	toppling	them,
and	brings	babies	and	puts	them	on	the	throne	--	very	chaotic,	uneconomical.
But	that's	how	things	are:	big	trees	disappear	and	seeds	sprout.	The	whole	of	life
is	a	tremendous	chaos
--	and	it	is	good	that	it	is	so.	If	there	were	order	there	would	have	been	ancient,
old	people,	and	no	babies.
Everything	would	have	been	dead	 long	 ago.	Nothing	new	would	happen	 then,
because	the	new	can	happen	only	out	of	chaos.	Everything	would	have	been	so
perfect,	 so	efficient,	 so	mechanical,	 that	 life	would	not	have	had	any	meaning.
Life	 is	 significant	 because	 there	 is	 chaos.	 The	 new	 is	 possible	 --	 that	 is	 the
meaning	of	chaos.	The	old	is	not	necessarily	going	to	be	repeated	--	that	is	the
meaning	of	being	unsure.
So	my	whole	teaching	is	to	learn	how	to	be	happy	with	unsureness,	and	how	to
go	on	moving	with	an	open	mind	and	open	being	and	let	things	come,	let	things
happen.	Never	allow	anything	to	become	stagnant.
If	you	can	remember	this	much	--	that	you	should	not	become	a	stagnant	pool	--
you	are	bound	to	reach	to	the	ocean;	nothing	can	prevent	you.	And	to	reach	to
the	ocean	is	to	reach	to	God.	A	river	is	more	orderly	than	the	ocean.	A	canal	is
even	more	orderly	than	a	river.	The	canal	is	man-made.	The	river	is	more	orderly
because	 it	 is	 limited	 by	 both	 the	 sides,	 by	 the	 banks.	 The	 ocean	 is	 absolutely
chaotic.	And	to	be	oceanic	is	the	goal.
So	live	in	freedom,	live	in	unsureness,	live	in	uncertainty,	and	never	hanker	for
anything	against	this	river-like	quality.	Millions	of	things	will	happen	to	you	and
nothing	 will	 ever	 hold	 you.	 You	 will	 pass	 through	 many	 things	 but	 you	 will
always	pass	beyond.	Things	come	and	go	--	the	movement	remains.	And	when
you	are	simply	starting	to	love	the	movement	and	delighting	in	it	with	no	goal	at
all,	with	no	motivation	--	when	the	movement	 is	 there	and	motivation	is	not	--
that's	what	I	call	celebration,	joy.	Then	nobody	can	make	you	miserable.	Even	if
you	are	thrown	in	hell	you	will	be	dancing	there,	you	will	be	able	to	enjoy	hell	--
it	is	a	beautiful	grace.
Otherwise	your	 so-called	 saints	 --	 certain,	 sure,	dogmatic	 --	 even	 if	 they	go	 to
heaven....	 I	 suspect	 that	 they	 don't	 go	 because	 God	 won't	 allow	 such	 boring,
monotonous	 company	 --	 but	 if	 they	 ever	 go,	 by	 hook	 or	 by	 crook	 or	 in	 some
way...	they	will	be	in	hell	there	too.	They	cannot	laugh.
A	rock	is	certain,	a	flower	is	not	so.	If	you	go	in	the	morning	the	rock	is	there,
the	flower	is	there.	If	you	go	in	the	evening	the	rock	is	still	there	--	the	flower	is
gone.	But	still,	would	you	like	to	be	a	rock	because	a	rock	is	very	certain	?	One
should	like	to	be	a	flower	--	even	if	only	for	a	moment,	but	it	is	worth	it.	To	be	a
rock	for	millions	of	years	and	just	to	be	a	flower	for	a	single	hour,	then	too	it	is
worth	it	to	be	a	flower	--	to	play	with	the	wind,	to	take	the	challenge	of	the	sun,
to	spread	fragrance,	to	live	intensely,	passionately,	and	then	wither	away	and	be
gone	with	no	regret....
[A	visitor	asks:	 I	 lost	 a	 finger	while	dancing,	 and	 since	 then	 I	began	yoga	 --	 I
changed	 from	 dance	 to	 Yoga,	 and	 I've	 had	 chronic	 infections	 and	 very	 bad
health.]
Sometimes	 it	can	happen	through	Yoga	because	anything	 that	can	be	good	can
also	be	bad	--	it	depends.
Always	remember	it	as	a	basic	rule:	anything	that	can	be	good	can	also	be	bad.
And	 if	 there	 is	 something	which	 can	 never	 be	 bad,	 then	 it	 can	 never	 be	 good
either.	 So	 it	 depends	 on	 the	 person,	 the	 situation,	 his	 bodily	 structure,	 in	 fact
there	are	many	problems.
In	 the	 first	 place,	 Yoga	 has	 never	 been	 invented	 for	 women.	 So	 that	 is	 a
foolishness	really	to	teach	Yoga	to	women.	It	was	invented	by	man	and	for	man.
So	 the	 whole	 idea	 is	 for	 the	 man's	 physiology,	 not	 the	 woman's	 --	 and	 their
physiology	is	different,	totally	different,	their	chemistry	is	different.	So	the	same
posture	may	be	good	for	man	and	may	not	be	good	for	woman.	And	I	have	seen
this	happening	many	times.
Women	become	very	fragile	--	they	are	fragile!	Yoga	puts	such	pressure	on	their
glands,	 their	 hormonal	 system,	 their	 chemistry.	And	 it	 is	 so	 different	 --	 it	was
basically	meant	for	man	so	woman	has	never	been	considered.	It	can	make	them
ill	and	sometimes	many	other	things	also	happen.
If	a	woman	persists	for	many	days,	maybe	illness	will	disappear,	but	then	male
traits	will	 start	 appearing	 in	 her,	 a	moustache	will	 start	 growing.	 If	 you	 go	 to
Shree	 Aurobindo's	 ashram	 and	 see	 the	 girls	 you	 will	 be	 surprised:	 out	 of	 all
proportion	 they	 all	 are	 growing	moustaches	 --	 too	many	yoga	 exercises.	Their
breasts	will	 start	 becoming	 smaller	 and	 it	will	 be	 difficult	 for	 them	 to	 carry	 a
pregnancy	--	their	womb	becomes	smaller	and	will	become	very	tense.	It	needs
to	be	very	relaxed,	really	very	elastic	so	the	child	can	grow	in	it.	The	womb	has
to	be	very	elastic	so	it	goes	on	expanding	with	the	child.	If	it	becomes	very	tight
the	 child	will	 be	killed	or	will	 not	 be	 really	grown,	will	 be	 retarded,	 and	 then
childbirth	will	be	very	very	painful.	So	I	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	watched	a	thousand	and	one	problems.
In	the	East	women	really	have	never	tried	so	there	was	no	problem.	Now	in	the
West	whatsoever	 is	 available	 to	men,	women	 are	 also	 trying.	 In	 fact	 they	 are
trying	more	than	men.	In	the	East	you	will	not	find	many	women	trying	Yoga	--
rarely,	very	 rarely.	 I	have	not	come	across	any	woman	practising	Yoga.	But	 in
the	West	now	the	old	structure	is	gone,	the	social	differences	are	gone.	Woman	is
as	free	and	everything	is	as	available	to	woman	as	man	--	now	there	are	dangers.
A	totally	new	technology	of	Yoga	has	to	be	developed	for	woman	--	and	that	can
be	 done	 only	 by	 women.	 This	 traditional	 Hatha	 Yoga	 won't	 do.	 It	 is	 really
dangerous!	So	my	first	suggestion	is	drop	it,	completely	stop	it.
...	Move	 to	 dancing.	Dancing	 is	 perfectly	 suited	 to	 a	woman's	 physiology	 and
chemistry,	 dancing	 is	 meant	 for	 her.	 If	 a	 man	 dances	 he	 starts	 becoming
feminine.	Dance	is	the	Yoga	for	women.	It	fits	with	their	body,	their	curvature,
their	 grace	 --	 it	 fits	 with	 them	 perfectly	 well.	 So	 move	 to	 dancing.	 Join	 the
dancing	group,	 the	music	group	 --	 simply	dance.	Dance	will	bring	your	health
back.	And	forget	Yoga	forever	--	it	is	not	for	you.	The	disease	is	simply	created
by	your	change,	so	there	is	no	problem	about	it.	Once	you	shift	your	energy	into
dance,	within	six	months	you	will	be	perfectly	well.	This	illness	will	disappear.
So	 while	 you	 are	 here,	 dance,	 sing,	 and	 do	 a	 few	 groups	 they	 will	 be	 very
helpful.	T'ai	Chi	you	can	continue	 --	back	home	also.	T'ai	Chi	 is	very	good....
Anything	 graceful,	 not	 drastic.	 Dancing,	 T'ai	 Chi	 are	 good	 but	 not	 Aikido	 or
Karate	--	no.	Something	in	which	you	can	flow	naturally	and	there	is	no	need	to
force	your	body.	These	yoga	contortions	are	not	good,	mm?	Good.
[A	sannyasin	asks:	I	always	feel	that	I	keep	working	and	trying	to	make	things
happen	 in	 my	 life,	 with	 my	 job,	 with	 my	 relationships	 with	 people...	 I	 don't
believe	that	if	I	let	go	of	those	things	that	everything	will	be	okay.	I	don't	have
that	feeling,	that	trust....	]
Mm	mm.	 I	 can	 see....	 The	 first	 thing:	 whatsoever	 comes	 naturally	 to	 you,	 is
good.	If	this	comes	naturally	to	you	--	striving,	holding,	making	everything	sure
that	 it	 happens	 the	 way	 you	 wanted	 it	 to	 happen,	 managing,	 planning,	 if	 this
comes	 naturally	 to	 you	 --	 surrender	 to	 your	 nature.	Why	 create	 this	 contrary
opposite	that	you	have	to	let	go?	This	will	be	let-go	--	what	I	am	saying.	Simply
accept	that	this	is	your	nature.	This	is	the	way	that	[you	are]	--	that	[you]	cannot
trust	that	things	will	be	okay	if	they	are	left	to	themselves.
You	--	not	the	striving	--	are	creating	the	problem.	You	are	creating	the	problem
having	an	ideal	against	striving.	On	the	one	hand	you	strive,	on	the	other	hand
you	 have	 an	 ideal	 of	 non-striving,	 so	 you	 create	 a	 polarity.	 Then	 you	will	 be
pulled	apart.	Now	if	you	don't	strive	your	nature	will	say	nothing	is	going	to	be
okay.	If	you	strive	your	mind	will	say,	 'Again	you	are	striving	and	life	happens
only	when	one	is	in	a	let-go.'
So	you	are	creating	your	own	trouble.
My	suggestion	is:	first,	there	is	no	need	to	create	this	new	ideal,	there	is	no	need
--	 relax	 in	 your	 nature.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 that	 this	 is	 your	 nature.	 I	 am	 simply
saying	that	whatsoever	happens	to	be	your	nature	right	now	--	that	you	strive	and
you	 like	 to	 strive	 and	 make	 certain	 and	 plan	 --	 simply	 relax	 into	 it,	 and	 do
whatsoever	you	want	 to	do	 totally.	Strive	 totally!	You	cannot	 trust?	Then	don't
trust!	Work	hard	on	your	own.	For	one	month,	drop	the	ideal	and	simply	go	with
your	nature.	And	in	one	month	there	will	be	much	change.
By	 and	 by	 you	 will	 see	 that	 the	 striving	 is	 disappearing	 and	 the	 let-go	 is
happening...	because	it	is	a	beginning	of	let-go!	You	follow	me?	If	you	surrender
to	your	nature	--	whatsoever	it	is,	XYZ	--	you	have	started	surrendering.	If	it	is
your	nature,	you	will	be	happy.	If	it	is	not,	by	and	by	it	will	disappear	and	your
real	nature	will	come	out.
And	I	don't	think	it	is	your	nature.	That's	why	the	idea	arises	again	and	again	to
be	 in	a	 let-go,	 to	surrender,	 trust,	and	 to	 let	 things	happen	in	 their	own	course,
not	to	strive,	not	to	push	the	river.	That	comes	to	your	mind	because	deep	down
that	 is	hidden	 --	your	nature	 is	 that.	But	 if	 you	 start	 striving	 for	 that,	 that	will
again	be	a	striving	--	you	follow	me?	So	I	don't	want	you	to	strive	for	that.	At
least	strive	for	things	you	have	been	striving	for	in	the	past.	Don't	create	a	new
goal	--	old	goals	are	enough.	You	just	go	with	it	and	forget	about	let-go.
For	one	month	do	hard	work,	and	after	one	month	tell	me	how	you	feel.	By	and
by	 you	will	 see	 that	 after	 the	 third	week	 a	 deep	 silence	 is	 arising.	A	 let-go	 is
happening	without	your	doing	anything	about	it.
What	I	am	telling	you	is	a	method	of	 let-go,	but	a	very	unconscious	method	--
not	deliberate.	A	deliberate	method	will	never	help	you.	You	would	like	to	have
some	deliberate	method	so	you	can	strive	for	it	but	I	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
am	not	going	to	be	a	party	in	that	game,	mm?	--	that	will	be	your	undoing.	So
this	is	always	my	approach	--
that	 if	 somebody	 likes	 running	I	 say	 'Run,	 run	as	much	as	you	can	so	you	fall
down!'	I	will	go	on	pushing	you,	 'Run	more!	Run	more!'	and	one	day	you	will
see	 that	 you	 cannot	 run	 any	more	 and	 you	 sit	 down.	Then	 that	 sitting	will	 be
something	beautiful.	Right	now	your	whole	energy	is	running	--	and	you	want	to
sit	down.	Then	 it	becomes	an	opposite	goal,	 it	creates	a	split	 --	and	 it	 is	never
good	to	create	any	split.
All	 splits	 are	 dangerous,	 they	 can	 lead	 to	 schizophrenia;	 they	 can	 create	 two
personalities	in	you.	So	in	the	morning	you	are	striving,	by	the	evening	you	are
surrendering;	 in	 the	morning	 you	 are	 striving.	 Then	 you	 become	 two	 separate
things	--	this	is	very	bad.	Then	it	becomes	very	difficult	to	integrate	them.	So	be
one.	Strive...	strive	hard.	Push	the	river.
I	know	that	one	day	you	will	be	tired	and	the	river	will	push	you,	but	then	you
will	not	be	able	to	do	anything.	You	will	be	so	tired,	so	dead	tired	that	there	will
be	no	energy	to	fight	with	the	river.	You	will	have	to	float...	and	then	a	sudden
experience	of	how	beautiful	 it	 is	 to	float	with	 the	river.	When	it	becomes	your
own	 experience,	 existential,	 mm?...	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 Then	 you	will	 never
strive	again.
So	for	one	month	do	everything	as	deliberately	as	possible.	For	one	month	don't
forgive	yourself	for	anything	that	you	are	not	doing	forcibly.	Do	forcibly,	no	rest
for	 you	 for	 one	 month.	 Get	 dead	 tired,	 exhausted,	 then	 one	 crust	 will	 be
broken....
You	will	need	to	come	and	for	a	little	longer	time	because	there	is	much	work	to
be	done.	And	alone	it	will	be	difficult	for	you	to	do	it	there.	Once	your	energy
has	started	moving	in	the	right	direction	there	is	no	problem	--	then	you	can	go
anywhere	and	it	will	be	growing.	But	right	now	it	will	be	difficult	on	your	own.
But	we	will	see,	mm?
Just	join	the	music	group	then	you	will	be	doing	[a	group],	then	see.	And	make
every	effort	--	at	least	in	the	music	group	meditations	and	[group].	Put	your	total
energy	 in	 it.	 If	 you	 can	 put	 total	 energy	 into	 it,	 maybe	 the	 breakthrough	 can
happen	here.	Because	 the	 time	is	short	so	you	have	 to	make	more	effort,	more
intensely.	Something	is	bound	to	happen,	mm?	Don't	be	worried!
[A	 therapist	 in	 the	Alexander	 technique	 says:	 I	 find	myself	 really	 getting	 into
meditation	through	the	work...	and	then	when	I	walk	out	 the	head	gets	back	in
the	way.	If	there's	anything	you	can	suggest....	]
Just	continue.	Things	are	going	very	well,	mm?	And...	you	have	changed	a	lot.
You	 really	 love	 your	work	 and	 so	work	 changes	 the	whole	 personality.	 If	 you
love	 your	 work	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any	 other	 meditation.	 Meditation	 really
exists	for	people	who	have	not	been	able	to	find	a	work	that	they	could	love.
Meditation	 is	 a	 substitute.	 If	 you	 can	 love	 your	work	 it	 is	 your	meditation,	 a
natural	meditation	--	there	is	no	need	to	do	any	other	meditation.
And	don't	be	worried	about	these	thoughts,	don't	pay	too	much	attention	to	them.
They	are	okay,	nothing	wrong	in	them.	Just	as	the	blood	circulates	in	the	body,
so	 thoughts	 circulate	 in	 the	 mind.	 You	 are	 not	 worried	 about	 the	 blood
circulating	 so	why	should	we	be	worried	about	 thoughts	circulating?	 It's	okay.
The	mechanism	of	 the	mind	has	 to	 keep	 functioning	 and	 rehearsing	 to	 remain
efficient.	It	is	homework.	When	you	are	thinking	something,	it	is	homework,	so
that	when	there	is	some	situation	you	can	be	ready	for	it.
When	awareness	becomes	perfect	 then	this	work	is	not	needed,	 this	homework
stops	automatically,	because	then	your	awareness	is	so	perfect	you	can	be	certain
that	you	can	rely	upon	it.	Whenever	there	is	a	situation	there	will	be	a	response,
and	 the	 response	 is	 going	 to	 be	 so	 true	 and	 so	 total	 that	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
prepare	for	it.
My	understanding	about	thinking	is	that	it	is	a	rehearsal,	mm?	You	are	going	to
give	an	 interview	so	you	 rehearse	 in	 the	mind	what	 the	official	will	 ask,	what
you	will	say,	how	you	will	go,	how	you	will	present	yourself,	how	you	will	enter
into	the	office;	you	have	to	be	calm	and	quiet	--	you	are	rehearsing.	Many	times
you	will	go	into	the	office	in	your	mind	and	many	times	you	will	face	the	person
who	is	going	to	interview	you.	Many	times	you	will	ask	many	questions	and	you
will	answer.	This	is	a	rehearsal	because	you	cannot	rely	yet	on	your	awareness.
Your	awareness	 is	not	yet	 reliable	so	you	want	 to	make	sure	 that	nothing	goes
amiss.	When	awareness	is	perfect	nothing	goes	amiss,	so	what	is	the	point?
By	 and	 by	 this	 rehearsing	 stops.	One	 simply	 goes	 to	 the	 interview....	 But	 that
comes.
So	it	is	not	a	question	of	how	to	stop	thinking.	The	more	basic	question	is	how	to
become	more	and	more	aware.	So	while	working,	enjoy	it,	and	become	more	and
more	 aware.	 When	 thoughts	 are	 passing,	 then	 too	 just	 remain	 aware	 that
thoughts	are	passing.	There	is	no	need	to	make	any	effort	to	stop	them	--	let	them
be	there.	When	their	need	disappears,	they	will	disappear.	And	in	life	you	cannot
make	 anything	 disappear	 unless	 its	 need	 disappears.	 So	 many	 people
unnecessarily	get	into	trouble.	They	want	to	make	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
something	disappear	for	which	need	still	exists	--	it	cannot	go,	it	is	not	possible.
Howsoever	you	fight	with	it,	it	will	not	go	--	it	will	go	only	when	the	need	has
gone.
Then	even	if	you	want	it	to	be	there,	it	cannot.	The	need	functions	like	the	roots,
and	these	thoughts	are	just	leaves	on	the	tree.	You	can	go	on	cutting;	that	is	not
going	to	help	--	the	roots	are	continuously	feeding	the	tree	and	the	sap	is	flowing
and	new	leaves	will	be	coming.	And	if	you	cut,	one	 tree	will	come	out	of	 that
same	place	and	the	bush	will	become	even	thicker	and	denser.	No	need	to	fight
with	 these	 leaves	 --	 let	 them	be,	 let	 them	 flutter	 in	 the	wind	 --	 good!	Nothing
wrong	in	it.
A	 little	 noise	 of	 the	mechanism...	 and	 it	 is	 a	 big	mechanism!	 It	 is	 the	 biggest
thing	in	the	world.	Millions	of	millions	of	cells,	and	as	many	combinations	are
possible	in	one	head	as	there	are	atoms	in	the	whole	existence;	the	same	number
of	combinations	is	possible	in	the	head.	It	is	a	big	phenomenon,	and	if	it	makes	a
little	noise	it	can	be	forgiven.
Man	has	not	yet	created	anything	more	silent	than	the	mind,	and	the	work	is	so
tremendous	 --	 even	 the	biggest	 computer	 is	nothing	compared	 to	mind.	And	 it
never	can	be	anything	compared	to	the	mind	because	it	is	created	by	the	mind,
and	 no	 computer	 can	 create	 a	 human	 mind.	 Unless	 a	 computer	 can	 create	 a
human	mind	 --	 and	 that	 is	 not	 possible	 --	 it	will	 never	 be	 equal	 to	 the	 human
mind.
So	a	 little	noise....	You	are	walking	and	your	body	 is	engaged	and	 the	mind	 is
free	 --	 it	 clicks,	mm?	 It	 links	 a	 few	 things	 that	have	been	hanging	 there...	 and
before	there	was	no	time	and	you	were	engaged	so	much	in	work.	Now	there	is
no	work	and	you	are	released	from	it,	and	the	mind	was	waiting	whenever	there
was	 space	 to	 work	 out	 a	 few	 things	 in	 the	mind...	 it	 goes	 on.	When	 you	 fall
asleep	 the	 mind	 is	 completely	 freed,	 it	 can	 go	 dreaming,	 fantasizing.	 Many
things	 are	 waiting	 on	 the	 list	 and	 it	 has	 to	 go	 into	 them	 and	 prepare.	 It	 is
continuously	preparing	for	you.
It	disappears	--	and	I	say	disappears	through	my	own	experience;	whatsoever	I
say	is	through	my	own	experience.	It	disappears,	but	it	disappears	only	when	one
day	 your	 awareness	 is	 so	 impeccable	 that	 now	 you	 don't	 require	 it.	 Then	 the
mind	says,	 'Now	there	 is	no	need	for	any	homework.'	Then	you	can	simply	go
into	any	situation	and	face	it!	And	a	perfect	response	comes	--	or	whatsoever	is	a
response	is	total	and	perfect	and	you	never	repent	for	it.	Whatsoever	happens	--
good!	You	move	 ahead.	You	 never	 repent	 for	 the	 past,	 for	 the	 gone,	 and	 you
never	prepare	for	that	which	is	coming	--	you	simply	move.
It	will	 come.	 Things	 are	 going	well.	 Just	 go	 on	meditating	more	 and	more	 in
your	work.
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	We	are	Born	at	the	Goal
20	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611205
ShortTitle:	WHIP12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	visitor,	who	is	a	group	leader	and	author,	says:	I	want	to	know	where	to	go
next....	I	need	to	know	where	to	go	next.]
Mm.	 (a	pause)	Drop	going...(the	visitor	 laughs)	and	 there	 is	no	next.	The	very
idea	of	going	is	basically	wrong.	The	very	idea	to	go	anywhere	is	the	cause	of	all
misery	We	are	at	the	very	point	where	we	want	to	be.	In	fact	we	are	born	at	the
goal	and	all	journey	is	futile.	The	more	you	try	to	reach	to	the	goal,	the	more	you
are	far	away	from	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	as	it	is	you	have	done	enough	--	relax!	The	place	that	we	are	seeking	is	the
place	we	are	standing	upon.	The	space	that	we	are	looking	for	is	the	space	from
which	we	are	looking.
But	the	effort	to	improve,	the	effort	to	grow,	to	go	somewhere,	to	be	somewhere,
has	its	own	relevance
--	it	is	needed.	It	is	needed	only	so	that	one	day	you	can	see	the	whole	absurdity
of	 it.	And	 in	 that	vision	 it	drops	and	suddenly	you	are	at	home.	So	 there	 is	no
next....
But	 the	mind	always	creates	 the	next	 --	beware	of	 the	mind	because	 the	mind
cannot	exist	without	the	next.	The	mind	exists	in	the	future,	it	exists	with	some
plan,	it	exists	for	something	to	do,	something	to	be	--
it	 cannot	 exist	 just	 herenow.	 The	mind	 knows	 no	 present.	 It	 cannot	 know	 the
present.	Either	it	 is	 in	the	past	or	in	the	future.	Either	it	 is	somewhere	where	it
was	or	it	is	somewhere	where	it	would	like	to	be	--	but	it	is	never	where	it	is.
So	this	'next'	is	always	there	in	the	mind,	mm?	It	goes	on	and	on....	And	it	is	such
an	effort	 that	as	you	move	 towards	 it,	 another	next	 is	present	 like	 the	horizon.
Mm?	you	go	slower	and	it	goes	on	receding.	So	as	I	see,	there	is	no	next	now.
...	 Just	be...	 just	be....	And	everything	 is	perfectly	good.	How	long	will	you	be
here?
[Osho	gives	the	visitor	sannyas]
This	will	be	your	name	now,	so	forget	the	old.	It	is	always	very	difficult	to	drop
the	old	name.	It	becomes	part	of	the	unconscious	--	but	that	is	the	significance	of
giving	a	new	name.	As	the	new	by	and	by	enters	 into	the	unconscious,	 the	old
disappears.	 Then	 with	 the	 old	 name	 the	 whole	 past	 simply	 becomes
discontinuous	with	you,	and	a	very	fresh	beginning,	very	empty....
This	will	be	your	new	name:	Swami	Deva	Amit	Prem.
Deva	means	divine,	and	amit	prem	means	eternal	love;	divine	eternal	love.	And
everything	else	dies	only	love	lives.	We	go	on	changing,	but	love	goes	on	living.
We	 are	 almost	 like	 vehicles	 through	 which	 the	 eternal	 love	 goes	 on	 flowing,
takes	many	forms	as	man	and	woman,	as	trees	and	animals.
In	Indian	mythology	we	have	a	very	beautiful	story.	Hindus	avoid	telling	it	even
because	 it	 looks	 a	 little	 dangerous.	And	 at	 least	Christians	will	 not	 be	 able	 to
understand	and	they	will	immediately	misinterpret	it.
The	story	 is	 that	God,	Brahma,	created	 the	world.	Then	He	created	 the	cow	--
Hindus	love	the	cow	very	much	so	He	created	the	cow	--	but	He	fell	in	love	with
her	so	He	became	a	bull	and	He	chased	the	cow.
Mm?	 Just	 to	 escape	 from	 the	 bull,	 the	 cow	goes	 on	 taking	 other	 forms	 --	 she
becomes	 a	 peacock,	 and	 the	 bull	 becomes	 a	male	 peacock,	 and	 this	 is	 how	 it
goes	on	and	on.	She	becomes	a	woman	and	the	bull	becomes	a	man,	and	this	is
how	 it	 goes	 on.	 And	 the	 whole	 creation	 is	 created	 only	 by	 female	 energy
escaping	and	the	male	energy	chasing.
But	the	story	is	tremendously	beautiful.	It	simply	says:	all	are	just	forms	--	only
love	 continues.	Maybe	 it	 is	 a	 cow,	maybe	 it	 is	 a	 tree,	maybe	 it	 is	 a	 peacock,
maybe	it	is	a	man	or	woman	--	these	are	just	forms...
God	chasing	His	own	creation.	God	has	fallen	in	love	with	His	own	creation.
So	everything	comes	and	goes,	only	 love	 remains.	You	will	be	gone,	 I	will	be
gone,	but	the	love	that	we	lived	will	continue.	It	will	enter	into	other	beings,	into
other	forms,	into	other	vehicles,	but	it	continues.
Amit	Prem	means	the	eternal	love	--	and	amit	has	many	other	meanings	also.	It
also	means	immeasurable	--	that	which	cannot	be	measured.	And	in	the	eastern
mind,	the	measurable	is	matter.	In	fact	the	word	matter	comes	from	a	root	which
means	 that	 which	 can	 be	 measured.	 And	 that	 which	 cannot	 be	 measured	 is
immaterial,	 that	which	cannot	be	measured	 is	unlimited,	has	no	 form.	So	from
this	moment,	think	yourself	more	as	formless	love	--	neither	male	nor	female...
not	measurable.	And	that's	what	to	me	is	to	be	in	prayer.
If	 you	 can	 remind	 yourself	 again	 and	 again	 about	 the	 formless,	 the
immeasurable,	 the	eternal,	 in	 those	moments	when	you	 forget	your	 form,	your
limitation	 --	 in	 those	 insights	 the	 infinite	 opens,	 you	 are	 transported,
transfigured.	And	by	and	by	those	insights	settle	and	they	become	almost	part	of
you.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 they	 happen	 and	 go	 --	 they	 are	 simply	 there...	 they	 become
natural.	They	start	following	you	like	your	climate.
So	 I	 know	your	 old	 name	 has	 associations,	 an	 identity.	 It	will	 be	 difficult	 but
then	it	will	be	more	paying	too...	to	drop	it	completely	as	if	the	old	man	has	died.
Bernie	 is	no	more	now,	and	you	enter	 into	a	 fresh	world...	with	no	past;	again
you	are	a	child.	And	this	is	your	birthday.	From	now	onwards	this	will	be	your
birthday	and	count	your	age	from	this	day.	Next	year	you	will	be	one	year	old!
[The	new	sannyasin	says:	It	seems	to	me	that	your	books	are	one	way	of	letting
people	know	what	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	to	say.	But	there	are	going	to	be	some	who	are	not	open.	And	my	function
in	the	past	has	been	to	open	doors.	I	would	like	to	serve	in	that	way.]
You	 will	 have	 to!	 You	 have	 to	 do	 much	 more!	 You	 have	 to	 become	 an
ambassador-at-large	for	me.	You	have	to	open	many	people's	doors,	and	all	the
people	with	whom	you	have	been	in	contact	in	your	past,	you	have	to	bring	them
to	me...	you	have	 to	 share	me	with	 them,	 so	you	do	whatsoever	you	can.	And
much	has	to	be	done,	because	in	the	name	of	spirituality	so	much	hocus-pocus	is
going	on	 in	America,	and	 fools	 from	the	East	are	almost	worshipped	as	sages.
Mm?	just	anybody	who	comes	from	the	East.
Prem	means	love	and	aneeta	means	amoral,	beyond	morality;	love	that	is	beyond
morality.	 And	 because	 of	 too	 much	 emphasis	 on	 character,	 love	 has	 been
sacrificed.	Love	 is	 a	 flowing	energy	and	character	 is	 a	dead	 structure.	Love	 is
neither	moral	nor	immoral	--	it	is	amoral.	Aneeta	means	amoral.	And	that's	what
I	teach:	don't	be	moral	and	don't	be	immoral.	There	are	people	who	are	moral	--
then	they	are	in	a	strait	jacket
--	and	there	are	people	who	are	immoral;	they	move	to	the	opposite	polarity.
When	you	move	opposite	to	a	lie,	you	again	become	a	victim	of	another	lie.	Just
somewhere	in	the	middle	is	the	truth.
So	love	in	itself	is	enough	--	it	needs	no	character.	Character	always	comes	from
the	past	and	love	is	always	of	the	present,	it	is	always	here	now.	If	you	are	a	wife
to	somebody,	that	is	a	past	relation.	If	you	are	a	husband	to	somebody,	it	is	a	past
relationship.	Love	has	to	be	lived	moment	to	moment.	One	never	knows
--	the	life	of	love	is	a	very	insecure	life,	but	tremendously	beautiful.	Dangerous,
adventurous,	 but	 the	 only	 way	 to	 live	 is	 to	 live	 in	 danger,	 and	 to	 live	 in
adventure.
So	never	allow	any	character	to	accumulate	around	you	and	become	an	armour.
Each	moment	the	past	goes	on	growing	and	the	armour	goes	on	becoming	bigger
and	bigger,	more	solid	and	concrete	--	and	 the	soul	 is	crippled,	paralysed	 in	 it.
The	imprisonment	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger	and	the	freedom	is	less
every	day:	 a	 child	 is	more	 free,	 a	 young	man	 less,	 the	old	man	has	 almost	 no
freedom	at	all.
To	remain	absolutely	free	is	what	a	true	and	authentic	life	is.	So	never	gather	any
character	 --	 remain	characterless.	And	 that's	what	 I	mean	when	 I	 say	a	man	 is
religious.	 A	 religious	 man	 is	 characterless,	 unreliable,	 unpredictable	 but	 very
alive,	very	spontaneous,	very	creative.
[The	leader	of	the	Soma	group,	who	had	come	to	darshan	some	nights	ago	about
her	relationship	with	her	assistants	(see	'God	Is	Not	For	Sale',	Sunday,	November
7th),	returned	to	darshan	tonight.	She	had	asked	one	assistant	to	leave	and	said	to
Osho	that	in	doing	so	she	felt	she	had	'missed'.
She	 wondered	 if	 there	 was	 anything	 she	 needed	 to	 do	 or	 if	 she	 needed	 to
change....	]
Your	problem	is	that	deep	inside	you	are	very	soft,	but	on	the	outside	you	have
gathered	a	very	hard	crust	--	and	it	happens	for	certain	reasons.
When	one	is	very	soft	 inside,	 just	 to	protect	oneself	one	creates	a	crust	around
oneself	of	hardness,	of	steel.	And	it	works	in	life	but	it	won't	work	with	me.	In
life	 there	 is	a	struggle;	with	me	 there	 is	surrender.	 In	 life	you	need	 to	be	hard,
otherwise	you	will	 be	nowhere.	There	 is	 a	 constant	 fight	 to	 survive	and	a	 soft
person	will	be	destroyed,	will	be	crushed.
So	 soft	 people	 become	 very	 hard	 --	 harder	 than	 the	 hard	 people.	 They
compensate	 too	much	and	 they	 lose	contact	with	 their	 softness.	Then	 there	are
many	problems.	Deep	down	you	feel	that	you	are	soft,	but	whatsoever	you	do	to
people	is	hard	and	you	don't	understand	it	because	that	hardness	is	only	on	the
outer	periphery.	So	people	come	to	know	it	because	they	are	in	contact	with	the
outer	periphery	of	your	being,	and	you	are	in	contact	with	your	inner	so	inside
you	feel	you	are	very	soft	and	loving.	So	there	is	always	a	problem.
In	 all	 your	 relationships	 that	 problem	 has	 been	 there,	 and	 it	 reflects	 in	 any
relationship.	On	the	outside	you	are	hard,	a	perfectionist,	trying	to	drive	people.
So	people	around	you	start	feeling	that	you	are	crushing	them,	destroying	their
freedom,	 turning	 them	 into	 slaves.	And	you	don't	understand	 it	because	 this	 is
just	your	outer	crust	--	but	you	have	to	look	into	relationships;	relationships	are
mirrors.
And	here	there	is	no	question	of	survival,	there	is	no	fight	going	on,	there	is	no
competition,	nothing.
You	are	not	part	of	a	society	any	more	--	you	are	part	of	a	family,	and	everybody
is	together	here.	So	all	that	you	have	developed	in	your	past	hangs	around	you	--
that	 has	 to	 be	 dropped,	 but	 one	 drops	 it	 only	 when	 there	 is	 some	 problem,
otherwise	one	never	becomes	aware.
I	was	watching	it:	in	every	group	all	the	assistants	by	and	by	leave,	and	nobody
feels	at	ease	with	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
People	feel	you	are	heavy,	too	dominating	--	and	they	are	true.	You	are	also	true
when	 you	 say	 that	 you	 are	 loving	 and	 not	 heavy,	 and	 you	 don't	 try	 to	 crush
anybody's	freedom;	you	simply	want	the	work	to	be	done;	you	care	for	the	work.
So	you	are	also	right,	but	you	have	to	deliberately	drop	this	hard	crust.	It	is	just	a
crust	 so	 it	can	be	dropped	very	easily.	And	 it	has	given	you	enough	pain.	You
cannot	succeed	in	any	love	relationship	either	because	of	this.
And	 there	 is	 a	 vicious	 circle.	When	 you	 feel	 that	 you	 are	 failing	 in	 your	 love
relationship,	 or	 in	 any	 relationship,	 you	 start	 being	more	dominating	 so	 that	 it
should	not	 fail	 --	 and	 it	 is	 failing	be-cause	of	your	domination.	When	you	 see
that	again	the	same	thing	is	happening	and	somebody	is	going	away	from	you,
you	 try	 to	 pull	 him	 too	hard	 --	 and	he	 is	 escaping	because	 you	 are	 too	much.
Simply	drop	this.	And	in	a	group	many	things	have	to	be	learned....
A	groupleader	is	not	only	a	leader	--	a	groupleader	has	to	be	a	father,	has	to	be	a
mother,	a	lover,	a	beloved,	a	child,	a	brother,	a	sister.	A	groupleader	has	to	be	so
many	things	together,	otherwise	a	groupleader	is	not	really	a	groupleader.	If	you.
are	 just	 a	 leader	 you	 know	 the	 technological	 aspect	 of	 it,	 but	 that	 won't	 help
much.	You	have	to	be	many	more	things.	You	have	to	be	all	aspects	of	humanity.
They	all	will	be	needed.	Sometimes	the	group	will	need	you	as	a	mother	--	then
be	a	mother.	And	you	will	have	to	be	very	flexible	so	you	can	fit	into	any	role.
You	 should	 not	 have	 a	 very	 fixed	 attitude	 --	 be	 flowing.	 And	 the	 assistants
particularly	have	to	be	taken	care	of.	Mm?	there	is	a	problem:	when	somebody
assists,	he	feels	humiliated	just	by	the	very	fact	 that	he	 is	an	assistant.	Just	 the
very	idea	that	he	is	simply	an	assistant	is	humiliating.	So	the	leader	has	to	look
after	 this	 --	 that	 the	person	should	not	 feel	humiliated.	A	 respect,	deep	 respect
should	 be	 given	 to	 him,	 and	 then	 you	 can	 take	 as	 much	 work	 from	 your
assistants	as	you	want	and	 they	will	never	 feel	hurt.	They	will	be	happy	 to	do
work.	In	fact	the	more	you	require,	the	more	you	demand,	the	more	they	will	feel
happy	--	but	a	deep	respect	is	needed	so	they	don't	just	feel	as	if	they	are	being
used	as	means.
The	groupleader	has	one	 thing	--	he	 is	 the	 leader,	so	automatically	he	 is	 in	 the
centre;	the	assistant	is	in	the	shadow.	A	good	groupleader	will	help	the	assistant
to	be	more	and	more	in	the	light	so	his	humiliation	is	not	there	and	by	and	by	he
can	drop	 it	 and	 forget	 about	 it.	So	more	and	more	 the	assistant	becomes	a	co-
leader,	not	an	assistant.	A	co-leadership	should	develop	in	our	groups,	otherwise
this	 problem	 is	 bound	 to	 arise	 again	 and	 again.	 And	 it	 will	 happen:	 in	 the
beginning	you	will	find	a	new	person;	he	will	be	happy.
After	 a	 few	 months	 when	 he	 has	 learned	 all	 the	 techniques,	 he	 will	 want	 to
participate	in	the	leadership.
That	desire	is	human	and	natural.	And	if	you	don't	allow,	he	will	start	reacting,
rebelling,	will	start	resisting	you,	will	not	like	to	work	or	will	work	just	anyhow,
doing	it	as	a	duty;	he	will	lose	interest	in	it.	So	you	have	to	remember	this.
You	always	bring	new	people	and	for	a	few	days	you	feel	very	good	with	them
and	 they	 feel	 very	 good	 with	 you.	 After	 two,	 three	 groups	 when	 they	 have
become	 alert	 and	 aware,	 they	 start	 creating	 trouble.	 And	 this	 is	 bad	 because
again	 you	 have	 to	 teach	 new	 people,	 so	 your	 energy	 is	 wasted.	 Those	 who
become	ready	 leave,	and	again	you	bring	new	people,	again	 teach	 them	--	and
you	know	it	is	going	to	happen.	After	two,	three	months	they	will	leave	because
the	same	problem	will	arise	again.	So	my	feeling	is	that	you	have	to	be	a	little
deliberate	 about	 it.	 Your	 crust	 has	 become	 almost	 unconscious,	 you	 are	 not
aware	of	it.
So	 whenever	 you	 feel	 that	 somebody	 is	 feeling	 hurt,	 become	 more	 aware,
become	 more	 loving...	 care	 more.	 A	 little	 care	 goes	 very	 deep	 and	 helps
tremendously.	Give	 the	 idea	 to	 the	 assistants	 that	 they	are	 co-leaders:	 they	co-
operate	with	you,	they	don't	assist	you.	Just	a	change	of	words	sometimes	can	be
of	tremendous	significance.
A	 little	change	 is	needed	 --	nothing	 is	 the	problem.	Your	work	 is	going	well...
everything	is	going	well.
Your	 group	 is	 growing	very	 beautifully,	many	people	 are	 being	benefited,	 and
you	are	growing	--	but	this	is	just	an	old	crust.	Particularly	in	the	West,	and	for
women	more	so,	it	is	happening.	Women	have	a	very	soft	core,	and	now	in	the
West	they	are	fighting	with	men	so	they	are	becoming	as	hard	as	men.	They	are
trying	to	be	as	hard	competitors	as	men	are,	they	are	trying	to	be	aggressive.	In
fact	 they	 don't	 want	 to	 be	 feminine	 any	 more,	 they	 feel	 hurt	 by	 their	 very
softness.	It	is	very	dangerous	--	a	woman	has	to	be	soft	--	and	this	competition
with	 man	 and	 imitation	 of	 man	 is	 very	 destructive.	 It	 is	 suicidal	 --	 but	 it	 is
happening.
You	 have	 been	 moving	 in	 that	 direction	 in	 your	 past...	 and	 this	 is	 some
coincidence	that	many	lib	women	are	coming	to	me.	All	have	the	same	problem,
mm?	They	have	grown	a	hard	 crust,	 and	when	you	become	 too	hard	you	 lose
your	softness,	your	femininity	--	you	lose	love.	And	then	it	becomes	difficult.	So
you	drop	 this,	mm?	 Just	 for	 two,	 three	months	you	have	 to	be	very	 conscious
about	 it.	 And	 if	 you	 have	 dropped	 Chidananda,	 okay,	 nothing	 to	 be	 worried
about.	But	don't	make	the	same	mistake	with	new	people	otherwise	the	same	will
happen	 after	 a	 few	 days.	 So	 try	 new	 people,	 but	 this	 time	 from	 the	 very
beginning	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
remain	alert,	mm?	And	it	will	be	okay.	Nothing	to	be	worried	about.
[A	sannyasin	says:	I	feel	very	much	some	sort	of	power	coming	up,	and	I	feel	I
like	to	dominate	people	and	just	to	nag	them,	talk	to	them	and	I	feel	that	they	get
hurt.	 But	 at	 that	 moment	 I	 still	 enjoy	 it	 --	 that	 they	 get	 hurt	 --	 but	 then	 the
consequence	is	that	I	hurt	myself.
It	is	--	you	are	hurting	yourself.
[The	sannyasin	replies:	I	haven't	got	to	the	roots	of	it	yet.	I	don't	see	it.	It	takes
me	over.]
I	think	you	can	do	[Soma]	group	and	[the	group	leader]	will	dominate	and	show
you.	 Do	 Soma.	 You	 try	 to	 dominate	 her	 and	 she	 will	 try	 to	 dominate	 you
(laughter).
It	comes	to	everybody,	mm?	because	we	have	been	brought	up	in	that	way.	Deep
down	we	 have	 been	 conditioned	 that	 if	 you	 don't	 dominate	 others,	 others	will
dominate	you	--	so	before	others	dominate	you,	it	is	better	to	dominate	them.	We
have	been	brought	up	in	a	climate	where	there	are	only	two	possibilities:	either
you	become	a	master	or	you	become	a	slave.	If	you	don't	become	a	master,	then
woe	 to	you	 --	you	will	be	a	 slave.	And	 it	 is	better	 to	be	a	master	 than	 to	be	a
slave,	 so	 everybody	 tries:	 before	 anybody	 else	 dominates	 you,	 dominate!	 But
whenever	 you	 dominate	 anybody,	 you	 hurt	 him,	 because	 nobody	 wants	 to	 be
dominated.	 And	 when	 you	 hurt	 somebody	 you	 are	 basically	 hurting	 yourself
because	he	is	just	like	you!	We	are	not	separate!	We	are	not	like	islands	--	we	are
connected,	members	of	each	other,	we	are	like	a	continent
--	so	when	I	hurt	you,	I	hurt	myself.
It	is	as	if	you	are	angry	with	your	leg	and	you	throw	a	rock	at	the	leg.	Sometimes
people	do	that!	They	are	angry	at	the	wall	and	they	will	beat	the	wall	and	then
their	hand	hurts.
Trying	 to	 dominate	 somebody	 simply	 shows	 that	 you	 are	 afraid	 of	 being
dominated.	 So	 it	 is	 fear	 --	 and	 this	 is	 no	 way	 to	 go	 beyond	 it.	 If	 you	 try	 to
dominate	others,	others	will	try	to	dominate	you.	Maybe	you	can	hurt	them;	then
somebody	else	will	 come	and	hurt	you.	And	 this	 trying	 to	be	on	 top	 is	 such	a
tension	 that	 you	will	 never	be	 relaxed.	And	 there	 is	 an	 alternative:	 there	 is	 no
need	to	be	either	dominated	or	a	dominator.	There	is	a	third	alternative:	one	can
simply	be	free	of	it	--	neither	dominated	nor	a	dominator.
That's	 what	 I	 call	 a	 sannyasin	 --	 one	 whose	 will	 is	 not	 ready	 to	 dominate
anybody	and	will	not	allow	anybody	to	dominate	him.	He	simply	does	not	speak
that	language	of	aggression,	he's	simply	not	part	of	it	--
he	simply	laughs	at	the	foolishness	of	it.	You	do	Soma,	mm?	Then	we	will	see.	It
will	go....
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	Nothing	Fails	Like	Success
21	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611215
ShortTitle:	WHIP13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
It	is	raining	today	so	I	remember	Indra;	Indra	is	the	indian	mythological	god	of
rains.	In	India	we	have	changed	everything	into	a	god.	The	river	is	a	god,	a	tree
is	a	god;	the	thundering	clouds,	the	rain	--
everything	 is	 divine.	 Indra	 is	 the	 name	 of	 the	 rain,	 the	 clouds,	 the	 lightning.
Anand	means	bliss.	So	the	name	will	mean	blissful	rain	--	and	remember	it.
Whenever	it	is	raining	just	sit	silently,	close	your	eyes,	feel	the	rain	falling...	the
sound	of	it,	the	music	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	it.	Be	soaked	by	its	sound	and	its	music.	And	sometimes	it	is	good	to	go	for
long	walks	when	it	is	raining.
Just	be	soaked	by	it	and	you	will	feel	very	very	cleansed.	You	will	feel	almost
like	a	god,	like	an	Indra.
Because	of	very	foolish	things,	people	are	missing	many	beautiful	things	in	life.
And	I	have	walked	miles	in	rain;	it	was	one	of	my	most	loved	things.	Whenever
it	was	raining	I	would	go	for	a	long	walk.	In	my	university	days	people	used	to
think	that	I	was	mad	because	who	goes	when	it	is	raining?	And	I	would	always
feel	pity	for	these	people.
One	Professor,	a	professor	of	economics,	once	told	me,	'Nobody	says	it	to	you,
but	we	think	you	are	crazy.	When	it	is	raining	you	always	come.	When	it	starts
raining,	 my	 wife	 starts	 waiting	 for	 you.'	 His	 house	 used	 to	 be	 the	 last	 in	 the
university	campus	so	I	used	to	come	to	their	house	and	just	sit	somewhere	under
a	tree	in	front	of	their	house.	So	he	said,	'It	has	become	a	part	of	a	routine	--	you
never	miss.	Are	you	mad?'	 I	 said,	 'One	day	come	with	me.	Then	only	 can	we
compare	notes.	Right	now	you	don't	have	any	experience.'
He	was	almost	 fifty	and	he	said,	 'That's	 true...	 I	have	never	walked	 in	 the	 rain
because	who	will	walk	and	for	what?'
I	said,	'You	just	give	me	one	chance.	Tomorrow	I	will	be	coming	--	you	follow.
For	one	hour	you	be	with	me	in	the	rain	and	then	later	on	you	can	sit	under	a	tree
and	talk	about	it.'	After	one	hour	he	started	crying.	He	touched	my	feet!	He	said,
'I	 am	 sorry	 that	 I	 said	you	 are	mad.	How	much	 I	 have	missed	 in	my	 life!'	He
said,	 'It	was	 the	greatest	experience	 I	have	ever	had	of	such	freshness,	of	such
freedom,	and	so	much	in	tune	with	nature.'
So	whenever	you	can,	just	go	for	a	walk	in	the	rain.	Whenever	you	cannot	--	you
are	feeling	cold	or	something	--	then	just	sit	under	the	roof	and	listen	to	the	rain.
Indians	 are	 right	 --	 everything	 is	 divine.	And	when	 it	 is	 raining	 Indra	 is	 very
much	around.
[A	 sannyasin	 returning	 to	 the	West	 says:	A	 lot	 has	 happened	 to	me	 since	 I've
been	here.	I	feel	scared.	I	feel	like	I'm	escaping.]
No,	 no,	 not	 at	 all.	 A	 lot	 has	 happened	 and	 a	 lot	 has	 to	 happen.	 And	 always
remember	that	I	have	given	you	a	discontent	--	a	discontent	which	can	never	be
totally	 satisfied.	 I	 call	 this	 discontent	 divine.	 It	 is	 a	 thirst	which	 the	more	you
quench,	the	more	it	grows	--	one	can	never	be	satisfied	with	God.	The	more	you
have	it,	the	more	you	hanker	--	it	is	a	non-ending	journey,	you	go	on	and	on	but
you	never	arrive.	And	that's	the	beauty	of	it	--	because	if	you	arrive,	you	will	be
bored.	That's	the	problem	in	the	world	--	people	arrive;	that's	the	problem.
Ordinary	 religious	 preachers	 go	 on	 saying	 that	 in	 the	world	 desires	 cannot	 be
fulfilled.	 My	 own	 understanding	 is	 just	 the	 opposite.	 The	 world	 is	 in	 a
tremendous	 boredom	 because	 desires	 are	 fulfilled.	 If	 you	want	money,	 if	 you
really	want	money	you	will,	have	it,	that	is	the	problem.	The	day	you	have	it	you
will	see;	now	what	to	do?	You	desire	a	woman:	if	you	really	desire	you	will	have
her	 --	 beware!	 Whatsoever	 one	 desires,	 in	 a	 subtle	 way	 one	 starts	 moving
towards	it.	And	one	day	--	maybe	there	is	a	time	gap,	bound	to	be	--	one	arrives.
And	 nothing	 fails	 like	 success	 --	 it	 fails	 absolutely.	 When	 you	 have	 arrived,
suddenly	you	see	it	is	pointless.	One	is	bored,	it	is	so	monotonous.
The	 beauty	 of	 God	 is	 that	 you	 never	 arrive.	 And	 the	 journey	 continues.	 A
thousand	and	one	 things	happen	and	every	day	you	are	on	a	new	altitude,	and
every	 day	 you	 achieve	 something	 --	 but	 you	 never	 arrive.	 Each	 new	 opening
proves	 only	 a	 new	 challenge.	 And	 whenever	 you	 have	 arrived	 on	 one	 peak,
suddenly	you	become	aware	that	there	is	another	--	a	higher	one	waiting	for	you,
challenging	you,	inviting	you.
So	this	going	will	be	helpful	--	nothing	to	be....	You	are	not	escaping.	There	are
people	who	escape,	but	you	are	not	escaping.	In	fact	it	is	time	you	should	go	and
just	be	there.	Mm?	much	has	happened	to	you	--
now	see	whether	you	can	retain	it.
[The	sannyasin	replies:	Yes,	I'm	a	little	worried	about	that.]
Don't	be	worried	--	you	will	be	able	to	retain	it.	Nothing	to	be	worried	about.	But
it	is	a	challenge.	There	will	be	problems,	mm?	It	is	a	different	rhythm	altogether.
You	 live	 amongst	 meditators	 the	 whole	 vibe	 is	 of	 meditation,	 of	 love,	 of
openness,	 of	 relationship,	 no	 struggle,	 no	 competition,	 no	 fights.	Everybody	 is
growing	in	his	own	way,	and	nobody	is	trying	to	compete	with	anybody	else	--
this	 is	a	non-competitive	world.	When	you	go	into	 the	world,	you	move	into	a
competitive	 world	 where	 everybody	 is	 after	 everybody	 else's	 neck...	 where
people	 are	 almost	 neurotically	 rushing	 --	 not	 knowing	 where,	 but	 rushing	 at
speed.	You	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
will	 be	 in	 the	 turmoil	 --	 you	 are	 going	 to	 the	marketplace	 --	 but	 it	 is	 part	 of
meditation	 sometimes	 to	 go	 to	 the	marketplace	 and	 see	what	 happens.	 Just	 be
watchful,	be	alert,	and	whenever	you	feel	that	you	are	getting	infected	by	other
people's	 wrong-moving	 energies,	 slow	 down,	 sit	 down,	 breathe	 slowly,	 again
move	into	your	inner	consciousness,	catch	hold	of	your	peace,	silence,	then	start
moving	again.
Whenever	you	feel	that	somebody	is	affecting	you	too	much,	is	distracting	you
from	 your	 centre,	 then	 remember	 nothing	 is	 more	 valuable.	 Now	 you	 have	 a
precious	stone	and	you	have	 to	protect	 it.	There	are	 thieves	and	 it	can	be	very
easily	stolen.	It	is	very	difficult	to	get	it;	it	is	very	easy	to	lose	it.	That's	why	the
worry	is	there	--	that	too	is	natural	--	but	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried.
[A	sannyasin	 says:	When	my	energy	comes	up	 it	doesn't	have	a	direction.	 I've
been	 trying	 to	watch	 it.	 I	 start	behaving	 like	a	 little	 four-year-old	and	showing
off.	Sometimes	 it	 feels	 there's	 a	 lot	 of	 love	 coming	up	 for	people	 I	 love	 to	be
with,	and	I	don't	know	what	to	do	with	it.]
It	 is	 good	 --	 nothing	 to	 be	 worried	 about	 mm?	 Just	 make	 it	 more	 centred.
Direction	is	not	important	--
centering	 is	 important.	 And	 there	 is	 a	 great	 difference	 between	 direction	 and
centering.	Direction	is	outwards	--	centering	is	inwards.	Directions	can	be	many
--	centering	can	be	only	one.
Ordinarily	we	have	been	taught,	everybody	has	been	taught,	to	put	our	energy	in
a	direction	--	that	means	towards	a	goal.	That	is	not	my	teaching.	That's	what	is
driving	 people	 crazy...	 because	 life	 has	 no	 direction.	 It	 is	 exploding	 in	 all
directions	 simultaneously,	 it	 is	 a	 simultaneous	 explosion	 --	 it	 is	 not	 directed
towards	any	goal	whatsoever.	It	 is	not	 linear,	not	 like	a	 line;	 it	 is	not	a	railway
line.	It	is	exploding	in	all	directions,	in	every	possible	way.	Life	is	like	that.	So
to	put	direction	to	your	life	may	mean	you	will	be	struggling	with	life	--	and	a
man	who	starts	forcing	himself,	channelises,	becomes	out	of	contact	with	life.
So	 somebody	 is	 after	 money	 --	 he	 has	 a	 direction.	 And	 somebody	 is	 after
political	power	--	he	has	a	direction.	But	these	are	the	stupid	people.	All	people
who	have	direction	are	stupid.
Centering	is	needed	--	that	is	totally	different.	When	you	explode,	you	must	have
a	centre	 from	where	 there	will	be	expression	all	over	 the	place.	You	become	a
flower	and	the	petals	open	in	all	directions.	What	will	be	the	case	if	the	petals	--
all	the	petals	--	open	in	one	direction?	The	flower	will	not	be	there.	They	open	in
all	 directions	 and	 the	 fragrance	 released,	 goes	 to	 all	 directions	 --	 it	 has	 no
direction,	 it	 is	not	addressed	at	all.	It	does	not	know	where	it	 is	going,	but	one
thing	is	certain,	it	is	centred.	The	flower	has	a	centre	to	it.
So	become	more	like	a	flower	be	centred.	Whenever	you	feel	this	energy,	don't
be	worried	about	the	direction.	Just	sit	silently	or	stand	silently,	breathe	slowly,
and	 feel	your	 energy	centred	 just	below	 the	navel,	mm?	 two	 inches	below	 the
navel.	And	if	by	and	by	you	can	feel	it	centred	there,	the	energy	will	become	a
circle	around	you	--	going	in	all	the	directions,	all	the	petals	moving	all	over	the
circle	--	but	there	will	be	a	centre	in	you	and	you	will	not	feel	lost.	You	will	feel
tremendously	happy	and	at	ease	and	at	home.
But	people	have	been	taught	about	direction	and	nobody	has	been	taught	about
centering.	No	culture	has	yet	existed	which	teaches	centering,	and	that's	what	is
needed.	Direction	 drives	 people	 crazy	 because	 you	 lose	 contact	with	 life.	 It	 is
unreal	--	direction	is	unreal.	Direction	moves	into	the	future.	And	life	knows	no
straight	line	--	it	knows	only	circles,	life	is	very	circular.	The	seasons	move	in	a
circle,	and	the	stars,	and	the	earth	and	the	moon	and	the	sun	and	life	itself.	Birth,
youth,	old	age,	death,	birth;	it	goes	on	moving	in	a	circle,	it	is	a	cycle.
So	when	you	start	thinking	of	direction	you	go	against	life,	you	make	a	line,	you
become	 linear,	 you	 become	 one-dimensional	 --	 and	 that's	 what	 madness	 is.
Obsession	is	one-dimensional:	an	obsessed	person	is	one	who	can	only	move	on
one	line.	That's	not	natural;	that	is	not	close	to	reality.
So	don't	bother	about	direction	 --	 there	 is	no	need.	Simply	 think	of	one	 thing:
when	you	start	feeling	energy,	just	remain	centred	so	that	you	will	have	a	centre,
a	hub	and	the	wheel...	the	wheel	can	move	on	the	hub,	and	all	its	movements	are
beautiful.	It	is	a	pure	play	of	energy.
Life	has	no	goal.	It	is	just	leela	--	a	pure	play	of	energy.
So	 never	 become	goal-directed	 --	 never	 !	We	 are	 not	 going	 anywhere;	we	 are
simply	here	to	delight,	to	dance,	and	to	enjoy.
This	moment	 is	all	 --	 the	whole	existence	converges	on	 this	moment	 --	we	are
not	going	anywhere.	All	going	is	wrong.	Just	being	here	is	right.
So	next	time	you	feel	energy,	just	centre	it.	And	soon	--	within	two,	three	weeks
--	you	will	be	able	to	feel	the	centre.	Once	you	feel	the	centering,	there	is	great
delight,	a	great	benediction.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	The	Body	has	its	own	Wisdom
22	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611225
ShortTitle:	WHIP14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	sannyasin	returning	from	Germany	says:	I	got	myself	pretty	lost	there.	I	don't
seem	 to	 be	 able	 to	 get	 a	 relationship	 together.	 Can	 you	 give	 me	 any	 kind	 of
advice?]
Mm	(a	pause).	It	is	not	only	a	question	of	relationship.	When	you	are	here	you
are	in	a	certain	atmosphere,	it	is	very	nourishing	to	your	inner	growth.	When	you
go	 away,	 you're	 in	 a	 totally	 different	world,	 uprooted,	 in	 a	 different	 soil,	 in	 a
different	climate.	And	the	whole	atmosphere	there	is	non-meditative.	So	when	a
person	is	growing	he	needs	a	constant	nourishment.	Once	he	has	become	grown-
up	there	is	no	need	for	it.
It	 is	 almost	 like	a	 small	 child	 --	he	constantly	needs	 the	nourishment	 from	 the
mother,	 the	milk	 from	 the	mother,	 the	warmth,	 the	protection,	 the	 caring.	One
day	he	will	become	capable	of	going	away	from	the	mother.	 In	 fact	 the	whole
effort	of	the	mother	is	that	one	day	he	should	be	able	to	be	on	his	own.	So	here	it
is	a	mother-atmosphere.	When	you	go	away	you	have	to	be	on	your	own.	Many
things	 that	 are	 supporting	 you	 disappear,	 and	 many	 things	 appear	 that	 are
destructive	and	it	becomes	a	constant	fight.	Here	you	are	floating.
Many	people	here	are	simply	growing	without	any	effort	on	their	part.	And	that's
my	whole	effort:	to	make	this	community	so	big	that	it	almost	becomes	a	world
in	 itself.	 Then	many	 people	 will	 be	 growing	without	 any	 effort	 of	 their	 own.
They	will	be	simply	riding	on	the	tide,	on	the	wave,	mm?	They	will	be	simply
moving	 with	 the	 total	 energy	 of	 the	 community.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 a
commune.
From	 the	 ancient	 days	 people	 have	 always	 tried	 to	 create	 a	 commune.	 And
whenever	a	commune	was	created	there	was	tremendous	growth.	Humanity	was
forged	into	a	new	world,	in	a	new	altitude.
A	 community	 simply	 means	 people	 who	 are	 moving	 in	 the	 same	 direction,
holding	each	other's	hands.
So	 sometimes	 somebody	 who	 cannot	 run	 on	 his	 own	 also	 starts	 running.
Somebody	who	would	be	 left	alone,	 if	 left	alone	would	feel	 lost,	 feels	 in	 tune.
Where	people	are	dancing,	you	start	dancing	easily.	Where	people	are	laughing,
you	start	laughing	easily.
Once	a	professor	tried	an	experiment.	He	decided	with	one	of	his	students	that
the	 student	 should	 try	 to	 laugh,	mm?	and	 the	professor	 should	observe	him	 in
many	situations.	So	the	student	went	to	the	station,	purchased	a	ticket,	smiled	at
the	 clerk,	 laughed	 and	 was	 very	 happy,	 and	 the	 clerk	 also	 smiled	 and	 started
laughing.	 When	 the	 student	 left,	 while	 the	 professor	 was	 watching	 the	 clerk
another	 passenger	 came,	 and	 the	 clerk	 smiled	 --	 he	 was	 still	 bubbling	 with
energy	 that	 had	 been	 released	 by	 the	 student	 --	 and	 the	 passenger	 started
laughing.
Then	 the	 professor	 followed	 the	 passenger.	 The	 passenger	 went	 into	 the
compartment,	 into	 the	 train,	 talked	 to	 somebody	 and	 started	 laughing,	 and	 he
was	 smiling;	 it	 became	 infectious.	 And	 in	 this	way	 he	 followed	many	 people
from	one	to	another	up	to	the	evening.	And	he	reports	 that	a	single	person	can
have	the	whole	town	laughing.
We	set	things	moving.	And	when	there	are	many	people	laughing,	of	course	it	is
very	difficult	to	be	sad...	almost	impossible,	it	is	going	against	the	grain.	In	the
first	place,	who	wants	 to	be	sad?	In	 the	second	place,	when	it	 is	difficult,	who
would	 like	 to	 take	 that	 difficulty	 and	 that	 arduousness	 and	 be	 sad?	And	when
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
everybody	is	laughing	your	vibe	changes.
Mm?	have	you	watched?	--	if	there	is	somebody	beating	a	drum,	your	feet	start
beating	 with	 it,	 your	 hand	 starts	 beating	 with	 it;	 suddenly	 your	 heart	 starts
beating	with	it.	You	would	like	to	dance.	Just	a	single	moment	before	there	was
no	idea	of	dancing,	but	just	the	drum	and	the	beating	of	it	has	entered	you.	You
are	no	more	your	ordinary	self.
So	a	commune	is	a	deliberate	effort	to	create	a	certain	pattern	of	energy.	That's
why	you	were	feeling	lost.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	relationship,	but	relationship
is	always	good.	You	are	back	here;	just	be	happy.	Move	happily	--	laugh	more,
dance	more.	And	there	are	always	people	who	would	like	to	have	a	relationship
with	 somebody	who	 is	happy	and	dancing	and	 singing.	 Just	don't	be	 sad,	 then
you	 are	 open	 to	 relationship,	 so	 whomsoever	 you	 deserve,	 you	 get.	 Never
complain	--	there	are	no	complaints;	there	is	no	need	--	if	you	get	an	ugly	person,
that	you	deserved.	It	is	always	the	right	person	that	comes	to	you.	So	if	you	want
to	find	a	better	person	become	better;	then	a	better	person	will	be	coming	to	you.
As	 I	 have	 been	watching	 thousands	 of	 people,	 I	 have	 never	 come	 across	 any
relationship	which	was	not	deserved.	You	create	it,	you	are	the	cause	of	it,	so	just
be	 happy	 and	 somebody	 is	 bound	 to	 knock...	 because	 people	 are	 born	 to	 be
related,	they	are	born	in	relationship;	relationship	is	a	must.	An	unrelated	person
is	no	more	human	--	he	falls	below	humanity.
That's	why	monks	who	move	 out	 of	 society	 and	 drop	 all	 relationships	 look	 a
little	stupid,	retarded.	Put	a	human	child	in	isolation	from	the	very	beginning	and
he	will	never	become	a	human	being.	He	will	never	learn	how	to	speak,	he	will
never	learn	how	to	sing,	he	will	never	learn	how	to	dance.	He	will	never	learn
how	to	relate	because	there	is	nobody	to	relate	to.	He	will	remain	like	a	rock,	he
will	not	flower.	He	will	not	be	a	human	being	at	all	--	he	will	be	subhuman.	And
he	will	be	in	a	worse	state	than	animals,	because	at	least	animals	have	their	own
society	--	they	relate,	they	are	not	isolated.	The	child	will	be	dull,	closed.
So	the	more	you	relate,	the	more	human	you	are.	And	to	reach	to	God	means	to
reach	 to	 the	 peak	 of	 your	 relationship.	 Prayer	 is	 the	 ultimate	 relationship	 --	 a
relationship	with	 the	whole	universe.	Mm?	you	 loved	so	many	persons	 --	now
they	are	not	fulfilling.	Now	a	person	is	a	limited	thing.	A	limitation,	a	boundary
always	comes;	then	you	want	to	relate	to	the	whole,	to	this	whole	universe.	Then
there	is	prayer.
So	people	start	from	sex,	move	into	love,	and	reach	to	prayer.
Never	be	afraid	of	sex,	but	never	be	content	with	 it.	Always	move	beyond	sex
towards	 love.	But	 love	 is	a	bridge,	not	 the	goal.	The	goal	 is	prayer.	When	you
can	relate	to	the	whole	universe,	then	you	can	never	be	isolated.	So	sometimes	it
has	 happened...	 a	 Buddha,	 a	Mahavira,	 they	 moved	 from	 the	 world,	 but	 they
were	not	retarded	and	they	never	became	subhuman.	They	became	super-human
because	they	learned	the	art	of	love	in	the	world.	Then	there	was	nothing	to	learn
--	all	that	the	world	could	give,	it	had	given	them.	Then	they	went	into	isolation.
But	 it	was	no	more	 isolation	because	 the	whole	universe	was	 there	 --	how	can
you	be	isolated?	If	you	know	how	to	relate	with	the	universe,	trees	and	rocks	and
stars,	you	are	never	alone.
Then	wherever	 you	 are,	 you	 are	 amidst	 your	 family.	 So	 they	 never	 fell	 below
humanity;	they	became	super-human.
So	 I	 am	not	 against	 going	 into	 the	 forest.	 I	 am	 in	 favour	 of	 it	 ,only	when	 the
society	has	given	you	all	that	it	can	give.	When	one	has	learned	love,	one	can	be
alone	--	or	one	can	be	in	the	society	anywhere;	then	everything	is	good.	One	is
never	uprooted.	You	can	throw	that	person	into	a	desert	and	he	will	be	as	happy.
You	can	throw	him	anywhere,	alone	on	an	island,	and	he	will	be	as	prayerful	as
anywhere	else.
So	never	be	afraid	of	sex	--	but	never	be	contented	with	it.	Always	strive	for	love
--	but	love	is	not	the	goal.	Love	is	a	bridge	--	the	goal	is	prayer.
[A	 sannyasin	 asks:	 Sometimes	 I	 find	 it	 difficult	 to	 distinguish	 between	 the
genuine	need	to	sleep	and	laziness.	I	wondered	if	you	could	shed	some	light.]
Then	do	one	thing:	whenever	you	feel	like	it,	go	to	sleep.	If	it	is	not	genuine	you
will	not	 fall	 asleep.	So	nothing	wrong	 --	you	 simply	 rest.	 If	 it	 is	genuine,	you
will	fall	asleep.	And	it	is	difficult	to	know	whether	it	is	genuine	or	not,	because
we	have	lost	track	of	our	natural	instincts	--	and	this	is	the	case	with	everybody.
There	are	people	who	cannot	make	any	distinction	between	the	hunger	which	is
genuine	 and	 the	 hunger	which	 is	 simply	 psychological;	 they	 cannot	make	 any
distinction.	Maybe	it	is	just	the	time	that	they	eat	every	day,	so	they	feel	hungry;
or	maybe	it	is	just	the	smell	that	is	coming	from	the	kitchen	that	makes	them	feel
hungry.	Maybe	it	is	just	the	food	that	they	have	seen,	and	the	colour	is	appealing
and	 their	 memories	 are	 revived:	 in	 the	 past	 they	 liked	 that	 kind	 of	 food	 and
suddenly	there	is	hunger.	It	is	difficult	because	we	have	lost	track	of	the	natural
instinct.	No	animal	has	that	difficulty.	When	the	animal	feels	hungry	he	knows,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
when	the	animal	feels	sleepy	he	knows;	and	there	is	no	problem	because	there	is
never	 false	 sleep	 and	 there	 is	 never	 false	 hunger.	 But	 with	 man	 there	 is	 a
problem,	because	man	has	a	great	imagination	--	the	imagination	is	the	problem,
that	makes	 the	 trouble.	The	 imagination	can	create	such	situations	 that	 it	 looks
almost	real.
That	is	the	problem	and	that	is	the	glory	too	--	it	is	only	because	of	imagination
that	man	 has	 thought	 about	God,	 that	man	 has	 thought	 about	meditation,	 that
man	 has	 thought	 about	 churches	 and	 temples,	 bibles	 and	 korans,	 and	 the
philosophies	and	art	and	music	and	painting.	It	 is	only	because	of	imagination.
No	animal	has	painted,	no	animal	has	created	any	music.
Even	when	we	say	that	the	birds	are	singing,	it	is	not	true	--	they	are	not	singing,
they	are	simply	making	noise!	And	if	you	listen	long	enough	you	will	see	they
are	making	the	same	noise	again	and	again	and	again,	 there	is	no	singing	in	it.
And	 this	 noise	 is	 unconscious;	 there	 is	 no	 deliberate	 creation.	 So	 man's
imagination	 is	his	 richness	and	his	problem	 too.	With	every	 richness	problems
arise.	So	this	is	a	basic	problem...	and	not	only	with	you.	Maybe	it	has	become
more	focused	on	sleep.
My	suggestion	is:	never	repress.	So	if	there	is	any	indecision	in	the	mind	as	to
whether	the	need	to	sleep	is	real	or	just	imaginary	--	if	there	is	any	suspicion	--
go	to	sleep.	Otherwise	there	will	be	repression	and	that	is	more	dangerous.	If	the
need	was	real	and	you	repressed,	that's	very	bad.	That's	how	we	have	lost	contact
with	 our	 instincts.	 Repressing	 the	 real	 is	 creating	 a	 barrier;	 then	 you	 will	 be
losing	contact	more	and	more.
A	moment	comes	when	one	knows	nothing	about	one's	natural	needs.	Then	the
society	 goes	 on	 teaching	 you,	 'This	 is	 your	 need.'	 The	 advertisement	 in	 the
newspaper	or	on	the	radio	or	on	the	TV	creates	the	need.
In	the	old	days	they	used	to	say,	'Whenever	there	is	a	demand	there	is	a	supply.'
Now	 the	 law	has	completely	changed:	you	create	 supply	and	 there	 is	demand.
You	 simply	 bring	 anything	 into	 the	 world,	 manufacture	 it	 first	 --	 don't	 be
bothered	whether	people	need	it	or	not	--	then	advertise	it.	If	rightly	advertised
you	will	 find	people	 as	 if	waiting	 for	 it,	 hungry	 for	 it	 --	 anything	whatsoever!
Any	 foolish	 thing	 will	 do	 and	 people	 will	 always	 be	 ready	 to	 purchase	 it,
because	people	have	lost	track	of	their	natural	instincts.
So	my	suggestion	is:	if	you	are	ever	in	any	suspicion,	then	always	err	on	the	side
of	nature;	never	err	against	 it.	So	 if	you	 feel	 sleepy,	go	 to	sleep.	Being	 lazy	 is
better	than	being	repressive.
Lazy	people	have	not	done	anything	wrong	in	the	world.	I	have	not	come	across
any	 crime	 that	 lazy	 people	 have	 done,	 but	 repressive	 people	 have	 been	 very
dangerous,	 murderers.	 They	 have	 murdered	 themselves	 and	 they	 have	 taken
revenge	on	others	too.
For	one	month	whenever	you	feel	sleepy	just	go	to	sleep.	And	within	one	month
you	will	be	able	to	feel	real	need.	It	will	simply	come	to	you	and	then	there	will
be	no	problem	about	it.	But	for	a	few	days	--	even	if	there	is	any	danger	of	being
lazy	--	take	the	risk,	be	lazy,	but	never	repress.	If	 the	need	is	real	and	you	pull
on,	somehow	you	force	yourself,	and	the	eyes	become	tired	and	the	body	feels
tired,	that	is	not	a	big	problem	because	in	the	night	you	will	sleep	and	tomorrow
the	 tiredness	will	 go.	The	 real	problem	 is	 that	you	are	 falling	away	 from	your
natural	needs:	you	are	not	listening	to	your	needs,	you	are	not	listening	to	your
nature.	You	are	becoming	deaf	 to	your	nature,	 so	 there	will	be	more	and	more
problems.
And	as	I	see,	many	people	have	completely	lost	all	moorings.	They	don't	know
exactly	who	they	are,	what	they	want	--	everything	has	to	be	told	to	them.	They
are	almost	like	zombies.	They	need	somebody	to	tell	them	that	this	is	time	to	get
up,'	so	get	up;	this	is	time	to	go	to	sleep,	so	go	to	sleep;	this	is	time	to	pray,	so
pray.	They	need	somebody	to	order	them	--	 then	they	can	manage.	There	is	no
spontaneity.
So	 for	one	month,	 simply	whenever	you	 feel	 --	maybe	 it	 is	 lazy,	 sometimes	 it
may	be	laziness;	I	am	not	saying	it	is	not	laziness	--	just	go	to	sleep.	After	one
month,	tell	me	again.	You	will	have	the	taste	of	the	real	and	then	you	will	have
the	distinction,	clear-cut.	Right	now	I	can	tell	you	how	to	distinguish	but	there	is
danger,	so	I	will	talk	to	you	after	one	month.
There	is	a	very	famous	story	about	a	sufi	mystic,	Maulana	Jalaluddin	Rumi.
A	 woman	 came	 to	 him	 and	 brought	 her	 child	 and	 she	 said,	 'You	 are	 a	 great
teacher	--	do	something.	She	eats	too	much	sugar	and	her	teeth	are	getting	bad
and	 her	 stomach	 is	 disturbed.	We	 are	 constantly	 in	 trouble	 and	 she	 is	 almost
obsessed:	sugar	and	sugar	and	sugar.	Though	she	does	not	understand	you,	she
respects	you,	so	if	you	say	something	she	will	listen.'
Rumi	said,	'Bring	her	after	three	weeks.'	The	woman	was	puzzled	--	it	was	such
a	simple	thing,	but	okay.	Three	weeks	afterward,	she	brought	the	child	and	Rumi
said,	 'Three	weeks	more	 --	 bring	her	 after	 three	weeks.'	After	 three	weeks	 she
brought,	and	Rumi	said	to	the	child,	'Stop	eating	sugar.	It	is	bad.'
The	woman	said,	'Just	to	have	you	say	this	we	had	to	wait	for	six	weeks?'
Rumi	 said,	 'There	 are	many	 things	 implied	 in	 it.	 First,	 I	 also	 like	 eating	 sugar
very	much,	so	I	had	to	try	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
on	my	 own	 to	 see	whether	 I	 could	 say	 to	 this	 child	 or	 not	 --	 how	 can	 I	 say?
Secondly,	it	will	be	too	aggressive	to	jump	upon	a	child;	it	will	be	too	early.	Let
the	child	feel	that	I	am	considering	--	I	am	not	in	a	hurry.	Let	the	child	feel	that	I
am	 thinking	about	 it	 I	 am	not	 inconsiderate.	You	have	been	 telling	her,	 "Don't
eat...	 don't	 eat..."	 Just	 repeating	 that	 won't	 have	 helped.	 Let	 there	 be	 a	 deep
relationship	between	me	and	the	child.	Now	the	child	must	be	able	to	see	that	I'm
not	 just	 supporting	 her	 mother.	 I	 have	 taken	 six	 weeks	 and	 now	 I	 say	 to	 the
child....'
And	he	said	to	the	child,	'I	am	also	an	addict,	I	love	sweet	things,	so	it	was	very
difficult	 to	 say	 anything	 to	 you.	Unless	 I	 can	 renounce,	 how	 can	 I	 ask	 you	 to
renounce?	You	are	such	a	small	child,	and	I	am	so	old	and	still	I	love	sugar!	So	I
had	to	renounce	it	--	now	I	have	renounced.	And	I	tell	you	it	can	be	renounced.
So	don't	be	worried,	it	is	my	experience	that	it	can	be	renounced.	And	if	I	can	do
it	--	such	an	old	man;	you	are	so	young	--	you	certainly	can	do	it.'	And	the	child
renounced.
Right	now	I	can	say	something	to	you	about	how	to	distinguish	but	that	won't	be
right	because	whatsoever	I	say	will	become	an	intellectual	understanding	to	you.
And	 there	 is	 every	 danger	 that	 your	 intellectual	 understanding	will	 make	 you
repressive.	The	intellect	is	very	repressive,	dominating,	dictatorial.
That's	 how	 it	 has	 disconnected	 you	 from	 your	 own	 body.	 So	 first	 put	 that
intellect	aside	--	that's	what	I	am	trying	to	say.	Just	put	it	aside.	If	it	is	saying	it	is
lazy,	 it	 is	 lazy	 --	 okay.	But	 if	 the	 body	 is	 saying	 something,	 you	 are	 going	 to
listen	to	the	body	and	not	to	the	intellect.
There	is	one	way	to	make	the	distinction	--	through	the	intellect;	that	will	always
be	repressive.	There	is	another	way	to	make	the	distinction	--	through	the	body;
that	will	never	be	repressive.	The	body	is	more	wise.	In	fact	the	body	is	so	wise
that	it	does	not	need	intellect	at	all	--	it	can	function	without	it.
I	was	 just	 reading	 a	 few	days	 ago	 in	 a	medical	 journal	 that	when	 a	man	dies,
within	 four	 minutes	 his	 intellect	 disappears.	 Then	 you	 cannot	 revive	 it	 --	 the
brain	 is	 gone,	 it	 cannot	 be	 repaired;	 four	minutes	 is	 enough.	The	heart	 can	be
revived	but	the	brain	cannot	be	revived	any	more.	So	in	a	heart	attack,	if	within
four	minutes	the	heart	can	be	revived	the	intellect	will	be	functioning,	but	then
too	much	will	be	lost.
Immediately	as	 the	heart	stops	 the	brain	starts	disappearing.	It	 is	a	very	fragile
thing	--	exists	with	great	difficulty.
But	I	was	surprised	to	know	that	when	the	heart	stops	the	stomach	continues	for
twenty-four	 hours.	 The	 person	 is	 dead	 for	 twenty-four	 hours	 and	 the	 stomach
continues	 to	digest.	The	man	 is	dead,	 the	brain	 is	gone,	 the	heart	has	 stopped.
The	 doctor	 has	 given	 the	 death	 certificate,	 but	 the	 stomach	 goes	 on	 absorbing
juices,	and	work	continues.	For	twenty-four	hours	the	body	works	on	its	own	--
with	no	brain,	with	no	heart
--	and	remains	perfectly	okay.	If	the	brain	can	be	substituted	and	the	heart	can	be
substituted,	the	body	will	function	again.
So	the	body	has	its	own	wisdom...	deeper	than	the	brain,	very	much	deeper	than
the	brain.	The	brain	is	just	the	surface.	So	the	distinction	has	to	come	from	the
body,	from	the	stomach.	And	food	and	sleep	both	are	stomach	needs:	when	you
have	a	full	stomach	you	feel	sleepy;	when	you	are	fasting	there	is	no	sleep.
Food	and	sleep	are	both	stomach	needs.	So	if	you	are	hungry	you	cannot	sleep.
You	will	turn	and	toss	in	the	bed	and	no	sleep	comes.	And	when	you	have	taken
a	good	meal,	immediately	you	feel	sleepy,	because	when	the	stomach	has	food	to
digest	it	wants	all	brain	functioning	to	stop.
The	 functioning	of	 the	 brain	 is	 a	 disturbance	 to	 the	 stomach,	 hence	 after	 food
one	wants	to	sleep	a	little.
After	a	good	meal	a	little	sleep	is	a	must.	Just	fifteen	minutes	will	do,	but	it	is	a
must,	because	when	the	stomach	has	food	a	very	basic	thing	happens:	the	head
cannot	function	--	the	energy	is	called	back	to	the	stomach.	All	energy	has	to	get
involved	into	digestion,	mm?	so	the	head	feels	sleepy.	That's	why	if	you	are	on	a
fast	you	will	not	be	able	to	sleep,	but	your	head	will	rush	and	run	and	think	of	so
many	things.
For	people	who	write	and	do	mental	work,	fasting	is	very	good.	They	think	more
and	 more	 clearly,	 because	 when	 the	 stomach	 has	 no	 need	 for	 energy,	 all	 the
energy	is	released	to	the	head.	So	simply	for	one	month,	go	with	the	body.	And
after	one	month,	report	to	me.	And	I	will	also	try	(a	chuckle)	and	then	we	will
see	what	happens.	Good!	(chuckling)	Good!
[A	sannyasin	asks:	Since	 I've	been	 in	Poona,	my	body's	 just	been	as	 though	 it
were	a	hundred	years	old.
It's	got	to	the	extent	now	where	I	can	hardly	function.	I	just	stay	in	my	room	all
the	 time.	 Physical	 activities	 tire	 me	 out	 to	 the	 point	 of	 exhaustion.	 And
sometimes	I've	gone	through	groups	while	I've	been	here,	even	though	I've	been
very	 tired,	because	 I	 thought,	 'Well,	 it's	 just	 the	mind.'	But	 I'm	pushing	myself
into	a	brick	wall.
Osho	checks	his	energy.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	 do	 a	 few	 things:	 one	 is	 --	 and	 the	 most	 fundamental	 --	 accept	 it.	 Your
rejection	of	it	is	making	things	worse.	Accept!	Mm?	the	first	thing	is	to	accept	it
and	follow	the	body	--	whatsoever	the	body	says.	If	it	feels	exhausted,	don't	go,
don't	 do	 anything,	mm?	So	 the	 first	 thing:	drop	 the	 rejection	 and	 the	 idea	 that
you	have	to	do	something	to	become	more	energyful.	Forget	about	it	--	that	very
idea	may	be	one	of	the	basic	causes.
The	second	thing:	whenever	you	are	lying	down	or	sitting	silently,	just	feel	that
you	are	not	the	body,	but	energy.	Just	with	closed	eyes,	simply	feel	your	body	as
a	moving	energy,	 a	 fluidity.	Energy	 is	moving;	 the	blood	circulation	 is	 energy,
the	breathing	is	energy.	You	are	simply	sitting	there	as	an	energy	pool.
Lying	 down	 on	 the	 bed,	 again	 become	more	 and	more	 identified	with	 energy.
Move	the	hand	and	feel	that	it	is	not	matter,	but	energy.
And	do	every	act	very	slowly	so	you	can	feel	it.	You	go	to	the	bath	--	go	very
slowly,	 feeling	 that	 your	 energy	 is	moving.	You	 eat	 --	 eat	 very	 slowly,	 feeling
that	you	are	eating	energy.	Breathing	in,	feel	you	are	breathing	energy	--	and	in
fact	that	is	what	we	are	breathing:	it	is	prana,	it	is	bio-energy.
So	while	breathing	in,	feel	you	are	taking	energy	in;	and	breathing	out,	feel	you
are	throwing	out	all	sadness,	all	dullness.
Whatsoever	you	do,	do	very	very	slowly.	Slow	down	every	process.	In	fact	that
idea	is	very	good	--	that	you	are	one	hundred	years	old.	Let	that	idea	--	that	you
are	 one	 hundred	 years	 old	 and	 you	 have	 to	move	 like	 a	 one	 hundred-year-old
person	 --	 be	 accepted.	 For	 three	 weeks	 be	 one	 hundred	 years	 old,	 and	 do
whatsoever	 at	 that	 age	would	 be	 right,	mm?	Don't	 run	 like	 a	 young	man,	 and
don't	do	Dynamic	Meditation	and	don't	do	Kundalini.	Sitting	silently,	if	you	feel
like	 doing	 any	 meditation,	 then	 do	 Nadabrahma.	 You	 can	 come	 to	 the	 music
group	if	you	feel	like	it	--	just	sit	and	listen	to	the	music.	Swaying	will	do	--	but
do	everything	very	very	softly	so	that	it	does	not	exhaust	energy	in	any	way.	Do
this	for	three	weeks,	and	after	three	weeks	tell	me	how	you	are	feeling.
It	will	be	possible	to	get	out	of	it,	but	drop	the	idea	of	getting	out	of	it;	accept	it.
What	 to	 do?	 If	 one	 has	 become	 one	 hundred	 years	 old,	 one	 has	 become	 one
hundred	years	old.	Sometimes	 it	happens.	Everybody	has	his	own	pace.	A	few
people	 become	 a	 hundred	years	 old	when	 they	 are	 thirty,	 a	 few	become	when
they	 are	 forty,	 a	 few	become	when	 they	 are	 a	 hundred,	mm?	And	 a	 few	don't
become	even	when	 they	 are	 a	hundred	 and	 ten.	Time	 is	not	by	 the	 clock.	The
body	has	its	own	time.	So	if	you	have	become	hundred	years	old,	perfectly	good.
Mm?
And	I	need	old	people	here,	mm?	(laughter)	There	 is	so	much	young	energy,	 I
need	a	few	old	people.
You	 can	make	 friends	with	 Paritosh	 (a	 sixty-eight-year-old	 resident	 sannyasin
present	at	darshan).	You	can	treat	him	just	like	a	younger	brother	(laughter).	Just
for	 three	 weeks	 you	 have	 to	 be	 a	 hundred	 years	 old,	 so	 let	 it	 be	 known	 to
everybody.	You	can	have	a	walking	stick	and	things	like	that	and	in	three	weeks
you	tell	me!	Mm?
[A	 sannyasin	 says:	 I	 found	out	 in	 the	group	 (the	Tathata	group)	 that	 I'm	a	big
fool.	I	have	a	sense	of	a	higher	self	--	occasionally	I	act	it	out	--	but	mostly	I'm	in
my	ego,	my	personality.	I	meditated	on	this	all	day	and	I	think	it's	fear.]
Mmm...	 you	 seem	 to	be	 right.	The	 ego	 is	 always	out	 of	 fear.	A	 really	 fearless
person	has	no	ego.	The	ego	is	a	protection,	an	armour.	Because	you	are	afraid,
you	create	an	 impression	around	you	 that	you	are	 so	and	 so	and	 this	 and	 that,
mm?	So	nobody	dares...	 otherwise	 fear,	 it	 is	 basically	 fear.	Good!	You	 looked
into	it	deeply	and	rightly.	And	once	you	see	the	basic	cause,	things	become	very
simple.	Otherwise	people	go	on	fighting	with	the	ego	--	and	the	ego	is	not	a	real
problem.	So	you	are	fighting	with	a	symptom,	not	with	the	real	disease.	The	real
disease	is	fear.	You	can	go	on	fighting	with	the	ego	and	you	will	go	on	missing
the	target	because	the	ego	is	not	the	real	enemy,	it	is	bogus.	Even	if	you	win,	you
will	not	win	anything.	And	you	cannot	win.	Only	a	real	enemy	can	be	defeated	--
not	a	false	enemy	that	does	not	exist	at	all;	it	 is	a	facade.	It	is	as	if	you	have	a
wound	and	it	looks	ugly	and	you	put	some	ornament	on	it.
Once	it	happened	that	I	was	staying	at	a	filmstar's	house	and	he	had	asked	many
people	 to	come	and	see	me.	A	film	actress	was	also	 there	and	she	had	a	really
beautiful	watch	with	a	beautiful	and	very	big	band.
Somebody	who	was	sitting	by	her	 side	started	asking	about	 the	watch	and	she
became	a	 little	worried.	 I	was	simply	watching.	He	wanted	 to	see	 the	watch	--
and	she	was	not	willing	to	take	it	off.	But	the	man	insisted	and	she	had	to	take	it
off.	Then	I	could	see	what	was	the	problem.	She	had	a	big	white	spot,	a	leprosy
spot.
She	was	hiding	that	leprosy	spot	under	the	band	of	that	beautiful	watch.	Now	she
was	exposed	--	and	she	started	perspiring	and	became	so	nervous.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 ego	 is	 just	 like	 that.	 There	 is	 fear,	 but	 nobody	 wants	 to	 show	 his	 fear,
because	 if	 you	 show	 that	 you	 are	 afraid	 many	 people	 will	 be	 there	 who	 will
make	you	more	afraid.	Once	they	come	to	know	that	you	are	in	deep	fear,	then
everybody	 will	 hit	 you	 hard.	 They	 will	 enjoy	 humiliating	 you,	 finding	 that
someone	is	weaker.	People	enjoy	exploiting;	to	kick	that	person.
So	every	person	who	is	afraid,	deep	down	creates	a	big	ego	around	the	fear	and
goes	on	pumping	more	air	in	that	balloon	of	the	ego	and	becomes	too	big.	Adolf
Hitler,	Idi	Amin	of	Uganda	--	that	type	of	person	becomes	very	puffed.	Then	he
starts	making	others	afraid.	Anybody	who	 tries	 to	make	anybody	afraid,	know
well	 that	 he	 must	 himself	 be	 deep	 down	 afraid,	 otherwise	 why?	What	 is	 the
point?	Who	bothers	to	make	you	afraid	if	he	is	not	afraid?
People	full	of	fear	make	others	afraid	so	they	can	rest	at	ease.	They	know	well
that	now	you	will	not	touch	them,	you	will	not	trespass	their	boundaries.	.
You	 looked	well	 --	 that	 is	exactly	 the	case.	So	don't	 fight	with	 the	ego.	Rather
watch	fear	and	try	to	accept	it.	It	is	natural...	it	is	part	of	life.	There	is	no	need	to
hide	it;	there	is	no	need	to	pretend	otherwise.	It	is	there	--	all	human	beings	are
full	of	fear.	 It	 is	part	of	humanity.	Accept	 it,	and	the	moment	you	accept	 it	 the
ego	 will	 disappear,	 because	 then	 there	 is	 no	 point	 for	 the	 ego	 to	 be	 there.
Fighting	with	 the	 ego	will	 not	 help;	 accepting	 the	 fear	will	 immediately	 help.
Then	 you	 know	 that	 yes,	 we	 are	 so	 tiny	 in	 such	 a	 vast	 universe	 --	 how	 is	 it
possible	not	 to	be	afraid?	And	life	 is	surrounded	by	death	--	how	is	 it	possible
not	to	be	afraid?	Any	moment	we	can	disappear...	a	small	thing	goes	wrong	and
we	disappear	--	so	how	is	it	possible	not	to	be	afraid?	When	you	accept,	by	and
by	fear	disappears	because	now	there	is	no	point.	You	accept	it,	you	have	taken	it
for	granted	--	it	is	so!
So	 don't	 create	 something	 against	 it	 to	 hide	 it,	 and	 when	 you	 don't	 create
anything	against	it,	it	simply	subsides.	I'm	not	saying	you	will	not	have	any	fear
--	I	am	saying	that	you	will	not	be	afraid.	Fear	will	be	there	but	you	will	not	be
afraid.	You	follow	me?	To	be	afraid	means	that	you	are	against	fear	--	you	don't
want	it	to	be	there,	and	it	is	there.
When	you	accept	it....	Just	as	trees	are	green,	humanity	is	full	of	fear.	Then	what
to	 do?	Trees	 are	 not	 hiding.	Everybody	 is	 prone	 to	 die.	 Fear	 is	 the	 shadow	of
death.	Accept	it	!
[A	 sannyasin	 says:	 I	 feel	 very	 happy.	 I'm	 feeling	 tremendously	 happy	 since	 I
took	sannyas.]
It	happens	 (he	chuckles).	Sannyas	helps.	 It	 simply	changes	 the	very	current	of
your	 consciousness.	 Trust	 is	 a	 great	 change:	 if	 you	 can	 trust	 somebody,	 a
thousand	and	one	burdens	simply	disappear.	Then	you	are	not	fighting	alone.	In
the	 dark	 night	 of	 life	 you	 are	 not	 alone.	 Somebody	 is	 there,	 you	 are	 with
somebody.
And	 if	 you	 can	 feel	 that	 somebody	 has	 an	 inner	 light,	 you	 can	 move	 more
trustfully,	more	totally.
It	happens,	but	the	problem	is	that	it	is	only	when	people	take	sannyas	that	they
understand.	Those	who	have	not	taken	sannyas	go	on	wondering	whether	there	is
something	 in	 it	 or	 not.	And	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 tell	 them	 there	 is	 something
unless	 they	 take	 it.	 There	 are	 a	 few	 things	 you	 come	 to	 know	only	when	 you
have	tasted.	So	now	tell	others	about	your	taste,	mm?
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	Sex	is	the	Beauty	of	Total	Release
23	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611235
ShortTitle:	WHIP15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[A	 sannyasin,	 returning	 from	 the	West	 says:	 It's	very	good	 to	be	back.	 It	 feels
like	my	home.]
It	is!	Home	is	where	you	belong,	and	home	is	where	you	can	be	at	home.	Home
is	where	you	can	relax	and	can	be	accepted	as	you	are...	where	nobody	tries	to
change	you,	nobody	expects	anything	from	you	and	everybody	is	ready	to	love
you	as	you	are.	And	there	is	no	bargain	in	love...	just	for	love's	sake.
Home	has	nothing	to	do	with	parents;	home	has	nothing	to	do	with	a	particular
house,	with	a	birthplace
--	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 those	 things.	 Home	 is	 a	 great	 psychological
experience...	the	experience	of	belonging.	Home	means	that	you	are	not	alone...
that	 somebody	 understands	 you,	 and	 whatsoever	 you	 do,	 there	 will	 be	 no
condemnation.	This	is	your	home.
And	this	is	my	effort	--	to	make	a	home	for	millions.	We	will	make	it!
[Osho	checks	the	energy	of	a	sannyasin	who	practices	massage	in	the	West.]
Good...	very	good.	The	energy	is	flowing	very	well.	You	can	be	really	deep	in
massage	--	you	can	go	very	far.	Up	to	now	you	have	been	only	swimming	on	the
surface.	 You	 can	 dive	 very	 deeply,	 and	 it	 will	 be	 a	 great	 help	 for	 your	 inner
growth.
Massage	 is	not	an	ordinary	 thing.	 It	has	 tremendous	meaning.	There	are	a	 few
people	who	are	born	to	massage	--	you	are	one	of	them.	Your	energy	can	go	very
very	 deep.	 But	 always	 remember	 a	 few	 things	 while	 massaging.	 One	 --	 the
person	you	are	massaging	has	no	body.	Conceive	of	him	as	bodyless	and	your
massage	will	go	very	very	deep.	First	think	of	him	as	having	no	body,	then	think
of	yourself	as	having	no	body.	By	body	I	mean	neither	he	nor	you	are	matter	--
both	are	energies.
When	 two	material	 things	 come	 close,	 they	 collide.	When	 two	 energies	 come
close	 they	 simply	 mix	 and	 mingle	 and	 melt	 into	 each	 other	 --	 there	 is	 no
collision.	 Two	 physical	 bodies	 are	 bound	 to	 collide.	And	whenever	 you	 touch
somebody's	 body	 as	 a	 body,	 and	 he	 also	 feels	 himself	 as	 a	 body,	 there	 is	 a
shrinking,	a	defence.	1	he	defense	armour	starts	working.
So	the	first	thing	is	to	feel	that	the	other	is	just	an	energy;	you	are	also	an	energy.
And	 then	start	playing	with	 the	energy	as	one	plays	on	a	guitar.	Make	 it	more
music	than	massage.	Make	it	more	play	than	work.
Let	it	be	more	from	the	heart	than	from	the	mind.
The	 technique	 has	 to	 be	 known,	 but	 then	 forgotten.	 One	 should	 know	 the
technique	 and	 then	 one	 should	 not	 bother	 about	 it.	 It	 remains	 deep	 in	 the
unconscious	and	functions	from	there	but	you	move	by	hunches.
So	you	 feel	 the	 energy,	of	 the	other	person,	you	present	yourself	 as	 an	energy
phenomenon,	and	then	two	energies	start	playing.	Massage	is	almost	like	love.
And	if	you	can	move	into	it	 that	way	you	will	have	very	orgasmic	experiences
and	you	will	be	benefited	tremendously.	The	massaged	may	not	be	benefited	so
deeply	 --	 it	 depends	 on	 him	 or	 on	 her.	 If	 the	 massaged	 also	 drops	 all	 body
consciousness,	 forgets	 the	body	and	remembers	only	a	subtle	play	of	energy	--
waves	 of	 energy	 and	 nothing	 else	 --	 then	 he	 will	 also	 be	 benefited.	 And	 the
benefit	will	 not	 only	 be	 relaxation	 --	 the	 benefit	will	 become	 deeply	 spiritual.
The	body	will	be	automatically	benefited,	but	deeper	layers	will	be	touched.	And
some	day	it	becomes	possible	--	when	you	and	the	person	you	are	massaging	are
both	 lost,	 and	 there	 is	 an	 inner	 energy	 orgasm,	 and	 both	 orgasms	 explode
simultaneously	--	that	you	will	know	for	the	first	time	what	it	is.	It	is	something
very	transcendental....
[Another	sannyasin	says:	It's	great	to	be	here	again.]
You	will	be	here	again	and	again.	It	is	always	good	to	go	for	some	time	and	then
come	back,	otherwise	one	tends	to	take	things	for	granted.	It	is	good	for	the	fish
sometimes	 to	 jump	out	of	 the	water	and	be	on	 the	 sand	and	 then	 thirst	 for	 the
water,	 and	 again	 jump	 into	 it.	 Then	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the	 fish	 knows	 what	 a
benediction	it	is	to	be	in	the	water.
So	this	is	a	small	oasis,	mm?	Go	into	the	desert	of	the	world,	feel	the	hot	winds,
and	 the	 conflicts	 and	 the	 violence	 all	 around.	 And	 whenever	 you	 feel	 tired,
exhausted,	come	back	again.	Rest	in	the	oasis,	then	be	ready	and	move	again.
[The	sannyasin	continues:	 I	 learned	when	I	was	 in	England	 that	 I	was	born	by
caesarean.	I	seek	that	kind	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	situation	in	my	life	everywhere.]
Mm	mm.	Many	 things	at	 the	 time	of	 the	birth	become	very	much	determining
factors.	Whatsoever	happens	at	 the	 time	of	birth	 is	very	very	 important	 for	 the
whole	 life.	 If	 you	 were	 born	 by	 caesarean,	 in	 every	 situation	 you	 will	 find
something	like	that.
...	But	that	will	disappear...	that	will	disappear.	Mm?	because	you	are	now	being
reborn	again,	so	the	old	birth	will	become	irrelevant	soon.
That's	 the	meaning	of	sannyas:	to	be	born	again.	It	 takes	a	little	time.	The	first
day	when	you	take	initiation	is	not	the	birth	really.	That	is	the	beginning	of	the
pregnancy.	Then	somewhere	later	on....	And	it	depends,	it	 is	not	so	mechanical
as	the	bodily	birth	--	not	always	nine	months,	sometimes	less,	sometimes	more...
sometimes	years.
The	day	you	take	sannyas,	the	pregnancy	has	started.	Now	nobody	knows	how
much	 time	 you	will	 take	 to	 become	mature	 and	 come	 out	 of	 the	womb.	And
everybody	will	be	different.	So	you	are	in	the	womb	again	--	and	this	time	it	is
not	 going	 to	 be	 a	 caesarean	 operation.	 You	 will	 be	 born	 naturally.	 You	 have
fallen	 into	 the	 right	 hands.	 Otherwise	 there	 are	 many	 people	 in	 the	 world	 of
spirituality	who	force,	who	are	almost	violent,	aggressive.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	be	so	relaxed	--	as	if	there	is	not	a	thing	to
worry	about.
Whenever	things	happen,	good;	if	they	don't	happen,	that	too	is	good.
To	 allow	 nature	 to	 take	 its	 course,	 to	 allow	 it	 so	 patiently	 that	 there	 is	 no
interference	 of	 any	 sort,	 is	 the	 approach	 of	 the	 religious	 mind.	 One	 simply
watches	and	moves,	and	helps	nature	to	take	its	course.
So	this	time	you	will	not	be	a	caesarean	--	because	I	don't	believe	in	operations,
in	forced	births.	And	once	that	has	happened,	the	impact	of	your	caesarean	birth
will	 disappear	 completely,	 because	 then	 it	 will	 not	 belong	 to	 you	 --	 it	 was
somebody	else's	birth.
[A	sannyasin	says	she	has	nothing	to	say.	Osho	gives	her	an	'energy	darshan']
That's	 a	 better	 way	 to	 say	 it.	 There	 are	 things	 words	 cannot	 convey	 but	 the
energy	 can	 convey.	 There	 are	 things	 to	 convey	 about	which	 you	 are	 not	 even
aware,	but	the	body,	the	energy,	can	communicate.	Much	is	going	to	happen?	So
really	be	ready	this	way,	mm...,	to	welcome	and	receive	it.	Be	ready.	All	that	is
needed	is	just	being	receptive.
God	is	searching...	we	need	not	search	for	Him	at	all.	And	even	if	we	search,	we
cannot	 find,	 because	we	 don't	 know	where	He	 is,	who	He	 is.	And	 even	 if	He
comes	 just	 in	 front	 of	 you,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 recognise	 Him,	 because
recognition	 is	 possible	 only	when	 cognition	 has	 happened	before.	Recognition
means	that	you	are	seeing	somebody	again	--	but	you	have	not	seen	God	before
so	how	can	you	seek	and	how	can	you	recognise?
Truth	cannot	be	sought	--	one	can	simply	be	receptive,	that's	all.	One	can	open
the	doors	and	wait...	and	wait	prayerfully.	One	can	say	only	 this	much,	 'If	you
come,	you	will	 be	 received,	welcomed.	 I	don't	 know	who	you	are,	 and	 I	don't
know	your	address	and	I	cannot	even	send	an	invitation.	But	whosoever	you	are,
and	whomsoever	it	concerns,	if	you	come,	my	doors	will	be	open	--	you	will	not
find	them	closed.'	That's	all	that	a	seeker	can	do...	that's	all	that	is	needed	to	be
done.	More	than	that	is	not	possible	and	is	not	needed.
So	let	this	posture	be	your	deep	attitude.	One	has	to	become	receptive.	Hence	I
go	on	emphasising	that	the	search	for	truth	is	not	a	male	search;	it	is	a	feminine
search	--	just	like	feminine	energy...	receptive.	Not	like	a	male	--	aggressive.
The	male	mind	has	created	science.	Science	is	aggressive.	It	is	almost	a	rape	on
nature.	It	is	a	violent	effort	to	force	nature	to	yield	its	secrets.	It	is	not	graceful.
There	 is	 no	 prayer	 in	 it.	 There	 is	 conflict.	 Hence	 they	 call	 it	 the	 'conquest	 of
nature',	'conquering	nature'.	But	this	is	absurd!	How	can	you	conquer	nature?	--
you	are	part	of	it.	How	can	my	hand	conquer	me?	--	the	hand	is	part	of	me.	How
can	a	leaf	conquer	the	tree?
Foolish,	just	foolish!
And	out	of	that	foolishness	we	have	created	a	whole	civilization	which	is	trying
to	conquer	everything.
It	 is	 the	male-dominated	world.	 And	when	 I	 say	male-dominated,	 I	mean	 the
aggressive	mind.	A	woman	can	be	male	if	she	has	an	aggressive	mind	and	a	man
can	be	feminine	if	he	has	a	receptive	mind.	Science	is	male,	religion	is	female.
Religion	is	simply	a	deep	receptivity...	a	readiness,	an	open	door.	If	God	comes
as	a	guest	He	will	not	be	refused,	that's	all,	and	He	will	be	received	with	great
gratitude,	He	will	be	a	welcome	guest.
So	meditate,	 dance	 and	 sing,	 but	 remain	 deep	 inside	with	 a	welcoming	 heart.
And	everything	will	come	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
in	its	own	right	time...	nothing	happens	before	its	right	time.	And	it	is	good	--	it
should	not	happen	before	the	right	time	has	come.	If	 it	happens	before	its	time
you	will	never	be	able	to	understand	it,	to	digest	it.	It	will	never	become	part	of
you,	it	will	even	become	a	burden	--	may	prove	poisonous.
So	just	one	thing	I	would	like	to	tell	you:	while	you	are	here	do	everything	that
is	available.	But	do	in	a	receptive	mood.	Is	the	difference	clear	to	you?	Rushing
is	not	good	--	waiting.	Hurry	is	not	good	--	grace.
[A	sannyasin:	Before	you	talked	about	expecting	God,	to	be	always	waiting	for
God,	but	when	He	comes	as	a	cockroach	I	don't	like	to	receive	Him.]
Mm!	Then	don't	receive.	Just	say	to	the	cockroach,	'You	should	not	approach	me
in	this	way.	This	is	not	the	way	I	am	going	to	receive	you'	--	that's	all.	Nothing
wrong	 in	 it,	 mm?	 One	 day	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 receive	 a	 cockroach	 too
(chuckling),	mm?
But	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	One	can	have	a	choice.	God	comes	in	so	many
ways,	so	there	is	no	need	to	receive	Him	in	only	one	form	--	you	can	receive	His
many	forms.	Trees	are	there,	and	men	and	women	and	cows	and	dogs	and	cats
and	 so	many	 things	 are	 there	 --	 you	 receive.	 If	 you	 don't	 like	 cockroaches	 no
need	to	be	worried!
But	 cockroaches	 are	 one	 of	 the	 great	 friends	 of	 humanity.	 They	 have	 lived	 as
long	 as	 humanity.	 They	 are	 great	 companions.	 And	 wherever	 man	 is	 found,
cockroaches	are	 found.	Wherever	man	goes,	 cockroaches	 reach.	But	 some	day
you	will...	a	vision	will	appear,	mm?	(Osho	chuckling)	You	will	see	a	cockroach
as	a	god,	but	there's	no	need	right	now.	Mm?	Right	now	you	love	other	forms	of
God.	Keep	it	for	the	last,	the	ultimate.
Mm?	that	will	be	your	last	barrier.	When	you	can	worship	a	cockroach	too,	that
day	you	will	become	enlightened	(laughter).
[A	 sannyasin	 says:	 I	 have	a	 sexual	problem...	 of	wishing	 that	no	one	had	ever
told	me	that	sex	existed.
And	I	feel	there's	something	very	wrong	with	me	all	the	time....	I	think	before	I
never	allowed	myself	to	look	at	it.	I	wanted	to	pretend	I	enjoyed	it.]
(after	a	pause)	Something	has	to	be	done,	mm?	Because	this	is	a	wrong	attitude,
and	you	will	unnecessarily	create	trouble	for	yourself	and	will	miss	many	things
which	 are	 necessary.	One	 has	 to	 go	 beyond	 sex	 one	 day,	 but	 the	way	 beyond
goes	 through	 it,	 and	 if	 you	 never	 go	 into	 it	 rightly,	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 go
beyond	 it.	So	going	 through	 it	 is	part	of	going	beyond.	You	may	have	 learned
some	attitude,	you	may	have	been	conditioned.
All	over	the	world	somehow,	humanity	is	being	corrupted	by	people	--	and	the
greatest	 corruption	 is	 that	 everybody	 is	 taught	 to	 feel	 guilty	 about	 enjoying
themselves...	 as	 if	 something	 is	 wrong	 when	 you	 are	 happy.	 When	 you	 are
miserable,	everything	is	okay,	but	when	you	are	happy,	something	is	wrong.	So
happiness	 has	 been	 crushed	 and	 repressed	 --	 and	 unless	 you	 explode	 into
happiness,	you	miss	the	whole	opportunity	of	life.
Life	 exists	 for	 that	 --	 so	 that	 one	 learns	 how	 to	 be	 absolutely	 happy...	 how	 to
explode	in	it.
And	certainly	sex	brings	you	the	greatest	possibility	of	explosion.	It	is	one	of	the
most	 natural	 ways	 to	 have	 a	 glimpse	 of	 samadhi,	 of	 deep	 meditation,	 of
benediction.	 There	 are	 other	 ways	 to	 go	 into	 benediction	 but	 they	 are	 not	 so
natural.	Sex	is	the	most	natural	way	--	biologically	built-in.	It	is	a	gift	of	God	so
that	 any	person	 --	he	may	be	 religious,	 irreligious,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	may
believe	God	exists,	may	not	believe,	be	a	communist,	atheist,	whatsoever....	But
one	 thing	 is	 naturally	 there	 that	 will	 give	 a	 glimpse	 of	 something	 beyond	 --
beyond	the	body,	beyond	the	mind.
So	three	things	you	have	to	remember	and	try.	First,	when	you	are	making	love,
be	active.	If	you	are	inactive	this	thing	will	happen	easily.	When	you	are	active
this	will	not	happen	so	easily.	So	tell	your	boyfriend	that	he	has	to	play	the	role
of	a	woman	and	you	will	play	the	role	of	a	man.	Let	it	be	a	game.	So	let	him	be
more	passive	and	you	become	more	active.	When	one	is	more	active,	the	activity
is	more	involved,	your	energy	is	more	involved	--	it	is	difficult	to	stop	it	in	the
middle.	But	when	you	are	passive	you	can	stop	any	time	because	you	are	almost
out	of	it.	You	are	just	there	like	a	spectator.	So	become	more	active,	mm?	And
this	is	just	a	temporary	measure.	Once	you	have	attained	to	orgasmic	experience,
then	 there	 is	no	need	--	you	can	start	playing	your	old	role	of	being	a	woman.
This	is	just	temporary.	So	tell	your	boy-friend	that	he	has	to	be	the	woman,	and
you	have	to	be	the	man	and	be	active.
And	second	thing:	before	you	make	love,	dance	together.	Let	it	be	a	wild	dance.
Sing	loudly,	dance,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
play	 music	 if	 you	 want	 to.	 Have	 incense	 in	 the	 room.	 Make	 it	 an	 elaborate
ritual...	almost	religious.
People	don't	move	 towards	 love-making	 in	 steps.	Two	persons	 are	 sitting,	 and
suddenly	 they	start	making	 love.	 It	 is	 so	abrupt	 --	and	 it	 is	very	abrupt	 for	 the
woman.	For	the	man	it	is	not	so	abrupt	because	man's	energy	is	a	different	type
of	 energy,	 and	 man's	 sexuality	 is	 more	 local.	 The	 woman's	 sexuality	 is	 more
total;	 her	 whole	 body	 has	 to	 be	 involved	 in	 it.	 So	 unless	 it	 is	 preceded	 by	 a
foreplay,	a	woman	never	goes	deeply	into	it.
So	first	dance,	sing,	let	the	energy	bubble	up,	and	then	be	the	active	partner.	And
go	wild!	Don't	have	any	pattern	--	go	wild.	If	you	want	to	scream	while	making
love,	don't	be	worried.	If	you	want	to	sing,	don't	be	worried.	If	you	want	to	just
utter	some	jibberish,	utter	it	--	that	will	function	like	a	mantra.
And	 the	 third	 thing:	 every	 day	 from	 the	morning	 to	 the	 evening,	 you	 have	 to
watch	 --	 in	 other	 things	 also	 you	must	 be	 repressing	 your	 joy.	 So	 it	 has	 to	 be
changed	 altogether.	 When	 you	 are	 eating,	 eat	 joyfully,	 because	 everything	 is
interconnected.	When	you	are	dancing,	joy	has	to	be	there.	Meditating,	be	joyful.
Talking	 to	 a	 person,	 be	 joyful,	 be	 radiant,	 flowing.	 Walking	 on	 the	 road,	 be
joyful.	We	don't	know	how	much	we	are	missing.	Just	an	ordinary	walk	on	the
road	coming	to	the	ashram	--	you	can	enjoy	it	so	tremendously.	Who	knows?	--
there	may	not	be	another	day	again.	Tomorrow	you	may	not	be	able	to	walk	on
the	road.	Tomorrow	you	may	not	be	there	to	receive	the	sun.	The	wind	will	be
there,	but	you	may	not	be	 there.	Who	knows	about	 tomorrow?	So	 this	may	be
the	last	day.
So	always	enjoy	each	moment	of	it	as	if	it	is	going	to	be	the	last.	Take	the	whole
of	it,	squeeze	it	completely,	don't	 leave	anything	in	it.	Then	one	lives	intensely
and	 passionately.	 And	 sex	 is	 just	 a	 by-product	 of	 your	 total	 attitude,	 so	 you
cannot	just	change	your	sex	--	that	is	not	possible.	Everything	is	interconnected,
mm?	so	you	will	have	to	change	everything.
Eat	joyously!	Just	don't	go	on	eating	as	if	you	have	to	do	it	so	you	just	stuff	the
body	--	enjoy	it!	It	is	a	sacrament.	Walk	--	enjoy	it.	It	is	God's	gift,	and	one	has
to	be	thankful	for	it.	Talking	to	somebody,	enjoy	it.
So	from	this	moment	start	enjoying	things	also	which	have	nothing	to	do	on	the
surface	with	sex,	mm?
But	the	total	result	will	be	that	if	you	enjoy	other	things,	you	will	enjoy	sex	too.
If	you	don't	enjoy	other	things	you	will	not	enjoy	sex	either.
This	 is	 my	 observation	 --	 that	 the	 attitude	 towards	 sex	 is	 a	 very	 symbolic
attitude;	it	shows	everything	about	your	whole	life.	So	you	will	not	be	enjoying
other	things	either,	or	only	to	a	certain	extent	and	then	you	will	be	stopping.	A
man	who	is	afraid	of	happiness,	joy,	is	always	afraid	of	many	things.	You	will	go
to	a	certain	extent	and	then	stop.
These	three	things,	and	report	to	me	after	three	weeks.	Three	weeks	of	wild	life,
mm?	(She	laughs)	Forget	all	humanity	--	be	an	animal,	pure	animal,	and	then	I
can	make	you	a	human	being	very	easily.	But	to	be	an	animal	one	needs	to	go
deep	into	things.
Unless	you	are	a	real	animal,	you	cannot	become	a	real	human	being.	And	unless
you	are	a	real	human	being,	you	cannot	become	a	divine	being.
Everything	has	a	hierarchy:	the	animal	is	the	base	of	the	temple,	humanity	is	the
walls	of	the	temple,	and	divinity	is	the	roof.	So	the	roof	cannot	exist	without	the
base.	One	can	have	the	roof,	and	if	 there	are	no	walls,	 then	too	it	cannot	exist.
Man	 is	a	 three	storey	building:	 the	 first	 storey	 is	animal,	 the	second	 is	human,
the	 third	 is	 divine.	 So	 you	 start	 from	 the	 first,	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 --	 lay
down	the	foundation	stone.
Right?	Good!
[The	 last	 five	pages	of	 this	chapter	 is	a	compilation	and	explanation	of	Osho's
guidance	 about	 sex,	 giving	 as	 examples	 several	 situations	 which	 arose	 during
darshans	where	people	asked	his	advice	about	their	sexual	energy.]
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	Live	at	the	Maximum
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
25	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611255
ShortTitle:	WHIP16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Anand	means	 bliss	 and	 amara	means	 eternal,	 deathless,	 immortal.	 And	 in	 the
East	 we	 define	 bliss	 as	 that	 which	 is	 eternal.	 Happiness	 is	 that	 which	 is
momentary.	When	happiness	becomes	eternal,	it	becomes	bliss.
Happiness	 is	 just	 a	 glimpse	 of	 that	 bliss	 --	 as	 if	 you	 have	 seen	 the	 far	 away
Himalayan	mountain	 peaks	 in	 a	 dream...	 or	 in	 a	 dark	 night	 there	 is	 a	 sudden
lightning	 and	 you	 have	 seen	 the	 vision	 --	 mm?	 Everything	 was	 clear	 for	 a
moment,	then	again	the	darkness	--	and	even	darker	than	before.
Happiness	 is	 a	 far	 away	 glimpse	 of	 bliss.	 -And	 by	 its	 very	 nature	 it	 is
momentary.	 You	 cannot	 make	 lightning	 permanent	 --	 by	 its	 very	 nature	 it	 is
momentary.	People	hanker	 for	 happiness	 and	 they	want	 to	make	 it	 permanent.
That	 is	 the	 whole	 desire	 of	 the	 human	mind	 --	 to	 make	 happiness	 something
permanent,	 which	 abides,	 which	 remains.	 But	 by	 its	 very	 nature	 it	 is	 non-
abiding,	by	its	very	nature	it	is	momentary.
Human	beings	go	on	struggling	for	the	impossible.	And	then	of	course	there	is
frustration.	You	can	look	everywhere	--	there	is	frustration,	misery.
So	 don't	 hanker	 for	 happiness,	 rather	 search	 for	 bliss	 --	 and	 that	 is	 a	 totally
different	dimension.	That's	what	meditation	is	all	about	--	the	technology	of	the
inner	search	for	something	which	is	eternal	in	you.
Only	on	 the	base	of	 that	 can	one	come	 to	a	point	where	one	can	 relax	and	be
really	happy.	This	ordinary	happiness	makes	you	really	more	and	more	unhappy.
By	the	time	you	are	settling	with	your	unhappiness,	again	there	is	a	moment	of
lightning	 --	 again	 there	 is	 happiness,	 again	 you	 are	 unsettled,	 again	 desire
arises...	 then	 there	 is	 frustration.	 By	 the	 time	 you	 are	 settling	 again,	 another
moment	of	happiness.
So	these	moments	of	happiness	are	far	between	--	and	between	two	moments	of
happiness	 there	 is	 great	 misery.	 We	 suffer	 that	 misery	 in	 the	 hope	 that	 the
moment	will	be	coming.	It	has	not	come	today	--
tomorrow	it	will	be	coming,	or	 the	day	after	 tomorrow,	but	 it	must	be	coming.
We	live	by	hope.
To	enter	into	meditation	is	to	enter	into	another	dimension	--	the	dimension	of	no
hope,	no	desire...	the	dimension	of	no	time.	And	the	search	is	not	for	happiness
at	 all	 --	 the	 search	 is	 for	 that	which	 is	 eternal.	By	 the	 time	 you	 recognise	 the
eternal	in	you,	suddenly	there	is	bliss,	and	then	bliss	is	no	more	like	lightning	--
it	is	a	permanent	light	in	you	that	abides.	Then	happiness	is	not	something	that
comes	and	goes	--	you	are	happiness	then.
When	happiness	becomes	just	your	nature,	it	is	bliss.	When	it	comes	and	goes	it
is	 of	 no	 use.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 toy,	mm?	The	 child	 becomes	 engaged,	 occupied,
enjoys	 playing	with	 it,	 but	meanwhile	misery	 goes	 on	growing	 and	 it	 goes	 on
exploring	again	and	again....
Anand	means	bliss	and	jagdeesh	means	god,	lord	of	the	world;	so,	god	of	bliss.
And	everybody	is	this	--
the	ultimate.	We	may	know	it,	we	may	not	know	it.	We	may	recognise,	we	may
not	 recognise,	 but	 the	 reality	 remains	 the	 same	 --	 only	God	 is,	 and	 everything
else	is	just	a	dream.	This	name	will	remind	you	continuously.	So	be	a	god,	live
like	a	god,	move	like	a	god.
God	has	not	 to	be	realised	--	God	is	already	there.	It	 is	your	reality...	 it	 is	you.
One	has	just	to	start	living	it	on	the	way.
And	that	is	the	basic	teaching	that	I	am	bringing	to	you	--	that	God	has	not	to	be
searched	 for.	 It	 is	 not	 somewhere	 far	 away	 --	 it	 is	 already	 the	 case.	 Just	 start
living	it.
Whatsoever	you	do,	do	with	the	conscious	idea	that	you	are	God	--	 love	like	a
god,	move,	walk	like	a	god.	Mm?	just	let	that	feeling	arise	more	and	more.	And
once	you	start	 living	 that	vibration,	suddenly	you	become	aware	 that	you	have
always	been	that.	And	not	only	you	--	the	moment	you	recognise	that	you	have
been	 always	divine,	 the	whole	 existence	 suddenly	 turns	 into	 a	 totally	different
world;	everything	becomes	divine.
....	And	do	a	few	groups	here.
First	Tathata.	Tathata	means	to	be	in	a	state	of	suchness	--	it	is	a	buddhist	word...
to	 live	 life	 as	 it	 is	 without	 hankering	 for	 any	 improvement,	 because	 all
improvement	is	a	desire	of	the	ego.	To	think	of	oneself	in	terms	of	becoming	is
to	create	misery.	So	Tathata	means	whatsoever	is,	is	--	live	it.	Don't	compare	it
with	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	 past	 and	 don't	 compare	 it	 with	 the	 future.	 Let	 that	 moment,	 the	 present
moment,	be	all,	as	if	there	is	no	other	time	--	in	fact	there	is	not,	only	the	present
is.	Tathata	means	living	in	the	present,	and	living	so	totally	that	the	past	and	the
future	 disappear,	 so	 you	 are	 passionately	 herenow,	 intensely	 herenow.	 You
become	 a	 burning	 flame	 --	 your	 torch	 burns	 from	 both	 ends	 together.	 And	 in
those	moments	one	exists	at	the	optimum.
We	 are	 living	 at	 the	minimum,	 that's	why	we	 are	missing	 the	 joy.	We	 are	 not
meant	to	live	at	the	minimum.	We	are	made	to	live	at	the	optimum,	we	are	made
to	live	at	a	hundred	degrees	--	from	there	is	evaporation,	transformation.	But	we
live	near	about	ten	degrees:	just	lukewarm	--	neither	cold	nor	hot.
Tathata	means	that	this	moment	is	all,	so	you	cannot	dissipate	your	energy	and
you	cannot	spread	your	life.	There	is	no	past	--	it	is	already	gone;	and	there	is	no
future	 --	 because	 it	 has	 not	 come	 yet.	 So	 all	 that	 you	 have	 got	 is	 this	 atomic
moment.	There	is	no	way	to	spread	your	life.	You	cannot	be	horizontal,	you	have
to	be	vertical	--	because	this	is	the	only	moment	there	is,	and	you	have	to	live	in
depth.	 That	 creates	 intensity...	 that	 creates	 passion.	 Life	 becomes	 a	 passionate
affair.	Then	each	moment	has	its	own	flame,	and	there	is	no	smoke.
Smoke	comes	when	you	are	not	burning	 totally.	 If	you	burn	a	new,	freshly-cut
log,	it	smokes	because	it	resists,	it	fights	the	fire.	It	is	not	ready	to	burn,	the	sap
is	still	alive;	the	log	is	not	dry.	The	log	is	not	ready	to	move	with	the	flames	--	it
fights.	There	is	resistance,	struggle,	conflict,	so	there	is	no	fire,	only	smoke;	the
log	smokes.	When	the	log	is	dry,	 there	is	no	smoke	--	 there	is	pure	fire.	When
there	is	no	past,	when	there	is	no	future,	you	are	not	wet	with	desire	--	you	are
dry.
And	 this	moment	 is	 all.	There	 is	 no	way	 to	 spread	yourself	 anywhere,	 so	you
dive	deep.	And	in	that	depth	one	starts	living	at	the	optimum	--	and	to	live	at	the
optimum	is	to	live	like	a	god.	So	Tathata	will	be	your	first	step	towards	it.	And
the	second	is	Sahaj....
Sahaj	means	spontaneity.	That	which	happens	on	its	own	accord	--	only	that	 is
true	 and	 that	 is	 beautiful	 and	 that	 is	 good.	 That	 which	 you	 do	 is	 wrong.
Whenever	 you	 are	 the	 doer	 you	 have	 erred.	 Being	 spontaneous	 means	 that
whatsoever	 life	 wants,	 it	 happens.	 You	 cooperate	 with	 it	 --	 with	 no
condemnation,	with	no	judgement,	with	no	good/bad.	Nothing	is	moral,	nothing
is	immoral.
There	are	only	two	types	of	things:	either	natural	or	unnatural.	So	if	you	go	on
dropping	the	unnatural,	the	natural	becomes	a	bigger	stream	by	and	by.	That	will
be	 the	 second	 step,	 and	 then	 I	will	 tell	 you	what	 else	 to	do...	 and	 the	 camp	 is
there.
And	fundamentally	I	am	here,	mm?	So	just	drink	me	as	deep	as	you	can.	And
you	are	not	new	here.
Some	day	you	will	recognise	that	you	have	been	with	me	before.
So	it	is	a	continuity	of	an	old	story....
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	Now	is	the	Season	to	Explode
26	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611265
ShortTitle:	WHIP17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[The	Sajah	--	spontaneity	--	group	is	at	darshan.	The	group	leader	said	it	was	a
very	 exciting	 group	 with	 a	 tremendous	 amount	 of	 life	 energy.	 However,	 one
woman	who	seemed	to	have	a	breakthrough,	left	the	group.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sometimes	some	people	leave.	If	they	feel	like	leaving	that	is	their	spontaneity,
so	let	them	leave.
Nothing	to	worry	about.	We	are	not	to	force	anybody	--	that	is	their	choice,	mm?
And	when	somebody	leaves,	help	him	not	to	feel	guilty	about	it	--	that	is	to	be
remembered.	Don't	feel	it	as	a	rejection	--	that	he	has	rejected	the	group	or	the
group	process;	no	don't	take	it	that	way.
This	 is	 how	 it	 evolved	 in	 his	 or	 her	 being	 --	 to	 leave.	 So	 if	 it	 has	 come	 into
somebody's	mind	to	leave,	then	that	is	the	spontaneous	thing	to	do.	Then	forcing
him	 or	 her	 to	 be	 in	 the	 group	 will	 be	 against	 the	 group,	 against	 the	 very
philosophy	of	the	group.	Even	if	 the	person	forces	himself	 to	be	there	and	you
come	 to	 know,	 just	 tell	 him	 not	 to	 force,	 because	 that	 is	 against	 the	 whole
process.	 The	 process	 is	 to	 float...	 and	 who	 knows?	 Surprises	 will	 be	 there!
Sometimes	somebody	comes	floating	to	a	point.	where	he	simply	jumps	out	of
the	river.	That's	how	it	happens	to	him	--	so	say	good-bye!	But	don't	make	it	in
any	way	 be	 felt	 as	 a	 rejection	 of	 the	 group	 --	 because	 if	 you	 feel	 that	 it	 is	 a
rejection	 of	 the	 group,	 then	 knowingly,	 unknowingly,	 you	 will	 create	 a	 guilt
feeling	 in	 the	 person	 who	 has	 left.	 He	 will	 start	 feeling	 that	 he	 has	 done
something	wrong,	that	he	should	not	have	done	it.	No.
One	thing	has	to	be	absolutely	clear	about	my	work:	I	don't	want	anybody	to	feel
guilty	about	anything.
I	want	humanity	 to	be	completely	 free	 from	guilt.	Now	all	 the	 religions	of	 the
world	have	done	just	the	opposite:	they	have	made	people	feel	very	very	guilty.
They	 have	 made	 all	 people	 feel	 like	 sinners.	 That's	 why	 the	 world	 is	 so
miserable.	The	ceremony	has	lost	its	music,	its	dance.	Everybody	is	so	sad	and
the	whole	thing	has	become	ugly	because	everybody	is	so	guilty.	If	you	eat	this,
you	are	guilty;	if	you	drink	that,	you	are	guilty.	If	you	make	love	to	this	woman,
you	are	guilty.	If	you	have	some	revolutionary	ideas,	you	are	guilty.	If	you	have
some	eccentric	sexuality,	you	are	guilty...	a	thousand	and	one	traps	to	make	you
guilty!
Unless	you	completely	deaden	yourself	you	cannot	be	respected.	So	the	society
respects	only	the	dead	people,	and	the	alive	people	are	all	guilty	and	sinners.
My	whole	approach	is	just	the	contrary,	the	diametrically	opposite	--	I	would	like
you	to	feel	happy.
Whatsoever	you	do,	you	are	accepted.	The	way	you	want	to	do	it	is	good	for	you
--	good	 that	 for	 three	days,	 four	days,	you	were	with	 the	group.	We	are	happy
that	for	four	days	we	continued	to	be	together.
When	next	 time	 somebody	 leaves,	 give	 him	a	 good	 farewell	 so	 that	 he	 leaves
without	 any	 guilt.	And	 it	 the	 person	 leaves	without	 any	 guilt,	 your	 group	 has
worked	tremendously	for	him.	If	he	comes	next	time	to	do	the	group,	he	will	not
come	out	of	guilt.	He	will	come	out	of	a	feeling	that	this	is	the	group	where	hc
belongs,	 that	 this	 group	has	 to	 be	 completed	 not	 out	 of	 guilt	 that	 he	 has	 done
anything	wrong,	but	out	of	a	feeling	that	he	has	missed	something.
The	original	meaning	of	 the	word	sin	 is	 'missing	 the	mark'.	 It	 is	 tremendously
beautiful.	It	has	lost	its	original	meaning.	A	sinner	is	one	who	missed	the	mark	--
nothing	else!
So	next	 time	when	somebody	 leaves,	give	him	a	good	 farewell.	Let	him	 leave
with	good	feelings	that	he	has	left	a	beautiful	group,	a	friendly	one	behind	--	and
a	great	desire	arises	in	him	or	her	to	come	back	next	time.
The	group	worked	well.	That	was	my	feeling	about	 it	 --	 that	 it	 should	become
very	very	spontaneous.
That's	 why	 I	 have	 given	 the	 name	 Sahaj;	 it	 means	 spontaneity,	 natural;
whatsoever	is,	is	good	and	we	accept	it	totally.
It	will	go	on	changing	because	a	spontaneous	group	will	change	every	 time.	 It
will	bring	many	surprises	to	you	too.	You	will	never	be	fed	up	with	it,	because	if
it	 is	structured,	participants	change	but	 the	 leader	 remains	 the	same,	and	every
time	he	is	repeating	the	same.	But	that	will	not	happen	in	your	group.	It	will	be
as	new	to	you	as	it	will	be	to	the	participants.
In	fact	the	group	has	no	leader	really	--	you	are	just	a	coordinator,	just	to	be	there
to	help,	that's	all...	a	midwife.
And	that	is	the	real	function	of	a	leader	--	to	be	a	midwife.	If	something	is	being
born,	you	help.	You	cannot	produce	the	child	and	you	are	not	supposed	to	make
a	pregnancy.	If	somebody	is	carrying	a	pregnancy,	you	help.	You	just	facilitate
the	process,	and	whatsoever	is....	You	are	not	worried	whether	a	girl	is	born	or	a
boy,	or	a	fool	or	a	wise	man;	you	are	not	worried	about	it.	That's	not	the	point	--
you	simply	help.
And	 each	 time	 there	will	 be	 different	 things,	 because	 different	 people	will	 be
coming	with	different	pregnancies.	It	is	going	to	be	a	continuous	surprise,	and	it
will	remain	very	very	alive.
[A	group	member	says:	I	often	feel	totally	restless	--	wanting	to	go	somewhere
and	not	knowing	where	to	go.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	what	 are	you	doing	 for	 twenty-four	hours?	 I	 think	you	need	a	 little	more
creativity,	more	action.	It	is	just	energy	--	nothing	else	--	and	energy	needs	work.
This	 is	how	man	makes	problems.	When	a	 child	 is	 a	 child	he	hankers	 to	be	 a
young	man	 because	 he	 looks	 all	 around	 --	 older	 people	 are	 so	 powerful,	 and
doing	many	things	which	he	would	also	like	to	do.	He	wants	to	grow	up	fast	--	as
fast	 as	 possible.	 In	 fact	 he	 prays	 to	 God,	 'By	 the	 morning	 make	 me	 bigger,
stronger.'	When	one	is	young	this	problem	arises	--	so	much	energy,	what	to	do?
It	constantly	goes	on	driving	you	mad:	do	something!
One	does	not	know	what	to	do	and	where	to	go	and	anywhere	you	go	it	makes
no	difference	--	it	is	there	again.	So	young	people	go	on	moving	from	one	town
to	another,	from	one	country	to	another,	from	one	guru	to	another....	Again	they
become	 restless.	 They	 are	 constantly	 on	 the	 move.	 The	 young	 energy	 is	 a
vagabond...	it	is	vagrant.	Then	it	creates	problems.	One	becomes	so	anxious	with
energy.	And	then	there	is	old	age.
Old	people	come	to	me	and	they	say,	'We	cannot	meditate.	We	would	like	to,	but
the	energy	is	not	there.
We	would	like	to	dance	like	these	young	people	--	we	cannot.'	So	it	seems	that
whatsoever	happens,	there	are	problems.
A	wise	person	 is	one	who	uses	all	 the	situations	of	 life.	When	he	 is	a	child	he
enjoys	childhood.	He	does	not	bother	a	bit	for	growing	up	soon	or	anything	--	he
does	not	think	about	it.	When	he	is	a	child,	he	is	a	child.	He	enjoys	that	innocent,
irresponsible	state	of	mind.	When	he	is	a	young	man	he	becomes	creative.
He	 does	 not	 go	 rushing	 from	 one	 place	 to	 another;	 rather	 he	 starts	 using	 the
energy	 to	move	from	one	space	 to	another	space	--	 the	 journey	becomes	 inner.
And	you	have	a	thousand	and	one	spaces	yet	unexplored.
So	 it	 is	 pointless	 to	 go	 to	 Kathmandu	 and	 to	 Goa	 and	 to	 Kabul	 --	 it	 is
meaningless.	There	are	Kathmandus	within	you	and	Goas	within	you	and	vast
tremendous	beautiful	beaches	of	being	--	you	need	to	go	there.
So	 when	 a	 person	 is	 wise	 and	 young,	 he	 uses,	 rides	 on	 the	 waves...	 dances,
laughs,	lives,	loves,	and	does	not	make	any	problem	out	of	it.	When	he	is	old,	he
uses	that	too;	when	the	energy	is	gone	he	can	sit	silently.
Now	he	can	follow	the	zen	maxim:	sitting	silently,	doing	nothing,	and	the	grass
grows	by	itself.
This	is	how	a	wise	man	should	be	--	using	all	opportunities	as	they	come.	And
each	opportunity	has	its	own	beauty	and	it	opens	its	own	door.
So	right	now	dance,	sing,	love	--	use	your	energy!	Invest	it	in	inner	exploration	-
-	paint,	make	poems,	write	a	novel.	This	is	the	time	when	one	needs	to	do	many
many	 things,	 because	 once	 energy	 is	 gone	 if	 you	 have	 not	 done	many,	many
things,	 you	will	 repent	 --	 but	 then	 it	will	 be	 too	 late.	So	use	 this	 time	 to	do	 a
thousand	 and	 one	 Things.	 Enjoy	 doing	 them	 and	 then	 the	 restlessness	 will
disappear.
This	is	how	I	have	lived.	When	I	was	a	child	I	was	never	worried	about	growing
up.	Why?	Why	should	one?	Then	I	lived	like	a	whirlwind.
Somebody,	a	young	man,	asked	Confucius,	'How	to	be	silent?'	Confucius	looked
at	him	and	he	said,
'Have	you	gone	mad?	When	you	die	you	will	rest	in	your	grave	--	then	you	will
be	silent!	What	is	the	hurry?
Right	now	enjoy!	Right	now	don't	be	worried	about	silence.	Everybody	is	to	die,
that	much	is	certain.	Then	in	your	grave	there	will	be	eternal	silence	--	you	enjoy
it	then!'
Confucius	is	right.	This	is	no	time	to	become	grave-like.	This	is	time	to	flower!
This	 is	 the	 season	 to	 explode!	 If	 you	 are	 not	 exploding,	 there	will	 be	 trouble,
mm?	It	is	just	like	a	tree	which	is	somehow	hoarding	its	flowers	and	fruits	inside
it,	and	does	not	allow	them	out.	It	will	go	mad!	Sooner	or	later	the	tree	will	be	on
the	psychiatrist's	couch,	going	through	psychoanalysis.	But	trees	don't	do	that	--
they	are	not	that	foolish.
When	it	is	time,	they	flower.	When	it	is	time,	many	fruits	come.	They	become	so
heavy	with	fruit	 that	 their	branches	start	 touching	 the	earth.	When	it	 is	 time	to
drop	the	fruits,	they	drop.	When	it	is	time	to	drop	the	leaves,	the	leaves	drop	and
they	stand	naked	against	the	sky.	When	it	is	time	to	die,	they	die	silently.
They	live	each	moment	as	it	comes.
This	is	my	essential	teaching:	live	each	moment	as	it	comes.	You	have	energy	--
be	creative,	mm?
[Another	 group	 member	 says:	 The	 fourth	 day	 leader	 had	 been	 saying	 to
everybody	to	go	crazy,	and	at	the	first	moment	a	fear	came	into	me	--	like	being
oppressed	by	violence...	going	into	a	space	where	I	didn't	feel	like	going.	Then
the	 group	 entirely	 focused	 on	 me	 saying,	 'Get	 angry!	 Get	 angry!'	 And	 they
started	slapping	me	and	fighting	me....	And	I	didn't	know	how	to	cope	with	this
violence...	So	how	to	cope	with	the	aggression?	--	because	I	didn't	feel	any	anger
against	anybody	or	anything	to	get	into	stuff	like	that.	The	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
first	three	and	a	half	days	were	really	spontaneous,	and	then	after	these	days,	this
fear.]
Mm	mm.	In	such	a	situation	you	should	listen	to	your	own	spontaneity,	and	then
you	would	have	enjoyed	the	last	days	tremendously.	They	were	hitting	you	--	let
them	hit	 --	but	you	didn't	 feel	anger,	 so	what	could	you	do?	 If	you	didn't	 feel,
you	didn't.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 create	 a	 feeling.	 Nobody	 has	 ever	 been	 able	 to	 create	 a
feeling.	 You	 can	 pretend,	 you	 can	 act,	 but	 how	 can	 you	 feel?	 If	 you	 are	 not
feeling,	you	are	not	feeling.
So	 this	was	a	good	opportunity	 --	 that	 they	are	slapping	your	 face,	and	hitting
and	saying	things	and	provoking	you,	and	you	were	just	sitting	there.	This	was
your	craziness!
Just	 sitting	 there...	Buddha-like.	And	 sooner	 or	 later	 they	would	 have	 felt	 that
they	were	crazy	and	what	were	they	doing	to	this	poor	man?	He	is	simply	sitting
there	looking	at	the	whole	scene,	enjoying	it	or	smiling.
They	could	have	killed	you	--	and	even	if	they	kill,	what	is	wrong	in	it?	(Osho
chuckles.	 ..laughter)	 I	 don't	 see	 the	 point	 --	what	 is	wrong?	One	 day	 you	will
die...	 and	 you	 will	 not	 find	 such	 a	 beautiful	 group	 to	 die	 in!	 (laughter)	 You
missed	an	opportunity!
Next	 time	 it	 happens,	 just	 listen	 to	 your	 spontaneity.	 This	 may	 be	 their
spontaneity	 --	 and	 of	 course	when	 somebody	 is	 hitting	 you	 and	 you	 don't	 get
angry,	he	becomes	more	angry	because	this	man	is	defeating	him.	So	that	is	his
problem.	 If	 you	 could	 have	 watched,	 it	 would	 have	 given	 you	 such	 a	 great
insight	into	your	being	and	such	a	transcendence.	All	this	craziness	around	you
and	you	were	sitting	there.
This	is	what	is	happening	to	me!	(laughter)	What	else	can	I	do?
But	 it	happens	 the	first	 time.	In	 the	next	group	you	look	at	 it	again.	Otherwise
some	time	repeat	Sahaj.
And	just	let	them.	What	are	they	doing?	What	can	they	do?	At	the	most	they	can
kill,	that's	all.	Once	you	accept	the	worst,	then	there	is	no	problem.	You	should
have	lain	down	there	amidst	them	and	let	those	crazy	people	do	what	they	were
doing	--	shouting	and	screaming	--	and	they	would	have	worshipped	you	finally!
They	would	have	touched	your	feet!	(laughter)	You	would	have	simply	attained!
You	would	have	become	enlightened	or	something!	This	 is	how	enlightenment
happens!	(chuckling...	laughter)	The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	Know	You	are	the	Universe
27	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611275
ShortTitle:	WHIP18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Deva	means	 divine	 and	 niseema	means	without	 any	 boundaries	 --	 unbounded,
unlimited,	infinite.	And	this	name	is	to	remind	you	continuously	that	nothing	is
limited.	All	limitation	is	imposed	by	the	mind,	otherwise	everything	is	unlimited.
It	begins	nowhere	--	it	ends	nowhere.	It	is	almost	as	if	you	stand	at	a	window	and
look	at	the	sky	--	the	frame	of	the	window	becomes	the	frame	of	the	sky.	But	the
sky	is	unlimited	--	it	is	your	window	that	gives	it	a	limitation.	The	mind	is	very
limited,	existence	is	unlimited.
So	whenever	 you	 look	 through	 the	mind	 you	will	 see	 boundaries,	 definitions.
Whenever	 you	 can	 see	 something	without	 the	mind,	 all	 boundaries	 disappear.
Hence	the	insistence	of	all	the	great	meditators	that	one	has	to	achieve	a	state	of
no-mind,	 because	 only	 then	 you	 know	 the	 real	 as	 it	 is.	 Otherwise	 you	 know
something	as	it	is	not,	as	the	mind	manipulates	it,	as	the	mind	makes	it	appear.
You	know	that,	but	that	is	not	real.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	you	look	at	a	tree	it	looks	limited.	But	if	you	penetrate	a	little	deeper,	the	roots
have	gone	into	the	earth,	they	are	joined	with	the	earth,	and	the	leaves	are	joined
with	the	sun,	with	the	sun	rays.	Every	leaf	is	continuously	in	a	tremendous	play
with	the	air.	Without	the	air,	without	the	sun	and	without	the	earth,	the	tree	won't
exist.	It	can't	exist	for	a	single	moment.
So	to	define	the	tree	is	not	right.	In	the	definition	of	the	tree,	the	earth	has	to	be
there,	 the	sun	has	 to	be	 there,	 the	air	has	 to	be	 there.	And	 then	 there	are	more
subtle	layers....
Now	even	scientific	researchers	show	that	if	you	love	the	tree,	when	you	come
to	it,	the	tree	feels	very	happy.	It	sways...	it	welcomes	you...	it	spreads	its	arms
towards	you.	So	even	it	is	connected	with	love.
If	 you	 come	 to	 the	 tree	 with	 hatred	 and	 you	 want	 to	 cut	 the	 tree,	 it	 shrinks,
becomes	afraid,	hates	you	from	its	very	guts.	Now	there	are	scientific	ways	 to
know	 it.	 And	 not	 only	 when	 you	 hate	 the	 tree	 does	 it	 hate	 you	 --	 even	 that
somebody	is	coming	with	the	idea	to	cut	the	tree...	the	very	idea	is	enough!	So	it
means	that	the	tree	is	connected	even	with	ideas.
And	not	only	that....	When	you	are	going	to	cut	a	particular	pine	tree,	the	other
trees	will	also	be	antagonistic	 to	you.	You	are	not	going	to	harm	them,	but	 the
rosebush	will	be	angry	at	you.	You	are	going	 to	cut	 the	pine	 tree	 --	 they	have
lived	together	for	so	long.	They	have	an	affinity,	a	family,	a	communion.
The	garden	will	miss	the	pine	tree	--	the	whole	garden	will	miss	it.
If	you	go	deeper	and	deeper,	you	see	that	things	are	so	interconnected	that	it	is
difficult	 to	 define	 anything.	 That's	 why	 God	 is	 indefinable	 --	 because	 God
simply	 means	 the	 totality	 of	 all	 the	 interconnections,	 of	 all	 the	 positive
interconnections,	impossible	interconnections	--	past,	present,	future.
The	totality	of	all	the	interconnections	is	what	God	is.	It	is	impossible	to	define.
But	 the	mind	 tends	 to	define,	categorise,	 label.	The	mind	says,	 'This	 is	a	man,
this	is	a	woman'	--	and	this	is	all	nonsense	because	in	every	man	there	exists	a
woman,	and	 in	every	woman	 there	exists	a	man.	This	 is	utter	nonsense	 to	say,
'This	 is	 a	 man,	 and	 this	 is	 a	 woman.'	 Maybe	 there	 is	 a	 little	 difference	 of
emphasis	 that's	 all.	 Because	 each	 child	 is	 born	 out	 of	 two	 parents,	 man	 and
woman;	the	child	inherits	both.	Your	mother	goes	on	living	in	you,	your	father
goes	on	living	in	you,	so	how	can	you	be	just	a	woman?
And	you	 cannot	 be	 only	 that	which	 you	 look	 on	 the	 surface.	There	 are	 layers
upon	layers	of	your	being	not	even	known	to	you,	so	how	can	you	define?
Just	a	few	days	ago	one	old	woman	came	--	of	course	old,	so	an	old	pattern	of
thinking.	And	she	 said,	 'I	 am	very	much	 impressed	by	you	Osho,	but	 I	 cannot
take	sannyas	because	I	have	accepted	Jesus	as	my	teacher.	I	am	a	Christian	and	I
am	an	orthodox	Christian.	 I	 am	 tremendously	 impressed,	 I	 love	what	you	 say,
but	I	cannot	follow	you,	I	cannot	come	with	you.'
I	told	her,	'If	you	really	love	Jesus,	you	have	to	come	with	me.	If	you	are	really	a
Christian,	 how	 can	 you	 avoid	me,	 how	 can	 you	 escape?	 But	 if	 you	 are	 not	 a
Christian,	 it	 is	 another	 thing.	 Then	 you	 can	 go	 on	 playing	 with	 the	 label
"Christian",	and	"Christ",	and	this	and	that.'
By	giving	you	 this	name,	Niseema,	 I	would	 like	you	 to	go	deeper	 into	 things,
and	 to	drop	 the	old	habit	of	 the	mind.	Nothing	 is	clear-cut	 --	 that's	 the	beauty.
That	is	the	mystery	of	life	--	that	nothing	is	clear-cut.
Everything	penetrates	everything	else	and	everything	is	a	member	of	everything
else...	everything	 is	overlapping	everything	else.	 It	 is	almost	 like	waves	on	 the
surface	of	the	ocean.	Have	you	ever	seen	a	single	wave?	It	is	impossible	to	see	a
single	wave	on	the	ocean.	Whenever	a	wave	exists,	it	exists	in	a	great	pattern	of
waves.
You	cannot	exist	alone.	You	exist	in	this	universe!
This	word	universe	 is	beautiful	 --	 it	means	unity:	uni	means	unity.	We	exist	 in
unity,	and	 the	unity	 is	multi-dimensional.	We	are	 joined	with	 the	past.	You	are
joined	 with	 your	 father,	 with	 your	 mother,	 with	 your	 mother's	 mother,	 your
father's	 father,	 and	 so	 on	 and	 so	 forth	 up	 to	Adam	 and	Eve,	 and	 to	God	who
created	Adam	and	Eve.	You	are	joined	to	all	that	is	ever	going	to	happen	in	the
world.	You	may	disappear,	but	you	are	joined,	because	you	will	create	a	certain
ripple	which	will	continue.
I	may	be	gone,	but	I	am	creating	a	certain	ripple	that	will	remain.	You	may	be
gone,	but	you	loved	somebody	and	that	love	created	a	ripple	that	will	remain	and
remain	and	remain.	It	can	never	disappear,	it	will	have	its	own	repercussions...	it
will	go	on	vibrating.	You	throw	a	small	pebble	in	the	lake	and	ripples	arise.	The
pebble	 settles	 very	 soon	 at	 the	 bottom,	 but	 the	 ripples	 continue.	 They	 go	 on
moving	towards	the	shore	--	and	there	is	no	shore	to	this	existence.
I	am	talking	to	you....	In	this	moment	something	is	transpiring	between	me	and
you.	I	will	be	gone,	you	will	be	gone,	but	that	which	is	transpiring	will	abide.	So
these	words	will	 go	 on	 echoing,	 reechoing.	The	 speaker	will	 not	 be	 there,	 the
listener	will	not	be	there,	but	what	is	transpiring	between	the	two	in	this	moment
has	become	part	of	eternity.	And	 there	 is	no	shore,	 so	 these	 ripples	will	go	on
and	on	and	on.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Now	scientists	say	that	if	we	can	invent	something	more	speedy	than	the	speed
of	light,	we	can	catch	many	things	from	the	past.	For	example,	Krishna	talked	to
Arjuna	--	those	vibrations	must	be	somewhere,	passing	near	some	star.	If	we	can
reach	and	catch	them	there,	we	can	listen	to	it	again.
Jesus	can	be	photographed	still.	The	only	problem	is	how	to	invent	a	vehicle	that
goes	faster	than	light.
Some	day	it	may	be	possible.	For	example,	Krishna	(the	ashram's	photographer)
is	taking	a	photograph.
When	 he	 takes	 a	 photograph	 it	 takes	 time	 for	 the	 light	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 plate.
When	his	photograph	comes	it	 is	not	exactly	of	the	present;	it	 is	of	the	past.	A
split	 second	 has	 passed	 --	 so	 a	 thousand	 years	 have	 passed;	 that	 makes	 no
difference.	If	we	can	run	ahead	and	from	there	we	can	take	a	photograph,	we	can
take	 Jesus	 surrounded'	 by	 his	 disciples	 by	 Lake	 Galilee,	 talking	 to	 them	 and
telling	his	parables.	Nothing	is	lost!
This	 is	 the	meaning	of	universe	 --	 it	 is	 a	unity.	Whatsoever	has	happened,	has
happened,	whatsoever	is	happening,	is	happening,	and	whatsoever	will	happen...
they	are	all	connected.
This	is	the	meaning	of	niseema.	So	feel	this	more	and	more.
And	just	by	feeling	it,	you	will	feel	tremendous	joy	arising	in	you.	Limitation	is
misery.	 To	 think	 of	 oneself	 as	 a	 woman	 is	 to	 become	miserable.	 To	 think	 of
oneself	 as	 a	Christian	 or	 a	Mohammedan	 is	 to	 become	miserable.	To	 think	 of
oneself	as	this	or	that	is	to	become	miserable.	Dropping	all	identity,	one	becomes
blissful.
So	let	your	sannyas	be	a	great	dropping	of	all	the	identities.	Know	that	you	are
the	universe.	This	is	the	meaning	of	saying	that	you	are	God....
[The	Encounter	 group	 is	 at	 darshan.	One	 group	member	 says:	You	gave	me	 a
message	last	time	that	I	should	take	more	initiative...	I	find	it	more	difficult	than
I	thought	it	would	be.]
Mm	mm.	I	was	also	thinking	it	would	be	difficult.	It	is	difficult	to	take	initiative
because	to	take	initiative	is	to	take	risk.	One	never	knows	where	it	will	lead	and
what	will	happen.	And	the	basic	fear	is	that	if	you	take	the	initiative,	maybe	the
other	is	going	to	reject.
The	fear	of	rejection	is	there,	so	people	don't	take	initiative	--	they	simply	wait.
They	 simply	wait	 for	 something	 to	happen:	 somebody	will	 turn	up,	 somebody
will	 knock	 at	 the	 door.	 Then	 you	 live	 at	 the	 minimum.	 Maybe	 some	 day
somebody	turns	up	but	you	will	never	live	at	the	optimum.
And	to	live	at	the	minimum	is	not	to	live	at	all	--	live	at	the	optimum.	So	make
each	moment	an	adventure.	Take	the	risk!	At	the	most	you	can	be	rejected.	What
is	wrong	in	it?	--	nothing.	At	least	you	will	have	the	satisfaction	that	you	tried.
I'm	not	saying	there	is	a	guarantee	that	you	will	succeed,	but	to	fail	is	better	than
not	to	try	--	at	least	you	know	that	you	tried.
And	if	you	fail	you	are	not	responsible	for	it	--	you	tried	your	best.	Then	when
God	encounters	you	 finally	 in	 the	 final	encounter	 --	you	can	say	 to	Him,	 'It	 is
you!	I	have	tried	my	best.	Whatsoever	I	could	do,	I	did.	And	if	I	failed,	you	have
failed,	not	me.'	And	that	is	something	worth	saying.	But	if	you	have	not	tried	at
all	how	will	you	face	your	God?	What	will	you	say?
The	opportunity	was	given	but	you	were	afraid	--	afraid	of	what?	At	 the	most,
the	worst	possibility	is	that	you	may	be	rejected.	So	accept	the	worst	and	hope
for	the	best...	and	continue.	You	will	start	enjoying.
Once	you	 take	 the	 risk,	by	and	by	you	 start	 enjoying	 the	 thrill	of	 initiative.	 In
fact,	if	each	time	you	take	the	initiative	you	are	accepted,	there	will	be	no	thrill.
The	 thrill	 comes	 because	 there	 is	 a	 possibility,	 fifty/fifty....	 Maybe	 you	 go	 to
somebody	 and	 you	 tell	 him,	 'I	 love	 you.'	Mm?	There	 is	 a	 thrill,	 because	who
knows?	He	may	 say,	 'Forget	 all	 about	 it.	 I	 am	 not	 interested.'	Or	 he	may	 say,
'Thank	you!	I	was	also	waiting,	and	I	was	afraid	to	take	the	initiative.'
If	each	 time	it	 turns	out	 to	be	 'yes',	 it	will	be	meaningless.	 If	whomsoever	you
approach	 says	 'yes',	 there	 is	 no	 thrill.	That	moment	between	yes	 and	no	 is	 the
moment	of	thrill,	of	sensation,	aliveness...	throbbing.
That	is	the	moment	when	you	burn	like	a	flame.	So	try!
It	is	hard.	It	is	hard	only	because	you	have	not	tried	it	before.	Once	you	enjoy	it,
once	you	have	learned	the	taste	of	it,	it	will	be	hard	not	to	take	the	initiative.	It	is
just	an	old	habit,	that's	why.	In	this	group,	try	more.
One	has	nothing	to	lose.	What	have	you	got	to	lose?	Nothing	to	lose	except	your
misery.	So	 if	 you	 fail	 you	 can	have	your	misery	back...	 nothing	 to	be	worried
about.	Who	can	take	your	misery?	If	you	want	to	be	miserable	you	can	always
be,	 nobody	 can	 take	 your	misery.	But	 if	 you	 simply	 go	 on	 sitting,	waiting	 for
something	to	happen,	it	may	happen,	it	may	not	happen.	And	even	if	it	happens
it	will	be	the	very	very	minimal.
Because	 this	 is	my	 feeling:	when	 you	move	 enthusiastically	 towards	 life	 then
enthusiastic	people	move	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
towards	you	--	the	same	challenges	the	same.	If	you	simply	sit,	then	a	lazy	bum
some	day	may	move	towards	you.	He	may	be	sitting	by	your	side	--	sitting	and
feeling	tired	--	and	you	are	also	tired,	and	he	will	say,	'Hey!	What	are	you	doing
there?	Wanna	fall	in	love	or	something?'	(laughter)	So	you	will	find	some	bum...
some	 lazy	 fellow	 --	 just	 like	 you!	 And	 then	 too	 you	 will	 both	 sit.	 Now	who
should	 initiate?	Who	 should	 hold	 the	 hand	 first?	And	who	 should	 say,	 'I	 love
you,'	or	this	and	that?
Many	 people	 I	 see	 that	way	 --	 sitting	 closed,	 not	 knowing	what	 to	 do...	 from
where	to	begin.	So	if	you	remain	closed	in	that	way,	you	will	find	some	day	that
some.	 closed	 person	 has	 landed	 upon	 you.	 Before	 it	 happens,	 take	 initiative.
When	you	take	initiative	and	you	are	enthusiastic,	moving,	full	of	energy,	riding
radiantly	 on	 the	 wave	 of	 life,	 then	 you	 will	 find	 some	 adventurous	 people.
Somebody	who	is	courageous	will	become	interested	in	you.
I	have	seen	it	happen	--	even	a	very	homely	woman	can	become	very	beautiful	if
she	has	initiative.	And	a	very	beautiful	woman	can	become	very	ordinary	if	she
has	no	initiative.	Initiative	gives	you	a	glow.
Certainly	 a	 corpse	 cannot	 take	 any	 initiative.	 So	 when	 you	 don't	 take	 any
initiative,	by	and	by	you	will	become	more	and	more	corpse-like.
Have	 you	 seen	 it?	Once	 a	woman	 gets	married	 she	 starts	 becoming	 ugly,	 fat,
loses	 proportion,	 loses	 charm.	 What	 happens?	 She	 is	 settling.	 The	 old
enthusiasm,	 the	 old	 urge	 to	 explore,	 to	 take	 the	 initiative,	 to	 find	 someone,	 is
finished.	She	has	arrived,	so	now	what	is	the	point?
In	a	society	where	divorce	has	a	bigger	rate,	women	are	more	beautiful	than	in	a
society	where	divorce	has	a	very	low	rate.	In	a	society	where	women	have	the
possibility	of	getting	married	again	and	again,	they	keep	younger.	In	India,	after
twenty-eight,	thirty,	the	woman	is	finished.	In	America	she	keeps	young	at	least
up	to	forty-five.	And	you	can	even	find	a	woman	of	fifty	who	is	still	young.	The
reason?	Still	the	initiative	is	possible;	things	have	not	settled.
The	 day	 marriage	 disappears	 from	 the	 world	 people	 will	 be	 more	 beautiful
because	 each	 day	 there	 will	 be	 a	 possibility.	 You	 follow	me?	 If	 the	marriage
completely	disappears	you	cannot	afford	to	be	fat	you	cannot	afford	to	be	ugly,
you	cannot	afford	 to	be	 stupid.	You	have	 to	be	on	guard,	alert,	 throbbing	with
life.
You	have	to	remain	attractive	--	you	cannot	afford	to	be	unattractive.	You	cannot
be	lazy,	otherwise	you	will	not	be	in	the	flow	of	life	--	you	will	be	thrown	out,
discarded...	thrown	in	some	out	of	the	way	place.
You	will	no	more	be	a	part	of	the	main	current.
If	 marriage	 disappears	 people	 will	 be	 more	 alive	 because	 they	 will	 be	 less
settled.	 More	 opportunities	 will	 be	 there,	 and	 things	 will	 be	 changing	 more.
There	will	be	more	of	a	flux-like	quality,	liquidity,	movement.	But	people	don't
want	 to	 take	 initiative.	 Immediately	 they	 find	 somebody	 --	 anybody	whom	by
chance	they	can	grab	--	they	settle	immediately.
Don't	be	in	such	a	hurry	to	settle.	You	have	not	even	grabbed	anybody	and	you
are	trying	to	settle.	Don't	settle.	This	settlement	is	a	suicide	--	move	out	of	it.	Be
more	playful.	Life	is	fun!	Don't	be	too	serious	about	it	--	there	is	nothing	to	lose!
The	 only	 losers	 I	 have	 come	 across	 are	 those	 people	who	 have	 never	 tried	 --
otherwise	all	are	winners;	whoever	tries	is	a	winner.	Even	if	you	lose,	I	say	you
win	something.	Maybe	you	don't	win	the	first	prize,	you	win	the	second	or	the
third	or	 there	are	always	booby	prizes...	something	(laughter).	Try!	What	other
group	are	you	going	to	do	?
[Another	 group	member	 says:	 The	 group's	 been	 very	 hard	 for	me.	 The	 leader
comments:	She	is	tremendously	strong	--	no	matter	what	happens	she	still	won't
show.	Osho	says	to	the	leader:]
She	will	not	be	hard...	Two	days	are	still	there	--	two	days,	so	she	will	be	very
soft.	She	is	very	soft	inside	--	just	a	strong	will.	So	once	she	can	surrender	her
will	to	her	heart,	she	can	become	as	soft	as	is	possible	for	a	human	being.
There	are	 two	 types	of	possibilities:	one	 is,	a	person	 is	 soft	because	he	has	no
will	--	but	his	softness	cannot	be	very	big,	it	will	be	very	tiny,	very	small.	The
quantity	 cannot	 be	very	 explosive.	He	 is	 soft	 because	he	 is	weak,	 the	 softness
comes	 because	 of	 the	 weakness.	 These	 people	 will	 be	 very	 sentimental,
emotional.	 Anger	 will	 come	 easily,	 love	 will	 come	 easy,	 and	 nothing	 will	 be
abiding.	It	will	be	just	a	mood.
These	people	will	be	very	flux-like,	they	won't	have	any	integrity.	Soft	they	will
be	 --	but	 their	 softness	 is	part	of	 their	weakness.	That	 softness	 is	not	going	 to
help	much.
But	she	can	become	soft	in	a	totally	different	way.	There	are	people	who	have	a
will.	If	they	want	to	be	hard,	they	can	be	hard.	If	they	want	to	be	soft	they	can	be
soft	 --	 but	 their	 softness	 will	 have	 a	 strength;	 it	 will	 not	 be	 part	 of	 their
weakness.	And	then	it	is	tremendously	beautiful.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
She	 can	 be	 soft	 and	 strong	 in	 her	 softness.	 If	 she	 decides	 not	 to	 be	 soft,	 then
there	is	no	way.	But	if	she	decides	to	be	soft,	she	can	become	the	softest	person
in	the	world.	She	has	a	very	clear-cut	will.	The	only	question	is	that	if	the	will	is
against	the	heart,	she	will	remain	hard.	If	the	will	surrenders	to	the	heart,	she	can
become	a	flower.
And	 this	 is	a	 real	 softness.	Mm?	Weakness	 is	 just	 a	 simulation:	 it	 just	 appears
soft	 because	 the	 person	 is	 weak,	 it	 is	 a	 sort	 of	 impotence.	 She	 will	 be	 from
tomorrow,	mm?	 I	 have	 put	 her	 head	 right	 on	 the	way.	 (to	 the	 group	member)
Don't	betray	me....	I	am	promising	them!	(laughter)	Right?
[Another	group	member	says:	I	can't	let	go	totally	--	and	of	course	that	applies	to
other	things	also.]
I	think	you	have	some	impossible	concept	of	totality	that	is	bugging	you.	We	can
create	impossible	concepts	and	then	we	can	be	very	unhappy.	Now	you	have	a
perfectionist's	idea	about	totality.
And	 in	 fact,	 totality	 and	 perfection	 are	 just	 the	 contrary	 --	 opposite	 goals.	 A
perfectionist	can	never	be	total.	And	a	person	who	wants	to	be	total	should	never
think	in	terms	of	perfection.
A	perfectionist	 is	an	idealist.	He	has	some	idea,	 ideal,	and	he	has	to	fulfill	 that
ideal.	 So	 an	 idealist	 is	 always	 miserable	 because	 he	 always	 falls	 short.
Whatsoever	he	does	there	is	something	missing	--	and	he	has	made	some	ideal
which	is	impossible.	And	only	the	impossible	looks	to	him	to	be	the	ideal,	that
which	cannot	be	achieved	becomes	very	attractive.	It	is	an	ego	trip	--	he	has	to
do	something	which	nobody	can	do.
He	has	to	do	something	which	cannot	really	be	done.	He	tries	for	it	and	he	falls
short	of	it	again	and	again...
feels	miserable.	Out	of	his	misery	he	again	tries...	again	tries...	and	his	whole	life
becomes	a	wasteland.
Now	totality	is	a	totally	different	question.
A	 person	who	 believes	 in	 totalily	 is	 not	 a	 perfectionist,	 he	 has	 no	 ideal	 --	 he
simply	believes	in	The	natural	Whatsoever	happens	is	good.	Everything	satisfies
him	because	There	is	nothing	to	com-pare.
Now	you	say	that	you	are	not	capable	of	expressing	your	anger	totally.	What	do
you	mean	by	totally?
You.	have	some	ideal	--	that	this	should	be	this	way.	Whatsoever	you	are	doing
is	enough!	That's	all	that	you	can	do	right	now.	You	cannot	go	ahead	of	yourself.
You	 can	 only	 go	 the	way	 and	 to	 the	 extent	 that	 you	 can	 go!	All	 that	 you	 are
doing	is	all	that	you	can	do.
This	acceptance	 is	part	of	 the	concept	of	 totality.	One	accepts	one's	 limitations
and	one	knows	that	the	impossible	is	not	possible.	And	the	possible	is	human	--
it	has	flaws,	 limitations.	Be	human!	Don't	ask	for	 the	super-human.	The	super-
human	 is	always	 inhuman.	 Just	be	human,	 relax	 --	and	 in	 that	 relaxation	more
will	become	possible.
Now	you	are	tense,	you	feel	that	you	are	not	doing	as	you	should	do,	but	from
where	is	this	'should'
coming	?	Maybe	you	are	watching	others,	comparing,	but	that	may	be	possible
for	them.	They	are	not	you	--
you	are	not	them.	You	are	you	and	they	are	they.
Somebody	is	crying	to	his	heart's	desire	and	you	cannot	cry	--	now	a	comparison
arises	 that	 this	 is	 how	 one	 should	 cry	 totally.	 But	 this	 may	 be	 natural	 to	 the
person	and	may	be	unnatural	to	you	--	because	you	are	not	alike;	nobody	is	like
anybody	else.	Each	individual	is	so	unique	--	and	one	has	to	be	respectful	of	this
uniqueness.	 That's	 what	 I	 call	 religiousness:	 respect	 your	 uniqueness!	 It	 is
nothing	 to	 brag	 about,	 it	 is	 not	 an	 ego	 trip.	 It	 is	 a	 simple	 acceptance...	 a
recognition	that	everybody	is	different	--	just	like	fingerprints.	Your	fingerprint
is	different	to	mine,	but	there	is	no	good,	no	bad.	It	is	not	that	mine	is	better	and
yours	is	not	good	--	there	is	no	comparison.	Yours	is	yours,	mine	is	mine.
So	 stop	watching	 others.	 Start	 accepting	 yourself.	And	whatsoever	 is	 coming,
that's	 right	 for	 you!	 Relax	 into	 it,	 and	 you	will	 see	more	 is	 coming.	 But	 that
comes	by	relaxation,	not	by	creating	an	ideal	and	a	strained	effort.	No	need!	This
is	 the	 idea	 in	your	mind	 --	a	 'should'	 exists	 somewhere.	You	have	some	vague
concept.
The	philosophy	of	totality	has	no	idea	of	perfection.	It	is	very	human.	Relax	for
these	two	days,	and	whatsoever	comes	naturally	is	good.	More	is	not	needed	--
there	 may	 not	 be	 any	 more!	 Always	 listen	 to	 your	 nature,	 and	 never	 try	 to
impose	anything	on	top	of	it	--	that	is	very	cruel,	that	is	a	sort	of	masochism.
Then	you	become	miserable,	and	when	you	become	miserable	you	make	more
effort.	When	you	make	more	effort,	you	are	still	more	miserable...	so	on	and	so
forth.	Relax!
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	accept	yourself...	whosoever	you	are!	If	I
can	take	your	guilt	away	from	you,	I	have	helped	you	tremendously.	If	I	can	take
your	ideals	away	from	you,	I	have	helped	you	tremendously.	If	I	can	make	you
simple	 and	 natural,	 ordinary,	 I	 have	 helped	 you	 tremendously.	 And	 just	 the
opposite	has	been	done	by	the	so-called	religious	people	up	to	now....
They	create	guilt.	Whatsoever	you	do.	they	are	ready	to	condemn	it	--	that	this	is
nothing!	Improve!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
They	go	on	creating	the	tempo.	And	of	course	you	feel	that	this	is	good	for	your
ego,	so	you	go	on	improving	yourself.	The	ego	is	never	fulfilled,	and	your	life	is
wasted.	For	these	two	days,	simply	relax.
Whatsoever	comes	is	right....
Easy	is	right!
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	Meditation	--	the	Ultimate	Music
28	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611285
ShortTitle:	WHIP19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[A	sannyasin	asks:	Would	give	me	any	guidance	on	places	 that	might	be	good
for	me	to	visit.	I	wish	to	go	on	a	pilgrimage	in	India.]
Go	to	all	the	buddhist	places:	Bodh	Gaya,	Sarnath,	Sanchi,	Ajanta,	Ellora	--	all
the	buddhist	places.	And	if	you	are	close	to	some	other	place	you	can	go,	mm?
But	your	whole	plan	 should	be	 to	visit	 all	 the	buddhist	 places.	They	will	 give
you	 great	 insight	 into	 things,	 and	 you	may	 start	 remembering	 your	 past	 lives.
(Osho	had	said	to	this	sannyasin	that	he	had	been	a	Buddhist	in	past	lives.)	But
before	 you	 go,	 you	 meditate	 well,	 do	 a	 few	 groups	 --	 and	 particularly	 the
buddhist	meditation	group	here,	mm	?	That	will	prepare	your	mind.
And	 then	 you	 start	 from	 Ajanta,	 Ellora,	 Sanchi,	 Sarnath,	 Bodh	 Gaya	 --	 the
buddhist	places,	mm?	and	keep	Buddha	 in	mind.	Dream	about	Buddha...	 think
about	Buddha.	It	will	be	a	great	help.
[Osho	said	one	could	visit	places	as	a	tourist	but	one	would	miss	much....	]
You	can	go	and	you	can	visit	--	then	they	are	ruins.	Something	in	you	can	make
them	again	alive,	then	they	are	no	more	ruins.	But	that	depends	on	you.	If	you
want	 to	 visit	 just	 ruins,	 there	 is	 no	 problem	 you	 can	 go.	You	 can	 go	 to	Bodh
Gaya	but	you	will	not	feel	Buddha	there	at	all.	And	he	can	be	felt	there.
When	 once	 such	 a	 person	 exists,	 he	 leaves	 such	 tremendous	 energy	 there.	He
became	enlightened	in	that	place	--	Bodh	Gaya	--	under	the	same	tree	that	still
exists.	He	continuously	walked	for	years	around	the	temple;	those	stones	are	still
there	on	which	he	would	walk	and	meditate,	and	under	the	tree	he	would	rest	and
meditate.
If	 you	 have	 a	 feel,	 and	 if	 you	 have	 some	 understanding	 of	 how	 a	 Buddhist
meditates	while	walking,	how	a	Buddhist	sits	silently	and	where	he	goes	into	his
inner	world,	those	stones	will	not	be	ordinary	stones.	If	you	can	also	go	into	that
space,	you	will	have	a	tremendous	realisation.
This	 is	my	approach:	 if	you	want	 to	go	and	see	Lake	Galilee	and	you	want	 to
visit	 Jerusalem;	do	some	christian	prayer	 --	otherwise	 it	 is	meaningless.	 If	you
want	to	go	to	some	hindu	places,	then	do	some	hindu	meditation	--	because	these
places	 open	 their	 doors	 only	 to	 those	 who	 are	 ready..	 They	 are	 not	 really	 for
visitors.
In	the	East	visitors	have	never	existed	--	this	is	a	western	phenomenon.	Unless
somebody	has	a	feel	for	some	place,	he	will	never	go.	A	Mohammedan	will	go
to	Mecca	--	nobody	else	will	go.	For	centuries	Mohammedans	have	not	allowed
anybody	else	to	enter,	because	it	is	pointless!	Unless	you	have	a	love	affair	with
Mohammed,	it	is	pointless.	Why	crowd	the	place?	In	fact	your	presence	creates	a
wrong	vibration.	If	somebody	is	there	who	is	just	a	visitor,	a	tourist	--	which	is	a
very	ugly	phenomenon	--	he	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
creates	a	certain	vibe.
I	have	seen	tourists	--	just	moving	with	their	cameras,	and	foolish	chit-chat,	and
with	their	radios,	where	one	needs	to	be	absolutely	silent.	And	within	one	hour
they	have	visited	the	whole	place	and	they	have	gone
--	finished!	They	have	taken	the	pictures	for	their	albums.	Now	they	can	go	back
and	tell	others	that	they	have	been	to	Bodh	Gaya,	they	have	seen	the	place.
This	is	absurd	--	because	the	place	is	not	an	outer	thing.	Unless	you	are	in	tune
with	it,	the	sound	will	not	happen.	You	may	go	and	you	may	miss.	So	it	is	futile	!
My	feeling	is:	first	do	a	few	groups	here	--	particularly	the	buddhist	group	--	and
after	the	buddhist	group	immediately	go	with	that	same	quality	inside	you.	Walk
the	 way	 that	 Buddha	 taught	 his	 disciples	 to	 walk...	 with	 that	 grace,	 with	 that
silence,	with	that	contentment,	with	that	awareness.	Breathe	as	 the	Buddha	has
taught	his	disciples	 --	 in	a	certain	 rhythmic	way.	And	 then	don't	be	 in	a	hurry.
When	 you	 go	 there,	 be	 there	 for	 two,	 three	 days.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 just
seeing	the	temple	--	it	can	be	seen	within	fifteen	minutes.
And	don't	 rush	 to	another	place	 --	 just	 stay	 there	 for	 two,	 three	days.	 In	many
moods	sit	under	the	tree.
Sometimes	 in	 the	morning,	 sometimes	 in	 the	 evening...	 sometimes	deep	 in	 the
night.	 Bribe	 the	 priest	 and	 go	 in	 the	 night	 --	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 night	when
nobody	goes	there,	and	all	visitors	are	gone,	and	guides	and	tourists	are	no	more
there,	and	the	place	is	absolutely	silent	as	it	must	have	been	when	Buddha	was
sitting	there.	Deep	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	in	the	dark	night,	just	sit	under	the
tree.
Just	 remain	 available	 there,	 and	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 that	 you	 may	 come	 in
contact	with	something.
Then	it	is	worth	making	that	effort....
Anand	means	bliss,	blissfulness,	and	gandharva	means	the	celestial	musician.	In
the	 indian	 mythology,	 Gandharva	 is	 the	 musician	 of	 the	 gods.	 In	 heaven,
Gandharva	is	the	musician	of	the	gods	--	he	plays	for	the	gods.	So	it	has	become
synonymous	with	music.	And	that	is	going	to	be	your	path.	So	listen	to	music	in
all	the	various	forms,	in	all	 the	varieties.	Birds	singing,	or	the	rain	falling,	or	a
waterfall,	or	just	the	wind	passing	through	the	pines...	dancing...	instruments;	if
you	want	to	play,	play,	otherwise	listen.	And	you	also	sing	sometimes.	There	is
no	need	to	sing	anything	meaningfully,	mm?	Just	a	sound,	a	babbling	will	do...
just	a	chanting	of	anything	 --	meaninglessly	 --	 just	as	one	chants	 the	alphabet.
But	let	music	be	your	very	centre,	and	you	will	be	tremendously	benefited.
Music	is	one	of	the	most	natural	ways	to	grow.	And	if	one	can	understand	music,
there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 understand	 anything	 else.	 The	whole	 existence	 is	musical.
There	is	a	music...	eternal	music.	It	is	there	even	in	silence.	In	fact	it	is	more	so
when	 there	 is	 silence.	 The	 stars	 are	 singing	 --	 One	 has	 just	 to	 develop	 a
receptivity.
So	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 that	 you	 have	 to	 become	 a	musician.	 If	 you	 feel,	 good....
Otherwise	 the	 music	 is	 available.	 You	 can	 become	 just	 a	 receiver,	 a	 total
receptor,	and	 that	will	do.	But	 .creating	a	 little	music	 is	also	helpful	and	good.
And	it	is	not	a	performance,	so	it	is	not	meant	for	anybody	--	it	is	just	for	your
own	joy.
What	have	you	been	doing?
[The	new	sannyasin	says	he	is	a	sculptor	working	with	stone.]
Mm,	mm	 !	 It	 is	music	 --	music	 in	 the	 stones....	That's	 very	 good...	 that's	 very
good.	It	is	music.	All	art	is	music...	only	medias	differ.
Meditation	 is	 the	 ultimate	 music	 --	 it	 is	 medium-less.	 And	 when	 there	 is	 no
medium	 there	 is	 perfection,	 because	 the	 medium,	 whatsoever	 it	 is,	 creates
hindrances.	You	 can	work	 as	much	 as	 you	want,	 but	 still	 you	will	 feel	 that	 if
there	were	no	medium	 then	 the	 thing	would	have	been	perfect.	 If	 the	medium
stands	 there	 against	 your	work....	Mm?	 if	 you	 are	working	on	 a	 stone	 and	 the
stone	resists....	In	every	possible	way	it	gives	you	a	good	fight	--	nobody	wants
to	yield,	nobody	wants	to	surrender.	The	stone	also	has	its	own	will
--	it	wants	to	keep	its	shape,	it	is	not	ready	to	be	altered	so	easily.	You	can	do	it,
but	still	you	will	feel	the	medium	is	a	barrier.
The	medium	is	needed	to	express,	but	the	very	medium	of	expression	becomes
the	barrier.	You	can	use	beautiful	words	 to	 express	 truth,	 but	 they	become	 the
barrier.
In	 China	 they	 say	 that	 when	 a	 musician	 becomes	 perfect,	 he	 throws	 his
instrument,	because	 then	the	 instrument	creates	disturbance.	When	an	archer	 is
perfect,	he	breaks	his	bow.	And	when	a	poet	has	come	to	perfection,	he	no	more
says	anything	--	he	keeps	quiet.	Then	his	poetry	is	silence.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	meditation	 is	 the	 ultimate	music	 because	 the	medium	 disappears.	Music	 is
there	but	there	is	no	medium.	Only	those	who	can	hear	without	the	medium	will
hear	it,	and	only	those	who	can	see	without	the	medium	will	see	it.
That's	why	Jesus	goes	on	saying	to	his	disciples,	'Those	who	have	ears,	hear,	and
those	who	have	eyes,	see.'	He	was	talking	not	to	blind	men,	not	to	deaf	people	--
they	were	as	normal	as	we.	But	he	goes	on	saying	again	and	again,	'If	you	have
eyes...'	He	is	talking	about	some	message	which	cannot	be	expressed...
which	remains	unexpressed.	And	one	who	can	see	something	invisible,	only	he
can	understand	 that	message,	otherwise	not.	So	your	meditations	will	help	you
tremendously.	Your	art	will	be	transformed	--	it	will	reach	new	altitudes.
In	the	East	we	have	always	been	working	in	every	way,	in	every	possible	way,	to
reach	 God.	 It	 may	 be	 religion,	 or	 it	 may	 be	 music,	 or	 it	 may	 be	 dancing	 --
whatsoever	--	but	in	the	East	our	effort	has	been	to	reach	God	from	everywhere.
So	 everything	 eastern	 has	 a	 quality	 of	 religiousness	 to	 it:	 Sculpture	 has	 a
tremendous	 religious	 quality.	 The	 western	 sculpture	 lacks	 much.	 It	 is	 more
sexual,	more	physical,	more	earthly.	And	if	sometimes	it	moves	away	from	the
physical,	 at	 the	most	 it	 reaches	 to	 the	 psychological.	And	 then	 too	 out	 of	 one
hundred,	ninety	percent	becomes	pathological:	Picasso	and	others	--
Chagall	--	look	a	little	pathological...	as	if	the	mind	were	not	quiet,	as	if	the	mind
were	 neurotic.	Things	 are	 topsy-turvy;	 the	 symmetry	 is	 lost.	 It	 seems	 a	 crowd
inside.	Picasso	doesn't	 seem	 to	 be	 one	man	 --	 seems	 to	 be	many	men,	 and	 all
painting	together.	So	the	painting	comes,	but	it	is	a	collage	--	it	is	not	one	piece,
it	is	not	unity.	It	is	not	cosmos,	it	is	a	chaos...	a	neurotic	thing.
And	 if	 you	watch	Picasso's	 painting	 too	 long,	 it	will	 create	pathology,	nausea,
apprehension	and	fear.	 If	you	watch	an	eastern	painting	--	 japanese,	chinese	or
indian	--	just	by	watching	it	you	will	become	quiet	and	peaceful.
[Osho	recounted	a	taoist	story	about	a	king	who	commissioned	an	artist	to	paint
a	picture.	Months	passed,	during	which	the	king	would	impatiently	enquire	as	to
whether	the	painting	was	ready	to	be	seen	yet.
Finally	the	artist	finished	his	work	and	showed	it	to	the	king	--	it	was	a	picture	of
a	forest	with	a	track	going	through	it	and	into	a	hill.	The	track	disappeared	into
the	horizon	as	far	as	one	could	see.	It	was	a	beautiful	picture	--	almost	lifelike	--
and	the	king	asked	the	artist	where	the	track	led	to.
'I	don't	know	myself,'	 said	 the	artist,	 'I'm	going	 to	 find	out.'	And	with	 that,	 the
story	goes,	he	went	along	the	track	and	disappeared	into	the	painting....	]
I	love	this	story!
If	 you	 really	watch	 a	 painting,	 you	 should	disappear.	 Just	 by	watching	 it	 your
mind	will	subside,	thoughts	will	disappear.	And	when	mind	is	not	there,	you	are
not	there	--	then	you	disappear.	So,	much	is	going	to	happen!
And	for	short	you	can	simply	use	Katya.	Anand	means	bliss	and	Katyayani	is	a
name	of	the	mother	goddess.	In	India	we	conceive	of	God	in	both	ways.	A	few
religions	conceive	of	Him	as	man,	a	few	religions	conceive	of	Him	as	woman...
a	few	as	'he'	and	few	as	'she'.	In	India	the	male	chauvinist	attitude	has	never	been
very	predominant,	 so	 down	 the	 centuries	 both	 the	 traditions	 have	 continued:	 a
few	think	of	Him	as	father,	and	few	think	of	Him	as	mother.	Katyayani	means
mother	goddess;	a	name	of	God	--	in	the	form	of	a	woman.	So	the	whole	name
will	mean	blissful	mother	goddess.
Forget	 the	 old	 name	 completely,	 mm?	 The	 old	 is	 gone,	 and	 this	 this	 is	 the
beginning	of	a	long	journey.
And	 the	 journey	 is	 such	 that	 it	 is	 sweet	 in	 the	 beginning,	 it	 is	 sweet	 in	 the
middle,	 it	 is	sweet-in	 the	end.	But	 it	 is	a	 long	 journey....	So	a	great	pilgrimage
starts	this	moment.	Feel	blessed	!	Good,	Katya.	Good!	(Osho	touches	her	head	in
blessing,	smiling	warmly.)
It	 is	 a	 name	 of	 an	 ancient	 Buddha.	 Gautam	 is	 only	 one	 Buddha;	 many	 have
preceded	 him	 and	 many	 have	 followed	 him.	 Buddhahood	 is	 a	 state	 of
consciousness;	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	Gautam	Buddha.	 Buddha	 is	 just	 like
Christ	 --	 Jesus	 is	his	name,	Christ	 is	his	 state	of	 consciousness;	Gautam	 is	his
name,	Buddha	is	his	state	of	consciousness,	hence	he	is	called	Gautam	Buddha.
This	 is	 the	 name:	 Samantbhadra	 --	 he	 is	 an	 ancient	 Buddha.	 Samant	 means
infinitely,	and	bhadra	means	graceful;	infinite	grace	--	that	is	the	literal	meaning
of	the	word.	But	it	is	a	name	of	an	ancient	Buddha,	very	significant.	And	I	am
giving	 it	 to	 you	 because	 I	 see	 the	 possibility	 that	 you	 will	 be	 growing	 on
buddhist	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
lines,	 potentially	 you	 are	 a	 Buddhist.	 So	 if	 you	 know	 it	 consciously,	 many
pitfalls	can	be	avoided	and	the	path	can	become	very	straight	and	direct.
[In	 answer	 to	 Osho's	 invitation	 to	 take	 sannyas,	 a	 visitor	 replies:	 I	 feel	 very
confused	about	it.	I	don't	know	myself	what	to	do.	I	can't	get	hold	of	anything.]
You	will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 get	 hold	 of	 anything	 that	 I	 say	 (laughter).	 I	 am	 so
contradictory	(a	chuckle	 in	his	voice)	 that	 it	 is	very	difficult.	 I	don't	allow	any
hold...	I	am	almost	like	mercury.	So	if	you	want	to	get	in,	get	in	--	don't	bother
about	the	hold.	You	will	never	have	it	--	and	there	is	no	need.
You	have	entered	 life	without	having	any	hold	on	 it.	One	falls	 in	 love	without
having	any	hold	on	love.
And	one	day	one	dies	--	and	without	even	understanding	the	ABC's	of	death.	My
sannyas	is	almost	like	that.
I	don't	even	try	to	explain	it,	because	explanation	makes	things	ugly.	Explanation
is	not	needed.
The	whole	effort	is	to	drop	reason	and	all	the	games	reason	goes	on	playing.	It	is
an	absurd	step.	Mm?
sannyas	is	an	absurdity,	a	sort	of	voluntary	madness	--	willingly	one	becomes	a
little	 mad.	 You	 try	 it!	 It	 will	 lead	 you	 into	 new	 spaces.	 And	 it	 will	 be	 very
helpful.	You	can	do	the	same	meditations	without	becoming	a	sannyasin,	but	you
will	miss	much	because	you	will	feel	that	you	are	an	outsider	and	you	will	never
be	able	to	get	into	the	very	spirit	of	it.
All	great	things	happen	when	you	have	become	an	insider.	Then	you	float	easily,
you	open	easily	--
otherwise	one	remains	on	guard.	If	you	are	here	without	becoming	a	sannyasin,
you	will	continuously	remain	on	guard,	and	my	sannyasins	will	go	on	attacking
you,	 'Why	 are	 you	 not	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin?'	 So	 you	 will	 remain	 on	 the
defence	and	that	will	create	a	fear.	You	will	be	afraid	to	communicate,	afraid	to
make	friends,	because	the	fear	will	always	be	there	--	if	you	become	too	friendly,
these	people	are	going	to	seduce	you	into	sannyas.	And	you	will	be	a	little	afraid
of	me	too.
Once	you	have	 taken	sannyas,	 all	 fear	disappears	 --	now	 there	 is	nothing	else.
The	worst	has	happened!
(laughter)
Just	do	it	right	now!
[The	visitor	says:	Yes,	please.]
Prem	 means	 love	 and	 buddha	 means	 consciousness,	 intelligence;	 loving
intelligence,	 loving	consciousness,	or	 love	awareness.	Love	is	 the	first	 thing	 to
be	done	and	the	second	thing	will	be	awareness.
So	the	name	is	just	a	condensed	formula	for	your	whole	work:	first	warming	up
through	love,	and	when	you	are	floating,	flowing,	you	have	melted,	and	you	are
no	more	frozen	and	cold,	no	more	indifferent,	compassion	has	arisen	--	then	the
next	step	is	to	become	aware.
Feel	more	loving,	affectionate,	caring.	Mix	with	people,	hold	hands,	hug	people	-
-	people	are	beautiful.
Don't	 miss	 any	 opportunities	 in	 which	 you	 can	 be	 loving	 --	 never	 miss	 any
opportunity	 of	 love.	 Then	 you	 have	 created	 the	 right	 jumping	 board	 for
awareness,	 and	 then	 your	 awareness	 will	 not	make	 you	 cold.	 Your	 awareness
will	be	like	a	flame	--	alive;	it	will	not	be	dead.
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	God	is	also	Darkness
29	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611295
ShortTitle:	WHIP20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[A	visitor	asks	which	groups	he	needed	to	do.]
You	book	for	[three	groups]	and	then	I	will	tell	you	what	else	to	do.	The	camp
will	reveal	many	things	about	you	--	how	your	energy	is	moving	and	where,	and
what	is	needed.
In	fact	all	techniques	are	good.	All	techniques	are	good	--	but	not	for	everybody.
With	some	personalities	 some	 technique	 fits,	with	 some	personalities	 the	 same
technique	may	not	work.	So	once	you	have	 found	a	 right	 track,	 and	once	 it	 is
exactly	 known	 how	 your	 energy	 is	moving,	 things	 become	 very	 simple.	 Then
you	can	move	in	a	progression,	one	group	after	another.
Otherwise	sometimes	it	happens	that	you	can	move	in	a	circle,	and	finally	you
find	you	are	back	in	the	same	place	where	you	have	always	been,	so	you	have
not	 moved	 at	 all.	 Sometimes	 you	 can	 do	 groups	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 they
contradict	each	other.	That	too	is	dangerous,	because	one	group	sets	your	energy
in	one	direction,	 another	group	sets	your	energy	 in	another	direction,	 and	 then
you	are	pulled	apart,	then	you	have	a	split.
Many	people	are	suffering	because	in	the	western	spiritual	market	everything	is
available,	so	whatsoever	is	available	one	wants	to	try	it.	And	when	one	has	tried
one,	then	one	wants	to	try	another	and	another	and	there	is	no	clear-cut	guidance
on	how	one	should	proceed,	step-wise	and	gradually.
The	groups	should	not	be	contradictory.	They	should	create	a	linear	progression
in	 you	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	 something	 growing,	 otherwise	 great	 confusion	 can
result.
For	example,	if	you	are	doing	some	old	eastern	techniques,	which	are	in	a	subtle
way	repressive,	and	 then	you	do	Encounter	and	cathartic	 techniques	which	are
expressive,	then	they	move	in	opposite	directions.
Both	are	good,	but	for	different	people.	If	you	don't	have	any	repression,	eastern
groups	can	be	of	tremendous	value,	but	if	you	have	something	repressed	already,
then	first	it	has	to	be	released	--	a	cathartic	group	is	needed.
So	groups	are	like	medicine:	all	medicines	are	good,	but	that	doesn't	mean	that
you	have	to	take	all	medicines.	You	have	to	take	only	that	medicine	which	fits
with	 you,	which	 is	 for	 your	 illness.	Otherwise	medicine	 can	 prove	more	 fatal
than	the	illness	itself,	because	it	will	be	poison.	If	it	has	to	kill	something	in	you
--	your	enemy	--	 it	will.	If	 it	has	nobody	to	kill,	 it	will	kill	you	--	 it	has	to	kill
somebody!
If	there	are	germs	to	kill,	it	will	kill	those	germs.	If	they	are	not	there,	it	will	kill
some	other	germs	which	are	very	essential	 for	your	 life	and	for	your	body.	So
here	we	are	trying	to	make	a	scientific	approach
--	not	in	a	haphazard	way	and	not	in	a	circular	way,	and	never	contradictory.
Sometimes	it	happens	that	some	group	which	today	is	contradictory	for	you	may
not	be	contradictory	after	a	few	groups	--	you	may	come	to	a	point	from	where	it
fits.
So	you	do	these	three	groups	and	the	camp.	The	camp	will	decide	many	things.
In	 the	camp	do	all	 the	 five	meditations,	 and	after	 the	camp	you	 tell	me	which
meditation	you	liked	the	most,	which	meditation	you	hated	the	most,	and	which
meditation	went	deepest	in	you	--	these	three	things.
Sometimes	 it	happens	 it	 is	 the	same	meditation	 that	goes	 the	deepest,	 that	you
love	 most,	 and	 that	 you	 hate	 most.	 Sometimes	 these	 are	 three	 different
meditations	--	one	never	knows.	But	if	you	can	feel	it	clear-cutly,	then	it	will	be
very	decisive.
Ordinarily	human	beings	exist	in	a	nebulous	state	--	like	a	cloud	--	and	it	is	very
difficult	to	see	their	form.	Not	that	the	form	cannot	be	seen	--	I	can	see	it	right
now,	I	am	seeing	what	form	your	energy	has	--
but	it	is	a	nebulous	form.	In	a	moment	it	will	change.	It	is	just	like	a	cloud:	one
moment	it	is	like	an	elephant,	another	moment	the	elephant	has	disappeared.	By
the	time	you	decide	it	is	an	elephant,	it	is	not	there	--	the	form	has	changed;	the
form	is	not	fixed.
So	ordinarily	the	human	mind	is	like	a	nebula,	a	very	clouded	state,	and	by	and
by	with	meditations	and	with	a	few	groups,	you	will	start	taking	a	certain	shape	-
-	a	shape	which	is	not	just	a	style	but	a	stability.
And	with	that	you	become	an	individual	--	never	before	it.
Before	it	you	have	personality.	Personality	is	a	style,	individuality	is	a	stability.
Personality	is	just	on	the	surface,	like	your	dress.	Stability	is	something	deeper,
that	persists	in	you,	and	by	and	by	that	tends	to	become	a	crystallised	form.	And
in	 fact	 that	 is	 what	 everybody	 is	 searching	 for	 --	 an	 integration,	 something
integrated,	something	about	which	you	can	say,	 'This	is	what	I	am!'	Right	now
you	cannot	say	who	you	are.
But	in	the	four	months	that	you	will	be	here,	much	can	be	done.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Anand	means	bliss,	and	akshara	means	the	eternal	--	that	which	is,	was,	and	will
be.	 And	 in	 the	 eastern	 search	 the	 eternal	 is	 true,	 and	 the	 momentary,	 the
temporary,	 is	 just	 an	 illusion,	 a	 dream.	 That	 which	 happens	 is	 not	 true.	 That
which	remains,	only	that	is	true.
Anand	Akshara	will	mean	eternal	bliss	--	and	it	is	there	in	you	right	in	this	very
moment.	 It	 is	not	 something	 that	you	have	 to	achieve.	 It	 is	not	 something	 that
you	have	to	invent,	create.	It	is	you!	Just	a	turning,	just	a	leaning	back	into	your
own	being.	That	is	the	exact	meaning	of	the	christian	word
'conversion'	--	to	turn	in,	to	turn	back,	to	look	into	one's	own	self.	Suddenly	it	is
there,	and	one	starts	 laughing	because	it	has	been	always	there,	and	it	was	just
foolish	to	go	on	looking.
[Another	visitor	says:	I'm	studying	acupuncture.]
That's	very	good...	very	meditative.	It	will	be	helpful.	And	if	by	and	by	you	start
feeling	 your	 own	 energy,	 or	 the	 working	 of	 the	 energy	 in	 your	 own	 body,
acupuncture	will	not	remain	just	a	technique	--	it	will	become	an	instrument.
And	it	is	an	insight.	You	can	learn	the	technique	--	nothing	will	come	out	of	it.
Rather	 it	 is	more	 a	 hunch	 than	 an	 art.	That	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 difficult	 things
about	ancient	techniques	--	they	are	not	scientific,	and	if	you	approach	through
the	 scientific	 outlook	 you	 may	 get	 some	 inkling,	 but	 the	 major	 part	 will	 be
missing.
And	whatsoever	you	will	be	able	to	get	hold	of	will	not	be	much,	and	it	will	be
frustrating.
The	whole	ancient	approach	was	 totally	different	 --	 it	was	not	 logical	at	 all;	 it
was	more	feminine,	more	intuitive,	more	illogical.
One	was	not	thinking	in	syllogism	as	the	scientific	mind	thinks.	Rather	one	was
in	 a	 deep	 participation	with	 existence...	more	 in	 a	 sort	 of	 dreaming	 state,	 in	 a
reverie,	 and	 allowing	nature	 to	 release	 its	 secrets	 and	mysteries.	 It	was	 not	 an
aggression	on	nature	--	a	persuasion	at	 the	most.	And	the	approach	is	from	the
interior.
If	 you	 go	 to	 study	 modern	 medicine,	 the	 approach	 is	 from	 the	 outside.	 You
dissect	 a	 dead	 body	 --	 it	 is	 there	 as	 an	 object.	 You	 can	 study	 it,	 but	 you	 are
studying	a	dead	body	--	and	a	dead	is	qualitatively	different	from	an	alive	body.
With	 the	 alive	 body,	 something	 of	 tremendous	 value	 exists	which	 has	 left	 the
dead	body.	A	dead	body	only	looks	like	a	body	--	it	is	no	more	a	body,	because	it
embodies	nothing.	So	even	to	say	it	is	a	body	is	not	right.	Even	linguistically	it	is
wrong,	because	it	embodies	nothing.
It	is	as	if	the	god	of	the	temple	has	disappeared,	and	you	still	go	on	calling	the
house	a	temple	--	it	is	no	more	a	temple.	It	was	a	temple	only	because	God	was
in	residence.
And	when	you	cut	a	body	you	come	to	know	certain	facts	which	are	of	the	dead
body.	Even	modern	medicine	is	becoming	aware	of	the	fact	that	we	will	have	to
find	 out	 some	 way	 to	 know	 more	 about	 the	 living	 body.	 But	 it	 is	 easier	 to
approach	 from	 the	 outside.	Mm?	 students	 can	 stand	 around	 the	 table	 and	 the
professor	can	teach.
Now	 it	 is	 not	 the	 same	way	 for	 acupuncture.	One	 has	 to	 approach	 one's	 own
body	from	the	interior-most	core.	Those	seven	hundred	points	were	not	known
objectively	--	they	were	known	in	deep	meditation.	When	one	goes	deep	inside
and	 looks	 from	 inside	 --	 a	 tremendous	 experience	 --	 one	 can	 see	 all	 the
acupuncture	points	surrounding	oneself,	as	if	the	night	is	full	of	stars.	And	when
you	have	seen	 those	energy	points,	 then	only	are	you	ready.	Now	you	have	an
inner	grasp,	and	you	will	be	able,	just	by	touching	the	body	of	the	other	person,
to	 feel	where	 the	 body	 energy	 is	missing	 and	where	 it	 is;	where	 it	 is	moving,
where	it	is	not	moving;	where	it	is	cold	and	where	it	is	warm;	where	it	is	alive
and	where	it	has	gone	dead.	There	are	points	from	where	it	responds,	and	there
are	points	from	where	it	has	no	response	at	all.
Meditation	 can	 be	 of	 tremendous	 value	 --	 and	 both	 are	 parallel	 growths.	 You
have	 chosen	 something	 good,	 but	 simultaneously	 you	will	 have	 to	 grow.	 You
will	be	able	to	know	acupuncture	only	to	the	extent	that	you	become	capable	of
knowing	yourself...	and	when	both	coincide	there	is	great	light.	In	that	light	you
can	 see	 everything	 --	 not	 only	 about	 yourself	 --	 about	 others'	 bodies.	 A	 new
vision	arises	as	if	a	third	eye	has	opened.
What	about	your	sannyas?
[She	replies:	I	don't	know.]
Mm	mm!	 Then	 you	 are	 ready	 for	 it	 (she	 laughs).	One	 should	 be	 adventurous
enough	 to	go	 into	 the	unknown....	Because	 there	 is	only	one	way	of	knowing,
and	that	is	by	going	into	it.	There	is	no	other	way.
So	go	into	it	and	see	what	it	is,	mm?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
...	You	are	holding	your	energy	deep	down,	so	something	will	have	to	be	done
about	 it.	You	may	not	be	even	aware,	mm?	but	you	are	controlling.	Control	 is
very	bad	--	but	we	have	been	taught	to	control.	So	you	may	not	be	responsible	at
all	for	it.	Everybody	has	been	taught	to	control.	Control	is	thought	to	be	the	great
value	--	it	is	not.	One	should	be	more	spontaneous	than	controlled.
And	spontaneity	has	its	own	discipline,	but	it	is	not	control	--	it	is	very	flowing.
If	you	remain	controlled	too	much	it	will	be	very	difficult	for	you	to	go	inside,
because	when	you	control	something,	the	first	need	is	go	outside.	Just	think	of	it
in	this	way.
If	you	are	controlling	air	inside	--	if	you	inhale	and	you	control	it	inside	--	then
you	cannot	go	in	because	the	whole	breathing	wants	to	go	out.	You	will	have	to
control	 it	 and	 you	 cannot	 go	 in.	 The	 air	wants	 to	 go	 out,	 so	 first	 it	 has	 to	 be
released.	When	 you	 have	 really	 exhaled,	 you	 are	 ready	 for	 inhalation.	Then	 it
goes	 in	naturally,	 and	with	 that	natural	 in-flow,	you	can	also	go	 in.	There	 is	 a
rhythm,	in	and	out.
So	here	we	have	both	types	of	groups	--	and	I	have	suggested	a	few	to	you.	A
few	groups	are	such	that	take	you	out,	and	a	few	groups	are	such	that	take	you
in.	 You	 will	 need	 both,	 in	 a	 rhythm.	 You	 are	 holding	 much	 energy,	 and	 that
holding	can	become	very	heavy	--	it	can	become	almost	like	a	rock.	There	is	no
trembling...	the	energy	is	not	vibrating.	So	much	has	to	be	done	--	but	it	will	be
done.	Change	to	orange	--
that	will	be	helpful.
This	will	be	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Chandan.
Deva	means	 divine,	 and	 chandan	means	 sandalwood.	 In	 India	 the	 perfume	 of
sandalwood	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 respected,	 revered	 perfumes	 --	 it	 is	 divine.	 So
divine	sandalwood	perfume	--	that	will	be	the	name.
And	I	feel	you	have	a	certain	affinity	with	sandalwood	--	that's	why	I	am	giving
you	 this	 name.	 That	 perfume	 will	 help	 you	 very	 much.	 So	 you	 can	 have
sandalwood	around	you,	you	can	use	sandal	perfume,	sandal	oil.	You	can	burn
sandal	incense	and	it	will	take	you	very	far	--	it	can	take	you	far	out!	It	has	been
chosen	for	particular	people...	and	small	things	are	of	tremendous	value.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	was	 reading....	 There	 is	 a	 bridge	 in	London	where	 people
used	 to	 commit	 suicide	 in	 big	 numbers.	 They	 have	 changed	 the	 colour	 of	 the
bridge	from	grey	to	red,	and	since	they	changed	the	colour,	the	suicide	rate	has
fallen	very	low.	You	see	the	point	of	orange	people?	(Osho	chuckles)	The	colour
grey	is	suicidal	--	red	is	more	alive,	red	is	the	colour	of	life.	So	even	colour	can
be	of	such	importance.	They	were	simply	surprised!
They	could	not	figure	it	out	--	that	just	by	changing	the	colour	it	happens...	but	it
happens!
Colour	enters	your	eyes,	changes	you.	Mm?	just	looking	at	green	suddenly	you
feel	peaceful	--
something	happens	inside.	It	is	the	same	with	smell:	a	certain	smell	and	you	start
floating	into	a	certain	space.	And	this	is	my	feeling	--	that	sandal	perfume	will
help	 you	 tremendously.	 It	 will	 make	 you	 more	 alive,	 more	 throbbing,	 more
vibrating,	more	pulsating....
Anand	is	bliss	or	blissful,	nisheetha	means	the	hour	of	midnight,	the	most	empty
hour.	 And	 whenever	 you	 can	 manage,	 midnight	 will	 be	 your	 best	 time	 for
meditation.	 For	 people	who	 like	 emptiness,	 the	midnight	 hour	 is	 the	 best	 --	 it
simply	corresponds	with	nothingness.	Just	as	in	the	midmorning	activity	is	at	its
peak	--	opposite	to	it,	at	midnight	activity	is	as	low	as	possible;	inactivity	is	at	its
peak.	It	is	the	most	passive	moment.	So	all	people	who	have	been	following	the
path	of	nothingness	--	what	Buddhists	call	shunyata	--	their	hour	for	meditation
has	been	 the	midnight	hour.	Nisheeth	means	midnight.	 Just	 to	 remind	you,	 I'm
giving	you	that	name,	Nisheetha.
And	 whenever	 you	 can	 manage,	 never	 miss.	 You	 can	 just	 sit	 in	 your	 bed	 at
midnight	when	everything	has	become	silent,	the	traffic	has	stopped	and	people
have	fallen	asleep.	When	millions	of	people	fall	asleep,	their	very	sleep	is	a	help
for	a	person	who	is	moving	into	nothingness,	because	they	are	no	more	creating
turmoil,	they	are	no	more	creating	vibrations,	they	are	no	more	creating	neurosis
all	around.	All	neurotic	people	are	asleep	--	all	politicians,	all	mischief-mongers,
all	are	asleep.	Mm?	they	have	fallen	into	oblivion.	At	that	moment	the	climate,
the	spiritual	climate,	is	the	purest,	and	one	can	simply	use	that	space	and	move
into	it.
If	you	can	keep	awake,	get	up	and	go	to	the	terrace	--	just	look	at	the	stars,	sit
silently.	Just	 twenty	minutes	will	do,	and	you	will	feel	so	calm	and	so	quiet.	If
you	want	 to	repeat	 the	same	experience	in	the	middle	of	 the	day	it	will	 take	at
least	 three	hours.	 It	 is	very	easy	at	midnight.	 It	 is	almost	as	 if	you	are	moving
with	the	tide,	so	you	don't	need	to	make	much	effort...	you	can	ride	on	the	tide.
And	change	to	orange.
'Sound	is	the	vehicle	to	move	to	the	other.	Become	absolutely	deaf	and	dumb	--
suddenly	you	will	find	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
that	you	are	standing	within.	That	is	why	silence	was	practised	so	much	--	all	the
bridges	to	the	other	were	broken.'
[There	 follows	 a	 description	 of	 the	 21-day	 silence	 and	 isolation	 technique.	 A
sannyasin	 reports	 on	 her	 experience	 after	 completing	 this.	 She	 found	 that	 she
went	 through	 several	 changes;	 some	 of	 the	 time	 it	 was	 easy,	 and	 later	 more
difficult.]
It	always	changes	when	you	have	touched	the	rock-bottom	of	misery;	only	then
it	changes,	never	before.
And	 remember	 --	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 fundamental	 things:	 if	 you	 are	 sad,
become	as	sad	as	you	can.	And	when	you	have	come	to	the	last	point	where	you
think	that	it	is	impossible	to	bear	it,	just	a	little	more	and	then	suddenly	you	will
see	the	turning	point	--	you	are	no	more	sad;	the	same	energy	is	becoming	joy.	If
you	had	stopped	then	you	would	have	remained	hanging	in	the	sadness.
And	 in	 silence	 this	 always	 happens	 --	 the	 beginning	 few	 days	 become	 very
heavy	because	it	is	so	new.
[The	sannyasin	says	she	enjoyed	being	outside	and	playing	with	children	during
the	silence.	But	at	night	was	afraid	of	the	darkness.]
This	 has	 been	good.	Next	 time	when	you	go	 into	 silence,	 the	whole	 day	 also,
don't	 play	 with	 children	 because	 that	 is	 not	 good.	 Mm?	 that	 is	 a	 sort	 of
communication.	And	if	you	enjoy	hills	and	trees	and	animals	and	birds,	then	it	is
no	more	silence.	These	trees	are	people...
Just	close	the	room	the	whole	day...	just	lie	down	on	the	floor,	look	at	the	room.
For	seven	days,	day,	night,	no	communication	with	the	outside	world	--	and	you
will	fall	in	love	with	darkness.
At	first	it	may	become	very	very	difficult,	but	then	the	turning	point	will	come.
And	once	you	can	love	darkness	you	have	achieved	something	valuable,	because
darkness	is	more	primal	than	light.
Darkness	 is	 more	 fundamental	 than	 light.	 Light	 comes	 and	 goes;	 darkness
always	 remains.	 Light	 is	 limited;	 darkness	 is	 unlimited.	 Light	 can	 be	 created;
darkness	 cannot	 be	 created.	 You	 can	 bring	 light	 here	 and	 there;	 darkness	 you
cannot	touch	even,	it	is	so	beyond.	In	the	day	there	is	light,	the	sun	is	there,	the
sun	 comes	 and	 disappears,	 but	 the	 darkness	 continues	 eternally;	 it	 is	 always
there.	So	light	is	momentary,	darkness	is	eternal.
There	 is	 only	 one	 occult	 school...	 in	which	 Jesus	 trained	 and	 John	 the	Baptist
was	 trained;	 the	 school	 is	 called	 the	 Essenes...	 that	 is	 the	 only	 school	 in	 the
whole	world	that	defines	God	as	darkness	--	and	I	love	it.
Their	 definition	 is	 far	 better	 than	 god	 as	 light.	You	will	 have	 to	 learn	 to	 love
darkness.	With	that	love	many	things	will	grow	in	you.
With	darkness	one	becomes	very	silent.	In	fact	darkness	is	more	like	silence	--
light	is	more	like	words....	But	fear	arises,	that's	true,	because	darkness	is	more
like	death	too.
So	next	 time	 just	 take	your	 food...	 if	you	want	 to	walk,	walk	 in	 the	 room,	but
close	all	the	windows	so	you	remain	in	the	room	absolutely	alone	--	no	book	to
read,	nothing	to	write	on,	no	tape	to	listen	to	--
nothing!	Just	for	seven	days,	absolute	zero.	But	not	now	--	sometime	later.
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	Life	is	Through	'Yes'
30	November	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7611305
ShortTitle:	WHIP21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[A	sannyasin	who	was	leaving	with	her	father,	who	had	come	from	Germany	to
take	her	home,	says:	I	surrender	to	anything	that	is	happening....	]
That's	 perfectly	 good.	 It	 is	 good	 to	 surrender	 to	 your	 father....	 You	 can	 come
again.	Whenever	he	allows	you,	you	can	come.	And	if	you	surrender,	he	will	be
allowing	you	to	come.	Listen	to	him,	because	he	cares	for	you,	he	loves	you	--
that's	why	he	has	 taken	 so	much	 trouble	 to	come.	And	don't	do	 it	unwillingly,
because	 sometimes	 we	 can	 even	 surrender	 unwillingly,	 but	 then	 we	 miss	 the
whole	opportunity.	Surrender	willingly,	happily,	joyfully,	then	every	opportunity
becomes	golden.	And	this	is	how	one	learns	in	life.
There	 is	 something	 in	 rebellion	and	 there	 is	 something	 in	 surrender	 too.	There
are	times	to	say	'no'.	Mm?
it	gives	you	a	spine,	it	makes	you	bold.	And	eveiy	child	sometimes	wants	to	say
no	 to	 the	 parents	 --	 that	 is	 part	 of	 growth.	 But	 if	 one	 goes	 on	 saying	 no
continuously,	and	becomes	fixed	in	the	no,	then	it	is	dangerous,	because	then	one
lives	in	the	negative	--	and	one	cannot	live	in	the	negative.
Lile	is	always	in	the	positive.	One	can	live	oniy	through	the	yes.
And	if	you	learn	too	much	of	the	no	--	today	you	will	say	no	to	your	father,	to
your	mother,	to	your	family,	and	if	you	become	addicted	with	the	no...	because	it
is	 like	 an	 addiction	 --	 it	 has	 an	 intoxication	 in	 it	 because	 it	 makes	 you	 very
egoistic.	When	you	 say	 'No!'	 you	 feel	you	are	 somebody	 --	you	can	 say	no	 to
anybody.	And	when	you	say	no	to	your	parents,	of	course	you	feel	very	egoistic.
You	feel	as	if	you	have	defeated	thern.	But	then	you	have	said	no	to	love!
Some	 day	 you	 will	 fall	 in	 love	 with	 somebody	 and	 again	 the	 no	 will	 come,
because	it	will	become	associated	with	love.	Parents	are	not	just	parents	--	they
are	many	more	things.	They	are	your	first	love.	If	you	say	no	to	them,	in	a	subtle
way	you	are	saying	no	to	love.	You	may	not	be	aware	of	that	right	now,	but	one
day	 you	 will	 find	 that	 you	 fall	 in	 love	 with	 somebody	 and	 again	 the	 same
problem	arises.
This	is	my	observation	--	that	every	woman	when	she	falls	in	love	with	a	man,
falls	 in	 love	with	her	 father	 again,	because	her	 idea	of	man	deep	down	comes
from	her	father.	Or	when	a	man	falls	in	Iove	with	a	woman,	he	falls	again	in	love
with	his	mother,	because	his	idea	of	woman,	his	very	image,	is	from	his	mother.
He	has	learned	about	woman	from	the	mother.	That	was	the	first	woman	in	his
life,	and	the	first	things	are	tremendously	important	--	the	impact	continues	the
whole	life.
So	if	you	say	no	--	and	I	know	that	sometimes	no	is	needed,	but	there	is	a	limit	to
it	--	if	you	say	an	absolute	no,	and	you	break	away	from	your	parents,	that	will
be	dangerous.	Then	your	love	will	be	disturbed.
[She	 repleis:	But	when	 I	 say	 'yes'	 to	 something,	 I	have	 to	 say	 'no'	 to	 the	other
thing.]
Yes,	that	I	know.	So	just	always	remember:	life	is	a	deep	rhythm	between	 'yes'
and	'no'.	One	cannot	live	with	only	one.	So	one	has	to	sav	both	the	'yes'	and	'no'
many	times.	It	is	just	like	breathing:	you	breathe	in.
then	you	breathe	out:	you	breathe	in.	then	vou	breathe	out.	If	you	say,	'I	will	only
breathe	in',	 then	you	will	die.	If	you	say,	 'I	will	only	breathe	out',	 then	too	you
will	die.	And	you	say,	'Why	should	I	do	these	contradictory	things	--	breathing	in
and	breathing	out?'	They	are	not	contradictory	--	they	are	part	of	a	great	rhythm.
When	you	 listen	 to	music,	 there	 is	 beat	 and	 then	 there	 is	 rest;	 beat,	 rest;	 beat,
rest.	If	there	is	only	beat,	there	will	be	noise;	there	will	be	no	music.	If	there	is
only	rest,	there	will	be	silence;	there	will	be	no	music.
Beat	and	rest	--	that	makes	the	music.	The	whole	of	life	is	a	continuous	balance
between	no	and	yes.
And	one	has	to	be	very	alert	about	what	one	is	saying.	Sometimes	say	'no'	--	I'm
not	saying	 to	always	say	 'yes'.	 If	you	always	say	 'yes',	you	will	be	dead.	Then
you	don't	have	any	stamina	in	you,	you	won't	have	spine.	Many	times	say	 'no',
but	don't	get	addicted	to	'no'.	Sometimes	say	'yes'	too.	And	make	a	balance.	Then
your	parents	will	also	uriderstand.
This	was	my	situation	with	my	parents.	They	knew	well	that	if	I	say	'yes',	I	mean
'yes';	if	I	say	'no',	I	mean	'no'.	Once	my	father	said	to	me,	'Do	you	say	"yes"	and
"no"	in	a	very	mathematical	way?	Because	sometimes	you	suddenly	say	"yes",
and	we	were	not	 expecting	 it.	And	 sometimes	you	 say	 "no",	 and	we	were	not
expecting	it.	How	do	you	manage	when	to	say	"no"	and	when	to	say	"yes"	?'
I	 said,	 'I	 keep	 balance.	 I	 never	 say	 "no"	 too	 much,	 because	 that	 breaks
relationship.	I	never	say	"yes"	too	much,	because	that	breaks	me.	I	have	to	keep
you	alive,	and	I	have	to	keep	myself	alive	too,	and	it	is	like	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
tightrope	walking.'
When	 you	 are	 leaning	 too	 much	 to	 the	 right,	 lean	 to	 the	 left	 immediately,
otherwise	you	will	 fall.	And	when	you	 start	 feeling	you	are	 falling	 to	 the	 left,
lean	to	the	right,	otherwise	you	will	fall.	Nobody	can	say	when	--	you	will	have
to	feel	it.	You	will	have	to	go	by	your	own	feeling.
So	 go	 --	 nothing	 to	 be	worried	 about.	 I	 am	 coming	with	 you.	 And	 say	 "yes"
happily,	 then	 next	 time	 when	 you	 want	 to	 come,	 they	 will	 happily	 send	 you.
Keep	 this	with	you	 (passing	her	a	box)	and	continue	 to	meditate.	Good...	And
help	my	work	there.
[to	the	father]	Next	time	come	and	be	here	for	a	few	days,	few	weeks,	and	it	will
be	good,	mm?
[A	sannyasin	said	 that	he	had	been	a	 therapist	 for	eight	years,	but	had	become
very	ill	and	stopped	work.
Later	he	did	other	manual	work.	Now	he	feels	he	could	continue	psychotherapy
with	guidance,	but	does	not	have	any	medical	qualifications.]
There	is	no	need,	because	in	fact	psychotherapy	is	still	not	a	science,	and	there	is
nothing	official	about	it.	All	official	certificates	are	bogus,	because	it	is	still	not	a
science.	Freud	simply	created	a	big	jewish	business,	that's	all	(laughter).	But	you
can	work.	I	can	feel	that	you	have	that	type	of	energy	which	a	healer	needs,	and
you	can	become	a	good	therapist.
A	 little	work	 on	 yourself	will	 be	 of	 tremendous	 value,	 because	when	 you	 are
going	to	help	others	you	have	to	be	in	a	certain	space.	Unless	you	are	in	a	certain
space,	have	a	certain	depth,	your	help	will	remain	superficial.	And	sometimes	it
happens	 that	even	 through	superficial	help	you	can	help	many	people,	because
many	people	are	only	superficially	ill.	They	don't	need	much	depth	work.
And	another	thing	about	illness	is	that	if	you	don't	do	anything	about	it,	then	too,
it	goes	by	a	certain	time.	And	that's	why	all	schools	of	psychotherapy	succeed	--
the	Jungian,	the	Freudian,	the	Adlerian...	and	now	there	are	a	thousand	and	one.
They	all	succeed	--	and	 the	basic	reason	of	 their	success	 is	 that	 if	you	prolong
your	analytical	work	for	a	long	period,	the	patient	cures	himself.
It	is	almost	like	the	common	cold.	They	say	that	if	you	take	medicine,	it	will	go
in	seven	days;	if	you	don't	take	medicine,	it	will	go	in	one	week	--	but	it	goes.
People	suffer....	If	you	can	just	manage	to	give	them	hope,	they	are	going	to	heal
by	themselves.	You	are	just	to	sit	by	the	couch.	That's	why	so	many	schools	are
successful.
In	 Zen,	 they	 found	 it	 out	 centuries	 ago.	When	 somebody	 goes	mad	 in	 Japan,
traditionally	 they	 will	 take	 him	 to	 the	 zen	 temple.	 If	 something	 is	 wrong
mentally,	they	will	take	him	to	the	priest.	Each	zen	temple	has	a	hut	far	away	for
such	people.	They	are	left	there;	nothing	is	done	about	them.	Food	is	given,	care
is	 taken,	nobody	 talks	 to	 them.	They	are	 simply	 left	 to	 themselvesj	 alone,	 and
within	three	or	four	weeks	they	are	cured.	And	it	is	thought	that	the	god	of	the
temple	helped.	Nobody	is	helping;	nobody	is	doing	anything.
Just	time	was	needed...	and	a	hope.
That's	why	Mesmer	helped	so	many	people	--	and	there	was	nothing	in	it.	Coue
helped	 many	 people,	 and	 there	 is	 nothing	 --	 just	 auto-suggestion.	 And	 even
charlatans	can	help	--	not	that	their	help	is	in	any	way	wrong.	They	help	many
people,	otherwise	they	would	not	be	in	business.	They	remain	in	business.
So	one	thing:	while	you	are	here,	do	a	few	groups	and	you	will	become	ready.	A
certain	 space	will	 soon	arise	 in	you,	 a	 certain	meditative	 state,	 and	out	of	 that
state,	 energy	 starts	 flowing.	 You	 can	 help	many	 people	 --	 and	 a	 real	 help,	 in
depth;	not	just	post-poning,	and	waiting	for	time	to	heal	them.
It	 is	 a	 hunch...	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 knowledge.	 If	 you	 know	 something
about	 it,	 good	 --	 it	 helps	 a	 little	 bit	 --	 but	 basically	 it	 remains	 a	 hunch.	 One
should	simply	be	available	to	the	patient.	One	should	be	able	to	feel	the	patient.
One	should	be	able	to	be	sensitive	to	the	patient	and	have	a	compassion,	and	a
meditative	energy...	a	loving	touch,	an	understanding	about	his	problem,	so	that
he	can	reveal	his	problems.
These	are	all	hunches.	And	one	should	not	make	a	formula,	because	each	patient
is	different.	One	should	simply	face	the	patient	and	let	energy	do	the	work.	And
it	is	good...	it	is	of	tremendous	value.
When	you	help	others,	you	help	yourself	too.	And	there	is	nothing	like	seeing	a
person	growing	healthy,	coming	back	 to	his	natural	self.	 It	 is	beautiful.	 It	 is	as
beautiful	as	when	a	gardener	sees	his	trees	flowering,	and	he	dances.	Humanity
is	the	supreme-most	flowering.	So	whenever	you	see	somebody	has	flowered,	it
is	a	tremendous	joy.
Just	close	your	eyes,	and	let	me	feel	your	energy.	Sit	and	raise	both	hands	this
way.
[Osho	checks	his	energy.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 energy	 is	 perfectly	 good;	 it	 just	 needs	 a	 little	 more	 flow	 to	 be	 more
streaming	 --	 it	 is	 there.	 So	 you	will	 be	 doing	 all	 the	 groups,	 and	 between	 the
groups,	whenever	you	have	time,	you	can	do	the	African	dance,	or	another	dance
group,	or	T'ai	Chi.	So	for	these	four	months,	continuous	work	on	the	energy.	You
will	explode.
Each	 human	 being	 carries	 such	 tremendous	 power,	 and	 we	 simply	 waste	 the
whole	power	in	problems.
Each	problem	can	become	a	power,	because	each	problem	is	really	power.	If	the
energy	moves	 in	a	non-problematic	way,	 then	all	problems	disappear	and	only
energy	is	left.	Problems	are	like	knots	--	the	energy	gets	stuck.	But	there	are	not
many	knots	either.	Your	energy	is	ready	--	just	a	little	push,	and	you	will	go	far.
Good!
[A	sannyasin	asks:	I'd	like	to	know	what	you	have	to	say	on	epilepsy?
In	reply	to	Osho's	questions	he	says	he	used	to	have	it	very	strongly,	but	it	has
not	been	there	for	three	to	four	years,	but	his	fear	remains.]
Then	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried.	Three	years	is	the	limit,	mm?	Then	you	are
out	of	it.	If	you	were	within	three	years,	 there	would	be	a	possibility	--	but	the
fear	is	natural.	These	things	are	such	that	once	you	have	known	them,	once	you
haYe	tasted	them,	fear	remains.	But	there	is	no	need	now.	You	can	be	completely
unafraid.	You	are	unnecessarily	carrying	a	fear	now	because	the	time	has	passed.
It	will	not	be	coming.	You	need	not	worry.
And	it	is	not	always	bad.	In	fact	all	epileptic	people	can	go	into	meditation	very
easily...	better	than	others.	Sometimes	it	has	happened	that	deep	meditators	have
been	thought	by	medical	people	to	be	epileptic
--	 because	 both	 phenomena	 are	 very	 close:	 in	 both	 cases,	 the	 mind	 stops
functioning.	 So	 they	 have	 some	 similarities;	 they	 overlap.	 There	 are	 many
cures....
Ramakrishna	Paramhansa	--	you	must	have	heard	the	name?	Psychologists	said
he	was	epileptic.	He	was	not,	but	his	meditation	would	take	such	a	tum	that	for
hours	 he	 would	 be	 almost	 uncon-scious.	 He	 was	 not	 unconscious	 --	 he	 was
perfectly	 conscious	 --	 but	 for	 those	 who	 were	 standing	 outside,	 he	 was
absolutely	unconscious.	He	was	very	conscious	inside	--	but	inside.	The	outside
completely	disappeared	as	if	the	bridge	of	the	mind	were	broken.
Once	he	remained	for	six	days	continuously	in	that	state.	And	doctors	would	say
that	this	is	an	epileptic	fit,	and	very	dangerous.	But	it	was	not!	Nobody	had	seen
such	a	beautiful	person....	In	thousands	of	years,	once	in	a	while,	such	a	beautiful
person	is	bom.	But	the	scientific	mind	has	its	own	attitudes.
Exactly	the	same	thing	happens	in	epilepsy.	You	are	suddenly	no	more	in	contact
with	 your	 mind,	 so	 you	 fall	 unconscious.	 The	 same	 can	 happen	 through
meditation,	but	then	you	are	knowingly	going	into	it	--
and	that	makes	a	lot	of	difference.	It	comes	by	and	by,	and	even	when	you	are
out	of	the	mind,	you	know	that	you	are	in	control	--	but	that's	the	difference	only.
In	epilepsy	you	are	not	in	control	at	all.
It	happened	that	one	very	famous	english	novelist,	Somerset	Maugham,	came	to
India	and	went	to	see	Ramana	Maharshi,	a	great	sage.	Maugham	was	a	man	of
rational	outlook	 --	he	had	gone	 there	 just	out	of	 curiosity;	he	had	no	 religious
search	 as	 such,	 no	 spiritual	 quest.	 He	 was	 staying	 in	 the	 ashram	 taking	 his
breakfast,	and	suddenly	Ramana	himself	came.	He	was	going	to	see	Ramana	in
the	 place	 where	 he	 used	 to	 sit	 for	 many	 years,	 but	 Ramana,	 hearing	 that
Somerset	Maugham	had	come	--	somebody	told	him	--	said,
'Okay,	I	am	going	to	see	him!'
He	 came	 so	 suddenly	 that	 Somerset	Maugham	 could	 not	 believe	 that	Ramana
Maharshi	himself	had	come.	The	shock	was	so	sudden,	and	 the	 impact	was	so
great	that	he	fell	in	a	swoon...	he	became	unconscious!
Now	in	the	whole	ashram	Ramana's	coming	was	thought	to	be	a	great	blessing	--
it	was	 rare	 that	 he	 should	 come	 to	 see	 a	 guest...	 and	 then	 this	 happening	 that
Somerset	 fell	 in	 a	 swoon	 and	 became	 unconscious.	 So	 the	 whole	 ashram
gathered	and	people	started	singing	and	were	very	joyous;	they	started	dancing.
They	thought	--	and	 it	was	right	 --	 that	under	Ramana's	 impact,	Maugham	had
moved	 into	 samadhi,	 into	 deep	 meditation.	 And	 that's	 exactly	 what	 had
happened.	But	when	Somerset	Maugham	came	back	he	could	not	believe	what
was	 going	 on.	 He	 said,	 'This	 is	 nothing	 --	 no	 meditation,	 nothing.	 It	 is	 just
because	 I	 was	 tired	 and	 because	 it	 is	 too	 hot	 --	 that's	 why	 I	 fell	 into
unconsciousness.'
He	found	this	rationalisation:	too	hot,	tired	from	the	journey.	And	when	he	wrote
an	 article	 about	 his	 visit,	 he	 wrote	 this:	 'People	 are	 foolish	 there!	 Just	 out	 of
tiredness	and	too	much	heat	I	had	fallen	unconscious,	and	they	thought	that	I	had
entered	some	samadhi	because	of	Ramana's	blessings	or	his	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
presence.	This	is	absurd!	And	I	deny	it!'
I	know	that	when	he	is	denying,	he	is	honest	--	he	is	not	dishonest.	That	is	his
explanation	--	because	he	simply	became	unconscious	so	he	did	not	know	what
happened.	And	when	he	came	back	this	is	the	rationalisation	that	he	made.	That
looks	 scientific:	 tired,	 long	 journey,	 climbing	 up	 the	mountain,	 then	 too	much
heat,	hot	 sun	 --	maybe	a	heat	 stroke	or	 something.	Any	explanation	would	do,
but	 this	 explanation	 that	 Ramana's	 impact....	 The	 sun's	 impact	 is	 okay,	 the
journey's	 impact	 is	okay,	but	 the	presence	of	 this	sage?	That	 is	not	acceptable:
the	rational	mind	cannot	accept	that.
And	 Somerset	Maugham	missed	 a	 great	 opportunity	 by	 refusing	 it.	 He	 could
have	entered	into	a	deeper	space.	He	became	so	much	afraid	of	it;	consciously	he
denied	 it,	 but	 then	 he	 became	 afraid.	 Then	 he	 escaped	 from	 the	 ashram	 --	 he
wouldn't	stay	there	for	long.
When	he	went	to	see	Ramana	to	take	his	leave,	he	wouldn't	enter	the	room.	And
again	he	found	a	rationalisation	--	that	he	would	have	to	remove	his	shoes,	so	he
would	take	leave	from	the	outside.	You	see	the	point?	(chuckling)	So	from	the
window,	standing	outside	the	room,	he	took	his	leave.	I	know	what	fear....	And
he	may	still	not	be	aware	that	the	fear	is	still	 there	--	 that	he	may	fall	 into	that
unconsciousness,	and	then	it	will	be	too	difficult,	because	now	he	is	neither	tired,
nor	it	is	hot,	and	the	sun	has	set.	Now	the	old	explanation	won't	do.	But	the	mind
can	play	tricks.	He	said,	'Just	to	remove	the	shoes	--	it	is	better	that	I	take	leave
from	the	outside,	and	go.'
Don't	be	worried	about	it.	And	whatsoever	it	was,	it	has	made	a	passage	in	you
and	meditation	will	use	that	passage.	But	drop	the	fear,	mm?	Good!
[The	Tao	group	is	present	at	darshan.	A	group	member	says:	I	feel	really	good.
But	I	 just	feel	my	ego	growing.	I	am	proud	of	myself,	and	the	ego	says	to	me,
'Make	 a	 lot	 of	 effort	 and	 fight,	 and	 you	 will	 attain	 by	 yourself.	 Don't	 expect
anything	from	other	people.'	And	I	have	this	problem	with	you.	The	ego	says	to
me,
'He	doesn't	know	you.	How	can	he	help	you	?'	So	the	ego	is	growing.]
Mm	mm.	Let	 it	grow.	Go	on	pumping	(laughter),	 then	 it	will	burst.	 It	 is	 like	a
balloon:	the	bigger	it	is,	the	easier	it	is	to	burst.	So	go	on,	just	go	on	puffing	it.
And	tell	it	that	it	is	perfectly	right.	Let	it	become	bigger,	bigger,	and	one	day	you
will	suddenly	see	that	it	has	burst.	Mm?	that	is	the	only	way	to	get	rid	of	it.
Let	it	be	big!
A	 small	 ego	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 get	 rid	 of,	 because	 it	 is	 so	 small	 it	 can	 hide
anywhere.	A	small	ego	can	pretend	to	be	humble,	and	then	it	is	very	difficult	to
detect	it.	A	big	ego	cannot	pretend	and	it	cannot	hide	anywhere	--	it	is	so	big.	So,
very	good!	Don't	be	worried	about	it.	Go	on	helping	it	and	enjoy	it.	Let	there	be
a	little	flirtation	--	nothing	wrong	in	it.	One	day	it	is	going	to	burst.	And	it	will
burst	only	when	it	is	too	big
--	 not	 before	 it.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 then	 on	 its	 own	 accord	 it	 falls	 and	 disappears.
Then	 humbleness	 arises	 --	 and	 that	 has	 a	 totally	 different	 flavour.	 It	 is	 not	 a
humbleness	that	you	have	practised.	It	has	simply	arisen	because	there	is	no	ego
any	more.
So	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	Just	go	on	doing	groups	and	making	effort	and
meditating,	and	tell	your	ego	that	there	is	no	need	for	any	help	from	anybody's
side	and	that	you	will	do	it	on	your	own,	and	go	on,	mm?	Any	day,	when	it	has
come	 to	 a	 bursting	 point	 you	 will	 see	 it	 bursting	 --	 and	 that	 will	 be	 a	 great
experience.	Don't	try	to	get	rid	of	it	right	now	--	you	cannot.	Let	it	be	ripe.
This	is	one	of	the	very	basic	problems	to	be	faced.	In	the	East	people	are	not	so
egoistic.	 Surrender	 seems	 to	 be	 very	 easy	 --	 but	 meaningless	 because	 people
don't	have	anything	to	surrender.	In	the	West	people	are	more	egoistic.	Surrender
seems	 to	 be	 very	 difficult,	 but	 then	 surrender	 is	meaningful	 becawe	 it	 is	 very
difficult;	they	have	something	to	surrender.
And	in	a	right	education,	in	a	right	culture,	this	will	be	the	balance:	first	we	will
teach	every	child	to	be	as	egoistic	as	possible	and	then	we	will	teach	him	how	to
allow	 this	 ego	 to	 burst	 on	 its	 own	 accord	 so	 he	 can	 become	 humble.	 Then
humbleness	is	a	happening.	And	when	the	ego	is	ripe,	and	falls	from	the	tree	on
its	own,	there	is	beauty,	grace,	benediction.
So	nothing	wrong	in	it.	You	can	go	on	fighting	with	me.	Let	that	game	be	there	-
-	no	need	to	be	worried.
But	you	are	trapped!	This	ego	is	going	to	be	destroyed,	mm?	Good!	Very	good!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	All	I	Represent	is	Love
1	December	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7612015
ShortTitle:	WHIP22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Orange	is	symbolic	--	symbolic	of	death	because	it	represents	fire.	In	India	we
burn	the	dead	body.
Actually	 in	 the	 old	 days,	 in	 the	 traditional	 days,	 when	 sannyas	 was	 given	 to
somebody	he	was	put	down	on	the	funeral	pyre.	The	master	would	stand	by	the
side,	and	other	disciples	would	say	good-bye	to	him.	The	fire	would	be	lit,	and
then	he	would	be	 taken	away	from	the	pyre	and	be	given	a	new	name	and	 the
orange	dress	--	to	indicate	that	he	has	passed	through	death...	that	the	old	is	gone.
Orange	is	also	symbolic	of	blood,	of	birth,	so	the	new	is	born,	the	new	baby	is
born	in	blood.
Orange	is	symbolic	of	death	and	birth,	of	crucifixion	and	resurrection.
So	change	to	orange,	and	start	looking	at	yourself	in	an	absolutely	new	way,	as
you	have	never	looked.
This	moment	becomes	a	new	beginning.	Start	from	ABC...	as	if	you	are	again	a
child	and	again	learning	the	ways	of	life.
And	much	is	going	to	happen	--	I	can	see	you	ready	for	many	things....
[A	sannyasin	brings	his	mother	to	take	sannyas]
Deva	means	divine,	and	kanksha	means	desire;	desire	for	the	divine,	desire	for
god.	And	 I	 can	 see	 that	 the	 desire	 is	 there.	 It	 is	 still	 a	 seed,	 but	 it	will	 sprout
soon.
In	fact	it	 is	not	that	you	have	come	to	see	[your	son]	--	that	desire	has	brought
you	here;	that	is	just	an	excuse.	Right?	I	have	caught	you!
[A	sannyasin	who	has	 returned	says:	 I	couldn't	get	 it	 together	 financially	and	I
fell	in	two.	Now	I	don't	know	how	long	I	can	stay.	I	would	like	to	stay	a	longer
period.	I'm	really	frightened	of	going	back.]
No,	I	will	put	you	together	--	don't	be	worried.	If	you	want	to	stay,	you	will	stay.
So	forget	that,	mm?
And	I	will	put	you	together.	Nobody	ever	falls	apart	really.	One	simply	feels...	it
is	 just	an	idea	--	because	basically	you	cannot	fall	apart.	Every	being	is	such	a
unity	that	there	is	no	way	to	fall	apart.
Many	times	we	imagine	that	we	are	falling	apart,	but	we	never	fall	apart.	Even
people	who	 are	 schizophrenic,	 split,	 in	madhouses	 --	 even	 they	 are	 not	 fallen
apart.	They	have	just	taken	the	idea,	a	fancy,	and	the	whole	society	helps	them	to
keep	the	fancy.	Maybe	there	is	some	politics	in	it,	maybe	the	family	wants	them
to	 remain	 mad,	 the	 society	 wants	 them	 to	 remain	 mad.	 Maybe	 they	 are
scapegoats	and	the	society,	wants	to	throw	its	own	garbage	on	them,	but	in	fact
they	are	not.
In	a	madhouse	they	tried	one	experiment.	They	made	it	clear	 that	unless	every
inmate	came	and	stood	in	a	queue	before	the	mess,	nobody	would	get	food.	For
just	two	days	they	waited,	and	by	the	third	day	all	the	mad	people	were	standing
in	the	queue	--	and	just	one	day	before,	two	days	before	they	wouldn't	listen	to
anything!	Then	they	made	another	thing:	they	fixed	switches	on	the	wall.	There
were	one	hundred	and	twenty	mad	people.	and	they	said	that	they	all	had	to	push
the	switches	together	--	one	hundred	and	twenty	people	--	only	then	the	doors	of
the	mess	would	open,	otherwise	they	would	remain	hungry.	They	managed
--	one	hundred	and	twenty	people,	and	mad	--	they	managed	to	push	the	button
together!	And	the	people	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
who	were	experimenting	were	 simply	surprised.	They	were	 thinking	 that	 these
people	were	mad!
One	of	the	greatest	seers	of	India,	Ramana	Maharshi,	never	used	to	be	very	kind
to	 mad	 people.	 One	 of	 his	 biographers,	 Chadwick,	 writes:	 'I	 was	 very	 much
surprised	that	he	is	such	a	great	saint	and	he	has	no	compassion	for	mad	people.'
Whenever	he	would	raise	 the	question,	Ramana	Maharshi	would	simply	 laugh,
and	drop	the	subject	and	never	discuss	it.
One	day	Chadwick	persisted.	He	said,	'I	want	a	clear-cut	answer.	Why	don't	you
have	any	compassion	for	mad	people?'	Ramana	said,	 'I	have	never	come	across
any	mad	people	 --	 they	 are	 all	 playing!'	 Just	 see	what	he	 says	 --	 'They	 are	 all
playing	 the	 game.'	 They	 have	 chosen	 to	 be	 mad!	 Nobody	 is	 mad,	 because
nobody	can	be	mad.
In	 the	 West	 many	 more	 people	 are	 going	 mad	 --	 every	 year	 many	 more	 --
because	madness	 is	 now	 an	 accepted	 thing;	 almost	 a	 way,	 a	 style	 of	 life,	 for
many	people.	In	the	East	so	many	people	never	go	mad.
In	my	home	 town	 there	was	one	mad	person.	 In	 fact,	 in	 every	village	 there	 is
one.	It	seems	he	is	needed
--	maybe	 like	 an	 outlet,	 a	 safety	 valve.	The	whole	 town	 remains	 sane,	 and	 he
becomes	 the	 leakage	 for	 insanity.	Children	would	 run	 after	 him,	 throw	 stones,
and	he	would	throw	stones,	and	it	was	such	a	scene	whenever	he	passed.
I	continuously	watched	him.	 I	never	 tortured	him.	 I	had	some	deep	feeling	 for
the	madman.	And	 sometimes	 I	would	go	and	 sit	by	his	 side	 --	he	used	 to	 live
under	a	 tree.	By	and	by	he	became	aware	of	 this	 fact	 that	 I	had	never	 tortured
him	as	every	child	of	the	town,	every	boy,	even	grown	up	people,	did.	So	he	one
day	asked	me,	 'Why	don't	you	 torture	me?	Why	don't	you	 throw	stones?	Don't
you	think	I	am	mad?'	I	said,	'I	have	never	thought	that	you	were	mad.'
He	laughed,	and	he	said,	'Come	close	to	me.	I	will	tell	you	a	secret	--	I	am	not!
But	don't	tell	it	to	anybody.	This	is	my	way	of	living.	This	is	how	I	get	my	food,
my	clothing.	This	is	an	agreement	between	me	and	the	village	--	that	I	will	play
the	role	of	a	madman.	It's	okay,	and	things	are	going	very	well!'
[The	sannyasin	answers:	But	at	the	same	time	I	feel	better	than	ever.]
Mm,	 You	 are	 better!	 I	 have	 put	 you	 together.	 Start	 meditating,	 dancing,	 and
forget	all	about	it!
[A	sannyasin	says:	I'm	feeling	very	happy...	Sometimes	I	can't	take	it.]
Yes,	 it	 can	 become	 unbearable	 too.	 Only	 pain	 is	 not	 unbearable	 --	 pleasure,
happiness,	can	become	unbearable.
So	whenever	you	cannot	take	it	in,	dance,	sing...	go	a	little	berserk.	Express	it...
cry,	let	the	tears	come.
Then	you	will	be	able	to	hold	it.	Whenever	it	is	too	much,	let	it	flow...	share	it.
[The	sannyasin	continued	that	she	found	she	felt	happier	outside	the	ashram	and
that	she	was	in	love	with	an	indian	sadhu.]
Mm.	Love	is	good.	Whomsoever	you	are	in	love	with,	it	is	good.	Love	is	good!
It	is	irrelevant	with	whom	you	are	in	love.	If	you	love,	you	love	me,	so	simply
love!	Mm?	don't	create	any	conflict.
This	is	the	mind	that	comes	again	and	again	in	between.	It	says,	'Why,	what	are
you	doing?	If	you	fall	in	love	with	this	man,	you	will	be	going	away	from	Osho!'
If	 you	 are	 going	 towards	 love,	 you	 are	 coming	 closer	 to	 me.	 If	 you	 are	 not
coming	closer	to	love,	you	may	be	here	just	sitting	in	front	of	me	and	you	are	far
away,	far,	far	away.	You	are	on	some	other	planet,	not	on	this	one	--	because	all
that	I	represent	is	love.
My	whole	effort	is	to	make	you	more	loving.
Remember	--	if	you	love,	you	love	me.
And	if	you	are	happy,	you	are	in	my	ashram,	mm?	Good!
[A	sannyasin	says:	I	wrote	to	you	about	having	a	fever	when	doing	meditation.	I
feel	a	lot	has	happened	to	me.]
You	are	feeling	very	weightless,	light?	--	that's	good.	Sometimes	meditations	can
bring	 fever,	but	 if	 fever	 is	brought	by	meditation,	 then	after	 the	 fever	you	will
feel	very	very	light,	almost	as	if	you	can	fly.
Mm?	because	 then	 that	 fever	was	something	psychological	 that	has	 left	you.	 It
was	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 your	 body.	 It	 was	 something	 feverish	 inside	 you	 that
exploded.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sometimes	 meditation	 brings	 a	 few	 things:	 it	 can	 bring	 fever,	 it	 can	 bring
headaches,	 stomach	 disturbances,	 it	 can	 bring	 diarrhoea.	 And	 they	 are	 all
tremendously	 helpful	 --	 but	 one	 comes	 to	 know	only	when	 they	 are	 gone,	 not
before	 it.	 Meditation	 is	 a	 cleansing	 process	 and	 whatsoever	 is	 stuck	 in	 your
system	has	to	be	thrown	out.	But	this	has	been	very	good.
[Osho	checks	her	energy.]
You	are	in	a	state	of	levitation...	very	good.	In	this	state,	sometimes	if	you	sit	and
meditate,	you	may	feel	you	have	risen	above	the	earth.	Not	actually	--	not	 that
the	body	rises	above	the	earth	--	but	your	subtle,	your	energy	body,	rises	above
the	earth.	 If	you	open	your	eyes,	you	will	 find	yourself	 sitting	on	 the	earth.	 If
you	close	your	eyes,	you	will	find	that	you	are	almost	two	or	three	feet	above	the
earth.
There	 are	 two	 laws:	one	 is	 of	 gravitation	 --	 science	knows	about	 it.	The	other
law,	levitation,	science	still	has	to	discover.	But	Yoga	has	always	known	it,	and	it
has	to	be	so,	because	each	law	can	exist	only	with	a	contrary	law	--	no	law	can
exist	alone.	If	birth	exists	then	death	exists.	If	day	exists	then	night	exists.
If	man	exists	then	woman	exists.	If	love	exists	then	hate	exists.	Each	law	has	to
function	with	its	opposite	which	is	also	complementary	to	it.
So	science	has	discovered	gravitation	--	that	things,	material	things,	fall	towards
the	 earth.	 Yoga	 says	 there	 is	 a	 law	 of	 levitation	 --	 that	 spiritual	 things	 fall
upwards.	 If	 they	 are	 allowed,	 they	 will	 start	 moving	 upwards.	 It	 is	 not	 just
metaphorical	that	we	look	upwards	for	God.	It	is	not	just	metaphorical	that	when
we	pray,	we	pray	towards	someone	who	is	there	high	in	the	heavens.	No,	it	is	an
indication	of	the	law	of	levitation.
So	you	are	exactly	in	the	ray	of	the	law	of	levitation	--	enjoy	it!	Mm?	this	is	the
moment	when	one	can	pray,	and	can	feel	prayerful,	and	can	simply	be	happy	for
no	reason	at	an.	This	is	the	moment	that	one	can	dance,	really	dance	and	dance
with	the	soul	--	not	only	with	the	body.	The	dance	can	go	to	your	very	core,	and
it	 will	 not	 be	 just	 a	 movement,	 physical	 movement;	 it	 will	 be	 a	 spiritual
experience.	So	you	start	praying.
In	the	night	when	you	go	to	sleep,	just	sit	in	the	bed	with	folded	hands	looking
upwards.	Put	the	light	off	and	in	deep	darkness,	just	look	upwards.	Feel	that	you
can	 fly,	 and	 then	 anything	 that	 comes,	 anything	 that	 you	would	 like	 to	 say	 to
God,	 say	 it	 --	 anything!	 Don't	 make	 it	 a	 formal	 affair:	 don't	 say	 the	 christian
prayer,	or	the	hindu	prayer,	or	any	prayer.	If	it	happens,	good...	it	is	beautiful.	If
it	 comes	 spontaneously,	 that	 too	 is	 good,	 but	 let	 it	 be	 spontaneous	 --	 don't
prepare	for	 it.	You	can	say	anything	at	 this	moment:	 just	 'hello'	 is	enough	of	a
prayer,	or,	'How	are	you,	God?'	is	enough	prayer.
Have	 you	 heard	 about	 the	 three	 mystics?	 Tolstoy	 has	 written	 a	 story,	 that	 in
Russia	before	the	revolution,	there	were	three	famous	mystics	who	used	to	live
on	a	small	island	in	a	big	lake.	They	became	so	famous	that	the	pope,	the	highest
religious	authority	of	the	Russian	Orthodox	Church,	became	very	much	worried
--	the	masses	were	going	towards	them.	So	finally	he	decided	to	go	and	see	what
is	happening.
He	went	by	motorboat...	landed.	Those	three	poor	people	--	they	were	very	poor
people	 --	 rushed	 and	 fell	 at	 his	 feet.	 He	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 these	 ordinary
people	 had	 fallen	 at	 his	 feet.	 He	 said,	 'What's	 your	 secret?	 Why	 are	 people
coming	to	you?'	They	said,	'We	don't	know.'
He	said,	'What	is	your	religious	practice,	what	is	your	sadhana?'
They	said,	'That	too	we	don't	know.	We	are	very	ignorant,	illiterate	persons.	We
know	just	one	prayer	--
we	do	that.'
So	he	asked,	'What	is	your	prayer?'
They	 looked	 at	 each	 other...	 they	 felt	 very	 ashamed	 and	 shy.	 Then	 one	 said,
'Forgive	 us	 father,	 because	 we	 don't	 know	 really	 how	 to	 pray,	 so	 we	 have
invented	 one.	 We	 should	 not	 have	 done	 this,	 but	 we	 are	 ignorant	 people	 --
forgive	us.	We	have	 invented	our	own	prayer.	Knowing	that	God	is	a	 trinity	--
God	the	Father,	the	Holy	Ghost,	and	the	Son	--	and	we	are	also	three,	we	have
made	a	prayer:	 "You	are	 three,	we	are	 three	 --	have	mercy	on	us."	This	 is	our
prayer.'
The	 head	 priest	 was	 very	 angry.	 He	 said,	 'Who	 told	 you	 this	 is	 prayer?	 Has
anybody	ever	heard	of	any	prayer	like	that?	You	should	learn	a	christian	prayer	-
-	Our	Lord's	prayer.'	So	he	taught	them.
They	asked	again,	they	asked	again	--	twice	he	repeated.	They	said,	'Okay,	now
we	will	remember.'
Mm?	Happy,	he	set	off	in	his	boat.	Then	just	in	the	middle	of	the	lake,	he	was
surprised	to	see	that	those	three	were	coming	--	almost	like	a	storm	--	running	on
the	water!
He	trembled!	He	started	saying,	'What	is	happening?	This	is	a	miracle!'	And	they
came	and	said,	'Father,	once	more	please	repeat	that	prayer	--	we	have	forgotten!'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
He	fell	at	the	feet	of	those	three	and	he	said,	'Your	prayer	is	right	--	my	prayer	is
just	 formal.	 You	 continue	 your	 prayer.	 I	 should	 not	 have	 disturbed	 you.	 Your
prayer	has	been	heard.	Now	who	am	I	to	say	that	this	is	not	right?	You	simply
continue	your	prayer.'
So	 just	 a	 'hello'	 sometimes	will	 do.	 Prayer	 has	 to	 be	 something	 of	 the	 heart...
spontaneous,	with	no	preparation.
So	 every	night,	 just	 a	 five	minute	 prayer	will	 be	very	helpful	 in	 this	moment,
mm?	and	then	go	to	sleep.
In	a	deep	prayerful	mood	fall	 into	sleep,	and	 in	 the	morning	when	you	get	up,
again	get	up	prayerfully.
Good.
[A	 sannyasin	 therapist	who	has	 recently	 returned	 says:	 I've	been	working	very
hard.	When	I'm	teaching	there	is	nobody	there,	and	it's	very	beautiful.	But	in	my
life	I	seem	to	have	lost	all	of	my	self-confidence.
But	now	I'm	here	with	you...	]
In	fact,	it	depends	how	you	look	at	it.	Otherwise	losing	self-confidence	can	be	a
great	privilege.	It	may	be	just	the	beginning	of	losing	the	ego...
Only	 the	 beginning....	 Because	 self-confidence	 is	 basically	 nothing	 but	 ego-
confidence.	And	self-confidence	is	not	of	much	help.	If	it	disappears,	it	is	good.
You	will	feel	more	free.	Of	course	you	will	not	feel	so	secure	--	but	with	security
there	 is	 no	 freedom.	Freedom	exists	 only	with	 insecurity.	You	will	 not	 feel	 so
certain	and	so	smug...	but	who	can	be	certain?	How	is	certainty	possible?	Life	is
so	vast,	so	unpredictable	--	how	can	one	have	self-confidence	in	the	first	place?
In	fact	only	stupid	people	can	have	self-confidence.	The	more	wise	you	become,
the	more	it	disappears.
[The	sannyasin	says:	When	I	feel	confident,	then	I	feel	that	I	move	with	a	kind
of	authority.]
That's	what	stupidity	is	--	authority.	When	you	are	authoritative,	you	are	no	more
alive,	you	are	no	more	free,	you	are	no	more	spontaneous,	and	you	are	no	more
in	 tune	with	 existence.	How	can	you	have	 authority?....	Because	 life	 is	 such	 a
mystery	--	nothing	is	known	about	life	and	nothing	can	be	known	about	life.	It	is
not	only	unknown	--	 it	 is	unknowable.	How	can	you	be	authoritative	about	 it?
The	authority	simply	means	that	you	are	not	aware	of	the	tremendousness,	of	the
vastness,	of	the	hugeness	of	life,	and	you	are	not	aware	of	the	mystery.
Socrates	 says,	 'When	 I	was	young,	 I	used	 to	 think	 I	knew	all.	When	 I	became
older,	I	became	suspicious,	I	lost	my	confidence	and	many	loop-holes	erupted	in
my	knowledge.	And	when	I	am	really	on	the	verge	of	death,	only	one	certainty	is
left	--	that	I	am	ignorant,	that	I	don't	know	anything.'
Socrates	is	really	one	of	the	wisest	men,	and	whatsoever	he	says,	he	means.
So...	 your	 self-confidence	 disappearing	 is	 a	 blessing.	 In	 fact	 one	 should	 start
living	 without	 authority.	 I	 know	 it	 is	 difficult	 --	 that's	 why	 people	 choose
authority.	Authority	seems	to	be	clear-cut.	It	is	as	if	in	the	vast	jungle	of	life	you
have	 cleared	 a	 small	 space	 --	 neat,	 clean...	 that's	 what	 authority	 is.	 But	 .look
around	 a	 little.	 Nothing	 is	 neat	 and	 everything	 is	 mysterious.	 Man	 knows
nothing.
So	I	don't	think	your	self-confidence	is	going	to	come	back	--	no!	You	will	have
to	 live	without	 it.	And	once	you	have	decided	to	 live	without	 it,	you	will	have
such	 beautiful	 freedom	 available.	 But	 I	 know	 your	 problem.	 You	 have	 been
trying	 to	 live	 through	 knowledge.	 You	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 live	 through
information,	 through	 the	 scripture,	 you	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 live	 through	 the
mind.	 Now	 try	 to	 live	 without	 the	 mind.	 You	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 live	 in	 a
rational	way	and	now	doubts	are	arising	about	reason.
The	 disappearing	 self-confidence	 simply	 means	 that	 now	 you	 are	 becoming
aware	 that	 life	 is	 bigger	 than	 reason.	When	 somebody	 asks	 you	 a	 question	 --
somebody	says,	'Is	there	a	God?'	only	a	foolish	person	can	say	yes	or	no.	He	can
say	with	confidence!	And	you	can	judge	by	the	confidence	how	foolish	he	is.
I	 go	 on	 looking	 into	 christian	 missionaries'	 books	 --	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 such
stupid	literature.	So	confident	--	and	without	knowing	anything!
Somebody	asks,	 'Is	 there	a	God?'...	 a	 small	child	asks	you,	 'Is	 there	God?'	and
you	say,	'Yes.'	Just	look	behind	your	'yes'.	What	are	you	trying	to	pretend	before
the	child?	Who	are	you	kidding?
Be	humble,	and	say	to	the	child,	 'I	don't	know.'	You	will	be	truer,	and	closer	to
God.	And	when	you	say,
'Yes,	 God	 is,'	 and	 you	 try	 to	 say	 it	 with	 deep	 confidence	 so	 that	 the	 child	 is
convinced,	and	 through	 the	conviction	of	 the	child	you	are	convinced	 that	you
know....	When	you	see	that	yes,	you	have	convinced	the	child	--	at	least	silenced
the	child,	if	not	convinced	--	then	you	feel	good.	But	life	is	not	so	easy.	It	is	not	a
question	of	two	plus	two	being	four.	Sometimes	in	life	two	plus	two	is	five,	and
sometimes	two	plus	two	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
three.	And	sometimes	whatsoever	you	do,	you	cannot	make	two	plus	two	--	they
don't	join.	That	plus	becomes	impossible.
Who	 can	 speak	 authoritatively?	You	 can	 speak	 only	 in	 deep	 humbleness.	You
can	say	'perhaps'.	How	can	you	be	certain?
I	 know	 the	 difficulty	 --	 because	when	 you	 are	 not	 certain,	 you	 become	 afraid
whether	 the	other	will	be	convinced.	 If	you	are	not	certain,	you	become	afraid
inside;	the	other	has	touched	your	uncertainty.
I	have	heard	that	a	man	was	travelling	in	a	train.	He	came	into	the	compartment
and	he	was	very	much	worried	and	trembling.	He	asked	the	man	who	was	sitting
just	in	front	of	him,	'Where	does	this	train	go?
Does	 this	 train	 go	 to	 London?'	 The	 man	 said,	 'Yes.'	 He	 started	 reading	 his
newspaper	again,	but	he	was	not	yet	certain.	He	asked	again,	'Sir,	can	I	ask	you
again?'	The	man	said,	'Are	you	mad?	All	over	the	compartment	it	is	written	that
the	train	is	going	to	London.	The	train	is	going	to	London	--	and	keep	quiet!'
He	started	reading	his	newspaper	again.	The	man	kept	quiet.
Then	at	 another	 station	 somebody	else	entered	 the	compartment	and	asked	 the
man	who	was	worried	whether	the	train	was	going	to	London	or	not,	'Is	this	train
going	to	London?	The	man	jumped	and	he	said,
'Now	you	have	made	me	uncertain	again!'
We	are	all	uncertain.	So	when	somebody	asks,	 '...	 is	 there	a	God?'	you	become
afraid	 deep	 down:	 he	 is	 making	 you	 uncertain	 again!	 Somehow	 you	 were
managing	to	believe	that	there	is	a	God	and	everything	is	okay	--	God	in	heaven
and	we	on	the	earth,	and	everything	is	going	well	and	He	is	taking	care	of	this
whole	mess,	this	chaos,	and	things	eventually	will	be	right.	And	now	here	comes
a	man,	a	small	child,	and	says,	'Is	there	a	God?	Does	God	really	exist?'	And	he	is
asking	so	innocently	--	again	he	is	provoking	your	uncertainty.
You	shout	loudly,	'Yes,	there	is	a	God!'	Against	whom	are	you	shouting?	Against
this	child	or	against	your	own	fear?	Just	as	you	are	trying	to	make	this	child	keep
quiet,	your	parents	had	made	you	keep	quiet.
Your	childhood	is	still	there...	uncertain.
This	is	all	absurd!	There	is	no	need	to	carry	such	self-confidence.	If	you	know,
you	know	--	 there	 is	no	need	for	self-confidence.	 If	you	don't	know,	you	don't
know.	What	is	the	need	for	self-confidence?	You	see	the	point?	If	you	know,	you
know.	There	is	no	need	for	self-confidence.	If	you	don't	know,	you	don't	know.
What	 will	 self-confidence	 do?	 So	 in	 either	 case,	 it	 is	 not	 needed	 --	 it	 is	 an
unnecessary	burden.	Forget	about	it!
And	this	time	when	you	go	from	here,	just	go	free.	Let	the	spontaneity	decide.
Of	 course	 then	 you	will	 become	very	 inconsis-tent	 --	 you	will	 be	 inconsistent
like	me	--	because	then	you	cannot	be	consistent.
Each	moment	has	its	own	spontaneity...	each	moment	has	its	own	say.
Deep	down	there	will	be	a	consistency,	but	that	will	not	be	on	the	surface.	Your
freedom	will	be	 consistently	 there,	but	your	 statements	will	 all	 be	different.	A
real	man	of	understanding	 is	bound	 to	be	contradictory,	because	a	 real	man	of
understanding	only	lives	the	moment.
For	example,	I	am	saying	to	you	that	there	is	no	need	for	self-confidence.	I	am
not	 saying	 that	 tomorrow	 also	 I	 will	 say	 the	 same	 and	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 that
yesterday	I	said	the	same	--	that	is	none	of	my	concern.
This	moment	--	looking	into	you,	looking	into	myself	--	this	is	how	I	feel...	that
there	 is	 no	 need.	One	 can	 simply	 be	 oneself	 --	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any	 self-
confidence.	And	I	am	not	saying	that	when	self-confidence	disappears,	you	will
have	 an	unself-confidence	 --	 that	 disappears	with	 it	 too.	 It	 is	 its	 shadow.	How
can	 you	 be	 unself-confident	 when	 there	 is	 no	 self-confidence?	 They	 both	 go
together.	You	are	simply	there	then	--
naturally	there...	responsive.	And	your	response	is	authentic,	not	authoritative.
An	authoritative	response	is	never	authentic,	and	an	authentic	response	is	never
authoritative.	But	 to	be	authentic	 is	more	valuable.	 If	you	don't	get	 confused	 I
will	say	that	to	be	authentic	carries	its	own	authority
--	but	it	is	not	authoritative.	It	is	sincere.
You	 look	 in	 my	 eyes....	 Whatsoever	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 not	 authoritative	 --	 it	 is
sincere.	And	sincerity	has	its	own	weight,	it	goes	deeper...	touches	the	very	core
of	your	being.	Authority	is	very	superficial,	authority	is	borrowed	--	sincerity	is
your	own	flowering.
So	forget	about	it!	There	is	no	need.
[The	sannyasin	says:	I	know...	 the	difference	between	the	authority	or	sincerity
that's	there,	and	the	authority	that	comes	from	the	mind.	But	it	seems	that	in	my
own	life,	I	can't	let	go	of	that	yet,	though	in	my	work	I	can.]
I	 understand.	 That	 will	 happen	 in	 your	 life	 too....	 Because	 when	 you	 are
working,	you	can	be	more	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
objective;	the	problem	is	somebody	else's.	When	it	is	your	own	life,	the	problem
is	yours.
Somebody	comes	to	you,	and	he	has	a	problem.	You	can	be	very	objective,	very
sincere	--	sincere	to	the	core	--	because	you	are	not	risking	anything.	You	can	be
sincere,	there	is	no	risk	--	but	when	the	problem	is	your	own,	the	question	is	your
own	--	then	the	answer	is	not	so	objective.	You	are	not	two,	you	are	one.
Now	the	question	is	arising	in	you!
The	day	Amit	Prem	[a	therapist	friend	with	whom	the	sannyasin	had	originally
come	to	see	Osho]	took	sannyas,	I	asked	him,	'Have.	you	something	to	say?'	He
said,	'Osho,	what	next?'	I	said,	'There	is	nothing.
Drop	 all	 hope.	 The	 very	 hope	 that	 one	 has	 to	 gain	 something	 and	 improve,
advance,	become	spiritual,	adept,	siddha,	this	and	that	--	all	nonsense!	Drop	all
hope!'
He	said,	'This	is	what	I	say	to	other	people!'
Now	if	you	have	said	it	to	other	people	and	it	was	authentic,	you	should	not	ask,
'What	next?'	Then	 there	 is	 no	next	 --	 this	moment	 is	 all,	 and	one	 is	 not	 going
anywhere.	We	are	already	here!	And	here	is	all	that	is.
There	is	no	future,	no	space	to	grow.	The	world	is	perfect	each	moment	--	it	is
not	going	from	imperfection	towards	perfection,	and	each	individual	is	perfect	as
he	is.	And	Amit	says,	'Yes,	this	is	what	I	say	to	other	people.'
Then	just	to	make	it	an	experiment,	I	didn't	suggest	that	he	do	any	group	or	any
meditation	or	anything.
Now	today	he	writes	a	letter	to	me	saying,	'I	think	that	by	being	here	nothing	is
going	to	happen.'	Again	the	same	desire	--	something	should	happen.	And	I	was
just	creating	a	situation.	I	was	just	making	it	clear	to	him	that	whatsoever	he	has
been	saying	to	others	is	not	authentic,	otherwise	it	should	enter	his	own	life	too!
It	 is	very	easy	 to	advise	others.	 It	 is	very	difficult	when	 it	 comes	 to	your	own
problems.	Then	you	become	uncertain,	because	you	know	your	answers	are	just
answers.	How	can	you	deceive	yourself?	You	can	deceive	somebody	else	--	it	is
easier.	The	other	does	not	know	whether	[you	have]	attained	or	not,	mm?
But	this	Amit	Prem	tells	somebody	that	there	is	nowhere	to	go;	herenow	is	the
goal.	Now	how	is	the	other	supposed	to	know	whether	he	is	talking	from	some
inner	 experience	 of	 the	 herenow,	 or	 whether	 he	 is	 just	 philosophical,	 he	 has
learned	a	doctrine?	The	other	will	be	impressed.
But	when	the	question	arises	to	Amit	Prem	himself	--	sitting	in	his	chair	or	lying
down	in	his	bed	and	suffering	from	dysentery	and	this	and	that,	and	the	problem
arises,	'Amit	Prem,	what	are	you	doing	here?
Why	 are	 you	wasting	 your	 time	 here?'	 --	 the	 question	 is	 real.	 The	 question	 is
more	real	than	your	answer.
Then	the	self-confidence....	You	will	feel	that	something	is	missing.	The	question
is	more	real,	deeper	than	your	answer.	Now	your	answer	has	to	be	deeper	too.
So	 this	 is	my	 suggestion:	 whatsoever	 you	 say	 to	 people,	 before	 you	 say	 it	 to
them,	after	you	have	said	it	to	them,	meditate	on	those	answers,	compare	notes
with	your	own	question.	And	by	and	by,	if	you	feel	that	you	have	not	answered
any	question	that	is	yours,	then	your	answer	is	not	really	authentic,	not	sincere.	It
looks	sincere,	it	may	be	a	beautiful	answer	--	that's	okay.	Very	logical,	pertinent,
penetrating	--	but	it	is	not	authentic....
Because	the	real	test	is	within	you.	There	is	the	crucible...	there	you	have	to	test
everything.	There	 is	 the	 real	 fire.	 If	 the	 answer	 is	 real	 it	will	 pass	 through	 the
fire.	If	the	answer	is	not	real	it	will	not	be	able	to	solve	your	question,	and	if	it
cannot	solve	your	question,	please	remember	that	it	is	not	sincere	--	then	better
not	to	say	it	to	anybody.
At	the	most	say,	'I	have	not	been	able	to	solve	my	own	question,	but	this	is	the
way	I	would	like	my	question	to	be	solved.	This	is	just	my	suggestion,	not	my
answer...	just	my	intellectual	approach	towards	it.
This	 is	my	 intellectual	 understanding,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 spiritual.'	 Say	 it!	 Then	 you
will	be	more	sincere.
Sincerity	 simply	 means	 that	 whatsoever	 you	 are	 saying	 to	 others	 you	 ask	 of
yourself,	'Has	it	happened	to	me?	Is	it	really	happening	to	me?'
That's	 what	 the	 problem	 is:	 you	 know	 the	 right	 answer,	 and	 when	 you	 are
teaching	you	are	a	good	teacher.	So	you	teach	well	--	you	satisfy	your	students.
They	feel	very	good	--	they	have	received	something.	But	when	you	come	home,
your	own	questions	are	 there	 (a	chuckle);	you	cannot	deceive	 those	questions!
They	are	there.
So	when	you	go	back,	tell	Amit	that	this	has	been	a	situation	for	him.
This	has	been	a	situation	--	and	I	was	putting	him	into	that	situation	to	give	him
a	 real	 feel	 that	 whatsoever	 he	 has	 been	 saying	 is	 just	 absurd.	 I'm	 not	 saying
wrong	--	I	am	saying	absurd.	It	may	be	right	--
because	it	looks	right	--	but	it	is	absurd.
Deep	down	in	him	there	is	a	great	desire	to	grow,	to	become,	to	be	something,	to
be	somebody.	I	simply	suggested	nothing	to	him	for	those	few	days	he	has	been
here.	In	fact	I	suggested	that	he	conduct	a	group	--
not	to	participate,	but	lead.	So	he	felt	that	if	he	is	leading	groups	here	and	he	was
leading	groups	there,	this	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ashram	has	nothing	to	give	to	him.
This	was	just	a	situation.	And	tell	him	that	is	worked!	It	has	brought	his	whole
heart	 to	 the	 surface.	Now	 the	 real	work	will	 start.	And	 tell	 [the	 sannyasin	ma
who	 was	 with	 him]	 she	 proved	 to	 be	 of	 a	 more	 grounded	 nature	 than	 Amit
Prem...	proved	to	be	more	centered.	But	god!	Now	things	are	clear...
[A	group	leader	who	had	to	return	to	the	West	for	health	reasons,	said	he	gave
groups	 there	and	many	participants	will	be	coming	 to	see	Osho.	He	 then	says:
It's	difficult	when	I	experience	that	part	 in	me	that	stops	me	from	coming	here
forever.]
Accept	that	too.	There	is	no	need	to	fight	it.	If	it	is	there,	it	is	there.	One	day	it
will	disappear,	but	you	need	not	make	it	disappear.	Then	it	will	never	disappear.
It	is	bound	to	be	there	in	everybody	who	is	close	to	me;	it	is	bound	to	be	there,
otherwise	you	will	simply	disappear.	You	will	disappear	into	my	emptiness.	You
have	to	cling	to	something	against	me.	That	is	your	security.
Nothing	wrong	in	it	--	it	is	natural.	It	is	part	of	the	whole	heritage.	We	have	been
trying	to	survive,	and	we	have	been	fighting	in	every	way	against	disappearing.
Down	 the	 centuries	 for	 millions	 of	 years,	 every	 being	 has	 been	 fighting	 and
fighting	to	survive.	Then	that	becomes	part	of	our	nature	--	that	effort	to	survive.
When	you	fall	in	love	it	creates	trouble,	because	love	is	possible	only	when	you
disappear.	So	that	whole	conditioning	of	the	mind,	of	centuries,	has	gone	to	the
very	cells.	That	becomes	a	barrier	to	all	kinds	of	love.
And	to	be	in	love	with	me	is	dangerous.	So	it	 is	a	natural	tendency	to	fight,	 to
find	some	way	or	other,	and	to	be	scared	and	afraid.	But	it	is	natural	--	accept	it...
let	it	be	there!
In	spite	of	it	you	are	going	to	disappear.	So	we	are	not	worried	about	it.	It	cannot
prevent	you...	it	cannot	even	delay	you.	It	is	almost	irrelevant,	so	don't	pay	much
attention	to	it.	In	fact	the	more	attention	you	pay	to	it,	the	more	you	feed	it.	It	is
there,	so	accept	it	just	like	your	back:	it	is	also	there,	a	part	of	you.
And	don't	in	any	way	try	to	drop	it.	If	you	try	to	drop	it,	it	will	give	you	a	great
fight.	Simply	accept,	and	in	spite	of	that,	things	are	growing,	things	are	moving	-
-	nothing	to	be	worried	about.
That's	why	when	you	are	there,	you	feel	me	more	and	more	easily,	because	then
there	is	no	problem	--
you	are	alone	there,	and	the	fear	is	not	there.
It	always	happens:	whenever	lovers	are	separate,	they	feel....	And	when	they	are
close	they	nag,	and	fight,	and	conflict	arises.	And	it	seems	absurd,	because	when
they	are	separate	and	far	away,	they	long	to	see	each	other,	to	be	with	each	other,
and	once	 they	are	 together,	again	 the	whole	nonsense	starts.	But	 this	 is	part	of
growth,	so	don't	be	worried.	Let	it	be	so!	That	is	for	me	to	look	after	it,	mm?
And	you	look	good.	Your	health	is	really	good!
[The	groupleader's	girlfriend	then	says	she	feels	a	conflict	between	being	in	the
ashram	and	being	with	her	boyfriend	when	he	was	in	the	West.]
It	 is	 natural,	 mm?	 You	 love	 me,	 you	 love	 [him].	 Both	 loves	 are	 of	 a	 totally
different	quality	and	a	different	dimension,	and	you	are	 torn	apart	between	 the
two.	It	is	natural,	the	difficulty	is	bound	to	be	there
--	but	 that	difficulty	will	help	you	to	grow.	It	 is	not	going	to	be	harmful;	 that's
why	you	also	feel	good.
Remember	only	one	thing:	you	can	have	both,	because	there	is	no	problem	about
it.	The	only	question	is	where	to	stay.	Stay	with	[him]	wherever	he	stays	--	if	he
stays	here	you	stay	here,	if	he	goes	to	the	West	you	go	to	the	West....	Because	it
is	not	only	a	question	of	your	being	with	me;	it	is	easier	for	me	to	work	on	him
through	you,	so	that	too	is	part	of	the	game.
If	he	is	left	alone	he	can	be	lost,	so	I	cannot	leave	him	alone,	mm?	And	you	are
my	 representative	 to	 follow	 him;	 wherever	 he	 goes,	 you	 be	 there.	 And	 your
growth	 is	 going	 very	well	 --	 nothing	 to	 be	worried	 about.	 So	whenever	 he	 is
here,	you	be	here.	And	drop	this	conflict	completely.	You	simply	be	with	[him]
wherever	 he	 is.	And	 I	 am	with	 you!	 --	 don't	 be	worried	 about	 it.	You	 are	 not
making	a	choice.	There	is	no	choice	in	fact!
Your	love	for	[your	boyfriend]	is	on	one	plane,	your	love	for	me	is	on	a	totally
different	plane	--	there	is	no	choice.	If	you	are	here	and	Amitabh	is	not,	you	can
fall	apart.	But	you	can	be	anywhere	and	you	will	not	fall	apart	from	me,	because
it	is	not	a	question	of	physical	closeness.	With	[your	boyfriend]	it	is	a	question	of
physical	closeness.	If	you	are	not	with	him,	there	is	a	possibility	you	may	move
away,	he	may	move	away.	That's	why	I	say	to	remain	with	him.	And	I	am	with
you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sooner	or	 later	he	 is	going	 to	 settle	here.	Where	else	will	he	 settle?	And	once
you	 drop	 this	 conflict,	 he	will	 settle	 sooner.	Now	 this	 too	works	 on	 his	mind,
knowingly,	unknowingly.	That	too	is	somewhere	in	the	unconscious.	He	goes	on
watching	what	[you	are]	going	 to	choose.	He	is	afraid	--	a	certain	fear	 is	 there
that	you	can	choose	me.	And	he	knows	if	I	say	to	you,	'Stay	here,'	you	are	going
to	stay	here	--	that	he	knows.
And	this	 too	he	knows,	because	I	am	saying	 to	you	to	follow	[your	boyfriend]
you	 are	 following	 --	 that	 too	 he	 knows.	 So	 there	 is	 in	 his	 mind	 ambiguity	 --
whether	you	are	really	with	him,	or	you	are	with	him	only	because	I	have	said	to
be	with	him.	He	will	be	at	ease	only	when	your	whole	conflict	disappears.	Then
he	can	stay	here	--	there	is	no	problem.
Once	he	 knows	 that	 he	 is	 not	 going	 to	 lose	 you	by	 staying	here....	His	 fear	 is
double:	his	first	fear	is	that	he	is	going	to	lose	himself,	his	second	fear	is	that	he
is	going	to	lose	[you].	So	think	of	poor	[boyfriend]	--
he	is	really	in	difficulty.
So	you	simply	drop	this	conflict	forever.	If	you	are	here	I	am	working	on	you,	if
you	are	 there	I	am	working	on	you	--	you	are	close	 to	me	so	wherever	you	go
there	is	no	problem	about	it.	And	finally	and	eventually	you	will	settle	here.	That
is	not	the	problem.
Once	[he]	becomes	perfectly	certain	about	you	--	that	you	are	with	him	--	then
what	is	the	point	of	moving	between	India	and	America?	And	it	is	also	good	to
move	a	little,	so	one	really	settles.	Before	one	settles,	little	movement	is	good.
This	 is	my	feeling,	people	who	have	come	for	 the	first	 time	and	settle	 forever,
sometimes	feel	a	little	difficulty.	The	desire	sometimes	arises	to	go	away.	So	let
him	come	and	go,	come	and	go.	By	and	by	that	will	tire	him,	and	then	you	will
be	really	settled.	But	everything	is	going	well.
[She	adds:	I	feel	afraid	that	you	will	die	when	I'm	not	here.]
No,	no.	When	I'm	dying,	I	will	call	you	immediately,	so	you	need	not	be	afraid.
You	will	be	here	when	I	am	dying.	Nothing	to	be	worried	about.	And	I	am	not
going	 to	die	 so	 soon.	 I	will	 have	 to	 look	 after	 so	many	people,	mm?	People	 I
have	initiated	I	have	to	bring	to	a	certain	state	--	only	then	can	I	go,	not	before.	I
can	manage...	don't	worry.
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	Get	Lost	in	My	People
2	December	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7612025
ShortTitle:	WHIP23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[To	a	new	sannyasin	who	said	she	hoped	to	stay	two	years,	Osho	said	 that	she
could	be	completely	transformed.....	]
So	do	a	few	groups	here,	mm?	We	have	two	years,	so	we	can	move	very	slowly.
And	there	is	no	hurry	--
we	can	enjoy	 the	 journey.	People	who	are	 in	a	hurry	cannot	enjoy	 the	 journey.
Their	eyes	are	fixed	on	the	goal.	They	cannot	enjoy	the	roadside	view	--	and	it	is
tremendously	beautiful.
The	 goal	 is	 beautiful,	 but	 the	 journey	 is	 beautiful	 too.	 God	 is	 beautiful,	 but
waiting	for	Him	is	also	beautiful.
One	 should	 not	miss	 the	 roadside	 view.	 In	 fact	 if	 somebody	 suddenly	 reaches
God,	he	will	not	be	able	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
recognise	Him.	The	road	prepares	one.	Slowly,	slowly	God	radiates	Himself	in
many	ways	--	in	the	valleys,	in	the	trees,	in	the	birds,	in	the	waterfalls	--	in	many
experiences	on	the	way	He	comes	to	you,	very	slowly.
Sometimes	you	can	only	hear	His	footsteps.	Sometimes	He	whispers.	Sometimes
it	is	very	vague	whether	He	has	been	there	or	not.	Sometimes	you	see	only	His
footprints	when	He	is	gone.
But	 this	 is	 how	 one	 becomes	 by	 and	 by	 acquainted	 with	 the	 unknown.	 In	 a
thousand	and	one	ways,	you	gather	bits	and	pieces	of	divinity.	That's	how	you
become	capable	of	recognising	Him	when	He	reveals	Himself	in	His	totality.
So	 it	 is	 better	 to	 follow	a	bullock	 cart	way	 and	go	 slowly,	 rather	 than	 in	 a	 jet
plane.	Because	if	God	is	suddenly	there	you	will	not	be	able	to	recognise	Him,
you	will	 not	be	 able	 even	 to	 see	Him.	There	will	 be	no	 link	between	you	and
Him.	You	will	be	poles	apart	 --	so	much	so	 that	 there	will	be	no	possibility	of
any	bridge.
So	 this	 is	 good	 that	 you	 will	 be	 here	 for	 two	 years.	 Enjoy	 everything	 that	 is
available	 here....	 And	 by	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 have	 become	 part	 of	my
community.
The	word	 community	 is	 very	 beautiful.	 It	means	 a	 unit	 of	 people	 and	persons
who	have	something	in	common	--	 from	 'common'	comes	 'community'.	This	 is
not	an	organisation.	You	are	related	to	me,	other	sannyasins	are	related	to	me	--	I
am	 the	 common	 factor.	 You	 are	 all	 sharing	 me	 and	 my	 presence	 --	 hence	 it
becomes	a	community.
So	 become	 more	 and	 more	 part	 of	 this	 family.	 Get	 in	 tune	 with	 the	 ashram,
meditations,	groups	.	.	.
make	friendships,	relationships,	relate	to	my	people.	The	more	you	get	lost	in	my
people,	 the	 closer	 you	 will	 come	 to	 me,	 because	 they	 all	 have	 one	 thing	 in
common	--	and	that	is	me.
And	from	this	moment	you	become	part	of	my	community....	Good!
[Another	 sannyasin	 says:	 I	 keep	 getting	 involved	with	 people	 but	 I	 don't	 feel
love	for	anyone.]
What	do	you	mean	by	love?	What	is	your	expectation	of	love?	Sometimes	it	can
happen	that	you	have	some	fantasy	about	love.	You	have	some	very	perfectionist
idea	 about	 love,	 and	 in	 comparison	 to	 it	 all	 your	 relationships	 will	 look
superficial.
[She	replies:	I	mean	warm	feelings	that	are	very	strong.
That's	what	I	am	saying	--	 that	again	 is	 the	same	problem.	How	strong	do	you
want	 feelings	 --	 almost	 feverish?	 The	 problem	 is	 created	 by	 you.	 If	 you	 have
some	 absurd	 idea	 of	 love,	 some	 romantic	 idea	 of	 love,	 some	poetic	 idea,	 then
reality	will	always	look	pale.	That's	why	poets	can	never	love.	They	have	such
high	ideas	that	everything	looks	superficial,	dirty,	earthly.	They	want	to	fly.
For	example,	if	you	have	an	idea	that	you	should	be	able	to	fly	in	the	sky,	and
you	 cannot	 --	 you	 can	 at	 the	most	 run	 on	 the	 earth	 --	 then	 you	will	 feel	 very
disturbed.	'What	type	of	flying	is	this?	I	continue	to	run	on	the	earth.'
My	 suggestion	 is	 that	 you	 forget	 all	 about	 your	 romantic	 ideas	 --	 they	 are
childish.	Listen	to	reality.	And	whatsoever	is	happening	is	good!	Enjoy	it!	Why
disturb	it?	You	can	disturb	everything.
Forget	the	idea	of	love.	You	must	be	carrying	some	philosophy.	Be	realistic:	this
is	what	love	is	--	and	if	you	go	into	it	and	enjoy	it,	it	will	grow	more	and	more,
but	because	of	your	idea	from	the	very	beginning	it	is	condemned.
The	myth	 of	 love	 is	 very	 deep-rooted	 in	 humanity.	 For	 centuries	 people	 have
been	taught	what	love	is.
Nobody	knows	anything	about	what	love	is,	but	they	go	on	teaching	people	what
love	is.	They	have	raised	the	whole	thing	to	absurdity,	so	whatsoever	you	do	will
fall	short.	And	then	you	are	condemned...	you	are	in	a	hell.
My	suggestion	is	--	forget	the	idealism.	Don't	say	that	it	is	not	warm	enough.	It	is
warm	--	good!	At	least	it	is	not	cold.	Lukewarm	--	it	will	do.	Just	a	little	spark	is
there	--	it	will	do.	Just	by	a	little	spark	you	can	create	such	a	big	fire;	the	whole
forest	can	be	on	fire	just	by	a	little	spark.	But	don't	condemn	the	spark,	otherwise
there	will	be	no	possibility	for	growth.
It	 is	good	 that	you	fall	 in	 love	with	people.	Maybe	 it	 is	 just	sexual	 --	 let	 it	be.
Nothing	is	wrong	in	sex...
it	is	the	spark.	But	what	happens	when	you	fall	in	love	with	a	person	is	that	you
start	 thinking	 this	 is	 just	 sexual;	 divine	 love	 is	 not	 happening	 --	 there	 is
condemnation.	Then	the	love	will	never	happen,	because	through	condemnation
you	will	kill	the	very	possibility	--	the	seed	will	be	burned.	Nothing	is	wrong	in
it!
You	are	a	body	too	--	and	every-thing	starts	from	the	body.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	you	are	eating,	if	you	have	some	absurd	idea	about	divine	energy,	you	will
say,	'What	material	things	am	I	eating?	Just	ordinary	food	--	butter	and	bread	and
vegetables.	I	need	divine	energy	--	and	this	is	all	material.	You	can	purchase	it	in
a	hotel.	This	cannot	be	divine.'
But	eat	it,	digest	it,	and	there	will	be	a	transformation	in	you.	The	material	will
become	mental,	the	physical	will	become	psychological,	and	if	you	digest	your
psychological	energy,	it	will	become	divine.
Divine	energy	is	not	available	in	the	marketplace;	all	that	is	available	is	physical
energy.	Then	you	have	to	transform	it	into	divine	energy.
Love	that	is	available	is	sexual,	so	accept	the.	facticity	of	it,	and	don't	condemn	it
--	that	it	is	just	sexual.
It	is	sexual,	but	sex	is	the	door.	Don't	get	stuck	in	sexuality,	but	don't	be	against
it	either.	Enjoy	it!	Let	it	become	a	little	higher	and	deeper	--	then	it	will	be	more
like	love.	And	if	 love	grows	even	deeper,	 it	will	become	more	like	prayer.	But
those	will	be	inner	transformations	that	you	have	to	bring	to	it.	The	available	is
raw	material.
It	is	just	like	a	raw	diamond.	You	may	not	even	recognise	that	it	is	a	diamond.
You	have	to	cut	it,	you	have	to	polish	it,	you	have	to	give	it	shape,	and	then	it	is
there	--	tremendously	valuable.
It	is	exactly	like	that:	sex	is	just	a	raw	diamond,	physicalness	is	a	raw	diamond.
So	you	will	have	to	cut,	you	will	have	to	work	on	it	--	hard	it	is...	arduous	it	is.
You	will	have	to	give	it	a	polishing	--	it	will	take	years	--	and	then	one	day	the
precious	is	in	your	hands.	But	the	precious	does	not	come	directly,	it	comes	very
indirectly.
In	the	world	you	exist	as	a	body...	 in	the	world	you	are	a	body.	Ninety	percent
you	are	a	body,	nine	percent	you	are	a	mind,	one	percent	you	are	a	soul.	That	is
the	 proportion	 --	 so	 of	 course	 the	 ninety	 percent	 is	 going	 to	 be	 very	 very
important.
My	understanding	is	that	you	are	creating	your	problem,	you	are	responsible	for
it	--	there	is	no	problem	in	fact.
So	start	looking	afresh,	have	a	new	vision.	And	nothing	is	wrong.	If	you	feel	to
move	with	many	people,	nothing	is	wrong.	Maybe	that	is	your	need	right	now.	In
the	beginning	it	is	natural	that	one	wants	to	move	with	many	people	--	because
how	to	select	the	right	one?	The	right	one	is	not	available	there.	It	is	not	written
on	the	forehead	of	somebody	that	this	is	the	right	person	for	you.	Nobody	knows
who	is	the	right	person.	You	have	to	meet	and	mix	and	see	in	many	situations,
and	 then	only	 can	you	come	 to	know	who	 is	 the	 right	person.	Once	you	have
found	the	right	person	there	will	be	no	need	to	move	with	many	people.	But	right
now	it	is	natural...	it	should	be	so.
It	is	just	a	search.	You	are	in	search,	so	whosoever	meets	you,	you	look	into	him.
How	can	you	know	beforehand	whether	he	is	for	you	or	not?	A	priori	there	is	no
way	to	know.	You	will	have	to	move	into	some	living	situation	with	the	person,
only	then	will	you	be	able	to	judge	whether	you	exist	for	him,	whether	he	exists
for	you...	only	through	experience.	So	if	you	don't	exist	for	him	and	he	does	not
exist	for	you	--	if	you	don't	fit	with	each	other,	and	you	don't	have	a	feeling	that
you	are	made	for	each	other	--	then	move	away...
the	 sooner	 the	 better.	 Sometimes	 it	 happens	 that	 one	 can	 get	 entangled	with	 a
person	 for	 whom	 one	 is	 not	 meant.	 Then	 the	 whole	 life	 is	 wasted.	 So	 play
around,	fool	around	--	nothing	wrong	in	it.	This	is	your	search!
It	 is	almost	as	 if	one	 is	 lost	 in	a	 jungle	and	 there	 is	no	map	available,	 there	 is
nobody	whom	you	can	even	ask:	What	will	you	do?	Will	you	simply	sit?	You
will	rush	this	side	and	that	--	you	will	go	to	east,	to	west,	to	south,	to	north,	mm?
You	will	start	exploring	the	territory.	Some	way	you	will	try	to	find	from	where
to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 jungle	 --	 and	 you	 will	 find	 a	 way	 !	 If	 you	 sit,	 there	 is	 no
possibility.	You	may	be	just	sitting	by	the	side	of	a	highway...	or	just	a	few	trees
may	be	hiding	the	highway,	and	you	can	simply	sit	there,	lost	forever.
So	 get	 up	 and	 be	 going,	 and	 look	 around.	 This	 is	 how	 things	 are,	 mm?	 This
whole	humanity	is	almost	like	a	jungle.	So	many	trees,	human	trees,	all	around	--
just	go	and	sit	and	shake	hands	with	people,	say,
'Hello'...	be	with	people.	One	day	with	some-body	you	simply	fit	!	It	happens	so
perfectly	that	you	cannot	believe	it	--	but	it	happens!
Before	it	happens	you	will	have	to	experiment.	This	is	the	experimental	stage	of
your	life,	so	experiment
--	 nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 it.	 And	 whosoever	 allows	 you	 to	 be	 with	 him,	 feel
grateful!	Whether	he	fits	with	you	or	not,	when	you	move	away	feel	thankful	--
he	 has	made	 you	more	 aware...	 he	 has	 given	 you	 some	 experience.	Now	 you
know	life	more	than	you	had	ever	known	before	you	met	him,	so	feel	grateful.
Never	move	in	anger	--	always	move	in	gratefulness,	and	sooner	or	later	you	will
come	upon	the	person.
But	first	thing,	drop	your	ideals,	mm?	Good.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[A	member	 of	 the	 Primal	 group	 says:	 I	 have	 a	 feeling	 that	 I	 am	 going	 rather
deeply,	and...	there's	much	more	still	for	me	to	discover,	but	it's	just	so	very	hard
for	me.	Sometimes	I	can't	find	a	way	to	move	and	I	feel	stuck.]
No,	 you	 are	 going	 well,	 and	 you	 are	 going	 deeper.	 But	 the	 inner	 depth	 is
immeasurable.	 You	 will	 never	 come	 to	 the	 bottom	 --	 remember	 it	 --	 because
there	is	no	bottom.	And	the	deeper	you	go,	the	more	you	will	feel	that	you	can
go	deeper.	You	are	going	.well.	I'm	not	saying	that	you	have	to	stop	there	--	you
have	to	go	further.	One	has	to	go	on	going.	It	is	a	journey	that	begins	but	never
ends...	and	that	is	the	beauty	of	it.
You	will	be	able	to	fall	deeper	by	and	by	--	you	are	not	stuck.	You	are	in	a	totally
different	situation,	but	that	too	feels	like	being	stuck.	When	you	move	inwards,
you	 come	 to	 a	 certain	depth	 to	which	you	have	never	 come	before;	 then	your
being	takes	a	little	time.	It	needs	to	get	rooted	in	that	depth.	That	time	is	not	a
time	when	you	can	say	you	are	stuck	 --	you	are	not	 stuck!	Your	being	 takes	a
little	time...	a	plateau	happens.
Once	your	being	has	got	roots	in	it,	you	can	go	again	deeper.	So	that	is	a	time	of
being	 established	 at	 a	 certain	 depth.	 If	 you	 simply	 go	 on	 deeper	 continuously,
there	will	be	no	establishment	of	anything,	 there	will	be	no	stability	 in	 it.	You
will	go	and	you	will	come	back,	and	it	will	become	just	a	memory,	and	by	and
by	the	memory	will	fade	away.
But	there	is	an	economic	structure	in	the	growth.	You	go	to	a	certain	state,	then
everything	stops,	so	the	whole	energy	that	is	involved	in	going	further	is	no	more
involved	 in	 going	 further.	Rather,	 it	 is	 used	 for	 this	 space	 to	 be	 established;	 it
becomes	solid,	crystallised.	Then	again	you	move.
So	 one	 moves,	 then	 rests	 a	 little.	 In	 that	 rest	 you	 are	 not	 stuck,	 but	 you	 can
interpret	it	as	your	being	stuck	--	that	is	a	wrong	interpretation.	I	can	see	you	are
not	stuck	at	all.
...	but	don't	be	worried.	Simply	 let	 the	energy	settle	 there,	get	 it	 centred	 there,
and	then	you	will	again	find	that	a	flow	has	come,	again	you	are	moving.	It	 is
just	a	rest.
One	has	journeyed	the	whole	day,	walked	miles	the	whole	day,	then	in	the	night
one	needs	to	rest	--
under	a	 tree,	one	has	 to	 rest	 for	 the	night.	By	 the	morning	one	will	be	able	 to
move	again.	And	if	you	continuously	move,	within	two,	three	days	you	will	fall,
and	 you	will	 never	 be	 able	 to	move	 again.	 So	 that's	 a	 natural	 system,	 a	 very
automatic	system:	you	go	only	up	to	a	certain	point,	 then	your	whole	structure
says,	now	enough	--	you	rest.	Let	the	energy	be	revived	again.	Let	the	body	relax
so	that	you	can	move	tomorrow	morning.
So	 there	 is	 a	 rhythm	 of	 movement,	 rest;	 movement,	 rest.	 This	 is	 just	 a	 rest
period.	Soon	you	will	see	that	the	movement	will	come.	Go	on	doing	whatsoever
you	are	doing	--	 the	movement	will	come.	And	by	the	end	this	group	will	also
give	you	a	new	depth.
Things	are	going	well....
[Another	 group	member	 says:	 This	 is	 the	 deepest	 I	 have	 ever	 gone	 --	 I	 really
went	 into	my	 feelings...	 I	 didn't	 get	 into	 anything	heavy...	There	was	 so	much
energy	that	I	really	felt	and	did	not	think.]
This	has	been	very	good.	Things	are	going	well.	More	--	much	more	--	will	be
coming.
And	don't	 think	that	something	heavy	is	coming.	You	may	not	have	something
heavy	repressed.	So	one	should	not	expect	anything	--	that	creates	the	problem.
One	should	simply	remain	without	expectation,	so	whatsoever	happens	is	okay.
If	 you	have	 some	expectation	 that	 something	heavy	 should	happen	and	 is	 not,
then	 there	 are	 two	 possibilities:	 either	 you	will	 start	 creating	 that	 heavy	 thing
because	 you	 want	 it	 so	 desperately....	 And	 that	 will	 be	 false	 --	 and	 your
unconscious	can	deceive	you.	Just	 to	satisfy	you,	if	you	want	something	heavy
you	have	something	heavy.	The	unconscious	can	create	something	heavy	which
will	 be	 false	 --	 and	 you	 will	 not	 be	 benefited	 by	 it.	 In	 fact,	 you	 will	 feel
exhausted	--	not	replenished,	not	rejuvenated.
When	 something	 really	 heavy	 is	 broken,	 one	 feels	 very	 very	 light	 --	 not
exhausted...	 one	 feels	 full	 of	 energy.	 But	 if	 the	 unconscious	 has	 to	 pretend	 --
mm?	 just	 to	 fulfill	 your	 expectation	 --	 you	 will	 feel	 very	 exhausted.	 So
whatsoever	comes	is	good.	If	nothing	comes,	that	too	is	good.
This	 is	one	of	 the	problems	with	growth	groups	--	because	everybody	 looks	at
everybody	else.
Somebody	 is	 going	 into	 something	 heavy	 and	 you	 are	 not,	 so	 you	 feel
comparative	 --	 that	 something	 is	missing,	he	 is	going	 into	 such	a	heavy	 thing.
But	he	may	have	to	go,	and	you	may	not	have	to.
I	have	come	across	people	who	have	been	in	Primal	Therapy	with	Janov	or	with
others,	 and	 because	 it	 is	 insisted	 upon	 that	 there	 is	 a	 primal	 scream,	 people
manage	to	scream	one	day.	It	looks	like	primal	and	it	is	not	--	because	after	that
primal	scream	they	remain	the	same.	If	it	is	really	a	primal,	they	will	be	totally
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
different....	But	 their	unconscious	played	 the	 trick.	The	unconscious	helps	you,
and	if	you	demand	too	much,	it	will	create	an	illusion,	a	hallucination.
Have	you	seen?	Sometimes	it	happens	to	women.	Some	woman	wants	to	have	a
child	very	desperately
--	she	can	create	a	false	pregnancy	and	her	stomach	becomes	big.	She	goes	on
filling	her	stomach	with	air	--
and	 not	 consciously!	Her	 period	 stops.	Now	 the	 unconscious	 is	 really	 playing
great	 tricks.	Because	 she	wants	 the	 child	 so	desperately,	 the	unconscious	 says,
'Okay,	have	it!'	How	can	the	unconscious	give	you	the	child?
Now	she	is	three	months,	four	months	in	pregnancy,	and	starts	vomiting,	and	all
the	symptoms	of	pregnancy	are	there.	When	she	goes	to	the	doctor	and	he	says
there	 is	 nothing,	 within	 two	 days	 the	 stomach	 settles	 down	 and	 the	 air
disappears,	and	the	period	comes	again,	and	all	the	symptoms	disappear.
The	unconscious	is	a	great	energy,	and	if	you	ask	too	much,	the	unconscious	can
give,	can	deliver	--	it	can	deliver	any	goods.	If	you	want	to	see	Christ,	you	will
see	Christ	there.	If	you	want	to	see	Krishna,	he	will	have	to	play	his	flute	--	and
you	will	see	him!	These	are	all	hallucinations.	So	don't	expect!
This	 should	 be	 one	 of	 the	 basic	 rules	 --	 that	 one	 should	 not	 expect	 and	 one
should	not	look	at	others.
Whatsoever	is	happening	is	their	thing,	mm?	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	you	--	you
are	 different.	 So	 just	 let	 things	 happen,	 and	 don't	 put	 any	 expectation	 in	 your
mind,	otherwise	you	can	have	a	false	pregnancy!	But	things	are	going	well,	mm?
Much	more	will	be	happening.	Very	good	!
[Another	group	member	says	he	worked	through	his	father	relationship	and	now
feels	as	if	a	weight	has	been	lifted	from	his	shoulders.	In	reply	to	Osho's	query,
he	says	the	weight	had	been	on	his	left	shoulder.]
Very	 good.	 If	 your	 left	 shoulder	 was	 heavy,	 your	 right	 brain	 must	 have	 been
burdened.	That's	how	it	goes:	they	are	joined	cross-wise	--	the	left	hand	is	joined
with	the	right	brain.
Soon	you	will	see	new	qualities	of	the	right	brain	arising	in	you.	The	right	brain
is	intuitive,	poetic...
more	 capable	 of	 religious	 experiences.	The	 left	 brain	which	 is	 joined	with	 the
right	hand,	is	more	rational,	logical.	So	if	the	burden	is	less	there,	suddenly	after
a	few	days	you	will	feel	some	new	insights	arising	in	you	--	and	when	they	arise,
help	 them.	Be	 careful	 about	 them	because	 they	will	 be	very	new	and	you	 can
neglect	them.
Many	things	die	through	negligence.	One	has	to	be	careful.	That's	why	I	asked
you	 which	 shoulder	 was	 feeling	 unburdened.	 So	 if	 you	 start	 feeling	 more
intuitive	 --	more	hunches	happen	 to	you,	you	become	more	 imaginative,	more
poetic,	and	 things	 look	more	colourful,	you	become	more	 loving,	more	feeling
arises	--
don't	be	afraid,	Mm?	otherwise	the	mind	will	again	close,	and	if	the	mind	closes,
again	your	left	shoulder	will	become	heavy.
And	now	you	will	 be	working	with	your	mother.	You	don't	 have	 any	problem
with	your	mother?
[He	answers:	The	nice	part	of	my	mother	came	up	--	not	the	heavy	part.]
Maybe...	sometimes	it	happens	that	if	the	heavy	part	is	with	your	father,	the	nice
part	will	be	with	your	mother.	They	are	enemies	--	so	if	the	father	is	heavy,	the
mother	must	have	been	nice	to	you....
That's	 natural	 --	 because	 you	 can	 have	 only	 one	 friend;	 either	 mother	 or	 the
father;	 you	 cannot	 have	 both.	 The	world	 is	 still	 not	 so	 aware.	 Even	 the	 child
cannOt	have	both	a	father	and	a	mother	--	he	has	to	choose.	And	from	that	very
moment	choice	starts.
If	 he	 chooses	 the	 father,	 the	 mother	 is	 against.	 If	 he	 chooses	 the	 mother,	 the
father	is	against	--	he	is	mama's	boy,	and	the	father	is	not	interested.	And	in	most
of	the	cases	it	happens	that	the	father	is	hard	on	the	boy,	nice	to	the	girls	--	nice
to	the	daughter	--	and	the	mother	is	nice	to	the	boy,	and	harder	on	the	daughter.
But	still	go	 into	 it,	mm?	It	 is	better	 to	clean	all	 the	relationships	with	 the	past.
Once	you	have	closed	the	accounts	with	the	past,	you	become	free,	you	become
liberated	into	the	future...	you	have	more	space.
Otherwise	the	past	goes	on	narrowing	you.
If	you	have	settled	your	accounts	with	your	father,	suddenly	you	will	feel	a	new
upsurge	of	love	for	men.	Don't	be	afraid	of	that	--	because	a	fear	arises	that	one
is	 becoming	 homosexual	 or	 something.	 That	 will	 come,	 because	 when	 the
father's	account	is	closed	and	you	start	feeling	good	about	your	father	--	that	yes,
everything	is	gone	and	finished,	and	you	don't	carry	the	wounds	--	you	will	start
feeling	good	about	men.	You	will	become	more	friendly	with	men,	because	each
man	somehow	represents	your	father.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[Another	group	member	 says:	 I	played	around	 for	 about	 four	days	and	 for	 the
last	couple	of	days	I	have	really	been	getting	into	it.	I	can	get	so	far	and	then	I
get	scared	to	go	any	further...	today	I	feel	sort	of	more	into	a	softer	space	.	But	I
just	get	scared	and	that's	it.	And	I	can	head-trip	about	it,	or	else	I	start	clowning,
and	then	it	stops.]
I	know	you	will	do	that	because	the	day	I	suggested	Primal	Therapy,	you	turned
and	you	said,	'Ah,	shit!'
(she	 laughs)	 I	didn't	 say	anything	 --	you	were	 trying	 to	be	 funny	 --	but	 it	was
foolish.	That	shows	your	whole	attitude,	and	if	you	go	into	something	with	that
attitude,	you	will	be	clowning	--	it	will	not	be	of	much	use.
Nobody	likes	to	be	advised.	And	I	have	to	do	that	sin	continuously	--	I	have	to
advise	people,	'Do	this,	do	that.'	Nobody	wants	to	be	advised,	because	it	is	very
against	 the	ego.	Even	 to	accept	 somebody's	advice	means	 that	you	don't	know
and	 somebody	 else	 knows.	 So	 in	 many	 ways	 one	 wants	 to	 avoid	 --	 jokingly
maybe,	but	that	is	a	trick	!
That	 very	moment	 I	 knew	 you	 had	missed	 that	 Primal	 group...	 I	 knew	 that	 it
would	be	difficult	for	you	!
The	group	had	not	started,	nothing	had	started,	but	I	could	have	predicted	then
that	 you	 would	 miss,	 because	 your	 attitude	 would	 be	 there.	 It	 was	 very
unconscious	--	not	that	you	did	it	knowingly,	it	was	unconscious	--
but	foolish	things	are	supported	by	people.
You	were	 here	with	 the	 Soma	 group,	 and	 even	 [the	 leader]	 and	 others	 started
laughing,	thinking	that	you	have	done	something	very	nice.	So	you	also	enjoyed
the	trick	--	you	thought	you	have	done	something	nice...	but	nobody	knows	what
people	are	doing.
Then	 you	 cannot	 be	 sincere;	 the	whole	work	 is	 a	wastage.	 So	 you	must	 have
been	fooling	and	pretending	and	clowning.
[One	of	the	leaders	comments:	It	seems	that	she	can	handle	the	heavier	feelings
but	 when	 it	 gets	 to	 softer	 spaces,	 it	 is	 difficult.	 She's	 really	 afraid	 of	 being	 a
child.	She's	already	well-developed	in	very	sophisticated	games	and	can	joke	and
turn	things	to	her	advantage.]
Tomorrow	 something	 is	 going	 to	 happen.	 I	 have	 hit	 hard	 on	 her	 head	 (with	 a
chuckle).	Tomorrow	something	is	going	to	happen!	Mm?	She	will	be	able.	These
sophisticated	games	are	just	protections.
She	 is	 a	 child	 --	 and	 she	 is	 simply	 protecting.	 She	 knows	 that	 if	 she	 goes
sincerely	into	it,	she	will	be	childish	--	that's	what	the	fear	is.	She	has	not	grown
up	 in	 that	way.	Maybe	 her	 height	 (she	 is	 tall)	 has	 played	 some	 role	 in	 it.	 She
must	have	been	 taller	 than	other	 children	when	 she	was	 a	 child,	 and	 that	 very
length	has	given	her	a	sense	that	she	is	a	grown-up.	So	she	has	never	really	been
a	child.	She	has	never	allowed	herself	that	freedom.
Now	 it	 is	 there	boiling	 inside,	 and	 she	knows	 that	 if	 she	 relaxes	 suddenly	 that
will	 erupt	 --	 and	 for	 the	 whole	 life	 she	 has	 repressed	 it!	 So	 now	 she	 tries	 to
manipulate	 every	 situation	 in	 her	 favour,	 by	 humour,	 by	 this	 and	 that,
rationalisation,	 intellectualisation.	 Those	 are	 all	 props	 --	 but	 they	 can	 all	 be
thrown.
Just	 say	 to	 her	 --	whenever	 you	 see	 that	 she	 is	 doing	 something,	 just	make	 it
clear	to	her	what	she	is	doing.	If	she	wants	to	do	it,	it	is	good,	she	can	--	it	is	her
game	--	otherwise	she	need	not	do	it.	And	from	tomorrow	she	will	enter;	she	is
ready	now.	 In	 fact	 her	group	will	 start	 from	 tomorrow,	 and	 she	will	 enter	 into
that	 space.	And	once	she	becomes	a	child,	 she	will	be	 tremendously	beautiful.
Great	happiness	will	arise	in	her.
Sometimes	it	happens	--	just	very	accidental	things....	For	example,	her	height	is
accidental.	 It	 is	 not	 her	 fault	 --	what	 can	 she	 do?	She	must	 have	 always	 been
taller	than	other	children	of	the	same	age,	so	she	must	have	been	feeling	always
that	she	is	more	grown-up	than	others,	and	that	has	made	a	gap.	That	gap	has	to
be	broken.	And	once	it	is	broken	she	will	become	very	very	soft,	flowing	--	and
that	is	her	fear,	too.
In	 the	modern	world	 it	 is	 happening	more.	 Even	 small	 children	 are	 becoming
very	sophisticated.	Each	generation	they	are	becoming	more	sophisticated.	The
world	 is	becoming	more	 informed,	more	knowledgeable.	Children	are	glued	 to
the	TV	for	six	hours	a	day.	They	are	getting	masses	of	 information	which	was
never	possible	at	any	other	age	or	any	other	time.	Of	course	they	are	very	very
sophisticated.
Modern	media	have	made	many	things	possible.
For	example,	a	child	cannot	read	a	novel	like	'Anna	Karenina',	but	he	can	see	the
film	on	the	TV.	To	read	'Anna	Karenina'	he	would	have	to	wait	for	many	years.
But	on	the	TV	he	can	see	and	he	can	understand	it	and	he	can	follow	it.	He	can
see	 Tolstoy,	 he	 can	 see	Dostoevsky,	 he	 can	 see	 Turgenev,	 Gogol,	 Gorky.	 The
whole	world	of	literature	which	was	not	available	to	him	before	is	available.	He
becomes	very	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
sophisticated.	Even	small	children	start	feeling	very	egoistic.
Just	 the	other	day	I	was	reading	a	 joke.	A	doctor	 told	a	small	child	 that	 if	one
eats	an	apple	a	day,	it	keeps	the	doctor	away.
The	child	said,	'Ah,	nuts	!	This	is	nothing	!'
The	doctor	was	a	little	shocked.	He	said,	'What	do	you	mean,	"This	is	nothing?"'
The	child	said,	'I	have	got	a	better	advice	to	give.'
The	doctor	said,	'What	is	that?'
The	child	said,	'Eat	one	onion	a	day,	and	it	keeps	everybody	away!	Not	only	the
doctor	--	everybody!'
Even	 small	 children	 are	 no	more	 ready	 to	 receive	 any	 advice	 from	 anybody...
they	have	become	very	subtle	egoists.
So	 that	 barrier	 has	 to	 be	 broken...	 and	 she	 is	 carrying	 that	 barrier.	 But	 from
tomorrow	 all	 the	 three	 musketeers	 (the	 leaders)	 jump	 on	 her!	 She	 has	 to	 be
destroyed	--	anyhow,	mm?	So	finish	the	job.
And	 once	 you	 have	 finished	 the	 job	 you	 will	 see	 something	 very	 very	 soft,
flower-like,	delicate,	arising.
It	is	there.	It	will	happen....
The	Shadow	of	the	Whip
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	The	Magic	is	Here
3	December	1976	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	7612035
ShortTitle:	WHIP24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[Osho	asks	a	visitor	how	long	he	has	been	here.	The	visitor	replies	 that	he	has
lost	track	of	time.]
That's	very	good,	mm?	When	one	can	 really	 lose	 track	of	 time,	one	has	 really
arrived!	Very	good.	Being	here	one	loses	track	of	time	and	space	both.
Time	is	an	illusion.	Through	the	illusion	--	and	particularly	in	the	West	--	people
have	become	too	time-conscious.	And	in	fact	time	is	nothing	but	the	mind	--	the
movement	 is	 just	 an	 idea.	 Nothing	 is	 going	 anywhere.	 The	 whole	 existence
simply	is;	simultaneously	it	is.
Time	exists	because	we	cannot	see	clearly.	It	is	just	as	if	you	look	out	onto	the
street	from	the	keyhole.
A	man	 is	 coming	but	 you	 cannot	 see	 him.	Suddenly	 he	 is	 there	 --	 but	 he	was
before.	Suddenly	he	disappears	again	--	he	is	still	somewhere	but	your	keyhole
makes	it	difficult	to	see.	Your	keyhole	creates	the	past,	the	present	and	the	future.
Just	a	moment	before	the	man	was	not	there,	so	the	person	who	has	never	left	his
keyhole	will	 think	 that	 the	man	 has	 appeared	 out	 of	 nothingness.	 That's	 what
future	 is.	 And	 when	 the	 man	 has	 gone	 a	 little	 further	 from	 the	 keyhole	 you
cannot	see	him,	and	now	you	say	that	he	has	disappeared	into	the	past.
The	past	is	that	which	you	cannot	see	any	more,	and	the	future	is	that	which	you
cannot	see	yet.
But	the	man	was	there,	is	there,	will	be	there.	It	is	your	key-hole	that	has	created
time.	If	you	can	come	out,	then	you	will	see	that	the	past	was	also	present,	the
present	is	also	present,	and	the	future	too,	is	present.
Only	the	present	is.	Only	now	is.	But	remember	the	present	is	not	part	of	time.
The	present	is	timeless...
eternal.
Time	 is	 a	 concept	 because	we	 are	 looking	 through	 the	mind.	 The	mind	 is	 the
keyhole.	It	is	created...	very	limited.	When	the	mind	is	dropped	there	is	simply
eternity...	no-mind.	Then	the	now	is	just	eternal.	The	now	goes	on	spreading	to
both	sides,	backwards	and	forwards.	And	in	that	now	there	is	peace.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	whole	 effort	 of	meditation	 is	 how	 to	 enter	 that	 now...	 how	 to	 drop	out	 of
time,	and	how	to	enter	eternity.	That	is	what	meditation	is	all	about.	And	one	can
get	there	because	in	fact	one	is	already	in	it.
So	my	whole	effort	here	 is	 that	by	and	by	we	drop	 these	mind	concepts,	mind
games.
Have	you	meditated	before?	What	type	of	meditation	were	you	doing?
[The	 visitor	 replies:	 Oh,	 several	 different	 types.	 The	 type	 I	 do	 now	 is	 on	 the
breath	--	similar	to	Vipassana	meditation...	lots	of	thoughts	come	too	and	I	watch
them.	Then	they	slow	down	a	bit	so	I	watch	the	breath	and	the	thoughts.	Then
also	I	feel	things	in	my	body	--	forces.	I'm	just	trying	to	be	aware	of	everything,
and	just	letting	my	mind	slow	down.]
It	will	be	good	if	you	proceed	in	a	more	scientific	way.	Vipassana	is	good,	but
your	procedure	is	a	little	unscientific.
Scientific	research	divides	mind	waves	into	four	types.	Ordinarily	in	the	waking
state	we	are	in	beta	--
they	 call	 it	 beta:	 too	 many	 thoughts,	 imagination,	 dreaming,	 reveries,	 plans,
reasoning,	logic...	and	it	is	a	constant	turmoil.	Your	mind	is	like	a	computer	--	it
is	working,	humming,	and	it	gets	hot.	Any	mechanism	gets	hot,	and	if	it	has	to
work	continuously	 for	 twenty-four	hours,	 it	 gets	 tired	 --	 and	you	never	give	 it
any	rest.
In	fact	you	have	completely	forgotten	how	to	give	it	rest,	or	nobody	has	taught
you	how	to	rest	it.	So	even	if	you	try,	it	continues	its	old	habits	--	thinking	and
going	into	thought,	chasing	this	thought	and	that.	It	is	almost	like	chasing	your
own	tail,	mm?	--	 it	 is	very	vicious.	One	thought	 leads	 to	another,	and	that	will
lead	to	another,	and	it	goes	on	unending.
This	 beta	 state	 of	 mind	 has	 a	 certain	 wave-length.	 They	 say	 it	 is	 fourteen	 to
thirty-two	cycles	per	second.
This	is	a	state	that	is	very	feverish,	trembling.	Not	that	something	is	wrong	in	it	-
-	when	needed	it	is	very	useful...	it	is	a	great	instrument,	but	only	when	needed.
If	it	goes	on	without	any	particular	need	for	it,	it	is	a	very	tiring	process.	Then	it
creates	anxiety,	stress,	strain,	and	the	ultimate	result	can	only	be	madness.
So	whenever	 a	 person	 is	 caught	 in	 the	 beta	 he	 is	moving	 towards	 that	 --	 and
everybody	is	caught	in	it...
we	 are	 born	 in	 it.	 Because	 this	 state	 of	 mind	 has	 given	 many	 benefits	 to
humanity,	we	have	become	addicted	to	it.	The	whole	scientific	process	has	come
out	 of	 beta.	 All	 that	 you	 see	 around	 --	 prosperity,	 richness,	 affluence,	 big
beautiful	 buildings,	 asphalt	 roads,	 cars	 and	 aeroplanes	 and	 space	 travel	 and
atomic	energy	--
have	 all	 come	 through	 the	 beta	 state.	 Of	 course	 it	 pays	 tremendously,	 so
humanity	is	very	much	addicted	to	it.
From	kindergarten,	 from	school	 to	university	 level,	we	 teach	only	one	 thing	 --
the	beta:	how	to	use	it	more	and	more,	how	to	be	proficient	in	it,	how	to	become
more	 logical,	 rational.	 The	 more	 logical,	 rational	 you	 are,	 the	 more	 you	 will
succeed	in	this	world,	because	this	world	is	created	by	the	beta	state	of	mind.
Animals	cannot	compete	with	man	because	they	live	below	beta.	They	have	not
developed	it	yet.
The	whole	civilisation	depends	on	beta,	so	it	is	not	very	easy	to	get	out	of	it.	We
are	deeply	 involved	 in	 it,	and	 there	 is	a	great	 investment	 in	 it.	So	 if	you	really
want	 to	 get	 out	 of	 it,	 you	 have	 to	 proceed	 in	 a	 very	 very	 scientific,
methodological	way.
The	 second	 state	 --	 just	 below	 beta	 --	 is	 alpha.	Alpha	 is	 like	 twilight.	 In	 beta
there	are	too	many	thoughts
--	 you	 are	 awake	 but	 your	 waking	 consciousness	 is	 completely	 clouded	 by
thoughts.	In	alpha,	thoughts	disappear	--	you	are	still	awake.	It	is	like	a	calm	lake
--	no	ripples...	a	silver	moon	in	a	silent	pond.
This	 second	state	has	 the	 range	 from	seven	 to	 fourteen	cycles	per	 second.	The
first	 has	 fourteen	 to	 thirty-two	 --	 the	 second	 has	 seven	 to	 fourteen.	 It	 is	 just
below	 the	 fourteenth.	Once	 you	 start	 getting	 to	 alpha,	 the	 first	 disappears	 and
you	enter	the	second	state.	Alpha	is	just	below	beta	--	it	is	hiding	in	you.	It	is	just
a	question	of	how	to	approach	it.	 .	 .just	a	little	right	movement	towards	it.	It	is
your	treasure.
This	second	state	alpha	--	is	the	state	of	meditation.	Thoughts	disappear,	thinking
disappears,	but	you	have	not	 fallen	asleep.	You	are	 fully	aware...	a	deep	peace
surrounds	you,	and	one's	whole	being	is	replenished,	rejuvenated.
Each	 person	 needs	 it	 for	 at	 least	 forty	minutes	 every	 day.	 It	 is	 a	must.	 It	 you
really	want	to	be	alive	as	a	soul,	as	a	spiritual	person,	it	is	a	must.	It	is	the	food
for	the	soul.
Below	alpha	is	theta	--	the	third	state.	The	range	of	theta	is	from	four	to	seven
cycles	per	second.	It	is	the	state	of	falling	into	sleep,	becoming	unconscious.	You
are	slowing	down	so	much	that	you	cannot	keep	alert;	the	alertness	disappears.
In	 the	 first	 there	 are	 thoughts	 and	 wakefulness,	 in	 the	 second	 thoughts	 have
disappeared	 --	 only	wakefulness,	 in	 the	 third	 the	wakefulness	 disappears.	You
become	sleepy...	you	start	dozing.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	then	there	is	the	fourth	state	--	delta.	The	range	of	delta	is	from	one	half	to
four	cycles	per	second.
It	is	the	deepest	sleep	--	where	everything	is	forgotten.	It	is	the	dreamless	sleep	--
what	Hindus	have	called
'sushupti'.
These	 are	 the	 four	 stages,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 be	 very	 scientific	 in	 approaching
them.	My	suggestion	is	that	you	start	this	way....	I	call	this	meditation	the	alpha
meditation.
It	can	be	done	without	any	beliefs.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	religion.	You	can	be
a	Hindu	 or	 a	Christian	 or	 a	Mohammedan	 --	 it	 doesn't	matter;	You	 can	 be	 an
atheist,	a	Communist	--	it	doesn't	matter.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	belief	--	it
is	simply	a	psy-chological	procedure.	But	if	you	start	this	way,	great	will	be	the
benefit	 and	 results	 will	 become	 more	 solid.	 Otherwise	 you	 can	 continue
Vipassana	 and	you	will	 remain	 a	 little	 confused	 and	 fuddled.	Sometimes	 there
will	be	a	few	moments	of	silence,	and	then	again	thoughts	will	come.
Let	there	be	a	one	year	programme	of	meditation.	For	three	months,	simply	sit.
If	you	can	sit	in	this	posture,	good,	otherwise	you	can	sit	in	a	chair.	If	you	can	sit
in	this	lotus	posture,	that's	the	best.
Sit	in	this	posture,	let	your	spine	be	straight,	and	put	your	left	hand	on	the	right
hand,	 letting	 both	 thumbs	 touch	 each	 other.	Mm?	 that	 will	 keep	 you	 alert.	 It
gives	a	certain	circulation	to	the	body	energy	--
this	touching	of	the	thumbs	--	and	will	not	allow	you	to	fall	asleep.
When	somebody	is	moving	into	alpha,	there	are	two	dangers:	one	danger	comes
from	beta	 --	 that	you	may	not	be	able	 to	drop	 thoughts,	another	danger	comes
from	theta	--	that	you	may	be	able	to	drop	them	so	suddenly	that	you	fall	asleep.
So	one	has	to	avoid	these	two	things	--	sleep	and	thought.
This	pressure	will	make	your	body	energy	move	in	such	a	way	that	you	cannot
fall	asleep.	This	 is	also	one	of	 the	best	postures	 in	which	 it	 is	most	difficult	 to
fall	asleep.	Again,	a	straight	spine	is	a	protection	against	sleep.	This	is	the	whole
protection	so	that	you	don't	fall	below	alpha.	If	you	fall	below	alpha,	you	will	be
asleep.	The	sleep	will	be	good	and	you	will	feel	very	fresh,	but	meditation	will
be	missed.
If	your	spine	 is	 leaning	 forwards	or	backwards,	or	you	are	 in	a	chair	and	very
restful,	it	is	more	possible	that	you	will	fall	asleep	because	that	is	more	a	part	of
your	 habit.	 Whenever	 you	 drop	 thinking,	 suddenly	 you	 take	 a	 jump	 --	 you
bypass	alpha	--	and	you	go	into	theta	and	fall	asleep.	Every	day	you	do	that,	so
that	is	more	natural	and	more	possible.	This	posture	protects	you.
...	You	can	use	a	cushion.	The	spine	should	be	straight.	You	can	make	yourself	as
comfortable	 as	 possible,	 because	 comfort	 is	 not	 the	 ingredient.	 If	 you	 are
uncomfortable,	 that	 discomfort	 won't	 allow	 you	 to	 fall	 into	 alpha;	 you	 will
continue	to	think	about	the	discomfort.	No,	it	has	not	to	be	uncomfortable.	It	has
to	be	comfortable,	but	not	 too	comfortable	--	comfortable	as	far	as	 the	body	is
concerned.	So	this	is	good	--
you	can	use	a	cushion.
Then	fix	your	eyes	on	your	left	hand...	 look	at	the	left	hand.	If	you	look	at	the
left	 hand	 continuously,	 that	 again	 stimulates	 your	 right	 side	 mind	 which	 is
meditative.	Your	left	hand	is	connected	with	the	right	side	mind,	and	if	you	look
at	the	left	hand,	your	eyes	and	your	left	hand	sooner	or	later	fall	in	tune	and	an
energy	cycle	arises,	your	right	side	mind	starts	functioning.
So	this	is	tremendously	helpful.	This	will	help	you	to	drop	thoughts	more	easily.
It	will	 not	 be	 needed	 that	 you	 do	 anything,	 because	 the	 right	 side	mind	 never
thinks.	It	is	the	part	from	where	you	feel.	It	is	the	part	from	where	you	love.	It	is
the	part	from	where	poetry	is	born	--	not	logic,	not	theology,	not	philosophy,	not
science.	That	comes	from	the	left	side	brain.
To	 continuously	watch	 is	 of	 tremendous	 significance.	You	 need	 not	 gaze	 at	 it
continuously,	but	just	go	on	looking	into	it	in	a	very	empty	way...	just	have	your
eyes	on	the	left	hand,	and	that	will	do	the	work.
Then	start	with	an	inhalation.	Inhale	deeply,	and	with	the	inhalation,	say	inside
'one',	and	then	exhale	deeply	and	say	'two',	inhale	again,	say	'three',	exhale,	say
'four',	inhale,	'five',	exhale,	'six'.	Go	on	up	to	ten,	then	again	start	from	one.
If	 you	 lose	 count	 somewhere,	 then	 start	 from	 one,	 but	 go	 from	 one	 to	 ten.
Inhalation	--	one,	exhalation	--
two:	do	it	in	that	way.	The	first	ten	breaths	should	be	as	deep	as	possible.	From
the	second	cycle	you	can	relax	and	let	the	breathing	be	natural,	silent	and	quiet	--
but	continue	to	count.	Just	by	counting,	within	three	months	you	will	be	able	to
attain	to	the	alpha	so	tremendously...	thoughts	will	disappear.
Thoughts	will	 come	 sometimes	 but	 you	 are	 not	 to	 pay	 any	 attention	 to	 them.
Neither	 have	 you	 to	 fight	 with	 them	 nor	 to	 acknowledge	 them.	 Just	 remain
indifferent.	Let	them	be	there	--	that	is	none	of	your	business.	Let	them	be	there,
and	they	will	subside	by	themselves.	You	continue	counting.
For	 three	months,	count	 this	way,	forty	minutes	every	day.	After	 three	months,
change	your	counting.
Only	count	exhalations.	Exhale	--	count	one,	inhale	--	keep	quiet,	exhale	--	count
two,	inhale	--	keep	quiet.
That	is	the	only	change	that	has	to	be	made	after	three	months.	Then	again	after
three	months,	drop	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
counting.	So	for	three	months,	count	inhalation	and	exhalation,	for	three	months
only	exhalations,	then	for	three	months	no	counting	--	just	watch.
...	Just	watch	the	breath.	Then	for	three	months,	forget	watching	too.	This	is	how
one	should	proceed	--
very	 slowly,	 gradually.	Within	 one	 year	 you	will	 be	 simply	 surprised.	Man	 is
carrying	such	tremendous	possibility.
But	if	you	don't	start	from	the	very	beginning,	it	will	be	difficult	and	more	time
will	be	wasted.	This	is	my	observation	--	that	many	people	start	meditation,	but
they	drop	 it	because	 results	are	not	coming,	so	 they	get	 fed	up.	So	one	should
proceed	very	scientifically	--	this	is	the	procedure.
If	you	proceed	 this	way,	within	 three	months	 there	will	be	definite	results,	and
then	you	can	drop	a	little
--	half	the	process	is	dropped.	You	don't	count	inhalations	--	now	you	are	getting
beyond	the	technique	a	little.	After	six	months	you	drop	counting	completely	--
you	 are	 getting	 even	 higher.	 Then	 drop	 everything	 after	 six	 months	 --	 even
watchfulness.	You	simply	sit.	Sitting	silently,	doing	nothing	--	that	is	what	Zazen
is.
That	is	the	peak.
So	let	it	be	a	one-year	programme,	and	don't	be	in	a	hurry.
...	Only	once	a	day	--	forty	minutes	will	do.	But	if	you	have	time	and	you	can	do
it	twice,	perfectly	good.
Mm?	You	can	never	do	too	much	meditation.
And	what	about	your	sannyas?
[The	seeker	replies:	I	think	it	would	make	life	too	difficult	for	me	in	the	West	to
have	to	wear	orange	all	the	time.	And	I	don't	think	that	I	could	find	a	job,	and	I
think	it	would	cut	me	off	from	a	lot	of	people	--	a	lot	of	my	friends	and	family.	It
would	make	 it	 harder	 to	 relate	 to	 everybody	 --	 that's	 the	main	 reason.	 Also	 I
don't	know	that	much	about	the	movement	yet	to	be	sure	that	I	want	to	be	in	it.]
These	 are	 not	 the	 true	 reasons	 --	 these	 are	 rationalisations...	 think	 about	 them.
These	are	tricks	of	the	mind.	Whatsoever	you	want	to	do,	you	find	a	reason	for	--
that	 it	will	be	difficult	 to	 find	a	 job,	 that	 it	will	be	difficult	 to	 relate	 to	people,
that	 it	will	be	hard	on	your	 friends.	 I	have	not	seen	 it	happen	--	and	I	have	so
many	sannyasins	in	the	West.	Neither	is	getting	a	job	difficult	nor	relating	--	in
fact	they	relate	better	because	they	love	more.
But	there	is	something	else	inside....	You	cannot	simply	say	that	you	are	afraid,
so	fear	takes	a	garb,	a	rationalisation	--	that	this	will	be	very	difficult.
First	 you	 have	 to	 relate	 to	 yourself	 --	 only	 then	 can	 you	 relate	 to	 anybody.
Otherwise	it	is	just	a	game	that	one	goes	on	playing	--	and	a	meaningless	game.
The	first	contact	has	to	be	with	your	interior,	and	then	you	will	be	able	to	relate
with	people.
Orange	 clothes	 cannot	 prevent	 you	 --	 only	 one	 thing	 can	 prevent	 relationship,
and	 that	 is	 if	you	are	not	 related	 to	yourself.	The	whole	effort	of	sannyas	 is	 to
make	you	capable	of	relating	with	yourself,	then	everything	follows.
So	think	about	it...	brood	on	it.	Those	are	not	the	real	causes,	because	otherwise
so	many	people	couldn't	do	it.	You	are	not	the	first	Westerner	here,	mm?	So	that
cannot	be	 the	 reason.	There	must	be	 some	other	 reason	 --	 some	other	 fear.	So
find	it	and	then	encounter	that	fear.
And	 the	 second	 thing:	 it	 is	 not	 a	movement;	 it	 is	 not	 a	mission.	These	orange
people	are	not	part	of	any	religion.	They	are	not	creating	a	church,	and	they	don't
believe	in	any	dogma	--	because	I	have	none.	They	are	related	to	me	--	they	are
not	related	to	each	other	really.	They	are	not	part	of	an	organisation	--	they	are
related	to	me.	Just	as	the	spokes	of	the	wheel	are	related	to	the	hub,	so	is	their
relationship	 to	 me.	 They	 are	 sharing	 something	 with	 me.	 It	 is	 a	 personal
relationship.
It	is	just	as	Jesus'	disciples	were	related	to	him	--	they	were	not	Christians;	they
were	simply	related	to	Christ.	It	was	a	personal	relationship...	a	love	affair.
Sannyas	is	a	love	affair.	Somebody	who	has	fallen	in	love	with	me	and	wants	to
share,	wants	to	move	with	me	for	a	little	while	if	 it	 is	possible,	wants	to	linger
with	me	a	little	longer.	It	is	not	a	movement	at	all,	and	it	has	nothing	to	do	with
any	organisation;	it	is	not	organisational.
The	approach	is	totally	personal.	I	believe	in	individuals,	and	I	don't	believe	in
organisations.	Each	organisation	has	proved	fatal	to	religion.
So	these	people	are	simply	related	to	me,	and	they	are	not	part	of	any	movement.
They	are	not	fighting	against	any	religion,	any	sect	or	any	tradition,	and	they	are
not	worried	about	the	society.	They	are	not	trying	to	change	the	world	--	they	are
not	concerned	with	it	at	all.	They	are	only	concerned	with	celebrating	with	me
for	a	few	moments.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Think	 about	 it	 --	 because	 one	 can	miss	 that	 celebration...	 one	 can	miss	 some
great	opportunity.
And	whenever	love	knocks	at	your	door,	open	the	door	and	drop	fear.
When	I	invite	you	to	sannyas,	it	is	simply	love	knocking	at	your	door.	You	can
say	'No'	and	I	will	say,
'Thank	you'	--	there	is	no	problem	about	it.	You	can	perfectly	well	say	'No'	and
be	here	--	but	you	will	have	missed	an	opportunity.
[The	seeker	asks:	Is	the	taking	of	sannyas	necessary	for	love?]
Sannyas	is	not	necessary	for	love,	but	once	you	are	in	love	many	things	become
necessary.	And	 if	you	are	 in	 love	with	me,	you	have	 to	do	many	crazy	 things!
(laughter)	Sannyas	 is	one	of	 the	crazy	 things.	 It	 is	almost	mad!	And	I	have	no
rationalisation	for	it	--	nothing.	I	don't	argue	for	it...	I	don't	say	that	there	is	any
argument	for	it	--	there	is	none.	It	is	simply	a	crazy	affair.
I	am	mad,	and	those	who	are	mad	would	like	to	join	hands	with	me.	So	if	you
are	mad	enough,	you	can	take	sannyas	right	now,	otherwise	you	can	think	a	little.
[Another	visitor	 says:	 I'm	a	biologist.	But	 I	 think	one	 can	be	meditative	 about
science	too...	]
One	 can	 be.	 In	 fact	 a	 scientist	 can	meditate	 better	 than	 anybody	 else,	 because
when	you	have	gone	to	one	extreme,	it	is	very	easy	to	move	to	the	other	extreme.
It	is	just	like	the	pendulum	of	a	clock:	when	it	is	going	to	the	left,	it	is	gaining
momentum	to	go	 to	 the	right.	So	when	one	becomes	very	very	rational,	one	 is
gaining	momentum	 to	 be	 irrational.	 And	 if	 a	 scientist	 really	 goes	 far	 into	 his
scientific	outlook,	one	day	he	will	become	religious.
In	 his	 last	 days,	 Albert	 Einstein	 started	 becoming	 more	 and	 more	 religious...
started	 feeling	 more	 and	 more	 for	 religion.	 Only	 a	 mediocre	 scientist	 never
becomes	 religious.	A	mediocre	man	 is	one	who	never	goes	 far	 enough.	 If	you
can	go	far	enough	in	any	direction,	one	day	or	other	you	will	swing	to	the	other
polarity	--	that	comes	naturally.	A	man	who	has	been	thinking	very	logically,	is
very	logical,	one	day	comes	to	see	that	logic	itself	is	illogical.
If	one	goes	deep	into	logic,	one	comes	to	a	few	axioms	which	have	simply	been
accepted	--	have	been	accepted	with	no	foundation	to	them.	The	whole	structure
is	very	logical,	but	the	foundation	is	illogical.	If	one	goes	deep	into	mathematics,
one	finds	that	mathematics	is	an	invention	of	man.	That's	why	it	is	so	scientific	--
because	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	life.	Mathematics	is	a	purely	human	invention	-
-	that's	why	it	is	so	pure	a	science,	because	existence	does	not	interfere	in	it.	But
then	become	aware	of	what	you	are	doing.	You	are	playing	a	game!	You	invent
your	laws,	you	invent	your	premises,	you	invent	your	structure,	and	you	play	a
game.	And	one	who	has	been	playing	a	game	is	one	day	bound	to	become	aware
that	there	is	more	than	this	game.
A	 biologist	 working	 continuously	 on	 biological	 problems	 is	 bound	 to	 become
aware	one	day	of	asking	himself;	'Who	am	I?'	Because	no	biology	can	reveal	it.
Who	is	this	one	who	is	searching?	Man	can	create	many	mechanisms,	can	create
almost	as	perfect	a	mechanism	as	the	mind,	can	create	a	beautiful	computer	--
but	no	computer	can	create	a	human	mind.
One	day	this	idea	--	who	are	you	and	who	is	it	inside	you	who	has	created	such	a
perfect	thing	--	will	arise.
There	 is	 an	 anecdote	 in	Ramakrishna's	 life....	He	was	 a	very	 rare	being...	 very
simple,	uneducated.	A	great	logician	came	to	see	him	who	was	very	well-known
all	over	the	world.	His	name	was	Keshava	Chandra	Sen	and	he	was	famous	for
his	 argumentative-ness.	 He	 came	 with	 his	 followers	 and	 he	 was	 absolutely
certain	--	and	rightly	so	--	that	he	would	defeat	this	illiterate	man.
He	 argued	 beautifully	 that	 there	 is	 no	God.	Ramakrishna	 listened	 to	 him	 very
attentively,	 and	 he	 enjoyed	 it	 --	 Ramakrishna	 enjoyed	 it	 tremendously.	When
Keshva	finished,	Ramakrishna	simply	jumped	up	and	hugged	him	and	said,	 'So
beautiful!'
Keshava	was	 very	 puzzled.	He	 said,	 'What	 is	 the	matter	with	 you?	 I	 came	 to
fight	and	argue	with	you,	and	you	don't	argue	with	me.	Why?'
Ramakrishna	said,	'In	fact,	looking	at	you	and	seeing	such	beautiful	logic,	seeing
such	beautiful	argumentativeness,	I	have	got	more	proof	for	God	!	If	there	is	no
God,	how	is	this	beautiful	consciousness,	this	beautiful	mind,	possible?	You	are
proof,	Keshava.'
Keshava	 relates	 in	 his	 autobiography	 that	 he	 became	 dumb!	 Suddenly	 all	 his
logic	disappeared.	This	man	was	tremendous!	He	had	never	thought	that	arguing
against	God	would	become	proof	of	God,	but	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Ramakrishna	 had	 said	 that	 such	 beautiful	 intelligence	 would	 be	 impossible	 if
there	were	no	God.
The	whole	of	scientific	 research	 is	going	 to	culminate	ultimately	 in	a	 religious
upsurge	in	the	whole	world,	because	every	scientific	invention,	every	discovery,
simply	 proves	 the	 infinite	 capacity	 that	 is	 hidden	 behind	 the	 human	 mind.
Reaching	to	the	stars	simply	proves	that	our	hands	are	not	small	--	our	reach	is
vast.	We	must	 be	vast!	Maybe	we	 are	 confined	 to	 a	 very	 small	 body	 and	 to	 a
very	limited	mind,	but	even	with	a	limited	mind	we	are	doing	so	many	miracles.
Just	 go	 on	 in	 your	 scientific	 work	 and	 start	 meditating,	 mm?	 There	 is	 no
contradiction.	In	fact	in	life	there	is	never	any	contradiction.	Everything	can	lead
to	everything	else	--	it	simply	depends	on	you.
My	observation	is	that	people	who	are	priests,	popes,	shankaracharyas,	religious
people,	are	the	most	irreligious	people	in	the	world	because	religion	has	not	been
a	discovery	for	them.	They	have	not	worked	for	it,	they	have	just	borrowed	it	--
it	is	almost	a	business	to	them.
Scientists,	 poets,	 painters,	musicians,	who	 are	 not	 really	 in	 any	way	 related	 to
religion,	 are	more	 religious,	 because	 religiousness	 is	 nothing	but	 a	 capacity	 to
wonder,	 a	 capacity	 to	 praise.	 And	 how,	 if	 you	 are	 looking	 into	 life,	 can	 you
remain	without	praising	it?	How	miraculous	it	is!
And	praise	becomes	proof.	If	you	start	praising,	one	day	it	becomes	the	proof	of
something	hidden.
A	wondering	consciousness	is	all	that	is	needed.	An	unprejudiced	consciousness
is	all	that	is	needed	--
and	 the	whole	 scientific	 training	 is	 for	 that...	 that	 one	 should	be	unprejudiced.
One	 should	 not	 be	 a	 Hindu,	 should	 not	 be	 a	 Christian,	 should	 not	 be	 a
Mohammedan.	One	should	not	have	any	concepts...	one	should	not	carry	any	a
priori	ideas	--	one	should	experiment	and	see.	One	should	believe	in	the	fact	and
not	in	any	sort	of	fiction.
Religion	is	something	that	is	hidden	behind	the	fact.	It	is	not	in	the	bible,	it	is	not
in	 the	koran	 --	 it	 is	 hidden	behind	 existence.	Behind	 every	 fact	 it	 is	 throbbing
there.
So	if	you	really	go	deep	into	the	fact,	one	day	or	other	you	are	certain	to	come
upon	God.	You	cannot	escape!
So	meditate	here,	and	come	next	time	for	a	longer	time.	Much	is	possible!
[A	sannyasin	 returning	 from	 the	West	 says	he	 is	confused	because:	 I	was	with
you	in	Bombay	two	and	a	half	years	ago.	I	find	myself	back	here,	but	somehow
the	magic	isn't	there,	and	it	feels	odd	that	I'm	back.]
Wait...	the	magic	will	come	with	a	flood.	It	always	happens....	The	magic	is	there
--	you	have	simply	lost	the	eyes	that	can	see	it.	The	magic	is	there	--	more	than
before	 --	 but	 you	 can	 see	 only	 that	 which	 you	 can	 see.	 You	 have	 lost	 some
innocence....	And	sometimes	it	happens	that	just	by	experiencing	something,	we
become	experienced	and	the	innocence	is	lost.
For	 example,	 the	 first	 time	 you	 came	 to	me,	 I	 was	 something	 new.	Now	 you
come	with	an	expectation	--
and	that	is	destroying	the	whole	thing.	Now	you	have	a	fixed	idea	about	me.	And
I	am	never	fulfilling	anybody's	ideas	--	never!	--	because	I	go	on	changing.
I	am	not	dead!	When	I	am	dead,	you	can	have	expectations	from	me	and	 they
will	always	be	fulfilled	because	there	will	be	nobody	to	change.
That's	why	whenever	a	person	like	Christ	or	Buddha	dies,	the	religion	grows	by
leaps	 and	 bounds.	 It	 becomes	 a	 great	 force...	millions	 of	 people	 join	 it.	Why?
Because	 now	Buddha	 is	 predictable.	Now	 you	 can	 have	Buddha	 according	 to
you.
When	you	came	for	the	first	time,	you	had	no	expectations	about	me.	You	were
completely	unknown	to	me,	I	was	unknown	to	you.	You	had	come	with	innocent
eyes.	Then	there	was	magic!
This	magic	has	nothing	to	do	with	me	--	that	magic	has	nothing	to	do	with	you.
Whenever	there	is	an	innocent	state	of	mind,	the	magic	is	there.
Look	at	a	rose	flower	with	innocent	eyes	and	the	magic	is	there.	Look	with	eyes
full	of	knowledge,	and	the	magic	has	disappeared.	Science	has	destroyed	much
magic	 in	 the	 world	 because	 science	 has	 given	 people	 knowledge,	 and	 people
think	 that	 now	 they	 know.	Nobody	 knows	 anything!	 That	 they	 know	 is	 just	 a
false	 idea.	 Now	 they	 know	 what	 is	 what	 so	 the	 magic	 is	 gone,	 and	 with	 the
magic,	God	has	disappeared	from	the	world.	Not	that	He	has	disappeared	--	how
can	 He?	 He	 is	 there	 just	 in	 front	 of	 your	 eyes	 --	 but	 you	 have	 become
knowledgeable.	That	is	creating	the	trouble.
Sometimes	it	happens	that	our	eyes	are	clouded	by	our	expectations.	Then	you
look	for	something...	you	want	to	repeat	some	experience.	You	want	me	the	way
I	was	 two	 years	 ago.	How	 can	 I	 be?	You	 come	with	 your	 expectations,	 fixed
ideas	--	and	nobody	is	ever	going	to	fulfill	them.	I	will	go	on	changing	--	I	am
not	predictable.	And	 if	you	come	without	expectations,	 suddenly	you	will	 find
that	the	magic	is	there...	more	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
than	before.	It	is	always	there....	But	it	takes	a	little	time.
Just	 meditate,	 dance	 in	 the	 music	 group,	 sing,	 and	 forget	 your	 past.	 What
happened	two	years	ago,	forget	it	!	Much	more	is	going	to	happen.	Don't	cling	to
it.	Don't	ask	for	repetition,	because	life	never	repeats.
They	 say	 that	 history	 never	 repeats	 --	 that's	 not	 right.	History	 always	 repeats,
because	history	 is	made	by	 fools,	 and	 fools	are	very	 repetitive.	Politicians	and
generals	and	warmongers	--	they	are	the	most	stupid	people	in	the	world	--	they
cannot	do	anything	new,	they	simply	go	on	repeating.	But	life	never	repeats...
life	is	pure	eternity.	Why	should	it	repeat	anything?
It	will	take	a	few	days.	Once	your	past	experience	has	been	dropped	and	you	are
again	fresh	and	new,	 the	magic	will	arise	and	explode	in	you.	It	 is	natural	--	 it
happens	to	many	people.	Nothing	to	be	worried	about.
And	 confusion	 is	 part	 of	 life.	Only	 dead	 people	 are	 never	 confused.	 They	 are
certain	--	but	their	certainty	is	worthless.	Confusion	is	more	valuable.	It	simply
says	 that	you	are	 still	 alive...	you	are	 still	growing.	There	 is	 still	possibility	 in
you	--	that's	what	confusion	means.	You	would	like	to	commit	suicide.	You	don't
want	 confusion	 --	 you	want	 certainty.	 Certainty	means	 committing	 suicide,	 so
once	and	forever,	one	is	finished.
I	am	not	going	 to	give	you	any	certainty.	 I	am	going	 to	give	you	clarity	--	not
certainty.	And	this	is	the	difference:	certainty	is	against	confusion,	clarity	is	not
against	 confusion.	 Clarity	 always	 finds	 a	 way	 through	 confusion	 --	 it	 is	 not
against	it.
Certainty	 is	 against	 confusion,	 certainty	 never	 allows	 any	 confusion	 to	 take
possession	of	you.	It	is	so	afraid	that	it	simply	avoids	it,	it	escapes	from	it	--	then
of	 course	 one	 remains	 stupid	 and	mediocre.	 I	 am	 for	 clarity,	 not	 for	 certainty.
And	each	new	confusion	has	to	be	welcomed,	because	each	new	confusion	will
bring	a	new	challenge	to	you	to	be	more	clear,	to	have	more	clarity,	to	have	more
transparency.
I	am	not	here	to	give	you	any	belief	--	hence	I	go	on	contradicting	myself.	I	don't
allow	you	any	foothold	because	I	don't	want	you	to	cling	 to	any	foothold.	The
moment	I	see	that	you	are	settling,	I	take	the	earth	away	from	you.	Of	course	you
fall	in	a	heap	and	you	are	confused.	You	collapse	and	you	become	angry	--
you	want	to	settle.	Look	at	this	!
The	mind	always	wants	to	settle	--	life	always	wants	to	love.	Life	is	movement	--
the	mind	is	a	stagnant	pool.	Life	is	river-like.
It	 is	 your	mind	 that	wants	 to	 remain	 in	 a	 stagnant	 state	 --	 that	 is	 creating	 the
trouble.	Life	wants	to	move
--	so	there	is	a	struggle.
You	are	all	for	the	mind,	unfortunately.	You	should	not	be	--	you	should	be	for
life.	You	should	say,
'Okay.	If	 there	 is	confusion,	good!	That	means	 that	my	old	 ideas	are	shattered,
my	 old	 beliefs	 are	 gone.	Now	 I	will	 have	 to	 find	 some	 new	 vision.	 I	 have	 to
move.	This	house	is	no	more	my	house	--	I	will	have	to	find	another.	I	no	more
belong	to	this	state	of	mind	--	hence	the	confusion.'	But	good	--	confusion	is	very
throbbing!
Do	a	 few	groups	here,	mm?	And	make	 these	four	months	here	 four	months	of
tremendous	engagement.
And	wait	--	the	magic	is	going	to	happen	to	you.	Just	wait....
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	The	Essential	is	One
Chapter	title:	You	are	Freedom
Chapter	title:	Search	for	the	Undefined
Chapter	title:	Childbirth	can	be	orgasmic
Chapter	title:	Laughter	is	Prayer
Chapter	title:	Be	a	Pure	Hedonist
Chapter	title:	Nothing	Fails	Like	Success
Chapter	title:	Live	at	the	Maximum
Chapter	title:	God	is	also	Darkness
Chapter	title:	The	Magic	is	Here
