
The	Invitation
Talks	given	from	21/08/87	am	to	05/09/87	pm
English	Discourse	series
30	Chapters
Year	published:	1988
The	Invitation
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Throw	the	bucket	and	draw	the	water
21	August	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708210
ShortTitle:
INVITA01
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
107
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	SAY	WHO	YOU	ARE?
Maneesha,	I	am	an	invitation	for	all	those	who	are	seeking,	searching,	and	have
a	deep	longing	in	their	hearts	to	find	their	home.
I	 am	 an	 answer	 to	 the	 question	 that	 everybody	 is,	 but	 cannot	 formulate	 --	 a
question	that	is	more	a	quest	than	a	question,	more	a	thirst	than	a	verbal,	mental
inquiry;	a	thirst	that	one	feels	in	every	cell	and	fiber	of	his	being,	but	has	no	way
to	bring	to	words	and	ask.
I	am	an	answer	 for	 that	question	which	you	cannot	ask	and	you	cannot	expect
that	it	could	be	answered.
When	I	say	I	am	the	answer,	I	don't	mean	that	I	can	give	you	the	answer...	yes,	if
you	are	ready,	you	can	take	it.	I	am	just	like	a	well,	ready	for	you	to	throw	your
bucket	 and	 draw	 the	 water	 for	 yourself.	 I	 have	 it	 but	 I	 cannot	 reach	 to	 you
without	your	efforts.
Only	you	can	reach	to	me.
It	is	a	strange	invitation.
It	will	take	you	on	a	long	pilgrimage	and	it	will	end	only	where	you	already	are.
You	will	have	to	move	many	steps	and	on	many	paths	just	to	come	to	yourself,
because	you	have	gone	far	away	from	yourself.	You	have	completely	forgotten
the	way	back.
I	am	a	reminder,	a	remembrance,	of	the	lost	home.
As	a	person	I	do	not	exist.
As	a	person	I	only	appear.
I	exist	as	a	presence.
Since	 the	day	 I	came	 to	know	myself,	 the	person	disappeared.	There	 is	only	a
presence,	a	very	living	presence	that	can	quench	your	thirst,	that	can	fulfill	your
longing.	Hence,	in	one	word	I	can	say	I	am	an	invitation,	of	course	just	for	those
who	 have	 a	 deep	 longing	 in	 their	 hearts	 that	 they	 are	missing	 themselves	 --	 a
deep	 urge,	 that	 unless	 they	 find	 themselves,	 everything	 else	 is	 meaningless.
Unless	it	is	your	a	priori	concern,	your	ultimate	concern,	such	that	if	it	is	needed
you	are	even	ready	to	lose	everything	for	it,	but	you	cannot	drop	it....
There	are	thousands	of	desires,	but	as	far	as	longing	is	concerned	there	is	only
one:	to	come	back	home,	to	find	your	reality.	And	in	that	very	finding,	you	have
found	all	that	is	of	any	value	--	blissfulness,	truth,	ecstasy.
Jesus	used	to	say,	"If	you	have	eyes	to	see,	see.	If	you	have	ears	to	hear,	hear."
Of	 course,	 he	was	 not	 talking	 to	 the	 blind	 and	 to	 the	 deaf.	He	was	 talking	 to
people	just	like	you.
Perhaps	he	was	talking	just	to	you,	because	you	are	not	new.
You	are	as	ancient	as	the	whole	existence.
You	have	always	been	here.
You	may	have	come	across	many	masters;	you	may	have	come	close	 to	many
buddhas,	but	you	were	too	much	engaged	in	trivia.	You	were	not	aware	of	your
longing.
I	am	an	effort	to	provoke	the	dormant	in	you,	to	wake	up	the	asleep.	The	fire	is
there,	but	is	burning	very	low	because	you	have	never	taken	any	care	of	it.
My	 invitation	 is	 to	 make	 you	 aflame,	 and	 unless	 you	 know	 a	 life	 which	 is
luminous	and	aflame	all	your	knowledge	is	just	a	deception.	You	are	gathering	it
to	help	you	forget	that	the	real	knowledge	is	missing.	But	however	great	is	your
accumulation	of	 the	other,	 the	objective,	 the	world,	 it	 is	not	going	to	become	a
substitute	 for	 your	 self-knowing.	 With	 self-knowing	 suddenly	 all	 darkness
disappears,	and	all	separation	from	existence.
I	 am	 an	 invitation	 to	 take	 a	 courageous	 jump	 into	 the	 ocean	 of	 life.	 Lose
yourself,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	find	yourself.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
EACH	TIME	 I	SEE	YOU,	 I	AM	SHOCKED	BY	YOUR	BEAUTY.	YOU'VE
GOT	TO
BE	THE	MOST	GORGEOUS	BEING	THAT	HAS	EVER	HAPPENED!
OSHO,	IN	WHAT	WAY	DO	YOU	EXPERIENCE	YOUR	OWN	BEAUTY?
Jalada,	there	is	no	way	to	experience	your	own	beauty.
All	knowledge	needs	a	certain	distance	between	 the	knower	and	 the	known.	 If
the	beauty	is	physical	then	there	are	ways	to	know	it	--	you	can	see	yourself	in	a
mirror.	But	if	the	beauty	is	coming	out	of	your	silence,	out	of	your	peace,	out	of
your	 inner	 splendor	 --	 it	may	 radiate	 from	your	physical	 being	but	 it	 does	not
belong	to	your	physical	body,	it	is	not	physical	--	then	there	is	no	way	to	know	it
yourself,	because	it	is	not	reflected	in	a	mirror.	You	can	experience	it.
The	most	important	thing	to	remember	is	that	the	beauty	that	you	have	seen	in
me	is	not	my	own,	it	is	yours	too	--	it	is	everyone's.	The	bodies	may	be	different,
but	the	inner	fire	is	the	same.	And	when	that	fire	starts	radiating	from	your	body,
it	 creates	 a	 certain	 grace,	 a	 certain	 beauty.	 It	 is	 no	 one's	 monopoly.	 It	 is
everybody's	intrinsic	potentiality.
If	you	can	see	my	beauty,	that's	an	indication	of	seeing	your	own	beauty,	because
I	am	nothing	but	a	mirror	 to	you.	But	 it	often	happens...	 looking	 in	 the	mirror
you	may	see	a	beautiful	face,	and	if	you	are	asleep	or	drunk	or	half-asleep,	half-
awake,	you	may	think	the	mirror	is	very	beautiful.	But	the	mirror	is	just	a	mirror;
it	is	only	reflecting	you.
One	 drunkard	was	 torturing	 his	wife	 by	 continually	 coming	 home	 late.	 Every
night	it	was	a	fight.	Finally,	 the	wife	gave	up	and	she	told	the	man,	"You	keep
the	key.	Unlock	the	door	from	the	outside	and	come	in	silently.	Don't	disturb	my
sleep,	 and	 don't	 create	 any	 nuisance	 so	 that	 the	 neighbors	 are	 disturbed.	 Just
come	and	go	to	sleep."
The	drunkard	was	very	happy.	That	day	he	drank	as	much	as	he	wanted;	now
there	was	no	question	of	any	problem	arising	out	of	it.	Then	he	came	home.	He
tried	 to	 be	 as	 silent	 as	 possible	 --	 opened	 the	 door,	went	 into	 the	 bathroom	 to
change	his	clothes,	looked	into	the	mirror	and	said,	"My	God."
All	his	face	was	scratched.	Blood	was	oozing,	because	he	had	been	in	a	fight	in
the	pub.
He	said,	 "Right	now	I	have	managed	perfectly	 silently,	but	 in	 the	morning	 the
wife	is	going	to	discover	these	scratches	and	this	blood,	and	that	will	bring	the
whole	problem	again	--	the	same	fight.	Somehow	I	have	to	hide	the	scratches;	I
should	at	least	put	some	ointment	on	them."
He	looked	all	around.	He	could	not	find	anything	except	his	wife's	lipstick.	He
thought	it	looked	like	an	ointment,	and	it	was	very	helpful	because	it	covered	the
scratches,	 the	 blood.	 He	was	 very	 happy	 at	 his	 success,	 went	 to	 his	 bed,	 and
there	was	no	quarrel,	no	fight.	It	was	one	of	the	most	beautiful	nights	of	his	life!
But	in	the	morning,	the	wife	shouted	from	the	bathroom,	"Are	you	mad	or	what?
You	have	destroyed	my	lipstick.	Not	only	that,	why	have	you	been	painting	the
mirror?"
He	was,	poor	fellow,	trying	to	put	the	ointment	on	his	face,	but	his	face	was	in
the	mirror.
So	 in	 the	mirror	wherever	 there	were	 scratches	 or	 blood	 on	 his	 face,	 he	 did	 a
great	job	of	painting	--	the	lipstick	was	finished	and	the	mirror	was	spoiled.
He	could	not	believe	how	 it	 could	have	happened.	He	said,	 "I	did	not	want	 to
disturb	you	so	I	tried	some	ointment,	and	only	this	thing	looked	like	ointment.	I
don't	know	what	happened	to	me,	why	I	have	put	it	on	the	mirror.	I	was	putting	it
on	my	own	face!"
In	life,	what	you	see	shows	much	about	you,	not	about	what	you	are	seeing.	The
same	sunset	looks	beautiful	to	one	person,	and	to	another,	sad.	And	to	another	it
doesn't	matter;	he	remains	indifferent.	The	sunset	is	the	same.	It	looks	beautiful
to	 the	person	who	 is	capable	of	being	 in	 tune	with	 it,	who	 is	capable	of	being
silent	and	a	mirror	 to	 reflect	 it	 into	his	own	being;	who	can	drink	out	of	 it,	 its
colors,	its	radiance,	its	splendor.
The	same	sunset	looks	sad	not	beautiful	to	somebody	else	because	he	is	sad;	he
projects	his	 sadness	onto	 it.	And	 the	 third	person	 lives	 in	a	way	which	can	be
called	the	way	of	indifference.	He	never	looks	at	the	sunset	or	the	moon	or	the
trees	or	the	flowers	or	people.	He	has	eyes	but	he	never	uses	them.	He	is	in	such
a	rush,	in	such	a	hurry	to	reach	somewhere	he	knows	not	where...	just	a	tension,
a	constant	 running	after	 shadows.	He	does	not	have	 time	 to	waste	 to	 look	at	a
stupid	sunset.
It	all	depends	on	you.
If	you	see	the	beautiful	in	me,	something	beautiful	has	arisen	in	you.
Two	men	were	riding	on	a	train	for	the	first	time	in	their	lives.	One	of	them	had	a
bunch	of	bananas.	He	offered	one	to	his	friend	and	began	to	peel	one	for	himself.
Just	then	the	train	entered	a	tunnel.
"Have	you	tasted	your	banana	yet?"	asked	the	first	man,	very	alarmed.
"No,	I	haven't,"	replied	his	friend.
"Well,	 for	 heaven's	 sake,	 don't,"	 said	 the	 first	man,	 "I	 took	 one	 bite	 and	went
blind."
We	 are	 very	 much	 enclosed	 in	 our	 own	 psychology,	 and	 we	 project	 that
psychology	all	around.
A	man	of	silence	finds	this	whole	world	is	full	of	silence.	Even	the	sounds	only
deepen	 the	 silence.	 And	 a	 man	 full	 of	 noise	 never	 becomes	 aware	 of	 the
immense	silences	in	the	night.	It	all	depends	on	you.	Your	world	is	nothing	but
you,	projected.
It	is	a	good	indication	that	you	feel	beauty	in	me	--	don't	stop	there.	It	is	not	an
objective	experience,	something	beautiful	is	growing	in	you.	Notice	it,	and	a	day
will	 come	 you	 will	 see	 everybody	 beautiful	 around	 you,	 everything	 beautiful
around	you.
Only	be	satisfied	when	you	cannot	 find	anything	which	 is	not	beautiful.	When
you	have	become	capable	of	looking	at	the	beauty	of	everything	that	exists	and
lives,	you	have	reached	to	a	flowering	of	your	own	being.
Your	question	can	be	looked	at	very	easily	from	a	different	point.	You	say,	"Each
time	I	see	you,	I	am	shocked	by	your	beauty.	You've	got	to	be	the	most	gorgeous
being	that	has	ever	happened!	Osho,	 in	what	way	do	you	experience	your	own
beauty?"
There	 are	 people	who	 see	me	 as	 the	 antichrist.	 The	American	 government,	 in
conspiracy	with	fundamentalist	Christians,	destroyed	the	commune	in	America.
And	now	they	have	raised	a	memorial	in	Wasco	County	where	the	commune	was
--	a	marble	memorial,	a	memorial	saying	that	they	succeeded	in	getting	rid	of	the
antichrist.
It	all	depends	on	you	what	you	see.
It	always	refers	to	you.
Two	small	children	were	standing	inside	an	art	gallery	because	it	was	raining	and
they	could	not	find	any	other	shelter.	So	they	entered	the	gallery.	Standing	there
soaked	with	water,	dripping,	one	boy	looked	at	a	Picasso	painting	and	he	said,
"My	God,	we	should	get	away	from	here!	If	they	catch	us	they	will	say	we	have
done	it.	Some	idiot	has	spoiled	everything.	We	have	not	touched	it,	but	we	are	in
a	position	we	will	not	be	able	to	defend."
It	is	said,	that	once	Picasso's	car	was	stolen.	He	reported	it	to	the	police	station,
and	the	people	knew	him.	They	said,	"It	is	very	sad	and	sorry.	Do	you	have	some
details	and	a	description	--	number	plate,	what	kind	of	car?"
He	 said,	 "I	 never	 looked	 at	 the	number	plate,	 but	 I	 can	draw	a	 sketch."	So	he
drew	a	sketch	of	his	car	and	the	police	searched	hard.	And	finally,	 they	caught
one	horse,	one	washing	machine	and	the	Eiffel	Tower!
The	 Picasso	 sketch	 gave	 them	 all	 these	 ideas	 --	 and	 it	was	 a	 sketch	 of	 a	 car!
Picasso's	way	of	 thinking,	way	of	 looking	at	 things,	was	strange	and	crazy.	He
was	a	great	genius,	but	a	little	outlandish.
A	very	rich	woman	wanted	him	to	make	her	portrait.	He	said,	"I	don't	generally
do	that	kind	of	painting	because	my	fee	is	so	much.	Secondly,	nobody	seems	to
be	satisfied	when	the	portrait	is	finished.	It	will	be	almost	one	million	dollars.	If
you	are	ready	to	pay	I	can	do	the	portrait."
The	woman	 said,	 "One	million	 or	 two	million,	 it	 doesn't	matter,	 but	 I	want	 a
portrait	by	you."
So	he	made	the	portrait.	It	took	many	sittings	and	the	woman	became	more	and
more	puzzled	as	she	saw	the	portrait	coming	up.	When	the	portrait	was	complete
she	said,
"Only	one	question,	I	want	to	know	where	my	nose	is.	Everything	is	okay,	but	at
least	I	should	know	where	my	nose	is.	From	there	I	can	figure	out	the	eyes,	the
mouth,	my	ears	-
-	that	can	be	the	center	for	finding	myself."
Picasso	said,	"I	told	you	in	the	very	beginning...!	Now	it	is	a	trouble	to	find	the
nose	--
who	knows	where	your	nose	 is!	 I	 have	painted	 it,	 that	 is	 true,	 but	 in	 so	many
sittings	 I	 can't	 remember	 exactly	 where	 I	 have	 put	 it.	 You	 take	 it	 home	 and
contemplate;	perhaps	you	may	find	it.	It	is	there,	that	much	is	certain.	It	is	there,
this	much	 I	 can	 guarantee	 because	 I	 remember	 I	 have	 painted	 your	 nose.	 But
don't	harass	me!	You	are	paying	money	for	the	portrait	not	for	these	questions.	If
you	 had	 told	 me	 before	 that	 you	 would	 ask	 questions	 I	 would	 have	 refused,
because	who	 takes	 care	where	 your	 nose	 is,	 and	 in	what	way	 does	 it	matter?
Somewhere	it	must	be	in	the	portrait.	If	somebody	asks	you,	you	can	say,	`Just
look,	you	will	 find	 it.'	 Just	one	 thing:	 if	you	or	 somebody	else	 finds	 it,	 inform
me."
Picasso	 became	 one	 of	 the	 great	 painters.	But	 all	 his	 paintings	 are,	 to	 say	 the
least,	insane.
He	himself	was	insane;	he	was	pouring	his	insanity	into	colors	on	the	canvas	--	it
was	 his	 projection.	 He	was	 a	 genius.	 He	 could	manage	 to	 paint,	 and	 paint	 in
many	original	ways.
Naturally,	 if	 you	 cannot	 find	 the	 nose,	 the	 portrait	 is	 original.	 What	 more
originality	can	you	expect?	He	has	worked	hard	but	his	way	of	seeing....
I	 had	 a	 professor	 in	my	 university...	 I	 used	 to	 listen	 to	 him	with	 closed	 eyes.
Finally,	 he	 could	 not	 resist	 the	 temptation.	 He	 said,	 "What	 is	 the	matter	 with
you?	Whenever	I	talk	to	you,	you	close	your	eyes."
I	said,	"To	talk	with	you	and	to	see	your	eyes	--	one	going	this	way,	one	going
that	way	--
makes	me	dizzy.	Sometimes	I	look	to	whom	you	are	talking,	because	you	never
look	at	me."
Those	eyes	were	such	that	when	he	was	talking	to	you	one	thing	was	certain,	he
would	not	be	looking	at	you.	That's	the	only	way	he	could	look	at	you:	when	he
was	looking	somewhere	else.
I	said,	"Either	you	get	your	eyes	fixed	or	please	forgive	me.	I	want	to	listen	to
what	you	are	saying;	I	don't	want	to	get	dizzy."
The	way	you	see	the	world,	the	way	you	see	people,	the	way	you	see	trees...	all
depends	on	you.
You	live	in	a	world	of	your	own	creation.
There	are	as	many	worlds	as	there	are	people	because	everyone	is	living	in	his
own	world.	No	 two	persons	 agree	 about	 anything.	Somebody	 thinks	 a	woman
beautiful,	 and	others	 laugh	at	 the	very	 idea:	 "If	 this	woman	 is	beautiful	 then...
finished!	Then	what	can	be	called	ugly?"
So,	Jalada,	 it	 is	perfect	 for	you	 to	see	beauty	 in	me,	but	 it	 is	part	of	your	own
seeing,	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	me.	 I	am	just	a	victim!	Today	I	am	beautiful,
tomorrow	if	you	are	angry	at	me,	then	too	remember.	If	you	see	that	this	is	the
antichrist,	remember,	it	is	your	own	idea.
It	 reminds	me	 that	 there	 have	 been	 found	 a	 few	 inscriptions	 contemporary	 to
Jesus'	life,	which	describe	him	as	the	ugliest	man	possible.	Not	only	was	he	ugly,
he	was	also	a	hunchback.	And	his	 followers	have	described	him	as	one	of	 the
most	beautiful	men.
Christians	 never	 even	 raised	 the	 question:	What	 about	 those	 inscriptions?	But
fortunately,	I	am	no	one,	neither	Christian	nor	Hindu	nor	Buddhist,	so	I	can	see
from	a	distance.
My	feeling	is	that	both	descriptions	may	be	right.	It	looks	absurd	--	how	can	both
descriptions	be	right	about	one	man?	They	are	not	descriptions	of	Jesus,	they	are
descriptions	of	the	people	who	were	describing	him.
Those	who	loved	him,	because	of	their	love	they	created	a	beautiful	personality.
Those	who	hated	him,	out	of	their	hate	have	created	an	ugly	man.	And	they	were
not	satisfied	even	with	that	--	 they	had	to	make	him	a	hunchback.	They	had	to
reduce	his	height	to	four	feet	six	inches;	they	had	to	make	him	a	pygmy.
This	has	to	be	understood	deeply,	because	then	you	don't	create	the	illusion	and
make	 it	 objective.	You	 should	 always	 remember	 that	whatever	 you	 see	 in	 the
world	 is	your	own	projection.	Yes,	 there	 is	 a	 state	when	you	are	beyond	mind
and	 all	 projections	 have	 dropped.	 Then	 you	 see	 the	 world	 as	 it	 is.	 It	 is	 just
unimaginably	beautiful,	but	that	beauty	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	beauty,	it	is
not	your	projection.
The	moment	you	go	beyond	your	mind,	you	suddenly	become	a	mirror	--	 then
you	reflect	reality.	Within	the	mind	you	project	reality;	you	don't	reflect.	Being
with	 me,	 meditating	 for	 years,	 something	 must	 be	 getting	 out	 of	 the	 mind,
beyond	the	mind.	And	you	will	be	absolutely	certain	that	some	transcendence	is
happening	 when	 if	 not	 only	 in	 me	 but	 in	 everybody	 you	 start	 seeing	 the
beautiful,	the	authentic,	the	sincere	--	even	in	those	who	are	not	beautiful,	who
are	 not	 sincere,	 who	 are	 not	 truthful.	 It	 doesn't	 matter;	 their	 actions	 don't
constitute	their	being.	Their	being	is	far	bigger	than	their	small,	tiny,	actions.
It	is	a	good	indication:	you	love	me.	Naturally,	you	can	see	something	beautiful,
but	 trust	 in	 it	 only	 when	 you	 start	 seeing	 that	 beauty	 everywhere,	 when	 the
whole	of	existence	becomes	beauty.
The	ancient	seers	of	India	have	described	existence	in	two	ways.	One	way	they
have	called	satyam,	shivam,	sundram.	Satyam	means	truth,	shivam	means	good,
sundram	 means	 beautiful.	 This	 is	 one	 expression	 of	 the	 ultimate	 experience.
Another	trinity	by	a	few	other	seers	has	one	thing	certainly	in	common	--	satya,
the	 truth.	 Satchitanand:	 sat	 means	 the	 truth,	 chit	 means	 consciousness,	 anand
means	blissfulness.
Both	are	right;	 it	 is	 their	choice.	They	could	not	avoid	one	thing:	 truth.	If	 they
had	 a	 poetic	 approach,	 then	 the	 good	 and	 the	 beautiful	 were	 naturally
experienced.	If	 they	were	of	a	different	disposition,	more	of	a	mystic	than	of	a
poet,	then	consciousness	and	blissfulness	became	part	of	their	trinity.
It	 is	 because	 of	 these	 statements	 that	 I	 say	 religions	 born	 outside	 of	 India	 are
very	childish.	Just	see	these	trinities	and	compare	them	with	the	Christian	trinity:
God	the	father,	God	the	son,	and	the	holy	ghost.
It	 is	 not	 even	 comparable	 to	 satchitanand:	 truth,	 consciousness,	 bliss	 or	 to
satyam,	 shivam,	 sundram:	 truth,	 good,	 beauty.	 These	 seem	 to	 be	 experiences.
God,	 the	 son	 and	 the	holy	ghost...	 I	 don't	 think	 anybody	has	 ever	 experienced
them.	And	the	experience	would	be	more	like	a	nightmare!
But	 it	 all	 depends	on	you.	 Just	 as	your	dreams	are	yours	 and	 show	something
about	your	mind,	so	are	your	ideas	while	you	are	awake.	They	show	something
about	you,	and	this	is	to	be	remembered	by	every	seeker.	This	is	a	turning	point.
We	are	easily	objective	but	our	reality	is	subjective.	We	see	things	there	which
are	our	own	projections.
A	poet	looks	around	the	trees	in	a	different	way.	He	sees	many	greens,	not	one
green.	His	sensitivity	is	so	deep	that	he	can	make	very	subtle	distinctions	in	the
green	of	one	tree	and	the	green	of	another	tree.	You	ordinarily	simply	see	that	the
trees	are	green,	but	not	even	 two	 leaves	are	exactly	 the	same	green.	 It	needs	a
very	 sensitive,	 artistic,	poetic,	 approach	 --	 it	depends	on	you;	you	 live	 in	your
own	world.
J.	 Krishnamurti	 used	 to	 say,	 "You	 are	 the	 world."	 Once	 this	 is	 understood
tremendous	 changes	 are	 possible.	 You	will	 not	 throw	 tantrums	 at	 others.	 You
will	become	more	centered,	you	will	become	more	subjective	and	introvert.	Your
world	will	start	losing	objects;	it	will	become	more	of	a	subjectivity	--	and	that	is
your	truth.
Once	you	are	centered	in	your	being,	beyond	mind,	then	you	can	see	the	world
as	it	is.
Only	 very	 few	 people	 have	 seen	 the	 world	 as	 it	 is.	 Everybody	 sees	 it	 as	 his
mood,	his	emotion,	as	his	idea	suggests	to	him.
Jalada,	 it	has	 to	be	remembered	continuously,	 that	whatever	you	see,	 it	 is	your
own	projection.	Unless	you	start	seeing	the	same	everywhere	--	in	the	friend	and
in	the	foe	--
then	your	experience	has	entered	into	a	new	realm.
Irving	 Levensky,	 a	 leading	 dress	 manufacturer,	 decided	 to	 go	 on	 an	 African
safari.	 After	 spending	 six	 weeks	 in	 darkest	 Africa,	 he	 returned	 to	 Seventh
Avenue.	Everyone	who	worked	in	his	show	room	gasped	when	he	walked	in	the
door.
Irving,	who	was	six	feet	tall	when	he	left	New	York,	was	now	little	higher	than
two	feet.
His	employees	all	looked	at	him	and	asked,	"Mr.	Levensky,	what	happened?"
He	 replied,	 "Never,	 but	 never,	 under	 any	 circumstances,	 call	 a	witch	 doctor	 a
schmuck!"
It	 is	better	not	 to	 call	 anything	 to	 anybody	 --	 just	 remain	centered	 in	yourself.
Look	 at	 the	 world	 and	 drop	 judgments,	 and	 you	 will	 have	 such	 a	 pure
atmosphere	 around	 you	 --	 no	 appreciation,	 no	 condemnation,	 just	 a	 pure
watchfulness.
This	watchfulness,	I	call	meditation.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
SOMETIMES	 I	 AM	 BLESSED	 BY	 THIS	 OVERWHELMING	 FEELING
THAT	THIS
COMMUNE	IS	BECOMING	GENTLY	ONE	BODY,	ONE	ORGANISM,	ONE
HEARTBEAT.	 AM	 I	 DREAMING?	 AM	 I	 ONCE	 MORE	 THE	 USUAL
UTOPIAN?
OH,	AMORE,	PLEASE	TELL	ME	IT	IS	NOT	A	DREAM.
Sarjano,	it	is	a	dream	that	is	coming	true,	but	it	is	a	dream	--	not	your	dream,	but
the	dream	of	everybody	who	is	here.
It	is	impossible	to	find	a	man	who	is	not	carrying	a	dream	of	utopia,	of	a	world
which	 is	 better,	 more	 human,	 more	 beautiful,	 more	 loving;	 a	 world	 without
conflicts,	 wars,	 discriminations,	 a	 world	 sensitive,	 compassionate,
understanding.	Every	human	being	carries	 in	some	corner	of	his	consciousness
the	dream,	and	it	is	not	a	new	phenomenon.
From	 the	 very	 beginning	 the	 dream	 has	 been	 present	 in	 humanity,	 and	 efforts
have	 been	 made	 to	 make	 a	 reality	 of	 it.	 Almost	 all	 efforts	 have	 failed,	 not
because	 of	 any	 intrinsic	 difficulty,	 but	 because	 of	 a	 vast	world	 that	 surrounds
you.	Your	dreams	are	not	in	tune	with	the	vested	interests	of	the	world,	and	they
are	more	powerful	--	immensely	powerful.
The	dreamer	is	very	delicate,	very	fragile,	just	like	his	dream.
It	is	a	communion	of	dreamers.
We	 created	 a	 dream	 in	 America,	 but	 the	 American	 establishment	 could	 not
tolerate	 it,	 because	 the	 dream	of	 human	beings	 living	 in	 peace	 and	 love	 as	 an
organic	 unity	 is	 against	 all	 politics,	 against	 all	 those	 who	 are	 in	 power.	 It	 is
against	 all	 the	 so-called	 religions,	 because	 if	 you	 succeed	 in	 creating	 a	 dream
here	and	making	it	a	reality,	who	is	going	to	bother	about	their	heaven	and	hell
and	God?
Bertrand	Russell	is	right	when	he	says	that	if	people	were	really	happy,	religions
would	disappear.	Religions	have	a	vested	 interest	 in	 the	misery	of	people.	The
people	have	to	be	kept	miserable;	otherwise,	what	will	happen	to	Christianity,	to
Hinduism,	to	Judaism,	and	millions	of	priests	who	are	living	as	parasites	because
you	are	miserable?	In	your	misery	you	need	some	kind	of	consolation!
In	the	first	place	they	make	you	guilty,	and	in	the	second	place	they	ask	you	to
go	to	the	church	to	confess	to	the	priest.	The	priest	will	fine	you	and	will	pray
for	you	to	God,	that	you	should	be	forgiven	--	it	is	such	a	game!	And	it	has	been
going	 on	 for	 centuries	 and	 still	man	 is	 so	 asleep	 that	 he	 does	 not	 see	 in	what
ways	he	is	being	manipulated.
No	child	comes	with	any	feeling	of	guilt	and	if	you	don't	teach	him	guilt,	he	will
never	know	about	 it.	He	will	 live	a	natural,	uninhibited,	beautiful	 life,	but	 that
will	 destroy	 the	whole	 profession	 of	 the	 priests.	 And	 now	 the	 psychoanalysts
have	also	joined	in	that	profession;	they	are	the	latest	version	of	the	priest.
Just	 the	other	day,	I	was	reading	that	a	patient	said	 to	 the	psychoanalyst,	"Last
night	 I	 did	 not	 dream."	 The	 psychoanalyst	 was	 saying,	 "Tell	 me	 about	 your
dreams.	 Unless	 I	 have	 your	 dreams	 I	 cannot	 analyze	 them	 and	 I	 cannot	 help
you."
The	 psychoanalyst	 became	 very	 angry.	He	 said,	 "You	 are	 very	 uncooperative.
Why	did	you	not	dream?	Without	dreams	what	can	I	do?	My	whole	profession,
my	whole	expertise	depends	on	your	dreaming.	Continue	 to	dream,	and	unless
you	cooperate,	I	am	at	a	loss;	I	cannot	help	you."
The	psychoanalyst	wants	you	to	continue	dreaming.	That	has	become	his	vested
interest.
The	 priest	wants	 you	 to	 go	 on	 committing	 sins.	The	 priest	will	 be	 at	 a	 loss	 if
nobody	commits	any	sin.
In	a	small	school,	the	teacher	was	telling	the	children	how	to	go	to	heaven.	And
after	one	hour's	continuous	effort	to	make	those	small	boys	and	girls	understand,
finally	she	asked,
"Can	anyone	tell	me,	what	are	the	requirements	to	go	to	heaven?"
One	small	boy	said,	"You	have	to	commit	sin."
She	said,	"What?	How	have	you	managed	to	get	this	idea	in	your	mind?"
He	 said,	 "Without	 committing	 sin,	 how	 is	 God	 going	 to	 forgive	 you?	 And
without	forgiveness,	nobody	can	enter	into	paradise."
The	child	was	saying	something	immensely	significant.	The	priests,	the	saints	go
on	teaching:	Don't	sin.	But	they	don't	mean	that;	remember,	they	go	on	saying	it
because	 they	 know	 the	 human	 nature,	 that	 you	 will	 sin.	 If	 they	 were	 for	 a
moment	 made	 aware	 that	 people	 had	 decided	 not	 to	 sin,	 they	 would	 be	 in
difficulty.	You	would	have	taken	their	whole	profession.
The	 pope	 this	 year	 declared	 that	 anybody	 who	 confesses	 to	 God	 directly	 is
committing	 a	 grave	 sin,	 you	 have	 to	 go	 through	 the	 right	 channel.	 Naturally,
because	if	people	start	confessing	to	God	directly,	raising	their	hands	to	the	sky
and	 saying,	 "God,	 I	 have	 committed	 this	 sin,	 please	 forgive	 me,"	 what	 will
happen	to	the	church?	What	will	happen	to	the	money	that	goes	on	flowing	into
the	church	because	you	commit	sin?
I	have	heard....
A	bishop	was	very	friendly	with	a	rabbi.	They	became	friends	because	both	were
interested	 in	 golf.	 And	 they	 had	 decided	 that	 on	 Sunday	 after	 the	 bishop	was
finished	 with	 the	 confessionals,	 they	 would	 go	 to	 the	 golf	 course.	 The	 rabbi
waited,	but	it	was	becoming	late.	So	finally,	he	came	to	the	church	to	see	what
was	the	matter.	He	went	inside.
In	the	Catholic	church	the	priest	sits	behind	a	small	window	with	a	curtain.	On
the	other	side	stands	the	man	who	confesses	his	sin,	and	the	priest	gives	him	the
punishment:
"Donate	 ten	 dollars	 to	 the	 church	 and	 never	 do	 such	 a	 thing	 again,"	 although,
deep	down	he	wants	him	to	do	it	every	day.	It	is	natural,	because	from	where	is
the	money	going	to	come?
The	rabbi	said,	"It	is	becoming	late."
The	bishop	said,	"What	to	do?	There	is	still	a	long	line	waiting,	but	you	can	be
of	help.
You	just	sit	here,	so	I	can	wash,	change	my	clothes,	and	get	ready.	Meanwhile,
you	do	the	confessional."
The	rabbi	said,	"But	I	don't	know	what	confessional	is."
The	 bishop	 said,	 "It	 is	 very	 simple.	You	have	 just	 seen	 that	man	who	 raped	 a
woman;	I	have	fined	him	ten	dollars.	So	just	five	dollars,	ten	dollars...	fine	them
and	tell	them	that	they	will	be	forgiven,	and	not	to	do	it	again."
The	rabbi	said,	"Okay,	I	will	try."
Of	 course,	 on	 the	 other	 side	 the	 people	were	 not	 aware	 that	 there	 had	 been	 a
change:	the	bishop	was	no	longer	there	and	the	rabbi	was	sitting	there.	And	one
man	said,	"Father,	you	have	to	forgive	me,	I	committed	rape	twice	this	week.
The	 rabbi	 said,	 "Son,	 don't	 be	worried.	 Just	 put	 thirty	 dollars	 in	 the	 donation
box."
The	man	 said,	 "But	 last	 time	when	 I	 committed	 rape,	 you	 asked	 only	 for	 ten
dollars.	Is	the	rate	going	higher?"
The	 rabbi	 said,	 "Don't	be	worried	my	son,	 ten	dollars	are	 in	advance.	You	can
commit	another	rape."
Utopia	 is	what	 every	human	heart	 carries	within	him,	particularly	 the	younger
generation,	because	as	you	become	older	you	become	 less	 and	 less	optimistic.
Seeing	 the	 reality	 and	 its	 ugliness,	 seeing	 that	 all	 the	 powers	 are	 against	 any
utopia,	 any	 freedom	 for	 human	 heart,	 any	 love,	 they	 don't	 want	 the	 world	 to
become	a	paradise,	because	then	they	will	be	out	of	employment,	and	nobody	is
ready	to	lose	his	bread	and	butter.
So	as	you	grow	old,	you	slowly,	 slowly	 start	 thinking	 that	utopias	are	utopias,
and	you	start	compromising	with	 the	society.	But	 there	are	a	 few	crazy	people
like	me	who	go	on	dreaming	in	spite	of	the	society,	in	spite	of	the	whole	world.
And	howsoever	difficult	the	dream	seems	to	be	to	materialize,	still	my	heart	says
there	is	no	harm	in	making	another	effort.	Perhaps	one	day,	if	not	in	my	life,	then
in	the	life	of	future	human	beings,	utopia	will	become	a	reality.
When	 the	 commune	 in	 America	 was	 crushed,	 almost	 bulldozed	 criminally,
anyone	in	my	place	would	have	dropped	the	idea	--	but	I	am	stubborn!	I	will	go
on	till	my	last	breath...
or	even	after	that.
Sarjano,	what	 is	happening	here	again	 is	 that	 the	dream	is	becoming	true.	And
we	have	learned	much	in	the	destruction	of	the	commune	in	America	--	it	has	not
been	 a	 bad	 experience.	 Learning	 is	 always	 good,	 and	 learning	 always	 comes
through	failures.	The	commune	had	succeeded,	almost	succeeded.
Here,	we	will	avoid	those	possibilities	of	destruction.	It	 is	better	 to	continue	to
dream	 for	 a	better	humanity	 than	 to	 settle	 into	 sadness	 and	pessimism.	Things
are	 still	 coming	 together	 again.	 People	 are	 returning	 and	 they	 are	 more
experienced	 now.	 They	 know	 not	 to	 have	 a	 structure	 that	 is	 capable	 of	 being
destroyed.	Something	totally	new,	a	more	organic	body,	not	a	dictatorial	regime;
no	enforcement	of	ten	to	twelve	hours'	work,	but	a	more	joyous,	life-affirmative.
Each	according	to	his	need,	each	according	to	his	choice.
We	 are	 making	 every	 effort	 not	 to	 disturb	 anybody's	 individuality,	 not	 to
sacrifice	 any	 individual	 for	 the	 commune.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 make	 every
individual	 as	 strong	 as	 possible,	 because	 that	 will	 be	 the	 total	 strength	 of	 the
commune	--	and	the	seeds	have	started	sprouting.
You	 are	 right,	 Sarjano,	 when	 you	 say,	 "Sometimes	 I	 am	 blessed	 by	 this
overwhelming	 feeling	 that	 this	 commune	 is	 becoming	 gently	 one	 body,	 one
organism,	one	heartbeat.	Am	I	dreaming?"	No,	it	is	a	reality	that	is	happening.
"Am	I	once	more	the	usual	utopian?"	We	are	making	every	effort	to	change	the
meaning	 of	 the	 word,	 ùtopia'.	 The	meaning	 of	 the	 word	 ùtopia'	 is	 that	 which
never	happens,	and	we	are	determined	to	change	the	meaning.	We	are	committed
to	 the	 idea	 that	 utopia	 is	 that	 which	 can	 happen.	 Its	 old	 definition	 has	 to	 be
changed	totally.	Utopia	is	the	very	heart	of	human	beings.	A	man	without	dreams
for	a	better	humanity	is	not	a	man,	he	is	a	desert.
"Oh,	amore,	please	tell	me	it	is	not	a	dream."	Sarjano,	it	is	both:	it	is	not	a	dream
because	 the	 dream	 is	 turning	 into	 reality,	 but	 it	 is	 still	 a	 dream	because	much
more	has	to	be	done.
You	should	not	be	satisfied.
This	 is	 a	 dream	 which	 goes	 on	 growing	 with	 new	 possibilities,	 with	 new
dimensions.	But	we	are	determined	to	create	it,	to	make	it	a	reality.	This	is	our
religion.	We	are	not	interested	in	going	to	paradise;	we	are	interested	in	making
the	paradise	come	here.	It	all	depends	on	our	love,	on	our	silence,	on	our	peace,
on	our	meditation,	and	being	aware	and	alert	not	to	fall	again	into	any	trap	of	the
vested	interests.
Once	the	tree	has	become	strong,	has	gained	roots	in	the	earth,	it	will	be	difficult
for	anybody	to	destroy	it.
I	believe	in	the	earth.
I	repeat	Zarathustra	who	said	to	his	disciples,	"Never	betray	the	earth."	All	 the
religions	have	betrayed	the	earth.
The	earth	is	the	only	reality.
Everything	else	talked	about	by	religions	is	only	fiction	to	distract	you.	We	don't
want	religions	which	are	interested	in	a	future	heaven	after	death.	Our	interest	is
here,	now	--
before	death.	What	is	the	point	of	thinking	about	after	death?	This	has	been	the
routine	because	people	could	not	succeed	 to	create	something	beautiful	 in	 life.
They	 started	postponing	 it	beyond	death	because	nobody	knows	what	happens
beyond	death;	so	it	was	a	very	good	postponement.
I	am	not	for	postponing	it,	not	even	for	tomorrow.	Whatever	can	be	done	should
be	done	right	now.
Don't	betray	the	earth;	don't	betray	the	present.
Don't	betray	your	dream;	your	dream	is	your	very	soul.
At	 a	 party	 an	 elderly	 bishop	 tired	 of	 social	 engagements	 sank	 wearily	 into	 a
chair.	His	hostess	rushed	up	suggesting	that	he	have	a	cup	of	tea.
"No	tea,"	grunted	the	bishop.
"Coffee?"
"No	coffee,"	was	the	solemn	reply.
"Scotch	and	water?"
"No	water."
Sarjano,	just	avoid	Scotch.	Just	avoid	unconsciousness.	Water	is	perfectly	good.
Be	clear	in	your	vision,	be	conscious	in	your	efforts.	The	dream	is	gaining	roots
and	I	hope	soon	we	will	see	the	flowers.	They	are	not	far	away.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Get	out!	get	out	from	your	blankets!
21	August	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708215
ShortTitle:
INVITA02
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
105
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SHUNRYO	SUZUKI,	ONE	OF	THE	FIRST	ZEN	MASTERS	TO	LIVE	AND
TEACH
IN	 THE	 WEST,	 WAS	 ONCE	 ASKED	 WHY	 HE	 NEVER	 SPOKE	 MUCH
ABOUT
SATORI,	 ENLIGHTENMENT.	 THE	 MASTER	 LAUGHED	 AND
ANSWERED,	"THE
REASON	I	DO	NOT	TALK	ABOUT	SATORI	IS	BECAUSE	I	HAVE	NEVER
HAD
IT."
COULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT.
David	Hey,	 Zen	 in	 the	West	 is	 in	 a	 very	 strange	 context.	 The	master	 you	 are
talking	 about,	 Shunryo	 Suzuki,	 must	 have	 felt	 immense	 difficulty	 to	 express
himself,	because	Zen	has	a	language	of	its	own.	It	has	a	climate	different	from
any	other	climate	that	exists	on	the	earth.
To	 bring	 Zen	 to	 any	 country	 is	 a	 difficult	 task.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 ready	 to	 be
misunderstood.
Suzuki's	statement	seems	to	be	clear,	and	anybody	who	will	read	it	will	not	have
any	difficulty	to	understand	it.	But	whatever	he	will	understand	will	be	wrong.
The	master	was	asked,	"Why	don't	you	speak	about	satori?"	--	the	Japanese	word
for	 enlightenment.	 And	 he	 answered	 the	 way	 a	 Zen	 master	 should	 answer
knowing	 perfectly	 well	 he	 could	 not	 be	 understood,	 he	 is	 bound	 to	 be
misunderstood.	He	said,	"The	reason	I	do	not	talk	about	satori	is	because	I	have
never	had	it."
The	statement	is	clear;	linguistically	there	is	no	problem,	there	is	nothing	to	be
understood	in	it.	Suzuki	is	saying,	"I	have	never	talked	about	it	because	I	have
never	had	it."	Now	I	will	have	to	give	you	the	whole	background,	the	climate	in
which	 the	meaning	of	 the	 same	sentence	 turns	 into	exactly	 its	opposite	as	you
understand	it.
Zen	has	an	absolute	certainty	that	no	one	can	have	satori	or	enlightenment;	you
can	have	 things.	You	can	have	money,	 you	 can	have	power,	 you	 can	have	 the
whole	world,	but	you	cannot	have	enlightenment.
Enlightenment	is	not	a	thing;	it	is	not	possible	to	possess	it.	Those	who	say	they
have	it,	don't	have	it	--	they	don't	even	understand	the	ABC	of	it.	One	becomes
enlightened	--
that's	 what	 Suzuki	 is	 saying.	 There	 is	 no	 distinction	 between	 I	 and
enlightenment,	 so	 how	 can	 I	 have	 it?	 The	 I	 disappears	 completely	 into
enlightenment	 just	 like	a	dewdrop	disappearing	 in	 the	ocean.	Can	 the	dewdrop
say,	 "I	 have	 the	 ocean"?	 The	 dewdrop	 is	 the	 ocean	 --	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of
having	it.	This	is	the	first	thing	to	be	clearly	understood.
Suzuki	 was	 an	 enlightened	 master;	 that's	 why	 he	 denied	 it.	 If	 he	 were	 not
enlightened,	but	was	only	a	scholar,	learned	about	Zen,	he	might	have	felt	very
embarrassed	to	deny	it.	He	might	rather	have	lied,	and	nobody	would	have	been
able	 to	 detect	 his	 lie.	 He	 could	 have	 said,	 "I	 have	 it,	 but	 the	 experience	 is
inexpressible;	 it	was	 so	 simple,	 that's	why	 I	 never	 talk	 about	 it."	But	 the	man
really	had	it.	To	really	have	it	means	you	can't	have	it;	you	disappear.
As	long	as	you	are,	there	is	no	enlightenment.
The	moment	there	is	enlightenment,	you	are	not.
You	disappear	just	like	darkness	disappears	when	there	is	light.	Darkness	cannot
possess	light;	you	cannot	possess	enlightenment.
I	don't	think,	David,	that	the	statement	of	Suzuki	would	have	been	understood	by
the	people	who	asked	the	question	and	who	received	the	right	answer.	It	needs	a
totally	different	context	to	understand.
The	Western	 education	 is	 so	 much	 of	 a	 nourishment	 to	 the	 ego...	 in	 fact	 the
Western	psychology	supports	the	idea	that	a	person	should	have	a	very	clear	ego
--	powerful,	aggressive,	ambitious;	otherwise,	one	cannot	survive	in	the	struggle
of	 existence.	 To	 survive,	 first	 you	 have	 to	 be,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 be	 not	 only
defensive,	 because	 the	 right	 way	 of	 defense	 is	 to	 offend,	 to	 attack...	 Before
anybody	else	attacks	you,	you	should	attack.	You	should	be	first,	not	the	second,
because	to	be	defensive	is	already	losing	the	battle.
And	because	of	the	Western	psychology,	the	whole	educational	system	supports
the	idea	that	a	man	becomes	mature	as	he	attains	a	more	and	more	crystallized
ego.	 This	 goes	 against	 the	 experience	 of	 all	 the	 buddhas,	 of	 all	 the	 awakened
ones.	And	 none	 of	 these	 psychologists	 or	 educationalists	 have	 any	 glimpse	 of
what	awakening	is,	of	what	enlightenment	is.
Those	who	have	become	enlightened	are	agreed,	without	any	exception,	on	the
point	 that	 the	ego	has	 to	disappear.	 It	 is	 false,	 it	 is	created	by	society;	 it	 is	not
your	original	face,	it	is	not	you.
The	false	must	disappear	for	the	real	to	be.
So	 remember	 these	steps:	 first,	 the	 false	must	disappear	 for	 the	 real	 to	be,	and
then	 the	 real	 has	 to	 disappear	 into	 the	ultimately	 real.	 People	 are	 living	 so	 far
away	from	their	ultimate	home	--	 they	are	not	even	real,	what	 to	say	about	 the
ultimate?	 For	 it,	 they	 have	 to	 first	 move	 away	 from	 the	 ego.	 They	 have	 to
experience	in	meditation	their	own	center.
But	this	is	not	the	end.	Meditation	is	only	a	beginning	of	the	journey.	In	the	end,
the	seeker	is	dissolved	in	the	sought,	the	knower	in	the	known,	the	experiencer	in
the	 experience.	 Who	 is	 going	 to	 have	 satori?	 You	 are	 absent;	 you	 are	 non-
existent	when	enlightenment	explodes.	Your	absence	is	an	absolute	necessity	for
enlightenment	to	happen.
Suzuki	 is	 absolutely	 right:	 "The	 reason	 I	 do	 not	 talk	 about	 satori	 is	 because	 I
have	never	had	it."	I	am	absolutely	certain	that	those	who	heard	him	are	bound	to
have	thought	that	he	had	had	no	experience	of	satori.	That	is	simply	the	meaning
of	what	he	is	saying.
Unless	 there	 was	 somebody	 who	 had	 experienced	 egolessness,	 and	 finally
selflessness,	Suzuki	was	without	fail,	bound	to	be	misunderstood.
But	he	was	a	man	of	immense	daring,	of	great	courage,	to	introduce	Zen	to	the
West.	 Not	 many	 people	 were	 impressed.	 Many	 certainly	 entertained	 Suzuki's
statements,	 his	 anecdotes	 from	 the	 annals	 of	 Zen;	 they	 thought	 them	 strange
jokes.	But	there	were	a	few	who	understood	not	what	 the	man	was	saying,	but
the	 man	 himself.	 He	 turned	 a	 few	 people	 on;	 he	 has	 the	 same	 distinction	 as
Bodhidharma	who	planted	the	seeds	of	Zen	in	China.
Suzuki	can	be	compared	to	Bodhidharma.	He	planted	the	seeds	in	the	West,	and
Zen	became,	in	the	Western	climate	and	mind,	a	new	fashion.	Suzuki	was	very
much	disturbed	by	it.	He	was	not	introducing	a	new	fashion,	he	was	introducing
a	new	revolution	and	a	new	style	of	being.	But	the	West	understands	things	only
in	that	way	--
every	two	or	three	years	a	new	fashion	is	needed;	people	become	bored	with	the
old.
And	Suzuki	was	received	with	joy,	because	he	had	brought	something	which	no
Christian	or	Jew	was	even	able	to	comprehend.	He	attracted	many	people	of	the
new	generation;	a	few	of	them	remained	true	to	the	master	to	the	very	end.	Many
traveled	 to	 Japan	 just	 because	 of	 Suzuki.	 Hundreds	 of	 Zen	 classics	 were
translated	 in	Western	 languages	 because	 of	 Suzuki.	Now	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 talk
about	Zen	 and	 still	 be	 understood,	 and	 the	whole	 credit	 goes	 to	 a	 single	man,
Shunryo	Suzuki.
It	has	never	to	be	forgotten	that	words	don't	exist	without	context.	If	you	forget
the	 context,	 whatever	 you	 will	 understand	 is	 going	 to	 be	 wrong.	 If	 you
understand	the	context,	it	is	impossible	to	misunderstand.
Berkowitz	was	crossing	Washington	Avenue	on	Miami	Beach	when	he	was	hit
by	 a	 passing	 auto.	 Several	 passersby	 picked	 him	 up	 and	 laid	 him	 down	 on	 a
bench.	A	kindly,	silver-haired	lady	approached	the	injured	man	and	asked,	"Are
you	comfortable?"
"Ehhh!	I	make	a	living,"	sighed	Berkowitz.
In	 the	 Jewish	 context	 he	 could	 not	 understand	 the	 word	 `comfortable'	 in	 any
other	sense	than	in	the	sense	of	making	a	good	living.	He	said,	"Yes."	He	has	the
accident,	but	he	cannot	understand	the	word	`comfortable'	in	the	present	context
of	accident.	Perhaps	he	may	be	dying,	perhaps	he	is	badly	hurt,	but	his	context
remains	as	his	old	mind	which	thinks	only	of	money,	earning.
This	 has	 to	 be	 remembered	 while	 you	 are	 studying	 Zen	 --	 the	 differences	 of
context.
It	is	said:	To	arrive	at	the	truth,	the	German	adds,	the	Frenchman	subtracts,	and
the	Englishman	changes	the	subject!
I	have	heard...
You	can	always	tell	a	man's	nationality	by	introducing	him	to	a	beautiful	woman.
An	 Englishman	 shakes	 her	 hand,	 a	 Frenchman	 kisses	 her	 hand,	 an	 American
asks	her	for	a	date,	and	a	Russian	wires	Moscow	for	instructions!
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	 YOU	 PLEASE	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 THE	 DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN
THE	SPIRITUAL	QUESTION,	"WHO	AM	I?"	AND	THE	PSYCHOLOGICAL
TRAUMA	OF	"WHO	AM	I?"?
Prem	 Shunyo,	 it	 is	 exactly	 the	 difference	 I	 was	 just	 talking	 about	 --	 the
difference	between	the	ego	and	the	self.
The	ego	is	your	false	idea	of	who	you	are;	it	is	just	a	fabrication	of	the	mind.	It	is
your	 own	homemade	mind-manufactured	 concept,	 but	 it	 has	 no	 corresponding
reality	to	it.	It	 is	perfectly	good	as	far	as	the	world	is	concerned	because	there,
you	 are	 dealing	with	 other	 egos.	The	moment	 you	 go	 beyond	 your	mind,	 you
also	go	beyond	your	 ego,	 and	 suddenly	you	 realize	 that	 you	 are	 not	what	 you
have	always	thought	yourself	to	be	--	that	your	reality	is	totally	different,	that	it
does	not	consist	of	your	body	or	of	your	mind,	 that	 in	fact	you	don't	have	any
word	to	express	it.
But	it	is	still	not	the	ultimate	reality;	it	is	just	in	between,	between	the	ultimate
reality	and	the	ultimate	falsehood.	It	is	better	than	the	false,	but	it	is	lower	than
the	really	real.	You	are	still	carrying	a	certain	idea	of	separation	from	existence.
That	 separation	 keeps	 you	 unavailable	 to	 all	 the	 blessings	 which	 are	 your
birthright.	 If	 you	 can	 drop	 those	walls	 and	 open	 yourself	 to	 the	 immensity	 of
reality,	you	will	disappear	as	a	separate	entity.
But	 this	 is	only	one	side.	On	 the	other	 side	you	will	 appear	as	 the	eternal,	 the
immense,	the	vast	reality	--	the	oceanic	experience,	which	is	the	only	experience
of	enlightenment	or	liberation.
You	have	to	get	rid	of	the	ego	first.	That	is	your	psychological	trauma,	or	better,
your	psychological	drama.	There	are	religions	which	have	accepted	the	false	ego
as	the	end	of	all,	there	is	nothing	beyond	it.	That	is	the	religion	of	all	the	atheists
of	different	trends,	a	communist.	Or	the	atheist	may	not	be	a	communist,	but	the
atheist	in	any	form	stops	himself	at	the	ego;	that	is	his	ultimate	reality.
He	is	the	poorest	man	in	the	world.	All	other	religions	except	atheism...	because
I	 take	 atheism	 also	 as	 a	 sort	 of	 religion,	 a	 lower	 form	 of	 religion	 than	 other
religions.
Christianity,	Judaism,	Mohammedanism,	go	a	step	further.	They	all	insist	to	drop
the	ego	and	to	recognize	your	authentic	reality,	your	real	self.
But	there	are	religions	like	Zen	which	go	to	the	very	end	of	the	road.	They	are
not	 satisfied	 just	 by	 dropping	 the	 ego.	 They	 are	 satisfied	 only	 when	 there	 is
nothing	 left	 to	 drop	 --	 even	 the	 self	 is	 gone	 --	 when	 the	 house	 is	 absolutely
empty,	when	you	can	say,	"I	am	not."
This	nothingness	 is	 creating	 the	 space	 for	 the	ultimate	 to	blossom.	 It	 does	not
come	 from	 anywhere	 else.	 It	 has	 always	 been	 there,	 just	 cluttered	with	 rotten
furniture,	 with	 unnecessary	 things.	 As	 you	 remove	 all	 those	 things	 and	 your
subjectivity	becomes	empty
--	 just	 as	 a	 room	 becomes	 empty	 as	 you	 remove	 everything	 from	 it	 --	 in	 this
emptiness	of	your	subjectivity,	blossoms	the	flower	of	ultimate	experience	--	you
are	no	more.
Naturally,	you	cannot	have	your	old	miseries,	your	old	traumas	and	dramas.	You
cannot	have	any	connection	with	your	own	past;	you	have	abruptly	cut	yourself
away	from	all	that	you	used	to	be.	Suddenly	a	new,	totally	fresh	opening...	in	a
way,	you	disappear.	In	a	way	your	authentic	essence	has	the	first	opportunity	to
come	into	its	full	glory,	into	its	absolute	splendor.
This	 is	 what	 enlightenment	 is.	 It	 is	 a	 negative	 process:	 negate	 the	 ego,	 the
psychological;	 negate	 the	 self,	 the	 spiritual.	 Go	 on	 negating	 until	 nothing
remains	 to	negate	--	and	 the	explosion!	Suddenly	you	have	arrived	home,	with
the	revelation	that	you	have	never	been	out	of	your	home.	You	have	always	been
there,	your	eyes	were	just	focused	on	objects.
Now	all	those	objects	have	disappeared.	Only	a	witnessing,	pure	awareness,	has
remained.	This	witnessing	 is	 the	end	of	all	your	misery	and	all	your	hell.	 It	 is
also	the	beginning	of	the	golden	gate	--	the	doors	are	open	for	the	first	time.
Two	white	 rats	were	 chatting	 through	 the	 bars	 of	 their	 laboratory	 cages.	 "Tell
me,"	said	the	first	white	rat,	"how	are	you	getting	along	with	Dr.	Smith?"
"Just	 fine,"	 replied	 the	 second	 rat.	 "It	 took	 a	while,	 but	 I	 have	 finally	got	 him
trained.
Now,	whenever	I	ring	the	bell,	he	brings	me	my	dinner."
It	 is	such	a	strange	world.	The	psychologist,	Dr.	Smith,	must	be	 thinking	he	 is
training	rats,	and	the	rats	are	thinking	they	are	training	Dr.	Smith!	The	games	of
the	ego...	The	wife	thinks	she	is	training	the	husband.	All	wives	are	training	their
husbands	their	whole	lives;	the	husbands	are	training	their	wives.	It	seems	life	is
just	to	train	and	to	be	trained	-
-	for	what?
A	woman	reached	Pablo	Picasso.	She	wanted	a	portrait;	 the	portrait	was	made.
She	was	absolutely	satisfied.	She	said,	"Just	one	thing,	you	have	forgotten	to	put
great	diamonds	around	my	neck,	a	great	diamond	ring,	diamond	bracelets."
Picasso	 said,	 "But	 you	 don't	 have	 them."	 She	 said,	 "It	 doesn't	 matter.	 I	 have
cancer,	 and	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 survive	more	 than	 six	 weeks.	 And	 I	 know	my
husband	 is	 going	 to	marry	 immediately	 after	 I	 die.	 He	 is	 just	 waiting	 for	my
death,	although	he	goes	on	saying,	`My	dear,	without	you	I	will	not	be	able	 to
live	a	single	moment.'	I	know	that	without	me	he	will	not	be	able	to	live	a	single
moment.	He	will	immediately	find	another	woman!"
Picasso	said,	"I	don't	understand	the	relationship	of	what	you	are	saying	and	the
diamonds."
She	said,	"You	don't	understand	the	woman's	mind.	I	want	my	portrait,	after	my
death,	 to	be	 seen	by	 the	woman	who	my	husband	 is	going	 to	marry.	Then	she
will	torture	him,
`Where	are	these	diamonds?'	I	cannot	leave	him,	even	if	I	am	dead.	He	has	to	be
trained,	he	has	to	be	kept	under	control."	Great	idea!
People	have	forgotten	completely	to	live.	Who	has	time?	Everybody	is	training
everybody	else,	how	to	be	--	and	nobody	seems	to	be	satisfactory,	never.
If	one	wants	to	live,	one	should	learn	one	thing,	to	accept	things	as	they	are,	and
to	accept	yourself	as	you	are.	Start	living.	Don't	start	training	for	a	life	sometime
in	the	future.	All	the	misery	in	the	world	is	created	because	you	have	completely
forgotten	to	live;	you	have	become	engaged	in	an	activity	which	has	nothing	to
do	with	life.
The	moment	you	are	married	to	a	man,	you	start	training	him	to	be	faithful.	Live
while	 he	 is	 faithful	 --	 it	 will	 not	 be	 more	 than	 two	 weeks;	 two	 weeks	 is	 the
human	limit!	Live	as	deeply	as	possible	--	perhaps	your	living	and	loving	deeply
may	 help	 him	 to	 remain	 faithful	 the	 third	 week	 also.	 And	 never	 project	 too
much;	three	weeks	is	enough.
My	 own	 experience	 is	 that	 if	 you	 have	 lived	 three	weeks	 lovingly,	 the	 fourth
week	will	follow.	But	you	start	disturbing	things	from	the	first	moment.	Before
you	 start	 living,	 training	 is	 needed;	 you	 spoil	 the	 time	 by	 training,	 and	 a	man
who	 could	 have	 loved	 you	 for	 at	 least	 two	 weeks	 becomes	 bored	 within	 two
days.
One	woman	never	married.	And	when	she	was	dying,	a	friend	asked,	"Why	have
you	never	married?	You	are	so	beautiful."
She	said,	"What	is	the	need?	As	far	as	training	is	concerned	I	train	my	dog,	and
he	 never	 learns!	 Every	 day	 I	 am	 training	 and	 he	 still	 comes	 home	 late	 in	 the
night.	I	have	a	parrot	who	tells	me	everything	a	husband	is	expected	to	say.	In
the	 morning	 he	 says,	 "Hello	 darling!"	 I	 have	 a	 servant	 who	 steals,	 who
continuously	 lies.	 What	 need	 have	 I	 for	 a	 husband?	 Everything	 is	 being
fulfilled."	A	husband	is	needed	for	these	things?
A	wife	is	needed,	not	to	have	an	experience	of	intimacy	and	love,	but	to	make	an
exhibition	 of	 her;	 just	 to	 show	 around	 the	 neighborhood	 and	make	 everybody
jealous	that	you	have	such	a	beautiful	woman.	Load	her	with	all	the	ornaments
and	make	everybody	jealous	of	your	richness;	otherwise,	how	are	you	going	to
show	your	 richness?	A	wife	 is	a	 show-window;	she	shows	your	achievements,
your	power.	Naturally,	you	have	to	train	her	how	to	become	more	social,	how	to
help	you	in	your	businesses.
The	saying	seems	to	be	perfect	that	behind	the	success	of	every	great	man	there
is	a	woman	--	in	many	different	senses.	Sometimes	just	to	escape	from	her,	one
becomes	madly	engaged	in	earning	money.
When	Henry	Ford	was	asked,	 "Why	did	you	go	on	earning	and	earning,	when
you	have	earned	so	much?	It	was	time	to	enjoy	and	relax."
He	said,	"That	was	not	the	reason	for	earning.	I	was	engaged	in	earning	first	to
escape	 from	my	wife,	and	secondly,	 I	became	 interested	 in	whether	 I	can	earn
more	or	she	can	spend	more."	A	competition,	a	lifelong	competition!
People	get	involved	in	strange	dramas.	Very	few	people	live	authentically	--	they
just	act.
A	man	is	sitting	in	a	cinema,	and	the	wife	is	continually	reminding	him	how	the
hero	is	showing	his	love	so	deeply	to	his	wife.	Finally,	the	husband	says,	"Stop
all	this	nonsense!
You	don't	know	how	much	he's	paid	for	it!	And	moreover,	it	is	only	acting;	it	is
not	reality.	I	will	certainly	say	he	is	a	good	actor."
The	wife	said,	"Perhaps	you	are	not	aware	that	in	actual	life	also	they	are	wife
and	husband."
He	said,	"My	God!	If	that	is	true,	then	he	is	the	greatest	actor	I	have	ever	seen;
otherwise,	even	on	the	stage,	to	show	so	much	love	to	your	own	wife	is	simply
beyond	human	capacity.	He	is	almost	a	genius	as	far	as	acting	is	concerned."
People	 think	 love	 is	 only	 for	 actors.	 It	 has	 been	 noted	 by	 psychoanalysts	 that
people	are	sitting	in	front	of	their	TV's	for	hours.	An	American	watches	TV	six
hours	 per	 day	 on	 average	 --	 that	 is	 the	 average.	 There	 may	 be	 few	 maniacs
watching	nine	hours,	ten	hours,	twelve	hours.	Slowly	slowly,	watching	movies,
watching	 television,	watching	a	 football	match,	watching	a	 tournament,	people
have	simply	become	observers;	they	don't	love.
Some	 actor	 loves	 --	 they	 simply	 watch.	 They	 don't	 play;	 some	 professional
players	play	--
they	watch.	They	don't	do	anything;	 they	are	glued	 to	 their	chairs	and	are	 just
watching	 everything.	 But	 watching	 and	 doing	 are	 totally	 different.	 They	 feel
completely	 satisfied	 that	 they	 have	 seen	 a	 beautiful	 film	 on	 love.	 They	 are
completely	 satisfied	 that	 they	 have	 seen	 a	 great	 boxing	 tournament.	And	 they
themselves	are	just	onlookers.
It	 is	 something	 of	 a	 great	 calamity	 that	 has	 reduced	 millions	 of	 people	 to
onlookers.	And	the	people	who	are	being	watched	are	actors.	They	are	not	in	real
love,	they	are	being	paid	for	it.	They	are	experts	in	deceiving	people,	pretending
that	what	they	are	doing	is	real.	Their	tears	are	false,	their	smiles	are	false,	their
love	is	false,	their	anger	is	false.
What	kind	of	world	have	we	created?	The	doers	are	all	acting	because	they	are
paid	for	it,	and	the	remaining	nondoing	world	is	simply	watching.
You	are	here	to	live.
You	are	here	to	dance.
You	are	here	to	experience	life.
Others	 are	 doing	 it	 for	 you.	 On	 your	 behalf	 people	 are	 loving,	 people	 are
playing,	people	are	doing	all	kinds	of	things.	And	what	is	left	for	you?	--	just	to
watch.	Death	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 take	much	 from	 you	 --	 only	 your	 television,
because	you	don't	have	anything	else.
This	is	the	false	ego	that	has	created	a	false	life	pattern	and	lifestyle.
Drop	everything	false.
Be	authentic	and	true;	that	is	the	first	step.	And	once	you	are	authentic	and	true,
you	will	see	how	beautiful	it	is.	And	that	will	create	the	longing	to	go	beyond,	in
search	of	the	ultimate	truth,	the	final	statement	and	the	final	experience,	beyond
which	nothing	else	exists.
A	famous	surgeon	went	on	safari	to	Africa.	When	he	came	back	his	colleagues
asked	him	how	it	had	been.	"Ah,	it	was	very	disappointing,"	he	said,	"I	didn't	kill
a	thing.	I	would	have	been	better	off	staying	here	in	the	hospital!"
Fifteen	minutes	after	 the	Titanic	sank,	Morie	and	Louis	find	themselves	on	the
same	overturned	raft.	The	water	is	freezing,	sharks	are	cruising	by,	and	the	raft	is
slowly	sinking.	"Ah	well,"	said	Louis,	"it	could	have	been	worse."
"Worse?	How	could	it	be	worse?"	screamed	Morie.
"Well,	we	could	have	bought	return	tickets!"
People	are	almost	crazy	--	a	tremendous	cleansing	is	needed	--	and	most	of	their
insanity	 is	because	of	 their	 false	 life;	 it	 is	not	 satisfying.	False	 food	cannot	be
nourishment,	 false	water	 cannot	 quench	 your	 thirst,	 and	 false	 ego	 cannot	 give
you	real	life.	It	is	simple	arithmetics.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 YOU	 SPOKE	 OF	 MEANING	 AND	 CONTEXT,	 IT	 SET	 BELLS
RINGING	IN
ME.	 MEANING,	 NOT	 JUST	 OF	 WORDS	 BUT	 OF	 EVERYTHING,
DEPENDS	ON
CONTEXT	 --	 ESPECIALLY	 MY	 LIFE.	 YOU	 HAVE	 A	 VAST	 CONTEXT,
BELOVED
MASTER.	WILL	YOU	PLEASE	SPEAK	ABOUT	YOUR	CONTEXT	IN	THIS
PLACE,	 THIS	WORLD,	AT	THIS	 TIME?	DID	YOU	CHOOSE	 IT,	OR	DID
EXISTENCE	PUT
YOU	 HERE	 KNOWING	 THAT	 WHATEVER	 HUMANITY	 NEEDS,	 YOU
ARE	THE
BEST	MAN	FOR	THE	JOB?
Devageet,	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	have	never	done	anything.	Whatever	has
happened,	 I	 cannot	 take	 the	 credit	 for	 it.	 Since	 the	 day	 I	 came	 to	 know	 my
nothingness,	 things	 have	 been	happening	but	 I	 am	not	 the	 doer.	Existence	 has
taken	 over.	 I	 am	 not	 even	 concerned	 whether	 what	 is	 happening	 is	 going	 to
succeed	or	fail;	it	is	none	of	my	concern.	Hence,	you	cannot	call	it	my	"job."	I
am	as	much	part	of	existence	as	the	trees,	as	the	moon,	as	the	stars.
The	whole	functions	in	an	organic	way.
Everything	is	related	to	everything	else.
The	smallest	blade	of	grass	is	connected	with	the	greatest	star	millions	of	light
years	away.	All	are	functioning,	and	there	is	nobody	who	is	dictating.
Existence	is,	in	itself,	the	master.
And	whatever	happens	is	spontaneous:	nobody	orders	it,	nobody	follows.	This	is
the	greatest	mystery.
Because	this	mystery	could	not	be	understood,	people	from	the	very	beginning
started	imagining	a	God.	Their	imagination	of	a	God	is	only	their	psychological
difficulty	 in	 accepting	 this	 tremendous	 universe,	 running	 spontaneously	 on	 its
own	 without	 any	 accidents.	 Not	 even	 a	 traffic	 policeman	 --	 and	 millions	 of
stars...!
Just	the	other	day	Hasya	brought	me	the	news	that	in	California	a	very	new	thing
has	suddenly	come	into	being.	During	the	last	week	five	persons	have	been	shot
dead.	And	 this	new	 thing	 is	happening	on	 the	 streets,	because	 the	 streets	have
become	 so	 small	 and	 the	 traffic	 is	 so	 great	 that	 cars	 are	 almost	 not	 moving.
Roads	appear	as	if	they	are	parking	lots.
And	people	are	carrying	guns	in	their	cars	because	they	become	so	annoyed	that
the	 man	 ahead	 is	 going	 so	 slow	 and	 it	 gets	 on	 their	 nerves.	 They	 have	 been
honking	their	horns,	but	nothing	is	moving.	Thousands	of	horns	are	honking	all
around.	And	in	 the	 last	week	five	persons	parked	by	 the	side	of	 the	road,	 took
out	a	gun	and	shot	the	man	ahead	whom	they	didn't	know	--	and	he	was	in	the
same	 trouble,	 he	was	 not	 creating	 it.	 The	 problem	was	 just	 that	 the	man	was
ahead.	 And	 this	 is	 just	 the	 beginning.	 Last	 week	 it	 started,	 now	 it	 will	 grow.
Because	 when	 things	 start,	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 stop	 them,	 particularly	 in
California!
Almost	 all	 the	 races	 of	 the	 world	 have	 conceived	 God.	 It	 is	 simply	 a
psychological	 problem,	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 religion,	 nothing	 to	 do	with
philosophy.	It	is	simply	incomprehensible,	it	is	inconceivable	how	this	immense
universe	 is	 running	 without	 any	 controller,	 how	 it	 has	 come	 into	 existence
without	any	creator.	Just	because	people	could	not	stretch	their	imaginations	and
their	 logic,	 they	 invented...	 just	 to	 console	 themselves	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	 to
worry	about;	otherwise,	it	would	be	very	difficult	even	to	sleep.
Millions	of	stars	and	galaxies	are	moving,	and	who	knows	in	the	night	where	the
crash	is	going	to	happen?	Nobody	is	looking	after	it	all.	There	is	no	policeman,
there	 is	 no	 court,	 there	 is	 no	 law	 --	 but	 strangely,	 everything	 is	 going	 so
smoothly.
Seasons	change	and	the	clouds	come	with	rains.	Seasons	change	and	new	leaves
and	 new	 flowers...	 and	 it	 has	 been	 going	 on	 since	 eternity.	Nobody	 keeps	 the
record.	Nobody	tells	the	sun	that	it	is	time;	there	is	no	alarm	clock	that	goes	off
exactly	 in	 the	morning	 to	 tell	 the	 sun,	 "Get	 out!	Get	 out	 from	your	 blankets!"
Things	simply	are	going	perfectly	right.
In	fact,	my	own	denial	of	God	is	based	on	the	same	reasoning.	I	say	God	is	not
because	no	God	can	manage	this	immense	universe.	Either	it	can	be	intrinsically
spontaneous...	 it	 cannot	 be	managed	 from	 outside.	Unless	 there	 is	 some	 inner
coherence,	some	inner	organic	unity,	no	outside	controller	can	go	on	managing	it
from	eternity	 to	eternity.	He	will	get	bored	and	shoot	himself,	because	what	 is
the	purpose?	Nobody	is	going	to	pay	him;	nobody	even	knows	his	address!
I	have	heard,	a	man	wrote	a	 letter	 to	God	because	he	needed	fifty	dollars	very
urgently.
And	not	knowing	the	address,	he	sent	it	to:	God	the	Father,	c/o	The	Postmaster	--
because	the	postmaster	must	know!	The	postmaster	opened	the	letter.	What	was
the	letter,	to	whom	was	he	supposed	to	send	it	--	to	God?	He	read	the	letter	and
he	 felt	 sorry	 for	 the	man;	he	must	be	 in	 really	great	 trouble.	He	had	described
that	his	mother	was	dying,	and	he	has	no	money,	no	employment,	no	money	for
food,	no	money	for	medicine.	"Just	for	once,	send	fifty	dollars	and	I	will	never
ask	again."
The	postmaster	 said,	 "Something	 should	 be	 done	because	 this	man	 should	not
feel	disappointed."
The	postmaster	himself	was	not	very	rich,	so	he	asked	all	the	people	in	the	post
office	to	please	contribute	something	--	forty-five	dollars	was	managed.	He	said,
"Something	is	better	than	nothing;	only	five	dollars	are	missing."	He	sent	forty-
five	dollars.
The	man	was	 very	 angry.	He	 said	 to	God,	 "Listen,	 next	 time	 you	 send,	 never
send	through	the	post	office	because	those	people	have	taken	their	discount,	five
dollars."
My	own	understanding	is	that	it	cannot	be	managed	from	outside.	That	is	more
inconceivable:	 why	 should	 any	 God	 take	 the	 trouble,	 and	 how	 long	 can	 he
manage?
Sometimes	 he	will	 get	 tired,	 and	 sometimes	 he	will	 be	 on	 holiday.	What	will
happen	 on	 holidays?	 And	 when	 he	 is	 tired	 or	 has	 fallen	 asleep,	 what	 will
happen?	Roses	will	stop	growing,	stars	will	be	going	on	the	wrong	path,	the	sun
may	start	rising	from	the	West	--
who	will	prevent	it?	--	just	for	the	change,	just	for	one	day.
No,	 from	 outside	 it	 is	 impossible	 --	 God	 is	 absolutely	 absurd	 --	 nobody	 can
manage	existence	from	the	outside.	The	only	possibility	is	from	the	inner;	it	is	an
organic	being.
The	moment	you	forget	yourself	as	a	separate	being,	you	become	part	of	it.	You
have	been	part	of	it;	you	were	unnecessarily	carrying	the	idea	of	being	separate
and	feeling	burdened.	 I	have	not	felt	burdened	at	all	about	anything.	Whatever
happens	I	have	not	even	thought	that	it	could	have	been	otherwise.	Why	should
it	be	otherwise?	Who	to	complain	to?	Because	I	don't	have	anybody	to	pray	to,	I
cannot	complain	either.	A	deep	acceptance,	and	you	have	gone	beyond	misery.
Yes,	my	context,	Devageet	is	vast	--	but	it	is	not	my	context,	it	is	the	context	of
the	whole.	It	is	functioning	perfectly	well	--	nothing	ever	goes	wrong.	But	if	you
take	 yourself	 separately,	 then	 you	 are	 unnecessarily	 becoming	 burdened.	 My
whole	 teaching	is:	drop	all	 the	burden	on	the	whole,	be	free	of	all	burden,	and
live	spontaneously	and	totally	and	without	any	guilt.
There	is	nobody	who	can	punish	you,	and	there	is	nobody	who	can	reward	you.
You	are	part	of	the	whole;	you	are	not	doing	it.	The	whole	is	doing	through	you,
whether	you	know	it	or	not.	The	moment	you	know	that	it	is	the	whole	which	is
functioning	through	you,	you	become	absolutely	free	of	all	responsibility.
My	 colleagues	 in	 the	 university	 used	 to	 say	 they	 have	 never	 seen	 a	 more
irresponsible	man	 than	me.	And	 they	said,	 "We	cannot	conceive	 that	a	man	of
your	understanding	never	feels	any	responsibility	for	anything."	It	was	difficult
for	them	to	understand	that	to	be	responsible,	first	you	have	to	be.
I	have	left	myself	far	behind,	and	since	then	there	is	no	responsibility.	Whatever
the	 whole	manages	 through	me,	 the	 whole	must	 be	 responsible	 for	 it.	 I	 don't
come	in	its	way.
I	don't	even	think	whether	it	is	right	or	wrong,	whether	it	should	be	done	or	not.
Who	am	I	to	judge?	This,	I	call	let-go.
Hymie	Goldberg	died	and	went	to	hell.	He	immediately	started	giving	orders	and
bossing	everyone	around.
"Stop	it,"	said	Satan.	"One	would	think	you	owned	the	place."
"I	do,"	said	Hymie,	"my	wife	gave	it	to	me	while	I	was	on	earth!"
I	don't	own	anything	 just	because	I	don't	have	a	wife!	 I	cannot	even	own	hell.
Nobody	can	 send	me	 there.	 I	 simply	go	on	 living	moment	 to	moment	without
bothering	 about	 the	 past,	 without	 bothering	 about	 the	 future.	 Anything	 that
happens,	happens,	I	accept	it	with	absolute	gratitude.
Certainly,	the	context	is	vast,	and	for	those	who	will	come	close	to	me,	for	those
who	 have	 come	 close	 to	me,	 that	 makes	 understanding	me	 or	my	 life	 almost
impossible;	 it	 has	 become	part	 of	 the	ultimate	mystery.	Unless	 you	 realize	 the
mystery	of	the	whole	you	cannot	have	any	conception	where	I	am.	I	am	certainly
not	what	appears	to	be	my	place,	my	space.
If	you	look	into	my	eyes,	you	can	see	into	the	depths	which	go	beyond	me.
If	you	listen	to	my	silences,	you	will	hear	the	silence	of	the	sky	--	it	is	not	mine.
And	I	would	like	you	also	to	be	in	the	same	space,	where	you	have	nothing	that
you	can	say	 is	yours,	where	nothing	belongs	 to	you	because	you	belong	to	 the
whole.
Just	 a	 joke	 for	Devageet;	 I	 don't	 know	why	 it	 should	be	 said,	but	 that's	why	 I
have	told	you	I	don't	have	any	reason	to	do	anything	--	just	this	joke	wants	to	be
told,	and	I	cannot	do	anything	about	it!
Stella	 and	 Eunice	 are	 in	 the	 kitchen	 preparing	 vegetables	 and	 gossiping	 on	 a
Friday	 night	 when	 Eunice	 looks	 out	 of	 the	 window.	 She	 sees	 her	 husband,
Bernie,	coming	up	the	walkway	with	a	bouquet	of	flowers.
Eunice	turns	to	Stella	and	says,	"Oh,	no!	He's	bringing	flowers.	That	means	the
whole	weekend	I	will	be	on	my	back	with	my	legs	up	in	the	air."
Stella	replies,	"What's	the	matter?	Don't	you	have	a	vase?"
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	Let	yourself	be	a	mystery
22	August	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708220
ShortTitle:
INVITA03
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
103
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	FEEL	WARM	LOVE	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE	AND	NOW	I	REALIZE	THAT
WHEN	I	AM	NOT	CLOSE	TO	YOU	IT	DOES	NOT	HAPPEN	IN	THE	SAME
WAY.	IS	IT
STILL	 TRUE	 THAT	 TIME	 AND	 SPACE	 DO	 NOT	 MAKE	 ANY
DIFFERENCE	IN
THE	GREAT	AFFAIR	BETWEEN	MASTER	AND	DISCIPLE?
Deva	Suria,	it	is	always	true	that	space	and	time	make	no	difference	in	the	great
love	 affair	 between	 the	 disciple	 and	 the	 master.	 It	 is	 not	 sometimes	 true	 and
sometimes	 not	 true;	 it	 belongs	 to	 the	 realm	 of	 the	 eternal.	 But	 in	 actual
experience,	particularly	 in	 the	beginning,	 the	 love	of	 the	disciple	 is	 still	not	so
pure;	 it	 still	 has	 expectations.	 It	 is	 not	 desireless	 yet;	 it	 is	 polluted	 by	 many
things.
Because	of	this	pollution	of	desires,	expectations,	it	appears	that	space	and	time
make	a	difference.	They	don't	make	any	difference	as	far	as	love	is	concerned,
but	your	love	is	not	just	love;	it	has	many	more	things	involved	in	it.	Even	the
expectation	of	enlightenment	is	enough	to	destroy	its	purity.
The	principle	is	about	the	pure	love	--	love	that	is	simply	happy	for	no	reason	at
all,	 love	 that	has	already	 joined	 the	dance	of	 the	master	 in	 the	heart.	Then	 the
master	 is	 not	 outside	 you;	 you	 carry	 him	 within	 yourself,	 wherever	 you	 are.
That's	why	space	and	 time	don't	make	any	difference.	But	 if	 the	master	 is	 still
outside	--	an	object	of	love	--	then	certainly,	space	will	make	a	difference,	time
will	 make	 a	 difference.	 The	 difference	 comes	 in	 through	 impurities,	 and	 the
impurities	are	such	 that	 it	 is	almost	unavoidable	 in	 the	beginning,	because	you
cannot	think	of	the	desire	for	enlightenment	as	an	impurity.
In	 fact,	 for	 you	 the	 great	 love	 affair	 between	 the	 master	 and	 the	 disciple	 is
happening	only	because	of	your	longing	for	enlightenment.	Naturally,	when	you
are	 close	 you	 feel	more	 confident.	 The	 closer	 you	 are,	 the	more	 you	 feel	 the
presence	of	the	master.	The	further	you	go	away,	your	confidence	starts	shaking
because	the	master	is	still	only	a	means	to	a	certain	end.
The	day	Gautam	Buddha	died...	 there	were	 ten	 thousand	disciples	who	always
followed	him	on	his	long	journeys.	In	that	great	crowd	of	disciples,	 there	were
people	like	Sariputta,	Maudgalyan,	Mahakashyapa,	Manjushri,	Vimal	Kirti,	and
many	more	who	had	already	become	enlightened,	who	had	already	crossed	the
barrier	between	 the	master	and	 the	disciple,	who	had	entered	 into	 the	world	of
the	devotee.
When	 Gautam	 Buddha	 died	 it	 was	 a	 great	 shock	 to	 everyone	 --	 even	 to	 his
closest	disciple,	Ananda;	he	burst	into	tears.	He	was	older	than	Gautam	Buddha	-
-	Buddha	was	eighty-two;	Ananda	must	have	been	nearabout	eighty-five	or	even
more	 --	 he	 burst	 out	 just	 like	 a	 small	 child	 whose	 mother	 has	 died.	 But
Manjushri,	Vimal	Kirti	 and	Sariputta	 remained	utterly	 silent,	 as	 if	nothing	was
happening,	or	whatever	is	happening	does	not	matter.
Many	 disciples	 were	 shocked	 by	 the	 coldness	 of	 Sariputta	 and	 others	 --	 they
could	not	understand.	They	could	understand	Ananda	bursting	into	tears;	in	fact,
they	thought	that	Ananda	was	the	most	intimate.	And	Sariputta	and	Maudgalyan
and	 Mahakashyapa	 --	 they	 were	 sitting	 silently.	 People	 asked	 them,	 "When
Ananda	is	crying,	why	are	you	silent?"
Sariputta	said,	"Because	for	me,	my	master	can	never	die.	Death	cannot	make	us
apart.
He	 has	 only	 left	 the	 body,	 but	 he	 is	 here;	 my	 heart	 is	 still	 feeling	 --	 in	 fact,
feeling	more	than	ever	--	his	presence."
And	 the	 same	was	 the	answer	of	 the	other	 enlightened	disciples...	 not	 a	 single
tear	 in	 their	 eyes.	 They	 were	 not	 hard,	 they	 were	 not	 cold.	 They	 had	 simply
crossed	the	barrier	between	the	master	and	the	disciple.	Either	you	can	say	they
had	entered	into	the	master's	consciousness,	or	you	can	say	they	had	allowed	the
master's	consciousness	to	enter	into	them.	It	means	the	same	thing:	the	two	had
disappeared;	now	there	was	only	one.
People's	 understanding	was	 absolutely	wrong	 that	Ananda,	who	had	burst	 into
tears,	must	have	loved	the	master	more.	Asked,	he	said,	"I	am	crying	because	he
was	 alive,	 and	 for	 forty-two	 years	 I	 have	 been	 his	 most	 intimate	 disciple	 --
intimate	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 I	was	 always	with	him.	 In	 these	 forty-two	years	 not
even	 for	 a	 single	 day	was	 I	 separate;	 even	 in	 the	 night	 I	 used	 to	 sleep	 in	 his
room,	just	to	be	present	in	case	he	needed	something.	I	am	not	crying	because	I
was	 the	 most	 intimate,	 I	 am	 crying	 because	 even	 with	 such	 a	 long	 physical
intimacy	 I	 have	 remained	 separate	 from	 him.	 Something	 has	 remained	 like	 a
barrier."
Gautam	Buddha	was	not	dead	yet.	He	had	closed	his	eyes,	and	he	was	relaxing
into	the	eternal.	He	came	back,	opened	his	eyes,	and	said	to	Ananda,	"Don't	be
worried.	 It	 was	 my	 presence	 and	 your	 love	 towards	 me	 that	 was	 the	 barrier,
because	 your	 love	 was	 motivated.	 You	 wanted	 to	 become	 enlightened	 before
anybody	else,	and	you	were	always	deep	down	jealous	when	other	people	were
coming	to	their	potential,	coming	to	their	source.
"Deep	down	you	felt	hurt	that	you	were	so	close	and	yet	others	were	becoming
enlightened	 who	 had	 come	 after	 you.	 You	 could	 not	 rejoice	 in	 their
enlightenment.	 You	 could	 have	 rejoiced,	 you	 could	 have	 celebrated,	 but	 your
mind	was	focused	on	your	own	enlightenment	--	you	were	too	much.	And	your
unconscious	continued	 from	 the	very	 first	day,	holding	on	 to	 the	 idea	 that	you
are	a	cousin-brother	to	me,	and	my	elder	brother.
"Although,	 after	 the	 first	 day	 you	 never	 mentioned	 it,	 still	 the	 psychological
memory	 was	 there.	 Consciously,	 deliberately	 you	 became	 a	 disciple,	 but
unconsciously	you	always	knew	that	you	were	the	elder	brother;	you	could	not
dissolve	with	me.	But	don't	cry,	because	the	moment	I	am	dead,	within	twenty-
four	hours	you	will	become	enlightened.
Without	my	death,	you	cannot	become	enlightened."
Ananda	 still	 could	not	 console	himself.	He	 said,	 "After	 twenty-four	hours	you
will	not	be	here.	To	whom	am	 I	 to	 say	whether	 I	have	become	enlightened	or
not?	And	I	don't	know	when	in	the	eternity	of	time	I	will	meet	a	man	like	you	--
a	consciousness	so	great	and	so	vast."
Buddha	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 worried;	 it	 is	 going	 to	 happen.	 I	 was	 watching
continuously.	I	was	myself	puzzled	why	it	was	not	happening	to	you.	You	want	it
too	much."
And	these	are	the	problems:	wanting	enlightenment	too	much,	and	you	will	miss
it;	holding	 the	desire	anywhere	 in	your	unconscious	 to	achieve	 it,	you	will	not
achieve	it.
Relaxing,	 forgetting	 all	 about	 enlightenment,	 forgetting	 all	 about	 the	 future,
living	in	the	present,	your	love	will	attain	to	a	crystal	clear	purity,	undefiled	by
any	desire,	even	the	greatest	desire	of	enlightenment.
Then	you	will	not	feel	the	distinction	between	the	master	and	yourself;	then	you
can	carry	 the	master	within	your	heart.	Then	wherever	you	are,	your	master	 is
with	you.	The	duality	is	dropped;	the	two	flames	have	become	one.	It	is	not	your
flame,	 it	 is	not	 the	master's	 flame	 --	when	 those	 two	 flames	become	one,	 they
become	universal.	 In	 separation,	 you	 are	 a	 disciple	 and	 there	 is	 a	master	 --	 in
becoming	 one,	 the	 disciple	 disappears,	 the	master	 disappears;	what	 remains	 is
only	a	pure	awareness.
The	transformation	of	love	into	pure	awareness	is	the	alchemy	one	has	to	learn
by	being	close	to	a	master.	By	being	close	to	a	master	you	can	enjoy	the	warmth,
his	presence,	his	words,	his	heartbeat.	But	as	you	go	 far	away	you	will	not	be
able	 to	 listen	 to	 the	same	heartbeat;	you	will	be	again	yourself	--	back	to	zero.
You	will	hear	the	heartbeat	but	it	will	be	your	own.	Close	to	the	master	you	are
overwhelmed.
The	secret	to	learn	is	to	purify	your	love.
Drop	all	ambitions.
There	is	nothing	to	be	achieved.
All	that	you	want	is	already	present	in	you.	The	master	is	not	going	to	give	you
anything	 that	 you	 don't	 have.	 In	 fact,	 the	 master	 goes	 on	 taking	 away	 things
which	you	think	you	have	but	you	don't	have.	And	the	master	cannot	give	you,
of	course,	that	which	you	have.
He	can	only	 take	away	all	 the	barriers,	 all	 the	hindrances,	all	 the	obstacles,	 so
only	 that	 which	 is	 your	 own,	 remains	 behind.	 In	 that	 unpolluted	 space,	 the
distinction	between	the	master	and	the	disciple	is	no	more.	That	does	not	mean
that	you	don't	 feel	grateful	 to	 the	master.	 In	 fact,	only	after	 this	has	happened,
you	feel	for	the	first	time	a	tremendous	gratitude.
Sariputta	was	going	very	reluctantly	on	a	message	tour.	Buddha	had	asked	him
to	 go	 to	 his	 own	 kingdom	 --	 he	 was	 a	 prince	 before	 he	 became	 a	 disciple.
Buddha	said,	"Now	it	is	your	responsibility	and	your	compassion	to	go	to	your
people	--	to	your	father,	to	your	mother,	to	your	whole	kingdom.	What	you	have
achieved,	let	them	become	aware	of	it.	It	is	their	potential	too;	share	it."
He	was	very	reluctant	to	leave.	Buddha	said,	"What	is	the	reluctance?	--	because
now	I	am	within	you.	I	am	sending	you	away,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	you
will	not	feel	any	distance."
Sariputta	said,	"Distance	is	not	the	question.	I	can	go	to	the	farthest	star,	still	you
will	be	within	my	heart.	The	 trouble	 is,	 here	 I	 touch	your	 feet	 every	day.	You
may	be	in	my	heart,	but	how	am	I	going	to	touch	your	feet?"
Gautam	Buddha	said,	"You	are	an	enlightened	being.	You	don't	have	to	touch	my
feet."
Sariputta	said,	"Before	enlightenment,	it	was	a	ritual.	Just	because	every	disciple
was	 touching	 your	 feet,	 I	was	 touching	 also.	But	 now	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 ritual.
Now	 it	 is	 authentic	 gratitude,	 because	without	 you	 I	 don't	 think	 I	would	 have
attained	to	myself.
Although	it	was	always	within	me,	I	don't	think	that	alone	I	was	able	to	discover
it	--	not	at	least	in	this	life.
"Your	 compassion,	 your	 love,	 your	 continuous	 showering	 of	 blessings	 slowly,
slowly	 removed	 all	 that	 was	 not	me.	 Now	when	 I	 touch	 your	 feet	 it	 is	 not	 a
ritual,	 it	 is	 a	 heartfelt	 nourishment.	 I	 feel	 nourished.	 The	 day	 I	miss	 touching
your	feet,	I	feel	a	great	gap.	And	I	know	that	you	are	within	me."
Buddha	said,	"Do	one	thing.	All	you	who	have	become	enlightened	will	have	to
learn	to	be	away	from	me,	and	yet	not	away	from	me.	It	is	true	you	cannot	touch
my	feet,	but	from	wherever	you	are	just	turn	towards	the	side	you	think	I	am	and
bow	down	to	the	earth.	My	body	belongs	to	the	earth.	If	you	touch	the	earth	with
the	same	gratitude,	you	have	touched	me."
Sariputta	went	away.	And	the	people	of	his	kingdom	could	not	believe	it;	he	had
become	 such	 a	 glory,	 such	 a	 magnificence,	 such	 a	 beauty.	 All	 this	 was
miraculous,	 but	 their	 curiosity	 was	 that	 every	 day	 --	 morning,	 evening	 --	 he
would	 turn	 towards	 the	 direction	 where	 Buddha	 was	 dwelling	 far	 away,	 and
touch	 his	 feet	 with	 tremendous	 gratitude.	 They	 said,	 "You	 are	 an	 enlightened
being;	you	don't	have	to	touch	the	earth."
He	said,	"I	am	not	touching	the	earth.	I	have	learned	a	new	secret,	that	the	body
is	nothing	but	earth,	that	the	earth	contains	not	only	the	feet	of	my	Buddha,	my
master,	but	all	the	buddhas	of	the	past,	of	the	present,	of	the	future.	Touching	it,	I
am	touching	all	those	who	have	become	awakened	and	made	the	path	clear	for
me,	showed	me	the	way."
Even	 when	 Buddha	 died,	 he	 continued...	 towards	 the	 same	 direction	 where
Buddha's	body	was	lying	at	the	last	moment.	He	never	felt	any	separation.	And	it
was	 not	 only	 for	 him,	 it	 was	 the	 same	 for	 all	 twenty-four	 disciples	 who	 had
become	enlightened.
Ananda	 became	 --	 just	 according	 to	 the	 prediction	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha	 --
enlightened	after	twenty-four	hours.	He	in	fact	did	not	move	from	the	place.	He
closed	 his	 eyes	 when	 Buddha	 died	 and	 remained	 without	 eating,	 without
drinking,	without	sleeping.	Those	twenty-four	hours	were	the	greatest	time	of	his
life,	a	time	of	transformation	from	an	ignorant	being	into	an	awakened	soul.	He
opened	his	eyes	only	when	the	tears	had	disappeared	and	a	smile	had	come	to	his
face.
Manjushri	was	close	 to	him.	He	 said,	 "What	happened?	You	were	crying;	you
were	sitting	as	if	dead,	and	suddenly	you	are	smiling."
Ananda	 said,	 "I	 am	 smiling	 because	 his	 prediction	 proved	 right.	 It	 was	 the
impurity	 of	my	 love	 that	was	 the	 hindrance.	And	 now	he	 is	 gone,	 there	 is	 no
question	 of	 feeling	 like	 his	 elder	 brother,	 of	 feeling	 any	 attachment.	 In	 his
funeral	 pyre,	 as	 his	 body	disappeared	 into	 the	 smoke,	 all	my	 attachments	 also
disappeared."
It	 is	 not	 necessary,	 Suria,	 that	 I	 have	 to	 be	 on	 a	 funeral	 pyre	 before	 you	 can
become	enlightened.	I	can	be	if	you	need	it.	One	day	I	will	be,	but	it	will	be	far
more	beautiful	 if	 the	day	I	am	on	 the	funeral	pyre,	you	are	without	 tears.	As	I
disappear	from	the	body	you	know	I	have	become	more	involved	deeply	within
you,	within	the	whole	existence.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
HELP!	 I	 AM	 FALLING	 TO	 PIECES!	 IS	 IT	 JUST	 MY	 MONTHLY
PREMENSTRUAL
EMOTIONAL	 TURMOIL?	 THIS	 TIME	 IT	 FEELS	 MORE	 LIKE	 AN
EMOTIONAL
DEEP	CLEANING.	ALL	THESE	TEARS	AND	PAINS	SEEM	TO	REMOVE
SOMETHING	 OLD	 TO	 MAKE	 SPACE	 FOR	 SOMETHING	 NEW,	 EVEN
THOUGH	I	HAVE	NO	IDEA	WHAT	IS	IS.	I	FEEL	EXCITED	AND	SCARED
AT	THE	SAME
TIME,	AND	I	DON'T	KNOW	WHAT	TO	HOLD	ON	TO	ANYMORE.
BELOVED	OSHO,	WHAT	IS	HAPPENING?
Nandan,	 a	 purification	 is	 happening.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 your	 monthly
period.	It	may	be	coincidence	that	both	are	happening	together,	but	because	you
have	 been	 capable	 of	 dropping	 your	 miserable	 relationship,	 which	 very	 few
people	are	capable...	Look	at	Latifa	--	old	great	Om	is	back!	It	took	me	so	much
trouble	to	separate	them...	because	both	were	miserable,	but	misery	is	something
at	least	to	hold	on	to.	Both	must	have	been	feeling	very	alone	without	misery.
Misery	functions	almost	like	a	magnet.	People	complain	about	it,	but	not	really
to	 get	 rid	 of	 it;	 they	 complain	 about	 it	 just	 to	 brag	 about	 it.	 They	 are	 really
saying,	 in	 fact	without	 saying,	 "Don't	 think	 I	 am	alone;	 I	 am	miserable!"	And
because	misery	hurts,	they	are	in	a	dilemma:	if	they	leave	the	misery,	that	means
leaving	the	miserable	relationship.	Then	they	feel	very	lonely,	and	then	they	are
reminded	of	the	Western	proverb	--	and	nothing	is	more	miserable	--	"Something
is	better	than	nothing."	At	least	there	was	something	to	talk	about,	to	question,	to
figure	out	--	and	now	you	are	just	sitting	in	your	room	doing	nothing.
Ginsberg	returned	home	from	a	trip	abroad	on	business	to	find	out	that	his	wife
had	been	unfaithful.	Very	upset,	he	interrogated	his	wife,	"Was	it	that	dungheap
Goldsberg?"
"No."
"Was	it	that	pile	of	filth,	Levensky?"
"No."
"Was	it	that	swine,	Morrie	Levy?"
"No."
Finally	 Ginsberg	 exploded,	 "What's	 the	 matter	 with	 my	 friends?	 Not	 good
enough	for	you?"
People	are	so	attached	to	misery	they	are	searching	and	looking	for	it.	Nandan,
you	 are	 in	 a	 beautiful	 space.	 Just	 remember	 not	 to	 miss,	 that	 you	 don't	 have
anything	to	hold	on	to	--
there	 is	 no	 need.	Why	 should	 one	 have	 something	 to	 hold	 on	 to?	 Are	 you	 a
passenger	in	a	commuter	bus,	that	you	have	to	hold	on	to	something?	And	even
if	 you	want	 to	hold	on	 to	 something,	 avoid	 for	 the	 time	being,	 human	beings;
otherwise,	they	will	start	the	same	old	story	again.
With	 great	 difficulty	 you	 have	 been	 able	 to	 finish	 a	 miserable	 relationship.
Rejoice	in	it.
And	as	far	as	holding	on	is	concerned,	anything...	a	teddy	bear!	And	don't	laugh,
because	you	know	the	great	bodyworker,	Satyarthi?	He	still	holds	on	to	a	teddy
bear.	He	cannot	go	to	sleep	without	his	teddy	bear.	And	it	is	an	old	dirty	teddy
bear,	 an	 old	 relationship,	 ancient	 friendship,	 from	his	 very	 childhood...	 he	 has
become	greasy!	He	may	be	wanting	to	escape,	but	Satyarthi	is	holding	on	and	he
has	 strong	 hands.	His	 art	 is	 deep	massage,	 and	 I	 think	 he	must	 be	 doing	 that
massage	to	the	teddy	bear.
An	 outdoor	 man	 who	 had	 gone	 on	 hunting	 expeditions	 all	 over	 the	 world	 --
always	accompanied	by	his	wife	at	her	insistence	--	told	his	troubles	to	a	friend
one	day.
"Yes	sir,"	said	the	hunter,	"I've	taken	that	woman	into	the	jungles	of	Africa,	the
jungles	of	Borneo,	 and	 the	 jungles	of	Malaya.	The	only	 trouble	 is,	 she	always
finds	her	way	back!"
So	Nandan,	it	is	good.	Hold	on	to	anything.	Keep	the	doors	closed	because	the
old	misery	may	 come	back,	 the	 old	miserable	 fellow	will	 be	 also	 in	 the	 same
space	--	what	to	hold	on	to?	Strange	ideas...	because	I	have	lived	my	whole	life
without	holding	anything,	and	I	don't	see	why	you	cannot.
Just	 learn	 to	 live.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 habit;	 there	 are	people	who	 cannot	 sleep	without
their	 intimate	 enemy,	 because	 it	 is	 a	 ritual.	 First	 they	 have	 to	 fight	 --	 a	 good
pillow	 fight,	 saying	 everything	 dirty	 that	 can	 be	 said	 to	 each	 other,	 and	 then,
feeling	 tired,	 they	 fall	asleep.	Alone,	one	 feels	almost	 lost;	one	does	not	know
who	he	is.	But	 there	 is	no	need.	It	 is	only	a	question	of	giving	a	 little	 time	for
your	consciousness	to	become	acquainted	with	aloneness.
Once	you	are	aware	of	the	beauty	of	aloneness,	the	purity	and	the	ecstasy	of	it,
you	 will	 never	 think	 to	 hold	 on	 to	 anything.	 And	 a	 relationship	 is	 possible
without	holding	on	 to	each	other.	Then	 the	 relationship	also	has	a	beauty.	You
are	not	dependent	on	each	other;	 the	other	 is	not	a	 teddy	bear;	nor	 should	you
allow	the	humiliation	of	being	a	teddy	bear	for	him.
You	stand	as	two	pillars	of	a	temple,	separate	but	supporting	the	same	roof.	Your
love	is	just	like	the	roof:	you	are	both	supporting	it,	but	you	stand	alone,	in	your
beauty,	in	your	silence,	in	your	meditation.
Nandan,	you	are	doing	perfectly	well.	You	ask	me,	"Osho,	what	is	happening?"
Nothing	 is	 happening,	 and	 that's	 what	 is	 needed.	 This	 constant	 desire	 that
something	 should	 happen	 keeps	 one	 unconscious:	 running	 after	 shadows,
throwing	 parties,	 going	 from	 here	 to	 there,	 to	 this	 person,	 to	 that	 person,	 for
something	 to	 happen.	 But	 just	 watch	 your	 whole	 past	 --	 has	 anything	 ever
happened?	One	only	deludes	oneself	that	things	are	happening.
Stop	deluding	yourself.
All	is	perfectly	good.
There	is	no	need	for	anything	to	happen.
The	 moment	 you	 relax	 and	 you	 don't	 desire	 for	 any	 happening,	 you	 will	 be
surprised	--
millions	of	things	are	happening.	So	many	birds	are	singing,	so	many	trees	are
blossoming...	 Just	 get	 out	 of	 the	 imprisonment	 of	 your	 own	 making,	 and	 all
around	things	are	happening.
The	whole	of	existence	is	always	in	a	celebration	--	participate	in	it.	Dance	with
the	trees,	dance	under	the	moon.	Just	for	a	few	days,	avoid	human	beings	--	I	am
saying	just	for	a	few	days,	just	to	give	you	a	gap	to	become	acquainted	with	the
nonhuman	 existence	 around	 you.	 Otherwise,	 you	 become	 so	 miserable	 with
human	 beings,	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 time,	 nor	 do	 you	 have	 a	 clear	 eyesight.
Everything	 becomes	 dismal	 and	 dizzy,	 and	 you	 cannot	 see	 the	 tremendous
universe	all	around	you,	in	eternal	ecstasy.
Be	acquainted	with	this	existence,	and	after	this	acquaintance	and	the	bliss	that
will	arise	out	of	it,	you	can	share	it	with	a	human	being	--	and	without	holding,
without	 any	 attachment,	 just	 being	 with	 a	 human	 being	 as	 if	 you	 are	 with	 a
stranger.	You	don't	know	who	he	is,	nor	does	he	know	who	you	are	--	and	there
is	any	need	 to	know.	Let	yourself	be	a	mystery	and	 let	him	be	a	mystery.	 It	 is
good	 if	 you	 can	 have	 a	 few	 moments	 of	 joy	 and	 celebrate	 together,	 but	 the
moment	 you	 see	 that	 holding	 starts,	 beware...	 you	 are	 getting	 back	 into	 the
misery	again.
It	does	not	matter	with	whom,	holding	on	is	the	fundamental	cause	of	all	misery.
If	you	can	relate	without	any	relationship,	just	a	casual	friendship,	you	will	feel
grateful.	There	was	no	need	for	it	to	happen,	but	still	existence	has	allowed	you
to	 be	 with	 a	 stranger	 for	 a	 few	 hours	 or	 a	 few	 days.	 Don't	 expect	 too	much.
That's	 why	 I	 am	 saying	 a	 few	 hours,	 a	 few	 days	 --	 not	 even	 a	 few	 weeks.
Because	the	more	you	expect,	the	more	is	the	possibility	to	cling,	to	hold.
One	strange	woman	from	the	Philippines...	 I	have	never	forgotten	her;	she	 is	a
sannyasin.
She	 told	 me	 that	 after	 being	 in	 so-called	 relationships	 and	 always	 finding,
strangely,	 that	 every	 relationship	 ends	 in	 hell,	 "I	 decided	 not	 to	 have	 any
relationship,	but	only	casual	meetings	with	strangers."
She	said,	"I	can	tell	 it	 to	you	--	I	don't	say	it	 to	just	anybody:	In	a	train	I	meet
somebody.	I	don't	know	him;	he	does	not	know	me	--	we	enjoy	the	time	together.
And	then	a	station	comes	--	he	gets	out.	And	the	moments	have	been	beautiful
while	we	were	together.
Now,	perhaps	we	will	never	see	each	other,	but	those	beautiful	moments	still	go
on	lingering	in	the	memory."
She	said,	"Since	I	learned	that,	I	have	been	only	with	strangers.	I	have	not	even
bothered	 to	 find	 out	 their	 names.	 I	 remember	 them	 only	 by	 their	 faces.	 And
anyway	there	is	no	need	to	remember,	because	there	is	no	possibility	of	meeting
them	again."	But	 I	have	seen	 that	 the	woman	has	a	 tremendous	freedom	and	a
great	beauty.
Out	of	this	understanding	--	of	not	creating	a	relationship	but	only	moments	of
relatedness,	 friendship,	 or	 better	 only	 friendliness;	 not	 falling	 in	 love	 but	 only
enjoying	love	without	creating	any	bonds,	without	giving	promises	for	tomorrow
or	 taking	 promises	 for	 tomorrow	 --	 just	 live	 the	 moment	 joyfully.	 And	 when
tomorrow	comes	it	will	also	bring	its	own	gifts.
Nandan,	whatsoever	pains	 and	 tears	you	are	passing	 through	are	 all	 cleansing.
And	you	can	feel	it,	 that	something	new	is	happening:	"Even	though	I	have	no
idea	what	it	is."
There	is	no	need	to	have	any	idea.	Let	it	happen,	because	having	an	idea	means
again	 you	 make	 it	 a	 mind	 thing.	 Let	 it	 happen;	 it	 is	 a	 cleansing	 of	 the
unconscious.	And	it	is	good	that	it	is	happening	in	your	premenstrual	emotional
turmoil	--	that	will	clean	your	body	and	your	mind,	both	together.
Just	wait....	Some	stranger	is	bound	to	knock	on	your	doors.	Never	be	afraid	of
strangers,	because	everybody	is	a	stranger.	However	long	you	have	lived	with	a
person,	you	remain	strangers.	And	being	with	a	stranger	has	a	freshness.	Never
hold	him,	and	never	allow	him	to	hold	you.	Make	it	clear:	"Our	meeting	is	out	of
freedom;	 freedom	 is	 a	greater	value	 to	me	 than	 love.	Because	 if	 love	destroys
freedom,	it	destroys	itself;	if	love	enhances	freedom,	it	enhances	itself."
Freedom	is	our	most	precious	treasure.	Don't	lose	it	for	anything.	And	anything
that	comes	out	of	it	as	an	offshoot	--	love,	friendliness	--	will	have	a	great	beauty
to	 it,	and	will	never	create	any	misery;	 there	 is	no	point.	The	moment	you	see
misery	is	arising,	say	goodbye;	become	strangers	again	as	you	have	been	before.
One	thing	I	have	observed	which	is	very	difficult	for	human	beings	to	maintain:
either	 they	 can	 love	 or	 they	 can	 hate,	 but	 they	 cannot	 remain	 just	 strangers
neither	hating	nor	loving.	Remember,	hate	is	also	a	relationship.	And	if	you	are
going	to	have	a	relationship	then	it	is	better	to	have	love,	because	in	the	misery
of	 love	 there	may	be	a	few	moments	which	are	beautiful.	But	 in	 the	misery	of
hate	it	is	all	dark	night	--	no	stars,	no	moon,	no	light,	no	possibility	of	anything;
it	is	poisonous.
These	are	 the	secrets	 to	 learn:	Love,	but	keep	as	much	apart	as	 the	pillars	of	a
temple	--
don't	come	too	close.	Being	at	a	distance	is	always	good;	a	fresh	breeze	can	pass
between	you.	Coming	 too	close,	 the	bad	body	odor,	 the	bad	breath...	and	 there
are	a	thousand	and	one	things.	Life	unnecessarily	becomes	a	continuity	from	one
hell	 into	 another.	 Just	 the	 names	 change,	 but	 the	 reality	 of	 misery	 remains
continuous.
My	 vision	 of	 a	 good	 world	 is	 that	 people	 will	 be	 individuals,	 meeting	 with
others,	 sharing	 their	 joy,	 their	 love,	 unconditionally.	 And	 not	 expecting	 that
tomorrow	 also	 will	 be	 the	 same	 --	 they	 will	 remain	 aware	 of	 the	 constantly
changing	existence.
Your	love,	your	friendliness	is	also	going	to	change.	And	when	it	changes	don't
cling.
Allow	it	to	change.	Be	like	a	river,	constantly	moving;	don't	become	a	pond.
All	marriages	are	ponds.	They	don't	go	anywhere,	they	are	simply	there.	Water	is
evaporating	 every	 day	 and	 they	 are	 becoming	more	 and	more	 dirty.	 One	 day
there	will	be	only	dirt.
The	river	is	constantly	flowing,	and	because	it	is	constantly	flowing,	it	remains
always	fresh.	The	freshness	is	in	its	flow.
Your	life	should	be	like	a	river.
And	you	will	have	to	move	through	many	scenes	--	why	get	caught	up	with	one
scene?
Why	go	on	reading	the	same	page	again	and	again	and	again?	It	is	destructive.
Once,	 it	 is	 beautiful	 --	 twice,	 it	 is	 dangerous.	Keep	 your	 eyes	 fresh,	 and	 keep
your	consciousness	available,	available	in	both	ways:	to	allow	someone	in	and	to
allow	someone	out,	with	no	hate	but	only	gratitude.
Slowly,	slowly...	Love	is	not	the	ultimate,	it	is	just	a	training	school	for	learning
how	 to	 be	 alone.	 This	 togetherness	 is	 so	 painful	 that	 finally,	 even	 the	 most
retarded	learn	that	to	be	alone	is	the	secret	of	being	blissful.
Even	 Niskriya	 has	 learned	 it!	 He	 is	 a	 silent	 fellow;	 he	 tolerated	 as	 long	 as
possible.	He	has	no	time	for	anything	except	his	work,	but	even	to	him	it	became
a	trouble	and	finally,	he	had	to	get	rid	of	it.	Since	then,	he	is	looking	very	happy.
I	have	just	been	wondering	how	long	he	will	remain	happy.	It	 is	possible	--	he
may	remain	happy	--	he	has	his	camera	to	hold	on	to!
So	Nandan,	 you	 can	 find	 something.	Anything	will	 do	 except	 a	 human	being;
these	are	 the	most	dangerous	animals	around.	Don't	get	caught	up.	Unless	you
are	certain	that	you	are	capable	of	getting	out	of	any	relatedness,	don't	enter	in.
Keep	 the	 door	 open;	 don't	 close	 it.	 And	 keep	 the	 future	 clean	 without	 any
promises	to	be	fulfilled.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
SINCE	 I	 STARTED	 MEDITATING	 FOUR	 YEARS	 AGO	 MY	 LIFE	 HAS
CHANGED
TREMENDOUSLY.	CHANGES	ARE	HAPPENING;	IT	IS	NOT	THAT	I	HAVE
AN
INSIGHT	AND	THEN	I	START	DOING	SOMETHING.	THIS	HAS	BEEN	A
TIME	OF
WAITING.	 THERE	 IS	 A	 FEELING	 THAT	 SOMETHING	 WANTS	 TO
EXPRESS
ITSELF,	 AND	 THAT	 I	 HAVE	 TO	 ALLOW	 IT.	 AM	 I	 WAITING	 FOR
SOMETHING
TO	GROW	STRONG	ENOUGH	OR	AM	I	JUST	LAZY?	OR	AM	I	WAITING
FOR
GODOT?
BELOVED	MASTER,	THANK	YOU	FOR	YOUR	BEING	HERE.
Amrit	Sagaram,	things	are	growing.
Since	you	started	meditating,	much	water	has	gone	down	the	Ganges,	and	much
has	changed	in	your	consciousness.	But	don't	ask	for	more;	let	existence	take	its
own	time.
Remember	Ta	Hui	--	the	more	you	hurry,	the	more	you	are	delayed.	You	cannot
do	anything	better	than	existence	is	doing	already.	Simply	leave	yourself	in	the
hands	of	existence.
This	 relaxedness	 people	 have	 misunderstood	 always	 as	 laziness.	 It	 is	 not
laziness.	It	looks	like	laziness	to	workaholics	who	cannot	sit	down,	who	have	to
do	 something	 because	 they	 are	 afraid	 the	moment	 they	 stop	 doing	 something,
they	will	have	to	know	themselves.	And	that	is	their	fear	--	who	knows	who	they
are?	It	is	better	to	avoid	the	encounter.
Relaxation	is	to	be	at	ease.	Whatever	is	happening	to	you	is	perfectly	good.
You	 say,	 "Since	 I	 started	 meditating	 four	 years	 ago	 my	 life	 has	 changed
tremendously.
Changes	 are	 happening,	 it	 is	 not	 that	 I	 have	 an	 insight	 and	 then	 I	 start	 doing
something.
This	 has	 been	 a	 time	 of	 waiting.	 There	 is	 a	 feeling	 that	 something	 wants	 to
express	itself,	and	that	I	have	to	allow	it."	That's	how	it	should	be.	Your	mind	is
worried	about	what	is	happening	because	what	is	happening	is	going	to	take	all
the	functions	of	mind	out	of	 its	control.	Hence,	 the	mind	is	creating	questions:
"Am	I	waiting	for	something	to	grow	strong	enough	or	am	I	just	lazy?	Or	am	I
waiting	for	Godot?"	You	are	not	waiting	for	any	Godot.
Meditation	 is	 simply	 a	waiting	 for	 the	unknown,	 for	 the	unpredictable,	 for	 the
incomprehensible.	And	the	more	the	waiting	is	pure,	the	more	grace	arises	out	of
it.	No	hurry,	no	desiring,	no	expectations,	just	waiting	and	millions	of	things	will
happen.	In	fact,	the	things	that	are	going	to	happen	to	a	meditator	are	so	vast	you
can	 not	 conceive	 of	 them,	 you	 can	 not	 have	 even	 dreamt	 of	 them;	 they	 are
beyond	the	capacity	of	the	mind	to	conceive.
You	just	wait	and	let	things	happen	to	you	--	not	according	to	you,	but	according
to	existence	itself.	Existence	has	not	 to	be	according	to	you;	you	have	to	be	 in
tune	with	existence,	according	to	existence.
This	 is	 the	 only	 difference	 between	 the	 non	meditator	 and	 the	meditator.	 The
non-meditator	always	wants	existence	according	to	his	ideas,	and	falls	naturally
into	miserable	states,	because	existence	 is	 too	big;	 it	cannot	 follow	your	 ideas,
your	 prayers,	 your	 expectations,	 your	 demands.	 The	 proverb	 is	 true	 that	 man
proposes	and	God	disposes	--	but	there	is	no	God	to	dispose.	In	fact,	in	the	very
proposal,	 you	 have	 disposed	 of	 it.	 You	 have	 created	 a	 failure	 for	 yourself
because	you	wanted	to	succeed.
So	there	is	nothing	to	expect,	nothing	to	desire.	Existence	is	so	abundant	that	if
you	 are	 simply	 waiting	 it	 starts	 showering	 flowers	 on	 you.	 A	 life	 of	 waiting,
without	any	expectations,	is	the	only	religious	life	I	know	of.
A	 Broadway	 bookie	 was	 given	 a	 parrot	 in	 lieu	 of	 cash	 payment.	 The	 bird's
vocabulary	 included	 choice	 phrases	 in	 English,	 French,	 Spanish	 and	 German.
Sensing	a	winner,	the	bookie	hauled	the	bird	off	to	his	favorite	bar.	"Speaks	four
languages,"	he	 said	 to	 the	bartender,	who	snorted	 in	disbelief.	 "Wanna	bet	 this
bird	can	speak	four	languages?"	the	bookie	challenged.
Annoyed,	the	bartender	finally	agreed	to	a	ten-dollar	wager.	The	bookie	turned
to	 the	parrot	 and	 said,	 "Parlez-vous	Francais?"	There	was	no	 response.	On	 the
street	the	bookie	glared	at	the	bird,	"You	fink!"	he	exclaimed,	"I've	got	ten	bucks
riding	on	you	and	you	clam	up	on	me.	I	oughta	strangle	you."
"Don't	be	a	jerk,"	the	parrot	replied.	"Just	think	of	the	odds	you'll	get	tomorrow."
Just	wait	 for	 tomorrow.	My	own	experience	 is,	 every	day	brings	 so	much	 that
when	 I	 think	 retrospectively	 I	 cannot	conceive	 that	 I	 could	have	expected	 it	 --
and	 it	 always	 brings	 in	 abundance!	 Existence	 is	 so	 compassionate	 and	 so
sharing,	but	only	to	those	who	don't	demand.	Desirelessness	is	the	foundation	of
all	great	happenings.
Sagaram,	just	wait	in	trust	and	everything	that	existence	has	will	be	revealed	to
you.
The	Lone	Ranger	 is	about	 to	be	hanged	by	 rustlers	who	caught	him	spying	on
their	camp.
His	only	hope	is	Tonto	who	managed	to	escape	and	go	for	help.	As	the	bandits
are	 putting	 the	 noose	 around	 the	 Lone	 Ranger's	 neck,	 he	 sees	 three	 horses
approaching	 at	 a	 gallop.	 Sure	 enough,	 as	 they	 get	 closer,	 he	 can	 see	 that	 it	 is
Tonto	on	the	first	horse,	but	he	can't	make	out	who	the	other	two	riders	are.
The	 Lone	 Ranger	 finally	 sees	 that	 Tonto	 is	 riding	 with	 two	 beautiful	 naked
women.	The	riders	burst	into	the	robbers'	camp	and	Tonto	rides	up	to	the	Lone
Ranger	saying,
"Kemosabe,	I	have	returned	with	the	people	you	asked	me	to	get."
"Tonto,	you	idiot,"	says	the	Lone	Ranger,	"I	told	you	to	go	get	a	posse!"
It	 is	 better,	 Sagaram,	 not	 to	 ask	 for	 anything;	 otherwise,	 there	 is	 always
frustration.
Don't	ask,	and	you	will	be	fulfilled.
Just	trust	silently	and	wait,	and	miracles	are	always	happening	to	the	meditators.
The	greatest	miracle	is	the	revelation	of	the	mystery	of	oneself.
You	are	perfectly	on	the	right	path.	Beware	of	your	mind	--	it	will	try	to	disturb
you,	 to	 distract	 you,	 to	 create	 doubts.	 Just	 put	 it	 aside.	 This	 great	 affair	 has
nothing	to	do	with	the	mind.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Your	god	is	as	rich	as	your	consciousness	22	August	1987	pm	in
Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708225
ShortTitle:
INVITA04
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
99
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
GEORGE	GURDJIEFF	HAS	SAID:	"YOU	ARE	IN	PRISON.	IF	YOU	WISH
TO	GET
OUT	OF	PRISON,	THE	FIRST	THING	YOU	MUST	DO	IS	REALIZE	THAT
YOU
ARE	IN	PRISON.	IF	YOU	THINK	YOU	ARE	FREE,	YOU	CAN'T	ESCAPE."
WHAT	ARE	THE	PRISONS	THAT	I	CALL	"HOME"?
Rama	Prem,	George	Gurdjieff	is	one	of	the	most	significant	masters	of	this	age.
He	is	unique	in	many	ways	--	nobody	has	said	things	in	the	contemporary	world
the	 way	 Gurdjieff	 has	 said	 them.	 He	 is	 almost	 like	 another	 Bodhidharma	 or
Chuang	Tzu,	apparently	absurd	but	in	reality	giving	great	indications	towards	the
liberation	of	human	consciousness.
You	 are	 asking	 about	 one	 of	 his	 significant	 statements.	 He	 often	 used	 to	 say,
"You	are	in	prison."	Sometimes	he	was	even	deeper	into	the	reality,	and	instead
of	saying,	"You	are	in	prison,"	he	would	say,	"You	are	the	prison."	That	is	more
true.
If	you	wish	to	get	out	of	prison	--	or	better	to	say,	if	you	don't	want	to	be	a	prison
--	 the	 first	 thing	you	must	do	 is	 realize	 that	you	are	 in	prison...	or	you	are	 the
prison.	This	is	something	to	be	always	remembered	as	one	of	the	first	principles
for	any	seeker	of	truth.
The	tendency	of	the	human	mind	is	to	deny	those	things	which	are	ugly,	to	hide
those	things	which	he	does	not	want	others	to	know	--	to	hide	in	such	a	way,	in
such	depths	of	the	unconscious	that	even	he	himself	becomes	unaware	of	them.
This	way	he	maintains	his	superficial	personality.
Gurdjieff	had	a	story	about	it...
There	was	a	magician	who	used	to	live	in	faraway	deep	forests,	and	he	had	many
sheep	because	that	was	his	only	food.	In	 those	deep	forests	he	was	keeping	all
those	 sheep	 just	 to	kill	 them	every	day,	one	by	one.	Naturally,	 the	 sheep	were
very	afraid	of	the	man,	and	they	used	to	run	into	the	forest	being	afraid	that	any
day	can	be	 their	day.	Their	 friends	are	gone,	 there	 is	no	 reliability...	 tomorrow
they	may	be	gone.	Out	of	fear	they	used	to	go	far	away,	deep	into	the	forest.	And
to	find	them	was	a	tedious	job	every	day.
Finally,	 the	magician	 did	 a	 trick.	He	 hypnotized	 all	 the	 sheep,	 and	 told	 every
sheep,	 "You	 are	 an	 exception;	 everybody	may	 be	 killed	 but	 you	 can	 never	 be
killed.	You	are	no	ordinary	sheep;	you	have	a	divine	privilege."	To	some	he	said,
"You	 are	 not	 sheep	 at	 all;	 you	 are	 lions,	 you	 are	 tigers,	 you	 are	wolves.	Only
sheep	 are	 killed.	 You	 need	 not	 hide	 yourself	 in	 the	 forest;	 that	 is	 very
embarrassing,	because	a	lion	hiding	himself	in	the	forest	in	the	fear	that	he	will
be	killed...	only	sheep	are	killed."	And	in	this	way,	he	managed	to	hypnotize	all
the	sheep	in	different	ways.
He	even	said	 to	a	 few	sheep,	 "You	are	men,	human	beings,	and	human	beings
don't	kill	each	other.	You	are	just	like	me.	Never	be	afraid	and	never	escape	out
of	fear."	Since	that	day,	no	sheep	escaped	and	hid	in	the	forest,	although	they	all
saw	 every	 day	 that	 one	 sheep	 was	 being	 killed,	 slaughtered.	 But	 naturally
everybody	thought,	That	must	be	a	sheep;	I	am	a	tiger,	a	lion,	a	human	being.	I
am	special	and	exceptional,	I	have	a	divine	privilege....	So	many	different	stories
he	put	in	their	minds.
Gurdjieff	says	that	unless	you	realize	the	first	thing	--	that	you	are	in	prison,	that
you	are	 the	prison	 --	 then	 there	 is	no	hope	for	 freedom.	 If	you	already	believe
that	you	are	free,	you	are	a	hypnotized	sheep	which	believes	himself	to	be	a	lion
--	exceptional,	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid	--	which	even	believes	he	is	a	human
being.	 He	 goes	 on	 seeing	 other	 sheep	 being	 killed,	 and	 still	 remains	 in	 a
hypnotized	state,	never	being	aware	of	his	actuality.	To	be	 free,	 if	you	already
know	that	you	are	free,	there	is	no	problem.
All	 the	 religions	 together,	 perhaps	 unintentionally,	 have	 created	 a	 tremendous
hypnotic	 state.	 People	 believe	 they	 have	 immortal	 souls.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 that
they	don't	have,	I	am	simply	saying	that	they	don't	know	what	they	are	believing.
And	because	they	believe	they	have	an	immortal	soul,	they	never	discover	that
they	already	have	it.	They	have	been	told,	"You	are	the	very	kingdom	of	God"...
and	it	is	so	comfortable	and	so	consoling	to	believe.	But	then	there	is	no	way	to
seek	and	search	and	find	whether	your	hypothetical	belief	has	any	truth	in	it,	or
is	just	a	hypnotic	trick	used	by	the	society	to	keep	you	unafraid	of	death,	to	keep
you	unafraid	of	disease,	old	age,	to	keep	you	unafraid	of	your	loneliness.
Your	God	may	be	just	a	psychological	hypnosis.	It	is	not	your	discovery.	That	is
true	--
that	much	 is	 absolutely	 true.	 It	 has	been	 implanted	 in	your	mind,	 and	because
you	go	on	believing	in	it,	your	belief	prevents	any	adventure	in	seeking	the	truth.
Ordinarily,	you	have	been	told	continually	that	unless	you	believe,	you	will	not
find.	But	the	truth	is	just	the	contrary.	Belief	is	a	barrier,	it	is	not	a	bridge.	Those
who	believe	never	 find,	 because	 they	never	 even	begin	 the	 search;	 there	 is	 no
need.
You	are	in	prison	and	you	think	you	are	free.
You	are	in	chains	but	you	think	they	are	ornaments.	You	are	a	slave	but	you	have
been	told	that	you	are	humble,	that	you	are	simple,	that	this	is	the	way	a	religious
person	should	be.	You	are	surrounded	by	many	hypnotic	strategies	developed	by
society	down	the	ages.	And	those	hypnotic	strategies	are	the	root	cause	of	your
ignorance,	of	your	misery,	of	your	unenlightened	state.
Hence	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 realize	 is	 that	 you	 are	 in	 prison.	 The	 moment	 you
recognize	 that	 you	 are	 in	 prison,	 you	 cannot	 tolerate	 the	 prison.	 Nobody	 can
tolerate	it;	it	goes	against	human	dignity.	You	will	start	finding	ways	to	get	out	of
it.	You	will	 start	 finding	people	who	have	already	got	out	of	 it.	You	may	start
seeking	and	searching	outside	help	beyond	 the	walls,	because	 there	are	people
beyond	the	walls	ready	with	every	kind	of	help.	But	they	are	absolutely	helpless
if	you	believe	that	you	are	living	in	absolute	freedom.
If	 you	 believe	 this	 imprisonment	 is	 your	 home,	 then	 of	 course	 it	 is	 absolute
nonsense	even	 to	 think	of	getting	rid	of	 it.	The	wall	 that	keeps	you	a	prisoner,
you	think	is	a	protection.	Then	there	is	no	question	of	making	a	hole	in	the	wall
and	getting	out,	or	finding	a	ladder,	or	taking	some	help	from	the	outside.	A	rope
can	be	thrown	from	the	outside,	a	ladder	can	be	arranged	from	the	outside,	but
this	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 the	 basic	 thing,	 that	 you	 are	 in	 prison,	 is	 recognized.
George	Gurdjieff	was	consistently	insisting,
"This	 is	 a	 basic	 realization.	 Without	 it,	 there	 is	 no	 progress	 towards
enlightenment.	If	you	think	you	are	free,	you	can't	escape."
"What	are	 the	prisons	 that	 I	call	 `home'?"	Rama	Prem,	all	 the	so-called	homes
are	nothing	but	prisons,	because	they	don't	give	you	freedom,	they	only	give	you
security,	safety,	and	in	place	they	take	away	your	very	being,	your	freedom,	your
joy,	your	dance.	But	certainly	they	give	you	security,	safety	--	and	naturally	you
have	to	pay	for	it.
The	price	that	one	has	to	pay	is	immensely	great	in	comparison	to	what	you	get.
You	 have	 to	 sell	 your	 very	 soul.	 But	 then	 what	 is	 the	 point	 of	 safety	 and
security?	You	were	searching	for	security	and	safety	for	your	being,	and	in	the
very	search	you	have	sold	your	being.	Now	you	are	secure	and	safe,	but	what	is
the	point?	For	whom	is	the	safety	and	security?	It	does	not	serve	you,	it	serves
those	 who	 have	 managed	 to	 convince	 you	 that	 "If	 you	 give	 your	 soul,	 your
being,	we	will	take	care	--	then	you	need	not	be	worried,	then	we	are	responsible
for	your	safety	and	security."
The	moment	you	give	up	your	responsibility,	you	give	up	everything.
Then	you	are	just	an	empty	shell,	without	any	meaning	and	without	any	essence.
Your	homes	are	nothing	but	beautiful	prisons	made	by	you,	decorated	by	you.
You	 think	 they	 are	 protecting	 you;	 they	 are	 destroying	 you.	 Certainly	 they
protect	you	from	the	rains	and	they	protect	you	from	the	winds	and	they	protect
you	from	the	sun,	but	for	these	trivia	they	destroy	you	completely.	You	lose	all
joy,	you	lose	all	freedom,	you	lose	all	sense	of	direction.
You	lose	the	very	purpose	you	are	here	for.
You	get	lost	in	your	own	home.
You	become	too	much	concerned	about	the	furniture	and	about	the	decorations,
and	 you	 forget	 yourself	 completely.	 This	 forgetfulness	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 deep
psychological	sleep.
Your	wife,	your	husband,	your	children	--	nobody	 is	yours.	All	are	man-made,
arbitrary	relationships	--	even	your	own	children	are	not	your	own.	They	come
through	you;	they	don't	belong	to	you.	You	belong	to	the	past;	they	belong	to	the
future.	 There	 is	 no	 connection,	 there	 is	 no	 relationship;	 hence,	 as	 man	 has
become	more	and	more	intelligent	there	has	come	a	great	generation	gap.
One	great	Russian	novelist,	Turgenev,	has	written	a	book	--	perhaps	his	best,	his
masterpiece	 --	 FATHERS	AND	 SONS.	 The	whole	 book	 is	 about	 the	 struggle
between	the	fathers	and	the	sons,	because	the	fathers	would	like	the	sons	just	to
be	their	replicas.
Naturally,	they	will	not	allow	the	sons	any	freedom.	Obedience	they	expect;	they
expect	their	sons	to	be	their	carbon	copies.
Even	 God	 the	 Father	 was	 expecting	 obedience	 and	 nothing	 else;	 what	 to	 say
about	 ordinary	 fathers?	He	was	 angry	 because	 of	 disobedience,	 and	 his	 anger
was	too	great	in	comparison	to	the	disobedience.	The	disobedience	was	created
by	him.	He	provoked	it;	he	created	the	curiosity	in	the	children,	Adam	and	Eve,
to	eat	from	certain	trees,	by	preventing	them	--	that	is	the	easiest	way.
I	 lived	 in	a	place;	 just	next	 to	me	was	a	very	beautiful	house,	with	a	very	big
garden	and	compound,	with	a	big	wall	surrounding	it.	And	in	India,	such	places
are	used	as	urinals.
A	good	wall...	and	immediately	you	feel	the	urge.	And	the	man	was	very	angry.
He	was	a	retired	general.	He	asked	me	what	to	do:	"It	is	strange,	because	there
are	so	many	houses,	but	people	go	on	urinating	around	my	house."
I	said,	"The	reason	is	that	you	have	not	put	up	any	notice."
He	said,	"What	kind	of	notice?"
I	 said	 to	 him,	 "Just	 put	 a	 few	notices	 around,	 all	 over	 the	wall:	Don't	Urinate
Here."
He	said,	"That's	a	good	idea!"
He	called	a	painter	and	wrote	all	over	 the	wall,	with	big	 letters:	Don't	Urinate
Here.	And	from	that	day,	anybody	who	passed	from	that	road	had	to	urinate!	It
was	 such	 an	 invitation;	 otherwise,	 one	 might	 not	 have	 been	 reminded.	 But,
"Don't	Urinate"...	and	suddenly	you	feel	that	this	is	the	right	place.	And	you	can
see	so	many	marks	where	people	have	already	urinated.	And	the	boards	on	the
wall	 certainly	 show	 that	 the	 owner	 knows	 that	 people	 urinate	 here;	 otherwise,
what	is	the	need	of	putting	such	boards?
In	one	of	the	capital	cities	of	India,	Bhopal,	I	was	surprised	to	know	that	people
have	 to	 put	 small	 boards	 even	 in	 their	 sitting	 rooms	 --	 "Don't	 Spit	 Here"	 --
because	that	is	the	only	city	in	India	where	people	spit	anywhere.	Even	in	your
sitting	 room,	 it	 is	 common	 practice.	 And	 those	 boards	 don't	 prevent	 anybody
from	doing	 it.	When	 I	 saw	 this	 I	 told	 the	 doctor	with	whom	 I	was	 staying,	 "I
have	never	seen	anywhere	 in	 India	such	 instructions.	And	here	 in	your	city,	 in
every	house...	How	did	it	start?"
He	said,	"I	don't	know."
I	 said,	 "Somebody	 must	 have	 first	 put	 up	 a	 board;	 spitting	 must	 have	 come
afterwards."	It	is	a	temptation.
In	 the	Garden	of	Eden,	so	many	 trees...	and	God	 indicated	 to	a	particular	 tree:
"This	is	the	tree	of	knowledge.	Never	eat	the	fruit	from	it."	There	was	no	need	of
any	serpent	to	convince	Eve,	God	convinced	her	himself;	he	is	the	serpent.	And
then	the	punishment	for	it	is	unbelievable.	Even	today	we	are	suffering	because
Adam	and	Eve	disobeyed!
Religions	 have	 created	 all	 kinds	 of	 crimes	 in	 the	 mind	 of	 man,	 just	 by
prohibiting	them.
They	 have	 also	 created	 ideas	 which	 prevent	 man	 from	 any	 search.	 They	 say,
"Believe"	--
and	belief	is	cheap.	You	don't	have	to	do	anything.	Gurdjieff	had	to	go	to	such
extents	that	he	started	saying	to	people,	"You	don't	have	souls.	It	is	a	wrong	idea,
implanted	within	you	by	religions,	that	everybody	has	a	soul."
He	had	to	say	such	a	thing	just	to	wake	you	up	to	search	whether	it	is	true	or	not;
otherwise,	 everybody	 was	 perfectly	 asleep.	 What	 is	 the	 need	 to	 search?	 You
already	have	it;	God	is	within	you!	So	do	other	things	which,	if	you	don't	do,	you
will	not	get	--
become	 a	 president,	 prime	 minister,	 become	 the	 richest	 man	 in	 the	 world,
conquer	the	world	--	because	these	things	will	not	happen	on	their	own.	As	far	as
God	is	concerned	you	already	have	him;	he	is	within	you,	you	don't	have	to	go
anywhere.	Any	day,	any	rainy	day	when	you	can't	go	anywhere	to	conquer	 the
world,	 and	 you	 don't	 have	 anything	 else	 to	 do	 --	 to	 correct	 the	mechanism	 of
your	 car,	 or	 to	 open	your	wall	 clock,	 or	 to	 open	your	 radio	 or	 television	 even
though	they	are	functioning	perfectly	well,	but	you	don't	have	anything	else	 to
do....	Any	 day,	when	 you	 don't	 have	 anything	 to	 do,	 you	 can	 find	God.	He	 is
within	you,	in	your	pocket.
Gurdjieff	is	perhaps	the	only	man	in	the	whole	of	history	who	insisted	against	all
religions	that	you	don't	have	a	soul	--	that	a	soul	has	to	be	created,	then	you	have
it.	You	are	not	born	with	it,	you	are	born	only	with	the	possibility.	If	you	make	a
great	 effort,	 perhaps	 you	may	 achieve	 it.	Otherwise	most	 people	 are	 born	 and
die;	there	is	no	soul	that	survives.
He	was	 telling	a	compassionate	 lie.	He	was	not	 right,	but	 I	 cannot	 say	 that	he
was	telling	the	lie	for	any	other	reason	than	compassion.	It	is	true	you	are	born
with	the	soul,	but	it	has	become	such	an	accepted	fact	that	you	don't	even	look
within	yourself.	Somebody	needs	 to	 shatter	your	 idea	 that	you	are	born	with	a
soul,	 to	tell	you	that	inside	you	are	just	empty,	hollow.	Perhaps	this	may	shake
you	up,	wake	you	up.	Perhaps	this	may	give	you	the	idea	to	look	inside	at	least
one	time,	whether	there	is	a	soul	or	you	have	been	deceived.
And	George	 Gurdjieff	 helped	more	 people	 in	 this	 century	 than	 anybody	 else,
because	he	created	a	great	longing:
"Don't	 die	 before	 you	 have	 created	 a	 soul;	 otherwise	 nothing	will	 survive	 the
death.
Crystallize	your	being	so	that	death	cannot	destroy	it.	But	you	are	not	born	with
it,	you	have	to	create	it."
The	idea	of	all	the	religions,	although	true,	has	not	been	helpful;	it	has	become	a
hindrance.	Gurdjieff's	 compassion	 is	 great.	All	 the	 religions	were	 against	 him,
obviously,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 one	 point	 they	 all	 agree	 on	 --	 that	 everybody	 is
born	with	a	soul.	But	Gurdjieff's	point	is	more	psychological,	and	more	effective
in	 creating	 liberation.	He	 says	 you	 are	 just	 empty,	 and	you	will	 remain	 empty
unless	you	make	the	effort,	with	a	determined	will,	to	create	a	center	within	you.
There	is	possibility,	potential,	but	you	have	to	make	it	an	actuality.
His	insight	was	great.
And	since	Gurdjieff,	people	have	forgotten	it	completely.	He	was	alive	just	thirty
years	 ago	 and	 just	 within	 thirty	 years	 people	 have	 forgotten	 the	 great	 teacher
who	was	 compassionate	 enough	even	 to	 lie,	 just	 to	make	you	 shocked;	 just	 to
create	 an	 opening	 in	 you	 so	 that	 you	 can	 start	 searching	whether	what	 all	 the
religions	have	been	saying	has	any	truth	in	it	or	not.
The	first	thing	he	says	is	to	realize	you	are	in	prison.	The	first	thing	that	can	also
be	said	 is,	you	have	 to	 realize	 that	you	are	not	yet.	You	have	 to	be.	You	are	a
seed,	but	you	have	to	find	the	right	soil,	and	nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you.	If	you
go	on	 depending	 on	 priests	 and	 your	 so-called	 saints,	 you	will	miss	 this	 great
opportunity	that	life	has	given	to	you.
And	one	does	not	know	whether	a	second	chance	is	being	given	or	not.	It	has	to
be	made	emphatically	clear	to	you	that	there	is	a	possibility	--	once	missed,	you
have	missed	it	forever.
Gurdjieff	created	a	great	turmoil	in	a	few	intelligent	people,	and	he	put	them	to
great	work	in	finding	themselves.	I	don't	agree	with	George	Gurdjieff	as	far	as
his	 methods	 are	 concerned,	 but	 as	 far	 as	 this	 statement	 is	 concerned	 I	 agree
totally.	It	is	simply	a	psychological	fact.
There	are	people	who	believe	 they	are	 intelligent.	 In	fact,	 it	 is	very	difficult	 to
find	somebody	who	believes	he	is	unintelligent.	If	you	can	find	somebody	who
believes	he	is	unintelligent,	there	is	a	possibility	for	him	to	be	intelligent.	But	for
all	 those	 who	 already	 believe	 they	 are	 intelligent,	 you	 can't	 help	 them.	 And
certainly	 this	 whole	 humanity	 is	 not	 intelligent.	 Their	 actions	 show	 it,	 their
behavior	 shows	 it,	 their	 misery	 shows	 it	 --	 it	 shows	 nothing	 but	 their
retardedness.
But	their	belief	is	that	they	are	geniuses	--	life	is	just	not	giving	them	the	right
opportunities	to	show	their	talents;	otherwise,	they	could	have	been	Picasso,	or
Sartre,	 or	 Bertrand	 Russell,	 or	 Martin	 Buber;	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 It	 is	 just
because	life	is	preventing	them;	otherwise,	they	have	everything.	It	is	not	so.
Now	 education	 is	 universal,	 particularly	 in	 advanced	 countries,	 but	 even
universal	 education	 does	 not	 create	 universal	 geniuses.	Everybody	 is	 educated
but	even	that	does	not	give	you	the	same	talent.	Man	is	living	in	a	kind	of	half-
awake	and	half-asleep	state,	and	 it	 is	very	easy	 to	believe	 that	you	are	great	 --
great	 in	 intelligence,	 great	 in	 beauty,	 great	 in	 everything	 --	 rather	 than	 finding
greatness,	creating	greatness,	because	that	will	require	effort,	tremendous	effort.
And	 enlightenment	 is	 the	 ultimate	 intelligence.	 If	 you	 already	 believe	 you	 are
intelligent,	you	have	stopped	yourself	from	growing.
Just	watch	exactly	where	you	are.
Be	very	impartial	about	judging	yourself.
See	exactly,	even	if	it	hurts,	that	you	are	a	slave	--	of	some	political	ideology,	of
some	 religious	 theology,	 of	 some	 racial	 stupidity.	 Just	 watch	 and	 be	 very
impartial	 and	 objective	 about	 yourself,	 and	 you	will	 find	what	Gurdjieff	 calls
your	prisons.	And	once	you	recognize	your	prisons,	it	is	not	difficult	to	get	out,
because	they	are	your	own	creations.
Bernstein	died	and	went	to	hell.	The	receptionist	asked,	"Where	do	you	want	to
go?"
"Do	I	have	a	choice?"	asked	the	surprised	Bernstein.
"Certainly!	This	anteroom	is	surrounded	by	closed	doors.	Just	listen	at	each	one
and	decide	which	you	want	to	enter."
Bernstein	listened	at	the	first	door	and	heard	horrible	shrieks	of	agony.	He	went
to	the	second,	then	the	third	--	always	hearing	screams,	cries,	and	yells.	Finally,
at	the	seventh	door,	he	heard	nothing	but	gentle	murmuring.
He	said	quickly,	"I'll	take	this	one."
The	door	was	flung	open	and	he	was	propelled	 inside.	He	found	himself	up	 to
his	lower	lip	in	a	vast	sea	of	shit.	With	him	were	millions	of	others,	standing	on
tiptoe,	muttering,
"Don't	make	waves!	Don't	make	waves!"
Whatever	you	have	made	your	life	is	your	own	choice.	Even	in	hell	you	have	a
choice	--
everywhere	 you	 have	 a	 choice.	 Your	 life	 is	 your	 own	 creation.	 Once	 you
recognize	it,	then	every	change	is	possible.
Churchill's	 commentary	on	man	was:	 "Man	will	occasionally	 stumble	over	 the
truth,	but	most	of	 the	 time	he	will	pick	himself	up	and	continue	on."	Man	 is	a
very	strange	animal,	strangest	of	all	the	animals	you	see.	He	goes	on	believing	in
things	which	are	not,	he	goes	on	believing	in	things	which	he	has	not.	He	never
makes	any	effort,	even	in	finding	one	very	fundamental	 thing:	who	he	is,	from
where	he	comes,	and	what	is	his	destiny,	where	he	is	going.
People	discuss	all	kinds	of	things,	and	people	read	about	all	kinds	of	things,	but
generally	they	never	bother	about	themselves.	It	seems	they	take	themselves	for
granted,	and	that's	what	Gurdjieff	wants	to	stop:	Don't	take	yourself	for	granted.
Look	 inside,	 search	 for	 who	 you	 are,	 and	 whether	 you	 are	 or	 if	 there	 is	 just
emptiness	and	something	has	to	be	done	to	bring	the	seed	to	sprout,	to	take	care
of	the	seed	so	that	one	day	it	can	blossom.
Sinking	uneasily	 into	 the	depths	of	 the	psychiatrist's	 couch,	 the	patient	 sighed,
"Doctor,	I	have	a	problem."	He	loosened	his	collar	and	continued,	"I've	got	one
son	 in	Harvard	 and	 another	 at	Yale.	 I've	 just	 gifted	 them	with	 twin	Ferraris.	 I
have	a	townhouse	on	upper	Fifth	Avenue,	and	a	summer	home	at	East	Hampton,
and	a	sprawling	ranch	in	Venezuela."
"Well,"	smiled	the	psychiatrist,	obviously	impressed,	"either	I	missed	something
or	you	really	don't	have	a	problem."
"Doc,"	the	harried	chap	croaked,	"I	only	make	seventy-five	dollars	a	week."
Naturally	you	will	have	problems!	You	make	 seventy-five	dollars	 a	week,	 and
you	 imagine	 all	 these	 things:	 two	Ferraris,	 two	 sons	 --	 one	 in	Harvard,	 one	 in
Yale	--	a	townhouse,	a	house	in	the	hills,	a	big	ranch	in	Venezuela,	and	seventy-
five	dollars	a	week!	People	create	their	problems.	People	are	utterly	poor	in	their
consciousness,	and	go	on	believing	that	 the	kingdom	of	God	is	within.	In	your
poor	consciousness,	you	can	have	only	a	very	poor	God	--	seventy-five	dollars	a
week.	Your	God	is	as	rich	as	your	consciousness	is,	because	the	God	is	another
name	for	your	consciousness.
Question	2
MY	BELOVED	MASTER,
THANK	YOU	FOR	YOUR	IMMENSE	LOVE	AND	COMPASSION	FOR	ME!
OSHO,	 HOW	 TO	 BE	 AWARE,	 ESPECIALLY	 DURING	 ANGER?	 THIS
FEELING	IS	SO
STRONG	 IT	 COMES	 ALWAYS	 LIKE	 THOUSANDS	 OF	 WILD	 HORSES
RUNNING.
I	AM	REALLY	TIRED	OF	IT!	CAN	YOU	HELP	ME,	AGAIN?
Prem	Ila,	you	have	the	simplest	problem	--	you	are	making	too	much	out	of	it.
"Like	thousands	of	wild	horses	running"	--	that	much	anger	would	have	burned
you!	From	where	do	you	bring	thousands	of	wild	horses?
I	have	heard	that	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	having	an	interview	to	be	employed	on	a
ship,	 and	 there	 were	 three	 officials	 interviewing.	 One	 officer	 said,	 "A	 great
cyclone,	tidal	waves,	and	the	ship	is	almost	sinking...	what	will	you	do?"
Mulla	said,	"No	problem.	I	will	do	what	is	technically	right	--	I	will	stop	the	ship
and	lower	down	a	heavy	support."
The	other	 officer	 said,	 "But	 another	 tidal	wave	 is	 coming,	 and	 the	 ship	 is	 just
going	to	sink.	What	are	you	going	to	do?"
Mulla	said,	"The	same	--	 I	will	 lower	down	another	heavy	support;	every	ship
carries	them."
The	third	officer	said,	"But	another	tidal	wave..."
And	Mulla	said,	"You	are	unnecessarily	wasting	my	time.	I	will	do	the	same	--
lower	down	a	heavy	support	to	make	the	ship	stable	against	the	tidal	wave."
The	first	official	asked,	"From	where	are	you	getting	all	these	heavy	supports?"
Mulla	said,	"It	is	strange.	From	where	are	you	getting	these	tidal	waves?	--	from
the	same	source!	If	you	can	imagine,	why	can't	I	imagine?	You	go	on	bringing	as
many	 tidal	waves	 as	 you	want,	 and	 I	will	 go	on	 lowering	heavier	 and	heavier
supports.	Anyway,	the	ship	has	to	be	saved.	It	is	not	a	question	from	WHERE...
you	know	from	where	you	are	bringing	those	tidal	waves."
Prem	Ila,	anger	is	a	very	small	thing.	If	you	can	just	wait	and	watch,	you	will	not
find
"thousands	 of	wild	 horses."	 If	 you	 can	 find	 even	 a	 small	 donkey,	 that	will	 be
enough!	Just	watch	it	and	it	will	go,	slowly.	It	will	enter	from	this	side	and	will
go	out	from	the	other	side.	You	just	have	to	keep	a	little	patience	not	to	ride	on	it.
Anger,	jealousy,	envy,	greed,	competitiveness...	all	our	problems	are	very	small,
but	 our	 ego	magnifies	 them,	makes	 them	 as	 big	 as	 it	 can.	 The	 ego	 cannot	 do
otherwise;	its	anger	has	also	to	be	great.	By	its	great	anger,	and	great	misery,	and
great	greed,	and	great	ambition	it	becomes	great.
But	you	are	not	the	ego,	you	are	only	a	watcher.	Just	stand	by	the	side	and	let	all
the	 thousands	 of	 horses	 pass	 --	 let	 us	 see	 how	 long	 it	 takes	 for	 them	 to	 pass.
There	is	no	need	to	be	worried.	As	they	come	--	they	are	wild	--	they	will	go.	But
we	don't	miss	even	a	small	donkey;	we	immediately	jump	on	it!	You	don't	need
thousands	of	wild	horses.	Just	a	small	thing,	and	you	are	full	of	anger	and	fire.
You	will	laugh	about	it	later	on,	at	how	stupid	you	were.
If	you	can	watch,	without	getting	involved,	as	if	it	is	something	on	the	screen	of
a	movie	house	or	of	a	TV	screen...	something	is	passing;	watch	it.	You	are	not
supposed	 to	do	anything	 to	prevent	 it,	 to	 repress	 it,	 to	destroy	 it,	 to	pull	 out	 a
sword	and	kill	it,	because	from	where	will	you	get	the	sword?	--	from	the	same
source	as	the	anger	is	coming.	It	is	all	imagination.
Just	watch,	and	don't	do	anything	 --	 for	or	against.	And	you	will	be	surprised:
that	 which	 was	 looking	 very	 big,	 becomes	 very	 small.	 But	 our	 habit	 is	 to
exaggerate.
A	 small	 boy	comes	home	 running,	 and	 tells	his	mother	 --	 he	 is	not	more	 than
three	years	old	--	"Mum,	a	great	 lion,	 roaring	 loudly,	was	running	after	me	for
miles!	But	somehow	I	managed	to	escape.	Many	times	he	came	very	close.	He
was	just	about	to	attack	me	when	I	started	running	faster."
The	mother	looked	at	the	boy	and	said,	"Tommy,	I	have	told	you	a	million	times
not	 to	 exaggerate!	 How	 can	 you	 find	 a	 lion	 in	 the	 city...	 and	 you	 have	 been
running	for	miles?
And	where	is	the	lion?"
The	boy	looked	outside	the	door.	He	said,	"He	is	standing	there.	But,	to	tell	you
the	truth,	it	is	just	a	small	dog	--	very	small!	But	when	it	was	running	after	me,	it
appeared....	 You	 tell	 me	 not	 to	 exaggerate,	 and	 right	 now	 you	 have	 been
exaggerating	that	you	have	told	me	millions	of	times."
Our	minds	are	very	exaggerating.	You	have	small	problems,	and	if	you	can	stop
exaggerating	and	 just	 see,	 then	by	 the	door	 a	poor	 small	dog	 is	 standing.	And
there	is	no	need	to	run	miles;	your	life	is	not	in	danger.
When	anger	comes	to	you,	Ila,	 it	 is	not	going	to	kill	you.	It	has	been	with	you
many	 times	before,	 and	you	have	 survived	perfectly	well.	 It	 is	 the	 same	anger
that	 you	 have	 been	 through	 before.	 Just	 do	 one	 thing	 new	 --	which	 you	 have
never	done;	every	time	you	get	involved	with	it,	fighting.	This	time	just	watch,
as	if	it	does	not	belong	to	you,	as	if	it	is	somebody	else's	anger.	And	you	are	in
for	a	great	surprise:	it	will	disappear	within	seconds.	And	when	anger	disappears
without	any	struggle,	it	leaves	behind	it	a	tremendously	beautiful	and	silent	and
loving	state.
The	 same	 energy	 that	 could	 have	 become	 a	 fight	with	 the	 anger	 is	 left	within
you.	Pure	energy	is	delight	--	I	am	quoting	William	Blake:	"Energy	is	delight"	--
just	 energy,	 without	 any	 name,	 without	 any	 adjective....	 But	 you	 never	 allow
energy	 to	be	pure.	Either	 it	 is	 anger,	 or	 hate,	 or	 love,	 or	 greed,	 or	 desire.	 It	 is
always	involved	in	something;	you	never	allow	it	in	its	purity.
Every	time	anything	arises	in	you,	is	a	great	chance	to	experience	pure	energy.
Just	watch,	and	the	donkey	will	go.	It	may	raise	a	little	dust,	but	that	dust	also
settles	on	its	own;	you	don't	have	to	settle	it.	You	simply	wait.	Don't	move	from
waiting	 and	 watching,	 and	 soon	 you	 will	 find	 yourself	 surrounded	 by	 a	 pure
energy	which	has	not	been	used	in	fighting,	in	repressing,	or	in	being	angry.
And	energy	 is	certainly	delight.	Once	you	know	the	secret	of	delight,	you	will
enjoy	every	emotion;	and	every	emotion	arising	in	you	is	a	great	opportunity.
Just	watch,	and	bring	a	shower	of	delight	on	your	being.	Slowly,	slowly	all	these
emotions	 will	 disappear;	 they	 will	 not	 come	 any	 more	 --	 they	 don't	 come
uninvited.
Watchfulness,	 or	 alertness,	 or	 awareness,	 or	 consciousness,	 are	 all	 different
names	of	the	same	phenomenon:	witnessing.	That	is	the	key	word.
Miss	Johnson,	 the	English	teacher	said,	"Today	we	are	going	to	do	definitions.
When	you	define	something,	you	say	what	 it	 is.	Now,	Wesley,	will	you	define
ùnaware'?"
Wesley	replies	"It's	the	last	thing	I	take	off	at	night!"
We	are	all	living	in	such	a	situation!	The	poor	boy	must	have	heard	ùnderwear'.
Nobody	is	conscious;	nobody	is	listening	to	what	is	being	said....
A	 young	 child	 was	 asked	 by	 the	 teacher,	 "What	 was	 the	 Polack	 pope's	 first
miracle?"
A	little	boy	said,	"He	made	a	lame	man	blind."
The	 Communist	 Party	 in	 Russia	 had	 a	 membership	 drive.	 The	 rules	 were	 as
follows:	Any	communist	who	could	recruit	a	new	member	would	no	longer	have
to	pay	dues.	 If	 he	got	 two	members	he	would	be	permitted	 to	 leave	 the	party.
And	if	he	recruited	three	members,	he	would	receive	a	certificate	stating	that	he
had	never	belonged	to	the	party	in	the	first	place.
It	 is	 such	 a	 strange	 world.	 If	 you	 are	 aware,	 then	 everywhere	 miracles	 are
happening.	But	you	don't	see	miracles	because	rarely	are	you	aware,	very	rarely.
Most	of	the	time	you	keep	your	eyes	open;	most	of	the	time	you	don't	snore.	But
that	does	not	mean	that	you	are	awake.	It	simply	means	that	you	are	pretending
to	be	awake.	But	deep	inside	are	so	many	thoughts,	so	much	confusion,	so	many
wild	horses,	that	how	can	you	see	anything?
How	can	you	hear	anything?	So	although	your	eyes	are	open,	they	don't	see.	And
although	your	ears	are	open,	they	don't	hear.
It	is	a	strange	phenomenon	that	God	made	eyes	in	a	different	way	from	ears.	You
cannot	close	your	ears;	you	can	close	your	eyes.	You	have	eyelids	 to	close,	 to
open,	 but	 what	 about	 your	 ears?	 God	 never	 bothered	 to	 give	 little	 earlids,
because	he	knew	you	are	so	much	 involved	 in	 the	mind,	you	don't	need	 them.
Your	 ears	 are	 always	deaf;	 you	don't	 hear,	 or	you	hear	only	what	you	want	 to
hear.
Bedfellows	Rule:	The	one	who	snores	will	fall	asleep	first.	Naturally!
I	have	heard...
A	bishop	was	very	angry	at	a	man	who	was	snoring	 loudly.	He	caught	hold	of
him	later	on	and	told	him,	"It	 is	not	right!	While	I	was	giving	the	sermon,	you
were	snoring."
The	man	said,	"I	am	sorry.	Next	time	I	will	take	care."
The	 bishop	 said,	 "You	 have	 to	 take	 care,	 because	 there	were	 so	many	 people
asleep	and	you	were	disturbing	 them	all.	 I	am	not	worried	about	my	sermon,	I
am	worried	about	my	congregation	which	was	fast	asleep.	And	you	were	snoring
so	fast,	you	might	have	woken	people	up.	They	were	having	a	morning	nap	after
a	tiring	night,	and	I	don't	want	to	disturb	anybody.	It	is	also	a	great	help	to	me,
because	 I	 go	 on	 repeating	 the	 same	 sermon	 every	 Sunday.	Otherwise	 I	would
have	 to	 prepare	 again	 and	 again,	 and	 it	 is	 unnecessarily	 tedious.	 I	 have	 been
using	 the	 same	sermon	 for	years	 --	nobody	objects,	because	nobody	has	heard
it."
You	go	into	any	church	and	you	will	find	people	fast	asleep;	it	is	a	place	to	sleep,
to	have	a	little	rest	from	the	worldly	affairs,	from	the	world	and	its	tensions.	Man
is	twenty-four	hours	asleep	as	far	as	spirituality	is	concerned.	And	in	your	sleep
you	see	anger	and	you	see	greed,	and	they	become	so	magnified,	so	big	that	you
get	caught	into	their	net	very	easily.
A	man	who	has	a	simple	art	of	watchfulness	has	a	golden	key.	Then	it	does	not
matter	whether	it	is	anger,	or	greed,	or	sensuality,	or	lust,	or	infatuation.	It	may
be	 any	 kind	 of	 disease,	 it	 doesn't	matter	 --	 the	 same	medicine	 functions.	 Just
watch,	 and	 you	 will	 be	 free	 of	 it.	 And	 watching,	 slowly,	 slowly	 as	 the	 mind
becomes	more	and	more	 contentless,	 one	day	mind	 itself	disappears.	 It	 cannot
remain	without	 anger,	without	 fear,	without	 love,	without	 hate	 --	 all	 these	 are
absolute	necessities	for	mind	to	exist.
By	watching,	you	are	not	only	getting	rid	of	anger,	you	are	getting	rid	of	part	of
the	mind.
And	slowly,	slowly...	one	day	you	are	suddenly	awake	--	there	is	no	mind	at	all.
You	are	just	a	watcher,	a	watcher	on	the	hills.	That	is	the	most	beautiful	moment,
the	most	glorious	dawn.	Only	from	then	your	real	life	begins.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	To	hell	with	enlightenment!
23	August	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708230
ShortTitle:
INVITA05
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
99
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	AFRAID	--	AFRAID	OF	ENLIGHTENMENT.	WHAT	IS	BEYOND
ENLIGHTENMENT?	 WHAT	 TO	 DO	 AFTER	 THE	 GOAL	 OF	 LIVING	 IS
REACHED?
WHAT	DO	YOU	AIM	FOR?	IT	IS	LIKE	FALLING	INTO	A	BOTTOMLESS
PIT.
YOU	FALL	--	NO	BOTTOM,	NO	GOAL.	THEN	WHAT	DO	YOU	AIM	FOR?
WHAT
IS	BEYOND	THE	GOAL?
Cliff	--	obviously	it	is	not	my	pilot	Cliff,	because	the	question	does	not	show	the
guts	of	a	pilot	--	but	whoever	you	are	you	have	raised	very	significant	questions.
I	am	saying	questions	because	there	are	many.	You	have	condensed	them	into	a
very	small	question.
First	you	are	saying,	"I	am	afraid,	afraid	of	enlightenment."	This	can	be	taken	as
a	general	state	of	human	mind;	otherwise	there	is	no	reason	why	so	few	people
have	 ever	 become	enlightened.	And	 those	who	have	become	enlightened	have
been	 shouting	 for	 centuries	 of	 its	 joy,	 its	 bliss;	 its	 ultimate	 truth,	 beauty;	 its
eternity	and	its	going	beyond	death.	But	the	larger	part	of	humanity	has	not	paid
any	 attention	 to	 it,	 naturally.	 Your	 question	 comes	 from	 the	 deepest	 core	 of
humanity.
It	 is	 not	 only	 your	 question,	 everybody	 is	 afraid	 of	 enlightenment.	 And	 the
reason	 is	 clear	why	 one	 is	 afraid:	 the	 fear	 is	 of	 losing	 yourself.	 For	 the	 same
reason	people	are	afraid	of	love;	for	the	same	reason	people	are	afraid	of	trust;
for	the	same	reason	they	remain	enclosed	in	all	kinds	of	fears,	miseries,	anxieties
and	anguish,	because	at	 least	 these	feel	familiar.	And	one	thing	is	certain,	 they
don't	ask	you	to	be	lost.	The	more	painful	your	life	is,	the	more	you	are.
Perhaps	 deep	 down	 you	 desire	 pain,	 you	 desire	 misery,	 you	 desire	 anguish,
because	 that	 keeps	 you	 clearly	 defined.	You	 are	 afraid	 of	 the	 same	 things	 for
which	you	also	have	a	longing.	On	the	one	hand,	there	is	a	longing	to	go	beyond
all	 fears,	 beyond	 all	 anxieties,	 beyond	 all	 suffering.	But	 the	 problem	becomes
complex,	 because	 being	beyond	 suffering	you	 are	 also	 beyond	yourself	 --	 you
are	the	suffering.	You	are	the	prison,	that's	why	you	are	afraid	to	get	out	of	it.	On
the	contrary,	you	try	to	console	yourself	in	every	way,	that
"This	is	not	a	prison,	this	is	my	home."
So	you	are	living	in	a	dilemma:	you	want	to	go	into	the	open	sky	and	open	your
wings	 and	 fly	 across	 the	 sun.	 But	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 you	 are	 afraid	 you	may
never	be	able	 to	find	the	way	back	to	your	cozy,	familiar	space.	Although	it	 is
painful	you	have	become	accustomed	to	it;	although	there	is	suffering	it	 is	like
an	 old	 friend.	 The	 beyond	 invites	 you,	 calls	 you	 to	 take	 courage.	 But	 it	 also
creates	 a	 trembling	 within	 you,	 because	 going	 out	 of	 the	 cozy	 circle	 of	 your
misery	and	your	hell,	you	know	for	certain	--	you	may	not	be	very	conscious	of
it	--	that	your	so-called	personality	will	melt	away	into	the	vast	ocean,	just	like
an	ice	block.
The	fear	is,	is	there	something	beyond	your	personality?	You	are	not	aware	of	it,
you	have	never	come	across	it	--	you	have	never	met	yourself.	You	know	only
the	superficial	that	has	been	told	to	you.	You	don't	know	on	your	own	authority
your	 essential,	 your	 inner.	And	 of	 course	 nobody	 else	 can	 say	 anything	 about
your	inner.	It	is	not	available	for	observation;	it	is	not	available	to	be	an	object.
Science	 cannot	 find	 it.	 Logic	 feels	 absolutely	 inadequate.	 Reason	 has	 not	 the
wings	to	fly	to	the	inner.
Karl	Marx	used	to	say,	"I	will	believe	in	God	only	if	he	is	caught	in	a	test	tube
and	 scientists	 unanimously	 declare	 that	 this	 is	 God	 --	 after	 dissection	 and
autopsy	to	find	whether	he	is	really	divine."	Karl	Marx	was	representative	of	you
all,	of	the	wider	humanity;	he	is	saying,	"How	can	I	believe	in	God?	Science	has
no	proof	for	it."	And	science	has	no	proof	either	for	your	self.	It	can	dissect	you,
it	can	cut	you	into	as	many	parts	as	possible,	but	it	will	not	find	you;	it	will	find
only	a	dead	corpse.
Only	very	recently	have	geniuses	become	aware	that	what	we	have	been	doing
in	physiology,	in	biology,	in	medical	sciences,	is	not	right.	The	moment	you	take
blood	out	of	my	body	and	then	you	test	it,	it	is	not	the	same	blood	that	is	flowing
in	my	body.	In	my	body	it	is	alive,	it	has	a	life	of	its	own;	outside	my	body	it	is	a
dead	 thing.	And	 you	 cannot	 conclude	 from	 the	 analysis	 of	 the	 dead	 about	 the
living.	You	can	take	anything	out	of	the	human	body,	but	the	moment	you	take	it
out,	you	have	taken	it	out	as	a	dead	thing.
In	the	human	body	it	was	an	organic,	living,	breathing,	alive	part.
A	 few	 very	 sensitive	 medical	 surgeons	 have	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 fact	 that
something	has	 to	be	done	about	 it,	because	 in	 the	medical	colleges	 they	go	on
studying	the	corpses,	skeletons,	to	decide	about	living	human	beings	--	there	is
such	 a	 great	 logical	 fallacy.	 But	 they	 are	 also	 feeling	 impotent	 --	 how	 to
approach	 life?	 All	 that	 they	 know	 is	 --	 their	 whole	 technology,	 their	 whole
methodology	is	to	know	--	the	object,	and	you	are	not	the	object.	Hence,	science
is	never	going	to	accept	your	living	being	--	it	is	beyond	its	limits.
Logic	cannot	accept,	reason	cannot	accept,	philosophy	cannot	accept.
And	your	fear,	on	top	of	it	all,	is	that	nobody	is	there	to	give	you	a	certainty	that
beyond	your	superficial	personality	there	is	something	more.	You	will	disappear
as	you	are,	and	you	will	appear	in	your	authentic	reality.	This	is	the	fear.	People
are	afraid	of	coming	closer	to	each	other,	even	in	love;	they	keep	each	other	at
arm's	length.	They	want	to	come	closer,	but	a	fear...	to	be	too	close,	you	can	be
lost.
With	 love,	 the	problem	 is	not	 so	great	 --	but	going	beyond	your	ordinary	 self,
your	accepted	face	that	you	have	seen	in	the	mirror,	that	others	have	told	you	is
very	beautiful,	or	 is	ugly...	All	your	knowledge	about	yourself	 is	dependent	on
others'	opinions.
I	used	to	have	a	very	beautiful	professor,	Professor	S.S.	Roy.	Now	he	is	retired
from	the	Allahabad	University	as	head	of	the	philosophy	department.	In	fact,	he
was	the	cause	of	my	going	to	the	university	where	he	was	teaching	in	those	days.
He	insisted.	And	I	could	not	say	no	to	him;	he	loved	me	too	much.
One	day	we	discussed...	and	every	day	we	were	discussing	a	thousand	and	one
things.
Our	relationship	as	student	and	professor	had	got	lost	long	before;	it	had	become
a	very	deep	 friendship.	And	he	 loved	sharp	arguments;	he	himself	was	a	great
logician.	 And	 I	 said	 the	 same	 thing	 to	 him,	 "Your	 idea	 of	 yourself	 is	 only	 a
collection	of	opinions	of	others;	you	don't	know	yourself."
He	said,	"You	will	have	to	prove	it."
The	next	day	I	went	to	his	wife	--	and	she	was	very	loving	towards	me	because	I
was	 always	 going	 to	 their	 home.	 She	 knew	 that	 her	 husband	 had	 never	 been
interested	in	any	student	in	this	way.	I	had	become	almost	part	of	the	family;	I
had	spent	many	days	there,	whenever	he	wanted.	He	invited	me	many	times	to
his	home	to	discuss	his	doctoral	thesis,	which	had	been	accepted	by	Cambridge
University	 --	 he	 was	working	 on	 the	 philosophy	 of	 Bradley	 in	 comparison	 to
Shankara.	Late	into	the	nights	we	would	go	on	discussing.
I	told	his	wife,	"Tomorrow	I	am	doing	an	experiment	and	you	have	to	help	me."
She	was	all	willing.	It	was	a	small	experiment.	I	told	her,	"When	Professor	Roy
gets	up	in	the	morning,	you	have	to	say	to	him:	What	is	the	matter?	Could	you
not	sleep?	Just	hold	his	hand:	Do	you	have	a	fever?	You	look	so	pale.	And	write
down	exactly	what	he	says."
He	said,	 "Who	 is	 looking	pale?	 I	 am	perfectly	healthy.	 I	have	 slept	well	 and	 I
don't	have	any	fever.	What	kind	of	idea	have	you	got?"
She	said,	"I	was	thinking	to	call	the	doctor."
He	said,	"Have	you	gone	mad?	When	I	am	saying	that	I	am	perfectly	okay...	if
there	were	fever	I	would	know	first.	And	I	have	seen	my	face	in	the	mirror;	there
is	 no	 paleness	 or	 anything.	 Are	 you	 kidding	 or	 something?"	 She	 noted	 every
single	word	the	way	he	said	it.
I	had	talked	with	his	gardener:	"When	he	comes	out	to	go	to	the	university,	just
run	and	hold	him,	and	tell	him:	You	are	wobbling,	what	is	the	matter?	Are	you
feeling	dizzy?
And	touching	his	hand,	say:	My	God,	you	have	fever!"
And	to	the	gardener,	he	said,	"I	could	not	sleep	as	deeply	as	I	always	sleep,	and
perhaps	you	are	right.	I	am	feeling	a	little	dizzy.	But	I	will	go	to	the	doctor."	The
medical	department	was	very	close	to	the	philosophy	department.	So	he	said,	"I
will	go."
He	used	to	walk;	the	distance	was	almost	one	mile.	Next	was	the	post	office,	and
I	had	told	the	postmaster...	and	they	were	very	close	friends,	because	both	were
Bengalis.	I	had	told	the	postmaster,	"You	be	out	when	he	comes	by,	and	just	say:
Roy,	I	don't	think	you	should	go	to	the	university	today;	you	need	rest.	You	look
almost	a	faded	shadow	of	yourself.	You	don't	look	to	me...	what	has	happened?"
And	 to	 the	 postmaster	 he	 said,	 "I	myself	was	 thinking	 --	 should	 I	 go?	 I	 have
never	been	absent.	I	have	never	taken	any	holiday,	but	perhaps	I	should	go	and
inform	the	department	that	it	is	difficult,	and	go	to	the	doctor	and	come	back."
Just	by	his	side	used	to	live	another	professor,	of	economics,	who	had	a	beautiful
car.
And	I	had	told	him,	"Tomorrow	you	should	not	come	out	of	your	house	before
Roy	has	passed	the	post	office.	Just	watch,	and	then	bring	the	car,	and	stop	by
his	side	and	say	to	him,	What	is	the	matter,	man?	You	come	in.	I	will	take	you	to
the	doctor,	you	are	not	in	right	condition	to	walk	one	mile."
And	Roy	said,	"You	are	perfectly	right.	I	was	wondering	that	if	somebody	comes
I	 can	 ask	 for	 a	 lift.	You	 are	 so	kind.	 I	 am	 feeling	dizzy;	 I	 could	not	 sleep	 the
whole	night.	And	I	have	a	strange	 fever	 that	does	not	show	on	 the	body,	but	 I
know	there	is	something	feverish	inside...	perhaps	a	brain	fever?	I	looked	in	the
mirror	and	my	face	looks	absolutely	white."	And	he	had	said	just	the	opposite	to
his	wife	just	five	minutes	before!
I	told	the	professor	of	economics,	Dr.	Sahai,	"The	whole	journey,	go	on	talking
about	 his	 sickness	 and	 tell	 him	 that	 it	 is	 old	 age,	 and	 not	 to	 be	 worried:	 It
happens	to	everybody.
Perhaps	brain	surgery...	but	don't	be	worried,	I	am	here	just	by	your	side.	I	will
take	care	of	your	family.	My	feeling	is	that	you	need	hospitalization."
And	Roy	said,	"Hospitalization?	I	was	thinking	just	a	visit	to	the	doctor	will	do."
The	 professor	 of	 economics	 said,	 "You	 are	 not	 taking	 the	 thing	 seriously.
Perhaps	you	have	a	brain	 tumor	or	 something;	otherwise,	why	are	you	 feeling
dizzy,	wobbly,	and	a	fever	which	is	not	showing	on	your	body?	On	the	contrary,
your	body	 seems	 to	be	 cold.	 It	must	be	 something	 to	do	with	your	brain.	You
have	been	working	too	hard	on	your	doctoral	thesis.	And	I	have	told	you	there	is
no	 need.	 You	 have	 a	 doctorate;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 another	 doctorate	 from
Cambridge.	You	are	unnecessarily...	and	you	are	now	old.	You	should	recognize
that	 there	 is	 a	 time	 when	 one	 can	 work,	 and	 there	 is	 a	 time	 one	 should
understand	how	far	one	is	capable	of	going."
And	 Roy	 said,	 "Perhaps	 you	 are	 right;	 I	 should	 drop	 that	 project.	 It	 is	 three-
fourths	complete	--	what	a	pity	that	I	have	to	drop	it;	it	is	a	great	thesis."
Nobody	had	compared	Shankara	with	Bradley,	and	both	are	very	similar	in	their
vision.
But	 they	were	not	 acquainted	with	each	other.	Shankara	was	 fourteen	hundred
years	before	Bradley,	so	there	was	no	possibility	for	him	to	know	about	Bradley.
Bradley	was	just	in	the	beginning	of	this	century,	and	even	he	was	not	aware	of
Shankara,	because	he	was	an	original	thinker.	He	was	not	interested	in	studying
other	philosophers;	he	was	more	interested	to	bring	out	his	own	ideas.
But	they	have	both	come	to	the	same	conclusions.
But	 Roy	 said,	 "Perhaps	 you	 are	 right	 --	 I	 should	 not	 put	 too	 much	 strain	 on
myself."
And	then	I	had	told	the	peon	in	front	of	the	department,	who	used	to	sit	outside
the	department	 to	give	appointments	and	other	 things...	he	was	a	strong	man.	I
told	him,
"You	simply	take	Professor	Roy	in	your	hands.	Even	if	he	resists	don't	worry.	I
promise	you	there	will	be	no	trouble	for	you."
He	said,	"If	you	promise,	then	there	is	no	problem.	So	what	do	you	want?"
I	said,	"You	should	force	him	onto	the	sofa:	Lie	down!	You	are	not	in	a	state	to
walk	or	 to	 sit,	 and	 I	 am	going	 to	 call	 the	doctor.	And	 just	note	down	what	he
says."
And	when	he	forced	him	there	was	no	resistance.	He	was	very	happy,	and	said	to
the	peon,	"I	never	thought	that	you	were	so	kind.	I	needed	to	rest.	Now	you	bring
the	doctor."
It	was	a	very	small,	but	very	beautiful	university	 --	perhaps	 the	most	uniquely
situated	 in	 the	whole	 of	 India,	 on	 a	 hill	 above	 a	 vast	 lake,	 and	 so	many	 lotus
flowers,	 and	 thick,	 lush	 greenery	 all	 around	 the	 university.	 The	 doctor	 came,
because	he	was	just	next	door,	and	I	had	told	him,	"Be	ready.	Inject	him	with	just
pure	water.	Do	all	kinds	of	testing,	and	tell	him,	"You	are	not	in	a	position	to	do
any	 mental	 work	 for	 at	 least	 three	 months.	 I	 hope	 that	 the	 brain	 tumor	 will
subside	by	 itself	 if	you	don't	exert	yourself.	There	will	be	no	need	for	surgery,
but	one	cannot	be	certain	about	such	things,	and	I	will	have	to	talk	to	the	head
surgeon."
And	Professor	Roy	said,	"You	just	bring	your	car	and	take	me	back	home."	And
the	head	of	the	department	had	not	yet	come,	so	he	told	the	doctor,	"I	am	not	in	a
position	to	write;	you	write	that	I	am	not	feeling	well	and	I	am	going	back	home,
and	perhaps	it	will	take	some	time	for	me	to	get	myself	together."	He	signed	the
note,	and	you	could	see	--	his	handwriting	was	very	beautiful,	but	 that	day	his
signature	was	shaky.
Back	home,	he	slept	the	whole	day.	He	could	not	eat	anything;	he	said,	"I	have
no	appetite."	The	wife	became	afraid	about	what	kind	of	experiment	I	was	doing.
He	was	talking	about	a	brain	tumor,	and	surgery,	and	three	months	rest!
And	 then	 I	went	 and	 collected	 all	 the	 notes	 from	 everybody	 in	 serial	 number:
one,	 two,	 three,	 four,	 five,	 six,	 seven...	And	 I	went	 to	 Professor	Roy.	He	was
under	a	blanket	--	in	hot	summer!	I	said,	"Just	please	read	these	notes."
He	said,	"I	am	not	in	a	position..."
I	said,	"Don't	be	worried;	 I	am	in	a	position,	 I	can	 read	 to	you.	From	the	very
morning,	these	are	your	seven	statements."
And	when	 he	 heard	 his	 statements,	 he	 said,	 "You	 rascal!"	He	 threw	 away	 the
blanket	and	he	said,	"Hell	to	that	brain	tumor;	I	have	nothing.	I	knew	from	the
very	beginning	that	it	was	a	strange	conspiracy!	But	I	never	thought	about	you,
that	you	would	do	such	a	thing	to	me.	You	could	have	killed	me!	I	have	to	phone
to	 the	 head	 surgeon	 because	 he	 is	 to	 come	 to	 check	me	 and	 decide	whether	 I
should	rest	or	an	immediate	operation	is	needed!"
I	said,	"No	operation	is	needed;	the	operation	is	complete!	This	is	what	I	wanted
to	prove	to	you,	that	you	live	by	the	opinions	of	others,	you	are	not	independent.
You	 can't	 trust	 even	your	 own	 feeling	 that	 you	 are	 healthy.	 If	 so	many	people
repeat	something,	you	go	on	falling.	Just	look	at	your	statements."
This	 is	your	personality	 --	 this	 is	not	your	 individuality.	You	cannot	do	such	a
thing	with	an	individual	who	has	a	groundedness.	The	fear,	Cliff,	is	because	you
don't	 have	 any	 experience	 of	 your	 innermost	 being;	 all	 that	 you	 know	 about
yourself	 is	 what	 people	 have	 said.	 And	 these	 are	 the	 people	 who	 don't	 know
anything	about	themselves	--	what	can	they	know	about	you?
Everybody	 is	 afraid	 of	 enlightenment,	 because	 who	 knows?	 Once	 your
personality	disappears	maybe	everything	disappears.	Then	what	 is	 the	point	of
such	an	enlightenment?	 It	 is	better	 to	 remain	unenlightened	--	at	 least	you	are.
And	death	may	come	whenever	it	may	come,	but	right	now	you	are	alive	--	why
unnecessarily	commit	a	suicide?
Enlightenment	appears	to	your	personality	as	a	suicide,	and	in	fact	it	is	a	suicide.
But	the	suicide	of	personality	is	the	beginning	of	individuality.	The	death	of	your
personality	and	ego	is	the	birth	of	your	real	authentic	being,	of	your	immortality.
You	will	 have	 to	gather	 courage,	 and	 remember	Michel's	Rule	 for	Prospective
Mountain	Climbers:	The	mountain	gets	steeper	as	you	get	closer	to	the	top.
So	as	you	come	closer	to	enlightenment	--	and	that	is	the	greatest	mountain	--	it
gets	 steeper,	 and	 more	 and	 more	 dangerous	 as	 you	 come	 close	 to	 the
disappearance	of	your	old	personality	with	which	you	were	so	identified.
But	I	tell	you,	I	have	survived.	I	have	lost	my	personality;	that's	why	I	am	not	at
all	concerned	what	people	 think	about	me.	The	whole	world	is	against	me,	but
they	 don't	 even	 create	 a	 small	 stir	 in	me.	 It	 does	 not	matter	whether	 they	 are
against	or	for;	it	is	their	business,	their	problem.	I	know	myself,	and	I	know	that
what	I	am	doing	and	what	I	am	trying	is	intrinsically	right.	Nobody,	just	because
they	are	in	the	majority,	can	destroy	my	truth.
Truth	 has	 never	 been	 the	 opinion	 of	 the	 majority;	 it	 has	 always	 been	 an
individual	achievement.	The	majority	is	interested	in	crucifying	the	truth,	but	it
is	not	ready	to	accept	it.
You	can	understand	the	psychology	of	it	all.	For	two	thousand	years	Christians
have	 been	 thinking	 about	 Jesus	 and	 his	 crucifixion.	 And	 I	 am	 utterly
disappointed	with	the	whole	two	thousand	years'	theology,	because	they	have	not
looked	at	 the	psychology	of	 the	crucifixion.	Why	did	people	crucify	Jesus?	He
had	not	done	any	wrong;	he	has	not	committed	any	crime.	But	the	majority	was
turning	 against	 him	because	 he	was	 telling	 them,	 "Drop	your	 ego;	 be	 humble.
Drop	your	so-called	false	identity;	just	be	nobody.
Blessed	are	those	who	stand	last	in	the	line."
He	was	talking	against	the	ambitious	majority.	They	did	not	crucify	Jesus,	they
crucified	 the	 truth	 that	was	 hurting	 them	 and	was	making	 them	 afraid:	 if	 they
become	impressed	by	this	man,	there	is	a	danger.	They	may	lose	half	the	bread
in	the	hope	of	the	whole	bread,	and	there	may	not	be	any	bread	at	all.	It	is	better
to	keep	the	half	and	not	 to	 lose	 it	 in	 the	hope	of	getting	 the	whole.	That	 is	 the
majority's	mind.
You	say,	"I	am	afraid	--	afraid	of	enlightenment."	It	is	natural,	so	don't	be	serious
about	it.	In	a	way,	it	is	a	good	symptom	--	at	least	you	have	become	interested	in
enlightenment;	otherwise,	you	would	not	be	afraid.	Just	go	into	the	town	and	you
will	not	find	anybody...	ask	people,	"Are	you	afraid	of	enlightenment?"	And	they
will	say,	"Why	should	we	be	afraid?"	They	have	never	bothered	about	it.	It	is	not
a	 problem	 to	 them,	 they	 have	 never	 thought	 about	 enlightenment.	 They	 will
think	you	are	crazy.	"Why	should	we	be	afraid	of	enlightenment?"
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 was	 looking	 at	 a	 newspaper	 clipping.	 It	 was	 a	 statement
against	me,	that	the	world	is	coming	to	an	end	but	I	seem	to	be	the	only	person
who	is	not	going	to	change,	who	is	still	talking	about	enlightenment.	As	far	as	I
am	concerned,	I	take	it	as	a	compliment.	When	the	world	is	coming	to	an	end,
this	is	the	right	moment.
Take	the	risk;	anyway	it	is	going	to	end.
Why	not	take	a	chance	and	become	enlightened?
The	world	is	coming	to	an	end	--	you	will	end	with	it.	So	now	there	is	no	fear:
before	the	world	ends,	end	your	personality,	and	at	least	you	will	be	saved.	The
world	may	end,	but	you	will	not	end.	And	the	person	who	has	criticized	me	is
right.	I	will	go	on	insisting.	My	insistence	will	become	more	and	more	powerful
as	the	end	of	the	world	comes	near,	to	make	more	and	more	people	interested	in
enlightenment	 because	 there	 is	 no	 problem	 about	 losing;	 you	 can	 put	 the	 fear
aside.
The	 fear	 is	 a	 good	 symptom	 --	 it	 means	 you	 have	 become	 interested	 in
enlightenment	 and	your	mind	 is	 trembling.	You	have	become	 interested	 in	 the
great	adventure,	the	great	affair,	and	your	small	personality	is	worried	that	this	is
the	end.	As	for	the	small	personality,	which	consists	only	of	public	opinions,	it	is
going	to	dissolve	--	naturally.
It	 is	said	that	every	river	before	entering	the	ocean	stops	for	a	while	and	looks
back	--	a	moment	of	hesitation	about	what	she	is	going	to	do.	Ahead	is	the	vast
ocean,	in	which	she	is	going	to	be	lost.	Back,	she	had	a	personality	of	her	own	--
her	 own	mountains,	 valleys,	 forests.	 The	 whole	 journey,	 long	 journey,	 maybe
thousands	of	years,	thousands	of	miles...
Naturally,	 it	 is	understandable	 to	hesitate	 for	a	moment.	But	 I	have	never	seen
any	river	go	backwards.	You	can	hesitate,	but	you	cannot	go	backwards.
Cliff,	you	have	come	to	the	cliff!	You	have	to	take	the	jump.	Only	by	taking	the
jump	will	you	prove	your	mettle.
"What	is	beyond	enlightenment?"	First	things	first!	Out	of	fear	you	are	thinking
that	 it	 seems	enlightenment	 is	bound	 to	happen;	now	be	clear	what	 is	going	 to
happen	after	it	--
"What	is	beyond	enlightenment?"
Beyond	enlightenment	 is	 all	 --	 the	whole	universe.	Beyond	enlightenment	you
are	no	more	a	small	dewdrop,	you	are	the	ocean.
"What	 to	 do	 after	 the	 goal	 of	 living	 is	 reached?"	You	 are	 not	 supposed	 to	 do
anything.	I	can	see	all	your	concerns	are	very	human.	You	know	one	thing,	that
now	you	cannot	avoid	enlightenment;	you	may	be	afraid,	but	you	have	 to	 take
the	jump.	Naturally,	you	are	asking,	"What	is	beyond	enlightenment?"	And	even
if	something	is	there	--	"What	to	do	after	the	goal	of	living	is	reached?"
You	 have	 never	 thought	 about	 what	 you	 have	 done	 as	 far	 as	 your	 birth	 is
concerned	--
have	you	done	anything?	What	are	you	doing	as	 far	as	your	 life	 is	concerned?
Do	you	think	you	are	breathing?	If	it	was	up	to	you	to	breathe,	you	would	have
been	dead	long	before;	just	in	anger,	or	in	some	love	affair,	you	would	forget	to
breathe.	Or	 in	 the	night,	will	you	sleep	or	not?	Or	keep	yourself	awake	 just	 to
continue	breathing,	because	if	you	fall	asleep	and	breathing	stops,	in	the	morning
who	is	going	to	get	up?	No,	breathing	you	are	not	doing.
Existence	is	breathing.
What	are	you	doing	as	far	as	your	inner	structure	of	life	is	concerned?	Do	you
digest?
Are	 you	 responsible	 for	 changing	 food	 into	 blood,	 into	 bones,	 into	 marrow?
These	 are	 not	 your	 concerns.	 Your	 concern	 ends	 with	 the	 taste	 buds,	 and	 the
moment	the	food	is	swallowed	it	goes	into	the	hands	of	existence;	it	is	no	more
your	concern.
One	day	 try	 to	be	continuously	aware	what	 is	happening	 in	your	stomach,	and
then	 you	 will	 have	 a	 good	 disturbed	 stomach	 for	 at	 least	 one	 week!	 Your
consciousness	 is	 not	 needed,	 the	 stomach	 is	 doing	 its	 work	 on	 its	 own.	 Your
brain	consists	of	seven	million	cells,	and	each	cell	is	doing	its	own	function,	and
you	are	not	needed	--	they	don't	even	ask	your	advice.	Has	any	part	of	your	body
stopped	you	sometime	and	asked	you,	"What	to	do?	--	I	am	at	a	loss?"	They	are
never	at	a	loss;	they	are	part	of	the	cosmic	organism.
They	have	an	inbuilt	process;	they	go	on	doing	their	things.
The	moment	you	become	enlightened	and	disappear	into	the	ocean,	you	will	not
be	asked	to	do	something	--	to	type,	or	to	dig,	or	to	prepare	piesta...	or	is	it	pizza!
You	are	not	supposed	to	do	anything;	you	are	gone.	Now	the	universal	force	has
taken	 possession	 of	 you.	 Things	will	 be	 happening,	 but	 they	will	 not	 be	 your
doing.
"What	do	you	aim	for?"	You	have	reached	beyond	aim.	Aim	is	a	concern	of	the
ego.	The	ego	cannot	exist	without	an	aim	--	some	ambition,	some	desire,	some
infatuation,	something	to	be	achieved	tomorrow.
The	ego	is	a	tension	between	today	and	the	future.	The	moment	there	is	no	ego,
there	is	no	tension.	You	simply	live	in	a	state	of	let-go.
Then,	 wherever	 the	 river	 takes	 you,	 wherever	 the	 life	 force	 takes	 you,	 you
simply	 go.	 It	 is	 not	 your	 goal;	 you	 have	 become	 part	 of	 the	 whole.	 Now
whatever	is	the	goal	of	the	whole...	and	I	don't	think	there	is	any	goal.	The	whole
is	perfectly	happy	in	singing	and	dancing	and	enjoying;	in	flowers,	in	the	wind,
in	the	rain,	in	the	sun,	in	the	stars.	There	is	no	goal.	The	whole	is	perfectly	happy
just	to	be,	herenow.
If	there	is	no	aim,	you	start	thinking	it	is	like	falling	into	a	bottomless	pit.	Then
what	 to	do	and	what	 to	aim	for?	"What	 is	beyond	 the	goal?"	You	are	 really	 in
trouble!	You	will	not	be	satisfied	unless	you	are	enlightened.	All	these	problems:
first,	"What	is	the	goal?"
Then,	"What	is	beyond	the	goal?"	You	want	to	determine	the	whole	eternity!
Your	question	should	be	just	about	enlightenment.	Beyond	that,	existence	takes
care.
Who	has	given	you	the	name,	Cliff?	--	that's	what	I	have	been	wondering.	Such	a
dangerous	name!	Use	your	intelligence	to	see	that	 the	fear	 is	arising	out	of	 the
false	 in	 you,	 the	 fear	 is	 not	 arising	 out	 of	 the	 real.	 The	 real	 is	 really	 deeply
challenged	by	the	idea	of	enlightenment.	But	be	intelligent;	otherwise	you	may
listen	to	the	personality	and	forget	to	listen	to	the	individuality.
Meditate	more,	so	that	your	intelligence	can	become	more	clear,	unclouded,	and
all	fears	will	disappear.	And	all	other	questions	are	just	nonsense;	they	will	also
disappear.	All	that	you	need	is	a	little	more	meditation,	a	little	more	sharpness	of
intelligence.
Paddy	 and	Maureen	 planned	 to	 get	married,	 so	 they	went	 to	 the	 doctor	 for	 a
physical	checkup.	The	doctor	 then	 tried	 to	explain	sex	 to	 them,	but	Paddy	 just
listened	with	a	dumb	expression	on	his	face.	So	the	doctor	took	Maureen	over	to
the	examination	table,	made	her	lie	down,	and	then	made	love	to	her.	"Now	do
you	understand?"	said	the	physician.
"Yes,"	said	Paddy,	"but	how	often	do	I	have	to	bring	her	in?"
A	 great	 question!	 Just	 become	 enlightened,	 Cliff!	 Don't	 get	 worried	 about	 so
many	problems.	You	will	 be	 lost	 in	 a	 jungle	 of	 a	 thousand	 and	one	problems.
And	enlightenment	 is	a	simple	process;	 it	 is	 just	becoming	your	authentic	self.
And	 it	 is	 so	 luminous	 that	 in	 its	 light	 all	 darkness	 disappears,	 and	 with	 the
darkness	all	 the	doubts,	all	 the	questions.	And	a	 tremendous	 insight	arises	 that
you	 are	 not	 separate	 from	 existence;	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 goal,	 no
question	of	direction;	no	question	where	you	are	going,	why	you	are	going.
Then	just	to	be	part	of	the	whole	is	so	immense	and	so	overwhelming,	one	feels
fulfilled	and	contented.	There	is	nowhere	to	go;	you	have	arrived.
The	 theatrical	agent,	 trying	 to	sell	a	new	strip	act	 to	a	nightclub	manager,	was
carrying	on	very	 excitedly	 about	 a	girl's	 unbelievable	 seventy-two,	 twenty-six,
forty,	figure.
"What	 kind	 of	 dance	 does	 she	 do?"	 the	 manager	 inquired,	 impressed	 by	 the
description	of	the	girl's	figure.
"Well,	she	doesn't	actually	dance	at	all,"	the	agent	replied.	"She	just	crawls	out
onto	the	stage	and	tries	to	stand	up!"
With	that	kind	of	figure...	how	can	you	dance?	Even	if	you	can	stand	up,	that's
enough!
Let	me	repeat	the	figure	--	seventy-two,	twenty-six,	forty!
Cliff,	you	have	come	to	the	right	place.	Here	we	are	not	giving	you	any	goals,
any	heaven,	any	paradise.	We	are	not	selling	any	future	to	you.	We	are	not	in	any
business	--
the	 churches	 are,	 the	 temples	 are,	 the	 synagogues	 are.	 I	 am	 teaching	 you	 that
there	 is	 no	goal	 and	 that	 there	 is	 no	meaning,	 but	 there	 is	 great	 joy,	 and	great
love,	and	great	blissfulness.	And	all	 that	you	have	to	pay	for	 it	 is	 to	drop	your
false	ego,	your	false	personality.
Become	silent.	In	your	silence,	all	questions	will	disappear.	And	the	dance	will
begin,	whatever	 the	 figure!	Because	as	 far	as	your	 inner	being	 is	concerned,	 it
has	no	figure;	it	is	just	a	luminous	flame	which	can	dance.	It	has	been	eternally
there,	repressed	by	you.	You	are	the	greatest	enemy	of	yourself.	My	effort	is	to
turn	you	into	the	greatest	friend	of	yourself.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	FEEL	REALLY	CONFUSED	ABOUT	THIS	WHOLE	ENLIGHTENMENT
BUSINESS.	ON	THE	ONE	HAND,	YOU	SAY,	"BE	THOROUGHGOING	IN
YOUR
SEARCH	 FOR	 ENLIGHTENMENT."	 BUT	 ON	 THE	 OTHER	 HAND,	 THE
VERY
DESIRE	TO	BECOME	ENLIGHTENED	PREVENTS	IT.
HOW	TO	SOLVE	THIS	DILEMMA?
Prem	Dipamo,	you	are	saying	something	significant,	but	you	have	to	understand
that	life	is	not	a	rational	thing;	it	is	very	irrational,	because	it	is	mysterious.
The	contradiction	that	you	see	in	my	statements	is	not	a	contradiction.	It	appears
like	 contradiction,	 something	 inconsistent,	 but	 I	will	 try	 to	 explain	 to	 you	 that
there	is	no	contradiction	at	all.	But	you	will	come	across	in	my	statements	many
times	 the	 same	 things,	 and	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 you	have	never	gone	beyond	 the
ordinary	 mind	 and	 its	 consistency.	 I	 remember	 Oscar	 Wilde	 as	 saying,
"Consistency	 is	 the	 last	 refuge	 of	 the	 unimaginative."	 A	 little	 imagination	 is
needed	to	understand	that	the	contradictory	is	complementary.
For	example,	before	I	take	your	question...	Some	examples	are	needed	from	your
ordinary	life	experience;	otherwise	you	will	never	be	able	to	understand	it.
Can	you	deliberately	make	any	effort	to	sleep?	When	sleep	is	not	coming,	what
are	 you	 supposed	 to	 do?	 Thousands	 of	 tricks	 have	 been	 suggested;	 nothing
works.	People	say	to	drink	a	glass	of	hot	milk.	You	can	drink,	but	the	hot	milk
will	make	 you	 even	more	 awake.	 People	 have	 been	 told	 to	 take	 a	 bath,	 but	 a
good	bath	will	make	you	more	fresh,	and	less	sleepy.	People	have	been	told	to
jog,	to	jump...	all	kinds	of	things;	nothing	helps.
Sleep	comes	only	when	you	completely	forget	about	 it.	You	just	 lie	down,	and
you	don't	try	in	any	way	to	bring	sleep	in;	it	is	not	in	your	power.	You	have	to
completely	 forget	 everything,	 and	 it	 comes.	 It	 comes	 only	 when	 you	 are	 not
desiring	it.
Now	there	are	two	problems:	first	you	have	to	desire;	otherwise,	why	should	you
go	 to	 sleep?	 You	 have	 to	 have	 a	 certain	 need,	 a	 desire,	 a	 longing	 for	 sleep;
otherwise	why...?
So	 in	 the	 beginning	 a	 desire	 is	 needed,	 but	 in	 the	 final	 stage	 the	 very	 desire
becomes	the	disturbance.	So	first	you	have	to	desire,	and	then	you	have	to	forget
all	about	it.	This	is	how	sleep	comes.
Your	 question	 is,	 "I	 feel	 really	 confused	 about	 this	 whole	 enlightenment
business."	It	is	a	confusing	business,	but	those	who	can	manage	to	pass	through
it	become	the	most	unconfused	people	in	the	world.
"On	 the	 one	 hand,	 you	 say,	 `Be	 thoroughgoing	 in	 your	 search	 for
enlightenment.'"	Yes,	it	is	true.	First	I	have	to	create	a	longing	for	enlightenment;
otherwise,	 enlightenment	 is	 non-existent	 on	 your	 laundry	 list.	 Nobody	 wants
enlightenment;	 people	 are	 wanting	 all	 kinds	 of	 things,	 but	 enlightenment	 is	 a
very	rare	variety.	Only	very	unique	people	even	become	interested	in	it.	So	first	I
have	to	insist:	"Be	thoroughgoing	in	your	search	for	enlightenment."
First	I	have	to	create	the	desire,	the	longing,	the	passion,	so	strong	that	you	drop
all	other	small	things	and	put	your	total	energy	into	the	search	for	enlightenment.
Once	you	have	done	this,	half	of	the	process	is	complete.
Then	begins	 the	other	half:	 "But	on	 the	other	hand,	 the	very	desire	 to	become
enlightened	 prevents	 it."	 When	 you	 have	 been	 very	 thoroughgoing	 in	 your
desiring,	in	your	search,	you	will	not	find	enlightenment.	The	more	you	search,
the	more	you	will	be	frustrated,	because	it	is	not	something	outside	you	that	you
can	 find.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	have	 to	 travel	 to,	 it	 is	 something	within
you.
So	 when	 you	 have	 become	 thoroughly	 a	 seeker,	 a	 searcher	 --	 frustrated,	 so
utterly	 in	 a	 state	 of	 defeatism	 that	 you	 have	 lost	 everything	 else;	 you	 staked
everything	 else	 for	 enlightenment,	 and	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 no	 sign	 anywhere	 --
then	 you	 have	 been	 thoroughgoing.	 Unless	 you	 are	 thoroughgoing,	 you	 will
come	to	this	frustration	because	you	will	know	that	you	are	not	thoroughgoing	--
perhaps	that's	why	you	are	missing.
So	 first	be	 thoroughgoing.	Your	 total	 energy	 should	be	 involved	 in	 the	 search;
then	 comes	 frustration.	At	 that	moment	 the	master	 says,	 "Now	you	have	done
enough	search.
Now	drop	 all	 searching;	 just	 sit	 silently."	And	you	 can	 sit	 silently	 only	 if	 you
have	been	running	so	long	and	you	are	tired,	your	mind	is	tired.	And	when	the
master	says,	"Now,	sit	down	silently.	Doing	nothing	 the	spring	comes,	and	 the
grass	grows	by	itself	--	no	desire,	no	demand,"	there	is	no	contradiction	--	this	is
the	whole	process.
Half	 the	process	 is	 to	bring	your	whole	energy	 into	 the	search,	and	 the	second
part	is	to	make	you	sit	down	and	drop	the	whole	search.	And	suddenly	it	is	there
because	 it	 is	 your	 innermost	 core	 --	 no	 search	 is	 needed.	 But	 without	 this
thoroughgoing	 search,	 you	would	 not	 have	 been	 able	 to	 sit	 down	 silently.	 To
make	you	sit	down	silently,	you	have	to	be	made	to	run	for	miles.
Only	when	you	are	utterly	tired	and	frustrated,	then	you	can	drop	even	the	idea
of	finding	enlightenment.	Then	you	are	utterly	silent.	You	have	forgotten	about
property,	money,	possessions,	power,	prestige,	 long	before,	because	you	staked
everything	 for	 enlightenment.	Now,	 the	only	 thing	 to	be	dropped	 that	you	 still
have	is	the	desire	for	enlightenment	--	that	is	the	last	desire	to	be	dropped.	But
first	it	has	to	be	created.
This	is	the	trouble	that	is	creating	confusion	in	you:	if	you	don't	desire,	how	are
you	going	 to	drop	 it?	You	have	 to	desire	so	 totally	 that	you	can	drop	 it	 totally
too.
And	this	is	the	mystery	of	enlightenment...
Ask,	 do	 everything	 that	 is	 possible,	 and	 then	 finally	 --	 tired,	 exhausted	 --	 you
need	to	relax;	you	even	let	go	of	the	idea	of	enlightenment,	it	is	all	futile.	In	this
silence,	when	there	is	no	desire	stirring	your	mind,	you	suddenly	find	you	are	the
enlightened	one.
That	 enlightenment	was	not	 somewhere	 else,	 it	was	within	you.	But	 it	 needed
utter	silence,	no	desire.	How	to	create	this	state	of	no	desire?
I	used	to	stay	in	a	house	with	a	friend;	he	had	a	child	--	very	charming,	but	very
active,	 constantly	 asking	 questions,	 constantly	 doing	 this	 and	 that,	 too	 full	 of
energy.	He	was	 the	 first	 child.	The	mother	was	 tired,	 the	 father	was	 tired;	 the
child	was	able	to	tire	anybody.
He	 started	 doing	 his	 exercise	 on	me	 too,	 but	 I	 said,	 "Listen,	 I	 have	 a	 certain
condition."
He	said,	"What	is	the	condition?"
"That	I	only	answer	any	question	if	you	fulfill	the	condition."
He	said,	"I	am	ready."
I	said,	"You	just	go	around	the	block	seven	times	as	fast	as	you	can.	And	don't
try	to	deceive	me,	because	I	know	exactly	whether	you	have	been	deceiving	or
not.	When	you	come	back	I	will	see	 if	you	are	perspiring...	perhaps	 tears	have
come	to	your	eyes.	Then	I	will	answer."
He	said,	"Okay."
He	went	round	the	block.	It	was	a	big	house,	and	for	this	little	boy,	seven	rounds
were	too	many.	When	he	came	back	he	simply	fell	down.	I	said,	"Rest	a	 little,
and	then	you	can	ask."
He	said,	"I	have	forgotten	all	questions.	Just	don't	harass	me;	just	let	me	rest."
I	said,	"That's	perfectly	okay."
He	fell	asleep.	His	mother	came;	she	said,	"This	is	strange.	He	tires	us	all.	What
did	you	do?	He	is	fast	asleep."
I	 said,	 "I	have	my	own	ways	of	making	people	enlightened!"	 I	have	 learned	a
secret:	first	exhaust	the	energy	which	has	become	their	infatuation,	their	greed,
their	ego,	their	lust	for	power,	and	all	kinds	of	things.	First	exhaust	it."
So	 first	 I	 teach	 a	 thoroughgoing	 search.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 been	 around	 the
block	seven	 times,	and	 tears	are	coming	 to	your	eyes,	and	you	have	not	 found
enlightenment,	 I	 will	 say	 to	 you,	 "Just	 rest	 a	 little;	 then	 we	 can	 discuss
enlightenment."
And	you	will	say,	"I	don't	want	even	to	discuss	this	business	of	enlightenment;	I
am	utterly	tired."	Just	rest,	and	in	that	very	rest,	you	become	aware	of	your	inner
flame.	So	there	is	no	contradiction,	it	is	simply	the	strategy.
Unless	 you	 are	 exhausted	 you	 will	 remain	 interested	 in	 something	 or	 other.
When	you	are	exhausted	all	your	interest	disappears;	all	 that	you	want	is	 to	be
silent,	at	ease,	relaxed	--
and	 that	 is	 the	moment	when	 enlightenment	 happens.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 object	 to	 be
found;	it	is	a	realization	of	a	silent	being.
That's	how	it	happened	to	Gautam	Buddha.	For	six	years	he	was	thoroughgoing
in	his	search;	perhaps	nobody	has	been	so	thoroughgoing.	He	did	everything	that
anybody	suggested.	He	 fasted	 for	months;	he	became	almost	a	skeleton.	There
exists	a	statue	of	the	days	when	he	was	fasting	--	he	was	fasting	under	a	master.
The	fast	was	a	special	way	where	you	have	to	reduce	to	smaller	quantities	every
day.
Unless	you	come	to	one	grain	of	rice	as	your	whole	food	for	twenty-four	hours	--
and	he	had	come	to	one	grain	of	rice,	just	one	single	grain...	if	you	see	that	statue
you	will	be	surprised	how	thoroughgoing	he	was.	All	flesh	has	disappeared;	you
can	see	all	his	bones.	His	whole	skeleton	is	simply	covered	by	the	skin.	You	can
see	that	he	has	exhausted	every	possibility;	if	he	goes	a	little	further	he	will	be
dead.
That	very	day,	when	he	had	come	to	the	point	of	one	grain	of	rice	a	day,	he	had
gone	to	take	a	bath	in	the	River	Niranjana.	It	is	a	small	river;	I	have	been	to	the
place.	But	even	in	that	small	river,	he	was	so	weak	that	the	current	of	the	river
was	more	powerful.	I	have	been	there;	the	current	is	almost	nonexistent.	But	in
his	situation	it	must	have	been	so	much	that	he	could	not	gather	energy	enough.
Energy	 comes	 from	 your	 food,	 and	 for	months	 he	 had	 been	 cutting	 down	 on
food.	Now	he	 had	 come	 to	 the	 last	 point	 --	 his	whole	 reservoir....	 That's	what
your	flesh	is.	So	when	you	fast,	in	the	beginning	your	weight	goes	down	by	two
pounds	per	day.
Addressing	 a	 conference	 of	 vegetarians,	 I	 told	 them	 that	 fasting	 is	 a	 kind	 of
cannibalism.
They	were	very	shocked	--	fasting,	and	I	am	calling	it	cannibalism?	I	said,	"It	is
cannibalism	because	where	do	 those	 two	pounds	disappear	 to?	You	have	eaten
them;	you	have	used	your	own	meat.	Because	you	are	not	eating	meat	you	think
you	are	not	using	meat,	but	it	is	your	own,	and	inside."	Just	in	the	sheer	activity
of	 living,	 one	 pound,	 two	 pounds,	 is	 gone.	 After	 seven	 days	 your	 activities
become	less;	then	you	lose	one	pound	per	week.
Gautam	Buddha	must	have	come	to	the	point	where	there	was	nothing	to	lose;	he
was	just	bones.	And	the	statue	is	tremendously	significant.	It	is	a	bronze	statue
showing	every	bone.	You	can	count	all	the	ribs;	they	are	just	covered	with	dried
skin,	because	the	skin	also	needs	nourishment.	He	could	not	get	out	of	the	river;
he	was	so	weak	that	he	was	hanging	on	to	a	root,	just	to	protect	himself	from	the
current	of	the	river.
At	 that	 moment,	 hanging	 on	 to	 the	 root	 of	 a	 tree,	 he	 came	 to	 think,	 I	 have
become	so	weak	that	I	cannot	even	cross	a	small	river...	And	in	India,	the	world
is	thought	to	be	a	great	ocean	--	bhavsagar,	the	ocean	of	being	--	and	you	have	to
cross	 it.	Only	 then	will	you	become	enlightened.	He	 thought,	 It	 is	beyond	me,
this	enlightenment	business.	I	cannot	cross	this	poor	River	Niranjana;	how	can	I
cross	the	ocean	of	being?	--	I	am	finished.	I	dropped	all	desires;	today	I	drop	the
desire	for	enlightenment	too.	I	don't	have	any	energy	for	any	desire.
That	night	he	slept	without	any	desire.	He	had	no	idea	what	he	was	going	to	do
tomorrow	 morning.	 For	 six	 years	 he	 was	 so	 much	 involved	 in	 searching	 for
enlightenment,	but	now	he	had	no	energy	even	to	think	what	he	was	going	to	do
tomorrow	morning.	He	slept	one	of	the	deepest	sleeps	of	his	life	--	no	desires,	no
dreams,	no	thought.	And	when	in	the	morning	he	opened	his	eyes,	 the	last	star
was	disappearing.	It	was	still	a	little	dark,	a	little	before	the	sun	would	be	rising.
As	 the	 last	 star	 was	 disappearing,	 he	 simply	 watched	 it	 disappearing	 --	 utter
silence	all	around.	And	suddenly	he	became	aware	of	his	own	light.
He	heard	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the	 still	 small	 voice	 that	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 search
anywhere:	You	are	it.
But	 without	 those	 six	 years	 of	 thoroughgoing	 search	 this	 moment	 would	 not
have	arrived.
Do	 you	 see	 that	 there	 is	 any	 contradiction?	 Contradiction	 only	 appears;	 deep
down	there	is	a	great	coherence.	You	can	say	both	things.	That's	why	there	are
two	 divisions	 of	 Buddhists:	 one	 says	 enlightenment	 happened	 because	 of	 six
years	of	 thoroughgoing	search,	and	the	other	one	says	enlightenment	happened
because	he	dropped	even	the	desire	for	enlightenment.
But	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	don't	belong	to	any	sect,	to	any	religion,	to	any
party;	 hence,	 I	 can	 see	 clearly	without	 any	prejudice	 that	 both	 the	 schools	 are
only	half	right.
Those	six	years	of	thoroughgoing	search	created	the	space	to	be	silent	--	so	silent
that	even	interest	in	enlightenment	is	no	longer	there.	That's	why	enlightenment
happened.
He	became	aware	of	 his	 own	 inner	 being.	All	 outside	 search	has	 disappeared;
hence,	the	one	hundred	and	eighty	degree	turn.	His	consciousness	turns	inwards,
because	there	is	no	goal	outside,	there	is	no	way,	and	there	is	nothing	to	be	done.
Your	question	 is	 significant,	Dipamo,	but	 remember:	 there	 is	 no	 contradiction;
both	 are	 essential	 parts	 of	 a	 single	 process.	 But	 first	 start	with	 thoroughgoing
search.	Don't	from	the	very	beginning	think	that	if	it	has	to	be	dropped,	why	not
drop	it	from	the	very	beginning?	--	you	cannot.	First	you	have	to	have	it.
Then	why	at	all	desire	from	the	very	beginning?	--	because	you	will	be	desiring
other	things.	The	problem	is	first	to	give	you	a	great	desire	for	enlightenment,	so
all	 other	 desires	 become	 combined	 into	 a	 single,	 one-pointed	 goal.	 And	 then
when	you	get	 frustrated...	because	you	are	bound	to	get	 frustrated,	nobody	can
find	enlightenment	with	thoroughgoing	search.	But	by	thoroughgoing	search	one
finds	frustration	--	such	utter	frustration	that	one	becomes	silent.	One	wants	just
to	rest,	not	to	do	anything.	Even	if	enlightenment	knocks	on	the	door,	one	is	not
interested.	One	has	no	energy	even	to	open	the	door.
In	that	moment,	your	inner	flame	is	seen	for	the	first	time.	And	this	seeing	of	the
light	inside	you	is	the	ultimate	experience.
It	is	the	most	beautiful,	and	the	most	glorious,	the	greatest	splendor	there	is.
Enlightenment	as	such	is	already	there.
You	are	a	buddha,	but	you	are	not	aware	of	 it.	How	 to	make	you	aware	of	 it?
Down	 the	 ages,	 this	 has	 been	 the	 way,	 and	 I	 don't	 see	 there	 is	 any	 other
possibility.	 You	 will	 become	 aware	 of	 it	 only	 in	 utter	 silence.	 But	 the	 utter
silence,	a	state	of	no-mind,	a	pure	space,	needs	all	your	desires	to	be	exhausted	--
so	it	is	a	device.
Gather	all	your	desires,	make	your	life	one-pointed	towards	enlightenment	--	and
I	assure	you,	you	will	not	find	it!	But	without	this,	nobody	has	found	it	either.
One	day	when	you	get	frustrated,	you	say,	"To	hell	with	enlightenment!"	That	is
the	day	the	miracle	is	going	to	happen.	It	happens	always	only	in	that	moment.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	You	don't	have	to	become	a	mountain	climber	24	August	1987	am
in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708240
ShortTitle:
INVITA06
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
94
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SITTING	WITH	YOU	IN	DISCOURSE	AND	HEARING	YOU	TALK	ABOUT
ENLIGHTENMENT	 AND	 SILENCE,	 I	 FEEL	 IMMENSELY	 BLESSED,
SOMETIMES
ALMOST	TOUCHING	THIS	 SPACE	OF	COMING	HOME,	AND	SILENCE
COMES
TO	MY	MIND.
BUT	AS	SOON	AS	YOU	LEAVE	THROUGH	THE	DOOR	AND	THE	MUSIC
STOPS,	IMMEDIATELY	THE	CHATTERING	INSIDE	STARTS	AGAIN.	FOR
ME	IT	IS
MUCH	 MORE	 DIFFICULT	 TO	 BECOME	 SILENT	 WHEN	 I	 AM
MEDITATING
ALONE,	BUT	SO	EASY	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE.
IS	THIS	NATURAL	IN	THE	RELATIONSHIP	BETWEEN	A	MASTER	AND
A	DISCIPLE?
Deva	Anuragini,	 it	 is	 very	 natural.	 Being	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 a	master,	 silence
happens	 on	 its	 own	 accord.	 Just	 as	 in	 the	 deep	Himalayas,	where	 the	 snow	 is
eternal	and	the	silence	almost	ancient...	 just	sitting	there	under	a	tree,	you	start
feeling,	falling	in	tune	with	the	immensity	that	surrounds	you.
To	be	in	the	presence	of	the	master	is	even	more	deep-going.	Because	what	is	the
meaning	of	being	 in	 the	presence	of	 the	master?	 It	 is	being	with	someone	you
love,	 someone	 you	 trust;	 someone	 with	 whom	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 go	 into	 the
unknown.	Being	 in	 this	 climate,	you	 forget	your	 trivial	matters;	 and	 forgetting
comes	easy,	not	by	your	effort.
The	master	is	silent	and	silence	is	contagious.
His	heart	 slowly	slowly	brings	you	also	 into	a	synchronicity.	You	start	beating
with	his	heart,	in	the	same	rhythm.
This	 is	 a	 beautiful	 experience	 in	 itself,	 but	 it	 is	 only	 a	 lesson	 on	 the	 path;	 it
simply	gives	you	a	glimpse.	Silence	has	to	come	to	you	in	your	aloneness,	then	it
is	your	own.
Otherwise,	 silence	 in	 the	Himalayas	belongs	 to	 the	Himalayas;	you	are	 simply
overwhelmed.	 And	 the	 silence	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 master	 belongs	 to	 the
master;	 you	 are	 simply	 touched.	 That's	 why,	 as	 soon	 as	 you	 are	 left	 alone	 to
yourself,	 your	old	mind	 is	back;	 it	 has	 just	been	waiting	by	 the	 side.	 It	 comes
with	a	vengeance.
You	have	to	understand	one	thing:	that	the	presence	of	the	master	simply	gives
you	an	indication	that	you	are	capable	of	silence,	that	mind	is	not	your	master.
That	it	is	not	an	impossibility;	that	you	can	have	a	little	taste	of	it.	Whilst	being
alone,	remember	it:	that	the	mind	is	just	a	servant	mechanism.
Watch	it;	it	is	very	ancient,	and	your	silence	is	very	new.	Your	silence	is	almost
like	a	roseflower	and	your	chattering	mind	is	like	a	rock,	very	ancient,	very	old.
It	can	crush	the	roseflower	at	any	moment	unless	you	are	aware,	unless	you	learn
one	lesson	--	that	mind	may	go	on,	yakkety-yak,	chattering,	but	you	should	not
become	part	of	it.
Certainly	you	are	not	the	mind,	just	as	you	are	not	the	body.	You	are	within	the
body,	 within	 the	mind,	 but	 your	 center	 is	 separate	 from	 the	 cyclone.	 It	 has	 a
totally	 different	 quality	 to	 it.	 Silence,	 stillness	 is	 just	 natural	 to	 it;	 it	 is	 its
flowering.
We	have	got	mixed	up.	Being	too	close	to	the	mind,	working	twenty-four	hours
with	the	mechanism,	you	have	forgotten	the	distinction.
Just	 this	much	has	happened,	 that	you	have	 forgotten	something	which	 is	very
essential.
The	original	root	from	which	the	word	`sin'	comes,	means	forgetfulness.	To	me
this	is	the	only	sin.	All	else	are	just	mistakes	which	can	be	corrected.	And	once
this	sin	 is	dropped,	many	other	mistakes,	 fallacies,	will	disappear	on	 their	own
accord.
A	 simple	 strategy	 is	 needed;	 I	 call	 it	 meditation.	 You	 can	 call	 it	 anything	 --
awareness,	alertness,	remembering,	watchfulness;	the	names	don't	matter.	What
matters	is	that	you	should	be	able	not	to	get	into	the	chattering	of	the	mind.	Just
be	a	watcher.	Don't	participate.	Just	stand	aside	and	see.	Don't	even	try	to	stop	its
chattering,	 because	 even	 in	 stopping	 it	 you	 have	 lost	 your	 watchfulness.	 You
have	become	a	participant	--	unfriendly,	but	still	you	have	become	a	participant
in	the	process.
This	 is	 a	 very	 simple	 phenomenon	 once	 you	 see	 the	 point	 that	 you	 can	 stand
aside	and	let	the	mind	go.	Don't	judge	what	is	going	on	in	the	mind	as	right	or
wrong.	Don't	 evaluate,	 just	 remain	 an	 indifferent	watcher.	 The	mind	 is	 almost
like	the	traffic	on	the	road.	It	is	none	of	your	concern	to	think	about	everybody
who	is	passing	on	the	road;	it	is	just	a	habit.
You	 may	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 great	 English	 linguist,	 Dr.	 Johnson,	 whose
dictionary	 is	 still	 used.	 He	 had	 got	 into	 the	 habit,	 while	 going	 for	 a	 walk,	 of
touching	every	 electric	pole.	 If	 by	 some	chance,	he	would	 forget	 to	 touch	and
then	 remember,	 he	would	go	back.	He	could	not	go	 ahead	without	 touching	 it
because	he	would	 feel	 something	 is	missing.	He	became	so	 identified	with	 the
habit	 that	no	 friend	 liked	 to	go	with	him,	even	 for	a	morning	walk,	because	 it
looked	so	stupid...
"I	 am	standing	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	 road	and	you	have	gone	back	 to	 touch	an
electric	pole?	Why	do	you	do	that?"
And	he	said,	"That's	the	question:	Why	do	I	do	it?	But	if	I	don't	do	it,	it	seems
something	is	missing."
Your	mind	and	your	getting	involved	with	it,	are	not	very	different.	You	have	to
learn	to	disidentify	yourself.
See	the	mind	working.
Be	watchful.
But	don't	make	any	judgment,	either	to	stop	it,	or	to	help	it,	or	to	prevent	it.	In	no
other	sense	should	you	move	from	your	indifference.
You	 will	 be	 surprised:	 a	 miracle	 is	 waiting	 for	 you.	 The	 moment	 you	 are
completely	indifferent,	standing	by	the	side,	the	traffic	on	the	road	slows	down.
Less	 thoughts	 are	 coming;	 bigger	 gaps	 between	 thoughts	 are	 happening.	 And
those	bigger	gaps	will	give	you	such	a	beautiful	peace,	such	silence.
So	two	things	are	happening:	the	mind	is	slowing	down	and	gaps	of	silence	are
enriching	 you,	 nourishing	 you,	 making	 you	 stronger	 to	 become	 disidentified.
You	have	 learnt	 the	secret;	now	the	key	 is	 in	your	hand.	Watching,	 finally	one
comes	to	a	point	when	one	thought	leaves	and	another	thought	does	not	come	for
hours.	One	is	simply	watching	and	the	road	is	empty.
This	silence	is	yours.
The	silence	in	my	presence,	or	in	the	Himalayas,	or	in	a	silent	deep	forest	is	not
yours.
You	are	simply	overwhelmed	by	something	so	great	that	your	small	mind	simply
stops.
But	it	is	not	much	of	a	gain,	you	should	not	become	habituated	to	it;	otherwise,
whenever	you	want	to	be	silent	you	have	to	come	close	to	me.	That	has	become
a	dependence.
No	real	master	would	like	his	disciples	to	be	dependent	on	him.	The	whole	effort
of	an	authentic	master	is	to	make	you	independent,	to	make	you	a	master.	How
long	are	you	going	to	remain	a	disciple?
But	 it	 is	 all	 in	your	hands.	 I	 can	give	you	 the	glimpses	at	 the	most.	But	 those
glimpses	are	keys;	you	should	learn	something	from	them.	One	thing	is	certain,
you	are	capable	of	being	silent.	A	second	thing	is	certain,	that	your	mind	stops.
Now	the	only	thing	to	get	hold	of	is	how	to	do	it	on	your	own	so	that	wherever
you	are,	you	are	surrounded	by	silence	and	all	its	beauties	and	blessings.
There	is	a	rule	called	Finagle's	Eighth	Rule:	Teamwork	is	essential;	it	allows	you
to	blame	someone	else.
Don't	blame	me	for	your	silence	--	take	responsibility.	Even	when	you	are	here,	I
may	be	the	triggering	point	but	the	silence	is	yours.	I	may	have	been	a	catalytic
agent,	but	the	silence	is	yours.
After	 acquiring	 enough	 money	 from	 handouts,	 an	 inhabitant	 of	 the	 Bowery
decided	 to	 take	 his	 refreshment	 at	 one	 of	 Wall	 Street's	 better	 drinking
establishments.
A	financial	tycoon	seated	next	to	him	was	visibly	appalled	at	the	appearance	and
odor	 of	 the	 down-and-outer	 --	 so	 much	 so,	 that	 he	 turned	 to	 the	 man	 and
pointedly	said,	"
`Cleanliness	is	next	to	godliness'	--	John	Wesley."
His	words	were	ignored	by	the	bum.
A	few	minutes	later,	the	financier	again	intoned	loudly,	"	`Cleanliness	is	next	to
godliness'	--	John	Wesley!"	Still	he	was	ignored.
Finally,	the	visibly	irritated	financier	shouted	in	the	man's	face,	"	`Cleanliness	is
next	to	godliness'	--	John	Wesley!"
To	which	the	skid	row	bum	calmly	replied,	"`Screw	you'	--	Tennessee	Williams."
The	poor	fellow	must	have	been	holding	himself	as	much	as	he	could.	But	an	old
habit...
finally,	he	could	not	manage;	 it	was	 too	much.	He	forgot	completely	where	he
was	and	that	he	had	to	behave	in	a	mannerly	way.
Your	mind	has	collected	all	kinds	of	rubbish	--	 it	 is	a	bum.	And	whenever	you
are	sitting	alone,	you	don't	have	anything	to	do,	the	mind	has	every	opportunity
to	exhibit	 all	 its	 accumulations.	And	 it	 is	because	you	become	 interested	 in	 it,
remember:	being	DISinterested	in	it	is	also	a	kind	of	interest;	being	against	it	is
also	a	kind	of	friendship.	It	is	a	love-hate	relationship.	You	wanted	to	be	silent,
but	just	your	wanting	won't	help.
Even	if	you	shout	to	it,	"Stop!	Don't	go	on	chattering,"	it	is	not	going	to	listen.
In	 fact,	 the	only	way	mind	has	ever	become	silent	 is	whenever	you	are	utterly
indifferent
--	as	if	it	is	not	your	mind	and	it	does	not	matter	whether	it	chatters	or	not.	When
your	indifference	is	so	deep	that	it	does	not	matter	if	it	chatters...	Let	him	chatter.
If	the	mind	stops	chattering,	don't	start	patting	your	back.	Just	remain	calm	and
quiet,	alert	and	watchful...	and	mind	has	always	stopped.	Meditation	has	never
failed	if	you	have	followed	the	right	rule.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	I	HEARD	YOU	TELLING	THE	STORY	OF	BUDDHA	SENDING
SARIPUTTA	BACK	TO	HIS	KINGDOM,	THIS	SUDDEN	FEAR	AROSE:	IF	I
GOT
ENLIGHTENED,	YOU	WOULDN'T	SEND	ME	BACK	TO	TEXAS,	WOULD
YOU?
Sarito,	it	seems	you	are	from	Texas.	Nobody	has	ever	heard	that	any	Texan	has
become	enlightened,	so	it	is	a	very	faraway	possibility.	Texan	and	enlightened?	-
-	it	has	never	been	heard!
Moreover,	 if	 by	 being	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 have	 dropped	 the	 idea	 of	 these	 stupid
divisions	 of	 nations,	 states,	 races,	 religions,	 and	 you	 have	 become	 simply	 a
human	 being,	 an	 inhabitant	 of	 this	 whole	 beautiful	 planet,	 you	 may	 become
enlightened.	But	certainly	I	will	not	send	you	to	Texas,	because	there	is	a	famous
rule	of	Mars:	An	expert	is	anyone	from	out	of	town.	In	Texas	nobody	is	going	to
hear	you.	I	will	send	you	somewhere	else.
But	I	will	send	you,	certainly,	so	beware	of	enlightenment.	If	you	don't	want	to
go,	don't	become	enlightened!
But	I	think	it	is	worth	going.	It	is	worth	going	anywhere,	because	once	you	are
enlightened,	you	need	to	share	it.	You	have	to	go	to	those	who	are	still	groping	in
the	dark.	With	enlightenment	necessarily	 comes	a	deep	 feeling	of	 compassion.
The	people	may	not	listen	to	you;	the	people	may	even	feel	irritated	and	annoyed
by	you;	the	people	may	even	be	condemnatory	of	you,	but	still	you	will	have	a
deep	compassion.
Whatever	they	are	doing	is	bound	to	be	--	they	are	ignorant.	You	have	also	been
ignorant	 and	you	have	also	behaved	 in	 the	 same	patterns.	Now	you	are	out	of
darkness,	 you	 can	 understand:	 those	who	 are	 in	 darkness	 are	 going	 to	 behave
accordingly.	But	they	need	help	--	in	spite	of	themselves	they	need	help.
And	by	giving	help	to	those	who	are	living	in	unawareness,	in	unconsciousness,
your	own	enlightenment	will	become	richer.	It	will	grow	new	dimensions	to	it.
So	 it	 is	 not	 only	 helping	 them;	 you	 are	 also	 being	 helped	 immensely.	 Sharing
what	you	have,	you	will	have	more	of	it.
Existence	is	never	in	favor	of	hoarders,	of	misers.
Existence	believes	in	abundance.
Otherwise	what	 is	 the	need	of	 so	many	 flowers?	 --	 just	 a	 few	chosen	 flowers,
lotuses,	roses,	would	have	been	enough.	What	is	the	need	of	millions	of	flowers?
There	 are	 hundreds	 of	 scientists,	 continually	 discovering	 new	 species	 of
flowers...	and	there	are	still	places	where	man	has	not	reached.
I	know	a	place	 in	 the	Himalayas	where	 there	 is	a	 flower	valley.	 I	have	 looked
down	into	it,	but	it	seems	nobody	has	ever	descended	there.	The	mountain	is	so
steep	that	it	seems	almost	impossible	to	get	down	to	the	valley;	it	is	thousands	of
feet	deep.	And	 the	flowers	 look	so	rare,	with	such	rare	colors;	 I	have	not	seen
those	flowers	anywhere	else.
I	 have	 inquired	 of	 experts,	 but	 they	 say	 nobody	 wants	 to	 get	 into	 trouble.	 If
somehow	one	could	reach	down	there,	then	coming	back	is	out	of	the	question.
People	 have	 looked,	 they	 have	 photographed.	 They	 have	 enlarged	 the
photographs,	 and	 they	 were	 amazed	 that	 these	 flowers	 don't	 belong	 to	 any
species	that	we	know.	And	this	may	not	be	the	only	place	like	this.
We	have	 thought	up	 to	now	 that	Everest	 is	 the	highest	peak	of	 the	Himalayas.
But	just	a	few	days	ago	the	Chinese	discovered	a	new	peak	which	is	higher	than
Everest.	It	is	a	Himalayan	peak,	but	in	the	whole	past	nobody	had	even	thought
that	there	was	anything	higher	than	Everest.	And	there	are	thousands	of	places	in
the	Himalayas	which	have	never	been	reached	by	human	beings.	They	all	grow
strange	flowers,	with	a	strange	perfume.
Existence	is	very	abundant.	And	if	you	want	to	be	part	of	existence	--	and	that's
what	enlightenment	is,	becoming	part	of	the	whole	--	you	cannot	be	a	miser.	You
will	have	to	reach	people.	They	will	prevent	you,	because	the	blind	person	does
not	want	to	hear	about	light.	It	hurts	him	because	it	makes	him	feel	again	that	he
is	blind.	He	would	love	to	know	that	there	is	no	light,	that	it	is	only	a	fiction	and
there	are	no	people	who	have	eyes;	these	are	just	very	cunning	people.	The	blind
man	will	be	very	 respectful	 to	 the	person	who	declares,	"There	 is	no	 light	and
there	are	no	eyes	and	you	are	a	perfect	being.
You	need	not	feel	humiliated	that	you	are	lacking	something."
But	this	is	the	trouble.	If	you	talk	to	the	blind	man	about	light,	he	is	going	to	be
angry	with	you	because	you	are	hurting	him.	But	without	hurting	him	you	cannot
help	him.	You	cannot	take	him	to	a	physician;	you	cannot	help	him	to	be	cured.
You	cannot	give	him	the	world	of	light	and	colors	and	beauties.
Eighty	percent	 of	 life	 consists	 of	 eyes;	 a	 blind	man	 lives	only	 twenty	percent.
This	is	the	ordinary	blindness.	The	unenlightened	perhaps	does	not	see	at	all	in
the	spiritual	sense.
Enlightenment	 brings	 one	 hundred	 percent	 a	 new	 light,	 a	 new	 life,	 and	 a	 new
laughter	to	your	being.
Sarito,	you	yourself	would	 like	 to	go	 to	Texas,	 although	Texas	 is	not	 the	 right
place.	But	 if	you	become	enlightened,	don't	be	worried	 --	you	can	 find	people
here	who	are	unenlightened;	help	them.	Why	be	concerned	about	Texas?	And	in
Texas	nobody	 is	 going	 to	 listen	 to	you.	You	have	heard	 the	 rule:	An	 expert	 is
anyone	from	out	of	town.
In	Hindustani	there	is	a	similar	proverb:	The	drums	which	are	very	distant	--	it
seems	almost	an	echo	--	they	are	the	most	beautiful	drums.
In	 ancient	Hebrew	 there	 is	 a	 proverb;	 Jesus	 has	 quoted	 it:	A	 prophet	 is	 never
respected	by	his	own	people.
In	fact,	instead	of	respecting,	they	crucify	their	own	prophet.	It	is	always	good	to
reach	to	strangers	because	they	will	be	able,	at	least	just	out	of	courtesy,	to	listen
to	you.	If	you	go	to	your	own	people	who	have	known	you	as	blind,	they	cannot
believe	that	now	you	have	become	enlightened.
I	 will	 not	 send	 you	 anywhere	 --	 you	 will	 ask	 to	 be	 sent	 somewhere,	 to	 help
someone.	I	am	saying	it	out	of	my	own	experience.	After	enlightenment,	I	could
have	 rested	and	not	bothered	unnecessarily	about	people	 from	whom	I	can	get
only	condemnation.	They	are	not	crucifying	me	because	it	is	a	little	out	of	date.
They	 are	 not	 assassinating	me	 because	 they	 have	 learned	 one	 thing:	 once	 you
assassinate	 an	 enlightened	 man,	 the	 assassination	 becomes	 the	 cause	 of	 a
tremendous	tradition.	The	people	who	were	never	interested	in	the	man	become
immediately	 interested	 --	 "Why	 have	 you	 assassinated	 him?"	 If	 Jesus	 had	 not
been	crucified	there	would	have	been	no	Christianity,	no	possibility	at	all.
So	the	fools	have	also	learned	something:	condemn,	say	all	kinds	of	lies	against
people	you	would	like	to	crucify,	but	don't	crucify.	You	have	done	it	once,	and
you	are	still	suffering.	Two	thousand	years	have	passed,	and	Christianity	goes	on
growing.	 Jews	can	never	 forgive	 themselves	 that	 they	did	 such	a	 stupid	 act	 as
crucifying	Jesus;	otherwise,	how	many	followers	had	he?	--	 twelve	uneducated
apostles,	villagers,	fishermen...	not	a	single	rabbi,	not	a	single	learned	professor,
not	a	single	man	belonging	to	the	higher	society.
And	these	twelve	beggars	who	had	gathered	around	Jesus	had	nothing	to	do	with
religion.
Their	whole	 interest	was,	 "He	 is	 the	only	begotten	 son	of	God";	 if	 they	go	on
clinging	to	him,	there	is	a	possibility	for	them	to	enter	into	paradise!
On	the	last	night	when	Jesus	is	about	to	be	caught,	you	can	see	their	desire.	They
are	not	worried	about	his	being	caught;	 they	are	not	worried	about	 the	 rumors
that	he	will	be	crucified,	they	are	worried:	"Lord,	in	paradise	of	course	you	will
have	the	second	place	to	God,	but	what	will	be	the	order	for	us?	Who	will	be	the
third?	Who	will	be	the	fourth?"	--
a	poor	lot,	greedy,	not	concerned	with	religion	at	all.	Their	concern	is	that	in	this
life	 they	 have	 suffered	much;	 they	 have	 been	 poor,	 uneducated.	 At	 least	 now
there	is	a	chance	to	hang	around	the	only	begotten	son	of	God.	And	when	on	the
last	 judgment	 day	 he	 chooses	 the	 people	who	 are	 to	 be	 taken	 into	 heaven,	 of
course	those	twelve	apostles	will	be	the	first;	they	are	making	it	guaranteed.	At
the	last	moment	they	are	asking	such	nonsense.
Gautam	Buddha	also	asked	his	disciples,	"Do	you	have	something	to	ask?"	And
he	had	ten	thousand	disciples,	but	they	all	simply	remained	silent.
They	said,	"You	have	said	so	much,	and	we	have	not	practiced	even	that.	Don't
make	 us	 feel	 ashamed.	 In	 this	 last	moment	 of	 your	 life	we	would	 like	 you	 to
relax	and	be	silent.
We	 don't	 have	 any	 question;	we	 don't	want	 to	 disturb	 you	 at	 all."	 This	was	 a
totally	different	kind	of	assembly;	they	were	concerned	for	their	master	that	his
death	should	be	silent	and	peaceful.	He	had	done	so	much.
But	Jesus	had	a	different	kind	of	gang.	They	were	all	interested	in	how	to	enter
into	paradise;	Jesus	was	just	 the	right	person	to	hang	around.	If	somebody	had
proved	that	he	was	not	the	only	begotten	son	of	God	they	would	have	been	the
first	to	escape.	Then	why	unnecessarily	waste	your	time?	Just	go	back	and	catch
fish,	or	farm	your	fields,	or	go	to	your	orchards.	Don't	waste	time	unnecessarily	-
-	you	are	poor	already.
The	moment	you	become	enlightened,	a	 tremendous	desire	will	arise	 in	you	to
share	it	with	all	and	sundry.
A	 wealthy,	 ninety-five-year-old	 multimillionaire	 is	 meeting	 with	 his	 financial
adviser.
The	 adviser	 is	 very	 excited	 and	 tells	 the	 old	man,	 "I	 just	 found	 out	 about	 an
investment	I	can	make	for	you	which	will	double	your	money	in	just	five	years!"
"Five	years?	Are	you	kidding?"	exclaims	the	old	man.	"At	my	age,	I	don't	even
buy	green	bananas."
Who	knows?	By	the	time	they	are	ripe,	you	may	not	be	here.	Experience	teaches
a	few	things.	My	experience	is	that	once	you	are	enlightened,	you	are	so	full,	just
like	a	rain	cloud,	you	want	to	shower.	Yes,	even	in	Texas!
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
TO	SIT	WITH	YOU	IS	LIKE	DRINKING	FROM	A	MOUNTAIN	STREAM.
MY
OWN	ATTEMPTS	AT	MEDITATION	AND	MOMENTS	OF	 LOVE	BRING,
AT	THE
MOST,	CITY	WATER.	HOW	CAN	I	FIND	YOUR	CLARITY	AND	SILENCE
IN	ME?
About	silence	and	clarity,	Shantamo,	we	will	discuss	later.	First	be	sure	that	the
city	water	is	not	from	Poona	--	it	is	polluted!
It	 is	 true;	you	have	given	a	good	comparison.	You	say,	"To	sit	with	you	is	 like
drinking	from	a	mountain	stream.	My	own	attempts	at	meditation	and	moments
of	love	bring,	at	the	most,	city	water.
"How	can	I	find	your	clarity	and	silence	in	me?"
There	 is	no	qualitative	difference	between	 the	water	 in	a	mountain	 stream	and
the	unpolluted	water	coming	from	your	tap	--	there	is	no	qualitative	difference.	If
you	 have	 tasted,	 the	 difference	 will	 be	 in	 richness.	 The	 stream	water	 is	 cool,
fresh,	always	new.	It	is	coming	from	melted	snows	from	the	high	mountain.
All	 that	you	have	to	know	is	that	even	if	you	have	started	to	taste	the	ordinary
city	water,	you	are	on	the	right	way.	To	reach	the	mountain	stream,	you	will	have
to	raise	your	consciousness	to	that	height.	You	don't	have	to	become	a	mountain
climber,	you	have	to	become	a	consciousness	climber.
There	are	schools	in	the	world	where	mountain	climbing	is	taught;	in	this	school,
we	teach	you	how	to	climb	higher	in	your	consciousness,	because	that	is	the	only
real	height.
And	you	have	it	within	you	--	the	highest	possibility	of	consciousness.	It	is	just
that	you	have	not	worked,	or	not	even	seen	upwards	to	your	own	height.	You	are
involved	 in	 so	 much	 trivia	 that	 you	 don't	 have	 time,	 just	 a	 little	 time	 for
clarifying	your	own	consciousness.	You	go	on	postponing.	Small	 and	ordinary
things	you	don't	postpone,	but	all	that	is	higher,	all	that	is	really	valuable,	you	go
on	postponing.
In	Hindu	scriptures	they	have	divided	life	 into	four	parts.	And	at	 the	time	they
divided	life	into	four	parts,	the	highest	age	of	man	was	not	more	than	forty.	Their
division	in	the	scriptures	is	that	up	to	twenty-five	years	you	should	be	a	celibate
and	 a	 student;	 up	 to	 fifty,	which	was	 very	 rare,	 you	 should	 be	 a	 householder,
raise	 children,	 run	 businesses,	 earn	 money,	 fulfill	 desires,	 ambitions	 --	 be
worldly,	in	a	single	word.	Up	to	seventy-five	years,	you	start	by	and	by,	slowly
slowly,	to	get	out	of	your	trivial,	ordinary	life;	after	seventy-five	you	become	a
sannyasin.	 Great	 strategy!	 Neither	 will	 you	 live	 nor	 will	 you	 ever	 become	 a
sannyasin.
This	 is	 a	 way	 of	 postponement,	 very	 cleverly	 done	 --	 a	 good	 division,	 to
postpone	any	effort	of	raising	your	consciousness.
It	is	not	strange	that	the	VEDAS,	which	define	this	way	of	how	life	should	be...
Those	VEDAS	are	written	by	hundreds	of	learned	people	--	not	a	single	one	was
an	enlightened	soul.	Even	the	so-called	seers	of	the	VEDAS	not	only	have	their
married	wives,	but	also	have	purchased	women	from	the	marketplace	--	because
women	were	still	sold.
Now	what	kind	of	seers	were	these	people,	who	could	purchase	a	woman	like	a
commodity?	And	what	respect	could	 they	have	 towards	a	commodity?	Women
were	auctioned;	hence,	in	Sanskrit,	for	`wife'	there	are	two	words	--	people	have
forgotten	the	distinction.	One	is	patni;	patni	means	your	married	wife.	Another	is
vadhu;	vadhu	means	your	purchased	woman.	You	can	use	her	as	a	wife,	but	her
children	will	 not	be	 able	 to	 inherit	 anything	 from	you	because	 she	 is	not	your
legal	wife.
Even	the	so-called	seers	living	in	the	forests	were	doing	all	such	things.	I	don't
think	 any	 of	 them...	 I	 have	 looked	 very	 closely	 into	 each	 sentence	 in	 the
VEDAS.	 I	 could	 not	 see	 that	 any	 one	 of	 them	 had	 reached	 to	 the	 heights	 of
Gautam	 Buddha.	 In	 fact,	 ninety-eight	 percent	 seem	 to	 be	 very	 stupid	 people,
very	ordinary.
Artie	Finkelstein	was	advised	by	his	doctor	that	he	had	a	very	rare	disease,	and
the	only	remedy	was	a	daily	glass	of	fresh	mother's	milk.	Artie	finally	found	a
young	lady	who	was	willing	to	sell	her	milk,	and	Artie	sat	down	and	nursed	on
her	breast.
After	about	five	minutes,	 the	woman	looked	at	him	and	breathlessly	asked,	"Is
there	anything	else	you	would	like?"
"Well,"	said	Artie,	"Er...	maybe	a	cookie?"
Idiots	are	idiots!	And	the	more	aged	they	become,	the	more	idiotic	they	become.
Even	 small	 children	 seem	 to	 be	 more	 clear,	 more	 crystal	 clear	 than	 your	 so-
called	old	idiots.
"I	had	tea	in	a	Jewish	house	yesterday,"	said	little	Sadie.
"How	did	you	know	it	was	a	Jewish	house?"	asked	her	mother.
"Well,	 because	 they	 had	 a	 fork	 in	 the	 sugar	 bowl!"	 replied	 Sadie.	 Even	 small
children...
Murphy	has	his	Sixth	Rule:	It	is	impossible	to	make	anything	foolproof	because
fools	are	so	ingenious.
And	they	are	all	around....
Raising	your	consciousness	is	not	something	that	you	have	to	plan,	that	you	have
to	carefully	work	out;	it	is	a	simple	phenomenon.
The	Fourth	Workshop	Principle	says:	The	more	carefully	you	plan	a	project,	the
more	confusion	there	is	when	something	goes	wrong.
It	is	always	better	to	remain	simple,	and	my	teaching	is	very	simple.	In	just	one
word	I	have	summed	up	 the	whole	of	 religiousness:	Be	alert	of	your	 thoughts,
and	 they	will	die	of	 their	own	accord.	And	as	 less	and	 less	 thoughts	are	 there,
you	become	more	and	more	weightless;	you	start	rising	high,	without	any	effort.
Soon	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 taste	 the	 fresh	 mountain	 stream.	 It	 is	 your	 own
consciousness	at	its	best.
Shantamo,	you	are	asking,	"How	can	I	find	your	clarity	and	silence	in	me?"	Just
drop	all	 that	 is	 rubbish;	 just	 look	at	 the	whole	 furniture	of	your	mind.	Perhaps
you	are	carrying	unnecessary	things	--	how	many	of	your	thoughts	are	really	of
any	use?	Just	sit	down	one	day	and	write.	Close	your	door	and	lock	it,	so	there	is
no	fear	and	you	can	be	authentic.
Just	 write	 down	 exactly	 whatever	 arises	 in	 the	 mind.	 Don't	 edit;	 don't	 add
anything	 to	 make	 it	 look	 beautiful.	 Don't	 be	 worried	 that	 it	 looks	 as	 if	 some
madman	 is	writing	 it;	 nobody	 is	 looking	 at	 you.	 Just	 a	 ten	minute	 exercise	 of
writing	 exactly	 everything	 that	 is	 within	 you	 --	 neither	 adding	 anything	 nor
taking	anything	out	--	and	then	read	it	aloud	so	that	you	can	hear	also	that	this	is
your	mind.	It	is	a	madhouse.	So	many	voices:	irrelevant,	relevant,	meaningless,
not	 at	 all	 related	 to	 anything,	 and	 they	 are	 all	 running	 around.	 But	 you	 have
allowed	them,	you	have	nourished	them,	just	by	being	not	alert.
There	is	a	small	anecdote	in	Gautam	Buddha's	life...
A	great	king,	Prasenjita,	has	come	to	listen	to	his	discourse.	Of	course,	it	is	his
capital,	his	kingdom;	he	is	sitting	in	front	and	while	Gautam	Buddha	is	speaking,
he	is	continuously	moving	his	big	toe.
Finally,	Buddha	stopped	and	asked	Prasenjita,	"Do	you	know	that	your	big	toe	is
moving	constantly?"	He	 immediately	 stopped.	Buddha	said,	 "Don't	 stop.	Let	 it
move,	but	be	aware	that	it	is	moving."
But	he	said,	"There	is	no	need."
"Then	why	was	it	moving?	It	is	your	toe,	and	you	are	not	aware	of	it."
This	is	our	state	of	unawareness.	You	are	doing	all	kinds	of	things,	most	of	them
without	being	conscious.	Why	are	you	doing	them?	Smoking	a	cigarette	--	have
you	ever	bothered	about	why	you	are	doing	it?	When	fresh	air	is	available	you
are	making	your	breathing	dirty	with	nicotine,	 poison,	 smelly,	 destroying	your
lungs	--	and	paying	for	it!
Many	governments	have	decided	that	on	every	packet	of	cigarettes	there	should
be	 some	 statement	 saying	 that	 it	 is	 harmful	 to	 your	 health.	The	manufacturers
were	 very	 angry,	 and	 they	 tried	 to	 prevent	 this	 from	 being	 done,	 because	 this
would	destroy	their	business	-
-	 and	 it	 is	 a	 big	 business.	But	medical	 science	was	 absolutely	 insistent	 that	 it
should	be	written.	Then	 it	 is	 the	 individual's	 responsibility.	He	has	 read	 it,	and
still	he	is	smoking;	then	he	is	taking	his	own	responsibility.
It	was	thought	that	the	cigarette	business	would	fall	down,	that	very	few	people
will	be	so	stupid	as	to	read	it	and	still	smoke.	This	is	the	state	of	humanity;	the
business	 has	 not	 disappeared.	 There	 are	 more	 factories,	 and	 there	 are	 more
cigarettes,	and	there	are	more	smokers.	And	it	is	not	that	they	don't	know	how	to
read.	 The	 doctor	 goes	 on	 saying,	 the	 wife	 goes	 on	 saying,	 the	 friends	 go	 on
saying,	"Stop,	it	is	destroying	your	lungs.	It	is	cutting	your	life;	it	is	dangerous;
even	cancer	is	possible	through	it."	But	it	makes	no	difference.
That's	why	 I	 say	 humanity	 is	 living	 in	 a	 deeply	 unconscious	 state.	 If	 you	 are
conscious,	 just	 a	 little	 bit	 conscious,	 your	 life	 pattern	will	 start	 changing.	You
will	 drop	many	 things	which	 you	were	 doing,	 and	 you	will	 start	many	 things
which	you	were	postponing.
The	day	you	start	being	alert	and	aware,	you	have	taken	a	great	step	towards	the
heights	of	your	own	being.	And	it	will	not	be	long,	if	you	persist,	to	reach	to	the
fresh	 mountain	 stream	 water.	 Otherwise	 your	 whole	 life	 remains	 polluted,
remains	without	 any	 adventure,	without	 any	 song,	without	 any	music,	without
any	clarity.
It	 is	your	birthright	 to	have	clarity	and	 silence.	And	 if	you	don't	have	 them,	 it
simply	means	you	have	not	tried	to	find	what	are	your	hidden	qualities,	what	is
your	hidden	splendor.	You	have	been	living	outside	the	house,	just	in	the	porch.
You	 never	 enter	 into	 the	 house;	 you	 don't	 know	 the	 treasures	 that	 are	 in	 the
house.
People	 don't	 feel	 that	 they	 are	 lost,	 because	 they	 don't	 care	 at	 all	 about
themselves.	 Rune's	 Rule	 is:	 If	 you	 don't	 care	 where	 you	 are,	 you	 aren't	 lost!
Obviously,	if	you	don't	care	then	wherever	you	are	it	is	perfectly	good.
Create	a	little	care	about	yourself.
Life	is	very	precious;	don't	waste	it	carelessly.
Just	 a	 little	 care,	 and	 tremendous	 is	 the	 benefit.	 Because	 as	 you	 start	 being
careful,	 alertness	will	 come	automatically.	Consciousness	will	 start	 growing	 in
you;	your	actions	will	reflect	your	clarity,	your	silence,	your	beauty,	your	grace.
And	I	am	not	asking	of	you	something	superhuman;	it	is	just	your	human	right.
But	 nobody	 else	 can	 give	 it	 to	 you,	 you	will	 have	 to	 claim	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 in	 the
hands	of	governments	to	declare	it	in	their	constitutions	--	that	won't	help.
You	have	to	do	a	little	work	upon	yourself.	Every	man	has	to	be	a	little	artistic	in
finding	and	creating	his	own	being,	giving	it	beauty	and	grace,	intelligence.
But	people	go	on	living	so	stupidly...	the	only	reason	seems	to	be	that	they	find
everybody	else	is	also	living	the	same	way,	so	perhaps	that	is	the	right	way;	the
majority	cannot	be	wrong!
A	man	had	gone	to	picnic	with	his	wife,	and	the	wife	stopped	at	a	place	near	a
pond	with	beautiful	trees,	and	said,	"This	seems	to	be	the	right	spot."
The	man	said,	"Certainly.	Fifty	million	mosquitoes	cannot	be	wrong!"
Truth	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 majority;	 truth	 has	 always	 been	 a	 finding	 of	 the
individual.	The	majority	has	always	lived	in	lies,	in	fictions,	in	fabricated	ideas,
which	are	consoling.
Truth	 needs	 a	 little	 effort	 on	 your	 part	 to	 drop	 all	 that	 is	 false,	 fictitious,
superstitious,	 given	 to	 you	 by	 your	 parents	 and	 by	 your	 society.	 And
immediately	you	will	find	your	intelligence	is	becoming	sharper.
Just	 rely	 on	 your	 own	 intelligence	 and	 you	will	 find	 clarity.	And	 just	 to	 have
intelligence	 is	 to	 have	 such	 a	 treasure	 --	 just	 to	 look	 at	 things	 without	 any
prejudice,	 without	 any	 preconceived	 idea.	 Slowly,	 slowly	 clarity	 grows...	 but
give	it	an	opportunity.
It	 was	 the	 first	 day	 of	 the	 new	 term	 at	 Princeton,	 and	 a	 black	 freshman	 was
learning	 his	 way	 around	 the	 campus.	 Stopping	 a	 distinguished	 looking
upperclassman	he	inquired,
"Say,	can	you	tell	me	where	the	library	is	at?"
"My	good	 fellow,"	 came	 the	 reply,	 "at	 Princeton	we	do	 not	 end	 our	 sentences
with	a	preposition."
"All	right,"	said	the	freshman,	"can	you	tell	me	where	the	library	is	at,	asshole?"
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Even	donkeys	are	not	worried
24	August	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708245
ShortTitle:
INVITA07
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
101
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	ARE	ONE-POINTEDNESS,	CONCENTRATION	AND	MEDITATION
RELATED	TO	EACH	OTHER?
Prem	Dinesh,	 one-pointedness,	 concentration	 and	meditation	 are	 not	 related	 to
each	other	at	all.	This	is	one	of	the	confusions	prevalent	all	over	the	world.
One-pointedness	 is	 another	 name	 for	 concentration,	 but	 meditation	 is	 just	 the
opposite	of	concentration.	But	in	most	of	the	books,	in	most	of	the	dictionaries,
and	by	the	so-called	teachers,	they	are	used	as	if	they	are	synonymous.
Concentration	simply	means	one-pointedness.	It	is	something	of	the	mind.	Mind
can	be	a	chaos,	a	crowd.	Mind	can	be	many	voices,	many	directions.	Mind	can
be	a	crossroads.
Ordinarily,	that's	what	mind	is,	a	crowd.
But	 if	 the	 mind	 is	 a	 chaos,	 you	 cannot	 think	 rationally,	 you	 cannot	 think
scientifically.	To	think	rationally	and	scientifically,	you	have	to	be	concentrated
on	 the	object	of	your	 study.	Whatever	 the	object	 is,	 the	one	 thing	necessary	 is
that	you	are	pouring	your	whole	mental	energy	onto	that	object.	Only	with	this
much	 force	 is	 there	 a	 possibility	 to	 know	 the	 objective	 truth;	 hence,
concentration	is	the	method	of	all	sciences.
But	 meditation	 is	 totally	 different.	 First,	 meditation	 is	 not	 of	 the	 mind.	 It	 is
neither	 one-pointed	 mind	 nor	 many-pointed	 mind;	 it	 is	 simply	 not	 mind.
Meditation	 is	 going	 beyond,	 beyond	mind	 and	 its	 boundaries.	 They	 cannot	 be
related;	they	are	opposite	to	each	other.
Concentration	is	mind	and	meditation	is	no-mind.
The	West,	 particularly,	 has	not	 known	meditation.	 It	 has	 remained	 confined	 to
concentration	--	hence	all	scientific	progress,	technology	--	but	it	has	not	known
the	inner	science	of	silence,	peace,	of	being	a	light	unto	oneself.
One-pointedness	can	reveal	the	secrets	of	the	outside	world.	Meditation	reveals
the	secrets	of	your	own	subjectivity.	It	can	be	said,	concentration	is	objective	and
meditation	 is	 subjective.	 Concentration	 moves	 outwards;	 meditation	 moves
inwards.	Concentration	 is	going	 far	 away	 from	yourself.	Meditation	 is	 coming
home	to	your	innermost	center.
Mind,	 reason,	 logic,	 all	 point	 towards	 the	 outer	 --	 to	 them,	 the	 inner	 does	 not
exist	at	all.
But	 this	 is	 a	 fundamental	 law	 of	 the	 inner	 reality	 that	 nothing	 is	 ever
accomplished	in	the	inner	world	by	a	reasonable	man.	It	is	an	irrational,	or	better
to	say	suprarational	approach	--	to	know	oneself	you	don't	need	mind,	you	need
utter	silence.	Mind	is	always	concerned	with	some	thing	or	many	things.	There
are	thoughts	and	thoughts,	ripples	upon	ripples	--	the	lake	of	the	mind	is	never
ripple-less.
Your	inner	being	can	be	reflected	only	in	a	mirror	without	any	ripples.	No	mind	-
-
absolute	silence	of	all	thoughts,	absence	of	the	mind	completely	--	becomes	the
mirror	 without	 any	 ripples,	 without	 even	 a	 single	 fluttering	 of	 thought.	 And
suddenly,	the	explosion:	you	have	become	aware	for	the	first	time	of	your	own
being.
Up	 to	 now,	 you	 have	 known	 things	 of	 the	world;	 now	 you	 know	 the	 knower.
That's	 exactly	 what	 Socrates	 means	 when	 he	 says:	 Know	 thyself.	 Because
without	knowing	thyself	--	I	want	to	add	to	the	Socratic	advice	--	you	cannot	be
yourself.	Knowing	thyself	is	a	step	to	being	thyself,	and	unless	you	are	yourself,
you	 can	 never	 feel	 at	 ease.	 You	 can	 never	 feel	 contented;	 you	 can	 never	 feel
fulfilled;	you	can	never	feel	at	home	in	existence.
Some	discomfort,	some	misery...	you	are	not	exactly	aware	what,	but	a	constant
feeling	 that	 something	 essential	 is	 missing;	 that	 you	 have	 everything	 and	 yet
something	which	can	make	everything	meaningful	is	absent.	Your	palace	is	full
of	all	the	treasures	of	the	world	but	you	are	empty.	Your	kingdom	is	big	but	you
are	absent.	This	is	the	situation	of	the	modern	man;	hence,	the	constant	feeling	of
meaninglessness,	anxiety,	anguish,	angst.
Modern	 mind	 is	 the	 most	 troubled	 mind	 that	 has	 ever	 existed	 for	 the	 simple
reason	that	man	has	come	of	age.	A	buffalo	is	not	disturbed	about	the	meaning	of
life	--	the	grass	is	his	meaning	of	life;	more	than	that	all	is	useless.	The	trees	are
not	 interested	 in	 the	meaning	of	 life;	 just	 a	good	 shower	 and	a	 rich	 soil	 and	a
beautiful	 sun	 and	 life	 is	 a	 tremendous	 joy.	 No	 tree	 is	 an	 atheist;	 no	 tree	 ever
doubts.	 Except	 for	 man,	 doubt	 does	 not	 exist	 in	 existence.	 Except	 for	 man,
nobody	looks	worried.	Even	donkeys	are	not	worried.
They	look	so	relaxed,	so	philosophically	at	ease.	They	have	no	fear	of	death,	no
fear	of	the	unknown,	no	concern	for	the	tomorrow.
It	 is	 only	 man	 and	 his	 intelligence	 that	 has	 given	 him	 a	 very	 difficult	 life,	 a
constant	torture.	You	try	to	forget	it	in	a	thousand	and	one	ways,	but	it	goes	on
coming	back	again	and	again.	And	this	will	continue	until	your	last	breath	unless
you	know	something	of	meditation,	unless	you	know	how	to	turn	inwards,	how
to	have	a	look	at	your	own	interiority.
And	suddenly,	all	meaninglessness	disappears.
On	 a	 very	 high	 level,	 you	 are	 again	 as	 at	 ease	 as	 the	 trees.	 At	 a	 very	 high
consciousness,	you	are	as	relaxed	as	the	whole	of	existence.	But	your	relaxation
has	a	beauty	to	it	--	 it	 is	conscious,	 it	 is	alert.	It	knows	that	 it	 is.	It	knows	that
while	the	whole	of	existence	is	asleep,	it	is	awake.
What	is	the	point	of	a	beautiful	sunrise	if	you	are	asleep?	What	is	the	beauty	of	a
rose	 if	 you	 are	 asleep?	Mind	 is	 your	 sleep,	 concentrated	 or	 not.	Meditation	 is
your	awakening.
The	 moment	 you	 awake,	 sleep	 disappears	 and	 with	 it	 all	 the	 dreams,	 all	 the
projections,	 all	 expectations,	 all	 desires.	 Suddenly	 you	 are	 in	 a	 state	 of
desirelessness,	 non-ambition,	 unfathomable	 silence.	 And	 only	 in	 this	 silence,
blossoms	flower	in	your	being.	Only	in	this	silence	the	lotuses	open	their	petals.
Remember	that	any	teacher	who	says	to	you	that	concentration	is	meditation	is
committing	 a	 great	 crime.	 Not	 knowing	 that	 he	 is	 misleading	 you,	 and
misleading	 you	 on	 such	 a	 fundamental	 subject,	 he	 is	 far	more	 dangerous	 than
somebody	who	can	kill	you.
He	 is	 killing	 you	 far	 more	 significantly	 and	 deeply.	 He	 is	 destroying	 your
consciousness;	he	is	destroying	your	very	possibility	to	open	the	doors	of	all	the
mysteries	that	you	are.
Albert	 Camus	 has	 one	 beautiful	 statement	 to	 remember:	 "The	 absurd	 is	 the
essential	concept	and	the	first	truth."	Naturally,	when	mind	is	not	there,	no-mind
cannot	be	a	 rational	concept.	 It	 is	 absurd.	 It	 cannot	 say	anything	 reasonably	 --
where	it	is,	what	it	is,	what	it	signifies.	It	can	only	indicate	mystically	--	hence
all	 the	parables	of	 the	world.	The	mystics	could	not	say	 in	a	 logical	way	what
they	have	experienced.	They	went	around	telling	stories,	parables,	which	can	be
understood	on	two	levels:	one	of	the	mind	and	one	of	the	no-mind.
That	is	 the	beauty	of	a	parable.	You	can	understand	it	 just	 like	any	other	story,
but	it	was	not	meant	to	be	just	another	story;	it	was	meant	to	give	you	some	hint,
some	hidden	hint	 towards	 that	 for	which	mind	 is	 absolutely	 inadequate.	 I	will
give	you	a	few	examples.
A	blind	man	 is	 brought	 to	Gautam	Buddha.	The	 blind	man	 is	 not	 an	 ordinary
man,	he	is	a	great	logician.	And	his	whole	village	is	tired	of	his	logic.	They	are
very	annoyed	and	irritated	by	the	blind	man,	because	he	refuses	to	believe	that
light	exists.	And	he	requires	of	the	whole	village	that	if	they	say	light	exists,	they
have	to	give	him	proof:	"I	can	touch	things;	let	me	touch	your	light.	I	can	taste
things;	let	me	taste	your	light.	I	can	smell	things;	at	least	let	me	smell	your	light.
I	can	hear	things;	beat	the	light	so	I	can	hear	the	sound.	Do	something.	These	are
the	only	four	senses	I	have."
Light	is	neither	available	to	the	nose	nor	to	the	ears;	neither	to	the	mouth,	nor	to
the	hands.	Unless	you	have	eyes,	there	is	no	way	to	prove	that	light	exists.
Gautam	Buddha	said	to	the	people,	"You	have	brought	him	to	a	wrong	man.	You
have	all	given	all	kinds	of	proofs,	and	you	have	not	been	successful.	What	can	I
do?	Take	him	to	my	personal	physician.	He	is	just	sitting	behind	me.	He	is	the
greatest	physician	of	our	time;	perhaps	he	can	cure	the	blind	man's	eyes.	He	does
not	 need	 any	 argument,	 he	 needs	 treatment.	 He	 does	 not	 need	 any	 evidence,
logical	 proof	 about	 light;	 he	 simply	 needs	 eyes.	 Then	 there	 will	 not	 be	 any
question	or	any	doubt	or	any	asking	for	evidence."
He	was	given	to	the	physician.	It	took	six	months	for	him	to	cure	that	man	from
his	blindness.	The	day	he	saw	light	he	cried	and	went	from	house	to	house	in	the
village	 to	 offer	 an	 apology,	 "Forgive	 me.	 Although	 I	 was	 being	 rational	 and
logical	I	had	no	idea	that	unless	you	have	eyes,	you	cannot	be	given	any	proof
that	 cannot	 be	 rejected	 by	 you,	 argued	 against."	 Although	 the	 whole	 world
knows	 that	 light	 exists,	 the	 whole	 world	 cannot	 make	 a	 single	 blind	 man
convinced	of	it.
Your	 consciousness	 is	 not	 available	 to	 the	 mind.	 Your	 mind	 is	 not	 the	 right
vehicle	to	know	yourself.	Unless	you	have	a	new	eye	--	what	in	the	East	we	have
called	 the	 third	 eye,	 symbolically....	 These	 two	 eyes	 open	 outwards.	 Just	 as	 a
symbol,	 the	 third	 eye	 opens	 inwards.	 The	 two	 eyes	 are	 for	 the	 duality	 of	 the
world,	the	one	eye	is	for	the	singleness	of	your	being.
As	you	start	looking	inwards,	you	are	amazed:	you	were	ignoring	yourself,	and
that	was	the	trouble.	That	was	why	you	were	in	misery,	anxiety,	suffering.	You
were	 trying	 everything	 to	 remove	 the	 misery,	 but	 it	 was	 caused	 by	 your
unawareness,	 by	your	 unconsciousness,	 by	your	 ignorance	of	 your	 own	being.
That	was	 the	 cause.	And	 unless	 that	 cause	 is	 removed,	 you	will	 never	 have	 a
taste	of	blissfulness,	of	ecstasy,	of	immortality,	of	the	divineness	of	existence.
The	pretty	young	thing	came	slamming	into	her	apartment	after	a	blind	date	and
announced	to	her	roommate,	"Boy,	what	a	character!	I	had	to	slap	his	face	three
times	this	evening!"
The	roommate	inquired	eagerly,	"What	did	he	do?"
"Nothing,"	muttered	the	girl.	"I	slapped	him	to	see	if	he	was	awake!"
But	 nobody	 is	 awake.	 Spiritually,	 we	 are	 all	 asleep.	 Meditation	 is	 a	 way	 of
awakening.
Concentration	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 meditation.	 But	 you	 have	 been	 told	 by
Christians,	 by	 Hindus,	 by	 Mohammedans,	 by	 all	 your	 so-called	 organized
religions	to	concentrate	on	God;	concentrate	on	a	certain	mantra;	concentrate	on
the	statue	of	a	Buddha,	but	concentrate.	And	remember,	whether	you	concentrate
on	 a	 hypothetical	God	which	nobody	has	 ever	 seen,	 nobody	has	 ever	met,	 for
which	no	proof,	no	evidence	exists	anywhere....	You	can	go	on	concentrating	on
an	empty	hypothesis,	that	is	not	going	to	reveal	you	to	yourself.
Concentrate	on	a	statue	which	 is	man-made,	manufactured	by	you;	you	can	go
on	 concentrating	 but	 you	 will	 not	 find	 anything	 to	 transform	 your	 being.	 Or
concentrate	 on	 scriptures,	 mantras,	 chantings...	 but	 all	 those	 efforts	 are	 an
exercise	in	utter	futility.
Go	 beyond	 the	 mind	 --	 and	 the	 way	 beyond	 the	 mind	 is	 very	 simple	 --	 just
become	 a	 watcher	 of	 the	 mind,	 because	 watching	 immediately	 separates	 you
from	the	thing	you	watch.	You	are	watching	a	movie;	one	thing	is	certain,	you
are	not	an	actor	in	the	movie.
Watching	 the	 road	 and	 the	 crowd	 passing	 by,	 one	 thing	 is	 certain;	 you	 are
standing	by	the	side,	you	are	not	on	the	road	in	the	crowd.
Whatever	you	watch,	you	are	not.
The	moment	you	start	watching	the	mind,	a	tremendous	experience	happens	--	a
recognition	that	you	are	not	the	mind.	Just	this	small	recognition	that	"I	am	not
the	mind"
is	 the	 beginning	 of	 no-mind.	You	 have	 transcended	 the	 crowd,	 the	 voices,	 the
chaos	of	the	mind;	you	have	moved	into	the	silences	of	the	heart.
Here	is	your	home,	your	eternal	being.
Here	is	your	deathless,	essential	existence.
Knowing	 this	 has	 never	 been	 transcended	 by	 anything	 more	 blissful,	 more
ecstatic.
You	may	have	heard	about	Segal's	Law:	A	man	with	one	watch	knows	what	time
it	is.	A	man	with	two	watches	is	never	sure.
Mind	is	not	only	two,	it	is	many.	A	man	with	mind	is	not	sure	of	anything.	He	is
doubtful	about	everything;	he	is	unsure	about	everything.	And	a	life	of	doubt	and
unsureness	is	not	a	life;	you	don't	have	any	roots	anywhere.	And	without	roots
you	cannot	have	flowers,	and	you	cannot	become	fruitful.	Your	life	will	remain
barren,	a	desert	where	nothing	grows.
Two	women	in	a	train	were	engaged	in	an	argument.	At	last,	one	of	them	called
the	conductor.	"If	this	window	is	open,"	she	declared,	"I	will	catch	cold	and	will
probably	die."
"If	the	window	is	shut,"	the	other	announced,	"I	shall	suffocate."
The	two	glared	at	each	other.	The	conductor	was	at	a	loss,	but	he	welcomed	the
words	of	a	man	who	sat	near.	These	were,	"First,	open	the	window;	that	will	kill
one.	Next,	shut	it;	that	will	kill	the	other.	Then	we	can	have	peace."
That	 is	 what	 you	 have	 to	 do	 with	 your	 mind	 if	 you	 want	 peace,	 peace	 that
passeth	all	understanding.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	TRIED	TO	WRITE	QUESTIONS	TO	YOU,	BUT	IT	IS	IMPOSSIBLE.
WHEN
YOU	WERE	 IN	SILENCE,	 I	BECAME	AWARE	THAT	YOUR	SILENCE	 IS
AN
INVITATION	FOR	MEDITATION.	IT	IS	PURE	CELEBRATION;	IT	IS	NOT	A
BURDEN	 OR	 A	 DUTY	 OR	 A	 BOTHER.	 IT	 IS	 A	 COMING	 CLOSER	 TO
YOU;	IT	IS
JOY.
MY	HEART	IS	OVERWHELMED	TO	SIT	AT	YOUR	FEET.	IN	DEEP	LOVE	I
SAY,
"THANK	YOU,	OSHO	FOR	THIS	INVITATION."
Divyam	 Sakar,	 there	 are	 no	 questions	 which	 are	 really	 of	 any	 significance,
because	questions	are	asked	by	the	mind.	And	the	mind	cannot	find	any	answer.
The	answer	is	in	the	death	of	the	mind.
All	 questions	 are	 in	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 answer	 is	 beyond	 it;	 hence,	 if	 you	 are
intelligent,	you	will	find	it	very	difficult	to	write	a	question.	People	who	go	on
writing	questions	 are	not	 really	 alert	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 these	questions	 cannot	 be
answered.	 Yes,	 you	 can	 be	 shown	 a	 way	 where	 you	 can	 find	 an	 answer,	 but
nobody	else	can	answer	your	question;	just	like	nobody	else	can	breathe	for	you,
and	nobody	else	can	drink	 for	you,	and	nobody	else	can	eat	 for	you.	You	will
have	to	do	these	things	yourself.
It	 is	 good	 that	 you	 felt	 it	 was	 impossible	 to	 write	 questions.	 It	 is	 impossible
because	 the	mind	 cannot	 even	 have	 any	 idea	 of	 the	 right	 question,	 because	 to
know	 the	 right	 question	 is	 to	 know	 the	 right	 answer.	 If	 you	 can	 recognize	 the
right	question,	 it	 is	not	 so	 far	away	 to	 recognize	 the	 right	answer.	A	mind	 that
can	 recognize	 the	 right	 question	 is	 certainly	 capable	 of	 recognizing	 the	 right
answer.	But	all	your	questions	are	wrong.
There	are	millions	of	questions	and	there	is	only	one	answer.	Questions	are	very
complex	 and	 the	 answer	 is	 very	 simple.	 The	 questions	 have	 created	 so	many
great	philosophies	 in	 the	world,	 so	many	great	 systems	of	 thought,	 systems	of
belief,	 great	 traditions	 of	 religion.	But	 none	of	 them	have	 come	 to	 the	 answer
that	 fulfills,	 to	 the	 answer	 that	 dispels	 all	 the	questions,	 because	 the	 answer	 is
your	being,	very	being.
The	 answer	 is	 not	 to	 be	 found	 in	 any	 scripture,	 nor	 can	 it	 be	 given	 by	 any
teacher.	Those	who	know	never	answer	your	question;	they	simply	destroy	your
question.	They	make	you	aware	of	a	quest,	not	of	a	question.	Their	invitation	is
for	a	quest,	not	for	a	question,	because	only	a	quest	can	lead	you	finally	to	the
space	where	you	find	not	a	verbal	answer,	but	an	existential	answer	--	yourself.
A	man	stepped	into	a	very	crowded	bus.	After	a	while	he	took	out	his	glass	eye,
threw	it	up	in	the	air,	then	put	it	back	in	again.
Then,	minutes	later	he	again	took	out	his	eye,	threw	it	up	in	the	air,	then	put	it
back	in	again.	The	lady	next	to	him	was	horrified.
"What	are	you	doing?"	she	cried.
"I'm	just	trying	to	see	if	there	is	any	room	up	front."
With	a	glass	eye!	Your	questions	are	just	like	that.	And	the	more	you	would	have
tried,	the	more	you	would	have	found	that	it	is	impossible	--	there	is	no	question
which	is	of	any	worth.
But	 then	 you	 suddenly	 fell	 upon	 something	 for	 which	 you	 were	 not	 looking.
Because	I	was	in	silence,	you	thought	perhaps	that	was	my	message	to	you	--	to
be	silent.	And	this	invitation	for	silence	became	your	meditation.
Now	you	can	say	to	me,	"It	is	pure	celebration.	It	is	not	a	burden	or	a	duty	or	a
bother	--	it	is	a	coming	closer	to	you;	it	is	joy.
"My	heart	 is	overwhelmed	 to	sit	at	your	 feet.	 In	deep	 love,	 I	 say,	 `Thank	you,
Osho,	for	this	invitation.'"
Remember	Fetridge's	Law:	Important	things	that	are	supposed	to	happen	do	not
happen,	especially	when	people	are	looking	for	them.
When	you	are	not	looking	for	anything,	a	certain	silence	descends	on	you.	And
in	that	silence	things	start	happening	that	were	never	happening	before	when	you
were	looking	for	them.
It	is	a	very	mysterious	life.
It	does	not	follow	your	ordinary	arithmetic.
When	 you	 are	 running	 too	much	 after	 silence,	 and	 peace,	 and	meditation	 and
enlightenment	 you	 simply	 get	 tired,	 bored,	 exasperated.	 It	 is	 never	 found	 that
way.	You	cannot	 find	 anything	of	value	while	you	are	 running.	And	naturally,
your	mind	 says:	 Run	 a	 little	 faster,	 you	 are	 not	 running	 fast	 enough.	And	 the
faster	you	run,	the	more	tense	you	are,	the	more	your	eyes	are	blurred,	the	more
dust	you	gather.	You	don't	know	where	you	are	running	because	you	don't	know
which	direction	the	truth	is.
It	is	not	in	running	after	it,	it	is	in	sitting	silently.	And	while	you	are	perfectly	a
pool	of	peace,	 truth	arises	within	you.	You	never	reach	truth;	 it	 is	always	truth
that	reaches	you.
But	you	must	be	at	your	home,	and	mostly	you	are	never	at	your	home.
I	have	heard	about	two	men,	great	friends,	who	were	talking	to	each	other.	And
one	said,
"Boy,	last	night	was	the	greatest	thing	that	has	ever	happened	to	me.	I	had	gone
fishing	and	caught	such	great	fish	that	even	to	carry	one	alone,	by	myself,	was	so
tiring;	it	was	such	a	burden.	The	fish	was	so	long	you	wouldn't	believe	it.	And
not	one,	I	caught	so	many	fish.	The	whole	night	I	have	been	carrying	them,	just
carrying	them."
The	second	man	said,	"This	is	nothing,	you	don't	know	what	happened	to	me	last
night.	 I	 dreamt	 that	 on	my	 one	 side	 is	 Sophia	 Loren	 --	 in	my	 bed,	 under	my
blanket.	I	said,`My	God!'	because	I	 looked	at	 the	other	side	and	I	saw	Marilyn
Monroe.	It	was	such	a	juicy	night."
The	first	man	who	had	been	catching	fish	the	whole	night	said,	"You	idiot.	Why
did	you	not	call	me?"	The	second	man	said,	"I	did	call,	but	your	wife	said	you
had	gone	fishing."
People	are	never	at	home.	Truth	comes	many	times	and	knocks	at	the	door,	but
your	wife	says	you	have	gone	fishing.
You	are	always	gone	somewhere.
Sitting	silently	you	are	at	home.
And	truth	is	not	something	that	comes	from	outside,	it	arises	out	of	the	intensity
of	your	silence.	In	fact,	the	intensity	of	your	silence,	a	great	silence	crystallized,
is	truth.
Truth	is	not	something	other	than	silence.
A	 small	 silence	 becomes	 the	 door	 to	 greater	 silences,	 and	 finally,	 the	 silence
itself	becomes	so	condensed	--	Gurdjieff	used	to	call	it	the	crystallization	--	you
find	yourself.
In	that	very	finding	you	have	found	the	truth.	Then	life	is	a	sheer	joy,	a	song,	a
dance,	a	celebration.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
COULD	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	TO	ME	ABOUT	FEAR?	WHAT	IS	FEAR?
WILL
MEDITATION	HELP	ME	OVERCOME	MY	FEAR	OF	DEATH?	WHY	AM	I
AFRAID
TO	LET	GO	INTO	SOMETHING	MORE	POWERFUL	THAN	ME?
Prem	Subuk,	you	have	asked	many	questions	in	a	single	small	question,	and	all
are	significant,	significant	for	any	seeker.
First,	you	are	asking	about	 fear.	There	are	many	 fears,	but	 fundamentally	 they
are	 only	 offshoots	 of	 one	 fear,	 branches	 of	 one	 tree.	 The	 name	 of	 the	 tree	 is
death.	You	may	not	be	 aware	 that	 this	 fear	 is	 concerned	with	death,	but	 every
fear	 is	 concerned	with	death.	Fear	 is	only	a	 shadow.	 It	may	not	be	apparent	 if
you	 are	 afraid	 of	 going	 bankrupt,	 but	 you	 are	 really	 afraid	 of	 being	 without
money	and	becoming	more	vulnerable	to	death.	People	go	on	holding	money	as
a	protection,	although	 they	know	perfectly	well	 that	 there	 is	no	way	 to	protect
yourself	against	death.	But	still,	something	has	to	be	done.	At	least	it	keeps	you
busy,	and	keeping	yourself	busy	is	a	kind	of	unconsciousness,	is	a	kind	of	drug.
Hence,	just	as	there	are	alcoholics,	there	are	workaholics.	They	keep	themselves
continuously	 involved	 in	 some	work;	 they	 cannot	 leave	working.	Holidays	 are
fearful;	 they	 cannot	 sit	 silently.	 They	 may	 start	 reading	 the	 same	 newspapers
they	have	read	three	times	already	that	morning.	They	want	to	remain	engaged,
because	 it	 keeps	 a	 curtain	 between	 themselves	 and	 death.	 But	 reduced	 to	 its
essentials,	the	only	fear	is	of	death.
It	 is	 significant	 to	 realize	 that	 all	 other	 fears	 are	 only	 offshoots,	 because	 then
something	can	be	done	if	you	know	the	very	roots.	If	death	is	the	basic	and	the
fundamental	 fear,	 then	 only	 one	 thing	 can	 make	 you	 fearless,	 and	 that	 is	 an
experience	within	you	of	a	deathless	consciousness.	Nothing	else	 --	no	money,
no	power,	no	prestige	--	nothing	can	be	an	insurance	against	death	except	a	deep
meditation...	which	 reveals	 to	you	 that	your	body	will	die,	your	mind	will	die,
but	you	are	beyond	the	body-mind	structure.	Your	essential	core,	your	essential
life	source	has	been	here	before	you	and	will	 remain	after	you.	 It	has	changed
through	 many	 forms;	 it	 has	 evolved	 through	 many	 forms.	 But	 it	 has	 never
disappeared,	from	the	very	beginning	--	if	there	has	been	any	beginning.	And	it
will	never	disappear	to	the	very	end,	if	there	is	any	end...	because	I	don't	believe
in	any	beginning	and	in	any	end.
Existence	is	beginningless	and	endless.
It	has	always	been	here	and	you	have	always	been	here.	Forms	may	have	been
different;	forms	have	been	different	even	in	this	life.
The	 first	 day	 you	 got	 into	 your	mother's	womb,	 you	were	 not	 bigger	 than	 the
full-point	on	your	question	mark.	If	a	photograph	is	shown	to	you,	you	will	not
recognize	that	this	is	you.	And	in	fact,	even	before	that...
Two	persons	were	arguing	about	how	far	back	they	could	go,	how	far	back	they
could	 remember.	One	 could	 remember	 his	 childhood	 nearabout	 three	 years	 of
age.	The	other	said,	"That	is	nothing.	I	remember	the	day	my	mother	and	father
went	to	a	picnic.	When	we	went	to	the	picnic,	I	was	in	the	father.	When	we	came
back	from	the	picnic	I	was	in	my	mother!"
Will	 you	 recognize	 yourself	 as	 you	 were	 when	 you	 were	 in	 your	 father?	 A
picture	can	be	shown	to	you;	it	can	be	enlarged	so	that	you	can	see	it	with	your
bare	eyes,	but	you	will	not	recognize	it.	But	it	is	the	same	life	form,	the	same	life
source	that	is	throbbing	in	you	right	now.
You	are	changing	every	day.	When	you	were	just	born,	just	one	day	old,	that	also
you	will	not	be	able	to	recognize.	You	will	say,	"My	god,	this	is	me?"	Everything
will	change;	you	will	become	old,	youth	will	be	gone.	Childhood	has	been	lost
long	before,	and	death	will	come.	But	it	will	come	only	to	the	form,	not	to	the
essence.	And	what	has	been	changing	all	along	your	life	was	only	the	form.
Just	the	other	day	I	looked	at	Chitten.	I	said,	"My	god,	what	has	happened	to	this
poor	man?"	Later	on,	I	tried	to	find	out	if	he	has	become	a	punk	or	what;	he	used
to	be	a	sane	sannyasin.	But	nothing	has	happened	to	him,	just	to	his	hair,	to	his
beard.	He	is	the	same;	he	is	still	sane.
Your	form	is	changing	every	moment.	And	death	is	nothing	but	a	change,	a	vital
change,	a	little	bigger	change,	a	quicker	change.	From	childhood	to	youth...	you
don't	recognize	when	childhood	left	you	and	you	became	young.	From	youth	to
old	age...	things	go	so	gradually	that	you	never	recognize	at	what	date,	on	what
day,	in	what	year,	youth	left	you.	The	change	is	very	gradual	and	slow.
Death	is	a	quantum	jump	from	one	body,	from	one	form	into	another	form.	But	it
is	not	an	end	to	you.
You	were	never	born	and	you	never	die.
You	are	always	here.
Forms	come	and	go	and	the	river	of	life	continues.
Unless	you	experience	this,	the	fear	of	death	will	not	leave	you.	You	are	asking,
"Will	meditation	help	me	overcome	my	fear	of	death?"	There	 is	no	other	way.
Only	meditation...	and	only	meditation	can	help.
I	 can	 say,	 all	 the	 scriptures	 can	 say,	 but	 that	 will	 not	 help;	 still	 a	 doubt	 may
remain.	Who	 knows,	 these	 people	may	 have	 been	 lying,	 or	 these	 people	may
have	 been	 deceived	 themselves.	 Or	 these	 people	 may	 have	 been	 deceived	 by
other	literature,	by	other	teachers.	And	if	a	doubt	remains,	the	fear	will	be	there.
Meditation	brings	you	face	to	face	with	the	reality.
Once	you	know	on	your	own	what	life	is,	you	never	bother	about	death.
There	 are	 beautiful	 stories	 about	 people	 of	 meditation,	 how	 joyfully,	 how
jokingly	 they	have	 taken	 their	death.	One	great	master,	before	dying	asked	his
disciples,	"You	know	me	perfectly	well,	that	I	have	lived	always	in	my	own	way.
I	want	to	die	also	in	my	own	way.	Just	suggest	some	unique	idea."
The	 disciples	 said,	 "This	 old	 man	 has	 tortured	 us	 his	 whole	 life.	 Now,	 what
original	idea	about	death...?	People	are	afraid	of	death,	and	this	fellow	is	asking
for	some	original	idea	of	how	to	die."
Somebody	suggested	to	sit	dying	in	a	lotus	posture.	Somebody	else	said,	"This	is
not	new,	people	have	died	sitting	in	a	lotus	posture."
Then	 the	 old	man	 said,	 "Reject	 it!	 Find	 something	 absolutely	 original,	 and	 be
quick	because	my	time	is	running	out."
Somebody	 suggested	 to	 die	 standing.	 People	 usually	 die	 lying	 down	 on	 their
beds.	That	 is	 the	most	 dangerous	place,	 because	ninety-nine	percent	 of	 people
die	on	their	beds.
Beware	of	the	bed!	In	the	night	when	your	wife	has	gone	to	sleep,	slip	down	and
sleep	on	the	floor.	Move	into	the	bathroom,	but	don't	be	on	the	bed.	That	is	the
place	where	death	has	found	ninety-nine	percent	of	its	victims.	Avoid	it!
Somebody	said,	"This	 is	a	 little	new,	but	 it	 is	not	absolutely	original	because	I
have	 heard	 about	 a	 master	 dying	 standing	 --	 just	 one	 man,	 but	 it	 is	 still
imitating."
Then	somebody	said,	"Then	do	one	thing.	Stand	on	your	head;	do	a	headstand	--
we	have	never	heard	that	anybody	has	done	that."
It	 is	 very	 difficult.	Even	 to	 fall	 asleep	 standing	on	your	 head	 is	 very	 difficult,
because	so	much	blood	is	running	to	the	head	it	keeps	you	awake.	Dying	is	much
more	difficult.	In	the	night	you	keep	your	head	on	a	pillow,	so	that	less	blood	is
reaching	the	head;	otherwise,	the	blood	flow	keeps	your	brain	cells	awake.
Intellectual	 people	 need	 two	 pillows,	 three	 pillows.	 Then	with	 great	 difficulty
they	 can	 stop	 the	 rush	 of	 the	 thoughts.	 Now	 standing	 on	 the	 head,	 so	 much
blood,	 because	 of	 gravitation,	 goes	 to	 the	 brain	 that	 it	 won't	 let	 it	 fall	 asleep.
Dying	will	be	much	more	difficult	because	death	is	a	deeper	form	of	sleep.
But	the	old	man	said,	"I	like	that	idea.	Just	be	certain	that	nobody	has	done	it."
All	his	disciples	said,	"It	is	true;	nobody	has	ever	done	it.	You	can	do	it	and	feel
happy	that	you	are	dying	in	an	original	way,	in	your	own	style."
And	the	old	man	stood	on	his	head	and	died.
Then	all	the	disciples	became	very	disturbed.	What	to	do	now?	They	had	known
about	people	dying	on	a	bed:	you	give	them	a	bath,	you	change	their	clothes,	you
take	them	to	the	funeral	pyre.	But	what	to	do	with	this	fellow?	--	he	is	standing
on	his	head.	Nobody	has	died	this	way,	so	nobody	knows	actually	what	should
be	done,	from	where	to	start.
Somebody	suggested	his	sister.	His	older	sister	was	also	a	great	master;	she	lived
in	a	nearby	monastery.	It	was	better	to	call	her	before	taking	any	action	than	later
on	to	be	condemned	for	something	that	you	should	not	have	done.
They	 called	 the	 sister	 and	 asked,	 "What	 are	we	 supposed	 to	 do?	He	 has	 died
standing	on	his	head."
The	sister	said,	"He	has	always	been	nasty."	She	was	also	a	great	meditator.	She
came	close	and	told	the	old	man,	"Stop	all	this	mischievousness!	At	least	at	the
time	of	death,	don't	be	ridiculous.	Behave!"	And	she	pushed	him	so	he	fell,	poor
man,	laughing.
The	disciples	said,	"This	is	strange.	This	old	woman	is	also	something."
And	she	went	back,	telling	him,	"Go	to	the	bed	and	die,	just	as	it	is	supposed	to
be	done.
Just	 do	 it	 properly.	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 come	 again.	And	 you	 fellows,	 don't	 be
worried.
Whatever	way	he	wants	to	die,	let	him	die.	Just	drag	him	to	the	funeral	pyre."
The	disciples	said,	"It	was	good	we	called;	he	was	still	alive."
Naturally,	 it	 is	very	difficult	 to	die	 standing	on	your	head.	The	poor	man	 tried
hard,	 but	 could	 not	manage.	And	 finally,	 because	 in	 the	East	 it	 is	 not	 right	 to
disobey	elders,	he	lay	down	on	the	bed	and	died.
Then	 before	 dying	 he	 said,	 "This	 time	 I	 am	 really	 dying;	 you	 can	 start	 your
ritual."
Still	they	watched,	pinched,	took	every	care	because	this	man	was	strange.	"We
thought	that	he	had	died	before,	and	who	knows,	he	may	still	be	playing	a	joke.
Death	is	a	joke?
We	had	been	always	so	afraid...."	They	pinched,	but	found	he	was	really	dead.
Another	master	before	dying	 told	his	disciples,	 "Listen,	 I	have	already	 taken	a
bath	 and	 I	 have	 changed	my	clothes,	 fresh,	 new,	 so	you	need	not...	 after	 I	 am
dead,	don't	try	to	deceive	me.	You	are	my	disciples,	you	have	to	follow	my	order.
After	my	death,	no	bath,	no	changing	of	clothes.	I	have	already	done	it	for	you."
They	said,	"Yes,	we	are	all	witnesses."
He	said,	"Then	remember,	nobody	should	interfere."
They	knew	their	master;	he	was	such	a	man	that	if	you	interfered,	he	might	open
his	eyes.
He	had	been	beating	them	his	whole	life,	and	they	did	not	want	him	to	beat	them
again,	even	after	death.
So,	they	simply	followed.	And	what	had	he	done?	--	he	had	played	the	last	joke.
As	the	fire	caught	his	body	--	he	had	hidden	firecrackers	inside	his	clothes;	that's
why	he	did	not	want	them	to	change	his	clothes	--	firecrackers	started	exploding
beautifully	all	around.
And	people	started	laughing;	they	had	never	seen	such	a	death.
But	the	disciples	said,	"He	was	a	man	who	could	laugh	at	death	because	he	knew
there	is	no	death."
Meditation	is	the	only	way	to	discover	your	deathlessness.
Then	all	 fear	disappears.	All	other	 fears	also	disappear,	because	 they	were	 just
offshoots,	branches	 --	maybe	gone	 far	away	from	the	 roots,	but	still	 they	were
connected	with	the	roots.
Finally	you	are	asking,	Subuk,	"Why	am	I	afraid	to	let	go	into	something	more
powerful	than	me?"	It	is	the	same	fear.	All	fear,	all	is	the	same.	You	are	afraid	of
going	into	something	more	powerful	than	you	because	a	dewdrop	dropping	into
the	ocean	is	bound	to	disappear;	it	is	death	to	the	dewdrop.	The	more	powerful
will	absorb	you;	hence,	the	fear.
But	if	you	know	that	your	life	is	the	greatest	power	in	existence,	there	is	nothing
more	 powerful	 than	 it,	 not	 even	 nuclear	 weapons	 can	 absorb	 it...	 once	 you
become	certain	about	 it,	 then	the	dewdrop	knows	it	 is	not	his	disappearance	in
the	 ocean,	 it	 is	 the	 ocean	 disappearing	 in	 the	 dewdrop.	 It	 is	 the	 dewdrop
becoming	as	vast	as	 the	ocean.	 It	 is	not	disappearance;	 it	 is	becoming	 infinite,
unbounded.
After	Brezhnev's	 death,	 the	 central	 committee	 of	 the	Communist	 Party	met	 to
choose	 his	 successor.	 After	 his	 unanimous	 election	 as	 general	 secretary,	 Uri
Andropov,	 the	 former	 chief	 of	 the	 secret	 police	 announced:	 "Very	 well,
comrades,	now	that	you	have	voted,	you	may	lower	your	arms	and	come	away
from	the	wall."
This	was	voting!	Naturally,	it	was	unanimous.
Death	is	such	a	fear.	But	if	you	have	just	a	small	glimpse	of	your	own	being	then
even	in	the	Soviet	Union	death	does	not	happen.
When	khrushchev	came	to	power,	addressing	the	first	meeting	of	the	Community
Party,	he	condemned	Joseph	Stalin	as	strongly	as	possible.	He	said,	"At	least	one
million	Russians	have	been	killed	after	 the	 revolution	by	a	 single	man,	 Joseph
Stalin.	 Thousands	 are	 in	 madhouses;	 thousands	 are	 in	 jails;	 thousands	 are
forcibly	 hospitalized	 and	 thousands	 have	 been	 sent	 to	 Siberia	 for	 their	 whole
lives.	They	cannot	return	to	Russia,	and	life	in	Siberia	must	be	the	hardest	in	the
whole	world,	just	to	survive."
One	man	 from	 the	 back	 of	 the	meeting	 said,	 "Comrade	 khrushchev,	 you	 have
been	a	central	committee	leader	with	Joseph	Stalin	your	whole	life.	Why	did	you
not	say	it	before?"	There	was	great	silence.
khrushchev	said,	"Whoever	has	asked	the	question,	the	question	is	significant.	I
am	going	 to	answer,	but	you	first	please	stand	up."	Nobody	stood.	khrushchev
called	three	times,
"Stand	 up,	 so	 I	 can	 at	 least	 see	 your	 face."	 But	 nobody	 stood,	 and	 nobody
repeated	 the	 question.	 khrushchev	 said,	 "Do	 you	 know	why	 I	was	 silent,	why
you	are	silent?	You	know	that	if	you	stand	up,	you	will	disappear.	I	knew	that	if	I
said	anything	against	Joseph	Stalin,	I	would	not	see	another	sunrise	again."
Death	 is	 such	 a	 fear.	 Even	 to	 Joseph	 Stalin,	who	was	 so	 powerful,	 death	was
such	 a	 fear	 that	 he	 never	 allowed	 his	 wife	 to	 sleep	 in	 the	 same	 room.	 Who
knows?	 --	 in	 the	night	 she	may	make	an	 effort	 to	 take	his	 life.	Yes,	 she	 is	 his
wife,	but	 just	being	a	wife	does	not	mean	anything.	Everybody	is	a	stranger	in
this	world,	and	just	by	going	to	a	registry	office	you	can't	become	known	to	each
other.	 He	 never	 allowed	 anybody	 to	 be	 friendly	 with	 him.	 In	 his	 whole	 life
nobody	ever	put	 their	hand	on	his	 shoulder.	That	was	not	possible.	He	always
kept	 people	 far	 away,	 following	 the	 old	 rule	 of	 Machiavelli,	 that	 the	 most
dangerous	people	to	those	who	are	in	power	are	those	who	are	closest.
The	vice	president	is	the	most	dangerous	to	the	president.	Because	he	is	so	close,
the	temptation	is	easy	to	push	this	man	away	in	some	way	and	capture	the	power
yourself.
These	powerful	people	like	Adolf	Hitler	or	Joseph	Stalin	or	Benito	Mussolini	are
as	much	afraid	of	death	 as	 anybody	else;	 all	 their	 power	makes	no	difference.
Only	very	few	people	like	Gautam	Buddha	or	Bodhidharma	or	Chuang	Tzu	have
been	able	to	go	beyond	the	fear	of	death.
You	can	go	beyond....
It	is	within	your	power	and	it	is	your	right.
But	you	will	have	to	make	the	small	effort	of	moving	from	mind	to	no-mind.
A	joke	for	you	to	remember	at	the	time	of	your	death...
It	seems	there	was	a	captain	in	the	KGB,	whose	stupid	son	had	great	difficulty
understanding	 the	 concepts	 of	 the	 party,	 the	 motherland,	 the	 unions,	 and	 the
people.
The	 captain	 told	 the	 boy	 to	 think	 of	 his	 father	 as	 the	 party,	 his	mother	 as	 the
motherland,	his	grandmother	as	the	unions,	and	himself	as	the	people.
Still,	 the	 boy	 did	 not	 understand.	 In	 a	 rage	 the	 father	 locked	 the	 boy	 in	 a
wardrobe	in	the	parental	bedroom.
That	night	the	boy	was	still	in	the	wardrobe	when	the	father	began	to	make	love
to	 the	mother.	The	boy,	watching	 through	 the	wardrobe	keyhole,	 said,	 "Now	 I
understand:	 The	 party	 rapes	 the	 motherland	 while	 the	 unions	 sleep	 and	 the
people	have	to	stand	and	suffer."
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Only	unripe	mangoes	are	safe
25	August	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708250
ShortTitle:
INVITA08
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
117
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	THE	STORY	OF	THE	BUDDHA	TWICE	SWATTING	AN	INSECT	FROM
HIS
HEAD,	 HOW	DID	 HE	 KNOW	 THAT	 HE	WAS	 NOT	 AWARE	 THE	 FIRST
TIME,	AND	HOW	CAN	HE	HAVE	NOT	BEEN	AWARE?	I	ASK	BECAUSE,
ALTHOUGH	 I	 AM	 PERCEIVING	 MYSELF	 TO	 BE	 GRADUALLY	 MORE
AWARE,	YET	I
CANNOT	 IDENTIFY	WHO	 IS	THE	PERCEIVER.	THE	WORST	THING	 IS
THAT
THE	 MIND	 TAKES	 THE	 OPPORTUNITY	 OF	 RELATIVE	 SILENCE	 TO
ENTER	 A	 HALL	 OF	 MIRRORS	 WITH	 WATCHERS	 WATCHING
WATCHERS,	WHO	ARE
WATCHING	WATCHERS	WHO	ARE	NOT	WATCHERS.
BELOVED	OSHO,	COULD	YOU	ILLUMINATE	OR	ELIMINATE	ME?
Rashid,	both	the	things	are	the	same:	to	illuminate	you,	or	to	eliminate	you.	They
are	two	aspects	of	the	same	experience.
Without	your	elimination,	illumination	is	not	possible.
You	are	the	only	barrier	to	your	own	realization.
You	 have	 raised	 a	 question	 which	 has	 tortured	 humanity,	 particularly	 the
intellectual	part	of	humanity,	for	centuries.	In	logic	it	is	called	infinite	regression.
But	existence	is	not	logical	if	you	remember	that,	then	the	problem	disappears.	If
you	think	that	existence	is	logical,	then	the	problem	becomes	insoluble.
It	is	apparently	true	that	you	can	watch	the	mind	but	somebody	else	behind	you
can	watch	you,	the	watcher.	But	you	can	go	on	and	on;	there	is	always	somebody
behind	who	is	watching.	In	logic	it	is	an	absurd	situation.
In	simpler	terms	it	is	something	like	God	creating	the	world.	Who	created	God,
because	without	creating,	nothing	can	exist?	That	was	the	premise	on	which	God
was	supposed.
How	can	this	whole	existence	be	there	without	a	God	creating	it?	But	it	creates
the	same	problem:	How	can	God	be	there	without	being	created?	Where	are	you
going	to	end?
Your	alphabet	will	end...	A-God	is	created	by	B,	and	B	is	created	by	C,	and	soon
you	will	 come	 to	X,	Y,	Z;	and	after	Z	 there	 is	nothing	except	 jazz	music.	The
whole	long	pilgrimage	of	logic	ends	in	something	illogical.
The	 very	 logical	 people	 have	 never	 supposed	 the	 first	 God	 because	 it	 is	 the
beginning	of	 a	 trouble	which	will	 never	 end,	 and	you	will	 get	more	 and	more
into	mud.
But	 in	existence	 things	are	different.	As	 far	as	God	 is	concerned,	 I	 cannot	 say
anything	--
I	have	traveled	my	whole	being,	and	I	have	not	found	him	anywhere.	And	all	the
religions	insist	that	he	is	within	you.	I	don't	know	about	the	without	--	it	is	a	vast
universe;	he	may	be	hiding	somewhere	--	but	as	far	as	my	own	consciousness	is
concerned,	 I	 am	 absolutely	 aware	 there	 is	 no	God.	And	 if	 it	 is	 not	within	my
consciousness,	it	cannot	be	in	any	other	consciousness	either,	because	the	quality
of	consciousness	is	the	same.	Just	as	the	light	is	the	same	whether	it	is	in	a	small
candle	flame,	or	in	the	big	sun,	or	in	the	faraway	stars	--	the	quality	is	the	same.
You	can	watch	the	mind	because	you	are	not	the	mind.
That	is	the	whole	reason	to	watch	it:
To	become	aware	that	you	are	separate.
Existentially,	 no	 problem	 arises	 because	 you	 cannot	 watch	 this	 watcher.	 You
have	come	to	the	very	end	of	the	rope;	in	the	very	first	step	you	have	completed
the	journey.
Logically,	you	can	manage	to	create	the	problem.	Watcher	one	watches	the	mind;
watcher	 two	watches	 the	watcher	 number	 one...	 and	 then	 go	 on	 ad	 absurdum.
Don't	make	 it	 a	puzzle.	That	will	be	 risking	your	own	possibility	of	becoming
aware.
It	is	not	a	logical	conclusion.
Logic	has	no	dominance	over	existence.
There	is	only	one	watcher;	you	cannot	go	behind	it.	If	you	can	go	behind	it,	then
it	was	not	the	watcher,	it	was	part	of	the	mind	--	mind	was	befooling	you.	A	part
of	 the	 mind	 can	 watch	 the	 other	 part.	 But	 if	 you	 have	 become	 completely
unidentified	with	the	mind	and	you	are	simply	a	watcher	--	not	a	thinker,	not	part
of	 the	mind	 in	 any	way	 --	 you	 have	 come	 to	 the	 end	 of	 the	 rope	 in	 the	 very
beginning.	There	 is	no	beyond	 it;	 however	you	 try,	you	will	not	be	able	 to	go
beyond	it,	you	will	always	remain	the	same	watcher.
It	is	the	experience	of	the	meditators	--	they	have	all	tried	--	that	perhaps	behind
the	 watcher,	 they	 may	 find	 some	 other	 watcher.	 But	 the	 watcher	 as	 a	 word
creates	the	problem.	It	 is	not	watcher,	it	 is	really	watching.	It	 is	a	process;	it	 is
complete	in	itself.
You	 cannot	 jump	 out	 of	 it	 and	watch	 it.	 You	 are	 it,	 so	 you	 cannot	 go	 behind
yourself.
It	 is	possible	to	watch	the	mind	because	you	are	not	the	mind,	so	you	can	step
back	and	have	a	look	at	the	mind.	And	this	stepping	back	and	having	a	look	at
the	 mind,	 is	 the	 greatest	 transformation	 that	 can	 happen	 to	 man.	 Freed	 from
mind,	 you	 are	 freed	 from	 all	 that	was	 binding,	 imprisoning,	 enslaving	 --	 your
miseries,	your	sufferings,	your	desires,	your	fears.
The	watcher	has	no	disease;	the	watcher	is	simply	a	mirror,	reflecting.	And	the
miracle	 of	 the	 process	 is	 that	 the	 more	 you	 become	 clearly	 distinct	 from	 the
mind,	the	mind	starts	disappearing.	That	is	the	elimination.
Mind	exists	with	your	support;	it	has	no	source	of	nourishment	other	than	your
support.
And	the	support	you	can	give	to	the	mind	is	of	identity;	you	have	to	become	one
with	the	mind.	Then	mind	as	a	parasite	goes	on	living.	But	the	moment	you	are
separate	 from	 the	mind,	 the	parasite	dies.	You	can	see	 it	disappearing	 just	 like
smoke,	into	thin	air.	Only	watching	remains.
You	cannot	watch	it,	you	are	it.
You	know	it,	but	you	don't	watch	it;	you	feel	it,	but	you	don't	watch	it;	you	live
it,	 but	 you	don't	watch	 it,	 because	 you	 cannot	 go	 behind	 it.	 It	will	 be	 still	 the
same	watcher.
It	 is	 good	 that	 existence	 is	 not	 logical;	 otherwise	 there	 would	 have	 been	 no
buddhas,	no	awakened	people.	There	would	have	been	number	one,	number	two,
number	three...
There	are	unending	numbers,	and	the	whole	process	would	become	tedious.	But
the	process	does	not	exist;	 it	 is	only	mind	 that	can	create	 the	problem	and	can
stop	you	from	going	into	existential	experience.
So	 to	 eliminate	 you	 is	 the	 only	way,	 Rashid.	 To	 illuminate	 you,	 to	make	 you
enlightened,	the	only	way	is	to	kill	you,	to	kill	you	as	an	identity	with	the	mind.
As	 the	mind	 is	 left	 --	 like	a	snake	 leaves	 its	old	skin	and	slips	out	of	 it	 --	you
have	 done	 the	whole	 pilgrimage	 from	 darkness	 to	 light,	 from	 the	 finite	 to	 the
infinite,	from	death	to	deathlessness.
You	are	 asking,	 "In	 the	 story	of	 the	Buddha	 twice	 swatting	 an	 insect	 from	his
head,	how	did	he	know	that	he	was	not	aware	the	first	time?"	When	you	have	a
headache,	 how	 do	 you	 know?	 Can	 you	 prove	 you	 have	 an	 headache?	 It	 is
impossible.	That	does	not	mean	that	headaches	don't	exist.
One	 of	 my	 teachers,	 a	 very	 beautiful	 man,	 an	 old	 Mohammedan	 and	 a	 very
colorful	 man...	 he	 never	 married.	 Once	 I	 asked	 him,	 "Why	 did	 you	 never
marry?"
He	said,	"I	cannot	afford	my	clothes,	my	beautiful	house,	and	a	wife	too.	Either	I
can	afford	a	wife...	but	then	there	is	no	house.	And	I	love	to	have	a	new	suit	of
clothes	every	day.	He	had	three	hundred	and	sixty-five	suits,	so	his	choice	of	the
same	 dress	 came	 only	 once	 in	 a	 year,	 and	 by	 that	 time	 people	 had	 almost
forgotten	that	dress.	He	lived	a	very	colorful	life	and	was	a	very	loving	man.
Before	 beginning	 a	 class,	 as	 the	 school	 opened,	 he	 always	 introduced	 himself
with	the	words,	"There	are	a	few	things	you	have	to	remember	with	me:	I	don't
believe	 in	 headaches,	 in	 stomachaches,	 and	 things	 like	 that.	 Unless	 you	 can
prove	 something,	 don't	 say	 anything;	 just	 sit	 and	do	 the	work.	Don't	 ask	 for	 a
holiday	because	you	have	a	headache."
He	 was	 very	 logical.	 Either	 prove...	 but	 how	 to	 prove	 a	 headache?	 I	 was
wondering	what	 to	do	with	 this	man,	because	he	 is	blocking	all	 the	avenues	to
escape	from	school!	And	I	was	rarely	in	the	school;	I	always	had	something:	a
headache	or	a	stomachache	--	which	are	very	beautiful	escapes;	you	don't	have
to	prove	them,	you	have	just	to	say	and	you	are	freed.	It	was	going	to	be	difficult
with	this	man	--	but	I	found	a	way.	He	had	created	a	mental	problem;	mind	could
not	solve	it.	But	existence	is	always	available	to	help	you.
Just	 in	 front	of	his	 small	bungalow	 there	were	 two	beautiful	mango	 trees.	The
mangoes	were	not	ripe	yet.	Mangoes	have	to	be	taken	away	from	the	trees	before
they	 are	 ripe	 because	 the	moment	 they	 are	 ripe,	 the	 parrots	 know	 before	 you
know.	And	parrots	love	mangoes;	in	hundreds	they	come.	Only	an	unripe	mango
is	safe!	And	they	were	really	very	big	mangoes.
I	climbed	 the	 tree...	because	every	evening	he	used	 to	go	 for	a	walk.	With	his
colorfulness,	beautiful	dress,	a	beautiful	staff	in	his	hand,	with	a	beautiful	cap...
every	 day	 everything	 was	 new;	 he	 even	 had	 three	 hundred	 and	 sixty-five
beautiful	staffs,	to	go	with	each	suit	of	clothes.	I	saw	him	going	out	and	then	I
climbed	 the	 tree.	He	used	 to	come	back	when	 the	 sun	had	almost	 set,	but	 still
there	was	not	absolute	darkness;	 there	was	still	 light.	When	he	came	under	 the
tree,	I	hit	him	with	a	big	mango.	An	unripe	mango	hits	almost	like	a	rock	and	he
said,	"Awk!"
I	said	to	him,	"Stop	the	noise.	You	will	have	to	prove	that	you	have	some	pain,
some	ache	in	your	head."
"You	come	down	first,"	he	said.	"Why	did	you	do	that?"
I	 said,	 "It	 is	 in	 answer	 to	 your	 introduction	 today.	 It	was	 the	 first	 day	of	 your
class.	I	am	a	student	and	I	need	as	many	holidays	as	I	want.	A	headache	is	one	of
the	best	excuses,	or	a	stomachache,	and	you	have	blocked	those	doors.	You	say,
`You	can	have	a	holiday	if	you	show	me	your	fever;	I	can	check	it.	If	you	have	a
wound,	I	can	check	it.	If	you	have	broken	your	leg,	I	can	check	it.	But	headaches
and	stomachaches,	and	like	things,	I	don't	believe,	so	never	ask	for	a	holiday.'"
I	said,	"Now,	can	you	prove	that	your	head	is	hurting?	I	know	it	must	be	hurting;
you	know	it	is	hurting,	but	can	you	prove	it?"
He	looked	at	me	and	he	said,	"Listen.	It	is	a	compromise	with	you.	You	need	not
say	 that	 you	 have	 a	 headache	 because	 that	 will	 give	 the	 idea	 to	 others.	 You
simply	raise	your	hand.	If	you	raise	your	hand	I	will	give	you	the	day	free."
I	said,	"There	 is	no	problem.	You	could	have	said	 that	before.	You	could	have
saved	your	head	from	being	unnecessarily	hit	by	a	mango."
The	other	students	were	very	troubled,	because	whenever	I	would	raise	my	hand,
he	 would	 tell	 me	 to	 go	 home	 and	 rest.	 The	 students	 thought,	 What	 is	 the
communication?	A	few	others	tried	raising	their	hands	and	he	asked,	"What	do
you	mean	by	raising	your	hand?"
They	said,	"We	don't	know.	But	why	do	you	allow	one	student	when	he	raises
his	hand?
And	he	raises	it	almost	every	day!"
Because	 the	 students	 were	 continually	 asking	me	what	 was	 the	 secret,	 I	 said,
"That	 is	not	possible	 for	me	 to	say,	because	 that	 is	a	commitment	between	me
and	him.	And	he	is	keeping	his	promise	so	I	will	keep	my	promise."
If	you	start	thinking	about	this	special	question	of	how	Buddha	became	aware	of
the	insect	he	removed	unconsciously	by	waving	his	hand...	How	do	you	become
aware	of	your	headache?	How	do	you	become	aware	of	 the	headache	 that	you
had	yesterday?
Right	now	maybe,	but	about	yesterday's?	--	you	may	be	imagining.	Do	you	have
any	proof	 that	yesterday	you	really	had	what	you	are	 talking	about	 today?	But
you	 know	 and	 everybody	 else	 knows,	 because	 a	 headache	 is	 a	 common
experience.
Awareness,	 watchfulness,	 is	 not	 a	 common	 experience.	 It	 can	 be	 common;	 it
should	 be	 common	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	 possibility	 for	 the	 liberation	 of
human	consciousness.
But	 don't	make	 it	 a	mind	 problem;	 otherwise,	 it	 will	 become	 like	 the	 famous
puzzle	of	Bertrand	Russell.
I	have	told	you	the	puzzle...
Once	in	England,	a	great	mathematician,	Godel,	was	writing	a	great	treatise	on
mathematics,	on	 the	 foundations	of	mathematics.	And	his	assumption	was	 that
there	 is	 no	 problem	 that	 cannot	 be	 solved	 by	 mathematics.	 He	 had	 worked
almost	thirty	years	for	that	great	book;	it	was	very	comprehensive.
Bertrand	Russell	was	also	working	in	collaboration	with	another	mathematician,
Whitehead,	 on	 a	 book	 --	 PRINCIPIA	 MATHEMATICA,	 the	 fundamental
principles	 of	mathematics	 --	which	would	 be	 all-inclusive;	 there	would	 not	 be
any	need	for	any	other	book	as	far	as	mathematics	is	concerned.
Both	of	the	mathematicians	were	of	the	same	caliber,	of	the	same	genius.	Godel
was	almost	completing	his	treatise,	because	he	was	an	older	man	than	Bertrand
Russell.	 It	 was	 almost	 a	 thousand	 pages	 of	 complicated	 argument	 to	 prove
mathematics	is	the	fundamental	science	and	the	only	science	which	has	no	flaw.
Just	at	that	time,	when	he	was	going	to	give	it	to	the	publisher,	Godel	received	a
letter	from	Bertrand	Russell.	Bertrand	Russell	had	himself	received	a	letter,	from
the	librarian	of	the	British	Museum	--	he	had	received	a	few	letters.	The	British
Museum	was	ordered	by	the	government	to	compile	catalogs	of	all	the	libraries
of	 England.	 So	 they	 ordered	 all	 the	 libraries	 to	 compile	 catalogs	 of	 all	 their
books.	 And	 they	 should	 compile	 two	 catalogs;	 one	 they	 should	 keep	 in	 the
library	and	the	other	they	should	send	to	the	British	Museum.
Then	the	British	Museum	would	compile	a	final	catalog	in	which	all	the	books
of	 the	 country,	 including	 the	British	Museum,	would	be	 included.	They	would
make	two	catalogs:	one	would	remain	in	the	British	Museum	and	one	would	go
to	the	Ministry	of	Education	from	where	the	order	had	come.
A	few	librarians	became	puzzled	about	something	like	your	question.	When	they
compiled	the	catalogs,	one	remained	with	them	and	one	was	going	to	the	British
Museum.	Now	the	problem	was	whether	to	put	that	catalog	also	in	the	catalog	--
because	it	was	a	book	in	the	library	--	or	to	leave	it	out.	Both	seemed	to	be	not
right.	How	can	you	put	the	catalog	itself	in	it?	And	not	to	put	it	in	means	you	are
leaving	one	book	in	the	library	without	being	cataloged.
So	they	wrote	questions	to	the	librarian	of	the	British	Museum.	He	himself	was
puzzled	 by	 the	 same	 problem:	 whether	 to	 put	 the	 final	 catalog	 also	 in	 the
catalog...	which	looks	absurd	because	a	catalog	is	for	other	books,	not	for	itself.
But	 there	 was	 this	 final	 catalog	 in	 the	 British	 Museum	 which	 remained
uncataloged,	so	rather	 than	sending	it	 to	 the	Ministry	of	Education,	he	sent	 the
question	 to	Bertrand	Russell,	knowing	 that	he	was	a	great	mathematician.	And
he	was	a	great	mathematician,	so	great	that	I	don't	think	anybody	reads	his	book.
The	 book	 is	 so	 complicated	 that	 just	 to	 prove	 that	 two	 plus	 two	 is	 four,	 he
devoted	 two	hundred	and	fifty	big	pages.	All	 the	complicated	arguments...	you
cannot	 even	 think	 to	write	one	page	 about	 the	 simple	 subject,	 two	plus	 two	 is
four.
But	when	he	received	the	letter	from	the	librarian,	Bertrand	Russell	was	puzzled.
What	to	do?	Just	then	he	remembered:	Old	Godel	thinks	that	everything	can	be
solved	by	mathematics.	It	is	better	to	send	it	to	him.
He	sent	him	the	puzzle,	saying	"What	do	you	suggest?	According	to	you,	every
problem	can	be	solved	and	it	is	a	mathematical	problem."
Godel	thought	over	it,	but	could	not	find	the	way.	And	because	he	could	not	find
the	way,	he	did	not	publish	his	book.	He	said,	"If	I	cannot	solve	a	simple	puzzle,
on	 what	 grounds	 can	 I	 claim	 that	 mathematics	 is	 capable	 of	 solving	 every
problem?"
You	 are	 saying:	 one	 can	 become	 aware,	 and	 one	 can	 become	 aware	 of	 one's
awareness.
Or	one	can	become	aware	of	one's	unawareness	and	then	can	become	aware	of
one's	awareness	of	unawareness	--	but	where	it	will	lead?
In	existence	there	are	no	problems.
Mathematics	is	only	an	extension	of	logic.	If	 the	question	had	come	to	me	and
not	 to	Bertrand	Russell,	 I	would	 have	 simply	 said,	 "A	 catalog	 is	 not	 a	 book."
And	it	is	finished.
You	are	required	to	compile	a	catalog	of	books	in	your	library	and	a	catalog	is
not	a	book.	That's	all	that	is	needed:	a	definition.	A	catalog	is	simply	a	catalog	of
other	books,	but	the	catalog	itself	is	not	a	book	because	it	deals	with	no	subject;
neither	is	it	philosophy,	nor	is	it	logic,	nor	is	it	mathematics,	nor	is	it	physics.	It
has	no	subject	matter;	hence	it	is	not	a	book.	So	there	is	no	question	of	including
it.	Once	you	 think	of	 including	 it,	 the	problem	is	arising	because	you	have	not
defined	what	a	catalog	is.
Neither	Bertrand	Russell	nor	Godel	thought	of	the	possibility	of	defining	it	as	a
catalog,	not	as	a	book.	That	would	have	solved	the	whole	thing.	But	they	were
more	interested	in	the	puzzle	and	the	possibility	of	its	mathematical	solution.
Awareness	to	me	is	not	a	puzzle.
It	is	not	even	part	of	any	philosophy.
It	is	an	existential	experience.
Just	become	aware	of	the	mind	and	then	try	to	become	aware	of	awareness,	and
you	will	 fail.	 If	you	can	become	aware	of	your	awareness,	 that	will	prove	 that
the	 first	 awareness	was	 not	 awareness,	 it	was	 part	 of	 the	mind.	Once	 you	 are
aware	you	have	come	to	the	dead-end.	Your	journey	is	complete.
You	say,	"...	although	I	am	perceiving	myself	to	be	gradually	more	aware,	yet	I
cannot	identify	who	is	the	perceiver."	You	cannot.	It	is	not	in	the	nature	of	it	to
know	the	ultimate.	You	can	be	the	ultimate,	but	you	cannot	be	the	knower	of	the
ultimate;	 otherwise,	 there	 will	 be	 a	 division	 between	 the	 knower	 and	 the
ultimate.
The	ultimate	is	the	situation	where	knowing	and	knower	dissolve	into	each	other
and	 become	 one,	where	 the	 knower	 is	 the	 known.	 In	 J.	Krishnamurti's	words,
"Meditation	is	when	the	observer	is	the	observed."	All	distinctions	disappear.
So	remember	Bucy's	Law:	Nothing	is	ever	accomplished	by	a	reasonable	man.
One	needs	 to	be	a	 little	unreasonable	 too.	 It	brings	great	 joy	and	spice	 in	your
life,	being	a	little	unreasonable.	A	reasonable	man	is	simply	flat.
And	existence	is	not	reasonable	at	all;	it	is	simply	there	without	any	reason.	If	it
were	not	there	you	could	not	have	complained.	If	it	is	there	you	cannot	explain
why	it	is	there.	It	is	simply	there.
Irving	 Levensky	 was	 asked	 by	 his	 wife	 to	 buy	 a	 chicken	 for	 Saturday	 night
dinner.	He	bought	the	chicken	and	was	on	his	way	home	when	he	remembered
that	he	didn't	have	his	house	key	and	his	wife	would	not	be	home	for	hours.
He	decided	to	pass	the	time	by	going	to	a	movie.	In	order	to	get	into	the	cinema,
he	stuffed	the	chicken	into	his	trousers.
He	sat	down	and	began	watching	the	movie.	It	fascinated	him	so	that	he	didn't
notice	the	chicken	sticking	its	head	through	the	fly	of	his	pants.
Two	women	were	sitting	next	to	him,	and	one	of	them	nudged	the	other.	"Look,"
she	said,	"look	at	that	thing	there	sticking	out	of	the	man's	pants."
The	other	replied,	"If	you've	seen	one,	you've	seen	them	all."
The	first	one	said,	"Yes,	but	this	one	is	eating	my	popcorn."
Existence	is	very	absurd.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	CAN	WE	KEEP	THE	MOST	BEAUTIFUL	GATHERING	OF	REBELS
AND
SEEKERS	WHO	EVER	EXISTED	ON	THE	EARTH	FROM	BECOMING	AN
ESTABLISHED	SOCIETY?
Prem	 Dipamo,	 the	 authentic	 rebellious	 man	 has	 no	 such	 problem;	 he	 never
becomes	part	of	any	establishment.
There	was	a	very	unexpected	experience	in	the	communist	revolution	in	Russia.
When	the	revolution	happened,	that	was	in	1917,	a	great	uneasiness	was	felt	in
the	 revolutionaries.	 The	 topmost	 revolutionaries,	 Lenin,	 Trotsky,	 and	 their
colleagues,	 were	 all	 in	 a	 strange	 situation,	 and	 one	 man,	 Joseph	 Stalin,	 took
advantage	of	their	puzzled	state.
Stalin	was	 not	 a	 revolutionary,	 he	was	 one	 of	 the	 great	 establishment	makers.
Just	 to	create	 the	establishment	--	because	 the	country	was	 in	a	chaos	after	 the
revolution;	 there	was	no	order,	no	 law	--	 the	 idea	of	 the	revolutionaries	was	 to
have	individuals	as	free	as	possible,	teach	them	to	be	responsible	so	there	would
be	no	need	of	law	and	no	need	of	the	law-establishing	agencies	of	the	police,	the
court,	the	judges.
Lenin	was	also	of	the	opinion	that	marriage	should	disappear,	because	it	is	one
of	 the	 fundamental	 establishments.	 All	 other	 establishments	 use	 it	 as	 their
foundation.	But	when	they	were	not	in	power,	it	was	easy	to	think	such	things;
when	they	came	into	power,	then	the	real	problems	were	there.
Leaving	individuals	free,	society	was	becoming	full	of	crime.	Responsibility	was
not	 arising,	 because	 responsibility	 is	 not	 just	 an	 idea	 --	 unless	 one	 is	 alert
enough,	meditative	enough,	silent	enough,	to	take	all	the	responsibility	of	his	life
and	not	to	disturb,	not	to	interfere	with	anybody	else's	life,	it	is	very	difficult.
It	is	well	known,	but	not	well	established,	that	Lenin,	the	head	organizer	of	the
revolution,	 was	 poisoned	 by	 the	 secretary	 of	 the	 party,	 Joseph	 Stalin.	 But	 the
poison	 was	 given	 very	 slowly,	 over	 a	 long	 period	 of	 time	 of	 two	 years.
Krupskaya,	Lenin's	wife,	has	written	 that	 it	was	absolutely	certain	 that	he	was
being	poisoned	because	she	was	not	allowed	to	change	the	doctor	--	the	doctor
was	appointed	by	Joseph	Stalin,	was	in	his	service.	He	was	not	treating	Lenin,	he
was	simply	poisoning	him	slowly.
Krupskaya	could	see	--	she	was	an	 intelligent	woman	--	 that	 instead	of	getting
well,	he	was	getting	worse.	The	more	the	treatment,	the	more	he	was	drowning	-
-	 something	 was	 wrong.	 Why	 this	 insistence	 that	 the	 doctor	 should	 not	 be
changed	 when	 the	 doctor	 is	 not	 succeeding	 in	 curing	 him?	 It	 was	 a	 natural
question	that	the	doctor	should	be	changed.
Trotsky	was	the	foreign	minister	 in	 the	new	government	of	 the	revolutionaries,
but	 he	 was	 as	 authentic	 a	 revolutionary	 as	 Lenin.	 He	wanted	 no	 ranks	 in	 the
army	--	somebody	lower,	somebody	higher.	Everybody	should	be	equal:	"We	are
creating	a	society	of	equality;	at	 least	 the	government	should	give	proof	 to	 the
society	that	the	people	who	belong	to	government	are	equal	in	rank."
But	the	generals	were	not	ready	to	be	equal	with	ordinary	soldiers.	It	is	a	childish
game	 in	 the	world,	 but	 even	 childish	games	 are	played	by	your	oldest	 people.
Just	having	a	 few	colored	stripes	on	your	coat	makes	people	 feel	very	special;
one	 color	 more	 added	 and	 they	 rejoice.	 It	 seems	 children	 are	 growing	 old
certainly,	but	they	are	not	growing	up;	they	are	not	becoming	intelligent.
So	 all	 the	 generals	 of	 the	 armies	were	 against	 Trotsky,	 and	 Joseph	Stalin	was
naturally	 in	 conspiracy	with	 all	 the	generals.	They	were	 all	 agreeing	with	him
because	he	was	going	to	keep	them	on	as	great	generals,	marshals,	colonels,	all
the	categories.	He	was	going	to	give	them	more	power.
So	naturally	they	conspired	with	Joseph	Stalin,	and	Trotsky	had	to	run	away,	out
of	the	Soviet	Union	--	and	he	was	the	defense	minister;	he	was	the	head	of	all	the
armies.	And	he	was	also	the	foreign	minister,	because	he	was	the	most	educated,
most	 intelligent	 person	 of	 all	 the	 revolutionaries.	Lenin	was	 a	 great	 organizer,
but	was	 not	 a	 great	 intellectual	 or	 a	 great	 orator.	He	was	 number	 two,	 in	 that
sense,	to	Trotsky.
Joseph	 Stalin's	 professional	 murderers	 followed	 Trotsky.	 He	 was	 killed	 in
Mexico,	 and	 killed	 very	 brutally	 with	 a	 hammer	 on	 his	 head,	 and	 in	 a	 very
strange	situation.	He	was	writing	the	biography	of	Joseph	Stalin...	because	Stalin
was	destroying	the	whole	revolution;	he	was	not	a	revolutionary.
Trotsky	 has	 written	 a	 tremendously	 insightful,	 very	 big,	 biography.	 He	 was
completing	 the	 last	 page,	 and	 as	 he	 had	 put	 the	 final	 full	 stop	 --	 that	was	 the
moment;	it	is	just	a	coincidence	that	he	was	looking	at	the	last	line,	finishing	it	--
the	hammer	came	down	on	his	head,	and	his	head	was	broken	into	pieces.
His	blood	is	splashed	all	over	 the	 last	page	of	his	hand-written	biography.	It	 is
still	in	a	museum	in	Mexico,	on	exhibition.	It	is	one	of	the	great	biographies,	and
written	by	an	enemy.	Trotsky	and	Stalin	were	enemies,	enemies	in	the	sense	that
Joseph	 Stalin	 was	 never	 a	 revolutionary.	 All	 he	 wanted	 deep	 down	 was	 to
replace	the	czar	and	become	a	czar	himself	--	and	he	became	it.	He	became	the
worst	czar	that	has	ever	existed.
In	 Russian	 history	 the	 worst	 czar	 was	 Ivan	 the	 Terrible,	 but	 he	 was	 nothing
compared	to	Stalin.	He	poisoned	Lenin,	he	killed	Trotsky,	and	he	went	on	killing
other	 great	 revolutionaries.	 He	 was	 satisfied	 only	 when	 all	 the	 great
revolutionaries	 who	 were	 responsible	 for	 the	 revolution	 were	 finished.	 He
replaced	 them	 with	 people	 who	 wanted	 law	 and	 order,	 and	 society	 and
organization.	He	created	 the	greatest	establishment	ever	created,	and	with	such
strength	that	the	whole	country	became	a	concentration	camp.
It	is	very	difficult	for	rebels	and	seekers	to	remain	rebels	and	seekers.	They	will
be	 rebellious	 even	 if	 the	 revolution	 has	 happened.	Any	 revolution	 is	 bound	 to
create	another	kind	of	establishment,	and	the	authentic	rebellious	man	will	again
revolt,	revolt	against	the	revolution	he	himself	has	created	but	had	never	thought
would	become	an	establishment.	The	authentic	rebel	never	becomes	part	of	any
establishment.
The	problem	is	that	the	rebels	are	very	few,	and	the	retarded	masses	are	so	many
that	unless	every	individual	is	a	rebel,	an	establishment	is	bound	to	follow.	The
rebel	 is	bound	 to	 fight	against	his	own	revolution,	which	 is	 turning	 into	a	new
establishment.	Up	 to	 now	 no	 revolution	 has	 been	 able	 to	 succeed	 because	 the
moment	 it	 succeeds	 it	 starts	 becoming	 another	 establishment.	The	 people	who
had	power	change,	but	 the	people	who	come	in	 their	place	are	more	powerful.
And	it	is	more	difficult	to	change	them,	because	they	know	all	the	strategies	that
they	have	used	in	changing	powerful	people.	So	they	will	not	allow	any	of	those
strategies.
For	seventy	years	in	Russia	there	has	not	been	a	single	rebel,	because	you	cannot
just	 become	 a	 rebel	 in	 a	 single	 moment.	 To	 be	 rebellious	 needs	 a	 certain
understanding,	 a	 certain	 alertness,	 a	 certain	 unprejudiced	 mind.	 Russia	 is	 the
only	 country	 in	 the	 world	 where	 revolution	 is	 impossible,	 and	 this	 is	 a	 very
strange	situation.	It	 is	the	country	where	revolution	succeeded	on	a	great	scale.
But	 the	 moment	 it	 became	 a	 success,	 suddenly	 the	 water	 turned	 into	 ice;	 it
became	the	establishment.	And	the	rebels	who	are	authentic	cannot	be	tolerated
anymore	by	the	same	group	who	changed	the	whole	society.
Stalin	was	 afraid	 of	 Trotsky,	 he	was	 afraid	 of	 Lenin.	 They	 had	 to	 be	 finished
because	they	were	people	who	would	risk	everything,	but	would	not	drop	their
rebelliousness;	they	would	not	become	a	new	establishment.
What	you	are	asking	for,	Dipamo,	is	a	society	where	everybody	is	so	aware	that
no	 law	 is	 needed;	 where	 everybody	 is	 so	 peaceful	 that	 no	 police	 are	 needed;
where	everybody	is	so	loving	that	rape	and	murder	and	heinous	crimes	become
impossible;	 where	 everybody	 is	 unrepressed,	 uninhibited;	 where	 everyone	 has
lived	his	 life	 according	 to	nature.	There	will	be	no	need	of	 any	establishment;
government	will	only	be	a	functional	entity	like	the	post	office,	or	railway	trains.
Who	cares	who	is	the	postmaster	general?	Have	you	ever	heard?	No	speech,	no
photograph	 is	 ever	 published	 in	 the	 newspapers	 about	 who	 is	 the	 postmaster
general.	He	is	managing	a	great	complex,	but	it	is	only	functional.
Governments	should	be	functional,	they	are	servants	of	the	people.	But	through
the	establishment,	 through	power,	 they	become	 the	masters	of	 the	people.	And
very	retarded	people,	when	they	become	masters,	destroy	all	that	is	delicate,	all
that	is	beautiful,	all	that	is	great.
But	 you	 can	 be	 a	 rebel	 even	 in	 a	 society	 which	 wants	 you	 to	 be	 part	 of	 the
establishment.
Don't	compromise.	Even	life	itself	 is	a	lesser	value	than	your	individuality	and
your	rebelliousness.
Your	rebelliousness	is	your	very	spirit.
You	 are	 truly	 a	 man	 only	 when	 you	 are	 rebellious,	 when	 you	 can	 say	 no	 to
anything	 that	goes	against	 freedom,	 that	goes	against	man's	dignity.	When	you
are	ready	to	go	 to	 the	gallows	without	any	grudge,	because	you	are	sacrificing
yourself	 for	 something	 far	 greater	 and	 more	 beautiful	 --	 for	 freedom,	 for
individuality,	 for	 expression,	 for	 creativity;	 you	 are	 sowing	 seeds	 for	 future
generations	--	you	will	not	be	sad.	You	will	be	immensely	happy	that	you	have
not	been	forced	to	become	a	slave;	that	rather	than	being	enslaved,	you	preferred
the	gallows.
Unless	 in	 this	 society	 a	 person	 is	 ready	 to	 choose	 crucifixion	 rather	 than
consolations,	medals,	and	Nobel	Prizes...	only	such	a	man	can	be	a	rebel	and	can
be	truly	spiritual.	We	hope	that	one	day	there	will	be	a	society	where	everybody
will	be	so	rebellious.
But	 rebellion	 does	 not	 mean	 reaction	 or	 destruction;	 rebellion	 means	 your
highest	 flowering	 of	 consciousness.	 Unless	 rebellion	 brings	 enlightenment	 to
you,	you	cannot	save	it;	you	will	have	to	compromise.	And	to	compromise	is	to
lose	your	self-respect,	is	to	lose	your	dignity	as	a	man.
Up	to	now	the	society	has	lived	under	a	false	idea	that	people	are	free.	Nobody	is
free;	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	ways	to	enslave	you.	Only	very	rarely	have	a
few	people	risked	everything	and	remained	individuals	even	at	the	risk	of	death	-
-	but	they	are	the	very	salt	of	the	earth.	They	are	the	people	who	have	maintained
humanity's	evolution.
Evolution	depends	on	only	a	very	few	people;	they	can	be	counted	on	your	ten
fingers.
Others	 live	 a	 life	 of	middle-class	 comfort,	 and	 for	 that	 comfort	 they	 sell	 their
souls	in	the	marketplace.
Dipamo,	 you	 are	 asking,	 "How	 can	 we	 keep	 the	 most	 beautiful	 gathering	 of
rebels	and	seekers	who	ever	existed	on	the	earth	from	becoming	an	established
society?"	If	people	are	really	rebels,	not	just	because	of	their	minds	but	because
of	 their	meditation,	 then	 there	 is	no	problem.	With	Gautam	Buddha	 there	were
ten	 thousand	 meditators;	 there	 was	 no	 establishment.	 Nobody	 was	 higher,
nobody	was	lower;	nobody	had	to	be	ordered.
Even	Gautam	Buddha	has	never	ordered	anyone	to	do	a	single	thing;	he	simply
shared	his	vision.	It	is	up	to	you	whether	to	participate	in	that	vision	or	not.	That
is	going	to	be	your	decision,	and	that	is	going	to	be	your	responsibility.
Freedom	brings	responsibility.
Those	ten	thousand	people	around	Gautam	Buddha	lived	a	rebellious	life;	 they
renounced	 society.	 People	 think	 that	 all	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 world	 have
renounced	society	for	the	same	reasons;	that	is	wrong.	Except	Gautam	Buddha,
all	 other	 religions	 have	 renounced	 the	 world	 to	 gain	 something	 in	 the	 other
world.	 It	 is	not	 renunciation;	 it	 is	pure	business,	almost	a	 lottery,	because	here
you	lose	very	small	things,	and	there	you	get	a	millionfold	reward	in	paradise.
Here	you	lose	a	woman	who	is	just	a	pain	in	the	neck;	there	you	get	hundreds	of
beautiful	 young	 women	 who	 always	 remain	 young,	 who	 don't	 perspire,	 who
don't	 use	 deodorants,	 who	 have	 a	 natural	 perfume	 arising	 out	 of	 their	 bodies;
their	age	is	fixed,	they	have	not	gone	beyond	sixteen.	For	millions	of	years	they
are	just	sixteen.	It	is	perfectly	good	to	renounce	a	wife	here	who	is	nothing	but	a
trouble,	in	the	hope	of	getting	beautiful	women	there.
I	have	heard	that	when	Muktananda	died,	one	of	his	disciples	was	so	devoted	to
him	that	he	could	not	live	another	day	--	the	next	day	he	also	died.	Naturally,	the
first	thing	was	to	look	around	for	where	his	great	master	Muktananda	was.
He	was	very	much	ashamed	to	see	that	he	was	lying	down	under	a	beautiful	tree
--
flowers	were	 showering	 from	 the	 tree	 and	Muktananda	was	 lying	down	naked
with	a	beautiful	woman.	As	he	came	closer	he	said,	"My	God.	He	was	always
against	 pleasures,	 but	 perhaps	 this	 must	 be	 a	 reward	 for	 his	 great	 celibacy."
Coming	 closer	 he	 saw	 that	 it	 was	 nobody	 other	 than	 the	 great	 film	 actress,
Marilyn	Monroe.	He	fell	to	the	feet	of	his	master	and	said,	"My	master,	I	always
knew	you	would	be	greatly	rewarded."
Monroe	said,	"You	idiot!	You	don't	understand	anything.	I	am	not	his	reward;	he
is	my	punishment!"
But	people	are	hoping.	Only	Gautam	Buddha	has	not	given	a	hope	for	the	future
life	to	his	disciples.	He	has	given	them	the	whole	kingdom	of	the	present,	not	of
the	future.	And	their	renunciation	of	the	world	is	not	against	the	world.	He	is	the
only	 one	who	has	 renounced	 the	world,	 and	 his	 followers	 have	 renounced	 the
world,	not	against	 the	world	but	against	 the	establishment	of	 the	society.	They
have	 created	 a	 gathering	 of	 rebels	with	 no	 order,	with	 no	 system	 except	 their
own	consciousness,	their	own	conscience.
He	was	working	on	those	people	to	be	deeply	meditative.	Then	there	is	no	need
of	 any	 establishment.	You	 always	 do	 the	 right	 thing;	 you	 cannot,	 even	 if	 you
want	 to,	 do	 the	wrong	 thing.	 You	 don't	 need	 any	 supervision,	 you	 don't	 need
somebody	 to	keep	you	within	 the	 law.	Once	you	have	 learned	 the	 law	of	 love,
then	all	other	laws	are	of	no	use	to	you.
Gautam	Buddha	pulled	them	out	of	society	for	the	simple	reason	that	in	society
they	will	have	to	compromise;	their	consciousness	is	not	so	strong	that	they	can
remain	without	compromise.
I	don't	want	my	people	 to	 leave	 the	world,	because	 twenty-five	centuries	have
passed	since	Buddha,	and	it	is	time	that	people	should	be	strong	enough	in	their
awareness	so	they	can	remain	in	the	society	without	compromising.	Although	it
is	far	more	difficult,	it	is	a	great	challenge	to	live	in	society	and	not	be	part	of	it,
to	live	in	society	but	not	allow	society	to	live	in	you.
That's	my	special	contribution	 to	 the	 religious	experience	and	 to	 the	 rebellious
human	beings.	In	the	past	they	used	to	escape	out	of	the	establishment,	but	that
shows	 cowardliness,	 fear.	 Be	 in	 the	 society	 and	 live	 according	 to	 your	 own
consciousness,	 whatsoever	 the	 consequences.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 suffer	 those
consequences	 than	 to	 escape	 and	 show	 your	 fearfulness,	 because	 fear	 cannot
allow	you	to	rise	to	your	ultimate	height.	The	society	can	be	used	as	a	fire	test	of
whether	your	rebellion	is	just	a	mind	game	or	it	is	a	spiritual	growth.	Those	who
are	rebellious	because	of	 their	spiritual	growth	don't	have	to	fear	 that	 they	will
become	part	of	established	society.
Moishe	 Finkelstein,	 a	 tailor	 from	 a	 small	 Ukrainian	 village,	 applies	 for
membership	of	the	Russian	Communist	Party	in	Kiev.
"Who	was	Karl	Marx?"	asks	the	Commissar.
"Never	heard	of	him,"	replies	Moishe.
"Who	was	Joseph	Vissarionovich	Stalin?"
"Never	met	him,"	answers	Moishe.
"Who	was	Vladimir	Ilyich	Lenin?"
"Can't	say	I	recall	the	name,"	replies	Moishe.
"Mr.	Finkelstein,	are	you	taking	us	for	idiots?"	asked	the	irritated	Commissar.
"No,"	replies	Moishe,	"Do	you	know	Irving	Levensky?"
"Never	heard	of	him,"	replied	the	Commissar.
"So,	do	you	know	Bernie	Heikleman?"	Moishe	asked	again.
"No,"	was	the	reply.
"So	you	know	Hymie	Goldberg?"	Moishe	asked	again.
"I	don't	know	who	you	are	talking	about,"	replied	the	irritated	Commissar.
"Well,"	says	Finkelstein,	"that's	how	it	is	--	you	have	your	friends;	I	have	mine!"
And	this	is	how	the	compromise	goes	on	happening	in	everybody's	life....
The	out-of-work	actor	came	home	to	find	his	house	in	a	shambles.	Lamps	were
knocked	 over	 in	 the	 living	 room,	 drapes	 were	 torn,	 and	 in	 the	 bedroom	 the
bedspread	was	ripped	and	the	sheets	torn.	On	the	bed	lay	his	wife,	badly	beaten
and	bruised,	sobbing	her	heart	out.
"What	happened?	Who	did	this	to	you?"	raged	the	actor.
"I...	I	fought	as	long	as	I	could,	but	he	was	too	strong,"	wailed	the	wife.	"He...
he..."
"Who?"	 rasped	 the	 actor.	 "Tell	 me	 and	 I'll	 find	 him	 and	 tear	 him	 limb	 from
limb."
"It	was	your	agent,"	said	the	wife.	"He	came	while	you	were	out."
"My	 agent?"	 the	 actor	 brightened.	 "Tell	 me,	 quickly,	 does	 he	 have	 a	 part	 for
me?"
He	 has	 forgotten	 everything.	 Out	 of	 employment,	 you	 cannot	 fight	 with	 your
agent.
In	life,	you	go	on	compromising	without	knowing,	not	only	with	the	society	but
even	with	your	family.	Even	the	people	you	love	demand	compromise.	Nobody
likes	the	individual;	everybody	wants	to	overpower	you,	to	dominate	you.
The	 husband	 wants	 to	 dominate	 the	 wife;	 the	 wife	 in	 her	 own	 ways	 tries	 to
dominate	 the	 husband.	The	parents	 dominate	 the	 children;	 the	 children	 also	 in
their	own	way	dominate	the	parents.	It	is	a	constant	struggle	going	on	in	multiple
ways,	where	nobody	is	allowed	to	be	just	himself,	where	to	be	oneself	is	a	crime.
But	to	accept	the	challenge	and	to	remain	yourself,	in	spite	of	all	the	odds,	is	a
great	joy.
To	keep	your	 individuality	 intact,	undamaged,	 in	a	society	where	everybody	 is
trying	to	dominate	you...	I	don't	think	it	is	good	to	escape	from	such	a	society.	In
the	Himalayas,	 in	deep	 forests,	you	may	 think	you	are	yourself	 --	but	 that	 is	a
false	notion,	because	there	is	no	context	in	which	you	can	put	it	to	the	test.
The	society	is	every	moment	a	test.
And	 here,	 to	 be	 just	 yourself,	 not	 out	 of	 arrogance,	 not	 out	 of	 your	 egoistic
feelings...
Those	people	who	are	arrogant	will	have	to	compromise,	because	there	are	more
arrogant	people.	Those	who	are	egoists	will	find	sooner	or	later	somebody	else
who	can	crush	them.
There	 are	 different	 kinds	 of	 powers.	 People	 slowly,	 slowly	 learn	 not	 to	 stand
erect,	but	they	start	crawling	on	the	ground.	In	this	society,	to	remain	erect	and
yourself	--	without	arrogance,	without	ego,	but	just	out	of	your	silence,	just	out
of	your	awareness	--	is	a	tremendous	experience	and	experiment.
I	 have	 lived	 life	 the	 way	 I	 wanted;	 it	 was	 difficult	 but	 it	 was	 immensely
rewarding.	It	gave	me	the	feeling	that	although	society	may	be	powerful,	if	you
have	guts	no	power	can	enslave	you.	They	can	kill	you,	 they	can	destroy	you,
but	they	cannot	enslave	you.
And	 to	 be	 destroyed	 is	 not	 undignified;	 to	 be	 killed	 is	 not	 against	 your
individuality,	 against	 your	 dignity,	 against	 your	 pride.	 In	 fact,	 these	 sacrifices
will	make	you	more	and	more	authentically	yourself.
Deep	down,	if	you	are	a	meditator,	you	know	your	body	can	be	taken	away	but
your	 being	 cannot	 even	 be	 touched	 --	 your	 immortality	 is	 sure.	 Hence,	 I	 am
adding	 to	 rebelliousness	 a	 new	 phenomenon.	 There	 have	 been	meditators,	 but
they	escaped	from	the	society,	and	there	have	been	rebellious	people	who	were
destroyed	by	the	society.	I	am	bringing	two	very	great	qualities	together	that	the
world	has	not	known	before:	 the	meeting	of	rebelliousness	and	meditativeness,
the	 meeting	 of	 rebelliousness	 and	 religiousness.	 To	 me,	 rebelliousness	 and
religiousness	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
There	 is	no	need	to	be	afraid	because	there	 is	nothing	that	can	be	destroyed	in
you.	And	that	which	can	be	destroyed	will	be	destroyed	whether	you	are	in	the
Himalayas,	or	hiding	in	the	monasteries.	The	body	is	going	to	be	destroyed,	so
there	is	no	need	on	the	part	of	the	body,	on	the	part	of	the	mind,	to	be	ready	to	be
enslaved.	 This	 happens	 because	 you	 are	 not	 aware	 of	 anything	more	 than	 the
body-mind	structure.	My	effort	is	to	make	you	aware	of	your	immortality.
Once	you	have	tasted	the	very	source	of	your	life	which	is	eternal,	then	nothing
can	make	you	do	things	which	are	not	in	tune	with	your	own	being.	You	will	say
yes	 only	 when	 you	 feel	 that	 this	 yes	 is	 not	 the	 yes	 of	 a	 slave	 but	 a	 man	 of
freedom.	You	will	 say	 no	 if	 you	 see	 that	 saying	 yes	will	 be	 only	 falling	 into
slavery.	But	this	is	possible	only	if	you	become	aware	of	your	being.
The	old	rebels	were	only	intellectually	rebellious.	My	rebel	has	to	be	spiritually
rebellious,	and	that	makes	a	tremendous	difference.	The	intellectual	rebellion	is
superficial	and	can	be	purchased,	but	the	spiritual	rebellion	is	not	a	commodity
in	the	market;	you	have	transcended	the	world.
I	don't	want	you	to	escape	the	world,	I	want	you	to	transcend	the	world	--	living
in	it,	going	through	all	the	fire	because	you	know	nothing	can	destroy	you.	This
certainty	can	create	a	gathering	of	rebels	without	any	establishment.
And	if	any	functional	kind	of	mechanism	is	needed,	that	is	not	a	problem.	Where
there	are	so	many	people,	something	functional	will	be	needed,	But	remember	it
is	functional,	it	does	not	give	you	any	status.	A	prime	minister	or	a	president	of	a
country	 are	 nothing	more	 than	 functional	 entities;	 they	 have	 a	 utility	 but	 they
don't	have	any	status.
Real	 status	 comes	 only	 from	 your	 realization	 of	 yourself,	 not	 by	 sitting	 on	 a
golden	throne.	If	people	bow	down	to	you,	remember	they	are	bowing	down	to
the	throne,	not	 to	you.	Tomorrow	somebody	else	will	be	there.	Yesterday	there
was	somebody	else	and	people	were	bowing	down.
I	have	heard	it	happened	in	Jagannathpuri...
It	 is	 one	of	 the	Hindu	 religious	 cities,	 and	 it	 has	 a	 great	 chariot,	 very	 ancient,
dedicated	to	God.	Jagannath	means	God,	the	lord	of	the	world.	Once	every	year,
the	 chariot	 goes	 through	 the	 streets	 and	 millions	 of	 people	 gather.	 Once	 it
happened	 that	 a	 dog	was	 going	 ahead	 of	 the	 chariot,	 and	 thousands	 of	 people
were	falling	on	the	ground,	touching	the	earth.	And	the	dog	said,	"Great,	I	must
be	someone	very	special!"
Millions	of	people,	but	all	your	presidents	and	all	your	prime	ministers	are	in	the
same	 position	 as	 the	 dog.	 People	 are	 respectful	 towards	 them,	 not	 because	 of
them	--	once	they	are	out	of	power,	nobody	even	remembers	them.
Before	the	Russian	revolution,	the	prime	minister	of	Russia	was	Kerensky,	one
of	the	great	powerful	men	in	the	world,	because	Russia	is	one-sixth	of	the	whole
world;	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 countries.	 Kerensky	 was	 so	 powerful,	 but	 the
revolution	 disturbed	 everything.	The	whole	 family	 of	 the	 czar	was	 killed.	Not
even	a	six-month-old	baby	was	left.	Kerensky	escaped,	and	for	almost	fifty	years
nobody	 heard	 anything	 about	 him.	 In	 the	 beginning,	 for	 three	 or	 four	 years,
people	thought,	What	has	happened?	But	then	the	people	forgot.
In	1960,	Kerensky	died	in	New	York;	he	had	been	running	a	grocery	store	for	all
these	years.	He	lived	long,	he	was	a	hundred	years	old	when	he	died,	but	he	had
changed	his	identity.	And	running	a	grocery	store...	nobody	even	bothered	who
he	was.
These	so-called	powerful	people	don't	have	any	power.	There	is	only	one	power,
and	that	comes	from	within.
Any	power	that	comes	from	outside	is	not	yours.
As	it	has	come,	it	will	be	taken	away.	So	if	you	are	intelligent	you	will	not	think
yourself	anybody	special;	you	are	just	functional.
In	 a	 society	 of	 greater	 consciousness,	 more	 intelligence,	 government	 will
become	just	a	small	functional	order,	it	will	not	be	an	enslaving	mechanism.	On
the	contrary,	it	will	help	individuals	to	become	more	sharp	in	their	intelligence,
deeper	in	their	meditation,	and	flowering	in	their	enlightenment	with	great	grace.
Only	this	kind	of	evolution	in	consciousness,	which	is	going	to	happen...	Perhaps
we	are	born	in	the	right	age	when	the	transformation	is	going	to	happen,	because
the	situation	is	such	that	either	the	whole	of	humanity	will	die,	or	it	will	have	to
change.	And	I	don't	think	anybody	wants	to	die.
The	only	alternative	is	to	be	more	conscious,	more	alert,	more	alive,	more	loving
--	and	create	a	new	world	with	a	new	man,	bring	a	new	dawn	to	humanity.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	Who	is	this	man	osho?
25	August	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708255
ShortTitle:
INVITA09
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
74
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
MY	FRIEND,	CHINTAN,	IS	JUST	STARTING	SIX	MONTHS	OF	HEAVY
CHEMOTHERAPY.	YOU	HAVE	ALREADY	SENT	HIM	SUCH	BEAUTIFUL
MESSAGES	FOR	HIS	MEDITATION	WHILE	PASSING	THROUGH	THIS.
NOW,	OSHO,	DO	YOU	HAVE	SOME	JOKES	FOR	HIM	TOO?
Prem	 Garima,	 Chintan	 is	 certainly	 passing	 through	 a	 difficult	 stage,	 but
everybody	has	to	finally	pass	through	the	difficult	stage	of	death.
Only	a	meditator	is	capable	of	passing	through	it	as	if	it	 is	a	joke.	He	can	pass
through	it	laughing	and	singing,	because	he	knows	that	the	fire	cannot	burn	and
the	death	cannot	destroy	him.
There	is	no	sword	that	can	cut	him.
He	belongs	to	the	eternal	life.
Once	a	small	glimpse	of	 the	eternity	 is	achieved,	 there	 is	no	 life	which	can	be
destroyed	by	anything.	It	can	be	removed	from	one	form	into	another,	but	death
cannot	do	more	than	that	--	just	the	changing	of	the	house.
To	the	non-meditator	death	is	the	end,	to	the	meditator,	a	beginning.	It	is	a	new
beginning,	a	fresh	beginning,	freed	from	the	old	rotten	body,	the	old	mind.	It	is	a
resurrection;	every	death	is	a	resurrection.	But	if	you	don't	know	it,	you	will	die
unconsciously	without	experiencing	the	beauty	of	resurrection.
If	you	can	die	consciously,	death	is	only	a	door	into	a	new	life	on	a	higher	plane.
But	 to	die	 consciously,	 one	has	 to	 live	 consciously.	You	cannot	manage	 to	die
consciously	without	a	 long,	meditative,	conscious	 life.	Only	a	conscious	 life	 is
rewarded	with	a	conscious	death	--	it	is	a	reward,	but	only	to	the	conscious	man.
To	the	unconscious	man,	it	is	the	end	to	all	his	efforts,	ambitions,	desires.	There
is	only	darkness	ahead,	not	a	single	light	and	no	possibilities	left.
Death	simply	takes	away	the	whole	future.
Naturally,	 the	 unconscious	 man	 is	 immensely	 afraid	 and	 deeply	 trembling,
knowing	that	death	is	coming	closer	every	day.	Since	your	birth	the	only	thing
that	has	been	certain	is	death;	everything	else	is	uncertain	and	accidental.	Only
death	is	not	accidental;	it	is	an	absolute	certainty.	There	is	no	way	to	avoid	it	or
dodge	it.	It	will	catch	hold	of	you	in	the	right	moment	at	the	right	place.
I	have	always	loved	the	beautiful	Sufi	story...
A	 king	 dreams	 in	 the	 night	 that	 a	 dark	 shadow	 is	 putting	 her	 hand	 on	 his
shoulder.	He	looks	back.	He	is	horrified.	It	is	just	a	dark	shadow,	but	the	shadow
speaks	and	says,
"There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 worried.	 I	 have	 just	 come	 to	 inform	 you	 --	 it	 is	 not
routine;	 you	 are	 a	 great	 king;	 it	 is	 an	 exception	 --	 otherwise	 I	 never	 come	 to
inform	anybody.	I	come	without	any	information."
The	king	said,	"But	who	are	you?"
The	 dark	 shadow	 laughed	 and	 said,	 "I	 am	 your	 death,	 and	 be	 prepared.
Tomorrow,	as	the	sun	will	be	setting,	I	am	going	to	come	to	you."
Naturally,	this	nightmare	woke	him	up.	Even	after	he	was	awake,	knowing	well
that	 it	was	 only	 a	 dream,	 he	was	 trembling	 and	 perspiring.	And	 his	 heart	was
beating	so	loudly	he	could	hear	it	himself.	He	immediately	called	the	council	of
all	his	wise	men,	and	particularly	the	royal	astrologers,	prophets,	and	told	them
the	dream.	He	asked	 them	 the	meaning	of	 it	 --	 is	 it	 true	 that	death	 is	going	 to
happen?	The	astrologers	may	be	able	to	figure	it	out.
The	wise	men,	the	philosophers,	the	astrologers,	the	prophets,	all	started	arguing
about	 the	 dream.	 Perhaps	 it	 was	 the	 first	 dream	 analysis!	 But	 they	 could	 not
come	to	any	conclusion,	 just	as	 they	cannot	come	to	any	conclusion	today.	All
the	dream	analysts,	 the	 so-called	psychoanalysts,	 differ	 in	 their	 interpretations.
You	take	the	same	dream	to	all	and	you	will	get	different	conclusions	about	the
dream.	You	will	be	more	confused	than	ever.
And	 so	 was	 the	 situation	 of	 the	 king	 from	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 till	 the
morning;	 he	 became	more	 and	more	 confused	 because	 everybody	was	 saying
something	different.
And	when	the	sun	started	rising,	 the	old	man	who	used	 to	serve	 the	king...	He
was	not	only	a	servant,	he	had	helped	the	king	from	his	very	childhood.	He	had
taken	care	of	him,	because	his	mother	had	died	and	his	father	had	appointed	the
man	to	take	care	of	the	child	because	he	was	his	most	trustworthy	bodyguard.	So
the	king	respected	him	almost	like	his	father.
The	old	man	said,	whispered	in	his	ear,	"These	great	thinkers	and	philosophers
and	 astrologers	 have	 argued	 for	 centuries	 and	 they	 have	 never	 come	 to	 any
conclusion;	do	you	think	they	will	come	to	any	conclusion	within	twelve	hours?
Forget	it;	that	is	not	possible.	These	are	the	people	who	know	only	how	to	argue;
they	never	come	to	any	conclusion.	They	argue	well	but	the	question	is	not	the
beauty	 of	 the	 argument,	 the	 question	 is	 what	 is	 the	 conclusion	 of	 all	 your
philosophies?	There	is	no	conclusion	at	all.
No	two	philosophers	agree	with	each	other."
The	king	asked	him,	"Then	what	do	you	propose?"
He	said,	"My	understanding	is	let	them	discuss;	there	is	no	harm.	But	you	take
our	fastest	horse	and	get	away	as	far	as	possible	from	the	palace.	It	is	dangerous
to	be	at	this	place,	for	at	least	the	coming	twelve	hours.	After	the	sun	has	set,	you
can	start	turning	back,	but	not	before	that."	It	looked	practical.	The	old	man	said,
"These	people	can	go	on	arguing;	there	is	no	need	to	stop	them.	If	they	come	to
any	 conclusion,	 I	 will	 follow	 you	 immediately.	 The	 best	 way	 is	 towards
Damascus,	 another	 capital	 of	 another	 kingdom.	 So	 I	 will	 know	where	 to	 find
you,	to	give	you	their	conclusion.	I	will	come	behind	you."
The	 king	was	 convinced	 by	 the	 old	man.	 He	 left	 all	 those	 great	 philosophers
discussing,	and	slipped	quietly	out	of	the	palace	with	the	best	horse	he	had.	The
whole	day	the	horse	was	running	as	fast	as	possible.	They	did	not	stop	to	eat	or
even	to	drink	water.	It	was	not	a	time	to	think	of	water	or	food.	And	the	horse
seemed	to	be	in	a	certain	understanding	that	it	was	a	very	critical	moment	for	his
master.
They	reached	near	Damascus,	just	outside	the	city,	as	the	sun	was	setting.	They
stopped	in	a	mango	grove	and	as	he	was	tying	the	horse	to	a	tree,	he	patted	it	and
he	said,	"You	prove	to	be	a	great	friend.	You	have	never	run	so	fast	before;	you
must	 have	 understood	 my	 situation.	 And	 we	 have	 come	 hundreds	 of	 miles
away."
As	the	sun	was	setting	he	immediately	felt	the	same	hand	on	his	shoulder	from
behind.
The	shadow	was	there	and	said,	"I	also	have	to	thank	your	horse.	I	was	worried
whether	you	would	be	able	to	reach	this	place	at	the	right	time	or	not.	That's	why
I	had	come	 to	 inform	you.	This	 is	 the	place	destined	 for	your	death,	 and	your
horse	has	brought	you	right	on	time."
Whether	 you	 run	 or	 you	 stay	 it	 doesn't	matter	 death	 comes.	Death	 has	 started
coming	 closer	 to	 you	 from	 the	 very	moment	 you	 were	 born.	 In	 what	 form	 it
comes	does	not	matter.
Bertrand	Russell	has	said	 that	 if	 there	were	no	death	 in	 the	world,	 there	would
have	been	no	religion.	He	has	some	great	insight	there:	without	death,	who	was
going	 to	 bother	 about	meditation?	Without	 death,	who	was	 going	 to	 bother	 to
know	 about	 the	 secret	 mysteries	 of	 life?	 One	 would	 have	 remained	 always
concerned	with	the	mundane	and	the	worldly.	Who	would	have	turned	inwards?
There	would	have	been	no	Gautam	Buddha.
So	death	is	not	just	a	calamity,	it	is	a	blessing	in	disguise.	If	you	can	understand,
if	you	have	this	much	intelligence	--	that	after	birth,	death	is	approaching	every
moment	closer	-
-	you	will	not	lose	your	time	in	trivia.	Your	priority	will	be	to	know	what	this	life
is	before	 it	 ends:	Who	 is	 living	 in	me?	What	 force?	For	 every	 intelligent	man
and	woman	this	is	the	priority.	Everything	else	is	secondary	to	knowing	oneself.
Once	you	know	yourself,	there	is	no	death.
Death	was	only	in	your	ignorance.
In	your	meditative	consciousness,	death	disappears	 just	 as	darkness	disappears
when	there	is	light	brought	in.	Meditation	brings	the	light	in,	and	death	is	found
to	 be	 the	 greatest	 fiction.	 It	 appears	 only	 from	 the	 outside	 that	 somebody	 is
dying.	From	the	inside	nobody	has	ever	died,	and	that	is	where	your	life	source
is.
Chintan	 is	 taking	 his	 death	 very	 joyously,	 very	 peacefully.	 He	 will	 die
consciously.	 He	 is	 giving	 every	 indication	 that	 death	 cannot	 make	 him
unconscious,	 cannot	knock	him	unconscious.	He	will	 retain	his	 consciousness,
and	he	will	have	a	laugh	as	he	will	be	dying,	because	the	whole	world	is	living	in
an	illusion.
Life	is	neither	born	nor	dies.
It	 has	 been	 before	 birth;	 it	will	 be	 after	 death.	Birth	 and	 death	 both	 are	 small
episodes	in	the	eternal	stream	of	consciousness	and	light.
Garima,	you	are	asking	for	some	jokes	for	him....
Giovanni	bumps	into	his	friend	Alfredo	on	the	streets	of	Rome,	and	notices	that
his	friend	is	looking	very	depressed.
"How	was	your	holiday	in-a	Miami	Beach?"	he	asks.
"Mama	mia,"	replies	Alfredo.	"It	was-a	terrible.	I	go-a	to	Miami	and	check	into-
a	 bigg-a	 hotel.	 In-a	 the	 morning	 I	 go	 down	 to	 eat-a	 breakfast.	 I	 tell-a	 the
waitress,	Ì	wanna	two	pissis-a	toast.'	She	bring	only	one	piss.	I	tell-a	her,	Ì	want
two	piss.'	She	say,	`Go	to	the	toilet.'
"I	say,	`You	no	understand,	I	wanna	two	piss	on-a	the	plate.'
"She	say,	`You	better	no	piss	on	da	plate,	you	sonna	va	bitch.'	I	don't	even	know
the	lady	and	she	call	me	sonna	va	bitch!
"Later	I	go	eat	at	the	bigga	restaurant.	The	waitress	brings	me	a	spoon	and	knife
but	no	fock.	I	tell-a	her,	Ì	wanna	fock.'	She	tell	me,	Èveryone	wanna	fuck.'
"I	tell	her,	`You	no	understand.	I	wanna	fock	on-a	da	table.'
"She	say,	`You	better	not	fuck	on-a	table,	you	sonna	va	bitch.'
"So	I	go	back	to	my	room	in-a	hotel	and	there	is	no	shits	on-a	my	bed.	I	call	the
manager	and	tell-a	him,	Ì	wanna	shit.'	He	tell	me	to	go	to	the	toilet.	I	say,	`You
not	understand.	I	wanna	shit	on	my	bed.'
"He	say,	`You	better	not	shit	on-a	bed,	you	sonna	va	bitch.'
"I	go	to	the	check-out	desk	and	the	man	at	the	desk	say,	`Happy	Holidays,	Peace
to	you.'
"I	say,	`Piss	on	you	too,	you	sonna	va	bitch,	I	gonna	go	back	to	Italy.'"
Just	tell	Chintan:	Avoid	Italy	and	go	anywhere	else.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	SAY	EVERYBODY	 IS	BEAUTIFUL.	CAN	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	THE
BEAUTY
OF	RONALD	REAGAN?
Prem	 Samarpan,	 everybody	 is	 certainly	 beautiful.	 When	 I	 say	 this,	 I	 mean
potentially,	 I	 do	 not	 mean	 actually.	 If	 actually	 everybody	 was	 beautiful,	 this
world	would	have	been	a	paradise.
Potentially	everybody	is	beautiful	--	yes,	even	Ronald	Reagan.	But	the	actuality
is	what	matters.	Actually,	he	is	the	ugliest	man	today,	Adolf	Hitler	number	one.
Kaddafi	 has	 called	 him	 "Adolf	 Hitler	 number	 two."	 I	 made	 a	 statement	 that
Kaddafi	should	correct	his	statement.	He	is	not	Adolf	Hitler	number	two,	he	is
Adolf	Hitler	number	one.	The	real,	poor	Adolf	Hitler,	has	become	number	two.
Adolf	Hitler	 had	very	 little	 power.	Ronald	Reagan	has	millions	of	 times	more
power,	 and	 he	 is	 as	 fascist	 and	 as	 fanatical	 as	 any	 Adolf	 Hitler.	 This	 is	 the
actuality.
Everybody	 is	 beautiful	 but	 everybody	 does	 not	 prove	 to	 be	 beautiful,	 because
very	few	people	attain	 to	 their	potential;	 they	go	astray.	They	don't	grow	to	be
what	they	were	born	to	be.	They	grow	in	an	insane	society	and	naturally,	learn
the	whole	art	of	being	insane.
Because	here,	whoever	is	more	insane	will	be	the	winner.
The	sane	person	will	stand	out	of	the	race.	And	the	insane	will	not	take	any	note
--
whatever	happens	to	him	or	to	others,	and	whatever	the	cost,	he	is	going	to	be	on
the	top.
Your	 presidents	 and	 your	 prime	ministers	 are	 your	most	 insane	 people.	 Their
right	 place	 is	 in	 madhouses,	 but	 they	 are	 ruling	 the	 whole	 world.	 In	 three
thousand	 years	 they	 have	 managed	 five	 thousand	 wars.	 And	 the	 insanity	 has
gone	 on	 growing;	 it	 has	 not	 been	 stable.	 Today	 it	 has	 reached	 its	 peak,	 and
Ronald	Reagan	 is	 standing	on	almost	 an	Everest	of	nuclear	weapons,	 ready	 to
destroy	the	whole	of	life	on	this	beautiful	planet.
Hence,	 I	 have	 to	make	 this	 strange	 statement:	 I	 love	 him;	 I	 respect	 him	 as	 a
human	being	if	he	comes	back	to	sanity...	but	he	is	going	more	and	more	insane
and	senile.	Retarded,	he	has	always	been.	It	would	have	been	perfectly	good	if
he	 had	 remained	 in	 Hollywood	 as	 a	 cowboy	 actor.	 But	 when	 he	 became	 the
president,	he	started	behaving	in	the	same	way	as	if	he	was	acting	in	a	cowboy
film.
It	is	real	life;	it	is	not	a	film,	but	he	has	not	been	able	to	assimilate	the	fact.
When	he	became	the	president,	he	came	to	the	White	House	with	his	only	friend,
a	chimpanzee.	Now,	if	you	cannot	find	any	friendship	in	human	beings	and	you
find	friendship	with	a	chimpanzee,	it	shows	something	about	you.	It	also	shows
something	about	the	chimpanzee	--	that	he	is	an	intelligent	fellow.
On	 the	 first	day	 they	had	both	gone	for	a	walk	on	 the	beach.	An	old	drunkard
watched	 these	 two	 fellows.	He	could	not	believe	 it	 and	he	could	not	 resist	 the
temptation	either.
He	went	close	to	them	and	said,	"Mr.	President,	it	does	not	look	right	to	have	a
chimpanzee	as	your	friend.	It	is	humiliating	to	the	whole	of	America."
And	as	Ronald	Reagan	was	going	to	say	something,	the	drunkard	said,	"You	shut
up	--	I	am	talking	to	Mr.	President."
This	man	Ronald	Reagan	has	gone	 completely	 astray,	 and	he	 is	 now	 the	most
powerful	man.	In	the	hands	of	a	great	insane	person	is	so	much	power	that	you
are	 living	moment	 to	moment	 in	 tremendous	 risk.	He	 can	 blow	 up	 the	whole
earth	just	by	pushing	a	button,	and	I	don't	think	that	he	will	hesitate	to	do	it.
His	 fanatical	 and	 fascist	 mind	 is	 capable	 of	 doing	 any	 idiotic	 thing.	 He	 has
behaved	with	me,	with	my	people,	with	the	commune	--	a	group	of	meditators	in
a	desert,	just	five	thousand	people	in	a	vast	desert	of	one	hundred	and	twenty-six
square	 miles,	 far	 away	 from	 any	 American	 town,	 at	 least	 twenty	 miles	 away
from	any	 town...	He	became	so	much	 interested	 in	destroying	 the	commune	 --
which	had	not	done	any	harm	to	him,	or	to	his	country	--	just	because	he	could
not	tolerate	a	peaceful	commune,	joyous	and	happy	and	celebrating.
Hundreds	of	news	media	people	and	visitors	from	all	over	America	had	started
coming	 to	see	what	was	happening:	how	 in	 five	years	we	had	 transformed	 the
desert	into	a	beautiful	oasis.	My	garden	alone	had	three	hundred	peacocks,	and
the	commune	had	almost	two	or	three	thousand	deer.	It	was	such	a	dream	come
true.
As	 the	 news	 started	 spreading	 in	 America,	 Ronald	 Reagan	 began	 to	 fear	 that
people	would	ask:	 If	 these	people	can	 turn	even	a	desert	 into	an	oasis	and	can
live	 so	 beautifully	 and	 so	 peacefully,	 with	 no	 court,	 with	 no	 law,	 with	 no
government,	why	should	the	richest	country	of	the	world	not	live	as	peacefully
and	as	joyously	and	as	lovingly?
Why	should	 there	be	 thirty	million	beggars	on	 the	 street	 in	America?	And	we
had	 absorbed	 a	 few	 hundred	 beggars	 into	 our	 commune.	Those	 beggars	 could
not	believe	it	when	we	behaved	with	them	on	equal	terms.	They	wrote	letters	to
me	saying,	"For	the	first	time	we	have	recognized	that	we	are	also	human	beings.
You	have	given	us	dignity	 and	 respect;	 otherwise,	we	had	been	 treated	 almost
like	dogs,	stray	dogs."
Ronald	 Reagan	 and	 his	 government	 became	 absolutely	 antagonistic	 for	 the
simple	 reason	 that	 we	 were	 so	 successful	 in	 creating	 a	 utopia.	 He	 could	 not
tolerate	us;	he	destroyed	the	commune.	He	had	the	power;	he	arrested	me	for	no
reason.	He	fined	me	sixty	lakh	rupees	for	no	crime,	and	after	that	I	was	deported
from	America	and	the	commune	was	crushed.
Now,	where	 there	were	 five	 thousand	 people	 living,	 and	where	 every	 year	 on
festival	 days	 for	 one	month,	 there	 used	 to	 be	 twenty	 thousand	 sannyasins	 --	 a
great	festival	of	love	and	joy	and	meditation	and	silence	and	creativity...
After	 I	was	out	of	America,	his	own	U.S.	attorney	gave	a	statement	 in	a	press
conference	that	they	had	no	evidence	against	me	of	any	crime;	hence,	they	could
not	send	me	to	jail.
Moreover,	they	did	not	want	to	make	me	a	martyr.	That	shows	their	deep	desire	-
-	they	wanted	to	kill	me,	but	they	prevented	themselves	because	that	may	have
strengthened	 the	 sannyas	 movement	 around	 the	 world.	 Thirdly,	 he	 said,	 "Our
priority	was	just	 to	destroy	the	commune	and	not	allow	Osho	into	America	for
fifteen	years."
I	was	not	thinking	that	they	would	continue	their	harassment,	but	even	today	that
harassment	continues.	They	have	forced	all	the	governments	of	the	world	to	pass
laws	so	that	I	cannot	enter	--	not	only	America,	but	any	country	in	Europe.	Now
this	is	absolutely	criminal.	Wherever	I	was,	he	forced	that	government	to	deport
me.
Just	the	other	day	I	found	out	that	one	archbishop	of	Greece	has	been	caught	at
the	Paris	airport,	hiding	a	large	amount	of	heroin	in	his	religious	paraphernalia.	I
was	deported	from	Greece	and	I	was	 just	a	 tourist.	 I	was	going	 to	be	 there	 for
only	two	weeks	more;	I	had	already	been	there	two	weeks.	I	was	deported	on	the
demand	of	the	archbishop,	the	highest	authority	of	the	Greek	Orthodox	church,
on	the	grounds	that	my	presence	in	Greece	will	destroy	its	tradition,	will	destroy
its	religion,	will	destroy	its	morality.
I	could	not	believe	that	we	are	living	in	the	twentieth	century.	I	had	not	even	left
my	 house,	 the	 compound.	 And	 if	 a	 religion,	 a	 morality,	 a	 church,	 twenty
centuries	old	--
because	the	Greek	church	is	the	oldest	church	as	far	as	Christianity	is	concerned
--	can	be	destroyed	by	a	tourist	in	two	weeks'	time,	is	it	worth	saving?
But	 the	 force	 behind	was	Ronald	Reagan.	 In	Uruguay	 I	was	 given	 a	 one-year
resident's	permit.	The	president	was	 interested	 in	me.	He	had	been	reading	my
books	and	he	was	very	happy	that	I	had	come	to	Uruguay.	That	would	open	the
door	of	Uruguay	to	international	visitors,	sannyasins.	It	is	a	poor	country	and	it
would	 be	 an	 economic	 help	 to	 the	 country.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 country,	 a	 small
country.
But	 as	 I	was	 given	 the	 one-year	 resident's	 permit,	 immediately,	 special	 agents
from	Ronald	Reagan	arrived.	And	Ronald	Reagan	himself	phoned	the	president
of	Uruguay,	saying,	"Osho	has	to	be	deported	within	thirty-six	hours.	You	have	a
choice:	If	you	want	to	keep	him	in	Uruguay,	you	can,	but	then	you	have	to	return
all	 the	money	 that	 has	 been	 given	 to	 you	 as	 loans	 in	 the	 past;	 that	 comes	 to
billions	of	dollars.	And	the	money	that	you	are	going	to	get	in	the	coming	two
years,	which	also	comes	to	billions	of	dollars,	will	be	canceled.	You	can	choose."
The	secretary	to	the	president	of	Uruguay	told	me,	"I	have	seen	for	the	first	time,
tears	in	the	eyes	of	the	president,	and	he	said,	Òsho's	coming	to	Uruguay	at	least
has	 made	 one	 thing	 clear	 to	 us,	 that	 we	 are	 living	 in	 an	 illusion	 that	 we	 are
independent.	We	are	not	even	free	to	accept	a	guest	in	our	country.	Now	America
is	blackmailing	us.	They	know	that	we	cannot	pay	all	the	loans;	we	don't	have...
and	we	cannot	afford	to	have	the	future	loans	withdrawn	because	all	of	our	plans
for	 the	 coming	 five	 years	 will	 have	 to	 be	 dropped.	 Our	 whole	 economy	 will
collapse.'"
He	 agreed,	 "I	will	 send	Osho	 away,	 although	 it	 is	 against	 our	 legal	 court	 and
against	the	constitution	of	Uruguay.	Once	you	give	a	man	one	year's	residence,
unless	 he	 commits	 some	 heinous	 crime	 --	 murder,	 rape,	 or	 something	 of	 that
category	--	you	cannot	take	away	his	residential	status.	But	I	am	ready	to	commit
something	against	the	constitution.
I	will	send	him;	I	will	persuade	him	to	leave	by	himself."
But	 Ronald	 Reagan	 insisted,	 "No,	 he	 has	 to	 be	 deported;	 he	 has	 not	 to	 be
persuaded	to	leave."
The	president	of	Uruguay	begged	him	 that	 this	was	going	 too	 far:	"In	 the	 first
place	he	has	every	right	to	stay,	because	he	has	not	committed	any	sin.	He	never
goes	out	of	his	house.	Secondly,	to	deport	him	what	cause	will	we	show?"
President	Ronald	Reagan	was	stubborn.	"That	is	not	our	problem,	but	he	has	to
be	deported."
The	president	of	Uruguay	tried.	He	sent	a	messenger	to	me,	"Shift	your	jet	plane
from	 the	 international	 airport	 to	 a	 small	 airport	 nearby.	And	 leave	 from	 there,
because	the	American	Embassy	is	watching	the	international	airport.	There	will
be	no	need	for	us	to	deport	you."
But	American	detectives	must	have	been	watching	the	president;	they	must	have
been	 watching	 me	 also.	 Before	 I	 reached	 the	 small	 airport,	 the	 American
ambassador	was	 there	ahead	of	us	and	he	had	phoned	 the	president	 to	send	all
the	 officials	 with	 all	 the	 necessary	 documents	 for	 deportation:	 "Without
deportation	he	cannot	be	allowed	to	leave	the	country."
I	was	deported.	I	had	to	be	stopped	for	two	hours	at	that	small	airport,	and	for	no
reason.
But	 they	 have	 made	 my	 passport	 a	 historical	 document.	 I	 had	 been	 deported
from	 twenty-one	 countries	 without	 any	 reason	 --	 against	 the	 constitutions	 of
twenty-one	countries.
Reagan's	idea	has	been	to	close	the	whole	world	to	me	and	then	force	the	Indian
government	--	which	he	is	doing	continuously	--	to	allow	no	sannyasins	to	reach
me.	 I	 have	 been	 informed	 by	 my	 friends	 from	 Washington	 that	 the	 attorney
general	said,	"Our	whole	effort	will	be	to	completely	silence	Osho."
One	reporter	asked,	"What	do	you	mean	by	silence?	Do	you	mean	that	he	should
be	assassinated?"
The	 attorney	 general	 said,	 "No,	 we	 don't	 mean	 that,	 but	 it	 will	 almost	 be
assassination."
The	strategy	is	 that	no	other	country	allows	me	to	enter.	My	country	of	course
cannot	deport	me,	but	it	can	prevent	people	from	reaching	me.
Many	 television	 companies	 have	 written	 saying,	 "We	 are	 continuously	 being
refused.	We	 are	 asking	 to	 come	 to	 Poona;	 they	 immediately	 refuse,	 and	 they
don't	give	any	reason	why."
Newspapers	have	been	refused	permission	to	reach	me.	Thousands	of	sannyasins
from	 all	 over	 the	 world	 have	 been	 refused	 visas.	 Somehow	 thousands	 have
already	got	their	visas,	because	now	I	have	taken	away	the	orange	robe,	the	mala
--	so	they	cannot	figure	out	whether	the	person	is	a	sannyasin	or	not.
I	am	not	a	serious	man,	so	I	have	told	my	sannyasins,	"If	they	ask	you,	simply
ask,	Who	is	this	man	Osho?	Do	you	want	us	to	go	to	him?	Where	is	Poona?	We
were	never	 thinking	of	going	but	you	seem	 to	be	 interested..."	Although	many
people	 have	 got	 visas,	 some	 have	 been	 turned	 back	 from	Bombay	 airport	 and
from	 Calcutta	 airport,	 back	 to	 their	 countries.	 This	 is	 because,	 the	 American
government	 has	 given	 the	 Indian	 government	 a	 whole	 list	 of	 the	 people	 who
were	living	in	the	commune.	They	are	asking	continuously,	that	every	sannyasin
who	is	here	should	give	the	police	commissioner	his	full	address	and	how	long
he	is	going	to	be	here,	so	that,	even	if	you	have	reached	me	one	time,	the	next
time	you	cannot.	We	have	not	given	any	names;	we	have	asked	them,	"On	what
grounds	are	you	asking?	If	you	are	asking	one	religious	institution,	you	should
ask	all	the	religious	institutions	of	the	country	to	keep	a	record	of	anybody	who
comes	 there	 and	make	 a	 report	 every	 day.	And	 if	 you	want,	 you	 can	 open	 an
office	 in	 front	of	 the	ashram,	and	anybody	who	comes	you	can	 take	his	name.
That	 is	 your	 business;	 that	 is	 not	 our	 business.	 It	 is	 not	 our	 concern	 and	 it	 is
against	our	philosophy	and	religion	to	discriminate	between	people	of	different
countries	 or	 different	 races,	 or	 different	 colors.	 And	 we	 will	 not	 do	 anything
against	our	own	thinking."
So	 they	 are	 at	 a	 loss	 what	 to	 do,	 because	 if	 they	 do	 anything	 against	 the
constitution	we	 are	 going	 to	 fight.	 But	 Ronald	Reagan	 goes	 on	 insisting.	 The
American	Embassy	goes	on	insisting	to	the	Indian	government	to	prevent	people
from	reaching	here.	Twice,	the	American	Embassy	has	been	here	to	watch	how
many	people	there	are	around	the	ashram.	And	now	the	police	commissioner	has
asked	 US,	 "Why	 does	 the	 American	 Embassy	 come	 again	 and	 again	 to	 the
ashram?	This	is	strange."
They	should	ask	the	American	Embassy.	How	do	we	know?	And	why	should	we
bother?
If	 all	 the	 embassies	 of	 the	world	 start	 coming	 it	 is	 perfectly	good.	We	are	not
doing	anything	criminal	here.
But	this	man	Reagan	has	lost	his	humanity.
Prem	 Samarpan	 you	 say	 everybody	 is	 beautiful	 --	 but	 everybody	 does	 not
actualize	his	beauty,	does	not	actualize	his	consciousness.	Everybody	is	capable
of	 enlightenment,	 but	 that	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 Ronald	 Reagan	 is	 enlightened.
Everybody	 is	 beautiful,	 but	 that	 does	 not	mean	 that	when	 you	 see	 a	 beautiful
cobra,	 you	 should	 not	 avoid	 it.	 Even	 if	 you	 are	 enlightened,	 please	 avoid	 it!
Appreciate	the	beauty,	but	avoid	it.
What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 dead	 snake	 lying	 in	 the	 road	 and	 a	 dead
politician	 lying	 in	 the	 road?	Whom	will	 you	 avoid	 first?	 If	 Ronald	Reagan	 is
lying	dead	on	the	road	and	a	dead	snake	is	lying	on	the	road,	I	suggest,	although
both	 are	 beautiful,	 that	 you	 avoid	 Ronald	 Reagan	 first!	 Politicians	 cannot	 be
trusted	whether	they	are	really	dead	or	not.
And	if	you	see	a	politician	and	a	snake	lying	dead,	you	will	also	see	one	thing:
there	will	be	skid	marks	in	front	of	the	snake,	not	in	front	of	the	politician.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	 IS	 THE	 HIDDEN	 MYSTERY	 IN	 THE	 SILENCE	 BETWEEN	 THE
PAGES	IN
FRONT	OF	YOU?
Prem	Maharaj,	all	that	I	want	to	say	to	you	is	in	my	gaps.	I	use	the	words	only	to
create	gaps.	So	when	I	am	simply	looking	at	the	pages,	I	am	giving	you	a	chance
to	 receive	 the	 message	 which	 cannot	 be	 said	 in	 words,	 which	 can	 only	 be
relayed,	transferred,	in	utter	silence.
There	 is	 an	 ancient	proverb:	 "People	will	 believe	 anything,	 if	 you	whisper	 it."
Particularly	 if	you	want	 the	women	 to	hear	anything,	whisper	 it!	But	 I	go	one
step	further.	If	you	really	want	to	express	the	truth,	don't	say	anything	about	it,
just	leave	the	gap.	Let	people	hear	without	your	saying	anything.	That's	the	only
way	truth	has	always	been	transferred
--	from	one	silent	heart	to	another	silent	heart.
In	utter	silence	is	the	only	possibility	to	meet,	to	merge,	to	share.
A	 joke	 for	 you	 Prem	Maharaj.	 The	 purpose	 of	 the	 joke	 is	 not	 the	 joke.	 The
purpose	is	the	laughter	that	follows,	because	in	that	laughter	your	thinking	stops.
In	that	laughter,	you	are	no	more	mind.	And	after	the	laughter,	just	a	very	small
gap	and	I	can	reach	to	the	deepest	core	of	your	being.
An	Englishman,	a	Frenchman,	and	a	Russian	were	arguing	about	the	nationality
of	Adam	and	Eve.
"They	 must	 have	 been	 English,"	 the	 Englishman	 offered.	 "After	 all,	 only	 a
gentleman	would	share	his	last	apple	with	a	lady."
"They	surely	were	French,"	 the	Frenchman	asserted.	"They	were	so	hopelessly
in	love."
"They	could	only	have	been	Russian,"	declared	 the	Russian.	 "Who	else	would
walk	around	naked,	have	but	one	apple	to	eat	between	them,	and	think	they	were
in	paradise?"
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	The	only	romance	that	knows	no	divorce
26	August	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708260
ShortTitle:
INVITA10
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
113
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
OVER	THE	LAST	FEW	MONTHS	I	HAVE	BEEN	GOING	THROUGH	AN
AMAZING	 PROCESS	 OF	 LETTING	 GO	 OF	 MY	 ATTACHMENTS,	 OF
CLEARING
THE	WAY	FOR	MY	HEART	TO	EXPAND	TO	YOU,	THE	DIVINE.
THANK	YOU,	OSHO,	FOR	SHOWERING	ME	WITH	SO	MUCH	LOVE.	AM
I	WORTHY	OF	SO	MUCH?
Prem	 Neera,	 everybody	 is	 worthy	 of	 much	 more,	 much	 more	 than	 he	 is
receiving.	But	the	responsibility	of	not	receiving	more	is	yours.
People	 live	 a	 closed	 life.	 They	 keep	 all	 their	 doors	 and	windows	 of	 the	 heart
completely	shut.	It	happens	because	of	a	natural	phenomenon	that	the	child	is	so
small	 and	 so	 helpless,	 and	 so	 dependent	 and	 is	 always	 in	 fear;	 everybody	 is
bigger	and	more	powerful.
His	 experience	 of	 fear	 in	 the	 very	 beginning	 starts	 the	 process	 of	 closing	 the
heart.
Fear	is	a	closing	process.
Love	is	just	the	opposite,	the	opening	process.	Unfortunately,	the	way	humanity
has	lived,	it	has	lived	in	fear.	Even	if	it	loves,	it	is	out	of	fear.	And	a	love	out	of
fear	is	absolutely	false.	It	is	better	to	be	loveless	--	because	at	least	it	will	go	on
hurting	you	to	the	point	that	you	will	have	to	change	--	than	to	have	a	substitute
false	 love	which	 consoles	 you,	 deceives	 you	 and	 keeps	 you	where	 you	 are,	 a
closed	being.
The	child	is	told	by	the	parents	to	love	them;	it	is	almost	an	order.	Love	cannot
be	ordered.	 If	 through	an	order	 something	 resembling	 love	happens	 it	 is	 false,
and	deep	inside	there	is	hate	because	nobody	wants	to	be	ordered,	manipulated.
But	every	parent	is	manipulating	his	own	children:	I	am	your	mother	--	love	me!
What	is	so	great	in	being	your	mother?	What	is	so	great	in	being	your	father?	If
there	is	something	great,	the	child	will	start	loving	you	and	then	there	will	be	a
totally	different	world.	The	child	will	learn	to	love	on	his	own,	not	because	you
have	ordered	but	because	of	the	way	you	are.
Love	arises	out	of	deep	respect	and	gratitude,	seeing	your	beauty	and	grandeur,
seeing	your	unconditional	love	which	asks	nothing	in	response,	not	even	love.	If
the	parents	can	shower	the	child	with	love	without	asking	for	any	response	from
him,	the	response	will	come.	And	this	response	will	have	an	authenticity;	it	will
come	from	the	opening	of	the	heart.	The	child	will	know	that	there	is	no	reason
to	 fear.	These	are	not	 the	people	 to	be	afraid	of;	you	can	open,	and	 this	 is	 the
beginning	of	a	totally	different	life.	Once	you	have	learned	that,	the	open	heart	is
not	 only	 capable	 of	 receiving	 love	 from	 your	 parents,	 it	 is	 also	 capable	 of
receiving	love	from	the	whole	existence.
The	whole	secret	is	a	simple	thing	--	the	opening	of	the	heart.	But	what	actually
has	been	happening	is	that	neither	of	the	parents	loves	each	other.	The	husband
loves	 because	 he	 is	 a	 husband;	 he	 is	 supposed	 to	 love.	 The	wife	 loves	 under
submission,	because	she	has	been	enslaved	through	marriage;	she	has	to	love.
When	 there	 is	 some	 compulsoriness,	 the	 beauty	 of	 love	 disappears	 and	 the
reality	of	love	changes	completely	to	its	opposite.	Husband	and	wife	love	each
other	 and	hate	 each	other	 too,	 simultaneously.	They	hate	because	 they	have	 to
love	under	compulsion,	under	the	rules	of	society,	convention,	law.	The	husband
can	demand	love;	the	wife	can	demand	love,	but	it	is	a	demanding	love;	in	subtle
ways	they	demand,	not	directly.
As	the	husband	comes	home...	the	wife	was	perfectly	okay	listening	to	the	radio,
looking	 at	 the	 television,	 singing	 to	 herself,	 and	 as	 the	 husband	 comes,	 she
immediately	lies	down	and	suddenly,	the	headache!
The	story	is	that	Adam	was	constantly	bothering	God:	first,	he	was	alone	and	he
had	no	idea	that	there	was	something	missing	in	his	life.	But	then	he	saw	a	bull
doing	 something	 to	 a	 cow.	And	 he	 ran	 to	God	 and	 said,	 "What	 is	 happening?
What	is	that	bull	doing	to	the	cow?"
And	God	said,"You	don't	bother	me	again	and	again.	I	have	told	you,	the	bull	is
loving	 the	cow."	And	all	 the	animals	and	 the	birds...	and	Adam	was	again	and
again	asking.
Finally,	God	became	tired	and	told	him,	"I	will	give	you	a	wife	also."
And	the	next	day,	in	the	morning,	Adam	ran	after	God	and	said,	"Just	a	minute,
please,	what	is	a	headache?"
The	first	night,	the	very	first	night	of	humanity's	beginning,	and	the	headache	is
the	first	problem	that	arises	--	the	wife	had	a	headache.
These	are	ways	of	manipulating.	When	your	wife	has	a	headache,	naturally	you
have	 to	be	 loving.	This	 is	not	 a	 time	 to	quarrel	or	 fight	or	 to	 argue	or	 tell	 her
things	 that	 she	has	done	wrong.	Some	other	 time	 --	 this	 is	not	 the	 time;	 she	 is
already	suffering.	The	headache	is	a	way	to	ask	for	your	sympathy,	but	it	is	not
love.	The	man	will	show	sympathy;	and	sympathy	is	ugly	in	comparison	to	love.
Always	remember:	all	these	qualities	are	relative.
Sympathy	 is	 good	 in	 comparison	 to	 antipathy,	 but	 sympathy	 is	 very	 poor	 and
ugly	in	comparison	to	love.
You	have	heard	about	Albert	Einstein's	law	of	relativity.	Somebody	has	reduced
it	 to	a	simple	maxim:	 the	 theory	of	 relativity	says	 that	 it	all	depends	on	which
side	of	the	toilet	door	you	are.	If	you	are	inside	time	is	going	fast,	and	if	you	are
outside	time	is	going	slow.	It	is	the	same	time,	just	the	door	is	creating	the	whole
trouble.
Love	is	something	that	can	blossom	in	its	beauty	only	when	unasked,	when	it	is
not	demanded.	When	it	comes	on	its	own,	even	unconsciously,	it	has	tremendous
beauty.	The	moment	you	demand,	it	may	come	because	the	wife	is	dependent	on
you...	and	in	certain	ways,	the	husband	is	dependent	on	the	wife.	Love	happens
between	two	independent	people	not	between	two	slaves	of	each	other.	And	the
poor	children	are	brought	up	by	these	two	persons	who	themselves	don't	know
the	secret	of	the	opening	of	the	heart.
Naturally,	they	start	from	the	very	beginning.	The	mother	goes	on	saying,	"He	is
your	daddy,	smile!"	as	if	these	things	can	be	ordered.	Smile...	and	the	poor	child
has	to	smile.
Now	what	is	there	in	this	dodo	you	call	daddy	that	the	poor	child	has	to	smile?
And	the	poor	child	does	not	understand	what	this	fellow	has	done	that	he	has	to
smile.	But	he	has	to	smile;	that	smile	becomes,	naturally,	a	Jimmy	Carter	smile,
absolutely	 false.	 The	 child	 starts	 becoming	 a	 politician;	 he	 smiles	 because	 he
knows	that	way	he	is	appreciated,	thought	to	be	a	beautiful	child.	If	he	does	not
smile,	 he	 is	 thought	 to	 be	 unworthy,	 and	 nobody	 wants	 to	 be	 condemned	 as
unworthy.	That's	how,	slowly,	the	child	starts	learning	false	things:	false	smiles,
false	love,	false	respect.
In	a	more	conscious	and	authentic	world,	the	husband	and	the	wife	should	first
learn	 how	 to	 remain	 independent	 and	 yet	 allow	 love	 to	 pass	 through.	 They
should	 not	 come	 too	 close.	Kahlil	Gibran	 is	 right	when	 he	 says	 to	 the	 lovers,
"You	 should	 stand	 like	 the	 pillars	 of	 a	 temple	 --	 far	 apart,	 yet	 supporting	 the
same	roof."	Your	love	should	be	supported	by	you,	but	you	should	leave	enough
gap	for	each	to	have	his	own	individual	 territory,	his	own	individual	space,	his
own	individuality.
You	should	not	trespass	on	each	other.	But	what	to	say	of	trespassing?	Husbands
and	 wives	 become	 detectives,	 FBI	 agents	 --	 against	 each	 other.	 They	 are
continuously	looking	out	of	the	corners	of	their	eyes:	What	is	happening?	This	is
not	love.	This	is	domination;	this	is	pure	animal	sexuality.	A	child	is	born	out	of
this	 situation,	 and	 unfortunately	 has	 to	 be	 brought	 up	 by	 these	 people.	 They
themselves	don't	know	what	love	is;	 they	missed	the	train.	Now	they	will	 train
the	child	to	miss	the	train.	And	this	goes	on	from	generation	to	generation.
Just	the	other	day,	there	was	a	question	from	Veena	--	how	to	open	the	heart?	It
is	just	like	somebody	asking	how	to	open	the	eyes.	If	you	were	forced	from	the
very	beginning	and	ordered	to	open	the	eyes,	perhaps	you	would	have	retaliated
by	 closing	 them.	That	would	 have	 been	 your	 assertiveness,	 your	 individuality,
and	 you	 may	 have	 forgotten	 completely	 how	 to	 open	 the	 eyes.	 Now,	 do	 you
think	 there	 can	 be	 some	 training	 to	 open	 the	 heart,	 some	 discipline,	 some
technique?	That	will	be	another	mistake.	You	can	pretend	that	your	heart	is	open.
That's	all	that	will	happen	by	your	discipline	and	training	and	technique.
What	is	needed	is	a	deep	understanding	of	why	the	heart	is	closed.	There	is	no
need	 to	 be	worried	 about	 opening	 it.	 Just	 knowing	why	 it	 is	 closed,	 you	will
come	upon	all	those	fears	that	have	closed	it.	Now	those	fears	are	not	there,	but
once	you	have	closed	the	doors	and	the	windows,	they	have	remained	closed.
Now	 nobody	 is	 forcing	 you;	 now	 you	 are	 grown	 up	 enough.	 You	 can	 assert
yourself;	 you	 can	 be	 an	 individual.	 You	 can	 say	 to	 your	 father,	 "If	 you	 are
lovable,	 I	will	 love,	 but	 not	 because	 you	 are	my	 father."	You	 can	 say	 to	 your
mother,	"Create	the	quality	of	lovableness	and	I	will	love	you	--	not	only	I,	but
others	also	will	love	you	--	but	not	because	you	are	my	mother."
Love	is	not	a	rational	thing.	It	is	not	a	syllogism:	she	is	your	mother;	hence	you
have	 to	 love	her.	Wherever	any	kind	of	compulsoriness	comes	 in,	 love	 is	very
delicate	and	disappears.
Everybody	is	much	more	worthy	than	he	can	even	dream	of,	to	receive	love,	to
share	love,	to	rejoice	in	making	love	your	very	life.
Birth	 is	 not	 in	 your	 hands,	 neither	 is	 death	 in	 your	 hands.	 Between	 birth	 and
death	only	one	thing	is	 in	your	hands,	and	that	 is	 love.	And	unfortunately,	 that
which	was	your	only	freedom	is	not	available	to	everybody.
Prem	Neera,	 you	 are	 saying,	 "Am	 I	 worthy	 of	 so	much?"	 You	 are	 worthy	 of
much	more.
Just	 learn	 to	be	 receptive,	 just	 learn	 to	be	humble,	 just	 learn	 to	be	simple,	 just
learn	 to	 be	 trusting.	Even	 if	 the	whole	world	 deceives	 you,	 still	 trust,	 because
that	is	their	problem	if	they	are	deceptive;	it	is	not	your	problem.
What	happens?	A	single	man	deceives	you	and	you	start	distrusting	the	whole	of
humanity.	 Do	 you	 see	 the	 absurdity	 of	 it?	 Even	 if	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity
deceives	you,	I	say	to	you,	still	 trust	--	because	trust	 is	much	more	valuable;	 it
has	an	intrinsic	value.	It	does	not	depend	on	whether	people	are	trustworthy	or
not.	And	 if	 you	 can	 trust	 in	 spite	of	 their	 untrustworthiness,	 you	may	create	 a
revolution	in	their	hearts	also,	because	they	are	also	as	human	as	you	are.
They	are	also	victims	of	the	same	society	and	the	same	pattern	as	you	are.	You
are	fortunate	if	you	have	opened	one	window.	You	are	fortunate	if	by	accident	a
door	 has	 been	 flung	 open.	 You	 are	 fortunate	 not	 to	 be	 part	 of	 the	 closed
humanity.
Now,	this	little	opening	has	to	be	made	bigger.	In	fact,	a	moment	has	to	come	in
the	life	of	love	when	all	the	windows	and	doors	disappear;	not	only	that,	but	all
the	walls	disappear	also.
You	are	just	under	the	open	sky,	under	the	stars	and	you	will	be	showered	from
all	directions,	all	dimensions,	with	so	much	immense	love	and	blissfulness	that
you	cannot	believe	why	it	is	happening	to	you.
It	is	the	only	miracle	in	the	world.	Walking	on	water	is	not	a	miracle;	it	is	just	a
stupidity.
Turning	water	 into	wine	 is	not	 a	miracle;	 it	 is	 a	 crime.	The	only	miracle	 I	 am
aware	of	is	a	completely,	totally	open	heart.	No	situation,	no	condition	can	close
it.
Meditation	will	help	you.	Meditation	is	almost	a	golden	key,	a	master	key	which
opens	many	doors.	 It	 can	open	 the	door	of	 love	 too.	As	you	become	silent,	 as
you	become	peaceful,	as	you	become	aware	of	your	 life	 force,	as	you	become
aware	there	is	no	death,	fear	disappears.	And	with	the	disappearance	of	the	fear	-
-	from	the	very	roots	--	now	there	is	no	point	in	keeping	your	heart	closed.	You
can	open	your	heart	to	friend	and	foe,	to	those	who	are	familiar	and	to	those	who
are	strangers.	And	you	will	receive	gifts	which	you	had	not	ever	imagined.
You	are	saying,	Neera,	"Over	the	last	few	months,	I	have	been	going	through	an
amazing	process	of	letting	go	of	my	attachments."	It	is	an	amazing	process,	but	it
is	the	process	I	have	been	telling	everybody	my	whole	life;	that	your	attachment
is	a	barrier,	it	is	not	a	bridge.
Your	attachment	keeps	you	unaware	of	your	own	great	potential.	The	more	you
become	attached	to	things,	to	people,	the	more	you	become	a	slave.	Attachment
is	another	beautiful	name	of	spiritual	slavery.	A	man	who	is	attached	to	money	is
a	slave.
I	used	to	know	a	man...
I	have	never	come	across	another	of	the	same	quality	of	attachment.	He	was	so
money	mad	that	even	if	you	had	a	one	hundred	rupee	note,	he	would	say,	"Just
let	me	touch	it."
And	he	would	touch	it	as	if	he	was	touching	his	beloved,	with	such	romance.	It
was	impossible	to	give	him	money	and	to	get	it	back.	I	inquired	about	him	from
all	 the	 people	 who	 knew	 him.	 They	 said,	 "He	 has	 never	 returned	 anybody's
money.	And	people	feel	full	of	pity.	Nobody	is	angry	about	it.	They	just	think	he
is	insane,	obsessed	with	money."
Walking	on	the	street	on	a	fullmoon	night,	he	suddenly	picked	up	something	and
then	threw	it	away	and	said,	"If	I	meet	this	man	I	will	kill	him.	The	son	of	a	bitch
spits	mucous	as	if	it	is	a	rupee;	it	shines	in	the	light."
Such	was	his	madness.	He	had	a	small	cloth	shop,	and	for	a	few	months	I	used	to
live	 just	 by	 the	 side	 of	 his	 shop	 in	 a	 small	 house.	 I	was	 puzzled	 to	watch	 the
whole	show	that	went	on	in	his	shop.	There	were	people	whom	he	knew	would
ask	for	things	on	credit.	He	would	immediately	give	me	a	sign	and	then	hide	in
the	back	of	the	shop	in	the	bathroom.
He	always	avoided	one	old	woman	in	particular.	And	I	had	to	tell	her,	"He	is	not
here."
But	one	day	I	said	to	her,	"What	is	the	matter?	Whenever	you	come	you	never
find	him	here."
She	said,	"There	is	nothing	the	matter.	He	is	afraid	of	me	because	he	owes	me
money.
And	 naturally,	 I	 will	 purchase	 things	 and	 I	 will	 tell	 him,	 `Deduct	 it	 from	 the
money	you	owe.'"
I	said,	"If	that	is	what	is	the	matter,	then	he	is	hiding	in	the	bathroom."
She	said,	"Really."
I	said,	"You	go	in."
She	said,	"Well	it	does	not	look	right."
I	said,	"You	go	in	and	open	the	door."
So	she	went	and	opened	the	door.	He	came	running	out.	He	was	very	angry	with
me.	I	said,	"If	I	had	known	that	this	was	the	reason,	I	would	have	never	deceived
that	woman	that	you	are	not	in	the	shop.	You	owe	money	to	her?"
He	said,	"I	owe	money	to	everybody.	In	this	whole	area,	nobody	can	say	that	I
don't	owe	money	to	them.	But	you	know	me;	I	cannot	return	money	once	I	get	it.
It	is	almost	like	a	heart	attack	to	give	the	money	back."
It	is	verging	on	insanity.	All	attachments	although	different	in	degree,	are	a	kind
of	 putting	 yourself	 down	 and	making	 something	 so	 important	 that	 people	 are
ready	to	die	for	money;	people	are	ready	to	die	for	power.	People	are	ready	to	do
anything	to	fulfill	their	ambition.	All	these	attachments	destroy	your	worthiness.
They	 take	 away	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful	 and	valuable	 in	 you.	You	become	 smaller
than	the	things	you	are	attached	to	and	infatuated	with.
A	man	who	has	no	attachment	has	tremendous	freedom;	he	has	nothing	to	lose.
And	if	everything	is	lost,	he	will	not	look	back	even	a	single	time.
I	have	told	you	the	story	of	Diogenes...
He	 used	 to	 live	 naked.	He	 is	 the	 only	man	 in	 the	Western	world	who	 can	 be
compared	 to	Mahavira	 in	 India.	 Both	were	 contemporaries;	 both	 lived	 naked.
Both	had	immensely	beautiful	bodies	and	were	very	strong	people.
Diogenes	 was	 going	 to	 the	 river.	 He	 used	 to	 carry	 only	 a	 begging	 bowl.
Mahavira	 did	 not	 use	 any	 begging	 bowl	 because	 everything	 that	 you	 become
used	to	creates	a	subtle,	psychological	slavery.
Mahavira	 used	 to	 make	 a	 cup	 with	 his	 hands	 to	 drink	 or	 to	 take	 food.	 But
Diogenes,	like	all	old	renunciates,	used	to	carry	a	begging	bowl.	He	was	running
towards	the	river;	he	was	so	thirsty	and	it	was	hot.	And	just	then	he	saw	a	dog
running	 by	 his	 side.	 The	 dog	 jumped	 ahead	 of	 him	 in	 the	 river	 and	 started
drinking.
Diogenes	felt	very	much	offended,	but	he	also	felt	deeply	grateful	to	the	dog....
he	 has	 shown	 him	 that	 a	 begging	 bowl	 is	 not	 needed!	 You	 can	 drink	 water
without	 it,	why	carry	 it	unnecessarily?	 "If	 a	dog	can	manage	 to	 live	without	 a
begging	 bowl,	 I	 am	 a	man;	 I	 can	manage."	 First,	 he	 threw	 away	 the	 begging
bowl,	and	he	said,	"That	was	my	only	possession	--	and	I	was	thinking	that	I	had
overcome	all	attachment,	but	throwing	that	bowl,	I	knew	that	now	I	had	become
really	free.	Otherwise,	 I	used	 to	keep	an	eye	out	 in	case	somebody	might	steal
the	begging	bowl."
It	was	a	beautiful	bowl	presented	to	him	by	a	king	and	beautifully	carved.	In	the
night	also	he	used	to	touch	the	begging	bowl	once	or	twice	to	see	that	it	was	still
there.	He	said,
"Since	the	moment	the	dog	taught	me	the	lesson,	I	have	felt	such	freedom,	and
such	a	burden	has	been	relieved	from	my	heart."
If	this	is	the	situation	with	a	begging	bowl,	what	will	be	the	situation	of	people
who	 are	 possessed	 of	 so	many	 things,	 so	 possessive	 that	 things	 become	 their
only	 life?	 And	 remember,	 the	 moment	 you	 become	 attached	 to	 a	 person,	 the
person	is	no	more	a	person.
You	have	changed	the	person	into	a	commodity,	into	a	thing.	Only	things	can	be
possessed.
If	a	husband	possesses	the	wife,	he	has	reduced	her	into	a	thing,	and	the	wife	can
never	 forgive	 him.	 If	 the	 wife	 possesses	 the	 husband,	 she	 has	 committed	 the
greatest	 sin	by	 reducing	a	human	being	 into	 a	 commodity.	Only	 things	 can	be
possessed,	not	conscious	human	beings.
But	you	possess	even	your	children.	You	say,	"This	is	my	child."	You	should	be
more	aware.	You	should	say,	"This	child	has	come	through	me.	I	have	been	the
passage,	but	he	does	not	belong	to	me.	He	belongs	to	existence."	If	this	insight
settles	in	you,	then	you	will	not	try	to	make	the	child	a	carbon	copy	of	you.
What	can	you	teach	the	child?	All	that	you	know	is	of	the	past;	it	is	dead,	it	is
gone,	it	will	never	come	back.	And	the	child	has	to	live	in	a	future	about	which
you	don't	have	any	understanding.	There	 is	no	possibility	 for	you	 to	know	 the
future.	Prepare	the	child	for	 the	unknown;	prepare	the	child	 to	be	adventurous.
Prepare	 the	 child	 to	 learn	 to	 live	 dangerously,	 because	 the	 more	 safety	 and
security	you	ask,	the	more	you	are	enclosed	in	a	prison	of	your	own	making.	A
prisoner	cannot	be	a	lover.
Only	freedom	knows	the	fragrance	of	love.
Only	freedom	knows	your	immense	worthiness.	And	that	does	not	give	you	any
ego,	 any	 arrogance.	 It	 makes	 you	 really	 more	 humble	 than	 ever	 --	 you	 don't
deserve	it;	still	existence	out	of	its	abundance	has	given	you	so	much.	You	learn
for	the	first	time	the	sense	of	gratitude,	gratefulness.
To	me,	 gratitude	 is	 the	 only	 prayer.	 Nothing	 has	 to	 be	 said,	 just	 a	 feeling	 of
gratefulness.
But	people	are	full	of	complaints	not	gratitude.
Veena	 has	 just	 asked	 how	 to	 open	 the	 heart	 because	 she	 had	 written	 a	 letter
which	 was	 ugly,	 and	 now	 she	 has	 written	 another	 letter.	 She	 thinks	 she	 has
improved	upon	the	first	one,	but	the	basic	points	are	still	there.	She	used	to	live
in	 this	 house	 and,	 to	make	 a	 bigger	 library,	 seventeen	 people	 from	 the	 house
have	been	moved	into	other	houses	in	the	campus;	the	whole	campus	is	one.	She
was	 never	 grateful	 that	 she	 was	 in	 the	 house,	 but	 she	 is	 complaining	 very
seriously	 that	 she	 has	 been	 moved	 from	 the	 house.	 She	 is	 not	 worried	 that
sixteen	other	people	have	also	gone.
Those	sixteen	have	written	letters	of	thankfulness,	that	they	are	grateful	that	they
lived	in	the	house	with	me,	and	they	are	grateful	that	they	have	been	chosen	to
make	a	place	for	the	library.	They	are	immensely	happy	and	thankful.	Only	she
is	complaining,	asking	why	she	has	been	moved	to	another	house.	She	is	living
with	her	boyfriend	in	the	room;	she	knows	that	we	don't	have	enough	space	for
people...
We	are	trying	to	find	more	and	more	places,	and	within	two	or	three	months,	you
all	will	have	places	in	the	ashram.	But	just	my	name,	and	the	price	of	any	house
goes	 up	 three	 times.	 So	 it	 is	 a	 little	 difficult,	 but	 I	 know	 you	 are	 living	 in
difficulties	outside.	The	same	flat	that	was	rented	for	seventeen	hundred	rupees
per	month	before	our	coming	back	to	Poona	is	now	being	given	to	sannyasins	for
eight	thousand	rupees	per	month.	Prices	have	gone	seven,	eight	times	higher.
But	Veena	will	not	feel	grateful	that	she	is	in	the	ashram.	She	will	not	think	that
thousands	of	sannyasins	are	living	outside,	paying	too	much,	eight	or	ten	times
more	than	the	market	price.
Two	thousand	sannyasins	are	living	outside,	and	she	is	demanding	that	she	wants
a	 separate	 room	 to	 herself.	 That	 means	 a	 separate	 room	 for	 her	 lover	 and	 a
separate	room	for	herself,	perfectly	aware	that	we	don't	have	a	space.
Demanding,	and	when	your	demand	is	not	possible	at	this	moment	to	fulfill,	you
become	 closed;	 you	 become	 angry.	 She	 has	 been	 angry,	 so	 angry	 that	 I	 was
puzzled.	Whenever	 I	 would	 come,	 she	was	 sitting	with	 folded	 hands,	 but	 she
would	never	open	her	eyes.	She	is	perfectly	aware	 that	 if	 I	see	her	eyes,	 I	will
immediately	 see	what	 is	 going	on	 in	 her.	To	 avoid	 that...	 she	was	keeping	her
eyes	closed,	and	I	knew	that	she	was	boiling	within.
Rather	 than	 feeling	 grateful	 that	 you	 are	 part	 of	 a	 commune	where	 everybody
loves	 you,	 everybody	 respects	 each	 other,	 where	 there	 is	 no	 hierarchy,	 where
there	 is	 nobody	 higher	 and	 nobody	 lower,	 that	 you	 are	 living	 in	 a	 totally	 new
world,	a	miniature	experiment...
she	is	concerned	about	stupid	things.	That's	how	the	mind	functions,	and	then	it
becomes	 closed.	And	when	 it	 is	 closed	 then	 she	 is	 angry	 that	 I	 am	not	 loving
towards	her.
My	 love	 is	 available,	 just	 as	 the	 light	of	 the	 sun	 is	 available.	You	 just	have	 to
open	your	eyes.	My	love	cannot	be	addressed	to	particular	people,	because	love
to	me,	cannot	be	a	relationship.
I	am	love.
I	can	share	with	you.
I	am	sharing	every	moment.
Those	who	are	capable	of	receiving	it	will	receive	it,	as	much	as	they	are	capable
--	and	their	capacity	depends	on	the	opening	of	their	hearts.	But	an	angry	heart
or	a	fearful	heart	cannot	be	open.
It	is	simply	a	question	of	understanding.	You	don't	have	to	force	your	heart	open;
that	won't	help.	You	have	simply	to	understand.	It	 is	 just	like	you	were	putting
two	 plus	 two	 is	 equal	 to	 five.	 Now	 no	 training	 is	 needed,	 just	 a	 simple
understanding	that	you	have	been	counting	wrong	--	finished.	Start	counting	two
plus	two	is	four.	Don't	ask	what	to	do	with	five,	how	to	get	rid	of	five.
Life	is	mostly	a	question	of	understanding.	So	just	understand	and	pay	attention
to	whatever	 life	has	given	to	you.	Are	you	worthy	of	 it?	We	are	not	worthy	of
anything....
intelligence,	 love,	 life	 itself;	we	are	not	worthy.	If	you	had	not	been	given	life,
you	could	not	have	registered	any	complaint	in	the	complaint	office:	why	have	I
not	been	given	life	when	everybody	else	--	Tom,	Dick,	Harry,	everybody	else	--
is	given	life?"	No,	there	would	have	been	no	possibility.
Life	 is	 given	 to	 you.	 Capacity	 to	 grow	 is	 given	 to	 you.	 Every	 opportunity	 to
come	 to	your	ultimate	peak	of	 consciousness	 is	given	 to	you.	A	heart	 that	 can
blossom	 in	 love	 is	given	 to	you.	 Just	 feel	grateful	 to	 life,	 and	as	you	will	 feel
grateful,	you	will	become	more	and	more	worthy,	and	more	and	more	humble	--
no	grudge,	no	complaint.
This	is	exactly	the	state	of	a	religious	man.	It	does	not	need	you	to	belong	to	any
organized	religion	for	you	to	become	religious.
Religiousness	is	your	gratefulness	towards	existence.
Such	beautiful	trees,	such	infinite	sky,	so	many	stars	and	you	have	not	paid	for
anything.
This	immense	universe	is	given	to	you	with	all	its	beauty,	sunrises,	sunsets,	and
all	 the	 flowers	 and	beautiful	 people.	 Just	watch	 and	you	will	 be	 aware	 that	 so
much	is	already	given,	but	you	are	taking	it	for	granted.	You	have	never	looked
at	it	as	a	gift	from	existence	without	your	asking,	without	your	demanding.
Once	you	start	seeing	all	that	has	already	been	given,	your	heart	will	be	full	of
gratitude.
And	that	gratitude	will	open	all	the	doors,	all	the	windows.	Existence	is	bridged
by	only	one	thing	and	that	is	gratefulness.	Then	miracles	start	happening	to	you.
Then	mysteries	go	on	opening	 their	doors	 to	you.	The	more	humble,	 the	more
simple,	the	more	grateful,	the	more	worthy	you	become	--	and	your	worthiness
has	no	limits.
Isaac	 Asimov	 has	 made	 a	 beautiful	 statement:	 "God	 loves	 all	 men,	 but	 is
enchanted	by	none."
Existence	 loves	 everybody	 --	 and	 a	man	who	 has	 disappeared	 as	 an	 ego,	 as	 a
personality,	is	nothing	but	a	vehicle	to	existence.	He	does	not	love;	he	is	love.	I
would	 like	 to	 remind	you	about	Oscar	Wilde.	He	 says,	 "To	 love	oneself	 is	 the
beginning	of	a	lifelong	romance."
If	 you	will	 see	what	miracles	 are	 happening	 around	you,	within	 you,	 you	will
respect	yourself	too,	you	will	love	yourself	too.	If	the	whole	existence	loves	you,
you	will	love	yourself.	And	that	is	the	only	romance	that	knows	no	divorce.	But
it	is	not	arrogant,	it	is	not	egoistic.	That	has	to	be	remembered,	because	ego	is	a
closing	factor.
Arrogance	divides	you	from	existence.
To	be	nobody	 is	 the	greatest	 achievement	 in	 the	world.	But	we	are	 living	 in	 a
very	 insane	 world	 --	 and	 when	 I	 say	 insane	 world,	 I	 only	 mean	 the	 insane
humanity	 --	 it	 goes	 on	 demanding	 and	 it	 has	 no	 gratitude	 for	 anything.
Everybody	 thinks	 that	 he	 is	 very	 worthy;	 life	 is	 just	 not	 giving	 the	 right
opportunities.	One	should	understand	in	a	different	way.
Whatever	 is	 given,	 you	 don't	 even	 deserve	 that.	 There	 is	 no	 right	 to	 demand;
everything	is	given	out	of	abundance,	not	because	of	your	right.
A	woman	went	to	her	psychiatrist	and	said,	"Doctor,	I	want	to	talk	to	you	about
my	husband.	He	thinks	he	is	a	refrigerator."
"That's	not	so	bad,"said	the	doctor,	"it	is	a	rather	harmless	complex."
"Well,	maybe,"	replied	the	lady,	"but	he	sleeps	with	his	mouth	open	and	the	light
keeps	me	awake."
We	are	living	in	such	a	world	where	you	never	see	that	you	are	mad.	Everybody
is	throwing	all	their	garbage	on	other	people.	The	woman	thinks	that	the	husband
is	insane,	and	in	actuality,	she	is	insane.	She	believes	that	he	is	a	refrigerator,	and
the	problem	is	not	that	he	is	a	refrigerator	--	he	can	go	to	hell	--	the	problem	is	he
sleeps	with	an	open	mouth	and	the	light	keeps	her	awake	the	whole	night!
Always	 remember	 --	 whenever	 you	 start	 condemning	 anything,	 remember
always	--
whenever	you	are	going	to	complain	against	existence:	have	you	made	a	list	of
what	has	been	given	to	you	by	existence?
No!	Nobody	has	any	 idea	even	 that	anything	has	been	given.	But	 if	any	small
thing	is	missing	you	make	so	much	fuss	about	it;	that	shows	your	insanity.
The	same	person	is	utterly	blissful	just	because	so	much	is	available,	and	without
asking.
He	has	never	asked	for	 this	wonderful	world	and	he	has	been	given	it.	And	he
has	not	even	thanked	the	universe.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
ALL	THESE	YEARS	WITH	YOU	IN	THE	COMMUNE	I	DID	WHAT	I	WAS
TOLD.
NOW,	 IT	 SEEMS,	 IT	 IS	ALL	UP	TO	ME...	 BUT...	WHO	AM	 I	 TO	KNOW
WHAT	TO
DO?	BY	THE	WAY,	I'M	GERMAN.
Siegfried	 Deven,	 even	 without	 your	 saying	 I	 would	 have	 known	 you	 are	 a
German!
All	the	dictators	in	the	world	are	created	by	us	because	we	want	somebody	else
to	tell	us	what	to	do.	There	is	a	very	subtle	reason	for	it:	when	you	are	told	by
somebody	 else	what	 to	 do,	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 responsibility	 for	whether	 it	 is
right	or	wrong.	You	are	free	of	responsibility;	you	don't	have	to	think	about	it;
you	 don't	 have	 to	 be	 worried	 about	 it.	 The	 whole	 responsibility	 goes	 to	 the
person	who	is	giving	you	the	orders	to	do	something.
People	like	Adolf	Hitler	or	Joseph	Stalin	or	Ronald	Reagan	are	not	just	there	in
their	powerful	positions	because	of	any	quality	of	theirs.	They	are	there	because
millions	 of	 people	want	 to	 be	 told	what	 to	 do	 --	without	 anybody	 dictating	 to
them	they	are	at	a	loss.
We	create	the	dictators.
Adolf	Hitler	was	almost	crazy,	but	a	nation,	one	of	the	most	intelligent	nations	in
the	 world	 which	 has	 created	 a	 great	 tradition	 of	 philosophers,	 thinkers,
theologians	of	the	first	rate...	Even	in	this	century	Germany	has	produced	people
like	Martin	Heidegger,	who	is	perhaps	this	century's	greatest	philosopher	--	but
he	was	also	a	follower	of	Adolf	Hitler.
It	 seems	 almost	 incomprehensible	 that	 a	 man	 of	 the	 qualities	 of	 Martin
Heidegger...	 I	 have	 looked	 into	 all	 the	 philosophers	 of	 the	 world;	 Martin
Heidegger	seems	to	have	such	a	genius,	such	a	great	originality	in	approaching
things	from	absolutely	new	directions	--
but	he	was	a	follower	of	Adolf	Hitler;	he	supported	him.	I	was	wondering	what
could	be	the	reason	--	and	the	whole	nation	supported	that	madman.	The	reason
is	that	nobody	wants	to	have	any	responsibility.	But	the	moment	you	lose	your
responsibility	--	you	think	it	is	a	burden,	somebody	else	takes	it	--	you	also	lose
your	individuality,	you	also	lose	your	freedom.
Your	responsibility	is	not	separate	from	your	freedom,	your	individuality.	Once
you	 drop	 your	 responsibility	 on	 somebody	 else's	 shoulders,	 you	 have	 reduced
yourself	 into	a	nonentity.	Of	course,	now	nobody	will	blame	you	 if	 something
goes	wrong,	but	you	have	lost	your	soul.
People	 condemn	 the	dictators,	 but	nobody	 thinks	what	 the	psychology	 is,	 how
dictators	are	created,	who	creates	them?	We	are	the	people	who	create	them,	and
we	create	them	in	the	hope	that	they	will	take	the	responsibility.	But	we	are	not
aware	that	with	the	responsibility	goes	our	freedom,	goes	our	individuality,	goes
democracy,	goes	freedom	of	thinking	or	expression	--	everything.
We	have	lost	our	soul	the	moment	we	put	our	responsibility	into	somebody	else's
hands.
And	there	are	people	who	enjoy	to	dominate,	to	dictate;	these	are	insane	people.
So	it	is	a	strange	situation.	People	want	to	be	unburdened	of	responsibility,	and
of	course	 there	are	a	 few	people	who	are	 ready	 to	 take	all	 the	 responsibilities,
because	 they	are	also	 taking	all	your	 freedom.	They	are	 taking	all	your	 rights,
your	very	individuality;	they	are	people	whose	only	will	is	for	power.	They	have
a	different	kind	of	insanity,	but	it	seems	to	be	very	fitting.	There	seems	to	be	a
certain	 synchronicity	between	 the	people	who	want	 to	get	 rid	of	 responsibility
without	knowing	that	they	are	getting	rid	of	their	very	soul,	and	the	other	insane
people,	who	love	only	one	thing,	power.
In	 the	 commune,	 you	 were	 happy...	 because	 I	 was	 not	 at	 all	 involved	 in	 the
commune;	 I	 was	 in	 silence	 and	 isolation.	 And	 naturally,	 a	 clique	 took	 all	 the
responsibility,	and	you	were	very	happy	to	work	twelve	hours,	fourteen	hours	a
day.	Even	God	became	tired	in	six	days.	You	were	working	seven	days.	You	had
no	other	time,	even	to	think	about	yourself.	Why	did	you	love	it?	There	is	some
psychological	background	to	be	understood...
You	 loved	 it	 because	 it	 helped	 you	 to	 forget	 yourself.	You	 loved	 it	 because	 it
helped	 you	 to	 be	 so	 occupied	 from	 the	 morning	 till	 night	 and	 then	 falling
asleep...	never	finding	a	small	gap	of	time	just	to	see	that	your	life	is	slipping	by
and	you	have	not	done	anything	even	 to	be	 introduced	 to	 it.	Death	 is	going	 to
knock	any	day	on	your	doors,	but	you	are	not	prepared	--	all	these	worries	had
no	time,	because	you	were	so	tired.	But	you	were	happy.
Here,	nobody	is	dictating	to	you.
It	 was	 all	 contrary	 to	 me,	 because	 I	 was	 in	 isolation	 and	 silence;	 I	 was	 not
interfering	 in	 anything.	 The	 moment	 I	 started	 speaking,	 the	 clique	 that	 had
become	the	dictators	all	escaped	from	the	commune.	They	knew	it	perfectly	that
I	would	disturb	the	whole	dictatorship.	That	dictatorship	could	not	be	continued;
it	was	destroying	people,	killing	them,	killing	their	very	spirituality.	The	whole
clique	disappeared	immediately	as	I	started	speaking,	the	moment	they	saw	that	I
had	come	into	the	commune,	and	I	would	not	tolerate	the	kinds	of	structures	that
they	had	maintained.
I	want	you	to	be	meditative;	I	want	you	to	have	some	time	to	relax;	I	want	you	to
have	 some	 time	 to	 think	about	 the	vital	problems	of	 life,	 and	 to	do	 something
about	them.
And	 we	 have	 all	 the	 arrangements	 for	 meditations,	 for	 group	 therapies,	 for
counseling,	for	all	kinds	of	possibilities	that	can	help	you	to	become	a	spiritual
giant.
The	work	 is	 needed	 because	 you	 need	 food,	 you	 need	 clothes.	 So,	 it	 is	 good
working	five	hours	--	and	that	should	also	not	be	too	tight.	Here	we	are	not	going
to	 create	 an	 army	 to	 conquer	 the	 world.	 We	 are	 creating	 a	 commune	 of
individuals	with	 their	own	spirituality,	unhindered,	uninterfered	with.	We	want
them	to	cleanse	their	minds,	sharpen	their	intelligence	and	enter	into	the	deepest
center	of	 their	being.	Those	 four,	 five	hours'	work	 is	 just	 to	keep	you	alive	 so
that	 you	 can	meditate,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 realize	 one	day	 a	 consciousness	 full	 of
light,	full	of	joy.
Here	nobody	is	going	to	tell	you,	Deven,	what	to	do.	I	want	you	to	find	what	you
can	do	the	best,	what	you	would	like	to	do;	that	which	you	can	enjoy,	which	will
not	 be	 a	 burden,	which	will	 not	 be	 imposed	 on	 you,	which	will	 be	 your	 own
creativity.
I	want	your	work	also	to	be	part	of	your	spiritual	growth;	not	against	it,	but	for
it.	 But	 that	 can	 come	 only	 from	 your	 own	 spontaneity.	 You	 have	 to	 take	 the
responsibility	on	yourself.
I	 want	 individuals	 to	 be	 absolutely	 free,	 responsible,	 alert,	 aware,	 neither
allowing	 anybody	 to	 dictate	 to	 them;	 nor	 allowing	 themselves	 to	 dictate	 to
anybody.	It	has	 to	be	a	beautiful	communion.	 It	 is	not	based	on	any	dictatorial
ideology.	It	is	based,	basically,	on	ultimate	freedom.
And	if	freedom	is	the	ultimate	goal	then	it	should	be	your	first	step	too,	because
only	the	first	step	will	lead	you	to	the	last	step.	It	is	not	possible	that	your	whole
life	you	are	 just	a	beast	of	burden,	doing	 things	 that	people	 tell	you	 to	do	and
then	suddenly	one	day	you	will	become	enlightened.	That	is	not	possible.
You	will	have	to	take	all	the	responsibility	for	what	you	are	doing.	And	you	will
have	to	grow	in	your	consciousness	and	awareness	so	that	only	the	right	flows
through	 your	 actions,	 so	 that	 whatever	 you	 do	 beautifies	 the	 commune,	 helps
people.
This	 is	a	gathering,	not	a	crowd;	it	 is	a	brotherhood,	not	a	factory.	Here,	every
individual	has	an	equal	opportunity	to	grow	into	whatsoever	he	wants	 to	grow.
And	my	whole	 effort	 is	 that	 you	 should	not	 be	 interfered	with.	Naturally,	 you
will	 find	 it	 difficult,	 but	 don't	 be	 stuck	 to	 your	Germanhood;	 that	 is	 a	 kind	 of
disease.
The	world	has	suffered	two	world	wars	because	of	Germans.	Don't	be	too	much
concerned	 that	 you	may	go	wrong.	 It	 is	 always	 good	 to	 go	wrong	 sometimes.
Just	 don't	 go	wrong	 again	 on	 the	 same	 point	 --	 do	 something	 else,	 some	 new
wrong.	Always	be	in	search	of	some	novelty.	Mistakes	are	absolutely	needed	for
learning,	but	one	should	not	commit	the	same	mistake	again.
And	everybody	has	 to	be	aware	of	 it:	nobody	 is	 responsible	 for	you.	And	you
don't	have	 to	ask	anybody's	permission.	Even	 if	you	commit	 something	wrong
there	 is	 a	 famous	 law,	 Steward's	 Law:	 It	 is	 easier	 to	 be	 forgiven	 than	 to	 get
permission.
And	 remember	 another	 law;	 it	 is	 dangerous,	 so	 never	 follow	 it:	 It	 is	 called
Jacob's	Law:	To	err	is	human.	To	blame	it	on	someone	else	is	even	more	human.
Don't	do	it,	ever.	To	err	is	human	and	to	accept	your	responsibility	is	the	dignity
of	a	human	being.	Don't	go	on	thinking	what	to	do	--	do	something!	Parkinson's
Law	is:	Delay	is	the	deadliest	form	of	denial.
Don't	delay.	Do	something	that	seems	appropriate	in	the	situation	and	congenial
to	your	spirit.	And	it	is	not	that	you	have	to	go	on	doing	continuously;	doing	is
not	 the	 goal	 of	 life.	 Being	 is	 the	 goal	 of	 life.	 Doing	 is	 only	 to	 support	 your
survival	so	that	you	can	find	your	being.	So	don't	wait	for	somebody	else	to	tell
you.
But	 all	 these	 centuries	 that	man	 has	 passed	 through,	 this	 has	 been	 the	 case	 --
always	looking	to	the	politicians,	looking	to	the	priest;	looking	to	neurotic-type
people	who	proclaim	themselves	prophets,	the	son	of	God,	messengers	of	God...
People	who	don't	want	to	take	any	responsibility	immediately	fall	into	their	trap.
All	your	prophets,	 and	all	 your	messengers	of	God	are	 so	ordinary.	Your	holy
scriptures	 are	 not	 even	 worthy	 to	 be	 called	 great	 literature;	 it	 is	 third	 class
journalism,	 nothing	 much	 more.	 And	 they	 are	 bringing	 laws	 and	 rules	 and
regulations	for	you	and	people	have	accepted	all	kinds	of	nonsense	just	in	order
not	to	seek	and	search	themselves.
To	 avoid	 search,	 to	 avoid	 seeking,	 people	 have	 even	 avoided	 thinking	 --
somebody	 should	 do	 the	 job	 for	 them!	The	 people	who	have	 been	 giving	 you
your	moral	codes,	your	ethics,	your	life	styles	are	the	people	who	remind	me	of
another	 law,	 Maud's	 Law:	 A	 conclusion	 is	 the	 place	 where	 you	 get	 tired	 of
thinking.	All	 the	conclusions	 that	your	prophets	have	given	 to	you	are	nothing
but	where	they	got	tired	of	thinking.
Just	 the	 other	 night,	 I	 was	 looking	 at	 a	 beautiful	 story.	 I	 became	 interested
because	 it	 was	 saying	 why	 Moses	 and	 all	 his	 Jews,	 his	 followers,	 went	 on
wandering	in	the	desert	for	forty	years.	So	I	became	interested	because	it	seemed
the	man	was	going	to	give	some	idea	why.	The	idea	suggested	was	that	they	had
lost	 a	 quarter	 so	 they	 looked	 all	 over	 the	 desert;	 it	 took	 forty	 years.	 Nobody
knows	whether	they	found	the	quarter	or	not;	I	don't	think	so.
The	 people	 you	 have	 been	 following	 are	 great	 people,	 great	 in	 their	 neuroses.
This	rule	will	explain	it	to	you.	Woop's	Rule	for	Drinking	--	they	have	given	you
ideas	for	everything:	I	always	drink	standing	up	because	it	is	much	easier	to	sit
down	when	 I	 get	 drunk	 standing	 up,	 than	 it	 is	 to	 get	 standing	 up	when	 I	 get
drunk	sitting	down.
Avoid	 these	 thinkers.	 They	 have	 dictated	 to	 humanity	 for	 long	 enough.	 Now,
stand	up	on	your	own	two	legs.	Remember	that	you	are	alone,	there	is	no	God,
there	are	no	messengers,	and	there	is	no	dictator.	You	have	to	be	decisive	about
your	own	life.	It	is	your	life	and	you	have	to	live	it	according	to	your	own	style.
Only	then	you	can	make	your	life	a	celebration;	otherwise	it	is	burdened	with	so
many	rules	and	regulations	that	you	cannot	dance	with	that	much	burden.
Deven,	 I	 think	 a	 few	 jokes	 may	 do	 for	 you.	 My	 only	 fear	 is	 that	 you	 are	 a
German	and	whether	you	will	get	them	or	not,	because	they	say	that	when	you
tell	a	joke	to	an	Englishman,	he	laughs	twice;	once,	just	to	be	polite,	and	then	in
the	middle	 of	 the	night	when	he	gets	 it.	A	German	 laughs	only	once,	 because
everybody	else	is	laughing.	And	if	you	tell	a	joke	to	a	Jew,	he	will	not	laugh	at
all.	On	the	contrary,	he	will	say	to	you	that	it	is	an	old	joke	and,	moreover,	you
are	telling	it	all	wrong.
But	I	think	being	here	with	me	for	so	long,	you	may	have	started	getting,	if	not
the	whole	joke,	something	of	it...!
A	priest	and	a	drunken	bus	driver	arrived	at	the	pearly	gates	where	they	met	St.
Peter.	"I	am	the	village	priest	and	would	like	to	be	admitted	to	heaven,"	said	the
priest.
"And	I	am	the	village	bus	driver	and	I	want	to	come	in	too,"	said	the	drunk.
"Okay,"	said	St.	Peter.	 "You,	Mr.	Priest,	will	have	 to	wait	over	 there	 for	a	 few
years,	but	you	Mr.	Bus	Driver,	you	can	go	right	in."
"But	wait	 a	minute,"	 said	 the	 priest,	 "I	 preached	 every	 Sunday	 in	 church	 and
taught	people	how	to	pray	and	be	good.	He	is	nothing	but	a	drunkard."
"Listen,"	 said	 St.	 Peter,	 "when	 you	 preached	 everybody	 slept.	 But	 when	 he
drove,	everybody	prayed	like	crazy."
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	Just	be	happy	that	your	hat	is	back
26	August	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708265
ShortTitle:
INVITA11
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
99
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
AM	I	COMING	OR	GOING?
Anand	 Surendra,	 the	 coming	 and	 going	 are	 happening	 simultaneously.	 Each
moment	 you	 are	 dying,	 and	 each	moment	 you	 are	 resurrecting.	 Each	moment
goes	on	becoming	past,	and	past	is	nothing	but	another	name	of	the	dead.	Each
moment	goes	on	bringing	the	future	in,	and	the	future	is	life.	The	small	present
moment	is	simply	a	moment	of	transition	where	death	and	life	meet.
So	your	question	is	not	so	simple	as	you	may	have	thought,	nor	is	it	an	ordinary
question.
It	 is	concerned	with	our	very	existence;	 this	 is	 the	way	 life	 is	happening	 to	us
every	 moment.	 But	 we	 are	 unaware	 that	 something	 goes	 on	 dying	 in	 us	 and
something	 goes	 on	 coming	 fresh	 and	 new.	 We	 are	 not	 aware	 --	 and	 all	 this
transition	happens	within	you,	within	your	very	heart.
But	because	we	are	not	aware	even	of	 the	heart,	we	are	not	even	aware	of	our
interiority.
Our	whole	lives	we	are	outside	of	ourselves	--	always	somewhere	else,	but	never
at	the	center	of	our	being.	If	even	for	a	single	moment	you	are	at	the	center,	you
will	see	that	coming	and	going	are	happening	simultaneously,	that	life	and	death
are	meeting	each	moment.
To	know	this	is	of	tremendous	importance.	That	means	it	will	change	your	whole
perspective	--	you	will	not	think	of	death	as	somewhere	far	away	in	the	future.
And	you	will	not	be	afraid	of	it	because	it	is	happening	every	moment.	What	we
usually	call	death	is	not	death	but	simply	that	life	stops	coming	in;	the	body	is	no
longer	 worth	 living.	 Life	 starts	 looking	 for	 some	 other	 vehicle,	 some	 other
medium	to	express	 itself.	Death	has	always	been	coming,	but	because	 life	was
not	 going	 you	 continued	 to	 live.	 With	 every	 breath,	 you	 inhale	 life	 and	 you
exhale	death.
Have	 you	 ever	 thought	 about	 whether	 any	man	 in	 this	 whole	millennium	 has
ever	died	during	inhalation?	Can	anybody	manage	to	die	with	inhalation?
Death	will	always	be	at	one	with	exhalation.
Inhalation	is	the	continuation	of	being	alive.
If	you	see	this,	then	death	is	not	somewhere	far	away.	There	is	no	need	to	fear;	it
is	every	moment	with	you,	just	like	a	shadow.	By	knowing	it	you	will	never	try
to	postpone	 living,	because	you	cannot	be	certain	whether	 in	 the	next	moment
life	will	be	coming	back	or	not;	there	is	no	guarantee.	And	it	is	not	unfortunate
that	there	is	no	guarantee;	it	keeps	you	more	alert,	more	watchful,	and	it	keeps
you	more	in	tune	with	the	present	moment.
If	things	were	guaranteed	you	might	not	be	able	to	live	life	with	surprises,	with
mysteries;	then	life	and	death	would	be	simply	mechanical	happenings	and	you
would	be	just	a	machine.	Your	always	being	available	to	life	and	to	death	makes
you	 a	 living	 being;	 you	 are	 not	 a	 machine.	 And	 to	 be	 mechanical	 in	 your
behavior	 is	 to	 reduce	 yourself	 from	 your	 dignity.	 That	 which	 is	 going,	 say
goodbye	 to	 it,	 and	 that	which	 is	 coming,	welcome	 it	with	 deep	 love	 and	deep
gratitude.
But	most	of	the	people	have	chosen	not	to	live.	Of	course	they	cannot	choose	not
to	 die;	 that	 is	 beyond	 them.	 But	 they	 can	 choose	 not	 to	 live,	 by	 living	 in	 a
lukewarm	way.	Most	 of	 the	 people	 have	 given	 their	 living	 into	 others'	 hands;
others	are	living	on	their	behalf.
Slade's	 Law	 says:	 If	 you	 have	 a	 difficult	 task,	 give	 it	 to	 a	 lazy	man;	 he	 will
always	find	an	easier	way	to	do	it.
And	 life	 is	 certainly	 one	 of	 the	 most	 simple	 and	 at	 the	 same	 time,	 complex
phenomena.
People	have	distributed	it:	others	are	living	for	them;	they	are	living	for	others.
Parents	are	 living	 for	children.	 I	have	always	 felt	amazed	when	somebody	has
said	to	me,	"I	am	living	for	my	wife,"	or	"I	am	living	for	my	husband,"	or	"I	am
living	for	my	children."
Nobody	can	live	for	anybody	else.	This	is	a	simple	mind	trick	to	befool	you;	you
can	live	only	for	yourself.	Life	on	behalf	of	somebody	else	is	just	not	possible.
That's	why	there	are	millions	of	people	 in	 the	world,	but	 the	quantity	of	 life	 is
very	small.
Five	billion	human	beings,	and	the	life	is	almost	non-existent:	there	is	no	song,
no	dance;	there	is	no	joy,	no	love.	On	the	contrary,	people	are	putting	their	whole
energy	 into	 creating	more	 destructive	 forces.	Anybody	watching	 from	 another
planet	 is	bound	to	think	that	 the	planet	earth	has	gone	crazy.	But	 it	 is	not	new,
this	craziness	is	very	ancient;	it	has	always	been	so.
One	 of	 the	 great	 thinkers,	 and	 a	 scientific	 thinker,	 Arthur	 Koestler,	 is	 of	 the
opinion	--
very	firm	opinion	--	that	from	the	very	beginning	something	has	gone	wrong	as
far	as	the	human	mind	is	concerned.	And	unless	that	wrong	is	corrected,	people
are	going	to	continue	fighting,	destroying	each	other	--	any	excuse	is	enough	and
people	are	ready	to	kill.	My	own	feeling	is	that	people	are	ready	to	kill	because
they	don't	know	how	to	live.
If	 they	know	how	to	 live,	 they	will	 respect	 life,	 they	will	have	a	 reverence	 for
life,	 and	 killing	will	 become	 impossible.	War	will	 be	 an	 impossibility	 for	 any
intelligent	human	beings.
Our	wars	prove	nothing	else	except	our	stupidity.	What	are	we	proving	by	war?
Whom	are	we	trying	to	conquer?	It	is	our	earth	and	it	is	one.	All	demarcations
and	lines	are	drawn	by	us;	they	are	not	on	the	map.
When	the	first	Russian	astronaut,	Yuri	Gagarin,	came	back	from	the	moon	--	he
was	 the	 first	man	 to	have	 such	 a	 close	 look	 at	 the	moon,	 and	 the	 first	man	 to
have	 such	 a	 faraway	 look	 at	 the	 earth	 --	 he	 said	 he	 was	 amazed	 that	 in	 that
moment	he	could	not	conceive	some	part	of	the	earth	as	the	Soviet	Union,	some
part	America,	 some	part	 India,	 some	part	China;	 there	were	no	parts.	And	 the
whole	 earth	 is	 as	 luminous	 as	 the	 moon	 --	 it	 needs	 only	 distance	 to	 see	 the
luminosity,	because	the	sun's	rays	are	being	reflected	back.
If	you	 look	 from	 the	moon,	 the	earth	 looks	 like	 the	moon	and	 the	moon	 looks
like	the	earth.	The	moon	does	not	shine	on	the	moon.	It	is	in	our	eyes	from	far
away	that	the	reflected	rays	of	the	sun	give	the	light	to	the	moon.	Yuri	Gagarin
was	not	aware	before	this	that	a	miracle	was	going	to	happen:	the	moon	becomes
just	 like	 the	 earth,	 and	 the	 earth	 becomes	 luminous.	 The	 earth	 is	 eight	 times
bigger	than	the	moon	and	so	its	light	is	also	eight	times	greater.	It	is	tremendous.
It	is	unimaginable.
When	he	came	back	to	Moscow,	the	people	asked	him,	"What	was	the	first	idea
in	your	mind	when	you	saw	the	earth	from	the	moon?"
He	said,	"You	will	have	to	forgive	me	--	I	forgot	completely	that	I	am	a	Russian.
I	simply	said,	Àh,	my	beautiful	earth.'	Those	were	the	first	words	that	came	into
my	mind."
To	see	a	simple	fact,	one	has	to	go	that	far?	It	is	our	beautiful	earth.	It	belongs	to
no	race,	to	no	nation;	it	belongs	to	us	all.	But	rather	than	using	our	life	energies
and	forces,	our	intelligence,	for	rejoicing,	we	are	working	hard	in	manufacturing
death.	 It	 seems	 the	 only	 function	 of	 life	 is	 to	manufacture	 death;	 it	 is	 utterly
absurd.
This	planet	has	 the	capacity	 to	become	a	paradise,	but	 it	 is	up	 to	us.	The	poor
mountains	cannot	do	anything;	 the	poor	trees	can	dance	in	the	sun,	 in	the	rain,
but	they	cannot	do	anything	more	than	that.	It	is	man	alone	who	can	transform
the	whole	atmosphere	from	death	orientation	to	life	affirmation.
And	 to	me,	 the	man	who	 is	 life	 affirmative	 is	 authentically	 religious,	 not	 the
people	 who	 go	 to	 the	 churches	 every	 Sunday,	 or	 the	 people	 who	 go	 to	 the
mosques,	or	 the	people	who	go	 to	 the	synagogues.	Those	people	are	deceiving
themselves	 by	 purchasing	 religion	 very	 cheaply,	 without	 risking	 anything,
without	transforming	themselves.	They	have	managed	to	create	beautiful	toys	to
play	with:	 statues	 of	God,	 scriptures	 descended	 from	 heaven,	messengers	 and
prophets	 imagined	 by	 us...	 because	we	 love	 the	 very	 idea	 that	 God	 cares	 and
sends	messengers	to	us.
We	have	believed	in	those	messengers	because	of	our	ego.	We	have	believed	in
God	because	of	our	ego:	that	God	created	man,	and	God	created	man	in	his	own
image,	 and	 God	 created	 man	 as	 the	 ultimate	 creation.	 After	 that	 he	 did	 not
create.	This	is	his	last	signature	of	his	creativity;	since	that	he	has	retired.
To	me,	it	has	a	totally	different	meaning.	Man	has	believed	that	he	is	created	by
God	because	that	gives	him	a	feeling	of	great	ego:	"I	am	no	ordinary	person,	but
a	creation	of	God."	But	to	me,	the	very	idea	of	God	is	ugly,	and	the	idea	that	he
created	 man	 makes	 man	 just	 a	 puppet.	 The	 idea	 that	 you	 are	 created	 by
somebody	 --	manufactured,	maybe	handmade	 --	 takes	 away	all	 dignity	 and	 all
pride	and	all	self-respect.	Then	you	cannot	have	any	soul	of	your	own.	Then	you
are	certainly	a	mechanism	and	nothing	more.
And	moreover,	you	are	in	the	hands	of	a	whimsical	God.	In	the	first	place,	why
did	he	remain	silent	for	eternity	and	not	create	you?	According	 to	Christianity,
he	 created	 man	 exactly	 four	 thousand	 and	 four	 years	 before	 Jesus	 Christ.	 I
presume	 it	 must	 have	 been	 Monday,	 the	 first	 of	 January;	 that	 is	 a	 logical
conclusion.	He	cannot	create	you	on	any	other	day,	because	before	the	creation
there	cannot	be	any	calendar.	So	whichever	day	he	created	you	was	the	first	of
January,	and	the	first	year	of	Our	Lord!
That	 reminds	me:	One	Jewish	astrologer	was	very	famous	and	well	known	for
his	 accurate	 predictions.	 Adolf	 Hitler,	 although	 reluctant	 --	 but	 knowing
perfectly	well	that	the	man	had	predicted	things	which	had	come	to	pass,	which
did	happen	--	finally	agreed	to	allow	him	to	read	his	destiny,	because	his	destiny
was	 the	 destiny	 of	 the	 nation.	 In	 his	 eyes,	 his	 destiny	 was	 the	 destiny	 of	 the
whole	world	--	and	not	just	for	one	year;	his	idea	was	to	have	a	one-thousand-
year	rule	over	the	whole	of	humanity.
The	 Jewish	 astrologer	 came,	 studied	 the	 stars	 when	 Adolf	 Hitler	 was	 born,
looked	 into	 his	 books	 and	 said,	 "Only	 one	 thing	 is	 certain:	 you	will	 die	 on	 a
Jewish	holiday."
Adolf	Hitler	 said,	 "It	 is	 a	 strange	 prediction;	what	 do	 you	mean	 by	 it?	Which
holiday?"
The	 astrologer	 said,	 "That's	 not	 certain.	Only	 this	much	 is	 certain,	 and	 this	 is
certain	because	any	day	you	die	will	become	a	Jewish	holiday!"
In	 the	 same	way,	 any	 day	God	 created	 the	world	must	 have	 been	 the	 first	 of
January;	there	is	no	other	way.
And	just	six	thousand	years	ago...	What	about	before	that?	That's	why	I	call	him
whimsical.	 This	 whimsical	 God	 remains	 silent	 for	 eternity	 --	 never	 created
anything	--
and	in	just	six	days	he	created	the	whole	world.	And	since	then	nothing	is	known
about	him.	On	the	seventh	day	he	rested	--	okay,	allowed.	But	one	has	to	come
back	to	the	office	on	Monday!	He	never	came	back	to	the	office.	And	moreover,
it	is	dangerous	if	he	returns	to	the	office;	what	will	he	do?	Now,	the	only	thing
left	 is	 to	destroy.	And	a	God	who	creates	 the	world	without	any	reason	 is	also
capable	of	destroying	it	without	any	reason.	Neither	do	you	have	any	answer	to
your	question	why	you	have	been	created,	nor	will	you	have	time	to	ask	why	you
have	been	destroyed.	Because	once	you	are	destroyed,	you	are	destroyed.	Who	is
going	to	ask?
The	whole	idea	of	God	creating	man	has	taken	away	the	beauty	of	life,	the	joy	of
life;	it	has	turned	you	into	mechanisms.	I	want	to	take	God	away	from	your	life,
so	that	you	can	feel	yourself	for	the	first	time	independent,	free,	not	as	a	created
puppet	but	as	an	eternal	source	of	life.	Only	then	you	can	rejoice.
The	world	looks	so	sad,	so	Christian.	It	is	not	only	Jesus	Christ	who	is	sad.	He
can	be	forgiven;	he	is	a	poor	fellow	on	the	cross.	You	don't	expect	that	he	should
smile	and	say	hello	to	you!	But	he	represents	almost	everybody	--	not	only	the
Christians	but	everybody	looks	as	 if	he	 is	on	the	cross,	 the	 invisible	cross...	so
serious.
Perhaps	 Jesus	was	 right	 that	 everybody	has	 to	 carry	his	 cross	on	his	 shoulder.
Why	in	the	first	place	should	everybody	carry	the	cross?	Can't	you	find	anything
else	to	carry?	I	cannot	accept	the	idea.	Nobody	should	carry	the	cross,	either	for
yourself	 or	 for	 anybody	 else.	You	 should	 not	 carry	 the	 cross	 at	 all.	 There	 are
beautiful	 things	 to	 carry:	 you	 can	 carry	 a	 guitar.	 And	 if	 you	 like	 very	 heavy
things,	you	can	carry	very	heavy	things:	an	old	big-sized	piano,	but	something
beautiful,	something	that	is	worthy	of	an	intelligent	man	-
-	not	a	cross.
I	see	the	whole	humanity	drowned	in	a	sea	of	sadness,	and	the	reason	is	that	you
have	been	conditioned	 to	be	 sad.	Your	 religions	don't	want	you	 to	 sing	and	 to
laugh	 and	 to	 dance,	 because	 people	 who	 laugh	 and	 sing	 and	 dance	 are
fundamentally	 of	 independent	 character.	 They	 have	 a	 certain	 uniqueness	 and
individuality	 of	 their	 own.	 They	 are	 not	 slaves,	 and	 they	will	 not	 agree	 to	 be
slaves	whatever	 the	 consequence.	And	 this	world	 only	wants	 you	 to	work	 for
some	vested	interests,	and	work	hard;	it	does	not	want	you	to	waste	your	time	in
meditating,	 or	 playing	 on	 the	 guitar,	 or	 dancing	 under	 the	 stars.	 The	 vested
interests	will	not	 like	 this	 idea.	They	would	like	you	to	be	serious,	sad,	so	 that
you	can	be	enslaved	easily,	so	that	you	can	be	purchased	easily,	so	that	you	can
be	exploited	easily.
Just	think	for	a	moment	of	the	whole	world	laughing,	dancing,	singing	--	just	for
one	hour.	All	kinds	of	slaveries	will	disappear,	and	all	nations	will	disappear,	and
all	religions	will	disappear.	Naturally,	the	presidents	and	the	prime	ministers	and
the	popes	and	ayatollahs	will	look	very	shocked.	What	is	happening?	And	they
will	join	sooner	or	later,	because	what	is	the	point	of	standing	amongst	the	whole
humanity	dancing	and	enjoying?
And	nobody	even	asking	why,	what	has	happened	--	nobody	has	time,	everybody
is	enjoying.	Soon	you	will	see	the	pope	also	in	the	crowd,	because	looking	from
the	outside	at	the	rejoicing	people	will	be	so	awkward,	so	embarrassing.	There	is
every	possibility	that	if	Jesus	were	alive	he	would	come	down	from	the	cross	and
start	dancing,	forget	all	about	the	cross	and	Christianity!
Who	cares	about	God?	--	only	miserable	people.	Who	goes	to	the	churches?	--
only	people	who	are	close	to	death,	old	people	afraid	of	coldness	and	aloneness
and	darkness	and	 the	grave.	And	one	never	knows	how	long	 they	will	have	 to
wait	 in	 the	grave	before	 the	 last	 judgment	day	comes.	 It	 is	going	 to	be	a	 long,
long	 wait	 in	 the	 grave,	 where	 you	 cannot	 even	 move;	 dancing	 is	 out	 of	 the
question!
On	the	last	judgment	day	I	can	guarantee	you	there	is	going	to	be	no	judgment,
because	there	will	be	billions	and	billions	of	people:	all	those	people	who	have
been	lying	in	the	graves	for	centuries,	all	of	you,	and	all	the	people	of	the	future
up	 till	 the	 last	 judgment	day	comes.	The	crowd	 is	going	 to	be	 so	big	 that	 it	 is
almost	impossible...	And	remember,	half	of	the	crowd	will	be	women;	there	will
be	so	much	chattering	and	so	much	searching
--	everybody	is	looking	for	his	husband	or	his	wife.	I	don't	think	that	there	is	any
possibility,	 particularly	 on	 that	 day,	 of	 any	 judgment.	 The	 whole	 idea	 is
nonsense.	In	one	day...!	And	why	should	these	poor	people	wait	in	their	graves?
So	when	people	come	close	to	their	graves,	when	they	feel	that	their	one	foot	is
in	the	grave,	they	put	their	other	foot	in	the	church!	Who	knows,	maybe	all	these
stories	that	have	been	told	in	the	church	are	true,	and	anyway	there	is	no	harm	--
why	take	the	chance?
Before	 I	 was	 deported	 from	 Greece,	 the	 archbishop	 of	 Greece	 threatened	 the
government	that	if	I	am	not	immediately	deported,	he	is	going	to	dynamite	and
set	fire	to	my	house.
And	all	the	people	who	are	in	there	with	me,	he	is	going	to	burn	them	alive.	This
is	 the	representative	of	Jesus	who	says,	"Love	your	enemy"	--	I	am	not	even	a
friend	--	and
"Love	your	neighbor."	He	has	forgotten	to	say,	"Love	the	tourist."
These	people	are	 religious	heads!	And	why	was	 the	archbishop	so	 troubled	by
me?
Because	in	the	garden	of	the	beautiful	house	by	the	sea	where	I	was	the	guest	of
a	 famous	film	director	of	Greece...	 It	 is	an	ancient,	beautiful	house,	 renovated,
with	 a	 big	 garden,	 and	 under	 a	 tree	 I	 used	 to	 sit	 and	 talk	 to	 the	 people.	 And
people	gathered	from	all	over	the	world	who	had	not	seen	me	for	almost	a	year,
or	two	years,	or	five	years.	I	was	close	so	they	all	had	come.	We	were	not	doing
any	harm	to	anybody;	we	were	simply	singing,	dancing.	There	was	music;	I	was
answering	their	questions.
What	was	troubling	the	archbishop?	--	because	he	must	have	been	troubled	very
much;	otherwise	nobody	threatens	to	burn	somebody	alive.
The	 joy...	people	are	dancing,	people	are	 loving	 to	each	other,	 there	 is	nothing
but	rejoicing	--	no	prayer,	no	Jesus	Christ,	no	cross.	He	became	afraid:	"This	is
going	to	destroy	our	younger	generation."
I	came	to	know	from	friends	that	ninety-four	percent	of	Greeks	are	registered	as
Christians,	but	only	four	percent	of	the	people	ever	go	to	the	churches	--	out	of
ninety-four	percent!	And	who	are	the	four	percent?	I	inquired	how	many	people
this	 particular	 archbishop	 has	 in	 his	 congregation.	 A	 woman	 who	 is	 my
sannyasin	 simply	 laughed	 and	 said,	 "I	 was	 worried	 that	 you	 would	 ask	 that
question;	it	is	very	awkward.	Only	six	old	women	are	his	whole	congregation."
And	 he	 was	 threatening	 for	 fifteen	 days	 continuously	 that	 he	 would	 bring	 a
protest	against	me.	I	was	waiting;	we	were	all	waiting	to	enjoy	the	protest.	We
would	have	welcomed	them	with	music	and	dance,	but	they	never	came.
Finally	I	asked,	"What	is	the	matter?	Every	day	it	is	being	postponed."
And	 they	 said,	 "You	 don't	 understand	 his	 situation.	 He	 goes	 on	making	 these
threats,	but	he	cannot	bring	a	protest	because	who	will	come?	--	six	old	women,
and	one	old	archbishop!	Seven	in	all;	it	will	look	hilarious."
But	 he	 managed	 to	 make	 the	 government	 afraid,	 because	 the	 government
depends	 on	 votes,	 and	 ninety-four	 percent	 of	 the	 people	 are	 Christian.	 Their
archbishop	has	to	be	listened	to.	They	may	not	go	to	the	church,	but	still,	 their
conditioned	minds	are	the	same.
Against	 the	 law,	 against	 the	 constitution,	 I	 was	 deported.	 I	 was	 arrested
immediately.	And	they	were	so	afraid;	the	government	was	so	much	afraid.	I	was
asleep	when	the	police	came	to	arrest	me,	and	my	people	said	to	them,	"Come,
sit	down	and	have	tea	and	we	will	wake	him	up."
But	they	said,	"We	are	not	going	to	wait	a	single	minute."
And	they	rushed	and	started	throwing	rocks	at	the	windows,	beautiful	windows
of	 that	 house.	 John	 had	 come	 to	 wake	 me,	 and	 when	 I	 woke	 up	 I	 could	 not
understand	what	was	 happening	 on	 the	 first	 floor.	 I	was	 sleeping	 on	 the	 other
floor.
The	 police	 had	 dynamite	 also.	 It	 almost	 looked	 as	 if	 the	 house	 was	 being
dynamited,	because	they	were	throwing	big	rocks	and	destroying	beautiful	glass
windows;	it	was	so	noisy.	I	could	not	see	the	point.	I	asked	the	man	who	took	me
into	police	custody,	"What	is	the	point	of	it	all?"
He	 said,	 "I	 don't	 understand	 myself."	 The	 government	 just	 seemed	 to	 be
absolutely	afraid	of	the	threat	that	the	archbishop	was	going	to	burn	twenty-five
people	who	were	living	in	my	house.
I	said,	"For	fifteen	days	he	has	continuously	been	threatening	to	bring	a	protest
against	me;	that	has	not	happened.	Can't	you	see	that	a	man	who	cannot	bring	a
protest	 can	 neither	 have	 the	 guts,	 nor	 the	 support?	 Who	 will	 carry	 all	 that
dynamite...	those	six	old	women?"
Even	the	police	were	sad,	and	they	could	not	believe	it:	"We	have	not	even	seen
your	people	in	the	city;	they	never	come	out.	They	are	just	enjoying	themselves
in	the	garden	of	your	house."
Just	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 window	 at	 the	 police	 station	 where	 I	 was	 sitting,	 two
women	police	 officers	were	 standing	 to	 prevent	 sannyasins	 from	 reaching	me.
Sannyasins	had	come	and	surrounded	the	whole	police	station,	and	they	started
dancing	 and	 singing.	Now	 it	 is	 not	 criminal	 to	 dance	 and	 sing,	 but	 the	 police
officers	said	to	me,	"Stop	your	people;	they	are	dancing	and	singing."
I	said,	"Dancing	and	singing	--	is	that	against	any	law?"
The	officer	said,	"It	is	not	against	any	law	but	it	is	making	us	very	frightened."
Those	 two	 policewomen	who	were	 standing	 just	 by	 the	window,	 to	watch	 the
window,	 allowed	 the	 sannyasins	 one	 by	 one	 to	 come	 and	 to	 talk	 to	 me.	 And
finally	they	said	to	me,
"We	are	sorry	that	this	is	happening	in	this	country,	in	this	century.	We	hope	that
you	will	come	again."
The	policewomen	told	me,	"The	people	of	the	island	where	you	are	staying	are
inquiring	what	they	should	do,	because	everybody	has	felt	so	wounded	and	hurt
by	the	behavior	of	the	government	and	the	archbishop."
I	 sent	 the	message:	 "Tell	 them	 they	all	 should	come	 to	 the	airport	 to	 show	 the
archbishop	just	who	can	protest	against	whom!"	And	when	I	came	to	the	airport,
there	were	almost	three	thousand	people;	the	whole	airport	was	full	of	people.	It
was	a	small	island;	perhaps	everybody	from	the	island	had	come	except	those	six
women!
Religions	 have	 lost	 their	 grip	 over	 man,	 but	 not	 over	 man's	 unconscious.
Consciously,	people	can	see	the	point;	it	is	so	simple:	this	kind	of	behavior	is	not
only	 inhuman,	 it	 is	 according	 to	 their	 own	 religion	 absolutely	 against	 Jesus
Christ,	against	THE	HOLY
BIBLE.	But	their	unconscious	is	beyond	their	own	power;	they	could	not	go	to
the	archbishop	to	stop	him,	to	say,	"You	are	humiliating	us,	you	are	humiliating
Jesus	Christ,	and	your	behavior	is	against	Christianity."
Nor	could	the	government	say	to	the	archbishop,	"You	should	resign;	you	should
not	be	 in	such	a	post.	To	an	 innocent	person	who	has	not	done	anything,	your
behavior,	your	constant	threat	--	and	ugly	threats,	that	you	will	burn	twenty-five
people	alive	--	is	not	gentlemanly,	to	say	nothing	about	it	not	being	Christian."
But	neither	the	government	seems	to	have	courage,	nor	the	people.	It	is	as	if	man
has	lost	all	his	guts.
I	 have	 been	 around	 the	 world	 and	 my	 experience	 is	 that	 over	 the	 centuries
religions	 have	 been	 castrating	 humanity;	 they	 have	 been	 destroying	 all	 your
courage,	all	your	dignity.
You	have	become	 so	 accustomed	 to	being	a	 slave	 that	you	cannot	 revolt.	And
that's	what	is	needed,	urgently	needed,	that	the	whole	of	humanity	revolts	against
all	limits	and	boundaries,	prisons	and	chains.
I	 came	 across	 a	 statement	 of	Karl	Marx;	 I	 don't	 agree	with	 him,	 but	with	 this
statement	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 disagree.	 He	 says	 that	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 put
flowers	on	your	chains.
So	you	see	only	the	flowers,	you	don't	see	the	chains.
Throw	away	all	the	flowers	and	throw	away	all	the	chains.	Only	then	will	you	be
able	to	have	a	heart	of	your	own,	an	individuality,	and	existence	can	become	full
of	laughter.	We	are	not	here	to	be	unnecessarily	miserable,	but	it	seems	we	are
trained,	 so	well	 trained	 to	be	miserable	 that	even	 if	 there	 is	an	opportunity	we
will	miss	it.
In	Bali	there	is	an	old	saying:	If	you	are	happy	you	can	always	learn	to	dance.
But	 basically	 man	 is	 not	 happy.	 He	 is	 so	 unhappy	 that	 just	 to	 forget	 his
unhappiness	he	goes	on	drinking	alcoholic	beverages,	uses	drugs	 --	marijuana,
hashish	and	opium	--	just	to	forget,	at	least	for	a	few	hours,	his	miserable	state.
And	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 at	 all	 to	 be	miserable.	 In	 fact,	 misery	 should	 be	 very
exceptional;	 happiness	 should	be	 simply	natural.	You	 should	not	 ask	 anybody,
"Why	are	you	looking	happy?"	But	this	is	the	situation.	If	you	are	looking	happy
and	 smiling	 and	 enjoying	 yourself,	 everybody	 will	 look,	 stare	 at	 you,	 as	 if
something	has	gone	wrong:	What	has	happened	to	this	poor	fellow?	Why	is	he
smiling	and	enjoying?	--	there	seems	to	be	no	reason.	And	somebody	is	bound	to
ask,	"What	is	the	matter?"	Some	policeman	is	going	to	come	asking,	"Why	are
you	creating	this	crowd	in	the	traffic?	Why	are	you	smiling?
Why	are	you	dancing?"
Is	 it	necessary	 to	show	some	cause	 to	be	healthy	and	happy?	But	nobody	asks
anybody	who	is	miserable;	nobody	even	stops	to	look	at	him.	To	be	miserable	is
accepted	as	our	natural	state.	There	is	no	need	to	inquire	about	any	cause,	about
any	 reason.	 If	 you	 think	 about	 it,	 you	will	 not	 believe	 to	what	 an	 insane	 state
man	has	fallen.
A	doctor	calls	his	patient	 to	give	him	the	results	of	his	 tests.	"I	have	some	bad
news	and	some	worse	news,"	 says	 the	doctor.	 "The	bad	news	 is	 that	you	have
only	twenty-four	hours	to	live."
"Ah,	no!"	says	the	patient,	"What	could	possibly	be	worse	than	that?"
The	doctor	answers,	"I	have	been	trying	to	reach	you	since	yesterday!"
Man	 cannot	 fall	 into	 a	 worse	 state.	 But	 he	 has	 fallen;	 he	 has	 forgotten	 the
laughter	every	child	is	born	with;	he	has	lost	his	way	to	health	and	wholeness.
The	door	opens	right	this	very	moment	--	always	herenow,	where	life	and	death
are	continuously	meeting.	You	have	chosen	death	orientation	because	 it	was	 in
the	 interests	 of	 those	 who	 are	 in	 power,	 and	 you	 have	 forgotten	 that	 life	 is
passing	by	while	you	are	being	drowned	in	sadness.
Once	Confucius	was	asked	by	a	disciple	how	 to	be	happy,	how	 to	be	blissful.
Confucius	said,	"You	are	asking	a	strange	question;	these	things	are	natural.	No
rose	 asks	how	 to	be	 a	 rose."	As	 far	 as	 sadness	 and	misery	 are	 concerned,	you
will	have	enough	time	in	your	grave;	then	you	can	be	miserable	to	your	heart's
content.	But	while	you	are	alive,	be	totally	alive.	Out	of	this	totality	and	intensity
will	arise	happiness,	and	a	happy	man	certainly	learns	to	dance.	I	agree	with	the
old	Bali	proverb.
We	 want	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 to	 be	 happy,	 and	 to	 be	 dancing,	 and	 to	 be
singing.	 Then	 this	whole	 planet	 becomes	mature,	 evolves	 in	 consciousness.	A
sad	 man,	 a	 miserable	 man,	 cannot	 have	 a	 very	 sharp	 consciousness;	 his
consciousness	is	dim,	dull,	heavy,	dark.
Only	when	you	laugh	heartily,	suddenly	like	a	flash	all	darkness	disappears.
In	your	laughter	you	are	your	authentic	self.
In	your	sadness	you	have	covered	your	original	face	with	a	fake	identity	that	the
society	expects	of	you.	Nobody	wants	you	to	be	so	happy	that	you	start	dancing
in	the	street.
Nobody	wants	you	to	have	a	hearty	laughter;	otherwise	the	neighbors	will	start
knocking	 on	 your	 walls,	 "Stop.	 Misery	 is	 okay;	 laughter	 is	 a	 disturbance."
Miserable	people	cannot	tolerate	anybody	who	is	not	miserable.
The	 only	 crime	 of	 people	 like	 Socrates	 was	 that	 they	 were	 immensely	 happy
people,	and	their	happiness	created	immense	envy	in	the	great	masses	which	are
living	in	misery.	The	masses	could	not	tolerate	such	happy	people;	they	have	to
be	destroyed	because	they	provoke	inside	you	a	possibility	of	revolt,	and	you	are
afraid	of	that	revolt.
Once	a	man	falls	in	love	with	rebellion,	he	is	on	the	right	path.
An	old	Russian	story...
The	people	of	Chelm	were	terrible	worriers;	they	even	worried	about	how	much
they	worried.	So	the	mayor	and	the	rabbi	appointed	Ira	the	candlemaker	to	do	all
the	worrying	for	the	people	of	Chelm.	And	for	this	he	would	earn	four	rubles	a
week.
The	scheme	did	not	work	because	Ira	went	home	to	Ruth	and	said,	"Wonderful,	I
have	got	four	rubles	a	week;	we	have	nothing	to	worry	about!"	Naturally,	he	was
thrown	out	from	his	employment	--	that	was	the	reason	that	he	was	going	to	get
four	 rubles	 a	week,	 so	 that	 he	 could	worry	 for	 the	whole	 town.	But	 he	 forgot
completely...	just	the	joy	of	having	four	rubles	a	week	for	nothing.	Naturally,	he
said,	"Now	there	is	nothing	to	worry	about."	But	that's	how	he	lost	his	job!
Paddy	was	feeling	under	the	weather,	so	he	went	to	see	his	doctor.	"I	just	can't
find	any	cause	for	your	illness,"	said	the	physician.	"Frankly,	I	think	it	is	due	to
drinking."
"In	that	case,"	replied	Paddy,	getting	up	to	leave,	"I	will	come	back	when	you	are
sober!"
"All	right,"	said	the	psychiatrist,	"tell	me	why	you	hate	your	sister	so	much."
"But	I	don't	have	a	sister,"	said	Hymie	Goldberg.
"Look,"	 said	 the	 psychiatrist,	 "if	 you	 want	 me	 to	 help	 you,	 you	 have	 got	 to
cooperate!
You	can't	say	that	you	don't	have	a	sister."
His	 psychoanalysis	 can't	 start	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 a	 sister!	 And	 certainly,	 your
cooperation	is	needed.	This	is	the	world;	it	can't	be	worse.
Question	2
BELOVED	MASTER,
PLEASE,	HOW	CAN	 I	 FALL	 INTO	A	DEEP	ACCEPTANCE	OF,	 "I	DON'T
KNOW"?
I	 DON'T	 KNOW.	 MY	 GOD!	 I	 DON'T	 KNOW	 MYSELF!	 I	 AM
SEARCHING...!
Prem	Anna,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 fall	 into	 a	 deep	 acceptance	 of	 "I	 don't	 know."
Either	you	know	or	you	don't	know.	There	is	no	question	of	acceptance.	If	you
know,	 it	 is	 perfectly	 good;	 if	 you	 don't	 know,	 it	 is	 even	 better!	Why	 are	 you
making	a	problem	out	of	it?	If	you	don't	know,	it	is	perfectly	okay	I	think,	with
everybody	here...	no	objection!	It	is	the	most	beautiful	state.
Not	knowing	is	the	ultimate	state	of	wisdom.
Socrates	 said	 in	 his	 last	 statement,	 "I	 know	 nothing."	 And	 he	 had	 to	 say	 this
because	the	Oracle	of	Delphi	had	declared	that	Socrates	was	the	wisest	man	in
the	whole	world.	The	people	who	heard	the	Oracle	rushed	towards	Socrates	just
to	 inform	him,	 "The	Oracle	 of	Delphi	 has	 declared	 you	 the	wisest	man	 in	 the
world."	And	Socrates	said,	"I	am	sorry	to	disagree,	because	I	know	nothing."
The	 people	 were	 shocked;	 they	 were	 thinking	 that	 they	 were	 bringing	 good
news.	They	went	back	and	asked	the	Oracle,	"What	 is	 the	matter?	You	declare
Socrates	the	wisest	man	in	the	world,	and	when	we	inform	him,	he	says,	Ì	know
nothing.'	There	must	have	been	some	mistake."
And	 the	Oracle	 said,	 "I	 have	 declared	 him	 the	wisest	man	 because	 he	 knows
nothing;	he	has	become	an	innocent	child,	clear	and	pure."
Knowledge	is	a	kind	of	disturbance	in	your	innocence.	It	is	a	burden,	it	does	not
help	you;	it	simply	makes	you	more	and	more	puzzled,	worried	--	doubts	arise.
And	you	think	gathering	more	and	more	knowledge	is	going	to	help?	It	does	not
help;	 It	 simply	 makes	 you	 more	 tense.	What	 ultimately	 helps	 is	 dropping	 all
knowledge.	But	if	in	the	very	beginning	you	feel,	"I	don't	know,"	you	are	blessed
--	enjoy	it.
It	is	not	a	question	of	acceptance,	because	acceptance	does	not	mean	enjoying	it.
You	may	+accept	something	with	reluctance;	you	may	accept	it	because	there	is
nothing	else	 to	do.	No,	 rejoice	 in	your	not	knowing;	make	 it	 innocence.	Don't
say,	"not	knowing,"
because	 that	 is	 a	 negative	 idea.	 That's	 why	 it	 has	 become	 a	 problem	 how	 to
accept	it.	Call	it	innocence	and	there	will	be	no	problem	of	acceptance.	You	will
rejoice	it,	you	will	dance	it,	you	will	sing	it.
Prem	Anna,	have	you	heard	this?
Hymie	Goldberg,	who	only	weighs	seventy	pounds,	goes	to	Texas	on	business.
He	checks	into	a	hotel	which	is	fifty	storeys	high,	and	is	shown	into	a	suite	the
size	of	a	ballroom.	Overwhelmed,	he	goes	down	to	the	bar	and	is	served	a	drink
that	is	so	big	it	takes	both	hands	to	lift.	"Everything	is	big	in	Texas,	pal,"	says	the
bartender.	When	his	dinner	arrives,	the	plate	is	the	size	of	his	dining	room	table
at	home.	"Hey	pal,	everything	is	big	in	Texas,"	says	the	waiter.
Finally,	 overcome	 by	 all	 this,	 Hymie	 decides	 it	 is	 time	 to	 go	 and	 try	 out	 his
super-king-size	bed,	but	he	 loses	his	way	in	 the	hotel's	vast	corridors.	Opening
the	door	of	a	darkened	room,	Hymie	falls	into	the	swimming	pool	with	a	great
splash.	When	 he	 comes	 to	 the	 surface,	 he	 begins	 to	 shriek,	 "Don't	 flush	 it!!!
Don't	flush	it!!!"
Naturally	he	was	thinking	that	this	must	be	a	toilet,	everything	is	so	big.
Prem	 Anna,	 just	 enjoy	 life.	 And	 you	 can	 enjoy	 life	 more	 when	 you	 know
nothing.	The	more	you	know,	the	less	 is	 the	possibility	of	enjoying	life.	I	have
never	seen	knowledgeable	people	even	 laughing;	 it	 is	below	 them.	Laughter	 is
one	 of	 the	 greatest	 qualities	 of	 the	 evolved	 intelligence	 of	 humanity,	 because
except	man,	nobody	else	laughs	in	the	whole	of	existence.	And	to	think	laughter
below	you	is	to	forget	that	it	is	the	highest	peak	of	consciousness.
A	man	was	drowning	in	a	river	and	was	shouting	for	help,	saying,	"I	can't	swim,
I	can't	swim!"
"So	what?"	shouted	back	a	drunk	from	the	bank,	"I	can't	play	the	piano,	but	I'm
not	shouting	about	it!"
Wishing	 to	surprise	her	husband	with	a	new	wig	she	had	 just	bought,	 the	wife
put	it	on	and	strolled	unannounced	into	his	office.	"Do	you	think	you	could	find
a	place	in	your	life	for	a	woman	like	me?"	she	asked	sexily.
"Not	a	chance,"	he	replied,	"you	remind	me	too	much	of	my	wife!"
So,	 Prem	 Anna,	 don't	 be	 worried	 about	 your	 ignorance,	 just	 learn	 to	 call	 it
innocence.
Always	use	right	words,	words	which	are	life	affirmative,	which	don't	condemn
you.
Then	 the	 idea	 of	 how	 to	 accept	 it	 does	 not	 arise.	 And	 if	 you	 have	 to	 accept
something,	you	cannot	rejoice	about	it;	it	can	be	only	out	of	compulsion,	out	of
necessity.	I	don't	want	anybody	to	live	a	life	of	compulsion	or	a	life	of	necessity.
One	should	live	a	life	of	abundance,	a	life	of	innocence,	a	life	out	of	freedom	of
the	heart.	Innocence	is	a	great	quality;	don't	call	it	ignorance.
The	priest	has	just	finished	his	sermon	on	charity,	and	so	passes	his	hat	around
for	donations.	The	hat	goes	around	the	whole	congregation	and	then	comes	back
to	him	as	empty	as	when	he	sent	it	out.
The	 priest	 looks	 inside,	 then	 shrugs	 and	 looks	 up	 to	 heaven	 and	 says,	 "Thank
you	Lord	for	small	mercies.	At	least	I	got	my	hat	back!"
In	 such	 situations,	 rejoice!	There	 is	 no	 point	 in	 complaining	 or	making	 a	 fuss
about	it;	just	be	happy	that	your	hat	is	back!
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	innocence	has	not	to	be	accepted,	it	has	to	be	relished,
danced,	rejoiced	--	it	is	a	blessing.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	A	meditator	needs	no	personal	guidance
27	August	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708270
ShortTitle:
INVITA12
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
110
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 YOUR	 SANNYASIN	 FOR	 SEVEN	 YEARS	 AND	 I	 AM
UNABLE	TO
EXPRESS	MY	GRATITUDE,	AS	IT	GAVE	MY	LIFE	DIRECTION	AND	JOY
AND
GRACE	AND	MORE.
NOW,	 BEING	HERE	 FOR	ONLY	ONE	WEEK,	 I	 REALIZE	 THAT	 I	 HAVE
ALWAYS
HAD	A	NEED	FOR	PERSONAL	GUIDANCE	FROM	SOMEBODY	TUNING
INTO
ME	 AND	 MY	 QUESTIONS.	 THIS	 STRONG	 NEED	 WAS	 ONLY
REINFORCED
DURING	A	COUNSELING	SESSION	TODAY,	HERE.
BELOVED	MASTER,	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
Satyam	Robert,	the	way	you	are	growing	in	silence,	in	your	meditations,	in	your
grace,	and	the	way	the	gratitude	is	coming	to	you,	you	don't	need	any	personal
guidance.	You	need	to	be	more	and	more	open	to	the	impersonal	existence.	The
idea	of	personal	guidance	is	mind's	old	habit	to	become	dependent	on	someone;
and	I	am	struggling	hard	against	your	habits.
The	whole	existence	is	available	to	guide	you	--	and	you	are	now	in	a	position	to
be	in	direct	contact	with	the	universe.	As	your	gratitude	deepens,	as	your	grace
becomes	more	and	more	clear,	as	your	silence	becomes	more	and	more	rooted	in
you	--	it	is	the	universe	itself	which	takes	you	into	its	own	hands.	Those	hands
are	 invisible,	 but	 they	 are	 there;	 you	 are	 not	 orphans	 in	 the	 universe.	You	 are
immensely	needed	and	loved,	you	are	just	not	aware	of	it.
My	own	suggestion	 is	 to	drop	 the	 idea	of	personal	guidance,	because	anybody
will	 try	 to	guide	you	according	to	his	mind,	according	to	his	 ideas	of	how	you
should	be.	That's	what	all	 the	teachers	of	the	world	have	been	doing:	imposing
their	 idea,	 their	 image	on	people	who	are	searching	and	seeking	guidance.	It	 is
one	of	the	most	dangerous	games	to	play,	because	in	it	you	are	always	the	loser.
If	 the	 teacher	 succeeds	 in	 imposing	 certain	 directions,	 certain	 patterns,
disciplines,	 according	 to	 me	 it	 is	 not	 guidance;	 it	 is	 misguidance.	 Because
nobody	knows	your	unique	self	--	only	you	can	know	it.	And	you	have	to	grow
according	to	your	nature,	not	according	to	anybody's	guidance.
To	 me,	 to	 be	 natural,	 to	 be	 spontaneous	 is	 enough.	 All	 guides	 have	 been
misguides.	 And	 you	 can	 see	 it:	 the	 whole	 universe	 of	 humanity	 is	 living	 in
tremendous	misguidance.
Otherwise	why	should	there	be	so	much	insanity?	Why	there	should	be	so	much
misery,	 so	much	 agony	 and	 spiritual	 suffering?	The	 reason	 is	 that	 nobody	 has
been	allowed	to	be	just	himself,	his	natural	being.
Your	so-called	religions	don't	trust	nature;	they	trust	in	holy	scriptures;	they	trust
in	 dead	 words	 spoken	 thousands	 of	 years	 before	 by	 people	 we	 do	 not	 know.
Whether	 they	 knew	 anything,	 or	 they	were	 just	 creating	 fictions...	 unless	 you
know,	you	can	never	be	certain.
But	they	are	molding	you	according	to	patterns	created	in	the	past.	This	process
of	 molding	 people	 into	 Christians,	 Hindus,	 Mohammedans,	 Buddhists,	 goes
against	the	very	basic	human	right;	it	does	not	allow	you	to	be	your	natural	self.
And	unless	you	are	yourself,	you	cannot	be	happy.
Just	 think,	 if	 there	 were	 teachers	 teaching	 roses	 that	 they	 have	 to	 become
lotuses...
Fortunately,	roses	don't	care	about	teachers	and	religions	and	churches.	But	just
think	for	a	moment:	if	people	were	there	who	were	telling	the	roses	to	be	lotuses,
the	marigolds	to	be	roses,	what	would	be	the	ultimate	outcome	of	it?
Roses	would	try	to	become	lotuses,	which	they	can	never	become;	it	is	not	their
self-nature.	They	can	only	be	roses,	beautiful,	immensely	graceful,	fragrant.	But
if	 this	 idea	 of	 being	 somebody	 other	 than	what	 their	 nature	 is,	 is	 imposed	 on
them,	 two	 things	will	 happen:	 they	will	 never	become	 lotuses,	but	 their	whole
energy	will	be	wasted	in	trying	to	become	lotuses.	And	the	second	thing	is	they
will	 not	 be	 roses	 either,	 because	 from	 where	 will	 they	 find	 the	 energy	 to	 be
roses?	That	whole	energy	is	making	an	effort	for	the	impossible.
Actually	 the	 same	 has	 happened	 with	 humanity.	 Everybody	 is	 giving	 you	 an
idea;	everybody	is	ready	to	tell	you	how	you	should	be.
All	"shoulds"	and	all	"should	nots"	have	 to	be	abandoned.	You	simply	have	 to
listen	to	your	own	inner	voice.	And	wherever	it	leads,	just	go	without	bothering
whether	people	think	it	is	right	or	wrong.
If	 you	 can	 become	 just	 your	 own	 self,	 if	 you	 can	 blossom	 into	 your	 intrinsic
nature,	then	only	you	will	have	blissfulness	--	a	peace	which	cannot	be	expressed
in	 words,	 and	 a	 certain	 poetry	 to	 your	 being;	 a	 certain	 dance	 to	 your	 being,
because	 you	will	 be	 in	 tune	with	 existence.	To	be	 in	 tune	with	 yourself	 is	 the
only	way	to	be	in	tune	with	existence.
Nobody	 needs	 personal	 guidance,	 because	 all	 personal	 guidance	 is	 a	 beautiful
name	for	dependence	on	somebody	and	he	is	going	to	distort	you.
I	don't	give	you	any	discipline	 --	 I	don't	 tell	you,	you	 should	be	 this	or	 that.	 I
simply	say	you	should	become	silent,	so	that	you	can	listen	to	your	still,	small
voice.	 That	 is	 your	 real	 guide;	 the	 guide	 is	 within	 you.	 I	 know	 hundreds	 of
psychoanalysts,	psychologists,	so-called	counselors.	They	are	burdened	with	all
kinds	 of	 problems,	 but	 they	 have	 just	 learned	 the	 technique,	 either	 from
education	or	from	the	libraries.	And	they	go	on	advising	--	to	advise	is	so	simple.
In	their	own	lives	they	are	not	what	they	are	advising.
If	 you	 watch	 the	 life,	 as	 I	 have	 watched	 very	 closely	 the	 life	 of	 people	 like
Sigmund	Freud	--	the	topmost	counselors	in	the	world:	Karl	Gustav	Jung,	Alfred
Adler,	Assagioli	-
-	I	have	been	simply	shocked	to	see	that	these	people	have	become	the	guides	to
millions	of	people.
I	remember	one	small	incident...
Wilhelm	 Reich,	 as	 a	 young	 psychoanalyst,	 was	 deeply	 interested	 to	 meet
Sigmund	Freud,	 the	 founder	of	psychoanalysis.	He	had	 read	 in	 the	universities
and	 he	 was	 a	 genius,	 perhaps	 of	 a	 far	 greater	 quality	 than	 Sigmund	 Freud
himself.	Sigmund	Freud	was	in	his	old	age,	just	the	last	years,	and	this	Wilhelm
Reich	 was	 asking	 again	 and	 again	 for	 an	 appointment.	 Finally	 he	 got	 the
appointment.	 And	 the	 way	 Sigmund	 Freud	 treated	 him	 is	 so	 inhuman,	 just
because	he	was	a	young	man,	fresh	from	the	university.
He	 had	 come	with	 some	 significant	 questions,	 and	 he	 had	 created	 in	 his	 own
mind	a	great	image	of	Sigmund	Freud,	naturally.	He	asked,	"I	have	come	from
far	 away	 to	 inquire	 a	 few	 things:	 One,	 you	 insist	 that	 unless	 a	 man	 is
psychoanalyzed,	completely	psychoanalyzed,	he	will	never	be	out	of	confusion
and	misery.	Can	you	 show	me	a	man	who	has	been	completely	analyzed,	 so	 I
can	 just	meet	him	and	see	what	a	completely	clear	man	would	be	 like?	 I	have
read	about	it,	but	I	don't	have	any	personal	experience	of	meeting	somebody	who
is	beyond	confusion	and	is	pure	clarity."
Sigmund	 Freud	 became	 angry,	 and	 he	 said,	 "What	 kind	 of	 nonsense...
psychoanalysis	 is	 not	 a	 simple	 thing.	 It	 takes	 decades	 for	 anybody	 to	 become
completely	psychoanalyzed."
Reich	was	shocked,	but	he	said,	"You	have	been	working	your	whole	life.	Have
you	psychoanalyzed	any	person	completely,	so	that	I	can	go	and	see	the	person?
Because	 other	 than	 that	 there	 is	 no	 proof	 that	 what	 you	 are	 saying	 has	 any
significance	as	far	as	science	is	concerned."	And	seeing	Sigmund	Freud	getting
angry...	because	Sigmund	Freud	was	not	accustomed	to	such	questions,	he	was
surrounded	with	cronies,	yea-sayers.
Whatever	nonsense	he	would	say,	they	would	say	that	it	was	a	great	truth.	Seeing
Sigmund	Freud	getting	so	angry,	Reich	said,	"Drop	that	subject.	I	want	to	know
whether	you	have	been	psychoanalyzed	totally	or	not."	And	Sigmund	Freud	had
to	tell	him,	"Get	out!	And	never	again	try	to	come	to	me;	you	don't	know	how	to
behave."
The	reality	is	that	all	his	life	Sigmund	Freud	was	being	asked	by	his	colleagues
again	 and	 again,	 "Just	 as	 you	 psychoanalyze	 us,	 now	we	 know	 the	 technique,
why	don't	you	get	psychoanalyzed,	by	any	of	us	you	choose?	We	would	like	to
have	 a	 look	 into	 your	 inner	 world	 of	 dreams,	 imaginations,	 desires,	 to	 see
whether	what	you	claim	to	be	absolute	clarity,	peace,	integrity	is	there	inside	you
or	not?"
He	refused	continuously;	he	never	allowed	himself	to	be	psychoanalyzed,	and	he
is	 the	founder	of	psychoanalysis.	Why	was	he	so	afraid	 to	be	psychoanalyzed?
He	 knew	 perfectly	 well	 that	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 advise	 others,	 but	 it	 is	 difficult	 to
transform	yourself.	He	was	suffering	from	ordinary	human	problems,	 the	same
tensions,	the	same	misery,	the	same	repressions,	the	same	inhibitions,	the	same
taboos.	And	he	was	afraid	to	open	up	his	dream	world	because	that	would	show
things	which	would	be	a	proof	that	although	he	was	the	founder,	he	himself	was
not	what	he	was	trying	for	the	whole	of	humanity	to	be.
The	same	is	the	situation	today.	Psychoanalysts	themselves	once	in	a	while	go	to
another	 psychoanalyst	 to	 be	 psychoanalyzed,	 because	 they	 have	 become	 too
burdened	with	problems.	It	is	such	a	stupid	game.
If	Gautam	Buddha	says	anything	about	meditation	it	is	his	own	experience,	not
just	a	theoretical,	 intellectual	formulation.	If	he	says	something	about	the	inner
light,	 he	 has	 seen	 it.	 If	 he	 says	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 go	 beyond	mind,	 he	 has	 gone
beyond	mind,	only	then	he	says	it.	And	the	people	who	watched	him	for	forty-
two	years	continuously	never	found	any	flaw,	never	found	him	at	any	time	angry,
at	any	 time	miserable,	at	any	 time	sad.	One	cannot	pretend	for	forty-two	years
continuously;	one	needs	holidays!	Even	 to	pretend	 for	 a	 few	hours	 to	be	what
you	are	not	is	such	a	tension	and	such	a	burden	that	you	are	going	to	drop	it	and
expose	yourself	at	the	slightest	excuse.
This	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	Western	 psychoanalytic	movement	 and	 the
Eastern	movement	for	meditation.
I	have	told	you	a	Sufi	story...
A	woman	was	very	much	impressed	by	a	Sufi	mystic,	and	she	was	very	worried
about	her	only	son.	She	was	living	for	him;	the	father	was	dead.	That	boy	was
her	life,	and	she	wanted	him	to	become	something.
The	boy	was	too	attached	to	eating	sweets	and	all	kinds	of	junk.	She	tried	hard;
everybody,	 the	 teachers,	 the	 priests	 all	 tried,	 but	 the	 boy	 was	 absolutely
indifferent	to	their	advice;	he	continued	to	eat	sweets.
He	was	the	only	son,	so	finally	the	mother	would	relax	and	would	give	him	what
he	wanted;	otherwise,	he	would	remain	hungry.	But	he	would	not	eat	anything
that	he	did	not	want	to	eat;	he	would	eat	only	things	that	he	wanted	to	eat.	And
those	 were	 things	 which	 were	 not	 healthy,	 which	 were	 not	 nourishing,	 which
could	create	problems	later	in	his	life.
The	Sufi	mystic	had	come	wandering	into	the	village,	and	the	woman	thought	it
was	a	good	chance.	That	man	has	such	a	tremendous	and	powerful	aura	around
him,	perhaps	he	may	be	able	to	change	this	stupid	boy's	mind.	She	took	the	boy...
she	 had	 been	 taking	 him	 to	 anybody	who	 could	 help;	 it	 had	 become	 almost	 a
routine	thing.	The	boy	went	there	very	reluctantly,	very	resistant;	it	had	become
almost	a	question	of	his	own	self-respect.
When	 the	woman	 told	 the	 Sufi	master	 about	 the	 situation,	 he	 said,	 "You	will
have	to	forgive	me.	Right	now	I	cannot	say	a	single	word	to	this	beautiful	boy.	I
am	old,	I	am	seventy	years,	but	it	will	take	at	least	two	weeks	for	me	to	be	able
to	say	something	to	him."
The	woman	could	not	believe	him.	Anybody,	any	idiot	was	ready	to	advise.	And
a	great	mystic	followed	by	many	many	people,	says	to	the	boy,	"You	will	have	to
forgive	me;	you	came	and	I	cannot	advise	you	right	now.	You	will	have	to	give
me	two	weeks	at	least."
The	boy	for	the	first	time	dropped	his	reluctance,	his	resistance.	For	the	first	time
he	 was	 respected,	 he	 was	 accepted	 as	 a	 dignified	 human	 being;	 he	 was	 not
condemned	out	 of	 hand.	And	 the	old	man	was	 really	 concerned,	 he	wanted	 to
give	 him	 some	 advice	which	would	 be	 of	 importance;	 he	 needed	 at	 least	 two
weeks'	 time.	 The	 mother	 was	 absolutely	 shocked,	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 this
great	mystic	cannot	advise	a	 small	boy	 right	now	on	such	a	 trivial	matter.	But
what	to	do?	They	had	to	wait	two	weeks.
After	two	weeks	she	came	again.	This	time	the	boy	came	very	joyously.	In	fact,
he	was	very	eager	about	how	fast	 the	days	were	moving,	and	he	was	counting
because	he	wanted	to	see	the	mystic	again.	"He	is	a	totally	different	man	from	all
other	men	you	have	 taken	me	 to."	The	woman	was	 surprised	because	 the	 boy
was	always	resistant,	reluctant.	He	went	against	his	will,	was	forced	to	go	--	and
this	 time	he	 is	 so	eager!	He	cannot	wait	 for	 two	weeks;	 those	 two	weeks	 look
like	two	years.
Finally	the	day	came,	and	in	the	early	morning	the	boy	took	a	shower,	changed
his	clothes,	got	ready.	The	mother	said,	"What	is	the	hurry?"
He	 said,	 "I	want	 to	 see	 the	man.	He	 is	 the	 only	man	 that	 I	 have	 felt	 respects
others."
Otherwise,	advising	others	is	a	kind	of	humiliation;	it	is	saying:	I	know	and	you
do	not	know.	I	am	the	guide	and	you	are	the	guided.	I	am	the	teacher	and	you	are
the	 taught.	 It	 is	 enjoying	a	 certain	 egotism	at	 the	 cost	of	humiliating	 the	other
person.
They	went,	 and	 the	woman	 first	 asked,	 "Before	 I	 ask	about	 the	boy,	 I	want	 to
know	why	it	took	two	weeks	for	you	--	is	it	such	a	great	philosophical	problem?"
The	 mystic	 said,	 "If	 it	 were	 a	 philosophical	 problem	 I	 would	 have	 answered
immediately;	it	is	an	existential	problem.	I	am	seventy	years	old;	he	is	just	seven
years	old.	I	have	lived	ten	times	more	than	the	boy,	still	I	love	to	eat	sweets.	And
as	long	as	I	myself	eat	sweets	I	cannot	say	anything.	These	two	weeks	I	tried	not
to	eat	sweets,	and	to	see	what	happens.
My	advice	will	depend	on	my	own	experience,	not	just	on	the	common	opinion
that	sweets	are	bad.	They	may	be	bad,	but	if	I	cannot	drop	them	at	seventy	years
of	age,	to	expect	a	small	boy	to	drop	them...	I	cannot	advise	that."
The	boy	was	immensely	impressed.	A	man	at	 this	age	tortured	himself	for	two
weeks?
And	he	said	to	the	boy,	"My	son,	it	is	very	difficult.	I	managed	to	drop	sweets,
and	I	have	managed	now	for	the	rest	of	my	life	--	but	to	advise	you	I	feel	a	little
shaky.	You	are	so	young.	To	drop	sweets	if	you	love	them	will	be	arduous,	and
to	 impose	 this	 idea	 on	 you	 I	 will	 be	 almost	 being	 violent	 and	 violating	 your
individual	right.	So	all	that	I	can	say	is,	it	is	good	and	it	is	healthy,	but	it	is	very
difficult.	 It	 is	 a	 challenge.	You	 can	 choose	whether	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 take	 the
challenge.	 I	 have	 dropped	 them	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 my	 life;	 only	 now	 have	 I	 the
authority	to	say	to	you	that	you	can	also	drop.	But	it	is	certainly	a	difficult	thing.
Are	you	ready	for	a	challenge,	an	adventure?"
The	boy	 said,	 "I	drop	 them	 right	now,	 and	 for	my	whole	 life.	 If	 you	can	drop
them,	why	can't	I	drop	them?	And	you	are	so	old;	I	am	so	young.	You	are	getting
weaker;	 I	 am	getting	 stronger.	 I	 can	 take	 the	challenge;	you	don't	 feel	worried
about	it."
The	 mother	 could	 not	 believe	 what	 is	 happening:	 it	 is	 a	 miracle.	 The	 boy	 is
persuading	the	old	man,	"I	will	be	able."
The	old	man	said,	"My	feeling	is,	you	should	also	think	about	it	for	two	weeks,
try..."
The	boy	said,	"No.	 I	am	dropping	 them	right	now	in	your	presence,	with	your
blessings."
The	people	you	go	to	for	personal	counseling	are	in	the	same	boat	in	which	you
are;	they	have	the	same	problems.	Here,	I	have	all	kinds	of	psychotherapists,	and
they	are	good	at	their	work	technically.	They	know	how	to	help	people,	but	they
don't	know	how	to	help	themselves.	They	write	their	problems	to	me,	and	they
are	 the	 same	problems	 for	which	 they	are	known	 to	be	good	counselors,	good
therapists.	To	know	something	technically	is	one	thing,	and	to	know	something
existentially,	experientially,	is	another	thing.
As	far	as	you	are	concerned,	you	are	already	moving	on	the	right	path.	These	are
good	symptoms	that	you	are	feeling	a	sense	of	direction,	 joy,	grace,	and	more;
these	are	indications	that	you	are	on	the	right	path	--	you	don't	need	any	personal
counseling.	 You	 need	 to	 be	 yourself	 more	 and	 more,	 more	 integrated,	 more
natural,	more	spontaneous.
You	have	found	the	path,	now	anybody	else	can	disturb	it.	It	is	possible	that	you
may	go	to	a	counselor	who	has	not	even	grown	as	much	as	you,	but	he	is	very
knowledgeable.
His	expertise	is	great;	he	can	talk	about	things	and	distract	you	from	the	path.
A	 meditator	 needs	 no	 personal	 guidance.	 A	 meditator,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 needs
only	 one	 thing:	 the	 atmosphere	 of	 meditation.	 He	 needs	 other	 meditators;	 he
needs	 to	 be	 surrounded	 by	 other	 meditators.	 Because	 whatever	 goes	 on
happening	within	us	is	not	only	within	us,	it	affects	people	who	are	close	by.	In
this	 communion	people	 are	 at	 different	 stages	 of	meditation.	To	meditate	with
these	people,	just	to	sit	silently	with	these	people,	and	you	will	be	pulled	more
and	more	towards	your	own	intrinsic	potentiality.
I	don't	want	you	to	become	somebody	else,	a	Gautam	Buddha	or	a	Jesus	Christ.	I
want	you	to	become	just	yourself,	anonymous,	nobody	special,	but	blissful.	And
you	are	already	on	 the	 right	path.	You	have	 taken	a	 few	steps;	now	 just	go	on
moving,	trusting	yourself,	and	on	each	step	your	confidence	will	become	deeper.
Never	ask	for	advice,	because	everybody	is	so	unique	and	so	different	that	there
has	 never	 been	 any	 person	 like	 you	 before,	 nor	 is	 there	 going	 to	 be	 another
person	 like	 you	 again.	 So	 really,	 no	 guidelines	 for	 you	 exist.	 But	 existence	 is
greatly	compassionate.	It	has	given	you	the	whole	program	of	your	life	in	a	seed
form.	If	you	don't	ask	anybody,	and	just	silently	listen	to	your	own	heart	and	go
on	 following	 it,	 you	will	 reach	 the	 space	where	 you	 can	 feel	 at	 home;	where
suddenly	you	realize	who	you	are,	where	suddenly	you	feel	a	synchronicity	with
the	whole	existence.
All	 that	 is	natural,	 the	 trees,	 the	 clouds,	 the	mountains,	 the	oceans,	with	 all	 of
them	you	will	find	a	certain	harmony.	You	will	not	find	harmony	with	machines,
big	and	great	computers,	factories,	automobiles,	railway	trains.	You	may	not	find
any	harmony...	 there	 is	no	question,	because	 these	are	heartless,	 lifeless	 things.
They	don't	know	how	to	sing;	they	don't	know	how	to	dance.	Have	you	seen	any
computer	 dancing?	 Have	 you	 heard	 of	 any	 computer	 falling	 in	 love	 with	 a
woman	computer?	Only	machines	will	be	left	out.
With	all	that	is	natural	and	all	that	grows,	all	that	blossoms,	all	that	moves	and
breathes,	 all	 that	 has	 a	 heartbeat,	 you	 will	 find	 a	 tremendous	 harmony.	 Your
heartbeat	will	be	merging	and	melting	into	the	universal	heartbeat	--	no	personal
counseling.
I	am	not	a	counselor.	Never	even	for	a	single	moment	in	my	life	have	I	thought
that	 somebody	 should	be	 according	 to	my	 ideas.	 I	 share	my	 ideas,	 I	 share	my
experiences	--
not	 so	 that	 you	 should	 become	 a	 certain	 ideal;	 I	 share	 with	 you	 as	 fellow
travelers.	 It	may	harmonize	with	you.	You	may	 find	 that	 it	 comes	 suddenly	 to
your	awareness	 that	 this	 is	very	natural	 for	you;	 that	you	were	not	aware	of	 it,
you	have	become	aware.	But	it	is	not	my	idea	then.	It	is	your	own	idea	of	which
you	have	not	been	aware.	I	share	my	ideas	with	you,	not	to	make	you	into	certain
prototypes,	but	to	give	you	an	insight	into	your	own	nature.
I	know	myself,	I	know	my	nature;	I	know	that	all	my	well-wishers,	my	parents,
my	 teachers,	 my	 professors,	 my	 friends,	 have	 tried	 their	 hardest	 to	 make	 me
something	else.
And	 I	 am	 immensely	 grateful	 to	 existence	 that	 I	 never	 listened	 to	 anybody;	 I
simply	went	on	following	my	own	inner	voice.	Whether	it	leads	me	into	hell	or
into	heaven	I	have	not	cared,	because	my	feeling	is	 that	 if	my	nature	 leads	me
into	hell	 then	perhaps	 that	 is	 the	place	where	 I	belong.	 In	heaven	 I	will	 be	 an
outsider,	I	will	feel	unfit.
Wherever	my	nature	leads	is	the	place	that	can	give	me	the	feeling	of	joy	and	the
feeling	 that	 life	has	 tremendous	meaning,	 that	 it	has	great	splendor;	 that	 it	 is	a
miracle	just	to	breathe	in	and	breathe	out;	that	nothing	can	be	more	perfect	if	you
reach	to	the	climax	of	your	own	nature.
Avoid	advisers	--	because	they	are	so	available	all	around	that	whether	you	ask
their	advice	or	not	they	will	give	it.	People	love	to	give	advice;	it	has	a	certain
joy.	People	would	love	to	create	their	own	carbon	copies,	and	they	will	feel	very
happy	that	they	are	the	original	and	everybody	is	just	at	the	most	a	true	copy.
You	have	your	own	originality.
It	is	better	to	remember	it	always.
Never	go	against	your	inner	feelings.
Very	few	people	in	the	world	have	come	to	the	flowering,	and	the	reason	is	that
very	few	people	have	been	rebellious	enough	against	the	so-called	advisers.	Very
few	people	have	dared	to	find	their	path	and	have	not	followed	the	superhighway
where	 everybody	 is	 going.	 But	 those	 are	 the	 few	 people	 who	 have	 helped
humanity,	 its	whole	evolution,	 its	whole	 intelligence.	Just	 take	away	 those	few
people	and	man	will	be	back	to	where	Darwin	thinks	he	started	growing	to	be	a
human	being.
The	 crowd	must	 have	 laughed	 at	 that	 time	 also.	When	 a	monkey	 came	 down
from	 the	 trees	 and	 stood	 on	 the	 ground	 on	 his	 two	 feet,	 the	 whole	 crowd	 of
monkeys	must	have	laughed,	giggled:	"Look	at	that	character!	Look	at	that	fool
who	 is	 going	 against	 tradition,	 against	 our	 forefathers,	 against	 our	 religion,
against	 our	 race."	 But	 they	 must	 have	 condemned	 that	 monkey	 who	 rebelled
against	the	whole	culture	of	the	monkeys,	their	civilization;	they	must	have	said,
"You	have	 fallen	down."	Naturally,	 he	has	 fallen	down	 from	 the	 trees.	And	as
time	passed,	he	must	have	become	weaker.	Monkeys	are	 far	stronger	 than	you
are;	they	have	to	be,	they	are	doing	continuous	exercise	jumping	from	one	tree	to
another.	You	have	to	do	something	else;	you	cannot	do	that	kind	of	jumping	now.
You	are	not	capable;	your	body	has	changed	completely.
But	 the	 first	 monkey	 who	 came	 down	 must	 have	 been	 a	 genius,	 must	 have
wanted	to	explore	life	on	his	own	rather	than	with	the	crowd	and	the	mob.	Other
monkeys	 are	 still	 hanging	 on	 the	 trees	 --	 they	 are	 traditional	 people!	 They
believe	in	their	ancestors,	they	believe	in	their	golden	past	and	they	don't	want	to
change.	To	change,	one	needs	courage
--	and	 to	be	alone,	and	 to	make	your	path.	And	make	your	path	by	walking	 it;
don't	look	for	a	ready-made	path.	It	may	have	served	somebody	else	but	it	was
not	made	for	you.
If	one	remembers	some	self-respect	and	dignity	of	his	own	being,	then	there	is
no	need	of	anybody	to	teach	you,	to	help	you.	You	are	born	as	a	complete	being,
with	all	the	potential.	You	just	have	to	work	on	your	potential	and	you	will	find
the	goal.
Leo	Tolstoy	is	reported	to	have	said	--	and	before	I	quote	him,	I	have	to	give	you
the	background....
He	had	 the	most	miserable	 life	possible.	He	was	born	 in	a	super-rich	family,	a
distant	cousin	 to	 the	royalty.	He	himself	was	a	count;	his	wife	was	a	countess.
Both	families	were	within	the	ten	topmost	families	of	Russia,	but	he	was	utterly
miserable.	He	could	not	manage	 to	 live	his	 life	with	his	 family,	with	his	wife,
and	the	reason	was	simply	that	both	were	of	 totally	different	natures.	The	wife
could	not	 even	 look	at	 him.	To	him	 the	way	he	was	behaving	was	 saintly.	He
used	 rotten	 clothes	 the	way	 beggars	 do,	 old	 secondhand	 shoes,	 and	 lived	 in	 a
way	only	a	beggar	is	supposed	to	live.	Naturally,	the	wife	could	not	tolerate	him.
She	has	lived	like	a	queen,	and	she	was	one	of	the	richest	women	in	Russia.
But	 Leo	 Tolstoy	 was	 a	 Gandhian,	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know.	 Although
Gandhi	came	later,	in	the	last	days	of	Leo	Tolstoy,	Mahatma	Gandhi	and	he	had
written	 a	 few	 letters	 to	 each	other.	And	Mahatma	Gandhi	declared	 that	he	has
been	under	three	masters;	one	is	Leo	Tolstoy,	another	is	Henry	Thoreau,	and	the
third	 is	 a	 Jaina	 monk,	 Shrimad	 Rajchandra.	 These	 three	 people	 impressed
Mahatma	Gandhi.
Mahatma	Gandhi	was	working	in	South	Africa	but	he	was	very	much	impressed
by	 the	 lifestyle	of	Leo	Tolstoy.	His	wife	was	so	angry	 that	 they	were	not	even
talking	to	each	other.	Talking	meant	always	a	fight.	They	had	different	natures.
Tolstoy	was	 trying	hard	 to	make	his	wife	 live	a	simple	 life,	 the	 life	of	poverty
because,	 "blessed	 are	 the	 poor."	 He	 was	 a	 fanatical	 follower	 of	 Jesus	 Christ.
Literally,	 he	 was	 living	 a	 poor	 life	 --	 and	 the	 wife	 was	 feeling	 absolute
repugnance.	She	wanted	him	to	live	like	a	prince,	as	he	really	was.
They	quarreled	their	whole	lives,	both	trying	to	make	the	other	be	according	to
his	 ideas,	 or	 her	 ideas.	 This	 is	 an	 extreme	 case,	 but	 this	 is	 the	 story	 of	 all
families:	nobody	is	allowed	to	be	himself	--	people	go	on	manipulating.
Maneesha	is	writing	a	book	about	her	experiences	with	me.	Just	the	other	day	I
heard	that	her	mother	from	Melbourne,	Australia,	has	written	a	very	angry	letter,
"First	you	made	me	condemned	by	the	Christian	society	here	in	Melbourne,	and
now	you	are	trying	to	write	a	book,	I	hear.	That	means	you	would	expose	it	 to
the	whole	world,	and	particularly	in	Melbourne	where	I	will	have	to	suffer."
And	 it	 is	 not	 any	 exception.	 Devageet	 has	 received	 a	 letter	 from	 his	 mother
saying,	 "Stop	writing	 the	book,"	because	he	 is	also	writing	a	book.	Now	 these
poor	mothers	 are	 in	great	 anxiety.	What	 are	 these	people	going	 to	write	 about
them?	--	that	must	be	a	deep	fear.
Secondly,	they	will	expose	that	Christianity	is	no	longer	relevant,	that	something
new,	something	basically	discontinuous	with	the	past	is	needed.	And	that's	what
sannyas	 is.	 So	 they	 must	 be	 afraid	 of	 the	 crowd,	 of	 the	 church,	 of	 the
congregation,	of	the	priest;	what	they	will	say:	"Look	what	your	son	has	done,"
or	"Look	what	your	daughter	has	done.
You	did	not	bring	them	up	rightly;	they	have	gone	astray."
Everybody	is	concerned	that	everybody	else	should	not	go	astray.	And	what	do
they	mean	 by	 astray?	You	 should	 not	 go	 in	 a	 different	 direction	 than	 they	 are
going.	And	you	know	their	whole	life	is	misery,	you	know	their	whole	mind	is
full	of	anxiety	and	agony;	you	have	never	seen	them	joyous.	You	have	never	felt
a	deep	harmoniousness	with	your	own	parents.	And	they	have	tried	in	every	way
--	 in	your	helplessness,	because	every	child	is	helpless	--	 to	force	you	onto	the
way	that	they	think	is	right.
But	their	whole	life	proves	that	they	are	not	right.	If	their	life	was	a	life	of	joy
and	 songs	 and	 celebrations,	 the	 children	 would	 have	 followed	 without	 any
punishment,	without	 any	harassment,	without	 any	 torture.	And	now	Maneesha
and	 Devageet	 are	 not	 small	 children;	 they	 have	 their	 lives,	 they	 have	 their
lifestyle	 and	 they	 want	 to	 share	 it	 with	 the	 whole	 world.	 Why	 should	 their
mothers	be	so	concerned?	What	is	the	fear?
Leo	Tolstoy	says,	"All	happy	families	resemble	one	another,	but	each	unhappy
family	 is	 unhappy	 in	 its	 own	 way."	 I	 cannot	 agree	 with	 him;	 I	 would	 rather
change	the	whole	statement	to	the	contrary:	All	unhappy	families	resemble	one
another,	but	each	happy	family	is	happy	in	its	own	way.
And	the	same	is	true	about	individuals:	All	unhappy	individuals	resemble	each
other;	 only	 happy	 individuals	 have	 a	 uniqueness.	Happiness,	 growing	 towards
blissfulness,	makes	you	unique	in	a	world	which	is	full	of	misery.
Always	 remember,	 the	whole	effort	of	psychoanalysis	and	other	 therapies,	 and
other	so-called	wise	men	is	nothing	but	to	help	you	remain	normal,	to	help	you
remain	part	of	the	crowd.	The	moment	you	try	to	become	an	individual	you	will
be	condemned,	because	five	billion	people	cannot	be	wrong	--	although	they	are
suffering	in	hell.	But	the	number	is	never	decisive	about	truth.
Ralph	 Waldo	 Emerson	 has	 made	 a	 statement:	 "To	 be	 great	 is	 to	 be
misunderstood."
I	knew	one	very	beautiful	man...
There	were	only	two	men	in	India	who	were	respected	so	highly	as	to	be	called
Mahatma;	 Mahatma	 means	 the	 great	 soul.	 One	 was	 Mahatma	 Gandhi	 and
another	 was	 Mahatma	 Bhagwandin.	 I	 was	 very	 much	 interested	 in	 Mahatma
Bhagwandin,	 just	as	he	was	very	loving	towards	me.	I	was	a	small	child	when
we	 became	 friends,	 because	 he	 had	 stayed	 with	 my	 family.	 He	 had	 come	 to
deliver	some	lectures	in	the	town,	and	we	used	to	go	for	morning	walks	together.
By	and	by,	we	forgot	completely	that	he	is	very	ancient,	old.	We	started	arguing
and	discussing.
It	 was	 just	 by	 coincidence	 that	 he	 was	 on	 his	 deathbed	 in	 Nagpur	 and	 I	 was
coming	 from	 Wardha,	 from	 a	 lecture	 tour.	 Somebody	 in	 the	 train	 told	 me,
"Mahatma	Bhagwandin	 is	very	very	 sick,	 and	 there	 seems	 to	be	no	possibility
that	he	will	survive	more	than	a	week."	So	I	stopped	at	Nagpur	and	went	to	see
him.
He	was	almost	dead;	he	had	become	absolutely	 like	a	skeleton.	He	opened	his
eyes	and	he	took	my	hand	in	his	hand,	and	he	said,	"I	am	worried	about	you,	that
you	will	be	misunderstood	your	whole	 life.	There	 is	still	 time	for	you	to	agree
with	the	masses,	whether	they	are	right	or	wrong."	And	he	was	saying	it	out	of
compassion.	He	said,
"Because	 I	 have	 suffered	my	whole	 life,	 and	 I	 have	 been	 condemned,	 I	 don't
want	you	to	be	condemned."
I	said,	"Do	you	want	me	to	be	a	hypocrite	and	respectable?	Do	you	want	me	to
be	something	other	than	my	nature	allows	me?"
He	 said,	 "I	 knew	you	would	 argue,	 and	 I	 know	 that	 you	 are	 right.	 It	 is	 just	 a
fatherly	feeling;	I	have	suffered	my	whole	life	because	I	always	was	in	favor	of
unpopular	movements,	unpopular	ideologies...	and	you	are	far	more	dangerous,
you	are	against	everybody."
I	said,	"I	have	 to	be	against	everybody.	I	have	 to	be	 just	myself.	And	anybody
who	 wants	 to	 pull	 me	 in	 some	 other	 direction	 is	 not	 my	 friend."	 I	 said,	 "I
understand	 your	 love,	 but	 you	 should	 also	 understand	 my	 situation.	 I	 would
rather	 be	 condemned	 by	 the	whole	world	 than	 go	 against	my	 nature.	Because
who	cares	about	 the	world?	They	cannot	bring	me	 the	 truth;	 they	cannot	bring
me	the	meaning;	they	cannot	bring	me	the	significance.
What	can	they	give	to	me?	--	respectability,	honor?	And	what	am	I	going	to	do
with	respectability	and	honor?	Those	are	all	bogus	words	used	to	cheat	people.	I
simply	want	to	be	nobody;	I	am	going	to	stick	to	myself.	And	this	is	my	promise
to	you	as	you	are	dying.	Remember	my	words	even	when	you	are	dead,	 that	 I
will..."
He	 said,	 "I	knew	you	wouldn't	 listen.	And	 I	 am	happy	 that	you	are	 absolutely
determined."	He	had	tears	of	joy	in	his	eyes	--	not	of	sadness,	joy.	He	said,	"If
you	 had	 agreed	 with	 me,	 I	 would	 have	 felt	 very	 sad	 that	 the	 world	 has	 lost
another	individual.	But	you	don't	agree	with	me,	even	when	you	see	I	am	dying.
In	such	a	situation	anybody	will	say,	just	to	be	polite,	`Yes,	whatever	you	say	I
will	do.'	Even	in	such	a	situation	you	are	not	ready	to	accept.	I	can	die	joyfully
because	I	have	loved	you	and	I	have	watched	how	you	are	growing	--	of	course
with	 a	 concern	 that	 you	will	 be	 condemned	 by	 religions,	 by	 governments,	 by
masses."
But	 what	 about	 all	 your	 psychotherapists,	 your	 leaders,	 your	 teachers,	 your
universities	--
what	is	their	function?	Their	function	is	to	keep	you	within	the	fold;	to	keep	you
just	 a	 sheep	 amongst	 the	 crowd	 of	 sheep	 and	 never	 allow	 you	 to	 be	 yourself.
They	are	all	angry	with	me	for	telling	this	to	young	people	who	have	not	yet	died
--	because	people	mostly	die	nearabout	thirty	years	of	age,	that	is	average.	And
then	they	are	buried	when	they	are	seventy.	That	is	almost	forty	years	that	people
live	a	posthumous	life;	they	have	died	long	before.
The	 day	 you	 decide	 that	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 a	 hypocrite	 and	 just	 do	 whatever
everybody	 else	 is	 doing	 and	 not	 be	 different,	 you	 have	 died	 --	 you	 have
committed	suicide.
My	whole	teaching	is:
Don't	commit	spiritual	suicide.
You	 don't	 need	 anybody	 else	 to	 guide	 you,	 because	 whoever	 guides	 you	 will
guide	you	wrongly.	He	cannot	know	your	nature	and	he	cannot	 look	 into	your
future.	He	has	no	eyes,	and	there	is	no	possibility.	How	can	you	see	in	a	seed	the
flowers	that	will	come	one	day	years	after?	All	that	can	be	done	is	that	the	seed
should	be	given	a	right	soil	--
not	right	advice.	Not	that	you	have	to	be	a	lotus,	or	you	have	to	be	a	rose.
Care	should	be	taken	that	the	seed	is	not	destroyed,	that	when	small	leaves	start
growing	out	of	it,	they	are	not	destroyed.	That's	the	function	of	the	master:	not	to
guide	 you	 but	 just	 to	 protect	 you	when	 you	 need	 protection,	when	 you	 are	 so
fragile,	so	new.	Just	growing,	 the	new	leaves	coming	out	of	 the	earth,	entering
into	an	unknown	world	where	strong	winds	blow,	heavy	rain	falls,	there	is	every
possibility	that	you	may	be	destroyed.
The	 function	of	 the	master	 is	not	 to	 lead	you.	The	 function	of	 the	master	 is	 to
help	you,	 to	protect	you,	but	only	 to	 the	moment	when	you	can	stand	on	your
own.	Then	slowly,	slowly	detach	himself	from	you	so	that	you	can	dance	alone
in	the	sky	under	the	stars	in	your	full	glory.
Johannes	Wolfgang	von	Goethe	has	made	a	beautiful	statement:	"All	theory,	dear
friend	is	grey.	But	the	golden	tree	of	actual	life	springs	ever	green."
Avoid	theories;	they	are	all	grey.
Let	the	dead	people	discuss	theories.
The	 living	 have	 something	more	 golden,	 something	more	 alive.	 They	 have	 to
love;	 they	 have	 to	 meditate.	 They	 have	 to	 become	 enlightened	 before	 death
knocks	on	their	doors.
Also	 remember	 that	 life	 is	 not	 the	 way	 it	 is	 lived	 in	 California!	 California	 is
almost	 a	 vast	 crazy	 place	where	 people	 are	 going	 from	one	master	 to	 another
master,	 just	 like	any	 fashion.	 Just	 as	 they	change	 their	 toothpaste,	 they	change
their	masters.	 Just	 as	 they	change	 their	 soaps,	 they	change	 their	 teachers,	 their
counselors,	their	psychoanalysts.
Oscar	Wilde	used	to	say,	"Fashion	is	a	form	of	ugliness,	so	 intolerable	 that	we
have	to	change	it	every	six	months."	There	is	no	need.
Just	the	other	day,	I	received	a	letter	from	a	sannyasin	saying	that	he	is	going	to	a
teacher;	has	he	my	blessings?...	can	he	go?	People	are	in	a	strange	situation;	they
want	to	ride	on	many	boats.	They	are	creating	their	life	in	such	a	way	that	it	will
be	a	disaster.	If	you	are	growing	well...	and	he	writes	that	his	meditation	is	going
well,	he	 is	starting	 to	see	 things	 that	have	so	far	been	only	words.	Now	at	 this
fragile	 moment,	 going	 to	 somebody	 is	 dangerous.	 But	 if	 I	 say,	 "Don't	 go,"	 I
interfere.	And	I	would	not	like	to	interfere,	even	if	you	are	going	wrong.
So	I	have	informed	him:	I	cannot	bless	because	I	don't	know	to	whom	you	are
going,	but	you	are	intelligent	enough.	If	you	feel	that	the	person	is	going	in	some
way	 to	 nourish	 your	 growth,	which	 is	 going	 perfectly	 right	 even	 according	 to
you	 --	you	are	 feeling	 that	you	are	 absolutely	on	 the	 right	path,	 that	misery	 is
disappearing,	that	suffering	is	disappearing,	that	you	are	no	more	worried;	that	a
kind	 of	 playfulness,	 weightlessness	 is	 arising	 --	 if	 you	 are	 aware	 of	 all	 this...
Remember,	that	if	anybody	can	be	of	nourishment,	it	is	perfectly	good	to	go.
But	 in	 fact,	 there	 is	no	need	 to	go	anywhere,	you	are	going	so	 right.	Go	more
deeply	into	it,	rather	than	going	sideways.
Go	straight	like	an	arrow.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	THE	RELATIONSHIP	BETWEEN	SILENCE	AND
BLISSFULNESS?	 IS	 SILENCE	 ALL	 THAT	 IS	 NEEDED?	 DOES
EVERYTHING
ELSE	FOLLOW?
Prem	Samarpan,	 there	 is	no	relationship	between	silence	and	blissfulness;	 they
are	two	names	of	the	same	thing.
Silence	 is	 blissfulness,	 not	 in	 the	 dictionaries,	 but	 in	 actual	 experience.	And	 I
don't	see	that	in	actual	experience	it	can	be	different	to	different	people.	As	you
become	 silent,	 you	 cannot	 be	 worried,	 you	 cannot	 be	 tense;	 you	 cannot	 be
miserable,	 you	 cannot	 be	 noisy,	 you	 cannot	 be	 chattering	 continuously.
Otherwise,	how	can	you	be	silent?
And	when	all	 these	stupid	activities	are	gone,	silence	simply	clears	 the	ground
for	blissfulness	to	be	discovered.	They	are	almost	the	same	phenomenon	because
they	happen	simultaneously.	As	you	become	silent,	a	certain	sweetness,	a	certain
fragrance,	a	certain	beatitude	spontaneously	arises	in	you.
But	your	silence	should	not	be	a	repressed	stillness;	you	should	not	be	silent	by
force.	If	you	are	silent	by	force,	if	you	have	repressed	your	mind	then	rather	than
doing	meditation	you	are	doing	gymnastics,	fighting	with	the	mind.	It	is	possible
you	can	force	the	mind	to	be	silent,	but	then	there	will	be	no	blissfulness.	There
will	 be	 just	 emptiness	 and	 a	 silence	 of	 the	 graveyard,	 not	 the	 silence	 of	 the
garden;	something	empty,	not	something	overflowing.
The	silence	that	comes	out	of	meditation	is	not	an	empty	experience,	 it	 is	very
positive	--
it	 is	 overflowingly	 positive.	 And	 what	 is	 there	 to	 overflow	 in	 silence	 except
blissfulness?
So,	please	check.	If	your	silence	is	not	bringing	blissfulness	then	you	are	trying
to	have	a	wrong	kind	of	silence	--	blissfulness	is	the	criterion	--	then	stop	doing
what	you	are	trying	to	do.
In	meditation,	silence	comes	on	its	own	accord.	You	simply	go	on	watching	the
mind	without	any	control,	without	any	 repression,	and	silence	comes	suddenly
just	like	a	breeze,	and	with	the	silence,	the	fragrance	of	the	flowers	--	that	is	your
blissfulness;	 it	 is	 your	own	 fragrance	which	you	were	not	 capable	of	knowing
because	there	was	so	much	noise.
The	 mind	 was	 creating	 so	 much	 fuss,	 thoughts	 were	 creating	 so	 many	 dark
clouds,	emotions	and	moods,	it	had	become	a	thick	barrier	between	you	and	your
real	self.	When	the	barrier	is	removed,	it	is	as	if	you	have	removed	a	rock	which
was	preventing	a	stream,	a	fountain.
And	 the	moment	you	 remove	 the	 rock,	 suddenly	 the	 fountain	bursts	 forth	 in	 a
great	dance	of	joy.	Your	blissfulness	is	not	something	that	comes	from	outside,	it
springs	from	within	you.	Just	the	rock	of	your	mind	--	thoughts,	miseries	--	has
to	be	removed.	It	is	not	that	you	have	to	repress	it,	because	by	repressing	it	you
will	be	repressing	the	fountain	behind	it	too.
So	the	question	can	arise,	Samarpan,	if	your	silence	is	a	wrong	kind	of	silence.
You	are	asking,	"Is	silence	all	that	is	needed?"	Yes,	absolutely	yes.	Silence	is	all
that	is	needed,	and	everything	else	follows	on	its	own	accord.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	Three	tickets	for	titsburg
27	August	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708275
ShortTitle:
INVITA13
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
101
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
LATELY,	 I	 FEEL	 THAT	 THE	 LONGING	 INSIDE	 TO	 GO	 BEYOND	 THE
MIND
AND	EXPERIENCE	SOMETHING	MORE	 IS	GROWING.	 IT	SEEMS	LIKE
SUCH	A	LONG	PROCESS	--	DOES	IT	HAVE	TO	TAKE	A	LONG	TIME?
Atit	Yama,	 the	 longing	 to	go	beyond	 the	mind	 is	 the	only	 longing	worthwhile.
All	that	man	desires	and	hopes	for	is	utterly	meaningless.	In	success,	in	failure,
in	every	possible	way	it	leads	you	nowhere.
It	is	not	only	that	you	feel	the	pain	in	failure	--	the	pain	and	the	defeat	and	the
agony.
Those	 who	 succeed	 also	 feel	 the	 same	 pain	 in	 a	 different	 way,	 perhaps	more
deeply	 than	 those	who	have	 failed,	 because	 they	have	 succeeded	 in	what	 they
wanted	 and	 yet	 their	 inner	 being	 is	 as	 dark	 and	 as	 empty	 as	 ever.	 They	 have
everything	 on	 the	 outside	 and	 nothing	 inside.	 In	 fact,	 all	 that	 they	 have
succeeded	 in	attaining,	 in	achieving,	becomes	a	contrast	 and	 shows	 their	 inner
emptiness	more	clearly	than	those	who	have	failed	to	attain.
It	is	just	as	if	you	write	with	white	chalk	on	a	white	wall:	it	doesn't	show.	You
have	 to	 write	 it	 on	 a	 blackboard	 and	 then	 it	 shows	 clearly.	 The	 emptiness,
meaninglessness	shows	more	clearly	on	the	blackboard	of	success	than	it	shows
on	 the	mind	 and	 its	 screen	 of	 failure.	 In	 failure	 there	 is	 still	 hope;	 in	 success
there	 is	no	hope.	You	have	already	arrived,	and	your	arrival	 is	 the	death	of	all
your	hoping.
It	 is	 a	 very	 strange	 experience	 that	 the	 only	 successful	 lovers	 are	 those	 who
never	 meet,	 are	 never	 allowed	 to	 meet	 by	 the	 society,	 by	 the	 parents,	 by	 the
situations.	They	 are	 the	 only	 successful	 lovers;	 the	world	 remembers	 them	 for
centuries.	 But	 once	 the	 lovers	 meet,	 then	 all	 hope	 and	 all	 romance	 from	 life
simply	evaporates.
There	is	one	longing	amongst	all	longings,	and	that	is	the	longing	to	go	beyond
mind.	But	there	is	a	contradiction	in	this	longing,	because	all	longing	belongs	to
the	mind:	how	can	the	mind	long,	desire,	to	go	beyond	itself?	So	the	longing	to
go	beyond	mind	has	not	to	be	understood	in	the	same	way	as	any	other	desire,
any	other	ambition.
In	fact	to	call	it	longing	is	not	right.	It	is	an	understanding	more	than	a	desire.	It
is	an	understanding	of	the	agony	and	the	pain	of	mind	that	makes	one	feel	it	is
better	 to	 go	 beyond.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 in	 the	 faraway	 future	 as	 a	 goal,	 but
something	that	has	to	be	allowed	to	happen	right	now.
If	you	can	see	what	mind	has	done	to	you	and	what	it	is	continuously	doing	to
you,	how	much	misery	and	how	much	suffering	it	goes	on	creating,	then	the	very
understanding	of	the	misery	of	mind	is	enough	to	go	beyond.	You	don't	ask	how
to	 go	 beyond,	 you	 simply	 cannot	 remain	 in	 the	 mind.	 You	 are	 in	 the	 mind
because	 you	 are	 not	 clear	 that	 your	misery	 is	 caused	 by	 the	mind.	You	 go	 on
throwing	the	responsibility	on	something	or	other.
Jean-Paul	 Sartre	 has	 said	 --	 and	 when	 a	 man	 like	 Sartre	 says	 something	 it	 is
significant;	his	statement	has	become	immensely	famous:	"The	other	is	hell."	In
an	 ordinary	way	 it	 appears	 to	 be	 right,	 because	 you	 always	 suffer	 because	 of
others:	your	wife	deserts	you;	your	husband	does	not	love	you;	your	children	are
turning	 into	hippies.	 It	 is	always	 the	others	who	are	creating	misery;	otherwise
you	would	be	in	paradise.
In	this	ordinary	sense	his	statement	has	meaning,	and	that's	why	it	has	become	so
famous	and	so	important.	But	deep	down	it	is	rooted	in	ignorance.
The	other	is	not	hell,	the	other	is	only	a	mirror.
The	other	only	reflects	your	mind,	your	face.
sI	have	heard	an	ancient	parable...
A	 woman	 who	 was	 very	 ugly	 was	 against	 mirrors.	 She	 was	 so	 much	 against
mirrors	that	she	did	not	allow	any	mirror	in	her	own	home.	Her	antagonism	was
so	deep	that	if	she	saw	a	mirror	in	somebody	else's	house	the	first	thing	she	did
was	to	break	the	mirror.	And	people	asked,	"What	is	the	matter,	why	have	you
broken	the	mirror?"
She	said,	"The	mirror	makes	me	ugly;	otherwise	I	am	perfectly	well.	If	there	was
no	mirror,	I	would	not	have	been	ugly."
The	same	is	the	situation	when	Jean-Paul	Sartre	says	that	the	other	is	hell.	It	is
you,	 it	 is	 your	 mind.	 And	 because	 Sartre	 goes	 on	 depending	 on	 this
understanding,	 a	 man	 of	 his	 caliber	 and	 genius	 never	 transcends	 mind,	 never
even	 thinks	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 unfortunate	 that	 such	 beautiful	 people	with	 such	 sharp
intelligence	remain	unaware	of	a	simple	fact	that	in	your	relationships	it	is	your
mind	that	is	reflected.	In	your	misery	it	is	your	mind;	in	your	jealousy	it	is	your
mind;	in	your	hate	it	is	your	mind;	in	your	lust	for	power	it	is	your	mind.
Once	you	see	the	multidimensional	capacity	of	the	mind	to	create	hell	for	you,
the	very	understanding	takes	you	out	of	it.	You	don't	have	to	long,	you	don't	have
to	desire;	you	don't	have	to	do	anything	else	other	than	understand	the	mind.
Yama,	 you	 are	 saying	 to	me,	 "I	 feel	 that	 the	 longing	 inside	 to	 go	 beyond	 the
mind	 and	 experience	 something	more	 is	 growing."	 Superficially,	 anybody	will
say	 that	 a	 spiritual	desire	has	 taken	possession	of	you,	but	 I	 am	going	 to	be	 a
little	hard	on	you.
First,	 the	 feeling	 is	 part	 of	 the	mind,	 the	 longing	 is	 part	 of	 the	mind,	 to	 have
some	experience	is	a	desire	of	 the	mind...	and	to	have	something	even	more	is
the	very	nature	of	mind.	It	can	be	reduced	to	a	simple	statement:	Mind	always
asks	for	more.	It	may	be	money	or	it	may	be	meditation,	it	doesn't	matter	--	mind
goes	on	asking	for	more.
Even	if	you	get	God	himself,	 the	mind	will	still	ask	the	same	thing:	something
more.
What	are	you	going	to	do	with	this	God?	Now	you	are	stuck	forever.	Just	think
of	yourself	getting	stuck	with	God	forever!	The	mind	may	even	suggest	to	you,
"It	 is	better	 to	 lose	 this	 fellow	rather	 than	 to	 remain	stuck	with	him;	either	get
something	more...	or	even	less	will	do,	but	a	change	is	absolutely	needed."
Mind	is	a	continuous	thirst	for	more.
It	never	finds	fulfillment.
So	you	have	to	understand	one	thing,	that	this	longing	should	not	be	part	of	the
mind.
This	desire	to	experience	something	more	should	not	be	mind	deceiving	you	in
the	name	of	religion,	in	the	name	of	spirituality.
The	only	way	to	avoid	the	mind	and	its	deceptions	--	and	they	are	very	subtle	--
the	only	way	is	to	drop	these	words:	`longing',	èxperience',	`more'.	Rather	try	to
understand	 the	mind,	what	 it	 is.	Look	 into	every	nook	and	corner	of	 the	mind,
from	where	 all	 desires	 arise,	 all	 longings	 arise,	 from	where	 all	 passions	 arise.
Just	look	into	this	source	of	all	your	life.
With	 the	 very	 understanding	 that	 the	 mind	 is	 the	 hell,	 you	 will	 find	 yourself
beyond	it;	you	will	not	have	to	go	beyond	it.
It	 is	almost	 like	when	you	find	your	house	 is	on	fire.	When	you	see	 it	on	fire,
you	don't	think	and	contemplate	what	to	do.	You	don't	consult	holy	scriptures	for
right	instructions.
You	simply	jump	out	of	the	house	--	whether	it	is	a	door	or	a	window	it	doesn't
matter;	whether	 you	 are	properly	dressed	or	 not	 it	 doesn't	matter.	You	know	a
great	 crowd	 is	waiting,	but	 if	 you	are	 in	your	bathroom	and	 suddenly	 find	 the
house	is	on	fire,	you	will	jump	out	of	the	window	naked.	You	will	forget	to	take
even	the	towel	with	you.	It	is	not	a	time	to	think	of	all	these	trivia	and	the	crowd
is	not	going	to	be	angry	with	you,	even	in	Poona.	Even	the	police	commissioner
is	 not	 going	 to	 take	 any	 action	 against	 you.	 In	 such	 a	 situation	 ordinary	 laws
don't	apply.
The	 transcendence	 from	mind	 has	 happened	 only	 to	 a	 very	 few	 people	 in	 the
world.	And	the	reason	is	that	most	people	get	deceived	by	the	mind.	The	mind
itself	starts	asking	for	transcendence,	for	going	beyond,	for	searching	the	truth,
and	you	forget	that	these	are	subtle	devices	of	the	mind	to	take	you	astray	from
one	single	thing:	that	is	a	deep	understanding	of	mind	itself.
Neither	 transcendence	 is	 needed	 nor	 going	 beyond	 is	 needed	 nor	 any	 spiritual
experience	is	needed.	What	is	needed	is	a	total	understanding	of	your	mind	and
its	structure	and	its	functioning.	And	that	very	understanding,	without	any	effort
on	your	part,	will	become	the	transcendence,	will	take	you	beyond,	will	give	you
the	experience	that	mind	was	only	dreaming	about	and	deceiving	you.
Your	question	is	certainly	arising	from	the	mind,	because	the	next	thing	it	says
is:	 "It	 seems	 like	 such	 a	 long	 process."	 Understanding	 is	 not	 a	 long	 process.
Understanding	 is	 immediate.	 You	 come	 across	 a	 snake	 on	 the	 road	 --
understanding	 does	 not	 take	 a	 long	 time.	 You	 simply	 jump	 out	 of	 the	 way
without	even	thinking	what	you	are	doing.
In	my	childhood,	in	front	of	the	house	in	which	I	used	to	live	were	only	shops.
On	my	side	of	 the	 road	 there	were	 residential	houses,	but	on	 the	opposite	side
there	were	only	shops.	So	after	nine	o'clock	at	night	the	shops	on	the	other	side
of	 the	 road	were	closed	and	 it	became	utterly	dark	 -at	 that	 time	electricity	had
not	come	to	my	village	--	and	we	used	to	frighten	people,	people	who	were	very
strong,	particularly	those	who	bragged	so	much	about	their	strength.
Just	nearby	there	was	a	gymnasium,	the	most	famous	in	the	area,	where	people
were	body-building,	and	 they	had	champions.	And	we	were	very	small	but	we
knew	that	whether	you	are	a	champion	or	a	great	wrestler,	it	does	not	matter.	We
used	 to	purchase	paper	snakes	from	the	market	and	we	would	put	 them	on	 the
other	side	of	the	road	attached	with	a	thin	black	thread	held	in	our	hands,	while
we	 sat	 in	 our	 house.	Nobody	 in	 the	 house	was	 concerned	 that	we	were	 doing
anything;	we	were	 simply	 sitting,	 just	holding	 the	 thread	and	watching	 for	 the
right	person.
Whenever	we	would	see	some	great	wrestler	coming	we	would	start	pulling	our
thread	slowly.	And	as	 the	snake	came	on	 the	road	 the	scene	was	worth	seeing.
The	wrestler	would	 forget	everything:	he	was	carrying	a	 lamp	 in	his	hand,	 the
lamp	would	fall	down	and	the	wrestler	would	run	so	fast	--	sometimes	he	would
fall	down.
And	a	crowd	would	gather,	"What	has	happened?"
And	he	would	say,	"There	was	such	a	great	snake."
The	people	said,	"This	is	strange,	every	night	the	snake	appears."
One	day	they	tried	to	look	for	the	snake,	"It	has	to	be	found	because	some	day
somebody	 is	 going	 to	 be	 killed	 by	 the	 snake."	And	 they	 found	 a	 paper	 snake,
they	 found	 the	 thread,	and	 they	 found	me	hiding	behind	my	grandfather's	bed!
Seeing	that	something	difficult	is	happening,	I	simply	put	the	thread	around	my
grandfather's	leg;	he	was	asleep.	The	crowd	woke	him	up	--	I	also	was	with	the
crowd,	asking,	"What	you	are	doing?"
He	said,	"I	was	asleep.	What	is	the	matter?	Who	has	put	this	thread	around	my
leg?"
And	the	crowd	also	saw	that	he	had	been	fast	asleep	and	that	somebody	else	was
behind	the	game.	And	this	snake	appears	every	day	after	nine	o'clock,	and	it	has
made	people	so	afraid	that	many	people	have	stopped	going	out	of	their	houses
after	nine	o'clock.
And	they	said	to	my	grandfather,	"Be	watchful	next	time;	just	remain	alert	and
watch	who	is	doing	this	trick."
My	grandfather	knew	who	must	be	doing	 it.	But	 I	was	with	 the	crowd	saying,
"You	 have	 to	 be	 a	 little	 alert."	 And	when	 everybody	was	 gone	 he	 said,	 "You
rascal!	You	are	doing	 this.	 I	have	seen	you	 in	 the	daytime	with	 that	snake	and
that	thread...	but	this	is	too	much,	that	you	put	it	around	my	leg."
I	said,	"There	was	no	other	way.	There	was	nobody	else	except	you.	I	was	hiding
behind	 you	when	 I	 saw	 that	 I	was	 going	 to	 be	 caught	 and	 I	 said,	 "It	 is	 good,
because	nobody	can	find	fault	with	a	sleeping	old	man.	So	you	have	to	forgive
me,	but	it	was	such	an	urgent	situation."
When	you	come	across	a	snake,	whether	it	is	paper	or	made	of	rubber	or	plastic
or	dead	does	not	matter.	It	does	not	take	any	time	to	freak	out;	it	is	not	a	process.
You	say	it	is	a	long	process,	"such	a	long	process	--	does	it	have	to	take	a	long
time?"
Somebody	 has	 sent	 me	 the	 Ashram's	 Law	 of	 Shortcut:	 The	 shortest	 distance
between	two	points	is	always	under	construction.
It	 is	very	difficult	 to	find	any	shortcut	here...	but	 there	 is	no	need	either	 if	you
follow	 rightly	 my	 understanding,	 my	 approach.	 Time	 is	 not	 involved	 at	 all;
neither	is	any	kind	of	distance.
This	very	moment	you	can	look	at	your	mind,	and	you	can	see	all	that	your	mind
contains.	And	that	will	be	enough	just	to	be	finished	with	it.	It	is	not	a	question
of	time;	it	is	not	a	question	of	effort.	It	is	only	a	question	of	clear	understanding.
That's	what	we	don't	do.	We	fight	with	anger,	we	fight	with	 jealousy,	we	fight
with	 everything,	 but	 fighting	 never	 helps	 because	 it	 takes	 time.	 And	 fighting
shows	 one	 thing	 absolutely:	 that	 you	 don't	 understand	 that	 by	 fighting	 you
cannot	go	beyond	mind.
Fighting	is	simply	one	part	of	mind	fighting	with	another	part.	It	is	like	making
both	my	hands	fight	with	each	other.	Do	you	think	any	hand	is	going	to	win?	It
depends	on	me;	I	can	make	the	right	hand	win	or	I	can	change	the	idea	and	make
the	 left	 hand	win.	But	 I	 know	 perfectly	well	 that	 it	 is	within	my	 power:	 both
hands	are	mine.
Any	 conflict	 in	 your	 mind,	 any	 split	 in	 your	 mind	 is	 just	 a	 game.	 You	 have
become	two	teams,	football	teams	or...	And	you	can	go	on	playing	the	game	and
you	can	enjoy	that	you	are	on	a	spiritual	pilgrimage,	that	you	are	a	great	seeker	-
-	but	you	are	just	playing	football.	And	you	are	playing	for	both	sides;	there	is	no
question	of	any	victory,	no	question	of	any	defeat.
That's	what	so-called	religious	people	have	been	doing	and	are	still	doing.	Their
rituals,	 their	prayers,	 their	austerities	certainly	 take	 time.	And	not	only	do	 they
take	 time,	 they	 never	 arrive	 anywhere,	 they	 remain	 the	 same	 persons.	Maybe
they	 have	 repressed	 their	 sexuality,	 but	 the	 sexuality	 is	 there.	 Repressed,	 it
becomes	 more	 dangerous	 because	 it	 becomes	 more	 deep-rooted	 in	 your
unconscious,	from	where	it	will	create	a	thousand	and	one	perversions.
I	have	heard	 that	 three	 rabbis	were	standing	on	 the	 railway	station.	They	were
going	somewhere,	obviously.	And	finally	the	youngest	one	said,	"Now	it	seems
the	train	is	going	to	come	and	I	should	get	the	tickets."
So	he	went	to	the	window	and	saw	a	beautiful	woman	working	on	her	register.
The	 young	 rabbi	 said	 to	 the	 woman,	 "Lady,	 how	 much	 will	 it	 cost	 for
Titsburgh?"	He	forgot	that	he	is	going	to	Pittsburgh.
The	woman	was	very	angry,	and	said,	"You	are	a	religious	man..."	The	rabbi	felt
very	ashamed.	He	came	back	and	 told	 the	other	 rabbis,	 "You	can	purchase	 the
ticket	 because	 I	 am	 feeling	 very	 nervous,	 and	 in	my	 nervousness	 I	 have	 said
something	wrong."
They	said,	"But	tell	us	what	you	have	said	wrong."
He	said,	"I	cannot	 repeat	 it.	And	don't	make	me	feel	more	guilty;	 I	am	feeling
very	bad."
So	the	second	rabbi,	more	elderly	than	the	first,	said,	"I'm	going.	What	kind	of
nervousness	is	this?	Just	purchasing	the	ticket..."	And	the	moment	he	saw	those
beautiful	 tits	he	 forgot	 everything	 --	his	old	age,	his	 austerities,	his	 rituals,	his
prayers;	all	were	forgotten.	And	of	course,	because	he	was	older	he	committed
more	mistakes	because	his	unconscious	and	his	repression	were	greater.	He	said,
"Just	 give	 me	 three	 tickets	 for	 Titsburgh	 and	 the	 change	 you	 can	 give	me	 in
nipples."
The	 woman	 was	 outraged.	 She	 said,	 "You	 rascals!	 You	 are	 pretending	 to	 be
rabbis?	The	first	one	came	and	now	you	have	come,	and	you	are	worse	than	the
first."
And	the	second	rabbi	came	back	trembling.	Then	the	oldest	rabbi	said,	"What	is
the	 matter	 with	 you	 idiots?	 Just	 purchasing	 a	 ticket...	 What	 happens	 on	 the
window?"
The	second	one	 said,	 "You	go	and	see	yourself.	Something	goes	wrong.	 I	was
not	thinking	that	I	can	do	such	a	stupid	thing,	but	it	simply	came	out."
The	old	rabbi	said,	"That	window	seems	to	be	mysterious.	But	let	me	try."	And
of	course	he	was	a	very	strict	disciplinarian,	a	perfectionist,	and	the	oldest	of	all.
He	kept	himself	very	alert	seeing	that	two	persons	have	failed	and	something	is
wrong	there.	He	saw	the	tits	but	he	understood	immediately,	Okay,	so	this	is	the
problem:	Pittsburgh	must	be	becoming	Titsburgh!
He	took	the	right	approach	and	said,	"Lady,	how	much	will	it	be	for	Pittsburgh?"
The	 lady	 said,	 "You	 are	 really	 a	 religious	 person.	 Those	 two	 fellows	 are	 so
ungentlemanly.	They	should	not	be	accepted	as	rabbis."
The	 rabbi	 said,	 "You	are	 right.	 I	will	 put	 them	 right,	 but	 I'm	going	 to	put	you
right	too!
You	are	not	dressed	properly.	And	remember,	when	you	die	Saint	Finger	on	the
gate	of	heaven	will	show	his	peter	at	you!"
The	old	man	became	angry...
But	you	cannot	get	away	from	the	repressed;	it	is	going	to	come	in	some	way	or
other.
Now	Saint	Peter	becomes	Saint	Finger,	and	the	poor	finger	becomes	peter.
Perversions	 are	 the	 only	 achievement	 of	 the	 repressed	 approach	 of	 all	 your
religions.	 It	has	created	a	very	perverted	humanity.	 I	will	not	 say	 to	you	 to	do
something	to	transcend	mind	--	I	will	say	to	you:	the	only	scientific	approach	is
to	 understand.	First	 understand	mind,	which	 is	 your	 reality.	Why	be	 in	 such	 a
hurry	of	going	beyond	 it	without	understanding	 it?	Understand	 it	 and	 the	very
understanding	 is	 transcendence.	 The	moment	 you	 have	 understood	 your	mind
you	are	beyond	it.	You	will	find	yourself	beyond	it	within	a	split	second;	it	won't
take	any	more	time.	It	is	not	a	process,	it	is	a	quantum	leap.
My	effort	is	to	continuously	emphasize	that	meditation	is	nothing	but	watching
the	mind,	understanding	 the	mind,	seeing	all	 its	subtle	and	cunning	ways.	And
once	 you	 have	 become	 perfectly	 aware	 of	 all	 its	 conscious,	 subconscious	 and
unconscious	 layers	 you	 are	 already	 out	 of	 it.	 In	 your	 very	watching	 you	 have
gone	beyond.	And	beyond	the	mind	there	is	no	desire	for	more,	because	beyond
the	mind	you	go	on	growing	more	and	more	 into	 infinity.	There	 is	no	need	 to
desire,	it	happens	spontaneously.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 is	 an	 understanding	 of	 the	mind	 and	 the	 second	 thing	 is	 to
rejoice	in	spontaneous	growth.
The	young	nun	rushed	into	the	mother	superior's	office	and	exclaimed,	"We	have
got	a	fresh	case	of	syphilis	in	the	convent!"	The	mother	superior	looked	up	and
said,	"Thank	God.	I'm	sick	to	death	of	red	wine!"
It	is	a	little	difficult.	The	nun	has	reported	to	the	superior	mother	that	they	have
received	a	fresh	case	of	syphilis.	And	the	superior	mother	said,	"Thank	God.	I'm
sick	to	death	of	red	wine.	Always	red	wine,	red	wine...	At	least	something	fresh
has	come."
A	 doctor	 received	 an	 urgent	 phone	 call.	 "Doctor,"	 said	 the	 voice.	 "My	 wife
swallowed	my	fountain	pen	two	hours	ago."
"Why	did	not	you	phone	me	sooner?"	asked	the	doctor.
"I	have	been	using	my	pencil	up	to	now,"	replied	the	husband,	"but	the	lead	has
broken	and	I	don't	have	a	sharpener."
Life	 is	 so	 ridiculous	 and	 so	 hilarious,	 that	 if	 you	 just	 try	 to	 understand	 your
mind,	you	will	have	a	great	laugh	at	yourself	and	what	you	have	been	doing.
Once	one	of	the	girlfriends	of	Pablo	Picasso	said,	"If	my	boyfriend	would	ever
meet	 a	 woman	 on	 the	 street	 who	 looked	 like	 the	 women	 in	 his	 paintings	 he
would	fall	over	in	a	dead	faint."
But	Picasso	is	not	aware	what	he	is	painting.	The	girlfriend	is	saying,	"If	some
day	on	the	road	he	meets	the	women	he	paints,	he	will	forget	all	painting;	he	will
faint	and	fall	over	on	the	road."	But	Picasso	is	not	aware	that	all	his	paintings	are
nightmarish.	And	 he	 has	 been	working	 so	 hard	 on	 those	 paintings	 all	 his	 life.
And	he	was	a	genius,	but	he	must	be	absolutely	unconscious	of	what	he	is	doing.
What	are	you	doing?	What	goes	on	 in	your	mind?	What	kinds	of	paintings	do
you	make?
What	kinds	of	dreams	come	to	you?	What	things	make	you	jealous?	What	things
make	you	infatuated?	Just	watch.	You	have	been	given,	free	of	charge	by	your
biology,	 a	whole	 television	 set	which	needs	no	 change	of	 any	batteries	 or	 any
electricity;	it	runs	continuously	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave.	And	who	knows	it
may	be	running	even	in	the	grave.
Brain	 surgeons	have	become	aware	of	 the	 fact	 that	 the	brain	 can	be	 taken	out
from	your	skull	and	put	into	a	mechanical	head.	All	that	it	needs	is	oxygen	and
blood	for	everything	to	run	through	the	mechanical	head	exactly	as	it	used	to	run
in	your	head	on	your	body.
Your	brain	continues	to	function.	It	does	not	know	that	the	man	has	changed.	It
goes	on	dreaming,	it	goes	on	thinking;	it	goes	on	making	plans,	it	goes	on	being
jealous.
Brain	surgeons	have	been	very	shocked	that	the	brain	does	not	need	you	at	all;	it
goes	 on	 by	 itself.	 And	 it	 is	 very	 frightening	 that	 a	 brain	without	 a	 body,	 just
mechanically	supported	for	its	nourishment	is	perfectly	well	and	it	goes	on	doing
the	same	old	exercises.
You	 are	 being	 used	 by	 your	 brain	 almost	 like	 a	 mechanical	 support,	 nothing
much	more.
This	brain	certainly	has	to	be	transcended,	but	to	transcend	it	you	are	not	to	fall
into	the	trap	of	taking	any	support	from	the	same	brain.	If	you	take	any	support
from	it,	you	will	never	be	able	 to	get	out	of	 its	 trap.	The	only	way	not	 to	 take
support	 is	 just	 to	 watch,	 wait	 and	 see	 all	 its	 functions.	 And	 you	 will	 feel
immensely	relieved	immediately,	because	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	you,	it	is	just
a	biocomputer.
And	 this	 understanding	 that	 "I	 am	 separate"	 is	 the	 transcendence,	 is	what	 you
mean	by	going	beyond.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	MY	FIRST	FEW	MONTHS	HERE,	WHILE	MEDITATING,	A	FEW	TIMES
I	CAME	ACROSS	A	VERY	INTENSE	SPACE	WHERE	IT	WAS	AS	IF	TIME
HAD
STOPPED.	BUT	NOW	 IT	DOES	NOT	HAPPEN,	AND	 I	CAN	FEEL	THAT
THERE	IS
SOME	EXPECTANCE	IN	ME,	THOUGH	I	REMEMBER	THAT	THE	SPACE
ONLY
CAME	WHEN	I	WAS	NOT	LOOKING	FOR	IT.	EVEN	THOUGH	I	FEEL	SO
GOOD
WHILE	MEDITATING	 --	ESPECIALLY	 IN	YOUR	PRESENCE	 --	SO	FULL
AND
RICH	 INSIDE,	 I	WONDER	WHERE	THOSE	SPACES	WENT	AND	HOW	I
CAN	GET
BACK	TO	THE	INNOCENCE	OF	NON-EXPECTANCE.
Shivam	 Suvarna,	 your	 question	 almost	 answers	 itself.	 But	 perhaps	 you	 have
managed	 the	 answer	 only	 intellectually.	Your	 question	 seems	 to	 be	 real,	 but	 it
also	implies	the	answer.
The	answer	seems	to	be	your	intellectual	understanding	of	the	situation.
I	will	read	the	question	to	make	it	clear	to	you,	because	that	clarity	will	change
everything.
"In	my	first	few	months	here,	while	meditating,	a	few	times	I	came	across	a	very
intense	space	where	it	was	as	if	time	had	stopped.	But	now	it	does	not	happen,
and	I	can	feel	that	there	is	some	expectance	in	me..."
That	expectance	is	preventing	it.	And	it	seems	that	intellectually	you	understand
it.	 You	 say,	 "...	 though	 I	 remember	 that	 the	 space	 only	 came	when	 I	was	 not
looking	for	it.	Even	though	I	feel	so	good	while	meditating	--	especially	in	your
presence	--	so	full	and	rich	inside,	I	wonder	where	those	spaces	went	and	how	I
can	get	back	to	the	innocence	of	non-expectance."
Any	 method	 --	 that's	 what	 you	 are	 asking	 for:	 How	 can	 I	 get	 back	 into	 that
innocence	 of	 non-expectance?	 Any	 method,	 whatever	 its	 nature,	 will	 make
things	more	complicated,	because	you	will	be	doing	it	to	get	into	a	space	which
comes	 only	 when	 you	 are	 not	 expecting	 it.	 Intellectually	 you	 seem	 to	 have
understood	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 was	 only	when	 you	were	 not	 expecting	 it,	 it	 came
suddenly.	And	now	 there	 is	 a	 subtle	 expectance	 and	you	 are	wanting	 to	 know
how	to	get	into	that	state	again.
You	simply	 forget	all	about	 those	spaces.	You	are	 feeling	good	 in	meditations,
why	bother	about	a	space	where	it	seemed	as	if	time	has	stopped?	What	are	you
going	to	get	out	of	it?	And	moreover,	it	was	only	"as	if."	Even	if	time	had	really
stopped,	 what	 is	 the	 gain?	 Perhaps	 the	 battery	 of	 your	 quartz	 watch	 was
finished...	time	stopped.	There	is	no	other	time	except	in	your	watches.
A	man	 charged	 into	 a	 jewelry	 shop,	 slammed	 his	 fist	 angrily	 on	 the	 counter,
removed	 a	 wrist	 watch	 from	 his	 pocket	 and	 shook	 it	 under	 the	 nose	 of	 the
saleswoman.	"Damn	it!
You	said	this	watch	would	last	me	a	lifetime,"	he	roared.
"Yeah,"	said	the	woman,	"but	you	looked	pretty	sick	the	day	you	got	it."
Don't	 be	 bothered	 about	 time	 stopping,	 great	 spaces	 happening.	 Feel	 good
because	 you	 are	 feeling	 rich	 and	 full	 inside.	 Enjoy	 this	 fullness;	 enjoy	 this
richness.	Become	 so	much	 involved	 in	 it	 that	perhaps	you	will	 find	 again	 that
time	 stops,	 that	 again	 that	 space	opens	up,	 far	bigger,	 far	more	deep,	 far	more
intense,	because	it	will	be	the	second	time.
But	you	have	to	be	involved	in	some	rich	experience	so	deeply	that	there	is	no
need	for	it.
These	things	happen	only	when	you	don't	need	them.	They	follow	the	same	law
as	banking:	If	you	need	money,	no	bank	is	going	to	give	you	any;	 if	you	don't
need	money,	every	bank	is	going	to	persuade	you	to	have	some.	They	are	willing
to	give	you	as	much	money	as	you	want	for	as	long	time	as	you	want.	Bankers
seem	to	understand	this	wonderful	working	of	existence.	When	someone	needs
something	 don't	 give,	 because	 it	 will	 be	 lost;	 it	 will	 never	 be	 returned.	When
somebody	has	so	much	money	that	he	does	not	want	anything	--	he	can	open	a
bank	himself	--	then	all	the	banks	are	ready	to	lend	on	lower	interest	rates.
Perhaps	existence	follows	the	same	law.	The	more	you	run	after	something	the
less	is	the	possibility	of	your	getting	it.	The	moment	you	stop,	and	you	drop	the
very	idea,	suddenly	you	have	got	it.
And	 you	 can	 forget	 those	 spaces	 only	 if	 you	 can	 create	 another	 dimension	 of
richness,	 affluence,	 blissfulness	 --	 and	 that	 is	 opening	 up	 through	 your
meditation	so	there	is	no	need	to	worry.	And	worrying,	you	will	not	be	a	winner.
Those	spaces	came	by	themselves.	Let	them	come	when	they	come.	When	they
come	enjoy	them,	when	they	don't	come	don't	even	look	back,	don't	even	think
about	them.
This	 is	 something	 very	 essential	 to	 learn	 on	 the	 path;	 otherwise,	 you	will	 get
stuck	 on	 every	 point.	 Whenever	 something	 beautiful	 happens,	 it	 will	 always
happen	without	your	knowing.
Unexpectedly	the	guest	comes.
But	 you	 feel	 so	 good	 that	 you	 start	 expecting.	Now	you	 are	 going	 against	 the
law.	The	guest	has	come	only	because	you	were	not	expecting,	and	now	you	are
expecting	 --	 not	 only	 expecting,	 but	 deep	 down	 demanding.	 And	 existence	 is
very	shy,	it	won't	come.	Get	involved	in	something	deeper	and	richer	in	another
dimension.	And	that	 is	happening	for	you,	so	 there	 is	no	problem.	You	are	not
empty,	you	are	feeling	full	and	rich.	Feel	more	rich	and	more	full.	Go	deeper	into
meditation	and	you	will	forget	those	spaces,	because	your	meditation	will	bring
greater	spaces,	greater	richness,	greater	experiences.	And	then	suddenly,	one	day
you	will	 find	not	 the	same	spaces	 that	you	had	found,	better	ones;	 it	 is	always
getting	better.	On	the	path	of	meditation	it	is	always	getting	better.
So	never	ask	for	anything	to	be	repeated,	because	that	way	you	will	be	a	loser.
Something	better	was	going	to	happen	and	you	were	asking	for	something	less.
That	past	 space	had	happened	when	you	were	not	 so	deep	 in	meditation.	Now
you	 are	 deep	 in	 meditation,	 you	 have	 earned	 more.	 You	 have	 become	 more
worthy.	 At	 that	 time	 you	 were	 not	 feeling	 so	 rich	 and	 so	 full.	 Now	 you	 are
feeling	so	rich	and	so	full,	you	need	not	worry.	Something	greater	will	happen.
But	 if	 you	 go	 on	 asking	 and	 hoping	 for	 those	 same	 spaces,	 you	 will	 be
preventing	 those	 spaces	 because	 existence	 never	 repeats.	 And	 you	 will	 be
preventing	 better	 spaces	 because	 you	 are	 not	 looking	 for	 the	 future;	 you	 are
looking	backwards	at	the	past.
There	is	no	technique	to	forget.	You	are	asking	for	a	technique,	how	to	become
again	 innocent	 and	 be	 non-expecting.	 By	 any	 technique	 whatsoever	 it	 is	 not
possible.	It	is	possible	to	get	better	spaces.	Why	should	you	hanker	for	those	old,
rotten,	already	experienced?	 --	They	are	secondhand.	Why	not	wait	 for	 fresher
and	 deeper	 and	more	 nourishing,	more	 ecstatic	 experiences	which	 are	waiting
ahead	on	the	path?	But,	if	you	go	on	looking	backwards,	you	are	stuck.
Don't	get	stuck	with	anything.
Howsoever	beautiful	it	is,	there	is	a	possibility	of	something	better	ahead.
I	have	always	told	a	Sufi	story...
An	old	man,	a	woodcutter,	was	so	old,	but	still	he	had	to	go	to	chop	wood	in	the
forest	and	bring	it	back.	He	was	just	able	to	afford	food	one	time	a	day,	and	he
was	 in	 his	 old	 age.	And	when	 the	woodcutter	 used	 to	 go	 in	 the	 forest,	 a	 Sufi
mystic	was	 always	 sitting	 on	 the	way,	 under	 a	 tree,	 the	 same	 tree.	He	 always
used	to	touch	the	feet	of	the	mystic,	and	the	mystic	used	to	laugh.
Finally,	one	day	he	could	not	contain	his	curiosity.	He	said,	 "I	 touch	your	 feet
twice	every	day,	going	into	the	forest	and	coming	back	from	the	forest.	And	it	is
strange,	you	always	laugh	--	Why?	I	am	a	poor	man,	uneducated,	but	this	much	I
can	understand:	I	am	paying	respect	to	you,	and	you	are	laughing.	This	does	not
seem	to	be	appropriate."
The	old	man	said,	"I'm	laughing	because	you	are	an	idiot.	Where	you	have	been
chopping	wood,	 just	 a	 little	 ahead	 there	 is	 a	 copper	mine.	And	with	 the	 same
effort	that	you	make	in	one	day	to	get	enough	wood	for	your	one	meal,	with	the
same	effort	you	can	get	enough	copper	for	two	meals	every	day	for	seven	days.
Six	days	you	can	rest;	one	day	you	can	work.	I	have	been	laughing	because	it	is
strange	that	a	man	has	been	coming	this	way	his	whole	life	and	he	never	goes	a
little	more.	He	always	gets	 stuck	with	 the	 same	 trees.	And	 just	 ahead	of	 those
trees..."
The	 next	 day	 the	man	went	 a	 little	 ahead	 and	 he	was	 surprised.	He	was	 very
happy.	He	came	and	he	touched	the	feet	of	the	master	and	said,	"I	am	sorry	that	I
could	not	understand	your	laughter."
Then	he	used	to	come	only	once	a	week.	But	the	master	started	laughing	again.
So	he	said,	"What	is	the	matter,	why	have	you	started	laughing	again?"
The	master	said,	"You	seem	to	be	such	a	sticking	guy.	Just	ahead	of	 that	mine
there	is	a	silver	mine.	Can't	you	imagine	anything?	Can't	you	see	that	there	is	so
much	ahead?"
He	said,	"I	never	 thought	about	 it.	But	you	are	strange	also.	You	know	--	why
don't	you	tell	me?"
And	 the	master	 said,	 "There	are	a	 few	 things	one	 should	 find	 for	oneself;	 that
helps	your	intelligence	to	grow.	I	had	to	say	because	my	time	is	finished.	And	I
cannot	just	wait	anymore	for	you	to	discover.	So	just	today	go	a	little	further	and
find	a	silver	mine."
He	found	a	silver	mine.	Now	it	was	needed	only	to	come	once	a	month.	But	he
got	stuck	there.	And	the	master	said,	"I	have	never	seen	such	a	fellow.	Don't	you
know	that	there	exists	gold	too?"
He	said,	"Where?"
"Just	a	little	ahead.	And	it	seems	that	unless	you	are	forced,	you	will	not	move,"
said	the	master.
That	day	he	went	a	little	ahead	and	found	a	big	gold	mine.	He	said,	"My	God,
my	whole	life	I	could	have	carried	so	much	gold	I	would	have	become	almost	a
king!	 And	 that	 mystic	 is	 such	 a	 strange	 fellow.	 He	 knows	 everything	 and	 he
never	said	anything	to	me."
But	 that	day	he	 thought	 "Now	 I	have	 to	make	one	effort	on	my	own.	Perhaps
there	is	something	more	ahead."
And	 there	 was.	 There	 was	 a	 diamond	 mine.	 He	 said,	 "My	 God!	 So	 many
diamonds.	And	that	mystic	knows	everything?	And	he	thinks	I	am	an	idiot!	Now
I	 think	 he	 is	 an	 idiot.	 He	 knows,	 and	 he	 goes	 on	 sitting	 under	 the	 tree	 doing
nothing,	just	waiting	for	people	to	give	something	to	him.	And	his	disciples	beg
and	bring	food	to	him,	and	he	knows	all	this.
And	he	thinks	that	I'm	the	idiot.	Today	I	am	going	to	tell	him,	`You	are	an	idiot.
What	are	you	doing	sitting	here,	knowing	all	that	perfectly	well.	I	am	an	ignorant
man	and	I	don't	know	what	is	ahead,	but	you	know.'"
So	he	came	back.	With	great	courage	he	showed	 the	diamonds	and	 the	mystic
laughed.
He	said,	"That's	good.	But	don't	get	stuck."
He	said,	"But	what	can	be	ahead	of	it?"
The	mystic	 said,	 "Ahead	of	 it?	 I	 am;	 otherwise	why	 am	 I	 sitting	here?	 I	 have
something	more	 valuable	 than	 diamonds.	 So	when	 you	 are	 finished	with	 your
diamonds	you	come	and	sit	under	my	feet.	It	is	my	last	days	and	I	would	like	to
share	 with	 you	 something	more	 than	 diamonds.	 But	 you	 had	 to	 pass	 through
these	 stages;	 otherwise	 you	 would	 not	 have	 understood	 that	 this	 poor	 fellow,
who	depends	on	people's	food,	who	is	just	a	beggar,	can	have	something	inside
him	which	is	far	more	valuable	than	the	whole	diamond	mine."
The	old	woodcutter	dropped	the	diamonds	there	and	he	said,	"I	am	finished.	If
that	is	the	case	then	I	am	not	going	to	leave	you."
The	old	man	said,	"You	can	sit	also.	There	is	enough	space	under	the	tree.	And	it
is	beautiful	and	very	shadowy.	And	my	people	bring	food	enough,	so	it	will	be
enough	for	both."
The	woodcutter	said...	he	was	an	ignorant	man,	not	a	thinker,	not	a	philosopher,
not	religious;	he	has	never	thought	much,	he	has	never	dreamt;	if	he	was	brought
to	 a	 psychoanalyst,	 the	 psychoanalyst	 will	 refuse	 him	 because	 he	 will	 not	 be
cooperating.	If	he	will	ask	him,	"Tell	me	about	your	dreams,"	he	will	say,	"I	don't
have	any	dreams."
Then	 the	 psychoanalyst	 cannot	 do	 anything.	 Without	 dreams	 he	 cannot	 help
anybody.
He	 sat	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 saint.	And	 as	 the	 night	 grew	deeper,	 the	 silence	 and
everything	became	quiet	and	calm.	He	also	became	quiet	and	calm	and	suddenly,
he	 started	 feeling	 the	 vibration	 of	 the	 mysterious	 man.	 He	 could	 not	 see
anything,	but	his	heart	was	dancing.	He	could	not	 say	anything,	but	his	whole
being	was	for	the	first	time	in	a	state	of	joy.	He	has	never	known	anything	except
misery,	poverty	and	suffering.
Early	in	the	morning,	before	he	could	even	say	thanks	to	the	saint,	the	saint	died.
But	 he	 had	 left	 behind	him	 another	 saint.	When	 the	 followers	 of	 the	 old	 saint
came	they	could	not	believe.	The	old	man	is	dead	but	a	new	fellow	is	sitting	by
his	side	with	the	same	vibe.
Those	 followers	have	 tasted	 the	 joy	 and	 the	peace	of	 the	old	man.	That's	why
they	used	to	come	from	a	faraway	town	to	bring	his	food.	Just	to	be	with	him	for
a	few	minutes	was	enough.	It	kept	them	running	twenty-four	hours,	celebrating
life.	They	could	not	believe	that	the	old	man	has	played	such	a	game	with	them.
He	 is	 gone	 but	 he	 has	 left	 a	 representative.	 They	 offered	 his	 food	 to	 the
woodcutter	 and	 the	 woodcutter	 became	 the	 saint.	 Nothing	 was	 said,	 nobody
declared	 that	 he	 was	 the	 successor,	 but	 he	 proved	 to	 be	 a	 far	 greater	 saint,
because	he	was	an	ignorant	man,	and	suddenly	silence	turned	all	his	 ignorance
into	innocence.
All	that	you	need	is	to	forget	always	what	happens,	and	remember	always	there
is	 much	 more.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 long	 for	 it	 because	 it	 always	 happens
whenever	you	are	right.
Whenever	you	are	 in	a	 right	 tuning	you	hear	 the	music	 from	 the	beyond.	And
whenever	you	are	in	a	right	space	the	whole	existence	celebrates	with	you.
There	is	no	technique	to	forget,	just	a	simple	understanding.	If	a	woodcutter	can
go	ahead,	why	can't	you	go	a	little	deeper	into	your	meditation?	That	memory	of
a	 beautiful	 experience	 is	 holding	you	back.	Forget	 all	 about	 it.	 It	 is	 not	worth
remembering	because	much	more	is	there.
Keep	yourself	available	for	much	more.	On	this	path	there	is	no	poverty,	there	is
always	more	and	more	richness.
On	this	path	you	don't	become	finally	a	beggar,	you	become	an	emperor.
The	plane	hit	a	storm	and	was	going	up	and	down	and	sideways.	A	little	old	lady
was	 getting	 very	 nervous	 and	 suddenly	 she	 shouted,	 "Everybody	 on	 the	 plane
pray!"
A	Scotsman	sitting	next	to	her	said,	"I	don't	know	how	to	pray."
"Well,	do	something	religious!"	the	old	lady	cried.
So	he	got	up,	took	off	his	hat	and	started	making	a	collection.
That's	the	only	thing	he	knows	that	is	religion.
Don't	 just	wait	 for	 those	spaces,	 there	are	greater	religious	spaces	ahead.	Don't
get	stuck	with	prayers.
"Before	sending	you	to	the	chair,"	said	the	judge	to	Moishe	Finkelstein,	"is	there
a	last	request	you	would	like	to	make?"
"Yes,	judge,"	said	Moishe,	"I	would	like	to	have	a	look	at	my	wife	first,	then	I
will	feel	more	like	dying."
People	 have	 strange	 fixations.	 Don't	 bother	 about	 what	 happened	 in	 the	 past.
What	 is	 happening	 right	 now	 is	 so	 beautiful,	 is	 it	 not?	 Then	 why	 create	 any
disturbance.	Just	go	deeper	into	it.
That	which	is	available	will	open	new	skies	and	many,	many	spaces.	And	then
you	 will	 wonder	 how	 foolish	 it	 was	 to	 expect	 your	 kindergarten	 experiences.
Those	 were	 just	 little	 glimpses	 of	 the	 unknown.	 The	 whole	 unknown	 is	 still
waiting	for	you	to	experience	it.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	Silence	is	the	right	soil
28	August	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708280
ShortTitle:
INVITA14
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
100
mins
Question	1
MY	BELOVED	MASTER,
I	 REALIZED	 THAT	 IT	 IS	 EASIER	 TO	 BECOME	 SILENT	 WHILE
LISTENING	TO
YOU	THAN	IN	ANY	OTHER	MEDITATION.	WHEN	YOU	STOP	TALKING
EVERYTHING	SEEMS	TO	STOP	FOR	A	MOMENT	AND	I	GET	A	GLIMPSE
OF
WHAT	 MEDITATION	 CAN	 BE!	 THESE	 ARE	 THE	 MOST	 PRECIOUS
MOMENTS
FOR	 ME!	 OSHO,	 WHY	 IS	 IT	 EASIER	 TO	 BECOME	 SILENT	 IN	 YOUR
PRESENCE?
Dhyan	Sandesh,	the	question	you	have	raised	is	significant	not	only	to	you,	but
to	many	more	who	are	not	fortunate	enough	to	be	in	my	presence,	but	who	will
be	reading	these	words	or	listening	or	seeing	this	on	the	video	screen	all	over	the
world.
The	question	arises	almost	for	everyone,	that	the	way	I	talk	is	a	little	strange.	No
speaker	 in	 the	 world	 talks	 like	 me	 --	 technically	 it	 is	 wrong;	 it	 takes	 almost
double	 the	 time!	But	 those	 speakers	have	a	different	purpose	 --	my	purpose	 is
absolutely	different	from	theirs.
They	speak	because	they	are	prepared	for	it;	they	are	simply	repeating	something
that	 they	 have	 rehearsed.	 Secondly,	 they	 are	 speaking	 to	 impose	 a	 certain
ideology,	a	certain	idea	on	you.	Thirdly,	to	them	speaking	is	an	art	--	they	go	on
refining	it.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	am	not	what	they	call	a	speaker	or	an	orator.	It	is	not
an	art	to	me	or	a	technique;	technically	I	go	on	becoming	worse	every	day!	But
our	 purposes	 are	 totally	 different.	 I	 don't	 want	 to	 impress	 you	 in	 order	 to
manipulate	 you.	 I	 don't	 speak	 for	 any	goal	 to	 be	 achieved	 through	 convincing
you.	 I	 don't	 speak	 to	 convert	 you	 into	 a	 Christian,	 into	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a
Mohammedan,	into	a	theist	or	an	atheist	--	these	are	not	my	concerns.
My	 speaking	 is	 really	 one	 of	 my	 devices	 for	 meditation.	 Speaking	 has	 never
been	used	 this	way:	 I	 speak	not	 to	give	you	a	message,	but	 to	 stop	your	mind
functioning.
I	 speak	 nothing	 prepared	 --	 I	 don't	 know	myself	what	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 next
word;	 hence	 I	 never	 commit	 any	 mistake.	 One	 commits	 a	 mistake	 if	 one	 is
prepared.	 I	 never	 forget	 anything,	 because	 one	 forgets	 if	 one	 has	 been
remembering	it.	So	I	speak	with	a	freedom	that	perhaps	nobody	has	ever	spoken
with.
I	am	not	concerned	whether	I	am	consistent,	because	that	is	not	the	purpose.	A
man	who	wants	to	convince	you	and	manipulate	you	through	his	speaking	has	to
be	consistent,	has	to	be	logical,	has	to	be	rational,	to	overpower	your	reason.	He
wants	to	dominate	through	words.
One	 of	 the	 very	 famous	 books	 of	 Dale	 Carnegie	 is	 about	 speaking	 and
influencing	 people	 as	 an	 art	 --	 it	 has	 been	 sold	 second	 only	 to	 THE	 HOLY
BIBLE	--	but	I	will	fail	his	examinations.	He	used	to	run	a	course	in	America	to
train	 missionaries,	 to	 train	 professors,	 and	 to	 train	 orators.	 I	 will	 fail	 on	 all
counts.	First,	I	have	no	motivation	to	convert	you;	I	have	no	desire	anywhere	to
impress	 you.	 And	 I	 don't	 remember	 what	 I	 have	 said	 yesterday,	 so	 I	 cannot
bother	about	being	consistent	 --	 that	 is	 too	much	worry.	 I	can	easily	contradict
myself,	because	I	am	not	trying	to	have	a	communication	with	your	intellectual,
rational	mind.
My	 purpose	 is	 so	 unique	 --	 I	 am	 using	 words	 just	 to	 create	 silent	 gaps.	 The
words	 are	 not	 important	 so	 I	 can	 say	 anything	 contradictory,	 anything	 absurd,
anything	 unrelated,	 because	my	 purpose	 is	 just	 to	 create	 gaps.	 The	words	 are
secondary;	the	silences	between	those	words	are	primary.	This	is	simply	a	device
to	give	you	a	glimpse	of	meditation.
And	 once	 you	 know	 that	 it	 is	 possible	 for	 you,	 you	 have	 traveled	 far	 in	 the
direction	of	your	own	being.
Most	 of	 the	 people	 in	 the	world	 don't	 think	 that	 it	 is	 possible	 for	mind	 to	 be
silent.
Because	they	don't	think	it	is	possible,	they	don't	try.	How	to	give	people	a	taste
of	meditation	was	my	basic	reason	to	speak,	so	I	can	go	on	speaking	eternally	--
it	 does	 not	matter	what	 I	 am	 saying.	All	 that	matters	 is	 that	 I	 give	 you	 a	 few
chances	to	be	silent,	which	you	find	difficult	on	your	own	in	the	beginning.
I	cannot	force	you	to	be	silent,	but	I	can	create	a	device	in	which	spontaneously
you	are	bound	to	be	silent.	I	am	speaking,	and	in	the	middle	of	a	sentence,	when
you	were	 expecting	 another	 word	 to	 follow,	 nothing	 follows	 but	 a	 silent	 gap.
And	your	mind	was	looking	to	listen,	and	waiting	for	something	to	follow,	and
does	not	want	to	miss	it	--
naturally	it	becomes	silent.	What	can	the	poor	mind	do?	If	it	was	well	known	at
what	points	I	will	be	silent,	if	it	was	declared	to	you	that	on	such	and	such	points
I	will	be	silent,	then	you	could	manage	to	think	--	you	would	not	be	silent.	Then
you	know:	"This	 is	 the	point	where	he	 is	going	 to	be	silent,	now	I	can	have	a
little	chit-chat	with	myself."
But	because	it	comes	absolutely	suddenly....	I	don't	know	myself	why	at	certain
points	I	stop.
Anything	 like	 this,	 in	 any	orator	 in	 the	world,	will	 be	 condemned,	 because	 an
orator	stopping	again	and	again	means	he	is	not	well	prepared,	he	has	not	done
the	 homework.	 It	 means	 that	 his	 memory	 is	 not	 reliable,	 that	 he	 cannot	 find,
sometimes,	what	word	to	use.
But	because	it	 is	not	oratory,	I	am	not	concerned	about	the	people	who	will	be
condemning	me	--	I	am	concerned	with	you.
And	it	is	not	only	here,	but	far	away...	anywhere	in	the	world	where	people	will
be	listening	to	the	video	or	to	the	audio,	they	will	come	to	the	same	silence.	My
success	is	not	to	convince	you,	my	success	is	to	give	you	a	real	taste	so	that	you
can	become	confident	that	meditation	is	not	a	fiction,	that	the	state	of	no-mind	is
not	 just	a	philosophical	 idea,	 that	 it	 is	a	 reality;	 that	you	are	capable	of	 it,	and
that	it	does	not	need	any	special	qualifications.
You	may	be	a	sinner,	you	may	be	a	saint	--	it	does	not	matter.	If	the	sinner	can
become	silent,	he	will	attain	to	the	same	consciousness	as	the	saint.
Existence	is	not	so	miserly	as	religions	have	been	teaching	you.	Existence	is	not
like	the	KGB	or	FBI	--	watching	everybody	to	see	what	you	are	doing,	whether
you	are	going	 to	 the	movie	with	your	own	wife	or	with	somebody	else's	wife.
Existence	is	not	interested	at	all.	The	problem	of	whether	the	wife	is	yours	or	not
is	 just	 a	 man-created	 problem.	 In	 existence,	 there	 is	 nothing	 like	 marriage.
Whether	 you	 are	 stealing	money,	 taking	 it	 out	 from	 somebody's	 safe	 or	 from
your	own,	existence	does	not	and	cannot	make	the	difference.	You	are	taking	out
the	money	from	the	safe	--	that	is	a	fact	--	but	to	whom	the	safe	belongs,	that	is
absolutely	of	no	concern	to	existence.
Once	George	Bernard	Shaw	was	asked,	"Can	a	man	 live	his	 life	 so	 lazily,	 just
keeping	 his	 hands	 in	 his	 pockets	 and	 enjoying?"	 George	 Bernard	 Shaw	 said,
"Yes,	just	the	pocket	should	be	somebody	else's!"
Keeping	your	hands	 in	your	own	pockets,	you	cannot	 survive!	And	 the	 fact	 is
that	almost	everybody	has	his	hand	in	somebody	else's	pocket.	And	that	fellow
may	have	his	hand	in	somebody	else's	pocket,	so	he	cannot	stop	you	because	by
stopping	you,	he	will	be	stopped.	So	he	has	to	accept	it,	and	if	he	has	his	hands
in	a	richer	pocket,	he	does	not	care	about	you.	Go	on	doing	whatsoever	you	are
doing,	just	don't	create	a	disturbance.
Existence	has	no	morality	as	such	--	it	is	amoral.	For	existence	there	is	nothing
wrong	 and	 nothing	 right.	 Only	 one	 thing	 is	 right	 --	 your	 being	 alert	 and
conscious.	Then	you	are	blissful.
It	is	very	strange	that	no	religion	has	defined	`right'	as	being	blissful,	or	defined
`virtue'
as	 being	 blissful.	 And	 they	 were	 in	 a	 difficulty	 to	 define	 it	 exactly	 as	 I	 am
defining	it	because	their	concern	was	that	in	the	world,	the	people	they	think	are
sinners	 look	 happier	 than	 the	 people	 they	 think	 are	 saints	 --	 the	 saints	 look
absolutely	 unhappy.	And	 if	 they	 say	 that	 blissfulness	 is	 the	 criterion,	 whether
you	 are	 right	 in	 tune	 with	 existence	 or	 not,	 this	 will	 destroy	 their	 whole
superstructure.	 The	 saints	will	 look	 like	 sinners	 and	 the	 sinners	will	 look	 like
saints.
But	 this	 is	my	 criterion	 because	 I	 don't	 care	 about	 the	 scriptures,	 I	 don't	 care
about	the	prophets,	I	don't	care	about	the	past	--	that	was	their	business	and	their
problem.	 I	 have	my	 own	 eyes	 to	 see,	why	 should	 I	 depend	 on	 anybody	 else's
eyes?	And	I	have	my	own	consciousness	to	be	aware,	why	should	I	be	dependent
on	Gautam	Buddha,	or	Bodhidharma,	or	Jesus	Christ?	They	were	not	dependent
on	me.	Obviously,	 there	 is	no	spoken	or	unspoken	agreement.	They	 lived	 their
lives	 according	 to	 their	 own	 understanding	 and	 insight;	 I	 am	 to	 live	 my	 life
according	to	my	understanding	and	my	insight.
My	 effort	 here	 to	 speak	 to	 you	 is	 to	 give	 you	 a	 chance	 to	 see	 that	 you	 are	 as
capable	of	becoming	a	no-mind	as	any	Gautam	Buddha	--	that	it	is	not	a	special
quality	 given	 to	 a	 few	 people,	 that	 it	 is	 not	 a	 talent.	 Everybody	 cannot	 be	 a
painter,	and	everybody	cannot	be	a	poet	--	 those	are	 talents.	Everybody	cannot
be	 a	 genius	 --	 those	 are	 given	 qualities	 from	 birth.	 But	 everybody	 can	 be
enlightened	 --	 that	 is	 the	 only	 thing	 about	 which	 communism	 is	 right.	 And
strangely	enough,	that	is	the	only	thing	communism	denies.
Enlightenment	is	the	only	thing,	the	only	experience	where	everybody	is	equal	--
equally	capable.	And	it	does	not	depend	on	your	acts,	it	does	not	depend	on	your
prayers,	 it	 does	 not	 depend	 on	whether	 you	 believe	 in	God	 or	 not.	 It	 depends
only	on	one	thing	and	that	 is	a	 little	 taste,	and	suddenly	you	become	confident
that	you	are	capable	of	it.	My	speaking	is	just	to	give	you	confidence.	So	I	can
tell	a	story,	I	can	tell	a	joke	--	absolutely	unrelated!
Every	intellectual	will	condemn	me,	saying,	"What	kind	of	speech	is	this?"	But
he	 has	 not	 understood	my	 purpose;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 speech,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 lecture.	 It	 is
simply	 a	 device	 to	 bring	 confidence	 to	 you	 and	 to	 your	 heart	 that	 you	 can	 be
silent.	The	more	you	become	confident,	the	more	you	will	be	able.	Without	my
speaking	 you	will	 start	 finding	 devices	 yourself.	 For	 example,	 you	 can	 go	 on
listening	to	 the	birds,	and	they	suddenly	stop,	and	they	suddenly	start.	Listen...
there	 is	no	reason	why	this	crow	should	make	noises	and	 then	stop	--	 it	 is	 just
giving	 you	 a	 chance....	 You	 can	 find	 them,	 once	 you	 know	 --	 even	 in	 the
marketplace	where	there	is	so	much	noise,	everything	is	going	on,	crazy.
Just	the	other	day	I	came	to	know	that	in	Greece	the	government	was	very	much
worried	 about	 the	 taxi	 drivers	 because	 they	were	 not	 following	 any	 rules,	 any
regulations	of	traffic.	Their	taxis	were	going	anywhere	they	wanted,	against	the
red	light!	Finally	they	decided	to	specially	train	the	taxi	drivers	for	a	week,	and
they	announced	three	big	awards	to	the	perfect	taxi	driver.
For	 first	 place,	 they	 could	 not	 find	 anyone;	 the	 police	 were	 searching	 for
someone	to	give	the	prize	to,	but	they	could	not	find	anyone.	In	fact,	the	moment
they	found	one	taxi	driver	who	was	behaving	exactly	the	way	he	should	on	the
road	--	the	moment	they	tried	to	stop	him	to	give	him	the	first	prize,	he	became
afraid	seeing	 the	police,	and	he	ran	against	 the	red	 light	and	spoiled	 the	whole
game!	He	did	not	think	that	they	would	give	a	prize;	he	must	have	thought	that
he	was	 bound	 for	 trouble	 --	 he	 did	 not	 care.	 Just	 in	 front	 of	 the	 police,	 just	 a
moment	before	he	was	going	to	be	the	first	award	winner	he	ran	against	the	light.
In	seven	days'	time	they	could	not	find	anyone.	They	could	not	find	a	taxi	driver
to	give	him	the	prize,	because	the	moment	the	taxi	driver	saw	the	police	standing
there,	he	became	even	more	crazy.	The	seven	days'	experience	showed	that	the
police	 and	 its	 presence	 had	 been	making	 taxi	 drivers	more	 nervous,	 and	 they
were	getting	the	whole	traffic	into	a	mess.
I	 don't	 follow	 any	 rules.	 I	 have	 read	 books;	 for	 example,	 I	 mentioned	 Dale
Carnegie,	 HOW	 TO	 WIN	 FRIENDS	 AND	 INFLUENCE	 PEOPLE,	 but	 my
whole	 life	 I	 have	 been	 doing	 just	 the	 opposite:	 how	 to	 influence	 people	 and
create	enemies.	And	I	have	been	successful	in	that!
Your	 question	 is,	 Sandesh,	 "I	 realize	 that	 it	 is	 easier	 to	 become	 silent	 while
listening	to	you."	The	reason	is	that	you	are	attentive;	your	mind	is	still	because
you	want	to	listen	to	me.	When	I	stop,	your	mind	cannot	start	quickly,	and	before
it	starts,	I	start	again!	I	am	watching	you!	I	give	you	only	this	much	gap,	so	you
cannot	 start	 your	 taxi	 again;	 otherwise	 you	will	 run	 against	 the	 red	 light,	 and
create	more	chaos.
So	my	speaking	is	not	oratory;	it	is	not	a	doctrine	that	I	am	preaching	to	you.	It
is	simply	an	arbitrary	device	to	give	you	a	taste	of	what	silence	is,	and	to	make
you	confident	 that	 it	 is	 not	 a	 talent	 --	 that	 it	 does	not	belong	 to	 any	 specially-
qualified	 people,	 that	 it	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 long	 austerities,	 that	 it	 does	 not
belong	 to	 those	 who	 call	 themselves	 virtuous.	 It	 belongs	 to	 all,	 without	 any
conditions;	you	just	have	to	become	aware	of	it.	And	that's	my	whole	purpose	in
speaking	to	you.
Once	you	are	certain	that	you	can	be	silent,	then	your	whole	focus	will	change.	It
is	not	a	question	of	discipline,	it	is	not	a	question	of	being	prayerful,	it	is	not	a
question	of	believing	in	God	and	all	kinds	of	nonsense.	It	is	a	question	of	feeling
your	 own	 possibility,	 and	 once	 you	 have	 known	 the	 possibility	 and	 become
confident	about	it,	the	whole	religion	in	your	vision	will	have	a	different	color.
It	is	a	question	of	silence	and	consciousness	and	blissfulness	--	it	has	nothing	to
do	with	sins	and	virtues	and	confessions.	Existence	does	not	bother	about	your
sins	 --	 what	 sin	 can	 you	 commit?	What	 punishment	 should	 be	 given	 to	 poor
human	beings?	Religions	 have	been	giving,	 for	 small	 things,	 eternal	 hell.	One
has	to	be	a	little	just	also.
Bertrand	Russell	has	counted	all	the	sins	that	he	has	committed,	and	all	the	sins
that	he	has	thought	to	commit	but	he	has	not	committed,	and	all	the	sins	that	he
has	 committed	 in	 his	 dreams.	 He	 has	 given	 the	 whole	 list	 and	 has	 asked	 the
Christian	 theologians...	 and	 he	 has	 remained	 unanswered	 for	more	 than	 half	 a
century.	Now	he	 is	dead;	 fifty	years	he	waited	 for	 the	 answer.	He	was	asking,
"These	are	all	that	can	be	counted	as	sins:	these	things	I	have	committed,	these
things	 I	 have	 only	 thought,	 these	 things	 I	 have	 only	 dreamt.	 How	 much
punishment	can	be	given	to	me	on	these	grounds?	The	strictest	judge	cannot	give
me	 four	 and	 a	 half	 years	 of	 jail,	 and	 Christianity	 is	 going	 to	 throw	 me	 into
eternal	hellfire!"
To	be	punished	for	eternity	you	need	another	eternity	to	commit	sins;	otherwise
it	will	not	be	just.	In	his	book,	WHY	I	AM	NOT	A	CHRISTIAN	--	he	was	born
a	 Christian,	 but	 as	 he	 became	 aware	 of	 the	 stupidness	 of	 the	whole	 Christian
theology,	he	wrote	the	book
--	he	has	asked	 these	questions	but	none	of	his	questions	have	been	answered.
The	only	answer	was	 that	his	book	was	banned	by	 the	pope.	 It	was	put	on	 the
pope's	 blacklist,	 which	 is	 published	 every	 year	 for	 the	 Catholics,	 saying	 that
"You	should	not	read	these	books."
I	am	fortunate,	my	books	are	also	on	the	list.	In	the	Middle	Ages	the	pope	used
to	burn	these	books;	now	it	is	difficult.	But	he	can	at	least	prevent	Catholics,	at
least	old	Catholics	who	are	afraid	of	death	and	who	are	coming	close	to	it.	It	is
difficult	for	him	to	burn	the	books;	it	is	difficult	for	him	to	prevent	even	the	new
Catholic	generation.	In	fact,	just	by	his	order	that	this	book	should	not	be	read,	it
becomes	more	attractive.
The	 only	 answer	 that	 Bertrand	 Russell	 got	 was	 that	 his	 book	 was	 put	 on	 the
blacklist	 and	his	 name	was	put	 on	 the	blacklist:	 "This	 book	 certainly,	 and	 any
other	book	by	this	man	should	not	be	read	by	Catholics	because	he	can	disturb
your	belief.	He	is	an	agent	of	the	devil"	--	this	is	the	answer.
He	has	asked	very	pertinent	questions.	He	says	that	on	the	one	hand,	Jesus	says,
"Love	 your	 enemies";	 he	 goes	 even	 to	 the	 point	 of	 saying,	 "Love	 your
neighbors"...	which	is	of	course	more	difficult,	because	enemies	are	far	away	but
the	neighbors	are	always	sitting	on	your	back.
But	 Jesus	 himself	 threw	 the	 moneychangers	 out	 single-handedly.	 He	 was	 so
enraged	 that	he	 turned	 their	 tables	and	he	 threw	 them	out	of	 the	 temple	of	 the
Jews.	What	authority	did	he	have?	And	what	happened	to	the	love?	His	authority
was	only	his	imagination	saying,
"I	 am	 the	 son	 of	God	 and	 you	 are	 spoiling	 the	 place	 of	my	 father	 by	making
business	 here."	 And	 those	 people	 were	 really	 helpful.	 Poor	 people	 could	 get
money	on	interest	from	the	temple,	and	the	temple	was	taking	less	interest	than
any	 other	 moneylenders	 outside.	 It	 was	 really	 to	 protect	 the	 poor	 from	 the
moneylenders.
And	 the	 temple	 needed	 some	money	 to	 run.	 It	was	 a	 big	 temple,	 hundreds	 of
rabbis;	it	was	the	very	center	of	their	Jewish	life.	Throwing	those	people	out	of
the	temple	just	on	the	idea,	on	the	assumption,	for	which	he	has	no	proof,	that	he
is	 the	 son	of	God.	And	he	behaved	with	 such	 anger,	 such	 arrogance.	Bertrand
Russell	wants	to	know	--	what	happened	to	his	preachings?
Jesus	comes	hungry	with	his	followers	to	a	village,	and	the	villagers	are	against
them;	 they	 refuse,	 they	 don't	 give	 them	 shelter.	 Hungry	 and	 tired,	 he	 comes
across	a	tree	and	he	curses	the	tree	because	there	are	no	fruits	on	it.	It	was	not
the	season.	What	can	the	poor	tree	do?	And	the	trees	are	not	expected	to	fulfill
your	demands.	His	cursing	the	tree	shows	that	he	was	a	very	angry	man,	blindly
angry.	 And	 Bertrand	 Russell	 has	 classified	 all	 these	 things,	 and	 asked	 for	 the
answers,	but	nobody	has	answered	a	single	point.
My	own	understanding	and	experience	is	that	the	idea	of	sin,	the	idea	of	virtue,
the	idea	of	reward,	the	idea	of	punishment,	heaven	and	hell,	are	simply	ideas	to
exploit	you,	to	keep	you	under	control.	It	is	a	psychological	bondage,	because	I
don't	see	any	point....
My	own	experience	 is	 that	 if	you	can	be	silent,	and	 if	you	can	 transcend	mind
and	your	consciousness	can	grow,	 it	does	not	matter	what	you	are	doing;	your
actions	are	not	counted	at	all,	only	your	consciousness.
Actions	are	very	small	things,	but	up	to	now	all	the	religions	have	been	counting
your	 actions,	 not	 your	 consciousness.	They	have	been	 training	you	how	 to	 act
rightly,	 and	what	 has	 to	 be	 avoided.	 But	 nobody	was	 saying	 that	 unless	 your
consciousness	rises	you	will	not	be	authentically	religious.
And	it	was	a	surprise	to	me	that	as	you	become	silent,	as	you	become	conscious,
more	 alert,	 your	 actions	 start	 changing	 --	 but	 not	 vice	 versa.	 You	 can	 change
your	 actions,	 but	 that	 will	 not	 make	 you	 more	 conscious.	 You	 become	 more
conscious,	and	your	actions	will	change	--	that's	absolutely	simple	and	scientific.
You	 were	 doing	 something	 stupid;	 as	 you	 become	 more	 alert	 and	 more
conscious,	you	cannot	do	it.
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 reward	 or	 punishment.	 It	 is	 simply	 your	 consciousness,
your	 silence,	your	peace,	which	makes	you	 look	 so	 far	 away	and	 so	deep	 into
everything	that	you	do.	You	cannot	do	harm	to	anybody;	you	cannot	be	violent,
you	 cannot	 be	 angry,	 you	 cannot	 be	 greedy,	 you	 cannot	 be	 ambitious.	 Your
consciousness	 has	 given	 you	 so	much	 blissfulness...	 what	 can	 greed	 give	 you
except	anxieties?	What	can	ambition	give	you?	--
just	a	continuous	struggle	to	reach	high	on	some	ladder.
One	very	successful	man,	perhaps	the	richest	man	of	that	time,	was	asked,	"What
have	 you	 learned	 from	 your	 life,	 because	 from	 poverty	 you	 have	 become	 the
richest	man	in	the	world?"	He	said,	"What	have	I	 learned?	I	have	learned	only
one	thing	--	climbing	the	ladder.	That	is	my	only	experience.	I	have	reached	to
the	highest	rung	of	the	ladder,	and	now	I	look	stupid!	Where	else	to	go?"
As	your	consciousness	becomes	more	settled,	all	your	life	patterns	change.	What
religions	have	called	sin	will	disappear	from	your	life,	and	what	they	have	called
virtue	will	automatically	flow	from	your	being,	from	your	actions.	But	they	have
been	doing	 just	 vice	 versa:	 first	 change	 the	 acts...	 It	 is	 as	 if	 you	 are	 in	 a	 dark
house,	 and	you	are	 stumbling	over	 furniture	 and	over	 things,	 and	you	are	 told
that	unless	you	stop	stumbling,	light	is	not	possible.
What	I	am	saying	is,	bring	light	in	and	stumbling	will	disappear,	because	when
there	 is	 light	 why	 should	 you	 stumble	 over	 things?	 Every	 time	 you	 stumble,
every	time	you	hit	your	head	on	the	wall,	it	hurts.	It	is	a	punishment	in	itself	--	a
wrong	 act	 is	 a	 punishment	 in	 itself;	 there	 is	 nobody	 recording	 your	 acts.	And
every	beautiful	action	is	a	reward	unto	itself.	But	first	bring	light	in	your	life.
Meditation	is	an	effort	to	bring	light	and	to	bring	joy	and	to	bring	silence	and	to
bring	blissfulness,	and	out	of	this	beautiful	world	of	meditation	it	is	impossible
for	you	to	do	anything	wrong.
So	 I	 have	 changed	 it	 completely.	 Religions	 were	 insisting	 on	 action;	 my
insistence	 is	 on	 consciousness,	 and	 consciousness	 can	 grow	 only	 in	 silence.
Silence	 is	 the	 right	 soil	 for	 consciousness.	When	you	 are	noisy	you	 cannot	 be
very	alert	and	conscious.	When	you	are	conscious	and	alert,	you	cannot	be	noisy
--	they	cannot	co-exist.
So	my	 speaking,	my	 talking	 should	not	 be	 categorized	with	 any	other	 kind	of
oratory;	it	is	a	device	for	meditation	to	bring	confidence	in	you	which	has	been
taken	away	by	religions.	Instead	of	confidence,	they	have	given	you	guilt	which
pulls	you	down	and	keeps	you	sad.	Once	you	become	confident	that	great	things
are	available	to	you,	you	will	not	feel	inferior,	you	will	not	feel	guilty	--	you	will
feel	blessed.	You	will	feel	that	existence	has	prepared	you	to	be	one	of	the	peaks
of	 consciousness.	 But	 you	 have	 not	 been	 going	 accordingly;	 you	 have	 been
following	the	priests	who	have	destroyed	your	dignity	and	your	pride.
Sandesh,	you	say,	"I	realized	that	it	is	easier	to	become	silent	while	listening	to
you	 than	 in	 any	other	meditation,"	 because	 in	 those	 other	meditations	 you	 are
alone.	 It	will	 take	 a	 little	 time	 to	 gain	 confidence	 --	 that's	why	 I	 am	 speaking
morning	and	evening,	almost	for	thirty	years	continuously.	Perhaps	two	or	three
times	 in	 these	 thirty	 years,	 I	 have	 stopped	 because	 I	 was	 not	 feeling	 well;
otherwise	I	have	continued	to	speak.
Every	morning	and	evening	I	want	to	give	you	the	confidence	that	you	are	losing
in	 your	 meditations.	 When	 you	 are	 meditating,	 of	 course	 it	 is	 you	 who	 are
meditating;	your	mind	goes	on	with	 its	old	habit.	And	many	people	who	have
not	been	given	the	confidence	have	turned	back.	They	try	meditation	for	a	few
days	and	it	becomes	a	failure	and	a	sadness	that	it	doesn't	happen.	And	they	start
thinking,	 "Perhaps	 my	 evil	 acts	 of	 the	 past	 life"	 --	 which	 the	 religions	 have
forced	 in	your	mind	 --	 "or	perhaps	my	belief	 in	God	 is	not	 total;	 something	 is
wrong	with	me."
I	 want	 you	 to	 be	 absolutely	 certain	 that	 nothing	 is	 wrong	 with	 anybody;	 all
wrongs	have	been	fed	into	you.
Religions	have	not	been	helpful	 in	creating	a	better	humanity.	They	have	only
destroyed	all	that	was	beautiful	in	man;	they	have	stopped	its	growth,	they	have
cut	the	very	roots.
Man	has	remained	a	pygmy	in	the	world	of	consciousness.
I	have	changed	the	whole	focus.	I	don't	say	to	you	that	you	have	to	do	this,	you
have	not	to	do	that,	that	this	is	sin	and	this	is	virtue.	I	say	only,	simply	be	alert
and	conscious	and	silent	and	blissful,	and	everything	else	will	follow.	Alone,	it
will	take	a	little	time	for	you.
As	your	confidence	becomes	more	and	more	solid,	 then	alone	also	you	will	be
able	to	be	silent.
With	me,	 to	be	silent	 is	easier	because	of	one	other	reason	--	I	am	silent;	even
while	I	am	speaking	I	am	silent.	My	innermost	being	is	not	involved	at	all.	What
I	am	saying	to	you	is	not	a	disturbance	or	a	burden	or	a	tension	to	me;	I	am	as
relaxed	as	one	can	be.
Speaking	or	not	speaking	does	not	make	any	difference	to	me.
Naturally,	this	kind	of	state	is	infectious.	Seeing	me,	being	here	in	my	presence,
looking	into	my	eyes...	even	watching	my	hands,	you	can	feel	that	they	are	the
gestures	 of	 a	 silent	 man.	 Slowly,	 slowly	 you	 become	 infected,	 contagious;
moreover,	around	a	silent	man	there	is	a	certain	energy	field	created.
You	 can	 try	 one	 beautiful	 experiment:	 just	 put	 some	 sand	 on	 a	 plate	 and	 then
when	somebody	is	playing	music,	put	your	plate	with	the	sand	on	top	of	it.	You
will	be	 surprised	 to	 see	 that	 every	 sound	makes	a	 change	 in	 the	pattern	of	 the
sand	on	the	plate.	It	goes	on	changing	with	every	sound.	Classical	music	will	put
all	 the	 sand	 in	 a	 very	 silent,	 very	 harmonious	 state;	 it	will	 create	 a	 pattern	 of
harmony.	The	same	sand,	the	same	plate	and	any	stupid	kind	of	modern	music	--
from	 jazz	 to	 the	 skinheads	 --	 and	 you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 your	 sand	 is	 in	 a
chaos.	 It	 loses	 all	 harmony,	 it	 loses	 all	 peacefulness,	 and	 patterns	 are	 created
which	show	immediately	to	anybody	disharmony,	discord.
A	man	of	silence	moves	with	a	certain	field	of	energy	around	him,	and	if	you	are
receptive,	his	vibe	starts	touching	your	heart.
Have	you	noticed?	A	husband	and	wife,	 if	 they	have	 really	been	 in	 love,	non-
possessive,	 non-jealous	 --	 and	 if	 they	 have	 helped	 each	 other	 to	 remain
individuals	 and	 they	have	deep	 respect	 for	 each	other	 --	 living	 a	 long	 life,	 for
fifty	 years	 together,	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know...	 it	 is	 a	 well-known	 fact
noticed	down	the	ages	that	they	start	looking	almost	the	same.	Their	voices,	their
eyes,	their	faces,	their	gestures...	they	become	so	harmonious	with	each	other.
Certainly,	 between	 a	 master	 and	 disciple	 the	 phenomenon	 is	 a	 millionfold
greater,	because	there	is	no	conflict	at	all.	And	particularly	with	a	man	like	me	--
I	am	not	in	any	way	forcing	you	to	be	disciples,	and	I	will	not	prevent	anybody
from	leaving	me.	I	welcome	you	when	you	are	here;	if	you	leave,	my	welcome
remains	 the	 same.	My	 love	 does	 not	 change.	You	 can	 go	 away,	 you	 can	 even
betray	me,	but	my	love	remains	the	same.	There	is	no	contract	between	me	and
you;	you	are	here	out	of	your	freedom,	any	moment	you	can	go.	I	am	here	out	of
my	freedom;	you	don't	bind	me.
In	this	state	of	freedom	the	master	and	disciple	can	come	closest,	and	naturally
energy	 flows	 from	 the	higher	 to	 the	 lower.	 It	 is	 just	 like	water	 coming	 from	a
mountaintop	towards	the	valley.
Lao	Tzu	has	actually	called	his	philosophy	of	life	"the	watercourse	way."	When
the	 master	 and	 disciple	 are	 so	 deeply	 in	 tune,	 because	 they	 are	 not	 in	 any
bondage,	both	are	meeting	out	of	their	freedom	--	and	an	authentic	master	never
thinks	 himself	 higher	 than	 the	 disciple,	 although	 the	 authentic	 disciple	 can
conceive	 of	 the	master	 as	 higher	 than	 anything	 --	 energy	 flows	 slowly	 to	 the
depths	of	your	being.	Meditation	becomes	almost	a	by-product;	silence	happens
on	its	own	accord.	Your	heart	itself	starts	dancing	with	the	master.
I	 was	 reading	 a	 statement	 of	 Walt	 Whitman,	 the	 only	 American	 I	 have	 any
respect	for.	He	says,	"I	celebrate	myself,	and	sing	myself."	I	agree	on	this	point	-
-	every	master	celebrates	himself	and	sings	himself.	Anybody	who	is	interested
joins	the	dance.	And	slowly,	slowly	there	is	no	master,	no	disciple,	but	only	the
dance,	only	the	celebration.
But	 this	 is	 only	 half	 of	 the	 statement;	 the	 other	 half	 I	 don't	 agree	with.	That's
where	 he	 shows	 his	 Christian	 roots:	 "And	what	 I	 assume,	 you	 shall	 assume."
That	disturbs	 the	whole	 thing.	Again	 it	has	come	 to	 the	same	point	 --	 "What	 I
believe	 you	 should	 believe,	 what	 I	 assume	 you	 should	 assume."	 Then	 there
comes	a	subtle	domination.	No,	on	that	point	I	cannot	agree.
I	 would	 have	 loved	 to	 agree	 with	 everything	 that	 Walt	 Whitman	 says,	 but	 I
cannot	go	against	reality.	It	is	enough	--	"I	celebrate	myself	and	sing	myself"	--
and	 if	 you	 rejoice	 in	 it,	 you	 join.	 It	 is	 not	 a	question	 that	 you	have	 to	 assume
what	I	assume,	that	you	have	to	believe	what	I	believe,	that	you	have	in	any	way
to	be	dependent	on	me.	You	are	participating	because	you	 love	 the	dance,	you
are	participating	because	you	love	to	celebrate;	you	are	participating	because	for
the	first	time	you	have	come	across	a	man	who	takes	life	as	a	celebration	not	as	a
burden	or	a	punishment.
It	 is	 enough	 that	you	enjoy	 the	 song	of	 the	master.	Your	 enjoyment	will	 bring
you	closer.
It	is	enough	that	you	enjoy	the	dance;	it	will	make	you	dance.	It	is	enough	that
you	love	the	celebration,	the	very	idea	that	life	is	celebration.	And	then	slowly,
slowly	there	is	a	melting	and	a	merging.	A	time	comes	when	it	is	difficult	to	find
who	is	the	master	and	who	is	the	disciple.
Masters	 and	disciples,	 if	 they	have	 lived	 long	enough	 in	 tune	with	 each	other,
become	almost	alike	--	without	any	effort	of	trying	to	become	alike,	because	that
would	 be	 forced	 and	 that	 would	 be	 false	 and	 that	 would	 be	 hypocrisy.	 Just
dancing	 together,	 sitting	 together,	 being	 silent	 together,	 a	merging	 is	 bound	 to
happen.
Sandesh,	 you	 say,	 "When	 you	 stop	 talking,	 everything	 seems	 to	 stop	 for	 a
moment	and	I	get	a	glimpse	of	what	meditation	can	be."	You	have	forgotten	to
note	 one	 thing.	What	 you	 have	 noted	 is	 right,	 that	 you	 get	 a	 glimpse	 of	what
meditation	 can	 be.	You	 have	 forgotten	 to	 note	 that	 you	 are	 capable	 of	 having
such	silent	moments,	 that	you	see	 that	meditation	 is	not	something	 impossible,
that	 it	 is	not	only	for	any	exceptional	category	of	people,	 that	 it	 is	available	 to
everybody.	You	 have	 pointed	 out	 one	 thing	 absolutely	 correctly,	 but	 you	 have
forgotten	to	see	that	you	are	also	capable	of	being	silent,	which	is	very	important
to	remember.
Because	 I	 cannot	 go	 on	 speaking	 the	 whole	 day	 to	 keep	 you	 in	 meditative
moments,	I	want	you	to	become	responsible.	Accepting	that	you	are	capable	of
being	 silent	 will	 help	 you	 when	 you	 are	 meditating	 alone.	 Knowing	 your
capacity...	and	one	comes	to	know	one's	capacity	only	when	one	experiences	it.
There	is	no	other	way.
You	are	saying,	"These	are	the	most	precious	moments	for	me.	Osho,	why	is	it
easier	to	become	silent	in	your	presence?"	In	my	presence	you	forget	your	own
ego,	 you	 forget	 yourself.	 The	 emphasis	 should	 be	 not	 on	 me,	 the	 emphasis
should	be	on	you,	on	the	fact	that	in	my	presence	you	love	me,	you	respect	me,
you	trust	me,	so	you	put	aside	your	defense	measures	--	your	ego	is	your	defense
measure.
Pay	 more	 attention	 to	 it,	 to	 why	 you	 become	 silent.	 Don't	 make	 me	 wholly
responsible	for	your	silence,	because	that	will	create	a	difficulty	for	you.	Alone,
what	are	you	going	to	do?	Then	it	becomes	a	kind	of	addiction,	and	I	don't	want
you	to	be	addicted	to	me.	I	don't	want	to	be	a	drug	to	you.
The	so-called	masters	and	teachers	of	the	religions	of	the	whole	world	--	I	have
come	across	almost	all	kinds	and	all	categories	of	teachers	--	want	their	disciples
to	be	addicted	to	them,	to	be	dependent	on	them.	That	is	their	power	trip.	I	don't
have	any	power	trip.	I	love	you,	whether	you	are	with	me	or	not	with	me.
I	want	 you	 to	be	 independent	 and	 confident	 that	 you	 can	 attain	 these	precious
moments	on	your	own.
If	you	can	attain	them	with	me,	 there	is	no	reason	why	you	cannot	attain	them
without	 me,	 because	 I	 am	 not	 the	 cause.	 You	 have	 to	 understand	 what	 is
happening:	listening	to	me,	you	put	your	mind	aside.	Listening	to	the	ocean,	or
listening	to	the	thundering	of	the	clouds,	or	listening	to	the	rain	falling	heavily,
just	 put	 your	 ego	 aside,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 need...	 The	 ocean	 is	 not	 going	 to
attack	you,	the	rain	is	not	going	to	attack	you,	the	trees	are	not	going	to	attack
you	 --	 there	 is	 no	 need	 of	 any	 defense.	 To	 be	 vulnerable	 to	 life	 as	 such,	 to
existence	as	such,	you	will	be	getting	these	moments	continuously	--	soon	it	will
become	your	very	life.
If	you	ask	me,	 I	have	almost	 forgotten	 the	 taste	of	misery;	and	because	I	have
forgotten	the	taste	of	misery	and	suffering	and	anxiety,	I	have	also	slowly	been
forgetting	the	taste	of	joy,	blissfulness,	ecstasy	--	they	have	become	natural.	Just
as	a	healthy	man	does	not	feel	continuously	that	he	is	healthy,	only	sick	people
become	 interested	 in	 health.	 The	 moment	 that	 you	 have	 become	 healthy...
coming	 out	 of	 your	 sickness,	 you	 will	 feel	 health	 but	 when	 it	 becomes	 your
natural	experience	of	every	day,	every	moment,	you	don't	have	any	contrast	of
sickness	to	compare	it	with.
You	don't	know	your	head	unless	you	have	a	headache	--	have	you	observed	it?
Do	you	become	aware	of	your	head?	You	become	aware	of	your	head	only	when
you	 have	 a	 headache.	A	 headache	 gives	 you	 the	 idea	 --	 people	who	 have	 not
experienced	headaches,	don't	know	what	it	is	to	have	a	healthy	head	without	any
headaches.
All	our	experiences	depend	on	their	opposites.	If	you	cannot	taste	the	bitter,	you
cannot	 taste	 anything	 sweet	 either	 --	 they	 go	 together.	 If	 you	 cannot	 see
darkness,	 you	 cannot	 see	 light.	And	 if	 you	 are	 continuously	 in	 one	 state,	 you
start	forgetting	about	it.
That's	what	I	call	going	beyond	enlightenment	--	the	day	you	start	forgetting	that
you	 are	 enlightened,	 the	 day	 it	 becomes	 just	 the	 natural	 course	 of	 your	 life,
ordinary,	 nothing	 special.	 The	way	 you	 breathe,	 the	way	 your	 heart	 beats,	 the
way	your	blood	runs	in	the	body,	enlightenment	also	becomes	part	of	your	being.
You	forget	all	about	it.
When	you	ask	the	question,	I	am	reminded	that	yes,	there	is	an	experience	called
enlightenment.	 But	 when	 I	 am	 sitting	 alone	 I	 never	 remember	 that	 I	 am
enlightened,	 that	 would	 be	 crazy!	 It	 has	 become	 such	 a	 natural,	 ordinary
experience.
First	 go	 beyond	 mind.	 Then	 go	 beyond	 enlightenment	 too.	 Don't	 get	 stuck
anywhere	until	you	are	simply	an	ordinary	part	of	the	existence,	with	the	trees,
with	the	birds,	with	the	animals,	with	the	rivers,	with	the	mountains.	You	feel	a
deep	harmony	--	no	superiority,	no	inferiority.
Gautam	 Buddha	 had	 some	 glimpses	 of	 going	 beyond	 enlightenment.	 He
mentioned	 it,	 that	 there	 is	a	possibility	of	going	beyond	enlightenment.	He	did
not	say	that	he	had	gone	beyond	it,	but	he	recognizes	the	fact	that	there	should
be	a	state	when	you	forget	all	about	enlightenment.	You	have	been	so	healthy,
you	have	forgotten	all	about	health;	only	then	have	you	come	home.	Finally	even
enlightenment	is	a	barrier	--	the	last	barrier.
Now	a	joke	for	you,	not	related	to	anything!	I	am	grateful	to	you	that	you	allow
me	to	say	anything	that	I	want;	you	don't	object....
Grandpa	Goldstein	got	drunk	one	night	and	no	one	could	find	him.	They	looked
everywhere	--	behind	the	barn,	in	the	hay	shed,	but	no	Grandpa.	Finally,	Bernie
heard	the	pigs	snorting	and	went	to	check.	There	was	Grandpa	Goldstein	lying	in
the	mud	with	an	old	sow,	stroking	her	belly.
"Gee,	honey,"	Bernie	heard	him	mutter,	"I	have	been	sleeping	with	you	for	forty-
nine	years	and	this	is	the	first	time	I	have	noticed	your	nightgown	has	two	rows
of	buttons!"
...	I	think	this	much	meditation	for	this	morning	will	do!
The	Invitation
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	Kissing	is	absurd	to	the	eskimos
28	August	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708285
ShortTitle:
INVITA15
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
104
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
MODEST	THOUGH	MY	EXPERIENCE	OF	AWARENESS	IS,	WHEN	IT	IS
HAPPENING	 I	 FEEL	 INTOXICATED.	 IT	 IS	A	 FAR	MORE	SUBTLE,	BUT
HEADIER
DRUNKENNESS	THAN	ANYTHING	THAT	MAKES	ONE	UNCONSCIOUS.
IS	THIS	A	CASE	OF	ILLUSION	OR	A	CASE	OF	DIVINE	WINE?
Maneesha,	awareness	and	divine	intoxication	are	contradictory	only	in	language
but	 not	 in	 experience.	 In	 experience	 they	 are	 synonymous.	 But	 the	 divine
intoxication	 is	 not	 at	 all	 similar	 to	 ordinary	 intoxication.	 It	 is	 not
unconsciousness	--	it	is	too	much	consciousness.
You	 become	 so	 small,	 and	 the	 whole	 ocean	 of	 consciousness...	 you	 start
drowning	in	it.
Particularly	 in	 the	 beginning	 it	 feels	 as	 if	 you	 are	 becoming	 drunk.	 But	 the
difference	 is	 clear:	 you	 remain	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 drunk.	 The	 ordinary
drunkenness	is	unconscious;	you	are	not	aware	that	you	are	drunk.	And	that	is	a
very	fundamental	difference.
You	 can	 be	 intoxicated	 just	 by	 too	 much	 consciousness	 because	 you	 cannot
contain	it.	It	starts	overflowing;	it	is	bigger	than	you.	And	in	the	beginning	it	is
so	sudden	and	so	much	that	you	feel	almost	without	any	control	over	yourself.
That's	why	the	idea	of	drunkenness	arises.
Because	in	intense	awareness	you	start	forgetting	your	ordinary	mind	--	your	so-
called	 ego,	 your	mundane	worries,	 your	 trivia	 of	worldly	matters	 --	 there	 is	 a
certain	 similarity	with	 intoxication.	The	whole	 infatuation	with	 intoxicants	has
remained	down	the	ages,	although	all	the	religions,	all	the	governments,	all	the
masters,	all	the	teachers,	all	the	moralists,	all	the	puritans	--	everybody	has	been
against	 intoxicants.	 But	 they	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 prevent	 humanity	 from
becoming	more	and	more	infatuated	with	newer	drugs.
Older	drugs	are	there	in	their	place;	new	drugs	are	being	continuously	added	--
now	man	can	manufacture	synthetic	drugs,	certainly	far	more	unconsciousness-
creating	 than	 any	 drugs	 found	 in	 nature.	One	 is	 surprised	 to	 know	why,	when
everybody	has	been	against,	they	have	not	been	able	to	prevent	it.	The	reason	is
very	simple,	and	not	far	away	to	find.
It	is	too	obvious;	perhaps	that's	why	one	feels	in	a	state	of	ignorance	about	the
cause,	about	the	reason.
Man's	life	has	remained	miserable,	so	miserable	that	he	wants	to	forget	it,	at	least
for	 a	 few	 hours,	 just	 to	 have	 a	 little	 rest.	 And	 all	 the	 religions	 and	 all	 the
governments	and	all	the	so-called	social	servants	have	not	been	able	to	alleviate
misery	from	human	life.	But	without	removing	the	cause,	they	have	been	forcing
man	not	 to	 drink	 alcohol,	 not	 to	 take	marijuana.	 It	was	 absolutely	 certain	 that
they	were	 going	 to	 fail.	 The	 cause	 has	 to	 be	 removed,	 not	 the	 symptom.	 The
symptom	will	go	on	its	own	accord;	just	remove	the	cause.
And	when	in	 intense	awareness	you	suddenly	forget	all	your	worries,	miseries,
suffering,	tensions,	it	appears	similar	--	that's	why	one	feels	as	if	one	is	divinely
intoxicated.
Divinely	because	you	have	not	 taken	any	 intoxicant,	but	 there	 is	a	 tremendous
difference	too,	not	to	be	forgotten:	that	you	are	aware.
Any	ordinary	drug	makes	you	simply	unconscious.	Meditation	brings	awareness,
but	awareness	is	such	a	big	phenomenon	that	you	are	bound	to	be	drowned.	And
in	 the	 beginning	 the	 experience	 is	 so	 much,	 so	 intense,	 that	 you	 are	 almost
erased,	 as	 if	 you	have	disappeared.	But	 it	 is	 not	 illusion.	 It	 is	 not	 any	kind	of
hallucination.
And	to	call	 it	divine	wine	is	 just	being	poetic.	It	 is	pure	awareness	which	does
the	 same	 work	 that	 is	 expected	 by	 people	 through	 intoxicating	 drugs.
Intoxicating	drugs	remove	symptoms;	awareness	removes	the	very	cause.	Drugs
simply	give	you	a	few	hours	of	forgetfulness,	and	again	the	misery	is	there	--	and
with	a	vengeance,	because	it	has	to	wait	for	six	hours;	it	becomes	more	intense.
Awareness	 cuts	 the	 very	 root	 of	 being	miserable,	 in	 anxiety,	 in	 anguish.	 And
because	 it	 cuts	 the	 very	 roots,	 after	 you	 have	 come	 down	 from	 the	 heights	 of
awareness	 you	 don't	 find	 misery	 --	 you	 find	 a	 peace,	 a	 silence,	 a	 very	 mild
sweetness	 and	a	very	 subtle	 fragrance,	 left	 behind	 the	 tide,	 the	 tidal	wave	 that
had	come	and	overtaken	you.
It	is	perfectly	beautiful.	There	is	nothing	illusory	in	it.	It	is	absolutely	existential.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	intoxicants.	Only	in	appearance,	in	the	beginning,	you
will	feel	as	if	you	are	intoxicated.
Irving	Levinsky	was	walking	around	New	York	City	thinking	how	crowded	and
impossible	city	life	was	becoming.	When	he	saw	a	man	lying	in	the	gutter	Irving
walked	over	and	said	to	him,	"Are	you	sick,	can	I	help	you?"
"No,	it	is	okay,"	said	the	man.	"I	have	found	a	parking	space	so	I	have	sent	my
wife	out	to	buy	a	car."
Intoxication	 is	one	 thing:	 this	kind	of	 thing	 is	not	possible	 through	awareness.
Through	awareness	you	can	 feel	 in	 the	beginning	 things	which	 look	strange	 --
happy	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all,	 smiling	 or	 laughing	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all.	 And	 it
becomes	a	vicious	circle:	when	you	laugh	then	you	see	that	"This	is	stupid,	why
I	am	laughing?"	Then	you	laugh	more	and	then	it	becomes	difficult	to	stop.	Just
seeing	 yourself	 laugh	without	 any	 reason	 it	 appears	 as	 if	 you	 have	 gone	mad,
because	 you	 have	 never	 understood,	 never	 experienced	 that	 being	 joyous,
laughing,	is	natural	and	healthy.
It	 does	 not	 need	 to	 have	 any	 cause.	 Sadness,	 seriousness	 are	 parts	 of	 a
psychologically	 sick	man	 --	 they	need	causes.	So	when	you	are	 feeling	happy,
don't	start	asking,	"Why	am	I	happy?"	When	you	are	feeling	sad	ask	why	you	are
sad.	But	strangely,	it	has	become	conventional	to	our	minds	that	when	we	are	sad
we	accept	it	as	if	it	is	our	nature.	And	when	we	are	joyous	even	we	are	surprised;
deep	inside	we	even	start	worrying:	"What	is	happening	to	me?"
Just	this	morning	I	quoted	Walt	Whitman,	and	he	says,	"I	am	the	celebration,	I
am	the	song."	It	is	one	of	his	most	beautiful	poems,	in	which	he	sings	the	song	of
himself:
"There	 is	 no	 reason.	 It	 is	my	nature	 to	 be	 a	 celebration,	 to	 be	 a	 song,	 to	 be	 a
festival."	It	is	just	healthy.	It	is	just	to	be	yourself.
While	Walt	Whitman	was	alive	he	was	very	much	condemned,	just	because	he
was	so	happy	for	no	reason	at	all	--	just	because	he	could	dance	alone,	sing,	not
for	anybody	else	but	 just	 for	himself,	or	 just	as	 if	he	was	 the	song,	he	was	 the
celebration	itself.	Christian	seriousness	could	not	understand	him.	The	ordinary
humanity	thought	him	either	mad	or	drunk.	But	he	was	not	drunk	and	he	was	not
mad;	he	was	one	of	the	most	intelligent	men	America	has	ever	produced.
Intelligence	is	a	celebration.
It	is	a	festival	of	lights	and	it	is	a	long	series,	a	chain	of	songs,	joys,	festivities.	It
is	only	 the	unintelligent	who	remain	sad	and	do	nothing	 to	 remove	 it.	 It	 is	 the
unintelligent	who	accept	sadness,	misery,	suffering,	behind	beautiful	names:	fate,
kismet,	 luck	 --	 all	 these	 words	 are	 nonsense.	 But	 these	 words	 help	 people	 to
remain	miserable.
The	man	of	awareness	gets	out	of	all	that	is	unnatural	and	certainly	finds	sources
of	juice	within	himself.	The	mystics	of	the	East	have	even	defined	God	as	raso
vai	saha;	"he	is	just	juice."	There	is	no	word	in	English	to	translate	exactly	the
depth	and	the	meaning	of	the	word	ras	--	juice	is	a	literal	translation.
When	you	are	happy	for	no	reason	at	all	you	find	a	certain	juiciness	inside	you	--
you	are	not	dry.	Your	saints	cannot	dance,	they	are	so	dry.	You	can	dance	only	if
you	are	full	of	 juice.	And	the	mystics	who	defined	God	as	raso	vai	saha	had	a
tremendous	insight.	They	are	removing	the	God	of	 the	 theologians,	 the	God	of
the	philosophers,	 the	God	of	the	so-called	religions.	They	are	creating	a	totally
new	concept	of	God	with	which	I	can	agree:	It	is	the	juice	of	life.
It	is	the	celebration	of	life.
It	is	the	festivity	of	life.
It	is	the	flower	and	the	fragrance.
But	people	are	living,	even	in	their	ordinary	wakefulness,	a	kind	of	sleepy	life.
The	whole	of	humanity	seems	to	be	under	a	spell,	as	 if	 they	are	all	walking	in
hypnosis,	as	if	they	are	all	suffering	from	somnambulism.
You	may	have	heard	about	sleepwalkers	who	get	up	in	 the	middle	of	 the	night
and	without	 waking,	 with	 open	 eyes,	 without	 stumbling,	 reach	 directly	 to	 the
kitchen,	find	the	fridge,	open	it,	eat	anything	to	their	heart's	content,	and	in	the
day	they	are	dieting!	And	the	doctor	is	puzzled	and	they	themselves	are	puzzled
--	"What	is	the	matter?	The	more	I	diet	the	more	my	weight	is	going	up."
And	there	are	almost	ten	percent	of	people	capable	of	somnambulism.	They	can
walk	in	their	sleep,	they	can	do	things,	and	in	the	morning	they	will	be	disturbed:
"Who	has	done	this?"	And	not	just	ordinary	people;	there	are	cases	on	record	of
very	great	geniuses.
Madame	 Curie,	 one	 of	 the	 first	 women	 ever	 to	 receive	 a	 Nobel	 Prize,	 was
struggling	 for	 three	years	 to	solve	a	mathematical	problem,	and	was	becoming
almost	hopeless.	Every	angle,	every	dimension,	every	process	she	tried,	but	she
was	not	reaching	the	right	conclusion.
Tired	one	night,	working	on	the	same	problem,	she	fell	asleep.	When	she	woke
up	it	was	almost	morning.	She	had	slept	three,	four	hours	just	on	the	table,	her
head	on	 the	papers	on	which	she	was	working	 to	find	 the	conclusion.	And	she
could	not	believe	her	eyes:	in	her	own	handwriting	the	conclusion	was	written.
There	was	no	process,	but	the	conclusion	was	there.
She	could	not	believe	 it,	because	she	had	been	working	 to	 find	 this	very	same
conclusion...	and	all	the	ways	she	had	tried,	she	had	reached	somewhere	else	but
never	to	this	point.	And	certainly	nobody	else	could	do	it,	because	the	door	was
locked,	her	husband	was	not	 at	 home	and	 the	 servant	did	not	 even	understand
arithmetic.	Looking	carefully,	she	found	it	was	her	own	handwriting	--	not	very
accurate,	because	it	had	been	written	in	sleep.
And	then	she	closed	her	eyes	and	tried	to	remember	whether	there	had	been	any
dream,	and	she	found	that	she	had	dreamt	that	she	was	working	on	the	problem,
had	found	the	conclusion,	and	she	was	writing	it	--	she	remembered	it.	And	then
she	remembered	the	whole	process.
Now,	when	she	was	writing	 the	answer	 she	must	have	been	writing	with	open
eyes.	 She	was	 a	 somnambulist,	 and	 this	was	 a	 sudden	 discovery.	 Then	 it	was
found	that	many	times	she	had	been	wandering	through	the	house	asleep.
And	to	disturb	anybody	who	is	walking	or	doing	something	in	his	sleep	is	very
shocking.
The	person	may	get	a	heart	attack,	because	he	cannot	believe	what	he	is	doing,
how	it	happened	to	be.
In	New	York	a	case	happened...
One	man	every	night	in	his	sleep,	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	used	to	jump	from
his	 building	 to	 the	 terrace	 of	 another	 building,	 almost	 ninety-storey-high
buildings	 --	 if	 he	 were	 to	 fall	 from	 there	 it	 would	 be	 impossible	 to	 find	 his
pieces.	 And	 the	 jump	 was	 really	 long;	 even	 professional	 jumpers	 in	 the
Olympics	would	have	refused,	seeing	the	gap	between	the	buildings.	Just	a	little
less,	one	step	less,	one	inch	less,	and	you	are	gone.
But	people	became	aware	of	it,	and	every	night	it	became	a	show.	A	crowd	used
to	 gather	 at	 the	 exact	 time	when	 the	man	would	 appear	 on	 his	 terrace,	would
jump	 to	 the	 other	 terrace,	 and	would	 jump	 back.	 People	 would	 watch	 it	 with
awe,	not	believing	in	their	eyes.
Slowly	the	crowd	became	bigger.	When	it	was	small	they	remained	silent;	when
the	crowd	became	bigger	it	was	difficult	to	keep	it	silent.	One	night	when	he	was
jumping,	 the	 crowd,	 new	 people,	 simply	 cheered	 him,	 and	 he	woke	 up	 in	 the
middle	of	his	jump.
And	you	can	conclude	what	happened:	he	fell	from	ninety	storeys,	just	in	front
of	 the	 crowd,	 shattered	 into	 pieces.	 He	 himself	 could	 not	 believe	 what	 was
happening.	And	he	had	done	it	so	many	times....
A	wife	begins	to	get	a	little	concerned	because	her	husband	has	not	arrived	home
on	 time	 from	his	 regular	Saturday	afternoon	golf	game.	As	 the	hours	pass	 she
becomes	more	and	more	worried,	until	at	eight	o'clock	the	husband	finally	pulls
into	the	driveway.
"What	happened?"	says	the	wife.	"You	should	have	been	home	hours	ago."
"Fred	had	a	heart	attack	at	the	second	hole,"	replies	the	husband.
"Oh,	that's	terrible,"	says	the	wife.	"But	why	are	you	so	late?"
"Well,"	 replies	 the	 husband,	 "for	 the	 next	 sixteen	holes	 it	was	 hit	 the	 ball	 and
drag	Fred,	hit	the	ball	and	drag	Fred."
Do	you	think	 these	people	are	awake?	They	may	not	be	called	somnambulists,
but	 they	 cannot	 be	 called	 conscious,	 they	 cannot	 be	 called	 really	 awake.	 The
poor	fellow	had	a	heart	attack,	he	has	died!	Now	it	was	time	to	stop	the	game,
but	 the	game	cannot	be	stopped	and	naturally,	 it	was	a	difficult	 job	to	drag	the
dead	man	and	then	to	play	the	hole	and	then	again	drag...
If	you	watch	your	life	and	the	life	of	people	around	you,	you	will	find	a	thousand
and	one	cases	where	people	are	thinking	that	they	are	aware	and	alert,	but	they
are	not.	Their	action	does	not	show	alertness	or	awareness.
While	 crossing	 the	 railway	 lines	 one	 day,	 Paddy	was	 hit	 by	 a	 train	 and	 badly
injured.	He	spent	six	months	in	hospital	but	was	finally	released.	While	he	was
walking	home	he	saw	a	toy	train	set	in	a	shop	window.	He	rushed	inside,	picked
up	a	hammer	and	started	smashing	the	toy	train	to	pieces.	The	shopkeeper	came
running	over,	shouting,	"Hey,	what	the	hell	are	you	doing?"
"It	 is	 okay,"	 replied	 Paddy,	 "it	 is	 dead	 now.	But	 you	 have	 to	 kill	 these	 things
before	they	grow	up	and	get	really	dangerous."
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	ALWAYS	TOUCHED	WHEN	YOU	SPEAK	OF	EACH	OF	US	HAVING
A	UNIQUE	INDIVIDUALITY,	BUT	I	THINK	I	AM	OFTEN	CONFUSING
PERSONALITY	 WITH	 INDIVIDUALITY.	 IS	 THIS	 INDIVIDUALITY
SOMETHING
GENETIC,	UNIQUE	TO	EACH	 INCARNATION,	OR	 IS	 IT	THE	ESSENCE
WHICH
MOVES	WITH	US	THROUGH	INCARNATIONS?
BELOVED	OSHO,	CAN	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	WHICH	WILL	HELP	US
COME
TO	KNOW	OUR	INDIVIDUALITY?
Prem	Prartho,	 it	 is	not	only	you	but	almost	everybody	who	misunderstands	the
difference	 between	 personality	 and	 individuality.	Most	 people	 live	 their	whole
lives	thinking	that	their	personality	is	their	individuality.
The	distinction	 is	very	 subtle.	Personality	 is	 that	which	 is	given	 to	you	by	 the
society,	 culture,	 civilization,	 education;	 in	other	words,	by	others	 --	people	are
giving	you	their	opinion	about	you	and	you	are	collecting	those	opinions.	Those
opinions	are	creating	your	personality.
You	 must	 have	 observed	 very	 small	 children	 whose	 personalities	 are	 not	 yet
developed.	It	takes	time;	for	at	least	three	to	four	years	the	child	remains	more	of
an	 individual	 than	he	may	perhaps	 ever	 be	 again.	He	 is	 authentic,	 sincere.	He
does	not	take	any	note	of	others'
opinions.
It	is	because	of	this	that	if	you	want	to	remember	your	past	you	can	go	back	only
up	to	a	certain	moment	--	and	that	moment	will	be	the	age	of	either	four	years	or
three	 years,	 at	 the	most	 three	 years.	After	 that	 there	 is	 a	 complete	 blank.	You
have	been	here	during	those	three	years,	but	you	don't	remember	anything.	You
were	nine	months	in	your	mother's	womb	--	you	don't	remember	anything	at	all.
The	reason	you	cannot	now	remember	 these	 three	years	 is	because	you	had	no
personality.	 It	 is	 the	 personality	 which	 accumulates	 opinions	 of	 others	 and
creates	 a	 false	 identity,	 a	 certain	 idea	of	 "Who	 I	 am."	You	don't	 know	exactly
who	 you	 are,	 because	 to	 know	who	 you	 are	 you	will	 have	 to	 dig	 deep	within
yourself	 through	 the	 whole	 rubbish	 that	 has	 accumulated	 in	 the	 name	 of
personality.	You	will	have	to	become	a	child	again.
That's	what	 is	meant	when	 Jesus	 says,	 "Unless	you	are	born	again	you	cannot
understand	what	 I'm	 saying."	And	 it	was	 said	 to	 a	 rabbi,	well	 learned,	 a	man
named	Nicodemus.	 He	was	 a	 professor	 in	 the	 Jewish	 university	 of	 Israel.	 He
wanted	 to	meet	 this	 charismatic	 young	man	 --	 so	 courageous...	 hiding	 behind
crowds,	Nicodemus	had	heard	Jesus	many	times.	He	himself	was	a	professor	but
he	 had	 never	 heard	 anybody	 speak	 the	 way	 Jesus	 was	 speaking,	 with	 such
authority.	 He	 was	 not	 quoting	 the	 scriptures,	 he	 was	 simply	 quoting	 his	 own
experience	--	hence	the	authority.
Nicodemus	 became	 interested	 but	 he	 was	 not	 courageous	 enough	 to	 come	 to
Jesus	 in	 the	 daytime,	 because	 if	 others	 see,	 what	 they	 will	 think?	 Jesus	 was
uneducated,	 a	 carpenter's	 son	 --	 perhaps	 what	 you	 call	 an	 illegitimate	 son,
because	virgins	cannot	give	birth	to	legitimate	sons.	And	he	had	no	acquaintance
with	the	ancient	traditions	of	Judaism	but	he	was	speaking	like	a	born	prophet.
Once	in	the	middle	of	the	night	when	there	was	nobody	else	and	all	his	followers
had	 gone	 to	 sleep	 and	 Jesus	 was	 doing	 his	 last	 prayer,	 Nicodemus	 came	 in
darkness	and	said,
"Forgive	me.	I	am	not	a	courageous	man,	I	am	a	coward.	I	wanted	to	meet	you
many	times	but	in	the	crowd,	before	the	crowd,	I	could	not	gather	courage.	So	I
have	come	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	but	I	had	to	come.	Please	forgive	me	for
disturbing	you."
Jesus	did	not	ask	Nicodemus	what	was	his	question,	what	was	his	 inquiry.	On
the	contrary,	he	simply	said,	"Unless	you	are	born	again,	you	will	not	understand
me."
What	 does	 he	 mean	 by	 "born	 again"?	 He	 means	 unless	 you	 become	 a	 child
again,	unless	you	put	your	whole	personality	aside.	Individuality	to	individuality,
there	is	a	possibility	of	a	communion.	With	your	personality	standing	in	between
--	you	are	a	great	professor,	you	are	a	learned	scholar,	you	are	a	famous	man;	all
these	troubles	are	standing	in	between	--	it	is	impossible	to	reach	you.	You	will
misunderstand	me,	 you	will	 distort	 me,	 you	will	 interpret	 me,	 you	will	 make
whatever	you	want	to	make	out	of	my	statements."
And	 what	 Jesus	 is	 saying	 is	 my	 own	 experience	 --	 continuously	 being
misunderstood	by	people	who	are	expected	to	be	intelligent.	It	is	strange	but	it	is
not	 only	 happening	 with	 me,	 it	 has	 always	 happened.	 If	 truth	 is	 not
misunderstood	 then	 there	 is	 something	 wrong	 with	 the	 truth.	 If	 a	 man	 is	 not
misunderstood	then	that	man	has	nothing	significant	to	say.
What	you	know	about	yourself	 is	your	personality.	You	know	 that	you	have	a
certain	name	--	are	you	aware	you	had	come	in	the	world	without	a	name?	You
have	a	certain	education,	a	certain	qualification	--	you	know	you	were	not	born	a
doctor	 or	 an	 engineer	 or	 a	 professor.	 These	 are	 things	 added	 to	 you.	 Your
degrees,	your	name,	your	fame...	all	these	things	are	added	to	you.
But	this	is	what	you	are.	As	far	as	you	are	concerned,	if	all	these	things	are	taken
away	 from	 you	what	will	 you	 be?	 Just	 a	 zero....	A	 plain	 slate,	 all	writing	 has
been	removed.
Your	personality	is	all	that	you	know	about	yourself	--	I	am	making	it	absolutely
simple	so	that	you	can	be	alert	--	and	your	individuality	is	that	which	you	don't
know	and	you	are.
Meditation	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 personality	 and	 to	 reach	 to	 your	 living
sources	of	life,	your	individuality,	your	flame,	that	you	have	brought	from	your
mother's	womb	--	and	 that	you	had	before	your	birth,	even	before	you	entered
the	womb	 of	 the	mother.	You	 have	 had	 your	 individuality	 since	 eternity.	 It	 is
your	essential	consciousness	which	is	covered	with	so	many	layers	of	so	many
lives	that	it	is	lost	completely	and	you	have	forgotten	the	way	how	to	reach	back
to	it.
And	 every	 life	 goes	 on	 adding	 more	 and	 more	 layers	 of	 dust	 around	 your
essential	life.
That	essential	life	is	immortal;	your	personality	is	mortal.
Your	personality	 is	dependent	on	other	people;	hence	you	are	always	afraid	of
other	people.	A	famous	man	can	become	nobody	if	people	change	their	minds.
And	people	change	their	minds	so	easily.	There	is	not	much	difficulty	in	it.
Who	is	Richard	Nixon	now?	Do	you	ever	hear	anything	about	poor	Nixon?	He
has	lost	his	personality;	by	losing	his	presidency	he	has	lost	all.	Now	he	is	living
almost	anonymously,	as	a	nobody.
It	happened	in	Napoleon	Bonaparte's	life...
He	 was	 defeated	 only	 once	 --	 all	 his	 life	 he	 had	 been	 winning.	 The	 battle	 in
which	 he	 got	 defeated	 by	 the	 English	 general	Wellington	was	 a	 very	 cunning
one.	Wellington	was	not	of	the	same	caliber	as	Napoleon	Bonaparte...	but	he	had
brought	 seventy	 cats	 in	 front	 of	 his	 army.	 His	 whole	 army	was	 wondering	 --
what	is	the	matter?	Why	these	seventy	cats?
It	was	a	secret	that	Wellington	had	come	to	know	from	his	detectives	that	in	his
childhood,	when	Napoleon	Bonaparte	was	almost	a	six-month-old	baby,	a	wild
cat	had	jumped	on	him	--	almost	playfully;	it	didn't	harm	him,	but	it	left	a	deep
fear	in	the	small	child's	mind.
It	 became	 the	 first	 impact	 on	 his	 personality,	 it	 became	 his	 foundation.
Everything	else	came	afterwards.	He	could	fight	barehanded	with	a	lion	or	with
a	tiger	with	no	fear	--	the	man	was	immensely	courageous.	But	in	front	of	a	cat
he	simply	lost	all	his	nerve.	It	was	beyond	his	powers	to	remain	himself;	his	very
foundation	of	personality	slipped.	And	it	was	beyond	him	because	it	was	deep	in
his	unconscious,	so	he	could	not	do	anything;	he	had	no	idea	even.
Only	a	woman	who	had	been	taking	care	of	him,	his	nurse,	was	aware	of	it.	But
out	 of	 fear	 she	 had	 not	 told	 anybody,	 because	 it	 was	 her	 fault.	 She	 had	 left
Napoleon,	 this	 little	baby	six	months	old,	 in	 the	garden,	and	had	gone	 to	meet
her	boyfriend	just	behind	the	bushes.	So	it	was	her	fault.
She	never	told	anybody	but	somehow	--	perhaps	she	may	have	told	the	boyfriend
--
Wellington's	detectives	found	out.
Wellington	was	afraid	that	there	was	not	much	possibility	of	his	victory	against
Bonaparte,	 because	 he	was	 continuously	winning.	And	 this	was	 going	 to	 be	 a
decisive	moment:	if	England	was	defeated	then	there	was	nobody	else	who	could
defeat	Bonaparte.	 So	 every	 effort	was	made	 to	 find	 out	 some	weakness	 in	 his
personality.
One	thing	must	be	said	in	favor	of	Wellington.	He	may	not	be	a	great	general	--
he	was	not	 --	but	he	was	certainly	a	better	psychologist	 than	a	general.	Before
going	 to	 the	war	 front	he	 looked	 into	 the	personality	 structure	and	he	came	 to
know	 that	 Bonaparte	 was	 not	 afraid	 of	 anything	 except	 a	 cat.	 That's	 why	 he
brought	seventy	cats	--	not	only	one	--
not	to	take	any	chances.
All	 along	 the	 front	 of	 his	 army	 there	were	 cats.	 There	was	 no	 possibility	 that
Wellington	is	allowing	Napoleon	Bonaparte	not	to	see	the	cats.	And	the	moment
Bonaparte	saw	the	cats	--	not	only	one	but	seventy	--	it	was	suddenly	as	if	all	his
power	slipped	out	of	him.
He	 became	 so	 nervous	 that	 he	 told	 his	 assistant	 general,	 "You	 take	 charge.	 I
cannot	be	in	the	front;	I	will	be	in	the	back.	You	arrange	the	battle,	I	am	no	more
in	my	senses."
The	assistant	general	could	not	understand	what	had	happened.	But	it	was	clear
that	 Napoleon	 Bonaparte	 had	 gone	 pale,	 looked	 almost	 as	 if	 he	 were	 dying.
Something	 very	 essential	 had	 simply	 gone	 out	 of	 him.	 This	 was	 the	 battle	 in
which	he	 lost	--	 it	was	not	 the	victory	of	Wellington,	 it	was	 the	victory	of	cats
against	a	six-month-old	baby	Napoleon.
He	was	imprisoned	on	the	small	island	of	Saint	Helena.	Of	course	he	was	given
all	the	facilities	that	should	be	given	to	a	great	man	of	his	caliber,	and	because	he
was	 having	 almost	 a	 nervous	 breakdown	 he	 was	 given	 a	 doctor,	 a	 nurse,	 a
beautiful	house...	and	he	was	not	imprisoned	like	any	prisoner,	he	was	just	kept
on	 the	 island.	 The	 island	 was	 vacated	 completely.	 Only	 he	 was	 there,	 a	 few
guards	were	there,	the	doctor	was	there.	He	was	allowed	to	move	on	the	island,
on	the	beach,	to	swim;	he	was	given	every	facility,	knowing	that	he	was	passing
through	a	tremendous	personality	crisis.
One	day	as	he	was	going	 to	 the	ocean,	 to	 the	beach,	a	woman	who	must	have
been	 taking	 care	 of	 the	 horses	 of	 the	 guards,	 was	 coming	 from	 the	 other
direction,	carrying	a	big	 load	of	grass.	 It	was	a	 small	 footpath;	 the	doctor	was
with	him	and	the	doctor	shouted	to	the	woman,	"Move	out	of	the	way!	You	don't
understand	who	is	coming	--	he	is	Napoleon	Bonaparte!"
But	 that	woman	was	an	uneducated	woman.	She	had	never	heard	of	Napoleon
Bonaparte	or	why	she	should	move.
Napoleon	Bonaparte	said	to	the	doctor,	"You	are	wrong.	The	time	is	gone	when
mountains	used	to	move	just	with	my	orders.	Now	it	is	better	I	should	move	out
of	the	way	of	a	poor	woman	who	is	just	carrying	grass	for	the	horses.	You	forget
all	about	the	Napoleon	Bonaparte	I	once	was.	I	am	no	longer	that	man."
He	was	saying	a	very	essential	 truth.	He	had	 lost	his	personality.	He	died	very
soon	after.
Only	 one	 thing	 could	 have	 revived	 him:	 not	 medicine	 but	 meditation,	 if
somebody	had	made	him	aware	 that	"What	you	have	 lost	was	not	yours	at	all.
You	have	still	got	your	essential	being	and	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried.	What
you	have	lost	was	false	and	what	 is	real	 is	still	within	you."	But	one	has	 to	be
aware	of	it.
You	are	too	much	identified	with	the	false,	the	personality	--	that's	the	meaning
of	the	word;	 it	comes	from	the	Greek	persona,	and	`persona'	means	a	mask.	In
Greek	theater	actors	used	to	wear	masks;	the	sound	was	theirs	but	the	face	was
not	theirs.	Sona	means	sound	--	sound	coming	through	a	mask.	You	don't	know
who	is	behind	 it.	The	only	real	 thing	 is	 the	sound	that	 is	coming	out;	anything
else	that	you	are	seeing	is	just	false.
But	with	you	things	have	become	far	worse;	even	the	sound	is	not	yours.	That
too	has	been	a	 training,	a	discipline.	You	have	been	corrected	continuously	by
your	parents,	by	your	teachers	--	how	to	speak,	how	to	sit.
I	 was	 being	 shown	 around	 a	 Christian	 theological	 college	 where	 they	 train
missionaries.
It	 is	 the	 biggest	 institution	 in	 Asia	 for	 training	 Christian	 missionaries	 and
ministers	and	priests	and	bishops.
I	was	 surprised...	 I	had	 to	 stand	outside	 the	door	with	 the	vice-chancellor	who
was	showing	me	around.	A	professor	was	 teaching	 the	students,	when	you	are
delivering	a	sermon	in	the	church,	how	you	should	stand,	how	you	should	look
at	 the	 audience,	 where	 you	 should	 speak	 loudly	 and	where	 you	 should	 speak
almost	in	a	whisper,	where	you	should	raise	your	hand,	what	gesture	should	be
used	at	a	particular	point,	where	you	should	beat	on	the	table...
I	 was	 horrified.	 I	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 this	 is	 religion.	 I	 said	 to	 the	 vice-
chancellor,	 "If	 this	 is	making	Christian	missionaries	who	 are	 going	 to	 convert
people	into	Christians..."	I	asked	him,	"Do	you	think	Jesus	had	gone	through	any
college,	through	all	these	gestures	and	training	and	voice?	He	was	an	uneducated
carpenter's	son.	There	were	no	theological	colleges	at	 that	time,	particularly	no
Christian	colleges.	And	still	none	of	your	missionaries	--	and	you	have	millions
of	missionaries	around	the	world	--	speaks	the	way	Jesus	spoke."
The	authority	was	not	out	of	 training.	 It	was	not	out	of	personality;	 that	 is	 the
difference.
That's	why	I	said	to	him,	"Although	there	have	been	hundreds	of	popes	in	these
two	 thousand	 years,	 none	 of	 them	 has	 been	 crucified	 because	 none	 of	 them
spoke	with	 that	 authority.	None	 of	 them	 spoke	with	 that	 poetry,	 none	 of	 them
spoke	so	dangerously	--
and	 they	 all	 represented	 Jesus!	 I	 will	 not	 accept	 anybody	 as	 a	 representative
unless	he	is	crucified."
I	said,	"You	teach	these	missionaries	to	carry	a	small	cross,	folding.	They	should
always	 keep	 it	with	 themselves	 and	when	 Jesus	 is	 crucified,	 unfold	 the	 cross,
stand	with	their	hands	on	the	cross,	look	upward	the	way	Jesus	looked...	that	is
the	last	and	the	real	thing."
The	vice-chancellor	said,	"You	are	making	a	joke	of	our	religion."
I	 said,	 "I	 am	 not	making	 a	 joke,	 you	 are	making	 a	 joke	 by	 teaching	 all	 these
people.	 You	 are	 not	 even	 allowing	 them	 their	 own	 voices	 --	 voice	 training
programs,	voice	test!"	And	your	voice	can	be	changed,	its	pitch,	its	vibration	can
be	checked	and	you	can	be	trained	how	to	change	it,	how	to	bring	a	new	quality
to	it,	more	forceful	or	more	peaceful,	more	musical.
And	 they	 had	 a	 department	 where	 they	 were	 testing	 people's	 voices,	 training
their	voices.
They	were	 even	 giving	 them	 hints	 about	where	 they	 should	 raise	 their	 hands.
Now,	that	hand	is	going	to	be	false	--	it	is	personality.
Jesus	also	had	raised	his	hand	at	that	point	but	that	was	individuality.	It	was	not	a
training.	Nobody	 had	 told	 him	 --	 it	was	 spontaneous,	 it	was	 coming	 from	 his
own	inner	being.
So	 remember:	whatever	you	have	 learned	 from	others	 is	not	you.	That	 is	your
persona,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 find	 your	 innocence	 again.	 You	 have	 to	 find	 your
essence	 before	 people	 started	 putting	 layers	 on	 you,	 before	 people	 started
civilizing	you,	making	you	more	cultured,	more	educated.
You	say,	Prartho,	"I	am	always	touched	when	you	speak	of	each	of	us	having	a
unique	 individuality,	 but	 I	 think	 I	 am	 often	 confusing	 personality	 with
individuality."
Not	often,	Prartho	--	always.	Because	once	you	know	your	individuality	you	will
never	again	get	confused.	Once	you	have	seen	the	real,	how	can	you	think	of	the
false	as	real?
Once	 you	 know	 the	 real,	 the	 false	 has	 disappeared	 from	 your	 consciousness
completely.
So	 whatever	 you	 are	 thinking	 of	 as	 individuality	 and	 personality	 are	 both
personalities.
One	may	be	deeper,	more	unconscious,	more	rooted	so	that	you	cannot	recognize
that	it	is	false;	one	may	be	superficial,	a	fresh	layer,	so	you	can	recognize	it	as
false.	But	both	are	personalities.
The	moment	you	know	your	 individuality	you	are	 finished	 forever,	 in	a	 single
blow,	with	all	that	is	false.	Suddenly	you	have	no	name,	no	fame,	no	religion,	no
nation.	Suddenly	you	 are	 just	 a	 pure	 consciousness,	 just	 a	 human	being	 --	 not
even	your	body,	not	your	mind,	not	your	heart,	but	just	a	pure	source	of	life.
That	source	of	life	goes	on	transmigrating	from	one	form	into	another.	Once	you
discover	 it	 your	 journey	 is	 coming	 to	 an	 end.	 Totally	 discovered,	 you	 are
enlightened.	 Then	 there	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be	 any	more	 birth	 for	 you,	 any	more
imprisonment	into	a	body,	into	a	personality	--	you	have	attained	to	freedom.
Individuality	is	freedom.
That's	why	 it	 touches	you;	even	 the	word	uttered	goes	deep	 inside	you	 like	an
arrow.
And	 the	 individuality	 is	bound	 to	be	unique.	The	personality	 is	 created	by	 the
society,	so	 it	wants	everybody	to	be	almost	similar	--	 the	same	dress,	 the	same
haircut,	the	same	mannerism,	etiquette.
For	example	if	you	meet	somebody	here	and	you	start	rubbing	noses	with	him,
you	will	be	 thought	mad	because	that	 is	not	part	of	 the	culture	here.	But	when
Eskimos	 for	 the	 first	 time	 saw	Christian	missionaries	 kissing	 each	 other,	 they
said,	"These	idiots!	They	think	they	will	teach	us	religion,	and	they	are	so	dirty;
they	 don't	 even	 understand	 the	ABC	 of	 hygiene.	 They	 are	mixing	 saliva	with
each	other,	and	they	think	they	are	showing	love!"
Kissing	is	absurd	to	the	Eskimos;	they	have	never	kissed	in	their	whole	history.
And	seen	from	their	viewpoint	it	seems	they	are	right:	kissing	mouth	to	mouth	is
really	dirty.	Just	think	of	it,	what	you	are	doing	--	exchanging	millions	of	germs.
This	you	call	love?	You	are	giving	your	diseases	to	the	person	you	love	and	that
person	is	giving	his	diseases	to	you,	and	you	both	are	in	love?	A	great	exchange
is	happening	in	the	name	of	love!
I	favor	the	Eskimos,	they	are	hygienic.	Rubbing	noses	is	very	clean	--	noses	are
the	cleanest	and	coolest	part	of	your	face.	And	it	is	possible	that	because	of	the
spread	of	AIDS,	the	whole	world	will	have	to	follow	the	Eskimos	sooner	or	later.
Kissing	 is	 going	 to	 be	 prohibited	 by	 law	 --	 not	 for	moral	 reasons	 but	 just	 for
scientific	reasons.
Even	 shaking	hands	 is	 not	 very	 scientific.	The	Hindu	way	of	welcoming	 each
other	with	folded	hands	is	absolutely	right.	Not	for	any	religious	reasons,	just	for
purely	hygienic,	scientific	reasons,	because	the	virus	could	pass	even	through	a
handshake.	 It	 can	pass	 through	perspiration;	 it	 is	possible	 for	 the	virus	 to	pass
through	anything	coming	out	of	your	body	--	saliva	or	perspiration.	And	people's
hands	are	perspiring.	It	is	dangerous.
Now	 I	 have	 been	 brought	 pictures	 from	American	magazines,	 from	European
magazines,	of	police	with	gloves	on	their	hands	because	they	were	preventing	a
protest	march	of	gay	people.	Now	to	touch	the	gay	people	is	dangerous.	But	who
knows	 who	 is	 gay?	 Popes	 have	 been	 gay,	 presidents	 have	 been	 gay,	 prime
ministers	 have	 been	 gay,	 great	 philosophers	 have	 been	 gay.	 You	 would	 be
surprised	if	you	knew	the	list	of	great	gay	people...	Socrates	was	gay.	Just	now	I
told	you	about	Walt	Whitman	--	he	was	gay.	There	have	been	hundreds	of	poets
and	painters,	writers,	novelists,	world-famous	people,	and	they	were	gay.
It	 is	better	to	fold	your	hands	and	keep	away.	Whoever	invented	the	folding	of
hands	must	have	been	a	very	alert	person.
For	different	reasons	these	things	have	come	into	existence.	Shaking	hands	has
not	 come	 out	 of	 love;	 neither	 has	 folded	 hands	 come	 out	 of	 love.	These	 have
both	come	out	of	showing	the	other,	"I	am	not	carrying	any	weapons.	You	can
accept	me	as	your	 friend	 --	 I	am	not	your	enemy."	When	both	hands	are	 there
you	can	see	that	the	other	person	is	not...
Even	 shaking	 with	 the	 right	 hand	 is	 enough	 because	 if	 a	 weapon	 has	 to	 be
carried	it	will	be	carried	in	the	right	hand,	unless	you	happen	to	be	a	leftist!
These	welcoming	signs,	 their	origin	 is	not	very	beautiful,	 it	 is	ugly.	 It	 is	 just	a
test	that	the	other	person	is	not	your	enemy,	that	you	can	trust	he	will	not	attack
you.	Both	are	showing	that	they	can	trust	each	other.
Slowly,	slowly	the	origin	of	things	is	always	forgotten	and	then	you	think	this	is
something	great.	Folding	the	hands	or	shaking	hands	--	they	are	really,	in	a	way,
ugly.
They	show	suspicion,	they	show	distrust.	But	in	every	culture	there	is	bound	to
be	some	kind	of	gesture.	And	everybody	is	brought	up	in	a	certain	culture,	in	a
certain	atmosphere.
He	learns	those	gestures.
It	happened	that	when	Japanese	sannyasins	started	coming	here	I	was	in	trouble
in	 the	 beginning	 because	 they	 have	 absolutely	 different	 gestures.	Nobody	 else
has	the	same	gestures	in	the	whole	world.	How	have	they	managed	to	have	such
gestures?	For	example	saying	yes,	everybody	 in	 the	world	except	 the	Japanese
moves	his	head	up	and	down.
The	 Japanese	move	 their	 heads	 sideways.	Everywhere	 else	 that	means	 no,	 but
not	in	Japan.	In	Japan	it	means	yes.
So	 when	 I	 used	 to	 talk	 with	 them	 I	 was	 at	 a	 loss.	 I	 am	 asking,	 "Are	 you
meditating?"	and	they	are	saying,	"No."
"Why	have	you	come?	You	are	wearing	a	mala,	are	you	a	sannyasin?"	And	they
are	saying,	"No."
"Then	why	are	you	wearing	the	mala?"
Finally	one	sannyasin	who	understood	a	 little	bit	of	English	 told	me,	"You	are
not	understanding	 those	poor	 fellows.	They	don't	understand	you.	 In	 Japan	 for
`yes'	you	have	to	move	your	head	sideways	and	for	`no'	up	and	down."
I	said,	"It	is	very	difficult.	How	have	you	managed	because	the	whole	world	is	in
agreement	about	that?"
There	must	have	been	some	deep	reason	why	the	Japanese	developed	a	certain
gesture	so	different	from	everybody	else.
But	all	that	you	know,	the	way	you	behave,	is	learned	from	others,	is	taught	by
others.
This	 is	 all	 your	 personality.	 The	 personality	 cannot	 be	 unique,	 it	 is	 social.
Individuality	 is	 not	 social,	 it	 is	 existential.	 In	 existence	 everything	 is	 unique;
every	tree	is	unique,	every	flower	is	unique,	every	star	is	unique.
Existence	believes	in	uniqueness.
Society	is	always	fearful	of	uniqueness.
It	does	not	like	anybody	to	be	unique.	The	unique	seems	to	be	a	stranger.	Society
wants	 uniformity,	 not	 uniqueness.	 You	 should	 eat	 the	 same	 things	 they	 are
eating;	you	should	use	the	clothes	they	are	using;	you	should	not	try	to	show	that
you	are	separate	from	the	crowd.	The	crowd	never	forgives	anybody	who	looks
like	 an	 outsider,	 a	 stranger.	 It	 tries	 in	 every	way	 immediately	 to	 force	 you	 to
become	part	of	the	society.	Then	people	feel	at	ease.
But	you	are	destroyed;	your	individuality	is	sacrificed	for	the	satisfaction	of	the
crowd;	hence,	when	you	hear	me	 talking	about	unique	 individuality	something
deep	 inside	you	 is	 stirred.	Something	 that	 is	 your	 real	 being	needs	 some	help,
needs	 some	 support,	 needs	 some	 invitation	 to	 come	 up	 and	 throw	 away	 the
personality.
Your	 being	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a	 Jain	 or	 a	 Buddhist	 or	 a	 Christian	 or	 a	 Jew	 are	 all
personalities	--
throw	them	away.	And	then	you	are	just	all	one,	pure	human	beings.	And	in	that
purity	 you	will	 find	 uniqueness	 because	 every	 flame	will	 have	 its	 own	 shape,
will	have	its	own	light,	will	have	its	own	fire.	Every	flower	of	your	being	will
have	different	fragrances.
And	 if	 some	 day	 a	 better	 humanity	 arrives	 on	 the	 earth	 and	 this	 old	 rotten
humanity	 disappears	 there	 will	 be	 variety,	 and	 variety	 will	 be	 respected	 and
loved.	Variety	makes	life	more	rich.	If	everybody	is	a	unique	individual	we	will
have	 a	world	 tremendously	 rich,	 because	 everybody	will	 be	 showing	 his	 own
talents,	 his	 own	 genius	 in	 his	 own	 way,	 in	 his	 own	 style.	 Nobody	 will	 be	 a
carbon	copy	of	anybody	else.	Everybody	will	be	original.
And	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way,	 Prartho,	 except	 meditation	 to	 discover	 your
individuality.
During	the	hotel-room	shortage	Bernie	was	given	a	room	with	two	beds	and	told
that	 they	 would	 have	 to	 rent	 the	 other	 bed	 to	 someone	 else.	 He	 was	 in	 bed
reading	when	the	other	occupant,	Shirley	was	shown	in.	Shirley	was	a	beautiful
blond.
She	glanced	at	Bernie	and	started	slowly	to	undress,	exposing	everything	to	her
best	advantage.	When	she	was	finally	nude	Shirley	posed	for	some	time	in	front
of	the	mirror,	first	this	way	and	then	that.
Finally,	she	got	in	bed	and	leaning	over	as	near	as	she	could,	whispered,	"How
would	you	like	to	come	in	my	bed?"
"No,	thanks,"	croaked	Bernie,	I've	already	come	in	mine!"
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	Drowned	in	spaghetti
29	August	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708290
ShortTitle:
INVITA16
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
95
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
"THERE	 IS	 SO	MUCH	MAGNIFICENCE	 IN	 THE	OCEAN...	WAVES	ARE
COMING
IN,	WAVES	ARE	COMING	IN...."	AND	ONCE	AGAIN	I	SEEM	TO	BE
DESPERATELY	 RUNNING	 FOR	 DRY	 LAND!	 MY	 SWEET	 OSHO,	 HOW
ABOUT
YET	ANOTHER	INTENSIVE	LESSON	ON	DROWNING?
Radha,	when	the	invitation	of	the	ocean	comes	don't	run	away	from	it.
The	ocean	 is	 the	very	beginning	of	 life,	not	only	metaphorically,	but	 factually.
We	are	from	the	ocean,	physically.	And	we	are	from	a	vaster	ocean,	invisible	to
the	 bare	 eyes,	 spiritual.	 And	 when	 the	 invitation	 comes,	 running	 towards	 dry
land	is	running	towards	your	own	grave.
Only	the	graveyard	is	outside	the	ocean.
Life	is	in	being	oceanic.
William	James	has	given	this	word,	òceanic'	to	the	world.	The	ocean	has	always
been	there,	but	once	in	a	while	a	man	of	insight	gives	it	a	totally	new	dimension.
He	 is	 the	 first	man	 to	 use	 the	word	 òceanic'	 in	 the	 sense	 of	 vastness,	 infinity,
eternity,	immortality.	It	is	always	there;	waves	upon	waves	go	on	coming.	Just	as
in	 the	 ordinary	 ocean,	 so	 in	 the	 ocean	 of	 consciousness:	 waves	 upon	 waves,
unending	joy,	unending	dawns,	unending	celebration.
Why	should	you	think	of	running?	But	it	is	not	rare;	almost	everybody	thinks	of
running	away	from	the	ocean,	from	anything	that	is	bigger	than	you,	because	the
fear	is	you	will	be	overwhelmed,	you	will	disappear.
You	don't	need	any	lesson	in	drowning;	the	ocean	will	do	the	whole	work.	You
simply	don't	 run.	You	 simply	go	on	 sitting	 silently	 and	 let	 the	ocean	 take	you
over.	Don't	be	worried	 that	 this	 is	going	 to	be	your	death.	That	 is	 the	 fear	 that
comes	to	every	mind	the	moment	it	is	close	to	the	infinite.	It	is	a	very	small,	very
tiny	thing.	It	has	made	its	own	cozy	life,	although	it	is	dark	and	miserable,	poor,
spiritually	poor.
But	 it	 seems	 to	 be	 safe	 in	 a	 way,	 that	 you	 are	 not	 being	 overwhelmed	 by
something	bigger	than	you.	And	unless	a	man	learns	how	to	be	overwhelmed,	he
will	miss	everything	that	is	of	value.	He	will	miss	love;	he	will	run	away	from
love,	because	love	is	bigger	than	you	and	very	overwhelming.	Such	a	person	will
run	 away	 from	 truth.	Lies	 are	 good;	 they	 are	 smaller	 than	you.	They	 are	 your
own	creation;	how	can	they	be	bigger	than	you?	But	truth	is	not	your	creation;	in
fact,	you	come	from	the	sources	of	truth.
Naturally,	the	fear	arises	when	you	come	across	truth.
Silence	is	overwhelming;	all	noise	is	yours.
Silence	belongs	to	existence.
With	 a	 noisy	mind,	 chattering	 day	 in,	 day	 out,	 you	 are	 comfortable.	And	 you
have	become	identified	with	 this	small	mind,	 this	small	personality,	which	you
are	not	in	reality.	But	you	can	know	only	if	you	allow	yourself	to	be	drowned	in
love,	in	truth,	in	silence,	in	an	ecstasy	that	knows	no	beginning,	no	end.	There	is
no	other	way	to	know	yourself,	other	than	drowning	yourself	in	the	very	source
of	 your	 life	 and	 the	 very	 goal	 of	 your	 life.	 People	would	 like	 to	 have	 a	 little
sample	before	they	drown.	It	is	not	a	marketplace;	truth	cannot	be	given	to	you
in	small	pieces	as	samples,	nor	can	love.
Mulla	Nasruddin	wanted	to	learn	how	to	swim.	He	approached	the	teacher	who
used	to	teach	children	to	swim;	the	teacher	was	very	willing.	He	said,	"It	is	not
difficult.	In	a	day	you	will	know	it."
In	 fact,	 everybody	 is	 born	 with	 an	 intrinsic	 capacity	 to	 swim.	 It	 is	 only	 a
remembrance	that	is	needed.	So,	it	is	not	really	something	new	added	to	you,	but
something	that	you	were	not	aware	of,	but	was	always	part	of	your	being.	The
child	in	the	mother's	womb	swims,	floats	in	water.	And	the	water	has	the	same
constituents,	chemicals,	salt	as	the	ocean.	This	fact	has	given	scientists	the	idea
that	 life	must	have	been	born	 first	 in	 the	ocean.	 It	 is	 still	 born	 in	 the	ocean:	 a
pregnant	 woman	 starts	 eating	 more	 salty	 things,	 because	 she	 has	 to	 keep	 the
balance	of	exactly	the	same	amount	of	chemicals	that	make	up	the	oceanic	water.
There	is	no	way	to	give	you	a	sample	of	life;	either	you	live	or	you	don't	live.	So
Mulla's	teacher	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	to	swim	is	a	very	minor	thing	--	you	can
see	that	small	children	are	learning..."
Mulla	was	a	little	afraid.	He	said,	"I	can	see	small	children	learning,	but	I	am	not
a	 small	 child."	And	 out	 of	 nervousness	 and	 fear	 he	 slipped	 on	 the	 stone	 steps
before	he	could	enter	the	river.	He	fell	down	and	he	got	up	and	started	running
without	saying	a	single	word	to	the	teacher.
The	teacher	said,	"Mulla	Nasruddin,	what	happened?"
He	said,	"It	is	enough.	I	will	first	learn	to	swim	and	then	I	will	come	close	to	the
water;	otherwise,	I	am	not	going	to	take	the	risk."
But	 how	 are	 you	 going	 to	 learn	 swimming	 on	 your	 bed?	You	 can	 throw	your
hands	and	your	legs	around.	It	may	give	you	some	fracture	or	something,	but	it
will	not	give	you	the	art	of	swimming.	Only	water	has	that	capacity	to	revive	in
you	a	hidden	secret	which	you	already	know.
One	 Japanese	 professor	 has	 been	 trying	 to	 teach	 children.	 First	 he	 started	 to
teach	 twelve-month-old	 children	how	 to	 swim.	 It	was	great	 news;	 nobody	had
ever	 thought	 that	 a	 twelve-month-old	 baby	 could	 swim.	 Then	 he	 went	 on
reducing:	ten-month-old,	nine-month-old,	six-month-old...	now	he	is	working	on
three-month-old	babies.	And	his	next	step	is	that	the	first-day-born	baby	should
be	put	immediately	into	a	small	lukewarm	tub	and	allowed	to	swim,	because	he
already	knows	intrinsically	and	just	needs	the	opportunity.
Millions	of	people	don't	know	how	to	swim	because	they	have	never	been	given
the	opportunity;	otherwise,	it	is	too	beautiful	an	experience	to	miss.	To	be	in	the
water,	is	to	be	back	in	your	very	life-giving	original	source.	It	can	revive	you;	it
can	give	you	a	freshness	and	rejuvenation.
Radha,	you	are	doing	just	like	Mulla	Nasruddin	--	running	for	the	dry	land.	That
is	running	for	your	grave	because	only	graves	are	dry.	The	whole	life	is	oceanic.
You	don't	need	to	learn	how	to	drown.	You	have	just	to	learn	not	to	escape,	not
to	run	away,	and	everything	will	be	done	by	the	oceanic	feelings	of	silence,	love,
truth,	meditation.	They	will	drown	you.	It	is	not	that	when	floods	come,	houses
start	learning	how	to	drown;	they	simply	drown.
And	your	dry	land	is	not	very	dry...!
If	Radha	runs	toward	dry	land,	that	would	be	Italy.	It	is	one	of	the	juiciest	places
on	 the	 earth,	 and	 very	 slippery	 --	 so	 much	 piesta!	 It	 has	 made	 every	 Italian
greasy.	They	don't	need	any	other	kind	of	lubrication;	their	whole	being	is	full	of
lubrication.	 Where	 will	 you	 find	 dry	 land	 in	 Italy?	 In	 Italy	 it	 is	 absolutely
difficult.
One	woman	has	just	gathered	a	ten-thousand	membership	for	the	Radical	Party
of	Italy.
She	is	a	beautiful	woman,	an	actress,	well	known.	She	allowed	herself	to	sit	in	a
square	in	Rome,	and	anybody	who	wanted	to	touch	her	breasts	or	kiss	her	had	to
enroll	as	a	member	of	the	Radical	Party.
Now,	in	Italy,	instead	of	ten	thousand	she	has	enrolled	fifteen	thousand.	And	she
fought	the	election	for	membership	of	parliament	by	sitting	absolutely	naked	in	a
convertible	car.	She	went	around	her	constituency...	you	can	play	with	her	body
the	way	you	want,	but	remember,	you	have	to	vote	for	her.	And	naturally,	people
enjoyed	 it	 immensely;	 she	 got	 more	 votes	 than	 anybody	 else.	 All	 great
politicians	and	leaders	are	left	far	behind.
The	 speaker	 of	 the	 parliament	 had	 to	 declare,	 "I	 will	 allow	 this	 lady	 in
parliament	if	she	promises	that	she	will	not	do	tricks	like	this	here	in	parliament
house,	because	that	will	be	an	insult	to	the	great	house	of	the	representatives	of
the	country."	She	has	not	promised.
And	 I	 think	 there	 is	 no	 provision	 in	 any	 constitution	 of	 any	 country,	 that	 you
cannot	be	naked	in	parliament.
You	can	do	all	kinds	of	things.	Nobody	has	ever	thought	that	these	things	have	to
be	written	 into	 the	 constitution.	Now,	 perhaps	 in	 Italy	 they	will	 have	 to	make
some	 amendments,	 because	 in	 the	 first	 reception	 given	 to	 her	 by	 the	 Radical
Party,	she	did	another	great	thing	that	perhaps	only	in	Italy	is	possible.	She	came
naked	and	started	pissing	on	the	front	line	of	the	gathering.	Those	were	the	most
important	people,	and	the	whole	crowd	clapped	and	laughed.	This	is	a	dry	land?
Nobody	thought	that	she	would	do	such	a	thing.	Nakedness	was	okay;	they	had
become	accustomed	to	this.	Now	they	are	all	wondering	what	she	is	going	to	do
next.
Radha,	just	learn	to	be	silently	available	for	whenever	a	tidal	wave	of	existence
comes	 to	 drown	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 your	 death;	 it	 is	 your	 real	 life.	 You	were	 dead
before	 it.	 These	 tidal	waves	 of	 love	 and	 truth	 and	 beauty	 and	 celebration	will
give	 you	 authentic	 life,	 life	 as	 it	 should	 be.	And	 I	 know	you	 so	well	 that	 you
cannot	find	any	home	anywhere	else.
Wherever	you	are,	you	will	feel	thirsty	for	me.
And	remember...
I	am	not	going	to	be	here	forever,	so	don't	escape	from	the	ocean.
Look...
The	 ocean	 has	 started	 raining	 and	 is	 sending	 messages	 through	 the	 winds,
through	 the	dance	of	 the	 trees.	Accept	 the	 invitation	of	something	greater	 than
you,	that	makes	you	great.
The	old	proverb	says:	"A	man	is	known	by	the	company	he	keeps."	Never	keep
company	with	smaller	things,	because	they	make	you	small.	Keep	company	with
vast	experiences	-
-	they	make	you	great.	They	bring	you	to	your	ultimate	splendor	and	glory.
One	thing	I	can	promise	to	you	--	if	you	want	to	try	it	you	can	try	--	run	for	the
dry	land	and	I	am	coming	with	you!
In	 Italy	 sannyasins	 are	 collecting	 thousands	 of	 signatures	 against	 the	 Italian
government's	order	that	I	cannot	enter	Italy.	They	even	wanted	me	to	become	the
president	of	the	Radical	Party.	I	refused.	I	said,	"This	is	not	radicalism	what	you
are	doing;	this	is	sheer	stupidity.	It	may	create	a	little	nuisance,	but	it	is	not	going
to	transform	man."	They	wanted	me	to	become	the	president,	because	then	they
have	more	weight	to	put	over	the	government.	Their	constitution	allows	that	they
can	choose	the	president	from	anywhere	in	the	world.	The	secretary	will	be	an
Italian	and	he	is	the	real	head.	The	president	will	be	a	formal	head.	But	I	refused.
I	 said,	 "Your	 Radical	 Party	 is	 not	 radical	 enough	 for	 me.	 It	 is	 more	 on	 the
ridiculous	side."
But,	 Radha,	 if	 you	 go	 there,	 I	 am	 coming.	 I	 have	 always	 felt	 a	 soft	 spot	 for
Italians.	I	don't	know	why.	I	have	not	even	tasted	spaghetti,	and	I	will	never	taste
it;	just	the	name	makes	me	afraid.
If	people	start	finding	a	dry	land	in	Italy,	then	the	ocean	has	to	fall.	It	is	not	the
ocean	that	is	coming	to	you,	it	is	me	--	and	you	are	afraid	of	me.	You	have	long
been	associated	with	me	and	now	the	spring	is	close	and	the	hesitancy	and	the
fear...	What	will	the	unknown	bring	to	you?
I	 informed	 you	 to	 come	 into	 Lao	 Tzu	 and	 work	 in	 the	 library.	 You	 became
frightened,	 because	 to	 be	 too	 close	 to	 me	 is	 dangerous.	 You	 have	 chosen	 to
continue	to	work	in	the	kitchen	making	spaghetti.	You	know	that	spaghetti	 is	a
protection;	I	will	not	come	to	that	side.	There	is	no	need	to	go	to	Italy.	Just	here
if	you	can	go	on	making	spaghetti	--	even	if	I	smell	it	that	is	enough	--	I	will	not
come	close	 to	 that	place.	That	 is	 the	only	security	from	the	ocean.	There	 is	no
need	to	learn	how	to	drown	or	how	to	swim,	just	remain	drowned	in	spaghetti.
That	will	keep	me	away.
But	you	cannot	escape.	You	have	crossed	that	line	a	long	time	ago.	I	know	my
people	who	have	crossed	the	line	from	where	they	cannot	return.	And	I	know	my
people	who	have	still	not	reached	that	line.
Just	yesterday	I	heard	about	one	sannyasin	who	has	said	that	he	agrees	with	me
sixty	percent.	Agreeing	sixty	percent	actually	means	the	difference	between	his
agreement	of	sixty	percent	and	disagreement	of	forty-nine	percent	is	only	eleven
percent.	Now	this	person	can	escape	any	moment.
But	 Radha,	 I	 don't	 think	 you	 agree	 with	 me	 sixty	 percent.	 And	 I	 have	 never
asked	anybody	how	much	you	agree	with	me.	Either	you	are	with	me	or	you	are
not	with	me.
There	is	no	question	of	agreement,	because	I	am	not	teaching	you	any	doctrine
that	you	have	to	believe.	Whether	you	believe	sixty	percent,	seventy	percent	or
fifty	percent,	you	believe.
I	 am	 simply	 making	 my	 own	 meditation	 available	 to	 you	 in	 different	 ways,
through	groups,	 through	 therapies,	 through	meditation,	 through	 talking	 to	 you.
You	have	not	to	agree	or	disagree;	those	are	childish	things.	Either	you	have	to
experience	me,	 and	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a	 hundred	 percent,	 or	 you	 have	 not	 to
open	 to	me,	and	 that	 is	going	 to	be	a	hundred	percent.	Either	you	open	or	you
don't.
Radha,	that	time	has	passed;	you	cannot	close	yourself	to	me.	Wherever	you	are
you	will	remain	open.	And	now	I	am	not	going	anywhere,	for	the	simple	reason
that	without	going	physically	I	can	reach	 to	my	people	 if	 they	are	open	 to	me.
Even	if	physically	I	reach	those	who	are	not	open	to	me	it	is	pointless.	Even	if
you	go	 you	will	 be	 coming	back,	 because	 the	moment	 you	 leave	me	you	will
start	thinking	again	to	come.	So	don't	do	unnecessary	exercises.
You	have	come,	you	have	been	one	of	my	oldest	sannyasins	who	has	never	for	a
moment	thought	that	 they	can	be	against	me.	But	the	fear	 is	natural:	 the	closer
you	come,	the	more	you	will	feel	afraid.	So	when	you	are	coming	closer,	come
fast,	faster	than	your	fear.
An	Eskimo	proverb	is:	On	thin	ice	one	should	run	fast.	Everybody	who	is	around
me	is	on	thin	ice.	Don't	stand	there!	Run	fast!	Your	speed	has	to	be	faster	than
the	breaking	of	the	thin	layer	of	ice.	And	according	to	your	weight,	Radha,	you
have	to	run	really	fast.
Anyway	you	want	to	run,	why	run	for	a	dry	land?	Run	towards	me.	I	have	been
calling	you	all,	 inviting	you,	persuading	you,	slapping	you	to	wake	up	because
you	go	on	falling	asleep.	Just	two	or	three	days	ago	I	had	to	slap	Veena	because
she	was	falling	asleep.
Now	she	looks	awake.
A	 little	 six-year-old	 girl	 came	 to	 the	 kitchen	 and	 asked,	 "Mommy,	 can	 I	 have
babies?"
"No,	of	course	not,	dear,"	her	mother	replied.
The	 little	girl	 turned	around	and	 ran	back	outside	 shouting,	 "Okay	boys,	 same
game,	same	game."
For	many	lives	you	have	been	playing	the	same	game	of	running	from	the	ocean
for	dry	land.	This	time	try	a	new	game	of	running	towards	the	ocean,	towards	the
overwhelming.
Running	 away	 is	 cowardly.	 Running	 towards	 the	 ocean,	 the	 overwhelming	 is
living	 dangerously.	 And	 only	 one	who	 lives	 dangerously,	 lives;	 others	 simply
vegetate.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
ARE	THERE	TWO	KINDS	OF	MEMORIES,	A	FACTUAL	MEMORY,	AND	A
SPIRITUAL	MEMORY?	 IF	 YES,	 IS	 THERE	 A	 CONNECTION	 BETWEEN
THEM?
Premrajo,	 there	are	 two	kinds	of	memories,	but	 they	are	not	a	 factual	memory
and	a	spiritual	memory.	They	are	a	factual	memory	and	a	psychological	memory.
There	is	nothing	like	a	spiritual	memory.	Your	being,	your	spirit,	has	no	past	and
no	 future;	 it	 is	 always	 in	 the	 present.	 It	 has	 no	 memories	 and	 it	 has	 no
imaginations,	no	dreams.	It	 is	pure	existence,	uncontaminated	by	 the	dead	past
that	 is	 no	more,	 and	 by	 the	 future	 that	 is	 not	 yet.	 But	 there	 are	 two	 kinds	 of
memory:	the	factual	memory	and	the	psychological	memory.	And	the	difference
between	the	two	has	to	be	understood	because	it	is	of	great	significance	for	you
all.
A	 factual	 memory	 keeps	 you	 only	 a	 watcher;	 you	 are	 not	 involved	 in	 it.	 For
example,	you	 remember	 that	yesterday	somebody	 insulted	you...	 If	you	simply
remember	that	somebody	insulted	you,	it	is	factual.	But	if	you	still	are	angry,	you
still	want	to	take	revenge,	you	are	still	waiting	for	some	opportunity	to	insult	the
person,	then	it	is	psychological	memory.
I	have	only	 factual	memories.	 I	 am	not	 involved	 in	 any	way	emotionally	with
those	 memories.	 They	 have	 happened,	 but	 I	 don't	 have	 any	 psychological
reaction	attached	to	them.
As	 you	 become	more	 and	more	 a	meditator,	 your	 psychological	memory	will
start	disappearing,	but	the	factual	memory	will	become	very	clear,	because	now
your	 energy	 is	 not	 divided.	The	psychological	memory	was	 creating	 a	 kind	of
darkness	around	the	fact.
You	were	not	detached;	you	were	not	a	 faraway	observer.	You	were	 too	much
attached	to	it	--	for	or	against	does	not	matter.
As	you	become	more	and	more	a	witness	of	your	mind,	a	disidentification	arises
with	the	mind	and	all	its	contents.	Your	memory	will	become	very	clear,	crystal
clear,	because	now	there	is	no	fog	of	your	emotions	and	reactions	around	it.	You
can	meet	a	man	who	has	insulted	you	as	if	he	has	never	insulted	you,	although
you	know	factually	that	he	has	insulted	you.	But	because	you	are	not	affected	by
his	 insult	 you	 know	 that	 it	 is	 his	 problem.	You	 have	 not	 taken	 the	 insult,	 you
have	 not	 accepted	 it.	Now	 he	 is	 absolutely	 free	 to	 say	 something,	whether	 he
says	it	or	not.	He	can	keep	it	in	his	mind;	it	is	his	problem.	You	have	not	become
part	of	his	problem	and	anxiety.
It	happened	one	night	that	a	man	could	not	sleep...
He	was	tossing	and	turning.	His	wife	said,	"What	is	the	matter?"
He	 said,	 "The	 problem	 is	 that	 tomorrow	morning	 I*****	 have	 to	 give	 back	 a
million-dollar	 loan	 and	 I	 don't	 have	 a	 single	 dollar	 to	 give	 back.	 Tomorrow
morning	I	will	go	bankrupt.	How	can	I	sleep?"
She	said,	"Who	has	given	you	the	loan?"
The	husband	said,	"It	is	nobody	other	than	my	friend	who	lives	just	in	front	of
our	house."
The	woman	opened	the	window	and	called,	"Fred,	Fred."
In	the	middle	of	the	night,	Fred	jumped	out	of	his	bed	and	answered,	"What	is
the	matter?"	He	opened	his	door.
She	said,	 "My	husband	has	not	a	 single	dollar	 to	give	you	 tomorrow	morning.
Now	you	worry	and	let	him	sleep."
It	is	so	simple	once	you	are	not	psychologically	attached	to	it.	Fred	was	perfectly
well,	asleep,	perhaps	happily	asleep	thinking	that	tomorrow	morning	he	is	going
to	get	one	million	dollars.	Now,	 there	 is	no	possibility	of	 any	 sleep.	What	has
happened?	Nothing	has	happened;	just	a	statement	from	the	woman,	but	now	it
is	a	psychological	problem.
She	 has	 shifted	 the	 problem.	 She	 told	 her	 husband,	 "Now	 you	 rest.	You	were
afraid	 to	be	 exposed.	 I	 have	exposed	you.	You	were	worried	what	people	will
think.	Now	let	him	worry	how	he	is	going	to	find	one	million	dollars."
A	 factual	 memory	 is	 perfectly	 mechanical.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 the	 memory	 of	 a
computer.	But	a	psychological	memory	is	your	identification.
I	have	heard	about	a	very	strange	case	in	a	psychology	conference...
An	old,	well-respected,	world-honored	psychologist	is	reading	his	paper,	but	he
is	finding	it	very	difficult.	He	is	perspiring,	although	it	is	an	air-conditioned	hall.
He	has	read	thousands	of	papers,	so	he	is	not	a	new	man	afraid	of	the	audience,
and	most	of	them	are	his	students.	He	is	so	old,	eighty	years	old.
But	something	is	strange	that	he	cannot	manage	to	concentrate	on	his	paper.	Just
in	the	front	row	is	a	beautiful	lady;	she	is	also	a	psychologist,	his	own	student.
And	by	her	side	is	one	of	his	colleagues,	old	colleagues,	of	the	same	age.	They
both	have	been	 students	of	Sigmund	Freud	and	 they	have	 lived	 almost	 twenty
years	together	under	the	same	master.
That	 other	 old	 fellow	 is	 playing	 with	 the	 breasts	 of	 the	 young	 woman
psychologist.	Now	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	psychologist.	He	is	neither	the
old	 man	 who	 is	 playing	 with	 the	 breasts	 nor	 is	 he	 the	 woman	 who	 has	 the
breasts.	But	the	disturbing	factor	is	that	the	woman	is	absolutely	unaffected;	she
is	listening	to	the	paper.
This	is	creating	trouble	in	his	mind.	What	is	the	matter?	The	woman	could	have
stopped	him,	but	rather	than	stopping	him,	she	is	absolutely	quiet	about	it	as	if
nothing	 is	 happening.	 And	 the	 old	 man	 is	 enjoying	 tremendously.	 This	 is
affecting	 the	 speaker	who	 is	 standing	 in	 front.	He	cannot	 concentrate,	 because
between	his	paragraphs,	he	has	to	look	and	see	whether	that	thing	has	stopped	or
not.
The	whole	conference	 is	worried	about	what	has	happened	to	him?	This	 is	not
the	way	he	has	ever	read,	and	it	is	a	very	important	discovery	that	he	has	made
about	 man's	 mind,	 but	 his	 presentation	 seems	 to	 be	 very	 strange.	 Finally,	 he
finished	 without	 waiting	 for	 the	 people	 to	 ask	 questions,	 which	 was	 part	 of
everybody's	paper.	When	you	bring	some	new	theory	you	have	to	satisfy	other
people	working	on	 the	same	ground	that	what	you	have	found	is	valid.	He	did
not	wait	for	that;	he	simply	stepped	down,	almost	stumbled,	and	asked	the	young
lady,	"Why	are	you	not	stopping	this	dirty	old	man?"
She	said,	"It	is	not	my	problem;	it	is	his	problem.	I	am	not	losing	anything.	And
if	he	 is	enjoying	 it	 in	his	old	age,	 let	him.	Perhaps	he	has	missed	his	mother's
breast	--	before	he	wanted	to	leave	it	he	was	taken	away.	Perhaps	his	mother	died
early	 and	 he	 had	 to	 live	 on	 bottled	 milk.	 There	 can	 be	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
reasons.	Perhaps	his	wife's	breasts	are	not	worth	playing	with.	But	it	 is	not	my
problem;	I	am	perfectly	at	ease,	without	any	disturbance.	 If	he	 is	 feeling	some
satisfaction	in	his	old	age,	let	him."
It	 looks	 strange,	 but	 it	 makes	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 factual	 and	 the
psychological.
The	 factual	 is	 there,	but	 the	woman	 is	 certainly	beyond	getting	 identified.	She
has	certainly	understood	a	few	fundamentals	of	life.	Both	the	two	old	men	who
are	 colleagues	 are	 disturbed.	 The	 one	who	 is	 playing	with	 her	 breast	must	 be
afraid	if	anybody	is	 looking	at	him	what	they	will	 think.	He	cannot	be	without
worry	of	being	caught	red-handed.	And	if	the	woman	starts	shouting	and	stands
up...	He	is	a	well-respected	man,	and	this	will	be	very	humiliating.
The	other	 fellow	 is	not	at	all	concerned	with	 the	 thing	 --	could	have	 remained
just	a	watcher;	it	is	not	his	business	--	but	he	becomes	psychologically	involved
although	 there	 is	 no	 need	 because	 factually	 he	 is	 out	 of	 it.	 You	 can	 become
involved	 in	 things	 in	 which	 you	 don't	 have	 to	 get	 involved.	 Involvement	 has
become	people's	habit.	And	if	you	get	involved	in	other	people's	problems,	then
what	about	your	own	problems;	how	can	you	remain	detached?
One	old	psychoanalyst	and	his	young	assistant	were	coming	down	the	elevator
after	 finishing	 their	 work	 for	 that	 day;	 it	 was	 already	 late.	 They	 should	 have
finished	three	hours	before,	but	the	patients	went	on	and	on	telling	their	dreams.
It	had	been	a	very	tiring	day,	and	the	young	man	was	getting	tired	every	day,	so
tired	 that	 he	 was	 thinking	 of	 dropping	 out	 of	 this	 business.	 Although	 the
profession	 is	 the	most	 highly	 paid	 profession	 in	 the	world	 he	was	 thinking	 of
doing	anything	else	--	this	was	torture.
But	he	was	wondering	that	the	old	man,	his	teacher	and	now	his	colleague,	does
not	 seem	 to	 have	 any	 worry.	 So	 on	 the	 elevator	 --	 finding	 him	 in	 seclusion,
nobody	else	was	there	to	hear	--	he	said,	"I	wanted	to	ask,	Professor,	one	thing.
You	 never	 get	 tired,	 you	 are	 old;	 I	 get	 so	 tired	with	 all	 kinds	 of	 rubbish	 and
nonsense.	 The	 whole	 day	 listening,	 listening,	 listening;	 I	 cannot	 sleep	 in	 the
night.	Those	patients	torture	me	--	even	in	the	night	they	become	my	nightmares.
The	whole	day	I	am	tired	and	in	the	morning	I	get	up	utterly	tired.	I	am	thinking
that	this	profession	is	going	to	finish	me.	What	about	you,	I	wondered.	You	look
as	fresh	by	the	evening	when	we	are	returning	as	when	you	come	into	the	office
in	the	morning	to	start	the	work."
The	 old	man	 said,	 "You	 don't	 know	 the	 secret.	Who	 listens?"	And	 he	 showed
him	 from	 his	 pocket	 two	 earplugs.	 He	 said,	 "This	 is	 the	 protection.	 Once	 the
patient	is	on	the	couch
--	and	Sigmund	Freud	has	very	cleverly	arranged	that	the	patient	cannot	see	the
psychoanalyst;	he	sits	behind	the	couch	--	the	moment	the	patient	has	started,	I
immediately	 take	 my	 plugs,	 close	 my	 eyes	 and	 just	 sit	 silently.	 It	 is	 such	 a
meditation.	It	is	so	beautiful.	He	is	paying	for	my	meditation.	Otherwise,	I	would
have	been	dead	long	ago.	I	wanted	to	tell	you	myself,	but	I	was	waiting	for	you
to	ask.	Never	tell	it	to	anybody	else;	particularly	the	patients	should	not	become
aware	that	they	are	not	being	listened	to
--	and	the	problems	are	almost	the	same."
The	whole	psychoanalytic	process	is	that	the	person	who	goes	on	talking	about
his	worries,	concerns,	anxieties,	just	by	talking	feels	relieved.	It	is	not	a	question
that	you	have	to	listen	to	it;	if	he	could	talk	to	a	wall	that	would	do	the	same	as
psychoanalysis.
But	it	is	difficult	to	talk	to	a	wall;	you	look	a	little	weird	talking	to	yourself.	The
more	highly	you	have	to	pay,	the	quicker	you	get	better,	because	then	you	start
bringing	up	all	the	rubbish	quickly.	If	you	pay	cheap	fees	then	you	go	slowly	--
first	 layer,	second	 layer,	 third	 layer,	and	 there	are	so	many	 layers	of	crap.	And
you	 don't	 want	 to	 expose	 yourself	 so	 quickly.	 But	 when	 you	 are	 paying	 too
much,	you	don't	want	to	waste	so	much	money	and	you	immediately	come	to	the
basic	layer.
The	question	 is	not	 that	 the	psychoanalyst	should	 listen	 to	you;	 the	question	 is
that	you	should	believe	that	he	is	listening	to	you.	That	is	what	helps	you.	If	the
psychoanalyst	listens	to	you,	he	may	become	psychologically	involved.	Then	it
is	tiring;	then	he	may	carry	it	over	into	the	night:	he	wants	to	sleep,	but	what	he
has	been	listening	to	and	thinking	about	is	not	complete	yet,	so	he	has	to	go	on
thinking.	Unless	his	whole	mind	is	satisfied,	everything	 is	complete,	sleep	will
not	come.
But	 there	 is	no	spiritual	memory.	When	you	pass	 from	one	 life	 to	another	 life,
two	 things	 go	with	 you:	 your	 spiritual	 being	 and	 your	 psychological	memory.
Your	factual	memory	is	left	behind.	Your	factual	memory	is	part	of	the	brain,	and
your	psychological	memory	is	your	mind,	and	you	have	to	learn	the	distinction
between	brain	and	mind.
Mind	 is	 created	 by	 the	 identification	 of	 your	 being	 with	 the	 brain.	 It	 is	 an
epiphenomenon;	it	has	no	existential	reality.	The	brain	has	an	existential	reality.
It	is	a	biocomputer,	a	perfectly	good	mechanism.	But	when	your	being	becomes
attached	 to	 the	 brain,	 a	 third	 entity	 comes	 into	 being	 which	 is	 the
epiphenomenon.	 It	 comes	 only	 out	 of	 identification.	 That	 is	why	 all	 the	 great
masters	have	been	insisting	on	disidentifying	yourself	with	whatever	goes	on	in
your	brain.
This	is	the	way	to	dissolve	the	mind;	otherwise,	this	fog	of	the	mind	will	follow
your	spirit	wherever	you	go.	That	is	why	it	is	possible	to	remember	about	your
past	lives.	But	the	remembrance	is	only	psychological,	 it	 is	not	factual.	So	you
cannot	depend	on	its	really	being	true.	It	may	be;	it	may	not	be.
Because	 you	 make	 so	 much	 fuss	 about	 small	 things	 psychologically,	 your
remembrance	will	carry	that	exaggeration.	The	fact	is	no	longer	there,	and	there
is	 no	 way	 to	 find	 out	 how	 longer	 you	 have	 exaggerated	 it.	 So	 people	 who
remember	 their	 past	 lives	 either	 as	 an	 accident,	 a	 freak	 of	 nature,	 or	 through
certain	techniques	which	take	you	back	into	your	past	life,	should	not	depend	on
what	 they	 remember.	 It	 is	 psychological	 impressions	which	may	 be	 correct	 or
which	may	contain	some	fact,	factuality,	but	they	cannot	be	absolutely	right.
I	 have	 studied	many	 cases	 because	 they	 happen	more	 in	 India	 than	 anywhere
else.	In	other	countries	where	Christianity	is	predominant,	Islam	is	predominant
or	 Judaism	 is	 predominant,	 the	 very	 conditioning	 prevents	 people	 from
remembering	their	past	lives.
But	 in	 India,	 all	 the	 three	 religions	 agree	 only	 on	 one	 point,	 reincarnation.	 So
there	is	no	conditioning	against	remembering	your	past	life.
Whatever	 nature	 creates	 as	 a	 barrier	 is	 so	 that	 you	 don't	 go	 crazy;	 one	 life	 is
enough.	If	you	remember	two	or	three	lives	and	you	have	been	passing	through
hundreds	 of	 lives,	 you	 are	 going	 to	 be	 crazy.	One	 life	 is	 enough	 to	make	 you
insane	--	one	wife	is	enough!
When	you	remember	hundreds	of	lives,	you	will	remember	wives	too,	and	all	the
torture	that	you	have	gone	through.	And	all	the	failures	and	all	the	humiliations,
all	 the	 diseases,	 sicknesses,	 and	 all	 those	 deaths	 and	 the	 pain...	 it	 will	 be
unbearable.
Hence,	the	natural	process	is	that	after	each	life	it	is	as	if	a	door	closes.	And	it
does	not	allow	the	past	life's	memory	to	infiltrate	into	your	life.	But	sometimes,
there	may	be	some	accident,	there	may	be	some	freak	of	nature	or	if	somebody	is
himself	trying	to	break	the	barrier,	then	there	are	techniques	to	break	it.
The	man	who	invented	the	techniques	for	breaking	the	barrier	 is	Mahavira.	He
calls	his	technique	jati-samaran,	memories	of	your	past	lives.	And	his	technique
is	absolutely	perfect.	But	I	don't	suggest	that	anybody	goes	into	it,	because	you
have	 to	 settle	 this	 life	 and	 that	 is	 enough.	 All	 that	 is	 only	 psychological
impressions.
Studying	people,	 I	was	wondering	how	they	remember	 things	which	cannot	be
true.
Nobody	 remembers	 that	 he	 was	 ordinary	 and	 he	 is	 ordinary	 right	 now.
Everybody	 remembers	 that	 he	was	Alexander	 the	Great,	 he	was	Nadirshar,	 he
was	 the	 Emperor	 Ashoka.	 I	 have	 never	 come	 across	 any	 single	 person	 who
remembers	 that	he	was	nobody,	 just	 a	 shoemaker	or	a	cloth	merchant;	nobody
remembers.	 And	 certainly,	 what	 they	 are	 remembering	 is	 their	 psychological
desire	of	 that	 life;	 it	 has	nothing	 to	do	with	 any	 factuality.	They	wanted	 to	be
Alexander	the	Great	and	they	could	not.
But	that	desire,	that	longing,	that	repressed	idea	has	come	with	their	minds.	And
now,	they	remember	as	if	they	WERE	Alexander	the	Great.	And	right	now	they
are	just	a	shoemaker.	It	is	against	evolution.	If	you	were	a	great	man	--	good	or
bad	--	you	will	have	moved	directly	more	into	that	dimension.	Either	you	would
have	 become	 even	 worse	 --	 if	 you	 were	 a	 Tamerlane	 or	 Genghis	 Khan	 or
Nadirshar,	 then	you	may	become	something	worse	 --	or	 remembering	 that	you
have	been	wrong	in	those	lives,	you	may	have	risen	in	consciousness;	you	have
become	a	wise	man,	a	nonviolent	man,	a	man	of	purity,	innocence	.
But	that	doesn't	seem	to	be	the	problem.	You	are	just	very	ordinary.	That	shows
your	past	has	not	been	extraordinary.	But	their	memory	is	very	certain	and	they
don't	 forget	 it.	 The	 easiest	 way	 to	 lead	 anybody	 into	 his	 past	 lives	 without
breaking	 the	 barrier...	 because	 I	 don't	 like	 to	 break	 anybody's	 barrier;	 it	 is
dangerous.	 It	 is	opening	a	 flood	of	so	many	memories	you	may	not	be	able	 to
contain	 them	 in	 your	 head;	 you	 may	 burst	 forth;	 you	 may	 start	 doing	 things
which	nobody	has	ever	expected;	you	will	not	be	in	your	own	control.
So	 the	 methods	 of	 Mahavira	 are	 perfectly	 right,	 but	 dangerous.	 And	 I	 don't
propose	 that	anybody	uses	any	kind	of	method	that	breaks	 the	barrier.	Without
breaking	the	barrier	 the	past	can	be	remembered,	and	that	 is	 through	hypnosis.
You	can	be	made	unconscious.	In	your	unconsciousness	you	can	be	taken	back
slowly:	first,	to	the	moment	of	your	birth	in	this	life	which	you	don't	remember
consciously;	 then,	 to	 the	day	you	got	 impregnated	which	you	don't	 remember;
then,	slowly	backwards	to	your	death	in	the	past	life.
Naturally,	if	that	comes	first,	it	will	be	like	reading	a	book	from	the	back.
First,	you	will	be	dead,	then	you	will	become	the	old	man,	then	you	will	become
the	young	man.	First	your	children	will	be	born	and	then	you	will	get	married.
The	 whole	 story	 will	 be	 going	 backwards.	 The	 beauty	 in	 unconsciousness
through	hypnosis	is	that	you	will	not	remember	anything.	When	you	wake	up	the
hypnotist	will	know	and	he	can	tell	you	that	this	is	what	you	remember	of	your
past	 life.	 But	 it	 will	 not	 disturb	 you,	 because	 you	 don't	 remember;	 your
conscious	mind	remains	without	being	flooded.
To	check	whether	the	man	was	really	getting	into	his	past	life	or	just	imagining,
dreaming,	I	have	hypnotized	the	same	person	a	hundred	times.	He	comes	always
to	 the	 same	 memory.	 Certainly,	 it	 is	 not	 imagination.	 Certainly,	 it	 is	 not
dreaming.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 dream	 the	 same	 dream	 again.	 And	 he	 is
unconscious,	so	he	cannot	manipulate.
He	comes	back	to	the	same	point	again.
Now	 scientists,	 particularly	 brain	 surgeons,	 have	 discovered	 seven	 hundred
centers	in	your	brain	which	contain	all	your	life.	And	the	strangest	phenomenon
that	they	discovered,	and	could	not	believe	in	the	beginning,	but	had	to	believe
because	there	is	no	other	way,	 is	 that	 those	seven	hundred	centers	each	control
one	 aspect.	 For	 example,	 one	 controls	 your	 sex.	Ordinarily,	 you	 think	 that	 the
genitals	is	where	sex	is.	It	is	not	the	genitals;	it	is	in	your	brain	from	where	your
genitals	 are	 just	 offshoots.	 Your	 hands	 are	 controlled	 by	 the	 brain,	 your	 legs,
everything;	your	tongue,	your	eyes,	everything	is	controlled	from	the	brain.	And
if	 you	 touch	 with	 an	 electrode	 --	 a	 very	 thin	 needle	 with	 electricity	 running
through	 it	 --	 if	 you	 touch	 a	 center,	 suddenly	 the	man	 starts	 doing	 things.	 For
example:	if	you	touch	his	dream	center,	even	if	he	is	awake	he	starts	talking	as	if
he	is	in	the	dream.	You	take	away	the	electrode	and	he	stops	talking.	The	great
surprise	was	that	 if	you	put	 the	needle	again	on	the	same	center,	 the	man	does
not	start	talking	from	the	point	where	he	has	stopped.	He	starts	the	dream	again
from	the	very	beginning.
It	seems	there	is	an	automatic	reversal	process.	You	have	to	reverse	a	tape,	but
your	brain	reverses	immediately.	When	you	put	the	needle	on	the	dream	center
again	it	starts	from	A	B	C,	not	from	the	point	where	it	has	stopped.	If	you	take
the	needle	away	again,	it	reverses	so	quickly	that	no	time	is	lost.	Put	the	needle
back	and	it	starts	from	A	B	C
again.	 If	 the	 man	 was	 saying,	 "I	 am	 Alexander	 the	 Great..."	 --	 if	 you	 have
touched	 his	 past	 life	memory	 center	 and	 he	was	 saying,	 "I	 am	Alexander	 the
Great,"	and	if	you	take	the	needle	away	and	put	it	back	again,	he	will	again	start
with,	"I	am	Alexander	the	Great."
Your	brain	contains	all	the	memories,	psychological	memories	of	your	past	lives.
But	 the	 more	 you	 meditate,	 the	 more	 you	 go	 on	 erasing	 all	 psychological
memories.	 Begin	 first	 from	 this	 life,	 then	 slowly,	 slowly	 your	meditation	 gets
deeper	and	the	past	life's	memories	are	also	removed,	erased.	And	a	man	with	no
psychological	memory	at	all	is	the	man	we	call	enlightened.	I	am	trying	to	give
you	different	dimensions	of	enlightenment.
Just	a	 joke	after	a	serious	matter	 in	which	you	had	 to	contain	your	 laughter.	 It
has	no	concern	with	the	question;	it	concerns	you.	So	my	tapes,	my	videos,	my
books	 should	be	 read	with	 the	 idea	clearly	 that	 I	 am	not	concerned	what	 I	 am
saying,	I	am	more	concerned	to	whom	I	am	saying,	and	why	I	am	saying.
My	concern	is	not	theoretical.
It	is	absolutely	practical.
So	 just	 to	 erase	 the	 seriousness	 which	 I	 know...	 past	 lives,	 new	 information,
psychological	memories,	spiritual	memories,	factual	memory.	These	are	not	the
things	 that	 are	 going	 to	 help	 you	 have	 a	 good	 laugh.	 This	 is	 none	 of	 those
memories....
"Mommy,"	asked	little	Sadie,	"does	everyone	have	their	legs	up	in	the	air	when
they	go	to	heaven?"
"No,"	the	mother	replied.	"Where	did	you	get	such	a	silly	idea?"
"Well,	 I	 just	came	from	 the	bedroom.	The	maid	had	her	 legs	up	 in	 the	air	and
was	screaming,	`God,	I'm	coming.	God,	I'm	coming.'	But	daddy	was	on	 top	of
her	and	he	would	not	let	her	go."
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	G-d
29	August	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708295
ShortTitle:
INVITA17
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
119
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
DOES	PSYCHOLOGICAL	THERAPY	HELP	TO	GO	BEYOND	THE	MIND?
Vijen,	psychological	therapy	can	help	you	to	understand	the	mind,	but	it	cannot
lead	you	beyond	the	mind.
Only	one	thing	leads	you	beyond	the	mind	and	that	is	meditation.	Meditation	has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 psychotherapy,	 but	 psychotherapy	 can	 create	 a	 ground	 by
giving	you	a	better	understanding	of	your	mind	to	go	into	meditation.	It	cannot
lead	you	directly	into	the	transcendental,	but	it	can	be	a	help,	 just	 the	way	you
prepare	a	garden.	First,	you	prepare	the	soil,	but	that	is	not	the	garden.	And	just
preparing	 the	ground,	 removing	 the	weeds,	 the	grass,	any	wild	growth,	 stones,
roots,	still	it	is	not	the	garden	--	this	much	psychotherapy	can	do.
Now	you	will	have	to	put	seeds,	give	nourishment	to	those	seeds,	care	and	love
and	protection.	And	slowly,	slowly	the	bare	ground	will	start	becoming	greener.
One	day	there	will	be	flowers	and	fruits.
Psychotherapy	is	only	a	cleansing	process,	but	it	is	like	all	cleansing	processes.
You	have	to	clean	your	house	every	day;	it	is	not	as	if	once	you	have	cleaned	it
you	have	 cleaned	 it	 forever.	Within	 twenty-four	 hours	 again	 dust	 gathers.	You
have	to	take	a	bath	every	day,	or	twice;	otherwise	you	will	start	getting	dirty.
Psychotherapy	is	good	as	a	cleaning	method,	but	it	does	not	go	beyond	that.	And
if	you	remain	addicted	to	psychotherapies	you	will	have	to	clean	yourself	again
and	again.	You	will	have	a	better	understanding	of	the	mind	but	just	that	much	is
not	 enough	 to	 create	 the	 world	 of	 the	 beyond.	 For	 that,	 seeds	 of	 meditation,
awareness,	watchfulness	are	absolutely	necessary.
And	once	you	have	gone	beyond	the	mind,	psychotherapy	becomes	meaningless.
Going	beyond	the	mind	simply	means	you	have	realized	your	own	being.	Now
mind	 is	 left	 far	 behind.	Going	 beyond	 the	mind	 also	means	 that	 now	mind	 is
going	to	function	as	a	servant	and	you	are	the	master.	So	whenever	you	need	to,
you	can	use	it.	Right	now	the	situation	is	just	the	reverse.	You	are	not	the	master,
and	 the	mind	 uses	 you.	 The	mind	 is	 almost	 blind	 and	 it	 directs	 your	 life	 and
sooner	or	later	you	are	going	to	fall	into	a	ditch.
All	minds	lead	finally	to	misery,	to	suffering.
Meditation	is	the	only	possibility	for	creating	a	space	where	blessings	shower.
I	am	not	against	psychotherapies.	I	am	simply	telling	you	they	can	be	used	as	a
foothold	to	jump	into	meditation.	You	can	jump	into	meditation	directly	too,	but
you	will	find	it	a	little	difficult	because	you	don't	have	a	clean	mind	and	a	clean
understanding.	The	mind	will	put	every	weight	on	you	and	drag	you	backwards.
Psychotherapy	 is	 instrumental,	helpful,	but	 alone	 it	 is	meaningless.	 I	 am	using
psychotherapy	in	 this	commune	as	a	means	towards	meditation,	as	a	help,	as	a
preparation.
But	in	the	West	psychotherapy	is	used	as	an	end	to	itself;	hence	psychotherapy	in
the	West	is	not	of	much	use.	Unless	it	becomes	a	stepping-stone	for	meditation,
you	are	moving	 in	a	circle.	Every	day	you	will	have	 to	clean.	Once	 in	a	while
you	 will	 have	 to	 go	 to	 a	 psychotherapist.	 People	 become	 addicted	 because	 it
gives	 you	 a	 clean	 feeling,	 but	 that	 clean	 feeling	 remains	 only	 for	 a	 few	 days;
again	you	have	gathered	all	the	rubbish.
Psychoanalysts	 ordinarily	 give	 their	 patients	 two	 sessions	 per	week,	 for	 years,
ten	years,	fifteen	years,	and	still	nobody	is	beyond	the	mind.	After	fifteen	years
of	 psychoanalysis	 one	 simply	 becomes	 addicted	 to	 psychoanalysis;	 now	 it	 has
become	a	necessity.	If	you	don't	go	twice	a	week	to	a	psychoanalyst	you	gather
too	much	 tension,	 too	much	dust,	you	feel	 too	dirty,	 too	heavy.	Now	you	have
created	 a	 new	problem.	 Psychology	 rather	 than	 giving	 you	 freedom	has	 given
you	new	chains.	It	is	as	addictive	as	any	alcohol	or	any	drug.	Nothing	is	wrong
in	 it;	 in	 itself	 it	 is	 helpful	 and	 beautiful,	 but	 you	 should	 use	 it	 for	 something
better.
Psychoanalysis	is	good	but	the	good	is	the	enemy	of	the	best.	You	should	not	get
addicted	to	the	good.	You	should	use	the	good	as	a	stepping-stone	for	the	best;
otherwise	it	turns	into	an	enemy.
Even	psychoanalysts	are	very	embarrassed	by	the	fact	 that	 there	is	not	a	single
man	 in	 the	 whole	 world	 who	 has	 been	 perfectly	 psychoanalyzed.	 And	 I	 am
amazed	at	their	stupidity.
Hoping	that	some	day	some	man	will	be	perfectly	psychoanalyzed	is	exactly	like
hoping	 that	 some	day	 some	house	will	be	perfectly	clean	and	 there	will	be	no
need	 to	 clean	 it	 again.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 absurd.	 The	 house	 will	 need	 cleaning
continually,	because	as	time	passes	dirt	gathers.
Even	the	cleanest	mirror	needs	cleaning	once	in	a	while	because	dirt	gathers	on
it,	vapor	gathers	on	 it;	 it	does	not	 reflect	clearly,	 it	 starts	 reflecting	distortions.
There	will	never	be	any	man	perfectly	psychoanalyzed,	because	 the	process	 in
itself	 is	 only	 of	 cleaning.	 Can	 you	 get	 your	 clothes	 cleaned	 forever,	 perfectly
cleaned?	 They	will	 again	 become	 ready	 to	 go	 into	 the	 laundry.	 So	 the	 people
who	 are	 going	 continuously	 into	 psychotherapies	 are	 going	 into	 a	 kind	 of
laundry,	dry	cleaning.	It	is	good,	but	good	is	not	enough.
Vijen,	in	a	sense	it	can	help	if	you	use	it	as	a	means	and	you	don't	forget	that	it	is
not	all.
In	another	sense	it	can	be	a	disturbance,	a	barrier,	if	you	think	that	this	is	all	and
there	is	nothing	else	beyond	it.
That's	what	is	happening	in	the	West.	Psychotherapists	think	this	is	the	ultimate,
but	they	have	not	produced	a	single	buddha.	Even	their	founders,	Freud	or	Jung
or	Adler	 are	 not	 awakened	 people.	 They	 are	 living	 in	 the	 same	misery,	 in	 the
same	suffering	as	you	are	living.	They	are	full	of	fear.	They	don't	know	anything
about	death,	that	it	is	a	fiction.
They	 have	 not	 experienced	 their	 own	 being.	 They	 are	 just	 scratching	 on	 the
surface.	Mind	is	your	surface;	your	being	is	in	the	center.	How	much	you	clean
your	surface	does	not	matter,	it	is	not	going	to	lead	you	to	the	center.	If	you	can
use	psychotherapy	as	a	means	it	is	good.	If	you	think	it	is	the	end	it	is	the	enemy
of	your	transcendence.	It	all	depends	on	your	intelligence.
A	Jew	asks	his	rabbi,	"I	have	two	problems.	I	have	asked	my	boss	a	dozen	times
already,	but	he	is	determined	to	fire	me	at	the	end	of	the	month."
"And	what	is	the	other	problem?"	asks	the	rabbi.
"Ah	well,	my	wife	does	not	get	pregnant,	although	she	stays	home	and	prays	all
day,"
answers	the	Jew.
"You	 are	 doing	 it	wrong,"	 suggests	 the	 rabbi.	 "Next	 time	you	 stay	 at	 home	 to
pray	and	send	your	wife	to	ask	the	boss."
Three	months	later	the	happy	Jew	thanks	the	rabbi:	"Your	help	has	worked!	The
boss	has	rehired	me	and	my	wife	is	pregnant!"
The	 rabbi	was	 certainly	 a	great	psychoanalyst	 and	did	help	 the	poor	 fellow.	 If
you	need	this	kind	of	help	then	psychotherapy	is	good,	but	don't	ask	for	more.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	FEEL	I	CAN	RELAX	MORE	AND	MORE	DEEPLY	INTO	MYSELF.	YET,
AT	THE
PERIPHERY,	 THERE	 IS	 AN	UNASSERTIVENESS,	 A	 TREMBLING	 THAT
CAN
CLOUD	THE	BLISSFULNESS	OF	LIFE.
BELOVED	MASTER,	DOES	MY	EGO	NEED	NOURISHMENT?
My	God!	Prem	Rajya,	I	wonder	whether	you	have	been	listening	to	me.	Every
day,	morning	and	evening,	I'm	telling	you	to	drop	the	ego	and	you	are	asking	me
a	great	question:	"Beloved	master,	does	my	ego	need	nourishment?"
And	you	are	also	saying,	"I	feel	I	can	relax	more	and	more	deeply	into	myself.
Yet,	at	the	periphery,	there	is	an	unassertiveness,	a	trembling	that	can	cloud	the
blissfulness	of	life.
Does	my	ego	need	nourishment?"
That	will	destroy	whatever	relaxation	you	have,	and	that	will	stop	your	growth
going	 inwards.	 It	will	make	 your	 trembling	more	 strong	 and	 the	 cloud	 that	 is
covering	 the	 blissfulness	 of	 your	 life	will	 become	 darker.	Nourishment	 of	 the
ego	 is	against	your	authentic	being;	 it	cannot	help	you	 in	any	way.	 It	can	only
destroy	you	--	destroy	you	as	you	are	destined	to	be	by	your	nature.
Ego	is	a	false	mask;	it	will	hide	your	original	face.	Don't	ask	for	its	nourishment.
In	fact,	cut	off	all	nourishment	to	it.	Let	it	die.	The	death	of	the	ego	will	be	the
beginning	 of	 your	 real	 life.	 The	more	 the	 ego	 becomes	 strong,	 the	 less	 is	 the
possibility	of	any	realization	of	yourself.
Little	Ernie	was	taking	a	walk	in	the	park	with	his	father,	when	suddenly	a	bee
settled	on	a	rock	in	front	of	them.	Just	for	spite,	Ernie	picked	up	a	piece	of	wood
and	smashed	the	bee,	whereupon	his	father	said,	"That	was	very	cruel,	Ernie,	and
for	being	cruel	you	will	get	no	honey	for	a	year."
Later,	Ernie	deliberately	stepped	on	a	butterfly.	"And	for	that,	young	man,"	said
his	father,	"you	will	get	no	butter	for	a	year."
When	 they	 returned	 home,	 Ernie's	 mother	 was	 fixing	 the	 dinner.	 Just	 as	 they
entered	 the	 kitchen,	 she	 saw	 a	 cockroach	 and	 immediately	 crushed	 it.	 Ernie
looked	at	his	father	mischievously	and	said,	"Will	you	tell	her,	Dad,	or	shall	I?"
Your	 question	 really	 makes	 me	 wonder	 how	 you	 have	 been	 listening.	 And
perhaps	this	is	 the	state	of	many	of	you.	You	listen	to	what	you	want	to	listen,
not	what	is	being	said.
You	go	on	continuously	interpreting	according	to	your	old	prejudices.	Your	mind
is	continuously	interfering;	it	does	not	allow	what	is	being	said	to	reach	to	your
heart.	What	 reaches	 to	 you	 is	 something	 else,	 distorted,	 disfigured,	 maybe	 so
distorted	that	it	is	almost	the	opposite	of	what	has	been	said.
One	has	 to	 learn	very	earnestly	 the	art	of	 listening.	 It	 is	a	difficult	art,	and	 the
greatest	 difficulty	 is	 that	 everybody	 thinks	 he	 knows	 it.	 Just	 because	 you	 can
hear,	 you	 think	 you	 can	 also	 listen.	 And	 these	 are	 two	 differing	 things,	 so
different	that	unless	you	start	listening	you	will	never	know	the	difference.
In	 the	dictionaries	 they	mean	 the	 same	 thing,	but	 in	actual	 life	hearing	 is	only
because	you	have	ears.	Listening	happens	when	just	behind	your	ears	there	is	no
noisy	mind	but	a	silent,	receptive	alertness.	If	there	is	a	continuously	chattering
mind	 behind	 the	 ears	 you	 only	 seem	 to	 listen.	 Then	 there	 are	 going	 to	 be
misunderstandings.
I	 myself	 was	 very	 shocked	 when	 I	 came	 to	 know	 that	 psychologists	 have
discovered	 that	 the	mind	does	not	allow	ninety-eight	percent	of	 information	 to
reach	you.	It	only	allows	two	percent;	ninety-eight	percent	is	simply	rejected	in
many	different	ways.	Either	it	gives	it	a	new	color,	a	new	meaning,	or	it	misses	it
deliberately,	takes	it	into	a	different	context	where	the	meaning	changes.	But	the
distortion	percentage	is	ninety-eight	percent.
The	 two	 percent	 it	 allows	 without	 distorting,	 because	 it	 agrees	 with	 its	 old
structure.
So	it	listens	only	to	itself.	Those	two	percent	are	agreeable	to	the	mind	and	so	it
immediately	 allows	 them	 in	 without	 creating	 obstructions,	 without	 creating
arguments,	 doubts,	 misinterpretations.	 And	 language	 is	 vulnerable;	 each	 word
can	mean	many	things.
The	mind	has	the	capacity	to	choose	any	meaning	it	wants,	any	meaning	that	fits
with	it.
The	art	of	 listening	 is	based	on	 silence	 in	 the	mind,	 so	 that	 the	mind	does	not
interfere,	it	simply	allows	whatever	is	coming	to	you.	I	am	not	saying	you	have
to	agree	with	it.
Listening	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	agree	with	it,	neither	does	it	mean	that
you	have	 to	disagree	with	 it.	The	art	of	 listening	 is	 just	pure	 listening,	 factual,
undistorted.	And	once	you	have	listened	then	comes	the	point	whether	you	agree
or	not,	but	the	first	thing	is	to	listen.
If	you	listen	to	something	which	is	true	there	is	no	question	of	disagreement.	If	it
is	 untrue,	 naturally	 you	 have	 to	 disagree	 with	 it.	 But	 your	 agreement	 or
disagreement	 should	 come	 not	 from	 the	 prejudiced	 mind,	 but	 from	 the
unprejudiced	heart.	Listening	is	from	the	heart,	and	hearing	is	from	the	mind,	it
is	 very	 superficial.	And	 because	 the	 heart	 is	 deeper,	 any	word	 that	 enters	 you
first	has	 to	encounter	 the	mind.	Before	 it	 reaches	 the	heart,	 the	mind	has	done
many	things	with	it.
A	man	is	standing	at	the	bar	and	another	guy	walks	up	to	him	and	says,	"Are	you
Joe	Smith?"
The	man	says,	"Yes."
The	guy	says,	"Were	you	in	Chicago	a	few	weeks	ago?"
Joe	says,	"Just	a	minute,"	and	takes	out	his	notebook,	turns	some	pages,	and	then
says,
"Yes,	I	was	in	Chicago	a	few	weeks	ago."
The	guy	says,	"Were	you	in	room	two	one	three?"
Joe	looks	in	his	notebook	and	says,	"Yes."
The	guy	says,	"Did	you	meet	Mrs.	Wentworth	in	room	two	one	four?"
Joe	looks	in	his	notebook	and	says,	"Yes."
The	guy	says,	"Tell	me,	did	you	make	love	to	Mrs.	Wentworth?"
Joe	scans	his	notebook	again	and	says,	"Yes,	I	made	love	to	Mrs.	Wentworth."
The	guy	says,	"Well,	I'm	Mr.	Wentworth	and	I	don't	like	it."
Again	Joe	looks	in	his	notebook	and	says,	"You	know,	that's	funny.	I	did	not	like
it	either."
This	 is	what	 you	 call	 hearing.	He	 agrees	 perfectly,	 but	 he	 hears	 only	what	 he
wants	to	hear;	he	understands	what	he	wants	to	understand.
And	 this	 is	 almost	 our	 everyday	 situation.	At	 least	 here	with	me,	 you	 have	 to
change	this	pattern,	you	have	to	be	utterly	silent	because	things	are	being	said	to
you	 which	 can	 bring	 a	 transformation	 in	 your	 whole	 life.	 Here	 you	 are	 not
learning	geography	or	history	or	philosophy;	here	you	are	learning	the	very	art,
the	 alchemy	of	 transformation.	 It	 is	 not	 collecting	 knowledge	 and	 information
and	becoming	more	knowledgeable.
The	effort	here	 is	 just	 the	opposite:	 to	make	you	less	knowledgeable	and	more
innocent,	to	the	final	point	where	you	can	say,	"I	don't	know	anything."	Just	like
a	newly	born	child,	you	are	pure	consciousness,	unscratched,	unspoiled.	This	is
the	state	of	a	sage,	of	a	wise	man.	His	life	has	a	completion.	From	childhood	he
began	 and	 he	moved	 the	whole	 circle	 of	 life.	 Back	 he	 has	 come	 again	 to	 the
same	point	that	he	has	left	in	his	childhood,	the	pure	consciousness	which	knows
nothing	 but	 reflects	 everything.	 He	 is	 capable	 of	 understanding	 everything
exactly	as	it	is	without	any	distortion	because	he	has	no	prejudices	to	distort.	The
state	of	the	sage	has	no	preconceived	ideas	to	mix	and	to	mess	and	to	disfigure.
There	is	a	story	in	the	life	of	Lao	Tzu.	I	have	loved	it	very	much...
He	used	to	go	for	a	morning	walk	deep	in	 the	mountains	very	early	before	 the
sunrise	when	it	was	dark	and	there	were	still	stars	in	the	sky.	And	he	used	to	go
to	the	peak	from	where	the	sunrise	was	the	most	beautiful.	And	he	would	stand
there	 sometimes	 for	 hours,	 just	 watching	 the	 sunrise,	 listening	 to	 the	 birds,
seeing	the	trees	dancing	with	joy	and	life,	opening	their	flowers,	releasing	their
fragrance.	And	then	he	would	come	back.
One	of	his	neighbors	used	to	come	with	him.	And	he	knew	that	Lao	Tzu	did	not
want	to	talk	at	all,	because	that	would	be	a	disturbance	in	his	deep	communion
with	nature.	He	had	 told	him,	"If	you	don't	use	any	words	not	even	hello,	you
can	 come.	 Silently	 you	 can	 join	 me,	 silently	 you	 can	 follow	 me,	 silently	 we
come	back;	there	is	no	need	to	say	even	goodbye.	Words	have	to	be	completely
dropped	if	you	want	to	come	with	me."
The	neighbor	loved	it	all.	He	had	never	thought	that	 things	can	be	so	beautiful
because	he	had	never	seen	the	world	with	such	a	silent	peaceful	mind,	and	with
such	a	beautiful	man	who	must	be	vibrating	his	silence	and	his	blissfulness	to	the
neighbor.	 Because	 they	 had	 been	 doing	 it	 for	 years	 now,	 the	 neighbor	 had
completely	forgotten	that	it	was	a	strange	type	of	morning	walk.
People	go,	and	they	talk	and	they	discuss	and	they	argue.	They	don't	look	at	the
trees,	they	don't	look	at	the	disappearing	stars,	they	don't	look	at	the	rising	sun.
They	are	so	much	involved	with	their	minds	that	who	is	there	to	look	at	all	the
beauty,	all	the	joy	of	existence,	the	life	again	coming	back	from	its	sleep	as	the
sun	has	set	the	day	before.
There	is	everywhere	celebration,	in	the	trees,	in	the	flowers,	in	the	birds.
The	man	was	immensely	grateful	to	Lao	Tzu	that	he	allowed	him	to	be	with	him
for	so	many	years.	Lao	Tzu	said,	"But	I	had	implored	you	not	to	use	language.
Why	are	you	using	language	today	after	so	many	years?"
He	said,	"A	problem	has	arisen.	A	guest	is	staying	with	me	and	he	also	wants	to
come	tomorrow."
Lao	Tzu	 said,	 "The	 condition	 you	 have	 to	 tell	 him.	He	 should	 remember	 that
nothing	has	to	be	said	on	the	way,	then	he	can	come."
And	 the	 guest	 thought,	 It	 is	 a	 strange	 condition.	 Not	 a	 single	word,	 not	 even
hello,	not	even	a	goodbye	when	departing...!
But	his	host	said,	"He	is	a	very	different	kind	of	man	and	he	will	not	relax	the
condition.
So	 please	 forget	 all	 your	 etiquette	 and	 mannerisms.	 Simply	 come	 with	 me,
remain	just	like	a	shadow,	and	the	experience	is	tremendous."
The	 experience	was	 tremendous.	When	 they	 reached	 to	 the	 highest	 peak	 from
where	they	could	see	the	sun	rising	just	underneath,	deep	down	in	the	valley,	he
forgot	 the	 condition;	 it	was	 so	 beautiful.	He	 had	 never	 seen	 such	 a	 thing,	 not
even	 in	 a	 dream.	 He	 was	 so	 overwhelmed	 that	 he	 said	 to	 Lao	 Tzu,	 "It	 is	 so
beautiful."
Lao	Tzu	looked	at	the	host.	Suddenly	the	guest	remembered	that	words	are	not
to	 be	 used.	 Nothing	 was	 said.	 But	 as	 they	 reached	 home	 Lao	 Tzu	 told	 his
neighbor,	"From	tomorrow	don't	come."
He	said,	 "But	you	are	punishing	me	 too	much,	and	 I	have	not	 spoken	a	single
word.	This	guest	is	new;	he	does	not	know	you.	And	he	has	also	not	said	much,
just	that	it	is	a	beautiful	sunrise."
Lao	 Tzu	 said,	 "You	 say	 it	 was	 just	 a	 little?	 That	 fellow	 is	 very	 talkative.
Although	he	was	not	saying	I	could	hear	his	chattering	mind.	All	the	way	he	was
chattering:	This	 is	beautiful,	 that	 is	beautiful,	 and	 finally,	he	asserted.	Does	he
think	that	we	can't	understand	beauty,	that	he	has	to	tell	us?	I	was	present;	you
were	present;	he	was	present.	We	were	watching	the	same	sunrise;	what	was	the
need	to	say	anything?	No,	he	is	too	talkative.
And	because	you	brought	him,	and	you	disturbed	my	morning,	from	tomorrow
nobody	comes	with	me."
The	neighbor	finally	persuaded	him	and	he	allowed	him	back	after	a	week,	but
told	him,
"Never	ask	if	any	guests	can	come.	They	don't	know	how	to	be	silent;	they	are
too	new.	I	have	never	felt	any	difficulty	with	you,	because	not	only	do	you	not
say	anything,	you	don't	think	anything."
Thinking	 and	 speaking	 are	 not	 basically	 different.	 In	 front	 of	 a	 silent	 man,
whether	 you	 think	 or	 speak	 it	 is	 the	 same.	 Thinking	 is	 talking	 with	 yourself
inside.	 People	 don't	 hear	 it	 because	 they	 are	 engaged	within	 themselves;	 they
don't	hear	even	when	you	talk	to	them.
How	can	they	hear	your	inner	chattering.	But	a	man	like	Lao	Tzu,	in	the	deepest
meditativeness,	is	able	to	catch	your	chattering	almost	like	whispering.	Even	that
much	is	a	disturbance	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	listen	to	what	is	being	said.
Gautam	Buddha	used	to	initiate	people,	and	the	first	thing	was	for	two	years	not
to	use	language	at	all.	Naturally,	two	years	is	a	long	period,	and	if	you	don't	use
language,	slowly	slowly	your	inner	chattering	also	stops	because	it	is	getting	no
more	nourishment	from	outside.	How	long	can	you	continue	playing	football	on
your	own?	You	need	a	partner.	Slowly,	slowly	you	become	fed	up	repeating	the
same	 things,	 because	 what	 new	 information	 will	 you	 be	 getting?	 You	 have
repeated	the	old	information	many	times.
I	have	heard...
People	were	waiting	in	the	waiting	room	of	a	railway	station.	The	train	was	late.
A	man	was	sitting	on	an	easy	chair	and	everybody	was	interested	in	watching	the
man.
Sometimes	he	will	giggle,	 sometimes	he	will	 even	 laugh	 loudly,	 sometimes	he
will	 throw	 something	 away.	 Everybody	 was	 silently	 watching	 and	 wondering
what	he	is	doing.
Sometimes	 he	 will	 make	 a	 bad	 face	 as	 if	 something	 bitter	 has	 come	 into	 his
mouth,	and	sometimes	he	will	smile	so	sweetly.
Finally	 they	could	not	contain	themselves.	The	train	was	getting	later	and	later
and	 that	man	was	weighing	 heavier	 and	 heavier	 on	 their	minds.	One	 of	 them
gathered	courage	and	went	to	the	gentleman	and	asked,	"You	have	to	forgive	us,
but	everybody	in	the	waiting	room	is	interested	to	know	what	you	are	doing?"
He	said,	"Doing?	I'm	not	doing	anything.	I'm	just	telling	jokes	to	myself."
They	said,	"That	makes	sense	why	you	sometimes	giggle	and	sometimes	laugh.
But	why	do	you	sometimes	throw	something	and	make	a	bad	face?"
He	says,	"When	I	hear	some	old	joke	I	throw	it	away."
Now	if	you	are	telling	jokes	to	yourself,	all	are	old.	From	where	are	you	getting
new	jokes?	And	how	long	will	you	deceive	yourself?	If	for	two	years	you	have
to	 sit	 silently	 just	 telling	 jokes	 to	 yourself,	 by	 the	 time	 two	years	 have	passed
everything	 is	 old.	You	will	 be	 throwing	with	 both	 the	 hands,	 and	 not	 a	 single
giggle!
After	initiating	anybody	into	sannyas	the	first	thing	Gautam	Buddha	used	to	say
was,
"Now	for	two	years	be	completely	silent.	Do	not	use	language.	If	you	want	water
then	show	the	symbol;	just	be	dumb.	Act	dumb,	as	if	you	cannot	speak,	so	you
are	 showing	 that	 you	 need	 water	 or	 you	 need	 food.	 You	 can	 point	 to	 your
stomach	when	you	are	feeling	hungry.	Use	symbols	as	if	you	cannot	speak."
Two	years	were	a	long	time,	but	after	two	years	people	were	so	calm	and	quiet,
so	radiant,	so	full	of	energy.	Your	constant	chattering	is	destroying	your	energy.
So	Buddha	 used	 to	 remind	 them,	 "Now	your	 two	 years	 are	 over,	 you	 can	 use
language	just	if	it	is	necessary.	But	now	you	are	capable	of	listening	to	what	I	am
saying."
But	many	of	 his	 disciples	 even	 after	 two	years	 did	not	 use	 any	 language.	The
silence	of	 being	dumb...	 and	 symbols	were	working	perfectly	well.	They	have
survived	 the	 two	years	 just	by	making	symbols,	 the	very	essential.	You	cannot
talk	 philosophy	 in	 symbols;	 you	 cannot	 argue	 for	 or	 against	 God	 just	 by
symbols.	You	can	ask	for	water,	you	can	ask	for	food,	you	can	ask	for	shelter;
you	 can	 say	 that	 you	 are	 feeling	 feverish	 or	 you	 are	 feeling	 cold	 or	 you	 are
feeling	too	hot	--	just	small	day-to-day	things	which	can	be	counted	on	your	ten
fingers.
Only	then	do	you	become	capable	of	listening;	otherwise	you	only	hear.	And	if
you	are	capable	of	listening	there	is	nothing	left	for	you	to	do.	In	that	silence	you
will	be	able	to	see	without	any	argumentation	within	you	what	is	right	and	what
is	 not	 right.	 The	 right	 immediately	 makes	 you	 so	 joyful	 and	 the	 wrong
immediately	 makes	 you	 sad	 and	 aloof.	 It	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of
differentiation	than	mental	talk:	"This	is	right;	this	is	wrong."
On	what	grounds	can	your	mind	say,	 "This	 is	 right"?	 It	 is	your	prejudice;	 it	 is
your	preconceived	idea.
But	the	heart	has	no	preconceived	ideas.	It	simply	sees	clearly.	It	has	eyes	but	no
ideas.	 It	 has	 a	 clarity	 but	 no	 prejudices.	With	 that	 clarity	 it	 can	 see	where	 the
door	is	and	where	the	wall	is.	It	does	not	have	to	think	about	it.	Only	a	blind	man
thinks,	Where	is	the	door?
Only	 a	 blind	man	 starts	 finding	 the	 door	with	 his	walking	 stick.	You	 don't	 do
that;	you	don't	even	think	about	the	door.	If	you	want	to	go	out,	you	know,	you
see.	There	is	no	need	of	thinking,	you	simply	go	out	of	the	door.
It	 is	 not	 because	 you	 are	 not	 thinking	 that	 first	 you	will	 try	 to	 go	 through	 the
wall,	and	then	you	think	about	where	the	door	is.	And	after	a	logical	syllogism
you	decide,	 "This	must	be	 the	door."	This	kind	of	process	does	not	 take	place
when	you	have	eyes.	Silence	becomes	your	eyes.	Silence	becomes	your	criterion
of	what	is	right	and	what	is	not	right.
And	the	decision	that	comes	out	of	silence	transforms	you.	You	don't	have	to	do
anything.
Mahavira,	another	contemporary	of	Gautam	Buddha,	a	man	of	the	same	height
of	 consciousness	 as	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 has	 made	 two	 divisions	 of	 people	 who
attain	to	truth.
One	 division	 he	 used	 to	 call	 the	 shravakar.	 It	 means	 one	 who	 is	 capable	 of
listening.
Shravan	means	listening,	and	shravakar	means	the	listener,	one	who	is	capable	of
listening	 in	 the	 sense	 I	 have	 defined	 listening;	 one	who	 need	 not	 do	 anything
else,	just	listening	will	be	enough.
If	you	have	a	master	with	you,	a	man	who	knows,	 then	 listening	 is	enough.	 If
you	don't	have	a	master	with	you	naturally	listening	will	not	help.	Then	you	have
to	 be	 a	 sadhu.	 So	 these	 are	 the	 two	 categories	 who	 travel	 towards	 truth.	 The
sadhu	means	the	monk.	He	has	to	follow	certain	disciplines;	he	has	to	perform
certain	 austerities,	 fasting,	 praying,	 chanting,	 the	 reading	 of	 the	 scriptures.	He
has	to	do	a	thousand	and	one	things	which	for	the	listener	are	not	needed.
The	art	of	listening	is	the	simplest	method	of	transformation.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	DON'T	EXIST	AS	A	PERSON	AND	YET	YOU	ARE	THE	BEING	THAT
I	 LOVE	 MOST.	 YOU	 KNOW	 NOTHING	 AND	 YET	 I	 PUT	 ALL	 MY
QUESTIONS	AT
YOUR	 FEET.	 YOU	 ARE	 JUST	 SILENCE	 AND	 YET	 I	 CAN	 ONLY	 SING
YOUR
SONG.	 YOU	 HAVE	 NO	 NAME	 AND	 YET	 I'M	 HELPLESS	 IN	 CRYING
YOUR
NAME.	YOU	TELL	US	EVERY	DAY	THE	INEXPRESSIBLE	CANNOT	BE
SAID,	AND	YET	I	CAN'T	HELP	BUT	TRY	AGAIN	AND	AGAIN.
YOU	KNOW	MY	GRATITUDE	AND	YET	I	CANNOT	RESIST	TO	TOUCH
YOUR
FEET	 AND	 WHISPER	 THANK	 YOU,	 OSHO.	 EVEN	 MORE	 TODAY,
BECAUSE
YOU	FREE	ME	FROM	SAYING	NO	TO	YOU.
BUT	NOW	I	HAVE	A	QUESTION:
SEEING	HOW	PAINFUL	 IT	 IS	TO	SAY	NO	TO	YOU,	HOW	CAN	 I	EVER
DARE	TO
ASK	YOU	ANYTHING?
Sarjano,	you	are	asking:	"Now	I	have	a	question:	Seeing	how	painful	it	is	to	say
no	to	you,	how	can	I	ever	dare	to	ask	you	anything?"
It	is	very	natural	to	say	yes	when	you	love,	just	as	it	 is	natural	to	say	no	when
you	don't	love.	But	there	is	still	a	deeper	layer	where	you	love	so	much	that	you
can	even	say	no.
Your	 love	 gives	 you	 that	 power.	 Your	 love	 does	 not	 make	 you	 a	 slave,
particularly	as	far	as	I	am	concerned.
You	can	say	yes	out	of	 fear.	Then	your	yes	has	no	value.	Your	yes	 is	valuable
only	when	it	comes	out	of	your	love.	The	value	is	not	in	your	yes;	the	value	is	in
your	love.	If	you	can	understand	this	then	you	can	understand	another	thing	also:
if	your	no	comes	out	of	your	love,	it	has	the	same	value	as	your	yes,	because	the
value	 is	neither	of	yes	nor	of	no;	 the	value	 is	of	your	 love.	Love	 is	absolutely
capable	of	saying	yes	or	no,	because	love	knows	no	fear.
Love	trusts	so	much	that	it	can	say	no	without	any	difficulty.	Saying	yes	is	very
natural,	but	there	may	be	times	when	you	have	to	say	no.	But	the	no	is	coming
from	a	 loving	heart	without	any	disrespect,	on	 the	contrary,	with	great	 respect.
You	 respect	 so	 much	 that	 you	 know	 that	 your	 no	 will	 not	 be	 taken	 as	 a
disrespectful	or	negative	attitude.
Love	gives	freedom.
Love	is	freedom.
So	you	need	not	be	worried	that	you	cannot	ask	for	anything.	Always	remember
that	you	are	free	to	say	yes	or	no	to	me.	I	am	not	your	enslaver;	I	am	not	your
jailer.	Not	in	any	sense	is	there	a	bondage	between	me	and	you.	All	that	exists	is
freedom	and	the	love	that	freedom	brings.
In	 this	 freedom	 and	 loving	 atmosphere	 everything	 is	 acceptable:	 your	 yes	 is
acceptable;	your	no	 is	acceptable.	And	unless	 this	 is	possible,	your	 love	 is	not
deep	enough.
What	 you	 have	 said	 in	 your	 whole	 question	 is	 more	 a	 statement	 and	 very
truthful,	honest	and	sincere.	There	was	only	one	question	in	the	end	that	I	have
answered,	 but	 I	 would	 like	 to	 discuss	 your	 statement.	 I	 am	 not	 answering	 it
because	there	is	no	question	in	it.	I	am	discussing	it	so	that	it	can	become	clear	to
all	those	who	are	present	here.	Because	one	day	everybody	has	to	come	to	this
state	from	where	Sarjano	is	speaking.
He	is	saying,	"You	don't	exist	as	a	person,	and	yet	you	are	the	being	that	I	love
most."
It	is	not	only	true	about	me.	Anybody	who	does	not	exist	as	a	person,	but	only	as
a	 presence,	will	 be	 loved	more	 than	 anyone	 else.	 Simply	 because	 he	 does	 not
exist	 as	 a	 person,	 he	 attracts,	 provokes,	 invites	 your	 love.	 His	 absence	 is	 a
tremendously	 powerful	 magnet.	 His	 absence	 is	 not	 emptiness;	 his	 absence	 is
overflowingly	 positive.	 The	 person	 is	 not	 there,	 but	 the	 presence	 is	 intensely
there.	And	what	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 person	 and	 the	 presence?	 --	 the
same	difference	as	there	is	between	the	flower	and	its	fragrance.	The	flower	is	a
person,	the	fragrance	is	only	a	presence.	You	cannot	catch	hold	of	it,	yet	you	can
be	overwhelmed	by	it.
A	 person	 has	 boundaries,	 limits.	 And	 one	 who	 has	 limits	 cannot	 give	 you
unlimited	freedom.	He	himself	is	not	unlimited.	Only	a	person	who	has	died	as
an	ego	and	has	resurrected	only	as	a	pure	being,	a	presence,	has	no	boundaries.
Obviously	 he	 is	 capable	 of	 giving	 you	 freedom;	 in	 fact,	 he	 cannot	 give	 you
anything	else.	He	has	no	boundaries.
He	can	also	give	you	a	world	without	boundaries.	And	naturally,	you	will	 love
such	a	presence	more	than	you	can	love	any	person.
A	person	is	a	very	small	thing.
A	presence	is	a	vast	sky	full	of	stars.
"You	know	nothing	and	yet	I	put	all	my	questions	at	your	feet."	I	know	nothing,
it	is	true.
And	only	a	man	who	knows	nothing	is	innocent.	Knowledge	corrupts	because	it
gives	 you	 prejudices,	 it	 makes	 you	 mechanical.	 If	 you	 ask	 a	 question	 to	 a
knowledgeable	man	 he	will	 not	 answer	 your	 question	 directly,	 he	will	 simply
repeat	 some	dead,	 ready-made	 formula.	He	knows;	his	answer	will	 come	 from
his	knowledge.
My	 answer	will	 come	 from	my	 innocence;	 hence,	my	 answer	will	 be	 a	 direct
response	to	your	question.	A	learned	man	cannot	respond	to	you	--	he	appears	to
answer	 you,	 but	 the	 answer	 is	 ready-made;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 fresh,	 spontaneous
response.	 It	 is	a	prerecorded	answer;	 it	does	not	pay	any	attention	 to	you.	The
answer	would	have	been	the	same	even	if	it	was	asked	by	somebody	other	than
Sarjano.
But	my	answer	will	be	different	to	each	person,	even	though	the	question	is	the
same,	 because	 I	 am	 responding	 each	 time	 not	 only	 to	 the	 question,	 but	 more
basically	 to	 the	 questioner.	 The	 questioner	 is	 the	 context.	 The	 question	 is
symbolic	 only.	 I	 have	 to	 answer	 the	 questioner	more.	The	 question	 is	 only	 an
excuse,	so	my	answers	will	be	different	although	your	question	may	be	the	same.
It	creates	great	difficulty	to	so-called	scholars.
One	professor	of	Bhagalpur	University	has	been	doing	research	for	his	doctorate
on	 my	 thoughts	 almost	 for	 seven	 years,	 and	 he	 becomes	 more	 and	 more
confused.	He	has	 inquired	 several	 times,	 "Which	 answer	 is	 right?	Because	 for
the	 same	 question	 you	 have	 given	 so	 many	 answers.	 You	 have	 created	 such
trouble	for	the	scholars	who	will	be	working	on	your	work	when	you	are	gone."
That's	the	way	scholars	work.	They	never	work	on	living	people,	they	work	on
dead	people.	They	will	work	on	Kabir,	they	will	work	on	Gautam	Buddha;	they
will	 work	 on	 Raidas,	 Meera,	 whom	 they	 condemned	 when	 they	 were	 alive.
Raidas	was	a	shoemaker	and	in	India	a	shoemaker	is	not	supposed	to	be	a	saint.
But	what	to	do	if	a	shoemaker	becomes	a	saint?	He	was	ignored,	condemned.	No
brahmin	could	go	to	him	to	ask	a	question.
Kabir	used	to	live	in	Varanasi,	which	is	the	Jerusalem	of	Hindus	or	the	Mecca	of
Hindus.
It	 is	 their	 ancientmost	 city	 and	 perhaps	 it	 is	 the	most	 ancientmost	 city	 in	 the
world.	 All	 Hindu	 learned	 scholars	 belong	 to	 Varanasi.	 And	 Kabir	 lived	 in
Varanasi	but	he	was	not	a	brahmin.	In	fact,	by	his	profession	he	was	a	weaver.
And	weavers	belong	to	the	fourth	class	of	the	sudras,	untouchables.	But	only	by
profession	was	he	a	weaver;	by	his	birth	nobody	knows	whether	he	was	Hindu	or
Mohammedan,	 because	 their	 parents...	 certainly	 he	was	 illegitimate,	 as	 people
call	children	if	they	are	not	out	of	marriage.
According	 to	me	 there	 are	 no	 illegitimate	 children;	 there	 are	 only	 illegitimate
parents.
And	when	I	say	illegitimate	parents	I	don't	mean	those	who	are	not	married,	but
those	who	give	birth	 to	 children	without	 any	 love.	Marriage	 is	 a	 formal	 thing.
Love	 is	 the	 reality,	 the	 substantial	 reality.	 Any	 child	 which	 is	 born	 out	 of	 a
formal	marriage	without	any	love,	I	call	those	parents	illegitimate.
Perhaps	Kabir	was	born	out	of	a	pair	who	were	not	married.	Out	of	fear	of	the
society	they	left	the	child	on	the	banks	of	the	Ganges.	A	Hindu	monk,	certainly	a
great	 sage,	 Ramananda,	 had	 gone	 to	 the	 Ganges	 early	 in	 the	 morning	 in
darkness.	And	the	little	baby	who	was	to	become	Kabir	was	lying	down	on	the
steps	of	the	Ganges.	And	as	Ramananda	passed	by,	the	little	baby	just	took	his
feet	in	his	hand.	Now	Ramananda	could	not	leave	the	child	touching	the	feet	of
the	master	 although	 it	was	 going	 to	 be	 a	 condemnation	 for	Ramananda,	 as	 to
where	he	got	the	child	--	most	probably	it	is	his	own	child	and	illegitimate!
Persons	like	Ramananda	don't	care	at	all	about	the	crowd	and	their	opinions.	The
child	 has	 caught	 his	 feet	 and	 he	 could	 not	 leave	 the	 child	 there,	 knowing
perfectly	 well	 that	 some	 parents	 have	 left	 him.	 He	 brought	 the	 child	 to	 his
monastery.	He	was	 a	 famous	Hindu	monk	 and	 had	 thousands	 of	 disciples	 and
they	 were	 all	 against	 him:	 "What	 are	 you	 doing	 unnecessarily	 taking	 a
condemnation?	Give	the	child	to	us;	we	will	leave	it	there	or	we	will	leave	it	in
some	orphanage."
Ramananda	said,	"It	is	not	that	there	is	any	question.	The	child	has	touched	my
feet,	and	I	cannot	refuse	anybody	who	is	ready	to	surrender	himself."
They	said,	"You	are	getting	into	unnecessary	trouble.	The	child	knows	nothing;
it	 is	 just	 accidental.	 You	 must	 have	 been	 passing	 by	 and	 he	 caught	 hold	 of
anything.	It	was	not	addressed	specially	to	you,	Ì	am	your	disciple.'"
But	Ramananda	said,	"You	don't	understand.	I	know	this	child,	not	to	whom	he
belongs	in	this	life,	but	on	his	hand	is	written	Kabir.
Kabir	is	a	Mohammedan	name	which	means	God;	it	is	one	of	the	names	of	God.
In	Mohammedanism	 there	 are	 one	 hundred	 names	 of	 God.	 One	 of	 those	 one
hundred	names	is	Kabir.	So	certainly	the	child	seems	to	be	born	either	out	of	a
father	who	is	Mohammedan	or	a	mother	who	is	Mohammedan	or	perhaps	both
are	Mohammedan,	but	it	does	not	matter.
Ramananda	said,	"I	can	look	into	the	past	life	of	the	child.	He	has	been	my	child,
my	disciple	before	too.	It	was	not	accidental	that	he	caught	my	feet.	He	simply
reminded	me,
`Your	poor	disciple...'"
People	 said,	 "You	 are	 getting	 into	 unnecessary	 trouble.	 Nobody	 is	 going	 to
believe	 these	 stories.	 And	 you	 will	 be	 unnecessarily	 thought	 immoral,
characterless."
Ramananda	said,	"That	doesn't	matter."
He	raised	 the	child	and	his	prediction	became	 true.	Because	he	said,	"One	day
this	child	will	be	a	greater	man	than	me.	I	will	be	remembered	only	because	of
Kabir."
And	 it	 is	 true.	Ramananda	would	have	been	 forgotten.	There	have	been	many
Ramanandas,	many	Hindu	saints	whose	names	have	been	 forgotten.	But	Kabir
proved	 to	 be	 such	 a	 great	man	 that	 obviously	while	Kabir	 is	 remembered	you
cannot	forget	Ramananda.
But	because	Kabir	was	not	 a	brahmin,	 and	certainly	he	was	 illegitimate	 in	 the
eyes	of	the	society,	brahmins,	the	higher	cast	people,	were	not	even	ready	to	go
to	listen	to	him.	They	heard	him	secondhand.	They	wanted	to	know	everything
about	 him	 because	 the	 people	 who	 were	 going	 to	 him	 were	 changing	 so
miraculously.	He	was	one	of	the	highest	categories	of	consciousnesses.	The	same
category	as	Gautam	Buddha	or	Lao	Tzu	or	Mahavira.
You	 reminded	me	 of	 him	by	 saying,	 "You	 know	nothing	 and	 yet	 I	 put	 all	my
questions	 at	 your	 feet."	 Knowing	 that	 I	 know	 nothing,	 if	 you	 still	 put	 your
questions	at	my	feet,	you	are	sure	to	find	the	answer.	It	won't	come	from	me,	it
will	arise	within	your	own	being,	out	of	your	humbleness.	Just	because	you	have
put	your	questions	at	my	feet	shows	immense	trust,	an	innocence.	And	your	trust
will	not	go	unfulfilled.
"You	 are	 just	 silence	 and	 yet	 I	 can	 only	 sing	 your	 song."	 It	 is	 true.	 I	 am	 just
silence,	but	I	am	not	a	dead	silence,	I	am	not	the	silence	of	a	cemetery.	I	am	the
silence	of	the	mountains,	the	silence	of	the	deep	forests.	My	silence	and	my	song
are	not	different.	My	silence	is	a	song;	it	has	a	music	of	its	own.	It	has	a	dance
too	of	its	own.	So	you	are	right,	Sarjano.
"You	have	no	name	and	yet	I'm	helpless	in	crying	your	name."	Knowing	that	I
have	 no	 name,	 if	 you	 cry	 my	 name	 in	 your	 helplessness	 you	 will	 be	 helped,
because	 you	 are	 not	 calling	me	 in	 ignorance,	 just	 believing	 in	my	 name.	You
know	perfectly	well	 that	 I	 don't	 have	 any	 name.	But	 one	 has	 to	 address	 some
name	--	it	is	arbitrary.	Namelessness	is	the	reality	but	you	cannot	point	a	finger
towards	nothingness,	towards	silence;	you	cannot	pinpoint.	Still	it	is	our	human
weakness,	we	have	to	use	names.
Silence	has	no	name	but	we	have	called	it	silence.	Existence	has	no	name	but	we
have	 called	 it	 existence.	 Enlightenment	 has	 no	 name	 but	 we	 have	 given	 it	 a
name.	It	is	our	human	weakness	and	frailty.	But	if	we	are	aware	of	the	fact	that
we	are	calling	the	nameless,	then	there	is	no	problem,	any	name	will	do.
I	told	you	Mohammedans	have	one	hundred	names	for	God.	I	must	remind	you
that	 in	 fact	 they	 have	 only	 ninety-nine	 names.	 One	 name	 they	 have	 left	 as
nameless.	 That	 is	 the	 real	 name.	Unfortunately	 the	 language	 is	 incapable,	 but
they	have	done	well.	They	say,
"God	 has	 one	 hundred	 names,"	 and	 then	 they	 give	 the	 list.	 The	 list	 has	 only
ninety-nine.	 I	 have	 asked	many	Mohammedan	 scholars,	 "How	do	 you	 explain
this?	Is	there	some	mistake,	some	error?	Either	the	man	counted	wrongly	or	he
has	forgotten	one	name."
And	 not	 a	 single	 Mohammedan	 scholar	 could	 give	 me	 the	 right	 explanation
because	learning	is	very	poor.
And	when	I	said	to	them,	"I	have	my	own	experience.	I	am	not	a	Mohammedan,
but	 I	 can	give	you	 the	answer:	The	 reality	 is	 the	man	has	done	 it	 deliberately.
Whoever	 has	 written	 these	 ninety-nine	 names	 knows	 perfectly	 well	 that	 one
name	is	missing.	But	that	is	the	true	name	which	cannot	be	pronounced;	hence
he	has	left	it.	The	number	one	hundred	is	given,	but	the	name	is	not	written.	So
the	man	was	neither	counting	wrongly	nor	has	he	forgotten	it."
When	 Jews	 write	 God	 they	 never	 use	 the	 O	 in	 the	 spelling.	 They	 use	 G-D,
because	the	real	essence,	the	very	center	is	not	capable	to	be	pronounced.	They
have	found	a	beautiful	way;	they	leave	out	the	O.	And	in	a	sense	the	English	O	is
also	exactly	the	same	as	the	English	zero.	You	can	take	it	in	both	the	senses,	that
God's	 real	 name	 can	 only	 be	 zero,	 nothingness,	 what	 Gautam	 Buddha	 called
shunyam,	zero;	he	has	exactly	called	it	zero.
It	is	perfectly	right	if	you	know	that	I	don't	have	any	name	and	still	you	call	my
name	in	your	helplessness;	you	are	not	committing	any	wrong.
"And	 yet	 I'm	 helpless	 in	 crying	 your	 name.	 You	 tell	 us	 every	 day	 the
inexpressible	 cannot	 be	 said,	 and	 yet	 I	 can't	 help..."	 Nobody	 can	 help.	 The
inexpressible	 cannot	 be	 said,	 but	 yet	 every	 effort	 has	 to	 be	 made	 to	 say	 it,
knowing	perfectly	well	every	effort	is	going	to	fail,	but	just	making	the	effort	is
significant.	Whether	it	succeeds	or	fails,	that	is	secondary.
You	make	the	effort	knowing	that	it	is	inexpressible,	yet	you	tried.	You	tried	and
you	gave	ninety-nine	names,	but	finally	you	accepted	your	defeat	that	no	name
can	be	given.
But	a	number	can	be	given	at	least:	the	number	one	hundred.	It	is	beautiful	that
the	 man	 gave	 the	 number	 at	 least.	 Just	 as	 the	 English	 O	 in	 God	 can	 also	 be
interpreted,	in	fact	should	be	interpreted,	as	zero	which	is	God's	name.	And	that
has	 been	 dropped	 because	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 for	 human	 lips	 to	 utter	 it.	 The
number	 one	 hundred	 has	 also	 tremendous	 meaning.	 One	 meaning	 is	 that	 the
inexpressible	 is	 perfect;	 one	 hundred	 is	 a	 perfect	 number.	 There	 have	 been
different	mystical	ways	but	all	have	failed.	But	that	failure	is	not	something	to	be
taken	in	sadness.	That	failure	also	shows	that	although	we	have	not	been	able	to
express	his	name,	we	have	caught	hold	of	the	nameless.	We	will	not	be	able	to
count	him	but	we	have	counted	everything	and	only	he	remains	uncounted;	that
is	a	way	of	counting.
"And	yet	I	can't	help	but	try	again	and	again.	You	know	my	gratitude	and	yet	I
cannot	resist	to	touch	your	feet	and	whisper	Thank	you,	Osho."
It	is	true	for	every	seeker	past,	present,	future,	that	nobody	can	show	gratitude	to
existence	but	still	one	has	 to	say	something.	Not	 that	 that	saying	expresses	 the
real	 experience	 of	 gratitude,	 but	 at	 least	 symbolically	 it	 gives	 you	 a	 certain
satisfaction.	You	cannot	express	it	in	its	totality,	but	you	can	give	it	a	symbolic
name.
In	fact	what	do	we	know,	even	about	small	things?	You	call	a	roseflower	red,	but
what	do	you	know	about	 red?	 If	 it	was	called	yellow	what	difference	would	 it
make?
One	of	the	great	philosophers	of	the	contemporary	world,	G.E.	Moore,	has	asked
the	question,	 "What	do	you	mean	by	yellow?"	And	all	 that	you	can	do	 is	 take
him	to	yellow	flowers,	marigolds,	and	show	him	that	this	is	yellow.	And	he	said,
"That's	what	I	am	trying	to	tell	you.	Even	a	small	and	mundane	ordinary	thing
like	yellow	is	inexpressible;	it	can	only	be	shown.	And	you	ask,	`What	is	good?
What	is	beauty?	What	is	God?	What	is	consciousness?'"
You	don't	understand	 that	 these	 things	also	can	only	be	 indicated.	They	can	be
shown.	I	can	take	your	hand	in	my	hand	and	show	you	the	path.	I	can	give	you
the	direction	where	you	will	find	consciousness.	But	I	cannot	express	it;	I	cannot
give	you	 any	 explanation	 right	 now	without	 your	 own	experience.	And	 if	 you
have	experience	you	don't	need	any	explanation.
Sarjano,	 lastly	 you	 are	 saying,	 "Even	 more	 today,	 because	 you	 free	 me	 from
saying	no	to	you.	But	now	I	have	a	question:	Seeing	how	painful	it	is	to	say	no
to	you,	how	can	I	ever	dare	to	ask	you	anything?"
There	is	no	question,	no	problem	at	all.	You	can	say	yes	to	me,	and	you	can	say
no	 to	me	with	 the	 same	 love,	with	 the	 same	 trust,	 and	 I	will	 understand	 your
love.	I	don't	care	about	your	words.	I	will	know	your	heart	and	I	will	know	the
depths	of	your	being.
Yes	and	no	are	just	trivia.
Sarjano,	you	have	made	people	serious,	and	I	hate	seriousness;	hence	this	joke...
The	 psychiatrist	 had	 been	 working	 with	 the	 patient,	 a	 sex	 maniac,	 for	 many
months.
Finally,	things	had	reached	a	point	where	the	doctor	thought	that	only	hypnosis
may	help	the	unfortunate	patient.	The	doctor	swung	a	pendulum	in	front	of	the
man's	face	and	said,	as	the	hypnotists	do,	"I	want	you	to	imagine	that	this	is	a	big
old	clock	pendulum,	ticking	away,	and	soon	you	will	be	asleep.	Ding-dong	sleep.
Ding-dong	sleep."
The	 patient	 lay	 still	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 then	 jumped	 up,	 shouting	 excitedly,
"Doctor,	it	works!	It	works!	My	ding-dong	is	asleep!"
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	A	good	laugh	is	the	greatest	prayer
30	August	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708300
ShortTitle:
INVITA18
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
122
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	OFTEN	TALK	TO	US	ABOUT	GRACE.
IT	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 SUCH	 A	 BEAUTIFUL	 WORD	 BUT	 MY
UNDERSTANDING	OF
ITS	MEANING	FEELS	LIMITED.	I	KNOW	THAT	IT	IS	SOMETHING	YOU
HAVE.
COULD	YOU	SPEAK	SOME	MORE	ABOUT	IT?
Deva	 Anupo,	 grace	 is	 one	 of	 the	 great	 mysteries	 of	 life.	 It	 is	 not	 something
physical,	not	psychological	but	something	spiritual.	It	is	not	within	your	power
to	create	it.	Any	created	grace	will	be	false,	phony.
Grace	comes	as	a	flowering	of	your	being.
The	moment	your	meditation	reaches	 to	 the	deepest	core,	 to	 the	very	center	of
the	cyclone,	a	tremendous	silence,	peace	and	blissfulness	arise	within	you.	Grace
is	 the	 total	 effect	 of	 all	 these	 qualities:	 silence,	 peace,	 love,	 compassion,
blissfulness,	ecstasy.	When	these	things	arise	in	you,	their	flame,	their	fire	starts
radiating	from	your	physical	body.
They	are	so	much	they	start	overflowing.	That	overflowing	of	your	inner	ecstasy
is	what	can	be	defined	as	grace.
So	 it	 is	possible	a	man	or	a	woman	may	not	be	beautiful	physically,	but	when
grace	 arises	 their	 physical	 beauty	 or	 their	 physical	 absence	 of	 beauty	 is
completely	changed.
Whatever	 their	 physique	 is,	 is	 overwhelmed	 by	 something	 inner	 which	 is	 far
more	powerful.
It	 is	 just	 like	a	 lamp:	 the	flame	is	 inside;	what	you	see	outside	 the	glass	of	 the
lamp	 is	 the	 radiation.	 The	 glass	may	 be	 beautiful;	 the	 glass	 may	 not	 be	 very
beautiful.	 The	 glass	may	 be	made	 of	 crystal;	 the	 glass	may	 be	made	 in	 India.
Once	the	inner	flame	is	 lit	you	don't	see	the	glass,	you	see	the	light.	When	the
inner	flame	is	not	lit	you	will	see	the	glass	because	there	is	nothing	else	to	see.
Then	you	will	differentiate	between	a	beautiful	man	and	an	ugly	man,	a	beautiful
woman	or	a	homely	woman.	Just	to	avoid	the	word	ùgly'
they	have	found	a	beautiful	word,	`homely'.
But	 these	 distinctions	 remain	 only	 if	 the	 inner	 light	 is	 still	 dormant.	Once	 the
inner	light	comes	radiating	through	the	body,	you	don't	see	the	body,	you	see	a
beautiful	radiance,	a	beautiful	aura	surrounding	the	person.	That	is	grace.
Grace	 transforms	your	physical	body	completely,	because	nobody	can	see	now
exactly	 what	 your	 physical	 body	 is.	 The	 grace	 is	 so	 stunning,	 every	 gesture
becomes	so	beautiful.
Your	eyes	radiate	a	totally	new	silence.	They	open	to	such	great	depths	that	they
become	almost	unfathomable.	Your	words	are	not	just	language,	something	more
is	 added	 to	 them.	A	 fragrance,	 a	beauty,	 a	music,	 even	your	prose	 sounds	 like
poetry.	Ordinary	words	 start	having	an	extraordinary	effect	because	your	 inner
experience	gives	them	authority.
Before,	 they	were	 empty,	 just	 used	 cartridges,	 they	had	nothing	 in	 them.	Now
they	are	still	the	same	words;	the	container	is	the	same,	but	the	content	is	a	new
addition	to	it.
Now	the	content	radiates	through	the	words,	and	you	can	see	it	in	many	ways.
Gautam	 Buddha	 was	 born	 on	 the	 boundary	 line	 of	 India	 and	 Nepal.	 Now
Nepalese	are	not	known	for	much	beauty.	They	are	part	of	the	Mongolian	race.
Their	 size	 is	 small,	 their	 faces	 don't	 show	 the	 beauty	 that	 you	 will	 find	 in
Kashmir.	But	Gautam	Buddha's	statues	are	in	a	way	not	factual.
I	 don't	 believe	 that	 such	 a	 beautiful	man	was	 born	 on	 the	 border	 of	 India	 and
Nepal.	 I	 have	 been	 over	 the	 whole	 territory	 of	 Nepal	 and	 I	 have	 never	 come
across	anything	resembling	this	beauty.	Perhaps	Gautam	Buddha	was	also	just	an
ordinary	Nepalese,	but	why	have	the	statues	been	made	so	beautiful?	The	artists,
the	sculptors	were	not	seeing	only	 the	physical	 frame	of	Gautam	Buddha,	 they
were	also	seeing	a	tremendously	powerful	aura	around	him	that	was	making	him
so	 beautiful.	And	 it	would	 have	 been	wrong	 to	make	 his	 statues	 as	 he	would
have	 looked	 before	 enlightenment.	 So	 those	 statues	 are	 all	 made	 after	 his
enlightenment.
Almost	the	same	has	happened	with	Jesus.	There	has	been	an	inscription	found
in	 the	 rocks	 near	 Galilee	 that	 describes	 Jesus	 Christ	 as	 an	 ugly	 man,
extraordinarily	 ugly.	 If	 you	 had	 seen	 him	 he	was	 repulsive.	His	 height	 in	 that
inscription	is	only	four	feet	five	inches	and	on	top	of	it	all,	he	is	described	as	a
hunchback.	Now	you	cannot	call	such	a	man	beautiful.	But	all	the	statues	and	the
descriptions	by	the	disciples	in	the	gospels	do	not	mention	that	he	was	a	pygmy,
four	 feet	 five	 inches	 high,	 that	 he	 was	 ugly	 and	 repulsive,	 that	 he	 was	 a
hunchback.	They	describe	him	as	poetically,	as	aesthetically	as	possible.
And	I	am	absolutely	certain	that	they	are	not	making	it	up.	It	is	not	their	desire	to
present	 Jesus	Christ	 their	master	 to	 the	world	as	beautiful.	They	have	 seen	his
beauty,	but	that	beauty	is	not	the	ordinary	beauty;	that	beauty	is	of	grace.
From	the	other	side	also	you	can	see	that	you	can	sometimes	find	very	beautiful
people,	physically	--	if	you	look	they	are	tremendously	beautiful	--	but	if	you	are
living	close	enough	to	them	you	will	find	their	ugliness	starts	coming	out	of	their
physical	structure.
Their	physical	 structure	may	be	 like	Cleopatra,	but	Cleopatra	 to	me	was	not	 a
beautiful	 woman.	 She	 may	 have	 had	 the	 form	 of	 a	 beautiful	 body	 but	 her
intentions	and	her	 state	of	consciousness	were	very	ugly.	She	cannot	have	any
grace;	she	was	selling	her	body	to	anybody,	just	 to	remain	the	queen	of	Egypt.
She	was	 not	 using	 the	 army	 to	 fight,	 she	was	 using	 her	 own	 body.	And	 great
generals	 like	Anthony	were	caught	 into	her	 trap.	She	was	using	her	beauty	 for
ugly	ends.	She	could	not	have	grace.
So	it	 is	possible	that	a	man	or	a	woman	may	be	physically	beautiful,	but	if	his
inner	being	is	full	of	darkness	that	darkness	will	show.	There	is	no	way	for	her	to
cover	 that	 darkness	 by	 any	 kind	 of	makeup.	 In	 ordinary	 photographs	 she	will
look	beautiful.	But	in	Russia	one	scientist	photographer,	Kirlian,	has	developed
very	 sensitive	 films	 that	 also	 take	 the	photograph	of	 your	 aura.	They	not	 only
take	your	physical	frame,	but	the	light	that	surrounds	you,	that	surrounds	every
living	being,	even	the	trees.
Even	 the	 leaves	 have	 an	 aura	 of	 their	 own.	 And	 that	 aura	 makes	 such	 a
difference.	 If	 a	man	 has	 grace	 he	will	 have	 a	 tremendously	 beautiful	 aura,	 so
stunning	to	the	eyes	that	you	will	forget	about	his	physical	body	whether	it	was
beautiful	or	not.
Christians	have	not	been	able	to	explain	the	inscription	and	the	discrepancy	with
the	gospels	because	they	don't	seem	to	understand	the	law	of	grace.	Kirlian	is	the
first	man	as	far	as	science	is	concerned	who	has	changed	the	whole	approach.	He
takes	photographs	of	the	aura;	his	photographs	are	not	only	of	you,	but	the	subtle
light	that	is	radiating	from	you.	There	are	people	who	have	almost	no	aura.	Their
bodies	may	be	beautiful	but	their	personalities	will	be	ugly.	Their	intentions	and
ambitions	and	their	desires	will	be	of	a	very	low	character.
Kirlian	 has	 photographed	people	 --	 simple	 people,	 innocent	 people,	 gardeners,
farmers,	 fishermen	 --	with	 no	 desire	 to	 become	 the	 president	 of	 a	 country,	 no
desire	to	become	a	prime	minister,	not	even	in	dreams.	It	is	enough	for	them	if
they	can	survive.	They	have	nothing,	but	 still	 in	 the	evening	 they	will	play	on
their	 flutes,	 they	 will	 dance,	 they	 will	 sing.	 They	 have	 beautiful	 auras	 in	 the
photographs	of	Kirlian.	He	has	opened	doors	of	a	new	dimension	which	has	not
been	much	taken	care	of	because	it	is	of	no	use	for	warmongers.
As	 your	 death	 approaches	 your	 aura	 starts	 shrinking.	 It	 means	 your	 life	 is
gathering	itself	at	the	center	from	where	it	can	leave	condensed	--	the	way	you
close	your	shop.
He	has	been	puzzled	by	many	things.	For	example:	you	have	five	fingers	on	the
hand	 and	 even	 if	 one	 finger	 is	 cut	 off	 in	 an	 accident,	 in	 a	Kirlian	 photograph
there	are	still	five	fingers.	The	one	that	is	no	longer	there	still	shows	its	aura;	the
aura	 is	 still	 there	 even	 though	 the	 physical	 part	 is	 gone.	 There	 will	 be	 a
difference,	 because	 the	 physical	 fingers	 which	 are	 still	 there	 will	 show	 a
substance	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 aura.	But	 that	 one	 finger	which	 is	missing	will
show	 simply	 a	 photograph	 of	 the	 aura;	 there	will	 be	 no	 inner	 substance.	 It	 is
nonsubstantial,	but	still	the	aura	is	there.
Working	deeply	on	it,	he	has	given	such	a	great	contribution	to	medical	science,
but	nobody	seems	to	use	it.	No	government	is	interested	in	life;	all	governments
are	in	the	service	of	death.	Seventy-five	percent	of	national	incomes	are	wasted
on	 the	 armies	 and	 arms.	 People	 are	 living	 only	 on	 twenty-five	 percent	 of	 all
income.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	reading	a	calculation	of	a	scientist	who	says	this	is	the
highest	 peak	 of	 production	 in	 the	 world	 ever.	We	 can	 feed	more	 people	 than
there	are	on	 the	earth.	There	 is	no	need	 for	anybody	 to	die	 through	starvation.
Science	 has	 provided	 every	 possible	 technology,	 but	 no	 politician,	 no	 political
party	is	interested	in	it;	no	government	is	interested	in	it.	Their	interest	seems	to
be	very	insane.
If	it	was	in	my	power,	I	would	put	all	the	presidents	and	all	the	prime	ministers
into	madhouses.	That	is	the	right	place	where	they	belong.	They	are	sick	people;
in	 fact,	 only	 a	 sick	psychology	can	be	 ambitious.	A	healthy	psychology	 is	not
ambitious	--	you	are	happy	as	you	are,	so	there	is	no	need	for	you	to	become	a
president	of	the	country.	Then	will	you	be	happy?	No	president	is	happy,	because
happiness	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	post,	with	your	money,	with	your	power.
It	has	something	to	do	with	your	inner	change,	inner	transformation.
Kirlian	has	found	that	six	months	before	a	person	is	going	to	die	his	aura	starts
shrinking.
If	care	is	taken,	that	man	can	avoid	death	for	a	few	more	years.	In	the	same	way
he	has	found	that	before	a	disease	shows	itself	on	the	body,	six	months	before,
he	can	guarantee	that	his	disease	is	going	to	come,	although	medically	 there	 is
no	way	to	check	on	him.
The	only	way	is	when	the	disease	comes.	Before	the	disease	happens	a	different
kind	 of	 darkness	 starts	 to	 appear	 on	 that	 part.	 And	 different	 diseases	 have
different	kinds	of	colors.
If	Kirlian	becomes	part	of	 the	authoritative	medical	world	 there	 is	no	need	for
people	first	to	fall	sick	and	then	to	be	cured.	Their	disease	can	be	prevented	even
before	they	have	become	aware	of	it.	Six	months	is	enough	time	to	cure	it	and	to
check	by	Kirlian	photography	whether	it	is	curing	or	not.
In	 the	 East	 for	 centuries	 there	 has	 been	 the	 idea	 that	 six	 months	 before	 your
death,	 you	 stop	 seeing	 the	 tip	 of	 your	 nose	 because	 your	 eyes	 start	 turning
upwards.	A	dead	man's	 eyes	are	 turned	completely	upwards;	you	can	only	 see
the	 white.	 That's	 why	 in	 every	 country,	 immediately	 a	 dead	 man's	 eyes	 are
closed,	 so	 nobody	 else	 becomes	 afraid;	 nobody	 gets	 an	 unnecessarily	 fearful
impression.	Because	 if	you	meet	 a	man	with	completely	white	 eyes,	no	black,
you	are	going	 to	 freak	out.	Perhaps	you	may	get	paralyzed	 then	and	 there	and
fall	down.
But	it	takes	six	months	for	the	eyes	slowly	to	turn	up.	Because	they	are	turning
up,	 the	 person	 cannot	 see	 the	 tip	 of	 his	 own	nose.	What	Kirlian	 is	 saying	 has
confirmed	 that	 old	 proverb	 to	 be	 absolutely	 right,	 that	 the	 time	 is	 six	months.
And	it	is	not	only	true	about	men,	but	about	leaves,	about	birds,	about	animals.
And	on	leaves,	his	work	is	tremendous.
One	of	my	sannyasins	sent	me	a	thesis	just	a	few	days	ago.	Listening	to	me	he
became	 interested	 and	 he	 worked	 a	 whole	 doctoral	 thesis	 on	 the	 auras	 of	 the
leaves.	Before	a	leaf	starts	dying	you	cannot	see:	it	is	still	green;	it	is	still	alive.
There	 is	 no	 way	 to	 say	 that	 it	 is	 going	 to	 die	 soon,	 fall	 and	 disappear.	 But
through	Kirlian	photography	other	leaves	which	are	going	to	live	show	a	bigger
aura,	and	the	leaf	that	is	going	to	die	within	six	months'
time	starts	showing	a	smaller	aura.	The	day	it	will	die	it	will	not	show	any	aura,
as	 if	 the	 whole	 light	 of	 life	 has	 become	 condensed	 inside.	 Now	 it	 does	 not
radiate.	It	is	ready	to	leave	this	form	of	life	for	another	form.
But	man	 can	be	 immensely	 helped.	 If	Kirlian	 photography	 is	 used	on	 a	wider
scale	there	is	no	need	of	so	many	hospitals,	so	many	doctors;	there	is	no	need	of
so	 much	 surgery,	 so	 many	 medicines.	 And	 this	 is	 the	 problem:	 It	 is	 the
establishment	which	 is	 preventing	Kirlian	 photography	 from	becoming	 part	 of
medical	 science	 because	 it	 will	 make	 many	 surgeons,	 almost	 all	 surgeons
obsolete,	unemployed.	It	will	throw	all	the	doctors	on	to	the	streets.	All	the	great
manufacturers	of	medicine	will	be	out	of	business	and	bankrupt.
These	are	 the	problems	because	 the	establishment	goes	on	preventing.	Nobody
thinks	of	man	as	such;	everybody	thinks	about	his	own	interest,	money,	power,
investment.	There	are	many	 inventions	 lying	down	in	government	warehouses.
Governments	purchase	them,	and	then	don't	bring	them	onto	the	market,	because
the	people	who	are	supporting	those	governments	with	money	will	be	affected.
A	 few	 days	 ago	 I	 told	 you	 about	 one	 Japanese	 scientist	 who	 has	 been	 in
Hiroshima	for	one	year.	He	risked	his	life.	He	allowed	himself	to	be	open	to	the
radiation	that	has	still	there.	But	it	is	lessening	every	day;	the	quantity	is	smaller,
but	 the	radiation	is	 there.	And	his	 thesis	was	saying	that	radiation	from	atomic
explosions	 or	 nuclear	 weapons	 can	 be	 used	 for	 creative	 purposes.	 The	 first
immense	experience	was	that	although	he	is	sixty-five	and	has	been	living	one
year	in	Hiroshima	--	ordinarily	it	was	expected	that	he	would	die	of	radiation	--
now	he	 looks	nearabout	 the	age	of	 forty-five.	He	 is	 sixty-five.	He	has	become
younger,	he	has	lost	twenty	years,	and	he	has	become	stronger.
He	 has	 created	 a	 few	 things,	 and	 because	 I	 have	 talked	 about	 him	 --	 he	must
have	heard	my	tape	or	seen	the	video;	perhaps	I	am	the	only	man	who	has	taken
an	interest	in	him.
He	is	coming	on	the	tenth	of	September.	And	he	has	sent	me	nearabout	twenty
thousand	 dollars'	 worth	 of	 inventions	 that	 he	 has	made...	 a	 belt	 with	 uranium
inside	it	which	radiates	in	very	minute	doses....	And	he	has	been	experimenting
that	if	you	keep	that	belt	on	your	body	for	one	year	it	will	give	you	tremendous
energy,	youth,	long	life;	many	diseases	that	you	would	have	suffered	from,	now
you	will	not.
He	has	also	sent	a	small	soap-like	thing.	That	too	is	covered...	You	have	to	keep
it	 in	 your	 bathtub	 and	 within	 ten	 to	 twenty	 minutes	 the	 bathtub	 starts	 almost
functioning	as	a	hot	springwater.	It	becomes	hot,	and	just	resting	in	that	water	is
enough	 to	 keep	 you	 healthy	 and	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 you	 developing	 any
diseases.
He	has	also	sent	a	small	bottle	of	which	you	have	to	take	just	two	drops	in	water.
For	ten	minutes	it	keeps	the	water	radiating	and	after	ten	minutes	it	changes	the
whole	quality	of	the	water.	It	becomes	sweeter,	tasteful	and	immensely	energy-
giving.
One	of	the	most	significant	war	material	producers	in	America	is	Lockheed.	He
has	informed	me	that	they	wanted	the	sole	copyright	of	the	belt	and	all	 that	he
has	invented.
Whatsoever	 price	 he	wants	 Lockheed	was	 ready	 to	 offer	 him,	 but	 he	 refused.
And	 he	 did	 well	 because	 Lockheed	 would	 have	 used	 them	 for	 destructive
purposes.	They	would	not	have	come	on	to	the	market	for	ordinary	people.
With	 modern	 science	 this	 has	 become	 a	 problem	 that	 any	 invention,	 any
discovery	needs	so	much	money	and	so	much	mechanism	that	only	governments
or	 very	 big	 firms	 like	 Lockheed	 or	 IBM	 or	 people	 like	 these	 can	 afford	 to
produce	 them.	 A	 scientist	 alone	 cannot	 work;	 he	 does	 not	 have	 the	 right
instruments	which	are	too	costly.
But	 he	was	 surprised	 that	 at	 least	 there	 is	 one	man	who	 supports	 him.	 I	 have
proposed	 that	 all	 the	 scientists	 of	 the	world	 should	make	 a	world	 academy	 of
scientists	 without	 any	 question	 of	 nation	 or	 race.	 And	 they	will	make	 it	 their
fundamental	constitution	 that	 they	will	 function	only	 for	peace	purposes.	They
will	function	only	to	help	man	live	longer,	live	better,	live	more	peacefully,	live
more	beautifully;	 live	without	disease,	without	old	age,	 live	more	 intelligently.
They	 are	 not	 going	 to	 work	 for	 any	 government,	 communist	 or	 capitalist,
Russian	or	American,	to	destroy	this	planet.
The	same	has	been	the	case	with	Kirlian.	His	discovery	is	now	almost	fifty	years
old,	but	no	government,	no	medical	institution	has	given	much	attention	to	him.
And	 he	 has	 given	 you	 one	 of	 the	 great	 secrets.	 He	 can	 prevent	 all	 kinds	 of
diseases	happening.
The	grace	is	your	aura,	and	as	your	inner	being	becomes	more	silent	your	aura
becomes	more	radiant.	And	just	as	Kirlian's	photography	has	been	able	to	catch
the	aura	which	your	ordinary	eyes	cannot	see,	a	disciple	in	love	and	trust	starts
seeing	 things	which	an	ordinary	observer,	outsider,	will	not	be	able	 to	 see.	He
starts	 seeing	 a	 grace;	 he	 starts	 hearing	 the	 music.	 He	 starts	 feeling	 a	 certain
fragrance	arising	from	the	man,	who	is	centered	in	his	being,	who	is	no	longer	a
personality	 but	 has	 become	 innocent	 individuality;	 whose	 connection	 is	 no
longer	with	the	society	but	existence	itself.
His	life	is	of	love;	he	is	love.	That	radiance	of	love	and	peace	and	silence	is	all
part	 of	 his	 grace.	 That's	why	 I	 said	 the	word	 `grace'	 has	 tremendous	meaning
because	all	that	meditation	gives	you	can	be	put	together	in	one	word,	and	that	is
`grace'.
But	don't	create	a	desire	for	it;	don't	long	for	it.	It	comes	if	your	meditation	goes
deep.
You	cannot	do	anything	with	grace	directly,	you	can	only	wait.	Your	waiting	has
to	become	so	deep,	so	trustful,	that	grace	will	come	when	the	time	comes.	Just	as
the	trees	go	on	waiting	for	the	spring	--	when	it	comes,	 it	comes.	They	are	not
running	after	spring;	they	are	not	making	any	speed.	They	are	not	creating	any
action	movement:	"Why	does	spring	come	only	once	a	year...	why	not	twice,	and
why	 does	 it	 not	 remain	 always?"	 The	whole	world	 is	 silently	waiting.	 Except
man	there	is	no	impatience	anywhere.
Impatience	makes	you	ugly.
Impatience	 is	 a	 disturbance	 in	 your	meditation.	 Learn	 to	wait.	 Be	 patient	 and
trust	that	existence	will	give	you	whatever	you	are	ready	for.	All	that	you	have	to
do	is	to	go	on	deeper	in	meditation,	beyond	mind	into	silence.	No	thoughts,	no
emotions,	 no	 moods,	 just	 a	 silent	 watchfulness	 and	 waiting	 for	 whatever
existence	finds	you	ready	for.
Grace	comes,	but	it	comes	without	a	whisper.	You	suddenly	find	it.	You	feel	it
within.
You	 feel	 it	 in	 your	movements;	 you	 feel	 it	 in	 your	 sleep;	 you	 feel	 it	 in	 your
speech	--
everywhere	you	are	engulfed.	But	the	only	thing	that	is	needed	on	your	part	is	a
deep	waitfulness.	Meditation	will	create	watchfulness	and	you	have	to	learn	the
art	of	waiting.
Philosophical	Phyllis	said	she	has	learned	three	discouraging	things	about	men.
One,	they	go	to	war	and	kill	each	other	when,	if	only	they	would	be	patient,	they
would	die	a	natural	death.	Two,	they	climb	trees	and	knock	down	apples	when,	if
only	 they	 would	 be	 patient,	 the	 apples	 would	 fall	 to	 the	 ground.	 Three,	 they
pursue	women	when,	if	only	they	would	be	patient,	women	would	pursue	them.
One	has	to	learn	the	art	of	waiting	and	then	millions	of	things	will	happen	to	you
which	never	happen	to	impatient	people.
A	man	 fell	 out	 of	 a	 tenth-storey	window.	He's	 lying	 on	 the	 ground	with	 a	 big
crowd	around	him.	A	cop	walks	over	and	says,	"What	happened?"
The	guy	says,	"I	don't	know,	I	just	got	here."
You	have	also	just	got	here.	Be	a	little	patient,	then	you	will	start	experiencing
things.
In	a	school	in	one	of	Chicago's	poorer	districts,	a	questionnaire	was	sent	home
with	 a	 girl	 pupil	 requesting	 information	 regarding	 the	 number	 of	 brothers	 and
sisters,	her	father's	occupation,	et	cetera.
The	 next	 day	 she	 returned	 with	 a	 scrap	 of	 paper	 on	 which	 was	 written	 the
following:	 There	 are	 eighteen	 children	 in	 my	 family.	 My	 father	 can	 also	 do
plumbing	and	carpentry	work.
Just	wait.	People	are	engaged	so	much.	Now	think	of	that	man:	eighteen	children
and	still	he	can	do	plumbing	and	carpentry	work.
Give	a	 little	 time	 to	yourself	and	 in	 the	end	you	will	 find	 that	 is	 the	only	 time
you	 have	 really	 lived.	 Even	 if	 you	 can	 just	 give	 one	 hour	 out	 of	 twenty-four
hours	 to	 yourself,	 to	 your	meditation,	 to	 your	 silence	 --	 just	 being,	 not	 doing
anything,	 just	waiting	and	 learning	 to	wait.	 In	 the	end	of	your	 life	you	will	be
surprised	that	your	 twenty-three	hours	have	gone	to	waste.	Only	that	one	hour,
whatever	you	have	gained	 in	 that	 one	hour	 is	 still	with	you	 and	 is	 going	with
you;	even	death	cannot	take	it	away.
Just	 one	 hour	 can	 give	 you	 immense	 peace,	 silence,	 blissfulness,	 and	 slowly,
slowly	the	aura	of	grace	will	arise	around	you.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	TALK	A	BIT	MORE	ABOUT	ACCEPTANCE?
Chintan,	I	understand	your	question....
Chintan	 is	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 death.	 The	 doctors	 have	 told	 him	 that	 he	 cannot
survive	 more	 than	 two	 months,	 and	 almost	 one	 month	 has	 passed.	 He	 had
inquired	of	me	when	 the	doctors	had	said	he	has	 some	canceric	growth	which
was	 not	 operable,	 and	was	 growing	 fast.	 Naturally,	 he	was	 shocked.	A	 young
man	who	has	not	seen	life	yet,	has	not	yet	lived,	just	in	the	middle...	naturally	he
was	very	shocked.
He	 wrote	 to	 me	 and	 I	 told	 him,	 "There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 shocked.	 You	 are
fortunate	 because	 you	 know	 the	 exact	 time	 when	 your	 life	 will	 be	 finished.
Others	 are	 not	 so	 fortunate;	 they	 don't	 know.	 Their	 life	 may	 be	 terminated
tomorrow.	Because	you	know	exactly	 that	within	 two	months	you	are	going	 to
die,	 live	 these	 two	months	 as	 intensely	 and	 as	 joyfully	 and	 as	meditatively	 as
possible.	You	cannot	postpone.	Others	can	postpone	because	they	are	not	aware
when	 they	 are	 going	 to	 die.	 You	 are	 in	 a	 good	 situation	 because	 you	 cannot
postpone.	You	have	to	do	everything	now."
He	understood	 and	 he	 has	 been	 very	 happy,	 very	 joyous,	meditating,	 dancing,
singing.
And	his	 friends	have	written	 to	me,	"We	could	not	believe	such	a	change.	His
doctors	 are	 in	 wonder;	 they	 have	 never	 seen	 anybody	 taking	 his	 death	 so
beautifully,	so	lightly."
His	question	needed	this	context	for	you	to	understand,	when	he	says,	"Can	you
talk	a	bit	more	about	acceptance?"
Human	languages	are	very	poor.	The	word	àcceptance'	has	a	hidden	reluctance.
You	may	not	have	looked	into	the	word,	but	when	you	say,	"accept	it,"	there	is	a
hidden	reluctance,	a	kind	of	compulsoriness,	because	there	is	nothing	else	to	do.
So	why	make	fuss	a	about	it	--	accept	it.
This	kind	of	acceptance	is	not	 true	and	authentic.	I	would	say,	enjoy	it.	Unless
your	acceptance	is	enjoyment,	unless	your	acceptance	is	wholehearted	--	without
any	reluctance,	not	out	of	any	compulsion,	not	out	of	a	particular	situation	but
out	of	your	understanding...
Acceptance	becomes	a	beautiful	experience	if	it	is	at	the	same	time	enjoyment.
You	are	not	accepting	under	the	pressure	of	circumstances;	you	are	accepting	on
your	 own	 accord,	 with	 joy,	 with	 a	 deep	 welcome.	 Then	 only	 you	 understand
what	 acceptance	 can	do	 to	your	being.	 In	 a	 single	moment	 it	 can	 change	you,
transform	you	from	an	ordinary	human	being	into	an	awakened	human	being.
But	don't	accept	reluctantly.	That	is	deceiving	yourself	because	deep	down	you
don't	want	to	accept.	Just	after	two	months	you	are	going	to	die?	And	naturally,
when	somebody	said,	accept	 it,	what	else	 to	do?	There	 is	nothing.	The	doctors
are	 doing	 the	 chemotherapy	 --	 they	 are	 doing	 everything	 that	 is	 possible.	 But
they	know	that	nothing	is	going	to	help;	the	cancer	has	gone	beyond	the	limits	of
their	cure.
Seeing	the	situation	you	can	accept	it,	but	there	will	be	a	negativity	inside	you.
You	 are	 accepting	 because	 nothing	 else	 can	 be	 done.	 If	 there	 was	 some
possibility	to	try	you	would	not	accept	it.	I	don't	call	this	authentic	acceptance.
Authentic	acceptance	has	no	negative	tone	in	it,	no	reluctance,	no	resistance,	no
compulsiveness.	It	is	not	because	of	the	pressure	of	things	and	situations	and	our
helplessness.	Don't	accept	out	of	helplessness;	accept	out	of	your	strength.
Two	months	 are	 so	much	 to	 live.	One	 can	 live	 as	 intensely	 and	 totally	 in	 one
second	as	people	live	in	their	whole	life.	But	their	living	is	very	thin,	spread	all
over	a	long	time.
That	 does	 not	mean	 that	 they	 are	 the	 fortunate	 ones,	 because	 authentic	 living
needs	great	intensity	and	great	totality,	not	a	thin	layer.	A	lukewarm	survival	is
not	living.	But	if	you	know	that	the	next	moment	you	are	going	to	die	you	will
drop	everything	that	you	were	involved	in,	and	the	only	priority	will	be	to	know
yourself.
Before	 death	 comes	 at	 least	 be	 aware	 who	 you	 are.	 You	 don't	 have	 time	 to
postpone.
It	happened	that	one	man	used	to	come	to	a	mystic	Eknath	for	many	years.	He
was	a	devotee	but	there	was	a	doubt	in	his	mind	that	was	continuously	pinching
him.	And	because	 there	were	 always	many	disciples	 he	 could	not	 ask.	So	one
day	he	came	very	early,	before	sunrise.	Eknath	was	just	coming	out	of	the	river.
He	had	 taken	 a	 bath	 before	 his	morning	meditation	 in	 the	 temple.	He	 reached
Eknath	 and	 said,	 "Forgive	me	 for	 disturbing	 you	 at	 this	 time,	 but	 I	 have	 been
carrying	a	question	my	whole	life."	And	he	was	a	young	man,	healthy,	strong;	he
said,	"And	I	cannot	dissolve	it,	it	continues.	It	is	a	disturbance	between	me	and
you."
Eknath	said,	"What	is	the	problem?"
He	said,	"The	problem	is	that	I	have	seen	you	for	many	years,	but	I	have	never
seen	you	sad.	I	have	never	seen	you	angry,	I	have	never	seen	you	jealous;	I	have
never	seen	you	in	any	negative	state	of	mind.	You	are	always	smiling	and	always
joyous	and	relaxed	as	if	there	is	no	worry	in	the	world,	no	problem	in	the	world.
You	don't	seem	to	be	concerned	even	about	death.	You	take	it	so	lightly.
"And	the	problem	is	that	a	doubt	arises	in	me	whether	you	are	an	actor	or	you
are	 really	 enlightened?	 One	 can	 manage	 to	 act	 smiling,	 always	 showing
joyousness,	 taking	 everything	 lightly,	 never	 seriously.	 Is	 it	 just	 a	 discipline?
Have	you	trained	yourself	for	it?	Or	is	it	something	that	has	happened	to	you	--	it
is	not	your	doing	but	a	natural,	spontaneous	understanding	that	has	arisen	out	of
your	meditations?	That	 question	has	been	bothering	me,	 because	one	man	 can
manage	 to	 pretend.	 You	 see	 actors	 in	 films	 and	 you	 know	 they	 are	 the	 most
miserable	 lot	 in	 the	 world,	 but	 in	 the	 film	 they	 look	 so	 joyous,	 so	 happy,	 so
loving,	 so	 peaceful,	 so	 courageous.	 If	 this	 is	 possible	 to	 do	 in	 a	 film	 or	 in	 a
drama,	then	why	is	it	not	possible	to	do	in	real	life?	You	need	just	a	little	control
not	to	show	your	real	feelings	but	always	to	go	on	acting."
Eknath	said,	"Wait	a	minute.	Before	I	answer	your	question	I	should	not	forget
something	that	I	wanted	to	tell	you.	I	have	been	forgetting	for	three	days,	and	it
is	 important;	 so	 first	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 that	 thing	 and	 then	 I	 will	 answer	 your
question.	Just	three	or	four	days	ago	I	happened	to	look	at	your	hand,	and	I	was
very	shocked.	Your	lifeline	is	finished;	just	such	a	small	fraction	has	remained	so
that	you	may	be	able	to	live	seven	days	at	the	most.
On	the	seventh	day	as	the	sun	will	be	setting	you	will	be	dying.	This	I	have	been
forgetting	and	this	too	is	as	important	as	your	question.	Now	we	can	discuss	your
question."
The	man	stood	up.	He	said,	"I	don't	have	any	question	and	I	don't	have	any	time
to	discuss.	If	death	is	coming	within	seven	days	why	should	I	worry	whether	you
are	real	or	unreal.	That	is	your	business;	it	is	not	my	problem."
The	man	started	going	down	the	steps.	There	were	many	steps	to	the	temple,	and
Eknath	watched	him.	Just	five	minutes	ago	he	had	come	so	strong,	so	young,	and
now	 he	 was	 going	 just	 like	 an	 old	 man,	 wobbling,	 taking	 the	 support	 of	 the
railing	that	he	had	never	taken	before,	afraid	to	fall.	And	when	he	reached	home
he	simply	went	to	bed	directly,	even	though	it	was	not	the	time,	it	was	morning	-
-	he	had	just	got	up	from	the	bed.	He	collected	the	whole	family	and	told	them
what	Eknath	had	said.
It	was	inconceivable	that	Eknath	will	lie;	there	is	no	point	in	lying.	So	there	was
crying	and	weeping,	and	that	man	stopped	eating.	What	is	 the	point	now	when
you	are	not	going	to	live?
But	 a	 strange	 thing	 started	 happening	 as	 he	 became	 settled	with	 the	 idea	 that
death	 is	 coming	 and	 nothing	 can	 be	 done.	 "Why	 not	 use	 this	 time	 for	 the
meditation	that	I	have	been	postponing	for	many	years?	Eknath	goes	on	saying
every	day	to	meditate,	put	your	energy	into	discovering	yourself,	and	I	have	been
postponing	 it,	 because	what	 is	 the	hurry?	 I	 am	a	young	man	and	 these	 things,
meditation	 and	 knowing	 yourself	 belong	 to	 the	 old	 people	 when	 they	 have
nothing	else	to	do.	Anyway	they	are	out	of	work,	retired.	That	is	the	right	time	to
meditate	and	find	out	who	you	are.	Right	now	you	have	to	find	out	many	other
things	--	money,	power,	prestige,	respectability.	This	is	not	the	time	to	waste	in
finding	yourself.	That	you	can	do	at	any	moment	when	you	will	not	be	of	any
use	in	life,	and	life	will	reject	you	by	retiring	you."
It	 is	 strange	 that	 everywhere	 when	 people	 are	 retired,	 their	 colleagues	 gather
together	just	to	say	goodbye	to	them,	and	they	always	give	them	a	pocket	watch.
That	 I	 cannot	 believe...	what	 is	 the	 idea?	But	 now	 I	 know.	 They	 give	 them	 a
pocket	watch	as,	"Not	much	time	is	left	to	remind	you,	but	now,	do	the	essential
things	that	you	have	been	postponing."
The	 man	 lay	 down,	 started	 watching	 his	 mind	 for	 the	 first	 time	 and	 became
utterly	silent	within	two	or	three	days.	But	the	whole	family	and	other	relatives
and	 friends	 from	 far	 away	 arrived.	 They	 were	 even	 more	 disturbed.	 Death	 is
coming;	that	is	a	shock.	And	what	has	happened	to	this	man?	He	does	not	open
his	eyes;	he	does	not	eat;	he	does	not	take	any	interest.	This	was	a	time	to	meet
the	 family,	 the	 friends,	 because	 who	 knows	 when	 you	 will	 ever	 meet	 these
people	again;	there	is	not	much	chance.
But	 he	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 anything.	 He	 did	 not	 even	 allow	 them	 to	 call	 a
physician.	 By	 the	 fourth	 day	 they	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 he	 was	 looking	 so
beautiful,	so	graceful,	so	silent.	His	whole	bedroom	almost	had	the	same	quality
which	exists	around	a	man	of	silence	or	which	exists	in	a	living	temple,	where
not	only	statues	are,	but	some	living	master	is	also	present.
People	 came	 with	 great	 words	 prepared,	 dialogues	 which	 one	 needs	 to	 say,
because	it	is	very	embarrassing	to	come	to	a	man	who	is	going	to	die.	What	to
say	 to	him?	You	cannot	 talk	about	movies,	you	cannot	 talk	about	politics,	you
cannot	talk	about	football	games,	you	cannot	talk	about	boxing.	What	is	there	to
talk	about?	It	is	very	embarrassing	if	somebody	is	dying	and	you	have	to	leave.
Then	one	prepares	a	dialogue	to	console	him,
"Don't	be	worried;	everybody	dies.	It	is	not	that	it	is	happening	only	to	you.	And
then	there	is	God:	you	have	been	a	virtuous	man,	and	your	heaven	is	absolutely
guaranteed."
One	 has	 to	 prepare	 things	 like	 that	 because	 now	 the	 worldly	 things	 that	 one
gossips	with	each	other	are	of	no	point.	But	as	they	entered,	even	this	dialogue
was	not	possible,	the	man	was	so	silent.	On	the	seventh	day	he	opened	his	eyes
and	asked	his	family,	"How	much	time	is	left	for	the	sun	to	set?"
Reading	this	story	I	remember	why	that	pocket	watch	is	given	to	people:	so	they
don't	 even	 need	 to	 ask	 anybody	 else;	 just	 look	 at	 your	 pocket	 watch	 and	 be
finished.	Never	present	a	pocket	watch	 to	anybody,	because	 that	simply	means
that	you	have	taken	it	for	granted	that	this	man	is	gone.	The	pocket	watch	is	the
last	present.
And	the	people	said,	"The	sun	is	just	about	to	set	within	a	few	minutes."	And	he
was	 showing	 such	grace,	 such	 joy,	 such	blissfulness,	 that	 the	 family	could	not
believe	 the	metamorphosis	 that	 these	 seven	days	have	been.	They	all	knew	he
was	an	ordinary	man.
The	wife	knew,	the	father	knew,	the	brothers	knew	that	he	had	nothing	special,
but	in	seven	days	he	has	gone	far	beyond	them.
Exactly	as	the	sun	was	setting	they	all	started	crying	and	weeping.	And	he	was
saying	to	them,	"Be	quiet.	There	is	nothing	to	worry	about."
At	that	moment	Eknath	arrived.	The	whole	family	touched	his	feet	and	told	him,
"Save	him.	Can	you	do	anything?"
Eknath	said,	"With	death	there	is	no	possibility.	Just	let	me	see	him."
So	 they	 all	 respectfully	moved	 and	 gave	way	 to	 Eknath.	 The	man	was	 sitting
silently	 with	 closed	 eyes,	 looking	 almost	 like	 a	 marble	 statue	 of	 Gautam
Buddha...	 in	 just	seven	days,	and	he	was	an	ordinary	person.	Eknath	called	his
name	and	said,	"I	have	come	to	see	you	and	to	tell	you	that	it	was	only	a	device.
You	 are	 not	 going	 to	 die.	You	 have	 a	 lifeline	 that	 is	 very	 long.	You	will	 live
almost	as	much	as	you	have	lived.	You	have	lived	only	half	the	lifeline,	so	there
are	many	years	to	live.	This	was	a	way	to	answer	your	question."
The	 man	 said,	 "My	 God.	 I	 never	 thought	 that	 this	 is	 a	 way	 to	 answer	 my
question."
Eknath	said,	"There	was	no	other	way.	Whatever	I	would	have	said	to	you,	you
would	have	remained	with	doubts.	A	man	who	can	pretend	for	years	to	be	happy
can	also	 lie	 that	he	 is	enlightened.	I	wanted	to	give	you	some	experience	of	 it,
that	it	is	not	acting.
And	 these	 seven	 days	 have	 given	 you	 the	 experience.	 Have	 you	 received	 the
answer	or	not?"
The	man	stood	up,	 jumped	out	of	 the	bed	--	for	seven	days	he	had	not	 left	 the
bed	at	all	--
touched	 the	 feet	 of	 Eknath	 and	 said,	 "Your	 compassion	 is	 great.	 Unless	 your
compassion	was	so	great,	you	would	not	have	lied.	But	you	have	answered	my
question.	Now	 there	 is	no	doubt	at	all.	And	 I	cannot	 see	 that	any	doubt	 in	 the
future	is	possible.	I	have	known	the	space	in	which	you	are	living."
Eknath	said,	"It	does	not	matter	whether	you	are	going	to	die	after	seven	days	or
seventy	 years.	Once	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 going	 to	 die,	 it	 does	 not
matter	when."
The	awareness	of	death	makes	you	 live	 life	 as	 totally,	 as	 joyously	as	possible.
Death	 is	 not	 your	 enemy.	 In	 fact,	 it	 is	 an	 invitation	 for	 you	 to	 live	 intensely,
totally,	 to	 squeeze	 every	 drop	 of	 juice	 from	 every	 moment.	 Death	 is	 a
tremendous	challenge	and	invitation.
Without	death	 there	would	not	have	been	any	Gautam	Buddha,	any	Jesus,	any
Lao	 Tzu,	 any	 Tilopa.	 There	would	 not	 have	 been	 any	Kabir,	 any	Raidas,	 any
Mansoor,	any	Sarmad.
It	 is	 death	 and	 its	 awareness	 that	 makes	 you	 live	 as	 totally,	 as	 deeply,	 as
consciously	as	possible.	Before	death	knocks	on	your	doors	you	should	be	able
to	see	the	eternal	life	within	you.	Then	there	is	no	death;	death	is	a	fiction.	It	is	a
reality	 only	 to	 those	 who	 have	 not	 lived,	 not	 lived	 in	 its	 completeness,	 in	 its
entirety.
For	those	who	have	lived	there	is	no	death.
It	is	only	a	change	--	just	changing	the	house.
I	am	reminded...
One	 night	 a	 thief	 entered	 into	Mulla	Nasruddin's	 house,	 and	Mulla	Nasruddin
was	trying	to	sleep.	He	had	only	one	blanket,	so	half	was	used	as	a	bed	and	half
to	cover	himself.
But	sleep	was	not	coming	because	the	mosquitoes	were	so	interested	in	keeping
him	awake.	They	are	great	teachers	who	are	continuously	making	an	effort	that
you	should	not	fall	asleep.	Their	whole	teaching	is	awareness.	I	always	thought
that	these	mosquitoes	seem	to	be	old	masters	trying	their	old	teaching.	Now	they
cannot	speak,	but	they	can	manage	to	keep	you	awake.
So	Mulla	was	turning	and	tossing,	and	then	suddenly,	he	saw	a	thief	entering.	It
was	 a	 dark	 night	 and	 the	 door	 was	 open.	 The	 thief	 was	 amazed.	 He	 hardly
figured	out	that	some	man	is	sleeping;	the	house	seems	to	be	completely	empty
and	all	doors	are	open	--	a	great	opportunity.	So	he	entered	inside	the	house	and
went	on	going	to	the	innermost	room,	not	being	aware	that	he	is	being	followed
by	Mulla	Nasruddin.
Suddenly	Mulla	stumbled	on	something	so	the	thief	became	aware.	Mulla	said,
"Don't	be	worried.	 I	have	been	 living	 in	 this	house	for	 thirty	years;	and	I	have
not	found	anything	up	to	now.	But	perhaps	with	your	expertise...	we	can	both	try
to	find	something.	Fifty-fifty?"
The	thief	could	not	believe	it.	What	kind	of	man	is	this?	It	is	his	own	house.	The
thief	became	a	little	afraid;	this	man	seems	to	be	either	mad	or	very	dangerous.
And	Mulla	said,	"Don't	be	worried.	If	you	are	not	agreeing	on	fifty-fifty,	you	can
have	sixty,	I	can	have	forty	--	or	whatever	you	want.	I	have	wasted	thirty	years
searching	and	searching	and	I	have	not	 found	anything.	So	whatever	you	want
me	to	give,	even	five	percent	commission	will	do.	You	try.	And	I	have	brought	a
candle."
He	lit	the	candle	and	he	said,	"Because	it	is	dark	it	will	be	difficult	for	you.	So	I
will	keep	the	candle	and	you	search."
The	 thief	 said,	 "I	have	also	been	stealing	 for	 the	 same	 time,	 thirty	years,	but	 I
have	never	met	a	man	like	you.	You	amaze	me."
But	there	was	nothing	at	all,	so	they	went	around	the	whole	house.	They	could
not	find	anything.	Finally	the	thief	said,	"You	are	right,	there	is	nothing	to	find."
As	he	was	going	out	--	he	had	been	into	other	houses	before	and	he	had	left	all
the	things	that	he	has	stolen	from	other	houses	outside	the	house	--	Mulla	went
with	 him,	 threw	 his	 blanket	 also	 in	 the	 pile.	 The	 thief	 said,	 "What	 are	 you
doing?"
He	said,	"Nothing.	I	am	coming	with	you,	just	changing	houses."
The	man	said,	"This	is	an	unnecessary	trouble	and	this	man	seems	to	be	a	little
crazy."	He	said,	"You	can	take	your	blanket."
He	said,	"No.	Either	fifty-fifty..."
But	he	said,	"I	have	stolen	these	things	from	other	houses."
He	said,	"That	does	not	matter...	otherwise	the	police	station.	Fifty-fifty?	This	is
my	 only	 business.	 I	 keep	 my	 house	 open	 and	 the	 thieves	 come;	 they	 do	 the
business."
The	man	said,	"You	seem	to	be	the	greatest	thief	in	the	world.	You	never	go	out;
thieves	come	by	themselves."
He	 said,	 "It	 has	been	happening.	But	 if	 you	want	 I	 am	prepared	 to	 come	with
you,	because	what	is	there	in	this	house?"
The	 man	 became	 so	 afraid	 of	 Mulla	 because	 he	 could	 not	 put	 him	 into	 any
category.	He	said,	 "You	can	keep	everything,	 just	 leave	me...	And	 I	will	never
come	back."
Mulla	said,	"As	you	wish,	but	I	was	always	thinking	of	changing	my	house.	You
will	also	get	the	blanket	and	the	whole	treasure	that	you	have	stolen	from	other
houses,	and	me	who	can	advise	you.	You	are	just	amateur.	You	may	have	been
stealing	 for	 thirty	 years,	 but	 you	 don't	 know	 much.	 I	 don't	 go	 anywhere	 and
thieves	come	by	themselves	and	fifty-fifty,	sometimes	even	more,	sometimes	a
hundred	percent.	Because	I	am	always	happy	to	change	the	house	and	they	are
afraid	to	take	me	to	their	house."
The	 man	 who	 knows	 himself	 knows	 death	 as	 only	 changing	 the	 house.
Acceptance	is	not	the	right	word,	but	there	is	no	other	word;	this	is	the	difficulty.
I	would	say,	Chintan,	rejoice!
Make	all	these	days	a	celebration.
And	if	you	can	make	all	these	days	a	celebration,	your	death	will	be	found	to	be
a	fiction.
These	 days	 of	 celebration	 and	 meditation	 and	 silence	 and	 joy	 and	 love	 will
create	 in	 you	 the	 capacity	 to	 die	 consciously.	 And	 one	 who	 dies	 consciously
knows	that	death	is	nothing	but	changing	the	house.	And	it	is	always	for	a	better
house	because	life	always	goes	upwards;	it	is	an	evolutionary	process.
I	was	really	shocked	by	the	American	government	particularly,	Ronald	Reagan's
government.	They	have	prohibited	 the	universities	 and	colleges	and	 schools	 to
teach	Charles	Darwin's	 theory	 of	 evolution.	 Books	 on	 the	 theory	 of	 evolution
have	been	burned	or	removed	from	all	libraries,	because	this	theory	of	evolution
goes	 against	 the	 Christian	 idea	 of	 creation.	 You	may	 not	 immediately	 get	 the
difference,	but	the	difference	is	there.
God	 created	 everything	 so	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 any	 evolution.	 He	 created
monkeys	as	monkeys,	and	he	created	men	as	men	--	not	that	the	monkeys	have
evolved	 into	 man;	 there	 is	 no	 evolution.	 God	 has	 made	 the	 world	 perfect.
Evolution	is	possible	only	if	things	are	imperfect.
This	fundamentalist,	fascist,	fanatical	idea	of	Ronald	Reagan	has	been	imposed
on	 the	 whole	 of	 America,	 and	 nobody	 is	 protesting	 that	 it	 is	 against	 the
constitution	of	America.
It	 is	 against	 democracy;	 it	 is	 against	 freedom	 of	 expression.	 The	 American
constitution	makes	it	clear	that	religion	should	not	interfere	with	people's	lives,
particularly	via	government	powers:	the	government	should	be	neutral.	But	this
is	not	neutrality.
And	to	stop	the	whole	of	America	knowing	anything	about	Charles	Darwin	and
his	 theory	of	evolution	 is	dangerous,	because	 it	means	you	cannot	evolve.	You
are	what	 you	 are.	 It	 is	 dangerous.	 I	 am	not	 saying	whether	Charles	Darwin	 is
right	or	wrong;	 that	 is	not	my	business.	 I	 am	saying	 that	 the	 idea	of	evolution
should	 not	 be	 taken	 away	 from	 people's	 minds.	 In	 fact,	 they	 should	 be	made
more	aware	that	for	thousands	of	years	we	are	not	evolving	--	we	should	evolve.
And	now	outside	we	have	got	everything.	Evolution	should	 take	on	a	different
dimension,	an	inner	evolution.	But	to	destroy	the	whole	idea...!	Ronald	Reagan
has	done	much	harm	to	America,	but	this	is	his	greatest	harm,	because	this	will
mean	 that	 if	 the	 idea	 of	 evolution	 completely	 disappears	 from	peoples'	minds,
then	wherever	they	are,	God	wants	them	to	be	there:	in	misery,	in	suffering,	in
anguish,	 in	 angst.	 But	 that's	 what	 God	 wants,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of
evolution.
I	don't	support	the	particulars	of	Charles	Darwin,	but	I	support	the	essential	fact
that	 evolution	 has	 been	 happening,	 because	 we	 have	 seen	 man	 becoming	 a
Gautam	Buddha.	I	don't	agree	that	monkeys	have	become	men.	And	even	if	they
have,	it	does	not	bother	me;	it	is	perfectly	good.
My	concern	is	for	the	future,	not	for	the	past.	I	want	man	to	evolve.	It	does	not
matter	 whether	 monkeys	 evolve	 into	 men	 or	 not,	 but	 man	 can	 evolve	 into
superman,	 into	 new	 man.	 But	 that	 evolution	 will	 happen	 only	 through	 deep
meditation,	 watchfulness,	 waiting	 and	 accepting	 life	 with	 joy,	 and	 accepting
death	 with	 joy,	 with	 no	 reluctance,	 without	 any	 pressure,	 but	 from	 your
innermost	feeling.
Everything	that	is,	is	beautiful.
It	 can	 be	 more	 beautiful	 --	 there	 is	 no	 limit	 to	 evolution.	 Particularly	 for
consciousness	there	is	no	limit;	it	can	go	even	beyond	Gautam	Buddha,	beyond
Bodhidharma,	 beyond	 all	 the	 great	 awakened	 people	 of	 the	 past,	 because
consciousness	has	no	limits.	It	is	as	vast	as	the	sky,	as	the	whole	universe.
Chintan,	accept	with	joy	and	dance	and	song.
Just	 a	 little	 joke	 so	 that	 you	 go	 from	here	 not	with	 serious	 faces.	This	 temple
believes	in	laughter	and	I	want	everybody	who	comes	here	to	go	laughing.	Even
on	the	way,	when	he	remembers	--	a	little	giggle.	In	the	night,	in	the	middle	of
the	night,	then	he	remembers
--	a	good	laugh.
A	good	laugh	is	the	greatest	prayer.
A	little	boy	on	a	picnic	strays	away	from	his	family	and	suddenly	realizes	he	is
lost	 and	 night	 is	 falling.	 After	 running	 around	 and	 shouting	 for	 a	 while	 he
becomes	very	frightened	and	kneels	down	to	pray	with	uplifted	hands.
"Dear	 Lord,"	 he	 says,	 "please	 help	 me	 to	 find	 my	 mummy	 and	 daddy	 and	 I
promise	I	won't	hit	my	sister	anymore."
Just	 then	 a	bird	 flies	 overhead	 and	 shits	 right	 into	his	 outstretched	hands.	The
boy	examines	 it,	 looks	up	 to	heaven	and	says,	"Lord,	don't	give	me	 this	shit,	 I
really	am	lost."
Everybody	 is	 really	 lost.	 Very	 few	 people	 have	 reached	 their	 home.	 But	 your
pilgrimage	 of	 finding	 your	 home	 should	 not	 be	 serious	 and	 sad	 and	 heavy;	 it
should	be	of	 laughter	and	song	and	dance.	If	you	can	find	your	home	dancing,
laughing,	 it	 is	 true	 finding.	By	 sadness	 and	 seriousness	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 find
some	graveyard,	not	your	home.
We	need	people	who	are	seekers	but	not	serious.	That	kind	of	seeking,	serious
and	sad,	has	not	led	man	anywhere.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	Pick	up	the	roses	and	avoid	the	thorns
30	August	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708305
ShortTitle:
INVITA19
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
85
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOU	WERE	RESPONDING	TO	SARJANO'S	QUESTION,	I	HEARD
YOU
SAY	THAT	A	DISCIPLE	CAN	SAY	NO	TO	THE	MASTER	IF	THE	LOVE	IS
DEEP
ENOUGH.
I	CAN	UNDERSTAND	YOUR	SAYING	NO	TO	US	OUT	OF	YOUR	LOVE,
BUT
NOT	THE	OTHER	WAY	ROUND.
DO	YOU	MEAN	THAT	THE	DISCIPLE	MUST	HAVE	THE	FREEDOM	TO
SAY	NO
BUT	IN	FACT	WOULD	NEVER	WISH	TO	OR	NEED	TO?	FROM	MY
EXPERIENCE,	 WHEN	 I	 HAVE	 SAID	 NO	 TO	 YOU	 I	 HAVE	 DENIED
MYSELF	AND
THEN	SUFFERED	THE	CONSEQUENCES.
HOW	 CAN	 THERE	 BE	 ANY	 SITUATION	 IN	 WHICH	 THE	 DEVOTEE
WOULD	SAY
NO	TO	THE	MASTER?
Maneesha,	the	question	you	have	asked	raises	many	questions:	questions	about
love,	questions	about	freedom,	questions	about	the	master	and	disciple	and	their
relationship.
Life	appears	to	be	very	simple	but	as	you	go	deeper	into	it,	it	becomes	more	and
more	 complex.	 And	 the	 ultimate	 complexity	 is	 that	 life	 consists	 of
contradictions.	If	you	understand,	those	contradictions	become	complementaries.
If	you	don't	understand	those	contradictions	become	opposites.
But	 in	 the	ultimate	organic	unity	 there	 is	enough	space	 for	both	yes	and	no.	 It
will	not	be	ultimate	organic	unity	if	there	is	only	space	for	yes,	if	there	is	space
only	for	light,	if	there	is	space	only	for	love,	and	not	their	opposites.
Our	mind	looks	at	things	in	categories	of	opposition,	but	mind	is	not	the	ultimate
decisive	factor.	The	ultimate	decisive	factor	 is	a	state	of	no-mind.	 In	a	state	of
no-mind	 everything	 is	 possible.	 The	 incomprehensible	 is	 also	 possible;	 the
impossible	is	also	possible.
Apparently	you	are	 right,	 that	 the	disciple	cannot	say	no;	how	can	 the	disciple
say	 no	 to	 the	master?	 In	what	 situations?	 It	 has	 been	 the	 tradition	 that	 no	 has
always	been	taken	as	negative.	With	me,	things	have	a	far	deeper	meaning	and
significance.	No	 is	not	necessarily	negative	and	yes	 is	not	necessarily	positive.
You	can	say	yes	out	of	fear,	then	it	is	negative.	You	can	say	no	out	of	love.	You
love	 so	 much	 that	 you	 are	 not	 worried	 even	 to	 say	 no.	 The	 no	 becomes
affirmative;	it	is	no	longer	negative.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	am	not	part	of	any	old	category	of	masters.	I	am	a
new	 beginning	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 the	 old	 master	 demanded	 surrender.	 I	 don't
demand	anything	from	you,	because	to	me	surrender	is	a	subtle	spiritual	slavery.
Of	 course,	 with	 a	 master	 the	 surrender	 feels	 beautiful	 but	 even	 if	 slavery	 is
decorated	with	flowers	I	cannot	be	deceived	by	it.
I	want	my	people	to	be	individuals	living	in	freedom.	If	they	love	me	it	is	out	of
their	 freedom,	 not	 out	 of	 fear,	 not	 out	 of	 desire,	 not	 out	 of	 some	 longing	 for
achievement.	The	old	disciple	was	surrendering	himself	because	he	wanted	to	be
enlightened.	The	master	was	being	used	as	a	means.	I	don't	allow	myself	to	be
used	as	a	means.	That	is	ugly.
The	old	master	was	using	the	disciples	for	his	own	egoistic	ends.	The	masters	in
the	 past	 used	 to	 brag	 about	 how	many	 disciples	 they	 had.	 The	 number	 of	 the
disciples	decided	the	greatness	of	the	master.	The	master	was	also	dependent	in	a
certain	sense	on	the	disciples.	It	 is	something	to	be	understood	that	you	cannot
make	 anybody	 dependent	 without	 yourself	 becoming	 dependent	 too.	 And	 the
same	 is	 true	 if	 you	 are	 independent,	 you	 would	 love	 to	 make	 everybody
independent.	Because	independent	individuality	has	such	beauty	and	grace,	such
joy,	 such	 freedom	 to	 fly	 in	 the	 sky	with	no	boundaries	and	no	chains,	with	no
conditions,	 no	 expectations,	 that	 a	 master	 would	 love	 his	 disciples	 to	 be
ultimately	free,	free	even	of	himself.
Zarathustra	 has	 said	 to	 his	 disciples:	 "Beware	 of	 me."	 That	 small	 statement
contains	 great	meaning,	 because	 a	 disciple	 can	 renounce	 everything	 to	 be	 one
with	 the	master,	 to	come	closer	and	closer	 to	 the	master;	he	can	even	sacrifice
himself.	But	in	this	sacrificing	he	will	enjoy	a	certain	unburdening,	because	now
he	is	no	longer	responsible.	The	whole	responsibility	is	on	the	shoulders	of	the
master.	 The	 disciple	 has	 become	 a	 sheep	 and	 the	 master	 has	 become	 the
shepherd.	Now	the	shepherd	will	take	care.
One	 can	 think	 in	 this	 way	 that	 the	 sheep	 has	 attained	 a	 certain	 freedom	 --
freedom	 from	 responsibility.	But	 becoming	 a	 sheep,	 even	 if	 you	 become	 free,
your	freedom	has	no	meaning.	It	is	fear;	it	is	irresponsibility.	In	a	deeper	sense
you	 have	 lost	 yourself	 to	 gain	 something.	 It	 is	 not	 out	 of	 love	 that	 you	 have
surrendered	to	the	master;	out	of	love	there	is	no	surrender,	there	is	no	need.
Love	 is	a	 far	bigger	phenomenon	 than	any	surrender.	Surrender	 is	of	 the	mind
and	 surrender	 is	 an	 effort.	 Love	 is	 of	 the	 heart	 and	 it	 is	 not	 an	 effort.	 You
suddenly	find	yourself	in	love	with	someone.	Even	if	you	try	to	be	in	love	with
someone	you	cannot	 succeed.	No	effort	 is	going	 to	be	successful.	Love	comes
just	like	the	spring	comes,	and	when	love	comes	it	brings	many	flowers.
There	have	been	 two	kinds	of	masters.	The	majority	of	 the	masters	 in	 the	past
demanded	 surrender,	 total	 surrender.	 It	 was	 a	 kind	 of	 spiritual	 slavery.	 The
master	 was	 enjoying	 a	 great	 ego,	 and	 the	 disciple	 was	 enjoying	 a	 great
unburdening	from	all	responsibilities.
Now	the	master	is	going	to	save	him.	Now	the	master	is	his	salvation,	liberation,
enlightenment.	All	that	he	could	do	he	has	surrendered	himself.	He	has	become
an	absolute	yes.
To	me	this	kind	of	relationship	was	not	healthy,	something	was	basically	wrong.
Because	 of	 this	 situation	 in	 the	 past	 one	man	 stands	 separate	 from	 the	whole
crowd	of	masters,	and	that	is	J.	Krishnamurti.	He	denied	he	was	a	master	and	he
refused	 to	 accept	 anybody	 as	 a	 disciple;	 this	 was	 another	 extreme.	 The	 other
masters	 were	 demanding	 absolute	 surrender.	 J.	 Krishnamurti	 has	 lived	 with
masters	who	have	asked	absolute	 surrender	 from	him,	and	as	he	became	more
and	more	mature	he	saw	the	whole	game:	the	master	enjoys	the	ego,	the	disciple
enjoys	irresponsibility.	But	neither	the	master	is	a	true	master	nor	the	disciple	is
a	true	disciple;	both	are	exploiting	each	other.
There	is	no	question	of	love	when	there	is	exploitation.	Krishnamurti	refused	to
be	master	of	anyone	and	he	refused	to	allow	anyone	to	think	that	he	is	a	disciple.
He	 has	 taken	 a	 great	 step	 but	 he	 has	moved	 to	 the	 very	 extreme.	And	 always
remember:	if	one	extreme	is	wrong	the	other	extreme	cannot	be	right.	The	right
is	always	somewhere	exactly	in	the	middle,	the	golden	mean.	Only	in	the	middle
is	 there	 balance,	 and	 only	 in	 the	 middle,	 exactly	 in	 the	 middle,	 is	 there
transcendence	of	the	polarities,	of	the	opposites.
My	position	is	exactly	in	the	middle.	I	don't	ask	any	surrender	from	you;	hence,	I
am	not	on	the	old	track.	I	don't	deny	you	the	beauty	of	being	a	disciple.	I	don't
insult	 you;	 I	 don't	 reject	 you.	 I	 accept	 your	 love,	 but	 I	 will	 not	 accept	 your
surrender.	 In	accepting	your	 love	and	your	disciplehood	 I	 am	your	master,	but
there	is	no	relationship	of	surrender.
I	am	not	here	to	erase	your	individuality.
I	am	here	just	to	erase	your	ego.
That	does	not	need	any	surrender,	 it	needs	a	deep	meditative	understanding	on
your	part.
I	can	give	you	love,	I	can	share	my	own	understanding	with	you,	but	there	is	no
condition	 attached	 to	 it.	My	 joy	will	 be	 to	 see	 you	 as	 a	 growing	 individual	 in
total	freedom.	And	in	total	freedom,	yes	is	as	much	possible	as	no.
I	can	understand	Maneesha's	problem,	that	no	is	very	difficult,	more	difficult	to	a
master	 who	 does	 not	 ask	 surrender.	 No	 becomes	 more	 difficult	 because	 the
master	allows	it.	If	the	master	does	not	allow	no,	he	is	repressing	something	in
you,	and	his	not	allowing	no	does	not	destroy	the	possibility	of	no	in	you.	On	the
contrary,	the	master	himself	is	afraid	that	if	you	are	not	prevented,	you	can	say
no.
The	 yes	 from	 you	 is	meaningless	 if	 you	 are	 not	 free	 to	 say	 no.	Your	 yes	 has
meaning	only	because	you	are	absolutely	 free	 to	say	no.	 It	does	not	mean	 that
you	have	 to	 say	no.	 It	 does	 not	mean	 that	 there	will	 be	 a	 situation	where	you
have	to	say	no.	In	fact	it	will	become	more	and	more	impossible	for	you	to	say
no.
To	 say	 no	 is	 easy	 when	 you	 are	 prevented,	 prohibited.	 Then,	 it	 becomes	 a
question	of	your	individuality;	it	becomes	a	question	of	your	spiritual	freedom.
And	certainly	anybody	who	has	any	dignity	is	bound	to	find	situations	where	he
would	like	to	say	no.	If	he	does	not	say	it	he	is	behaving	as	a	hypocrite.	He	is	not
saying	 no	 because	 he	 is	 afraid	 to	 lose	 the	 love	 of	 the	master	 and	 to	 lose	 the
possibility	of	getting	higher	states	of	consciousness.
But	this	is	business,	this	is	cunningness.	And	there	should	not	exist	any	business
or	any	cunningness	between	the	master	and	the	disciple.
Krishnamurti	 has	moved	 to	 the	 very	 extreme:	 no	master,	 no	 disciple.	But	 that
created	an	absurd	situation,	for	his	whole	life,	and	he	lived	long,	ninety	years.	He
started	being	a	teacher	at	the	age	of	fifteen,	and	he	wrote	his	first	book	AT	THE
FEET	OF	THE
MASTER	at	 the	age	of	 fifteen.	 It	was	so	early	 that	 later	on	he	could	not	even
remember	whether	he	had	written	it	or	not.	It	appeared	as	if	in	a	dream,	far	away,
just	an	echo.
From	 the	 age	 of	 fifteen	 to	 the	 age	 of	 ninety,	 almost	 seventy-five	 years
continuously	 --	 no	 master	 has	 been	 teaching	 so	 long.	 Gautam	 Buddha	 was
teaching	for	only	forty-two	years;	so	was	Mahavira.	Jesus	taught	for	only	three
years,	because	at	the	age	of	thirty-three	he	was	crucified;	he	started	his	teaching
career	at	the	age	of	thirty.	Perhaps	Krishnamurti	is	the	only	person	who	has	been
a	teacher	for	seventy-five	years.
But	the	question	is	that	his	situation	is	very	absurd.	If	he	does	not	accept	himself
to	be	master	and	he	does	not	accept	you	as	disciples,	then	what	is	he	doing	for
seventy-five	 years?	Running	 around	 and	 around	 all	 over	 the	world	what	 is	 he
doing...	to	whom	he	is	talking?
The	word	`disciple'	does	not	mean	anything	else	other	than	a	learner;	that	is	its
original	meaning.	If	he	is	not	talking	to	people	who	are	ready	to	learn,	then	what
is	the	point	of	talking?	And	if	Krishnamurti	is	not	a	master,	from	where	does	he
get	the	authority	to	talk,	to	say	anything	to	anybody?	He	goes	on	denying	that	he
is	a	master,	and	everybody	knows	he	is	a	master.	And	he	goes	on	saying,	"You
are	not	the	disciples,"	and	everybody	who	listens	to	him,	learns	from	him,	feels	a
certain	disciplehood.
Both	are	denying	actualities.	Out	of	fear	that	they	may	not	get	trapped	into	the
past	 relationship	 of	 master	 and	 disciple.	 This	 whole	 seventy-five	 years	 of	 J.
Krishnamurti	are	full	of	fear,	the	fear	of	the	past	heritage,	centuries	of	master	and
disciple	 relationship,	 because	 it	 has	 become	 a	 spiritual	 slavery.	 The	 disciple
could	not	say	no.	Rather	 than	allowing	the	disciple	 to	say	no	he	simple	denied
that	 there	 is	a	disciple.	 It	 is	not	a	great	revolution;	 it	 is	 just	a	reaction,	moving
from	one	extreme	wrong	situation	to	another	wrong	situation,	another	extreme.
I	am	standing	exactly	in	the	middle.	I	can	see	both	the	extremes,	the	right	and	the
left.
And	I	can	see	that	both	are	half,	incomplete.	Both	are	not	going	to	help	anybody
to	attain	to	spiritual	freedom.	The	first	because	it	insists	on	surrendering,	and	the
second	because	it	simply	denies	that	you	are	a	disciple.	And	Krishnamurti	goes
on	 teaching	 for	 seventy-five	 years	 continuously,	 and	 becomes	 angry	when	 the
listeners	don't	listen	rightly.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	Krishnamurti	used	to	become	very	angry	at
times	when	he	saw	somebody	listening	to	him	for	fifty	years	and	still	he	has	not
understood	anything.	He	would	just	look	at	the	people	and	beat	his	head	--	it	was
absolutely	 natural.	 I	 will	 not	 say	 that	 it	 was	 unnatural,	 but	 he	 created	 the
situation.	In	the	very	first	place	he	denied	disciplehood,	and	then	he	wants	them
to	understand	him.
I	 accept	 the	 status	 of	 a	 master	 and	 the	 status	 of	 a	 disciple.	 There	 is	 nothing
wrong	in	it	if	the	master	and	disciple	are	not	exploiting	each	other.	If	the	disciple
is	not	using	the	master	as	a	means	to	enlightenment,	liberation,	and	the	master	is
not	using	the	disciple	for	his	own	aggrandizement,	for	his	own	ego-fulfillment.	I
want	disciples	and	masters	to	stand	side	by	side	in	deep	love,	with	no	question	of
any	surrender,	with	no	expectation	from	the	master	that	you	have	always	to	say
yes.
My	 own	 experience	 is	 the	more	 you	 are	 prohibited	 from	doing	 something	 the
more	there	is	a	desire	to	do	it.	Prohibition	is	a	kind	of	provocation.
I	don't	prohibit	you.
It	does	not	disturb	me	or	my	individuality	if	you	say	no.	On	this	point	Maneesha
is	right,	 that	whenever	she	has	said	no,	she	has	suffered	the	consequences.	But
that	is	up	to	you	--
not	my	expectation.	It	is	going	to	be	your	understanding	that	when	you	say	no,
you	have	taken	yourself	as	if	you	are	wiser;	you	will	suffer	the	consequences.
I	have	not	 said	 to	Sarjano,	 "You	will	not	 suffer	 the	consequences	of	your	no."
But	it	will	not	be	from	me:	not	that	I	will	be	annoyed,	not	that	I	will	be	irritated,
not	that	I	will	be	angry.	It	is	perfectly	okay	with	me	whether	you	say	yes	or	no.
But	 for	yourself	 there	 is	going	 to	be	a	difference.	Yes	means	you	are	 listening
and	following	what	I	am	saying.	No	means	you	are	deciding	for	yourselves.	As
far	as	I	am	concerned	you	are	absolutely	free	to	decide	for	yourself,	but	then	you
have	to	be	ready	for	the	consequences	also.
Freedom	brings	responsibility.
That's	 the	 meaning	 I	 continuously	 repeat,	 and	 I	 know	 you	 don't	 understand.
Everybody	likes	freedom	and	nobody	likes	responsibility,	but	 they	come	in	the
same	package;	you	cannot	separate	 them.	 I	give	you	freedom	AND	I	give	you
responsibility.	You	 cannot	 complain	 about	me,	 because	 you	 are	 always	 free	 to
say	no.	You	cannot	say	that	I	have	inhibited	you,	because	I	have	not	asked	that
you	say	yes	whether	you	want	or	not.	You	cannot	blame	me.
This	is	absolutely	true,	that	whenever	you	will	say	yes,	you	will	find	a	peace,	a
silence.
And	 whenever	 you	 will	 say	 no,	 you	 will	 find	 a	 deep	 burden	 on	 your	 heart,
almost	a	wound.	But	you	are	creating	 that	wound.	And	I	will	not	prevent	you,
because	 I	 know	 that	 preventing	 provokes	 people	 to	 do	 the	 same	 thing	 that	 is
being	prevented.
A	famous	Tibetan	story...
A	man	was	 serving	 an	 old	master	 continuously,	 bringing	 food,	 bringing	water
from	the	well,	massaging	his	feet.	And	the	old	man	used	to	say,	"Why	are	you
wasting	your	time?"
because	the	old	man	understood	perfectly	that	there	must	be	some	desire.
Finally,	one	day	the	man	said,	"I	am	serving	you	because	I	want	to	learn	some
miracle,	just	one	miracle."
The	old	man	said,	"But	I	don't	know	any	miracle.	You	have	unnecessarily	wasted
your	time.	You	should	find	somebody	else	who	knows	about	miracles."
But	 the	man	 said,	 "I	 have	 been	 told	 that	 you	 always	 deny	 that	 you	 know	 any
miracles,	 and	 you	 go	 on	 continuously	 performing	 miracles.	 I	 have	 been	 told,
`Don't	listen.	Go	on	serving	him.	One	day	he	will	tell	you	some	secret,	but	only
when	he	finds	you	are	ripe.'
Perhaps	I	am	not	ripe	yet."
After	a	 few	days	 the	old	man	saw	 that	 this	man	 is	still	unnecessarily	working.
"Somebody	 has	 put	 the	 idea	 in	 his	 mind	 that	 I	 perform	 miracles.	 Perhaps
miracles	happen,	but	they	happen	on	their	own.	I	am	not	the	performer."
With	 people	 of	 great	 consciousness	 things	 happen	 just	 on	 their	 own.	 Just	 as
when	 the	 sun	 rises	 birds	 sing;	 it	 is	 not	 that	 the	 sun	 is	 performing	 a	 miracle.
Flowers	 open	 their	 petals,	 not	 that	 the	 sun	 is	 performing	 a	 miracle,	 just	 the
presence	of	the	sun	and	things	start	happening.	The	presence	of	a	very	conscious
awakened	man	is	enough	for	many	flowers	to	open,	for	many	birds	to	sing.
The	old	man	said,	"It	seems	you	will	not	leave	me	unless	I	tell	you	the	secret."
The	man	said,	"That's	true."
So	he	said,	"I	will	tell	you	the	secret.	I	wrote	a	small	mantra,	the	Tibetan	mantra
om	mani	padme	hum."
Om	means	 the	 eternal	 sound	 of	 existence.	Diamond	 in	 the	 lotus,	mani	 padme
hum:	mani	means	diamond,	padme	means	lotus.	It	means	the	eternal	sound	and
the	diamond	in	the	lotus.	It	expresses	the	meaning	of	enlightenment:	the	eternal
music	 all	 around,	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 lotus,	 and	 inside	 the	 lotus	 the	 light	 of	 a
diamond.	 In	 a	 small	 mantra	 they	 have	 condensed	 the	 whole	 experience	 of
enlightenment.
So	the	old	man	said,	"Take	this	mantra	and	repeat	it	five	times,	just	five	times.
First	take	a	bath,	change	your	clothes	to	fresh	clothes,	close	your	door,	sit	alone
and	repeat	 the	mantra	five	 times.	Then	you	will	be	able	 to	do	any	miracle	you
want	to	do."
The	man	 rushed,	he	did	not	 even	 show	his	gratitude	or	 even	 say	 just	 a	Thank
You.	He	simply	rushed	down	the	steps	of	 the	 temple.	When	he	was	 just	 in	 the
middle	 the	old	man	 shouted,	 "Wait,	 I	 have	 forgotten	one	 thing.	While	you	are
repeating	the	mantra	remember	one	thing:	don't	think	of	any	monkey."
The	man	said,	"Why	should	I	think	of	a	monkey?	I	have	never	thought	of	it	 in
my	whole	life!"
The	old	man	said,	"That's	okay,	just	remember	that.	No	monkey	allowed	at	all.	If
the	monkey	comes	in	you	have	to	repeat	the	mantra	five	times	again."
The	man	said,	"But	why	should	the	monkey	come?"
The	old	man	said,	"I	don't	know.	I	have	told	you	the	secret.	This	is	the	secret	my
master	has	told	me."
But	 he	 could	 not	 even	 get	 down	 the	 steps	 before	 he	 started	 thinking	 about
monkeys.	He	said,	"My	God,	I	have	not	started	the	mantra	yet	and	monkeys	are
coming."	He	will	close	his	eyes	and	there	were	monkeys	and	monkeys,	giggling,
making	faces	at	him.	He	said,
"It	is	a	strange	mantra.	I	have	not	started	yet."
He	reached	home	crowded	with	monkeys.	Wherever	he	will	look,	he	could	see
only	 a	 monkey.	 He	 went	 inside,	 took	 a	 bath,	 but	 it	 was	 no	 use.	 Even	 in	 the
bathroom,	 inside	 the	 bathroom	with	 the	 door	 closed,	monkeys	were	 sitting	 all
around.	He	said,	"That	old	man	is	such	an	idiot.	If	this	monkey	was	the	trouble
he	should	not	have	mentioned	it.
Elephants	are	not	coming,	camels	are	not	coming,	lions	are	not	coming;	nobody
is	coming	except	the	monkey."
Then	he	sat	in	a	lotus	posture	with	closed	eyes	but	it	was	useless.	The	monkeys
were	nudging	him;	the	monkeys	were	sitting;	it	was	a	congregation	of	monkeys
all	around.	He	was	very	worried.	His	wife	passed,	and	he	looked	and	sometimes
it	 looked	as	 if	she	 is	a	monkey	and	sometimes	she	 looked..."No,	no,	she	is	my
wife."	 His	 father	 passed.	 And	 sometimes	 he	 looked	 like	 an	 old	 monkey,	 and
sometimes	he	looked	like	the	father.	The	man	said,	"I'm	going	mad."
Five	 times	was	 too	much.	Even	 to	complete	 the	mantra	om	mani	padme	hum,
just	 those	 four	words,	 and	 there	were	 so	many	monkeys.	 The	whole	 night	 he
tried	hard.	He	took	a	bath	many	times.	He	thought	perhaps	the	clothes	are	not	as
fresh	as	they	should	be,	so	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	in	the	cold	winter,	he	stood
naked.	Now	there	was	no	question	of	dirty	clothes	or	anything.	But	the	monkeys
were	 sitting	 in	 lotus	 posture	 all	 around.	He	 started	 shouting	 at	 them	 and	 they
laughed.
By	the	morning	he	was	almost	mad.	He	said,	"That	old	man	is	tricky.	For	years	I
served	him.	Finally	he	gave	me	the	secret	and	managed	to	destroy	the	secret	by
keeping	the	monkey	with	it."
He	went	back	to	the	old	man,	returned	the	mantra	and	he	said,	"Keep	it	with	you
because	those	monkeys..."
The	old	man	said,	"You	said	they	never	come	to	you."
He	said,	"I	have	not	dreamt	or	seen	or	even	thought	about	a	single	monkey	in	my
whole	 life.	There	are	millions	of	animals	 I	have	not	 thought	about;	 there	 is	no
need.	If	you	had	not	said	the	word	I	would	have	been	able	to	perform	miracles
but	now	it	is	impossible."
The	master	said,	"What	can	I	do?	That	monkey	comes	with	the	mantra.	Without
the	monkey	the	mantra	is	useless.	Unless	you	can	avoid	the	monkeys	you	cannot
perform	miracles."
He	said,	"I	have	forgotten	all	miracles.	I	just	pray	that	you	take	your	mantra	and
relieve	me	of	the	monkeys,	because	I	am	afraid	that	the	mantra	is	gone	but	the
monkeys	may	not	go.	And	I	have	small	children	and	a	wife	and	an	old	father.	I
have	to	take	care	of	them.	I	cannot	go	on	fighting	with	these	monkeys	the	whole
day	and	night."
The	old	man	said,	"Once	you	have	left	the	mantra	with	me	they	will	not	come.
They	are	very	religious	people."
The	man	went.	And	he	was	surprised,	he	looked	all	around,	no	monkey.	When
he	reached	home,	the	wife	looked	like	the	wife,	the	father	looked	like	the	father
and	the	children	looked	like	the	children.	He	said,	"It	is	strange."	He	took	a	bath,
the	bathroom	was	empty.
The	mantra	was	short.	He	said,	"Although	I	have	returned	his	written	mantra,	I
have	 been	 repeating	 it	 the	whole	 night,	 so	 I	 have	 remembered	 it.	 There	 is	 no
harm...	now	I	can	repeat	it."
The	moment	 he	 started	 one	monkey	 appeared	 just	 as	 he	 said	Om.	And	 a	 few
monkeys	were	around	saying	Om.	He	dropped	the	whole	idea.	He	said,	"I	should
go	to	my	shop	and	look	at	my	business.	This	idea	of	performing	miracles	is	not
for	me."
If	I	say	to	you,	"Never	say	no	to	me,"	you	will	find	many	many	times	the	desire
to	say	no;	hence	I	give	you	absolute	freedom.	It	is	up	to	you	to	say	yes	or	to	say
no.	You	 are	 to	 decide	 your	 own	 destiny.	 I	 can	 only	 help	 you,	 suggest	 to	 you,
show	you	the	way.	But	you	can	say,	"I	don't	want	to	go"	--	I	cannot	force	you.
You	can	accept	my	understanding.
You	can	reject	it,	and	in	your	rejection	I	don't	think	that	there	is	less	love.	That's
why	I	 said	 if	you	deeply	 love	me	you	will	not	be	worried	by	saying	no.	But	 I
have	not	mentioned	anything	that	will	happen	to	you.
By	 saying	 no	 you	 are	 relieving	 me	 from	 responsibility.	 You	 are	 taking	 the
responsibility	 into	 your	 own	 hands.	 Now	 if	 things	 go	 wrong	 you	 cannot
complain	about	me.	When	you	say	yes	and	things	go	right	I	cannot	brag	about	it.
The	yes	is	yours;	the	no	is	yours;	the	consequence	will	be	yours.
I	 love	 you	 enough	 --	 hence	 I	 give	 you	 total	 freedom.	 If	 you	 love	 yourself
enough,	you	will	be	aware	what	no	can	do	to	you	and	what	yes	can	do	to	you.
I	teach	you	awareness	and	then	leave	you.	A	man	of	awareness	will	not	try	to	go
through	the	walls,	he	will	find	the	door.	A	man	of	awareness	will	pick	up	roses
and	will	avoid	the	thorns.
I	give	you	freedom,	and	in	giving	you	freedom	I	feel	absolutely	free.	I	don't	have
any	burden	of	 solving,	 saving,	 liberating	humanity.	 I	 don't	 have	 any	burden	 at
all.	I	am	absolutely	weightless.	I	am	not	a	savior,	not	a	messiah,	not	a	messenger.
I	have	chosen	a	third	category.	Just	as	Krishnamurti	is	alone	on	the	extreme	left,
I	am	alone	in	the	middle.	And	Krishnamurti	is	reacting	against	the	tradition.	I	am
not	 reacting,	 I	 am	simply	acting	out	of	understanding.	 I	 can	see	where	 the	old
pattern	went	wrong.	I	will	not	do	just	the	opposite	because	just	the	opposite	will
also	go	wrong.	I	am	doing	something	exactly	in	the	middle.
So	 I	don't	deny	your	discipleship.	 I	don't	deny	 it	because	 I	 respect	you.	 I	 love
you.	 I	cannot	say	I	am	not	a	master	because	I	know,	I	have	experienced,	 I	can
share	it	with	you.
Then	it	is	up	to	you	to	say	yes	or	no.
Maneesha	 is	 right.	 So	 as	 a	 footnote	 remember	 her,	 that	 no	will	 bring	 its	 own
consequences.	It	is	not	that	I	will	punish	you,	your	no	will	punish	you	itself.	Yes
will	bring	 its	own	 rewards.	 It	 is	not	 that	 I	will	 reward	you;	yes	brings	 its	own
rewards.
Between	me	and	you	there	 is	no	relationship	other	 than	of	 love.	But	 it	 is	good
that	Maneesha	 has	 raised	 the	 question;	 otherwise,	 there	 was	 a	 possibility	 that
many	may	have	misunderstood.
The	 concerned	 doctor	 is	 trying	 to	 convince	 the	 patient	 that	 he	 is	 overweight.
"Now	just	 step	on	 the	scales,"	says	 the	doctor.	 "There...	you	see?	Now	look	at
this	chart	and	compare	your	weight	with	the	average	weight	for	your	height.	You
are	way	overweight."
"No,	I	am	not,"	says	the	patient.	"I	am	just	six	inches	too	short."
It	is	a	very	difficult	world	--	misunderstanding	is	possible	everywhere.
The	matronly	woman	was	 alone	 in	 the	 house	watching	 her	 favorite	 television
program	 when	 her	 husband	 burst	 through	 the	 front	 door,	 stalked	 into	 the
bedroom	without	saying	a	word,	and	began	packing	his	suitcase.
"Where	are	you	going?"	she	demanded.
"I	 resigned	 from	 the	 firm	 today.	 I'm	 sick	 and	 tired	 of	 you,	 and	 I'm	 going	 to
Australia.	I'm	told	that	the	young	ladies	there	will	gladly	pay	five	dollars	a	night
for	 the	 services	 of	 a	 good	man,	 and	 I	 intend	 to	 live	 off	 the	 earnings	 from	my
lovemaking."
He	then	continued	to	pack.	Suddenly	his	wife	pulled	her	suitcase	from	the	closet
and	began	packing	her	own	clothing.	"And	where	do	you	think	you	are	going?"
he	demanded.
"To	Australia,"	 she	 laughed.	 "I	want	 to	 see	 how	 you	 are	 going	 to	 live	 on	 ten
dollars	a	month."
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHENEVER	ANY	EMOTIONS	GET	TRIGGERED,	MY	ATTEMPTS	AT
WATCHING	 USUALLY	 RESULT	 IN	 MIND	 TRIPS,	 UNLESS	 I	 DO
SOMETHING
LIKE	RUN	AROUND	BUDDHA	HALL	A	COUPLE	OF	TIMES	FIRST.
I	 FEEL	 THAT	 IF	 I	 COULD	TURN	ALL	 THIS	 ENERGY	 IN,	 INSTEAD	OF
OUT,	GREAT	THINGS	COULD	HAPPEN.
WHILE	YOU	TALK	TO	US	ABOUT	WATCHING,	 IT	 FEELS	 SO	 SIMPLE.
AND
BASKING	IN	YOUR	SILENCE,	I	WONDER	HOW	IT	CAN	BE	A	PROBLEM.
BELOVED	MASTER,	WHAT	AM	I	MISSING,	OR	AM	I	TOO	IMPATIENT?
Prashanto,	the	first	thing	is	to	remember	that	the	exact	purpose	of	Buddha	Hall	is
what	you	are	doing.
Go	on	running	as	long	as	you	don't	fall	down.	Fall	down	on	the	ground	not	by
any	 effort,	 but	 just	 let	 it	 happen	by	 running	 continuously.	The	 time	will	 come
when	you	will	fall	down.	Then	rest	there	and	you	will	find	immense	peace	and
great	silence	which	you	have	never	known.
This	 is	exactly	 the	purpose	of	Dynamic	Meditation:	 to	exhaust	your	energy,	so
the	 mind	 has	 no	 more	 supply	 of	 energy	 to	 create	 thoughts	 and	 dreams	 and
imaginations.	So	you	are	using	the	Buddha	Hall	perfectly	correctly	for	the	first
time,	knowing	that	that	is	the	purpose	of	it.
I	have	never	told	anybody,	because	then	from	tomorrow	you	will	see	there	will
be	two	big	crowds	running.
Exhaust	the	outgoing	energy	and	suddenly	you	will	find	you	are	in.	To	go	in,	you
don't	need	any	energy,	you	are	there.	The	outgoing	energy	has	to	be	exhausted,
so	 you	 cannot	 go	 out.	 As	 far	 as	 going	 in	 is	 concerned	 that	 is	 a	 wrong	 idea;
nobody	goes	 in.	How	can	you	go	 in?	That's	where	you	are!	You	can	go	out	 --
that's	okay.
So	 go	 to	 Buddha	Hall	 and	 run	 as	much	 as	 you	 can.	Don't	 stop	 in	 the	middle
thinking	 that	 it	 is	 too	 tiring.	Go	 on,	 go	 on,	 let	 the	 body	 according	 to	 its	 own
wisdom	 fall	 down.	 Don't	 act,	 don't	 try	 to	 deceive,	 because	 you	 are	 deceiving
yourself.	And	 if	 you	 can	 allow	 the	 body	 to	 go	 on	 running	 till	 it	 falls,	 then	 lie
down	 there	 on	 the	 ground,	 and	 you	 would	 be	 surprised	 that	 you	 have	 never
known	such	peace,	such	silence,	such	deep	meditation.
Gautam	Buddha	himself...	If	you	go	to	Bodhgaya	where	he	became	enlightened	-
-	 that's	why	the	name	of	 the	city	has	become	Bodhgaya.	Gaya	must	have	been
the	 name	 of	 the	 town	 but	 when	 Gautam	 Buddha	 became	 enlightened,	 bodh
means	enlightenment,	so	the	city	of	Gaya	became	Bodhgaya.	There	is	a	temple
in	his	memory	made	almost	two	thousand	years	ago	and	there	is	the	tree	under
which	he	used	to	sit.
If	you	go	 to	Bodhgaya	you	will	 still	 find	what	 I	have	described	 to	you	by	 the
side	of	the	temple	and	nearly	two	hundred	stones	in	a	line.	For	one	hour	Gautam
Buddha	 used	 to	 sit	 and	meditate,	 and	 for	 one	 hour	 he	 used	 to	 walk	 on	 those
stones	 and	meditate.	When	he	became	 tired	of	walking	he	would	 sit;	when	he
became	tired	of	sitting	he	would	walk.
This	way	he	exhausted	his	outgoing	energy.
One	day	 he	 found	 there	 is	 no	 energy	 at	 all	 for	 any	 outgoing.	He	 remained	 in.
And	 this	 remaining	 in	 revealed	 to	 him	 his	 luminous	 being,	 his	 ultimate
consciousness.
In	language	it	is	a	problem;	we	say,	go	in.	You	cannot	go	in,	because	if	you	go
in,	then	that	"in"	will	also	be	out.	You	can	only	go	out;	you	cannot	go	in.
In,	you	are.	What	do	you	mean	by	"in"?	It	is	not	the	inside	of	your	house;	it	is
where	you	are.	There	you	don't	need	going,	all	 that	you	need	 is	 that	you	don't
have	 any	 energy	 to	 go	 out,	 so	 naturally	 you	 remain	 still	 and	 silent	 and	 in.
Suddenly	there	is	an	explosion	of	light	and	bliss	and	ecstasy.
So	 you	 have	 found	 a	 beautiful	 meditation,	 Prashanto.	 Continue,	 and	 you	 will
find	many	more	 from	 tomorrow	on	 the	way.	Don't	 chitchat	with	anybody.	The
moment	you	enter	the	path	by	the	side	of	Buddha	Hall	forget	that	anybody	else
exists	in	the	world:	you	and	the	road,	till	you	fall	down.	Then	in	a	day	you	can
achieve	something	which	you	may	not	be	able	to	achieve	in	one	year's	Dynamic
Meditation.	This	is	the	ultimate	dynamic	meditation!
I	have	not	told	people	but	you	have	found	it,	so	now	I	have	to	recognize	it.
Just	 remember	one	 thing,	 that	 you	 are	not	 to	 stop	by	yourself.	Because	 if	 you
stop	you	will	miss	the	point,	you	will	always	stop	before	the	energy	is	finished.
That's	why	I'm	saying	go	on	and	on	and	on	till	you	cannot	go	on,	and	you	fall.
Don't	 pretend	 to	 fall,	 because	 those	 are	 all	 deceptions	 that	 you	 can	 detect
yourself.	You	know	perfectly	well	when	you	are	pretending	to	fall	and	when	you
are	really	falling.
So	don't	misunderstand	me.	The	real	thing	will	happen	only	when	automatically
you	find	yourself	falling.	You	are	just	a	watcher,	not	a	doer.	And	a	tremendous
experience	is	possible.
The	 father	 was	 having	 a	 heart-to-heart	 talk	 with	 his	 son	 before	 the	 boy's
marriage.
"Son,"	he	said,	"I	have	two	bits	of	advice	for	you	before	you	get	married.	First,
you	must	 tell	 your	wife,	 right	 from	 the	 start,	 that	 you	 insist	 on	 spending	 one
night	each	week	out	with	the	boys."
"And	what,"	asked	the	son,	"is	the	second	bit	of	advice?"
His	father	smiled	and	said,	"Don't	waste	it	on	the	boys."
Hymie	Goldberg	goes	for	his	weekly	visit	to	the	doctor	and	says,	"Doc,	I	snore
so	loudly	that	I	keep	myself	awake.	What	can	I	do?"
The	 doctor	 rolls	 his	 eyes	 and	 says,	 "Why	 don't	 you	 try	 sleeping	 in	 another
room?"
So	Prashanto,	just	get	exactly	what	I	am	saying.
A	Jew	and	an	Irishman	were	fishing	in	separate	boats	some	distance	apart.	The
Irishman	 got	 a	 bite	 and	 was	 so	 nervous	 that	 he	 fell	 out	 of	 the	 boat.	 He	 sank
twice,	and	as	he	was	coming	up	the	second	time,	the	Jew	rowed	over	and	called
out:	"Mister,	can	I	have	your	boat	if	you	don't	come	up	again?"
People	have	their	own	understanding.	Just	get	exactly	what	I	have	told	you,	and
when	 something	 happens	 report	 to	 me,	 because	 everybody	 will	 be	 waiting,
"What	 happened	 to	Prashanto?"	And	 tomorrow	 everybody	will	 be	watching!	 I
have	made	you	a	hero	within	a	second.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	Those	third	rate	politicians,	those	dwellers	of	the	gutter	31	August
1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708310
ShortTitle:
INVITA20
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
89
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	CANADA,	WHERE	I	LIVE,	I	HAVE	BEEN	ASKED	TO	PARTICIPATE	IN
NATIONAL	 POLITICS.	 SHOULD	 I	 REFRAIN,	 GIVEN	 THE	 STATE	 OF
POLITICS
IN	THE	WEST,	OR	SHOULD	I	ACCEPT	AND	USE	THE	EXPERIENCE	AS
ANOTHER	DIMENSION	OF	MY	PROCESS?
Rupananda,	 it	 is	 well	 known	 what	 I	 think	 about	 politics,	 but	 I	 will	 not	 say
anything	to	you,	this	way	or	that.
My	whole	approach	to	my	people	is	that	of	freedom.	You	have	to	act	out	of	your
own	intelligence.	You	don't	have	to	depend	on	my	advice.
I	go	on	giving	you	my	experiences,	my	attitudes,	but	there	is	no	compulsion	that
you	have	to	follow	them.	You	are	not	my	followers,	you	are	my	friends.
I	cannot	impose	my	ideas	on	someone	I	love;	I	give	you	absolute	freedom	to	do
whatsoever	your	intelligence,	your	meditativeness	allows	you.	And	I	don't	think
you	will	go	wrong.
Just	 don't	 be	 attracted	by	 ambition,	 don't	 be	 attracted	by	power,	 because	 those
infatuations	are	destructive.	And	the	people	who	become	attracted	by	things	like
money,	power,	prestige,	miss	one	thing:	that	is	life.
Balzar	 has	 a	 law	 about	 it:	 Life	 is	what	 happens	 to	 you	while	 you	 are	making
other	plans.
A	 politician	 has	 no	 life,	 he	 is	 always	making	 other	 plans,	 and	meanwhile	 life
goes	on	slipping	by.	But	still,	it	is	going	to	be	your	choice.
I	 never	want	 to	 be	 remembered	 by	 you	 as	 someone	who	 forced,	manipulated,
dominated	you	according	to	his	 ideas.	I	can	share	everything	with	you,	but	 the
final	decision	has	 to	be	yours,	because	that's	how	one	matures.	If	you	feel	 like
going	into	politics,	just	think	what	you	can	contribute,	or	you	will	also	become
part	of	the	whole	dirty	game	that	goes	on	in	the	name	of	politics.
You	are	asking	me,	"Should	I	get	into	the	gutter?"	I	will	not	prevent	you.	If	you
enjoy	 it	 is	 perfectly	 okay	 with	 me!	 But	 always	 remember,	 don't	 take	 part	 in
anything	unless	you	are	ready	so	that	you	can	improve	it,	you	can	give	it	some
refinement	--	not	only	about	action,	but	also	about	talk.	Cogglin's	Law	is:	Don't
talk	unless	you	can	improve	the	silence.	It	is	a	tremendously	beautiful	statement:
Don't	talk	unless	you	can	improve	the	silence	--	very	insightful.
Don't	 go	 into	 politics	 unless	 you	 can	 improve	 humanity	 and	 you	 can	 improve
people's	humbleness...	not	getting	into	a	competitive	will	to	power,	because	that
kind	 of	 thing	 happens	 only	 when	 you	 are	 feeling	 empty	 inside.	 I	 have	 never
heard	of	 any	politician	becoming	enlightened	 --	 that	will	 be	 a	 contradiction	 in
terms	 --	 nor	 vice	 versa,	 have	 I	 ever	 heard	 of	 any	 enlightened	 man	 being	 a
politician.
You	think	you	will	be	exploring	a	new	dimension	through	the	gutter?	Through
the	gutter	you	will	get	into	a	deeper	gutter,	a	bigger	gutter,	the	main	gutter.	It	is
not	a	dimension;	it	is	simply	falling	from	your	intelligence,	it	is	not	maturity.	A
certain	retardedness	is	absolutely	necessary	in	politics.	If	you	feel	you	qualify...!
You	have	to	be	continuously	lying,	you	have	to	be	promising	things	which	you
know	perfectly	well	you	cannot	deliver.
Just	the	other	night	I	was	reading	about	a	rabbi	who	wrote	a	letter	to	a	friend,	but
a	very	strange	letter.	He	wrote	a	small	paragraph	and	then	left	almost	the	whole
page,	and	signed	underneath.	That	is	not	the	way	people	write	a	letter.	When	you
write	a	letter,	you	sign	underneath	it...	this	much	gap.	The	man	was	also	puzzled
when	he	received	the	letter.	He	inquired	of	him,	"What	is	the	reason	for	leaving
such	a	big	gap	between	the	letter	and	the	signature?"
He	 said,	 "It	 says	 in	 the	 scriptures,	 `Keep	 yourself	 as	 far	 away	 from	 lies	 as
possible.'"
But	still,	if	you	like	there	is	no	problem;	there	are	many	sannyasins	in	the	same
gutter	 in	different	countries.	A	certain	cruelty,	 inhumanity,	cunningness	are	 the
basic	requirements	for	you	to	become	a	politician.	So	I	am	worried	whether	you
have	 all	 these	 prerequisite	 conditions.	 Innocence	 is	 of	 no	 use;	 that	 will	 bring
failure.	Silence	is	of	no	use,	truthfulness	is	of	no	use,	to	be	sharply	intelligent	is
no	 use.	 And	 remember	 one	 thing:	 politics	 gives	 you	 power,	 but	 it	 gives	 you
power	by	making	you	a	beggar.	All	politicians	are	beggars,	whether	they	may	be
presidents	or	prime	ministers.
Every	 five	years,	and	 they	are	 standing	on	your	door	with	 their	begging	bowl.
They	are,	in	fact,	servants	of	the	people.	At	least	they	have	to	pretend	after	each
five	 years.	 For	 five	 years	 they	 can	 believe	 they	 are	 masters,	 but	 they	 cannot
befool	anybody	of	intelligence.
And	this	reminds	me	that	the	people	from	whom	you	are	going	to	beg	for	votes
are	ignorant,	prejudiced,	are	not	contemporaries.	They	belong	to	past	centuries,
many	centuries	back;	they	are	superstitious.	If	you	want	to	have	their	votes,	you
have	to	fall	to	their	standard;	they	are	not	going	to	rise	to	your	standard.
To	be	a	politician	is	a	tragedy.	But	still,	if	you	want	to	make	your	life	a	tragedy	I
have	 no	 objection.	 The	 whole	 politics	 around	 the	 world	 misses	 anything
significant	for	the	future.
It	is	too	much	concerned	with	trivia,	small,	ugly	conflicts.	It	is	not	interested	in
reality	 to	 improve	 the	 destiny	 of	 humanity,	 to	 give	 new	 dreams	 to	 people,	 to
bring	more	poetry	 into	 their	 lives.	On	 the	 contrary,	 it	 destroys	 their	 dreams,	 it
destroys	their	hopes;	it	destroys	their	trust	in	other	human	beings,	because	they
have	been	continuously	cheated	by	the	politicians,	exploited.
Oscar	Wilde	has	said,	 "A	map	of	 the	world	 that	does	not	 include	utopia	 is	not
worth	glancing	at."	But	no	politician	can	remain	successfully	 in	politics	with	a
utopian	mind;	 he	 has	 to	 be	 practical,	 pragmatic.	He	 has	 to	 forget	 fundamental
things,	 that	 through	wrong	means	you	can	never	 reach	 the	 right	 end.	Only	 the
right	means	justify	the	rightness	of	your	ends.	But	no	politician	can	manage	to
follow	 right	 means	 towards	 right	 ends.	 He	 may	 talk	 about	 right	 ends,	 right
values,	 but	 all	 his	means	will	 be	wrong,	 and	 through	wrong	means	 you	 never
reach	to	right	ends;	they	don't	connect.
You	have	to	be	mean.	You	have	to	be	destructive.	If	needed,	you	have	to	commit
all	kinds	of	crime.	 If	you	can	do	all	 these	 things,	only	 then	you	can	become	a
politician.	 It	 is	 an	 absolutely	 foolish	 and	 absurd	 game,	 and	 particularly	 for	 a
sannyasin	who	is	searching	for	higher	values,	who	is	looking	for	inner	reality	--
who	is	thinking	of	beauty,	truth,	good.	Politics	is	just	the	opposite.	A	sannyasin
is	 trying	 to	 find	 his	 authentic	 being,	 and	 the	 politician	 has	 to	 create	 a	 false
personality	according	to	what	people	need.
A	politician	has	to	say	things	which	he	does	not	mean	but	which	satisfy	people.
He	 can	 never	 speak	 his	 mind;	 in	 fact,	 people	 who	 have	 gone	 deep	 in
understanding	 the	psychology	of	politics,	 say	 in	politics	mind	 is	not	needed	at
all.	We	don't	see	any	politician	functioning	in	a	way	that	shows	his	genius.	There
have	been	millions	of	geniuses,	nobody	was	attracted	towards	politics,	only	very
mediocre	 people.	 In	 a	way	 they	 represent	 the	unintelligent,	 unevolved	masses.
They	are	the	representatives	of	the	slaves.
I	have	heard...
A	great	politician's	brain	surgery	was	being	done.	When	the	surgeons	opened	his
brain	they	saw	so	much	rubbish	and	garbage	that	they	thought	it	is	better	to	take
the	whole	mind	out	of	 the	skull	and	clean	it;	 they	have	never	seen	anything	so
dirty.	So	they	left	the	politician	in	anesthesia,	so	he	was	not	aware,	and	they	went
into	another	room.
Meanwhile,	the	politician	came	out	of	anesthesia,	was	resting	on	the	bed,	when	a
man	 came	 rushing	 and	 shouted,	 "What	 are	 you	 doing	 here?	 You	 have	 been
chosen	as	the	president."
He	said,	"My	God!	What	am	I	doing	here?"	--	and	got	up.
The	surgeons	looked	from	the	other	room,	and	said,	"Hey!	Where	are	you	going?
Your	brain	is	here;	we	are	cleaning	it!"
The	man	 said,	 "Now	 I	don't	 need	 it!	Clean	 it	well	 and	keep	 it.	When	 I	 am	no
longer	 the	 president	 of	 the	 country	 I	 may	 need	 it,	 but	 right	 now	 there	 is	 no
problem."
What	use	is	a	mind	to	the	president?
Presidents	 are	 chosen	 who	 have	 no	 minds	 of	 their	 own,	 so	 they	 can	 simply
function	as	rubber	stamps.
Politics	is	a	strange	world,	but	if	you	want	to	have	some	taste	of	the	ugliest	part
of	human	beings,	you	can	go	into	politics.	Just	remember	one	thing:	going	in	is
easy,	getting	out	will	be	very	difficult,	almost	impossible.	It	is	getting	into	deep
imprisonment	by	your	own	desires.	But	there	are	people	who	are	jailbirds;	they
like	prison.	I	have	known	many	politicians;	I	have	not	seen	anything	worthwhile
in	 their	 lives.	They	have	 staked	everything	 just	 to	be	 in	power.	And	what	will
these	people	do	with	power?	They	will	create	more	wars,	they	will	create	more
weapons,	they	will	create	more	possibilities	for	a	global	suicide.
These	 are	 my	 ideas	 about	 politics,	 but	 these	 are	 my	 ideas,	 you	 don't	 have	 to
follow	them.
If	you	are	feeling	a	certain	urge	for	power,	go	into	 it.	Of	course	I	cannot	bless
you.	I	will	feel	sad	and	sorry	for	your	going	in	a	wrong	direction,	but	I	cannot
prevent	 you	 either,	 because	 any	 interference	 in	 your	 life	 is	 against	 my	whole
approach.	So	please,	meditate	over	it.
Go	 around	 Buddha	 Hall;	 you	 will	 find	 Prashanto	 there,	 either	 enlightened	 or
dead!	That	is	far	better	than	going	into	politics.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 IN	 SOME	 LONG	 RELATIONSHIPS	 FOR	 MANY	 YEARS.
WHEN	I	HEAR	YOU	TALKING	ABOUT	JEALOUSY	AND	FIGHTING	AND
ALL	THESE
PASSIONATE	THINGS	IN	RELATIONSHIPS,	I	BECOME	REALLY	SHAKY,
BECAUSE	IT	SEEMS	I	NEVER	EXPERIENCE	THESE	THINGS	REALLY
STRONGLY.	 LAST	 NIGHT	 I	 GOT	 VERY	 SAD	 ABOUT	 IT,	 AND	 THE
QUESTION
CAME	UP	WHETHER	I	EVER	REALLY	LOVED	SOMEBODY,	WHETHER	I
REALLY	DID	LET	GO	AND	LOSE	CONTROL.
BELOVED	MASTER,	DO	LOVE	AND	HATE,	FIGHTING	AND	HARMONY,
COOLNESS	AND	PASSION	REALLY	ALWAYS	BELONG	TOGETHER?
Anand	Vimlan,	there	are	always	exceptions.	My	feeling	about	you	is	that	you	are
being	 sad	 unnecessarily.	 Life	 allows	 exceptions:	 very	 rarely	 you	 will	 find	 a
couple	who	is	not	in	a	love-hate	relationship	but	simply	in	love.	Naturally,	this
kind	of	love	will	have	a	certain	coolness	about	it,	it	cannot	be	hot.
To	make	it	hot,	you	have	to	bring	the	opposite	 in;	 then	fighting	and	quarreling
and	 arguing	 gives	 a	 certain	 excitement	 to	 your	 energies.	 And	 when	 tired	 of
fighting	and	arguing,	you	again	move	--	the	pendulum	goes	on	moving	between
love	and	hate.	When	your	pendulum	moves	 towards	 love,	you	feel	strong	 love
because	of	 the	contrast.	 It	depends	on	your	 likings:	people	 like	hotdogs!	Dogs
are	enough,	but	they	want	hot	dogs!
Your	love	is	of	a	silent	type,	peaceful.	There	are	rivers	which	are	mountainous,
falling	 from	mountains	 as	waterfalls	 into	 the	 valleys;	 there	 is	much	 going	 on.
And	there	are	rivers	which	flow	in	the	valleys	silently,	so	silent	that	you	cannot
see	that	they	are	flowing.	But	I	don't	think	that	you	have	to	be	sad	about	it;	it	is	a
higher	quality	of	love	which	is	cool,	without	any	excitement,	without	any	heat.
Don't	you	love	ice	cream...	a	cool	breeze,	a	silent	house;	no	pillow	fighting,	no
plates	being	broken?	I	know	it	brings	a	little	spice	in	life	when	pillows	are	going
like	 missiles	 in	 the	 air,	 but	 that	 kind	 of	 spice...?	 That	 kind	 of	 excitement	 is
stupid.
A	love	that	can	be	cool,	and	without	a	hot	passion,	is	a	higher	quality.	Every	love
should	become	of	that	quality.
An	ancient	seer	of	this	country	has	made	a	very	strange	statement.	For	centuries
in	 this	 part	 of	 the	world,	when	people	 get	married	 they	go	 to	 some	master,	 to
some	 wise	 man	 to	 have	 his	 blessings;	 that	 is	 conventional.	 That	 is	 more
important	than	the	marriage	done	by	the	priest.	The	blessings	of	a	wise	man	or
an	enlightened	man,	if	you	can	find	one,	will	not	be	just	words.	He	will	shower
you	with	all	his	love,	with	all	his	grace,	with	all	his	flowers	of	silence	and	peace.
One	of	 the	ancient	 seers	of	 the	UPANISHADS	has	a	very	 strange	blessing	 for
couples	 who	 come	 to	 him:	 "I	 bless	 you,	 that	 you	 will	 have	 ten	 children,	 and
finally	 the	 husband	will	 become	 your	 eleventh	 child."	 It	 looks	 absurd	 --	what
kind	of	blessing	is	this?	But	I	feel	that	the	man	had	a	great	insight.
The	 growth	 of	 love	 should	 finally	 be	 so	 cool,	 so	 passionless	 that	 the	 husband
becomes	almost	a	child	to	the	wife,	because	a	woman	is	intrinsically	a	mother.	In
real	love,	the	woman	functions	as	a	mother,	even	to	the	husband.	How	they	can
hate?	But	it	rarely	happens,	and	as	the	world	has	gone	farther	and	farther	away
from	their	own	selves	and	silence	and	peace	and	coolness,	their	life	as	husband
and	wife	has	also	gone	in	the	same	way.
So	when	I	am	talking,	I	am	talking	not	about	the	exceptions	--	now,	people	like
you	are	exceptions	--	I	am	talking	about	the	general	rule.	But	it	is	good	that	you
ask	the	question;	it	makes	my	answer	complete.	I	have	talked	about	the	majority;
now,	I	am	talking	about	a	very	small	minority	 in	 the	world	--	 they	are	 the	 true
lovers.	Their	love	knows	no	friction,	but	only	deep	understanding	of	each	other.
So	don't	be	worried	about	what	I	have	been	saying	about	the	majority,	about	the
world	at	large.	You	don't	have	to	follow;	you	are	perfectly	going	right.
Bennett's	Accidental	Discovery	 says:	 First,	most	 auto	 accidents	 are	 caused	 by
people	with	driver's	licenses,	so	I	tore	up	my	license.	Secondly,	according	to	the
latest	 statistics,	 most	 auto	 accidents	 happen	 within	 eight	 miles	 of	 your	 own
home,	so	I	moved.
Don't	be	stupid	about	these	statistics,	and	about	these	accidents.	Just	watch	your
own	inner	feeling.	 If	you	are	feeling	happy	with	your	cool	and	silent,	without-
any-conflict	love,	you	need	not	start	being	childish,	immature.	You	don't	have	to
follow	others.
The	people	who	are	fighting	with	their	spouses	are	really	very	repressed	people;
their	 repression	 is	 great.	 All	 the	 religions	 and	 all	 the	 cultures	 and	 all	 the
educational	 institutions	 are	 repressing	 people,	 teaching	 them	 to	 repress	 sex.
Repressed	sex	 is	very	poisonous,	because	 then	 it	will	not	be	satisfied	with	one
woman	 or	 with	 one	 man.	 That	 is	 really	 the	 cause	 of	 fight,	 the	 cause	 of	 all
jealousies,	 the	 cause	 of	making	 spouses	 into	 KGB	 agents.	 They	 are	 watching
each	move	of	the	other	person.
The	 husband	 cannot	 even	 look	 at	 a	 beautiful	woman	passing	 by	 if	 the	wife	 is
with	 him,	 because	 even	 looking	 at	 her	 is	 going	 to	 cause	 immense	 trouble	 at
home.	It	is	strange.	If	you	love	your	wife	and	your	wife	loves	you,	and	you	see	a
beautiful	 flower	or	a	beautiful	 face	or	a	beautiful	moon,	 there	 is	no	difference.
But	because	of	repressedness,	the	wife	knows	the	husband	would	like	to	have	as
many	 women	 as	 possible;	 she	 has	 to	 be	 on	 guard.	 And	 because	 the	 husband
knows	his	repression,	he	is	aware	that	wife	is	also	repressed	in	the	same	way.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 big	 computer	 they	 have	 invented	 in	 New	 York	 which
answers	 your	 questions.	 A	 boy	 went	 and	 asked,	 "Can	 you	 tell	 me	 where	 my
father	is?"
And	the	computer	said,	"Your	father	has	gone	fishing."
The	boy	laughed.	He	said,	"This	is	absolutely	wrong.	My	father	has	been	dead
for	three	years."
The	computer	laughed	and	said,	"My	son,	that	was	the	husband	of	your	mother
who	died	three	years	ago.	Your	father	has	gone	fishing!"
But	this	goes	on	happening	because	for	thousands	of	years	so	much	sexuality	is
repressed	that	 it	 is	not	possible	to	be	satisfied	with	one	woman,	with	one	man.
There	is	no	basic	difference,	and	the	moment	you	put	the	light	off	any	woman	is
the	same,	any	man	is	the	same.	Small	details	may	be	different,	but	the	repressed
desire	 is	discontented.	A	humanity	without	any	sexual	repression	will	not	have
this	kind	of	relationship	which	is	continuously	nagging,	fighting,	harassing	each
other.
This	is	the	greatest	psychological	problem	facing	humanity:	how	to	get	rid	of	the
repression	that	religions	have	planted	in	everybody's	unconscious.	It	has	gone	so
deep	in	the	bones,	in	the	blood,	in	the	marrow,	that	one	existentialist	philosopher
has	said,	"I	would	like	to	make	love	to	all	the	women	of	the	earth;	still,	I	cannot
say	I	would	be	satisfied."	He	is	saying	something	true,	sincerely	true.	And	he	is
saying	something	not	only	about	himself,	he	is	saying	it	about	all	human	beings,
men	and	women	both.
But	this	is	madness.	You	don't	say,	"I	will	not	feel	satisfied	unless	I	have	eaten
apples	from	every	tree	of	the	world."	That	kind	of	statement	will	not	be	relevant
at	all.	But	the	existentialist	philosopher's	statement	has	a	relevance;	he	is	saying
something	 true.	That	 does	 not	mean	 that	 he	 does	 not	 love,	 but	 his	 love	 is	 not
capable	 to	 remove	 the	 deep-rooted,	 repressed	 sexuality;	 it	 is	 not	 enough.	 He
wants	more,	and	he	wants	change.
These	are	the	reasons	of	conflict.	You	are	fortunate	if	your	life	has	been	moving
like	a	silent	river	without	any	unnecessary	conflict,	friction;	otherwise	there	are
everyday	scenes,	and	this	continues	all	your	life.
I	have	heard	that	ninety-year-old	Herbie,	who	tried	to	seduce	a	fifteen-year-old
girl	was	arrested	for	assault	with	a	dead	weapon!
It	is	saddening.	Ninety	years	old	and	you	are	not	beyond	sex,	you	are	not	beyond
childish	things;	it	is	because	of	repression.
Man	has	to	be	completely	released	from	all	kinds	of	inhibitions	and	repressions,
and	love	will	become	a	very	silent	and	cool	affair.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
PASSING	 THROUGH	 THE	 GATE	 OF	 THIS	 MANDIR	 FOR	 THE	 FIRST
TIME	IN
EIGHT	YEARS,	 I	FELT	A	KIND	OF	FRAGRANCE	WHICH	HAS	STAYED
WITH
ME	EVER	 SINCE.	 IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	TO	TAKE	THIS	 FRAGRANCE	WITH
ME
WHEN	I	LEAVE?
OH,	 BELOVED	 MASTER,	 IT	 IS	 SO	 BEAUTIFUL,	 AND	 I	 AM	 SO
GRATEFUL	TO
SPEND	 THIS	 TIME	 WITH	 YOU,	 EVEN	 IF	 I	 CANNOT	 TAKE	 THIS
FRAGRANCE
WITH	ME.
Prem	Maharaj,	 the	 fragrance	 that	you	have	felt	 in	 this	 temple	of	seekers	 is	not
something	 that	 you	 can	 leave	 behind.	 This	 fragrance	 contains	 love,
meditativeness,	silence,	trust,	life-affirmative	values,	a	song	of	gratitude,	a	dance
with	the	trees	and	with	the	stars...
This	fragrance	is	an	experience	of	a	totally	new	atmosphere	that	does	not	exist	in
the	 outside	 world.	 If	 you	 meditate,	 you	 will	 become	 the	 same	 temple.	 Then,
wherever	you	go	the	fragrance	will	go	with	you	like	a	shadow;	even	others	will
feel	it.
It	 is	not	 the	 first	 time	 that	 such	a	question	has	come	 to	me.	The	moment	 they
enter	the	gate	many	people	have	felt	suddenly,	as	if	they	are	entering	into	another
world	--	 the	air	 is	different,	 the	vibe	 is	different	--	as	 if	 they	have	come	home.
And	 there	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 a	 certain	 fragrance,	 because	 so	 many	 people	 are
meditating,	and	slowly,	slowly	their	inner-being	flowers	are	opening.	The	whole
purpose	of	all	these	people	to	be	here	is	absolutely	different	from	any	gathering
anywhere	outside	in	the	world.
These	are	 the	people	who	are	 in	search	of	 the	essential,	 existential	 life	 source.
They	 are	 at	 different	 stages	 of	 evolution	 in	 consciousness,	 but	 they	 are	 all
radiating	 something	 of	 higher	 stages.	 So	when	 you	 enter	 the	 temple,	 you	will
find	 the	 air	 is	different,	 the	 trees	 are	different,	 the	people	 are	different.	And	 if
you	also	become	a	meditator,	 as	 I	know	you	are	becoming,	 this	 fragrance	will
start	coming	from	within	your	own	being.	Even	others	may	feel	it	wherever	you
go.
I	want	my	sannyasins...	I	have	taken	away	the	clothes	which	made	them	distinct;
I	have	taken	away	their	malas.	But	still	people	feel	that	they	look	a	little	different
from	 others;	 still	 the	 airport	 officers	 catch	 hold	 of	 them!	 In	 Indian	 embassies
when	they	go	for	a	tourist	visa,	they	immediately	get	the	idea	that	they	are	going
to	Poona;	Poona	has	become	synonymous	with	my	name.	And	many	sannyasins
have	wondered	--	they	are	not	wearing	the	orange,	they	are	not	wearing	the	mala
--	how	they	have	become	suddenly	suspicious?
A	sannyasin	will	have	a	certain	fragrance,	a	certain	style,	a	certain	way	which	is
subtle;	it	may	not	be	very	apparent	to	the	eyes,	but	it	can	be	detected.
I	would	like	you	to	be	known	as	separate	from	the	crowds,	not	by	your	clothes
not	by	anything	outer,	but	 just	by	your	very	being	 --	your	silence,	your	peace,
your	love,	your	eyes.
Every	gesture	of	you	should	declare	that	you	are	a	sannyasin.
One	day	the	pope	gets	a	phone	call	from	God.	God	says	to	him,	"Since	you	have
been	such	a	good	pope,	I	wanted	you	to	be	the	first	to	know."
"The	first	to	know	what?"	asks	the	pope.
God	says,	"I	have	some	good	news	and	some	bad	news.	The	good	news	is	that
from	now	on,	the	world	will	have	only	one	religion."
"That's	 wonderful,"	 says	 the	 pope.	 "Now	 everyone	 will	 be	 at	 peace,	 and
everyone	 will	 get	 along	 with	 one	 another	 --	 that's	 great.	 But	 what	 is	 the	 bad
news?"
"In	a	few	days,"	says	God,	"you	will	be	receiving	a	phone	call	from	Ma	Anando
in	Poona!"
That	 one	 religiousness	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be	 Catholic	 or	 Christian.	 That	 one
religiousness	 is	 going	 to	 be	 this	 fragrance,	 Prem	Maharaj,	 that	 you	 have	 been
feeling	here.	Once	our	people	are	ready,	they	will	go	on	spreading	it	all	over	the
world;	it	needs	it	tremendously.
Just	remember	one	thing:	Never	be	miserly.	Share	your	experiences	here	with	me
your	silences	of	the	heart,	your	flowering	of	the	being.	Go	on	sharing	the	song
that	you	have	heard	here,	that	music	that	is	all	around	you.
Sometimes	I	feel	sad	for	a	few	people.	One	old	sannyasin,	Kabir,	wrote	a	letter
to	me,	saying	"Osho,	I	want	to	share	what	has	happened	to	me	in	all	these	years
living	with	you.
But	 can	 I	 talk	 about	 you	 without	 mentioning	 your	 name?"	 This	 cowardliness
should	be	dropped.
I	want	you	not	to	be	sheep,	but	lions.
I	want	you	to	roar	about	the	experience,	because	the	world	is	so	deaf	that	unless
you	roar	they	won't	pay	any	attention.	And	the	moment	you	mention	my	name,
even	 if	 they	 are	 dead,	 they	 will	 wake	 up!	 Without	 my	 name,	 they	 will	 feel
goody-goody,	and	you	will	feel	very	goody-goody.	But	only	with	my	name,	will
you	be	able	to	judge	whether	those	people	have	any	intelligence,	any	awareness,
any	 understanding,	 or	 whether	 they	 are	 just	 mediocre	 people	 with	 prejudiced
minds.
Share	without	being	miserable,	without	being	miserly,	and	share	with	authority.
You	have	nothing	to	lose.
It	is	a	tremendous	challenge	to	change	this	whole	earth	into	a	paradise,	but	you
will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 do	 that	 if	 you	 are	 cowardly	 or	 miserly.	 There	 are	 many
sannyasins	who	remain	silent	and	don't	share	just	out	of	the	fear	that	they	may	be
condemned:	 "You	 have	 also	 fallen	 from	 the	 traditional	 religion,	 from	 the
convention,"	they	simply	remain	quiet.
That's	not	right;	that	is	not	compassionate.	That	is	cruel.	If	you	know	something,
share	it	for	two	reasons,	because	the	humanity	needs	it,	and	the	second	reason	is
that	the	more	you	share,	the	more	you	will	have	of	it.
MacTavish,	O'Rourke	and	Hymie	Goldberg	were	mourning	the	loss	of	a	mutual
friend.
MacTavish	said,	"As	you	well	know,	my	friends,	I	am	a	thrifty	Scottish	soul.	But
there	is	a	legend	in	my	family	that	if	one	places	a	wee	bit	of	money	in	the	casket
so	that	it	may	be	buried	with	the	body,	it	will	ease	the	way	into	the	next	world.
For	the	sake	of	our	friend,	I	will	place	ten	dollars	in	the	casket	with	him."	And
with	 a	 flourish,	 he	 released	 a	 ten	 dollar	 bill	 and	 let	 it	 flutter	 onto	 the	 dear
departed's	breast.
O'Rourke	had	no	intention	of	being	outdone.	"Well,"	he	said,	"this	strikes	me	as
near	 superstition,	but	 I	will	 also	contribute	 that	 sum."	And	a	 second	 ten	dollar
bill	joined	the	first	on	the	dead	man's	breast.
Goldberg	 said	 at	 once,	 "Do	 you	 think	 I	 won't	 join	 in	 this	 kind	 deed?"	 And
whipping	 out	 his	 check	 book,	 he	 quickly	made	 out	 a	 check	 for	 thirty	 dollars,
placed	it	on	the	dead	man's	breast	and	took	the	two	ten	dollar	bills	as	change!
Don't	be	 that	miserly.	Share	with	your	 full	heart,	because	 it	 is	not	only	 for	 the
benefit	of	the	other,	 it	 is	also	for	the	benefit	of	your	own	being.	The	more	you
share,	the	more	open	you	will	become.	Your	sharing	is	not	a	loss.	In	the	ordinary
world	of	economics,	if	you	give	things	to	people,	you	lose	them.
I	have	heard...
A	man	stopped	his	car	by	the	side	of	a	beggar.	He	was	in	a	good	mood;	he	had
won	 a	 lottery.	He	was	 surprised	 by	 the	 beggar,	 because	 his	 clothes	were	 very
costly,	although	very	old	and	dirty	and	rotten,	and	his	face	also	looked	cultured,
educated.	But	life	had	been	hard	--	it	seems	he	belonged	to	a	very	good	family,
and	some	calamity	had	happened.	He	stopped	his	car;	he	was	in	a	good	mood,
took	out	a	ten	rupee	note	and	gave	it	to	the	beggar,	and	the	beggar	laughed.
The	man	said,	"Why	are	you	laughing?"
The	beggar	said,	"I	am	laughing	because	this	is	the	way	I	finished	all	my	money,
my	whole	heritage	that	my	father	has	left.	I	also	used	to	have	a	beautiful	car,	but
I	was	giving	 to	everybody	 --	whoever	needed.	 I	 laughed,	because	 if	 this	 is	 the
way	you	are	also	going,	soon	you	will	be	standing	by	my	side."
In	ordinary	economics,	when	you	give	things	you	lose.	But	in	the	spiritual	world
laws	 change.	There,	 if	 you	DON'T	give	 you	 lose:	 if	 you	 keep	 your	 doors	 and
windows	closed,	your	blissfulness,	your	silence,	all	become	stale.	But	if	you	go
on	sharing,	fresh	waters	will	be	coming	from	the	eternal	sources	of	life,	and	your
blissfulness	will	 remain	 always	 fresh	 and	 fragrant.	And	 it	will	 go	 on	 growing
wider	and	wider.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	concerned	 this	 is	 the	only	 real	 charity,	 to	 share	your	 innermost
treasure	with	people,	 familiar	or	 strangers,	and	 to	 turn	 their	eyes	also	 inwards.
Because	 seeing	 your	 treasure,	 they	 will	 be	 reminded	 of	 their	 own	 treasures.
Experiencing	your	fragrance,	you	will	be	putting	them	on	the	search	of	how	they
can	 also	 be	 so	 fresh,	 so	 fragrant,	 so	 graceful.	 From	 where	 can	 they	 get	 this
beauty	 that	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the	world,	 this	music	without	 instruments,	 and
this	poetic	atmosphere	without	words?
Sharing	with	 people	 is	 putting	 them	 on	 the	 right	 way:	 in	 search.	 And	 if	 they
know	what	happens	to	the	real	seeker,	they	will	not	go	on	any	wrong	path.
The	 Indian	 constitution	 says	 three	 things	 are	 charitable:	 giving	 to	 the	 poor,
making	hospitals	for	the	sick,	opening	schools	for	the	uneducated.	It	is	a	shame
that	 this	 should	 be	 the	 only	 kind	 of	 charity	mentioned	 in	 the	 constitution	 of	 a
country	which	knows	far	higher	realms	of	charity.	The	constitution	was	written
by	people	who	had	no	idea	--	they	were	politicians.	They	could	not	conceive	that
there	can	be	some	higher	charity.
To	me	these	are	good	but	not	great.	The	constitution	would	have	been	far	richer
if	it	had	mentioned	sharing	your	spiritual	experiences	with	those	who	are	poor	in
spiritual	experiences.
I	have	been	fighting	for	years	with	the	Indian	government.	They	are	not	ready	to
believe	that	this	institution	is	a	charitable	institution,	and	they	cannot	understand
that	there	are	deeper	treasures,	higher	consciousnesses,	and	those	who	don't	have
them	--	they	are	poor.
Sharing	 your	 spirituality,	 sharing	 your	 meditation,	 sharing	 your	 love	 at	 least
should	have	been	mentioned	in	the	constitution,	particularly	of	a	country	which
has	 been	 for	 centuries	 the	 land	 which	 has	 attracted	 seekers	 from	 all	 over	 the
world.	But	this	constitution	was	not	written	by	seers	or	enlightened	people,	but
by	 those	 third-rate	 politicians,	 those	 dwellers	 of	 the	 gutter.	 They	 cannot	 see
anything	 more	 than	 the	 fragrance	 they	 feel	 in	 the	 gutter;	 that	 is	 the	 only
fragrance	they	know	of.
I	would	like	you	not	to	be	bothered	by	constitutions	and	other	things.	You	have
to	understand	the	higher	economics:	share	so	that	you	can	have	more.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	To	know	oneself	and	to	be	oneself
31	August	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8708315
ShortTitle:
INVITA21
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
87
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	SPEAK	ON	DISCIPLINE	AND	MEDITATION?
Niten,	it	is	a	very	strange	question	because	every	day,	morning	and	evening,	I	am
speaking	on	discipline	and	meditation.	 If	anybody	reads	your	question,	he	will
think	that	for	the	first	time	I	have	to	speak	on	discipline	and	meditation!	Where
have	you	been	for	so	long?
You	remind	me	of	two	old	friends;	they	meet	on	a	street	in	Leningrad...
"How	is	life	treating	you,"	asks	one.
"Just	great,"	replies	the	other.
The	 first	 one	 looks	 at	 him	 dubiously	 and	 says,	 "Have	 you	 been	 reading	 the
papers?"
"Of	course,"	replies	the	other,	"how	else	would	I	know!"
People	 know	 about	 their	 own	 lives	 by	 reading	 newspapers,	 and	 I	 have	 been
telling	you	every	day	about	meditation	and	nothing	else,	and	you	are	asking...!
Okay...
A	little	old	Jewish	lady	sits	down	on	a	plane	next	to	a	big	Norwegian.	She	keeps
staring	 and	 staring	 at	 him.	Finally	 she	 turns	 to	him	and	 says,	 "Pardon	me,	 are
you	Jewish?"
"No,"	he	replies.	A	few	minutes	go	by	and	she	looks	at	him	again	and	says,	"You
can	tell	me	--	you	are	Jewish,	aren't	you?"
He	answers,	"Definitely	not."
She	keeps	studying	him,	and	says	again,	"I	can	tell	you	are	Jewish!"
In	 order	 to	 get	 her	 to	 stop	 annoying	 him,	 the	 gentleman	 says,	 "Okay,	 I	 am
Jewish."
She	looks	at	him	and	shakes	her	head	back	and	forth	and	says,	"Really,	you	don't
look	it!"
I	am	wondering	from	where	to	begin!	Niten,	meditation	is	the	only	contribution
the	 East	 has	 made	 to	 humanity.	 The	 West	 has	 made	 many	 contributions,
thousands	of	scientific	 inventions,	 immense	progress	 in	medicine,	unbelievable
discoveries	 in	 all	 the	 dimensions	 in	 life.	 But	 still,	 a	 single	 contribution	 of	 the
East	is	far	more	valuable	than	all	the	contributions	of	the	West.
The	West	 has	 become	 rich;	 it	 has	 all	 the	 technology	 to	 be	 rich.	 The	 East	 has
become	poor,	immensely	poor,	because	it	has	not	looked	for	anything	else	except
for	one	thing,	and	that	is	one's	own	inner	being.	Its	richness	is	something	which
cannot	be	seen,	but	it	has	known	the	highest	peaks	of	bliss,	the	greatest	depths	of
silence.	 It	 has	 known	 the	 eternity	 of	 life;	 it	 has	 known	 the	 most	 beautiful
flowering	of	love,	compassion,	joy.	Its	whole	genius	has	been	devoted	to	a	single
search	--	you	can	call	it	ecstasy.
Meditation	is	only	a	technique	to	reach	to	the	ecstatic	state,	to	the	state	of	divine
intoxication.	It	is	a	simple	technique,	but	the	mind	makes	it	very	complex.	Mind
has	to	make	it	very	complex	and	difficult,	because	both	cannot	exist	together.
Meditation	is	the	death	of	the	mind.
Naturally,	 mind	 resists	 every	 effort	 for	meditation.	 And	 if	 you	 go	 on	 without
listening	 to	 the	 mind...	 It	 is	 clever	 and	 cunning	 enough	 to	 give	 you	 false
directions	and	call	them	meditation.
Just	today	I	was	informed	about	one	of	the	people	who	has	been	for	many	years
a	 disciple	 of	 Maharishi	 Mahesh	 Yogi.	 He	 is	 now	 here	 meditating,	 but	 he
continues	his	master	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi's	meditation	too.
What	 Maharishi	 Mahesh	 Yogi	 calls	 transcendental	 meditation	 is	 neither
transcendental	nor	meditation.	It	is	a	mind	trick.	Just	one	thing	is	missing	in	it	--
I	have	been	telling	you	about	the	monkey	--	and	the	person	who	is	here	should
remember	 it!	Transcendental	meditation	works	only	 if	you	don't	 remember	 the
monkey.	So	from	tomorrow	morning,	be	careful!	The	slightest	remembrance	of
the	monkey,	and	transcendental	meditation	is	meaningless.
In	 fact,	 after	 eighteen	 years	 being	with	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi	 and	doing	 his
transcendental	 meditation,	 what	 is	 the	 need	 to	 come	 here?	 But	 mind	 is	 so
cunning	 that	 he	 is	 consoling	 himself	 that	 perhaps	 it	 is	 his	 master,	 Maharishi
Mahesh	Yogi,	who	has	sent	him	here.	But	why	should	he	send	you	here?	I	don't
consider	 that	 he	 knows	 anything	 at	 all	 about	 meditation.	 What	 Maharishi
Mahesh	Yogi	is	teaching	in	the	name	of	meditation	has	been	known	for	centuries
in	the	East	by	almost	everybody	that	it	is	a	psychological	trick.	It	is	not	harmful.
On	the	contrary,	it	can	give	you	a	little	rest;	it	can	give	you	a	good	feeling	as	if
you	 have	 taken	 a	 shower.	But	 it	 is	 not	meditation,	 because	 it	 cannot	 take	 you
beyond	the	mind.
Any	effort	made	by	the	mind	cannot	 take	you	beyond	the	mind.	This	 is	a	very
fundamental	rule	to	remember.	The	so-called	transcendental	meditation	is	just	an
example.	There	are	many	of	the	same	kind	prevalent	all	over	the	East,	but	they
don't	bring	enlightenment.	They	don't	bring	awakened	consciousness	and	that	is
the	only	criterion	to	decide	whether	they	are	right	or	not.	A	tree	is	known	by	its
fruits,	and	a	technique	is	known	by	what	it	achieves.
Transcendental	meditation	 is	 representative	 of	 all	 the	meditations	which	mind
has	suggested	to	you;	it	is	a	cunning	way	to	take	you	astray.	Mind	remains	safe,
not	only	safe,	but	becomes	stronger.	All	 these	 techniques	are	of	concentration.
You	concentrate	on	some	word,	holy	word	--	the	name	of	God,	or	any	mantra	--
and	you	repeat	it	as	fast	as	you	can,	just	inside	your	mind.	The	faster	you	can	do
it	the	better;	the	speed	helps	two	things.	The	mantra	or	the	name	of	God	--	even
your	own	name	will	do;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	God	--	any	meaningless	word
will	 do	 because	 the	 technique	 depends	 on	 something	 else.	 It	 depends	 on	 fast
repetition,	so	fast	that	there	are	no	gaps	left	in	between.
Because	there	are	no	gaps,	thoughts	cannot	arise;	thoughts	need	a	little	space.
This	is	one	thing:	that	you	go	on	repeating	a	word	faster	and	faster,	and	as	you
go	on	doing	it	for	years,	you	really	become	an	expert.	So	one	thing	it	does	is	that
it	does	not	give	a	chance	for	any	idea	to	enter	into	your	mind.	The	second,	more
fundamental	 thing	 it	 does	 is	 that	 it	 creates	 tremendous	 boredom.	 Obviously,
anything	continuously	repeated	is	going	to	create	boredom,	and	boredom	is	the
basis	of	auto-hypnosis.
When	you	become	bored,	you	start	falling	into	a	sleep,	which	is	not	exactly	sleep
because	 it	 is	 deliberately	 created;	 hence	 it	 has	 a	 different	 name	 --	 hypnosis.
Hypnosis	means	sleep,	with	a	difference,	that	it	is	deliberate.
Sleep	comes	naturally	--	on	its	own,	spontaneously.	Hypnosis	is	deliberate	sleep
--	you	create	a	situation	in	which	it	is	bound	to	happen.	This	deliberate	sleep	is
immensely	healthy,	and	even	ten	or	fifteen	minutes	in	a	hypnotic	state	gives	you
a	 good	 relaxation	 which	 hours	 of	 ordinary	 sleep	 cannot	 give.	 And	 when	 you
come	out	of	it,	you	will	feel	very	fresh.
I	absolutely	agree	 that	 if	you	are	doing	 it	only	 for	 this	purpose	 --	 relaxation,	a
freshness	comes,	but	 it	never	 takes	you	beyond	the	mind.	How	can	it	 take	you
beyond	 the	 mind,	 because	 mind	 itself	 is	 repeating?	 By	 repetition,	 it	 does	 not
need	 to	 think;	 repetition	 itself	 becomes	 a	 substitute	 for	 thoughts.	 And	 by
repetition	it	falls	into	a	deep	sleep	--	dreamless	sleep,	which	gives	you	immense
freshness,	rejuvenation.
Naturally,	you	can	be	deceived	that	this	is	meditation	--	you	can	go	on	doing	it
your	whole	life.	It	is	healthy,	it	is	good,	it	is	nourishing,	but	it	is	not	meditation.
Meditation	starts	by	being	separate	 from	the	mind,	by	being	a	witness.	That	 is
the	 only	 way	 of	 separating	 yourself	 from	 anything.	 If	 you	 are	 looking	 at	 the
light,	naturally	one	thing	is	certain,	you	are	not	the	light,	you	are	the	one	who	is
looking	at	it.	If	you	are	watching	the	flowers,	one	thing	is	certain,	you	are	not	the
flower,	you	are	the	watcher.
Watching	is	the	key	of	meditation:
Watch	your	mind.
Don't	do	anything	--	no	repetition	of	mantra,	no	repetition	of	the	name	of	God	--
just	watch	whatever	 the	mind	 is	 doing.	Don't	 disturb	 it,	 don't	 prevent	 it,	 don't
repress	 it;	don't	do	anything	at	all	on	your	part.	You	just	be	a	watcher,	and	the
miracle	of	watching	is	meditation.	As	you	watch,	slowly,	slowly	mind	becomes
empty	of	thoughts;	but	you	are	not	falling	asleep,	you	are	becoming	more	alert,
more	aware.
As	the	mind	becomes	completely	empty,	your	whole	energy	becomes	a	flame	of
awakening.	This	flame	is	the	result	of	meditation.	So	you	can	say	meditation	is
another	 name	 of	 watching,	 witnessing,	 observing	 --	 without	 any	 judgment,
without	any	evaluation.	Just	by	watching,	you	immediately	get	out	of	the	mind.
The	watcher	 is	 never	 part	 of	 the	mind	 and	 as	 the	watcher	 becomes	more	 and
more	rooted	and	strong,	the	distance	between	the	watcher	and	the	mind	goes	on
becoming	longer	and	longer.	Soon	the	mind	is	so	far	away	that	you	can	hardly
feel	 that	 it	exists...	 just	an	echo	 in	 faraway	valleys.	And	ultimately,	even	 those
echoes	disappear.	This	disappearance	of	the	mind	is	without	your	effort,	without
your	using	any	force	against	the	mind	--	just	letting	it	die	its	own	death.
Once	mind	 is	 absolutely	 silent,	 absolutely	 gone,	 you	 cannot	 find	 it	 anywhere.
You	become	 for	 the	 first	 time	 aware	of	 yourself	 because	 the	 same	energy	 that
was	involved	in	the	mind,	finding	no	mind,	turns	upon	itself.	Remember:	energy
is	a	constant	movement.
We	 say	 things	 are	 objects,	 and	 perhaps	 you	 have	 never	 thought	 why	 we	 call
things	 objects.	 They	 are	 objects	 because	 they	 hinder	 your	 energy,	 your
consciousness.	They	object;	they	are	obstacles.	But	when	there	is	no	object,	all
thoughts,	emotions,	moods,	everything,	has	disappeared.	You	are	in	utter	silence,
in	 nothingness	 --	 rather	 in	 nothingness;	 the	 whole	 energy	 starts	 turning	 upon
itself.	This	returning	energy	to	the	source	brings	immense	delight.
Just	 the	 other	 day,	 I	 quoted	 William	 Blake,	 "energy	 is	 delight."	 That	 man,
although	he	is	not	a	mystic,	must	have	found	some	glimpse	of	meditation.	When
meditation	comes	back	to	its	own	source,	it	explodes	in	immense	delight.
This	delight	in	its	ultimate	state	is	enlightenment.
Anything	 that	helps	you	 to	go	 through	 this	process	of	meditation	 is	discipline:
perhaps	 taking	 a	 good	 bath,	 being	 clean	 and	 cool;	 sitting	 in	 a	 relaxed	 posture
with	 eyes	 closed,	 neither	 hungry	 nor	 overloaded;	 sitting	 in	 a	 posture	which	 is
most	relaxing...	having	a	look	at	the	whole	body,	every	part	and	whether	there	is
any	tension.	If	there	is	any	tension,	then	change	the	posture	and	bring	the	body
into	a	relaxed	state.
In	the	East	it	has	been	found,	and	found	rightly,	that	the	lotus	posture	--	the	way
you	must	have	seen	the	statues	of	Buddha;	that	is	called	the	lotus	posture...	It	has
been	a	discovery	of	thousands	of	years	that	that	is	the	most	relaxed	state	of	the
body.	But	 for	Westerners	who	are	not	accustomed	 to	sitting	on	 the	ground,	 the
lotus	posture	is	a	nightmare!	So	avoid	it,	because	it	 takes	almost	six	months	to
learn	the	lotus	posture;	it	is	not	necessary.
If	you	are	accustomed	to	sitting	on	a	chair,	you	can	find	a	way,	a	posture,	a	chair
made	in	a	certain	way	that	helps	your	body	to	relax	all	its	tensions.	It	does	not
matter	whether	you	are	sitting	in	the	chair	or	in	the	lotus	posture	or	lying	down
on	the	bed.	Sitting	is	preferable	because	it	will	prevent	you	from	falling	asleep.
The	 lotus	posture	was	 chosen	 for	many	 reasons.	 If	 one	 can	manage	 it	without
torturing	himself,	 then	 it	 is	 the	best,	but	 it	 is	not	a	necessity.	 It	 is	certainly	 the
best	situation	in	which	you	can	enter	into	watchfulness.	The	legs	are	crossed,	the
hands	 are	 crossed,	 the	 spine	 is	 straight;	 it	 gives	 many	 significant	 supports	 to
being	watchful.	First,	in	this	position,	gravitation	has	the	least	effect	on	the	body
because	your	spine	is	straight.	So	the	gravitation	can	effect	a	very	small	portion.
When	you	are	 lying	down,	gravitation	effects	your	whole	body.	That's	why	for
sleeping,	 lying	down	is	 the	best	posture.	Gravitation	pulls	 the	whole	body,	and
because	 of	 its	 pull,	 the	 body	 loses	 all	 tensions.	 Secondly,	when	 you	 are	 lying
down,	 if	 the	purpose	 is	 to	 sleep	 then	you	should	use	a	pillow	because	 the	 less
blood	 reaches	 to	 your	 mind,	 the	 less	 the	 mind	 will	 be	 active.	 The	 less	 blood
reaches	to	the	mind,	the	more	possibility	to	fall	asleep.
A	lotus	posture	is	a	great	combination.	It	has	the	least	effect	of	gravitation,	and
because	 the	 spine	 is	 straight	 a	 lesser	 amount	 of	 blood	 reaches	 to	 the	mind,	 so
mind	cannot	 function.	 In	 that	posture	you	cannot	 fall	asleep	easily.	And	 if	you
have	 learned	 the	 posture	 from	 your	 very	 birth,	 it	 becomes	 so	 natural.	 The
crossing	of	 the	 legs,	 the	 crossing	of	 the	 hands	 have	 a	 significance.	Your	 body
energy	moves	 in	a	circle;	 the	circle	 is	not	broken	anywhere	 in	a	 lotus	posture.
Both	your	hands...	one	hand	gives	 the	energy	 to	 the	other	hand;	your	one	 foot
gives	energy	to	the	other	foot	--	and	the	energy	goes	on	moving	in	a	circle.	You
become	a	circle	of	your	bio-energy.
Many	things	are	of	much	help.	Your	energy	is	not	being	released	so	you	don't	get
tired.
Your	 blood	 is	 reaching	 in	 a	 lesser	 amount	 so	 the	mind	 does	 not	 function	 too
much.	You	are	sitting	in	such	a	position	--	your	legs	are	locked,	your	hands	are
locked	and	your	spine	is	straight	--	sleep	is	difficult.	These	are	just	supports;	they
are	not	essential.
It	 is	not	 that	one	who	cannot	sit	 in	a	 lotus	posture	cannot	meditate,	meditation
will	 be	 a	 little	 difficult	 but	 the	 lotus	 posture	 is	 only	 helpful,	 not	 absolutely
needed.	And	for	the	people	from	colder	countries	where	sitting	on	the	ground	is
not	possible	--	their	bodies	for	centuries;	their	parents	and	their	parents'	parents
from	Adam	and	Eve...	Have	you	seen	any	picture	of	Adam	and	Eve	sitting	in	a
lotus	posture?	In	fact,	it	would	have	been	very	good	for	them,	because	sitting	in
lotus	posture	they	could	sit	naked	and	yet	nobody	would	have	been	very	much
aware	 of	 their	 nakedness.	 That's	 how	 the	 Jaina	 monks	 sit,	 always	 in	 lotus
posture.	 You	 cannot	 see	 their	 genitals.	 Their	 legs	 are	 crossed,	 their	 hands	 are
crossed;	this	functions	almost	as	a	protection	for	their	nakedness.
But	 if	 for	 centuries	 people	 have	 never	 sat,	 then	 it	 will	 unnecessarily	 create
trouble;	your	body	structure	has	taken	a	certain	mode.	It	 is	better	 to	follow	the
body	and	its	wisdom:	use	a	chair.	The	whole	thing	is	you	should	be	comfortable
so	 that	 the	 body	 does	 not	 draw	 your	 attention.	 That's	 why	 tension	 has	 to	 be
avoided,	 because	 if	 you	 have	 a	 headache	 then	 it	 will	 be	 difficult	 to	meditate.
Again	and	again,	your	attention	will	go	to	the	headache.	If	your	leg	is	hurting,	or
if	there	is	any	slight	tension	anywhere	in	the	body,	it	immediately	alarms	you.	It
is	natural	and	it	is	part	of	the	body's	wisdom.
If	it	does	not	alarm	you	then	there	is	danger:	a	snake	may	be	biting	you,	and	you
may	go	on	sitting;	your	clothes	may	catch	fire,	your	body	may	be	burning,	and
you	may	not	be	aware	of	it.	So	the	body	immediately	alarms	wherever	there	is
any	trouble.	That's	the	reason	to	create	a	relaxed	position	in	which	the	body	need
not	alarm	you,	because	every	alarm	will	be	a	disturbance	in	your	meditation.
So	the	first	thing	of	discipline	is	a	relaxed	body	and	closed	eyes,	because	if	you
have	 open	 eyes,	 then	 so	 many	 things	 are	 moving	 around,	 they	 can	 be	 a
disturbance.	It	is	perfectly	right	for	the	beginners	to	use	a	blindfold,	so	that	you
are	completely	inside,	because	it	is	your	eyes,	your	senses	that	take	you	outside.
Eyes	take	eighty	percent	of	all	your	outgoing	contact	--	eighty	percent	is	through
the	eyes,	so	close	the	eyes.
For	the	beginners,	it	is	good	if	they	can	use	earplugs.	Close	the	ears	so	no	noise
from	the	outside	disturbs	you.	It	is	only	for	the	beginners;	all	the	precautions	are
for	the	beginners.
And	then	just	watch	your	mind	as	if	the	mind	is	nothing	but	a	traffic	of	thoughts
or	a	film
--	a	movie	passing	on	the	TV	screen.	You	are	just	a	neutral	observer.
This	 is	 the	discipline.	And	 if	 this	discipline	 is	 complete,	watching	 comes	very
easily,	 and	 watching	 is	 meditation.	 Through	 watchfulness	 mind	 disappears,
thoughts	disappear.	And	that	moment	is	the	most	blessed	moment:	when	you	are
fully	 awake	 and	 there	 is	 not	 a	 single	 thought,	 just	 a	 silent	 sky	 of	 your	 inner
being.
This	is	the	moment	when	energy	turns	inwards;	the	turning-in	is	sudden,	abrupt.
And	 as	 the	 energy	 turns	 inwards,	 it	 brings	 immense	 delight,	 orgasmic	 delight.
Suddenly	your	awareness	becomes	so	rich	because	the	energy	is	nourishment	to
your	awareness.	The	energy	coming	back	creates	almost	a	flame	of	your	being.
You	see	all	around	pure	light,	silence	--	utter	silence,	and	an	immense	centering.
You	are	now	at	your	very	center.
At	 the	 right	 moment,	 when	 you	 are	 exactly	 centered	 --	 the	 explosion.	 That
explosion,	we	call	enlightenment.	This	enlightenment	brings	you	all	the	treasures
of	 the	 inner	world,	 the	whole	 splendor.	 It	 is	 the	 only	miracle	 in	 the	world:	 to
know	oneself	and	to	be	oneself,	and	to	know	that	one	is	deathless,	one	is	beyond
the	body,	beyond	the	mind;	one	is	just	pure	consciousness.
So	the	discipline	is	just	a	support,	the	essential	thing	is	witnessing,	watching	--
that	is	meditation.	But	in	the	name	of	meditation,	there	are	hundreds	of	so-called
teachers	 who	 go	 on	 exploiting	 people.	 Maharishi	 Mahesh	 Yogi	 became	 well
known	 in	 the	West,	because	 the	West	was	not	aware	 that	 in	 the	East,	 even	 the
villagers	are	doing	the	so-called	transcendental	meditation.	Everybody	chanting,
repeating	the	name	of	God	--	it	is	an	enjoyable	exercise.	I	am	not	against	it;	it	is
perfectly	good,	but	don't	call	it	meditation	and	don't	call	it	transcendental.	Those
are	wrong	words	for	it.
It	is	hypnotic	auto-suggestion	and	nothing	more.	It	will	never	give	you	the	light
that	Kabir	talks	of,	"As	if	thousands	of	suns	have	arisen	all	around."	It	will	not
give	 you	 what	 Rumi	 calls	 as	 if	 the	 whole	 sky	 is	 showering	 flowers,	 and	 the
whole	being	is	filled	with	perfume,	unearthly,	not	of	this	world."
It	will	not	give	you	the	ecstasy	that	Patanjali,	the	founder	of	Yoga,	continuously
insists	 on	 in	 his	 yoga	 sutras.	 He	 says	 that	 samadhi,	 ecstasy	 is	 very	 similar	 to
sleep	with	only	one	difference	that	it	is	alert.	If	sleep	can	be	awake,	if	sleep	can
be	full	of	awareness,	then	it	is	samadhi,	it	is	ecstasy.	It	will	never	give	you	the
buddha	nature.	It	gives	you	ordinary	mental	rest	--	physical	relaxation;	hence,	I
am	not	against	it.
Whatever	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi	and	other	people	like	him	are	doing	is	good,
but	 they	 are	 calling	 something	meditation	which	 is	 not.	 That's	where	 they	 are
leading	people	astray.	If	they	had	remained	sincere	and	authentic	and	told	people
that	this	will	give	you	mental	health,	physical	health,	a	more	relaxed	life,	a	more
peaceful	 existence,	 it	was	 right.	But	 once	 they	 started	 calling	 it	 transcendental
meditation	they	have	raised	a	very	trivial	thing	to	an	ultimate	significance	which
it	cannot	fulfill.	People	have	been	in	transcendental	meditation	for	years,	and	in
the	East,	for	thousands	of	years.	But	that	has	not	become	their	self-knowing,	and
that	has	not	made	them	Gautam	Buddhas.
If	you	want	to	understand	exactly	what	meditation	is	Gautam	Buddha	is	the	first
man	 to	 come	 to	 its	 right,	 exact	 definition	 --	 that	 is	 witnessing.	 Learn	 from
Gautam	Buddha	witnessing,	and	 learn	from	Patanjali	 the	discipline	 that	can	be
helpful	 for	meditation.	This	way,	 yoga	 and	mediation	 can	become	a	 synthesis.
Yoga	 is	 a	 discipline,	 just	 an	 outer	 support	 --	 immensely	 helpful	 but	 not
absolutely	 needed.	 And	 Gautam	 Buddha	 has	 given	 to	 the	 world	 the	 very
fundamental	and	the	most	essential	thing:	witnessing	as	meditation.
Niten,	 your	 question	will	 not	 be	 solved	 until	 you	 start	 on	 the	 path	 a	 little	 bit;
otherwise,	you	will	ask	again,	"What	is	meditation?"	Just	my	explaining	it	to	you
is	not	enough;	you	will	have	to	move	on	the	path.
Hymie	 and	 Becky	 Goldberg	 are	 about	 to	 take	 their	 first	 flight	 on	 an	 airliner.
Hymie	spends	a	while	enjoying	his	comfortable,	reclining	seat	and	watching	the
pretty	 stewardess	 walking	 up	 and	 down	 the	 aisle.	 Next	 he	 looks	 out	 of	 the
window	and	says	excitedly,	"Becky,	look	at	those	people	down	there,	they	look
like	ants."
Becky	 leans	 over,	 has	 a	 look	 and	 then	 says,	 "They	 are	 ants,	 you	 idiot...	 we
haven't	left	the	ground	yet!"
Hymie	 Goldberg	 was	 so	 interested	 in	 watching	 the	 pretty	 girls	 going	 up	 and
down	the	aisle,	he	had	completely	forgotten	that	the	airplane	was	still	standing	--
it	had	not	moved!
So	looking	at	the	ants,	he	thought	they	must	be	people	from	such	a	height.
That's	why	you	meditate	with	closed	eyes!
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	YOU	 TALK	ABOUT	 THE	 SAME	OLD	 THINGS	DAY	AFTER	DAY
AND	YET
PRODUCE	A	NEW	REVELATION	WITH	EACH	SENTENCE	IS	TO	ME	THE
GREATEST	 MIRACLE	 IN	 EXISTENCE.	 WOULD	 YOU	 CARE	 TO
COMMENT,	PLEASE?
Veena,	it	is	very	simple.	First,	because	I	have	nothing	to	say,	so	I	am	free	to	say
anything.
I	don't	know	what	is	going	to	be	my	next	sentence;	hence,	it	is	not	a	burden	or	a
trouble;	it	is	spontaneous.	I	am	not	an	orator	who	has	to	practice	and	rehearse.	I
love	people,	and	I	love	to	share	my	experience	with	them.	I	don't	remember	the
past;	hence,	it	is	very	difficult	for	me	to	repeat	it.	And	because	I	look	more	at	the
questioner	than	his	question...
and	 all	 questioners	 are	 different;	 their	 questions	 may	 be	 almost	 the	 same.
Looking	at	 the	questioner,	my	answer	changes,	 I	 respond	to	 the	person.	 I	don't
have	 any	doctrine	 to	 preach,	 so	 I	 don't	 have	 to	 be	 consistent.	 I	 enjoy	 absolute
freedom.
In	the	past	history	of	mankind,	only	poets	have	been	given	a	certain	license	that
they	 can	 use	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 freedom	 not	 to	 bother	 about	 the	 grammar	 and	 the
language	 and	 the	 rules	 and	 the	 regulations.	 They	 had	 to	 be	 given	 that	 much
license,	 otherwise	 they	 could	 not	 have	 poetry.	 That	 is	 the	 difference	 between
prose	 and	 poetry:	 prose	 has	 to	 follow	 rules,	 regulations,	 grammar,	 linguistics;
poetry	 has	 a	 certain	 freedom.	 I	 am	 even	 using	 prose	 with	 absolute	 license,
because	I	don't	see	there	is	any	reason	to	follow	any	limits.
All	 that	 I	know	 is	 if	what	 I	 am	 feeling	 is	 conveyed	 to	you,	whether	 it	 is	 right
grammar	or	wrong	grammar,	whether	it	is	the	right	word	or	the	wrong	word,	is
irrelevant.	 If	 I	 have	 conveyed	my	 joy,	my	 love,	my	 peace,	my	 blissfulness	 to
you,	any	word	is	right.	And	because	I	have	so	much	overflowing	experience	of
my	being	I	can	go	on	for	a	millennium	talking	about	it	--	from	different	aspects,
different	angles,	different	directions;	it	will	remain	inexhaustible.
You	have	heard	speakers,	orators;	I	don't	belong	to	their	category.	I	simply	enjoy
gossiping!	 It	 is	 not	 a	 gospel	 --	 I	 am	not	 serious	 about	 it.	Seriousness	 to	me	 is
psychologically	 sick.	 Healthy	 people	 will	 not	 enjoy	 gospels;	 they	 are	 boring.
And	you	can	see	in	any	church	you	will	find	people	asleep.	The	Sunday	sermon
is	a	good	morning	nap;	people	go	to	the	church	for	that	good	morning	nap...	no
disturbance.	And	the	sermon	is	almost	the	same,	it	helps	sleep.
I	 have	heard	 that	 one	great	 preacher	was	very	much	disturbed.	He	was	 a	very
learned	rabbi.	His	 trouble	was	 that	an	old	millionaire,	who	had	contributed	 the
most	to	the	synagogue,	used	to	sit	just	in	front	of	him	and	sleep	and	snore	loudly.
It	 was	 not	 a	 trouble	 that	 he	 was	 snoring,	 it	 was	 a	 trouble	 because	 his	 snore
disturbed	 other	 sleepers!	And	 his	 snore	 kept	many	 other	 sleepers	 awake.	That
disturbed	the	preacher	because	that	meant	every	Sunday	you	have	to	bring	a	new
sermon	--	people	are	awake.
It	 is	 a	 good	 agreement	 between	 preachers	 and	 their	 congregation,	 that	 the
congregation	will	sleep	and	the	preacher	will	preach.	He	can	go	on	preaching	the
same	thing	every	time.	There	is	not	much	to	preach	either.	In	all	the	four	gospels,
it	 is	 only	 one	 story	 repeated	 four	 times,	 the	 same	 incidents	 reported	 by	 four
journalists!	And	not	very	educated	either!	So	what	can	 the	poor	preachers	do?
What	can	the	rabbis	do?
I	have	been	looking	through	the	TALMUD,	and	it	is	so	tiring	that	anybody	who
suffers	from	sleeplessness,	I	suggest	the	TALMUD	--	you	can	just	manage	two
or	 three	 pages!	 It	 is	 so	 much	 nonsense,	 and	 on	 that	 nonsense	 rabbis	 go	 on
interpreting,	 interpretations	 upon	 interpretations.	 And	 the	 original	 is	 basic
rubbish.	 I	 have	 always	 suspected	because	 the	namèrabbi'	 seems	 to	be	 so	 close
tòrubbish'	that	there	must	have	been	some	past	connection	between	rubbish	and
rabbi!
But	somehow	the	rabbi	had	to	stop	that	old	man	--	and	he	found	a	way.	He	used
to	 come	with	his	 grandchildren	 --	 a	 little	 boy,	 sometimes	 a	 little	 girl	 --	 but	 he
always	used	 to	 bring	 a	 little	 child	with	 him.	The	 rabbi	 one	day	 took	 the	 child
aside	 and	 said,	 "Listen,	 my	 boy,	 if	 you	 can	 keep	 your	 grandpa	 awake,
particularly	when	he	starts	snoring	--	you	can	nudge	him	--	I	will	give	you	four
annas."
The	boy	said,	"Settled!"
And	the	next	sermon	day	it	was	really	great;	the	boy	did	not	allow	the	old	man	to
snore.
The	moment	he	would	snore,	the	boy	would	nudge	him.
The	old	man	was	amazed,	"What	has	happened?"	The	boy	had	never	done	such	a
thing	before...	always	sitting	silently.	Outside	he	asked,	"What	is	the	matter?"
The	boy	said,	"Nothing	is	the	matter.	I	am	getting	four	annas	to	keep	you	awake,
because	your	snoring	is	disturbing	the	whole	congregation."
"Who	is	giving	you	four	annas?"	the	old	man	asked.	"I	will	give	you	eight	annas
if	you	sit	silently	and	don't	disturb	my	snoring."	The	boy	said,	"That's	perfectly
good	--	agreed!"
Next	 time	 the	 rabbi	 looked	 again	 and	 again	 at	 the	 boy,	 and	 the	 boy	 started
looking	downwards,	and	the	old	man	was	snoring.	And	the	rabbi	said,	"What	is
the	matter?"	He	many	times	made	the	indication,	but	the	boy	would	not	look	at
him	at	all.	He	continued	to	look	downward.	After	the	sermon	the	rabbi	took	the
boy	aside,	and	said,	"You	seem	to	be	very	cunning.	Have	you	forgotten?"
He	said,	"No,	the	old	man	is	giving	me	eight	annas	not	to	disturb	him."
The	rabbi	said,	"I	will	give	you	one	rupee."
He	said,	"That's	perfectly	good	--	promised."
Next	 time	he	again	started	nudging	the	old	man.	The	old	man	said,	"Have	you
forgotten?"
The	boy	said,	"I	have	not	forgotten.	Now	the	rabbi	is	giving	me	one	rupee,	and
business	is	business!"
A	true	Jew!
I	don't	know	what	 is	going	 to	come	through	me.	I	am	almost	a	vehicle,	 I	have
left	myself	almost	completely	in	the	hands	of	existence.	So	whatever	existence
wants	 to	 convey	 to	 you,	 I	 am	 available.	 That's	why	 I	went	 on	 stopping	many
times	because	it	is	not	in	my	hands,	it	is	in	the	hands	of	existence.	If	something
goes	on	flowing,	it	is	okay	--	and	if	it	is	nothing,	I	wait.	I	wait	for	existence	to
pick	up	the	last	thread.
Veena,	you	say	that	it	is	the	greatest	miracle	in	existence.	I	can	agree	with	you.	I
myself	 feel	 it,	 that	 either	 I	 am	 mad	 --	 because	 for	 thirty	 years	 I	 have	 been
continuously	speaking,	nonstop...	Now	I	am	speaking	much	less;	otherwise	five
lectures	 per	 day	 had	 been	 my	 usual	 routine	 from	 morning	 till	 late	 night.
Naturally,	 I	 thought	 either	 I	 am	 mad	 or	 it	 is	 a	 miracle.	 There	 are	 only	 two
possibilities;	I	am	happy	with	either!
A	 Soviet	 citizen	 who	 was	 visiting	 the	West	 was	 besieged	 by	 many	 questions
from	persons	wanting	to	know	more	about	communism.
"You	mean	 to	 tell	me,"	asked	a	curious	host,	 "that	by	being	a	communist,	you
share	everything?"
"Yes,"	came	the	reply.
"You	mean,"	 the	 host	 continued,	 "if	 you	 had	 two	 houses	 you	 would	 give	me
one?"
"Of	course."
"And	if	you	had	two	cars,	you	would	give	me	one?"
"Certainly,"	replied	the	Russian.
"And	if	you	had	two	stoves,	or	 televisions,	or	refrigerators	you	would	give	me
one	of	each?"
"Naturally,"	said	the	Russian.
"And	if,"	the	host	went	on,	"you	had	two	shirts,	you	would	give	me	one?"
"No,"	replied	the	communist	emphatically.
"Why	not?"
"Because	I	have	two	shirts!"
Veena,	 I	 simply	 enjoy	 talking,	 just	 as	 I	 enjoy	 silence.	 I	 have	 to	 keep	 some
balance.	Most	of	 the	 time	I	am	silent,	and	then	naturally,	 I	have	to	 take	a	 little
holiday	from	silence.
Then	I	talk	to	my	heart's	content.	I	do	only	two	things:	I	talk	to	you,	and	then	I
go	to	sleep!	In	the	morning	I	wake	up,	I	talk	to	you,	and	then	I	go	to	sleep.	My
twenty-four	hours	are	divided	into	two	things:	talking	and	sleeping!
My	sleep	is	my	silence,	my	ecstasy,	my	samadhi.	My	talking	is	my	sharing	with
you	what	I	have	found	in	my	sleep!
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	A	sannyasin	is	never	retired
1	September	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709010
ShortTitle:
INVITA22
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
110
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THIS	QUESTION	IS	ASKED	BY	A	TREMBLING	HEART,	WRITTEN	BY	A
TREMBLING	 HAND.	 MY	 GRATITUDE	 FEELS	 SO	 INADEQUATE	 FOR
YOUR
GIFT.	WHY	DO	I	FEEL	SO	UNWORTHY	OF	YOU?
Veet	 Vidhan,	 there	 are	 certain	 symptoms	 of	 falling	 in	 love.	 One	 of	 them	 is	 a
feeling	 of	 unworthiness,	 because	 love	 is	 so	 vast,	 and	 you	 are	 so	 small.	 You
cannot	 earn	 love,	 it	 comes	 on	 its	 own	 accord;	 suddenly	 it	 starts	 showering	 on
you.
Naturally,	because	you	have	not	earned	it,	you	cannot	feel	worthy	of	it.	As	love
deepens,	the	feeling	of	unworthiness	deepens.	If	a	person	in	love	does	not	feel	it,
that	means	the	love	is	superficial,	and	the	man	has	too	big	an	ego.	Only	in	that
situation	--	when	your	ego	is	too	big,	and	your	love	is	a	superficial	affair,	not	the
great	affair	Ta	Hui	was	talking	about...
Before	the	great	affair	of	love,	it	is	absolutely	necessary	and	inevitable,	that	one
should	feel	unworthy.	Nothing	is	wrong	in	it;	it	is	exactly	as	it	should	be.	Out	of
this	 unworthiness,	 slowly,	 slowly	 transformation	 happens.	 I	 can	 predict	 it	will
happen	 to	 you	 too,	 because	 your	 feeling	 of	 unworthiness	 is	 not	 just	 an
intellectual	 question.	 Intellect	 never	 asks	 such	 questions;	 ego	 does	 not	 allow
such	questions;	mind	is	not	capable	of	asking	such	questions.
Mind	 and	 ego	 and	 intellect	 --	 they	 all	 take	 it	 for	 granted	whatever	 happens	 in
their	 lives	is	not	enough.	They	are	worthy	for	more;	hence	the	question	cannot
arise	 from	 those	 sources.	 The	 only	 source	 that	 remains	 is	 the	 heart,	 which	 is
always	 true	 and	 always	 sincere.	And	once	 the	 heart	 starts	 feeling	 unworthy,	 it
does	not	give	a	sadness	to	you	but	a	gratefulness.	Slowly,	slowly	unworthiness
turns	into	gratitude:	you	are	not	worthy	of	something	and	it	has	been	showering
on	you;	you	cannot	even	understand	why	existence	has	chosen	you.
One	of	Gautam	Buddha's	disciples,	Manjushri,	became	enlightened	sitting	under
a	tree.
The	 moment	 he	 became	 enlightened,	 suddenly	 flowers	 from	 the	 tree	 started
showering	 on	 him.	 Those	 who	 were	 around,	 they	 could	 not	 believe	 what	 is
happening.	 There	was	 not	 any	 strong	wind.	 There	 is	 no	 reason	why	 so	many
flowers	go	on	showering	on	Manjushri.
He	was	sitting	silently	with	closed	eyes;	perhaps	he	was	not	even	aware.
They	reported	to	Gautam	Buddha.	He	looked	where	Manjushri	was	sitting	under
a	 tree,	 and	he	 said,	 "He	has	become	what	his	destiny	was;	he	has	come	 to	his
flowering.	 And	 not	 only	 is	 his	 inner	 being	 full	 of	 joy,	 even	 the	 tree	 is
celebrating."
These	 kinds	 of	 stories	 for	 centuries	 had	 been	 taken	 as	 metaphors,	 poetry,
beautiful	anecdotes.	But	now	we	can	say	they	are	factually	possible	on	scientific
grounds.	Trees	are	very	sensitive,	more	sensitive	than	you	are.	They	join	you	in
your	celebration;	they	join	you	in	your	mourning.	Of	course,	you	are	not	aware,
but	 now	 scientists	 have	 found	ways	 to	 figure	 it	 out.	 They	 have	made	 a	 small
instrument	like	a	cardiogram,	which	is	attached	to	the	tree,	and	the	cardiogram
starts	working,	making	the	graph	of	the	tree's	sensitivity.
When	 the	 tree	 is	 at	 ease,	 relaxed,	 the	 cardiogram	 makes	 the	 graph	 very
symmetrical.	If	a	woodcutter	comes	with	his	axe,	with	the	idea	to	cut	the	tree...
He	has	not	 started	cutting	and	he	has	not	even	said	 that	he	 is	going	 to	cut	 the
tree,	but	if	he	has	the	idea,	 the	tree	is	even	sensitive	to	the	idea.	And	suddenly
the	graph	 starts	 trembling	 just	 like	your	heart	 trembles...	writing,	 your	hand	 is
trembling.	The	whole	 tree	starts	 trembling	deep	down,	and	 it	can	be	caught	on
the	graph.	The	graph	is	no	longer	symmetrical;	it	goes	crazy.
Not	only	is	it	that	the	tree	which	has	to	be	cut	becomes	aware	of	your	thought,
your	thought	creates	a	vibration	around	you	which	a	simple	heart	can	catch	hold
of.	Other	trees	surrounding	the	tree	--	friends	and	companions	which	have	been
together	 for	years,	have	 joined	 in	sadness	when	 there	was	no	rain,	have	 joined
when	 the	 rain	 comes	 and	 brings	 great	 joy	 and	 blessings.	 They	 have	 passed
through	many	falls	and	seen	themselves	standing	naked	against	the	sky,	and	have
seen	many	 springs	 together	 when	 great	 foliage	 comes	 and	when	 flowers	 start
blossoming.	A	certain	communion,	a	certain	friendliness	has	arisen	in	them.
So	 it	 has	 been	 found	 that	 the	 tree	 which	 is	 going	 to	 be	 cut	 starts	 trembling,
catches	 the	 thought.	But	 other	 trees	 nearby	 also	 start	 trembling...	 just	 the	 idea
that	one	of	their	old	friends	is	going	to	be	destroyed.	Strangely	enough,	scientists
have	been	shocked	that	it	means	trees	are	more	sensitive	than	human	beings:	you
don't	know	what	 thought	 is	going	on	in	the	person	who	is	sitting	by	your	side;
every	mind	 is	 broadcasting	 its	 thoughts	 all	 around,	 and	you	are	 catching	 them
but	you	are	not	aware.
They	have	tried	bringing	the	same	woodcutter	again,	but	with	no	idea	of	cutting
the	tree.
He	 comes	 with	 his	 axe,	 the	 graph	 continues	 exactly	 the	 same,	 symmetrical,
showing	that	the	tree	is	not	worried	because	there	is	no	idea	in	the	woodcutter's
mind	 --	 and	 the	 other	 trees	 also	 stop	 trembling.	 And	 when	 the	 gardener	 is
brought	who	has	nourished	those	trees,	cared	for	them,	has	loved	them,	in	lonely
moments	 has	 even	 talked	 with	 them...	 I	 had	 a	 gardener,	 an	 old	 man,	 a	 very
beautiful	man	--	and	he	was	not	just	professionally	a	gardener,	he	loved	trees.	I
have	 seen	 him,	when	 there	was	 nobody	 and	 he	 thought	 nobody	was	watching
him;	I	have	seen	him	talk	to	the	trees.
Once	 I	 caught	 hold	 of	 him,	 because	 he	was	 continuously	winning	 every	 year;
almost	five	years	he	was	with	me	and	every	year	he	was	winning	the	corporation
prize	for	bringing	the	biggest	roses.	I	asked	him,	"What	 is	 the	matter;	you	talk
with	trees?"	He	said,	"I	love	them,	I	feel	them.	I	can
tell	you,	but	not	anybody	else,	because	I	trust	you	will	understand,	that	it	is	not
one-sided;	they	also	answer	in	some	way	or	other.	I	have	not	been	winning	these
prizes	because	I	am	a	great	gardener."
The	city	was	big,	and	there	were	many	millionaires	 in	 the	city.	They	had	great
gardens	and	many	gardeners.	And	 they	were	all	puzzled	because	 they	were	all
trying	to	win	the	prize,	but	this	old	man	went	on	winning.
He	said,	"It	is	just	my	talking	to	the	trees,	saying,	`Don't	forget	in	the	right	time
to	give	me	the	biggest	flower.	It	is	a	question	of	my	prestige	and	your	prestiges.'"
And	he	 said	 to	me,	 "It	 has	never	 failed.	Those	other	gardeners	 are	doing	hard
work	with	more	manure,	more	chemicals.	They	are	doing	everything	that	the	art
of	gardening	will	suggest,	but	this	is	beyond	the	art	of	gardening."
As	 the	 gardener	 is	 brought,	 all	 the	 trees	 feel	 so	 immensely	 happy	 that	 the
symmetrical	graph	becomes	almost	a	dance.	Just	as	it	has	become	crazy	out	of
fear,	so	out	of	love	it	again	becomes	not	the	ordinary	silent	tree,	but	showing	a
tremendous	joy	as	if	the	tree	is	jumping,	dancing.	And	you	can	see	the	difference
between	the	graphs.	When	the	tree	is	afraid,	the	graph	will	show	you	that	these
lines	are	coming	out	of	fear.	And	when	the	tree	has	suddenly	seen	the	gardener
who	has	 taken	care	and	grown	 it	 like	his	own	children,	 the	graph	dances.	And
you	can	see	in	the	graph	that	it	is	not	out	of	worry,	but	out	of	a	gratitude	and	out
of	a	welcome	--	a	friend	has	come.	And	other	trees	also	do	the	same.
Man	is	capable	of	receiving	immense	joy	if	he	only	learns	how	to	be	grateful.	So
you	are	on	the	right	path,	Vidhan.	But	don't	go	on	thinking	in	terms	that	you	are
unworthy,	because	that	has	to	be	transformed	into	gratitude.	It	is	certain,	nobody
is	worthy.	What	have	you	done	 to	be	alive?	What	have	you	done	 to	have	such
beautiful	 eyes?	 What	 have	 you	 done	 to	 have	 this	 potentiality	 of	 becoming	 a
Gautam	 Buddha?	 You	 have	 not	 done	 anything;	 it	 is	 just	 coming	 out	 of	 the
abundance	of	existence.	Existence	has	so	much	that	it	has	to	share	out	of	sheer
necessity	to	unburden	itself;	it	is	overflowing.	And	if	people	remain	thirsty,	it	is
their	own	fault.
There	 is	an	ancient	saying	 in	 India	 that	you	can	remain	 thirsty	standing	on	 the
bank	of	a	river.	Unless	you	learn	how	to	bow	down,	fill	your	hands	with	water,
the	river	is	not	going	to	jump	towards	you.	It	is	available;	just	a	little	humbleness
on	your	part,	a	little	receptivity	on	your	part,	and	you	can	quench	your	thirst.
Everything	that	is	great	in	life	is	abundantly	available;	just	don't	shrink	in	your
unworthiness.	It	is	a	beautiful	first	step	to	experience	it,	but	then	for	what	are	we
worthy?
Neither	for	life,	nor	for	love,	nor	for	this	beautiful	body	--	we	are	not	worthy	for
anything;	we	have	just	taken	all	this	for	granted.	This	is	the	irreligious	mind.
I	 don't	 call	 a	man	 irreligious	who	does	 not	 believe	 in	God.	 I	 don't	 call	 a	man
irreligious	 who	 does	 not	 go	 to	 the	 temples	 or	 churches.	 I	 don't	 call	 a	 man
irreligious	 if	he	denies	heaven	and	hell	and	all	 that	nonsense.	But	 I	call	a	man
irreligious	 if	 he	 does	 not	 feel	 unworthy	 of	 all	 that	 he	 has	 received	 and	 is
receiving	 every	 moment.	 With	 every	 breath,	 with	 every	 heartbeat	 life	 is
continuously	 giving	 you.	 The	 same	 life	 is	 capable	 of	 giving	 you	 immense
blissfulness,	of	which	you	cannot	even	have	an	idea	unless	you	have	tasted	it.
Just	change	your	unworthiness	 into	gratefulness,	 into	 thankfulness.	And	to	me,
this	kind	of	gratitude	is	 the	only	 true	prayer.	You	don't	have	to	say	anything	--
just	the	feeling	of	gratefulness	that	I	don't	deserve,	I	don't	see	why	so	much	has
been	given	to	me	and	so	much	goes	on	showering	on	me.	What	can	I	do	except
be	grateful?
This	gratefulness	should	sink	deep	in	your	consciousness,	in	your	very	fibers	and
cells	 of	 body.	You	will	 simply	become	gratefulness,	 then	 it	 is	 prayer.	And	 the
things	that	are	called	prayer	are	just	false.	Millions	of	temples	and	churches	and
synagogues,	and	millions	of	people	continuously	praying...	but	their	prayers	are
false	because	they	are	always	asking	for	something.	They	are	never	thanking	for
what	they	have	already	received.
In	their	prayers	if	you	look,	you	will	find	the	beggar,	the	ungrateful	beggar.	And
you	will	also	find	in	all	the	prayers	of	all	the	religions	--	I	have	looked	as	deeply
as	possible	into	every	religion	--	there	is	a	certain	complaint	that	things	are	not
as	they	should	be:	"Others	are	getting	more;	I	am	not	getting	that	much."	These
are	not	prayers,	they	are	simply	wasting	their	time.	They	have	not	even	come	to
understand	the	meaning	of	prayer.
It	 is	 not	 in	 the	 words,	 it	 is	 prayerfulness.	 And	 prayerfulness	 means	 only	 one
thing,	and	only	one	 thing,	gratefulness	 --	a	gratitude	 that	goes	on	sinking	deep
into	your	being	 for	everything:	 for	 trees	being	green,	 for	 rain	coming	down	 to
quench	the	thirst	of	the	earth.
And	when	the	first	rains	come,	the	sweet	smell	coming	from	the	earth	is	earth's
gratitude.
And	 the	 trees	becoming	green,	and	bringing	millions	of	 flowers,	 that	 is	earth's
thankfulness,	 that	 is	 earth's	 prayer.	That's	 how	you	 should	 be;	 that's	 how	your
prayer	should	be	--	nothing	but	a	gratefulness.
Slowly,	slowly	man	goes	on	forgetting	what	complaint	is,	what	grudge	is.	As	he
becomes	more	attuned	with	gratefulness,	he	forgets	completely	that	he	has	to	ask
for	something.
Things	are	coming	without	his	asking.	He	has	just	to	keep	his	doors	open	and	the
guest	comes.	He	has	just	to	wait,	and	wait	lovingly,	prayerfully.
I	am	giving	you	the	meaning	of	prayer	in	a	way	no	religion	has	ever	given	it	to
humanity;	 their	 prayers	 are	 so	 childish,	 stupid.	 A	 gratefulness	 will	 make	 you
more	and	more	capable	of	receiving	gifts.
The	so-called	religions	that	have	overruled	man's	mind	for	centuries	are	mostly
fictions.	 I	have	come	across	Albert	Camus'	very	 strange	but	beautiful	 and	 true
statement:	"If	God	did	not	exist,	we	would	have	to	invent	him"	--	otherwise,	to
whom	are	you	going	to	complain?	on	whose	shoulders	are	you	going	to	throw	all
your	responsibilities?	with	whom	are	you	going	to	be	angry?	who	is	going	to	be
your	security,	safety...?
Camus	is	saying	something	very	important	when	he	says	that	if	God	did	not	exist
we	would	have	 to	 invent	him,	and	 if	God	did	exist,	we	would	have	 to	abolish
him.	If	God	did	exist	why	would	we	have	to	abolish	him?	--	because	it	would	be
intolerable.	 To	 be	 so	 grateful	 to	 him	 would	 look	 like	 humiliation:	 you	 are
unworthy	 and	 he	 goes	 on	 giving	 to	 you	 --	 you	 could	 not	 forgive	 him;	 he	 is
insulting	you,	he	is	making	you	aware	of	your	unworthiness.
I	 have	a	 friend	who	was	 at	 a	 time	education	minister.	He	used	 to	 come	 to	me
once	in	a	while,	and	one	day	he	told	me	something	that	he	would	not	have	told
anybody:	 "I	 have	 thought	 many	 times	 to	 bring	 it	 to	 your	 notice,	 but	 then	 I
stopped	myself.	But	there	is	a	limit,	I	have	to	tell	it	to	you."	He	was	born	a	poor
man,	and	he	was	adopted	by	a	rich	man,	a	very	rich	man,	who	had	no	children.
So	he	suddenly	rose	from	poverty	to	be	a	super-rich	man.
He	 started	 giving	 money	 to	 his	 relatives	 who	 were	 poor,	 because	 he	 himself
belonged	 to	a	poor	 family;	his	 relatives	were	poor,	his	 friends	were	poor.	And
now	 he	 had	 so	 much,	 and	 he	 had	 got	 it	 without	 any	 effort,	 and	 he	 was	 in	 a
position	 to	 help	 everybody.	 He	 really	 helped	 all	 his	 relatives,	 his	 father,	 his
brother,	his	sisters,	his	friends,	and	he	made	all	of	them	very	rich.	I	was	aware	of
the	fact.
He	 told	me	 "The	 problem	 is,	 I	 have	 been	 so	 generous	 to	 everybody	who	was
even	faraway	connected	--	a	faraway	cousin,	or	 just	an	acquaintance	--	but	 if	 I
saw	that	they	were	in	trouble,	I	gave	them	as	much	as	they	wanted;	I	gave	them
more.	Now	they	are	all	flourishing,	they	are	all	rich.	But	one	thing	strange	is	that
they	don't	feel	obliged	towards	me!	On	the	contrary,	most	of	them	never	come	to
see	me	or	meet	me;	 in	 fact,	 they	avoid	me.	 It	hurts	me	very	much,	 that	 I	have
done	so	much...	and	what	kind	of	ungrateful	people	are	these?"
I	said,	"You	don't	understand	 the	deeper	psychology	behind	it.	You	have	given
them,	but	you	don't	know	that	the	giver	always	insults	the	person	he	is	giving.	In
the	very	giving	you	have	become	higher	and	 the	person	who	has	 received	has
become	 lower.	 If	 you	 are	 an	 understanding	man,	 you	will	 see	 this	 is	 actually
what	 happens.	 I	want	 to	 ask	 you	 one	 thing:	Have	 you	 ever	 accepted	 any	 help
from	them?"
He	said,	"I	don't	need	it	--	why	should	I	accept	their	help?"
I	said,	"That's	where	you	are	humiliating	them,	insulting	them.	What	is	wrong?	-
-	 small	 things.	 If	you	 just	phone	a	 friend	whom	you	have	helped,	who	 is	now
rich,	has	a	factory	of	his	own,	cars	of	his	own...	if	you	just	ask	him,	`Send	two
cars;	I	need	them	very	much.'
You	may	not	need,	you	have	enough	cars!	Just	let	those	cars	come,	and	after	an
hour	send	them	back.	You	don't	need,	but	let	that	man	feel	that	he	can	also	give
something	to	you,	that	he	is	not	always	on	the	receiving	end.	He	is	sometimes	on
the	giving	side	also.
"Or	you	can	tell	some	friend,	Ìn	your	garden	I	saw	such	beautiful	roses.	Can	you
send	me	a	dozen	 roses	 today?'	And	he	will	be	 immensely	happy	 to	send	 those
dozen	roses.	It	doesn't	cost	him	much,	but	he	will	start	forgiving	you,	and	he	will
start	being	grateful	to	you."
The	man	 said,	 "Perhaps	 you	 are	 right.	 I	 have	 never,	 never	 asked	 anybody	 for
anything,	because	I	don't	need.	And	I	never	thought	that	just	giving	to	somebody,
and	always	giving	and	never	taking..."
"Anything,	anything	without	any	value...	a	few	flowers	or	just	calling	the	person
and	saying,	Ì	am	feeling	very	lonely.	Can	you	come	and	be	with	me	for	breakfast
or	for	the	lunch?	--	I	will	be	immensely	grateful.'	You	would	have	helped	those
people	to	regain	their	dignity.	You	have	given	them	money	but	you	have	made
them	beggars,	and	nobody	can	forgive	you,	this	is	utterly	inhuman."
And	he	said,	"I	understand,	but	I	will	not	be	able	to	do	it;	it	is	against	my	ego."
I	said,	"That	is	then	absolutely	clear	why	they	are	avoiding	you:	they	know	that
you	are	giving	to	them,	not	because	they	are	poor	but	because	you	are	rich.	You
are	not	concerned	with	their	problems	and	worries	and	difficulties.	You	are	just
exploiting	 their	 misery,	 their	 suffering,	 their	 poverty	 for	 your	 own	 ego
fulfillment;	Ì	have	been	a	great	help.'	And	you	are	bragging	continuously...	How
can	they	forgive	you?"
That's	what	Albert	Camus	means	when	 he	 says	 that	 if	God	 did	 exist	 and	was
available	to	humanity,	we	should	have	to	abolish	him	because	it	would	become
intolerable:	he	goes	on	giving	and	he	will	not	ask	for	anything	from	you	because
he	 has	 everything	 --	 the	whole	 belongs	 to	 him!	He	would	 take	 away	 all	 your
dignity.	You	can	forgive	somebody	for	anything,	but	you	cannot	forgive	anybody
who	destroys	your	dignity	as	a	human	being,	who	takes	away	your	pride.
Fortunately,	 there	 is	 no	 God,	 and	 particularly	 for	 you.	 There	 are	 people	 who
believe	 in	God:	deep	down	 they	 are	 angry	with	him.	They	may	pray	 and	 they
may	show	 their	 respect,	but	deep	down	 they	 think,	 "Why	 is	my	wife	suffering
from	 cancer?	 If	 God	 is	 compassionate,	 then	where	 is	 his	 compassion?	 I	 have
been	praying	for	years,	why	am	I	poor?	The	people	who	never	pray	and	never
come	to	the	church	or	 the	temple	or	 the	synagogue	are	rich!	I	am	honest	and	I
am	 trying	 to	 be	 as	 sincere	 as	 human	 frailty	 will	 permit,	 but	 I	 remain	 poor,	 a
failure,	 a	 nobody...	 and	 the	 people	 who	 are	 mean	 and	 cunning	 and	 can	 do
anything	to	achieve	power	and	money	--	they	are	successful.	The	priests	go	on
saying	that	God	is	just.	Where	is	your	justice?"
These	 things	 go	 on	 remaining	 in	 your	 unconscious	 --	 you	 may	 not	 say	 them
because	 they	may	make	God	very	 angry.	 In	 fact,	 in	 the	TALMUD,	 the	 Jewish
God	says	exactly	the	words,	"I	am	a	very	angry	God.	I	never	forgive;	never	take
me	for	granted."	A	very	beautiful	sentence	is:	"I	am	not	your	uncle,	remember."
That	is	very	Jewish,	but	their	God	is	a	Jew,	you	cannot	do	anything	about	it.	He
is	reminding	you,	"I	am	not	your	uncle,	so	don't	expect	any	niceness	from	me.	I
am	your	father."
You	 know	 there	 is	 a	 difference	 between	 the	 father	 and	 the	 uncle:	 uncles	 are
always	friendly;	fathers	are	authoritarian,	powerful	people;	you	belong	to	them.
It	is	very	rare	to	see	a	son	and	a	father	being	friendly,	trusting	each	other,	telling
each	 other	 their	 innermost	 thoughts	 and	 feelings.	 But	 you	 will	 always	 find
people	 immensely	 friendly	 with	 their	 uncles.	 They	will	 not	 say	 things	 to	 just
anybody	which	they	can	say	to	their	uncles;	some	different	quality	exists.
Such	a	God	is	not	only	Jewish,	such	a	God	is	the	God	of	all	primitive	people.	In
all	primitive,	holy	scriptures	he	is	very	angry.	If	he	was	available	in	the	world,
Albert	Camus	is	right,	we	would	have	to	kill	him.	It	would	become	intolerable	--
his	interference	in	everything,	his	commandments	for	everything,	and	his	anger,
and	his	 violence,	 and	his	 torture;	 his	 blackmailing	 that	 he	will	 throw	you	 into
hellfire	for	eternity	if	you	don't	 listen	to	him.	And	if	you	are	obedient,	in	other
words	if	you	are	just	a	slave,	you	will	have	all	the	joys	of	paradise.	Such	a	God
would	 not	 be	 tolerable,	 particularly	 to	 those	 who	 have	 some	 pride	 of	 being
individuals.	It	will	be	easier	to	finish	him.
In	fact,	Sigmund	Freud	sometimes	comes	to	very	great	insights;	he	was	certainly
a	 genius.	 But	 unfortunately	 these	 people	 never	 came	 in	 contact	 with	 any
meditation;	 otherwise	 they	 would	 have	 given	 the	 world	 tremendous
contributions.	Still,	because	of	their	genius	they	had	glimpses	and	insights.	One
of	 his	 insights,	 which	 may	 not	 be	 factual	 is	 certainly	 psychological.	 The
psychological	is	far	more	significant	to	understand	than	the	factual,	because	the
factual	 is	 ordinary,	 outside	 you;	 the	 psychological	 is	 within	 you	 and	 controls
you.
Freud	 says	 that	 people	 worship	 God	 as	 father	 because	 some	 time	 in	 the
beginning	they	must	have	killed	some	dominant	father,	somebody	who	was	too
dictatorial.	It	is	a	well-known	fact	that	many	kings	have	been	killed	by	their	sons
because	the	king	was	going	on	and	on	living.	And	the	son	was	becoming	old	and
it	seemed	that	he	was	not	going	to	live	to	be	a	king;	the	only	possibility	was	the
death	of	the	father.	Many	kings	have	imprisoned	their	fathers	and	taken	over	the
throne,	 because	 they	 saw	 that	 there	 seemed	 to	 be	 no	 possibility	 of	 his	 natural
death	--	at	least	while	there	was	time	to	enjoy	being	a	king!
What	would	be	the	point	when	you	are	seventy-five	or	eighty	when	your	father
dies	and	you	succeed?	Within	a	year	or	two	you	would	be	gone	too.
There	 is	 a	 possibility	 factually,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 historical	 record	 of	 it;	 hence,
historians	have	rejected	the	insight.	But	I	am	not	a	historian	and	I	think	history	is
simply	bunk!	My	concern	with	God	is	for	psychological	reasons.
Sigmund	 Freud	 says	 that	 because	 somewhere	 in	 the	 past	 man	 had	 to	 kill	 the
father	 he	 felt	 the	 guilt	 of	 what	 he	 had	 done.	 And	 out	 of	 that	 guilt	 he	 started
worshipping	the	ancestors,	the	fathers,	the	elderly	people,	the	old	people.	All	this
respect	 has	 arisen	 out	 of	 a	 guilt	 which	 has	 settled	 in	 the	 human	 heart.	 Man
started	inventing	a	God	as	father,	raising	temples	in	his	memory,	statues,	priests
praying,	worshipers	worshipping.
Behind	 this	whole	scene	and	drama	of	 religion,	Sigmund	Freud	finds	only	one
single	fact	and	that	is:	somewhere	in	the	past	man	has	behaved	so	badly	with	his
father	--	perhaps	murdered	--	that	he	cannot	forgive	him.	So	the	only	way	is	to
pray,	make	God	your	father,	 the	creator	of	 the	world.	All	 these	hypotheses...	 It
was	a	very	original	insight.
A	man	who	has	no	guilt	will	not	go	to	a	church,	will	not	go	to	a	confessional	in	a
Catholic	church.	For	what?	--	unless	one	enjoys	talking	about	so-called	sins...!
I	have	heard...
One	woman	was	coming	every	Sunday	 to	 the	confessional,	and	confessing	 the
same	 sin	 that	 she	had	been	 raped.	The	bishop	 said,	 "That	 is	 not	 your	 sin,	 you
don't	have	to	confess	it	--	let	the	person	who	has	raped	you."
She	said,	"But	I	enjoyed	it!	That's	why	I	have	to	confess	it.	I	pretended	to	resist,
but	deep	down	I	enjoyed."
The	 priest	 said,	 "Even	 if	 you	 enjoyed	 it,	 you	 have	 been	 forgiven.	 You	 have
donated	 to	 the	 charity	box,	 and	 I	 have	prayed	 for	you	 to	God.	And	 this	 is	 the
third	time...	who	is	this	man?	Is	he	the	same	man	raping	again	and	again	every
week?"
She	said,	"I	have	to	confess,	he	has	raped	me	only	once,	and	because	I	enjoyed	it
he	did	not	bother	to	rape	me	again.	He	looked	embarrassed...	what	is	the	point?
In	fact,	he	must	have	felt	he	had	been	raped,	tricked.	So	I	go	into	places	where
he	hangs	around;	the	moment	he	sees	me,	he	escapes."
But	 the	priest	 said,	 "If	 it	has	happened	only	once	 then	what	 is	 the	point	 every
week	to	come	to	the	confession?"
She	 said,	 "I	 enjoy	 the	 idea	 and	 to	 tell	 you	 in	 detail.	 It	 is	 nothing	 to	me	 --	 ten
dollars	I	can	give	as	a	punishment,	and	you	can	pray	for	my	sin.	But	I	enjoy	even
describing	it."
My	own	feeling	is	that	the	number	of	people	who	confess	in	the	Catholic	church,
most	 of	 them	 have	 not	 committed	 those	 sins.	 They	 simply	 enjoy	 the	 idea,	 "I
raped	a	woman."
Perhaps	 they	want	 to	 rape	 a	woman,	but	 it	 is	 a	 difficult	 job.	But	 to	 confess	 is
very	simple,	just	ten	dollars.	And	for	ten	dollars,	enjoying	the	idea	that	I	raped
the	woman...	At	least	the	priest	is	convinced	and	he	will	convince	God	too.
Sigmund	Freud	seems	to	me	to	be	psychologically	right;	otherwise	there	would
be	no	temples,	no	churches,	no	mosques,	no	gods.	Man	needed	someone	to	pray
to,	needed	someone	to	complain	to,	needed	someone	to	throw	all	responsibility
onto.	But	 if	 he	was	 available	 in	 the	world,	 just	 in	 the	M.G.	market,	 he	would
have	been	killed	--	and	particularly	in	Poona.
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 this	 M.G.	 Road	 is	 named	 after	 Mahatma
Gandhi;	 M.G.	 is	 short	 for	 Mahatma	 Gandhi	 Road	 --	 and	 Poona	 has	 killed,
assassinated	 Mahatma	 Gandhi!	 The	 day	 a	 Poona-ite	 assassinated	 Mahatma
Gandhi	 sweets	 were	 distributed	 and	 there	 was	 celebration.	 And	 now	 they	 are
calling	their	main	market	M.G.	market.	This	is	the	guilt	that	somehow	has	to	be
erased,	so	they	have	raised	the	statue	to	Mahatma	Gandhi.	Strange...	you	kill	the
man	and	then	you	raise	the	statue.
You	must	have	 seen	on	 the	hills,	 just	 nearby	 the	bridge,	 there	 is	 one	beautiful
bungalow	 where	 Mahatma	 Gandhi	 used	 to	 stay.	 The	 people	 to	 whom	 that
bungalow	 belongs	 used	 to	 come	 to	 listen	 to	me	 in	 Bombay.	And	when	 I	was
moving	to	Poona,	I	said	to	those	people,	"That	bungalow	is	empty	and	that	will
be	the	best	place	for	the	ashram	because	of	the	hills	around;	the	road	goes	round
and	round	--	and	the	whole	hill	part	belongs	to	the	bungalow.	For	the	ashram	it
will	be	perfect,	and	whatever	your	price...
They	said,	"It	is	not	a	question	of	price,	it	is	because	Mahatma	Gandhi	used	to
stay	 there,	 so	 we	 have	 made	 it	 a	 memorial."	 Now	 it	 is	 a	 Mahatma	 Gandhi
memorial	--	there	is	a	statue,	there	is	a	memorial.
Just	by	the	other	side	of	the	river	there	is	one	palace,	Aga	Khan	Palace,	where
the	 British	 government	 used	 to	 imprison	 Mahatma	 Gandhi,	 as	 a	 special
concession,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a	 jail;	 it	 is	 a	 palace,	 it	 was	 used	 for	 Mahatma
Gandhi.	 Whenever	 the	 government	 wanted	 to	 put	 him	 in	 jail	 the	 palace	 was
used,	 and	 he	 was	 free	 to	 move	 in	 the	 gardens.	 He	 was	 provided	 with	 his
secretaries,	with	his	wife;	he	continued	to	function	just	as	if	he	was	outside.	In
fact,	 he	was	 in	 a	better	position;	outside	he	used	 to	 live	 in	 small	huts	because
poverty	was	his	philosophy.	Here	he	was	living	in	the	Aga	Khan's	Palace,	one	of
the	most	beautiful	buildings	in	Poona,	with	a	vast	garden.
His	wife	died	while	he	was	in	prison	in	the	Aga	Khan	Palace.	His	wife's	samadhi
is	in	the	Aga	Khan	Palace,	so	now	the	Aga	Khan	Palace	has	also	become	part	of
a	memorial.
Because	Mahatma	Gandhi	was	imprisoned	there	and	his	wife	died	there...	And	it
was	a	group	of	Hindu	chauvinists	of	Poona	who	killed	him.	And	now	they	are
trying	to	somehow	erase	the	guilt	feeling	--	making	memorials,	making	statues,
giving	names	to	the	streets.
Sigmund	Freud	is	right	in	my	understanding	that	man	must	have	behaved	badly
in	 the	past	with	 their	 elders,	 particularly	 the	 fathers.	And	 there	 is	 a	 possibility
that	fathers	may	have	been	killed,	because	they	were	holding	all	the	power	--	and
all	the	power	included	all	the	beautiful	women	of	the	clan.	The	sons	were	young,
they	 needed	 beautiful	 women;	 the	 father	 was	 old	 but	 he	 was	 holding	 all	 the
beautiful	women:	unless	he	dies,	there	is	no	possibility	for	the	young	people	to
have	those	beautiful	women,	they	were	that	old	man's	property.
Psychologists	have	been	trying	to	find	the	same	pattern	in	monkeys.	If	you	see
monkeys	sitting	on	a	tree,	you	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	on	top	is	the	oldest
monkey,	 the	most	 powerful	monkey.	He	 is	 the	 president!	Nobody	 else	will	 be
allowed	 to	 sit	on	 the	 top	of	 the	 trees;	 that	 is	a	question	of	prestige	and	power.
And	around	him	are	all	 the	beautiful	 females.	He	 is	old	but	even	 the	youngest
females	first	have	to	be	under	his	control.	Then	underneath	that	are	other	elders,
and	underneath	that	are	the	young	people.
Naturally,	there	is	every	possibility	--	and	it	happens	--	that	the	older	monkey	is
killed	by	the	younger	monkey	because	he	is	taking	away	their	whole	life.	He	has
lived	enough	and	he	goes	on	living	--	and	he	is	holding	all	the	power.	There	is	a
deep	will	 to	power	 in	 everybody,	 and	particularly	 the	power	over	 the	 females.
Nobody	can	even	 look	at	 those	 females	while	 the	old	man	 is	alive.	They	don't
have	 any	 other	 money	 and	 treasure	 and	 kingdoms;	 their	 only	 property	 is	 the
females.	On	this	point	of	the	females,	many	old	monkeys	are	killed.
Perhaps	this	discovery	by	the	scientists	led	to	the	insight	of	Sigmund	Freud	that
one	day	men	killed	 their	 fathers	 --	 had	 to	kill,	 had	 to	 remove	 them,	otherwise
they	wouldn't	allow	you	to	live	at	all.
If	God	did	 exist,	 it	 is	 absolutely	 certain	 he	would	 have	 been	 assassinated	 --	 it
would	have	become	absolutely	intolerable.	But	fortunately,	he	does	not	exist	so
nobody	 can	 assassinate	 him.	 But	 unfortunately,	 people	 have	 created	 a
hypothetical	God	which	neither	you	can	 assassinate	nor	you	can	 communicate
with.	It	is	a	simple	hypothesis,	but	still	it	helps	people	to	get	rid	of	their	guilt.
The	 priest	 is	 the	 beneficiary;	 he	 keeps	 the	 hypothesis	 alive.	 He	 fights	 for	 the
hypothesis,	 because	 all	 that	 comes	 to	 God	 as	 offerings	 to	 erase	 the	 guilt	 of
people	reaches	the	priest.
So	 the	 priest's	whole	work	 is	 to	make	more	 and	more	 people	 guilty.	This	 is	 a
business	and	a	very	subtle	structure:	make	people	guilty	about	everything,	every
pleasure.
In	Jainism,	even	to	eat	food	tastefully	is	a	sin;	you	should	not	eat	tastefully.	You
can	eat,	but	don't	take	the	taste,	don't	enjoy	it.	That	is	possible	only	if	your	taste
buds	 are	 operated	 on;	 otherwise	 it	 is	 not	 possible.	Your	 tongue	 and	 your	 taste
buds...	and	they	are	not	many,	they	can	be	removed	very	easily.	Then	you	won't
taste	anything.	But	that	is	not	the	idea.
The	idea	is	that	because	of	those	taste	buds	you	will	have	to	taste	and	then	you
will	feel	guilty.	And	once	you	are	guilty,	you	are	in	the	hands	of	the	priest.
Now	 sex	 is	 not	 in	 your	 hands.	 Feeling	 good	 and	 happy	with	 a	 restful	 night	 is
natural,	but	 Jainism	condemns	 it.	 Jaina	monks	should	eat	only	one	 time	a	day,
and	 that	 too,	 standing	 because	 being	 comfortably	 seated	 you	 can	 eat	 more;
standing	you	will	get	tired	yourself.
And	it	looks	so	embarrassing	--	a	crowd,	and	you	are	standing,	and	you	have	to
take	your	food	in	your	hands.
The	Jaina	monk	is	not	allowed	to	have	anything	as	his	possession.	So	how	much
can	you	take	in	your	hands?	--	and	you	cannot	take	twice.	So	they	are	hungry.	To
think	of	food	or	to	think	of	women	or	to	think	of	any	pleasure	is	a	sin	--	even	to
think,	 even	 to	 dream.	 And	 I	 cannot	 conceive	 that	 a	 Jaina	 monk	 can	 avoid
dreaming	about	 food,	or	 that	 so-called	 celibates	 --	 Jaina,	Catholics,	Buddhists,
Hindus	--	can	avoid	dreaming	about	women?
And	 the	 priests	 say	 that	 whether	 you	 dream	 or	 you	 actually	 act	 it	 does	 not
matter:	even	to	dream	about	good	food	is	as	sinful	as	actually	eating	it	because
the	question	is	of	your	mentality;	to	dream	about	a	beautiful	woman	is	as	sinful
as	having	a	beautiful	woman.
All	 the	 religious	priests	 for	 thousands	of	years	have	been	managing	 to	 find	all
those	 areas	 where	 you	 are	 weak,	 where	 nature	 can	 be	 condemned.	 And	 you
cannot	do	anything	because	it	is	a	natural	thing,	so	naturally,	you	will	feel	guilty.
Guilt	is	the	whole	foundation	of	your	religions.
The	priest	needs	you	to	be	guilty,	and	because	of	guilt	you	need	God	--	who	is
going	 to	 forgive	you?	What	are	your	prayers?	 "Forgive	us,	we	are	 sinners	and
your	 compassion	 is	 great.	 Forgive	 us	 father."	And	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 listen	 to
you!
Because	God	is	just	a	hypothesis,	assassination	is	not	possible.	You	cannot	find
him	anywhere.	Albert	Camus	 is	 right:	 if	God	did	not	 exist,	we	would	have	 to
invent	him.
That's	what	we	 have	 done,	we	 have	 invented	 him.	 If	God	 did	 exist	we	would
have	to	abolish	him.	The	existential	problem	is	what	I	have	told	you,	the	feeling
that	I	am	unworthy.
It	is	true:
Nobody	is	worthy.
We	have	received	everything	for	no	reason	at	all.
Being	grateful	to	existence	is	the	only	authentic	religion,	and	it	does	not	need	to
have	 an	 adjective	 to	 it	 --	 Christian	 or	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan.	 It	 is	 simply
gratefulness.
Vidhan,	you	are	on	 the	 right	 track;	 just	don't	get	 stuck	at	unworthiness,	 that	 is
one	 side	 of	 the	 coin.	 The	 other	 side	 of	 the	 coin	 is	 gratefulness.	 This	 is	 the
negative	side;	that	is	the	positive	side.
Remember,	always	to	go	with	the	affirmative,	the	positive,	and	you	will	never	go
astray.
The	ultimate	 affirmation	 comes	 the	day	when	you	explode	 into	 light,	 into	 joy,
into	bliss,	into	song,	into	dance.	All	that	will	create	more	and	more	gratefulness
in	you.
You	will	become	just	a	prayer.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	MORNING,	WHEN	YOU	MENTIONED	ABOUT	A	POCKET
WATCH
BEING	 THE	 LAST	 PRESENT	 FOR	 PEOPLE	 WHO	 RETIRE,	 I	 WAS
AMAZED,	 BECAUSE	WHEN	YOU	LEFT	 FOR	AMERICA	 I	WAS	AT	MY
VILLAGE,	AND	I	RECEIVED	BY	MAIL	A	UNIQUE	PRESENT	FROM	YOU
--	A	VERY	BEAUTIFUL
SEIKO	POCKET	WATCH!	I	WAS	DELIGHTED	BY	THIS	RARE	GIFT,	BUT
TODAY	I	FEEL	A	BIT	SHAKY!
BELOVED	OSHO,	COULD	YOU	PLEASE	TELL	ME	SOMETHING	ABOUT
THE
SIGNIFICANCE	OF	THIS	GIFT?
Sardar	Gurudayal	 Singh,	 I	 remember	 the	 pocket	watch	 that	 I	 have	 sent	 you.	 I
have	 been	 giving	 watches	 to	 hundreds	 of	 my	 sannyasins.	 The	 significance	 is
simple,	so	you	need	not	be	worried	by	what	I	said	yesterday.
It	 was	 not	 a	 retirement	 gift;	 a	 sannyasins	 is	 never	 retired!	 He	 becomes
enlightened,	but	retirement	is	not	possible	neither	before	enlightenment	nor	after
enlightenment.
Retirement	does	not	exist	in	the	world	of	a	sannyasin,	so	you	can	drop	your	fear
and	 worry;	 it	 was	 not	 a	 retirement	 gift.	 I	 have	 been	 giving	 watches	 to	 many
people	because	my	whole	message	is:	be	watchful!
So	don't	misunderstand	me...
A	man	in	New	York	for	the	weekend,	struck	up	a	conversation	with	a	young	lady
in	the	bar.	After	a	few	drinks	he	suggested	that	 they	buy	a	bottle	and	go	to	his
room;	she	agreed.
When	 the	 girl	 began	 taking	off	 her	 clothes,	 the	man	 asked,	 "Say,	 how	old	 are
you?"
"Thirteen,"	she	replied.
"Thirteen?	Good	Lord,"	said	the	man.	"Get	your	clothes	back	on	and	get	out	of
here."
At	the	door	the	girl	paused	and	said,	"Superstitious,	eh?"
In	America,	the	number	thirteen	is	very	superstitious!	You	will	find	in	hotels	that
after	the	twelfth	storey	comes	the	fourteenth.	The	thirteenth	storey	does	not	exist
at	all	because	nobody	is	ready	to	stay	on	the	thirteenth	floor.
I	 have	 seen	 one	 book:	 a	man	 had	 done	 great	 research	work	 proving	 that	 this
superstition	 of	 the	 number	 thirteen	 is	 not	 just	 superstition,	 it	 has	 a	 scientific
background.	I	was	very	much	amazed	so	I	went	through	the	book.	It	was	sheer
nonsense	what	he	had	done.	He	had	collected	the	number	of	accidents	which	had
happened	 on	 the	 thirteenth	 date,	 the	 number	 of	 people	 who	 died	 on	 the
thirteenth,	the	number	of	people	who	got	cancer	on	the	thirteenth...	all	kinds	of
calamities	 that	 happened	 on	 the	 thirteenth.	 He	 had	 collected	 such	 a	 list	 that
anybody	 would	 be	 greatly	 impressed	 that	 certainly	 this	 number	 thirteen	 is
dangerous.
I	 wrote	 a	 letter	 to	 the	man	 saying,	 "Unless	 you	 do	 the	 same	 research	 for	 the
eleventh	and	for	the	twelfth	--	just	two	dates	will	do,	one	before	thirteenth...	and
find	 out	 what	 happens	 on	 the	 twelfth,	 what	 happens	 on	 the	 eleventh,	 all	 the
calamities...	And	unless	 you	 find	 that	more	 accidents	 happen	on	 the	 thirteenth
than	on	 the	 twelfth	or	eleventh,	 that	more	people	die	on	 the	 thirteenth	 than	on
any	other	date,	 your	 thesis	 is	 just	 nonsense.	This	way	you	can	prove	 any	date
dangerous,	because	people	are	dying	on	every	date,	every	day.	There	is	no	quota
given	for	dates."
I	 received	 a	 letter	 saying	 that	 the	man	 had	 died;	 unfortunately	 he	 died	 on	 the
eleventh!
One	of	his	friends	replied	that	the	man	himself	had	missed	the	thirteenth.	But	in
America	 that	 superstition	 is	 very	 prevalent.	 People	 don't	 want	 the	 number
thirteen	on	 their	car;	 they	avoid	 the	number	 thirteen	 in	every	way.	 In	 the	army
you	won't	find	a	soldier	whose	number	is	thirteen.
Sardar	 Gurudayal	 Singh,	 that	 retirement	 watch	 is	 also	 a	 superstition,	 but	 it	 is
possible	 that	whoever	 invented	 it	 first	may	have	had	 some	 idea	 similar	 to	me,
that	 now	 a	man	 is	 retiring,	 life	 is	 in	 a	way	 finished.	 It	 is	 good	 to	 give	 him	 a
watch	because	 the	days	are	 few,	 time	will	be	rushing	by	faster	 than	ever.	So	 it
will	be	helpful	to	keep	him	alert,	watchful.
Time	 is	 not	 money,	 time	 is	 life,	 and	 to	 give	 a	 watch...	 Now	 it	 has	 become
superstition	 nobody	 bothers	 what	 is	 the	 meaning.	 Nobody	 knows	 either	 the
people	who	are	giving	or	the	person	who	is	receiving...	but	just	a	golden	pocket
watch.
But	when	I	have	given	watches	--	and	I	go	on	giving	--	that	does	not	mean	that
you	are	retired.	That	does	not	mean	that	your	days	are	finished,	"Just	count	the
hours	on	your	watch."
It	means:	Be	watchful,	be	aware	and	alert.
Every	 moment	 is	 full	 of	 danger	 and	 full	 of	 ecstasy.	 If	 you	 can	 use	 it	 for
awareness	and	watchfulness,	 it	becomes	a	great	ecstasy,	 the	 juiciest	experience
of	life.	But	if	you	are	not	aware,	some	moment,	some	day,	you	are	going	to	die...
Don't	die	before	destroying	your	ego.
Let	the	ego	die	first	so	that	you	can	realize	your	real	immortal	being.
I	have	given	it	to	you,	Gurudayal,	just	to	be	watchful,	because	one	can	get	into
any	trouble	--	particularly	a	man	like	Gurudayal.
A	 few	 days	 ago	 somebody	 came	 to	 me	 to	 inform	 me	 that	 Sardar	 Gurudayal
Singh	was	going	 to	marry	Mukta.	 I	said,	"I	am	telling	enough	jokes,	and	he	 is
trying	 to	 be	 a	 practical	 joke!"	 And	Mukta	 is	 also	 great!	 She	 has	 found	 poor
Sardar	Gurudayal	 Singh.	He	 is	 a	 rare	man,	 a	 happy	man,	 but	 to	 find	 him	 for
marriage...!	And	he	 is	 such	 a	 fellow	he	will	 not	 say	no.	He	has	 known	 life	 in
many	colors:	he	has	been	in	the	army,	he	has	fought	in	the	wars;	he	has	been	my
bodyguard	for	many	years,	and	he	is	of	a	simple	and	innocent	heart.	If	somebody
approaches	him	for	marriage	at	this	age,	he	will	say	okay.
Somehow	I	have	persuaded	Mukta	not	to	do	such	a	thing,	because	he	is	living	a
free	life.
He	has	divorced	his	wife	long,	long	ago;	he	has	not	a	single	worry	in	the	world.
He	is	one	of	my	most	profound	sannyasins	--	poor,	but	immensely	rich	because
he	can	laugh	more	beautifully	than	anybody	else.	I	don't	have	to	know	where	he
is	sitting.	When	he	starts	laughing	I	know	because	his	laughter,	even	in	his	old
age,	comes	louder	than	anybody	else's.
No	need	to	worry	about	that	watch!	Just	be	watchful;	don't	get	into	any	trouble.
Now,	getting	married	to	Mukta...	You	will	be	in	trouble;	she	will	be	in	trouble.
She	is	enjoying	fully.	She	has	divorced	her	husband	long	ago;	you	have	divorced
your	wife	--	both	are	free.	But	 I	must	say	 that	Mukta	has	an	eye	 to	find	a	real
man!
Two	jokes	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh...
"You	will	be	poor	and	unhappy	until	you	are	forty,"	said	the	fortune-teller	to	her
customer.
"Then	what?"	asked	the	worried	customer.
"Well,	by	then	you	will	be	used	to	it,"	the	fortune-teller	replied!
A	man	 approaching	 retirement	went	 along	 to	 see	 the	 company	 doctor	 for	 one
final	checkup.	To	his	horror	the	doctor	said,	"I	don't	know	quite	how	to	put	this,
but	your	heart	is	on	its	last	legs	and	you	have	only	got	six	months	to	live."
"Is	there	nothing	I	can	do?"	asked	the	shocked	man.
"Well,"	said	the	doctor,	"you	can	give	up	alcohol,	and	cut	out	smoking.	Don't	eat
rich	foods,	no	dancing,	and	don't	even	think	about	sex!"
"And	this	will	make	me	live	longer?"	the	man	asked	hopefully.
"No,"	replied	the	doctor,	"it	will	just	seem	longer!"
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	What	kind	of	vehicle	are	you	using
1	September	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709015
ShortTitle:
INVITA23
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
101
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
HEARING	YOU	SPEAK	THE	OTHER	MORNING,	IT	FINALLY	CAME	TO
MY
CONSCIOUSNESS	THAT	I	AM	SEXUALLY	REPRESSED.
I	 CAN'T	 REMEMBER	 BEING	 SEXUALLY	 REPRESSED	 BEFORE	 THE
AIDS
SCARE	 STARTED.	 ALSO,	 BEING	 REJECTED	 SEXUALLY	 BY	 A
BOYFRIEND
HAS	CONTRIBUTED;	ALTHOUGH	I	SHARE	THE	RESPONSIBILITY	FOR
THAT	--
OR	TRY	TO.
I	CAN	REMEMBER	A	TIME	WHEN,	WITH	NO	BOYFRIENDS,	I	WOULD
FEEL
MY	 SEXUAL	 ENERGY	 AND	 YET	 IT	 WOULD	 NEED	 NO	 OUTLET.	 IT
WOULD
STAY	IN	MY	BODY	AND	I	WOULD	FEEL	ORGASMIC	ALL	OVER.
BUT	NOW	I	FEEL	IMPRISONED	BY	REPRESSED	SEX	AND	NEED	YOUR
GUIDANCE.
Prem	Shunyo,	you	are	simply	confused.	You	are	not	sexually	repressed.	You	are
simply	an	English	lady.	It	seems	you	had	forgotten	it.
Just	a	few	days	ago	a	drunkard	was	arrested	in	France.	He	was	making	love	to	a
dead	woman	on	the	beach.	When	asked,	he	said,	"I	thought	she	is	English."
Don't	 be	 worried	 about	 repression.	 And	moreover	 you	 are	 coming	 to	 the	 age
when	everybody	feels	disturbed,	particularly	women	from	the	West.	Middle	age
is	a	troublesome	and	anguish-creating	state.
A	few	things	for	you	to	contemplate...
First,	one	has	to	recognize	that	one	is	getting	into	middle	age.
Middle	age	is	when	you	still	believe	you	will	feel	better	in	the	morning.
Middle	age	is	when	you	want	to	see	how	long	your	car	will	last	instead	of	how
fast	it	will	go.
Middle	age	is	when	you	are	home	on	Saturday	night,	the	telephone	rings	and	you
hope	it	is	not	for	you.
Middle	age	is	when	you	change	from	stud	to	dud.
Middle	age	is	when	you	stop	criticizing	the	older	generation	and	start	criticizing
the	younger	one.
These	are	just	symptoms	I	am	telling	you,	so..!
Shunyo,	 people	 who	 have	 been	 here	 with	 me	 for	 almost	 ten	 or	 twelve	 years
cannot	be	sexually	repressed.	That	is	my	whole	condemnation	all	over	the	world;
you	can	call	it	my	reputation.	And	asking	me	a	question	about	sexual	repression
is	just	destroying	my	reputation!
Two	 men	 sitting	 in	 a	 bar	 were	 commiserating	 about	 married	 life.	 "I	 know	 a
man,"	 says	 one,	 "who	 has	 been	married	 for	 thirty	 years	 and	 he	 spends	 every
evening	at	home."
"That's	what	I	call	love,"	says	the	other.
"Oh,	really?"	replied	the	first,	"the	doctor	called	it	paralysis."
It	all	depends	how	you	take	it.
You	 are	 not	 sexually	 repressed.	 You	 suddenly	 remembered	 that	 you	 are	 an
English	lady...
where	are	you?...	what	are	you	doing	here?
A	commissar	was	visiting	a	collective	farm	to	check	on	the	season's	crops.	"How
are	the	potatoes?"	he	inquired.
"The	potatoes	are	so	plentiful,"	a	farmer	replied,	"that	if	we	put	them	end	to	end
they	will	touch	the	feet	of	God."
"How	can	that	be?"	blurted	the	commissar,	"there	is	no	God."
"Well,"	the	farmer	answered,	"there	are	no	potatoes	either."
Shunyo,	all	that	has	happened	is	that	that	crazy	Milarepa	has	escaped	from	you.
But	don't	be	worried;	he	is	crazy	enough,	he	will	come	back.
You	 can	 rely	 on	me,	 I	will	 see	 to	 it	 that	 the	 poor	 fellow	 comes	 back.	He	will
roam	 about	 in	 the	 ashram	 a	 few	 days.	 You	 enjoy	 the	 freedom,	 and	 don't	 be
worried;	he	cannot	get	lost.	Finally	he	is	going	to	come	to	you.
This	 has	 been	 going	 on	 for	 years.	 I	 have	 been	watching	 it,	 I	 have	 never	 said
anything	 to	you.	 It	 is	not	something	new.	Hundreds	of	 times	he	must	have	 left
you	and	he	has	come	back.	He	is	a	very	tame	fellow.	You	have	just	to	give	him
enough	rope,	so	that	he	can	enjoy	the	idea	that	he	is	free.
There	 is	 nothing	 to	 worry	 about.	 You	 simply	 enjoy	 a	 few	 days	 of	 peace	 and
silence,	and	paralysis.
It	is	very	rare	to	find	time	to	be	alone,	to	be	oneself.	It	is	fortunate	to	find	some
people	who	once	in	a	while	escape,	before	they	get	caught	somewhere	else.	And
he	has	proved	so	reliable	that	many	times	I	was	thinking,	now	he	is	lost	--	and	I
see	him	back	again.
You	 just	 have	 to	 learn	 patience.	And	 by	 the	way,	 it	 is	 a	 good	 excuse	 to	 learn
patience,	waiting	and	trusting	that	he	will	come.	Suddenly,	one	night	he	will	start
knocking	on	your	door.
I	don't	 think	 that	 there	 is	 any	other	woman	who	can	 tolerate	him	 long	enough
except	Prem	Shunyo	--	she	is	almost	immune	to	Milarepa.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
FOR	TEN	YEARS	I	HAVE	THOUGHT	THAT	WHEN	YOU	SAID	THERE	IS
NO
TIME-SPACE	 SEPARATION	 BETWEEN	 THE	 MASTER	 AND	 THE
DISCIPLE,	AND
WHEN	YOU	SAID	THE	DISCIPLE	HAS	TO	MELT	INTO	THE	MASTER	SO
THAT
THEIR	 HEARTS	 BEAT	 TOGETHER,	 I	 THOUGHT	 THAT	 YOU	 WERE
SIMPLY
BEING	 POETIC.	 THE	 OTHER	 EVENING	WHEN	 YOU	WERE	 TALKING
ABOUT
THIS	RELATIONSHIP,	I	SUDDENLY	GOT	THAT	YOU	MEAN	WHAT	YOU
SAY
SO	POETICALLY.
I	 WOULD	 LIKE	 TO	 TAKE	 YOU	 HOME	WITH	ME	 IN	 MY	 HEART,	 MY
BELOVED
MASTER,	AND	I	AM	A	SLOW	LEARNER	WITH	A	FRIGHTENED	HEART
AND
ONLY	SIX	WEEKS.
WILL	YOU	COME	WITH	ME	THIS	TIME?
Prem	Dheera,	the	first	time	you	were	right,	when	you	thought	I	was	simply	being
poetic.
The	second	time	you	were	wrong,	when	you	started	thinking	that	I	mean	what	I
say	so	poetically	--	I	don't	mean.	If	I	start	going	into	everybody's	hearts	it	will	be
impossible	to	put	me	together	again!
You	can	love	me	wherever	you	are.
You	can	feel	me	wherever	you	are.
But	poetry	 is	poetry;	don't	make	 it	 something	pragmatic	and	practical.	When	 I
talk	 about	 melting	 and	 about	 merging	 and	 about	 having	 a	 heart-to-heart
communion,	 don't	 take	 it	 that	 that's	 actually	 what	 I	 mean.	 Those	 are	 only
indications	towards	a	very	subtle	phenomenon	in	which	I	remain	I,	you	remain
you.	In	fact,	you	become	more	yourself	than	you	have	ever	been	before.
If	 love	 cannot	 give	 you	 individuality,	 uniqueness,	 that	 love	 is	 impotent.	 The
power	 of	 love	 consists	 of	 giving	 you	 freedom	 and	 authentic	 individuality	 and
being.	That's	the	way	to	take	me	with	you.
When	you	become	an	individual,	peaceful,	silent,	utterly	free	from	all	kinds	of
bondage,	then	your	freedom,	your	uniqueness,	your	love	all	indicate	that	you	are
taking	me	home.
You	should	not	take	me	as	a	person.
You	should	take	me	as	the	values	which	I	am	teaching	to	you.	If	you	take	those
values	with	your	heart,	you	are	taking	me;	hence	I	say	again,	the	first	time	you
were	 right	 when	 you	 thought	 I	 was	 being	 poetic.	 Poetry	 should	 never	 be
understood	 literally;	 it	 is	 symbolic,	 but	 it	 is	 significant.	 Just	 because	 it	 is	 only
symbolic	 does	 not	 mean	 it	 is	 insignificant.	 Its	 significance	 certainly	 does	 not
consist	in	being	factual.	It	is	something	much	more	than	fact,	it	is	truth	itself.
Ordinarily	we	don't	make	any	distinction	between	fact	and	truth.	Factually	you
cannot	 take	me	in	your	heart	 --	 that	 is	an	 impossibility.	But	 truthfully,	you	can
take	me	in	your	heart.	That	will	mean	my	fragrance,	my	joy,	my	meditativeness,
my	ecstasy,	my	presence	but	not	my	person.
If	you	can	understand	this	there	is	no	problem	--	I	can	come	with	you.
Just	one	thing	to	be	remembered:	what	kind	of	vehicle	are	you	using?
A	 Frenchman,	 a	 German	 and	 a	 Russian	 were	 boasting	 about	 the	 modes	 of
transportation	at	their	disposal.
"I	 drive	 a	 Renault	 to	 work,"	 said	 the	 Frenchman.	 "On	 Sundays	 I	 drive	 my
Peugeot.	And	when	I	go	abroad,	I	drive	a	Citroen."
"I	 drive	 a	 Volkswagen	 to	 work,"	 said	 the	 German.	 "On	 Sundays	 I	 drive	 my
BMW,	and	when	I	go	abroad	I	drive	a	Mercedes."
"As	 for	 me,"	 said	 the	 Russian,	 "I	 take	 the	 bus	 to	 work.	 On	 Sundays	 I	 drive
around	in	my	little	Moskvitch.	And	when	I	go	abroad,	I	drive	a	tank."
So	just	be	careful	if	you	are	taking	me	in	you	heart,	that	you	don't	drive	a	tank	--
I	am	a	peaceful	person	and	I	don't	want	to	go	to	war!	But	as	far	as	my	presence
is	concerned	you	are	absolutely	allowed	to	take	me	with	you.
My	whole	effort	here	 is	not	 to	create	an	 illusion	 in	you,	but	on	 the	contrary	 to
destroy	all	possibilities	of	illusion.	Man	has	lived	under	all	kinds	of	illusions;	he
is	surrounded	by	hallucinations.	When	you	fall	 in	love	with	someone	it	 is	very
rarely	a	true	experience.
More	often	it	is	only	an	illusion,	an	idea,	a	projection.	When	you	see	someone	as
beautiful	it	is	more	your	biology	that	is	creating	the	illusion	of	beauty.	Once	your
biological	infatuation	is	finished	the	beauty	will	disappear;	the	same	woman	will
not	look	beautiful	at	all.
From	 the	very	beginning	 the	woman	has	known	 the	psychology	of	man	better
than	man	understands	woman's	psychology.	In	fact,	man	has	been	continuously
saying	that	woman	is	a	mystery.	I	don't	see	any	mystery	anywhere.	I	have	known
more	women	 than	 perhaps	 anybody	 else	 in	 the	world,	 and	 I	 have	 known	men
also.	None	of	them	is	a	mystery.
Everything	is	absolutely	clear,	but	you	don't	want	to	see	it	clearly	--	you	want	to
go	on	having	 illusions.	 Illusions	are	 sweet,	nice,	beautiful.	The	 truth,	 the	bare,
naked	truth	is	not	so	sweet.
Gautam	Buddha	continuously	says	that	when	you	see	a	beautiful	woman,	don't
forget	that	she	is	just	a	skeleton,	just	as	you	are	a	skeleton,	covered	with	a	bag	of
skin.	Maybe	someone	has	a	little	longer	nose	and	somebody	has	a	little	smaller
nose,	 and	 somebody	 has	 round	 eyes	 and	 somebody	 has	 a	 different	 shape,	 but
inside	it	is	the	same	blood,	bones,	flesh.	Beauty	seems	to	be	only	skin-deep.
If	you	have	X-ray	eyes	you	will	be	surrounded	with	skeletons	all	around.
Just	recently	it	happened	in	Europe	that	one	woman	was	driving	a	crane	and	she
struck	an	electric	pole.	The	shock	was	so	tremendous,	she	fell	down	in	a	coma.
She	 did	 not	 die,	 but	 after	 a	 few	hours	 she	 came	back	 to	 consciousness	with	 a
strange	 phenomenon:	 her	 eyes	 had	 become	 X-ray	 eyes.	 Now	 she	 is	 suffering
from	a	tremendous	migraine...	but	doctors	are	using	her	in	the	hospital	as	an	X-
ray	machine.	She	has	opened	a	new	dimension.
Because	of	too	much	electricity	the	eyes	have	changed.	Now	they	can	see	deep
down	 inside	 you,	 and	 she	 is	 completely	 horrified.	 She	 cannot	 open	 her	 eyes
because	she	cannot	see	your	face;	she	can	see	only	your	skeleton.	She	cannot	see
your	 skin	 and	your	 beautiful	 nose.	She	 is	 the	 first	woman	who	 sees	 people	 as
they	actually	are,	without	any	illusions.
Asked,	"Do	you	feel	some	difference	between	beautiful	people	and	ugly?"	--	she
laughed.
She	 said,	 "There	 is	 no	 one	 who	 is	 beautiful	 and	 no	 one	 who	 is	 ugly.	 All	 are
skeletons	and	horrible."
A	man	was	admitted	to	a	psychiatric	hospital	because	he	thought	he	was	Ronald
Reagan.
But	 this	 caused	 a	 problem	 for	 the	 staff	 because	 they	 already	 had	 a	 Ronald
Reagan	on	the	books	and	the	director	thought	it	might	cause	trouble.	But	then	he
hit	upon	a	brilliant	idea.	On	his	first	night	at	the	hospital,	one	of	the	staff	put	him
in	the	same	cell	as	the	other	Ronald	Reagan	in	the	hope	that	this	confrontation
would	bring	one	or	both	to	their	senses.
The	next	morning	he	called	 the	new	man	 to	his	office	and	asked	how	his	 first
night	had	been.
"Oh,	 doctor,"	 replied	 the	man,	 "I	 have	 been	 living	 under	 a	 delusion	 for	many
years."
"That's	an	amazing	insight,"	said	the	doctor	excitedly.	"Please	go	on."
"Well,"	 continued	 the	 man,	 "for	 as	 long	 as	 I	 can	 remember,	 I	 thought	 I	 was
Ronald	Reagan,	but	I'm	not."
"That's	very	good,"	said	the	doctor.	"So	who	are	you?"
The	man	looked	at	the	doctor,	smiled	sweetly	and	said,	"I'm	Nancy."
People	go	on	changing	their	illusions.
I	want	you	to	come	out	of	all	the	illusions	and	just	see	reality	as	it	is.	It	is	simple
and	it	is	beautiful.	In	the	beginning	you	may	be	shocked	because	your	delusions
are	destroyed.
But	as	you	will	become	more	and	more	accustomed	and	in	accord	with	existence
and	reality,	you	will	feel	a	tremendous	freedom	and	a	great	sense	of	authenticity.
Gautam	Buddha's	statement	is	on	record	that	to	experience	truth	in	the	beginning
is	 bitter,	 in	 the	 end	 it	 is	 very	 sweet.	But	 illusions	 are	 totally	different,	 just	 the
contrary:	 in	 the	 beginning	 they	 are	 very	 sweet;	 in	 the	 end	 they	 turn	 out	 very
bitter.	 In	 fact,	 this	 should	 be	 the	 criterion:	 something	 that	 is	 sweet	 in	 the
beginning,	be	aware	of	it;	it	is	illusion.	Soon	you	will	be	awakened	out	of	it	and
it	will	hurt	and	 it	will	 feel	very	bitter.	 It	 is	better	 to	experience	 truth,	which	 is
bitter	 in	 the	 beginning	 but	 in	 the	 end	 proves	 to	 be	 the	 sweetest	 experience
possible.
So	when	I	am	talking	to	you,	I	have	to	be	poetic	for	the	simple	reason	that	there
are	 things	which	 cannot	 be	 said	 in	 prose.	There	 are	 things	which	 can	 only	 be
hinted	 at	 in	 a	 poetic	 way.	 But	 poetry	 can	 always	 be	 misunderstood	 because
poetry	is	symbolic	and	you	cannot	take	it	as	actual.	The	moment	you	take	poetry
as	 literal	and	factual,	you	are	creating	an	illusion	which	will	sooner	or	 later	be
destroyed	by	the	reality.
No	illusion	can	live	for	long.
Every	illusion	has	a	very	small	lifespan.
I	don't	want	you	to	get	into	any	kind	of	illusory	relationship	with	me.	I	have	been
talking	 about	 the	 master	 and	 the	 disciple	 relationship	 from	 different	 angles,
emphasizing	many	things;	this	also	should	be	remembered,	that	all	that	has	been
said	to	you	about	it	is	poetic	and	symbolic.
You	 cannot	merge	 or	melt	 actually,	 but	 you	 can	merge	 and	melt	 by	 dropping
your	ego.
That's	exactly	the	intention,	that	you	drop	the	ego;	that	between	the	master	and
the	disciple	there	will	be	only	two	persons	--	 the	master	and	the	disciple	--	not
four	 persons,	 the	 ego	 of	 the	 master	 and	 the	 ego	 of	 the	 disciple	 and	 then	 the
master	and	the	disciple	behind	their	egos.
That	is	happening	in	almost	all	your	relationships.	On	every	bed	where	you	find
a	couple,	just	look	closely,	you	will	find	four	persons:	two	real	persons	and	two
unreal	persons.
Those	 two	 unreal	 persons	 are	 created	 by	 both	 projecting	 something	 onto	 the
other.
Naturally	 there	 is	going	 to	be	disillusionment.	Every	 relationship	comes	 into	a
state	of	disillusionment;	 then	 it	 really	hurts.	Never	create	any	relationship	with
projection.
Avoid	your	ego,	avoid	your	mind.
Just	see	clearly	without	any	thoughts	disturbing	your	vision	and	you	will	never
create	a	relationship.	You	will	have	relatedness,	you	will	have	deep	intimacy	but
there	will	be	no	relationship,	no	binding;	otherwise	every	relationship	becomes	a
kind	of	marriage.	And	the	moment	something	becomes	a	marriage	it	has	turned
into	 an	 imprisonment.	 Certainly,	 the	 master	 disciple	 relationship	 cannot	 be
allowed	to	turn	into	a	marriage;	that	will	destroy	its	whole	purpose.
The	whole	purpose	is	to	give	you	freedom,	to	help	you	to	be	free	from	all	kinds
of	 chains	 which	 you	 have	 mistaken	 for	 ornaments;	 to	 take	 you	 out	 of	 your
imprisonment	which	you	have	taken	as	your	home;	to	make	you	aware	that	your
religion,	your	nation,	your	race,	your	caste,	your	ideology,	all	are	different	kinds
of	imprisonments,	and	they	all	turn	you	into	prisoners.
They	decorate	their	chains	with	flowers,	they	make	their	chains	with	gold,	but	it
does	 not	matter	whether	 the	 chains	 are	made	 of	 gold	 or	 of	 steel	 --	 chains	 are
chains,	and	they	destroy	your	dignity.	They	destroy	your	humanity,	they	reduce
you	into	a	slave.	The	whole	of	humanity	is	living	in	many	kinds	of	slaveries.
The	slavery	has	become	multidimensional:	you	belong	to	a	race,	you	belong	to	a
nation,	you	belong	to	a	religion,	you	belong	to	a	political	party...	And	all	 these
are	causes	of	your	slavery;	all	these	are	destructive	to	your	spirituality.
An	authentic	human	being	does	not	belong	 to	any	 religion,	does	not	belong	 to
any	 nation,	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 any	 race.	He	 is	 simply	 part	 of	 existence.	Why
belong	to	small	trivial	crowds	when	you	can	belong	to	the	whole	universe?	And
with	belonging	to	the	whole	universe	there	is	an	immense	difference.
When	 you	 belong	 to	 the	 whole,	 it	 gives	 you	 freedom	 because	 the	 whole	 is
unlimited	and	there	are	no	limitations,	no	boundaries.
The	whole	can	never	become	a	prison	to	you.
The	awakened	man	lives	 in	 the	whole,	belongs	to	 the	whole	universe.	He	does
not	belong	to	small	cages	howsoever	beautiful	they	may	be.
I	want	my	people	to	belong	to	the	whole.	That's	the	only	way	I	can	help	you,	and
I	can	show	my	love	to	you	and	my	respect	to	you.	It	has	not	been	the	case	in	the
past:	no	master	has	been	respectful	towards	his	disciples.	He	has	asked	that	the
disciples	should	be	respectful	towards	him;	that	they	should	be	grateful	towards
him;	that	they	should	be	surrendered	to	him.	These	are	very	subtle	games	of	the
ego.
If	you	love,	if	your	love	is	real,	you	will	not	ask	for	surrender.	If	your	love	is	real
you	will	have	tremendous	respect,	it	does	not	matter	whether	you	are	master	or
disciple.
Respect,	reverence	for	life,	does	not	need	any	special	qualification.	You	will	be
respectful	to	the	trees	and	to	the	birds	and	to	the	stars	too.
A	master	who	is	not	respectful	to	his	disciples	has	no	right	to	have	any	respect
from	the	disciples	either;	it	is	a	mutual	understanding	and	awareness.	The	master
is	 not	 in	 any	 way	 holier-than-thou	 or	 higher-than-thou.	 He	 may	 be	 more
experienced	in	certain	ways,	he	may	be	richer	in	his	inner	world,	but	that	does
not	 create	 any	 hierarchy.	 All	 hierarchies	 are	 created	 by	 the	 ego,	 and	 to	 be	 a
master,	 to	 be	 an	 awakened	 person,	 the	 first	 thing	 is	 to	 drop	 the	 ego	 then	 you
cannot	create	any	hierarchy.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	about	Gautam	Buddha's	past	life...
He	loved	to	relate	about	his	many	past	 lives.	At	least	 twenty-four	past	 lives	he
has	related	in	his	discourses	to	his	disciples	--	beautiful	stories.	It	does	not	matter
whether	they	are	historically	true	or	not.	There	is	no	way	to	find	it	out,	and	there
is	no	 reason	 to	be	worried	 about	whether	 they	 are	historical	 or	not	 --	 they	 are
significant.
He	says,	"In	one	of	my	past	lives,	when	I	was	as	unconscious	as	you	are,	when	I
was	 as	miserable	 as	 you	 are,	when	 I	was	 searching	 for	 a	master	 as	 you	 have
come	 to	 me	 searching	 for	 a	 master,	 I	 heard	 about	 a	 man	 who	 had	 become
enlightened.	Immediately	I	rushed	and	when	I	reached	a	great	crowd	had	already
arrived.
"I	 touched	 the	 feet	 of	 the	 man	 who	 had	 become	 enlightened	 and	 the	 most
surprising	 thing	 was	 that	 I	 had	 no	 thought	 of	 touching	 the	 feet	 --	 it	 simply
happened.	 Just	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 man	 was	 so	 immense,	 I	 found	 myself
touching	his	feet	without	my	will,	without	my	thought,	without	my	preparation,
without	 even	my	 readiness.	 I	had	 just	 come	 to	 see	out	of	 curiosity	whether	he
was	really	realized	or	not,	and	what	had	happened.
"As	I	came	close	to	him	something	transpired	and	I	touched	his	feet.	I	stood	back
and	even	a	greater	miracle	happened:	that	man	touched	my	feet.
"I	 said	 to	him,	 `What	are	you	doing?	You	are	awakened,	 enlightened;	 I	 am	an
ignorant	 man	 in	 search	 of	 a	 master,	 and	 masters	 don't	 touch	 the	 feet	 of	 the
disciples.'
"And	 the	 awakened	man	 said,	 Ì	 don't	 belong	 to	 that	 category	of	masters.	 I	 am
ready	 to	 touch	 everybody's	 feet	 because	 I	 know	 they	 are	 all	 going	 to	 become
enlightened	 one	 day	 or	 other.	 And	 there	 are	 only	 seven	 days	 in	 a	 week!
Somebody	becomes	enlightened	on	Monday	and	somebody	becomes	enlightened
on	 Sunday	 --	 it	 does	 not	 matter.	 One	 thing	 is	 certain,	 that	 everybody	 carries
inside	him	a	buddha.	And	I	can	see	in	you	that	it	is	not	going	to	be	long	before
you	will	be	enlightened.	I	can	see	the	seed	has	already	died	and	that	new	sprouts
have	started	growing	within	you.	Seeing	your	great	future,	I	touched	your	feet,
and	also	 to	 remind	you	 that	when	you	become	an	enlightened	man,	 remember
that	one	enlightened	man	has	touched	your	feet	when	you	were	just	a	disciple.'"
Gautam	Buddha	used	to	relate	this	story	again	and	again	to	his	disciples	saying,
"I	have	as	much	respect	towards	you	as	you	have.	I	have	found	the	truth;	you	are
searching	for	it.
It	is	not	much	of	a	difference.	I	have	arrived;	you	are	arriving."
I	 don't	want	 to	 create	 any	kind	of	 illusory	 relationship	between	me	and	you.	 I
want	to	stand	alone	and	I	want	you	also	to	stand	alone,	and	in	our	aloneness	we
shall	meet.
In	our	aloneness,	in	our	freedom	we	shall	have	reverence	and	we	shall	have	love,
but	our	love	will	not	be	a	bondage,	and	our	respect	will	not	create	a	hierarchy.
Question	3
BELOVED	MASTER,
PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THE	DISCIPLE'S	ALONENESS	AND
COURAGE.
Anand	Taral,	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 realize	 is	 that	whether	you	want	or	not,	you	are
alone.
Aloneness	is	your	very	nature.
You	can	try	 to	forget	 it,	you	can	try	not	 to	be	alone	by	making	friends,	having
lovers,	mixing	in	the	crowd...	But	whatever	you	do	remains	just	on	the	surface.
Deep	inside,	your	aloneness	is	unreachable,	untouchable.
A	 strange	 accident	 happens	 to	 every	 human	 being:	 as	 he	 is	 born	 the	 very
situation	of	his	birth	begins	in	a	family.	And	there	is	no	other	way,	because	the
human	child	is	the	weakest	child	in	the	whole	of	existence.
Other	animals	are	born	complete.	A	dog	is	going	to	remain	a	dog	his	whole	life,
he	is	not	going	to	evolve,	grow.	Yes,	he	will	become	aged,	old,	but	he	will	not
become	more	 intelligent,	 he	will	 not	 become	more	 aware,	 he	will	 not	 become
enlightened.	 In	 that	 sense	 all	 the	 animals	 remain	 exactly	 at	 the	 point	 of	 their
birth;	 nothing	 essential	 changes	 in	 them.	 Their	 death	 and	 their	 birth	 are
horizontal	--	in	one	line.
Only	 man	 has	 the	 possibility	 of	 going	 vertical,	 upwards,	 not	 just	 horizontal.
Most	 of	 humanity	 behaves	 like	 other	 animals:	 life	 is	 just	 growing	 old	 --	 not
growing	up.	Growing	up	and	growing	old	are	totally	different	experiences.
Man	is	born	in	a	family	amongst	human	beings.	From	the	very	first	moment	he
is	 not	 alone;	 hence,	 he	 gets	 a	 certain	 psychology	 of	 always	 remaining	 with
people.	In	aloneness	he	starts	feeling	scared...	unknown	fears.	He	is	not	exactly
aware	of	what	he	is	afraid	of,	but	as	he	moves	out	of	the	crowd	something	inside
him	becomes	uneasy.	To	be	with	others	he	feels	cozy,	at	ease,	comfortable.
It	is	because	of	this	reason	he	never	comes	to	know	the	beauty	of	aloneness;	the
fear	prevents	him.	Because	he	was	born	in	a	group	he	remains	part	of	a	group,
and	 as	 he	 grows	 in	 age	 he	 starts	 making	 new	 groups,	 new	 associations,	 new
friends.	Already,	existing	collectivities	don't	satisfy	him:	the	nation,	the	religion,
the	 political	 party...	 He	 creates	 his	 own	 new	 associations:	 Rotary	 Club,	 Lions
Club.	But	all	these	strategies	are	just	to	avoid	one	thing:	never	to	be	alone.
The	whole	 life	 experience	 is	 of	 being	 together	 with	 people.	 Aloneness	 seems
almost	like	a	death.	In	a	way	it	is	a	death;	it	is	the	death	of	the	personality	that
you	have	created	in	the	crowd.	That	is	a	gift	of	others	to	you.	The	moment	you
move	out	of	the	crowd	you	also	move	out	of	your	personality.
In	 the	crowd	you	know	exactly	who	you	are:	you	know	your	name,	you	know
your	degrees,	you	know	your	profession;	you	know	everything	that	is	needed	for
your	passport,	your	 identity	card.	But	 the	moment	you	move	out	of	 the	crowd,
what	is	your	identity,	who	are	you?	Suddenly	you	become	aware	that	you	are	not
your	 name	 --	 your	 name	 was	 given	 to	 you.	 You	 are	 not	 your	 race	 --	 what
relationship	 has	 race	 with	 your	 consciousness?	 Your	 heart	 is	 not	 Hindu	 or
Mohammedan;	your	being	is	not	confined	to	any	political	boundaries	of	a	nation;
your	consciousness	is	not	part	of	any	organization	or	church.	Who	are	you?
Suddenly	 your	 personality	 starts	 dispersing.	 This	 is	 the	 fear:	 the	 death	 of	 the
personality.
Now	you	will	 have	 to	 discover	 freshly,	 you	will	 have	 to	 ask	 for	 the	 first	 time
who	you	are.	You	will	 have	 to	 start	meditating	on	 the	 fact:	Who	am	 I?	 --	 and
there	 is	 a	 fear	 that	 you	 may	 not	 be	 at	 all.	 Perhaps	 you	 were	 nothing	 but	 a
combination	 of	 all	 the	 opinions	 of	 the	 crowd,	 that	 you	were	 nothing	 but	 your
personality.
Nobody	wants	to	be	nothing.
Nobody	wants	to	be	nobody.
And	in	fact	everybody	is	a	nobody.
There	is	a	very	beautiful	story...
Alice	has	reached	Wonderland.	She	came	to	meet	 the	king	and	the	king	asked,
"Alice,	did	you	meet	a	messenger	coming	towards	me?"
She	said,	"I	met	nobody."
The	king	said,	"If	you	met	nobody,	why	has	he	not	arrived	yet?"
Alice	was	very	much	puzzled.	She	said,	"You	are	not	understanding	me	rightly.
Nobody	is	nobody."
The	 king	 said,	 "That	 is	 obvious	 that	 nobody	 is	 nobody,	 but	 where	 is	 he?	 He
should	 have	 reached	 here	 by	 this	 time.	 It	 simply	means	 nobody	walks	 slower
than	you."
And	naturally	Alice	was	very	much	annoyed	and	forgot	that	she	is	talking	to	the
king.
She	said,	"Nobody	walks	faster	than	me."
Now	the	whole	conversation	goes	on	with	 that	"nobody."	She	understands	 that
he	is	saying,	"Nobody	walks	slower	than	you."
"...	and	I	am	a	fast	walker.	I	have	come	from	the	other	world	to	Wonderland,	a
small	 world	 --	 and	 he	 is	 insulting	me."	 Naturally	 she	 retorts,	 "Nobody	 walks
faster	than	me!"
The	king	said,	"If	that	is	right	then	why	has	he	not	arrived?"
And	this	way	the	discussion	continues.
Everybody	is	a	nobody.
So	 the	 first	 problem	 for	 a	 disciple	 is	 to	 understand	 exactly	 the	 nature	 of
aloneness.	 It	means	nobodiness;	 it	means	dropping	your	personality	which	 is	a
gift	to	you	by	the	crowd.
As	you	move	off	 out	 of	 the	 crowd	you	 cannot	 take	 that	 gift	with	 you	 in	 your
aloneness.	In	your	aloneness	you	will	have	to	discover	again	afresh,	and	nobody
can	give	you	the	guarantee	whether	you	will	find	anybody	inside	or	not.
Those	who	have	reached	to	aloneness	have	found	nobody	there.	I	really	mean	no
body.
No	name,	no	form,	but	a	pure	presence,	a	pure	life,	nameless,	formless.	This	is
exactly	 the	 true	 resurrection,	 and	 it	 certainly	 needs	 courage.	 Only	 very
courageous	 people	 have	 been	 able	 to	 accept	 with	 joy	 their	 nobodiness,	 their
nothingness.	Their	nothingness	is	their	pure	being;	it	is	a	death	and	a	resurrection
both.
Just	today	Hasya	was	showing	me	a	small,	beautiful	cartoon:	Jesus	hanging	on
the	cross,	 looking	at	 the	sky,	 is	saying,	"It	would	have	been	better	 if	alongside
God	the	father	I	had	Allah	the	uncle.	It	would	have	been	better;	at	least	if	God
was	not	listening,	Allah	might	have	helped."
Having	 just	God	 for	 his	whole	 life	 he	was	 very	 happy	proclaiming,	 "I	 am	 the
only	begotten	son	of	God."	And	he	never	talked	about	God's	family,	his	brother,
his	wife,	his	other	sons	and	daughters.	In	the	whole	of	eternity	what	has	he	been
doing?	He	does	not	have	a	TV	to	waste	time,	to	pass	time.	He	does	not	have	any
possibility	of	having	a	movie	hall.	What	does	this	poor	fellow	go	on	doing?
It	 is	a	well-known	fact	 that	 in	poor	countries	the	population	goes	on	exploding
for	the	simple	reason	that	the	poor	man	has	no	other	free	entertainment.	The	only
free	 entertainment	 is	 to	 produce	 children.	 Although	 it	 is	 in	 the	 long	 run	 very
costly,	right	now	there	is	no	ticket,	no	problem,	no	standing	in	the	queue...
What	has	God	been	doing	for	the	whole	eternity?	He	has	created	only	one	son.
Now	on	the	cross	he	remembers	that	it	would	have	been	better	if	God	really	had
a	few	brothers,	sisters,	uncles.	"I	could	have	asked	help	from	somebody	else	if
he	is	not	listening	to	me."
He	is	praying	and	he	is	being	angry	saying,	"Why	have	you	forgotten	me?	Have
you	given	up	on	me?"	--	but	there	is	no	answer.
He	 is	 waiting	 for	 the	 miracle.	 The	 whole	 crowd	 that	 has	 gathered	 to	 see	 the
miracle	by	 and	by	 started	dispersing.	 It	was	 too	hot,	 unnecessarily.	Nothing	 is
going	to	happen;	if	something	was	going	to	happen	it	would	have	happened.
After	six	hours	 there	were	only	 three	 ladies	 left	who	were	still	believing	that	a
miracle	 may	 happen.	 One	 was	 Jesus'	 mother	 --	 naturally,	 mothers	 go	 on
believing	that	their	child	is	a	genius.	Every	mother,	without	exception,	believes
that	she	has	given	birth	to	a	child	which	is	a	giant.
Another	 woman	 who	 loved	 Jesus	 was	 a	 prostitute,	 Mary	 Magdalene.	 That
woman,	although	she	was	a	prostitute,	must	have	loved	Jesus.	Even	the	disciples,
the	so-called	apostles,	who	became	second	to	Jesus	in	importance	in	the	history
of	Christianity,	all	twelve	escaped	just	out	of	fear	of	being	caught	and	of	being
recognized	--	because	they	were	always	hanging	around	with	Jesus,	everywhere.
You	 never	 can	 believe	 the	 crowd:	 if	 they	 were	 caught,	 they	might	 have	 been
crucified,	 if	 not	 crucified	 at	 least	 beaten,	 stoned	 to	 death.	 Only	 three	 women
were	left.
The	third	was	another	woman	who	loved	Jesus.	It	was	love	that	remained	in	the
last	moments	 in	 the	 form	of	 these	 three	women.	All	 those	disciples	must	have
been	with	Jesus	just	in	order	to	get	into	paradise.	It	is	always	good	to	have	good
contacts,	 and	 you	 can't	 find	 a	 better	 contact	 than	 the	 contact	 with	 the	 only
begotten	son	of	God.	Just	behind	him	they	will	also	be	able	to	enter	through	the
gates	of	paradise.	Their	disciplehood	was	a	kind	of	exploitation	of	Jesus;	hence
there	was	no	courage.	It	was	cunning	and	clever,	but	not	courageous.
Only	love	can	be	courageous.
You	are	asking	about	aloneness	and	courage.	Courage	comes	out	of	 love...	Do
you	 love	yourself?	Do	you	 love	 this	existence?	Do	you	 love	 this	beautiful	 life
which	 is	a	gift?	 It	has	been	given	 to	you	without	your	being	even	ready	for	 it,
without	your	deserving	it,	without	your	being	worthy	of	it.
If	you	love	this	existence	which	has	given	life	to	you,	which	goes	on	providing
every	 moment	 life	 and	 nourishment	 to	 you,	 you	 will	 find	 courage.	 And	 this
courage	will	help	you	to	stand	alone	like	a	cedar	of	Lebanon,	high	--	reaching	to
the	stars	but	alone.
In	 aloneness	 you	 will	 disappear	 as	 an	 ego	 and	 personality	 and	 you	 will	 find
yourself	 as	 life	 itself,	 deathless	 and	 eternal.	 Unless	 you	 are	 capable	 of	 being
alone	your	search	for	truth	will	remain	a	failure.
Your	aloneness	is	your	truth.
Your	aloneness	is	your	divineness.
The	 function	 of	 the	master	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 stand	 alone.	Meditation	 is	 just	 a
strategy	to	take	away	your	personality,	your	thoughts,	your	mind,	your	identity
with	the	body,	and	leave	you	absolutely	alone	inside,	just	a	living	fire.	And	once
you	have	found	your	living	fire,	you	will	know	all	the	joys	and	all	the	ecstasies
that	human	consciousness	is	capable	of.
The	old	woman	watched	her	grandson	eat	his	soup	with	the	wrong	spoon,	grasp
his	knife	by	the	wrong	end,	eat	the	main	course	with	his	hands,	and	pour	tea	into
the	saucer	and	blow	on	it.
"Has	 not	 watching	 your	 mother	 and	 father	 at	 the	 dinner	 table	 taught	 you
anything?"	she	asked.
"Yes,"	said	the	boy,	chewing	with	his	mouth	open,	"never	to	get	married."
He	has	learned	a	great	lesson:	Remain	alone.
It	is	really	very	difficult	to	be	with	others,	but	we	are	accustomed	from	our	very
birth	to	be	with	others.	It	may	be	miserable,	 it	may	be	a	suffering,	 it	may	be	a
torture	but	we	are	accustomed;	at	least	it	is	well	known.
One	 is	 afraid	 to	 step	 into	 the	darkness	 beyond	 the	 territory,	 but	 unless	 you	go
beyond	the	territory	of	the	collective	mask,	you	cannot	find	yourself.
Groucho	 Marx	 has	 made	 a	 beautiful	 statement	 for	 you	 to	 remember:	 "I	 find
television	 very	 educating.	Every	 time	 somebody	 turns	 on	 the	 set	 I	 go	 into	 the
other	room	and	read	a	book."
The	 teacher	of	a	class	of	 ten-year-olds	 is	 too	 shy	 to	conduct	 the	 sex-education
class	and	so	she	asks	her	class	to	make	this	a	homework	project.
Little	 Hymie	 asks	 his	 father	 who	 mumbles	 something	 about	 a	 stork.	 His
grandmother	 said	 he	 came	 from	 a	 cabbage	 patch	 and	 his	 great-grandmother
blushes	and	whispers	that	children	come	from	the	great	ocean	of	existence.
The	next	day,	little	Hymie	is	called	by	the	teacher	to	report	on	his	project.	Little
Hymie	says	 to	 the	 teacher,	"I'm	afraid	 there	 is	 something	wrong	 in	our	 family.
Apparently	nobody	has	made	love	for	three	generations!"
In	 fact,	 very	 few	 people	 have	 loved	 at	 all;	 they	 have	 pretended,	 have	 been
hypocrites	deceiving	not	only	others	but	have	deceived	themselves	too.
You	can	love	authentically	only	when	you	are.
Right	now	you	are	only	a	part	of	a	crowd,	a	cog	in	the	wheel.	How	can	you	love?
--
because	you	are	not.	First	be;	first	know	yourself.
In	your	aloneness	you	will	discover	what	it	is	to	be.	And	out	of	that	awareness	of
your	being	love	flows,	and	much	more.
Aloneness	should	be	your	only	search.
And	it	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	go	to	the	mountains,	you	can	be	alone	in
the	 marketplace.	 It	 is	 simply	 a	 question	 of	 being	 aware,	 alert,	 watchful,
remembering	that	you	are	only	your	watchfulness.	Then	you	are	alone	wherever
you	are.	You	may	be	 in	 the	crowd,	you	may	be	 in	 the	mountains;	 it	makes	no
difference,	 you	 are	 just	 the	 same	 watchfulness.	 In	 the	 crowd	 you	 watch	 the
crowd;	 in	 the	mountains	you	watch	 the	mountains.	With	open	eyes	you	watch
existence;	with	closed	eyes	you	watch	yourself.
You	are	only	one	thing:	the	watcher.
And	 this	watcher	 is	 the	greatest	 realization.	This	 is	your	buddha	nature;	 this	 is
your	 nature	 of	 enlightenment,	 of	 your	 awakening.	 This	 should	 be	 your	 only
discipline.	 Only	 this	 makes	 you	 a	 disciple:	 this	 discipline	 of	 knowing	 your
aloneness.	Otherwise,	what	makes	you	a	disciple?	You	have	been	deceived	on
every	point	in	life.	You	have	been	told	that	to	believe	in	a	master	makes	you	a
disciple.	 That	 is	 absolutely	 wrong;	 otherwise,	 everybody	 in	 the	 world	 is	 a
disciple.
Somebody	believes	in	Jesus,	somebody	believes	in	Buddha,	somebody	believes
in	Krishna,	 somebody	 believes	 in	Mahavira;	 everybody	 believes	 in	 somebody
but	nobody	is	a	disciple,	because	to	be	a	disciple	does	not	mean	to	believe	in	a
master.	To	be	a	disciple	means	to	learn	the	discipline	of	being	your	self,	of	being
your	true	self.
In	 that	 experience	 is	 hidden	 the	 very	 treasure	 of	 life.	 In	 that	 experience	 you
become	for	the	first	time	an	emperor;	otherwise	you	will	remain	a	beggar	in	the
crowd.	There	are	two	kinds	of	beggars:	poor	beggars	and	rich	beggars,	but	they
are	all	beggars.	Even	your	kings	and	your	queens	are	beggars.
Only	those	people,	very	few	people	who	have	stood	alone	in	their	being,	in	their
clarity,	in	their	light,	who	have	found	their	own	light,	who	have	found	their	own
flowering,	 who	 have	 found	 their	 own	 space	 they	 can	 call	 their	 home,	 their
eternal	home	--	those	few	people	are	the	emperors.	This	whole	universe	is	their
empire.	They	don't	need	to	conquer	it;	it	is	already	conquered.
By	knowing	oneself	you	have	conquered	it.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	Virtue	is	the	currency	of	heaven
2	September	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709020
ShortTitle:
INVITA24
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
116
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	IS	IT	THAT	GOING	INTO	SOMETHING	CONSCIOUSLY	HAS	SUCH
A	 POWER	 TO	 REVEAL	 ALL	 THE	 THREADS	 WHICH	 MAKE	 UP	 THE
TANGLE?
Devageet,	 the	 reality	 is	 just	 the	opposite.	All	our	 tangles	 in	 life	are	created	by
our	 unconsciousness,	 so	 the	 moment	 you	 become	 conscious	 those	 tangles
disappear.	It	 is	not	the	power	of	consciousness	that	makes	them	disappear.	It	 is
the	power	of	unconsciousness	that	creates	them.
All	 the	 tangles	 of	 life,	 of	 love,	 of	 relationship	 are	 created	 by	 our
unconsciousness.	We	don't	know	what	we	are	doing,	and	by	the	time	we	become
aware	it	is	too	late.	What	has	been	done	cannot	be	undone.	Our	unconsciousness
is	 very	 supportive	 to	 the	 ego	 --	 they	 have	 a	 co-existence.	 Coming	 of
consciousness	will	not	only	disperse	all	the	tangles,	it	will	also	disperse	you	as
an	ego.	It	is	a	very	complicated	and	complex	phenomenon.
In	 your	 unconsciousness	 you	 do	 something.	 It	 is	 almost	 certain	 that	 once	 you
have	done	something	wrong	that	has	created	misery	in	you,	around	you,	you	will
come	to	your	senses.	But	you	cannot	undo	it	because	the	ego	comes	in	between.
You	cannot	even	say,
"I	 am	 sorry."	 Just	 a	 simple	 apology	may	disperse	 the	 tangle	but	 the	 ego	won't
allow	 even	 that.	And	you	 are	 almost	 a	 victim;	 you	 are	 not	 doing	 things.	Your
unconsciousness,	your	unawareness	goes	on	forcing	you	to	do	things.
Just	last	night	I	answered	Prem	Shunyo's	question	very	lightly	and	very	lovingly
and	very	joyously.	I	joked	about	it,	but	she	was	pissed	off	--	I	could	see	her	face.
Milarepa	was	angry.
You	don't	know	what	you	are	doing.	What	you	are	doing	is	almost	beyond	your
hands;	you	are	 reacting.	 If	Prem	Shunyo	had	heard	what	 I	was	 saying...	 I	was
simply	saying,
"Don't	take	it	seriously."	I	was	laughing	about	it,	but	she	could	not	laugh.	You	all
laughed	because	it	was	not	your	problem.	The	more	you	laughed	the	more	you
made	her	serious.
In	each	person's	life	the	time	of	change	comes.	And	one	of	the	greatest	things	to
remember	is	that	when	you	change	a	certain	pattern	of	life,	you	have	to	change
naturally.
It	is	not	in	your	hands.	Biology	makes	you	capable	of	sex	at	the	age	of	thirteen
or	fourteen;	it	is	not	your	doing.
At	 a	 certain	 age,	 as	 you	 are	 coming	 closer	 to	 forty	 or	 forty-two,	 the	 biology's
purpose	 is	 finished.	 All	 those	 hormones	 that	 have	 been	 propelling	 you	 are
disappearing.	To	accept	this	change	is	very	difficult.	You	suddenly	start	thinking
as	if	you	are	no	longer	beautiful,	that	you	need	a	face-lift.
I	have	heard	about	a	woman	who	was	 saying	 to	 the	plastic	 surgeon,	 "I	need	a
face-lift."
The	surgeon	looked	at	her	and	he	said,	"There	 is	nothing	wrong;	 it	 is	 just	age.
Don't	be	worried	about	it.	Why	unnecessarily	go	to	the	trouble?	But	the	woman
was	insistent,	so	the	doctor	said,	"Okay,	but	it	will	cost	five	thousand	dollars."
The	woman	said,	"That	much	money	I	don't	have.	Can't	you	suggest	something
cheaper?"
The	doctor	said,	"Yes.	You	can	purchase	a	veil."
It	is	one	of	the	Western	problems.	In	the	East	no	woman	is	worried.	Things	are
accepted	as	they	come.	Acceptance	has	been	the	basic	foundation	of	Eastern	life.
The	West	is	continuously	imposing	on	nature,	demanding	how	things	should	be.
Nobody	wants	to	become	old,	so	when	the	time	of	transition	from	one	stage	of
life	comes,	a	very	strange	phenomenon	happens	--	and	that	is	what	is	happening
to	Shunyo.	I	did	not	say	it	because	I	did	not	want	to	hurt	her.
It	 is	 going	 to	 happen	whether	 I	 say	 anything	 about	 it	 or	 not,	 just	 as	 a	 candle
comes	to	the	very	end,	has	only	a	few	seconds	more	before	it	will	be	gone.	At
the	last	moment	the	candle	suddenly	becomes	bigger	with	all	its	power.
Nobody	wants	to	go.
It	 is	 a	 well-known	 fact	 to	 medical	 science	 that	 people	 at	 the	 time	 of	 death
suddenly	become	completely	healthy;	all	their	diseases	disappear.	This	is	the	last
effort	of	their	life
--	 to	 resist	 death.	 The	 people	 who	 are	 related	 to	 them	 feel	 very	 happy	 that
suddenly	all	diseases	have	disappeared.	The	person	has	become	calm	and	quiet,
but	 they	 don't	 know	 that	 it	 signifies	 death.	 The	 diseases	 have	 disappeared
because	 their	 function	 is	 fulfilled:	 they	have	killed	 the	man.	Now	 it	 is	 the	 last
spurt	of	life.
The	same	happens	with	every	biological	change	in	 life.	When	sex	is	becoming
irrelevant,	you	start	thinking	of	sex	more	than	ever,	and	suddenly	a	great	spurt...
That	 is	 what	 is	 giving	 her	 the	 idea	 that	 it	 seems	 she	 is	 sexually	 repressed	 --
because	so	much	sexuality	is	suddenly	overwhelming	the	mind.
The	mind	can	only	understand	logically,	rationally	one	thing:	from	where	is	this
sexuality	coming?	--	it	must	be	coming	from	the	repressed	unconscious.	That	is
what	Sigmund	Freud	and	their	followers	have	been	teaching	to	the	whole	world.
They	 are	 right	 on	 many	 points;	 they	 are	 wrong	 on	 many	 points.	 Particularly
about	this	point,	the	transition	when	you	are	no	longer	young	and	the	hormones
in	you	 are	 going	 to	 disappear,	 and	 the	 interest	 in	 sex	 is	 going	 to	 die	 --	 before
dying	it	will	explode	with	its	full	force.
If	you	go	to	a	psychoanalyst,	he	will	say	that	you	are	sexually	repressed.	I	cannot
say	that,	because	I	know	that	 this	sudden	overwhelming	sexuality	will	be	gone
by	 itself,	 you	 don't	 have	 to	 do	 anything.	 It	 is	 the	 signal	 that	 life	 is	 passing
through	a	change.	Now,	 life	will	be	more	calm	and	more	quiet.	You	are	 really
entering	into	a	better	state.
Sex	is	a	little	childish.	As	you	become	more	and	more	mature,	sex	loses	the	grip
over	you
--	and	it	is	a	good	sign.	It	is	something	to	be	happy	about;	it	is	not	a	problem	to
be	solved.
It	is	something	to	celebrate.
In	the	East	no	woman	ever	feels	the	trouble	of	the	transition	from	youth	to	old
age.	In	fact,	she	feels	immensely	happy	that	now	that	old	demon	is	gone	and	life
can	be	more	peaceful.	But	the	West	has	been	living	under	many	illusions.	One	is
the	illusion	that	there	is	only	one	life.	That	creates	immense	trouble.	If	there	is
only	one	life	and	sex	is	disappearing,	so	you	are	finished.	Now,	there	is	no	more
opportunity;	 there	will	not	be	any	more	excitement	 in	 life.	Nobody	 is	going	 to
say,	"You	are	beautiful	and	I	love	you	and	I	will	love	you	forever."
So	 first,	 the	 illusion	of	one	 life	 creates	 a	problem.	Second,	 the	psychoanalysts
and	other	therapists	have	created	another	illusion	that	sex	is	almost	synonymous
to	 life.	 The	more	 sexual	 you	 are,	 the	more	 alive	 you	 are.	 So	when	 sex	 starts
disappearing	 one	 starts	 feeling	 like	 a	 used	 cartridge:	 now	 there	 is	 no	 point	 to
live;	life	ends	with	sex	ending.	Then	people	try	all	kinds	of	bizarre	things:	face
lift,	plastic	surgery,	 false	breasts.	 It	 is	stupid,	simply	stupid.	People	start	 trying
wigs;	they	start	trying	dresses	which	are	sex-provoking.
Almost	 all	Western	women	are	 starving	 --	 they	 call	 it	 dieting!	The	 idea	 in	 the
West	 is	 that	 a	woman	 is	beautiful	 if	 she	 is	not	 fat.	And	nature	has	 some	other
idea:	the	woman	has	to	be	a	little	fat	because	for	nature	the	woman	is	a	mother.
A	mother	needs	extra	fat	for	the	child,	because	when	the	child	is	in	her	womb	he
will	 need	 food.	And	when	 the	 child	 is	 in	 the	womb,	 the	mother	 starts	 feeling
nausea;	she	cannot	eat,	she	starts	 throwing	up.	She	needs	emergency	fat	 in	her
body	so	she	can	feed	the	child	because	the	child	needs	food;	he	is	growing	fast.
Science	says	that	in	the	nine	months	in	the	mother's	womb,	a	child	grows	so	fast
that	 he	will	 never	 grow	 so	 fast	 again	 in	 his	 seventy	 years.	 In	 nine	months	 he
passes	through	almost	the	whole	evolution	of	man,	from	the	fish...	all	the	stages.
His	requirements	have	to	be	fulfilled	by	the	mother	--	And	she	cannot	eat...	you
can	imagine.	It	is	troublesome	to	have	a	child	in	your	belly.	I	don't	think	any	man
is	ready	to	be	pregnant:	he	will	commit	suicide;	without	any	doubt	he	will	jump
from	a	fifty-storey	building,	"I	am	finished...
pregnant...?"
Just	think,	the	idea	that	you	have	a	child	in	the	belly,	and	you	will	go	crazy.	But
how	to	get	rid	of	it...
The	mother	goes	through	immense	suffering,	great	sacrifice;	hence,	 in	 the	East
we	have	not	created	the	idea	of	a	skinny	woman.	Of	course,	the	skinny	woman
looks	 more	 sexually	 attractive,	 younger.	 The	 fat	 woman	 looks	 less	 sexually
interesting,	because	she	loses	proportions.	Her	waist	is	no	longer	very	small.	Her
body	has	gathered	so	much	fat	 that	nobody	will	feel	attracted	towards	her.	She
does	not	have	the	necessary	attraction	for	the	human	mind.
The	East	has	accepted	that	a	woman	has	to	be	a	little	more	fat	than	a	man,	a	little
more	rounded.
Just	the	other	day	somebody	brought	me	a	book	of	pictures	taken	by	one	famous
photographer	and	on	the	front	page	was	Sophia	Loren.	In	the	East	she	cannot	be
conceived	of	as	very	beautiful:	she	must	be	dieting	--	and	dieting	is	nothing	but
the	rich	man's	idea	of	starvation.
The	poor	 people	 starve	 by	 themselves.	The	 rich	people	 starve	 in	 a	 costly	way
under	 professional	 guidance.	The	 fear	 that	 you	will	 not	 be	 attractive,	 that	 you
will	 no	 longer	 be	 looked	 at	 by	 people...	 You	will	 pass	 through	 the	 street	 and
nobody	will	look	at	you;	who	is	going...?
It	is	a	great	need	of	man,	and	particularly	women,	to	have	attention	--	attention	is
nourishment.	A	woman	 suffers	 immensely	when	nobody	pays	 attention	 to	 her.
She	has	nothing	else	 to	attract	people	by;	 she	has	only	her	body.	Man	has	not
allowed	her	to	have	other	dimensions	where	she	can	become	a	famous	painter,	a
dancer	or	a	 singer,	a	 learned	professor.	Man	has	cut	all	other	dimensions	 from
the	woman's	 life	where	 she	can	be	attractive	and	people	will	pay	 respect	 even
while	she	becomes	old.
I	have	to	remind	you	of	the	meaning	of	`respect':	it	means	looking	back.	When
somebody	passes	by:	re-spect.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	honor;	it	has	something
to	do	with	your	being	suddenly	aware	that	a	beautiful	thing	has	passed.
Woman	is	left	only	the	body	by	man,	so	she	is	so	much	concerned	with	the	body
that	it	creates	clinging,	possessiveness,	fear	that	the	person	who	loves	her,	if	he
leaves,	perhaps	will	find	another	person.	And	without	attention	she	starts	feeling
almost	dead:	What	 is	 the	use	of	 life	 if	nobody	 is	paying	attention	 to	you?	She
does	not	have	an	intrinsic	life	of	her	own.
Man	has	taught	woman	that	her	life	depends	on	others'	opinions	about	her.	You
can	see	all	over	the	world	that	beauty	competitions	are	arranged	only	for	women,
and	the	woman	does	not	even	revolt	against	these	ideas.	Why	not	for	men?	Just
as	 you	 choose	 a	Mrs.	 or	Miss	 Universe,	 choose	 a	Mr.	 Universe.	 No,	 nobody
bothers	 about	 the	 man's	 body.	 He	 can	 grow	 fat;	 he	 can	 become	 a	 Winston
Churchill.	Still	he	attracts	attention	because	he	has	power.
In	the	same	book	just	beside	Sophia	Loren	is	Winston	Churchill	--	ugly,	as	fat	as
you	 can	 conceive,	 the	 whole	 face	 sagging.	 He	 needs	 a	 face-lift	 --	 not	 Sophia
Loren	--	but	he	will	not	bother;	there	is	no	need.	He	can	have	power,	he	can	be
the	prime	minister.	He	can	be	this	and	he	can	be	that...
Man	 has	 managed	 over	 the	 centuries	 to	 have	 all	 the	 other	 dimensions	 of
attracting	people,	 and	he	has	 left	 to	woman	only	one	dimension:	her	body.	He
has	 made	 woman	 just	 a	 vegetable.	 And	 naturally,	 the	 vegetable	 starts	 being
worried	if	there	are	no	customers.
It	is	not	a	coincidence	that	in	the	most	sexually	perverted	country,	France,	while
being	 in	 love	 with	 a	 woman,	 you	 say,	 "I	 want	 to	 eat	 you."	 Are	 these	 people
cannibals?	Is	the	woman	a	vegetable	or	what?	"I	want	to	eat	you"	shows	a	great
respect	for	the	woman!
When	nobody	says	 to	her,	"I	want	 to	eat	you,"	she	 thinks,	"I	am	now	finished.
Life	has	come	to	an	end!"
But	 here	 with	 me	 you	 have	 to	 learn	 something.	 The	 first	 thing	 is	 a	 deep
acceptability	 of	 all	 the	 changes	 that	 nature	 brings	 to	 you.	 Youth	 has	 its	 own
beauty;	old	age	has	 its	own	beauty	 too.	 It	may	not	be	sexual,	but	 if	a	man	has
lived	silently,	peacefully,	meditatively,	 then	old	age	will	have	a	grandeur	of	 its
own.
Just	 as	 the	 snow-covered	peaks	 look	beautiful,	 the	white	 hairs	 of	 old	 age	 also
have	their	own	beauty	--	and	not	only	beauty,	but	wisdom	too,	which	no	young
man	 can	 claim,	 because	 all	 his	 behavior	 is	 stupid.	 He	 is	 running	 behind	 this
woman,	running	behind	that	woman.
The	old	man	has	stopped	all	this	running	business.	He	has	settled	in	himself.	He
is	no	longer	dependent	on	anybody	else.	The	old	woman	should	follow	the	same
way.	There	should	be	no	difference	between	men	and	women.
That	 is	why	 I	was	 simply	 laughing	 and	 joking	 about	 Prem	 Shunyo's	 question
because	I	did	not	want	her	to	become	serious	about	something	which	is	natural.
And	if	Milarepa	feels	angry,	he	simply	proves	what	I	have	been	saying,	that	he	is
crazy.
Now	he	is	running	after	younger	women.	This	shows	that	you	are	not	maturing,
not	 learning	 that	 what	 you	 call	 love	 is	 not	 love,	 but	 biological	 slavery.	 Love
happens	only	when	you	are	beyond	biological	 slavery;	 then	 love	has	a	beauty.
Biological	 slavery	and	 the	biological	 relationship	are	so	ugly	 that	 for	centuries
people	 have	decided	 to	make	 love	 in	 darkness	without	 light,	 so	 they	don't	 see
what	they	are	doing.
Particularly	 the	 woman	 is	 very	 sensitive	 when	 you	 make	 love	 to	 her;	 she
immediately	closes	her	eyes.	Just	to	see	this	nasty	thing	that	is	happening...
I	have	heard	that	when	Henry	Ford	died	he	was	received	with	a	great	welcome	in
heaven	and	even	God	thanked	him:	"You	have	done	great	service	to	humanity	by
creating	so	many	cars	--	you	are	a	great	creator."
Henry	Ford	said,	"That's	okay,	but	you	are	not	that	great	a	creator.	You	have	put
man's	body	in	such	a	stupid	way	that	the	loveliest	part	people	think	about,	dream
about	 is	so	close	 to	 the	dirtiest	part.	Could	you	not	find	somewhere	else	 in	 the
whole	body?
Why	has	 love	 to	be	sandwiched	between	the	ugliest	parts?	You	don't	have	any
sense,	no	aesthetics.	The	exhaust	pipe	 is	so	close	 to	 the	most	 lovely	part	 that	I
cannot	believe	that	you	are	a	great	creator"	--	and	he	was	right.
God	 has	 committed	 many	 mistakes.	 This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 major	 mistakes.	 The
loving	 part	 could	 have	 been	 anywhere	 else:	 you	 have	 a	 six-foot-long-body,	 so
much	territory!	And	what	kind	of	a	stupid	god...	where	he	puts	the	loving	parts?
Not	only	is	it	to	be	accepted	when	life	is	going	through	a	biological	change,	but
it	has	to	be	rejoiced	that	you	have	passed	over	all	that	stupidity,	that	now	you	are
free	from	biological	bondage;	it	is	only	a	question	of	conditioning.
When	you	ask	me	questions	you	should	remember	that	I	never	in	any	way	want
to	hurt	you.	Even	sometimes	if	I	have	to	avoid	the	truth,	I	avoid	it	but	don't	hurt
you.	If	you	get	hurt	about	something	that	must	be	your	own	mind.	But	perhaps
you	are	just	a	victim	in	that	too	--	it	is	unconscious.
Devageet,	you	are	asking,	"How	is	it	that	going	into	something	consciously	has
such	a	power	to	reveal	all	the	threads	which	make	up	the	tangle?"
They	 have	 been	made	 in	 your	 unconsciousness.	 They	 have	 been	made	 in	 the
darkness	 of	 your	 being.	 And	 when	 you	 bring	 light,	 naturally	 you	 see	 all	 the
tangle:	 how	 you	 have	 created	 your	 misery,	 your	 suffering,	 your	 anguish,
yourself.	Seeing	it	is	enough	--	all	those	tangles	disappear.
A	conscious	man	never	creates	any	tangle;	he	lives	more	intensely	than	anybody
else.	 But	 his	 life	 is	 without	 any	 tangles	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 in
consciousness	you	cannot	create	tangles.
Abbie's	 wife	 had	 just	 died	 and	 he	 was	 standing	 over	 the	 grave	 and	 sobbing
uncontrollably.	His	best	friend	put	his	arm	around	him	and	said,	"Abbie,	time	is
a	wonderful	 thing.	Believe	it	or	not	some	day	you	will	want	to	start	a	new	life
again	 and	 be	with	 people,	maybe	 even	 get	married	 again.	 Listen	 to	me:	 Time
heals	wounds."
Abbie	looked	at	him	and	replied,	"I	know,	I	know...	but	what	am	I	going	to	do
tonight?"
Such	 is	 the	 unconsciousness	 of	man.	 The	wife	 died	 in	 the	morning	 and	 he	 is
worried	about	what	he	is	going	to	do	in	the	night	--	tonight!	And	you	are	talking
about	time:	that	some	day	wounds	will	be	healed.	What	about	tonight?
I	 have	 heard	 an	 ancient	 story,	Arabic,	 that	 a	man's	 father	 died	 and	 all	 the	 old
people	of	the	neighborhood	came	and	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	son.	If	you	have
lost	 your	 father,	 we	 are	 here.	 Don't	 think	 for	 a	 single	 moment	 that	 you	 are
fatherless.	We	are	all	your	fathers.	You	can	come	always	to	us	in	any	difficulty,
any	problem."
He	was	very	much	consoled,	seeing	the	concern	of	his	neighborhood	people.	He
had	never	thought	that	they	would	be	so	considerate.
And	 then	 his	 mother	 died	 and	 all	 the	 old	 women	 came	 and	 said,	 "Don't	 be
worried.	We	are	still	alive.	You	can	look	at	us	as	your	mother	and	whatever	your
mother	was	doing	for	you,	we	can	do.	There	is	no	problem	about	it."
He	was	very	much	consoled.	And	then	his	wife	died,	and	not	a	single	wife	from
the	neighborhood	came	to	say	don't	be	worried	we	are	here.	Whatever	your	wife
was	doing,	we	will	do...!
The	man	was	very	angry.	He	stood	 in	 front	of	his	house,	watching	 if	 anybody
would	come	or	not	--	and	nobody	came.	Finally,	he	started	shouting,	"You	nasty
people.	When	my	father	died	all	the	old	people	came.	When	my	mother	died	all
the	old	women	came.
And	 now	my	wife	 has	 died	 and	 no	 young	woman	 is	 coming	 --	 what	 kind	 of
neighborhood	is	this?
"...	absurd,	illogical!	I	am	waiting	from	the	morning	for	somebody	to	turn	up,	but
nobody	has	come."
One	has	 to	accept	 life.	But	your	unconsciousness	does	not	allow	you	to	accept
life	as	it	is.
You	wanted	something	else.
It	 is	 perfectly	 good	 when	 sex	 disappears.	 You	 will	 be	 more	 capable	 of
meditating.	You	will	be	more	capable	of	being	alone.	You	will	be	more	capable
of	being	blissful,	without	any	misery	because	the	whole	game	of	sex	is	nothing
but	a	long	misery	--	fighting,	hate,	jealousy,	envy.	It	is	not	a	peaceful	life.
It	is	peace,	silence,	blissfulness,	aloneness,	freedom	which	give	you	the	real	taste
of	what	life	is.
Two	women	are	 talking	 in	a	 tearoom	at	 four	o'clock	over	 two	 large,	gooey	 ice
cream	sundaes	and	little	sugary	cakes.	They	have	not	seen	each	other	since	high
school	days	and	one	is	bragging	about	her	very	advantageous	marriage.
"My	husband	buys	me	whole	new	 sets	 of	 diamonds	when	 the	ones	 I	 have	get
dirty,"	she	says,	"and	I	have	never	even	bothered	to	clean	them."
"Fantastic,"	said	the	other	woman.
"Yes,"	says	the	first,	"we	get	a	new	car	every	two	months."
"Fantastic,"	says	the	other.
"And	 our	 house..."	 pursues	 the	 first	woman,	 "Well,	what	 is	 the	 use	 of	 talking
about	it,	it	is	just..."
"Fantastic,"	finishes	the	other.
"Yes,	and	tell	me,	what	are	you	doing	nowadays?"	asked	the	first	woman.
"I	go	to	the	charm	school,"	says	the	other.
"Charm	school!	Why,	how	quaint.	What	do	you	learn	there?"
"Well,	we	learn	to	say,	fantastic,	instead	of	bullshit."
In	 your	 unconsciousness	 everything	 is	 bullshit.	 And	 when	 you	 become
conscious,	it	is	really	fantastic:	all	tangles	disappear,	all	problems	disappear.	But
you	need	not	go	to	a	charm	school	 to	 learn	 it,	because	 in	a	charm	school	deep
down	the	woman	is	saying,
"Bullshit."
And	she	is	just	repeating	like	a	parrot,	"Fantastic,"	but	she	means	bullshit.	Not	in
a	 charm	 school,	 but	 in	 a	 school	 where	 your	 unconsciousness	 slowly,	 slowly
disappears	leaving	a	luminous	being	within	you	--	then	there	is	no	tangle	in	life.
I	have	lived	a	very	strange	life.	Anybody	else	would	have	found	so	many	tangles
in	it,	so	many	troubles.	I	have	also	passed	through	all	kinds	of	tangles,	troubles,
problems,	 but	 I	 have	 remained	 unscratched;	 I	 have	 enjoyed	 the	 journey.
Whatever	life	brought	to	me,	I	have	enjoyed	it.	I	have	tried	to	make	the	best	out
of	it,	whatever	it	is.
There	is	no	point	in	crying	and	weeping	over	spilled	milk.	Any	situation	can	be
made	 a	 learning,	 a	 step	 towards	 maturity,	 can	 be	 turned	 into	 a	 beneficial
opportunity.	 That	 is	 what	 I	 call	 intelligence;	 otherwise,	 what	 is	 the	 difference
between	intelligent	people	and	unintelligent	people.
Devageet,	 it	 is	 true	 consciousness	 has	 tremendous	 power,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 used	 in
revealing	and	dispersing	 the	 tangles	of	your	 life;	 they	simply	disappear	as	you
become	conscious.
Gautam	Buddha	used	to	say	that	when	the	lights	are	on	and	from	the	windows
people	 can	 see	 that	 the	 master	 is	 awake,	 thieves	 don't	 come	 close.	When	 the
lights	are	put	off,	only	then	do	thieves	come	close	to	the	house	to	see	whether	the
master	 has	 gone	 to	 sleep	 and	 it	 is	 the	 right	 time	 to	 enter.	He	was	 saying	 this
about	 consciousness.	 He	 used	 to	 call	 sex,	 greed,	 lust	 for	 power,	 position,
respectability	all	thieves.	They	come	to	you	only	when	they	see	that	there	is	no
light	in	the	man;	inside	it	is	all	dark.
Once	you	are	radiating	consciousness	and	light,	those	thieves	don't	come	close	to
you.
But	 consciousness	 has	 its	 own	 power.	 It	 is	 simply	 in	 the	 presence	 of
consciousness	 that	 tangles	 disappear.	The	power	 is	 not	 used	 for	 dispersing	 the
tangles	and	problems;	the	power	is	 to	bring	blissfulness.	The	power	is	 to	bring
peace,	 silence,	 at	 homeness,	 at	 easeness	 and	 a	 tremendous	 ecstasy,	 a	 divine
drunkenness.
Life	becomes	for	the	first	time	self-oriented;	you	don't	have	to	beg	from	others
for	 anything.	Nobody	can	give	you	blissfulness;	 nobody	 can	give	you	 ecstasy.
Nobody	can	give	you	the	sense	of	immortality	and	the	dance	that	comes	with	it.
Nobody	can	give	you	the	silence,	which	becomes	a	song	in	your	heart.
What	can	people	give	to	you?	In	fact,	the	power	of	consciousness	gives	you	so
much	that	you	become	capable	of	sharing	with	people.	For	the	first	time,	you	can
give	to	people.
They	 are	 living	 in	 darkness;	 they	 haven't	 seen	 any	 light.	 They	 don't	 have	 any
idea	what	a	conscious	being	is.	They	don't	have	any	conception,	comprehension
of	the	power	of	consciousness,	how	many	flowers	shower,	how	much	fragrance
becomes	natural	to	you.
You	can	give,	and	you	can	give	them	a	taste	and	you	can	give	them	a	direction,
so	they	can	also	find	the	same	power	which	is	dormant	in	them.
A	 conscious	man	 awakened	 can	 help	millions	 of	 people	 to	move	 towards	 the
source	of	joy,	real	and	authentic	life,	to	pure	love	which	knows	nothing	of	hate,
which	 knows	 nothing	 of	 jealousy,	 which	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 body	 and
biology	--	which	is	just	a	spiritual	communion,	a	feeling	of	deep	compassion	for
your	innermost	being.
Yes,	 the	 power	 of	 consciousness	 gives	 you	 many	 things.	 The	 treasure	 is
inexhaustible,	 but	 your	 problems	 and	 tangles	 that	 have	 been	 created	 by
unconsciousness	 --	 for	 them	 no	 power	 is	 needed,	 just	 the	 presence	 of
consciousness	is	enough.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	VIRTUE?
Fantastic!	Here,	we	 are	 not	 concerned	 about	 virtue	 at	 all.	Virtue	 is	 for	 people
who	 are	 unconscious;	 it	 is	 a	 training	 for	 them	 to	 say,	 "Don't	 say	 bullshit,	 say
fantastic!"
Virtue	is	a	training	a	discipline	imposed	on	unconscious	people.	All	the	religions
talk	about	virtue	as	being	against	 sin.	They	have	made	 fixed	categories.	Some
things	are	condemned	as	sin	and	some	things	are	praised	as	virtues.	The	virtuous
man	will	have	immense	reward	after	death,	and	the	sinner	will	be	condemned	to
hellfire	for	eternity.
This	is	the	strategy	of	fear	and	greed,	because	man	can	be	easily	manipulated	by
these	two	things	--	fear	and	greed.	Heaven	is	nothing	but	greed	exaggerated;	so
hell	is	fear	exaggerated,	and	human	beings	are	afraid	of	eternal	hellfire.	Out	of
fear	they	somehow	try	to	avoid	whatever	is	sin.	And	the	trouble	is	anything	that
gives	you	joy,	anything	that	gives	you	pleasure	is	sin.
Out	of	fear	they	lose	all	contact	with	life,	they	become	dry	and	dead	before	their
death.
There	is	only	one	consolation:	that	they	are	declared	saints,	they	are	worshipped.
Just	 their	 ego	 is	 satisfied	 greatly;	 otherwise	 they	 are	 suffering	 deep	 down
immensely.
That	 is	why	your	saints	cannot	 laugh:	 laughter	needs	a	 little	 juice.	There	 is	no
juice	in	them;	everything	is	dry.	They	are	deserts	where	nothing	grows	green.	So
on	the	one	hand	the	pressure	of	fear...
I	 have	 seen	 pictures	 of	 the	Middle	Ages:	 there	 were	 Christian	 preachers	 who
made	 so	 much	 fuss	 about	 hell	 and	 its	 tortures	 that	 just	 to	 be	 in	 the	 church
listening	to	their	sermons	many	ladies	used	to	faint.	Just	the	idea	that	they	were
going	into	such	detail...
what	 would	 be	 done	 to	 you?	 The	 people	 thought	 the	 preachers	 were	 great
according	 to	 how	much	 they	 could	 infect	 people's	 psychologies.	 The	 greatest
preacher	was	one	in	whose	congregation	almost	everybody	fainted.
A	deep	 fear	 psychology,	 a	 deep	 guilt	 psychology	on	 the	 one	 hand,	 and	on	 the
other	hand	greed	 to	be	 fulfilled	as	a	 reward.	You	will	be	getting	everything	 in
paradise:	 all	 those	 things	 which	 are	 sins	 here	 on	 the	 earth,	 they	 will	 also	 be
available	to	you.
Mohammedans	 are	 against	 alcohol,	 but	 in	 their	 paradise	 there	 are	 rivers	 of
alcohol.	You	don't	have	to	go	to	a	small	pub,	you	can	drink,	you	can	drown,	you
can	 swim.	 All	 the	 rivers,	 they	 don't	 consist	 of	 water	 --	 pure	 wine.	 Here	 it	 is
condemned:	you	should	not	fall	in	the	trap	of	love.	A	woman	is	condemned	and
in	the	heaven	--	in	every	religion's	idea	of	heaven	--	women	are	freely	supplied.
Of	course,	according	to	your	virtue	you	will	get.	If	your	virtue	is	great	perhaps,
Sophia	Loren	--	it	all	depends	on	your	virtue.
A	strange	game	has	been	played	with	the	human	mind.	Thousands	of	girls...	I	say
girls,	because	they	don't	grow	in	age.	They	don't	have	to	feel	like	Prem	Shunyo;
they	are	fixed	for	eternity	at	the	age	sixteen.	In	fact,	they	are	prostitutes,	eternal
prostitutes,	but	they	are	thought	to	be	rewards	for	saints.	How	many	other	saints
have	 used	 those	 rewards,	 because	 since	 the	 beginning	 the	 same	 staff	 has	 been
working,	 not	 even	 a	 shift	 change.	 I	 have	 never	 come	 across	 anything	 about	 a
shift	change	or	any	staff	change	in	the	holy	scriptures	--	the	same	young	women.
They	 remain	 always	young.	They	don't	 perspire;	 they	do	not	 need	deodorants.
They	must	be	certainly	made	of	plastic,	because	only	plastic	does	not	perspire.	A
real	skin	is	bound	to	perspire	if	it	is	alive,	because	through	every	pore	of	the	skin
you	 are	 breathing	 in.	And	 perspiration	 is	 a	 natural	way	 of	 keeping	 you	 at	 the
same	body	temperature.
If	it	is	too	cold	you	start	shivering.	You	may	not	be	aware	why	you	are	shivering.
You	 think	 it	 is	 because	 of	 the	 cold;	 it	 is	 to	 keep	 your	 body	 temperature
continuously	the	same.
Shivering	gives	you	inner	heat.	In	the	hot	season	you	perspire.	You	perspire	so
that	your	water,	perspiration	is	taken	away	by	the	heat;	it	evaporates	so	the	heat
does	 not	 affect	 your	 temperature.	 It	 simply	 evaporates	 your	 perspiration.	 It
leaves	 you	 without	 increasing	 your	 temperature;	 otherwise,	 if	 there	 was	 no
perspiration,	your	life	span	would	not	be	very	big.
The	 life	 span	 can	 be	measured	 in	many	ways:	 in	 years,	 seventy	 years,	 but	 as
body	 temperature	 from	 ninety-eight	 to	 one	 hundred	 and	 ten	 --	 just	 twelve
degrees	is	your	span	of	life.	If	there	was	no	perspiration,	your	temperature	would
be	as	high	as	the	heat	is	around	you.	The	moment	you	pass	one	hundred	and	five,
you	would	start	getting	dizzy.
The	moment	you	pass	one	hundred	and	seven,	you	would	be	falling	into	a	coma.
The	moment	you	pass	one	hundred	and	ten,	you	would	have	passed	away.
It	 is	 perspiration	 that	 saves	 you;	 it	 is	 your	 life	 savior.	 But	 those	 poor	 plastic
girls...	and	eternal	promise	for	all	joys!
The	 Hindu	 heaven	 has	 certain	 trees,	 which	 they	 call	 kalpavriksha,	 wish-
fulfillment	trees.
You	don't	have	to	order	a	cup	of	tea	or	a	woman	or	a	car;	you	don't	have	to	order
anybody;	you	don't	have	 to	call	any	bearer	or	give	a	call	 to	some	agency.	You
just	sit	under	the	wish-fulfilling	tree	--	and	they	are	all	over	heaven,	everywhere
--	 you	 just	 sit	 underneath	 and	 you	 say	 whatever	 you	 want,	 and	 immediately,
instantly,	it	will	be	provided.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	of	a	man,	who	by	some	accident	stumbled	into	heaven.
He	had	no	idea	where	he	had	reached.	He	was	sitting	under	a	kalpavriksha.	He
was	 feeling	 very	 hungry.	 He	 had	 been	 traveling	 a	 lot	 and	 that	 is	 how	 he	 had
stumbled	somehow	by	accident	into	heaven.
He	said,	"I	am	feeling	hungry	but	I	don't	see	any	hotel	anywhere,	any	restaurant,
nothing.
I	don't	see	even	a	single	man.	But	I	am	feeling	very	hungry,	if	I	could	get	some
good	 food...	 Immediately	 beautiful	 women	 appeared	 from	 nowhere	 with	 all
kinds	 of	 sweets	 and	 delicious	 foods.	 He	 was	 so	 hungry	 that	 he	 did	 not	 pay
attention	to	where	all	these	things	were	coming	from.
He	started	eating,	feeling	perfectly	well.	He	was	tired.	He	went	to	sleep.	Before
going	 to	 sleep,	 he	 thought	 that	 sleeping	 on	 the	 ground,	 uneven	with	 stones,	 if
someone	could	arrange	 just	a	mattress,	and	suddenly	--	he	could	not	believe	--
again	beautiful	women	appeared	with	a	beautiful	bed	and	 they	put	him	on	 the
bed.	But	he	was	so	tired	that	he	still	did	not	think	what	was	going	on.
When	refreshed,	he	awoke.	He	thought,	my	God,	there	is	nobody	here	who	has
brought	the	food,	and	I	have	not	said	to	anybody;	I	just	thought	about	it!	And	he
looked	at	the	beautiful	bed,	"Who	has	brought	this?	I	had	simply	thought	about
lying	down	on	the	ground.	It	seems	there	must	be	ghosts	around."	That	was	the
natural	 conclusion,	 because	 he	was	 not	 aware	 that	 he	was	 in	 heaven,	 under	 a
kalpavriksha.
"There	must	be	ghosts	all	around,	my	God"	--	and	immediately	ghosts	appeared,
because	whatever	you	would	say...	The	moment	he	saw	the	skeletons	of	ghosts
dancing	 all	 around,	 he	 said,	 "My	 god,	 they	 are	 going	 to	 kill	 me"	 --	 and	 they
killed	him.	The	man	never	came	back.
Religions	have	used	 fear	 to	prevent	you	 from	 living,	and	greed	 to	help	you	so
that	you	can	be	patient	and	hope	that	great	things	are	ahead.	Just	the	small	things
you	are	leaving,	and	for	eternity	you	will	enjoy	all	the	pleasures	that	you	want	--
and	you	don't	have	to	pay	for	them.
Virtue	is	the	currency	of	heaven.
The	more	virtuous	you	are,	the	bigger	a	bank	balance	you	have	in	heaven.	I	don't
teach	you	virtue	because	your	virtue	is	false,	because	deep	down	there	is	greed.
I	teach	you	only	awareness.
Out	 of	 awareness	 whatever	 you	 do	 is	 virtue	 according	 to	 me.	 And	 out	 of
unawareness	whatever	you	do	is	sin	according	to	me.	And	according	to	me,	your
sins	 are	 not	 going	 to	 take	 you	 to	 hell.	Your	 sins	 immediately	 give	 you	 hell	 --
here,	 just	 now.	 And	 your	 virtues	 are	 not	 going	 to	 give	 you	 an	 eternity	 of
paradise.	Your	virtues	give	you	 joy,	blissfulness,	 the	moment	you	act	with	 full
awareness.
The	punishment	 and	 the	 reward	 is	 immediate:	 the	 reward	 follows	your	 action.
But	 it	 depends	where	 your	 action	will	 lead	 you.	 It	 can	 be	 unconscious	 action,
then	hell	herenow.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	geography;	it	is	something	to	do	with	your	psychology.
Acting	 consciously,	 you	 are	 in	 paradise	 wherever	 you	 are.	 Once	 you	 have
learned,	you	will	not	ask,	"What	is	virtue?"	You	will	ask,	"What	is	awareness?
What	is	consciousness?"	You	will	ask,	"What	is	meditation?"	--	because	that	is
going	to	make	you	conscious	and	make	you	alert.
What	brings	misery	is	sin.
Whatever	brings	joy	is	virtue.
Alfred	 North	 Whitehead	 has	 made	 a	 beautiful	 statement:	 It	 requires	 a	 very
unusual	mind	to	make	an	analysis	of	the	obvious.
To	me,	 it	 is	absolutely	obvious	that	virtue	or	sin,	heaven	or	hell	are	secondary.
The	primary	is	your	alertness,	your	awareness,	but	people	won't	ask	the	obvious.
These	are	by-products,	and	by	getting	entangled	with	by-products	you	will	be	in
trouble.
There	 is	 a	 tale	 concerning	 Sherlock	 Holmes	 and	 Doctor	 Watson	 on	 board	 a
train...
They	passed	a	flock	of	sheep	and	Watson	said,	"A	sizable	flock,	Holmes."
"Ah,	exactly	 seven	hundred	and	eighty-four	 in	number,	my	dear	Watson,"	 said
Holmes	sleepily.
"Good	heavens,	Holmes,"	said	Watson.	"Surely	you	can't	have	counted	them."
They	are	 in	a	 train;	 the	 train	has	passed	 the	sheep.	The	flock	 is	 left	 far	behind
and	it	must	have	taken	a	single	moment	to	pass.
"Not	 directly,"	 said	 Holmes.	 "I	 made	 use	 of	 a	 simple	 trick	 any	 school	 child
knows.	I	merely	counted	the	legs	and	divided	by	four."
Just	don't	get	 into	nonsense;	otherwise,	you	will	always	feel	what	Leonardo	da
Vinci	has	confessed	in	his	letters:	I	have	offended	God	and	mankind	because	my
work	did	not	reach	the	quality	it	should	have.	Now,	Leonardo	da	Vinci	is	one	of
the	 greatest	 geniuses,	 and	 whatever	 he	 has	 done	 is	 incomparable.	 There	 is
nobody	else	who	even	comes	close	 to	him.	But	even	 such	a	great	man	 feels	 a
little	guilt,	"I	have	not	reached	the	quality	it	should	have."
This	is	the	atmosphere	that	religions	have	created	in	the	world.	They	don't	allow
anybody	to	be	at	ease,	even	the	greatest	genius.	They	go	on	telling	you	that	you
are	 still	 not	 doing	 right;	 you	 are	 still	 far	 away	 from	 the	 goal.	 You	 are	 still
unworthy;	you	are	always	unworthy.	They	will	not	leave	you	at	peace	so	that	you
can	 enjoy	 life	 and	 love	 life	 and	 be	 grateful	 to	 God,	 and	 be	 grateful	 to	 the
universe	--	which	both	mean	the	same	to	me.
God	is	not	a	person.	It	is	this	whole	universe	--	these	trees,	these	clouds,	the	sun,
the	stars,	you	and	everybody,	whether	asleep	or	awake,	whether	committing	sins
or	virtues,	you	are	part	of	one	organic	universe.
If	 you	 commit	 a	 sin...	 The	word	 `sin'	 has	 been	 contaminated	 by	 the	 religions;
otherwise	 it	 simply	 means	 in	 its	 roots,	 forgetfulness,	 unawareness.	 It	 means
exactly	what	 I	am	saying	 to	you.	Sin	 is	your	unawareness.	Any	action	done	 in
unconsciousness	 is	 sin.	 But	 religions	 have	 completely	 destroyed	 the	 original
meaning	of	the	word.	Whatever	you	are	doing	consciously	is	virtue	and	there	is
no	ready-made	list	of	what	are	virtues,	because	in	a	different	situation,	the	same
thing	may	become	sin.	The	thing	that	was	virtue	in	one	condition,	in	one	context,
may	not	be	virtue	 in	another	context;	 it	all	depends.	But	how	are	you	going	 to
know	whether	in	this	context	it	is	virtue	or	sin.
Those	dead	categories	that	have	been	given	to	you	like	the	ten	commandments,
fixed	 forever,	 they	 don't	 take	 account	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 life	 is	 continuously
changing	and	you	are	moving	every	moment	into	a	new	situation	--	and	a	new
situation	needs	a	new	response.
So	I	don't	give	you,	I	can't	give	you	any	ready-made	list	 to	avoid	these	 things,
that	 these	are	sins	and	avoid	 them	because	 they	will	 lead	you	 to	hell.	 I	cannot
exploit	 you	 and	 your	 fears	 and	 I	 cannot	 say	 to	 you	 that	 these	 are	 the
commandments,	if	you	follow	them	yours	is	the	kingdom	of	God,	because	in	life
things	go	on	changing.
It	happened...
I	had	a	friend;	he	was	a	professor	in	the	university	--	a	very	learned	professor	of
Sanskrit.
He	wanted	to	go	to	Tibet	because	many	scriptures	in	Sanskrit	on	Buddhism	had
been	burned	by	the	Hindus	in	India.	But	their	translations	exist	in	Tibetan	still,
so	he	wanted	to	translate	them	back	into	Sanskrit.
It	was	 a	 great	 idea	 and	 he	was	well	 versed	 in	 Sanskrit.	He	 had	 been	 learning
Tibetan	for	years	and	now	he	was	ready.	But	he	was	a	brahmin	by	caste,	a	very
orthodox	brahmin.
In	India	 it	 is	perfectly	good	 to	get	up	at	 five	o'clock,	early	 in	 the	morning	and
have	 a	 good	 bath	 in	 the	 nearby	 lake	 or	 in	 the	 nearby	 river,	 and	 then	 do	 your
prayer,	meditate.	Only	after	that	can	you	enter	into	the	mundane	world	of	your
profession,	your	life,	your	family.
In	Tibet,	the	Tibetan	holy	book	says	that	only	one	bath	a	year	is	allowed;	Tibetan
monks	are	the	dirtiest	people	to	find.	I	have	been	harassed	by	Tibetan	monks.
When	 the	 Dalai	 Lama	 came	 for	 the	 first	 time	 --	 escaped	 from	 Tibet	 with
thousands	of	Lamas	--	I	was	taking	a	camp	in	Bodhgaya	and	all	the	Lamas	first
came	to	pay	respect	to	the	place	where	Gautam	Buddha	had	become	enlightened.
I	 was	 taking	 a	 camp	 just	 there	 in	 the	 compound	 of	 the	 memorial	 temple	 for
Buddha.	I	had	never	come	across	Tibetan	Lamas.	But	such	are	habits,	 they	die
very	hard.	They	use,	I	think	three	or	four	layers	of	clothes,	one	on	top	of	another.
Their	clothes	are	greasy,	dusty	and	they	will	not	take	any	bath	because	their	holy
scripture	says	once	in	a	year	is	compulsory.
When	my	friend	reached	Tibet,	he	continued	to	follow	his	pattern	of	life	in	India.
He	could	not	manage	to	be	there	more	than	three	days,	because	he	had	to	take	a
bath	 early	 in	 the	 morning,	 five	 o'clock,	 according	 to	 the	 brahmin	 religion.
Without	taking	a	bath	you	cannot	eat;	that	is	a	sin	--	and	in	India	it	is	certainly
right.	But	in	Tibet	the	whole	context	is	different.	To	take	a	bath	in	ice-cold	water,
five	 o'clock	 in	 the	 early	morning	 is	 to	 freeze	 yourself	 to	 death.	 Food	 is	 not	 a
problem.	You	will	not	be	able	to	eat	food.	In	three	days	he	got	so	tortured	by	this
morning	bath.
One	day	he	tried;	it	was	too	much.	The	whole	day	he	was	feeling	as	if	his	blood
was	frozen.	And	for	another	two	days	he	could	not	eat	because	he	could	not	take
the	bath.	So	he	had	taken	only	one	bath	in	Tibet	and	one	day	he	had	eaten	and
two	days	he	remained	without	food.	But	he	thought,	How	long	will	it	be	because
I	cannot	survive	without	food,	neither	can	I	survive	with	the	bath.	It	is	better	to
go	home,	forget	all	about	those	scriptures;	it	is	none	of	my	business.
He	came	back.	I	was	surprised	when	I	saw	him	back	"...	so	quick	you	managed
to	translate."
He	 said,	 "Forget	 all	 about	 translations.	Congratulate	me	 that	 I	 am	 alive."	And
when	he	told	me	I	said	that	this	is	stupidity.
In	Tibet	you	should	look	at	the	context,	not	at	your	Hindu	idea	of	virtue	and	sin	-
-	 that	 is	 stupidity.	 Mohammedans	 have	 been	 allowed	 by	 their	 founder,
Mohammed,	four	wives,	and	it	is	perfectly	virtuous	to	have	four	wives.
Mohammed	 himself	 married	 nine	 wives.	 Obviously	 he	 was	 a	 prophet,	 no
ordinary	man,	but,	it	was	perfectly	right	in	those	times	because	the	Arabs	were
continuously	fighting	and	killing.	But	only	men	were	killed;	it	was	against	their
culture	to	kill	any	woman.	The	women	were	raped,	but	not	killed.
So	there	was	a	strange	situation;	there	were	four	times	more	women	than	men.	If
he	had	insisted	that	monogamy	was	virtue,	as	is	being	insisted	all	over	the	world
--	polygamy	or	even	bigamy	is	a	crime,	is	a	sin	--	he	would	not	have	been	right.
Because	if	monogamy	had	been	virtuous,	what	would	have	happened	to	the	three
women	 who	 are	 left	 without	 men?	 They	 would	 corrupt	 the	 whole	 of	 society.
They	 will	 become	 prostitutes	 and	 the	 whole	 society	 would	 become	 an	 ugly
scene.	So	Mohammed	is	perfectly	right;	I	support	him.
But	not	now	in	India,	where	women	and	men	are	equal	as	they	are	everywhere,
nature	keeps	a	balance,	an	exact	balance.	To	keep	the	balance	nature	has	to	take
care:	 it	 gives	birth	 to	one	hundred	 and	 fifteen	boys	when	 it	 gives	birth	 to	one
hundred	girls,	because	 fifteen	boys	will	pop	off	before	 the	 time	of	marriage	 --
boys	are	weak	and	fragile.
The	 ordinary	 idea	 that	 women	 are	 weak	 and	 fragile	 is	 just	 male	 chauvinistic
imposition.
Nature	knows	better:	fifteen	boys	per	hundred	are	going	to	die.	Girls	don't	die;
they	have	a	greater	 resistance	 against	diseases.	They	are	not	 so	often	 sick	 and
they	live	longer	than	men,	five	years	longer	all	over	the	world.
So	 by	 the	 time	 the	 marriageable	 age	 comes,	 there	 are	 a	 hundred	 boys	 and	 a
hundred	girls.
Monogamy	seems	 to	be	absolutely	right	 in	 this	context,	but	Mohammedans	go
on	insisting	that	it	is	part	of	their	religion...	So	even	in	India	they	are	allowed	to
have	 four	wives.	 It	 is	 such	 an	 ugly	 situation	 because	 it	means	 three	men	will
remain	without	wives.
So	the	Mohammedans	abduct	women	from	other	religions.
Hindus	particularly	are	very	touchy	people.	If	a	woman	has	been	forcibly	taken
by	the	Mohammedans	to	their	homes,	even	if	they	have	not	touched	her	she	will
not	be	accepted	back	in	the	Hindu	fold,	she	has	to	go	to	the	Mohammedans.	She
has	fallen	below	the	dignity	of	a	Hindu.
So	Mohammedans	have	been	continually	 stealing	women	 from	other	 societies.
They	have	to,	because	what	 to	do	with	the	three	men	that	are	without	women?
Those	three	men	will	start	relationships	with	others'	wives	and	that	will	create	a
mess.	And	the	Indian	constitution,	which,	in	the	name	of	religion,	doesn't	want
to	interfere	in	any	religion,	cannot	do	anything	to	prevent	Mohammedans	from
this	 polygamy.	And	 those	 four	women	 that	 they	marry,	 they	 use	 as	 economic,
financial	help;	they	work	and	the	husband	rests.	This	is	great!
The	Mohammedan	priests	go	on	insisting	on	no	interference,	because	a	man	with
four	women	can	create	four	children	per	year,	very	easily,	but	a	woman	with	four
men	cannot	create	four	children;	she	will	create	only	one	child.	The	population
of	Mohammedans	goes	on	increasing	as	nobody	else	can	increase	the	population
the	 way	 they	 can.	 So	 you	 will	 not	 be	 surprised	 that	 India	 has	 been	 divided;
Mohammedans	have	taken	Pakistan	and	made	it	separate.	The	country	has	been
cut	into	three	parts:	one	side	is	Pakistan,	given	to	Mohammedans;	another	side	is
Bangladesh,	 given	 to	 Mohammedans.	 And	 still,	 within	 forty	 years,	 in	 India
Mohammedans	are	again	number	two	to	Hindus.
Again	they	can	ask	for	another	country.	And	you	will	also	be	surprised	that	India
is	a	Hindu	country	but	the	number	of	Mohammedans	in	India	is	more	than	in	any
Mohammedan	 country	 in	 the	 world	 --	 not	 even	 Arabia,	 or	 Egypt,	 or	 Iran,	 or
Libya,	or	Palestine...	No	Mohammedan	country	has	so	many	Mohammedans	as
India	has.
India	is	the	greatest	Mohammedan	country	in	the	world	if	you	take	the	number
of	 the	 Mohammedans.	 And	 the	 number	 goes	 on	 growing	 four	 times	 more.
Hindus	are	simply	puzzled	what	to	do	because	soon	they	will	be	outnumbering
Hindus.	They	have	taken	Pakistan,	they	have	taken	Bangladesh,	and	it	is	not	far
away	when	 they	will	 be	 the	majority	 and	Hindus	will	 become	 the	minority	 in
their	own	country.
Situations,	contexts	should	be	taken	into	account	and	that	is	possible	only	if	you
are	living	a	very	alert	and	conscious	life;	otherwise	you	will	follow	dead,	ready-
made	 things	 which	 may	 have	 been	 relevant	 at	 some	 time.	 Those	 times	 have
changed	and	they	have	become	irrelevant,	but	the	list	continues	to	be	the	same.
So	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 any	 list.	 I	 have	 been	 asked	 by	 priests,	 Hindus,
Mohammedans,	Christians,	 that	 I	 should	make	 a	 clear-cut	 statement:	what	 are
sins,	what	are	virtues	and	what	are	my	fundamental	principles	of	religion?
I	said,	"My	first	fundamental	and	the	last	fundamental	is	that	religion	cannot	be	a
fixed	 thing.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 spontaneous.	 It	 has	 to	 come	 out	 of	 your	 awareness.
Nobody	can	decide	it.	No	catechism	can	be	given	according	to	me.
I	can	only	teach	you	awareness	and	then	you	find	out	with	your	awareness,	with
your	own	light	where	to	go,	what	to	do.
Anything	done	with	awareness	is	virtue.
Anything	done	with	unawareness	is	sin.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	Just	go	and	tell	everybody
2	September	1987	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709025
ShortTitle:
INVITA25
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
103
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SINCE	MY	ARRIVAL	HERE	 I	 HAVE	BEEN	 LIVING	 INTENSELY,	AND	 I
SEE
THAT	THE	PRESENT	IS	ONLY	POETRY.
I	 THANK	 YOU	 DEEPLY	 FOR	 YOUR	 BEING	 HERE	 WITH	 US.	 I	 AM
LEAVING	IN
A	 FEW	DAYS	AND	 I	 FEEL	 THAT	YOU	WILL	BE	 EVERYWHERE	 I	 GO,
BUT	I	AM
SCARED	OF	THE	NOISE	OF	THE	WORLD.	 I	DO	NOT	WANT	TO	LOSE
MYSELF
THERE.
CAN	YOU	TELL	ME	SOMETHING?
Dhyan	Giovanna,	once	you	have	tasted	the	inner	silence,	the	noise	on	the	outside
does	not	matter;	it	is	not	a	disturbance	at	all.	The	only	disturbance	comes	from
your	inner	noise,	the	chattering	noise	inside,	the	continuous	rush	of	thoughts	--
that	is	the	real	marketplace.	What	is	outside,	is	outside;	you	can	pass	through	the
marketplace	in	absolute	silence.	If	your	inner	being	is	not	disturbed,	then	what	is
happening	outside	cannot	have	any	impact	on	you.
The	fear	arises	only	because	we	are	not	certain	of	our	own	silence	--	our	silence
is	 very	 vulnerable.	 And	 in	 the	 beginning,	 it	 is	 natural	 --	 it	 is	 nothing	 to	 be
worried	 about.	 All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 that	 the	 inner	 silence	 should	 be	 more
crystallized.	In	fact,	going	into	the	outer	world	can	be	of	immense	help	because
it	 becomes	 a	 test.	Use	 it	 as	 an	 opportunity	 to	 test	 your	 silence.	And	once	you
start	feeling	silent	in	the	crowd,	then	you	will	be	overjoyed	--
then	 you	 can	 be	 certain	 that	 this	 silence	 is	 yours;	 otherwise	 sometimes	 one	 is
deceived.
In	 the	mountains	you	can	be	silent,	 in	 the	deep	forest	you	can	be	silent,	 in	 the
middle	 of	 the	 night	 under	 the	 stars	 you	 can	 be	 silent	 --	 but	 that	 is	 not	 your
silence.	It	is	just	the	outer	silence	penetrating	you.	In	fact,	there	is	no	difference	-
-	 outer	 silence	 penetrating	 you,	 or	 outer	 noise	 penetrating	 you	 --	 both	 are	 the
same;	you	are	under	the	impact	of	the	outside.
Hence	I	don't	give	any	value	to	the	silence	that	you	feel	coming	from	the	outside.
This	silence	will	not	be	much	help;	when	noise	comes,	you	will	be	overwhelmed
by	the	noise.
The	silence	has	not	to	be	of	the	mountains,	of	the	stars,	of	the	silence	of	the	deep
night,	nor	the	silence	of	this	commune.	Here	everybody	is	silent	--	at	least,	trying
to	be	silent!
With	so	many	people	trying	to	be	silent,	one	can	just	become	part...	But	it	is	the
same:	you	can	become	part	of	a	commune	and	feel	silent;	in	the	crowd	you	can
become	part	of	 the	crowd	and	you	will	 feel	noisy.	 In	 fact,	you	are	not	yet.	All
your	experiences	are	dependent;	you	don't	exist	as	an	individual.	That	is	the	fear;
otherwise	it	does	not	matter.
I	used	to	have	a	friend	who	was	condemned	in	the	whole	city	--	he	was	a	thief,
and	you	can	say	he	was	a	master	thief.	For	almost	six	months	he	would	be	in	jail,
and	six	months	outside.	Nobody	in	the	city	even	wanted	to	talk	to	him.
From	the	jail	he	used	to	come	directly	to	my	house.	He	was	a	very	lovable	man.
And	whenever	he	would	come	from	the	jail	to	my	house,	naturally	everybody	in
the	 family	 was	 disturbed.	 My	 father	 again	 and	 again	 insisted	 to	 me	 that	 this
friendship	was	not	good.
I	said,	"Why	do	you	believe	in	him	and	not	in	me?	Am	I	your	son,	or	is	he	your
son?"
And	he	said,	"What	kind	of	argument	are	you	giving	me?"
I	said,	"I	am	saying	exactly	the	right	thing.	You	don't	believe	in	me,	you	believe
in	him.
You	 are	 afraid	 I	 will	 be	 affected	 by	 him	 --	 you	 are	 not	 giving	 even	 a	 single
thought	that	I	may	affect	him.	Why	do	you	think	I	am	so	weak?"
He	said,	"I	have	never	thought	from	this	angle	--	perhaps	you	are	right."
Slowly,	 slowly	 that	man	 became	 accepted	 by	my	 family.	 It	 took	 a	 little	 time;
there	were	many	reasons	for	them	to	reject	him.	The	first	reason	was	that	he	was
a	Mohammedan;	second,	he	was	a	thief.
I	 had	 to	 sit	 outside	 the	 dining	 room	because	 they	would	 not	 allow	him	 in	 the
dining	room.
In	a	Jaina	family,	no	Mohammedan	can	be	allowed	in	the	dining	room.	Even	for
guests	or	customers,	separate	plates,	glasses,	saucers,	cups	--	everything	is	kept,
but	it	is	kept	separate;	it	is	used	only	for	them.	And	I	insisted	that	when	I	invited
him	for	food,	I	was	going	to	eat	with	him	--	I	could	not	insult	him.	He	may	be	a
thief,	he	may	be	a	Mohammedan,	it	doesn't	matter;	I	respect	his	humanity.	So	the
only	way	was	 that	 I	would	 also	 have	 to	 sit	 outside	 the	 dining	 room.	And	my
friend	 used	 to	 say,	 "Why	 do	 you	 unnecessarily	 continue	 to	 fight	 with	 your
family?"
And	 slowly,	 slowly	my	 respect	 towards	him	changed	him.	He	was	 angry	with
me,	saying,
"Your	respect	prevents	me	from	being	a	thief,	and	I	don't	know	anything	else.	I
am	uneducated."
He	was	an	orphan,	and	there	was	no	other	way	for	him	except	either	to	beg	or	to
steal,	 and	certainly	 stealing	 is	better	 than	begging.	Begging	degrades	you	very
badly;	by	stealing,	at	least	you	are	using	your	intelligence,	your	courage.
He	was	angry	and	said,	"Now	my	life	has	become	really	a	problem,	and	you	are
the	cause.	I	cannot	steal	because	I	cannot	betray	your	trust,	your	love	and	your
respect.	And	nobody	is	ready	to	give	me	employment."
So	 I	 took	 him	 to	 my	 father	 and	 I	 said	 to	 him,	 "Now	 my	 friend	 wants
employment.	You	are	against	his	stealing,	now	give	him	employment;	otherwise
you	will	be	responsible	for	his	stealing.	The	poor	fellow	is	ready	to	do	any	work,
but	 nobody	 in	 the	whole	 city	 is	 ready	 to	give	him	work	because	he	 is	 a	 thief.
People	say	to	him,	`Bring	certificates	from	where	you	have	been	working.	Who
has	ever	employed	you	ever	in	your	whole	life?'	And	he	has	no	certificates."
I	 told	 my	 father,	 "Listen,	 somebody	 has	 to	 give	 him	 work	 the	 first	 time;
otherwise,	how	can	he	get	a	certificate?	You	give	him	employment,	and	then	you
can	give	him	a	certificate.	And	I	guarantee	that	he	will	not	steal	and	he	will	not
do	anything	wrong."
On	my	guarantee	my	father	employed	him.	All	other	friends	of	my	father	said,
"What	 are	 you	 doing,	 giving	 a	 job	 to	 a	 thief?	 He	 will	 deceive	 you."	 But	 my
father	 said,	 "My	 son	 has	 given	 his	 guarantee,	 and	 I	 have	 to	 give	 the	man	 an
opportunity	 because	 my	 son's	 reasoning	 is	 right:	 If	 nobody	 gives	 him	 an
opportunity,	 then	 everybody	 is	 pushing	 him	 towards	 the	 jail.	 And	 the	 whole
society	is	responsible	for	pushing	him	towards	the	jail.
He	wants	 to	work,	 but	 if	 nobody	 is	willing	 to	 give	 him	work....	What	 do	 you
want	--	that	he	should	commit	suicide	or	what?"
Once	 a	 person	 goes	 into	 jail,	 then	 it	 becomes	 his	 only	 place,	 his	 home.	 Then
within	a	few	days	he	 is	back,	because	 there	 is	nobody	outside	 to	give	him	any
protection,	any	dignity,	any	respect,	any	love.	It	is	better	to	be	in	the	jail.
He	 proved	 tremendously	 trustworthy,	 and	 finally	my	 father	 had	 to	 accept.	 He
said,	"You	are	right.	I	was	thinking	that	I	was	taking	an	unnecessary	risk.	I	had
not	thought	that	your	reasoning	was	going	to	work.	He	is	a	professional	thief	--
his	whole	life	has	been	just	going	in	and	out	of	the	jail.	But	you	were	right."
My	father	was	a	very	 sincere	man	and	very	 truthful;	he	was	always	willing	 to
accept	his	mistakes,	even	in	front	of	his	own	son.	He	said,	"You	were	right,	that	I
trusted	more	in	him	--	I	thought	he	would	spoil	your	life.	I	did	not	trust	that	you
might	transform	his	life."
Giovanna,	it	all	depends	how	much	you	trust	your	silence,	how	much	you	trust
yourself,	how	much	the	silence	is	arising	from	your	inner	sources.	Then	there	is
no	problem	--	you	can	go	in	the	noisy	world	and	you	will	remain	silent.	And	it	is
possible	that	you	may	change	a	few	people	you	come	in	contact	with.	Why	trust
that	they	will	be	able	to	change	you?	Why	accept	your	weakness?
Go	in	the	world	with	courage	and	with	strength,	and	the	noise	of	the	world	will
not	be	a	disturbance.	And	your	silence	will	help	people	 to	become	silent.	Talk
about	your	experience	of	meditation	to	your	friends,	to	your	family.	It	is	always
helpful	 to	provoke	in	people	an	invitation,	 to	provoke	in	people	a	longing,	 that
they	 have	 been	missing	 something	 that	 you	 have	 attained.	 And	 the	more	 you
spread	 your	 experience	 and	 share	 your	 experience	with	 people,	 the	more	 you
will	be	protecting	yourself;	they	will	not	be	able	to	influence	you.
Start	 spreading	 your	 fragrance	 and	 your	 silence	 and	 your	 experience.	 That
becomes	a	subtle	protection	around	you,	and	that	also	becomes	a	tremendously
transforming	force.
Rather	than	going	with	fear,	go	with	blissfulness,	spreading	the	experience	that
has	happened	to	you.
You	say	the	present	is	pure	poetry	--	that	is	so	valuable;	share	it.	And	trust	that
the	 higher	 value	 is	 always	 victorious.	 The	 noise	 cannot	win	 over	 silence,	 and
misery	cannot	win	over	blissfulness,	and	darkness	cannot	win	over	light.	These
are	fundamental	rules	of	existence.
Just	follow	these	fundamentals	and	you	will	be	enriched	in	the	marketplace	even
more	than	you	can	be	enriched	here.	Because	there,	you	will	become	stronger	--
you	will	 find	 the	challenge	 to	become	stronger.	And	each	 time	you	come,	you
will	 come	 here	 to	 refresh	 yourself,	 to	 go	 deeper,	 to	 find	 greater	 peaks	 of
consciousness	and	then	go	into	the	world.
Make	it	a	point	that	the	world	has	not	to	be	renounced.	The	world	needs	people
who	are	silent.
In	the	past,	 the	silent	people	have	deserted	the	world;	they	have	escaped	to	the
mountains.
In	my	opinion,	they	were	cowards	and	escapists.	They	have	not	helped	the	world
to	evolve	more,	to	become	more	mature,	to	become	more	peaceful;	they	simply
escaped	just	out	of	fear	that	the	world	would	destroy	them.
I	 want	my	 people	 to	 go	 into	 the	 world	 and	 destroy	 the	 world's	 noisiness,	 the
world's	 ugliness,	 greediness.	 It	 is	 a	 challenge,	 and	 it	 is	 very	 exciting.	Always
remember:	the	best	defense	is	attack!	Attack	people	with	your	peace,	with	your
love,	with	your	silence,	with	your	joy	--	that's	the	best	defense,	and	that	is	a	great
service	to	humanity	too.
Sid	 Levensky,	 aged	 eighty-three,	 goes	 into	 the	 confessional	 at	 Saint	 John's
Cathedral.	The	priest	asks	him,	"Have	you	anything	to	confess?"
"Yes,"	 says	 the	 old	man,	 "my	wife	 died	 two	months	 ago.	 Two	 days	 after	 she
passed	 on	 I	 met	 another	 woman.	 She	 is	 twenty-two	 years	 old.	 I	 have	 been
sleeping	with	her	since	the	day	I	met	her.	Sometimes	we	do	it	two	or	three	times
a	day."
"And	how	old	are	you?"	asks	the	priest.
"Eighty-three,"	Sid	replies.
"Oh	dear!"	says	the	priest,	"Go	home	and	say	ten	Hail	Marys."
"I	can't	do	that,"	says	the	old	man,	"I'm	Jewish."
"Then	for	God's	sake,	why	are	you	telling	me	all	this?"	asks	the	priest.
"Oh,	it's	not	just	you,"	replies	Sid,	"I'm	telling	everybody!"
So	just	go	and	tell	everybody!
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	BEEN	AROUND	YOU	FOR	EIGHT	MONTHS	NOW,	YET	I	FEEL	I
RARELY	REALLY	LET	YOU	IN.
WHAT	CAN	I	DO,	OSHO?
Prem	 Arpana,	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	 would	 suggest	 that	 you	 don't	 do
anything.	 It	 is	 your	 effort,	 your	 desire	 that	 is	 preventing	me	 being	within	 you
because	all	desire,	longing,	closes	the	doors.
And	you	are	asking,	"What	can	I	do?"	If	you	can	do	nothing,	that	will	be	the	best
--	you	just	leave	this	idea.	What	are	you	going	to	do	with	me	inside	you?	I	am
perfectly	happy	wherever	I	am!	And	I	can	help	you	from	the	outside	more	easily.
And	 this	 eight	 months,	 you	 say,	 "I	 feel	 I	 rarely	 really	 let	 you	 in."	 It	 means
sometimes,	 not	 really,	 but	 you	 let	 me	 in.	 Why	 are	 you	 engaged	 in	 this
unnecessary	mind	game?	There	is	no	need.	It	happens,	but	it	happens	only	when
you	are	not	waiting	for	it;	 it	happens	only	when	you	are	not	making	any	effort
for	it.
It	 is	one	of	 the	most	difficult	 things	 to	understand,	 that	 there	are	 things	which
happen	not	by	your	doing,	but	by	your	not	doing,	your	sleep	--	if	you	make	an
effort,	then	it	is	impossible.	People	have	been	doing	all	kinds	of	things:	chanting
mantras,	repeating	numbers	from	one	to	a	hundred	and	back,	from	one	hundred...
ninety-nine,	 ninety-eight,	 ninety-seven...	 to	 one.	And	 again,	 going	 up,	 coming
down,	going	up,	coming	down.
In	 fact,	 all	 this	 effort	 keeps	 them	 awake.	But	 these	 are	 the	 suggestions	 of	 so-
called	wise	 people,	who	 are	 all	 around,	 ready	 to	 give	 advice	 like,	 "Repeat	 the
name	of	God."	That	will	keep	you	awake!	The	only	thing	that	can	bring	sleep	is
to	 forget	 all	 about	 it	 --	 do	 something	 else,	 anything	will	 do.	 Just	 lying	 down,
what	is	the	harm?	Have	a	good	rest,	why	be	worried	about	sleep?	And	when	you
are	at	ease,	with	no	worry,	no	chanting,	no	mantra,	no	God	--	you	are	just	resting
--	 you	will	 find	 slowly,	 slowly	 sleep	 is	 coming,	 enveloping	 you.	You	will	 not
know	when	you	have	fallen	asleep.
Do	you	know	exactly	at	what	time	you	enter	from	waking	into	sleep?	You	have
been	 sleeping	every	day	 for	your	whole	 life,	 but	do	you	 remember,	 any	night,
even	a	single	time,	the	exact	moment	when	you	entered	into	sleep?	Even	if	you
look	at	your	watch,	sleep	will	be	gone.	That	much	effort	on	your	part	is	enough
to	disturb	it.	Sleep	comes	only	when	you	have	completely	forgotten	about	it.
And	this	is	a	vicious	circle:	people	who	are	suffering	from	sleeplessness	cannot
forget	it	for	a	single	moment,	and	that	creates	sleeplessness.	And	the	more	they
are	suffering	from	sleeplessness,	the	more	difficult	it	becomes	for	sleep	to	come.
There	are	many	things	in	life	which	need	absolute	relaxation	on	your	part.	They
will	 come	when	 the	 right	moment	 is	 there,	 and	 the	 right	moment	means	when
you	have	forgotten	them	completely.
It	happens	often	that	you	remember	somebody	--	seeing	him,	you	know	him,	you
know	his	name,	it	is	just	on	the	tip	of	your	tongue.	But	why	is	it	not	coming	out?
The	more	you	try...
It	 becomes	a	very	weird	 experience	 --	 you	know,	you	perfectly	know,	you	are
absolutely	certain	 that	you	know	 the	name,	you	know	 the	person.	There	 is	not
the	slightest	doubt	in	you,	but	somehow	it	is	stuck	just	on	the	tongue	--	it	does
not	come	out.	It	becomes	a	very	strange	feeling.
And	then	you	start	doing	something	else.	How	long	can	you	go	on	sitting	with
this	 strange,	 weird	 feeling?	 You	 just	 go	 in	 the	 garden,	 start	 digging	 a	 hole,
planting	 a	 tree,	 or	 pruning	 the	 trees...	 and	 suddenly	 it	 is	 there.	When	 you	 had
forgotten	 completely	 to	 remember	 it,	 it	 suddenly	 comes	 --	 surfaces	 to	 your
consciousness.	But	it	surfaces	only	when	you	have	forgotten	to	remember	it.
These	eight	months	you	must	have	been	trying	hard	to	feel	me	inside	you.	In	the
first	place,	there	was	no	need.	You	have	to	feel	yourself;	that	is	the	basic	thing
that	you	have	not	done.	You	don't	know	your	own	inside	--	how	can	you	feel	me
inside	you?
Just	first	do	the	homework:	feel	yourself,	your	interiority,	your	inner	being.	And
the	moment	 you	 feel	 your	 inner	 being,	 you	will	 be	 so	 overwhelmed	with	 joy,
relaxation,	at	ease,	 that	 there	 is	a	possibility	you	may	feel	me	also	within	you.
You	may	 feel	 stars,	 you	may	 feel	 the	 sun,	 you	may	 feel	 the	 whole	 existence
within	you.	But	first,	feel	your	within.
Let	 me	 say	 it	 this	 way:	 If	 you	 can	 feel	 your	 within,	 the	 without	 also	 comes
within.	 You	 become	 so	 expansive,	 your	 consciousness	 becomes	 so	 vast,	 it
spreads	all	over	existence.
It	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful,	most	blissful	experiences.
And	 I	have	no	objection	 if	you	 feel	me	within	yourself	 --	 from	my	side,	 I	 am
absolutely	willing	to	come	in.	But	you	don't	know	that	 the	doors	of	your	 inner
subjectivity	 are	 closed.	 First,	 get	 settled	 inside.	 Before	 you	 invite	 the	 guest,
please	become	the	host;	otherwise,	what	am	I	going	to	do	in	an	empty	house?	I
am	a	lazy	man.	Unless	you	are	there	to	take	care	of	me,	I	am	not	coming!
Max	Levensky	 is	 dragged	out	 of	 bed	 at	 three	 a.m.	 one	morning	 and	 is	 hauled
before	the	KGB.	He	is	accused	of	being	anti-Soviet	and	is	then	interrogated.
"What	is	the	definition	of	a	communist?"	demands	the	KGB	man.
Max	 replies	 immediately,	 "Someone	 who	 has	 read	 the	 works	 of	 Marx	 and
Lenin."
"And	what,"	continues	the	interrogator,	"is	the	definition	of	an	anti-communist?"
Max	thinks	for	a	moment	and	then	says,	"Someone	who	has	read	the	works	of
Marx	and	Lenin	and	understands	them."
You	 just	 try	 to	 understand	 yourself,	 and	 then	 everybody	will	 be	 coming	 in	 --
Marx	and	Lenin...!	But	the	first	thing	first.	The	only	thing	that	can	be	said	is:	the
basic	need	is	to	know	yourself,	be	yourself,	and	everything	else	will	follow.	The
understanding	of	yourself	opens	the	doors	of	all	the	mysteries	of	existence.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	OFTEN	TELL	US	THAT	WE	SHOULD	NOT	JUDGE	OURSELVES	OR
OTHER
PEOPLE.
I	AM	A	TEACHER	AND	BECAUSE	OF	MY	JOB	I	HAVE	TO	JUDGE	THE
STUDENTS.
NOW	THAT	I	AM	GOING	BACK	TO	ITALY,	I	AM	WORRIED	ABOUT	HOW
I	SHALL	MANAGE	WITH	MY	JOB.	CAN	YOU	GIVE	ME	SOME	HELP?
Kalo	Shreeman,	my	 saying	 that	 you	 should	 not	 judge	 does	 not	mean	 that	 you
cannot	 say	 to	 a	 student,	 because	 you	 are	 a	 teacher,	 "The	 answer	 you	 have
brought	is	not	right."
It	is	not	judging	the	person,	it	is	judging	the	act.	And	I	am	not	telling	you	not	to
judge	the	act	--	that	is	a	totally	different	thing.
For	example,	somebody	is	a	thief	--	you	can	judge	that	stealing	is	not	good.	But
don't	judge	the	person,	because	the	person	is	a	vast	phenomenon	and	the	act	is	a
small	thing.
The	 act	 is	 so	 small	 a	 piece...	 that	 small	 piece	 should	 not	 become	 a	 judgment
about	 the	 whole	 person.	 A	 thief	may	 have	many	 beautiful	 values:	 he	may	 be
truthful,	he	may	be	sincere,	he	may	be	a	very	loving	person.
When	I	say	don't	judge	a	person,	I	am	not	saying	that	you	are	not	allowed	to	say
that	somebody	is	committing	a	mistake.	Somebody	is	falling	into	a	well	--	I	am
not	 saying	 that	 you	 should	 just	 stand	 silently	without	 judging.	This	 judgment,
"Don't	go	that	way"	--
perhaps	 that	man	 is	 blind	 and	you	have	 to	 prevent	 him;	otherwise	he	will	 fall
into	the	well.	But	preventing	him,	seeing	that	he	is	blind,	does	not	mean	that	you
are	condemning	him.	The	moment	you	start	thinking	in	terms	of	condemnation
then	judgment	enters,	and	I	am	against	that	kind	of	judgment.
One	student	is	doing	something	which	is	not	right.	You	are	a	teacher,	your	very
function	 is	 to	 put	 the	 student	 on	 the	 right	 path.	 It	 is	 your	 love,	 it	 is	 not	 your
condemnation;	 it	 is	your	compassion,	not	your	 judgment.	But	most	often	what
happens	 is	 just	 the	 opposite:	 people	 start	 judging	 the	 person	 rather	 than	 the
action.	 Actions	 have	 to	 be	 corrected	 --	 and	 particularly	 in	 a	 profession	 like
teaching,	you	have	to	correct;	you	cannot	allow	students	to	go	on	doing	wrong
things.	That	will	be	very	cruel,	uncompassionate.
I	have	been	a	teacher	myself,	but	I	have	never	judged	a	single	student	as	far	as
his	person,	his	being	is	concerned.	But	that	does	not	mean	I	have	not	corrected
them	 if	 they	 were	 wrong.	 For	 example,	 I	 was	 sitting	 one	 day	 with	 the	 vice-
chancellor.	He	loved	to	talk	with	me	whenever	he	could	get	a	chance	and	could
find	me,	because	I	was	very	rarely	present.
And	most	often	I	avoided	passing	by	his	office	because	he	used	to	tell	his	peon
that	 if	 he	 saw	 me,	 to	 just	 bring	 me	 in.	 He	 loved	 to	 talk;	 he	 enjoyed	 a	 good
argument.
I	 was	 talking	 with	 him,	 and	 a	 girl	 came	 crying.	 So	 he	 said	 to	 me,	 "Just	 a
moment,"	and	he	asked	the	girl,	"What	is	the	matter?	Why	are	you	crying?"	She
said	a	certain	boy,	a	student	 in	her	class	had	been	harassing	her	 for	almost	 the
whole	year.	"He	throws	small	pebbles	at	me	in	the	class,	he	writes	letters	to	me."
And	 the	 vice-chancellor	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 worried,	 I	 will	 call	 him	 and	 put	 him
right;	such	things	cannot	be	allowed.	He	will	be	punished,	you	don't	be	worried.
And	if	he	does	not	stop,	I	will	expel	him	from	the	university."
I	 was	 listening,	 and	 I	 said,	 "Just	 wait	 a	 minute.	 I	 want	 to	 ask	 the	 girl	 a	 few
things."
He	said,	"Of	course,	you	can	ask.	If	you	can	help	in	 the	matter,	 it	will	be	very
good."
I	asked	the	girl,	"Are	you	really	hurt	by	his	throwing	pebbles	at	you	and	writing
love	 letters	 to	you?	Be	honest!	The	day	he	does	not	write	a	 love	 letter	 to	you,
don't	you	wait	for	it?"
The	vice-chancellor	said,	"What	are	you	talking	about?"
I	said,	"You	just	keep	quiet.	When	I	am	talking,	you	just	be	a	gentleman	--	keep
quiet."
The	girl	stopped	crying.	I	said,	"Do	you	understand?	If	no	young	man	harasses
you,	will	you	feel	good?	Don't	you	know	there	are	girls	who	are	not	harassed	by
anybody,	and	they	are	suffering?"
The	vice-chancellor	said,	"What	are	you	saying?"
I	said,	"You	keep	quiet,	I	am	going	to	solve	the	matter	completely.	I	will	talk	to
that	boy	also."
He	said,	"You	need	not	talk,	because	the	way	you	are	talking..."
I	said,	"Now	I	have	taken	the	matter	in	my	hands."	I	asked	the	girl,	"Are	his	love
letters	not	written	well?	Then	I	can	teach	him	how	to	write	love	letters!	Because
every	girl	wants	love	letters	--	I	don't	see	that	there	is	anything	unnatural	in	it."
Now	the	vice-chancellor	was	boiling!	He	said	to	the	girl,	"You	go	away."
I	said,	"She	can	go	only	when	you	answer	a	few	questions	in	front	of	her.	When
you	were	a	student,	just	remember	those	old	days	--	those	beautiful	days.	Have
you	not	written	love	letters	to	girls?"
He	 looked	 at	me,	 he	 looked	 at	 the	 girl,	 and	 he	 said,	 "My	God,	what..."	 For	 a
moment	he	was	silent.
I	said,	"Be	honest!"
He	said,	"Yes	I	have	written..."
I	 said,	 "And	 just	 a	 moment	 before,	 you	 were	 expelling	 that	 boy	 from	 the
university	and	you	had	forgotten	completely."
Every	young	man	will	write	letters,	and	if	somebody	does	not	write,	the	function
of	the	teacher	is	to	help	him:	"Are	you	a	dodo	or	what?"
As	far	as	my	classroom	is	concerned,	from	the	very	first	day	I	entered	after	the
long	summer	vacations,	my	first	thing	was...	because	in	India	the	girls	sit	on	one
side,	boys	sit	on	another	side,	and	in	between	there	is	a	big	space.	My	first	thing
was,	"Just	get	mixed."
They	would	look	very	embarrassed....
I	said,	"Just	get	up,	and	you	can	choose	whomsoever	you	want,	but	get	mixed!	I
cannot	 tolerate	 this	 stupidity	 because	 this	 is	 the	 cause	 --	 you	 have	 to	 throw
stones,	you	have	to	write	letters...	What	is	the	need?	Just	sit	next	to	each	other,
and	if	you	want	to	say	something,	whisper.	Whisper	--	I	can	stop;	I	can	give	you
time.	For	fifteen	minutes	you	do	whatsoever	you	want	to	do.	I	will	keep	my	eyes
closed	 and	 meditate,	 so	 that	 after	 fifteen	 minutes	 we	 can	 concentrate	 on	 the
subject	matter.	This	is	more	primary."
Students	were	very	much	afraid	of	me.	With	hesitation	they	would	mix	up;	still
they	would	sit	so	that	they	would	not	touch	each	other.	I	said,	"What	nonsense	--
do	you	think	each	other	untouchable?	Sit	relaxed.	And	if	you	want	to	nudge	the
girl,	or	the	girl	wants	to	nudge	you,	it	is	perfectly	okay;	nature	demands	it.	And
because	you	are	prevented,	then	you	start	ugly	behavior.	Now,	taking	the	air	out
of	 the	 girls'	 bicycles	 --	 that	 I	 don't	 think	 is	 natural!	 That	 is	 sheer	 stupidity.
Harassing	them	on	the	road,	saying	ugly	dirty	words	--	I	don't	think	that	is	right,
nor	is	it	worthy	of	you.
"If	you	want	 to	 say	 something,	write	a	beautiful	 love	 letter.	 If	you	don't	know
how	to	write,	I	am	here	--	I	am	available.	Anybody,	male	or	female,	can	come	to
the	common	room	where	I	sit.	I	will	teach	you	how	to	write	love	letters."
My	 class	was	 the	most	 silent	 class,	 and	 I	 told	 the	 vice-chancellor,	 "Sometime
you	can	come	and	you	can	see	--	nobody	is	doing	anything	to	anybody	because
they	are	allowed;	I	accept	it	as	my	responsibility	that	they	should	be	allowed	to
be	as	natural	as	possible.
Every	girl	should	feel	that	she	is	loved,	desired,	that	there	are	people	who	look	at
her	with	 loving	eyes.	Every	boy	wants	 to	be	 loved.	And	 this	 is	 the	 time	when
they	should	pass	through	these	experiences."
I	said	to	the	girl,	"What	do	you	want?	Tell	me	exactly.	Do	you	want	the	boy	to	be
expelled?"
She	said,	"No."
"Do	you	want	him	not	to	write	letters	to	you?"
She	said,	"No."	The	vice-chancellor	said,	"Then	why	have	you	come	here?"
I	said,	"It	is	very	simple	--	she	simply	wants	your	attention.	She	wants	to	say	to
the	world	that	she	is	being	loved,	somebody	is	writing	love	letters,	and	without
telling	others	there	is	no	joy	in	the	thing.	The	whole	world	should	know	that	she
is	no	ordinary	girl	--
exceptionally	beautiful	--	people	are	throwing	stones."
The	 vice-chancellor	 said	 to	 the	 girl,	 "Now	 you	 go,	 because	 listening	 to	 such
things...	he	can	even	spoil	me.	You	just	leave	the	room,	and	if	you	don't	want	to
do	anything	against	that	boy,	never	come	again."	And	when	the	girl	had	gone,	he
said,	"You	should	not	do	such	a	thing,	because	if	people	come	to	know..."
I	 said,	 "In	 fact,	 you	 are	 afraid	 of	 your	wife,	 it	 is	 not	 about	 people.	And	 I	 am
going	to	tell	your	wife	that	this	old	man	is	teaching...	in	front	of	me,	he	has	been
teaching	that	love	letters	are	natural."
He	said,	"You	were	saying	natural!"
I	said,	"You	were	listening	silently!	Do	you	agree	with	me	or	not?"
He	said,	"I	agree,	but	don't	go	to	my	wife	--	that	is	the	only	woman	I	am	afraid
of."
I	said,	"Then	you	have	to	behave."
Just	don't	judge	so	quickly,	and	don't	judge	the	person.	Judge	actions,	and	correct
them,	and	don't	correct	them	according	to	tradition,	convention,	according	to	so-
called	 morality,	 according	 to	 your	 prejudices.	 Whenever	 you	 are	 correcting
somebody,	be	very	meditative,	be	very	silent;	 look	at	 the	whole	 thing	 from	all
perspectives.	Perhaps	they	are	doing	the	right	thing,	and	your	prevention	will	not
be	right	at	all.
So	when	I	say,	"Don't	judge,"	I	simply	mean	that	no	action	gives	you	the	right	to
condemn	the	person.	If	the	action	is	not	right,	help	the	person	--	find	out	why	the
action	is	not	right,	but	there	is	no	question	of	judgment.	Don't	take	the	person's
dignity,	 don't	 humiliate	 him,	 don't	make	 him	 feel	 guilty	 --	 that's	 what	 I	mean
when	I	say,	"Don't	judge."
But	as	far	as	correcting	is	concerned:	unprejudiced,	silently,	in	your	awareness,	if
you	see	that	something	is	wrong	and	will	destroy	that	person's	intelligence,	will
take	him	on	the	wrong	paths	in	his	life,	help	him.
The	job	of	the	teacher	is	not	just	to	teach	futile	things	--	geography,	and	history,
and	all	kinds	of	nonsense.	His	basic	function	is	to	bring	the	students	to	a	better
consciousness,	 to	 a	 higher	 consciousness.	 This	 should	 be	 your	 love	 and	 your
compassion,	and	this	should	be	the	only	value	on	which	you	judge	any	action	as
right	or	wrong.
But	never	for	a	single	moment	let	the	person	feel	that	he	has	been	condemned.
On	the	contrary,	let	him	feel	that	he	has	been	loved	--	it	is	out	of	love	that	you
have	tried	to	correct	him.
Conrad	was	six	years	old.	Although	he	was	six,	he	had	never	spoken	a	word.	His
parents	 took	 him	 to	 the	 psychiatrist,	 but	 it	 didn't	 help.	But	 one	 evening	 at	 the
dinner	table,	Conrad	looked	down	at	his	plate	of	food	and	said,	"Take	away	this
muck,	it	tastes	terrible!"
His	 parents	 were	 elated	 and	 wept	 with	 joy.	 "You	 can	 talk!"	 cried	 his	 mother.
"How	come	you've	never	spoken	before	this?"
"Up	to	now,"	said	Conrad,	"everything	has	been	fine!"
Don't	judge	people	--	try	to	understand	them.	Now	he	is	saying	such	a	beautiful
thing:
"What	is	the	need	to	speak	when	everything	is	going	fine?	Only	for	the	first	time
something	is	terrible!"
A	guy	 lying	 in	a	hospital	bed,	coming	around	 from	an	anesthetic,	wakes	up	 to
find	the	doctor	sitting	beside	him.	"I	have	got	bad	news	and	good	news	for	you,"
says	the	doctor.
"Would	you	like	the	bad	or	good	first?"
"Aaagh,"	groans	the	guy,	"tell	me	the	bad."
"Well,"	says	the	doctor,	"we	had	to	amputate	both	your	legs	above	the	knee."
"Aaagh,"	groans	the	guy,	"that's	really	bad."
After	recovering	from	the	shock,	he	asks	the	doctor	for	the	good	news.
"Well,"	 said	 the	 doctor,	 "the	 man	 in	 the	 next	 bed	 would	 like	 to	 buy	 your
slippers!"
Just	 don't	 be	 serious!	Don't	 think	 that	 you	 are	 a	 teacher	 so	 you	 are	 in	 a	 very
serious	job.
Look	at	 life	with	more	playful	eyes...	 it	 is	 really	hilarious!	There	 is	nothing	 to
judge	--
everybody	 is	 doing	 his	 best.	 If	 you	 feel	 disturbed	 by	 somebody,	 it	 is	 your
problem,	not	his.	First	correct	yourself.
I	have	my	own	way	of	looking	at	things....	I	was	a	teacher	for	nine	years,	and	I
never	judged	a	single	student.	I	have	never	examined	a	single	examination	paper,
because	I	told	the	vice-chancellor,	"If	I	really	examine,	nobody	is	going	to	pass.
And	if	I	am	going	to	pass	a	few	people,	why	should	the	others	not	be	passed?	So
things	 are	 clear	 --	 you	 can	decide	 --	 either	 I	 can	 pass	 everybody,	 or	 I	 can	 fail
everybody."
He	said,	"You	always	bring	strange	ideas!	I	have	been	a	teacher	my	whole	life;
this	idea	never	happened	to	me."
I	said,	"This	is	exactly	what	I	am	going	to	do,	so	you	can	decide."
He	said,	"It	is	better	you	don't	take	any	examination	papers.	I	will	inform	the	in-
charge	that	you	should	not	be	given	any	papers	to	examine."
I	 said,	 "That's	 perfectly	 right,	 because	 that	 saves	 me	 the	 trouble	 of	 judging
people	unnecessarily."
Only	once	 they	 appointed	me	 as	 a	 superintendent	 of	 the	whole	 examination.	 I
said,	"You	are	doing	something	wrong	--	you	don't	understand	me."	That	was	my
first	 encounter	with	 the	new	vice-chancellor.	 I	 said,	 "You	don't	 know	me.	The
old	man	knew	me;	he	never	committed	any	mistake	like	this."
He	said,	"What	are	you	saying?	Is	it	a	mistake?"
I	said,	"It	is	a	mistake	because	you	don't	know	me.	But	give	it	a	try!"
So	he	said,	"Okay."
He	 came	 two	 or	 three	 times	 to	 see	 what	 was	 happening,	 and	 he	 was	 feeling
terrible	when	he	heard	me	telling	the	students,	"Listen,	if	you	have	brought	notes
hiding	in	your	pockets,	I	have	no	objection.	Just	don't	be	caught.	Do	it	cleverly,
watchfully,	because	it	is	not	a	sin	--	but	you	should	not	be	caught.	To	be	caught
is	the	crime."
The	vice-chancellor	was	standing	there,	listening.	And	I	said	to	them,	"I	will	try
my	best	to	catch	you.	So	you	decide.	I	give	you	two	minutes	--	if	you	are	afraid
of	being	caught,	just	bring	everything	that	you	are	hiding	and	put	it	on	the	table,
and	 I	will	not	 say	anything	 to	you.	But	after	 that,	 if	you	are	caught,	 then	your
whole	year	is	spoiled."
Immediately,	students	started	bringing	their	notes	--	one	boy	had	written	answers
on	his	shirt,	inside.	So	he	said,	"What	am	I	supposed	to	do?	I	have	no	notes	but	I
have	written	many	things	on	my	shirt,	inside	--	should	I	give	the	shirt?"
I	said,	"You	have	to	give	it."
The	vice-chancellor	was	standing	there.	He	said,	"What	is	going	on?"
I	said,	"You	keep	quiet.	I	told	you	beforehand,	if	I	am	the	superintendent	things
will	be	going	according	to	me."
I	told	the	boy,	"You	take	your	shirt	off,	put	it	here."
He	said,	"But	it	is	too	cold."
I	said,	"That's	not	my	problem	--	why	have	you...."
So	he	had	to	take	off	his	shirt.	And	the	vice-chancellor	said,	"This	is	too	much."
I	 said,	 "I	 cannot	 help...."	 And	 nobody	 was	 doing	 anything	 --	 they	 had	 even
brought	books,	whole	books.	They	were	hiding	 them	behind	their	coats,	shirts,
pants,	everything	came	out!
And	I	said	to	them,	"Now	you	can	start	answering	your	questions.	And	don't	be
worried,	if	you	cannot	answer	something,	I	am	here;	I	am	here	to	help	you.	You
can	just	raise	your	hand	and	I	will	come	and	try	to	help	you."
Nobody	raised	his	hand.	I	said,	"What	is	the	matter?"	They	were	afraid,	because
this	has	never	happened	--	a	superintendent	telling	them,	"I	will	help	you."	I	said,
"This	is	just	human.	You	are	in	difficulty,	and	I	am	sitting	here	doing	nothing...."
That	 was	 the	 first	 and	 the	 last	 time....	 The	 vice-chancellor	 said,	 "You	 are	 a
strange	person.
That	 boy	 is	 shivering	 --	 how	 can	 he	 write?"	 It	 was	 a	 cold	 morning...	 the
examinations	used	to	be	early	in	the	morning,	seven	o'clock....	Somebody's	pants
had	been	taken,	because	people	used	to	write	on	their	pants	--	people	do	all	kinds
of	things.
They	had	their	ways,	and	I	knew.	I	have	also	been	a	student,	and	I	knew	all	kinds
of	 things.	That	was	very	easy,	 to	write	on	your	pants	--	nobody	will	be	able	 to
see.	But	I	told	them,	"It	doesn't	matter,	even	if	you	have	to	sit	naked...	sit	naked!
Next	time	you	will	not	do	such	a	thing.	But	I	am	not	uncompassionate	to	you;	if
you	are	in	need	of	some	answer	that	you	cannot	find,	I	will	give	it	to	you;	you
just	 have	 to	 raise	 your	 hand.	 Because	 according	 to	 me,	 all	 examinations	 are
absolutely	absurd."
If	 it	were	up	to	me,	I	would	allow	the	students	to	have	all	 the	books	available.
Only	a	very	intelligent	student	can	find	out	the	answers	from	the	books	in	three
hours.	And	you	will	be	able	to	judge	their	intelligence	in	a	better	way;	otherwise
somebody	 has	 just	 crammed	 five	 answers,	 and	 he	 knows	 nothing	 else,	 and	 he
comes	first	 in	the	class.	And	somebody	else	knows	everything,	 just	has	missed
those	five	questions,	and	he	is	a	failure.
This	is	not	a	good	examination;	they	should	be	allowed	to	have	the	whole	library
available	to	them.	They	can	go	to	the	library,	they	can	find	the	answer,	they	can
write	it.
In	 three	 hours,	 they	 have	 to	 find	 as	 beautiful	 answers	 as	 possible.	 And	 only
intelligent	students	will	be	able	to	find	them.
In	the	Soviet	Union	they	have	changed	this	old	idea	of	examinations.	Now	books
are	 available	 --	 all	 the	 books	 concerned	 are	 available	 in	 the	 hall	 where	 the
students	are	given	their	examination;	they	can	consult	any	book.	It	is	far	better,
because	 the	ultimate	concern	 is	 to	know	 the	 intelligence	of	 the	person,	not	his
memory.	 So	 students	 need	 not	 memorize	 anything	 --	 they	 have	 to	 understand
things.	In	examination	time	they	can	either	just	from	their	 intelligence	give	the
answer,	or	 they	can	 look	 in	 the	books.	But	 if	 in	a	 five	hundred	page	book	you
have	 to	 find	 one	 answer,	 you	 need	 some	 intelligence	 --	mediocres	will	 not	 be
able	to	find	the	answer,	they	will	become	so	nervous...
And	there	 is	no	need	 that	a	person	should	have	 to	wait	 for	one	year.	 I	 told	 the
vice-chancellor,	"If	I	am	going	to	be	the	superintendent	I	will	follow	my	ideas,	I
don't	 care	 what	 is	 conventional.	 The	 conventional	 is	 not	 necessarily	 the	 right
thing.	 I	 will	 give	 them	 all	 the	 available	material;	 they	 can	 find	 out.	 Only	 the
intelligent	 people	 will	 be	 able	 to	 find	 out.	 And	 those	 who	 have	 not	 been
successful	should	be	given	a	chance	again	after	one	month.	What	is	the	problem
that	they	should	wait	for	one	year?"
Finally,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 of	 any	 examinations	 if	 every	 teacher	 goes	 on	 giving
marks	in	his	diary	every	day	to	the	students.	And	every	year,	all	the	notes	from
all	the	teachers	are	collected.	And	based	on	those	counts	the	students	are	moved,
either	upward	or	downward.	Because	there	are	many	who	deserve	to	go	back	--
they	 have	 somehow	 slipped,	 they	 should	 not	 be	 allowed...	 they	 should	 be	 put
back;	they	should	earn	better	marks	and	go	ahead	again.
And	this	should	remain	available:	if	a	teacher	finds	that	an	intelligent	student	has
unnecessarily	 to	wait	 six	months	more	 for	 examination,	he	 should	 recommend
that	 the	 student	 be	moved	 right	 now	 to	 a	 higher	 class,	 because	he	has	 enough
intelligence.	There	is	no	need	for	him	to	wait	six	months	more.	Teachers	should
be	 the	decisive	factors.	 In	 that	situation,	nobody	fails,	nobody	passes	 --	people
simply	 move.	 A	 few	 move	 faster,	 a	 few	 move	 a	 little	 slower;	 everybody
according	 to	his	pace.	Nobody	is	condemned	as	a	failure,	nobody	is	praised	as
first-class,	 nobody	 is	 praised	 as	 a	 gold	medalist.	All	 these	 things	 teach	 people
unnecessary	ambition,	and	ambition	is	poison.
You	are	a	 teacher;	you	should	try	 in	every	way	to	change	the	very	structure	of
teaching,	 particularly	 your	 teaching.	 And	 slowly,	 slowly	 things	 move.	 You
should	 tell	 other	 teachers,	 "There	 are	 many	 things	 wrong	 with	 the	 education
system	 itself,	which	 nobody	 bothers	 about.	And	 you	 are	 judging	 students;	 the
first	 thing	 should	be	a	 right	 system	of	education."	The	whole	 system	 is	 rotten,
old,	out	of	date;	it	has	to	be	completely	changed.
So	 I	am	not	 saying	don't	 judge.	Particularly	 systems,	conventions,	 traditions	 --
judge	them!	But	don't	judge	individuals.	If	their	actions	are	wrong,	help	them	to
get	free	of	those	wrong	actions.	If	they	are	going	in	wrong	directions,	help	them
to	find	right	paths.
And	this	should	be	your	love,	this	should	not	be	your	judgment.
"Young	man,"	said	the	judge,	looking	sternly	at	the	defendant,	"it	is	alcohol,	and
alcohol	alone,	that	is	responsible	for	your	present	sorry	state."
"I	am	glad	to	hear	you	say	that,"	replied	Paddy,	with	a	sigh	of	relief.	"Everybody
else	says	it	is	all	my	fault!"
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	You	have	your	problem	--	I'm	going	home
3	September	1987	am	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709030
ShortTitle:
INVITA26
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
133
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 HARMONY	 I	 FEEL	 WITH	 YOU,	 THE	 VISION	 OF	 LOVE	 AND
FLOWERING,	 TREMBLES	 WITHIN	 ME.	 I	 FEEL	 A	 GIVING	 OF
EVERYTHING	TO	THIS
WONDERFUL	 GIFT	 OF	 LIFE.	 SOMETHING	 IS	 HAPPENING	 THROUGH
ME	OR
WITH	ME	OR	IN	SPITE	OF	ME	--	AND	I	KNOW	THIS	IS	HOME.
BELOVED	MASTER,	BELOVED	MYSTERY,	WHO	AM	I?
The	mystery	of	life	always	happens	in	spite	of	you.	In	the	beginning	there	is	no
other	alternative	possible.	Only	in	 the	end	does	it	start	happening	through	you.
But	 it	 can	 happen	 through	 you	 only	 when	 you	 are	 not.	 Then	 you	 become	 a
hollow	bamboo	which	can	be	turned	into	a	flute	and	the	song	can	pass	through	it.
In	the	beginning	you	are	--	you	are	too	much.
So	when	 the	 first	 experience	 of	mystery	 starts	 happening	 it	 is	 in	 spite	 of	 you.
And	it	is	good	to	understand	that	life	is	far	bigger	than	you	can	conceive	and	its
power	 is	 immense	 beyond	 our	 any	 conception;	 just	 we	 are	 waiting	 patiently,
searching	patiently,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	we	don't	know	the	way,	knowing
perfectly	well	 that	we	have	lost	our	original	eternal	home	--	knowing	perfectly
well	that	we	are	unconscious.	All	our	efforts,	our	search,	our	seeking	is	groping
in	the	dark.
It	 is	 good	 to	 remember	 our	 situation.	Do	your	 best.	 In	 spite	 of	 your	 darkness,
blindness,	 unconsciousness,	whatever	 you	 can	 do,	 do.	But	 remember,	 it	 is	 not
going	 to	 happen	 through	 your	 doing.	 It	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 because	 you	 are
longing	for	it	so	deeply	that	existence	cannot	resist,	cannot	remain	indifferent	to
you.
So	although	you	are	not	prepared,	nobody	is	prepared.	Nobody	knows	the	way,
nobody	knows	where	 the	home	 is,	 nobody	knows	 in	which	direction	 to	move,
what	discipline	to	follow.
But	there	are	two	kinds	of	people:	those	who	are	not	aware	of	their	situation	of
darkness	and	blindness,	and	those	who	think	that	they	are	not	blind,	that	they	are
not	in	darkness;	that	they	know	the	way,	that	they	know	where	they	have	to	go,
that	they	know	what	they	have	to	do.
These	are	the	people	to	whom	existence	cannot	happen;	they	are	too	much.	And
all	 that	 they	 know	 is	 absolutely	 false,	 they	 have	 not	 experienced	 it.	 But	 their
falsity	is	so	much	identified	with	their	being,	it	is	their	ego	which	says,	"You	are
not	blind.	There	 is	no	darkness	and	all	 that	 is	needed	you	know	 it	 through	 the
scriptures,	through	the	old	masters,	through	reading,	learning,	studying."	But	all
that	is	borrowed;	it	is	not	going	to	help.
No	 two	persons	 reach	 the	end	on	 the	 same	 route.	Hence	Gautam	Buddha	may
have	reached	through	a	certain	path	and	Chuang	Tzu	may	have	reached	through
another	path,	but	their	paths	are	no	longer	useful	for	you.	In	fact,	it	is	impossible
to	find	their	paths	either.	Their	paths	disappear	just	as	the	birds	flying	in	the	sky
don't	leave	any	footmarks.
So	you	cannot	find	out	from	where	the	world	has	reached	to	the	heights,	and	you
cannot	follow	because	there	are	no	footprints.	All	there	is,	is	what	is	written	in
your	scriptures...
and	you	try.	The	Buddhist	tries	the	way	Buddha	may	have	followed.	In	the	first
place	there	is	no	way	to	find	what	way	he	has	followed,	because	the	way	is	inner
and	 nobody	 is	 capable	 of	 giving	 an	 expression	 to	 it.	 So	 what	 is	 written	 is	 a
faraway	echo	in	the	minds	of	the	disciples.
It	is	a	strange	story	to	remember	that	the	man	who	remembered	the	most	of	what
Buddha	 has	 said	 in	 forty-two	 years...	 And	 Buddha	 continuously	 resisted	 their
efforts	to	write	it	down	because	he	did	not	want	to	leave	any	scripture	behind	nor
did	he	want	to	leave	any	statue	of	himself.	He	wanted	to	disappear	just	as	if	he
has	 not	 come.	 One	 of	 his	 names	 is	 Tathagata.	 It	 has	 two	meanings;	 both	 are
significant.	One	is:	the	man	who	taught	the	philosophy	of	suchness.	The	other	is
more	literal	but	has	a	tremendous	significance.
Literally	 the	 word	 `tathagata'	 means	 just	 came,	 just	 gone,	 leaving	 no	 mark
behind,	just	like	a	breeze	comes	you	feel	it	and	the	coolness	of	it,	and	it	is	gone.
Neither	do	you	know	from	where	it	comes	nor	you	know	where	it	goes.
So	for	his	whole	life	Buddha	did	not	allow	his	statements	to	be	compiled.	And	in
the	end	he	said	to	them,	"No	statue,	no	memorial	should	be	made	of	me	because
I	want	 to	 disappear	 as	 if	 I	 had	 never	 been.	Because	whatsoever	 is	 left	 behind
becomes	the	hindrance	for	people;	it	does	not	help	them."
There	is	a	great	insight,	very	profound	--	and	such	egolessness,	such	simplicity,
such	 humbleness	 that	 he	 wants	 to	 disappear	 silently	 without	 any	 footprints,
because	nobody	can	follow	anybody	else.	Nobody	can	become	wise	by	reading
and	studying	scriptures.
So	that	greater	part	of	humanity	which	believes	that	they	know,	they	are	the	ones
to	whom	the	mystery	is	not	going	to	happen.	But	if	you	are	searching,	knowing
perfectly	well	that	you	know	nothing	--	you	don't	even	know	that	your	ignorance
is	absolute;	it	is	not	that	a	little	bit	you	know	and	a	little	bit	you	don't	know	--	in
this	 humbleness,	 in	 this	 acceptance	 that	 I	 don't	 know,	 the	 mysteries	 start
happening.	They	happen	in	spite	of	you.
You	cannot	manage	--	they	are	not	manageable,	they	are	not	under	your	control	-
-	but	once	they	start	happening	they	make	their	way	through	you.
Slowly,	slowly	the	ice	of	your	ego	melts	and	a	passage	is	made.	Existence	starts
singing	 its	songs,	sending	 its	music,	giving	you	directions;	helping	you	 to	 find
the	doors	of	all	that	is	mysterious	and	is	not	available	to	the	mind	but	only	to	the
man	of	heart,	to	the	man	of	humbleness	--	to	the	man	who	is	perfectly	aware	that
he	knows	nothing.
And	it	is	good	that	you	ask,	"Beloved	Master,	beloved	mystery,	who	am	I?"
You	are	Swami	Satyadharma.	This	much	you	should	remember;	otherwise	in	the
ordinary	life	you	will	get	lost.	Once	you	forget	that	you	are	Swami	Satyadharma
then	you	don't	know	where	you	are	going	and	what	you	are	doing.
I	have	told	you	two	small	stories...
One	 is	 about	George	Bernard	Shaw.	He	 is	 traveling	 in	a	 train	 from	London	 to
some	place	and	the	ticket	checker	comes.	Bernard	Shaw	looks	into	everything,
opens	 this	 suitcase,	 that	 suitcase,	 all	 the	pockets,	 and	 the	 ticket	 is	missing.	He
starts	perspiring	and	looks	very	much	afraid	and	concerned.
The	ticket	checker	says,	"I	know	you;	everybody	knows	you.	The	ticket	must	be
somewhere;	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 You	 will	 find	 it.	 Don't	 get	 so	 nervous	 and
excited	in	your	old	age"	--	he	was	ninety.
The	ticket	checker	said,	"I	will	not	disturb	you,	I	am	going.	You	just	relax."
George	Bernard	Shaw	said,	"You	don't	understand.	It	 is	not	 the	question	of	the
ticket.
Who	is	bothering	about	the	ticket?	The	question	is	where	am	I	going?	Can	you
tell	me	where	I	am	going?	Without	the	ticket...	now	I	have	got	into	a	tangle.	I	am
not	searching	for	the	ticket	for	you	--	I	don't	care	about	you	or	anybody.	But	the
problem	is:	Where	am	I	going?"
The	ticket	checker	said,	"My	God,	that	is	impossible	for	me	to	figure	out	where
you	 are	 going.	 Now	 I	 can	 understand	 why	 you	 are	 feeling	 so	 nervous.	 Your
hands	are	trembling."
The	second	anecdote	is	about	Mulla	Nasruddin	in	the	same	situation	as	George
Bernard	 Shaw.	 The	 ticket	 checker	 is	 asking	 for	 the	 ticket	 and	 he	 is	 looking
everywhere.	Other	passengers	are	puzzled	that	he	looks	into	every	pocket	but	he
leaves	one	pocket.	He	does	not	touch	that	one.
Finally,	the	ticket	checker	said,	"You	have	looked	everywhere	but	you	don't	look
into	this	pocket."
He	said,	"Don't	talk	about	that	pocket.	That's	my	only	hope	and	I	don't	want	to
destroy	 that	 hope.	 If	 it	 is	 not	 there	 I'm	 finished.	Then	 it	 is	 nowhere	 else.	So	 I
cannot	open	that	way.	I	will	look	everywhere	possible..."
He	 had	 thrown	 all	 the	 clothes	 and	 everything	 out	 of	 the	 suitcases.	 The	 ticket
checker	was	at	a	 loss,	 the	passengers	were	at	a	 loss.	But	Mulla	was	absolutely
reluctant,	 "Whatever	happens,	 I	am	not	going	 to	 touch	 that	pocket.	That	 I	will
leave	because	at	least	there	is	a	hope	that	perhaps	the	ticket	is	there.	If	the	ticket
is	not	there	then	I	am	completely	finished."
The	problem	is	the	same:	I	don't	know	where	I	am	going.	So	as	far	as	the	world
is	 concerned,	 you	 are	 Swami	 Satyadharma	 --	 and	 there	 are	 two	 Swami
Satyadharmas	here.
Remember,	you	are	not	the	other	one.	To	make	it	clear,	the	other	one	is	German;
so	don't	get	mixed.
Just	as	you	call	me	Beloved	Master,	beloved	mystery,	I	call	you	beloved	disciple,
beloved	 mystery.	 Behind	 Swami	 Satyadharma	 everything	 is	 a	 mystery.
Satyadharma	is	just	a	facade	for	the	outside	world,	just	a	utilitarian	identity;	it	is
not	your	reality;	but	behind	it	is	a	mysterious	being.	You	are	becoming	aware	of
gifts	of	existence,	of	mysteries.	Something	is	happening	through	it;	just	allow	it.
Your	 function	 is	 not	 to	 prevent,	 not	 to	 be	 reluctant.	 Join	 your	 hands	 with
whatever	is	happening.	That's	what	I	mean	by	let-go.
Let	existence	cleanse	you.
Allow	it	total	power	over	you.
Don't	 be	 worried	 that	 you	 will	 be	 destroyed,	 because	 you	 will	 be	 destroyed.
There	is	no	need	to	worry;	it	is	absolutely	certain.	When	things	are	certain	there
is	no	worry.	It	is	only	the	uncertainty	that	creates	worries.
You	 will	 be	 destroyed....	 That	 which	 will	 remain	 undestroyed	 in	 you	 is	 your
authentic	 self.	 That	 which	 is	 destroyed	 is	 your	 personality,	 your	 false	 self;	 it
needs	to	be	destroyed.
You	can	use	 that	destroyed	part	 in	 the	world	because	 they	won't	 understand	 if
you	say	that	you	are	a	mystery.	Even	your	family,	your	wife,	your	children,	your
parents	will	think	you	have	gone	mad	if	you	say,	"I	am	a	mystery."	Nobody	is	a
mystery	and	only	you	are	a	mystery?	--	where	did	you	lose	yourself?
So	as	far	as	 the	outside	world	is	concerned	you	are	Swami	Satyadharma	--	not
the	 other	 one;	 that	 you	 have	 to	 remember!	 This	 is	 a	 problem	 for	 sannyasins
because	 they	have	 the	 same	names,	many.	You	can	get	 lost	 and	 start	 thinking,
Who	am	I?	And	naturally,	you	are	a	mystery,	but	a	German	mystery	or	an	Italian
mystery...	this	much	you	should	remember:	that	you	are	not	a	German	mystery.
For	the	outside	world,	completely	keep	your	old	false	identity,	your	name,	your
profession,	 your	 qualifications.	 But	 inside	 you	 will	 know	 that	 it	 is	 only
utilitarian,	not	real,	useful;	useful	in	the	society,	but	when	you	are	alone	you	are
not	Swami	Satyadharma	and	you	are	not	Italian	or	German	or	English.
You	are	not	even	your	body.
You	are	not	your	mind.
You	are	just	the	pure	mystery	behind.
Now	there	is	no	way	to	describe	it,	you	will	have	to	experience	it,	and	you	are
moving	rightly	towards	that	experience.	Just	don't	in	any	way	knowingly	out	of
fear	hinder	the	process.	There	is	no	fear:	only	the	false	will	die	and	the	real	will
remain	always	and	always.	That	is	the	definition	of	the	real:	That	which	remains.
The	false	is	just	useful.	In	the	crowd	of	the	world	you	need	a	name.	The	reality	is
nobody	has	a	name,	but	it	will	be	a	very	difficult	world	if	everybody	drops	the
name	because	it	is	false.	Then	you	won't	have	any	address.	The	postman	cannot
find	 you	 anywhere	 because	 everybody	 is	 a	 mystery!	 You	 will	 create	 troubles
because	you	are	not	 the	husband	and	you	are	not	 the	wife	and	you	are	not	 the
father	 and	 you	 are	 not	 the	 child	 --	 everything	 outside	 will	 be	 disturbed,	 will
become	a	chaos.
Outside	keep	everything	as	it	is.
Inside	don't	be	identified	with	it.
This	 is	 the	 whole	 secret	 of	 finding	 yourself	 without	 being	 condemned	 by	 the
society	as	mad.
A	 traveling	 salesman	was	 just	 on	 the	 point	 of	 checking	 into	 a	 hotel	 when	 he
caught	sight	of	a	stunning	young	woman	who	was	without	doubt	giving	him	the
full	 come-on	 treatment.	He	 strolled	 over	 to	 her	 and	 nonchalantly	 exchanged	 a
few	words	with	her,	behaving	as	though	he	had	known	her	all	his	life.	Then	they
both	walked	to	the	reception	desk	and	booked	in	as	man	and	wife.	After	a	one-
night	stay,	the	salesman	went	to	collect	his	bill	and	check	out.	He	was	appalled
to	be	presented	with	a	bill	for	one	thousand	pounds.
"Look	here,	 this	 is	out	of	 the	question.	 I	have	only	been	here	 for	one	day,"	he
cried.
"Yes	sir,"	replied	the	receptionist,	"but	your	wife	has	been	here	a	month."
So	 don't	 get	 into	 such	 trouble.	 On	 the	 outside	 remain	 exactly	 what	 you	 are,
Swami	Satyadharma.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 ADVISE	 WATCHING	 PATIENTLY	 THE	 UNTANGLING	 OF	 THE
GORDIAN
KNOT	THAT	TIES	ME	TO	THE	PAST.	SOME	PART	OF	ME	IS	HAPPY	TO
DO
THAT;	ANOTHER	PART	WANTS	YOU	TO	SLASH	THE	KNOT	ASUNDER.
IS
THIS	LAZINESS	OR	MASOCHISM	OR	A	MIND	TRIP?
It	is	not	masochism,	Prem	Rajiva,	nor	is	it	a	mind	trip.	You	are	sincerely	wanting
to	get	out	of	the	entanglement.	You	want	to	be	free	of	all	entanglement;	you	want
to	come	out	of	the	prison.	What	you	are	calling	the	Gordian	knot,	you	want	it	to
be	slashed.
It	 is	a	sincere	and	authentic	desire,	but	 the	 trouble	arises	because	 this	desire	 is
also	from	the	mind.	So	one	part	of	the	mind	is	ready	to	cut	the	Gordian	knot	and
another	part	of	the	mind	is	always	against.	It	is	not	a	special	question	about	the
Gordian	knot	that	divides	you.
Mind's	functioning	is	through	duality.	The	right	word	used	for	that	is	`dialectics'.
Karl	 Marx	 has	 used	 that	 word	 as	 a	 foundation	 of	 communism.	 He	 calls	 his
philosophy	 dialectical	 materialism.	 He	 says	 the	 society	 evolves	 through
dialectics,	 and	 by	 dialectics	 he	 means	 it	 will	 be	 helpful	 to	 you	 for	 your
development	--	and	what	he	says	has	some	truth	in	it.
The	meaning	of	 dialectics	 is	 that	 one	part	 functions	 as	 the	 thesis,	 another	 part
functions	as	the	antithesis	and	out	of	the	conflict	of	the	two	comes	the	third	part,
a	synthesis.
Synthesis	 on	 its	 own	 accord	 becomes	 again	 thesis	 and	 creates	 antithesis,	 and
their	conflict	brings	a	new	synthesis.	This	is	how	step	by	step	evolution	happens.
And	he	is	right,	although	he	used	his	philosophy	to	support	a	political	ideology.
That	is	fictitious,	but	the	idea	of	dialectics	in	itself	is	absolutely	correct.
He	says	 that	 the	proletariat,	 the	poor	are	 the	 thesis,	and	the	rich,	 the	capitalists
are	the	antithesis.	Now	there	is	going	to	be	a	class	struggle,	a	revolution,	a	fight
between	thesis	and	antithesis	that	will	create	the	dictatorship	of	the	proletariat	as
the	 synthesis.	 On	 its	 own	 then	 it	 will	 become	 the	 thesis	 and	 it	 will	 create	 its
antithesis	 as	democracy	of	 the	proletariat.	And	out	of	 the	conflict	between	 the
two	will	arise	another	synthesis.
Every	man's	capacity	to	think	is	limited.	That	synthesis	never	becomes	thesis.	He
has	come	to	the	end	of	his	row;	he	has	arrived	at	a	state	where	there	is	no	class,
no	 government.	 He	 has	 achieved	 the	 utopia.	 Now	 there	 is	 no	 need	 of	 any
conflict,	any	revolution.	But	I	don't	see	that	evolution	is	going	to	stop	anywhere.
So	 he	 has	 used	 a	 very	 significant	 principle	 of	 philosophy	 for	 his	 political
ideology.	And	as	he	reaches	to	his	ultimate	goal	he	forgets	all	about	dialectics.
That	 is	 not	 only	 his	 fault	 --	 everybody's.	 The	 religions	 say	 God	 created	 the
world,	and	when	you	ask	them	who	created	God	--	finished.
They	have	come	to	the	end	of	their	row.
The	 Jainas	 in	 India	 say	 that	man	 has	 been	 evolving,	 not	 in	 his	 physiology	 as
Darwin	 thinks	 --	 that	 in	 physiology	 he	 is	 evolving	 from	 apes	 or	 monkeys	 or
gorillas	 --	 but	 Jainism	 says	 man	 is	 evolving	 through	 different	 animal
consciousnesses,	not	physiologically	but	in	his	soul.	It	seems	more	accurate	than
Charles	Darwin.	Charles	Darwin	does	not	have	any	evidence.
The	whole	thing	seems	to	be	hypothetical	because	nobody	has	seen	any	monkey,
because	 if	 in	 the	past,	 thousands	of	years	ago,	 some	monkey	became	a	human
being,	why	are	other	monkeys	not	becoming	human	beings	now?	They	are	now
more	 evolved	 as	 man	 has	 evolved.	 Now	 they	 will	 be	 jumping	 every	 day!
Suddenly	you	see	a	monkey,	and	he	jumps	and	becomes	a	man	and	says,	"Hello,
where	are	you	going?	I	am	coming	too."
Nobody	 has	 encountered	 any	 monkey	 becoming	 a	 man.	 And	 the	 difference
between	a	monkey	and	man	is	so	great	that	it	cannot	be	possible	to	take	a	jump
suddenly.	Monkeys	know	how	 to	 jump,	but	 that	does	not	mean	 they	can	 jump
and	become	a	human	being.
They	can	jump	from	one	branch	to	another	branch	--	that's	perfectly	okay	--	but
they	 cannot	 jump	 from	 one	 state	 of	 consciousness	 into	 a	 totally	 new	 state	 of
consciousness,	because	it	needs	a	new	brain,	a	different	size	of	brain;	it	needs	a
different	structure	of	the	body.	Just	to	stand	on	two	legs	a	monkey	will	need	so
much	bodywork	that	he	will	not	survive.
It	has	happened	in	Lucknow...
A	boy	was	found	who	had	been	raised	by	wolves	in	the	forest,	and	just	the	other
day	a	girl	was	found.	She	was	the	same	age,	thirteen,	and	she	had	been	raised	by
animals.	So	 the	boy	 and	girl	walk	on	 all	 fours	 --	 naturally,	 they	have	 imitated
their	parents.
It	 has	 happened	 in	 Calcutta	 too.	 They	 tried	 to	 make	 him	 stand	 on	 two	 legs,
thinking	that	the	man	should	be	restored	to	humanity	--	they	killed	him.	Just	the
effort	to	make	him	stand	on	two	legs	was	so	difficult	because	he	now	had	a	fixed
structure.	For	fourteen	years	he	had	walked	on	all	fours;	now	suddenly	he	could
not	stand.
And	the	same	happened	in	the	Lucknow	case:	in	six	months	they	had	killed	the
boy.	I	put	the	whole	responsibility	on	the	stupid	idea	that	these	people	should	be
restored.	They	were	perfectly	beautiful;	 there	was	no	need.	This	boy	who	was
killed	in	Lucknow	by	the	scientists	and	the	doctors...	They	were	giving	him	all
kinds	of	medicines	and	injections	and	bodywork	and	massage.	And	the	boy	was
so	strong	that	they	needed	four	or	five	people	to	catch	hold	of	him;	otherwise	he
used	to	run	faster	on	his	four	feet	than	any	runner.	He	could	have	come	first	in
any	Olympic	race	anywhere;	he	was	a	wolf.
It	would	have	been	more	humane	to	leave	him	back	in	the	forest.	But	this	is	how
the	unconscious	mind	functions.	Now	a	girl	has	been	found	in	Europe	and	they
have	immediately	started	working	on	her	to	restore	her.	They	will	kill	her.	I	can
predict	it	--
because	this	"restoration"	is	not	possible;	it	would	take	a	lifetime.
As	for	the	Lucknow	boy,	in	six	months	the	whole	success	for	the	scientists	and
the	doctors	was	that	he	learned	one	word:	the	name	Ram	that	they	had	given	to
him.	That	was	their	whole	success	--	and	they	enjoyed	very	much,	that	they	had
done	"great	service."	All	they	did...	There	are	five	billion	human	beings,	what	is
the	point	of	taking	a	beautiful	wolf	back	into	humanity,	and	rejoicing	that	he	has
learned	the	name	Ram?
And	thousands	of	people	were	coming	--	he	had	become	an	exhibition	--	to	ask
him,
"What	is	your	name?"	And	he	would	say,	"Ram"	--	with	anger.	According	to	his
mind,	it	was	purely	torture	because	traction	was	being	done.
Suddenly	a	monkey	cannot	become...	And	Charles	Darwin	also	was	looking	for
a	middle	link.	The	monkey	must	have	become	first	a	middle	link	between	man
and	 monkey,	 and	 then	 from	middle	 link	 he	 may	 have	 moved	 to	 monkey.	 He
never	could	find	any	middle	link;	his	hypothesis	remains	hypothesis.
All	these	philosophers	go	on	using	some	idea.	Once	they	get	attached	to	it	they
extend	 it	 into	 a	 philosophy,	 into	 a	 whole	 system.	 That's	 what	 Marx	 did.	 But
dialectics	 is	 a	 natural	 phenomenon,	 particularly	 as	 far	 as	man's	 psychology	 is
concerned:	mind	functions	through	dialectical	ways.
You	will	never	find	mind	without	any	split.
I	keep	coming	across	very	intelligent	people....	 I	wanted	one	of	our	sannyasins
who	is	a	very	intelligent	legal	expert,	to	come	here	--	and	there	is	no	problem	in
coming.	His	wife	is	also	as	educated	as	he	is.	They	were	both	colleagues	in	law
college,	his	wife	was	a	magistrate.	He	has	been	in	the	commune.	The	wife	had
also	come,	but	because	they	had	a	small	child	she	went	back	and	took	a	job	as	a
magistrate.	Now	that	her	husband	has	gone	back	to	join	her,	she	has	dropped	out
of	her	 job.	So	I	 told	both	of	 them	they	could	come	here.	He	 informed	me	 that
ninety	percent	he	wants	to	come,	but	ten	percent	of	his	mind	thinks	of	security,
safety;	the	child,	his	education,	old	age,	the	future...
I	 have	 come	 across	 such	 people	 all	my	 life,	 and	 I	 have	 asked	 them	 only	 one
thing:	If	you	are	intelligent	enough,	then	why	are	you	choosing	the	ten	percent
part	of	your	mind	against	the	ninety	percent?	You	are	not	realizing	at	all	that	you
are	choosing	ten	percent	of	the	mind	--	and	you	are	afraid	to	choose	the	ninety
percent.
And	mind	 is	never	going	 to	be	a	hundred	percent	 for	anything.	That	 is	not	 the
way	mind	 functions,	 it	 is	 out	 of	 the	 question.	Mind's	 function	 is	 always	 to	 be
divided	on	every	question:	a	thesis,	antithesis,	and	then	you	have	to	find	out	the
synthesis,	and	you	have	to	function	according	to	the	synthesis.
So	there	is	no	problem	about	your	being	a	masochist;	you	are	not	on	a	mind	trip
either.	It	is	simply	the	way	of	the	mind	that	it	never	functions	as	a	total	unit.	In
fact,	 if	you	see	the	dialectics	 in	 life	you	will	find	it	 in	many	places.	You	walk,
that	is	dialectical.	If	both	your	legs	move	together	one	hundred	percent	you	will
fall	down.	Fifty	percent	remains	static,	fifty	percent	moves.	Then	the	other	fifty
percent	becomes	 static	and	 the	 static	part	 starts	moving.	That's	how	you	walk;
that	 is	 dialectical	 philosophy.	That's	 how	 a	 bird	 flies;	 that's	 how	you	 use	 your
hands.
Even	your	mind	is	not	one	single	piece;	it	has	two	hemispheres.	Your	right	hand
is	connected	with	the	left	side	of	your	mind	and	your	left	hand	is	connected	with
the	right	side	of	your	mind.	So	if	something	goes	wrong	with	the	left	side	of	the
mind,	for	example	paralysis,	then	your	right	hand	will	be	paralyzed.
Both	have	different	functions.	The	right	side	of	the	mind	thinks	and	the	left	side
of	 the	mind	 feels,	and	 thinking	and	 feeling	are	 just	 like	 two	 legs.	They	cannot
join	together;	otherwise	there	will	be	no	progress	in	life.	You	will	remain	static.
So	it	is	simply	a	matter	of	not	understanding	the	nature	of	mind.	You	have	one
part	of	the	mind	ready	--	let	it	go	and	do	its	job.	That	is	the	moving	leg,	and	the
other	part	 is	 the	static	part.	And	you	 think	 that	you	would	 like	me	 to	slash	 the
knot	asunder.	I	cannot	do	that	because	I	love	you.
Once	I	started	doing	things	for	you,	you	would	become	dependent	on	me.	And
that	is	the	last	thing	that	I	will	tolerate.	I	would	not	like	you	to	be	dependent	on
me.	I	can	give	you	the	way,	I	can	show	you	the	way,	but	I	will	not	walk	for	you.
You	will	have	to	walk	yourself,	because	I	want	you	to	be	absolutely	independent
and	free.	Today	I	am	here,	tomorrow	I	may	not	be	here.
If	you	become	dependent	on	me,	as	has	been	happening	all	over	 the	world	for
centuries	--
people	become	dependent	on	the	masters,	and	the	masters	enjoy	the	dependence.
Neither	are	the	masters	authentic	nor	are	the	disciples	intelligent	--	and	humanity
has	remained	static.
Are	 you	 aware	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 for	 centuries	 there	 has	 been	 no	 evolution?	 If
monkeys	 have	 become	 human	 beings	 at	 some	 time,	 what	 have	 human	 beings
done?	--	 they	are	stuck.	At	 least	some	daring	human	being	should	 take	a	 jump
and	 start	 flying,	 do	 something!	 But	 you	 know	 perfectly	 well	 that	 if	 you	 try
flying,	there	will	be	no	evolution,	only	multiple	fracture.
It	 has	 happened	 to	 a	 few	 people	 under	 LSD	 or	 under	 impact	 of	 some	 drug	 --
particularly	LSD	gives	 these	 ideas	 that	 you	 can	 fly.	And	one	woman	 flew	out
from	an	eighty-storey	building,	from	the	eightieth	floor.	She	simply	flew	out	of
the	window.	And	you	know	what	would	happen...	so	it	happened.
LSD	is	a	very	harmless	drug,	but	 it	should	be	used	under	medical	supervision,
because	it	gives	such	ideas,	great	ideas,	and	the	mind	is	no	longer	functioning	so
there	is	no	opposition;	there	is	a
one	hundred	percent	surety	--	and	that	is	very	dangerous.	A	one	hundred	percent
surety	 is	not	 favorable	 to	evolution.	 It	 is	good	that	 the	mind	should	be	divided
for	and	against,	discuss,	argue,	and	slowly	slowly	progress.
But	 one	 thing	 is	 strange,	 that	 for	 at	 least	 one	million	 years	 there	 has	 been	 no
evolution	as	far	as	man	is	concerned.	You	cannot	call	this	evolution:	one	person
becomes	 a	 Gautam	 Buddha	 or	 one	 person	 becomes	 a	 Bodhidharma	 or	 one
becomes	a	Tah	Hui	--	you	cannot	call	that	evolution.	The	whole	of	humanity	is
stuck	somewhere.
What	is	the	problem?	The	problem	is,	humanity	is	not	moving	with	the	part	of
the	mind	which	is	for	evolution;	it	is	staying	with	the	part	of	the	mind	which	is
not	for	evolution.
You	 have	 to	 learn	 only	 one	 thing,	 that	 you	 have	 already	 a	 part	 of	 your	mind
ready,	happy	to	do	that.	So	do	it!	Don't	bother	about	the	other	part	of	the	mind.
That	 mind	 is	 pulling	 you	 back;	 it	 represents	 your	 past.	 And	 the	 mind	 that	 is
feeling	happy	and	excited	to	do	something,	it	represents	your	future.	Choose	the
future.
Don't	depend	on	somebody	else,	because	that	dependence	is	dangerous.	It	is	not
only	one	question	that	can	be	solved,	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	questions	--
and	your	evolution	depends	on	your	own	readiness	to	risk,	your	own	acceptance
of	danger.
You	are	in	a	right	position;	there	is	no	problem.	Just	listen	always	to	the	part	of
the	mind	that	is	for	the	future,	that	is	for	the	unknown,	that	is	for	evolution,	and
the	other	part	will	come	following	behind.
Once	you	are	decisive,	the	other	part	of	the	mind	will	immediately	follow	you.	It
will	 remain	 against	 you	 until	 you	 are	 decisive.	And	 the	 decision	 has	 to	 come
from	 looking	 at	 the	 fact	 of	which	mind	 is	 for	 the	 future	 and	 evolution,	which
mind	 is	 going	 to	 give	 you	 a	 better	 life,	 a	 better	 understanding,	 a	 better
consciousness	 --	choose	 that	and	 the	Gordian	knot	will	be	slashed	without	any
effort	on	your	part	or	without	any	need	from	outside	help.
A	woman	 leaned	over	her	 side	of	 the	 fence	 and	asked	 the	 little	boy	next	door
how	he	was	getting	on	with	his	new	stepfather.
"Great,"	he	replied,	"every	morning	he	takes	me	out	in	the	boat	to	the	ocean,	puts
me	in	the	water	and	then	I	swim	back	to	the	beach."
"But	is	not	that	a	bit	dangerous	for	a	little	boy?"	asked	the	woman.
"Oh,	that's	easy.	The	hard	part	is	untying	the	knot	and	getting	out	of	the	bag."
It	is	certainly	a	little	harder...	but	if	you	can	manage	to	do	it,	it	will	give	you	a
sudden	quantum	leap	for	a	higher	consciousness.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 OFTEN	 TALKED	 ABOUT	 PSYCHOANALYSIS	 AND	 RELATED
THERAPIES.
WOULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 COMMENT	 ON	 MORE	 RECENT
DEVELOPMENTS	LIKE
FRITZ	 PERLS'	 GESTALT	 THERAPY	 AND	 --	 THE	 LATEST	 FASHION	 --
VOICE
DIALOGUE?	 CAN	 THESE	 THERAPIES	 HELP	 A	 PERSON	 WHO	 IS
ALREADY
MEDITATING	TO	SEE	HIMSELF	AND	HIS	GAMES	MORE	CLEARLY?
Tilo,	in	the	first	place	psychotherapies	like	Fritz	Perls'	Gestalt	therapy	and	others
are	already	old;	they	are	not	new.	The	only	new	thing	which	is	the	latest	fashion
is	Voice	Dialogue	--	but	they	are	all	just	mind	games.
They	 cannot	 contribute	 anything	 to	 a	 man	 who	 is	 already	 meditating	 --	 no
psychotherapy	 has	 the	 quality	 of	 meditation,	 because	 no	 psychotherapy	 has
produced	 a	 single	 enlightened	 being.	Their	 founders	were	 not	 enlightened	 and
the	enlightened	beings	in	the	East	never	bothered	about	any	psychotherapy.	They
have	not	 even	bothered	about	psychology	or	mind	 itself,	 because	 for	 them	 the
question	was	not	 to	solve	the	problems	of	the	mind,	for	 them	the	question	was
how	to	get	out	of	the	mind	which	is	easier.	Then	the	problems	all	are	finished,
because	 once	 you	 are	 out	 of	 the	mind,	 the	mind	 has	 no	 nourishment	 to	 go	 on
creating	problems;	otherwise	it	is	an	unending	process.
You	get	psychoanalyzed,	whether	old	or	new	fashions	it	doesn't	matter;	they	are
just	variations	of	the	same	theme.	Your	mind	feels	a	little	fresh	and	good	after	a
psychological	 session,	 because	 you	 have	 unburdened	 yourself.	 A	 little
understanding	of	mind	also	comes	--	that	keeps	you	normal.
In	fact,	all	psychotherapies	are	in	the	service	of	the	establishment;	their	function
is	 not	 to	 let	 people	 go	 abnormal.	 Somebody	 is	 going	outside	 the	 herd	 and	 the
norms	 of	 the	 herd	 and	 doing	 things	which	 it	 is	 not	 supposed	 that	 you	 should
do...!	They	may	be	harmless	but	 the	 society	cannot	 tolerate	 such	people.	They
have	to	be	brought	to	the	normal,	to	the	average	standard.
The	psychotherapist's	work	is	to	clean	your	mind.	It	is	a	kind	of	lubricating	your
mechanism	 --	 it	 functions	 a	 little	 better	 and	 you	 start	 becoming	 a	 little	 more
understanding	about	 the	functionings	of	 the	mind,	although	that	does	not	make
any	 revolutionary	 change.	And	 it	 is	 possible	 you	may	 solve	 one	 problem,	 but
you	have	not	removed	the	cause.
Mind	itself	is	the	problem.
So	you	can	 remove	one	problem,	mind	will	 create	another	problem...	 It	 is	 just
like	pruning	the	trees:	you	prune	one	leaf	and	just	out	of	self-respect	and	dignity
the	 tree	will	grow	 three	 leaves	 in	 the	place	where	 there	used	 to	be	one.	That's
why	gardeners	go	on	pruning;	that	gives	trees	more	foliage,	more	leaves.
The	 same	 is	 the	 situation	 with	 the	 mind:	 you	 can	 remove	 one	 problem	 by
understanding	it
--	and	it	is	costly	--	but	the	mind	is	still	there	which	has	created	the	problem,	and
psychoanalysis	does	not	go	beyond	 the	boundaries	of	 the	mind.	The	mind	will
create	 a	 new	 problem,	 more	 complicated	 than	 the	 one	 that	 you	 have	 solved.
Naturally,	because	the	mind	understands	you	can	solve	that	kind	of	problem,	it
creates	something	new,	more	complicated,	more	foliage.
Meditation	is	a	totally	different	thing	than	psychoanalysis	or	any	therapies	which
are	confined	to	the	mind.	It	is	simply	a	jumping	out	of	the	mind:	You	have	your
problems	--
I'm	going	home.
Because	mind	is	a	parasite	it	does	not	have	its	own	existence.	It	needs	you	inside
in	it,	so	it	can	go	on	eating	you,	your	head.	Once	you	jump	out	of	it,	the	mind	is
just	a	graveyard.
All	those	problems	that	were	too	big	drop,	they	simply	drop	dead.
Meditation	 is	 a	 totally	different	 dimension:	you	 simply	watch	 the	mind	and	 in
watching	you	come	out	of	it.	And	slowly,	mind	with	all	its	problems	disappears;
otherwise	the	mind	is	going	to	create	strange	problems.
The	other	day	in	England	a	court	released	a	murderer.	It	is	a	very	strange	case,
and	 it	may	 give	 impetus	 to	many	 people	 to	murder.	 The	murderer	was	 in	 the
second	world	war	fighting	in	Japan.	And	he	pleaded	in	the	court	that	in	the	night
he	dreamt	 that	 the	Japanese	were	chasing	him,	and	 they	were	 just	about	 to	get
hold	of	him.	He	became	so	 frightened	and	he	wanted	 to	 survive,	 so	he	caught
hold	of	the	neck	of	one	Japanese	and	killed	him	by	pressing	on	his	neck.	And	as
the	Japanese	was	killed,	he	awoke	from	the	dream	and	the	Japanese	was	no	one
but	his	wife.
The	court	was	in	a	difficulty	what	to	do,	because	he	had	not	done	it	consciously,
in	 awareness.	 Now	 to	 punish	 him	 does	 not	 seem	 right,	 even	 in	 a	 traditional
England,	where	anything	new	takes	years	to	be	accepted.	When	the	whole	world
will	accept	it	then	England	will	try!
The	judge	must	have	been	a	man	of	great	understanding,	but	he	has	also	opened
a	 door	 of	 dangers.	 Now	 anybody	 can	 kill	 his	 wife	 and	 say,	 "What	 can	 I	 do?
Japanese	were	 following..."	 It	 is	 a	 precedent	 that	 you	 have	 released	 one	man,
acquitted	completely	from	committing	any	crime.
Now	you	are	able	to	commit	crime.	You	just	have	to	pretend	that	you	are	asleep,
and	there	is	no	way	for	the	court	to	find	out	whether	you	were	really	asleep	and
the	Japanese	were	really	following	you	in	your	dream.	The	poor	woman	was	fast
asleep,	he	 jumped	up	and	killed	her	--	and	perhaps	he	 is	right...	But	now	there
will	be	cases	which	will	not	be	right.	Perhaps	what	he	is	saying	is	 true;	he	has
been	 in	 the	 war	 in	 Japan	 and	 that	 may	 have	 come	 as	 a	 dream	 from	 his
unconscious;	 and	 out	 of	 fear,	 to	 protect	 himself,	 he	 started	 fighting	 with	 the
Japanese.	And	there	was	nobody	else	in	the	room	except	 the	wife	close	to	him
just	on	the	bed,	so	he	jumped,	caught	hold	of	the	Japanese...
Mind	is	your	only	problem.
All	other	problems	are	just	offshoots	of	the	mind.
Meditation	cuts	the	mind	from	the	very	roots.
And	all	 these	therapies	--	Gestalt	and	Voice	Dialogue	and	Fritz	Perls	--	we	can
use	them	for	those	who	have	not	yet	entered	into	meditation	just	to	have	a	little
understanding	of	the	mind	so	they	can	find	the	door	from	where	to	get	out.
We	are	using	all	kinds	of	therapies	which	are	helpful,	but	not	for	the	meditators.
They	 are	 only	 helpful	 in	 the	 beginning	 when	 you	 have	 not	 yet	 become
accustomed	to	meditation.
Once	you	are	meditative	you	don't	need	any	therapy,	no	therapy	is	helpful	then.
But	 in	 the	 beginning,	 it	 can	 be	 helpful,	 and	 particularly	 for	 the	 Western
sannyasins.
I	don't	 suggest	 it	much	 for	Eastern	people	 that	 they	 should	do	 therapy	groups.
For	example,	Japanese	have	been	found	not	 to	understand	 that	 in	an	encounter
group	if	people	are	fighting	it	 is	just	playful	fighting.	They	really	start	fighting
and	they	can	become	dangerous;	they	can	kill	somebody.
Different	cultures...	Japanese	have	been	writing	 letters	 to	me	saying	 that	 in	 the
therapies	 they	are	 telling	us	 that	you	hate	your	mother,	your	 father	 --	 and	 it	 is
absolutely	wrong!
We	will	kill	the	therapist!	Japan	has	a	totally	different	culture.	The	very	idea	that
you	 hate	 your	 mother	 --	 and	 the	 person	 will	 commit	 hara-kiri.	 He	 will	 kill
himself	because	it	is	so	shameful.
I	 have	 come	 to	 know	 such	 stories	 of	 hara-kiri	 that	 you	 cannot	 believe.	 One
famous	 historical	 case	 happened	 three	 hundred	 years	 ago.	A	 very	well-known
master	of	martial	arts	forgot,	when	he	went	to	meet	the	emperor,	to	bow	down.
In	Japan	you	have	to	bow	down	even	to	your	enemy	when	you	go	to	fight.
Both	bow	down	to	each	other	because	one	never	knows	who	will	be	left	alive.	At
this	 moment	 enmity	 and	 friendship	 don't	 matter.	 At	 this	 moment	 when	 one
person	 is	 never	 going	 to	 be	 seen	 again	 and	 will	 not	 even	 be	 able	 to	 ask	 for
forgiveness,	they	give	respect.
And	it	is	authentic,	it	is	not	formal.
Going	 to	 the	emperor	and	forgetting	 to	bow	down...	And	he	 forgot	because	he
was	a	great	master	and	thousands	of	people	who	were	learning	under	him	were
all	bowing	down	to	him.	So	he	had	become	accustomed	to	people	bowing	down
to	him,	and	then	he	would	respond	by	the	same	gesture.	It	was	such	bad	manners
that	when	he	was	made	aware	 that	he	had	committed	a	great	crime	because	he
had	not	bowed	down	to	the	emperor,	he	committed	suicide.
That	is	the	routine	process.	There	is	no	other	way	except	that	to	show	that	you
really	feel	repentant.	It	is	not	so	easy	as	in	the	West	where	you	can	just	say,	"I'm
sorry"	--	that	is	very	formal	and	very	easy.	Japanese	take	things	very	seriously.
The	only	way	you	can	say,	"I'm	sorry"	is	by	hara-kiri	--	one	feels	so	ashamed	of
himself	that	he	cannot	allow	himself	to	live	anymore.
The	more	 strange	 thing	 is	 that	 his	 three	 hundred	 intimate	 disciples	 committed
hara-kiri	because	their	master	had	behaved	in	a	shameful	way.	They	were	not	at
all	concerned,	but	because	their	master	has	fallen	in	grace,	how	can	they	stand	in
the	world	with	grace	and	dignity?	Three	hundred	disciples	committed	hara-kiri.
This	is	a	historical	fact,	and	this	kind	of	thing	has	been	happening	in	Japan	for
centuries.
So	one	sannyasin	has	written	to	me,	"The	therapist	goes	on	insisting,	`You	must
hate	your	mother...'	Either	 I	will	 kill	 the	 therapist	 or	 I	will	 kill	myself	 if	 he	 is
right.	Because	I	don't	see	that	I	have	ever	hated	my	mother."
And	in	fact	the	situation	is	different.	In	Japan	almost	one-third	of	the	girls	don't
marry;	 they	 remain	with	 their	mother.	 In	 the	 rest	 of	 the	world	 the	 situation	 is
different.	And	what	psychoanalysis	has	found	does	not	apply	to	the	Japanese.	It
applies	only	to	the	Western	mind	and	its	upbringing.
Sigmund	Freud	is	right	only	about	the	Western	mind	and	its	tradition.	When	he
says	 that	 every	 girl	 hates	 her	 mother	 because	 she	 loves	 the	 father,	 the	 whole
thing	is	based	on	their	understanding	of	sex,	that	one	loves	the	opposite	sex.	So
girls	love	the	fathers,	the	boys	love	the	mother.	But	the	girls	cannot	express	their
love,	particularly	they	cannot	be	sexually	related	with	the	father,	and	the	mother
is	related	sexually.	So	they	become	jealous	of	 the	mother	--	 the	mother	is	 their
enemy.	 The	 boys	 become	 enemies	 of	 the	 father	 and	 because	 of	 that	 the	 boy
cannot	make	love	to	the	mother.
The	Japanese	cannot	even	think	of	this;	even	Indians	cannot	think	of	this	--	just	a
totally	different	upbringing.	Indians	cannot	believe	what	kind	of	nonsense	this	is.
And	for	the	Japanese	things	are	very	difficult.	If	you	insist	and	you	convince	him
that	he	hates	his	mother	or	he	hates	his	father	--	and	 the	whole	psychoanalysis
depends	on	these	kinds	of	things:	who	you	hate,	why	you	hate...	And	they	go	on
digging	deeper	and	they	prove	to	the	person	that	from	very	childhood	there	has
been	a	jealousy	and	that	is	creating	all	the	problems.
"Why	 can't	 you	 love	 your	 wife?"	 --	 the	 psychoanalyst	 will	 come	 to	 the
conclusion	 that	 you	wanted	 to	 love	 your	mother	 --	 and	 your	wife	 is	 not	 your
mother	--	and	the	wife	does	not	love	you	because	she	wanted	to	love	her	father
and	 you	 are	 not	 her	 father.	 So	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 fight	 continuously.	You	 have
fallen	in	love	with	the	girl	because	something	in	her	resembles	your	mother.	And
the	girl	has	fallen	in	love	for	the	same	reason:	something	in	you	resembles	her
father.
So	 you	 have	 married	 your	 mother;	 she	 has	 married	 her	 father.	 This	 is
psychoanalysis.
And	because	neither	she	is	behaving	like	your	mother	nor	you	are	behaving	like
her	father,	problems	arise.
But	to	say	to	a	Japanese,	"You	have	married	your	mother,"	is	simply	out	of	the
question.
To	say	to	an	Indian,	"You	have	been	secretly	loving	your	mother	and	you	wanted
a	sexual	relationship	with	her...";	he	cannot	even	think..."Are	you	in	your	senses
or..."
In	India	the	tradition	is	that	the	son	loves	his	mother	almost	like	a	goddess.	He
loves	his	father	and	respects	his	father	next	to	God.	And	the	difficult	thing	is	that
even	 the	 people	 in	 the	 East	who	 are	 teaching	 or	who	 are	 in	 the	 profession	 of
psychoanalysis,	as	professors	or	as	practitioners,	they	have	all	learned	from	the
West	and	they	don't	understand	that	the	East	has	a	totally	different	orientation.
And	Sigmund	Freud	or	Jung	or	Adler	or	Assagioli	or	Fritz	Perls	have	no	 idea.
Not	even	in	their	dreams	have	they	thought	that	people	can	be	different	from	the
Western	people.
In	the	East	psychoanalysis	is	not	of	much	help.	For	the	Westerners,	I	like	them	to
go	 through	 groups	 just	 to	 clean	 the	 mind.	 With	 a	 clean	 mind,	 to	 enter	 into
meditation	is	easier.	But	if	you	don't	enter	meditation	and	you	simply	depend	on
cleaning	 the	mind,	 then	you	will	be	cleaning	 the	mind	for	your	whole	 life	and
you	will	not	go	anywhere	else.
Because	of	its	different	orientation	the	East	should	find	seats	in	the	universities
for	meditation,	not	for	psychoanalysis.
One	of	the	great	Indian	psychologists	who	was	the	head	of	the	department	in	the
Hindu	 university	 of	 Varanasi	 belonged	 to	 a	 village	 near	 my	 village;	 and
moreover,	he	was	father-in-law	to	one	of	my	friends	who	had	studied	with	me.
He	 was	 one	 of	 the	 most	 respected	 professors	 of	 psychology,	 but	 he	 was
condemned	by	everybody	because	people,	thinking	that	he	would	be	able	to	help
them	 with	 their	 mind	 problems,	 would	 go	 for	 psychoanalysis,	 and
psychoanalysis	brings...	They	would	ask,	"Whom	do	you	hate?"
And	the	Indian	would	find	himself	at	a	loss	because	everything	comes	down	to
sex	--	and	the	Indian	cannot	accept	that	idea.	It	is	not	the	same	orientation	as	in
the	West.
This	 man's	 name	 was	 Laljiram	 Shukla.	 And	 because	 his	 son-in-law	 was	 my
friend,	the	son-in-law	was	continuously	telling	him	that	he	must	meet	me	at	least
once.	He	was	an	old	man.	I	was	just	out	of	the	university.	He	invited	me	to	come
to	 Varanasi	 because	 his	 son-in-law	 was	 continually	 praising	 me.	 It	 became	 a
psychological	 problem	 for	 the	 psychologist	 that	 the	 son-in-law	 was	 more
interested	 in	me,	and	not	 interested	 in	him	and	was	continually	praising	me.	 It
became	a	challenge	to	him.
I	was	not	aware	what	the	situation	was.	When	he	invited	me	I	thought	perhaps	it
was	because	of	my	friend;	he	may	have	talked	about	me,	so	I	went.	I	was	a	guest
in	his	house,	and	I	immediately	became	aware	of	a	certain	tension.
I	asked	my	friend,	"What	is	the	matter?"
He	said,	"The	problem	is	that	I	have	been	talking	about	you	not	knowing	that	he
was	 feeling	very	 offended.	But	 he	 never	 showed	 it,	 and	now,	 because	 you	 are
here	 --	 and	 many	 other	 professors	 have	 become	 interested;	 all	 his	 students,
nearabout	twenty	postgraduates,	they	are	all	coming	in	the	morning	to	meet	you
--	he	is	feeling	very	much	wounded."
So	in	the	morning	he	exploded.	He	started	arguing	with	me,	and	because	I	told
him,	 "All	 your	 education	 is	 from	 the	West;	 all	 that	 you	 are	 talking	 is	 simply
nonsense	in	the	East	--
what	do	you	know	about	meditation?	All	your	knowledge	is	about	the	mind,	and
that	 too	 of	 a	 certain	 mind,	 the	Western	 mind.	 You	 are	 betraying	 the	 East	 by
teaching	people	all	kinds	of	nonsense,	which	does	not	make	any	actual	impact	on
them,	because	that	is	not	their	problem.
"I	have	never	seen	anybody,	 I	have	 looked	 in	so	many	people's	minds...	 In	 the
East	nobody	is	jealous	of	the	father,	nobody	wants	to	make	love	to	the	mother,
but	without	these	things	the	psychoanalyst	will	say,	Ìf	you	want	to	be	cured	you
will	have	to	cooperate.'"
And	I	argued	with	him	--	I	had	to	because	he	was	so	angry	with	me	that	I	could
not	understand	why	he	had	invited	me.	And	because	he	could	not	answer,	I	asked
him	directly,	"I	ask	you,	have	you	ever	in	your	childhood	wanted	to	make	love	to
your	 mother?	 Have	 you	 ever	 thought	 in	 your	 childhood	 to	 kill	 your	 father
because	he	was	your	competitor	for	the	same	sex	object,	the	mother?"
He	cooled	down,	and	he	said,	"Never.	I	never	thought	about	these	things."
I	said,	"What	are	you	doing	now?	Imposing	on	people	ideas	which	are	not	their
problems,	 are	 you	 helping	 them	 or	 destroying	 their	 integrity?	 You	 are	 telling
them	that	their	problems	are	things	which	are	not	their	problems."
In	the	East	for	centuries	the	problem	has	been	how	to	get	beyond	the	mind	--	the
only	 problem,	 the	 single	 problem.	 But	 for	 the	 Western	 mind,	 because	 it	 has
developed	 in	 a	 different	way,	 it	 has	 never	 thought	 about	 transcending	mind.	 I
have	 looked	 into	 Jewish	 sources,	 into	 Christian	 sources;	 there	 is	 not	 a	 single
statement	in	the	whole	history	of	the	West	where	somebody	has	made	an	effort
to	go	beyond	the	mind.
They	have	used	 the	mind	 to	pray,	 they	have	used	 the	mind	 to	believe	 in	God;
they	have	used	the	mind	to	become	religious,	virtuous,	but	they	have	never	even
thought	that	there	is	a	possibility	of	going	beyond	the	mind.
In	 the	East	 that	has	been	 the	only,	single	search.	The	whole	genius	of	 the	East
has	been	working	for	one	thing,	no	other	problems:	how	to	go	beyond	the	mind.
Because	 if	you	can	 solve	your	problems	wholesale	 just	by	going	beyond,	 then
why	go	for	retail	solving	of	problems.	The	mind	will	go	on	creating;	it	is	a	very
creative	 force.	You	 solve	 one	problem,	 another	 problem	arises.	You	 solve	 that
problem,	another	problem	arises.
It	 is	 a	 good	 business	 for	 the	 psychoanalyst,	 because	 he	 knows	 you	 are	 never
going	 to	 be	 cured.	You	 are	 not	 going	 to	 be	 cured	 of	 the	mind;	 he	 cures	 your
specific	 problems.	Your	mind	 is	 there,	 the	 source.	He	 never	 cuts	 the	 roots,	 he
only	cuts	leaves,	branches	at	the	most,	but	they	go	on	growing	again	--	the	roots
are	there.
Meditation	is	cutting	the	very	roots	of	problems.
I	repeat:	the	mind	is	the	only	problem,	and	unless	you	go	beyond	the	mind,	you
will	never	go	beyond	problems.
It	is	strange	that	even	today,	the	Western	psychologists	have	not	even	pondered
over	the	fact	that	the	East	has	created	so	many	enlightened	people.	None	of	them
has	bothered	about	the	analysis	of	the	mind.
Just	as	in	the	Western	literature	--	religious,	philosophical,	theological	--	there	is
no	idea	of	going	beyond	the	mind,	in	the	same	way	in	the	Eastern	philosophical
literature	there	is	nowhere	any	mention	that	psychoanalysis	or	psychology	is	of
any	importance.	The	West	has	lived	with	the	mind	and	the	East	has	lived	beyond
the	mind,	so	their	problems	don't	seem	to	be	the	same.
Ugly	things	can	happen	when	you	impose.	For	example,	Erhard	was	running	the
movement	of	EST	--	and	it	 looks	stupid	to	the	Eastern	meditator.	What	he	was
trying	 to	 do	 is	 so	 hilarious,	 but	 people	 felt	 very	good.	You	will	 also	 feel	 very
good	if	you	do	it,	without	paying	him	the	two	hundred	and	fifty	dollars	fee	for
you	to	become	enlightened.
And	how	you	become	enlightened	is	a	very	simply	process.
You	are	not	allowed	to	go	 to	 the	bathroom,	so	your	bladder	goes	on	becoming
more	and	more	filled	with...	and	it	starts	hurting	--	and	you	are	not	allowed	to	go
to	the	bathroom.
And	the	session	continues	from	the	morning	till	night.	The	whole	day	to	contain
yourself,	to	resist	the	temptation...!
In	 such	 a	 situation	 who	 is	 listening	 to	 what	 nonsense	 he	 is	 talking?	 You	 are
trying	 to	 hold	 yourself	 so	 that	 in	 some	 unaware	 moment...	 And	 then	 it	 starts
happening,	because	how	long	can	you	do	it?	Particularly	women	don't	have	any
control	on	the	bladder;	man	has	a	little	control,	but	women	don't	have.
So	one	woman	starts	pissing	 --	and	when	one	starts...	And	Erhard	used	 to	say,
"That	is	great!"	And	she	feels	certainly	immensely	relieved.	First	you	created	the
tension	and	the	tension	became	too	much;	it	became	anguish,	agony.	And	now,
she	feels	so	released:	It	 is	enlightenment."	She	says,	"I	have	got	it"	--	and	then
follows	a	chain...	Somebody	else	starts	getting	it,	somebody	else	starts	getting	it
--	 they	used	 to	 fill	 the	whole	hall	with	urine.	And	 they	have	paid	 two	hundred
and	fifty	dollars	--	you	can	do	it	on	your	own!
If	this	is	enlightenment,	just	close	your	room,	and	if	you	need	some	help	it	can
be	very	easy;	your	friend	can	tie	you	so	you	cannot	go	to	 the	bathroom.	Then,
contain	yourself	as	long	as	you	can	and	there	comes	a	moment	when	you	cannot
contain.	Then	the	bladder	simply	takes	over.	You	are	simply	surprised	by	what	is
happening.	And	such	a	great	 relaxation	and	relief	 follows,	such	peace	 that	you
have	never	known	--	peace	that	passes	understanding!
These	idiots	have	been	creating	new	fashions	in	psychology,	in	psychoanalysis,
therapies
--	and	earning	millions	of	dollars,	and	cheating	people.	It	 is	not	enlightenment.
And	 if	 this	 is	 enlightenment	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 enlightened.	 It	 is
perfectly	good	to	go	to	the	toilet...	forget	all	about	enlightenment.
The	East	has	never	bothered	about	the	mind,	has	not	even	taken	any	note	of	it,
has	ignored	it.	From	Patanjali	to	Gautam	Buddha,	to	Shankara,	to	Ramakrishna,
to	J.
Krishnamurti	--	the	whole	tradition	does	not	bother	about	the	mind.	The	mind	is
mentioned	only	for	one	purpose:	how	to	transcend	it.
Hundreds	 of	 methods	 have	 been	 found	 which	 can	 help	 you	 to	 transcend	 the
mind,	 and	 once	 you	 are	 beyond	 the	mind	 all	 its	 problems	 look	 as	 if	 they	 are
somebody	else's	problems.	You	attain	to	a	state	of	a	watcher	on	the	hills,	and	all
the	 problems	 are	 in	 the	 valleys.	And	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 impact	 on	 you;	 you
have	gone	beyond	them.
The	West	has	 remained	utterly	mind	centered.	 In	 the	West	 the	only	 thing	 they
have	 thought	 about	 is	matter	 and	mind.	And	matter	 is	 the	 reality	 and	mind	 is
only	a	by-product;	beyond	mind	there	is	nothing.
In	 the	 East	 matter	 is	 illusory,	 mind	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 all	 your	 illusions,
projections,	dreams.	Your	reality	is	beyond	matter	and	mind,	both.
So	we	divide	reality	in	the	East	into	three	parts:	matter,	the	outermost;	the	soul,
the	innermost;	the	mind	is	in	between	the	two.	Matter	has	a	relative	reality;	it	is
not	 absolutely	 real,	 just	 relatively	 real.	 The	mind	 is	 absolutely	 unreal,	 and	 the
soul	is	absolutely	real.
This	is	a	totally	different	categorization	of	humanity.	In	the	West	the	categories
are	simple:	matter	is	real,	mind	is	just	a	by-product,	and	there	is	nothing	beyond
mind.
So	remember,	Tilo,	if	you	are	meditating	then	nothing	else	is	needed.	If	you	are
not	meditating,	 then	 these	 psychotherapies	may	 be	 helpful	 as	 a	 stepping-stone
for	meditation.
It	was	sunrise,	and	the	young	athlete	was	doing	push-ups	on	the	beach	when	a
drunk	appeared.
The	drunk	weaved	his	way	to	within	a	few	yards	of	the	perspiring	young	man,
sat	down	on	the	sand	and	laughed	and	laughed.
"What	the	devil	are	you	laughing	about?"	asked	the	annoyed	young	man.
The	drunk	laughed	and	said,	"Don't	look	now,	but	somebody	stole	your	girl."
Unnecessarily	doing	push-ups...
The	West	 is	 unnecessarily	making	 tremendous	 effort	 in	 analyzing	 the	mind	 --
utterly	 useless	 unless	 they	 accept	 a	 transcendental	 state.	And	 that's	why	 again
and	again	 they	get	cheated	by	 frauds.	For	example,	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi	 is
cheating	 the	whole	of	 the	West	by	any	stupid	 thing.	First	 it	was	 transcendental
meditation,	then	people	became	fed	up	with	it	because	it	was	not	meditation;	it
was	mind	repeating	a	mantra.	You	were	not	going	beyond	the	mind,	so	what	is
transcendental	in	it?
So	his	 earnings	became	very	 low;	he	had	 to	 invent	 something	new.	So	he	has
invented	 spiritual	 yogic	 flying.	 First	 he	 started	 by	 spiritual	 levitation:	 you	 can
meditate	and	become	so	light	that	you	will	start	rising	upwards!	--	and	you	can
find	 idiots	 everywhere...	 And	 people	 were	 paying	 four	 hundred	 dollars	 for
learning	spiritual	levitation.	In	the	first	place	what	are	you	going	to	do	by...	even
if	 you	 levitate,	what	 purpose	 is	 going	 to	 be	 served	 by	 it?	 In	 the	 second	 place
nobody	was	levitating;	people	were	hopping.
Trick	 photography	 was	 being	 used	 and	 spread.	 People	 were	 shown	 to	 have
levitated,	and	they	had	levitated	with	their	mattress	also	--	that	was	strange.	The
mattress	also	has	become	yogic,	spiritual...!
He	was	 continually	 asked,	 "Give	 a	 public	 demonstration	 of	 your	 levitation"	 --
and	he	could	not.	A	case	was	brought	in	the	Supreme	Court	of	America	by	seven
of	his	own	disciples,	who	had	been	working	hard	on	levitation	and	found	that	it
was	 absolute	 nonsense	 --	 they	were	 just	 hopping!	 So	 they	 had	 brought	 a	 case
against	him,	demanding	ninety	million	dollars.	He	has	been	cheating	the	whole
world,	and	he	has	accumulated	tremendous	money.
Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi	 dropped	 that	 idea	 because	 he	 could	 not	 give	 a	 public
demonstration.	He	 came	with	 a	 new	 idea,	 and	 this	 new	 idea	 is	 yogic	 flying	 --
even	greater.	And	what	is	the	purpose	of	yogic	flying?	--	if	one	person	can	learn
to	 fly,	 then	ninety-nine	persons	 in	 the	world	will	become	meditative	and	silent
and	peaceful.
A	big	business,	because	it	means	for	five	billion	people	to	become	peaceful	--	no
war,	no	conflict,	 just	blissfulness	--	millions	of	people	will	have	 to	 learn	yogic
flying.	 Again,	 he	 was	 aware	 that	 he	 would	 be	 asked	 to	 give	 a	 public
demonstration.	He	has	given	one	demonstration	 in	Europe,	and	now	another	 is
planned	in	America	soon.	And	what	people	saw	was,	it	was	the	same	hopping,
but	now	it	is	hopping	not	only	in	one	place,	you	go	on	hopping...
Every	 frog	 knows	 it!	 And	 it	 is	 so	 stupid	 that	 people	 are	 paying	 millions	 of
dollars	 to	 learn	 what	 the	 frogs	 know	 without	 any	 difficulty.	 They	 are	 giving
public	 demonstrations	 and	 they	 don't	 even	 see	 that	 they	 are	 being	 absolutely
stupid.	 A	 few	 have	 become	 so	 expert	 that	 now	 there	 are	 hurdle	 races;	 small
hurdles	are	places	and	they	hop	over	the	hurdles.
They	are	great	spiritual	people.
But	 I	 don't	 see	 the	 connection.	 Even	 if	 they	 can	 hop,	 and	 go	 on	 crossing	 the
hurdles,	 in	what	way	 is	 this	 going	 to	 create	 peace	 in	 the	world...?	Nor	 can	 it
create	peace	 in	 the	person	who	 is	 hopping.	 It	will	 create	more	 retardedness	 in
him.	The	very	 idea	 that	he	has	accepted	 this	stupid	 thing	shows	that	he	has	no
intelligence	at	all.	And	what	peace,	how	can	peace	be	attained	by	these	kinds	of
things?
He	 is	 now	proposing	 to	 the	world	 that	 if	millions	 --	 he	 has	 calculated	 exactly
how	many	millions	of	people	are	needed	 to	 learn	hopping	 to	prevent	 the	 third
world	war.
I	don't	believe	that	man	is	so	stupid	that	he	gets	caught	by	such	frauds.	People
are	 learning.	 Maharishi	 Mahesh	 Yogi	 has	 opened	 an	 academy	 in	 Switzerland
where	thousands	of	people	are	learning	hopping.
The	West	is	being	exploited	by	all	kinds	of	frauds	for	the	simple	reason	that	the
West	has	not	 looked	 into	 the	matter	of	meditation	 itself.	So	any	 idiot	goes	and
says	anything,	and	gathers	 followers	because	 they	don't	know	what	meditation
is.	Neither	will	chanting	a	mantra	nor	hopping	nor	levitation...
These	 things	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 meditation.	 Meditation	 has	 only	 one
meaning,	 and	 that	 is	 going	 beyond	 the	mind	 and	 becoming	 a	witness.	 In	 your
witnessing	is	the	miracle	-
-	the	whole	mystery	of	life.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	Still	time	to	change	the	trains
4	September	1987	am	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709040
ShortTitle:
INVITA27
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
107
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	ALSO	GETTING	OLD.	WOULD	YOU	TELL	ME	A	FEW	LAWS	FOR
MIDDLE
AGE	ALSO?
Amrito,	everybody	is	getting	old.	Since	the	day	you	were	born,	you	have	been
getting	old
--	each	moment,	each	day.	Childhood	is	a	flux,	so	is	youth	--	just	old	age	never
ends,	because	it	terminates!	That	is	the	unique	quality	of	old	age,	that	it	brings
you	to	ultimate	rest.	But	you	want	a	few	laws	for	middle	age...	You	are	a	man	of
medicine,	you	should	know	better.
As	 far	as	 I	am	concerned,	 I	have	never	been	a	child,	never	a	youth,	and	never
become	old	and	never	will	die.	 I	know	only	one	 thing	 in	me	 that	 is	absolutely
unchanging	and	eternal.
But	just	for	your	sake...
There	 are	 many	 laws	 about	 middle	 age,	 because	 all	 over	 the	 world	 people
become	old.
And	many	thinkers	have	been	thinking,	What	is	this	old	age?	The	first	law	is	De
Never's	 Lost	 Law;	 obviously	 about	 old	 age,	 the	 law	 can	 be	 the	 last:	 Never
speculate	on	that	which	can	be	known	for	certain.
You	know	perfectly	well	you	are	getting	old,	now	don't	 speculate	on	 that,	 that
will	make	you	more	miserable.
The	law	is	beautiful,	never	speculate	on	that	which	can	be	known	for	certain.	In
fact,	in	life,	except	death	nothing	is	certain;	everything	can	be	speculated	upon,
but	not	death.
And	old	age	is	just	the	door	to	death.
Middle	age	is	when	you	begin	to	exchange	your	emotions	for	symptoms.
Lendel's	Law:	You	know	you	are	getting	old	when	a	girl	calls	"No,"	and	all	you
feel	is	relief.
Old	 age	 is	 when	 you	 start	 to	 turn	 out	 the	 lights	 for	 economical	 rather	 than
romantic	reasons!
Old	age	is	that	period	of	life	when	your	idea	of	getting	ahead	is	staying	even.
Old	age	is	when	you	can	do	just	as	much	as	ever,	but	would	rather	not.
Old	age	 is	a	mysterious	experience,	but	all	 these	 laws	have	been	 found	by	 the
Western	mind.	I	have	not	been	able	to	discover	anybody	in	the	whole	literature
of	 the	 East	 talking	 about	 old	 age.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 old	 age	 has	 been	 praised
immensely,	because	in	the	East	it	has	been	thought	that	you	are	not	old.	If	your
life	has	simply	moved	on	the	horizontal	line,	you	are	only	aged.	But	if	your	life,
your	consciousness,	has	moved	vertically,	upwards,	 then	you	have	attained	 the
beauty,	 the	 glory	 of	 old	 age.	 Old	 age	 in	 the	 East	 has	 been	 synonymous	 with
wisdom.
These	are	the	two	paths:	one	is	horizontal,	from	childhood	to	youth,	to	old	age
and	 to	 death;	 another	 is	 vertical,	 from	 childhood	 to	 youth,	 to	 old	 age,	 and	 to
immortality.	 The	 difference	 in	 quality	 of	 both	 the	 dimensions	 is	 immense,
incalculable.	 The	 man	 who	 simply	 becomes	 young,	 and	 old,	 and	 dead,	 has
remained	identified	with	his	body.	He	has	not	known	anything	about	his	being,
because	being	 is	never	born	and	never	dies;	 it	 is	always,	 it	has	been	always,	 it
will	be	always,	it	is	the	whole	of	eternity.
On	the	vertical	line	the	child	becomes	young,	but	the	youth	on	the	vertical	line
will	be	different	from	the	youth	on	the	horizontal	line.	Childhood	is	innocent,	but
that	is	the	point	from	where	these	two	different	dimensions	open	up.	The	youth
on	the	horizontal	 line	is	nothing	but	sensuality,	sexuality	and	all	kinds	of	other
stupidities.	The	youth	on	the	vertical	line	is	a	search	for	truth,	is	a	search	for	life
--	it	is	a	longing	to	know	oneself.
A	man	on	the	vertical	line	cannot	be	called	young	if	he	is	not	meditative,	and	the
same	is	true	about	old	age.	On	the	horizontal	line,	old	age	is	simply	trembling,
afraid	 of	 death;	 I	 cannot	 think	 of	 anything	 except	 a	 graveyard,	 and	 darkness
which	goes	on	becoming	darker	and	darker.	It	cannot	conceive	of	himself	except
as	a	skeleton.
On	 the	vertical	 line,	old	age	 is	a	celebration;	 it	 is	as	beautiful	as	man	has	ever
been.
Youth	 is	 a	 little	 foolish	 --	 is	 bound	 to	 be;	 it	 is	 inexperienced,	 but	 old	 age	 has
passed	through	all	the	experiences	--	good	and	bad,	right	and	wrong	--	and	has
come	to	a	state	where	it	is	no	longer	affected	by	anything	concerned	with	body
or	mind.
It	 is	 a	 welcome!	 old	 age	 on	 the	 vertical	 line	 is	 keeping	 its	 door	 open	 for	 the
ultimate	guest	to	come	in.	It	is	not	an	end,	it	is	a	beginning	of	a	real	life,	of	an
authentic	being.
Hence,	 I	 continuously	make	 the	 distinction	 between	 growing	 old	 and	 growing
up.	Very	few	people	have	been	fortunate	to	grow	up;	the	remainder	of	humanity
has	 only	 been	 growing	 old.	And	 naturally	 they	 are	 all	moving	 towards	 death.
Only	on	the	vertical	line	does	death	not	exist;	that	is	the	way	to	immortality,	to
divinity.	And	naturally,	when	one	becomes	old	on	that	dimension,	he	has	a	grace
and	a	beauty	and	a	compassion	and	love.
It	has	been	noted	again	and	again...	There	is	a	statement	in	Buddhist	scriptures
that	 as	 Buddha	 became	 older,	 he	 became	 more	 beautiful.	 This	 I	 call	 a	 true
miracle.	Not	walking	on	water	 --	 any	drunkard	can	 try	 that.	Not	 turning	water
into	wine	 --	 any	 criminal	 can	 do	 that.	 This	 is	 a	 true	miracle:	 Buddha	 became
more	beautiful	than	he	was	in	his	youth;	he	became	more	innocent	than	he	was
in	his	childhood	--	this	is	growth.
Unless	 you	 are	 moving	 on	 the	 vertical	 line,	 you	 are	 missing	 the	 whole
opportunity	of	life.
But	here	our	whole	effort	 is	 to	block	 the	horizontal	 line	and	open	 the	blocked
vertical	 line.	 Then	 every	 day	 you	 are	 coming	 closer	 to	 life,	 not	 farther	 away.
Then	 your	 birth	 is	 not	 the	 beginning	 of	 death,	 your	 birth	 is	 the	 beginning	 of
eternal	life.	Just	two	different	lines	and	so	much	difference.
The	West	has	never	thought	about	it;	the	vertical	line	has	never	been	mentioned
because	 they	haven't	 been	brought	 up	 in	 a	 spiritual	 atmosphere	where	 the	 real
riches	 are	 inside	 you.	 Even	 if	 they	 think	 of	 God,	 they	 think	 of	 him	 outside.
Gautam	Buddha	could	deny	God	--	I	deny	God.	There	is	absolutely	no	God	for
the	 simple	 reason	 that	we	want	 you	 to	 turn	 inwards.	 If	God	 is	 --	 or	 anything
similar	--	it	has	to	be	found	inside	you;	it	has	to	be	found	in	your	own	eternity,	in
your	own	ecstasy.
To	think	of	oneself	as	a	body-mind	structure	is	the	most	dangerous	idea	that	has
happened	to	people.	That	destroys	their	whole	grace,	whole	beauty,	and	they	are
constantly	trembling	and	afraid	of	death,	and	trying	to	keep	old	age	as	far	away
as	possible.	In	the	West,	if	you	say	to	an	old	woman,	"You	look	so	young,"	and
she	knows	she	is	no	longer	young,	she	will	stand	in	front	of	the	mirror	for	hours
to	 check	 whether	 any	 youthfulness	 has	 remained	 anywhere.	 But	 she	 will	 not
deny	it,	she	will	be	immensely	happy.	In	the	East,	nobody	says	to	an	old	woman,
"You	are	young";	on	the	contrary,	old	age	is	so	respected,	loved,	so	that	to	say	to
somebody,	"You	look	younger	than	your	age,"
is	a	kind	of	insult.	.
I	am	reminded	of	one	incident	that	happened	life...
I	was	staying	in	Chanda	--	a	far	corner	of	Maharashtra	--	with	a	very	rich	family,
and	they	were	very	much	interested	in	an	astrologer.	They	loved	me	and	I	used
to	go	at	least	three	times	per	year.	That	was	their	quota,	and	I	used	to	stay	there
for	at	least	three	or	four	days	each	time.	Once	when	I	went	there,	without	asking
they	had	arranged	with	the	astrologer	to	come	and	to	look	at	my	hands	and	tell
some	things	about	me.	When	I	came	to	know	about	it,	everything	was	fixed;	the
astrologer	was	sitting	in	the	sitting	room.	So	I	said,
"Okay,	let	us	enjoy	that	too!"
I	showed	him	my	hand;	he	pondered	over	it	and	he	said,	"You	must	be	at	least
eighty	years	old."
Of	 course,	 one	 of	 the	 daughters	 of	 the	 rich	man	 freaked	 out,	 "This	 is	 stupid.
What	kind	of	astrology..."
At	 that	 time	 I	 was	 not	 more	 than	 thirty-five	 --	 even	 a	 blind	 man	 could	 have
measured	 thirty-five	and	eighty!	She	was	 really	angry,	 and	 she	 told	me,	 "I	 am
finished	with	this	astrologer.	What	else	can	he	know?"
I	 said,	 "You	 don't	 understand.	 You	 are	 more	 Westernized	 --	 educated	 in	 the
Western	 style.	 You	 have	 been	 to	 the	 West	 for	 your	 education	 --	 you	 can't
understand	what	he	was	saying."
She	said,	"What	was	he	saying?	It	was	so	clear	there	is	no	need	to	understand;	he
was	 simply	 showing	his	 stupidity.	A	 thirty-five-year-old	young	man,	 and	he	 is
saying	that	you	are	eighty	years	old."
I	said,	"Be	patient."
And	I	told	her	a	story	about	Emerson...
A	man	asked	Emerson,	"How	old	are	you?"
Emerson	said,	"Nearabout	three	hundred	and	sixty	years."
The	man	could	not	believe...	and	he	had	always	believed	in	Emerson	that	he	is	a
man	 of	 truth!	What	 had	 happened	 --	 a	 slip	 of	 the	 tongue?	Or	 had	 he	 become
senile?	Or	is	he	joking?
To	make	 things	 clear	 he	 said,	 "I	 did	not	 hear	what	 you	 said.	 Just	 tell	me	how
much...?"
Emerson	said,	"You	have	heard	it	--	three	hundred	and	sixty	years."
The	man	said,	"I	cannot	believe	it.	You	don't	look	more	than	sixty	years."
Emerson	said,	"You	are	 right	 in	a	way:	on	 the	vertical	 I	am	three	hundred	and
sixty,	and	on	the	horizontal	I	am	sixty."
Perhaps	he	was	the	first	Western	man	to	use	this	Eastern	expression	of	horizontal
and	vertical.
Emerson	was	immensely	interested	in	the	East,	and	he	had	a	few	glimpses	which
bring	him	closer	 to	 the	 seers	of	 the	UPANISHADS.	He	 said,	 "Actually	 I	 have
lived	sixty	years;	you	are	right.	But	in	sixty	years	I	have	lived	as	much	as	you
will	not	be	able	 to	 live	even	 in	 three	hundred	and	sixty	years.	 I	have	 lived	six
times	more."
The	vertical	 line	does	not	 count	 years,	 it	 counts	 your	 experiences.	And	on	 the
vertical	line	is	the	whole	treasure	of	existence	--	not	only	immortality,	not	only	a
feeling	 of	 divineness,	 but	 the	 first	 experience	 of	 love	 without	 hate,	 the	 first
experience	 of	 compassion,	 the	 first	 experience	 of	 meditation	 --	 the	 first
experience	of	the	tremendous	explosion	of	enlightenment.
It	 is	not	a	coincidence	that	 in	 the	West,	 the	word	ènlightenment'	does	not	have
the	same	meaning	as	in	the	East.	They	say	that	after	the	black	ages,	dark	ages,
came	the	age	of	enlightenment.	They	refer	to	people	like	Bertrand	Russell,	Jean-
Paul	 Sartre,	 Jaspers	 as	 very	 enlightened	 geniuses.	 They	 don't	 understand	 that
they	are	misusing	a	word,	dragging	it	into	the	mud.	Neither	is	Bertrand	Russell
enlightened	nor	Jean-Paul	Sartre	nor	Jaspers.
Enlightenment	does	not	happen	on	the	horizontal.	Even	in	his	old	age	Jean-Paul
Sartre	was	still	running	after	young	girls.	Bertrand	Russell	changed	his	wife	so
many	times,	and	he	lived	long	on	the	horizontal	--	almost	a	century.	But	even	in
his	old	age,	his	interests	were	as	stupid	as	young	people.
The	 East	 understands	 that	 the	 word	 ènlightenment'	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
genius,	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 intelligence,	 it	 has	 something	 to	 do	 with
discovering	your	real,	authentic	being.	It	is	discovering	God	within	you.
Amrito,	you	need	not	be	worried	about	laws.	Those	laws	are	all	on	the	horizontal
line.	On	the	vertical	line	there	is	love,	no	law;	there	is	the	growing	experience	of
becoming	more	 and	more	 spiritual	 and	 less	 and	 less	 physical,	more	 and	more
meditative	and	less	and	less	mind,	more	and	more	divine	and	less	and	less	of	this
trivial	material	world	in	which	we	are	so	much	enmeshed.
On	 the	 vertical	 line,	 slowly	 you	 feel	 desires	 disappearing,	 sensuality
disappearing,	 sexuality	 disappearing,	 ambitions	 disappearing,	 will	 to	 power
disappearing...	your	slavery	in	all	its	aspects	disappearing	--	religious,	political,
national.	 You	 become	 more	 of	 an	 individual.	 And	 with	 your	 individuality
growing	clear	and	luminous,	the	whole	humanity	is	becoming	one	in	your	eyes	--
you	cannot	discriminate.
There	 are	great	 experiences	on	 the	vertical	 line;	on	 the	horizontal	 line	 there	 is
only	decline.	On	the	horizontal	 line	 the	old	man	lives	 in	 the	past.	He	thinks	of
those	beautiful	days,	those	Arabian	nights	when	he	was	young;	he	thinks	also	of
those	beautiful	days	when	there	was	no	responsibility	and	he	was	a	child	running
after	butterflies.	In	fact,	for	his	whole	life	he	has	been	running	after	butterflies	--
even	in	old	age.
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	passing	along	a	street...
And	he	saw	a	beautiful	young	woman	so	he	gave	her	a	good	nudge.	The	woman
was	shocked,	because	Mulla	was	old;	all	his	hairs	were	pure	silver	white.	The
woman	said,
"You	should	be	ashamed	--	all	your	hairs	are	pure	white.	You	are	the	age	of	my
grandfather	 --	 you	 should	 have	 been	 dead	 by	 now.	 You	 are	 showing	 your
ugliness....
Mulla	said,	"Listen,	my	hairs	are	white,	that's	true,	but	my	heart	is	still	black	--
dark	black."
On	the	horizontal	line,	that's	what	happens	--	your	hairs	will	become	white,	but
you	don't	become	white.	In	fact,	on	the	contrary:	as	you	grow	old,	you	become
more	and	more	infatuated	by	desires,	because	now	you	know	that	ahead	there	is
only	 death.	 So	 you	 enjoy	 as	 much	 as	 possible,	 although	 enjoying	 becomes
difficult,	physically	you	have	lost	 the	energy.	So	the	old	man	on	the	horizontal
line	becomes	cerebrally	sexual;	he	is	continuously	thinking	of	sex.
Psychologists	have	been	watching	thousands	of	people,	and	they	have	concluded
that	every	man	thinks	of	a	woman	at	least	once	in	three	minutes.	Just	check	it!
That	 will	 show	 you	 on	 what	 line	 you	 are	 --	 horizontal	 or	 vertical.	 And	 each
woman	 thinks	of	 a	man	one	 time	 in	 seven	minutes.	That	 is	 the	difference	 that
creates	 conflict.	 The	moment	 the	 husband	 comes	 and	 asks,	 "Dear,	what	 about
it?"	 and	 she	 says,	 "I	 have	 a	 headache,	 don't	 torture	 me	 any	 more..."	 The
difference	is	that	she	thinks	of	it	only	one	time	in	seven	minutes,	that	means	one
day	in	seven	days...!
The	man	thinks	of	the	woman	one	time	in	three	minutes,	that	is	average.	In	old
age	those	three	minutes	shrink	into	one	minute.	The	old	man	has	nothing	else	to
do	but	to	think	--
and	what	else	is	there	to	think	about?	He	imagines	beautiful	women.
One	 day	 Mulla	 Nasruddin	 was	 sitting	 on	 his	 balcony	 watching	 the	 beautiful
sunset...
And	 suddenly	 he	 shouted	 to	 his	 servant,	 "Bring	my	 glasses,	 bring	my	 glasses
quickly!"
The	servant	said,	"What	calamity	has	happened?"	He	brought	his	glasses.
Mulla	 said,	 "You	 idiot,	 when	 I	 say	 quick	 it	 mean	 quick.	 We	 missed	 the
opportunity."
The	servant	said,	"I	don't	understand,	what	opportunity?"
He	 said,	 "Such	 a	 beautiful	woman	was	going	by,	 but	my	 eyes	 can't	 figure	out
whether	 she	 is	 a	 woman	 or	 a	 man,	 whether	 she	 is	 really	 beautiful	 or	 I	 am
imagining.	Glasses	were	needed,	but	by	the	time	you	brought	the	glasses	she	was
gone."
The	servant	said,	"You	are	under	the	wrong	impression;	she	was	not	a	woman!
He	is	my	brother	who	has	come	to	see	me.	Nobody	else	has	passed."
The	old	man	is	continuously	thinking	of	 the	past	--	 this	 is	 the	psychology.	The
child	thinks	of	the	future	because	he	has	no	past;	there	is	no	question	of	thinking
of	the	past	--
no	yesterday.	He	thinks	of	days	to	come,	the	whole	long	life.	Seventy	years	gives
him	space...	He	wants	to	become	big	enough	quickly	to	do	things	that	all	the	big
people	are	doing.
The	old	man	has	no	future	--	the	future	means	death;	he	does	not	even	want	to
talk	about	the	future.	The	future	makes	him	tremble.	The	future	means	the	grave
--	he	talks	about	the	past.
And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 countries.	For	 example,	 a	 country	 like	 India	never
thinks	of	 the	 future.	That	would	mean	 it	had	become	old;	 it	 is	 symptomatic.	 It
always	 thinks	 of	 the	 past.	 It	 goes	 on	 playing	 the	 life	 of	 Rama	 and	 Sita;	 for
centuries	the	same	story...	every	village	performs	that	drama.	It	goes	on	thinking
about	 Buddha	 and	 Mahavira	 and	 Adinatha	 and	 RIGVEDA	 and	 the
UPANISHADS.
Everything	 has	 passed.	 Now	 the	 country	 is	 simply	waiting	 to	 die;	 there	 is	 no
future.
According	to	the	Indian	idea	--	and	that	is	the	idea	of	the	old	mentality,	the	mind
of	the	old	man	--	the	best	age	was	millions	of	years	ago;	it	was	called	satyuga,
the	age	of	truth.
After	that	man	started	falling.
You	can	see	the	psychological	parallel;	there	are	four	ages:	childhood,	the	young
man,	middle	 age,	 the	 old	man.	According	 to	 these	 four	 he	 has	 projected	 four
ages	for	life	itself.
The	 first	 age	 was	 innocent,	 just	 like	 a	 child	 --	 very	 balanced.	 They	 give	 the
example	 that	 it	has	four	 legs	 just	 like	a	 table,	perfectly	balanced.	And	then	 the
decline	starts....
In	 India,	 the	 idea	 of	 evolution	 has	 never	 existed,	 but	 on	 the	 contrary	 just	 the
opposite	idea.	The	word	is	not	even	used	in	the	West	--	you	may	not	have	even
heard	of	the	word	-
-	but	in	India	they	have	been	thinking	about	involution,	not	evolution:	"We	are
shrinking,	we	are	falling	down."
In	the	second	stage	of	the	fall	one	leg	is	lost;	the	table	becomes	a	tripod.	It	is	still
balanced,	 but	 not	 as	much	 as	 it	was	with	 four	 legs.	 In	 the	 third	 stage	 it	 loses
another	leg;	now	it	is	standing	only	on	two	legs,	absolutely	unbalanced.	And	this
is	the	fourth	stage:	even	two	legs	are	not	available;	you	are	standing	on	one	leg	--
how	long	you	can	stand?
The	first	stage	is	called	satyuga,	the	age	of	truth;	the	second	is	simply	named	by
the	 number;	 treta	 is	 the	 third,	 because	 only	 three	 legs	 are	 left.	 The	 second	 is
called	dwapar.
Dwa	is	exactly	what	two	is	in	English;	this	`two'	comes	from	the	Sanskrit	dwa;
moving	 through	 many	 other	 languages	 it	 becomes	 twa,	 and	 then	 finally	 it
becomes	two.	And	the	fourth	age	they	have	called	kaliyuga,	the	age	of	darkness.
We	are	living	in	the	age	of	darkness.	This	is	the	mind	of	the	old	man:	ahead	there
is	only	darkness	and	nothing	else.	The	child	thinks	of	 the	future,	of	 the	golden
future;	 the	 old	 man	 thinks	 of	 the	 golden	 past.	 But	 this	 happens	 only	 on	 the
horizontal	line.	On	the	vertical	line,	the	past	is	golden,	the	present	is	golden,	the
future	is	golden;	it	is	a	life	of	tremendous	celebration.
So	rather	 than	being	worried	about	 the	 laws	of	old	age,	 think	about	which	line
your	train	is	moving	on.	There	is	still	time	to	change	trains;	there	is	always	time
to	change	 trains	because	 from	every	moment	 that	bifurcation	 is	 available.	You
can	shift,	shift	from	the	horizontal	to	the	vertical;	only	that	is	important.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	AGAIN	ABOUT	COMING	TO	THE	MASTER
AND
GOING	BACK	TO	THE	WORLD?
Again?
Chetan	Dhyan,	 it	 seems	you	 have	 heard	 it	 before.	Where	were	 you	 that	 time?
And	are	you	certain	you	will	be	able	to	hear	this	time?
I	can	say...	in	fact	I	am	saying	everything	again	and	again	and	again,	but	you	are
not	ever	at	home	so	you	don't	know.	You	think	I	am	saying	new	things	every	day
--	from	where	can	I	get	new	things?	I	have	stopped	reading;	for	twelve	years	I
have	not	touched	a	single	book.	I	don't	meet	people,	so	I	can't	gather	gossips	or
gospels.	I	don't	go	anywhere.	I	just	talk	to	you	and	go	to	sleep!
In	sleep	do	you	think	I	can	find	new	things	every	day?	My	sleep	is	dreamless,
contentless
--	just	a	pure	silence.	It	is	another	name	for	meditation	to	me.
Nirvano	 just	 takes	 care	 that	 once	 in	 a	while	 I	 sleep,	 or	 else	 the	 body	 suffers;
otherwise	 the	whole	 night	 I	 am	 awake.	 I	 have	 divided	 the	 day	 into	 two	 parts
because	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 read.	 I	 have	 read	 so	much,	 and	 now	 I	 am	 utterly
bored	when	 I	come	 to	 look	at	books.	 I	 already	know	what	 these	 idiots	will	be
writing.	And	there	is	no	other	source....
The	 only	 thing	 is	 that	 you	 feel	what	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 new,	 that	 you	 have	 never
heard	 it	before.	You	have	been	here,	but	 I	will	not	 refuse	your	question.	 I	will
repeat	it	again!	But	before	I	say	anything	about	it,	to	wake	you	up	I	will	tell	you
a	story.	I	use	stories	and	jokes	 to	keep	you	awake!	If	 I	start	 talking	about	pure
philosophy	there	will	be	complete	silence	and	people	will	start	snoring!
For	 centuries	 people	 have	 been	 snoring	 whenever	 religion,	 spirituality,
philosophy	and	meditation	were	discussed.	And	all	the	great	masters	have	been
in	immense	agony	because	of	their	compassion	--	what	to	do	with	these	people?
But	I	have	found	a	way:	there	is	no	need	to	say	to	you,	"Wake	up!"	I	simply	tell
you	a	joke	when	I	see	you	are	slipping	into	sleep.	Then	you	just	straighten	up,
open	your	eyes,	look	all	around	--	I	don't	allow	anybody	to	snore!
A	man	from	Warsaw	in	Chelm	on	a	business	trip,	was	walking	down	the	street
when	 he	 was	 stopped	 by	 Yossel	 the	 chimney	 sweep.	 "Zalman!"	 cried	 Yossel.
"What	 has	 become	 of	 you?	 It's	 so	 long	 since	 I	 have	 seen	 you.	 Just	 look	 at
yourself."
"But	wait,"	replied	the	stranger,	"I'm..."
"Never	mind	that,"	said	Yossel.	"I	can't	get	over	how	much	you	have	changed.
You	used	to	be	such	a	big	man,	built	like	an	ox.	And	now	you	are	smaller	than	I
am.	Have	you	been	sick?"
"But	wait,"	replied	the	stranger,	"I'm..."
"Never	mind	that,"	said	Yossel.	"And	what	has	become	of	your	hair?	You	used	to
have	 a	 fine	 head	 of	 black	 hair,	 and	 now	 you	 are	 completely	 bald.	 What	 has
happened?	You	know,	I	don't	see	how	I	ever	recognized	you.	Zalman,	what	has
become	of	you?"
"I	have	been	trying	to	tell	you,"	the	man	replied.	"I	am	not	Zalman."
"Oy,"	replied	Yossel,	"You	have	gone	and	changed	your	name	as	well!"
If	one	does	not	want	to	listen,	what	to	do!	You	will	find	some	way	out.
Your	question	is	beautiful.	You	say,	"Can	you	say	something	again	about	coming
to	the	master	and	going	back	to	the	world?"
The	moment	you	have	found	a	master,	wherever	you	are	the	master	will	be	with
you.
Finding	the	master	means	drinking	from	his	well.
Finding	the	master	means	becoming	yourself	--	so	attuned	with	the	master,	so	in
accord,	in	such	a	deep	harmony,	that	you	only	appear	two,	but	you	have	become
one.	 The	 bodies	 are	 two,	 but	 the	 inner	 flames	 of	 your	 life	 have	 become	 one.
Once	you	have	found	the	master,	there	is	no	way	to	go	anywhere	where	you	can
be	without	the	master.
If	 going	 to	 the	world	 you	 find	 yourself	 alone,	without	 the	master,	 that	 simply
means	only	one	thing,	without	any	doubt	--	you	have	not	found	the	master	yet.
There	 is	 a	 beautiful	 story	 about	 Mahakashyapa,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant
disciples	of	Gautam	Buddha	--	perhaps	just	second	to	him,	or	maybe	just	equal
to	 him.	 He	 never	 asked	 any	 question,	 he	 never	 bothered	 Buddha	 about	 any
problem.	Finally,	Buddha	became	concerned,	"What	is	the	matter?	Everybody	is
asking,	 everybody	 is	 receiving	 the	 answer,	 and	 this	Mahakashyapa	 never	 asks
anything.	And	if	he	does	not	ask	there	is	no	point	in	answering	him	--	what	am	I
going	to	answer?"
He	called	Mahakashyapa.	With	 tears,	Mahakashyapa	came	 to	him	and	he	said,
"The	only	thing	is	that	I	am	afraid	of	enlightenment."
Buddha	 said,	 "You	 are	 strange.	 You	 have	 left	 your	 kingdom	 and	 you	 have
become	a	sannyasin,	and	now	you	are	afraid	of	enlightenment?"
He	 said,	 "That's	 true,	 that's	why	 I	 don't	 ask	 anything,	 because	 I	 am	 afraid	 if	 I
become	enlightened	you	will	send	me	away	to	spread	the	message,	 the	word.	I
have	been	watching;	those	people	who	have	become	enlightened	have	been	sent
away,	and	I	cannot	 live	a	single	moment	without...	Just	 leave	me	alone.	I	don't
want	any	enlightenment,	I	just	want	to	be	with	you.	And	I	can	be	with	you	only
if	I	am	unenlightened;	once	I	am	enlightened	I	know	you	will	send	me."
Buddha	said,	"I	promise	you,	I	will	not	send	you.	But	just	out	of	that	fear,	don't
prevent	yourself	from	becoming	enlightened	--	you	don't	know	what	it	is!"
Because	of	the	promise	of	Gautam	Buddha,	Mahakashyapa	became	enlightened
on	 the	 second	 day.	All	 this	 time	 he	 had	 been	 becoming	 silent,	 peaceful	 --	 no
question,	no	answer;	the	chattering	of	the	mind	had	gone	away.	For	twenty	years
he	had	been	sitting	in	deep	closeness	with	Buddha,	and	his	love	for	him	was	so
much	that	he	was	ready	to	drop	the	idea	of	enlightenment.
You	 will	 find	 very	 few	 disciples	 who	 will	 be	 ready	 to	 drop	 the	 idea	 of
enlightenment.
They	will	say,	"This	is	stupid.	For	enlightenment	we	have	come	to	a	master,	and
then	for	the	master	we	drop	the	idea	of	enlightenment!	It	does	not	make	sense."
But	 once	 Buddha	 promised	 him,	 the	 next	 day	 he	 became	 enlightened.	 And
Buddha	called	him,	"Mahakashyapa,	now	you	have	to	go	and	spread	the	word."
Mahakashyapa	said,	"And	what	about	your	promise?"
Buddha	said,	"A	promise	was	given	to	an	unenlightened	man!	You	are	no	longer
the	same	man;	that	man	has	gone.	To	you	I	have	never	given	any	promise."
Mahakashyapa	said,	"That's	true.	That	man	is	gone,	but	be	kind	enough...	Forget
about	 the	promise	because	you	are	 tricky,	you	are	getting	out	of	 it.	Let	me	be
here."
But	Buddha	said,	"What	will	you	do	here?	Don't	you	know	that	once	you	have
become	 enlightened,	wherever	 you	 are	 I	 am	with	 you?	 I	 am	you.	What	 is	 the
difference	 between	my	 enlightenment	 and	 your	 enlightenment?	 Just	 a	 day	 ago
you	were	an	unlit	candle;	today	you	have	your	own	flame	--	and	the	flame	is	the
same.	Today	you	are	a	buddha	yourself."
Mahakashyapa	touched	his	feet	and	said,	"I	will	go,	but	just	allow	me	one	thing,
that	wherever	I	am	I	can	bow	down	towards	your	direction	and	touch	your	feet.
Your	feet	will	not	be	there,	but	I	can	touch	the	ground	and	kiss	the	ground.	This
much	you	will	have	to	allow	me."
Buddha	said,	"I	can	allow	you.	There	is	no	harm	in	it,	but	what	will	others	think?
They	 will	 think	 you	 are	 crazy.	 First	 you	 are	 going	 to	 talk	 about	 meditation,
enlightenment	--
they	will	think	you	are	a	little	strange	--	and	when	they	see	you	kissing	the	earth
and	 touching	 the	earth	with	your	head	 then	 it	will	become	certain	 to	 them	that
you	are	really	mad."
Mahakashyapa	said,	"That	you	can	leave	to	me.	That	is	my	problem;	you	should
not	interfere	in	it.	First	you	tricked	me	into	enlightenment	--	for	twenty	years	I
was	so	happy.
Now	I	am	more	happy	and	more	blissful.	For	twenty	years	I	was	happy	in	spite
of	my	ignorance,	now	I	am	happy,	simply	happy	--	there	is	no	ignorance,	there	is
no	darkness.	I	am	grateful	to	you.	I	know	you	are	within	me	now,	but	whatever
the	world	thinks	I	will	continue	to	touch	your	feet	--	at	least	from	far	away,	just
in	your	direction."
And	his	whole	life	he	continued.	People	were	amazed	seeing	him	every	morning,
every	 evening,	 "What	 are	 you	 doing?"	 But	 he	 was	 such	 a	 luminous	 figure,
nobody	could	think	that	he	was	mad.	In	fact,	they	had	never	seen	such	a	man	of
genius,	 intelligence,	 awareness,	 love,	 compassion,	 blissfulness	 --	 twenty-four
hours	 in	 ecstasy.	 So	 they	 could	 not	 think	 that	 he	 was	 mad,	 but	 what	 was	 he
doing?"
He	said,	"I	bow	down	to	my	master's	feet.	He	must	be	a	 thousand	miles	away,
just	 in	 the	direction...	 I	 cannot	 forget	my	gratitude	 towards	him.	 If	 he	had	not
tricked	me	I	would	have	remained	unenlightened	forever.
"Just	 for	 me	 to	 become	 enlightened,	 my	 master	 was	 even	 ready	 to	 lie.	 He
promised	me	--
knowing	perfectly	well	that	he	was	not	going	to	keep	his	promise	--	and	he	is	a
man	 of	 his	 word;	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 him	 going	 against	 his	 word.	 But	 his
compassion	was	so	much,	and	his	love	was	so	much,	how	can	I	forget	him?
"It	does	not	matter	where	he	 is	 I	bow	down	in	gratitude	morning	and	evening,
and	that	is	my	most	precious	time.	I	am	blissful,	I	am	ecstatic,	I	am	enlightened."
But	I	want	you	to	know	that	he	said	to	people	again	and	again,	"Even	my	great
ecstasy	is	less	than	the	ecstasy	I	feel	when	I	bow	down	to	my	master.	Whatever	I
am	is	his	compassion	and	nothing	else."
Chetan	Dhyan,	 you	 need	 not	 be	worried	 if	 you	 have	 found	 the	master	 in	me.
Then	wherever	you	are	you	will	find	me	very	close,	nearby	--	just	following	you
like	a	shadow.
But	 if	 you	 get	 lost	 into	 the	 world,	 that	 will	 also	 be	 a	 good	 experience,	 to
understand	 that	you	have	not	 found	 the	master.	 In	any	case,	 these	are	 the	only
two	alternatives	--	either	you	will	find	me	in	your	gratitude,	in	your	love,	in	your
peace,	in	your	silence,	in	your	meditations,	in	your	joy,	or	you	will	forget	about
me	 in	 the	 crowd.	 In	 both	 of	 the	ways	 it	 will	 be	 a	 beautiful	 experience	 and	 a
beautiful	test.
I	 want	 everybody	 here...	 those	 who	 are	 essential	 to	 run	 the	 commune	 should
remain	here;	otherwise,	people	should	come	and	go.	They	can	manage	 it	 to	be
here	for	three	months	--
be	here	three	months	and	go	back	into	the	world.
The	day	you	can	start	 finding	me	wherever	you	are	 is	 the	greatest	day	of	your
life.
Question	3
BELOVED	MASTER,
LOVING	TO	HEAR	YOU	LAUGH,	LOVING	YOUR	JOKES,	LOVING	YOU
--
BELOVED	MASTER,	WOULD	YOU	SPEAK	TO	US	ABOUT	LAUGHTER?
Anand	Svabhavo,	when	you	are	hungry	you	don't	want	 somebody	 to	 speak	on
food!
When	you	are	in	a	river	drowning,	you	don't	want	somebody	else	to	talk	about
the	art	of	swimming.	There	are	right	moments	and	right	situations,	and	there	are
things	which	can	be	talked	about,	yet	misunderstood.
Laughter	 is	 a	 mystery.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 experience	 it	 than	 to	 hear	 someone	 talk
about	it.	But	one	becomes	curious,	"What	is	laughter?"
Laughter	is	the	most	intelligent	factor	in	you.
Buffaloes	don't	laugh,	and	if	you	meet	a	buffalo	laughing	you	will	go	mad!	Then
it	will	be	impossible	to	bring	you	to	sanity.	No	animal	laughs.	Laughter	needs	a
very	sensitive	intelligence.	It	means	that	you	can	understand	the	ridiculousness
of	a	certain	situation.
What	 are	 jokes?	 They	 are	 a	 very	 clever	 arrangement.	 They	 take	 you	 in	 a
direction	 logically,	 rationally,	 you	 start	 expecting	 that	 now	 this	 is	 going	 to
happen,	 this	 is	 going	 to	 happen...	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 happening	 according	 to	 your
expectations.	 Then	 comes	 a	 sudden	 turn	 and	 something	 happens	 which	 you
could	never	have	imagined.	That	brings	laughter	to	you.
It	 is	 a	 very	 internal	 process	 of	 your	 rational	 expectation.	 If	 what	 you	 were
expecting	 happens,	 there	will	 be	 no	 laugh.	But	 if	 you	 see	 something	 that	 you
could	 not	 have	 conceived	 and	 everything	went	well	 up	 to	 the	 end	 --	 and	 then
suddenly	something	happens	that	makes	you	immediately	forget	all	your	reason,
logic,	mind...
Laughter	is	the	only	ordinary	experience	when	you	are	no	longer	a	mind,	and	I
use	 it	 to	 give	 you	 glimpses	 of	 no-mind,	 of	 meditation,	 of	 a	 transcendence	 of
mind.	Perhaps	I	am	the	first	man	in	the	whole	history	of	mankind	who	has	been
using	jokes	as	a	preparation	for	meditation.	Jesus	would	not	laugh;	Buddha	will
not	 laugh;	 Lao	 Tzu	 is	 not	 heard	 to	 have	 ever	 laughed...	 They	 were	 serious
people,	and	they	were	doing	serious	work!
It	will	be	good	to	understand	a	small	incident	which	began	the	tradition	of	Zen.
Those	 are	 the	 people	who	 understand	 --	 the	 only	 people	 on	 the	 earth,	 a	 small
stream	who	have	understood	the	meaning	of	 laughter	because	 their	origin	 is	 in
laughter.
It	was	again	Mahakashyapa...
He	was	sitting	under	his	tree	--	he	was	sitting	under	his	tree	for	twenty	years.	It
had	almost	become	his	tree;	nobody	else	used	to	sit	under	that	tree.	Everybody
knew	that	that	was	the	place	for	Mahakashyapa	and	not	to	disturb	that	man.	"He
never	asks,	he	never	says	anything,	he	never	talks	--	why	disturb	him?	Just	leave
him	alone."	It	had	become	an	accepted	fact.	But	one	day	he	laughed	--	and	that
day	was	his	day	of	enlightenment.
A	 great	 king,	 Prasenjita,	 asked	 his	 wife...	 His	 wife	 was	 a	 disciple	 of	 Gautam
Buddha,	 a	 lay	 disciple,	 not	 a	 sannyasin,	 but	 immensely	 interested	 in	 Gautam
Buddha	 and	 hoping	 that	 one	 day	 her	 husband	 would	 allow	 her	 to	 become	 a
sannyasin.	 Prasenjita	 was	 not	 interested	 in	 sannyas;	 he	 was	 interested	 in
increasing	his	kingdom,	 to	make	 it	bigger	and	bigger.	He	was	always	 fighting,
invading	new	areas.
By	 chance,	Buddha	 had	 come	 into	 the	 capital	 of	 Prasenjita,	 and	 the	wife	was
insisting,
"You	 have	 to	 come	with	me	 to	welcome	 him	 because	 it	 doesn't	 show	 culture,
refinement	if	you	don't	come.	A	man	of	the	caliber	of	Gautam	Buddha	happens
in	millions	of	years.
Kings	and	queens	are	a	rupee	a	dozen!	You	can	find	them	anywhere;	they	are	not
worth	much.	You	will	be	forgotten,	but	Gautam	Buddha's	name	will	remain	till
the	 last	 man	 has	 become	 enlightened.	 You	 may	 be	 remembered	 if	 you	 go	 to
Gautam	Buddha	 and	 touch	his	 feet.	 Just	 this	 small	 act	 on	your	part	will	make
you	historical".
And	that	is	true	--	who	would	have	heard	about	Prasanjita?	There	were	hundreds
of	 other	 kings	 at	 that	 time,	 and	 we	 don't	 know	 anything	 about	 them,	 but
Prasanjita	 is	known.	And	because	 the	wife	was	 insistent,	he	 said,	 "Okay,	but	 I
have	to	present	something	to	him."
He	 had	 a	 very	 beautiful	 diamond.	 Other	 kings	 were	 jealous	 of	 that	 diamond;
perhaps	 that	was	 the	 best	 diamond	 available	 in	 those	 days.	 So	 prasenjita	 said,
"What	else	can	I	offer	to	him?	I	will	offer	this	diamond."
The	wife	said,	"You	don't	understand,	a	diamond	or	a	stone	 is	equal	 to	him.	 It
will	 be	 better	 that	 you	 take	 a	 lotus	 flower,	 because	 to	 him	 the	 lotus	 flower
represents	a	revolution
--	 it	 comes	out	 of	 dirty	mud.	And	 it	 is	 the	most	 beautiful	 flower	on	 the	 earth,
most	fragrant,	the	biggest	flower.	It	comes	from	the	dirt,	it	crosses	the	water	and
stands	 on	 top	 of	 the	water.	 This	 is	 a	 great	 revolution:	 dirt	 turning	 into	 such	 a
beautiful...
"So	velvety	are	 the	flowers,	 leaves	and	petals	 that	when	dewdrops	 in	 the	night
gather	on	the	big	petals	and	big	leaves,	they	are	so	velvety	that	the	water	cannot
touch	 them.	 They	 remain	 on	 the	 lotus	 leaves,	 but	 the	 lotus	 leaf	 remains
untouched	by	them.	The	lotus	flower	remains	in	the	water	but	the	water	does	not
touch	it	--	that	gives	it	another	significance	that	a	man	should	live	in	the	world
untouched	 by	 it.	He	 should	 live	 in	 the	world	 but	 not	 allow	 the	world	 to	 enter
him;	he	should	live	in	the	dirty	world,	but	he	has	the	possibility	of	becoming	a
lotus	flower."
So	the	lotus	became	a	symbol	for	 the	 transcendence	from	the	trivial	matters	of
the	world.
Gautam	Buddha	is	represented	in	thousands	of	temples	sitting	on	a	lotus	flower.
That	 lotus	 flower	 represents	his	philosophy	 --	 it	 has	become	a	 symbol.	So	 she
said,	 "In	our	beautiful	pond	at	 the	palace	 I	will	 find	 the	best	and	biggest	 lotus
flower	--	you	take	the	lotus	flower."
The	husband	did	not	think	that	a	lotus	flower	had	any	value	in	comparison	to	his
diamond	which	could	purchase	a	whole	kingdom.	So	he	said,	"Okay,	I	will	take
both,	and	I	will	see	which	he	prefers.	This	is	my	first	meeting,	so	let	me	judge
the	man."
He	 touched	 the	 feet	 of	 Buddha	 and	 wanted	 to	 give	 the	 great	 diamond.	 Ten
thousand	 disciples	 were	 present.	 They	 could	 not	 believe	 the	 radiance	 of	 the
diamond,	 its	 clarity,	 purity,	 its	 perfection	 --	 and	 it	 was	 so	 great.	 There	 was
complete	silence,	because	everybody	was	watching	what	Buddha	was	going	 to
do	now,	because	it	was	against	his	disciplines	to	have	anything	more	than	three
changes	of	clothes	and	one	begging	bowl	--
that	had	to	be	the	only	possession	for	any	sannyasin.	Now	what	was	he	going	to
do...?
Was	he	going	to	refuse	the	king?	--	that	will	be	insulting.	Was	he	going	to	accept
it?	--
but	 that	 will	 be	 against	 his	 discipline.	 So	 there	 was	 great	 silence	 and	 great
curiosity.
Buddha	saw	the	diamond	and	told	prasenjita,	"Drop	it!"
Very	 reluctantly,	 he	 dropped	 it,	 because	 now	 there	 was	 no	 way...	 He	 has
presented,	 and	 the	man	 is	 saying	 "Drop	 it."	 Under	 the	 impact	 of	 Buddha	 and
those	ten	thousand	people	-
-	 in	which	 there	were	 nearly	 two	 dozen	 enlightened	 people	 --	 he	 dropped	 the
diamond.
Then	he	brought	from	the	other	hand	the	lotus	flower,	thinking	that	perhaps	his
wife	was	right.
Buddha	said,	"Drop	it!"
prasenjita	could	not	believe	what	kind	of	man	he	was,	"I	have	brought	presents
and	he	goes	on	saying,	`Drop	it.'"
The	third	time,	when	he	had	dropped	the	lotus	flower,	his	hands	were	empty,	but
Buddha	said	loudly,	"Drop	it!"
He	said,	"I	don't	have	anything	to	drop."
That	 was	 the	 moment	 when	Mahakashyapa	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 twenty	 years
started	laughing,	madly.	prasenjita	was	very	much	offended,	but	Gautam	Buddha
called	Mahakashyapa	gave	him	 the	 lotus	 flower,	and	 told	him,	"From	you	will
start	a	totally	new	and	unique,	fresh	stream."
That	 fresh	 stream	has	developed	 into	Zen	 --	but	 it	was	born	 in	 the	 laughter	of
Mahakashyapa.
prasenjita	said,	"I	don't	understand	what	is	happening...	why	this	man	laughed."
Gautam	Buddha	said,	"He	 laughed	because	you	could	not	understand	my	 third
request	to	drop	it.	I	wanted	you	to	drop	your	ego.	I	am	not	concerned	with	lotus
flowers,	not	concerned	with	diamonds.	I	only	am	concerned	with	one	thing,	your
ego.	Unless	 you	 drop	 it,	 you	 have	 not	 dropped	 anything.	And	 I	 cannot	 accept
your	diamond	or	your	lotus	flower,	because	that	will	enhance	and	nourish	your
ego.
"That's	 why	 Mahakashyapa	 laughed	 because	 the	 poor	 emperor	 does	 not
understand	 the	 language	 of	 a	 mystic	 --	 but	 he	 understood	 it.	 In	 ten	 thousand
sannyasins	he	was	the	only	one	who	understood	what	I	meant	--	and	he	laughed.
I	have	chosen	him	to	be	the	first	for	a	new	stream	of	seekers,	so	he	is	the	founder
of	Zen."
Zen	 was	 founded	 in	 laughter,	 and	 for	 twenty-five	 centuries	 the	 tradition	 has
continued	 to	 produce	 enlightened	 people.	Most	 of	 the	 traditions	 have	 died	 but
Zen	still	brings	flowers.
Perhaps,	rooted	in	laughter,	it	is	rooted	in	the	highest	consciousness.
Anand	Svabhavo....
Rabinovich	sits	down	in	a	cafe	and	orders	a	glass	of	tea	and	a	copy	of	PRAVDA.
"I'll	 bring	 the	 tea,"	 the	 waiter	 tells	 him,	 "but	 I	 can't	 bring	 you	 a	 copy	 of
PRAVDA.	The	Soviet	regime	has	been	overthrown	and	PRAVDA	isn't	published
anymore"	--	PRAVDA	is	the	mouthpiece	of	the	Communist	Party	of	the	Soviet
Union.
"All	right,"	says	Rabinovich,	"Just	bring	me	the	tea."
The	next	day	Rabinovich	comes	to	the	same	cafe	and	asks	for	tea	and	a	copy	of
PRAVDA.	The	waiter	gives	him	the	same	answer.
On	 the	 third	 day,	 Rabinovich	 again	 orders	 tea	 and	 PRAVDA.	 This	 time	 the
waiter	says	 to	him,	"Look,	sir,	you	seem	to	be	an	 intelligent	man.	For	 the	past
three	days	you've	ordered	a	copy	of	PRAVDA,	and	three	times	now	I've	had	to
tell	 you	 that	 the	 Soviet	 regime	 has	 been	 overthrown,	 and	 PRAVDA	 isn't
published	anymore."
"I	know,	I	know,"	says	Rabinovich.	"But	I	just	like	to	hear	it."
Two	Jews	sat	in	a	coffee	house	discussing	the	fate	of	their	people.
"How	miserable	is	our	lot,"	said	one.	"Pogroms,	plagues,	quotas,	discrimination,
and	Adolf	Hitler...	Sometimes	I	think	we'd	be	better	off	if	we'd	never	been	born."
"Sure,"	 said	 his	 friend.	 "But	 who	 has	 that	 much	 luck	 --	 maybe	 one	 in	 fifty
thousand?"
Try	to	get	it!
It	was	at	the	office	Christmas	party.	As	they	lay	on	the	office	reception	couch	in
the	darkened	room,	their	breath	came	hot	and	fast.
"Oh,	Melvin,	oh	Melvin,"	she	said	passionately,	"You've	never	made	love	to	me
like	this	before.	Is	it	because	of	the	holiday	spirit?"
"No,"	he	panted.	"It	is	probably	because	I	am	not	Melvin!"
It	 is	possible,	when	you	have	a	hearty	 laugh,	mind	stops,	because	mind	cannot
laugh.	It	is	structured	seriously,	its	function	is	to	be	serious,	miserable,	sick.	The
moment	you	laugh,	it	does	not	come	from	your	mind,	it	comes	from	the	beyond,
from	your	very	inner	spirit.
According	 to	 me,	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 missed	 one	 of	 the	 dimensions	 of	 the
greatest	 importance,	 a	 sense	 of	 humor.	 And	 they	 have	made	 the	whole	 world
serious.
I	want	my	people	to	fill	the	world	with	laughter,	joy,	songs,	and	dances.	We	are
not	 seeking	 for	 any	 paradise	 --	 we	 are	 seeking	 how	 to	 create	 the	 paradise,
herenow,	because	we	are	not	interested	in	things	after	death.	If	we	can	create	a
paradise	herenow,	certainly	we	will	be	able	--	even	if	we	meet	in	hell	--	to	create
the	paradise	there.
All	my	people	are	condemned	by	all	the	religions,	so	I	hope	we	will	be	reaching
hell.	But	they	are	to	be	warned,	"Don't	send	my	people	to	hell,	because	they	will
turn	the	hell	into	a	far	better	paradise	than	you	have	with	your	old,	dirty	and	dry
saints	who	cannot	even	smile!"
I	trust	absolutely	that	when	a	million	sannyasins	enter	into	hell	with	their	guitars
and	songs	and	dances	and	jokes	the	whole	quality	and	the	whole	atmosphere	of
hell	 is	 going	 to	 be	 changed	 --	 I	 think	 even	 the	 devil	 will	 join	 you!	 He	 will
become	a	sannyasin:	Swami	Anand	Devil!
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	Opening	the	doors	of	light	and	beyond
4	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709045
ShortTitle:
INVITA28
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
92
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHO	IS	THIS	GHOSTWRITER	WHO	IS	MAKING	THE	GOLDEN	RULES?
Amrito,	as	far	as	I	am	concerned	there	is	only	one	golden	rule,	that	there	are	no
golden	 rules.	What	 are	 known	 as	 golden	 rules	 are	 only	 gold-plated.	These	 so-
called	golden	rules	are	obviously	made	by	people	who	have	gold.	You	can	see
that	these	rules	are	not	golden	but	only	gold-plated...
Women	 have	 a	 much	 better	 time	 than	 men	 in	 this	 world;	 there	 are	 far	 more
things	forbidden	to	them.
Many	a	romance	begins	when	a	girl	sinks	into	his	arms	--	and	ends	up	with	her
arms	in	his	sink.
Bachelor:	A	man	who	comes	to	work	each	morning	from	a	different	direction.
Milligan's	Law	of	Home	Economics:	Two	can	live	as	cheaply	as	one,	for	about
half	as	long.
You've	 heard	 of	 the	 three	 ages	 of	 woman:	 youth,	 middle	 age	 and,	 "You	 are
looking	wonderful."
Golding's	Law	of	Typecasting:	The	world	 is	 divided	 into	 two	 types	of	people,
those	who	divide	the	world	into	two	types	of	people,	and	those	who	don't.
The	meek	shall	inherit	the	earth,	but	not	its	mineral	rights.
Women	 are	 entirely	 to	 blame	 for	men's	 lies;	 they	 keep	 insisting	 on	 asking	 the
most	awkward	questions.
A	thing	is	not	necessarily	true	because	a	man	dies	for	it.
Klein's	Law	of	Possibilities:	Nothing	is	impossible	for	people	who	don't	have	to
do	it	themselves.
In	this	world	there	are	only	two	tragedies:	one	is	not	getting	what	one	wants,	and
the	other	is	getting	it.
Middle	age:	Later	than	you	think	and	sooner	than	you	expect.
Old	age	is	not	so	bad	when	you	consider	the	alternative.
Percy's	Law	of	Laziness:	The	world	 is	 divided	 into	 two	 sorts	 of	 people,	 those
who	are	willing	to	work	and	those	who	are	willing	to	let	them.
Karl	Marx	says,	"To	do	is	to	be	do."
Albert	Camus	says,	"To	be	is	to	do."
And	Frank	Sinatra	says,	"Do	be	do	be	do."
Question	2
BELOVED	MASTER,
IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 TO	 EXPERIENCE	 LOVE	 AND	 MEDITATION	 AT	 THE
SAME
TIME?
Taglish	Bharti,	love	and	meditation	are	not	two	things;	hence,	the	question	itself
does	not	arise.
Love	is	a	meditation	and	meditation	blossoms	in	love.	Of	course	when	I	use	the
word
`love'	 I	 don't	mean	 the	 love	 that	 ordinarily	 is	 understood	 by	 the	word,	 I	 don't
mean	 the	 biological	 infatuation	 --	 anyway	 it	 is	 not	 love.	 It	 is	 simply	 your
chemistry,	not	you	which	feels	attracted,	and	under	the	chemistry's	illusion	you
think	 you	 are	 in	 love.	 But	 that	 kind	 of	 love	 every	 animal,	 every	 bird	 knows
perfectly	well.
Only	man	seems	to	be	deluded,	and	deluded	so	much	that	all	the	animals	in	the
world	except	man	have	a	certain	season	when	they	are	infatuated	--	their	season
of	reproduction,	a	very	limited	period	in	the	year	when	biology	overtakes	them,
makes	 them	completely	blind;	 forces	 them	almost	against	 their	will.	Have	you
seen	 two	 animals	making	 love?	And	 have	 you	 ever	 seen	 them	 smiling?	 They
look	 so	 bored	 that	 how	 to	 get	 out	 of	 it	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 only	 problem	 that	 is
troubling	them.
The	whole	year	they	look	more	relaxed,	more	at	ease,	more	in	tune	with	nature
and	 with	 themselves,	 but	 when	 the	 reproduction	 season	 comes	 they	 all	 start
looking	 sad,	 serious,	 saintly.	 They	 forget	 their	 playfulness;	 they	 forget	 their
freedom.	Suddenly	they	feel	themselves	under	a	kind	of	hypnotic	trance;	in	fact,
it	is	a	chemical	trance.
That's	why	scientists	are	able	to	change	sexes	very	easily.	A	man	can	become	a
woman,	a	woman	can	become	a	man	--	just	a	very	small	change,	a	change	in	the
hormones,	 in	 the	chemistry	of	 their	bodies.	 Just	a	 few	more	hormones	and	 the
woman	will	start	growing	a	mustache	and	beard.
Now	 there	 are	 many	 people	 in	 the	 world	 who	 have	 changed	 their	 sexes.
Sometimes	it	has	happened	automatically	because	man	consists	of	both,	man	and
woman.	 Something	 is	 contributed	 by	 your	 father,	 something	 is	 contributed	 by
your	 mother,	 so	 you	 are	 both:	 your	 father	 and	 your	 mother,	 part	 man,	 part
woman.	Whichever	is	more	in	percentage,	perhaps	sixty	percent	man	and	forty
percent	woman,	then	you	are	man	or	it	may	be	otherwise,	then	you	are	a	woman.
This	percentage	of	hormones	can	be	changed	just	by	giving	you	injections.	And
in	the	developed	countries	there	are	already	men	who	have	been	born	as	women,
and	women	who	have	changed	to	men.	But	in	the	beginning	the	very	idea	came
to	mind	because	once	 in	a	while	 there	was	an	accidental	case.	For	example,	 in
the	very	beginning	of	this	century	in	London	there	was	a	case.	A	man	fell	in	love
with	a	woman	and	he	married	 the	woman.	But	after	 the	marriage	he	was	very
much	amazed	that	the	woman	slowly	started	changing	into	a	man.
After	a	year	he	was	so	much	ashamed	because	the	whole	town	was	laughing	at
him:	 his	 woman	 had	 turned	 completely	 into	 a	man.	 He	 went	 to	 the	 court	 for
divorce.	The	court	was	puzzled;	there	had	never	been	a	case	like	that	before	the
court.	And	 the	man	was	 perfectly	 reasonable.	He	 said,	 "I	married	 a	woman;	 I
have	never	married	a	man.	Why	should	I	marry	a	man?	Obviously	the	marriage
is	 canceled;	 in	 fact,	 I	 don't	 need	 any	 divorce,	 but	 just	 not	 to	 be	 illegal,	 I	 am
asking	for	divorce."
His	wife	was	 sent	 for	 a	medical	 examination.	There	was	no	need	because	 she
had	 a	mustache	 and	 beard;	 her	 breasts	 had	 disappeared.	 There	 was	 not	much
need,	but	not	taking	any	chances	the	judge	said,	"Let	her	be	medically	examined.
If	the	doctor's	report	says	she	has	become	a	man	then	there	is	no	question,	your
divorce	is	accepted."
That	 gave	 the	 idea	 to	 the	 scientists	 that	 perhaps	 the	woman	 has	 a	 very	 small
difference	 between	 her	 male	 hormones	 and	 female	 hormones.	 Perhaps	 she	 is
fifty-one	percent	woman,	forty-nine	percent	man,	and	by	some	change,	climate,
food,	some	medicine...	it	can	be	anything	that	has	altered	the	proportion	between
man	and	woman	in	her.	The	difference	was	very	slight,	very	borderline,	and	she
became	a	man.
This	 opened	 a	 door	 of	 great	 research,	 and	 it	 was	 found	 that	 every	 man	 can
become	a	woman	and	every	woman	can	become	a	man.
This	reminds	me	that	in	the	East,	from	the	very	beginning,	almost	ten-thousand-
year-old	 statues	 are	 available	 in	 which	 Shiva	 and	 his	 wife,	 Parvati,	 are
represented	as	one	personality:	half	man,	half	woman.	It	is	a	beautiful	aesthetic
and	 artistic	 sculpture,	 and	 that's	 how	 it	 has	 been	 thought	 always:	 a	 beautiful
metaphor,	but	nobody	has	thought	of	it	as	a	reality.
The	people	who	created	that	statue	must	have	come	to	know	that	every	man	is
carrying	a	woman	within	him	and	every	woman	is	carrying	a	man	within	her	--
and	this	change	is	not	impossible.
My	 own	 feeling	 is	 that	 in	 the	 future	 many	 more	 people	 will	 be	 changing	 --
because	why	not	have	both	the	experiences	in	one	life?	Most	intelligent	people
will	change	--	the	unintelligent	always	are	afraid	of	any	change	--	otherwise,	you
have	lived	as	a	woman	for	thirty	years,	now	it	is	time,	why	not	have	a	look	from
the	other	side?	Why	go	on	living	on	this	bank?	The	scenery	from	the	other	side
is	also	very	beautiful.
Only	 then	will	 the	 old	 idea	 of	 the	 poets	 that	 the	woman	 is	 a	mystery	will	 be
solved.	 You	 can	 become	 a	 woman	 and	 know	 what	 the	 mystery	 is.	 You	 can
become	a	man	and	know	what	the	mystery	is.	There	is	no	mystery	at	all;	it	is	just
a	poetic	conception.	The	difference	is	only	biological,	chemical,	hormonal.
I	 don't	 call	 that	 kind	 of	 infatuation	 love;	 I	 call	 it	 lust.	 And	 to	 be	 confused
between	lust	and	love	has	created	your	problem.
You	 are	 asking,	 "Is	 it	 possible	 to	 experience	 love	 and	meditation	 at	 the	 same
time?"	Lust	and	meditation	you	cannot	experience	at	the	same	time.
Lust	is	against	meditation.
It	is	desire,	an	ugly	desire.
It	takes	you	towards	unconsciousness.
Meditation	 is	 the	 greatest	 longing,	 the	 only	 longing	which	 cannot	 be	 called	 a
desire.	And	it	takes	you	upwards	towards	more	consciousness.
Now	both	things	you	cannot	do	--	going	upwards	towards	more	conscious	being
and	going	downward	towards	more	unconscious	being;	you	cannot	do	them	both
at	the	same	time.
But	 love	 and	 meditation	 are	 both	 reaching	 towards	 higher	 states	 of	 being.
Meditation	is	a	state	of	thoughtlessness,	a	state	of	silence,	serenity,	tranquility	--
a	state	of	blissfulness.
There	 is	no	reason	why	 love	should	be	against	 it.	Out	of	blissfulness	 love	will
flow.	In	fact,	only	a	meditative	person	can	be	a	loving	person,	and	only	a	loving
person	can	be	meditative,	because	both	are	going	beyond	the	unconscious	mind,
the	dark	mind,	the	blind	mind,	and	opening	the	doors	of	light	and	the	beyond.
They	are	different	names	and	their	different	names	have	a	certain	meaning	and
significance.	Meditation	is	possible	even	if	you	are	alone.	In	fact,	 it	 is	possible
only	when	you	are	alone,	in	your	aloneness,	utter	purity...	no	crowd	of	thoughts
or	emotions	or	feelings,	just	a	flame	of	being	conscious.
Meditation	is	the	discovery	of	your	own	self.
But	once	you	have	discovered	 the	 treasure	a	 tremendous	need	arises	 in	you	 to
share	it.
That	 sharing	 is	 love.	Meditation	 is	 like	 the	 sun	 and	 love	 is	 like	 the	 radiation
reaching	to	faraway	flowers	to	open,	for	birds	to	sing,	to	make	the	whole	living
world	alive,	fresh,	rejuvenated.	Exactly	what	the	sun	is	doing	to	the	whole	solar
system,	meditation	does	to	the	whole	human	world:	it	radiates	love.
And	if	meditation	does	not	radiate	love	then	one	is	in	some	fallacy.	What	he	is
thinking	 is	 meditation	 is	 not	 meditation.	 It	 may	 be	 concentration,	 it	 may	 be
contemplation,	but	it	is	not	meditation.
Concentration	is	of	the	mind,	one	pointedness	of	the	mind.	Contemplation	is	also
of	 the	 mind,	 not	 one	 pointedness	 but	 one	 subject	 matter.	 If	 you	 are	 thinking
about	 light	 you	 go	 on	 thinking	 about	 light,	 higher	 and	 deeper	 and	 more
possibilities	and	implications	of	light;	but	you	keep	track	of	one	dimension.
So	we	can	define	contemplation	as	thinking	in	one	single	dimension,	not	going
astray,	not	going	here	and	 there;	not	allowing	many	different	 sorts	of	 thoughts
but	 one	 singular	 path,	 moving	 in	 the	 same	 direction.	 Science	 depends	 on
concentration	 and	 philosophy	 depends	 on	 contemplation.	 Religion	 depends	 on
meditation.
Meditation	is	when	mind	is	not	functioning	at	all,	when	mind	is	absolutely	silent
and	still,	as	if	absent.	In	this	absentness	of	mind	your	authentic	being	surfaces.
Your	mask	disappears	and	your	original	face	is	encountered	for	the	first	time.
For	the	first	time	you	know	who	you	are.
And	this	experience	of	oneself	is	the	experience	of	one's	divineness.	Out	of	this
divineness	 radiates	 love.	 It	 is	 not	 addressed	 to	 anyone	 in	 particular;	 it	 simply
radiates	to	friend	and	to	foe,	to	the	familiar	and	to	the	stranger;	it	does	not	know
any	discrimination.
When	the	sun	rises	it	does	not	rise	only	for	roses	and	not	for	marigolds.	It	does
not	 rise	only	 for	 rich	people	and	not	 for	 the	poor.	 It	does	not	 rise	only	 for	 the
strong	 and	 not	 for	 the	weak.	 It	 rises	 unaddressed.	 It	 radiates	 in	 all	 directions.
Whoever	has	eyes	will	be	able	to	see	it.	Having	eyes	simply	means	whoever	is
receptive,	whoever	is	sensitive	will	be	able	to	see	it.	The	sun	does	not	rise	only
for	the	blind.
Only	a	blind	man	can	pass	a	man	of	meditation	without	feeling	his	love.	I	mean
spiritually	 blind,	 one	who	 does	 not	 have	 any	 idea	 of	who	 is	within	 his	 being;
who	 knows	 himself	 according	 to	 others,	 what	 they	 say.	 His	 knowledge	 of
himself	is	nothing	but	a	collection	of	opinions	of	other	people.	He	does	not	know
himself	directly,	immediately;	and	because	he	does	not	know	himself	he	remains
closed;	otherwise	it	was	not	possible	to	crucify	Jesus.
Those	 who	 crucified	 Jesus	 must	 have	 been	 spiritually	 blind.	 The	 man	 was
absolutely	innocent,	and	he	was	full	of	love.	He	had	not	harmed	anyone;	in	fact,
he	was	 trying	 to	help	everyone.	But	 it	 is	a	 strange	world.	Here	 there	are	more
blind	people	than	those	who	have	eyes.	And	because	the	people	who	have	eyes
and	receptivity	are	in	a	minority	they	remain	silent.	It	is	very	unfortunate	that	the
blind	are	very	articulate	and	 those	who	have	eyes,	 seeing	 that	 the	majority	are
blind,	 remain	 silent.	They	go	on	 seeing	 that	Socrates	 is	being	poisoned	by	 the
blind	and	they	don't	protest.
In	my	 eyes	 the	 people	who	 poisoned	 Socrates	 or	 crucified	 Jesus	 or	murdered
Mansoor	 or	 assassinated	 Sarmad,	 they	 were	 less	 responsible	 than	 those	 who
knew	that	what	was	happening	was	absolutely	wrong	but	remained	silent	out	of
fear.
There	is	a	beautiful	incident...
When	Al-Hillaj	Mansoor,	 a	Mohammedan	mystic,	was	 being	 very	 primitively
assassinated...	Jesus'	crucifixion	is	far	more	sophisticated;	Socrates'	poisoning	is
even	more	sophisticated,	but	nobody	has	suffered	as	much	as	Al-Hillaj	Mansoor.
First	 they	 cut	 his	 legs	 --	 they	killed	him	piece	by	piece,	 just	 to	 torture	him	as
much	as	possible,	to	the	optimum	--	then	they	cut	his	hands.	Then	they	destroyed
his	eyes	with	hot	iron	rods	--
they	went	on	piece	by	piece.
Thousands	 of	 people	 had	 gathered	 to	 watch.	 Al-Hillaj	 Mansoor's	 master,
Junnaid,	a	famous	teacher,	was	also	present.	Of	course	he	was	absolutely	against
what	 was	 happening,	 but	 the	 weakness	 of	 the	 good...	 Seeing	 the	 majority	 he
remained	 silent.	He	 knew	 that	Mansoor	was	 born	 after	 thousands	 of	 years;	 he
was	one	of	the	rarest	flowers.
Junnaid	had	been	a	 teacher	of	 thousands,	but	none	of	his	students,	none	of	his
disciples	had	reached	to	the	same	heights	as	Mansoor	--	all	this	he	understood.
People	were	 throwing	 stones	 before	 the	 assassination	 began.	He	 did	 not	want
people	to	know	that	he	was	not	throwing	stones,	so	instead	of	throwing	a	stone
he	 threw	 a	 roseflower,	 just	 to	 show	 that	 he	 had	 thrown.	Now	 in	 thousands	 of
stones,	who	can	 find	out	what	he	had	 thrown?	People	 saw	 that	he	had	 thrown
something.
But	Mansoor	could	see.	When	thousands	of	stones	were	falling	on	him,	hitting
him,	and	blood	was	flowing	all	over	his	body,	he	could	see	that	a	roseflower	also
fell	on	his	face.
And	he	knew	that	 this	roseflower	could	only	be	thrown	by	his	master	Junnaid.
He	shouted	 from	his	cross,	"Junnaid,	 these	 thousands	of	stones	are	not	hurting
me	so	much	as	your	roseflower;	it	has	created	a	wound	in	my	very	soul."
This	statement	is	tremendous:	"Thousands	of	stones	have	not	hurt	me.	These	are
people	who	don't	know	me	--	but	you	know	me;	I	had	grown	under	your	shadow.
Still,	 instead	of	protesting,	you	are	 so	 cowardly	 that	you	are	 afraid	 that	 if	 you
don't	 throw	something	people	may	start	suspecting	that	you	may	be	a	friend..."
And	tears	came	to	his	eyes.
And	Mansoor	 said,	 "These	 tears	 are	 not	 for	 these	 stones;	 these	 stones	 are	 not
worth	my	 tears.	These	 tears	are	 for	 the	man	who	has	 thrown	 the	 roseflower	 to
me."
And	still	Junnaid	remained	silent....
The	 good	man	 is	 responsible.	The	 silent	man,	 the	man	who	has	 understood	 is
responsible	 for	 all	 that	 has	 happened	 in	 the	 history	 of	man	 against	 the	 people
who	were	just	pure	love,	pure	silence,	pure	godliness.
But	perhaps	nothing	can	be	said	to	those	good	people	either,	because	if	they	had
come	out	 there	would	have	been	another	assassination	and	nothing	else.	That's
what	 Junnaid	 said	afterwards,	 and	he	was	 right.	Other	disciples	 asked	him,	 "It
was	very	shameful	when	he	called	out	your	name.	You	behaved	as	if	you	were
not	Junnaid.	It	 is	shameful	 that	you	did	not	protest	when	your	greatest	disciple
was	being	tortured	--	tortured	brutally."
No,	even	animals	don't	torture	in	that	way.	If	you	want	to	kill	someone,	kill.	But
to	cut	him	piece	by	piece	is	so	condemnable.
The	other	disciples	said,	"You	should	have	protested."
Junnaid	said,	"Do	you	think	it	would	have	saved	him?	I	have	also	thought	about
it.	It	is	not	that	I	have	not	felt	the	tragedy,	I	have	felt	as	much	hurt	as	Mansoor.	I
loved	him,	but	I	knew	that	if	I	had	come	out	and	protested,	then	instead	of	one
man,	two	men	would	have	been	assassinated.	Nothing	would	have	been	achieved
by	it."
But	still	I	feel	it	would	have	been	better	that	two	men	were	assassinated	instead
of	 one.	 I	 differ	 from	 Junnaid,	 because	 there	may	 have	 been	 a	 third	man	who
would	have	come	out,	and	three	men	may	have	provoked	courage	in	many	more.
It	 is	 not	 that	 in	 that	 vast	 crowd	 there	 was	 only	 Junnaid	 who	 saw	 that	 it	 was
absolutely	inhuman	and	ugly	--	and	there	was	no	crime.	The	crime	was	simply
that	Al-Hillaj	Mansoor	had	said,	"I	am	God,"	ana'l	haq,	and	simultaneously	he
said,	 "It	 is	not	 that	only	 I	am	God	 --	you	are	also.	 I	know	 it;	you	still	have	 to
know	it.	That's	the	only	difference."
So	 he	 was	 not	 speaking	 because	 of	 his	 ego,	 he	 was	 speaking	 because	 of	 his
experience.
He	 was	 not	 denying	 godhood	 to	 anyone.	 He	 was	 simply	 saying,	 "Your	 God
seems	to	be	asleep;	my	God	is	awake.	One	day	it	was	also	asleep	and	I	was	as
ignorant	as	you	are.
One	day	you	will	be	also	as	awake	as	I	am.	It	is	only	a	difference	of	time."
Such	 a	 compassionate	 man.	 Why	 has	 humanity	 behaved	 so	 badly	 with	 these
people?	 One	 of	 the	 reasons,	 fundamental	 reasons	 is	 that	 their	 height	 hurts
people's	 egos.	 Their	 silence,	 their	 love,	 their	 beauty,	 their	 grace,	 their
blissfulness...	Everything	hurts	people,	because	they	are	living	in	dark	holes,	in
misery,	in	suffering,	in	anguish,	and	somebody	is	standing	on	the	hilltop,	sunlit,
surrounded	by	fragrant	flowers.	They	cannot	forgive	such	a	man.
This	is	something	to	be	deeply	understood	and	remembered,	that	up	till	now	man
has	proved	by	and	large	barbarous.	All	talk	of	civilization	is	nonsense.	All	talk
of	culture,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Christian,	is	simply	bullshit.	Because	the	way
we	have	behaved	with	our	best	sons	and	daughters	is	not	cultured,	is	not	human.
It	is	subhuman	or	perhaps	even	below	animals.
No	animal	murders	another	animal	of	his	own	species.	No	lion	will	kill	another
lion,	 howsoever	 hungry;	 he	 would	 rather	 die	 than	 kill.	 But	 man	 is	 the	 only
animal	again.	He	is	unique	in	many	ways:	he	is	the	only	one	who	kills	people	of
his	own	species	--	not	only	kills	but	eats.
Just	a	few	days	ago	in	Palestine	the	people	demanded	from	the	government,	"We
should	be	allowed	to	eat	the	dead	people	because	there	is	a	shortage	of	food	--
and	it	seems	utterly	uneconomical	not	to	eat	the	dead	people."	Their	demand	was
ugly	 but	 more	 ugly	 is	 that	 the	 Palestinian	 government	 has	 accepted	 their
demand,	 saying	 that	 it	 is	 okay.	 The	 government	 cannot	 supply	 food.	On	what
grounds	can	it	deny	them?
First	 they	 will	 start	 eating	 people	 who	 died	 naturally	 and	 then	 they	 will	 start
eating	people	who	have	been	killed	on	purpose.	That	has	happened	in	Buddhist
countries:	in	China,	in	Japan,	in	Korea,	in	Taiwan.	You	will	find	hotels	where	it
is	written,	"Here	only	the	meat	of	the	naturally	dead	animals	is	available."	Now
so	many	natural	deaths	of	animals	don't	happen	anywhere	in	the	world	that	they
can	 supply	 food	 for	 the	whole	 country.	How	many	 animals	 do	 you	 see	 dying
naturally?
Those	 boards	 are	 absolutely	 false,	 as	 false	 as	 you	 will	 find	 in	 India.	 Every
restaurant,	hotel,	sweetshop...	they	will	all	have	a	board	saying,	"Only	pure	ghee
is	used	here."	And	everywhere	vegetable	ghee	made	by	vegetables,	not	by	milk,
and	sometimes	even	by	rotten	vegetables,	not	even	the	best	quality	vegetables,	is
available.	 From	where	 can	 they	 get	 so	much	 pure	 ghee?	You	 cannot	 even	 get
pure	milk.
I	was	a	postgraduate	student	and	the	man	who	used	to	supply	the	milk	to	all	the
students	 in	 the	 hostel	 was	 known	 as	 a	 very	 saintly	man;	 he	was	 really	 called
Santa	Baba,	because	everybody	 thought,	He	 is	 so	honest;	he	 is	 supplying	pure
milk.	He	always	used	to	come	with	his	son,	carrying	the	milk.
I	 heard	 him	 many	 times.	 If	 somebody	 asked	 "Santa	 Baba,	 is	 the	 milk	 really
pure?"	He	would	immediately	put	his	hand	on	his	son's	head	and	say,	"If	I	have
mixed	water	in	the	milk	my	son	will	die."
Naturally	 people	 thought...	 I	 heard	 it	many	 times.	 I	 started	 thinking	 that	 there
must	be	some	clue	to	the	mystery,	because	I	used	to	take	his	milk	and	I	knew	it
was	not	pure.	It	was	so	thin	that	it	was	more	water	than	milk.	One	day	I	took	him
aside	and	I	said	to	him,
"No	need	of	your	son...	and	no	need	for	you	to	put	your	hand	on	his	head.	You
just	tell	me	one	thing.	Is	it	really	true?"
For	a	moment	he	was	silent	and	then	he	said,	"It	is	not	true."
I	said,	"You	are	every	day	offering	your	son."
He	said,	"It	is	very	simple.	I	never	mix	water	into	milk;	I	always	mix	milk	into
water.	So	I	am	not	making	any	wrong	statement."
You	cannot	get	anything	pure.
I	have	heard	about	Mulla	Nasruddin,	 that	he	wanted	 to	commit	 suicide.	So	he
went	and	got	poison	with	great	difficulty	 from	a	chemist.	He	had	 to	bribe	him
because	 from	 where	 would	 he	 get	 the	 prescription	 for	 poison?	 Without	 the
prescription	 the	chemist	 said,	"I	cannot	give	you	anything;	you	have	 to	have	a
doctor's	prescription."
He	said,	"Who	is	going	to	give	me	the	prescription?	I	want	 to	commit	suicide.
You	take	these	one	hundred	rupees	or	two	hundred	rupees,	because	I	am	going	to
die.	What	am	I	going	to	do	with	the	rupees	afterwards?"
So	he	bribed	him,	went	very	happily	home,	mixed	the	poison	in	the	milk,	drank
it,	slept,	waited	and	waited	and	waited,	and	there	was	no	death	coming,	not	even
sleep!	Many	 times	he	woke	up,	 looked	all	around	--	whether	he	was	 in	hell	or
heaven...	but	his	wife	was	snoring	by	his	side.
He	 said,	 "My	 God,	 how	 long	 is	 this	 poison	 going	 to	 take?	 The	 chemist	 was
saying	the	moment	you	put	it	on	your	tongue	you	are	gone..."
And	it	was	becoming	morning.	The	whole	night	he	had	been	waiting.	Morning
came	and	his	wife	was	still	snoring	by	his	side.	He	rushed	to	the	chemist	--	he
was	just	opening	the	doors	of	his	shop	--	and	asked	him,	"What	is	the	matter?"
He	 said,	 "What	 can	 I	do?	You	know,	 in	 this	 country	you	cannot	 find	anything
pure.
Everything	is	mixed.	In	a	way	it	is	good;	nobody	can	commit	suicide	--	at	least
by	taking	poison."
A	man	of	love	is	really	the	only	man	who	is	cultured,	who	is	civilized.	And	such
a	 love	 arises	 only	 as	 a	 fragrance	 of	 meditation;	 hence	 my	 insistence	 on
meditation.	Unless	we	turn	people	 towards	meditation	on	a	vaster	scale	--	as	 it
has	never	been	done	before	--
there	is	not	much	hope	for	the	future,	for	future	humanity.
But	 I	 am	 not	 a	 pessimist,	 not	 a	 single	 inch.	 I	 am	 an	 absolute	 optimist.	 I	 will
believe	to	the	very	last	moment	when	the	world	is	committing	suicide	in	a	world
war,	 to	 the	 last	 moment	 I	 will	 trust	 that	 man	 will	 wake	 up.	 Seeing	 such	 a
tremendous	tragedy	ahead,	how	can	people	remain	asleep?
Now	 there	 are	 only	 two	 alternatives:	 either	 suicide	 or	 meditation.	 Life	 has
brought	us	to	such	a	point	where	there	are	not	many	roads;	just	two	roads,	two
possibilities,	 simple	 choice.	 Either	 humanity	 chooses	 to	 commit	 suicide	 under
the	leadership	of	Ronald	Reagan,	or	humanity	chooses	to	meditate,	to	be	silent,
to	be	peaceful,	to	be	human,	to	be	loving.
Only	through	meditation	can	we	defeat	the	politicians	--	and	the	politicians	need
to	 be	 totally	 defeated.	 Their	 power	 has	 to	 be	 destroyed	 forever.	 Their	 nuclear
weapons	and	their	atomic	weapons	have	to	be	thrown	in	the	Atlantic	and	in	the
Pacific.	And	 if	 they	want	 to	 jump	with	 them	they	can	 jump	also,	because	 they
are	the	greatest	criminals	in	the	world.
Ordinary	 criminals	may	murder	 somebody	 and	 you	 take	 them	 to	 the	 gallows.
Adolf	 Hitler	 kills	 eight	 million	 people,	 alone.	 Joseph	 Stalin	 kills	 one	 million
Russians,	his	own	people,	without	any	difficulty.	All	 these	politicians	continue
creating	more	and	more	weapons	to	destroy	humanity.	And	they	are	the	leaders,
they	are	the	guides	of	people.
With	these	blind	politicians	dominating	the	world	there	is	no	hope.
I	invite	the	whole	humanity,	because	this	is	a	decisive	moment,	this	is	the	time
when	 a	 great	 revolution	 is	 needed,	 a	 revolution	 against	 all	 politicians,	without
any	discrimination	of	whether	 they	 are	 socialist,	 communist,	 fascist,	 capitalist;
whether	they	believe	in	democracy	or	they	believe	in	dictatorship	--	it	does	not
matter.
For	the	first	time	all	politicians	are	standing	together	to	destroy	humanity,	and	if
we	can	make	man	free	from	the	political	jargon...	The	only	way	to	free	man	is	to
make	man	loving,	peaceful.	So	he	simply	drops	the	weapons	and	he	says,	"They
are	not	needed.	We	are	not	going	 to	kill	 each	other.	And	 if	you	have	 so	much
urge	 to	 fight,	 then	 the	 presidents	 and	 the	 prime	 ministers	 can	 have	 boxing
matches	--	and	we	all	will	enjoy.	It	will	be	really	great."
What	is	the	need	to	destroy	so	many	innocent	people	for	a	few	idiots	who	cannot
come	to	a	solution;	seeing	perfectly	well	 that	 the	 time	is	becoming	shorter	and
shorter	and	any	accident	is	possible	--	and	there	will	be	no	humanity	at	all.
I	have	heard	that	the	third	world	war	happened,	and	a	monkey	sitting	on	a	tree
says	to	a	female	monkey,	"Darling,	should	we	start	it	all	again?"	And	he	has	an
apple	in	his	hand.
"Eat	 it	 again"...	 and	 God	 will	 throw	 you	 out	 of	 the	 Garden	 of	 Eden	 and	 the
beginning	of	another	humanity....
But	 that	 humanity	 will	 again	 end	 up	 in	 some	 Ronald	 Reagan	 --	 it	 won't	 be
different.	The	only	difference	that	can	be	called	a	difference	is	the	difference	of
consciousness.	 And	 meditation	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 science	 of	 creating	 that
difference.
You	 are	 asking,	 "Is	 it	 possible	 to	 experience	 love	 and	meditation	 at	 the	 same
time?"
And	I	am	saying	to	you:	Love	is	only	possible	if	meditation	is	possible.	They	are
both	two	wings	of	the	same	bird.	And	if	you	want	the	bird	to	fly	high	in	the	sky
of	consciousness,	both	the	wings	are	needed,	love	and	meditation,	but	not	your
kind	of	love.
You	should	remember	the	difference	between	your	kind	of	love	and	the	love	I'm
talking	about.
The	husband	and	wife	were	having	a	terrible	argument.	Finally	the	wife	threw	up
her	arms	and	exclaimed,	"Why	did	I	have	to	marry	you	to	find	out	how	stupid
you	are?"
"You	did	not	have	to,"	replied	the	husband	angrily.	"You	should	have	known	it
the	minute	I	asked	you."
Who	is	going	to	ask	you	except	a	stupid	person!	That	very	moment	it	was	clear,
there	was	no	need	for	so	many	years	to	wait	to	find	out.	I	am	not	talking	about
this	love.
The	 new	 fully-automatic	 airplane	 was	 making	 its	 first	 cross-country	 flight.	 A
recorded	announcement	said,	"This	is	the	first	all-automatic	jet.	There	is	no	pilot,
no	 crew.	 Press	 a	 button	 and	 we	 take	 off.	 Press	 another	 button	 and	 dinner	 is
served.	 Press	 another	 button	 and	 we	 land.	 Nothing	 can	 go	 wrong...	 can	 go
wrong...	can	go	wrong...	can	go	wrong...."
And	we	are	 sitting	on	 a	volcano	of	nuclear	weapons	 --	 and	 everything	 can	go
wrong!	Just	press	a	button...
Your	question	is	not	only	a	personal	question.	It	has	now	become	a	question	for
the	whole	of	humanity,	the	whole	earth.	But	unfortunately,	in	five	billion	people
it	 is	difficult	 to	find	even	a	few	hundred	people	who	are	sincerely	interested	in
finding	what	meditation	is	--	not	by	studying	about	it	but	by	experiencing	it.
Time	is	running	short.	Every	moment	we	are	coming	closer	to	a	situation	which
may	 be	 deliberately	 created	 or	 may	 be	 just	 accidental.	 We	 have	 known	 the
experience	 a	 few	 days	 ago.	 In	 France	 something	 went	 wrong;	 in	 Russia
something	went	wrong.	You	cannot	trust	machines.	Man	has	not	trusted	man	but
he	has	trusted	machines	more.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	 in	Japan,	which	is	 the	most	 technologically
advanced	 country	 in	 the	 world	 today	 --	 it	 has	 left	 America	 far	 behind...	 Its
currency	 is	 now	 the	 most	 valuable;	 the	 dollar	 rates	 second.	 In	 America	 the
greatest	 rich	man	has	 only	 four	 and	 a	 half	 billion	 dollars.	 In	 Japan	 the	 richest
man	 has	 twenty-one	 billion	 dollars.	 And	 Japan	 is	 the	 only	 country	 where
thousands	 of	 robots,	 mechanical	 men,	 are	 functioning	 and	 working	 in	 the
factories.	They	are	cheap,	because	they	don't	get	temperamental,	they	don't	go	on
strike,	they	don't	ask	for	wages.	The	question	of	a	pay	rise	does	not	arise.
They	work	twenty-four	hours	a	day	with	no	shift	change.
But	 suddenly,	 last	 month	 a	 strange	 thing	 happened	 --	 that's	 what	 I	 call	 an
accident.	In	one	factory	five	persons	were	killed	by	the	robot	mechanical	men;
something	went	berserk.
Those	robots	simply	grabbed	the	people	who	were	passing	by,	gave	them	a	good
hug	--
finished.	Engineers	could	not	believe	what	was	happening,	 "Is	 it	 some	kind	of
love	that	has	arisen	in	the	heart	of	the	robot?"
And	not	only	one,	five	robots	in	one	factory	--	just	in	one	day.	And	from	that	day
people	are	keeping	far	away.	Even	engineers	are	looking	from	far	away	because
to	come	close	if	the	robot	falls	in	love	with	you...	Then	just	a	good	hug,	and	you
are	finished.	I	am	not	talking	about	this	kind	of	love.
Man	also	does	this	kind	of	love,	not	only	robots.	If	you	watch	men...	How	many
men	 have	 killed	 how	many	 women	 although	 they	 are	 alive?	 How	many	men
have	 been	 killed	 by	women	 although	 they	 are	 alive,	 but	 just	 alive,	 breathing,
surviving?	But	they	don't	know	any	life.	Love	has	destroyed	their	life.	This	is	not
the	love	I	am	talking	about.
Love	should	enhance	life,	make	it	 richer	and	more	beautiful	and	more	blissful.
Lovers	 should	 give	 more	 freedom	 to	 each	 other,	 more	 individuality,	 more
dignity.	 But	 what	 is	 happening	 for	 centuries	 is	 just	 the	 opposite.	 Lovers	 are
trying	to	dominate	each	other,	to	destroy	each	other,	to	enslave	each	other.	I	am
not	talking	about	that	love.	That	love	cannot	go	with	meditation.
"My	wife	thinks	she	is	a	chicken,"	the	husband	explained	to	the	psychiatrist.
"That's	a	serious	delusion,"	was	the	reply.	"How	long	has	this	been	going	on?"
"Three	years,"	mumbled	the	husband.
"Three	years?"	 said	 the	 shocked	 shrink.	 "Why	did	you	not	bring	her	 in	before
now?"
"Well,"	replied	the	embarrassed	husband,	"frankly,	we	needed	the	eggs."
This	 is	 going	 on	with	 almost	 every	 couple;	 they	 are	 driving	 each	 other	 crazy.
This	is	not	love.	If	this	is	love	then	what	is	hate?
The	very	idea	of	domination,	the	very	desire	to	be	powerful	over	others	shows	a
poverty	 of	 soul.	 It	 shows	 that	 you	 don't	 have	 power	 over	 yourself;	 hence	 the
desire	to	have	power	over	others.
That's	why	 I	 say	 the	 politician	 is	 the	 poorest	 person	 in	 the	world,	 because	 his
desire	is	 to	have	power	over	millions	of	people.	This	desire	shows	his	poverty.
He	 has	 no	 power	 over	 himself	 and	 he	 wants	 to	 have	 power.	 But	 it	 does	 not
matter...	he	may	have	power	over	one	person	or	one	million	people	or	one	billion
people	--	it	does	not	matter.	His	inner	feeling	of	inferiority,	that	he	has	no	power
within	 himself	will	 remain	 the	 same.	He	 can	 deceive	 the	world	 but	 he	 cannot
deceive	himself.
That's	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 politician	 and	 the	 religious	 person.	 The
religious	person	searches	for	power	over	himself,	and	the	politician	searches	for
power	 over	 others.	 The	 politician	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 violent,	 destructive,	 ugly,
barbarous.
Only	a	man	who	wants	to	be	the	power	over	himself,	who	wants	to	know	where
the	source	of	his	life	is,	from	where	he	is	getting	his	energy,	where	the	life	and
energy	source	within	him	are...
The	search	for	it	is	meditation.
Finding	it	is	enlightenment.
And	 once	 you	 have	 found	 it	 you	 have	 so	much,	 in	 such	 abundance,	 that	 you
cannot	help	sharing	it.	You	become	a	rain	cloud	which	wants	 to	shower	on	the
thirsty	earth.	And	you	must	have	smelled	 the	sweet	 fragrance	 that	comes	 from
the	 thirsty	 earth,	 from	 the	 first	 rain	 cloud's	 shower	 on	 it,	 in	 gratitude,	 in
thankfulness.
A	man	of	meditation	like	Gautam	Buddha	showers	his	love	--	he	is	a	rain	cloud,
or	 better	 to	 call	 him	 a	 love	 cloud,	who	 showers	 his	 love	 to	 all	 those	who	 are
thirsty,	to	all	those	who	are	aware	that	love	is	showering.
But	 the	majority	 are	 so	 foolish,	 they	 immediately	 open	 their	 umbrellas.	 They
protect	 themselves	 from	 love,	 they	 protect	 themselves	 from	Gautam	Buddhas,
they	protect	themselves	from	Socrates...	Strange	people.	Something	is	basically
wrong,	and	that	is,	they	don't	know	themselves	and	they	don't	know	their	thirst
and	they	don't	know	what	nourishment	they	need.
Love	is	the	nourishment	that	is	missing	in	the	world.
Yussel	Moscowitz	had	lost	all	interest	in	life,	so	he	went	to	see	his	psychiatrist.
The	usually	patient	shrink	decided	to	use	shock	tactics	this	time	and	said	sharply,
"What	would	happen	if	I	cut	off	your	left	ear?"
"I	could	not	hear,"	replied	Yussel	with	a	sigh.
"Then	what	would	happen	if	I	cut	off	your	right	ear?"	barked	the	shrink.
"I	could	not	see,"	said	Yussel,	beginning	to	show	signs	of	boredom.
The	psychiatrist	became	alarmed.	 "This	 is	 serious.	Why	do	you	say	you	could
not	see	if	I	cut	off	your	right	ear?"
"Because,"	said	Yussel	with	a	yawn,	"my	hat	would	fall	over	my	eyes.	Both	the
ears	gone,	how	can	I	see?"
The	people	you	think	are	psychiatrists,	psychologists,	psychoanalysts,	the	people
who	are	helping	humanity	to	become	more	sane,	are	the	most	 insane	people	in
the	world.	 The	 statistics	 are	 very	 clear.	 From	no	 other	 profession	 do	 so	many
people	 go	mad	 as	 from	 the	 profession	 of	 psychiatry.	The	 proportion	 is	 double
that	from	any	other	profession.
In	 the	 past	 the	 professors	 used	 to	 be	 champions	 of	 going	mad;	 now	 they	 are
number	two.
Number	one	is	the	psychologists.	They	commit	suicide	four	times	more	than	any
other	profession	--	and	these	are	the	people	who	are	helping	humanity	to	be	sane,
normal,	healthy,	intelligent.	These	are	the	people	supposed	to	teach	you	how	to
live	and	how	to	live	joyously.	These	are	the	people	who	claim	that	their	function
is	to	teach	the	art	of	living.
But	if	these	people	are	going	to	teach	the	art	of	living	it	is	going	to	be	a	really
dangerous	art	of	living.	It	will	not	be	the	art	of	living,	it	will	be	the	art	of	at	the
most	vegetating.
The	professor	asked	the	young	girl	 in	his	psychology	class,	"Which	part	of	 the
body	expands	to	ten	times	its	natural	size	under	an	emotional	impact?"
Blushing,	the	girl	replied,	"I	would	rather	not	answer	that."
The	professor	called	on	the	boy	sitting	next	 to	her	who	promptly	replied,	"The
pupil	of	the	eye."
The	 professor	 turned	 back	 to	 the	 girl	 and	 said,	 "Your	 confusion	 shows	 three
things.	 One,	 that	 you	 did	 not	 do	 your	 homework;	 two,	 that	 you	 have	 a	 dirty
mind;	and	three,	that	one	day	you	will	be	sadly	disappointed."
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	The	crescendo	of	the	insanity	of	centuries	5	September	1987	am	in
Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709050
ShortTitle:
INVITA29
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
103
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SINCE	 BECOMING	 OLD	 TWO	 DAYS	 AGO,	 I	 HAVE	 DISCOVERED	 A
WHOLE
NEW	 WORLD,	 THE	 WORLD	 OF	 WOMEN'S	 GOSSIP.	 I	 AM	 NOW
ACCEPTED	AS
ONE	OF	 THE	GIRLS	 --	WELL	ALMOST,	 BUT	 I	 GUESS	 I	WILL	 NEVER
KNOW
THAT.	MY	QUESTION	IS:	IS	THERE	NO	END	TO	GRATITUDE?
Devageet,	 I	 have	 told	 you	 that	 the	woman	has	 three	 ages.	 She	 never	 becomes
old;	it	is	only	the	man	who	becomes	old.
The	woman	passes	through	childhood,	through	youth	and,	"How	wonderful	you
are	looking."
I	 think	 somebody	 has	 told	 you,	 "How	 wonderful	 you	 are	 looking."	 That	 has
given	you	the	wrong	conception	of	"Since	becoming	old	two	days	ago..."
All	are	lunatics,	but	he	who	can	analyze	his	delusion	is	called	a	philosopher.
From	today	you	will	be	known	as	a	philosopher....
Remember:	Old	age	is	when	the	candles	cost	more	than	the	cake.
And	also	remember:	Old	age	is	when	getting	it	up	gets	you	down.
You	 have	 certainly	 entered	 into	 the	 age	 when	 people	 will	 call	 to	 you,	 "How
wonderful	you	are	looking."
The	eyes	of	the	dead	are	closed	gently;	we	also	have	to	open	gently	the	eyes	of
the	living.
I	will	try	my	best	to	be	gentle	with	you	because	you	must	be	dreaming:	women
never	become	old;	it	has	never	been	heard	of.
You	are	not	aware	of	a	very	 fundamental	 law:	When	you	are	up	 to	your	nose,
keep	your	mouth	shut.
And	never	forget	that	money	can't	buy	happiness,	but	it	can	buy	you	the	kind	of
misery	you	prefer.
In	old	age	certainly	one	wants	to	be	happy,	but	nothing	can	buy	happiness.	In	old
age	 people	 have	 money,	 but	 money	 can	 buy	 only	 the	 misery	 you	 prefer,	 not
happiness.
So	I	 think,	Devageet,	 it	 is	better	still	 to	wait.	Two	days	is	not	a	long	time,	you
can	come	back.	It	is	dangerous	to	be	old.	Start	falling	in	love	with	someone,	and
old	age	will	disappear.	That	is	one	of	the	strategies	to	drop	old	age....
A	man	 in	 love	 is	 incomplete	 --	 that's	 true	 --	 until	 he	 has	married.	 Then	 he	 is
finished.
So	 just	don't	get	married.	Always	 remain	 in	 love,	 and	you	will	be	young.	The
moment	you	are	married	then	I	cannot	help.
The	only	thing	to	remember	about	women	is:	A	man	who	moralizes	is	really	a
hypocrite,	and	a	woman	who	moralizes	is	invariably	ugly.
Just	avoid	the	moralizing	women!
It	is	simply	human	to	err	--	and	that's	what	you	have	done,	fallen	into	a	human
error	--	but	 the	 law	is:	To	err	 is	human,	but	 to	make	a	real	mess	of	 things	you
need	a	computer.
One	who	 dares	 to	 be	 a	 fool	 should	 remember	 that	 that	 is	 the	 first	 step	 in	 the
direction	of	wisdom.
You	have	the	intrinsic	capacity	to	become	wise,	but	only	two-day-old,	not	very
old.
If	you	have	really	become	old,	you	will	come	to	know	sex	is	hereditary.	If	your
parents	never	had	it,	chances	are	you	won't	either.
Socialism	is	when	the	state	owns	everything;	capitalism	is	when	your	wife	does.
And	this	is	a	tremendously	significant	maxim	to	remember	as	far	as	old	people
are	concerned:	Whenever	you	 feel	 the	urge	 to	exercise,	 just	 lie	down	and	wait
until	it	passes.
If	you	have	really	become	old	just	have	a	look	at	your	passport.	If	you	actually
look	like	your	passport	photo,	you	are	not	well	enough	to	travel.
Devageet,	you	are	perfectly	young.	Just	to	avoid	women	you	are	trying	to	play
that	 you	 are	 old.	That	 is	 not	 new.	 In	my	 commune	 every	 sannyasin	plays	old.
This	is	a	very	different	world:	outside	men	are	chasing	women;	in	my	commune
women	chase	men.
Outside	 women	 have	 headaches;	 in	 the	 commune	men	 have	 headaches.	 They
look	so	much	worried	and	afraid	that	some	woman	is	going	to	get	 them	--	and
most	often	the	woman	succeeds.
It	is	good	that	you	understand	that	two	days	ago	you	became	old.	Remain	old!
A	big	Yorkshire	 farmer	 found	 it	necessary	 to	go	 to	London	for	several	months
and	decided	to	leave	one	of	his	best	workers	in	charge:	"I	want	you	to	take	care
of	things,	Harry,	as	if	I	were	here	myself,	understand?"
Harry	nodded.
Four	months	 later	 the	boss	 farmer	 returned	 to	 find	everything	 in	 shape.	Harry,
pointing	things	out	said,	"The	chicks	have	been	laying	plenty	of	eggs,	the	wheat
has	grown	double	strong,	the	vegetables	are	better	than	they	have	ever	been,	and
as	 for	 those	monthly	 spells	 your	daughter	 used	 to	have,	 I	 have	 even	got	 those
stopped."
Devageet's	old	age	is	the	same.	Let	him	remain	old	but	don't	believe	his	old	age.
He	can	get	anybody's	monthly	problem	stopped.	He	is	simply	pretending	to	be
old.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
AM	I	MOVING	RIGHTLY	OR	AM	I	JUST	A	HOPELESS	NUTCASE?
Premnath,	your	question	is	very	significant,	because	in	this	world	everybody	is
moving	 rightly	 except	 the	 nuts	 --	 at	 least	 that's	 what	 the	 whole	 humanity
believes.
The	reality	 is	 just	 the	contrary:	 the	whole	of	humanity	 is	a	nutcase,	and	only	a
few	nuts	escape	from	this	madhouse	you	call	the	world.
It	happened	once...
Kahlil	Gibran's	one	friend	became	mad.	He	was	a	very	great	poet,	 thinker	of	a
high	caliber,	a	genius.	When	Kahlil	Gibran	heard	he	came	back	to	Lebanon.	He
was	born	 in	Lebanon,	he	was	brought	up	 in	Lebanon,	he	was	a	Lebanese.	But
then	he	went	to	America	and	he	spent	his	whole	life	in	America.
Hearing	about	his	 friend	 in	Lebanon	he	came	back	 to	 see	him;	he	went	 to	 the
madhouse.
His	friend	was	sitting	alone	in	the	park	of	the	madhouse	on	a	bench.	He	looked
at	Kahlil	Gibran	but	did	not	pay	much	attention,	did	not	even	show	that	he	has
recognized	him.
Kahlil	Gibran	said,	"Don't	you	recognize	me?"
He	 said,	 "I	 recognize	 everybody.	 But	 what	 are	 you	 doing	 here?	 With	 great
difficulty	I	have	been	able	to	leave	that	mad	world	and	enter	 into	this	peaceful
place.	What	are	you	doing	here?"
And	Kahlil	Gibran	writes	in	his	diary,	"It	shocked	me,	but	he	was	making	a	very
significant	point.	He	was	saying	that	only	 the	madhouse	seems	to	be	sane,	and
outside	the	madhouse	everybody	is	insane."
At	 least	 in	 the	 madhouse	 nobody	 worries,	 nobody	 is	 ambitious	 to	 become	 a
president	or	a	prime	minister,	nobody	 is	concerned	 to	become	the	richest	man,
nobody	has	any	ambition.	People	are	enjoying	moment-to-moment	life.	You	may
not	like	their	way	of	doing	it,	you	may	not	like	their	way	of	enjoying	it,	but	that
is	 your	 problem	 not	 their	 problem.	 In	 the	madhouse	 nobody	 has	 any	 problem
except	the	doctors	who	are	running	here	and	there	worried	and	concerned.	The
mad	people	don't	have	any	worry	in	the	world;	they	are	just	at	ease	as	they	are.
They	are	in	a	tremendous	acceptability.
It	happened	in	one	madhouse...
The	old	doctor	retired	and	a	new	doctor	came.	So	there	was	a	farewell	party	and
a	welcome	party	also	for	the	new	doctor.	The	old	doctor	who	was	retiring	spoke
first.
There	was	not	a	single	clap.	Nobody	laughed,	nobody	seemed	even	to	hear	him
or	what	 he	was	 talking	 about.	 There	was	 utter	 silence	 as	 if	 there	was	 nobody
present.	 And	 when	 the	 new	 doctor	 stood	 up	 people	 clapped,	 enjoyed,	 a	 few
people	started	dancing...
The	new	doctor	said,	"This	is	strange.	The	old	doctor	who	has	served	them	his
whole	life	is	retiring,	and	they	remain	completely	silent;	they	did	not	even	clap
once."
So	when	the	meeting	was	over	he	asked	a	madman,	"What	is	 the	matter?	Why
did	you	misbehave	with	the	old	man?	You	clapped	for	me	and	you	don't	know
me	at	all."
They	all	said,	"The	reality	is,	you	look	just	like	one	of	us.	We	were	so	happy	to
find	you.
That	man	was	 a	 problem.	He	was	 continuously	worried	 --	 and	here	nobody	 is
worried;	things	are	running	very	smoothly."
No	war,	no	murder,	no	suicide	--	and	 it	 is	one	of	 the	strangest	 things	 that	mad
people	 rarely	 fall	 sick.	 If	 they	 are	 sick	 they	 become	 healthy.	Mad	 people	 are
healthy	people,	because	all	the	problems	that	can	create	mental	tension	and	can
affect	your	body	are	no	longer	there.	Their	bodies	are	natural,	and	they	become
innocent	like	children.
The	new	doctor	was	very	much	shocked	when	he	heard	the	real	reason	for	their
clapping	and	joyous	shouts	and	why	a	few	started	dancing.	When	he	heard	that
they	thought	that	he	was	one	of	them,	he	looked	a	little	crazy.
In	fact,	one	of	 the	great	psychologists,	Adler,	has	created	a	psychology	around
will	to	power.	And	one	day	he	was	in	his	class.	He	said	to	his	disciples	who	he
was	preparing	for	the	new	psychology,	"The	people	who	become	teachers	are	the
people	who	want	 to	 dominate	 others,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 easiest	way	 to	 dominate;
small	 children	 cannot	 do	 anything	 much	 about	 it.	 The	 people	 who	 become
politicians	suffer	from	inferiority	complex.	To	hide	that	they	try	to	magnify	their
ego	as	much	as	they	can	--	until	it	bursts."
And	he	was	explaining	about	every	kind	of	profession	--	why	people	choose	a
certain	 profession.	 One	 young	man	 stood	 up	 and	 he	 said,	 "You	 have	 left	 one
profession	out	completely,	the	profession	of	the	psychologist."
Adler	was	silent.	He	could	not	answer	because	the	answer	was	clear.	The	student
said,
"Perhaps	you	cannot	say	it,	but	I	will	have	to	say	to	complete	the	list.	The	people
who	tend	to	become	psychologists	are	people	who	are	psychologically	sick."
In	 fact,	 neurotics,	 psychotics,	 all	 kinds	 of	 nuts,	 enter	 into	 the	 world	 of
psychology.	That	is	the	most	beautiful	hiding	place	they	can	find.	They	become
experts	about	madness,	but	deep	down	they	are	mad	people.	I	have	studied	the
lives	of	psychologists	and	I	have	been	really	surprised	that	these	people	should
have	been	 in	madhouses.	They	are	 treating	mad	people,	 and	 they	are	 the	most
highly	paid	profession	in	the	world.
You	 are	 asking,	 "Am	 I	 moving	 rightly	 or	 am	 I	 just	 a	 hopeless	 nutcase?"
Everybody	 is	 a	 nutcase	 but	 nobody	 is	 hopeless.	 The	 world	 has	 unfortunately
been	growing	for	thousands	of	years	in	such	a	way	that	it	has	turned	everybody
into	a	nutcase.	There	are	two	kinds	of	nuts:	normal	and	abnormal.
The	normal	nuts	run	the	whole	world.	They	are	doctors,	they	are	professors,	they
are	engineers;	deep	down	the	madness	is	 there,	but	within	limits.	Everybody	is
on	 the	 boundary	 line.	 Just	 a	 small	 incident,	 a	 small	 accident,	 and	 they	 can	 go
beyond	the	boundary	line:	the	wife	dies,	the	business	goes	bankrupt	--	anything
can	 happen	 and	 the	 boundary	 line	 can	 be	 crossed,	 they	 immediately	 become
nutcases.
The	psychologists	of	 the	whole	world	are	only	trying	to	do	one	thing:	 to	make
abnormal	nuts	normal,	somehow	to	bring	them	back	within	the	boundary	line.	It
does	not	help	the	nutcases,	but	it	helps	the	world	to	go	on	running	in	its	common
way.
But	why	has	it	happened	that	so	many	people	in	the	world	are	either	mad	or	just
on	 the	 boundary	 line?	 There	 is	 not	 any	 qualitative	 difference,	 but	 only	 a
quantitative	difference,	a	difference	of	degrees.	We	have	been	brought	up	with
mother's	 milk,	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 superstitions;	 they	 have	 gone	 deep	 into	 our
unconscious.
I	 used	 to	 live	 in	 a	 city	 for	 a	 few	 months.	 Just	 in	 front	 of	 me	 there	 was	 a
municipal	water	tap.	And	the	man	had	the	idea	that	while	he	was	filling	his	pot
with	 the	water,	 if	 a	woman	passed	by,	 that	water	 had	become	dirty.	He	would
immediately	throw	the	water	and	he	would	start	filling	it	again.
One	 day	 I	 was	 watching.	 "What	 is	 the	 matter?"	 I	 asked	 the	 man.	 He	 said,
"According	to	my	religion	women	are	--	even	their	shadow	is	dirty,	and	I	cannot
drink	dirty	water."
I	managed	to	find	a	woman	and	paid	her	so	that	I	could	tell	her,	"Tomorrow	you
go	on	walking	and	let	us	see	how	long	his	religion	lasts."
But	 that	man	was	 also	 a	man	 of	 great	 courage,	 because	 the	 whole	 day...	 The
woman	got	 tired,	 but	 I	was	paying	her	 so	 she	managed	 to	 continue.	She	went
away	for	some	time	to	eat;	she	sent	her	daughter	to	replace...	The	evening	came
but	the	man	continued	to	throw	away	the	water	because	the	woman	had	come.
Finally	it	was	too	much.	He	threw	the	pot	and	came	directly	to	me,	because	he
understood	what	was	happening.	And	he	said,	"You	will	drive	me	crazy!"
I	 said,	 "You	 are	 crazy.	 Nobody	 can	 drive	 you	 crazy.	 The	 very	 idea	 you	 are
carrying	that	even	the	shadow	of	the	woman	makes	things	dirty...	You	are	born
of	a	woman,	so	you	are	dirty.	For	nine	months	you	have	been	within	the	womb
of	a	woman,	and	you	have	not	even	thought	for	a	single	moment	what	kind	of	a
stupid	idea	you	are	carrying.	Nobody	can	drive	you	crazy.	I	am	trying	to	drive
you	sane.	So	remember,	from	tomorrow	this	superstition	is	not	going	to	happen
again;	otherwise...	I	get	paid	enough,	and	I	am	alone	--
I	will	keep	a	woman	constantly	on	duty	so	that	whenever	you	are	on	the	tap	she
has	just	to	walk	there.	Or	she	can	just	stand	there,	why	walk?"
The	man	said,	"Then	something	will	have	to	be	done."
And	 he	 did;	 he	 changed	 neighborhood.	 That	 very	 night	 he	 escaped	 from	 the
neighborhood.	I	tried	to	find	where	he	had	gone.	I	was	in	search,	but	the	city	was
big.
Somebody	who	knew	him	told	me,	"Don't	waste	your	time.	He	has	left	the	city
itself	because	he	knows	you	will	not	leave	him	easily;	wherever	he	goes,	you	can
appoint	a	woman	to	walk...	And	without	the	water	he	cannot	cook	his	food,	he
cannot	eat	his	food,	he	cannot	drink	water.	You	were	killing	him."
But	 he	 was	 not	 thought	 mad,	 because	 in	 the	 neighborhood	 in	 which	 he	 was
living	everybody	had	 that	 superstition.	He	was	 just	poor;	others	had	 their	own
running	water.
That	poor	man	did	not	have	his	own	bathroom,	his	own	running	water,	so	he	was
using	the	corporation	water.	But	they	all	believed	that	he	was	right,	I	was	wrong.
That's	why	I	should	disturb	people's	 religions	--	 these	are	 religions.	 If	you	 just
watch	 what	 kind	 of	 religions	 people	 have	 been	 brought	 up	 in,	 you	 will	 be
surprised	that	they	have	turned	the	whole	humanity	into	an	insanity.
I	had	once	a	friend	who	was	a	professor,	and	I	have	been	his	student	also.	For
my	 postgraduate	 studies	 I	 was	 his	 student,	 and	 then	 when	 I	 also	 became	 a
professor	in	the	same	university	we	became	colleagues.	But	our	friendship	was
old,	since	my	student	days.	He	had	the	idea	that	to	see	a	woman	is	the	greatest
sin.	Now	he	was	a	well-qualified	professor....	He	used	to	walk	with	his	umbrella
covering	his	eyes,	so	that	he	could	see	only	two	or	three	feet	ahead.	And	he	used
to	run	so	fast	--	his	bungalow	and	the	department	were	not	very	far	apart.	With
his	umbrella	 touching	his	head	he	would	 run	almost	 to	his	house	and	 lock	his
house	from	inside.
In	 the	 class	 I	was	 the	 only	male;	 there	were	 two	 female	 students.	 There	were
only	three	persons	in	his	class.	He	could	not	look	at	women;	it	was	against	his
religion	which	believed	that	celibacy	is	the	foundation	of	religion.
So	 he	 used	 to	 teach	 with	 closed	 eyes.	 Seeing	 him	 teach	 with	 closed	 eyes,	 I
thought	this	was	a	good	opportunity	to	have	a	good	sleep.	So	I	was	also	sitting
with	closed	eyes.
Those	 two	girls	wondered...	 and	 they	 felt	 strange	 also:	 the	 teacher	 is	 asleep	 --
with	closed	eyes	he	 is	 speaking;	 the	only	male	student	 is	 listening	with	closed
eyes....
The	professor	thought	that	I	must	be	following	the	same	ideology	of	celibacy.	He
was	very	happy,	because	in	the	university	he	was	laughed	at.	Now	at	least	there
were	two	persons	belonging	to	the	same	idea.	He	took	me	aside	one	day	and	he
said,	"You	are	doing	it	perfectly	well.	But	how	do	you	manage	on	the	road?	--
because	I	don't	see	you	carrying	the	umbrella."
I	said,	"To	tell	you	the	truth	I	don't	belong	to	your	madness.	I'm	simply	sleeping;
this	is	my	time	to	sleep.	My	whole	life	I	have	slept	from	twelve	to	two	without
any	exception."
Even	in	school	I	used	to	disappear	for	those	two	hours.	In	the	university	I	used	to
disappear,	 and	when	 I	 became	 a	 professor	 I	 asked	 the	 vice-chancellor,	 "These
two	hours	are	absolutely	sacred	to	me.	You	can	give	me	periods	before	or	after,
but	these	two	hours	you	cannot	touch."
He	said,	"What	is	the	matter?"
I	said,	"The	matter	is	that	these	two	hours	are	devoted	to	sleep.	If	you	give	me	a
period	 I	will	 sleep	 --	 and	 I	will	 tell	 all	 the	 students	 to	 fall	 asleep,	 to	 just	keep
quiet	and	silent	and	enjoy."
So	he	gave	me	periods	after	two	o'clock.
I	 told	 the	 professor	 --	 Bhattacharya	was	 his	 name	 --	 "You	 are	 under	 a	wrong
impression.	I	don't	believe	in	such	idiotic	 ideas,	because	with	your	closed	eyes
you	 are	 seeing	 the	woman	more.	What	 are	 you	 seeing	with	 your	 eyes	 closed?
And	in	fact,	why	have	you	closed	the	eyes?	You	must	have	seen	the	woman	first,
then	only	can	you	close	your	eyes.
And	if	in	seeing	a	woman	your	celibacy	is	disturbed,	it	is	not	much	of	a	celibacy.
What	will	you	do	in	a	dream?"
He	said,	"You	are	right.	In	a	dream	I	cannot	do	anything.	Neither	is	the	umbrella
there...
and	 the	 eyes	 are	 already	 closed	 --	 the	 women	 are	 inside.	 Do	 you	 have	 any
suggestion?"
I	said,	"Because	of	this	umbrella	and	because	of	these	closed	eyes	your	dreams
are	 disturbed	 by	 women.	 If	 you	 drop	 this	 idiotic	 discipline	 that	 you	 have
imposed	upon	yourself...	Women	have	their	own	business.	Who	is	bothering	to
come	into	your	dreams?"
He	said,	"No,	my	father	followed	the	same	ideology,	my	forefathers..."	--	he	was
a	 brahmin	 from	 Bengal	 --	 "and	 I	 cannot	 drop	 it,	 although	 I	 know	 the	 whole
university	thinks	me	mad."
But	others	have	their	own	madness.	It	may	be	different,	may	not	be	detectable	if
everybody	has	it,	but	to	be	sane	there	is	only	one	possibility	and	that	comes	out
of	meditation;	otherwise,	whatever	you	do	is	going	to	be	insane	because	it	will
be	 coming	 out	 of	 your	 unconsciousness.	 You	 will	 not	 be	 doing	 it	 in	 your
alertness,	in	your	awareness.
According	 to	me	 the	madman	 is	 one	who	 has	 fallen	 completely	 unconscious,
who	has	 lost	 even	 the	 thin	 layer	of	 consciousness	 that	you	have.	But	 even	 the
thin	layer	of	consciousness	does	not	prevent	you	from	behaving	insanely.
You	 just	watch	 yourself.	 Just	watch	 your	 thoughts	 --	 and	 you	will	 be	 amazed
what	 kind	 of	 thoughts	 go	 on	 in	 your	mind.	Watch	 your	 actions,	what	 kind	 of
actions	you	go	on	doing.	Are	they	actions	or	are	they	only	reactions?
A	 sane	man	 behaves	 differently.	A	Gautam	Buddha	 is	 surrounded	 by	 a	 crowd
which	 is	abusing	him,	using	ugly	words,	obscene	words,	because	he	 is	against
the	organized	religion	of	the	Hindus	and	he	is	against	the	Hindu	holy	scriptures,
the	VEDAS.	He	has	criticized	them	as	hard	as	it	is	possible,	and	they	need	it.	It
is	not	that	he	is	wrong.	He	has	condemned	the	whole	priesthood,	that	these	are
the	exploiters,	parasites.	Naturally,	brahmins	were	enraged.
And	this	was	a	brahmin	village	through	which	he	was	passing.	And	the	brahmins
surrounded	 him	 and	 said	 every	 kind	 of	 bad	 thing	 that	 they	 could	manage.	He
listened	silently.	His	disciples	became	angry,	but	because	Buddha	was	present	it
was	not	courteous	to	say	anything	before	the	master.	The	master	was	standing	so
silent,	and	listening	as	if	they	are	saying	very	sweet	things.
Finally	Buddha	said	 to	 them,	"If	your	 things	 that	you	wanted	 to	say	 to	me	are
finished,	I	would	like	to	reach	to	the	place	where	people	must	be	waiting	for	me.
But	 if	your	 things	are	not	 finished,	after	a	 few	days	when	I	will	be	 returning	I
will	 inform	you.	And	 I	will	have	enough	 time	 to	 listen	 to	all	 that	you	want	 to
say."
One	man	 said,	 "Do	 you	 think	 we	 are	 saying	 something?	We	 are	 condemning
you.	Do	you	understand	or	not?	Because	anybody	else	would	become	angry,	and
you	are	standing	silently..."
The	 statement	 that	 Buddha	 made	 to	 these	 village	 people	 is	 immensely
significant.	He	said,	"You	have	come	a	little	too	late.	If	you	had	come	ten	years
ago	when	I	was	as	insane	as	you	are,	not	a	single	person	would	have	gone	alive."
Ten	years	ago	he	was	a	prince,	a	warrior,	one	of	the	best	archers	of	his	time,	a
great	 swordsman,	 and	 those	 brahmins...	 he	 could	 simply	 have	 removed	 their
heads	with	a	single	blow,	without	any	difficulty.	Because	those	brahmins	know
nothing	about	swords	or	arrows	or	being	a	warrior.	He	would	have	just	cut	them
--	almost	like	vegetables.
He	said,	"You	have	come	late.	Ten	years	ago	if	you	had	come...	but	now	I	am	no
longer	insane.	I	cannot	react	and	I	would	like	to	ask	you	one	question.	In	the	last
village	 people	 came	with	 sweets	 and	 fruits	 and	 flowers	 to	 receive	me,	 but	we
take	food	only	one	time	a	day,	and	we	had	already	taken	the	food.	And	we	don't
carry	 things,	 so	we	had	 to	 tell	 them,	 `You	please	 forgive	us,	we	cannot	 accept
sweets,	 flowers.	We	 accept	 your	 love,	 but	 these	 things	 you	 will	 have	 to	 take
away.'	I	want	to	ask	you,"	he	said	to	this	angry	crowd,
"what	must	they	have	done	with	their	sweets	and	flowers	that	they	had	brought
as	presents	to	us."
One	man	said,	"What	is	the	problem	in	it?	They	must	have	distributed	the	sweets
in	the	village."
Buddha	 said,	 "That	makes	me	 very	 sad.	What	will	 you	 do?	 --	 because	 I	 don't
accept	what	you	have	brought,	just	the	same	way	as	I	did	not	accept	the	sweets
and	 the	 flowers	 and	 other	 things	 that	 the	 people	 brought	 to	 me	 in	 the	 other
village,	if	I	don't	accept	your	obscenity,	your	ugly	words,	your	dirty	words,	if	I
don't	accept,	what	can	you	do?	What	are	you	going	to	do	with	all	 this	garbage
that	you	have	come	with?	You	will	have	to	take	it	back	to	your	homes	and	give	it
to	your	wives,	to	your	children,	to	your	neighbors.
"You	will	have	to	distribute	it,	because	I	simply	refuse	to	take	it.	And	you	cannot
make	me	angry	unless	I	accept	your	humiliation,	your	insult.	Ten	years	ago	I	was
not	 conscious;	 if	 somebody	 had	 insulted	 me	 he	 would	 have	 lost	 his	 life
immediately.	 I	 had	 no	 idea	 that	 insulting	 me	 is	 his	 problem,	 and	 that	 I	 have
nothing	to	do	with	it	--	I	can	simply	listen	and	go	on	my	way."
This	is	what	I	call	sanity.	Do	you	think	humanity	is	sane?	It	only	appears...	just
superficial	 sanity,	 mannerism,	 etiquette,	 culture,	 civilization,	 just	 skin-deep.
Scratch	a	little	deeper	and	the	barbarous	comes	out.
If	you	really	want,	Premnath,	to	be	a	sane	being,	sannyas	is	the	way	for	sanity,
for	 dropping	 all	 those	 unconscious	 layers	 of	 your	 mind	 which	 force	 you	 to
behave	 unconsciously.	 And	 in	 your	 unconsciousness	 you	 are	 doing	 things	 for
which	you	yourself	will	 repent	when	you	will	become	a	 little	 alert	 and	aware,
"What	have	I	done?"
The	insane	person	can	only	react.	The	sane	person	acts,	the	sane	person	responds
--	he	never	reacts.
The	way	is	simple	and	you	are	at	the	right	place	where	your	mind	can	become
calm	 and	 quiet,	 so	much	 so,	 as	 if	 it	 is	 absent.	 You	 should	 be	 certain	 of	 your
sanity	only	if	you	can	attain	a	state	of	no-mind.	Only	then	can	you	be	certain	that
nothing	can	drive	you	mad,	because	the	mind	that	was	possible	to	become	insane
is	no	more	--	you	have	transcended	it.
I	am	reminded	of	an	old	story...
Once	there	was	an	old	couple	who	lived	deep	in	the	forest,	and	they	never	saw
anybody	else.	One	day	the	old	husband	was	walking	on	a	lonely	path	when	he
saw	something	shining	on	the	ground.	He	bent	down	to	pick	it	up	and	it	was	a
mirror.	But	 he	 had	 never	 seen	 a	mirror	 before	 and	when	he	 saw	his	 own	 face
reflected	in	it,	he	thought	it	was	his	father's	face.	Obviously	he	had	never	seen
his	own	face,	but	he	had	seen	his	father's	face.
So	 he	 took	 it	 home	 and	 placed	 it	 up	 in	 the	 attic	 for	 safekeeping,	 and	 every
evening	he	would	go	up	and	say	good	night	 to	his	father.	But	his	wife	became
suspicious	about	what	he	was	doing	in	the	attic	every	evening.	So	one	night	she
followed	him.	She	saw	him	looking	at	 the	mirror	and	saying	good	night	 to	it...
but	 she	 had	 never	 seen	 a	 mirror	 before	 either!	 So	 she	 pushed	 over	 to	 him,
grabbed	the	mirror	out	of	his	hand,	looked	into	it	and	said,	"You	old	idiot!	You
mean	every	night	you	come	sneaking	up	here	just	to	say	good	night	to	this	ugly
old	woman?"
But	 this	 is	 how	our	mind	 functions.	You	 don't	 know	your	 original	 face	 --	 and
there	 is	 no	mirror	which	 can	 show	you	your	 original	 face.	What	 you	know	as
your	 face	 is	 only	 the	 face	 that	 you	 have	 seen	 reflected	 in	 the	 mirror;	 it	 is	 a
reflection.
You	must	have	seen	in	big	cities	or	in	exhibitions	or	in	circuses,	there	are	mirror
halls	where	different	kinds	of	mirrors	are	arranged:	in	some	mirrors	you	become
so	 tall,	 and	 in	 some	mirrors	 you	 become	 such	 a	 pygmy;	 in	 some	mirrors	 you
become	so	fat,	and	in	some	mirrors	you	become	so	thin....
I	don't	 think	 the	mirror	 that	you	are	using	can	be	perfect.	 It	 is	very	difficult	 to
have	 a	 perfect	mirror.	 If	 by	 chance	 you	have	 a	mirror	which	makes	 your	 face
look	beautiful	or	ugly,	then	you	will	carry	that	idea	with	yourself.
But	you	don't	know	your	original	face,	how	it	is,	directly.	It	is	only	in	the	state	of
no-mind	that	you	become	aware	of	your	originality,	and	that	is	the	only	sanity	as
far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned	 --	 as	 far	 as	 any	 awakened	 human	 being	 has	 ever	 been
concerned.
It	is	by	going	beyond	the	mind	and	entering	into	the	no-mind	that	you	will	attain
sanity;	otherwise,	Premnath,	you	will	remain	either	a	normal	nutcase	--	or	if	you
are	a	little	courageous,	a	little	adventurous,	you	may	go	beyond	the	border,	and
you	will	be	stamped	a	madman.	And	once	you	are	stamped	by	the	society	as	a
madman	you	may	come	back	 to	being	normal,	but	nobody	will	ever	 think	 that
you	are	normal.
I	used	to	live	with	one	of	my	father's	sisters	while	I	was	in	the	college	studying.
The	husband	of	my	father's	sister	had	a	brother.	He	used	to	come	just	to	chitchat
with	me,	and	I	saw	every	possibility	that	he	could	go	beyond	the	border;	just	a
little	push	was	needed.
So	one	day	I	was	talking	to	him	and	I	 told	him,	"If	you	are	really	religious"	--
and	he	was	 a	 very	 religious	 fanatic	 --	 "then	you	 should	 touch	your	wife's	 feet
every	night	before	you	go	to	bed."
He	said,	"But	where	is	it	written?"
I	said,	"It	is	not	written.	Great	principles	remain	unwritten,	they	are	transferred
from	master	to	disciple."
But	he	said,	"People	will	think	that	I	am	mad	or	something.	Nobody	touches	the
feet	of	his	wife."
I	 said,	 "Every	woman	 should	 be	 taken	 as	 your	mother;	 only	 then	 you	 can	 be
celibate."
He	said,	"That's	right."
That	night	he	went	home.	He	touched	the	feet	of	his	wife	and	the	wife	shrieked
and	the	whole	house	gathered	saying:	"What	are	you	doing?"
And	he	said,	"Every	woman	is	a	mother."
They	said,	"That's	right	but	that	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	touch	the	feet	of
your	wife.	Don't	be	stupid!"
But	he	became	stubborn	--	he	was	a	fanatic.	He	said,	"I	will	touch...	She	is	my
wife,	not	yours	--	and	what	is	wrong	in	it?	I	am	just	paying	my	respect."
His	other	brothers	came	to	me	asking,	"What	kind	of	thing	have	you	told	him?"
I	said,	"I	was	just	checking	whether	he	could	cross	the	line	or	not.	I	will	pull	him
back.
Don't	be	worried."
But	 it	 was	 really	 difficult	 to	 pull	 him	 back.	 I	 had	 to	 convince	 him,	 "Just	 for
society's	sake...	You	have	deep	respect,	you	can	touch	your	wife's	feet	when	she
is	asleep	in	the	night.	Show	your	respect;	it	does	not	matter	whether	she	is	asleep
or	awake."
He	said,	"That's	right.	I	am	getting	into	trouble;	everybody	thinks	I	am	mad."
He	 stopped	 touching	 the	 feet	 but	 everybody	 continued	 to	 think	 that	 he	was	 a
little	cuckoo.
People	 had	 never	 thought	 that	 he	 was	 cuckoo	 before	 when	 he	 was	 doing	 the
same	things.
Now	he	is	doing	the	same	things	and	people	are	suspicious.	Once	a	suspicion	has
entered,	then	it	is	very	difficult	to	remove	it	from	the	mind	of	the	society.
And	in	fact	people	enjoy	it	that	you	are	mad	and	they	are	not	mad.	They	provoke
your	madness	once	 they	know	 that	you	are	vulnerable.	Only	one	person	 is	not
vulnerable	to	any	provocation:	he	who	knows	the	secret	of	meditation.
A	 couple	 went	 to	 see	 a	 new	movie,	 and	 the	 two	 seats	 in	 front	 of	 them	were
occupied	 by	 a	 man	 and	 his	 dog.	When	 the	 film	 was	 over	 the	 dog	 applauded
enthusiastically.	 The	 man	 behind	 leaned	 forward	 and	 said,	 "That's	 simply
astonishing."
"Yes,	it	is,"	said	the	dog's	companion,	"Especially	since	he	hated	the	book."
Just	all	around	you,	if	you	watch	clearly,	you	will	find	all	kinds	of	nuts....
The	Queen	of	England	was	visiting	The	Royal	Military	Hospital,	and	insisted	on
making	a	round	of	the	wards.	She	came	into	a	room	with	three	beds	and	asked
the	first	soldier,
"What	is	wrong	with	you?"
Embarrassed,	the	soldier	replied,	"Syphilis,	Your	Majesty."
Trying	to	appear	natural,	the	Queen	asked,	"And	what	treatment	do	you	get	for
it?"
"Wire	brush	and	Dettol,"	the	soldier	replied.
"Is	 there	 anything	 you	 would	 like	 to	 make	 your	 stay	more	 comfortable?"	 the
Queen	asked.
"No,	Ma'am,	I'm	a	soldier	in	the	Queen's	Own	Regiment,	and	that's	enough	for
me."
Deeply	touched,	the	Queen	moved	on	to	the	next	bed,	where	the	soldier	lay	on
his	stomach.	"What	is	wrong	with	you,	soldier?"	she	asked.
"Piles,	Your	Majesty,"	grunted	the	soldier.
"What	is	your	treatment	here?"
"Wire	brush	and	Dettol,	Ma'am."
Wincing	the	Queen	asked	if	there	was	anything	she	could	do	to	make	him	more
comfortable.	 He	 answered	 that	 he	 was	 simply	 grateful	 to	 be	 a	 soldier	 in	 the
Queen's	Own	Regiment,	and	that	was	more	than	enough.
The	third	soldier	told	her	hoarsely	that	his	problem	was	a	sore	throat.
"What	is	the	treatment	for	that?"	she	asked.
"Wire	brush	and	Dettol,	Ma'am,"	came	the	reply.
"Is	there	anything	I	can	do	to	make	you	more	comfortable?"
"Yes,	Ma'am.	Next	time	I	would	like	my	treatment	first."
It	is	such	an	insane	world	you	have	just	to	be	watchful	and	alert	and	you	will	see
ridiculous,	 hilarious	 things	 happening	 everywhere.	 It	 is	 unbelievable	 that	 sane
people	should	do	such	things.
But	 remember:	 everybody	 is	 vulnerable.	We	 are	 born	 in	 a	wrong	 society,	 in	 a
wrong	world,	with	wrong	conditions.	And	unless	you	are	really	interested	to	get
rid	of	your	past	and	past	 impacts,	 impressions	on	your	mind,	 it	 is	not	going	 to
leave	you	easily.	The	madness	continues.
And	as	you	grow	your	madness	also	continues	to	grow.	It	is	not	strange	that	after
sixty,	people	start	 thinking	you	are	senile;	you	have	been	always.	Just	now	the
senility	has	grown	to	a	point	where	it	is	apparent.	It	cannot	come	suddenly	from
nowhere.	It	has	been	growing	with	you.
Nobody	wants	to	talk	to	old	people	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	are	irritable,
annoyed	easily,	 expect	 too	much,	 and	 to	you	 they	 look	a	 little	 insane.	Perhaps
their	mind	is	tired;	not	only	are	they	retired,	their	sanity	also	is	retired.
Three	old	men	were	sitting	on	a	bench	in	a	public	park.	One	was	seventy-five,
the	second	was	eighty	and	the	 third	was	ninety.	They	used	to	meet	 there	every
evening.	The	whole	day	they	waited	for	the	evening,	because	they	were	the	only
friends.	 Everybody	 else	 was	 far	 below	 their	 age.	 And	 there	 was	 such	 a
generation	gap	that	there	was	no	question	of	making	friends	with	anybody	else.
All	the	three	persons	were	retired,	but	that	evening	the	first	seventy-five-year-old
man	was	 looking	very	 sad,	ashamed.	The	second	old	man	asked,	 "What	 is	 the
matter	with	you?	Why	are	you	so	sad,	so	ashamed?	What	have	you	done?"
He	said,	"Don't	ask.	A	beautiful	lady	was	taking	a	bath	--	she	was	a	guest	in	our
house,	 and	 I	 was	 peeping	 from	 the	 keyhole	 and	 my	 mother	 caught	 me	 red-
handed.	It	is	so	shameful."
Both	the	other	old	men	looked	at	each	other	and	laughed,	and	they	said,	"Don't
be	 stupid,	 everybody	 does	 such	 things	 in	 childhood,	 everybody	 gets	 caught.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 feel	 so	 ashamed	 about	 something	 that	 happened	 in
childhood."
He	said,	"What	are	you	saying?	It	happened	this	morning!	And	I	don't	know	how
I	am	going	to	go	back	home.	I	wanted	to	die	at	that	very	moment."
The	second	man	said,	"I	can	understand	your	problem.	I	have	also	my	problems.
They	are	bigger	than	yours.	It	is	now	the	seventh	day	that	I	have	not	made	love
to	my	wife.	The	moment	I	say,	`What	about	it?'	she	simply	turns	to	the	other	side
and	says,	Ì	have	such	a	headache	and	I	am	so	tired.	Just	go	to	sleep.'"
The	third	old	man	laughed	and	said	to	the	first	old	man,	"Just	ask	him	what	kind
of	love	he	makes	to	his	wife."
And	he	asked,	"What	kind	of	love	do	you	make?"
He	said,	"Love?	I	take	her	hand	into	my	hand	and	press	it	three	times.	And	then
we	say	good	night	and	go	to	sleep.	What	more	can	I	do	at	this	age?"
The	 oldest	 said,	 "Your	 problems	 are	 childish,	 stupid.	 I	 am	 facing	 the	 real
problem.	This	morning	my	wife	slapped	me,	and	I	said,	`Why	are	you	slapping
me?'	She	 said,	 `What	 are	 you	doing?'	 I	 said,	 Ì'm	preparing	 to	make	 love.'	 She
said,	`You	idiot,	neither	do	you	sleep	the	whole	night	nor	do	you	let	me	sleep.
This	is	the	third	time	you	are	making	love.'	So	I	think	I'm	losing	my	memory."
Just	watch	people....
If	you	are	alert	and	silent	and	sane	you	will	be	simply	surprised	what	goes	on
happening	all	around.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	create	a	commune	of	people	who	are	completely	free
from	past	conditions,	fanatic	religions,	fascist	political	ideologies,	and	who	start
responding	 to	 life	 out	 of	 silence	 and	 peace,	 awareness,	 consciousness,	 not
through	 a	mind	which	 has	 no	 eyes.	 It	 is	 blind.	 It	 reacts	 immediately	 like	 any
mechanism.	But	it	has	no	eyes	to	see	directly	and	deeply	into	any	problem.
Even	the	greatest	people	that	you	know	in	the	world	behave	very	childishly,	and
they	are	creating	millions	of	problems	for	other	people	because	they	have	power.
The	whole	power	is	in	insane	hands;	not	a	single	powerful	man	in	the	world	is
even	 interested	 in	meditation	--	and	except	meditation	 there	 is	no	way	out.	We
are	really	coming	to	the	crescendo	of	the	insanity	of	centuries.
In	all	of	our	lifetimes	we	are	going	to	see	the	ultimate	madness	exploding	by	the
time	this	century	comes	to	an	end	--	and	it	is	not	long.	It	is	now	nineteen	eighty-
seven;	 the	year	 two	 thousand	 is	 less	 than	 thirteen	years	away.	 In	 these	 thirteen
years	things	will	go	on	becoming	more	and	more	insane.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 received	 a	 letter	 from	 Oregon,	 from	 a	 doctor,	 a	 dental
surgeon,	"I	am	very	ashamed	by	the	way	the	American	government	treated	you
and	 the	commune.	You	had	brought	a	new	colorfulness	 to	 the	state	of	Oregon.
Rather	than	rejoicing	in	that	colorfulness,	they	destroyed	the	whole	commune."
Many	 intelligent	people	 in	America	 feel	 the	 same	way,	but	 the	old	problem	 --
those	 intelligent	 people	 feel	 but	 they	 remain	 silent,	 because	 they	 know	 the
majority	 is	 absolutely	 insane.	 They	 are	 so	 insane	 that	 they	 destroyed	 the
commune	illegally,	they	imposed	crimes	on	me	of	which	I	have	not	even	dreamt.
They	 blackmailed	me	 through	my	 attorneys,	 because	 they	made	my	 attorneys
afraid	 that	 if	 they	were	 going	 to	 insist	 on	 trial,	 then	my	 life	might	 be	 at	 risk
because	 the	 American	 government	 would	 not	 like	 to	 be	 defeated	 by	 a	 single
individual:	"You	know	and	we	know	that	we	don't	have	any	evidence,	 so	your
victory	is	certain.	But	remember,	your	victory	would	mean	the	assassination	of
Osho."
It	 was	 made	 so	 clear	 by	 the	 government	 attorneys	 to	 my	 attorneys,	 that	 they
came	 to	 me	 and	 said,	 "We	 have	 never	 seen	 such	 a	 thing	 happening.	 It	 is
absolutely	insane,	absolutely	illegal,	criminal.	Now	they	want	you	to	accept	any
two	crimes,	the	smallest	crimes,	but	accept	that	you	are	guilty	of	two	crimes	so
that	they	can	save	the	face	of	America	and	American	democracy	and	American
justice.	And	once	you	have	accepted	two	crimes	then	there	will	be	no	trial	and
you	will	be	freed."
I	was	very	stubborn.	I	told	my	attorney,	"It	is	better	to	fight	the	case	because	they
don't	have	any	evidence	and	they	cannot	have	any	evidence."
But	the	attorney	said,	"The	question	is	of	blackmail.	They	are	threatening	us	that
they	will	withdraw	 the	 bail	 and	 they	will	 put	 you	 in	 jail.	And	 they	 can	 go	 on
postponing	the	case	for	ten	years,	fifteen	years,	and	in	these	ten	or	fifteen	years
they	will	 harass	 you,	 torture	 you.	And	we	 are	 afraid	 they	may	 even	 take	your
life,	because	they	have	made	one	thing	clear,	that	the	government	is	not	ready	to
be	defeated	by	a	single	individual."
With	tears	in	their	eyes	they	begged	me,	"Don't	insist	on	a	fight.	We	know	that
you	have	not	committed	any	crime,	and	they	know	it.	And	we	had	not	gone	to
negotiate	with	them;	they	came	to	us	to	negotiate."
This	 is	 very	 strange	 --	 that	 the	 government	 should	 come	 to	 the	 criminal	 to
negotiate...	for	what?	If	I	have	committed	the	crime	I	should	be	punished.	What
negotiations?	Is	it	a	business?
But	the	reason	was	clear:	they	knew	they	could	not	prove	anything	against	me.
And	 the	 Attorney	 General	 of	 America	 later	 on	 accepted	 --	 when	 I	 had	 left
America	--	that	I	had	not	committed	any	crime;	they	didn't	have	any	proof,	any
evidence,	 any	 witness.	 But	 you	 will	 not	 believe	 that	 even	 knowing	 this,	 they
blackmailed	my	attorneys.	They	cried	and	I	had	to	accept,	because	they	told	me,
"It	is	absolutely	futile.	It	is	hitting	your	head	against	the	wall	for	no	meaning.	It
will	destroy	your	whole	movement,	it	will	destroy	all	your	sannyasins,	and	you
will	leave	millions	of	people	who	love	you.	It	is	better	to	accept	two	crimes."
I	said,	"I	am	not	a	serious	man.	I	can	accept	all	of	their	thirty-four	crimes.	There
is	 no	 problem,	 but	 don't	 ask	 for	 any	proof,	 because	 I	 don't	 have	 any	 evidence
either."
They	said,	"No,	nobody	is	going	to	ask	for	evidence."
And	what	happened?	As	I	accepted	two	crimes	the	judge	immediately	ruled	that
I	am	punished	with	four	hundred	thousand	dollars	--	that	is	nearabout	sixty	lakh
rupees	--	for	two	crimes	which	I	have	not	committed,	which	they	have	forced	in
a	blackmail	way	threatening	my	attorneys	that	my	life	is	at	risk,	"just	to	save	my
life!"	But	they	never	mentioned	that	once	I	accepted	then	sixty	lakh	rupees	will
be	the	fine.	They	did	not	mention	that.	This	was	the	second	trick.
First	they	blackmailed,	"This	way	there	will	be	no	trial	and	we	will	release	Osho
immediately."	But	with	 the	 judgment	 the	 judge	came	--	 four	hundred	 thousand
dollars.
My	 people	 who	 were	 present	 in	 the	 court	 immediately	 collected	 that	 much
money	within	ten	minutes,	because	the	attorneys	were	concerned	to	get	me	out
of	 America	 as	 quickly	 as	 possible.	 And	 as	 I	 was	 coming	 out	 of	 the	 jail,
immediately	 another	 summons	 for	 some	 other	 case	 that	 they	 had	 created	 in
another	court...	They	were	waiting	outside	the	jail	to	give	me	the	summons.
As	 I	was	 coming	 to	 the	 airport	 I	 received	 the	 news	 that	 they	 had	 put	 a	 bomb
under	my	chair.	They	were	waiting	that	if	I	didn't	accept,	and	I	wanted	to	go	with
the	trial,	 then	they	would	just	explode	the	bomb	and	finish	the	whole	thing,	so
there	would	be	no	person	and	no	question	of	any	trial.
Now	 that	 bomb	 cannot	 arrive	 inside	 the	 jail	 and	 under	 my	 chair	 without
somebody	 who	 is	 not	 part	 of	 the	 government,	 who	 is	 not	 part	 of	 the	 high
authorities	of	the	jail...	The	jail	had	no	interest	in	killing	me.	The	idea	must	have
come	from	Washington	--	it	must	have	come	from	Ronald	Reagan.
These	people	who	are	in	power	are	lying,	blackmailing	--	doing	every	kind	of	act
that	 is	 inhuman.	 But	 perhaps	 they	 are	 doing	 it	 in	 their	 insanity,	 in	 their
unconsciousness.
And	there	is	no	great	movement	in	the	world	to	counter	the	forces	of	violence,
madness,	except	our	movement	for	meditation.
The	responsibility	is	great	on	each	of	you.	Not	only	for	your	own	sake,	but	for
the	sake	of	preventing	 the	mad	powers	 from	destroying	 this	beautiful	planet	 --
this	planet	which	has	produced	a	Gautam	Buddha,	a	Jesus	Christ,	a	Zarathustra;
this	planet	which	has	given	birth	to	a	Krishna,	to	a	Mahavira,	to	a	Lao	Tzu.	And
these	are	just	the	beginnings	of	spring;	there	are	higher	possibilities	in	the	future.
If	man	goes	on	living	on	the	earth,	we	will	be	producing	even	higher	peaks	than
we	have	 produced	 in	 the	 past.	Those	 high	peaks	 in	 the	 past	were	 produced	 in
spite	 of	 all	 the	 hindrances	 of	 the	 society.	 If	 the	 society	 is	 supportive,	 we	 can
create	so	many	beautiful	people	around	the	world	that	it	can	turn	from	a	desert
into	an	oasis.
And	that's	what	the	dental	surgeon	reminded	me	of	in	his	letter:	"We	miss	you;
you	 turned	 a	 desert	 into	 an	 oasis,	 and	 we	 feel	 ashamed	 that	 the	 American
government	 did	 something	 absolutely	 wrong.	 You	 brought	 a	 message	 which
could	have	saved	not	only	America	but	the	whole	of	humanity."
They	 are	 missing	 now	 because	 that	 small	 commune	 in	 Oregon	 had	 become
suddenly	more	important	than	Washington	itself.	All	the	eyes	from	all	over	the
world	were	concentrated	on	the	commune:	"What	is	happening	there?	Why	are
people	so	happy?
Why	are	people	so	loving?	Why	is	there	no	fighting?	Why	is	there	no	murder?
Why	is	there	no	suicide?	What	has	happened	to	those	people?	Their	jealousies,
their	conflicts	seem	to	have	disappeared,	they	have	entered,	it	seems,	into	a	new
state	of	consciousness."
But	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned	 I	 have	 no	 complaint	 against	 anybody.	My	 own
feeling	is	it	was	good	that	they	destroyed	the	commune.	It	helped	my	people	to
spread	all	over	the	world.	And	wherever	my	one	sannyasin	is,	he	will	create	the
right	 atmosphere.	And	 a	 few	people	 are	 bound	 to	 gather	 around	him	 to	 create
small	communes	all	over	the	world.
Now	I'm	not	interested	in	creating	a	big	commune,	because	any	big	commune	is
going	 to	be	destroyed	by	 the	power	 that	 is	any	government.	 It	does	not	matter
whether	 it	 is	 the	 Indian	government	or	 the	American	government.	 If	 I	create	a
big	 commune	 again,	which	 is	 possible	 now...	 The	moment	 you	 have	 a	 power,
although	your	 power	 is	 of	 love	 and	 peace	 and	 silence,	 the	 powerful	 people	 in
New	Delhi	will	start	getting	disturbed.
I	don't	want	to	repeat	history.
Only	idiots	repeat	history.
So	my	 new	 idea	 is	 that	 we	will	 not	 create	 a	 big	 commune	 that	 unnecessarily
comes	into	conflict	with	the	powers.	We	will	create	small	communes	all	around
the	earth	so	nobody	will	be	worried,	because	a	few	people	cannot	be	dangerous
to	the	vested	interests,	but	those	few	people	can	make	the	whole	world	afire	with
love,	with	peace,	with	silence,	with	blissfulness.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
The	Invitation
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	Avoid	the	priests
5	September	1987	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8709055
ShortTitle:
INVITA30
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
83
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WILL	 YOU	 GIVE	 ME	 A	 FEW	 MORE	 LAWS	 TO	 COME	 OUT	 OF	 MY
CONFUSION?
Devageet:	When	all	else	fails,	read	the	instructions.
Women	are	meant	to	be	loved,	not	to	be	understood.
Moscow	is	the	city	where,	if	Marilyn	Monroe	should	walk	down	the	street	with
nothing	on	but	shoes,	people	would	stare	at	her	feet	first.
When	people	agree	with	you,	you	must	be	wrong.
Women's	minds	are	cleaner	than	men's;	they	change	them	more	often.
After	thirty-five	a	man	begins	to	have	thoughts	about	women.	Before	that	age	he
had	feelings.
I	have	told	Devageet,	"You	must	cut	your	sex	life	 to	half."	He	inquired	of	me:
"Which	half?	thinking	about	it	or	talking	about	it?"
The	human	race	never	solves	any	of	its	problems	--	it	only	outlives	them.
Assumption	is	the	mother	of	all	screwups.
What	you	resist,	you	become.
No	matter	how	many	excellent	decisions	you	make	in	a	working	day,	people	will
only	remember	the	single	bad	one.
No	man	is	lonely	while	eating	spaghetti	--	it	requires	so	much	attention.
You	can	always	find	what	you	are	not	looking	for.
In	any	organization	 there	will	always	be	one	person	who	knows	what	 is	going
on.	This	person	must	be	fired.
Don't	ever	prophesy,	for	if	you	prophesy	wrong	nobody	will	forget	it,	and	if	you
prophesy	right	nobody	will	remember	it.
One	can	survive	everything	nowadays	except	death.
Evil,	what	is	evil?	There	is	only	one	evil:	to	deny	life.
If	you	can	keep	calm	while	all	those	around	you	are	freaking	out,	then	you	don't
understand	the	problem.
Inscription	on	 the	 tombstone	of	Peter	 the	Pessimist:	 I	knew	this	would	happen
one	day.
A	KGB	agent	comes	across	a	Jew	reading	a	Hebrew	grammar	book	on	a	bench
in	Gorky	Park.	"Hey,	Jew,"	he	says,	"Why	are	you	bothering	to	read	that?	You
know	we	will	never	let	you	go	to	Israel."
"Well,"	says	the	Jew,	"I'm	reading	it	in	case	they	speak	Hebrew	in	heaven."
"And	what	if	you	go	to	hell?"
"Ah,"	sighs	the	Jew,	"Russian	I	already	know."
So	 if	 you	 really	want	 to	 get	 out	 of	 confusion,	 Devageet,	 read	 Russian.	 That's
where	you	are	bound	to	go!
A	woman	was	filling	out	an	application	form	at	the	bank	when	she	came	to	the
space	for	age.	She	hesitated	a	long	time.	Finally,	the	clerk	leaned	over	and	said,
"The	longer	you	wait,	the	worse	it	gets."
Question	2
BELOVED	MASTER,
YOU	ARE	THE	ONLY	HOPE.	PLEASE	GIVE	ME	A	PUSH.
Taglish	Bharti,	almost	everybody	needs	a	push,	because	almost	everybody	is	just
on	the	border.
Enlightenment	 is	not	far	away;	you	are	not	 to	go	miles	 in	search	of	 it.	All	 that
you	need	is	to	open	your	eyes	and	just	see	clearly	where	you	are,	because	in	that
very	place	and	in	that	very	moment	you	are	already	enlightened.
Enlightenment	is	not	something	that	you	can	make	a	goal	of,	it	is	your	reality.	It
is	 really	 foolish	 to	 search	 for	 it,	 because	 the	 one	 who	 is	 searching	 for	 it,	 is
himself	 the	 enlightenment.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 achievement,	 it	 is	 a	 discovery	 or	 to	 be
more	 correct,	 it	 is	 a	 rediscovery.	You	 knew	 it	 at	 a	 time	when	 society	 had	 not
corrupted	your	mind,	when	you	were	still	so	small	that	you	were	incorruptible,
so	 innocent	 that	 the	 society	 was	 not	 capable	 of	 teaching	 you	 anything	 to
condition	 your	mind.	 It	 is	 the	 layer	 upon	 layer	 of	 conditionings	 that	 is	 hiding
your	light.
You	don't	have	to	go	anywhere.
You	 just	 have	 to	 put	 aside	 all	 the	 conditionings;	 but	 it	 is	 very	 difficult.	 It	 is
difficult	because	you	think	those	conditionings	are	tremendously	important.
Just	today	I	saw	where	one	newspaper	had	published	one	of	my	talks	in	which	I
have	said	that	Adolf	Hitler,	Krishna	and	Manu	are	not	much	different	from	each
other.	Obviously	the	editor	was	bombarded	from	all	over	the	country	with	letters
condemning	it:	"You	should	not	publish	such	a	thing.	Krishna	and	Manu	cannot
be	compared	to	Adolf	Hitler."
Before	I	go	deeper	into	it,	I	would	like	to	tell	you	something	about	Adolf	Hitler.
I	 received	a	 letter	 from	 the	president	of	 the	neo-fascist	party,	 asking	me	 that	 I
should	 stop	 speaking	 against	 Adolf	 Hitler,	 "because	 it	 hurts	 our	 religious
feelings."
Even	 I	 was	 shocked.	 It	 rarely	 happens	 that	 I	 am	 shocked.	 I	 said,	 "My	 God,
religious	feelings	are	hurt?!"
And	the	president	says	in	the	letter,	"Perhaps	you	are	not	aware	that	Adolf	Hitler
was	a	reincarnation	of	an	Old	Testament	prophet,	Elijah."
Now	somebody	is	hurt	because	I	have	said	something	against	Adolf	Hitler.	And
what	 have	 I	 said?	 --	 that	 he	 has	 killed	 millions	 of	 people	 single-handed,	 just
because	of	a	prejudice	against	Jews.	A	childish	prejudice,	because	Jews	believe	-
-	and	they	have	suffered	for	that	stupid	belief	for	almost	four	thousand	years	--
that	they	are	the	chosen	people	of	God.	Moses	gave	them	this	idea:	You	are	the
chosen	people	of	God.
Naturally,	they	have	been	hated	by	everybody	else.	Nobody	can	accept,	"You	are
the	 chosen	people	of	God."	And	particularly	Adolf	Hitler	was	very	 angry.	His
people,	 the	 Nordic	 Aryans	 and	Germans,	 they	 are	 the	 chosen	 people	 of	 God.
How	dare	Jews	say	that	they	are	the	chosen	people	of	God?
Of	course,	 these	 two	chosen	people	of	God	cannot	 live	 together;	one	has	 to	be
demolished!	 Hitler	 alone	 killed	 almost	 six	million	 Jews	 and	millions	 of	 other
people	wherever	he	invaded.	And	this	 is	 the	reincarnation	of	a	Jewish	prophet,
Elijah	--	and	he	is	killing	Jews	in	millions!
And	the	president	of	 the	neo-fascist	party	is	 threatening	me,	 that	I	will	have	to
suffer	dangerous	consequences	if	I	speak	again	against	Adolf	Hitler.	And	when	I
said	 that	 I	don't	see	much	difference	between	Krishna,	Manu	and	Adolf	Hitler,
Hindus	must	have	felt	the	same:	their	hearts	are	hurt,	their	religious	feelings	are
hurt.
But	Krishna	 is	 responsible	 for	 the	great	war	 in	which	 India	 suffered	 so	much.
Millions	of	people	died	in	the	war,	and	he	was	the	man	who	provoked	Arjuna	to
fight.	 It	 was	 a	 family	 war,	 between	 cousin-brothers,	 Arjuna	 and	 Duryodhana.
They	were	fighting	for	the	kingdom,	and	when	Arjuna	saw	millions	of	people	in
the	 battle	 field	 who	were	 all	 related	 to	 each	 other	 --	 because	 it	 was	 a	 family
quarrel...	 some	 relatives	 were	 on	 this	 side,	 some	 relatives	 on	 that	 side;	 some
friends	on	this	side,	some	friends	on	that	side.
Even	 the	 grandfather	 of	 Arjuna,	 who	 loved	 Arjuna	 immensely,	 was	 on	 the
opposite	side.
He	 loved	 Arjuna	 and	 he	 hated	 Duryodhana,	 but	 he	 loved	 the	 father	 of
Duryodhana,	 Dhritrashtra,	 who	 was	 a	 blind	 man.	 Feeling	 compassion	 for	 the
blind	man	he	wanted	his	son	to	become	the	king	--	but	he	loved	Arjuna.	Now	it
was	a	very	 strange,	 tangled	 situation.	Dronacharya,	 the	 teacher	of	both	Arjuna
and	Duryodhana	--	he	taught	them	the	art	of	archery	--	was	the	greatest	archer	of
those	days,	and	he	loved	Arjuna	because	he	even	surpassed	his	master	in	archery.
Duryodhana	was	far	behind,	but	still	Dronacharya	had	chosen	to	fight	on	the	side
of	Duryodhana	because	there	was	more	possibility	of	winning.	Duryodhana	was
a	cunning	man	and	he	had	one	hundred	brothers.	Dronacharya	had	many	wives,
and	being	old	there	was	nothing	else	to	do.
Those	one	hundred	brothers	had	 thousands	of	 relatives	and	 friends.	They	were
really	 powerful,	 they	 were	 all	 cunning,	 and	 they	 were	 bent	 upon	 having	 the
kingdom.
Arjuna	 had	 only	 five	 brothers.	 And	 those	 five	 brothers	 were	 deceived	 by
Duryodhana	 and	 his	 brothers	 into	 a	 game	 of	 gambling.	 And	 in	 that	 gambling
they	lost	everything,	even	their	wife.	The	five	brothers	only	had	one	wife.	Then
Duryodhana	 sent	 all	 the	 brothers	 for	 thirteen	 years	 to	 hide	 in	 forests	 and
mountains,	saying	if	they	were	found	they	would	be	killed.
So	for	thirteen	years	they	had	been	wandering,	hiding	themselves	in	mountains
and	 forests,	 and	 being	 chased.	 Somehow	 they	 survived.	 Now	 was	 their	 only
chance.
Duryodhana	 was	 already	 in	 power,	 he	 had	 the	 kingdom	 in	 his	 hands	 and	 the
armies	 and	 everything	 --	 the	 treasure	 --	 and	 in	 thirteen	years	 these	people	had
become	utterly	poor,	weak;	they	had	lost	contact	with	friends,	families.
But	when	Arjuna	saw	 the	 situation	 --	he	was	certain	about	his	archery,	and	he
was	certain	that	he	could	win.	But	a	great	question	arose	in	his	mind:	What	is	the
point?	If	I	have	to	kill	my	own	brothers	and	if	I	have	to	kill	my	own	grandfather
who	has	loved	me,	and	if	I	have	to	kill	my	own	master	who	has	created	a	great
archer	out	of	me...	What	is	the	point,	even	if	I	win,	of	killing	millions	of	my	own
people?	Whether	they	are	on	this	side	or	on	that	side,	they	will	be	killed.
It	is	simply	a	massacre	without	meaning.	I	don't	care	about	such	a	kingdom.	And
what	 is	 the	 point	 of	 sitting	 on	 a	 golden	 throne	when	 your	 own	 people,	 all	 of
whom	you	have	loved,	for	whom	you	would	have	liked	to	live...	Surrounded	by
their	corpses,	sitting	on	the	golden	throne...
Arjuna	 thought,	 I	 would	 feel	 so	 embarrassed,	 so	 ashamed	 that	 I	 am	 afraid	 I
would	 commit	 suicide.	 I	 would	 not	 be	 able	 to	 tolerate	 that	 situation.	 If	 I	 am
defeated	 then	 two	million	people	 are	going	 to	die.	 If	 I	win,	 that	victory	 is	 not
worth	it.
He	 decided	 not	 to	 fight.	 It	 was	 Krishna	 who	 persuaded	 him.	 The	 whole	 of
SHRIMAD
BHAGAVADGITA	 is	 a	 persuasion.	 Arjuna	 goes	 on	 arguing	 against	 war	 and
violence,	and	Krishna	goes	on	insisting,	"It	is	your	duty,	it	is	your	destiny.	It	is
God's	 decision	 that	 you	 should	 fight.	And	 this	 so-called	 ideology	 that	 you	 are
talking	about	of	nonviolence,	of	no	war,	of	not	killing	is	nothing	but	hiding	your
cowardice,	your	escapism."
So	finally	he	managed	to	persuade	him	to	be	for	the	war.	And	that	war	destroyed
this	 country	 forever.	 After	 that	 war	 --	 and	 it	 is	 called	 The	 Great	 Indian	War,
Mahabharata	--
after	 that	great	war	India	became	poor,	 lost	nerve,	was	 invaded	by	all	kinds	of
small	 tribes,	 barbarians,	 nomads;	 it	 has	 remained	 a	 slave	 country	 for	 two
thousand	years,	such	a	vast	country.
It	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 greatest	 country	 in	 the	 world	 as	 far	 as	 population	 is
concerned,	 and	 it	 has	 been	 dominated	 by	 small	 nations,	 small	 tribes.	 People
simply	lost	nerve,	 they	simply	dropped	the	very	idea	of	fighting.	Mahabharata,
the	great	Indian	war,	was	such	a	deep	wound	that	India	lost	its	guts.
If	I	have	compared	Krishna	with	Adolf	Hitler,	I	don't	think	I	have	done	anything
wrong.
But	the	prejudices	are	such	that	people	are	not	ready	to	see	their	conditionings.
Krishna	 was	 a	 non-vegetarian;	 Adolf	 Hitler	 was	 a	 vegetarian.	 Krishna	 had
sixteen	 thousand	 wives,	 and	 only	 one	 out	 of	 sixteen	 thousand	 was	 his	 real
married	wife.	 The	 remaining	were	 all	 other	 people's	wives,	whom	he	 forcibly
snatched	 from	 their	 families,	 from	 their	 small	 children,	 from	 their	 husbands,
from	their	old	parents.
He	 destroyed	 sixteen	 thousand	 families	 and	 I	 don't	 think	 he	would	 even	 have
recognized	those	sixteen	thousand	women.	He	treated	women	almost	like	cattle.
Any	woman	that	caught	his	eye	was	immediately	taken	away	by	his	soldiers	to
his	palace.
Hitler	remained	a	bachelor	his	whole	life.	Just	for	three	hours	before	he	died	he
married.
And	the	only	thing	he	did	with	his	wife	after	the	marriage	was	to	commit	suicide
because	the	enemy	was	dropping	bombs	on	Berlin.	He	had	lost	the	war.	And	the
woman	 was	 insisting	 for	 years,	 "We	 should	 get	 married."	 But	 he	 had	 been
saying,	"Wait	till	I	am	victorious;	I	don't	have	time	for	anything	else.	Once	I'm
victorious	and	I	have	proved	that	the	nomad	Nordic	Germans	are	the	highest	and
holiest	and	the	God-chosen	race...	I	have	no	time	for	anything	else."
When	he	 saw	 that	 now	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 any	 victory,	 he	 is	 finished,	 the
whole	of	Germany	is	gone,	his	capital	is	being	bombed,	he	is	being	searched	--
and	he	was	hiding	 in	an	underground	basement	 --	he	allowed	 the	woman...	He
told	 his	 secretary,	 "Find	 any	 priest	 and	 bring	 him	 immediately;	 I	 want	 to	 be
married.	Let	this	woman's	desire	be	completed."
A	priest	was	brought	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	They	were	married	and	after	the
marriage	 he	 took	 poison,	 and	 the	 wife	 took	 poison.	 And	 he	 had	 ordered	 his
people	that	after	they	were	dead	to	immediately	pour	petrol	over	them	and	burn
their	 bodies	 completely.	 They	 didn't	 even	want	 the	 enemy	 to	 get	 any	 trace	 of
their	bodies.
Adolf	Hitler	had	no	habits	like	smoking	or	drinking.	He	used	to	get	up	early	in
the	morning	 and	 he	 used	 to	 go	 to	 bed	 early	 in	 the	 evening.	He	was	 almost	 a
mahatma,	a	great	soul.
But	Hindus	will	be	hurt,	because	they	think	Krishna	is	the	reincarnation	of	God
himself;	they	are	hurt	because	of	a	conditioning.	If	they	have	a	little	intelligence
to	 see,	 then	 they	 can	 see	 that	 both	 persons	 have	 perpetuated	 war,	 violence,
cruelty,	destructiveness.
Manu	has	for	five	 thousand	years	ruled	over	India,	particularly	 its	morality,	 its
caste	 system,	 and	 the	 harm	 that	 he	 has	 done	 to	 this	 country	 is	 incalculable.
Millions	of	women	have	burned	themselves	alive	because	of	Manu,	because	he
prescribes	that	every	wife	who	is	sincerely	faithful	to	her	husband	should	jump
in	 the	 funeral	 pyre	when	 her	 husband	 dies;	 she	 has	 no	 right	 to	 live	 anymore.
Because	 of	 him	 millions	 of	 women	 down	 five	 thousand	 years	 have	 burned
themselves	alive.	This	is	so	ugly.
It	 is	because	of	Manu	that	one	fourth	of	India	has	remained	untouchable.	They
are	called	the	sudras;	they	are	not	accepted	as	human	beings...	subhuman	beings.
Even	their	shadow	is	thought	to	be	untouchable.	If	a	sudra	passes	by	you	and	his
shadow	falls	on	you,	you	have	to	immediately	take	a	bath	to	purify	yourself.
These	sudras	have	been	killed	for	any	small	reason:	if	they	have	entered	into	a
street	 which	 is	 prohibited	 to	 them,	 if	 they	 have	 heard	 even	 words	 of	 Hindu
scriptures,	 the	 VEDAS.	 They	 were	 killed	 because	 it	 is	 prohibited	 that	 they
should	be	educated	and	they	should	know	anything	about	the	VEDAS;	because
the	VEDAS	would	become	dirty	if	these	poor	people	know	anything	about	them.
These	sudras	have	not	been	accepted	in	society.	They	cannot	live	inside	the	city;
they	 have	 to	 live	 outside	 the	 city.	 They	 have	 remained	 utterly	 poor,	 and	 they
have	been	doing	all	 the	dirty	work	of	 the	society.	They	don't	have	any	dignity,
any	respect.	They	are	not	accepted	in	any	way	to	be	human	beings.	You	don't	see
them.	They	live	outside	 the	city	 in	 their	small	bamboo	huts,	which	any	 time	--
and	 this	has	been	happening	even	 today,	any	day...	Hindus,	high-caste	Hindus,
go	 to	 their	 villages,	 burn	 their	 bamboo	 cottages,	 burn	 living	beings,	 rape	 their
women	and	kill	all	of	them.	And	it	is	because	of	Manu.
And	if	I	have	put	Manu	and	Krishna	and	Adolf	Hitler	in	the	same	category,	then
anybody	who	says	I	am	wrong	I	am	ready	to	accept	the	challenge.	Rather	than
writing	 to	 that	 newspaper	 editor	 --	 and	 that	 coward	 editor	 immediately	 has
written	an	editorial	asking	for	forgiveness,	that	it	was	his	fault	that	he	published
my	statement.	It	is	not	his	fault.	My	statement	is	my	statement,	and	I	stand	by	it.
And	anybody	who	thinks	that	I	am	wrong	I	am	ready	for	any	public	discussion
on	the	point.
But	just	conditionings,	nobody	is	ready	to	look	at	the	actual	facts.	No	Christian
will	be	hurt	by	this	because	it	is	not	his	conditioning.	No	Mohammedan	will	be
hurt	by	this	because	it	is	not	his	conditioning.
Your	only	problem	in	life	is	the	religion	in	which	you	were	born,	the	society	in
which	you	were	born,	the	family	in	which	you	were	born.	But	it	is	unfortunate
there	is	no	other	way,	at	least	up	to	now;	this	is	the	only	way.
And	because	you	are	born	in	a	certain	religion,	in	a	certain	ideology,	in	a	certain
morality,	you	become	so	conditioned	and	so	attached	to	all	these	ideas	which	are
not	yours.	You	become	absolutely	incapable	of	seeing	what	is	right	and	what	is
wrong.	This	 is	 the	problem	which	keeps	you	unenlightened;	otherwise	 there	 is
no	other	problem.
Taglish,	not	only	do	you	need	a	push,	everybody	needs	a	push,	and	really	a	hard
push.
Unless	 you	 are	 shocked	 and	 awakened	 from	 your	 deep	 sleep,	 from	 your
unconscious	acceptance	and	 identity	with	others'	 ideas,	you	will	never	become
an	individual;	you	will	never	come	to	know	your	own	light,	you	will	never	come
to	know	your	own	innocence	and	the	flowers	that	blossom	in	your	innocence.
You	have	 to	get	 rid	of	all	your	knowledge;	you	have	 to	get	 rid	of	all	your	 so-
called	religions.	You	have	to	be	as	innocent	as	a	small	child.	You	are	born	just	as
human	beings,	not	as	Mohammedans,	not	as	Hindus,	not	as	Christians.	All	these
are	prisons	in	which	you	have	been	put	from	your	very	beginning,	so	you	have
completely	forgotten	that	they	are	prisons.	They	appear	to	be	cozy	homes;	they
are	not.
It	needs	 tremendous	courage	 to	drop	out	 from	 these	prisons.	But	 I	 think	every
man,	 every	 woman	 has	 the	 courage.	 Just	 an	 invitation	 is	 needed,	 and	 an
encouragement	is	needed.
And	 a	 support	 from	 a	 commune,	 from	 friends	 is	 needed	 so	 that	 you	 are	 not
alone;	there	are	other	people	also	on	the	same	path	in	the	same	rebellion.
Taglish,	remember	one	thing.	If	you	really	want	to	be	alive,	contemporary,	fresh,
and	you	want	to	have	a	future	not	full	of	darkness	and	death	but	full	of	eternity
and	blissfulness,	 then	you	will	have	 to	 take	a	 little	 risk.	A	 risk	of	dropping	all
kinds	of	borrowed	knowledge,	all	 that	has	been	given	to	you	by	others,	so	that
you	can	find	what	is	your	own.
I	 am	 reminded	 of	 one	 great	 mathematician,	 P.D.	 Ouspensky.	 He	 was	 world-
famous	when	he	met	Gurdjieff,	his	master.	Gurdjieff	was	not	known	outside	of	a
small	 circle	 of	 seekers.	 He	 was	 made	 famous,	 world-famous,	 because	 of
Ouspensky.	 But	 the	 day	Ouspensky	 arrived	 to	meet	Gurdjieff,	 he	 had	 already
written	a	very	important	book.
Perhaps	there	are	only	three	books	which	can	be	said	to	be	really	important.
One	is	written	by	Aristotle.	The	name	of	the	book	is	ORGANUM.	It	means	the
first	principle	of	wisdom.	The	second	book	is	written	by	Bacon,	who	is	the	father
of	all	modern	science.	His	book's	name	is	NOVUM	ORGANUM,	new	principle
of	wisdom.
Aristotle	 is	 thought	 to	be	 the	 father	of	Western	 logic,	mathematics	 and	 related
sciences,	and	Bacon	is	certainly	 the	most	 important	 figure	who	has	created	 the
whole	 of	 science,	 the	 whole	 technology	 that	 has	 made	 the	West	 strong,	 rich,
affluent,	healthy.
And	the	third	important	book	is	Ouspensky's	TERTIUM	ORGANUM,	the	third
principle	of	wisdom.	This	seems	to	be	the	most	important	of	the	three.	And	the
first	thing	Ouspensky	had	written	inside	the	book,	not	out	of	any	egoism	but	out
of	 sheer	 truthfulness,	 "Before	 the	 two	 ORGANUMS	 existed,	 TERTIUM
ORGANUM,	my	book,	had	already	existed,	because	it	is	more	fundamental	than
those	two,	Aristotle's	and	Bacon's	books."
It	is	certainly	one	of	the	most	well-written	books	I	have	come	across,	and	I	have
seen	more	books	than	perhaps	any	living	human	being.
When	Ouspensky	reached	Gurdjieff,	Gurdjieff	was	nobody	and	Ouspensky	was
a	world-famous	mathematician.	Gurdjieff	gave	Ouspensky	an	empty	paper	and	a
pencil	 and	 told	him,	 "Go	 into	 the	other	 room"	 --	no	other	 introduction	 --	 "and
first	write	 down	 on	 one	 side	what	 you	 know	 on	 the	 fundamental	 questions	 of
life,	 and	on	 the	other	 side	write	what	you	do	not	know	--	because	 this	will	be
decisive.	Whatever	you	know	I	will	never	discuss	with	you.	You	know	it,	there	is
no	need.	Whatever	you	do	not	know	I	will	teach	you."
There	were	at	least	twenty	disciples	sitting	in	that	dark	room,	doing	nothing,	just
silently	sitting.	Ouspensky	had	not	expected	such	an	introduction.	The	man	who
brought	 him	 had	 been	 resisting	 for	 almost	 nine	 months	 saying,	 "Unless	 the
master	says	`yes,'	I	cannot	introduce	you."	And	after	nine	months	of	waiting	he
was	brought	into	his	presence,	and	this	was	the	behavior	that	he	got.
He	said,	"It	is	strange,"	but	he	went	into	the	other	room	--	there	was	nothing	else
to	do.
And	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 his	 life	 he	 started	 thinking,	Do	 I	 know	 it,	 do	 I	 know
anything	about	God?	--	and	I	have	been	writing	about	God.	Do	I	know	anything
about	the	human	soul?	--	and	I	have	been	writing	about	it.	Do	I	know	anything
about	consciousness?	--	and	I	have	been	writing	about	it.
He	could	not	write	 a	 single	word	on	 the	 side	where	he	was	 supposed	 to	write
what	he	already	knew.	He	came	back	after	half	an	hour	and	returned	the	paper
empty.	And	he	said,	"Forgive	me,	I	tried	hard.	But	really	I	don't	know	anything.
You	will	have	to	teach	me	from	ABC."
This	 is	 the	 way	 to	 drop	 your	 conditionings.	 This	 is	 the	 way	 to	 realize	 your
ignorance.
What	 your	 ignorance	 is	 finally	 turns	 out	 to	 be	 your	 innocence.	 It	 looks	 like	 a
death	when	everything	that	you	know	and	that	you	have	been	attached	to	is	taken
away.	But	on	the	other	side	it	is	a	resurrection.
So	if	you	really	want	to	wake	up	and	if	you	also	want	to	become	part	of	the	great
hope	for	humanity	and	the	future	of	man,	then	die	to	the	past,	so	that	you	can	be
reborn	to	the	future.	Less	than	that	will	not	do;	more	than	that	is	not	needed.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	DOES	IT	MEAN	TO	LOVE	MYSELF?
Prem	Kabir,	one	has	to	begin	not	by	loving	oneself,	because	you	don't	know	who
you	are.
Who	are	you	going	to	love?
If	you	start	by	 loving	yourself,	you	will	 love	only	your	ego,	which	 is	not	your
self,	 which	 is	 your	 false	 personality.	 Almost	 everybody	 loves	 his	 personality;
everybody	 loves	 his	 ego.	 Even	 the	 ugliest	 woman,	 if	 you	 say	 to	 her,	 "How
beautiful	you	are,"	will	not	refuse	to	accept	it.
I	have	heard...
Two	old	men	meet	on	a	street	corner.	"Where	have	you	been	for	the	past	eight
weeks?"
"In	jail,"	says	the	second	man.
"In	jail?	How	come?"	says	the	first	man.
The	second	old	man	replies,	"Well,	about	eight	weeks	ago	I	was	standing	on	a
street	corner	and	this	beautiful	young	girl	rushes	up	with	a	policeman	and	says,
`He	is	the	man,	officer.	He	is	the	one	who	attacked	me.'	And	you	know,	I	felt	so
flattered,	I	admitted	it."
How	many	things	you	have	admitted	that	you	know	perfectly	well	are	not	true.
People	 say	you	are	 so	 loving,	 so	 sincere,	 so	 truthful,	 so	beautiful,	 so	honest	 --
and	you	never	deny.	This	is	not	the	love	I	have	been	talking	about.
Yes,	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 love	 yourself,	 because	 unless	 you	 love	 yourself	 you
cannot	 love	 anybody	else.	You	don't	 know	what	 love	 is	 if	 you	have	not	 loved
yourself.	 But	 before	 you	 can	 love	 yourself	 you	 have	 to	 know	 yourself;	 hence
love	is	secondary,	meditation	is	primary.
And	the	miracle	is,	if	you	meditate	and	slowly,	slowly	get	out	of	the	ego	and	out
of	 your	 personality	 and	 realize	 your	 real	 self,	 love	will	 come	on	 its	 own.	You
don't	have	to	do	anything,	it	is	a	spontaneous	flowering.	But	it	blossoms	only	in
a	certain	climate,	and	that	climate	I	call	meditation.	In	the	climate	of	silence	--
no-mind,	no	disturbance	 inside,	absolute	clarity,	peace	and	silence	 --	 suddenly,
you	will	see	thousands	of	flowers	have	opened	within	you,	and	their	fragrance	is
love.
Naturally,	first	you	will	love	yourself,	because	that	will	be	your	first	encounter.
First	you	will	become	aware	of	the	fragrance	that	is	arising	in	you	and	the	light
that	has	been	born	 in	you,	and	 the	blissfulness	 that	 is	 showering	on	you.	Then
loving	will	become	your	nature.	Then	you	will	love	many;	then	you	will	love	all.
In	fact,	what	we	know	in	our	ignorance	is	a	relationship,	and	what	we	know	in
our	awareness	is	no	longer	a	relationship.	It	is	not	that	I	love	you;	it	is	that	I	am
love.
And	you	have	 to	understand	 the	difference.	When	you	 say,	 "I	 love	you,"	what
about	others?	What	about	 the	whole	existence?	The	more	narrow	your	 love	 is,
the	more	imprisoned.	Its	wings	are	cut;	it	cannot	fly	in	the	sky	across	the	sun.	It
does	not	have	freedom;	it	is	almost	in	a	golden	cage.	The	cage	is	beautiful,	but
inside	the	cage	the	bird	is	not	the	same	bird	that	you	see	in	the	sky	opening	its
wings.
Love	has	to	become	not	a	relationship,	not	a	narrowing,	but	a	broadening.
Love	has	to	become	your	very	quality,	your	very	character,	your	very	being,	your
radiance.	Just	as	the	sun	radiates	light	not	for	anyone	in	particular,	unaddressed,
meditation	radiates	love	unaddressed.
Of	course,	first	it	is	felt	within	oneself,	for	oneself,	and	then	it	starts	radiating	all
around.
Then	you	love	not	only	human	beings,	you	love	trees,	you	love	birds;	you	simply
love,	you	are	love.
You	are	asking,	Prem	Kabir,	"What	does	it	mean	to	love	myself?"
It	means	meditation.
It	means	to	be	yourself.
And	nature	will	bring	love	as	a	reward.
Just	 don't	 listen	 to	 the	 priests.	 They	 are	 the	 enemies	 of	 love.	 They	 have	 been
teaching	 the	 world	 to	 hate	 yourself	 and	 to	 hate	 the	 world,	 because	 they	 have
been	teaching	either	it	is	a	sin	that	you	were	born	or	it	is	because	of	the	evil	acts
of	your	past	life	that	you	are	suffering	in	this	life.	But	no	religion	accepts	this	life
with	 joy	 and	 rejoicing,	 as	 a	 gift,	 as	 a	 reward	 of	which	 you	 are	 not	worthy,	 of
which	you	don't	claim	any	right.	You	have	not	earned	it.
So	the	first	thing	is,	avoid	the	priests.	They	have	taught	you	life-negative	values.
And	my	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 bring	 back	 life-affirmation.	 That's	what	 I	 call	 loving
yourself,	accepting	yourself	not	as	a	sinner.	How	can	you	accept	yourself	if	you
think	you	are	a	sinner?	How	can	you	love	yourself	if	you	think	you	are	nothing
but	full	of	guilt,	nothing	but	an	accumulated	past	of	evil	acts	of	millions	of	lives?
You	will	hate	yourself.	And	that's	what	your	priests	have	been	saying:	renounce
life,	hate	life,	hate	pleasure,	hate	everything,	and	sacrifice	everything	if	you	want
to	 enter	 into	 paradise.	Nobody	has	 ever	 returned	 from	paradise,	 so	 there	 is	 no
evidence	of	any	paradise	anywhere,	no	proof,	it	is	just	a	futile	exercise	which	has
never	been	able	to	come	to	a	conclusion.
The	old	priest	was	warning	his	congregation	about	sin.
"Sin,"	he	said,	"is	like	a	big	dog.	There	is	the	big	dog	of	pride,	and	the	big	dog	of
envy,	and	the	big	dog	of	greed,	and	finally,	there	is	the	big	dog	of	sex.	And	you
have	to	kill	those	big	dogs	before	they	kill	you	and	prevent	you	from	getting	to
heaven.	It	can	be	done.	I	know,	because	over	the	years	I	have	done	it.	I	killed	the
big	 dog	 of	 envy,	 the	 big	 dog	 of	 pride,	 the	 big	 dog	 of	 greed	 --	 and	 yes,	 my
children,	I	killed	the	big	dog	of	sex."
"Father,"	came	a	voice	from	the	back	of	the	church,	"are	you	sure	that	last	dog
did	not	die	a	natural	death?"
You	 cannot	 change	 nature.	 If	 you	 can	 simply	 live	 naturally,	 transformations
come.	 If	 they	 come,	 then	 sex	 disappears	 --	 but	 not	 by	 your	 efforts.	 By	 your
efforts	 it	 goes	 on	hanging	 around	you.	The	more	you	 repress	 it,	 the	more	you
have	it.	The	more	you	live	it,	the	more	is	the	possibility	to	go	beyond	it.
An	old	couple	were	sitting	at	home	one	evening	listening	to	the	faith	healer	on
the	radio.
"Okay	folks,"	he	began,	"God	wants	 to	heal	you	all.	All	you	have	 to	do	 is	put
one	hand	on	the	radio	and	the	other	hand	on	the	part	that	is	sick."
The	old	lady	got	up,	shuffled	over	to	the	radio	and	put	her	hand	on	her	arthritic
hip.	Then	the	old	man	put	one	hand	on	the	radio	and	the	other	hand	on	his	fly.
His	wife	looked	at	him	with	contempt	and	said,	"You	old	idiot.	The	man	said	he
would	heal	the	sick,	not	raise	the	dead!"
Live	naturally.	Live	peacefully.	Live	inwardly.	Just	give	a	little	time	to	yourself,
being	 alone,	 being	 silent,	 just	watching	 the	 inner	 scene	 of	 your	mind.	 Slowly,
slowly	thoughts	disappear.	Slowly,	slowly	one	day	the	mind	is	so	still,	so	silent
as	if	it	is	not	there.	Just	this	silence...	in	this	moment	you	are	not	here,	as	if	the
whole	Buddha	Hall	is	empty.
In	 this	 silence	 within	 you,	 you	 will	 find	 a	 new	 dimension	 of	 life.	 In	 this
dimension	greed	does	not	exist,	sex	does	not	exist,	anger	does	not	exist,	violence
does	 not	 exist.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 credit	 to	 you;	 it	 is	 the	 new	dimension	 beyond	mind
where	 love	 exists,	 pure,	 unpolluted	 by	 any	 biological	 urge;	where	 compassion
exists	 for	 no	 other	 reason	 --	 not	 to	 get	 any	 reward	 in	 heaven	 --	 because
compassion	is	a	reward	unto	itself.
A	deep	longing	exists	to	share	all	that	treasure	that	you	have	discovered	within
yourself,	 and	 to	 shout	 from	 the	 housetops	 to	 the	 people,	 "You	 are	 not	 poor!
Paradise	is	within	you.
You	need	not	be	beggars,	you	are	born	emperors."	You	just	have	to	discover	your
empire,	and	your	empire	is	not	of	the	outside	world;	your	empire	is	of	your	own
interiority.	It	is	within	you	and	it	has	always	been	there,	just	waiting	for	you	to
come	home.
Love	will	come,	and	will	come	in	abundance	--	so	much	that	you	cannot	contain
it.	You	will	find	it	is	overflowing	you,	it	is	reaching	all	directions.
Just	discover	your	hidden	splendor.
Life	can	be	simply	a	song,	a	song	of	joy.
Life	can	be	simply	a	dance,	a	celebration,	a	continuous	celebration.	All	that	you
have	to	learn	is	a	life-affirmative	lifestyle.
I	 call	 only	 that	 man	 religious	 who	 is	 life-affirmative.	 All	 those	 who	 are	 life-
negative	may	think	they	are	religious;	they	are	not.	Their	sadness	shows	they	are
not.	Their	seriousness	shows	they	are	not.
A	man	of	authentic	religion	will	have	a	sense	of	humor.	It	 is	our	universe,	it	 is
our	home.
We	are	not	orphans.	This	earth	is	our	mother.	This	sky	is	our	father.	This	whole
vast	universe	is	for	us,	and	we	are	for	it.
In	fact,	there	is	no	division	between	us	and	the	whole.	We	are	organically	joined
with	it,	we	are	part	of	one	orchestra.
To	feel	this	music	of	existence	is	the	only	religion	that	I	can	accept	as	authentic,
as	valid.
It	does	not	have	any	scriptures,	it	need	not	have.	It	does	not	have	any	statues	of
God,	because	it	does	not	believe	in	any	hypotheses.	It	has	nothing	to	worship,	it
has	 only	 to	 be	 silent,	 and	 out	 of	 that	 silence	 comes	 gratitude,	 prayer,	 and	 the
whole	existence	turns	into	a	godliness.
There	is	no	God	as	a	person.	God	is	spread	all	over:	in	the	trees,	in	the	birds,	in
the	animals,	in	humanity,	in	the	wise,	in	the	otherwise.
All	that	is	alive	is	nothing	but	godliness	ready	to	open	its	wings,	ready	to	fly	into
the	freedom,	ultimate	freedom	of	consciousness.
Yes,	you	will	love	yourself	and	you	will	love	the	whole	existence	too.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Osho.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Three	tickets	for	titsburg
Chapter	title:	Drowned	in	spaghetti
Chapter	title:	G-d
Chapter	title:	Avoid	the	priests
